=== PAGE 1 ===

ANCIENT INDIAN 
TRADITION & MYTHOLOGY 
Translated by 
A BOARD OF SCHOLARS 
And Edited by 
Dr. G.P. BHATI 
VOLUME 59

=== PAGE 3 ===

ANCIENT INDIAN TRADITION AND 
MYTHOLOGY SERIES 
[PURA:NAS IN TRANSLATION] 
VOLUMES 
SIVAl-4 
LINGA 5-6 
BHAGAVATA 7-1 1 
GARUI;>A 12-14 
NARADA 15-19 
KURMA20-21 
BRAHͶA 22-26 
AGNI 27-30 
VARAHA31-32 
BRAHMA 33-36 
VAYU 37-38 
PADMA39-48 
SKANDA, PARTS I-XI, 49-59 
VOLUMES UNDER PREPARATION 
SKANDA, PARTS XII-XXV 
BHAVI1>YA 
BRAHMAVAIVARTA 
DEVIBHAGAVATA 
KALIKA 
MARI<ANI;>EYA 
MATSYA 
VAMANA 
V11>:NU 
ͷHARMOTIARA

=== PAGE 4 ===

THE 
SKANDA-PURANA 
. 
Translated and Annotated by 
Dr. G.V. TAGARE 
PART XI 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE LIMITED e DELHI

=== PAGE 5 ===

First Editiun: Delhi, 1997 
© MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBUSHDtS PRIVATE UMITED 
All Rights Resened 
ISBN: 81-208-1565-0 
Also available at: 
MOTIIAL BANARSIDASS 
41 UA Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 1 10 007 
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, Warden Road, Mumbai 400 026 
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004 
Sanas Plaza, Subhash Nagar, Pune 411 002 
16 St. Mark's Road, Bangalore 560 001 
8 Camac Street, Calcutta 700 017 
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004 
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 
UNESCO COLLECTION OF REPRESENTATIVE WORKS-Indian Series 
This bool& lu.u been acceptMl in 1M Indian Translatiun Series 
of 1M UNESCO Collection of Representative Worlcs, 
jointly sponsuml. by 1M UnitMl Nations Educa-
tional, Scientific and Cultural Organiz.atiun 
(UNESCO) and 1M Guvemmmt of India 
PRINTED IN INDIA 
BYJAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRIJAINENDRA PRESS, 
A-45 NARAINA, PHASE I, NEW DELHI I 10 028 
AND PUBUSHED BYNARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBUSHERS PRIVATE UMITED, 
BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007

=== PAGE 6 ===

PUBUSHER'S NOTE 
The purest gems lie hidden in the bottom of the ocean or in the depth 
of rocks. One has to dive into the ocean or delve into the rocks to find 
them out. Similarly, truth lies concealed in the language which with 
the passage of time has become obsolete. Man has to learn that lan­
guage before he discovers that truth. 
But he has neither the means nor the leisure to embark on that 
course. We have, therefore, planned to help him acquire knowledge by 
an easier course. We have started the series of A!Jcient Indian Tradition 
and Mythology in English Translation. Our goal is to universalize 
knowledge through the most popular international medium of expres­
sion. The publication of the Punil}.as in English Translation is a step 
towards that goal. 
Acknowledgements 
It is our pleasant duty to put on record our sincere thanks to Dr. 
RN. Dandekar and the UNESCO authorities for their kind encourage­
ment and valuable help in the publication of the volumes in this series.

=== PAGE 7 ===

CONTENTS 
PususHER's NoTE 
ABBREVIATIONS 
SKANDA-PᖻA 
BOOK IV: KASi-ᖼA 
SECTION II: UTIARARDHA 
Chapters 
51. Description of Sun-gods Called AruQa, Vrddha etc. 
52. Description of Da5a8vamedha 
53. Siva's Attendants Go to Varru_tasi 
54. The Greatness of Pisacamocana Tirthᖽ 
55. Ga1.1esa Proceeds on a Mission to KaSi 
56. Manifestation of the Maya of GaQesa 
v 
ix 
1 
1 1 
19 
28 
35 
40 
57. Manifestation of I)hu1.1c;lhi Vinayaka and Fiftysix Vinayakas 47 
58. Attainment of Salvation by Divodasa 
59 
59. Paiicanada Comes into Being 
77 
60. Manifestation of Bindumadhava 
90 
61. The Greatness of Vaiᔻ1.1ava Tirthas 
102 
62. Manifestation of the Bull-emblemed Lord 
1 22 
63. The Story of Jyeᔻl}lesa 
131 
64. The Secret of Jyeᔻl}le5vara 
1 39 
65. Manifestation of ParasareSvara.di Lirigas 
1 48 
66. Saile5a and Other Lirigas 
155 
67. In Praise of Ratne5vara 
1 67 
68. The Origin of Krttivasas 
1 84 
69. The Assembly of Sixtyeight Holy Spots 
191 
70. Establishment of the Deities 
204 
71 . Exploits of Durga 
212 
72. Victory of Durga 
220 
73. The Greatness of Orilkara 
230 
.74. The Greatness of Orilkara (Continued) 
246 
75. Manifestation of Trilocana 
254 
76. The Power of Trilocana 
261 
77. The Greatness of K.edara 
273 
78. The Greatness of Dharme5a 
279 
79. Dharme5akhyanam 
285 
80. The Vrata Called Manorathatrfiya 
294

=== PAGE 8 ===

viii 
Skanda Pura7Ja 
81. The Legend of Dharme5vara 
301 
$2. Exploits of Amitrajit 
307 
83. Manifestation ofVire5vara 
317 
84. Tirthas from the Confluence of Ganga and VaraQa up to 
MaQikarQika 
327 
85. Granting of Boons to Durvasas 
336 
86. Manifestation of Vi5vakarmesa 
342 
87. Daᕙa's Sacrifice 
352 
88. Sati Casts off Her Body 
361 
89. Manifestation of DaᖾSvara 
369 
90. The Story of Parvatisa 
379 
91. The Greatness of Gangesvara 
381 
92. The Story of Narmade5vara 
382 
93. Manifestation of SatiSvara 
384 
94. Manifestation of Amrtesa and Other Lingas 
387 
95. Vyasa's Arms Get Paralysed 
391 
96. Vyasa Released from the Curse 
398 
97. Holy Spots in VaraQasi 
414 
98. Departure unto the Pavilion of Salvation 
436 
99. The Greatness of Sri Visve8vara 
444 
100. Index to KaSikhaQ<;la 
450 
INDEX 
461

=== PAGE 9 ===

ABBREVIATIONS 
Common and self-evident abbreviations such as Ch (s)-Chapter(s) , 
p-page, pp-pages, \'---Vei"Se, \\'--Verses, Ftn-Footnote, Hist Ind. Philo.­
History of Indian Philosophy are not included in this list. 
AGP 
AIHT 
AITM 
AP 
AV 
BdP 
BG 
BhP 
Br 
BsP 
BVP 
cc 
cvs 
DB 
De or 
GDAMI 
DhS 
GP 
GS 
HD 
JP 
KA 
KP 
LP 
Manu 
S.M. Ali's The Geography of PuratJas, PPH, New Delhi, 
1973 
Ancient Indian Histurical Tradition, F.E. Pargiter, Motilal 
Banarsidass (MLBD) , Delhi 
Ancient Indian Tradition and Mytholog;y Series, MLBD, 
Delhi 
• 
AgniPurar_w, Guru Mandai Edition (GM) , Calcutta, 1957 
Atharoa Veda, Svadhyaya Ma;u;lal, Aundh 
BrahmiitJ4a PuratJa, MLBD, Delhi, 1973 
Bhagavadgitii 
Bhagavata PuratJa, Bhagavat Vidyapeeth, Ahmedabad 
BrahmatJa (preceded by name such as Satapatha) 
Bhavi˛ya PuratJa, Vishnu Shastri Bapat, Wai 
Brahma Vaivarta PuratJa, GM, 1955-57 
Caturoarga CintamatJi by Hemadri 
CaratJa Vyuha Sutra by Saunaka, Com. by Mahidasa 
Devi Bhagavata, GM, 1960,01 
The Geographical Dictionary of Ancient and Mediaeval 
India, N.L. De/Dey, Oriental Reprint, Delhi, 1971 
Dharma Sutra (preceded by the author's name such as 
Gautama) 
· 
Garutf,a PuratJa, ed. R.S. Bhattacharya, Chowkhamba, 
Varanasi, 1964 
Grhya Sutra (preceded by the name of the author such 
as Apastamba) 
History of Dharma Sastra, P.V. Kane, G.O.S. 
PuratJa (Journal of the Kashiraj Trust) , Varanasi 
Kautilya A:rthaSastra 
Kurma PuratJa, Venkatesvara Press Edn., Bombay; also 
Kashiraj Trust Edn., Varanasi, 1971 
Linga PuratJa, GM, 1960; also MLBD, Delhi, 1981 
Manusmrti

=== PAGE 10 ===

X 
Mbh 
MkP 
MN 
MtP 
MW 
NP 
PdP 
PE 
PR or 
PRHRC 
Ŭv 
Sat Br 
SC or SMC 
SkP 
SP 
VaP 
VR 
VdP 
VmP 
VP 
VrP 
Skanda PuriiT}IJ 
Mahiibharata, Gita Press, Gorakhpur, VS 2014 
Miirlr.a1J4eya Purii'1}1J 
Mahiibhirata Niimiinultrama7J-i, Git:a Press, Gorakhpur, VS 
2016 
Matsya Purii7J-a, GM, 1954 
M. Monier-Williams' Sanskrit-English Dictionary, 
MLBD, Delhi, 1976 
Niiradiya or Niirada Purii1Jll, Veilkaᔽe8vara Press, 
Bombay 
Padma Purii7J-a, GM, 1957-59 
Purii7J-ic Encyclopaedia, V. Mani, English Version, 
MLBD, Delhi, 1975 
Puranic Rewrds on Hindu Rites and Customs, 
R.C. Hazra, Calcutta, 1948 
IJg Veda, Svadhyaya M;u:t<;lal, Aundh 
Satapatha Briihma7J-a 
Smrti Candrikii by Devanna Bhana 
Skanda Purii7J-a 
Siva Purii7J-a 
Viiyu Purii7J-a 
ViilmZki Riimiiya7J-a 
V˜7J-udharrrwttara Purii'1}1J 
Viimana Purii'1}1J 
V˝'TJ-U Purii'1}1J 
VariihaPurii'1}1J

=== PAGE 11 ===

SKANDA PUDA 
BOOK IV: KASI ᖷI)A 
SECTION II: UTTARAR.Dᖸ 
CHAPTER FIFTYONE 
Description of Sun-gods Called AruČa, Vrddha etc. 1 
Obeisance to Sri GaČesa : 
Agasti enquired: 
1 . 0 delighter of the heart of Parvati, 0 Lord born of the 
body of the Omniscient Lord, I wish to ask sorr:ething. 0 Lord, 
it behoves you to explain it. 
2. How did that chaste lady, a daughter of Patriarch Dakᖹa, 
a wife of Kasyapa and mother of Garuc;la become a slave? 
Skanda replied: 
3. 
I shall recount to you, 0 highly intelligent one, how that 
pitiable lady Vinata got into slavery; listen. 
4. Formerly Kadru gave birth ᖺo a hundred sons of Kasyapa 
and Vinata to three, namely Uluka, Arui.J.a and Tarkᖹya. 
5. 
In view of his being the eldest, Kausika (i.e. Uluka) 
attained the kingship of birds; but since he was bereft of virtues, 
he was dethroned from the kingdom by all those birds. 
6-7. "This (bird) is evil-eyed; he is blind by day; he is always 
I . This chapter describes the legend of the following Sun-gods. Their 
names and locations are noted as below: 
Name 
I . Arul).aditya 
2. Vrddhaditya 
3. Keiavaditya 
4. Vimaladitya 
5. Gangaditya 
6. Yamaditya 
Location 
In Trilocana Temple 
South of Visalak¶i Temple at Mira GhaŤ 
In Adi-Keiava Temple 
In Jangamba<;li area-south of Godulia crossing 
At Lalita Gha·a 
At Yama Tirtha near Virdvara.

=== PAGE 12 ===

2 
Skanda Purii1J,a 
crooked-nailed; his voice causes extreme alarm to everyone." 
Thus those birds censured its qualities in various ways. Hence 
they did not select anyone else as a king. They moved about 
as they pleased. · 
8. 
Since Kausika's lot had been so, Vinata was excessively 
eager to see a son. Hence she broke open the egg of the 
middle one. 
9. The egg was to be broken after completion of one thou­
sand years, 0 Pot-born Sage. But out of eagerness, the egg was 
broken open by her in eight-hundredth year. 
10. 
By that time all the limbs of that highly refulgent 
child staying within that egg, had become full-fledged above 
the thighs only. 
1 1 . 
As soon as it came out of the egg, the mother was 
cursed by that child with semi-fledged limbs. The splendour of 
his face was Aru1_1a (red) with rage. 
1 2-13. "0 my mother, the sons of Kadrii were seen playing 
in the lap of their mother gracefully by you and the egg was 
broken open. Hence, I have become one with incompletely 
developed limbs. I, therefore, curse you. 0 bird! Be the slave 
of those very children born of your co-wife." 
14. 
Trembling due to that curse, the bird spoke thus, "0 
Aniiru (thighless one) , my son, tell me the end (redemption) 
of the curse, unto your mother." 
15. 
Aniiru said: "Do not break open that third egg. It is 
unfledged like mine. He who is to be born out of this egg, will 
redeem you from slavery." 
1 6. 
After saying thus, Aru1_1a flew unto the sacred place 
called Anandakanana, where Visvesvara bestowed blessedness 
even on that crippled one. 
1 7. 
Thus the cause of the slavery of Vinata has been re-
counted to you as per your query. 0 sage, incidentally I shall 
tell you the origin of Aru1_1aditya. 
18. 
This child was called Aniiru because he had no thighs. 
He was known·- as Aru1_1a because his (face) had become red in 
colour due- to anger. Penance was performed by him at Vara1_1asi 
and the Sun-god was propitiated. 
19. 
That Lord too became pleased and granted boons to 
that Aniiru. The Sun-god became known as Aru1_1aditya after his 
name.

=== PAGE 13 ===

IV.ii.51 .20-32 
3 
The Sun-god said: 
20. 
0 Aniiru, son of Vinata, stay forever in my chariot in 
front of me, dispelling the darkness for the welfare of all the 
worlds. 
2 1 . 
If men worship the idol installed by you here in VarclJ:lasi, 
to the north of Mahadeva idol, they will have nothing to fear 
from anywhere. 
22. 
Neither misery, nor poverty, nor sins will affect those 
who always worship me designated as AruQ.aditya. 
23. 
By resorting to AruQ.aditya they can ward off the af-
fliction from all ailments. They are not affected by evil phe­
nomena, nor are they burned by the fire of grief. 
24. 
Thereafter the Sun-god made AruQ.a mount his chariot 
and took him away. Even today AruQ.a rises at dawn in the solar 
chariot. 
25. 
Whence can there be fear from misery unto him who 
gets up in the morning everyday and offers obeisance to AruQ.a 
along with the Sun-god? 
26. 
If any excellent man listens to the greatness of AruQ.aditya, 
he will never incur any sin. 
Skanda said: 
27. 
Listen to the greatness of Vrddhaditya. I shall narrate 
it to you. The very act of listening to it makes a man avoid 
sinful acts. 
28. 
Here at VaraQ.asi formerly an old great sage named 
Harita propitiated the Sun-god for the sake of great abun­
dance of penance. 
29. 
Endowed with firm devotion, he installed the image of 
the Sun towards the south ofVisalᖶi.The image had all auspicious 
characteristics and was intended to bestow auspiCiousness. 
30. 
Bradhna (the Sun-god) , being pleased with him, granted 
a boon unto that old austere sage. He said, "Do not delay. 
Request me. What boon should be given by me to you?" 
3 1 . 
That sage chose the boon from the delighted Sun-
god, the jewel of firmament: "If the Lord is pleased, grant me 
youth once again. 
32. 
Since I have reached old age, I have no capacity to

=== PAGE 14 ===

4 
Skanda Purii:rJa 
perform penance. Having regained my youth, I shall perform 
an excellent penance. 
33. 
Penance alone is the greatest virtue. Penance alone 
is the greatest wealth. Penance alone is the great (Puru;iirtha 
called) love. Penance is certainly salvation. 
34. 
Prosperity and riches can be obtained anywhere with-
out penance. Good position was obtained by Dhruva and others 
only on the strength of penance. 
35. 
Thanks to your liberal gift of the boon, I shall regain 
youth honoured by all and thereafter perform penance that 
bestows greatness in both the worlds. 
36. 
Fie upon old age of living beings here! Thereby all 
become estranged because even women do not remain under 
one's control, when one's sense-organs are afflicted with old age. 
37. 
Even death is preferable to old age that causes exces-
sive misery. Death is painful for a moment, but the pain of old 
age occurs every moment. 
38. 
Men who have conquered their sense-organs, desire 
longevity for the sake of long continued penance, wealth for 
the purpose of donation, a wife for procreating a son, and 
intellect for attaining salvation." 
39. 
Bradhna (the Sun-god) removed the senility of the 
old man immediately and granted him youth that produces 
charm and becomes the means of attaining merit. 
40. 
After attaining youth from Bradhna thus, that great 
old sage Harita performed a fierce penance in VaraQ.asi. 
41 . 
Thereafter that deity Aditya who dispels senility is 
remembered as Vrddhaditya, because he had been propitiated 
by the old sage Harita. 
42. 
Many have attained supernatural powers, 0 Pot-born 
One, by propitiating in VaraQ.asi, Vrddhaditya, the destroyer of 
old age, wretchedness and ailments. 
43. 
By bowing down to Vrddhaditya at Varil}.asi on a Sunday, 
a man shall obtain the desired benefit. He will not meet with 
wretchedness. 
Skanda said: 
44. 
Hear, henceforth, 0 sage, about the excellent Kesavaditya 
and how the Sun-god attained (spiritual) knowledge after as­
sociating with Kesava.

=== PAGE 15 ===

IV.ii.51 .45-56 
5 
45. 
Once, Adikesava was seen w()rshipping the Linga of 
Isvara by Saptasva (seven-horsed one = the Sun-god) who was 
proceeding ahead in the firmament. 
46. 
Out of curiosity, Ravi descended from heaven and sat 
silently, motionlessly, steadily near Hari and was greatly amazed. 
47. 
Desirous of asking Hari something and awaiting the 
opportunity thereof, he bowed down to Hari when the latter had 
concluded the adoration. He kept his palms joined in reverence. 
48. 
"Welcome to you", said Hari with great respect. He 
made the Sun-god who had bowed down, sit near him. 
49. 
Seeing that it was a suitable opportunity and having 
got the permission of the destroyer of Asuras, Lokacak!;US ('the 
eye of the world'-the Sun) bowed down to Adhok!;aja (Vi!;QU) 
and submitted as follows: 
Ravi said: 
50. 
0 Visvarhbhara, 0 Lord of the universe, you are the 
immanent soul of all the worlds. 0 Madhava, worthy of being 
adored by the universe, is there anyone worthy of being adored 
here, even by you? 
5 1 . 
0 resort of all the worlds, all this (visible world) manifests 
from you. Everything gets dissolved in you. You alone are the 
protector of the entire universe. 
52. 
I have come to you after seeing this surprising thing. 
What is this that is being worshipped, 0 Lord, by you, the 
destroyer of the distress of worldly existence? 
53. 
On hearing this speech of the thousand-rayed Sun, 
Hr!;ikesa (Lord Vi!;QU) stopped the Sun-god with a gesture of 
his hand as though saying, "Do not speak loudly." 
Sri Vi;Ǚu said: 
54. 
The Blue-throated Consort of Uma, the great Lord, 
the Lord of Devas alone is worthy of being adored here. He 
is the cause of all causes. 
55. 
If anyone of deficient intellect worships someone other 
than the Three-eyed Lord, he should be considered as one 
devoid of eyes, though actually he may have eyes. 
56. 
Mrtyuiijaya alone is worthy of being adored. He re-

=== PAGE 16 ===

6 
Skanda Purii:rJa 
moves birth, death and old age. Indeed, by worshipping Mrtyuiijaya, 
Sveta (ketu) was able to vanquish death. 
57. 
By propitiating Kalakala (Siva) , Bhp:igl vanquished 
Kala (god of Death) . Mrtyu (god of Death) spared the son of 
Silada (Nandi) and others who worshipped Mrtyuiijaya. 
58. 
Who will not become the most adorable of all by wor-
shipping Bhiitesa who vanquished the Tripuras sportingly by 
discharging a single arrow? 
59. 
The propitiation of the Three-eyed Lord is the no-
blest act, since he is the cause of the victory over the three 
worlds. 0 Bradhna, who does not adore the enemy of Smara, 
who is the vital essence of all? 
60. 
To whom is Lord Siva not the most adorable one? 
This whole universe becomes shrunk (destroyed) when his eyelashes 
close and becomes full-fledged when his eyes open. 
6 1 . 
By worshipping the Liriga of Sambhu here, a man 
attains all the four aims of life immediately. No hesitation 
need be entertained in this respect. 
62. 
Certainly after worshipping Sambhu's Liriga here, a 
man instantly gets rid of heaps of sins acquired in the course 
of hundreds of births. 
63. 
Undoubtedly what things-sons, wives, lands, heaven, 
liberation from Sarilsara, will not happen (be obtained) by 
worshipping (Siva) ? 
64. 
0 Thousand-rayed One, by the sole worship of Sivaliriga 
the riches and prosperities of all the three worlds have been 
attained by me. It is true, it is certainly true all the times. 
65. 
This alone is the greatest Yoga, this alone is the great-
est austerity, this alone is the greatest wisdom whereby Sivaliriga 
is worshipped. 
66. 
In this wide world, the receptacle of misery, whence 
can there be the fear of misery unto those by whom the Liriga 
of Parvati's Lord has been worshipped even once? 
67. 
0 Ravi, 0 Divakara, even great sins do not harass him 
who has sought refuge in the Liriga forsaking everything else. 
68. 
0 Bhaskara, interest in the worship of the Liriga here, 
shall occur only in those persons whose severance from the 
mundane existence, Mahesvara wishes to bring into effect. 
69. 
There is nothing else in all the three worlds more 
meritorious than the propitiation of the Liriga. One shall have

=== PAGE 17 ===

IV.ii.51 . 70-81 
7 
(the benefit of) having the holy bath in all the Tirthas by 
resorting to the holy water with which the Linga is bathed. 
70. 
Hence, 0 Arka, you too worship the Liil.ga of Mahesvara 
in order to acquire the greatest glory increasing with the greatest 
refulgence. 
71 . 
On hearing these words of Hari, the Thousand-rayed 
Lord made a crystal Liilga, 0 sage, and has been worshipping 
it ever since and even today. 
72. 
Vivasvan (Sun-god) chose Adikesava as his preceptor 
and is worshipping there to the north of Adike8ava. 
73. 
Hence that Linga is called Kesavaditya. He is the de-
stroyer of the darkness of devotees. Oq being adequately 
worshipped, he shall bestow for ever everything desired in the 
mind. 
74. 
By propitiating Kesavaditya in Varfu).asi, a good man 
acquires highest wisdom whereby he attains salvation too. 
75. 
In the holy Tirtha Padodaka at the confluence of 
Ganga and VaraQ.a, one should perform the ritualistic offering 
of water to one's predecessors and should visit Kesavaditya. He 
is liberated from congenital sins. 
76-77. 0 Agasti, on the Rathasaptami day (seventh day of 
the bright half of Magha) coinciding with a Sunday, a devotee 
should take bath early in the morning in the Padodaka Tirtha 
in front of Adikesava. He should observe silence and worship 
Kesavaditya. Instantaneously, · he shall be absolved of the sins 
incurred in the course of seven births. 
78-8 1 . 
Three Mantras: 
"(a) May the Saptami of the month of Makara dispel all my 
sins acquired in the course of seven births and the illness and 
grief attending them. (b) May these seven types of sins: (i) 
committed in the current birth, (ii) acquired in the previous 
birth, (iii) mental ones, (iv) verbal ones, (v) physical ones, (vi) 
known ones, (vii) unknown ones, be dispelled. (c) 0 Saptasaptika 
(the Solar Sakti) , the Saptami of Makara destroys these seven 
forms of sins, by my holy bath. Dispel them along with the 
seven ailments. " 
By repeating these three Mantras and by taking the holy dip 
in Padodaka and also by visiting Kesavaditya a man shall be

=== PAGE 18 ===

8 
Skanda Pura1Ja 
free from sins instantaneously. 
82. One who listens to the greatness of Kesavaditya with 
faith, is never smeared with sins. He acquires devotion unto 
Siva. 
Skanda said: 
83. 
Henceforth, listen 0 sage, to the excellent Vimaladitya 
stationed in the beautiful forest of Harikesavana in VaraQ.asi. 
84-85. Formerly, there was a ᕐatriya named Vimala in the 
'Ucca Desa' (in the country called 'Ucca' or in a hilly country) . 
Though he abided by the path devoid of impurities, he contracted 
the foul disease of leprosy as a result of the previous Karmas. 
He left his wife, home and riches. The sensible man repaired 
to VaraQ.asi and propitiated Bradhna (the Sun-god) . 
86. 
He worshipped the Sun-god with the fragrant flowers 
of Japa, Karavira, excellent Kirhsuka, red lotuses and Asoka, 
87:89. He offered garlands of Patala and Carhpaka flowers 
with exquisite workmanship. He offered red sandal mixed with 
saffron, agallochum and camphor. He offered Devamohana 
incenses filling the whole atmosphere with profuse perfume, 
lights with Karpiira, lamps with wicks and also milk and ghee 
puddings for Naivedya. He offered different kinds of arghyas, 
repeated hymns and prayers of the Sun-god in accordance with 
the (specific) injunctions. While he was propitiating thus, the 
Sun-god became the bestower of boons. 
90. 
He said: "0 Vimala of spotless activities, mention the 
boon you would have. Let this leprosy of yours disappear. Request 
for another boon." 
91-94. On hearing these words of the Sun-god, Vimala bowed 
down in prostration on the ground, with hairs standing on end 
due to exhilaration. He submitted to the Sun-god having mono­
wheeled chariot: ."0 eye of the universe, 0 incomprehensible 
soul, 0 dispeller of great darkness, if the holy Lord is pleased, 
if a boon may be granted to me, then let there be no leprosy 
in the whole family of those who are steadfast in devotion unto 
you. 0 Thousand-rayed One, let there not be other ailments 
too; let there be no poverty and let there be no distress unto 
your devotees."

=== PAGE 19 ===

IV.ii.51.95-1 07 
9 
Sri Surya said: 
95. 
Let it be so, 0 highly intelligent one. Listen to an-
other excellent boon. This idol has been adored by you, 0 
extremely intelligent one. 
96. 
I will never leave off the vicinity of this idol. This 
image will be popularly known after your name. 
97. 
Its name shall be Vimaliiditya. It shall always be the 
bestower of boons on devotees. It shall dispel all ailments and 
all sins. 
98. 
Mter granting these boons, the Sun vanished there 
itself. Vimala, with a clean spotless body went to his abode. 
99. 
Thus is the Vimaladitya at Varal}.asl the bestower of 
auspiciousness. Merely by visiting him, the foul disease of leprosy 
becomes completely destroyed (cured) . 
100. 
A man who listens to this story of Vimaladitya attains 
spotless purity. He gets rid of all mental impurities. 
Skanda said: 
1 0 1 . There is another (deity) Gangaditya to the south of 
Visvesa. A man attains purity merely by seeing it. 
102. 
When Ganga arrived with Bhaglratha leading her, the 
Sun-god stationed himself there in order to eulogize Ganga. 
103. 
Even to this day, Bhaskara faces Ganga day and night 
and eulogizes her. He is delighted in his soul and bestows 
boon on the devotees of Ganga. 
104. 
An excellent man who propitiates Gangaditya in Varaf.J.asl, 
never attains wretchedness at any place. Nor does he fall ill. 
Skanda said: 
105. 
0 blessed one, listen to another thing connected with 
Yamaditya. On hearing it, a man never sees the world of Yama. 
106. 
By visiting Yamaditya, 0 sage, to the west of Yamda 
and to the east of Vlrda a devotee never sees the world of 
Yam a. 
107. 
Mter taking bath in Yama Tirtha on a Tuesday coin­
ciding with the fourteenth lunar day, the devotee should visit 
Yamesvara. He is quickly absolved of all sins.

=== PAGE 20 ===

1 0 
Skanda Purii1J.a 
I 08. 
Formerly Varna performed pure penance in Varna Tirtha. 
Then he installed Vamesa and Vamaditya that bestow super­
natural powers. 
109. 
0 Pot-born One, since Aditya was installed there by 
Varna, he is known as Vamaditya and he removes the torture 
arising from Varna. 
1 1 0. 
One who bows to Vame5a and Yamaditya installed by 
Varna and takes his holy dip in Vamatirtha does not see the 
world of Varna. 
Ill. 
One becomes free from indebtedness to Pitrs by per­
forming libations arid offerings of balls of rice in Varna Tirtha 
on the fourteenth lunar day on a Tuesday with BharaQ.i con­
stellation. 
1 1 2-1 1 4. The Piq-s dwelling in Narakas always desire thus: "If 
this excellent combination of a Tuesday with BharaQ.i and the 
fourteenth lunar day occurs and if some highly intelligent (scion 
of our family) takes his holy bath in Varna Tirtha at Kasi and 
of(ers·libations along with gingelly seeds, it shall be conducive 
to our liberation. If Sraddha is performed in this combination 
at Varna Tirtha at Kasi, of what avail is the pilgrimage to Gaya 
and Sraddhas with enormous Dak³iQ.as?" 
1 1 5. 
One should be free from indebtedness to the Pitrs by 
performing Sraddha in Varna Tirtha, adoring Vamesvara and 
bowing down to Vamaditya. 
Skanda said: 
1 1 6. 
Thus (the propitiation of) twelve Adityas who dispel 
sins has b͵en explained to you. On listening to the origin of 
these, a man does not fall into a hell. 
1 1 7. 
0 Pot-born Sage, there are many other Adityas too 
installed in KaSi such as Guhyakarka etc., by devotees of the 
Sun-god. 
1 1 8. 
By listening to these holy Adhyayas (chapters 45 to 
5 1 ) explaining the twelve Adityas and by narrating them to 
others a man can avert disasters. He never attains wretched­
ness.

=== PAGE 21 ===

IV.ii.52. 1-9 
1 1 
CHAPTER FIITYfWO 
Description of Da5asvamedha1 
Skanda said: 
1 . Mter the Sun had gone to KaSi that is fascinating to all 
the three worlds, 0 sage, Hara who was stationed in Mandara 
reached a high degree of anxiety: 
2. 
'The Yoginis have not returned till this day. Nor has the 
fierce-rayed Sun-god. It is surprising that I have no tidings 
about K.asi. It has become very difficult to get. 
3. 
Or, what is surprising in this: If K.asi makes even my 
steady mind fickle and unsteady, what th,en is the position in 
regard to other Suras? 
4. 
I burned down Kama, the conqueror of the three worlds, 
by my glance. Alas! the desire for K.asi burns all the more and 
torments me. 
5. 
Whom shall I send next to seek the tidings of K.aSi? 
Brahma alone is capable of knowing it because he is four-faced 
(or clever-faced) .' 
6. 
Mter tpinking thus, Srikai.J.tha invited the Creator (Brahma) 
with great deal of respect. Mter he had taken a seat, he spoke 
to him: 
7. 
"At first the Yoginis were sent. Then the thousand-rayed 
Sun was sent. Till today, they have not returned from KaSi, 0 
Lotus-born One2• 
8. 
0 Lord of the worlds, that K.asi creates eagerness in my 
mind like a tremulous-eyed girl in that of an ordinary man. 
9. 
Though Mandara here abounds in beautiful caves, I do 
not feel drawn towards it like a crocodile which does not revel 
1. Da5asvamedha GhaZ is the most popular GhaZ in VaraQasi. In ancient 
times it was called Rudrasarovara. But it got its name DaSa5vamedha when God 
Brahnia performed ten horse-sacrifices here under the sponsorship of King 
Divodasa. The Brahmeiivara Liilga established by Brahma is in a low-lying 
building inundated every year in floods. The Dasasvamedhe5vara Liilga is in 
the compound of Sitala Devi. Godavari (now called Godulia Nala) joined 
Ganga at this GhaZ and this had additional sanctity due to this confluence. 
The original GhaZ is the southern side of the modern Dasasvamedha 
Gha·a. The northern GhaZ was formerly called Prayaga Ghaŉ and was an 
independent one. (BCL 226-8) 
2. The reading 'Kamalasaritbhava' is more appropriate than 'KalaSa.sarilbhava'.

=== PAGE 22 ===

1 2 
Skanda Purii1J,a 
in a small lake where the water is shallow as well as turbid. 
10. 
That burning sensation arising from the poison Halahala 
did not so torment me as this one arising from the separation 
of Kasi which afflicts me very much. 
1 1 . 
Though the cool-rayed Moon is situated on my head 
and sheds nectarine drops as it were, it is not capable of dispelling 
the distress arising from the separation from Kasl. 
12. 
0 Brahma, 0 highly intelligent one, 0 foremost among 
noble ones, go hence to Kasi quickly and do an investigation 
for me in this regard as desired by me. 
1 3. 
0 Brahma, you alone know the reason for my leaving 
Kasl. Even a dull-witted one may not leave Kasl. What to say 
in the case of one who knows something! 
14. 
0 Brahma, why don't I go myself to Kasi along with 
my Maya (Parvati-the Sakti) today itself? But I am not eager 
to assail Divodasa who abides by his Dharma. 
15. 
0 Brahma, since you carry out everything that has to 
be done, the instruction 'Do this and this' is entirely meaning­
less in your case. 
16. 
Go safe without any ill-luck. May your path lead to 
auspiciousness." 
Brahma took the order with a bowed head and went joyously 
to Varal).asl. 
17. 
The Self-born Lord with white Swan as his vehicle 
reached the city of Varal).asi quickly and considered himself 
blessed, as one who has done his duty. 
18. 
'In this contact with Kasi, I have gained the benefit 
of having the Swan as a vehicle, since they say that there are 
obstacles in regard to the attainment of Kasi at every step. 
19. 
The root drs (to see) has become meaningful in re-
gard to my Drsau (eyes) since this Anandavatika has come 
clearly within the range of my vision. 
20. 
The celestial river itself waters it with its own current. 
The trees are blissful here. The people are full of bliss here. 
2 1 . 
All the fruits in Kasi give delight for ever. Kasi is a 
perpetual source of delight. Siva is a perpetual bestower of 
bliss. 
22-25. Hence, all the creatures in Kasi become bliss embod­
ied. Only those feet that traverse the ground in the city of 
Visvabhartr (Siva) and become blessed, know how to traverse.

=== PAGE 23 ===

N.ii.52.26-35 
1 3 
Only those ears of great learning, of persons well-versed in the 
Vedas here know how to hear, because Kasl has been heard 
by them once. Only the mind of diligent person here medi­
tates properly because Kasl, the source of all authorities, is 
pondered over by it. The intellect of intelligent persons here 
comprehends everything, because the abode of Dhiirjati has 
been made its object. 
26. 
Better indeed are those grains and grass blades, even 
though wafted by wind and fallen within Kasl, than those people 
who have not seen KasL 
27. 
Today, my life-span extending over two Panirdhas has 
become fruitful, because in the course of that period the city 
of Kasika, rare to be visited, has been attained by me. 
28. 
Wonderful is my asset of righteousness, astonishing is 
the weightiness of my fortune, since I have seen Kasl today that 
has been thought over for a long time. 
29. 
The tree of my austerities sprinkled with the water of 
devotion to Siva, has borne the abundant fruits of all cherished 
desires. 
30. 
Various things have been created by me in the course 
of my. creative activities. But Kasl that has been created by 
Visvesa is unique in itself.' 
3 1 . 
Brahma, who was delighted in his mind after viewing 
the city of VariiQ.asl, assumed the form of an aged BrahmaQ.a 
and visited the king. 
32. 
With raw rice-grains wet with water in his hand, he 
proclaimed Svasti unto the king. He was saluted by the king 
and offered a seat which he occupied. 
33. 
The king duly honoured him by standing up and offering 
the seat and the like. On being asked the purpose of his visit, 
the BrahmaQ.a said to the king: 
The Brahma7J.a said: 
34. 
0 king, I am an aged person staying here for a long 
time. You may not know me but I know that you are Ripuiijaya 
(in your previous birth) or conqueror of enemies! 
35. 
Hundreds of kings have been seen by me. They dis-
tributed much by· way of monetary gifts. They successfully fought 
many battles. They regularly performed sacrifices. They con­
trolled their sense-organs.

=== PAGE 24 ===

1 4 
Skanda Purat:UJ 
36. 
They eschewed the group of six enemies (lust, anger 
etc.) . They were of excellent conduct. They possessed Sattva 
quality. They mastered learning. They were experts in state­
craft and polity. 
37. 
They are clever yet merciful and chivalrous. They abide 
by the vow of truthfulness. They are on a par with the Earth 
in forbearance. By their majesty and gravity they have excelled 
oceans. 
38. 
They have conquered anger and are brave. They are 
the source of origin of gentleness and of handsome features, 
being richly endowed with these and other good qualities. Thus 
they have amassed good reputation as their asset. 
39. 
But, 0 saintly king, generally among these kings, two 
or three of your extremely sacred, good qualities have not 
been seen by me. 
40. 
You consider your subjects as members of your family. 
You consider BrahmaQas as your deity. You have great austeri­
ties to your credit. In this regard the other kings are unlike 
you. 
41 . 
0 Divodasa, you are blessed. You are worthy ofhonour 
due to your good qualities. You are worthy of the adoration of 
all good persons. Afraid of you, even the Devas do not go 
astray. 
42. 
Of what avail unto you, 0 king, is the panegyric of 
BrahmaQas like me who are devoid of desires? What can we 
do? The group of your good qualities makes us your eulogiz­
ers. 
43. 
May this chitchat be set apart. I shall state the thing 
relevant at present. 0 king, I am desirous of performing a 
sacrifice. Hence I seek your help. 
44. 
0 king, this kingdom has a benign king in you. It is 
the receptacle of all prosperities. I have some assets in the 
form of great wealth accumulated by legitimate means. 
45. 
In this land of Karmas, the capital city is the most 
excellent one. Even on the day of annihilation, there is not 
reduction in the power to yield benefits in the case of the holy 
rites. 
46. 
The wealth amassed by persons abiding by the righ-
teous path, should be utilized in Kasi. Otherwise it will be 
conducive to pain and distress.

=== PAGE 25 ===

IV.ii.52.4 7-57 
15 
47. 
0 king, 'no one understands the excellent greatness 
of Kasi, except the three-eyed Sarhbhu, the bestower of all 
wisdom. 
48. 
I think that you are highly blessed since. you rule Kasi, 
the excellent Tanu (physical form) of Visvabhartr (Lord Siva) , 
as a result of merits incurred in the course of many hundreds 
of births. 
49. 
This has been decided by great sages that Kasi is the 
essence of the three worlds, the essence of the three Vedas 
and the greatest essence of the three aims of life. 
50. 
This city is protected, thanks to the blessings ofVisvesa, 
by you. By the protection of even one in Kasi (it is as good as) 
the three worlds protected. 
5 1 . 
0 sinless one, I shall mention •another thing condu-
cive to your welfare if it appeals to you. Visve8a alone should 
always be propitiated by means of all rites. 
52. 
Never look upon the Lord of the universe like other 
gods, 0 king. Brahma, ViᔻQU, Indra, Candra and Arka are 
mere playthings of Dhurjaᔽi. 
53. 
What is conducive to your welfare has been told by 
me, since kings should be properly advised by BrahmaQas desirous 
of their ultimate benefit. Otherwise what have I to do with 
such (anxious) thoughts? 
54-57. 
When the BrahmaQa kept quiet after speaking this, 
the excellent king replied: 
The king said: 
0 excellent Brahmal}a, whatever has been spoken by you 
has been grasped by me in the heart. I am at your service in 
the matter of helping you who are desirous of performing 
sacrifice. 
Take away all the requisites for the sacrifice from .my trea­
sury. Whatever I have in the kingdom consisting of seven constituent 
elements, you are the lord unto that entirely. With single­
minded attention go ahead with the sacrifice. Consider that 
everything you desire has already been accomplished. In my 
rule over the kingdom, 0 BrahmaQa, I have no selfish interest.

=== PAGE 26 ===

1 6 
Skanda Purii:f],a 
I do endeavour for helping others with my own person, sons 
and wives. 
58. 
It has been said by learned men that for kings the 
sole duty is the protection of the subjects. It is far superior to 
sacrificial rites and even Tirthas. 
59. 
The fire arising out of the suffering of the subjects 
is fiercer and more terrible than the fire of thunderbolt which 
can reduce to ash two or three persons (only) whereas the 
former destroys the kingdom, the family and the physical frame 
(of the king) . 
60. 
0 excellent BrahmaQ.a, whenever I feel the desire for 
having the valedictory bath after a sacrifice, I bathe myself with 
the waters from the feet of BrahmaQ.as. 
6 1 . 
The offerings I make in the mouth of a BrahmaQ.a, 
0 excellent Brahmai_la of high intelligence, are, I think, better 
than sacrificial rites. 
62. 
Among all the desires· in my heart, this one is more 
dominant that at least someone should be seen today request­
ing for something, even my own body. 
63. 
Oh! Good! My desire has become fulfilled after- many 
days that today you have come to my abode begging for something, 
0 BrahmaQ.a. 
64. 
With the mind concentrated, 0 BrahmaQ.a, perform 
many sacrifices with ample monetary gifts. Take it that assis­
tance in everything has been rendered already. 
65. 
On hearing this speech of the virtuous and highly 
intelligent king, Brahma, the Creator, became pleased in his 
mind. He gathered together the requisites for sacrifice. 
66. 
Getting the help of the saintly King Divodasa, the 
Lotus-born One performed in Kasl ten great horse-sacrifices. 
67. 
As the interspaces of the firmament were pervaded by 
the columns of smoke from the Homas, the firmament has not 
given up the bluish colour ever since. 
68. 
Since that time onwards, that Tlrtha has become well-
known all over the world. The Tirtha named Dasasvamedha in 
VaraQ.asl is the bestower of auspiciousness. 
69. 
Formerly that Tirtha was known by the name Rudrasaras. 
It later became 'Dasasvamedhika' due to its taking over by 
Brahma.

=== PAGE 27 ===

IV.ii.52. 70-83 
17 
70. 
Thereafter, the heavenly river came into contact with 
it in association with Bhaglratha. Hence that excellent Tlrtha 
became extremely meritorious and sacred. 
71. 
After installing the Liilga Dasasvamedhda there, Brahma 
stayed there itself. Even till today he has not left Kasl. 
72. 
He did not find any vulnerable point in that king who 
was extremely interested in pious acts. Hence what could Brahma 
have said after going to Lord Siva? 
73. 
He realized the power of the ·holy place. Meditating 
on Siva, the Lord of the universe, Brahma installed Brahmdvara 
and remained there itself. 
74. 
. It is certain that Kasi: is the supreme form of Visvesa. 
Since I serve it, Sambhu will not get angry with me. 
75. 
Who is silly enough to leave .after arriving at Kasl 
capable of removing Karmas acquired in the course of many 
births? 
76. It is but natural that the body of the Lord of Visva, the 
annihilator of the distress of the universe, should feel all the 
more distressed through the great fire of separation from Kasl. 
77. 
After attaining Kasl, the destroyer of masses of sins, 
if anyonᖴ leaves it, he should be known as a human beast, 
averse to the iJlpreme bliss. 
78. 
If Kasl is attained by the blessings of Isa, it should not 
be abandoned by a person desirous of the glory of liberation 
after discarding the hellish worldly evils. 
79. 
If anyone of wicked intention abandons Kasl and goes 
elsewhere, the outcome of the fruit of the four aims of life 
surely slips down from his hands. 
80. 
Who is silly enough to abandon it after attaining Kasi:, 
the destroyer of mass of sin, the heightener of excellent merit 
and the bestower of the bliss of salvation? 
81. 
Where does one get that happiness in Satyaloka? Where 
is that happiness in the region of Viᔻl).u-the happiness that 
is obtained in Kasi: even after resorting to it for half a: minute. 
82. 
After having come to this decision about the ·various 
good qualities of Varal).asl, 0 sage, Druhil).a (God Brahma) did 
not return to Mandara mountain. 
-
Skanda said: 
83. 
0 son of Mitra and Varul).a, I shall narrate the great-

=== PAGE 28 ===

18 
Skanda Purii:rJa 
ness of Dasasvamedha in Kasi, the crest:iewel of all holy spots. 
84. 
Whatever sacred rite, even if it is very small, is per-
formed after reaching Dasasvamedhika, the most excellent of 
all excellent Tirthas, it is said to be everlasting. 
85-86. Holy bath, liberal gifts, ]apa, Homa, Svadhyaya, worship 
of a deity, offer of twilight prayers, libation and Sraddha in 
veneration of the ancestors, everything in Dasasvamedha is 
holy. By taking a single bath in Dasasvamedha Tirtha and by 
visiting the Lord of Dasasvamedha, an excellent man is rid of 
all sins. 
87. 
On the first day of the bright half of the month of 
Jyeᔻtha, the devotee should take the holy dip in the Dasasvamedha 
Tirtha. He is rid of congenital sins. 
88. 
By taking a holy dip in the Rudra Sarovara on the 
second day of the bright half of Jyeᔻtha, the sins committed 
in two births perish instantaneously. 
89. 
An excellent man, taking bath on the days in the 
following order (i.e. third day, fourth day etc.) till the tenth 
day in the bright half of the month shall get rid of the sins 
of as many births (e.g. second day-two births, third . day­
three births, fourth day-four births etc.) . 
90. 
On the Dasahara day that removes the sins of ten 
births, the devotee should take his holy dip in the Da§asvamedhika 
Tirtha. He shall never experience the torture of Yama. 
91. 
By visiting Dasasvamedhesa Liiiga on the Dasahara 
Tithi, one is undoubtedly absolved of sins acquired in the course 
of ten births. 
92. 
If one takes his holy dip on the Dasahara day and 
worships thᖲ excellent Dasasvamedhesa Liiiga with great devotion, 
the fate of' being conceived in a womb never touches him. 
93. 
In the Rudrasaras, the man should perform the annual 
pilgrimage extending over the whole of a fortnight in the 
bright half of the month of Jyeᔻtha. He is never assailed by 
obstacles. 
94. 
Certainly, one obtains the benefit of the valedictory 
baths of ten horse-sacrifices by taking the holy dip in the 
Dasasvamedha Tirtha on the Dasahara day. 
95. 
On the western bank of the celestial river, one should 
bow down to Dasaharesvara. He is the holiest of the holy. He 
never experiences wretchedness.

=== PAGE 29 ===

IV.ii.52.96-IV.ii.53.4 
19 
96. 
What is glorified as the southern door of the inner 
shrine at Kasi, there the devotee should visit Brahme5vara. He 
shall be honoured in the world of Brahma. 
97. 
Thus till the arrival of Visvesvara, the highly intelli-
gent Druhil).a stayed in Varal).asi in the guise of a Brahmal).a. 
98. 
The eminent king Divodasa got a Brahmasala built 
for the sake of Brahma in the guise of an aged Brahmal).a, 
when he concluded the .Yajiia. 
99. 
The beautiful Brahmasala is near Brahmesvara. Brahma 
set his abode there making the atmosphere reverberating with 
the recitation of Vedic passages. 
1 00. 
Thus, 0 holy Brahmal).a, the extremely great impor­
tance of the Dasasvamedha Tirtha has been recounted to you. 
It is destructive of all sins. 
1 0 1 . 
By listening to this holy chapter and narrating it with 
faith (Sraddha) , an excellent man obtains the world of Brahma. 
CHAPTER FIFTYfHREE 
Siva's Attendants Go to Varaǔasi 
Agasti said: 
1 . 0 Lord who are the foremost among the knowers of 
Brahman, an unusually interesting story of Brahma has been 
narrated. What did Saril.bhu do, when Brahma too stayed there 
itself? 
Skanda said: 
2. 
0 Agastya, 0 blessed one, when Brahma too stayed at 
Kasi, Girisa who was extremely afflicted in mind, began to 
think. 
3. 
'That city of Kasi is a fascinating place. Such a city has 
never come within the range of my vision. 
4. Whoever goes to that city stays behind. Indeed the Yoginis 
having come into contact wilh Kasi have become Ayoginis (non­
Yoginis}.

=== PAGE 30 ===

20 
Skanda Purii:r;ta 
5. 
Even the thousand-rayed Sun has become ineffective. 
Even Vidhi, clever in arranging everything, has not been able 
to accomplish my object.' 
6-7. 
Mter thinking thus, the Lord of Devas called many of 
his attendants and sent them saying, "Oh, go quickly to the city 
of VaraQ.asi. Mter going quickly, find out what the Yoginis do. 
What is that Sun-god doing and what Vidhi is doing." 
8-15. He called them by their respective names and sent 
the m with due h o n o u r . 0 SailkukarQ.a, 0 Mahakala, 
G h a Q. t a k a r Q. a , M a h o d ar a , S o m a n a n d i n , N a n d i ᔻe Q. a , 
Kalapiilgala, Kukkuta, KuQ.<;fodara, Mayurakᔻa. BaQ.a, GokarQ.a, 
Taraka, TilaparQ.a, Sth ulakarQ.a, DrmicaQ.<;la, Prabhamaya, 
Suke§a, Vindati, 0 Chaga, Kapardin, Piilgalakᔻaka, Virabhadra, 
0 Kirata, Caturmukha, Nikumbhaka, Paiicakᔻa, 0 Bharabhuta, 
Tryakᔻa, Kᔻemaka, Lailgalin, Viradha, Sumukha, Aᔻa<;lhi­
all of you are my sons just as these Skanda and Herarhba, 
like this, Naigameya, like this Sakha and Visakha and Nandi 
and Bhrngi. Despite your presence, though you possess 
excessive valour, I do not get any news of Kasi, nor of 
King Divodasa, nor of the Yoginis, the Sun and Brahma. 
Hence let two of you go. This SailkukarQ.a and Mahakala 
are capable of making even Kala tremble. Let them go to 
find out the news of VaraQ.asi and let them return hurriedly. " 
16-17. 
Taking a vow accordingly, they quickly reached the 
city of VaraQ.asi. Just as one, howsoever clever he may be, gets 
deluded the very moment he sees the tricks of a juggler, so 
were SailkukarQ.a and Mahakala enamoured as soon as they 
saw Kasi. 
They thought thus: 
18. 
Oh, how wonderful is the great power of delusion! 
Oh, what a misfortune! The unwise go away elsewhere after 
attaining Kasi, the mass of liberation. 
19. 
Even the salvation which has been achieved slips out 
of the hands of those persons by whom Kasi, the ground of 
great blessings, has been abandoned. 
20. 
If one takes bath even with hot water at Kasi even the 
valedictory baths of all Yajiias are excelled. Who shall abandon 
- (such) Kasi? 
2 1 . 
Even if a single flower is offered on the top of Siva

=== PAGE 31 ===

IV.ii.53.22-34 
21 
Liilga at K:isi the merit thereof is the same as that of a gift 
of ten gold pieces? Who shall leave that K:isi? 
22. 
They say that even the position of Indra is insignifi-
cant (in comparison with the status) one obtains by means of 
a single prostration in front of Siva at K:isi. Who will forsake 
that K:isi? 
23. 
By feeding a single BrahmaQ.a to his satisfaction at 
Kasi, one gets more merit than that of Vajapeya (sacrifice) . 
Who will forsake that K:isi? 
24. 
By duly making the gift of a single cow to a Brahma1.1a 
at K:isi, one gets the merit of gifting ten thousand cows. Which 
sensible man forsakes that K:isi? 
25. 
By installing a single Liilga at K:isi, one establishes 
the lordship of three worlds. Who wil( forsake that K:isi? 
26. 
Both of them resolved thus; they installed two meri-
torious Liilgas and permanently stayed there. They have never 
left (K:isi) till today. 
27. 
By visiting Sankukar1.1esvara Liilga adored by the at-
tendant SailkukarQ.a, a creature is never born in the great 
womb of any mother. 
28. 
By worshipping SailkukarQ.esvara on the north-west-
ern side of Visvesa, a man never re-enters the terrible ocean 
of mundane existence. 
29. 
Where can one have any fear after bowing down to, 
adoring and eulogizing Mahakalesvara Liilga adored by the 
attendant Mahakala? 
Skanda said: 
30. 
SailkukarQ.a and Mahakala were late by a great deal 
of time. Knowing this the omniscient Lord despatched two 
other GaQ.as. 
31. 
"0 GhaQ.takan.ta, you come. 0 highly intelligent Mahodara, 
both of you go to K:iSi quickly to know the situation there." 
32. 
Thus, these two GaQ.as after reaching the great city 
K:isi, have not returned till today. They remained at some 
place there itself. 
33. 
Mter duly installing GhaQ.ᔽakarQ.esvara Liilga at K:isi, 
the excellent GaQ.a GhaQ.ᖳkarQ.a took excessive delight in it. 
34. 
He dug a sacred pit there itself for performing the

=== PAGE 32 ===

22 
Skanda Purii1J.a 
rite of ablution of the Liriga and meditating upon the Liriga 
in the usual manner does not leave Kasi till today. 
35. 
To the west thereof, Mahodara became engrossed in 
meditating on Siva. Even today, 0 Pot-born Sage, he meditates 
on Mahodaresvara Liriga. 
36. 
0 excellent Brahmal).a, after visiting Mahodaresvara 
in Varal).asi, one never enters the cavity of a mother's belly. 
37. 
Mter taking the holy dip in the Ghal).takarl).ahrada 
and visiting Lord Vyasesvara, if a devotee dies elsewhere, he 
will be deemed one that has died at Varal).asi. 
38. 
Mter duly performing Sraddha in the great Tirtha, a 
devotee shall redeem seven ancestors, even if they are suffering 
in hell. 
39. 
Even today, after dipping down in that holy pit, if one 
becomes very attentive for a moment, he surely hears the ringing 
sound of the bells of the great worship of Visvesvara. 
40-41. 0 Pot-born One, the ancestors say: "Will not there 
be one offering gingelly seeds and water in our family in the 
pure waters of Ghal).takarl).a?" Persons belonging to their family, 
after performing the libatory rite in the great Hrada Ghal).takarl).a 
at Kasi have attained great supernatural powers. 
Skanda said: 
42-43. 
When the Gal).a Ghal).ᔽakarl).a had gone and when 
Mahodara too had gone, the Enemy of Smara (Lord Siva) 
became wonderstruck. Shaking his head frequently and smil­
ing again and again, Hara said in his mind: 'Oh Kasi! I know 
you well that you have a great power of bewitching others. 
44. 
Those who are conversant with the affairs of yore 
praise you as the destroyer of great delusion. But they do not 
know this aspect of Kasi that it is a place possessing a great 
power of creating delusion. 
45. 
I shall be sending all others and you will enchant 
them. Thus I know, Kasi, you, the enchanting herb. 
46. 
Still I shall send all the attendants I have. Wise men 
do not stop their endeavour in a task that has to be accom­
plished. 
47. 
Stopping of endeavour should never be resorted to by 
wise people. Their continuous endeavour can even avert adverse 
fate.

=== PAGE 33 ===

IV.ii.53.48-63 
23 
48. 
The Sun and the Moon in the firmament, though 
assailed by Svarbhanu (Rahu) never abandon till today their 
endeavour in regard to what they have undertaken. 
49. 
Being adverse in one place, fate frequently frustrates 
actions. In another place all the actions become fruitful by 
concentration on adequate effort. 
50. 
It is the Karma performed before (in previous birth) 
that is called Daiva (fate) and not anything else. Effort should 
be made by a sensible man to eradicate it. 
5 1 . 
Foodstuff that is kept in a vessel does not enter the 
mouth merely by force of fate. By the actions of hands and 
mouth, it shall enter the cavity of the belly! 
52. 
After justifying endeavour as one that certainly tri-
umphs over fate, the Lord sent five GaQ.a; of great impetuosity. 
53. 
They were Somanandi:, NandiᔻeQ.a, Kala, Pirigala and 
Kukkuᔽa. They too have not returned till today, just as dead 
Ji:vas do not. 
54. 
With a desire to propitiate Sarhbhu, they too installed 
Lirigas after their names and stayed at Kasi:, the source of 
origin of salvation. 
55. 
By visiting the great Somanand15vara Liriga in Nandavana, 
a man with devotion shall attain the greatest bliss in Somaloka. 
56. 
By visiting NandiᕇeQ.esvara to the north thereof, a 
man shall get an Anandasena (immense delight) and instan­
taneously conquer even death. 
57. 
By bowing down to the great Liriga Kalesvara to the 
north-west of Gariga, one shall avert being bound with the 
noose of Kala for ever. 
58. 
By adoring Pirigale5vara, a little to the north of Kalesa, 
one shall obtain knowledge of the form of Pirigala and attain 
identity therewith. 
59. 
Those who display devotion to Kukkuᕋe5vara Liriga 
having the shape of hen's egg will never be born in a womb. 
Skanda said: 
60. 
When the five GaQ.as, 0 sage, beginning with Somanandi 
stayed on at Anandakanana, SthaQ.u said: 
61-63. "This alone should be done by us, if due reflection 
is made. Let these persons of mine stay there under this pretext.

=== PAGE 34 ===

24 
Skanda Purii7J-a 
Even if the Pramathas of greatness and virility enter VaraQ.asi, 
it is beyond doubt that even (it is as good as) I have entered 
it. I shall send successively whatever attendant I have. When 
all have gone, I shall also go." 
64. 
Mter deciding thus within the heart, four of his Pramatha 
GaQ.as were sent by the Trident-bearing Lord of Devas. 
65. 
The GaQ.as named May ura, KuQ.<;iodara, BaQ.a and 
GokarQ.a resorted to their Maya power and entered Kasi. 
66. 
They employed hundreds of means, but none of them 
was capable of making Divodasa agitated or confused. 
67. 
'By which action does the Lord become satisfied, if 
hundreds of offences were committed.' Pondering thus, they 
carried on the excellent propitiation of the Lirigas. 
68. 
If a single Li:riga of Sarilbhu was duly adored here, the 
Three-eyed Lord may forgive a hundred offences and bestow 
salvation. 
69. 
Sambhu is not satisfied with Yajiias, Diinas, Tapas and 
Vratas .to the same extent as when a Liriga is duly adored even 
once. 
70. 
If he is conversant with the procedure of Liriga worship 
and is always engaged in the worship of the Liriga, even if the 
man possessed two eyes he should be directly conceived as 
three-eyed. 
71 . 
Neither by the gift of a hundred cows nor by the gift 
of a hundred gold pieces, is that benefit obtained by men 
which they get by worshipping the Liriga once (only) . 
72. 
That benefiᖬ is not obtained by Yagas like horse-sac-
rifice, which is obtained by men by worshipping the Liriga 
always. 
73. 
Mter duly bathing the Li:riga, if the devotee sips thrice 
the water with which it is bathed, the .three types of his sins 
perish quickly. 
_ 
74. 
He who bathes his head with the water of the ablu-
tion of the Li:riga gets the benefit of holy dip in Ganga, and 
he becomes free from sin here itself. 
75. 
Mter visiting an adored Liriga, if anyone bows down 
to it even once, doubt arises in respect to his becoming embodied 
(in the next birth, i.e. he is not born again) . 
76. 
If anyone instals a Li:riga with devotion, there is no 
doubt in this that he becomes free from sins committed in the

=== PAGE 35 ===

IV.ii.53. 77-91 
25 
course of seven births. On being purified, he attains heaven. ' 
77. 
After thinking thus, Lingas that destroy great sins 
were installed in .Kasi by the Gal).as for quelling the offence 
against the master. 
_ 
78. 
By visiting Kui).Qodaresvara Linga near LoHirka, one 
becomes rid of all sins and is honoured in the world of Siva. 
79. 
One is never conceived in womb, if one adores 
Mayuresvara on the banks of Asi to the west of KuQQodardvara 
Liilga. 
80. 
The great Bal).esvara-Liilga is to the west of Mayurda. 
Merely by visiting it, one is liberated from all sins. 
81 . 
To the west of Antargeha (inner shrine) a devotee 
should worship the great Linga Gokarl).esa in .Kasi at its very 
entrance. He is never assailed by obstacles. 
82. 
When the devotee of Gokarl).esvara dies, wherever he 
dies, he does not experience loss of knowledge. 
Skanda said: 
83. 
While these four attendants were delaying, the Lord 
of GaQa'S described the greatness and importance of .Kasi. 
84. 
'The whole universe is deluded by the Maya of ViᕇI).U. 
Indeed, this .Kasi is the personified form thereof. It is the sole 
enchanter of the universe. 
85. 
Setting aside brothers, wives, son, land, house and 
wealth, even facing death, all resort to .Kasi. 
86. 
While there is nothing to fear from even death at 
.Kasi, why should the GaQas staying there be afraid even of me? 
87. 
To which can .Kasi be compared, where death is an 
auspicious thing, ashes an embellishment and a loincloth a silk 
garment? 
88. 
There the maiden (in the form) of Salvation chooses 
everyone having Prantyabhuᔻal).a (the Taraka Upadesa at the 
time of death as an embellishment) , whether he is rich or 
poor, a Brahmal).a or a CaQQala. 
89. 
Even Sakra and other Suras are not on a par with a 
ten-millionth part of the creatures meeting with death at .Kasi 
and attaining salvation. 
90. 
A creature that dies at .Kasi is bowed to intently by 
Brahma, Narayal).a and others with joined palms on their heads. 
91 . 
In the state of a corpse, the creature does not become

=== PAGE 36 ===

26 
Skanda Purii:rJ.a 
unclean in KaSi. Hence I myself touch its ear. 
92. 
A meritorious person who repeats twice or thrice the 
word Kasi is holier than all holy things. He is the greatest (of 
all) . 
93. 
I have been meditated upon in the heart, I have been 
served always by that person by whom Kasi has been meditated 
upon in the heart and by whom Kasi has been served. 
94. 
If a living being serves Kasi with unfaltering mind, I 
retain him always in my heart assiduously. 
95. If one is unable to stay personally, one should make at 
least one person stay there by hiring him as a resident of the 
holy place. Certainly, he gets the benefit of the one who resides. 
96. 
Those intelligent men of fortitude, who resolve to 
stay in KaSi until death, should be known as liberated ones 
even while alive. They alone are venerable and adorable.' 
97. 
Mter reflecting thus on the merits of VaraQ.asi many 
times, SthaQ.u called other GaQ.as and joyously sent them. 
98. 
"0 Taraka come on; 0 clear-minded one, go to that 
city which Divodasa, the abode of righteousness, rules. 
99-101. 0 TilaparQ.a, 0 SthillakarQ.a, 0 DrmicaQ.Qa, 0 
Prabhamaya, 0 Sukesa, 0 Vindati, 0 Chaga, 0 Kapardin, 0 
Piliᖭ, 0 Virabhadra, 0 GaQ.a named Kirata, 0 Caturmukha, 
0 Nikumbhaka, 0 Paficakᕇabhara, 0 Bhiltakya, 0 Tryakᕇa, 0 
ᖮmaka, 0 Lailgalin, 0 Viradha, 0 Sumukha, 0 Ca<Jhi, let 
all the GaQ.as, the blessed ones devoted to their master and of 
steady resolve, go separately." 
102. 
Desirous of-finding out a vulnerable point in the king, 
they kept awake with winkless eyes. Those clever GaQ.as adopted 
many Mayas, forms and shapes. 
103. 
Unable to find out his weakness, they wasted the wealth 
of their reputation and they uttered in disgust, "Ah! What has 
befallen?" They censured themselves. 
GaǗas said: 
104. 
Fie upon us who were always honoured by our Lord! 
It is however pitiful indeed that not even a single man could 
be brought under our control here. 
1 05. 
Fie upon us who have failed to do the duty toward the 
Three-eyed Lord who has bestowed favours upon us along with 
great honour, gift and friendship!

=== PAGE 37 ===

IV.ii.53. 106-118 
'2."1 
106. 
What fate shall befall us, since we have blundered in 
our duty towards our master? Certainly, our residence shall be 
in a world full of blinding darkness. 
107. 
Alas! At every step those persons will suffer, who do 
not fulfil the task of the Lord, yet continue to live with unimpaired 
activities of the sense-organs. 
108. 
The desires of the servants who take a lot -after being 
honoured, but who spoil the task of the Lord, become frus­
trated. 
109. 
This earth becomes burdened with those servants who 
do not fulfil the task of their masters and who shamelessly 
stand in front of the Lord and stare at his face! 
1 10. 
The earth, the mother of living beings, does not have 
great unbearable burden, because of m'?untains, oceans and 
huge trees but due to that of the traitors to the Lord. 
1 11 . 
Ha! A famous ancient Gatha (verse) has been remem­
bered by us. It is for that purpose that we will stay here with 
steady resolve to stick to it. 
112. 
The city of Varai.J.asi is the refuge unto those who 
have not acquired Pui.J.yas, whose wealth and longevity have 
become reduced and who are devoid of all means. 
113. 
The· city of Varai.J.asi is the refuge unto those who are 
depressed due to the weight of sins, who experience repen­
tance and who move up and around everywhere. 
11 4. 
There is no refuge anywhere except at the city of 
Varai.J.asi to those who are disloyal traitors to their masters, 
who are ungrateful and who kill treacherously. 
115. 
After deciding this to be the meaning (implication) 
of the Gatha, the Pramathas remained there without their forms 
being known to King Divodasa. 
1 16. 
Though that king wa$ extremely intelligent, he did not 
come to know (the existence) of those sensible Gai.J.as stationed 
there in various forms and shapes by the power of i5a. 
117. 
It is surprising that not even Citragupta knows those 
creatures stationed in Varai.J.asi. Nothing need be said about 
others residing in the mortal world! 
1 18. 
Dharmarat (Lord Varna) never gauges fully persons of 
unbroken power and influence, of unlimited brilliance, who 
have installed the Lirigas.

=== PAGE 38 ===

28 
Skanda Purii:TJ.a 
119. 
Thus, 0 Pot-born Great Sage, all those Pramathas 
who have been regularly worshipping Lingas do not leave even 
today Kasi, the bestower of welfare. 
120. 
0 sage, the excellent GaQ.a named Taraka worships 
even today the great Linga Tarakesa that bestows the redeem­
ing Taraka Jiiana. 
121. 
After showing steady devotion to Tarakesvara Linga, 
Taraka knowledge is easily acquired by excellent men. 
122. 
By visiting TilaparQ.esvara Linga installed by TilaparQ.a, 
there cannot remain sin, even of the size · of a gingelly seed 
sticking to one. 
123. 
After duly performing the worship of SthulakarQ.esvara 
Linga, a man attains excellent merit. He never attains a wretched 
state. 
124. 
To the west thereof, the devotee should propitiate 
DrmicaQ.Q.elivara Linga and Prabhamaya Linga. He is never assailed 
by sins. 
125. 
After visiting Prabhamayesvara Linga, even if the devotee 
dies elsewhere, he shall go to Sivaloka through a Prabh:amaya 
(refulgent) vehicle. 
126. 
After adoring Sukesesvara in the Harikda grove, the 
devotee does not bear the ᕵatkausika ('made of the six dhatus') 
body repeatedly. 
127. 
By adoring Vindatisa near BhimacaQ.Q.i, the man casts 
off even the most horrible sin and attains eternal salvation. 
128. 
By visiting the great Linga Chagalesa stationed near 
Pitrisvara, no one touches . even Prakrta sin like a brute. 
CHAPTER FIFTYFOUR 
The Greatness of PiSiicamocana 1irtha1 
Skanda said: 
1 . 0 Pot-born One, I shall narrate the greatness and im­
portance of Kapardisa Linga. May Your Holiness kindly listen 
attentively. 
· 
1. This tank is on the western skirt of VaraQasi. By performing Sraddha 
of a person who died in an accident etc., the (dead) person becomes free from 
the state of a goblin. People drive spike in the trunk of a tree in the temple 
area. (BCL 267-268)

=== PAGE 39 ===

IV.ii.54.2-15 
29 
2-3. 
A certain leader of the GaQ.as named Kapardin, a very 
great lover of Sarhbhu, installed the Liilga of Sarhbhu to the 
north of Pitri:Sa. In front of it, he dug a pit named Vimalodaka. 
The very touch of the water thereof makes man free from 
impurities. 
4. 
I shall narrate a traditional legend exactly as the events 
took place there formerly in Treta Yuga. 0 Kurhbhayoni, lis­
tening to it dispels sin. 
5. 
There was an excellent Pasupata (devotee of Pa5upati) 
named Valmlki. The sage performed penance adoring Kapardisa. 
6-7. 
Once in the Hemanta season in the month of MargaSirᕇa. 
that ascetic took his bath in the holy Tirtha Vimalodaka at 
midday and then took Bhasmasnana (smearing holy ash) all­
over the body. He performed all the midday holy rites on the 
right side of the Liilga. 
8-9. 
He placed (applied) the holy dust on the forehead, 
he meditated on the identity of the soul and the Absolute, 
repeated the Paiicakᕇari Vidya ( nama/:1. sivaya) and then pon­
dered over Lord Kapardin. Mter making the prescribed num­
ber of circumambulations along the Sarhhara Marga (Apasavya 
or anticlock-wise direction) , he then loudly uttered 'Om huc;lurh' 
thrice. 
10-12. Prefixing the PraQ.ava he uttered the Svaras (musical 
notes) ᕵac;lja etc. and sang. With great delight he danced de­
picting the Hasta Mudras, Ailgaharas, delightful CarimaQ.c;lalas 
etc. The sage of great penance then sat for a short while on 
the banks of the lake. Then he saw a terrible Rakᕇasa of hideous 
features. The bones at the temples and cheeks were dried up. 
The whole face was pale. The tawny eyes were sunk in their 
cavities. 
13. 
The ends of hairs were rough and dishevelled. The 
neck, was very long and lean, the nose flat to the extreme, the 
lips dry and the teeth long and projected. 
14. 
His head was very huge. The hairs on the scalp stood 
erect. The lobes of ears were hanging loose. He was terrible 
with his tawny moustache . and beard. 
15. 
The lolling, hanging tongue was fearful; the back of 
the neck was very rough. The bones of the collar region were 
stout, tough and the two broad shoulders increased his fero­
ciousness.

=== PAGE 40 ===

30 
Skanda Pura7J.a 
1 6. 
The armpits were deep; the pair of arms were dry and 
short. The fingers of the palms were separated. The big nails 
were depressed. 
17. 
The chest was excessively rough and dusty and slightly 
protruding; the skin of the belly seemed to touch the back. He 
was fierce with the ample waist and hips. The sacral bone was 
devoid of flesh. 
18. 
The two buttocks were loose and suspended. The penis 
ᖯs short with shrunk testicles. The thigh-bones were free from 
(i.e., without) flesh and long. The stout bones of the kneecap 
appeared like a cage of bones. 
19. 
Mere skin and bones had remained in his body; the 
entire physical form seemed to be full of sinews and tubular 
vessels. The shanks were long. He was terrible with the big 
bones of the ankles. 
20. 
The feet were very broad. The toes were long, thin 
and crooked. The entire body was prominent with the skin and 
bone over-spread with sinews. 
2 1 . 
He was awful, terrible in size with thick growth of 
hairs. He appeared to be very hungry. He looked like a tree 
burnt in forest fire. The eyes were rolling and unsteady. 
22-24. 
He looked an embodiment of the (poetic) senti­
ment of fear (Bhayanaka) . He struck terror in all living beings. 
On seeing that ghost terrifying the hearts of onlookers though 
piteous in the face, the old ascetic boldly asked him: "Who are 
y"bu? Whence have you come here? Wherefore is this condition 
of yours? 0 Rakᕇasa, I ani asking with a compassionate heart. 
Speak out without fear. We ascetics are adequately protected 
with the holy ash as a coat of mail. We repeat the thousand 
names of Siva (for welfare) . " 
25. 
O n hearing the utterance of the ascetic joyously, the 
Rakᕇasa said to the sympathetic sage, with palms joined in 
reverence: 
Rak;asa said: 
26. 
0 holy Sir, 0 excellent ascetic, if you have any sym­
pathy, listen for a short while with great attention. I shall 
recount the facts about me.

=== PAGE 41 ===

27. 
On the banks of Godavari, there is a region named 
Pratiᔻ!hana. I was a Brahmal}a living there on 1irtha-pratigraha 
('monetary gifts from pilgrims' ) . 
28. 
As a result of that act, I have attained this miserable 
plight in a desert region which is highly terrible, devoid of 
water and trees. 
29. 
0 sage, I have spent a great deal of time in residing 
there, hungry, distressed with thirst and enduring chillness 
and heat. 
30. 
When huge clouds shower great downpour day and 
night, when the wind blows in the rainy season, I do not have 
anything to cover myself. 
3 1 . 
Those who do not make monetary gifts on festive 
occasions . but accept 1irtha-pratigraha (Dak;ir_tii from pilgrims) 
attain birth like this, involving great misery. 
32. 
Mter a great deal of time had elapsed, 0 sage, once 
a BrahmaQa boy was seen arriving there at the desert region. 
33. 
At the time of sunrise, he did not perform the Sandhya 
rites. Mter urinating and voiding the bowels, he did not perform 
the purificatory rites of Sauca and Acamana. 
34. 
On seeing him devoid of Sauca and Sandhyii Karmas 
and behaving like a Muktakaccha (Buddhist heretic) I passed 
into his body for the purpose of enjoyment. 
35. 
0 sage, because of my ill luck that Brahmal}a boy 
came to this holy city along with a merchant due to greed of 
wealth. 
36. 
0 excellent sage, that Brahmal}a went into the inte-
rior of the city. Along with his sins I came out of his body 
instantaneously. 
37. 
By the command of Siva, 0 storehouse of austerities, 
we ghosts and great sins do not have the right of entry in 
VaraQasl. 
38. 
Even today those sins wait outside for him . to come 
out. They are afraid of the Pramathas guarding the· border. 
39. 
0 ascetic, till today we stood waiting with the hope 
that he would come out today, tomorrow or the day after. 
40. 
Even today he has not come out. Even today our hope 
does not cease to be. Thus, fettered by the ropes of hope, we 
stay on though without any ground to stand on. 
41 . 
I shall speak of today's miracle. 0 ascetic, listen to it

=== PAGE 42 ===

32 
Skanda Purii:fJ,a 
now itself. I think something very good is bound to happen. 
42. 
Everyday with great hunger we go as far as Prayaga with 
a desire for something to eat, but we do not get it anywhere. 
43. 
Everywhere, in every forest, there are fruit-bearing 
trees. There are reservoirs with dear water on the earth at 
every step. 
44. 
There are other types of foodstuff easily accessible to 
all. There are plenty of varieties of beverages everywhere. 
45-47. But, the moment they come within our sight they 
move far away. Fortunately, 0 sage, on seeing a pilgrim today 
afflicted with hunger as I was, I approached him thinking that 
I should eat him forcibly. I was about to seize him quickly when 
words purified by the name of Siva came out of his lotus-like 
mouth-words which removed all obstacles. 
48. 
By remembering Siva's name, my sin too became re-
duced. Hence I got entrance here. 
49. 
I was not immediately observed by the Pramathas at 
the border, since Yama too does not see those who have Siva's 
name always sounding in their ears. 
50. 
Now I came as far as the border of Antargeha (Inner 
Shrine) along with him. That pilgrim went into the inside. I 
have stayed behind. 
5 1 . 
0 sage, having seen you, I regard myself honoured 
now. 0 merciful one, save me from this terrible state. 
52-54. 
On hearing these words of the ghost, that compas-
sionate ascetic thought in his mind: 'Fie upon those men who 
work only for their own sake! All the beasts, birds etc. are mere 
fillers of their own bellies. In this world only he is blessed who 
is always engaged for the sake of others. With my power of 
penance, I shall undoubtedly redeem this sin-distressed ghost 
who has sought refuge in me. ' 
55-56. 
After reflecting thus in his mind the excellent sage 
said to the Pisac!l: "Take bath in this lake Vimaloda for the 
sake of quelling your· sins. By the power of this Ti:rtha and the 
visit paid to Kapardi:sa, 0 Pisaca, your Pisacahood will become 
weak and then perish." 
57. 
On hearing these words of the sage who was delighted 
in his mind, the ghost with joy in his heart, bowed down to 
him. With the palms joined together he said to him:

=== PAGE 43 ===

IV.ii.54.58-70 
33 
58-59. 
"0 excellent sage, 0 my lord, I do not get water 
even to drink, where then is the possibility of bath? As the 
deities of water will protect it, there can be talk of drinking 
here? Even the touch of water is very difficult to get. " 
On hearing this statement of the ghost, he · experienced 
great pleasure. 
60. 
The ascetic who was capable of redeeming the whole 
universe said: "You take this holy ash and apply it to your 
broad forehead. 
61 . 
Due to the greatness of this holy ash, 0 ghost, no one 
anywhere will harass or create obstacles to even great sinners. 
62. 
On seeing the forehead of even a sinner whitened by 
the Vibhuti (holy ash) , the servants of Yama become terrified 
of the Pasupata missile and take to flight. 
63. 
On seeing a pond marked (spoiled) with bones, ban-
ners etc., wayfarers keep themselves away from them, and similarly 
the servants of Yama from one who is marked with holy ash 
and flowers. 
64. 
Even the beasts of prey all-round never approach an 
excellent man fortified with Bhitti as a protecting coat of mail 
and guarded by Sivamantras. 
65. 
If anyone devoutly smears with Bhasma sanctified by 
Siva Mantra, the forehead, the chest, the root of the arm, cruel 
beings do not injure him. 
66-67. 
The holy ash is declared as Rak;ii because it guards 
us day and night from all the wicked animals. Since it causes 
prosperity it is called Vibhuti. Since it illuminates (Bhiisana) 
the world or dispels (Bhartsana) Avidya and its creations, it is 
called Bhasma. Since it minces sins it is called Piimsu. And since 
it eradicates ( ±iira1Ja) sin, it is called ±iira. The terms are 
thus (etymologically) explained by scholars." 
68. 
He took the Bhasma from its receptacle and placed 
it in the hand of the ghost. He received it with veneration and 
applied it over the forehead. 
69. 
On seeing the Pisaca marked with Vibhuti, the deities 
of waters did not prevent him as he was ready to dive into 
water. 
70. 
By the timᖰ he took his bath, drank water and came 
out of the lake his Pisacahood disappeared. He attained a 
divine body.

=== PAGE 44 ===

34 
Skanda Purii'T}-a 
71 . 
Wearing divine garlands and garments, applying di-
vine scents and unguents he got into a divine vehicle and 
reached the aerial path. 
72. 
As he went along the sky that ascetic was bowed down 
to by the Pisaca. He spoke loudly, "0 sinless holy Sir, I have 
been liberated by you. 
73. 
Thanks to the greatness of this Tlrtha. I attained a 
divine physical form far different from that miserable birth 
extremely censured (by all) . 
74. 
From today onwards, this Tlrtha shall be known by 
the name Pisiicamocana. Through ablution, this Tlrtha shall 
eradicate Pisacahood of others as well. 
75-76. 
If in this highly meritorious Tirtha, men take their 
holy dip, offer balls of rice along with Sandhya prayers and 
libations, their Pitrs and Pitamahas who by ill-luck had ac­
quired Pisacahood will cast off the same and attain the greatest 
goal (Mokᔻa) . 
77. 
Today, 0 ascetic, on the fourteenth lunar day of the 
bright half of the month of Margaslrᔻa, the rites of ablution 
etc. should be carried out (as they _are) conducive to the eradi­
cation of Pisacahood. 
78. 
Those men who perform annual pilgrimage here will 
be liberated from the sin of 1irtha-pratigraha (acceptance of 
dana in a Tirtha) . 
79. 
By taking the holy dip at Pisacamocana, worshipping 
KapardiSa and making gift of cooked food there, men can be 
fearless elsewhere (i.e. there is no need to be afraid of death 
elsewhere) . 
80. 
On the fourteenth lunar day in the bright half of 
Margaslrᖱa, if a devotee takes his holy dip (in the Tirtha) 
before KapardiSa, he shall not attain Pisacahood even if he 
dies elsewhere. " 
81 . 
Mter saying thus the divine person bowed down to 
that ascetic agai.n and again. The blessed one attained divine 
goal. 
82. 
0 Pot-born One, after witnessing that great miracle, 
the ascetic propitiated KapardiSvara and attained salvation in 
due course of time. 
83. 
Beginning with this, 0 great sage, the Tirtha at Vara:r:tasl, 
Pisacamocana, the destroyer of all sins, attained great renown.

=== PAGE 45 ===

N.ii.54.84-N.ii.55.8 
35 
84. 
If in the Paisacamocana Tirtha one feeds a single 
Sivayogin, one attains the benefit of feeding ten million per­
sons. 
85. 
By listening to this holy chapter with restrained mind, 
a man is never attacked by goblins, ghosts and vampires. 
86. 
This great narrative should be assiduously read to 
bring about peace and quiescence among children attacked by 
Biilagrahas ('goblins attacking children') . 
87. 
If a man proceeds to another land, after listening to 
this narrative, he will be nowhere assailed by thieves, tigers, 
Pisacas etc. 
CHAPTER FIFTYFNE 
GaǕlesa Proceeds on a Mission to Kasi 
Skanda said: 
1 . 0 Kurhbhayoni (Pot-born Sage) , listen. I shall speak to 
you about the Liilgas that the other Gai.J.as installed there at 
Kasi. 
2. The Linga of Sarhbhu named Piilgalakhye8a was installed 
to the north of Kapardi:Sa by the Gai.J.a named Pingala. 
3. 
Merely by visiting it, sins are eradicated. Virabhadra was 
a great favourite of the Trident-bearing Lord of Devas. 
4. 
Even today, o n e should s teadily meditate upon 
Virabhadresvara Linga. Merely by visiting it attainment of heroic 
powers takes place. 
5. By worshipping Virabhadresvara behind Avimuktesvara, 
one shall be victorious. He will never face obstacles or defeat 
in battle. 
6. 
0 sage, Vi:rabhadra himself possesses the body of a 
hero. He destroys the mass of obstacles of the residents of 
Avimukta. 
7. By worshipping Vi:rabhadra accompanied by his auspi­
cious and splendid spouse Bhadrakali a man obtains the ben­
efit of residence at KaSi. 
8. 
Kiratesa ᖩiilga was installed to the south of Kedara in

=== PAGE 46 ===

36 
Sksnda Purii1Ja 
Kasl by Kirata. It bestows freedom from fear on the devo­
tees. 
9. 
A glorious Gat;ta, Caturmukha, is meditating steadily 
even today on Caturmukhesvara Liriga near Vrddhakale§a. 
10. 
The devotees of Caturmukhesa are honoured by the 
groups of Suras in heaven including Brahma. They are en­
dowed with all pleasures. 
1 1 . 
After visiting Nikumbhe§vara adored by the Gat;ta 
Nikumbha and worshipping it, if one proceeds to (his) village 
one shall surely attain the fulfilment of the task. He is honoured 
in Sivaloka near Kuberesa. 
12. 
After duly adoring Paiicake§a, the great Liriga to the 
south of Mahadeva in Kasi:, the man shall attain the power of 
remembering previous birth. 
13. 
By meditating on Bharabhutesvara Liriga adored by 
Bharabhuta Gat;ta, at the northern gate of Antargrha, the devotee 
shall stay in Sivapura. 
14. 
Those by whom Bharabhutesvara Liriga has not been 
visited in Kasl, have become burdens unto the earth like non­
(ruit-bearing trees. 
15. 
Tryak!jesvara, a great Liriga, is being meditated upon 
even to.day by the Gat;ta named Tryakᔻa in front of the Three­
eyed Lord, 0 Pot-born One. 
16. 
Those who are devotees of that Liriga become three­
eyed ones (like Siva) on death. No doubt need be entertained 
in this regard. 
17. 
The leader of Gat;tas named ᕐemaka who assumed a 
form himself in Kasl, even today steadily meditates on the 
omnipresent Visvesvara. 
18. 
If a devotee worships ᕂemaka, a great Gat;ta, in Varat;tasl, 
all his obstacles get dissolved. There shall be welfare (for him) 
at every step. 
19. 
If someone has gone to another land, ᕐemaka should 
be worshipped with a desire for his safe return. He will imme­
diately return safe and sound. 
20. 
By visiting LarigaHSvara adored by Larigalin on the 
northern side of Visvesa a man never falls ill. 
2 1 . 
By worshipping even once Larigallsa, one obtains the 
entire benefit of the gift of five ploughs. It endows all (kinds 
of) riches.

=== PAGE 47 ===

IV.ii.55.22-36 
37 
22. 
By pr.opitiating Viradhe8vara worshipped by the GaQ.a 
named Viradha, one is free from crimes though one might 
have committed all the offences. 
23. 
A crime committed by the residents of Kasi, becomes 
wiped off instantaneously by the adoration of Viradhesa. 
24. 
By assiduously bowing down to Viradhe8a to the south-
west of DaQ.«;lapaQ.i, one is freed from all offences; there is no 
doubt about it. 
25. 
By visiting Sumukhesa, a great Liriga, that faces west 
and that was adored by the GaQ.a named Sumukha, one is rid 
of all sins. 
26. 
By taking the holy dip in Pilipila Tirtha and visiting 
Sumukhesa one will always see the pleasant-faced Dharmarᖪa 
(god of Death) and not the wry-faced one. 
27. 
By devoutly visiting on the new-moon day in the month 
of Asa«;lha, the Liriga named Aᔻa«;lhisvara adored by ᕀa«;lhi, a 
man becomes rid of all sins. 
· 28. 
By worshipping ᕀa«;lhisa to the north of Bharabh fitesa, 
on the new-moon day of the month of ᕀa«;lha, one is never 
distressed by sins. 
29. 
By undertaking the annual Yatra (pilgrimage) on the 
fo.urteenth or fifteenth lunar day in the Suci months of Jyeᔻtha 
and ᕀa«;lha in the bright half, a man becomes free from sins. 
Skanda said: 
30-3 1 . 0 sage, when these GaQ.as stayed behind in VaraQ.asi 
after installing Lirigas after their names for the delight ofVisvesa, 
Visvesa thought again regarding the city of Kasi: 'Which good 
one shall I send today and get the greatest delight? 
32. 
The Yoginis, the hot-rayed Sun, the Creator, the GaQ.as 
beginning with SarikukarQ.a - these have not returned from 
Kasi like the rivers that flow into the ocean. 
33. 
Certainly those who have entered Kasi have entered 
my abdomen. They have "no outlet like Havis offered in a well­
kindled fire. 
34. 
Those who are engaged in the worship of Lirigas and 
have permanent stay in Kasi are undoubtedly my mobile Lirigas. 
35. 
Mobile and immobile, sentient and otherwise-all are 
my Lirigas. Those who hate them are wicked ones. 
36. 
Those in whose mouth there is VaraQ.asi, those in

=== PAGE 48 ===

38 
Skanda Purii7Ja 
whose ears there is the story of Visvesvara-only they are the 
Lingas of Kasl worthy of being worshipped as I am. 
37. 
Yama will not overpower them from whose mouths 
these clear words-Viirii7Jasz, Kiisz and Rudraviisa-come out. 
38. 
Those who, after reaching Ananda Kanana, yearn for 
any other place (city) that is not the place of bliss, remain 
always devoid of bliss here. 
39. 
Let death come today or after a long time, Kasl should 
never be abandoned by men for fear of Kali (Age) and Kala 
(god of Death) . 
40. 
Inevitable events will take place at every step. It is 
persons without intellect who abandon Kasi: that is the abode 
of prosperity. 
41 . 
It is better to endure thousands of obstacles at every 
step in Kasl and not elsewhere. One should never desire an 
unimpeded kingdom anywhere else. 
42. 
How many moments (eye-winkings) can prosperity be 
enjoyed continuously? But Kasika yields great pleasure con­
tinuously here and hereafter. 
43. 
I, the Lord of the universe, am the lord (here) . Ka.Sika 
is the illuminator of salvation. The celestial river has nectarine 
waves. What is it that this combination of three does not bestow? 
44. 
This city is limited to five Krosas (Krosa = three Kms.) ; 
but its prosperity is of unlimited extent. It is the cause of the 
salvation of a devotee. 
45. 
Certainly my city, Kasl, alone is the place of perma-
nent rest for those who come and go and are distressed due 
to the burden of the worldly existence. 
46. 
This pavilion of wish-yielding creepers bearing abun-
dant fruits of fulfilled cherished desires, is called Kasika. It is 
always at the disposal of wayfarers of worldly existence. 
47. 
This Kasl is the wonderful and distress-dispelling um-
brella of the emperor NirvaQaraja ('king of liberation' ) . Its 
supporting rod is my lifted-up trident. 
48. 
For the acquisition of incessant happiness, Kasl should 
never be abandoned by men of meritorious nature who sportingly 
desire the glory of salvation. 
49. 
Those who permanently take up their residence in 
my Anandavana get here the tasty fruits of the glorious salva­
tion.

=== PAGE 49 ===

IV.ii.55.50-61 
39 
50. 
K;Hi enchants even me despite the fact that I am 
Nirmama (free from desire of possessions) and Nirmoha (free 
from delusion) . By whom should not that enchantress of the 
universe be remembered? 
5 1 . 
Her very name is also sweet. It manifests the greatest 
bliss. Why is she not repeated in japa by those with merits in 
possession? 
52. 
If people incessantly imbibe the nectarine name of 
Kasi, their pathway certainly becomes lustrous and nectarine. 
53. 
I am the Atman of all. I am free from Mamatii (sense 
of possession) . Indeed in this world only those who repeat the 
name of Kasi are the people belonging to me. 
54. 
It was after knowing this secret of VaraQ.asi that the 
GaQ.eSvaras along with the Yoginis, the Sun and Brahma stayed 
there itself and not with any other purpose. 
55. 
If not, how can those Yoginis, Sun-god, Brahma and 
those GaQ.as forsake me and stay elsewhere? 
56. 
A great good has resulted by their staying behind in 
Kasi. Even one of them may be able to create split in the 
kingdom without (the assistance) of another country (inter­
vening) . 
57. 
Those who have gained entry are entirely persons 
having my forms. They will surely try for my arrival there. 
58. 
I shall send others too from my attendants. Though 
those who have gone there are all excellent ones, yet I too 
shall go. ' 
59-60. Mter reflecting thus Mahadeva called Gajanana and 
sent him after telling him thus: "0 my son, go to Kasi from 
here. Staying there, endeavour for the accomplishment of our 
purpose along with the GaQ.as without any obstacle. Create 
obstacles in the case of the king. " 
61 . 
Keeping the command of Dhiiijati on his head, GaQ.adhisa 
well conversant with the situation, hastened to Kasi for a stay 
there.

=== PAGE 50 ===

40 
Skanda Purii:TJ-a 
CHAPTER FIFTYSIX 
Manifestation of the Maya of Ga'fJ,esa 
Skanda said: 
1 . 
Thereafter, pondering on the means of facilitating 
Sarilbhu's arrival at Kasi, the Elephant-faced One set off from 
Mandara mountain, duly taking up the behest of Isa. 
2. 
The Lord reached Varal).asi quickly proceeding on a 
fast chariot. He assumed the form of a Brahmal).a and entered 
at a time when good ones eulogized him. 
3. 
He became an old astrologer visiting every house. He 
moved about in the city delighting the citizens. 
4. 
He himself showed dreams to the men during the 
night and went to their houses in the morning explaining the 
benefits or otherwise thereof. 
5. 
"In order to kindle your enthusiasm, I shall recount 
the vᖫrious activities seen by you in dream in the night today. 
6. I 
While sleeping at night a big, deep pond was seen by 
you in the fourth Yama. You reached the bank after sinking 
in the same a couple of times. 
7. 
You sank down and got up many times in the mud 
slimy with its waters. The outcome of this bad dream shall 
cause you great fear. 
8. 
A person with shaven head and wearing ochre-coloured 
robes was seen by you. He will cause you terrible distress. 
9. 
The eclipse. of the Sun was seen at night. It will cer-
tainly cause great evil. The fact that you saw two rainbows at 
night, is not conducive to auspiciousness. 
10. 
The Sun came to the West and made the Moon fall 
to the ground even as he was about to rise up in the sky. This 
indicates something fearful to the entire kingdom. 
1 1 . 
A pair of banners fighting each other were seen. It 
is not good. It may only bring about split in the kingdom. 
12. 
You saw yourself being carried to the South even as 
your hairs and teeth were dropping down. this forebodes something 
awful to the family. 
1. W 6-19 state the fruits of d,reams as was believed then.

=== PAGE 51 ===

IV.ii.56. 1 3-25 
41 
1 3. 
As the night came to a close, you saw the banner on 
the top of the palace break down. Know that this will certainly 
cause ruin of the kingdom. It will cause a great danger. 
14. 
In the dream, the city was flooded with the waves of 
the ocean of milk. I suspect a great danger to the citizens 
within three or four fortnights. 
15. 
Since in your dream you have been carried in a monkey-
vehicle towards the South, 0 highly intelligent one, the means 
to nullify its effect is leaving the city for good. 
16. 
The crying woman that you saw towards the close of 
the night, without clothes and with the hairs dishevelled is the 
goddess of glory that has departed. 
1 7. 
The pot-like pinnacle on the top of the temple was 
seen by you falling down. Within a few days the kingdom will 
split. 
18. 
In the dream the city was surrounded by excessively 
crying herds of deer (barking dogs- Comm.) . It will be aban­
doned (uninhabited) within a month. 
19. 
Certainly some grave mishap unto the residents of 
this place is being indicated by these falcons, owls, vultures etc. 
hovering over this city." 
20. 
In this way, recounting often these evil forebodings 
of bad dreams, that Lord of Obstacles expelled many of the 
city-dwellers. 
2 1 . 1 
He pointed out to some. that the transits of the 
Planets were not good. "Saturn, Venus and Mars are in the 
same zodiac. 
22. 
This Dhumagraha (Ketu) has pierced through the 
region of the Great Bear in the firmament and has gone to the 
West. That indicates ruin unto the king. 
23. 
Saturn has gone beyond the zodiac and thereafter is 
in its regress-path. It is associated with evil Planets (like Rahu, 
Ketu and Mars) . It is not considered good. 
24. 
0 citizens, the earthquake that happened yesterday 
seems to cause great trepidation even in my heart. 
25. 
This meteor rose from the North and went quickly 
towards the South. It then got dissolved in the sky itself with 
a violent gust of wind and thunderstroke. It is not auspicious. 
I. VV 21-29 indicate astrological and other evil omens.

=== PAGE 52 ===

42 
Skanda Purii:T_I.a 
26. 
This Caityavrkᔻa (holy fig tree) despite its being deep-
rooted has been uprooted by the velocity of the violent gust 
of wind and it has fallen down in the quadrangle. It indicates 
a great evil. 
27. 
At sunrise the crow has perched itself on the top of 
a dried-up tree in the East and begins to crow harshly making 
others very much afraid. 
28. 
Two deer have dodged the hunters and have gone 
fast through the middle of the shopping complex in front of 
the citizens. They are inauspicious to them. 
29. 
Even in this autumn season, birds are seen untimely 
on the mango and Sala trees. I think it is foreboding of great 
fear and danger to the inhabitants of the city." 
30. 
Thus, terror was generated by Vighnesvara in the guise 
of a false BrahmaQ.a and some citizens were driven away from 
(forced to quit) the city. 
·31 . 
By using his Maya power he entered the female apart-
ments-and by recounting events experienced by them, he became 
an object of confidence of the women. 
32. 
"0 lady of auspicious features, hundred sons less by 
seven were born to you. One of them was riding a horse over 
a bridge outside, when he fell down and died. 
33. 
This pregnant woman will give birth to a splendid 
daughter. This woman had been wretched before but now she 
has become blessed and fine. 
34. 
This woman is extremely endearing to the king and 
the queens. A pearl .ornament from his own bosom has been 
given to her by the king. 
35. 
I think only five or seven days have passed by. Two 
villages have been promised to be given to her by the king as 
his favour." 
36. 
By saying various things directly experienced, thus, 
the BrahmaQ.a became one worthy of being honoured by the 
queens. They began to describe his many good qualities indirectly 
to the king. 
37. 
"How wonderful! This BrahmaQ.a is handsome and 
has good behaviour in the same way as he is clever in every­
thing. He is truthful and speaks sparingly. 
38. 
He is not greedy. He is liberal-minded. His conduct 
is good. He has perfect control over the senses. He is satisfied

=== PAGE 53 ===

with even a little. He is averse to accepting monetary gifts. 
39. 
Anger is subdued by him. His face beams with plea-
sure. He is never malicious or deceitful. He is grateful. His 
countenance is cheerful. He is averse to calumny and slander. 
40. 
He counsels what is meritorious. He is a pious-souled 
one. He observes all vows scrupulously. He is clean and his 
activities are clean. He is efficient in Srutis and Smrtis. 
41 . 
He is intelligent and conversant with the holy legends 
and myths. He is honoured by all and he looks at everything 
keenly. He is adept in a number of arts. He is the best among 
those conversant with the treatises on Astronomy. 
42. 
He has forbearance. He is of noble birth. He is not 
miserly. He enjoys keeping the mind free from impurities. No 
one else has been seen elsewhere so richly endowed with these 
good qualities. " 
43. 
Thus those women of the inner apartment spent their 
time enumerating his good qualities every now and then. 
44. 
Once the chief queen of King Divodasa named Lilavati 
spoke to the king about him on a suitable occasion. 
· 
45. 
"0 king, there is an aged, learned BrahmaQ.a having 
a number of excellent qualities. He is a great embodiment and 
storehouse of the BrahmaQ.ical virtues and Vedic knowledge. 
You must meet him." 
46. 
The permission having been given by the king, the 
queen sent her clever female companion and brought that 
BrahmaQ.a who appeared like an embodied form of BrahmaQ.ical 
splendour. 
4 7. 
From a distance the king saw the BrahmaQ.a coming 
and mentally thought thus, 'Good qualities are present where 
excellent form and features are found.' He became delighted. 
48. 
By going a few steps forward, the king received and 
honoured him duly. He delighted the king by means of benedictory 
passages taken from the four Vedas. 
49. 
The king duly bowed down to the BrahmaQ.a and offered 
him a seat which he occupied. The king and the BrahmaQ.a 
mutually enquired about each other's welfare. 
50. 
The excellent BrahmaQ.a and the king were adepts in 
the art of conversation. They were pleased at the (mutual) 
questions and answers. 
5 1 . 
At the end of the dialogue the BrahmaQ.a was respect-

=== PAGE 54 ===

fully sent home by the king. Having received great honour 
and due deference he entered his hermitage. 
52. 
When the Brahmat:J.a had gone back to his hermitage, 
King Divodasa extolled the Brahmat:J.a before Li:lavatl profusely. 
53. 
"0 great queen Li"lavati, 0 highly intelligent lady fond 
of good qualities, the Brahmat:J.a has been duly praised. He is 
more meritorious than the way in which he is eulogized. 
54. 
He knows everything that has already taken place. He 
understands the present. In the morning, he is to be called 
and asked to tell something about the future. " 
55. 
When the night dawned, the king invited the Brahmat:J.a 
in the morning and offered him many kinds of enjoyable things 
and rich presents. 
56. 
He duly welcomed the Brahmat:J.a, devoutly offering 
him a silk-cloth and other things. When they were alone, the 
king asked the Brahmat:J.a what had been cherished in the 
heart. 
The king said: 
57. 
It is certain that you alone appear to me the greatest 
among Brahmat:J.as. It is my opinion that the intellect of no one 
else is as much conversant with truth as thine. 
58. 
On seeing you as a highly intelligent storehouse of 
austerities, having control over the mind and the sense-organs, 
0 Brahmat:J.a, I am inclined to ask you something which please 
tell me truthfully. 
59. 
This kingdom has been ruled by me, not so by other 
kings. Divine pleasures have been enjoyed by me to the (ut­
most) extent of my prosperity. 
60. 
Without the least lassitude by day or by night, the 
wicked ones have been controlled by me by force and the 
subjects have been protected more than my own bosom-born 
progeny. 
61 . 
Of what avail is my enumeration not worthy of being 
repeated? I know that I have some merit due to the adoration 
of the feet of Brahmat:J.as. Nothing much. 
6ᖵ. 
My mind is not inclined and drawn towards any of the 
activities. Hence, 0 noble and excellent Sir, ponder over and 
tell me what is going to be conducive to welfare.

=== PAGE 55 ===

The Briihma7J-a said: 
63. 
Even the minutest duty of kings should always be ex-
plained by a wise man when asked privately. 
64. 
But even the least should not be explained even by 
the minister when not asked, as he is sure to be afraid of great 
dishonour. 
65. 
On being asked, I shall tell. Do not entertain any 
doubt on that account. If what I say is carried out, you shall 
understand the cause of your dejection and disinterestedness. 
66. 
0 king of excellent intellect, listen. I shall not say 
anything contrary to the fact (truth) . You are valorous, ex­
tremely courageous and powerful. You are always fortunate. 
67. 
I think that even in Amaravatl, the Lord of the gods 
(Indra) is not as richly endowed with merit, "renown and intellect. 
68. 
I consider you on a par with Guru (Preceptor of the 
Devas) in view of the excellent intellect; on a par with the 
Moon in view of brightness and serenity; you are the very Sun 
in brilliance and on a par with Fire in respect of your valorous 
exploit. 
69. 
You are on a par with the Wind-god in respect of your 
strength; on a par with Kubera through gifting of wealth; on 
a par with Rudra in respect of the ability to chastise; you are 
the very Niqti on the battlefield. 
70. 
You are Pas! (Varm:ta) who binds the wicked; in regard 
to the act of controlling the evil ones you are like Yama; you 
are on a par with Mahendra in respect of your great prosperity; 
you are on a par with the Earth in forbearance. 
71. 
In the act of abiding by the bounds of morality, you 
are the ocean; in re!;,ard to greatness, you are Himalaya. You 
are Sukra in royal polity and in the act of ruling a land you 
are on a par with Manu. 
72. 
You are the dispeller of distress like a cloud; holy like 
the name of Ganga; you are the bestower of excellent goal on 
all creatures like Kasl. 
73. 
In the matter of annihilation you are Rudra; in ac-
cording protection you are the four-armed ViᕇJ).u; you are the 
creator like Brahma and the Goddess of Speech is in your 
lotus-like mouth. 
74. 
Kamala (Goddess of wealth) is in your lotus-like hand;

=== PAGE 56 ===

46 
Skanda Purii:r:ta 
there )s the poison HaHihala in your anger; your speech is on 
a par with the divine nectar; your arms are the veritable A.Svinlsutas. 
75. 
Everything powerful is in you, 0 king, because you 
are the very embodiment of all the Devas. Hence, what is conducive 
to your auspiciousness is known to me truly. 
76. 
Calculating from today, 0 king, on the eighteenth 
day, a Brahma1_1a from the North will certainly come to you and 
advise you. 
77. 
His behest should be unhesitatingly carried out by 
you, 0 king. Thereby, 0 highly intelligent one, whatever you 
have cherished in your heart will be realized. 
78. 
Mter saying so, the excellent Brahma1_1a took leave of 
the king. Mter receiving his consent, he joyously entered his 
hermitage. The king was very much surprised (at the events) . 
79. 
Thus the entire city including the king, the subjects 
and the royal Antal)pura (female apartment) was brought under 
his influence by Vighnajit through his own power of Maya. 
80. 
Mter considering himself one who has fulfilled his 
duties, that Lord Vighnajit took various guises himself and 
stayed on in Kl1Sl. 
8 1 . 
Ga1_1adhipa adorned his own spot of that time, 0 Pot-
born One, when Divodasa himself was not present formerly. 
82-83. When King Divodasa was expelled by Viᔻ1_1u and the 
city was renovated by Visvakarman, the Lord himself came to 
the beautiful Variil_lasl city from Mandara and eulogized Ga1_1anayaka 
at the outset. 
Agastya said: 
84. 
How was Vighnajit eulogized by the Lord of Devas? 
How did Vinayaka take various guises himself. 
85. 
By what names did he establish himself in the city of 
Ka.Sl? 0 Six-faced One, tell all those things briefly. 
86. 
On hearing this utterance of the Pot-born One the 
Six-faced Lord related to him the auspicious story of Ga1_1araja 
based on facts.

=== PAGE 57 ===

CHAPTER FIFTYSEVEN 
Manifestation of l)huTJ.fj,hi Vinayaka and Fiftysix1 Vinayakas 
Skanda said: 
Lord Visvesa entered the auspicious city of Vara:Q.asl. 
1 . 
0 excellent sage, Visve§a was accompanied by Visva (Goddess 
Parvati) , Mahasakha, Visakha and myself. Nandi and Bhp'lgi 
proceeded ahead. 
2. He was accompanied by Naigameya and surrounded on 
all sides by Rudras; he was eulogized by Sanaka and others and 
attended upon by the celestial sages. 
3. 
He was hailed with joy by the commanders of all the 
Ayatanas (regional shrines) and by the Guacdians of the Quarters. 
All the holy Tirthas displayed their holy waters. Gandharvas 
sang songs of auspicious import. 
4. 
He was adored by celestial damsels who danced with the 
gestures of the hands resembling tender sprouts. He was greeted 
1. J;>hul)!;lhi Vinayaka alias J;>hul)!;lhiraja has a prime position at the centre 
of Kasi. He is to be worshipped by pilgrims on entrance to Kasť. His name 
is derived from 4hutf.h-'to search, to find' (v 33 in this chapter) . Siva got 
entrance into Kasi through his machinations. Hence this name. 
This chapter gives the locations of the fifty-six Vinayakas at Kasi. These 
Vinayakas are arrayed at the eight directional points in seven concentric circles 
centring around l)hul)!;lhiraja near the Visvanatha Temple, as follows: (See vv 
59-1 1 4) . 
Circle No. 
Names of Viniiyakas 
I. 
(1) Arka, (2) Durga, (3) Bhimacal)!;la, (4) Dehali; (5) Uddal)!;la, 
(6) Pasapal)i, (7) Kharva, (8) Siddhivinayka 
II. 
( 1 ) Larilbodara, (2) Kiitadanta, (3) Salakatal)taka, ( 4) Kii¸m3.l)c;la, 
(5) Mul)c;lavinayaka, (6) Vikatadvija, (7) Rajaputra, (8) Pral)ava 
III. 
( 1 ) Vakratul)!;la, (2) Ekadanta, (3) Trimukha, (4) Paiicasya, (5) 
Herarilba, (6) Vighnaraja, ( 7) Varada, (8) Modakapriya 
IV. 
( 1 ) Abhayada, (2) Sirilhatul)c;la, (3) Kiil)iŦ, (4) ŧipr:iprasadana, 
(5) Cintamal)i, (6) Dantahasta, (7) Pical)c;lila, (8) Uddal)Ũamul)c;la. 
V. 
( I ) Sthiiladanta, (2) Kalipriya, (3) Caturdanta, (4) Dvitul)c;la, 
(5) JyeHha, (6) Gajavinayaka, (7) Kalavinayaka, (8) Nage5a 
VI. 
(1) Mal)ikarl)a, (2) Asavinayaka, (3) Smigal)eSa, (4) Yaũvighne5a, 
(5) Gajakarl)a, (6) Citr.J.ghaQta, (7) Sthiilajail.gha, (8) Mitravinayaka 
VII. 
(1)-(5) Moda and others, (6) Jiianavinayaka, (7) Dvaravighne5a, 
(8) Avimuktavinayaka.

=== PAGE 58 ===

all round in the firmament by means of musical instruments 
sounding automatically. 
5. 
All the quarters reverberated with the deafening sounds 
of the Vedic chants by the sages. The groups of CaraQ.as eulogized 
him. He was surrounded everywhere by aerial chariots. 
6. 
The great Lord who was showered with parched grains 
slipping down through the fists of the ladies of heaven, expe­
rienced horripilation due to excess of joy. 
7. Many groups of Vidyadhara women offered him garlands 
as presents. He was greeted and hailed by Yakᔻas, Guhyakas, 
Siddhas and other sky-traversers. 
8. 
Animals and birds went ahead indicating the auspicious 
omens of the time of entry. Kinnarls and Kinnaras with beaming 
faces extolled him. 
9. 
Great festivity was celebrated and displayed by ViᔻQ.u, 
Mahalakᔻml, Brahma, Visvakarman, Nandin and GaQ.esa. 
10. 
Naga damsels performed the rites of Nlrajana (wav-
ing of the lights) all round. Thus the great Lord entered the 
auspicious city of VaraQ.asl. 
1 1 . 
Even as all the Devas were watching, the Bull-emblemed 
Lord got down from the great bull, embraced the Lord of 
GaQ.as and spoke: 
12. 
"The fact that I have reached the auspicious city of 
VaraQ.asl, very difficult of access even to me, is due to the 
favour of this child alone. 
13. 
What is difficult to be accomplished even by a father 
in all the three worlds can be easily accomplished by a son. 
The instance for the same is I myself. 
14. 
By the powers of his intellect, something has been 
achieved by this Elephant-faced One in order to facilitate my 
entrance into KliSl. 
15. 
I have really become one blessed with a son inasmuch 
as he has accomplished through his manliness a long-cher­
ished desire of mine." 
16. 
After saying this, the destroyer of the three cities oft-
eulogized by Indra and others, joyously eulogized the Elephant­
faced One with clear words. 
Snkatt!ha said: 
1 7. 
Be victorious, 0 foremost one among those who cause

=== PAGE 59 ===

obstacles. You are the cause of freedom from obstacles unto 
your devotees. 0 one free from obstacles, 0 subduer of obstacles, 
0 one with great obstacles reduced to a single obstacle! 
18. 
Be victorious, 0 Lord of all GaQ.as! be victorious, 0 
leader of all GaQ.as, 0 one whose lotus-like feet are bowed to 
by the GaQ.as, 0 one with countless good qualities! 
19. 
Be victorious, 0 omnipresent one, 0 Lord of all, 0 
single treasure-house of all intellects, 0 one conversant with 
all the worlds of Maya, 0 Lord worshipped at the beginning 
in the course of all rites! 
20. 
0 auspicious one among all auspicious ones! Be vic-
torious, 0 cause of auspiciousness unto all. 0 subduer of 
inauspiciousness! 0 cause of salvation! 0 most auspicious of 
all auspicious things! 
• 
2 1 . 
Be victorious, 0 one worthy of the adoration of those 
who create (like Brahma and others) , 0 one bowed to by the 
one who sustains (i.e. ViᔻQ.u) , 0 one who is venerable to the 
one who causes annihilation (Rudra) ! Be victorious, 0 one 
who bestows success in the performance of good acts. 
22. 
0 one whose lotus-like feet are worthy of the adoration 
to Siddhas! Be victorious, 0 granter of the fulfilment of desires. 
0 sole storehouse of all Siddhis (the eight supernatural pow­
ers) ! 0 indicator of great Siddhis and prosperities! 
23. 
0 creator of all GuQ.as! 0 one beyond all the GuQ.as! 
0 leader of all good qualities! 0 one with perfect conduct! 0 
one identical with wealth! Be victorious, 0 you who are ex­
tolled! 
24. 
Be victorious, 0 Lord of all armies! 0 bestower of 
strength on the enemy of Bala (i.e. Indra) ! 0 one with the tips 
of the teeth as bright as cranes! 0 young boy of great valour! 
25. 
0 Lord, 0 support of infinite greatness, 0 piercer of 
the mountain (Krauiica) 1 , 0 one who has lifted up the El­
ephants of the Quarters by the tips of the tusks! Be victorious, 
0 (Lord) with serpents for ornaments! 
26. 
0 merciful Lord of divine form, those who bow down 
to you on the earth attain salvation though they may be the 
1 . Here Gat:da is identified with Skanda, as it was Skanda who pierced the 
Krauiica mountain (Commentator) .

=== PAGE 60 ===

50 
Skanda Purii:r:,ta 
doers of all sinful acts. You always remove all their great calamities. 
You bestow on them heavenly pleasures and salvation too. 
27. 
0 Vighnaraj3;, those who are perceived even for a 
moment on the earth by means of your benign glances have 
all their sins reduced. They are Puruᔻottamas (ViᔻQ.US, most 
excellent ones among men) and Lakᔻmi looks at them with 
benign glances. 
28. 
0 Lord who are expert in destroying promptly the ob­
stacles of those who bow down, you are lik...: the Sun unto the 
lotus-like heart of DakᔻayaQ.i. Those who eulogize thee are heard 
to have become renowned. There is nothing surprising in it. It 
is surprising that only they are the leaders of GaQ.as. 
29. 
Those· who regularly adore the pair of your feet do 
flourish with plenty of sons, grandsons, wealth and grain. Their 
lotus-like feet shall be regularly eulogized by many servants. 
They will obtain untainted wealth and fortune worthy of being 
enjoyed by kings. 
30. 
0 ultimate cause of all causes, you are the cause of 
all. You alone are worthy of being known by Vedic scholars for 
ever. 0 Lord of divine form incapable of being expressed by 
ordinary words, you are something worthy of being sought 
after by the original words (of the scriptures) . 
31 . 
The Vedas do not know you really, 0 stage-manager 
of the mobile and the immobile beings. Even Brahma and 
others do not know you. You alone annihilate, protect and 
create everything. 0 Lord who cannot be comprehended even 
mentally, how is it possible to eulogize you adequately? 
32. 
I have killed the Daityas, the chief of whom were 
Tripuras, Andhaka and Jalandhara who had already been de­
stroyed by the arrows of your angry glances. Excepting you who 
has the power even to wish for the success of the tasks that yield 
benefits even if they were to be insignificant. 
33. 
The root /)hitrJ4h is well-known to mean "to search 
for". Your name .l)hQI).Qhi is due to the fact that you search for 
everything that your devotees require (and bestow on them) . 
0 I;>huQ.<;ihiraja, 0 Vinayaka, which embodied soul can obtain 
access to Kasi too without your pleasure? 
34. 
If a resident of Kasi bows down to your lotus-like feet 
first and then bows down to me, I reach up to the root of his 
ear and impart (the Taraka Mantra) , before the departure of

=== PAGE 61 ===

IV.ii.57.35-44 
51 
the lifebreath, something whereby he is not reborn in the 
world. 
35. 
A devotee takes his holy bath in MaQikarQika along 
with the cloth worn and walks ahead (not minding) the feet 
getting soiled. He offers libation to the celestial sages, human 
beings and the manes. He then comes to Jiianodatirtha Qiianavapl) 
and worships you. 
36. 
First the devotee should propitiate you by means of 
huge quantities of sweetmeat of great flavour, incense, lights, 
garlands and sweet-smelling unguents, and then me capable of 
bestowing the benefit of Kasl. 0 I;>huQ<;lhi, thereby who does 
not flourish? 
37. 
A devotee may undertake pilgrimage to Ti:rthas and 
that too without the conventional order. Even then, due to 
your benign, merciful glances, all the obstacles and calamities 
antagonistic to his own welfare, shall be removed, 0 I;>huQ<;lhi, 
and he will obtain the complete benefit here at Kasl. 
38. 
If anyone bows down to you, 0 I;>huQ<;lhi Vinayaka, 
everyday early in the morning at Kasl, all the· obstacles shall 
be removed and no object on the surface of the earth shall be 
inaccesible to him here and hereafter. 
39. 
If anyone repeats the name of I;>huQ<;lhi Vinayaka, all 
the eight Siddhis will repeat his name in the heart everyday. 
He will enjoy different kinds of pleasures worthy of being enjoyed 
by Devas. In the end he will be wooed by Goddess NirvaQa 
Kamala (Glory of Liberation) . 
40. 
0 I;>huQ<;lhiraja, 0 bestower of all Siddhis, even if one 
staying far off remembers the pedestal of your feet everyday, 
he will get the entire benefit of staying in Kasl. My words 
cannot be contradicted or falsified at any time. 
41 . 
0 blessed one, I know that it is for the removal of 
innumerable obstacles that you have assumed different forms 
and stay here in this holy spot. 
42. 
Let these heaven-dwellers listen. I shall mention all 
those forms of yours, 0 sinless one, assumed in the different 
areas. 
43. 
First, you are I;>huQ<;lhiraja slightly to my right. You 
seek out and bestow all the desired objects and wealth on the 
devotees. 
44. 
0 son, 0 GaQeSa, if diverse kinds of adoration are

=== PAGE 62 ===

52 
Skanda Puriir.ta 
performed unto you on the Caturthz (fourth day) coinciding 
with a Tuesday with huge quantities of Modakas (sweetmeats) 
of fragrant flavour and scented garlands, I make them Gar:tas. 
45. 
Those who worship you on every CaturthZ with con-
centration of mind, 0 I)hur:tQhi, are really blessed. 0 elephant­
faced one, they will place their left foot on the head of all 
miseries and mishaps and attain the status of the Elephant­
faced One. 
46. 
0 I)hur:tQhi, the devotees who observe Naktavrata (taking 
food only at night) and worship you on thᖞ fourth day of the 
bright half of Magha will be worthy of being worshipped by the 
enemies of Asuras. 
47. 
The devotee shall cover (make) LaQQUS with white 
gingelly seeds and eat them on the bright Caturthz of Magha 
after undertaking the annual pilgrimage. 
48. 
On that Caturthz, 0 I)hur:tQhi, the Yatra (pilgrimage) 
should be assiduously performed by those who wish for fulfilment 
of the worship at the holy spot, for your propitiation. It shall 
remove all calamities. 
49. 
He who does not perform that Yatra nor offers Naivedya 
with LaQQUS of gingelly seeds should be at my bidding struck 
with thousands of obstacles. 
50. 
A devotee conversant with the Mantras shall devoutly 
perform Homa with gingelly seeds, ghee and other requisites 
on that CaturthZ. His Mantra will become fruitful. 
5 1 . 
0 Gajanana, 0 I)hur:tQhi, the Mantra, be it Vedic or 
otherwise, should be repeated in your presence. It will then 
accord the desired Siddhis (fulfilment of desires) . 
lsvara said: 
52. 
It is certain that a person of excellent mind who 
reads this eulogy composed by me will never be afflicted by 
obstacles. 
53. 
If anyone recites this meritorious eulogy of I)hur:tQhi 
in the presence of I)hur:tQhi, all the Siddhis will stay near him 
always. 
54. 
Mter repeating this eulogy with adequately controlled 
mind, the devotee shall never be assailed by mental sins at any 
time. 
55. 
The man who repeats the prayer unto I)hur:tQhi shall

=== PAGE 63 ===

IV.ii.57 .56-67 
53 
attain wives, sons, land, excellent horses, excellent houses, wealth 
and foodgrains. 
56. 
This eulogy uttered by me is named Saroasampatkara 
('Giver of all prosperities' ) . It should be assiduously repeated 
always by one who desires salvation. 
57. 
If anyone is desirous of going anywhere for a specific 
purpose, he should go after repeating this meritorious prayer. 
Invariably all the Siddhis (achievements) shall come face to 
face to him. 
58. 
I shall mention another thing also. Let those heaven­
dwellers listen. I shall mention the places where I)hu:r.H}.hi had 
stayed for the sake of guarding the holy spot. 
First Circle of Vinayakas: 
59. 
At the confluence of Ganga and Asi at Kasl is the 
Vinayaka named Arkavinayaka. If he is visited on Sundays by 
people, he will subdue all distresses. 
60. 
Gai:Iadhyakᔻa named Durga is the destroyer of all wretch­
edness. It is in the southern region of the holy spot and should 
be assiduously worshipped. 
61 . 
On the south-west of the holy spot near Bhlmacai:I<;H 
is Bhlmacai:Ic;lavinayaka. On being visited he removes great 
fear. 
62. 
On the western side of the holy spot is Dehalivinayaka. 
There is no doubt about 
this that he will remove all the 
obstacles of the devotees. 
63. 
On the north-western side of the holy place is the 
Gajanana named Uddai:Ic;la. He will always strike down massive 
groups of obstacles. 
64. 
On the north of Kasl, Pasapai:IiᖟVinayaka (Vinayaka 
with the Pasa, noose, in his hand) always binds obstacles due 
to the devotion of the residents of Kasl. 
65. 
The beautiful Kharvavinayaka is at the confluence of 
Ganga and Varai:Ia. He will subdue and shorten even huge 
obstacles of good devotees. 
66. 
To the east of the holy spot Siddhivinayaka is always 
ready to protect the holy spot. It is on the west of Yamatlrtha 
and is a prompt bestower of powers on a Sadhaka (aspirant) . 
67. 
These eight Vinayakas are on the outer ring of Kasl.

=== PAGE 64 ===

54 
Skanda Purii:rJa 
They expel non-devotees and bestow all the Siddhis on the 
devotees. 
Second Circle of Vinayakas: 
68. 
Henceforth I shall mention those Vinayakas who pro-
tect this holy spot Avimukta on the second external ring. 
69. 
On the western bank of the heavenly river, to the 
north of Arkavinayaka is Lambodara Gar:tadhyakᔻa ('Leader of 
Gar:tas' ) who washes off all the mud of obstacles. 
70. 
To the west thereof and to the north of Durga-Vina-
yaka is Kutadanta. He is the annihilator of difficulties and 
calamities. He always protects this holy place. 
71 . 
Slightly to the north-east of BhlmacaQ.«;la Gar:tesa is 
Salakatarhkata, the protector of this holy spot. This Gar:tadhyakᔻa 
is worthy of being adored. 
72. 
The Vinayaka named Kuᔻmar:t«;la is situated on the 
east of Dehalivighnesa. He is to be worshipped always by the 
devotees for the suppression of great mishaps and calamities. 
73. 
MuQ.«;lavinayaka stationed in the south-east direction 
of the Gar:tapati named Uddar:t«;la is extremely renowned. He 
is to be adored well by devotees. 
74. 
His body is stationed in Patala. The head is situated 
in Kasl. Hence the Lord in Kasl is spoken as Mur:t«;lavinayaka. 
75. 
One shall attain the position of the lordship of Gar:tas 
by worshipping the Gar:tapati Vikatadvija to the south of the 
Gar:tesana (named) PasapaQ.i. 
76. 
The Vinayaka named Rajaputra is on the south-west 
of the Lord named Kharva. On being worshipped, he will re­
instate a king who has lost his kingdom. 
77. 
The Gar:tadhipa named PraQ.ava is on the western bank 
of GaQ.ga and to the south of Rajaputra. On being bowed down 
to he will lead (a devotee) to heaven. 
78. 
These eight Vinayakas are situated in Kasl in the sec-
ond external ring. They will dispel all the obstacles of those 
who permanently stay in Kasl. 
Third Circle of Vinayakas: 
79. 
Those Vighnarajas who are stationed in this holy spot 
on the third external ring, according protection always, should 
be mentioned by me now. 
·

=== PAGE 65 ===

IV.ii.57.80-90 
55 
80. 
VakratUI).Qa, the remover of mass of sins, is stationed 
to the north of Larilbodara who is on the beautiful bank of the 
heavenly river. 
8 1 . 
Ekadantaka stationed on the north of the Gal).apati 
Kutadanta shall always protect Anandakanana from calami­
ties. 
82. 
The monkey-lion-elephant-faced Vighne8a named 
Trimukha (Three-faced) is situated to the north-east of 
Salakatarikata. He is the remover of the fear of (people of) 
Kasi. 
83. 
The Vighnarat named Paiicasya is in the eastern di-
rection of Kuᔻmai).Qa. With an excellent chariot (drawn by) 
lions, he protects the city of Varal).asi. 
84. 
The Lord named Herarhba stationed in the south-east 
of Mui).Qavinayaka is worthy of being worshipped always. He 
will fulfil the desires of all the residents of Kasl like Arilba 
(Goddess) . 
85. 
For the purpose of Siddhi, a wise devotee should worship 
the Gal).apati (named) Vighnaraja who destroys all obstacles. 
He is stationed to the south of Vikatadanta. 
86. 
The Gal).adhyakᔻa named Varada stationed slightly in 
the south-west direction from the Vinayaka (named) Rajaputra, 
should be worshipped. He is the bestower of boons on the 
devotees. 
87. 
The Gal).esa (named) Modakapriya is stationed to the 
south of Pral).avavighnesa on the auspicious bank of the celes­
tial river in the Pisarigila Tlrtha. He is worthy of being 
adored. 
Fourth Circle of Vinayakas: 
88. 
Eight Vinayakas should be clearly visualised by men 
with delighted minds in Kasl on the fourth external ring. They 
are the destroyers of the obstacles of the devotees. 
89. 
The Vinayaka Abhayada who is the destroyer of the 
fear of all, is stationed on the bank of the heavenly river in 
the northern direction from VakratUI).Qa. 
90. 
The Vinayaka (named) Sirhhatui).Qa is stationed on 
the north of Ekadasana (Ekandanta) . He deᖠtroys the elephants 
in the form of calamities of the inhabitants of Varal).asi.

=== PAGE 66 ===

56 
Skanda Purii:fJ,a 
9 1 . 
The GaQadhyakᔻa (named) KiiQitakᔻa is stationed in 
the north-eastern direction of TrituQQa (Trimukha) . He will 
protect Mahasmasana (i.e. Kasl) from the evil eye of the 
wicked. 
92. 
ᕐipraprasadana stationed to the east of Paiicasya shall 
protect the city. Siddhis are quickly attained by the worship of 
ᕐipraprasadana. 
93. 
CintamaQi Vinayaka is stationed to the south-east of 
Herarhba. He is like CintamaQi (wish-yielding stone) unto the 
devotees. He will directly present (to the devotees) whatever 
is thought of by them. 
94. 
The GaQe8vara (named) Dantahasta is towards the 
south of Vighnaraja. He will be (commanding) thousands of 
obstacles to harass men who hate VaraQasl. 
95. 
The Lord named PiciQQila is to the south-west of 
Varada. He is surrounded by Yatudhanas (demons) and pro­
tects the city day and night. 
96. 
What is it that the Herarhba named UddaQQamUQQa 
does not bestow on devotees when visited? He is stationed in 
Pilipila Tirtha to the south of Modakapriya (Vinayaka) . 
Fifth Circle of Vinayakas: 
97. 
I shall now mention the Vinayakas twice-four (= eight) 
in number, stationed in Kasi on the fifth external ring and 
protecting the holy spot. 
98. 
The GaQesana named Sthiiladanta is stationed on the 
bank of the heavenly·river to the north of Abhayaprada. To the 
good, he bestows enormous Siddhis. 
99. 
The Vinayaka (named) Kalipriya is stationed to the 
north of SirhhatUQQa. Among those who harass the devotees 
flocking to the Tirtha, he creates natural quarrel always. 
100. 
The Vinayaka named Caturdanta is on the north-east 
of KiiQitakᕇa. Masses of obstacles shall perish merely by visiting 
this Lord. 
101. The GaQanayaka named DvitUQQa is stationed to the 
east of ᖝipraprasadana. He looks equally majestic both in front 
and behind. 
102a. By visiting him, men will attain all-round glory and 
splendour.

=== PAGE 67 ===

IV.ii.57. 102b-1 14 
57 
102b-1 03. The GaQ.iidhyakᔻa named Jyeᔻᕡha is the eldest of 
my numerous sons. He is stationed to the south-east of Cintamal).i 
Vinayaka. For the acquisition of surpassing excellence he should 
be adored well on the fourteenth day in the bright half of the 
month of JyeHha. 
104. 
Gaja-Vinayaka is to be adored in the southern direc­
tion of Dantahasta. By worshipping him devoutly prosperity 
with elephants will be attained. 
105. Kala-Vinayaka is to the south of the Gal).apati named 
Picii).Qila. By resorting to him, men will not have the fear of 
the god of Death 
106. 
The devotee is honoured in Nagaloka by visiting the 
GaQ.apa named Nagesa stationed in the southern direction from 
the Gal).apa named Uddai).QamUI).Qa. 
• 
Sixth Circle of Vinayakas: 
107. 
Hereafter the Vighnanayakas stationed on the sixth 
external ring are being mentioned. Merely by listening to their 
names men will achieve supernatural power. 
1 08. 
The Gal).apati named Mal).ikarl).a is the destroyer of 
obstacles in the east. Asa Vinayaka is stationed in the south­
east fulfilling the hopes and desires of a devotee. 
109. 
SrHigal).esa in the south is the indicator of creation 
and annihilation. Yakᔻa Vighnesa in the south-west is the de­
stroyer of all obstacles and is the greatest. 
1 1 0. 
Gajakarl).a in the west is the cause of welfare to all. The 
GaQ.apati named Citraghal).ᖡ protects the city in the north-west. 
1 1 1-1 12. In the north Sthiilajangha subdues the sins of those 
who control their minds. That auspicious Vinayaka named 
Mitravimlyaka protects the city of Isa in the north-east. He is 
to be worshipped in the north of Varna Tirtha. 
Seventh Circle of Vinayakas: 
I shall mention the Vinayakas stationed on the sᖢventh ex­
ternal ring. 
1 13-1 14. The five Vighnesas are Moda and others; the sixth 
one is Jiianavinayaka; the seventh one is Dvaravighnesa present 
in front of the great door.. Avimukta Vinayaka, the eighth one,

=== PAGE 68 ===

58 
Sko:11.da Pura7J-a 
removes all the distress of those with humble minds in my holy 
spot Avimukta. 
1 15. 
He who remembers these fiftysix Gajam.ukhas even 
when he is in a far-off country, shall attain knowledge on death. 
1 1 6. 
If a devotee recites this meritorious eulogy of J;)hut:tc;lhi 
involving fifty-six Gajananas, he becomes a meritorious-souled 
one. He gets supernatural powers at every step. 
1 1 7. 
Wherever one may be, all these Gat:tesvaras sft,Quld be 
remembered. They protect a man falling into the ocean of 
great calamity. 
1 18. 
On hearing this eulogy of great merit and these Vinayakas, 
one is never afflicted by obstacles. One is rid of all sins too. 
1 19-120. Mter saying this, the Lord of the Devas became highly 
joyous in his mind. He was coronated by Brahma and others. He 
granted them whatever they desired. Efficient that he was in 
doing ·the proper thing, he entertained all of them duly. He then 
entered the royal palace built by Visvakarmat:t 
Skanda said: 
121. 
Thus Vighnajit ('Subduer of obstacles' i.e. Gat:tesa)was 
eulogized by the Lord of Devas. That Vinayaka created thus many 
of his own forms. 
122 
0 Pot-born One, by repeating these names ofl_)huQ.c;lhiraja, 
a man shall get whatever he desires. 
123. 
There are thousands, nay innumberable, forms of the 
Gat:tesa l_)hut:tc;lhi there, devoutly worshipped by many devotees. 
124. 
They are Bhagiratha, Gat:tadhᖣa, Hariᖤandra, Vinayaka, 
the. Gat:tapati named Kaparda and then Binduvinayaka. 
125. 
These and others are the Vighnesas installed by everyone 
of the devotees. By worshipping them too men do attain all 
riches. 
126. 
By listening to this meritorious chapter with faith, a 
man gets rid of all .. obstacles and obtai,_ns the desired position.

=== PAGE 69 ===

IV.ii.58. 1-10 
59 
CHAPTER FIFTYEIGHT 
Attainment of Salvation by Divodasa 
Agastya said: 
1 . 0 Skanda, what did Hara do while in the Mandara mountain 
when even Gajanana was causing delay? 
Skanda said: 
2. 
0 Agastya, listen to the meritorious story being nar­
rated by me now. Its theme is Varar:tasi alone and it is destruc­
tive of all sins. 
. 
3. When the Elephant-faced One was delaying in Avimuktaka, 
the excellent one among holy spots, Adhokᔻaja (Viᔻr:tu) was 
quickly met by the Three-eyed Lord. 
4. 
He was addressed thus many times with great respect: 
"Do not do (it) yourself what was done by others who had 
gone there before." 
Sri Vi,sǖu said: 
5. 
0 Sankara, endeavour must be made by all living beings 
in accordance with their intellect, strength and weakness. But 
they bear fruits according to your (direction) . 
6. Actions (Karmas by themselves) are insentient. Even 
living beings are not free themselves. You are the witness unto 
their acts and also the prime mover of living beings compel­
ling them to work. 
7. But in regard to the devotees of your feet, the mental 
inclination is such that you yourself will say, "Excellent wbrk 
has been done by him." 
8. Whatever work is performed here, whether it be very 
small or great in size, 0 Girisa, that fructifies if it is performed 
with due recollection of your feet. 
9. If a task is well-prepared (planned) , perfectly carried 
out with keen intellect, it is bound to perish instantaneously, 
should it be performed without due remembrance of your 
feet. 
10. Excellent effort will be made by me today as I have been 
sent by Sarilbhu. In regard to us richly endowed with devotion

=== PAGE 70 ===

60 
Skanda Purii:fJa 
unto you, the task is practically accomplished. 
1 1 . A task may be extremely unachievable by solely depend­
ing on one's own intellect, strength and endeavour; 0 Siva, 
the same task can be easily accomplished by meditation on 
you. 
1 2. All the tasks of those persons, 0 Lord, who circumambulate 
you, 0 Bhava, and then proceed ahead, become already ac­
complished due to the fear of you. 
1 3. Know, 0 Mahadeva, that this task has been accomplished 
certainly. The only thing is that the auspicious hour for the 
entry into Kasl should be thought of. 
1 4. Or, neither the auspicious nor the inauspicious time 
need be considered in regard to the time for arrival at Kasl. 
That alone is the auspicious moment when Kasl is within reach. 
15. After circumambulating and bowing down to Sari:tbhu 
again and again, the Garuc;la-emblemed Lord set off from Mandara 
along with Lakᔻml. 
1 6. After making Varai_lasl the guest (object) of his eyes 
(vision) , he joyously made his name Pui_lc;larlkakᔻa (Lotus-eyed 
One) meaningful. 
1 7. ViᔻJ.lU of pure mind washed his hands and feet in the 
confluence of Ganga and VaraJ.la and took his bath with the 
clothes on. 
18. Then onwards, that Tlrtha came to be called Piidodaka 
because his feet, the bestower of auspiciousness, were washed 
at the outset by the Yellow-robed Lord. 
19. If men take their bath in Padodaka Ti:rtha, their sins 
accumulated in the course of seven births, perish quickly. 
20. By offering Sraddha there and libations with water and 
gingelly seeds, one will be able to redeem the members of his 
family three times seven in number. 
2 1 . In the Tlrtha (called) Piidodaka at Kasl the satisfaction 
obtained by the great-grandfathers is the same as obtained by 
them at Gaya, indeed. 
22. Niraya (Hell) will never touch a man who takes his bath 
in Padodaka, drinks the water thereof and offers the same 
water (as libation) . 
· 
23. 
After drinking Padodaka once in the ViᔻJ.lU Padodaka 
Tlrtha, it is certain that one will never drink the milk of the

=== PAGE 71 ===

IV.ii.58.24-34 
61 
breasts of a mother (i.e. will get Mokᔻa) . 
24. 
A devotee who bathes a Salagrama having a discus 
inscribed (i.e. within it) sprinkled with a conch (filled) with 
waters of Padodaka and drinks the water thereof will become 
immortal. 
25. 
If one drinks Vi,s-Ču Padodaka in the ViᔻI).U Padodaka 
Tirtha, of what avail is heavenly nectar that has been in ex­
istence for a long time? 
26. 
If the holy rites with water are not performed at Kasi 
with Padodaka, their very life is futile. They are on a par with 
a bubble of water in regard to their splendour. 
27-28. 
Accompanied by Lakᔻmi and Garu<;la, ViᔻI).U per­
formed the daily rites. He withdrew his form pervading the 
three worlds and fashioned a stone image-with his own hands. 
Adikesava himself adored that image, the bestower of all 
prosperities and Siddhis. 1 
29. 
By worshipping that brilliant image of the great Lord, 
named Adikesava, a man considers Vaikul).tha the very court­
yard of his house. 
30. 
That area within the limits of Kasi is well-known as 
Svetadvipa. Men who serve that image do reside in Svetadvipa 
(Region of Viᔻl).u) . 
3 1 . 
There is another Tirtha in front of Kesava named 
ᕐirabdhi. One who performs holy rites with water there, will 
stay on the shores of the Ocean of Milk. 
32. 
If a man performs Sraddha there and gifts away a 
milch cow along with all ornaments as laid down, he will be 
able to make his forefathers stay in the Ocean of Milk. 
33. 
One who devoutly gifts a single cow there becomes 
a meritorious-souled one on the shores of the Milk Ocean and 
can make hundred and one generations of his family move to 
the Milk Ocean with plenty of 'mud' i.e. cream produced by 
the milk. 
34. 
A devotee should offer many excellent cows here with 
faith along with monetary gifts. He will be able to make everyone 
I . Adike5ava temple sits in a grove of trees on the high bank of the RajghaŊ 
plateau, overlooking ·Ganga and VaraJ;Ia. But the Tirthas mentioned after the 
emblems ofViŋJ;IU and his Avataf"as in the following verses are located in the 
landscape of imagination alone (BCL 204) . Some Tirthas such as the Pmhlii.da 
Tirlha are however geographically locatable today.

=== PAGE 72 ===

62 
Skanda Purii1Ja 
of his forefathers live there with comfortable quilts for sound 
sleep. 
35. 
To the south of ᕐiroda is the excellent Sailkha Tirtha. 
By offering water-libations there unto the Pitrs, one is honoured 
in ViᔻQ.uloka. 
36. 
To the south thereof is the Cakra Tirtha which is 
something very inaccessible even to the forefathers. One who 
performs Sraddha (there) becomes free from indebtedness to 
forefathers. 
37. 
The Gada Tirtha is very near it. It is destructive of 
all mental anguish; it causes the redemption of the Pitrs and 
the destruction of all sins. 
38. 
Beyond that is the Padma Tirtha. Mter taking the 
holy bath there and offering libations to the Manes duly one 
is never deficient in fortune and wealth. 
39. 
There itself is the Tirtha of Mahalakᔻmi renowned in 
all the three worlds. Mahalakᔻmi herself, the delighter of the 
three worlds, took her holy ablution there. 
40. 
One who takes his holy bath in that Tirtha and gifts 
jewels and gold and silk clothes to BrahmaQ.as never becomes 
deficient in fortune and prosperity. 
4 1 . 
Due to the great efficacy of the Tirtha, wherever he 
is born he becomes prosperous. His forefathers become bril­
liant and glorious. 
42. 
An image of Mahalakᔻmi is there and it is adored by 
all the three worlds. By bowing down to her devoutly a man 
never suffers from sickness anywhere. 
43. 
The devotee should keep awake on the night of the 
eighth lunar day in the dark half of Bhadrapada and worship 
Mahalakᔻmi. He will obtain the benefit of the holy vow. 
44. 
There, in the vicinity of Tarkᔻyakesava, is the Tarkᔻya 
Tirtha. By taking the holy bath there a man never sees the 
serpent (in the form) of worldly existence. 
45. 
Beyond that is the Narada Tirtha that destroys great 
sins. It is here that Narada got the instruction in Brahmavidyii. 
46. 
A man who takes his holy dip there, shall obtain 
Brahmavidyii perfectly from Kesava. Hence, in Kasi, he is said 
to be Naradakesava. 
47. 
After worshipping devoutly Lord Naradakesava the 
devotee never occupies a place in the womb of any mother.

=== PAGE 73 ===

IV.ii.58.48-62 
63 
48. Prahlada Tlrtha is beyond it, where the Lord is 
Prahladake§ava. By performing Sraddha etc. there a devotee 
is honoured in the world of Vil).I).U. 
49. 
Verᖥ· near it is the great Arhbarll)a Ti:rtha that de-
stroys sins. Performing holy rites with water there a man gets 
liberated from sins. 
50. 
Adityakesava to the east of Adike§ava is worthy of 
being adored. 
Merely by visiting it, a 
devotee is liberated 
from great sins. 
5 1 . 
The Ti:rtha (named) Dattatreye§vara is there itself; so 
also Adigadadhara. By propitiating the forefathers there itself, 
a devotee shall acquire Jniinayoga ( 'Path of knowledge') . 
52. 
The great Bhargava Ti:rtha is towards the east of 
Bhrgukesava. A man who takes his holy·bath there shall be­
come a wise man, a man of excellent intellect like Bhargava. 
53. 
There to the east of Vamanakesava is Vamana Tlrtha. 
By worshipping that Vil).I).U, a devotee shall stay near Vamana. 
54. 
In front of Naranaraya.l).a is the Tlrtha named 
Naranaraya.l).a. A man who takes his holy bath in the Tlrtha 
there, shall become Naraya.l).a. 
55. 
Beyond that is Yajiiavaraha Tlrtha that destroys sins. 
By taking baths therein, one gets the merit of a Rajasuya sacrifice. 
56. There is a Ti:rtha entirely free from impurities there, 
named Vidara.l).a-narasirhha. One who takes his holy bath there 
shall tear off the sins acquired in the course of a hundred 
births. 
57. 
To the east of Goplgovinda is the Tlrtha named 
Goplgovinda. Mter taking the holy bath there and worship­
ping Vil).I).U, a devotee shall become a favourite of Viᔻ.I).U. 
58. To the south of Goplgovinda is the Tlrtha named 
Lakl)mlnrsirhha. By taking holy dips in the Ti:rtha, one is never 
abandoned by the 
Goddess of Fortune. 
59. Beyond it, near Sel)amadhava is Sel)a Tlrtha. The sat­
isfaction of the forefathers to whom libation is offered there, 
is thorough. 
60. To the south thereof is SaiJ.kha Madhava Ti:rtha entirely 
free from impurities. A man who performs holy rites with 
water there, shall become free from impurities though he be 
a sinner. 
61-62. 
Beyond it is the extremely sacred Ti:rtha named

=== PAGE 74 ===

64 
Skanda PuriiTJ-a 
Hayagriva. Mter taking the holy ablution there and worship­
ping Hayagrivakesava, and also offering balls of rice in the 
presence of Hayagriva, a devotee shall attain the splendour of 
Hayagriva and get liberated along with his forefathers. 
Skanda said: 
63. 
dentally 
gingelly 
64. 
Tirthas 
sins. 
All these Tirthas have been enumerated to you inci­
because even on a ground extending as much as a 
seed there at Kasi, there are many Tirthas. 
0 Pot-born One, even by hearing the names of these 
specially enumerated by me, a man becomes free of 
65. 
Now, 0 Brahma:Q.a, I shall mention to you the relevant 
topic. Listen to what the Lord of Vaiku:Q.tha, the wielder of 
conch, discus and club, did. 
66. 
Mter entering into the image of Kesava, Lord Kesava 
came out of it by a bit of a bit of a part because he had 
decided in his mind to do something pertaining to the task 
of Sarhbhu. 
Agastya said: 
67. 
Oh! Where did the Lord with the discus in his hand 
go out by a bit of a bit of his part? 0 Six-faced One, after 
reaching Kasi, where did Hari go out? 
Skanda said: 
68. 
0 sage, why did Viᔻ:Q.U not go out completely? I shall 
mention the reason thereof. Listen to me for a moment. 
69. 
One attains the city of Vara:Q.asi by a great deal of 
PuTJ-ya. Thereafter, a wise man should not abandon it even if 
tempted by great benefits. 
70. 
Hence, 0 Pot-born One, his image was installed by 
Murari at Kasi and he went out partially by a bit. 
7 1 . 
Mter going a little to the north of Kasi the Discus-
bearing Lord created an area called Dharmakᔻetra for his own 
stay. 
72. 
Thereafter the Lord of Lakᔻmi himself assumed the 
form of (a follower of) Buddha, that was very beautiful, fas­
cinating unto the three worlds.

=== PAGE 75 ===

IV.ii.58. 73-84 
65 
73. 
Sri (Lakᔻml) became a Parivrajika (female mendi-
cant) exquisitely beautiful in form. On seeing her, the entire 
universe remained (n::otionless) as though painted in a pic­
ture. 
74. 
On seeing the mother of the universes, the source of 
the universe, with a book placed on the palms of the hand, 
the entire universe stood motionless. Garu<;la assumed the best 
of forms and became their disciple. 
75. 
He had a wonderfully brilliant intellect. He was devoid 
of desire for all the objects. He was engaged in attending to 
his preceptor. He had a book on the palms of his hands. 
76. 
He asked his preceptor about the greatest of virtues 
that can facilitate release from worldly bondage. The excellent 
preceptor . was gentle-faced and delighred in himself. 
77. 
He was an adept in the treatises on Dharma and Artha. 
He was endowed with wᖦsdom and perfect in general and specialized 
knowledge. He was of sweet, sonorous voice. He spoke softly 
and lovingly uttering the words distinctly. 
78. 
He was proficient in the magical art of stunning, ex-
orcising, attracting persons to him and keeping them under 
his control. So also in various other activities. At the time of 
his lecture, even birds were attracted and he could make them 
experience thrill. 
79. 
He was served by excellent deer which imbibed the 
nectar-like songs he sang. He checked the swift motion of 
winds by giving them a great deal of joy. 
80-8 1 . 
He was adored even by the trees under the pretext 
of the falling of flowers. Then that meritorious-souled fol­
lower of Buddha (named) Pm_1yaklrti said to his disciple Vinayaklrti, 
endowed with great humility: 
Pu?Jyak"irti said: 
82. 
0 Vinayaklrti, the eternal virtue has been asked by 
you. I shall explain it entirely, 0 highly intelligent one. Listen. 
83. 
The world has been in existence since beginningless 
time. It manifests itself (automatically) by itself and it gets 
dissolved by itself. 
84. 
In all embodied beings beginning with Brahma up to 
a blade of grass, the soul alone is the real master (Isvara)

=== PAGE 76 ===

66 
Skanda Pura7J.a 
therein. There is no other (external being like God as) con­
troller thereof. 
85. 
The names Brahma, ViᕇQ.U, Rudra etc. are mere names 
of the embodied oneᖧ, like out own names PuQ.yaklrti etc. 
86. 
Just as our body perishes in due course, so also the 
bodies of everything from Brahma to a mosquito perish when 
their (respective) time arrives. 
87. 
If it is pondered over (it is evident) that there is 
nothing special about the body (of anyone) . Intake of food, 
sexual intercourse, sleep and fear are common to all. 
88. 
Every embodied one attains the same (degree of) 
satisfaction after getting its own usual quantity of food; no 
more (degree of satisfaction) in any case. 
89. 
Just as we become free from thirst after joyously drinking 
some beverage, so also others who are thirsty; there is no 
difference great or small (in the satisfaction derived after drinking) . 
90. 
Let there be thousands of women with exquisite beauty 
and seductive charms; but at the time of intercourse only one 
can be enjoyed. 
. 
9 1 . 
Let there be hundreds of horses and let there be 
many elephants, but at the time of riding, only one is enough; 
no second (is required) . 
92. 
At the time of sleeping the same pleasure is experi-
enced irrespective of sleeping on a couch or on bare ground. 
93. 
Just as we embodied ones are afraid of death, so also 
all those beginning with Brahma and ending with insects, are 
afraid of death. 
94. 
If we intelligently ponder (it is evident that) all embodied 
beings are equal. Mter decisively thinking thus, no one should 
be violently injured by anyone, anywhere at any time. 
95. 
There is no other virtue on a par with compassion 
for living beings anywhere on the surface of the earth. Hence 
mercy should be assiduously practised by men. 
96. 
If one living being is protected, all the three worlds 
would get protected,;- if one is killed, all are killed. Hence one 
should protect (and) not kill (others) . 
97. 
Non-violence has been stated as the greatest virtue by 
the ancient wise men (or teachers) . Hence violence should 
not be practised by men who are afraid of hell. 
98. 
In all the three worlds consisting of mobile and immobile

=== PAGE 77 ===

IV.ii.58.99-108 
67 
beings, there is no sin like violence or InJUry. One indulging 
in violence goes to hell and one who abstains from it goes to 
heaven. 
99. 
There are many kinds of gifts. Of what avail are they, 
yielding but insignificant fruit? There is nothing like the gift 
of freedom from fear. 
1 00. 
Mter poring over and reflecting upon different kinds 
of scriptural texts here, four types of gifts have been men­
tioned by the great sages for the sake of welfare here and 
hereafter. 
1 0 1 . 
Freedom from fear should be offered to those who 
are afraid; medicine should be given to those who are afflicted 
with ailments; learning should be imparted to those who seek 
lores; and cooked food should be givefl to one (who is) dis­
tressed with hunger. 
1 02. 
The power of Maᕘi (miraculous gems) , Mantra (spell) 
and Auᔻadha (medicine) is indeed incomprehensible. That 
should be assiduously practised for the purpose of earning 
different kinds of riches. 
103. 
After acquiring wealth in various ways, the twelve Ayatanas 
around should be worshipped well. Of what avail is the wor­
ship of other things (deities) ? 
104. 
The auspicious twelve Ayatanas include the five or­
gans of action, the five sense-organs, the mind and the intel­
lect. 
105. 
Heaven and hell exist here itself (in this world) , no­
where else. Happiness is what is termed as heaven and misery 
what is called hell. 
106. 
If the body is cast off when happiness is being en­
joyed, it is the ultimate salvation; there is no other salvation. 
107. 
When Klesa1 (distress) is destroyed along with the 
Vasana (Avidya, nescience) there is Vijiiiinoparama (cessation 
of Vijiiana) . This would be known as Mokᔻa (salvation) by 
persons who ponder over reality. 
168. 
This authoritative statement is quoted by the follow­
ers of the Vedas: "One should not injure or kill any living 
being." There is no other Vedic statement directing one to kill 
or injure. 
I . Klesas are five: avidyii (nescience) , asmitii (agoti$II1) , raga (desire) , dveqa 
(aversion) , abhinivesa (tenacity of existence) .-MW 324.

=== PAGE 78 ===

68 
Skanda Pura7J.a 
1 09 . 
The Sruti exhorting one to perform Agni,wmzya 
(AgniHoma) etc. is something that misleads others and is quoted 
by evil men. That Sruti which prescribed killing of sacrificial 
animals is not authoritative in the view of those who know. 
1 1 0. 
It is surprising that heaven is sought after cutting 
trees, killing animals, making slush of blood and by burning 
gingelly seeds, ghee etc. 
1 1 1 . 
While PuQ.yaklrti was expat1atmg on Dharma in this 
manner, the citizens heard about this from others successively 
and proceeded (towards him) . 
1 1 2. 
The women of the city were attracted by that Parivrajika 
named Vijiianakaumudl who was very proficient in all lores. 
1 1 3. 
Before them she elaborated on the tenets of Buddha, 
exhorting them to believe only those things that are directly 
seen and adopting only the means of acquiring happiness of 
the body. 
Vijnanakaumud'i said: 
1 1 4. 
This is mentioned by Sruti that Ananda (bliss) is the 
form of Brahman. That should be accepted as it is. The view 
of its diversity is baseless. 
1 1 5. 
One should achieve happiness as long as this body 
is strong and healthy and the sense-organs are not feeble, even 
as old age is far off. 
1 1 6. 
Where can there be happiness when there is defi­
ciency in the sense-organs and health is not normal? Hence 
even the body should be given over to suppliants (before old 
age) by those who wish for happiness. 
1 1 7. 
The earth is (really) burdened by those people who 
are not ready to satisfy the desire of those who beg, and not 
on account of oceans, mountains and trees. 
1 1 8. 
The body is bound to pass off quickly and everything 
hoarded is attended with the certainty of loss. Mter realizing 
this a sensible man should endeavour for the happiness of the 
body. 
1 19. 
Ultimately the body is bound to be a prey to dogs, 
crows and worms. The truth that the body is reduced to ashes 
in the end, has been accepted in the Vedas. 
1 20. 
The classification (of people) into various castes is

=== PAGE 79 ===

IV.ii.58.121-133 
69 
futile in this world. When the state of being human is common 
(to all) , who is high and who is low? 
1 2 1 . 
It is said by elderly persons that this entire creation 
is that of Brahma and others. Dakᔻa and Marlci are reputed 
to be the sons of that creator. 
1 22. 
(It is said that) thirteen charming-eyed daughters of 
Dakᔻa were married in a way approved by scriptures to Kasyapa, 
the son of Marlci. 
1 23. 
"This man is worthy of (carnal) approach. This man 
is not (so) . " Futile is such consideration by people of this age 
who are deficient in intellect and valour. 
1 24. 
The four castes are said to have originated from the 
mouth, arms, thighs and feet (of the Cosmic Being) . This 
belief evolved by the forefathers does ᖨot stand to reason. 
1 25. 
If four sons are born to one (woman) from one (man} , 
will they be different in castes? 
1 26. 
This discrimination between caste and caste does not 
appear (to be correct) to the mind. Hence nobody should 
entertain discrimination between man and man at any time 
and at any place. 
1 27. 
On hearing this speech of Vijiianakaumudl the women 
of the city gave up their excellent mind to serve their hus­
bands. 
1 28. 
By practising the black magic of attracting and win­
ning over (others) men who were fascinated by the wives of 
others succeeded in their objective. 
1 29. 
Royal ladies living in inner apartments, princes, citi­
zens and city women were deluded by both of them. 
1 30-1 3 1 . That lady-mendicant removed the barrenness of 
barren women with various special devices. Vijiianakaumudl 
made women with husbands alive, blessed with conjugal bliss. 
To some she gave (medicated) collyrium, to some others medicine 
called Tilaka (Comm.) . 
132. 
Many (women) were initiated (into Buddhism) with 
Mantras effective in bringing (others) under control. Some 
were muttering Mantras while others were drawing MaQ.<;lalas 
(magical designs) . 
133. 
Some women sitting steady in front of fire-pit began 
to offer various material as oblations into the sacrificial fire.

=== PAGE 80 ===

70 
Skanda Pura7J-a 
1 34. 
Best results such as the growth of vegetation without 
cultivation (and others like provision of honey in cups of leaves 
from trees) became defunct because of the rise of sins. Slowly 
the power of the king also got blunted. 
1 35. 
Though he was stationed far away, Vighne§a (named) 
I;>huQ.<;lhinija made King Ripufijaya ('conqueror of enemies') 
dejected in his mind and disinclined to administer the king­
dom. 
1 36. 
Divodasa kept count of the eighteen-day period: "When 
will that BrahmaQ.a who will be instructing me, arrive?" 
1 37. 
When the eighteenth day arrived and the sun reached 
the zenith of the sky, that excellent BrahmaQ.a came to the 
gate. 
1 38. 
It was Adhokᔻaja (ViᔻQ.U) himself under the name of 
PuQ.yaklrti from Dharmakᔻetra who came to the king in the 
guise of a BrahmaQ.a. 
1 39. 
The BrahmaQ.a who came was as though fire itself 
having assumed a physical form. He was accompanied by two 
or three other holy persons repeating blessings: ''jay a . (Be 
victorious) ; ]iva (Be alive) . " 
140. 
O n seeing him coming from a distance, the anxious 
king considered him a preceptor capable of imparting to him 
instructions. 
1 4 1 . The king approached him and bowed down to him 
frequently. Having received him with welcoming words, he 
took the BrahmaQ.a into the inner apartment. 
1 42-143. 
The king offered Madhuparka (mixture of honey, 
curds etc.) and adored him duly. When he dispelled the fatigue 
due to the journey and attained normal state, with his lotus­
like face beaming with pleasure, he offered him foodstuffs to 
eat and did everything needed. The king then asked the BrahmaQ.a 
who was contented and comfortably sitting: 
The king said: 
1 44. 
Bearing the burden of the administration of the kingdom, 
I am afflicted, 0 excellent BrahmaQ.a. Actually, I have no distress 
but a slight loss of interest has appeared. 
145. What shall I do? Where shall I go? How can I be 
happy? 0 BrahmaQ.a, two fortnights have elapsed since I am 
worried thus.

=== PAGE 81 ===

IV.ii.58.146-1 64 
71 
1 46. 
With all my enemies having been destroyed completely 
unlimited series of pleasures has been enjoyed by me like the 
Three-eyed Lord (Siva) in a manifest form. 
1 47. 
By my own ability, I became identical with Parjanya, 
Agni and Anila. The subjects have been protected well like my 
own bosom-born children. 
1 48. 
BrahmaQ.as have been propitiated everyday with money. 
While ruling the kingdom I have committed only one offence. 
149. 
All the Devas have been slighted by me due to the 
arrogance born of the power of my penance. But I swear by 
you that, that too I did only to render help to my subjects and 
not for my own sake. 
150. 
Now do become my spiritual preceptor. It is due to 
the rise of my good luck that you have! come here. I shall 
continue to rule the kingdom thus without caring for and 
fearing the god of Death. 
1 5 1 . 
Nowhere in my kingdom is the likelihood of an un­
timely attack by the god of Death nor is there the fear of old 
age, sickness and poverty. 
152. 
While I rule no one shall resort to an unrighteous 
activity. All the people grow richer in piety. All of them have 
a rise in prosperity and happiness. 
1 53-154. 
All the people engage themselves passionately 
in the pursuit of excellent learning; all are experts in travers­
ing the path of good people. Or, what do we get even if the 
longevity extends up to the end of a Kalpa? All the objects of 
pleasure appear like chewing what is already chewed. 0 ex­
cellent BrahmaQ.a, of what avail is the kingdom which is like 
pressing of what is already pressed? 
155. 
0 wise one, advise something for the prevention of 
further stay in the womb. Or, of what avail are the thoughts 
like these for me who have sought refuge in you? 
156-157. 
Undoubtedly I shall do ·whatever you say today. 
By your mere sight all the desires of others too become ful­
filled. They have almost become so in my case. I know this. 
Who have not (i.e. all have) become doomed due to the animosity 
of Devas? 
158-1 64. 
The Tripuras were heroic and much devoted to 
Siva. They were the followers of their own duty. They used to 
protect their own subjects. Still they were reduced to ashes

=== PAGE 82 ===

72 
Skanda Purii:r_ta 
playfully by letting fall a single arrow, by Hara who constructed 
his chariot out of the earth, made Himalaya the bow, who 
made Vedas the horses, Vasuki the bow string, Viriii.ci, god 
Brahma, the charioteer, ViᔻI}.U the arrow, the sun and the 
moon as the wheels of the chariot, Pral}.ava as the whip, the 
stars and the planets becoming the pegs, the sky as the wooden 
fender for protection in the chariot, Sumeru as the flagstaff, 
the lofty Kalpa tree as the banner, serpents as the ropes for 
binding the Vedas (horses) and the Ailgas as the bodyguard, 
Kalagnirudra being made the arrowhead and the wind the 
feathered part. 
Bali who was the most excellent one among those who per­
formed Yajii.as was formerly driven to the nether regions by 
Hari who fraudulently disguised himself as a dwarf and took 
three steps. 
Vrtra who was of good behaviour was killed by Sutraman 
(Indra) . 
1 65. 
Bearing in mind the previous enmity of Hari who was 
defeated by Dadhici by means of Kusa grass, although he fought 
for victory, that leading Brahmal}.a Dadhici was killed by the 
Devas for the sake of his bones. 
1 66. 
The thousand arms of Bal}.a, a devotee of Siva, were 
cut off by Hari formerly during a battle. What offence did that 
excellent one of good conduct commit? 
1 67. 
Hence antagonizing the Devas cannot be conducive 
to welfare. But since I tread the path of the good, I do not 
have the slightest fear from the Devas. 
1 68. 
Vasava and other Devas have attained Devahood through 
Yajiws. But I have superiority over them due to Yajiias, Diinas 
and Tapas. 
1 69. 
Let there be superiority or inferiority. Of what im­
portance is this to me now? This meeting with you, has pro­
vided a pleasant pause in the activities of the sense-organs. 
1 70. 
Now, 0 great one, who are conversant with the requisite 
means that is capable of uprooting Karmas, grant that unto 
me, whereby I shall get beatitude. 
Skanda said: 
1 7 1 . O n hearing the words uttered by the king thus due

=== PAGE 83 ===

IV.ii.58.1 72-182 
73 
to the entry of Gai_lesa, Hrᔻike8a who was in the guise of a 
Brahmai_la said: 
Sri Vi,I"ċU said: 
1 72. 
0 highly intelligent one, 0 sinless one, 0 crest jewel 
among kings, well-said, (very) well-said! What should have been 
given as advice by me has been well-indicated by you. 
173. 
At the very outset you have already washed off all the 
impurities of the sense-organs through the pure waters of excellent 
penance and hence have become the best bestower of honour 
on me. 
1 74. 
What has been said by you, 0 king, is entirely true, 
0 highly intelligent one. I know your power as well as disin-
terestedness (in worldly affairs) . 
0 
175. 
A king like you has never been before nor will there 
ever be. You knew well how to enjoy the kingdom. It is but 
proper that you wish to abandon it now. 
1 76. 
In spite of the opposition from the Devas no offence 
has been committed by you. Nor has occurrence of non-righ­
teousness taken place in your kingdom. 
1 77. 
What piety has been observed by your subjects under 
your guidance and persuasion has made the heaven-dwellers 
satisfied. 
1 78. 
Only one defect in you occurs in my mind, and it is 
the fact that Visvdvara has been made to stay far away from 
Kasl by you. 
1 79. 
This I know is the greatest offence on your part, 0 
most excellent one among the rulers of the earth. I shall now 
tell you the best means of quelling that sin. 
180. 
Even granting that one has committed as many sins 
as there are hairs on the body, all those sins vanish if one 
instals a Lili.ga. 
1 8 1 . 
If a single Lili.ga is installed here with due devotion 
to Isa, it is as though the entire universe has been established 
by him. 
182. 
The counting of the number of jewels in the ocean 
is possible by those who are experts in calculation. But the 
extent of the merit of the installation of Lili.gas cannot be 
written down.

=== PAGE 84 ===

74 
Skanda Pura7J.a 
1 83. 
Hence with all endeavour make a Linga installed. By 
that installation of the Linga, you will become blessed and 
contented. 
1 84. 
Mter saying this, the Brahmal).a meditated for a short 
while with unwavering mind. Thereafter he touched the king 
with his hand with his countenance beaming with delight and 
said thus: 
Sri Vi,s-7J.u said: 
1 85. 
0 king, I se.!! another thing also through my vision 
of knowledge. 0 most excellent one among wise men, listen 
to that too with adequate attention. 
1 86. 
You are blessed. You have fulfilled your task. You are 
worthy of being honoured even by great men. Your very name 
should be uttered in morning by one who wishes to attain 
auspicious benefit. 
187. 
0 Divodasa, thanks to your presence and proximity. 
We are highly blessed. Among mortal beings those who utter 
your name are also blessed. 
1 88. 
The Brahmal).a continued to say smilingly, shaking 
his head repeatedly, highly delighted in his heart with joyous 
horripilation. 
1 89. 
"Oh! The purity of this one (is excellent) ! Oh! The 
rise of the fortune of this one (is praiseworthy) since one 
should meditate on him always! Visvesvara should be medi­
tated upon by all. 
1 90. 
Oh! The resulting fate of this (king) cannot be ob­
tained by anyone (else) ! What is far away from even us is not 
far away from him." 
1 9 1 . 
Mter considering thus within his heart, the Brahmal).a 
extolled the king and disclosed everything that he saw during 
his meditation. 
The Brahma7J.a said: 
1 92. 0 king, the tree of your cherished desire has borne 
fruit today. You will be attaining the greatest position with this 
very body. 
1 93. Vi5vesvara does not have any consideration in his heart

=== PAGE 85 ===

IV.ii.58. 194-208 
75 
for people like us nor for a BrahmaQ.a whose eyes are directed 
towards his feet in the same manner as he has for you in his 
heart. 
194. 
Since you have installed a Liilga, a divine aerial chariot 
of Sambhu will be coming on the seventh day from today to 
take you away. 
195. 
0 king, you know what that merit is, whereof this is 
the result. I too know that it is due to your service to the city 
of VaraQ.asl. 
196. 
0 excellent one among kings, even if one takes care 
of a single resident of VaraQ.asl, one will have this same benefit 
at the time of the death of his body. 
, 
1 97. 
On hearing this, the valorous, saintly king Divodasa 
who was delighted, granted to the BrahmaQ.a and his disciples 
what they desired. 
198. After repeatedly bowing down to the propitiated 
BrahmaQ.a, the joyous king said, "I have been redeemed from 
the ocean of worldly existence." 
199. 
The BrahmaQ.a too was delighted in his heart with his 
desires fulfilled. He took leave of the king and went to the 
place of his choice. 
200-202. Hari who was in the guise of a sham BrahmaQ.a 
pondered over this frequently: 'What is that spot highly sa­
cred, which I can occupy and take all my devotees to the 
highest abode with the great blessings of Visvesa?' Mter seeing 
the Hrada (whirlpool) Paiicanada he decided thus, took his 
holy dip there duly, and stationed himself there. 
203. 
Expecting an early personal contact with the Three­
eyed Lord, the Lord of Lakᔻml sent Tarkᔻya to convey the 
news about the king. 
204-208. The eminent king Divodasa extolled the leader of 
BrahmaQ.as and summoned all the subjects, the vassal kings along 
with their ministers, the keeper of the treasury, cavalry, elephant 
army etc., the eldest son Samaraiijaya and five hundred other 
sons, the priest, the Rtviks, the BrahmaQ.as, the watchmen, the 
princes of vassal kingdoms, the cooks, the physicians, many foreigners 
who had arrived on various missions, the crowned queen along 
with the other members of the Inner Apartment, the elders, the 
cowherds, and the children, with great delight. He joined his

=== PAGE 86 ===

76 
Skanda Puriir.w 
arms in deference and said to them what the Brahmai).a had told 
regarding the seven-day limit. 
209-210. Even as they were listening to the miracle with sad 
faces, the king himself took Prince Smaraiijaya to the royal 
palace (outside Kasi) . The king of keen intellect and merito­
rious soul crowned his son and granted favours to the citizens 
and dwellers of the surrounding districts. He then went back 
to Kasl. 
2 1 1 . After returning to Kasl that highly intelligent king 
who had conquered his enemies got a palace built on the 
western bank of the celestial river. 
212. 
That king built a shrine of Siva spending the whole 
of the amount he had won by defeating the enemies in battle. 
2 1 3. 
Since the wealth and fortune of the kings had been 
entirely utilized there, that auspicious part of the land became 
well-known as BhupalasrL 
2 1 4. 
The king, the conqueror of enemies, installed the 
Linga Divodasesvara and considered himself blessed for hav­
ing fulfilled his tasks. 
2 1 5-2 1 8. On a certain day the king worshipped that Linga 
duly, bowed down to it and eulogized the Linga that accorded 
him satisfaction. By · that time a divine aerial chariot came 
down quickly from the sky with the attendants sprawled about 
in it all-round. They had tridents and Khaᖘvangas (skull-topped 
clubs) in their hands. Their splendour surpassed the dazzling 
radiance of the Sun ᖙnd fire. They had eyes in their foreheads 
and had matted hairs. Their limbs shining like pure crystals 
illuminated the sky. Their physical forms had venerable ap­
pearance due to the jewels on the hoods of the serpents which 
constituted their ornaments. Their necks appeared to be resorted 
to (i.e. had blue tinge) by the darkness terrified by the per­
petual brilliance. 
2 1 9-222. The aerial chariot was surrounded by hundreds of 
Rudrakanyas with the fingers of their hands busily engaged in 
moving chowries. 
Thereafter the king was embellished by the attendants in 
a joyous mood, with divine garlands, unguents and silk robes. 
His excellent forehead became three-eyed. His throat became 
blue. All his limbs were rendered white. His hairs became 
matted. His body had four arms and was adorned with ser-

=== PAGE 87 ===

IV.ii.58.223-IV.ii.59.3 
77 
pents. A crescent-shaped moon adorned his head. The atten­
dants then took the king to heaven. 
223-224. Ever since then, that holy Tlrtha became renowned 
as Bhupalasrl. The devotees should perform Sraddha etc. there. 
They shall make monetary gifts in accordance with their ca­
pacity. They should visit Divodasesvara and worship him de­
voutly. They shall then listen to the narrative about the king. 
No such devotee shall ever be reborn in a womb. 
225. 
A man who reads and teaches or causes to read this 
sacred narrative of King Divodasa becomes liberated from sins. 
226. 
If anyone enters a battlefield after listening to the 
auspicious account of Divodasa, he need not have any fear 
from the enemies. 
227. 
The meritorious story of Divodasa destroys great 
calamities. It should be read assiduously for the suppression 
of all obstacles. 
228. 
Where the story of Divodasa that destroys all sins is 
read, there is neither drought nor fear from premature death. 
229. 
By reading this narrative, all desires will become ful­
filled like those of Viᕄt:J.U who carried out what Sambhu had 
thought of. 
CHAPTER FIFTYNINE 
Paiicanada1 Comes into Being 
Agastya said: 
1-3. 0 Six-faced Lord, 0 delighter of the heart of Sarvajiia 
(Omniscient Siva) , whose hairs have been kissed by Gaur!, 0 
I . Paiicanada is Paiicaganga, one of the five sacred-most Tirthas on Ganga. 
Before Ganga was brought there by Bhagiratha there were two streams (rivu­
lets)-Dhiitapapa and Kirai)a, joining the pool called Dharmanada. At Prayaga 
Ganga was joined by Yamuna and Sarasvati. These three rivers coming from 
Prayaga, assimilated the local two rivulets Dhiitapapa and KiraQa. The confluence 
of the five rivers at this place became known as Paiicaganga Tirtha and the 
fine Ghiita here is known Paiicagangii Ghiita. (BCL, p. 237) 
Today, to the north of the bathing Gha· is a trickle of water called Dhiitapapa. 
To the south (of what is called Lak¸mai)a Bal Gha·) . there is a rectangular 
KuQ<;ia opening towards Ganga and it is called the "river" KiraQa. In fact these 
PuraQic 'rivers' are symbolically represented today. 
The present chapter describes how this spot became "Paiicanada" (Paiicaganga) .

=== PAGE 88 ===

78 
Skanda Purii:TJ-a 
slayer of Taraka, 0 storehouse of all knowledge, obeisance to 
you, the son of Sarvajiia, the cause of welfare and the re­
deemer. Obeisance to the noble-souled Kumara who conquered 
Mara completely in every respect. I offer obeisance to you 
who, after perceiving Kamari (enemy of Kama, Siva) , Ardhanarlsa 
(the Lord half of whom is female) as brought about by Kama 
(Love) conquered Mara though yet a Kumara (a person of 
tender age) 
4. 
0 Lord Skanda, it has been mentioned by you that Hari 
with a sham physical form of a Brahmal).a, occupied the ex­
tremely holy Tlrthas (called) Paiicanada at Kasl. 
5. Kasl is the most sacred Tlrtha among all the regions of 
Bhu, Bhuval). and Sval). (the three worlds) . Even therein the 
extremely sacred Tlrtha called Paiicanada came to be known 
by Hari. 
6. 
Whence, 0 Six-faced One, is the name Paiicanada (was 
given) unto that Tlrtha? How did it become the holiest of all 
Tlrthas? 
7-8. 
Lord ViᔻI).u is the immanent soul, the Lord of the 
universe, the protector, the creator and the playful destroyer 
of all the worlds. How did he happen to have a form though 
he is formless? How did he, the unmanifest one, become manifest? 
How did he, one without shape, happen to be one with shape? 
How did he who is transcendent, happeᖚ to be immanent in 
the world? 
9-1 1 . He who has no birth, took many births; he who is 
nameless, to9k many distinct names; he who has no support, 
is the supporter of everything; he who is devoid of attributes, 
became the basis of attributes; he wl).o has no sense-organs, 
became the Lord of sense-organs; he who has no legs, has 
become the traverser of all places. How did the omnipresent 
Janardana withdraw his form and station himself at Paiicanada, 
the most excellent Tlrtha, in the form of being the soul of all? 
0 Six-faced Lord, narrate this as it has been heard by you 
from the Five-faced Lord. 
Skanda said: 
12. Mter bowing down to Mahesvara, I shall tell this story 
that subdues all sins and brings about all welfare.

=== PAGE 89 ===

IV.ii.59. 13-26 
79 
13. 
I shall tell how the Tirtha called Paiicanada at Kasi 
became well-known. Merely by repeating its name, sin gets 
shredded into a thousand bits. 
1 4. 
Prayaga is the Lord of all Tirthas. It forcibly draws 
out the sins of sinners through its own power; 
1 5-17. 
It is by the power of Prayaga that all the Tirthas 
remove the sins of sinners. In the month of Magha when the 
Sun is in the Zodiac of Capricorn they come into contact with 
the king of Tirthas (i.e. Prayaga) every year and get rid of 
their impurities. Prayaga, the Lord of all Tirthas, gets rid of 
all the impurities dumped into it by all the other Tirthas and 
also the great sins of great sinners, thanks to the power of 
Paiicanada. Throughout the year the Tirtha Nayaka ('Lord of 
the Tirthas' i.e. Prayaga) gathers togethct- masses of sins. In 
the month of Karttika, by a single dip into Paiicanada, all 
those sins are dispelled. 
18. 
I shall mention how Paiicanada originated. 0 blessed 
son of Mitra and Varm;Ia, listen. 
19. 
Formerly there was a sage of great penance named 
Vedasiras, born in the family of Bhrgu. It was as though he 
was another embodied form of the Vedas. 
20. 
While that sage was performing the penance, Suci, 
the most excellent one of the celestial damsels, endowed with 
beauty and well-shaped limbs came into his view. 
2 1 . 
Merely at her sight the mind of the sage became 
extremely agitated. He had an emission of semen immedi­
ately. The excellent celestial damsel became frightened. 
22. 
She bowed down to him from a distance. Sud's limbs 
shook excessively due to her fear of the curse of the sage. She 
spoke to him: 
23-24. 
"0 storehouse of extremely rigorous penance, I have 
not committed even the least offence. (If so) I should be 
excused. 0 receptacle of forgiveness and forbearance, ascetics 
are personified forgiveness. The minds of sages are generally 
softer than even a lotus. 0 extremely good one, in their own 
form, women are hard-hearted. " 
25. 
On hearing these words of that celestial damsel Suci, 
the sage curbed the flow of the great current of anger by 
means of the dam of discrimination. 
26. 
Pleased within himself he said: "0 Suci, you are in-

=== PAGE 90 ===

80 
Skanda Purii:1Ja 
deed Suci (pure) . In this matter there is no fault on my part 
nor on yours, 0 fair lady. 
27. 
'Young maide_ns are of the form of fire and men are 
like butter' , so say those who are less informed. If we ponder 
there is a great difference. 
28. 
Even butter melts only on coming into contact with 
fire, but it is wonderful that man melts even from a distance, 
merely when the name of a woman is mentioned. 
29. 
Hence, 0 Suci of pure mind, you need not be afraid, 
Since you came unexpectedly, I had the emission of semen. 
30. 
If a sage is free from lust there is no harm in this 
emission of semen as much as there would be from a fit of 
anger which is "inimical as well as blinding within a moment. 
3 1 . 
The power of penance accumulated with very great 
difficulty becomes reduced due to anger, like the lustre of the 
sun and the moon when covered with a patch of cloud. 
32. 
How can wealth and human aspiration flourish, should 
there be anger, the cause of ruin and disaster? How can good 
people prosper if wicked people gain the upper hand? 
33. 
When anger grips the mind, how can love stir out? 
When Rahu completely eclipses the Moon, how can there be 
the moonlight? 
34. 
When the forest-fire of anger blazes, how can the 
tree of peace stand safe and sound? Has the safety and sound­
ness of a baby elephant been seen anywhere by anyone when 
a lion is nearby? 
35. 
Hence anger which is antagonistic to and destructive 
of the four aims of life should be eschewed by a sensible man. 
36. 
Now, 0 fair lady Suci, listen, what should be done by 
you. Our semen never goes waste. Hence accept it (within 
you) . 
37. 
Should this semen that got emitted at your sight be 
taken care of by you, an extremely pure jewel of a female child 
will be born of you, " 
38. 
On being addressed thus by the sage, that celestial 
lady was reborn as it were. "This is your great favour", saying 
so she swallowed the semen of the sage. 
39. 
In due course of time the celestial lady gave birth to 
a jewel of a female child that was the storehouse of loveliness, 
delighting much the eyes of onlookers.

=== PAGE 91 ===

IV.ii.59.40-51 
81 
40. 
Leaving her in the hermitage of Sage Vedasiras, Suci, 
the most excellent one among the celestial damsels, went 
somewhere as she pleased. 
41 . 
By means of the milk of a doe in his own hermitage, 
Vedasiras affectionately brought up that doe-eyed girl. 
42. 
The sage gave her a meaningful name Dhittapiipii ('One 
who has shaken off sins') by merely uttering which all the 
clusters of sins quake (through fear) . 
43. 
She had all the characteristic features of brilliance. 
She was beautiful in every limb. The sage did not keep her 
away from his lap even for a moment. 
44. 
Looking at her growing steadily day by day, he was 
extremely glad like that Ocean of Milk looking at the beautiful 
digit of the moon at night. 
• 
· 
45. 
On observing that she reached the age of eight, the 
great sage thought within himself: 'To whom is she to be 
given?' and so asked her directly: 
Vedasiras said: 
46. 
0 my blessed daughter, 0 Dhiitapapa of splendid 
eyes, to which bridegroom shall I give you? You yourself tell 
about that bridegroom. 
4 7. 
On hearing this utterance of her father whose mind 
was drenched with excessive affection, that girl Dhiitapapa 
said with her face lowered: 
Dhittapiipii said: 
48. 
Dear father, if you consider that I should be given 
away to a handsome bridegroom, then give me unto that person 
of whom I am telling you now. 
49. 
He should appeal to you too, dear father. May you 
be pleased to listen attentively? 
He should be the holiest of all. He should be one devoutly 
bowed to by all. 
50. 
He should be one whom all love, from whom all 
happiness originates, who never perishes and who continues 
to be ever present. 
5 1 . 
He must be one who certainly guards from the rise

=== PAGE 92 ===

82 
Skanda Pura:TJ,a 
of great calamities here in this world as well as hereafter, by 
whom all cherished desires get fulfilled. 
52. 
He must be one in whose presence conjugal bliss 
shall increase day by· day and by continuously carrying out 
whose service, there should be nothing to fear. 
53. 
He should be one on mentioning whose name, no 
one can harass and with whom as support, the fourteen worlds 
stand steady. 
54. 
For your welfare as well as that of mine, dear father, 
give me unto that Vara (excellent one, bridegroom) who possesses 
these and other good qualities and whose activities are excel­
lent. 
55-57 a. On hearing this, her father experienced great joy: 
"I am blessed. My ancestors are blessed in whose family there 
is a daughter like her. Certainly this girl whose intellect is thus 
inclined is verily (as her name indicates) Dhutapapa ('one 
whose sins are shaken off) . Who can he be here who is really 
endowed with qualities like these. Or, how can he be obtained 
without the appearance of the fruit of great merits?" 
57b-58. Then the eminent sage concentrated his mind for 
a while and visualized by his spiritual knowledge, a bridegroom 
with such good qualities. Then he spoke to the blessed girl: 
The Father said: 
59. Listen, 0 wise girl! Verily there certainly exists a bride­
groom, the receptacle of the good qualities as enumerated by 
you. 
60. He who is extremely handsome in his features, cannot 
be easily obtained. He sh_puld be purchased (won over) by 
means of penance as the price in a market in the form of some 
excellent Tlrtha. 
61 . 0 (my) daughter, he cannot be easily obtained through 
a lot of wealth, or through nobility of birth, or by the study 
and practice of the Vedas and Scriptures or through the power 
of prosperity. 
62. Neither by the beauty of physical form can he be ob­
tained, nor by intellect and never by valour. The only means 
(to obtain him) is the purity of the mind through subduing 
the sense-organs.

=== PAGE 93 ===

IV.ii.59.63-73 
83 
63. 
That befitting husband of great intellect is to be ob­
tained with the help of great austerity together with Dama 
(controlling the sense-organs) . Dana (gifts) and Dayii (com­
passion) . 
64. 
On hearing these words that girl bowed down to her 
father. Having decided to perform penance, she requested her 
father for the requisite permission. 
Skanda said: 
65. 
On being permitted by her father, she performed a 
great penance in the extremely sacred spot (of Avimukta)­
a penance not easily performed even by .ascetics. 
66. 
(What a great contrast! ) Where is that girl of exquis­
itely soft limbs? Where is such an uncommon penance of that 
sort which can be performed only with a sturdy physical frame? 
Wonderful is the fortitude of persons of excellent mental set­
up! 
67. 
In rainy season when there was continuous down­
pour together with violent gusts of wind, she spent many nights 
on large slabs of stone. 
68. 
She did not tremble even slightly when she heard the 
terrible thundering sound, nor when she saw the dazzling 
streaks of lightning and when she got drenched in torrential 
downpour. 
69. 
During dark nights there were frequent flashes of 
lightning in the penance grove. It appeared as though it passed 
to and fro inspecting her practice of penance. 
70. 
Verily the season of summer itself had come down to 
the penance grove under the guise of that girl and started 
performing penance with five fires all-round. 
71 . 
Though scorched by the five fires the girl never felt 
thirsty for water, nor did she drink even a drop from the tip 
of a Kusa. 
72. 
She appeared to be wearing a shawl in the form of 
horripilation; her very skin trembled; she was lean and ema­
ciated through the penance. Thus she spent the early wintry 
nights. 
73. 
In late winter during the nights she resorted to the 
lakes, when she was thought by the Sarasa birds there as though

=== PAGE 94 ===

84 
Skanda Purii?J-a 
a new loᖛus-plant had sprung up. 
74. 
Even the minds of ascetics become passionate during 
spring but the passion of her mind and the reddish tinge of 
her lips were taken over by the sprouts of mango trees. 
75. 
During her stay in the forest in spring season, that 
girl kept her mind steadily engaged in penance though she 
heard the Kakali: sound of the cuckoos. 
76. 
In autumn she became engaged in the penance, after 
depositing as it were the lustre of her lips in the Bandhujlva 
(China rose) and the charming gaits in the swan. 
77. 
The ascetic girl Dh ii.tapapa who had eschewed all 
contacts with pleasures resorted to the practice of Bhogins 
('those who enjoy', serpents) (i.e. the only intake was air) in 
order to prevent the rise of hunger. 
78. 
Just as a jewel when whetted on a whetting stone 
attains greater lustre, so also her body, though lean on account 
of the penance, shone all the more. 
79. 
On seeing her in continuous penance with purity of 
mind, Brahma approached her and said: "0 girl of excellent 
intellect, I am pleased. Choose a boon. " 
80. 
O n seeing the Four-faced Lord seated o n his vehicle, 
the swan, she became delighted. Bowing down with palms joined 
in deference, she spoke to the Grand Patriarch: 
Dhittapiipii said: 
8 1 . 
0 Grandfather, 0 bestower of boons, if a boon is to 
be granted to me, make me the purest of all pure ones. 
82. 
On hearing of her desire, the Creator was excessively 
delighted and contented in his mind. He spoke in reply to that 
pure girl seeking purity: 
Brahmii said: 
83. 
0 Dhii.tapapa, by my boon, do become the most sa-
cred and purest without parallel of all the pure things here 
all-round. 
84. 
0 girl, there are three and a half crores of pure 
Tlrthas in heaven, on the earth and in the atmosphere. They 
are capable of purifying more and more.

=== PAGE 95 ===

IV.ii.59.85-93 
85 
85. 
At my behest may all those Ti:rthas reside in your 
body in every pore of hair. Be the most sanctifying of all. 
86. After saying this, Brahma vanished. That girl Dhutapapa 
whose sins had become dispelled went to the hut of Vedasiras, 
her father. 
87. Once Dharma who had been attracted by her power of 
penance, saw her sporting about in the courtyard of the hut. 
He requested the girl: 
Dharma said: 
88. 0 fair lady of splendid countenance, 0 slender-bellied 
one of huge buttocks and large eyes, I qave been bought as 
it were by thy richly beautiful form; grant me the pleasure bf 
secret intercourse. 
89. 0 fair-eyed One, thanks to thee, the Lord of Love harasses 
me excessively. 
Thus she was often requested in secret by that (Dharma) 
whose name she did not know. 
She said: 
90. My father should be the giver. 0 wretch of wicked intention, 
request him because a girl should be given in marriage by her 
father. This is the injunction of the eternal Sruti. 
9 1 . After hearing these words, Dharma continued his im­
portunity to that girl of forbearance, he himself having lost 
it due to the gravity of what was destined to happen. 
Dharma said: 
92. 0 beautiful girl of great fortune, I do not (wish to) 
request your father. Carry out my desire through the Gandharva 
form of marriage. 
93. On hearing these importunate words, that girl wished 
to pay regard due to her father because of her being a daugh­
ter. She therefore, spoke to the BrahmaQ.a thus:

=== PAGE 96 ===

86 
Skanda Purii:r_ta 
94: "0 dulT-witted one, do not speak thus again. Go .. away 
from here." Though admonished thus by the girl, he did not 
remain quiet because he was utterly afflicted by god of Love. 
95. 
Then the girl cursed him, having become powerful 
due to her penance: "Since you are utterly insensible, become 
a river, a receptacle of water." 
96. 
Cursed thus by her he too became angry and cursed 
her thus: "0 wicked-minded one of hard heart, become a 
rock. " 
Skanda said: 
97. Thus on account of their mutual curse, 0 sage, Dharma 
became a river in the great Ti:rtha named Avimukta. It became 
well-known as the great Dharmanada. 
98. 
Very much frightened, she told her father the reason 
of her becoming a rock. By means of his meditation, the sage 
understood that it was Dharma and said to his daughter: 
99. 
"Do not be afraid, dear daughter. I shall do unto you 
everything that will end in an auspicious result. His curse cannot 
become otherwise. Become a lunar stone. 
1 00. 
When the moon rises you will become melted, dear 
daughter, and be a river, dear chaste one, well-reputed as 
Dh iitapapa. 
1 0 1 . 
0 girl, that Dharmanada is your splendid husband. 
He possesses all those good qualities as expressed by you. 
1 02. 
0 wise one, listen to one thing more. By the power 
of my penance there shall be two forms of both of you, the 
original and the liquidized. " 
1 03. 
0 scorcher of enemies, thus the father consoled the 
daughter. The wise sage blessed her duly when she became a 
lunar stone. 
1 04. 
Ever since then, 0 sage the Hrada (still Pond) be­
came famous as Dharmanada in Kasl. In the liquid form Dharma 
1s the destroyer of great sins. 
1 05. 
That splendid river Dhiitapapa consists of all Tlrthas. 
It shall remove masses of great sins as though they are trees 
growing on its banks. 
1 06. 
Before the advent of the celestial river Bradhna (the 
Sun-god) performed a penance in that Ti:rtha called Dharmanada 
along with Dh uta papa.

=== PAGE 97 ===

1 07. 
The Ray-garlanded Lord (the Sun-god) meditated on 
Mangala Gauri in the presence of Gabhast'isvara (Siva) and 
performed his fierce penance. 
1 08. 
While he was performing the penance in the name 
of Mayiikhaditya, great sweat issued forth from his rays due 
to the strain involved. 
1 09. 
The continuous perspiration that issued forth from 
the rays, became a holy river named KiraQa. 
1 1 0. 
In conjunction with Dhiitapapa, the river named KiraQa 
shall destroy the darkness of the mass of great sins merely 
through the holy bath therein . 
1 1 1 . 
At the outset, the holy Dharmanada joined Dhiitapapa 
whereby all sins were destroyed because it consisted of all 
Tirthas. 
1 1 2 . 
KiraQa augmented by the Sun joitled with her. Merely 
by remembering the name of KiraQa great delusion becomes 
destroyed. 
1 1 3. 
Ki raQa and Dh iitapapa fall into the auspicious 
Dharmanada. These two rivers in VaraQasi with their holy waters 
destroy all sins. 
1 1 4. 
Thereafter Bh agirathi arrived there along with 
Bhaglratha, son of Dillpa. Yamuna and Sarasvatl came there 
like Bhaglrathl. 
1 1 5. 
Five rivers are glorified here: KiraQa, Dhiitapapa, Sarasvati 
of holy waters, Ganga and Yamuna. 
1 1 6. 
Hence the Tlrtha became renowned in all the three 
worlds by the name Paiicanada. A man who takes his holy dip 
therein does not take up a physical form consisting of the five 
elements. 
1 1 7. 
In this confluence of five rivers that destroys masses 
of sins, one should take one's ablution whereby one passes off 
splitting the pavilion of the cosmos. 
1 1 8. 
There are many Tlrthas here in Kasl at every step, 
but they are not on a par even with a ten-millionth part of 
Paflcanada Tlrtha. 
1 1 9. 
By taking the holy dip on a single day in Paflcanada 
at Kasl that benefit one certainly gains which one gains by 
taking sedulous bath in Prayaga for the whole of the month 
of Magha. 
1 20. 
Mter bathing in Pailcanada Tlrtha and offering liba-

=== PAGE 98 ===

tions to the forefathers, a devotee should worship Bindumadhava. 
He will not be reborn. 
1 2 1 . 
The contentment of the forefathers shall be for as 
many years as there are gingelly seeds in the libation to the 
forefathers in the holy Tirtha of Paiicanada. 
1 22. 
If Sraddha is offered with great faith in the splendid 
Tirtha of Paiicanada, the forefathers shall become liberated, 
though they might have taken birth in different species of 
creatures. 
1 23. 
On observing the greatness of Paiicanada in respect 
to the injunctions regarding Sraddha this Gatha (folk rhyme) 
is being sung by the groups of ancestors in the world of Yama. 
1 24. 
"Will someone belonging to our family come to 
Paiicanada at K<H1 and perform Sraddha whereby we shall get 
liberated? " 
1 25. 
This Gatha pertaining to Paiicanada at Kasi is being 
sung everyday in front of Sraddhadeva (god of Death) by the 
forefathers. 
1 26. 
If even the least of money is given away there in the 
Paiicanada Tirtha there shall be no reduction to that Pul).ya 
(merit) even if the Kalpa comes to a close. 
127. 
Even a barren woman shall certainly give birth to a 
son after taking a holy bath in the Paiicanada Hrada for a year 
and worshipping Mailgala Gaurl. 
1 28. 
If the deity of one's own choice be bathed with the 
holy waters of Paiicanada filtered with a cloth, the devotee 
shall attain great benefit. 
1 29. 
A drop of water of Paiicanada when weighed against 
hundred and eight potfuls of Amrta has excelled (those pitch­
ers of Nectar) . 
1 30. 
By taking in a drop of Paiicanada water with faith, 
one gets as much purity as is cited as the benefit of taking in 
Paiicakurca (Paiicagavya) . 
1 3 1 . 
By taking the holy bath i n the waters of Paiicanada 
one gets hundred times the benefit that one gets after Avabhrtha 
(valedictory) baths after Rajasuya and Asvamedha. 
1 32. 
Rajasuya and Asvamedha may very well be the means 
of achieving heaven; but the holy bath in Paiicanada is con­
dudve to salvation for two Ghańikas of Brahma. 
1 33. 
Coronation in the heavenly kingdom is not as much

=== PAGE 99 ===

worthy of honour to good people as the holy dip in Paiicanada 
which accords immense pleasure. 
1 34. 
Better to go to Varai.J.asl and be a servant to those 
who sprinkle themselves with the waters of Paiicanada than be 
a king elsewhere with million kings as servants. 
1 35. 
Those who do not take their holy dips in Paiicanada 
in the month of Karttika that removes all sins, continue to stay 
in a mother's womb even today. They are doomed to be in 
the womb again. 
· 
1 36. 
In Krtayuga the Tlrtha is named Dharmanada; in Treta 
it is Dh utapapaka; in Dvapara it is Bindu Tirtha and it is 
remembered as Paiicanada in Kali age. 
1 37. 
What is obtained as benefit in Krtayuga after per­
forming penance for a hundred years is obtained as benefit 
by a single bath in Paiicanada in the m<Jnth of Karttika. 
1 38. 
By performing holy ablution in Dharmanada in the 
month of Karttika, one shall get the same benefit as is obtained 
elsewhere by performing holy rites such as IHiipurtas for the 
whole life. 
1 39. 
There is no Tirtha anywhere on the earth like Dhutapapa 
where a single holy dip destroys sins accumulated in the course 
of three births. 
1 40. 
By gifting gold to the extent of a KrTI.J.ala (a Raktika) 
in Bindu Tlrtha a man is never kept in want of gold. He will 
never be poor. 
1 4 1 . 
At Bindu Tirtha any of these things can be gifted: a 
cow, a plot of land, gingelly seeds, gold, a horse, clothes, 
cooked food, garland or ornaments. Thereby one gets those 
things perennially. 
1 42. 
By offering a single Ahuti ifl a well-kindled fire in 
accordance with the injunctions at the holy Tlrtha called 
Dharmanada, one obtains the benefit of ten million Homas. 
1 43. 
No one is capable of extoll՗ng adequately the infinite 
greatness of Paiicanada Tirtha which is the splendid abode of 
all the four aims of life. 
1 44. 
By listening to this meritorious narrative and making 
others listen devoutly, one becomes purified in the soul of all 
sins and is honoured in the world of ViTI.J.U.

=== PAGE 100 ===

CHAPTER SIXTY 
Manifestation of Bindumiidhava1 
Skanda said: 
1 . The origin of Paiicanada has been narrated, 0 Son of 
Mitra and Varur_1a. Now I shall narrate the great story of the 
manifestation of Madhava. 
2. 
On hearing it with faith, an intelligent man shall be­
come liberated instan.taneously from sins. He will not be separated 
from wealth and glory. He will be united with virtue. 
3-5. 
Upendra took leave of the Moon-crested Lord and 
reached the city of Varai.J.asl riding on his vehicle GaruQa. He 
completed the journey in a moment after starting from the 
mountain Mandara. By means of his Maya, he evicted King 
Divodasa. Thereafter he stationed himself in the Padodaka 
Tlrth՘ by the name and form of Kesava. He thought of the 
greatness of Kasl. On seeing the Tlrtha of Paiicanada he became 
extremely delighted. 
6. The delighted lotus-eyed Lord said: "The good qualities 
of Vaikul).ńha cannot be fully reckoned. Still they have been 
ignored by me. 
7. The number of spotless qualities as are conspicuously 
present in the whirlpool of Paiicanada in Kasl are not present 
in the Ocean of Milk. 
8 . 
Even in Svetadvlpa where is that big collection of good 
qualities like what is present in the Tlrtha named Dhutapapa? 
It is extremely holy and sacred. 
9. The contact with Kaumodakl is not so much conducive 
to my joy as is the touch of the holy waters of Dhutapapa in 
every respect. 
1 0. 
Even when the Daughter of the Milky Ocean (LakTrp.l) 
touches my limbs, I do not get that much pleasure as I get 
I. .Bindu Madhava temple was built at the top of Paiicaganga Ghata. Its 
glory is described by Tulasidasa (16th cent.) . The European traveller Tavernier 
( 1 7th cent.) notes this 'great Pagoda' as most impressive. But the temple was 
destroyed by the orders of Aurangzeb and a mosque was built there. Today 
the temple called Bindu Madhava is located in an inconspicuous building in 
the shadow of the big mosque of Aurangzeb. (BCL 206-207)

=== PAGE 101 ===

IV.ii.60. 1 1-24 
91 
here when touched by Dhutapapa. " 
1 1-13. 
He had already sent TarkTya (GarU<;I.a) to the pres­
ence of the Three-eyed Lord to intimate the events of Anadakanana; 
and he described the good qualities of King Divodasa and the 
merit arising from Paiicanada. Thereafter the Consort of the 
Daughter of the Ocean of Milk (ViTl).u) became highly pleased 
when he was comfortably seated there thus. 
ViTńarasrava (ViTQ.u) of keen vision saw a sage engaged in 
penance. His limbs were not well-nourished (i.e. emaciated) . 
1 4-22. 
That sage Agnibindu of great austerities approached 
the lotus-eyed Acyuta. He joyously bowed down to him placing 
his head on the ground. He could espy the Lord (lit. make 
him the guest of his eyes) whose form CIJld size neither the 
Vedas nor the UpaniTads nor the Devas beginning with Brahma 
could understand. The UpaniTads could not describe him. The 
Lord was like this. 
He was adorned with sylvan flower garlands. He was seated 
close to Kamala (Goddess LakTml) . He had the conch, lotus, 
mace and discus hanging from his four hands. His chest shone 
with the jewel Kaustubha. He was clad in yellow robes. His 
complexion had the lustre of a blue lotus. His form was sweet 
and shining. A lotus gracefully came out of his deep naval. His 
lips were excessively reddish in tinge. His teeth resembled the 
seeds of a pomegranate. His crown brightened the atmosphere. 
His feet were adored by the Lord of Devas. He was eulogized 
by Sanaka and others. His glory and greatness was sung about 
by Narada and other divine sages. His mind was extremely 
delighted by Prahlada and other devotees of the Lord. He had 
chastised all the Danavas. He held the bow called Saniga. He 
was the slayer of Madhu and Kaińabha. He was the indicator 
of the death of Karilsa. By the devotion of devotees the very 
Kaiv.alya, the invisible and formless supreme Brahman, had 
become manifested in human form in him. 
23-24. 
His (Agnibindu's) palms joined in reverence were 
kept close to his head and he prayed with great devotion . 
There, very near Paiicanada frequently resorted to by Markal).<;leya 
and others, that sage Agnibindu eulogized Acyuta who caused 
Bali's downfall. Delighted in mind he prayed to Govinda who 
had occupied a large rocky slab.

=== PAGE 102 ===

92 
Agnibindu said: 
(Agnibindu 's Prayer) 
Skanda Puriir_ta 
25. 
Om, obeisance to you who accord external and internal 
purity, 0 lotus-eyed one. You are the thousand-headed, thousand­
eyed and thousand-footed PuruTa. 
26. 
With an unfettered intellect, I bow down to the pair 
of your feet that dispel all Dvandvas (the three types of distresses 
inimical to human life) , 0 ViTI).U who are saluted by JiTl).u 
(Indra) and other Suras. 
27. 
Who is competent to eulogize him wherefor even the 
words of Vacaspati (Preceptor of Devas) do not get a chance? 
(But) devotion is all-powerful here (Hence I do pray) . 
28. 
(You are) that Supreme Lord and Master, who is beyond 
the ken of mind and words. How can he who is beyond words 
be adequately prayed to by people of paltry intellect like me? 
29. Who can be powerful enough to eulogize him who is 
beyond mind and words, the Lord whom words cannot pene­
trate and whom mind cannot worship with comprehension. 
30. 
By whom is the supreme excellence of that Lord 
understood, whose breath is the collection of the Vedas along 
with the six Ail.gas (ancillaries) recited in Pada and Krama 
ũŪū 
. 
3 1 . 
Sanaka and others possess minds, intellects and senses 
without the least lethargy and they meditate upon him. Yet 
they do not get him exactly in the Hrdakasa (ethereal space 
of the heart) . 
32. 
His acts are being sung about by Narada and other 
excellent sages who observe celibacy from childhood. Yet he 
is not perfectly understood. 
33. 
0 Lord who are identical with the mobile and immobile 
beings due to Maya but are really different from them, none 
understands you. You are subtle in form, unborn, immutable, 
single, the primordial one, imperceptible to Brahma and others, 
invincible, of infinite powers, perpetual, free from ailments, 
unembodied and of imponderable form. 
34-35. Everyone of your names, 0 Murari, shall dispel the 
sins of sinners accumulated in the course of many births and 
likely to bring in great prosperity. These names shall accord 
the honoured benefit of great Yajiias, when uttered repeat-

=== PAGE 103 ===

IV.ii.60.36-42 
93 
edly-the names Mukunda, Madhusudana, Madhava, NarayaQ.a, 
NarakarQ.avataraQ.a, 
D am odara, Madhuha, Caturb h uj a , 
Visvarilbhara, Virajas and Janardana. Where i s the fear from 
the god of Death unto those who repeat the names? They will 
not be reborn. 
36. 
0 Lord Trivikrama whose form is clothed in silk cloth 
that shines splendidly like the lightning streak, those who always 
meditate upon you in their hearts, you, the lotus-eyed one 
having the sparkling splendour of the cluster of clouds, came 
into contact with your splendour of imponderable form. 
37. 
0 Hari having a curl of hair named Srlvatsa on your 
breast, 0 Acyuta, 0 slayer of Kaińabha, 0 Govinda having 
Garuc,la as your vehicle, 0 Kesava having the discus in your 
hand, 0 consort of LakTml, 0 slayer of Danujas (demons) 
having the Saniga bow in your hand, there is no fear for a 
man endowed with devotion unto you. 
38. 
With the garlands of the flowers of the celestial tree 
Mandara, the entire hosts of Devas assiduously adore those 
persons of character and conduct free from impurities, by 
whom, 0 Lord, you have been worshipped with Tulasl flowers 
having divine fragrance that dispels the fragrance of musk. 
39. 
Even the status of kings is not difficult to obtain for 
those people, 0 lotus-eyed one with no form in reality, in 
whose speech rests your name that bestows all cherished desires, 
in whose ears reverberate the sweet words of your stories and 
in the wall of whose minds is indelibly engraved your form. 
40. 
The Vrndarakas (Devas) , the chiefs among whom are 
Yama, lndra and Kubera, always venerate in heaven those who 
adore you always, 0 Srlpati who rest on the couch of the 
serpent SeTa and are efficient in granting a series of pleasures 
of heaven and salvation . 
41 . 
0 Lord with the lotus shining in the hand, groups 
of Siddhas, Devas and celestial damsels eulogize in heaven 
those people who always eulogize you. 0 Lord, 0 bestower of 
all supernatural powers, who have eyes as large as a lotus, 
excepting you who grants the 
charming glory of ultimate 
salvation? 
42. 
0 Lord who adopt physical forms sportingly, 0 Lord 
the pair of whose feet are bowed to by Brahma, you destroy, 
you protect and you create all as your sporting activities in-

=== PAGE 104 ===

94 
Skanda Purii'T}a 
stantaneously. 0 supreme one, you alone are the entire uni­
verse; you alone are the Lord of the universe; you are the seed 
of the universe. Hence I always bow unto you. 
43. 
0 foe of the Lord of Danujas (Demons) , you are the 
eulogizer, you are the eulogy and you alone are the object 
worthy of being eulogized. I do not think that anything is 
different from you, 0 ViᔻQ.u. 0 Lord inimical to the mundane 
existence, dispel my eagerness (thirst) for worldly existence. 
44. 
Mter eulogizing Hrᔻi:kesa thus, Agnibindu of great 
austerities remained silent. Then ViᔻQ.U, the bestower of boons, 
spoke to the sage: 
Sri Vi,51JU said: 
45. 
0 highly intelligent Agnibindu, 0 storehouse of great 
austerities, I am highly pleased. Choose your boon. There is 
nothing which cannot be given to you. 
Agnibindu said: 
46. 
If you are pleased, 0 Lord, 0 Lord of VaikuQ.ᔽha, 0 
Lord of the universe, 0 consort of Lakᔻm1, grant me what I 
am requesting for. 
47. 
Being permitted by Hari with a gesture of his eye-
brows that sage became highly delighted. Mter bowing down 
he chose the boon from Kesava. 
48. "For the sake of the welfare of all creatures, particularly 
of those who are desirous of liberation, stay here in the whirlpool 
of Paiicanada, 0 Lord, although you are omnipresent. 
49. 
This boon should be unhesitatingly granted to me by 
the Lord of Lakᔻm1, so also (grant me) devotion unto your 
lotus-like feet. I do not desire any other boon. " 
50. 
O n hearing thus about the boon of Agnibindu, the 
Slayer of Madhu became pleased. For the sake of helping 
others, the Consort of the Daughter of the Ocean (i.e. of 
Lakᔻml) said, "So be it. " 
Sri Vi,51JU said: 
5 1 . 
Certainly I shall stay here, directing the path of salva-

=== PAGE 105 ===

IV.ii.60.52-65 
95 
tion unto persons having devotion to Kas1, 0 Agnibindu who 
are the most excellent one among sages. 
52. 
0 sage, I am highly delighted. Mention a boon fur­
ther I shall grant you. You are already a great devotee of mine. 
May your devotion to me be firmer. 
53. 
0 storehouse of austerities, even at the outset I have 
been desirous of staying here. Then it has been requested for 
by you. I shall stay here forever. 
54. 
If anyone has any sense, who is dull-headed enough 
to leave Kasi: after reaching it? After acquiring a ruby of in­
estimable value who will desire a piece of glass abandoning 
that (ruby) ? 
55. 
With a very little effort, merel)'o by casting off the 
body here, the body that has to go in any case, one gets 
salvation. Where else can one have it thus? 
56. 
Why won't a sensible man take up the immortal divine 
physical form by exchanging the earthly body already worn 
out by old age? 
57. 
Neither by austerities, nor by monetary gifts nor through 
Yajiias in which much is given away as gifts, is salvation ob­
tained in the manner it is obtained at Kasi: through giving up 
the body. 
58. 
Even those who practise Yogic exercises, even the 
Yogins of well-restrained minds are not liberated in a single 
birth. But people are liberated through the loss of the body 
(i.e. death) in Kasl. 
59. 
The fact that the body courts death in Kas1 is itself 
a great Dana; it is the great austerity, and it is the most ex­
cellent Vrata. 
60. 
He who does not leave Kas1 after reaching Kas1 alone 
is the most sensible scholar in the world; he alone is merito­
rious and blessed. 
6 1 . 
0 sage, I shall stay here as long as Kasl exist.s. Being 
propped up on the tip of the trident of Siva, even at the time 
of Pralaya (final annihilation) it has no destruction. 
62-65. 
On hearing these words of ViTI).U, the great sage 
Agnibindu said with hairs standing up due to delight: "I shall 
choose another boon. 0 Consort of LakTml, stay here in the 
auspicious Tlrtha of Paiicanada adopting my name and grant

=== PAGE 106 ===

96 
Skanda Purii1Ja 
salvation to devotees as well as to non-devotees. Grant salva­
tion unto those people also who take their holy ablution here 
in Paiicanada but go to other lands and die there. Although 
she (LakTml) has the twin forms of being steady and unsteady, 
let not Sri forsake those men who adore you after taking the 
holy bath in Paiicanada. " 
Sri Vi,\"'IJU said: 
66. 
0 Agnibindu, 0 sage, let what has been sought by you 
be so. My name shall occur along with half of your name and 
also of Ma (LakTmi) (Hence Bindu-Mii-dhava) . 
67. 
My naՑe Bindumadhava shall be well-known in all the 
three worlds. 0 sage, in Kasi it will be (considered) as one 
that destroys groups of great sins. 
68. 
Where is the fear from worldly existence to those who 
will always adore me here in the meritorious whirlpool of 
Paiicanada? They are blessed men. 
69. 
If people keep me in their hearts as stationed in Paiicanada 
always, LakTmi in the form of Vasu (Wealth) and LakTmi named 
after salvation (i.e. MokTalakTmi) shall always be at their sides. 
70. After reaching Paiicanada, if BrahmaQ.as are not propi­
tiated with monetary gifts, they will be likely to be overwhelmed 
by disaster quickly and their riches will weep (i.e. will be lost) . 
7 1 . 
Only they are blessed i n this world; they alone are to 
be considered as having fulfilled their tasks if after reaching 
my vicinity all the riches are dedicated to me. 
72. 
0 Agnibindu who are the most excellent one among 
the sages, this Tirtha shall be known as Bindu Tirtha after 
your name. It will be destructive of all sins. 
73. 
If in the month of Karttika, a devotee strictly abides 
by the vow of celibacy and takes the holy ablution in the Bindu 
Tirtha before sunrise, why should he be afraid of Yama, the 
son of Sun-god? 
74. 
Even after, out of delusion, committing thousands of 
sins, if a man takes his holy bath in Dharmanada in the month 
of Karttika, he will become free from sins instantaneously. 
75. 
As long as the body is healthy, as long as there is no 
weakness in the sense-organs, a devotee should observe the 
holy vows because a vow has the body as its fruit.

=== PAGE 107 ===

IV.ii.60. 76-88 
97 
76. 
This body, the receptacle of uncleanliness, should be 
purified by means of fasting or taking a single meal or living 
on what is obtained without begging. 
77. 
KrcchracandrayarJ-a and other Vratas should be observed 
assiduously since this impure body becomes pure by the ob­
servance of vows. 
78. 
Dharma stays firm in the body purified by Vratas. Artha 
and Kama along with Mok®a stay there where Dharma too stays. 
79. 
Hence those Vratas that contribute to the attainment 
of Dharma should be observed by men who are desirous of the 
gain of the fourfold aim of life. 
80. 
If a man is unable to observe Vratas always, he should 
at least perform them during the Caturm!isya (four months of 
rainy season from ATa<;lha to K.arttika) . 
8 1 -82. Some of the Vratas are: Lying down on bare ground, 
celibacy, abstaining from eating certain foodstuffs, the vow of 
taking single meal etc., some Dana everyday in accordance 
with one's capacity, listening to the PuraQ.as, acting in accor­
dance with the themes therein, maintaining continuous lights 
of lamps (before deities) , keeping awake and the great wor­
ship of the deity of one's choice. 
83. 
For the purpose of increasing piety, a sensible man 
should assiduously avoid going to and fro in places with seeds 
and seedlings in abundance. 
84. 
Persons with whom conversation is prohibited should 
not be talked to by those who maintain Caturmasya Vratas. 
They will maintain silence always or should speak only the 
truth. 
85. 
An observer of Vratas should avoid grains and lentils 
like Ni®pava, Masura and Kodrava. One should always stay among 
clean people. A non-observer of vows should not be touched. 
86. 
Teeth, hairs, clothes etc. should be scrupulously washed 
everyday. No evil thought should be entertained in the heart 
by an observer of vows. 
87. 
Those who scrupulously maintain the Caturmasya Vratas 
are entitled to complete benefit as an observer of vows in all 
the twelve months. 
88. 
If one lacks physical power for the observance of 
Vratas even in the stipulated four months, he should maintain 
the Vratas at least in the month of K.arttika, should he wish

=== PAGE 108 ===

98 
Skanda Puriir..ta 
for the benefit of the year-long Vratas. 
89. 
If a person was silly enough to pass the month of 
Karttika without the observances of Vratas, he is a pig-souled 
one. Such persons wili not deserve even the least of merits. 
90. 
At the advent of the month of Karttika a highly meri-
torious devotee should observe Krcchra, Atikrcchra or Priijiipatya. 
9 1 . 
When the month of Karttika has arrived one will ob-
serve Vratas like Fasts (e.g. ) , Ekiintara11rata (fasts on alternate 
days) , Tririitra Vrata (meal once in three days) , Paiicariitra (meal 
once in five days) or Saptariitra (meal once in seven days) . 
92. 
A devotee may observe the Vrata once in a fortnight 
or once in the month. No observer of Vratas shall make the 
month of Kartrika barren (vowless) anywhere. 
93. 
In the month of Karttika, an observer of Vratas should 
stick to the diet of vegetables, milk, fruits or cooked barley 
grains. 
94. 
A man of Vratas should perform Nitya Sniina (bathing 
everyday) or Naimittika Sniina (bath on ceremonious occasions) . 
Seeking the benefit of the great Vrata the devotee should observe 
celibacy in the month of Karttika. 
95. 
If a devotee of pure mind passes the dark half of the 
month while strictly observing celibacy, it will be on a par with 
the performance of Brahmacarya throughout the year. 
96. 
If a devotee concludes the month of Karttika with 
fasts, it is as good as though the whole year is spent by him 
in holy fasts. 
97. 
If a devotee passes the month of Karttika sticking to 
the diet of vegetables and milk, it is as good as the whole Sarat 
(autumn) has been spent by him with that diet. 
98. 
One shall take food only on leaves in the month of 
Karttika. Bell-metal vessel should be scrupulously avoided. If 
a devotee takes food in bell-metal vessels, he shall not get the 
benefit of that Vrata. 
99. 
If one invaՒiably (takes food) in a bell-metal vessel, 
he should make . gift of a bell-metal vessel filled with ghee. 
During the month of Karttika one should not take in honey 
which gives inferior birth. 
1 00. If one abandons honey one should make the gift of ghee 
or milk pudding with sugar. One should avoid oil in the month 
of Karttika for application over the body or taking in as food.

=== PAGE 109 ===

1 0 1 . 
For, 0 sinless one, that embodied soul shall become 
a resident of hell on smearing himself with oil on that occa­
sion. If one has eschewed oil, one should make a gift of gingelly 
seeds measuring a Dror_ta supplemented with gold. 
1 02. 
He who eats fish in the month of Karttika is reborn 
in the species of whales. One who eats fish in the dark half 
of the month, becomes a worm in purulent blood. 
1 03-1 04. 
Kings who habitually eat meat should abstain 
from it in the month of Karttika. One who is engaged in the 
observance of Vratas after eschewing fish and flesh shall be­
come exonerated from the fault of eating fish and flesh cer­
tainly. If there is restraint in fish and flesh in the month of 
Karttika, the observer of the Vrata shall make a gift of an 
ashgourd along with blackgram and ten gold pieces. 
1 05. 
He who takes food silently in the month of Karttika 
really takes in nectar. An observer of the vow of silence shall 
make a gift of an excellent bell accompanied with gingelly 
seeds and gold. 
1 06. 
A virtuous man observing Vrata in Karttika who eschews 
salt has actually abandoned all juices. That observer of Vrata 
should make gift of a cow. 
1 07. 
One who observes the vow of lying down on bare 
ground will not touch the earth again (i.e. will not be born 
again) . An observer of the vow of lying down on the earth 
shall make gift of a palanquin with cotton and pillows. 
1 08. 
He who makes the gift of continuous unextinguished 
light with wicks soaked in ghee, never attains the disaster of 
being in the blinding darkness of delusion. 
1 09. 
He who makes Dlpakaumudl ( the splendour of 
moonlight through lamps) at night in the month of Karttika 
shall never see the hells of Tamisra and Andhatamisra. 
1 1 0. 
One who is angry with the darkness of sins through 
the gifts of lamps in Karttika, never sees the son of the Sun­
god (i.e. Varna) with the face darkened due to anger. 
1 1 1 . 
He who illuminates in front of me a lamp with daz­
zling wicks, shall see the three worlds including mobile and 
immobile beings flooded with light. 
1 1 2. 
A man who bathes me with pots of Paiicamrta be­
comes very meritorious. He will stay there for the period of 
a Kalpa after reaching the shores of the Ocean of Milk.

=== PAGE 110 ===

1 1 3. 
He who makes moonlight arising from lamps on every 
night in the month of Karttika in front of me, becomes en­
dowed with devotion. He will never enter the dark area of a 
womb. 
1 1 4. One who illuminates a light in front of me with the 
wick soaked in ghee in the month of Karttika, never meets 
with slips of intellect even when there is the great fear of 
death. 
1 1 5. 
Salvation is not very far off from those devotees who 
take their holy bath in the Bindu Tlrtha in the month of 
Karttika and organize Yatra (religious procession and congre­
gational worship) unto me. 
1 1 6-1 19. 
The devotee repeats the following two Man-
tras: "0 Damodara, 0 slayer of the king of Danavas, accept my 
Arghya; I am observing the Vrata in the month of Karttika, 
after taking the holy ablution. 
0 KrTr;ta, may Your Lordship accept in company with Radha, 
the Arghya, offered by me in the course of the Naimittika (periodical 
as per certain condition) Snana (holy bath) in the month of 
Karttika that dispels sins." He who thus offers Arghya unto me 
through a conchshell with water flowing out over gold, jewels 
and flowers is a meritorious person. He should conceive it as 
the entire earth filled with gold when offering the Arghya water; 
it will be as though a befitting thing has been gifted by him 
to a deserving person on the occasion of a holy festival. 
1 20-1 24a. 
On Prabodhinl Ekadasl day (the eleventh day in 
the bright half of the lunar month of Karttika) a devotee 
should take his holy dip in the Bindu Ti:rtha. He should keep 
awake the whole of the night. In accordance with his capacity 
he should light many lamps after adoring me. There should 
be sound of musical instruments in triple symphony as an 
entertainment. He should listen to Purar;tas etc. There shall be 
great festivities till the Tithi (lunar day) is complete. In order 
to propitiate me, he should make ample gifts of cooked food. 
Even though he might have committed great sins, he will not 
thereafter enter the womb of a woman. 
He who take.;; his holy bath in the Bindu Tlrtha and wor­
ships me here in the name of Bindumadhava attains salvation. 
1 24b-1 26a. 
0 sage, in Satyayuga I should be worshipped 
with the name of Adimadhava. In Treta I should be known as

=== PAGE 111 ===

Anantamadhava, the 
bestower of all Siddhis (supernatural 
powers) . In Dvapara I named Srlmadhava bring about the 
fulfilment of the greatest aim. In Kali age I, Bindumadhava, 
should be known as the destroyer of the impurities of Kali. 
1 26b-1 27a. 
In Kali age men burdened with sins do not 
attain me, being deluded by my Maya alone. They are eagerly 
engrossed in arguing about the differences. 
1 27b-1 29. 
Persons though performing many devotional rites 
aimed at me should be known as my enemies if they are inimical 
to Visvesa. They attain the status of Pisacas (vampires) . Mter 
being born as Pisacas, they will have to spend thirty thousand 
years in the ocean of misery at the bidding of Kalabhairava. 
Thereafter, by the blessings of Visvesa alone they will attain 
salvation. 
1 30. 
Hence hatred should not be entertained against Visvesa, 
the Supreme Atman, because there is no expiatory rite unto 
those who hate Visvesa. 
1 3 1 . 
Those base men who hate Visve§a even mentally shall, 
after death, enter the hell Andhatamisra forever. 
1 32. 
Those who are engaged in censuring Siva and those 
who censure the Pasupata cult and devotees, should be known 
as my enemies. They fall into a dirty hell. 
1 33. 
Those who hate and censure Visvesvara shall succes­
sively rot in twenty-eight crores of hells spending a Kalpa in 
each. 
1 34. 
It is because I have attained the blessings of Visve§a, 
0 sage, that I too am a bestower of salvation. Hence Visve§vara 
should always be resorted to, particularly by my devotees. 
1 35. 
This Varal).asl should be known, 0 sage, as a Pasupata 
SthaH (holy spot pertaining to Siva) . Hence Pasupati (Siva) 
should be resorted to in Kasl by those who seek salvation. 
1 36. 
Here in this Pailcanada Tlrtha Visvesvara himself always 
takes his holy ablution in the month of Karttika along with 
his 
GaQ.as, attendants and Skanda. 
1 37. 
Brahma, the Vedas, Yajilas, Brahmal).l and other mothers, 
the seven oceans, rivers--all these take their holy bath in Dhutapapa 
in the month of Karttika. 
1 38. 
The entire sentient beings and embodied ones in all 
the three worlds come to Dhutapapaka for taking their holy 
dip in the month of Karttika.

=== PAGE 112 ===

1 39. 
Those embodied ones who have not taken their holy 
dip in Paii.canada in the auspicious month of Karttika waste 
their lives as futile as the bubbles in water. 
1 40. 
Anandakanana is meritorious. Paii.canada is more meri­
torious than that. My vicinity is more so, 0 great sage Agnibindu. 
1 4 1 . 
In the same way, by implication know the greatness 
of Paii.canada which is the most excellent one among all ex­
cellent Tlrthas, 0 highly intelligent one. 
1 42-1 43. 
Merely by hearing about it, a highly intelligent 
one becomes liberated from great sins. 
Mter hearing this directly from Vigm's mouth, Agnibindu, 
the great sage, bowed down and further asked Bindumadhava, 
Acyuta: 
Agnibindu said: 
1 44-1 45. 
0 Lord, I wish to hear. 0 Bindumadhava, narrate 
it. 0 Janardana, how many forms have you in Kasl? What are 
those likely to occur in future? Tell me those by worshipping 
which your devotees will attain blessed contentment, 0 Acyuta. 
CHAPTER SIXTYONE 
The Greatness of Vai,l"ttava Tirthas 
Agastya enquired: 
1-2. 
0 Six-faced Lord, the narration of Madhava that is 
destructive of sins has been heard by me. The excellent great­
ness of Paii.canada too has been heard perfectly. Tell me what 
the Slayer of Madhu replied when Agnibindu asked Madhava, 
the destroyer of Daityas. 
Skanda replied: 
3. 
Listen, 0 great sage Agastya, to what is being related 
by me now, as told by Madhava to Sage Agnibindu.

=== PAGE 113 ===

IV.ii.61 .4-16 
103 
Bindumiidhava said: 
4. 
0 highly intelligent Agnibindu, at the outset know me 
as Adikesava in the Padodaka Tlrtha, the bestower of salvation 
on the devotees. 
5. Those who worship Adikesava in the immortal nectar­
ine holy spot Avimukta do attain immortality free from all 
miseries. 
6. Mter installing the great Sangamesa Linga that destroys 
sins of men by its very sight, Adikdava always accords worldly 
pleasures and salvation. 
7. To the south of Padokada there is the greater Tlrtha of 
Sveta Dvlpa. Under the name of Jiianakdava I bestow knowl­
edge on men there. 
8. Mter taking the holy ablution in the presence ofJiianakesava 
in Sveta Dvlpa, a man should worship Jiianakesava. He never 
slips down from knowledge (into ignorance) . 
9. I am named Tarkᔻyakdava in the Tlrtha named 
Tarkᔻyatlrtha. I should always be worshipped by excellent men 
with devotion. They become dear to me like Tarkᔻya. 
10. 
There itself in the Narada Tlrtha, I am Naradakesava, 
the instructor in Brahmavidya unto those whose bodies are 
washed in that Tlrtha. 
1 1 . 
Prahlada Tlrtha is also there itself. It should be adored 
under the name Prahladakesava by devotees for the increase 
of great devotion. 
1 2. 
There in the Ambarlᔻa Tlrtha under the name 
Adityakdava I destroy the mass of the darkness of sins even 
due to mere visit. 
1 3. 
To the south of Dattatreydvara, I, Adigadadhara, re-
move the series of illnesses of worldly existence of the devo­
tees there. 
14. 
There itself, in the Bhargava Tlrtha, under the name 
of Bhrgukesava I fulfil the cherished desires of the men re­
siding in Kasl. 
15. 
In the great Tlrtha named Vamanatlrtha which is aus-
picious and which accords everything prayed for even men­
tally, I should be worshipped in the name of Vamanakesava 
by persons desirous of auspiciousness. 
1 6. 
In the Naranaraya1_1a Tlrtha, the devotees worship me

=== PAGE 114 ===

in the form of Naranarayal).a and then attain identity with 
N aranarayal).a. 
1 7. 
In the holy place named Yajii.avarahatirtha I should 
be worshipped by men desirous of the fruits of Yajii.as under 
the name Yajii.avaraha. 
18. 
I, named Vidaranarasimha, dispel the obstacles of 
Kasl. I should be resorted to in the Tirtha named so for quelling 
the torments of the Tirtha. 
19. 
By worshipping me named Gopigovinda devoutly in 
the Gopigovinda Tirtha, a man can avoid the touch of my 
Maya. 
20. 
0 sage, I am LakTminrsimha in the holy Tirtha named 
so. To those endowed with devotion, I always accord the glory 
of salvation. 
21 . 
In the SeTatirtha that dispels sins, I am named 
SeTamadhava. I distribute among devotees all things desired 
by them. 
22. 
Mter taking the holy dip in the Sailkhamadhava Tirtha 
and bathing me, Sailkhamadhava, with water through a conchshell, 
a devotee shall become lord of the treasure Sailkhanidhi. 
23. 
In the great Hayagrivatirtha a devotee bows down to 
me, Hayagrivakeiiava. Thereby he shall attain certainly the great 
region of ViTJ).U. 
24. 
To the west ofVrddhakaleiia, I am named BhiTmakeiiava. 
When resorted to with Bhaktiyoga, I dispel terrible torments 
and calamities. 
25. 
To the north of Lolarka, I am Nirval).akesava showing 
(the path of) salvation to devotees and I dispel the fickleness 
of mind. 
26. 
To the south of Trilokasundari I am well-known in 
Kasi as Tribhuvanakesava. A venerable devotee who adores me 
thus does not enter any womb (attaining MokTa) . 
27. 
In front of Jii.anavapi know me as Jii.anamadhava. By 
worshipping me there with devotion, one attains eternal wis­
dom. 
28. 
I am named Svetamadhava in the vicinity of VisalakTl. 
Adored with devotion I make the devotee of the form of 
Svetadvipesvara. 
29. 
To the .north of Daiiasvamedha, a devotee should worship 
me in the name of Prayagamadhava after taking the holy bath

=== PAGE 115 ===

IV.ii.61 .30-4 1 
105 
in Prayagatlrtha. By visiting me, he becomes free from all sins. 
30. 
By taking the holy dip here in front of me, one gets 
ten times the benefit reputed to result from going to Prayaga 
in the month of Magha. 
3 1 . 
Here in Kasl in my presence the merit of those who 
take their holy dips is ten times the merit at the confluence 
of Ganga and Yamuna. 
32. 
Here in Kasl one gets ten times more benefit than 
what is obtained in KurukTetra by those who make gifts when 
the Sun is swallowed by Rahu (i.e. during solar eclipse) . 
33. 
Where Ganga flows northwards1 and Yamuna east-
wards, a man who goes to that confluence is rid of the sin of 
Brahmat:ta's slaughter. 
34. 
There one should get the head ,.shaved; balls of rice 
should be offered with emotional fervour and great Danas 
should be made by one who wishes to get great benefit. 
35. 
All those good points which were enumerated in the 
PrajapatikTetra become innumerable in the great AvimuktakTetra. 
36. 
The great Linga named Prayagesa stands there grant-
ing the desired object. Thanks to its nearness, the Ti:rtha is 
glorified as Kamada. 
37. If people do not take their holy baths at dawn in the 
month of Magha at Kasl and in Prayaga when the Sun is in 
Capricorn, how can they attain salvation? 
38. Those who have self-control and take holy baths in the 
month of Magha, in the Prayaga at Kasi certainly will attain 
the benefit arising from ten horse-sacrifices. 
39-40. 
Those who devoutly worsh ip everyday Prayaga­
madhava and the wish-yielding Prayagesa after taking the holy 
dip in Prayaga in the month of Magha, obtain wealth, grain, 
sons, and properties and enjoy pleasures delighting the mind 
in this world and attain the greatest bliss of salvation (in the 
next world) . 
4 1 . 
In the month of Magha all the Tlrthas flow into Prayaga 
from east, 
north , west, south, nether region and heavenly 
region. 
I . But at Prayaga (Allahabad) Ganga flows southward. At VaraJ;asi there 
is no Yamuna. There is no confluence.

=== PAGE 116 ===

106 
Skanda Pura'T}a 
42. 
0 sage, the Tirthas stationed in Kasi do not go any-
where. If at all they go, they go to the three excellent Tirthas. 
43. 
In the month of Karttika everyday in the morning 
they come to me in the Paiicanada Tirtha which subdues masses 
of great sins and produces welfare. 
44. 
In the month of Magha that is inimical to sins, all the 
Tirthas take their bath near Prayagesa after me. 
45. 
In the midday all the Tirthas go for their bath every-
day to MaQ.ikan:tika that accords salvation. 
46. 
0 sage, this great secret in Kasi has been narrated to 
you, how the three '{'irthas are superior especially at their own 
times. 
47. 
I shall tell you another secret. It should not be di-
vulged anywhere and everywhere. It should be strictly kept 
secret from non-devotees. It should not be concealed from 
people of devotion . 
.48. 
All the Tirthas in Kasi are superior one to the other. 
Assailᖜng with their splendour, they dispel great sins. 
49. 
Lifting up one single finger this secret of VaraQ.asi is 
being told to you that only MaQ.ikarQ.ika is the most superior 
one. 
50. 
Only after resorting to the great power pertaining to 
MaQ.ikarQ.ika all Tirthas, sticking to their respective abodes, 
roar. 
5 1-52. 
After dispelling many great sins of sinners, the Kasi 
Tirthas become desirous of expiation. Whether it is the day 
of specific astrologi<:al importance or otherwise, they observe 
certain regulations and submerge into MaQ.ikarQ.ika at mid­
day. They thus do become pure. 
53. 
Everyday at midday Visvesa in the company of Visva 
takes his holy ablution near MaQ.ikarQ.ika. 
54. 
With great joy I reach MaQ.ikarQ.ika travelling from 
VaikuQ.ᔽha everyday and take the holy plunge along with Padma, 
0 sage. 
55. 
I am competent to remove the sins of those who utter 
even once my name; hence I have attained the title Hari. That 
is the power pertaining to MaQ.ikarQ.ika. 
56. 
Everyday Pitamaha (Brahma) comes to MaQ.ikarQ.ika 
riding his vehicle, the Swan, from Satyaloka, for the perfor­
mance of midday rituals.

=== PAGE 117 ===

IV.ii.61 .57-69 
107 
57. 
The Guardians of the Quarters beginning with lndra, 
the great sages beginning with Marici come to MaQ.ikarQ.ika 
for performing the midday rites. 
58. 
From the world of serpents, the serpents, the chiefs 
of whom are Seᔻa and Vasuki, come to MaQ.ikarQ.ika at midday 
for taking their holy bath. 
59. 
All the sentient ones among all mobile and immobile 
beings do take their holy bath at midday in the waters of 
MaQ.ikarQ.ika (which are) free from impurities. 
60. 
Which qualities among the weightiest (greatest) qualities 
of MaQ.ikarQ.ika that cannot be enumerated by me and others, 
can possibly be described, 0 BrahmaQ.a? 
6 1 . 
Those saints by whom this MaQ.ikarQ.ika, the ground 
for salvation has been attained, have actually performed in­
tense austerities in the forests. 
62. 
Those excellent men who successfully reached 
MaQ.ikarQ.ika in their last years are definitely those by whom 
great gifts have been donated. 
63. 
Those by whom the soft ground of MaQ.ikarQ.ika has 
been converted into their bed have definitely observed all 
Vratas exactly according to their respective injunctions. 
64. 
They alone are blessed ones among mortal beings, 
they are (on a par with) those who have been initiated into 
all Kratus (sacrifices) , if they have seen MaQ.ikarQ.ika after spending 
their wealth acquired by meritorious means. 
65. 
If in their old age MaQ.ikarQ.ika has been reached, 
then definitely many kinds of pious rites as well as Iǘtapitrtas, 
(must) have been performed by those men. 
66. 
Jewels, silk clothes, gold, elephants and horses should 
be assiduously gifted away near MaQ.ikarQ.ika by a sensible and 
intelligent man. 
61. 
If money acquired through legitimate meritorious means, 
be it even so little, is given (as Dana) at MaQ.ikarQ.ika, 0 sage, 
it becomes everlasting unto those men. 
68. 
If an excellent man performs a single PraQ.ayama as 
laid down in the scriptures, it is as good as the excellent Yoga 
has been practised along with its six ancillaries. 
69. 
By reciting the Gayatri only once after reaching 
MaQ.ikarQ.ika, one certainly attains the benefit of reciting the 
Gayatri ten thousand times.

=== PAGE 118 ===

108 
Skanda Puriir.za 
70. 
Offering a single Ahuti (oblation into sacrificial fire) 
near MaQ.ikarr.lika a sensible man derives undiminished ben­
efit of the performance of Agnihotra throughout the life. 
71 . 
On hearing these words of Hari, Agnibindu of great 
penance, bowed down with great devotion and asked Madhava 
further: 
Agnibindu said: 
72. 
0 ViTQ.U, what is the extent of th is meritorious 
MaQ.ikarQ.ika? Tell me, 0 lotus-eyed one. No one else is more 
conversant with truth (in this matter) than you. 
Sri Vi,s-r.zu said: 
73. 
MaQ.ikarQ.ika extends from Gangake§ava to the MaQ.c;iapa 
(pavilion) of I:Iariscandra and from the middle of the divine 
river up to Svardvara. 
_ 
74. 
This one is the gross extent. I shall mention to you 
the subtle one. Hariscandravinayaka is in front of the Tirtha 
of Hariscandra. 
75-76. 
Simavinayaka (Vinayaka at the boundary) is to the 
north of the whirlpool of MaQ.ikarQ.ika. After devoutly adoring 
Simavinayaka by means of Modakas (sweetmeats) along with 
the requisite services, an excellent man should go to MaQ.ikarQ.ika. 
Devotees should offer libations to the Manes in the great 
Hariscandra Tirtha. 
77-82. 
The ancestors shall become propitiated for a hun­
dred years. They will accord the desired benefit. 
After taking the holy bath in the great Hariscandra Tirtha, 
a man endowed with faith should bow dowq to Hariscandresvara. 
He will never swerve from truth. 
Beyond that, in the vicinity of Parvatdvara is the Parvatatirtha 
which is the basis of Mahameru and is destructive of great sins. 
After taking the holy bath there, adoring isa, gifting some­
thing in accordance with one's capacity and occupying the 
peak of Meru, a devotee enjoys celestial pleasures. 
Kambalasvatara Tirtha is to the south of Parvatdvara. The 
auspicious Linga named Kambalasvataresa is to the west of 
that Tirtha. If a devotee takes his holy bath in that Tirtha and

=== PAGE 119 ===

IV.ii.61 .83-96 
109 
adores that Liilga, persons born in his family shall become 
persons conversant with music and equipped with glory. 
CakrapuTkari1_1i there is conducive to the avoidance of Yonicakra 
(cycle of births) . 
83. 
CakrapuTkari1_1i Tirtha is my excellent resort. A man 
who takes his holy bath there does not enter the dense en­
tangled cycle of worldly existence. 
84. 
Great penance was performed by me there for so 
many years extending to a Parardha in number. Visvesvara, 
the great Lord, then became visible to me. 
85. 
There, very great and indestructible power and pros-
perity was acquired by me. CakrapuTkaril_li.became well-known 
as Ma1_1ikar1_1ika. 
86. 
Abandoning the liquid form there, Ma1_1ikar1_1ika ap-
peared directly to me having assumed the form of a woman. 
87-90. I shall mention her physical form that bestows aus­
piciousness profusely on the devotees. If men meditate on that 
form thrice a day for six months, Ma1_1ikar1_1ika will appear as 
a visible goddess. She has four arms and large eyes. Her eye 
in the forehead sparkles. She faces the west always with palms 
joined together. She holds a garland of blue lotuses in her 
right hand. In the lifted left hand in the gesture of according 
boons, there is a splendid pomegranate fruit. She is in the 
form of a virgin always. Always twelve years old. 
9 1 . 
Her lustre is like that of pure crystal. Her glossy hairs 
are dark blue in colour. Her beautiful lips have surpassed 
corals and rubies. 
92. A fresh Ketaki flower in full bloom adores the braided 
hairs on her head. Pearl necklaces and ornaments beautify her 
limbs. She is clad in silk cloth having the lustre of the moon. 
93. 
She also wears a splendid garland of lotuses on her 
bosqm. She should be meditated day and night in this form 
in the heart by those who are desirous of salvation. 
94. 
The glorious Ma1_1ikar1_1ika is the abode of Nirva1_1alakTmi 
('Glory of Salvation' ) . I shall mention a Mantra named Bhakta­
Kalpadruma ( 'wish-yieldiՓ celestial tree unto devotees') per­
taining to her. If this is repeated, even the eight supernatural 
powers will be acquired by men. 
95-96. 
First Mantra: "viigbhavabzja-aim, miiyii-b7ja is hrim,

=== PAGE 120 ===

1 10 
Skanda Purii:r.ta 
ma, hrt-nama}J,. Hence the Mantra of fifteen syllables [ om aim 
hiim siim klim om mar.tikarr_tikiiyai nama}], om] . This Mantra con­
sisting of fifteen syllables is on par with the celestial tree. It 
accords all series of happiness. It should be repeated. To the 
persons of pure Sattva quality, it accords the highest region. 
97. 
Second Mantra is om mam mar.tikarr_tike prar.taviitmike 
nama}],. It has fourteen syllables. 
98. 
This Mantra should always be repeated by men de-
sirous of salvation. The Homa should be performed one-tenth 
in number by men with faith and eagerness. 
99. 
An intelligent devotee always remaining pure shall 
perform the Homa with lotuses soaked in milk products and 
Havis together with sugar and honey. 
1 00. 
If the Mantra is repeated three hundred thousand 
times, even if the devotee dies in other lands, he certainly 
attains salvation by the power of this Mantra. 
1 0 1 . 
A gold image decorated with freshly cut diamonds 
should be worshipped assiduously. The form of the image 
should be as described before. 
1 02. 
By men who desire only salvation, the image should 
be worshipped in the house or after worshipping assiduously 
should be thrown into Mar:tikarr:tika. 
· 
1 03. 
Even if they are staying far away, means should be 
resorted to by men (who being) afraid of the worldly exist­
ence, have faith and eagerness. 
1 04. 
One who takes the holy bath in Mar:tikarr:tika should 
visit Mar:tikarr:tisa. Thereby· the man does not stay further in 
the womb of a mother. 
1 05. 
Mar:tikarr:ti:Svara Linga was installed by me formerly in 
the eastern entrance of the Antargrha (Inner Shrine) . Here 
Mar:tikarr:tisvara should be worshipped by those who desire 
salvation. 
1 06. 
To the south of Mar:tikarr:ti is the Pasupata Tirtha. A 
devotee should perform all the rites like water-libations there 
and visit Pasupatisvara. 
1 07. 
It is there that Pasupata Yoga was imparted by the 
Pinaka-wielding Lord. It is he who removes the ignorance and 
bondage of Suras, the chief of whom is Brahma, and also my 
bondage. 
1 08-109. 
Pasupati has assumed the form of a Linga himself

=== PAGE 121 ===

IV.ii.61 . 1 10-1 21 
I l l 
and shines always in Kasl for the removal of the bondage of 
the individual souls. There, on the fourteenth 
day in the 
bright half of the month of Caitra, men of pure minds should 
assiduously perform Yatra (religious festival, procession etc. ) . 
They should keep awake at night. 
1 1 0. 
Devotees should fast on the fourteenth day (in the 
bright half of all months) and then worship the Lord. They 
must have Paral).a (ritualistic breaking of fast) on the new­
moon day. Thereby they are never fettered by Maya. 
1 1 1 . 
Beyond that, in front of Pasupata Tlrtha, is Rudravasa 
Tlrtha. After taking their bath there, men should worship Hara, 
Rudravasesvara. 
1 1 2. 
By propitiating Rudravasesvara to the south of 
Mal).ikarl).i:Svara a man (devotee) should undoubtedly stay in 
the world of Rudravasa. 
1 1 3. 
To the south thereof is the Visva Tlrtha occupied by 
all the Tlrthas of the world. After taking the holy bath there 
devoutly, a devotee should visit Visvanatha. 
1 1 4. 
Thereafter he should adore with great devotion Visva 
i.e. Gaurl. He will thereby become venerable unto the whole 
universe. He should identify himself with the entire cosmos. 
1 1 5. 
Thereafter, is the Mukti Tlrtha. A devotee should 
take his holy ablution there also and worship MokTesvara. He 
will undoubtedly attain salvation. 
1 1 6. 
After visiting MokTesvara behind Avimuktesvara 
a 
man never moves about in this mortal world. 
1 1 7. 
Avimukte§vara Tlrtha is beyond Mukti Tlrtha. A devotee 
should take holy dip there and worship Avimuktesa. He will 
become liberated. 
1 1 8. 
Beyond that is the Taraka Tlrtha where Visve§vara 
himself mentions the Taraka Brahma which is like ambrosia 
unto the ears of the dead. 
1 1 9. 
A devotee who takes his holy bath in the Taraka Tlrtha 
and visits Tarakesvara, crosses the ocean of worldly existence 
and redeems his own ancestors also. 
1 20. 
Very near is Skanda Tlrtha. An excellent man who 
plunges therein and visits the Six-faced Lord eschews the (physical) 
body having six Kosas (sheaths i.e. skin, flesh, blood, semen, 
bone and marrow) . 
1 2 1 . 
By visiting the Six-faced Lord to the east of Tarakesvara,

=== PAGE 122 ===

1 1 2 
S'kanda Purii'l'}a 
a devotee can assume the body of Lord Kumara and stay in 
the Քa<;lanana world. 
1 22. 
Beyond that is the meritorious I)hm).<;lhi Ti:rtha. A 
man should perform aU the rites in water there and eulogize 
I)hut:-<;lhi Gat:-apati. He is never assailed by obstacles. 
1 23-1 25. 
The unparalleled Bhavani Ti:rtha is to the south 
of I)huQ.<;lhi Tiftha. A devotee should take his holy bath there 
and worship Bhavanl by means of silk garments embellished 
with jewels, Naivedya, foodstuffs of a great variety, flowers, 
incense and lights. Worshipping Bhavanl and isa is as though 
all the three worlds including the mobile and immobile be­
ings have been worshipped. Bhavanl and Sarikara should be 
worshipped with great faith. 
1 26-1 27. 
A wise devotee should arrange for the great 
Yatra of Bhavanl on the eighth day in Caitra. One hundred 
and eight circumambulations should be made. Thereby it is 
as though the entire earth consisting of the seven continents 
has been circumambulated by him along with mountains, her. 
mitages, forests and oceans. 
1 28. 
Eight circumambulations are to be made everyday by 
those who are satisfied with that much. Bhavanl and Sarikara 
are to be always bowed to assiduously. 
1 29. 
Bhavanl accords to devotees what they desire. Bhavanl 
always bestows garments. Hence Bhavanl should be worshipped 
in Kasi: by the residents of the Tlrtha. 
1 30. 
Bhavanl always accords to the residents of Kasl what 
they do not have and preserves what they acquire. Hence Bhavanl 
should always be resorted to by the residents of Kasl. 
1 3 1 . 
Alms should always be prayed of her by a mendicant 
desirous of salvation, since Visvesa's consort is the giver of 
alms at Kasl. 
1 32. 
Here in the house is Visvesa. Bhavanl is the lady of 
his house. She gives the alms in the form of salvation to all 
the residents of Kasl. 
1 33. 
On being worshipped by men, Bhavanl makes easily 
available what is difficult to attain, to the residents of Kasi:kTetra. 
1 34. 
A man observing Vrata on the MahaTȻaml day shall 
keep awake during the night and worship Bhavani in the morning. 
He will acquire the desired benefit. 
1 35. 
There is no doubt in this that all the desires of the

=== PAGE 123 ===

IV.ii. 61 . 1 36-1 48 
1 1 3 
devotee will be fulfilled, if h e visits Bhavani to the west of 
Sukresa. 
1 36. 
If enjoyment of pleasures and salvation are to be 
acquired, one should always reside in Kasi, should take bath 
in (the river Ganga) flowing northwards and serve Bhavani 
and Sali.kara. 
1 37. 
The Mantra: "0 Mother Bhavani, I shall become the 
dust of your feet. 0 Mother Bhavani, I shall become the most 
obedient among your slaves. 0 Mother Bhavani, I shall always 
become a devotee of yours if I should not be born in this 
world. I shall not have rebirth in the world. " 
1 38. 
For the purpose of the attainment of happiness this 
Mantra should always be repeated by the• residents of Kasi, 
while standing, walking, sleeping or keeping awake. 
1 39. 
IՕana Tirtha is also there near Bhavani Tirtha. He 
who takes his holy bath there and worships !sana does not take 
birth again. 
1 40. Jftana Tirtha too is there, that bestows wisdom on 
men. One should take bath in that Tirtha and visit Sivajftanesvara. 
1 4 1 . 
If Jftanda stationed near Jfi.anavapi is worshipped by 
people, they will never meet with loss of wisdom even when 
they die. 
1 42-1 43. 
There alone is Sailadi Tirtha that gives greatest 
prosperity and glory. There a devotee should perform Sraddha 
etc., make gifts in accordance with one's capacity and visit 
Sailadisvara to the north of Jftanavapi. He will attain the status 
of a Gal).a. No doubt need be entertained in this respect. 
1 44. 
To the south of Nandi Tirtha is my ViTI).U Tirtha. 
There a devotee should offer riceballs and become free from 
indebtedness to Pitrs. 
1 45. 
After taking the holy bath, the devotee should visit 
me, ViTI).U, on the right side of Visvda. He will go to the world 
of ViTI).U. 
146-1 47. 
During every Ekadasi ( 1 1 th day) , Sayan! (Ekadasi 
in the bright half of ATa<;lha) and Bodhini (Ekadasi in the 
bright half of Karttika) the devotee should keep awake at night 
near my image. At dawn he should worship me devoutly, feed 
Brahmal).as and make gifts of cows, gold and plots of land. He 
does not come to the earth again. 
1 48. 
There the devotee can finally conclude the Vrata without

=== PAGE 124 ===

1 14 
Skanda Purii:rJa 
being very parsimonious in spending money. At my bidding, 
the intelligent devotee shall attain the benefit of the Vrata 
perfectly. 
1 49-150. The auspicious Paitamaha Tlrtha is to the south 
of my Tlrtha. There the devotee should propitiate ancestors 
through the performance of Sraddhas and worship Pitamahe8vara 
Liriga stationed above Brahmanala with devotion. The man 
will attain Brahmaloka. 
1 5 1 . A Karma performed near Brahmasrotas whether aus­
picious or inauspicious attains great Akᔻayata (state of perma­
nence) . Hence one shall do only what is auspicious. 
1 52. 
0 excellent sage, whatever has been done here whether 
auspicious or inauspicious, ever if it be so very little, is not 
lost even at the time of final annihilation. 
153. 
This is called Nabhi Tlrtha because it is as though 
the navel of the earth. This is the navel of the spherical cosmic 
egg and it causes rise of prosperity. 
1 54. 
It is the navel of MaQ.ikarQ.ika, the ground of depth 
(giimbhiryabhumikii?) . It is in this that the entire cosmic . egg 
merges and it is from this that is comes forth. 
1 55. 
Brahmanala is a great Tlrtha well-known in all the 
three worlds. By taking his holy bath in its confluence a man 
shakes off the impurities of ten million births. 
1 56. If even a bone were to fall into Brahmanala those 
people never enter the pavilion of the cosmic egg. 
1 57. 
Beyond that, to the south of Brahmanala is the Bhaglrathl 
Tlrtha. By taking his holy bath there a man is completely rid 
of the sin of Brahmat:J.a's murder. 
1 58. 
The Liriga called Bhaglrathi:Svara is in the vicinity of 
Svargadvara. The sight of that Liriga is said to effect the PurascaraQ.a 
of BrahmaQ.a-slaughter. 
1 59. 
If one's ancestors had fallen into inauspicious state 
(Hells) , one should assiduously offer libations unto them in 
the Bhaglrathl Tlrtha. 
1 60. 
He should perform Sraddha in accordance with the 
injunctions in the Bhaglrathl Tlrtha and feed Brahmat:J.as. Thereby 
he will take the ancestors to Brahmaloka. 
1 6 1-1 63. 
To the south thereof is the great Tlrtha named 
Khurakartari. Cows which arrived from Goloka have made the 
ground here uneven by means of the tips of their hoofs. Hence

=== PAGE 125 ===

IV.ii.61 . 1 64-1 76 
1 15 
it is called Khurakartari. The devotee should take his holy bath 
in that Tirtha, offer balls of rice, perform all the rites in water 
and visit Khurakartarisa Liilga. He will thereby attain Goloka. 
He will never be devoid of cattle wealth, thanks to the worship 
of that Linga. 
1 64-1 65. 
To the south of Khurakartari is the excellent 
Markar.u;la Tirtha. A devotee who performs all the Sraddha 
rites in that Tirtha that dispels sins, and visits Markar:u;leye8vara 
Linga shall attain longevity, increase in the Brahmar:tical splendour 
and greatest renown in the world. 
1 66-1 67. 
VasiTųha Tirtha is the greatest destroyer of great 
sins. Mter offering libations to Pitrs there and visiting VasiTųhesa, 
a man can prevent getting contamination with the sins ac­
quired in the course of three births. P'ully equipped with 
Brahmar:tical splendour, he stays in VasiTųhaloka. 
1 68. 
There itself is the Arundhati Tirtha that heightens 
the conjugal bliss of women. That Tirtha should particularly 
be plunged into by chaste women. 
1 69. 
The sin arising from harlotry shall instantaneously 
vanish if one plunges into that Tirtha. That is due to the 
power of Arundhati. 
1 70. 
By wo r s h i p p i n g Vas i H h e svara to th e e a s t o f 
Markar:t<;leyesvara a man becomes rid of sins. H e will acquire 
great merit. 
1 7 1 . 
The images of VasiTųha and Arundhati should be as­
siduously worshipped there. A woman does not become a widow 
nor does a man become separated from his wife. 
1 72-1 73. To the south of VasiHha Tirtha is the excellent 
Narmada Tirtha. Mter performing Sraddha there a wise per­
son should visit Narmadesa and make great gifts there. He is 
never abandoned by Padma (Goddess of Fortur.e) . Beyond 
that, to the east of Trisandhyesvara is the Trisandhya Tirtha. 
1 74. 
A man who takes his holy bath there, and offers Sandhya 
prayers in accordance with the iՖunctions is not assailed by 
sins arising from the omission and irregularity of performing 
Sandhya prayers. 
1 75. 
A Brahmar:ta who visits Trisandhyesvara and performs 
Sandhya rites thrice a day with great faith, shall attain the 
merit of reciting three Vedas. 
1 76. 
Beyond that is the Yogini Tirtha. A man who takes

=== PAGE 126 ===

a plunge therein and visits Yoginlpltha shall attain Yogic SiddhL 
1 77-1 79. Agasti T!rtha that dispels masses of great sins is 
there. An excellent man who takes his holy bath there assidu­
ously, visits Lord Agastlsvara, offers libations to the grandfa­
thers thereafter in AgastikuȼQa and bows down to Lopamudra 
accompanied by Agasti, shall become rid of all sins and free 
from all distresses. He will go to Sivaloka along with his ancestors. 
1 80. 
To the south of Agastya Tlrtha there is a highly sacred 
T!rtha named Gail.gakesava which destroys all sins. 
1 8 1 . 
There, 0 sage, the intelligent devotee who worships 
my auspicious image named after the T!rtha (i. e. Gail.ga­
Kesavesvara) with great faith, is honoured in my world. 
1 82. 
By offering riceballs there and offering Danas in ac­
cordance with his capacity, he should proffer contentment 
unto the Pitrs extending over a hundred years. 
1 83. 
Thus the extent of MaĨikarĨl has been narrated to 
you. It is to the south of Slmavinayaka who dispels obstacles. 
1 84. 
I am VaikuĨtha Madhava (stationed) to the east of 
Vairocanesvara. By worshipping me with devotion there the 
devotee shall attain the benefit of being worshipped in Vaikuȼtha. 
1 85. 
I am named Vlramadhava to the west of Vlresa, 0 
age. If the observer of vows worships me there, he does not 
meet with the torture of Yama. 
1 86. 
I am named Kalamadhava in the vicinity of Kalabhairava. 
It is certain that neither Kali nor Kala affects my devotee. 
1 87. 
The devotee should observe fast on the elevanth day 
in the bright half of Margaslr!ja and keep awake during the 
night. He shall not meet with Yama anywhere. 
1 88. 
To the south (right) of Pulastlsvara, I am (called) 
NirvaĨanarasirhha. Even by bowing down to that image the 
devotee attains salvation. 
1 89. 
0 sage, to the east of Orhkara, I am (called) Mahabala 
Nrsirhha. One who worships that image does not see the extremely 
strong messengers of Yama. 
1 90. 
I am ( called) PracaĨQanarasirhha to th e east of 
CaĨQabhairava. By worshipping that image, the devotee shall 
be free from sins even if he has committed very grave ones. 
1 9 1 . 
To the east of Dehalivinayaka I am (called) Girinrsirhha, 
the tearer of elephants in the form of masses of powerful sins. 
1 92. 
0 great sage, I, Narasirhha, am the remover of great

=== PAGE 127 ===

fears too, to the west of Pitamahesvara, creating alarm unto 
the fright of devotees. 
1 93. 
To the west of Kalasesvara, I am (called) Atyugranara­
sirhha. If worshipped with faith, I remove even the mass of 
very fierce sins. 
1 94. 
In the vicinity of Jvalamukhi I am (called) Jvalamalinr­
sirhha. When adored perfectly, I burn down the grasses in the 
form of the masses of sins. 
1 95. 
I am (called) Kolahalanrsirhha, the subduer of Daityas 
and Danavas, because there arises chaotic noise among sins 
when my name is uttered. 
1 96. 
If a devotee worships me devoutly in the place where 
there is Kankalabhairava who is intelligent and efficient in the 
protection of Kasi, he is never interrupted by torments. 
1 97. 
Behind Nilakarnhesvara I am (callt:d) Vitankanarasirhha. 
A man becomes free from fear by worshipping me there with 
great faith. 
1 98. 
I n the vi c i n i ty of Anan tesvara, I am ( c all e d ) 
Anantavamana. On being worshipped, I remove even the endless 
sins of the devotee. 
199. 
I am named Dadhivamana (because) I bestow curd­
rice on the devotees. Merely by remembering the name (of 
that Lord) , a man ceases to be poor. 
200. 
In Kasi to the north of the Three-eyed Lord, I am 
(called) Trivikrama. On being Worshipped, I bestow wealth 
and remove sins. 
20 1 . 
I am called Balivamana. I was worshipped by Bali. To 
the east of Balibhadresvara, I am the augmenter of the strength 
of the devotees. 
202. 
To the right (south) of Bhava Tirtha, I am Tamravaraha 
by name. I came here from Tamradvipa. I am the bestower 
of what the devotees desire. 
203-204. 
0 sage, (I am) Dharai.J.ivaraha in the vicinity of 
Prayagesvara. The devotee should take his holy bath in the 
Varaha Tirtha, visit me here in the form of a Boar and worship 
me with great fervour. He will never face the torture of being 
in a womb. By giving a very small quantity of cooked food, 
he acquires the benefit of a gift of lands. 
205. 
People sinking into the deep ocean of great sins will

=== PAGE 128 ===

1 18 
not get drowned even in Pralaya after obtaining the raft of 
devotion unto me. 
206. 
In the vicinity of Kitlsvara, I am (called) Kokavan'iha. 
A man worshipping me there gets whatever fruit is desired by 
him. 
207-208. There are a hundred Narayal).as, five hundred 
Jalasayins, thirty in the form of tortoise, twenty in the form 
of fish, a hundred and eight Gopalas, Buddhas are thousands 
in number, Parasuramas are thirty in number and there are 
a hundred and one Ramas. 
209. 
I am only one in the form of ViTI).U resorting to the 
middle of the pavilion of Mukti (salvation) by the grace of 
Visvda who himself gave me that favour. 
2 1 0. 
There are six million Gal).as in the form of Narayal).a 
with the discus and the club lifted up. They keep watch around 
the holy spot. 
2 1 1-212. 
On hearing this, Agnibindu became delighted with 
hairs standing on ends. The intelligent sage asked further: "0 
Lord, mention the different forms for the welfare of yo·ur 
devotees and to quell my doubts. 0 infinite one, how many 
are your Milrtis? How are they to be known? Tell this. " 
2 1 3-21 4. 
On hearing the words of Agnibindu, the store­
house of austerities, Lord ViTI).U mentioned the different Milrtis 
in due order. On hearing these, a man can avoid being a 
victim of Varna. Prajapati (i.e. ViTl).u) mentioned twenty-four 
different Milrtis beginning with Kesava. 
Sri Vi,s-tu said: 
2 1 5. 
0 Agnibindu of great intellect! Listen, I am enumerating 
to you (the different forms) , 0 sage. Beginning with the first 
right-hand (upper) one understand these things in the SrHi 
order (clock-wise) . 
2 1 6. 
Understand the Milrti of Kesava through Sankha (up­
per right hand) , Cakra (upper left hand) , Gada (lower left 
hand) and Padma (lower right hand) . On being worshipped, 
this Milrti shall undoubtedly fulfil the wish (of the worship­
per) . 
21 7. 
(The Milrti) Madhuha should be understood through 
Sankha (upper right hand) , Padma (upper left hand) , Gada

=== PAGE 129 ===

IV.ii.6l .218-228 
l l9 
(lower left hand) and Cakra (lower right hand) . By serving 
this M iirti, enemies become destroyed. 
2 1 8. 
(The Miirti) SarikarŃaQ.a should be worshipped with 
the following as weapons: Sarikha (upper right hand) , Padma 
(upper left hand) , Cakra (lower left hand) and Gada (lower 
right hand) . If this Miirti is worshipped, the creature is never 
reborn . 
2 1 9. 
Damodara is worshipped with Sarikha, Kaumodakl 
(Gada) , Cakra and Padma (in the order mentioned above) . 
He bestows wealth, sons, cattle-wealth and grains. 
220. 
Vamana is equipped with Sarikha, Cakra, Padma and 
Gada. When installed in the house, he makes people prosper-
ous. 
22 1 . 
Paiicajanya (i.e. Sarikha) , Gada, Palilma and Sudarsana 
(i.e. Cakra) of variegated forms (indicate) Pradyumna who is 
worshipped by men. He bestows much wealth. 
222. 
The six Miirtis beginning with ViŃQ.U are mentioned 
beginning with upper left hand in the clock-wise order. Merely 
by remembering it heaps of sins become dissolved. 
223. 
For prosperity, ViŃQ.U (equipped) with Sarikha, Cakra, 
Gada and Padma should be worshipped by men. Madhava with 
Sarikha, Padma, Gada and Cakra is the bestower of greatest 
prosperity. 
224. 
For perfect achievement Aniruddha should be medidated 
upon as having Sarikha, Padma, Cakra and Gada lifted up. 
PuruŃottama (should be meditated upon) as equipped with 
Sarikha, Gada, Cakra and Padma. 
225. 
With Sarikha, Cakra, Padma and Gada, 0 sage, AdhokTaja 
is the remover of further rebirth. Janardana with Sarikha, 
Kaumodakl (Gada) , Padma and Cakra should be meditated 
upon. 
226. 
The six Miirtis beginning with Govinda (have the 
weapons) clock-wise beginning with_ left lower hand. Govinda 
always wields Sarikha (lower left hand) , Cakra (lower right 
hand) , Gada (upper right hand) and Padma (upper left hand) . 
227. 
Trivikrama should be worshipped for good fortune 
with Sarikha (lower left hand) , Padma (lower right hand) , 
Gada (right upper hand) and Cakra (left upper hand) . Sridhara 
wielding Sarikha, Padma, Cakra and Gada is for prosperity. 
228. 
HrŃlkesa is esteemed with Sarikha, Gada, Cakra and

=== PAGE 130 ===

1 20 
Skanda Purii:IJa 
Padma. Nrsirilha is comprehended through Sari.kha, Cakra, 
Padma and Gada. 
229. 
Acyuta is a permanent holder of Sari.kha along with 
Gada, Padma and Cakra. The six Murtis beginning with Vasudeva 
should be comprehended beginning with right lower hand. 
230. 
Vasudeva always holds Sari.kha (right lower hand) , 
Cakra (right upper hand) , Gada (upper left hand) and Padma 
(lower left hand) . 
231 . 
0 sage, Padmanabha should be known as having Sari.kha, 
Padma, Cakra and Gada. Upendra has always Sari.kha along 
with Gada, Cakra and Padma as his weapons. 
232. 
Equipped with Sari.kha, Cakra, Padma and Gada Hari 
removes the sins of men. Kr!?t:ta is said to be with Sari.kha, 
Gada, Padma and Cakra. 
233. 
0 great sage, these different Murtis of mine have 
been enumerated, knowing which a man certainly obtains en­
joyment of pleasures and liberation. 
234. 
While Govinda was narrating to Sage Agnibindu thus, 
the Lord of Birds who sets aside his enemies by means of his 
wings, came within the range of vision. 
235. 
After quickly bowing down, he joyously announced 
the arrival of the Three-eyed Lord. Thereupon Hnlkesa ex­
citedly said, "Where is the Lord? " 
Garutf,a said: 
236. 
May this great Bull-emblemed Lord be perceived, the 
lustre of the jewels of whose banner fills the space between 
heaven and earth. 
237-240. 
The bull-emblemed chariot was very exquisite. 
It was capable of making the creating of the eyes of the people 
fruitful. The faces of the quarters were brightened with the 
splendour of ten million suns as it were. The entire courtyard 
of the firmament was covered with aerial chariots of Devas. 
The caves of mountains echoed with the sounds of great musical 
instruments. And it was rendered fragrant by handfuls of flow­
ers scattered by Vidyadhara damsels. The Louts-eyed Lord saw 
the chariot of the Three-eyed Lord from afar and became 
delighted. Hairs stood on ends and he bowed down his head.

=== PAGE 131 ===

IV.ii.61 .241-251 
121 
The Lord who wielded Sailkha, Cakra and Gada desired to get 
up. 
241 . The bestower of salvation, the storehouse of joys told 
Agnibindu, "Touch this Sudarsana Cakra with your right hand." 
242. 
On being told, Agnibindu touched Sudarsana. Imme­
diately he became Sudarsanal], ('of excellent knowledge and 
wisdom' ) due to the favour of Hari. 
Skanda said: 
243. 
By his service of Bindumadhava, the sage assumed 
the form of luminous splendour, 0 Pot-born One. He merged 
as one into Kaustubha, the form of splendour. 
244. 
0 Pot-born One, it is definite •that those who had 
made their minds function like bees around the louts-like feet 
of Bindumadhava became comparable to Agnibindu. 
245. 
One should always stay in Kasl. Bindumadhava should 
be visited. This narrative is to be heard. The (good) goal of 
the worlds should be attained. 
246. 
The Origin of Paiicanada is conducive to merit. The 
story of Madhava is conducive to merit. The residence in Varar:tasl 
is meritorious. All this occurs to those of meritorious births. 
247. 
He who reads Agnibindu's prayer here in front of 
Madhava shall have his desires richly fulfilled. He will become 
master of the glory of salvation. 
248. 
For the sake of highest satisfaction, this excellent narrative 
should be recited always at the time of Sraddha, in front of 
the Brahmar:tas who take their food. 
249. 
This narrative should be particularly repeated at the 
time of festivals, in the holy vicinity of Paiicanada, for the 
increase of the glory of merit. 
250. 
For the fullest realization of enjoyment of pleasures 
and salvation, the story of the manifestation of Bindumadhava 
should be assiduously read and listened to with great devo­
tion. 
25 1 . At the time of Harivasara (i.e. Ekadasl) a devotee 
should keep awake during the night. By listening to this narrative 
of great merit, he will attain residence in Vaikur:ttha.

=== PAGE 132 ===

122 
Agastya said: 
Skanda Purii'f}a 
CHAPTER SIXTITWO 
Manifestation of the Bull-emblemed Lord 
1-6. 
0 Skanda, I am not satiated by hearing the story nar­
rated by you. The wonderful description of Bindumadhava has 
been heard. I desire to hear now the contact between the 
Lords of Devas. Mter hearing from Tarkᔻya about the activities 
of Divodasa and the display of ViᔻQ.u's Maya what did the Three­
eyed Lord tell the GaruQ.a-emblemed Lord? Who were all those 
who came from the Mandara mountain along with Sarilbhu? 
How was Isa faced by Brahma whose eyes were overcome with 
shame? What did the Lord say to Brahma? What was said by 
the Sun-god? What was narrated by the Yoginls? What did the 
ashamed GaQ.as say? Describe all this to me, 0 Skanda. I am 
very eager to hear. 
On hearing these questions of the Pot-born Sage, the son 
of Isa replied after bowing down to Siva and Siva, the bestowers 
of supernatural powers on those who bow down to them. 
Skanda said: 
7. 
0 sage, listen to this story that dispels all sins, that subdues 
obstacles without leaving anything behind and increases great 
welfare. 
8-9. 
Thereafter (ViᔻQ.U) the Lord inimical to Asuras joy­
ously gave a reward to the king of birds, on hearing the arrival 
of Sambhu, when he announced the happy arrival of Sarilbhu 
near VaraQ.asl. Then Hari kept Brahma at the head and pro­
ceeded forward. 
10. 
He was accompanied by the Sun-god; he was surrounded 
by the GaQ.as and followed by the Yoginls. He was in close 
touch with GaQ.eSa. (He went hand-in-hand with GaQ.esa­
Comm.) . 
1 1 . 
Immediately after seeing the Bull-emblemed Lord of 
Devas, the Consort of Sri quickly got down from Tarkᔻya and 
bowed to him. 
12. 
The aged Pitamaha bent down his head immediately.

=== PAGE 133 ===

IV.ii.62. 1 3-25 
1 23 
He was prevented from bowing down further by Mr<;la (Siva) 
himself to whom he had already bowed down. 
1 3. 
Showing raw rice grains which were wet along with 
fruits, the Unborn Lord (Brahma) chanted Rudra Suktas with 
a hand raised up by way of hailing ( Svasti) . 
1 4. 
GaQ.eSa hurriedly prostrated keeping his head on the 
two lotus-like feet (of Siva) . With great pleasure Hara kissed 
the head of Gajanana (smelt the crown of the head) . 
15. 
He embraced him and made him sit in his own seat. 
Somanandi and other GaQ.as prostrated themselves like a log 
of wood. 
1 6. 
After bowing down to Isa, the Yoginis sang auspicious 
songs. Then the Sun-god bowed down to Hara, the Lord of 
Pramathas. 
• 
1 7. 
Thereafter the Crescent-moon-crested Lord (Siva) made 
Hari sit near his throne on the left side with due honour. 
18. 
He offered a seat to Brahma and made him sit on the 
right side. All the GaQ.as who had bowed down to him were 
glanced (kindly) at and honoured thereby by Sarva. 
19. 
The Yoginis were favoured by a nodding gesture of 
the head. Ravi (Sun-god) was rendered satisfied with a gesture 
of the hand indicating "Sit". 
20. 
Thereafter, Brahma joined his hands together in rev-
erence and submitted to Sambhu whose lotus-like face was 
beaming with pleasure: 
Brahmii said: 
2 1 . 
0 Lord, 0 Lord of Devas, 0 consort of the Daughter 
of the Mountain, let me be forgiven for not returning after 
coming to VaraQ.asi. 
22. 
0 Moon-adorned Lord, who will abandon KliSi even 
aftᖓr casually visiting it? Even when he is old, who will abandon 
it, if he is capable of doing something? 
23. 
Being a BrahmaQ.a, it is not possible to do anything 
harmful, or even if one is capable of harming, who will desire 
to do it to a meritorious person? 
24. 
This is the command of the esteemed Lord too that 
no sensible man should deliberately commit harassment in 
regard to a person following the righteous path. 
25. 
Who will have any adverse intention towards Divodasa,

=== PAGE 134 ===

124 
Skanda Purii1Ja 
the king of Kasl, even slightly? He is a king of such meritorious 
activities, always alert in following the path of righteousness. 
26-30. 
On hearing these words, SrlkaQ.tha of pure intel­
lect became pleased. Laughingly he said to Brahma: 
The Lord of Devas said: 
0 Brahma, I know everything. First you are a Brahmal).a; 
your defects are to be condoned. Further you have performed 
ten horse-sacrifices. Further still, much welfare has been carried 
out by you, 0 Brahma. Against thousands of offences, my Liriga 
has been installed. Even if one Liriga of mine was installed by 
one anywhere, no trace of offence on him remains, even if he 
may have committed all the offences. If anyone commits any 
offence against a Brahmal).a, though he (the BrahmaiJ.a) may 
have committed a thousands offences, his wealth will perish in 
a few days. 
3 1 . While the Lord of Devas said this, the GaQ.as and the 
Mothers heaved sighs of relief looking around at one another's 
face. 
32. On realizing the opportune moment, Arka (the Sun­
god) who looks after mobile and immobile beings, noticed 
Sarhbhu, the consort of Uma (pleased in his mind) with a 
beaming face, and submitted thus: 
Arka said: 
33-36. 
0 Lord, after proceeding to Kasl from your, pres­
ence, and adopting some strategic steps, I found that I was 
utterly inefficient though I have a thousand rays, in respect to 
King Divodasa who performed his duty righteously. I stayed 
behind here knowing fully well that Your Lordship will cer­
tainly come here. 0 Lord of Devas, I have been awaiting your 
esteemed arrival. I divided myself into many forms and was 
eagerly engaged in propitiating you. My cherished desire has 
become fruitful now, thanks to the glorious sight of Your Lordship. 
The tree of my desire was sprinkled with the waters of a modicum 
of devotion and it has blossomed due to meditation. 
* 
* 
*

=== PAGE 135 ===

IV.ii.62.37-52 
1 25 
37-38. 
On hearing this utterance of Ravi, the Sun-eyed 
Lord of Devas said: "0 Bhaskara (Sun) , you are not at fault. 
You have actually carried out my task since you preferred to 
stay here where the Suras had no access while that king was 
ruling. " 
39. 
Mter consoling the Sun-god thus, the Lord of Devas, 
the storehouse of mercy, consoled the GaiJas who remained 
bowing down due to shame. 
40. 
The Yoginls too were keenly observed by Sarilbhu and 
appeased. They stood close together with their necks pressed 
down as it were due to the weight of shame. 
41 . 
Then the Three-eyed Lord passed his eyes towards 
the Discus-bearing Lord. Before Sarvajiia (Omniscient Siva) , 
the magnanimous Hari did not say anytning. 
42. 
Isa who had already heard from GaruQa the activities 
of GaiJesa and Sani.gin became mentally pleased, and did not 
say anything. 
43-44. 
In the meantime five divine cows came there from 
Goloka, namely Sunanda, Sumanal)., Suslla, Surabhi and Kapila 
the fifth one, the destroyer of all masses of sins. Due to the 
fondling glance of Bharga (Siva) their udders flowed. 
45. 
(Like) clouds, their udders showered continuous and 
unbroken streams of milk till a whirlpool formed itself there. 
46. 
It was perceived by the attendants like a second Ocean 
of Milk. With the presence of the Lord of Devas that became 
a great Tlrtha. 
47. 
Mahdvara named it Kapila Hrada ('Pool of Kapila') . 
Thereafter at the behest of the Lord all the heaven-dwellers 
took their holy ablution there. 
48. 
Thereupon, the divine grandfathers emerged from 
the Ti:rtha. On seeing them all the Suras joyously offered 
libations. 
49. 
The divine grandfathers such as Agnlᔻvattas, Barhiᔻads, 
Ajyapas and Somapas as well as others became propitiated. 
They prayed to Sarilbhu: 
50-5 1 a. 
"0 Lord of Devas, 0 Lord of the universe, 0 bestower 
of freedom from fear unto the devotees! We had everlasting 
contentment in this Ti:rtha due to your vicinity. Hence, 0 
Sarilbhu, grant us a boon with a delighted mind." 
5 1 b-52. On hearing the words of the divine ancestors, Sarva,

=== PAGE 136 ===

126 
Skanda Purii1Ja 
the Bull-emblemed Lord, said these words with great satisfac­
tion to all the Pitrs, even as all the Devas were listening: 
The Lord of Devas said: 
53-54. 
Listen, 0 ViᔻI).U of mighty arms; listen you, 0 Pitamaha. 
If in this Kapila Tlrtha filled with the milk of Kapila (and other 
cows) devotees offer rice balls with great faith as Sraddha offerings, 
their ancestors will be pleased at my behest. 
55. 
I shall speak another extremely satisfying thing. The 
Sraddha offered here when Monday and new-moon day coin­
cide, is everlasting in its benefit. 
56. 
During Sarhvarta period (i.e. 'annihilation of all cre-
ated beings') all waters and water reservoirs dry up and perish; 
but the Sraddha performed here during the new-moon-Mon­
day conjunction is never wasted. 
57. 
If a Sraddha can be performed here in the Kapiladhara 
Tlrtha during new-moon-Monday conjunction, of what avail is 
Gaya and Puᔻkara? 
58. 
Where you are, 0 Gadadhara, 0 Pitamaha, where you 
too are and where I the bull-emblemed one am, there certainly 
is the river Phalgu (the river in Gaya) . 
59. 
All those Tlrthas, stationed in heaven, firmament and 
earth will reside here on a day when new-moon coincides with 
Monday. 
60. 
What is obtained through performing Sraddha at the 
time of eclipses in Kurukᔻetra, Naimiᔻa and the confluence of 
Gari.ga and the ocean can be obtained in the Tlrtha of 
Vrᕄabhadhvaja. 
61-64. 
0 divine grandfathers, I shall tell you all the names 
of the Tlrtha. Tᖔey are the bestowers o.f satisfaction on you all. 
At first this Puᔻkaril).l is remembered as ( 1 ) Madhusrava. 
Thereafter it should be known as ( 2 ) Krtakrtya, then 
(3) ᕂlranlradhi, ( 4) Vrᔻabhadhvaja Tlrtha, (5) Pitamaha Tlrtha, 
(6) Gadadhara Tlrtha, (7) Pitr Tlrtha, (8) Kapiladhara, 
(9) Sudhakhani, and ( 1 0) Sivagaya. Thus this auspicious Tlrtha 
is known by ten names. 
65. 
0 grandfathers, these are the ten names of this Tlrtha. 
Even without Sraddhas and libations they bring in satisfaction 
unto you all.

=== PAGE 137 ===

IV.ii.62.66-78 
1 27 
66. 
Those who are desirous of the satisfaction of the Pitrs, 
should feed BrahmaiJ.as at the time of the conjunction of the 
sun and the moon (new-moon day) . Their Sraddha is infinite 
(in fruit) . 
67. 
If a devotee makes gifts of auspicious Kapila (tawny) 
cows at the time of Sraddha for the satisfaction of the Pitrs, 
the ancestors shall stay on the shores of the Milk Ocean. 
68. 
If Vrᔻotsarga (setting free a young bull to roam at 
will) is performed in this Tirtha of Vrᔻabhadhvaja, the Pitrs 
will be propitiated as though through the Puro<;l.asa (oblations) 
in horse-sacrifices. 
69. 
0 grandfathers, through Sraddhas in the Kiipiladharika 
Tirtha on a new-moon day coinciding with a Monday, the merit 
is eight times that performed at Gaya. • 
70. 
Those who become dead through abortion and those 
who die before teeth are cut, become redeemed through the 
Kapiladharika Ertha. 
71 . 
Balls of rice offered here for the redemption of (those 
who die) before the investiture with the sacred thread and 
before marriage, become everlasting. 
72. 
In the Kiipiladharika Tirtha, all these become satis-
fied: those who die on being burnt by fire (accidental) and 
those who are not cremated in fire. 
73. 
Those who were denied religious funeral rites and 
(the requisite) sixteen Sraddhas get satisfaction by offering 
oblation at Ghrtakulya (i.e. Krtakrtya) . 
74. 
If libations are offered in Madhusrava all these derive 
satisfaction: those who die without male issues or heir for offering 
libations. 
75. 
To those who meet with unnatural death or are killed 
by thieves, through lightning strokes or by drowning in water 
Sraddha can be offered here and that yields good goal. 
76. 
Those who commit misdeeds and commit suicide also 
derive satisfaction (of redemption) through balls of rice of­
fered at Sivagaya. 
77. 
The balls of rice offered here to the dead ancestors 
of father's Gotra and mother's side, shall become the yielders 
of everlasting satisfaction. 
78. 
If libations are offered at Vrᔻabhadhvaja Tirtha, those 
who die among the relatives on wife's side or on friend's side

=== PAGE 138 ===

1 28 
Skanda Purii:IJ.a 
also derive satisfaction. 
79. 
Whether the dead ones belong to the families of 
Brahmar:tas, ᕂatriyas, Vaisyas, Siidras or Antyajas, if their names 
are uttered and offerings are made, they become redeemed. 
80. 
Through offering libations in the Kapiladharika Tirtha 
all these are lifted to higher status: those who die during trans­
migration among brutes or those who become ghosts and vampires. 
8 1 . 
If libations are offered in Madhusravas, the Pitrs who 
are reborn among men in the mortal world become celestial 
beings. 
82. 
If libations are offered in the Vrᔻabhadhvaja Tirtha, 
those Pitrs who, through Pur:tyas, have gone to the celestial 
world and assumed the form of Devas, go to Brahmaloka. 
83. 
This Tirtha is full of milk in Krtayuga; full of honey 
in Treta, full of ghee in Dvapara and full of water in Kali age. 
84-86. 
This Tirtha should be known as auspicious though 
it is beyond the frontiers. Within Varar:tasi this is very excellent 
due to my close presence. Since my banner with the emblem 
of a bull was observed by the men staying in Kasi, 0 granᖕ­
fathers, I shall stay here under the name of Vrᔻabhadhvaja in 
the company of Pitamaha (Brahma) , Gadadhara, Ravi and the 
attendants for your satisfaction, 0 grandfathers. 
87. 
Even as, with these words, the Bull-bannered Lord 
was granting boons to the grandfathers, Nandin came there, 
bowed down to the Lord and submitted: 
Nandikesvara said: 
88-94. 
The chariot has been kept ready. May the victory 
procession start. There are eight lions there (i.e. Miilaprakrti 
and the seven Tattvas beginning with Mahat) . There are eight 
splendid bulls (eight Dhatus-constituents of the body) . Eight 
elephants (those of the quarters) shine there. There are eight 
fast horses (Citta, Ahamkara, Buddhi and five sense-organs) . 
The controlling mind with whip in hand is seated there. The 
chariot poles are Ganga and Yamuna. Mornings and evenings 
are the two wheels presided over by Pavana (Wind-god) . The 
clean umbrella is the region of heaven. Clusters of stars constitute 
the nails. Serpents are the binding cords. Srutis are the path-

=== PAGE 139 ===

IV.ii.62. 95-106 
129 
finders. Smrtis are the protecting chariot-fenders. Dakᔻil).a is 
the firm yoke. Makhas (Sacrifices) are the guards. Pral).ava is 
the seat. Gayatri is the footstool. The Vyahrtis with the ancillaries 
are the series of steps. The Sun and the Moon are the per­
petual gatekeepers. Agni is the snout-like projection, shaped 
like an alligator. Moonlight constitutes the chariot-ground. 
Mahameru is the flagstaff. The lustre of the Sun is the banner. 
The Goddess of Speech herself is the holder of chariot. 
Skanda said: 
95-98. 
The Lord of Devas, the Consort of Uma, was informed 
thus by Sailadi (Nandikesvara) . The eight divine Mothers performed 
the Nirajana rite. Thereupon the Pinaka-wielding Lord stood 
up supported by the hands of Sarngin (Vhl).u) . The sound of 
the divine musical instruments filled the space between heaven 
and earth. It was heightened by the Caral).as who sang auspicious 
songs. The quarters became deafened by that divine sound. As 
though summoned by it, the residents of all the worlds around 
came there. 
99. 
The Devas were thirty-three crores in number; the 
Gal).as were one crore and two hundred thousand; there were 
nine crores of Camul).<;ias and one crore Bhairavis. 
100. 
Eight crores of highly powerful followers of mine came 
there; they were six-faced, Kumaras and peacock-vehicled. 
1 0 1 . 
Seven crores of elephant-faced gods with huge bellies 
came there in great speed. Wielding shining axes in their hands, 
they are reputed to be obstacles unto obstacles. 
102. 
Eighty-six thousand sages expounding the Vedas came 
there. There were as many householders too. 
1 03. 
There were three crores of serpents residing in the 
nether regions; two crores of each of these-the Danavas and 
the Daityas of auspicious souls. 
1 04. 
There were eight million Gandharvas; Yakᔻas and Rakᔻasas 
were half a crore (five million) . Vidyadharas were two million 
and one hundred thousand. 
1 05. 
There were sixty thousand celestial damsels of great 
splendour, eight hundred thousand Gomatrs (Cow-mothers) 
and six hundred thousand Suparl).as. 
106. 
The seven Oceans came there proffering different

=== PAGE 140 ===

130 
Skanda Purii:T}a 
kinds of jewels. There were fifty-three thousand Rivers. 
1 07. 
Eight thousand Mountains, three hundred Vanaspatis 
(varieties of trees and herbs) and eight Diggajas (elephants 
supporting the quarters) came to the place where the Pinaka­
yielding Lord was present. 
1 08. 
Accompanied by these and eulogized everywhere there 
the cont<mted Lord SrikaQ.ᔽha rode in the chariot and entered 
the auspicious Kasi. 
1 09. 
Accompanied by the Daughter of Lord of Mountains, 
the Three-eyed Lord, the abode of joys, the mine of bliss saw 
Kasi which is far better than even heaven. 
Skanda said: 
1 1 0. 
By listening to this meritorious narrative that destroys 
the sins of ten million births, by reading it and by making it 
read (by others) one shall attain identity with Siva. 
1 1 1 . 
Particularly during the Sraddha period this should be 
assiduously read. That Sraddha shall be everlasting and ex­
tremely pleasing to the Pitrs. 
1 1 2. 
By reading the greatness of Vrᔻabhadhvaja (Tirtha) 
in the presence of Siva everyday for a year, a man without a 
son will beget a son. 
1 1 3. 
The story of the grand entry into Kasi of Visvesvara 
that has been narrated is certainly the seed of the bulbous root 
of great bliss. 
1 1 4. 
After joyously reading this narrative one should enter 
a new house. There is no doubt in this that he will be the 
enjoyer of every kind of happiness. 
1 1 5. 
This excellent narrative causes delight unto the three 
worlds. Merely by listening to this Visvesvara becomes pleased. 
1 1 6. 
Since the Lord had the great acquisition of what was 
unobtainable, the narrative named Kiifipravesa is an excellent 
japya (holy text to be recited) .

=== PAGE 141 ===

IV.ii.63. 1-12 
131 
CHAPTER SIXTYTHREE 
The Story of ]ye®!he5a 
Agastya said: 
1 . 
0 Slayer of Taraka, tell me what was done by Purari 
(Siva) after seeing Kasi that gives delight to the eyes and was 
attained as fulfilment of his highly cherished desires. 
Skanda said: 
2. 
0 husband of a chaste lady (Lopamudra) , 0 Agastya, 
listen, I shall tell you everything in full. Kasi was made a guest 
of his vision (i.e. attained) with great eagᖖrness by the Moon­
crested Lord. 
3. Thereafter, Jaigi!javya, an excellent sage, was seen living 
within a cave by Lord Saravajiia (Siva) whose mind is very 
affectionate towards his devotees. 
4-5. 
Ever since the day Rudra set out to the Mandara mountain 
riding on the Lord of Bulls along with the Daughter of the 
Mountain, 0 Pot-born One, the blessed Jaigi!javya of great intellect 
took a firm resolve: 
6. 
'I shall take in even a drop of water only when I shall 
be able to see the louts-like feet of the Three-eyed Lord.' 
7. 
0 sage, perhaps due to his Yogic Dharai:J.a power or 
due to Sarhbhu's grace, Yogi Jaigi!javya managed to survive 
without eating and without drinking. 
8. 
None else but only Sarhbhu knew this fact. For the 
same reason as soon as he returned from that place (Mandara) , 
the Lord of Pramathas came there at the outset. 
9. 
Hence men should perform great religious festival 
there on the fourteenth day in the bright half of the month 
of JyeHha or when Monday coincides with Anuradha Star. 
10. 
Therefore, that spot in Kasi became a very important 
place of pilgrimage according merit. There the Liii.ga named 
JyeHhesvara manifested itself. 
1 1 . 
Just as darkness vanishes as soon as the Sun rises, so 
sin incurred in the course of a hundred births is destroyed 
instantaneously as soon as the Liii.ga is seen by men. 
12. 
If a man takes his holy bath inJyeHhavapi, offers libations

=== PAGE 142 ===

132 
Skanda Puriir.ta 
to the ancestors and visits JyeHhdvara, he is not reborn on the 
earth thereafter. 
13. 
There very near JyeHhesvara Gaur! who bestows all 
spiritual powers all-round, appeared as Jyeᔻᔽha and Sreᔻᔽha. 
1 4. 
For the sake of increase in wealth, a great festival 
should be celebrated there on the eighth day in the bright half 
of the month of Jyeᔻᔽha and the devotees should keep awake 
during the night. 
15. 
A woman who plunges herself into the Jyeᔻᔽhavapi 
and bows down to JyeHha Gaur! shall enjoy conjugal bliss and 
great fortune. 
1 6. 
Since Sarilbhu himself made his stay there at that 
spot, the great Liiiga there became well-known thereafter as 
Nivasesa. 
1 7. 
By resorting to Nivasdvara Liiiga riches of all kinds 
abide in the house at every step. 
18. 
After performing Sraddha in accordance with the 
injunctions in Jyeᔻᔽha Sthana, a most excellent man gives ex­
cellent satisfaction to the Pitrs. 
19. 
By making many gifts in accordance with his capacity 
in the JyeHha Tirtha in &Hi, a man attains excellent heaven 
and salvation as well. 
20. 
At the outset, JyeHhesvara should be worshipped in 
Kasl by men who seek welfare. Then JyeHha Gauri should be 
worshipped by men who desire to attain the state of being the 
most excellent one among all. 
21 . 
Thereafter, calling Nandin, Dhurjaᔽi. the storehouse 
of mercy, spoke these words even as all the Devas were listen­
ing: 
lsvara said: 
22. 
0 son of Silada, there is a beautiful cave here; you 
enter it quickly; therein stays my devotee, Sage Jaigiᔻavya. 
23. 
He practises great observances and restraints. Only 
the skin, bones and sinews are left of him. Fetch unto me my 
devotee, steadfast in his resolve to see me. 
24. 
Ever since I left Kasi and went to Mandara, a most 
beautiful (mountain) , he has observed great restraints and has 
stopped taking in food.

=== PAGE 143 ===

IV.ii.63.25-35 
1 33 
25. 
Take this toy-lotus which will nourish him like nectar. 
Touch his limbs with this which will cause excellent nourishment. 
26. 
Thereupon, Nandin took that toy-lotus of the Lord, 
bowed down to the Lord of the chiefs of Devas and entered 
the deep cave. 
27. 
On seeing him with his mind fixed in the DharaQ.a 
state and the limbs dried up in the fire of austerities, Nandin 
touched him with the lotus. 
28. 
At the very touch of that lotus, that eminent Yogin 
became happy and fresh like a frog in a crevice at the end of 
summer, due to the association (touch) of rain. 
29. 
Then Nandin immediately took the great sage with 
him, bowed down in front of the Lord of.Oevas and made him 
(the sage) fall at his feet. 
30. 
Seeing Sari.kara in front, Jaigiᔻavya became bewildered. 
He bowed down to the Lord with the Daughter of the Moun­
tain resting on his left side. 
3 1 . 
After prostrating himself like a log of wood on the 
ground and rolling round, the sage eulogized the moon-crested 
Lord with great devotion. 
Jaigi®avya said: 
(Prayer by Jaigi®avya) 
32. 
Obeisance to Siva, the quiescent, omniscient Lord of 
auspicious soul, the bulbous root (concentrated form) of the 
bliss of the universe, the cause of supreme delight! 
33. 
(Obeisance) to the Lord endowed with form, without 
form and having different forms; to the three-eyed Lord eulogized 
by Vidhi (Brahma) and ViᔻQ.u; to the cause of extreme bless­
edness. 
34. 
Obeisance to you, the stationary one; obeisance to 
you, the mobile one; obeisance to you, the soul of all. Hail to 
you, the supreme soul! 
35. 
Obeisance to the Lord covetable to the three worlds; 
to the Lord who burned down the physical form of Kama; 
obeisance to the Lord according special significance to things, 
to the entire (creation) ; obeisance to you having Seᔻa as your 
bracelet.

=== PAGE 144 ===

134 
Skanda PuriirJa 
36. 
Bow to you, 0 Srlkal).ᔽha; obeisance to you having 
poison sticking to the throat; obeisance to the Lord whose feet 
are venerable unto Vaikul).ᔽha (Vil?I).U) ; obeisance to the Lord 
of unobstructed prowess. 
37. 
Obeisance to the Lord half of whose body is taken 
over by Sakti; obeisance to the Lord without physical form; to 
the Lord having excellent physical form; to the lord who prevents 
further acquisition of a body by an embodied soul when bowed 
down to even once. 
38. 
Obeisance to the Lord identified with Kala (Time) ; 
to Kalakala ('Slayer of god of Death') ; to the Lord who de­
voured the poison Kalakuᔽa; to the Lord having serpents for 
the sacred thread; to the Lord wearing serpents as ornaments. 
39. 
Obeisance to you, 0 KhaQ.«;iaparasu (Siva) ; obeisance 
to the Lord wearing (on his head) the crescent moon; to the 
Lord who dispels the misery of everyone; to the Lord equipped 
with sword and shield. 
40. 
Obeisance to the Lord sung about by Devas; to the 
Lord having the waves of Ganga serving the purpose of a garland; 
to the consort of Gaurl; to the Lord of the mountain; to Girisa; 
to the begetter of Guha. 
41 . 
Obeisance to the Lord having the crescent moon for 
his excellent ornament; to the Lord having the moon, the sun 
and fire as eyes; obeisance to you, 0 Lord with hides for robes; 
obeisance to you the quarters-clad (nude one) . 
42. 
To the Lord of the universe, to the elderly one, to 
you the dispeller of birth and old age; obeisance to the enlivener; 
obeisance to you, the dispeller of the sins of those who mutter 
prayers repeatedly. 
43. 
Obeisance to the Lord holding the I;>amaru (a hand-
drum) in his hands; obeisance to you having the bow in the 
hand; obeisance to you the three-eyed one; obeisance to you, 
the eye of the universe. 
44. 
Obeisance to the Lord holding the trident, 0 holder 
of Ganga of the triple stream (flowing through three worlds) ; 
to the over-lord of the heaven, praised in all the three Vedas. 
45. 
(Obeisance) to the Lord identified with the three 
Vedas; to the satisfied one; to the bestower of satisfaction on 
the devotees. Obeisance to you, the initiated one; obeisance 
to you, the Lord of Devas.

=== PAGE 145 ===

IV.ii.63.46-57 
135 
46. 
Obeisance to you, the Lord who have taken away all 
the sins completely; to the long-visioned one; to the Lord staying 
far off; to the Lord difficult of access; to the destroyer of 
defects. 
47. 
0 lord, 0 holder of the digits of the moon; to the 
Lord accessible only to those who are free from defects; obeisance 
to you, 0 Dhiirjaᔽi. 0 Lord fond of Dhattiira flowers. 
48. 
Obeisance to the intelligent one, the righteous one; 
obeisance to you, the protector of piety. 0 blue-throated Lord, 
obeisance to you; obeisance to you of red-blue complexion. 
49. 
0 Lord who fill with (endow with) prosperity and 
abundance of the three worlds, those who merely remember 
your names; obeisance to the Lord of Praptathas; to the Lord 
holding the Pinaka in the raised hand. 
50. 
Obeisance to the Lord of Pasus (individual souls) ; to 
the Lord releasing the souls from bondage; to the Lord removing 
great sins even when only the names are uttered. 
5 1 . 
(Obeisance) to the Lord beyond the Para (Unmanifest) ; 
to the Lord who redeems persons; to the Lord beyond cause 
and effect. Obeisance to the Lord whose acts are beyond 
comprehension; to the Lord whose stories are very sacred. 
52. 
Obeisance to Vamadeva; to the Lord half of whose 
boJy is female; to the Lord moving about on a bull; obeisance 
to Bharga; to Rhima and to the remover of the fear of those 
who bow down. 
53. 
Obeisance to Bhava; to the destroyer of worldly exist-
ence; obeisance to the Lord of living beings. 0 great Lord, 
obeisance to you; 0 Mahe8a, 0 Lord of splendours. 
54. 
Obeisance to the consort of Mrc;lani; obeisance to you, 
the conqueror of Death; obeisance to you, the destroyer of 
(Dak!ja's) sacrifice; to the Lord of whom. the king of Yak!jas is 
a favourite. 
55. 
To the performer of Yajiia; to the bestower of the 
fruit of Yajiias; obeisance to Rudra; to the Lord of Rudras; to 
the Lord who rejects despicable cooked food; to you, 0 bestower 
of fortune. 
56. 
Obeisance to the trident-bearing Lord; to the penna-
nent lord; to the Lord moving about in the cremation grounrl; 
to the lover of Siva; obeisance to Sarva, the omniscient one. 
57. 
Obeisances to Hara, forbearance incarnate, 0 forgiver;

=== PAGE 146 ===

1 36 
Skanda Purii:TJ.a 
to you identified with ᖝetrajna (individual soul) ; to one who 
is powerful; to the destroyer of ᖝiti (Earth ) ; obeisance to you, 
fair-complexioned as milk. 
58. 
Obeisance to you, 0 slayer of Andhaka; to the Lord 
devoid of beginning and end; to the sustainer of the earth; to 
Isa who is eulogized by Indra and Upendra (ViᔼQu) . 
59. 
Obeisance to the lover of Uma; obeisance to you, G 
Ugra (fierce one) ; to Ordhvaretas (of sublimated sexual urge 
i.e. who have controlled sexual energy) ; to the Lord having a 
single form; to the single one, whose form is great prosperity. 
60. 
Obeisance tp you of infinite capacity for action. Obei-
sance to the consort of Ambika. You are Orhkara, Vaᔼafkara 
and you alone are the three worlds, viz. Bhiil}, Bhuval} and 
Sval}. 
6 1 . 
0 Lord of Uma, you are all that exist here, visible or 
invisible. I do not know how to pray; you alone are one who 
enables the eulogizer to pray. 
62. 
You are the person to be addressed; you are the speaker; 
you alone are the speech; I bow down to you, 0 Mahade-va; I 
do not know anyone else; 0 Mahesvara, I do not eulogize 
anyone else. 
63. 
0 Consort of Gaurl, I do not bow down to anyone 
else; 0 Siva, I do not utter anyone else's name; I am dumb in 
regard to the expression of another's name; I am deaf is respect 
to listening to another's story. 
64. 
I am lame in regard to the act of approaching an-
other (god) and blind in looking up to anyone else. You are 
the only lord; you are the only creator. 
65. 
You alone are the protector and the annihilator. Diversity 
is a misconception of the ignorant. Hence you alone are the 
refuge more and more, again and again. 
66-67. 
0 Mahe§vara, lift me up drowning in the ocean of 
worldly existence. 
Mter eulogizing Mahesana thus, Jaiglᔼavya, the great sage, 
kept quiet before SthaQu (Siva) like a pillar. 
On hearing this prayer of the sage, the Lord adorned with 
the moon, became delighted and said to the sage, "Ask for a 
boon. "

=== PAGE 147 ===

IV.ii.63.68-80 
137 
Jaigi;avya said: 
68. 
If the Lord of Devas is pleased, 0 Lord of Bhavani, 
0 bestower of the remote (inaccessible) status (Mokᔼa) , let me 
not be far off from your lotus-like feet. 
69. 
0 Lord, this is another boon which should be. given 
without hesitation: May there be your presence in the Liilga 
installed by me. 
lsvara said: 
70. 
0 blessed Jaigiᔻavya, 0 sinless one, may everything 
mentioned by you take place. Further, I shall grant you another 
desirable boon. 
71 . 
The Yogasastra that will facilitate the achievement of 
salvation is passed on to you. You will be the foremost Yogacarya 
among all Yogins. 
72. 
0 ascetic, with my favour, you will understand cor-
rectly the secret of Yogavidya whereby you will attain salvation. 
73. 
You will be my devotee devoid of old age and death 
like Nandin, Bhrngin and Somanandin. 
74. 
There are many Vratas; there are many varieties of 
holy observances and restraints. There are many kinds of aus­
terities and there are many types of Diinas. 
75. 
There are many ways of attaining the good and destroying 
sins. But greater than everything else is the holy observance 
practised by you. 
76. 
This is the greatest holy observance that food is taken 
in only after seeing me. If anything is eaten without seeing and 
visiting me, it means only consumption of sin. 
77. 
He who takes in leaves, fruits or flowers without wor-
shipping (me) shall become deluded with the regular intake 
of semen (as food) for twenty-one births. 
78. 
Other Niyamas and Yamas do not deserve even a six-
teenth part of the great holy observance practised by you. 
79. 
Henceforth you will be near the feet of mine in every 
respect forever. Hence there itself you will certainly attain the 
glory of ultimate salvation. 
80. 
The Liilga named Jaigiᔻavyesvara in Kasl shall be the 
most precious of all. There is no doubt in this that after serving 
(that Linga) for three years one will attain Yoga.

=== PAGE 148 ===

1 38 
Skanda PuriitJ.a 
81 . 
With my blessings, a devotee eagerly engaged in prac-
tising Yoga after entering the cave of Jaiglᔼavya, shall attain the 
desired fulfilment within six months. 
82. 
This Linga of yours should be assiduously worshipped 
and the beautiful cave should be visited by devotees who desire 
the greatest achievement. 
83. 
Hence in this Jyeᔼthesvara ᕐetra, your Linga that 
yields all spiritual powers will, on being seen, touched and 
worshipped, destroy masses of sins. 
84. 
If Sivayogin.s are fed in this JyeHhe5vara ᕐetra the 
benefit thereof shall be that of feeding ten millions for each 
one (of the Yogins so fed) . 
85. 
Jaiglᔼavyesvara Liil.ga should be assiduously guarded, 
especially in the Kali age, from those of perverted intellect. 
86. 
0 ascetic, I shall make my presence felt in this Linga 
forever, in order to bestow Yogic powers on the aspirants. 
87. . 
Listen, 0 blessedjaiglᔼavya, I shall grant another boon. 
The prayer composed and recited by you will be highly con­
ducive to the achievement of Yogic power. 
88. 
It will subdue great sins; it will increase great merits; 
it will suppress all great fears; it will increase great devotion. 
89-9 1 . 
Nothing is impossible to attain through the recita­
tion of this prayer. Hence it should be assiduously recited by 
excellent aspirants. 
After granting th!s boon to him, the smiling destroyer of 
Kama turned towards the BnihmaJ.las residing in the holy spot 
who had assembled there. 
Skanda said: 
By listening to this unparalleled narrative assiduously a sensible 
man becomes free from sins. That man is never tormented by 
calamities.

=== PAGE 149 ===

IV.ii.64.1-l l 
139 
CHAPTER SIXTYFOUR 
The Secret of Jye;thefuara 
Agastya said: 
1-2. 
0 Six-faced One, what did the Brahma1_1as say on see­
ing Sarilbhu? Tell me also what different Liilgas are there. 
What miracle happened in the highly meritorious holy spot 
Jyeᔻthasthana much appreciated by the Lord of the Devas? Tell 
me, 0 Six-faced One. 
Skanda replied: 
3. 
Listen, 0 Agastya. I shall tell you what has been asked 
by you. In deference to Brahma, the Lord went to Mountain 
Mandara. 
4. 
Then those Brahma1_1as, the sinless Sannyasins of the 
holy spot (compelled to) desist from accepting monetary gifts, 
became bereft of support. 
5. 
They sustained themselves with bulbous roots etc. Dig­
ging incessantly the ground with the tips of thick sticks, they 
created a beautiful pond named Da1_1Q.akhata. 
6. Around that holy Tirtha, they installed many great Liilgas. 
Eager to propitiate Mahesa, they assiduously performed pen­
ance. 
7. Always smeared with holy ash and wearing Rudr-akᔻa, 
they were ever engaged in the adoration of Liilgas. They regu­
larly repeated the Satarudriya passages also. 
8. 0 sage, when they heard of the return of the Lord of 
Devas, though they were lean due to austerities, they became 
filled with pleasure. 
9. 
Five thousand Brahma1_1as who were practising severe 
austerities, came from Da1_1Q.akhata, the great Tirtha, for the 
vision of the Lord. 
10. 
From the holy spot named Mandakini Tirtha . the 
Brahma1_1as engaged in Pasupata Vrata, solely propitiating Siva, 
came there in a body numbering ten thousand. 
1 1 . 
Ten thousand three hundred sages reached there from 
Harilsa Tirtha. One thousand two hundred came from the Tirtha 
of Durvasas.

=== PAGE 150 ===

12. 
Six thousand BrahmaiJas came from Matsyodari; seven 
hundred came from Kapalamocana. 
13. 
One thousand two hundred came from the Tirtha 
named ᖗIJamocana. 0 sage, five thousand came from VaitaraiJi. 
14. 
From the holy pit named Prthudaka caused to be dug 
by King Prthu, one thousand three hundred BrahmaiJas set 
off. 
15. 
From the holy pit named after the celestial damsel 
Menaka, two hundred came. From Urvasi KuiJc;la one thousand 
two hundred came. 
16. 
Similarly from Airavata KuiJc;la three hundred BrahmaiJas 
came. From Gandharvapsaras Tirtha, nine hundred BrahmaiJas 
came. 
1 7. 
From Vnesa Tirtha, three hundred ninety came. From 
YakᔻiiJi KuiJc;la came one thousand three hundred. 
1 8. 
From Lakᔻmi Tirtha came one thousand six hun-
dre d . Seven thousand excellent BrahmaiJas came from 
Pisacamocana. 
19. 
From Pitr KuiJc;la, a few more than a hundred came; 
From Dhruva Tirtha, six hundred; five hundred from Manasa 
Saras. 
20. 
From Vasukihrada ten thousand BrahmaiJas came. Simi-
larly from Janaki KuiJc;la eight hundred BrahmaiJas came to see 
the Lord. 
2 1 . 
They all came to the Lord of Kasi, the bestower of 
supreme bliss. Similarly from Gautama KuiJc;la nine hundred 
BrahmaiJas came. 
22. 
From the Durgatisarhhartr Tirtha one thousand one 
hundred BrahmaiJas came there to see the Lord, Consort of 
Uma. 
23. 
0 Pot-born One, the BrahmaiJas residing on the banks 
of Ganga from the confluence of Asi till the Sangamesvara 
Tirtha, came there. 
24. 
Eighteen thousand five hundred fifty-five BrahmaiJas 
came there from the banks of Ganga. 
25-26. 
With auspicious Suktas (hymns) Sarhbhu was eulo­
gized by the BrahmaiJas shouting slogans of victory. They had 
wet rice-grains and Durva grass, flowers and fruits and garlands 
of fragrant flowers in their hands. He was bowed down to 
repeatedly. Mter granting them freedom from fear, Sarhbhu

=== PAGE 151 ===

gladly enquired after their welfare. 
27. 
Thereafter with the hands joined in reverence, the 
BrahmaQ.as said: "0 Lord, to us the residents of the holy spot, 
there is always increase in happiness and welfare. 
28. 
Particularly you have been made visible to our eyes, 
you whose real form even the Srutis did not know really. 
29-30. 
Those who are averse to your holy spot will not 
have happiness at any time. All the fourteen worlds will always 
turn away their faces from them. 0 Lord who have serpents 
as bracelets, if .Kasi is always in the hearts of people, the poison 
of the serpent of worldly existence will not be effective in 
regard to them anywhere. 
3 1 . 
The two-syllabled Mantra KA.-Sl is the jewel which de-
stroys rebirth (i.e. leads to Mokᕇa) . How can then be the negation 
of welfare, if it is retained in the throat? 
32. 
He who always drinks the nectar in the form of the 
two-syllables KA-Sl, gives up (six) changes such as old age and 
becomes immortal and liberated. 
33. 
He by whom the pair of syllables acting as nectar unto 
the ears, namely, KA-Sl has been heard never hears the story 
arising from conception. 
34. 
If the dust of .Kasi, being wafted by the wind, were to 
fall on a head, that head becomes characterised by the digit 
of the moon, 0 Moon-crested Lord. 
35. 
Even if casually, Anandakanana were to come within 
the range of the vision of people, they are not reborn here 
(and hence) they never see the cremation ground. 
36. 
If anyone were to repeat this great Mantra, namely 
Kali, while moving about, standing, sleeping or walking, he 
becomes free from fear. 
37. 
If the two Bijaaras .Ka-si (KA is the Bija of Kama and 
SA is the Bija of Sri) were to be retained in the heart, all the 
Karmabijas (seeds of Karmas) become ineffective in regard to 
him. 
38. 
If anyone were to die muttering .Kasi-.Kasi-.Kasi even 
while staying elsewhere, salvation shines in front of him. 
39. 
This .Kasi is weal incarnate. 0 Bhava, you are the weal 
in person. The triple stream Ganga is the form of weal. This 
triad of weal exists nowhere else." 
40. 
On hearing these words fully expressive of devotion

=== PAGE 152 ===

to the holy spot from the Brahmal}.as, Hara, the lover of the 
Daughter of the Mountain, became highly pleased. 
41 . 
The Lord, delighted within, said: "Blessed are you, 0 
excellent Brahmal}.as, since you have such a devotion to my 
holy place of excessive sanctity. 
42. 
I know that you have all become fully endowed with 
Sattva Gul}.a by resorting to this holy spot, free from Rajas and 
Tamas and hence capable of crossing the ocean of worldly 
existence. 
43. 
Those who are devotees of Varal}.asi are certainly my 
devotees. They are certainly living-liberated ones, the objects 
of the benign glances of the glory of salvation. 
44. 
Those by whom the meanest of creatures stationed in 
Kasi, has been antagonized, have actually antagonized the entire 
earth along with me. 
45. 
He who rejoices on hearing the eulogy of Varal}.asi 
has actually congratulated joyously the entire cosmic egg. 
46. 
Those men who reside in this Anandakanana are free 
from sins. They will reside within my mind. 
4 7. 
Those who stay in my holy spot and do devotional acts 
unto me, those who bear the distinguishing marks of my devotees, 
only to them do I impart the means of salvation. 
48. 
I do not impart to them (salvation) , to those who 
neither stay here, nor are devoted unto me, nor bear the sig­
nificant marks. 
49. 
If Kasi, the city of salvation, shines in the hearts of 
people, they shine before me and are enveloped by the glory 
of salvation. 
50. 
Those to whom this Kasi, the glory of salvation, does 
not appeal are undoubtedly fallen ones, inferior to those who 
desire the glory of heavenly pleasures. 
5 1 . 
The four aims of life of th.ose who eagerly wish for 
Kasi, shall stand in front of them like servants, 0 Brahmal}.as, 
with my favour. 
52. 
I am the blazing fire of forest in the Anandakanana 
here. I burn down the seeds of Karmas of the creatures; I do 
not let them grow. 
53. 
One should always stay in Kasi. I should be adored 
assiduously. Kali and Kala should be overcome. The lady Mukti 
(Salvation) should be enjoyed.

=== PAGE 153 ===

IV.ii.64.54-65 
143 
54. 
Even after reaching Kasl, a man of evil intellect, who 
does not serve me properly (will find) that the glory of salva­
tion though within the grasp of his hands, perishes quickly. 
55. 
Blessed are you BrahmaQ.as, residents of Kasl, noted 
prominently for devotion . I am not far from your thoughts nor 
is so Kasika. 
56. 
What boon should be given to you here? Choose it 
from me as you please, since you, the Sannyasins of the holy 
spot, are my favourites. 
57. 
On imbibing the nectar emanating from the ocean of 
milk of the mouth of Mahesana, all the BrahmaQ.as became 
satisfied. They chose an excellent boon. 
The Briihma7J-as said: 
58. 
0 omniscient Mahe§ana, consort of Uma, this is our 
boon. Kasl, the dispeller of the distress of the worldly exist­
ence, should never be abandoned by you. 
59. 
In view of the prayer of the BrahmaQ.as let not any 
curse pronounced by anyone be an obstacles unto salvation, at 
any time; let is not be effective in KasL 
60. 
Let our devotion to the pair of your lotus-like feet be 
unaffected by the opposing pairs of entities. Let our stay in 
Kasl be continuous till death. 
61 . 
Of what avail is another boon. This boon itself should 
be given to us. But, note, 0 Slayer of Andhaka, still we shall 
choose another boon. 
62. 
Let there be your presence in the Liilgas as your rep-
resentation installed by us, purified by the devotion unto you. 
63. 
On hearing these utterances of those BrahmaQ.as the 
Pinaka-wielding Lord said: "So be it": and another boon was 
also granted, namely "You will be endowed with knowledge. " 
64. 
The Lord of Devas said further: "0 BrahmaQ.as, listen. 
I shall tell you what is beneficial to you. Let it be certainly 
carried out. 
65. 
The north-flowing river (Ganga) should always be re-
sorted to. The Liilga should be assiduously adored. Self-control, 
offering gifts and compassion for others should be practised

=== PAGE 154 ===

always by those who desire salvation. 
66. 
This alone is mentioned as the secret of the inhabitants 
of the holy spot. Thoqghts for others' welfare should be en­
tertained. Words causing grief and affliction should not be 
uttered. 
67. 
Sins should not be committed here by persons desir-
ous of eminence, since good and evil deeds committed here 
are everlasting. 
68. 
The sin committed elsewhere perishes in Kasi. The 
sin committed in Varal}.asi perishes in Antargeha (Inner sanc­
tum Sanctorum of Kasi) . 
69. 
The sin committed in Antargeha causes Paisacya (state 
of being a vampire) and downfall in hell. If the sin is commit­
ted outside, the attainment of vampire hood and hell goes away 
(after entering Antargeha) . 
OR: If a man commits a sin within Antargrha and goes (out 
of VaraQ.asi) , he gets the vampire hood and hell. 
70. 
A Karma done in Kasi is not wiped off even in crores 
of Kalpas, but to those who die here Rudrapisacatva happens 
for thirty thousand (divine years) . 
71-72. 
If a person staying in Kasi is always engaged in 
sinful activities, he attains the species of Pisacas continuing for 
thirty thousand years. Thereafter he continues to stay here. He 
will attain excellent knowledge. Therefore, when knowledge is 
attained, he will attain perfect salvation. 
73. 
In the case of those who commit sins here, but die 
elsewhere, I shall tell you the goal reached by them. Listen, 
0 BrahmaQ.as. 
74. 
There are some GaQ.as of mine called Yamas. They 
are ferocious and hideous in forms. At the outset they put evil­
doers of the holy spot in a crucible and blow. 
75. 
Thereafter, in rainy season they take the persons of 
evil action to the eastern marshy places rarely accessible (to 
others) . They then put them in the vast expanse of water. 
76. 
They are bitten day and night by winged leeches, 
aquatic reptiles and mosquitoes that cannot be warded off. 
77. 
Thereafter in the season of winter, they are taken to 
the Himalaya mountain. They deprived of food and clothing, 
are subjected to great distress day and night. 
78. 
Thereafter, in summer season, they are kept in desert

=== PAGE 155 ===

region devoid of water and vagetation. They are (continuously) 
kept thirsty and scorched by the rays of the sun. 
79. 
They are tortured and harassed by the ferocious Gar;tas 
all-round in this manner for an unlimited period of time and 
ultimately brought here. 
80-8 1 . 
Those Yamas convey the information to the pres­
ence of K.alaraja. Inspecting them K.alaraja reminds them of 
their sinful actions. He unites them with other Rudrapisacas 
keeping them naked, distressed by hunger and thirst and having 
the skins at the belly and back touching each other. 
82. 
Thereafter, those Rudrapisacas continue to be the 
attendants of Bhairava and endure much fatigue arising from 
the severity of hunger and thirst. 
83-84. 
Occasionally they get some food and that too 
contaminated with blood. Thus, they reᖆain there in an exces­
sively miserable condition for a period of thirty thousand years. 
With cords round their necks, they are taken around the impaling 
stake in the cremation ground. Although very thirsty, they do 
not get any opportunity to even touch water. 
85. 
When ultimately at the sight of K.alabhairava their 
sins become destroyed, they are born here itself and become 
liberated at my behest. 
86. 
Hence one should not feel drawn towards sinful ac-
tivities, thoughts and utterances. Those who desire to attain 
great benefit, should always abide by the path of purity. 
87. 
No sinner dying in Avimukta falls into hell. With my 
favour, he attains the greatest goal (Mokᔻa) . 
88. 
If my devotee of excellent holy vows observes fast, he 
will not return (to the worldly existence) even in the course 
of a hundred crores of Kalpas. 
89. 
Realizing that the life of human beings is not perma-
nent and it is full of sins, Avimukta should always be resorted 
to. It causes release from the fear of worldly existence. 
90. 
Excepting the city of Varar;tasi that suppresses all sins, 
I do not see any other means of expiation in the Kali age for 
the creatures. 
9 1 . 
Whatever sin has been incurred and accumulated in 
the course of thousands of previous births, becomes dispelled 
entirely as soon as one enters Avimukta. 
92. 
On death here itself the greatest salvation is obtained,

=== PAGE 156 ===

!46 
Skanda Pura'{&a 
which the Yogin is likely to get after practising Yoga in the 
course of thousands of births. 
93. 
Animals of the lower strata having their habitation in 
Avimukta attain the gr.eatest goal (Mokᔻa) after meeting with 
death in due course. 
94. 
Those deluded ones enveloped in darkness (ignorance) 
who do not resort to Avimukta, frequently stay in the midst of 
faeces, urine and seminal fluid (in the womb) . 
95. 
If a sensible man reaches Avimukta and installs a Liilga, 
he has no rebirth even in the course of hundreds of crores of 
Kalpas. 
96. 
Certain indeed is the downfall of planets, constella-
tions and stars in the course of time. But there is no problem 
of a downfall in the case of those who die in Avimukta. 
97. 
Mter committing murder of a BrahmaQ.a, if one later 
repents and gains mental control and meets with his death in 
K.asi, he undoubtedly becomes liberated. 
98. 
Chaste women with mental purity and concentration 
due to devotion unto me, attain the greatest goal, 0 BrahmaQ.as, 
.if they die in Avimukta. 
99. 
0 excellent BrahmaQ.as, at the time of death I myself 
impart Taraka Brahman whereby an embodied soul becomes 
identical with that (Supreme Soul) . 
1 00. 
Nowhere else does anyone attain Mokᔻa like my devo­
tee here itself, with the mind centred round me and all his 
activities dedicated to me. 
1 0 1 . Mter realizing that death is certain and inevitable, 
return (to life) is full of misery and every created thing is 
unsteady (i.e. what comes surely goes away) one should resort 
to K.asi. 
1 02. 
The Glory of Salvation will resort to those men of 
pure intellect by whom Kisi is resorted to in thought, word 
and deed. 
1 03. 
It is as good as the entire three worlds including me 
have been pleas€d bt him, if a person could please at least a 
single person residing in Kasi through wealth legitimately 
earned. 
1 04. 
If a meritorious soul propitiates a man of the City of 
Salvation, through abundance, by granting (four) aims of life, 
0 BrahmaQ.as, I too propitiate him.

=== PAGE 157 ===

IV.ii.64.105-1 18 
147 
1 05. 
The saintly king Divodasa, righteously protecting Kasi, 
has attained my region along with his physical body. There is 
no return from that region. 
1 06. 
Here within a single birth, Yoga, knowledge and sal­
vation (are attained) . Hence after reaching Avimukta one should 
not go to another penance-grove. 
1 07. 
Mter fully comprehending that salvation is difficult 
to attain, and the worldly existence excessively terrible, one 
should hit (one's) feet with a stone and wait for Kala, here. 
1 08. 
When men of defiled intellect leave Avimukta and go 
elsewhere, Bhiitas (living beings, spirits) will laugh clapping 
the hands together (at that) . 
1 09. 
Which creature will be mentaJly inclined to go out 
after coming to the meritorious VaraQ.asi, the most excellent 
holy spot? 
1 10. 
The benefit obtained by men through Mahiidiinas (most 
valuable gifts) elsewhere is obtained when (only) a KakiQ.i (20 
Varaᔽikas, 1A (one fourth of a PaQ.a) is given away in Avimukta. 
I l l . 
One man may worship a Linga. Another may perform 
penance. Between these two, he who worships the Linga is 
superior. 
1 1 2. 
One has duly gifted away a crore of cows in the other 
holy spots. The other stays in Kasi for a single day. Between 
these two, the resident of Kasi is better. 
1 13. 
The benefit that is obtained by feeding a crore of 
BrahmaQ.as elsewhere, can be obtained if a single person is fed 
in VaraQ.asl. 
1 1 4. 
Giving alms in Kasi shall be on a par with Tuliipu˙adiina 
(giving things equal in weight of the devotee as a gift) on 
Sannihati in Kuruk!jetra when there is solar eclipse. 
1 1 5. 
Here my great luminous splendour is established from 
Patala. It has gone beyond the seven worlds. The infinite firmament 
has taken the form of Linga. 
1 1 6. 
It is certain that those who remember my Avimukta 
Lnga even at an extremity of the earth, are liberated from 
great sins. 
1 1 7. 
One by whom I am seen, touched and worshipped in 
this holy spot, acquires Tiiraka Jniina. He is not reborn. 
1 18. 
One who worships me here but dies elsewhere, at­
tains me in the next birth. He will then be liberated. "

=== PAGE 158 ===

148 
Skanda Purii7Ja 
1 19. 
After telling the greatness of the holy spot before the 
Brahmai;J.as, Hara vanished there itself even as they were watching. 
1 20. 
Those Brahmai;J.as too, after seeing the Three-eyed 
Lord directly, became extremely delighted in their minds. They 
then returned to their respective hermitages. 
1 2 1 . After thinking over the speech of Sambhu, the store­
house of mercy, the Brahmai;J.as abandoned other activities and 
worshipped the Liil.gas. 
Skanda said: 
1 22. By reading and causing the excellent narration of the 
secret to be read, a faithful devotee becomes rid of the sins 
and is honoured in the world of Siva. 
• 
CHAPTER SIXTYFIVE 
Manifestation of PariiSaresvariidi Lingas 
Skanda said: 
1 . 0 Pot-born One, the Liil.gas around Jyeᔻthesvara are five 
thousand in number. They are perfectly capable of according 
spiritual powers to the sages. 
2. The Parasardvara Liil.ga is a great Liil.ga to the north 
of Jyeᔻthesa. Merely by seeing it, pure knowledge is gained. 
3. There itself is the 
Liil.ga called 
Mai;J.«;lavyesvara which 
accords Siddhis. By visiting it, a man does not become evil-minded. 
4. The Liilga named Sail.karesa is there itself. It bestows 
auspiciousness always. The Deity Bhrgunarayai;J.a there bestows 
all spiritual powers on devotees. 
5. The Liil.ga named Jabalisvara there also accords great 
Siddhis. If one visits it, one will never attain evil state or go to 
hell. 
6. Sreᔻtha Aditya (Excellent Sun-god) has been installed 
there by Sage Sumantu. As a result of visiting it, the disease 
of leprosy is cured. 
7. 
Goddess Bhairavi there is named Bhiᔻai;J.a. She has a

=== PAGE 159 ===

IV.ii.65.8-24 
149 
terrible form. On being worshipped eagerly and fervently, she 
destroys everything terrible. 
8. 
The Linga of Upajanghani there liberates (the devotees) 
from the bondage of Karmas. Devoutly resorted to by men, this 
great Liiiga bestows spiritual powers within six months. 
9. The Linga named Bharadvajeiivara and Madrlsvara are 
excellent. These two are situated in one place and they should 
be visited together by a person of meritorious soul. 
10. 0 Pot-born One, the Linga installed by AruQ.i is also 
there. By doing its service, one shall attain all prosperities. 
1 1 . There is a very beautiful Liiiga called Vajasaneya there. 
By visiting it men shall attain the benefit of Vajapeya. 
1 2-2 1 . The Various Lingas in the Holy Region around ]ye$lha 
Sthiina: 
KaQ.veiivara is the auspicious Liiiga, Katyayanesvara Liiiga, 
Vamadevesvara Liiiga, Autathyeiivara, the Linga named Harltesvara, 
Galavesvara Linga, the Liiiga of Kurhbhi of great merit, 
Kausumesvara, AgnivarQ.esvara, Naidhruvesvara, Vatsesvara the 
great Liiiga, ParQ.adesvara, Saktuprastheiivara Liiiga, KaQ.adesa, 
another great linga there installed by MiiQ.«;fiikayani, Babhraveyeiivara 
Linga, Silavrtti"Svara, Cyavaneiivara Liriga, Salaiikayanakesvara, 
Kalindamesvara Liiiga, Akrodhaneiivara Linga, Kapotavrttisa Liiiga, 
Karikeiia, Kuntalesvara, Kantl:tesvara, Kaholesa, the Linga adored 
by Turhbaru, Mataiigesa, Maruttesa, Magadheyeiivara,JatiikarQ.eSvara 
Liiiga,Jarhbukeiivara,Jarudhi"Sa,Jaleiia,Jalmesa,Jalakeiivara-these 
and other Lingas number about five thousand. 0 Pot-born 
One, if a man remembers, visits, touches, adores, bows down 
to and eulogizes these auspicious Lirigas in the excessively 
sacred Jyeᔻthasthana, there arises no sin in him. 
Skanda said: 
22. 
0 great sage, listen; I shall tell you what happened 
here at the JyeHhasthana. It is destructive of sins. 
23. 
Even a·s Mahesa was enjoying himself as he pleased 
at JyeHhasthana, Siva too played eagerly games with her 
ball. 
24. 
She demonstrated the sprightliness of her limbs that

=== PAGE 160 ===

150 
Skanda Purii:TJ.a 
moved up and down. As the bees hovered round her, being 
attracted by the fragrance of her breath, her eyes became slightly 
disturbed. 
25. 
As her tresses of hairs became loosened, the excellent 
garland fell down and covered the ground. Drops of perspira­
tion flowing down her cheeks washed away the lines of cosmetic 
painting and made her shine all the more. 
26. 
The brilliance of her body was completely revealed as 
the upper cloth over her breasts was tossed about. The lotus­
like palms of the goddess became excessively red as she con­
tinuously beat the springing ball. 
27-29. 
Her eyebrows seemed to dance as her eyes closely 
followed the ball. MrQanl, the beautiful mother of the uni­
verse, was playing thus and she was seen by the Ditijas (demons) 
named Vidala and Utpala who happened to go through the 
firmament. They were extremely haughty, due to the boons 
they had received from Brahma. They were so mighty that they 
considered all the men in all the three worlds as worthless as 
grass. In fact, they were caught within the range of vision of 
the god of Death present nearby. 
30. 
Afflicted by the god of Love, they were eager to abduct 
the goddess and hence they quickly descended from the sky, 
resorting to sorcery. 
31-32. 
In the guise of the attendants of the Lord, they 
came near the mother divine. Those extremely wicked and 
fickle-minded demons were recognized by Sarvajiia, Siva, the 
omniscient one through their tremulous eyes. Presently Durga, 
the destroyer of terrible enemies, was glanced at significantly. 
33. 
Undᖇrstanding the significance of the glance the goddess 
sharing half the body of the omniscient Lord simultaneously 
killed both of them with that very ball. 
34 
Hit with the ball by the great goddess, the wicked 
demons of great prowess whirled round and round and col­
lapsed. 
35-36. 
Those great Daityas, the wicked ones, who had 
attempted a criminal misdeed, fell down like two ripe fruits 
shaken off from the stalk by wind or like peaks of a great 
mountain struck down by thunderbolt. Thereafter the ball 
transformed itself unto a Linga. 
37. 
It became a Linga named Kandukesvara very near

=== PAGE 161 ===

IV.ii.65.38-50 
l !i l 
JyeHhesvara. It wards off all evil-minded ones. 
38. 
How can fear of misery assail that devotee who listens 
joyously to the manifestation of Kandukesa and adores it? 
39. 
Bhavanl who eradicates fear, brings about the Yogalqema 
( 'acquisition and preservation of desired objects') to men who 
are devotees of Kandukesvara and are devoid of sins. 
40. 
Mr4anl always worships that Liriga. There itself is the 
perpetual presence of Goddess Parvati according spiritual powers 
to the devotees. 
41 . 
How can Bhavanl and Isa be the bestowers of all desired 
things on those men by whom Kandukesa, the great Liriga, has 
not been worshipped? 
42. 
That Liriga named Kandukesvara. should be visited 
assiduously. It is destructive of all the masses of torments 
and calamities. 
43. 
Even on hearing the very name of Kanduke§vara, a 
mass of sins becomes destroyed immediately like darkness meeting 
with the hot-rayed sun. 
Skanda said: 
44. 
Listen, 0 blessed one, 0 BrahmaQ.a, listen to what 
took place near Jyeᔻthesvara. It is certainly extremely wonder­
ful. 
45-46. 
When BrahmaQ.as were performing great austeri-
ties without any desire or motive in DaQ.Qakhata, the great 
Tlrtha that accords satisfaction unto the Devas, sages and 
forefathers, the wicked Daitya (named) Dundubhinirhrada, the 
maternal uncle of Prahlada, thought about the means of easily 
conquering the Devas. 
47-48. 
He thought over this many times: 'What is the source 
of their (Devas') strength? What is the food of the Devas? 
What is their support?' He came to this decision which, he 
thought, was the real fact: 'Certainly on consideration BrahmaQ.aS 
seem to be the real causes. ' So, thereafter, he endeavoured to 
kill BrahmaQ.as frequently. 
49. 
'Since the Devas live on Kratus (Yajiias) , the Kratus 
are based on the Vedas and those Vedas are in the custody of 
BrahmaQ.as, BrahmaQ.as constitute the power of the Devas. 
50. 
It is certain that all the Vedas along with lndra have

=== PAGE 162 ===

152 
Skanda Purii:r:ta 
the support of BrahmaQas. There need not be any hesitation 
in concluding that BrahmaQas are the power behind the 
Devas. 
5 1 . 
If BrahmaQas are annihilated, the Vedas are auto­
matically destroyed. When the Vedas are destroyed, Yajiias get 
destroyed. 
52. 
When Yajiias are ruined, Devas become deprived of 
their food and so weak that they can be easily conquered. 
53-54. When Devas are conquered, I myself will become the 
honoured Lord of the three worlds. I shall then take away 
all the unlimited riches of Devas. When the troublesome 
fellows have been destroyed in the kingdom, I will solely enjoy 
pleasures. ' 
Mter deciding thus, 0 sage, he directed his thoughts in the 
following direction: 
55. 
'Where do those BrahmaQas with abundant BrahmaQical 
brilliance, richly endowed with the study of the Vedas and 
possessing the power of penance, live mostly? 
56. 
VaraiJ.asi must be the spot where BrahmaQas prepon-
derate. Mter destroying them at the outset, I shall go to the 
other Tirthas. 
57. 
Whatever may be those Tirthas, whatever may be those 
hermitages where there are BrahmaQas, all those BrahmaQas 
are to be devoured by me all-round.' 
58. 
Mter deciding thus as befitting his race, the wicked 
Mayavi (one capable of sorcery) came to Kasi and killed 
BrahmaiJ.as. 
59. 
Wherever excellent BrahmaQas went to collect sacri-
ficial twigs and Darbha grass in the forest, the evil-minded Daitya 
(attacked and) devoured them. 
60. 
He took the form 
of a hunter in the forest or an 
aquatic animal under the water and hid himself so that no one 
could recognise him. 
61 . That Daitya endowed with Maya-power remained invisible 
even to Devas. Sometimes he used to sit in the guise of a sage 
e ngrossed in meditation like an ascetic during day­
time. 
62. 
He used to watch them entering the huts and going 
out. Then at night he assumed the form of a tiger and devoured 
many BrahmaQas.

=== PAGE 163 ===

IV.ii.65.63-76 
153 
63. 
He used to carry them off without making any noise. 
He did not leave behind even their bones. Thus many BrahmaQ.as 
were killed by that wicked demon. 
64. 
Once on the Sivaratri day, a certain devotee performed 
the adoration of the Lord of Devas in his hut and remained 
in meditation. 
65. 
Haughty on account of his strength, Dundubhinirhrada, 
the king of Daityas, assumed the form of a tiger and desired 
to seize him. 
66. 
He could not attack that devotee engaged in medita-
tion with a firm resolve to realise Siva, because he (the devo­
tee) had uttered the Astra-Mantra with due Vinyasas (protec­
tive arrangement by Mantra) thereof. 
67. 
Thereupon, Sambhu, the omniprᖈsent one, Hara, un-
derstood the intention of the wicked Daitya and decided to kill 
him. 
68. 
Even as the tiger was about to seize him, Hara, the 
esteemed protector-jewel of the universe against evil-spirits, 
efficient in the means of protecting the devotees, appeared 
before him. 
69. 
On seeing Rudra coming out of the Linga worshipped 
by that devotee, the Daitya grew in size, comparable to a big 
mountain, retaining the same form (of a tiger) . 
70. 
The Danava looked at Sarvajiia with contempt (and 
went ahead) . On seeing him come, the Lord squeezed him 
within his machine-like armpit and pressed. 
71-74. 
The Paiicasya (tiger) struck at Paiicasya (Lord Siva) 
with his fist on his head. 
Being pressed and squeezed within the armpit the tiger retaining 
its form howled and roared in distress. His cries filled heaven 
and earth. With their minds trembling due to that sudden 
roar, the ascetics came there following the sound in the darkness 
of the night. There they saw the Lord with the king of beasts 
locked up in the armpit. 
75. 
"0 Isa, bless us. 0 Preceptor of the universe, stay 
here itself in this selfsame form adopting the name Vyaghrda. 
76. 
0 great Lord, afford protection to JyeHhasthana always. 
Save us, the residents of the Tirtha, from other torments and 
calamities. "

=== PAGE 164 ===

154 
Skanda Purii1J.a 
77-80. 
On bearing their words, the Moon-embellished Lord 
said: "So be it" and continued thus, "0 eminent BrahmaQ.as, 
listen. Undoubtedly I shall destroy the mass of calamities of 
that man who will visit me here faithfully, in this form itself. 
If a man worships this Liilga and goes ahead on his journey, 
he will not have any fear arising from thieves, tigers etc. 
After listening to this story of mine and remembering the 
Liilga the man may enter battlefield. He will win (the battle) . 
Not otherwise. " 
8 1 . 
After saying thus, the Lord o f the chiefs o f Devas 
merged into that Liiiga. Surprised and dismayed thereby, the 
BrahmaQ.as went back in the morning to the places where they 
had come from. 
Skanda said: 
- 82. 
Ever since then, 0 Pot-born One, the Liilga came to 
be kqown by the name Vyaghre8vara. It is to the north of 
Jyenhesa. If visited and touched, it removes fear. 
83. 
The servants of Varna are afraid of the devotees of 
Vyaghre5vara. Even if the Yamas (servants of Varna) are very 
cruel, they will deign to say, "Be victorious. Be alive." 
84. 
On hearing the manifestation of Parasare8vara and 
other Liilgas here, a man can avoid being smeared with the 
mud of great sins. 
85. 
On listening to the stories of the manifestation of 
Kandukesa and Vyaghre8a, a man will never be distressed due 
to calamities. 
86. 
Utajesvara Liilga is situated to the west of Vyaghresa. 
It has sprung up for the sake of according protection to the 
devotee. One shall be free from fear after worshipping it.

=== PAGE 165 ===

IV.ii.66. 1-12 
155 
CHAPTER SIXTYSIX 
Sailesa and Other Lingas 
Skanda said: 
1 . 
I shall narrate to you the details of the other Lirigas 
around Jye³theiivara. Listen, 0 scorcher of Vatapi. 
2. 
To the right (south) side of Jye³theiia is the auspicious 
Liriga of celestial damsels. There itself is the well of the celestial 
damsels named Saubhagyodaka. 
3. 
Those men or women who take their holy bath in the 
water of that well and visit Apsarasesvara never meet with 
misfortune. 
4. 
There itself,. near the tank, is a Liriga named Kukkutesa. 
By worshipping it the family of the men flourishes and becomes 
prosperous. 
5. 
The auspicious Pitamahesvara Liriga is on the · bank of 
JyeHhavapi. By offering Sraddha there, the man will make the 
forefathers joyous. 
6. 
To the south-west of Pitamahesa, Gadadharesvara Liriga 
should be worshipped with great care. It accords satisfaction 
to the forefathers. 
7. 
0 sage, in the south-west quarter of Jye³thesvara is a 
Liriga named Vasukisvara. It should be worshipped completely. 
8. 
Holy ablution, Dana and other rites there in the VasukikͲc;la 
remove the fear of men from serpents due to the power of 
Vasukisa. 
9. 
If anyone takes his holy bath in the Vasukikul).c;la on the 
Nagapaiicami day, he will never be touched (affected) by the 
poison issuing forth from serpents. 
10. 
The religious festival should be performed on the 
Nagapaiicami day during rainy season there. Serpents become 
pleased always with that family. 
1 1 . 
On the western side of that Kul).c;la is Takakeiivara Liriga. 
It should be carefully worshipped. It accords all the spiritual 
powers to the devotees. 
12. 
0 sage, to the north thereof is the Tak³akakul).c;la. One 
who performs libations and other rites in water there, is never 
attacked by serpents.

=== PAGE 166 ===

156 
Skanda Purii:r.ta 
1 3. To the northern side of that Km).Qa is Bhairava named 
Kapali, who destroys the agitation and fear of the devotees and 
always accords welfare to the entire holy spot. 
14. 
That great holy spot of Bhairava accords fulfilment of 
a spiritual endeavour of an aspirant. The Vidyas (Mantras) 
repeatedly practised there attain fulfilment within six months. 
15. 
There Goddess Cai}.QI with a huge head destroys great 
obstacles of the devotees. For the achievement of one's cher­
ished desires, she should be worshipped with the requisite 
offerings of adoration, oblations etc. 
1 6. 
An excellent man who makes the pilgrimage to her 
(holy spot) on the MahaHaml day becomes famous, wealthy 
and endowed with sons and grandsons. 
1 7. 
To the west of Mahamul}.<;ia ('goddess with a huge head') 
is a well-called Catul_lsagara Vapika. One who takes holy bath 
therein, shall (be deemed to) have taken his bath in all the 
four oceans. 
18. That holy spot is extremely well-known. It is named 
Catul_lsagara. There are four Lirigas there installed by_ four 
Oceans. 
19. 
Lirigas on the four sides of that tank, burn sins on 
being worshipped. To the north of it is a Liriga named Vrᔻabhesvara. 
20. 
That has been installed by the Bull of Hara himself out 
of his devotion (to Hara) . By visiting it men will attain salva­
tion within six months. 
2 1-22. 
To the north of Vrᔻesvara is (a Liriga) named 
Gandharvesvara. To the east of it is Gandharvakul}.<;ia. An excellent 
man should take his holy bath there, worship Gandharvdvara, 
make gifts in accordance with his capacity and offer libations 
to the forefathers and Devas. He 'will rejoice in the company 
of Gandharvas. 
23. 
There is a serpent named Karkota to the east of 
Gandharvesvara. A well called Karkotavapl and a Liriga named 
Karkotakesvara are also there. 
24. 
A man who takes his bath in that Vapl (tank) , adores 
Karkotesa and propitiates 
Karkota Naga is honoured in the 
world of Nagas (Serpents) . 
25. 
If Karkota Naga is visited by men who perform all the 
rites in the water of Karkotavapl, no poison (originating) from 
mobile and immobile beings will affect them.

=== PAGE 167 ===

IV.ii.66.26-36 
157 
26. 
To t he w e s t of Karkotesa is a Liilga n a m e d 
Dhundhumari:Svara. The worship of that Liilga dispels the fear 
of men from enemies. 
2.7. 
To the north thereof is stationed Pururavesvara Liilga. 
It should be visited with effort. It accords fulfilment of the four 
aims of life. 
28. To the east thereof is a Liilga adored by the elephant 
of the quarter named Supratlka. It is named Supratikesvara. It 
increases fame and strength. 
29. 
A great lake named Supratika shines in front of it. By 
taking holy dip in it and by visiting that Liilga, a devotee 
attains the position of the Lords of the quarters. 
30. 
A Mahagauri deity Vijayabhairavi is also there. She 
is stationed in the northern gateway fof the sake of protec­
tion. For the 
attainment of a desired object, she should 
be worshipped. 
31 . 
On the beautiful banks ofVaral}.a are the Gal}.aS Hul}.c;lal}.a 
and Mul}.c;laJ}.a. They watch and guard the holy spot. They eradicate 
all obstacles. 
32. 
They are to be visited with effort for the purpose of 
keeping the holy spot free from obstacles. Mter visiting Hul}.c;lal}.esa 
and Mul}.c;lal}.esa a devotee shall become happy. 
Skanda said: 
33. 
0 Enemy (killer) of Ilvala, be attentive. Listen to a 
story of what happened as an excellent event on the charming 
banks of Varal}.a formerly. 
34. 
Once on seeing the Lord of the Mountains delighted 
in his mind, the chaste lady Mena, who was reminded of Uma, 
heaved a sigh and she spoke thus: 
Menii said: 
35. 
0 son of venerable elders (Aryaputra) , 0 Lord of Moun­
tains, I have no news of Gauri ever since her marriage. 
36. 
Where is that Lord now-he who habitually moves about 
on a stately bull, wears ornaments of serpents and ashes, whose 
habitation is the extensive cremation ground and who is clad 
with nothing but the bare quarters?

=== PAGE 168 ===

158 
Skanda Purii7J,a 
37. 
0 beloved one, I think that the eight mothers1 Bnlhmi 
etc. who appear in their exquisite forms, may cause some distress 
to the girl. 
38. That Trident-bearing Lord is without a second; he has 
no one else. Hence, 0 lord, may effort be made to get some 
news about him. 
39. At the speech of his beloved wife, the Mountain fond of 
his child, spoke these words with tears, his speech being obstructed 
by excessive affection for Uma. 
The Lord of Mountains said: 
40. 
I myself shall go, 0 Mena, to enquire after her. My 
fondness for her is being scorched unduly, due to the fire-like 
fact of not being able to see her. 
41 . 
Ever since Gauri set out from my house, I think the 
Goddess of Fortune too has gone out of my house. 
42. 
0 my beloved, accustomed to imbibe the nectarine 
lisping words of her, my ears have ceased to pay heed to other 
words ever since that day. 
43. 
Ever since my long-lived daughter went out of my 
sight, even moonlight causes great distress to me. 
44. 
After saying this the Lord of Mountains took with him 
jewels and clothes of various kinds and set out when the time 
was auspicious. 
Agastya said: 
45. 
0 Six-faced Lord, what were those jewels and how 
many of them did he take with him, when he set out? Tell me 
even as I ask. 
Skanda said: 
46. 
(He took with him) two crores of Tuliis (weight of a 
hundred Palas) of pearls and a hundred Tuliis of white shining 
diamonds. 
4 7. 
0 BrahmaQ.a, there were more than nine lakhs of a 
I . The eight mothers are: BrahmaQ.i, Vai¶Qavi, Varahi, Narasirilhi, Kaumari, 
Mahendri, CamuQQ.a and CaQQ.ika.

=== PAGE 169 ===

N.ii.66.48-62 
159 
hundred Tuliis highly brilliant (diamonds) of six angles (six 
cut faces) . There were two hundred thousand Tuliis of Vidiiras 
(Lapis lazuli) of spotless splendour. 
48. 
0 sage, know that there were five crores of Tuliis of 
rubies and nine hundred thousand Tuliis of topaz. 
49. 
0 sage, in the same way (he took with him) there a 
hundred thousand Tuliis of Gomeda jewels and half a crore of 
TuHi.s of blue sapphires. 
50. 
There were a million emeralds and nine crores of 
Tuliis of pure coral. 
5 1 . 
0, sage, it is impossible to calculate the number of 
the ornaments intended for the eight different parts of the 
bodies or of the clothes of tender fabric of diverse colours. 
52. 
There were many Camaras and fragrant articles. 0 
sage, innumerable were the gold pieces, slaves (men and women) 
etc. 
53. 
The Lord of Mountains took all these things and set 
out. Mter coming to the banks of Varal).a he looked at Kasi. 
54. 
All the different storeys (of the buildings there) were 
studded with many gems. The extensive firmament above was 
lighted up by the splendour of the rubies of the various palatial 
buildings. 
· 
55. 
The different quarters shone brightly, due to the golden 
pinnacles of the mansions. Through the different banners such 
as Jayantl and Vaijayantl, the city appeared like heaven. 
56. 
It was the wonderful sports-ground of the great eight 
Siddhis. Due to the various groves abounding in all kinds of 
fruits, it far excelled the gardens of Kalpa trees. 
57. 
On seeing the exuberancf. and opulence of Kasl thus, 
the Lord of Mountains became ashamed. He spoke these words 
to his own mind. 
58-6la. 'The jewels and the rubies put forth excellent lustre 
on the palaces, streets, ramparts, houses, turrets, doors of diverse 
kinds etc. The space between heaven and earth is fully brightened 
with the masses of lustre. I know that such opulence and abundance 
does not find a place even with the abode of Kubera. It does 
not exist even in the region of Vaikul).tha. What to say of other 
(worlds) ?' 
6lb-62. 
Even as the Lord of Mountains was thinking thus 
in his mind, a pilgrim came within his view. The Lord of Moun-

=== PAGE 170 ===

160 
Skanda Purii:TJ,a 
tains beckoned to him respectfully and asked him: 
Himaviin said: 
63. 
0 excellent pilgrim, sit on this seat. 0 traveller, tell 
me the details of your city. What are the special characteristics 
of this place? What unprecedented thing has happened? 
64. 
Who is the chief administrative head here now? What 
are his activities? If you know tell everything to me. 
65. On hearing the speech of the Lord of Mountains, 0 
sage, the pilgrim began to narrate: 
The Kiirpatika (pilgrim) said: 
66-67. 
I shall narrate, 0 eminent king, listen; I shall mention 
everything that you ask. 0 honoured one, only five or six days 
have elapsed since the arrival of the Consort of the Daughter 
of the Lord of Mountains, the Lord of the universe from the 
beautiful Mandara mountain after Divodasa had gone to heav­
en. 
68. 
He who is omnipresent and the presiding deity of the 
entire universe is the ruler and administrator here. He is Sarva, 
the bestower of everything. He has vision all-round. 0 lord, 
how is he not known (to you) ? 
69. 
I think you have a stony form, a heart harder than 
stone, since you do not know the Consort of the Daughter of 
the Mountain, Visvesvara in Kasl. 
70. 
Better indeed is that mountain Himalaya, though his 
interior is naturally hard, because he propitiated the Ruler of 
the universe by giving (in marriage) his daughter dearer to 
him than his very vital breath. 
71 . 
Though Gaurl's father has congenital hardness, he has 
become worthy of the .esteem of even Visvaguru (Brahma) , 
because he had propitiated Sarilbhu by means of his daughter 
who was like a garland (worthy of being worn on the head) . 
72. 
Who can profess to know the activity of that Lord worthy 
of being known only through the Vedas? I know only this much 
that the entire universe is activised by him. 
73. The presiding deity (of this city) has been mentioned 
by me. So also the activity of the said presiding deity. The

=== PAGE 171 ===

IV.ii.66.74-84 
161 
unprecedented thing about which you have asked, I shall now 
mention. Listen. 
74. The Companion of the Daughter of the King of Moun­
tains rejoices on having come to Kasl. At present, he, the Consort 
of Uma, is stationed in the excellent jyeHhesvara Sthana. 
Skanda said: 
75. 
Whenever that traveller uttered the nectar-like letters 
that constitute the tender name of Girija, the Lord of Moun­
tains became excessively delighted. 
76. 
If the nectar-like name Uma has been imbibed by anyone 
in the universe, 0 Pot-born One, he will no more suck the 
breasts of ·a mother thereafter. 
77. 
If anyone remembers day and night, the two-syllabled 
Mantra, namely Uma, 0 Brahmal}.a, Citragupta will not remember 
him even if he were a sinner. 
78-79. 
Again the delighted Himavan heard the utterance 
of the Karpa!ika. 
The Kiirpatika said: 
0 king, have you not even heard with your ears that unpre­
cedented thing viz. that a big mansion is being built by Vi§vakarman 
for the sake of Visvesvara, the bestower of salvation on all 
living beings? The mansion is being built elaborately. 
80. 
There the walls of the palace all-round are made of 
(bars of) jewels, and rubies. Their splendour excels even the 
brilliance of the Sun. 
81 . 
There are one hundred and twelve sparkling pillars as 
though eight of them were intended to support each of the 
(fourteen) worlds. 
82. 
In that palace · the splendour and beauty all-round is 
hundred crores of times more than what exists in the fourteen 
worlds. 
83. 
The foundation slabs of lunar stone jewels that have 
the sparkling lustre of the pillars made of jewels of diverse 
colours are covered by those pillars. 
84. 
Dolls of remarkable splendour made of blue sapphire 
and rubies hold jewel-set lamps and perform Nirajana ('waving 
of lamps' ) rites day and night.

=== PAGE 172 ===

162 
Skanda Pura7J-a 
85-86. 
On the glossy rocky platform shaped like a lotus 
and made of glittering crystals, various forms of objects made 
of gems appear as though perfectly set up by a painter in his 
picture. They have vari<1us colours like pale red, yellow, madder, 
blue and spotted. 
87. 
Rows of ruby-studded pillars dazzle the eyes. They appear 
like the sprouts of the Glory of Salvation in the surrounding 
holy spot Avimukta. 
88. 
Near that palace huge heaps of jewels resembling peaks 
of mountains have been made by the GaQ.as who brought them 
from various oceans. 
89. 
The GaQ.as have brought masses of jewels from the 
treasuries of the.Nagas from the nether worlds and have heaped 
them near the palace like huge mountains. 
90. 
The devotee of Siva, the son of Pulastya (i.e. Kubera) 
has caused crores of gold peaks to be brought through Rakᔻasas 
from the excellent mountain (Meru) and dumped there (near 
the palace) . 
91 . 
0 king, on hearing that a palace is being built, the 
devotees residing in other Dvlpas (continents) have brought 
numerous ruby pieces. 
92. 
CintamaQ.i 
(wish-yielding divine jewel) itself has dis­
tributed all kinds of jewels wished for by Visvakarman in the 
course of his building activity day and night. 
93. The wish-yielding celestial trees yielded many banners 
of different colours with great devotion everyday there. 
94. 
Day by day, the oceans of curds, milk, sugarcane juice 
and ghee bathe it continuously with pots of Paiicamrtas. 
95. 
There the divine wish-yielding cow, Kamadhenu, bathes 
devoutly Lord ViSve8a in the form of a Liilga with currents of 
honey milked by herself. 
96. 
Mountain Malayacala serves the Lord by means of 
sandal juice. The divine camphor-producing trees named 
Karpiirarambha serve devoutly the Lord by means of masses of 
camphor. 
97. 
These are the various unprecedented wonderful things 
that happen everyday in the abode of Sailkara. How is it, 0 
hard-hearted one, that you do not know the Lover of Uma? 
98. 
On perceiving such an opulence of his son-in-law, the

=== PAGE 173 ===

IV.ii.66.99-1 1 2 
163 
King of Mountains was overwhelmed with excessive shame, 0 
Pot-born One. 
99. 
The King of Mountains gave a handsome reward to 
the K.arpatika and when he went away, he was lost in thought. 
1 00. 
With his eyes bulging out due to dismay, he said to 
himself: 'It is good, 0 ashamed one, since you have heard 
(what should be heard) . 
1 01-102. So much of rich opulence is seen here in the 
abode of my son-in-law who sports about and who is the Lord 
of the three worlds that the presents brought by me for my 
daughter and to satisfy my son-in-law appear to me worthless. 
1 03. 
I have been thinking that he continues to be what I 
had seen of him formerly, as one with a senile, feeble bull as 
his sole asset and one averse to all activt: pursuits. 
1 04. 
No one knows him fully. He had no family at any 
time. He does not have even a single name. It cannot even be 
guessed as to which family he belongs. 
1 05. 
What is his conduct? What are his activities? He is an 
I8vara (Lord) only in name. There is nothing to be seen around 
him that would indicate his prosperity and affluence. 
1 06. 
He who was so before, has begun to bestow riches in 
the form of salvation on even the meanest of a wretch. With 
a pleasant face, he makes all rites fruitful. 
1 07. 
He is the omniscient one to be known only through 
the Vedas. The entire universe is his progeny. He is one whom 
no one has known even at the outset. It is he who is (reputed 
to be) one who should be known through the Vedas. 
1 08. 
He alone is the omniscient one who always has re­
mained misunderstood and unknowable. Not even a single name 
of his can be fully comprehended by any man. 
1 09. 
It is certain, he bears all the names of everyone as his 
names. He belongs to all climes and regions. He is bestower 
of all supernatural powers on all. 
1 10-1 1 2. His native land is unknown. He is averse to all 
avocations, whom, hard-hearted that I have been, I had viewed 
formerly as one devoid of all good conduct. But he is actually 
one from whom the Srutis and Smrtis learn all good conduct. 
He whom I had taken to be an Isvara only in name is the real 
Isvara, one who displays his affluence through others. He is 
the basis of all GuJ.las; he is beyond all GuQas. He is both Para

=== PAGE 174 ===

164 
Skanda Purii:{la 
(cause) and Apara (effect) . 
1 1 3. 
He is junior to me. He is elder to me and beyond me. 
He is greater (and older) than the greatest (the elder-most) . 
I am the Lord of Mountains. Uma's husband is the Lord of the 
universe. 
1 14. 
I am one of limited assets. He is one with immense, 
immeasurable wealth. The presents I have are worthless and 
insignificant. This is not the opportune moment to meet him. 
1 15-1 1 6. 
After returning (home) and coming back later I 
shall do something. ' 
After resolving thus in his mind, the Lord of Mountains 
called together all his followers in the evening, all the moun­
tains of great prowess. He gave them the order in these words: 
"All of you are greater in power than others. 
1 1 7. 
You have to carry out this sole behest of mine before 
sunrise (tomorrow) . Erect a temple of Siva hurriedly. 
1 1 8-1 2 1 . If this is carried out, I shall become contented here 
in this world and in the other world too. If anyone erects a 
temple of Siva after coming to &HI, it is as good as he has 
made all the three worlds equipped with temples. It is as meritorious 
as though all great gifts have been duly made by him on an 
excellent day of festivity to a deserving person with more faith 
than even for his daughter's sake. If the great abode of Sᖉrilbhu 
is built by anyone in accordance with his wealth acquired through 
righteous means, the Goddess of Fortune will never forsake 
him. It is as though all austerities involving the sole intake of 
withered leaves have been performed by him. 
1 22. 
If after reaching &HI, a Siva temple is caused to be 
built by anyone, it is as though all the excellent and great 
Makhas (sacrifices) have been performed by him. 
123-1 24. If the temple of the Lord of Devas is built in 
Anandakanana, it is as though all sacrifices have been per­
formed by him with special excellence. " 
O n hearing his command thus, the followers built an excel­
lent temple before the night dawned. At the same time Sailesvara 
Liriga was installed by the Lord of Mountains. The entire Mar;t<;lapa 
(Pavilion) was rendered white due to the sparking lustre of 
lunar-stone jewels. 
1 25. 
He caused a laudatory inscription too to be made 
with excellent writings of the characters, mentioning his supe-

=== PAGE 175 ===

IV.ii.66. 126-138 
165 
riority over all the other mountains. 
1 26-1 27. Thereafter, at the break of dawn the King of Moun­
tains took his holy dip in the whirlpool of Paficanada, bowed 
down to Kalaraja, worshipped him and discharged the 
heap (of jewels) all-round. He hurriedly left the place fol­
lowed by his attendants, the Mountains, and went back to his 
abode. 
1 28-1 30. 
In the morning the two GaQ.as, HuQ.Q.aQ.a and 
Mu(lQ.aQ.a, saw the beautiful temple of the Lord on the auspi­
cious bank of VaraQ.a and became delighted. They came to 
Mahadeva to intimate to the Lord about the temple not seen 
before. On seeing Mahadeva to whom Uma was showing the 
mirror, the two GaQ.as prostrated themselves on the ground 
before him and stood with palms joined. in reverence. When 
the permission was granted with a gesture from the eyebrows, 
they submitted: 
131-132. 
"0 Lord of Devas, we do not know (by whom) a 
very beautiful palace has been erected on the banks of VaraQ.a. 
He must be someone of steadfast devotion. 0 Lord, till last 
evening it was not seen by us both. It has been seen only this 
morning. " On hearing this utterance of the GaQ.as, Isana spoke 
to the Daughter of the Lord of Mountains. 
1 33-134. Though the omniscient Sarvajfia (Siva) had come 
to know of everything, he spoke like one who did not know: 
"0 Daughter of the King of Mountains, we shall go to see that 
palace." After saying this, Isa set out along with his Gal_las and 
the Daughter of the Mountain, 0 sage, riding on a great chariot 
since he was eager to see the palace. 
1 35. 
Girisa saw the palace on the banks of VaraQ.a. Though 
it had been built in the course of a single night, its structure 
was extremely beautiful. 
1 36. 
Getting down from the chariot, he entered the sanc­
tum sanctorum where he saw the great Liilga entirely made of 
lunar-stone. 
1 37. 
It was extremely sparkling with its brilliance. It was 
like a sprout of the glory of salvation. It accorded great pleasure 
to the eyes. It was destructive of the likelihood of rebirth. 
1 38. 
While Isvara evinced a desire to know by whom the 
Linga was installed, he saw before him the laudatory inscrip­
tion commemorating the constructor.

=== PAGE 176 ===

166 
Skanda Purii7J,a 
1 39. 
Mter reading it as it were a little within his mind, the 
Slayer of Kama said to the goddess: "Well; see your own father's 
creation. " 
1 40-142. O n hearing it, Uma was extremely delighted. She 
had experienced horripilation all over her body. It was as though 
the sprouts of the glory of bliss spread over her body attaining 
the splendour of K.adamba flowers. Thereafter the goddess 
bowed down to the feet of the Lord and said: "0 Lord, you 
must station yourself in this excellent Liilga day and night. To 
those devotees of this great Sailesa Liilga of Mahesa you will 
grant great opulence here and glory hereafter." 
1 43-144. Mter saying "So be it", the Lord said to Parvatl 
further: "The devotees should take their holy dip in VaraQ.a 
and worship Sailesa. They should offer libation to the fore­
fathers and joyously make gifts in accordance with their capacity. 
They will never experience a return to the worldly life. 
145. 
0 fair lady, I shall be ever present in the great Sailesvara 
Liilga. I shall grant salvation to those people who worship this 
Liilga. 
146. 
No misery shall ever assail those residents of Kasl who 
see Sailesvara on the excellent banks of VaraQ.a." 
147. 
A boon was granted by Uma in respect to the Liilga 
there, 0 Pot-born One: "There is no doubt about this that the 
devotees of Sailesvara are my own sons." 
Skanda said: 
148. 
Thus Sailesvara Liilga has been described to you, 0 
great sage. Now, I shall explain to you the origin of Ratnesvara. 
1 49. 
Mter hearing the greatness of Sailesa with great faith, 
a man will give up the slough of sin and attain Sivaloka.

=== PAGE 177 ===

IV.ii.67. 1-12 
167 
CHAPTER SIXTYSEVEN 
In Praise of Ratne5vara1 
Agastya said: 
1-2. 
0 Six-faced Lord, narrate to me the origin of Ratne8vara, 
the great Linga in Kasi reputed to be made of jewels. What is 
the greatness of this Linga? By whom has it been installed? 
Describe this in detail, 0 delighter of the heart of Gaur!. 
Skanda said: 
3. 
0 sage, I shall tell you the greatness of Ratne8vara and 
how that Linga manifested itself on the earth. 
4. 
0 sage, I shall narrate how that Linga came to appear. 
This is a Linga the name of which, when heard, shall destroy 
sins accrued in the course of three births. 
5-6. 
The jewels that were kept in a beep by the King of 
Mountains to the north of Kalaraja (Kalabhairava) became a 
Linga consisting of all jewels, due to the meritoriousness of 
that Mountain. It has the lustre of all the previous stones and 
the splendour of Indra's bow (Rainbow) . 
7-9. The jewel of wisdom is obtained merely at the sight of 
that Linga. 
After visiting Sailesvara, Siva and Siva came to the place 
where, 0 sage, the Ratnamaya Linga constituted of jewels, had 
manifested itself. The vast region of the firmament was per­
vaded by its sparkling clusters of lustre. On seeing that splen­
did Linga created out of all Ratnas and not seen before, Bhavani 
asked Sankara: 
10-1 2. 
"0 Lord of Devas, 0 Lord of the universe, 0 bestower 
of freedom from fear on all devotees, whence has this Linga 
come? Its root penetrates as far as Patala. With its flames and 
rays it permeates the sky fully. Through its lustre it illuminates 
the quarters. What is its name? What is its form? 0 dispeller 
of Bhava (worldly existence) , what is its power? Mere sight of 
1. Ratne5vara Liriga is in the middle of the road from Maidagin to Mrtyuiijaya. 
( BCL 358)

=== PAGE 178 ===

168 
Skanda Purii'T}a 
this delights my mind, which feels pleased here alone. 0 Lord, 
be pleased to describe it." 
The Lord of Devas said: 
13. 
0 Aparl).a, Listen. I shall tell you, 0 Parvatl, what you 
have been asking, the features of this Linga, the receptacle of 
all brilliance. 
14. 
0 fair lady, for your sake a huge collection of jewels 
was brought here by your father Himavan, the Lord of Moun­
tains. 
15. 
All these jewels had been acquired by Himadri through 
his own merit. He kept all those Ratnas Uewels) as a heap here 
and went back to his abode. 
16. 
0 sinless lady, whether it is for your sake or for my 
sake, whatever is offered with great faith at Kasl will bear the 
fruit in this manner. 
17. 
This Linga named Ratnesvara has my form and fea-
tures alone. In Varal).asl its influence is very great, indeed, 0 
Uma. 
18. It is the very crest-jewel of all the Lingas here. Hence 
its name Ratnesvara. It bestows the greatest jewel in the form 
of salvation. 
19. 
0 Mahesvarl, get a mansion erected for this Liil.ga 
with this gold kept in a heap by your father. 
20. 
The merit of installing a Linga can be easily obtained 
by getting the mansion of the Linga built by a person of manifested 
fervour. 
2 1 . 
Saying "So be it", the goddess engaged the numerous 
Gal).as beginning with Somanandin in the construction of the 
mansion, 0 sage. 
22. 
Within a Yama (3 hours) a golden palace resembling 
the peak of Meru was built by the Gal).as. The palace had many 
wonderful things enhancing its variegated character. 
23. 
As evidenced by her beaming face, the goddess be-
came highly delighted on seeing the completed construction 
of the mansion. She honoured the Gal).as by distributing presents 
among them. 
24;. 
Again, after due obeisance, the goddess asked Mahadeva

=== PAGE 179 ===

IV.ii.67.25-38 
169 
about the greatness of this Liri.ga, 0 great sage. 
The Lord of Devas said: 
25. 
0 Devl, this Liri.ga has already been in existence as 
it is beginningless; but it manifested itself due to the greatness 
of the merit of your father. 
26. 
This is the greatest among great secrets in this holy 
spot. It accords whatever is thought of. In Kali age, it should 
be carefully kept as a secret from persons of defiled intellect. 
27. 
Just as a precious stone kept hidden in the house is 
not known to others, so also is this Liri.ga evolved out of Ratnas 
in my house Avimukta. 
28. 
If Ratnesa is adored, 0 Parvatl, it is as though all the 
Liri.gas in the entire universe have been wᖊrshipped by them. 
29. 
0 Gaur!, if people were to adore Ratnesa Liri.ga even 
by some mistake, they will invariably become kings ruling the 
seven continents. 
30. 
By adoring once the Liri.ga named Ratnesvara, a man 
obtains all the objects which in value or importance are on a 
par with jewels in all the three worlds. 
3 1 . 
Those who worship Ratndvara Liri.ga without any desire 
will become my Gat:tas in the end and see me here. 
32. 
Oh goddess, by adoring Ratnda, that merit is ob-
tained which, it is proclaimed, is the merit of chanting the 
Rudriya Mantras a crore times. 
33. 
With respect to this Liri.ga that has been existing with­
out a beginning there is an event that happened before. I shall 
tell you that wonderful legend which will destroy all sins. 
34-36. Formerly there was a dancing girl here named Kalavatl. 
She was an adept in the art of dance. Once in the month of 
Phalguna, on the Sivaratri day, she kept awake throughout the 
night, danced and sang very sweetly. She was clever in playing 
on musical instruments too which "she herself played. That 
dancing girl thus propitiated Ratndvara Mahaliri.ga by means 
of triple symphony and returned to her desired land. 
37. 
There that excellent dancer met with death. She be-
came the daughter of Vasubhiiti, a king of Gandharvas. 
38. 
That was due to the merit she acquired through music, 
instrumental and vocal, and dance displayed before the Lord

=== PAGE 180 ===

170 
Skanda Purii7J.a 
during the period of keeping awake on the Sivaratri night. 
39. 
She became famous by the name Ratnavali:. She was 
beautiful with exquisite form and features. She was clever in 
all fine arts. Her speech was very sweet. 
40. 
0 Pot-born One (?) , she delighted her father Vasubhuti 
always as she was very clever in all Gandharva arts and a veritable 
mine of the gems of good qualities. 
41 . 
0 sage (?) , she had three female companions of great 
skill and cleverness. Their names were Sasilekha, Anangalekha 
and Citralekha. 
42. 
Along with those three girls she (Ratnavali:) medi-
tated on the goddess of speech in one place. The delighted 
Sarasvati granted all of them all the arts. 
43. 
0 Gauri, due to the latent impressions of her practice 
in the previous birth, Ratnavali imposed upon herself the auspicious 
vow and observance of Ratnesvara Linga. 
44-45. 
Her vow was: "It is only after visiting the jewel­
m.ade Linga in Kasi of Ratndvara everyday that I will utter a 
word." That excellent daughter of the Gandharva used to visit 
the Linga everyday accompanied by those friends. 
46. 
Once after propitiating this excellent Linga of mine, 
that girl adored me with a series of sweet songs. 
47. 
0 Uma, all the three friends had gone away for 
circumambulation. Satisfied by her songs, remaining stationed 
in the Linga, I granted a boon: 
48. 
"0 Gandharva girl, he who has a name similar to 
yours and will have his dalliance with you this night, will become 
your husband." 
49. 
Mter imbibing the nectar-like words that issued from 
the Linga even as the nectar issued from the ocean, she became 
highly delighted as well as bashful too. 
50. 
Thereafter, along the aerial path she went to her 
father's house in the company of her companions when she 
joyously divulged the news of the boon to the companions. 
5 1 . 
She was congratulated by the companions saying, "Excel-
lent! Good fortune! Good luck! " They said further: "Today your 
desire will become fulfilled, due to your adoration of Ratnesvara. 
52. 
If to-night that person who will take away your virgin­
ity comes, that thief should be carefully fettered with the cords 
of your creeper-like arms.

=== PAGE 181 ===

IV.ii.67 .53-66 
171 
53. 
(If he is fettered) that fortunate fellow, your lover, 
directed by Ratneiia can be seen by us in the morning as the 
person granting you your desired boon. 
54. 
It is a miracle that you could see the Lord directly in 
the Ratneiivara Liriga, due to your weighty merit, when we had 
gone away delightedly. 
55. 
Wonderful is the outcome of the fortune of men. 
Wonderful is the excess of their merit. Realization of the desire 
occurs only to one while many are standing together in one 
place. 
56. 
'It is the fate alone that becomes fruitful. Neither 
endeavour nor any other powerful thing.' So say those who 
support the contention of those who givt! importance to fate. 
They speak truth not falsehood. 
57. 
Your endeavour as well as ours is one and the same. 
But fate makes one fruitful as in your case, and not so in our 
case. 
58. 
But, 0 friend, it is only what is generally believed by 
people that is given expression to by us incidentally. But actually 
the fulfilment of your cherished desire is clearly the same as 
that of ours." 
59. 
Even as they were speaking thus, a long, endless way 
was left behind by them in a moment as though it was very 
insignificant. They reached their respective abodes. 
60. 
Again in the morning, they all got up and gathered 
together in one place. She was silent but was clearly seen by 
them as though she had been sexually enjoyed. 
61. 
Remaining silent throughout, she reached Kaiii and 
took her bath in the waters of Mandakini along with her com­
panions. She visited my Liriga named Ratneiivara. 
62. 
Mter fulfilling the conditions of her vow and obser-
vances, she became nervously bashful with eyes shrinking like 
buds. On being persistently asked by her friends she said: 
Ratniivafz said: 
63-66. 
After concluding the journey to the shrine of 
Ratneiivara when you all returned to your respective abodes, 
I continued to remember the nectar-like words of Ratneiia. 
Mter elaborate and scrupulous make-up and embellishment of

=== PAGE 182 ===

172 
Skanda Purii7Ja 
the limbs, I entered the bed chamber. As I was overzealous for 
seeing him, my eyes were deprived of sleep. But due to the 
weightiness of the inevitability of the future events, I was led 
to a dreamy state forcibly. There had been two causes for my 
self-forgetfulness. Utter lassitude and the gentle touch of his 
limbs dispelled my consciousness. I was already helpless due to 
lassitude and further due to his touch. 
67-70. 
I do not know what happened thereafter including 
who I was, where I was and who he was. As he was about to 
go out, dear friends, I stretched my arms to catch hold of him, 
when my bangles behaved inimically jingling excessively. I was 
brought to the state of wakefulness slightly on account of that 
loud sound. Mter being submerged in the nectarine whirlpool 
of continuous pleasure, I was forcibly made to fall within a 
moment into the flames of the fire of separation from him. I 
do not know to which family he belongs or to which land. I 
do not know what his name is. But, 0 friends, the great fire 
of separation from him distresses me very much. 
71-75. 
My mind is excessively anxious with the hope of a 
subsequent contact with him. There is only one effective medicine 
for the vital breaths which are about to depart from the body, 
0 friends, and that is seeing again that man enjoyed in the 
night. The chance for a second vision of him for me depends 
upon you all, 0 my companions. Which girl will utter a lie to 
her friends charming and affectionate? The vital breaths will 
continue within me if he is seen. Otherwise they will depart. 
The tenth state (of certain death) will get ready to afflict me. 
On hearing these words of that distressed girl, they too 
experienced trepidation of the heart. They looked at each 
other and said: 
The Girl Companions said: 
76. 
0 fair lady, how is he to be found out when neither 
his name, nor his native village, nor his ancestry are known? 
What means of remedy can be employed? 
77-79. 
On hearing their words expressive of doubts, that 
girl could say only partially what she wanted to say. Before

=== PAGE 183 ===

IV.ii.67.80-88 
173 
completing her statement she swooned. She evidently wanted 
to say, "0 my friends, you have no power in the task of en­
abling me to meet him again." Thereupon the female compan­
ions did everything necessary to remove distress and restore 
consciousness by applying cooling materials. 
80. 
When she could not be brought back to conscious-
ness from the swoon by means of the cooling process, Ratnesa­
Snapanodakam (the water with which the Ratne8vara Liilga was 
bathed) was brought by one of the friends. 
81 . 
When she was sprinkled with it, she was revived from 
the state of swooning immediately, as though she woke from 
sleep. Just then she began to say, "Siva! Siva! " 
Skanda said: 
82. 
Even when there is great calamity and torment no 
devotee with abiding faith has any other remedy except the 
water with which the feet of the Lord have been washed. 
83. 
Even those ailments within the body or outside the 
body (i.e. internal and external ailments) which are incurable, 
perish by touching (and sipping) the water of the Lord with 
great faith. Not otherwise. 
84. 
He, by whom the water from the feet of the Lord has 
been resorted to, becomes pure within and without. No wretched 
state overtakes him. 
85. 
The water from the glorious feet (of the Lord) shall 
dispel all the three types of distress-that caused by other 
living beings or bhutas (elements) , that by supernatural beings, 
and that caused by bodily ailments. 
86. 
The daughter of the Gandharva got rid of her feverish 
ailment. Tender and decisively bold in her intellect and fully 
aware of what was relevant, she said thus to her companions: 
Ratnavafi said: 
87. 
0 SaSilekha, Anailgalekha and Citralekha, how are 
you all incapacitated to fulfil my desire? Where are your fa­
mous arts and skills? 
88. 
With the favour of Ratnesvara, an effective means of 
getting at my lover has been perceived by me. You wish me 
well. So carry it out.

=== PAGE 184 ===

1 74 
Skanda Purii'l'}a 
89. 
0 Sasilekha, you draw all the Devas for the purpose 
of getting at the desired one. 0 Anaiigalekha, you draw all the 
young men moving about all over the earth. 
90. 
0 Citralekha, you draw pictures of all those who are 
in the nether worlds embellished with the freshness of youth. 
9 1 . 
On hearing this, those companions praised her clev-
erness and drew the pictures of the young men richly endowed 
with prime of youth. 
92. 
The Gandharva girl who was (fresh and beautiful) 
like dawn, looked at those kings and others possessing glorious 
forms above the state of boyhood and fully endowed with the 
vigour of manhood. 
93. 
That girl of splendid eyes looked at all the Suras, but 
did not give up the unsteadiness of her eyes in regard to those 
heaven-dwellers. 
94. 
Next even after seeing the sages and princes residing 
in the middle world (i.e. Earth) the love-lorn girl did not get 
any pleasure anywhere. 
95. 
Thereafter, Ratnavall, a girl with excellent eyes ex-
tending up to the ears, saw the pictures of the young men of 
the nether worlds. 
96. 
That Gandharva girl saw the young men of Daityas 
and Danujas but did not feel any attraction for them. She 
became all the more distressed by the arrows of Manmatha. 
97. 
Her tender limbs became excessively distressed even 
when the nectarine rays of the moon touched her. Seeing the 
serpent youths she heaved a slight sigh. 
98. 
Even when she saw those Bhogins (Serpents, enjoyers 
of pleasure) painted in the picture, it is surprising that the 
princess became for a moment as though she had enjoyed the 
pleasures. 
99. 
She saw severally all the youths born of Seᔻa family, 
Takᔻaka family as well as Vasuki family. 
1 00. 
Mter seeing the scions of the families of Puli:ka, Ananta, 
Karkoᔽa and Bhadra and other Naga youths she saw Saiikhaciiga. 
1 0 1 . 
Merely at the sight of Saiikhaciiga she became exces­
sively bashful. She experienced horripilation in every limb and 
joint.

=== PAGE 185 ===

IV.ii.67. 102-1 14 
1 75 
1 02. 
From that excess of bashfulness her lover who de­
prived her of her virginity was inferred by Citralekha, the most 
skilful of all. 
1 03. 
Thereupon Citralekha, clever in practical jokes, quickly 
threw the hem of a variegated cloth over the painting canvas 
and covered it. 
1 04. 
Keeping quiet due to bashfulness, Ratnavall looked at 
Citr:tlekha with a crooked glance, while her lips throbbed. 
1 05. 
Anailgalekha was glanced at suggestively by Sasilekha. 
She removed the hem of the variegated cloth thrown over by 
Citralekha. 
1 06. 
The daughter of Vasubhiiti, the splendid girl Ratnavali:, 
saw Ratnacii<;la in the midst of the membc.rs of his (Ratnacii<;la's) 
family. 
1 07. 
At the very moment when he was seen, her eyes were 
filled with tears of joy. Her cheeks were covered with drops of 
perspiration. 
1 08. 
Her creeper-like tender body trembled with hairs stand­
ing on ends all over. With eyes closed giving them the appear­
ance of buds, she stood (motionless) as though painted in a 
picture. 
1 09. 
Thereupon Citralekha came near the distressed girl 
and comforted her: "Do not be worried, 0 Gandharva girl. 
Now your desire has been fulfilled. 
1 1 0. 
0 friend, do not grieve over (anything) . r.verything 
concerning this (lover) has become known, such as nature, 
land, name, lineage etc. Moreover he is easy of access, since 
he has been given to you by Ratnesvara. 
1 1 1 . 
Indeed, you have been made satisfied by Ratnesa through 
the acquisition of a befitting bridegroom. Get up. We shall go 
home. Ratnesa is the bestower of everything on us. " 
1 1 2. 
As they were travelling by the aerial path they were 
seen by chance by Subahu, a Danava, residing in the nether 
worlds. 
1 1 3. 
Carrying off all those four like a lion with awful fangs 
and jaw seizing hinds in a desolate forest, he set out towards 
his abode. 
1 1 4. 
On seeing the Danava with a countenance rendered 
hideous through his curved fangs and the eyes blood-red, those 
Gandharva girls began to tremble (through great fear) .

=== PAGE 186 ===

1 76 
Skanda Purii:r,ta 
1 1 5. 
"0 mother, 0 father, save us. Alas! Fate, do not let 
this happen that is about to happen in a cruel way to helpless 
girls. 
1 1 6. 
Alas! 0 Fate, what is it that we, the unfortunate ones, 
h ave d o n e ? Is even a sinful word ever utte red even 
m e n tally? 
1 1 7. 
Excepting children's toys, excepting the adoration of 
Ratnesvara and excepting the good acts by way of being the 
dependents of our parents, we do not know of anything self­
willed. 
1 1 8. 
We are going towards the nether worlds. We are wretched. 
We do not have anyone to help and lead. We are feeble girls 
seeking succour, 0 omnipresent Ratnesa, 0 Sarhbhu, who are 
there to protect us?" 
1 19. 
As the Gandharva girls were lamenting thus like afflicted 
ones seeking compassion the magnanimous Ratnacii.Q.a, the 
king of Serpents, heard them. 
1 20. 
"Who is this uttering the name of my Lord Ratnesa, 
the great Lord of Liilgas, the Lord who severs the bondage of 
Karma?" 
1 2 1 . Again he heard the cry of distress issuing from the 
mouths of those girls: "0 Ratnesa, save, save us. " On hearing 
it, he seized his weapons and set out. 
1 22. 
Ratnacii.Q.a saw that demon of evil activities who was 
excessively frantic and furious by imbibing liquid suet and human 
flesh. 
1 23-1 26. He rebuked him thus: "0 wretched one, 0 abductor 
of cultured &iris, having come within my view, where will you 
go, you base one? 
0 evil-minded one, your life-breath will be knocked off by 
my arrows as my mind is determined to save the distress ones. 
So pro c e e d ahead in your j ourney towards the c i ty of 
Yam a. 
At the time of sanger or even of utter annihilation, if people 
utter the name of Ratnesvara with terrified minds, they need 
not entertain fear from people like you. 
If men are given succour by the great name of Ratnesvara, 
they need not be afraid of rebirths, old age, sickness, Kali age 
and the god of Death." 
1 27. 
After saying thus (to the demon) , he assured and

=== PAGE 187 ===

IV.ii.67. 128-141 
1 77 
said, "Do not be afraid", to those terror-stricken (girls) with 
their eyes turned towards his face like hinds sniffed at by a 
tiger. 
1 28. 
After consoling the Gandharva girls thus, that son of 
the Serpent king drew the bowstring fully up to his ear and 
discharged the arrow. 
1 29. 
That king of demons who became infuriated like a ser­
pent kicked by foot, whirled with great force a huge iron bar that 
resembled the staff of the god of Death and hurled it. 
1 30. 
If Ratnesvara Liilga manifests prominently within the 
heart, even the thick staff of Kala is but a small firebrand in 
his case. 
1 3 1 . With his great arrows, he (Ratnacf.u;la) split the iron 
bar into two while it was in the middle (in the air) like the 
life of one of wicked activity gets cut short in the prime. 
1 32-134. Thereafter, he discharged an arrow having the lustre 
of KaHinala (Death-fire) against the demon. That arrow en­
tered his heart, searched scrupulously within (and understood 
the wickedness within his heart) , dislodged the life breath 
within and returned to the quiver by itself. Probably the arrow 
of the serpent prince had gone to proclaim these things to the 
Maidens of the Quarters. 
1 35. 
(The arrow might have said:) "If anyone wishes to 
enjoy happiness through articles acquired by illegitimate means, 
those articles along with his vital breaths do vanish. Where is 
his happiness then?" 
136-1 38. After killing the Danava in this manner, the mighty 
king of Serpents spoke to the girls: "Who are you? Whose 
daughters? How did you come into contact with this wicked 
demon? Where was Ratnesvara Liilga seen by you all? By uttering 
the syllables constituting his name you could have got rid of 
the great dangers. You all tell it quickly so that I can get at 
the facts." 
1 39. 
On hearing these excessively loving and endearing 
words, the girls (whispered to each other) looking at each 
other's face: "Who is this resembling someone seen before? 
1 40. 
Who is this friendly person without an ulterior motive? 
He has somehow made his presence in the desolate wilderness 
staking his life. He has saved us, the girls. 
141 . 
The senses are fickle naturally, but on seeing him

=== PAGE 188 ===

178 
Skanda Purii:r_ta 
they have become relieved (i.e. calmed down) as if nectar has 
been imbibed (by them) . 
1 42. 
Even after seeing another more beautiful object, our 
eyes are not inclined t.o proceed elsewhere. 
1 43. 
Mter tasting the sweetness of the nectarine words, 
our ears do not evince any expectation of grasping other words 
from the source. 
1 44. 
These feet though they are usually active in moving 
about, have become lame even though they have perceived 
this youth who is the thief of the excellent jewel of our minds. " 
145. 
Thus those girls spoke to each other in undertone. 
Though those girls had already seen him in the picture stand­
ing amidst (others) , they did not recognize him. 
1 46. 
Those fawn-eyed ones perhaps did not see him clearly 
because their eyes had been rendered blind due to the exces­
sive agitation caused by the confrontation with the demon of 
extremely terrible form and features. 
147-149. They spoke to that youth who had saved their lives: 
"Indeed, Sir, what has been asked by your esteemed self with 
an endearing mind, we shall explain completely. Please be 
attentive for a moment. This is the daughter of Vasubhuti, the 
king of Gandharvas, Ratnavali: by name. This girl is a veritable 
mine of the gems of good qualities. We are her friends, fol­
lowing her always like a shadow. 
1 50. 
Ever since her childhood, she has been going to Kasi 
always for worshipping the Liilga named Ratnesvara. She has 
been permitted by her father too. 
151-152. A boon has been granted to her by the delighted 
Lord Saril.bhu: ' (Someone) having his name similar to yours, 
0 virgin, will violate your virginity in dream. He will be your 
husband. ' This girl is excessively sad after enjoying the youth 
with whom she had dalliance during the dream. 
1 53. 
She is further distressed much with the fire of sepa­
ration from him. Through our skill in arts that youth has been 
shown to her in a picture. 
154. 
She has been revived by seeing him painted in a 
picture, albeit the name of his residence or family was not 
known. 
155-159. Thereafter, we bowed down to Ratnesvara. She was 
eager to return to her abode. We were also going along with

=== PAGE 189 ===

IV.ii.67. 160-169 
179 
her when in an isolated place in the aerial path, a certain base 
demon came there all of a sudden. Seizing us he entered the 
nether worlds. Subsequently your esteemed self, yourself have 
known the base fellow. Indeed, Sir, our personal information 
has been narrated to you. 0 storehouse of mercy, be gracious 
enough to reveal to us who you are. Ever since that evil demon 
was seen by us our eyes have become blinded as though light­
ning has struck them down. We are ones who flee due to fear, 
0 saviour from fear; we do not know anything. Where are we? 
Who are we? Who are you? What has happened? What is about 
to happen?" 
1 60. 
On hearing this, the prince of serpents, a meritorious 
soul with decent intellect, consoled those terror-stricken girls 
speaking thus: 
1 6 1 . 
"Come with me. I shall show Ratnesvara to you. " In­
viting them thus, he led them to the tank of sports with pleas­
ing excellent water. 
1 62. 
The steps leading to the water were made of gems of 
different colours. Swans and ruddy geese were chirping loudly. 
It appeared as though the tank itself was welcoming them 
under the pretext of the shrill cries of the aquatic birds. 
1 63. 
There in accordance with his instructions, they got 
into the sport tank along with their clothes, flowers and ornaments 
and then emerged therefrom. 
1 64-1 65. Mter coming out, the Gandharva girls found them­
selves made invisible as it were. On seeing the temple of 
Ratnda near Kalaraja, they spoke to one another in great 
surprises: "Is this a dream or reality? Or is this a playful trick 
of Ratnesvara? 
1 66. 
Are we ourselves under some illusion? Are we not 
Gandharva girls at all? What is this, we do not know. This is 
something like the play of a juggler. 
1 67. 
This is Ganga flowing northwards, it is quite clear. 
This is the tank of Sankhacf.u;la. This is the temple of Sankhacf.u;la. 
1 68. 
This is the Paiicanada Tirtha. 'Fhis is the temple of 
Vagisvara, a visit to which results in the enhancement of eloquent 
speech. 
1 69. 
This is Sankhacuc,lesvara installed by Sankhacii<:fa. The 
visit to this Lord removes the fear arising from Kalasarpa (Black 
Serpent, i.e. god of Death) .

=== PAGE 190 ===

1 80 
Skanda Purii'T}a 
1 70. 
This is the pool named Mandakinl, the receptacle of 
meritorious holy waters. Men performing all the water rites 
herein, do not re-enter the mortal world. 
1 7 1 . This is Goddess Asapurl on the splendid banks of 
MandakinL She was eulogized by Tripurari (Siva) when he was 
desirous of conquering Tripura. 
1 72. 
Even today when she is adored by men, she fulfills the 
hopes and ambitions of the suppliants. 
This deity SiddhyaᔻJ:akesvara is to the west of MandakinL 
1 73. 
By his adoration one will clearly get the eight Siddhis 
in one's house. There itself is the holy pit named SiddhyaHaka 
with waters free from Rajas (dust particles, Rajas quality) . 
1 74. 
One who takes his holy bath here and performs 
Sraddha, shall go to heaven free from Rajas quality. Those 
eight Siddhis are corporeal spiritual powers granting all the 
Siddhis in Kasi. 
1 75. 
This deity Maharaja Vinayaka is the bestower of all 
Siddhis. If men bow down to him their obstacles perish. 
1 76. 
This is the lofty palace of Siddhesvara shining with 
gold and having gemset flagstaff and banners. By visiting this 
deity one shall attain Siddhis. 
1 77. 
In the middle portion of the holy spot is the deity 
Madhyamesvara. By visiting this deity one can terminate one's 
stay in the middle and nether worlds. 
1 78. 
By adoring Madhyamesa ardently men shall become 
lords of the Earth extending to the oceans. Thereafter, one 
attains salvation. 
1 79. 
Airavatesvara Liilga is towards the east thereof. It causes 
the achievement of the desired objects. In the banner thereof 
is seen the elephant Airavata. 
180. 
This is the place of Vrddhakalesvara built with jewels. 
On the night of every new-moon day, the Moon stays there 
along with the stars. 
1 8 1 . I f the deity i s visited by men, Kala will not b e pow­
erful in the worldly existence. Kali will not be powerful. Truly, 
heaps of sins will not be powerful. " 
1 82. 
Even as the excited girls were discussing Vasuvibhiiti, 
the Gandharva, came there hurriedly. 
183-187. He had heard everything beginning with the news 
regarding the demon Subahu; how his daughter RatnavaH who

=== PAGE 191 ===

IV.ii.67. 188-198 
181 
was pleased (on account of the boon from Ratnesvara) was 
abducted along with her friends while returning from the shrine 
of Ratnesvara in an isolated place in the aerial path; how he 
took them to Patala; how a fight ensued; how he was killed by 
RatnaciiQ.a, a devotee of Ratnesa; how that demon Subahu was 
killed by that great warrior wielding a big bow with a single 
arrow; how (RatnaciiQ.a) who was asked about the news, brought 
them through the sport tank to SarikhaciiQ.a's tank which extended 
to Patala too; how they saw Kasi when they emerged therefrom 
and; how they became extremely excited though they eagerly 
saw everything. 
188. 
The king of Gandharvas saw his daughter as though 
she was reborn. The natural beauty of her lotus-like face was 
a bit faded due to fear lurking yet. She . was there along with 
her friends. 
189. 
He embraced her again and again, sniffed at her head 
and kissed her forehead. He took her on his lap and eagerly 
asked her about all the events. 
190. 
She told him the details of the story of the abduction 
omitting the acquisition of the boon from Ratnesvara and the 
incident of the dream. 
1 9 1 . 
Understanding perfectly what RatnavaH was thinking 
in her mind through her facial gestures, Sasilekha narrated in 
clear terms everything in detail. 
192. The king of Gandharvas became pleased and consid­
ered himself blessed. He joyously extolled the prowess of 
Ratnesvara. 
Skanda said: 
193-198. Listen, 0 excellent sage, 0 restrainer of the growth 
of Vindhya. Everyday RatnaciiQ.a who had perfect control over 
his senses, used to come out from Nagaloka through the path 
of the tank. Mter taking his holy bath in the waters of Mandakinl, 
he worshipped Ratnesvara offering eight handfuls of gems. 
Then he joyously placed eight golden lotuses (near the deity) . 
Once during sleep, Ratnesa in the form of a Liriga spoke to 
RatnacuQ.a, his devotee of steadfast vows: "You will rescue a girl 
abducted by a demon after defeating him in battle. She will 
become your wife . " That magnanimous king of serpents

=== PAGE 192 ===

182 
Skanda Purii1Ja 
remembered this boon. Mter killing the demon he released 
the girl by his prowess. Through the path of the tank he brought 
her to the earth once again. 
199-203. Thereafter he did as he was wont to do everyday. 
The wise youth worshipped the Liil.ga, circumambulated and 
came out of the beautiful Ma.1:u;lapa of Ratndvara. Thereupon 
he was repeatedly pointed out to Vasubhiiti, the king of Gandharvas, 
with the tip of the index finger by them, "This is that blessed 
youth. " 
On seeing the prince of serpents, the king of Gandharvas 
became delighted with hairs standing on ends. His eyes beamed 
with smile in his face. He thought in his mind thus after seeing 
him, of youthful form and nobility of birth: 'I am blessed. I 
have been favoured by Ratnesa by offering me an excellent 
bridegroom This girl too is blessed, because her husband is 
quite suitable to her. ' 
204-206. Mter thinking thus he called the charming youth 
to him and asked him his name and family. He considered the 
pros and cons and before Ratnesvara gave his daughter to him 
joyously he took him to the world of Gandharvas and performed 
all the auspicious rites. He honoured him with Madhuparka 
and made him hold her hand (in marriage ceremony) . As 
required by the due marital rite, he gave him many jewels. 
207. 
Sasilekha, Anail.galekha and Citralekha too informed 
their respective parents and wooed him as their husband. 
208. Mter marrying all the four splendid Gandharva girls 
Ratnac ii<;la went to the palace of his father along with 
them. 
209-210. He went to his father like Pra.l).ava proceeding towards 
Siva along with the four Srutis. The king of serpents prostrated 
at the feet of his parents along with the newly wedded brides. 
He duly informed him about the grace of Ratnda. He was 
congratulated duly by the parents and he spent the days hap­
pily along with them. 
lsvara said: 
2 1 1 . 0 Daughter of the Mountain, Ratnesvara is my immo­
bile Linga. It bestows everything on everyone. It's power is 
unparalleled.

=== PAGE 193 ===

IV.ii.67.212-225 
183 
2 1 2. 
In this Linga thousands of Siddhas have attained great 
spiritual powers. 0 lady of slender waist, till today this Linga 
remained hidden. 
2 1 3. 
Ratnesa has been brought into manifestation through 
great jewels acquired through merit by Himavan, your father 
and a devotee of mine in all respects. 
214. 0 Daughter of the King of Mountains, I love this Linga 
very much. This Linga should be assiduously worshipped in 
Varal).asl. 
215. 
0 Uma, 0 my beloved, by the blessings of Ratnesa 
many jewels are acquired, jewel of a son, jewel of a wife etc. 
and even heavenly pleasures and salvation. 
2 1 6. 
One who bows down to Ratnesvara but dies elsewhere 
never returns from heaven even after hu,.ndreds of crores of 
Kalpas. 
2 1 7. 
A devotee should observe fast on the fourteenth day 
in the dark half and keep awake at night in the vicinity of 
Ratnesvara. He will attain Sannidhya i.e. proximity to me. 
218. 
0 my beloved, in your previous birth, due to your 
devotion to me, Dakᔻayal).iSvara Linga was installed by you to 
the east of this Linga. 
219. A man can avoid going to wretched state by visiting 
it. There your name is Arilbika and I am Arhbike8vara. 
220. 
0 lady of excellent waist, your son ᕵac;lanana is also 
in the form of an image there. 0 Uma, by visiting these three 
a man can avoid re-entry into a womb (i.e. is liberated) . 
2.2 1 . The greatness of Rafnesvara has been described to 
you by me. It should be carefully kept secret from persons 
whose minds are defiled by the sins of Kali age. 
222. 
He who reads always this narrative of Ratne8vara is 
never separated from sons, grandsons and cattle wealth. 
223. 
On hearing the origin of Ratne8vara along with the 
legends thereon, an excellent bachelor obtains an excellent 
jewel of a girl, befitting his family. · This is true. 
224. 
A girl who listens to this fascinating legend with faith 
gets a good husband and will be a chaste lady. 
225. 
On hearing this Itihasa (legend) no man or woman 
will be distressed due to the fire of separation from the beloved 
ones.

=== PAGE 194 ===

1 84 
Skanda Purii1Ja 
CHAPTER SIXTYEIGHT 
The Origin of Krttiviisas1 
Skanda said: 
1 . 
Listen to another event, 0 eminent BnlhmaJ}a, that hap­
pened there. It causes great wonder and dispels great sins. 
2. 
While Mahe5vara was narrating the story of Ratne5a thus, 
there was heard a great tumultuous cry everywhere, "Save, 
sa't7e. " 
3 . 
"This son of dͳmon Mahia. the demon Gajasura is coming 
here, crushing all the Pramathas. He is haughty and proud 
due to his prowess. 
4. 
Wherever he sets his foot, the ground (under his feet) 
shakes there due to his weight. 
5. 
By the force of his thighs trees fall down. On being hit 
by his baton-like arms, mountains and their peaks get crushed 
to poʹder. 
6. 
Getting entangled with his hairs, clouds leave off the 
sky but do not give up the blue colour due to the contact 
thereof. 
7. 
By the heavy exhalation of his breath oceans get surged 
up with high tides, while rivers along with aquatic animals, 
become full of heavy waves. 
8. 
The body of this demon, an adept in sorcery, is nine 
thousand Yojanas in height and as many in girth. 
9. 
The tawny colour and the glaring lustre of his eyes has 
gone over to lightning-streak, which is not given up even to­
day (by it) . And here he dashed hurriedly. 
10. Whichever quarter this irresistible Danava approaches, 
it becomes level and even throughout without ups and downs, 
as if by the terror of him certainly. 
1 1 . 
Having acquired boon,s from Brahma, this demon 
considers the three worlds as insignificant as a blade of grass 
1. This Liiiga is to the north-east of Maidagin. It is one most ancient Liiiga 
in KaSi. The temple was destroyed by Aurangazeb and a mosque was built but 
it is opened to Hindus on Sivaratri day.

=== PAGE 195 ===

N.ii.68. 12-21 
185 
(thinking within) , 'I cannot be killed by women or men over­
whelmed by lust.' 
1 2. 
The Trident-wielding Lord knew that the great Daitya 
rushing towards him could not be killed by anything else and 
hit him with the trident. 
1 3. 
Pierced through by the trident (and raised aloft) the 
demon Gajasura thought that he was made to resemble an 
umbrella. He said to Hara (Siva) : 
Gajiisura said: 
14. 
0 Trident-armed Lord of Devas, I know that you are 
the slayer of Smara (Lord of love) . 0 destroyer of Puras, my 
death at your hands is conducive to my J¥elfare indeed. 
15. 
I wish to submit something. Please attend to what I 
say. I tell you the truth, not the untruth. 0 Mrtyufijaya ( 'con­
queror of death') consider this. 
16. 
You are the only Lord worthy of the reverence of all 
the worlds. You are stationed above the entire universe and 
I am now stationed above (you) . Hence this is my victory! 
1 7. 
If I am to die at the tip of your trident I am blessed. 
I have been favoured. Everyone has to die in due course of 
time. But a death like this is conducive to welfare. 
18. 
On hearing these words of his, the Lord of Devas, the 
storehouse of compassion, Sarhbhu laughingly replied to Gajasura, 
0 Pot-born One: 
lsvara said: 
19. 0 Gajasura with great manliness as your asset, I am 
delighted. Mention a boon befitting you. I shall grant it, 0 
Asura of good intellect. 
20-2 1 . 
On hearing this, that · great Daitya replied to 
Mahesvara: 
Gajiisura said: 
0 Lord with the quarters for your robes, if you are pleased, 
0 three-eyed one, always wear this hide of mine. It has been

=== PAGE 196 ===

186 
Skanda Purii1Ja 
sanctified by the fire from your trident. It fits you in size. It 
is smooth to touch. It has been won as a stake in the battle­
field. 
22. 
May it always have a pleasing odour. May it always be 
very tender. May it always be free from impurities. May it 
always be an excellent decoration. 
23. 
0 Lord, though it was subjected to the flames of the 
fire of great penance for a long time (or as it had survived 
the fire of your third eye) , this hide has never been burnt. 
Hence it is the storehouse of merit and fragrance. 
24. 
If my hide fiad not been meritorious, 0 quarter-clad 
one, how could it have come into contact with you in the 
battlefield? 
25. 
0 Sailkara, if you are pleased, grant me another boon. 
From today onwards, may you have the name 'Krttivasas. ' 
26. 
O n hearing these words of his, Sailkara said, "So be 
it" and further said to that Daitya whose mind was purified by 
devotion: 
lsvara said: 
27-28. 
0 storehouse of merit, 0 great Daitya, listen to 
another rare boon. You have cast off your body in a battle in 
the great holy spot Avimukta. May this holy body of yours 
become my Liilga in this holy spot, the means of salvation, the 
bestower of salvatioQ on all here. 
29. 
This will be known by the name Krttivasesvara. It will 
be destructive of great sins. It will be at the top (i.e. greatest) 
of all Liilgas. It will be the most excellent. 
30. 
It will be the most excellent of all the Liilgas in VaraQasi, 
even of the greatest ones. It will be the most excellent one 
(among them) like the head. 
3 1 . 
For the sake of the welfare of men, I shall stay here 
along with the members of my family and followers. When this 
Liilga is visited, worshipped and eulogized, the man will be­
come blessed. He will not reenter the world. 
32-38. 
I shall stay in the Krttivasesvara Liilga in order to 
bless all those who stay in Avimukta-Rudras, Pasupatas, Siddhas, 
sages, philosophers, quiescent ones, men with control of sense-

=== PAGE 197 ===

IV.ii.68.39-46 
187 
organs, those who have conquered anger, persons unaffiicted 
by the opposing pairs (such as pleasure and pain) , those who 
do not have possessions, those who are devoted to me, those 
who are desirous of salvation, those who are equally unaf­
fected by honour and insult, and those who view a lump of 
clay, a stone and a piece of gold alike. 
Undoubtedly three times everyday, ten thousand crores of 
Ti:rthas approach Krttivasa. All these become rid of their sins 
when they approach Krttivasesvara: Men of Kali and Dvapara 
ages with foul and sinful intellect, those who do not follow the 
practice of the good, those who are averse to truthfulness and 
cleanliness, those who are carried away by Maya, hypocrisy, 
covetousness, delusion and egotism, BrahJ;p.ai).as partaking of 
the cooked food of Sudras, gourmets, gourmands, too greedy 
ones, and those whose minds are far removed from Sandhya 
prayers, holy baths, Japas and adorations. They will attain sal­
vation easily like persons of great meritorious deeᖋs. 
39-41 . 
Hence Krttivasesvara Liriga in KaSi should be re­
sorted to by men. Salvation which cannot be easily achieved 
elsewhere in thousands of births can be obtained in Krttivasesvara 
Liriga within a single birth. The sins committed in the previ­
ous births shall perish slowly due to penance, Dana etc. But 
if Krttivasdvara is visited they perish immediately. Men who 
worship Krttivasesvara Liriga have actually entered my body. 
They are not reborn. 
42. 
In Avimukta, people should stay here. They should 
chant Satarudriya Mantras and Lord Krttivasesvara should be 
visited again and again. 
43. 
By worshipping Krttivasas in .Kasi, one obtains that 
benefit which is obtained when seven crores of Maharudra 
Mantras 
are chanted flawlessly. 
44. 
On the fourteenth day in the dark half of Magha a 
devotee should observe fast, worship Krttivasesa and keep awake 
at night. He will attain the great goal. 
45. 
He who celebrates great festival on the full-moon day 
in Caitra month around Krttivasesvara Liriga will not enter any 
womb. 
46. 
After saying this, the Quarter-clad Lord of Devas accepted 
the great hide of Gajasura and wore it.

=== PAGE 198 ===

188 
Skanda Purii:TJa 
47. 
0 Pot-born One, there was a great celebration of a 
festival on that day when the Quarter-clad attained Krttivasatva 
(state of wearing the hide) . 
48. 
When the trident was lifted up at the place where the 
Daitya was impaled on the trident and raised up as an umbrella, 
a great holy Kul).qa (pit) took shape (was formed) . 
49. 
A devotee should take his holy bath in that Kul).qa, 
offer libations to the ancestors and visit Krttivasesvara. He will 
be blessed. 
Skanda said: 
50. 
Listen, 0 Agastya, to what happened in that Tlrtha. 
By the power of that Tirtha crows got transformed into swans. 
51-53. 
Formerly there was a religious festival at Krttivasa 
on the full-moon day in the month of Citra. The cooked rice 
offered was obtained and kept in a heap by many priests. 0 
Brahmal).a, birds flocked there on seeing it and they began to 
fight with one another in the sky for the cooked rice. The 
crows with limbs not developed well began to crow in- harsh 
sounds when hit by the crows of fully developed limbs. The 
weaker ones were struck down by the stronger ones. 
54. 
On being struck down, they fell down into that Kul).qa 
from the sky above. Since they were destined to live further, 
the crows were saved. They were transformed into swans. 
55-56. 
People assembled there for the festival became 
surprised. Pointing out to them with their fingers, they ex­
claimed, "See, 0 Lord! Even as we were watching, the crows 
which fell into the Kul).qa here became Dhartaraᔻᔽras (swans 
with black· feet and beaks) , due to the power of this Tlrtha. " 
57. 
Ever since then, 0 Pot-born One, that Kul).qa near 
Krttivasa became well-known in the world by the name Harhsa 
Tirtha. 
58. 
Those who become highly defiled in their souls due 
to excessively dirty, sinful activities become pure instantaneously 
when they perform all the water rites at Harhsa Tirtha. 
59. 
One should always live in Kasi, should bathe in Harhsa 
Tirtha, Krttivasa should be visited and the greatest position 
(Moleya) should be attained. 
60. 
0 sage, at every step, there are many Liilgas in Kasi.

=== PAGE 199 ===

IV.ii.68.61-74 
189 
But Krttivasesvara Linga is remembered as the head of all the 
LiJ.lgas. 
6 1 . 
After propitiating Krttivasa with the mind full 
of devotion, one attains the benefit arising from the worship 
of all the Liilgas in Ka.Si. 
62. 
Whatever rite is performed in the vicinity of Krttivasa-
japa, Dana Tapas and Homa, libations and adoration of the 
deity, becomes endless in its benefit. 
63. 
This Tirtha has been in existence from times imme-
morial, 0 Pot-born One. It manifested itself, due to the pres­
ence of Lord Mahesa. 
64. 
These Siddha' Liilgas become concealed in the differ-
ent Yugas. Buy by the presence of Sarilbhu, ey manifest themselves 
again. 
65. 
Around Hamsa Tirtha, 0 sage, there are ten thou-
sand and two hundred Lingas installed here by excellent sages. 
66. 
Everyone of these Lingas, beginning with Ka.tyayanesa 
and ending with Cyavanesa, accords spiritual powers to the 
residents of Avimukta. 
67. 
The great Lomase5a Liilga was installed by Lomasa 
to the west of Krttivasas. If a devotee visits it, where is the fear 
of the god of Death? 
68. 
The great auspicious Ma.latisa Linga is to the north 
of Krttivasa. By adoring that Liilga a king becomes lord of 
elephants. 
69. 
The Linga called Antakesvara is stationed to the north 
thereof. One even with great sins becomes rid of all sins by 
visiting it. 
70. 
The greatJanakesa Linga at its side is the great bestower 
of knowledge. By worshipping that Linga knowledge of Brah­
man is attained. 
71 . 
To the north thereof is Bhairava of dark-coloured 
limbs and a huge imagf" By visiting it men can ward off the 
sight of Yama. 
72. 
Goddess Su³kodari with awful eyes is also there to the 
north of Krttivasa. She devours the obstacles of Ka.Si. 
73. 
To the south-west of the goddess is the Vetala (Spirit, 
ghost) named Agnijihva. Adored on Tuesday, he bestows all 
desired objectives and powers. 
74. 
There is the Veta.lakuJ.lc;ia there that dispels all ail-

=== PAGE 200 ===

190 
Skanda Purii'T}a 
ments. Cuts, tumours and other ailments and pain vanish when 
the waters of the Kul).<;ia come into contact with them. 
75. 
A devotee who scrupulously takes his holy bath in the 
Vetalakul).<;la and bows down to Vetala shall obtain all the 
desired objectives difficult of access to all embodied beings. 
76. 
There is the Gal).a there with two arms, four feet and 
five heads. Immediately after visiting it, sins are destroyed and 
split into a thousand. 
77. 
0 Sage, to the north thereof is Rudra, the terrible 
one, with four horns (Vedas) , three feet (the Savanas) , two 
heads (the Priiya'T}'iya, introductory rite, and Udayan'iya, con­
cluding rite) . He has seven hands (the Vedic Metres) . 
78-8 1 . 
0 Pot-born One, he (Lord Rudra) cries out as 
follows, in the shape of Vna (Bull, Dharma) and bound in 
three ways (by means of Mantras, Brahmal).as and Kalpas) : 
"Those who are evil-intentioned ones in Kas1 and those who 
bring in obstacles to Kasi-it is to cut them off that I am 
holding the dagger. Those who are pious-minded in Kasi and 
those who remove obstacles in Kas1-it is to make their fami­
lies flourish that I hold the Amrta jar in my hand." 
If a devotee visits Vrl}arudra and worships him with devotion 
and great means of service, he is never assailed by obstacles. 
To the northern quarter of Rudra is the serpent deity named 
Mal).ipradipa. 
82-83. 
Beyond it is Mal).ikul).<;ia. It is a great holy Kul).<;ia 
that dispels poison and ailments. A devotee should take his 
holy ablution in the Kul).<;ia and visit the serpent-deity. He 
should obtain a kingdom full of jewels and rubies, abounding 
in elephants, horses and chariots and richly endowed with 
excellent wives and sons. 
84-85. 
There is no doubt in this that if Krttivasesvara Liilga 
in Kasi has not been visited those people will be mere burdens 
of the world. 
Skanda said: 
Those men who hear the ongm of Krttivasa and VISit his 
Linga will attain welfare. There is no doubt about it.

=== PAGE 201 ===

IV.ii.69. 1-17 
191 
CHAPTER SIXTYNINE 
The Assembly of Sixtyeight Holy Spots 
Skanda said: 
1 . Listen, 0 Agastya, 0 mass of penance, to the descrip­
tion of all the Liilgas in Kasi: which, if resorted to, shall be 
conducive to the salvation of men of purified souls. 
2. 
The spot where the hide was sportingly worn by the 
Lord, is well-known as Rudravasa. It accords all spiritual powers. 
3. When Krttivasa stationed himself voluntarily there along 
with 
Uma, 
Nandin came there and submitted after 
due 
obeisance: 
4. 
"0 Lord of the chiefs of Devas, 0 Lord of the universe, 
sixty-eight very fascinating and charming mansions full of jewels 
have sprung up here. 
5. Whatever splendid holy shrines are there in the three 
worlds-BhiiQ., BhuvaQ. and SvaQ.-capable of bestowing salva­
tion, have been brought here by me from all-round. 
6. Which has been brought from where, which has been 
installed in what place, I shall describe, 0 Lord. Be pleased 
to attend for a short while. 
7. 
The salvation-giving great Liilga of the Lord of Devas 
named SthaQ.u, has sprung up here from Kurukᔻetra. Only a 
sixteenth part thereof is present there. 
8. 
In front of it there is the great splendid PuᔻkariQ.I (holy 
lake) named Sannihati to the western side of Lolarka. It is 
(called) the holy spot Kurukᔻetra Sthala. 
9. Whatever holy rite is performed there, say, holy bath, 
offerings, Japas, penance and monetary gifts, by those who 
seek welfare, shall truly be crores of crores (of times) more 
beneficial than those at Kurukᔻetra. 
1 0. 0 Lord, accompanied by Brahmavarta the Lord of Devas 
has manifested himself in Kasi: from Naimiᔻa. after leaving a 
mere part there. 
1 1-17. 
To the northern side of I;>huQ.<;lhiraja is the Linga 
called Devadeva (Lord of the Devas) which bestows all spiri­
tual powers on the aspirant. Beyond it is the excellent well, 
well-known as Brahmavarta, which dispels the likelihood of

=== PAGE 202 ===

192 
Skanda Puriir;ta 
coming back (into this world) in the case of men. A devotee 
should take his bath in the waters of that well and adore 
Devadeva. The merit thereof is known as crores of crores of 
times that at NaimiᔻaraQ.ya. 
From the shrine and holy spot of GokarQ.a has sprung up 
here voluntarily the great Linga named Mahabala in the vicinity 
of Sambaditya. By visiting and touching it, every powerful (great) 
sin is thrown far off like a mass of cotton wafted by wind. 
By visiting Mahabala Linga in front of Kapalamocana, a 
devotee attains great power and he will attain the city of sal­
vation. 
The Linga named SasibhuᔻaQ.a has been installed here to 
the east of RQ.amocana. It was brought from the excellent holy 
spot Prabhasa. By resorting to that Linga a man will attain the 
state of the Moon-embellished Lord (i.e. Siva) . 
1 8. 
He attains crores of times more the merit from the 
religious festival at Prabhasakᔻetra. 
Lord Mahakala has himself come here from Ujjayinl. 
1 9-23. 
Merely by remembering his name, a devotee cᖌas­
es to have the fear of Kali and Kala. This Linga named Mahakala 
is situated to the east of the great Linga named PraQ.ava. Through 
its visit, it bestows great salvation and it destroys all sins. 
Ayogandhesvara Linga has manifested itself here from the 
excellent Puᔻkara Tlrtha along with Puᔻkara (holy lake) . A 
devotee should visit Lord Ayogandha in the northern side of 
Matsyodari and take his holy bath in AyogandhakuQ.Qa. He 
redeems his ancestors from the worldly existence. 
Mahanade§vara Linga has come here from the holy spot 
Anahasa. It is to the north of Trilocana. If visited, it is con­
ducive to salvation. 
Mahotkatesvara Linga has come here from the holy spot 
Marutkota. It is to the northern side of Kamesvara. When 
visited, it accords spiritual powers devoid of impurities. 
24. 
Vimalesvara Linga has come here from the holy spot 
Visvasthana. It is to the western side of Svarllna. If visited, it 
accords spiritual powers devoid of impurities. 
25. 
The ᖍTeat Mahavrata Linga has come over here from 
the Mahendra mountain. It is in the vicinity of Skande§vara. 
It bestows the merit of great Vratas (holy observances and 
vows) .

=== PAGE 203 ===

IV.ii.69.2M3 
193 
26-29. 
In the course of the first Yuga i.e. Krtayuga when 
the groups of celestial sages were reciting the prayers, a great 
Liilga appeared after piercing through the ground which was 
very difficult to break through. Since their desire -was fulfilled, 
they proclaimed it "Mahadeva". Ever since then, it became 
Mahadeva in Kasi. It was by that great Liilga that Kasika was 
made the holy spot of salvation. A man who visits Mahadeva 
here in Avimukta, shall surely go to Sambhu's world wherever 
he may die. That Liilga should be assiduously resorted to in 
Avimukta by those who desire salvation. 
30. 
Anandakanana has never been given up by Mahadeva 
in the form of Liilga even in the course of other Kalpas. 
3 1 . 
Its shrine (of the Liilga) of auspicious form is incom-
parable. It consists of all gems. It is the' favour of that Lord 
Mahadeva. 
32. 
That is the presiding deity in VaraQ.asi fulfilling all 
desires. It is in the form of all Liilgas and is named Mahadeva. 
33. 
Undoubtedly all the Liilgas of the three worlds have 
been seen by the person who has seen Mahadeva having form 
of Liilga in Varal}.asi. 
34. 
By worshipping Mahadeva once in Varal}.asi, a man 
will joyously reside in Siva's world until the annihilation of all 
living beings. 
35. 
The Mahadeva Liilga should be assiduously invested 
with the sacred thread or Kusa grass in the month of Sraval}.a 
on the fourteenth day. The devotee shall never be in a womb 
(thereafter) . 
36-37. 
Accompanied by Phalgu and other Tirthas num­
bering eight and a half cores, Pitamahesvara Liilga came here 
from Gaya Tirtha at the place where Dharma performed aus­
terities for one million Yugas keeping as witness the great 
Liilga named Dharmesvara. 
38. 
A man should joyously worship Pitamahe5vara Liilga 
there. There is no doubt about this that he gets liberated 
along with twenty-one generations of his family. 
39-43. 
From Prayaga, the kings of Tirthas, Mahesvara named 
Siilatailka came here by himself accompanied by the Tirtharaja 
himself and stayed south of the beautiful Nirval}.amai}.Qapa. 
The pure mansion of that Lord excels Mount Meru. It is refulgent 
like gold. It is a boon granted by the Lord himself in a previous

=== PAGE 204 ===

194 
Skanda Purii7Ja 
Yuga. Mahesvara should be worshipped at the outset in Kasi. 
He dispels all sins. 
One who takes his holy bath in Prayaga (stationed) here, 
bows down to Mahesvara after adoring in accordance with the 
injunctions, with elaborate requisites of services, and visits 
Siilatanka undoubtedly obtains merit crores of times more 
than that arising from the holy bath at (the original) Prayaga. 
44. 
From Sailkukarl).a, a great holy spot, the Liilga called 
Mahatejas appeared here. It bestows increase in great splendour. 
45. 
His mansion is the storehouse of great splendour. It 
is extremely pure. It pervades the sky with its sparkling flame­
like splendour. It is (as if) solely constructed with rubies. 
46. 
By visiting, touching, eulogizing and adoring that Liilga, 
that greatest region is attained, on reaching which no one 
comes to grief. 
47. 
By adoring Mahatejas to .the east of Vinayake8vara the 
devotee goes to the region of Mahesvara in a fire-like resplen­
dent vehicle. 
48. 
The great Mahayogisvara Liilga revealed itself from 
the extremely sacred Tirtha named Rudrakoti. 
49. 
It is in the vicinity of Parvatisvara Liilga. It bestows 
all miraculous powers. By visiting that Liilga, men get the 
merit of (visiting) a crore of Liilgas. 
50. 
All-round the mansion thereof, mansions of beautiful 
structure, about a crore in number, belonging to Rudras, have 
been erected by Rudramiirtis. 
51-54. 
That is called Rudrasthali at Kasi by expounders 
of the Vedas. Those who die in Rudrasthali, whether they be 
worms, insects, locusts, animals, birds, beasts, men of barbar­
ian descent or learned Dikᔻitas, become Rudras. They (who 
have become Rudras) do- not have any return to the world. 
All the sins accumulated in the course of thousands of births, 
become entirely destroyed as soon as the devotee enters 
Rudrasthali. Th.e devotee may be desirous (of fruits) or free 
from desires or .one born as a brute (non-human being) , but 
if that being dies at Rudrasthali, he will attain the supreme 
liberation. 
55. 
Krttivasas has come down here voluntarily from the 
holy spot Ekarilbara (Bhuvanesvara) and stationed here in the 
Krttivasas Linga.

=== PAGE 205 ===

IV.ii.69.56-68 
195 
56. 
In this holy spot the Lord in the company of Amba 
and hosts of sages, imparts into the ears of his own dt::votees 
the knowledge of Brahman revered by the Srutis. 
57. 
From Marujailgala (Marwar, Rajasthan) Cai).QISa has 
come down to the Siddhi-bestowing holy spot here. Merely 
through his look, he will split the mass of fierce sins into a 
hundred parts. 
58. 
He who visits the great Cai).Qisvara Liilga in the vi-
cinity of Gal).adhyakl?a, armed with the noose, attains the greatest 
goal. 
59. 
Lord Nllakal).!ha himself has arrived here from the 
K.alaiijara mountain. He is the destroyer of worldly existence 
and has stationed himself in the vicinity of the Gal).as called 
Dantakii!a. 
60. 
Those devotees by whom Nllakal).!hesvara Liilga in 
K.asi has been duly adored, shall themselves become blue­
throated moon-embellished ones. 
61 . 
The Liilga with the epithet Vijaya has come down 
here from Kasmira. (It has stationed itself) to the east of 
Salaka!arilka!a and always bestows success on men. 
62. 
By adoring Vijayesa, men become always victorious in 
battle, royal palace, gaming table and scholastic, disputation. 
63. 
From Tridai).Qa city Lord Urdhvaretas himself has ar-
rived here. He has established himself keeping in front of him 
Kiil?mai).Qaka, the presiding officer of the Gal).as. 
64. 
By viewing Urdhvaretas a devotee attains a.n elevatᖎd 
status. There is no question of going downwards (in status 
etc.) in the case of the devotees of Urdhvaretas. 
65. 
The Liilga named Srikal).!ha (has come) from the 
holy spot Mai).Qalesvara and established itself to the north of 
Vinayaka called Mai).Qa. 
66. 
Men who are devoted to Srikal).!ha are Srikal).!has 
themselves. They are not short of glory and fortune either 
here or hereafter. 
67. 
The Lord with the appellation Kapardisvara himself 
manifested in the Pisacamocana Tirtha from the great Chagalai).Qa 
Tirtha. 
68. 
One who assiduously worships Kapardi:Sa, does not 
fall into hell, nor does he become a vampire even if he com­
mits the most heinous sin.

=== PAGE 206 ===

196 
Skanda PuraT_ta 
69. 
From the holy place Amn"itakesvara, the Linga named 
Sukᔻmesa has arrived in this holy spot, the source of all welfare. 
70. 
By visiting Sukᔻmesvara Linga in the vicinity of Gar;te8a 
called Vikatadvija, one attains the subtle goal. 
7 1 . 
(The Linga named) Devesa Jayanta has arrived here 
from the holy spot Madhukesvara. It is stationed in front of 
Gar;tapati (named) Larhbodara. 
72. 
One who takes his holy bath in the splendid waters 
of Ganga and visits Jayanta shall attain the miraculous powers 
desired. He will be victorious everywhere. 
73-76. 
Tripurantaka, the Lord of Devas, manifested from 
Srisaila. The merit that has been mentioned as obtained by 
visiting the summit of Srisaila, can be easily obtained by visiting 
Tripurantaka. 
If a man worships with great devotion Lord Tripurantaka 
on the western side of Visvesa, he does not enter a womb. 
Lord Kukkute8vara has come here from Saumyasthana. He 
is stationed in the vicinity of Gar;tesa called Vakratur;t<;la. By 
visiting and adoring him, all miraculous powers can be acquired. 
77. 
Lord Trisuli: has himself come here from the holy 
spotjalesvara (stationed) in front of Gar;tapati (named) Kutadanta. 
He bestows all Siddhis. 
78. 
LordJati has come from the great holy spot Ramesvara. 
He is on the northern side of Ekadanta. If worshipped, he 
bestows all desired things. 
79. 
Lord Tryarilbaka has come from the holy spot Trisandhya. 
He is on the eastern side of Trimukha. If worshipped, he 
accords the state of Tryarilbaka. 
80. 
Haresvara has come here from the holy spot Hariscandra 
(and is) in front of Hari§candresvara. If worshipped, he always 
bestows victory. 
81-82. 
Sarva has come h ere from ( the h oly plac e ) 
Madhyamake§vara. I t i s established keeping (itself) i n front of 
Caturvede§vara Linga. The Linga Sarva in Kasi bestows the 
highest attainment (Mokᔻa) . By worshipping the Linga called 
Sarva no man falls into the status (category) of a lower being. 
83. 
Another great Linga has appeared here from Sthalesvara 
(at a place) where is Yajiiesvara Linga. It bestows the benefits 
of all Lingas. 
84. 
By worshipping Maha Linga, a devotee having great

=== PAGE 207 ===

IV.ii.69.85-98 
197 
faith attains great glory in this world as well as in the other. 
85. 
Sahasrakᔻa Liriga has come here from the holy spot 
named Suvarl).a. By visiting it men obtain the eye (vision) of 
knowledge. 
86. 
By visiting Lord Sahasrakᔻesvara (which is) to the 
south of Saile§vara, a devotee can cast off the sins of hundreds 
and thousands of births. 
87. 
From the holy spot Harᔻita has appeared the Liriga 
Harᔻita that dispels darkness. On being visited and touched, 
it bestows delight on men. 
88. 
The mansion (shrine) of Harᔻitesvara is in the vicin-
ity of Mantre5vara. By visiting it men will always enjoy series 
of delightful events. 
89. 
Rudra himself has come here fmm Rudramahalaya. 
By visiting it men clearly pass on to the world of Rudra. 
90. 
There is no doubt in this that those men by whom 
Rudresvara Liriga here in K:Hi has been worshipped should be 
known as embodiments of Rudra. 
9 1 . 
If Lord Rudresvara is visited in the vicinity of Tripure§a, 
those devotees are to be known as on a par with Rudra, whether 
alive or dead. 
92. 
The great Lord Vne§a has come here from the holy 
spot Vrᔻabhadhvaja. He is in the vicinity of Bal).esvara Liriga. 
He always bestows piety. 
93. 
The Liriga named Isane5vara has come here from the 
holy spot Kedara. That should be visited in the west of 
Prahladake§ava. 
94. 
A devotee who takes his holy bath in the waters of 
the north-flowing (Ganga) river and worships Isane5a, shall 
stay in the city of Isana with splendour like that of Isana. 
95. 
The beautiful Miirti (image, form) Bhairavi has come 
here from the holy spot Bhairava. Its name is Sarhharabhairava. 
It should be assiduously visited. 
96. 
It is to the east of Kharvavinayaka. If worshipped it 
will be conducive to all Siddhis. Sarhharabhairava in Kasi shall 
destroy series of sins. 
97. 
Ugra, the bestower of Siddhis, has manifested him-
self here from the holy spot Kanakhala. By visiting him, men 
can get rid of their fierce sins. 
98. 
Ugra Liriga should always be resorted to. It is to the

=== PAGE 208 ===

198 
Skanda Purii:T}a 
east of Arkavinayaka. Even very fierce obstacles shall perish on 
its being worshipped. 
99. 
0 Lord, the Lord named Bhava has manifested him-
self from the great holy spot Vastrapatha here in the vicinity 
of BhimacaQ.<;li. 
1 00. 
If a man worships Bhave8vara, he never appears again 
in the world. He will become the lord of all kings carrying out 
his behests. 
1 0 1 . 
Lord DaQ.<;li arrived in VaraQ.asi from Devadaruvana 
chastising masses of sins, and has stationed himself in the form 
of a Liilga. 
1 02. 
It is to the east of Dehalivinayaka that Lord DaQ.<;lisvara 
should be worshipped. If men worship him, their rebirth never 
takes place. 
1 03. 
From the holy spot BhadrakarQ.ahrada Siva came here 
directly followed by the pool BhadrakarQ.ahrada. He is the 
bestower of happiness on all when worshipped. 
1 04-1 05. That excellent Tirtha is to the east of GaQ.apati 
named UddaQ.<;la. A devotee who takes his holy bath in 
Bhadrakarl}.ahrada and adores the Liilga named Siva, attains 
welfare everywhere. By worshipping BhadrakarQ.eSa, the devo­
tee shall hear the welfare of all living beings; he sees the well­
being of all with his own eyes. 
106. 
Sailkara has come from the holy spot called Hariscandra 
and shines in front of you. By worshipping him there occurs 
no rebirth from the womb of a mother. 
1 07. 
Kala Liilga, well-known as Kalase8a has come from 
Yama Liilga, a great holy spot. It is stationed to the west of 
Candresa. 
1 08. 
If a man takes his holy bath in the Yama Tirtha to 
the right side of Mitravarul}.a and visits Kala Liilga, whence is 
the fear of Kali and Kala? 
1 09. 
H e w h o c o n d u c ts h i s p i l g r i m age t h e r e o n 
Narakacaturdasi day will not proceed to Varna's abode, even 
though he may be a sinner. 
1 1 0-1 1 1 . From the great holy spot of Nepala, Pasupati came 
here where the system of Pasupata Yoga was imparted by you, 
the Pinaka-wielding One, the Lord of Devas, to Brahma and 
others for the sake of salvation. Merely on visiting it one is 
rid of the brutish bonds.

=== PAGE 209 ===

IV.ii.69. 1 12-1 27 
199 
1 1 2. 
From the holy spot Karaviraka Kapalisa came here. 
He should be assiduously visited in the Kapalamocana Tirtha. 
1 1 3. 
Merely by visiting it, the sin of BrahmaQa-slaughter 
is dispelled. 
Umapati has come here from the city of Devika (DevipataQa?) 
and established himself. 
1 1 4-1 1 7. 
Visited to the east of Pa5upati, he dispels sin 
accumulated in the course of a long time. 
The Liilga named Diptesa has come here from Mahe5varͭ
etra 
(Kailasa) . He stands near Umapati for the purpose of illumi­
nation. The Liilga (named) Dipte5a situated in the middle of 
Kasi bestows enjoyment of pleasures here and salvation here­
after. 
Acarya Nakulisvara (Lakulisvara) has co"me from the holy 
spot Kayarohai_la (Baroda Dist. in Gujarat) . He stands surrounded 
by his disciples observing the great Pasupata Vratas. Visited to 
the south of Mahadeva, he bestows knowledge. He destroys 
quickly the Ajnana (Ignorance) that causes c·onception and 
worldly existence. 
1 1 8. 
The Liilga nained Amaresa has come from Gailgasagara 
(confluence of Ganga and the Sea) . If it is visited, immortality 
is not difficult to be achieved. 
1 19-120. Lord Bhlmesvara from Saptagodavari Tirtha shines 
here in the form of a Liilga for the sake of (granting) enjoy­
ment of pleasures as well as salvation of all men. If a devotee 
visits Lord Bhimesvara in front of Nakulisvara, even terrible 
sins perish instantaneously. 
12 1-1 22. From the holy spot Bhiitesvara, (the Liilga named) 
Bhasmagatra manifested itself here. A devotee shall assidu­
ously worship it on the southern side of Bhimesa. By visiting 
Bhasmagatra, that merit is attained which one usually acquires 
after a perfect practice of Pasupata Yoga for a hundred years. 
1 23. 
From (the holy spot) Nakulisvara Lord Hara has him­
self manifested in the form of a Liilga in Kasi and is well­
known as Svayarilbhii. 
1 24. 
A devout man should take his holy bath in Siddhahrada 
and worship Svayarilbhii Liriga in front of Mahalak³mlsvara. 
He will never be reborn. 
1 25-1 27. Very near Prayaga Tirtha is a palatial mansion with 
the lustre of corals. This is the great palace of the Lord named

=== PAGE 210 ===

200 
Skanda Purii7Ja 
Dharći Vaniha. He has come down from Vindhya mountain 
after hearing 
that Your Lordship have come down to Kasi 
from Mandara having caves full of jewelͮ . He was accompanied 
by the Gćas, sages and gods. That Lord Dhara1.1ivaraha should 
be assiduously visited. He will redeem one who is immersed 
in the ocean of disaster and seeks refuge. 
1 28. 
From the holy spot Kar1.1ikara has come Ga1.1adhyakƃa 
having the hue of Kar1.1ikara flowers. He should be worshipped 
as having a club in his hand. He is the destroyer of thousands 
of obstacles. 
1 29. 
By worship:ping Ga1.1adhyaƂa stationed to the west of 
that deity Dharćivaraha a devotee shall obtain the status of 
Ga1.1apatya ('leadership of the attendants') . 
1 30. 
From Hemakflta the Linga (named) Lord Virflpakƃa 
has manifested itself here, to the south of deity Mahesvara. If 
visited, it will redeem the devotee from worldly existence. 
1 3 1 . 
From Gailgadvara, the Linga (named) Himasthesa (has 
manifͯ sted itself) . It is conducive to the attainment of miracu­
lous powers. It should be visited to the west of Brahmanala. 
1 32. 
0 Lord, from Kailasa Ga1.1adhipa has come. Other 
Ga1.1as of great strength numbering seven crores have come 
from Kailasa mountain. 
1 33-1 35. Seven forts have been built by them. They are on 
a par with seven heavens. They have huge doorways fitted with 
mechanical devices and panels fixed intricately. They are richly 
endowed with all requisites. Each of them contains a crore of 
warriors. (The forts. were) respectively made of gold, silver, 
copper, bell metal, brass, lead and lead stone. They are firm 
and reach as far as the sky. Thereafter a big fort was made all­
round .KaSi (as huge as) a mountain by them. 
1 36. A moat was also made by them below, with the water 
of Matsyodari flooding it. Matsyodari was split into two, the 
external one and the internal one. 
1 37-1 39. Mixed with the waters of Ganga it became famous 
as a great Tirtha. 1 When the waters of Ganga begin to flow 
I . These verses describe the condition of the last millennium. Matsyodari: 
Fonnerly i.e. a thousand years ago, Matsyodari was a rivulet flowing into Varar:ta. 
Rarely Gailg;i over-flooding into the course ofVarar:ta swelled Varar:ta so much 
·

=== PAGE 211 ===

IV.ii.69. 140-148 
201 
in the opposite direction i.e. southwards, the Matsyodari Tirtha 
is obtained due to the weightiness of the merit. If the festival 
of the Sun and the Moon occurs (i.e. eclipses or entry into 
a new Zodiac sign) , then the merit thereof is hundred crores 
of times. When Ganga and Matsyodari join together (i.e. waters 
of Ganga enter Matsyodari) , all the festivals, all the Tirthas 
and all the Lingas are there. 
140. 
Devout men who take their holy baths in Matsyodari 
at any time and offer balls of rice, will never again lie in the 
belly of a mother. 
1 4 1 . 
This holy spot Avimukta shall assume the shape of a 
fish (Matsya) when the water of the celestial river is seen flowing 
all-round. 1 
1 42. 
Those men who take their holy bath in Matsyodari, 
are the best among men. Even after committing many sins, 
they will never see the city of the god of Death (Yama) . 
1 43. 
Of what avail is the bath in many Tirthas? Of what 
avail is the performance of difficult austerities? If a devotee 
takes bath in Matsyodari, whence need he fear a chance of 
being conceived and born? 
144. 
One who takes one's bath wherever there are Lingas 
installed by men, Devas or sages, and in Matsyodari, attains 
salvation. 
145. 
There are many Tirthas present in Bhul}., Bhuval}. or 
Sval}. (in the three worlds) , but it is certain that they are not 
equal to a ten-millionth part (of Matsyodarl) . 
146. 
Thus, 0 Lord, the Tirtha has been rendered very 
great by that resident of Kailasa i.e. GaQ.adhipa of esteemed 
and exalted activities. 
147. 
From the Gandhamadana mountain, the Linga named 
Bhurbhuval}. manifested itself to the east of GaQ.adhipa. 
148. 
Mter visiting the Linga called Bhilrbhuval}. men become 
meritorious enough to stay for a long time far above the worlds 
that it pushed back the waters of Matsyodari in the opposite direction. Hence 
the propriety of v 1 37b-1 38a and also v 141. The mingling of the backward 
flowing waters of Ganga, VaraQ.a and Matsyodari was regarded very auspicious. 
Matsyodari Tirtha was a big lake. This great Tirtha was drained in 1826. Today 
Matsyodari is a small park with a pond called "Machodari" just to the south 
of Orilkara. (BCL 1 1 6-1 18) 
I . This happened when Ganga was over-flooded.

=== PAGE 212 ===

202 
Skanda Purii'TJ.a 
of Bhiil}., Bhuval}., Sval}. and Mahal}. enjoying divine pleasures. 
149. 
0 Lord, from beneath the bottom .of the seven neth­
er worlds, the great Liiiga (named) Hatakesa came here ac­
companied by Bhogavati (the river of Patala) . 
1 50. 
Its palace was built by serpents, the chief of whom are 
Se´a and Vasuki, with masses of jewels, rubies and diamonds. 
The great palace was erected assiduously. 
1 5 1 . 
That Linga is made entirely of gold and equipped 
with necklaces of jewels.. It is to the east of Isane8vara. It should 
be adored assiduously. 
1 52. 
A devout man should worship that Linga with great 
devotion. He will become blessed with all prosperity. Mter 
enjoying numerous pleasures, 
he will attain salvation after 
death. 
153. 
From the world of Taraka (stars) in the sky, the Linga 
in the form of refulgence came here and manifested in front 
of Jiianavapi. That Linga (is called) Tarake8vara. 
154-1 56. Tarakajiiana (Knowledge of redemption) shall be 
obtained by worshipping that Linga. A man should take his 
holy bath in Jiianavapi, visit Tarakesa, perform all the due 
rites at twilight after offering libations to grandfathers and 
observe the vow of silence till the Linga is visited. He is lib­
erated from all sins and he attains perpetual merit. At the end 
of the life, he gets Taraka Jiiana through which he gets lib­
erated. 
1 57. 
From the holy spot of Kirata where formerly 
the 
Lord became a hunter, Kiratesa has manifested here. 
1 58. 
A man should bow down to that Kiratesvara Linga 
behind Bharabhiite8vara. He will 
never lie thereafter within 
the belly of a mother. 
1 59. 
The Linga called Maruke8vara came from the city of 
Lanka. By worshipping that Linga men have no fear of Rakµsas. 
160. 
That Linga named Nairrte8vara is in the south-west­
ern quarter. Worshipped after Paulastyaraghava it destroys all 
evils (men and things) . 
161 . 
Jala Linga is fond of water. It is more meritorious 
than Sthala Linga. It has come there from and established 
itself in the middle of the waters of Ganga. 
1 62. 
Its (mansion o r shrine) i s very wonderful It is seen 
in the middle of Ganga. It is very excellent and consists of all

=== PAGE 213 ===

IV.ii.69.163-175 
203 
metals. It is splendid and is full of all jewels. 
163. 
Even today it is seen by a few due to the weightiness 
of merit accumulated. 
The Liriga (named) Sre!jĳha came here from the holy spot 
KoĳISvara. 
164. 
By visiting that Liriga one attains the merit of visiting 
ten million Lirigas. The Liriga (named) SreHha is behind 
Jye!jĳhesvara. It bestows excellent Siddhis. 
165. 
The Liriga (named) Anale8vara has come out of the 
mouth of Va«;lava (submarine fire) . Worshipped here in front 
of Nalesvara it bestows all Siddhis. 
1 66. 
Having come from Virajas Tirtha the Three-eyed Lord 
of Devas stationed himself in Trivi!jƀpa Liriga of beginningless 
. 
. 
existence. 
167. 
From Amarakćƀka Lord Orilkara manifested him­
self in the J;Ileritorious Pilipila Tirtha that bestows redemption 
on all. 
168. 
That is the first Liriga with Taraka (Prͦ
ava) as its 
source while Ganga had not yet arrived at KaSi. However, it 
had manifested for the sake of uplifting the three worlds. 
1 69. 
A great Liriga with its (Pͧ
ava's) shape manifested 
itself therefrom. None other than our Lord knows its great­
ness. 
1 70. 
0 Lord, I brought these great Ayatanas (holy spots) 
after leaving only a part in the different original holy spots. 
1 7 1 . 
All those meritorious ones have arrived with great 
fervour, not otherwise. 0 Lord, all the places all-round are 
beautiful in every respect and are capable of scraping the sky. 
1 72. 
They are constructed of many metals and are bril­
liant with all variegated jewels. Merely by viewing their pin­
nacle, salvation is attained. 
1 73. 
0 most excellent one among Suras, if the names of 
these Lirigas are heard, heaps of sins arising in thousands of 
births perish. 
1 74. 
0 Lord, what behest is to be carried out now by me? 
The Lord may be pleased to utter it and it should be consid­
ered as fulfilled. 
Skanda said: 
1 75. 
On hearing these words of Nandin, Hara, the Lord

=== PAGE 214 ===

204 
Skanda Purii:rJ.a 
of the chiefs of Devas, joyously commanded Sailadi (Nandin) 
and said thus; 0 Pot-born One: 
Sri Devadeva said: 
1 76-1 78. 0 Nandin, you have done well. 0 perpetual per­
former of what is pleasing, carry out this behest. Employ the 
CaQ.<;ils now. There are nine crores of CamuQ.<;ias accompanied 
by their deities, Bhutas, Vetalas and Bhairavas. Their forms 
are impossible to be assailed. In order to guard the city, post 
them all-round in every fort along with their vehicles, armies 
and weapons. 
Skanda said: 
1 79-1 82. Mter commanding Nandin thus, Mr<;la in the com­
pany of Mr<;lanl, went to the holy Traiviᔻᔽapa that enables the 
seed of salvation to grow. 
The son of Silada took up the behest or" Isa on his head, 
called the Durgas and established them in every fort. ᖏy lis­
tening to this chapter describing the sacred Ayatanas, in due 
order, with great faith, a man will attain heavenly pleasures 
and salvation. If a man listens to this group of sixtyeight great 
Ayatanas, he will never enter the cave of the belly of a mother. 
CHAPTER SEVENTY 
Establishment of the Deities 
Agastya said: 
1 . 
0 son of Katyayani, tell me how the deities were ap­
pointed in their duties at the behest of the Lord of Devas by 
Nandin, the delighter of tᖐe universe. 
2. 
0 Lord, please do me a favour. Narrate factually where 
which deities were posted for the protection of Avimukta. 
3. 
On hearing this request of Agastya, the son of Mahadeva 
joyously narrated which places were assigned to which deities 
in Anandavana.

=== PAGE 215 ===

IV.ii.70.4-1 7 
205 
Skanda said: 
4. 
Mter creating Visala Tirtha in Ganga in VarƁasi, Visaliikl}i1, 
the great bestower of cherished things, was established on the 
back of the holy spot. 
5. 
(A devotee) who takes his holy bath in Visala Tirtha and 
bows down to Visalakl?i attains profuse riches and glory ac­
cording great welfare both here and hereafter. 
6. 
On the third day in the dark half of the month of Bhadra 
(Aug.-Sept. ) men should observe fast and keep awake at night 
in the vicinity of Visalakl?i. 
7. 
In the morning, after embellishing fourteen virgins with 
garlands, clothes and ornaments according to the capacity (of 
the devotee) , they should be fed assiduo1)sly. 
8. 
Thereafter, Paral).a rite (breaking the fast) should be 
performed in the company of sons and servants. Thereby, 0 
Pot-born One, the benefit of a perfect residence in VarͰasi 
shall be obtained. 
9. 
On the same day a great religious festival should be 
organized by the residents of the holy place for the purpose 
of quelling troubles and for the acquisition of glory of salva­
tion. 
1 0-1 7. 
In Varal).asi, Visalakl?i should be assiduously adored 
by means of incense, lights, splendid garlands, fascinating presents, 
ornaments of gems, pearls etc., wonderful canopies, chowries, 
excellent silk garments not used before and fragrant scents, 
for the enrichment of the Glory of Salvation by the residents 
of any place. Even the least thing offered by excellent men 
to Visalakl?i is conducive to bring in endless benefit in both 
the worlds. 
The perfect fruit of whatever is offered at the seat of Visaliikl}i, 
of Japa, Homa, eulogy etc., is salvation. No hesitation need be 
entertained in this regard. 
By the adoration of VisaHikl?i a husband endowed with the 
wealth of handsome fe ,\tures and embellished with good qualities 
and habits is obtained by virgins, an excellent son by a preg-
I . ViSiiliiJc#: Near Vi5vanatha Temple towards Gangi. The shrine is a SaktipiŨ:;,. 
(where a part of Sati's body fell) . VisalaŌi is regarded as connected with 
Kamakµi of Kaiici and Kamakhya of Assam and also with Minaqi of Madurai. 
(BCL 1 72-1 73)

=== PAGE 216 ===

206 
Skanda Purii7J.a 
nant woman and capability of conception by barren women. 
Great conjugal bliss is obtained by women hitherto denied 
that bliss; widows are assured that in the next life there will 
be no widowhood. Worshipped, heard or seen in K.asi, Visalalqi 
fulfills the desires of women and men desirous of the greatest 
liberation. 
18. 
There in the vicinity of Gariga-Kesava, there is an-
other Tirtha called Lalita Tirtha. Goddess Lalita\ the great 
protectress of the holy place, is there. 
19. 
She too should be assiduously adored for the aug-
mentation of all affluence. Obstacles never come in the way 
of the worshippers of Lalita. 
20. 
By worshipping Lalita in the month of Asvina (Sept.-
Oct.) on the second day in the dark half, a devotee, whether 
man or woman, attains the desired status. 
2 1 . 
By taking the holy bath in Lalita Tirtha and bowing 
down to Lalita the devotee shall obtain blessedness everywhere 
even if he utters anything (by way of prayer) . 
22. 
0 sage, Goddess Visvabhuja, an aspect of Gauri is 
stationed in front ofVisalalqi, destroying always the great obstacles 
of those having devotion to the holy spot. 
23. 
For the augmentation of all desired things the reli-
gious festival of Goddess Visvabhuja should be assiduously cel­
ebrated· during the nine days of the Sarat season (first to the 
ninth day in the bright half of Asvina) . 
24. 
If any man does not bow down to Goddess Visvabhuja 
in Varai.J.asi, how can that evil-souled one get mental peace 
from great calamities. 
25. 
Those by whom Goddess Visvabhuja is eulogized and 
adored in Varai_lasi, are nev_s:r harassed by masses of obstacles. 
They are meritorious souls. 
26. 
There is another deity in VarƁasi namely Varahi in 
the vicinity of Kratuvaraha. By devoutly bowing to her, a man 
can avoid sinking down into the ocean of disaster. 
27. 
Sivadiiti should be visited there itself. She destroys 
calamities. She keeps her trident lifted up for the protection 
of Anandavana. She threatens enemies. 
1. She is at Lalita Ghat, formerly known as Ganga Ke5ava Ghat. Lalita is 
an important deity at Varar:tasi and Prayaga. (BCL 231-32)

=== PAGE 217 ===

IV.ii. 70.28-40 
207 
28. 
On the southern side of Indre5a is the deity Aindri 
holding the thunderbolt in the hand and seated on a lordly 
elephant. She should be worsi)ipped. She always confers afflu-
ence. 
29. 
In the vicinity of Skandesvara is the deity Kaumari 
riding the peacock as her vehicle. She should be assiduously 
visited for the increase of great benefit. 
30. 
To the south of Mahesvara, goddess Mahe5vari seated 
on the bull as her vehicle should be worshipped by men. She 
bestows cattle wealth. 
3 1 . 
In the vicinity of NirvaQa-Narasirhha is the · deity 
Narasirhhi with the discus raised up in her beautiful hand. She 
should be adored by those who are desirous of salvation. 
32. 
The deity Brahmi 
riding the swan as her vehicle is 
stationed to the west of Brahmesa. She strikes down enemies 
with a handful of water out of her KamaQ«;ialu (waterpot) . 
33. 
For acquiring a perfect knowledge of Brahman, she 
should be worshipped everyday by BnihmaQas, ascetics and 
those desiring to know the truth about Brahman. 
34. 
A devotee should always resort to the deity NarayaQi 
in K.asi. She eradicates obstacles by means of great arrows 
discharged from the Sarriga bow hͱre and there. 
35. 
Great rise in prosperity in K.asi comes to that person 
who bows down to NarayaQi who is to the west of Gopi-Govinda. 
She rotates the discus in her raised index finger. 
36. 
Thereafter, a man with devotion should worship Gauri 
in the form of Viriipak³i, in the northern direction of Devayani. 
He obtains the desired glory. 
37. 
The deity Saile5vari who is stationed near Saile8vara 
and who, with her index finger threatens calamities and tor­
ments, should be duly worshipped. 
38-39. A man with devotion should take his holy bath in 
Citrakiipa that bestows various kinds of benefit on l_llen, visit 
Citraguptesvara and worship the deity CitraghaQta·. One who 
worships CitraghaQta will not be adversely reported by Citragupta 
even if he has committed many sins and left the path of righ­
teousness. 
40. 
If a devotee in K.asi, whether man or woman, fails to 
worship Citraghai)ta, thousands of obstacles will come to him 
or her at every step.

=== PAGE 218 ===

208 
Skanda Purii:r;ta 
41 . 
It is on the third day in the bright half of the month 
of Caitra that devotees should assiduously arrange the reli­
gious procession and pilgrimage. A very great celebration should 
be held and vigilance be kept during the night. 
42. 
If a devotee worships Citragha1.11:<i with all the great 
requisites of a great adoration, he does not hear the knell of 
the bell of the god of Death tied round the neck of his buffalo. 
43. 
The deity Citragriva should be bowed to in the east 
of Citrangadesvara. The man never sees the tortures of various 
kinds (inflicted by Varna) . 
44. 
A man with devotion should perform all rites in the 
water in Bhadraᖑapi and visit Bhadrakali in front of Bhadranaga. 
He never sees inauspiciousness and sorrow. 
45. 
By assiduously worshipping Harasiddhi to the east of 
Siddhivinayaka, the excellent man obtains all great powers. 
46. 
After duly worshipping Vidhi by means of different 
kinds of offerings, in the vicinity of Vidhisvara, the devotee 
attains various kinds of powers. 
47. 
The devotee should take his holy bath in the Prayaga 
Tirtha and worship the deity Niga<;fabhaiijani ('breaker of fet­
ters') . He is never tormented with fetters. 
48. 
With the desire for liberating a prisoner, a devotee 
should always worship Niga<;labhaiijani on a Tuesday, devoutly 
taking only one morsel of food. (The name of the deity may 
be Bandi-Comm.) 
49. 
On being worshipped she accords even the severance 
from worldly bondage. Of what reckoning are fetters etc. through 
her adoration? 
50. 
There is no doubt in this that due to the faith of men 
resorting to the feet of the _deity Bandi, even a kinsman staying 
very far off will return soon. 
5 1 . 
If she is served perfectly after taking up some vow 
and observances, she will fulfil all desires soon removing all 
doubts regarding Kaᖒi. 
52. 
This deity, the breaker of the bondage of the devo-
tees, has a hammer and a chisel in her hands. She is in the 
vicinity of Tirtharaja. What desires does she not fulfil? (i.e., 
fulfils all desires.) 
53-55. Behind Pasupati and in the vicinity of Amrtesvara is 
the goddess (Amrtesvari) . She should be assiduously bowed to

=== PAGE 219 ===

IV.ii. 70.56-66 
209 
after taking a holy bath in the well Amrtakupa. A man should 
devoutly worship the deity Amr!esvarl. By resorting to her 
lotus-like feet the devotee shall gain immortality. Who will not 
gain immortality if he meditates on the deity Mahii,maya holding 
a pitcher of nectar in the right hand and granting fearlessness 
with the gesture of left hand? 
56. 
The deity Siddhalak!?mi, the mother of the universe, 
is to the west of Amrtesvara. She is in front of the Prapitamaha 
Liilga. She bestows great powers. 
57. 
Who will not attain glory and fortune by visiting the 
mansion of Siddhalak!?mi, that has the shape of a lotus and 
is called Lak!?mivilasa. 
58. 
Thereafter the deity Kubja, the mother of the uni-
verse, who is in front of Nalakubara Liilga and to the west of 
Prapitamaha (Liilga) should be worshipped. 
59. 
On being worshipped, Kubja removes calamities entirely. 
Hence Kubja should be assiduously worshipped in Kasi by 
those who seek auspiciousness and welfare. 
60. 
Kubjarhbaresvara Liilga is to the west of Nalakubara. 
There the deity Trilokasundari Gauri should be worshipped. 
She bestows everything desired. 
61 . 
The deity Trilokasundari shall bestow spiritual pow-
ers (and make a female devotee) the most beautiful lady in 
all the three worlds. By worshipping that goddess widowhood 
does not befall. 
62. 
The deity of great power named Dipta is in the vi-
cinity of Sarilbaditya. By worshipping her, devotees become 
endowed with brilliant splendour. 
63. 
Goddess Mahalak!?mi, the mother of the universe, is 
in the vicinity of Srikm),!ha. The mother of the universe should 
be worshipped after taking holy bath in Srikui:u;ia Tirtha. 
64. 
The devotee should offer libations to the ancestors 
duly in the Tirtha designated Srikm:u;la and make due gifts. 
He will never be abandoned by the goddess of Wealth. 
65. 
The holy spot of Lak!?mi is a great Piᔽha (sacred pedestal) 
that accords spiritual powers (to the aspirant) . A man who 
practises Mantras there shall attain Siddhi. 
66. 
There are many Pi!has in Kasi conferring spiritual 
powers, but nothing else is the great cause of fortune and 
affluence like Mahalak!?mipitha.

=== PAGE 220 ===

210 
Skanda Pura\a 
67. 
On the sacred day of MahalaƂmyatami, men should 
celebrate religious festivals there. On being worshipped here 
duly, Padma (goddess Lakmi) never abandons their abodes. 
68. 
To the nortli of Mahalakmi is the deity Hayakai).fhi 
holding an axe. Everyday she cuts off the great trees of obstacles 
in Kasi. 
69. 
The deity Kaurmi Sakti (the Sakti of Kurma, ViQu's 
incarnation as Tortoise) is to the south of Mahalakmi. She 
holds noose in her hand. She binds the masses of obstacles 
of the holy spot every moment. 
70. 
On being worshipped and eulogized by men, she ac-
cords ͨ
etra-siddhi (Siddhi of the holy spot?) . 
Sikhi CaQQi · is the great protectress of the holy spot in the 
north-west. 
7 1 . 
She consumes the mass of obstacles and produces the 
sound akin to thal of a peacock. By visiting her, all the ail­
ments of men perish. 
72-73. Always alert, BhimacaQ«;li guards the northern gate­
way. A devotee should visit BhimacaQQi holding a noose an<;l 
mallet in front of Bhime8vara, and perform all rites like water 
libations in BhimakuQ«;ia. He will become contented and blessed. 
He will never see anywhere the messengers of Yama of exces­
sively terrible appearance and size. 
74. 
The goddess Chagavaktresvari is to the south of 
Vrabhadhvaja. Day and night, she eats off the shoots of the 
trees of masses of obstacles. 
75. 
It is due to the grace of that goddess that the oppor-
tunity of living in KaSi is obtained. Hence one should sincerely 
worship Goddess Chage8vari on the Mahatami day (eighth 
day in the bright half of Asvina) . 
76. 
Goddess .Talͩ
ailghesvari keeps the palm tree as her 
weapon. She eradicates clusters of obstacles in Anandavana 
(i.e. Kasi) . 
77. 
A devͪ tee should bow down to the hideous-faced 
Talajailghesvari (who is) to the south of Sailgamesvara Liilga. 
He is never assailed by obstacles. 
78. 
In the Tirtha named Uddalaka, to the south of 
Uddalakesvara Liilga, the deity named Yamadarh³tra chews the 
mass of obstacles. 
79. 
Those by whom Yamadariltra is bowed to in the Tirtha

=== PAGE 221 ===

IV.ii. 70.80..92 
21 1 
named Uddalaka, are never afraid of Yama here even after 
committing a number of sins. 
80-85. 
In Darukesvara Tirtha in the vicinity of Darukda 
is the deity well-known as Carmamm:u;la. She has the nether 
worlds constituting her palate and mouth. The sky is her upper 
lip and the earth the lower lip. She holds a skull and a dagger 
in her hands. She is fond of swallowing the whole of cosmos. 
(She is so lean that) her belly is dried up. She appears as 
though she is bound with sinews. She protects the eastern part 
of the holy spot from masses of obstacles. She has thousands 
of huge brawny arms shining. She is squint-eyed. She holds 
a discus and sweetmeat in the hands extending like the ocean. 
She wears the hide of a leopard. She laughs harshly and 
boisterously. She chews the bones of sinnͫ rs quickly as though 
they were merely lotus stalks. She keeps the bodies of betray­
ers of the holy spot with wicked habits stuck up at the tip of 
her trident. A garland of skulls adorns her. She is terrible in 
form. By bowing down to Carmamm.u;la a man is never assailed 
by the obstacles of the holy spot. 
86-87. 
T h i s ( o th e r ) d e i ty MaharuQ.c;la is also like 
CarmamuQ.c;la. There is only this difference that she has the 
garland of headless trunks as her ornament. Both the god­
desses are excessively powerful and they guard the holy spot. 
They spread their hands before each other, clap them and 
laugh boisterously. · 
88. 
The deity MaharuQ.c;la of fierce countenance always 
stands in Hayagrivesvara Tirtha to the north of Lolarka. She 
removes the obstacles of her devotees. 
89. 
In between these two deities named CarmamuQ.c;la 
and MaharuQ.c;la is stationed CamuQ.c;la with her form made up 
of skulls. 
90-9 1 . These three deities should be assiduously worshipped 
by the residents of the holy spot. They bestow wealth and 
foodgrains. They accord sons and grandsons. They destroy all 
calamities. They grant the Glory of Salvation when remembered, 
visited, bowed to, touched and adored by men with great 
faith. 
92. 
To the west of MaharuQ.c;la is the auspicious goddess 
Svapndvari. She foretells the future, whether good or bad, to 
the devotee directly in the course of a dream.

=== PAGE 222 ===

212 
Skanda Purii:r;a 
93-94. 
A devotee should take his holy bath in the holy 
confluence of Asi on any lunar day. Whether man or woman 
that wise one should observe fast and worship Svapnesvara 
Liriga and the Goddess Svapnesvarl. He or she should lie down 
on bare ground. He (she) will be able to see the future in 
dream. 
95. 
Even today this can be tested there and believed in 
by the persons who know. Svapnesvarl will tell the past, present 
and future. 
96. 
She should be assiduously worshipped in Kl!Si on the 
eighth, ninth or fourteenth lunar day by men who seek knowl­
edge during day or night. 
97. 
To the west of Svapnesvari is stationed Goddess Durga. 
She always protects the southern side of the holy spot. 
CHAPTER SEVENTYONE 
Exploits of Durgii 
Agastya said: 
1 . 0 son of Uma, how did the goddess get the name Durga? 
How should she be worshipped in KliSI? Narrate this to me. 
Skanda said: 
2. 
0 highly intelligent Pot-born One, I shall tell you how 
the goddess got the name Durga and how she should be worshipped 
by the aspirants. 
3. There was a great Daitya named Durga born of Daitya 
Ruru. Mter performing an intensively fierce penance, he got 
the boon of invincibility by human beings. 
4. Thereupon, all the worlds beginning with Bhiil_l, Bhuval_l, 
and Sval_l were brought under his control after conquering 
them in battle with the prowess of his arms. 
5. That powerful demon himself became (assumed the powers 
of) lndra, Vayu, 
Candra, Varna, Agni, Varul).a and Kubera. 
6. He himself took up the position of Isana, Rudra, Arka

=== PAGE 223 ===

IV.ii. 71.7-18 
213 
(the Sun-god) and Vasus. Fearing him even the great sages 
gave up penance. 
7. Agitated through fear for him, Brahmai).as ceased to 
study the Vedas. Enclosed sites for the performance of Yajiias 
were destroyed by his soldiers of unendurable (ferocity) . 
8-9. Many chaste women were outraged by them (as they, i.e. 
the demons were) determined to follow evil path. After carrying 
away others' possessions by force, they enjoyed them because 
they were unconquerable. They were evil in their conduct and 
ruthless in every activity they took up. Rivers became diverted 
from their regular course. Fires ceased to blaze. 
10. 
The luminaries ceased to be brilliant due to • the fear 
for him. The faces of the maidens in the form of the quarters 
became lustreless all-round. 
1 1 . 
All pious rites ceased (to be performed) . Impious 
ones prevailed. They alone transformed themselves into clouds 
and showered sportingly. 
12. 
In great fear for him, the earth put forth plants even 
though the seeds had not been sown. Even barren, non-fruit­
bearing trees bore fruits. 
1 3. 
The wives of gods and sages were imprisoned by that 
excessively arrogant demon. All the heaven-dwellers were made 
forest-dwellers by him. 
1 4. 
Extremely terrified, men did not honour gods who 
visited their houses even with a polite conversation, because 
they would in that case face difficulties and disasters. 
Skanda said: 
1 5. 
Neither nobility of birth nor good habit and conduct 
contribute to greatness. High position alone is conducive to 
welfare. A fall from high position is thought to be meanness. 
1 6. 
Only they are blessed who, even in adversity, forced 
by wretchedness, do not step into the courtyard of persons 
with mind defiled by affluence. 
1 7. 
Death is better in the world because there is no in-
dignity therein. Even immortality is not conducive to welfare 
if there is meanness. 
18. 
Only they live truly, only they are meritorious, they 
whose mind like the ocean does not give up its dignified majesty 
even in adversity.

=== PAGE 224 ===

214 
Skanda Purii1J.a 
19. 
At times there is rise in prosperity. At times there 
comes adversity. A wise man of fortitude should not give up 
courage on either of these chance occasions. 
20. 
The rise and fall of the meritorious should be kept 
in mind by wise men. Equanimity should never be abandoned. 
Happiness and sorrow are impermanent. 
21 . 
He who becomes depressed at the times of adversity 
is ruined. Both the worlds are lost in regard to him. Hence 
one shall avoid dejection. 
22. 
If people remain courageous even in disaster in this 
world and in the other one, no misery and disaster, being 
slighted and driven away by their courage, will touch them 
again. 
23. 
The Devas who had lost their kingdom sought refuge 
in Mahesa. Thereupon the Goddess was directed to suppress 
the demon by the omniscient one (Siva) . 
24. 
On receiving the great Lord's behest joyously, Bhavanl 
assured freedom from fear to the immortal ones and set about 
for the war. 
25. 
She summoned Kalaratri, the most beautiful one in 
all the three worlds by her radiance. RudraJ.ll sent her to 
challenge the demon. 
26-30. 
Mter coming to that Daitya of evil conduct, Kalaratri 
said: "0 Lord of Daityas, give up the wealth of the three worlds. 
May Indra get back the three worlds. You go to Rasatala. May 
all the sacred rites enjoined in the Vedas and binding on the 
expounders of the Vedas be performed. If at all there is a 
vestige of pride (in you) , come on for a fight; otherwise, if 
you wish to live, seek refuge in Indra. I have been sent by the 
goddess of great auspicious features to you to convey this message. 
If you are indifferent to it, your death is certain. Hence, 0 
great Asura, do what is proper. If you care to hear what is 
beneficial to you, go unto her to retain your life (and save 
your life) . " 
31-38. 
O n hearing these words of Goddess MahakaH that 
king of Daityas blazed with fury: "Catch her; seize her. This 
enchantress of the three worlds has come here due to my 
good luck. This is the great fruit of the creeper in the form 
of affluence born of the reign of the three worlds. It is for 
this woman alone that Devas, sages and men were imprisoned

=== PAGE 225 ===

IV.ii.71 .39-49 
215 
by me. Without any strain on my part and due to the rise of 
auspiciousness, she has come to my own abode. Due to the 
power of good luck, what one deserves shall certainly come 
to one whether staying in forest or in own residence. May the 
attendants take her to the great Ladies' Apartment. My king­
dom has become adorned with this lady of excellent embel­
lishment. Highly intelligent that I am, I have had this great 
rise in my fortune today. The fortune is not mine alone but 
of the entire race of the Daityas. Let the ancestors dance; let 
the kinsmen rejoice in the happiness. Let Mrtyu, Kala, Antaka, 
rather all the Devas, feel the terrific impact of fear." When he 
said thus and the attendants came near her to carry her away, 
the leader of the Daityas was replied to by Kalaratri. 
Kiilariitri said: 
39-40. 0 king of Daityas of great wisdom, this is not proper 
on the part of people like you. We are only messengers. We 
are extremely dependent on others, 0 most excellent one 
among statesmen. Even the most insignificant one should never 
harass a messenger. What then in the case of great and powerful 
lords like you? 
41-42. 
0 great king, why this favour on mean ones like 
she-messengers! On her arrival, when the goddess comes, we 
too shall come without giving you any trouble. 0 Lord of 
Daityas, defeat my mistress in battle and enjoy as you please 
thousands of women like me. 
43-49. 
Today itself you will have the great happiness on 
seeing her. Along with your ancestors all your kinsmen shall 
be happy. All your long-cherished desires will become fulfilled 
today. There is no one to protect her. She is a weak woman. 
She possesses all exquisite features. It behoves you to see her. I shall 
show you where she, the great mine (of gems) in the whole universe, 
is. If only one (like me) 's held what fuJfilment shall there be to your 
love? Till the end of this < iay, I shall not leave your vicinity. So restrain 
these attendants who deSJre to seize me. 
On hearing her utterance thus, that Asura, deluded by lust 
and anger, preferred that she-messenger alone (though) she 
was his own death. 
He commanded the eunuchs thus, 0 sage: "Let the atten-

=== PAGE 226 ===

216 
Skanda Purii:r;ta 
dants take her to the Antabpura quickly." Those powerful eunuchs 
tried to seize her with force. 
50-52. 
With the fire issuing from her grunting sound of 
HUM, she quickly reduced them to ash. Ori seeing them reduced 
to ash in a moment by that she-messenger, the Lord of Daityas 
became furious. With a motion of his eyes he created thirty 
thousand Daityas such as Durdhara, Durmukha, Khara, Slrapal).i, 
Pasap:il).i, Surendradamana, Hanu, Yajfiari, Kha4ga-loman, Ugrasya, 
Devakarilpana etc. 
53. 
"Let the Danavas bring this wicked woman quickly 
tying her with ropes, making her tresses dishevelled and making 
her robes and ornaments loosened. " 
54. 
At this behest of the Lord of Daityas, the demons 
with Durdhara as their leader endeavoured to seize her hold­
ing ropes, swords and mallets in their hands. 
55. 
All those demons with bodies huge and heavy like 
biᕱ mountains, keeping their hands raised, holding weapons 
and missiles were forcibly struck by her exhaled breath and 
hurled to the ends of the quarters. 
56. 
As those Daityas numbering hundreds of crores were 
blown away, Goddess Kalaratri set off by the aerial path. 
57-60. 
Crores and crores of thousands of great Asuras 
filled the space between heaven and earth and followed her 
as she moved on. The great Daitya named Durga set off angrily 
accompanied by a hundred crores of chariots, two hundred 
Arbudas (i.e. 2000 crores) of elephants and a crore of Arbudas 
of horses having the velocity of wind. The foot soldiers were 
innumerable. They reduced huge rocks into powder under 
their feet. They were very huge and terrible. They struck terror 
into all the three worlds and they kept their arms and weapons 
lifted up. 
61-66. 
After her arrival, she reported the Daitya ' s 
misdemeanour. On seeing Mahadevl ('great goddess') camping 
on the Vindhya mountain, the leader of the Daityas felt his 
heart pierced through by the arrows of the god of Love. She 
had a thousand huge arms. She was excessively radiant with 
various terrible weapons (in the hands) . She was eager to 
fight. Her splendid face appeared to be washed clean by the 
innumerable rays of the rising moon. She appeared like the 
unusual. moonshine of a peculiar moon moving up from the

=== PAGE 227 ===

IV.ii.71.67-85 
217 
ocean of beauty. Her person was pervaded by the lustre of a 
collection of great rubies. She was the very luminary illuminating 
the beautiful cities of the three worlds. She was like the great 
herbal creeper enlivening the god of Love burnt down by the 
fire of the eye of Siva. She resembled the great medicinal 
plant enchanting the universe with all the components of gracefully 
shining beauty. The demon of fierce tyrannical power commanded 
the chiefs of his great army thus: 
67-73. 
0 Jarilbha, Mah:ijarilbha, Kujarilbha, Vikaᔽanana, 
Larilbodara, Mahakaya, MahadarilHra, Mahahanu, Piil.gakᔻa. 
Mahiᔻagriva, Mahogra, Atyugravigraha, Kruraᕲa, Krodhanakranda, 
Sarilkrandana, Mahabhaya, Jitantaka, Mahabahu, Mahavaktra, 
Mahidhara, Dundubhi, Dundubhirava, Mahadundubhi, Nasika, 
Ugrasya, Dirghadasana, Meghake5a, Vrkanana, Sirilhasya, 
Sukaramukha, Sivarava, Mahotkaᔽa. Sukatui).Qa, Pracai).Qasya, 
Bhimakᔻa, ᕐudramanasa, Ulukanetra, Kail.kasya, KakatUJ).Qa, 
Karalavak, Dirghagriva, Mahajail.gha, Kramelaka-Sirodhara, 
Raktabindu, Japanetra, Vidyujjihva, Agnitapana, Dhumrakᔻa, 
Dh umanil:tsvasa, Cai).Qa, Cai).Qarilsutapana and others with 
Mahabhiᔻal).a as your leader, listen attentively to my command. 
74-75. 
If anyone among you or others can bring this 
Vindhyavasini boldly and intelligently, with force or through 
deceit, I shall undoubtedly grant him the position of Indra 
today. On seeing this beautiful woman my mind has become 
agitated. 
76. 
Let all of you go immediately, lest my mind already 
afflicted by the arrows of Kama; should become further per­
turbed due to the want of the attainment thereof." 
77. 
On hearing this utterance of Durga, the lord of Daityas, 
all the Daitya attendants joined their palms in reverence and 
said: 
78-85. 
"Listen attentively, 0 great king. Is this assignment 
difficult at all, being particularly that of a helpless, feeble 
woman? 0 lord, what great effort is. needed in bringing her? 
Who can dare to face us in all the three worlds? We are inherently 
very powerful beings on a par with the masses of flames of the 
fire appearing at the time of the annihilation of all beings. 
Moreover we are active in this endeavour through your grace. 
If only your majesty give us this command, immediately we will 
bring Indra along with his women and the entire hosts of

=== PAGE 228 ===

218 
Skanda Purii:r;ta 
Maruts a,nd throw him down in front of your feet. The worlds 
of Bhiib, Bhuvab and Sval}. have come under your command. 
The worlds of Mahal}., Jana, Tapal}. and Satya are those where 
you exercise your authority. 0 great Asura, there too there is 
nothing which we cannot achieve through your command and 
direction. The Lord of VaikmHha always obeys your behests 
by joyously sending all the beautiful gems. The Lord of KaiHisa 
has already been left off {ignored) by us because he swallows 
poison and adorns himself with ash, hide and serpents due to 
excessive poverty. Due to his fear for us, a woman has been 
concealed by him in half of his body. In his entire village, 
there is no other quadruped. 
86-95. 
He has only one old bull. That too does not depend 
upon anyone else. In his entire city, the attendants of this sort 
live. All of them are habitual residents of cremation grounds 
and clad only in their loin cloths. They appear white with the 
ash. they have single matted tress of hairs. 
0 L'Ord, what are we to do with those Gai_las gripped with 
poverty? Indeed the oceans regularly send collections of gems 
everyday. The pitiable serpents cause illumination for our sake 
every evening through the gems on their hoods, 0 Lord. The 
wish-yielding celestial tree, the divine cow, the groups of CintamaQi 
jewels-all these are present even in our houses, due to your 
favour. Wind-god does the work of a fan for assiduously serv­
ing you. Varui_la supplies pure water everyday. Fire-god washes 
the clothes. The Moon himself is your umbrella-bearer. 
The Sun causes the full-bloom of the lotuses in your pleasure­
ponds. Who is it among human beings, Devas and Serpents who 
does not look up to your benign favour. All living beings begin­
ning with Suras, Asuras, birds and Sky-walkers etc. depend upon 
you. 0 king, see {for yourself) our manliness. We shall forcibly 
bring her." After saying thus all of them became simultaneously 
agitated like the oceans at the time of Samvarta (ultimate disso­
lution of the world) to flood the entire universe. The sound of 
martial instruments rose all-round. 
96-100. On hearing that cowards experienced horripilation. 
Though the Devas are not cowards usually, yet they became 
frightened. The earth quaked. All the oceans became agitated. 
The garlands of stars fell doᕳn. The tumultuous sound of the 
wardrums pervaded heaven and earth.

=== PAGE 229 ===

IV.ii. 71 . 101-1 15 
219 
Thereupon the goddess created out of her body hundreds 
and thousands of Saktis. The extensive army of these powerful 
Daityas that resembled the ocean crossing the limits of the 
shores, was checked all-round by those Saktis (surrounding 
each one) . The weapons and missiles discharged by the Daityas 
in the course of the war were very fierce. Yet they were treated 
contemptuously like blades of grass by the Saktis and 
destroyed. 
101-103. The demons, the chief of whom wasJambha, became 
excessively furious and they showered arrows, missiles etc. like 
clouds showering water. They discharged and wielded swords, 
discus, Bhusui).Q.is, maces, mallets, iron rods, tridents, axes, 
javelins, spikes, spears, crescent-shaped sharp weapons, razor­
edged arrows of various sorts that pierced •through the vulner­
able parts of the bodies. They hurled huge trees and big boulders 
too. 
104-108. The great goddess camping on Vindhyas, equipped 
with Maya power, lifted a big bow fitted with arrows having 
a missile presided over by Wind-god. With it she sportingly 
scattered far away the multitudes of weapons and missiles of 
the Daityas. 
On seeing his army stripped of all their weapons, Durga, 
the great Asura, seized a burning Sakti (Spear) and hurled it 
towards the goddess. As the spear approached her rapidly in 
the course of the battle, the goddess reduced it to powder with 
the arrows discharged from her bow. On perceiving the Sakti 
split up, Durga the great demon discharged a discus that delighted 
the circle of the Daityas very much. That too was reduced to 
minute particles with hundreds of arrows by the goddess. 
109. 
Thereupon the tormentor of the immortal ones seized 
a bow evolved out of horn which resembled the bow of Indra 
and hit the heart of the goddess with an arrow. 
1 1 0-1 1 1 . Though that arrow was obstructed by the goddess 
through her arrows of great velocity, 0 sage, it rapidly rushed 
towards the goddess. Thereupon, she struck at it with the 
frame of her bow moving it rapidly and warded it off-a veritable 
shaft of the god of Death himself, it was. 
1 1 2-1 15. When the arrow became ineffective, the infuriated 
unassailable demon seized a trident that had the brilliant lustre 
of the fire appearing at the time of the great ultimate anniᕴ

=== PAGE 230 ===

220 
Skanda Purii:r;ta 
hilation of the world, and hurled it at the goddess. As the 
trident approached her, Cai;i<;lika cut it off by means of her 
own trident along with the hope of victory in the demon. 
When that great trident was rendered ineffective by the tri­
dent of the goddess, the great lord of the Daityas seized a 
huge club and rushed suddenly at the goddess. The powerful 
demon struck her on the shoulder. 
1 1 6. 
Hitting the shoulder of the goddess, the club resem­
bling the peak of a big mountain split into a hundred and 
thousand bits. 
1 1 7. 
Then, with the left foot, the goddess kicked the leader 
of the Daityas who was afflicted in the heart and fell on the 
ground. 
1 1 8. 
After the fall, the leader of the Daityas got up imme­
diately and vanished in a trice like a lamp extinguished by the 
wind. 
1 1 9. 
Thereupon the Saktis urged by the mother of the 
universe moved about in the hosts of the Daityas like the army 
of the god of Death at Samvarta time. 
CHAPTER SEVENTYfWO 
Victory of Durga 
Agastya said: 
1 . 0 Skanda, 0 son of the omniscient Lord, 0 delighter 
of the heart of Parvati, who were all those Saktis? Tell their 
names to me. 
Skanda said: 
2. 
0 Pot-born Sage, I shall tell the names of those great 
Saktis born of the limbs of Uma. Listen to them factually: 
3. 
Trailokyavijaya, Tara, ᕐama, Trailokyasundari, Tripura, 
Trijaganmata, Bhima, Tripurabhairavi, 
4. 
Kamakhya, Kamalakᔻi, Dhrti, Tripuratapani, Jaya, Jayanti, 
Vijaya, Jalesi, Aparajita,

=== PAGE 231 ===

IV.ii. 72.5-22 
221 
5. Sailkhini, Gajavaktra, Mahiᕇaghni, RaQ.apriya, Subhananda, 
Kotarakᕇi, Vidyujjihva, Sivarava, 
6. Trinetra, Trivaktra, Tripada, Sarvamailgala, Humkaraheti, 
Talesi, Sarpasya, Sarvasundari", 
7. 
Siddhi, Buddhi, Svadha, Svaha, Mahanidra, Sarasana, 
PasapaQ.i, Kharamukhi, Vajratara, ᕵac;lanana, 
8. Mayuravadana, Kaki, Suki, Bhasi, Garutmati; Padmavati, 
Padmakesi, Padmasya, Padmavasini, 
9. Akᕇara, Tryakᕇara, Tantu, PraQ.avesi, Svaratmika, Trivarga, 
Garvarahita, Ajapa, JapahariQ.i, 
10. Japasiddhi, Tapal:tᕶiddhi, Yogasiddhi, Para, Amrta, 
Maitrikrt, Mitranetra, Rakᕇoghni, Daityatapani, 
1 1 . Stambhani, Mohani, Maya, Bahumaya, Balotkata., Uccatani, 
Maholkasya, Danujendrakᕇayamkari, 
1 2. 
ᕷemamkari, Siddhikari, Chinnamasta, Subhanana, 
Sakambhari, Mokᔻalakᕇmi, Trivargaphaladayini, 
1 3-14. 
Vartali, Jambhali, Klinna, Asvaruc;lha, Surdvari, 
Jvalamukhi and others. They numbered nine crores. All of 
them were extremely powerful. Sportingly the armies of the 
mighty Danavas were shrunk by them like the worlds shrunk 
by the flames of the fire at the time of the ultimate annihi­
lation. 
1 5-16. 
In the meantime, Durga, the mighty leader of the 
Daityas, made a shower of hailstones with the velocity of gusts 
of winds from behind the clouds. Thereupon, the esteemed 
goddess checked the shower of hailstones by discharging SoᕇaQ.a 
('drying up') missiles. 
1 7-18. 
Just as a lustful young woman remains unsuccessful 
even after getting a eunuch, so also the shower of the hail­
stones by the Daitya was ineffective in regard to the goddess. 
Thereupon, with the anger due to the sprain in his arms, the 
king of demons uprooted a peak of mountain and hurled it 
from the sky above. 
19. 
On noticing the huge mountain peak rushing towards 
her, she split it into millions of bits by striking if with the 
thunderbolt. 
20. 
Frequently shaking his head embellished with the earrings, 
the demon took the form of an elephant and rushed at the 
goddess. 
2 1-22. 
On seeing the elephant coming forward huge in

=== PAGE 232 ===

222 
Skanda Pura7J-a 
size like a mountain, the goddess bound him with a noose and 
quickly cut his trunk off with a sword. On the trunk having 
been cut off by the goddess, the elephant excessively trum­
peted. Rendered ineffective in his action, he assumed a buffalo's 
form. 
23-26. 
Kicking with his hoofs, he made the immovable 
earth tremble. That powerful animal hurled many boulders 
and rocks with his horns. Struck down by his exhalation, huge 
trees fell down on the ground. The seven vast expanses of 
water lashed against the shores and overflowed them. The 
pavilion of the three worlds was shaken by that powerful demon 
in the form of a great buffalo as though by the violent gusts 
of wind at the close of the Yugas. The entire Cosmic Egg 
became bewildered by the sudden, terrible fight. On seeing 
it, the goddess became furious and struck him with her tri­
dent. 
27-28. 
Flurried on being struck by the trident, he fell 
down and rose up again. Abandoning the form of the buffalo 
he became (a Daitya) with a thousand arms. Invincible (to 
others) that Durga shone excessively in the battlefield, hold­
ing thousands of weapons and resembled Kala, the destroyer. 
29-36. 
Then that highly powerful Daitya king seized the 
goddess (though) an expert in the battle and carried her quickly 
along the sky. Thereupon, he hurled the mother of the uni­
verse far off from the sky. In an instant the highly impetuous 
Daitya covered her with masses of arrows. 
The goddess within the circle of arrows high up in the sky 
above, shone like a streak of lightning encircled by masses of 
great clouds. 
Dispersing the multitude of arrows perfectly by means of 
her own arrows, she pien:ed the leader of Daityas by means 
of a great arrow. 
Pierced in the heart by the goddess with that great arrow, 
he became highly agitated and fell on the ground with eyes 
rolling about and created a river (of blood) by means of great 
torrents of his blood. When that Durga of highly impregnable 
exploits fell down, the divine war drums were beaten. All the 
worlds became delighted. The sun and the moon along with 
fire regained their original splendour. Making a shower of 
flowers, the Devas came there along with the great sages. They

=== PAGE 233 ===

IV.ii. 72.37-46 
223 
eulogized the great goddess respectfully with great hymns. 
The Devas said: 
[The . Prayer of the Devas:] 
37. 
Obeisance to you, 0 goddess, the nursing mother of 
the universe, the source of origin of the three worlds (like the 
AraQi producing fire) , 0 great Sakti of Mahesvara, 0 destroyer 
of Daityas, like an axe felling trees. 
38. 
0 siva pervading the three worlds, 0 wielder of conch-
shell, discus and club, obeisance to you in the form of ViᔻQU 
.engaged in holding forth in your hand your own Saniga 
bow. 
39. 
Obeisance to you, 0 goddess with the swan for ve-
hicle, 0 creatress of all :created things. 0 ground of origin of 
all worlds without beginning, 0 goddess in the forᕸ of the 
Four-faced Lord. 
40. 
You are the Sakti of Indra, of Kubera, of Vayu (the 
Wind-god) , of VaruQa, of Varna, of Niqti, of Isa and of Fire­
god. 
4 1 . 
You are the light of the Moon; you are the Sakti of 
the Sun; you are the Sakti of all the gods; you are the supreme 
goddess. 
42. 
You are Gauri; you are Savitri; you are Gayatri; you 
are Sarasvati. You are Prakrti; you are the (cosmic) intellect; 
you are in the form of the great Ego. 
43. 
You are in the form of the mind; you are in the form 
of all lndriyas (sense-organs) . You are in the form of the five 
Tanmatras (subtle elements) ; 0 Arilbika, you are in the form 
of all (gross) elements. 
44. 
You are in the form (of the qualities like) sound etc. 
You are one who blesses all the organs of action; you are the 
creator of the Cosmic Egg, 0 goddess. You are identical with 
the Cosmos. 
45. 
0 great goddess, you are the supreme goddess; you 
are greater than the greatest; you are in the form of the supreme 
soul, greater than everything beyond. 
46. 
0 isani, you are in the embodiment of everything; 
you are the formless one; you are present everywhere. 0 great

=== PAGE 234 ===

224 
Skanda Purii7J.a 
Maya, you are the power of Consciousness ( Cicchakti). 0 immortal 
one, you are Svaha; and also Svadha. 
47. 
You are in the form of Vaᔻaᔽ and Vauᔻaᔽ; you are in 
the form of Prat:J.ava; you are in the form of all the Mantras; 
Brahma and others are born of you. 
48. 
You are in the form of the four aims of life; you are 
the outcome of the benefit of the four aims of life; this entire 
universe is (born) from you; 0 storehouse of the universe, 
everything is in you. 
49. 
Whatever is visible and invisible, whatever is gross 
and subtle you are in the form of Sakti therein. There is 
nothing anywht;re without you. 
50. 
0 mother, the great leader of Asuras, Durga, who 
had employed the entire host of armies of the Daityas against 
the genuine Devas (Brahma and others) , has been killed by 
you. 0 refuge of those who bow down, we have been pro­
tected. Who else is there whom we shall seek as refuge? 
5 1 . 
0 goddess, only they whom you look with favour can 
be prosperous in the world with wealth and grain; only they 
can be blessed with sons, wives, grandsons and excellent friends; 
only their fame can spread all over the universe and make it 
bright as if with rays of the moon. 
52. 
0 consort of the enemy of Tripura, not even the 
least of trouble can befall the people in whose mind there 
is devotion unto you. Where can there be distress to the men 
who bow down unto you? Where is rebirth in the world to 
those who resort to your name throughout their lives? 
53. 
It is surprising, 0 Bhavanl, that the Daitya Durga fell 
within the range of your vision in the course of the battle and 
was subjected to the control of the god of Death, though your 
vision is the storehouse of nectar. It is clearly well-known. 
Even a wicked one does not attain wretchedness (or return to 
the earth by being born again) if he falls within the range of 
your vision . 
54. 
The Daityas who had attained the state of the locusts 
in the fire of your weapons, pierce through the (disc of the) 
Sun and attain heaven. This is because good persons do not 
have evii-intcntions towards even wicked ones. Loving them 
like good persons, they direct them to their own pathways. 
55. 
0 Mp;lanl, always protect us in the East (since) we

=== PAGE 235 ===

IV.ii. 72.56-62 
225 
have always bowed to you. 0 Bhavani, protect us in the South 
at every step from adversity. 0 wife of Tripura-Tapana ('destroyer 
of the three Puras') , protect us in the West. 0 Mahesi, do 
protect your devotees in the North. 
56-57. 
0 Brahmal).i, always protect (us) whose heads are 
bent down to you. 0 Vaiᔻl).avi, protect the families (of devo­
tees) from beneath. May Mrtyuiijaya, Trinayana, Tripura and 
Trisakti, protect in the quarters of Rudra, Fire (South-East) 
Nirrti (South-West) and the Wind-god (North-West) . 0 god­
dess devoid of impurities, may your trident protect our hairs; 
may the goddess Sasikalabhrt (wearing the crescent moon on 
her head) protect our forehead; may Uma protect the eye­
brows; may the bride of the Three-eyed Lord protect our eyes; 
may the daughter of the Mountain protect our nose; may Jaya 
protect the upper lip; and may Vijaya protect the region of 
lower lip. 
58. 
May Srutirava protect the pair of our ears; may Sri 
protect the row of teeth; may Cai).Qi protect the pair of our 
cheeks; may Val).i protect our tongue; may jayamati.gala always 
protect the chin; and may Katyayani protect the entire facial 
region. 
59. 
We make obeisance (to you) . May Nilakal).ᕡhi protect 
our neck here; may Bhudarasakti (Varahi) always protect the 
nape of the neck; may.Kaurmi protect the region of our shoulders 
always; may Aindri (Indra's Sakti) protect the upper arm and 
may Padma protect the hand. 
60. 
May Kamalaja protect the fingers of the hands; may 
Viraja protect the nails; may the destroyer of darkness sta­
tioned in the solar disc protect the armpit; may Sthalacari 
protect the chest; may Dharitri protect the heart; may the 
slayer of night-stalking demons protect both sides. 
6 1 . 
May Jagadisvari always protect the cavity of the stomach; 
may Nabhogati protect our navel; may Aja protect the back; 
may Vikaᕡa protect the waist; may Parama protect the buttocks; 
may Guharal).i ( ' Mother of Guha' ) protect the private 
parts; and may Apayahantri ('Destroyer of danger' ) protect 
the anus. 
62. 
May Vipula protect the pair of thighs; may Lalita pro-
tect the knees; may Java protect the calves; may Kaᕡhoratara 
protect the pair of ankles here; may Rasatalacara protect the

=== PAGE 236 ===

226 
Skanda Puriif.&a 
feet; may Ugra protect the region of the toes; may Candri 
protect the nails; and may Talavasini protect the soles of the 
feet. 
63. 
May Lakᔻmi protect our house; may ᕐemakari always 
protect our fields; may Priyakari protect our sons; may Sanatani 
protect our longevity. 
64. 
May Mahadevi protect the fame; may Dhanurdhari 
protect our virtue; may Kuladevi protect the family; may 
Sadgatiprada always protect the goal of the good. 
65. 
May Sarvani protect from all sides in the battlefield, 
in the royal palace, at the gaming table, at the hostilities, 
when there is danger from the enemy, in the house, in the 
forest, in water etc. 
66. 
Mter eulogizing the mother of the universe thus, all 
the Devas including Indra, sages, Gandharvas and CaraQ.as 
bowed down to her again and again. 
67-71 . 
Thereafter the delighted mother of the universe 
spoke to those excellent Suras: 
Durgii said: 
May all the Suras take up their administrative task in their 
respective positions of authority as before. 
I have become pleased with this prayer and eulogy perfectly 
based on reality. I shall grant you another boon. Ob! Listen 
ye all excellent Suras. If any man of pure habit eulogized me 
devoutly by means of this prayer, I shall destroy his adversity 
at every step. 
If a man wears the coat of mail of this prayer, he has no 
fear anywhere as if he is within the Vajrapaiijara (Adamantine 
Cage) . 
From today my name will become famous as Durga because 
I have caused the downfall of Durga, the Daitya, which was 
very difficult to accomplish. 
72. 
Those who seek refuge in me, Durga, will have no 
wretchedness anywhere. This eulogy of Durga is named 
Vajrapanjara and is highly meritorious. 
73-75. 
Making an armour with this, one can cease to be 
afraid of even Yama. Ghosts, goblins, vampires, evil Planets,

=== PAGE 237 ===

IV.ii. 72.76-89 
227 
groups of Sakinis and I;>akinis wicked spmts like Jhotirigas, 
demons, cruel poisonons serpents, fires, thieves, Vᕹtalas, fevers 
arising from gaseousness or biliousness etc.-all these flee on 
hearing this splendid prayer. 
76-77. 
This hymn named Vajrapanjara is laudatory of Durga. 
One who is protected by this hymn is free from the fear of 
even the thunderbolt. 
If anyone repeats this eight times and drinks the water 
consecrated therewith, he will never have pain in the stomach. 
78-80. 
Consecrated with this hymn, one will never have 
any affliction in the womb. Children will experience great 
peace and tranquillity by drinking the water consecrated with 
this hymn. All the Saktis along with me will be present where 
there is the presence of this hymn. At. my behest, they will 
accord protection to all my devotees. 
Mter granting boons thus to the Devas, the goddess van­
ished. 
81-84. 
All those heaven-dwellers joyously went to their 
respective abodes. 
Skanda said: 
It was thus, 0 great sage, that the goddess got the name 
Durgii. Listen how she should be worshipped (and resorted to) 
at Kasi, I shall tell you. 
Durga, the destroyer of wretchedness, should always be adored 
at Kasi on the eighth and the fourteenth lunar day and espe­
cially on Tuesdays. 
During the autumnal nine-day festivities, she should be adored 
everyday. She will then destroy collections of obstacles and 
grant wisdom and knowledge. Due to the presents of great 
adoration and the food offerings of sweet cooked rice Durga 
in Kasi shall be the bestower of cherished things. She will 
grant spiritual powers. There is no doubt in this. 
85-89. 
During the autumnal Navaratra every year, pilgrimage 
and festivals should be performed unto her by the devotees 
along with the members of their families, seeking auspicious­
ness. 
If anyone of evil intellect fails to perform the annual pil-

=== PAGE 238 ===

228 
Skanda Purii:r.ta 
grimage and religious festival of Durga at K.asi, there shall be 
thousands of obstacles at every step of his. 
A man who takes his holy bath in Durgakui).Q.a and duly 
worships Durga, the destroyer of all insurmountable distresses, 
shall get rid of the sins of nine births. 
That Goddess Durga protects K.asi all-round in the company 
of the Saktis. They, the chief of whom is K.alaratri, should be 
assiduously worshipped by men. 
Similarly, there are nine other Saktis who protect this holy 
spot from thousands of oppressive torments. They are the 
following deities (protectors) of the quarters in due order. 
90-9 1 . 
They are Satanetra, Sahasrasya, Ayutabhuja, ASvarii.Q.ha, 
Gajasya, Tvarita, Savavahini, Visva and Saubhagya-Gauri. They 
have been posted in the eight directions beginning with East 
and (the last one) in the middle. These deities protecting the 
holy spot 
should be assiduously worshipped. 
92. 
Similarly, there are eight Bhairavas established in the 
eight quarters, who always protect K.asi, the abode of the goddess 
and glory of salvation. 
93. 
They are Ruru, Cai).Q.a, Asitariga, Kapali, Krodhana, 
Unmattabhairava, Sarhhara and Bhiᔻal).a in due order. 
94. 
There are sixty-four Vetalas of extremely terrible forms. 
All of them have garlands of skulls and headless trunks. They 
have scissors and skulls in their hands. 
95. 
They are nude with dishevelled hairs. They are in-
ebriated with blood as their wine. 
96. 
All of them could assume many different forms. They 
have different kinds of weapons and missiles in their hands. 
They have crores and crores of servants surrounding them 
with the same characteristics and features as they themselves 
(have) . 
97-100. Some of these sixty-four are the following: Vidyujjihva, 
Lalajjihva, Krii.rasya, Krii.ralocana, Ugra, Vikatadarhᔻtra, Vakrasya, 
Vakranasika, Jarhbhaka, Jrrhbhal).amukha, Jvalanetra, Vrkodara, 
Gartanetra, Mahanetra, Tucchanetra, Antramai).Q.ana, Jvalatkesa, 
Karhbusiras, Kharvagriva, Mahahanu, Mahanasa, Larhbakarl).a, 
Karl).apravaral).a, Anasa and so on. 0 sage, these and others 
protect the holy spot always. They are fond of the blood of 
the people of evil actions and conduct. They terrify the people 
of wicked actions and habit.

=== PAGE 239 ===

N.ii. 72. 101-1 12 
229 
1 01-102. 
0 Pot-born Sage, the Saktis I mentioned be-
ginning with Trailokyavijaya and ending with Jvalamukhi pro­
tect Kasi all-round in the four quarters with their weapons 
raised aloft. For quelling all great obstacles they should be 
assiduously worshipped. 
103. 
Bhairavas, the chief of whom is Ruru, are the dispellers 
of great fear. They should always be adored in Kasi. They are 
the causes of all riches. 
104. 
Vetalas beginning with Vidyujjihva are fierce in their 
forms. On being worshipped here, they will remove even excessively 
fierce masses of obstacles. 
105. 
Similarly, the group of Bhutas here of diverse and 
terrible forms numbering a hundred crores, 0 sage, protects 
the city with the weapons lifted up. 
• 
106. 
All these deities who protect the holy spot of the 
glory of salvation at every step, should be worshipped in Kasi 
by those who desire Salvation. 
107. 
On listening to this meritorious chapter named Durga­
jaya and containing the names of the various Saktis a man will 
surmount all difficulties quickly. 
108. 
On hearing the names of Bhairavas and Vetalas enu­
merated and cited here, the mari does not become dispirited 
due to obstacles. 
109. 
Those Bhutas, even when not visited -iirectly will as­
siduously protect the reader of this narrative along with those 
who listen to it. 
1 1 0. 
Hence this narrative that removes great obstacles should 
be listened to attentively by men devoted to Kasi. 
1 1 1-1 12. If this is copied and worshipped and kept in the 
house the deities will destroy thousands of the obstacles be­
falling that owner of the house. This narrative resembling the 
adamantine cage should be listened to with great respect by 
one who has any love for Kasi.

=== PAGE 240 ===

230 
Skanda Purii:TJa 
CHAPTER SEVENTYTHREE 
The Greatness of Orhkiira1 
Agastya said: 
1 . Mter reaching the holy shrine Trilocana, what did the 
Lord of Devas do in the company of the Mother of the uni­
verse? Tell me quickly. 
Skanda said: 
2-6. 0 Pot-born Sage, I shall explain what has been asked. 
Listen. The Pltha named Virajas has been mentioned as the 
bestower of all Siddhis. Merely by visiting that Pi:tha, a man 
becomes rid of Rajas quality. It is there in Varai:J.asl that the 
great Liriga Trilocana (is stationed) . The Tlrtha named Pilipila 
in the waters of the celestial river is well-known. It is being 
praised as a Tlrtha in Kasl containing all the Tlrthas. Since, 
0 sage, all the Devas, sages, men, serpents along with rivers, 
mountains and forests exist there, that Tlrtha and that Liriga 
named Trilocana have been called TriviHapa. For this same 
reason it is really very great. 
7. 0 sage, I shall describe the greatness of Triviᔻtapa Liriga 
as described by the Pinaka-wielding Lord to the Mother of the 
universe. 
Dev"i said: 
8. 
0 Lord of Devas, 0 Sarva, 0 Lord of the universe, the 
omnipresent bestower of all, 0 procreator of all, the vision 
of all, I am asking something. Do explain it. 
I. A thousand years ago, Orilkara, one of the most important Siva Liilgas 
in Kasi, was a grand temple on the bank of a large inland lake Matsyodari. 
Today Orilkara temple is scarcely known. It is in the open on a small hillock 
surrounded by a Muslim locality. In ancient times, it was a group of five 
temples representing A, U, M, Nii.da and Bindu, the components of OM. The 
main temple was rebuilt by the Maratha queen Ahalyabai Holkar who ap­
pointed a Brahmai:Ia to look after the worship and management of the temple. 
There are Muslim graves in the foreground of the temple (See picture BCL 
1 1 2) . Nada and Bindu temples have disappeared and others are in a dilapi­
dated condition. (BCL 1 1 2-1 20)

=== PAGE 241 ===

IV.ii. 73.9-21 
231 
9. This holy spot is your favourite. It is a great medicine 
for stopping the growth of the seed of Karma. It is the abode 
of the Glory of Salvation. It gives me great delight. 
10. 
Before the dust of this holy spot, even the three worlds 
become a mere blade of grass. By whom can the greatness of 
the whole of that holy spot be comprehensively understood? 
1 1 . 
It is true that all the Lirigas that are here are un-
doubtedly causes of the attainment of salvation. They are also 
self-manifested ones. 
12. 
Granting that this is so, 0 Lord, it behoves you to 
mention the speciality thereof. 0 Sarikara, what are the Lirigas 
in KlHI that exist primordially? 
1 3-1 6. What are those Lirigas where the J...ord stays forever 
along with his beloved even during Samvarta (final annihila­
tion) ; by which Kasl has become well-known as the city of 
liberation; by merely remembering which there shall be the 
destruction of sin; by visiting and touching which (a devotee 
shall) attain heavenly pleasures and salvation; 0 Lord, by 
worshipping which, even once in the course of a birth, it will 
be decisively asserted that all the Lirigas in KaSI shall be deemed 
to have been worshipped? 
0 ocean of the nectar of compassion, have pity on me and 
mention this. 0 Sambhu, I have prostrated myself at your 
feet. 
1 7-18. 
On hearing this excellent utterance of the god­
dess, 0 enemy of Vindhya, 0 excellent· one, Mahesana re­
counted all the great Lirigas, by listening to the names where­
of heaps of sins become reduced, mass of merit is attained, 
which causes salvation in Kasi. 
The Lord of Devas said: 
19. 
0 goddess, listen to the secret that brings about sal-
vation in this holy spot. Brahma, NarayaQ.a and others do not 
know this. 
20-2 1 . 
0 Parvati, the Lirigas in Anandakanana cannot be 
reckoned. There are gross and subtle ones; there are Lirigas 
made of gems of various kinds and of various metals. 0 goddess, 
there are many Lirigas made of stone. Many of them are self-

=== PAGE 242 ===

232 
Skanda Purii:fJ,a 
manifested (i.e. natural ones) . Many have been installed by 
Devas, by sages. 
22-26. They are worshipped by Siddhas, Caral}.as, Gandharvas, 
Yakᕇas and Rakᕇasas. There are many Liilgas engraved with 
their respective names and made by Asuras, serpents, men, 
Danavas, celestial damsels, the elephants supporting the quar­
ters, mountains, Tirthas, bears, monkeys, Kinnaras, birds etc., 
0 Goddess. All of them are causes of the attainment of sal­
vation. Some are visible. Some are invisible. 0 dear one, some 
of them have become ruined; some are shattered due to passage 
of time. 0 fair lady, they are also to be worshipped. Once they 
were counted as a hundred Parardhas (Parardha=one followed 
by seventeen zeros) . Sixty crores of Lirigas are stationed within 
the waters of Ganga. 0 goddess, those Siddha Liilgas have 
become invisible in this Kali age. 
27. 
There is no limit, 0 beloved one, to the Liilgas installed 
by iny devotees since the day on which they were counted (by 
me) . 
28. 
0 fair lady, I shall mention those Liilgas that confer 
salvation, about which you have asked and due to which, this 
holy spot has become the most excellent. 
29. 
In Kali age, 0 Daughter of the Lord of the Mountains, 
they will become totally concealed but their power will never 
disappear from their respective spots. 
30. 
Those who are full of the sins of Kali age, those who 
are wicked, heretics and rogues, will never know even the 
names of these Siddha Liilgas. 
31 . 
0 lady of fair countenance, all sins get destroyed even 
when the names of these Liilgas are heard. Heaps of merit 
become increased. 
32-36. 1 Omkara is the first Liilga; the second is Trilocana. 
1 . Locations of 14 Liilgas mentioned in vv 32-36: 
Name of the Linga 
Present Location 
1. OrilkareSvara. 
North of Macchodari 
2. Trilocana 
Between Macchodari and Ganga 
3. Mahadeva 
North-east of Trilocana 
4. Krttivase5vara 
5. Ratne5vara 
The first tirtha of VaraQ.asi 
North.,east of Maidagin. Temple demolished. Now 
a mosque. Open to Hindus on Sivaratri. 
In the middle of the road from Maidagin to 
Mrtyunjaya

=== PAGE 243 ===

IV.ii. 73.37-42 
233 
Mahadeva is the third and Krttivasas is the fourth. Ratnesa is 
the fifth Liriga; the sixth Liriga is called Candresvara. Kedara 
is the seventh Liriga, 0 beloved one, and the eighth is Dharmesa. 
Viresvara is the ninth one. They know that Kamda is the tenth 
Liriga. The highly splendid Visvakarmesvara Liriga is the elev­
enth one. The twelfth one is MaQ.ikarQ.iSa and Avimukta is the 
thirteenth. The fourteenth Liriga of mine is the great Liriga 
named Visvesvara. 0 my beloved fair lady, these fourteen Lirigas 
are the causes of welfare. The combination of all these is 
called Muktikᔻetra ('Holy spot of Salvation' ) . 
37. 
These great deities are the presiding deities of this 
holy spot. Propitiated duly they grant to men the glory of 
salvation. 
38. 
0 fair lady, 0 my beloved one, ihese fourteen great 
Lirigas in Anandakanana are mentioned as worthy of the worship 
of all embodied ones. 
Skanda said: 
39. 
Beginning with the auspicious first lunar day in every 
month, the religious festival of these should be carefully car­
ried out. 
40. 
0 Pot-born One, this is the truth, this is the truth. 
I shall repeat it again and again. Who will get salvation in Kasi 
without propitiating Mahadeva in these Lirigas? 
4 1 . 
Hence, 0 sage, these Lirigas should be very devoutly 
worshipped with all care by those who desire the benefit of 
Kasi. 
Agastya asked: 
42. 0 Six-faced One, are these great Lirigas the only causes 
6. 
Candre5vara 
West of Sankaņ Devi Temple 
7. 
Kedaranatha 
At Kedara GhaJ 
8. 
Dharme5vara 
East of Visvanatha at Dharma Kiipa 
9. 
Vire5vara 
South of SankaŇ Devi 
10. 
Kame5vara 
Just east of Macchodari 
1 1 . 
Visvakarme5vara 
North-east of Mrtyuiijaya 
12. 
Mar;tikan;i5vara or Above Mar;tikarr;tika GhaJ-Just in City 
Mar;tikarr;tikesvara 
13. 
Avimukte5vara 
Inside the Vi5vanatha Temple 
14. 
Vi5ve5vara 
The centre of Kasi

=== PAGE 244 ===

234 
Skanda Purii'T)a 
of salvation? Are there others too? If there are, kindly men­
tion. 
Skanda said: 
43. 
0 sage of excellent observances, there are other great 
Lhigas too, but they will be hidden ones due to the power of 
Kali. 
44. 
He who has perpetual devotion to Isvara, he who 
knows the truth about KaSi, will know these Liilgas; no one 
else can do so. 
45-50. Even the utterance of the names of these brings in 
the destruction of the sins of Kali. These fourteen great Liilgas 
in Kasi are the Liilgas that cause salvation in Anandakanana: 
Amrtda, Tarakda, Jiianda, KaruQesvara, Mokᔻadvardvara, 
SvargadvareSvara, Brahmesa, Lailgala, Vrddhakalesvara, Vrᔻesa, 
CaQQisa, Nandikda, Mahesvara and the fourteenth one well­
known as Jyotiriipdvara Liilga. (The Lord tells the Goddess:,) 
' '0 
fair lady, these are the fourteen Liilgas in Kasi. They should 
never be mentioned to those with intellect defiled by Kali. If 
anyone propitiates these fourteen Liilgas, he has no further 
return to the path of worldly existence. This unparalleled treasure 
of Kasi should not be revealed to anyone and everyone. 
5 1 . 
0 lady of excellent countenance, this is the greatest 
of the secrets of this holy place. 0 goddess, even the utterance 
of the names of these Liilgas in great disaster removes all 
miseries. 
52. 
Indeed all the fourteen Liilgas bring about proximity 
to me. 0 Daughter of the Lord of Mountains, this is the heart 
of Avimukta. 
53. 
These are those Liilgas that grant liberation unto all. 
Out of compassion for great devotion these have been evolved 
by me taking the entire essence from each of the (fourteen) 
worlds. 
54. 
0 beloved one, these fourteen Liilgas of mine are 
the cause behind the reputation that liberation is assured in 
this holy spot. 
55. 
Only they are the genuine observers of vows, 0 my 
beloved, only they are the real ascetics, those devotees, by 
whom these Liilgas are meditated upon in Anandakanana.

=== PAGE 245 ===

IV.ii. 73.5fH>9 
235 
56. 
Only they are the persons who have adopted the ex-
cellent Yoga path, only they can be deemed to have made 
genuine gifts, they by whom these Liilgas have been seen in 
KaSi even if it be from afar. 
57-58. 
0 Parvati, if, after arriving at Avimukta, the great 
Liilgas are worshipped even once by anyone, he is free from 
sins and is on a par with one who has performed all those 
pious rites of I˗ta and Pitrta enjoined by excellent sages. There 
is no doubt about this that he is a liberated soul." 
Skanda said: 
59-62. 
0 BrahmaQ.a, 0 enemy of Vindhya, other Liilgas 
too have been mentioned to the GoddeS'!i by Sarhbhu for the 
benefit of his devotees. Liᕺten to them. They are Sailda, Sailgamda, 
Svarlina, Madhyamdvara, HiraQ.yagarbha, isana, Gopreklja, 
Vrljabhadhvaja, Upasanta Siva, Jyeljᕻha, Nivasesvara, Sukre5a, 
Vyaghra Liilga and Jambiikesa the fourteenth one. 0 sage, a 
man will attain salvation by worshipping these too. 
63. 
These Liilgas should be earnestly worshipped by ex-
cellent persons starting on the first lunar day in the dark half 
of Caitra and concluding on the fourteenth day. 
64. 
The annual religious procession, festivity and pilgrimage 
of these should be celebrated with great pomp and ceremony 
by those who are desirous of salvation. 
65. 
0 sage, if anyone visits these fourteen great Liilgas 
with earnestness, he is never reborn in the world, the· ocean 
of misery. 
66. 
"0 my beloved, this alone is the (underlying) great­
est fact of the holy spot, to be sure, that this is the greatest 
panacea for those who· have been overwhelmed with the sick­
ness of worldly existence. 
67. 
This is the Upaniljad ('secret') of the holy spot. This 
is the greatest seed of salvation. This group of Liilgas, 0 my 
beloved, destroys the forest of Karma like a veritable forest 
fire. 
68-69. 
The greatness of each and everyone of these Liilgas 
has no beginning and end. 0 goddess, it is known only to me 
and not to anyone else."

=== PAGE 246 ===

236 
Skanda Purii:rJ.a 
On hearing this, 0 sage, the goddess became glad and ex­
perienced horripilation. Mter bowing down to Lord Isana, the 
omniscient Siva, the bestower of everything she said: 
Devi said: 
70-75. 
On hearing this great mystic secret of Kasl men­
tioned now, 0 dear Lord, my mind has become very eager. 
It is said that each and everyone of the Liilgas is highly 
potent, 0 Karal).esvara, and the cause of salvation in Kasl. 
0 Lord of the worlds, tell the greatness severally of these 
fourteen Liilgas that dispel sins. 
How is the arrival of Omkaresa Liilga here from that ex­
cessively meritorious holy spot Amarakal).taka? 
Of what intrinsic form is this Orilkara, 0 Hara, and what 
is its greatness? By whom was this formerly propitiated? What 
did it bestow on being propitiated? 
Mter making these nectarine words of Mr<;lanl 
reach his 
ears, the Lord narrated the very wonderful tale of Ori:rkara. 
Devadeva said: 
76. 
0 Aparl).a, I shall describe to you the story how the 
Orilkara Liilga manifested itself here. Listen. 
77. 
Formerly, here in Anandavana, 0 great goddess, a 
great penance was performed with very intensive concentra­
tion by Brahma, the creator of the universe. 
78. 
When a thousand Yugas passed, a supreme radiance 
sprang up in front of him piercing the seven nether worlds 
and illuminating the faces of all quarters. 
79-80. 
That same brilliance which had originally mani-
fested itself within himself, due to his genuine concentration, 
presented itself before Brahma. On account of the crackling 
and splitting sound that arose from the ground Brahma who 
had good control over the senses, gradually came back from 
samiidhi. 
81-82. 
Even as the Creator ceased to meditate and gradu­
ally opened his eyes and looked before him, he saw the first 
letter "A" (31) endowed with Sattva quality. It is the cause of 
Rgveda and the protector of the creation. It is identical with

=== PAGE 247 ===

IV.ii. 73.83-95 
237 
Naraya:t:ta and is established beyond all darkness (Tamas gu:t:ta) . 
83. 
Thereafter he saw the letter " ll' (o} beyond it, having 
the Rajas form. It is the source of Yajurveda. It was the creator 
of everything. It was his own reflected form. 
84-88. 
Beyond it he saw the letter 
"M" ("tr) resembling the 
abode of tryst of silent darkness especially with Tamas form. 
It was the source of Samaveda and the cause of dissolution. 
It has Rudra's form. Then in front of him, the meditator (Brahma) 
saw the Cosmic form of Sabda Brahman (Sound Absolute) 
endowed with and without attributes. It was the abode of 
Aniikhyaniida (Parii, the subtlest sound) . It wa_s the embodi­
ment of the supreme bliss. It is well-known as Sabdabrahman. 
It is the cause of all verbal utterance. 
Thereafter above the Niida (Sound Absolute) he saw the 
subtlest ultimate form of Bindu, the cause of all causes, the 
absolute cause of the universe. Brahma saw this due to his 
power of penance. 
89-92. 
It is well-known as OM because it protects (Avanat) 
and also because it raises up the devotee by its power. 
It is formless and also endowed with form. It was seen by 
the Creator. It is also well-known as Taraka because it redeems 
persons whose mind is engrossed in the contemplation and 
Japa of itself. Brahma saw that. It is glorified as Pra:t:tava because 
it is ardently eulogized by those who are desirous of the great 
salvation. Hence it is greater than everything else. It is also 
called Pra:t:tava because it leads (pra1.1ayet) one who resorts to 
it towards the greatest region (Mokᔻa) . Hence Brahma per­
ceived that quiescent Pra:t:tava. 
93. 
That is constituted of the three Vedas or is identical 
with Brahma, Viᔻ:t:tu and Rudra; that is the fourth one, the 
great Atman; that is really beyond the fourth (viz. Vi5va, Taijasa, 
Prajiia and Turiya) (Omkara is beyond the Turiya.) It is Akhilii.tmalca 
(identical with everything through Maya) . It has the forms of 
Nada and Bindu and it was seen by Brahma whose vehicle is 
a bird. 
94. 
It is from it that the Vedas along with their Ailgas, 
the source of everything began to function. That cause of the 
Vedas was seen in front of him by the Lotus-born One. 
95. 
The Bull (sacrifice-formed Viᔻ:t:tu) , tied in three ways 
(with Mantra, Brahma:t:ta and Kalpa) , roaring (praised with

=== PAGE 248 ===

238 
Skanda Puratta 
Mantras of the Rg, Yajus and Sarna mantras) , of brilliant form 
(brilliance itself) was seen by Brahma. 
96-100. That Lord (Mahadeva) was seen by Brahma-the 
Lord who had four horns (the four Vedas) , seven hands (seven 
important Vedic metres) , two heads (the sacrjfices Prayaniya 
and Udayaniya) and three feet (the three Savanas) . That in 
which the entire thing, the past, the future, and the present 
became dissolved again and again, that seed, the cause of all 
but itself having no cause was seen by DruhiQ.a (Brahma) . 
That Liilga was seen where the receptacle of everything from 
Brahma to a blade of grass is dissolved and is being sought 
and therefore is honoured by all good people. That was seen 
by Brahma-that where the five entities (i.e. Asti, Bhati, Priyam, 
Rupa and Nama) are revealed, that which consists of five Brahmans 
(the four Vedas, Itihasas and PuraQ.as) and that which has the 
letters "A"(3f) etc. as its features. After observing Isvara in the · 
form of Liilga and evolved of five syllables (A, U, M, Nada 
Bindu) , he eulogized Sankara as distinct from the Prapaiica 
(visible world) . 
Prayer to Omkara 
(101 to 140) 
Brahma said: 
1 0 1 . 
Obeisance to the Lord in the form of Orilkara. Obei­
sance to the Lord assuming the form evolved of the syllables. 
0 Sadasiva, obeisance to the source of origin of "A" and other 
letters. 
1 02. 
You are "A", you are " U' and you are "M" (constitut­
ing OM) , 0 Lord devoid of form (in reality) . Obeisance to 
you, the embodiment of \U(, YAJU and SAMA. Vedas and (in 
reality) beyond all forms. 
103. 
Obeisance to you in the form of Nada (sound termed 
Para, Pasyanti, Madhyama and Vaikhari) ; obeisance to one in 
the form of the part of Bindu; obeisance to one identical with 
the visible and the invisible, to one identical with all forms. 
1 04. 
Obeisance to you, the storehouse of radiance; 0 Lord, 
devoid of Vikaras like death etc. (i.e. birth, existence, increase, 
change and decrease) ; obeisance to you, 0 Sarva, Rudra, Bhava. 
1 05. 
Obeisance to Ugra, the terrible one, to the Lord of

=== PAGE 249 ===

IV.ii. 73. 106-1 15 
239 
Pasus (individual souls) . Obeisance to one in the form of Tara 
(OM) ; obeisance to you, the source of origin (of all i.e. the 
cause of all) . 
106. 
Obeisance to you, free from Maya. Obeisance to you, 
the most auspicious one; obeisance to you, Kap.ardin (having 
matted hairs) ; obeisance to you, the blue-throated one. 
107. 
Obeisance to you, the most excellent one among the 
bestowers of benefits. 0 Girisa, obeisance to you who have 
penetrated Pas us as Yajiia ( obscure?) . Obeisance to the long 
one, to the short one, to the huge one increased in form. 
1 08. 
Obeisance to the sire of Kumara, to you having the 
body of a youth; obeisance to the white, black, yellow and pink 
one. 
1 09. 
Obeisance to one with smoke eolour, the tawny one. 
Obeisance to one with the variegated radiance; obeisance to 
the pale red-coloured one; obeisance to the Lord with green 
brilliance. 
l l O. 
Obeisance to one in the form of different Van_1as 
(letters, castes) , to the Lord of Van].as; obeisance to you in the 
form of the vowels, to one in the form of the consonants. 
l l l . 
Obeisance, obeisance to the acute-accented one, to 
the accentless one and to the circumflexed-accented one, to 
the Lord of the short, long and prolated vowel; obeisance to 
you one with the (form of) Visarga. 
l 1 2. 
Obeisance to you in the form of A!"msvara, 0 Lord 
with the nasal sounds; obeisance to one without nasal sounds; 
obeisance to one in the form of the dental and palatal con­
sonants. 
1 1 3. 
Obeisance to one in the form of the labials and the 
letters issuing from the bosom ( upadhmaniya) ; obeisance to 
one in the form of the sibilants; obeisance to you identical 
with semi-vowels, to the Pinaka-wielding Lord identical with 
the Paiicama note (in music) . 
1 1 4. 
Obeisance to you identical with the Niᔻada note; obei­
sance to the Lord of Niᔻadas (forest tribes) ; obeisance to you 
in the form of Vil).a, flute, drum and other musical instru­
ments. 
l 1 5. 
Obeisance to Tara (the high pitched note) ; obeisance 
to the Mandra (the low-pitched) note, to the terrible one, to 
one in the form of Aghora; obeisance to one in the form of

=== PAGE 250 ===

240 
Skanda Purii:t:ta 
Tiinas ( 49 protracted key-notes) ; obeisance to the Lord of 
Mitrcchanas. 
1 1 6. 
Obeisance to one in the form of Bhava based on 
the difference of Sthiiyins and Saiiciirins (permanent or stable 
and evanescent feelings) ; obeisance to one identical with Tala 
(beating of the time) ; to one fond of Tala; to one, the source 
of origin of Lasya (graceful) dance and TaQ<;iava (aggressive) 
dance. 
1 1 7. 
0 Lord, extremely fond of Tauryatrika (union or triple 
symphony of dance, vocal and instrumental music) , to one 
identical with Tauryatrika, 0 bestower of the glory of salvation 
on those who present Tauryatrika with devotion! 
1 1 8. 
Obeisance to you in the form of the gross and the 
subtle, the visible and the invisible; obeisance to the modern 
one; obeisance to you, the ancient one. 
1 19. 
Obeisance to one in the form of the extensive do­
main of words, to one beyond the extensive domain of words; 
obeisance to the only one manifesting in many different forms; 
obeisance to the Lord of the real and the unreal (controller 
of cause and effect) . 
1 20. 
0 Sabdabrahman (the Vedic Scripture) , obeisance to 
you. O.beisance to you, 0 supreme Brahman. Obeisance to 
one comprehensible only through the Vedanta. Obeisance to 
the controller of the Vedas. 
1 2 1 . Obeisance to the Lord in the form of the Vedas. 
Obeisance to one whose form is self-manifest. 0 Lord of Parvati, 
obeisance to you. Obeisance to you, 0 Lord of the universe. 
1 22. 
Obeisance to you, 0 Lord of the chiefs of Devas, 0 
bestower of the divine position on the Devas; obeisance to 
you, 0 SaiJ.kara; 0 Mahe5vara, obeisance to you. 
1 23. 
Obeisance to you, 0 delighter of the universe. Obei­
sance to you, 0 Moon-crested one; obeisance to you, 0 con­
queror of death and obeisance to you, the three-eyed one. 
1 24. 
Obeisance to the Lord with the Pinaka in the hand; 
to one who h_olds the weapon (called) trident. Obeisance to 
the destroyer of the Tripuras. 0 slayer of Andhaka, obeisance. 
1 25. 
Obeisance, 0 subduer of the pride of Kandarpa 
(god of Love) . Obeisance to the enemy of Jalandhara, to Kala; 
obeisance to the Kala of Kala, to one who swallows the poison 
Kalak uta.

=== PAGE 251 ===

IV.ii.73. 126-1 37 
241 
1 26. 
Obeisance to the Lord who destroys the distress of 
devotees, who contributes to the distress of only the non-devotee; 
obeisance to the cause of knowledge; to the Lord in the form 
of knowledge; obeisance to you, the omniscient one. 
1 27. 
You are the bestower of Yogic Siddhi; the most ex­
cellent one of Yogins; you are the bestower of the benefit of 
all austerities to ascetics, 0 Lord whose wealth is penance. 
1 28. 
You alone are in the form of the sacred Mantras; you 
are the bestower of the fruit of Mantras; you are the fruit of 
the great gift (Mokᔻa) ; you are the maker of the great gift. 
1 29. 
You alone are the great Yajiia, 0 Lord, the bestower 
of the benefit of great Yajiias. You are all; you move every­
where. You are the bestower of all; the seer of all. 
1 30. 
The consumer of all, you are· the creator of all, 0 
annihilator of all. Obeisance to you, 0 Lord having the abode 
in the ether of the cavity of the heart of Yogins. 
1 3 1 . You alone protect the three worlds in the form of 
ViᔻJ.lU, 0 wielder of conch, discus and club. 0 saviour, obei­
sance to you, 0 Sattvamiirti (of Sattva as form) . 
1 32. 
You alone create this (universe) having become Vidhi 
(Brahma) . Conversant with the technique of arrangement you 
assume the Rajas form, 0 bestower of the position free from 
Rajas. 
1 33. 
You alone are the great Rudra; you are the great 
Ugra, the wearer of serpents. You alone are the great terrible 
one, 0 Lord moving about in the great cremation ground. 
1 34. 
You adopt the Tamasic body, 0 death unto the god 
of death; you become Kalagnirudra in the end and make Sarhvarta 
(the period of ultimate annihilation) active. 
1 35. 
0 unborn one, in the form of Puruᔻa and Prakrti you 
make the entire universe beginning with Mahat manifest once 
again by raising the eyelashes. 
1 36. 
The closure and the opening of your eyes cause the 
dissolution and resurrection. You move about unfettered and 
this entire process is but the playful pastime of you · having the 
garland of skulls. 
1 37. 
0 Dhiirjaᕡi, the skull that sparkles round your neck 
is clearly the garland of the seed (Ajiiana, ignorance) of all 
who have been consumed by the fire of ultimate annihila­
tion.

=== PAGE 252 ===

242 
Skanda Pura7J-a 
1 38. 
0 Sarhbhu, the entire mobile and immobile beings 
are in you; they issue from you. Who knows how to eulogize 
you (adequately) , you .who are beyond the ken of primordial 
(or Vedic) words?. 
1 39. 
You are the eulogizer; you alone are the eulogy; you 
alone are the object of eulogy always. I know "Om nama˟]. sivaya" 
alone. I do not know anything else. 
140. 
You are my refuge; you alone are the ultimate goal; 
0 Lord, I bow down to you alone, I bow down to you; obei­
sance, obeisance. 
141 . 
After saying this Brahma bowed down to Mahesvara 
many times. He prostrated himself like a log of wood on the 
ground before the Lord named Pral).ava, in the form of great 
Liriga. 
lsvara said: 
142. 
Thereupon, 0 Daughter of the Lord of Mountains, 
on hearing the great hymn of prayer of Brahma, that _was 
extremely wonderful and that causes great wealth and lord­
ship, I became satisfied. 
143. 
Though I am formless, I assumed the form of Sarikara 
and emerged from that Liriga. I spoke to the Four-faced Lord: 
"I am delighted. Tell me what boon you will have." 
144. 
The Four-faced One, on seeing me directly, got up, 
said again and again, "Be victorious, be victorious" and bowed 
down with palms joined in reverence. 
145. Tears due to delight welled up in his eyes. He had 
horripilation due to excess of delight. The Lotus-seated One 
spoke in faltering tone: 
Brahma said: 
1 46. 
0 Lord of Devas, if you are delighted, if a boon is 
to be given to me, then, 0 Sarikara, may your presence be in 
this great Liriga. 
1 47. 
This boon alone should be granted. I do not choose 
any other boon. May this be named Orhkaresvara bestowing 
salvation only on the devotee.

=== PAGE 253 ===

IV.ii.73.148-158 
243 
Skanda said: 
1 48. 
0 BrahmaJ.Ia Sage, on hearing this utterance of Brahma, 
the Lord said these words to the Four-faced One, "May it be 
so. " 
1 49. 
Extremely propitiated by that hymn the Lord imme­
diately granted other boons too to Vidhi, the performer of 
a penance of long duration: 
lsvara said: 
1 50. 
0 most excellent one among Suras-excellent due to 
the austerities-be the storehouse of al! the Vedas. With my 
favour, may you have the capacity to create things. 
1 5 1 . You will be the grandfather of all. You will be worthy 
of everyone's honour. It is to bestow the benefit of your penance 
that this Liilga has sprung up. 
1 52. 
0 Brahma, this is the greatest Liilga in the form of 
Omkara. It is identical with Sabdabrahman. The region of Brahman 
(Mok1jia) cannot be far away if men propitiate this. 
1 53. 
This Liilga is named 'Akara'; this is the great Liilga 
named ' Ukara' . It is called 'Makara', Nada and Bindu. 
1 54. 
For the sake of the liberation of all creatures here, 
in this Anandakanana, this Liilga has come up and it is called 
!sana, the abode of five entities ("A" etc. or Brahma, Vi1jiQ.U, 
Rudra, Isvara and Sadasiva) . 
1 55. 
If a creature takes its holy ablution in the Matsyodarl 
Tlrtha and visits Omkara Isvara, he is never reborn in the belly 
of a mother. 
1 56. 
This is Nadesvara1 Liilga. This Linga is very rare. If 
it is visited on the beautiful shore of Matsyodarl and touched, 
it bestows salvation. 
1 57. 
Since a reddish tawny radiance is seen in this Liilga 
it is called Kapilesa (Kapila-tawny, Vi1jiQ.U) . This Liilga is very 
rare. 
1 58. 
When Matsyodarl mingles with Ganga in the pres-
1 . As noted above the shrines of Nada and Bindu are untraceable now.

=== PAGE 254 ===

244 
Skanda Pura7J-a 
ence of Kapilesvara, a man will take his holy bath there. He 
dispels the sin of BrahmaQ.a-slaughter. 
159. 
When VaraQ.a becomes flooded with water and gets 
mingled with the water of the celestial river1 a man, a devotee 
shall take his holy bath therein and visit Nade5vara. What is 
it that he bewails thereafter? He need not be sorry for any­
thing thereafter. 
1_60. 
On the eighth and fourteenth lunar days, sixty crores 
of Tirthas along with the oceans enter Matsyodari. 
1 6 1 . When Ganga comes near PraQ.avesa, it is an extremely 
meritorious time dear to Devas, sages and Pitrs. 
1 62. 
At that time the ablution, ]apa, Dana, Havana and 
adoration of the deity in Matsyodari in the vicinity of Orilkaresvara, 
is of everlasting benefit. 
1 63. 
One shall attain the benefit of a horse-sacrifice merely 
at the sight of Orilkara. Hence Oritkara Isvara should be as­
siduously visited in Kasi. 
1 64. 
Human birth, the sole means of achieving the four 
aims of life, is very rare. Even that shall be as futile as a wᕼter 
bubble unto him by whom Nadesa has not been seen. 
1 65. 
A devotee shall take his ablution in the waters of 
Matsyodari, visit Kapilesana and offer balls of rice-he will be 
free from indebtedness to the ancestors. 
1 66. 
Even after committing many great sins due to delu­
sion, if a devotee visits Orilkara at Kasi, why should he be 
afraid of Varna? 
1 67. 
On seeing a man born of their family ready to pro­
ceed towards Orhkara the grandfathers joyously dance about. 
1 68. 
Whichever name of the ancestors the intelligent (scion) 
remembers and bows down, he causes the uplift of that ances­
tor to the region of Brahman. 
1 69. 
By visiting Orhkara devoutly one attains that benefit 
which is obtained after chanting earnestly a hundred-thou­
sand times, the Rudra Mantra. 
1 70. 
The birth of a man is only a burden unto the earth 
if he does not visit Orhkara, the bestower of every desire in 
Anandavana. 
1. This was possible some ten centuries ago when Ganga was in spate. Now 
this is impossible in the present Macchodari.

=== PAGE 255 ===

IV.ii.73. 171-182 
245 
1 7 1 . I f Orhkara alone is visited, i t i s on a par with the 
visiting of all the Lingas in the entire earth, undoubtedly. 
1 72. 
If a man dies elsewhere after bowing down to Prat:tavesa, 
he attains heaven, is reborn in .KaSI and attains salvation afterwards. 
1 73. 
0 Brahma, certainly I shall stay always in this Linga 
and shall always grant salvation to one who worships this. 
1 74. 
Mter bowing down to Orhkara even once with assi­
duity, a man will certainly become blessed and contented, 
thanks to my great blessings. 
1 75. 
To the west of Orhkara is the excellent Tara Tlrtha; 
a man who performs all aquatic rites there, surmounts all 
wretchedness. 
1 76. 
Devotees of Orhkaresa should not be considered mere 
human beings. They are Rudras covered with human skin. 
They attain salvation. 
1 77. 
The greatness of this Linga here is not known to 
others, It is because of the rise of your merit, 0 Brahma, that 
it thus manifested itself here. 
1 78. 
By the power of this Linga, you will understand ev­
erything factually. 0 Brahma, hence you create the entire uni­
verse consisting of mobile and immobile beings. 
1 79. 
Mter granting this boon to the lotus-born Brahma 
Sarhbhu disappeared within that great Linga. 
Skanda said: 
180. 
Brahma worships this Linga even today eulogizing by 
means of Brahmastava composed by himself. 
181-182. A man repeating Brahmastava is rid of all sins. He 
is filled with all great merits. He obtains the most excellent 
knowledge. If the devotee repeats this Brahmastava thrice a 
day for a full year, he will attain knowledge at the time of 
death whereby he is liberated from all bondage.

=== PAGE 256 ===

246 
Skanda Purii:rJ.a 
CHAPTER SEVENTYFOUR 
The Greatness of Omkara (Continued) 
Skanda said: 
1 . Listen, 0 destroyer of Vat.api, to the story of Damana, 
a BrahmaiJ.a. The story is capable of dispelling sins. It took 
place in Kasl in the Padmakalpa. 
2-3. The son of Bharadvaja was called Damana by name. 
Mter the sacred thread ceremony had been performed, he 
learned all lores. He realized that the worldly existence was 
full of misery and life was transient. Mter realizing this, the 
learned scholar Damana set out from his house. 
4-6. In utter disgust for all worldly pleasures, he proceeded 
in some direction aimlessly. He wandered from penance grove 
to penance grove, mountain to mountain, sea to sea, forest to 
forest, Tlrtha to Tlrtha and river to river practising austerities. 
With the sense-organs and the mind fully controlled he stayed 
in everyone of all the holy spots and shrines all over the world. 
But he could not obtain steadiness of mind anywhere. 
7-8. A person who could instruct and guide him in accor­
dance with his desire was also not seen anywhere. Once by 
chance that ascetic named Damana saw the Tlrtha called 
AmarakaiJ.taka on the banks of Reva. There was the great 
meritorious shrine of Orhkara also there. 
9-1 1 . 
On seeing it he became pleased in his mind. His 
mind attained steadiness. 
There he saw the ascetics of the Pasupata cult. They had 
embellished their bodies (smearing them) with holy ash. They 
regularly worshipped the Liil.ga. They sustained themselves by 
means of alms. They pondered over and discussed the Agama 
scriptures. They were seated before their preceptor with their 
minds steady. He too bowed down to him and sat in the vicinity 
of the preceptor. 
1 2-14. 
With the neck bowing down very low and with the 
pair of hands joined together (in reverence) , he sat there. The 
great sage named Garga, the preceptor of the Pasupata cult 
had a very slender physical frame due to the continuous 
performance of austerities and also because of the onset of the 
old age. He was considered the most excellent one among all

=== PAGE 257 ===

IV.ii.74. 15-35 
247 
ascetics engaged in prop1t1atmg Sarilbhu. He asked Damana 
thus: "Who are you? From where have you come here? Though 
you are young, you are not drawn towards worldly pursuits. 
How is it so, tell me, 0 excellent one." 
1 5-27. 
On hearing this speech full of affection, Damana 
said: "0 venerable one, 0 Preceptor of Pasupatas, 0 Sir who 
are fond of propitiating the omniscient one, I shall tell you 
truthfully what is in my mind. I am son of a Brahmal).a. I have 
put in adequate efforts in (studying) the Vedas and scriptures. 
After realizing the worthlessness of the worldly existence I 
have resorted to Vanaprastha ('Forest recluse') stage of life. 
I desired to attain spiritual powers with this body itself. I took 
holy ablution in many Tirthas; I have recited Mantras crores 
of times. Many deities have been resorted to. Many Havanas 
(sacrifices) have been performed. Many teachers have been 
served for a long time. Many nights have been spent in great 
cremation grounds. Peaks of great mountains have been in­
deed resorted to by me. Many thousands of medicines of divine 
potency have been adopted and made use of by me. Rasiiyanas 
(life-prolonging medicines) have been taken in plenty by me. 
Caves of terrible appearance like jaws of Death, wherein Siddhas 
stayed, have been entered by me fearlessly. Great penance also 
has been performed with the requisite observances and re­
straints, 0 Lord. But nothing bringing about Siddhi has been 
sighted by me. Now after wandering over the entire earth, I 
have approached Your Holiness. It appears as though my mind 
has obtained steadiness, as if the Siddhi has been obtained. 
Indeed the words that will issue forth from your louts-like 
mouth will grant me Siddhi. Surely not otherwise. So, in this 
very earthy physical form." On hearing this utterance of Damana, 
Preceptor Garga spoke these words narrating an excellent miracle 
seen by him directly, even as the disciples were desirous of 
salvation and so had <'dopted the great Pasupata Vrata. 
Garga said: 
28-35. 
If you are desirous of Siddhi with this very physical 
form, listen attentively. I am recounting it to you. 0 highly 
intelligent one, I am narrating what has been directly seen by 
me in the great holy spot Avimukta. It is the bestower of all 
Siddhis on good persons. It is the great mine of the jewels

=== PAGE 258 ===

248 
Skanda Pura7J-a 
named Dharma, Artha, Kama and Mokᔻa. 
To all the creatures resorting to it, it is like a burning lamp 
unto the locusts of all their Karmas; it is the great dispeller 
of the mass of darkness. It is like a forest fire unto the trees 
of Karmas; it is a flame of the submarine fire unto the ocean 
of worldly existence; it is the veritable ocean of milk for the 
glory of salvation; it is the home of highest bliss and happi­
ness. It accords the greatest awakening to those who are in the 
prolonged slumber of ignorance. To living beings in utter 
fatigue due to (incessant) coming and going (birth and death) 
it is like a (shady) wayside tree. It is like the thunderbolt for 
the mountains of great sins accumulated in the course of many 
births. It accords the great Sreyas (good) to the persons who 
utter its name. It is the greatest abode of Visvesa. It is the limit 
of heaven and salvation. Its ground is washed perpetually by 
the rolling waves of the celestial river. It is the dispeller of all 
miseries. What happened in the holy spot of such a nature, 
I shall tell you. 
36. 
Who is competent to extol adequately the greatness 
of that holy place where there is no fear of the god of Death 
and where there is no fear of sins. 
37. 
All the Tirthas all-over the world that dispel the sins 
of creatures, always come to KaSi for the sake of (their) purification. 
38. 
Even one eating all (including prohibited) things and 
selling everything (including his own daughter) attains that 
meritorious position in Kasi which cannot be attained by 
performing sacrifices, giving gifts, or otherwise. 
39. 
The great tree of worldly existence originating from 
the seed of passionate attachment does not grow in Kasi. It 
is cut off by the axe of Dirghasvapa (death or long absorption 
in the meditation of Visvesa) . 
40. 
Of all barren lands Kasi is the most barren where the 
seed in the form of Karma, even if sown, does not grow. 
41. 
Certainly those who remember Kasi here are good 
people. Rid of all the masses of sins they will attain excellent 
goal. 
42. 
The attainments of all the worlds including Satya are 
destructible but those of Avimukta cannot be destroyed and 
they can be had only at the behest of Siva. 
43. 
In the whole cosmos where can one see that distinc-

=== PAGE 259 ===

IV.ii. 7 4. 44-56 
249 
tion which even worms, insects and locusts attain on giving up 
their bodies in Avimukta? 
44. 
If Kasl is somehow reached after a long time, means 
should be found out whereby there is no exit therefrom. 
45-48. Mal).ikarl).isa is in the East; Brahme§a is stationed in 
the South; Gokarl).a is in the West and Bharabhiita in the 
North. 
Thus is this excellent holy spot Avimukta the bestower of 
great benefit. If a devotee takes his holy bath in the whirlpool 
of Mal).ikarl).l, visits Lord Visve8vara and circumambulates the 
holy spot, he obtains the beᕽefit of Rajasiiya sacrifice. The 
ancestors of one who offers Sraddha there get liberated. 
A holy spot on a par with Avimukta do(",'! not exist anywhere 
in the Cosmic Egg, conferring Siddhi on the aspirant. It is true 
(certainly) , it is true. 
49. 
Mahapariᔻadas ('Great attendants of Siva') equipped 
with noose and swords in their hands, always protect the holy 
place there. They are fierce to cruel people while kindly disposed 
to others. 
50. 
The terrible attendant (named) Agahasa surrounded 
by a crore of Gal).as, protects the Eastern Gate day and night, 
from evil ones. 
5 1 . 
Similarly, Bhiitadhatri:Sa is the protector of the Southern 
Gate of the holy spot. Gokarl).a surrounded by a crore of Gal).as, 
protects the Western Gate. 
52-53. Ghal).takan}.a, the great Gal).a, protects the Northern 
Gate. Chagavaktra protects the North-eastern corner. Bhiᔻal).a 
protects the portion of South-eastern direction. Sankukarl).a 
protects the South-west direction and Drmicai).Q.a protects the 
North-west. Thus, these highly brilliant Gal).as always protect 
the holy place. 
54. 
Kalakᔻa. Ral).abhadra, Kauleya and Kalakampana are 
the Gal).as stationed on the other bank of Ganga according 
protection from the East. 
55. 
Virabhadra, Nabha, Kardamalip tavigraha a n d 
Sth iilakarl).a of powerful arms are posted o n the other side of 
Asi. 
56. 
Visalakᔻa. Mahabhlma, Kui).Q.odara and Mahodara are 
stationed at the entrance to the region. They protect the Western 
Gate.

=== PAGE 260 ===

250 
Skanda Purii1J.a 
57. 
NandiᔻeQa, Paiicala, Kharapada, KaraQᔽaka, Ananda, 
Gopaka and Babhru protect on the banks of VaraQa. 
58. 
In that holy spot of great merit, there is the Liilga 
named Omkara. Aspirants have attained great Siddhis there 
with this physical body. 
59. 
These Pasupatas, Kapila, SavarQi, Sr:ikaQᔽha, Piilgala 
and Aihsuman have become Siddhas due to the propitiation 
of that Liilga alone. 
60. 
Once all these five performed the worship of that 
Liilga and began to dance, making the noise of a bull. Thus 
they got themselves merged into that Liilga. 
6 1 . 
I shall mention another miracle that happened there. 
Listen to it, 0 Damana, 0 highly intelligent and most excel­
lent BrahmaQa. 
62. 
0 sage, once a she-frog lingered around the Liilga 
circumambulating it always and eating the rice grains from the 
remnants of the materials of worship. 
63. 
In view of the fact that she ate Sivanirmalya, she did 
not die there. Due to this sin (of voracious eating) her death 
took place out of the region of the holy spot. 
64. 
One shall rather imbibe even poison but should not 
eat Siva's belongings. Poison kills only one (person) but the 
possessions of Siva kill sons and grandsons also. 
65. 
People who develop their limbs by means of Sivasva 
should not be touched by good men. As a result of their sins, 
they become dwellers of the hell Raurava. 
66. 
A certain crow saw the frog hastily hopping about 
here and there. It seized the frog with its beak and went out 
of the holy spot. 
67-69. 
The frog was cast off outside the holy spot by the 
crow. In course of time, due to the merit as well as sin com­
mitted by her, she was born as daughter in the house of Puᔻpabaᔽu 
with some physical defects. Her merit was due to the 
circumambulation of the Liilga and touching the same. Her 
limbs were splendid and proportionate. She had all the aus­
picious characteristics, but her face resembled the face of a 
vulture due to the sin of eating the raw rice grains among the 
remnants of the materials of worship of Siva. 
70-76. 
She had a very sweet voice and she was perfectly 
conversant with the intricacies of music such as the seven notes,

=== PAGE 261 ===

IV.ii. 7 4. 77-89 
25 1 
three Gramas, twenty-one Mitrcchanas, forty-nine Tanas, one 
hundred and one Talas, six main Ragas each having five Anganas 
(Ragin'is, wives etc. etc.) (six Ragas and thirty Ragin'is in all) . 
Thus the thirty-six Ragaraginis delighted persons in love with 
music. Based on the distinctions of place and time, there are 
sixtyfive other Ragas (such as Malava, Sri etc.) . Others think 
that there are as many Ragas as there are Talas (i.e. one hundred 
and one) . With the secrets of Gita (song) understood perfectly 
that girl (named) Madhavi of sweet voice and excellent Vratas 
worshipped Orilkara always. Though in her excellent prime of 
youth, the daughter of Puᔻpabatu considered Orilkara with 
great honour, due to the fine impressions of the previous 
birth. Her mind though fickle by nature, 0 Damana, attained 
stability due to the service of that Lhiga like that of a noble­
souled (sage) with mind absorbed in the Supreme Absolute 
due to the practice of Yoga. Neither hunger nor thirst worried 
her during the day nor sleep during the nights. 
77-80. 
Her mind was free of lethargy in viewing that Liriga. 
By day or by night she had perforce to wink her eyes. That 
chaste lady considered those occasions as great obstacles. She 
thought thus: 'How can I expiate for the time spent in vain 
in winking and not being able to see the Liriga?' With this 
thought she never desisted from the service rendered to Orilkara. 
Urged by the desire for water, she drank the nectarine name 
of the Liriga. Her long eyes reaching the ears of either side 
did not desire to see anything else except the Omkara Liriga 
stationed in the ether of the heart of good persons. 
8 1 . 
Her ears were not interested in listening to other 
words and sounds. Her hands became very efficient in making 
the excellent garlands of the Lord. 
82. 
Her feet did not wander elsewhere for pleasure aban-
doning the precincts of the shrine of Orilkara occupied by the 
glorious goddess of salvation. 
83-89. 
Her organ of speech pronounced the names ofOrilkara 
refraining from uttering other names. (She uttered names of) 
Orilkara. ISva.ra is Prai_lava. It is Siira (permanent) even in Pralaya. 
It is Para (greater than all) . It is the illuminator of Brahman. 
It is the embodiment of Sabdabrahman as the three Vedas. It is 
the abode of the Kalas of Niida and Bindu. 
It is the excellent immutable one. It is the primordial form.

=== PAGE 262 ===

252 
Skanda Purii7J.a 
It is in universal form. It is in the form of Para (cause) and Avara 
(effect) . It is the most excellent of all. It is Vare7J.ya (worthy of 
being desired) . It is Varada (bestower of boons) . It is Sasvata 
(eternal) , Santa (quiescent) , lsvara (the powerful Lord) . 
It is the sole creator of all the worlds; it is the sole protector 
of all the worlds. It is the sole annihilator of all the worlds; 
it is the sole adored one of all the worlds. It has neither 
beginning nor end; it is everlasting; it is auspicious. It is Sankara 
(benefactor) . It is Avyaya (unchangeable) . It is one. It is beyond 
the three Gul).as. It is embodied in the minds of devotees. 
It is unconditioned. It is Niriikiira (free from forms or shapes) , 
Nirvikiira (free from modification) ; it is Niranjana (free from 
the limitations of causes) , it is Nirmala (devoid of passions or 
impurities) , Nirahamkiira (devoid of the ego) , Ni;prapanca (devoid 
of ramifications) , Nijodaya (ever rising and flourishing) , Sviitmiiriima 
(rejoicing within itself) , Ananta (infinite) , Sarvaga (moving 
everywhere) , Sarvadarsin (seeing everything) , Sarvada (bestower 
of all) , Sarvabhoktr (en joyer of all) , the all, the abode of all 
pleasures. 
90-92. 
Her tongue tasted the juice of the syllables consti­
tuting its name day and night. It did not know any other Rasa. 
Madhavl swept the space round the palatial shrine and the hall 
of pictures. She washed all the utensils of the worship. She 
devoutly served all the Pasupatas who were engaged in ador­
ing Pral).avesa considering them like her father. 
93-95. 
Once on the fourteenth day in the month ofVaisakha, 
Madhavl observed fast during the day and kept awake at night. 
When the pilgrims and devotees who had gathered there for 
the festival had gone away in the morning, she swept every­
where and joyousl}' worshipped the Linga. She sang sweet songs 
and danced gracefully. Meditating on Omkara Linga, she got 
merged within the Linga. 
96-98. 
The highly intelligent lady merged into the Linga 
with this physical body itself, even as the ascetics, the chief of 
whom was my own preceptor, were watching. A radiance issued 
forth from the Linga pervading the sky. The girl also assumed 
the form of a luminary and merged into it. Even today the 
residents of the holy spot celebrate great festival with pomp 
and ceremony on the fourteenth day in the bright half in the 
month of Vaisakha.

=== PAGE 263 ===

IV.ii.74.99-1 1 3 
253 
99. 
The devotees who observe fast then and keep awake 
at night on the fourteenth day attain great knowledge wher­
ever they may die ultimately. 
1 00. All the Tirthas in the entire universe arrive there on 
the fourteenth day in Vaisakha to visit Orhkara. 
1 0 1 . 
In front of the Liilga, there is the most excellent cave 
named Srimukhl. It is the doorway to Patala. Indeed Siddhas 
stay there. 
1 02. 
Those who observe excellent Vratas and stay in that 
cave for fi,e nights, will see Naga Girls who will recount auspicious 
and inauspicious things. 
1 03. To the .north of the cave there is a well with tasty 
juice for its water. One who drinks it for six months actually 
drinks Brahmamrta (elixir of Brahman) : 
1 04. 
By visiting Nadesvara Liilga, the cause of Nada (di­
vine sound) , there one can hear the entire world of sounds. 
1 05. 
By taking the holy ablution in Matsyodari mixed with 
the waters of the celestial river and Vara1_1a a devotee shall 
become blessed and contented. He never grieves over any­
thing anywhere. 
1 06. 
Innumerable devotees serving 
Orhkaresvara have 
attained Siddhi with their earthy body transforming itself into 
divine one instantaneously. 
1 07. 
Avimukta is the greatest sacred place in the entire 
co:>mos. Even greater than it is Orhkara on the banks of Matsyodari. 
1 08. 
Alas ! 
What for are they born, those by whom 
Pra1_1avesvara is not worshipped in Kasi? They have merely 
caused the youth of their mothers decline. 
... 
1 09-1 1 0. 
Ever since Visve5a came from Mandara moun-
tain to Anandakanana, 0 excellent one, all other holy places 
along with the oceans, mountains, rivers and Tirthas and continents 
went there itself. 
1 1 1-1 1 2 . 
0 sage, it is my good luck that I have been 
reminded now by you. I shall also come. We shall go to KaSi 
slowly. All these disciples of mine who observe the great Pasupata 
Vratas are desirous of going to Kasi because all of them desire 
salvation. 
1 1 3. 
If after attaining old age, Kasi is not visited, how can 
they have the great happiness after the rare human birth is 
lost in vain?

=== PAGE 264 ===

254 
Skanda Puriir_ta 
1 1 4. 
Before the weakness of the sense-organs takes place, 
before the span of life comes to a close, Sarhbhu's Anandakanana 
should be assiduously resorted to. 
1 1 5. 
If people resort to Anandavana of Sambhu, the abode 
of glory, steadfast Sri (Wealth or Glory) will never leave them. 
They will be inexhaustible store of happiness. 
1 1 6. 
Mter narrating this exquisite story, Garga, the most 
excellent one among Pasupata devotees reached the city of 
Varat:tasi along with Bharadvaja. 
1 1 7. 
Accompanied by Gargacarya, the pious-soule<! Damana 
propitiated the glorious Orhkara and merged into that Linga. 
Skanda said: 
1 1 8. 
0 sage, 0 enemy of Ilvala, Orhkara is a great shrine 
in Avimuktaka. Many Sadhakas have attained Siddhi there. 
1 19. 
The greatness· of Prat:tave8vara should never be re­
counted in the presence of men of vitiated minds in Kali age 
and not at all in the presence of heretics. 
1 20. 
Those who censure Mahadeva, those senseless ones 
who censure the holy spot and those who censure the Purat:J,a, 
should never be talked to. 
1 2 1 . 
"There is no Linga like Orhkara anywhere on the 
earth." Thus the Lord of Devas has decisively told Gauri. 
1 22. 
Mter listening to this chapter with the mind com· 
pletely engrossed in it, a man will be rid of all sins. He will 
·'attain Siva's world. 
CHAPTER SEVENTYFIVE 
Manifestation of Trilocana1 
Agastya said: 
I . 
0 Visakha, I am not fully satiated after listening to the 
story of Orhkara that dispels great sins. Narrate the story of 
Triviᔻᕻapa. 
1 . Trilocana is one of the oldest and most famous of Lirigas. Its temple 
is just above Trilocana Ghat (BCL 231 ) .

=== PAGE 265 ===

IV.ii.75.2-14 
255 
2. 0 Six-faced One, 0 highly intelligent one, how was the 
highly meritorious manifestation of Trilocana narrated to the 
Goddess by the Lord of the Devas? 
Skanda said: 
3. 
Listen, 0 sage, I shall narrate the story that dispels fatigue­
the story of TriviHapa, in the manner in which it has been 
narrated by the Lord. 
4. That Pitha (Seat of holiness) is called Viraja. The Liilga 
there is Triviᔻtapa. By visiting that Pitha, a man becomes rid 
of Rajas. 
5. 0 
Pot-born One, three streams have their confluence 
there. All the three dispel sins. (They flow) to the south of 
Trilocana. 
6-7. Sarasvati, Kalindi and Narmada who gives excessive 
happiness assume the forms of the streams for the purpose of 
bathing the Liilga directly. All those three rivers with pitchers 
in their hands bathe the Liilga Triviᔻtapa of great refulgence, 
three times a day. 
8. All-round, Liilgas named after themselves have been 
installed by them. By visiting them, men will obtain the ben­
efit of holy ablution in them. 
9. Sarasvati:Svara Liilga is to the south of TriviHapa. On 
being seen, it accords the region of Sarasvati. On being touched, 
it dispels sluggishness. 
1 0. 
Yamunesa is to the west. If devoutly worshipped by 
men, even if they be sinners, this prevents (falling into) the 
world of Yama. 
1 1 . 
Seen to the east of Trilocana, Narmadesa accords 
excellent welfare. By adoring that Liilga, men's further (like­
lihood of) staying within the womb is prevented. 
1 2. 
A devotee who takes his holy bath in the Pilipila 
Tirtha near TriviHapa and visits Trilocana Liilga need not 
bewail anything further. 
1 3. 
Even by recollecting Triviᔻtapa Liilga, a man will be-
come the Lord of Triviᔻtapa (heaven) . One should not bother 
about that. 
14. 
Those who visit Triviᔻtapa shall undoubtedly become 
the creators (of the world) . They alone are contented and

=== PAGE 266 ===

256 
Skanda Purii1J.a 
blessed. They alone are men of great intellect. 
1 5-2 1 . There is no doubt about this that those devotees will 
be free 
from the sins accumulated in the course of seven 
births, if the Triviᔻtapa Liriga in Anandakanana is bowed down 
to by them; if those pe
.
rsons of pure intellect had heard even 
the name of Trilocana. 
If Triviᔻtapa is visited in Kasl, one shall get that benefit 
which is attained when all the Lirigas all-over the earth have 
been visited. 
He will instantaneously be rid of all sins. He will never be 
reborn in any womb. He is (to be considered as) one who has 
bathed in all the Tlrthas. He is one who has performed all 
valedictory baths (after sacrifices) . 
The devotee ·shall take his holy bath in the waters of the 
north-flowing river (Ganga) in the Pilipila Tlrtha, where those 
highly meritorious rivers always stay. If one performs Sraddha 
etc. what will he do in Gaya? The devotee who takes his holy 
bath in the Pilipila Tlrtha, offers balls of rice and visits Triviᔻtapa 
Liriga, shall obtain the benefit of crores of Tlrthas. 
The sin that has been acquired elsewhere shall vanish on 
visiting Kasl. 
22-26. 
A sin committed in Kasl gives the state of a Pisaca 
(vampire, evil spirit) . If someone commits a sin in Anandakanana 
due to ignorance, he should visit TriviHapa Liriga. He will get 
rid of that sin. Anandakanana is the most excellent (place) in 
the whole of the earth. 
There too all the Tlrthas are superior. Still superior is the 
place of Orhkara. Trilocana is in the form of ultimate Sreyas 
(welfare) . It is more excellent than the excellent Liriga Orhkara 
that illuminates the path of salvation. 
Just as the Sun is the best among the luminaries, just as the 
Moon is the best among things worthy of being seen, so also 
the Trilocana Liriga is the greatest among all Lirigas. 
27. 
Salvation, the sole treasure of supreme bliss, is not 
out of reach of- the. worshippers of Trilocana. 
28-3 1 . By worshipping other Lirigas throughout the life, one 
cannot attain the good that is obtained by worshipping Trilocana 
once. 
Persons of great intellect who worship Trilocana Liriga at 
Kasl should be worshipped by the dwellers of the three worlds

=== PAGE 267 ===

IV.ii. 75.32-45 
257 
who desire to get my favour. 
Why should men be afraid if even after having renounced 
everything and performed Pasupata Vrata they have deviated 
from the regulations, when the great Liilga (named) Triviᔻtapa 
exists, which dispels masses of great sins, is the heap of merit 
and is the pawnshop of salvation? 
32. 
By worshipping even once the great Trilocana Liilga, 
one is rid of all sins acquired in the course of hundreds of 
births. 
33-40. 
All these great sinners can have redemption from 
sins by bowing down to Trilocana Liilga: Sinners such as a 
BrahmaQ.a-slayer, a liquor-drinker, a thief, a defiler of the 
preceptor's bed, one who associates with the preceding per­
sons (sinners) for a year and hence becomes a great sinner, 
one who carnally approaches another man's wife, one who is 
interested in committing violence to others, one who habitu­
ally reviles at others, one who betrays trust, an ungrateful 
wretch, a destroyer of foetus, paramour of a Sudra woman, 
one who forsakes parents and preceptors, one guilty of arson, 
one who administers poison, a cow-slayer, a woman-slayer, a 
Sudra-slayer, a violator of a virgin, a cruel one, one indulging 
in scandal, one who is averse to one's own Dharma, a cen­
surer, an atheist, one who persistently indulges in perjury, one 
who eats prohibited things, one who sells prohibited articles. 
All these with the sole exception of a slanderer of Siva, attain 
expiation from sins by bowing down to Trilocana Liilga. 
A deluded fool engaged in censuring Siva, a censurer of 
Saivite 
scriptures-there is no expiation for him. No such 
redemption is seen in any scripture by anyone. He who per­
forms the act of censuring Siva should be known as a soul­
killer, a murderer of the three worlds. He is baser than the 
basest. He should not be talked to. 
4 1 . 
Those who are engaged in censuring Siva in the midst 
of the devotees of Siva, fall into the terrible hell as. long as 
the Sun and the Moon (shine) . 
42. 
Followers of Siva should be carefully adored in Kasi: 
by those who desire salvation. Even when they are adored, Siva 
undoubtedly becomes delighted. 
43-45. 
With a desire for the expiation of all the sins 
committed here, the following words should be unhesitatingly

=== PAGE 268 ===

258 
Skanda Purii'T_I,a 
uttered by those who believe in authority. If you are desirous 
of making a beginning, if you are afraid of sins, if you con­
sider our words true on _the authority of scriptures, then forsake 
everything, make up your mind and go to Anandakanana where 
Visvesvara himself is present. 
46-53. 
If men enter the holy spot with such a definite 
resolve within themselves, no mass of sins harasses them. The 
greatest virtue is attained. The devotees should take their holy 
ablution in the great Ti:rtha, in the triple stream devoid of 
impurities, in the meritorious Ti:rtha named Pilipila served by 
three rivers, where the great sins have been hurled off by the 
glance of the eyes of the Three-eyed Lord. They must offer 
libations to thos·e who should be offered them in accordance 
with the injunctions in the Grhya Sutras. They must make 
monetary gifts without any dishonesty in the matter of spend­
ing but in accordance with their capacity. They should visit 
Triviᔻtapa Linga and adore it with great devotion with all 
these necessary requisites, namely sweet scents, different kinds 
of garlands, Paiicamrta, incense, lamps, Naivedya (food) offer­
ings, clothes, ornaments, ne<:essary articles of adoration, bells, 
mirrors, chowries, flags and banners of diverse colours, dances, 
m u s i c a l i n strum e n t s , e x c e l l e n t s o n g s , 
Japa, j oyo u s 
circumambulations and prostrations to the fullest satisfaction 
of the attendants. After adoring thus, he should say "I am free 
from sins. " He should then request the BrahmaQ.as to make 
the proclamatory utterance. A wise man who does these shall 
instantly become sinless. 
54. 
Then he should take his bath in Paiicanada and next 
perform ablution in the pool MaQ.ikarQ.ika. Thereafter he should 
worship Visvesa whereby he attains great merit. 
55. 
This expiatory rite- is cited as one that purifies great 
sins. This should not be mentioned to an atheist who down-
grades the greatness of Kasi. 
. 
56. 
One whG performs this auspicious expiatory rite giv-
ing monetary gifts avariciously, goes to hell. It is true; it is 
true, 0 Pot-born One. 
57. 
At the time of Prado;a (dusk of the thirteenth lunar 
day) , if a devotee circumambulates seven times the Trilocana 
shrine, he attains that merit which is acquired after completely 
circumambulating the whole of the earth.

=== PAGE 269 ===

IV.ii. 75.58-71 
259 
58. 
If a devotee visits in Kasl the TriviHapa Liilga girdled 
by a serpent but dies elsewhere, he will become liberated m 
the next birth. 
59. 
Elsewhere, in the case of all the Liilgas, a time of 
meritorious significance is specified, but at TriviHapa night 
and day are equally meritorious times for men. 
60. 
The Liilgas, the chief of whom is Orhkara, are of 
adequate power of destroying sins, but, 0 Parvatl, the power 
of Trilocana is something very unique. 
61 . 
0 Aparl_la, listen to the reason why this Liilga is su-
perior to all the other Liilgas. I shall tell. Retain it in the ear. 
62. 
Formerly as I was absorbed in Yoga, this great Liilga 
pierced through the seven nether worlds from beneath the 
earth and issued forth in front of me. • 
63. 
I was stationed well-concealed in this Liilga formerly 
and I gave unto you, 0 Gaurl, three eyes and you saw the 
excellent Liilga. 
64. 
Ever since then, 0 Goddess of Devas, this Liilga is 
praised as Trilocana, the bestower of vision of knowledge, by 
people residing within the three worlds. 
65. 
Those who are the devotees of Trilocana are all them-
selves three-eyed; they are my attendants; they are indeed liberated 
ones even while living. 
66. 
0 Mahesanl, no one fully understands the greatness 
of Trilocana Linga; it has been kept well-concealed by me 
alone. 
67-70. The devotees should take their holy bath in the Pilipila 
whirlpool on the third day in the bright half of Vaisakha, 
observe fast devoutly and keep awake at night. They should 
take bath again there itself in the morning and worship Trilocana. 
After worshipping the Linga, they should offer Dharma-ghatas 
i.e. 'pots offered for merit' filled with cooked rice along with 
monetary gifts. They should joyously do this keeping in view 
their ancestors, 0 Goddess. They should then break the fast 
in the company of the devotees of Siva. After casting off their 
earthly bodies (later on) , 0 Goddess, they will invariably become 
my Gal_las going ahead (in processions etc.) as a result of that 
merit. 
71 . 
Devas, men and the great serpents wander in their 
worldly life (of birth followed by death) , 0 Gauri, only till

=== PAGE 270 ===

260 
Skanda Pura7Ja 
they see Trilocana Liilga in K.asi. 
72. By seeing Triviᔻtapa once, after taking bath in the Pilipihi 
pool, a creature never sucks at the breasts of a mother here 
(i.e. gets Mokᔻa) . 
73. Every month on the eighth and the fourteenth days, 0 
fair lady, all the Tirthas come to see Lord TriviHapa. 
74. Taking bath in the waters of Pilipilii to the south of 
Triviᔻᔽapa and offering Sandhya prayers once, one shall attain 
the merit of performing Rajasiiya. 
75. There itself, there is a well named Padodaka which destroys 
sins. Drinking its water a man is not born again as a man. 
76. At the side of that Liilga, there are many Liilgas accord­
ing salvation on being seen and touched. 
77. Santanava (installed by Santanu) Liilga has been in­
stalled on the banks of Ganga. By seeing it a man distressed 
by worldly existence attains peace. 
78. To the south of it, 0 Sage, there is the great Liilga 
named Bhiᔻmeiia. If it is seen neither Kali nor Kala (Death) 
nor Kama (lust) harasses men. 
79. To the west of it there is the great Liilga renowned as 
Drol')eiia. By worshipping that Liilga, Drol')a assumed the form 
of a luminary again. 
80. In front of it is the Asvatthameiivara Liilga that accords 
great merit. It is due to the worship thereof that the son of 
Drol')a does not fear even Kala. 
8 1 . To the north-west of Drol')eiia is the great Valakhilyesvara 
Liilga. By visiting it with great faith one shall obtain the merit 
of performing all Yajiias. 
82. To the left thereof the Linga named Valmikeiivara can 
be seen. By seeing it, a man becomes rid of all grief. 
83. I shall narrate another incident that happened here 
itself, 0 Pot-born One. The greatness of TriviHapa has been 
recounted to the Goddess by the Lord.

=== PAGE 271 ===

IV.ii.76. 1-13 
Skanda said: 
CHAPTER SEVENTYSIX 
The Power of Trilocana 
261 
1. 
Listen, 0 son of Mitra and VaruQ.a, to what happened 
in the Pltha named Viraja in a former Kalpa called Rathantara. 
2-6. Two pigeons had made their nests and lived freely in 
the mansion of Trilocana, the mansion that was built of MaQ.ikya 
(Rubies) and other precious stones. It (the mansion) was as 
large as the Meru mountain. It had many windows with various 
shapes and undulations. It appeared like a pillar of support 
fixed by the creator (or Siva) himself, in v,iew of the likelihood 
of the heavenly world falling down during the annihilation at 
the end of the Kalpa. 0 sage, when the banners were wafted 
by wind, it appeared that it warded off masses of sins from 
entering. It shone with its brilliant golden pinnacle. It was as 
though out of fatigue the full moon settled (for rest) there. 
The pair of doves circumambulated the mansion everyday in 
the morning, noon and evening. 
7. While they flew around, the winds from their fluttering 
wings removed the dust particles sticking to the mansion everyday. 
8. The names Trilocana and Triviᔻtapa constantly uttered 
by the devotees reached their ears. 
9. 
The four types of musical instruments that adequately 
delighted Sambhu echoed after entering the cavities of their 
ears. 
10. 
The radiance of the auspicious Aratrika ('waving of 
lights') during the three Sandhyas (morning, noon and evening) 
entered the eyes of the two birds revealing the activities of the 
devotees. 
1 1 . 
Watching the festivities, the two birds of steady minds 
did not care to fly to their desired places, thereby denying 
themselves the opportunity to get their food. 
12. 
They circumambulated the mansion filled with the 
devotees pecking at the ricegrains etc., 0 sage. 
13. 
0 BrahmaQ.a, to the southern side of the Lord there 
is the water of the four streams (viz. Ganga, Yamuna, Sarasvatl, 
Narmada) . Sometimes the birds took their bath therein. When 
they were distressed due to thirst, they drank it.

=== PAGE 272 ===

262 
Skanda Purii:tJ.a 
1 4. 
In the vicinity of Trilocana those two birds thus moved 
about busy with their activities resembling those of pious men. 
A long period thus elapsed. 
15. 
Comfortably ensconced within the windows in the 
precincts of the temple, they were once seen by a certain 
vulture of cruel vision. 
1 6. 
The vulture desired to seize the pair of doves. He 
quickly descended from the sky and entered another Siva temple. 
1 7-2 1 . From there he observed the arrivals and departures 
of the two (birds) and thought thus, 'By which way do they 
go out? Where, when and what do they do? How can these two 
be caught by me freely and simultaneously? They have entered 
well within their fort. Would it be that they may not come 
under my control?' Thinking thus the vulture paused awhile 
with his vision directed solely towards them. It is for this reason 
that wise men praise the strength of excellent forts. Even a 
weak enemy cannot be caught all of a sudden. What can be 
achieved by a single fort, cannot be attained by a king even 
with a thousand elephants or a hundred thousand horses. 
22. 
An enemy well-entrenched in his fort cannot be attacked 
by anyone at any time, if the fort is self-dependent and is not 
exposed by one who knows the secret. 
23. 
Noticing that the doves were fearless, the vulture be-
came angry with red eyes. Mter praising thus the strength of 
a fort, he went up into the sky. 
24. 
Then the clever female dove whose sole strength was 
the fort observed the enemy, the bird of great strength. She 
then said to her husband: 
Kalaravi (the Female Dove) said: 
25. 
0 highly intelligent dear dove, having pleasing chirp-
ing sound delighting all 
lovers, this vulture who has come 
within the range of your vision is a powerful enemy. 
26-29. 
The male dove heard these words of the female 
with contempt and indifference and said to her: 
Piiriivata (Male Dove) said: 
0 fortunate one, how many sky-wanderers (birds) are not 
present here? How many of those birds do not roost in these

=== PAGE 273 ===

IV.ii. 76.30-41 
263 
temples? 0 my beloved, how many do not see us comfortably 
perched here? If we are to be afraid of all those, whence can 
we have that happiness as we have now? Divert yourself with 
me. Cast off this worry, 0 auspicious one. I do not have any 
thought for this poor hawk in my heart. 
30-3 1 . 
On hearing these words of the male, the female 
kept quiet with her eyes resting on the feet of her husband. 
After pointing out the beneficial path, a chaste female should 
remain silent with a desire to do what is pleasing to her husband. 
She should always carry out the commands of her husband. 
32. 
The falcon came another day also and saw the couple, 
seeing them with a constant, undeviated gᕾze like the god of 
Death looking at a person whose span of life has come to an 
end. 
33. 
Thereafter he circled round the mansion in a quick 
whirling movement. After observing their movements and activities 
he went away through the sky. 
34. 
When the hawk had gone far into the sky, the be-
loved, female dove said, "0 Lord, has the wicked enemy been 
seen by you?" 
35-39. On hearing her words the Kalarava (Pigeon) said 
again: "0 timid one, what will he do to me, the one sporting 
about in the sky? My fortress too is on a par with the heaven 
where there is nothing to fear from the enemy. He does not 
know the diverse modes of flight in the firmament. Eight modes 
of flight have been cited: "Pratf,l,na (flying forward) , Uq.tf,ina 
(flying up) , Sa7J.4zna (flying perfectly) , Ka7J.4a (stem-like flight) , 
Vyiilf.a (serpentine flight) , Kapiitikii (door-like movement, swinging 
movement) , Sramsinz (pendulous) and Ma7J.4alavati (encircling 
flight) . 0 my beloved dove, no other bird anywhere is so 
clever in these modes of flight as I am in the sky. Relax comfortably, 
dear one. What should worry you as long as I am alive?" On 
hearing his words that chaste one remained quiet. 
40. 
Another day the hawk came and occupied the rock-
cut frieze a little away from them, perching on it very com­
fortably. 
4 1 . 
He stayed there for the duration of a Yama (3 hours) 
closely observing their nest. Then the hawk flew away. The 
frightened (female) dove said again:

=== PAGE 274 ===

264 
Skanda Purii:rJ.a 
42: 
"My dear, this place should be forsaken. It has been 
defiled by the evil one's sight. This ruthless fellow was sitting 
very near joyously. " 
43. 
With the same indifference and contempt as before, 
he said again, "My dear, what will he do? This is the nature 
of fawn-eyed ones. Generally they are very cowardly. " 
44. 
The powerful vulture came the next day too. He sat 
facing them for the duration of two Yamas. 
45. 
Carefully observing their path he went away soon in 
the manner he had come. Mter the bird had gone the female 
bird spoke: 
46-48. "Lord, we s'hall go away to some other place since 
death is close to us here. Mter the wicked one has gone for 
good, we can be happy, dear one. 
Why should a wise man face destruction with undue attach­
ment for his native land? Equipped with Pak;as (wings, follow­
ers and partisan s ) his movement anywhere shall yield 
success: 
If anyone does not leave off his own native land infested 
with troubles, he is no better than a lame man. He meets with 
destruction like a tree standing on the banks (of a river) . " 
49. 
Even after hearing the words of his beloved uttered 
thus the male, overwhelmed by the inevitability of the future 
events, said arrogantly and with contempt, "My dear, do not 
be afraid of that bird." 
50. 
The next day the powerful falcon came to their threshold 
early in the morning and stayed there till the evening. 
5 1 . When the Sun· had set and that bird had gone away the 
female dove came out of the nest and spoke to her husband: 
52-58. "0 Lord, this is the time to go out. Even as the death 
(i.e. falcon) is far off, go out, 0 dear one of excellent intel­
lect, even after forsaking me. 
When you are alive, there is nothing which is difficult to 
get all over the earth; new wives, new friends, new wealth and 
newl house-all these you will get again. If the self is protected 
at the expense of wife and wealth, everything is obtained as 
by King Hariscandra. 
The Atman (self) is the dear kinsman; this Atman is great 
wealth; this Atman is the great means for earning piety, wealth, 
love . and salvation.

=== PAGE 275 ===

IV.ii. 76.59-71 
265 
As long as there is safety and well-being in the Atman, there 
is safety and well-being in all the three worlds. But thaᕿ well­
being is desired along with renown by one with excellent intellect. 
Death is preferable to well-being devoid of renown and 
renown is earned by nien by acting along the path of justice. 
Hence paying heed to the path of justice and good policy, 
dear Lord, go away from this place. If you do not go away in 
the morning you will have '(cause to regret) and remember 
my words. " 
59. 
Though h e was warned thus by his wife, the female 
dove of great intelligence, he did not leave his abode because 
he was prevented by the inevitable future. 
60. 
The next day in the morning the falcon came there 
equipping himself with something to eat, 0 sage. The exit of 
the doves was obstructed. 
61-64. The highly intelligent falcon stayed there for a few 
days and said to the pigeon: "Fie upon you, devoid of man­
liness! 
0 dull-witted one, either fight or come out at my behest. 
If you starve yourself to death, you will surely fall into hell. 
You are two. I am alone. Victory and defeat are uncertain 
and fluctuate. Either heaven or fort itself can be attained by 
one who fights for the strategic base with full strength. 
Urged by the intrinsic strength and earnestness of those 
highly intelligent ones who strive to attain their aim, the fate 
too shall come to their assistance." 
65. 
Thus taunted by the falcon and further encouraged 
by his wife, the pigeon resorted to the entrance of his fort and 
fought with the hawk. 
66. 
The hungry and thirsty pigeon was ultimately seized 
with its firm feet by the powerful vulture and the female dove 
was held with its beak immediately. 
67. 
Holding both of them the hawk flew into the sky 
quickly seeking a place where there was no other bird so that 
he could eat them. 
68-71 . 
Thereupon, the pigeon was thus addressed by his 
wife of supreme intelligence: "0 Lord, you considered me a 
mere female and slighted my words. Hence you have come to 
this plight. What shall I do? For I am only a . feeble female. 
If even now, my dear, you will pay heed to a single request

=== PAGE 276 ===

266 
Skanda Purii:(Ja 
of mine, it will be to your benefit, I assert. Do so unhesitatingly. 
Acting in accordance with this single advice of mine will not 
make you one unduly controlled by a fem;lle. Even as I am 
held by him in his beak, even as he continues to be in the 
sky without touching the ground, do bite his foot with force 
for releasing yourself." 
72. 
On hearing these words of his wife that bird did so. 
Mflicted very much in his foot the vulture shrieked very loudly. 
73. 
On account of that shriek, the female dove was let 
off from the closed mouth (beak) . As the claws lost their grip 
the male pigeon ako fell down free. 
74-75. 
Even in adversity endeavour should not be aban­
doned by wise men. What a powerful beak it was! What an 
amount of affliction did the foot give! That was because luck 
will yield benefit to an endeavouring person, though weak. 
76. 
Hence (it is true that) endeavour always bears fruit 
in accordance with luck. Therefore thinkers extol endeavour 
(even) at the time of adversity. 
77-79. 
In course of time, they died on the banks of Sarayu, 
by dying where creatures attain Kasi. One of them (the male 
pigeon) became a Vidyadhara in the city of Ayodhya, a city 
of salvation. He was the son of Mandaradama and his name 
was Parimalalaya. He was the abode of many lores and of great 
skill in arts. Even in his childhood, he was endowed with devotion 
to Siva. 
80. 
Conquering his sense-organs and the mind he re-
solved, 'I shall observe the vow of having only one wife.' 
8 1 . 
Attachment to other men's wives will dispel and re-
duce fame, longevity, strength and happiness. It shall prevent 
the likelihood of going to heaven. Hence a sensible man should 
avoid it. 
82-84. 
That brilliant (Vidyadhara youth) took up another 
resolve too, due to his practice of the previous birth, namely 
seeking shelter (in the shrine of) Trilocana: 'As long as my 
body is free from illness, while there is no loss of the power 
of the sense-organs, I will not take in even a bit before wor­
shipping Trilocana in Kasi. The Lord is the abode of all merits. 
He is the illuminator of all aims of life. He is the producer 
of .all (healthy) desires. He is the sole cause of the greatest 
bliss.'

=== PAGE 277 ===

IV.ii. 76.85-98 
267 
85. 
Thus ParimaHilaya, the son of Mandaradama assidu-
ously went to Kasl always to visit TriviHapa. 
86. 
The female dove was born in Patala in the palace of 
Ratnadlpa, the king of serpents. Her name was RatnavalL 
87. 
That daughter of Serpent Rantadipa was as it were a 
singular gem, evolved out of the beauty, good habits, qualities 
and skill in arts of all the Naga girls. 
88. 
She had two female companions. One of them was 
Prabhavati by name and the other KalavatL Both of them 
always followed her. 
89. 
0 Pot-born One, those two companions were as though 
inseparable from the body of Ratnavall like her bodily lustre 
and shadow. 
90-9 1 . Mter childhood when she beca111e a young woman, 
she imposed upon herself this restraint, on seeing her father 
devoted to Siva: "Dear father, everyday I will break silence 
only after worshipping Trilocana in Ka.Si in the company of 
these two friends. Not otherwise." 
92. 
Thus, that Serpent Princess accompanied by her two 
female companions worshipped Trilocana everyday and re­
turned home. 
93. 
Everyday she wreathed garlands of various kinds and 
colours with fresh flowers of pleasing fragrance and adored 
the Lord. 
94. 
All the three used to sing songs exquisite in their 
Gandhara (and other) Ragas. All the three used to dance gracefully 
with many circular Rasa movements. 
95. 
All the three joyously played on ViQ.a, flute and Mrdailgas 
in the presence of the Lord. They were extremely efficient in 
Laya and Tala. 
96. 
Thus through fragrant garlands of diverse kinds, un-
guents and smearing pastes etc. all the three Naga girls wor­
shipped the Lord. 
97-98. 
Once in the month of Madhava, they observed fast 
on the third lunar day. At night they observed the rite of 
JagaraQ.a (keeping awake) through dances, songs, narration of 
tales etc. On the morning of the fourth lunar day, they took 
their holy bath in the auspicious Pailipila Tirtha and wor­
shipped Trilocana. Then they went to sleep in the pavilion 
itself.

=== PAGE 278 ===

268 
Skanda Pura7Ja 
99-1 0 1 . When they were asleep, the Three-eyed, Moon-crested 
Lord whose limbs were as white as pure camphor, came out 
of the Liilga with serpent-like girdle. His throat was blue like 
a Tamala tree; his serpent ornaments shone. His left half was 
occupied gracefully by Sakti. He had a serpent as his sacred 
thread. Then the Lord told the girls, "Get up". 
1 02-1 03. They got up in great excitement and wiped their 
eyes which 
reached their ears. They shook their limbs and 
pressed their bodies while yawning; their mouths seemed to 
tinkle. When they looked in front with bewildered minds the 
Three-eyed Lord who had unexpectedly arrived, was seen by 
them. 
1 04. Recognizing by the characteristic features that it was 
the Lord, those girls bowed to him and eulogized with delighted 
faces and throats falteringly choked. 
Prayer of the Naga Girls 
( 1 05-1 15) 
1 05. 
Be victorious, 0 Sarhbhu, be victorious, 0 Isana, be 
victorious, 0 omnipresent Lord and bestower of everything. 
Be victorious, 0 destroyer of Tripuras. Be victorious, 0 slayer 
of Andhaka. 
1 06. 
Be victorious, 0 destroyer of Jalandhara. Be victori­
ous, 0 Lord who dispelled the arrogance of the god of Love. 
Be victorious, 0 progenitor of the three worlds. Be victorious, 
0 Lord who make the th.ree worlds flourish. 
1 07. 
Be victorious, 0 Lord with the three worlds as (your) 
abode. Be victorious, 0 Lord esteemed and saluted by all the 
three worlds. Be victorious, 0 Lord who are at the back and 
call of devotees. Be victorious, 0 leader of Pramathas. 
1 08. 
Be victorious, 0 Lord the sides of whose matted hairs 
are washed by the waters of Tripathaga (Ganga) . Be victori­
ous, 0 Lord who have illuminated the three worlds with the 
brilliance of the crescent moon. 
1 09. 
Be victorious, 0 Lord whose person has been ren­
dered bright by the lustre of the gems on the hoods of ser­
pents. Be victorious, 0 Lord half of whose body has been 
bought through penance by the daughter of the King of Mountains. 
1 1 0. 
Be victorious, 0 Lord with the cremation ground as 
your abode. Be victorious, 0 Lord fond of VaraQ.asi. Be victo-

=== PAGE 279 ===

rious, 0 bestower of salvation on all living beings occupying 
Anandakanana. 
1 1 1 . Be victorious, 0 Lord of the universe, 0 Sarva devoid 
of Sarvari (darkness of Maya) . Be victorious, 0 Lord fond of 
dance. Be victorious, 0 Ugra who are expert in singing. 
1 1 2. 
Be victorious, 0 Prar;tava. Be victorious, 0 refuge of 
the good. Be victorious, 0 great storehouse of refulgence. Be 
victorious, 0 trident-wielding Lord. Be victorious, 0 Virupakᕛa 
(odd-eyed one) . Be victoriousᖀ 0 bestower of everything on 
those who bow down. 
1 1 3. 
Though conversant with all creations, Brahma is not 
competent to eulogize you adequately. 0 Lord, the words of 
Vacaspati become dull and impeded while eulogizing you. 
1 1 4. 
Though the Vedas know (everything) , they do not 
know you really, 0 Omniscient Lord, the mind cannot com­
prehend you properly, because you are infinite and beginningless. 
1 1 5. 
Hail to you! Bow to you! Obeisance to you! Obei-
sance! Obeisance! 0 Trilocana, obeisance to you. 0 Triviᕛᖁpa, 
we make obeisance to you. 
1 1 6. 
Mter saying this, the girls fell on the ground like a 
log of wood. Making the girls get up the Moon-crested Lord 
said: 
1 1 7. 
"The son of Mandaradaman, the Vidyadhara chief, 
named Parimalalaya will become the husband of all of you. 
1 1 8. 
Mter enjoying worldly pleasures of all sorts in the 
Vidyadhara world for a long time, you will become detached 
and attain what is achieved by residing in .KaSi. 
1 1 9. 
All the three of you are devotees of mine. So also that 
Vidyadhara youth. AU the four will attain salvation at the end 
of this life. 
1 20. 
In the previous birth too, my service had been per­
formed by all of you and also by him. Hence this birth has 
become free from impurities, purified by devotion. 
1 2 1 . Whoever reads this prayer of yours in front of me, 
will be granted all that he desires as in the case of yours. 
1 22. 
If a pure man recites this in the morning, he rids 
himself of the sin committed at night. By reading this in the 
evening he clearly destroys the sin committed during the day."' 
1 23. 
When the Lord of Devas said thus those girls became

=== PAGE 280 ===

270 
Skanda Purii1Ja 
delighted in their minds. They bowed to Isana with palms 
joined in reverence and said: 
Niiga Girls said: 
1 24. 
We dare to ask, 0 Lord, 0 Sailkara, the merciful one: 
How was service rendered to Your Lordship by the four of us 
in the previous birth? Be pleased to tell. 
1 25. 
0 Bhava, kindly narrate the events that happened in 
the previous lives of that meritorious soul as well as of ours. 
0 storehouse of compassion, be kind. 
1 26. 
On hearing these words lovingly spoken by the girls, 
the Lord narrated those incidents which took place in their 
lives and that of his. 
lsvara said: 
1 27. 
Listen, 0 Naga girls, with concentrated attention, all 
the three of you. I shall narrate the (details of) your as well 
as his previous birth. 
1 28. 
This Ratnavali: was formerly a female dove and that 
leader of Vidyadharas was a male dove, her husband. 
1 29. 
They spent a long time very comfortably in my palace 
here. With the winds of their wings, they removed the dust 
particles sticking to the (various parts of) the palace. 
1 30. 
Many circumambulations were performed both above 
and below by them hovering in the sky or fluttering about in 
my courtyard. 
1 3 1 . 
They took their bath in the Caturnada Tirtha and drank 
the water too there many times. Pleasing chirping sound also was 
made by the pigᖂons for the pleasure (of the devotees) . 
1 32. Various joyous and pleasant activities of my devotees 
here were watched by these two with great pleasure and stead­
fast mind. 
1 33. 
Many times the auspicious lights shown to me were 
seen by them and the nectarine syllables of my names had 
been imbibed through the ears. 
1 34. 
Due to the powerful influence of the (sub-human) 
bird life they led, they did not die in my presence. Of course, 
they died in Ayodhya that is competent to accord the attain­
ment of Kasi.

=== PAGE 281 ===

IV.ii. 76. 1 35-1 49 
271 
1 35. 
By virtue of their death in Ayodhya, she became the 
daughter of Ratnadipa and her husband was born as the son 
of the Vidyadhara. 
1 36-1 37. I shall tell you the previous birth of this Serpent 
girl Prabhavati who has become the daughter of Padmin, the 
Naga King. This Kalavati is the daughter of Trisikha, the king 
of Serpents. Listen to her antecedents too. I shall narrate. 
1 38. 
In their third 
previous birth these two girls were 
well-behaved daughters of Sage ArayaQ.a. They loved each other 
very much. 
1 39. 
Urged by themselves, they were given (in marriage) 
to NarayaQ.a, the son of Amu!)yayaQ.a by their father ArayaQ.a. 
1 40. 
NarayaQ.a who had not by then attained his youth, 
had once gone to fetch sacrificial twigs. A1t fate would have it, 
he was bitten by a serpent in forest. 
1 4 1 . 
The names of the daughters of ArayaQ.a were Bhavani 
and Gautaml. They met with the misery of widowhood. They 
found themselves in a wretched condition. 
142. 
Hence a sensible man 
should scrupulously avoid 
marrying a girl named after a goddess or a river. 
143. 
Incidentally once these two girls, out of delusion, 
plucked banana fruits without being permitted, from the wonderful 
hermitage of a certain sage. 
144. 
Though they had performed many rites and vows such 
as fasting for a month etc., the daughters of the BrahmaQ.a 
died in due course and became monkeys in the next birth. 
1 45. As a result of the theft of fruits, they attained the 
state (birth) of monkeys. Due to the merit of preserving their 
modesty, they were born in Kasl. 
146. 
That BrahmaQ.a NarayaQ.a attending to the service of 
his father dutifully, became a pigeon in Kasi after being bitten 
by a serpent. 
1 47. 
In his earlier birth he W!ls their husband thᖃs. Now 
he will be the husband of you three. 
1 48. 
There was a great Nyagrodha (holy fig) tree at the 
side of the palace (temple of Siva) . Those two became the 
monkeys living on that tree with many branches. 
1 49 . 
They playfully i m m ersed 
themselves in the 
Catul).srotasvini (four streams) Tirtha. When they were thirsty, 
they drank the water from the same Tirtha.

=== PAGE 282 ===

1 50. In view of the natural fickleness of their life they playfully 
circumambulated the mansion (of Siva) and visited the Linga 
many times. 
1 5 1 . While they were wandering thus very freely near the 
Nyagrodha tree, they were caught and bound with ropes by 
someone in the garb of a Yogin. 
152. They were taught simian gambolling tricks and dances 
for the purpose of getting alms. In course of time those two 
monkeys died somewhere. 
1 53. Thanks to the merit of living in Kasl and service to 
Trilocana in the form of circumambulation etc., they were 
born as serpent girls. 
1 54. Now all of you will attain that Vidyadhara prince as 
your husband and will enjoy heavenly pleasures and ultimately 
attain salvation in Kasl. 
155. If any auspicious rite howsoever small or insignificant, 
is performed in Kasl, certainly the result thereof is salvation 
by my blessings. 
1 56. Of all the cities in the entire three worlds, the city of 
VaraQ.asl is the most excellent. There too the Orhkara Linga 
is excellent and even more excellent is Trilocana here. 
1 57. Stationed here in this Linga, I grant salvation to the 
devotees. Hence with all effort Trilocana is to be worshipped 
in Kasl. 
1 58. Mter saying this, the Lord of the chiefs of Devas entered 
the sanctum sanctorum of the shrine, regaining his form that 
is (invisible and) beyond the ken of mind and words-the 
form that is more perfect than (anything else) in the three 
worlds. 
1 59. Those girls too went to their respective abodes and 
reported everything that had happened to their mothers. They 
thought themselves Wessed and contented. 
1 60. Once in "the ·month of Madhava, the day of the great 
religious festival arrived. The Vidyadharas and the Nagas met 
together along with their retinue. 
1 61-162. In the great holy shrine Virajaska in the vicinity of 
Trilocana, as a result of the boon granted by the Lord, they 
formally enquired about each other's family antecedents. The 
Nagas offered the three princesses to the Vidyadhara (youth) .

=== PAGE 283 ===

IV.ii.76.163-IV.ii.77.1 
273 
On getting those three daughters-in-law, Mandaradaman be­
came very pleased. 
1 63. All these three also became delighted, namely Ratnadlpa 
the Lord of Nagas, Padmin the Lord of Bhujagas (Serpents) 
and Trisikha the leader of PhaQ.Is (Cobras) . 
1 64. After getting the excellent (Vidyadhara) ParimaHilaya 
as their son-in-law, they became mutual kinsmen and their 
eyes began to beam with pleasure. 
1 65. After celebrating the marriage, they entered their 
respective abodes extolling the greatness of Trilocana Liilga. 
1 66-1 67. The glorious Vidyadhara youth enjoyed great plea­
sures along with the Naga princesses. He reached Varal).asl 
and served Trilocana contentedly singing sweet songs in the 
company of the Naga princesses. He then Jlleditated much on 
the Atman and merged into the middle of the Liilga. 
Skanda said: 
1 68. The greatness of Trilocana was well-concealed and guarded 
by the Lord in Kaliyuga. Hence men of inferior intellect do 
not adore that Liilga. 
1 69. On hearing this story of Trilocana even a sinful person 
will become rid of sins and attain the greatest goal. 
CHAPTER SEVENTYSEVEN 
The Greatness of Kediira1 
Piiroati said: 
1 . Obeisance to you, 0 Lord of the chiefs of Devas. 0 
ocean of kindness for those who bow down, do narrate the 
I. 'Kedara' means 'field'. The Kedara-Liliga is not a smooth-surfaced shaft 
set into a Pitha but a rough mound with a white line in the middle like a 
mound of Khichari cut at half. For king Mandhatr offered his half of Khichari 
to Siva in the guise of a guest, when the whole moBnd turned into a stone liliga. 
The temple is at the top of Kedara Ghat on Ganga and was providentially 
saved from Aurangzeb's destruction. Kedareiivara is said to be senior. The 
section of Kedara in Varat;tasi is regarded as the most sacred part of Kaiii. (BCL 
136-142)

=== PAGE 284 ===

274 
Skanda Purii1J-a 
greatness of Kedara · out of compassion for the devotees. 
2. The great love you show to that Linga in Kasl is superb. 
The devotees thereof, 0 Lord of Devas, are persons of great 
intelligence. 
Devadeva said: 
3. 
Listen, 0 Apar1.1a, I shall narrate to you the details of 
the tale of Kedaresvara, on hearing which even a sinner becomes 
instantly rid of all sins. 
4. If a man is desirous of going to Kedara and if he has 
so resolved in his mind, all his sins acquired since his birth 
perish instantly, 
5. 
If a man has set out from his house with an intention 
to go in the direction of Kedara, the sins acquired in the 
course of two births go away from his body. 
6. As soon as he reaches half the way, the sins committed 
in the course of three births get out of their abode in his body 
and go away in despair sighing grievously. 
7. 
One who continues to stay in the house repeating "Kedara, 
Kedara, Kedara" thrice in the evening, shall certainly attain 
the benefit of the pilgrimage (to Kedara) . 
8. 
By visiting the mountain peak of Kedara, and by drink­
ing the water (of Kedara Tlrtha) a devotee shall undoubtedly 
be rid of the sins acquired in the course of seven births. 
9. By taking the holy ablution in Harapapa Hrada and by 
worshipping Kedarda, a devotee is undoubtedly rid of the sins 
acquired in the course of a crore of births. 
10. 
Mter bowing down to Kedara once and performing 
all water libation rites in the Harapapa Tlrtha, a devotee shall 
fix the Linga in the lotus-like heart. On death he will attain 
salvation. 
1 1 . 
He who performs Sraddha with great faith in Harapapa 
Hrada, redeems seven generations. He will then attain my 
world. 
12. 
0 Apar1.1a, listen with great attention to what hap-
pened formerly in the Rathantara Kalpa. I shall describe it to 
you. 
1 3. 
The son of a Brahma1.1a came here from Ujjayinl. 
Mter the investiture with the sacred thread had been per­
formed by his father, he adopted the vow of celibacy.

=== PAGE 285 ===

IV.ii.77.14-31 
275 
14-16. 
He visited the holy spot of Kasi of Pa8upati and saw 
it all around. It was full of BrahmaQ.a followers of Pasupati, 
adorned with crown-like matted hairs. They regularly adored the 
Liil.gas. Their bodies were embellished with holy ash. They were 
contented with the meals got by way of alms. They nourished 
themselves with the nectarine waters of Ganga. He became 
highly delighted in his mind and got initiated in the most excellent 
Vrata called MahiipiiSupata by the preceptor HiraQ.yagarbha. 
17-18. 
That disciple VasiHha (of that name, or having perfect 
control of sense-organs) became the most excellent one among 
the Pasupatas. Everyday he got up early in the morning and took 
his bath in Harapapa Hrada. He took the bath with Vibhitti (holy 
ash) and also adored the Liil.ga three times everyday. He never 
differentiated between Siva Liil.ga and his preceptor. 
19. 
That disciple Vasiᔻtha aged roughly twelve years went 
on pilgrimage to Kedara in the great Mountain, the father 
of Gaurl. 
20. 
After going there and imbibing the water in the form 
of Liil.ga, the devotees assume the form of Liil.ga and they 
never become grief-stricken like worldly men. 
2 1 . 
After reaching the mountain Asidhara, the preceptor 
named HiraQ.yagarbha of the ascetic Vasiᔻtha passed away. 
22. 
Even as the sages were watching, the attendants (of 
Siva) joyously took him to Kailasa in an aerial chariot covet­
able unto all. 
23. 
He who has started from his house towards Kedara 
but casts off his vital airs midway without any trace of coward­
ice, shall live in Kailasa for a long time. 
24. 
On observing this miracle, the ascetic Vasiᔻtha de-
cided that Kedara alone is worthy of the greatest honour among 
all Liil.gas. 
25-26. After concluding the pilgrimage to Kedara he returned 
to VaraQ.asl. He took up a resolve and later acted accordingly: 
'As long as I live I shall certainly visit Kedara on the PiirQ.ima 
day every year in the month of Caitra while residing in the 
city of VaraQ.asl. ' 
27. 
H e joyously and perfectly made sixty-one such pil-
grimages staying as a celibate religious student in Anandakanana 
permanently. 
28-3 1 . 
On the next Caitra month also he made prepara-

=== PAGE 286 ===

276 
Skanda Purii:Ja 
tion for the pilgrimage with great pleasure and enthusiasm, 
though he was assailed by old age and greying hairs and though 
he was dissuaded by the (other) ascetics who suspected that 
he would die and also by other associates with hearts full of 
compassion. Still there was no loss in his enthusiasm because 
his mind was steadfast. The pure sage Vasiᔻᔽha decisively resolved 
in his mind thus: 'Even if I die midway I shall have salvation 
like my preceptor. ' Further he never took in food given by 
Sudras. 0 CaQ.Qika, hence I became pleased with him. 
32-36. 
Vasiᔻᔽha, the excellent sage, was told by me in dream: 
"0 ascetic of steadfast vow, I am pleased. Know that I am 
Kedara. Unhesitatingly request for any desired boon from me. " 
Even when I said thus, he insisted that the dream was false. 
Thereupon, he was again assured by me: "It is a dream of 
persons who are not pure that is false; but not so in the case 
of people like you who behave in the manner befitting their 
name (i.e. Vasiᔻᔽha 
= having full-control of the senses) . Tell 
me the boon you will have. 0 BrahmaQ.a, leave off your doubts 
regarding the dream. There is nothing which I cannot or will 
not give you who are full of Sattva quality." On hearing this 
statement of mine, HiraQ.yagarbha's disciple, the most excel­
lent one among saints, choose the boon thus: 
37. 
"If you, the Lord of Devas, are pleased, then all these 
people along with their followers, 0 Trident-wielding Lord, 
should be blessed. This alone is my boon. " 
38. 
0 goddess, o n hearing these words o f that (sage) by 
nature helpful to others, I became extremely pleased and said 
to him, "It will be so. " 
39. 
By his further act o f rendering help to others, his 
penance became doubly effective. On account of that merit, 
he was further urged by me, "Choose (another) boon. " 
40. 
That highly intelligent Vasiᔻᖄa, steadfast in his Pasupata 
vow, 0 goddess, requested for my stay here away from the 
mountain Himalaya. 
· 
4 1 . 
Then, attracted by his penance I stationed myself there 
on the Himalaya Mountain with only a sixteenth of my power 
but here with the full-complement thereof. 
42-43. 
Then, when the day dawned, even as all were watching, 
I eulogized by Suras and sages, started from Himalaya keeping 
Vasiᔻᔽha in front accompanied by all of his followers. Mter

=== PAGE 287 ===

IV.ii. 77.44-57 
277 
arriving here. I stationed myself in the Harapapa Hrada Tirtha 
for obliging him. 
44. 
All these persons who offered libations with water in 
Harapapa and propitiated me, have attained Siddhi with their 
own physical forms with my favour. 
45. 
Ever since then I have been stationed in this Linga 
in the great holy spot of Avimukta for conferring Siddhi on 
the aspirants especially in the age of Kali. 
46. 
By seeing Kedara in Kasi one obtains seven times as 
much merit as obtained by visiting Kedara after climbing Himalaya. 
4 7. 
In Kasi we have everything that is there in Kedara, 
like Gaur! Kuᗂu;la, Harilsa Tirtha devoiA of impunties and 
Madhusrava ('honey-pouring' ) Ganga. 
48. 
This Harapapa Tirtha is destructive of the sins ac-
quired in the course of seven births. Afterwards when it mingles 
with Ganga it becomes destructive of the sins committed in 
crores of births. 
49. 
Here (in the Harilsa Tirtha) , formerly two ravens who 
were fighting in the sky had fallen. Even as the people assembled 
there were watching, they transformed themselves into swans 
and came out. 
50. 
0 Gauri, formerly you had taken your bath in this 
great Hrada. Ever since then, it is well-known as Gauri Tirtha. 
It is the most excellent of all excellent Tirthas. 
5 1 . 
The Amrtasrava (nectar-pouring) Ganga here dispels 
the darkness of great delusion. It destroys the ignorance produced 
in the course of many births. 
52. 
The Holy Manasa lake performed a great penance 
here formerly. Hence among the people, this has become 
renowned as Manasa Tirtha. 
53-57. 
Formerly here men became liberated merely by 
taking their bath. Afterwards, I was propitiated by the Devas 
who had difficulty in attaining salvation, by saying, "All should 
become liberated." (Then I said) "If Devas or human beings 
take their holy bath in Kedara KuQ.Q.a, they will have progress 
(and salvation) . So it will grant salvation to people of all castes, 
stages of life and righteousness practised merely by casting off 
the bodies here and not otherwise. " Then at his importunity, 
I said, "So be it." Ever since then, . 0 great goddess, I am 
granting salvation to those who cast off their bodies elsewhere

=== PAGE 288 ===

278 
Skanda Purii:T}-a 
too, if they take bath in Kedara Km:u;la, devoutly worship me 
and repeat my names. 
58. 
If a devotee takes bath in the Kedara Tirtha and offers 
balls of rice without hurrying through the rites, a hundred 
and one generations of his family cross the ocean of worldly 
existence. 
59. 
When new-moon day coincides with a Tuesday, one 
should go to Kedara Km:u;la and offer Sraddha. If so, of what 
avail is Gaya Sraddha? 
60. 
Advice should be given thus to a person who is de-
sirous of going to Kedara (i.e. in the Himalaya) by other men: 
"Touching Kedara (Liriga) in Kasi, you will be one who has 
done his duty." 
6 1 . 
On the fourteenth day in the dark half of Caitra, a 
devotee should observe fast and drink three mouthfuls of water. 
He thus occupies the Hrllinga. 
62. 
There is no doubt about this that men and women 
will obtain that benefit here itself that is obtained there, by 
drinking the water of Kedara. 
63. 
By honouring, adoring a devotee of Kedara with clothes, 
food, monetary gifts etc., one dispels the sin committed ever 
since the birth and goes to my abode. 
64. 
Yama and other guardians of the worlds will bow 
down always to that person who bows down to Kedare8a three 
times a day, for a period of six months. 
65. 
In the Kali age, anyone and everyone will not under-
stand the greatness of Kedara. A man of meritorious soul who 
understands that, will certainly understand everything. 
66. 
By visiting Kedaresa even once, 0 
goddess, a man 
becomes my follower. Hence one shall assiduously visit Kedaresa 
in Kasi. 
67. 
Citrarigadesvara Liriga is to the north of Kedara. It 
is very auspicious. By continuously worshipping it, a man enjoys 
heavenly pleasures. 
68-72. 
To the south of Kedara is Nilakat:J.tha. By visiting 
it one who is bitten by the serpent of worldly existence, need 
not be afraid of the poison i.e., misery. To the north-west 
thereof is Arhbariᕇesa. A man who visits it is never compelled 
to stay in a womb in the miserable worldly existence. By 
worshipping Indradyumnesvara Liriga in its vicinity, a devotee

=== PAGE 289 ===

IV.ii. 77. 73-IV.ii. 78.5 
279 
goes to heaven in a luminous vehicle and enjoys. The man will 
visit Kalaiijaresvara Linga to the south thereof. He will con­
quer old age and Kala and live in my world for a long time. 
By visiting ᕐemesvara Linga to the north of Citrailgadesvara, 
a devotee obtains welfa.re everywhere, both in this world and 
elsewhere. 
Skanda said: 
73-74. 
0 Enemy of Vindhya, the supreme greatness of 
Kedara was thus recounted by the Lord of Devas formerly to 
Amba. It has been recounted to you by me. A man becomes 
contented and blessed by listening to the origin of Kedare!ivara 
Liilga. He becomes rid of sins instantly and attains Siva's world. 
CHAPTER SEVENTYEIGHT 
The Greatness of Dharmesa1 
Piirvati said: 
1-4. 0 Sambhu, 0 Isana, narrate to me (the qualities of) 
that Linga in Anandakanana, which causes increase in merit. 
Merely by remembering the name of it great sins get annihi­
lated. The Linga should be always resorted to by the aspirants; 
where a devotee will have the most excellent delight. Here the 
result of what is gifted, offered in the sacred fire, repeatedly 
muttered and meditated upon is of everlasting merit. Remem­
bering it, visiting, bowing down to and touching this Linga 
and adoration of it and bathing with Paiicamrta etc. shall result 
in a series of benefits. 
Skanda said: 
5. 
0 Pot-born One, I shall expound to you what is recounted 
by the omniscient Lord, on hearing the request of the god­
dess. Please listen. 
I. Situated to the east of Visvanatha Temple near Dharma Kii.pa.

=== PAGE 290 ===

280 
Skanda Pura7Ja 
Devadeva said: 
6. 
0 Uma, what is asked by you is conducive to release 
from the bondage of worldly existence. There I -shaq extol the 
Liiiga. Be steady in mind. 
7. This is the greatest secret of mine in Anandakanana 
here. It has not been revealed to anyone by me. Nor does 
anyone know what to ask about it. 
8. 
0 my beloved, in Anandavana there are many of my 
Lirigas, but I shall recount to you only what you have asked. 
9. It is here, 0 Visvaga (Omnipresent One) , that you are 
yourself present in ·the form of Mukti (Liberation) and here 
your son is also present destroying obstacles. 
1 0. When I was desirous of victory in the battle with Tripuras, 
my hope thereof was fulfilled by the offer of eulogy and many 
gifts of Modakas (sweetmeats) here . 
. 1 1 . Here is a Tlrtha that increases the pleasure of ancestors 
and destroys sins; it was by taking his bath here that the Slayer 
of. Vrtra (Indra) became rid of the sins of killing Vrtra (a 
BrahmaQa) . 
1 2. I t was h e re that D h arm araj a ( Va rn a ) o b tai n e d 
DharmadhikaraQa (authority over matters pertaining to merit 
and demerit and their rewards and punishment) after performing 
a very difficult penance with the greatest concentration. 
13. Here itself birds obtained knowledge that effected lib­
eration from worldly existence. There is a beautiful golden 
tree here with many roots. 
1 4. It was after visiting the Liriga here that the king named 
Durdama became pious-minded instantly though he had pre­
viously outraged all the worlds. 
15. 0 beautiful lady, listen to the origin and the greatness 
of that Liriga. It is destructive of great sins. I shall recount it. 
1 6. Here in my Anandavana, it is specifically called 
Dharmapltha. By visiting that Dharmapltha alone, a man is 
liberated from sins. 
1 7. Formerly, in front of you, 0 Visalakᔻl, Varna, the son of 
Sun-god, performed a severe penance with great self<ontrol. 
1 8-2 1 . 
During winter he used to stand in water; during 
rainy season he used to stand directly under the sky; and during 
summer he used to stand ;n the middle of five fires. Some-

=== PAGE 291 ===

IV.ii. 78.22-31 
281 
times he performed the penance standing for a long time, 
touching the ground with the tips of his feet (i.e. big toes) . 
Sometimes he stood on a single leg for a long time. That 
fortunate one had the intake of only air for a long time. When 
he felt thirsty, he drank only a few drops of water through the 
tips of Darbhas. Performing the penance thus, he spent the 
period of a cycle of four Yugas in accordance with the reck­
oning of Devas, with the greatest concentration and mental 
absorption to see me four times. 
22. Then becoming pleased with the penance of that steady­
minded (Dharma) , I went there to grant the boons to the 
noble-souled Sam ana (Yam a) . 
23-3 1 . 
There was a banayan tree called Kaiicana-iiakha 
( 'having golden branches') according shelter to many birds 
and having extensive shade which removed his distress due to 
the penance. 
When gentle wind shook the tender sprouts resembling hands, 
it appeared as though it invited the wayfarers distressed due 
to their travel and as if it wanted to remove their fatigue. The 
tree delighted groups of suppliants very much through their 
round fruits which were fully ripe and tasty emitting fragrance 
and affection. 
Beneath it I saw the distinguished son of the Sun-god with 
the body straight and motionless like a post. His eyes were 
fixed at the tip of his nose. He resembled the Sun in the blue 
sky surrounded by his own radiance, when the brilliance of 
his own austerities made a halo around him. 
He had installed a great Linga named after himself (i.e. 
Dharmeiivara Linga) which was made of crystalline solar stone 
and worshipped with great devotion as if with a mass of splendour. 
Yama was performing the penance keeping this Linga as 
witness. 
I spoke to Dharmaraja: "0 Bhaskari ('son of the Sun-god') , 
speak out the boon you would have, 0 highly fortunate one. 
Enough of your continuance of penance, 0 splendid-vowed 
one. I am delighted." On hearing this and seeing me Samana 
bowed down. The son of the Sun-god whose sense-organs and 
mind were delighted stopped his meditation and eulogized 
with genuine sincerity.

=== PAGE 292 ===

282 
Prayer of Dharma: 
(32-41 ) 
Dharma said: 
Skanda Purii:r_ta 
32. 
Obeisance, obeisance, 0 cause of all causes. Obei-
sance, obeisance to one without a cause. Obeisance, obeisance 
to you, the presiding deity of all effects. Obeisance, 0 Lord 
with a form different from effects. 
33. 
Obeisance to one in the form of formlessness. Obei-
sance to one having all the forms. Obeisance to the subtlest 
one; obeisance to one identical with cause and effect. Obei­
sance to Aparara (the perfect and extensive one) . Obeisance 
to one according access to the other shore of the greatest 
ocean (Samsara) . Obeisance to you, the moon-crested one. 
34. 
You are AniSvara (having no other Lord over you) . 
You are the lord of the universe. You are identical with the 
Gul).as. You are free from attributes; you are beyond Kala (Time) . 
You are beyond Prakrti. Obeisance to you, the embodimant 
of Kala (Time) . Obeisance to you, 0 ultimate cause devouring 
Kala (Time, god of Death) . 
35. 
You alone are the bestower of the status of salvation, 
0 Lord of infinite power. You alone are the salvation (per­
sonified) . You are identical with the individual soul; you are 
the supreme soul. You are the immanent soul of the mobile 
and immobile beings. 
36. 
0 sole kinsman of the universe, the universe originates 
from you; you are directly the universe itself; and the universe 
is yours. You are the first creator, the protector and the annihilator. 
Obeisance, obeisance to you, 0 Lord of Vidhatr (Brahma) 
and ViᕇI).U. 
37. 
You are Mr<;la (bestower of happiness) unto those 
who follow the path of the Vedas; you alone are Bhima ('the 
terrible one') unto those who do not follow the path of the 
Vedas. 0 Soma ('one with Uma as his consort') , you are the 
benefactor of th()Se having excellent devotion. 0 Rudra, you 
are Ugra ('the fierce one') to those devoid of devotion. 
38. 
You alone are Siilin ('the trident-bearer') unto the 
enemies; you alone are Siva ('the auspicious one') unto those 
with humble mind and polite words. You are the sole Srikal).ᔽha 
('glorious-throated one') to those who resort to your feet. You

=== PAGE 293 ===

IV.ii. 78.39-48 
283 
are the fierce-throated one with the poison Hahihala to the 
wicked ones. 
39. 
I offer obeisance to you, 0 Sailkara, the quiescent 
one. Obeisance to you, 0 Sarilbhu, embellished with the digit 
of the moon; obeisance to you, the lord with serpents for 
ornaments. 0 Lord having Pinaka in the hand, obeisance to 
the enemy of Andhaka. 
40. 
He alone is blessed who has devotion unto you. He 
alone who is your worshipper is meritorious. He who always 
eulogizes you, shall be eulogized by Indra and other Devas. 
4 1 . 
0 Lord with infinite power, who like me with very 
limited intellectual power can eulogize you adequately-you 
who are incomprehensible to the words of the ancients? This 
prayer unto you is mere bowing down uato you. 
Skanda said: 
42. 
Mter uttering (this prayer) the son of the Sun-god 
said, "Obeisance to Siva with great 
devotion." With great 
delight he touched the ground with his head and bowed down 
to Sarilbhu a thousand times. 
43. 
Then Siva, the Lord, prevented him from further 
obeisances as he was already distressed due to the penance 
and granted the boons to the son of the Seven-horsed One 
(the Sun-god) : "You be Dharmaraja by name also. 
44. 
You alone have been employed by me in the admin-
istration of Dharma unto all embodied beings, mobile as well 
as immobile. At my behest rule over all. Your duty commences 
today. 
45. 
You are the Lord of the southern direction. Be the 
witness unto the Karmas of all creatures. May the good and 
the bad ones from the mortal world attain the goal of their 
respective Karmas along the path pointed out by you. 
46. 
0 Dharma, men shall obtain without delay the Siddhi 
by visiting, touching and worshipping this Liilga which has 
been propitiated here by you with full devotion unto me. 
47. 
If any man of spotlessly pure mind takes his holy bath 
here in this Dharma Tirtha in front and visits at least once 
Dharmesvara, die achievement of the aims of life is not out 
of his reach. 
48. 
If in spite of committing a thousand sins, any one

=== PAGE 294 ===

284 
Skanda Purii:T}a 
sees Dharmdvara by chance, he will not suffer from hellish 
pain at any time; the immortal ones speak highly about him 
in heaven. 
49. 
If any man does not endeavour for his good even 
after obtaining Dharmapitha at Kasi, 0 Dharma of exceeding 
splendour, how can he, like you, make himself one of fulfilled 
duty? 
50. 
There is no doubt about this that the desires of the 
devotees of Dharmesvara will become fruitful as in your case. 
0 Dharmaraja, all your cherished desires have been attained 
by you through your excessive austerities. 
5 1 . 
Wherefore should one be afraid if he performs even 
once the adoration of Dharmesvara, despite commission of 
great sins here? A devotee of the Liriga worshipped by you is 
your own kindred. 
52. 
If anyone adores Dharmesvara, 0 Dharma, with a 
leaf, flower, water or Diirva grass, the Devas with nectar as 
their food will be exceedingly delighted and they will honour 
him with garlands of the divine Mandara flowers. 
53. 
(Usually) people who commit sins are afraid of you. 
But they need never be afraid if only they make arrangement 
for the adoration of Dharmesvara and thereby captivate your 
mind through kinship. 
54. 
0 Dharma, even in the future Yugas (and Kalpas) 
whatever 
men offer here in the Dharmapitha after having 
their holy dip in the celestial river and bowing down to your 
Liriga becomes everlasting: 
55. 
Those men who observe fast on the eighth lunar day 
in the bright half of the month of Karttika and celebrate the 
festivities, keeping awake during the night, before Dharmdvara, 
are not born again on the earth. 
56. 
Those men who recite this prayer uttered by you in 
front of your (Liriga) become free of sins, go to my world and 
attain your companionship. 
57. 
0 Dharmaraja, the son of the storehouse of splendour 
(the Sun) , ask for any other boon desired by you. I shall grant 
it to you. There is nothing here which cannot be given to you. 
Simply make the effort of uttering the word." 
58. 
On seeing Sarikara full of mercy and delighted in 
form ready to bestow everything he cherished in his mind

=== PAGE 295 ===

IV.ii.79. 1-12 
285 
(Varna) became immersed in the lake of a mass of bliss. For 
a moment he was unable to utter anything. 
Skanda said: 
CHAPTER SEVENTYNINE 
Dharmesiikhyiinam 
(Episode of Dharma) 
1 . On seeing that his throat was choked with tears of joy, 
Mp;la (Siva) , the ocean of nectar, touched him with both the 
hands exuding nectar. 
' 
2. With the joy of his touch, Dharmaraja of great austeri­
ties, whose body had been burnt in the fire of penance, put 
forth sprouts once again (i.e. became nourished) . 
3. Then the son of Bradhna (the Sun-god) said to Umapati, 
the Lord of Devas, who was quiescent, joyous in countenance 
and surrounded by the tranquil attendants: 
4. 
"0 omniscient Isana, 0 storehouse of mercy, if you are 
pleased, of what avail is another boon, because you have been 
seen in person by me? 
5. If I am considered worthy of being granted a boon 
(because I have seen you directly) , to you whom neither the 
Vedas nor the Vedic Puruᔻas (i.e. Brahma and ViᕞQ.u) know 
adequately, I shall 
then make this request, 0 Lord: 
6-7. 0 SrlkaQ.tha, be the grantor of boons to these young 
ones of birds, the parrots who speak sweetly and were wit­
nesses to my penance for a long time, who have been deprived 
of their parents but who are conversant with the stories of 
mythology and whe have eschewed their food and play. 
8. While giving birth to these the she-parrot being attacked 
by a sickness (v. l . pain of delivery) passed away and the he­
pigeon was eaten by a hawk. 
9. 
0 Lord of the helpless ones, these helpless birds have 
been always looking up to my face and were protected by you 
in the remaining part of their life." 
1 0-12. 
On hearing these words of Dharma, pure because ­
they were intended to help others, 0 sage, Sarilbhu called

=== PAGE 296 ===

286 
Skanda Purii:TJ,a 
those young ones of the parrot. They bowed down their heads 
with humility. He who was so delighted with Dharma said: "0 
birds, 0 good ones in association with Dharma, what boon has 
to be given to you all who served Dharmesa and whose great 
sins of the previous births have become nullified due to contact 
with saintly people?" 
1 3-14. 
On hearing these words of Mahe8a, those birds 
after bowing down to the Lord of Devas submitted to him: 
The Birds said: 
Obeisance to you, 0 destroyer of worldly birth, 0 Lord of 
helpless ones, 0 omniscient one, 0 three-eyed Lord, what 
boon should be desired by us beyond this that we have been 
seen (by you) despite our being of the brutish category? 
15. 
May there be hundreds and hundreds of profits, 0 
Girisa, unto the persons of great enterprise and efforts here; 
but this is the greatest profit that you should be within the 
range of our vision. 
16. 
0 Lord, these things that are visible are entirely 
momentary. You alone are permanent and free from destruc­
tion. The worship done unto you is not momentary (in yield­
ing frujt) . 
1 7. 
By viewing the adoration of the Linga performed by 
this sage (Varna) , we are able to recollect crores of our births 
of diverse nature. 
18. 
0 Lord, we have_ had our births in the category (life) 
of the celestial ones for a long time. Thousands of divine 
damsels had been enjoyed sportively. 
19. 
We have had our births in the womb of Asuras, Danavas, 
Nagas, Nairrtas, Kinnaras, Vidyadharas and Gandharvas. 
20. 
While being human we have attained the status of 
kings many times; in water (we had) the state of aquatic beings 
and on the ground the state of ground walkers. 
2 1 . 
We have been forest-dwellers in the forests, rustic 
ones in villages; we have been donors and beggars, protectors 
and murderers. 
22. 
We have been happy and we have been miserable 
too. We had become the victorious ones as well as the van­
quished ones.

=== PAGE 297 ===

IV.ii. 79.23-35 
287 
23. 
We have been serious students and the dullest fools; 
we have been masters as well as servants. We have had births 
in the four types of living beings (oviparous, viviparous, sweat­
born and shooting shrubs) of high level, medium level and 
the basest one. 
24. 
From one womb to another and to a third therefrom, 
we have various forms. 0 Sarhbhu, but nowhere did we have 
any stability. 
25-26. 
0 Pinaka-wielding One, not even the least quan­
tum of happiness was attained by us anywhere. But now, thanks 
to our accumulated merits, we have visited Dharmesvara. Our 
sins have been burnt by the flames of the fire of the austerities 
of the son of Tapana (the Sun-god) . 0 Three-eyed Lord, on 
seeing you. directly we have become blessed. We feel the satisfaction 
of having achieved our objective. 
27-28. 
Still, if a boon is to be given, 0 Dhiirjati, 0 omniscient 
one, grant that knowledge to the miserable, pitiable creatures 
like us-knowledge whereby we can be released from this worldly 
bondage. We are fettered and by the bonds of Maya not to 
be easily cut by persons like we. 
29. 
0 Sarhbhu, we do not covet the position of Indra, not 
that of the Moon, nor do we covet anything else. We desire 
only the death at Kasi after which there is no rebirth. 
30. 
0 omniscient one, we understand everything due to 
your presence in the vicinity, just as all trees gain fragrance 
due to contact with a Sandal tree. 
3 1 . 
This itself is (the cause of) the great knowledge that 
brings about the destruction of worldly existence, namely casting 
off of the body at the proper time in your Anandakanana. 
32. 
Formerly this great essence has been extracted and 
stated by Brahma after churning the entire verbal expanse: 
(There is) 'Salvation to those who cast off the body at Kasi. ' 
33. 
What could be expounded through many passages 
was uttered by Hari to Ravi (the Sun) in eight syllables: ᕟ'Kaivalya 
(Salvation) in dying at Kasi" (kaivalyam kiisisamsthitau). 
34. 
The excellent sage Yajiiavalkya said in the assembly 
of sages: "Having studied the Nigamas (scriptures) from Ravi 
(Sun-god) , the great position (salvation is to be gained) in 
Kasi in the end.' ' 
35. 
Formerly this alone was said by you too to Jagaddhatri

=== PAGE 298 ===

288 
Skanda Pura:r_ta 
(Goddess Parvatl, the mother of the universe) on the Mandara 
Mountain: "Kasl is the birth-place of salvation." 
36. 
0 Sarilbhu, Kr.ᔻIJ.advaipayana (Vyasa) too will be say-
ing this, "Where Visvesvara is directly present salvation is ac­
quired there at every step. " 
37. 
Other ancient sages, Lomasa and others, who estab-
lish holy spots, say, "Kasika is the illuminator of salvation." 
38. 
We too know thus: Certainly there alone is salvation, 
in Anandakanana, where the celestial river flows. 
39. 
We know everything that happens in heaven, in the 
mortal world and in the nether worlds-the past, the present 
and the future, due to the great blessings of Dharmesa. 
40. 
That is· how, 0 Sambhu, we know all these, the ut-
terances of Hiral).yagarbha (Brahma) , Hari, the sage and Your 
Lordship as well. 
41 . 
Due to our resorting to Dharmapltha, the entire Cos-
mic Egg is within the range of our verbal expression like a 
fruit of Emblic Myrobalan on the palm. 
42. 
0 Lord, even we, birds, have become the possessors 
of undoubted knowledge in its entirety, due to the power - of 
penance of Dharmaraja. 
43-45. 
On hearing the speech of the birds, beneficial, 
soft, sweet, truthful, self-evident through experience, polished, 
brief (to the point) , explained with illustration, the Lord became 
excessively surprised. He himself then extolled the magnifi­
cence of the Pi˖ha: "Among all the cities in the three worlds, 
Kasl is my royal palace. There too the mansion of enjoyment 
is built of jewels of inestimable value . My palace named 
Mokᔻalakᔻmlvilasa ('Graceful sport of the Goddess of the glory 
of Salvation') is the place -of origin of great weal. 
46. 
By circumambulating it, even birds become liberated. 
So also the Devas who walk in the firmament and move about 
as they please. 
4 7. 
By viewing the palace named Mokᔻalakᔻmlvilasa even 
the sin of the slaughter of a BrahmaiJ.a goes away from the 
body. Not by any other means. 
48. 
NidhiinakalaSas ('treasure pots') do not become separated 
anywhere from those people by whom the Kala5a (pinnacle­
dome) of Mokᔻalakᔻmlvilasa is seen. 
49. 
They will always be my guests-they by whom the

=== PAGE 299 ===

IV.ii. 79.50-62 
289 
banner fluttering aloft my palace was seen even from far away. 
50. 
This 
is a great mysterious shooting sprout of the 
bulbous root named Ananda, which has pierced the ground 
and issued forth under the pretext of that palace. 
5 1 . 
There, many forms beginning with Brahma and end-
ing with an immobile being are painted in pictures, and it is 
surprising that (even) they adore me always. 
52. 
In the entire world that mansion is the sole place of 
my greatest happiness. It is the beautiful chamber of my sports. 
It is my ground of confidence. 
53. 
Although I am omnipresent, this palace is my great 
resort. I am that Supreme Brahma well-known through the 
great words of the Upaniᔻads. Though unembodied I shall 
also become embodied to do favour to -the devotees. 
54. 
To the south thereof is the Dhiiman (abode) of the 
Nai}J,Sreyasz Sri ('Glory of Salvation')-my pavilion. I stay there 
always. That is my Sadomar.t¢apa ( 'Assembly Hall') . 
55. 
If anyone stands there motionless for the duration of 
half a Nimeᔻa. it is as good as if Yoga has been practised by 
him for a hundred years. 
56. 
That spot is named Niroiir.tamar.t¢apa. It is well-known 
all-over the earth. One who chants (even) a single JP{ (Vedic 
verse) there, shall obtain the benefit. 
57. 
If anyone performs a single PraQ.ayama in the Mukti 
MaQ.<;lapa it is on a par with the eight-limbed (of eight stages) 
Yoga practised elsewhere for ten thousand years. 
58. 
If anyone utters the six-syllabled Mantra (i.e. om nama˞] 
siviiya) once in NirvaQ.amaQ.<;lapa, he will derive the same benefit 
as is obtained by repeating the Rudra Mantra a crore times. 
59. 
A devotee who takes his bath in the water of Ganga 
remains pure (in body, mind and speech) . One who repeats 
Satarudriya in NirvaQ.amaQ.<;lapa should be knowr. as Rudra himself 
in the guise of a BrahmaQ.a. 
60. 
By performing Brahma Yajiia in the southern MaQ.<;lapa 
once, one attains Brahmaloka and realizes the Supreme Brah­
man. 
61 . 
If without any personal desire, one reads Dharma 
Sastra, PuraQ.as and Itihasas there, one shall stay in my abode. 
62. 
If one stands in the NirvaQ.amaQ.<;lapa for a moment 
with the fickleness of the senses dispelled, he will be blessed

=== PAGE 300 ===

290 
Skanda Purii:rJ.a 
as one who has done his duty, whereas elsewhere he has to 
perform a great penance (to get the same result) . 
63. 
By observing silence for half a Ghatika in the South-
ern Ma:t:u;l.apa, one attciins the same merit as is obtained else­
where through the austerity of living solely on the intake of 
wind for a hundred years. 
64. 
If in the Muktimal}.<;lapa anyone makes a gift of gold, 
even if it be a Kr;?Jalaka (i.e. Ratti) in weight, he moves about 
in heaven in a golden vehicle. 
65. 
A devotee may perform the rite of Jagara?Ja ('keeping 
awake at night') there on any day after observing fast. Then 
he should adore the Liil.ga. He will attain the merit of having 
observed all Vratas. 
66. 
By making great gifts there, by performing great Vratas 
there and by learning all the Vedas there, the man does not 
fall from the heavenly region. 
67. 
A man whose vital airs make their exit in my Mukti 
Mal}.<;lapa, will enter me and become stationed here as long 
as I stay here. 
68. 
In Jiianavapi I shall have aquatic sports always along 
with Uma. Merely by drinking the water thereof, one gets 
knowledge devoid of impurities. 
69. 
That spot for aquatic sports is extremely delightful to 
me. In this royal abode, it is filled with water that dispels 
sluggishness. 
70. 
In front of that palace is my Srngarama?JQ,apa (Pavil-
ion for enjoyment, elegant dress and makeup etc.) . This should 
be known as Sri Pitha bestowing glory and wealth on those 
who are devoid of it. 
71-73. A person who makes for my sake gifts of pure silk 
clothes, garlands of various kinds, together with Yak;akardama 
(fragrant ointment prepared with saffron, camphor etc . ) , 
ornaments and embellishments of various kinds and the ma­
terials required f<?r worship, shall be adorned with glory. Wherever 
that excellent man inay stay, the Glory of Salvation will woo 
him for accepting the acquisition of the status of salvation. It 
does not matter where he meets with his death (he will cer­
tainly have salvation) . 
74. 
To the north of the palace called Moalamivilasa 
is the beautiful Aisvarya Ma?JQ,apa (Pavilion of opulence and

=== PAGE 301 ===

IV.ii. 79.75-87 
291 
Royal Glory) . It is there that I bestow Aisvarya (opulence) . 
75. 
To the eastern side of my palace, there is the Jiiiina 
Ma7J4apa. There I grant the (spiritual) knowledge to the good 
people who meditate on me. 
76. 
In the royal mansion of Bhavani (?) there is my culinary 
hall which I enter joyously to accept whatever is offered there, 
which yields merits (to the donor) . 
77. 
My floor of rest ( Visriimabhitmikii) is the great man-
sion of Visiiliik;i. There I bestow ultimate rest (salvation) on 
those who are distressed due to worldly existence. 
78. 
CakrapuᔻkariQ.i is the Tlrtha for my regular (midday) 
bath. To those persons who take their holy bath there, I grant 
that freedom from impurities (salvation), 
79. 
At the end there, I grant that which they call the 
supreme truth, that which they mention as the excellent Brahman, 
that the realization of which emerges from within. 
80. 
At the end there, I grant that which they call the 
knowledge giving redemption, that which they call supremely 
pure and that which they call that resting within its own soul. 
8 1 . 
Here there is the excellent MaQ.ikarQ.ika which is the 
source of auspiciousness unto the universe. There I redeem 
from fetters Pasus (ignorant beings) bound by Karmas. 
82. 
In the matter of granting salvation there, I never 
think whether they deserve it or not. In Anandakanana that 
is my place of giving gifts day and night. 
83. 
To the living beings which get drowned in the most 
unfathomable ocean of worldly existence I become the sole 
helmsman and I take them across (the ocean of Sarhsara) . 
84. 
MaQ.ikarQ.ika is very famous as the fortunate source 
of conjugal bliss. There I give everything unto both a BrahmaQ.a 
and a Siidra. 
85. 
In MaQ.ikarQ.ika even pitiable ones attain that salva-
tion which is very difficult to obtain elsewhere even by those 
who resort to the knowledge of Brahman and those richly 
endowed with the practice of great Samiidhi (i.e. Yoga) . 
86. 
Whether he be an initiated one or a CaQ.Qala, whether 
an erudite scholar or an illiterate fellow, once he comes to 
MaQ.ikarQ.ika everyone is equal unto me in the matter of granting 
salvation. 
87. After reaching MaQ.ikarQ.ika I give unto all creatures

=== PAGE 302 ===

292 
Skanda Purii'T}a 
everything that was accumulated for a long time, the asset of 
liberation, in granting which I am miserly elsewhere. 
88-89. 
If by chance the extremely difficult simultaneous 
combination of three entities is obtained here, unhesitatingly 
should one accept the entire thing that had been accumulated 
for a long time. This simultaneous combination of three viz. 
physical body, wealth and MaQikarQika, is unobtainable to 
even Indra and other Devas. 
90. 
Mter. considering this again and again I perpetually 
grant the glory of salvation to all creatures (without any dis­
tinction) who approach MaQikarQika. 
9 1 . 
In VaraQasl that is the spot for the grant of salvation 
for me. In all the three worlds there is nothing similar to the 
dust particles of that spot. 
92. 
Avimuktesvaresvara is the greatest spot of adoration 
of the Liilga. By worshipping it there even once, a man will 
have the satisfaction of having done his duty. 
93. 
I shall perform the evening Sandhya rite in accor-
dance with Pasupata cult in the Pasupatlsvara shrine. By ap­
plying the holy ash there, a devotee can avoid Pasupasa (bonds 
of Pasus, ignorant souls) . 
94. 
I am always preforming the early morning Sandhya 
rite in Orilkaraniketana. Even a single Sandhya rite performed 
there destroys all sins. 
95. 
Always on every Caturdasl (fourteenth lunar day) I 
stay in Krttivasa. A devotee who performs Jiigara'T}a (keeping 
awake) rite on the Caturdasl day here is not born in a womb 
thereafter. 
96. 
If devoutly adored, Ratnesvara bestows great gems. A 
man who adores that Liilga with gems, shall get the jewel of 
a woman and such other things. 
97. 
Though I am stationed in all the three worlds, I abide 
in the Triviᔻtapa Liilga always for facilitating the fulfilment of 
the desires of devotees. 
98. 
Tl).ere the man will serve the great Pi!ha called Virajaska. 
Thereby he definitely becomes free from Rajas quality. He will 
perform all aquatic rites in Caturnada (i.e. Pilipila Ti:rtha) . 
99. 
In the Mahadeva Liilga my great Pi!ha accords spiri-
tual powers to aspirants. Merely by visiting that Pi!ha one is 
rid of great sins.

=== PAGE 303 ===

IV.ii. 79. 1 00-1 13 
293 
100. 
The Pitha entitled Vrᔻabhadhvaja accords delight to 
the ancestors. One who offers libation to the ancestors there 
instantly redeems the Pitrs. 
1 0 1 . 
I assume the form of Adi Keiiava in Adikeiiavapiᔽha. 
I lead all the loving devotees of ViᔻQ.U to Svetadvlpa. 
102. 
There itself near the Paiicanada Tlrtha, in the 
MailgaHiplᔽha that bestows all auspiciousness, I redeem the 
devotees. 
103. That is the greatest region of ViᔻQ.U where I lead in 
the form of Bindumadhava the devotees of ViᔻQ.U who take 
their bath in Paiicanada. 
104. 
Within a short time they attain the greatest salva­
tion-they who serve Vlreiivara in the 11reat Pitha called 
Paiicamudra. 
1 05. 
There, in the vicinity of Candreiivara in Siddheiivarlplᔽha, 
spiritual powers can be attained within six months by those 
who make themselves present there. 
1 06. 
Ucciitana (magical power of expulsion) and other Siddhis 
are obtained by many Sadhakas (spiritual practitioners) in 
Yoginlplᔽha that bestows Yogasiddhi in Kaiil. 
107. 
There are many Pithas in Kaiil at every step. But the 
power of Dharmeiia Piᔽha is something unique and very excel­
lent. 
108. 
It is there that these young parrots who were crying, 
'Save, save' became the receptacles of pure knowledge due to 
my good advice and instruction. 
109. 
0 son of TaraQ.i (Sun-god) , I shall never leave off 
your excellent penance-grove from today, nor this Dharmesvara 
Plᔽha. 
1 1 0. 
0 son of Ravi, see these parrots. They will be going 
to my great city, with my blessings, seated in a divine aerial 
chariot. 
1 1 1 . There, they will enjoy pleasures for a long time and 
acquire the knowledge imparted by me. They are extremely 
pure, due to your contact. They will attain salvation here." 
1 1 2. 
When the Lord of Devas said thus, a divine aerial 
chariot comparable to the peak of Kailasa came there embel­
lished with Rudra-Kanyas. 
1 1 3. 
Those pure birds assumed divine forms and took leave 
of Dharma. They then went to Kailasa, riding in that vehicle.

=== PAGE 304 ===

294 
Skanda Purii7Ja 
CHAPTER EIGHTY 
The Vrata Called Manorathatrtzyii 
Skanda said: 
1 . 0 Pot-born One, on seeing that wonderful incident 
Jagadarilbika bowed down to the great Lord Sarilbhu, the destroyer 
of the distress of those who bow down and said: 
Ambikii said: 
2. 
0 great Lord, 0 Mahesvara, it is the greatness of this 
Pltha that even brutish (non-human) creatures attained knowledge 
that facilitates release from worldly existence. 
3. Therefore, having understood the power of Dharmapltha, 
0 Dhiirjati, I shall stay in the vicinity of Dharmesvara from 
this day onwards. 
4. I shall always enable the devotees of this Liriga, be they 
men or women, to achieve the fulfilment of their desire. 
lsvara said: 
5. 
You have done well, 0 Goddess, in adopting and sup­
porting this Dharmapltha that enables good people to realize 
their desires. 
6. Only they are the enjoyers of all, only they are worthy 
of being honoured by all, who adore you, 0 Visvabhuje, here. 
7. 0 Visvabhuje, the bestower (cause) of the origin, sus­
tenance and annihilation of Visva (the universe) , people all 
over the world who worship you here, will become men of 
pure souls. 
8. If anyone performs devotional rites unto you on the 
third lunar day (in the bright half of Caitra) called Manoratha 
Trtlya, whatever he desires will be realized, due to my bless­
ings. 
9. 0 beloved, whether it is a woman or a man, the devotee 
who performs your Vrata realizes all desires and in the end 
obtains (spiritual) knowledge. 
Devz said: 
10. 
0 Lord, be pleased to tell this: What sort of Vrata is

=== PAGE 305 ===

IV.ii.80. 1 1-21 
295 
Manoratha Trtiya? What is the story? What Is the benefit? By 
whom has it been observed? 
lsvara said: 
1 1 . 
Listen, 0 Goddess, 0 redeemer from worldly exist-
ence, I shall answer what has been asked by you. This Manoratha 
Vrata is a greater secret than the greatest one. 
1 2. 
Puloma's daughter (i.e. Sad) formerly performed a 
great penance in order to attain some desire, but she did not 
get the benefit of the penance. 
1 3. 
Thereupon, she worshipped me joyously with great 
devotion. She had a sweet melodious voice and she worshipped 
to the accompaniment of music with the secret 'implied) therein. 
14. 
I was extremely delighted by her song which was soft 
and sweet; the Tala (beating the time) , the setting, the Dhatu 
(Tan as) , Mana and Kala were excellent. 
15. 
I said, "0 Pulomaja, speak out the boon you wish to 
have. I am delighted by this excellent song and the adoration 
of the Liriga." 
Pulomajii said: 
1 6. 
If the Lord of Devas is pleased, 0 Mahadeva, the 
great beloved of the great goddess, fulfil the desire I do cherish. 
1 7. 
May he be my husband, he who is honoured among 
all Devas, is the most handsome among all the Devas, is the 
most excellent one among the regular performers of sacri­
fices. 
18. 
0 Bhava, delighted that you are, grant me beauty as 
desired, happiness as desired and span of life as desired. 
19. 
Whenever with a hearty desire for happiness I do 
have physical contact with my husband, let me have another 
body after casting off that one. 
20. 
0 Bhava, 0 destroyer of worldly existence, let my 
devotion to the adoration of the Liriga be excellent, removing 
old age and death. 
2 1 . 
Even at the departure of the husband, let me not 
have widowhood even for a moment. 0 Mahadeva, but my 
chastity shall not be violated.

=== PAGE 306 ===

296 
Skanda Purii:T}a 
Skanda said: 
22. 
On hearing this desire of Paulomi, the Lord, the 
destroyer of Puras, became surprised for a moment. Smilingly 
he said: 
lsvara said: 
23. 
0 daughter of Puloma, you will have this desire that 
you have cherished fulfilled through the observance of a Vrata. 
Perform it, 0 lady, with the sense-organs controlled. 
24. 
It will be fulfilled by the observance of Manorathat.rtiya. 
I shall describe the '"Vrata for the fulfilment thereof. Perform 
it as recounted. 
25. 
If that Vrata which yields great conjugal bliss is per­
formed, 0 girl, your desire shall definitely be fulfilled. 
Pulomii-Kanyii said: 
26. 
0 Sarhbhu, 0 ocean of compassion, 0 bestower of 
everything on the living beings who bow down, of what nature 
is that Vrata? What is its efficacy . What deity has to be invoked 
there? 
27. 
When should it be performed ? What is the mode of 
procedure? 
On hearing these words, Siva spoke to her: 
lsvara said: 
28. 
0 Paulomi, that splendid Vrata is to be observed on 
Manorathatrtiya. Goddess Visvabhuja Gauri, having twenty arms, 
should be worshipped. 
29. 
Asavinayaka should be worshipped before the god-
uess by the observer of the Vrata. He is the bestower of boon 
and grantor of freedom from fear with the gestures of his 
hand. A rosary and sweetmeat are held in the hands. 
30-35. 
On the eve of Caitra Sukla Trtiya, the devotee first 
cleans his teeth. After the performance of the evening rites 
(Sandhya prayers etc.) he should take a meal in moderate 
quantity, not for full satiation. Controlling anger, curbing the 
sense-organs, he should be pure, avoiding the touch of those

=== PAGE 307 ===

IV.ii.80.36-46 
297 
precluded from being touched and keep the mind fixed on 
the deity. Then he should formally resolve to take up the 
Vrata: 'I shall observe the Vrata in the morning, 0 faultless 
mother Visvabhuja. Please do be present there for the fulfilment 
of my desire.' Mter succinctly stating and formally adopting 
the Vrata, he should go to sleep at night meditating on aus­
picious things. The sensible devotee should get up early in the 
morning and go through the essential daily routine. After 
Sauca purificatory rites like Sauca and Acamana, he should 
take up the tooth-brush twig of ASoka tree which is auspicious 
and destructive of all grief. The day routine is duly concluded 
and the excellent devotee conversant with the rules enjoined 
shall take his bath again the evening. Wearing pure (fresh) 
clothes, he shall perform the adoration of Gauri. 
36-39. 
At the outset Vinayaka is to be worshipped with 
the Naivedya offering of Ghrtapura (sweetmeat) . Then the 
devotee worships Visvabhuja with excellent ASoka flowers. Asokavarli 
(wick of Asoka twig) , Naivedya offerings, incense of agallochum 
etc. should be offered. The deity is smeared with Kumkuma 
(saffron powder) . Ekabhakta (single ball of rice) should be 
then offered along with ASokavarti lamp and charming Ghrtapuras. 
Thus Caitra Trtlya passes off, 0 daughter of Puloma. The 
devotee should observe the Vrata on all the Trtlyas beginning 
with Vaisakha and ending with Phalguna. I shall describe the 
twigs to be used as tooth-brush in the proper order: 
40-42. 
I shall describe the objects used as unguent and 
also the flowers. 0 Girl of auspicious Vratas, I shall describe 
the Naivedya of Gar:tanayaka and the goddess. I shall describe 
the cooked food for Ekabhakta also. Listen to them for the 
purpose of acquiring the desired benefit. The following twigs 
are to be used as tooth-brush (in those eleven months in due 
order) : jarilbu, Apamarga, Khadira, Jati, Cuta, Kadambaka, 
Plakᔼa. Udurilbara, Kharjuri, Bijapurl and Da<;l.imi. These are 
the trees from which the tooth-brush twigs should be taken 
by the persons observing the Vrata. 
43-46. 
0 girl, the unguent shall be as follows: Sindura 
(saffron) , agallochum, musk, sandal, red sandal, Gorocana, 
Devadaru, lotus-seed, turmeric (for two months) and Yaᕙakardama. 
If anyone or all of the previous are not available, then 
Yakᔼakardama is recommended. This Yakᔼakardama is a favourite

=== PAGE 308 ===

298 
Skanda Purii1J-a 
of Devas and is prepared as follows: Take two parts of musk, 
two parts of saffron, three parts of sandal and one part of 
camphor. Mter smearing with the unguent, the d:evotee should 
worship with flowers. I shall mention those also. 
47-52. 
The flowers are Patala, Mallika, Lotus, K.etaki, Karavira, 
Lilies, Rajacampa, Nandyavarta, jati, Kumari and Karl}.ikara. If 
any flower is not available the leaf thereof can be used. If all 
these flowers 
are not available, the devotee should worship 
with some fragrant flowers that he can get. 
In the month of Karttika the following can be joyously offered 
as Naivedya to the "goddess along with Vighnesvara: Karambha 
(flour mixed with curds) , rice mixed with curds, gruel with 
mango juice, Pha1}ikiis, Vatakas, milk pudding with sugar, rice 
with green gram and ghee. In the month of Magha, Inderika, 
La<;l<;lus, and the splendid Lampasika should be offered. In the 
month of Phalguna, Muᔻᔽika with sugar within and fried in 
ghee should be offered as Naivedya. What is offered in ghee 
shouid be used for Ekabhakta (single meal) . A devotee offering 
anything else as Naivedya or partaking of the same incurs downfall. 
He is deluded. 
53-54. 
The devotee should continue to worship thus for 
a year, worshipping on the Trtiya of every month. In order 
to complete the Vrata, the devotee should worship fire on the 
ground repeating Jiitavedasa Mantra and offering gingelly seeds 
and clarified butter as well as monetary gifts. The devotee 
performing the Vrata should offer one hundred and eight 
Ahutis in accordance with the rules. 
55. It is prescribed that the adoration is to be performed 
in the night always; the meal is taken always at nights. This 
Homa is also at night and ±amiipanii (request for forgiveness) 
is also at night. 
56-61 . 
Gauri and Vinayaka are to be worshipped with these 
two Mantras: "0 mother accept this devout adoration of mine 
along with that of Vighnesvara. Obeisance to you; 0 Vi8vabhuja, 
fulfil my desire quickly. Obeisance to you, 0 destroyer of obstacles; 
obeisance, 0 Asavinayaka. You do grant me my desire along 
with Visvabhuja." At the time of concluding the Vrata, the 
following should be made over as gifts: a cot with cotton mattress, 
pillow, a doll for holding the lamp and a mirror. 
The presiding preceptor and his wife should be made to sit

=== PAGE 309 ===

IV.ii.80.62-73 
299 
on the cot and the devotee observing the Vrata should joy­
ously honour them with garments, ornaments for the hands 
and ears, sweet scents, sandalpaste, garlands and monetary 
gifts. In order to make the Vrata perfect he should also give 
a milch cow, objects of utility and pleasure, umbrella, foot­
wear and waterpot. 
62-65. 
The Acarya should be addressed thus: "This Vrata 
of Manoratha Trtlya has been performed by me. If it is deficient 
or redundant, let it be perfectly balanced at your words (of 
blessings) . " Then the devotee takes leave of the preceptor and 
the latter says, "So be it. " The devotee follows the preceptor 
till the external boundary (of the village etc.) . Gifts are made 
to others also in accordance with the capacity of the devotee. 
The night is spent along with the depensJ.ents in good humour. 
On the Caturthl day in the morning, four boys and twelve 
virgin girls are (to be) honoured with scented garlands and 
fed duly. Thus this pure Vrata becomes complete. 
66-68. 
For the sake of realizing one's wishes this excel­
lent Vrata should be performed by all. A bachelor performing 
this Vrata for a full year will clearly acquire a pleasing 
wife belonging to a noble family. She will be closely following 
his mental predilections. She will be chaste and redeem him 
from the ocean of miserable worldly existence. A virgin will 
get a husband rich and endowed with all good qualities. An 
auspicious woman with a living husband will get sons and 
unobstructed (continuous) happiness of the husband. 
69-70. 
An unfortunate woman will become fortunate; a 
poor one rich; a widow will never become a widow (in the 
next birth) ; a pregnant woman gives birth to a son of long 
life. A Brahmal).a will acquire learning which will confer all 
luck. 
71 . 
By resorting (observing) to this Vrata a dethroned king 
will regain his kingdom; a Vaisya acquires profit; a Siidra attains 
all that he wished for. 
72. A seeker after piety acquires piety; one desirous of 
wealth will obtain wealth; a lustful man will get all that he 
loves and a seeker of salvation, salvation. 
73. By performing the Vrata of Manoratha Trtiya the devotees 
shall certainly get whatever desire is cherished by them.

=== PAGE 310 ===

300 
Skanda Puriir_ta 
Skanda said: 
74. 
On hearing from Siva thus, Siva was delighted in her 
mind. With palms joined in reverence, she asked Visvesa again: 
75. 
"0 Sadasiva, if the devotees perform this Vrata else-
where, how will they worship me and Asavinayaka?" 
Siva said: 
76. You have asked pertinently, 0 goddess, who dispel all 
suspicious. 0 Visva, you are directly visible in Varal}.asl and as 
such you should be worshipped there. 
77. You will be worshipped along with Asa-Vinayaka who 
fulfils all hopes and desires, who removes infinite number of 
obstacles and seeks the auspiciousness of my holy place. 
78-79. 
Those who perform this Vrata elsewhere should 
fetch (all concerned persons) quickly, make obeisance to those 
who are far removed and make them contented with (the 
realization) of their desires. 0 Visva, they must make images 
of gold of yours as well as that of Vighnesvara with gold more 
in weight than five Kr$r_talakas (Rattls) . 
80. The devotee should make a gift of both the images at 
the conclusion of the Vrata to the Acarya. If this Vrata is performed 
(even) once, the performer of the Vrata shall become blessed 
and contented. 
81 . Then, 0 Goddess, after hearing of this excellent Vrata, 
Pulomaja performed it and realized her desire in the manner 
she had wished in her heart. 
82. Vasiᔻtha was obtained by Arundhatl and Atri by Anasilya. 
Dhruva, the most excellent of all sons, was obtained by Sunlti 
from U ttᕠnapada. 
83. The wretchedness and misery of Sunlti vanished by 
performing this Vrata again. The four-armed husband was acquired 
by Goddess Lakᔻml, the daughter of the Ocean of Milk. 
84. Why need more be told? 0 lady of excellent hips, if this 
Vrata is performed by anyone, it is as though all the Vratas 
have been performed by him. 
85. A sensible man should listen to this meritorious story 
with concentration of mind. He attains auspicious intellect 
and gets rid of all sins.

=== PAGE 311 ===

IV.ii.81 . 1-10 
301 
CHAPTER EIGHTYONE 
The Legend of Dharmesvara 
Agastya said: 
1 . 
0 Skanda, be pleased to tell me how the greatness of 
the Dharma Tirtha was narrated by Lord Sarilbhu to the God­
dess. Have mercy on me. 
Skanda said: 
2. 
0 subduer of the loftiness of Vindhya, 0 highly intel-
ligent one, listen. I shall narrate the origin of Dharma Tirtha 
as explained by the Lord. 
3. 
After killing Vrtra, Indra incurred the sin of Brahmal).a­
slaughter. Being distressed excessively, he asked his preceptor 
the mode of expiation (of that sin) . 
Brhaspati said: 
4. 
0 king of Devas, if you are desirous of dispelling this 
sin of Brahmal).a-slaughter which is usually very difficult to get 
rid of, go to Kasi protected by Visve5a. 
5. 
0 Sakra, except the great capital city of Visvesa, no 
other great remedy for the sin of Brahmal).a-slaughter is seen 
anywhere. 
6. 
0 enemy ofVrtra, go quickly to that place in Anandavana 
where the head of Brahma fell from the tip of the hand of 
Bhairava. 
7. 
Reaching even the outskirts of Anandavana, 0 Sakra, 
Brahma-Hatyii (sin of Brahmal).a-slaughter) shall flee trembling, 
without anyone to support (her) . 
8. 
Kasi presided over by Vi5ve5a, is the great destroyer of 
other sins also of even great sinners. 
9. 0 Satakratu (lndra, the performer of a hundred sacri­
fices) , it is only in Kasi that one gets liberated from great sins. 
It is only in Kasi that one gets liberation from the great worldly 
existence, not other places. 
10. Kasi is the city of salvation; Kasi dispels all sins. KaSi 
is very dear to Visvesa. Even heaven is not like KaSi.

=== PAGE 312 ===

302 
Skanda Purii:r;ta 
1 1 . Kasika, the illuminator of salvation, should never be 
abandoned by one who is afraid of the sin of Brahmahatya or 
by one who is afraid of the worldly existence. 
12. If they cast off their bodies there, the seeds of the 
Karmas of the creatures do not germinate because they are 
burnt up by the eye of Siva. 
13. 0 enemy of Vrtra, for the purpose of dispelling the 
sin of the slaughter of Vrtra go to that famous Kasi and pro­
pitiate Visve8a, the bestower of salvation on all the world. 
1 4. 
On hearing these words of Brhaspati, the thousand­
eyed Indra came hurriedly to Kasi, the destroyer of great sins. 
1 5-1 6. 
After taking his bath in the north-flowing river 
(Ganga) for the purpose of expelling the sin of Brahmahatya, 
he went round Dharme8a and stood worshipping Mahadeva. 
Sutrama (lndra) was engrossed in chanting the Mahiirudra 
Mantra. He saw the Three-eyed Lord stationed in the middle 
of the Linga brightening the atmosphere with his own radi­
ance. 
1 7. 
Again he eulogized many times with Rudra Sitkt-a, as 
mentioned in the Vedas. Thereupon Bhava came out of the 
Liilga, manifested himself and said: 
18. "0 husband of Saci, I am pleased. Choose your boon. 
0 Suvrata ('one of excellent Vratas') , you have sought refuge 
in Dharmapitha; what should be granted to you? Tell me quickly." 
19. 
On hearing these loving words of the Lord of Devas, 
the Slayer of Vrtra said thus: "0 omniscient one, what is it that 
is not known to you?" 
20. 
Urged by compassion for him, since h e served 
Dharmapitha, Isa created a Tlrtha there and said, "0 lndra, 
take your bath here." 
21. 
No sooner did Indra take his bath there than he became 
endowed with divine fragrance. He regained his previous exquisite 
splendour as the performer of a hundred sacrifices. 
22. 
On seeing that miracle, Narada and other sages joyously 
took their holy bath in Dharma Tlrtha, the dispeller of sins. 
23. 
They offered libations to the celestial Pitrs and per­
formed Sraddha with great faith. With potfuls of the waters of 
that Tlrtha they bathed Dharmesa. 
24. 
Ever since then, that Tirtha became famous by the

=== PAGE 313 ===

IV.ii.81 .25-36 
3U3 
name Dharmandhu (Dharma Kupa) . It is the greatest Ti:rtha 
that washes off sins like that of Brahmaᕘa-slaughter without 
any strain. 
25. 
Merely by taking bath in Dharmandhu, one gets a thousand 
times as much benefit as is proclaimed to be the benefit of 
a bath in Ti:rtharaja (Prayaga) . 
26. 
In Dharma Tirtha one obtains the same benefit as in 
Ganga Dvara, Kurukᔻetra and in the confluence of Ganga and 
the ocean. 
27. In Dharmakiipa that benefit is obtained which one gets 
by taking holy dip in Narmada, in Sarasvati and in Gautami 
(Godavari) when Guru Qupiter) is in the Zodiac Simha (Leo) . 
28. 
In the Dharmajalasaya, the same benefit is obtained 
which one gets by taking a holy bath il! the Ti:rthas of Manasa, 
Puᔻkara and the ocean around Dvaraka. 
29. 
Here the benefit is the same as in the holy spot Sukara 
on the Karttiki day, in Gauri Mahahrada (in Kedara) on the 
Caitri day and in Sankhoddhara on the day sacred to Viᔻᕘu 
(Ekadasi day) . 
30. 
With the hope of receiving balls of rice, Pitrs expect 
men to take their holy dips in the two Ti:rthas, viz. Ganga and 
Dharmakupa. 
3 1 . Great-grandfathers become elated in Phalgu Tirtha near 
Pitamaha, and in Dharmakupa in front of Dharmda. 
32. 
Mter taking the holy dip in Dharmakupa and offering 
the libations to the ancestors, what more can a man expect 
to do to delight the Pitrs by going to Gaya? 
33. In Dharma Tirtha too the ancestors become pleased by 
the offer of balls of rice as in Gaya, to the same extent, neither 
less nor more. 
34. They are blessed devotees of their Pitrs; the Pitamahas 
are propitiated by them; they are the sons who become free 
from indebtedness to the Pitrs in Dharma Ti:rtha. 
35. 
Due to the power of that Tirtha Indra became sinless 
instantly. Mter bowing down to the Lord of Devas, he went 
to Amaravati. 
36. 
0 Pot-born One, the greatness of Dharma Ti:rtha is 
unfathomable. Even by seeing one's own reflection in that 
Kupa (holy well) one shall obtain the benefit of the offer of 
a Sraddha.

=== PAGE 314 ===

304 
Skanda Pura7J.a 
37. A man need make the gift of only a Kakil).i there for 
the delight of the Pitrs. He will have everlasting benefit due 
to the power of Dharmapitha. 
38. If a person feeds Brahmal).as, ascetics or sages, he will 
clearly obtain the benefit of a Vajapeya sacrifice for everyone 
of the particle of rice (they eat) . 
39. 
Mter reaching Amaravati, Indra extolled in the pres­
ence of the heaven-dwellers the greatness of Dharmapitha in 
Kasi. 
40. Again he went to Anandakanana of Sarilbhu accom­
panied by the sages and the Devas and installed a Liilga there. 
41 . 
This Linga is to the west of Tarakesa and is called 
Indrdvara. The world of lndra will not be far from men who 
visit it. 
42. 
To the south thereof is SaciSa installed by Saci herself. 
By the worship of Sacisa women will have unparalleled con­
jugal bliss. 
43. 
Near it is Rarilbhesa, the bestower of excessive happi­
ness and great prosperity. All round Indre§vara is another deity 
Lokapaldvara. 
44. By worshipping it the Guardians of the Quarters can be 
propitiated. They will bestow opulence. To the west of Dharmda 
is Dharal).isa. He is glorified much. By visiting him one will 
have courage in the kingdom, royal household etc. 
45. 
To the south of Dharmesa, the great (Liilga) named 
Tattvesa should be worshipped by men. By worshipping that 
Liilga the knowledge of truth dawns uninterruptedly. 
46. 
The devotee should worship Vairagyesa on the eastern 
side of Dharmesa. By touching that Liilga, the mind shall tum 
away (from worldly inclinations) . 
47. Jiianesvara Liilga to the north-east is the bestower of 
knowledge on all embodied beings. To the north of the splen­
did Dharmesvara Liilga is Aisvaryesa. 
48. 
By visiting it, men will attain opulence (as) mentally 
desired. These Liilgas, 0 Pot-born One, are the forms of 
Paiicavaktra (five-faced Lord Siva) (Dharal}.isa, Tattvda, Vairagyesa, 
J iiandvara and Aisvaryesa) . 
49. A man should surely resort to these (Liilgas) . He attains 
salvation. Another event that happened there itself, I shall 
narrate. 0 sage, listen.

=== PAGE 315 ===

IV.ii.81.50-64 
305 
50. 
On hearing it a man can avoid being drowned in the 
terrible ocean of worldly existence. 
There is a great foot of Mountain Vindhya here named 
Kadarilba Sikhara. 
51-52. 
There was a king named Durdama, son of Dama. 
Mter the death of his father, he became the king. He had no 
control over his sense-organs. Overwhelmed with lust he used 
to abduct young women of the citizens. Intrinsically bad people 
were his favourites and good people turned enemies. 
53. 
He punished those who never deserved it. He was not 
inclined to punish culprits who deserved it. He was in the 
habit of hunting and was always in the company of hunters. 
54-56. 
People who gave him sound advice were banished 
from the country by him. Siidras were pppointed as judicial 
authorities and Bn'ihmal}as were taxed. He was contented with 
the wives of others and remained aloof from his legally wed­
ded wives. He never worshipped Siva and ViᔻQU, the Lords of 
all, the dispellers of misery and all sins, the bestowers of all 
desires, the very essence of the whole world. 
57. 
In regard to his subjects, the king named Durdama was 
like another comet rising up suddenly for their utter destruc­
tion. 
58. Once that king of sinful prosperity, addicted to vices, 
entered forests along with hunters closely following a boar. 
59. As luck would have it, that king Durdama riding on a 
horse and armed with a bow, entered Anandakanana 
alone. 
60. He saw the trees all round fruitless but they were extensive 
and had plenty of shade. He felt his fatigue dispelled. 
61 . 
He was fanned for a moment as though by the trees 
with the sprouts for the fans through excellent wind, fragrant, 
cool and gentle. 
62. 
On seeing that forest, the fatigue (of sin) congenital 
with him vanished; only the fatigue due to hunting did not 
subside (completely) . 
63. 
In the middle of the forest he saw a palace kissing the 
sky above. It was the sole beautiful receptacle of great rods of 
gems and jewels. 
64. 
That king was highly surprised. He got down from the 
horse. On reaching Dharmesamal}<;\apa he congratulated himself.

=== PAGE 316 ===

65-68. 
'I am blessed. I am delighted. My eyes have be-
come blessed today. This very day is blessed since I espied this 
piece of land.' 
. 
Further, due to the power of Dharmapltha he cursed him­
self for his previous association with the wicked people to the 
exclusion of good people. 
He said: "Fie upon me who have been outraging all crea­
tures, who was an expert in afflicting the subjects harshly, who 
under delusion, considered myself happy by the abduction of 
other men's wives and misappropriation of other men's wealth! 
Till today my life has been utterly futile. I have been de­
ficient in sanity. It is a pity that religious sacred spots like this 
were not seen anywhere by me before. " 
69. 
After cursing himself thus very much, h e bowed down 
to Lord Dharmesvara. King Durdama then mounted his steed 
and went back to his kingdom. 
70. 
Then he invited all the old hereditary ministers dis­
pensing with the services of all new appointees. He invited the 
citizens too. 
71-73. 
He bowed down to BrahmaQ.as and allotted to them 
ample means of subsistence. After establishing the subjects on 
the righteous path, he crowned his son as the king. He pun­
ished those who deserved punishment and gave delight to 
good people. Averse to worldly pleasures, he set aside even his 
wives and went alone to Kasl, the city that enhanced welfare. 
He propitiated Dharmesvara and in due course attained sal­
vation. 
74. 
It is due to his visits to Dharmesvara everyday that the 
uncontrollable Durdama of such a (bad) nature became the 
most excellent one among those who controlled their sense­
organs and in the end attained salvation. 
75. 
Thus the greatness of Dharme8a has been narrated by 
me in short. 0 Pot-born One, who can adequately compre­
hend the greatness Qf Dharmapltha? 
76. 
He who listens to this narration of Dharmesa is the 
most excellent one among men. He will instantly be rid of sins 
committed ever since birth. 
77. 
A sensible man will get this excellent narration of 
Dharmesa recited particularly at the time of Sraddha among 
BrahmaQ.as. It causes satisfaction to the Pitrs.

=== PAGE 317 ===

IV.ii.81. 78-IV.ii.82.8 
307 
78. 
A man of excellent intellect listening to this Dharmakhyana 
even from a distance, will be freed from all sins. In the end 
he will go to the palace of Siva. 
CHAPTER EIGHTYfWO 
Exploits of Amitrajit 
Piirvati said: 
/ 
1 . 
0 Mahesana, the greatness of Viresvara is being heard. 
Hundreds of persons have performed penances there and have 
attained great Siddhis. 
2. 
How did that excellent Liriga manifest there in Kasi? 
It is a quick bestower of spiritual powers. 0 Lord of the uni­
verse, narrate this unto me. 
Mahesvara said: 
3. 
Listen, 0 great goddess, to the great manifestation of 
Viresa, 0 Siva, on hearing which a man obtains a lot of merit. 
4. 
There was a king named Amitrajit. He conquered the 
cities of his enemies. He was endowed with Sattva quality and 
was very righteous. He was always engaged in delighting his 
subjects. 
5. 
Fame was his asset; he was liberal in making gifts; he 
was intelligent and considered Brahmal).as as Devas. His hairs 
always remained wet because he took valedictory baths after 
the performance of sacrifices. 
6. 
He was polite, versed in statesmanship, expert in all 
activities. He had mastered all (ocean-like) lores; he possessed 
good qualities and was a favourite of people of good qualities. 
7. 
He was grateful; sweet in speech; averse to all sinful 
activities; truthful in speech; abode of cleanliness; a man of 
few words; he subdued his sense-organs. 
8. In battlefield he resembled the god of Death in reful­
gence. In the assembly of .the learned he shone as a learned 
person; he was completely conversant with the amorous sports

=== PAGE 318 ===

308 
Skanda Purii'T}a 
of lustful women; though young he was a favourite of the 
aged. 
9. 
He got his treasury increased for use in pious acts. His 
armies and vehicles were plenty and well-equipped. He was 
wise and a refuge unto good subjects. 
10. He was endowed with steadfastness and courage; clever 
in the awareness of the proper time and place; he honoured 
all those worthy of honour always; he was free from 
faults. 
1 1 . Dedicating his mind and thoughts to the pair ofVasudeva's 
feet, he ruled the kingdom without hostile elements and free 
from all calamities like too much of rain, absence of rain etc. 
1 2. 
With no one to transgress his command, he enjoyed 
glory. He was devoted to ViᔻQu and enjoyed pleasures after 
dedicating them to ViᔻQu. 
1 3. 
There were many lofty shrines of ViᔻQu in every mansion 
in the kingdom of that king, the storehouse of great fortune, 
0 Siva. 
1 4-22. 
In every house the sweet names of the Enemy. of 
Madhu were heard uttered by the tongues of women, chil­
dren, old men and even cowherds, e.g. Govinda, Gopa, Gopala, 
Gopijana-manohara (fascinating to the cowherdesses) , GadapaQ.i, 
GuQ.atita (beyond all attributes) , GuQ.ac;lhya, Garuc;ladhvaja (Garuc;la­
emblemed) , Kesihrt (Killer of Kesi) , Kaiᕡabharati (enemy of 
Kaiᕡabha) , Karhsari, Kamalapati, KrᔻI).a, Kdava, Kaiijakᔻa (Lotus­
eyed) , Klnasabhayanasana (destroyer of the fear of the god of 
Death) , Puruᔻottama, Papari, PuQ.c;larikavilocana, Plta-kausekavasana 
(clad in yellow silk) , Padmanabha, Paratpara (greater than the 
greatest) ' Janardana, Jagannatha, Jahnavljalajanmabh ul:t (origin 
of the water of Ganga) , Janminarh janma-haral).a ( dispeller of 
the births of all living beings) , Jaiijapukaghanasana (destroyer 
of the sins of those who repeatedly utter the names) , Srivatsavakᔻas, 
Srikanta, Srikara, Sreyasarhnidhi, Srirailga, SarilgakodaQ.c;la, Sauri, 
Sitarhsulocana (Moon-eyed) , Daityari, Danavarati, Damodara, 
Duran taka ( slayer of the wicked) , Devakihrdayananda, 
Dandasukdvaresaya (lying on the couch of Serpent King) , ViᔻQU, 
VaikuQᕡhanilaya, Bal).ari, ViHarasravas (heard in every seat) 
Viᕢaksena, Viradhari, Vanamalin, Venapriya, Trivikrama, Trilokisa, 
Cakrapal).i, Caturbhuja etc. 
23-24. 
In every house, groves and groves of Surasa (Tulasi)

=== PAGE 319 ===

IV.ii.82.25-37 
309 
plants alone were seen. The sacred and wonderful activities of 
the Consort of the Ocean-born Goddess were seen painted in 
the pictures on the walls of the mansions. No other talk was 
heard except (that about) the story of Hari. 
25. Due to the fear of that king, Hari:Q.as (deer) that happily 
roamed about in forests were not killed by hunters because 
they had the name of Hari as a component part of their names. 
26. 
Neither fish, nor tortoises, nor boars were killed by 
even meat-eaters, because they were afraid of him. 
27. 
On Harivasara (i.e. eleventh lunar day) even sucking 
children did not drink breast-milk (of their mother) in the 
kingdom of Amitrajit. 
28. 
On Hari's day (eleventh lunar day) even animals avoided 
grazing grass. They were keen in observing fast. What then 
will be the case of men? 
29. While he was ruling the earth, on Harivasara great festi.vals 
were celebrated by all the citizens. 
30. 
Only one devoid of devotion to Vi1?Q.U became worthy 
of being punished with death or fine in the country of that 
King Amitrajit. 
3 1 . In his kingdom even Sudras were stamped with the 
marks of conch and discus after initiation into Vai1?Q.ava cult. 
They shone like those initiated in Yajiias etc. 
32. 
Everyday the auspicious rites performed by the people 
who never yearned for the benefits thereof, were dedicated to 
Vasudeva. 
33. . Excepting Mukunda, Govinda, Acyuta, Paramananda 
(the heightest bliss) no one (other deities) was chanted about, 
honoured or served by the people. 
34. To that king Kr1?Q.a alone was the greatest Lord; KrᔻQ.a 
alone was the ultimate goal; Kr1?Q.a alone was the greatest kinsman. 
35. While that king was ruling properly the kingdom, once 
the venerable Narada came there to see him. 
36. Adored by the king in accordance with the injunctions 
with (curds mixed honey and water) Madhuparka etc. Narada 
extolled that King Amitrajit. 
Niirada said: 
37. 
Seeing only Govinda in all living beings, 0 king, you

=== PAGE 320 ===

310 
Skanda Purii:r_ta 
are blessed; you have fulfilled your task; you are worthy of 
being honoured by the heaven-dwellers. 
38-39. 
0 excellent one among kings, I have attained the 
greatest purity after seeing you, who see the entire universe 
pervaded by that Lord who is Vedapuruᔻa ViᔻQ.U, who is Hari 
the Yajiiapuruᔻa, who is the immanent soul of this universe, 
who is the creator, protector and the destroyer of this world. 
40. 
In the worldly existence that is transitory, there is only 
one thing of great essence, the devotional fervour to the lotus­
like feet of the Consort of Kamala (Goddess Lakᔻml) . It is the 
bestower of everything. 
4 1 . All the objects of the world resort to that wise and 
intelligent one who forsakes everything else and always resorts 
to ViᔻQ.U alone. 
42. 
In the whole Cosmic Egg that is excessively change­
able, only he attains steadiness, he whose sense-organs have 
been firmly attached to Hrᔻlkesa. 
43. 
One should resort solely to Acyuta after realizing that 
youth, wealth and life are very fickle like a drop of water on 
a lotus leaf. 
44. 
Only he is always worthy of being saluted whose speech, 
mind are pervaded by Lord Janardana. He is Janardana him­
self in the form of a man. 
45. 
On this earth who is there who has not attained the 
state of Puruᕣottama (ViᔻQ.U, the best among men) by medi­
tating on the Consort of Goddess Lakᔻml with sincere Prattidhiina 
(deep mental absorption) . 
46. 
I have become delighted in all the senses and the mind 
by this devotion to ViᔻQ.U that you evince. I have decided in 
mind to help you. 0 king, listen to what I say. 
4 7-5 1 . 
The daughter of a Vidyadhara, named Malayagandhinl 
was playing in the pleasure grove of her father. She was abducted 
by Kari.kalaketu, a powerful Danava and son of Kapalaketu. It 
is (proclaimed) that the marriage of the girl is to take place 
on the next Trtlya. She is at present in Campakavatl, a city in 
Patala. While I was returning from Hatakda I was seen by her 
with eyes filled with tears. Mter bowing down to me, she requested 
thus." Listen to it, 0 celibate one, 0 most excellent one among 
sages. Kari.kalaketu, the wicked one, has abducted me from the 
Gandhamadana Mountain after enchanting me (by his Maya) ,

=== PAGE 321 ===

IV.ii.82.52-64 
31 1 
as I was absorbed in childish play. He cannot be killed with any 
other weapon. 
52. 
He is destined to die by the stroke (thrust) of his 
trident, not otherwise, in battle. (Now) he is fearlessly asleep 
here, after outraging the whole world. 
53. 
If any man who is fully aware of what he does, kills this 
wicked Danava by means of the trident given by me and takes 
me back, it will be conducive to welfare. 
54. 
If in this matter you are desirous of helping me, save 
me from the wicked Danava. 0 great sage, a boon too has 
been granted to me by the goddess: 
55-56. 
'An intelligent young devotee of ViᔻQ.U, 0 dear 
daughter, will marry you by the (next) T·rtiya. ' Do something 
yourself so that this statement (of the goddess) becomes true. 
You be the main cause alone. ' ' 0 king, at this instance of that 
girl, I have come to you, who are an intelligent young man 
engrossed in devotion to ViᔻQ.U. 
57. 
Hence, 0 king of mighty arms, go for the accomplish­
ment of the task. After killing that wicked Danava, bring back 
the splendid (girl) Malayagandhini quickly. 
58. 
That Vidyadhara girl will manage to live on seeing 
you, 0 king. Without any (extra) effort she will cause the 
death of the wicked one through you, at the instance of Parvati. 
59. On hearing these words of Narada, King Amitrajit 
experienced a thrill raising the hairs on the body in regard to 
that Vidyadhara girl. 
60. 
He asked him (the sage) the means to go to Caril.pakavati. 
0 Daughter of the Lord of Mountains, that king was thus told 
by Narada again. 
61. "On the full-moon day, 0 king, go quickly to the ocean. 
Seated on the boat you will see the divine Kalpa tree stationed 
in a chariot. 
62. 
There you will see a celestial lady seated on a divine 
couch singing in a sweet voice the following Gatha (verse set 
to music) holding the ViQ.a. 
63. 
'A Karma, whether good or evil, done by one will 
certainly get its consequence experienced by the same person 
guided by the (invisible) thread of fate.' 
64. 
After singing this Gatha, she will instantly dive into the

=== PAGE 322 ===

312 
Skanda Purii:r;a 
deep ocean along with the chariot, tree and conch. 
65. Your Highness should unhesitatingly follow her into 
the great ocean quickly from the boat, eulogizing Yajiiavaraha. 
66. 
Thereafter you will see the beautiful city of Carhpakavati 
in Patala along with that girl, 0 king." 
67-68. 
Mter saying thus, 0 goddess, the son of the Four­
faced Lord (Brahma) vanished. The king reached the ocean 
and saw everything as it was described. He entered the ocean 
and reached that city. The Vidyadhara girl too became the 
guest of his eyes (was seen) . 
69-71 . 
A girl was seen by that king, who appeared to be 
the sole glory of the beauty of all the three worlds. He thought 
for a short while: 'Is this the deity of Patala created by Viᔼt:J.u, 
the enemy of Madhu, for according festivity for my eyes? It 
is the very splendour of the Moon created completely differ­
ent from the creation of Brahma probably due to the fear of 
Rahu and the New Moon. She stands here in the guise of a 
young woman having nothing to fear from anywhere. ' Mter 
reflecting thus the king went near her. 
· 
72-75. 
The girl, saw that excessively handsome king with 
broad chest on which a Tulasi garland was seen hanging down. 
The pair of his excellent arms was marked with the figures of 
conch and discus. The two rows of his teeth were bright and 
sparkling as though they had been washed clean by the nectar 
of the letters constituting the names of Viᔼt:J.U. He himself was 
like a tree growing out of the seed of the devotion to Bhavani 
having the guise of a man and laden with the fruits of cher­
ished desires. On seeing him she experienced horripilation 
caused by delight. The girl stepped down from the swinging 
couch with the shoulders stooping down due to bashfulness. 
Controlling the tremor, she spoke thus to the king: 
76-78. 
"0 handsome-featured one, who may be you? It 
appears as though you have entered the very abode of the god 
of Death. You have upset my mental feelings, ill-fated that I 
am. The wicked Danava, Kailkalaketu is of hard features. He 
has frequently outraged the three worlds and he cannot be 
killed by the weapons of his enemies. 0 handsome one, as 
long as he does not come back stand well-concealed in the 
deep and spacious armoury. 
79-80. 
Due to the boon of Uma, he is not competent to

=== PAGE 323 ===

IV.ii.82.81-93 
313 
violate my modesty as a virgin. The Vlctous one desires to 
marry me the day after tomorrow, the next Trtiya. Due to my 
curse, his life has practically come to an end. 0 young man, 
do not be afraid of him. His work will be over ere long. " 
8 1 . 
On being advised thus by the Vidyadhara girl that 
warrior of mighty arms stayed concealed in the armoury awaiting 
the arrival of the Danava. 
82. 
In the evening that Danava of terrible features re-
turned wielding in his hand the trident that instilled fear into 
even the god of Death. 
83. 
The ferocious Danava roared on his arrival with his 
voice resembling the rambling sound of the clouds at the time 
of universal annihilation. He rolled his eye.s in his inebriation 
and spoke to the Vidyadhari thus: 
84. 
"0 lady of excellent complaxion, accept these jewels. 
With your marriage day after tomorrow, your virginity is com­
ing to an end. 
85-87. 
0 fair lady, I shall be giving ten thousand slave 
girls to you in the morning, all very charming. They are Asuris, 
Suris, Danavis (and of other classes) . Besides them there will 
be hundred each of Gandharvis, Naris (human being) and 
Kinnaris and six hundred each ofVidyadharis, Nagis and Yakᔻi:Q.is. 
There will be eight hundred Rakᔻasis and a hundred excellent 
celestial women. 0 lady of pure thoughts, these will be your 
servants. 
88. 
As my wedded wife here, you will be the owner of the 
entire assets and possessions of the Guardians of the Quarters 
in their abodes. 
89-92. 
Being married to me, you will enjoy all divine pleasures 
in my company. Oh, when will the day after tomorrow dawn 
when the rite of marriage is to take place? It will be full of 
a series of happiness arising from the intimate contact and 
touch of your limbs. Day after tomorrow I shall be getting the 
greatest thrill. It would have been more if the day was nearer. 
Day after tomorrow I shall be fulfilling all my desires cher­
ished in my heart for a long time. 0 Fawn-eyed One, I shall 
make you the sole mistress of all my opulence spread over all 
the three worlds acquired by me after defeating in battle all 
the Devas beginning with Indra. " 
93. 
After prattling thus, that demon who was in great

=== PAGE 324 ===

314 
Skanda Purii7J.a 
intoxication due to the tasting of human flesh and suet, went 
to sleep without fear, keeping the trident in his own lap. 
94-97. 
Recollecting the boon of Gauri and observing that 
the fearless demon was out of his senses and in deep sleep, 
the Vidyadhara girl called that excellent king exquisitely handsome 
in every limb and soundly protected by his devotion to ViᔻQ.u. 
She even muttered within herself, "Dear Lord." Taking away 
the trident from the lap of the demon, she said: "Take this; 
kill him quickly. " On hearing this, King Amitrajit whose lustre 
was akin to that of the rising Sun, took the trident from the 
girl. The king of powerful arms joyously shouted, according 
freedom from fear to the timid girl. 
98-99. 
Fearlessly, he kicked the demon with his left foot, 
remembering within his mind the discus-bearing Hari, the 
protective jewel of the universe. He said "0 wicked flesh-eater, 
get up. Fight with me you who desire to outrage the modesty 
of ·a virgin. You are my enemy but I do not want to kill you 
while asleep. " 
1 00-103. On hearing this, that Danava got up in g·reat ex­
citement and said again and again, "My dear beloved, give me 
the trident." He then continued: "Who is this fellow that has 
entered the abode of death? With whom is the ultimate killer 
(god of Death) angry? Who has fallen within my vision? This 
insignificant puny man will not be even competent to scratch 
my itching powerful arms. 0 fair lady, of what need then is my 
trident? Do not be afraid. See my fanciful sport. This fellow 
will now be my morsel. He has been sent as a present unto me 
by Kala (god of Death) himself afraid of me. " 
1 04. 
After saying this, the king was quickly hit in his chest 
as hard as rock, by the Danava, with a blow of his fist with full 
force. 
1 05. 
The hard-chested king well-protected by the Discus­
bearing Lord, did not experience even the least pain; on the 
other hand it pained his (Demon's) hand. 
1 06. 
Then hit by the infuriated king with a blow from his 
outstretched hand on his face, the demon's head shook. He 
fell down on the ground but soon got up. 
1 07. 
Summoning up courage the excessively powerful de­
mon then said:

=== PAGE 325 ===

IV.ii.82.108-1 22 
315 
Danava said: 
108. 
It is known that you are not a human being. You are 
the Four-armed Slayer of Danavas, who has come here in the 
form of a man after getting a loophole, in order to kill me. 
109. 
0 Madhubhid ('Slayer of Madhu') , you (really think 
you) are powerful. Kindly do this much. Keep aside this great 
trident and fight with me with your own weapons. 
1 1 0. 
Powerful (demons) Kaiᔽabha and others were never 
killed by you in battle through your power. They were deceit­
fully killed by you in fraudulent disguise. 
I l l . 
You took the form of a human dwarf and sent Bali 
to Patala. HiraQ.yakasipu was killed by you by assuming the 
form partly human and partly beastly. 
. 
1 1 2. 
The Ruler of Lanka was felled down by you in the 
form of one with matted hairs. Karhsa and others were killed 
by you who had taken the guise of a cowherd. 
1 1 3. 
In the form of a woman you cheated the Asuras and 
took away the Sudha (divine ambrosia) . Sankha and many 
others were killed by you in the form of aquatic animals. 
1 1 4. 
0 you foremost among Mayavins (deceivers) , 0 knower 
of the vulnerable points of everyone, I am not at all afraid of 
you if only you will leave off this trident. 
1 15. 
Or, of what avail are these piteous utterances worthy 
of only cowherds? you will not abandon the trident and I shall 
not defeat you in the battle. 
1 1 6. 
Indeed this embodied one has to die this morning. 
Better that it is at your hands, be it through strength or through 
deceit. 
1 1 7. 
This Vidyadhari girl has not been defiled by me. She 
is chaste. She should be considered to be Goddess Lakᕞmi 
herself, guarded by me for your sake." 
1 1 8. 
After saying this, the Danava hit him with a blow of 
his left hand that could even shake a big mountain. 
1 1 9. 
In the course of the fight the king endured that blow 
on the chest, but balancing the trident in his hand he aimed 
at his chest. 
1 20-1 22. The . king of powerful arms hit him and he died 
instantly. After killing the demon Kankalaketu thus , he spoke 
to the Vidyadhara girl who was watching with hairs rising up 
due to delight: "0 lady of exquisites hips, at the instance of

=== PAGE 326 ===

316 
Skanda Purii:r;ta 
Sage Narada I have carried out your desire. 0 lady who are 
aware of what has been done, tell me what (more) shall I do 
now. " On hearing these words of the king of magnanimous 
mind, she said: 
Malayagandhini said: 
1 23. 
0 liberal-minded hero. 0 my life-saving medicine, 
why do you ask me? I have already been bought by you with 
your own life at stake. I am the undefiled daughter of a noble 
family. 
1 24. 
While the girl was saying so, Sage Narada habitually 
roaming about as he pleased came there unexpectedly from 
the world of gods. 
1 25. 
On seeing the excellent sage, they two were delighted. 
They bowed down their heads and were blessed by the sage. 
1 26. 
They were sprinkled (with water) by Narada after 
they had gone through the rite of clasping the hands (merrying) . 
Mter the auspicious rite was over, they went along the path 
pointed out by Narada. 
1 27-1 28. Accompanied by Malayagandhinl, King Amitrajit 
reached the city of Vara.Q.asl where auspicious ceremonies had 
been arranged by the citizens. The king entered that city, the 
mere sight of which enables wise man to avert the downfall 
into a hell. 
1 29. 
The king entered that city where even Indra and oth­
ers do not get free access and which causes the attainment of 
salvation. 
1 30: 
That king entered the city K;iSI remembering which 
a man averts the contingency of being contaminated by sins 
and which is desired by all the three worlds. 
1 3 1 . That Lord of subjects entered that Kasl, on entering 
which a man . is never assailed by even great sins. 
1 32. 
Seeing the glory and opulence of Kasl from afar, that 
Vidyadhara girl censured the heavenly world and even the city 
in Patala. 
1 33. 
That newly wedded girl was not delighted on getting 
Amitrajit as her husband as much as when she saw Kasl, the 
wonderful abode of the highest bliss.

=== PAGE 327 ===

IV.ii.82.1 34-IV.ii.83.2 
317 
1 34. 
Considering herself blessed, that lady of great mental 
ability acquired the greatest delight through her husband and 
(staying in) Kasl. 
1 35. 
Attaining Malayagandhinl as his wife, King Amitrajit 
resorted to love with predominance of piety and so obtained 
the most excellent happiness. 
1 36. 
That queen, loyal to her husband and desirous of a 
son, once sincerely submitted to her husband engrossed in 
devotion to Lord ViᔻQ.U. 
The Queen said: 
1 37. 
0 king, if there is the consent of my husband. I shall 
take up the great Vrata of Abhlᔻta Trtlya that fulfils the cher­
ished desire for a son. 
The King said: 
1 38. 
0 queen, tell me. Of what nature is the Vrata of 
Abhi:Ha Trtlya? What is the deity to be worshipped therein? 
What is the benefit of the rite? 
1 39. 
If a woman, without being permitted by her husband 
were to perform Vrata etc., she will become miserable if she 
lives, and will go to hell if she dies. 
1 40. 
On being requested thus by the king, the queen began 
to narrate the mode of performing that Vrata along with its 
secret principle. 
CHAPTER EIGHTYTHREE 
Manifestation of Viresvara 
The Queen said: 
1 . 
0 king, pay attention. I shall describe the actual mode 
of performing this Vrata, its benefit and the desired deity. 
2. 
Formerly this Vrata was recounted by Narada, the son 
of Brahma, to Rddhi, the wife of Kubera, of glorious coun­
tenance who was desirous of a son.

=== PAGE 328 ===

3. 
It was duly performed by that goddess and the son 
Nala Kubara was born. Due to this Vrata sons have been ac­
quired by many other women too. 
4. 
Gauri conversant with the mode of the rite should be 
duly worshipped along with the child sucking the breast milk 
with upturned face. 
5-1 0. 
On the third day in the bright half of Margasirᔻa, 
the devotee places a pot upon which a copper pot is placed. 
This copper pot is (to be) filled with rice grains. A cloth, 
new, un torn and coloured with turmeric is to be placed 
(as a cover) on the copper pot. It will be of very fine 
texture. A splendid lotus blossomed by the rays of the Sun 
is placed upon it. An idol of Brahma made of four gold 
coins (eighty Rattis) is placed on the peri carp of the lotus 
and is adored devoutly with jewels, silk clothes etc . , flowers 
of various kinds, and with sweet fruits such as oranges 
etc . , sandalpaste and other fragrant substances, camphor 
and musk, Naivedya offerings such as milk pudding etc . , 
and sweetmeats o f diverse shapes and sizes and with incense 
in wh ich Agallochum is prominent. At night the devotee 
and his people should keep awake in a flower-bedecked 
pavilion keeping the sleep away performing great festivities. 
1 1-15. 
In the sacrificial pit a Hasta in diameter the Brahmal).a 
conversant with Mantras should consign into the fire full-blown 
thousand lotuses after soaking them with ghee and honey repeating 
the Mantra Jiitavedase. 
He should make the gift of a newly calved, tawny-coloured, 
well-behaved milch cow to the preceptor, with befitting orna­
ments. Mter devoutly observing the fast, the couple will wear 
fresh clothes. 
In the morning of the Caturthi day, the joyous couple should 
honour the preceptor with clothes, ornaments, garlands and 
monetary gifts. The idol with all the requisite appurtenances 
should be given to the Acarya. The couple observing the Vrata 
should repeat this Mantra. 
1 6. 
"0 creative energy! 0 Goddess conversant with the 
mode of creation of the universe and creating diverse things! 
Propitiated by th::S splendid Vrata, grant us a son who will 
continue the lineage." 
1 7. 
A thousand Brahmal).as should be fed with great devotion.

=== PAGE 329 ===

(The Vrata-observing couple) should break the fast with the 
remaining food. 
18. 
0 king, it is thus that I wish to observe the Vrata along 
with you. Do this favour unto me for the sake of the acqui­
sition of the desired benefit. 
19. The excellent king heard this with great delight in his 
mind. 0 sage, the Vrata was duly observed and she became 
pregnant. 
20-22. 
Gaurl who was propitiated with devotion was re­
quested by the pregnant woman: "0 Mahamaya, grant me a 
son born of a part of ViᔻI).U. As soon as he is born, he will go 
to the heaven and return here. He will be a great devotee of 
Sadasiva and become well-known in the entire world. 
Without being fed at the breasts, he will instantly be a six­
teen year old boy. 0 Gaurl, make if possible that such a son 
is born to me. " 
23. 
The words "So it will be" were uttered by Mr«;lanl who 
was much pleased with the devotion. In due course she gave 
birth to the son with the Mula star at his nativity. 
24. 
Even as she lay in the lying-in-chamber she was in­
formed by the ministers, her well-wishers, "0 queen, if you 
seek (the well-being of) the king abandon the son born under 
the malignant star." 
25. 
On hearing the words of the ministers she who con­
sidered her husband as her deity and who was wise in follow­
ing what is expedient, abandoned the son who was acquired 
in that manner. 
26-30. 
She summoned the nurse. The queen spoke this 
to her, "There is the Matrka deity named Vika!a in the great 
Paiicamudra Mahapl!ha. Dear nurse, place this child in front 
of her and submit thus, "This child is granted by Gaurl. He 
has been placed in front of you by the queen who desires the 
well-being of the husband and who has been urged by the 
ministers." The nurse listened to the speech of the queen. She 
placed the child, gracefully shining like the moon, in front of 
Vika!a and went home. Then Goddess Vika!a summoned the 
Yoginls and said, "Take the child immediately before the Maqga1,1a 
(group of Mother-deities) and do as they bid you do. Protect 
the child with great effort."

=== PAGE 330 ===

31-34. 
At the instance of Vikaᔽa, the Yoginis went through 
the sky and took him to the place where Brahmi and other 
Mothers were. The Mothers are BrahmaQ.i, VaiᔻQ.avi, Raudri, 
Varahi, Narasirhhika, Kaᕤmari, Mahendri, CamuQ.<;ia and CaQ.<;lika. 
The group of Yoginis bowed down and placed in front of the 
Mothers that boy who had the lustre of the Sun. On seeing the 
beautiful boy sent by Vikaᔽa, they simultaneously asked the 
child, "Who is your father? Who is your mother?" 
35-39. 
On being asked by the Mothers thus he did not say 
anything. Then the group of Mothers said to the great Yoginis: 
"This (boy) is marked with excellent characteristics. He de­
serves a kingdom. 0 Yoginis, he should be taken back to that 
place without delay, where the great goddess Paficamudra, the 
bestower of desires, stays. By resorting to her the glory of 
salvation does not remain far away from man. 
There is salvation at every step, everywhere in Kasi, the 
creator of auspiciousness. Still that Piᔽha is specially the cause 
of all spiritual powers. By resorting to that Pnha and due to 
the great blessings of Visvesvara, Siddhi shall accrue to this 
child having the shape and size of a sixteen-year old boy. " 
40-4 1 . 
Thus with the blessings of the group of Mothers 
the boy was instantly brought to the Mahapnha marked with 
the five Mudras at the instance of the Mothers. Thereafter 
from the heaven he came here to Anandakanana and performed 
an extensive penance of divine quality. 
42. 
Umadhava (Lord Siva) became pleased with the very 
severe penance of that prince of steady mind and sense­
organs. 
43. Sari.kara manifested himself to him in the form of a Liri.ga 
and said, "I am pleased, 0 son of a king; speak out the boon 
(you will have) . " 
Skanda said: 
44-45. 
Seeing the Liri.ga consisting of speech (Vedas) with 
all rediance, standing before him penetrating through the 
seven nether worlds, due to the blessing of the Supreme Almighty, 
he bowed down lying on the ground like a log of wood and 
eulogized Dhurjaᔽi joyously through the Suktas (hymns) with 
Rudra as their deity-the Suktas he had repeatedly practised 
in the previous birth.

=== PAGE 331 ===

IV.ii.83.46-59 
321 
46. 
Then Lord Mahesvara, the bull-emblemed Lord of 
Devas became pleased with his penance and said: 
Devadeva said: 
47. 
Choose a boon. By means of the penance performed 
by you, your tender body has been subjected to pain by you 
though still a boy in body. My mind has been captivated hence. 
48. 
On hearing the repeated speech of Siva urging him to 
accept the gift of a boon, he became delighted experiencing 
horripilation. He requested for the boon. 
Kumiira said: 
49-52. 
0 Mahadeva, 0 Lord of Devas, if a boon has to 
be granted to me, Your Lordship shall stay here always allevi­
ating the distress due to the worldly existence. 0 Sarilbhu, do 
favour the devotees by granting what they desire, even as you 
are stationed in this Liilga. They will get their desires realized 
even without showing the ritualistic Mudras etc. 0 Lord, you 
grant the great Siddhi to those who merely visit, touch and 
bow even without chanting the Mantras. You must bless always 
those who are devoted to this Liilga mentally, verbally and 
physically. This is my boon. 
On hearing about the boon he wished to have the Lord in 
the form of the Liilga said: 
53-55. 
"0 Vira, let what you, the son of a devotee of 
Viᔻ1_1u, said, be real. Since your father King Amitrajit is a devotee 
of Viᔻ1_1u, you are born with a part of Viᔻ1_1u. You are son of 
one who is engrossed in devotion to me also. After your name 
this Liilga will be known, 0 Vira, as Viresvara Liilga. At Kasl 
it will bestow the cherished desires of the devotees, nav all _that 
they think of. From today, 0 Vira, I shall stay in thᕥs Liilga 
always. 
56. 
Undoubtedly I shall grant great Siddhi unto those 
who resort to me. But no one will understand my greatness 
in the Kali age. 
57-59. 
He who understands fortunately, will obtain the 
great Siddhi. Whatever ]apa is performed, Homa is offered

=== PAGE 332 ===

gifts are donated and deities adored and pious works such as 
renovation of dilapidated shrines etc. done, all these cause 
everlasting benefit. 
As for you, you will attain the kingdom inaccessible to all 
other kings, enjoy pleasures of unlimited extent and in the 
end will attain Siddhi. 
The city of Varal).asl is the most beautiful one in the entire 
world. 
60-64. 
There, the confluence of the rivers Asi and Ganga 
is meritorious. Above that the Hayagrlva Tlrtha is more meri­
torious. It is here that Viᔻl).U in the form of the horse-necked 
god accords what the devotees yearn for. Gaja Tlrtha is better 
than Hayagrlva· Tlrtha. It is here that one obtains the benefit 
of the gift of elephants, merely by taking a holy bath. 
Kokavaraha Tlrtha is more meritorious than Gaja Tlrtha. By 
worshipping Kokavaraha people will cease to take births. 
Dillpa Tlrtha in the vicinity of Dillpesvara is more excellent 
than Kokavaraha. It dispels sins immediately. More than this 
is the Sagaratlrtha in the vicinity of Sagarda. 
65-69. 
By getting himself immersed therein, a man averts 
getting immersed further in the ocean of misery. More aus­
picious than Sagara Tlrtha is the Saptasagara Tlrtha, by taking 
the holy dip where a man attains the merit of taking the holy 
bath in all the seven seas. Better than Saptabdhitlrtha is the 
Tlrtha well-known as MaP.odadhi. An intelligent man who takes 
his holy bath there at least once, burns the great ocean of sins. 
More meritorious than this is the Caura Tlrtha in the vicinity 
of Kapilesvara. Sins of stealing gold etc. shall perish by taking 
a holy bath there. Harilsa Tlrtha in the vicinity of Kedardvara 
is more worthy of adoration. There I lead the embodied beings 
to Brahman in the form of a Harilsa (Swan) . 
70. 
Beyond that is the highly meritorious Tlrtha of 
Tribhuvana-Kesava. Men who take bath there do not enter the 
mortal world. 
71 . 
More than · that is the Govyaghresvara Tlrtha where 
both of them (Cow and Tiger) attained Siddhi by eschewing 
their natural enmity. 
. 
72. 
0 Vlra, more excellent than this is the holy spot 
named Mandhatr Tirtha where that king (i.e. Mandhata) at­
tained the position of an Emperor.

=== PAGE 333 ===

IV.ii.83. 73-85 
323 
73. 
More meritorious than this is the Mucukunda Tirtha. 
A man who takes his holy bath there is never attacked by 
enemies. 
74. 
Prthu Tirtha is a greater and higher means of all wel­
fare than that. A man who visit Prthvisvara there, will become 
Lord of the earth. 
75. 
More than that is the highly Siddhi-bestowing Tirtha 
of Parasurama, where the son of Jamadagni became liberated 
from the sin of killing ᕂatriyas. 
76. 
Even today a sin due to the murder of a ᕂatriya perishes 
by means of a single bath performed knowingly or unknow­
ingly. 
77. A Tirtha that causes welfare bet(er than that is indeed 
that of KrᔻI.J.a's elder brother, where Baladeva became liber­
ated from the sin of murdering a Siita (narrator of Pural).as, 
Romahaqai.J.a) . 
78. 
The Tirtha of King Divodasa of excellent intellect, is 
also there. A man who bathes there at any time does not slip 
from knowledge till the end. 
79. 
A great Tirtha better than that is destructive of all sins. 
It is there that Bhagirathi stands visible directly in the form 
of an image. 
80. 
If one takes the holy bath in the Bhagirathi Tirtha, 
offers Sraddha with a correct knowledge of its procedure and 
makes gifts to deserving persons, he will never be in a womb 
again. 
81 . 
0 Vira, Harapapa Tirtha is also on the banks of 
Bhagirathi. By taking the holy bath there, multitudes of great 
sins become destroyed. 
82. 
A man who visit Niᔻpapesvara Liriga there becomes 
rid of sins, 0 Vira, at that very instant (of visiting the Liriga) . 
83. 
Dasasvamedha Tirtha is considered more excellent 
than that. By taking the holy dip there, one attains the benefit 
of ten Asvamedhas (horse-sacrifices) . 
84. 
They call Bandi Tirtha a better bestower of auspi-
ciousness, 0 Vira. By taking bath there, the man will be lib­
erated from the worldly bondage. 
85. 
Formerly many Devas were imprisoned by Demon 
Hiral).yakᔻa. They were fettered too and they eulogized Jagadarhbika 
(Mother of the universe) .

=== PAGE 334 ===

324 
Skanda Pura1Ja 
86. 
The Mother of the universe, who was bowed to by 
those Devas who had been freed from the fetters is being sung 
about since then as Bandl. Even now she is prayed to by men. 
87. 
Bandi Tlrtha that breaks great fetters is there itself. 
One who bathes there is liberated from all bonds of Karmas. 
88. 
0 king, Banditirtha in the city of Kasi is highly excel­
lent. A man who bathes there will attain salvation due to the 
blessings of the goddess. 
89. 
More excellent than that is well-known as Prayaga Tirtha 
where Prayagamadhava is the bestower of the benefit of all 
Yagas. 
90. 
ᕂOQ.i-Varaha Tlrtha is a better bestower of auspicious­
ness than that. A man who bathes there is never born in brutish 
(non-human) species. 
9 1 . Kalesvara Tirtha is greater and more excellent than that. 
Kali and Kala do not affect and torment the excellent man who 
bathes there. 
92. 
There itself is Asoka Tlrtha, more auspicious than that. 
A man who bathes there never falls into the ocean of misery. 
93. 
0 son of the king, purer than that is the Sukra Tlrtha. 
The excellent man who bathes there is not reborn through 
semen virile. 
94. 
Better merit-bestowing than that is the excellent Bhavani 
Tirtha, 0 king. If one takes bath there and visit Bhavani and 
Isa, one is never reborn. 
95. 
Prabhasa Tlrtha is well-known as the bestower of auspi­
ciousness on· men more than that. It is in front of Somesvara. 
One who takes bath there is never born into a womb. 
96. 
Beyond it is the GarU<;la Tlrtha destructive of the poison 
of worldly existence. Mter adoring Garu<;lesa and taking bath 
therein one does not meet with an occasion to feel sorry. 
97. 
0 Vlra, beyond that is the meritorious Brahma Tirtha 
in front of Brahmesvara. By taking his holy bath there, a man 
attains Brahmavidya. 
98. 
Beyond it is Vrddharka Tlrtha and thereafter is Vidhi 
Tirtha. A man who bathes there proceeds to the world of Ravi 
(Sun) free from impurities. 
99. 
Thereafter is the Nrsirhha Tirtha that averts great fear. 
Why should one be afraid of even Kala (god of Death) after 
bathing there?

=== PAGE 335 ===

IV.ii.83.100-1 14 
325 
100. 
Batter bestower of merit than that on men is the 
Citrarathesvara Tirtha. If one takes bath there and makes gift, 
one does not see Citragupta. 
1 0 1 . 
Beyond that is the meritorious Dharma Tirtha sta­
tioned in front of Dharmesa. One shall be free from indebt­
edness to ancestors after performing Sraddha etc. there. 
102. 
Beyond it is the Visala Tirtha free from impurities 
and the bestower of extensive benefit. Having bathed there 
and visited Visalakᔼi, one is never reborn in a womb. 
1 03. Jarasandhesa Tirtha is in the vicinity of Jarasandhesa. 
One who bathes there never becomes deluded by the afflic­
tions of the fever of worldly existence. 
1 04. 
Beyond that is the Lalita Tirtha. that augments con­
jugal bliss. If one bathes there and adores Lalita one never 
becomes poor ·and miserable. 
1 05. 
Beyond it is the Gautami Tirtha that washes off all 
sins. After bathing there and offering balls of rice (to the 
Manes) one never bewails anything. 
106-1 12. (There is) a series of Tirthas beyond it, vi z. 
Gail.gakdava Tirtha, Agastya Tirtha, Yogini Tirtha, Trisandhyakhya 
Tirtha, Narmada Tirtha, Arundhateyaka Tirtha, VasiHha Tirtha, 
the excellent Markai}.Qeya Tirtha. All these Tirthas are the 
bestower of merit. The latter is more (efficacious) than the 
former (preceding) . Then there is the excellent Tirtha named 
Khurakartari. By performing Sraddha and other rites a man 
will get rid of sins. Beyond it is the saintly King's Tirtha named 
Bhagiratha Tirtha. It accords excessive merit. If anyone makes 
the gift of even the least of things there, it becomes everlast­
ing in benefit even at the close of the Kalpa. More than these 
Tirthas, more than the three crores of Liilgas, 0 Vira, this 
Viresvara Liilga will be extremely excellent. If a man bathes in 
the Vira Tirtha and worships Viresa, it is as though he has 
bathed in all these Tirthas, and not otherwise. If anyone worships 
Viresvara Liilga at night it is as though three crores of Liilgas 
have been worshipped by him here. 
1 1 3. 
Viresvara Liilga should be assiduously resorted to by 
the person who wishes for Lakᔼmi, the bestower of salvation 
as well as worldly pleasures. 
1 1 4. 
If a man performs a single act of Jagaral}.a (keeping 
awake at night) and worships Viresa on the fourteenth lunar

=== PAGE 336 ===

326 
Skanda Purii:rJ.a 
day, he does not take the body consisting of the five elements. 
1 1 5. 
This Liriga should always be worshipped by those who 
have attained Siddhis as well as those who wish for Siddhis, 
because it causes the realization of all desires pertaining to 
this world as well as the other world. 
1 1 6. 
If a man bathes Viresa with Paiicamrta, he will attain 
the merit of a crore of pots of Paiicamrta bath for each moment's 
duration. 
1 1 7. 
There is no doubt in this that with a single flower 
offered to Viresa one will get the benefit of offering a crore 
of flowers elsewhere. 
1 1 8. 
No doubt or hesitation need be felt in this regard 
that by offering a single Ahuti in the vicinity of Viresvara, one 
will attain the benefit of a crore of Homas done perfectly. 
1 1 9. 
Even the least thing offered to Viresa gives inex-
haustible benefit. In the Naivedya (food offering) the devotee 
gets the benefit of offering a crore of lumps of boiled rice for 
every lump that he offers. 
1 20. 
If anyone repeats Maharudra Mantra once or. makes 
someone else repeat it once in the presence of Viresa, cer­
tainly he will attain the benefit of repeating Rudra Mantra a 
crore of times. 
1 2 1 . Whatever is performed by men observing Vratas such 
as the rite of Vratotsarga etc. (formal concluding rite after observance 
of vows etc.) will undoubtedly increase by a crore of times. 
1 22. 
If the devotee performs eight Namaskaras (prostra­
tions) in front of Virdvara, he will obtain the benefit of eight 
crores of Namaskaras. There is no doubt about this. 
1 23. 
0 Vira, with my favour this Virdvara Liriga shall be 
the abode (cause) of all riches. There is no doubt about it. 
1 24. 
Even as they are alive, by my behest, men will have 
knowledge, entitled Tiiraka (the redeemer) . Hence this Liriga 
should be resorted to by those who seek auspiciousness. " 
125-1 27. On hearing this, the heroic son of Amitrajit said 
again after bowing down to the Lord of Devas with fully realized 
desires: "0 Lord of Devas, all these Tirthas have been narrated 
to me. 0 Lord, be pleased to recount other Tirthas too. Kindly 
narrate the Tirthas beginning with Adikdava and concluding 
with Bhagiratha Tirtha. On hearing about these a man becomes 
free from sins."

=== PAGE 337 ===

IV.ii.83.1 28-IV.ii.84.9 
327 
1 28. 
On hearing this speech (request) of the prince, Mahdana 
began to recount the Tirthas in Ganga. 
CHAPTER EIGHTYFOUR 
Tirthas from the Confluence of Gangii and Varaċii up to 
Maċika˚ikii 
Skanda said: 
1 . 
0 BrahmaJ.la, listen how Sthai_lu (Siva) created a holy 
spot by means of the meritorious confluence of Ganga and 
Varai_la. 
2. 
A person who takes his holy bath in that confluence 
and worships Sangamesa, shall never again meet with the contact 
of a mother's womb. 
3. 
The Tlrtha called Padodaka is there. It is there that 
the Lord wielding Sarnga bow (i.e. Vil?J.lU) washed his feet at 
the outset as soon as he came from Mandara. 
4. 
On the Vyatlpata day (New-Moon day on Sunday etc.) 
the devotee should perform all the rites such as offering water­
libation in Vil?J.lupadodaka Tirtha. He will never have any return 
to the worldly existence. 
5 . 
A person who bathed in Padodaka Tlrtha and wor-
shipped Kesava becomes an excellent man rid of the residence 
in Sarhsara. 
6. 
That spot in Kasl has been pointed out by Brahmai_las 
as Svetadvlpa. After acquiring merit there, the devotee shall 
become lord of Svetadvlpa. 
7. 
Beyond Padodaka Tirtha is the Tirtha called ᕂlrabdhi 
(Milk Ocean) . One who acquires merit there will stay on the 
shore of the Milk Ocean. 
8. 
To the southern side of ᕂlroda is the excellent Sankha 
Tirtha. A man who takes his bath there, will certainly become 
lord of the treasures, Sankha etc. 
9. 
Behind Sankha Tirtha is the excellent Cakra Tirtha. By 
getting immersed in the waters of that Tlrtha, one averts fall

=== PAGE 338 ===

328 
Skanda Purii:IJ.a 
into Sarilsaracakra (cycle of worldly existence) . 
10. 
Beyond that is Gada Ti:rtha that is destructive of the 
ailments of worldly existence. By performing Sraddha etc. there, 
one shall see Lord Gadadhara. 
1 1 . Beyond that is Padma Ti:rtha that causes glorious for­
tune and satisfaction of the Pitrs. By performing the rites of 
holy ablution etc. there one shall accomplish the reduction of 
sins. 
12. Thereafter is the Ti:rtha of Mahalakᔼmi that bestows 
great merit. By adoring Mahalakᔼmi there one shall obtain the 
glory of salvation. 
• 
1 3. 
Thereafter is Garutmata Tirtha that is destructive of 
the poison of worldly existence. One who performs rites such 
as offering water-libations there, achieves residence in VaikuQtha. 
14. 
Thereafter is Narada Ti:rtha, the sole cause of the attain­
ment of Brahmavidya (knowledge of the Absolute) . By taking 
the holy bath there and viewing Naradake§ava, one shall become 
liberated. 
15. To the south thereof is Prahlada Tirtha that bestqws the 
benefit of devotion. Merely by taking the holy bath there one 
shall become extremely endearing to ViᔼQu. 
1 6. 
Thereafter is Arilbariᔼa Tirtha that destroys great sins. 
People who perform auspicious rites there, do not enter a 
mother's womb (i.e. are not reborn) . 
1 7. 
Thereafter is the excellent Ti:rtha named Adityakdava. 
One who takes the ablution there too shall get coronation 
bath in heaven. 
18. The Ti:rtha of Dattatreya, the most sacred one in all the 
three worlds, is also there. By devoutly taking the holy bath 
therein, one shall attain perfection in Yoga (Yogasiddhi) . 
19. 
Beyond that is Bhargava Tirtha that bestows great knowl­
edge. By taking the holy bath duly there one shall attain Bhargava's 
world. 
20. Thereafter is Vamana Tirtha that causes the presence 
of ViᔻQU. By performing Sraddha rite there, one is liberated 
from indebtedness to Pitrs. 
2 1 . Thereafter is the Ti:rtha called NaranarayaQa that bestows 
auspiciousness. By getting immersed in that Tlrtha, people 
rarely find residence in the womb. 
22. To the south thereof is the auspicious Yajiiavaraha Tlrtha.

=== PAGE 339 ===

IV.ii.84.23-35 
329 
Men who take their holy bath there, certainly obtain the benefit 
of Rajasuya. 
23. 
The holy Tlrtha named Vidaranarasirilha is also there. 
By a single holy bath there the sin acquired in the course of 
a hundred births perishes. 
24. 
Thereafter is Gaplgovinda Tlrtha that bestows the world 
of ViᔼJ.lU. A wise man who takes his holy bath there will never 
know the pain of being in a womb. 
25. 
To the south of Goplgovinda is Lakᔼmlnrsimha Tlrtha. 
The excellent man stationed there is wooed by NirvaJ.lalakᔼml 
(glory of salvation) . 
, 
26. 
In the southern direction thereof is the excellent Seᔼa 
Tlrtha. If one gets immersed there, no tracf of one's mass of 
great sins remains there. 
27. 
In the southern direction thereof is Sankha-Madhava 
Tlrtha. Whence is the great fear of sin to men if they resort 
to that? 
28. 
Thereafter is the Tlrtha called Nllagrlva which is un­
paralleled. It is more sacred than Sankhamadhava Tlrtha. It 
accords Siddhi at the same instant. One who bathes there, is 
always pure. 
29. 
Uddalaka Tlrtha too is there. It is destructive of all the 
mass of sins. Merely with the holy bath there, it bestows on 
men great prosperity. 
30. 
Thereafter, in the vicinity of Sankhye5vara is the Tlrtha 
called Sankhya. By resorting to that Tlrtha Sankhya-Yoga be­
comes clear to man. 
31 . 
In the vicinity of Svarllne5vara is Svarllna Tlrtha, so 
called because Lord Umapati himself got merged therein from 
the heavenly world. 
32. 
There all sacred rites of men such as the rites of ablution, 
making gifts, feeding BrahmaJ.las faithfully, Japas, Homas and 
ilrcanas become indestructible. 
33. 
The extremely sacred Mahiᔻasura Tlrtha is near it. That 
leader of demons could conquer all the Suras due to the penance 
he performed there. 
34. 
A person resorting to that Tlrtha even today is never 
harassed by enemies nor by great sms. He will obtain the 
benefit 
sought. 
35. 
Very near it is BaJ.la Tlrtha that bestows a thousand

=== PAGE 340 ===

330 
Skanda Purii1Ja 
arms. A man taking his holy bath there will obtain (develop) 
steady devotion to Sambhu. 
36. 
Beyond it is the excellent Tlrtha named Goprataresvara. 
If a man without a son takes his holy bath there, he will easily 
cross Vaitaral).L 
37. 
To the south thereof is the Tlrtha called Hiral).yagarbha 
which dispels all sins. One who takes the holy ablution there 
is never devoid of gold. 
38. 
Beyond that is Pral).ava Tlrtha which is the most excel­
lent of all excellent :nrthas. A man will become liberated while 
still living merely by taking his holy bath there. 
39. 
Beyond it is Pisailgila Ti:rtha which dispels sins even 
by the vision thereof. 0 Sage Agastya, it is the site of my 
abode, the bestower of excellent Siddhi. 
40. 
If one takes his holy bath in Pisailgila Tlrtha and makes 
the gift of something, why should he be afraid of the sin com­
mitte.d by him even if he dies elsewhere? 
41 . 
A person who takes his holy bath in Pisailgila Tlrtha 
and adores me, will become my friend having the lustre akin 
to that of the Sun. 
. 
42. 
Thereafter is the Tlrtha named Pilipila that is entirely 
sanctified by the vision of Trivil!tapa (i.e. Lord Trilocana) . It 
destroys the impurities of the mind. 
43. 
By performing Sraddha and other rites there and fully 
satisfYing the distressed and the helpless ones, a man obtains 
great and steady prosperity. 
44. 
Thereafter is Nagesvara Ti:rtha that dispels great sins. 
By immersing oneself in that Ti:rtha one can achieve the reduction 
of all sins. 
45. 
To the south thereof is the excellent Ti:rtha of great 
merit named Karl).aditya. A man who bathes in it will attain 
the brilliance of the Sun. 
46. 
Thereafter is Bhairava Ti:rtha that bestows the destruc­
tion of the masses of great sins, causes the rise of the fourfold 
aims of life and dispels all obstacles. 
47. On the BhaumaHaml day i.e. eighth lunar day coinciding 
with a Tuesday) if a man takes his holy bath there, offers 
libation to the Pitrs and visits Kalabhairava, he will subdue 
Kali and Kala. 
48. 
The Ti:rtha called Kharvanrsirilha is in front of Bhairava

=== PAGE 341 ===

IV.ii.84.49-61 
331 
Ti:rtha. How can a man who takes his holy bath there have the 
fear originating from sins? 
49. 
To the south thereof is the exceedingly pure Ti:rtha of 
Sage MrkaQ.Q.a. Men who take their holy bath there, will not 
meet with accidental death anywhere. 
50. 
Thereafter is the Tlrtha named Paiicanada which is 
resorted to by all Ti:rthas. A man who takes his bath there, 
does not continue to be a worldly being (i.e. becomes free 
from Sarilsara) . 
5 1 . All the Tlrthas of the entire Cosmic Egg enter that 
Tlrtha during the month of Karttika for getting rid of their 
own sins. 
52. 
Always all these excellent Ti:rthas stay there for three 
days from the Dasaml (tenth day) onwards for the sake of 
ridding themselves of their own impurities. 
53. 
Within Kasl, at every step, there are all sorts of Ti:rthas. 
But the greatness of Paiicanada is unique. Nowhere else has 
it been obtained by any of them. 
54. 
If people make at least one Karttika day fruitful by 
means of Japa, Homa, Arcana and Dana, they alone are blessed 
ones who have fulfilled their tasks. 
55. 
If all the Tirthas (consolidated together) are simulta­
neously weighed against Paiicanada, they do not attain equal­
ity with even a sixteenth part of Paiicanada. 
56. 
An intelligent man who takes the holy bath in Paiicanada 
Ti:rtha and visits Bindumadhava is never reborn in the belly 
of a mother. 
57. 
Thereafter is Jiianahrada Tlrtha which dispels the slug­
gishness and ignorance of even the dull-witted. A man who 
takes his holy bath there, never experiences loss of wisdom. 
58. A man should take his holy bath in Jiianahrada and 
visit Jiiane8vara. He will thereby obtain that knowledge by 
which he is never tormented (by ignorance) . 
59. 
Thereafter is Mangala Ti:rtha that destroys all inauspi­
ciousness. By diving into it a devotee shall be the recipient of 
auspiciousness. 
60. All inauspiciousneᕦs shall perish. Auspicious results take 
place. This happens in the case of a person who takes his bath 
in Mangala Ti:rtha and bows down to Lord Mangala. 
6 1 . 
Beyond that is the Tlrtha of the Sun which is destruc-

=== PAGE 342 ===

332 
Skanda Puriir_ta 
tive of impurities. One who takes the holy ablution there and 
visits Gabhastliia shall be free from impurities. 
62. 
There itself Makha Tirtha is in the vicinity of Makhesvara. 
An excellent man who takes his holy bath there acquires the 
benefit and merit of performing a sacrifice. 
63. 
By the side thereof is Bindu Tirtha, the cause of the 
greatest knowledge. By performing Sraddha etc. there one shall 
get the excellent merit of good deeds. 
64-65. 
The Tirtha of Sage Pippal:"ida is situated to the 
south thereof. On a Saturday the devotee should take his holy 
bath there, visit 
Pippalesvara and eat a Pippala fruit uttering 
the Mantra beginning with asvatthe etc.1 He will never be afflicted 
by Saturn. It will destroy evil dreams too. 
66. 
Thereafter is the Tirtha called Tamra-Varaha. It is 
exceedingly sacred. If the devotee bathes there and makes 
some gifts, he will never become immersed in the ocean of 
sins. 
67. 
Beyond it is Kalagariga that destroys the sins of the Kali 
age. A sensible man who bathes there becomes rid of sins 
instantly. 
68. 
T h e great I n d radyu m n a Tirtha i s i n fro n t o f 
Indradyumne8vara. By performing aquatic rites there one shall 
attain the world of Indra. 
69. 
Thereafter is Rama Tirtha in front of Viraramesvara. 
Merely by bathing in that Tirtha one shall attain the world of 
ViᔼI).U. 
70. 
Thereafter is Aikᔼvakava Tirtha destructive of the masses 
of all sins. An excellent man becomes sanctified in his soul by 
taking his bath there. 
1i . Marutta Tirtha is by its side in the vicinity of Marutte8vara. 
By taking bath there and adorning the Lord, one shall attain 
great prosperity. 
72. 
Thereafter is Maitravarur:ta Tirtha, destructive of sins. 
By offering balls of rice there, one becomes a favourite of the 
Pitrs. 
73. 
Thereafter is the great and pure Agni Tirtha in front 
of Agnisa. By diving in that Tirtha, one attains Agniloka. 
74. 
There itself in the vicinity of Arigaresvara is Angara 
1 . The Mantra is "asvatthe vo ni$adanam " etc. (RV.X.97.5) .

=== PAGE 343 ===

IV.ii.84. 75-86 
333 
Tirtha. On the Angara Caturthi day (the 4th in the dark half 
falling on Tuesday) a devotee taking his bath there becomes 
liberated from sins. 
75. 
Thereafter is Kali Tirtha in the vicinity of Kalasesvara. 
If one bathes there and adores that Liilga, be need not be 
afraid of Kali age and Kala (god of Death) . 
76. 
There itself is Candra Tirtha in the vicinity of Candresvara. 
By taking bath there and worshipping Candre5vara the devo­
tee attains the world of the Moon. 
77. 
Beyond that is Vira Tirtha in the vicinity of Viresvara 
which has already been mentioned to you. It is the greatest 
and most excellent of all Tirthas. 
78. 
Thereafter is Vighnesa Tirtha that removes all obstacles. 
Even one who has perfectly bathed then:in is not assailed by 
obstacles. 
79. 
Thereafter is excellent Tirtha of the saintly King 
Hariscandra. One who takes his holy bath there, never swerves 
from truth. 
80. 
The merit acquired in the Tirtha of Hari5candra, 0 
Vira, gives inexhaustible enjoyment in this world as well as the 
other. 
8 1 . Thereafter is Parvata Tirtha in the vicinity of Paravatesa. 
The holy bath therein whether on Parva Kala1 or otherwise, 
yields the benefit of all festive occasions. 
82. 
Kambalesvara Tirtha there eliminates all kinds of poi­
sons. A man who takes his holy ablution becomes an expert in 
musical lore. 
83. 
Thereafter is Sarasvata Tirtha that bestows all Lores. 
The Pitrs shall be present there along with the celestial sages 
and human beings (Pitrs of that category) . 
84. 
Uma Tirtha is there itself. It possesses all power. Merely 
by taking bath therein it will be conducive to the attainment 
of Uma's world. 
85. 
Beyond that is the most excellent Tirtha the name of 
which is Ma1_1ikarr_1ika. It is well-known in all the three worlds. 
It is capable of uplifting the three worlds. 
86. 
That is the same as Cakrapuᔻkari1_1i Tirtha made at the 
I. Paroakiila: The time at which the Moon at its conjunctions or opposition 
passes through the node (MW 609A) .

=== PAGE 344 ===

Skanda Puriir.ta 
outset by ViᕧI).U. Merely by hearing its name one is rid of all 
sins. 
87. The heaven-dwellers perform the Japa of Mat:J.ikart:J.ika in 
all the three Sandhyas (dawn, midday and dusk) . The utter­
ance of the name thereof is conducive to the great welfare of 
all men. 
88. 0 Vira, only they are blessed, they can be considered as 
persons of fulfilled tasks by whom Mat:J.ikart:J.ika is heard, seen 
and remembered. 
89. 
0 Vira, thrice a day I perform the Japa of those men 
of meritorious deeds who perform the Japa of Mat:J.ikart:J.ika in 
all the three worlds. 
90. 
If the five-syllabled great Mantra, Ma-I).i-kar-t:J.i-ka is uttered 
by anyone, it is as though he has performed many great Yajiias 
with a hundred thousand (gold coins) for Dakᕧil).a. 
9 1 . 0 Vira, if after reaching Mat:J.ikarl).ika I am worshipped 
by anyone, he is a man of meritorious deeds, by whom great 
gifts have been donated. 
92. 
If the ancestors have been propitiated by anyone by 
means of the waters of Mat:J.ikarl).ika, it is as though Sraddhas 
have been performed by him at Gaya with honey and milk 
puddings. 
93. 
Somapiinas ('Drinking Soma juice frequently') are char-
acterized by a return to this world. Of what avail is Somapiina 
(Drinking of Soma juice) to that man of purified intellect by 
whom the water of Mat:J.ikart:J.ika is drunk (as Mokᕧa is attained 
thereby) ? 
94. 
If the holy ablution is performed in Mat:J.ikart:J.ika it 
is as though they have taken baths in all the Tirthas again and 
again during the great Parva occasions. Similarly, they have 
had all the Avabhrtha baths. 
95. 
If Mal).ikarl).ika is adored with gems and flowers of 
gold, it is as though they have worshipped all the Suras be­
ginning with Brahma and ViᕧI).u by means of holy sacrifices. 
96. 
If Mat:J.ikart:J.ika is worshipped by anyone, it is as though 
I have been daily worshipped along with Uma after the Sambhavl 
Dlkᕧa (Initiation in the adoration of Sarilbhu) . 
97. 
If the glorious Mal).ikarl).ika has been faithfully served 
by anyone, it is as though austerities have been performed by 
him for a long time with withered leaves etc. (for diet) .

=== PAGE 345 ===

IV.ii.84.98-1 13 
335 
98-99. 
One may very well make plenty of gifts, one may 
perform many sacrifices and one may perform austerities in 
the forests for a long time. Still after enjoying heavenly opu­
lence one has to return to the earth. But if MaQ.ikarQ.ika, the 
charming Ti:rtha in Paiicakrosl (the holy spot extending to five 
Krosas) , in the extensive earth is resorted to, those devotees 
go away never to return (to Sam sara) . 
1 00. 
I think that this alone is the benefit of gifts, Vratas, 
sacrifices and austerities that MaQ.ikarQ.ika becomes accessible. 
1 0 1 . 
This glorious MaQ.ikarQ.ika is the Glory of Salvation 
itself directly. Even I do not know clearly the (entire) great­
ness of this MaQ.ikarQ.ika practically. 
1 02-105. To the south of MaQ.ikarQ.ika is the great Pasupata 
Ti:rtha; beyond it is the Ti:rtha called Rudravasa and thereafter 
is the great Visva Ti:rtha. Thereafter is the beautiful Mukti 
Tlrtha; then the excellent Avimukta, Taraka Tlrtha and Skanda 
Tlrtha. Beyond it is the Ti:rtha of I;>huQ.Qhi. Then there are the 
Tlrthas of Bhavanl, Isana, the excellent Jiiana Tlrtha, Nandi: 
Tlrtha, ViᕨQ.U Tlrtha and the Tlrtha of Pitamaha. This is the 
Nabhi Tlrtha and beyond it is Brahmanala. Then the Bhaglratha 
Tlrtha which has already been recounted to you. 
106. 
On the north-flowing celestial river there are many 
meritorious Tlrthas near Kasl but only a few have been men­
tioned by me. 
107. 
0 Prince, among them Paiicatlrthl (set of five Tlrthas) 
is exceedingly excellent. By the holy ablution therein a man 
can well forget further stay in a womb. 
1 08- 1 1 0 . The first one is the confluence of Asi (with 
Ganga) , the greates1 and the most excellent one among the 
Ti:rthas. Thereafter is the Tlrtha called Dasasvamedha which 
is resorted to by all the Ti:rthas. There is the Padodaka Tlrtha 
in the vicinity of Adikesava; then is the meritorious Paiicanada 
which removes mass of sins merely by the ablution. 0 highly 
excellent one, apart from these four Tlrthas the fifth one named 
MaQ.ikarQ.ika accords the purity of the mind and the 
limbs. 
1 1 1 . 
I take bath here always in the company of Uma during 
Parvan days (religious festivals) and also with Brahma, ViᔼQ.U, 
lndra and other Suras and sages. 
1 1 2-1 1 3. That is why this Gatha (verse current among the

=== PAGE 346 ===

336 
Skanda Purii:T}a 
folks) in accordance with the Vedas, is being sung always by 
those who reside in Nagaloka and also by the heaven-dwellers: 
'It is the truth. It is thᕩ truth. (I repeat) Again it is the truth. 
This is the truthful statement. There is no Tirtha on a par with 
MaQ.ikan:tika anywhere in the Cosmic Egg.' 
1 1 4. 
By taking the holy bath in Paiicatirthi a man ceases 
to take up the body consisting of five elements. Or he becomes 
Paiicasya (the five-countenanced Lord Visvesvara himself) . " 
1 1 5 . 
After granting to Vira 
these boons, Lord Hara 
vanished. That Vira adored Viresa and attained his desire. 
Skanda said: 
1 1 6. 0 Agastya, if anyone listens to this meritorious chapter 
on Tirthas, his sins become reduced even if they have been 
acquired in the course of hundreds of births. 
1 1 7. This narrative of Virdvara has already been told to 
you in the context of Tirthas. Hereafter I shall describe Kamda. 
CHAPTER EIGHTYFIVE 
Granting of Boons to Durviisas 
Skanda said: 
1 . 
I shall narrate unto you, 0 Agastya, the meritorious 
story in the manner recounted by Purari (Siva) to Parvati, the 
mother of the universe. 
2-3. Formerly Durvasas, a great ascetic, excessively reful­
gent and irascible, wandered over this earth consisting of oceans, 
mountains, forests, rivers, big lakes, villages, towns and cities. 
Ultimately he reached Anandakanana of Sarilbhu. 
4. 
On seeing the whole of the pleasnre-grove of Sarilbhu 
beautified with many palaces and consisting of many ponds 
and lakes, he became delighted. 
5. 
On seeing at every step the beautiful huts of the sages 
who had conquered the excessive fear of the god of Death, 
Durvasas became surprised.

=== PAGE 347 ===

IV.ii.85.6-18 
337 
6. On seeing the trees with blossoms pertammg to all the 
seasons, having plenty of shade and glossy tender sprouts, yielding 
excellent fruits and entwined by excellent creepers, the sage 
became pleased. 
7-1 1 . 
Durvasas was exceedingly delighted on seeing the 
excellent P<Hupata devotees whose limbs were all embellished 
with holy ash. Their heads were covered with matted hairs. A 
loin cloth alone constituted the robe of everyone of them. 
They were engrossed in meditating on Smarari (Siva) . Big 
bottle gourds were tucked in their armpits. The Huc;lutkara 
(Huc;l-like bellowing sound) produced by them was louder than 
the rumble of clouds. Their sole possessions were a KaraQ.c;la 
(cane-vessel for holding the Linga) , a staff and a drinking pot. 
In certain places, he saw the TridaQ.c;lins (Sannyasins having 
three staffs) devoid of possessions and contacts, not afraid of 
even Kala because they had sought refuge in Visvesa. In cer­
tain places he saw life-long celibates conversant with the mystic 
doctrines of the Vedas. On seeing the BrahmaQ.as in Kasi with 
hairs turned tawny because of their daily bath in Ganga, Durvasas 
rejoiced all the more. 
1 2. 
"In Kasl there is a unique sense of satisfaction in the 
domesticated animals, a special lustre in the animals of the 
forest such as the deer etc. and an excessive joy sᕪen in birds 
and other creatures not so very manifest elsewhere. 
1 3. This spot is the abode of excellent welfare. Where is 
such a spot available to the immortal ones in heaven? In the 
creatures of this place too, it increases the greatest pleasure. 
1 4 . 
Far superior are these animals that wander in Anandavana 
with permanent bliss, and not the Devas who resort to 
Nandanavana. 
15. Better to be a Mleccha (Barbarian) resident of Kasl with 
an auspicious future, than a Dikᔼita (initiated Vedic BrahmaQ.a) 
elsewhere, who does not merit salvation. 
1 6. 
The entire earth, the heavenly world and the world of 
serpents, do not attract my mind in the same way as this city 
of Visvesvara. 
1 7. Though I have been wandering all over the earth no­
where else did my mind gain steadfastness as it has here. 
18. 
In the entire Cosmic Egg, this must necessarily be the 
most beautiful city. " After eulogizing thus, Durvasas attained

=== PAGE 348 ===

338 
Skanda Purii:fJ.a 
some steadiness of the mind. 
19. Though that sage of excessive penance performed the 
austerities for a long time, he did not attain any fruit thereof. 
Then he got excessively angry. 
20. 
"Fie upon me, a defiled ascetic! Fie upon my penance 
which is difficult to be performed! Fie upon this holy spot of 
Sarhbhu that deceives all! 
2 1 . I shall do something to bring about such a state as no 
one gains salvation here." Saying thus he was about to curse. 
Then Siva laughed loudly. 
22. 
A Liriga appeared there and it became well-known as 
Prahasitesvara ('Lord of boisterous laugh') . On visiting this 
Liriga, men will attain delight at every step. 
23. 
The surprised Mahdita (Siva) said in his mind: 'I offer 
obeisance to ascetics like this again and again. 
24. These Brahmal).as became unduly indignant with the place 
where they perform penance, where they have built their hermitages 
for penance and where they have been established. 
25. 
If they do not get the least of what they have only just 
thought of, they are overwhelmed with anger that deprives 
them of the glory of austerities. 
26. 
Still ascetics should be honoured by those who desire 
their own welfare. Why mind this in regard to the ascetics 
whether they are hot-tempered or otherwise?' 
27. 
Even as Mahesana thought within himself thus, the fire 
due to the anger of the (sage) pervaded the entire firmament. 
28. 
Since the entire expanse of the sky was permeated by 
the masses of columns of smoke arising from the fire of his 
anger, the sky retains its great bluish colour even today. 
29. 
Then the attendants (of Siva) became agitated like the 
waters of the ocean at the time of the ultimate annihilation. 
They asked one another, "What! What is this! ! " 
30. 
Roaring and making gestures of threat and lifting their 
weapons in their hands, the Pramathas stood in readiness all­
round the abod·e of Sarhbhu. 
3 1 . 
"Who is Yama? Who is Kala? Who is Mrtyu (Death) ? 
Who is the Antaka (destroyer) ? Who is Vidhata (creator) ? 
Who are these Devas (like Indra) ? When ·we are angry, who 
can be our enemy? 
32. 
We shall drink fire like water. We shall turn all the

=== PAGE 349 ===

IV.ii.85.33-49 
339 
mountains into powder. We shall convert all the seven oceans 
into desert region. 
33. We shall pull up Patala or pull down heaven. We shall 
make a mouthful of the entire sky. 
34. 
We shall shatter the entire cosmos into pieces. We 
shall hurl Kala and Mrtyu against each other like palm fruits. 
35. 
Or we shall be swallowing the universe excluding the 
city of VaraiJ.asl where the creatures become liberated soon 
after death. 
36. 
Whence is this mass of smoke? Whence is this mass of 
flames? Who is deluded by arrogance and conceit and does 
not know Rudra, the conqueror of the god of Death?" 
37. Prattling and boasting thus, the attendants of Sarhbhu, 
the strikers of fear into even great terroᕫ, built a rampart that 
touched the sky. 
38-46. They split the fire of Pralaya (arising from the anger 
of Durvasas) in to many pieces as though they were rocky boulders. 
The following GaiJ.esanas unassailable to others like thunder­
bolt, checked even the movement of the wind in Kasl. They 
were: Nandin, NandiᔼeiJ.a, Somanandin, Mahodara, Mahahanu, 
Mahagrlva, Mahakala, Jitantaka, Mrtyuprakarhpana, Bhlma, 
GhaiJ.takariJ.a, Mahabala, Kl!obhaQ.a, DravaiJ.a, Jrrhbhin, Paiicasya, 
Paiicalocana, Dvisiras, Trisiras, Soma, Paiicahasta, Dasanana, 
CaQ<;la, Bhp'lgiriti, Tundin, PracaiJ.Qa, TaiJ.<;lavapriya, PiciQ<;lila, 
Sthulasiras, Sthulakesa, Gabhastiman, Kl!emaka, Kl!emadhanvan, 
Vlrabhadra, RaiJ.apriya, CaiJ.<;lapaiJ.i, SulapaiJ.i, PasapaiJ.i, K[sodara, 
Dlrghagrlva, Piil.gakᔼa, Piilgala, Piil.gamurdhaja, Bahunetra, 
LarhbakariJ.a, Kharva, Parvatavigraha, GokariJ.a, GajakariJ.a, 
Kokilakhya, Gajanana, I (i.e. Skanda) , Naigameya, Vikatasya, 
Agahasaka, S!rapaiJ.i, Sivarava, VaiQika, VeiJ.uvadana, Duradharᔼa, 
DuQ.saha, Garjana and Riputarjana. 
47. 
When those warriors were agitated, all the three worlds 
shook and became bewildered by the flames of the anger of 
Durvasas. 
48. 
The Sun and the Moon had their lustre dimmed by 
the refulgence of the GaiJ.as and so (out of pity) were permit­
ted by them to enter Kasl. 
49. 
Umadhava (Siva) checked the army of Pramathas, which 
was highly perturbed (saying) , "This sage, the son of Anasuya, 
is a part of mine."

=== PAGE 350 ===

340 
Skanda PuriirJa 
50. 
Thereafter Sarhbhu of great refulgence, the storehouse 
of compassion, came out of the Liriga of Durvasas thereby 
saving the city from the curse of the sage. 
5 1 . 
"Let not the curse of the sage be an obM.acle to the 
people's salvatjon at K;Hi. " Pitying thus the Lord became directly 
visible to him. 
52. 
He said: "I am pleased, 0 sage of excessive wrath; 
unhesitatingly choose what boon is to be given to you by me?" 
53-58. 
Thereupon, 0 Agastya, the sage who had raised 
his hand for cursing became ashamed. He said, "Becoming 
blind with anger, I of an evil intellect, have committed a serious 
crime." He repeatedly said, "Fie upon me who have been over­
povered by anger! Fie upon me who attempted mentally to 
curse Kasl that bestows freedom from fear on all the three 
worlds! 
Kasl alone is the means of salvation to all those who arc 
immersed in the ocean of misery, who are extremely distressed 
due to the frequent coming and going (i.e. transmigration) 
and whose necks have been fettered by Karmas. 
_ 
To all the creatures, Kasl alone is the mother who accords 
the milk of great nectar and who leads them to the highest 
position. There can be no comparison between Kasl and a 
mother. The mother conceives one in the womb and Kasl 
releases one from the womb. 
If anyone also curses Kasl of such excellence, he himself 
will get cursed; but Kasl will never. " 
59. 
On hearing these words of Durvasas, the Three-eyed 
Lord became exceedingly delighted with the added pleasure 
due to his praise of Ka.Si. 
60. 
The intelligent one who eulogizes Kasl, he who keeps 
Kasl in his heart (is blessed, for) a fierce penance has been 
performed by him, a crore of sacrifices have been performed 
by him (by such a person) . 
6 1 . If the two syllables "Ka-sl" find a place at the tip of the 
tongue of anyone, he is of highly gifted intellect. He will never 
be conceived in a womb. 
62. 
One who utters the two-syllabled Mantra, namely Kasl, 
in the morning, conquers both the worlds and attains the 
position beyond all the worlds. 
63. 0 son of Anasuya, what knowledge you have gained due

=== PAGE 351 ===

IV.ii.85.64-78 
341 
to the merit of eulogizing Kasi now has not been acquired 
before (by you) by means of penance. 
64. 
0 sage, a DikȺita who eulogizes and adores me is not 
as dearly loved (by me) as one who is fond of eulogizing Kasi. 
This is the truth. 
65. 
Through the eulogy of Kasi I derive a pleasure the like 
of which I never get through religious gifts, sacrifices or penance 
(performed by devotees) . 
66. 
If Anandakanana is eulogized with genuinely sincere 
mind by anyone, it is as though I have been perfectly eulo­
gized with all the Suktas occurring in the Srutis. 
67. 
0 ascetic, 0 son of Anasuya, all your desires shall be 
fulfilled; you will have the greatest knowledge that is destruc-
tive of the great delusion (S::unsara) . 
• 
68. Mention, 0 sinless one, what other boon is to be granted 
to you, because sages like you alone are worthy of the praise 
of good men. 
69. 
It is only one who is competent and capable by the 
performance of penance who can become angry. What can 
one who is incompetent do, even when he is angry? He is like 
one who is (destitute, and) bereft of means of sustenance . " 
70. 
On hearing this, Durvasas eulogized the Lord clad in 
elephant hide. He experienced horripilation due to excess of 
delight and prayed for a boon. 
Durviisas said: 
71-73. 
0 Lord of Devas, 0 Lord of the universe, 0 Sailkara, 
the merciful, 0 destroyer of great sins and crimes, 0 enemy 
of Andhaka, 0 destroyer of Smara, 0 Mrtyuiijaya ( 'conqueror 
of death') , 0 Ugra, 0 Lord of goblins, 0 Lord of MrQani, 0 
three-eyed Lord, if the Lord is pleased with me, if a boon is 
to be granted to me, let this Liilga be called Kamada here. 0 
DhurjaȻi, let this pond of mine be called KamakUQ.Qa. 
Devadeva (Siva) said: 
74-78. 
Let it be so, 0 sage of great splendour, 0 exces-
sively irascible one; this Liilga named Durvasesvara installed by 
you will be Kameiivara (by name) bestowing desired things on 
men. An intelligent man who takes his holy bath in KamakUQ.Qa

=== PAGE 352 ===

342 
Skanda Puriir.ta 
that has been your resort, at Prado® a (dusk) when Trayodasi 
(thirteenth day) coincides with Saturday and visits Kamda Liilga 
installed by you, will never be subjected to the tortures of Varna 
due to the fault effected by lust. Many sins committed in the 
course of many births become destroyed instantly, due to the 
holy dip in the waters of Kama Tirtha. By resorting to Kamesvara 
desires will become fulfilled. 
79-8 1 . 
After granting these boons, Sarilbhu merged into 
that Liilga. 
Skanda said: 
By propitiating that LiiJ.ga all the desires were attained by 
Durvasas. Hence Kamesvara should be carefully adored in Kasi 
always by those who have great desires. For the quelling of great 
sins they should take the holy bath in Kamakm:H;la. A merito­
rious man who reads this Kamesvarakhyana and the sensible one 
who listens to it, all of them become free from sins. 
CHAPTER EIGHTYSIX 
Manifestation of Visvakarme5a 
Piirvatz said: 
1 . 
The Visvakarmesvara Liilga in Kasi is very well-known. 
0 Lord of Devas, narrate to me the origin of that Liilga. 
Devadeva said: 
2. 
Listen, 0 goddess, I shall narrate the story that de-
stroys sins, the charming story of how Visvakarmesa Liilga 
manifested itself. 
3. 
Formerly there was Visvakarman who was another physical 
form of Brahma (the Creator) . He was the son of Patriarch 
TvaȺ!r- He was (indeed) clever in all arts and crafts. 
4. 
After being invested with the sacred thread, the boy 
was living in the abode of his preceptor (for education) . He

=== PAGE 353 ===

IV.ii.86.5-25 
343 
had his daily meal out of the alms of cooked rice he got. He 
served his preceptor duly. 
5-7. Once, at the advent of rainy season, his preceptor said 
to him; "Make a hut for me where the shower of rain will not 
torment us. It should never collapse nor should it become old 
and dilapidated. " He was addressed thus by the wife of the 
preceptor: "0 son of Tvaᔻn·, make a bodice for me befitting 
my limbs. It should neither be too tight nor too loose. It 
should be made of bark and not of cotton. Make it carefully 
so that it will always remain bright. " 
8-9. He was commanded by the son of the preceptor: "Make 
a pair of sandals for me, on wearing which my feet can avert 
contamination with mud. It should not have any leather strap­
ping. Even when I run it should be comfortable. With the 
sandals on, I should be able to wade through water as quickly 
as on dry ground. " 
1 0-15. 
The daughter of the preceptor told him: "0 son 
of Tvaᔻᕬf, you will, with your own hands, make a pair of gold 
earrings for me. Give me fanciful toys worthy of girls. These 
also should be made by you yourself out of ivory. 0 intelligent 
one, make domestic instruments too such as mortar and pestle; 
make them unbreakable. 0 excellent one, make foot-stools 
which will always be bright even without being washed. Also 
cooking pans and pots. 0 son of Tvaᔻᔽf, instruct me in the art 
of cooking too, so that the fingers do not get burned but the 
dishes get cooked properly. Also make a single-pillared house, 
out of a single piece of wood, 0 son of Tvaᔻᔽf, which I can 
hold (like an umbrella) wherever I wish. " 
1 6. 
Those who studied along with him, those who were senior 
to him, all desired that something should be made by him. 
17. 0 Daughter of the Mountain, he promised everyone: 
"Let it be so" but, afraid and worried, he fled and entered into 
the middle of a forest. 
18. He did not know how to make any of the things which 
had been promised by him. He had decisively committed himself 
by assuring everyone that he would do everything. 
19-25. 
That son of TvaHr cogitated thus: 'What shall I do? 
Where shall I go? I am in the middle of the forest. Who will 
help me and guide my intellect? Whom shall I seek refuge in? 
The foolish fellow who undertakes to do something at the

=== PAGE 354 ===

344 
Skanda Purii:FJa 
instance of the preceptor, his wife or his child but does not 
fulfil the same certainly falls into hell. The sole duty of a 
religious student is the ministration of service to the precep­
tor. How can I discharge my duty without carrying out his 
behest? By fulfilling the tasks entrusted by preceptors and 
elders, one can realize all one's desires, not otherwise. Hence 
his (Preceptor's) behest should be fulfilled. Staying here in 
this forest, how can I hope to carry out their instructions? 
Who will help me here? I am weak and deficient in intellect. 
Leave aside the case of the preceptor. Even in the case of 
another of inferior status, if one assents to something but does 
not carry it out, he incurs downfall. Ignorant and having none 
to assist, how am I going to do all these things undertaken out 
of fear for them? Obeisance to you, 0 inevitable fate! ' 
26. 
While that son of Tvaᔻtr, held up in the middle of the 
forest, was thinking thus, a sage was seen by him who had 
come there then only. 
27-31 . 
Mter bowing down to the ascetic seen in the for­
est, he said to him: "0 esteemed Sir, who may you be? You 
have excessively pleased my mind. My body has been scorched 
due to feverish anxiety; but at your sight, it has become in­
stantly cool as though it has dived through a mass of snow­
flakes. Has my previous Karma assumed your form of an as­
cetic and come here? Or are you Siva himself, the ocean of 
compassion manifested before me? Whoever you may be, I 
offer obeisance to you. Instruct me as to how I shall be com­
petent to carry out· the task entrusted by the preceptor, his 
wife and his children? Tell me the procedure thereof. Give me 
intellectual assistance. You have come as a kinsman in this 
isolated place." 
32. 
On being requested thus in the forest by the religious 
student, the ascetic with his heart full of compassion advised 
him accordingly. 
33. 
If a person approached as an authority on being asked 
for guidance misguides one, he is sure to fall into a terrible 
hell, to stay there till all the living beings are annihilated. 
The Ascetic said: 
34. 
0 Brahmacari, I shall tell you. Listen. Is this any 
mysterious thing? Due to the blessings of Visveiia, even Brahma

=== PAGE 355 ===

IV.ii.86.35-46 
345 
has become clever in the act of creation. 
35. 
If you, 0 son of TvaHr. propitiate the omniscient Lord 
Siva at Kasl, your name Visvakarman ('ene who performs all 
tasks') shall be truly meaningful. 
36. With the blessings of Visvesa in Kasl, no desire shall 
be unattainable, even if it be for salvation; it is easily obtained. 
Mokᔻa too diffficult to achieve, is easy to people casting off 
their bodies here. 
37. It is due to the great favour of Visvesa that the ability 
to create things was obtained by Brahma and the capacity to 
protect the creation by ViᔻIJ.U. 
38. 
If you desire the realization of your wishes, 0 boy, go 
to the abode of Visvesvara presided over b)' the glory of ul­
timate salvation. 
39. 
Indeed Sarilbhu is the bestower of everything. On being 
requested for milk only by Upamanyu he granted him the 
entire ocean of milk. 
40. 
To a person staying in Anandavana, mass of piety is 
attainable at every step. In fact, what is it that cannot be obtained 
in Sarilbhu's Anandakanana and who is it by whom it is not 
obtained? 
4 1 . Who will not resort to that Kasl where masses of great 
sins become reduced merely by the touch of the celestial river. 
42. 
Even through crores of sacrifices such a mass of piety 
is not obtained, as is obtained at every step, while walking 
through the streets of VaraiJ.asl. 
43. 
If there is any desire for piety, wealth, love and salva­
tion, go then to VaraiJ.asl, go then to the sanctifier of all the 
three worlds. 
44. 
Certainly men will attain the fruits of all desires, when 
Sarva, Vi8vesvara, the bestower of everything, is resorted to in 
Kasl. 
45. 
On hearing the utterance of the ascetic thus, the son 
of Tvaᔻtr became highly pleased. He asked the ascetic himself 
the means of reaching KasL 
Tva˘tr said: 
46. 0 excellent one among ascetics, where is that Anandavana 
of Sarilbhu where nothing existing in all the three worlds becomes

=== PAGE 356 ===

346 
Skanda Purii?Ja 
difficult to get for Sadhakas (Aspirants) ? 
47. 
0 sage, is it in heaven, or in the mortal world or in 
the abode of Bali? Where is that Anandavana where 
there 
exist the Glory of Bliss? 
48. 
It is the place where Lord Visvesvara, the helmsman 
of all the worlds, imparts the Tarakajr"lana (knowledge) whereby 
the devotees become identical with him. 
49. It is the place where the Glory of Salvation is invariably 
easy of access to a person traversing Anandavana. What to 
speak of lesser desires! 
50-54. 
Kindly tell me, who will take me there to the city 
of Sarilbhu? How should I go? 
On hearing these words full of faith, that ascetic said: "Come. 
I shall take you. I too am desirous of going there. After obtaining 
human birth, if K:HI is not resorted to, where is human birth 
once again? Where is Kasl, the cause of welfare, the destroyer 
of the bondage of Karmas? If the human life is wasted by 
being bereft of the access to Kasl, the future and the whole 
span of life, everything is gone waste. Hence in order to make 
this highly fickle human life fruitful, I will go to Kasl. Come 
on, after setting aside Maya (Delusion) ." On hearing this, the 
son of Tvaᔻᔽr reached the city of Visvesvara accompanied by 
that highly sympathetic sage. He regained the satisfaction of 
mind. 
55-59. 
After taking him as far as Kasl, 0 Pot-born One, 
the ascetic went somewhere unexpectedly. Then the son of 
Tvaᔻᔽr thought thus, 'Indeed it is Visvesa himself, the bestower 
of anything thought of on everyone. Though he is far off, he 
is present in the vicinity of those who steadily persist in the 
path of the good. If the Three-eyed Lord casts the benign 
glance on anyone, he is drawn very near to himself despite his 
being far off and he himself imparts instruction regarding the 
right path. Where was I, a lonely boy in the forest with mind 
bewildered due to anxiety? Where was that ascetic who advised 
me properly and brought me here? (A great disparity, indeed! ) 
This is the playful pastime of this Three-eyed Lord whose devotee 
has nothing difficult to get. Where am I? Where is Kasika? 
(What a great difference between us! ) 
60. 
Sarilbhu has not been propitiated by me anywhere in

=== PAGE 357 ===

IV.ii.86.61-73 
347 
the previous birth. This is definitely known as an inference 
from (my being) an embodied being. 
6 1 . In this birth too, it is obvious that he has not been 
propitiated because I am only a boy. This is directly observed. 
How does he have the inclination to bless? 
62. Yes, it is known! my devotion to the preceptor is the 
cause of propitiation of Sarhbhu; it is due to that that I have 
been blessed by the compassionate Visve§a. 
63. 
Or the Three-eyed Lord does not depend upon a specific 
cause like other gods. He blesses even the poorest man and 
the cause thereof is compassion alone. 
64. If he has no pity on me, what accounts for my contact 
with the ascetic? In the form (of that ascetic) Sarhbhu himself 
has certainly brought me here. 
• 
65. 
Neither charity nor performance of sacrifices, neither 
austerities nor Vratas can be the cause of Sarhbhu's pleasure. 
The cause thereof is his grace alone. 
66. When one does not leave off the path ordained in the 
Srutis and traversed by the good, this Lord Visvesvara does 
have the greatest pity. ' 
67. After invoking the sympathy of Sarhbhu, the son of Tvaᕞtr. 
with real purity, installed the Liriga of Isa and adored it with 
a steady mind. 
68. 
He used to take bath everyday and worship !sana after 
bringing from the forest a huge collection of flowers blossom­
ing in the changing seasons. He sustained himself by eating 
bulbous roots, roots and fruits alone. 
69. 
When the son of Tvaᔻtr spent three years thus with the 
mind directed towards the propitiation of the Liriga, the Lord, 
the storehouse of mercy, became pleased with him. 
70-72. 
Coming out of that Liriga itself, Bhava said: "0 son 
of Tvaᔻtr. choose a boon, 0 boy who have determined in mind 
to work for the sake of the preceptor. I am pleased with your 
steady devotion. You will have the capacity to make the things 
in accordance with the request made by the preceptor, his wife 
and the two children of his. 
73. 
0 son of Tvaᔻtr. I shall grant you other boons too. I 
am satisfied with your adoration. 0 highly blessed one, listen 
to them. (It is due to the power) of this Liriga of wonderful 
glory.

=== PAGE 358 ===

348 
Skanda Purii'T}a 
74-78. 
Like another Brahma (the Creator) you will know 
how to make things out of gold and other metals, wood, stones, 
gems, jewels, flowers, clothes, camphor and other scented things, 
water, bulbous roots, fruits, skins and peels of things-nay of 
all things. Whatever people may be interested in, houses, temples 
etc. and whatever may be the mode of liking, you will be able 
to carry out the task to their full satisfaction. You will know 
how to create things, the mode of making the dresses of all 
kinds, varieties of dishes from lentils, all types of fine arts, the 
triple symphony etc. 
79-80. 
Different kinds of machines and musical instru­
ments, different types of weaponry, arrangement of artificial 
ponds and reservoirs of water, building of forts-you will know 
how to create all these in such a manner as to excel others. 
Due to my boon, you will master all the arts. 
8 1-83. 
All (tricks of) jugglery and magical arts will be 
known to you. You will be clever in all tasks. Your intellect will 
be the most excellent one. Due to my boon, you will under­
stand the mental predilections of everyone. Why say more? 
Whether in heaven or in Patala or here, you will know every­
thing supernatural and superb. 
84. 
0 sinless one, your name shall be Visvakarman be­
cause you will be knowing all the activities of all the worlds 
and of everyone. 
85. 
What other boon should be given to you? Request for 
it quickly. There is nothing that cannot be given to you since 
you have been engaged in the adoration of the Liil.ga. 
86. Desired things should be granted even to that devotee of 
excellent mind who worships the Liil.ga elsewhere. All ᖅhe more 
so in the case of one who worships the Liil.ga especially in .Ka.Si. 
87. He by whom a Liil.ga has been installed in Kasi, has 
been adored in Kasi and has been eulogized in Kasi, is a 
mirror unto my form. 
88. You are the bright and clear mirror of my three-eyed 
form, because you have adored the Liil.ga in Kasi. 0 son of 
Tval?tf, 0 performer of religious vows, choose the boon. 
89. 
He who setting me aside worships another deity in 
.K;iSi, my capital city, is a poor wretch, deficient in intellect, 
deprived of (good things) and devoid of salvation. He has to 
be satisfied with lesser things.

=== PAGE 359 ===

IV.ii.86.90-102 
349 
90. 
Hence here in Anandavana, I am to be worshipped by 
those who desire salvation, by Brahma, ViQu, Moon and Indra. 
No one else is adored here. 
9 1 . Just as you have come to Anandavana and have wor­
shipped me, so also other persons of meritorious deeds have 
worshipped and attained me. 
92. 
You are to be blessed completely. Hence choose a boon 
that is rare and know that it is already granted. Oh, speak out; 
do not delay. " 
Visvakarman said: 
93. 0 Saiikara, though this Linga has been installed by me, 
ignorant that I am, yet let others also he the recipients of 
excellent knowledge by propitiating it. 
94. 
0 Lord, you have to be requested for another thing 
too and you will grant it. When will Your Revered Lordship 
make me build your palace? 
Devadeva said: 
95. 
Let what you said be so. Those who worship your Linga 
shall become the recipients of excellent knowledge and well­
initiated in the process of salvation. 
96. 
When Divodasa becomes the king due to the boon of 
Vidhi, then at my instance he will make you build my palace. 
97-98. 
KaSI has been renovated and colonized by that king. 
Due to GaQda's Maya, he will become disgusted with kingdom. 
At the advice of ViQU, he will seek refuge in me. Abandoning 
the glory of royal bliss, which is fickle, he has attained (will 
attain) the glory of salvation here. 
99. 0 ViSvakannan, go ahead. Endeavour to fulfil the command 
of the preceptor, since those who devoutly serve their precep­
tors are my devotees. Thee is no doubt in it. 
1 00. 
Those who dishonour their preceptor, are worthy of 
being dishonoured by me. Hence do what is advised by the 
preceptor. That should be your desire. 
1 0 1 . 
Thereafter you will come to stay with me-(you) a 
sanctified soul carrying out what is beneficial to the Devas till 
you finally attain salvation. 
1 02. 
Here, in 
your Linga, I shall abide forever as the

=== PAGE 360 ===

350 
Skanda Purii:r}a 
bestower of their desire. The Glory of Salvation is not far from 
the devotees of this Liilga. 
1 03. 
Those who adore your Liilga which is to the north of 
Ail.garda, will attain at every step the fulfilment of their desires. 
1 04. 
Mter saying thus the Lord vanished. The son of Tva11tr 
went back to his preceptor. Mter carrying out many things 
desired by the preceptor, he returned to his house. 
1 05. 
At his home too, he made his parents contented through 
his activity. Mter fulfilling properly their behests as declared 
by them, he came back to Kasl. 
1 06. 
The son of Tvalitf is eagerly attached to the propitia­
tion of his own Liilga. That sensible devotee does not leave 
off Kasi: till today. He is continuing the activities pleasing to 
all the Devas. 
lsvara said: 
1 07. 
0 goddess, 0 daughter of the Lord of Mountains, all 
those Liilgas in KaSi: efficacious in causing salvation and specifically 
asked by you, have been described by me to you. 
1 08-1 1 0. 
They are: the Liilga named Orilkara, Lord 
TriviHapa, Mahadeva, Krttivasas, Ratnda, Candra, Kedara, 
Dharmda, Viresvara, Kamda, Visvakarmda and MaQ.ikarr.li:Svara, 
that which is worthy of my adoration named Avimukta, then 
0 goddess, that which has my name i.e. Visvanatha which is 
well-known in the universe and which accords happiness to the 
whole universe. 
1 1 1 . 
If after reaching Avimukta, Visvdvara is worshipped 
by 11nyone, he does not take birth again in the course of 
hundreds of crores of Kalpas. 
1 1 2. 
Yatis (mendicants) ofwell-controlled souls are allowed 
free movement for eight months. It is not desirable for them 
to stay in a place for a whole year, but only four months are 
enjoined. 
1 1 3. 
In the case of those who have entered Avimukta free 
movement is not proper. Salvation is undoubted here. Hence, 
Kasika should not be abandoned. 
1 1 4. 
One should not abandon Anandavana and go to a 
penance-grove elsewhere, since, with my support, penance, Yoga

=== PAGE 361 ===

IV.ii.86. 1 15-125 
351 
and salvation-all belong to this place only. 
1 15. 
Out of compassion for all creatures, this holy spot has 
been created by me. In this holy spot, all those who are desirous 
of Siddhi, do accomplish it. 
1 16. 
On merely seeing Anandavana all the sins of the past 
and present committed knowingly or unwittingly become 
destroyed. 
1 1 7-1 1 8. It is easily obtained in Kasi: whatever one gets by 
means of great strain in practising severe austerities, by means 
of great Danas (gifts) , great Vratas, observances and restraints, 
great sacrifices, Yogic practices, repeated studies of the Vedanta 
Sastras and resorting to all the Upaniᔻads. 
1 19. 
Living beings wander about after being fettered by 
the cords of Karma, unless and until they forsake their bodies 
in the abode of Visvesvara. 
1 20. 
0 goddess, I sportingly grant unto even lower non­
human beings in Kasi: in the end that place where even Yajiiikas 
(performers of sacrifices) do not go. 
1 2 1 . All living beings having their residence i n this holy 
spot of salvation, dying in due course, do attain the greatest 
goal. 
1 22. 
Even a person attracted by worldly pleasures, even 
one who has no interest in piety, casting off the body here in 
due course, does not reenter the world. 
1 23-1 25. In Varal).asi: one gets every moment a crore times 
more the benefit obtained in Prayaga, 0 goddess, by taking 
the holy dip in the morning in the month of Magha. 
The greatness of this holy spot is something beyond the 
pale of words. Only a few parts have been mentioned by me 
out of love for you. 
By listening to the narratives of the fourteen Lirigas, an 
excellent man attains excellent respect and adoration in the 
fourteen (i.e. all) worlds.

=== PAGE 362 ===

352 
Skanda Pura'T}-a 
CHAPTER EIGHTYSEVEN 
Dak$a 's Sacrifice 
Agastya said: 
1-5. 0 Six-faced Son of the omniscient Lord Siva, 0 Lord 
proficient in everything, I have become exceedingly pleased 
on hearing the manifestation of these Liilgas that accord salvation. 
I am now on a par with the unaging Deva after drinking 
the nectar. Through the Liilgas, the chief of which is Orilkara, 
this Anandakanana generates only bliss even to sinners. I have 
obtained the greatest bliss on listening to this narration of the 
Liilgas. 
I have become a living liberated soul after listening to the 
truth about the holy spot. 0 Skanda, narrate the details of the 
fourteen Liilgas beginning with Dakᔻesvara, which you have 
enumerated. Speak out fully their efficacy. 
Dakᔻa was a person who censured the Lord in the assembly 
of Devas. How did he instal the miraculous Liilga of the Lord? 
6. On hearing this utterance of the Pot-born One, 0 Suta, 
the Peacock-vehicles Lord narrated the origin of Dakᔻa. 
Skanda said: 
7-8. Listen, ·o sage, I shall narrate the story that destroy sins. 
Dakᔻa went to Kasi for performing the Purascara'T}-a rites when 
urged by the Self-born Lord (Brahma) for expiation. He was 
ugly-countenanced with a face resembling a goat and he had 
been refused by Dadhici. 
9. Once ViᔻQ.u went to Kailasa for the purpose of serving 
the Moon-crested Lord of Devas. He was followed by the Lotus­
born Lord. 
1 0-1 2. 
There were present the Guardians of the world 
beginning with "Indra, Visvedevas, group of Maruts, Adityas, 
Vasus, Rudras, s·adhyas, Vidyadharas, serpents, sages, celestial 
damsels, Yakᔻas, Gandharvas, Siddhas and CaraQ.as. The Lord 
of the chiefs of Devas was bowed down to by them and they 
experienced horripilation due to the excess of joy. He was 
eulogized through many songs of prayer. They were duly received

=== PAGE 363 ===

IV.ii.87. 13-26 
353 
by Sambhu. With their eyes revetted to his face, they occupied 
their respective rows of seats. 
13. When all were seated, Viᔻᔽarasravas (Viᔻ:Q.U) was duly 
honoured by Sambhu by grasping his hand and eagerly asked 
thus: 
1 4-19. 
"0 Hari marked with the Srivatsa, 0 destroyer of 
the race of demons like a forest fire burning the trees, I hope, 
your ability to protect the three worlds is unobstructed and 
undiminished. I hope, you adequately chastise the wicked Ditijas 
and Danujas in battlefield. Do you, like me, honour Brahma:Q.as 
even if they are angry? I hope, the cows are free from harass­
ment all over the earth. I hope, women retain their glorious 
splendour and the vow of chastity and fidelity to their hus­
bands. I hope, Yajiias are performed in• accordance with in­
junctions on the earth with due offering of monetary gifts. I 
hope, the penance of the ascetics is always free from moles­
tation. I hope, the excellent Brahma:Q.as study and recite with­
out obstacles all the Vedas together with their Ailgas (ancillaries) . 
0 Kesava, do the kings protect the subjects like you? I hope, 
the four castes and stages of life scrupulously adhere to their 
respective duties with delighted minds and sense-organs." 
20-26. 
Mter asking thus the delighted Lord of Vaiku:Q.ᔽha, 
Dhurjaᕭ (Siva) asked Brahma too: "I hope, your spiritual splendour 
flourishes. 0 Vidhi, I hope, truth does not slip in the pavilion 
of the three worlds; hindrance to pilgrimage is not brought 
about by anyone anywhere. I hope, Indra and other Suras 
administer their own respective realms complacently on being 
well-protected by the brawny arms of Viᔻ:Q.U. " The Lord thus 
asked everyone of them who evinced deep respect and esteem. 
Mter asking them the purpose of their visit, the Lord met 
their desires duly and discharged them. Thereafter he entered 
his palace as the Devas happily returned to their respective 
abodes. 
Half way during his return journey Dakᔻa. the father of Sati, 
began to ponder very worriedly. He had been honoured (by 
the Lord) on the same level as the other gods without any 
preferential treatment. He was extremely agitated in his mind 
like the ocean when churned with Mandara mountain. He said 
thus to himself blinded by the flurry of great anger: 
[ Censuring Siva ( double meaning with implied eulogy) ]

=== PAGE 364 ===

354 
Skanda PuriirJ.a 
27. 
'He has become highly arrogant after getting my daughter 
Sati. He does not belong to anyone and no one belongs to 
him anywhere. 
28. 
Does he come under anyone's 
control? What is his 
Gotra? What is his native land? What is his nature? What is 
his job of sustenance? What is his conduct of life? He eats 
poison. His vehicle is a bull. 
29. 
Generally he is not an ascetic. Where is penance? Where 
is the taking up of weapons? He cannot be considered one 
among the householders, because his place of residence is 
cremation ground. 
30. 
He is not a religious student with a vow of celibacy, 
because his status is that of a wedded man. How can he be 
a forest-dweller, because he is deluded by the maddening influence 
of Lordship and prosperity. 
3 1 . 
He cannot be a BrahmaQ.a, because the Veda does not 
know him. In view of his wielding weapons and vehicles per­
haps he may be a Ʒatriya. But he is not one. 
32. 
A Ʒatriya is one who protects others from injury and 
loss. How is it relevant in the case of this one who is fond of 
Pralaya (Annihilation) ? He is also not a Vaisya, because he is 
perpetually functioning like a moneyless one. 
33. 
He cannot be a Sudra, because he flaunts his sacred 
thread of serpents. Thus he is beyond the Varr:tas and Asramas. 
Who is he? He cannot be decisively proclaimed. 
34. 
Everyone is known through his Prakrti (Nature) . But 
this Sthar:tu (Siva, a post) is devoid of Prakrti. Mostly he is not 
a male because of his semi-feminine body. 
35. 
He is not a female as well, because of the moustache 
on his face. He is not at all a eunuch because his Liriga is 
adored. 
36. 
He is not a boy because he has seen and been in many 
years. He is sung about as Ugra (fierce) , an old one without 
beginning. 
37. 
Hence youth cannot certainly be expected as possible 
in him, the 
ancient one. He is not an old one, because he 
is devoid of senility and death. 
38. 
In the end he annihilates Brahma etc. Still he is not 
a sinner. There is not even a trace of PuQ.ya (merit) in him 
because he cut off one oT Brahma's heads angrily.

=== PAGE 365 ===

IV.ii.87.39-57 
355 
39. 
Where can be cleanliness in him who is embellished with 
bones and bereft of clothes? Of what use is uttering too much? 
Nothing about his activities is known. 
40. 
The height of impudence seen in this person of matted 
hairs is surprising. He did not get up even after seeing me, 
his father-in-law and senior. 
41 . 
Persons not disciplined by mothers and fathers will 
certainly be like this, devoid of nobility and attributes, uncon­
trolled and negligent of rites. 
42. 
Self-willed in their movements, unguided and conceited 
in every respect, not possessing anything, they consider them­
selves lords. 
43. 
This is the nature of all sons-in-law. Acquiring some 
power and pelf, mostly they become arrogant undoubtedly. 
44. 
The Moon too, much in love with Rohii).I became ar­
rogant. Not affectionate towards Krttika and other stars he was 
cursed to become a victim of pulmonary consumption. 
45-46a. I shall extirpate this arrogance of the Trident-bearing 
One entirely. Just as I have been insulted by him, when I went 
to his house, so also I shall spoil his honour completely. ' 
46b-50. Mter thinking and deciding thus in various ways, 
Patriarch DakTa went home and summoned all the Devas including 
Indra. "I am desirous of performing a sacrifice and you all will 
assist me in performing it. May all of you quickly bring the 
requisite things soon. " He then went to Svetadvlpa and made 
the Discus-bearing Lord, Acyuta, the UpadraTta (main observer) 
of the great sacrifice and YajiiapuruTa (the person presiding 
over the Yajiia) . All the sages, the expounders of Vedas, became 
his Rtviks. Then began the great sacrifice of DakTa. On seeing 
the groups of the Devas in that great sacrifice of DakTa without 
Siva, Brahma went home under some pretext. 
5 1 -57. 
Dadhlci saw the residents of all the three worlds 
present at the sacrifice of DakTa except Satl and Isvara. They 
had received duly all the honours along with garments and 
ornaments. Desiring that DakTa should have an auspicious result, 
he said thus: 
Dadhici said: 
0 DakTa, 0 skilful Patriarch, having the form of the creator 
himself! It is certain that nowhere has anyone the same capa-

=== PAGE 366 ===

356 
Skanda Purii7J.a 
city as you have. 0 highly intelligent one, arrangement and 
collection of the requisites of a Yajiia seen by us here in your 
case, have not been recently seen anywhere else. (They say) 
A Kratu cannot be (easily) performed. There is no enemy on 
a par with Kratu (if not performed properly) . If it has to be 
performed it should be performed only when the wealth (one 
can command) is like this. Fire-god himself is directly present 
in the sacrificial pit. Indra and other deities are also directly 
present. All the Mantras are also directly invoked. The Yajiiapuruᔻa 
(Viᔻ.Q.U) is also directly present. The preceptor of gods himself 
is the presiding priest here. Brahma himself is present and 
Bhrgu, well-versed in Karmakii7J.4a, is also here. 
58. 
This Puᔻan, this Bhaga, this Goddess Sarasvatl, all these 
Guardians of the Quarters-they themselves accord protection 
here. 
59-62. 
You have undergone the auspicious init:ation ac­
companied by Her Ladyship Satarupa. This Dharma, your son­
in-law, is here along with his ten wives and he himself super­
vises all the pious rites carefully. This lord of medicinal herbs, 
the Moon, the best among your sons-in-law, works on your 
behalf along with his twenty-seven wives. The highly sensible 
Dvijaraja (Moon) supplies all the medicinal herbs. Marlca Kasyapa 
initiated into the Rajasuya sacrifice, gifting away all the three 
worlds as Dakᔻi.Q.ii, the foremost among the patriarchs, works 
on your behalf along with his thirteen wives. 
63-65. 
The divine cow Kiimadhenu yields the Havis (sac­
rificial oblation) . The divine tree Kalpavrkᔻa yields sacrificial 
twigs and the Darbha grass. Visvakarma makes all the wooden 
utensils, the carts, the pavilion etc., as well as the ornaments 
intended for the guests and the Rtviks. The eight Vasus give 
(distribute) the wealth and garments. Lakᔻml herself adorns 
the Suvasinls (noble ladies) present here. 
66. 
0 Dakᔻa. as I see all round, all things are conducive 
to my happiness. But one thing, the very thing you have for­
gotten, makes me miserable. 
67. Just as the body bereft of the soul does not look beau­
tiful even when it is embellished, so also the Yajiia does not 
shine without Isvara (Siva) . It appears like a cremation ground. " 
68. 
On hearing these words of Dadhlci, Dakᔻa. the Patri-

=== PAGE 367 ===

IV.ii.87.69-80 
357 
arch, flared up with anger very much like fire when ghee is 
poured in it. 
69. 
He was seen before very much delighted with the eu­
logy offered by Dadhici. The same Dakᔼa was seen now emit­
ting fire from his countenance. 
70. 
With his whole body trembling with rage, Dakᔼa, the 
Patriarch, said to the Brahmal).a as though he was bent upon 
murdering him. 
Dak$a said: 
7 1 . 0 Dadhici, you are a Brahmal).a. What can I do to you 
in this regard? Alas! I am in the initiated state. Nothing is 
within my power to do. 
72. By whom have you been invited here? Why have you, 
a highly dull-witted one, come here? Even if you have come, 
by whom have you been asked to offer your opinion? 
73. 
You say thus: how can that sacrifice where the glorious 
Hari, the most auspicious of all auspicious ones, is the Yajiiapuruᔼa, 
be like a cremation ground? 
74-78. 
You are comparing with a cremation ground this 
great sacrifice where Sakra, the wielder of thunderbolt, the 
performer of a hundred sacrifices, the Lord of thirty-three 
crores of immortal ones is himself present. Here Dharmaraja, 
the sole judge of the righteous and the unrighteous, is also 
present. You are comparing with an inauspicious ground that 
Yajiia where Fire-god himself is present directly and Kubera 
bestows glory and wealth. Out of arrogance, you call that sacrificial 
ground a place for cremation, the place where the preceptor 
of gods himself is the presiding officer of the Kratu. You compare 
with the inauspicious ground and call it one, the sacrificial 
ground where those sages, the chief of whom is Vasiᔻtha work 
as ᕮtviks. 
79-80. 
On hearing thus, Sage Dadhici, the most excellent 
one among the wise, replied, "Hari the auspicious of all aus­
picious ones may be the Yajiiapuruᔼa. Still in the Vedas, ViᔼI).U 
is being cited as a Sarhbhavi Sakti (Power) belonging to Sarhbhu. 
The left limb of the first creator is Hari and the other one 
Vidhi (Brahma) .

=== PAGE 368 ===

358 
Skanda Puriir:w 
8 1 . 
(lndra) with the thunderbolt as his weapon might have 
performed a hundred sacrifices but the fact is that as soon as 
he was cursed by Durvasas he became bereft of glory in a 
moment. 
82-84. 
He propitiated the Lord of goblins (Siva) again 
and regained Amaravati. Dharmaraja has been mentioned by 
you as the protector of your sacrifice. His power is known to 
all when he formerly tried to bind Sveta with cords. Dhanada 
(Kubera) is afraid of the Three-eyed Lord. Fire-god is his 
(Siva's) eye. Rudra rushed to the help of the preceptor of gods 
when Dvijaraja (Moon) ravished the exceedingly beautiful Tara. 
85-87. 
VasiHha and others who work as your Rtviks know 
him (Siva) . Rudra is one without a second. These and the 
other sages know this well, yet they are working in your sac­
rifice because they honour you. If you listen to my words, the 
words of a (real) Brahmal).a, that will be beneficial to you. Pay 
heed to me, and invite Visvesa, the Lord of the fruits of a 
Kratu. Without him this Kratu, though performed (success­
fully) is no better than one not performed. 
88. 
If that Mahadeva, the sole observer of all activities is 
present, your desires as well as the desires of all these will 
become realised. 
89. Just as insentient seeds do not germinate themselves, 
so also all the insentient activities and rites do not bear fruit 
without Isvara. 
90. 
A religious rite without Siva is like a speech without 
purport, a body without piety and a woman without a husband. 
9 1 . A rite without Siva is like regions without Ganga, a 
house without a son and wealth without liberal gifts. 
92. 
A rite without Siva is like a kingdom without a min­
ister, a Brahmal).a without Vedic Study and happiness without 
a woman. 
93. 
A rite without Siva is like twilight (prayer) without 
Darbha grass, libation without gingelly seeds and Homa without 
ablution . " 
94. 
Deluded by Saril.bhu's Maya, even the alert, efficient 
DakTa did not pay heed to the words thus uttered by Dadhici. 
95-1 01 . 
He replied furiously: ''Why should you worry about 
my Kratu? All the rites, the important and essential ones for 
(performance of) Kratu become invariably fruitful by proper

=== PAGE 369 ===

IV.ii.87. 102-1 1 1 
359 
performance. Even the rite of your Isvara does not achieve its 
result through incorrect performance. Everyone is Isvara (master) 
in the matter of making his rite fruitful. It was said by you just 
now that Isvara is the witness of all rites. That may be just so, 
but nowhere does the witness offer the object desired. As to 
your statement that the insentient rites do not bear fruit with­
out Isvara, I shall cite a counter-example. Even the insentient 
seeds germinate, blossom and fructify when their proper time 
and season come. In the same manner a sacred rite bears fruit 
without Isvara. Of what avail is then that Isvara of great inaus­
picious features? 
Dadhici said: 
1 02. 
By proper performance, a rite may perhaps bear the 
fruit but if Isvara is not favourable the fruitful one perishes 
quickly. 
1 03. 
A rite performed 
contrary to the injunctions may 
bear fruit due to the power of the divine wish. How can all 
the others here below him and dependent on him be called 
Isvaras! 
1 04. 
Isa is not like an ordinary witness. He is the undoubted 
witness of all the activities of everyone and the bestower of the 
benefits. 
105. 
It is the Lord, the creator of everything, who penetrates 
the seed in the forms of earth, water etc., and in the form of 
the Time causes the germination of the seed. 
1 06. 
You said that the rite will bear fruit at the proper 
time even without Isa, but that time is the Lord himself the 
maker of all, the lord of all. 
1 07. 
Another thing mentioned by you is the only true 
thing. Of what avail is Isvara here, Isvara the personified form 
of great auspiciousness! 
108. Those who are really great, those whose forms are of 
auspicious nature, and those who rea:lly deserve the name Isvara, 
what have they to do here near you? 
109. 
When Brahmal).a Dadhici replied· thus point by point, 
Dakᔻa became all the more furious, due to arrogance born of 
excellent prosperity. 
1 1 0-1 1 1 . He looked around and commanded those who were

=== PAGE 370 ===

360 
Skanda Purii:r:ta 
in the vicinity: "Quickly remove this base Brahmal)a. Take him 
far away from this excellent sacrifice. His mind is dwelling on 
something not very good." On hearing this Dadhici said laughingly: 
1 1 2-1 1 3. "0 foolish one, why do you attempt to remove me 
far away. It is certain that you too are far removed from everything 
auspicious along with all these. 0 Prajapati, all of a sudden 
the angry punishment of the great Lord, the administrator of 
the worlds, will fall on your head." 
1 1 4-1 1 6. Mter saying this the Brahmal)a went out of that 
sacrificial hall. When he went out all these also followed him: 
Durvasa, Cyavana, you (i.e. Agastya) , Uttail.ka, Upamanyu, Rcika, 
Uddalaka, Mal)<;lavya, Vamadeva, Galava, Garga, Gautama and 
others who knew the true nature of Siva. 
Mter Dadhici's departure the great sacrifice was resumed 
joyfully. 
1 1 7. Dakᔻa, the Prajapati, gave the Brahmal)as who remained 
there twice the usual Dakᔻil)a and more money to the others 
also." 
1 1 8. All the sons-in-law were pleased by him with plenty of 
wealth. The daughters too were elaborately adored with dis­
play of great affluence. 
1 19. The wives of the sages, the wives of the Devas and also 
the ladies of the city-all these were made the recipients of 
great honour. 
1 20. With the loud sound of the Vedic chant of the Brahmal)as 
who were excessively delighted in their minds, the firmament 
was clearly made one with sound as its attribute by Dakᔻa. 
1 2 1 . Agni became Mandagni ( 'one with the gastric fire 
impaired') when the priest (profusely) offered the Ahutis. Ladies 
in the form of quarters were propitiated by the fragrance of 
the ghee-offerings. 
1 22. The Suras became pot-bellied through Svahakaras and 
Vaᔻatkaras. Mountains of excellent cooked food were made by 
him at every step. 
1 23. Streams of ghee, thousands of rivulets of honey, great 
lakes of milk and huge eddies of liquid raw sugar were also 
made by him. 
1 24. Heaps of silk garments, peaks of jewels were made. 
The ground of the sacrificial hall was paved with gold and 
silver.

=== PAGE 371 ===

IV.ii.87. 1 25-IV.ii.88.8 
361 
1 25. In his Kratu even the much sought beggars were not 
to be found. Even the servants were delighted and well-nour­
ished. 
1 26. The sound of auspicious songs pervaded the courtyard 
of the firmament. Groups of celestial damsels became delighted 
and Gandharvas became excessively joyous. 
1 27. Vidyadharas became jubilant. The earth flourished much 
in that great Kratu of DakTa, full of the display of affluence. 
When the sacrifice proceeded smoothly, Sage Narada went to 
Kailasa. 
CHAPTER EIGHTYEIGHT 
Sati Casts off Her Body 
Agastya said: 
1 . 0 Six-faced One, tell me the interesting story as to what 
was done by the sage, the son of Brahma, after reaching the 
world of Siva. 
Skanda said: 
2. Listen, 0 Pot-born One, I shall tell you what was done 
by the noble-souled Narada after hurriedly going to Kailasa, 
the abode of Sailkara. 
3-8. By the celestial path the sage arrived at the abode of 
Sarilbhu. On seeing Siva and Siva, he bowed down and Siva 
returned the salute respectfully. 
The sage occupied the seat pointed out by him watching 
their game of dice. They continued the play with the dice and 
when they did not stop, the sage Վas prompted by eagerness 
and said: 
Niirada said: 
0 Lord of Devas, the entire Cosmic Egg is your play. 0 
Lord, the twelve months are the houses in the chess board and 
the thirty lunar days the dark (squares) and the bright ones

=== PAGE 372 ===

362 
Skanda Purii:IJ.a 
are the chessmen. The two Ayanas (transits of the Sun) are 
the two dices. The two stakes are success and defeat entitled 
Sr;ti (creation) and Pralaya (annihilation) . The success of the 
Goddess is Srᔻti and the success of Dhurjati is Pralaya. The 
duration of the game of both of you is cited as the mainte­
nance (of the universe) . Thus the entire Cosmic Egg is a mere 
play of the Lord and the Goddess. 
9. Neither the Goddess will defeat her Lord nor Iiia will 
defeat the Sakti. I am desirous of submitting something. 0 
mother, let it be heeded to. 
1 0. 
Despite being the leader of omniscient ones, the Lord 
is not aware of anything because he is stabilized far above 
honour and dishonour. 
1 1 . 
He is Sporting Soul (one who assumes body sport-
ively) e 1dowed with certain attributes but on pondering over 
deeply, .e is (found) utterly without any attribute. In spite of 
his enᕯ ::ᕰing himself in activities, he is not affected by those 
activittu . 
12. 
: ;tationed in the middle (heart) of everything he takes 
up an Ml i · . tude of neutrality. This Maheiiana has an impartial 
VISIOn or 
t>qually viewing) friends and enemies in respect of 
everythi1J,. 
1 3 . 
\ 
u are the Sakti of this Lord, the greatest object of 
honour to everyone. Even to Dakᔻa, you have given honour 
as befitting a progeny. 
14. 
But certainly you alone are the one mother of all the 
universe. Brahma, Keiiava and Vasava have come out of you. 
15. 
Being deluded by the Maya of the Three-eyed Lord, 
you do not know yourself. That is why, 0 Satl, my mind is 
pained. 
1 6. 
Other women too who are chaste and endowed with 
great fidelity to their husbands do not take into account anything 
except the pair of feet of their husbands. 
1 7-18. 
Or, let this matter be set aside. I shall mention the 
relevant matter on hand. Today I have seen something un­
usual near NHagiri in the vicinity of Haridvara. Therefore, I 
have come to you. I am eager to say something urged by a very 
surprising and sad event. 
1 9-20. 
This is the cause of surprise that in the sacrificial 
pavilion of Dakᔻa, all the men in the whole of the three worlds

=== PAGE 373 ===

IV.ii.88.21-33a 
363 
along with their women-folk were seen. All of them were equally 
well-adorned with their lotus-like faces beaming with pleasure. 
Oblivious of all other activities they all took part in the sac­
rifice of Dakᔻa. 
2 1-22. 
The event that caused grief was this that the couple 
of Bhava and Bhavani that dispels worldly existence (Samsara) , 
that from which this world originated, in which it functions 
and in which it will certainly merge, was not seen. The inabil­
ity to see you both (absence of both of you) made me very 
sad. 
23. 
It was not only this that took place there, something 
else also happened. It is not possible for me to describe it. 
That Dakᔻa was the person who spoke it. 
24. 
On hearing those words, Brahina walked away. He 
(Dakᔻa) was rebuked very much by the great sage Dadhici. 
25. 
Even as the Devas and the sages stood watching the 
patriarch was cursed. On hearing the words of abuse he used, 
ears were closed by me. 
26. 
On hearing the abusive censure of Bhava many 
BrahmaQ.as, the chief of whom was Durvasas, walked out in 
protest along with Dadhici. 
27-28. 
But the great Yliga went on with the lay public 
jubilant and well-nourished. I was unable to bear to look at 
it. Hence I came away, 0 Goddess! I am not enthusiastic enough 
to speak anything further out of deference to your sisters there 
along with their husbands. 
29. On hearing this Goddess Sati, the daughter of Dakᕛa, 
cast off the dice from her hand and meditated for a short 
while. 
30-3 1 . 
She said, "Let it be so. My refuge is Bhava alone." 
After deciding thus in her mind, Sati, the daughter of Dᕜa, 
got up immediately and bowed down to Sankara. Joining her 
palms in reverence over her head, the Goddess submitted to 
the Lord: 
Devi said: 
32-33a. Be victorious, 0 destroyer of Andhaka, 0 Three­
eyed Lord, 0 slayer of Tripuras! Your feet are my refuge, 0

=== PAGE 374 ===

364 
Skanda Purii:r:ta 
Sadasiva; grant me the permission (to go) . Pray do not pre­
vent me. I shall go to my father. 
33b. 
Mter saying this, she placed her head at the lotus-like 
feet of the enemy of Andhaka. 
34. 
Then Goddess MrQanl was told by Sambhu: "0 fair 
lady, get up. Tell me, 0 beautiful lady enjoying conjugal bliss, 
what is it that you lack here? 
35. 
0 Goddess, it was by you that conjugal bliss was granted 
to LakTml, excellent lustre to Brahma:Q.I, and the state of being 
ever fresh to Sacl. 
36-37. 
It is due to you that I am competent to protect the 
vast prosperity and overlordship. Having attained you as Sakti 
assuming a sportive form, I create this, protect this and con­
sume this (universe) . 0 lady, I am encouraged by you. 0 
sharer of my left half, why should you wish to forsake me?" 
38-39. 
On hearing this utterance of Siva, Siva (Satl) said 
to Mahe§vara: "0 Lord of my life, I am not going anywhere 
leaving you. My mind will stay steady at the pair of your feet. 
I am going to see the Kratu of my father. I have not seen a 
Yajiia anywhere . " 
40-42. 
O n hearing the words o f Katyayanl, Sambhu said 
then: "If a Kratu has not been seen by you, I shall perform 
a Kratu then. Or you, the holder of my Sakti, create another 
Kratu rite. Let there be another YajiiapuruՏa. Let there be 
other guardians of the worlds. Create quickly other sages for 
performing the duties of Rtviks." 
On hearing this utterance of Sambhu, the Goddess said 
again: 
43-44. 
"0 Lord, the festivities of my father's Yajiia should 
be seen by me certainly. Grant me permission. Do not let my 
words be otherwise. Who is competent to turn back one's 
mind or the water that flows downwards, 0 Lord? Do not 
prevent me now. " 
45-48a. 
On hearing this, the omniscient Lord of goblins 
said: "0 Goddess, do not go forsaking me. Once you go you 
will never meet (me) . Today it is Saturday. It should stop you 
from going towards the east. 0 my beloved, the star (constellation) 
is JyeTtha. The lunar day is the ninth. The Yoga is the seven­
teenth one (i.e. Vyatlpata) ; separation today is inauspicious.

=== PAGE 375 ===

IV.ii.88.48b-61 
365 
You were born when half of Dhaniᔻtha was over. Therefore it 
is the fifth day today. Do not go, 0 Goddess. If you go now, 
you will never see me again." 
48b-49a. Again the goddess said: "If I am, even by name, 
Sati, I shall be able to serve you with another body." 
49b-52. Thereupon Bhava spoke again: "Who is competent 
to prevent a woman or a man if his mental predilection is 
extremely excited. 0 Goddess, there is no meeting again. I am 
speaking the truth. But, 0 fair lady, 0 my beloved, should one 
value and wish for great honour as the prized asset, one should 
not go even to the h<;mse of parents, if (one is) not invited. 
Just as a river having flowed into the ocean does not flow back, 
so also your return after going now is impossible." 
Devz said: 
53. If I am attached to the pair of your lotus-like feet, you 
alone will be my Lord in the next birth. 
54-56. 
After saying this, the Goddess departed with eyes 
blinded due to anger. What should be done by persons desirous 
of going on some purpose was not done. She did not bow to 
Mahadeva, nor did she circumambulate him. That was why she 
did not return after her departure. 
Even today, those who depart without bowing down to Mahesana 
and without circumambulating him do not return like the days 
that elapse. 
57. 
The walking on foot even that holy path was consid-
ered very hard by that queen of the Lord of the three worlds. 
58. 
On seeing Sati walking on foot, the Lord too was 
pained in his mind very much. Then he called his Gal).as: 
59. 
"0 GaQ.as, take the aerial chariot with mind and wind 
as its wheels, yoked with ten thousand lions and having the 
main pole of the flag rising like Sumeru. 
60. 
The great gust of wind (Pravaha) shall be its banner 
and the cosmic intelligence shall be the marked middle pole 
and Narmada and Alakananda shall be the shafts. 
61. 
The sun and the moon shall act as the umbrella there 
and the excellent Varahi Sakti shall be the Makaratu'f.UJa (the 
fitting in front shaped like the snout of a crocodile) .

=== PAGE 376 ===

366 
Skanda Purii:r.ta 
62. 
Gayatri itself shall be the yoke; Takᔻaka and others 
shall be the ropes; the charioteer is Pral).ava and the sound 
of Orhkara shall be the creaking sound. 
63. 
The Ailgas (ancillary subjects) shall be the protective 
fittings and the seven metres shall be the front fender (for 
protection against collision) . " 
O n being ordered by Hara thus, the GaQ.as took the chariot 
quickly. 
64. 
Mter the goddess had been seated in the aerial chariot, 
the attendants accompanied the great Goddess shining with 
divine splendour (surpassing that of the sun-Comm.) . 
65. 
In a moment the wife of the Three-eyed Lord saw the 
open yard of Dakᔻa's assembly. She got down quickly from the 
aerial chariot stopped in the firmament. 
66-69. 
Observed (fearfully) by the awestruck guards, she 
entered the hall of sacrifice. She saw her mother wearing a 
crown and dressed in auspicious clothes, and her sisters dressed 
and adorned duly accompanied by their husbands. They had 
various emotions. Some were surprised. Some were arrogant. 
Some were delighted and some were frightened. They looked 
on probably with the thought, 'This beloved of Hara has come 
unexpe<;:ted and uninvited. How could she come in a moment 
in the aerial chariot?' Without saying a word to all those, Sati 
went near Dakᔻa. The father and the mother said, "You have 
come. It is good." 
Sati said: 
70. 
0 my dear father, if it is good that I have come, how 
is it that I was not invited like these my sisters? 
Daa said: 
71 . 
My dear daughter, 0 blessed one without a parallel, 
0 auspicious one to all, this is not at all your fault. This is 
my own fault. 
72-75. 
It is my mistake that you were given to such a 
husband by me who is ignorant and senseless. If I had known 
him that this lsvara is no isvara at all, how could I have given 
you to that person having Maya (deceit) for his form? I was 
contented with his name Siva ('Auspicious One') but did not

=== PAGE 377 ===

IV.ii.88. 76-84 
367 
know that he was not auspiCious in form. He was extolled 
before me by Pitamaha in diverse ways. 'This is Sankara ( 'Bene­
factor' ) , this is Sarilbhu ('Enjoyer of Bliss') , Pasupati ('Lord 
of Animals' ) , Siva ('Auspicious' ) , Srikal).tha ( 'Embraced by 
Glory' ) , Mahesa ( ' Great Lord' ) , Sarvajiia ( ' Omniscient' ) , 
Vpᔻadhvaja ('Piety-emblemed' ) . You give your daughter to this 
Mahadeva wielding the bow. ' 
76-80. 
0 faultless one, you were given to him (in mar­
riage) at the instance of Brahma by me. I did not know that 
he is Virupakᔻa ('Odd-eyed' ) , Ukᔻaga ( 'Moving about on a 
bull') , Viᔻabhakᔻin ( 'Swallower of poison' ) , Resident of the 
cremation ground, Sulin (Trident-bearing, suffering from colic 
pain) , Kapalin (holding the skull) , appearing to be handsome 
by the contact of Dvijihva's (serpents, scandal-mongers) , Sup­
porter ofjala ('water, sluggish ones') , Kapardin ('having matted 
hairs') , Having Kalanki (spotted one the Moon) kept on the 
head, soiled and smeared with dust. Sometimes he wears only 
a loin cloth; in some places he is nude like a madcap. In some 
places he wears a hide; he is fbnd of begging for alms; hideous 
goblins are his followers; Sthal).u (Standing like a post) , Ugra 
(fierce) , having such fearful ones for attendants, assuming the 
body of Mahakala; human bone constitutes his weapon. He is 
devoid of caste and race.1 
81-84. 
Where is Hara and where is this sacrifice, the abode 
of auspiciousness! No one knows him well. Even one who 
knows him is deceived. Of what avail is much talk? 0 daughter 
equipped with all good behaviour, he is covered with dusty 
clothes (i.e. only Bhasman-holy ash constitutes his robes) . 
His ornament is human bone. Serpents tied to his arms are 
his bracelets. Matted hairs hang loose from his head. The tips 
of his hands are busy in playing on his I;>amaru. He has the 
fragmented (crescent) moon as the crestjewel. He is inter­
ested in displaying his Tal).<;iava dance. All his activities are 
inauspicious. Where is that (inauspicious) Hara and where is 
the sacrifice, the abode of all auspiciousness! Hence, 0 Mr<;lani, 
auspicious unto all, you were not invited. (What a great dif­
ference between Hara-the dispeller of Ignorance and its effects, 
1 . All these above-mentioned epithets have two meanings, one derogatory 
and one complimentary.

=== PAGE 378 ===

granting liberation to all and the sacrifice, the resort of the 
inauspicious Sarilsara-Comm. ) . 
85. 
Superfine silk clothes, splendid jewels, gems and or-
naments, all these have already been kept ready for you. Come, 
see them and accept them. 
86. 
How can the odd-eyed trident-bearing Siva fit in here, 
among the Devas and Indra of very auspicious dress and fea­
tures? 
87. 
On hearing this utterance of her father, the chaste 
lady Satl became very grief-stricken in her heart. She began 
to speak: 
Sati said: 
88-89. 
0 Lord, after hearing two Padas (words of a verse) 
nothing else was heard by me even as you continued to speak. 
That I shall explain to you. You have aptly said, "No one 
knows him well. Even one who knows is deceived, who knows 
that Sadasiva?" 
90-94. 
You were deceived before by contracting an alli­
ance with him. You are deceived even now as you are prattling 
without any sense. If you had considered Sarilbhu then as you 
describe him now, how could you have given me to him whom 
no one knows? Or, in the matter of an alliance with him, it 
is not your intellect that was the cause. Dear father, the cause 
thereof was 
the weightiness alone of my merit. 
After repeating (such words) many times she continued: 
"You are the procreator of this body. Rebuke of my husband 
has been heard by me thro_ugh this body alone. An expiation 
for this is that it should be cast off. A good woman of es­
teemed birth must continue to live as long as the rebuke and 
insult of her dear Lord is not heard." 
95. 
After saying .this, she consigned the sacrificial twig of 
her body to the fire ignited by her wrath, by way of restrain­
ing her breath. 
96. 
Thereupon, all the Devas including Indra lost their 
colour and radiance. The fire did not burn as brightly as 
before through the Ahutis. 
97-101 . 
Instantly, the capacity of the Mantras became re-

=== PAGE 379 ===

IV.ii.88. 1 02-IV.ii.89.5 
369 
duced. Some of the excellent BrahmaQ.as enqmnng one an­
other said, "Alas, what great calamity has befallen like this?" 
A violent gust of wind blew, capable of swaying even moun­
tains. Within a moment the ground of the pavilion of the 
sacrifice was covered (with grass and dust) . There appeared 
an unexpected streak of lightning and thunderblast that shook 
the earth. Meteors fell down from the sky. Ghosts and vam­
pires danced. Falcons and vultures hovered in the sky above. 
Jackals and vixen howled inauspiciously beneath the Sun. The 
clouds showered drops of blood there. 
1 02. 
A loud report of earthquake 
rose from the earth 
causing tremor of the hearts. Divine weapons clashed with one 
another terribly. 
1 03-1 06. The sacred sacrificial objects aՐnd offerings were 
defiled by jackals and hounds. Cakoras and crows flew over 
the sacrificial pavilion. The sacrificial hall turned instantly 
into a cremation ground. Everything got stuck up in the place 
where it was. All objects became motionless as though painted 
in a picture and lacked lustre. ViTQ.U and others became awestruck 
and suspicious. DakTa and his attendants became pale-faced. 
The BrahmaQ.as then resumed the Yajiia somehow. 
CHAPTER EIGHTYNINE 
Manifestation of Dak;esvara 
Skanda said: 
1 . Again, 0 Agastya, Narada who had approached the Goddess, 
went back to intimate to Hara all the news about the Goddess. 
2. 
Narada saw Sarhbhu holding conversation with Nandin 
with the gestures of his index finger and bowed to him. 
3. He sat on the excellent seat vacated by Sailadi exhib­
iting a bit of embarrassment and kept quiet for a short while. 
4. By the facial expression (of Narada) itself, the omni­
scient Lord knew the full details. Sarhbhu asked the sage: "For 
what reason is this adoption of silence by you? 
5. 
The natural state of the embodied ones consists of coming 
into existence and disappearing altogether. Even the divine

=== PAGE 380 ===

370 
Skanda Purii:rJa 
bodies depart thus in course of time. 
6. Everything that is visible is perishable, especially that 
which is not of independent nature. Hence, 0 Brahmal}.a, 
what is surprising in this? Whom does Kala not sweep off? 
7. The coming into existence of a totally non-existent thing 
is not possible. There cannot be (total) negation of an exist­
ing one. Hence learned men do not get deluded." 
8. On hearing the utterance of Saril.bhu, the eminent sage 
said thus: "Indeed what the Lord has uttered is true. 
9-1 0. What should have occurred inevitably has happened. 
There is no doubt about it. But a mind-boggling anxiety torments 
me much. In fᕝct, in your case, nothing gets decreased and 
nothing gets increased. Due to your immutability and perfec­
tion, there is neither loss nor gain to you. How can there be 
decrease or growth in you? 
1 1 . Alas! How can this wretched world devoid of Isvara (Lord 
Siva) exist (at all) ? It will be a piteous state if some will not 
worship you from today. 
1 2-13. 
Dakᔻa. the patriarch, did not invite you to the Kratu. 
So on seeing the disrespect shown by him, Devas, sages and 
human beings too will begin to dishonour you. Of what avail 
is prosperity unto the people prone to disrespect? Even those 
who have overcome the fear of Kala, have been insulted. Are 
they men of prestige merely because they are endowed with 
opulence? 
1 4-18. 
Of what avail is their very long life and enormous 
wealth? Those who value honour as their asset do not get 
insulted at every step. I do not glorify those unumbrageous, 
insensible ones though they live long. Among all women that 
Sati, to whom honour was the asset is the most blessed. On 
hearing your censure she considered her life worthless like 
grass." On hearing this, Mahakala fully understood the demise 
of Satl. (He said:) "It is true, 0 sage, that the Goddess con­
sidered her life worthless like grass." When the sage kept quiet 
due to the fear of Mahakala, Rudra became all the more fierce, 
flared up with the fire of excessive wrath. A great lustre manifested 
itself from that fire, rising from that wrath. 
19. 
It became visible and assumed the shape of a colossal 
person (image) . He was holding the great missile Bhusul}.<;il. 
He was powerful enough to make Kalamrtyu (god of Death)

=== PAGE 381 ===

IV.ii.89.20-36 
371 
tremble. He bowed down to Isa and said: 
20. 
"0 father, give me the order. What excellent service 
shall I offer to you? At your behest I can make a mouthful of 
the entire cosmos. 
2 1 -22. 
I can make a handful of all the seven seas and 
drink it up. At your behest I can convert Rasatala into Patala 
or vice versa and 
bring it off, 0 Isa, sportingly. I can bring 
here Indra along with all the guardians of the world, dragging 
them with their tresses of hair. 
23. 
Even if the Lord of Vaiku1_1tha were to assist him, I 
can, at your behest, render his missile ineffective. 
24. 
Who are these pitiable wretches, sons of Ditijas and 
Danujas, weak and feeble in war? If anyone among them were 
to show his might, I shall crush him to death. 
25-28. 
Shall I bind up Kala in battle? Shall I strive to 
bring about the death of Mrtyu? If I became furious in battle­
field, 0 Mahesana, none among mobile and immobile beings 
will be able to steady itself. This is because of the strength I 
derive from you. If I were to kick with my foot, the entire 
earth shall tremble along with Rasatala like the leaves of a 
plantain tree in the gust of wind. I can reduce to powder these 
Kuliicalas (principal mountains) with a blow of my hand. Why 
say much? Command me. There is nothing that l cannot achieve 
with the support of your powerful feet. Know that whatever is 
thought of is (already) 
accomplished. " 
29. 
O n hearing this assertion of him, Isa considered it 
accomplished. He joyously told him as though he had already 
d<?ne his duty: 
30-32a. "0 blessed one, you are a great hero among all my 
Ga1_1as. You be highly well-known by the name Virabhadra. 
Quickly carry out my task. Destroy the sacrifice of DakTa. All 
those who show disrespect to you and those who come to their 
help should be slighted by you. Go ahead, my son, with splen­
did future. " 
' 32b-36. Mter receiving this Ajiia (command) of Paramesvara 
respectfully (with his head) he circumambulated Hara and 
rushed ahead very fast. Thereafter Sambhu created out of his 
breath hundreds of crores of other Ga1_1as to follow him. Some 
of those Ga1_1as went ahead of Virabhadra who had already left. 
Some followed him and some accompanied him on both his

=== PAGE 382 ===

372 
Skanda Purii:IJa 
sides. The entire firmament was pervaded by them who ex­
celled even the Sun with their brilliance. The peaks of the 
mountains were struck down by some. The roots and peaks of 
some mountains were uprooted by some. 
37. 
After uprooting huge trees, some of them reached 
the courtyard of the sacrificial hall. The sacrificial posts were 
pulled out by some. Some of them filled up the sacrificial pits. 
38. 
Some of the highly ferocious Gal').as destroyed the 
pavilion. Some of them armed with tridents dug up the sac­
rificial altars. Some of them ate the cooked rice offering soaked 
in ghee. Others drank the curds and the ghee. 
39. 
Some of them destroyed cooked rice heaped up like 
mountains. Some made the milk pudding their (regular) food. 
Some drank up the milk. 
40. 
Some of them with their limbs nourished with sweet-
meats smashed the Yajfla utensils to pieces. Some with brawny 
arms crushed the handles of the sacrificial ladles. 
41 . 
Some broke the carts. Some swallowed the animals. 
Some whose rediance surpassed the splendour of fire, ·extin­
guished the sacrificial fire. 
42. 
Others joyously wore the silk garments. Some appro-
priated the jewels heaped into a mountain already. 
43. 
Even as Lord Bhaga was looking on, one of them 
deprived him of his eyes. Another infuriated Gal').a felled down 
the row of teeth of PuTan. 
44. 
The Yajfla who assumed the form of a deer was seen 
fleeing by one of them. He beheaded it from afar with his 
discus. 
45. 
One of them saw Sarasvati going away and he cut off 
her nose. The pair of lips of Aditi were cut off by another 
infuriated Gal')..a. 
46. 
Another one ripped off the arms of Aryaman. A cer-
tain Gal').a forcibly took out the tongue of Agni. 
4 7-53. 
Another attendant of great exploit cut off the testicles 
of Vayu. A certain one bound Yama with cords and asked, 
"Where is Dharma if Mahesa is not worshipped at the outset?" 
Another Gal').a caught Naiqta by the hairs and dragged him 
up many times, saying, "The holy offering without the Deity 
(Siva) was eaten up by you. " He kicked him with his foot. 
Another one caught hold of Kubera by the legs and shook him

=== PAGE 383 ===

IV.ii.89.54-67 
373 
with force making him vomit the many Ahutis already taken 
in. There were the eleven Rudras in the same row as that of 
the guardians of the world. They were slighted by the Pramathas 
for their wrongful claim to the title of Rudra. Another Pramatha 
pressed the belly of Varui.J.a with force and made him vomit 
out what had been offered without reference to Isa. The thousand­
eyed Indra of great intellect took up the form of a peacock, 
flew on to a mountain and watched the scene. The Pramathas 
bowed down to the Brahmal).as and said "Go away, go away. " 
54. 
The Pramathas took to task the other Yajakas (per-
formers of the Yajiia) . While the Yaga was thus devastated by 
the Pramathas who had come earlier, Vi:rabhadra himself reached 
the spot surrounded by the army of Pramathas. 
55. 
On seeing the sacrificial hall reduced to a pitiable 
condition on a par with a cremation ground by the Pramathas 
earlier, Virabhadra said: 
56-58. 
"0 Gal).as, see. This is the state of the rites begun 
by the evil-minded ones without acknowledging Isvara. Why 
should there be hatred for Mahdvara? Those who despise 
Mahadeva, the sole witness of all religious rites, and still engage 
in ritualistic acts, will attain a condition like this. 0 Gal).as, 
hurry up; where is that DakTa of foul activity? Where are the 
Suras who partook of the offerings in the Yajiia? Catch hold 
of all of them and bring them here." 
59. 
On hearing this command of Vi:rabhadra when those 
Pramathas rushed forward, the infuriated Mace-bearing Lord 
was seen. 
60. 
Though they were very strong and valorous, those 
Pramathas were brought to the state of dried leaves caught in 
the wild gust of wind by that (Mace-bearing One) . 
61 . 
Thereupon due to the fright of Hari the Pramathas 
dispersed helter-skelter. Vi:rabhadra on a par with the tornado 
at the time of annihilation, became all the more fierce. 
62-63. 
He saw ahead the Sani.ga (name of ViTI).u's bow) ­
bearing Lord eulogized by his own attendants who were numerous, 
endowed with four hands and who had conquered the ex­
tremely powerful Daityas. On seeing the slayer of Daityas served 
(by those attendants) holding discus, maces, swords and Sani.ga 
bows, Vi:rabhadra said: 
64-67. 
"You are the YajiiapuruTa here performing and

=== PAGE 384 ===

374 
Skanda Purii7J.a 
supervising the great Yajfia. By your vigour and power you act 
as the protector of DakTa, the enemy of the Three-eyed Lord. 
Either you bring DakTa and surrender him to me or fight with 
me. If you don't care to surrender DakTa, you have to protect 
him with extra care. Mostly among the devotees of Sarhbhu, 
you are cited as the foremost one, since, when the number of 
lotuses was one less than a thousand, you offered your lotus­
like eye. The discus Sudarsana was granted to you by Sarhbhu 
who was pleased. It is due to the assistance of that discus, that 
you defeat leading Danujas in war. " 
68. On hearing this spirited speech of Virabhadra ViTI}.U 
desirous of probing his inherent strength spoke to him. 
69-70. 
"You are more or less a son unto Sarhbhu; you are 
foremost among the Gal}.as. Equipped with the command of 
the king (Siva) you have become more powerful. Whosoever 
you may be, I am also competent enough to protect DakTa. 
I shall see your strength, how you will be able to take him 
away. " 
71 . 
On being told thus by the San'lga-bow-wielding Lord, 
Virabhadra encouraged the Pramathas to fight by means of 
the gestures of his eyes. 
72. 
Thereafter the followers of ViTI}.U were told (taunting 
words) and were reduced to the state of animals picking up 
grass blades with their mouths (i.e. were brought to a humili­
ating condition) . 
73. 
Thereupon the infuriated Garu4a-vehicled Lord struck 
each of them in the chest by means of a thousand arrows in 
the course of the battle. 
74. 
Pierced in their chests, all the Gal}.as shed blood and 
attained in the battlefield the lustre of Kirhsuka flowers in 
autumnal season. 
75. 
The Gal}.as shone like elephants with ichor oozing 
down and like mountains exuding liquids reddened with minerals. 
76-77. 
Then the leader of the Gal}.as laughingly told the 
chief of Vaikul}.tha: "0 San'lga-bow-wielding One, I know you. 
You are expert in fighting; but your fight has been confined 
to Daityas and leading Danavas and not with the ParTadas 
(attendants of Siva) . " Mter saying thus a BhuSUI}.QI was taken 
up in his hand by Virabhadra. 
78. 
Immediately the Mace-bearing Lord took up his mace

=== PAGE 385 ===

IV.ii.89. 79-92 
375 
that used to reduce to powder the huge bodies of the leading 
Daityas resembling mountains. Thereafter Virabhadra struck 
Gadadhara with his Bhusm:u;li. 
79-8 1 . 
Clashing with his body, the BhusUI}.QI broke into 
a hundred pieces. Vasudeva struck with force by means of a 
blow with Kaumodakl (name of the Gada) the valorous Virabhadra 
who did not feel the pain at all. Thereafter Virabhadra took 
up a Khatvailga, struck the Mace-wielding Gadadhara in his 
brawny right hand and made the mace fell down. The infu­
riated Slayer of Madhu hit him with his discus. 
82-84. 
On seeing the approaching discus, he remembered 
Sailkara. Due to the recollection of Sailkara, the discus be­
came slightly crooked and coming into close contact with Vira's 
neck became perfectly Sudarsana (pleasing. to the sight) . With 
that discus the Lord of Gal}.as shone all the more like one 
wooed in the battle by VlralakTml with the garland of victory. 
On seeing Sudarsana held up as an ornament of his neck, Hari 
slightly smiled with a trace of surprise. Then he took up his 
Nandaka (sword) . 
85. 
Even as the Siddhas stood watching in heaven he 
produced a bellowing sound Hum (Humkiira) and made the 
raised hand of ViTI}.U holding Nandaka paralysed stiff. 
86-89. 
Seizing a brilliant trident he rushed against him 
wishing to kill Hari. Thereupon the king of Gar:tas was checked 
by a celestial speech: "Do not commit any rash deed." Then 
Virabhadra, the most excellent one among the Gal}.as, left him 
alone and went over to DakTa shouting loudly: "Fie upon you 
who censured Isvara! Why a person like you who has skill, 
whose opulence is so vast as this and who has assistance of the 
Devas, does not perform the sacred rite with Isvara (present) ? 
With the blows of my open hand I shall smash to pieces that 
defiled mouth with which Siva was censured by you. " 
90. 
After saying thus, h e struck a hundred blows with the 
open hand and smashed the face · of DakTa who said harsh 
words about Hara. 
9 1 . 
Thereafter, he chopped off the ears and other parts 
of those who had assembled there for the festivity, the chief 
of whom was Aditi. 
92. 
The straight-plaited tresses of some of them were cut 
off by that excessively infuriated (Virabhadra) ; the hands of

=== PAGE 386 ===

376 
Skanda Purii:t:ta 
some were chopped off and the breasts of some also were cut 
off. 
93. 
The Par11ada tore up the noses of others. So also the 
favourite of Siva pared off the fingers of still others. 
94. 
He split into two the tongues of all those who cen-
sured the Lord of Devas and chopped off the ears of all those 
who listened to it then. 
95. 
Some of them who consumed the sacrificial offering 
ignoring the Lord of Devas were tightly tied with cords round 
the neck and were suspended from the sacrificial posts with 
faces down. 
96. 
The Moon, Dharma and others, the chiefs of whom 
were Bhrgu and Marici were excessively insulted by him. 
97. 
These were the (other) sons-in-law of the evil-minded 
Dak1ja. He discarded Mahesvara and considered these more 
than Siva. 
98-1 0 1 . 
Those holy pits, those sacrificial posts, those pil­
lars, that pavilion, those altars, those utensils, those diverse 
sacrificial offerings, the various requisite things collected for 
the purpose of the Yajiia, the various functionaries of the· Yajiia, 
those watchmen on duty and those Mantras-all were sportingly 
smashed and destroyed. The inauspicious affluence of Dak11a 
went off (was destroyed) in a short while in the same manner 
as the riches acquired by deceiving others. When the great 
Kratu was brought down to such a plight by Virabhadra along 
with the Ga.Q.as, Brahma (became sorry) for the omission 
(annihilation?) of the due rites. He informed Hara and brought 
him there. 
1 02. 
Siva was brought to that place where the sacrifice 
devoid of Siva's (adoration) had become like this. When Mahadeva 
came Virabhadra became very much ashamed. 
1 03. 
He bowed down but did not say anything. The Lord 
himself understood everything. Mter propitiating the Lord of 
the chiefs of Devas, Brahma spoke again: 
1 04-1 09. " 0 storehouse of mercy, though Dak11a is guilty, he 
should be shown kindness. 0 Sarikara, get all these reinstated 
as before. 
0 Sarilbhu, let order be passed so that the Vedic rites can 
be resumed as before. This rite shall be duly fulfilled with 
isvara (present) .

=== PAGE 387 ===

IV.ii.89. 1 10-121 
377 
0 Paramesvara, in all those rites without invocation of Isvara, 
there shall be thousands of obstacles in this manner. 
If considered properly, this Dakᔻa. the pitiable wretch, is a 
great devotee of yours, because by undertaking a sacred rite 
without Isvara he has set an example for others. 
Another 
person performing a holy rite by setting aside 
Mahesana will have the same result as in the case of Dakᔻa. 
Hence no one will (dare to) undertake any holy rite anywhere 
without Siva, after having heard and understood (the conse­
quences) of such an act of Dakᔻa. " 
1 1 0. 
On hearing the utterance of Brahma thus, Lord 
Mahesvara smiled and commanded Virabhadra, "Reinstate 
everything as before." 
1 1 1-1 12. After getting the command <5f Sarva, Virabhadra 
rearranged everything as before except the face of Daᕓa. Those 
who censure isvara are certainly dumb animals. So Virabhadrŧ 
the GaQa, made Dakᔻa · goat-faced. 
1 1 3. 
Thereafter the Lord took leave of Brahma. His duty 
as a householder having been concluded, he went to Himaprastha 
accompanied by his Parᕔdas for performing penance. 
1 1 4. 
Since no person will remain even for a short while 
bereft of some stage of life, the excellent Asrama (stage of 
life) is beneficial. 
1 1 5. 
Henᕕ that Mahesvara, the bestower of the fruit of 
all penances, performed penance along with his GaQas. Brahma 
instructed Dakᔻa (as follows) : 
1 1 6-120. "Go to VariiQasi, if you desire to wash off the dirt 
of sins arising from censuring Hara. It is otherwise irremov­
able. After reaching the meritorious VariiQasi that removes 
masses of sins, do instal the Liriga. Sambhu will become pleased 
thereby. When Mahesvara is satisfied the entire universe con­
sisting of mobile and immobile beings_ becomes satisfied. Excepting 
in VariiQasi nowhere else will your sin be removed. Expiatory 
rite for sins like BrahmaQa-slaughter has been laid down by 
learned men, but not for the censure of Hara. In that case, 
Kasi alone (is the redeeming feature) . If meritorious persons 
instal a Liriga in Kasi, it is as though all pious rites have been 
performed by them. They alone are the seekers of all aims of 
life. " 
1 2 1 . O n hearing these words of Brahma, Daͬ
a hurried to

=== PAGE 388 ===

378 
Skanda Purii:TJ-a 
Avimukta, the great holy place, and performed a great pen­
ance. 
1 22. 
He duly installed a Liilga and became engrossed in 
propitiating the Liilga. He did not care to know anything in 
thᕖ world other than the Liilga. 
1 23. 
Dakᔻa. the efficient patriarch, eulogized Mahesana 
day and night, worshipped, bowed down to, mediated upon, 
and saw him alone. 
124. 
Dakᔻa thus meditated 
on the Liilga of Isvara with 
great concentration of the mind for 1 2,000 years. 
1 25. 
In the meantime, Sat! took the form of Uma, born 
of Mena, the chaste wife of Himalaya. By means of a severe 
penance, she attained the Pinaka-wielding Lord as her hus­
band. 
1 26-1 28. Dakᔻa continued to worship the Liilga and remained 
steady in the penance. The Daughter of the Lord of Moun­
tains had come to Kasi with her husband. On seeing (Dakᔻa) 
engaged in adoring Siva Liilga with steadiness of mind, the 
Goddess submitted to Hara: "0 Lord, this devotee has become 
feeble on account of his penance. 0 ocean of mercy; do a 
favour unto this Prajapati by granting him a boon." On being 
told thus by AparQ.a, Sarilbhu, the Lord, said to Dakᔻa: 
1 29-1 3 1 . "0 highly fortunate one, tell me the boon you will 
have. I shall grant you whatever is mentally desired by you. " 
O n hearing this utterance o f Isa, h e bowed down to Hara 
many times, eulogized by means of different kinds of prayers 
and on seeing Sailk_ara pleased, he spoke to the Lord of the 
chiefs of Devas: "If a boon has to be granted to me, let there 
be unruffled fJ.Xed devotion of mine to the pair of your feet. 
This is a great Liilga which I have installed here. 0 Lord, you 
should station yourself in this Liilga forever. 
1 32. 
0 Lord, 0 ocean of mercy, may the offence commit­
ted by me be pardoned. Let there be only these boons. Of 
what avail are other boons even if they be ever so excellent?" 
1 33-1 36. On hearing this, the great Lord Bhava became all 
the more pleased and said: "Let what is uttered by you be so 
and not otherwise. I shall grant you another boon too. 0 
Prajapati, listen to it. This Liilga that has been installed by you 
is Dakᔻe5vara by name. If men serve this Liilga, I shall un­
doubtedly forgive a thousand offences. Hence this should be

=== PAGE 389 ===

IV.ii.89. 1 37-IV.ii.90.6 
379 
adored by people. Due to the worship of this Liilga you will 
be worthy of the esteem of everyone. At the end of two Parardhas 
you will attain salvation . " 
137. 
After saying thus, the Lord of the chiefs o f Devas 
merged into that Liilga. Dakᔻa went home having realized all 
his desires. 
Skanda said: 
1 38-1 39. 
0 Agastya, I have thus narrated the ongm of 
Dakᔻe5vara. On listening to this a creature is rid of hundreds 
of offences. If a man listens to this meritorious narrative pertaining 
to the origin of Dakᔻesvara, he is not touch.ed by sins, even 
if he happens to be the committer of an crimes. 
CHAPTER NINETY 
The Story of ParoatiSa 
Agastya said: 
1 . 0 delighter of the heart of Parvati, narrate the ongm 
of Parvatisa which has already been described by you as a 
dispeller of sins. 
Skanda said: 
2-4. 0 Agastya, Listen. Once Mena, the chaste wife of Himalaya 
spoke to her daughter, the daughter of the King of Mountains: 
"Do you know what is the native place of Siva? Where is his 
residence? Who is his relative? Probably there is no relative 
and no home of the son-in-law anywhere." On hearing the 
words of her mother, the daughter of the Lord of Mountains 
became very much ashamed. On getting an opportunity, Gauri 
bowed down to Sarilbhu and submitted: 
5. 
"0 Lord, 0 husband, certainly today I have decided to 
go to my mother-in-law's house. I should not stay here. Take 
me to your own house:" 
6. On hearing the words of the daughter of Himalaya (Parvati)

=== PAGE 390 ===

380 
Skanda Pura7Ja 
thus, Girisa who was aware of the reality, left Him:alaya and 
came to his own Anandavana. 
7. On reaching Anandavana, the cause of great bliss, the 
Goddess forgot the abode of her father and became one of 
the very form of bliss. 
8. Then Gauri intimated to Girisa once: "How is it that in 
this holy spot here, there is a mass of continuous bliss? Kindly 
let me know." 
9-1 5. On hearing this speech of Gauri, the Pinaka-bearing 
Lord replied: "In this holy spot, the abode of salvation, ex­
tending over five Krosas, 0 Goddess, there is not a spot even 
as minute as a gingelly seed without a Liriga. Around each of 
these Lirigas, the ground to the extent of a Krosa too shall be 
the giver of bliss. 0 Goddess, here in this Anandavana, the 
cause of great bliss, there are many Lirigas in the form of 
highest bliss. By the contented and blessed people living in 
all the fourteen worlds, excess of contentment has been at­
tained by making Lirigas here after their respective names. 
Even Se!ia with his special knowledge does not know the extent 
of the welfare of a person by whom my Liriga has been in­
stalled, 0 great Goddess. 0 Goddess, born of the Mountain, 
that is why this holy spot is the cause of great bliss which is 
beyond calculation due to the numerous Lirigas. " 
1 6-18. 
On hearing this the great Goddess bowed down to 
the feet of the Lord once again and cajoled him: "0 Mahadeva, 
grant me permission to instal my own Liriga. Getting the permission 
of the husband a chaste lady attains welfare. There is no loss 
of her welfare even in Sarhvarta." Mter propitiating the Lord 
of Devas and getting the consent of Mahe5ita, the Liriga was 
installed in the vicinity of Mahadeva by Gauri. 
19. By visiting that Liriga all sins including BrahmaQ.a-slaughter 
will get dissolved. There is no doubt about it. There shall be 
no further bondage within a body. 
20. 0 sage, listen to the boon granted by the Lord of Devas 
in respect to that Liriga with a desire for the welfare of devo­
tees. 
2 1 . At the death of the person who worships the Liriga 
named Parvatisa, he will become a Kasi Liriga. 
22-25. 
After becoming a Kasi Liriga he will enter me. 
One who adores Parvatisa on the third lunar day in the

=== PAGE 391 ===

IV.ii.91 . 1-l l 
381 
bright half of Caitra, gets all fortune here and excellent goal 
hereafter. If the woman or man propitiates Parvatisvara, she 
or he will never enter a womb thereafter. She/he will attain 
all good fortune. If the devotee utters even the name of Parvatisa 
Linga, the (accumulated) sin of a thousand births perishes 
instantly. The excellent man who listens to the greatness of 
Parvati:Sa becomes a man of great intellect and obtains all the 
desires of this world as well as that of the other world. 
CHAPTER NINETYONf. 
The Greatness of Gangesvara 
Skanda said: 
1-4. 
0 sinless one, the greatness of Parvatisa has been 
recounted to you. 0 sage, listen now to the origin of Gangesvara, 
on iistening to which one shall attain the merit of a bath in 
Ganga wherever he may be. When Ganga along with Dilipa's 
son Bhagiratha had a confluence with CakrapuᔻkariQ.i Tirtha 
in this Anandakanana, she knew the unparalleled power of the 
holy spot born of the protection assured by Sarhbhu. Mter 
recollecting the superb benefit of the installation of a Linga 
in Kasi, a splendid Linga was installed by Ganga. 
5-9. 
Rare indeed is the sight of Gange§vara Linga in Kasl. 
If a devotee worships Gangesa on the Dasahara (tenth day in 
the bright half of JyeHha) , his sin accumulated in the course 
of a thousand births perishes instantly. 
In Kali age, Gange§vara Linga shall mostly be concealed. 
It's sight is conducive to merit unto all men. If the rare Gange§vara 
Linga is seen by anyone, undoubtedly Ganga is directly seen 
by him. 0 son of Mitra and VaruQ.a, there is no doubt about 
this that Ganga, the remover of all sins, is of very rare acces­
sibility in Kali age. Kasi is of still rare accessibility when Tiᔻya 
(Kali age) arrives. 
1 0-1 1 . 
More than that, the Linga named Gangesvara is of 
yet rarer accessibility in Kasl. The visit thereof is conducive 
to the destruction of sins. If a devotee listens to the greatness

=== PAGE 392 ===

382 
Skanda Purii'T}a 
of Gangda, he will never fall into a hell. He will obtain the 
mass of requisite merits and derive whatever is coveted. 
CHAPTER NINETYfWO 
The Story of Narmadesvara 
Skanda said: 
1 . 0 sage, I shall narrate to you the greatness of Narmadda. 
Merely by thinking of it all the great sins perish. 
2. In the beginning of this Varahakalpa the leading sages 
asked: "0 son of MrkaQ.9u, which is the most excellent river? 
Tell us." 
Miirka'T}tf,eya said: 
3. 
0 sages, listen all of you. There are hundreds of rivers. 
All of them remove sins. All of them are bestowers of merit. 
4-5. Of all the rivers, those that fall into the seas are the 
most excellent. Of all those rivers Ganga, Yamuna, Narmada 
and Sarasvatl are the most excellent rivers. Among the rivers, 
0 eminent sages, these four are highly meritorious. 
6. 
Ganga is the embodiment of ᕗgveda. Yamuna is cer­
tainly Yajurveda. Narmada shall be Samaveda personified and 
Sarasvatl Atharva Veda. 
7. Ganga is the origin of all rivers and it fills the ocean. 
No excellent river can attain equality with Ganga. 
8. 
But formerly Reva (Narmada) performed penance for 
a long time. 0 excellent one, the creator (Brahma) who was 
ready to grant the boons was requested thus: 
9-13. "0 Vidhi (Creator) , 0 Lord, if you are pleased, grant 
me equality with Ganga. " Thereupon Narmada was told smil­
ingly by Brahma: "If equality with the Three-eyed Lord can be 
attained by anyone else, the equality with Ganga can also be 
obtained by another river. If at any place another man can be 
equal to Puruᕇottama, then another river can attain equality 
with Ganga. If at any place another woman can be on a par 
with Gaurl, another river shall attain equality with the celestial

=== PAGE 393 ===

IV.ii. 92. 1 4-28 
383 
river. If by any means another city can be equal to the city 
of Kasi, then another river can obtain similarity with the heavenly 
river. " 
14. 
On hearing these words of Vidhi (Brahma) Narmada, 
the excellent river, refused the boon of the Creator and came 
to the city of VaraQ.asi. 
15. 
Of all the meritorious rites no other rite than the 
installation of a Linga at Kasi has been declared by some as 
a rite causing greatest welfare. 
1 6. 
Thereafter, the meritorious river Narmada made the 
installation duly in the Pilipila Tirtha near TriviHapa. 
17. 
Thereupon Sambhu became pleased with that splen-
did-souled river end said: "0 blessed one, JJ sinless one, choose 
whatever boon appeals to you." 
1 8-27. 
On hearing this, Reva, the most excellent river, 
said to Mahdvara: "0 Dhurjati, of what avail here is a worth­
less boon, 0 Lord of Devas. 0 Mahdvara, may my devotion 
be unswerving towards the pair of your feet. " On hearing this 
very excellent statement of Reva the Lord became extremely 
delighted and said: "Let what you said be so. 0 abode of 
merits, I am granting you another boon. Take it. 
By my blessings, 0 Narmada, all the stones on your banks 
will be in the form of Lingas. 
I shall grant you another excellent boon unachievable in 
fact by means of masses of austerities. Hear that too. 
Ganga removes sins instantly. Yamuna does it in seven days 
and Sarasvati in three days but you remove merely at your 
sight. 
I shall grant another boon too, 0 Narmada that dispel sins 
at mere sight. The Liilga named Narmadesvara installed by 
you is highly meritorious and it will accord eternal salvation. 
The son of Surya (i.e. god of Death) will assiduously bow 
down on seeing the devotees of this Lii1ga for the . sake of 
increasing great welfare. 0 noble lady, there are many Liilgas 
in Kasi at every step, but the greatness of Narmadesa is some­
thing miraculous. " 
Mter saying thus the Lord of Devas merged into that Linga. 
28. Mter attaining the miraculous sanctity Narmada became 
extremely delighted. The remover of sins at the mere sight, 
Narmada returned to her own land.

=== PAGE 394 ===

384 
Skanda Purii:T}a 
29. On hearing the words of the saintly son of MrkaQ.c;ia, 
those eminent sages became delighted in their minds. They 
carried out the tasks beneficial to them. 
Skanda said: 
30. On hearing the greatness of Narmadesa, a man endowed 
with devotion shall cast off the slough of sins and will attain 
excellent knowledge. 
CHAPTER NINETYfHREE 
Manifestation of Sat'iSvara 
Agastya said: 
1 . The greatness of Narmadesa which destroyed sins has 
been heard. Now, 0 Skanda, recount the origin of Satisvara. 
Skanda said: 
2-3. 0 sage born of Mitra and VaruQ.a, I shall narrate the 
story, listen, how Satisvara Liilga manifestated itself in Kasi. 
0 sage, formerly Satadhrti (Brahma) performed a very great 
penance. Pleased by that penance, the Lord of Devas was ready 
to grant the boons. 
4. The omniscient Lord, fond of BrahmaQ.as, told Brahma, 
"0 creator of the worlds, choose the boon." 
Brahmii said: 
5. 
0 Lord of Devas, if you are pleased and if you will grant 
me the desired boon, then you be my son and may the Goddess 
be the daughter of Dakᕇa. 
6. 
On hearing this as the boon desired by Brahma, the 
great Lord looked at the face of the Goddess and smiled. 
Then he spoke to the Four-faced Lord: 
7. 
"0 Brahma, may your desire come to be true. 0 Grand­
father, what is it that cannot be given?" Mter saying this, the

=== PAGE 395 ===

IV.ii.93.8-23 
385 
Moon-crested Lord came out of the forehead of Brahma. 
8-1 0. That boy went on crying looking at the face of Brahma. 
Thereafter Brahma saw and spoke to the crying child, ''Why 
do you cry again and again even after obtaining me as your 
father?" On hearing what was said by Brahma, the child said, 
"I am crying for the name. Give me a name, 0 Creator, 0 
Grandfather. " That magical infant (Miiyiuf,imbha) got the name 
Rudra because he cried. 
Agastya said: 
1 1 . 0 Six-faced One, though Isa assumed the form of an 
infant, why did he cry? If you know explain it to me. My 
eagerness is very great. 
Skanda said 
12. Due to the fact that I am a son of the omniscient Lord, 
I know something. I shall tell the cause of crying. Listen, 0 
Pot-born One. 
1 3-1 4. 
A thought occurred in the mind of the Lord, the 
Supreme Soul, to test the sharpness of the intellect of the 
four-faced Parameᕇ!hin (Brahma) , Vedhas, the sole lord of Satyaloka. 
Hence out of delight there was abundance of tears in (the 
eyes) of Mahesa. 
Agastya said: 
1 5-1 6. 
What is that sharpness of intellect of Brahma no­
ticed by Sambhu in his mind, whereby there was abundance 
of tears of joy in the Lord even during the time of infancy? 
Tell me this, 0 wise one, 0 increaser of the bliss of the omniscient 
Lord. 
On hearing the words uttered by Agastya the enemy of Taraka 
said: 
1 7-23. 
"0 Pot-born Sage, it was this that the Lor.d men­
tally considered. The Lord aware of everything knew that Vidhi's 
wish was like this: 'Who is competent to redeem the father 
except his progeny? This is one of my desires. The second 
desire is certainly this. This (Lord Siva) is the remover of the 
rebirth of a person who remembers (him) . If he becomes the

=== PAGE 396 ===

386 
Skanda Purii:rJa 
child, I shall obtain every moment perfect vision, the touch 
of the limbs, the opportunity of sharing the same bed, seat 
and diet etc. with him .. After becoming the child, what wished­
for thing will not be given to me by him. who is beyond the 
ken of speech and mind? The creature that touches him once, 
that joyously sees him once will not be born again. It will 
become great in bliss. Undoubtedly I shall become the recep­
tacle of the greatest happiness if he somehow becomes a play­
thing in the house.' Thus by realizing the wish of Vidhi, the 
Lord had tears of joy in all the three eyes. " 
24-25. 
On hearing this utterance of Skanda, Agastya re­
joiced very much. He bowed down at his feet and said: "Be 
victorious, 0 son of the omniscient Lord; obeisance to you, 
the soul of bliss. The mind of Vidhi and the innermost thought 
of Sambhu have been perfectly understood by you. " 
26-27. 
Skanda too was extremely satisfied to notice the 
delight of the listener. "0 Agastya, you are blessed, you are 
blessed. You know how to listen correctly. My effort in nar­
rating this tale to you has not gone in vain. " After saying · this 
to Agastya, the Six-faced Lord said once again: 
28-29. 
"When the Lord assumed the form of Rudra, the 
Goddess became the daughter of DakTa. Sati, that daughter of 
DakTa, was desirous of a husband. She performed a fierce 
penance in &HI. She saw Hara in front manifesting himself 
in the form of Liriga and saying clearly, '0 great Goddess, 
enough of your penance. ' 
30-35. 
(He continued) "This Liriga will be named Satlsvara 
Liriga after your name. 0 daughter of DakTa, just as your 
desire has been fulfilled here, so the desire of anyone else also 
will be fulfilled by propitiating this Liriga. 
A virgin will attain a husband far beyond her expectation 
by propitiating this Liriga; similarly a young man, an excellent 
wife. Whatever whoever desires, that will be realized by him 
by adoring Sati:S-vara.. There is no doubt about it. 
After worshipping Satisvara if anyone desires anything, that 
desire will soon be fulfilled. On the eighth day from today 
your father, the Patriarch, will give you, his daughter, to me. 
Your desire is fruitful. " After saying this, the Lord of the chiefs 
of Devas vanished there itself. 
36. That Sati, the daughter of DakTa, joyously went home.

=== PAGE 397 ===

IV.ii.93.37-IV.ii.94.9 
387 
On the eighth day the father gave her to Rudra. 
Skanda said: 
37-38. 
Thus Satisvara Linga manifested itself in Kasi. 0 
sage, if it is even recollected the Liilga shall accord the great­
est SattvaguQ.a. By visiting Satisvara Liilga to the east of Ratnesa, 
the devotee is rid of sins immediately and he derives knowl­
edge in due course. 
CHAPTER NINETYFOl)R 
Manifestation of Amrte.Sa and Other Lingas 
Skanda said: 
1-2. 
0 great sage, I shall describe other Lii::gas too, the 
chief among which is Amrtesa. The very name of these Liilgas 
bestows nectar. 
Formerly there was a sage here (in Kasi) leading the life 
of a householder. His name was Sanaru. He was always en­
gaged in Brahmayajiia (teaching Vedas) . He always considered 
guests as his deity. 
3. 
He was always engaged in the adoration of the Liilga. 
He never took monetary gifts from pilgrims in the holy spot. 
The son of Sage Sanaru was Upajailghani. 
4. 
Once he went to a forest where he was bitten by a 
serpent. Then he -was brought to his hermitagՉ by his friends. 
5. After heaving a heavy sigh Sanaru took Upajailghani to 
the cremation ground in the vicinity of Svargadvara. 
6-7. A Liilga in the shape of a Bilva fruit (Sriphala) was lying 
as if hidden there. The sensible sage had placed the dead body 
there and thought: 'How can the boy bitten by a serpent be 
cremated? ' In the meantime the boy Upajanghani was revived 
to life. He got up like one who had been sleeping. 
8. 
On seeing Upajailghani alive and active once again, Sanaru 
was struck with great wonder. 
9. 
'What is the cause of my son Upajailghani's ability to

=== PAGE 398 ===

388 
Skanda Purii7J.a 
be alive and active? The serpent that bit him outside the holy 
spot had not made him dead (when brought within this holy 
place ) . ' 
1 0-1 2. 
Even as the sage was pondering over the resusci­
tation of the son, an ant brought another dead ant there itself, 
which also regained life and walked away. After knowing the 
truth indicated by the revival the sage dug up the ground with 
his soft palm. There a Liilga of the size of a Bilva fruit was 
seen by him. 
1 3-14. 
That Liilga was adored there by Sanaru along with 
all the members of his family; a name Amrtesvara also was 
assigned to that long standing ancient Linga. One shall cer­
tai nly attain i m m ortality by touc h i n g this Linga i n 
Anandakanana. 
1 5-16. After worshipping Amrtesa that sage reached his home 
with the son resuscitated. It was seen by the people with wonder. 
Ever since then, 0 eminent sage, that Amrtesa Liilga has been 
bestowing spiritual power on men in Kasl. It may become 
hidden once again in Kali age. 
1 7. 
On coming in touch with Amrte8vara dead persons 
come to life instantly. Merely by touching it those who are 
alive attain immortality. 
18. 
There is no other Liilga anywhere on the earth equal 
to Amrte8a. In Kali Yuga it is rendered hidden by Sarilbhu 
intentionally. 
19. 
If even the name of Amrtesvara in Kasl is remem­
bered by people, they will never have the fear arising .from 
malignant Planets etc. 
20. 
0 sage, there is another great Linga named KaruQ.esvara 
in the vicinity of Mokᔻadvara in front of Mokᔻadvaresvara. 
2 1-23. By visiting that highly merciful Linga no one will be 
able to go out of the holy spot (i.e., will get salvation there 
itself) . 
Holy ablution should be taken in MaQ.ikarQ.ika. KaruQ.esvara 
should be visited. Fear arising from obstacles to the holy spot 
should be joyously discarded. 
On Mondays the devotee shall observe the vow of taking in 
food once only (per day) . The observer of the Vrata should 
worship KaruQ.esvara with KaruQ.amalli flowers. 
24. 
Satisfied with that Vrata Lord KaruQ.esvara will never

=== PAGE 399 ===

IV.ii.94.25-37 
389 
banish him from the holy spot. Hence this Vrata should be 
observed. 
25-28. 
Karmᕘesvara may also be worshipped with the leaves 
or the fruits thereof (i.e. of the Karul).amallika plant) . If a 
person devoid of perfect knowledge does not know that Liilga, 
he will worship Karul).a plant uttering "May the Lord of Devas 
be pleased. " 
I f a twice-born observes this Vrata every Monday for a year 
Karul).esa shall become pleased with him and shall grant him 
whatever is desired. Karul).eSa should be visited purposefully 
here in Kasi by men. 
Thus the excellent greatness of Karul).eSa has been narrated 
to you, on hearing which no fear arising from obstacles shall 
occur in Kasi. 
• 
29. 
By v i s i ti n g b o th , i . e . , Svargadvaresvara1 a n d 
Mokᔻadvaresvara in Kasi, one shall obtain heavenly pleasures 
and salvation. 
30. Another Liilga namely jyotirupesvara Liilga shines in 
Kasi. By worshipping it the devotees become brilliant in form. 
3 1 . There is no doubt about it that a man obtains radiance 
in form by worshipping the great Lord Jyotirupesvara on the 
banks of the Cakrapuᔻkaril).i. 
32. 
Ever since the advent there of the excellent river 
Bhagirathi, the celestial river joyously worships that Liilga. 
33. 
Formerly when Viᔻl).u was performing penance here, 
that lustrous Liilga manifested itself here. Hence, this holy 
spot is splendid. 
34. 
Even if a person meditates on jyotirupesvara on the 
banks of Cakrapuᕇkaril).i or from a long distance, Siddhi can­
not be far away from him. 
35. 
0 excellent one, among all these fourteen Liilgas, eight 
Liilgas are of great power. They are like forest-fire unto the 
seeds of Karmas. 
36-37. 
These thirty-six Liilgas are conducive to the great­
ness of the holy spot: the fourteen Liilgas beginning with 
Omkara, the great eight Liilgas beginning with Dakᕇesvara 
and the. fourteen Liilgas beginning with Sailesa. 
1. Svargadvareivara-A temple ·set into the city ofVaral).asi several hundred 
yards up-hill from the river along the lane called Brahma Nala which was 
formerly a rivulet. (BCL. 251)

=== PAGE 400 ===

390 
Skanda Purii7J.a 
38. Sadasiva in the form of the thirty-six Tattvas1 (viz. five 
Suddha, seven Suddhiisuddha and twenty-four Asuddha) is sta­
tioned in these Liilgas always in this holy spot and imparts the 
Taraka knowledge. 
39. This is the central principle indeed in the form of thirty­
six Liilgas. By resorting to these, all wretched states (such as 
Hell) can be averted. 
40. 0 
sage, certainly these Liilgas are highly mysterious 
and esoteric. Due to the power of these Liil.gas, salvation here 
is assured. 
4 1 . 0 highly intelligent one, Kasl is the holy spot of salva­
tion, due to these LiiJ.gas. These other Liilgas manifest them­
selves in every Yuga. 
42. This holy spot Anandakanana of Sarhbhu is beginningless. 
Those who attain permanent stability (or death) here are un­
doubtedly liberated ones. 
43. Yogic Siddhi is definitely achieved here; so also Tapassiddhi 
(i.e. the fruit of penance) ; Siddhis (attainment of 'fruits') in 
Vratas, Mantras, Tlrtha are certainly achieved here. 
44. The Anandava!ika ( 'pleasure grove ' ) of Sarhbhu is the 
source of origin of what is called the set of eight Siddhis, the 
great ones, beginning with Ar:tima. 
45. This Anandakanana is the abode of the glory of salva­
tion. This is attained through merits and should not be aban­
doned by one afraid of worldly existence. 
46. This alone is the great profit; this alone is the most 
excellent penance; this alone is the highest merit that Varar:tasl 
is obtained. 
47-.48. 
Death is inevitable to one who is born and it may 
happen anywhere. The goal to be obtained afterwards may be 
auspicious or inauspicious in accordance with the Karmas. 
After realizing that death . is inevitable and that one attains a 
condition in accordance with one 's Karmas, Kasika should be 
resorted to positively because it eradicates all Karmas. 
I. The thirty-six Tattvas are as follows: 
(i) 
Five Suddha Tattvas are: Siva, Sakti, Sadasiva, Isvara and Vidya. 
(ii) Seven Suddhiiiuddha Tattvas are: Maya, Kala, Niyati, Kala, Avidya, Raga 
and PuruŤa. 
(iii) Twenty-four Aiuddha Tattvas are: Pralqti, Buddhi, Aharilkara, five Tanmatras, 
five Mahabhutas, Manas, five cognitive organs and five conative organs.

=== PAGE 401 ===

IV.ii.94.49-IV.ii.95.1 
391 
49. Mter attaining human birth, though the life may be 
extending over only a moment, those who do not resort to the 
city of KaSi, are deprived of everything they possess. They are 
dull-witted. 
50. Rare is human birth and rare is the city of Kasi. Those 
who are in contact with both are undoubtedly liberated. 
5 1 . Where are such austerities here; where is that excellent 
Yoga whereby liberation is obtained? The most excellent sal­
vation is obtained by residing here in Kasi. 
52. It is truth. Again (I affirm that) it is the truth. Again 
and again, it is asserted as truth. There is no other place on 
the earth like Kasi for the attainment of salvation. 
53. Visvesa is the bestower of salvation,. always. The north­
flowing (river) is conducive to salvation. There is liberation 
in Anandakanana. Salvation is to be attained nowhere else. 
54. The only bestower of salvation is Visvesa. No one else. 
He makes (people) reach Kasi and grants salvation (to them) 
and not through other means. 
55. Sayujya Mukti (i.e. liberation in the form of complete 
unification in God) is to be attained here alone. Sannidhyadi 
( 'nearness to Siva etc.') can be attained through other means. 
This too is not easily obtained certainly (elsewhere) . But salvation 
in Kasi is easily obtained. 
Skanda said: 
56. Listen, 0 Agastya, the most fortunate one; I shall tell 
you the future that Kn:Q.advaipayana Vyasa will speak as a great 
statement later on and what he will do afterwards in order to 
come to a decisive conclusion. 
CHAPTER NINETYFIVE 
Vyasa 's Arms Get Paralysed 
Vyasa said: 
1 . Listen, 0 highly intelligent Siita, to what has been stated 
by Skanda as the future concerning me to the highly intelli­
gent Pot-born (Agastya) .

=== PAGE 402 ===

392 
Ska.'tda Puriir.ta 
Skanda said: 
2. 
Listen, 0 blessed sage, 0 son of Mitra and Varul).a, how 
the excellent sage, the son of Par:Hara, will be getting de­
luded. 
3-5. The highly intelligent Vyasa divided the Vedas into many 
Sakhas {branches) . He taught Siita and others the eighteen 
Pural).as. He composed a work entitled Mahabharata that can 
be called the innermost secret (essence) of the Srutis, Smrtis 
and Pural).as and which is the most fascinating one. It subdues 
all sins. It gives perfect peace. By merely listening to it, the 
sin of killing a Brahmal).a is destroyed. 
6-1 0. 
Once that glorious sage was wandering over the 
earth when he reached NaimiᔻaraQ.ya where there were lead­
ing sages Saunaka and others. These ascetics numbered eighty­
eight thousand. TripuQ.<;lras embellished their great foreheads 
and they wore shining Rudrakᔻa necklaces. Vyasa saw them 
pi.ously smeared with holy ash, desirous of frequent reciting 
with devotion Rudra Siiktas, engaged in the propitiation of 
Lirigas. They were reverently and with attention uttering the 
name of Siva. They were decisive in their minds and so were 
always asserting: "Visvesa is one alone. He and no one else is 
the bestower of salvation." On seeing them all with their souls 
in communion with Girisa, Sage Vyasa lifted up his index 
finger and said thus again: 
Vyiisa 's Statement: 1.1-19. 
1 1 . 
"After churning the vast expanse of words and com-
ing to firm conclusions again and again, this alone has been 
understood (by me that) , Hari, the Lord of all, should be 
resorted to. 
1 2. 
In Veda, in Pural).as, in RamayaQ.a and in Bharata, 
Hari alone and no one else comes in the beginning, middle 
and end. 
1 3. 
This is the truth; this is the truth; this is the truth, 
thrice asserted. It is not false to assert that there is no scrip­
ture other than Veda; there is no God other than Acyuta. 
1 4. 
The Lord of Laᕙmi, is the bestower of everything. 
No one else. Lakᕇmisa is the bestower of salvation. Hence 
Lakᕇmisa alone should be meditated upon. No one else.

=== PAGE 403 ===

IV.ii.95. 15-26 
393 
15. 
No one other than Janardan a is the bestower 
of enjoyment of pleasures here and of salvation hereafter. 
Hence the Four-armed Lord should always be resorted to by 
those who desire happiness. 
1 6. 
Those men of little intellect who serve another (de-
ity) abandoning Kdava, enter the mysterious and painful cycle 
of worldly existence again and again. 
1 7. 
There is only one Lord of all. Hnikda is greater 
than the greatest. One who serves him shall be worthy of 
being served by the three worlds. 
18. 
There is only one bestower of virtue, who is ViᔻQU. 
There is only one bestower of much wealth, who is Hari. 
There is only one bestower of enjoyment, who is the Discus­
bearing Lord. There is only one bestower of salvation, i.e. 
Acyuta. 
19. 
Those who adore another Lord forsaking the Saniga-
wielding Lord, should be banished like a twice-born (BrahmaJ:.la) 
bereft of the Vedas. " 
20. 
On hearing the words of Vyasa thus the residents of 
Naimiᔻa forest became agitated in their hearts. They said these 
words: 
The Sages said: 
21-22. 
0 highly intelligent sage, 0 son of Parasara, you 
are worthy of our honour and esteem because the Vedas have 
been classified by you and you are_ conversant with the PuraQas. 
Also, because you are the author of the great work Bharata 
that gives a definite understanding of virtue, wealth, enjoy­
ment and salvation. 
23-25. 
0 son of Satyavati, who else can be more conver­
sant with the reality and truth here (in this world) ? · The stu­
dents hereof do not have faith in what has been asserted by 
you raising the index finger. They are more likely to have 
faith in the words uttered by you when you emphatically utter 
those words in the Anandavana of Sambhu. 
26. 
0 Vyasa, go to Vara1.1asi where Visvesvara himself is 
present. There are not seen changing features of the different 
Yugas there. Nor does it touch the earth. 
* 
* 
*

=== PAGE 404 ===

394 
Skanda Purii:r;a 
27. 
On hearing this, Sage Vyasa who became angry in his 
mind, left the place quickly accompanied by his disciples 
numbering about ten thousand. 
28. 
On reaching Vara1_1asl, Vyasa, the brilliant and glori-
ous one, took his holy bath in the pond named Paiicanada, 
adored Madhava and went to Padodaka. 
29-40. (Adoration of Adikesava) Vyasa took his bath and 
performed other rites there and visited Adikdava. He spent 
five nights there and was duly honoured by the devotees of 
ViT1_1u. He was delighted with conchs blown behind and in 
front of him. He uttered the various names of the Lord: "Be 
victorious, 0 ViT1_1u. HrTlkesa, Govinda, Madhusiidana, Acyut.a, 
Ananta, Vaiku1_1!ha, Madhava, Upendra, Kesava, Trivikrama, 
Gadapa1_1i, Sani.gapa1_1i, Janardana, SrlvatsavakTas, Srikanta, 
Pltarhbara, Muran taka, Kai!abhari, Balidhvarhsin , Karhsari, 
Kesisiidana, Naraya1_1a, Asuraripu, KrT1_1a, Sauri, Caturbhuja, 
Devaklh rdayan anda ( th e de lighter of D evakl ' s h e art) , 
Yasodanandavardhana (the increaser of the delight of Yasoda) , 
Pu1_1<;larlkakTa, Daityari, Damodara, Balapriya, Balaratistuta, Hari, 
Vasudeva, Vasuprada, ViTvakcamii, TarkTyaratha, Vanamalin, 
Narottama, AdhokՊaja, Ʒamadhara, Padmanabha, Jalesaya, 
Nrsirhha, Yajiiavaraha, Gopa, Gopalavallabha, Goplpati, Gu1_1atlta, 
Garu<;Iadhvaja, Gotrabhrt. Be victorious, 0 Ca1_1uramathana; 
be victorious, 0 protector of the three worlds; be victorious, 
0 beginningless one; be victorious 0 bliss; be victorious, 0 
Lord having the lustre of the blue lotus; 0 Lord with the chest 
adorned by Kaustubha, 0 Lord who dried up all the secretions 
of Piitana; protect, protect, 0 protective jewel of the universe; 
0 destroyer of Naraka, 0 thousand-headed PuruTa. 0 bestower 
of happiness on Indra. What is past and what will be the future, 
there you are the sole PuruTa. " Vyasa eulogized the Lord having 
a garland of sylvan flowers by uttering the names of the Lord. 
He sang with graceful freedom and danced with great joy. 
41-44. 
Sage Vyasa came to the abode (Temple) of Visvesa 
with great delight. He stood along with the devotees of the 
Lord in front of Jiianavapl. An excellent garland of Tulasl 
leaves made his neck shine. He beat the time himself, holding 
the cymbals. He himself became the dancer. He was conver­
sant with playing on the flute. He himself held the Sruti. Mter 
concluding the dance thus, Vyasa, the son of Satyavatl, stood

=== PAGE 405 ===

IV.ii.95.45-56 
395 
in the middle of his disciples and lifted up his· right hand. He 
recited the same verses singing them aloud: 
45. 
"Mter churning the vast expanse of words and com-
ing to firm conclusions, this alone has been understood (by 
me) that Hari, the Lord of all, should be resorted to. " 
46-47. 
All the verses beginning with the above indicating 
his assertion, Vyasa recited with the left hand raised. Thereupon 
Sailadi made the hand paralysed playfully. There was also 
stupefaction of the power of speech of the excellent sage Vyasa. 
48. 
Thereupon ViTJ}.U came there secretly and spoke to 
Vyasa: "0 Vyasa, a great offence has certainly been committed 
by you. 
49. 
Even I am greatly afraid due to this offence of yours. 
There is only one Lord of the universe,Ջ and he is Visvesa. 
There is no one else. 
50. 
I am the discus-bearer, due to his favour. I am the 
Lord of LakTml due to his power. It was by Sarilbhu himself 
that the capacity to sustain the three worlds was granted to me. 
5 1 . 
Due to the devotion to him the greatest 
Aisvarya 
(prosperity, lordship) was obtained by me as a boon from 
him. If you desire my welfare, eulogize Sambhu. 
52. 
Do not entertain a thought like this to eulogize me 
on any other occasion, 0 son of Parasara. " On hearing this, 
Vyasa expressed by means of gestures: 
53-54. 
"The paralysis of the arm has been brought about 
by that Nandin by his mere eyes. The stunning of the speech 
has been caused by my fear of him. Touch the root of my 
throat so that I shall be able to eulogize Bhavanlsa, the de­
stroyer of worldly existence. " Mter touching his throat, ViTJ}.U 
secretly went away. 
55. 
Thereupon the son of Satyavatl whose arm had been 
paralysed in that manner, began to eulogize Mahesana liberal­
mindedly. 
Vyasa said: 
(Vyasa 's Prayer) 
(56-63) 
56. 
Brahman alone is one. There are not many entities 
here. Hence Rudra is only one. There is none second to him.

=== PAGE 406 ===

396 
Skanda Purii:!J-a 
If there be anyone else anywhere, let him who has the capacity 
to do so, explain it to me. 
57. 
Highly terrible poison Kalakiita with flaming sparks 
around was born of the Milk Ocean, due to the churning with 
Mandara. No one other than Mahesa could endure it. On 
account of its flames, Vigm turned back. 
58. 
Sripati (Vigm) was his arrow. The entire earth was 
his chariot. Brahma, the Lord of the world, was his charioteer. 
The horses were the Vedas. Who is on a par with Rudra by 
whom the group of three Puras was burned by the discharge 
of the arrow? 
59. 
Kandarpa who was the sole conqueror of the uni-
verse through his flowery arrows, viewed Rudra as of the same 
level as the other Devas. He himself was reduced to ashes. 
Who is worthy of eulogy other than that conqueror of Kama? 
60. 
Which man of meagre intellect like me (can) under-
stand ViSvanatha in his true self, because the Veda does not 
know him? Neither ViTI).U nor Brahma, neither mind nor speech 
know that Lord of Devas. 
6 1 . 
I bow down to him wherein everything is stationed, 
who is everywhere, who is all, who is the maker, who is the 
protector, who is the destroyer, who has no beginning, who 
is the beginning (cause) of everything, who is the sole one, 
who has no end and who causes the end of everything. 
62. 
(He is that Lord) the utterance of whose one name 
is on a par with a horse-sacrifice; by a single bowing down to 
whom LakTmi (glory) was attained by the insignificant Indra; 
by whose eulogy Satyaloka is obtained and by whose adoration 
the glory of salvation is not far off. 
63. 
I do not know any other Lord than Srimahesa; I do 
not eulogize another Lord except Sarilbhu; I do not bow down 
to a Lord other than the Three-eyed One. This is the truth, 
the truth, the truth, not a lie." 
64. 
When the great sage eulogized Sarilbhu thus, there 
was a favourable glance from Sarilbhu whereby Nandin undid 
the paralysis of his arm and smilingly said, "Obeisance to all 
of you Brahmal).as." 
Nandikesvara said: 
65. 
0 Vyasa, this prayer proclaimed by you is highly meri-

=== PAGE 407 ===

IV.ii.95.66-74 
397 
torious. Sailkara becomes pleased with the wise one who will 
read and recite this. 
66. 
This Vyasal!taka ('Eulogy in Eight Verses by Vyasa') 
is to be read and recited in the morning with concentration. 
It makes evil dreams and sins subside. It gives the devotee 
(salvation in the form of) vicinity to Siva. 
67. 
By repeated utterance of this prayer, all the sip.ners 
become rid of their sins, such as a slayer of mother, a slayer 
of father, a killer of cows, a killer of boys, an imbiber of 
liquor, a stealer of gold etc. 
Skanda said: 
68-69. 
Ever since then the son of ᕚarasara became de­
voted to Sarilbhu. Beyond Ghai.ltakarQ.ahrada, he installed the 
Liilga called Vyasdvara. He always embellished himself with 
holy ash. He adorned himself with. Rudrakl!as always. He became 
forever a worshipper of the Liilga. 
70. 
He renounced (all other) holy spots. Mter knowing 
the reality of this holy spot that bestows salvation, he does not 
leave off Kasika till today. 
7 1 . 
A man should take his bath in GhaQ.takarQ.ahrada 
and visit Vyasdvara. Wherever he happens to die, he will be 
on a par with one who dies in VaraQ.asi. 
72. 
Mter adoring Vyasdvara Liilga in Kasi an excellent 
man does not suffer from loss of knowledge at any time. He 
is never assailed (affected) by sins. 
73. 
To the devotees of Vyasesvara there is no fear from 
Kali and Kala; there is neither the fear of sins nor of obstacles 
to the holy spot. 
74. 
Vyasesvara should be visited with effort by the resi-
dents of Kasi who are afraid of sins. They take their holy 
ablution in GhaQ.takarQ.a(hrada) .

=== PAGE 408 ===

398 
Skanda PuriirJ.a 
CHAPTER NINETYSIX 
Vyiisa Released from the Curse 
Agastya enquired: 
1-2. 0 Skanda, how will he curse the city of VaraQ.asi if KrᕇQ.a 
Dvaipayana is an ardent devotee of Sambhu, if he knows the 
secret of the holy place and has known (by personal experi­
ence) the efficacy of the holy spot (VaraQ.asi) and if he was 
the most excellent among the knowers (of spiritual wisdom) ? 
Skanda replied: 
3. 
0 sage, it is the truth that has been enquired about by 
you. I shall narrate it; listen. On your having enquired, I shall 
recount the future story of Vyasa. 
4. 
Ever since Nandin paralysed the arm of that sage, he 
began to eulogize Mahe5ana with great reverence. 
5-6. "There are many Tirthas in Kasi. There are many Liilgas 
in Kasi. Still Visvesa is to be resorted to and MaQ.ikarQ.ika 
should be used for the holy ablution. Among Liilgas the only 
(important one) is Visvesa and among Tirthas it is MaQ.ikarQ.ika." 
Saying thus Vyasa honoured both of them. 
7. Discarding much of verbose talk, everyday he bathed in 
the morning and began to extol the greatness of Mahesita in 
the Pavilion of Salvation. 
8. Everyday, in front of his disciples, the greatness of the 
holy spot was joyously described by Vyasa, the great sage. 
9. Whatever is done here, in this holy spot, auspicious or 
otherwise, does not perish even in Samvarta (final annihila­
tion) . Hence one should regularly practise what is conducive 
to welfare. 
10. 
MaQ.ikarQ.ika should never be abandoned by the wise 
as long as thᕈy live, if they, highly intelligent persons who 
have completed their work (duties) , desire to attain Siddhi of 
this holy place. 
1 1 . 
Ablution should be performed everyday in the 
CakrapuᕇkariQ.i Tirtha (MaQ.ikarQ.ika) . Visvesvara should always 
be adored with flowers (and Bilva) leaves, fruits and water. 
12. 
The duty pertaining to one's own VarQ.a and Asrama

=== PAGE 409 ===

IV.ii.96. 1 3-24 
399 
should not be discarded even in the least. The greatness of 
the holy spot should be incessantly listened to everyday with 
faith. 
1 3. 
Religious gifts are to be made here very secretly and 
in accordance with one's capacity. Cooked food also should 
be given by one who wants to avoid obstacles. 
1 4. 
Extending help to others should be carried out al-
ways by a sensible man. So also the rites of ablution, making 
gifts etc. especially on festive occasions. 
15. 
Special worship should be conducted with elaborate 
celebrations. So also worshipful processions should be taken 
out. The deities of the holy spot should be worshipped. 
16. 
No weak and vulnerable points of anyone should be 
mentioned anywhere here by the wise. 'One should (refrain 
from) other men's wives, other people's possessions and injury 
to others. 
1 7. 
Scandalous words about others should not be uttered. 
Jealousy should not be evinced in regard to others. Untruth 
should not be uttered even when the vital airs are choked in 
the throat. 
1 8-19. One can utter untruth in order to save a creature 
living here. All living beings of this place should be assidu­
ously protected by any means whatsoever, auspicious or inaus­
picious. If one creature is assiduously saved here in Kasi, there 
is no doubt about this that one will attain that merit which 
one is likely to get by protecting the three worlds. 
20. 
Those who stay in Kasi always, those who establish 
the installations within the precincts of the holy spot, should 
be considered Rudras. They are undoubtedly living liberated 
souls. 
2 1 . 
They should be adored. They should be bowed to. 
They should be made happy. If they are happy Visvesvara himself 
will be happy. 
22. 
For the joy of Visvesa, everything possible for acquir-
ing and preserving the good of the people who stay in Kasi 
should be done by even those good men who are far off. 
23. 
Free play of passions should be curbed by those who 
stay here. The fickleness of the mind too should be assidu­
ously avoided here. 
24. 
Death should not be directly desired here. Salvation

=== PAGE 410 ===

400 
Skanda Purii:IJ.a 
too should not be wished for ardently. Means for drying up 
the body should not be undertaken by a sensible man. 
25. 
Perfection in functioning of the body should be desired 
for the fulfilmenᕉ of th·e Vratas, ablution etc. Ample longevity 
should be thought of here for the flourishing growth of the 
great benefit. 
26. 
Self-protection should be done here for the increase 
of the good. One should not even mentally think of abandon­
ing one's body. 
27. 
The good that is obtained in Kaiil in the course of 
a single day is not obtained in the course of even a hundred 
years anywhere else. 
28. 
What i6 obtained elsewhere by means of Yogic prac-
tice throughout the life, is attained in Varat:asi by means of 
a singly Prat:ayama. 
29. 
What is obtained by taking bath in all the Tirthas 
throughout the life, can be obtained in Anandavana by bath­
ing in Mat:ikart:ika alone. 
30. 
What is obtained as merit by worshipping all the Lirigas 
throughout the life, is obtained by worshipping Viiiveiia (only) 
once with faith. 
3 1 . 
Obtaining a sight of Viiiveiia may be possible by ex-
changing that faultless merit which has been acquired in the 
course of a thousand births. 
32. 
By having a sight of Viiiveiivara that merit is perfectly 
obtained that is acquired by duly making the gift of a crore 
of cows. 
33. 
The merit said by the great sages to be obtained by 
making sixteen great religious gifts, comes to men by offering 
flowers unto Viiiveiia. 
34. 
Whatever merit is obtained by everyone through horse-
sacrifice and other Yajiias is acquired by bathing Viiiveiia with 
Paiicamrta. 
35. 
A hundred times of the merit acquired by a faultless 
performance of a thousand Vajapeyas, is obtained by offering 
valuable Naivedyas unto Viiiveiia once (only) . 
36. 
He who dedicates unto Viiiveiia a banner, an umbrella 
and chowries shall obtain the rulership of the entire earth 
under his single Royal Umbrella. 
37. 
Affluent collection of all requisite things will never

=== PAGE 411 ===

IV.ii. 96.38-50 
401 
leave a person who offers to the Lord of the universe all the 
ingredients of the great worship. 
38. 
Wish-yielding celestial trees will spread cool shade in 
the courtyard of the devotee who makes a flower-garden with 
all the flowers of all the seasons. 
39. 
If a devotee offers unto Visvesa a cow for the purpose 
of milk intended for bathing the Lord, his grandfathers will 
reside on the shores of the Milk Ocean. 
40. 
If a devotee gets the coating with lime done in the 
palatial abodes of Viiivesa or gets paintings done (on the wall) , 
his own abode will be painted in Kailasa. 
41-43. 
If a devotee feeds Brahmal}.as, ascetics or Sivayogins 
here in .Kaiil, there is no doubt about t@is that he will get the 
benefit of. feeding a crore of persons with faith for each of 
such persons. 
Penance should be performed here; gifts must be made here; 
Viiivda should be propitiated here by means of baths, Homas, 
Japas etc. What is obtained elsewhere by men by making a crore 
of Japas is obtained here by a hundred and eight Japas only. 
44. 
What is said to be the merit acquired 
through a 
crore of Homas elsewhere by learned sages, can be acquired 
here in Anandakanana through a hundred and eight Ahutis. 
45. 
If Rudrasitktas are recited in .Kasl in the vicinity of 
Viiiveiia, the merit of the recitation of all the Vedas is obtained. 
46. 
I do not know (adequately) the merit of one who 
meditates on the great immutable, Absolute. Residence should 
always be made in .Kaiil. The north-flowing (river) should always 
be resorted to. 
47. 
Even at the time of terrible disaster .Kasl should never 
be abandoned, because Lord Visvapati is the protector (of 
devotees) and the remover of their adversities. 
48. 
Through holy baths, gifts, Japas etc., the day should 
be made fruitful, because the rite performed in .Kasl is con­
ducive to greatness. 
49. 
Krcchracandrayal}.a and other (expiatory) rites· should 
be assiduously performed so that the aberrations of the sense­
organs do not at all harass one here. 
50. 
If the sense-organs corrupt the embodied ones inor­
dinately the desire of obtaining a residence here is not ful­
filled on account of obstacles.

=== PAGE 412 ===

402 
Skanda Purii:TJ-a 
Agastya said: 
5 1 . 
0 Skanda, narrate the characteristic features of those 
rites of Krcchracandrayal).a etc., which Vyasa will be expound­
ing for purifying- the sense-organs. 
Skanda said: 
52. 0 highly intelligent one, I shall describe to you Krcchra1 
etc., through the performance of which a man obtains great 
purity of the body. 
53. 
Piidakrcchra has been explained thus: the devotee takes 
only a single meal at night of what is obtained without request­
ing for it or he fasts a single day. 
54. 
Parr;takrcchra is described as that expiation in which 
the water wherein leaves of banyan, Udumbara, lotus, Bilva 
(are boiled separately2 on each day (in succession ) is drunk 
(with Kusa dipped therein) everyday. 
55. 
Saumyakrcchra has been explained thus: Each of the 
following is separately eaten each day: oil cake, ghee, butter­
milk, wheat flour and water and fast is observed (cf. Yiijiiavalkya 
Smrti 111.32 1 ) . 
56-57. 
A Brahmal).a observing Atikrcchra does as follows: 
He eats Havis in the morning for three days; Havis in the 
evening for three days obtained without request; Havis for 
three days and then observes fast for three days or as before 
takes in a morsel of food and observes fast for three days. 
58. 
Krcchriitikrcchra rite consists of taking in milk for twenty-
one days. Pariika rite is explained as a rite in which a devotee 
observes fast for twelve days. 
59. 
A Brahmal).a performing the Antyapriijiipatya rite does 
as follows: He takes food in the morning for three days, then 
in the evening for three days, and then takes in food not 
begged for three days, and then observes fast for three days. 
60. This (following) rite is known as Siintapanakrcchra. Cow's 
urine, cowdung; milk, curds, ghee and Kusa water-all these 
are mixed together and consumed. Fast is observed for a night. 
1. Krcchra-A generic term for several kinds of expiation. The procedures 
of different kinds of expiation given here in Skanda have variations in other 
Smrti works. For the details see HD IV pp. 1 32-1 52. 
2. Vide HD IV, p. 142 for varieties.

=== PAGE 413 ===

IV.ii.96.61-73 
403 
61 . 
This rite is known as Mahasantapanakrcchra: In it the 
articles prescribed for Santapana are taken severally for six 
days and fast is observed on the seventh. 
62-64. 
A Brahmal).a 
performing Taptakrcchra expiation 
takes bath once. With great concentration and purity he drinks 
for three days hot water, milk, ghee and wind. For three days 
he drinks hot water, then he drinks hot milk for three days 
and then he drinks hot ghee for three days and for three days 
he takes in only air (i.e. observes fast) . If it is milk or water, 
he drinks one Pala thereof and in the case of ghee it is two 
Palas. I have explained Taptakrcchra. 
65. Ekahnikakrcchra is described as follows: The devotee takes 
in cooked barley mixed with cow's urin&. It purifies the body. 
66. 
This is on a par with Prajapatya rite. The hands are 
kept stretched out the whole day. Only air is inhaled. The 
devotee stands in water throughout the night till dawn. 
67. The following rite is known as Candrayar.ta: During the 
dark half of the month, the devotee reduces the number of 
morsels by one everyday and during the bright half increases 
it by one everyday and drinks water three times everyday (The 
maximum number of morsels is fifteen on full-moon day) . 
68. 
This is the injunction regarding Candraya'T_ta: In the 
bright half the number of morsels is increased by one every­
day and is reduced by one in the dark half. Nothing is eaten 
on the new-moon day. 
69. 
A Brahmai.J.a with mental concentration and purity 
shall eat four lumps of rice in the morning and four lumps 
after sunset. This is known as Sisu Candraya1_ta. 
70. 
A devotee with controlled self eats eight riceballs of 
sacrificial food at midday regularly. This is known as Yaticandraya1_ta. 
71 . 
With concentration and mental purity the devotee on 
the whole eats three times eighty (i.e. 240) Havi$ya lumps in 
the course of a month (i.e. eight morsels per day) . ᕊ-le goes 
to the world of Candra (Moon) . 
72. 
Limbs become pure with water, mind with truth, ego 
(Bhutatma) through learning and austerities and intellect becomes 
pure with knowledge. 
73. 
That knowledge comes to men by serving or residing 
in Kasi. The rise of compassion of Visvesa also occurs by serving 
(resorting) to Kasi.

=== PAGE 414 ===

404 
Skanda Purii1Ja 
74-80. 
Then (is) the attainment of Mahodaya ('great rise' 
i.e. salvation) capable of eradicating Karmas. Hence one shall 
duly observe and practise assiduously holy bath, make gifts, 
penance, Japa, Vrata, listen to the Pural).as, resort to the path 
indicated by Smrtis, think of the feet of Visvesa every moment, 
everyday, do worship of the Lingas three times, instal Lingas, · 
converse with good men, repeat the name Siva, Siva, give hospitable 
reception to a guest, make friendship with the other residents 
of the holy spot, to have faith in God, practice humility, re­
main unmoved by honour and insult, be free from lust, give 
up arrogance, practice non-attachment, abstain from violence, 
maintain (oneself) without receiving monetary gifts, be in­
clined to favour others, be free from hypocrisy, jealousy and 
spirit of competitiveness, acquire wealth without craving for 
it, practice non-covetousness, absence of lassitude, want of 
harshness and wretchedness. All these activities of a good man 
should be pursued by a resident of the holy spot. Thus he will 
impart instruction in piety to his disciples everyday. 
8 1 . 
Vyasa will be staying thus: taking bath thrice Ռvery-
day, partaking of the alms received everyday and worshipping 
the Lingas everyday. 
82-88. 
Once Hara was desirous of testing him. He spoke 
to the Goddess: "When Vyasa, the extremely pious one, comes 
for alms today, 0 fair lady, do not give him alms anywhere." 
Saying "So it shall be" to Bhava, the eradicator of worldly 
existence, Bhavani: went round every house. She bowed down 
to all and forbade giving alms to him (and his disciples) . 
Unable to get the alms the sage and his disciples became 
dejected. Seeing that the time had elapsed, he wandered in 
the city again. Alms were duly received by all the other mendicants 
at every house but that sage and his disciples did not receive 
the alms anywhere. Accompanied by his disciples, he concluded 
the evening rites and remained without food thus for the whole 
day and night. The next day the sage performed the midday 
rites and went round the city begging for alms along with his 
disciples. He wandered everywhere visiting every house again 
and again. 
89. 
He did not get alms anywhere like an unlucky fellow 
unable to get money. Then Vyasa, utterly weary after his wandering 
thought:

=== PAGE 415 ===

IV.ii.96.90-103 
405 
90. 
'What may be the reason that alms cannot be ob-
tained though assiduously sought after? ' He 
summoned his 
disciples. Vyasa asked everyone: 
91-95. 
"It seems that all of you too did not get alms. What 
has happened in this city? At my behest two or three of you 
go out. If alms cannot be got even on the second day despite 
best efforts, it is certain that some calamity has befallen arising 
out of great disaster. Instantly there has broken out a great 
famine for food in the entire city. Or a royal punishment has 
been meted out to all the citizens. Otherwise alms have been 
forbidden by someone out of malice towards us. Have the 
citizens become wretched by some mysterious portent fore­
boding evil. Go and find out all these thingՍ and return quickly. " 
Getting the permission from the holy preceptor two or three 
disciples noticed the opulence of the citizens and after return­
ing said thus: 
The Disciples said: 
96-9 7 . 
May the worthy Sir listen. There is no great disas­
ter here. There is no dearth of cooked food anywhere in the 
entire city. How can there be the fear of any mysterious portent 
where sages like you are present and where Visvesvara is directly 
stationed and the celestial river also flows? 
98. 
Even in Vaikm}.tha there is no such affluence as that 
of the householders here in the city of Visvesa. (Cities like) 
Alaka etc. are extremely insignificant. 
99. 
0 great sage, there are not as many jewels in oceans 
as there are in the houses of these people, who partake of the 
remnants of the worship of Visvesa. 
1 00. 
There are heaps of grain in every house. Such heaps 
are not present anywhere in the city of Indra bequeathed by 
the celestial trees. 
1 0 1 . 
There is no poor man anywhere is that entire city 
where VisalakTi herself bestows extensive benefits. 
1 02. 
This Anandakanana is the abode of the glory of sal­
vation where salvation is easily accessible. How can anything 
else be rare there? 
1 03. 
All the women are chaste and have their husbands 
alive. All of them have the form of BhavanL They have dedi­
cated their righteous activities to Visvesa.

=== PAGE 416 ===

406 
Skanda PuraT_ta 
1 04. 
The entire menfolk in Kasi are the leaders of GaQ.as. 
All of them are Kumaras (Lord Karttikeya) . All have Tarakadpᕇᕋi 
(vision of redemption) . 
105-107. Those whose foreheads are marked with Tripui;J.c,lra 
(three parallel lines of holy ash) have become moon-crested 
ones. Even thos.e afflicted with thousands of calamities, do not 
leave Kasi. AI{ of them are Sarvajnas (identical with omni­
scient Lord Siva) . In every house there are students expound­
ing and discussing the topic of Brahman. All their sins have 
been washed off by the heavenly river. They have become the 
four-faced lord Brahma (They are very clever and eloquent.) 
They are the lords of the glory of liberation. They stay permanently 
at the holy spot. 
108. 
Those who have resorted to this holy spot are Hrᕇikesas, 
Puruᕇottamas, and should be known as Acyutas. 
109. 
Whether women or men, all of them are entirely 
perfect, identical with the Three-eyed Lord and the Four-armed 
Lord. 
1 1 0. All of them are SrikaQ.ᔽhas here. All have certainly 
conquered death. Since they are Ardhanarisvaras, they have 
their persons resorted to by the glory of salvation. 
1 1 1 . The mass of piety here is great. There are many great 
heaps of wealth. All desires bear fruit here. Kaivalya (Salva­
tion) is free from impurity here. 
1 1 2. 
Those who die in Kasi do not have any contact with 
a womb thereafter. Neither Kali nor Kala torment this holy 
spot. 
1 1 3-1 14. Sins do not torment those who seek refuge in Visvesa 
in this place. Where Visvesvara is directly present in the form 
of Nada, Bindu and Kala, PraQ.ava with Mantras for its physical 
form is present in the form of Dhvani (sound) . Hence it is 
certain that the Vedas in their physical form are here (they 
are present in personified forms) . 
1 1 5-1 2 1 . Sarasvati is in the form of a river. Therefore, the 
whole of Anandakanana is an abode of scriptures; the 
Dharmasastras have their abode here. It is not false that all 
the Devas in heaven are entirely present here. Serpents come 
here from Rasatala and perform the rite of Nirajana ( 'waving 
of lights') to Visvesa every night by means of the lights of the 
jewels in their hoods. All the oceans along with the herds of

=== PAGE 417 ===

IV.ii. 96. 122-129 
407 
Kamadhenus bathe Visvesvara with the flow of Paiidimrta. The 
five celestial trees, Mandara, Parijata, Santana, Haricandana 
and Kalpadruma, are always present here along with the other 
trees. All the groups of Suras, all the great sages and all the 
Yogins attend upon the Lord of Kasi. Kasi is the abode of 
lores. Kasi is the great home of Lakᕇmi. Kasi is the holy spot 
of salvation. The entire city of Kasi is in the form of the three 
Vedas. 
1 22. 
On hearing this, the son of Parasara of great austere 
penance spoke thus to his disciples: "Repeat this Sloka." 
The Disciples said: 
1 23. 
Kasi is the support of all lores. Kasi is the great home 
of Lakᔻmi. Kasi is the holy spot of salvation. Kasi is the entire 
extent of the three Vedas. 
Skanda said: 
1 24. 
On hearing this, Vyasa shall become blinded with 
anger. His whole body will be burning with the fire of hunger. 
0 Pot-born One, he will curse Ka.Si. 
Vyasa said (i.e. will say): 
1 25. 
May not scholarship continue for three generations! 
May not wealth continue for three generations! May salvation 
not be continuous for three generations! 
Thus Vyasa curses Kasi. 
1 26. 
'Here arrogance of scholarship is excessive. The ar­
rogance of wealth is also excessive here. The residents of this 
place do not give alms due to the arrogance of certainty of 
salvation.' 
1 27. 
Thinking thus Vyasa cursed K,aSi then. Even after cursing, 
the angry sage went for alms. 
1 28. 
He entered every house hurriedly with his eyes directed 
to the sky. He wandered all over the city, but did not get alms 
anywhere. 
1 29. 
Seeing the Sun slightly reddish in its disc (in the 
evening) , he threw the begging bowl down and went towards 
his hermitage.

=== PAGE 418 ===

408 
Skanda Purii:r_ta 
1 30. 
While he was going on, he was requested to be the 
guest receiving alms by Mahadevi (Parvati} who had assumed 
the form of a laywoman and was seated at the portals of her 
house. 
The Housewife said: 
1 3 1 . 
0 holy Sir, mendicants were not seen anywhere to­
day. My lord will never take food without extending hospitality 
to a guest. 
1 32. 
The lord of my house has concluded the rites of 
Vaisvadeva etc. He is waiting for the arrival of a guest. Hence 
do you be the guest. 
1 33-1 34. A householder who eats food alone without a guest, 
actually partakes of a great sin along with his grandfathers. 
Hence do come quickly. Fulfil the desire of my husband who 
wishes to make the life of a householder fruitful by honouring 
a guest. 
1 35-1 37. On hearing this, Vyasa was not angry any more. He 
was surprised. He said to her: 
Vyasa said: 
0 fair lady, who are you? Whence have you come? You have 
not been seen before anywhere. I think, you are piety personi­
fied uniquely. You are pure-minded. All my senses have be­
come delighted on seeing you. 0 Lady who are beautiful in 
every limb, you are sure to be the heavenly nectar itself. Due 
to the fear of being struck by Mandara mountain, you avoided 
staying behind in the Milk Ocean. 
1 38. 
Or (you are) the digit of the Moon who being of the 
New-Moon day and afraid of Rahu is standing in the form of 
a lady fearlessly in Kasi. 
1 39. 
Or you are Kamala (Goddess Lakᔻmi) who have for­
saken your residence in the lotus that closes at night and 
taken up permanent residence in Kasi that (always) shines 
extensively. 
1 40. 
Or are you the embodiment of compassion, remov­
ing all the masses of misery of the residents of KaSi and bestowing 
the greatest bliss? 
1 4 1 . 
Or are you the presiding deity of VaraQ.asi? Or are

=== PAGE 419 ===

IV.ii. 96. 142-153 
409 
you the glorious salvation well-sung about in Kasi? 
142. 
Has my good fortune transformed itself into this female 
form? (Are you the deity) that treats impartially a CaQ.<;lala and 
a person performing sacrifices? 
143. 
Or you may be Bhavani, the destroyer of worldly misery 
and the bestower of a raft (to cross the ocean of Sarilsara) on 
the devotee, as a fruit of his devotion. She is certainly sung 
about in the holy spot. 
144. 
In every respect you are neither a mortal woman, nor 
an Asura woman, neither a Kinnari nor a Vidyadharl or a lady 
of Naga, Gandharva and Yakᔻa tribes. 
145. 
You are certainly the desired deity, someone who 
eradicates my delusion. 0 fair lady, whatever you may be, why 
should I be anxious about it? 
• 
146. 
I have become a dependent (of yours) on seeing you. 
I shall certainly carry out your behest. Do command me. 
147. 
With the only exception of wasting (the power of my 
penance) , I shall do, whatever you command me to do. I am 
at your disposal, 0 lady of splendid eyes. 
148. 
The words of noble ladies like you cannot belittle the 
greatness of good men. But anyhow tell me the truth, 0 auspicious 
lady. Who are you? 
149. 
0 lady of vision free from impurities, how can there 
be untruth in this body of yours? 
On being asked thus by the sage, 0 Pot-born One, she, the 
very vital life of the universe, said: 
1 50. 
"0 sage, I am the lady of the house of a householder 
staying here itself. I see you everyday seeking alms surrounded 
by the group of your disciples. 
15 1-152. You alone do not know me. I know you very well. 
Of what avail is too much of a talk? 0 sage, before the sun 
sets, make the hospitality of my dear lord fruitful. " 
O n hearing it the sage said bowing down with humility: 
Vyasa said: 
1 53. 
0 splendid lady, I abide by a certain rule. If that is 
duly observed, I shall receive the alms once. None on another 
occasion.

=== PAGE 420 ===

410 
Skanda Purii:r;ta 
1 54-1 55a. On hearing the utterance of the sage she said 
thus: "0 sage, speak out unhesitatingly. 0 learned one of 
excellent intellect, what is your rule? By the grace of my hus­
band there is no shortage of anything here." 
1 55b. 
On hearing this that ascetic became pleased within 
himself and said: 
1 56. 
"I have ten thousand disciples. I request for cooked 
food for all of them. Before the sun sets I must take my food. 
Otherwise not." 
1 57. 
On hearing this she too was delighted and said to the 
sage: "Why delay? Go and fetch all your disciples. " 
1 58. 
Again he asked her: "0 good lady, have you such a 
power as to make all my disciples satisfied?" 
159-166a. Smilingly she said to him: "Pue to my husband's 
grace, 0 sage, everything is kept ready in my abode so that 
everyone of the suppliants is satisfied in every respect. We are 
not one of those women who begin to doubt (the power of) 
their ᕌusbands. As soon as a guest or seeker of food comes 
at the house, the rite (of hospitality) is fulfilled. All the quarters 
are full. All the desires are perfectly fulfilled. Due to the grace 
of the feet of the Lord, the entire household is full. Go quickly 
and return along with as many of the seekers of hospitality as 
are there. My husband is one of those of olden times. He does 
not brook delay. My loving husband is fond of guests. Hence 
for the sake of perfect hospitality go hurriedly and return 
before sunset." 
On (hearing this) he was delighted. Hurriedly be called 
together all the disciples from everywhere. After coming back 
he saw her with her eyes waiting for his return. He said, "Mother, 
all have come. Give us food quickly. The sun has come very 
near the mountain of sunset." 
1 66b. 
After saying this the ascetics entered the temple. 
1 67-1 68. As the sages reached the middle of that palace 
they became resplendent like daylight due to the radi­
ance of the jewels in the pavilion thereof. They were 
immediately received and the feet were washed by some 
and others were duly honoured. By a few they were seated 
and served with food. 
1 69. 
On seeing the collection of foodstuffs cooked in divine 
manner their eyes attained the greatest satisfaction and their

=== PAGE 421 ===

IV.ii.96.1 70-180 
41 1 
noses were delighted through the odour. 
1 70. 
By taking i n the c o o k e d fo o d stuffs , 
t h ey 
became extremely satisfied. After the washing of the mouths, 
they were adorned with garlands, garments and sandalpaste. 
1 71-1 74. After concluding the evening rites the sage and 
others sat for a while in front of the householder. They show­
ered him with blessings and got ready to leave. 
Then the hint of a glance was directed at the lady by the 
old householder. She asked: "What is the main pious duty of 
those who reside in holy spots? We shall regulate our life in 
the holy spot in accordance with it." 
On hearing the words of the housewife Sage Vyasa, the 
most excellent one among those who know all about pious 
duties and who were propitiated by the ta?te of dainty delica­
cies drenched with the nectar of her esteem, smilingly replied 
to the lady, the greatest among all-knowers. 
Vyasa said: 
1 75-180. 0 mother of pure inner feelings, 0 bestower of 
honour along with dainty food, that alone is the main pious 
duty that is being practised by you and nothing else. 
You alone who are engrossed in serving your husband are 
aware of the righteous duty. If you ask me still, I shall mention 
some truism to you. 
On being asked, something should be said by one even if 
one knows but very little. 0 auspicious lady, that alone is 
Dharma whereby your aged husband becomes pleased. Noth­
ing else. 
The housewife said: "Well, may this be Dharma. Certainly it 
is being practised in accordance with my capacity. But I am asking 
you about the general acts of piety, something common to all." 
Vyasa replied: 
Words that do not cause disgust and distress, ability to bear 
with the ascendancy of others, doing the duty after careful 
consideration, concern for the prosperity of one's own abode. 
The householder asked: "0 learned one, tell me, which one 
of these Dharmas do you have (performed) ?"

=== PAGE 422 ===

412 
Skanda Pura:r_ta 
1 8 1 . Thereupon Vyasa stood stunned as one cornered. He 
did not say anything. So the ascetic was further addressed by 
the householder: 
182. 
"If these alone that you have enumerated are Dharmas, 
then asceticism was seen among them by you alone. Pronounc­
ing curses was seen excellent by you. 
183. 
Compassion is perfect in you alone. Fortitude is ex­
cellent in you. There is the possibility of curbing lust and 
wrath in you. 
184. 
You alone know very well how to speak words that do 
not cause disgust and distress. Ability to bear with the ascen­
dancy of others is seen perfectly in you alone. 
1 85. You alone are the greatest abode of doing the duty 
after careful consideration. Certainly you show great concern 
for the prosperity of your own abode. 
186. 
Tell me one thing, 0 learned one. If a person does 
not attain his selfish interest due to absence of fortune and 
if he curses angrily, on whom does that curse fall?" 
Vyasa said: 
187. 
If a person does not attain his selfish interest due to 
absence of fortune and he curses angrily, that curse, on the 
contrary, falls on the person who has cursed because he has 
been thoughtless. 
The Householder said: 
188. 
0 Brahma1.1a if, Alas, alms are not received by you 
even after wandering, what is the crime committed by the 
poor residents of the holy spot? 
1 89. 
0 ascetic, listen to my words. If a person is unable 
to bear seeing the opulence in this capital city of mine, he 
alone is one cursed. 
190. 
0 wrathful sage, from now onwards do not stay in my 
holy spot unaffected (by your) curse. You are not worthy enough 
to stay here. 
191-192. The state of being a Rudrapisaca will be the result 
of the wickedness, even if it be very little, perpetrated towards 
the residents of this holy spot. Get out now itself. Be outside 
this holy spot. My holy spot is the sole cause of salvation. It

=== PAGE 423 ===

IV.ii. 96. 193-204 
413 
IS not suitable to persons like you. 
193. 
On hearing this his (Vyasa's) lips and palate became 
dry. He began to tremble. Rolling in front of the feet of Gauri 
he sought refuge in her. 
194. 
Crying bitterly he spoke these words: "Mother, save 
me, save me. I am helpless. I shall be saved if you help me. 
I am puerile. I am your son. 
195. 
Save me who have sought refuge in you. Protect me 
who seek refuge in you. Our defiled mind is the abode of 
many sins. 
196-197. The imprecation of Sarilbhu cannot be altered even 
by your holiness. I too have sought refugᕍ in you. Hence, 0 
Siva, let this be done. Grant me the permission to enter this 
holy spot on the eighth and fourteenth lunar days. The Lord 
will not go against your words." 
198. 
On being requested thus by the sage, Bhavani the 
source of compassion, looked at the face of Mahe5ita and at 
his bidding said, "So it will be." 
199. 
Then both of them Siva and Siva who bring about the 
happiness to the holy spot vanished. Vyasa too confessing his 
own fault went out of the holy spot. 
200. 
Day and night he used to look at the holy spot not 
far from his vision. On the eighth and fourteenth lunar days 
he used to enter the holy spot. 
201 . Even today he looks at the row of palaces in Kasi, 
being stationed on the eastern bank of the celestial river in 
the south-east of Lolarka. 
Skanda said: 
202. 
Thus, 0 Pot-born One, Vyasa will pronounce his 
imprecation on the holy spot. Mter giving his curse he will 
go out instantly. 
203. 
That is why everything will be auspicious to one praising 
the splendour and auspiciousness of the holy spot. Otherwise 
everything will be otherwise. 
204. 
If one listens to this meritorious chapter entitled 
"Vyasaiapavimok;aǓam" ('Release of Vyasa from a curse') one 
will never have the fear from great impassable difficulties and 
portents.

=== PAGE 424 ===

414 
Skanda Puriitta 
CHAPTER NINETYSEVEN 
Holy Spots in Viiriittasi1 
Agastya said: 
1 . 
0 Son of Siva, after listening to the future of Vyasa, 
I am greatly surprised. Now, do narrate the details of the holy 
spots. 
2. 
0 Six-faced One, recount to me all those holy shrines 
that are located in Anandakanana in the form of Lingas. 
Skanda said: 
3. 
0 Pot-born One, I shall tell you how this very question 
was clarified unto the Goddess then by the Lord. Listen. 
The Goddess said: 
4. 
0 Lord Mahesvara, do describe to me all those holy 
shrines and (the places) where they are located in Kasi. 
The Lord of Devas said: 
5. 
Listen, 0 Large-eyed Goddess, Linga is called Tirtha. 
A reservoir of water also is called Tirtha because of its asso­
ciation with an idol. 
6. 
The idols are (of) Brahma, ViᔻIJ.U, Arka (the Sun) , 
Siva, Vighnesvara etc. Where there is a Linga of Siva, that is 
indeed a Tirtha. 
7. 
Mahadeva in VaraiJ.asi is mentioned as the first Tirtha. 
To the north thereof the great well bestows Sᕎrasvatapada (the 
position of a devotee of Goddess Sarasvati) . 
8. 
Seen in the north-east of the holy spot, it dispels the 
bondage of a Pasu (individual soul) . Behind it, VaraiJ.asi in 
embodied form should be worshipped by men. 
9. 
Assiduously worshipped, it always bestows comfortable 
residence (habitation) . To the east of Mahadeva is the excel­
lent Linga called Goprekᔻa. 
1. The locations of most of these holy spots have been noted in previous 
chapters.

=== PAGE 425 ===

IV.ii. 97. 1 0-24 
415 
1 0-1 1 . 
On VlSitmg it, one acquires an excellent gift of 
cows as a fruit thereof. It is known as Goprekᕇa because, formerly 
cows were sent by Sarilbhu himself from the World of Cows 
( Goloka) and they came to Varar;tasi. To the south of Goprekᕇa 
is (the Tirtha) called Dadhicisvara. 
1 2-1 3. 
As a fruit of visiting it, men will derive the benefit 
resulting from the performance of Yajfias. The Tirtha {Liilga) 
Atrisvara worshipped by Madhu and Kaitabha is to the east 
thereof. By visiting that Liilga assiduously, one attains the region 
of Viᕇr;tu. The Liilga (named) Vijvara is known as situated to 
the east of Goprekᕇa. 
1 4. 
By worshipping it a man becomes free from fever instantly. 
To the east thereof is Vedesvara, the bᕏtower of the merit of 
reciting the four Vedas. 
1 5. 
To the north of Vedesvara are ᕐetrajiia (Isvara) and 
Adikesava. By visiting it, the three worlds are certainly seen. 
1 6-17. 
By visiting Sailgamesvara to the east thereof, one 
becomes sinless. The four-faced Liilga named Prayaga installed 
by Brahma, the four-faced Lord, bestows the world of Brahma 
when worshipped. If Gauri, the begetter of Santi (peace) is 
worshipped there, she brings about peace. 
18. To the east (the Liilga named) Kuntisvara should be 
worshipped by men on the banks of Varar;ta. As a result of the 
worship thereof, sons illuminating one's own family are born. 
19-2 1 . 
The Tirtha to the north of Kuntisvara is the eddy 
named Kapila Hrada. Merely by taking bath there and wor­
shipping the Bull-emblemed Lord, one shall derive the full 
benefit of a Rajasuyayajiia. If a Sraddha is performed by the 
sons there, the Manes numbering crores and crores residing 
in hells beginning with Raurava pass on to the region of Pitrs. 
0 sage, the Liilga named Anusuyesvara is to the north of 
Goprekᕇa. 
22-24. 
By visiting it, women shall clearly attain the benefit 
of chastity. 
To the east of that Liilga is Siddhivinayaka who should be 
worshipped. One obtains that Siddhi (spiritual power) which 
one desires, as a result of making obeisance unto him. 
The Liilga of Hirar;tyakasipu is to the west of Gar;tesa. The 
well Hirar;tyakupa is beyond that and it brings about abun­
dance of gold and horses and wealth.

=== PAGE 426 ===

416 
Skanda Purii:r;ta 
25. The Mm:u;Hisuresvara Liriga to the west thereof is also 
the bestower of spiritual power. 
Vrᔻabhesvara to the south-west of Goprekᔻa yields the desired 
fruit. 
26. 
0 sage, the Skanddvara Liriga is to the west of Mahadeva. 
By worshipping that Liriga, men shall attain the state of living 
in the same world as I. 
27-29. 
Verily by the side thereof are Sakhesa, Visakhesa, 
Naigameyesvara as well as other GaQ.as beginning with Nandin. 
Thousands of Lirigas are installed by them. By visiting them, 
men shall attain the state of being in the same world as those 
GaQ.as. Siladesa, the destroyer of corrupt intellect, is to the 
west of Nandi:SvaFa. There HiraQ.yakᔻesvara bestows great strength. 
He is auspicious and splendid. 
30. 
To the south thereof is the Liriga named Anahasa that 
bestows all happiness (happiness unto all) . To the north thereof, 
is the auspicious Liriga named Prasannavadanesa. 
3 1 . As a result of the auspicious vision thereof, a devotee 
stands with face beaming with pleasure. To the north of this 
is the holy pit (named) Prasannoda that bestows freedom from 
impurities on men. 
32. To the west of Attahasa are the Lirigas named after 
Mitra and VaruQ.a. They dispel great sins and bestow their 
worlds. They are to be worshipped. 
33. 
To the south-west of Anahasa is the Liriga named 
Vrddhavasiᔻtha. By worshipping it men get great knowledge. 
34. 
KrᔻQ.esa installed in the vicinity of Vasiᔻthda bestows 
the world of ViᔻQ.U. Yajftavalkyda to the south thereof increases 
spiritual energy. 
35-36. 
Thereafter, one should worship Prahladdvara that 
increases devotional fervour and assiduously worship Svalina 
Liriga to the east thereof. With a desire to bless his devotees 
Siva himself has merged therein. The goal of those who cast 
off their bodies in Svalina is the same as has been laid down 
as the goal of those who wish for the greatest bliss and who 
always abide by spiritual knowledge. 
37. Vairocanesvara Liriga is stationed in front of Svalina. 
To the north thereof is Balisa that causes great strength. 
38-39. 
BaQ.esa Liriga (which is there itself, if) worshipped 
bestows all desires. To the east of Candresvara is the Liriga

=== PAGE 427 ===

IV.ii.97.40-52 
417 
named Vidyeiivara. By resorting to that Liiiga, all the god­
desses of learning become propitiated. Vireiia to the south 
thereof is the deity that confers great Siddhis. 
40. 
There itself is the Goddess Vikata that redeems (the 
devotees) from all miseries. That Mahapitha named Paiicamudra 
should be known as one that yields all Siddhis. 
41 . 
Great Mantras repeatedly recited there become fruit­
ful quickly. Not otherwise. Sagareiivara should be worshipped 
in the north-west corner of that Pitha. 
42. Complete benefit of a horse-sacrifice will be derived 
by worshipping Sagareiivara. Valiiia to the north-east thereof 
is the preventer of birth in animal species. 
43. To the north thereof is Sugriveᕑ who destroys masses 
of great sins. Haniimadiiivara there is the bestower of the merit 
of taking to celibacy. 
44. 
There Jambavatiiivara who bestows great intellect should 
be worshipped. Asvineyeiivara (the idol installed by the twin 
gods Aiivinikumaras) should be worshipped on the western 
bank of Ganga. 
45-48. 
To the north thereof is Bhadrahrada filled with 
the milk of cows. A man who takes his holy dip in Bhadrahrada 
certainly attains that merit which one derives when a thousand 
Kapila (tawny) cows are duly gifted away. 
When the constellation Piirvabhadrapada falls on a full­
moon day, that period is highly auspicious bestowing the merit 
of a horse-sacrifice. By visiting Bhadrt>svara which is on the 
western bank of the Hrada (Eddy) , a devotee shall attain Goloka 
(The World of the Divine Cows) due to the merit thereof. 
There is no doubt in this. 
0 sage, Upaiiantaiiiva is to the south-west of Bhadreiivara. 
49-50. 
One attains great peace by touching that Lii.6a. By 
visiting Upaiiantaiiiva Liiiga, a devotee gets rid of all evils and 
attains a heap of the good. 
To the north thereof, is Cakreiia who causes prevetition of 
the cycle of births in wombs. 
5 1 -52. 
To the north thereof is the Cakrahrada whirlpool 
that increases great merit. A man should take his bath in the 
Cakrahrada and worship Cakreiia. With the innermost soul 
purified, he will attain the world of Siva. To the south-west 
thereof, there is Siileiia. He should be visited with all efforts.

=== PAGE 428 ===

418 
Skanda PuriirJa 
53. 
0 lady of excellent complexion, formerly a trident was 
fixed there for the purpose of taking bath. In front of Sf.de8a, 
a great deep lake ca111e into existence. 
54. 
After taking bath in the Hrada and visiting Lord Siilesvara, 
men attain Rudraloka leaving behind the abyss of the worldly 
existence. 
55. To the east thereof a severe penance was performed 
by Narada. An excellent Liilga was installed and an auspicious 
holy pit was 
made. 
56. 
There is no doubt about this that after taking his holy 
bath in the auspicious Kur:u;la and visiting Naradesvara a man 
will cross the extremely terrible ocean of worldly existence. 
57. By visiting Avabhratakesvara to the east of Naradesvara 
one attains the goal free from impurities and gets rid of the 
mass of sins. 
58. 
In front of it is the Tamrakur.u;la (Holy Copper Pit) . 
One who takes a holy dip therein, does not resort to any 
womb (i.e. gets Mokᕇa) . To the north-west thereof is GaQ.adhyakᕇa. 
the remover of obstacles destroying them completely. 
59. 
There is the holy KuQ.<;la that removes obstacles there. 
One who bathes there never faces obstacles. 
In the northern direction thereof, there is the excellent 
Anarakesvara Liilga. 
60. 
There is the holy KuQ.<;la too named Anaraka. One who 
bathes there never falls in a hell. 
To the north thereof in the charming banks of VaraQ.a is 
Varal}.esa. 
6 1 . 0 great sage, Akᕇapada, the holy Siddha and devotee 
of Pasupati, attained the ultimate fulfilment (Sivaloka) with 
this physical body itself. 
62. 
To the west thereof is Saile8a, the bestower of the 
desired greatest salvation. 
To the south thereof is Koᔽlsvara Liilga, the bestower of 
everlasting Siddhis. 
63. 
By taking· a bath in the Koᔽi Tlrtha and worshipping 
Kopsa, a man obtains the merit of a religious gift of ten million 
cows. 
64. 
There is a Mahasmasanastambha ( 'pillar of the crema­
tion ground', otherwise known as Kulastambha-now known 
as Lat Bhairava-BCL 192-193) stationed in the south-east di-

=== PAGE 429 ===

IV.ii.97.65-78 
419 
rection of Kotlsa. Maharudra stays in that pillar along with 
Uma. 
65-68. 
By embellishing that pillar, a man (devotee) at­
tains his (Rudra's) foot. 
There is the greatest Ti:rtha named Kapalamocana there 
itself in the vicinity of Kapalda. One who takes the holy bath 
there gets the merit of a horse-sacrifice. The splendid ᔺamo­
cana Ti:rtha is on the northern direction thereof. A man who 
takes his bath in that Tlrtha becomes rid of the three debts. 
There itself is the Ail.garaka Tlrtha and the holy Kui).Qa as 
bright as a burning coal. After taking the holy bath in the 
Ari.garaka Ti:rtha, one ceases to take rebirths. A man who takes 
the bath there on the fourth lunar day that coincides with a 
Tuesday is never assailed by ailments. He is never miserable. 
69. To the north thereof is Visvakarmesvara Liri.ga that 
bestows knowledge. To the right thereof is the splendid 
Mahamui).Qesvara Liilga. 
70-72. 
There is also a well named Subhoda. One must 
take one's bath there positively (without fail) . 
A very splendid garland consisting of skulls was hurled there 
by me. Thereupon, Goddess MahamUI).Qa, the destroyer of 
sins, was born. A Khatvanga (skull-topped club) was held. That 
gave the origin to Khatvangda. By visiting Khatvangesa a man 
becomes rid of sins. 
To the south thereof is Bhuvanda and the holy pit is 
Bhuvanesvara. 
73. 
A man who takes his bath in the holy pit there, shall 
become lord of the worlds. To the south thereof, are Vimalda 
and the holy pit Vimalodaka. 
74-75. 
Mter bathing therein and visiting lsa, a man be­
comes rid of impurities. A Pasupata devotee named Tryambaka 
became a Siddha there and reached Rudraloka with this self­
same physical body. 
To the west thereof is the shrine of Bhrgu which confers 
much merit. 
76-78. 
By worshipping it in accordance with the injunc­
tions, one shall attain the palace of Siva. To the west thereof 
is Subhesvara who bestows auspicious benefits. Sage Kapila, a 
devotee of great penance, became a Siddha there. There indeed 
in the vicinity of Kapilesvara is a beautiful cave. He who enters

=== PAGE 430 ===

420 
Skanda Purii:r_ta 
that cave does not enter any womb (i.e. is not reborn) any­
where. The well Yajiioda there bestows the merit of a horse­
sacrifice. 
79. 
This alone is Omkara consisting of "A" and other syllables. 
I myself am Nadesa on the northern bank of Matsyodarl. 
80. 
Nade8a is the great Brahman. Nadesa is the greatest 
goal. Nade8a is the greatest region that gives redemption from 
the miseries of worldly existence. 
81-82. 
Jahnavi (Ganga) comes within the view of that Lord 
sometimes. That is called Matsyodarl. The bath therein is obtained 
through merits. 0 great Goddess, when Matsyodari Ganga reaches 
Kapilesvara to the west, that is a rare combination. 
83. 
Uddalakesvara Linga is to the north of Kapilesvara. By 
visiting it, the greatest Siddhi is attained by all. 
84. 
To the north thereof is BaᔻkuliSa Linga, that yields the 
attainment of all objects and riches. To the right of BaᔻkuliSa 
is the Kaustubhesvara Linga. 
85. As a result of its worship, one is never isolated from 
a heap of jewels. Sankukari_lesvara Linga is to the south of 
Kaustubhesvara. 
86. 
By resorting to Sankukari_leSvara Linga, an aspirant obtains 
the greatest knowledge even today. Aghoresa is at the en­
trance of the cave. There is an auspicious well to the north 
thereof. 
87. 
It is famous by the name Aghoroda (the water of which 
gives redemption from worldly existence) and it bestows the 
merit of a horse-sacrifice. There are two splendid Lingas named 
Gargesa and Damane8a then. 
88. 
In the place where they both attained Siddhi with this 
self-same physical body, a devotee should worship those two 
Lingas. Thereby he attains the desired Siddhi. 
89. 
To the right side thereof is the great holy pit known 
as Rudravasa. By worshipping Rudresa there, one shall obtain 
the merit of ten million Rudras (i.e. chanting of Rudra-Sitkta 
ten million times) . 
90. 
0 Apari_la, when the fourteenth lunar day coincides 
with the Rudra-constellation (Ardra) , bath in that holy pit is 
considered to be highly meritorious and exceedingly fruitful. 
9 1 . If a man takes his holy bath in the Rudrakui_l<;la and 
visits Lord Rudresvara, he will certainly attain Rudra's world

=== PAGE 431 ===

IV.ii.97.92-105 
421 
at any place where he happens to die. 
92. 
In the south-western direction of Rudra is the Mahalaya 
Liilga. In front of it is the Pitrkupa, the greatest abode of the 
pitrs. 
93. 
A man should perform Sraddha there and cast rice­
balls into the Pitrkupa. The performer of the Sraddha shall 
attain Rudraloka along with twenty-one generations of his family. 
94. 
There is another big lake named VaitaraQ.I there fac­
ing the west. 0 Goddess, a man who takes his bath there never 
falls in a hell. 
95. 
To the west of RudrakuQ.Q.a is the BrhaspatHivara Liilga. 
By visiting it when the Puᔻya constellation falls on a Thursday, 
a devotee obtains supermatual faculty of speech. 
96. 
To the south of Rudravasa is the excellent Kamesa 
Liilga. Still to the south of it is the MahakuQ.Q.a that fulfils the 
wish thought of (intensely) as a result of the holy bath. 
97. 
The Yatra (ceremonial procession) there on the thir­
teenth lunar day in the bright half of Caitra fulfils wishes. 
The splendid Nalakubara Liilga is to the east of Kamesvara. 
98-100. The sacred Kupa (well) in front of it is the bestower 
of plenty of wealth and foodgrains. 
To the east of Nalakubara are the Suryacandramasesvaras 
(Liilgas installed by the Sun and the Moon) . When worshipped 
they remove the mass of the darkness of ignorance. 
To the right thereof should be seen Adhvakesa who re­
moves delusion. 
The Siddhlsvara Liilga there bestows great Siddhis. MaQ.Q.alesa 
there itself bestows the position of a MaQ.Q.alesa (Lord of a 
great county or tract of land) . 
1 0 1 . To the east of KamakuQ.Q.a is Cyavanesa, the bestower 
of plenty. Sanakesa too is there itself and he bestows the merit 
of a Rajasuya sacrifice. 
1 02. 
Behind it is the Sanatkumara Liilga that brings about 
Yogic Siddhis. To the north thereof is Sanandesa, the enhancer 
of great (spiritual) knowledge. 
1 03. 
To the south of it is Ahutlsa. When seen it bestows 
the merit of Homas. To the south thereof is Paiicasikhesvara 
Liilga that brings about merit. 
1 04-1 05. To the west thereof is MarkaQ.Q.eya Hrada, the lake 
that enhances merit. If a man takes his bath in that deep lake,

=== PAGE 432 ===

422 
Skanda Purii:TJ-a 
why should be bewail anything further? 
Bath and charity performed there bestows endless merit. To 
the north thereof is KuQ.Q.esa worshipped and bowed to by all 
the Siddhas. 
1 06. 0 BnihmaQ.a, by visiting KuQ.Q.e8a a man obtains that 
merit which is obtained in the course of twelve years after 
receiving Pasupata initiation. 
1 07. To the east of MarkaQ.Q.eya Hrada is SaQ.Q.ilyesa that 
bestows excellent merit. Behind it is CaQ.Q.esa that removes as 
much sin as the religious observance at the time of solar eclipse 
does. 
1 08. 
To the right of Kapalesa is the holy pit (KuQ.Q.a) named 
Srikat:ttha. By taking his holy bath in that KuQ.Q.a, a man will 
become a donor, due to the power of Sri (Goddess of Wealth) . 
1 09-1 1 1 . In the vicinity of that KuQ.Q.a is Mahalakᔻmi:Svara 
Linga. A devotee should take his holy bath in the waters of 
that KuQ.Q.a and worship MahalakᔻmL He will be fanned by 
celestial damsels with their hands holding chowries. When the 
heaven-dwellers go to Matsyodari from the heavenly world, it 
is this path alone that they take. They march through that 
path happily surrounded by their women. Hence, 0 excellent 
sage, that region is well-known by the name Svargadvara ('doorway 
to heaven') . The Linga to the south of that KuQ.Q.a bestows the 
position of Brahma. 
1 1 2. Gayatrisvara and Savitri:Svara should be assiduously wor­
shipped. Satyavati:Svara Liil.ga is on the charming banks of 
MatsyodarL 
1 1 3-1 15. It should be worshipped to the east of those too. 
It causes increase in power of penance and prosperity. The 
great Ugreiivara Linga is situated in the eastern direction from 
Lakᔻmi:Sa. By worshipping that Lir)ga a man becomes jiitismara 
( 'capable of remembering previous births' ) . To the south 
thereof is UgrakuQ.Q.a which by virtue of the holy dip therein 
surpasses even Kanakhala Tlrtha (in efficacy) . 
To the west of that KuQ.Q.a is Karaviresvara Linga. Due to 
the visit thereof men obtain destruction of ailments. 
1 1 6. To the north-west thereof is Maricisa KuQ.Q.a that is 
destructive of masses of sins. Behind it is Indra KuQ.Q.a, 0 sage, 
as well as Candresvara Linga. 
1 1 7-1 1 8. In the southern direction from Indresa is the splendid

=== PAGE 433 ===

IV.ii.97. 1 19-132 
423 
Karkotavapika (tank named after Karkota) . A devotee should 
take the bath in the waters of the tank and visit Karkotakesvara. 
It is undoubted that he will obtain the overlordship of Nagas 
(Serpents) . Behind it is Lord Hara (Siva) named DrmicaJ:lQesa) 
who dispels the sin of BrahmaJ:la slaughter. 
1 19. To the south thereof is MahakUJ:lQa that bestows the 
merit of attaining Rudraloka. To the west thereof is the great 
Liilga well-known as Agnlsa. 
1 20. To the east thereof is the KUJ:lQa named Agneya which 
bestows Saloka ('having the same world') with Agni. It is the 
KUJ:lQa to the east of Agneyesvara. There is SubhakUJ:lQa to its 
south. 
1 2 1 . A man who bathes there in the KuiJQa stays in heaven 
along with the ancestor. To the east thereof is Balacandresa, 
the bestower of the goal of attaining Candraloka. 
1 22. 
All-round Balacandre5a there are many GaJ:la Lingas. 
By visiting those 
Liilgas one attains the lordship of the GaJ:las. 
1 23. In the vicinity of Balacandra there is a well favourite 
wi th the Pltrs. One who takes the holy bath there and per­
forms Sraddha redeems seven generations of ancestors. 
1 24. 
To the east of that well is the meritorious Linga named 
Visvesvara. To the east of Visvesvara is Lord Hara (known as) 
Vrddhakalesvara. 
1 25-1 26. In front of it is the well-named Kciloda which removes 
all ailments. If any man or woman drinks the water thereof, 
he (she) never returns to the mortal world even in the course 
of hundreds of crores of Kalpas. By drinking it, the one becomes 
rid of the fear arising from the bondage of births. 
127. 
0 Pot-born Sage, even at the time of the ultimate 
annihilation , there cannot be the destruction of what is of­
fered at that wel l as (a religious) gift unto those whose souls 
are engrossed in Siva. 
128. Those men who resusci tate and renovate (shrines etc.) 
broken and in ruins there, attain Rudraloka and rejoice hap­
pily forever. 
1 29-130. In the southern direction from Kcilesa is Mrtyvisa 
(Lord of death) who wards off premature death. The Linga 
named Dakᔼe5vara is in the northern direction from that well. 
By worshipping it, even a thousand crimes (sins) perish. 
1 3 1-1 32. The great Mahakale5a Linga is to the east of Dakᔼe5a.

=== PAGE 434 ===

424 
Skanda Purii:r;ta 
Indeed this entire universe cons1stmg of mobile and immo­
bile beings has been worshipped by the man who takes his 
bath in the Mahakui}.Q.a and worships Mahakala. 
If one visits Antakesvara to the south thereof, there is no 
fear of the god of Death. 
1 33. 
0 sage, to its south is Hastipaldvara Linga. By wor­
shipping it one attains the merit of making the gift of an 
elephant. 
1 34. 
Airavata KuQ.Q.a and Airavatdvara Linga are there it­
self. A man worshipping that Linga enjoys plenty of wealth 
and foodgrains. 
1 35. 
Malatisvara Linga to its south is conducive to welfare. 
Jayantesa to the north of Hastisvara bestows victory. 
1 36. 
The auspicious Bandisvara is to the north of Mahakala 
KuQ.Q.a. Bandi KuQ.Q.a is famous in Varal}.asi as the destroyer 
of great sins. 
1 37-1 38. Through the holy bath there, making of gifts and 
performance of Sraddha, one enjoys everlasting merit. The 
Linga is Dhanvantarisvara and the Kui}.Q.a should have been 
named thereafter. But, the name of the Linga is Tuilgdvara 
and the Kui}.Q.a is named Vaidydvara. 
1 39. 
Great medicinal herbs full of nectar and conducive 
to excellence of intellect have been cast therein. Hence through 
the bath therein and the visit to that Linga, all the ailments 
perish along with terrible sins. 
140. 
To the north thereof is Halisesa, the destroyer of all 
ailments. The auspicious benefactor Sivesvara is to the south 
of the deity named Tunga. 
1 4 1 . JamadagniSvara Liilga is very auspicious and it is to 
the south of Sivesa. Bhairavesa is to the west thereof. There 
is a splendid well to the north thereof. 
142. 
Merely by touching the water thereof one shall ob­
tain the merit of performing all Yajiias. To the west of that 
well is Sukesa, the bestower of Yogic Siddhis. 
143-144. To the south-west thereof is Vyasesa and there is 
a well of pure water. A man who takes his bath in the Vyasakupa 
and offers libations to Suras and Pitrs, attains everlasting world 
wht;rever it is desired. To the west of Vyasa Tirtha is the great 
(a deep lake called) Ghal}.ᔽakarl}.a Hrada. 
1 45. 
If a devotee takes his bath in Ghal}.ᔽakarl}.a Hrada and

=== PAGE 435 ===

IV.ii.97. 146-159 
425 
visits Vyasda, wherever he may happen to die, he would derive 
the merit of having death at Varaᖿ:tasl. 
146-147. Near Ghaᖿ:tᔽakarᖿ:ta is the lake PaiicaciiQ.apsaral:t. 
After bathing in the waters of PaiicaciiQ.a and visiting that 
Lord a man attains heavenly world. He will be a favourite of 
Paiicacii<;la (celestial damsel) . To the south thereof is Gaurlkiipa 
that destroys all sluggishness. 
148. 
To the northern direction of PaiicaciiQ.a there is the 
Tlrtha named Asoka. Still to the north thereof is the great 
Mandakinl Tlrtha that destroys great sins. 
149. 
She (Mandakinl) is highly meritorious in the heav­
enly world. All the more so, 0 sage in the mortal world. To 
the north thereof is Madhyamesa who sleeps in the middle of 
the holy spot. 
150. 
A man will keep awake on the eighth lunar day in the 
month of Caitra, called Asoka=>aml. He will never be miser­
able. He will always be cheerful. 
1 5 1 . The extent of Muktikᔻetra (Kasl, the holy spot of salvation) 
is one Krosa (3 Kms.) in every direction starting from this 
Madhyamesvara, the merit-giving Liilga. 
1 52-1 55. All the great-grandfathers always say this alone: "Will 
anyone born in our family take bath in the waters of Mandakinl, 
be pure in every respect and feed Brahmaᖿ:tas, ascetics and 
Pasupata devotees?" 
A man who bathes in Mandakinl and sees Madhyamesvara 
shall stay in Rudraloka for a long time accompanied by twenty­
one generations of his family. 
To the south of Madhyamesa is the auspicious Visvedevesvara. 
By the worship of this deity, all the thirteen Visvedevas can be 
deemed to have been worshipped. To the east thereof is 
Vlrabhadresa the bestower of the position of the greatest warrior 
(Mahavlra) . 
1 56. 
To its south is the auspicious welfare-bestower 
BhadrakaH. There is a deep lake named BhadrakaH Hrada, 
the bestower of great auspiciousness. 
157. 
To the east thereof is Apastambesvara Liilga the 
greatest bestower of knowledge. There is a meritorious Kiipa 
to the north thereof and Saunaka Hrada is behind it. 
158-159. The Liilga to the west of the Hrada named Saunakesa 
Liilga bestows excellent intellect. A man should take his bath

=== PAGE 436 ===

426 
Skanda Purii:r,ta 
in the lake there and visit Saunakesvara. Thereby he will obtain 
that divine knowledge whereby he will cross death. To the 
south thereof is Jarhbukda who prevents birth in animal 
species. 
1 60-1 61 . To the north thereof is Matail.gesa, the instructor 
in the musical lore. To the north-west of Matail.gesa, there 
are many Lingas all-round installed by sages here. They be­
stow all Siddhis. Brahmaratesvara Liil.ga is to the south of 
Matail.gesa. 
1 62. 
If one visits that Liil.ga, one's span of life is ne-ver cut 
in the middle. There is Ajyapesvara Linga and also many other 
Piq- Lingas. Due to the service rendered to that Liil.ga, all the 
great-grandfathers become pleased. 
1 63-1 64. To the south thereof is the Siddhakupa where there 
are thousands of Siddhas. Some of these Siddhas are in the 
forms of Wind and some Siddhas abide in the rays of the Sun. 
The Liil.ga installed by them is called Siddhesvara. Merely due 
to a visit to it, one shall have all Siddhis free from im­
purities. 
1 65. 
To the west thereof is the Siddhavapi: tank. If the 
waters are drunk and if the holy dip is taken, the tank bestows 
Siddhis. To the east of the Siddhakupa is the Liil.ga called 
Vyaghresvara. 
1 66. 
By visiting that Liil.ga, men cease to be afraid of tigers 
and thieves. JyeHhesvara is to the south thereof. It bestows 
great Siddhis in the JyeHha Sthana (in the region of the greatest) . 
1 67. 
To the south thereof is the Prahasitesvara Linga, the 
abode of joys. To the north thereof is Nivasesa who bestows 
the merit of residence in .Kasl. 
1 68. 
There is a well Catussamudra Kupa that bestows the 
merit of holy bath in the ocean. Goddess JyeHha is there. On 
being bowed to, she bestows the greatest position. 
1 69. 
To the south of Vyaghra Liil.ga is the Liil.ga named 
Ca1.1ᔾ1Svara. to the north of it is the lake dug with a staffs 
(Dar_t4akhiita) which brings about joy to the Pitrs. 
1 70. 
Bath after an eclipse in Da1.1ᔿakhata bestows great 
merit. The cave Jaigi:ᔻavyaguha is there and the Liil.ga there 
has the same name. 
1 71 . One who undertakes fast for three nights there, ac­
quires knowledge devoid of impurities. To the west thereof is

=== PAGE 437 ===

IV.ii.97. 1 72-184 
427 
the Devaleiivara Liilga which bestows great merit. 
1 72. 
The deity there is Satakala in the vicinity thereof. 
The Consort of Uma disposed of a hundred Kalas, 0 Pot-born 
One, in the course of the manifestation of that Liilga. 
1 73. 
By visiting that Liilga a devotee shall enjoy a hundred 
years' life-span without break. To the south thereof is Satatapeiia, 
the bestower of the merit of great Japas. 
1 74. 
To the west thereof is Hetukeiia who is the giver of 
great benefit. To the south of it is Akᔻapadeiia, the promoter 
of great (spiritual) knowledge. 
1 75-1 76. In front of it is Kat:J.adeiia. There is a well of meri­
torious waters. Mter taking bath in Kat:J.adakupa, a devotee 
should worship Kal}.adeiia. He is never forsaken by wealth, or 
foodgrains. Bhutliia who causes the prosp«trity of good persons 
should be seen to the south of it. 
1 77. 
To the west thereof is the Liilga that is named ᕀac;lhliivara 
and destroys sins. To the east thereof is Durvaseiia that causes 
plenty of fulfilment of all desires. 
1 78. 
To the east of Vyaseiivara there are two deities, 
Sailkhalikhiteiivaras. They should be seen with effort in KaiiL 
They are the promulgators of knowledge. 
1 79. 
The merit that is obtained by concluding the due 
performance of the rite of Paiiupata Vrata can be obtained 
h e re i n s tan tly by s e e i n g o n c e t h e d e i ti e s Viiive iias 
(Sankhalikhiteiivaras) . 
1 80. 
To the north-east thereof is Avadhuteiia who is the 
promulgator of the knowledge of Yoga. The Avadhuteiia Tirtha 
causes the destruction of all sins. 
1 8 1 . To the east of Avadhuteiivara is Paiiupatliivara Liilga. 
By rendering service to that Liilga men get rid of Paiiupaiias 
(Karmic shackles of the individual soul) . 
1 82. 
To the south of it is Gobhilesa that bestows the fulfilment 
of great ambitions. Behind it is the excellent Jlmiltavahaneiia 
Liilga. 
183. 
As a result of the service rendered to that Liilga, one 
attains the position of a Vidyadhara. Mayukharka and Gabhastliia 
are there in Paiicanada. 
1 84. 
To the ᕁorth thereof there is a great holy well named 
Dadhikalpa Hrada. Rare indeed is the holy bath in that well 
and the vision of the deity.

=== PAGE 438 ===

Skanda Purii7Ja 
1 85. 
In the northern part of Gabhasti:Sa is Hara named 
Dadhikalpesvara. If a man visits the Lord promptly he will stay 
in Tryakᔻapura (City of the Three-eyed Lord) for the period 
of a Kalpa. 
1 86. 
To the south of Gabhast!Sa a devotee should visit 
Mangala, the abode of the auspicious goddess Gauri, and feed 
a Brahma:t:J.a couple. 
1 87. 
They should be adorned in accordance with one's 
c apacity. There is no end to th e merit there of. One 
circumambulation of Mangala has the same ·merit as the 
circumambulation of the Earth. 
1 88. 
To the north of Mukhaprekᔻesvara near Mangala 
is the Goddess Vadanaprekᔻa:t:J.a. She is Goddess Siva who causes 
all Siddhis. 
1 89. 
To the north of Mukhaprekᔻa there are two splendid 
Lingas named TvaHriSa and Vrttlsa. They say that a visit pa_id 
to those two deities has the same merit as that of the gift of 
a plot of land along with gold. 
190. 
To the north thereof is Goddess Carcika, a visit to 
whom is auspicious. In front of Carcika is the Revatesvara 
Linga that causes peace. 
1 9 1 . 
In front of it is the Paficanadesvara Linga that is 
conducive to great auspiciousness. To the west of Mangala is 
the great splendid well Mangaloda ('a well of auspicious waters') . 
1 92. 
To the west of Mangala is the great splendid Linga 
of Upamanyu. Behind it is the Vyaghrapadesvara Linga that 
removes the fear of tigers. 
193. 
To the south-west of Gabhastisa is Saiiankeiia who removes 
mass of sins. To the west thereof is Caitraratha Linga that 
bestows divine goal. 
1 94. 
To the west of Revatesa is Jaimini:Sa, the destroyer of 
great sins. 0 excellent one among the sages, there are many 
Lingas of (i.e. installed by) many sages. 
195. To the north-west of Jaimini:Sa there is the Rava:t:J.esvara 
Linga. Due to paying a visit to it one ceases to have great frear 
of the Rakᔻasas. 
196. 
To the south thereof is Varaheiia. Ma:t:J.c.lavyesa is still 
to its south. Further south of it is Praca:t:J.c.leiia and Yogeiia is 
still to its south. 
197. 
To the south thereof is Dhateiia (? Dhatriiia) . Someiia

=== PAGE 439 ===

IV.ii.97. 198-212 
429 
is in front of it. To its south-west is Kanakesa, the bestower 
of gold on the good. 
198. 
To the north thereof are the five Lingas of the Pa1.1<Javas 
conducive to the joy of the good. In front of it is Sarhvartesa 
and Svete8a is to its west. 
199. 
Behind it is one Kalasesa and the Linga that bestows 
freedom from fear of the god of Death. 0 sage, it rose up 
from a pot when Sveta was fettered by Kala. 
200. 
To the north thereof is Citraguptesvara Linga that 
eradicates sins. Behind Citraguptesvara is Dr<Jhesa who gives 
great merit. 
201 . Grahesa is to the south of Kalase8a. The Linga there 
is excellent. A visit to that Linga subdues harassment by (malignant) 
Planets. 
• 
202. 
Behind Citraguptesvara is Yadrcche8a granting great 
merit. Utathyavamadevesa Linga is to the south of Grahesvara. 
203. 
To the south thereof are the auspicious deities Kambale8a 
and ASvataresa. There itself is the pure Linga worshipped by 
Nalakubara. 
204. 
To the south of it is Ma1.1ikan.1iSa Linga and Palitesvara 
is to its north. There itself is the Jarahara Linga. Behind it is 
Papanasana. 
205. 
To its west is Nirjaresa and to the south-west thereof 
is Pitamaha. Pitamahasrotika stream is also there and a Sraddha 
performed there yields great merit. 
206. 
To the south thereof is Varu1.1e8a and Ba1.1e8a is to 
still further south. KuᔻmaJ:.l<Jesa in Pitamahasrotika brings about 
Siddhis. 
207. 
To its east is Rakᔻasesa and Gangesa is to its south. 
To its north there are many Lingas. They are (called) Nimnagesas. 
208. 
Vaivasvatesa is there and the Lord prevents Yamaloka 
(death) . Behind it is Aditisa and in front of it is Cakresa. 
209. 
In front of it is the great deity named Kalakesa. He 
brings about visible proofs. The shadow (i.e. reflection of the 
deity) is seen there. One who sees it becomes free from sins. 
2 1 0. 
Behind it is Tarakesa and further ahead is Svari_labharada 
('the bestower of Bharas of gold') . To its north is Maruttesa. 
Sakresa is ahead thereof. 
2 1 1-212. To its south is Rarilbhe8a. Sasisvara is there itself. 
To the north thereof are Lokape8as viz. many Lingas of (i.e.,

=== PAGE 440 ===

430 
Skanda Puriir_ta 
installed by) Nagas, Gandharvas, Yakᔻas, Kinnaras, Apsaras, 
celestial sages and groups of the GaQ.as. They bestow different 
kinds of Siddhis. 
2 1 3. 
To the south of Sakre8a is Phalgunesa, the destroyer 
of great sins. To the south thereof is Mahapasupatesa who 
brings about great auspiciousness. 
2 1 4. 
To the west thereof is Samudreiia. Isane8a is to its 
north. To the east thereof is L:"iitgali:Sa who confers all Siddhis. 
215. 
Those who worship without passionate attachment 
and hatred attain Siddhi. Salvation of these has been announced 
by me. 0 Goddess, they are not (ordinary) men. 
2 1 6. 
In Larigali:Sa the ascetics Madhupiriga and Svetaketu 
attained excellent Siddhi with this self-same physical body. 
2 1 7. 
There itself are Nakuli:Sa and Kapileiia. Both resort to 
my holy Vrata. It is a great secret. 
2 1 8. 
In its vicinity is Prltikesa. 0 my beloved, I take plea­
sure therein. Due to a single fast observed there, the benefit 
lasts more than a hundred years. 
219. 
If during my Parva (i.e. Sivaratri) a devotee observes 
fast in Prltikesa and performs a single JagaraQ.a (keeping vigil) , 
it is assured that he attains the position of a GaQ.a. 
220. 
In the southern direction of the deity there is a tank 
of splendid waters. Imbibing the water thereof is conducive to 
the cessation of rebirths of men. 
221-222. To the west of that holy water DaQ.<;fapaQ.i (Staff­
handed deity-like Bhairava) accords perpetual protection. There 
are three Lirigas to the east, south and north thereof, viz. Tara 
(Tarakesa) , Kala (Kalesa) and Sailadaja (Nandikesvara) . With 
faith in them a devotee should drink water and offer it to the 
lotus-like heart. Those excellent men by whom that water is 
drunk are blessed. They have achieved their objectives. 
223. 
Mokᔻesa, the bestower of the sense of liberation, should 
be worshipped in the vicinity of Avimukta. KaruQ.esa the abode 
of compassion, is to the north thereof. A devotee should worship 
that deity. 
224. 
SvarQ.akᔻesa, the bestower of knowledge, is to the east 
thereof. To the north thereof, Saubhagyagaurl should be duly 
adored for the purpose of full conjugal bliss and prosperity. 
225-226. In the southern portion of Visvesa, Nikurhbhesa 
who brings about the prosperity of the holy spot should be

=== PAGE 441 ===

IV.ii.97.227-238 
431 
assiduously worshipped. Behind it Vighnanayaka, the destroyer 
of all obstacles, should be worshipped, especially on the fourth 
lunar day. Viriipakᔻa who accords excellent Siddhis should be 
worshipped in the south-eastern direction from Nikurilbhesa. 
227. 
To the south thereof is Sukresa who grants increase 
of sons and grandsons. To the north thereof is a great Liri.ga 
named Devayani:Svara. 
228. 
In front of Sukresa is the deity named Kacesa. He 
should be (properly) worshipped. By bathing in the Sukrakiipa 
one shall obtain the merit of a horse-sacrifice. 
229. 
To the west of Sukresa, Bhavanl and Isa should be 
bowed down to. They are auspicious and they always accord 
to their devotee Bhakta (foodstuff) and Pota (raft for crossing 
the ocean of Sarilsara) . 
230. 
Alarke§a stationed in the eastern direction of Sukre§a 
should be worshipped. Madalasesvara is there to the east thereof. 
He destroys all obstacles. 
23 1 . 
Gai).eSvare§vara Liri.ga is very great and i t bestows all 
Siddhis. 0 Brahmai).a, it was installed by Raghunatha (Rama) 
after slaying the king of Lanka. 
232. 
By touching that Liri.ga, even the slayer of a Brahmai).a 
becomes pure instantly. Another Liri.ga that accords great merit, 
named Tripurantaka, should be worshipped there. 
233. 
To the west thereof is the splendid Dattatreyesvara 
Liri.ga. To the south thereof is Harikesesa. GokarJ:.lesa is be­
yond that. 
234. 
Ahead of it is a lake that destroys sins. Behind it is 
Dhruvesvara. In front thereof is Dhruvakui).Qa that is extremely 
delightful to the Pitrs. 
235. 
Pisacesa installed to the north thereof removes the 
state of a Pisaca (ghost or vampire) . To the south thereof is 
Pitrisa and Pitrkui).Qa is in front of it. 
236. 
The great-grandfathers become pleased with men who 
perform Sraddhas there. Ahead of Dhruve§a is Taresa (Prai).avesa) . 
The same deity is Vaidyanatha. 
237. 
To the south-west thereof is Manu's Liri.ga that is 
great and that causes increase in the family. Priyavratesvara 
Liri.ga is in front of Vaidyanatha. 
238. 
To the south thereof is Mucukundesa. By the side 
thereof is Gautamesvara. To its west is Bhadresa and to the

=== PAGE 442 ===

432 
Skanda Purii1J-a 
south thereof is the Lord of Rᔻyasp'l.gin. 
239. 
Brahmesa is in front of it. Parjanyesa is in the north­
eastern direction. To the east thereof is Nahuᔻesa. VisaHikᔻl is 
in front thereof. 
240. 
Visalakᔻi:Svara Liilga is there itself and it grants resi­
dence in K.asl. Jarasandhesvara Liilga is to the south thereof 
and it destroys fevers. 
241 . 
In front of it is Hiral}.yakᔻa Liilga that confers gold. 
It should be worshipped. To the west thereof is Gayadhlsa and 
further to the west is Bhaglratha. 
242. 
Ahead of it, 0 sage, and to the west of Brahmesa is 
Dillpesa. There the Linga along with the holy Kul}.c;ia bestows 
the desired be!lefit on a devotee who takes the holy bath. 
243. 
Visvavasu's Liilga is there. Mul}.c;iesa is there to the 
east. To the south of it is Vidhi:Sa. Still further to the south 
is Vajimedhaka (Vajimedhesvara) . 
244. 
A man should take the holy bath in Dasasvamedhika 
and visit the excellent Liilga. He earns the merit of ten horse­
sacrifices. 
245-246. To the north thereof is Matr Tlrtha that removes 
the fear of rebirth of a man who takes his holy bath. One who 
takes the holy bath there, whether man or woman, attains the 
desired benefit, with the favour of the Mothers (Brahm! etc.) . 
To the south of your (Agastya ' s ) Kul}.c;ia is the great 
Puᔻpadan tesvara. 
247. 
In the south-east direction thereof there are many 
Liilgas installed by gods, sages and Gal}.as. To the south of 
Puᔻpadanta is Siddhi:Sa who bestows the great Siddhi. 
248. As a result of the adoration consisting of five Upacaras 
(services) the deity may accord great Siddhi in dream. By 
means of service unto Hariscandresa men will attain kingdom. 
249. 
To the west thereof is Nairrtesa. Ailgirasda is further 
to the south. To the south thereof is ᕂemesa and Citrailgesa 
is further to the south. 
250-25 1 . To the south thereof is Kedara that bestows the 
state of being a follower of Rudra. In the region of south of 
Kedara, hundreds and thousands of Liilgas were installed by 
the kings of the lunar and solar races. In the direction south 
of Lolarka (the deity Arkavinayaka) fulfils all hopes and ambitions 
on being adored.

=== PAGE 443 ===

252. 
To the west thereof Karandhamesvara Liriga bestows 
great benefit. To the west thereof Mahadurga (great goddess 
Durga) destroys great distresses. 
253. 
Suᔻkesvara Liriga to the south thereof is adored by 
the dry river (i.e. Asi) . Janakesa is to the west thereof. Sarikukar:r:ta 
is to the north thereof. 
254-255. To the east thereof is Mahasiddhlsvara Liriga that 
bestows all Siddhis. A man (of devout nature) should take the 
holy bath in the Siddhaku:r:t<;la and visit the great Siddhesvara 
Liriga. He wiii achieve all the Siddhis. To the north-west of 
Sarikukar:r:tesa is the Liriga called Va<;lavya. 
256. 
Ahead of it is Vibha:r:t<;lesa. To the north thereof is 
Kaholesa. The Liriga there is Dvare8vara and the goddess is 
the auspicious Dvaresvarl. 
257. 
Siddhi is achieved by the adoration thereof, accord­
ing residence in Anandakanana. There the guardians are, 0 
sage, the Ga:r:tas of various forms and weapons. 
258. 
There itself are Haridisa Liriga and K.atyayana Liriga. 
To the side thereof is Jarigalesa and behind it is Mukute5vara. 
259-262. There itself the Ku:r:t<;la is free from impurities. It 
accords the merit of pilgrimage to all places. By bathing in 
Mukutaku:r:t<;la and visiting Mukutesvara that merit is obtained 
which is considered to be the merit of pilgrimage to all the 
Lirigas. This great earth (country) is the bestower of the Siddhi 
of penance and Yoga. 0 Sage, there are hundred thousands 
of Lirigas conducive to Siddhi there. 0 Goddess, the only 
quarter, the northern one, in Vara:r:tasl, is my favourite. There 
too, 0 my beloved one, I take more interest in Paiicayatana 
( Omkara) . I am stationed there always at the time of creation, 
maintenance and also of annihilation. 
263. 
He who knows thus, is never touched by sins. It is the 
truth, the truth. (I repeat) it is the truth again. 0 my beloved, 
three times the truth. It cannot be anything else. 
264. 
If one wishes residence in my world, one should go 
there quickly. Only a brief statement about the Lirigas has 
been made by me, 0 sage. 
265. 
Some Lirigas are devoutly installed twice or thrice. 
They have not been repeated. They should be adored faith­
fully in every respect. 
266. 
These Lirigas, Ku:r:t<;las, wells and tanks which havt>

=== PAGE 444 ===

434 
Skanda PuriiT}-a 
been described should be faithfully revered by men of good 
sense and intellect. 
267-270. The merit of paying a visit to and bathing in there 
is ever more and more. Who is competent to reckon the number 
of the Liilgas, wells, lakes, tanks and idols present here. Even 
the grasses growing in Anandakanana are superior. No place 
elsewhere is fit for even the heaven-dwellers to take rebirth. 
K.asi is full of all Liilgas. It is the sole place of origin of all 
Ti:rthas. If it is seen and served till the death of the body; it 
bestows heavenly pleasures and salvation. But, 0 Goddess, you 
alone are my greatest beloved, because of the power (of your) 
penance. 
271-272. This K.asi is naturally the ground of rest for me. 
Those who take (utter) the name of K.asi, those who rejoice 
therein, are on a par with Sakha and Visakha; they are like 
Skanda, Nandin and Gajasya. 0 fair lady, they alone are my 
devotees, they alone are my pious attendants. 
273-275. Only those who dwell in Anandavana are real aspirers 
for salvation. If people are regular dwellers of Anandavana, it 
is as good as though great panance has been performed by 
them, great holy rites have been performed by them and great 
charitable gifts have been made by them. They have taken 
their holy plunge in all Ti:rthas; they are initiated in all Adhvaras 
(sacrifices) . They have practised all pious rites. If people do 
not dwell in Anandavana even in their last days, they all are 
mere burdens of the earth, whether they are Suras, Asuras, 
serpents or human beings. 
276. 
Even a Siidra (here) is better than one who has mastered 
the Vedas elsewhere. The former is one who has crossed the 
ocean of worldly existence and the latter is baser than the 
Siidra. 
277. 
Indeed he alone is Sarvajfia (Siva, the omniscient) ; 
he alone is AdhikekᔻaQ.a (Siva, the surplus-eyed)-he who casts 
off the physical body in K.asi and takes up a nectarine one. 
278. 
By listening to this meritorious chapter that encom­
passes the secret of all Tirthas, a man duly obtains the merit 
arising from visiting K.asi. 
279. 
If anyone reads this chapter in the morning everyday, 
indeed all the Ti:rthas have been visited by him, not otherwise. 
280. 
A sensible man who recites in low voice this chapter

=== PAGE 445 ===

IV.ii.97.281-296 
435 
consisting of (references to) all Lingas is never harassed by 
Yama, his messengers or by sins. 
281 . If a man of meritorious soul remains pure and keeps 
mind in full concentration and recites mentally this chapter, 
he derives the benefit of Brahmayajiia. 
282. 
He who regularly recites this Adhyaya is (like) one 
who has bathed in all holy KuQ.Qas, (like) one who has sipped 
the waters of all the holy tanks, one who has adored all the 
Lin gas. 
283. 
Of what avail are other diverse stotras (Hymns to a 
deity) that accord only very little benefit? This chapter of 
great benefits should be regularly recited by those who love 
me. 
284. 
By reciting once this great ch;pter, that benefit is 
obtained which is usually obtained when great gifts are given. 
285. 
The benefit that is obtained by taking the holy bath 
in all the Tirthas and by visiting all the Lingas can certainly 
be obtained by men by reciting this (chapter) . 
286. 
This alone is the most severe penance; this alone is 
the greatest Japa, namely the recitation of the chapter enu­
merating all the Lingas in Kasl, 0 sage. 
287. 
This Japa should never be given, should never never 
be given, to one who hates me, to an atheist, to one who is 
engaged in decrying the Vedas. 
288-292. By repeating this Adhyaya all the sins are destroyed­
the sin arising from slaying a BrahmaQ.a, cohabiting with a 
prohibited woman, eating forbidden edibles, enchanting and 
ensnaring the wife of the preceptor, stealing gold, slaying father 
and mother, killing a cow, destroying a foetus etc., all the 
great sins, known and unknown, all the minor sins committed 
verbally, physically or mentally. By my bidding undoubtedly 
these perish. There is no doubt in this that the learned one 
who repeats this chapter obtains sons, grandsons, wealth , 
foodgrains, wife, lands, everything desired by the mind, heav­
enly and other pleasures and salvation. 
293. 
Even as the Lord was narrating this story before the 
Goddess, Nandin came there, bowed down and submitted thus: 
294-296. "The work of the construction of the great palace 
is completed. The chariot has been kept ready. Brahma and 
other Suras have assembled. The Lotus-eyed Lord seated on

=== PAGE 446 ===

436 
Skanda Pura7Ja 
Garu<;la is waiting at the doorway along with his followers. He 
has kept the leading sages in front waiting for the opportunity. 
All the people of holy rites in all the fourteen worlds have 
heard about the festival of (your) grand entry and have as­
sembled. " 
Skanda said: 
297. On hearing these words of Nandin, the Lord accom­
panied by the Goddess got into the divine chariot and set out 
from heaven. 
CHAPTER NINETYEIGHT 
Departure unto the Pavilion of Salvation 
Vyiisa said: 
1 . 
Listen, 0 blessed Suta, how the extremely great festi-
val of Sarilbhu was recounted to the Pot-born One who had 
been asking. 
Skanda said: 
2. 
Listen, 0 highly intelligent one, to the narrative of the 
grand entry of Sambhu, a narrative that causes delight to all 
the three worlds and destroys great sins. 
3. 
Coming from Mandara at the time of Damanaparva 
(thirteenth lunar day in the bright half in the month of Caitra) , 
Sarilbhu moved about here and there though he reached 
Anandagahana. 
4. 
When the royal mansion exhibiting the grace of the 
glory of salvation had been completed, the Lord entered the 
inner apartment from the Virajal], pedestal (seat of the Three­
eyed Lord) . 
5-7. 
It was on the first lunar day in the bright half of the 
month of Karttika when the constellation Anuradha was in 
conjunction with Budha (Mercury) . The Moon was in the seventh 
sign of zodiac and the other Planets were in their ascendancy.

=== PAGE 447 ===

IV.ii. 98.8-20 
437 
Musical i::lstruments were played. All the quarters were bright 
and clear. The sound of chanting of Vedic Mantras by BrahmaQ.as 
drowned all other sounds. The track between Bhurloka and 
Bhuvarloka was reverberating. All were thus joyous at the time 
of the festivities connected with the grand entry of Sarhbhu. 
8. 
Groups of Gandharvas sang; groups of celestial dam-
sels danced. CaraQ.as eulogized and the assemblages of the 
gods were delighted. 
9. 
Winds blew wafting fragrance; clouds showered flow-
ers. All people wore auspicious dress; all spoke auspicious 
words. 
1 0-15. 
All mobile and immobile beings became extremely 
delighted. Among all the Suras and Asuras, Gandharvas, Ser­
pents, Vidyadharas, Sadhyas, Kinnaras, human beings, among 
all women and men, the four aims of life had a prominent 
place. 0 sage, when the sky got smeared with columns of 
smoke from the incense, it became blue and it has not given 
up till today the blue colour it acquired then. For the purpose 
of the Nlrajana rites (waving of lights ceremoniously) all the 
lamps were lighted and the same can be seen in the sky even 
today in the (assumed) form of stars. In every mansion ban­
ners of different sizes and colours shone, brightened by the 
beautiful lustre of the flagstaff on every Siva temple. Musicians 
sang in some places and dancers danced in some other places 
in every shrine of Siva. 
1 6-17. 
In some places the four types of musical instru­
ments were played. In everyone of the paths, the ground became 
slippery and glossy on account of the sandalpastes having many 
hues such as green, white, madder colour, blue and yellow. 
In every courtyard garlands of festivity with auspicious features 
shone. 
18. 
On the tops of the ornamental tower-gates jewels and 
jewel-set platforms shone. Series of mansions bright like nec­
tar acquired the name of Saudha (Mansion) . 
(i) 
Mansion 
Saudha: (ii) 
Whitewash 
(iii) 
Nectarine 
19-20. 
Even iilsentient things shone like sentient beings 
whatever are said to be auspicious things, 0 Pot-born One, it 
became the birth anniversary of their own.

=== PAGE 448 ===

438 
Skanda Purii?Ja 
Then the Lord of Devas arrived and entered the Pavilion 
of Salvation. 
2 1 . Then the Lord of Devas was given the coronation bath 
by the Four-faced Lord as he was seated on an auspicious seat 
along with Bhavani and surrounded by groups of sages and 
the assemblages of Kumaras (Sanaka etc.) . 
22. With innumerable jewels, silk garment and sweet-smelling 
garlands of various colours the groups of Devas as well as 
those great lords of serpents worshipped Mahesa then. 
23. 
0 Pot-born One, Sarhbhu was duly adored by the gem­
bearing oceans, excellent mountains and other meritorious 
souls in accordance with their possessions. Then the Lord was 
given Nirajana (waving of the lights) by the groups of mothers. 
24. At the outset Siva, worthy of being saluted by all the 
groups of the immortal ones, propitiated all the leading sages 
by means of the fulfilment of their life-long desires cherished 
within the hearts. After addressing Brahma he spoke to Vi!!QU. 
25. 
With great honour (he made him sit near) saying, "Sit 
here. You are the sole cause of all my lordship. Even t}lough 
you may be standing far off you are very near to me. There 
is no one other than you who can carry out my task. 
26. 
The excellent king Divodasa was given good advice so 
that he attained the greatest Siddhi and my (his) desire was 
completely achieved. 
27. 
0 Vi!jQU, ask for a boon. You will have whatever you 
desire. There is nothing here that cannot be given to you. It 
is due to you and this GaQeSa, that Anandavana was obtained 
by me. 
28. 
In all the three worlds, there is nothing else so lovable 
to me as this VaraQasi, the origin of the greatest happiness. 
It is the mine of Brahmarasayana (Elixir of realization of Brahman) . 
People who take the long sleep there (i.e. those who die there) 
do not have further birth." 
29. On hearing these words of the Lord of the universe, 
Vi!!QU spoke to Mahesa, the bestower of boons: "If, 0 Pinaka­
bearing Lord, you are pleased, then let me not be far removed 
from your feet. " 
30. 
On hearing this speech of the Slayer of Madhu, Purari 
was delighted and said thus: "0 Enemy of Mura, stay forever 
near me here, in this resort of the Glory of Salvation.

=== PAGE 449 ===

IV.ii.98.31-39 
439 
3 1 . Someone may be devoted to me; but if he resorts to 
me without propitiating you at the outset, his desire will definitely 
not be realized through me, the deity greater than the great­
est, 0 Lord having the lotus and the discus in the hands. 
32. 
0 Acyuta, there is all happiness to one who abides 
here in this Pavilion of Salvation. That cannot be had even 
in Kailasa mountain utterly free from impurities, nor even in 
the mind of a devotee with permanent glory. 
33. 
If the devotees stay even for a moment here in this 
southern pavilion of mine, with steady mind, without thinking 
about anything else and having perfect concentration of mind, 
they will never be reborn in a womb. 
34. 
Those who duly bathe in the deep Cakrasaras lake, 
the crest-jewel of all the Ti:rthas, and ente5 this (pavilion) for 
a short while without any wish in the mind, become free from 
sins. They are verily my attendants. 
35. 
Those who remember me in the pavilion of salvation, 
and make gift of some money according to their capacity, 
those who listen to meritorious narratives even for a moment 
with steadiness, earn the merit of the gift of ten million cows. 
36. 
0 Upendra, if the devotees bathe in the MaQ.ikarQ.ika 
Hrada and sit for a short while in the pavilion of those de­
sirous of salvation, it is as fruitful as though penances have 
been performed by them for a long time and they have had 
their holy plunge in all the reputed Ti:rthas. 
37. 
0 Hari, there are holy Ti:rthas here at every step, but 
can they be compared to MaQ.ikarQ.ika? Are there not many 
auspicious pavilions here? But this is the greatest resort of the 
glory of salvation. 
38. 
In the con.ing Dvapara Age, 0 Hari, this KaivalyamaQ.<;iapa 
(Pavilion of Salvation) will become reputed in the world as 
KukkutamaQ.<;iapa. "1 
Hari said: 
39. 
0 Lord with an eye in the forehead, do recount to me. 
How is it that this Pavilion of Salvation will become reputed 
as said by the Lord? 
I. W 39-88 narrate the legend why Mukti Mai}Qapa came to be called 
Kukkuň Mai}Qapa.

=== PAGE 450 ===

440 
Skanda Purii:FJ.a 
Devadeva said: 
40. 
0 Four-armed Lord, a Brahmru:ta will be born here by the 
name Mahananda practising the rituals of ᕃeda. He will be one 
abstaining from acceptance of monetary gifts in the holy spots. 
41-43. 
He will be devoid of hypocrisy. He will not be cruel­
minded. He will always be the favourite of guests. But when 
his father passed away, he, in his prime of youth, was led astray 
by the fierce arrows of the Lord of Love. He became friendly 
with someone and abducted his wife. Urged by her and deluded 
utterly, he drank what should not be drunk. Fascinated by the 
god of Love, he contracted a taste for prohibited foodstuffs. 
44. 
On seeing the devotees of Viᔻr:tu of great wealth, he 
immediately adopted the guise of a Vaiᔻr:tava. The deluded 
soul then begins to censure devotees of Siva, the giver of 
salvation from hell. 
45. 
On seeing the devotees of Siva ready to give some­
thing, he may despise Vaiᔻr:tavas entirely and sustain himself 
through (what was offered to) the Siva Liilga. 
46. 
Thus he became fully conversant with the practice of 
heresy. He was averse to the routine baths and prayers at dawn 
and dusk. He used to put big Tilaka marks (on the forehead) , 
wear garlands and pure bright-washed clothes. 
47. 
He flaunted the tuft of hairs (on the head) . His hands 
were ready to receive anything and everything. He used to 
receive illegitimate gifts from everyone. He followed the path 
of the insane. A pair of sons was born to him. 
48. 
Even as he behaved thus, a certain rich man would be 
arriving there for the purpose of pilgrimage. 
49-50a. Mter taking bath in the Cakrasaras lake, he would 
be saying thus: "I am a man with ready cash willing to donate. 
By birth I am the best among Car:tc;lalas. Is there anyone ready 
to accept gifts, so that I can offer this wealth. " 
50b-51 . On hearing his words, this fellow who was seated 
there was pointed out with a gesture of the fingers by some 
people: "Only he who utters prayers and adopts the postures 
of meditation, will take the gift. None else." 
52. On hearing these words of those people, the low-caste 
fellow goes near him, prostrates before him and speaks thus: 
53. 
"0 great BrahmaQa, redeem me. Make my pilgrimage 
fruitful. I have something which you do take and bless me."

=== PAGE 451 ===

IV.ii.98.54-67 
441 
54. 
Thereupon he placed the rosary on the ear and ceased 
to meditate. With a gesture of his hands he asked, "How much 
wealth do you have?" 
55. 
He took the hint and spoke as though extremely delighted, 
"I shall give you as much as will satisfy you. Not less. " 
56-58. 
On hearing his words, that Mahananda who was 
highly delighted broke silence and said thus: "I am not keen 
in accepting the gift. But I shall accept in order to bless you. 
0 most excellent one among all excellent people, if you carry 
out my behest I shall do so. Whatever you have, from it, not 
even a bit should be given to anyone else. Then alone I shall 
accept and not otherwise. " 
The Cii:r.uf,iila said: 
59-6 1 . 
Whatever money has been brought by me for the 
propitiation of Visvesa, I shall give unto you, because, to me 
you are Visveiia himself. 0 excellent Brahmal).a, those who stay 
in the royal capital of Visvesa, be they important or insignifi­
cant creatures, all of them form part of Visvesa. Those who 
habitually uplift and redeem others, those who fulfil the desires 
of others, those who regularly render help to others, are part 
of Visvesa. 
62. 
On hearing these words, he became highly delighted 
in his mind and all sense-organs. The Brahmal).a spoke to the 
low-caste man from a hilly tract: 
63. 
"Come on. Take the Darbha grass. Perform the rite of 
Utsarga (giving up) quickly." The magnanimous man from the 
hilly tract did accordingly. 
64-66. 
He uttered, "May Visvesa be pleased. " He then went 
away. That Brahmal).a continued to stay there though despised 
and abused by the other Brahmal).as. The moment he came 
out he was assailed by many of them. "Here is a CaQcJala 
Brahmal).a who has taken money from a CaQcJala. He is verily 
a CaQcJala, excommunicated by the entire world." Saying thus 
they chased him, 0 Hari, producing Thutkiira (sound of spit­
ting out) . 
67. 
Afraid of them, he never stirred out for some time 
like an owl afraid of crows. He dropped down his head due 
to shame.

=== PAGE 452 ===

442 
Skanda Purii:T_ta 
68. 
Once that fellow censured by the people consulted 
his wife and went to Ki:kata land abandoning the city of VaraQ.asi. 
69. 
On the way of his destination, he was observed trav­
elling with gold on his person. Though he was in the middle 
of the caravan of pilgrims, he was waylaid by highwaymen. 
70-71 . 
They took him to a dense forest along with all his 
possessions. They seized his wealth and consulted one another 
saying: "This vast wealth can be fully used up by us only if he 
ceases to live. He should be killed along with his servants. " 
72. After deciding thus they said, "0 traveller, remember 
what should be remembered. We are surely going to kill you 
along with your retinue. " 
73-75. 
O n hearing this, that BrahmaQ.a thought thus within 
his mind, 'Alas! My family for the sake of which much wealth 
was taken by me as gift has become ruined. The wealth re­
ceived as gift has also been lost. My life is lost and the resi­
dence in the city of Kasi has also ceased. Everything has been 
ruined simultaneously owing to the activity of my evil intellect. 
Due to that defiled gift of money, I could not even die in 
Kasi. ' 
76. 
Since he remembered his family during the last mo­
ment of his life as well as Kasi, he was reborn as a cock in the 
Ki:kata land, though he was killed by the thieves. 
77. 
The woman became a hen and both the sons also became 
cocks. Due to the recollection of Kasi, he was able to recollect 
the previous birth. 
78. After many. years had passed by, four excellent pil­
grims came to that wayside place where the cocks were living. 
79-87. 
They were speaking the tales (topics) of VaraQ.asi 
to one another loudly. On hearing the story of Kasi, those 
cocks also set off in their company, thanks to the power of 
their memory of the previous birth. The kind-hearted pilgrims 
saw them on the way, cast ricegrains etc. (for them to eat) and 
brought them to the excellent holy spot. Having reached the 
holy spot, those cocks would be moving round the excellent 
Pavilion of Salvation. The residents of the holy place saw them 
following certain set of rules. They had conquered (the de­
sire) to eat. They performed religious observances. They were 
averse to anger. They were highly delighted to hear the talks 
and stories about me. They were devoid of greed and delu-

=== PAGE 453 ===

IV.ii. 98.88-95 
443 
sion. Their heads were wet, due to the plunge within the 
celestial river. They were engrossed in repeating my names. 
They paid due attention to my stories. Their mental activities 
were directed towards me. The residents of the holy place 
honoured those cocks as beings treading the paths of the 
good. Due to the impressions of the previous activities, they 
consulted one another and reduced their intake of food. Thus 
they would be casting off their lives. 0 ViᔻQU, by my grace, 
they will get into an aerial chariot even as all the people 
watched and will reach KaiHisa, my abode. For a long time 
they will enjoy excellent divine pleasures. Then they will become 
endowed with knowledge and attain eternal salvation. 
88. Mter this incident the people wjll begin to call this 
Pavilion of Salvation the Pavilion of Cocks. 
89. 
Those men who come to the Muktimai_l<;lapa and re­
member their story will certainly attain the good (i.e. Mokᔻa) . 
90. 
Even as Saril.bhu narrated this future story to Hari, a 
tumultuous sound of ringing bells arose there. 
9 1 . Thereupon the Lord of Devas, the Consort of Uma, 
called Nandin and said, "Nandin, go and find out whence 
(comes) this sound. " 
92. Then Nandin returned and spoke to the Bull-emblemed 
Lord after bowing down to him with palms joined in rever­
ence, and face beaming with pleasure. 
Nandin said: 
93. 
0 Lord of Devas, 0 Three-eyed Lord, what new thing 
can I say to you. The graceful charms of the Glory of Salvation 
are being adored by some here. 
94-95. 
Then SariJ.bhu said smiling, "Our desire has been 
fulfilled." The Lord of the chiefs of Devas, in auspicious guise, 
got up. Accompanied by the Goddess, Brahma and Hari, he 
went to the Rariga MaQ<;iapa. 
Skanda said: 
After listening to this meritorious Adhyaya, the giver of 
great bliss, a man will attain the greatest joy and will certainly 
reach Kailasa.

=== PAGE 454 ===

444 
Skanda Purii7Ja 
CHAPTER NINETYNINE 
The Greatness of Sri Visvesvara 
Vyiisa said: 
1 . 
Listen, 0 Suta, to the (activities of the) life of the 
Lord of Devas, of Visvesa, the great Atman, in the manner 
narrated to the Pot-born One by the Saravana-born Lord 
(Karttikeya) . 
Agastya said: 
2. 
0 Senanl (Commander-in-chief i.e. Karttikeya) , do narrate 
to me what the Lord did after coming out of the Nirvat:ta 
Mat:t<;lapa accompanied by the Devas and Indra. 
Skanda said: 
3. 
I shall describe what Sambhu did after reaching Srngara-
Mat:t<;lapa from Mukti-Mat:t<;lapa, keeping Brahma and Viᔻt:tu as 
forerunners. 
4-7. The Lord sat facing the East along with us and the 
Goddess. Brahma sat on his right and Sarngin (Viᔻt:tu) sat on 
his left side. He was fanned by Mahendra and surrounded by 
the sages. He was silently served by the Gat:tas with arms lifted 
up. They were standing at the sides with respectful veneration 
to the utmost. Sambhu raised his right hand and showed the 
Linga to Brahma and Viᔻt:tu saying: "Look. This is the greatest 
splendour. This alone is greater than the greatest. 
8-1 4. 1 
This alone is my immobile form that accords the 
highest Siddhi. These are Pasupata devotees, Siddhas observ­
ing celibacy ever since childhood. They have conquered their 
sense-organs. They are fully engrossed in their penance. They 
are free from impurities due to their knowledge of the five 
topics (entities) 2 (or the four Vedas, Itihasas and Purat:tas) . 
They lie down on a heap of holy ash. They have mental restraint. 
I. W 8-1 3 describe the Pasupata way of life. 
2. Paiicarthajiiana-Knowledge of the Omkara (Consisting of A, U, M, 
Nada and Bindu r ) ; or the knowledge of the Mantra of five syllables 'sivaya 
namar'.

=== PAGE 455 ===

IV.ii.99. 15-22 
445 
They are well-behaved. They are Ordhvaretas (They have sub­
limated their sexual energies) . They are always engaged in the 
adoration of the Linga. Their sense-organs and minds do not 
turn towards anyone else. They are always pure on account of 
Varut:a (shower) and Agneya (ash) baths. Their food consists 
of bulbous roots, roots and fruits. Their eyes are dedicated to 
the Supreme Being. They are truthful. They have conquered 
anger. They are devoid of delusion. They do not possess anything. 
They do not desire anything. They have no sense of identity 
with the body etc. They have no sorrow. They are free from 
ailments. The are Nirbhagas (i.e. have abandoned riches) , Nimpayas 
(do not employ means of expendiency) ; they have no contact 
with others; their hearts are free from impurities. They have 
crossed the terrible ocean of the worldly 'existence. They have 
no doubts. They are free. from sins. They are free from op­
posing pairs (e.g. pleasure-pain) . They have certain firm views. 
Their activities are uncontaminated by egotism. They are always 
my great favourites. They are my sons in my own form. These 
are to be adored and bowed to, thinking them to be I myself, 
by those who solely worship me. 
15. 
If they are adored, I become pleased undoubtedly. In 
this holy spot of Visvesvara, Sivayogins should be duly fed. 
1 6-19. 
If each one is perfectly fed, it has the merit of 
feeding ten million persons. This Visvesvara is Lord of the 
universe himself in the form of a stationary being. 
He brings about all the Siddhis of all persons who are devoted 
to him. I may be manifest sometimes and sometimes unmanifest. 
0 Devas, I stay in this Anandakanana as I please, indepen­
dently for the purpose of blessing all devotees here for ever. 
I shall be staying in the form of a Linga, bestowing the 
object thought of. All the Lingas (whether) they are self-hom 
or not, always come to see this Linga. 
20. 
There is no doubt about this that I stay in all the 
Lingas. But this is the greatest of my forms as a Linga. 
2 1 . 
0 heaven-dwellers, it is as good as I have been seen 
directly by the person by whom this Linga was seen faithfully 
with a pure vision. 
22. 
May the Devas listen along with the sages. If one 
hears about this Linga, all his sins accumulated in the course 
of a birth perish in an instant.

=== PAGE 456 ===

446 
Skanda PuriifJ,a 
23. 
In one remembers this Liilga, all the sins accumulated 
in the course of two births necessarily perish immediately at 
my behest. There should be no doubt about it. 
24. With this Liilga in view, if one sets out from his house, 
all the sins accumulated in the course of three births perish 
instantly. 
25. 
0 immortal ones, by seeing this Liilga, one gets the 
merit arising from a hundred horse-sacrifices invariably, due 
to my blessings. 
26. 
0 Suras, the merit of a thousand Rajasuya sacrifices 
accrues merely by the touch of this self-born Linga of myself, 
of Visvdvara. 
27. 
Merely by offering flowers along with a palmful of 
water with devout feelings, one attains the merit of (offering) 
a hundred SuvarQ.as (gold pieces) . 
28. By performing the worship alone with great devotion 
of this king of Lingas, the merit of adoration with a thousand 
golden lotuses is obtained. 
29. 
By performing the great adoration of this Liilga with 
Paficamrta as the main constituent, one obtains all the four 
aims of life. 
30. 
0 immortal ones, if an excellent devotee bathes the 
Liilga of mine with the waters filtered and purified through 
a cloth, he obtains the merit arising from a hundred thousand 
horse-sacrifices. 
3 1 . If anyone devoutly smears the Liilga with sweet-smell­
ing sandal juice, he will be smeared (in heaven) with scented 
Yakᕄakardama (mixture of camphor, agallochum, musk and 
Kankola) by celestial damsels. 
32. 
By offering sweet-smelling incense (a devotee) becomes 
the receptacle of divine scent. By lighting lamps of clarified 
butter, he moves about in an aerial chariot in the form of a 
radiant splendour. 
33. 
By offering a lamp with camphor-wick once, a devotee 
attains white splendour of the body like camphor and be­
comes three-eyed with an eye in forehead. 
34. 
By offering Naivedya alone, an intelligent devotee will 
enjoy great pleasures and reside on the Kailasa Mountain at 
the rate of a Yuga for each particle of boiled rice. 
35. 
If anyone offers rice pudding with ghee and sugar

=== PAGE 457 ===

IV.ii.99.36-48 
447 
unto Visvesa, it is as though all the three worlds including 
Devas, Pitrs and human beings have been propitiated by him. 
36. 
Great indeed is the merit of one who offers Mukhaviisa 
(perfume to make the breath fragrant) , mirror, beautiful chowries, 
awning and comfortable couch. 
37. 
It is somehow possible to calculate the number of the 
jewels in an ocean; but who can calculate the merit of the 
offerings of Mukhaviisa etc.? 
38. 
He who devoutly offers the means and materials of 
worship like bell, . water-pot etc. in any abode (temple) shall 
stay here near me. 
39. 
If a devotee makes arrangement for either vocal, in­
strumental music or dance for propitiating me, in front of him 
there shall be great triple symphony. • 
40. 
One who. makes arrangement for pictures and paint­
ings in my mansion, shall enjoy great pleasures of diverse 
kinds staying before me. 
4 1 . By bowing to Visvesvara once i n the course of life, a 
wise man becomes the lord of the earth with his feet bowed 
down to by all the three worlds. 
42. 
If a devotee visits Visvesvara but dies elsewhere, he will 
undoubtedly become liberated in the next birth. 
43. 
How can there be rebirth if the name of Visve8vara is 
at the tip of the tongue, the story of Visvanatha in the ear and 
the regular meditation of Visvesa in the mind? 
44. 
After seeing Visvanatha's (my) Liilga if one rejoices, 
he will be counted as one among my Gal}.as, because he has 
the strength of the merit. 
45. 
If one repeats during the three Sandhyiis (morning, 
midday and evening) everyday Visvesa, Visve8a and Visvanatha 
I too shall utter the name of that meritorious devotee. 
46. 
0 Suras, this great Liilga is worthy of being worshipped 
even by me for ever. Hence it should be assiduously wor­
shipped by Devas, sages and human beings. 
4 7. 
If Visvesvara is not seen and if Visve8vara is not remem­
bered, they are seen by the messengers of the god of Death and 
they have to recollect (experience) the sufferings of the womb. 
48. If this Liilga is bowed to, they will be bowed to by 
Suras and Asuras. When considered against a single bow 
to the Liilga, the position of the Guardian of a Quarter

=== PAGE 458 ===

448 
Skanda Purii:TJ,a 
is worthless. There is downfall from the position of a 
Guardian of a Quarter, (but) there is no downfall from 
the obeisance to Siva. 
49. 
May all the groups of Devas, sages and GaQ.as listen. 
I shall speak the truth and that too for helping others. No­
where within the worlds of Bhiil:t, Bhuval:t, Svarga, Mahal:t and 
Jana, is there a Linga equal to Visvda. 
50. 
Neither in Satyaloka, nor in Tapoloka nor in VaikuQ.tha, 
KaiHisa and Rasatala is a Tlrtha anywhere on a par with 
MaQ.ikarQ.ika, or a Linga like Visvesa. 
5 1 . There is no Linga equal to that of Visvanatha. There 
is no Tlrtha ot_her than MaQ.ikarQ.ika. There is no splendid 
penance grove anywhere else on a par with my Anandavana. 
52. 
The whole of VaraQ.asl is full of Tlrthas. Its very name 
is 'Tlrtha of all Tlrthas'. There itself is the highly sacred 
MaQ.ikarQ.ika, the very ground of my happiness. 
53. 1 From the site which is my royal palace, the city extends 
in between the north and the east; to the left it is three hundred 
hands (up to Hariscandresvara) and to the right it is two hun­
dred hands (up to Ganga Kesava-Comm.) . 
54. 
In Ganga, MaQ.ikarQ.ika extends to five hundred hands 
north to south. It is the very essence of the three worlds. It 
is the basic support of the great soul. Those who resort to it 
lie in my heart (They are of the form of Sat-Comm.) . 
55. 
In this Anandakanana of mine, this Linga which is the 
abode of nectar (of Salvation) and from which the radiance 
of the Self originates has come out by itself from the bottom 
of the seven Patalas out of compassion for the devotees. 
56. 
The greatest punishment for those people who resort 
to this Linga after indulging in reasoning alone is this that 
they will never cease to be born and reborn in the womb. 
57. 
Whatever is beneficial (or desirable) to oneself should 
be offered to this Linga by people who are devoted to me. 
Neither here nor elsewhere does the sin committed by sinners 
perish as it perishes here. 
58. 
If any Linga here is worshipped by highly intelligent 
ones stationed far away, the Glory of Salvation shall abide in 
them along with auspicious things given by me alone. 
I . VV 53-54 delimit the sacredmost part of VaraQasi.

=== PAGE 459 ===

IV.ii. 99.59-69 
449 
59. 
0 ViᔻQ.U, listen, 0 Creator (Brahma) listen; may all the 
Devas, sages and the GaQ.as listen. This Linga gives the greatest 
Siddhi unto the good, due to being in my vicinity. There is 
not the slightest change in this regard. 
60. 
If the wealth earned by means of good merit is offered 
to this Linga that is the means of the achievement of all Siddhis. 
I accord to them the Nirval}.apada (Position of Salvation) that 
is the means of obtaining every happiness beyond measure 
and which affords freedom from fear. 
61 . 
Lifting up the hand, I assert again and again that, in 
this world having the three Vedas, only three things are es­
sential: Visvesa Linga, MaQ.ikarQ.ika water and the city of Kasi. 
This is the truth, threefold truth. " 
62. 
Then the Lord got up along with Sakti, performed the 
excellent worship and merged into the same Linga. The Suras 
uttered, "Be victorious, be victorious" and eulogized the Lord. 
Skanda said: 
63-64. 
0 son of Mitra and VaruQ.a, 0 highly intelligent 
one, only a part of the great efficacy of the holy spot Avimukta 
has been narrated. It dispels sins. I have narrated it to you in 
accordance with my understanding because you are being distressed 
due to separation from Kasi. Ere long you will reach the excellent 
Kasi. 
65. 
The Sun has come to the peak of the mountain of 
setting. To you as well as to me, this is the time for silence. 
Vyasa said: 
66. 
On hearing this, 0 Siita, the sage along with Lopamudra 
bowed down to the Son of Uma repeatedly and set out for the 
Sandhya prayers. 
67. 
After learning well the secret of the holy spot of the 
Moon-crested Lord, Agastya with a firm mind became engrossed 
in the meditation of Siva. 
68. 
0 Siita, who is capable of adequately describing the 
exalted greatness of Anandakanana even in a hundred years. 
69. 
The greatness has been recounted to the Pot-born One 
by Skanda in the same manner as it was narrated to the Goddess 
by the noble Lord.

=== PAGE 460 ===

450 
Skanda Purii?Ja 
70. 
0 excellent one, it has been narrated to you as well 
as Suka and others. Now tell me what you have been desirous 
of asking me. I shall Jilarrate it to you. 
7 1 . 
On hearing this meritorious chapter that is destruc­
tive of all sins and that accords all the benefits desired, a man 
will become contented. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED 
Index to Kiis'ikha?Jt!a 
Suta said: 
1 . 
I am exceedingly satisfied on hearing this ex-:ellent 
Kasikhal).«;ia of the Skanda-Pural).a. It has been retained in the 
heart. 
2. 
0 Son of Parasara, narrate the chapter covering the 
Anukramal).ika as well as the excellent Mahatmya (greatness of 
the Kasikhal).«;ia) in order to make this like the previous one. 
Vyiisa said: 
3. 
0 righteous-souled Siita, 0 Son of Jatukarl).i, listen. 
May the Sons Suka, Vaisarhpayana and others also listen. 
4. 
I shall narrate the chapter of Index and contents as 
well as the Mahatmya of this Khal).«;ia for the purpose of dis­
pelling sins. It enhances the merit. 
5. 
The conversation ·of Vindhya and Narada has been 
mentioned in the first (chapter) . The power and greatness of 
Satyaloka has been cited in the second (chapter) . 
6. 
The arrival of the Devas to the penance-grove of Agastya 
(chapter third) , the conduct of chaste women (chapter 4) and 
the departure of the Pot-born One (chapter 5) . 
7. 
The praise of the Tirtha (chapter 6) , then the seven 
cities are remembered ( chapte.r 7) ; the nature of Sarhyamini 
(chapter 8 ) , and thereafter the world of Bradhna (Sun-god) 
(chapter 9) .

=== PAGE 461 ===

IV.ii.100.8-19 
451 
8. 
Then Sivasarman's arrival at the worlds of Indra and 
Agni (chapter 1 0) . Then the origin of Agni (chapter 1 1 ) . 
Thereafter the origin of Kravyat (i.e. Niqti) and Varul).a (chapter 
1 2) . 
9. 
The origin of the lords of Gandhavatl (Capital of Vayu) 
and Alaka (Capital of Kubera) (chapter 1 3) , and the arrival 
of the Brahmal).a Sivasarman in Candraloka (chapter 1 4) . 
1 0. 
Then the tale of the stellar world (chapter 1 5) . Then 
the origin of Sukra (Venus) (chapter 1 6) . Then the descrip­
tion of the worlds of Maheya (Mars) , Guru Qupiter) and Sa uri 
(Saturn) (chapter 1 7) . 
1 1 . The world of the Seven Sages (chapter 18) , the pen­
ance of Dhruva (chapter 19) , the arrival of ViᕄI).U (chapter 20) 
and the arrival at the world of Dhruva" (chapter 2 1 ) . 
12. Sivasarman's vision of Satyaloka (chapter 22) , the coro­
nation of the Four-armed Lord (chapter 23) , Sivasarman's 
Salvation (chapter 24) . 
1 3. 
The conversation between Skanda and Agastya begins 
(chapter 25) ; the origin of Mal).ikarl).ika (chapter 26) . Then 
the greatness of Ganga and the hymn of Dasahara (chapter 
27) . 
1 4. 
The efficacy of Ganga (chapter 28) , the thousand names 
of Ganga (chapter 29) . Eulogy of Varal).asl (chapter 30) . The 
manifestation of Bhairava (chapter 31 ) . 
1 5. 
The origin of Dai).Q.apal).i (chapter 32) , the origin of 
Jiianavapl (chapter 33) . The anecdote of Kalavatl (chapter 
34) , then (rules of) good conduct (chapter 35) . 
1 6. 
Brahmacariprakaral).a (Duties of celibate students) 
(chapter 36) , the salient characteristics of women (chapter 
37) . Prescriptions and prohibitions (chapter 38) . Description 
of Avimuktda (chapter 39) . 
1 7. 
Then the duties of a householder (chapter 40) . Review 
of Yoga (chapter 41 ) . Kalajiiana (chapter 42) . The story of 
Divodasa (chapter 43) . 
18. 
Description of Kasl (chapter 44) . Description of Yogin Is 
(chapter 45) . Narration (legend) of Lolarka (chapter 46) . The 
story of U ttararka (chapter 4 7) . 
19. The greatness of Sambaditya (chapter 48) ; the eulogy 
of Drupadaditya (chapter 49) as well as Mayiikhaditya. The 
story of GaruQ.a (chapter 50) , Arul).arka etc. (chapter 57) including

=== PAGE 462 ===

452 
Skanda Purii:r.ta 
the Sun-gods, viz. Vrddha Kesava, Vimala Gangadityas. 
20. 
The Tirtha of Dasasvamedha (chapter 52) . The arrival 
of the Gat:tas from Mandara (chapter 53) . Legend of Pisacamocana 
(chapter 54) and deputation of .Gat:tesa (chapter 55) . 
2 1 . MayagaQ.apati described (chapter 56) . The manifesta­
tion of I;>hut:t<;lhi (chapter 57) . The series of Viᔻt:tu's Maya and 
Divodasa being sent to Kailasa (chapter 58) . 
22. The origin of Paiicanada (chapter 59) ; the origin of 
Bindumadhava (chapter 60) . Then the greatness of Vaiᔻt:tava 
Tirthas (chapter 61 ) . 
23. 
Departure of the bull-emblemed, trident-bearing Lord 
of Kasi from Mandara (chapter 62) . The dialogue of Jaigiᔻavya 
and Mahda at the Jyeᔻtha Sthana (chapter 63) . 
24. 
Then the narration of the secret of the holy spot which 
destroys sins (chapter 64) . The origin of Kandukda and Vyaghresa 
(chapter 65) . 
25. 
Then is the story of Sailesvara (chapter 66) ; the vision 
of Ratnda (chapter 67) ; the origin of Krttivasas (chapter 69) . 
26. 
The Adhiᔻthana of the deities (chapter 70) ; thᕅ ex­
ploits of Durga (Demon) (chapter 71 ) ; Victory of Durga (Goddess) 
(chapter 72) . Then the description of Orhkara (chapter 
73) . 
27. 
Further description of the greatness of Orhkara (chap­
ter 74) . The origin of Trilocana (chapter 75) . The power of 
Trilocana (chapter 76) . Narration of Kedara (chapter 77) . 
28. 
The greatness of Dharmda (chapter 78) . The story of 
the birds (chapter 79) . The narration of Visvabhuja (chapter 
80) . Then the story of Durdama (chapter 81 ) . 
29. 
Then the narration of Viresvara (chapter 82) . Further 
greatness of Viresa (chapter 83) . Ganga in combination with 
the Tirthas (chapter 84) . Then the greatness of Kames a (chap­
ter 85) . 
30. 
The greatness of Visvakarmesa (chapter 86) ; the be­
ginning of the Yajiia of Dakᔻa (chapter 87) ; Sati casts off her 
body (chapter 88) ; then the origin of Dakᔻesvara (chapter 
89) . 
3 1 . Then the glorification of Parvatisa (chapter 90) ; then 
the greatness of Garigesa (chapter 9 1 ) ; the origin of Narmadesa 
(chapter 92) . 
32. 
The origin of Satisvara (chapter 93) ; the description

=== PAGE 463 ===

IV.ii. 1 00.33-41 
453 
of Amrtesa etc. (chapter 94) , Vyasa's arm benumbed (chapter 
95) . Redemption of Vyasa's curse (chapter 96) . 
33. The groups of holy spots and Tirthas (chapter 97) . A 
detailed narration of MuktimaQ.Q.apa (chapter 98) . The mani­
festation of Visvda (chapter. 99) . Then the Yatra Parikrama 
(order in the pilgrimage) (chapter 1 00) . 
34. 
Thus the hundred narrations have been enumerated 
in due order. On hearing this alone the benefit of the entire 
KhaQ.Q.a is acquired. In this chapter covering the contents, 
there is Yatra Parikrama. 
Suta said: 
35. 
Narrate the Yatraparikrama, 0 exc.ellent son of Satyavati, 
with a desire for the welfare of the people desirous of the 
respective Siddhis. 
Vyasa said: 
I. Panca-1irthika Yatra: 
36-40. Listen, 0 highly intelligent LomaharᔻaQ.a. I shall tell 
you how the pilgrimage is to be joyously performed first by 
Pilgrims. ' 
The following pilgrimage is called Paiicatirthika (Yatra of 
the group of five Tirthas) : At the outset a devotee should take 
bath, along with the cloth worn, in the waters of Cakrapuᔻkarirᕆl. 
He then duly offers libation to the Devas along with the Pitrs. 
Then he propitiates the BrahmaQ.a suppliants. He then makes 
obeisance to Aditya, Draupadi, ViᔻQ.U, DaQ.Q.apaQ.i and Mahesvara. 
Then he goes to visit I)huQ.Q.hi Vinayaka. He performs ablu­
tion in Jiianavapi and adores Nandikesa. Thereafter he wor­
ships Tarakesa and Mahakalesvara thereafter. Then he adores 
DaQ.Q.apaQ.i once again. This is Paiicatirthika. 
41 . 
This should be done everyday by those who wish for 
great benefits. 
II. Vaisve5van Yatni 
Thereafter Vaisvesvari Yatra (Pilgrimage to Visvesvara) should 
I. VV 3p0 describe the first (shortest) Pati.ca-Tirthika Yatra. It is limited 
to five Tirthas only.

=== PAGE 464 ===

454 
Skanda Purii:T_ta 
be performed. This bestows the achievement of all objectives. 
42. Then the pilgrimage to the fourteen Ayatanas should 
be duly performed beginning with the first lunar day in the 
dark half and ending with the fourteenth. 
43-4 7. 
Or the pilgrimage can be performed on every four­
teenth lunar day by the people who desire the mastery of the 
holy spot. A pilgrim obtains the benefit if he takes bath in the 
different Tirthas, worships the different Lingas and observes 
silence while travelling. He will visit ( 1 ) Orilkara at the outset 
after performing aquatic rites in Matsyodari. Then he should 
go to (2) TriviHapa, (3) Mahadeva, then (4) Krttivasas, (5) 
Ratnesa, (6) then Candresa and then (7) Kedara, then he 
should go to (8) Dharmesvara, (9) Viresa, and ( 1 0) Kamesvara. 
Then ( 1 1 ) Visvakarmesvara, then ( 1 2) Mat:J.ikart:J.isvara. After 
seeing ( 1 3) Avimuktesvara he will worship Visve§a ( 1 4) This 
pilgrimage should be assiduously performed by a resident of 
the holy spot. 
48. 
If someone stays in the holy spot but does not perform 
this pilgrimage, he will be beset with obstacles indicating expulsion 
from the holy spot. 
III. A$!iiyatana Yiitrii 
49-50. 
Another pilgrimage of eight Ay_atanas should be 
performed for the purpose of subduing obstacles, especially 
on every eighth lunar day. They are: Dakᔻe§a, Parvatisa, 
Pasupatisvara, Gat:J.esa, Narmadesa, GabhastiSa, SatiSvara and 
the eighth one Tarakesa. 
5 1 -62. 
All these Lingas should be visited for suppressing 
great obstacles. 
IV. Bath and Darsana of 1 4 Lingas 
There is another splendid pilgrimage that always brings 
about Yoga and ᕂema (acquisition and preservation) . It destroys 
all obstacles and it should be performed by the residents of 
the holy spot. 
Taking holy bath in Varat:J.a. ( 1 ) Sailesa should be visited 
at the outset. (2) Then holy dip is taken in the Sangama and 
Sangamesvara should be seen. (3) Then the devotee takes the 
holy plunge in Svalina Tirtha and visits Svalina lsvara. ( 4)

=== PAGE 465 ===

IV.ii.1 00.63-73 
455 
Mter bathing in Mandakinl Tirtha Madhyamesvara should be 
seen. (5) Then he should perform aquatic rites in Hirai).yagarbhesa 
Tirtha and he should visit Hirai).yagarbhda. (6) Then he should 
take bath in Mai).ikarr:tika and visit Isana, the Lord. (7) Then 
he should perform the aquatic rites in Goprekᗀ?akupa and visit 
Goprekᗀ?a. (8) Mter taking bath in Kapileyahrada, he should 
visit Vnabhadhvaja. (9) He should visit Upasanta Siva after 
making use of the water in the well concerned. ( 1 0) After 
bathing in Paiicac UQahrada he should adore Jyeghasthana. 
( 1 1 } Mter bathing in Catu}:tsamudra Kupa he should adore 
the Lord. ( 12) Mter Upasparsana (bath) in the tank which is 
in front of the Lord, he should visit Sukrdvara and perform 
the aquatic rites in the well concerned. ( 1 3) Mter bathing in 
Dar:tQakhata, he should worship Vyaghresa. • ( 14) Mter bathing 
in Saunakesvara Kur:tQa he should worship the great Jarhbukesa 
Liri.ga. After performing this pilgrimage, the man is never 
reborn in the ocean of worldly existence, the ocean of misery. 
The pilgrim age unto these Ayatanas should be successively 
performed in this order, beginning with the first lunar day in 
the dark half and ending with the Caturdasl thereof. Mter 
performing this pilgrimage a man is never reborn. 
V. Ekiidasiiyatani Yiitrii 
There is another pilgrimage consisting of eleven Ayatanas. 
It should be performed. 
63-66. 
Having bathed duly as per prescriptions in Agnldhra 
kur:tQa, the devotee should visit Lord Agnldhra. Then he should 
proceed to Urvaslsa and thereafter to Nakullsvara. Mter vis­
iting ᕀaQhlsa and Bharabhutesvara thereafter, after visiting 
Lari.gallsa a n d Tripuran taka t h e r e afte r , a n d t h e n 
Mana}:tprakamesvara h e should proceed to PrHikesa. Thereaf­
ter he should visit Madalasesvara and then Tilaparr:tdvara. 
This pilgrimage of eleven Liri.gas should be assiduously per­
formed. A man performing this pilgrimage shall attain Rudra's 
status. 
VI. Gaun Yiitra 
67-73. 
Hereafter I shall narrate the excellent Gaurl Yatra 
that should be performed on the third lunar day of the bright

=== PAGE 466 ===

456 
Skanda Purii:r_ta 
half. It bestows all riches. Having bathed perfectly in Goprekᔻa 
a devotee shall go to Mukhanirmalika. Mter taking the bath 
in the JyeHhavapl tank, the man should worship JyeHhagaurl. 
Saubhagyagaurl should be worshipped by those who have per­
formed aquatic rites in the Jiianavapl tank. Then after per­
forming the same rite there itself, he should worship Srngaragaurl. 
Mter bathing in Visalagariga he ·should proceed to Visalakᔻl. 
Mter a bath as per prescription in the Lalita Tirtha, the devotee 
should worship Lalita. Mter bathing in the Bhavanl Tlrtha, he 
should adore Bhavanl. Then Marigala should be worshipped 
by the devotees who have performed aquatic rites with the 
waters of Bindu Tlrtha. Thereafter, for the purpose of steady 
increase in the prosperity, he should go to Mahalakᔻml. By 
performing . this pilgrimage in this holy spot that causes sal­
vation no man will be assailed by miseries anywhere here or 
hereafter. 
Pilgrimages of Ga'T_tesas, Bhairava etc. 
One shall always perform the pilgrimage of Vighnaraja on 
every Caturthl day (fourth lunar day) . 
74. 
With him (Gat:tesa) in view Modakas (ball-shaped sweet-
meat) should be given to Brahmat:tas for their happiness. During 
Tuesdays Bhairava Yatra that removes sins should be performed. 
75. 
The pilgrimage unto Ravi (Sun-god) should be per-
formed on Sundays, on the sixth lunar day when it coincides 
with a Sunday and also on Ravisaptaml day, for the purpose 
of subduing all obstacles. 
76. 
Cat:tc;ll Yatra is considered auspicious v.rhen performed 
on the eighth or ninth lunar day. Everyday the pilgrimage of 
the inner apartment (Sanctum) should be performed. 
Antargrha Yatra: 
77. At the outset, the_ early morning bath is taken. Then 
the five Vinayakas are bowed· to. A devotee then makes obei­
sance to Visvda standing in the Nirvat:tamat:tc;lapa. 
78. 
The devotee resolves thus: 'I shall perform the Yatra 
of the inner Sanctum for subdueing the mass of sins.' Mter 
taking up the vow thus, he goes to Mat:tikart:tika. 
79. 
After the bath he will return silently and worship

=== PAGE 467 ===

IV.ii.l00.80-98 
457 
MaQ.ikan:.J.ika. Then he bows to Kambala and A.Svatara and offers 
obeisance to Vasuki:Sa. 
80. 
Then he visits in order Parvatesa, Gailgake§ava, Lalita 
and Jarasandhesvara. 
81 . 
Then after seeing Somanatha, he goes to Varaha. 
Then bows to Brahme8vara and Agasti:Svara. 
82. 
He should pay obeisance to Kasyapesa and Harikesavana. 
Mter visiting Vaidyanatha he should visit Dhruvesa. 
83-86. 
The ·following are to be visited, worshipped and 
bowed to: GokarQ.esvara, Hatake8vara, Klkasesvara in the lake 
where bones are cast (Asthikᔻepa) , Bharabhuta, Citraguptesvara, 
CitraghaQ.ta, Pasupatisvara, Pitamahesvara, Kalasesvara, Candresa. 
Vlresa, Vidyesa, Agni:Sa, Nagesvara, Hariscandra, CintamaQ.ivinayaka 
and Senavinayaka, the remover of all obstacles. 
87. VasiHha and Vamadeva in the form of idols should be 
deliberately seen in KasL They are destroyers of great ob­
stacles. 
88-90. 
The following are then visited and bowed to: 
Simavinayaka, KaruQ.esa, Trisandhyesa, Visalakᔻi, Dharmesa, 
Visvabahuka, Asavinayaka, Vrddhaditya, Caturvaktresvara Liilga, 
then Brahmi:Sa, Mana}.J.prakamesa, Isanesa, CaQ.Qi and CaQ.Qi:Svara, 
Bhavani and Sailkara. I;>huQ.Qhi should be worshipped. The 
devotee then should adore Rajarajesa. 
91-95. 
Lailgallsa should be worshipped the n . Then 
NakuHSvara. Mter bowing to Parannesa the devotee bows to 
Paradravyesvara, Pratigrahesvara or Niᔻkalailkesa. Mter wor­
shipping MarkaQ.Qeyesa he should bow to Apsarasesvara. Then 
Gailgesa is to be worshipped; then he should take his bath in 
Jiianavapi tank. Then he should bow down to Nandikesa, Tarakesa, 
Mahakalesvara, DaQ.QapaQ.i, Mahesa and Mokᔻesa. Mter bow­
ing down to Vlrabhadresvara and Avimukte8vara, the five Vinayakas, 
he should go to Visvanatha. Then he will break silence and 
utter this Mantra. 
96. 
"May Lord Sarilbhu be pleased with this pilgrimage of 
the Antargrha (Inner Sanctum) , which has been duly performed 
by me, even if it be deficient or superfluous in any respect." 
97. Mter uttering this Mantra, the devotee rests for a short 
while in the MuktimaQ.Qapa. He should then go home. The 
man is rid of his sins. He is meritorious. 
98. 
On the day of ViᔻQ.U (i.e. Lunar eleventh) the pilgrim-

=== PAGE 468 ===

458 
Skanda Pura1Ja 
age to all the ViQ.u Tirthas should be assiduously performed 
for enhancing one's great merit. 
99. 
On the fifteenth day in the month of Bhadrapada (August­
Sept.) the devotee should worship Kulastarilbha. The worship 
thereof will remove misery and Rudrapisaca state. 
100. 
These Yatras should be performed by the residents 
of the holy spot with great faith. During the days 
of great 
festivals especially, the Yatras should be performed. 
101. 
The Krtin (one who wishes to be blessed) should 
never make the day deficient in Yatras. Two Yatras should be 
assiduously performed everyday. 
102-104. Certainly it is bath in the celestial river at the outset 
and then (visit to) Visvesa. If while staying in Kasi, the day has 
been spent in vain, the Pit.rs become disappointed on the very 
same day. He is indeed bitten by the serpent of Kala (death, 
time) . He is seen by death to be sure. He is robbed, if he does 
not visit Visve5a on that day. He who bathes in MaQ.ikarQ.ika 
and v.isits Visve5a, has bathed in all the Tirthas. 
105. Truth! Truth! Again it is the truth, truth, truth again 
and again! Visvesvara should be seen everyday and MaQ.ikarQ.ika 
should be bathed in. 
Vyasa said: 
Phalasmti (Fmit of hearing etc.) of the Kasi Kha1Jrf.a 
106. 
0 Siita, on hearing this excellent greatness of Kasi 
as described in the Skanda Pura7Ja, no man falls into hell even 
if he commits a thousand sins. 
107. 
By listening to Ka.SikhaQ.4a, 0 Siita, one undoubtedly 
attains that merit which is acquired after bathing in all the 
Tirthas. 
108. 
Certainly then the man gets by thus listening that 
merit which is acquired by making all kinds of gifts and performing 
many Yajiias. 
109-1 10. 
By listening to Ka.SikhaQ.4a, that great merit is 
acquired which is usually acquired after performing severe 
penances and also by learning all the four Vedas along with 
their ancillaries. 
11 1 . 
Grandfathers become satisfied by listening to this in

=== PAGE 469 ===

IV.ii.100.1 12-132 
459 
the same manner as the ancestors are satisfied after gifts are 
ᗁpade in Gaya. 
1 1 2. 
If Kasikhal}c;ia which is the cause of all welfare is heard 
by persons of steady intellect, then all the Pural}as have been 
heard. 
1 1 3. 
If the excellent greatness of Kasi is listened to by 
men of steady minds, they acquire great heaps of merits and 
all the Dharmas have been paid heed to by them. 
1 1 4. 
If the whole Khal}c;ia is recited (silently) , that alone 
is the worship of the Lord. It is glorified as the greatest ado­
ration. The entire Khal}c;ia should be listened to with faith, 0 
BrahmaJ}a. 
1 15. 
If anyone listens to even one story of .Kasikhal}.c;ia, 
undoubtedly all the Dharmasastras have been heard by him. 
1 1 6. 
This Kasikhal}c;ia is known as the solt: cause of great 
Dharmas, the expounder of great truths and tl)e cause of the 
acquisition of all desires. 
1 1 7. 
By listening to this, Kaivalya (Salvation) ceases to be 
far off in the case of men. All the Pitrs become pleased on 
hearing this excellent Khal}.c;ia. 
1 18-1 19. All the immortal beings beginning with Brahma, 
Viᕒu and Siva become pleased. The sages rejoice. Sanaka and 
others become elated. All shall certainly be delighted; all the 
four types of living beings become pleased by listening to this 
greatness of Varal}asi. 
1 20-1 2 1 . If a learned man expounds this excellent narrative 
entirely, or even half, or even a quarter or half of that or one 
excellent episode, he should be assiduously bowed to, he should 
be worshipped like a favourite deity. In order to please Vi8ve8a 
much should be given to him. 
1 22-132. If he is satisfied, Visvesa too is undoubtedly satis­
fied. There cannot be any powerful inauspicious thing iiY the 
place where this Khal}c;ia, the cause of the greatest bliss, is 
being read. The learned man who listens to this, the sensible 
scholar who expounds this and the meritorious-souled man 
who reads this, all these are forms of Rudra. 
If anyone copies this and offers this beautiful book to anyone 
else, it is as though all the Pura1,1as have been given by him, 
not otherwise. 
A giver of the manuscript is honoured in heaven as many

=== PAGE 470 ===

460 
Skanda Purii?Ja 
thousands of Yugas as there are episodes in this, as there are 
verses in this, as there are words, as there are syllables in this, 
as many Matras (Syllabic instants) there are here, as many 
rows of words are here, as there are threads in the string, as 
many threads in the cloth, as many pictures there are in the 
beautiful book. 
He who listens to this excellent Kha:r:t<;la twelve times, will 
be rid of the sin of even Brahma:r:ta-slaughter immediately, 
with the favour of Sarhbhu. 
If a man without a son listens to this after due bath with 
great faith, he will surely have a son by the power of the 
command of Sarhbhu. 
Of what avail is speaking much, 0 Siita? Whatever may be 
one's wish one shall be blessed by listening to this and obtain 
the same. 
Even if a man listens to this excellent Kasikha:r:t<;la from a 
far-off land, he will have the merit of residing in Kasi at the 
behest of Siva. 
By listening to this a man will be victorious everywhere. He 
will be of pure heart and he will enjoy bliss everywhere. 
1 33. 
One shall have interest in listening to this, only if 
Visvesa is pleased with one. He is meritorious. His mind is free 
from impurities. 
1 34. 
This book is the most excellent one of great auspi­
ciousness among all- auspicious things. It must be copied in 
writing and should be worshipped for the attainment of all 
auspiciousness. 
· · End of Kasikha:r:t<;la Uttarardha .. 
:: End of Kasikha:r:t<;la 
· ·

=== PAGE 471 ===

Abhayada 
55 
abhinivesa 
67 
AbhiŹta Trtiya, Vrata of 
317 
Adhvakesa 
421 
Adigadadhara 
63, 103 
Adike5ava 
5, 61, 103, 415 
Adikesavapi¶ha 
293 
Adimadhava 
I 00 
Adityakesava 
63, 1 03 
Agasti5vara 
1 1 6 
Agasti Tirtha 
1 16 
Agastya Tirtha 
325 
Aghoroda 
420 
Agneya Km:u'-a 
423 
Agneye5vara 
423 
Agnibindu 
9 1 , 1 02 
Agnijihva 
1 89 
Agni Tirtha 
332 
Ahamkara 
1 28 
Ahuusa 
421 
Aiźva Tirtha 
332 
Aindri 
207 
Airavata Km:u'-a 
424 
Airavate5vara 
1 80 
Airavate5vara Linga 
424 
Ai5varya MaJ:J.<Japa 
290 
Ai5varyesa 
304 
Ajyape5vara Liilga 
426 
Żapade5a 427 
Alarke5a 
431 
AmarakaJ:ltaka 246 
Amaresa 199 
Aril.barip Tirtha 
63, 103 
Aril.bariµe5a 
279 
Amitrajit 
307 
Amrtakii.pa 
209 
Amrte5a 
389 
Amrte5vara 388 
AmrteSvari 
208 
Aril.suman 
250 
Amſyai;ta 271 
Anakhyanada 
237 
Anale5vara 
203 
Ananda 250 
Anantamadhava 
101 
INDEX 
Anantavamana 
1 1 7 
Anaraka 
418 
Anarake5vara Liilga 
418 
Angara 
332 
Ailgaraka Tirtha 
419 
anger 
80 
Ailgirasesa 
432 
AI;lima 
390 
Antake5vara 
1 89 
Antargrha Yatrii 
456 
Antyapr.ijapatya (rite) 
402 
Anii.ru 
2 
- 
Anusii.ye5vara 
415 
Apastambe5vara Liilga 425 
Apsarase5vara 
155 
Arayai;ta 
271 
Arkavinayaka 
53, 432 
AruƊ:ta 
I, 2 
Arui;taditya 
1 , 2 
Arundhateyaka Tirtha 
325 
Arundhati Tirtha 
1 15 
ża<Jhi5vara 
37, 427 
Asa Vinayaka 
57 
Asitailga 
(Bhairava) 228 
asmita 
67 
ASoka 
425 
ASoka Tirtha 
324 
Žžyatana Yatrii 
454 
ASuddha Tattvas 
390 
ASvarii.<Jha 
228 
ASvatare5a 429 
Asvatthame5vara Liilga 
260 
ASvineye5vara 
417 
Atikrcchra 
402 
Atri5vara 
415 
Aţtahasa 
249, 416 
Atyugranarasirilha 
117 
Avabhratake5vara 
418 
Avadhii.te5a 
427 
avidya 
67 
Avimukta 
233, 247, 335 
Avimuktaqetra 
105 
Avimukta Vinayaka 57 
Avimukte5vara Tirtha 
I l l 
Avimukte5vare5vara 
292

=== PAGE 472 ===

462 
Ayatanas, twelve 
67 
Ayogandhaku"Q.a 
192 
Ayogandhe5vara 
192 
Ayutabhuja (Sakti) 228 
Babhru 
250 
Bilacandre5a 423 
Baladeva 323 
Balivimana 
1 17 
Bandik¹Q.a 
424 
Bandi Tirtha 
323 
Bandi5vara 
424 
Bfeiia 429 
Bfe5a Liilga 416 
Bfeiivara 
25 
bell-metal vessel, taking food in a 98 
Bhadrahrada 
417 
Bhadrakili 
35, 208 
Bhadrakili Hrada 
425 
Bhadrakan)ahrada 
198 
Bhadrakºeiia 
198 
Bhadravipi 
208 
Bhadreiia 
431 
Bhadreiivara 
417 
Bhaga deprived of his eyes 
372 
Bhagiratha 58, 432 
Bhagiratha Tirtha 
325, 336 
Bhigirathiƀ 114 
Bhagirathi Tirtha 
1 14, 323 
Bhairava Tirtha 330 
Bhairaveiia 424 
Bhakta-kalpadruma, Mantra 
named 
109 
BhirabhUta 
36, 249 
Bhirabhuteiivara 
36 
Bhiradvije5vara 
149 
Bhirgava Tirtha 
63, 103 
Bhasma sanctified by Siva Mantra 33 
Bhasmagitra 
199 
Bhavini 
214, 271, 324 
Bhavini Tirtha 
1 12, 324 
Bhavini, Tirthas of 335 
Bhaveiivara 
198 
BhimacCQ.avinayaka 
53 
Bhimaca"Q.i 
210 
Bhimeiivara 
199 
Bhi·"i 
148 
Bhi3makeiiava 
104 
Bhi3meiia 
260 
Bhogavati 
202 
Bhrgukeiia 
103 
Bhrgukeiiava 
103 
BhrguniriƁa 
148 
Bhupalaiiri 
76, 77 
BhUrbhuval) 
201 
Bhutadhatri5a 
249 
Bhuvane5a 
419 
Bindu 
237 
SkandaPura1Jil 
Bindu Tirtha 89, 332 
Bindumidhava 
96, 98, 101, 293 
Binduviniyaka 
58 
Brahmi 12, 376 
Brahma-Hatyi 
301 
Brahmi instructs DȞ 
377 
BrihmCa. offence against a 
124 
Brahmanila 
1 14, 336 
BrihmCas 
151 
BrihmCa-slaughter, remedy for the 
sin of 301 
Brahmfi 
158 
Brahmariteiivara Liilga 
426 
Brahmastava 
245 
Brahma Tirtha 
324 
Brahmivarta 
191 
Brahmavidyi 
324 
Brahmeiia 249 
Brahmeiivara 
17 
Brihmi 
207 
Brhaspati5vara Liilga 421 
Buddhi 
128 
Caitraratha Liilga 
428 
Cakrahrada 
417 
CakrapƂkari"i 
109, 291, 389 
Cakrapu3kari"i became well-known as 
MCikºiki 
109 
Cakrapu3kari"i Tirtha 
333, 381 
Cakra Tirtha 
62, 327 
Cakreiia 
417 
Carilpakivati 
311 
Camu"Q.a 
158, 211 
Cim¹Q.is 
204 
Ca"Q.a 
228 
Ca"Q.eiia 422 
CCQ.iki 
158 
CCQ.iiivara 
426 
Candra 
350 
Candra Tirtha 
333 
Cindriƃa 
403 
Candreiivara 233

=== PAGE 473 ===

Index 
Carcikli, Goddess 
428 
Carmamui;I4a 
211 
castes 
68 
Catubsagara Vapikli 
156 
Catul)srotasvini Tinha 271 
Caturdanta 
56 
caturmasya, performing Vratas at least 
in 
97 
Caturmasya Vratas 97 
Caturmukha 36 
Caturmukhe5vara 
36 
Catumada Tinha 
270 
Catussamudra Kupa 426 
Caura Tirtha 
322 
celibacy 97 
censuring Siva 101, 257 
Chagaliii;l4a Tinha 
195 
Chagale5a 
28 
Chagavaktra 
249 
ChageSvari 210 
chariot 
128 
Cintarnai;Ii 
56 
Citraghai;Ita 
57, 207 
Citragriva 
208 
Citragupteivara 
207 
CitragupteSvara Liri.ga 
429 
Citrakupa 
207 
CitnUigade5vara Liri.ga 
278 
CitnUige5a 
432 
Citrarathe5vara Tinha 
325 
Citta 
128 
cooked food 
67 
courage 
214 
crows transformed into swans 
188 
Cyavane5a 
189, 421 
Dadhici5vara 
415 
Dadhikalpa Hrada 
427 
Dadhikalpe5vara 
428 
Dadhivamana 
1 17 
Daiva (fate) 
23 
DÙ 
375 
Ŧ made goat-faced 
3'i7 
Dæyai;IiSvara Liri.ga 
183 
DaÚe5a 
423 
DÛe5vara 378, 389 
Dama 
305 
Damana, story of 246 
Damane5a 
420 
Damodara 
1 19 
Dana in accordance with one's 
capacity 97 
Dai;I4akhata 
139, 426 
Dai;IQapiii;li 
430 
Dai;I4i5vara 
198 
Dantahasta 
56 
Darukeivara Tinha 211 
Da.Saivamedha 
1 1 , 16 
Da.Saivamedha Tinha 
323 
Dattatreye5vara 
63, 431 
Dehalivinayaka 
53 
Devadeva 
191 
Devale5vara Liilga 
427 
Devayani5vara 
431 
Deve5ajayanta 
196 
Dhanvantari5vara 
424 
Dharai;Ii5a • 304 
Dharai;Iivar.iha 
1 17, 200 
Dharm0tra 
64 
463 
Dharmanada 
77, 86, 89 
Dharmandhu (Dharma Kiipa) 
303 
DhannapiŢa 
280 
Dharma Tinha 302, 325 
Dharma Tinha, origin of 301 
Dharme5a 233, 350 
Dharme5a PiÜa 293 
Dharme5vara 
283 
Dhate5a 428 
Dhruvakui;If1.a 431 
Dhruve5vara 
431 
l;>hui;If1.hiraja 
70 
l;>hUI;I4hi Tinha 112 
l;>hUI;I4hi Vinayaka alias 
l;>hui;I4hiraja 
47 
Dhundhuman5vara 
157 
Dhutapapa 77, 81 
Dhfltapapa became a lunar stone 
86 
Dhfltapapaka 
89 
Dhfltapapili 
101 
Dilipa Tinha 322 
Dilipe5a 
432 
Dipta 
209 
Dipte5a 
199 
Divodasa 
12, 123, 438 
Divodase5vara 
76 
Dr4he5a 
429 
Drmicai;I4a 
249 
Drmicai;I4e5a 
423 
Drmicai;I4e5vara 
28 
Droi;Ie5a 260

=== PAGE 474 ===

464 
Dundubhinirhnida 
151 
Durdama 280, 305 
Durga 
212 
Durga 
226 
Durga:iaya 
229 
DurgakUJ:IC.la, bath in 
228 
Durviisas 
336 
Durvasesvara 
341 
Dvaravighne5a 
57 
Dvaresvara 
433 
Dviire5vari 
433 
dveta 
67 
Dvitur.u;la 
56 
eating fish in dark half of Kiirttika 
99 
eight Bhairavas 
228 
eighteen Purii!Jas 
392 
eight modes of flight 263 
eight mothers 
158 
eight Siddhis 
390 
Ekadan taka 
55 
Ekiida5ayatani Yatra 
455 
Ekiihnikaiq'cchra 
403 
Ekiirilbara 
194 
equanimity 
214 
erecting a temple of Siva 
164 
evil omens 
41 
fasts 
98 
fasts on alternate days 98 
fiftysix Gajamukhas 
58 
five days, meal once in 
98 
five divine cows 
125 
five Liilgas of the Pii!J<;lavas 
429 
food only on leaves 
98 
foodstuffs, abstaining from eating 
certain 
97 
fourteen Liilgas, Dar5ana of 454 
freedom from fear, gift of 67 
fruits of dreams 
40 
Gabhastisa 
427 
Gada Tirtha 
62 
Gadadhara Tirtha 
126 
Gadadharesvara 
155 
Gajakan:ta 
57 
Gajasura 
184 
Gajasura, the great hide of 187 
Gajiisya 
228 
Gaja Tirtha 322 
Skanda Purii'T}a 
Gaja-Vinayaka 
57 
Gal}.adhyakta 
53, 58, 200 
GandharvakUJ:tQa 
156 
Gandharve5vara 
156 
Gal}.e5vare5vara Liilga 
431 
Ganga 
382 
Gailgii and Yamuna, confluence 
of 105 
Gailgaditya 
1, 9 
Gailgakesava 
1 16 
Gailgake5ava Tirtha 
325 
Gailga-Kesave5vara 
1 16 
Gangesa 
429 
Gailge5vara, origin of 381 
Garga 
246 
Garge5a 
420 
Garu<;la Tirtha 324 
Gauri KuQ<;ia 
277 
Gaurikiipa 
425 
Gauri Tirtha 
277 
Gauri Yatra 
455 
Gautame5vara 431 
Gautami 
271 
Gautami Tirtha 
325 
Gayadhisa 432 
Gayatrisvara 
422 
GhaQukan:ta 
21, 249 
Ghal}.va Hrada 
424 
GhaQukan:te5vara 
21 
gingelly seeds, gift of 99 
Girinrsimha 
116 
Gobhilesa 
427 
GokarQa 249 
Gokan:tesa 
25, 431 
Gopaka 
250 
Gopigovinda 
63, 104 
Gopigovinda Tirtha 
104, 329 
Goprewa 
414 
Govyiighre5vara Tirtha 
322 
Grahe5a 429 
great sinners 257 
greatest holy observance 
137 
Halise5a 
424 
Harilsa Tirtha 
189, 277, 322 
hand of VȝQU paralysed 
375 
Haniimadisvara 
417 
Hara desirous of testing Vyasa 
404 
Harapapa Hrada 
274, 277 
Harapapa Tirtha 
323

=== PAGE 475 ===

Intkx 
Harasiddhi 
208 
Hare5vara 
196 
Hari 
106, 392 
Haridi8a Lii_ ga 
433 
Harikese8a 
431 
Hari8candra 
58 
Hari8candra, Tirtha of the saintly 
King 
333 
Hari8candra Tirtha 
108 
Hariscandravinayaka 
108 
Hariscandresa 
432 
Hariscandresvara 
108 
Harita 
3 
Har*ita 
197 
Hastipale8vara Liilga 
424 
Haƕe8a 
202 
hating Vi8ve8a 
101 
Hayagriva 
64 
Hayagrivakesava 
1 04 
Hayagrivatinha 
104, 322 
Hayagrive8vara Tirtha 
2 1 1 
Hayakal)thi 
210 
Herarilba 
55 
Himasthesa 
200 
HiraJ)yakaSipu, Liilga of 
415 
Hiral)yaua Liilga 
432 
honey to be avoided during Karttika 
98 
Hul)=al)a and Mul)=al)a 
157 
HuJ)=aJ)eSa 
1 57 
Indradyumna Tirtha 
332 
lndradyumnesvara Liilga 
279 
Indra Kul)=a 
422 
lndresvara 
304 
!sana 
335 
!sana Tirtha 
1 1 3 
lsane8a 
430 
Isane5vara 
197 
JabatiSvara 
1 48 
Jaigi*avya 
1 3 1 , 1 32 
JaigiÍvya, cave of 
138 
Jaigi*avyaguhii 
426 
Jaigi*avye8vara 
1 37 
Jaiminisa 
428 
J ala Liilga 
202 
JamadagniSvara Liilga 
424 
Jarilbuke8a 
426 
Janake8a Liilga 
1 89 
J iiilgale8a 
433 
Jariisandhe8a Tirtha 
325 
Jarasandhe8vara Liilga 
432 
Ja!i 
196 
Jiianahrada Tinha 
331 
Jiianakesava 
103 
Jiianamadhava 
1 04 
Jiiana Tirtha 
1 13, 335 
Jiianavapi 
290 
Jiianavinayaka 
57 
Jiiane5vara Liilga 
304 
Jvalamalinrsirilha 
1 1 7 
Jvalamukhi 
229 
Jye*Qha 
57 
Jye*Qha 
1 32, 426 
Jye*Qhe8vara 
1 3 1 , 426 
Jyotirupeiftra Liilga 
389 
Kace8a 
431 
Kadarilba Sikhara 
305 
Kadrii 
1 
Kahole8a 
433 
Kiilagailga 
332 
Kiilakampana 
249 
Katakesa 
429 
Kala Liilga 
198 
Kata-Vinayaka 
57 
Katak*a 
249 
Katamadhava 
1 1 6 
Kataiijaresvara Liilga 
279 
Kiilaratri 
2 1 4 
Kala5e8a 
198, 429 
Kalavau 
1 69, 267, 271 
Katesa 
430 
Kalipriya 
56 
Kali Tirtha 
333 
Kiiloda 
423 
Kiimada 
105 
Kiimakul)=a 
341 , 421 
Kambala5vatara Tirtha 
108 
Kambala5vataresa 
1 08 
Karilbalesa 
429 
Kambale8vara Tirtha 
333 
Kiime8a 
233, 350 
Kiime8a Liilga 
42 1 
Kiime5vara 
341 
Kal)adakiipa 
427 
Kal)adesa 
427 
Kanakesa 
429 
Kal)=a 
263 
465

=== PAGE 476 ===

466 
Kanduke5vara 
151 
Kaitkilaketu 
310 
Kapalaketu 
310 
Kapiilamocana 
419 
Kapiilesa 
422 
Kapali 
156, 228 
Kapalisa 
199 
Kaparda 
58 
Kapardin 
29 
Kapardi5a Liilga 28 
KapardiSva.ra 
195 
Kapiipki 263 
Kapilii 
125, 250 
Kiipiladhiira 
126 
Kapilii Hrada 
125, 415 
Kapilii Tirtha 
126 
Kapile5a 
243 
Karandhame5vara Liilga 433 
Karar:Itaka 250 
Karavire5vara Liilga 422 
Kardamiiliptavigraha 
249 
Karkotake5vara 
156 
Karkotaviipi 
156 
Karkotaviipiki 
423 
Kan;likiira 200 
Kiirttika, celibacy in the month of 98 
Kiirttika, oil to be avoided in the 
month of 
98 
Kiirttika, taking food silently in the 
month of 99 
.Kanu:lii plant 
389 
KaruJ;leSvara 
388 
KiiSiprave5a 
1 30 
Kiityiiyana Liilga 
433 
Kiityiiyanesa 
189 
Kauleya 
249 
Kaumiiri 
158, 207 
Kaurmi Sakti 
210 
Kausika 
1 
Kaustubhe5vara Liilga 
420 
Kediira 
233, 350, 432 
Kediire5vara, the tale of 274 
keeping awake 
97 
Kesavaditya 
1 , 4 
Kharapiida 
250 
Kharvanrsimha 
330 
Kharvaviniiyaka 
53 
Khurakartari 
325 
Khurakartari5a Liilga 
1 15 
Kikata 
442 
SkandaPurii:rJa 
KiÝii 
77, 87 
Kiriita 
36 
Kiriite5a 
35, 202 
Kle5as 
67 
Kokiivariiha 
1 18 
Kokivariiha Tirtha 
322 
Kolahalanrsimha 
1 1 7 
Kopsa 
419 
Kop5vara Liilga 
418 
Krauiica mountain 
49 
KrcchraciindriiyaJ;la 
97, 402 
Krcchriitikrcchra 
402 
Krodhana 
228 
Krttiviisas 
186, 194, 233, 350 
Krttiviise5vara 
186 
Þlira 33 
Þemaka 
36 
Þeme5a 
432 
Þeme5vara Liilga 279 
Þetrajiia 415 
Þipraprasiidana 
56 
Þiriibdhi 
61 
Þiraniradhi 
126 
ÞOJ;li-Variiha Tirtha 
324 
Kubjii 
209 
Kubjiiiil.bareSva.ra Liilga 
209 
Kukkuta Mß<;lapa 
439 
Kukkuàesa 
155 
Kukkuàe5vara 
23, 196 
Kulastambha 
418 
KuJ;l<;lesa 
422 
Kui;l<;lodara 249 
Kui;l<;lodare5vara 
25 
Kiii:Iitiiá 56 
Kunti5vara 
415 
KuruÚetra 
105 
Kurukâetra Sthala 
191 
KiiâmiiJ;l<;la 
54 
Kiiâmiii:I<;Iaka 
195 
Kãmiii:I<;Iesa 
429 
Kiitadanta 
54 
LaÚminrsimha 
63, 104 
äminrsimha Tirtha 
329 
LaÚmiviliisa 
209 
Lalita, Goddess 
206 
LaiiJ.bodara Gßiidhå 
54 
Liiilgalin 
36 
Liiilgali5a 
430 
Liiilgali5vara 
36

=== PAGE 477 ===

l'Ttfkx 
Lat Bhairava 
418 
learning 67 
Liilgas in the Holy Region around 
Jye3Ƅa Sthana 
149 
listening to the Pur.i1;1as 
97 
locations of fourteen Liilgas 232 
locations of the fifty-six Vinayakas at 
Ka.Si 
47 
Lokapale5vara 
304 
Lokapesas 
429 
Loma5esa 
189 
Lord of ƅp'tgin 
432 
Lord Trivi3tapa 
350 
lying down on bare ground 
97 
Madalaseiivara 
431 
Madhavi 
251 
Madhusrava · 126 
Madhyame5a 
425 
Madhyarne5vara 
180 
Madri5vara 
149 
Maha Linga 
196 
Mahabala 
192 
Mahabala Nrsimha 
116 
Mahabharata 
392 
Mahabhima 
249 
Mahadeva 
193, 233, 350, 414 
Mahadeva Liilga 
292 
Mahadurga 
433 
Mahakala 
192 
Mahakale5a Liilga 423 
Mahakale5vara 
21 
Mahakm:u;la 
421, 423 
MahalaOmi 
62, 209 
MahalƆmipitha 209 
MahalaOmi5vara 
422 
Mahalaya Linga 421 
Mahamaya 
209 
Maharnul;lc;la 
419 
Mahanade5vara 
192 
Mahananda 
440, 441 
Maharaja Vinayaka 
180 
Maharu1;1c;la 
211 
Mahasantapanakrcchra 
403 
Mahasiddhi5vara Liilga 433 
MahasmaSa.nastambha 418 
MahƇtarni. Vrata on the 
112 
Mahat 
128 
Mahatejas 
194 
Mahavrata Liilga 
192 
Mahayogi5vara Liilga 
194 
Mahendri 
158 
Mahesvari 
207 
Mahi3a 
184 
Mahiƈura Tirtha 
329 
Mahodadhi 
322 
Mahodara 
21, 249 
Mahodare5vara 
22 
Mahotkate5vara 
192 
467 
maintaining continuous lights of lamps 
before deities 97 
Maitr.ivaru1;1a Tirtha 
332 
Makha Tirtha 
332 
Malatisa 
189 
Malati5vara Liilga 424 
Malayagandhini 
310 
Manasa nnha 
277 
Mandakini Tirtha 139 
Ma1;1c;lalavati 
263 
Ma1;1c;lalesa 421 
Mandaradama 
266 
Mlil;lc;lavyeiia 
428 
Mlil;lc;lavye5vara 
148 
Mandhatr Tirtha 
322 
Mangala 
428 
MailgalapiƉa 
293 
Mailgala Tirtha 
331 
Ma1;1ikarJ;1a 
57 
MaJ;likarl;lika 
106, 291, 333 
MaJ;likarl;lika, extent of 
108 
MaJ;likarl;lika in the form of a 
woman 
109 
MaJ;likarviiia 
1 1 0, 233, 249 
MaJ;likarvi5a Liilga 
429 
MaJ;likuJ;lc;la 
190 
MaJ;li, Mantra and Au3adha 
67 
Ma1;1ipradipa 
190 
Manoratha Trtiya 
294 
Manoratha Vrata 
295 
Manu's Liilga 
431 
Mariciiia Ku1;1c;la 
422 
MarkaJ;lc;la Tirtha 
115 
MarkaJ;lc;leya Hrada 
421 
MarkaJ;lc;leya Tirtha 
325 
MarkaJ;lc;leye5vara Liilga 
1 15 
marrying a girl named after a goddess 
or a river 271 
Maruke5vara 
202 
Marutkota 
192 
Marotta Tirtha 
332

=== PAGE 478 ===

468 
Maruttesa 
429 
Matailgesa 
426 
Matr Tirtha 432 
Matsyodari 
200, 244 
Matsyodari Tirtha 243 
Mayukharka 
427 
Mayuresvara 
25 
medicine 
67 
Mitravinayaka 
57 
mobile Liilgas 
37 
Moda 
57 
Modakapriya 
55 
Mouadvaresvara 
389 
Mok*alak*mivilasa 
290 
Mok*esa 
430 
Mok*e5vara 
I l l 
most excellent rivers · 382 
Mrkru:u;la, Tirtha of Sage 
331 
Mrtyvisa 423 
Mucukunda Tirtha 
323 
Mucukundesa 
431 
Muktakaccha 
31 
Muktiksetra, extent of 425 
Mukti Ma!)l;iapa 
439 
Mukti Tinha 
335 
MukuQakuQ.I;ia 
433 
MukuQesvara 
433 
Mulaprakrti 
128 
MUQ.Qal)esa 
157 
MUQ.I;iasure5vara Liilga 
416 
MuQ.I;iavinayaka 
54 
MuQ.I;iesa 
432 
Nabha 
249 
Nabhi Tinha 
1 14, 335 
Nada 
237 
Nade5a 
420 
Nadesvara 
244 
Nadesvara Liilga 243, 253 
Nagesa 57 
Nage5vara Tirtha 330 
Nahu*esa 
432 
Naigameyesvara 
416 
Naiqte5vara 
202 
Nakuli5vara, Acarya 
199 
Nala Kiibara 
318 
Nandike5vara 
430 
Nandi*eQ.a 
250 
Nandi*eQ.eSvara 
23 
Nandi Tirtha 335 
Skanda Purii:IJa 
Narada 
369 
Narada Tinha 
62, 103 
Naradakesava 
62, 103 
Naradesvara 
418 
Naranarayal)a 
63, 104 
Naranarayal)a Tirtha 
103 
Narasirilhi 
158, 207 
Narayal)a 
271 
Narayal)i 
207 
Narmada 
382 
Narmada Tirtha 
1 15, 325 
Narmadesa 
1 15, 255 
Narmadesvara 
383 
Niga!;labhaiijani 
208 
Nikurilbha 
36 
Nikumbhesa 
431 
Nikurilbhesvara 
36 
NilakaQ.Ɩa 
195, 279 
Nimnagesas 
429 
Nirjaresa 
429 
Nirv:I.Q.akesava 
104 
NirvaQ.ama!)l;iapa 
289 
Nirval)anarasimha 
1 16 
Ni*pape5vara Liilga 
323 
non-violence as the greatest virtue 
66 
Offering a single Ahuti 
108 
offering of water 
7 
old age 
4 
OM 
237 
Orilllia 230, 232, 244, 250, 256, 
350, 389 
Orilllia Liilga 
272 
Omllie5vara 
242, 243 
other great Liilgas 234 
other Liilgas 
235 
Padakrcchra 402 
Padma Tirtha 
62 
P:idodaka 
7, 60, 260 
Padodaka Tinha 
336 
Paitamaha Tirtha 
1 14 
Palite5vara 
429 
Pamsu 
33 
Paficacu!;lapsaraQ 
425 
Paricagailga 
77 
Pancala 
250 
Paricamudra 
417 
Paficanada 
77, 78, 87, 89, 102 
Paficanada, origin of 121

=== PAGE 479 ===

Index 
Paiicanada Tirtha 
87, 106 
Paiicanade5vara Linga 
428 
Paiicasya 
55 
Paiicatirthi 
336 
Paiica-Tirthika Yatra 
453 
Papanasana 
429 
Paraka 
402 
Parasaresvara Linga 
148 
Parimalalaya 
266 
P:ujanyesa 
432 
PaƗakrcchra 
402 
P:uvatatirtha 
108, 333 
P:uvatesvara 
108 
Parvatisa, origin of 379 
PasapaQi-Vinayaka 
53 
Pasupata cult and devotees, censurer of 
the 
101 
Pasupata devotees 
337 
Pasupata Tirtha 
335 
Pasupata way of life 
444 
Pasupata Yoga 
198 
Pa8upati 
198 
Pa8upati8vara Linga 
427 
Pavilion of Cocks 
443 
Pavilion of Salvation 
443 
penance, power of 80 
person following the righteous path, 
a 
1 23 
Phala8ruti (Fruit of hearing etc.) of the 
KaSi KhaJJ4a 
458 
Phalgu 
126 
Phalgunesa 
430 
PiciJJ4ila 
56 
Pilipila 
230, 258, 259 
Pilipila Tirtha 
256 
Pingala 
250 
Pingalakhyesa 
35 
Pingalesvara 
23 
Pippalada, Tirtha of Sage 
332 
Pisacamocana 
34 
Pisacesa 
431 
Pitamaha, Tirtha of 335 
Pitamahasrotika 
429 
Pitamaha Tirtha 
126 
Pitamahe8vara 
193 
Pitamahe8vara Linga 
155 
Pitrisa 
431 
PitrkuJJ4a 
431 
Pitr Tinha 
126 
Prabhamaya 
28 
Prabhasa Tirtha 
324 
Prabhavati 
267 
PracaJJ4anarasimha 
1 16 
PracaJJ4eiia 
428 
Pra4ina 
263 
Prahasite5vara 
338 
Prahasite5vara Linga 426 
Prahladakeiiava 
103 
Prahlada Tirtha 
63, 103 
Prahladesvara 
416 
Prajapatiuetra 
105 
PraQava 
54, 237 
PraQava Tirtha 330 
PraJJavesa 
245 
Pra)Jave5vara 
253 
Prasannavadane5a 
416 
Prayaga •79, 415 
Prayagamadhava 
104, 105, 324 
Prayaga Tirtha 324 
Prayagesa 
105, 106 
Pritikeiia 
430 
Priyavrate8vara Liiiga 
431 
protection of the subjects 
16 
PuQyakirti 
65 
469 
Pur;i!Ja themes, acting in accordance 
with the 
97 
Puriirave8vara Linga 
157 
PƘkariJJi Tirtha, ten names of 126 
Pu*pabaQu 
250 
Pu*padanteiivara 
432 
raga 
67 
Rajaputra 
54 
Raqa 
33 
Raqasesa 429 
Rama Tirtha 
332 
Rarilbhe5a, 
304, 429 
Ra!Jabhadra 
249 
Ratnavali 
1 70, 267 
Ratneiia 
233, 350 
Ratne8vara, origin of 
167 
RaVa)Jeiivara 
428 
reciting the Gayatri only once after 
reaching MaQikar)Jika 
107 
Revate8vara Linga 
428 
Ripmijaya 
70 
Rudra 
386 
Rudrakoti 
194 
Rudrasaras 
16 
Rudrasthali 
194

=== PAGE 480 ===

470 
Rudra Suktas 
123 
Rudravasa 
191 
Rudravasa Tirtha 
I I I 
Rudrav:ise5vara 
I l l 
Rudresa 
420 
Ruru 
212, 228 
Saciia 
304 
safe return, worship of ƙemaka 
for 
36 
Sagaratirtha 
322 
Sagaresvara 
417 
Sahasƚ Uil.ga 
197 
Sahasrasya 
228 
Sailiidi paralyses the hand of 
Vyasa 
395 
Sailadiivara 
I I3 
Sailadi Tirtha 
l 1 3 
Saileia 
389, 418 
Sailesvari 
207 
Saivite scriptures, censurer of 257 
Sakhesa 
416 
Saktis born of the limbs of Uma 
220 
SalakatarilkaÎ 
54 
Samhara 
228 
Samharabhairava 
197 
Samudresa 
430 
Sanakesa 
421 
Saniiru 
389 
Sanatkumara Uil.ga 421 
Siii].cJ.ilyeia 
422 
Sa;u;lina 
263 
Sail.gameia Uil.ga 
103 
Sail.game5vara 
415 
Sail.gameivara Liil.ga 
210 
Sail.kara 
375 
Sail.karesa 
1 48 
Sail.kar*al)a 
1 19 
Sail.kha Tinha 
62, 327 
Sail.khalikhiteivaras 
427 
Sail.khamadhava Tinha 
63, 104 
Sail.kukan;ta 
249, 433 
Sail.kukan;leia 
433 
Sail.kukan;teivara 
21, 420 
Sannihati 
191 
Siintanava 
260 
Santapanalqcchra 
402 
Saptagodavari Tinha 
199 
Saptasiigara Tinha 
322 
Siirasvata Tinha 
333 
Sarasvati 
382 
Sarasvatiivara 
255 
SkandaPura7Ja 
Sarva 
196 
Sarvasarilpatkara 
53 
SaSail.keia 
428 
Saiibhu*al)a 
192 
SaSilekha, Anail.galekha and 
Citralekha 
1 70 
SaSiivara 
429 
Satakiila 
427 
Satanetrii 
228 
Satiitapeia 
427 
Satiivara, origin of 384 
Sati takes the form of Uma 
378 
Saubhiigya-Gauri 
228, 430 
Saubhagyodaka 
1 55 
Saumyakrcchra 
402 
Saunaka Hrada 
425 
Saunakesa 
425 
Saunakesvara 
426 
Savarl).i 
250 
Savavahini 
228 
Savitriivara 
422 
SeÍmadhava 
104 
Se*atinha 
63, 104, 329 
seven days, meal once in 
98 
Siddhahrada 
199 
SiddhakuQcJ.a 
433 
Siddhakupa 
426 
Siddhalaumi 
209 
Siddhavapi 
426 
Siddhesvara 
180, 426, 433 
Siddheivaripi!ha 
293 
Siddhis 
390 
Siddhiia 
432 
Siddhiivara Liil.ga 
421 
Siddhivinayaka 
53, 208, 415 
SiddhƛÎkeivara 
180 
Sikhi Cai;cJ.i 
210 
Silade5a 
416 
Simavinayaka 
108 
Sirilhatul).cJ.a 
55 
Sisu Ciindriiyal)a 
403 
Sivaduti 
206 
Sivagaya 
1 26 
Siveia 
424 
Sivesvara 
424 
sixty-four Vetiilas 
228 
Skanda Tinha 
I l l , 335 
Skandeivara 
416

=== PAGE 481 ===

Index 
Smarailjaya, Prince 
76 
Somanandisvara 
23 
Somapana 
334 
Somesa 
428 
Sraddha in the Kapiladhara 
126 
Sraritsini 
263 
Sre°tha 203 
SrikaQtha 
195, 250, 422 
SrikuQc1-a Tirtha 209 
Srimadhava 
101 
Srimukhi 
253 
Sr°tigaQe5a 
57 
staying in KaSi until death 26 
Sthala Liii.ga 202 
SthaQu 
191 
Sthiiladanta 
56 
Sthiilajaii.gha 
57 
SthiilakarQa 
249 
stupefaction of the power of speech of 
the excellent sage Vyasa 
395 
Subahu 
175 
SubhakuQc1-a 
423 
Subhesvara 
419 
Suddha ( Tattvas) 
390 
Suddhasuddha (Tattvas) 
390 
Sudhakhani 
126 
Sugrive5a 
417 
Sukrakiipa 
431 
Sukra Tirtha 
324 
Sukresa 
431 
Sii±mesa 
196 
Sumanal) 
125 
Sumantu, Sage 
148 
Sumukhesa 
37 
Sun, Tirtha of the 
331 
Sunanda 
125 
Supratike² 
157 
Surabhi 
125 
Siiryacandramasesvaras 
421 
SuSila 
125 
S³e´ Liii.ga 
433 
Sµkodari, Goddess 
189 
Svalina 
416 
Svapne´ Liii.ga 
212 
SvapneSvari 
211 
Svargadviira 
422 
Svargadviire² 
389 
Svarlina Tirtha 
329 
SVlll"l}abharada 429 
SVlll"l}¶e5a 
430 
SvayariJ.bhii 
199 
Svetamadhava 
104 
taking single meal 
97 
Ta·kakuQc1-a 
155 
Ta±ake5vara Liii.ga 
155 
Talajaii.ghe5vari 
210 
TamrakuQc1-a 
418 
Tamravaraha 
117 
Taptakrcchra 
403 
Tara Tirtha 
245 
Taraka 
237 
Tiiraka Brahma 
I l l 
Taraka Tirtha 
1 1 1 , 335 
Tarakesa 28, 429, 430 
Tarakesvara 
202 
Taresa 
4§1 
Tar¸ 
I , 62 
Tar¹ake5ava 
103 
Tar¸tirtha 62, 103 
Tattve5a 
304 
theft of fruits, result of the 
271 
thirty-six Tattvas 
390 
three days, meal once in 
98 
Threºyed Lord, propitiation of 
the 
6 
TilaparQe5vara 
28 
Tirtha 
414 
Tirtha called Da53.Svamedha 336 
Tirtha called HiraQyagarbha 
330 
Tirtha called Nilagriva 
329 
Tirtha called Rudnlvasa 
335 
Tirtha called Sankhya 
329 
471 
Tirtha called Tamra-Varaha 
332 
Tirtha named Gopratiire´ 
330 
Tirtha named Pailcanada 
331 
Tirtha named Pilipila 330 
Tirtha of l)hUQc1-hi 
335 
Tirtha of great merit named 
KarQaditya 
330 
Tirtha of King Divodasa 
323 
Tirtha of Para5urama 
323 
Tirtha-pratigraha 
31, 34 
Trailokyavijaya 
229 
Tribhuvanakesava 
104 
Trilocana 
230, 256, 259 
Trilokasundari Gauri 
209 
Trimukha 55 
Tripurantaka 
196, 431 
Trisandhyakhya Tirtha 
325

=== PAGE 482 ===

472 
Trisandhya Tirtha 
1 15 
Trisandhyesvara 
1 15 
Trisikha 
271 
Trisuli 
196 
Trivikrama 
1 17 
Trivi*!apa 
203 
Trivi*!apa, story of 254 
Tryarilbaka 
196 
Tuilge5vara 
424 
Tvarita 
228 
TƜtrlsa 
428 
two pigeons, story of 
261 
Uddiilaka 
2 1 1 
Uddiilaka Tirtha 
329 
U ddalakesvara Liilga 
420 
UddaJ.l=a 
53 
UddaQ=amuQ=a 
56 
u==ina 
263 
Ugra 
197 
U gre5vara Liilga 
422 
Uluka 
1 
Uma Tirtha 
333 
Umapati 
199 
Unmattabhairava 
228 
Upajailghani 
389 
Upajailghani, Liilga of 
149 
Upamanyu, Liilga of 
428 
Upa5anta5iva 
417 
Ordhvaretas 
195 
U!aje5vara Liilga 
154 
Utathyavamadeve5a Liilga 
429 
VadanapreuaJ.la, Goddess 
428 
Va=avya 
433 
Vaidyanatha 
431 
Vaidyesvara 
424 
VaikuQ\ha Madhava 
1 1 6 
Vairagyesa 
304 
Vairocane5vara Liilga 
416 
Vai*Qavi 
158 
Vai5veSvari Yiitra 
453 
VaitaraJ)i 
421 
Vajimedhaka (Vajimedhe5vara) 
432 
Vajrapaiijara 
226 
VakratuQ=a 
55 
Valakhilye5vara 
260 
Valmike5vara 
260 
Vamanakesava 
103 
Vamanatirtha 
63, 103 
Varada 
55 
Varahesa 
428 
Varahi 
158, 206 
SkandaPurii:r_ta 
V:ir:iQasi, sacredmost part of 448 
V:ir:il)asi as a Pasupata Sthali 
101 
VaruQesa 
429 
Va5i*Qha 
275 
Vasi*!ha Tirtha 
1 15, 325 
VaSi*Qhe5a 
1 15, 416 
Vasi*!he5vara 
1 15 
Vastrapatha 
198 
Vasubhuti 
169 
VasukikuQ=a 
155 
Vasuki5vara 
155 
Vedas, division of 
392 
Vedasiras 
79 
Vedesvara 
415 
VibhaQ=esa 
433 
Vibhuti 
33 
Vid:iraQa-narasirilha 
63, 104, 329 
Vidhi 
208 
Vidhi5a 
432 
Vidhi5vara 
208 
Vidyesvara 
417 
Vi_dyujjihva 
229 
Vighnanayaka 
431 
Vighnaraja 
55 
Vighnaraja, pilgrimage of 456 
Vighne5a Tirtha 
333 
Vijayabhairavi 
157 
Vijayesa 
195 
Vijfianakaumudi 
68 
Vtiflanoparama (cessation of 
Vijnana) 
67 
Vijvara 
415 
VikaƝ. Goddess 
417 
VikaQadvija 
54 
Vimala 
8 
Vimaladitya 
1 , 8 
Vimale5a 
419 
Vimale5vara 
192 
Vimalodaka 
29, 419 
Vinata 
1 
Vinata, cause of the slavery of 
2 
Vinayaka 
58 
Vinayakirti 
65 
Vindatisa 
28 
Virabhadra 
35, 249, 371 , 373, 377 
Virabhadresa 
425 
Virabhadresvara 
35

=== PAGE 483 ===

Index 
Viridha 
37 
Viridhe§vara 
37 
Viraja 
255 
Virajas 
230 
Virajaska 
292 
Viramadhava 
1 16 
Vira Tirtha 
325, 333 
Vire:Sa, manifestation of 307 
Viresvara 
233, 350 
Vire:Svara Linga 
321 , 325 
VirupaOa 
200, 431 
VirupaOi 
207 
Visakhda 
4I6 
Visala Tirtha 
205, 325 
Visatak3a 
249 
VisataOi 
205, 432 
VisataOi:Svara Linga 
432 
Vi~eu 
393 
Viwu Padodaka 
60 
Vi~eupadodaka Tirtha 
327 
Vi~eu Tirtha 
1 13, 335 
Vi3ųa:Srava 
9I 
Vi:Sva 
Ȝ:ȟ 
Vi:Svabhuja, Goddess 
206 
Vi:Svakarmesa Linga, story of 
342 
Vi:Svakarme:Svara Linga 
4I9 
Vi:Svabhuja Gauri 
296 
Visvakarman 
342 
Visvakarmda 
350 
Visvakarmesvara 
233 
Vi:Svakarme:Svara Linga 
419 
Vi:Sva Tirtha 
335 
Vi:Svavasu's Linga 
432 
Visvedevesvara 
425 
Visve:Svara 
233, 423 
Vitankanarasimha 
I I7 
vow of silence 
99 
Vratas 
97 
Vratas to be performed at least in the 
month of Karttika 
97 
Vrddhaditya 
I 
Vrddhaditya, greatness of 3 
Vrddhakale:Svara 
I80 
Vrddharka Tirtha 
324 
Vrddhava:Si3¶ha 
4I6 
Vr·bhadhvaja 
293 
V¸bhadhvaja Tirtha 
I26 
V¸bhe:Svara 
156, 416 
VŴarudra 
I90 
Vr3esa 
197 
Vrtti:Sa 
428 
Vya<;la 
263 
Vyaghra Linga 
426 
Vyaghrapade:Svara Linga 
428 
Vyaghre:Svara 
I54 
Vyasa 
392 
Vyasa becomes angry 
394 
Vyasa curses KaSi 
407 
Vyasa eulogiŵes the Lord 
394 
Vyasakupa 
424 
Vyasa:Sapavimok3aeam 
413 
VyaŶtaka 
397 
Vyase:Sa 
424 
Vyase:Svara 
397 
worship of the deity of one's 
choice 
97 
Yadrcche:Sa 
429 
Yajiiavalkye:Sa 
4I6 
Yajiiavaraha 
104 
Yajiiavaraha Tirtha 
63, I 04 
Yajiie:Svara 
I96 
Yaŷ Vighne:Sa 
57 
YamadariiHra 
2I 0 
Yamaditya 
I , 9 
Yamas 
144, I54 
Varna Tirtha 
I98 
Yamuna 
382 
Yamune:Sa 
255 
YaticandrayCa 
403 
Yogesa 
428 
YoginipiŸha 
293 
Yogini Tirtha 
1 15, 325 
473