=== PAGE 1 ===

Indian Journal of Traditional Knowledge 
Vol. 13(4), October 2014, pp. 716-724 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vedic mythology of solar eclipse and its scientific validation 
S Santhosh Kumar1* & R Rengaiyan2 
1Department of Physics, Avvaiyar Government College for Women, Karaikal–609 602, UT of Puducherry, India; 
2Department of Physics, Aringar Anna Government Arts College, Karaikal – 609 605, UT of Puducherry, India 
*E-mail: santhosh.physics@gmail.com  
Received 21.10.13, revised 21.04.14  
Rig Veda, the oldest one among the four Vedas, pronounces the phenomenon of the Solar eclipse in a mythical language. 
During the eclipse, the eclipse induced gravity waves causes a reduction in Ozone layer concentration in the stratosphere 
which allows more cosmic radiations of different wavelengths, to the surface of the earth. The research carried out about the 
radiations received during the past eclipses and its influence on seawater reveal the scientific knowledge behind Rishi Atri’s 
dispelling of darkness by the four Rigs, given in Pancavimsa Brahmana. Hence, for the first time, the eclipse event is 
differentiated into a four stage process, as per our recent findings on the change in Oceanic pH. The influence of solar 
eclipse on living organisms, especially, the erratic behaviour of animals, birds and marine organisms to eclipse is addressed. 
This new scientific finding supports strongly the Vedic predictions of eclipse and the traditional practices of Indians 
especially Hindus, which differ from region to region. 
Keywords: Solar eclipse, Cosmic radiation, Seawater, Rig veda, Traditional practice 
IPC Int. Cl.8: G01, G05, G21, G01T, G21H 7/00, F26F 3/28, C02F, B63J 1/00 
Recent scientific explorations in Astronomy are 
wrapped up with the predictions of Rishis in the 
Indian Vedic period. India is rich in its tradition and 
culture and is known for its traditional values. India’s 
rich Vedic scripts pronounce the process of eclipse in 
the language of metaphor. Among the four Vedas 
namely Rig, Yajur, Sama and Atharva, in the oldest 
Vedic text, Rig Veda, Rishi Atri dispelled the darkness 
caused by eclipse, by chanting four mantras. Since the 
ancient Vedas are written in the language of metaphor 
the process of eclipse is connected with Lords, 
demons, etc. In the scientific view, the eclipse is a 
celestial process happening often and which helps the 
scientists to gather information regarding the 
astronomic and climatic changes, and even the 
influence of cosmic radiation on earth’s surface. 
Investigating the solar radiation changes during the 
process of eclipse will explore even the present 
understanding of eco-balance since the world is 
composed of matter and light.  
The 
animals/birds 
can 
identify 
the 
natural 
calamities/events even before its occurrence, it is 
believed so. The reasons are said to be different for 
different events, for example, humidity change before 
rain is felt by animals /birds. Similarly the death rate 
is low for animals /birds compared to humans during 
Tsunami or earthquake, which indicates the capacity 
to identify/feel the forthcoming event, i.e. they are 
getting disturbed due to the atmospheric or earth’s 
magnetic field change. In the event of eclipse also the 
erratic behaviour of such organisms are reported 
many. The marine organisms are also hide themselves 
from the exposure to Sun. All studies, past and 
present, concluded that these changes are similar to 
night time chemistry. But in Rig Veda, Rishi Atri 
pointed out that this is entirely different than the night 
time behaviour. Hence, we conceived the concept of 
radiational cause to the behavioural changes of living 
organisms during eclipse. This paper tries to answer 
the questions arise regarding the cause of behavioural 
changes of living organisms and explains how our 
scientific findings coincides with the predictions of 
Vedic Astronomy. 
 
Astronomy in Indian Veda 
Ancient India's contributions in the field of 
astronomy are well known and well documented.  
The earliest references to astronomy are found in the 
Rig Veda, dated 2000 BC-5000 BC. The ancient 
—————— 
*Corresponding author

=== PAGE 2 ===

SANTHOSH KUMAR & RENGAIYAN: TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE OF SOLAR ECLIPSE 
 
 
717 
Indian astronomy emerged in 500 AD and culminated 
in 
original 
findings 
like, 
the 
calculation 
of 
occurrences of eclipses, Earth’s circumference, 
theorizing about gravity, determining the Sun as a 
star, determining the number of planets in the Solar 
System, etc. The earliest concept of a heliocentric 
model of the solar system, i.e. the Sun is at the centre 
and the Earth is orbiting it, is found in several Indian 
Vedic Sanskrit texts. For example, according to 
Aitareya Brahmana (c. 9th–8th century BC),  
"The Sun never sets nor rises", which indicates that 
the Sun is stationery (hence the Earth is moving 
around it) and Yajnavalkya (c. 9th–8th century BC) 
also recognized that the Earth is round and believed 
that the Sun is "the centre of the spheres and is much 
larger than the Earth". 
Many Indian astronomers like Aryabhata and 
Bhaskara had formulated ideas about gravity and 
gravitation in the early middle ages. The cosmological 
time cycles have been explained in the Surya 
Siddhanta. The Indian astronomer-mathematician 
Aryabhata (476–550), in his work Aryabhatiya, 
propounded a mathematical heliocentric model in 
which the Earth was taken to be spinning on its axis 
and the periods of the planets were given with respect 
to a stationary Sun. After that, Bhaskara (1114-1185) 
explained more about it and mentioning in his treatise 
Siddhanta-Shiromani, about the law of gravity, and 
different planets orbit the sun with different 
velocities. The ancient Indian astronomers had also 
recognized that stars are same as the Sun, that the Sun 
is center of the universe (solar system) and that the 
circumference of the Earth is 5,000 Yojanas. (one 
Yojana = 7.2 km), which is close to the actual figure 
obtained by the modern scientific methods (40,075 
km), which is only 10% difference. 
In the original version of the Valmiki Ramayana, a 
vivid description of a total solar eclipse is given in the 
first 15 slokas of the 23rd sarga of the Aranyakandam, 
and mentioned as Rahu is the cause, but in the 
Atharvaveda, (13.2.16-18, 28) the description of Ketu 
is found and is more suited for a comet, but Rahu is 
nowhere mentioned in the Rig, Sama and Yajurveda.  
In those days, the Full Moon and the New Moon 
were referred to as Raka and Sinivali, respectively 
(Sayana Bhasya, and Rigveda 2.33.8). The cause of 
the eclipses (in Sanskrit - grahanam) is ascribed to a 
demon, called Svarbhanu, striking the Sun with 
darkness. It invoked Rishi Atri (the human son of 
Lord Brahma, as per Veda), who repelled its darkness 
by chanting four Rik mantras (Rigveda 5.40.5-6), 
which is in harmony with our findings of four stages 
of the eclipse process in context with its radiation 
effects.  
 
Eclipse in Vedic Period  
Almost all scripted wars witnessed an eclipse, 
either solar or lunar eclipse. Few of them are, (i) The 
final battle of a 5 yr war between Alyattes II 
of Lydia and Cyaxares of the Medes, ended abruptly 
due to a total solar eclipse on May 28, 585 BC 
according 
to 
Herodotus 
(1.74)1 
(ii) 
In 
the 
Peloponnesian War between the Athenians and 
Syracusans2, a lunar eclipse was witnessed on August 
28, 413 BC. (iii) In 2159 BC, the Chinese emperor 
Chun King put to death the royal astronomer brothers 
Hsi and Ho when they failed to predict the eclipse of 
October 22, 2134 BC3 (iv) The European Emperor 
Louis was so perplexed by the five minutes of totality 
he witnessed during the eclipse of May 5, 840, and he 
died shortly thereafter. The fighting for his crown 
ended three years later which divided Europe into the 
three major areas, as we know today, France, 
Germany, and Italy4. 
The date of an eclipse referred to in the Bible is 
known for certain: "`And on that day,' says the Lord 
God, `I will make the Sun go down at noon, and 
darken the Earth in broad daylight'." (Amos 8:9) 
"That day" was June 15, 763 B C and which was 
confirmed by an Assyrian historical record known as 
the Eponym Canon. On the day of Ibrahim's death, the 
sun eclipsed and the people said that the eclipse was 
due to the death of Ibrahim (the son of the Prophet). 
But Allah's Apostle said, "The sun and the moon are 
two signs amongst the signs of Allah. They do not 
eclipse because of someone's death or life. So when 
you see them, invoke Allah and pray till the eclipse is 
clear". Similarly India’s greatest Idhikasas, namely 
Valmiki Ramayana and Mahabharatha also quoted 
the description of eclipse and the tradition and 
practice in those days. 
A solar eclipse occurred on June 15, 763 B C 
allowed Thiele to fix every other name in the 
complete Assyrian lists of rulers from 891 to 648 B C 
and he was able to double check his accuracy with the 
canon of Ptolemy (70-161 A D)5. Ptolemy provided a 
large number of solar, lunar and planetary positions 
with their dates, and over 80 of these have been 
verified by modern astronomers6. Thus the calculation 
of predated eclipse events helps to trace the old

=== PAGE 3 ===

INDIAN J TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE, VOL 13, NO. 4, OCTOBER 2014 
 
 
718 
historical events and the rulers’ period. Even though 
many more eclipse events were witnessed in early 
scripts, almost all of them are from 600 B C onwards. 
The first Chinese report of eclipse is dated around 
2134BC. It is very important to note here that the 
eclipse event is witnessed and scripted in India during 
Vedic period itself. 
Rig Veda is a very old Sanskrit language text of 
religious and historical significance in India. The 
dating of Vedas has been a matter of major 
controversy but many astronomical observations in 
the Vedic texts, suggesting that some parts of Vedas 
are between 2000 BC to 5000BC. Rishi Atri was the 
first to predict solar eclipses and calculate their 
durations; the Rig Veda and the Pancavimsa 
Brahmana witness this. 
 Vedas are compilation of suktas or hymns from 
many different Rishi’s over a vast span of historical 
time 
as 
evidenced 
by 
different 
astronomical 
references there in. Vedavyasa, long time ago, 
bundled various thousands of Vedic hymns, generated 
over long periods previous to his time, into different 
groups called Rig, Yajur, and Sama etc much after 
their creation. Rig Veda, as we now know,  
1017 suktas consisting of nearly 10800 ‘Rik`s’ or 
hymns. Many of Rig Veda chapters or Mandalas are 
associated with one Rishi or his family, clearly 
suggesting a period of many generations of 
contributors to the texts. Fifth Rig Veda Mandala 
called Atri Mandala is associated with Rishi Atri.  
In this chapter, the 40th sukta and 5th Rik, Rishi Atri 
describes a total solar eclipse, as follows:  
 
 
 
Rig Veda- HYMN XL. 5. 
 
As per the translation in English by Ralph T H 
Grifith, in the first verse, as the shadow of the moon 
starts covering a large part of the sun the red tinge of 
the solar chromosphere becomes visible and Rishi Atri 
describes this as the color of red sheep7. When the full 
solar eclipse takes effect and only the corona can be 
seen, he describes this as the color of silver sheep. 
When the shadow starts receding from the sun the 
reddish effect is again seen. Finally when the eclipse 
is completely over the sun is restored to its original 
bright luster, which Rishi Atri calls the colour of 
white sheep. The fifth stanza of the hymn says that all 
the creatures were frightened and were in a terrible 
condition during the total solar eclipse. Also he said 
that the darkness at the time of full solar eclipse is 
totally different from what the normal darkness is. 
Only birds and animals get distracted by such kind of 
darkness. 
Astronomy was quite advanced in Vedic era. The 
event of solar eclipse was described as Svarbhanu, a 
demon, had trapped the Sun and the whole earth was 
dark. Rig Veda also says that Svarbhanu was not from 
the heaven but he was from the earth. It itself explains 
two concepts: (i) Svarbhanu (Moon) is associated 
with earth, i.e. it is the natural satellite of the earth 
and (ii) it does not have its own brightness and only 
reflects the light of sun (‘bhanu’ – Sun; ‘Swarbhanu’ 
– lighted by Sun). Thus Rishi Atri says the truth about 
the Moon and the solar eclipse that Swarbhanu 
(Moon) comes between the sun and the earth and 
because of that the solar eclipse takes place. 
 
Science of Solar eclipse 
The solar eclipse being a rare natural phenomenon 
gives an opportunity to investigate how the ionising 
radiations react to the material surface of the earth due 
to the fast solar radiation changes. A huge quantity of 
shorter wavelength radiations are expected to reach 
the earth’s surface during solar eclipse since the 
disturbance of the heat balance along the supersonic 
travel of the trajectory of the Moon’s shadow could 
generate eclipse-induced gravity waves8-10, which 
results a reduction in the stratosphere ozone layer 
concentration8,11-13. Several measurements of solar 
radiation were carried out since 1960; recent works of 
Zerefos et al.13,14 focussed on the study of eclipse-
induced changes in the spectral solar irradiance at the 
earth’s surface, the effect of multiple scattering on sky 
brightness, and the wavelength dependence of the 
limb darkening effect, etc. The radiations in shorter 
wavelengths (350 nm) are generally influenced more 
by the eclipse, and at large eclipse percentages 
(>85%), it slowly decreases as the eclipse approaches 
its maximum compared to that of the longer 
wavelengths14. Hence, one can expect more shorter 
wavelength radiations during partial eclipse, which is 
less studied. The environmental effects of solar

=== PAGE 4 ===

SANTHOSH KUMAR & RENGAIYAN: TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE OF SOLAR ECLIPSE 
 
 
719 
eclipse had been mainly focussed on meteorological 
parameters, photochemistry15, boundary layer physics, 
total columnar ozone, gravity waves, and ionospheric 
parameters. Zerefos et al. pointed out a characteristic 
artificial decrease of total ozone during solar eclipse13, 
which allows more radiations to pass through.  
India had a total solar eclipse on 22 July 2009, which 
was visible over the central India, while a partial 
eclipse in southern part, and an annular eclipse on 15 
January 2010, and the study conducted on seawater 
during these events is analysed giving emphasis to 
solar radiation and Vedic concepts. The influence of 
solar eclipses on cloudiness, i.e. ‘eclipse clouds’, has 
been observed just before the beginning of the total 
solar eclipse, as reported by Hanna16 and remains 
dissipated up to the maximum eclipse period.  
Kolev et al. observed a continuous decrease in wind 
speed without any significant change in direction 
during the solar eclipse of 11 August 199917. Founda 
et al. also reported a similar effect of observations 
during the solar eclipse on 29 March 200618. As per 
our observations recorded at the study location 
Karaikal, (latitude 10o 55' N and longitude 79o 52' 
E),U T of Puducherry, India, during the past annular 
eclipse, there was a shift in wind direction 20o 
towards south (from 250o to 230o SW) but no change 
in the wind speed. This shift in wind direction may be 
mainly due to the change in pressure gradient force 
during eclipse.  
 
Experiment 
Emphasis was given on the response of seawater to 
the abrupt changes of solar radiation during eclipse. 
This work also aims at delineating the different types 
of radiations reaching the earth’s surface and the 
possible effects on seawater. 
Earlier studies on the ozone concentration reveal 
that considerable reduction in ozone concentration 
during partial eclipse and total eclipse11-13, which is 
the major phenomenon for the observation of more 
radiations of shorter wavelength on the earth. Many 
observational evidences on the formation and 
propagation of eclipse-induced gravity waves at 
different atmospheric heights were reported9,10. 
Zerefos et al. pointed out that the eclipse-induced 
cooling of the ozone layer in the stratosphere is the 
main source of gravity waves propagating both 
upwards and downwards19. Measurements of total 
column of ozone using Brever Spectrophotometers 
have revealed that there was a reduction of 30-40 DU 
total ozone on the day of eclipse, 29 March 2006, than 
the day before at Athens14. Such a reduction in surface 
O3 may be due to decreased efficiency of the 
photochemical O3 formation15. 
The seawater from Bay of Bengal, the eastern coast 
of India, with pH 8.1 (which is the average oceanic 
pH) is subjected in this study to find the influence of 
solar radiation on the pH( power of Hydrogen) of 
seawater under the exposed condition since major part 
of the earth is covered by sea. pH is a measure of the 
acidity or alkalinity of a substance and is one of the 
stable measurements in seawater. Ocean water has an 
excellent buffering system with the interaction of 
carbon dioxide and water so that it is generally always 
at a pH of 7.5 to 8.5. In this context, a three stage 
experiment is conducted: (i) Sample at exposed 
condition during solar eclipse, (ii) normal days and 
(iii) 
Sample 
at 
non-exposed 
condition. 
Simultaneously, the changes in the meteorological 
parameters are also recorded for better understanding 
of other influencing parameters. Since the said 
location had a partial eclipse on July 22, 2009, we 
were able to detect the abrupt change of solar 
radiation and its effect on sea water. The change in 
pH value is recorded accurately with a calibrated  
pH meter containing a glass electrode with 
temperature compensation controls, during the eclipse 
event and a few days prior to and after the eclipse, but 
on 15 January 2010 (annular), it was recorded well 
before the beginning of the eclipse, at 30 sec. 
resolution. The DI-PH101 model (Deep) pH meter 
with resolution ±0.01pH of operating voltage 
230VAC is used in this experiment. A two-point 
calibration procedure is followed. The electrode is 
rinsed with distilled water and placed it in the pH=7.0 
buffer solution. After showing a stabilized value it is 
adjusted to read pH of 7.0. The electrode is removed 
and rinsed it again with distilled water and then 
placed in pH=4.0 buffer solution, and adjusted to read 
pH of 4.0. Then it is placed again in the pH of  
7.0 after rinsing, and noted weather the reading is  
7.0. Until it shows the pH of 7.0 this procedure is 
repeated and thus calibrated the equipment. The 
temperature control knob is set at 25oC. 
The percentage of solar disk covered by the moon’s 
umbral shadow was calculated using a high resolution 
telescope with curved grid lines. The meteorological 
factors like air temperature and the light intensity are 
recorded continuously during the eclipse period. The 
wind speed and wind direction are recorded using

=== PAGE 5 ===

INDIAN J TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE, VOL 13, NO. 4, OCTOBER 2014 
 
 
720 
anemometer and wind wane respectively, of Cyclone 
Detection Radar Station, Karaikal. 
 
Discussion 
It is obvious to mention here that the study of 
celestial events is not only the modern scientific 
interest but from the Vedic period (2000 BC), since 
exploring the truth behind the natural events is a noble 
quality of human being in all time.  
Most of the traditional practices in India had 
originated from Vedas. Due to the difficulty in 
providing proof to the mantras/hymn in Veda, it is 
pronounced as Myth. Hence, Vedic myth became 
ancient Indian tradition.  
Water appears to act as the Earth's sensory organ 
for the cosmic cycles. Dr. Theodor Schwenk has 
investigated the subtle effects of the cosmos on water, 
and has clearly showed the variations in water 
response to changes in planetary constellation and 
also found that moving water acts as a receiver, while 
still water preserves the received information20. In his 
experiments he vibrated water at regular intervals, 
before, throughout and after a solar eclipse. The 
wheat grains that used water shaken during the eclipse 
had a stunted growth, whereas the growth was normal 
to the water shaken before and after the eclipse, and 
which 
was confirmed 
afterwards 
using 
other 
techniques. 
Lawrence Edwards had also carried out fascinating 
work on how the shape of tree and flower buds 
change their shape to the planetary alignment 
change20. For example the planet Mars influences the 
oak, Venus the birch, the cherry is influenced by the 
Sun, etc. Thus water is receptive to cosmic influence 
and conveys its information to all living organisms, 
because they are all largely composed of water.  
The experiments performed during the past two 
eclipses at the said location, Karaikal in India offered 
an interesting result of significant decrease in pH of 
seawater on the day of eclipse than normal days. On 
the day of total solar eclipse, 22 July 2009, the 
observed value of pH reveals a considerable reduction 
of 20% of the difference between the normal and 
seawater, which is plotted in Fig.1. This observed 
change in pH value raised the curiosity and interest of 
continuous assessment of this study and hence the 
experiment is repeated on the day of annular eclipse, 
15 January 2010. Even an hour before the eclipse 
event the pH value seems decreased from normal day 
value and reached its maximum reduction when the 
moon’s umbral shadow on the solar disc was 45% and 
when the eclipse percentage was maximum, the 
decrease in pH value is minimum. A second minimum 
is recorded when the solar disc was released around 
40% during the end of the eclipse event. Hence, the 
effect of solar eclipse on radiation exists even well 
before the beginning of the eclipse and the drastic 
decrease of pH value observed during partial 
maximum prolonged even after the end of the eclipse. 
It is stated in Vedas that the inauspicious period of 
eclipse actually begins about four praharas before a 
solar eclipse and three praharas before a lunar 
eclipse, (prahara being the unit of time equivalent to 
one-eighth of a day). This entire period of an eclipse 
was represented as the parvakala. Indian Hindus take 
bath both before and after this parvakala as a belief 
that which will erase the unholy shadow of Rahu and 
avoid its ill-effects. During the complete process of 
eclipse a raise in pH value between the two minima 
[Fig. 2, (iii)] is observed and hence the full process is 
divided into four stages namely, normal to first 
minimum (N1M), first minimum to central maximum 
(1MCM), Central Maximum to second minimum 
(CM2M) and second minimum to normal (2MN).  
Atri's dispelling of the darkness by the four Riks in 
four steps (Sec.3): the first part of the darkness he 
repelled 
became 
a 
reddish 
sheep 
(solar 
chromosphere), the second part he repelled became a 
 
 
Fig. 1—Comparison of solar radiation induced H+ ion activity in 
seawater during (a) normal day and (b) partial solar eclipse event 
on 22 July 2009. The reduction in pH value during eclipse is 
around 20% of the difference between the ordinary water (pH 7.5) 
and seawater (pH 8.5). The vertical dotted line is the time of 
maximum eclipse occurrence, at which the ionisation of seawater 
started due to the shorter wavelength rays reaching the earth’s 
surface.

=== PAGE 6 ===

SANTHOSH KUMAR & RENGAIYAN: TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE OF SOLAR ECLIPSE 
 
 
721 
silvery sheep (solar corona), the third part again 
became a reddish one, and the fourth a white sheep 
(regaining the original colour). Thus the coincidence 
of our results [Fig. 2 (iii) & (iv)] as a four stage 
process of eclipse is in excellent agreement with the 
Vedic prediction, first time in this field.  
The higher plasma frequency of the profilogram, 
i.e. the Total Ozone Concentration (TOC) in the 
ionosphere during eclipse21 [Fig.2 (i)] and the change 
in stratosphere, particularly, the O3 concentration 
during the eclipse event22 [Fig.2(ii)] are compared 
with the effect of recorded pH value of seawater23 
[Fig.2(iii)] and the Vedic predictions [Fig.2(iv)], and 
are in good agreement among each other, i.e. the 
change in ionosphere, stratosphere, seawater and 
Vedic predictions respectively (The first part (i) of 
Fig. 2 is taken from Ref. 21 and the second part (ii) if 
from Ref. 22).  
The O3 concentration is decreased or a depletion 
region is formed at the partial maximum (≈ 45% of 
eclipse) due to gravity induced waves, and at the 
eclipse maximum the O3 layer becomes wider/thicker 
than the normal level [Fig.2 (i)] in the shadow region8-
13. Hence the penetration of short range cosmic rays 
are reduced to a maximum level and the reduction in 
pH value is minimum14,23, and, thus the prediction of 
Rishi Atri that a silvery sheep, (close to the normal 
emission of the Sun - corona) matches well with our 
results. At the partial maximum, i.e. around 45% of 
the eclipse both at the beginning and end of the event, 
the reduction in pH is maximum due to the formation 
of depletion region in the O3 layer, which was 
pronounced in Rig Veda as a Reddish Sheep (inner 
atmosphere of the burning globe - chromosphere) 
which is far away from the normal emission. Such 
formation of depletion region in the O3 layer allows 
more short range cosmic radiations to reach the 
surface of the earth and hence causes a maximum 
reduction in pH value of seawater.  
After an hour of the eclipse, the seawater started 
regaining its original state. This may be due to the fact 
that the influence of decrease of shorter wavelength 
radiations as the eclipse approaches its maximum 
compared to longer wavelengths. This is in 
correlation with Tzanis et al. that the solar radiation 
started to increase after the eclipse totality, while the 
surface ozone concentration started to increase about 
one hour later and returned to its ordinary behaviour 
several minutes after the end of the eclipse12. A 
decrease in light intensity (the total luminous flux 
incident on the earth’s surface per unit area) of 10,000 
Lux and a decrease in surface air temperature of 6oC 
are recorded during the annular maximum. 
Search for the scientific reason of decreasing pH 
value perceived the influence of ionising radiations 
reaching the surface of the earth during eclipse. 
 
 
Fig. 2—pH variation of seawater with respect to the stratospheric 
change and the Vedic prediction, (i) Ionospheric change during 
solar eclipse (reproduced with permission from Ref. 33), 
(ii) Stratospheric change during solar eclipse (reproduced with 
permission from Ref.34), (iii) Comparative plot of Variation of 
pH in seawater during (a) normal day and (b) annular solar eclipse 
under exposed condition on 15 January 2010 (dashed line shows 
the % of eclipse; (+) symbol for approaching eclipse maximum 
and (-) symbol for towards the end of process) (hrs refers IST), 
(iv) Pictorial representation of four stages of solar eclipse as per 
Rig Veda.

=== PAGE 7 ===

INDIAN J TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE, VOL 13, NO. 4, OCTOBER 2014 
 
 
722 
Zhaobing et al. observed that irradiation of drinking 
water using gamma rays reduces its pH value24. 
During the partial solar eclipse of Oct. 1995, we have 
detected huge gamma counts at the eclipse maximum 
by gamma ray spectrometric experiments with 
NaI(Tl) scintillator. By comparing our earlier 
detection and measurements with the report of 
Zhaobing et al., it is obvious that among the shorter 
waves, gamma rays influences more in the reduction 
of pH value in seawater24. These gamma rays are 
reaching the earth’s atmosphere due to the gravity 
wave induced reduction in ozone concentration, as 
explained before. The low energy gamma rays (≈ 1.24 
MeV) reaching the surface of the earth are not passing 
through matter, as such these will not penetrate deep 
into the sea, instead are absorbed by the upper layer of 
the seawater and the particles get excited25. Due to the 
close association of pH value with salinity, this 
reduction in pH value of seawater in the surface layer 
during solar eclipse causes a critical change in the 
behaviour of marine organisms that they move to 
deeper region during this period. After few hours of 
the eclipse event these organisms come to their 
normal behaviour since the seawater regains its 
original state after few hours of the end of the eclipse. 
Hence the effect of the solar eclipse started before few 
praharas of the eclipse event and lasts for few 
praharas after the end of the process, as stated in 
Vedas. 
Sudden Ionospheric disturbances (SIDs)' can be 
generally caused by either GRBs or Solar eclipse 
events. When the Earth lies in the path of the tightly 
beamed burst of energy, the atmosphere is slammed 
with massive doses of radiations and a sudden 
increase in ionisation occurs due to GRBs, while the 
obscuration of Sun by moon causes an opposite effect 
and hence a decrease in critical frequency (Total 
Electron Content) is expected. The Total Ozone 
Concentration (TOC) in the ionosphere during 
eclipse21 also showed a similar effect to that of  
pH change in seawater, that is, the higher plasma 
frequency of the profilogram [Fig. 2(i)] is in vertical 
line with the depletion regions of Ozone layer in the 
Stratosphere [Fig.2(ii)] and which also corresponds to 
the dip in pH curve [Fig.2 (iii)], which provide a link 
between ionosphere-stratosphere and biosphere. Such 
effects are now interrelated with the Vedic predictions 
of Rishi Atri, who enchanted four mantras (Riks) 
during eclipse [Fig. 2(iv)], may be to protect the 
people from the harmful radiations. 
As per NASA TP 2001-209990 report on the total 
solar eclipse of 2002 December 04, ships and boats 
offer an opportunity for considerable mobility during 
the critical moment of the eclipse, which supports our 
findings of reduction in pH. The very recent report of 
Sharma et al., states that the change in meteorological 
parameters and the photochemical ozone formation 
during eclipse are more or less similar to the 
behaviour of night time chemistry15. As a conclusion 
of our study, the darkness effect due to eclipse is not 
similar 
to 
the 
night 
time 
darkness, 
instead 
predominant short range radiations are also reaching 
the surface of the earth, particularly gamma rays. 
Studies concerning behavioural changes of animals, 
such as fishes, birds, rodents, and chimbanzees 
responded rapidly during total solar eclipse26-29. The 
studies on fresh water fishes during the 1980 solar 
eclipse in India reveals that all the studied species 
almost stopped gulping air, became sluggish, and 
sheltered to the bottom, and such changes during solar 
eclipse are related with the activities appropriate for 
sunset26. It is known that, pH can affect the ionization 
of the amino acid side chain which in turn change the 
secondary, tertiary and quaternary structure of the 
protein molecule. This will alter the active site and 
consequently its action. The change in pH of the 
medium or environment leads to alteration in the 
shape of the enzyme since each and every enzyme is 
characterized by an optimum pH, at which the 
specific enzyme functions most actively30,31. Such 
structural changes in enzyme have an effect on ionic 
binding which is necessary to drive chemical reaction. 
In biological systems an unexpected change in pH can 
have a major effect downstream. Hence, as per our 
findings, it may be viewed in the context of radiation 
and pH change during eclipse32. It was described by 
Rishi Atri also in Rig Veda that the darkness at the 
time of full solar eclipse is totally different from the 
normal darkness. Hence this new finding may probe a 
new gateway to the study of behavioural changes of 
marine organisms during eclipse, in the context of 
change in pH. Hence the traditional practices of India, 
from Vedic period to today, that is taking bath before 
and after eclipse, fasting during eclipse, covering 
food, well and drinking water, etc. are scientifically 
valid practices. 
 
Summary and conclusion 
India’s rich Vedic tradition has a powerful 
influence in the field of astronomy and the eclipse

=== PAGE 8 ===

SANTHOSH KUMAR & RENGAIYAN: TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE OF SOLAR ECLIPSE 
 
 
723 
events are well documented. Finding the truth of such 
predictions explored new findings in the context of 
eclipse causing radiation effects. During solar eclipse, 
reduction in ozone concentration is formed because of 
gravity waves due to the change in pressure gradient 
force. The ozone depression allows ionizing radiation 
in addition to non-ionizing rays in the short period of 
eclipse. These rays have a wide range of effects on 
humans and aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. 
However the role of ionizing radiation, such as 
gamma rays, during this process is less studied. Here, 
we report that, the gamma rays are reaching the 
earth’s surface during eclipse, which reduced the  
pH of seawater when exposed to solar radiation. It is 
to be noted here that this observation is during eclipse 
partial maximum in both the event of total and 
annular eclipses, in the coastal area; where the 
seawater influences the effect of eclipse, especially on 
meteorological parameters. Our results are the first 
one reported about the influence of gamma rays 
during solar eclipse in the pH value of sea water. The 
results discussed will probe a gateway to a new 
approach of the behavioural studies of marine 
organisms in the context of pH value during eclipse 
period and may add an additional parameter in the 
geophysical studies of polar region. The minima and 
maxima obtained in the pH curve corresponds to the 
four stage process of eclipse, quoted in Vedic scripts, 
and this result may be the first scientific evidence to 
the four Riks of Rishi Atri in Rig Veda. 
 
Acknowledgement  
The permission granted by Dr. Petra K Knizova to 
reproduce the 1st part of Fig. 2 and Dr. E. 
Gerasopoulos to reproduce the second part of the Fig. 
2, is greatly acknowledged.  
 
References 
1 
Thomas D Worthen, "Herodotus's Report on Thales's 
Eclipse", Electronic Antiquity, Vol. 3.7,1997. 
2 
Thucydides, The Pheloponnesian War, translated by Rex 
Warner, (Harmondsworth), 1972. 
3 
Henkel FW, “The Chinese astronomers, Hi and Ho”,  
The Observatory, 17 (1984) 361-361. 
4 
Michael J Carlowicz & Ramon E Lopez, Storms from the 
Sun: The emerging science of space weather, Joseph Henry 
Press, 2002, 35. 
5 
Thiele R Edwin, The Mysterious Numbers of the Hebrew 
Kings: A Reconstruction of the Chronology of the Kingdoms 
of Israel and Judah, (Willam B. Eerdmans Pub. Co, Grand 
Rapids, MI), 1951, 41-42. 
6 
Goldstein R Bernard, Saving the Phenomena: The 
background to Ptolemy’s planetary theory, JHA, (1997) 
xxviii. 
7 
Griffith & Ralph T H, The Hymns of the Rigveda, 2nd edn, 
Kotagiri, Nilgiri, 1986. 
8 
Eastman John A & Stedman Donald H, Variations in the 
ambient ozone concentration during the 26 February 1979 
solar eclipse, Atmospheric Envir, 14 (1980) 731-732. 
9 
Seykora E J, Bhatnagar A, Jain RM & Streete J L, Evidence 
of atmospheric gravity waves produced during the 11 June 
1983 total solar eclipse, Nature, 313 (1985) 124-125. 
10 Singh L, Tyagi TR, Somayajulu YV, Vijayakumar PN, 
Dabas RS, Loganandham B, et al., A multi-station satellite 
radio beacon study of ionospheric variations during solar 
eclipses, J Atmos Solar-Terrestrial Physics, 51 (1989)  
271-278. 
11 Chudzynski S, Czyzewski A, Ernst K, Pietruczuk A, 
Skubiszak W, et al., Observation of ozone concentration 
during the solar eclipse, Atmos Res, 57 (2001) 43-49. 
12 Tzanis C, Varotsos C & Viras L, Impacts of the solar eclipse 
of 29 March 2006 on the surface ozone concentration, the 
solar ultraviolet radiation and the meteorological parameters 
at Athens, Greece, Atmos Chem Physics, 8 (2008) 425-430. 
13 Zerefos C S, Balis D S, Zanis P, Meleti C, Bais A F, et al., 
Changes in surface UV solar irradiance and ozone over the 
Balkans during the eclipse of 11 August 1999, Adv Space 
Res, 27(12) (2001) 1955-1963. 
14 Kazadzis S, Bais A, Kouremeti N, Blumthaler M, Webb A, 
et al., Effects of total solar eclipse of 29 March 2006, Atmos 
Chem Physics, 7 (2007) 5775-5783. 
15 Sharma S K, Mandal T K, Arya B C, Saxena M, Shukla D K, 
et al., Effects of the solar eclipse on 15 January 2010 on the 
surface O3, NO, NO2, NH3, CO mixing ratio and the 
meteorological parameters at Thiruvanathapuram, India, 
Annales Geophysicae, 28 (2010) 1199–1205. 
16 Hanna E, Meteorological effects of the solar eclipse of  
11 August 1999, Weather, 55 (2000) 430-446. 
17 Kolev N, Tatarov B, Grogorieva V, Donev E, Simenonov P, 
et al., Aerosol lidar and in situ ozone observations of the 
planetary boundary layer over Bulgaria during the solar 
eclipse of 11 August 1999, Int J Remote Sensing, 26 (2005) 
3567-3584. 
18 Founda D, Melas D, Lykoudis S, Lisaridis I, Garasopoulos E, 
et al., The effect of the total solar eclipse of 29 March 2006 
on meteorological variables in Greece, Atmos Chem Physics, 
7 (2007) 5543-5553. 
19 Zerefos C S, Garasopoulos E, Tsagouri I, Psiloglou B E, 
Belehaki A, et al., Evidence of gravity waves into the 
atmosphere during the March 2006 total solar eclipse, Atmos 
Chem Physics, 7 (2007) 4943-4951. 
20 Lawrance Edward, The Vortex of Life, (Floris Press, 
Edinberg), 1993. 
21 Knizova P K & Mosna Z, Acoustic–Gravity Waves in the 
Ionosphere During Solar Eclipse Events, Acoustic Waves - 
From Microdevices to Helioseismology, Prof. Marco G. 
Beghi (Ed.), ISBN: 978-953-307-572-3, In Tech, 2011.  
22 Gerasopoulos E, Zerefos C S, Tsagouri I, Founda D, 
Amiridis V, et al., The total solar eclipse of March 2006: 
overview, Atmos Chem Physics, 8 (2008) 5205–5220. 
23 Santhosh Kumar S & Rengaiyan R, Influence of solar eclipse 
on seawater, Nat Sci, 3 (2011) 69-74. 
24 Zhaobing Guo, Zheng Zheng, Chunhui Gu & Dengyong 
Tang, 
Radiation 
removals 
of 
low-concentration 
halomethanes in drinking water, J Hazardous Mat, 164(2-3) 
(2009) 900-903.

=== PAGE 9 ===

INDIAN J TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE, VOL 13, NO. 4, OCTOBER 2014 
 
 
724 
25 Tsypin S G, Kukhtevich V I & Yu A Kazansky, The 
penetration of gamma-rays through water, iron, lead and 
combination of iron and lead, J Atomic Energy, 1 (1956) 
217-220. 
26 Pandey K & Shukla J P, Behavioural studies of freshwater 
fishes during a solar eclipse, Environ Biol Fishes, 7 (1982) 
63-64. 
27 Elliott J A & Elliott G H, Observations on bird singing 
during a solar eclipse, Canadian Field-Naturalist, 88 (1974) 
213-217. 
28 Advani R, Behaviour of rodents during solar eclipse,  
J Bombay Nat Hist Soc, 78 (1981) 551-552. 
29 Branch J E & Gust D A, Effect of solar eclipse on the 
behavior of a captive group of chimpanzees (Pan 
troglodytes), Am J Primatol, 11 (1986) 367–373. 
30 Ann S McDermid, Ailsa S McKee & Philip D Marsh, Effect 
of environmental pH on enzyme activity and growth of 
Bacteroides gingivalis W50, Infection Immun, 56 (1988) 
1096-1100. 
31 Ram Kumar Tripathi, Chintamani Chaya Devi & Abburi 
Ramaiah, pH dependent interconversion of two forms of 
tyrosinase in human skin, Biochem J, 252 (1988) 481-487. 
32 Santhosh Kumar S, Why Birds/Animals Fly/Run Away to 
Solar Eclipse?, Curr Adv Environ Sci, 2 (2014) 11-14.