=== PAGE 2 ===

457
II OвүҲ вҖәrвҲӮ ParamГҘtmane NamaВЁ II
вҖәRвҲ«MADBHAGAVADGвҲ«TГ…
TATTVAVIVECANвҲ«
(With translation into English and Commentary)
By
Jayadayal Goyandaka
tvameva mГҘtГҘ ca pitГҘ tvameva
tvameva bandhuвҖ№ca sakhГҘ tvameva
tvameva vidyГҘ draviЖ’aвүҲ tvameva
tvameva sarvaвүҲ mama devadeva
Г п¬Ӯв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ в—ҠГҠГғГҠ Гё ГҒВ¬ГғГҠ Г п¬Ӯв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ
Г п¬Ӯв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ 
вҖҷГЈЕ“ГҲp 
вҖҡПҖГҠ 
Г п¬Ӯв—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮвҖ“
Г п¬Ӯв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ 
ГҒп¬ӮlГҠ 
ВәЛқГҒп¬ӮГЎГҠВў 
Г п¬Ӯв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ
Г п¬Ӯв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ 
вҖҡп¬ӮZ 
в—Ҡв—Ҡ 
Е’пЈҝп¬ӮЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮH
Gita Press, Gorakhpur, India

=== PAGE 3 ===

вқ–Price : ` 150
         ( One Hundred and Fifty Rupees only)
Printed & Published by :
Gita Press, GorakhpurвҖ”273005 (INDIA)
(a unit of Gobind Bhavan-Karyalaya, Kolkata)
Phone - (0551) 2334721, 2331250; Fax : (0551) 2336997
web : gitapress.org  e-mail : booksales@gitapress.org
Visit gitapressbookshop. in for online purchase of Gitapress publications.
Twenty-ninth  Reprint     2017
5,000
Total           1,46,000

=== PAGE 4 ===

* A General Survey of the GвҲӮtГҘ *
3
Thou art Mother, Thou art Father,
Thou art Kinsman, Thou art Friend,
Thou art Knowledge, Thou art Wealth,
Thou art my all, O Lord of Lords!
Obeisance to KГҰВ¶Ж’a, Guide and Teacher
of the world, son of Vasudeva, Chastiser of
KaвүҲsa and CВөaЖ’Вөura, and DevakвҲӮГӯs supreme
delight.
GLORY OF THE GвҲ«TГ…
The BhagavadgвҲӮtВөa contains divine words
emanating from the lips of God Himself. Its
glory is infinite, unlimited. None can really
describe it. Even вҖәeВ¶a, the thousand-headed
serpent-god, whose back forms the couch of
God ViВ¶Ж’u, and вҖәiva and GaЖ’eвҖ№a, cannot
fully depict this glory. How can a puny
mortal expect to do it? The Epics and
PurВөaЖ’as etc., have sung the glory of the GвҲӮtВөa
at many places; but if all those words of
praise are brought together, even then it
cannot be declared that the glory of the GвҲӮtВөa
has been fully enumerated. The fact is that
a full description of the glory of the GвҲӮtВөa
is never possible. For how can a thing which
can be fully described remain unlimited ? It
at once becomes finite and limited.
As a scripture, the GвҲӮtВөa embodies the
supreme spiritual mystery and secret. It
contains the essence of all the four Vedas.
Its style is so simple and elegant that after
a little study man can easily follow the
structure of its words; but the thought behind
those words is so deep and abstruse that
even a lifelong, constant study does not
show one the end of it. Everyday the book
exhibits a new facet of thought; hence the
GвҲӮtВөa remains eternally new. And deep reflection
with reverence and faith will make it directly
appear impregnated with deep meaning at
every step. The virtues, glory, essential
character, truth, mystery and worship of God
as well as the topics of Action and Knowledge
have been discussed in the GвҲӮtВөa in such a
way that its parallel can hardly be found in
any other book. As a scripture, the GвҲӮtВөa is
so incomparable that there is no word in it
which is devoid of some instructive thought.
There is not a single word in the GвҲӮtВөa, which
may be described as flattering. Whatever
statements have been made in it are true to
the very letter. To assume overpraise in the
words of God, the very embodiment of
Truth, is to show disrespect to the divine
words.
The GвҲӮtВөa is an epitome of all the
scriptures. The essence of all the scriptures
is to be found in it. And it would be no
exaggeration, indeed, if it is called the very
store-house of all scriptural knowledge. For
a fair understanding of the GвҲӮtВөa may lead one
automatically to a comprehension of the
truths contained in the other scriptures, and
no separate study is required to obtain this
knowledge.
The MahВөabhВөarata also says: Г«вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҖЎГҠГҠSГІГҠв—ҠГҝГӢ
ВӘГӢГғГҠГӯГіГ«Г«The GвҲӮtВөa comprises all the scriptures.ГӯГӯ
(BhвҲӮВ¶ma-Parva, 44.4). But this statement too
is inadequate. For all the scriptures have
originated from the Vedas, the Vedas were
revealed through BrahmВөaГӯs mouths, and
BrahmВөa himself took his descent from the
LordГӯs navel. In this way, a great distance
separates the scriptures from the Lord. But
the GвҲӮtВөa has emanated directly from the lips
of the Lord; hence there will be no exaggeration
Лҷ
A General Survey of the GвҲӮtВөa

=== PAGE 5 ===

4
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
if it is declared as superior to all the scriptures.
The divine sage VedavyВөasa himself says:Гі
ВӘГӢГғГҠ вҖҡГҲВӘГӢГғГҠ вҲ‘В§ГғВёвҲҡГҝГҠ ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠГЈГҝГ’вҖ” вҖЎГҠГҠГ№вҖҡВўВӘЛқвҖһГ’UвҖ”вҖ“
ГҝГҠ 
Sп¬ӮГҝВў 
В¬kЕёГҠГ·SГҝ 
в—ҠГҲПҖВ¬kГҠГҒmГҒЕёSвҖҡГҺГғГҠH
(MahВөabhВөarata, BhвҲӮВ¶maparva, 43.1)
Г«Г«The GвҲӮtВөa alone should be sung, heard,
recited, studied, taught, pondered and
assimilated properly and well. What is the
use of collecting other scriptures ? For the
GвҲӮtВөa has emerged directly from the lotus-like
lips of God ViВ¶Ж’u Himself.ГӯГӯ
Through the word Г«PadmanВөabhaГӯ in the
above verse, the author of the MahВөabhВөarata
has brought out the very idea expressed by
us. That is to say, the GвҲӮtВөa has emanated
from the lips of the same Lord from whose
navel BrahmВөa took His birth; and the Vedas,
which are the source of all the scriptures,
were revealed through the mouths of BrahmВөa.
The GвҲӮtВөa is superior even to the GaвҲҶgВөa.
In the scriptures, liberation has been declared
to be the reward of a bath in the GaвҲҶgВөa.
But he who bathes in the GaвҲҶgВөa, though he
can obtain liberation himself, does not acquire
the power of liberating others. He, however,
who takes a dive into the GвҲӮtВөa, not only gets
liberated himself, but also gains the power
of liberating others. The GaвҲҶgВөa has sprung
from the feet of the Lord, whereas the GвҲӮtВөa
has emanated directly from the divine lips.
Again, while the GaвҲҶgВөa liberates him alone
who goes to it and takes a plunge in its
waters, the GвҲӮtВөa finds its way to every home,
and shows the way to liberation to every
individual. These are the reasons why the
GвҲӮtВөa is declared as superior to the GaвҲҶgВөa.
The GвҲӮtВөa is superior even to the GВөayatrвҲӮ.
Through the practice of Japa of the GВөayatrвҲӮ
man attains liberation, no doubt. But he who
practises Japa of the GВөayatrвҲӮ secures liberation
only for himself; whereas the student of the
GвҲӮtВөa liberates not only himself but others as
well. When the Dispenser of Liberation, God
Himself, becomes his own, Mukti becomes
a trifling affair to him. It takes up its abode
in the dust of his feet. He makes a gift
of Mukti to anyone and everyone who asks
for it.
If we declare the GвҲӮtВөa as greater even
than God, there will be no exaggeration. The
Lord Himself says:Гі
ВӘГӢГғГҠГјГҠГҝпЈҝЛҳвҖһВўU ГҒГғDГ”UГҠГҒв—Ҡ ВӘГӢГғГҠ в—ҠпЈҝ ГёГҠпЈҝГ»ГҠв—ҠВў ВӘГҺвҖһUв—ҠЛңвҖ“
ВӘГӢГғГҠГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠГҲВ¬ГҠГҒГјГҠГ Гҝ ГІГҠГӢВ°ГҖвҖ№ГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠЕёЛң В¬ГҠвҖ№ГҝГҠГӘГҝвҖһUв—ҠЛңH
(VВөarВөahapurВөaЖ’a)
Г«Г«I take My stand on the GвҲӮtВөa, the GвҲӮtВөa
is My supreme abode. I maintain the three
worlds on the strength of the wisdom contained
in the GвҲӮtВөaГӯГӯ.
Apart from this, in the GвҲӮtВөa itself the
Lord openly declares that he who follows
His instructions contained in the shape of the
GвҲӮtВөa will undoubtedly attain liberation. Not
only this, He further says that even he who
studies this scripture will have worshipped
Him through wisdom-sacrifice. When such
is the value of a mere study of the GвҲӮtВөa, what
shall we say of the man who has moulded
his life according to its teachings, initiates
GodГӯs devotees into its secrets and disseminates
and propagates its teachings among them ?
Referring to such a man, the Lord says that
he is very dear to Him. It will be no
exaggeration to say that he is dearer to God
than His very life. The Lord subordinates
Himself to the will of such devotees. Even
in the case of noble souls, it is found that
those who follow their teachings become
dearer to them than their own life. The GвҲӮtВөa
constitutes the LordГӯs principal mystic teachings.
What wonder, then, that the follower of these
teachings should be dearer to Him than even
His life ?
The GвҲӮtВөa is the very life-breath, the
heart and the verbal image of the Lord. He

=== PAGE 6 ===

* A General Survey of the GвҲӮtГҘ *
5
who has his heart, speech, body and all his
senses and their functions imbued with the
GвҲӮtВөa is the very embodiment of the GвҲӮtВөa. His
very sight, touch, speech and thought lend
supreme sanctity to others, to say nothing of
those who follow his precept and example.
Really speaking, no sacrifice, charity, austerity,
pilgrimage, religious vow, self-restraint and
fasting etc., stand comparison with the GвҲӮtВөa.
The GвҲӮtВөa contains words directly
emanating from the lips of BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a. Its compiler is MaharВ¶i VyВөasa. The
Lord uttered parts of His discourse in verse,
which the compiler VyВөasa recorded exactly
as they emanated from His lips. The part of
it uttered in prose was versified by the
compiler, and the words of Arjuna, SaВӨjaya
and DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra were similarly versified by
him in his own words, and dividing the book
of seven hundred verses, into eighteen chapters,
he made it an organic part of the MahВөabhВөarata.
This is how the book has come down to us.
PURPORT OF THE GвҲ«TГ…
The GвҲӮtВөa is an unfathomable ocean of
wisdom. In fact, an infinite store of knowledge
lies embedded in it. The greatest of savants,
who have established their reputation by
vanquishing their rivals in polemics, and sages
engaged in the investigation of truth, find
themselves incapable of explaining its secrets.
For, its full meaning is known to BhagavВөan
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a alone. The next place may be
assigned to its compiler, VyВөasa, and its direct
recipient, Arjuna. The attempt, therefore, on
the part of a man like me to fathom the depth
of meaning and glory of such a book, full of
deep esoteric import, is like the attempt of an
ordinary bird winging to measure the extent
of the boundless heavens.
The GвҲӮtВөa is a bottomless sea containing
endless strata of meaning. Just as a diver
diving deep into the sea lays his hands on
precious gems, even so, diving deeper and
deeper into the secrets of the GвҲӮtВөa, the seeker
goes on discovering ever new piles of
extraordinary gems of ideas. But the king of
birds, GaruЕ’a, as well as the tiny mosquito
both take their flight in the air, each according
to his or its capacity. In the same way each
and every student of the GвҲӮtВөa makes something
out of it according to his or her comprehension.
Therefore, careful inquiry on the subject
reveals that the primary aim of the GвҲӮtВөa is
to lead the JвҲӮva, merged in the ocean of
worldly existence due to ignorance coming
down from eternity, to the realization of
God; and with this object in view the GвҲӮtВөa
prescribes means by adopting which man
can realize God even while scrupulously
performing his worldly duties. This wonderful
art of applying the spiritual truth in practical
life has been revealed in the GвҲӮtВөa, which
prescribes two paths for God-realization to
suit the nature and qualification of the SГҘdhaka.
These two paths areГі(1) the Path of
Knowledge or SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga, and (2) the
Path of Yoga or Karmayoga (III.3).
Here it may be pointed out that
almost all the scriptures have mentioned
three principal ways to God-realizationГі(1)
Action, (2) Worship and (3) Knowledge.
How does the GвҲӮtВөa, then, speak of only two
paths ? Does it not recognize the cult of
devotion? Many students of the GвҲӮtВөa, however,
understand its teachings as laying particular
emphasis on Devotion, and the Lord too has
brought out the special glory of Devotion in
the clearest terms here and there (VI.47) and
declared His realization as easy of attainment
through Devotion (VIII.14). Our reply to this
question is that the cult of Г«UpВөasanВөaГӯ or
Worship dealt with in the scriptures alongwith
those of Action and Knowledge is covered

=== PAGE 7 ===

6
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
by the two Paths mentioned above. When
a man worships God recognizing Him as
one with him, such worship falls under
SВөaвҲҶkhyaniВ¶ВўhВөa or the Path of Knowledge;
and when it is carried on in terms of
diversity, it is comprised in YoganiВ¶ВўhВөa or
the Path of Action. This constitutes the main
difference between SВөaвҲҶkhyaniВ¶ВўhВөa and
YoganiВ¶ВўhВөa. Similarly, verse 24 of Chapter
XIII speaks of God-realization through the
practice of meditation alone; but there too
it should be understood that meditation which
is practised in terms of identity with God
falls under SВөankhyaniВ¶ВўhВөa, while that which
is practised in terms of diversity is comprised
in YoganiВ¶ВўhВөa. The popular belief that Devotion
is the principal means to God-realization
according to the GвҲӮtВөa is also correct. Devotion
has been accorded a very high place in the
GвҲӮtВөa and definite instructions have been
given to Arjuna at several places to cultivate
Devotion (IX.34; XII.8; XVIII.57, 65, 66).
Nevertheless, the GвҲӮtВөa upholds only two
Paths. According to it, Devotion forms part
of the discipline of Yoga. And, inasmuch as
Devotion involves activity, the above view
upheld by the GвҲӮtВөa cannot be pronounced
to be altogether opposed to reason. The
question how Devotion goes with the
discipline of Yoga will be examined later in
the course of this discussion.
Besides, the various senses in which the
two words Г«JВӨВөanaГӯ and Г«KarmaГӯ have been
used in the GвҲӮtВөa also carry special significance.
In the GвҲӮtВөa Г«KarmaГӯ and Karmayoga, and so
Г«JВӨВөanaГӯ and JВӨВөanayoga too, are not identical.
According to the GвҲӮtВөa action prescribed by
the scriptures can be performed from the points
of view of both the Path of Knowledge and
the Path of Yoga. Even the Path of Knowledge
is not opposed to action as such; while in the
Path of Yoga, performance of action alone
has been recognized to be the SВөadhanВөa or
practice (VI.3), whereas actual renunciation
of action is deemed to be a hindrance (III.4).
In verses 47 to 51 of Chapter II, verse 19 of
Chapter III and verse 42 of Chapter IV. Arjuna
has been commanded to perform action
following the Path of Yoga; while in III.28
and V.8, 9 and 13 the Lord tells us how to
perform action from the point of view of the
Path of Knowledge. There is no place for
action with an interested motive in either of
the two paths; on the other hand, the Lord
declares men working with an interested motive
as of meagre intelligence (II.42Гі44 and 49;
VII.20Гі23; IX.20-21, 23-24).
The word Г«JВӨВөanaГӯ too has not been used
in GвҲӮtВөa in the sense of JВӨВөanayoga (the Path
of Knowledge) alone; it also signifies Self-
realization, which is the culmination of all
spiritual practicesГіof the Path of Knowledge
as well as of the Path of Yoga,Гіand which
is also called real Knowledge, or the Realization
of Truth. Verse 24 and the latter half of verse
25 of Chapter IV speak of JВӨВөanayoga or the
Yoga of Knowledge, while verses 36 to 39
of the same chapter refer to Г«JВӨВөanaГӯ or Self-
realization, which is the culmination of all
spiritual practices. In this way, at other places
too the word should be interpreted according
to the context in which it has been used.
An attempt will now be made briefly
to discuss such topics as the essential character
of the Path of Knowledge and the Path of
Yoga, the main points of difference between
them, their ramifications and the persons
qualified to follow these paths and also
whether the two paths are independent of
each other or interdependent, and so on.
ESSENTIAL CHARACTER OF THE
TWO PATHS
(1) All objects are illusory or unreal

=== PAGE 8 ===

* A General Survey of the GвҲӮtГҘ *
7
like water seen in a mirage or like the world
of dream, so that all actions proceeding from
the mind, senses and the body are nothing
but the moving of GuЖ’as, born of MВөayВөa
(Nature), in the shape of the senses etc.,
among GuЖ’as in the shape of the various
sense-objects. Realizing this, a follower of
the Path of Knowledge no longer claims the
doership of those actions (V.8-9). And
remaining constantly established in identity
with the all-pervading Supreme Spirit or
God, who is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss
solidified, he ceases to recognize the existence
of anything else than God (XIII.30). Such
is the Path of Knowledge or Г«SВөaвҲҶkhyaniВ¶ВўhВөaГӯ
as it is called. It is also termed as Г«JВӨВөanayogaГӯ
or Г«KarmasannyВөasaГӯ.
(2) A follower of the Path of Yoga, on
the other hand, regards everything as belonging
to God. He remains equipoised in success
and failure and, renouncing attachment and
the desire for fruit, performs all actions
according to the behests of God (II.47Гі51).
Or, resigning himself to God in thought,
word and deed, he practises, with faith and
reverence, constant meditation on His divine
form, alongwith His name, virtues and glory
(VI.47). This constitutes the Path of Yoga.
It is this path which has been designated by
various other namesГіe.g., Samatvayoga or
Buddhiyoga, i.e., the Yoga of equanimity,
Г«Tadartha KarmaГӯ or Г«Madartha KarmaГӯ, i.e.,
working for the sake of God, and SВөattvika
TyВөaga or Renunciation of the SВөattvika type.
In the path of Yoga, Bhakti or Devotion
does play a part, either in a general way,
or as the ruling principle. The Path of Yoga
as enunciated in the GвҲӮtВөa is not divorced
from Devotion. Even those verses which do
not explicitly mention Devotion of God
(II.47Гі51) do involve obedience to the
commandments of the Lord in any case; and
that too is conducive to God-realization. In
this sense Bhakti indirectly figures there too.
For, actually treading the Path of
Knowledge, the Lord has suggested several
processes, the fruit of all of which is the
same, viz., realization of God, who is Truth,
Consciousness and Bliss solidified. Although
having many subordinate types, the Yoga of
Knowledge, may be divided into four main
types. They may be represented by the
following guiding principles:Гі
(1) All that exists is Brahma and Brahma
alone.
(2) All phenomenal existence is illusory;
in fact, nothing exists but Brahma, who is
Truth, Consciousness and Bliss solidified.
(3) All that appears is my own selfГі
it is I.
(4) Whatever appears is illusory and
transient, and has no real existence; I, the
one eternal conscious Self, exists.
Among these, the practices based on the
first two maxims have reference to the word
Г«TatГӯ (That) in the Vedic formula Г«TattvamasiГӯ
(Thou art That), while the last two have
reference to the word Г«TvamГӯ (Thou). The
principles given above may be elaborated as
follows:Гі
(1) Whatever appears in this world of
animate and inanimate beings is Brahma;
nothing is different from God, who is Truth,
Consciousness and Bliss solidified. Whatever
action we perform, the means and materials
of that action, and the doer himselfГіall that
is Brahma (IV.24). Just as blocks of ice
floating in an ocean are pervaded, both
inside and outside, by water and water alone,
and the blocks themselves are nothing but
water, even so all animate and inanimate
beings are pervaded, both inside and outside,
by God and God alone, and it is He who
exists in the form of all those beings (XIII.15).

=== PAGE 9 ===

8
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
(2) Negating all phenomenal existence
as illusory, momentary and perishable, and
realizing that the substratum of them all, viz.,
God alone, exists, and nothing besides God,
even the mind and intellect should be merged
into Brahma; and thus establishing himself
in identity with God, the SГҘdhaka should
become one with Him through direct realization
(V.17).
(3) The whole animate and inanimate
creation is Brahma, and that Brahma is my
own self; hence all this is my own self.
Following this line of thought, the SГҘdhaka
should look upon all animate and inanimate
beings as his own self.
In the eyes of the SГҘdhaka who carries
on the above practice, nothing remains but
Brahma; it is in that being of his, which is
the same as Knowledge and Bliss solidified,
that he now delights (V.24; VI.27; XVIII.54).
(4) Regarding all this phenomenal
existence, which is illusory and a product of
the three GuЖ’as, and all activities proceeding
from it, as apart from oneГӯs self, perishable
and transient, and totally negating them all,
the Self alone should be realized as the only
Existence (XIII.2, 34).
In order to enable the SГҘdhaka to attain
the above state of mind, the Lord has
inculcated on the mind of the SГҘdhaka,
through various devices and at more than
one place, the truth that the Self is the seer,
witness, conscious and eternal, and that all
material, objective existence such as the
body etc.,Гіall that appearsГіis transient,
and, therefore, unreal; the Self alone is real.
In order to support this very view, the Lord
devotes verses 11 to 30 of Chapter II to a
discussion of the eternal, pure, awakened,
formless, 
changeless, 
actionless 
and
transcendent Self. SГҘdhakas who look upon
God as their own self attain Self-realization
only when they proceed with their SВөadhanВөa
regarding the soul as possessed of these
characteristics. Whatever action is taking
place is nothing but the play of the GuЖ’as
among themselves; the Self has nothing to
do with them (V.8, 9; XIV.19)Гіit neither
does anything itself nor causes anything to
be done. Realizing this they constantly and
eternally feel supreme joy within their own
self (V.13).
Of the four practices of JВӨВөanayoga
mentioned above, the first two are associated
with the worship of Brahma, while the third
and the fourth are conjoined with the form
of worship in which the worshipper regards
the deity as his own self.
Here the question arises: Are the above
four practices to be carried on at the end of
abstract meditation, or during the meditation
itself ? Or, can they be followed in both the
states ? Our reply to this question is that only
the process delineated at the end of Section
(4) above, which proceeds on the lines
indicated in V.9, is to be practised while
dealing with the world; whereas that given
at the beginning of Section (2) and which
has to be practised according to verse 17 of
Chapter V, is to be carried on only during
meditation. The rest can ordinarily be practised
in both the states.
In this connection the following extracts
from the GвҲӮtВөa attract our special notice:Гі
(1) п¬ӮГҠвҖҡГҲЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮВёГҒв—ҠГҒГғ ГіГ«Whatever appears
is the same as GodГӯ (VII.19); and
(2) вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҒSГ•ГғВў ГҝГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠВў Г·ВЎГ ГҝпЈҝвҲ‘В§Г п¬Ӯв—ҠГҠГҒSГ•ГғвҖ”Гі Г«He
who, established in unity, worships Me as
residing in all beings as their selfГӯ (VI.31).
One may ask here: Why have these not been
mentioned in connection with the processes
delineated in Section (1) above? Our reply to
this question is that both these verses occur
in the context of Bhakti and both relate to a

=== PAGE 10 ===

* A General Survey of the GвҲӮtГҘ *
9
God-realized soul; hence they have not been
mentioned in connection with the first practice.
Should, however, anyone treat these verses
as bearing on the path of Knowledge and
desire to carry on practice in accordance with
the same, there can be no objection to it.
Just as the discipline of Knowledge has
been divided into four types as above; even
so the discipline of Yoga may be classified
under three main heads:Гі
(1) Karmayoga with special emphasis
on Action.
(2) Karmayoga blended with Devotion.
(3) Karmayoga dominated by Devotion.
(1) Karmayoga with special emphasis
on Action consists in performing duties
enjoined by the scriptures with due regard
to oneГӯs grade in society and stage in life,
completely renouncing the desire for fruit
and attachment in respect of all actions and
worldly objects. In His teaching on this type
of Karmayoga, the Lord has at some places
insisted on the renunciation of the fruit alone
(V.12; VI.1; XII.11; XVIII.11); at other
places He has laid stress on the renunciation
of attachment alone (III.19; VI.4); while at
still other places He has demanded the
renunciation of the fruit as well as of
attachment (II.47, 48; XVIII.6, 9). Where
stress has been laid on the renunciation of
the fruit alone, renunciation of attachment
too should be taken as covered by the same;
while in the context where renunciation of
attachment alone has been insisted upon,
renunciation of the fruit as well should be
taken as implied in it. The discipline of
Action is really consummated only when
both the fruit and attachment are renounced.
(2) Karmayoga blended with Devotion:
In this discipline the striver has been asked
to worship God through the performance of
duties appropriate to his VarЖ’a or grade in
society, regarding Him as present in the
whole universe (XVIII.46).
(3) Karmayoga dominated by Devotion:
It is further divided into:Гі
(a) Offering of actions to God, and
(b) Action for the sake of God.
Offering of actions to God is also
practised in two ways. In that which is
known as Г«complete surrenderГӯ the striver
renounces the feeling of mineness, attachment
and the desire for fruit in respect of all
actions. He believes that everything belongs
to God, that he too is GodГӯs, and whatever
acts are performed by him are also His, and
that it is God who is getting everything done
by him as the showman gets things done by
his puppet. And with this belief he performs
duties prescribed in the вҖәВөastras according to
His behests and for His pleasure alone
(III.30; XII.6; XVIII.57,66).
Besides this, an act done with some
other motive in the first instance may at a
later stage be offered to God; it may be
offered in the middle even during the process
of its performance; it may be offered as soon
as it is completed; or its fruit alone may be
offered. All these are so many forms of
offering oneГӯs actions to God, even though
they represent only its initial stage. It is
through the continued practice of these
preliminary stages that the stage of Г«complete
surrenderГӯ as referred to above is ultimately
reached.
Г«Action for the sake of GodГӯ is also of
two kinds:Гі
Duties enjoined by the scriptures, which
are performed according to the behests of
God, with the object of God-realization or
attainment of Divine Love, or for the sake
of GodГӯs pleasure, and even so offering
worship to the LordГӯs images etc., and other
acts of worship such as the practice of

=== PAGE 11 ===

10
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
adoration and meditation etc.,Гіwhich are
performed for the sake of God alone and
which are even externally connected with
God,Гіboth these are included in Г«actions for
the sake of GodГӯ. Both these types of actions
have been referred to in the GвҲӮtВөa by the terms
Г«MatkarmaГӯ and Г«Madartha-KarmaГӯ (XI.55;
XII.10).
That which has been spoken of as
exclusive Devotion or the Yoga of Devotion
(VIII.14, 22; IX.13, 14, 22, 30, 34; X.9;
XIII.10; XIV.26) is also included in the two
types of action represented by the words
Г«BhagavadarpaЖ’aГӯ (action offered to God)
and Г«BhagavadarthaГӯ (action for the sake of
God). The fruit of all these is the same, viz.,
God-realization.
The next question is, Г«Г«Is the Path of
Yoga an independent means to God-realization,
or does it contribute to God-realization as an
auxiliary to the Path of Knowledge ?ГӯГӯ Our
reply to this question is that the GвҲӮtВөa subscribes
to both these views. In other words, the GвҲӮtВөa
holds the Path of Yoga to be both an
independent means to God-realization or
Liberation and as subsidiary to the Path of
Knowledge. If the striver so desires, he can,
without the help of the discipline of
Knowledge, attain the highest perfection
directly through the practice of Karmayoga;
or, obtaining access to the Path of Knowledge
through Karmayoga, he can realize God by
treading the Path of Knowledge. Which of
the two courses he should adopt depends on
his predilection or predisposition. That the
Path of Yoga is an independent means has
been clearly affirmed by the Lord in V.4 and
5, as well as in XIII.24. That he who works
for God alone, fixing his mind on Him,
realizes Him through His grace, has also
been declared by the Lord at several places
(VIII.7; XI.54, 55; XII.6Гі8).
Even so disinterested action and worship
both can also play their part as subsidiary
to the Path of Knowledge (V.6; XIV.26).
But, as JВӨВөanayoga is characterized by a form
of worship in which the worshipper looks
on God as his own self, the path of Knowledge
cannot be auxiliary to Bhaktiyoga, or the
Path of Yoga, in which the worshipper
views God as distinct from him. It is quite
another thing if a follower of the Path of
Knowledge later on finds his inclination or
opinion changed and, giving up this path
takes to the Path of Yoga, and then realizes
God through this latter path.
Here it may be asked: What is the
process followed by those who, having taken
to Karmayoga or the Path of Yoga in the
beginning, realize God later on through the
practice of SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga or the Yoga of
Knowledge? The process followed by such
strivers may be referred to by the term
Г«TyВөagaГӯ or renunciation and divided into the
following seven stages:Гі
(1) TOTAL RENUNCIATION OF
PROHIBITED ACTS
This consists in wholly abstaining, in
thought, word and deed, from vile deeds
prohibited by the scriptures, such as thieving,
adultery, lying, duplicity, chicanery, coercion,
violence, taking forbidden food, indulgence
in frivolities etc. This is the first stage of
Renunciation.
(2) RENUNCIATION OF ACTIONS
MOTIVATED BY DESIRE
This means ceasing to perform, with a
selfish motive, sacrifices, charity, penance,
worship and other actions motivated by
desire, which are generally performed with
a view to obtaining agreeable object, such
as wife, progeny and wealth etc., or with the

=== PAGE 12 ===

* A General Survey of the GвҲӮtГҘ *
11
object of securing freedom from some ailment
or ridding oneself of other calamities. This
is the second stage of Renunciation.
If by chance one is confronted with a
duty, secular or sacred, which is outwardly
motivated by desire, but the omission of
which is calculated to cause pain to anyone
or interferes with the time-honoured institutions
of Action and Worship, there is no objection
to oneГӯs performing it disinterestedly, and
only for the good of the world. Thereby he
will not be deemed to have performed an
act motivated by desire.
(3) COMPLETE RENUNCIATION OF
THIRST FOR WORLDLY OBJECTS
This consists in giving up the thirst for
enhancing oneГӯs honour, fame, social prestige
and the number of oneГӯs wives, progeny and
whatever other objects of a transient nature
have fallen to oneГӯs lot, regarding them as
an obstacle to God-realization. This is the
third stage of Renunciation.
(4) RENUNCIATION OF THE
PRACTICE OF TAKING SERVICE
FROM OTHERS WITH A SELFISH
MOTIVE
Asking for money or bodily service
from another for oneГӯs own gratification and
accepting articles or bodily service offered
without oneГӯs asking for the same and
seeking to attain oneГӯs selfish end through
anyone by any means whatsoeverГіall this
is included in taking service from another
with a selfish motive. Renunciation of all
these is the fourth stage of Renunciation.
If non-acceptance of physical service
from another, or of refreshments etc., offered
by another, where one is entitled to receive
such service or offer, causes any pain to
anyone, or in any way hinders the maintenance
of the world order, accepting service on such
an occasion in an unselfish spirit, and only
for the pleasure of those offering it, would
not be blameworthy. For, non-acceptance of
service offered by oneГӯs own wife, son or
servant, or of refreshments etc., offered by
friends and relatives etc., is likely to cause
them pain and may prove harmful, so far as
propriety of social conduct is concerned.
(5) ABSOLUTE RENUNCIATION OF
SLOTH AND THE DESIRE FOR
FRUIT IN RESPECT OF ALL ONEГӯS
DUTIES
Devotion to God, worship of gods,
service to oneГӯs parents and other elders,
performance of sacrifices, charity and penance,
earning oneГӯs livelihood appropriate to oneГӯs
grade in society and stage in life and bodily
functions such as taking of food and drink
and so onГіall these constitute oneГӯs duty.
Giving up sloth and every form of desire in
respect of these is the fifth stage of
Renunciation.
(6) TOTAL RENUNCIATION OF THE
SENSE OF MEUM AND
ATTACHMENT WITH REGARD TO
ALL WORLDLY OBJECTS AND
ACTIVITIES
All worldly objects like wealth, house,
clothes etc., all near and dear ones like wife,
children, friends etc., and all forms of enjoyment
of this world and the next like honour, fame,
prestige etc., are momentary and perishable,
and should be regarded as impermanent; and
there should be no sense of meum and
attachment with regard to them. Similarly,
having developed exclusive and unadulterated
love for God alone, one should cease to
entertain all sense of meum and attachment
with regard to actions performed through the

=== PAGE 13 ===

12
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
mind, speech and body and even with
respect to the body itself. This is the sixth
type of Renunciation.
Men who have reached this sixth stage
of Renunciation develop dispassion for all
objects of the world; and God, who is the
supreme embodiment of Love, becomes the
only object of their attachment. Therefore,
hearing and telling and mentally dwelling on
the stories of spotless divine Love, which
reveal His virtues, glory and mystery, and
practising constant adoration and meditation
and pondering the hidden meaning of the
scriptures while living in a secluded place
are their only favourite pursuits. They do not
like to live in the midst of sensual men or
to waste even a moment of their valuable
time in mirth, luxury, carelessness, vilification
of others, sensuous enjoyments and idle talk
etc., and they perform all their duties in a
disinterested way only for GodГӯs sake, dwelling
all the time on His Name and Form.
The above six stages of Renunciation
constitute the practice of Karmayoga. Through
the continued practice of this discipline the
SГҘdhaka realizes the truth about God by His
grace, and thereby attains the imperishable
supreme state (XVIII.56).
Should, however, anyone seek to realize
God through SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga or the Path of
Knowledge, he should, after practising the
above six forms of Renunciation, tread the
Path of Knowledge on the lines of the
following seventh stage:Гі
(7) COMPLETE RENUNCIATION OF
LATENT DESIRE AND SELF
IDENTIFICATION WITH REGARD
TO THE WORLD, ONEГӯS OWN
BODY AND ALL ACTIONS
Being products of MВөayВөa all objects of
the world are wholly transient, and God
alone, who is Truth, Consciousness and
Bliss solidified, is equally present everywhere
with this conviction one should erase from
oneГӯs mind all thoughts of worldly objects,
including the body and every form of activity
even in the form of impressions. And
completely renouncing self-identification with
the body, one should totally disclaim doership
with regard to all actions performed by the
mind, speech and body, and get firmly and
constantly established in identity with God.
This is the seventh stage of Renunciation.
Through such practice the SГҘdhaka
easily and immediately succeeds in realizing
God (VI.28). But the striver who adopts the
practice of SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga from the very
beginning, without going through the discipline
of Karmayoga as outlined in the foregoing
paragraphs, attains God with difficulty.
вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡSГғГҲ в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖв—ҠГҠ#ГҲв—ҠГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГғвҖ” вҖ“ (V.6)
Here the question arises: Is it possible
for a striver to practise both the disciplines
simultaneously ? If not, why not ? Our reply
to this question is that the two disciplines
of SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga and Karmayoga cannot be
followed by the same striver at one and the
same time. For, during the process of his
SВөadhanВөa, the KarmayogвҲӮ recognizes action,
the fruit of action, God and his own self as
distinct entities and, renouncing the fruit of
action and attachment, performs all his duties
for the sake of God, or as an offering to
God (III.30; V.10; XI.55; XII.10; XVIII.56-
57). The SВөaвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ, on the other hand,
disclaims the doership with regard to all
actions performed by his mind, senses and
body, regarding them as nothing but the
moving of the GuЖ’asГіwhich are the products
of MВөayВөa, among themselves, or that of the
senses among their objects, and remains
established in identity with the all-pervading.
Divinity, who is Truth, Consciousness and

=== PAGE 14 ===

* A General Survey of the GвҲӮtГҘ *
13
Bliss solidified (III.28; V.13; XIII.29; XIV.19-
20; XVIII.49Гі55). The KarmayogвҲӮ regards
himself as the doer of actions (V.11); the
SВөaвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ does not (V.8, 9). The KarmayogвҲӮ
offers his actions to God (IX.27-28); the
SВөaвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ does not recognize actions,
performed by the mind and senses without
any sense of doership, as actions at all
(XVIII.17). The KarmayogвҲӮ views God as
apart from him (XII.10); the SВөaвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ
looks on Him as ever identical with him
(XVIII.20). The KarmayogвҲӮ recognizes the
existence of PrakГҰti and all objects evolved
from PrakГҰti (XVIII.61); the SВөaвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ
refuses to recognize the existence of anything
other than Brahma (XIII.30). The KarmayogвҲӮ
recognizes the existence of Karma and its
fruit; the SВөaвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ, on the other hand,
neither recognizes the existence of any action
or its fruit as apart from Brahma, nor claims
to have any connection with such action.
Thus the process of SВөadhanВөa as well as the
views of the two types of strivers are poles
asunder. Under the circumstances, it is not
possible for the same individual to follow the
two disciplines at one and the same time.
Just as a person, intending to travel from
India to New York in America, would reach
America if he continues to travel along the
correct route either purely eastward or purely
westward, even so, though the disciplines
of SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga and Karmayoga proceed
on altogether different lines, a SГҘdhaka
who resolutely pursues either will speedily
reach the supreme common goal of both,
viz., God (V.4).
QUALIFICATION FOR THE TWO
PATHS
The question now remains: Who are
qualified for the practice of SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga
and Karmayoga as taught by the GвҲӮtВөa ? Are
they open to all irrespective of class, creed
or nationality or only persons belonging to
a particular VarвҲҶa or grade in society, a
particular Г…вҖ№rama or stage in life and a
particular community are eligible for their
practice ? Our reply to this question is that,
although the method of spiritual discipline as
enunciated by the GвҲӮtВөa is wholly Indian in
character, and has been followed by the В§RВ¶is
or seers of Vedic Mantras, nevertheless on
a careful reflection on the teachings of the
GвҲӮtВөa, it can be safely asserted that the
spiritual disciplines taught in the GвҲӮtВөa can be
practised by all human beings. This gospel
of BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, the Teacher of the
whole world that He is, is intended for all
mankindГіand not for any particular class or
order. This constitutes a distinctive feature
of the GвҲӮtВөa. The Lord has made this point
abundantly clear in the course of His teachings
by using words like Г«MВөanavaВЁГӯ (a human
being), Г«NaraВЁГӯ (man), Г«DehabhГҰtГӯ (an
embodied soul), Г«DehвҲӮГӯ (one possessed of a
body) etc., at several places. While enunciating
the fundamental practice of SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga,
the Lord throws it open to all humanity by
using the word Г«DehвҲӮГӯ in that context (V.13).
Similarly, the Lord declares in unequivocal
terms that any human being can attain
perfection by worshipping the all-pervading
Divinity through the performance of duties
alloted to him by the scriptures (XVIII.46).
Even so with regard to Devotion, the Lord
declares women, the вҖәВөudras (members of the
labouring class) and even those of vile birth
as qualified to practise it (IX.32). And
wherever else the Lord teaches any particular
discipline, He never restricts its practice to
men belonging to a particular VarЖ’a, Г…вҖ№rama
or community alone.
Nevertheless, it should be remembered
that all actions are not suited to all individuals.

=== PAGE 15 ===

14
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
That is why the Lord lays great emphasis
on VarЖ’a-Dharma or the division of duties
according to different VarЖ’as or castes. Only
those actions that have been prescribed for
a particular VarЖ’a or grade in society constitute
the duty of that VarЖ’a, and not those prescribed
for any other VarЖ’a. It is by this principle
that oneГӯs action should be governed. Every
man can perform duties allotted to him by
such VarЖ’adharma (or the code of conduct
prescribed for the different VarЖ’as or castes)
according to his qualifications and taste. Apart
from the duties prescribed for oneГӯs VarЖ’a
or grade in society, duties prescribed for the
whole of humanity, such as right conduct
and devotion etc., can be practised by all.
Some people hold the view that only
those belonging to the order of SannyВөasa,
and members of no other Г…вҖ№rama or order
are eligible for the practice of SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga.
This too does not appear to be supported by
reason. In verse 18 of Chapter II, the Lord
commands Arjuna to fight even from the
point of view of SВөaвҲҶkhya. If He recognized
SannyВөasвҲӮs alone as qualified for the practice
of SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga, He could never have
commanded Arjuna to fight from the said
point of view. For the order of SannyВөasa
shuts out all action, not to speak of much
more terrible deeds like war. Moreover,
Arjuna was no SannyВөasвҲӮ or recluse either,
and the Lord has even advised him to
approach men of spiritual insight, and seek
enlightenment from them (IV.34).
Apart from this, in verse 4 of Chapter
III, the Lord declares that perfection in
SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga cannot be attained merely by
refraining from action. If the Lord regarded
SannyВөasвҲӮs alone as qualified for the practice
of SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga, He would have declared
renunciation of actions as indispensable for
the same, rather than make the above
statement. Not only this, in verses 7Гі11 of
Chapter XIII, where He has enumerated
various 
means 
of 
attaining 
wisdom,
renunciation of attachment for and identification
with son, wife, home etc., has also been
mentioned as one such meansГіГ«вҖўвҖҡГҒQВ§вҒ„UЕёГҒГ·cп¬ӮXГ”UвҖ”
В¬ГҲГІГҠЕ’ГҠвҒ„UВӘГҺвҖһUГҠГҒЕ’В·ГҲГӯ.
The question of giving up attachment
for and identification with oneГӯs wife, children,
wealth, home etc., arises only where there
is connection with them. In the order of
SannyВөasa, there is no connection with wife,
children and so on. Such being the case, if
SannyВөasвҲӮs alone were qualified to practise
JВӨВөanayoga, it was needless to mention
renunciation of attachment for and identification
with them as a means of attaining wisdom;
for the question of renouncing them does not
arise in the case of a SannyВөasвҲӮ.
Again, in Chapter XVIII, where Arjuna
makes a direct inquiry about the nature of
SannyВөasa and TyВөaga, the Lord discusses in
verses 13 to 40 the subject of SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga
or the Path of Knowledge in place of
SannyВөasa, and nowhere mentions the order
of SannyВөasa, the Lord implied the order of
SannyВөasa by the word Г«SannyВөasaГӯ, or if He
regarded SannyВөasвҲӮs alone as qualified to
practise SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga, He would have certainly
mentioned this in clear terms on that occasion.
All this definitely proves that the practice of
SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga is equally open to the SannyВөasвҲӮ
as well as to the house-holder. Of course,
it is true that for the practice of SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga
the order of SannyВөasa affords greater facilities,
and in this sense the mode of life of a recluse
may certainly be declared as better suited for
the practice of SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga than that of a
householder.
In the practice of Karmayoga action is
predominant and one is specially enjoined to
perform the duty prescribed for oneГӯs grade

=== PAGE 16 ===

* A General Survey of the GвҲӮtГҘ *
15
in society (III.8; XVIII.45-46); on the other
hand, renunciation of action has been declared
as a hindrance in this path (III.4). Therefore,
in the order of SannyВөasa, one cannot practise
Karmayoga which lays special emphasis on
Action; for, in that order there is actual
renunciation both of material objects and
actions such as sacrifice and charity etc.
Practice of devotion to God, however, can
be carried on in all Г…вҖ№ramas. Hence the
practice of Karmayoga dominated by Devotion
is possible in all Г…вҖ№ramas.
There are people who labour under a
misconception that the GвҲӮtВөa is useful only for
hermits and recluses, and is of no use to
householders. That is why people generally
keep their boys aloof from the GвҲӮtВөa under
the obsession that a study of this book may
lead them to renounce their household. But
the above facts belie their apprehension.
They fail to perceive that it was due to the
supremely esoteric teaching of the GвҲӮtВөa that
Arjuna,Гі who had, under a spell of delusion
shrunk from his duty as a KВ¶atriya and made
up his mind to live on almsГіremained a
householder all his life and continued to
perform his duties. How could the same GвҲӮtВөa
produce such a contrary result in the case
of our boys ? Not only that; the Deliverer
of the GвҲӮtВөa, BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a Himself,
so long as He remained on earth as an
AvatВөara (a direct manifestation of the Deity),
remained constantly engaged in action,Гі
protected the virtuous, redeemed the wicked
by putting an end to their earthly existence
and established the kingdom of righteousness
on earth. He even went the length of saying
that if He did not scrupulously engage in
action, people would follow His ways and
give up their duty; and thus He would be
responsible for creating confusion in society
(III.23-24). This does not mean either that
the GвҲӮtВөa is not meant for recluses. The GвҲӮtВөa
is intended for men belonging to all VarЖ’as
and Г…вҖ№ramas. All can undertake spiritual
practice according to the principles of either
SВөaвҲҶkhya or Yoga, for whichever they may
be qualified, performing actions pertaining to
their respective VarЖ’a or Г…вҖ№rama.
DEVOTION IN THE GвҲ«TГ…
The paths of Devotion, Knowledge and
ActionГіall these have been discussed at
length in the GвҲӮtВөa. Strivers following any of
these paths can obtain sufficient material for
their guidance in the book. Arjuna, however,
was a devotee of the Lord; therefore, while
throwing light on the various paths, whatever
personal instructions are given to Arjuna for
his own guidance, the Lord generally exhorts
him to follow the Path of Action with special
emphasis on devotion (III.30; VIII.7; XII.8;
XVIII.57, 62, 65, 66). In some places, he
has even been urged to action alone (II.48,
50; III.8, 9, 19; IV.42; VI.46; XI.33-34); but
there too Devotion should be inferred as
implied, drawing the inference from other
places. In IV.34 the Lord directs Arjuna
to approach the enlightened and seek
enlightenment from them, and that too in
order to show him the method of attaining
Self-realization and by way of cautioning
him. The Lord did not really mean to direct
Arjuna to any enlightened soul to seek
wisdom, nor did Arjuna actually seek wisdom
anywhere according to the process mentioned
in that verse. A reference to the beginning
and end of the GвҲӮtВөa also leads one to the
conclusion that the culmination of the GвҲӮtВөa
lies in Г«Self-surrenderГӯ. True, the teaching of
the GвҲӮtВөa actually commences from the verse
Г«вҖўвҖЎГҠГҠпЈҝГ«ГҝГҠЕёГЈп¬ӮвҖЎГҠГҠпЈҝГёSГ п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГӯ etc.,ГіГ«Г«You grieve over
those who should not be grieved forГӯГӯ (II.11);
but the seed of this teaching is contained

=== PAGE 17 ===

16
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
in 
ArjunaГӯs 
statement 
in 
verse 
II.7
Г«вҲ‘В§ГҠВ¬ВёГЎГҝЕ’ГҠпЈҝВ·ГҠпЈҝВ¬вҖһUГғSп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮвҖ”Гӯ etc., in which the word
Г«PrapannamГӯ (having taken refuge) reveals
his spirit of self-surrender. That is why it is
with a call to surrender that the Lord
concludes His teaching with the words
Г«вҖҡп¬ӮВёЕ“в—ҠГҠВёЕёЛң В¬ГҒвҒ„UГ ГҝГ–ГҝГӯГіГ«Resigning all duties to
MeГӯ etc.
There is not a single chapter in the GвҲӮtВөa,
in which there is no reference to Devotion
at one place or another. By way of illustration
the reader is referred to verse 61 of Chapter
II, verse 30 of Chapter III, verse 11 of
Chapter IV, verse 29 of Chapter V, verse
47 of Chapter VI, verse 14 of Chapter VII,
verse 14 of Chapter VIII, verse 34 of
Chapter IX, Verse 9 of Chapter X, verse 54
of Chapter XI, Verse 2 of Chapter XII, verse
10 of Chapter XIII, verse 26 of Chapter
XIV, verse 19 of Chapter XV, verse 1 of
Chapter XVI (where the compound word
Г«JВӨВөanayogavyavasthitiВЁГӯ refers to the practice
of meditation on God), verse 27 of Chapter
XVII, and verse 66 of Chapter XVIII. In
this way each and every chapter of the GвҲӮtВөa
contains a reference to Devotion. Chapter
VII to XII, in particular, contain copious
references to Bhakti; that is why these six
chapters have been recognized as dealing
primarily with Bhakti. For the sake of
illustration, only one verse from each chapter
has been cited above.
Even so, references to Knowledge too
may be found in several chapters. By way
of illustration the reader is referred to verse
29 of Chapter II, verse 28 of Chapter III,
verse 24 of Chapter IV, verse 13 of Chapter
V, verse 29 of Chapter VI, verse 13 of
Chapter VIII, verse 15 of Chapter IX, verse
3 of Chapter XII, verse 34 of Chapter XIII,
verse 19 of Chapter XIV and verse 49 of
Chapter XVIII. Of all other chapters, Chapters
II, V, XIII and XVIII in particular contain
numerous verses dealing with the subject of
Knowledge.
Even as the GвҲӮtВөa fully reveals the truth
about Devotion and Knowledge, so does it
unfold the secret of Action as well. Verses
39 to 53 of Chapter II, verses 4 to 35 of
Chapter III, verses 13 to 32 of Chapter IV,
verses 2 to 7 of Chapter V, and verses 1
to 4 of Chapter VI fully unravel the secret
of Action. Of these, again, verse 47 of
Chapter II and verses 16 to 18 of Chapter
IV throw particular light on the subject of
Action. Apart from these the topic of Action
has been dealt with in other chapters too.
For dearth of space, more references are
not being given here. All this shows that the
GвҲӮtВөa does not only confine itself to a discussion
of Devotion alone but throws ample light on
all the three subjects of Knowledge, Action
and Devotion.
GOD AS QUALIFIED AND
ABSOLUTE, AND HIS WORSHIP
It has been stated above that whether
we worship God as apart from ourselves, or
as our own self, the fruit of both is the same.
How is it true ? For, to him who worships
God as other than himself, the Lord reveals
His divine form; and when the worshipper
leaves his body, he ascends to the LordГӯs
own supreme Abode. He who worships God
as his own self, on the other hand, becomes
one with Brahma or the Absolute. There is
no change of place for him. Our reply to
this question is that what we have stated is
true, and the objection raised above is also
to the point. How the two facts can be
reconciled, is being shown below.
The form of God-realization varies in
every individual case according to the
sentiment and faith of the worshipper during

=== PAGE 18 ===

* A General Survey of the GвҲӮtГҘ *
17
the period of his spiritual discipline. Those
who worship Him in terms of identity, i.e.,
as their own self, realize Him in terms of
identity; while to those who worship Him
in terms of diversity, He reveals Himself as
other than the worshipper. God is realized
differently by different strivers according to
their respective conviction.
Worship in terms of identity and worship
in terms of diversity, both these constitute
the worship of God; for God is both absolute
and qualified, with form and without form,
manifest and unmanifest, and what not. To
those who regard Him as absolute and
formless, He is devoid of attributes and form
(XII.3). To those who look upon Him as
qualified and formless, He is possessed of
attributes though devoid of form (VIII.9). To
those who view Him as almighty, all-
supporting, all-pervading, all-surpassing, i.e.,
adorned with all excellent virtues, He is
endowed with all noble virtues (XV.15, 17,
19).* To those who hold Him as embracing
everything, He embraces all (VII.7-12; IX.16-
19). To those who recognize Him as possessed
of form and attributes both, He reveals
Himself as such (IV.8; IX.26).
What has been stated above is, no
doubt, true; but this does not solve the basic
point raised by the questioner, which stands
as it is. The question was just this: When
God is realized differently by different
individuals, how can the fruit of the various
disciplines be called one ? Our reply to this
question is that the realization of God by the
SГҘdhaka corresponds in the first instance
with his own conception about God or with
his sentiment in respect of Him. The realization
of His true nature, that follows next, is
beyond the range of speech; words fail to
describe what it is like. The ultimate fruit
of all forms of worship is one and the same,
no matter whether He is worshipped in terms
of identity or in those of diversity. In order
to make this very point clear the Lord says
that those who worship God in terms of
identity realize the Lord Himself (XII.4;
XIV.19; XVIII.55), and he who worships
Him in terms of diversity becomes one with
Brahma or the Absolute (XIV.26), secures
lasting peace (IX.31), realizes Brahma (VII.29),
attains the eternal, imperishable Abode
(XVIII.56), and so on and so forth. It is in
order to impress upon the mind of Arjuna
the identity of fruit of both forms of worshipГі
that carried on in terms of identity and that
practised in terms of diversityГіthat the Lord
expresses the same truth in various ways,
both directly and indirectly. The goal to be
attained, the truth to be realized by both the
types of worshippers,Гіthose who worship
Him in terms of identity and those who
worship Him in terms of diversity,Гіis one
and the same; it has been described in some
places as Г«supreme peaceГӯ and the Г«eternal
stateГӯ (XVIII.62), as the Supreme Abode at
another (XV.6), and as Г«AmГҰtaГӯ (supreme
Bliss) at still another (XIII.12). Again, it has
been referred to at some places as the
Г«supreme stateГӯ (VIII.13), and at still others
as Г«highest perfectionГӯ (XVIII.45). It has
been spoken of at one place as Г«the imperishable
supreme StateГӯ (XV.5), as Г«Brahma who is
all peaceГӯ at another (V.24) and as everlasting
peace consisting of supreme BlissГӯ (VI.15)
at still another. Besides these, many more
words have been used in the GвҲӮtВөa to denote
that ultimate fruit. But nothing can be said
about it beyond the assertion that it is the
fruit of all diciplines. It transcends speech.
* The verses referred to above mention only the excellent virtues of God. Hence the word Г«Apohana,
in XV.15 has been interpreted by us, not in the senses of effacement of memory and wisdom, but as that
of doubt and misapprehension.

=== PAGE 19 ===

18
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
He alone, who has attained that object
knows it; but he too cannot describe it. He
can only hint at it by the use of the above
or similar other words, even as we help a
friend to pick out the new moon by pointing
to a bough which appears to touch it. (This
is what is known as the вҖәВөakhВөacanЕ’ra-nyВөayaГӯ
in Sanskrit.) Hence the only reasonable
conclusion is that the supreme Reality which
is the Г«fruitГӯ of all spiritual practices, is one.
This reality of God is transcendent in
character, a supreme mystery, and the secret
of all secrets. He alone who has realized it,
knows it. But even this assertion is made
only with the object of pointing to that
Reality. Considered logically, however, even
this statement is wide of the mark.
EQUANIMITY IN THE GвҲ«TГ…
Equanimity is the dominant note of the
GвҲӮtВөa. The test of God-realization lies in the
attainment of equanimity. In all the three
paths of Knowledge, Action and Devotion,
cultivation of equanimity has been declared
as essential even as part of the discipline to
be followed; and equanimity has been pointed
out as a distinguishing mark of those who
have realized God through any of the three
paths. Divorced from equanimity, even spiritual
practice is deficient, much more Realization.
He who lacks equanimity cannot be called
a realized soul. The use of the compound
word Г«SamaduВЁkhasukhamГӯ (balanced in joy
and sorrow) in II.15 denotes that of those
who tread the Path of Knowledge only, he
who is possessed of equanimity is eligible
for immortality or liberation. The latter half
of II.48, which declares Yoga to consist in
equanimityГіГ«вҖҡв—ҠГ п¬ӮВў ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘ В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝГӯГіenjoins the
follower of the Path of Action to maintain
his balance of mind while performing his
duties. And in verse 20 of Chapter XII, the
Lord expects even a SГҘdhaka treading the
Path of Devotion to practise equanimity.
Even so, equanimity finds a prominent place
among the marks of a GuЖ’ВөatвҲӮta or a realized
JВӨВөanayogвҲӮ (XIV.24-25). Again, a realized
KarmayogвҲӮ has been declared as equipoised
(VI.7-9) and equanimity has also been included
among the marks of a realized devotee
(XII.18-19).
In order to enable Arjuna to grasp the
truth of this virtue easily and thoroughly, the
Lord explains in the GвҲӮtВөa in different ways
the conception of equanimity with reference
to all living beings, actions, abstract ideas
and objects. For example:
EVEN-MINDEDNESS TOWARDS MEN
IN GENERAL
Г«Г«He who looks upon well-wishers and
neutrals as well as mediators, friends and
foes, relatives and objects of hatred, the
virtuous and the sinful, with the same eye,
stands supremeГӯГӯ (VI.9).
EVEN-MINDEDNESS TOWARDS MEN
AND ANIMALS
Г«Г«The wise look with the same eye on
a BrВөahmaЖ’a endowed with learning and
culture, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a
pariah tooГӯГӯ (V.18).
EVEN-MINDEDNESS TOWARDS ALL
BEINGS
Г«Г«Arjuna, he who looks on all as one,
on the analogy of his own self, and looks
upon the joy and sorrow of all with a similar
eye,Гіsuch a YogвҲӮ is deemed the highest of
allГӯГӯ (VI.32).
At some places, the Lord mentions
equanimity with reference to men, actions,
objects and abstract ideas together. For
exampleГі

=== PAGE 20 ===

* A General Survey of the GвҲӮtГҘ *
19
Г«Г«He who is alike to friend and foe, as
well as to honour and ignominy, who remains
balanced in heat and cold, pleasure and pain,
and other pairs of opposites, and is free from
attachment (is dear to Me)ГӯГӯ (XII.18).
In the above passage, Г«friendГӯ and Г«foeГӯ
stand for men; Г«honourГӯ and Г«ignominyГӯ
represent treatment by others, which is an
action; Г«heatГӯ and Г«coldГӯ refer to objects;
while Г«joyГӯ and Г«sorrowГӯ are abstract ideas.
Г«Г«He who is ever established in the Self
takes sorrow and joy alike, views a clod of
earth, a stone and a piece of gold alike, is
possessed of wisdom, receives the pleasant
as well as the unpleasant in the same spirit,
and views censure and praise alikeГӯГӯ (XIV.24).
In the above passage as well, Г«sorrowГӯ
and Г«joyГӯ are abstract ideas; Г«clod of earth,Гӯ
Г«stoneГӯ and Г«goldГӯ represent objects; Г«censureГӯ
and Г«praiseГӯ typify action by others; while
Г«pleasantГӯ and Г«unpleasantГӯ refer to all the
four, viz., beings, ideas, objects and actions.
In this way he who looks on all with
the same eye, who, though entertaining the
feelings of Г«IГӯ and Г«mineГӯ only in name in
his dealings with the world, is even-minded
towards all, who sees unity in the whole
worlds;Гіsuch a man is possessed of
equanimity and he alone is an advocate of
equality in the real sense of the term.
There is a world of difference between
the cult of equanimity preached by the GвҲӮtВөa
and the doctrine of the so called equality
preached by modern socialism. Modern
socialism is anti-theistic in its outlook, whereas
the cult of equanimity preached by the GвҲӮtВөa
sees God everywhere and in everything.
One uproots Religion, while the other upholds
Religion at every step; one is violent in its
conception, while the other establishes the
principle of non-violence; one is based on
self-interest, while the other has no room for
selfishness. One, though abolishing all
distinctions in the matter of interdining and
social intercourse etc., maintains disunion in
spirit; while the other, though maintaining
due discrimination in the matter of interdining
and social intercourse according to the bounds
prescribed in the вҖәВөastras, does not admit any
disparity in spirit and exhorts us to perceive
the Supreme Spirit as the same in all. The
goal of one is mammon-worship, while that
of the other is God-realization. In one there
is identification with oneГӯs party and disrespect
for others; while in the other there is complete
absence of pride, and respect for all which
comes from a sense of the immanence of
God. In one, there is emphasis on external
behaviour, while in the other it is the spirit
which matters; in one it is material happiness
which is of primary importance, while in the
other it is spiritual happiness that counts; in
one there is want of tolerance for othersГӯ
wealth and othersГӯ views, in the other there
is equal respect for all; one is dominated by
partiality and prejudice, while the other
prescribes conduct which is free from partiality
and prejudice.
DESTINY OF JвҲ«VAS AFTER DEATH
The GвҲӮtВөa mentions three grades of
destinies, viz., high, middling and low,
corresponding to the qualities (GuЖ’as) and
actions of the JвҲӮvas. The destiny of those
who perform duties and worship prescribed
in the вҖәВөastras from the points of view of
Karmayoga and SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga has been
described in verse 24 of Chapter VIII. Of
these, again, the destiny of those who fall
from Yoga has been mentioned in verses 40
to 45 of Chapter VI. There it is stated that
casting off their mortal coil they ascend to
heaven and other worlds and, having enjoyed
the pleasures of those celestial regions for a

=== PAGE 21 ===

20
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
pretty long period, are reborn in the homes
of wealthy people of pious conduct. Or,
without being temporarily transferred to heaven
they are directly reborn in a YogвҲӮГӯs family
and, driven once more to the practice of
Yoga by the impulse of their previous
SВөadhanВөa, attain the supreme goal.
The destiny of those who perform the
prescribed duties or worship with an interested
motive has been described in verses 20 and
21 of Chapter IX; there it has been shown
how those who perform sacrifices etc.,
prescribed in the Vedas with a desire to
attain heaven ascend to that region, and how,
on the stock of their merit being exhausted,
they are hurled back to the mortal plane. The
route and the process of their ascent to heaven
have been delineated in the commentary on
verse 25 of Chapter VIII.
Verses 14, 15 and 18 of Chapter XIV
briefly describe in a general way the destiny
of all men. When a man gives up the ghost
during the preponderance of the quality of
Sattva, he attains to the higher worlds; dying
when Rajas is in the ascendant, one is born
among men; and he who expires during the
predominance of Tamas is born in the
species of birds, beasts, insects, moths and
trees etc. Even so a man established in Sattva
ascends after death to the higher regions;
men of a RВөajasika disposition who are
established in Rajas remain in the world of
mortals; and men of a TВөamasika temperament
who are established in Tamas descend in the
scale of spiritual evolution, i.e., are cast into
hell or born in sub-human species. In verses
19 to 20 of Chapter XVI the Lord says, with
reference to TВөamasika men of a demoniac
disposition, that He repeatedly casts them
into demoniac wombs, i.e., the species of
low-born creatures like dogs and swine etc.,
and subsequent to this they are cast into
terrible hells. Similarly, in other places too
the GвҲӮtВөa speaks of men attaining good or evil
destiny according to their qualities and actions.
The destiny of liberated souls has been
described at length at many places in the
shape of the goal of the Paths of Knowledge
and Action.
SOME SPECIAL FEATURES OF THE
GвҲ«TГ…
(1) MEANS OF TESTING THE
PREDOMINANCE OF GUВ§NAS
The GвҲӮtВөa has laid down certain definite
standards of judging whether a particular
object, idea or action belongs to the SВөattvika,
RВөajasika or TВөamasika type. They are as
follows:Гі
(1) An idea or action which is untainted
with selfishness, which is free from attachment
and the sense of Г«mineГӯ, and which is
conducive to God-realization, should be
regarded as SВөattvika.
(2) An idea or action which is tainted
with greed, selfishness, and attachment, and
which yields momentary pleasure and
ultimately leads to sorrow should be regarded
as RВөajasika.
(3) An idea or action which is
characterized by violence, infatuation and
obstinate error, and which leads to sorrow
and ignorance, should be regarded as
TВөamasika.
Thus pointing out the distinguishing
marks of ideas and actions of the SВөattvika,
RВөajasika and TВөamasika types, the Lord
enjoins us all to adopt those of the SВөattvika
type and discard those of the other two
types.
(2) PREDOMINANCE OF SPIRIT
OVER ACTION IN THE GвҲ«TГ…
Although the GвҲӮtВөa recognizes good

=== PAGE 22 ===

* A General Survey of the GвҲӮtГҘ *
21
conduct and a noble spirit both as conducive
to blessedness, it lays emphasis on the spirit
or oneГӯs mental attitude. In the marks of a
stable-minded YogвҲӮ, a devotee and a GuЖ’ВөatвҲӮta
(one who has transcended the three GuЖ’as)
given at the end of Chapters II, XII and XIV
respectively, it is the spirit that has
been emphasized (II.55Гі71; XII.13Гі19;
XIV.22Гі25). In Chapters II and XIV,
ArjunaГӯs question has particular reference to
conduct, but the LordГӯs reply lays emphasis
on the spirit. In the eyes of the GвҲӮtВөa, most
ordinary pursuits such as fighting, trade,
agriculture and menial service etc., done in
a disinterested spirit, are superior to the
noblest acts like sacrifice, charity, penance,
public service and worship etc., done with
an interested motive, inasmuch as the former
are conducive to liberation (II.40, 49; XII.12;
XVIII.46). In Chapter IV too, which enunciates
various practices in the form of so many
sacrifices (IV.24Гі32), liberation has been
shown to depend primarily on the spirit of
the sacrificer.
GвҲ«TГ… AND THE VEDAS
The GвҲӮtВөa shows great regard for the Vedas.
By declaring Himself as worthy of being known
by the Vedas, as the author of the VedВөanta
and the knower of the Vedas, the Lord enhances
their glory to a great extent (XV.15). While
speaking of the PвҲӮpala tree in the shape of
creation, the Lord says that he alone who
knows Г«Г«this tree with its roots in essence
really knows the truth of the VedasГӯГӯ (XV.1).
The Lord shows thereby that the intention of
the Vedas is to reveal the true character of the
world together with its cause, viz., God. The
Lord says that He simply reiterates what the
Vedas have stated by the analytical process.
Thus citing the Vedas as authority in support
of His utterances, the Lord has exalted the
Vedas to the skies. By declaring the three
VedasГіВ°Rk, YajuВ¶ and SВөamaГіas His own
selves, He has accorded them a still greater
honour. The Lord states that the Vedas have
proceeded from Him (III.15; XVII.23). He
further says that various means to God-
realization have been taught in the Vedas
(IV.32). Thereby He clearly indicates, as it
were, that the Vedas do not merely enunciate
practices which bring enjoyment in the
worldГіas some unthinking men hold, but
that they set forth, not one or two, but numerous
ways to God-realization. While referring to
His Reality as the Г«Г«Supreme GodГӯГӯ, the Lord
says that knowers of the Vedas term it as
Г«AkВ¶araГӯ or the syllable OвүҲ (VIII.11). By this
statement too the Lord conveys the same idea,
viz., that the Vedas do not merely speak of the
transient enjoyments of this world and of heaven,
which are the goal of men who are motivated
by desire, but that they discuss at length the
imperishable Reality of God as well. This
makes it clear that the Lord has shown
exceptional esteem and regard for the
Vedas.
This raises the question: Why, then, did
the Lord speak slightingly of the Vedas at
several places ? For example, He has spoken
of men obsessed by desire and devoted to
the letter of the Vedas as unwise (II.42).
Again, declaring the Vedas as dealing with
the evolutes of the three GuЖ’as in the form
of worldly enjoyments, as well as with the
means of attaining such enjoyments, He has
advised Arjuna to remain unattached to them
(II.45). And referring to men who are motivated
by the desire and devoted to the ritual
enjoined by the three Vedas, the Lord says
that they repeatedly come and go, and do
not escape from the whirligig of birth and
death (IX.21). What are we to understand
from the above?

=== PAGE 23 ===

22
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Our reply to the above question is that,
although the observations of the Lord referred
to above appear to decry the Vedas, really
speaking they do not. The GвҲӮtВөa values absolute
desirelessness on the part of a doer or a
worshipper much more than an interested spirit,
and has declared the former as indispensable
for God-realization. Hence it is with a view
to declaring selfish motive with regard to oneГӯs
actions or worship as lower than absolute
desirelessness and as conducive to momentary
sense-enjoyments, that the Lord has off and
on proved it to be of no consequence; but
He has nowhere denounced such spirit just
as He has denounced prohibited acts. Even
where He speaks of oneГӯs transcending the
fruits held out by the Vedas, He only refers
to the fruits of actions performed with an
interested motive. Thus it is clear that nowhere
in the GвҲӮtВөa does the Lord decry the Vedas;
on the other hand, He has only extolled them
every now and them.
GвҲ«TГ… AND THE SCHOOLS OF
SГ…ГғKHYA AND YOGA
Some people hold the view that wherever
the word Г«SВөaвҲҶkhyaГӯ occurs in the GвҲӮtВөa, it
stands for the SВөaвҲҶkhya system of philosophy
founded by MaharВ¶i Kapila; but this does not
appear to be a reasonable view. In three
consecutive verses (Verses 19, 20 and 21)
of Chapter XIII, and elsewhere too, the GвҲӮtВөa
uses the words Г«PrakГҰtiГӯ and Г«PuruВ¶a, together,
and these are the two principal words of the
SВөaвҲҶkhya terminology; this has led people to
conclude that the GвҲӮtВөa upholds the doctrine
of SВөaвҲҶkhya taught by Kapila. Similarly,
some people interpret the word Г«YogaГӯ too
as referring to the school of philosophy of
that name founded by MaharВ¶i PataВӨjali. At
the beginning of Chapter V, and at many
other places too, the words Г«SВөaвҲҶkhyaГӯ and
Г«YogaГӯ have been used together; this has
also contributed to the assumption that the
words Г«SВөaвҲҶkhyaГӯ and Г«YogaГӯ respectively
stand for the philosophical systems of those
names attributed to sages Kapila and PataВӨjali.
But the view does not appear to be supported
by reason. The Г«SВөaвҲҶkhyaГӯ referred to in the
GвҲӮtВөa is not the same as the SВөaвҲҶkhya system
of philosophy associated with the name of
Kapila, nor is the Г«YogaГӯ spoken of in the
GвҲӮtВөa the same as the Yoga of PataВӨjali. This
will be clear from the following:Гі
(1) The SВөaвҲҶkhya system of philosophy
refuses to recognize God as conceived by
the GвҲӮtВөa.
(2) Although the word Г«PrakГҰtiГӯ occurs
at several places in the GвҲӮtВөa, there is a world
of difference between Г«PrakГҰtiГӯ as conceived
by the GвҲӮtВөa and the Г«PrakГҰtiГӯ of SВөaвҲҶkhya.
According to the SВөaвҲҶkhya philosophy as
taught by Kapila, Г«PrakГҰtiГӯ denotes a state of
equilibrium of the three GuЖ’as. But the
Г«PrakГҰtiГӯ of the GвҲӮtВөa is the cause of the three
GuЖ’as, which are its evolutes (XIV.5).
SВөaвҲҶkhya recognizes PrakГҰti as without
beginning and eternal; the GвҲӮtВөa does hold it
to be without beginning (XIII.19), but not
eternal.
(3) Similarly, there is a great difference
between Г«PuruВ¶aГӯ as conceived by the GвҲӮtВөa
and the Г«PuruВ¶aГӯ of the SВөaвҲҶkhya philosophy.
According to SВөaвҲҶkhya, PuruВ¶as are many;
but Г«SВөaвҲҶkhyaГӯ as preached by the GвҲӮtВөa
recognizes only one PuruВ¶a (XIII.22, 30;
XVIII.20).
(4) The GвҲӮtВөaГӯs conception of Г«MuktiГӯ
also widely differs from Г«MuktiГӯ as taught
by the SВөaвҲҶkhya system. According to the
latter, Mukti or liberation consists in the final
cessation of sorrow. In the Г«MuktiГӯ of the
GвҲӮtВөa, however, there is not only final cessation
of sorrow but in addition to it there is

=== PAGE 24 ===

* A General Survey of the GвҲӮtГҘ *
23
realization of God; who is an embodiment
of supreme Bliss (VI.21-22).
(5) Besides 
the 
above 
doctrinal
differences, the Yoga system of PataВӨjali
defines Г«YogaГӯ as the cessation of the functions
of the mind. The GвҲӮtВөa however, uses the
word Г«YogaГӯ in different senses according
to the context in which it occurs (vide
commentary to II.53).
Thus there is a great difference between
the teachings of the GвҲӮtВөa, on the one hand,
and the teachings of the SВөaвҲҶkhya and Yoga
schools of philosophy, on the other.
APOLOGY FOR THE PRESENT
COMMENTARY
For many years past some friends have
pressed me, and tried to prevail upon me,
to write a detailed commentary on the GвҲӮtВөa
according to my own ideas. Already there
exist a number of glosses, commentaries and
expositions on the GвҲӮtВөa by revered Г…cВөaryas
or world-teachers, saints and holy men, as
well as by savants possessing deep insight
into the вҖәastras. They are all worthy of
respectful consideration, and have attempted
to bring to light the secrets of the GвҲӮtВөa
according to their own respective standpoints.
But most of them are in Sanskrit and are
particularly useful to men of learning. Therefore,
the friends argued that a commentary should
be written in a simple language, which may
be of use to all, and may be comprehended
by the common run of people, and which
may contain a detailed exposition of the
teachings of the GвҲӮtВөa. With this end in view,
and believing that the writer himself would
be benefited the most by such an undertaking,
the work was taken in hand. But experience
showed that the task was far more difficult
than it appeared to be in the beginning.
I am conscious of the fact that from the
points of view both of ability and qualification,
this attempt on my part will be regarded as
nothing short of a daring act. By caste I am
a VaiвҖ№ya, and in point of learning and
wisdom too I find myself wholly unequal to
the undertaking. Thus I am altogether
unqualified to write a commentary on a
universally respected scripture like the GвҲӮtВөa.
As regards the meaning of the GвҲӮtВөa, far from
claiming a full understanding of the teachings
of the Lord, it would be too presumptuous
on my part to say that I have understood
even a hundredth part of their import. And
having grasped their meaning even to a small
degree it is all the more difficult to translate
them into practice. Those alone who are
specially favoured by the Lord can undertake
to do so. Practice in life of all those teachings
in their entirety is indeed a far cry; even they
are really blessed, who have moulded their
lives according to a stray verse of the GвҲӮtВөa
dealing with spiritual practice; and I bow
crores of times at their sacred feet. Such
persons alone possess the requisite qualification
to interpret the GвҲӮtВөa.
Thus, from all points of view, the
present attempt on my part is a daring
enterprise and sheer childishness. Nevertheless,
it has provided me an opportunity to devote
some thought to the meaning of the GвҲӮtВөa, to
reflect on the divine teachings of the Lord
and to discuss spiritual topics and these
moments of my life have been spent in the
best way possible, for which I consider
myself blessed. This has no doubt contributed
to advance my knowledge of the GвҲӮtВөa and
has also served to correct many errors;
nonetheless, it may be safely presumed that
I have erred at every step in the course of
this undertaking. For, whether I have understood
even a hundredth part of the teaching of the
GвҲӮtВөa cannot be definitely said. The real

=== PAGE 25 ===

24
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
commentary, I have neither referred to the
views of any Г…cВөarya or commentator, nor
criticized any. But while stating my own
point of view, I may have said something
which may conflict with the views of any,
for which I seek forgiveness from all. It has
not been my object to enter into controversy,
or compare one point of view with another.
As far as possible, care has been taken
to avoid inconsistency between what has
gone before and what follows; but inasmuch
as the commentary has assumed unwieldy
proportions, it is not unlikely that mistakes
of this type may have escaped notice. I
humbly hope that the generous reader will
kindly rectify all such errors and inform me
about the same.
In writing this commentary, I received
invaluable help from several revered
personages, friends and relatives. Modern
etiquette demands that I should mention
them all by name. But if I proceed to do
so, I would be hurting their feelings in the
first instance; and secondly my relations with
them are of such an intimate nature that any
praise offered to them is as good as self-
praise. Therefore, without mentioning any of
them by name, I consider it enough to say
that but for their ungrudging co-operation the
commentary would not perhaps have seen
the light of the day as it is.
Гі Jayadayal Goyandaka
import of the GвҲӮtВөa is known in its entirety
only to the Lord Himself, and to a certain
extent to Arjuna, for whom the GвҲӮtВөa was
intended. Or, even those who have actually
realized God, and have fully actualized in
life the grace of God, may partially know
it. What more can I say on this  subject ?
I, for my part, am deeply obliged and
indebted to all those revered souls who have
written glosses and commentaries on the
GвҲӮtВөa; for in shaping the present commentary,
I have taken great help from a number of
those glosses and commentaries. Therefore,
with a heart full of gratitude, I offer, again
and again, my humble salutations to those
adorable souls.
With regard to this commentary, of
course, I can unhesitatingly say that it is full
of imperfections. Far from correctly interpreting
the intention of the Lord, I may have
misconstrued it myself at several places, and
in many places I may have represented the
very reverse of what the Lord intended to
say. For all these errors, I apologize with
folded hands both to the merciful Lord and
to all lovers of the GвҲӮtВөa. Whatever I have
written, I have written according to my own
poor lights; and I hope men of learning and
wisdom will pardon me for the childishness
I have exhibited through this indication of
my poor understanding. In the present
U

=== PAGE 26 ===

Лҷ
вҖәrвҲӮmad Bhagavad-GвҲӮtГҘ
Contents
1.
A General Survey of the
GвҲӮtГҘ (By Syt. Jayadayal
Goyandaka) .............................. 3Гі24
Chapter I
2.
Title and Summary of the
Chapter and Link of the
Story ....................................... 31Гі34
3.
DhГҰtarГҘВ¶ВўraГӯs question to
SaВӨjaya about the affairs
of the battle at KurukВ¶etra;
SaВӨjaya begins to narrate
the events on the battle-field .... 34-35
4.
Duryodhana 
approaches
DroЖ’ГҘcГҘrya and requests him
to survey the hostile army............. 36
5.
A short account of the
principal warriors on the
PГҘЖ’Е’ava side, such as
SГҘtyaki, VirГҘВўa, Drupada,
DhГҰВ¶Вўaketu, 
CekitГҘna,
KГҘвҖ№irГҘja, Purujit, Kuntibhoja,
вҖәaibya, 
YudhГҘmanyu,
UttamaujГҘ, Abhimanyu, etc.,
and also of those on the
Kaurava side, such as
DroЖ’ГҘcГҘrya, BhвҲӮВ¶ma, KarЖ’a,
KГҰpГҘcГҘrya, 
AвҖ№vatthГҘmГҘ,
VikarЖ’a, BhВөuriвҖ№ravГҘ, etc. ....... 36Гі43
6.
Duryodhana praises his own
army in comparison to the
opposite army and requests
that 
all 
should 
protect
BhвҲӮВ¶ma. An account of
blowing 
of 
conchs
by the warriors on both sides  43Гі49
7. At ArjunaГӯs request вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a places his chariot
between the two armies :
Arjuna surveys the warriors
drawn up for battle ................. 49Гі53
8.
Seeing all his relations
arrayed 
on 
the 
battle-
field, 
Arjuna, 
through
apprehension 
of 
their
destruction, is filled with deep
sorrow. He recounts the evil
consequences of destruction
of the race and family
traditions, 
and 
of 
an
intermixture of castes etc.;
overwhelmed 
with
despondency he lays aside
his bow and arrows ............... 54Гі63
9.
Meaning of the Colophon
at the end of each chapter ............ 64
Chapter II
10.
Title and Summary of the
Chapter and Link of the
Story ....................................... 65Гі67
11.
Arjuna declines to fight even
on the exhortation of вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a. 
In 
astate 
of
perplexity he prays to the
Lord for instructions and
guidance; proclaiming his
decision not to fight he
keeps quiet ............................. 68Гі75
12. Discussing the knowledge
of the soul, the Lord
encourages Arjuna to fight
from the point of view of
SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga .......................... 76Гі91
13. The Lord exhorts Arjuna to
fight by demonstrating to
him the advantage and
propriety of engaging in a
righteous war according to
the 
code 
of 
honour
prescribed for a KВ¶atriya,
and 
concludes 
the
discussion on SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga.. 91Гі96

=== PAGE 27 ===

26
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
14.
Describing the superiority
of selfless action and the
inferiority of self-interested
action, the Lord urges Arjuna
on to Karmayoga.................. 96Гі112
15.
The various senses in
which the terms Г«YogaГӯ and
Г«YogвҲӮГӯ have been used in
the GвҲӮtГҘ .................................. 112-114
16.
At ArjunaГӯs request the Lord
discusses 
the
characteristics of a man
possessed of a stable mind,
the means of attaining
stability 
of 
mind
and its fruit ..........................114Гі138
Chapter III
17.
Title and Summary of the
Chapter and Link of the
Chapter .................................. 139-140
18.
At ArjunaГӯs request the Lord
enunciates 
the 
two
disciplines of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga
and Karmayoga and exhorts
him to perform his duties ....140Гі152
19.
The Lord brings out the
importance of performing
actions for the sake of
sacrifice; and after explaining
the 
wheel 
of 
creation
emphasizes the necessity
of performing oneГӯs duties 152Гі162
20.
Even though the enlightened
soul has no obligation to
discharge, the Lord shows
the necessity for action on
the part of the wise and
even on the part of God
Himself, in the interest of
the world order: the marks
of the wise and the unwise;
and the LordГӯs exhortation
for the performance of
actions without attraction and
aversion ...............................162Гі185
21.
In response to ArjunaГӯs
question, the Lord describes
the nature and seat of desire
and advises him to kill it.....185Гі197
Chapter IV
22.
Title and Summary of the
Chapter and Link of the
Chapter .................................. 198-199
23.
Discussion 
about 
the
manifestation of the Lord
and the creation of the four
orders of society by Him;
secret of action and the
glory of enlightened souls ...199Гі227
24.
Different forms of sacrifices
described .............................227Гі245
25.
The glory of Knowledge
described .............................245Гі257
Chapter V
26.
Title and Summary of the
Chapter and Link of the
Chapter .................................. 258-259
27.
In answer to the question
of 
Arjuna, 
вҖәrвҲӮ 
KГҰВ¶Ж’a
differentiates 
between
SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga 
and
Karmayoga, and describes
the marks and glory of the
SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ and KarmayogвҲӮ  259Гі272
28.
Discussion 
about 
the
SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ 
and
SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga .......................272Гі288
29.
Description of DhyГҘnayoga
(Meditation) 
for 
the
SГҘdhakas 
of 
both
SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga 
and
Karmayoga, 
and 
the
attainment 
of 
Supreme
Peace through realization
of the Lord as the sole
enjoyer of all sacrifices, the
supreme Lord of all the
worlds and the disinterested
friend of all beings...............288Гі293

=== PAGE 28 ===

Chapter VI
30.
Title and Summary of the
Chapter and Link of the
Chapter .................................. 294-295
31.
A tribute to the KarmayogвҲӮ;
marks of the man who has
climbed 
to 
the 
height
of Yoga; exhortation for
redeeming the self and the
marks of the God-realized
soul ......................................295Гі305
32.
Description of DhyГҘnayoga
with its fruit ..........................305Гі337
(Meditation on вҖәrвҲӮ вҖәaвҲҶkara,
вҖәrвҲӮ ViВ¶Ж’u, вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma and
вҖәrвҲӮ 
KГҰВ¶Ж’a; 
(311Гі313)
(Stealing of calves and the
cowherd boys by BrahmГҘ;
the glory of the GopвҲӮs of
Vraja; вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a reveals to
YaвҖ№odГҘ the whole creation
within His mouth and a
similar vision granted to
KГҘkabhuвҖ№uЖ’Е’i 
by 
вҖәrвҲӮ
RГҘma 
within 
His 
own
belly, etc. (331Гі333)
33.
In response to the questions
of Arjuna the Lord discusses
the subject of mind-control
and the destiny of him who
has fallen from Yoga ...........337Гі352
34.
Greatness of the YogвҲӮ;
exhortation for becoming a
YogвҲӮ; and supremacy of the
YogвҲӮ mentally united with
the Lord ...............................352Гі355
Chapter VII
35.
A reference to the division
of the GвҲӮtГҘ into three groups
of six chapters each .................... 356
36.
Title and Summary of the
Chapter and Link of the
discourse ............................... 356-357
37.
Eulogy 
of 
JВӨГҘna 
and
VijВӨГҘna, 
VijВӨГҘna, 
i.e.,
Knowledge of the absolute
Brahma 
and 
manifest
Divinity, and rarity of true
Knowledge about the reality
of God; a description of the
AparГҘ (lower) and ParГҘ
(higher) PrakГҰtis of God and
the evolution of all beings
from the aforesaid two
PrakГҰtis; a reference to God
being the supreme cause
of all and a description of
His integral being ................357Гі365
38.
Condemnation 
of 
men
possessing a demoniac
disposition and eulogy of
devotees of God of all kinds;
a reference to the worship
of all deities .........................365Гі378
(Short notes on Dhruva,
DraupadвҲӮ, Uddhava and
PrahlГҘda 367Гі369)
39.
The cause of failure to
realize the glory of God and
a tribute to those who have
come to know Him in His
entirety .................................378Гі385
Chapter VIII
40.
Title and Summary of the
Chapter and Link of the
Discourse ..................................... 386
41.
In response to ArjunaГӯs
query the Lord discusses
the nature of Brahma,
AdhyГҘtma, 
Karma,
AdhibhВөuta, Adhidaiva and
AdhiyajВӨa, and the destiny
of man after death...............387Гі395
42.
The Final destiny of the
YogвҲӮs who contemplate on
the formless Divinity with
attributes, and of those who
adore the formless and
attributeless Brahma ...........395Гі402
* Contents *
27

=== PAGE 29 ===

28
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
43. The glory of Devotion to
God and a description of
the cosmic day and night,
as well as of the supreme
Abode which is attained by
all types of worshippers
along with the means of
attaining it in the shape of
Devotion...............................402Гі411
44.
The Bright and Dark paths
described .............................411Гі419
Chapter IX
45. Title and Summary of the
Chapter and Link of the
Discourse .............................. 420-421
46.
A dissertation on JВӨГҘna and
VijВӨГҘna, i.e., Knowledge of
the 
absolute 
Brahma
and the manifest Divinity,
the glory of the divine power
and 
the 
evolution 
of
the universe .........................421Гі431
47.
Condemnation of those who
think low of the Lord for
want 
of 
knowledge
of His greatness; the glory
of Devotion; a description
of 
His 
integral 
being
along with Its glory and the
destiny of those who aspire
for heaven ...........................431Гі443
48.
The glory of single-minded
Devotion...............................443Гі475
(Short life-sketches of Vidura,
SВөudГҘmГҘ, DraupadвҲӮ, the Lord
of elephants, вҖәabarвҲӮ and
Rantideva 449Гі457);
(The story of BilvamaвҲҶgala
462Гі466):
(Short notes on Guha, the
chief of the NiВ¶ГҘdas, the
YajВӨapatnвҲӮs, SamГҘdhi VaiвҖ№ya
and 
SaВӨjaya 
467Гі470);
(The stories of SutвҲӮkВ¶Ж’a and
the royal sage AmbarвҲӮВ¶a
471Гі473)
Chapter X
49.
Title and Summary of the
Chapter and Link of the
Discourse ..................................... 476
50.
A reference to the glory
and Yogic power of the Lord
and the reward of knowing
them .....................................476Гі486
(Short notes on MarвҲӮci,
AвҲҶgirГҘ, 
Atri, 
Pulastya,
Pulaha, Kratu and VasiВ¶Вўha
482Гі484)
51.
Bhakti discussed with its
reward and glory .................486Гі490
52.
Arjuna offers his praises to
the Lord and requests Him
to describe His glory and
Yogic power ........................490Гі497
(Short notes on DevarВ¶i
NГҘrada, Asita, Devala and
VedavyГҘsa 492-493)
53.
The Lord recounts His
manifestations and power
of Yoga ................................497Гі519
(Short notes on Kubera,
BГҰhaspati and BhГҰgu
501Гі503): (Note on Yama
507-508); (Note on the
GaвҲҶgГҘ 509); (Story of
the discomfiture of the
celestials at the hands of
Brahma appearing as a
YakВ¶a 514-515): (Note on
вҖәukrГҘcГҘrya 516)
Chapter XI
54.
Title and Summary of the
Chapter and Link of the
Discourse .............................. 520-521
55.
Arjuna requests the Lord to
reveal his Cosmic Body .....521Гі524
56.
The Lord describes His
Cosmic Body and confers
the divine eye on Arjuna.....524Гі527
57.
The Cosmic Body of the
Lord described by SaВӨjaya 527Гі531

=== PAGE 30 ===

58.
Arjuna beholds the Cosmic
Body and offers his praises
to It.......................................531Гі541
59.
The Lord describes His
glory and encourages Arjuna
to fight ..................................541Гі544
60.
Arjuna extols the Lord and
requests Him to show His
four-armed form ...................545Гі553
61.
The 
Lord 
glorifies 
His
Cosmic Body and reveals
His four-armed form and
human form successively ...553Гі556
62.
The Lord extols His four-
armed form and speaks of
exclusive 
devotion 
to
Himself .................................557Гі560
Chapter XII
63.
Title and summary of the
Chapter and Link of the
Discourse .............................. 561-562
64.
In response to ArjunaГӯs
query the Lord pronounces
His verdict on the relative
importance 
of 
the
worshippers of God with
form and of those who adore
God  without form, and
discusses 
the 
various
practices leading to God-
realization.............................562Гі575
65.
The marks of devotees who
have realized God...............575Гі585
66.
A reference to advanced
devotees of God who are
yet on the way to God-
realization............................... 585-586
Chapter XIII
67.
Title and Summary of the
Chapter and Link of the
Discourse .............................. 587-588
68.
KВ¶etra and KВ¶etrajВӨa as
well as Knowledge and the
Object 
of 
Knowledge
discussed ............................588Гі604
69.
PrakГҰti and PuruВ¶a discussed
along with Knowledge .........604Гі620
(The Four Equipments and
Sixfold Riches 611-612)
Chapter XIV
70.
Title and Summary of the
Chapter and Link of the
Discourse .............................. 621-622
71.
Glory of Knowledge and the
emanation of creation from
the union of PrakГҰti and
PuruВ¶a (Matter and Spirit) 622Гі624
72.
The Three GuЖ’as or modes
of PrakГҰti, viz., Sattva, Rajas
and Tamas, presented in
diverse ways .......................625Гі635
(Ten factors conducive to
the growth of the GuЖ’as
628-629)
73.
Means of rising above the
three GuЖ’as; marks of a
man who has transcended
the three GuЖ’as; and the
greatness of God ................635Гі644
Chapter XV
74.
Title and Summary of the
Chapter and Link of the
Discourse .............................. 645-646
75.
The 
Tree 
of 
Creation;
means to God-realization;
and the Supreme Abode of
God ......................................646Гі652
76.
The JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ or embodied
soul ......................................653Гі656
77.
The glory and essential
character of God and the
three 
categoriesГіKВ¶ara,
AkВ¶ara and PuruВ¶ottama ....657Гі663
Chapter XVI
78.
Title and Summary of the
Chapter and Link of the
Discourse .............................. 664-665
79.
Godly 
and 
demoniac
properties 
and 
their
respective fruits ...................675Гі670
* Contents *
29

=== PAGE 31 ===

80.
Marks of men possessing a
demoniac disposition and
their downward course in the
scale of spiritual evolution 671Гі679
81.
Commandment to avoid the
gates of hell in the shape
of lust, anger and greed;
and admonition to perform
duties sanctioned by the
вҖәГҘstras ................................679Гі681
Chapter XVII
82.
Title and Summary of the
Chapter and Link of the
Discourse .............................. 682-683
83.
Three kinds of Faith; men
who 
practise 
austere
penance, discountenanced
by the scriptures .................683Гі687
84.
Classification 
of 
food,
sacrifices, austerity and
charity according to the
predominance of the three
GuЖ’as ..................................687Гі701
85.
The use of the sacred
appellations OM, TAT and
SAT explained .....................701Гі705
Chapter XVIII
86.
Title and Summary of the
Chapter and Link of the
Discourse .............................. 706-707
87.
The 
nature 
of 
TyГҘga
determined by the Lord in
response to ArjunaГӯs query 707Гі718
88.
Factors 
contributory 
to
actions according to the
SГҘвҲҶkhya point of view ........718Гі722
89.
Classification 
of 
JВӨГҘna,
Karma, KartГҘ, Buddhi, DhГҰti
and Sukha according to the
predominance of the three
GuЖ’as ..................................723Гі741
(Glory of Dharma; nature
of 
Truth, 
Compassion,
Tranquility 
and
Non-violence 742-743)
90.
Duties of the four orders of
society and their reward .....741Гі757
(Story of ViвҖ№vГҘmitra and
VasiВ¶Вўha 753-754; story of
BhвҲӮВ¶ma 755Гі759; and story
of TulГҘdhГҘra VaiвҖ№ya 760;
need and utility of the
institutions of VarЖ’a and
Г…вҖ№rama discussed
761Гі764)
91.
Path of Knowledge ..............757Гі762
92.
Karmayoga accompanied
with Bhakti; glory of Self-
surrender 
and 
the
LordГӯs call to Arjuna for
surrender .............................762Гі775
(Greatness of Arjuna and 
the LordГӯs love for him 
785Гі787)
93.
Glory of the GвҲӮtГҘ .................775Гі784
U
30
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *

=== PAGE 32 ===

Лҷ
вҖәrвҲӮmadbhagavad-GвҲӮtГҘ
Chapter I
The present chapter is the Introduction to the great teachings delivered to the entire
world by God Himself in the form of the GвҲӮtВөa, making Arjuna the immediate cause for
its delivery. After a recital of the principal warriors on both sides, it mainly
describes ArjunaГӯs dejection, caused by faint-heartedness, from the fear of loss
of friends and relatives in the course of the impending clash of arms. And
such a feeling of dejection helps oneГӯs spiritual advancement by inducing
aversion to worldly enjoyments if one comes in touch with an advanced Soul. That is
why the chapter has been given the title of Г«Г«The Yoga of Dejection of ArjunaГӯГӯ.
In the first verse of this chapter DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra enquires of SaВӨjaya about the details of
the war. Thereupon SaВӨjaya describes in the second verse how, approaching DroЖ’ВөacВөarya,
Duryodhana starts his conversation. In the third verse Duryodhana invites
DroЖ’ВөacВөarya to observe the mighty army of the PВөaЖ’Е’avas and devotes verses
4 to 6 to a recital of the names of the prominent warriors on the PВөaЖ’Е’ava
side. In the seventh, asking DroЖ’ВөacВөarya to know pointedly the main warriors and generals
of his own army, he gives in verses 8 and 9 the names of some of them and describes
their heroism and skill in warfare. In the tenth verse declaring his own army as
unconquerable, and that of the PВөaЖ’Е’avas as comparatively weaker, in the eleventh he
requests all his warriors to guard BhвҲӮВ¶ma on all sides. The twelfth verse speaks of BhвҲӮВ¶ma
blowing his conch and the thirteenth describes the noise produced by the sudden blaring
forth of conches, kettledrums, drums and trumpets, etc., in the Kaurava army. Fourteenth
to eighteenth verses speak of BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, Arjuna, BhвҲӮma, YudhiВ¶Вўhira, Nakula,
Sahadeva and all other distinguished warriors of the PВөaЖ’Е’ava army blowing their respective
conches and verse 19 tells us of the terrible sound echoing through heaven and earth and
rending the heart of Duryodhana and his followers. Seeing the sons of DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra arrayed
for battle Arjuna requests вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, in verses 20 and 21, to place the chariot between
the two armies, and in verses 22 and 23 he says that the chariot should be kept there
till he has carefully observed and scanned the warriors assembled for the war. Verses 24
and 25 describe how placing the chariot between the two armies, as desired by Arjuna,
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a invites the latter to behold the warriors assembled for the war. Then, upto verse
30 there is a description, first by SaВӨjaya and then by Arjuna himself, of the latterГӯs
perplexity and grief at the sight of his relations in battle-array. In verse 31 Arjuna points
out the evil consequences of war and verses 32 and 33 are devoted to his reasons for
not coveting either victory or the pleasures attending sovereignty. In verses 34 and 35
Arjuna mentions his close relationship with the warriors, viz., they being his teachers, uncles,
etc., and declares that he did not want to kill them, though he might be killed by them,
or even for the sovereignty of the three worlds. Saying so, he proceeds in verses 36 and
Title of the
Chapter
Summary of
the Chapter

=== PAGE 33 ===

32
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
37 to say that even though Duryodhana and his brothers were desperadoes, their killing
would result only in sin and happiness could never be expected from it. In verses 38
and 39 he points out why the PВөaЖ’Е’avas should desist from the sin of destruction of their
own race and enmity towards friends, and devotes verses 40 to 44 to a detailed enumeration
of the evils resulting from the destruction of a family and its traditions. In verses 45 and
46 Arjuna says that the preparation for war with a view to killing his own relations due
to lust for throne and enjoyment was nothing but preparation for the commission of a
great sin, and expressing regret for it, he declared that it was better that the sons of
DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra should kill him. The chapter is concluded with verse 47, wherein SaВӨjaya
describes how having determined not to fight, and agitated by grief, Arjuna laid down
his arms, and sank into his chariot.
The pomp and wealth of the PВөaЖ’Е’avas displayed during the performance of the
RВөajasВөuya sacrifice aroused deep jealousy in the mind of Duryodhana, who in collusion
with вҖәakuni, etc., invited YudhiВ¶Вўhira to a game of dice, in which YudhiВ¶Вўhira
was fraudulently defeated and deprived of all his wealth and possessions.
Finally, it was settled that YudhiВ¶Вўhira and the other PВөaЖ’Е’avas, together with
DraupadвҲӮ, should repair to the forest and live there in exile for twelve years;
after this for one year they were to remain incognito, untraced by the Kauravas. All these
thirteen years the kingdom was to be ruled by Duryodhana, and if the PВөaЖ’Е’avas remained
undetected during the stipulated period of one yearГӯs incognito existence, the kingdom
was to be returned to them after the conclusion of thirteen years. Having successfully
concluded their exile of thirteen years according to these terms when the PВөaЖ’Е’avas at
last asked for the return of their kingdom, Duryodhana gave a flat refusal. The learned
and aged family priest of Drupada was sent to DuryodhanaГӯs court to negotiate in favour
of the PВөaЖ’Е’avas, but Duryodhana remained adamant. Thereafter both the sides began
to prepare themselves for war. Duryodhana went to DvВөarakВөa to invite BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
to join him as an ally. Arjuna also reached there the very same day. They both found
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a resting on a couch in His palace. Observing that вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a was asleep,
Duryodhana went in and occupied a nice and comfortable seat placed at the head of
the couch, while Arjuna remained standing near the feet of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, joining both his
palms in a posture of humility. The moment вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a opened His eyes He saw Arjuna
standing before Him, and then, when He turned His head, He could observe Duryodhana
seated on the chair at the head of the couch. BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a welcomed both of
them, and asked for the reasons of their visit. In reply Duryodhana said, Г«Г«Your love and
affection for me as well as Arjuna are quite balanced, and both of us are your relations;
but I was the first to approach you. The code of honour among honourable men demands
that help should be rendered to the first seeker of help. You are the greatest and most
honourable person in the world today; therefore, you should render help to me alone.ГӯГӯ
The Lord said, Г«Г«I agree that you were the first to come here; but My eyes fell on Arjuna
first. Therefore, I shall help both of you. According to the law of the scripture, the privilege
of first choice should be given to the younger in age, therefore ArjunaГӯs desire should
be satisfied first. My help will be available in this war in two ways. One side will have
Link of the
Story

=== PAGE 34 ===

* Chapter I *
33
My most powerful NВөarВөayaЖ’вҲӮ-SenВөa, and on the other, I shall remain Myself, single-handed,
bound by the vow of not participating in battle, and not taking up arms. Now, Arjuna,
as righteousness dictates, I give you the first chance to express your desire; please take
from out of those two whatever you preferГӯГӯ. Arjuna thereupon chose BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a,
the slayer of foes, and a manifestation of NВөarВөayaЖ’a Himself, as his helper. Duryodhana,
for his part, took the powerful NВөarВөayaЖ’вҲӮ-SenВөa as his share, and returned to HastinВөapura
very much delighted at heart.
Then, BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a asked Arjuna why, when He (вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a) would not
participate in battle as a warrior, Arjuna gave up preference for the NВөarВөayaЖ’вҲӮ-SenВөa and
took Him (вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a) on his side Arjuna replied, Г«Г«Lord ! You are capable of destroying
all those forces single-handed; why should I, in that case, care for the army ? Besides,
I have for a long time cherished the desire in my heart that you should act as my Charioteer.
Kindly fulfil that desire of mine during this great warГӯГӯ. The Lord, who is ever the most
devoted lover of His devotees, accepted with pleasure this role of driving the horses of
ArjunaГӯs chariot, as desired by Arjuna. That is how BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a became the
charioteer of Arjuna, and at the commencement of the battle of KurukВ¶etra delivered to
Arjuna the divine teachings as incorporated in the GвҲӮtВөa.
On the return of Duryodhana and Arjuna from DvВөarakВөa, when the armies on both
sides had assembled, BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a Himself went to HastinВөapura as the emissarry
of the PВөaЖ’Е’avas, and tried to prevail upon Duryodhana to prevent the war; but Duryodhana
declared in clear and explicit terms : Г«Г«So long as I am alive, the PВөaЖ’Е’avas can never
expect to have the kingdom. I am not prepared to give them even as much land as can
be covered by the point of a needle.ГӯГӯ (MahВөabhВөarata, Udyoga-Parva, Chap. 127, verses
22 to 25). It is only then that according to the advice of their mother, KuntвҲӮ, and under
the inspiration of BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, the PВөaЖ’Е’avas finally decided to resort to war,
considering their cause to be righteous, and establish by force of arms their rightful claim
to the kingdom.
When both the sides had thoroughly prepared to start the battle, the sage VedavyВөasa
approached DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra and said, Г«Г«If you want to see this terrible carnage with your
own eyes, I can make you a gift of transcendent vision.ГӯГӯ But DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra replied: Г«Г«O
chief of BrahmarВ¶is, I have no desire to see with my own eyes this slaughter of my own
family, but I should like to hear all the details of the battleГӯГӯ. Thereupon the great sage
VedavyВөasa conferred the gift of divine vision on SaВӨjaya (DhГҰtarВөaВ¶ВўraГӯs trusty counsellor)
and said to DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra, Г¬SaВӨjaya will describe to you all the incidents of the warГ®.
Whatever happens in the course of this war, he will directly see, hear and otherwise come
to know. Whether an incident takes place before his eyes or behind his back, during the
daytime or at night, privately or in public, and whether it is reduced to actual action
or appears only as a thought, it will not remain hidden from his view. He will come
to know everything exactly as it happens. No weapon will touch his body, nor will he
feel the least exhaustion.
Г«Г«What is taking place is inevitable; there is no power on earth capable of arresting
the course of this catastrophe. It will end in the triumph of righteousness and virtue.ГӯГӯ

=== PAGE 35 ===

34
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
On MaharВ¶i VedavyВөasaГӯs departure from the royal court, SaВӨjaya in answer to
DhГҰtarВөaВ¶ВўraГӯs query described to him the location of the different DvвҲӮpas (divisions) of
the terrestrial world in the course of which he gave a geographical description of
BhВөaratavarВ¶a (India) as well. In the meanwhile, the struggle between the Kauravas and
PВөaЖ’Е’avas started and continued for ten days, when the great BhвҲӮВ¶ma was thrown down
from his chariot and lay on his bed of arrows. At this point SaВӨjaya, again, goes to
DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra and suddenly announces to him the fall of BhвҲӮВ¶ma in battle (BhвҲӮВ¶ma-Parva,
Chap. 13). Terribly moved at the sad news, DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra requested SaВӨjaya to describe
to him all the incidents of the conflict. Thereupon SaВӨjaya gave a detailed description
of the formation of the two rival armies. Then, DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra again asked SaВӨjaya to recite
to him in greater detail all the incidents that had taken place from the beginning of the
battle till then. Here commences the first chapter of the GвҲӮtВөa. It constitutes the twenty-
fifth chapter of BhвҲӮВ¶ma-Parva of the MahВөabhВөarata. It starts with DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra questioning
SaВӨjaya in the following terms:
ГӨГҠГҺГғвҒ„UГҠcвүҲЛӣU В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
Е“в—ҠВёЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠпЈҝ 
вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠпЈҝ 
вҖҡв—Ҡп¬ӮпЈҝГғГҠ 
ГҝГҲГҝГҲГ вҖҡп¬ӮвҖ”вҖ“
в—ҠГҠв—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвҖ” В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬ӮГҠpГ’п¬Ӯ ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠвҲ‘ГҲВ§п¬ӮВёГғ вҖҡTГҝH 1H
Е“ГҺГғвҒ„UГҠcвүҲЛӣUвҖ” DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra, the blind king of HastinВөapura; В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё said; Е“в—ҠВёЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠпЈҝ вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠпЈҝ on the
sacred soil of KurukВ¶etra; вҖҡв—Ҡп¬ӮпЈҝГғГҠвҖ” gathered; ГҝГҲГҝГҲГ вҖҡп¬ӮвҖ” eager to fight; в—ҠГҠв—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвҖ” my own sons;
В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬ӮГҠвҖ” the sons of PВөaЖ’Е’u; Гё and; вҲһп¬Ӯ indeed; ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛң what; вҖўвҲ‘ГҲВ§п¬ӮВёГғ did; вҖҡTГҝ O SaВӨjaya.
DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra said: SaВӨjaya, gathered on the holy land of KurukВ¶etra, eager to
fight, what did my sons and the sons of PВөaЖ’Е’u do?
(1)
austerities at this very place. Those who die
here go to the higher regions after death. For
these and similar other reasons Г«KurukВ¶etraГӯ
is called a Dharma-KВ¶etra or PuЖ’ya-KВ¶etra,
Г«holy tractГӯ.
By the word Г«MВөamakВөaВЁ, (my sons)
DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra refers to his hundred sons and all
the warriors on his side. And by the word
Г«PВөaЖ’Е’avВөaВЁГӯ (the sons of PВөaЖ’Е’u), he means the
five PВөaЖ’Е’ava brothers, YudhiВ¶Вўhira and others,
and all the warriors on their side. The
questioning in the verse shows DhГҰtarВөaВ¶ВўraГӯs
desire to know in detail the account of the
terrible fight which had raged for ten days
prior to this,Гіhow the assembled fighters started
the battle, who was matched with whom in
the fighting array, and who was killed by
whom, on what date and by what means, etc.
Chapter 83 of Vanaparva, and Chapter
53 of вҖәalyaparva, of the MahВөabhВөarata, contain
detailed disquisitions on the sacredness of
KurukВ¶etra. It has been described as bounded
by the river SarasvatвҲӮ in the north, and the
river DГҰВ¶advatвҲӮ in the south. It is said that
the length and breadth of the area were five
Yojanas each, corresponding to forty miles
on each side. The present geographical position
of the place is south of Ambala in Haryana
and north of Delhi. A small town, named
KurukВ¶etra, is even now situated at the place.
There is another name, SamantapaВӨcaka,
by which the locality is designated. The
вҖәatapatha-BrВөahmaЖ’a and other sacred books
mention it as the place where celestials like
Agni, Indra and BrahmВөa performed their
austerities. King Kuru also performed severe

=== PAGE 36 ===

* Chapter I *
35
In answer to DhГҰtarВөaВ¶ВўraГӯs query, SaВӨjaya says:
вҖҡTГҝ В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
Е’ГҺВ¶Г”ГҠ ГғГҲ В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬ӮГҠЕёГӢвҲ‘ВўВ§ вҲҡГҝГҚвҖҰВўU Е’ГҲГҝГҠпЈҝВёЕ“ЕёSГғЕ’ГҠвҖ“
вҖўГҠГёГҠГҝВёв—ҠГҲВ¬вҖҡXГ”UГӘГҝ 
вҒ„UГҠВЎГҠ 
п¬ӮГёЕёв—ҠвҖҷЛқп¬ӮГӢГғЛңH 2H
вҖҡTГҝвҖ” SaВӨjaya; В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё said: Е’ГҺВ¶Г”UГҠ seeing; ГғГҲ and; В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬ӮГҠЕёГӢвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛң the army of the PВөaЖ’Е’avas;
вҲҡГҝГҚвҖҰUв—ҠЛң drawn up for battle; Е’ГҲГҝГҠпЈҝВёЕ“ЕёвҖ” Duryodhana; ГғЕ’ГҠ at that time; вҖўГҠГёГҠГҝВёв—ҠЛң the preceptor
(DroЖ’a); В©UВ¬вҖҡXГ”UГӘГҝ approaching; вҒ„UГҠВЎГҠ king; п¬ӮГёЕёв—ҠЛң (these) words; вҖўвҖҷЛқп¬ӮГӢГғЛң spoke.
SaВӨjaya said: At that time, seeing the army of the PВөaЖ’Е’avas drawn up for battle
and approaching DroЖ’ВөacВөarya, King Duryodhana spoke these words:         (2)
latter their right to their kingdom, or whether
the righteous King YudhiВ¶Вўhira himself, being
influenced by the holiness of the tract, had
walked out of the war, or whether both the
armies had, till then, remained arrayed in
battle in their respective positions, and no
fight had yet taken place, or, if there had
been a fight, what was its result, etc.
DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra having already heard the news
of the great BhвҲӮВ¶maГӯs fall in battle, the
questioning cannot mean that he had remained
wholly ignorant of the battle, and therefore
wanted to know whether the sanctity of the
Г«holy landГӯ of KurukВ¶etra had reformed the
mind of his sons, inducing them to make
peace with the PВөaЖ’Е’avas by conceding to the
Though the grand old man BhвҲӮВ¶ma was
the Chief Commander of the Kaurava army,
the position which Guru DroЖ’ВөacВөarya, held
in that army was also very high and responsible.
In an army the position allotted to a commander
must be maintained by him; he cannot quit
his position without throwing the army into
disorder. Therefore, though exercising the
authority of the King, Duryodhana considered
it better to go to DroЖ’ВөacВөarya himself, rather
than summon the Г…cВөarya to him and thus
make him move from his allotted place in
the army. Over and above this, DroЖ’ВөacВөarya
was old in age and advanced in knowledge,
and being the Teacher of the Kurus was
worthy of respect and honour. Again,
Duryodhana had to use the Г…cВөarya as an
instrument for serving his own selfish end;
for this as well it was desirable to secure to
goodwill of the Г…cВөarya by proper exhibition
of honour. From the spiritual point of view,
it is oneГӯs duty to show humility and respect
SaВӨjaya refers to Duryodhana as Г«RВөajВөaГӯ,
or King. The following may be the reasons
for it:
(a) Duryodhana was an eminent hero
and a great statesman and was actually
running the whole Government.
(b) It is the nature of saints to show
respect to all, and SaВӨjaya was a man of
saintly character.
(c) An epithet of respect applied to the
son would bring pleasure to DhГҰtarВөaВ¶ВўraГӯs
heart.
The PВөaЖ’Е’ava army had been arrayed in
such a spectacular manner that its very sight
startled Duryodhana, and in an anxious mood
he hastened himself to inform DroЖ’ВөacВөarya
about it. His idea was that after an examination
of the formation of the PВөaЖ’Е’ava army, the
great Teacher of Military Science, DroЖ’a, would
advise BhвҲӮВ¶ma, the Chief Commander, to form
a battle-array which would be better and more
impregnable than that of the PВөaЖ’Е’ava army.

=== PAGE 37 ===

36
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
by oneГӯs conduct towards every other being;
nay, in politics as well, a shrewd and clever
man in order to get his purpose served shows
respect to others. From all these points of
view, it was but meet and proper for
Duryodhana to go to DroЖ’ВөacВөarya himself.
Approaching DroЖ’ВөacВөarya, what Duryodhana said is stated below:
В¬вҖЎГҝГ’ГғГҠВў В¬ГҠГЎВ«ГҲUВ¬ГҲГІГҠГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠГҠГёГҠГҝВё в—ҠвҖһUГғГӢВҘ Гёв—ҠГҚв—ҠГ”ЛңвҖ“
вҲҡГҝГҚвҖҰUГҠВў ВәЛқГҲВ¬Е’В¬ГҲГІГҠпЈҝГЎГҠ Гғп¬Ӯ ГҒвҖЎГҠcГҝпЈҝГЎГҠ Е“ГӢв—ҠГғГҠH 3H
В¬вҖЎГҝ behold; вҲһГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” yonder; В¬ГҠГЎВ«ГҲUВ¬ГҲГІГҠГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of the sons of PВөaЖ’Е’u; вҖўГҠГёГҠГҝВё master; в—ҠвҖһUГғГӢв—ҠЛңГ” mighty;
Гёв—ҠГҚв—ҠЛң army; вҲҡГҝГҚвҖҰUГҠв—ҠЛңГ” arrayed for battle; ВәЛқГҲВ¬Е’В¬ГҲГІГҠпЈҝГЎГҠ DhГҰВ¶Вўadyumna (son of Drupada); Гғп¬Ӯ ГҒвҖЎГҠcГҝпЈҝГЎГҠ
Е“ГӢв—ҠГғГҠ by your talented pupil.
Behold, O Revered Master, the mighty army of the sons of PВөaЖ’Е’u arrayed for
battle by your talented pupil, DhГҰВ¶Вўadyumna, son of Drupada.                       (3)
a person whom the PВөaЖ’Е’avas had made their
Supreme Commander. It was now for the
Г…cВөarya to consider what should be his line of
action.
The Kaurava army consisted of eleven
AkВ¶auhiЖ’вҲӮs,* and the PВөaЖ’Е’ava army only of
seven. Though numerically smaller, the
PВөaЖ’Е’ava army appeared very huge because
of its adoption of the military array known as
Г«VajravyВөuhaГӯ. Besides, a smaller army might
be more powerful than a larger one if its
deployment was better and more efficient
than that of the larger army. That is why
calling the army of the PВөaЖ’Е’avas Г«a mighty
armyГӯ, Duryodhana attempted to draw the
Г…cВөaryaГӯs attention to it, and appealed to him
to devise some means of getting the better of
it.
As a diplomat, Duryodhana was
exceptionally clever. In order to excite
DroЖ’ВөacВөarya by rousing his revengeful spirit
against DhГҰВ¶Вўadyumna and ire against the
PВөaЖ’Е’avas, he referred to DhГҰВ¶Вўadyumna as
DrupadaГӯs son and 'your talented pupil'. By
these words he reminded DroЖ’a of DrupadaГӯs
unseemly behaviour towards him in the long
past, and then of his getting DhГҰВ¶Вўadyumna
as his son by the performance of a sacrifice
with the unholy motive of killing DroЖ’a. By
implication, he also said that DhГҰВ¶Вўadyumna
was so clever and the Г…cВөarya so simple that
though born to kill him, he had obtained
from him teaching in the science and art of
archery. And, then, how skilful and dexterous
he was to array his army in such an impregnable
way as to baffle his opponents ! It was such
Having thus pointed to the array of the PВөaЖ’Е’ava army, Duryodhana now proceeds
to mention in three verses the names of the principal warriors on the PВөaЖ’Е’ava side:
вҖўГІГҠ вҖЎГҠГҚвҒ„UГҠ в—ҠвҖһпЈҝUcп¬ӮГҠвҖҡГҠ Г·ГӢв—ҠГҠВЎГҲВёЕёвҖҡв—ҠГҠ ГҝГҲГҒЕ“вҖ“
ГҝГҲГҝГҲЕ“ГҠЕёГҠпЈҝ 
ГҒп¬ӮвҒ„UГҠвүҲp 
ВәЛқГҲВ¬Е’p 
в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„UГ•вҖ”H 4H
Е“ГҺCГ”UвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ГғГҲpпЈҝГҒвҲ‘В§ГғГҠЕёвҖ” вҲ‘В§ГҠГҒвҖЎГҠвҒ„UГҠВЎp п¬ӮГӢГҝВёп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңвҖ“
В¬ГҲLВ§ГҒВЎГ вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГҒГЈГғГ·ГҠпЈҝВЎp 
вҖЎГҠГ’Г©Гҝp 
ЕёвҒ„UВ¬ГҲXГ”Uп¬ӮвҖ”H 5H
ГҝГҲЕ“ГҠв—ҠГЈГҝГҲp ГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠГЈГғ В©UГ»ГҠв—ҠГҠГ’ВЎГҠp п¬ӮГӢГҝВёп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңвҖ“
вҖҡГҠГ’Г·ВәЛқГҠпЈҝ ВәЛқГҠГ’В¬Е’пЈҝГҝГҠp вҖҡп¬ӮВё вҲһп¬Ӯ в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„UГ•ГҠвҖ”H 6H
* A mixed unit of army composed of 21,370 chariots, as many elephants, 65,610 horses and 1,09,350 foot.

=== PAGE 38 ===

* Chapter I *
37
вҖўГІГҠ (There are) in this army; вҖЎГҠГҚвҒ„UГҠвҖ”Г” heroes (such as); в—ҠвҖһпЈҝUcп¬ӮГҠвҖҡГҠвҖ” wielding mighty bows;
Г·ГӢв—ҠГҠВЎВёГҲЕёвҖҡв—ҠГҠвҖ”Г” equal to BhвҲӮma and Arjuna; ГҝГҲГҒЕ“ in military prowess; ГҝГҲГҝГҲЕ“ГҠЕёвҖ”Г” a name of SВөatyaki;
ГҒп¬ӮвҒ„UГҠвүҲUвҖ” VirВөaВўa; Гё and; ВәЛқГҲВ¬Е’вҖ” Drupada; Гё and; в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„UГ•вҖ” the warrior chief; Е“ГҺCвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ГғГҲвҖ”Г” DhГҰВ¶Вўaketu;
ГёпЈҝГҒвҲ‘В§ГғГҠЕёвҖ”Г” CekitВөana; вҲ‘В§ГҠГҒвҖЎГҠвҒ„UГҠВЎвҖ” the King of KВөaвҖ№вҲӮ (the modern VВөarВөaЖ’asвҲӮ); Гё and; п¬ӮГӢГҝВёп¬ӮГҠЕёЛң valiant;
В¬ГҲLВ§ГҒВЎГғЛң Purujit (lit., the conqueror of many); вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГҒГЈГғГ·ГҠпЈҝВЎвҖ”Г” Kuntibhoja; ГёГ” and; вҖЎГҠГ’Г©ГҝвҖ” вҖәaibya;
Гё and; ЕёвҒ„UВ¬ГҲXГ”Uп¬ӮвҖ”Г” the best of men; ГҝГҲЕ“ГҠв—ҠГЈГҝГҲвҖ” YudhВөamanyu; Гё and; ГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠГЈГғвҖ” mighty; В©UГ»ГҠв—ҠГҠГ’ВЎГҠвҖ”
UttamaujВөa; (lit., one who possesses supreme strength); ГёГ” and; п¬ӮГӢГҝВёп¬ӮГҠЕёЛң valiant; вҖҡГҠГ’Г·ВәЛқвҖ”Г” the
son of SubhadrВөa, Abhimanyu; ВәЛқГҠГ’В¬Е’пЈҝГҝГҠвҖ” the (five) sons of DraupadвҲӮ; Гё and; вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё all (of them);
вҲһп¬Ӯ indeed; в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„UГ•ГҠвҖ” warrior chiefs.
There are in this army heroes wielding mighty bows and equal in military
prowess to BhвҲӮma and ArjunaГіSВөatyaki and VirВөaВўa and the MahВөarathвҲӮ (warrior chief)
Drupada; DhГҰВ¶Вўaketu, CekitВөana and the valiant King of KВөaвҖ№вҲӮ, and Purujit, Kuntibhoja,
and вҖәaibya, the best of men, and mighty YudhВөamanyu, and valiant UttamaujВөa,
Abhimanyu, the son of SubhadrВөa, and the five sons of DraupadвҲӮ,Гіall of them
MahВөarathвҲӮs (warrior chiefs).
(4,5,6)
the internecine feud that followed among the
YВөadavas. There was another YВөadava warrior
bearing the name of YuyudhВөana, who is
mentioned in MahВөabhВөarata Udyoga-Parva,
Chapter 152, verse 6.
VirВөaВўa was the name of the virtuous
king of the Matsyas. The PВөaЖ’Е’avas spent
their one yearГӯs incognito existence under
him. His daughter, UttarВөa, was given in
marriage to ArjunaГӯs son, Abhimanyu.
VirВөaВўa and his three sons, Uttara, вҖәveta
and вҖәaвҲҶkha, were killed in the MahВөabhВөarata
war.
Drupada was the son of King PГҰВ¶at of
the PВөaВӨcВөalas. King PГҰВ¶at and Sage BharadvВөaja
were great friends; therefore, Drupada passed
a certain period of his early days in the
hermitage of Sage BharadvВөaja, where an
intimacy was formed between him and DroЖ’a,
the son of Sage BharadvВөaja. On the demise
of PГҰВ¶at, when Drupada had become king
of the PВөaВӨcВөalas, DroЖ’a went to see him on
a certain occasion, and addressed him as a
friend. But this was resented by Drupada,
and DroЖ’a came away wounded at heart.
Imparting the knowledge of archery both to
the Kauravas and the PВөaЖ’Е’avas, DroЖ’a realized
The term Г«YudhiГӯ in verse 4 cannot be
interpreted as the substantive of Г«AtraГӯ, as
some are prone to take it; for the battle had
not actually commenced till then. Besides,
the PВөaЖ’Е’ava army having been referred to
in the immediately preceding verse, the
term Г«AtraГӯ naturally refers to it, and no
substantive is thus required to go with it.
By connecting the word Г«YudhiГӯ with
Г«BhвҲӮmВөarjunasamВөaВЁГӯ, it has been indicated that
the famous warriors whose names follow
equalled BhвҲӮma and Arjuna in prowess and
proficiency in the art of warfare.
The history and career of the warriors
whose names appear in these verses are
given below:
YuyudhВөana was the other name of
SВөatyaki, who was ArjunaГӯs disciple (vide
MahВөabhВөarata, Udyoga-Parva, Chapter 81,
verses 5-8). He was the grandson of вҖәini,
a YВөadava Chief (MahВөabhВөarata, DroЖ’a-Parva,
Chapter 144, verses 17-19). He was very
much attached to BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and
was a powerful warrior and an Г«AtirathвҲӮГӯ,
who could fight any number of warriors
single-handed. 
Having 
survived 
the
MahВөabhВөarata War, he met with his death in

=== PAGE 39 ===

38
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
the preceptorГӯs fee by having Drupada
vanquished in battle by Arjuna in requital of
the insult he had suffered at DrupadaГӯs
hands, and appropriated half of the latterГӯs
kingdom. Vanquished in battle, Drupada re-
established his friendship with DroЖ’a only
as a matter of show, nursing a grievance
against him in the core of his heart. With
the help of a couple of BrahmarВ¶is, named
YВөaja and UpayВөaja, he performed a sacrifice
with the motive of obtaining a son who
would kill DroЖ’a. From the altar of that
sacrifice sprang up both DhГҰВ¶Вўadyumna and
KГҰВ¶Ж’Вөa. It was this KГҰВ¶Ж’Вөa who later on
became known in history by the names of
DraupadвҲӮ and YВөajВӨasenвҲӮ, and whom the
PВөaЖ’Е’avas married after winning her hand in
an open trial of skill in archery. King
Drupada was a great KВ¶atriya hero and was
counted as a MahВөarathвҲӮ. In the MahВөabhВөarata
War he was killed by DroЖ’a in an open fight
(MahВөa., DroЖ’a., Ch. 136).
DhГҰВ¶Вўaketu was the son of вҖәiвҖ№upВөala,
King of Cedi. He met his death at the hands
of DroЖ’a in the MahВөabhВөarata War (MahВөa.,
DroЖ’a., 125).
CekitВөana was a YВөadava hero belonging
to the clan of VГҰВ¶Ж’is (MahВөa., BhвҲӮВ¶ma.,
84.20), a MahВөarathвҲӮ as a fighter and possessed
of great prowess. He was one of the seven
commanders of the seven AkВ¶auhвҲӮЖ’вҲӮs of the
PВөaЖ’Е’ava army (MahВөa., Udyoga., 151). He
met his death at the hands of Duryodhana
in the MahВөabhВөarata War (MahВөa., вҖәalya., 12).
The King of KВөaвҖ№вҲӮ was also a great hero
and a MahВөarathвҲӮ. His name cannot be clearly
made out. In the Udyoga-Parva, Chapter
171, his names are given as SenВөavindu and
KrodhahantВөa. But in the KarЖ’a-Parva, Chapter
6, where his death is related, his name has
been mentioned as AbhibhВөu. Purujit and
Kuntibhoja were both brothers of KuntвҲӮ, and
maternal uncles of YudhiВ¶Вўhira and his brothers.
Both of them met their end at the hands of
DroЖ’ВөacВөarya in the MahВөabhВөarata War (MahВөa.,
KarЖ’a., 6.22,28).
вҖәaibya was the father-in-law of the
righteous King YudhiВ¶Вўhira. His daughter
DevikВөa was given in marriage to YudhiВ¶Вўhira
(Г…di-Parva, 95). He was not only a hero and
a powerful fighter, but was also a great man
of character. That is why he has been called
'the best of men'.
YudhВөamanyu and UttamaujВөa were two
brothers, who were princes of the PВөaВӨcВөala
territory (MahВөa., DroЖ’a., 130). In the formation
of the battle array they were posted to guard
the wheels of ArjunaГӯs chariot (MahВөa.,
BhвҲӮВ¶ma., 15-19). They were both great fighters
and heroes possessed of immense strength,
therefore the two attributes Г«mightyГӯ and
Г«valiantГӯ have been added to their names.
They both met their death at the hands of
AвҖ№vatthВөamВөa while asleep at night (MahВөa.,
Sauptika., 8.34,37).
Abhimanyu was ArjunaГӯs son, born of
SubhadrВөa, who was вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’aГӯs sister. He
was married to UttarВөa, the daughter of
VirВөaВўa, King of the Matsyas. Abhimanyu
received his training in archery from his
father, Arjuna, as well as from вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’aГӯs
eldest son, Pradyumna, and was a fighter of
uncommon merit. On a particular day in the
course of the MahВөabhВөarata War DroЖ’ВөacВөarya
had adopted the military formation of
CakravyВөuha, Г«Array of the WheelГӯ, of such
exceptional strength that even the foremost
PВөaЖ’Е’ava warriors like YudhiВ¶Вўhira, BhвҲӮma,
Nakula, Sahadeva, VirВөaВўa, Drupada and
DhГҰВ¶Вўadyumna failed to enter it, being worsted
by Jayadratha, who kept the gate. Arjuna
was engaged in fighting elsewhere. On that
day the young hero Abhimanyu broke into
that military formation of the Kaurava army
single-handed and gave an exhibition of his
exceptional military prowess by killing

=== PAGE 40 ===

* Chapter I *
39
innumerable fighters on the side of the
enemy. But DroЖ’a, KГҰpВөacВөarya, KarЖ’a,
AвҖ№vatthВөamВөa, BГҰhadbala and KГҰtavarmВөГҘГі
these six MahВөarathвҲӮs of the Kaurava army,
in contravention of the rules of war, surrounded
the young hero, Abhimanyu, who even in
that state despatched, single-handed, many a
fighter to his doom. In the end he was struck
on the head with a club by DuВЁвҖ№ВөasanaГӯs son,
and this caused his death (MahВөa., DroЖ’a.,
49.). King ParвҲӮkВ¶it was the son of Abhimanyu.
The names of the five sons of DraupadвҲӮ
were Prativindhya, вҖәrutasoma, вҖәrutakarmВөa,
вҖәatВөanвҲӮka and вҖәrutasena, who were descended
from the loins of YudhiВ¶Вўhira, BhвҲӮmasena,
Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva respectively
(MahВөa., Г…di., 221.80-84). They were killed
by AвҖ№vatthВөamВөa at dead of night (MahВөa.,
Sauptika., 8).
A great hero exceptionally well-versed
in the scriptures and the science of arms, and
capable of commanding ten thousand bowmen
battling together is called a MahВөarathвҲӮ.*
Separate and detailed description of the
prowess of almost all the fighters whose names
have been cited by Duryodhana in these verses
can be found in the MahВөabhВөarata, Udyoga-
Parva, Chapters 169-172. There also they have
been described as either AtirathвҲӮs or MahВөarathвҲӮs.
Over and above them, there were other
MahВөarathвҲӮs in the PВөaЖ’Е’ava army, whose names
appear in the above chapters of the
MahВөabhВөarata. The term Serve in verse 6
should be interpreted to include them all.
After citing the names of the chief fighters in the PВөaЖ’Е’ava army, Duryodhana now
proceeds to tell Г…cВөarya DroЖ’a the names of the principal warriors in his own army.
вҖўSв—ҠГҠвҲ‘Вў ГғГҲ ГҒп¬ӮГҒвүҘГҠCГ”UГҠ ГҝпЈҝ ГғГҠГҒГӣГҠвҖҷГҠпЈҝЕ“ ГҒmВЎГҠпЈҝГ»ГҠв—ҠвҖ“
ЕёГҠГҝвҲ‘В§ГҠ в—Ҡв—Ҡ вҖҡГ’ГЈГҝSГҝ вҖҡГңГҙГҠГҠГ•Z ГғГҠГЈвҖҷЛқп¬ӮГӢГҒв—Ҡ ГғпЈҝH 7H
вҖўSв—ҠГҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛң on our side; ГғГҲ also; ГҒп¬ӮГҒвүҘГҠCГ”UГҠвҖ” (the) principal (warriors); ГҝпЈҝ who (are); ГғГҠЕёЛң them;
ГҒЕёвҖҷГҠпЈҝЕ“ know; ГҒmВЎГҠпЈҝГ»ГҠв—Ҡ O best of BrВөahmaЖ’as, (lit., the twice-bornвҖ“); ЕёГҠГҝвҲ‘В§ГҠвҖ” generals; в—Ҡв—Ҡ вҖҡГ’ГЈГҝSГҝ
of my army; вҖҡГңГҙГҠГҠГ•Вёв—ҠГ”Лң information; ГғГҠЕёЛң them; вҖҷЛқп¬ӮГӢГҒв—Ҡ I mention (below); ГғпЈҝ for you.
O best of BrВөahmaЖ’as, know them also who are the principal warriors on our sideГі
the generals of my army. For your information, I mention them:
(7)
point of heroism, steadiness, strength, intellect,
courage, prowess, energy and knowledge of
arms. The verb Г«NibodhaГӯ brings out that
there was no paucity of such heroes and fighters
of exceptional merit in his own army, and he
was citing the names of only a selected few
among them for the personal knowledge of the
Г…cВөarya.
The term Г«TuГӯ in the text has been used
in the sense of Г«alsoГӯ. Applying it after
Г«AsmВөakamГӯ (on our side), Duryodhana intends
to say that not only in the PВөaЖ’Е’ava army,
but in his own army also, there were many
great heroes and fighters.
The word Г«ViвҖ№iВ¶ВўВөaВЁ, has been used to point
out those who were supreme in his army in
*
вҲһвҲ‘В§ГҠпЈҝ Е’вүҘГҠвҖҡвҖһUdГҠГҒГЎГҠ ГҝГҠпЈҝЕ“ГҝпЈҝlSГғГҲ Е“ГҒГЈп¬ӮЕёГҠв—ҠЛң вҖ“ вүҘГҠSГІГҠвүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠВ¬Лқп¬ӮГӢГЎГҠp в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„Г• ГҹГҒГғ Sв—ҠГҺГғвҖ”H
вҖ“
Investiture with the sacred thread (В©UВ¬ЕёГҝЕё) is counted as a second birth among the high-class
Hindus and hence they are known as the twice-born after they have undergone this sacred rite.
Now, in two verses, Duryodhana proceeds to mention the names of the principal
warriors on his side, and praise them and other heroes of his army.

=== PAGE 41 ===

40
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Г…cВөarya DroЖ’a was MaharВ¶i BharadvВөajaГӯs
son. From MaharВ¶i Agnivesya and вҖәrвҲӮ
ParaвҖ№urВөama he obtained knowledge of all
forms of arms and missiles with their secrets.
A thorough master of Vedas and VedВөaвҲҶgas
(sciences helpful in the study of the Vedas)*
and a great ascetic, he was an exceptionally
bold AtirathвҲӮ, possessed of very deep knowledge
and experience of archery, and the use of
other forms of weapons, and unrivalled skill
in warfare. He was fully aware of the use
of BrahmВөastra, Г…gneyВөastra and other wonderful
weapons of war. Whenever he joined a battle
with all his strength, he was unconquerable.
He was married to KГҰpвҲӮ, the daughter of
MaharВ¶i вҖәaradvВөan, and AвҖ№vatthВөamВөa was the
fruit of this wedlock. He was a friend of
King Drupada in his early days. On one
occasion when approaching King Drupada
he addressed the latter as his dear friend.
Drupada, intoxicated with power, rudely
hurled the reply to his face, Г«Г«A powerful
king like me can never be the friend of a
poor beggar like you.ГӯГӯ This rebuke of King
Drupada went deep into his heart; thereafter
going to HastinВөapura, he began to live under
the shelter of his brother-in-law, KГҰpВөacВөarya.
There he came in touch with BhвҲӮВ¶ma, who
appointed him as the teacher of the Kaurava
and PВөaЖ’Е’ava princes. On the conclusion of
the training of these princes, DroЖ’a asked his
pupils to pay him the preceptorГӯs fee by
bringing Drupada before him as a prisoner
of war. His favourite pupil Arjuna succeeded
in carrying out the behest of his teacher by
vanquishing Drupada in battle, and brought
him as a prisoner with all the ministers of
his Court. Without inflicting any physical
injury on him DroЖ’a released Drupada from
his bondage, but deprived him of his territory
lying north of the river BhВөagвҲӮrathвҲӮ, which he
appropriated for himself. In the MahВөabhВөarata
War, DroЖ’a carried on a fearful fight as the
Commander-in-chief of the Kaurava forces
for five days; but in the end hearing a false
report about the death of his son he renounced
his arms, and sitting in the posture of Yoga
entered into deep meditation on God. When
his life-force left the mortal frame, his bright
soul illumined the entire region of the sky
with a brilliant light. At this stage
DhГҰВ¶Вўadyumna struck him with a sharp sword,
which separated his head from the trunk.
In the foregoing verse, beginning it with
the word Г¬YourselfГ®, Duryodhana first cited
the name of DroЖ’a among the heroes on his
side, so that DroЖ’a might be highly pleased
with him and enter the battle-field with all
the strength and fervour at his command.
Moreover, as his teacher, DroЖ’a was worthy
of the honour by Duryodhana, and it was
reasonable from this point of view also to
count him first among his warriors.
BhвҲӮВ¶ma was the eldest son of King
Г·п¬ӮГҠГЈГ·ГӢcв—Ҡp вҲ‘В§ГЎГҠВёp вҲ‘ГҺВ§В¬p вҖҡГҒв—ҠГҒГғTГҝвҖ”вҖ“
вҖўEГ Г•ГҠв—ҠГҠ ГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГЎГҠВёp вҖҡГҠГ’в—ҠЕ’ГҒГ»ГҠSГғГ•Г’п¬Ӯ ГёH 8H
Г·п¬ӮГҠЕёЛң yourself; Г·ГӢcв—ҠвҖ” BhвҲӮВ¶ma; Гё and; вҲ‘В§ГЎГҠВёвҖ” KarЖ’a; ГёГ” and; вҲ‘ГҺВ§В¬вҖ” KГҰpa; ГёГ” and; вҖҡГҒв—ҠГҒГғTГҝвҖ”
(ever) victorious in battle; вҖўEГ Г•ГҠв—ҠГҠ AвҖ№vatthВөamВөa; ГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГЎГҠВёвҖ” VikarЖ’a; Гё and; вҖҡГҠГ’в—ҠЕ’ГҒГ»ГҠвҖ” the son
of Somadatta, BhВөuriвҖ№ravВөa; ГғГ•ГҠ so; вҲһп¬Ӯ even; Гё and.
Г«Г«Yourself and BhвҲӮВ¶ma, KarЖ’a and KГҰpВөacВөarya, who is ever victorious in battle,
and, even so, AвҖ№vatthВөamВөa, VikarЖ’a and BhВөuriвҖ№ravВөa (the son of Somadatta)Г®.  (8)
* They are: 1. VyГҘkaraЖ’a (Grammar), 2. Chandas (Prosody), 3. JyotiВ¶a (Astronomy), 4. вҖәikВ¶ГҘ
(Phonetics), 5. Kalpa (the science of rituals), and 6. Nirukta (Etymology).

=== PAGE 42 ===

* Chapter I *
41
вҖәГҘntanu. He was born of BhВөagвҲӮrathвҲӮ (the spirit
of the river GaвҲҶgВөa). He was an incarnation of
the ninth Vasu, a celestial named Г«DyuГӯ (MahВөa.,
вҖәГҘnti., 50,26). His original name was,
Devavrata. While in the prime of youth, he
took the vow of life-long celibacy and
renunciation of all claim to the throne in order
to facilitate his fatherГӯs marriage with SatyavatвҲӮ,
in answer to the demand of SatyavatвҲӮГӯs foster-
father. Owing to the terrible nature of this
vow, he became famous on earth as BhвҲӮВ¶ma
(the superior most). For the sake of his fatherГӯs
happiness, he wholly abandoned without the
least hesitation the happiness of possessing a
wife and a kingdom, which are objects of
great temptation to the generality of men in
this world. Extremely delighted at this
uncommon sacrifice of his, BhвҲӮВ¶maГӯs father,
вҖәВөantanu, gave him the boon that even Death
would be powerless to kill him without his
consent. A life-long celibate, the very
embodiment of flaming energy, and a master
of the scriptures and of the science of warfare,
BhвҲӮВ¶ma was a great soul, possessed of infinite
knowledge and heroism of the highest order
and a strength of resolve unsurpassed in its
firmness. All the great virtues like valour,
renunciation, 
endurance, 
forgiveness,
compassion, 
tranquillity, 
self-control,
truthfulness, non-violence, contentment,
equanimity, strength, righteousness, majestic
bearing, humility, large-heartedness, popularity,
straight-forwardness in speech, courage,
continence, indifference to worldly attachments,
knowledge, wisdom, devotion to parents,
knowledge of the scriptures and devotion to
the preceptor, etc., were found fully developed
in him. Above all, his life was fully saturated
with the spirit of devotion to God. He possessed
full knowledge of the divinity of BhagavВөan
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, and was an exclusive lover and
faithful devotee of the Lord. In the MahВөabhВөarata
War, he had no equal in the field of battle. He
made a promise to Duryodhana that though he
would refrain from killing the five PВөaЖ’Е’avas,
he would in course of the fight slaughter with
his own hands ten thousand warriors every
day (MahВөa., Udyoga., 156. 21). Holding the
position of the Chief Commander of the
Kaurava army, he carried on a fearful fight for
ten days. Thereafter, lying on his bed of
arrows he enlightened all by delivering to
them his inexhaustible store of knowledge,
and, when the sun started on its northern
course, gave up the body of his own free will.
KarЖ’a was a son of KuntвҲӮ, the mother of
the PВөaЖ’Е’avas, begotten of the Sun-god when
KuntвҲӮ was a young maiden. Putting him into
a box, KuntвҲӮ had thrown him into the river;
but fortunately this did not cause his death,
and carried by the current of the river the box
finally reached HastinВөapura. There picked up
by Adhiratha, a SВөuta (charioteer) by caste, the
child was taken to his home and was nursed
and brought up by RВөadhВөa, the wife of Adhiratha,
and began to be recognized as their own child.
Born with a natural gold armour and earrings,
he was given the name of Г«VasuВ¶eЖ’aГӯ, KarЖ’a
received his training in arms from DroЖ’ВөacВөarya
and ParaвҖ№urВөama, and became a proficient
and experienced master of the scriptures and
of the science of arms. He was a match for
Arjuna in the knowledge of arms and as a
fighter in the field. Duryodhana crowned him
as King of the AвҲҶgas (territory corresponding
to modern Bhagalpur in Bihar). A bosom friend
of Duryodhana, he devoted himself body and
soul to the constant thought of DuryodhanaГӯs
welfare. His devotion to Duryodhana was so
deep and great that even though approached
by mother KuntвҲӮ and BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
Himself, he refused to give up the cause of
Duryodhana and join the PВөaЖ’Е’avas during the
fight at KurukВ¶etra. His charities were
incomparable. A regular worshipper of the
Sun-god, he used to give away with great

=== PAGE 43 ===

42
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
pleasure whatever was asked of him, by
whosoever it may be, at the time of his worship.
One day, in ArjunaГӯs interest, Indra, the King
of celestials, assumed the form of a BrВөahmaЖ’a
and begged him to make a gift of the natural
armour and ear-rings attached to his body.
With great delight, that very moment, KarЖ’a
tore his armour and ear rings from the body
and gave them away. In exchange for them,
Indra gave him a missile, which was infallible
in its effect when hurled against a fighter, and
with the help of which KarЖ’a killed BhвҲӮmasenaГӯs
son, GhaВўotkaca, during the War. After
DroЖ’ВөacВөaryaГӯs death, assuming the charge of
the Kaurava army for two days as Chief
Commander, he met his death in a fight with
Arjuna.
KГҰpВөacВөarya is the son of MaharВ¶i вҖәaradvВөan
of the family of Sage Gotama. He is an
experienced master of the science of archery.
He had a sister named KГҰpвҲӮ. Having been
brought up by King вҖәВөantanu out of pity
(KГҰpВөa), he got the name of KГҰpa, and his sister
got the name of KГҰpвҲӮ. A proficient scholar of
the Vedas, he is a virtuous soul possessed of
many good qualities and rectitude of conduct.
Before the advent of DroЖ’ВөacВөarya, he used to
impart instruction in the science of archery to
the Kaurava, PВөaЖ’Е’ava and YВөadava warriors.
He remained alive even after the death of all
the Kauravas, and it was he who imparted the
knowledge of arms to King ParвҲӮkВ¶it. He is a
great hero and a great expert in vanquishing
an enemy; therefore, the attribute of
Г«SamitiВӨjayaВЁГӯ, (ever victorious in battle) has
been affixed to his name in the verse. He is
said to be still alive.
AвҖ№vatthВөamВөa is the son of Г…cВөarya DroЖ’a.
A great expert in military science, and a great
fighter and hero, he is counted as a MahВөarathвҲӮ.
He also received his training in arms under
his father, DroЖ’ВөacВөarya. He too is believed
to be alive still.
VikarЖ’a was one of the hundred sons
of DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra. He was an extremely virtuous
soul, a great hero and a MahВөarathвҲӮ. At the
time of her persecution in the Kaurava Court
when DraupadвҲӮ asked the assembled people
whether she had been actually lost to the
PВөaЖ’Е’avas as a stake in the gamble, except
Vidura there appeared none to open his lips
against that persecution. At that critical moment,
it was VikarЖ’a alone who rose in the open
Court and declared in scathing terms, upholding
both justice and righteousness, that it was a
great injustice not to answer DraupadвҲӮГӯs
question. He also said that in his opinion
DraupadвҲӮ had not been won by the Kauravas
as a stake in the game (MahВөabhВөarata, SabhВөa-
Parva. 63.18-25).
BhВөuriвҖ№ravВөa, the son of Somadatta, was
the grandson of King вҖәВөantanuГӯs elder brother,
BВөahlвҲӮka. He too was a virtuous soul, an
expert in the art of warfare, a great hero and
a MahВөarathвҲӮ. He performed many sacrifices
giving away huge riches as sacrificial fees.
He met his death at the hands of SВөatyaki in
the MahВөabhВөarata War.
The two indeclinables Г«TathВөaГӯ and Г«EvaГӯ
used at the end of the verse, show that equally
with KГҰpВөacВөarya, AвҖ№vatthВөamВөa, VikarЖ’a and
BhВөuriвҖ№ravВөa too were Г«ever victorious in battleГӯ.
вҖўГЈГҝпЈҝ Гё вҖҷвҖһUп¬ӮвҖ” вүҘГҠГҚвҒ„UГҠ в—ҠЕ’Г•пЈҝВё Г ГҝQВ§ВЎГӢГҒп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ”вҖ“
ЕёГҠЕёГҠвүҘГҠГ”SГІГҠВ¬ЛқвҖһUвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠвҖ” 
вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё 
ГҝГҲhГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҠвҒ„UЕ’ГҠвҖ”H 9H
вҖўГЈГҝпЈҝ other; Гё and; вҖҷвҖһUп¬ӮвҖ” many; вүҘГҠГҚвҒ„UГҠвҖ” heroes; в—ҠЕ’Г•пЈҝВё for me; Г ГҝQВ§ВЎГӢГҒп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ” who have staked

=== PAGE 44 ===

* Chapter I *
43
The names of вҖәalya, BВөahlвҲӮka, Bhagadatta,
KГҰtavarmГҘ, Jayadratha and other MahВөarathвҲӮs
do not appear in any verse going before;
therefore pointing to them all in a general way
in the present verse, Duryodhana intends to
show that the names of heroes taken by him
did not exhaust the list of the heroes on his
side, but that besides them there were many
other fighters who stood on his side, well-
equipped with arms like swords, clubs, etc.,
which are wielded by the hand, and missiles
like arrows, iron clubs, spears etc., who were
MahВөarathвҲӮs and great experts in the art of
warfare, and were ready to sacrifice their lives
for him. He wanted to assure the Г…cВөarya that
all these warriors would fight for the victory
of his side to the best of their ability till their
very last breath.
(their) lives; ЕёГҠЕёГҠвүҘГҠSГІГҠВ¬ЛқвҖһUвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠвҖ” equipped with various weapons and missiles; вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё all; ГҝГҲhГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҠвҒ„UЕ’ГҠвҖ”
skilled in warfare.
And there are many other heroes, all skilled in warfare, equipped with various
weapons and missiles, who have staked their lives for me.                   (9)
After praising the prowess of the great warriors on his side Duryodhana now proceeds
to compare the two armies, and declares his own army as more powerful than and superior
to that of the PВөaЖ’Е’avas.
вҖўВ¬ГҝГҠВё#Вў ГғЕ’Sв—ҠГҠвҲ‘ВўВ§ вҖҷвҲӮВўU Г·ГӢcв—ҠГҠГҒГ·вҒ„UГҒЛҮГҠГғв—ҠГ”ЛңГ”вҖ“
В¬ГҝГҠВё#Вў ГҒГ п¬ӮЕ’в—ҠпЈҝГғпЈҝВ·ГҠВў вҖҷвҲӮВўU Г·ГӢв—ҠГҠГҒГ·вҒ„UГҒЛҮГҠГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 10H
вҖўВ¬ГҝГҠВё#в—ҠЛңГ” (is) unconquerable; ГғГғЛңГ” this; вҖўSв—ҠГҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” of ours; вҖҷвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” army; Г·ГӢcв—ҠГҠГҒГ·вҒ„UГҒЛҮГҠГғв—ҠЛңГ” fully
protected by BhвҲӮВ¶ma; В¬ГҝГҠВё#в—ҠЛңГ” (is) easy to conquer; ГғГҲ while; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” that; вҲһГғпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of theirs; вҖҷвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ”
army; Г·ГӢв—ҠГҠГҒГ·вҒ„UГҒЛҮГҠГғв—ҠЛңГ” guarded in every way by BhвҲӮma.
This army of ours, fully protected by BhвҲӮВ¶ma, is unconquerable; while that army
of theirs, guarded in every way by BhвҲӮma, is easy to conquer.
 (10)
Chapter 55, Duryodhana similarly gives a
description of his army to DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra, where
also he mentions almost all those MahВөarathвҲӮs
by name, and declaring that the great BhвҲӮВ¶ma
was its protector shows its invincibility.
There he clearly says, 'O King, I find the
majority of fighters in the ranks of the enemy
without any material qualities, and the majority
of fighters in our ranks as possessed of
remarkable qualities and of great promise'.*
Therefore, in his opinion there was no
cause to fear defeat in the War. Similarly,
in the BhвҲӮВ¶ma-Parva, where Duryodhana,
again, gives a description of his army to
DroЖ’ВөacВөarya, he merely repeats the above
verse of the GвҲӮtВөa (BhвҲӮВ¶ma-Parva, 51.6). In
By declaring his army as protected by
BhвҲӮВ¶ma and unconquerable, Duryodhana
proves the superiority of his forces. The
point he made was that the army collected
by him was full of many renowned Generals
or MahВөarathвҲӮs, and it was under the protection
of BhвҲӮВ¶ma, the greatest living hero and
fighter of the world, who had frustrated even
the great ParaвҖ№urВөama in battle. From the
numerical point of view as well, his army
comprised four AkВ¶auhiЖ’вҲӮs more than the
PВөaЖ’Е’ava army. It was not possible, therefore,
for anybody to vanquish such an army,
which possessed more power than what was
required for the purpose of vanquishing the
PВөaЖ’Е’avas. In the MahВөabhВөarata, Udyogaparva
* ВӘГҲГЎГҠвҖһUГӢЕёВў В¬вҒ„пЈҝUВ·ГҠВў Гё вҖҷвҖһГҲU В¬вүҘГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғвҖ“ ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠпЈҝЕ’ГҝВў вҖҷвҖһГҲUВӘГҲГЎГҠв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠЕёp ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҠГӘВ¬ГғпЈҝH

=== PAGE 45 ===

44
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
the verse which precedes it, he goes so far
as to say, Г«Г«All of you MahВөarathвҲӮs possess
the power to kill the PВөaЖ’Е’avas with their
entire army single-handed; it should cause no
wonder, then, if you kill them with your
combined efforts.Гӯ*
From all these facts it is clear that the
term Г«AparyВөaptaГӯ in the above verse is used
by Duryodhana to bring out the strength and
greatness of his army. Wherever these verses
have been uttered, as in the places referred
to above, their intention is to give
encouragement to the warriors on his side.
The propriety of this interpretation is proved
by the context in which the verse is uttered
by Duryodhana in every case.
By declaring the PВөaЖ’Е’ava army as
guarded by BhвҲӮma and Г«ParyВөaptaГӯ (easy to
conquer), Duryodhana attempted to prove it
to be a weaker and vulnerable army. The
point he sought to make clear was that
whereas BhвҲӮВ¶ma was the protector of the
Kaurava army, there stood on the other side
BhвҲӮma, who though possessed of a strong
body, could not stand comparison with BhвҲӮВ¶ma
as a fighter. So far as mastery of the art of
warfare, knowledge of arms and scriptures,
and power of intellect were concerned, BhвҲӮВ¶ma
was quite incomparable; whereas BhвҲӮma
was, if anything, an indifferent archer, and
a man of dull intellect. Therefore, according
to Duryodhana, the PВөaЖ’Е’ava army was
Г«ParyВөaptaГӯГіlimited in power, and easy to be
conquered by the Kauravas.
army, Duryodhana had cautioned DuВЁвҖ№Вөasana
and all other warriors by explaining this
danger in detail (MahВөa., BhвҲӮВ¶ma 15.14-20).
Similarly, on the present occasion impelled
by that lurking fear in his mind, Duryodhana
exhorts all the principal generals in his army
to maintain, with their utmost strength, their
respective positions in the battle-array, taking
exceptional care and precaution that вҖәikhaЖ’Е’вҲӮ
might not get a loophole to come in front
of BhвҲӮВ¶ma in the course of the battle. They
should be alert to drive away вҖәikhaЖ’Е’вҲӮ by
The great warrior BhвҲӮВ¶ma possessed the
power to protect himself: Duryodhana too
knew this fact full well. But BhвҲӮВ¶ma had
made an announcement that DrupadaГӯs son
вҖәikhaЖ’Е’вҲӮ had taken birth as a female child
and subsequently became a male through
sex-transformation; but because he was born
as a female, BhвҲӮВ¶ma still regarded him as a
female, and would not face him in battle
according to the canons of chivalry followed
by a KВ¶atriya fighter. That is why on a
previous occasion also while reviewing the
Thus declaring his army, protected by BhвҲӮВ¶ma, as unconquerable, Duryodhana now
proceeds to exhort all his Generals, including DroЖ’ВөacВөarya, to guard BhвҲӮВ¶ma from every
direction.
вҖўГҝЕёпЈҝВ·ГҲ Гё вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёВ·ГҲ ГҝГ•ГҠГ·ГҠВӘв—Ҡп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғГҠвҖ”вҖ“
Г·ГӢcв—Ҡв—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮГҠГҒГ·вҒ„UЛҮГҠГЈГғГҲ Г·п¬ӮГЈГғвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮВё вҲһп¬Ӯ ГҒвҖһUH 11H
вҖўГҝЕёпЈҝВ·ГҲ fronts; Гё and; вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёВ·ГҲ on all; ГҝГ•ГҠГ·ГҠВӘв—ҠЛңГ” in (your) respective positions; вҖўп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғГҠвҖ”Г”
stationed; Г·ГӢcв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” BhвҲӮВ¶ma; вҲһп¬Ӯ indeed; вҖўГҒГ·вҒ„UЛҮГҠГЈГғГҲГ” protect on all sides; Г·п¬ӮГЈГғвҖ”Г” you; вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёГ” all; вҲһп¬ӮГ”
in particular; ГҒвҖһUГ” positively.
Therefore, stationed in your respective positions on all fronts, do you all guard
BhвҲӮВ¶ma in particular on all sides.                                          (11)
* вҲһвҲ‘Г’В§вҲ‘В§вүҘГҠвҖ” вҖҡв—ҠГ•ГҠВё ГҒвҖһU ГҝГҚГҝВў вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„UГ•ГҠвҖ”вҖ“ В¬ГҠГЎВ«ГҲUВ¬ГҲГІГҠГҠЕёЛңГ” вҒ„UГЎГҠпЈҝ вҖһUГЈГғГҲВў вҖҡвҖҡГ’ГЈГҝГҠЕёЛңГ” ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҲ вҖҡВўвҖһUГғГҠвҖ”H

=== PAGE 46 ===

* Chapter I *
45
force of arms, the moment he made any such
attempt. If BhвҲӮВ¶ma could be saved from
вҖәikhaЖ’Е’вҲӮ, there was nothing else for the
Kauravas to fear; for it was quite easy for
BhвҲӮВ¶ma to vanquish single-handed all the
MahВөarathвҲӮs in the PВөaЖ’Е’ava army.
After the above account of how Duryodhana praised the principal warriors of his
army, and more particularly his Chief Commander BhвҲӮВ¶ma, SaВӨjaya now proceeds to
describe the subsequent events on the field of battle:
ГғSГҝ вҖҡTЕёГҝГЈвҖһUВ·Z вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§п¬ӮГҺhвҖ” ГҒВ¬ГғГҠв—ҠвҖһUвҖ”вҖ“
ГҒвҖҡВўвҖһUЕёГҠЕ’Вў ГҒп¬ӮЕёlГҠпЈҝГ¬ГҠГ’вҖ” вүҘГҠГ”WВў Е’ГӨв—ҠГҠГ’ В¬ЛқГғГҠВ¬п¬ӮГҠЕёЛңH 12H
ГғSГҝГ” to him (Duryodhana); вҖҡTЕёГҝЕёЛңГ” bringing; вҖһUВ·Вёв—ҠЛңГ” joy; вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§п¬ӮГҺhвҖ” the grand old man of
the Kaurava race; ГҒВ¬ГғГҠв—ҠвҖһUвҖ”Г” (their) grand-uncle (BhвҲӮВ¶ma); ГҒвҖҡВўвҖһUЕёГҠЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” like a lion; ГҒп¬ӮЕёlГ” roaring;
В©UГ¬ГҠГ’вҖ”Г” terribly; вүҘГҠWв—ҠЛңГ” (his) conch; Е’ГӨв—ҠГҠГ’ blew; В¬ЛқГғГҠВ¬п¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” glorious.
The grand old man of the Kaurava race, their glorious grand-patriarch, BhвҲӮВ¶ma,
cheering up Duryodhana, roared terribly like a lion and blew his conch.    (12)
somewhat startled and anxious at the sight
of the PВөaЖ’Е’ava array. He further noticed that
suppressing his anxiety, Duryodhana had
been praising the Kaurava army in order
to encourage the fighters and had been
exhorting DroЖ’a and the other MahВөarathвҲӮs
to protect BhвҲӮВ¶ma. Intending, therefore, to
assure Duryodhana of his own great prowess,
and delight DuryodhanaГӯs heart, and to
proclaim, 
as 
Chief 
Commander, 
the
commencement of the fight, BhвҲӮВ¶ma gave a
loud roar like a lion, and blew his conch with
great force.
Next to BВөahlвҲӮka, BhвҲӮВ¶ma was the oldest
member of the Kaurava race. He had the
same degree of relationship with the Kauravas
and the PВөaЖ’Е’avas, and being the grand-uncle
of both the branches, he was an object of
reverence to both; that is why SaВӨjaya called
him Г«the grand old manГӯ of the Kauravas,
and grand-uncle. Though much advanced in
age, he excelled even the foremost younger
heroes in energy, strength, fitness and
heroism; therefore, he has been described as
Г«gloriousГӯ. The grand old warrior noticed
Duryodhana standing near DroЖ’ВөacВөarya,
ГғГғвҖ” вүҘГҠГ”WГҠp Г·пЈҝГҝВёp В¬ГЎГҠп¬ӮГҠЕёвҲ‘В§ВӘГҠпЈҝв—ҠГҲПҖГҠвҖ”вҖ“
вҖҡвҖһUвҖҡГ’п¬ӮГҠГЁГҝвҖһUГЈГҝГЈГғ вҖҡ вүҘГҠГ©Е’SГғГҲв—ҠГҲвҲӮUГҠпЈҝЛҳГ·п¬ӮГғЛңH 13H
ГғГғвҖ” then; вүҘГҠГ”WГҠвҖ”Г” conches; Гё and; Г·пЈҝГҝВёвҖ” kettledrums; ГёГ” and; В¬ГЎГҠп¬ӮГҠЕёвҲ‘В§ВӘГҠпЈҝв—ҠГҲПҖГҠвҖ”Г” tabors, drums
and trumpets; вҖҡвҖһUвҖҡГҠ вҲһп¬Ӯ all at once; вҖўГЁГҝвҖһUГЈГҝГЈГғГ” blared forth; вҖҡ вүҘГҠГ”Г©Е’вҖ” (and) the noise; ГғГҲв—ҠГҲвҲӮUвҖ”
tumultuous; вҖўГ·п¬ӮГғЛң was.
Then conches, kettledrums, tabors, drums and trumpets all at once blared forth
and the noise was tumultuous.                                           (13)
martial music, belonging to the different
commanders, were sounded. The sounding
of these instruments at one and the same
time produced terrible noise that echoed
and re-echoed through the entire region of
the sky.
When roaring like a lion and blowing
his 
conch, 
BhвҲӮВ¶ma 
announced 
the
commencement of the battle, all the regions
were flooded with hope and encouragement,
and suddenly in all sections of the army
conches, trumpets and other instruments of

=== PAGE 47 ===

46
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
ArjunaГӯs chariot was very large and
excellent in every way. Covered all over
with a plate of gold, it looked exceptionally
bright and beautiful, and was very strong in
build. Flags decorated it on all sides with
small tinkling bells attached to them. The
wheels attached to it were large and strong.
A high flag containing the emblems of the
moon and stars glittered like lightning and
вҖәrвҲӮ HanumВөan was posted on it. With regard
to this flag SaВӨjayaГӯs report to Duryodhana
was that in height as well as in length it
covered the distance of a Yojana (8 miles).
Its colour was as variegated as the rainbow
in a cloud. Though so large and widely
extended, it was very light, and could not
be held up by any obstruction. It passed
easily through clusters of trees without ever
being touched by them.
There were four celestial horses attached
to this chariot, all white, very beautiful, well-
decorated, well-trained, strong and nimble.
These were taken from the hundred celestial
horses received as a gift from the Gandharva
king, Citraratha. The peculiarity about these
horses was that any number of them might
be killed in action, and yet their total number
would ever remain hundred and could not be
reduced. Moreover, they could go anywhere
on this earth and in heaven. This was also
true of the chariot (MahВөa., Udyoga., 56),
which was a gift made to Arjuna by the Fire-
god as a mark of pleasure after the burning
of the KhВөaЖ’Е’ava forest (MahВөa., Г…di., 225).
Seated on this glorious chariot, when BhagavВөan
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and the great warrior Arjuna heard
the tumultuous noise produced by the blowing
of conches and sounding of drums and other
instruments of martial music by the fighters
of the Kaurava army including the great
BhвҲӮВ¶ma, they too, in order to announce the
commencement of the fight, blew their
respective conches. The conches belonging
to BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and Arjuna were no
ordinary conches; they were of an extraordinary
type, brilliant to look at and most uncommon
in character. That is why they have been
called Г«celestial conchesГӯ.
DhГҰtarВөaВ¶ВўraГӯs query was: 'After assembling for the fight, what did his own sons and
the sons of PВөaЖ’Е’u do?' In answer to this, SaВӨjaya described up to this point the doings
of the fighters on DhГҰtarВөaВ¶ВўraГӯs side. And now, in five verses, he proceeds to describe
the doings of the PВөaЖ’Е’avas:
ГғГғвҖ” EпЈҝГғГ’вҖһВёUГҝГ’ГҝВёГҲQпЈҝ в—ҠвҖһUГҒГғ SГҝГЈЕ’ЕёпЈҝ ГҒSГ•ГғГҠГ’вҖ“
в—ҠГҠЕ“п¬ӮвҖ” В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬ӮpГ’п¬Ӯ ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝГҠГ’ вүҘГҠГ”WГҠГ’ В¬ЛқЕ’ГӨв—ҠГғГҲвҖ”H 14H
ГғГғвҖ” then; EпЈҝГғГ’вҖ” вҖһUГҝГ’вҖ” ГҝГҲQпЈҝ  в—ҠвҖһUГҒГғ SГҝГЈЕ’ЕёпЈҝГ” in a glorious chariot drawn by white horses; ГҒSГ•ГғГҠГ’Г”
seated; в—ҠГҠЕ“п¬ӮвҖ” вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a (lit., Lord of LakВ¶mвҲӮ, the Goddess of Prosperity); В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬ӮвҖ”Г” the
(celebrated) son of PВөaЖ’Е’u, Arjuna; Гё and; вҲһп¬Ӯ also; ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝГҠГ’ вүҘГҠГ”WГҠГ’Г” (their) celestial conches;
В¬ЛқЕ’ГӨв—ҠГғГҲвҖ” blew.
Then, seated in a glorious chariot drawn by white horses, вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a as well
as Arjuna blew their celestial conches.                                    (14)
В¬ГҠ@ВЎГЈГҝВў NВ·ГӢвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠГ”ГҠпЈҝ Е’пЈҝп¬ӮЕ’Г»ГҠВў Е“ЕёTГҝвҖ”вҖ“
В¬ГҠГ’ГЎВ«ЛӣВўU Е’ГӨв—ҠГҠГ’ в—ҠвҖһUГҠвүҘГҠWВў Г·ГӢв—ҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВё п¬ӮГҺвҲ‘В§ГҠпЈҝЕ’вҒ„UвҖ”H 15H
В¬ГҠ@ВЎГЈГҝв—ҠЛң (His) Conch named PВөaВӨcajanya; NВ·ГӢвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠГ”вҖ” вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a; Е’пЈҝп¬ӮЕ’Г»ГҠв—ҠЛң (his) conch

=== PAGE 48 ===

* Chapter I *
47
Г«HГҰВ¶вҲӮkaГӯ, means a sense, and the Lord
(Controller or Propeller) of the senses is
called Г«HГҰВ¶вҲӮkeвҖ№aГӯ*. The term also denotes a
repository of joy, happiness and power
accompanied with amenities of life.вҖ“ The
Lord is not only the controller of the senses,
but a repository of joy, happiness and power
accompanied with amenities of life. Therefore
one of the names of BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a is
Г«HГҰВ¶вҲӮkeвҖ№a.Гӯ Having killed a demon, PaВӨcajana
by name, who possessed the form of a
conch, BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a took him for His
conch. That is why His Conch got the name
of Г«PВөaВӨcajanyaГӯ (HarivaвүҲвҖ№a II. xxxiii.17).
x
x
x
At the time of the RВөajasВөuya sacrifice,
Arjuna conquered a large number of kingdoms
and brought untold riches to the PВөaЖ’Е’ava
capital; that is how he got the epithet of
Г«DhanaВӨjayaГӯ. And he obtained the conch
named Г«DevadattaГӯ from Indra, the King of
Heaven, when Arjuna went there to fight the
NivВөatakavacas and other demons (MahВөa.,
Vana., 174,5). The sound of this conch was
so loud and terrible that it used to terrify the
soldiers in the enemyГӯs ranks.
x
x
x
The second PВөaЖ’Е’ava, BhвҲӮma, was a
man possessing exceptional physical strength.
His deeds used to be so terrible that they
caused terror in the heart of those who either
saw or heard of them. That is how he came
to be known as Г«BhвҲӮma, of terrific valiant
deedsГӯ. He was a great eater and possessed
extraordinary power to digest a huge quantity
of food; that is how he got the name of
Г«VГҰkodaraГӯ. He possessed a conch of very
large size, whose sound reverberated to a
long distance; hence it has been called a
Г«mighty conch.Гӯ
Devadatta; Е“ЕёTГҝвҖ” Arjuna; В¬ГҠГ’ГЎВ«ЛӣUв—ҠЛң known as PauЖ’Е’ra; Е’ГӨв—ҠГҠГ’ blew; в—ҠвҖһUГҠвүҘГҠГ”Wв—ҠЛң (his) mighty conch;
Г·ГӢв—ҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВё of valiant deeds; п¬ӮГҺвҲ‘В§ГҠпЈҝЕ’вҒ„UвҖ” BhвҲӮma (the second son of PВөaЖ’Е’u).
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a blew His conch named PВөaВӨcajanya; Arjuna, his own called Devadatta;
while BhвҲӮma of terrific valiant deeds blew his mighty conch, PauЖ’Е’ra.
(15)
вҖўЕёГЈГғГҒп¬ӮВЎГҝВў вҒ„UГҠВЎГҠ вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГЈГғГӢВ¬ГҲГІГҠГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҲГҒЕ“ГҒDГ”UвҒ„UвҖ”вҖ“
ЕёвҲ‘ГҲВ§вҖ№вҖ” 
вҖҡвҖһUЕ’пЈҝп¬Ӯp 
вҖҡГҲГүГҠГҠпЈҝВ·в—ҠГҒГЎГҠВ¬ГҲcВ¬вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’H 16H
вҖўЕёГЈГғГҒп¬ӮВЎГҝв—ҠЛң conch known by the name of Anantavijaya; вҒ„UГҠВЎГҠ king; вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГЈГғГӢВ¬ГҲГІГҠвҖ” (the eldest)
son of KuntвҲӮ (aunt of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a); ГҝГҲГҒЕ“ГҒDГ”UвҒ„UвҖ” YudhiВ¶Вўhira (lit., steadfast in battle); ЕёвҲ‘ГҲВ§вҖ№вҖ” Nakul
(the fourth son of PВөaЖ’Е’u); вҖҡвҖһUЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮвҖ” Sahadeva (the fifth son of PВөaЖ’Е’u); Гё and; вҖҡГҲГүГҠГҠпЈҝВ·в—ҠГҒГЎГҠВ¬ГҲcВ¬вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’
(their) conches SughoВ¶a and MaЖ’ipuВ¶paka (respectively).
King YudhiВ¶Вўhira, son of KuntвҲӮ, blew his conch, Anantavijaya; while Nakula
and Sahadeva blew theirs, known as SughoВ¶a and MaЖ’ipuВ¶paka, respectively. (16)
Nakula and Sahadeva were not sons of the
same mother, YudhiВ¶Вўhira has been referred
to in the verse as the Г«son of KuntвҲӮ.Гӯ Though
at the time of the War YudhiВ¶Вўhira possessed
no kingdom, he had conquered all the kings
at the time of the RВөajasВөuya sacrifice, and
Of the five sons of PaЖ’Е’u, YudhiВ¶Вўhira,
BhвҲӮma and Arjuna were born of his first wife
KuntвҲӮ, and Nakula and Sahadeva, of MВөadrвҲӮ,
the second wife. In the present verse, the
names of Nakula and Sahadeva also appear;
and in order to show that YudhiВ¶Вўhira,
*
NВ·ГӢвҲ‘В§ГҠГЎГҠГӢГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГЎГҝГҠвҖһГҲUSГғпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠГӢвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝ ГҝГғГҠпЈҝ Г·п¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ”вҖ“ NUВ·ГӢвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠSГғГғГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮcГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ Г…ГҝГҠГғГҠпЈҝ Е’пЈҝп¬ӮпЈҝВ·ГҲ вҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠп¬ӮHU (HarivaвүҲвҖ№a 279.46)
вҖ“
вҖһUВ·ГҠВёГғЛңГ” вҖҡГҲПҖГҠГғЛңГ” вҖҡГҲПҖГ’EГҝГҠВёЕ’ЛңГ”Е“ГҺВ·ГӢвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠГ п¬Ӯв—ҠГҲГ«ГҝГғпЈҝHU (MahГҘbhГҘrata, Udyoga. 70.9)

=== PAGE 49 ===

48
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
assumed the position of the Emperor.
Moreover, SaВӨjaya believed that after the
War he would again assume sovereignty.
Even at the time when SaВӨjaya spoke these
words, all the marks of a king were present
in YudhiВ¶ВўhiraГӯs body. These were the reasons
why SaВӨjaya added the title of Г«KingГӯ to
YudhiВ¶ВўhiraГӯs name.
вҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҝp В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠпЈҝcп¬ӮГҠвҖҡвҖ” ГҒвүҘГҠГ”ПҖГЎВ«UГӢ Гё в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„UГ•вҖ”вҖ“
Е“ГҺCГ”UlГҲв—ҠAГҠпЈҝ 
ГҒп¬ӮвҒ„UГҠвүҲUp 
вҖҡГҠГ ГҝГҒвҲ‘В§pГҠВ¬вҒ„UГҠГҒВЎГғвҖ”H 17H
ВәЛқГҲВ¬Е’ГҠпЈҝ 
ВәЛқГҠГ’В¬Е’пЈҝГҝГҠp 
вҖҡп¬ӮВёвүҘГҠГ”вҖ” 
В¬ГҺГҒГ•п¬ӮГӢВ¬ГғпЈҝвҖ“
вҖҡГҠГ’Г·ВәЛқp в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһГҲUвҖ” вүҘГҠГ”WГҠГЈЕ’ГӨв—ҠГҲвҖ” В¬ГҺГ•Г„В¬ГҺГ•вҲ‘ЛңВ§Г”H 18H
вҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҝвҖ” (the) King of KВөaвҖ№вҲӮ (the modern VВөarВөaЖ’asвҲӮ); Гё and; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠпЈҝcп¬ӮГҠвҖҡвҖ” (the) excellent archer;
ГҒвүҘГҠГ”ПҖГЎВ«UГӢ вҖәikhaЖ’Е’вҲӮ; Гё and; в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„UГ•вҖ” (the) great car-warrior; Е“ГҺCГ”UlГҲв—ҠAвҖ” DhГҰВ¶Вўadyumna; ГҒп¬ӮвҒ„UГҠвүҲUвҖ” King
VirВөaВўa; Гё and; вҖҡГҠГ ГҝГҒвҲ‘В§вҖ” SВөatyaki; Гё and; вҖўВ¬вҒ„UГҠГҒВЎГғвҖ” invincible; ВәЛқГҲВ¬Е’вҖ” King Drupada; ВәЛқГҠГ’В¬Е’пЈҝГҝГҠвҖ”
the five sons of DraupadвҲӮ; Гё as well as; вҖҡп¬ӮВёвүҘГҠГ”вҖ” all of these and from all sides; В¬ГҺГҒГ•п¬ӮГӢВ¬ГғпЈҝ
O lord of the earth; вҖҡГҠГ’Г·ВәЛқвҖ” (the) son of SubhadrВөa, Abhimanyu; Гё and; в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһГҲUвҖ” mighty-
armed; вүҘГҠГ”WГҠЕёЛң (their respective) conches; Е’ГӨв—ҠГҲвҖ” blew; В¬ГҺГўГҠвҲ‘Лң В¬ГҺГўГҠвҲ‘Лң severally.
And the excellent archer, the King of KВөaвҖ№вҲӮ, and вҖәikhaЖ’Е’вҲӮ, the MahВөarathвҲӮ (great
chariot-warrior), DhГҰВ¶Вўadyumna and VirВөaВўa; and invincible SВөatyaki, Drupada as well as
the five sons of DraupadвҲӮ, and the mighty-armed Abhimanyu, son of SubhadrВөa, all of
them, O Lord of the earth, severally blew their respective conches from all sides. (17-18)
training of a Prince. In due time, that so-called
Г«PrinceГӯ was married to the daughter of
HiraЖ’yavarmВөa, king of the DaвҖ№ВөarЖ’as. Coming
to live with her husband the daughter of
HiraЖ’yavarmВөa discovered that вҖәikhaЖ’Е’вҲӮ was
a woman, and sad at heart sent word to her
father to that effect. King HiraЖ’yavarmВөa got
so enraged at the news that he immediately
declared war on King Drupada, and made a
resolve to avenge the wrong by taking
DrupadaГӯs life. Desiring to avoid the fight,
King Drupada took recourse to the worship
of the Deity. And вҖәikhaЖ’Е’вҲӮ, for his part,
terribly cast down at the unfortunate turn of
events, quietly left the palace determined to
put an end to his life in the forest. There he
happened to meet a YakВ¶a, SthВөuЖ’ВөakarЖ’a by
name, possessed of supernatural power, who
out of pity gave his manhood to вҖәikhaЖ’Е’вҲӮ for
a stipulated period, accepting for himself
вҖәikhaЖ’Е’вҲӮГӯs femininity in exchange. This is the
story of how вҖәikhaЖ’Е’вҲӮ turned a man from a
вҖәikhaЖ’Е’вҲӮ and DhГҰВ¶Вўadyumna both were
sons of King Drupada. вҖәikhaЖ’Е’вҲӮ was the elder,
and DhГҰВ¶Вўadyumna the younger brother. In
the beginning, King Drupada had no issue;
he, therefore, resorted to the worship of
BhagavВөan вҖәiva with the motive of obtaining
a successor. When Lord вҖәiva pleased with
his worship asked Drupada to take a boon,
King Drupada submitted his prayer for a child.
BhagavВөan вҖәiva said he would get a daughter;
but Drupada replied that he sought a son,
and not a daughter. Thereupon BhagavВөan вҖәiva
said that the girl would subsequently be
transformed into a son. As the result of this
boon, a daughter was born to King Drupada
in course of time; but possessed as he was of
full faith in the words of BhagavВөan вҖәiva, he
announced it as the birth of a son. The queen
also took precaution to suppress the truth about
the childГӯs sex. The daughter was given a
boyГӯs name Г«вҖәikhaЖ’Е’вҲӮ, and, dressed as a boy,
was given all the requisite education and

=== PAGE 50 ===

* Chapter I *
49
woman. Returning thereafter to his kingdom,
вҖәikhaЖ’Е’вҲӮ gave assurance to his parents that
he was no longer a woman, and pacified his
father-in-law, HiraЖ’yavarmВөa, by furnishing
proof of his manhood. By a curse of Kubera,
SthВөuЖ’ВөakarЖ’a remained a woman all his life;
therefore, вҖәikhaЖ’Е’вҲӮ had not to return his
manhood, and remained a man for the rest
of his life, BhвҲӮВ¶ma was aware of this history
of вҖәikhaЖ’Е’вҲӮ, and, therefore, always refused
to strike him as an adversary. вҖәikhaЖ’Е’вҲӮ was
a great hero and fighter, and a MahВөarathвҲӮ
among warriors. Placing him in front as a
screen, Arjuna struck at BhвҲӮВ¶ma on the last
day of BhвҲӮВ¶maГӯs fight, and put an end to the
career of that old warrior. The other heroes
mentioned in these two verses have already
been introduced to the reader.
x
x
x
By the use of the word Г«SarvasaВЁГӯ in
this verse, SaВӨjaya intends to convey that
besides вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a the five PВөaЖ’Е’avas, the
King of KВөaвҖ№вҲӮ and other heroes whose names
are mentioned in the above verses, the other
RathвҲӮs, MahВөarathвҲӮs and AtirathвҲӮs in the PВөaЖ’Е’ava
army also blew their respective conches.
Having told how following the lead of BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and Arjuna, all heroes
and warriors of the PВөaЖ’Е’ava army blew their conches from their respective positions,
SaВӨjaya now proceeds to show the effect produced by that sound:
вҖҡ ГүГҠГҠпЈҝВ·ГҠпЈҝ Е“ГҠГғВёвҒ„UГҠcвүҲЛӣUГҠГЎГҠГҠВў NЕ’ГҝГҠГҒЕё вҲҡГҝЕ’ГҠвҒ„UГҝГғЛңвҖ“
ЕёГ·p В¬ГҺГҒГ•п¬ӮГӢВҘ ГёГ’п¬Ӯ ГғГҲв—ҠГҲвҲӮUГҠпЈҝ вҲҡГҝЕёГҲЕёГҠЕ’ГҝЕёЛңH 19H
вҖҡвҖ” that; ГүГҠГҠпЈҝВ·вҖ” sound; Е“ГҠГғВёвҒ„UГҠcвүҲЛӣUГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛң of the sons of DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra and those who sided with
them; NUЕ’ГҝГҠГҒЕё (the) hearts; вҲҡГҝЕ’ГҠвҒ„UГҝГғЛң rent; ЕёГ·вҖ” heaven; Гё and; В¬ГҺГҒГўГҠп¬ӮГӢв—ҠЛң earth; Гё and; вҲһп¬Ӯ as
well; ГғГҲв—ҠГҲвҲӮвҖ” terrible; вҲҡГҝЕёГҲЕёГҠЕ’ГҝЕёЛң echoing through.
And the terrible sound, echoing through heaven and earth, rent the hearts of
DhГҰtarВөaВ¶ВўraГӯs sons.                                                     (19)
which resounded throughout the earth and
sky and caused such a terror and fright in
the sons of DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra and the other fighters
on their side that they felt a sudden oppression
in their hearts as if they had been rent
asunder.
When the conches of all the heroes in
the PВөaЖ’Е’ava army were sounded all at a time,
the sound produced by them was so great,
loud, deep and dreadful that it filled all the
regions of heavan and earth. Widely spreading
over those regions, it produced echoes,
After describing how the sound of conches blown by the PВөaЖ’Е’avas oppressed the
hearts of the Kaurava heores, SaВӨjaya proceeds in the next four verses to quote the words
which Arjuna, full of enthusiasm, addressed to BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a:Гі
вҖўГ• вҲҡГҝп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғГҠГЈЕ’ГҺВ¶Г”UГҠ Е“ГҠГғВёвҒ„UГҠcвүҲЛӣUГҠЕёЛңГ” вҲ‘В§ГҒВ¬ГӨп¬ӮВЎвҖ”вҖ“
В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГ»ГҠпЈҝ вүҘГҠSГІГҠвҖҡГӘВ¬ГҠГғпЈҝ Е“ЕёГҲLВ§lГӘГҝ В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬ӮвҖ”H 20H
NВ·ГӢвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠГ”Вў ГғЕ’ГҠ п¬ӮГҠГ„ГҝГҒв—ҠЕ’в—ҠГҠвҖһU в—ҠвҖһUГӢВ¬ГғпЈҝвҖ“
вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
вҖҡпЈҝЕёГҝГҠпЈҝLВ§Г·ГҝГҠпЈҝв—ҠВёГӨГҝпЈҝ вҒ„UГ•Вў SГ•ГҠВ¬Гҝ в—ҠпЈҝЛҳГ«ГҝГҲГғH 21H

=== PAGE 51 ===

50
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
In accordance with his promise to
BhвҲӮmasena (MahВөa., Vana., 151.17-18) the
great hero HanumВөan always occupied the
huge flag of Arjuna, and from time to time,
during the war, used to give loud and
dreadful roars (MahВөa., BhвҲӮВ¶ma., 52.18).
SaВӨjaya employs the attribute Г«KapidhvajaГӯ
for Arjuna, in this verse, to remind DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra
of this fact.
Observing that Duryodhana and his
brothers, and all other Kaurava warriors, in
their full battle-uniform, were completely
ready with their weapons to start the battle,
the heroic sentiment was awakened in ArjunaГӯs
mind as well, and he immediately took up
the GВөaЖ’Е’вҲӮva bow in his hand. This is what
SaВӨjaya tries to convey by verse 20.
Referring, again, to BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
as Г«HГҰВ¶вҲӮkeвҖ№aГӯ in verse 21 above, SaВӨjaya is
pointing out to King DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra that God
Himself, the Knower of all hearts, was acting
as ArjunaГӯs charioteer. Was it, therefore, not
the height of ignorance and folly to expect
victory in that fight in which Lord Himself
was helping the other side ?
Г«AcyutaГӯ means one who is never
vanquished, or who never suffers a fall. The
word also means he who ever remains
established in his self, and is never dissociated
from his power and glory. Addressing вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a by this name, Arjuna reveals his
knowledge about the glory and reality of вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a. In other words, Arjuna means to say
that regardless of the servile role of driving
his chariot, He is nevertheless, and for ever,
God Himself!
вҖўГ• now; вҲҡГҝп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғГҠЕёЛңГ” arrayed (against him); Е’ГҺВ¶Г”UГҠ seeing; Е“ГҠГғВёвҒ„UГҠcвүҲЛӣГҠЕёЛңГ” the sons of DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra;
вҲ‘В§ГҒВ¬ГӨп¬ӮВЎвҖ” an epithet of Arjuna (lit., one who has a monkey seated on his banner); В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГ»ГҠпЈҝ
вүҘГҠSГІГҠвҖҡГӘВ¬ГҠГғпЈҝ when missiles were ready to be hurled; Е“ЕёГҲвҖ” (his) bow; В©UlГӘГҝ taking up; В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬ӮвҖ”
son of PВөaЖ’Е’u, Arjuna; NВ·ГӢвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠв—ҠЛңГ” to вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a; ГғЕ’ГҠ then; п¬ӮГҠГ„Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” words; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” (the) following;
вҖўГҠвҖһU addressed; в—ҠвҖһUГӢВ¬ГғпЈҝ O lord of the earth; вҖҡпЈҝЕёГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” В©Г·ГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” of the two armies; в—ҠГӨГҝпЈҝ in the middle;
вҒ„UГ•в—ҠЛңГ” chariot; SГ•ГҠВ¬Гҝ place; в—ҠпЈҝ my; вҖўГ«ГҝГҲГғ O KГҰВ¶Ж’a.
Now, O lord of the earth, seeing your sons arrayed against him, and when missiles
were ready to be hurled, Arjuna, who had the figure of HanumВөan on the flag of
his chariot, took up his bow and then addressed the following words to вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a:
Г«Г«KГҰВ¶Ж’a, place my chariot between the two armies.
(20-21)
battle in their battle-dress. The object of his
making this request was to know definitely
who were the heroes on the other side with
whom he would be required personally to come
to grips in that dreadful business of war.
Arjuna says to BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a that
taking the chariot between the two armies it
should be placed at such a suitable point, and
for such length of time, that he could see and
closely examine all the warriors arrayed for
ГҝГҠп¬ӮЕ’пЈҝГғГҠГҒГӣГҠвҒ„UГӢЛҮГҠпЈҝЛҳвҖһВўU ГҝГҠпЈҝhГҲвҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠЕёп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғГҠЕёЛңвҖ“
вҲ‘Г’В§в—ҠВёГҝГҠ 
вҖҡвҖһU 
ГҝГҠпЈҝhвҲҡГҝв—ҠГҒSв—ҠГЈвҒ„UГЎГҠвҖҡв—ҠГҲlв—ҠпЈҝH 22H
ГҝГҠп¬ӮГғЛң till; вҲһГғГҠЕёЛң these (adversaries); ГҒЕёвҒ„UГӢЛҮГҠпЈҝ have carefully observed; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛң I; ГҝГҠпЈҝhГҲвҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠЕёЛң
вҖўп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғГҠЕёЛң drawn up for battle; вҲ‘Г’В§вҖ” whom; в—ҠГҝГҠ I have to; вҖҡвҖһU with; ГҝГҠпЈҝhвҲҡГҝв—ҠЛң engage; вҖўГҒSв—ҠЕёЛң
вҒ„UГЎГҠвҖҡв—ҠГҲlв—ҠпЈҝ in this fight.
Г«Г«And keep it there till I have carefully observed these warriors drawn up for
battle, and have seen with whom I have to engage in this fight.            (22)

=== PAGE 52 ===

* Chapter I *
51
It had been definitely stipulated that on
the completion of thirteen yearsГӯ exile, the
kingdom of the PВөaЖ’Е’avas would be returned
to them. These thirteen years the kingdom had
remained under the control of the Kauravas
only as a trust; but Duryodhana, with the evil
intent of wrongfully appropriating the
kingdom, backed out of the mutually agreed
stipulation altogether. From the beginning of
his career up till then Duryodhana had
practised many forms of persecution against
the PВөaЖ’Е’avas, but this last wrong action on his
part became wholly intolerable. Remembering
this evil intent of Duryodhana, Arjuna speaks
of him in the verse as Г«evil-mindedГӯ.
ArjunaГӯs desire to scan the well-wishers
of Duryodhana seems to indicate the thought
that even though the wrongs and cruelties
perpetrated by evilminded Duryodhana were
well-known throughout the world, those
kings had assembled to uphold his cause and
help him in the fight. It proved that their
mind and intellect had become as vitiated as
that of Duryodhana. That is why they had
gathered together to lend their support openly
to his wrongs, and give him encouragement
by the show of their pomp and power. Thus
trying to advance DuryodhanaГӯs interest they
were, in reality, doing him harm. Arjuna,
therefore, wanted to see with his own eyes
who those fighters were, who regarding
themselves to be great heroes and eager to
participate in the war had taken their stand
on the battle-field. There was the spirit of
challenge in ArjunaГӯs mind when he expressed
this desire, and he wanted to teach them a
lesson that it did not pay to take side with
wrong and unrighteousness.
ГҝГҠпЈҝГ SГҝв—ҠГҠЕёГҠЕёп¬ӮпЈҝЛҮГҠпЈҝЛҳвҖһВўU Гҝ вҲһГғпЈҝЛҳГІГҠ вҖҡв—ҠГҠВӘГғГҠвҖ”вҖ“
Е“ГҠГғВёвҒ„UГҠcвүҲЛӣUSГҝ Е’ГҲвҖҷВёГҲhпЈҝГҝВёГҲhпЈҝ ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝГҒГёвҲ‘В§ГӢВ·Вёп¬ӮвҖ”H 23H
ГҝГҠпЈҝГ SГҝв—ҠГҠЕёГҠЕёЛң ready to fight; вҖўп¬ӮпЈҝЛҮГҠпЈҝ shall scan (them); вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛң I; Гҝ вҲһГғпЈҝ whosoever; вҖўГІГҠ here,
on this side; вҖҡв—ҠГҠВӘГғГҠвҖ” have assembled; Е“ГҠГғВёвҒ„UГҠcвүҲЛӣUSГҝ Duryodhana (son of DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra); Е’ГҲвҖҷГҲВёhпЈҝвҖ”
evil-minded; ГҝГҲhпЈҝ In (this) war; ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝГҒГёвҲ‘В§ГӢВ·Вёп¬ӮвҖ” well-wishers.
Г«Г«I shall have a look at the well-wishers of evil-minded Duryodhana in this war,
whoever have assembled on his side and are ready for the fight.ГӯГӯ                  (23)
SaВӨjaya now proceeds to describe in two verses what BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a did on
hearing the above request of Arjuna.
вҖҡTГҝ В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠГҲQГ”В§ГҠпЈҝ NВ·ГӢвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠГ”ГҠпЈҝ ВӘГҲВ«UГҠвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠГ”пЈҝЕё Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғвҖ“
вҖҡпЈҝЕёГҝГҠпЈҝLВ§Г·ГҝГҠпЈҝв—ҠВёГӨГҝпЈҝ SГ•ГҠВ¬ГҒГҝГ п¬ӮГҠ вҒ„UГ•ГҠпЈҝГ»ГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңH 24H
Г·ГӢcв—ҠВәЛқГҠпЈҝГЎГҠВ¬Лқв—ҠГҲПҖГғвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёВ·ГҠВў Гё в—ҠвҖһUГӢГҒЛҮГҠГғГҠв—ҠЛңвҖ“
В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё В¬ГҠГ•Вё В¬вүҘГҝГ’ГғГҠГЈвҖҡв—Ҡп¬ӮпЈҝГғГҠГЈвҲ‘ГҲВ§MВ§ГҒЕёГҒГғH 25H
вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛң thus; В©UQГ”В§вҖ” addressed; NВ·ГӢвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠвҖ”Г” вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a; ВӘГҲВ«UГҠвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠГ”пЈҝЕё by Arjuna; Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғ O DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra
(lit., a descendant of Bharata); вҖҡпЈҝЕёГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” В©UГ·ГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ”Г” of the two armies; в—ҠГӨГҝпЈҝ in the middle;  SГ•ГҠВ¬ГҒГҝГ п¬ӮГҠГ”
having placed; вҒ„UГ•ГҠпЈҝГ»ГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛң the magnificent chariot; Г·ГӢcв—ҠВәЛқГҠпЈҝГЎГҠВ¬Лқв—ҠГҲПҖГғвҖ” in front of BhiВ¶ma and DroЖ’a;
вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёВ·ГҠв—ҠЛң all; Гё and; в—ҠвҖһUГӢГҒЛҮГҠГғГҠв—ҠЛң (in front) of the kings; В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё said; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O (celebrated) son of PГҰthВөa,
Arjuna; В¬вүҘГҝ behold; вҲһГғГҠЕёЛң these; вҖҡв—Ҡп¬ӮпЈҝГғГҠЕёЛң assembled; вҲ‘ГҲВ§MВ§ЕёЛң Kauravas; ГҹГҒГғГ” thus.

=== PAGE 53 ===

52
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«GuЕ’ВөakВөaГӯ means Г«sleepГӯ and
a conqueror of sleep is called Г«GuЕ’ВөakeвҖ№aГӯ.
Arjuna had conquered his sleep; that is, he
could carry on lifeГӯs activities without taking
rest in the form of sleep, and never felt
oppressed by sleep. He was never overcome
by lethargy. By mentioning him as Г«GuЕ’ВөakeвҖ№aГӯ,
SaВӨjayaГӯs intention was to point out to
DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra that he could never expect his
sons to overcome Arjuna, who was always
so alert and circumspect.
By saying, Г«behold these Kauravas
assembled hereГӯ, BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a intimated
that, in accordance with ArjunaГӯs request that
the chariot should be placed between the two
armies and kept there till he had carefully
observed all the warriors, He had brought
the chariot between the two armies and had
placed it at such a point that from there
Arjuna could have a clear view of all the
warriors. The chariot had been brought to
a standstill, and Arjuna could observe the
fighters as long as he liked.
The word Г«KauravasГӯ in the sentence
Г«Г«behold these KauravasГӯГӯ, has a special
significance. By this, BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
intended to say that the fighters in that army
were mostly members of ArjunaГӯs own family,
and his own kith and kin. It was an invitation
to Arjuna to see those near and dear ones drawn
up for battle. This covert suggestion from
the Lord brought to light ArjunaГӯs deep
identification with, and attachment to his own
family, which had up till now remained
concealed within his heart. These words, as
it were, acted as the seed from which sprung
the faint-heartedness of Arjuna caused by
compassion, the source of which was affection
for blood relations. It appears that in order to
make available His blessings to the world, using
Arjuna as His instrument, the Lord through
the use of these words produced such a
dejection in ArjunaГӯs mind that he refused to
participate in the war, as the result of which
there began to flow from the direct lips of God
Himself the sweet and nectarean stream of
words in the form of the divine GвҲӮtВөa, which
sanctified the three worlds, and uplifted, and
will continue, for an infinite period of time,
to uplift the souls of an infinite number of beings.
SaВӨjaya said: O king, thus addressed by Arjuna, вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a placed the
magnificent chariot between the two armies in front of BhвҲӮВ¶ma, DroЖ’a and all the
kings and said, Г«Г«Arjuna, behold these Kauravas assembled here.ГӯГӯ
(24-25)
Hearing the above words of BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a what Arjuna did, is now being
described by SaВӨjaya.
ГғГІГҠГҠВ¬вүҘГҝГҒГ SГ•ГғГҠГЈВ¬ГҠГ•ВёвҖ” ГҒВ¬ГғГҺГҺЕёГ• ГҒВ¬ГғГҠв—ҠвҖһUГҠЕёЛңвҖ“
вҖўГҠГёГҠГҝГҠВёГЈв—ҠГҠГғГҲвҲӮUГ”ГҠГЈГ·ЛқГҠГғГҺГҺГЈВ¬ГҲГІГҠГҠГЈВ¬ГҠГ’ГІГҠГҠГЈвҖҡПҖГ”ГӢВҘSГғГ•ГҠ H 26H
EвүҘГҠГҲвҒ„UГҠГЈвҖҡГҲNЕ’pГ’п¬Ӯ 
вҖҡпЈҝЕёГҝГҠпЈҝLВ§Г·ГҝГҠпЈҝвҒ„UГҒВ¬вҖ“
ГғГІГҠ there; вҖўВ¬вүҘГҝГғЛң saw; ГҒSГ•ГғГҠЕёЛңГ” stationed; В¬ГҠГ•ВёвҖ” Arjuna; ГҒВ¬ГғГҺГҺЕёЛң (his) uncles; вҖўГ• now; ГҒВ¬ГғГҠв—ҠвҖһUГҠЕёЛң
grand-uncles (and even great grand-uncles); вҖўГҠГёГҠГҝГҠВёЕёЛң teachers; в—ҠГҠГғГҲвҲӮUГҠЕёЛң maternal uncles; Г·ЛқГҠГғГҺГҺЕёЛң
brothers (and cousins); В¬ГҲГІГҠГҠЕёЛң sons (and nephews); В¬ГҠГ’ГІГҠГҠЕёЛң grand-nephews; вҖҡПҖГӢЕёЛң friends; ГғГ•ГҠ
even so; EвүҘГҠГҲвҒ„UГҠЕёЛң fathers-in-law; вҖҡГҲNЕ’вҖ” well-wishers; Гё and; вҲһп¬Ӯ as well; вҖҡпЈҝЕёГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” В©UГ·ГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” вҖўГҒВ¬ in
both the armies.
Now Arjuna saw stationed there in both the armies his uncles, grand-uncles
and teachers, even great grand-uncles, maternal uncles, brothers and cousins, sons

=== PAGE 54 ===

* Chapter I *
53
Hearing the above direction of the Lord,
Arjuna lifted his eyes, and, looking up and
down, scanned all his relations stationed in
the two armies. There he observed posted in
both the armies, uncles like BhВөuriвҖ№ravВөa, and
grand-uncles and great-grand-uncles, like
BhвҲӮВ¶ma, Somadatta and BВөahlвҲӮka. There were
teachers like DroЖ’ВөacВөarya and KГҰpВөacВөarya.
Purujit, Kuntibhoja and вҖәalya (MВөadrвҲӮГӯs brother)
etc., were maternal uncles, YudhiВ¶Вўhira, KarЖ’a,
etc., were his brothers, and Duryodhana,
etc., his cousins. Abhimanyu, Prativindhya,
GhaВўotkaca and LakВ¶maЖ’a etc., were his sons,
or sons of his brothers and cousins. The sons
of LakВ¶maЖ’a, etc., were related to him as
grand-nephews. Besides, there were many
friends and playmates of early youth. Drupada,
вҖәaibya, etc., were fathers-in-law. There were
also many well-wishers in both the armies,
who came to participate in the fight only
with the object of doing good to their respective
sides, without any selfish motive.
and nephews, and grand-nephews, even so, friends, fathers-in-law and well-wishers
as well.                                              (26, & first half of 27)
the impending holocaust, his heart gave way
and he was suddenly overtaken by a sentiment
which was the reverse of what a fighter should
possess, a sneaky cowardliness born of
excessive fellow-feeling and tenderness. This
is mentioned in SaВӨjayaГӯs words as Г«deep
compassionГӯ. Under its influence Arjuna forgot
his own inherent nature, the manliness of a
KВ¶atriya: that is why he has been referred to
as Г«filled with compassionГӯ.
The word Г«Г«IdamГӯГӯ meaning Г«these wordsГӯ,
used in this verse, refers to all the words
uttered by Arjuna in verses beginning with
the next and ending with verse 46 of this
chapter.
The preceding one and a half verses
mentioned ArjunaГӯs uncles, grand-uncles and
many other relations, who stood in both the
armies; but there were other relations of his
among the fighters, the nature of whose
relationship with him he did not clearly bring
out, e.g., wifeГӯs brothers like DhГҰВ¶Вўadyumna,
вҖәikhaЖ’Е’вҲӮ and Suratha, etc., and sisterГӯs
husbands like Jayadratha, etc., and other
fighters related to him in other ways, who
are all referred to by SaВӨjaya in this verse,
when he says Г«all relations present there.Гӯ
When Arjuna saw all those near and dear
ones arrayed for battle, and thought that all
of them would meet their inevitable doom in
SaВӨjaya now describes what Arjuna did after thus observing the warriors in the two
armies.
ГғГҠГЈвҖҡв—ҠГӢЛҮГҝ вҖҡ вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГЈвҖҷГЈЕ“ГҚЕёп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғГҠЕёЛңH 27H
вҲ‘ГҺВ§В¬ГҝГҠ 
В¬вҒ„UГҝГҠГҒп¬ӮCГ”UГҠпЈҝ 
ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГӢЕ’ГҒГӣГҠЕ’в—ҠвҖҷЛқп¬ӮГӢГғЛңГ”ЛңвҖ“
ГғГҠЕёЛң those; вҖҡв—ҠГӢЛҮГҝГ” seeing; вҖҡвҖ” the same; вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝвҖ” the son of KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna; вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёЕёЛң all; вҖҷГЈЕ“ГҚЕёЛң
relations; вҖўп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғГҠЕёЛң present; вҲ‘ГҺВ§В¬ГҝГҠ В¬вҒ„UГҝГҠ with deep compassion; вҖўГҠГҒп¬ӮCГ”UвҖ” filled; ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГӢЕ’ЕёЛң
sorrowing; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛң these (words); вҖўвҖҷЛқп¬ӮГӢГғЛң uttered.
Seeing all those relations present there, Arjuna was overcome with deep compassion,
and uttered these words in sadness. (Second half of 27 and first half of 28).
(28)
In the next two and a half verses, Arjuna himself describes to what a miserable state
he had been reduced by his excessively soft feelings for his relations:

=== PAGE 55 ===

54
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
By the above words, Arjuna intends to
show that the effect of indiscriminate slaughter
of the fighters in the great War would be
extremely horrific for both sides. He knew
it as a matter of fact that the warriors present
before his eyes, young and old,Гіdear uncles,
cousins, relations and friends,Гіall would
walk into the jaws of death. The realization
of this fact, all at once, produced such a
sentimental pity in his heart,Гіsuch a deep
fright and compassion in the mind,Гіthat
they produced their reaction on the body in
the form of trembling of limbs, and hair
standing on end.
вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
Е’ГҺВ¶Г”пЈҝUв—ҠВў Sп¬ӮВЎЕёВў вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ ГҝГҲГҝГҲГ вҖҡГҲВў вҖҡв—ҠГҲВ¬ГҒSГ•Гғв—ҠЛңH 28H
вҖҡГӢЕ’ГҒГЈГғ в—Ҡв—Ҡ ВӘГҠГІГҠГҠГҒГЎГҠ в—ҠГҲПҖВў Гё В¬ГҒвҒ„UвүҘГҠГҲcГҝГҒГғвҖ“
п¬ӮпЈҝВ¬Г•ГҲp вүҘГҠГ”вҒ„UГӢвҒ„пЈҝU в—ҠпЈҝ вҒ„UГҠпЈҝв—ҠвҖһUВ·Вёp ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝH 29H
Е’ГҺВ¶Г”UГҠГ” at the sight of; Гҹв—Ҡв—ҠЛң Sп¬ӮВЎЕёв—ҠЛң these kinsmen; вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ O KГҰВ¶Ж’a; ГҝГҲГҝГҲГ вҖҡГҲв—ҠЛң longing for battle;
вҖҡв—ҠГҲВ¬ГҒSГ•Гғв—ҠЛң arrayed; вҖҡГӢЕ’ГҒГЈГғ give way; в—Ҡв—Ҡ my; ВӘГҠГІГҠГҠГҒГЎГҠ limbs; в—ҠГҲПҖв—ҠЛң (my) mouth; Гё and; В¬ГҒвҒ„UвүҘГҠГҲcГҝГҒГғ
is parching; п¬ӮпЈҝВ¬Г•ГҲвҖ” a shiver; Гё nay; вүҘГҠГ”вҒ„UГӢвҒ„пЈҝU в—ҠпЈҝ (runs) through my body; вҒ„UГҠпЈҝв—ҠвҖһUВ·ВёвҖ” horripilation;
Гё and; ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝ takes place.
Arjuna said: KГҰВ¶Ж’a, at the sight of these kinsmen arrayed for battle my limbs
give way, and my mouth is getting parched; nay, a shiver runs through my body
and hair stands on end.
(2nd half of 28 and 29)
his limbs had become numb and wholly devoid
of power; far from being able to string his
bow, GВөaЖ’Е’вҲӮva and wield it, he could not even
hold it in his hand, and it seemed to him to
It was an extremely deplorable and
grievous state to which Arjuna was reduced
by the softness of heart caused by his
compassion. Describing it, he himself said that
ВӘГҠГЎВ«UГӢп¬ӮВў dВўвҖҡГғпЈҝ вҖһUSГғГҠГ»п¬ӮBГ’В§п¬Ӯ В¬ГҒвҒ„UЕ’sГ”ГғпЈҝвҖ“
Её Гё вүҘГҠвҲ‘AВ§ГҠпЈҝГӘГҝп¬ӮSГ•ГҠГғГҲВў Г·Лқв—ҠГғГӢп¬Ӯ Гё в—ҠпЈҝ в—ҠЕёвҖ”H 30H
ВӘГҠГЎВ«UГӢп¬Ӯв—ҠЛң the bow GВөaЖ’Е’вҲӮva; dВўвҖҡГғпЈҝ slips; вҖһUSГғГҠГғЛң from (my) hand; Г п¬ӮвҲ‘Лң (my) skin; Гё and;
вҲһп¬Ӯ too; В¬ГҒвҒ„UЕ’sГ”ГғпЈҝ burns all over; Её Гё вүҘГҠвҲ‘AВ§ГҠпЈҝГҒв—Ҡ I am not (even) able and; вҖўп¬ӮSГ•ГҠГғГҲв—ҠЛң to stand;
Г·Лқв—ҠГҒГғ reels; Гҹп¬Ӯ as it were; Гё and (hence); в—ҠпЈҝ my; в—ҠЕёвҖ” mind.
The bow, GВөaЖ’Е’вҲӮva,* slips from my hand and my skin too burns all over; my
brain is whirling, as it were, and I can no longer stand straight.                  (30)
*
The GВөaЖ’Е’вҲӮva bow possessed by Arjuna was a celestial weapon. It was of the size of a palm tree
(Vide MahВөa., Udyoga., 161). Arjuna himself, disguised as the eunuch BГҰhannalВөa, gave a description of
it to Prince Uttara in the following terms:ГіГ«This is the world-renowned bow of Arjuna. It is plated all
over with gold, is the best of all weapons and possesses the power of a hundred thousand weapons. It
is with this bow that Arjuna has conquered gods and men. This wonderful, variegated, peculiar, delicate
and gigantic bow was adored for a long time by gods, demons and Gandharvas (celestial musicians). This
super-celestial bow was kept for a thousand years by BrahmВөa, for 503 years by PrajВөapati, for 85 years
by Indra, for 500 years by the moon-god and for a hundred years by VaruЖ’a (the god of waters)Гӯ. Arjuna
got it from VaruЖ’a at the instance of the Fire-god, who was pleased with him for his having offered the
KhВөaЖ’Е’ava forest to the Fire-god for consumption (Vide MahВөa., Г…di., 225).

=== PAGE 56 ===

* Chapter I *
55
be actually dropping out of his hand. The
thought of the dreadful effect of the war had
made his mind almost like a boiling cauldron,
as the effect of which his very skin was
burning; the mental agony had made his mind
so restless that he could not fix it on anything
even for a moment. His head was reeling, and
he felt as if he would fall senseless to the ground.
he meant that no form of good could be
expected from such killing of near relations
and friends. For, firstly, doing to death of
relations by violence was bound to lead to
repentence, which would ever after continue
to corrode the mind. Secondly, in their
absence life would be quite miserable. And,
thirdly, sin would accrue from such killing.
Thus it was beneficial neither from the point
of view of this world, nor from that of the
next. Therefore, Arjuna held that it was not
at all advisable to start the war.
Omens portend either good or evil. The
word Г«NimittВөaniГӯ in the present verse refers
to such omens. An untimely eclipse, shaking
of the earth and shooting of stars in the
skyГіall these inauspicious omens gave an
indication to ArjunaГӯs mind that the result
of this War would not be happy. That is
why he pointed out that, in his opinion,
it appeared better not to engage in that
fight.
When Arjuna said that he did not see
any good in killing his kith and kin in battle,
Describing his state of dejection in the above words, Arjuna now proceeds to give
his reasons against the War :Гі
ГҒЕёГҒв—ҠГ»ГҠГҠГҒЕё Гё В¬вүҘГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ ГҒп¬ӮВ¬вҒ„UГӢГғГҠГҒЕё вҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠп¬ӮвҖ“
Её Гё ГјГҠпЈҝГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳЕёГҲВ¬вүҘГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ вҖһUГ п¬ӮГҠ Sп¬ӮВЎЕёв—ҠГҠвҖһUп¬ӮпЈҝH 31H
ГҒЕёГҒв—ҠГ»ГҠГҠГҒЕё the omens (also); Гё and; В¬вүҘГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ I see; ГҒп¬ӮВ¬вҒ„UГӢГғГҠГҒЕё adverse; вҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠГ”п¬Ӯ O KГҰВ¶Ж’a (lit.,
the Supreme Deity); Её Гё nor; ГјГҠпЈҝГҝвҖ” (any) good; вҖўЕёГҲВ¬вүҘГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ I see; вҖһUГ п¬ӮГҠ in killing; Sп¬ӮВЎЕёв—ҠЛң my
kith and kin; вҖўГҠвҖһUп¬ӮпЈҝ in battle.
And, KeвҖ№ava, I see such omens of evil; nor do I see any good in killing my
kinsmen in battle.                                                       (31)
by killing those near and dear ones were not
at all coveted by him. He clearly visualized
that the slaughter of those relations would
Drawing a faithful picture of the state
of his mind, Arjuna said that victory, kingdom
and earthly pleasures which he would gain
In the above verse, Arjuna said that there was no possibility of any form of good
resulting from the killing of kith and kin in battle. Now, he proceeds to re-emphasize that
idea in another form:
Её вҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUЛҮГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮВЎГҝВў вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ Её Гё вҒ„UГҠГ–ГҝВў вҖҡГҲПҖГҠГҒЕё ГёвҖ“
ГҒвҲ‘Вў ЕёГҠпЈҝ вҒ„UГҠГ–ГҝпЈҝЕё ВӘГҠпЈҝГҒп¬ӮГЈЕ’ ГҒвҲ‘ВўВ§ Г·ГҠпЈҝВӘГ’ВЎГӢВёГҒп¬ӮГғпЈҝЕё п¬ӮГҠH 32H
Её not; вҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUЛҮГҠпЈҝ I covet; ГҒп¬ӮВЎГҝв—ҠЛң victory; вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ O KГҰВ¶Ж’a; Её Гё nor; вҒ„UГҠГ–Гҝв—ҠЛң kingdom; вҖҡГҲПҖГҠГҒЕё
pleasures; (Её) Гё nor; ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛң of what use (is); ЕёвҖ” to us; вҒ„UГҠГ–ГҝпЈҝЕё kingdom; ВӘГҠпЈҝГҒп¬ӮГЈЕ’ O KГҰВ¶Ж’a
(lit., Protector of cows); ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛң Г·ГҠпЈҝВӘГ’вҖ” of what use (are) luxuries; ВЎГӢГҒп¬ӮГғпЈҝЕё п¬ӮГҠ or even life.
KГҰВ¶Ж’a, I do not covet victory, nor kingdom nor pleasures. Govinda, of what
use will kingdom, or luxuries, or even life be to us !                      (32)

=== PAGE 57 ===

56
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
bring him in this world as well as in the next
nothing but mental agony and torture. Then,
what for should he fight, why should he put
them to death? What would he do with a
kingdom and pleasures obtained by such
dreadful means ? He put it as his definite
opinion that after killing them, life would be
of no use to him whatsoever.
Relations like teachers, grand-uncles
and uncles etc., had already been mentioned
in a previous verse. Here, referring to two
other relations, viz., Г«wifeГӯs brothersГӯ like
DhГҰВ¶Вўadyumna, вҖәikhaЖ’Е’вҲӮ and Suratha etc.,
and Г«other relationsГӯ like Jayadratha etc.,
Arjuna wanted to say that in this world
people exert to gain wealth and objects of
enjoyment for the sake of their relations only,
who were the centres of their affection.
When all such relations would be killed in
battle, what purpose would be served by
kingship, and other objects of enjoyment?
Such a kingdom, and such pleasures, would
be nothing but sources of extreme misery
and distress.
Here Arjuna says that rulership of a
kingdom and all the pleasures and enjoyments
which follow in the wake of the possession
of such authority, were not necessary for his
own use at all. He knew it well that such
pleasures were neither permanent, nor the
possessions themselves everlasting. If he had
craved for a kingdom, it was only for those
brothers, friends and relations; but now he
observed that they had all assembled on the
battle-field ready to sacrifice their lives. Of
what use would be the kingdom, luxuries
and pleasures, if they all departed from the
earth by mutual slaughter ? Therefore, from
any point of view whatsoever, it was
undesirable to resort to war.
Arjuna now gives his reasons for not coveting a kingdom and other pleasures obtained
by wading through the blood of his kith and kin:
ГҝпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠГ•пЈҝВё вҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUГҒЛҮГҠГғВў ЕёГҠпЈҝ вҒ„UГҠГ–ГҝВў Г·ГҠпЈҝВӘГҠвҖ” вҖҡГҲПҖГҠГҒЕё ГёвҖ“
Гғ Гҹв—ҠпЈҝЛҳп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғГҠ ГҝГҲhпЈҝ В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠВўSГ ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ Е“ЕёГҠГҒЕё ГёH 33H
вҖўГҠГёГҠГҝГҠВёвҖ” ГҒВ¬ГғвҒ„UвҖ” В¬ГҲГІГҠГҠSГғГ•Г’п¬Ӯ Гё ГҒВ¬ГғГҠв—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖ”вҖ“
в—ҠГҠГғГҲвҲӮUГ”ГҠвҖ” EвҖЎГҠГҲвҒ„UГҠвҖ” В¬ГҠГ’ГІГҠГҠвҖ” вүҘГҝГҠвҲӮUГҠвҖ” вҖҡГӘвҖҷГҒГЈЕ“ЕёSГғГ•ГҠH 34H
ГҝпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠЛң вҖўГ•пЈҝВё for whose sake; вҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUГҒЛҮГҠГғв—ҠЛң ЕёвҖ” (is) coveted by us; вҒ„UГҠГ–Гҝв—ҠЛң (the) throne, kingdom;
Г·ГҠпЈҝВӘГҠвҖ” luxuries; вҖҡГҲПҖГҠГҒЕё pleasures; Гё and; ГғпЈҝ Гҹв—ҠпЈҝ those very persons, (viz); вҖўп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғГҠвҖ” stand arrayed
(here); ГҝГҲhпЈҝ on the battle-field; В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠЕёЛң (their) lives; Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ risking; Е“ЕёГҠГҒЕё riches; Гё and; вҖўГҠГёГҠГҝГҠВёвҖ”
teachers; ГҒВ¬ГғвҒ„UвҖ” uncles; В¬ГҲГІГҠГҠвҖ” sons and nephews; ГғГ•ГҠ вҲһп¬Ӯ even so; Гё and; ГҒВ¬ГғГҠв—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖ” grand-
uncles (and great grand-uncles); в—ҠГҠГғГҲвҲӮUГ”ГҠвҖ” maternal uncles; EвүҘГҠГҲвҒ„UГҠвҖ” fathers-in-law; В¬ГҠГ’ГІГҠГҠвҖ” grand-
nephews; вүҘГҝГҠвҲӮUГ”ГҠвҖ” brothers-in-law (wifeГӯs brothers); вҖҡГӘвҖҷГҒГЈЕ“ЕёвҖ” other relations; ГғГ•ГҠ and.
Those very persons for whose sake we covet the kingdom, luxuries and pleasuresГі
teachers, uncles, sons and nephews and, even so, grand-uncles and great grand-uncles,
maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grand-nephews, brothers-in-law and other relationsГі
are here arrayed on the battle-field staking their lives and wealth.              (33, 34)
Showing the relation in which he stood to the heroes assembled in the two armies,
Arjuna now expresses his unwillingness to kill them for any reason whatsoever:

=== PAGE 58 ===

* Chapter I *
57
Arjuna here says that the slaughter of
DhГҰtarВөaВ¶ВўraГӯs sons and their associates in the
opposite army would bring no good, either
in this world or in the next; when thus it
would fail to bring about what was desired;
it could never bring delight or joy in any
shape or form. Therefore, he did not want
to kill them from any point of view.
Lord Manu says in clear terms, in his
famous Code (VIII.350-51):ГіГ«Г«An attacking
desperado must be killed without hesitation.
No sin accrues to a slayer, when he slays
a desperado.ГӯГӯ*
As for a desperado, the VasiВ¶Вўha-SmГҰti
defines him in the following words (Vide
III.19):ГіГ«Г«Criminals guilty of the following
six forms of crime are classed as desperadoes:Гі
setting fire to a house; administration of poison;
attempt to attack with weapon in hand; robbing
of wealth; dispossessing a rightful owner of
вҲһГғГҠГӣГҠ вҖһUГЈГғГҲГҒв—ҠГ«ВҝUГҠГҒв—Ҡ ГүГҠAГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ в—ҠЕ“ГҲвҖҡГҚЕ’ЕёвҖ“
вҖўГҒВ¬ ГІГҠГ’вҲӮUГҠпЈҝГ„ГҝвҒ„UГҠГ–ГҝSГҝ вҖһпЈҝUГғГҠпЈҝвҖ” ГҒвҲ‘ВўВ§ ЕёГҲ в—ҠвҖһUГӢвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғпЈҝH 35H
вҲһГғГҠЕёЛң them; Её not; вҖһUГЈГғГҲв—ҠЛң to kill; ГҹГ«ВҝUГҠГҒв—Ҡ I want; ГүГҠAГғвҖ” вҖўГҒВ¬ even though they may slay me;
в—ҠЕ“ГҲвҖҡГҚЕ’Её O KГҰВ¶Ж’a (lit., the slayer of demon Madhu); вҖўГҒВ¬ ГІГҠГ’вҲӮUГ”ГҠпЈҝГ„ГҝвҒ„ГҠUГ–ГҝSГҝ вҖһпЈҝUГғГҠпЈҝвҖ” even for the
sovereignty of the three worlds; ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛң ЕёГҲ how, then (shall I kill them); в—ҠвҖһUГӢвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғпЈҝ for (this) earth.
O Slayer of Madhu, I do not want to kill them, though they may slay me, even for
the sovereignty over the three worlds; how much the less for the earthly kingdom! (35)
only with the motive of keeping the kingdom
under their possession. When refraining from
fight, he would himself give up all claim to
the kingdom, there would remain no cause
for them to think of killing him. But if, in
spite of this, any fighter in the rival army
thought of making an attempt on ArjunaГӯs
life, Arjuna for his part would not kill him.
By using the words Г«GhnataВЁГӯ and Г«ApiГӯ
in the above verse, Arjuna indicates that apart
from the fighters on his own side, who would
in no case act in opposition to him, even those
of his relations who were posted in the opposite
ranks, would very likely give up their desire
to kill him when he would refrain from the
fight. For they came to oppose him in battle
At this point, it might be asked why he did not want to kill them, even for the
sovereignty of the three worlds. In reply to this Arjuna says that nothing would be gained
by slaying those near relations; on the other hand, sin would accrue from it. He thus
re-emphasizes the standpoint already taken up by him in the previous verse:
ГҒЕёвҖһUГ Гҝ Е“ГҠГғВёвҒ„UГҠcвүҲЛӣUГҠГӣГҠвҖ” вҲ‘В§ГҠ В¬ЛқГӢГҒГғвҖ” SГҝГҠГ®ГҠЕёГҠЕ’ВёЕёвҖ“
В¬ГҠВ¬в—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮГҠГјГҠГҝпЈҝЕ’Sв—ҠГҠЕёЛң 
вҖһUГ п¬ӮГ’ГғГҠЕёГҠГғГғГҠГҒГҝЕёвҖ”H 36H
ГҒЕёвҖһUГ Гҝ slaying; Е“ГҠГғВёвҒ„UГҠcвүҲЛӣUГҠЕёЛң the sons of DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra; ЕёвҖ” to us; вҲ‘В§ГҠ what; В¬ЛқГӢГҒГғвҖ” joy; SГҝГҠГғЛң can be;
ВЎЕёГҠЕ’ВёЕё O KГҰВ¶Ж’a (lit., one who is invoked by all men); В¬ГҠВ¬в—ҠЛң sin; вҲһп¬Ӯ only; вҖўГҠГјГҠГҝпЈҝГғЛң will take hold of;
вҖўSв—ҠГҠЕёЛң us; вҖһUГ п¬ӮГҠ killing; вҲһГғГҠЕёЛң them; вҖўГҠГғГғГҠГҒГҝЕёвҖ” desperadoes (though they are).
KГҰВ¶Ж’a, how can we hope to be happy slaying the sons of DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra; killing
even these desperadoes, sin will surely accrue to us.                          (36)
*
вҖўГҠГғГғГҠГҒГҝЕёв—ҠГҠГҝГҠГЈГғВў вҖһUГЈГҝГҠЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠГҒп¬ӮГёГҠвҒ„UГҝЕёЛңвҖ“ ЕёГҠГғГғГҠГҒГҝп¬ӮЕ“пЈҝ Е’ГҠпЈҝВ·ГҠпЈҝ вҖһUГЈГғГҲГ·Вёп¬ӮГҒГғ вҲ‘В§pЕёH

=== PAGE 59 ===

58
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
his land; abduction of a woman.ГӯГӯ*
In Duryodhana and his friends all these
marks of desperadoes could be found in their
entirety. By setting fire to the house made
of lac, they had attempted on the life of the
PВөaЖ’Е’avas; BhвҲӮmasena had been given poison,
with his food; and now they came prepared,
weapon in hand, to kill the PВөaЖ’Е’avas in
battle. In the game of dice, they had defrauded
the PВөaЖ’Е’avas of all their wealth and even
of their kingdom. By dragging DraupadвҲӮ to
the open Court they had subjected her to a
barbarous form of ignominy, and Jayadratha
had even tried to abduct her. Under these
circumstances, the idea of sin accruing from
killing Duryodhana and his friends ought not
to have dejected ArjunaГӯs mind. But there
is a statement in another SmГҰti text to the
following effect: Г«He who destroys his own
race and family is the greatest sinner.ГӯвҖ“
Regarding this injunction to be of much
greater weight, and stronger, than a common
injunction, Arjuna gave expression to these
ideas. He goes on upholding, and elucidating,
this stand-point up to the very end of this
Chapter.
Showing so far that the slaughter of oneГӯs kith and kin was harmful from every point
of view, Arjuna now pronounces his definite opinion on the subject:
ГғSв—ҠГҠГӣГҠГҠвҖһUГҠВё п¬ӮГҝВў вҖһUГЈГғГҲВў Е“ГҠГғВёвҒ„UГҠcвүҲЛӣUГҠГЈSп¬ӮвҖҷГҠГЈЕ“п¬ӮГҠЕёЛңвҖ“
Sп¬ӮВЎЕёВў ГҒвҖһU вҲ‘В§Г•Вў вҖһUГ п¬ӮГҠ вҖҡГҲГҒПҖЕёвҖ” SГҝГҠв—Ҡ в—ҠГҠЕ“п¬ӮH 37H
ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛң therefore; Её вҖўвҖһUГҠВёвҖ” ought not; п¬ӮГҝв—ҠЛң we; вҖһUГЈГғГҲв—ҠЛң to kill; Е“ГҠГғВёвҒ„UГҠcвүҲЛӣUГҠЕёЛң the sons of DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra;
Sп¬ӮвҖҷГҠГЈЕ“п¬ӮГҠЕёЛң our relations; Sп¬ӮВЎЕёв—ҠЛң our own kinsmen; ГҒвҖһU for; вҲ‘В§Г•в—ҠЛң how; вҖһUГ п¬ӮГҠ killing; вҖҡГҲГҒПҖЕёвҖ”
happy; SГҝГҠв—Ҡ can we be; в—ҠГҠЕ“п¬Ӯ O KГҰВ¶Ж’a.
Therefore, KГҰВ¶Ж’a, it does not behove us to kill our relations, the sons of
DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra. For how can we be happy by killing our own kinsmen?
(37)
opinion that it would be altogether unbecoming
on the part of the PВөaЖ’Е’avas to kill Duryodhana
and other relations in the Kaurava army. He
held that there was not the slightest possibility
of the PВөaЖ’Е’avas obtaining any form of
happiness, in this world or the next, by
killing these near ones. Therefore, he said
he did not want to fight.
By using the word Г«TasmВөatГӯ (therefore)
at the beginning of the verse, Arjuna meant
to say that looking to the sad mental and
physical plight to which he had been reduced
and the reasons put forward by him against
entering upon the War, and because, again,
of the other thoughts which were surging
within his mind, he was definitely of the
At this point it may be argued that the blame for the destruction of the race and family
attached equally to both the parties. Considering this, if Duryodhana did not think of retiring
from the struggle, why should Arjuna, for his part, bestow so much thought on this aspect
of the problem ? Arjuna gives his reply to his question in the following two verses:
ГҝlГҘГҝпЈҝГғпЈҝ Её В¬вүҘГҝГҒГЈГғ вҲӮUГ”ГҠпЈҝГ·ГҠпЈҝВ¬вҖһUГғГёпЈҝГғвҖҡвҖ”вҖ“
вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮUЛҮГҠГҝвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғВў Е’ГҠпЈҝВ·Вў ГҒв—ҠГІГҠВәЛқГҠпЈҝвҖһпЈҝU Гё В¬ГҠГғвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңH 38H
*
вҖўГҒВӘAЕ’ГҠпЈҝ 
ВӘвҒ„UЕ’pГ’п¬Ӯ 
вүҘГҠГ”Г№В¬ГҠГҒГЎГҠЕ“ВёЕёГҠВ¬вҖһUвҖ” вҖ“ ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠЕ’ГҠвҒ„UГҠВ¬вҖһUГ»ГҠГҠВё Гё В·В«пЈҝUГғпЈҝ sГ”ГҠГғГғГҠГҒГҝЕёвҖ”H
вҖ“
вҖҡ вҲһп¬Ӯ В¬ГҠГҒВ¬DГ”UГғв—ҠГҠпЈҝ ГҝвҖ” вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГҝГҠВёГғЛң вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮUЕёГҠвүҘГҠЕёв—ҠЛң вҖ“

=== PAGE 60 ===

* Chapter I *
59
Here Arjuna means to say that such action
on the part of Duryodhana and his friends was
no doubt most reprehensible, but it was not
unnatural for them; for their inordinate greed
had wholly destroyed their power of
discrimination between good and evil. Therefore,
they could not see the great evil and disaster
that would inevitably follow the destruction of
all members of the race, nor could they realize
what a dreadful sin it was to look upon relations
and friends as enemies and fight with them for
mutual slaughter. Arjuna and his brothers,
however, were not blinded by greed; they could
clearly see what evil and disaster would ensue
from the destruction of the family and race.
Therefore, knowingly, and with their eyes wide
open, why should they be guilty of such an
outrageous sin ! They should, therefore,
considering the evil nature of the act, withdraw
themselves from the fight.
вҲ‘В§Г•Вў Её ГҙГҠпЈҝГҝв—ҠSв—ҠГҠГҒГ·вҖ” В¬ГҠВ¬ГҠЕ’Sв—ҠГҠГҒГӣГҠп¬ӮГҢГғГғГҲв—ҠЛңвҖ“
вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮUЛҮГҠГҝвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғВў 
Е’ГҠпЈҝВ·Вў 
В¬ЛқВ¬вүҘГҝГҒjВЎВёЕёГҠЕ’ВёЕёH 39H
ГҝГҒЕ’ if; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; вҲһГғпЈҝ these (people); Её not; В¬вүҘГҝГҒГЈГғ perceive; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝГ·ГҠпЈҝВ¬вҖһUГғГёпЈҝГғвҖҡвҖ” having (their)
minds blinded by greed; вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮUЛҮГҠГҝвҲ‘ГҺВ§Гғв—ҠЛң resulting from the destruction of oneГӯs own race; Е’ГҠпЈҝВ·в—ҠЛң
the evil; ГҒв—ҠГІГҠВәЛқГҠпЈҝвҖһпЈҝU (involved) in treason to (oneГӯs) friends; Гё and; В¬ГҠГғвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛң the sin; вҲ‘В§Г•в—ҠЛң why;
Её not; ГҙГҠпЈҝГҝв—ҠЛң should be thought of; вҖўSв—ҠГҠГҒГ·вҖ” by us; В¬ГҠВ¬ГҠГғЛң вҖўSв—ҠГҠГғЛң from this crime; ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҒГғВёГғГҲв—ҠЛң
turning away; вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮUЛҮГҠГҝвҲ‘ГҺВ§Гғв—ҠЛң resulting from the destruction of oneГӯs own race; Е’ГҠпЈҝВ·в—ҠЛң evil;
В¬ЛқВ¬вүҘГҝГҒjвҖ” clearly seeing; ВЎЕёГҠЕ’ВёЕё O KГҰВ¶Ж’a.
Even though these people, with their mind blinded by greed, perceive no evil
in destroying their own race and no sin in treason to friends, why should not we,
O KГҰВ¶Ж’a, who see clearly the sin accruing from the destruction of oneГӯs family, think
of desisting from this crime?
(38, 39)
Through the destruction of the family, when
the older members possessing knowledge of
these customs and traditions have disappeared
from the scene, it is but natural for the
remnant of straggling women and children
to lose this knowledge, and thus those
traditions disappear and get lost.
There are five incentives, which compel
Every good family is a repertorium of
many good and beneficial customs and usages,
which are handed down from generation to
generation, and help to maintain the high
standard of conduct of the family and prevent
its men and women from going astray. These
beneficial and uplifting customs and usages
are known in one word as Г«family traditionsГӯ.
Arjuna now proceeds to show what evils follow the destruction of the race:
вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮUЛҮГҠГҝпЈҝ В¬ЛқГЎГҠвүҘГҝГҒГЈГғ вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮUЕ“в—ҠГҠВёвҖ” вҖҡЕёГҠГғЕёГҠвҖ”вҖ“
Е“в—ҠпЈҝВё ЕёCГ”пЈҝU вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮВўU вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г Fв—ҠЕ“в—ҠГҠпЈҝВёЛҳГҒГ·Г·п¬ӮГ ГҝГҲГғH 40H
вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮUЛҮГҠГҝпЈҝ with the destruction of a family; В¬ЛқГЎГҠвүҘГҝГҒГЈГғ disappear; вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮUЕ“в—ҠГҠВёвҖ” family traditions;
вҖҡЕёГҠГғЕёГҠвҖ” age-long; Е“в—ҠпЈҝВё ЕёCГ”пЈҝU virtue having been lost; вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮUв—ҠЛң the family; вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г Fв—ҠЛң entire; вҖўЕ“в—ҠВёвҖ” vice;
вҖўГҒГ·Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ takes hold of; В©UГғ and.
Age-long family traditions disappear with the destruction of a family; and virtue
having been lost, vice takes hold of the entire race.
(40)

=== PAGE 61 ===

60
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
man to keep to the path of virtue and avoid
sin. These are: fear of God, command of the
scriptures, fear of violation of the family
traditions, State laws, fear of physical injury
or pecuniary loss. Among these, God, though
absolutely real, and command of the scriptures,
though representing Truth, depend on manГӯs
faith, and are not direct or perceptible
incentives. State laws govern only the subjects
of the State; but those who wield power
generally do not respect them. Fear of physical
injury or pecuniary loss affects only individuals,
in the majority of cases. Family traditions alone
link up the individual with the family and
society. The society and family which lose
these beneficial customs and traditions become
as unruly and wayward as a restive steed
without the control of a bridle. A self-willed
man will not tolerate any law, however
uplifting it may be. When the members of a
society or family throw off every form of
restraint, sin extends its sway over that society
or family as a matter of course. This is what
is meant by Г«sin takes hold of the entire familyГӯ.
or turn hostile to them. In that state the sacred
law of conjugal fidelity, which is the very
root and foundation of the social code, loses
its hold on society. That ideal being lost,
women of the purest families get corrupt and
tainted with the vice of adultery. They have
sensual connections with men of different
castes. The caste of the mother being different
from that of the father, the offspring of such
a union is of mixed blood. Thus the purity
of the race maintained from generation to
generation, gets totally lost.
With the disappearance of family traditions
as men and women lose all forms of restraint,
their activities, in most cases, begin to be
tainted by vice; the result is that sin becomes
predominant and spreads itself over the
whole society. Moral values begin to be
treated as outworn formulas and lose their
import in the eyes of men and women. Far
from observing the rules of morality and
restraint, they even do not care to know
them, and make fun of those who volunteer
to acquaint them with such rules of conduct,
Arjuna now proceeds to show what happens after the entire family has thus come
under the sway of sin:
вҖўЕ“в—ҠГҠВёГҒГ·Г·п¬ӮГҠГ вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ В¬ЛқЕ’ГҲcГҝГҒГЈГғ вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮUГҒSГІГҠГҝвҖ”вҖ“
SГІГҠГӢВ·ГҲ Е’ГҲCГ”UГҠвҖҡГҲ п¬ӮГҠcГЎГҠпЈҝВёГҝ ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝ п¬ӮГЎГҠВёвҖҡVвҒ„UвҖ”H 41H
вҖўЕ“в—ҠГҠВёГҒГ·Г·п¬ӮГҠГғЛңГ” with the preponderance of vice; вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ O KГҰВ¶Ж’a; В¬ЛқЕ’ГҲcГҝГҒГЈГғ become corrupt;
вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮUГҒSГІГҠГҝвҖ” the women of the family; SГІГҠГӢВ·ГҲ Е’ГҲCГ”UГҠвҖҡГҲ (and) with the corruption of women; п¬ӮГҠcГЎГҠпЈҝВёГҝ
O KГҰВ¶Ж’a (lit., a descendant of the VГҰВ¶Ж’i); ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝ ensues; п¬ӮГЎГҠВёвҖҡVвҒ„UвҖ” intermixture of castes.
With the preponderance of vice, KГҰВ¶Ж’a, the women of the family become corrupt;
and with the corruption of women, O descendant of VГҰВ¶Ж’i, there ensues an
intermixture of castes.
(41)
Arjuna now shows the mischief caused by the intermixture of castes:
вҖҡVвҒ„UГҠпЈҝ ЕёвҒ„UвҲ‘В§ГҠГҝГ’п¬Ӯ вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮUГүГҠAГҠЕёГҠВў вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮUSГҝ ГёвҖ“
В¬ГғГҒГЈГғ ГҒВ¬ГғвҒ„ГҠпЈҝ sГ”пЈҝВ·ГҠВў вҲӮГҲU#ГҒВ¬ГЎВ«UГҠпЈҝЕ’вҲ‘В§ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГҠвҖ”H 42H
вҖҡVвҒ„UвҖ” admixture of blood; ЕёвҒ„UвҲ‘В§ГҠГҝ (makes) for damnation; вҲһп¬Ӯ surely; вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮUГүГҠAГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of the
destroyers of their race; вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮUSГҝ of the race (itself); Гё and; В¬ГғГҒГЈГғ fall; ГҒВ¬ГғвҒ„UвҖ” the manes;

=== PAGE 62 ===

* Chapter I *
61
as taught by the Vedas is implied by the
word Г«JВөatidharmaГӯ. It lays down duties for
the diverse castes and orders of society.
When healthy family customs disappear through
the death of the older members of the family,
who are the custodians of those customs, and
there is an aggravation of the evils leading
to an intermixture of castes, the VarЖ’a-
Dharma also dies a natural death. For, it
cannot abide in offspring produced by the
union of parents belonging to diverse castes.
That is how through the evils which bring
ГҒвҖһU also; вҲһВ·ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of their race; вҲӮГҲU#ГҒВ¬ГЎВ«UГҠпЈҝЕ’вҲ‘В§ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГҠвҖ” deprived of the offerings of rice and water
(вҖәrВөaddha and TarpaЖ’a).
Progeny owing to promiscuity damns the destroyers of the race as well as the
race itself. Deprived of the offerings of rice and water (вҖәrВөaddha, TarpaЖ’a, etc.), the
manes of their race also fall.                                                   (42)
destroyers of the race, virtue being lost the
offspring that appear as the result of admixture
of blood, being the products of vice and under
the sway of vice, do not, in the first place,
know anything about these rites and even if
instructed by somebody, fail to perform them
due to lack of faith; and if any of them
perchance performs them, they being
disqualified by the rules of scriptures, their
offerings do not reach the manes at all. Thus
deprived of the offerings of rice and water
from their descendants, the manes of the race
suffer a fall from the world of the manes.
Offering of lumps of rice to the manes
at the time of the вҖәrВөaddha ceremony and
feeding of BrВөahmaЖ’as, etc., for the satisfaction
of the manes are collectively known as
Г«PiЖ’Е’akriyВөaГӯ; and the offering of water to the
manes during the TarpaЖ’a ceremony is known
as Г«UdakakriyВөaГӯ. Their aggregate is called
Г«PiЖ’Е’odakakriyВөaГӯ. In popular language, they
are known as the performance of вҖәrВөaddha and
TarpaЖ’a. People who are conversant with,
and have faith in, scriptural injunctions and
traditional customs perform these ceremonies
with due reverence. But in the families of the
Arjuna now points out what harm is caused by the evils which bring about an
intermixture of castes:
Е’ГҠпЈҝВ·Г’вҒ„пЈҝUГғГ’вҖ” 
вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮUГүГҠAГҠЕёГҠВў 
п¬ӮГЎГҠВёвҖҡVвҒ„UвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UвҲ‘Г’В§вҖ”вҖ“
В©UГ вҖҡГҠlГЈГғпЈҝ ВЎГҠГҒГғЕ“в—ҠГҠВёвҖ” вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮUЕ“в—ҠГҠВёвҖЎГё вүҘГҠГҠEГғГҠвҖ”H 43H
Е’ГҠпЈҝВ·Г’вҖ”Г” вҲһГғГ’вҖ” through these evils; вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮUГүГҠAГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of the killers of kinsmen; п¬ӮГЎГҠВёвҖҡVвҒ„UвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UвҲ‘Г’В§вҖ” bringing
about an intermixture of castes; В©UГ вҖҡГҠlГЈГғпЈҝ get extinct; ВЎГҠГҒГғЕ“в—ҠГҠВёвҖ” caste-traditions; вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮUЕ“в—ҠГҠВёвҖ” family
customs; Гё and; вүҘГҠГҠEГғГҠвҖ” age-long.
Through these evils bringing about an intermixture of castes, the age-long caste-
traditions and family customs of the killers of kinsmen get extinct.
(43)
The evils which bring about an
intermixture of castes may be enumerated
as follows:Гі(1) Destruction of the race;
(2) Destruction of family traditions through
destruction of the race; (3) Preponderance
of vice; and (4) Fall of women from the
high ideal of feminine chastity and indulgence
in adultery, etc., due to preponderance of
vice.
Codes of right conduct handed down
from generation to generation are called
Г«age-long family traditionsГӯ. The VarЖ’a-Dharma

=== PAGE 63 ===

62
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
about an intermixture of castes, both caste-
traditions (JВөatidharmas) and family customs
(Kuladharmas), coming down from antiquity,
get extinct.
hell for an indefinite length of time. This
view has been handed down to him by his
family-traditions. Therefore, in his opinion,
no one should make an attempt to destroy
his race.
In this verse Arjuna says that those who
have lost their family traditions and are
merged wholly in vice, fall into hells like
KumbhвҲӮpВөaka and Raurava etc., as the result
of their sins and suffer there the tortures of
The disaster caused by the extinction of family customs is now shown:
В©Г вҖҡГӣГҠвҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮUЕ“в—ҠГҠВёГЎГҠГҠВў в—ҠЕёГҲcГҝГҠГЎГҠГҠВў ВЎЕёГҠЕ’ВёЕёвҖ“
ЕёвҒ„UвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ЛҳГҒЕёГҝГғВў 
п¬ӮГҠвҖҡГҠпЈҝ 
Г·п¬ӮГғГӢГ ГҝЕёГҲвүҘГҠГҲГјГҠГҲв—ҠH 44H
В©UГ вҖҡГӣГҠвҲ‘ГҲВ§вҖ№Е“в—ҠГҠВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” в—ҠЕёГҲcГҝГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of men who have lost their family traditions; ВЎЕёГҠЕ’ВёЕё O KГҰВ¶Ж’a;
ЕёвҒ„UвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ in hell; вҖўГҒЕёГҝГғв—ҠЛңГ” for an indefinite period of time; п¬ӮГҠвҖҡвҖ” reside; Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ is assured; ГҹГҒГғ
so; вҖўЕёГҲвүҘГҠГҲГјГҠГҲв—Ҡ we have heard.
KГҰВ¶Ж’a, we hear that men, who have lost their family traditions, dwell in hell
for an indefinite period of time.                                            (44)
Showing thus for the great evil and harm that follow the destruction of a race, Arjuna
now expresses regret for the preparations he has made for carrying on the War:
вҖўвҖһUГҠпЈҝ вҖҷГғ в—ҠвҖһUГ В¬ГҠВ¬Вў вҲ‘В§ГғГҲZ вҲҡГҝп¬ӮГҒвҖҡГғГҠ п¬ӮГҝв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҝВәЛқГҠГ–ГҝвҖҡГҲПҖвҲӮUГҠпЈҝГ·пЈҝЕё вҖһUГЈГғГҲВў Sп¬ӮВЎЕёв—ҠГҲlГғГҠвҖ”H 45H
вҖўвҖһUГҠпЈҝ Oh; вҖҷГғ what a pity; в—ҠвҖһUГғЛңГ” В¬ГҠВ¬в—ҠЛңГ”В§ a great sin; вҲ‘В§ГғГҲВёв—ҠЛңГ” on committing; вҲҡГҝп¬ӮГҒвҖҡГғГҠвҖ” have
set our mind; п¬ӮГҝв—ҠЛңГ” we; ГҝГғЛңГ” in that; вҒ„UГҠГ–ГҝвҖҡГҲПҖвҲӮUГҠпЈҝГ·пЈҝЕё due to lust for throne and enjoyment; вҖһUГЈГғГҲв—ҠЛңГ”
on killing; Sп¬ӮВЎЕёв—ҠЛңГ” our own kinsmen; В©UlГғГҠвҖ” are intent.
Oh what a pity! We have set our mind on the commission of a great sin
in that due to lust for throne and enjoyment we are intent on killing our own
kinsmen.
(45)
involved in an act of sin. But it was a matter
for extreme regret that even they had decided
to commit this dreadful sin. Referring to lust
for throne and enjoyment as the motive of
this great sin, Arjuna shows here that it
would be a great blunder on their part to
engage in war with that motive.
The indeclinable particle Г«AhoГӯ indicates
wonder, and the particle Г«BataГӯ is expressive
of great sorrow. Using both these in the
above verse, Arjuna wants to show that the
PВөaЖ’Е’avas being regarded by the whole world
as virtuous and possessed of intelligence, it
was in no way proper for them to be
After expressing regret as set forth above, Arjuna now sets forth his decision:
ГҝГҒЕ’ в—ҠГҠв—ҠВ¬ЛқГғГӢвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠвүҘГҠSГІГҠВў вүҘГҠSГІГҠВ¬ГҠГЎГҠГҝвҖ”вҖ“
Е“ГҠГғВёвҒ„UГҠcвүҲЛӣГҠ вҒ„UГЎГҠпЈҝ вҖһUГЈГҝГҲSГғГЈв—ҠпЈҝ ЛҮГҠпЈҝв—ҠГғвҒ„ВўU Г·п¬ӮпЈҝГғЛңГ”H 46H

=== PAGE 64 ===

* Chapter I *
63
Here Arjuna says that when, even after
the commencement of war, he would thus
give up his arms and refrain from offering
any resistance to his adversaries, very likely
they would also desist from battle, and the
result would be that all their relations and
friends would be saved. But if, perchance,
instead of adopting that course and finding
him unarmed and unwilling to fight, they attack
and kill him, such a death would be a blessed
death for him. For in that case he would not
be involved, firstly, in the great sin of
slaughtering the family; secondly, the lives of
all his relations and friends would be saved;
and thirdly, the great virtue of saving the family
from destruction would make it easy for him
to reach the Supreme state. Arjuna was definite
in his mind that his death in the above manner
without any show of resistance would lead
both to the protection of the family and his
supreme good. That is why he described such
a death as Г«preferableГӯ for him.
ГҝГҒЕ’ if; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ”В§ me; вҖўВ¬ЛқГғГӢвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” unresisting; вҖўвүҘГҠSГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” unarmed, defenceless; вүҘГҠSГІГҠВ¬ГҠГЎГҠГҝвҖ”Г” armed
with weapons; Е“ГҠГғВёвҒ„UГҠcвүҲЛӣГҠвҖ” the sons of DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra; вҒ„UГЎГҠпЈҝГ” in battle; вҖһUГЈГҝГҲвҖ” should kill; ГғГғЛңГ” that; в—ҠпЈҝГ”
for me; ЛҮГҠпЈҝв—ҠГғвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” better; Г·п¬ӮпЈҝГғЛңГ” would be.
It would be better for me if the sons of DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra, armed with weapons, kill
me in battle while I am unarmed and unresisting.                        (46)
Anticipating the question as to what Arjuna did after expressing his sentiments
to BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a in the above words, SaВӨjaya gives a description of ArjunaГӯs
condition:
вҖҡTГҝ В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠГҲГ„Г п¬ӮГҠВЎГҲВёЕёвҖ” вҖҡГҰЛңUГ…ГҝпЈҝ вҒ„UГ•ГҠпЈҝВ¬SГ• В©UВ¬ГҠГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГғЛңвҖ“
ГҒп¬ӮвҖҡГҺГ–Гҝ вҖҡвүҘГҠвҒ„ВўU ГёГҠВ¬Вў вүҘГҠГ”ГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§вҖҡВўГҒп¬ӮВӘAв—ҠГҠЕёвҖҡвҖ”H 47H
вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛң thus; В©UГ„Г п¬ӮГҠГ” having spoken; вҖўВЎГҲВёЕёвҖ” Arjuna; вҖҡГҰЛңUГ…ГҝпЈҝ on the battle-field; вҒ„UГ•ГҠпЈҝВ¬SГ•пЈҝ into
the hinder part of (his) chariot; В©UВ¬ГҠГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГғЛң sank; ГҒп¬ӮвҖҡГҺГ–Гҝ throwing aside; вҖҡвүҘГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛң with arrows
(quiver); ГёГҠВ¬в—ҠЛң (his) bow; вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§вҖҡВўГҒп¬ӮВӘAв—ҠГҠЕёвҖҡвҖ” with (his) mind agitated by grief.
SaВӨjaya said: Arjuna, whose mind was agitated by grief on the battle-field, having
spoken thus, and having cast aside his bow and arrows, sank into the hinder part
of his chariot.
(47)
horrid picture of the destruction of his family,
the horrible sin attendant on it, and the
terrible consequences of that sin began to
revolve on the film of his mind. A heavy
gloom cast its shadow over his face and his
eyes became deeply laden with grief.
In this verse SaВӨjaya describes how
Arjuna possessed by extreme dejection, and
having uttered the above words, laid down
his famous GВөaЖ’Е’вҲӮva bow and quiver and
sinking back into his chariot, quietly lost
himself in a chain of miserable thoughts. The
Лҷ ГғГ вҖҡГҒЕ’ГҒГғ ГјГҠГӢв—ҠjВӘп¬ӮeГӢГғГҠвҖҡГҚВ¬ГҒЕёВ·Г вҖҡГҲ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГҝГҠВў ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠпЈҝ
ГјГҠГӢвҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠВЎВёГҲЕёвҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’пЈҝЛҳВЎГҲВёЕёГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҠЕ’ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ ЕёГҠв—Ҡ
В¬ЛқГ•в—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГӨГҝГҠГҝвҖ”H 1H

=== PAGE 65 ===

64
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Thus, in the UpaniВ¶ad sung by the Lord, the science of Brahma, the
scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and
Arjuna, ends the first chapter entitled
Г«The Yoga of Dejection of ArjunaГӯ.
The colophon given at the end of every chapter of the GвҲӮtВөa reveals its glory and
majesty. Г«Om Tat SatГӯ are sacred Names of God (vide GвҲӮtВөa, Chap. XVII.23). Sung by
God Himself, it has been given the name of вҖәrвҲӮmad BhagavadgвҲӮtВөa. The essence of the
UpaniВ¶ads is embodied in it and by itself also it is an UpaniВ¶ad; therefore it has been
designated as an UpaniВ¶ad. It has also been termed as the science of Brahma (BrahmavidyВөa),
because it leads to a perception of the supreme Truth and Reality about God in His absolute,
formless state. It is a Г«scripture of YogaГӯ because it reveals the secret of the practice of
Karmayoga, here called Yoga, through the cultivation of disinterestedness. It records the
conversation between BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, who is God Himself, and the great devotee
Arjuna, and every chapter of it contains the description of a Yoga which leads to God-
Realization; therefore, it has been referred to as Г«the dialogue between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and ArjunaГӯ
and every chapter designated as the Yoga of.....
U

=== PAGE 66 ===

Лҷ
вҖәrвҲӮmadbhagavad-GвҲӮtГҘ
Chapter II
When Arjuna, who had sought refuge in the Lord, asked about the certain means
of driving away his grief, the Lord described the truth about the Self upto verse 30 in
this chapter. In the practice of the Yoga of Knowledge, the primary emphasis
is laid on hearing as well as reflection and constant meditation on the truth
about the Self. Although after the thirtieth verse, through a dissertation on
ArjunaГӯs own duty, the character of the Yoga of Action has also been dealt with in this
chapter, nevertheless the teachings of the chapter commence with a description of the Yoga
of Knowledge or SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga, and the character of the Self has been described in it
in greater detail than in other chapters; hence it has been given the name of Г«SВөaвҲҶkhyayogaГӯ,
or the Yoga of Knowledge.
In the first verse of this chapter SaВӨjaya gives a description of ArjunaГӯs state of
dejection. In the second and third verses BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a reproaches Arjuna for his
dejection accompanied by infatuation and faint-heartedness and encourages
him to fight. In verses 4 and 5 Arjuna states that he would rather
live on alms than slay noble elders like BhвҲӮВ¶ma and DroЖ’a. Verses 6
and 7 are devoted by Arjuna to an expression of his doubt as to whether he should fight
or not, to a description of his weakness in the form of faint-heartedness and perplexity
and to a prayer to the Lord, in a spirit of surrender, for proper guidance about his duty.
In verse 8 declaring that undisputed sovereignty over the three worlds would not drive
away his grief, he shows indifference to worldly aspiration. Then, in verses 9 and 10
SaВӨjaya describes how expressing his unwillingness to fight Arjuna became silent, and
how вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a smiled at this and addressed Arjuna. In verse 11 the lord begins His teaching.
Verses 12 and 13 are devoted to a description of the eternal and immutable character
of the soul; verse 14 speaks of the transitory nature of sense-enjoyments with emphasis
on the necessity of ignoring both pleasure and pain; verse 15 shows that the capacity
to treat pleasure and pain alike leads to immortality. Verse 16 defines what is real and
what is unreal; verse 17 reveals the true character of the Г«realГӯ, and verse 18 the true
character of the Г«unrealГӯ, ending with a clear exhortation for Arjuna to fight. Verse 19
declares those as ignorant, who hold the soul as subject to death or capable of killing;
while verse 20 is devoted to characterization of the soul as free from the six forms of
transformation. In verse 21 it is shown that the knower of the Self neither kills anyone
nor causes anyone to be killed. In verse 22 the passing of the soul from one body to
another has been explained by showing its similarity to the discarding of worn-out clothes
and taking new ones, and verses 23 to 25 declare that the soul can neither be cut, nor
burnt, nor drenched, nor dried; that it is eternal, omnipresent, immovable, constant,
everlasting, unmanifest, unthinkable and immutable, so one should not grieve for it. In
Title of the
Chapter
Summary of
the Chapter

=== PAGE 67 ===

66
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
verses 26 and 27 it is shown that even if the soul is regarded as constanly taking birth
and constantly dying, one should not lament for it; and in verse 28 it has been declared
unwise to lament over the loss of bodies, because they are perishable. Verse 29 shows
that the perceiver of the soul, and the speaker and hearer of the truth about it are alike
rare, and verse 30 proves that inasmuch as the soul can never be slain it is not in the
fitness of things to grieve for any being. Verses 31 to 36 are devoted to a consideration
of ArjunaГӯs duty as a KВ¶atriya, and show that it would be improper for Arjuna, from
any point of view, to desist from battle. Verse 37 declares that participation in battle is
advantageous, both from the point of view of this world as well as of the next, and ends
with an exhortation to Arjuna to prepare himself for the fight. Evenness of mind in pleasure
and pain, gain and loss, etc., has been shown in verse 38 as the secret of remaining
untouched by sin in such deeds as participation in war. In verse 39 the subject of Karmayoga
(the Yoga of selfless action) has been introduced as a means of throwing off the shackles
of Karma. Verse 40 is devoted to praising the greatness of Karmayoga and verse 41 to
showing the difference between the determinate and one-pointed intellect and the scattered
intellect of ignorant men moved by desires. Verses 42 to 44 describe the character of
those who are obsessed by desire and look upon heaven as the supreme goal of life. In
verse 45 Arjuna is advised to be free from desires, to rise above pairs of opposites like
pleasure and pain etc., to be established in the Eternal Existance and to remain unconcerned
about the supply of wants and the preservation of worldly possessions, and keep the mind
under control. Then, pointing out in verse 46 that happiness accruing as the fruit of Vedic
rituals has no attraction for a BrВөahmaЖ’a who has obtained enlightenment, verse 47 is devoted
to a definition of Karmayoga in a nutshell. In verse 48 equanimity is described as
synonymous with Yoga. Verse 49 says that action with a selfish motive is far inferior
to equanimity and that the seeker of the fruit of action is extremely poor and wretched.
Verse 50 and 51 are in praise of a KarmayogвҲӮ, possessing equanimity, and exhort Arjuna
to apply himself to Karmayoga, making it perfectly clear that equanimity leads to the
attainment of the blissful Supreme State. Then, in verses 52 and 53 the Lord states that
when growing indifferent to the world, the mind becomes pure, clear and steadfast, it
succeeds in realizing God. In verse 54 Arjuna puts four questions about the person possessed
of a stable mind. His first question is briefly answered in verse 55, the second question
in verses 56 and 57 and the third in verse 58. These verses describe the marks of one
possessed of a stable mind by saying that he has no cravings and desires, is satisfied in
the self, requiring no eternal means of enjoyment, remains unperturbed in sorrows, is devoid
of thirst for pleasures, is absolutely free from passion, fear and anger, remains unattached
to everything and neither rejoices nor recoils when meeting with good and evil, and
withdrawing his senses from sense-objects keeps them under complete control. In verse
59 saying that sense-objects may cease when they are not enjoyed by the senses, but the
relish for them persists and this relish disappears through God-realization, the Lord shows
in verse 60 the turbulent nature of the senses, and urges in verse 61 the necessity of
controlling the mind and senses and devoting oneself to God, and ends the verse with
the praise of one who has conquered the senses. Verses 62 and 63 show the gradual
process of manГӯs fall and degradation through indulgence in thoughts of sense-objects and

=== PAGE 68 ===

* Chapter II *
67
verses 64 and 65 show how placidity of mind is attained by one who acts remaining
free from likes and dislikes, how his sorrows come to an end and his intellect soon becomes
firmly established in God. Then, in verse 66 showing that he who has no control over
his mind can have no determinate reason, thoughts of God, peace and happiness, the
illustration of the wind and boat has been cited in verse 67 to demonstrate how
discrimination is taken away by the sense which has the mind joined to it; and finally,
verse 68 is intended to establish that in reality the man of stable mind is he who has
complete control over his senses. Then, verse 69 shows how Brahmic Bliss is night to
the generality of men, even as worldly enjoyment is night to the seer. Verse 70 is devoted
to the praise of the exalted soul who has attained wisdom and compares him with the
ocean; and verse 71 declares that supreme peace is attained by him who moves in the
world free from all forms of desire, attachment, egoism and thirst for enjoyment. The chapter
is concluded in verse 72 with a description of the glory of this Brahmic state.
After giving a description of the renowned warriors on both sides and their blowing
of conches the first chapter stated, by way of introduction to the teachings of the GвҲӮtВөa,
that ArjunaГӯs chariot was placed between the two armies. The sight of his
near and dear ones in both the armies strongly reacted on ArjunaГӯs mind
in the form of grief and infatuation and the chapter was concluded by saying
how refusing to fight and laying down arms, Arjuna sank down in his chariot in utter
dejection. In this circumstance, it being necessary to state how BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a tackled
Arjuna and prepared him to enter the fight, SaВӨjaya begins the second chapter with a
description of ArjunaГӯs mental state:
вҖҡTГҝ В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
ГғВў 
ГғГ•ГҠ 
вҲ‘ГҺВ§В¬ГҝГҠГҒп¬ӮCГ”Uв—ҠГјГҠГҲВ¬ГҚГЎГҠГҠВёвҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮпЈҝUЛҮГҠГЎГҠв—ҠЛңвҖ“
ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГӢЕ’ГЈГғГҒв—ҠЕ’Вў 
п¬ӮГҠГ„Гҝв—ҠГҲп¬ӮГҠГё 
в—ҠЕ“ГҲвҖҡГҚЕ’ЕёвҖ”H 1H
вҖҡTГҝ В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё SaВӨВ§jaya said: Гғв—ҠЛң to him (Arjuna); ГғГ•ГҠ as mentioned before; вҲ‘ГҺВ§В¬ГҝГҠ with pity;
вҖўГҠГҒп¬ӮCГ”Uв—ҠЛң over whelmed; вҖўГјГҠГҲВ¬ГҚГЎГҠГҠВёвҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮпЈҝUЛҮГҠГЎГҠв—ҠЛң whose eyes were filled with tears and agitated; ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГӢЕ’ГЈГғв—ҠЛң
sorrowing; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛң the following; п¬ӮГҠГ„Гҝв—ҠЛң words; В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё said; в—ҠЕ“ГҲвҖҡГҚЕ’ЕёвҖ” the slayer of Madhu; вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a.
SaВӨjaya said: вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a then addressed the following words to Arjuna, who
was, as mentioned before, overwhelmed with pity, whose eyes were filled with tears
and agitated, and who was full of sorrow.                                                     (1)
profuse tears, and who was deeply merged
in grief due to the fear of destruction of his
family and of the terrible sin that would
accrue from such destruction.
Referring to BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a by the
name Г«MadhusВөudanaГӯ (Slayer of Madhu) in
this verse, and qualifying the word Г«VВөakyamГӯ
(word) by Г«IdamГӯ (these) SaВӨjaya gave a
warning to DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra. His intention was to
The state of extreme dejection from
which Arjuna suffered had been described
in detail in the first chapter. The second
chapter starts with a brief reference to that
state when it says that BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
addressed Arjuna, who had been completely
taken up by faint-heartedness due to
commiseration for his friends and relations,
whose disturbed eyes had been giving out
Link of the
story

=== PAGE 69 ===

68
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
point out that BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a had on
a previous occasion killed the demon Madhu,
who had been tyrannizing over the celestials.
That was how He came to be known as
Г«MadhusВөudanaГӯ. It was that very вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
who encouraged and inspired downcast and
unwilling Arjuna with the following words
to engage himself in the fight. Under these
circumstances how could DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra expect
a victory for his sons, who were as great
tyrants as the demon Madhu, and specially
when it was the LordГӯs chosen mission to
bring about the destruction of tyrants and
persecutors. Therefore, SaВӨjaya intended by
implication to urge that those among
DhГҰtarВөaВ¶ВўraГӯs sons and relatives, who had
survived the fearful slaughter of ten days
could yet be saved if DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra could
influence his sons to make peace with the
PВөaЖ’Е’avas.
nor to bring fame, the Lord gives His reasons
for expressing amazement and wonder. The
intention was that the sentiment with which
Arjuna was now overpowered was not
entertained by men possessed of nobility of
character, and was not likely to lift Arjuna
to heaven or contribute to his fame. Out of
the four objects of life it would lead to the
fulfilment of noneГіneither of MokВ¶a
(salvation), nor of Dharma (virtue), nor of
Artha (wealth), nor of KВөama (enjoyment).
Therefore, possessed of a strong intellect, as
he was, how could Arjuna be subject to such
a depression of spirits at that critical hour on
the battle-field, faced with the imminent
danger of a clash of arms with very powerful
adversaries?
The word Г«KaвҖ№malamГӯ with the adjective
Г«IdamГӯ, in this verse, indicates ArjunaГӯs
heaviness of heart and low spirits, due to
infatuation. The Lord here administers a snub
to Arjuna, and expressing wonder asks how
in that dangerous and difficult situation, viz.,
on the battle-field, where dejection and
cowardliness were wholly out of place, and
just at the moment when the battle was to
commence, a hero and fighter like him, who
was capable of easily vanquishing the greatest
of MahВөarathвҲӮs, should be overtaken by an
unworthy faint-heartedness, which was not at
all expected of him. Wherefrom did he get it?
Calling this dejection and faint-
heartedness of Arjuna as unworthy of noble
souls and calculated neither to lead to heaven,
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲп¬ӮГҠГё
вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГғSГ п¬ӮГҠ вҲ‘В§вүҘв—ҠвҲӮUГҒв—ҠЕ’Вў ГҒп¬ӮВ·в—ҠпЈҝ вҖҡв—ҠГҲВ¬ГҒSГ•Гғв—ҠЛңвҖ“
вҖўЕёГҠГҝВёВЎГҲCГ”Uв—ҠSп¬ӮГҮГҝВёв—ҠвҲ‘В§ГӢГҢГғвҲ‘В§вҒ„Uв—ҠВЎГҲВёЕё 
H 2H
вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГғвҖ” wherefrom, how; Г п¬ӮГҠ you; вҲ‘В§вүҘв—ҠвҲӮUв—ҠЛң infatuation; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛң this; ГҒп¬ӮВ·в—ҠпЈҝ at this critical (hour);
вҖҡв—ҠГҲВ¬ГҒSГ•Гғв—ҠЛң has overtaken; вҖўЕёГҠГҝВёВЎГҲCГ”Uв—ҠЛң (it is) shunned by noble souls; вҖўSп¬ӮГҮГҝВёв—ҠЛң not leading to
heaven; вҖўвҲ‘В§ГӢГҢГғвҲ‘В§вҒ„Uв—ҠЛң not bringing fame; вҖўВЎВёГҲЕё O Arjuna.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavВөan said: Arjuna, how has this infatuation overtaken you at this
critical hour? It is shunned by noble souls; neither will it bring heaven nor fame to
you.
(2)
Г„вҖ№Г’Г©ГҝВў в—ҠГҠ Sв—Ҡ ВӘв—ҠвҖ” В¬ГҠГ•Вё ЕёГ’ГғГ»п¬ӮЖ’ГҝГҲВ¬В¬lГғпЈҝвҖ“
ЛҮГҠГҲВәЛқВў NUЕ’ГҝЕ’ГҠГ’вҖҷВёГҖГҝВў Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠDГ”U В¬вҒ„UГЈГғВ¬H 3H
Г„вҖ№Г’Г©Гҝв—ҠЛң unmanliness; в—ҠГҠ Sв—Ҡ ВӘв—ҠвҖ” yield not; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna; Её not; вҲһГғГғЛң this;

=== PAGE 70 ===

* Chapter II *
69
The other name of KuntвҲӮ, mother of the
PВөaЖ’Е’avas, was PГҰthВөa. KuntвҲӮ was a heroic
mother. When BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a had gone
to HastinВөapura as a messenger of peace to
try for an amicable settlement of the dispute
between the Kauravas and the PВөaЖ’Е’avas, and
met there His fatherГӯs sister, KuntвҲӮ, the latter
had sent through Him a message full of
sentiments of the most heroic type to her son,
Arjuna. In that message, citing the instance
of BidulВөa and her son SaВӨjaya, KuntвҲӮ had
encouraged Arjuna to establish the claim of
the PВөaЖ’Е’avas over their kingdom by the
arbitrament of war. Therefore, addressing
Arjuna as Г«PВөarthaГӯ, BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
reminds Arjuna of that message, worthy of
a true KВ¶atriya mother, and intends to convey
by the first half of the verse that as a hero
himself, Arjuna was a worthy son of a
worthy mother, for whom it was quite out
of place to be overcome by unmanliness and
cowardice. Possessed as he was of
incomparable valour and skill as a fighter,
which invariably struck terror into the hearts
of the greatest of heroes and generals, to
what a sad plight he had brought himself,Гі
his hair standing on end, face drooping and
trembling, the GВөaЖ’Е’вҲӮva about to drop from
his hand, and the mind merged in grief, quite
perplexed and confused. This unmanliness
and faint-heartedness was never worthy of
him.
He who scorches the foe by virulence
of attack is called a Г«ParantapaГӯ. Here the
intention of addressing Arjuna as Г«ParantapaГӯ
is to remind him of his fame as a Г«scorcher
of foesГӯ. Being the vanquisher of extremely
powerful demons like the NivВөatakavacas and
others, how could he now adopt such an
attitude of cowardice and unmanliness, which
were the reverse of what a KВ¶atriya should
possess, and would thus delight the heart of
his enemies instead of terrifying them as
before.
By asking Arjuna to Г«shake off this
paltry faint-heartedness and stand upГӯ, the
Lord shows that in the heart of a hero like
Arjuna there should be no place for
pusillanimity, which is invariably rejected by
heroes, and is entertained only by cowards,
who feel scared at the sight of a battle.
Therefore, the Lord urges him to throw it
off immediately and prepare and harden
himself for the fight.
Г п¬ӮГҒГҝ You; В©UВ¬В¬lГғпЈҝ becomes; ЛҮГҠГҲВәЛқв—ҠЛң base; NUЕ’ГҝЕ’ГҠГ’вҖҷВёГҖГҝв—ҠЛң faint-heartedness; Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ shaking off; В©UГҒГ»ГҠDГ”U
stand up; В¬вҒ„UГЈГғВ¬ O scorcher of enemies.
Yield not to unmanliness, Arjuna; this does not become you.  Shaking off this
base faint-heartedness stand up, O scorcher of enemies.
 (3)
As a rejoinder to these observations of the Lord, Arjuna shows, in two verses, the
impropriety of fighting elders, who were an object of reverence to him, and gives out,
again, what he considered to be his definite decision in the matter.
вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
вҲ‘В§Г•Вў Г·ГӢcв—Ҡв—ҠвҖһВўU вҖҡГҰЛңUГ…ГҝпЈҝ ВәЛқГҠпЈҝГЎГҠВў Гё в—ҠЕ“ГҲвҖҡГҚЕ’ЕёвҖ“
ГҹВ·ГҲГҒГ·вҖ” 
В¬ЛқГҒГғГҝГҠпЈҝГ SГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ 
В¬ГҚВЎГҠвҖһUГҠВёп¬ӮГҒвҒ„UвҖҡГҚЕ’ЕёH 4H
вҲ‘В§Г•в—ҠЛң how; Г·ГӢcв—Ҡв—ҠЛң BhвҲӮВ¶ma; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛң I; вҖҡГҰЛңUГ…ГҝпЈҝ on the battle-field; ВәЛқГҠпЈҝГЎГҠв—ҠЛң DroЖ’a; ГёГ” and; в—ҠЕ“ГҲвҖҡГҚЕ’Её
O KГҰВ¶Ж’a (lit., Slayer of Madhu); ГҹВ·ГҲГҒГ·вҖ” with arrows; В¬ЛқГҒГғГҝГҠпЈҝГ SГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ shall fight; В¬ГҚВЎГҠвҖһUГҠГ’Вё (they
are) both worthy of adoration; вҖўГҒвҒ„UвҖҡГҚЕ’Её O destroyer of foes.

=== PAGE 71 ===

70
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Addressing the Lord as Г«Slayer of MadhuГӯ
and Г«Destroyer of foesГӯ and using the word
Г«kathamГӯ (how), Arjuna expresses his surprise.
His intention is to show that BhвҲӮВ¶ma and
DroЖ’a, with whom the Lord was encouraging
him to fight, were neither demons nor enemies;
on the other hand, they were very respected
elders. Under the circumstance, how did the
Lord, contrary to His nature, exhort Arjuna
to fight his elders? How could Arjuna
involve himself in the commission of that
dreadful sin?
By using the word Г«IВ¶ubhiВЁГӯ Arjuna
means to show that elders against whom the
use of even light words was considered as
a great sin, how could he range himself
against them in a fight with sharp arrows?
He, therefore, wondered how BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a exhorted him to do what appeared to
him to be an utterly sinful action.
Arjuna said: How, KГҰВ¶Ж’a, shall I fight BhвҲӮВ¶ma and DroЖ’a with arrows on the
battle-field? They are worthy of deepest reverence, O destroyer of foes.
 (4)
them. He would gain neither salvation nor
merit through that act, but only wealth and
sense-enjoyments, which were valueless as
compared to the lives of those elders. And
these too he would gain as the fruit of
slaughter of those elders, and, therefore,
these pleasures would be as if stained with
their blood. In his opinion, therefore, killing
elders for obtaining such pleasures and
enjoyments could never be meet and proper.
Some commentators have taken the word
Г«ArthakВөamВөanГӯ as an attribute of Г«GurВөunГӯ; but
this does not appear to us to be a proper
interpretation inasmuch as Arjuna has spoken
of these elders in this very verse as Г«nobleГӯ,
and he could not be expected to speak of them
in the same breath as obsessed by greed
for wealth, the two attributes being naturally
contradictory. We have therefore chosen to
interpret Г«ArthakВөamВөanГӯ as we have done.
The word Г«GurВөun with the adjective
Г«MahВөanubhВөavВөanГӯ points to teachers like
DroЖ’ВөacВөarya and KГҰpВөacВөarya, and elderly
relations like BВөahlвҲӮka, BhвҲӮВ¶ma, Somadatta,
BhВөuriвҖ№ravВөa and вҖәalya, etc., who were all
noble in character, posted in the army of
Duryodhana. By using the indeclinable Г«ApiГӯ
after the word Г«BhaikВ¶yamГӯ it is indicated
that though it was considered dishonourable
for a KВ¶atriya to live on alms, such a
livelihood was, indeed, preferable than the
enjoyment of the pleasures of kingship obtained
through the massacre of noble elders who
were objects of reverence and respect. By
using the adjective Г«RudhirapradigdhВөanГӯ and
Г«ArthakВөamВөanГӯ and the indeclinable Г«EvaГӯ
after the noun Г«BhogВөanГӯ, Arjuna compares
by implication the value of the lives of those
noble elders with what he would actually
gain by the most reprehensible act of killing
ВӘГҲMВ§ЕёвҖһUГ п¬ӮГҠ ГҒвҖһU в—ҠвҖһUГҠЕёГҲГ·ГҠп¬ӮГҠЕёЛң ГјГҠпЈҝГҝГҠпЈҝ Г·ГҠпЈҝQГҲВў Г·Г’ЛҮГҝв—ҠВ¬ГӢвҖһU вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝвҖ“
вҖһUГ п¬ӮГҠГ•ВёвҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠВўSГғГҲ ВӘГҲMВ§ГҒЕёвҖһГ’Uп¬Ӯ Г·ГҲTГӢГҝ Г·ГҠпЈҝВӘГҠЕёЛң LВ§ГҒЕ“вҒ„UВ¬ЛқГҒЕ’ГҮЕ“ГҠЕёЛңH 5H
ВӘГҲMВ§ЕёЛң elders; вҖўвҖһUГ п¬ӮГҠ without slaying; ГҒвҖһU because; в—ҠвҖһUГҠЕёГҲГ·ГҠп¬ӮГҠЕёЛң noble; ГјГҠпЈҝГҝвҖ” (is) better; Г·ГҠпЈҝQГҲВ§в—ҠЛң
to live on; Г·Г’ЛҮГҝв—ҠЛң alms; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; ГҹвҖһU вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ in this world; вҖһUГ п¬ӮГҠ (even after) killing; вҖўГ•ВёвҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠЕёЛңГ”
(in the form of) wealth and sense-enjoyments; ГғГҲ after all; ВӘГҲMВ§ЕёЛң elders; ГҹвҖһU in this (world);
вҲһп¬Ӯ only; Г·ГҲTГӢГҝ I shall enjoy; Г·ГҠпЈҝВӘГҠЕёЛң pleasures; LВ§ГҒЕ“вҒ„UВ¬ЛқГҒЕ’ГҮЕ“ГҠЕёЛң blood-stained.
It is better to live on alms in this world without slaying these noble elders, because
even after killing them we shall after all enjoy only blood-stained pleasures in the
form of wealth and sense-enjoyments.
 (5)

=== PAGE 72 ===

* Chapter II *
71
By saying Г«we do not know which is
preferable for usГӯ, Arjuna indicates that he
was not in a position to decide whether it
was better for him to fight or to refrain from
it; for while on the one hand it was laid
down as the duty of a KВ¶atriya to fight, the
destruction, on the other hand, of the family
and race as the result of such a fight was
also declared as an evil and a sin.
Again, when Arjuna says Г«nor do we
know whether we shall win, or they will
conquer usГӯ, he means that if it was held that
it was better to fight, he was unaware
whether the crown of victory would belong
to his side or would be wrested from his
hands by his adversaries.
Further, when Arjuna says Г«killing whom
we do not even wish to live, those very sons
of DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra are arrayed against usГӯ, he
means to say that if it was granted that the
battle 
would 
end 
in 
a 
victory 
for
his side, even then it did not appear to him
advisable to engage in that fight. For, those
real cousins of his, Duryodhana and others,
killing whom he did not even wish to live,
stood arrayed before him to meet their
death in that fight. If at all he attained a
victory, it would be gained by putting those
cousins to death. Therefore, he was puzzled
and perplexed and could not decide for
himself what would be the proper course for
him to adopt.
Even after giving out his definite decision in these words when Arjuna found that
he was not fully satisfied and doubt arose in his mind about the correctness of his attitude,
he again spoke as follows:
Её ГёГ’ГғГҒmkвҖ” вҲ‘В§ГғвҒ„UГӣГҠГҠпЈҝ ВӘвҒ„UГӢГҝГҠпЈҝ ГҝmГҠ ВЎГҝпЈҝв—Ҡ ГҝГҒЕ’ п¬ӮГҠ ЕёГҠпЈҝ ВЎГҝпЈҝГҝГҲвҖ”вҖ“
ГҝГҠЕёпЈҝп¬Ӯ вҖһUГ п¬ӮГҠ Её ГҒВЎВЎГӢГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҠв—ҠSГғпЈҝЛҳп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғГҠвҖ” В¬Лқв—ҠГҲПҖпЈҝ Е“ГҠГғВёвҒ„UГҠcвүҲЛӣГҠвҖ”H 6H
Её not; Гё even; вҲһГғГғЛң this; ГҒп¬ӮkвҖ” we know; вҲ‘В§ГғвҒ„UГғЛң which of the two courses (to fight
or not to fight); ЕёвҖ” for us; ВӘвҒ„UГӢГҝвҖ” (is) preferable; ГҝЕ’ЛңГ” п¬ӮГҠ (nor do we know) whether; ВЎГҝпЈҝв—Ҡ
we shall win; ГҝГҒЕ’ п¬ӮГҠ or whether; ЕёвҖ” us; ВЎГҝпЈҝГҝГҲвҖ” they will conquer; ГҝГҠЕёЛң whom; вҲһп¬Ӯ very;
вҖһUГ п¬ӮГҠГ” killing; Её ГҒВЎВЎГӢГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҠв—ҠвҖ” we do not wish to live; ГғпЈҝ those; вҖўп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғГҠвҖ” stand; В¬Лқв—ҠГҲПҖпЈҝ in the
enemy ranks; Е“ГҠГғВёвҒ„UГҠcвүҲЛӣГҠвҖ” sons of DhГҰtarВөaВ¶tra.
We do not even know which is preferable for usГіto fight or not to fight; nor do
we know whether we shall win or whether they will conquer us. Those very sons of
DhГҰtarВөaВ¶tra, killing whom we do not even wish to live, stand in the enemy ranks.  (6)
Expressing in these words his inability to ascertain his duty, Arjuna now takes refuge
in the Lord and prays that the Lord may enlighten and guide him definitely and clearly
as regards his duty.
вҲ‘В§ГҠВ¬ВёГЎГҝЕ’ГҠпЈҝВ·ГҠпЈҝВ¬вҖһUГғSп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮвҖ” В¬ГҺГ«ВҝUГҠГҒв—Ҡ Г п¬ӮГҠВў Е“в—ҠВёвҖҡГӘв—ҠГҚвҖҰUГёпЈҝГғГҠвҖ”вҖ“
ГҝГ«ВҝЛӣпЈҝUГҝвҖ” SГҝГҠГҒГӣГҠГҒpГғВў вҖҷЛқГҚГҒвҖһU ГғГЈв—ҠпЈҝ ГҒвүҘГҠcГҝSГғпЈҝЛҳвҖһВўU вүҘГҠГҠГҒЕ“ в—ҠГҠВў Г п¬ӮГҠВў В¬ЛқВ¬ГӣГҠв—ҠЛңH 7H
вҲ‘В§ГҠВ¬ВёГЎГҝЕ’ГҠпЈҝВ·ГҠпЈҝВ¬вҖһUГғSп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮвҖ” with my very being smitten by the vice of faint-heartedness; В¬ГҺГ«ВҝUГҠГҒв—Ҡ
I beseech; Г п¬ӮГҠв—ҠЛң You; Е“в—ҠВёвҖҡГӘв—ҠГҚвҖҰUГёпЈҝГғГҠвҖ” (and my) mind being puzzled with regard to duty; ГҝГғЛң
which; ГјГҠпЈҝГҝвҖ” good; SГҝГҠГғЛң is; ГҒЕёГҒpГғв—ҠЛң decidedly; вҖҷЛқГҚГҒвҖһU tell; ГғГғЛң that; в—ҠпЈҝ me; ГҒвүҘГҠcГҝвҖ” disciple (lit.,
worthy of instruction); ГғпЈҝ Your; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛң I (am); вүҘГҠГҠГҒЕ“ (pray) tell; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛң me; Г п¬ӮГҠв—ҠЛң in You; В¬ЛқВ¬ГӣГҠв—ҠЛң
having taken refuge.

=== PAGE 73 ===

72
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
With my very being smitten by the vice of faint-heartedness and my mind puzzled
with regard to duty, I beseech  You! Tell me that which is decidedly good; I am Your
disciple. Pray! instruct me, who have taken refuge in You.
 (7)
him to lay down their lives. He did not want
to kill Duryodhana and other relations even
for the sovereignty of the three worlds;
how, then, for this earth? (Chap. I.32-35).
Undisputed sovereignty over the entire earth
and lordship over the gods could not drive
away his grief (Chap. II.8). He who was
prepared to sacrifice so much, could neither
be miserly by nature, nor attached to worldly
enjoyments. Besides, interpretation of the
word in this sense does not fit in with the
context here.
The Г«KВөapraЖ’yaГӯ by which Arjuna was
possessed was a sort of lowness of spirits,
which expressed itself in the form of faint-
heartedness and grief mixed up with
compassion. SaВӨjaya, in the first verse of the
chapter, referred to this very state of Arjuna
when he spoke of the latter as Г«overwhelmed
with pityГӯ. In verse 3 of this chapter, the
Lord uses the word Г«unmanlinessГӯ to describe
this very state of Arjuna. All these clearly
indicate that the Г«KВөarpaЖ’yaГӯ of Arjuna was
nothing but faint-heartedness coupled with
compassion produced by the fear of loss of
his kith and kin.
As an ideal KВ¶atriya fighter Arjuna
was, by his very nature, a hero. Cowardliness
of spirit was a weakness in his case, to
whatever cause it might be attributed.
Therefore, Arjuna calls it in this verse as the
Г«vice of faint-heartednessГӯ.
On account of this faint-heartedness,
ArjunaГӯs very nature as a KВ¶atriya, adorned
with such qualities as valour, prowess, firmness,
adroitness and courage, etc., had been vitiated;
that is why his very limbs were giving way,
the mouth was parched, the body was
shaking, the skin appeared to be burning all
over and the mind was puzzled and reeling,
The word Г«KВөarpaЖ’yaГӯ is an abstract
noun derived from the adjective Г«KГҰpaЖ’aГӯ,
which conveys various meanings:Гі
(1) A miser, who, even though possessing
abundant wealth, does not like, owing to
excessive greed and attachment for wealth,
to spend even a farthing either in charity or
in satisfying the legitimate needs of himself
or of his dependants is a Г«KГҰpaЖ’aГӯ.
(2) The main object of human life, as
pointed out by the scriptures and declared
by saints, who are the saviours of humanity,
is realization of God through attainment of
Knowledge about the reality of God. He
who forgetting this primary goal of existence
wastes his life only in enjoying sense-
objects, that man of feeble intellect is also
called Г«KГҰpaЖ’aГӯ. The вҖәruti says:Гі
ГҝГҠпЈҝ п¬ӮГҠ вҲһГғЕ’ЛҮГҠвҒ„ВўU ВӘГҠГҮГҝВёГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ’Г п¬ӮГҠЛҳSв—ҠГҠГҖвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠГ В¬ЛқГ’ГҒГғ вҖҡ вҲ‘ГҺВ§В¬ГЎГҠвҖ”вҖ“
(BГҰhadВөaraЖ’yaka., III. viii. 10)
Г«Г«GВөargвҲӮ! whoever departs from this
earth without knowing God, the Imperishable,
is a Г«KГҰpaЖ’aГӯ.
The Lord too has called in the GвҲӮtВөa men
attached to worldly enjoyments and power,
seeking the fruits of action as Г«KГҰpaЖ’aГӯ
(II.49).
(3) One with a wretched and miserable
state of mind is also, in a general sense,
called Г«KГҰpaЖ’aГӯ.
The Г«KВөarpaЖ’yaГӯ complained of by Arjuna
was neither of the nature of miserliness,
produced by greed, nor of attachment to
worldly enjoyments. For Arjuna was by
nature an extremely generous and charitable
person and a master of his senses. In the GвҲӮtВөa
itself he clearly states that he coveted neither
victory, nor kingdom, nor pleasures, for his
own sake; those relations of him for whom
these things were needed were arrayed before

=== PAGE 74 ===

* Chapter II *
73
as it were. Observing these marks of weakness
in him, which were quite opposed to his
nature, appearing as the result of his
unmanliness of spirit, Arjuna says in this
verse, Г«My very being has been smitten by
the vice of faint-heartedness.Гӯ
He whose mind had become wholly
incapable of ascertaining what is virtue and
what is vice, what is duty and what is
prohibited action, is called Г«DharmasammВөuЕ’ha-
cetВөaВЁГӯ, i.e., one whose mind is puzzled with
regard to duty. The mind of Arjuna at this
time was in a state of terrible confusion with
regard to his duty. From the point of view of
protection of subjects, the duty of a KВ¶atriya
and vindication of his rightful claim, he
considered war to be a righteous duty and
thought it advisable to engage in the fight;
while, on the other hand, the unmanly spirit
that had now taken possession of him, unfolding
to his mind the various dreadful effects of the
war, was trying to force him to take up the
profession of a beggar, adopt SaвүҲnyВөasa and
retire to the forest. The mind obsessed by
compassion did not allow the intellect to
function freely and come to a decision, and
finding himself entirely puzzled and perplexed,
Arjuna expresses himself as above.
The words Г«Tell me what is decidedly
goodГӯ should not be interpreted to mean that
Arjuna was frightened at the sight of the very
powerful Kaurava army, protected by such
invincible and world-renowned heroes and
fighters as BhвҲӮВ¶ma, DroЖ’a, KarЖ’a, etc.,Гіan
army much larger than that of the PВөaЖ’Е’avas,Гі
and despairing of victory, approached the
Lord for a definite light as to whether it
would be Г«goodГӯ for him to fight, or to retire
from the battle with a view to ascertaining
whether victory or defeat would follow his
footsteps. Here the predominant sentiment of
his heart was affection and tenderness for
friends and relations. There was, again, the
fear of sin that would attach to him as the
result of the destruction of friends and
relations, which might be a great obstacle to
his attainment of the supreme good. As
opposed to this there was also the slow
stirring of thought that renunciation on his
part of the recognized duty of a KВ¶atriya to
engage in a righteous war might also be
wrong, and might prove a hindrance to the
attainment of supreme good. That is why he
wanted to know what was Г«decidedly goodГӯ.
His question, therefore, had no relation with
victory or defeat in war; its object was to
know what was conducive to supreme good
in the form of God-realization. In short,
Arjuna here says, Г«Lord, I have wholly lost
my capacity to ascertain what is my duty.
Pray tell me definitely how I can attain the
supreme good.Гӯ
Arjuna was BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’aГӯs dear
friend. Spiritually speaking, they might have
been on different levels; but in practical life
the relation between Arjuna and вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
was, in almost all places, that of equality.
While dining, reposing in bed or going from
one place to another, BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
used to show the same consideration to
Arjuna as He bestowed on His own Self,
and Arjuna also, for his part, reciprocated
that sentiment of equality and friendship,
though maintaining in his heart deep reverence
and respect for вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’aГӯs spiritual superiority.
But now finding himself in a most deplorable
state of mind, Arjuna felt that he was not
fit to maintain equality with вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a.
Between two equals there might be exchange
of advice and counsel, but no instruction as
from a superior to an inferior; there might
be prompting and suggestion, but no command.
Arjuna realized that suggestion and advice
would not help him at that stage to get out
of the mental rut. What he needed was a true
Guide and Teacher, who would command

=== PAGE 75 ===

74
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
him to follow a certain path, and driving out
all his grief and infatuation, would help him
to attain the supreme good. Who could be
a better guide to him than вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a? But
the shower of nectar in the form of a GuruГӯs
instruction fell only when the soil of the
discipleГӯs heart was ready to receive it.
Therefore, Arjuna now says, Г«Lord, I am
Your disciple.Гӯ
There are many types of disciples. The
disciple who after receiving instruction from
the Guru depends on self-effort centred in the
ego, or looks to other sources of help than
that of the Sadguru, cannot derive true benefit
from the grace of the Guru. Therefore along
with the declaration of his discipleship, Arjuna
takes up the attitude of exclusive surrender,
and says, Г«Lord, I am not only Your disciple,
but I have also taken refuge in YouГӯ. The root
of the word Г«PrapannaГӯ means surrender of
the self to God, knowing and realizing Him
to be the repository of all power and the highest
Being. The term is synonymous with Г«taking
refuge in the LordГӯ, Г«throwing of the self at
the LordГӯs feetГӯ, and Г«offering the self to GodГӯ.
The spirit of a Г«PrapannaГӯ is truly cultivated
when one completely, and for all time, throws
one self at the feet of God and keeps looking
on at the LordГӯs enchanting face without a
twinkle in the eye and with the mind constantly
engaged in the thought of God from the
exclusive desire of always acting as a mere
puppet in His hands. He believes, on the one
hand, that God is almighty, omniscient, the
knower of all hearts, an endless ocean of
innumerable virtues, the supreme master, the
infinite repository of greatness, love, valour,
virtue, knowledge, non-attachment, etc., the
remover of all afflictions, shackle of Karma,
and every form of doubt and error, the dearest
lover, the dearest friend, the dearest relation,
the Supreme Guide and the Supreme Divinity,
and regards himself, on the other, as standing
alone in the world utterly helpless and without
any support, devoid of intelligence, lacking
in strength, lacking in substance, and depending
thoroughly and exclusively on GodГӯs help,
support, knowledge, power and incomparable
affection for the devotee who thus takes refuge
in Him. ArjunaГӯs desire was to develop such
an attitude of surrender to the Lord, and inspired
by this feeling he now says, Г«Г«Lord, I am Your
disciple. Pray instruct me, who have taken
refuge in You.ГӯГӯ When this idea of true
surrender to God, the best and most perfect
flower of spiritual insight, would develop into
true surrender under the influence of the most
esoteric teaching of the Lord contained in verses
65 and 66 of the eighteenth chapter, and Arjuna
would be prepared to carry out the behest of
the Lord without any question, the GвҲӮtВөa itself
would reach its conclusion. Thus the SВөadhanВөa
of the GвҲӮtВөa commences from this verse, the
seed is sown here for the beginning of the
GвҲӮtВөa gospel, and the SВөadhanВөa would reach its
consummation when the Lord would exhort
Arjuna to Г«surrender all dutiesГӯ to Him. There
lies the natural culmination of the GвҲӮtВөa.
Thus praying to the Lord for instruction and guidance, Arjuna gives his reasons for
the prayer, in the course of which he also gives expression to his oppressive thoughts.
Её ГҒвҖһU В¬ЛқВ¬вүҘГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ в—Ҡв—ҠГҠВ¬ЕёГҲlГҠЕ’ЛңГ” ГҝГ«ВҝUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҲГ«ВҝUГҠпЈҝВ·ГЎГҠГҒв—ҠГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖўп¬ӮГҠГҘГҝ Г·ГҚв—ҠГҠп¬ӮвҖҡВ¬%в—ҠГҺhВў вҒ„UГҠГ–ГҝВў вҖҡГҲвҒ„UГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠГҒВ¬ ГёГҠГҒЕ“В¬Г Гҝв—ҠЛңГ”H 8H
Её not; ГҒвҖһU for; В¬ЛқВ¬вүҘГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ I see; в—Ҡв—Ҡ my; вҖўВ¬ЕёГҲlГҠГғЛңГ” can drive away; ГҝГғЛңГ” (that) which; вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛң
grief; В©UГ«ВҝUГҠпЈҝВ·ГЎГҠв—ҠЛң exercising a withering effect; ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” senses; вҖўп¬ӮГҠГҘГҝ on obtaining; Г·ГҚв—ҠГҠГ’ on
(this) earth; вҖўвҖҡВ¬%в—ҠЛңГ” undisputed; ВҙВ§hв—ҠЛңГ” affluent; вҒ„UГҠГ–Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” kingdom; вҖҡГҲвҒ„UГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” over the gods; вҖўГҒВ¬
even; Гё and; вҖўГҠГҒЕ“В¬Г Гҝв—ҠЛң lordship.

=== PAGE 76 ===

* Chapter II *
75
Referring to вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’aГӯs exhortation to
face his adversaries in the fight, Arjuna says
here that the best result that could be expected
from the battle was a victory which might
bring him undisputed sovereignty over the
earth; but the more he thought over the
matter the more he felt that, even if he
obtained lordship over the gods, not to speak
of sovereignty over the earth, that would not
remove the grief which was drying up his
senses. He, therefore, appeals to the Lord to
show him some definite and unfailing way
that would remove his grief and bring him
everlasting happiness and bliss.
For, even on obtaining undisputed sovereignty and an affluent kingdom on this
earth and lordship over the gods, I do not see any means that can drive away the
grief which is drying up my senses.                                       (8)
It is stated now what Arjuna did after uttering these words:
вҖҡTГҝ В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠГҲГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ NUВ·ГӢвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠВў ВӘГҲВ«UГҠвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠвҖ” В¬вҒ„UГЈГғВ¬вҖ“
Её ГҝГҠпЈҝГ SГҝ ГҹГҒГғ ВӘГҠпЈҝГҒп¬ӮГЈЕ’в—ҠГҲГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ ГғГҚcГЎГҠГӢВҘ вҖҷГ·ГҚп¬Ӯ вҖһUH 9H
вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” thus; В©UГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ having spoken; NUВ·ГӢвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠв—ҠЛңГ” to вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a; ВӘГҲВ«UГҠвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠвҖ” an epithet of Arjuna;
В¬вҒ„UГЈГғВ¬ O scorcher of enemies; Её not; ГҝГҠпЈҝГ SГҝпЈҝ will fight; ГҹГҒГғ that; ВӘГҠпЈҝГҒп¬ӮГЈЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a; В©UГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ
telling (again); ГғГҚcГЎГҠГӢв—ҠЛңГ” silent; вҖҷГ·ГҚп¬Ӯ became; вҖһUГ” clearly.
SaВӨjaya said: O king, having thus spoken to вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, Arjuna again said to
Him, Г«I will not fightГӯ, and became silent.
(9)
became silent.
 вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a is called Г«GovindaГӯ because,
according to the derivation Г«ВӘГҠпЈҝГҒГ·п¬ӮпЈҝВёЕ’п¬ӮГҠГ„ГҝГ’ГҢп¬ӮlГғпЈҝ
вҲӮUГЁГҝГғпЈҝГӯ, the truth about God is known through
the words of the Vedas. The GвҲӮtВөa also
saysГіГ«п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’Г’p вҖҡп¬ӮГ’ВёвҒ„UвҖһUв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ п¬ӮпЈҝlвҖ”ГӯГіГ«Г«It is I whom the
four Vedas seek to know.ГӯГӯ (XV.15)
In this verse, SaВӨjaya says to DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra
that after taking refuge in the Lord, in the
manner described above, and praying to
Him for instruction and guidance, and
then expressing his own oppressive and
disturbing thoughts, Arjuna now clearly said
that he would not fight, and thereafter
Anticipating the question as to what BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a did when Arjuna became
silent, SaВӨjaya says:
Гғв—ҠГҲп¬ӮГҠГё NUВ·ГӢвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠвҖ” В¬ЛқвҖһUвҖҡГҒГӣГҠп¬Ӯ Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғвҖ“
вҖҡпЈҝЕёГҝГҠпЈҝLВ§Г·ГҝГҠпЈҝв—ҠВёГӨГҝпЈҝ 
ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГӢЕ’ГЈГғГҒв—ҠЕ’Вў 
п¬ӮГёвҖ”H 10H
Гғв—ҠЛңГ” him (Arjuna); В©Uп¬ӮГҠГёГ” addressed; NUВ·ГӢвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠвҖ”Г” вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a; В¬ЛқвҖһUвҖҡЕёЛңГ” smiling (at him); Гҹп¬ӮГ” as
if; Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғГ” O descendent of Bharata, DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra; вҖҡпЈҝЕёГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ”Г” В©UГ·ГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” of the two armies; в—ҠГӨГҝпЈҝГ” in the
midst; ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГӢЕ’ГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ” sorrowing; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” the following; п¬ӮГёвҖ”Г” words.
Then, O DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra! вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, as if smiling, addressed the following words
to Arjuna, sorrowing in the midst of the two armies.                      (10)
indirectly points out that the same Arjuna,
who, a little while ago, had requested BhagavВөan
Referring here to him who was Г«sorrowing
in the midst of the two armiesГӯ, SaВӨjaya

=== PAGE 77 ===

76
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a to place his chariot between the
two armies in a bellicose and challenging spirit,
was now, at the sight of his kith and kin in
the two opposing armies, greatly perturbed
and agitated due to infatuation. It was to this
Arjuna, obsessed by grief, that BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a addressed His words.
By the words, Г«Г«вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, as if laughing
at him, addressed the following words,ГӯГӯ
SaВӨjaya gives an indication of what the Lord
said, and the spirit in which He said it. The
intention was to bring out that instead of
maintaining the fighting attitude which Arjuna
had evinced when he requested the Lord to
draw up the chariot between the two armies,
he was now swayed by the opposite sentiment
of grief; and, again, after taking refuge in
the Lord, and praying to him for instruction
and guidance, and without waiting for His
advice, he had straightway declared that he
would not fight. How utterly inconsistent
these actions of Arjuna were ! Therefore,
mentally laughing at these inconsistencies,
the Lord said:Гі
which reaches its conclusion in verse 66 of
the eighteenth chapter.
Referring to the great sin accruing from
the destruction of oneГӯs race in verses 31 to
44 of Chapter I and 4 to 6 of Chapter II and
egoistically referring to the meanness of
Duryodhana and others and harping on his
own sense of duty, Arjuna again attempted
to establish by various arguments that it would
be wrong to engage in that fight. Referring to
those arguments of Arjuna, the Lord says in
this verse that he was talking like the learned.
It is with reference to ArjunaГӯs state of
grief at the sight of his uncles, grand-uncles,
other relations and teachers etc., in both the
armies from fear of their destruction, as
described by himself in verses 28 to 30 of
the first chapter, his sorrow over the
preparations for war as expressed in verse
45, and the agitated state of his mind as
described by SaВӨjaya in verse 47, that the
Lord here says, Г«Г«You gireve over those who
should not be grieved for.ГӯГӯ This verse marks
the beginning of the gospel of the GвҲӮtВөa,
When thus Arjuna, merged in distressing thoughts and taking refuge in the Lord,
sought for the way to overcome his intense grief, and declared that neither sovereignty
over the earth nor lordship over gods would drive away that grief, the Lord considering
him a fit recipient for instruction and in order to remove his grief and infatuation for
all time, first shows him what is real and what is unreal, and trying to prove that it
was ArjunaГӯs duty to engage in the fight even from the point of view of Knowledge, enters
into a discussion of the Path of Knowledge.
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲп¬ӮГҠГё
вҖўвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝГ«ГҝГҠЕёГЈп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝГёSГ п¬ӮВў В¬ЛқГҙГҠГҠп¬ӮГҠЕ’ГҠВўp Г·ГҠВ·вҖҡпЈҝвҖ“
ВӘГғГҠвҖҡГҚЕёВӘГғГҠвҖҡГҚВўp ЕёГҠЕёГҲвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝГёГҒГЈГғ В¬ГҒГЎВ«UГғГҠвҖ”H 11H
вҖўвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝГ«ГҝГҠЕёЛңГ” those who should not be grieved for; вҖўГЈп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝГёвҖ”Г” have grieved over; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” you;
В¬ЛқГҙГҠГҠп¬ӮГҠЕ’ГҠЕёЛңГ” words of wisdom; Гё and (yet); Г·ГҠВ·вҖҡпЈҝ you speak; ВӘГғГҠвҖҡГҚЕёЛңГ” those whose life-breath
has departed, the dead; вҖўВӘГғГҠвҖҡГҚЕёЛңГ” those whose life-breath has not yet departed, who are
still living; ГёГ” and; Её not; вҖўЕёГҲвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝГёГҒГЈГғ sorrow over; В¬ГҒГЎВ«UГғГҠвҖ” wise men.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavВөan said: Arjuna, you grieve over those who should not be grieved
for and yet speak like the learned; wise men do not sorrow over the dead or the
living.                                                                 (11)

=== PAGE 78 ===

* Chapter II *
77
The uppermost thought in ArjunaГӯs mind
at that time was that the destruction of his race,
which was an inevitable consequence of the
war, would lead to a confusion of castes and
bring about the fall of his ancestors who were
in the other world. He was also feeling anxious
for his kith and kin who were arrayed against
him, and considered sovereignty and other
enjoyments meaningless without them. He also
apprehended that the destruction of race would
further lead to the corruption of women. This
is what is meant by ArjunaГӯs grieving for the
dead and the living, and the Lord tells Arjuna
that the wise never grieve in this way. For in
the eyes of the wise man, God, who is an
embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss,
is the only abiding reality and nothing exists
apart from Him. He is the Self of all and is
absolutely indestructible, whereas the bodies
are transient and cannot stay. The association
as well as the separation of the body and the
Soul, though inevitable from the worldly point
of view, are only imaginary as a dream. Under
such circumstances, for whom should he
grieve and why? But Arjuna was certainly
grieving, which showed that he was not truly
learned, but was merely holding forth as a
learned man.
appearance of their present bodies, and would
continue to exist after the disappearance of
those bodies. Destruction of bodies does not
lead to the destruction of the soul. Therefore,
Arjuna should not grieve for those relations
out of fear of their destruction.
Establishing in this verse the everlasting
character of the soul, the Lord shows to Arjuna
that neither those whose loss he feared, nor
Arjuna himself, nor even BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
was, is, or would ever be non-existent at any
time. They existed even before the birth and
In the preceding verse BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a told Arjuna that he was grieving for
BhвҲӮВ¶ma and other relations who should not be grieved for. The question naturally arises,
why should they not be grieved for ? The Lord, therefore, first of all, establishes the eternal
character of the soul, and proves that from the point of view of the soul it was unwise
to grieve for them:-
Её Г п¬ӮпЈҝп¬ӮГҠвҖһВўU ВЎГҠГғГҲ ЕёГҠвҖҡВў Её Г п¬ӮВў ЕёпЈҝв—ҠпЈҝ ВЎЕёГҠГҒЕ“В¬ГҠвҖ”вҖ“
Её ГёГ’п¬Ӯ Её Г·ГҒп¬ӮcГҝГҠв—ҠвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё п¬ӮГҝв—ҠГғвҖ” В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңH 12H
Её ГғГҲ вҲһп¬Ӯ neither (is it a fact that); вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; ВЎГҠГғГҲГ” ever; Её not; вҖўГҠвҖҡв—ҠЛң was; ЕёГ” nor (that);
Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” you (were not); ЕёUГ” nor again (that); Гҹв—ҠпЈҝ these; ВЎЕёГҠГҒЕ“В¬ГҠвҖ” kings (lit., rulers of men); Её
Гё вҲһп¬Ӯ nor (is it a fact that); Её not; Г·ГҒп¬ӮcГҝГҠв—ҠвҖ” shall be; вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё all; п¬ӮГҝв—ҠЛңUГ” we; вҖўГғвҖ” В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛң subsequent
to this, hereafter.
In fact, there was never a time when I was not, or when you or these kings
were not. Nor is it a fact that hereafter we shall all cease to be.           (12)
Thus showing the soul as eternal by nature, the Lord now proceeds in the next verse
to bring out its immutable character, thereby proving that it was an error to grieve for
the soul:
Е’пЈҝГҒвҖһUЕёГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒSв—ҠГЈГҝГ•ГҠ Е’пЈҝвҖһпЈҝU вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’в—ҠГҠвҒ„ВўU ГҝГҠГ’п¬ӮЕёВў ВЎвҒ„UГҠвҖ“
ГғГ•ГҠ Е’пЈҝвҖһUГҠГЈГғвҒ„UВ¬ЛқГҠГҒ#Е“ГӢВёвҒ„USГғГІГҠ Её в—ҠГҲsГ”ГҒГғH 13H
Е’пЈҝГҒвҖһUЕёвҖ” of the soul residing in the body; вҖўГҒSв—ҠЕёЛң in this; ГҝГ•ГҠ just as; Е’пЈҝвҖһпЈҝU body;  вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’в—ҠГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛң boyhood;

=== PAGE 79 ===

78
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
ГҝГҠГ’п¬ӮЕёв—ҠЛңГ” youth; ВЎвҒ„UГҠ old age; ГғГ•ГҠ even so; Е’пЈҝвҖһUГҠГЈГғвҒ„UВ¬ЛқГҠГҒ#вҖ” acquisition of another body (is predicated);
Е“ГӢвҒ„UвҖ” the wise man; ГғГІГҠ about this matter; Её not; в—ҠГҲsГ”ГҒГғ gets deluded.
that contacts between the senses and their
objects give rise to the feelings of heat and
cold, pleasure and pain, etc., He shows that
it is these objects which when contacted by
the senses give rise to every form of dual
experience, e.g., the feelings of heat and
cold, love and hatred, joy and grief, pleasure
and pain, concord and discord, etc. All
morbid feelings arise from a sense of
permanence of the objects of senses. Therefore,
knowing and realizing those objects as
transitory and fleeting by nature, their contact
That by which things are measured, or
by which knowledge of things is obtained, is
called a Г«MВөatrВөaГӯ. Therefore, the term Г«MВөatrГҘГӯ
is intended here to mean all the senses, including
the mind; and Г«SparвҖ№aГӯ means contact. Thus
the compound word Г«MВөatrВөasparвҖ№ВөaВЁГӯ comes to
mean contact of the mind and senses with
their respective objects, e.g., sound, touch,
colour, taste and smell.
Heat and cold, pleasure and pain, etc.,
mentioned in this verse, stand for all pairs
of contraries. Therefore, when the Lord says
Just as boyhood, youth and old age are attributed to the soul through this body,
even so, it attains another body. The wise man does not get deluded about this.    (13)
leaves a body and takes another; it is the astral
body which undergoes these experiences, and
they are attributed to the soul. Being unaware
of this truth, it is only the unwise who grieve
over oneГӯs transition from one body to another.
The wise never do so; for in the eyes of the
wise the soul has no relation with the body.
Therefore, Arjuna should not grieve for those
relatives.
Regarding the soul as subject to change,
the unwise think that it suffers great pain both
when leaving a particular body and taking a
new birth, and, therefore, grieve for it. In the
present verse, the Lord declares this unwise.
He says that just as childhood, youth and old
age do not really belong to the soul, but pertain
only to the gross body, and are falsely attributed
to the soul, even so, it is not the soul which
In the preceding verse, showing that the soul was eternal and immutable, the Lord
established the position that it was unwise to grieve for the same. But, here, it may be
urged that notwithstanding the eternal and immutable character of the soul, union with
and separation from oneГӯs kith and kin do bring actual experiences of pleasure and pain.
Therefore, how can grief be avoided? In reply to this the Lord declares all contact and
separation to be transitory by nature and urges that both pleasure and pain arising from
them should be avoided:
в—ҠГҠГІГҠГҠSВ¬вүҘГҠГҠВёSГғГҲ вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ вүҘГҠГӢГғГҠпЈҝcГЎГҠвҖҡГҲПҖЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖЕ’ГҠвҖ”вҖ“
вҖўГҠВӘв—ҠГҠВ¬ГҠГҒГҝЕёГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒЕёГ ГҝГҠSГғГҠВўГҒSГғГҒГғЛҮГҠSп¬Ӯ Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғH 14H
в—ҠГҠГІГҠГҠSВ¬вүҘГҠГҠВёвҖ” contacts between the senses and their objects; ГғГҲ indeed; вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ O son of
KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna; вүҘГҠГӢГғГҠпЈҝcГЎГҠвҖҡГҲПҖЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖЕ’ГҠвҖ” giving rise to the (feelings of) heat and cold, pleasure and
pain, etc.; вҖўГҠВӘв—ҠГҠВ¬ГҠГҒГҝЕёвҖ” (are) fleeting; вҖўГҒЕёГ ГҝГҠвҖ” (and) transitory; ГғГҠЕёЛң them; ГҒГғГҒГғЛҮГҠSп¬Ӯ (therefore)
endure; Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғ O descendant of Bharata, Arjuna.
O son of KuntвҲӮ, the contacts between the senses and their objects, which give
rise to the feelings of heat and cold, pleasure and pain etc., are transitory and fleeting;
therefore, Arjuna, endure them.                                           (14)

=== PAGE 80 ===

* Chapter II *
79
should not be allowed to produce any
unhealthy reaction on the mind.
Describing the contact between the senses
and their objects as coming and going and
impermanent, by nature, and asking Arjuna to
rise above the same, the Lord has shown that
such contacts, giving rise to pleasure and pain,
being transitory do not contain the least trace
of true happiness. Therefore, Arjuna is being
advised to put up with them, that is, he is being
asked not to rejoice or grieve over their coming
and going, nor to entertain any partiality or
prejudice for or against these. Meeting with
oneГӯs near and dear ones is also included in
this; for, as in the case of other objects it is
through the mind and senses that we are united
with or separated from our relatives. Hence it
should be understood that the Lord exhorts
Arjuna to overcome pleasure and pain resulting
from all such contacts and separation.
The adjective Г«SamaduВЁkhasukhamГӯ (to
whom pleasure and pain are alike) is used
to denote the essential qualification of a
Г«DhвҲӮraГӯ. He who looks upon both pleasure
and pain with equanimity, that is, regarding
both the experiences as fleeting, makes no
distinction between them, is a Г«DhвҲӮraГӯ; he
alone can overcome them without being
affected by them.
Contacts between the senses and their
objects, which were expressed by the word
MВөatrВөasparвҖ№ВөaВЁГӯ in the preceding verse, are
referred to again in this verse by the word
Г«EteГӯ (these). And by saying, Г«who is not
tormented by these contacts,Гӯ it is intended
to show that when the practicant through the
repeated and constant practice of overcoming
the feelings of attraction and repulsion, joy
and grief, arising from the contact of, or
separation from, objects of senses, attains a
state when the contact of any sense with any
object of enjoyment fails to produce any kind
The indeclinable Г«HiГӯ in this verse has
been used to denote reason. The intention
is to point out the reason why contacts
between the senses and their objects should
be avoided.
Г«В§RВ¶abhaГӯ signifies Г«the bestГӯ, or Г«the
most excellentГӯ. Thus the compound word
Г«PuruВ¶arВ¶abhaГӯ here denotes the most heroic
and strongest of men. Addressing Arjuna as
Г«PuruВ¶arВ¶abhaГӯ in this verse, the Lord intends
to say that being the best of heroes and
strongest of men, indifference to pleasure
and pain etc., is a part of ArjunaГӯs nature;
therefore, it should be quite easy for him to
rise above all these dual experiences.
The word Г«DhвҲӮramГӯ is generally used
with reference to the God-realized soul; but,
now and then, it is also used to signify a
soul sufficiently qualified to realize God.
Here it means a practicant who has reached
a state of ripeness in the practice of
SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga, or the Yoga of Knowledge.
Anticipating the question as to what will be the effect of ignoring such contacts of
senses and their objects, the Lord says:
ГҝВў ГҒвҖһU Её вҲҡГҝГ•ГҝГЈГ ГҝпЈҝГғпЈҝ В¬ГҲLВ§В·Вў В¬ГҲLВ§В·В·ВёГ·вҖ“
вҖҡв—ҠЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖвҖҡГҲПҖВў Е“ГӢвҒ„Вў вҖҡГҠпЈҝЛҳв—ҠГҺГғГ п¬ӮГҠГҝ вҲ‘В§ГҖВ¬ГғпЈҝH 15H
Гҝв—ҠЛң whom; ГҒвҖһU for; Её not; вҲҡГҝГ•ГҝГҒГЈГғ torment; вҲһГғпЈҝ these (contacts); В¬ГҲLВ§В·в—ҠЛң the person; В¬ГҲLВ§В·В·ВёГ·
O best of men, Arjuna; вҖҡв—ҠЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖвҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛң to whom pain and pleasure are alike; Е“ГӢвҒ„Uв—ҠЛң wise; вҖҡвҖ”
he; вҖўв—ҠГҺГғГ п¬ӮГҠГҝ for immortality; вҲ‘В§ГҖВ¬ГғпЈҝ becomes eligible.
Arjuna, the wise man to whom pain and pleasure are alike, and who is not
tormented by these contacts, becomes eligible for immortality.               (15)

=== PAGE 81 ===

80
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
of agitation or morbid feeling in his mind,
then should it be regarded that he is a Г«DhвҲӮraГӯ
or a wise man to whom pain and pleasure
have become equal.
By saying Г«he becomes eligible for
immortality the Lord means to say that the
wise man referred to above as possessed of
an equable mind, who remains unperturbed
and unaffected by any contact whatsoever,
becomes qualified to attain Г«MokВ¶aГӯ or realize
God and very soon succeeds in directly
perceving Him.
remains in the same state of being, constant
and unchangeable. Therefore, if the cause of
ArjunaГӯs grief was fear of destruction of the
soul of BhвҲӮВ¶ma and other relatives, it was
equally improper for him to entertain such
grief.
The words Г«UbhayoВЁГӯ (both) and
Г«AnayoВЁГӯ (these) point to the above Г«AsatГӯ
and Г«SatГӯ, Г«unrealГӯ and Г«RealГӯ. Distinguishing
between the Real and the unreal, the saints
and seers of truth reached the conclusion that
things which changed, suffered destruction,
and did not last for ever were unreal, that
is to say, unreal things could never exist
while that which at no time, and under no
circumstance, underwent any form of change
and destruction, and ever continued to exist
was the Real; that is to say, the Real never
ceased to exist. This is what is meant by
perception by the seers of truth of the reality
of both the unreal and the Real.
The term Г«AsataВЁГӯ in this verse signifies
the ever-changing physical body, the senses
as well as their objects, including all that is
material in this objective world. Therefore,
when the Lord says: Г«the unreal has no
existenceГӯ, He means to say that it was non-
existent even before the time of its so-called
existence, and will be non-existent afterwards;
therefore, in reality, it does not exist even when
it appears to exist. Under the circumstance, if
ArjunaГӯs grief was due to his apprehension
with regard to the destruction of either the
physical bodies of BhвҲӮВ¶ma and other relatives,
or of any other material object, it was unwise
for him to indulge in such grief.
Г«SataВЁГӯ or Г«the RealГӯ connotes the Supreme
Spirit, which is all-pervading and eternal.
The words Г«it never ceases to beГӯ are
intended to convey the idea that at no time,
and under no circumstance, the soul undergoes
any change, or ceases to exist. It ever
In verses 12 and 13 of this chapter the Lord proved the soul to be eternal and
immutable, and in verse 14 He declared the contact of the senses and mind with objects
of senses as fleeting and transitory. But He did not make it clear how the soul was eternal,
and how such contact was transitory. Therefore, in the next verse, the Lord defines what
is real and what is unreal in order to show how to distinguish between the two:
ЕёГҠвҖҡГғГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮlГғпЈҝ Г·ГҠп¬ӮГҠпЈҝ ЕёГҠГ·ГҠп¬ӮГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮlГғпЈҝ вҖҡГғвҖ”вҖ“
В©UГ·ГҝГҠпЈҝвҒ„UГҒВ¬ Е’ГҺCГ”UГҠпЈҝЛҳГЈГғSГ п¬ӮЕёГҝГҠпЈҝSГғГ»п¬ӮЕ’ГҢвүҘГҠГҒГ·вҖ”H 16H
Её not; вҖўвҖҡГғвҖ” of the unreal; ГҒп¬ӮlГғпЈҝ is; Г·ГҠп¬ӮвҖ” being; Её not; вҖўГ·ГҠп¬ӮвҖ” negation; ГҒп¬ӮlГғпЈҝ is; вҖҡГғвҖ”
of the real; В©UГ·ГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” вҖўГҒВ¬ of both; Е’ГҺCГ”UвҖ” has (thus) been perceived; вҖўГЈГғвҖ” reality, essence; ГғГҲ
whereas; вҖўЕёГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” these; ГғГ»п¬ӮЕ’ГҢвүҘГҠГҒГ·вҖ” by the seers of truth.
The unreal has no existence, and the Real never ceases to be; the reality of
both has thus been perceived by the seers of Truth.                            (16)

=== PAGE 82 ===

* Chapter II *
81
The word Г«IdamГӯ together with Г«SarvamГӯ
in the present verse refers to all material things
like the body, the senses, the mind, all objects
of enjoyment and places of enjoyment, etc.
All these things which come under the common
connotation of Matter are pervaded by the
Supreme Spirit, which represents the principle
of life or Consciousness. By characterizing the
Supreme Spirit as imperishable, the Lord
indicates that the term Г«imperishable, denotes
the same supreme soul which He defined in
the preceding verse under the name of Г«SatГӯ,
and which has been determined by the seers
of truth as the only Г«realГӯ substance.
By the statement that Г«none can bring
about the destruction of this indestructible
substanceГӯ, the Lord has shown that just as
the cloud is pervaded by ether, even so, all
material objects are pervaded by the Supreme
Spirit, so that no material object possesses
the capacity to destroy this supreme soul.
Therefore, being constant and ever-existent,
the soul alone represents what can be termed
as Г«RealГӯ.
Of the Г«RealГӯ it is stated in the preceding verse that it never ceases to be. The Lord
now proceeds to tell us what that Г«RealГӯ is:
вҖўГҒп¬ӮЕёГҠГҒвүҘГҠ ГғГҲ ГғГҒmГҒh ГҝпЈҝЕё вҖҡп¬ӮВёГҒв—ҠЕ’Вў ГғГғв—ҠЛңвҖ“
ГҒп¬ӮЕёГҠвүҘГҠв—ҠвҲҡГҝГҝSГҝГҠSГҝ Её вҲ‘В§ГҒpГ вҲ‘В§ГғГҲВёв—ҠвҖһВёUГҒГғH 17H
вҖўГҒп¬ӮЕёГҠГҒвүҘГҠ imperishable; ГғГҲ alone; ГғГғЛң that; ГҒп¬ӮГҒh know; ГҝпЈҝЕё by whom; вҖҡп¬ӮВёв—ҠЛң all; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛң this;
ГғГғв—ҠЛң (is) pervaded; ГҒп¬ӮЕёГҠвүҘГҠв—ҠЛң destruction; вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝSГҝ вҖўSГҝ of this indestructible (substance); Её
вҲ‘В§ГҒpГғЛң no one; вҲ‘В§ГғГҲВёв—ҠЛң вҖўвҖһВёUГҒГғ has power to bring about.
Know That alone to be imperishable, which pervades this universe; for no one
has power to destroy this indestructible substance.                         (17)
Explaining thus what is Real, the Lord proceeds in the next verse to tell us what
is Г«unrealГӯ:
вҖўГЈГғп¬ӮГЈГғ Гҹв—ҠпЈҝ Е’пЈҝвҖһUГҠ ГҒЕёГ ГҝSГҝГҠпЈҝQВ§ГҠвҖ” вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢГҒвҒ„UГЎГҠвҖ”вҖ“
вҖўЕёГҠГҒвүҘГҠЕёГҠпЈҝЛҳВ¬Лқв—ҠпЈҝГҝSГҝ ГғSв—ҠГҠlГҲГӨГҝSп¬Ӯ Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғH 18H
вҖўГЈГғп¬ӮГЈГғвҖ” perishable; Гҹв—ҠпЈҝ (all) these; Е’пЈҝвҖһUГҠвҖ” bodies; ГҒЕёГ ГҝSГҝ eternal; В©UQВ§ГҠвҖ” (are) spoken of;
вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢГҒвҒ„UГЎГҠвҖ” of the soul; вҖўЕёГҠГҒвүҘГҠЕёвҖ” imperishable; вҖўВ¬Лқв—ҠпЈҝГҝSГҝ indefinable; ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛң therefore; ГҝГҲГӨГҝSп¬Ӯ fight;
Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғ O descendant of Bharata, Arjuna.
All these bodies pertaining to the imperishable, indefinable and eternal soul are
spoken of as perishable; therefore, Arjuna, fight.                          (18)
appear without any corresponding reality,
even so, all these bodies, though unreal
appear as Г«RealГӯ through ignorance. They
have no Г«RealГӯ existence. Their destruction
is therefore inevitable, so that it is futile to
grieve for them.
By using the plural form in the word
Г«DehВөaВЁГӯ and the singular form in Г«вҖәarвҲӮriЖ’aВЁГӯ
The word Г«DehВөaВЁГӯ (bodies), qualified
by Г«ImeГӯ (these), in the above verse, denotes
all bodies, and in order to explain what is
Г«unrealГӯ, they have been characterized as
perishable. The intention is to show that the
mind, the senses and the gross or physical
bodyГіall these are perishable. Just as the
body and the world pertaining to a dream

=== PAGE 83 ===

82
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
(soul), the Lord has shown that in all bodies
the soul is one. Due to Nescience, the soul
appears as varied in different bodies. But in
reality it is one. The word Г«вҖәarвҲӮriЖ’aВЁГӯ refers
to that which has been mentioned in the
preceding verse as Г«RealГӯ, and by which the
entire world of Matter is said to be pervaded;
and 
the 
three 
adjectives, 
Г«eternalГӯ,
Г«imperishableГӯ and Г«indefinable,Гӯ have been
used with reference to it in order to prove
its identity with that Г«RealГӯ, and by calling
it Г«вҖәarвҲӮrвҲӮГӯ, possessor of the body, and showing
its relation with the different bodies, the
identity between the soul and God has been
demonstrated. The purpose is to show that
though in practical experience it appears that
different souls are acting within and holding
the different bodies, as a matter of fact, they
are not different, but one reality, the one
principle of life and consciousness. This can
be understood by the analogy of a dream,
where none but the dreamer is existent and
all the diversities observed are but part of
the dream, and after awakening, the dreamer
alone remains. Even so, the diversities observed
in the world are caused by Nescience. After
the dawning of Knowledge, all diversities
cease.
By using the word Г«TasmВөatГӯ indicative
of cause, and then commanding Arjuna to
fight, the Lord has shown that when it was
proved that the body was perishable and its
destruction inevitable, and the soul was
eternal and could never be destroyed, there
remained no cause for the least grief. Therefore,
Arjuna should no longer show any hesitation
or unwillingness to engage himself in the
fight.
terminated, is called a Г«killerГӯ. In this way
the killer also is a body, and not the soul.
But ignorant men, attributing the function of
a body to the soul, regard the soul to be a
killerГіan agent (vide III.27); that is why
they have to reap the bitter fruit of such
actions.
The separation of the astral body from
the gross body is called Г«deathГӯ, It is the
gross body that meets with death; therefore,
in the preceding verse it was stated that Г¬all
these bodies are perishable.Г® Even so, the
body plus mind and intellect, through whose
agency the life of another gross body is
In the preceding verse the Lord commanded Arjuna to fight, showing the soul to
be eternal and changeless; but no clear light was thrown by Him on the problem raised
by Arjuna when he said, Г«Г«I do not want to kill them; it would be better for me if the
sons of DhГҰtarВөaВ¶Вўra killed me.ГӯГӯ Therefore, in the next verse He deals with that problem,
saying that it was nothing but ignorance to think that the soul was capable of killing
or was killed.
Гҝ вҲһЕёВў п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠ вҖһUГЈГғГҠвҒ„ВўU ГҝpГ’ЕёВў в—ҠГЈГҝГғпЈҝ вҖһUГғв—ҠЛңвҖ“
В©UГ·ГҠГ’ ГғГҠГ’ Её ГҒп¬ӮВЎГҠЕёГӢГғГҠпЈҝ ЕёГҠГҝВў вҖһUГҒГЈГғ Её вҖһUГЈГҝГғпЈҝH 19H*
ГҝвҖ” who; вҲһЕёв—ҠЛң this (soul); п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠ knows; вҖһUГЈГғГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛң capable of killing; ГҝвҖ” who; Гё and; вҲһЕёв—ҠЛң
this (soul); в—ҠГЈГҝГғпЈҝ regards; вҖһUГғв—ҠЛң killed; В©UГ·ГҠГ’ both; ГғГҠГ’ these; Её not; ГҒп¬ӮВЎГҠЕёГӢГғвҖ” know; Её nor; вҖўГҝв—ҠЛң
this (soul); вҖһUГҒГЈГғ kills; Её neither; вҖһUГЈГҝГғпЈҝ is killed.
They are both ignorant, he who considers the soul to be capable of killing and
he who takes it as killed; for, verily the soul neither kills, nor is killed.    (19)
*
Compare the following verse of the KaВўhopaniВ¶ad (I. ii. 19):Гі
вҖһUГЈГғГҠ ГёпЈҝГЈв—ҠГЈГҝГғпЈҝ вҖһUГЈГғГҲ В°Лң вҖһUГғpпЈҝГЈв—ҠГЈГҝГғпЈҝ вҖһUГғв—ҠЛң вҖ“ В©UГ·ГҠГ’ ГғГҠГ’ Её ГҒп¬ӮВЎГҠЕёГӢГғГҠпЈҝ ЕёГҠГҝ В°Лң вҖһUГҒГЈГғ Её вҖһUГЈГҝГғпЈҝH

=== PAGE 84 ===

* Chapter II *
83
By saying, Г«the soul is never born nor
it ever dies,Гӯ and negating thereby the two
modifications of birth and death, the Lord
negates, in effect, all the six modifications
in the soul, and then uses other expressions
also to negate the other modifications.
The six modifications are: (1) Birth,
(2) Becoming, (3) Growth, (4) Transformation,
(5) Decay and (6) Destruction. By declaring
the soul as Г«unborn,Гӯ the modification of birth
has been negated of it. The sentence Г«nor does
it become on being bornГӯ negates the second
modification of Г«becomingГӯ; the term Г«primevalГӯ
negates the third modification of Г«growthГӯ; the
term Г«everlastingГӯ negates Г«transformationГӯ; the
term Г«eternalГӯ negates Г«decayГӯ; and the sentence
Г«even though the body is slain, the soul is notГӯ,
negates the last modification of Г«destructionГӯ.
The preceding verse says that the soul cannot be killed by anybody. The question,
therefore, arises: how is it that the soul cannot be killed? In answer to this, showing
that the soul is not subject to any form of modification, the Lord brings out the character
of the soul:
Её ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝ ГҒв—ҠЛқГҝГғпЈҝ п¬ӮГҠ вҲ‘В§Е’ГҠГҒГёГӣГҠГҠГҝВў Г·ГҚГ п¬ӮГҠ Г·ГҒп¬ӮГғГҠ п¬ӮГҠ Её Г·ГҚГҝвҖ”вҖ“
вҖўВЎГҠпЈҝ ГҒЕёГ ГҝвҖ” вүҘГҠГҠEГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГҝВў В¬ГҲвҒ„UГҠГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ Её вҖһUГЈГҝГғпЈҝ вҖһUГЈГҝв—ҠГҠЕёпЈҝ вүҘГҠГ”вҒ„UГӢвҒ„пЈҝUH 20H
Её neither; ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝ is born; ГҒв—ҠЛқГҝГғпЈҝГ” dies; п¬ӮГҠ (again); вҲ‘В§Е’ГҠГҒГёГғЛң ever; Её not; вҖўГҝв—ҠЛң this (soul);
Г·ГҚГ п¬ӮГҠ after being born; Г·ГҒп¬ӮГғГҠ comes into being; п¬ӮГҠ (again); ЕёГ” nor; Г·ГҚГҝвҖ” only then; вҖўВЎвҖ” (is)
unborn; ГҒЕёГ ГҝвҖ” eternal; вүҘГҠГҠEГғвҖ”Г” everlasting; вҖўГҝв—ҠЛң this (soul); В¬ГҲвҒ„UГҠГЎГҠвҖ” primeval; Её nor; вҖһUГЈГҝГғпЈҝ is
slain; вҖһUГЈГҝв—ҠГҠЕёпЈҝ вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„пЈҝU with the destruction of the body.
The soul is never born nor it ever dies; nor does it become on being born. For,
it is unborn, eternal, everlasting and primeval; even though the body is slain, the
soul is not.
(20)
In verse 19 the Lord stated that the soul neither kills anybody, nor is killed by anybody.
In that connection showing in verse 20 that the soul is above modification, it has been
made clear why it is not killed by anybody. In the next verse, it is shown why the soul
does not kill anybody.
п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГҠГҒп¬ӮЕёГҠГҒвүҘГҠЕёВў ГҒЕёГ ГҝВў Гҝ вҲһЕёв—ҠВЎв—ҠвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңвҖ“
вҲ‘В§Г•Вў вҖҡ В¬ГҲLВ§В·вҖ” В¬ГҠГ•Вё вҲ‘ВўВ§ ГүГҠГҠГғГҝГҒГғ вҖһUГҒГЈГғ вҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңH 21H
п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ knows; вҖўГҒп¬ӮЕёГҠГҒвүҘГҠЕёв—ҠЛң imperishable; ГҒЕёГ Гҝв—ҠЛң eternal; ГҝвҖ” who; вҲһЕёв—ҠЛң this (soul); вҖўВЎв—ҠЛң unborn;
вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛң (and) free from decay; вҲ‘В§Г•в—ҠЛң how; вҖҡвҖ” that; В¬ГҲLВ§В·вҖ” man; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna;
вҲ‘В§в—ҠЛң whom; ГүГҠГҠГғГҝГҒГғ causes to be killed; вҖһUГҒГЈГғ kills; вҲ‘В§в—ҠЛң (and) whom.
Arjuna, the man who knows this soul to be imperishable, eternal and free from
birth and decayГіhow and whom will he cause to be killed, how and whom will
he kill?                                                              (21)
when he knows that it is the body which is
killed by another body conjoined with the
mind, intellect and senses,Гіhow can he
identify himself with the body and believe
In this verse the Lord has brought out
the idea that he who knows the true nature of
the soul can never think that he can kill anyone,
or cause anyone to be killed. In other words,

=== PAGE 85 ===

84
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
that he has killed anyone, or caused anyone
to be killed? For in his consciousness there
remains only one Spirit existent everywhere,
which neither dies nor can be killed, and which
again neither kills, nor causes anyone to be
killed. Therefore, all these actions of being
subjected to death, infliction of death on another,
or becoming the cause of anotherГӯs death etc.,
are attributed to the soul due to ignorance. In
reality, they have nothing to do with the soul.
Therefore, grieving for any being whatsoever
does not stand to reason.
should be construed to mean expiry of the
duration of its life. If the word Г«worn-outГӯ is
interpreted in the sense of Г«oldГӯ, it will raise a
difficulty inasmuch as people do not in every
case die old. Men and women in their youth,
and even infants, are very often found to enter
the portals of death. On the termination of its
Г«PrВөarabdhaГӯ (the sum-total of Karmas bearing
fruit in oneГӯs life), a being may die at any
age, no matter whether it is old age, youth or
infancy; and that will be considered the limit
of its life. The wearing-out of a body should,
therefore, be taken to mean the exhaustion of
the force of PrВөarabdha, which has been
responsible for building it. Taken in this sense,
the adjective Г«JвҲӮrЖ’ВөaniГӯ (worn-out) applied to
the noun Г«bodiesГӯ is quite appropriate.
On the analogy of Г«VВөasВөaвүҲsiГӯ (clothes),
use of the plural form in вҖәarвҲӮrВөaЖ’iГӯ (bodies)
also has been made after due thought and
consideration. There may be two reasons for
the use of the plural form in this case:Гі
From a superficial view, the illustration
may appear to be somewhat inappropriate,
and not on all fours with the fact sought to
be illustrated. For, generally one feels a sort
of gratification in leaving off worn-out clothes
and adopting new ones, while the process
of casting off an old body and entering into
another entails suffering and pain. A deeper
consideration, however, will show that the
illustration is not inappropriate. For, in casting
off an old body and entering into a new one,
it is the ignorant alone who suffers pain, not
the wise. A child weeps when its mother
removes old clothes, soiled with dirt, from
its body, and compels it to wear new ones.
The mother remains indifferent to the weeping
of the child and in the childГӯs own interest
makes it submit to the change of clothes.
Even so, God, for the good of the JвҲӮva, and
caring little for its tears, changes its body
when it is worn-out.
In this context, the wearing-out of a body
True, the soul is eternal and imperishableГіit can never be killed; therefore, it should
not be grieved for. And the body, being perishable, must perish; hence the body too should
not be grieved for. But when a soul leaves one body and enters another, the process
involves excessive pain. How, then, is it unreasonable to grieve for such a painful event?
Anticipating this question, the Lords says:
п¬ӮГҠвҖҡГҠВўГҒвҖҡ ВЎГӢГЎГҠГҠВёГҒЕё ГҝГ•ГҠ ГҒп¬ӮвҖһUГҠГҝ Еёп¬ӮГҠГҒЕё ВӘГҺЛҶГҠГҒГғ ЕёвҒ„UГҠпЈҝЛҳВ¬вҒ„UГҠГҒГЎГҠвҖ“
ГғГ•ГҠ вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„UГҠГҒГЎГҠ ГҒп¬ӮвҖһUГҠГҝ ВЎГӢГЎГҠГҠВёГЈГҝГЈГҝГҠГҒЕё вҖҡВўГҝГҠГҒГғ Еёп¬ӮГҠГҒЕё Е’пЈҝвҖһUГӢH 22H
п¬ӮГҠвҖҡГҠВўГҒвҖҡ garments; ВЎГӢГЎГҠГҠВёГҒЕё worn-out; ГҝГ•ГҠ as; ГҒп¬ӮвҖһUГҠГҝ casting off; Еёп¬ӮГҠГҒЕё new ones; ВӘГҺЛҶГҠГҒГғ
takes; ЕёвҒ„UвҖ” a man; вҖўВ¬вҒ„UГҠГҒГЎГҠ other; ГғГ•ГҠ likewise; вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„UГҠГҒГЎГҠ bodies; ГҒп¬ӮвҖһUГҠГҝ discarding; ВЎГӢГЎГҠГҠВёГҒЕё worn-
out; вҖўГЈГҝГҠГҒЕё other; вҖҡВўГҝГҠГҒГғ enters; Еёп¬ӮГҠГҒЕё new ones; Е’пЈҝвҖһUГӢ the embodied soul.
As a man shedding worn-out garments, takes other new ones, likewise, the
embodied soul, casting off worn-out bodies, enters into others that are new. (22)

=== PAGE 86 ===

* Chapter II *
85
(a) There is no knowing how many
bodies a particular JвҲӮvВөatmВөa has cast off up
till now, how many it has taken anew, and
how many more it will continue hereafter to
cast off and adopt, till it obtains enlightenment
and consequent release from birth and death.
This is indicated by the plural form applied
in this context.
(b) Every individual soul possesses three
bodies:Гіthe gross, subtle and causal. When
the JвҲӮvВөatmВөa leaves one body and enters into
another, all these three bodies are changed.
The actions of a man are responsible for the
modification of his nature or disposition. The
causal body is represented by oneГӯs individual
nature made up of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas
or the principles of harmony, motion and
inertia. This is also known as disposition or
temperament. Generally speaking, it is oneГӯs
nature which determines the last thought at
the time of death, and according to that last
thought or desire the subtle body is formed.
The JвҲӮvВөatmВөa leaves a worn-out body carrying
the subtle and causal bodies with it, and
enters into a new gross body suited to the
subtle body. Thus it was quite reasonable to
use the plural form of the word to indicate
the change that takes place in all the three
bodiesГіgross, subtle and causal.
In reality the soul, being immobile and
non-active, does not migrate from one body
to another; it is ever fixed and steady. But
just as when a pot is carried from one place
to another, the ether or space within the pot
also appears to be carried, even so when the
subtle body leaves a gross body and enters
another, it appears that the soul also has
moved from one body to another. Therefore,
the acts of leaving one body and entering
into another are attributed to the soul in order
to explain the phenomenon of death to the
ordinary people. The word Г«DehвҲӮГӯ is indicative
of the soul identifying itself with the body;
due to its association with gross body, it
appears to be leaving one and entering into
another. In this sense, it has been said that
the soul leaves a worn-out body and enters
into a new one.
In this verse, two different verbs Г«GГҰhЖ’ВөatiГӯ
and Г«SaвүҲyВөatiГӯ have been used respectively
with reference to the two objects Г«clothesГӯ
and Г«bodiesГӯ. The primary sense of Г«GГҰhЖ’ВөatiГӯ
is Г«to takeГӯ and that of Г«SaвүҲyВөatiГӯ is Г«to goГӯ.
Clothes are taken and worn, therefore the
verb Г«GГҰhЖ’ВөatiГӯ has been used with reference
to them; and the soul appears to leave a body
and enter into another, therefore the verb
Г«SaвүҲyВөatiГӯ has been used with reference to it.
Similarly, the use of the two words
Г«NaraВЁГӯ (man) and Г«DehвҲӮГӯ (living creature)
in this verse has a special significance,
inasmuch as clothes are worn and discarded
by men alone, and not by other beings, but
migration from one body to another holds
good in the case of all beings. Therefore, the
word Г«NaraВЁГӯ (man) has been used while
speaking of clothes, and the word Г«DehвҲӮГӯ
(embodied being) while speaking of bodies.
Proving it unreasonable to grieve over the process of leaving one body and adopting
another, the Lord reverts in the next three verses to a discussion, in an indirect way,
of the eternal and changeless character of the soul, because of the difficulty in understanding
itГӯs character, and proves that grieving for fear of its destruction was unbecoming and
improper.
ЕёГ’ЕёВў ГҒВҝUГЈЕ’ГҒГЈГғ вүҘГҠSГІГҠГҠГҒГЎГҠ ЕёГ’ЕёВў Е’вҖһUГҒГғ В¬ГҠп¬ӮвҲ‘В§вҖ”вҖ“
Её ГёГ’ЕёВў Г„вҖ№пЈҝЕ’ГҝГЈГ ГҝГҠВ¬ГҠпЈҝ Её вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝВ·ГҝГҒГғ в—ҠГҠLВ§ГғвҖ”H 23H

=== PAGE 87 ===

86
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
ArjunaГӯs grief proceeded out of the
apprehension that he would be required to kill
his elders and other relations by striking them
with lethal weapons, or by hurling destructive
weapons against them; therefore, in order to
remove his grief, the Lord establishes the
immortality and formlessness of the soul by
pointing out the inability of all the four elements
of earth, water, fire and air to destroy it. He
shows that even when the body is cut to pieces
by weapons, the soul is not. Destructive fire-
missiles may burn the body, but the soul will
not be burnt, the VВөaruЖ’Вөastra (weapon of water)
may be applied to dissolve the body, but the
soul will not be dissolved thereby; the weapon
of air (VВөayavyВөastra) may dry up the body, but
the soul will not be dried up. The body is
perishable and possessed of a form; the soul is
everlasting and formless. Therefore, the soul
can never be destroyed by the element of earth
in the form of any weapon or by the elements
of water, fire and air.
Её not; вҲһЕёв—ҠЛң this (soul); ГҒВҝUГЈЕ’ГҒГЈГғ cut; вүҘГҠSГІГҠГҠГҒГЎГҠ weapons; Её not; вҲһЕёв—ҠЛң this (soul); Е’вҖһUГҒГғ burns;
В¬ГҠп¬ӮвҲ‘В§вҖ” fire (lit., that which purifies); Её not; Гё and; вҲһЕёв—ҠЛң this (soul); Г„вҖ№пЈҝЕ’ГҝГҒГЈГғ wet; вҖўГҠВ¬вҖ” water;
Её not; вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝВ·ГҝГҒГғ dries; в—ҠГҠLВ§ГғвҖ” wind.
Weapons cannot cut it, nor can fire burn it; water cannot wet it, nor can wind
dry it.                                                                 (23)
вҖўГ«ВҝпЈҝUlГҠпЈҝЛҳГҝв—ҠЕ’ГҠsГ”ГҠпЈҝЛҳГҝв—ҠГ„вҖ№пЈҝlГҠпЈҝЛҳвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝcГҝ вҲһп¬Ӯ ГёвҖ“
ГҒЕёГ ГҝвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮВёВӘГғвҖ” SГ•ГҠГЎГҠГҲвҒ„UГёвҖ№ГҠпЈҝЛҳГҝВў вҖҡЕёГҠГғЕёвҖ”H 24H
вҖўГ«ВҝпЈҝUlвҖ” incapable of being cut; вҖўГҝв—ҠЛң this (soul); вҖўЕ’ГҠsГ”вҖ” incapable of being burnt;
вҖўГҝв—ҠЛңГ” this (soul); вҖўГ„вҖ№пЈҝlвҖ”Г” incapable of being dissolved by water; вҖўвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝcГҝвҖ” undriable; вҲһп¬Ӯ as
well; ГёГ” and; ГҒЕёГ ГҝвҖ” eternal; вҖҡп¬ӮВёВӘГғвҖ” omnipresent; SГ•ГҠГЎГҠГҲвҖ”Г” immovable; вҖўГёвҖ№Г”вҖ” constant; вҖўГҝв—ҠЛңГ” this
(soul); вҖҡЕёГҠГғЕёвҖ” (and) everlasting.
For this soul cannot be cut, nor burnt by fire; it cannot be dissolved by water,
nor dried by air. The soul is eternal, omnipresent, immovable, constant and
everlasting.
(24)
dried by air. In order to show that the
indestructibility of the soul is totally different
from that of ether, the soul is called eternal,
omnipresent and everlasting. The intention of
this is to show that ether is not eternal,
because during the final dissolution of
creation it is dissolved; whereas the soul
never ceases to be, therefore it is eternal.
Then ether is not all-pervasive, it pervades
only its own evolutes; but the soul is all-
pervasive. Again, ether has a beginning; but
the soul is without beginning. Thus by the
use of these last adjectives the difference
between the soul and ether has been clearly
brought out.
The present verse has been added by
the Lord to show by argument why the soul
cannot be destroyed by weapons. It is
indivisible, unmanifest, constant and immutable;
therefore weapons are altogether powerless
to destroy it.
When it is said that the soul is not prone
to being cut or burnt by fire etc., the
indestructibility of the soul is no doubt
established; but these tests equally apply to
ether as well; for being the cause of all other
elements and pervading them all, it cannot
be cut by weapons, which are products of
the earth, nor can it be burnt by fire, nor
dissolved by water, nor again can it be

=== PAGE 88 ===

* Chapter II *
87
By describing the soul as Г«stillГӯ and
Г«motionlessГӯ, it has been shown that both
forms of motion represented by vibration and
movement from one place to another are
absent in it. Motion, which takes place when
the thing is rooted to a fixed place, is known
as Г«vibrationГӯ, whereas motion in the form
of change of place is termed as its movement
from one place to another. The soul neither
vibrates, nor moves from one place to another.
It is all-pervasive: there is no place which
is not filled by it.
Therefore, like the soul, PrakГҰti too is
unmanifest and unthinkable. But PrakГҰti is not
immutable, it is subject to change, whereas
the soul undergoes no transformation in any
circumstance. Thus the soul is something
entirely different from PrakГҰti. When the soul
is realized as eternal, omnipresent, immovable,
everlasting, unmanifest, incomprehensible and
immutable, as described above, grieving for
it becomes quite out of place and unreasonable.
The soul cannot be cognized by any of
the senses, therefore it is called Г«unmanifestГӯ,
nor can it be conceived by the mind, therefore
it is Г«incomprehensibleГӯ.
Again, by describing it as Г«immutableГӯ,
the distinction between the soul and PrakГҰti
has been emphasized. The intention of this is
to show that all the senses as well as the mind
are evolutes of PrakГҰti; they cannot, therefore,
apprehend PrakГҰti, which is their cause.
вҖўвҲҡГҝQВ§ГҠпЈҝЛҳГҝв—ҠГҒГёГЈГ ГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГҝв—ҠГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГҠГҝГҠпЈҝВёЛҳГҝв—ҠГҲГ«ГҝГғпЈҝвҖ“
ГғSв—ҠГҠЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮВў ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ’Г п¬ӮГ’ЕёВў ЕёГҠЕёГҲвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝГҒГёГғГҲв—ҠвҖһВёUГҒвҖҡH 25H
вҖўвҲҡГҝQВ§вҖ” unmanifest; вҖўГҝв—ҠЛң this (soul); вҖўГҒГёГЈГ ГҝвҖ” unthinkable; вҖўГҝв—ҠЛңГ” this (soul); вҖўГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГҠГҝВёвҖ”Г”
immutable; вҖўГҝв—ҠЛңГ” this (soul); В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is spoken of; ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” therefore; вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛң as such; ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ’Г п¬ӮГҠ knowing;
вҲһЕёв—ҠЛңГ” this (soul); Её вҖўЕёГҲвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝГҒГёГғГҲв—ҠЛңГ” вҖўвҖһВёUГҒвҖҡ you ought not to grieve.
This soul is unmanifest; it is incomprehensible, and it is spoken of as immutable.
Therefore, knowing this as such, you should not grieve.                   (25)
In the above verses, describing the soul as unborn and imperishable the Lord
demonstrated that it was unreasonable to grieve for it. In the next two verses He shows
that it is improper to grieve for it, even if it be assumed that it is subject to birth and
death:
вҖўГ• ГёГ’ЕёВў ГҒЕёГ ГҝВЎГҠГғВў ГҒЕёГ ГҝВў п¬ӮГҠ в—ҠГЈГҝвҖҡпЈҝ в—ҠГҺГғв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГғГ•ГҠГҒВ¬ Г п¬ӮВў в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ ЕёГ’п¬ӮВў вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝГҒГёГғГҲв—ҠвҖһВёГҒвҖҡH 26H
вҖўГ• if; Гё and; вҲһЕёв—ҠГ”ЛңГ” this (soul); ГҒЕёГ ГҝВЎГҠГғв—ҠЛңГ” subject to constant birth; ГҒЕёГ Гҝв—ҠЛң constantly;
п¬ӮГҠГ” and; в—ҠГЈГҝвҖҡпЈҝ you regard; in that case; в—ҠГҺГғв—ҠГ”ЛңГ” dying; ГғГ•ГҠ in that case; вҖўГҒВ¬ too; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” you;
в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ O Arjuna, of mighty arms; Её not; вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” in this way; вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝГҒГёГғГҲв—ҠЛңГ” to grieve; вҖўвҖһВёUГҒвҖҡ ought.
And, Arjuna, if you should assume this soul to be subject to perpetual birth
and death, even then you should not grieve like this.
(26)
in 
reality, 
the 
soul 
is 
not 
subject
to birth and death, nevertheless, if Arjuna
took it to be such, that is, if he held that
it was constantly born whenever it was
The two indeclinables Г«AthaГӯ, and Г«CaГӯ,
in the above verse, are indicative of assumption.
By 
the 
other 
words 
which 
follow
them the Lord has tried to show that although,

=== PAGE 89 ===

88
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
united with a body, and that similarly it
constantly died whenever it was disunited
from a body, then, according to that line of
thought as well, it was unreasonable for
Arjuna to grieve for it as he did in verses
28 to 47 of the first chapter.
adjective Г«AvyaktВөadвҲӮniГӯ it has been shown
that before birth they had no connection
The word Г«BhВөutВөaniГӯ in this verse stands
for beings in general. By applying to it the
ВЎГҠГғSГҝ ГҒвҖһU Е“ЛқГҲп¬ӮГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҺГ ГҝГҲЕ“ГҲЛқВёп¬ӮВў ВЎГЈв—Ҡ в—ҠГҺГғSГҝ ГёвҖ“
ГғSв—ҠГҠЕ’В¬ГҒвҒ„UвҖһUГҠГҝпЈҝВёЛҳГ•пЈҝВё Её Г п¬ӮВў вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝГҒГёГғГҲв—ҠвҖһВёUГҒвҖҡH 27H
ВЎГҠГғSГҝ for the born; ГҒвҖһU because (in that case); Е“ЛқГҲп¬ӮвҖ” (is) certain; в—ҠГҺГ ГҝГҲвҖ” death; Е“ЛқГҲп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” (is)
inevitable; ВЎГЈв—Ҡ rebirth; в—ҠГҺГғSГҝ for the death; Гё and; ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” therefore; вҖўВ¬ГҒвҒ„UвҖһUГҠГҝпЈҝВё вҖўГ•пЈҝВё over an
inevitable event; Её not; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” you; вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝГҒГёГғГҲв—ҠЛңГ” to grieve; вҖўвҖһВёUГҒвҖҡ ought.
For, in that case death is certain for the born, and rebirth is inevitable for the
dead. You should not, therefore, grieve over the inevitable.                (27)
liberation, the soul is not regarded as subject
to birth and death, which are conceived in
ignorance only.
The word Г«TasmВөatГӯ, again, is indicative
of cause. By using the expression Г«over the
inevitableГӯ alongwith it, it has been shown
that according to this view there being no
escape from birth and death, no possibility
of alteration in or deviation from that course
of events, it was useless to grieve over it.
Therefore, from this point of view as
well, it was improper for Arjuna to indulge
in grief.
The indeclinable Г«HiГӯ, in this verse, has
been used to denote cause. The present verse
pursues the line of thought of the previous
verse, and re-emphasizes the same conclusion
by cogent argument.
Here the Lord does not state the actual
truth. He only recapitulates the point of view
of those ignorant men who hold the soul to
be constantly taking birth and constantly
dying. According to this school of thought,
every mortal is bound to be reborn; for this
school does not believe in liberation. In the
true doctrine, which upholds the idea of
The verses going before have shown that it was unreasonable and improper to grieve
both from the point of view of those who regard the soul as eternal, unborn and
imperishable, as well as of those who regard it as constantly subject to birth and death.
Now, the next verse shows that grief with reference even to the gross bodies of beings
cannot be justified by reason.
вҖўвҲҡГҝQВ§ГҠЕ’ГӢГҒЕё Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё вҲҡГҝQВ§в—ҠГӨГҝГҠГҒЕё Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғвҖ“
вҖўвҲҡГҝQВ§ГҒЕёЕ“ЕёГҠГЈГҝпЈҝп¬Ӯ ГғГІГҠ вҲ‘В§ГҠ В¬ГҒвҒ„UЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮЕёГҠH 28H
вҖўвҲҡГҝQВ§ГҠЕ’ГӢГҒЕё unmanifest before birth; Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё beings; вҲҡГҝQВ§в—ҠГӨГҝГҠГҒЕёГ” (they are) manifest in the
interim (between birth and death); Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғ O descendant of Bharata, Arjuna; вҖўвҲҡГҝQВ§ГҒЕёЕ“ЕёГҠГҒЕё
will become unmanifest at death; вҲһп¬Ӯ only; ГғГІГҠ under such circumstances; вҲ‘В§ГҠ what; В¬ГҒвҒ„UЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮЕёГҠ
(cause for) lamentation.
Arjuna, before birth beings are not manifest to our human senses; on death
they return to the unmanifest again. They are manifest only in the interim between
birth and death. What occasion, then, for lamentation?                         (28)

=== PAGE 90 ===

* Chapter II *
89
with their present bodies. By the word
Г«AvyaktanidhanВөaniГӯ, it has been shown that
in the end, that is, after death too they would
maintain no connection with these gross bodies.
The word Г«VyaktamadhyГҘniГӯ expresses the
idea that during the intermediate period alone,
viz., from birth to death, they are manifest
and maintain relation with their bodies.
By the words Г«What occasion, then, for
lamentation?Гӯ the Lord intends to say that
just as the dream world is non-existent before
and after the dream, it is during the dream
alone that the dreamer has a semblance of
relation with it, even so, one has no cause
to lament for bodies with which one is
connected only during the intermediate stage,
and not permanently. In the MahВөabhВөarata,
StrвҲӮ-Parva, Chapter 2, Vidura also gives
expression to a similar sentiment:Гі
Г«Those whom you now regard to be
your own, came from an unseen state, i.e.,
before birth they were unmanifest, and they
have become unmanifest again. Therefore,
in reality, neither are they yours, nor are
you theirs. What is the occasion, then, for
lamentation?Гӯ*
Being extremely hard to understand, the Lord described the nature of the soul in
the above verses, in diverse ways, in order to make Arjuna understand the truth about
it. Now in the next verse He shows the difficulty and marvellous nature of perception,
description and hearing of that truth.
вҖўГҠpГҝВёп¬ӮГ В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғ вҲ‘В§ГҒpЕ’пЈҝЕёв—ҠГҠpГҝВёп¬ӮmЕ’ГҒГғ ГғГ•Г’п¬Ӯ ГёГҠГЈГҝвҖ”вҖ“
вҖўГҠpГҝВёп¬ӮГ¬ГҠГ’Еёв—ҠГЈГҝвҖ” oГҺГЎГҠГҠпЈҝГҒГғ ГјГҠГҲГ п¬ӮГҠГҘГҝпЈҝЕёВў п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ Её ГёГ’п¬Ӯ вҲ‘В§ГҒpГғЛңH 29HвҖ“
вҖўГҠpГҝВёп¬ӮГғЛңГ” as marvellous; В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғ perceives; вҲ‘В§ГҒpГғЛңГ” scarcely someone; вҲһЕёв—ҠЛңГ” this (soul);
вҖўГҠpГҝВёп¬ӮГғЛңГ” as marvellous; п¬ӮЕ’ГҒГғ speaks; ГғГ•ГҠ so; вҲһп¬Ӯ even; Гё and; вҖўГЈГҝвҖ” (scarce) another; вҖўГҠpГҝВёп¬ӮГғЛңГ”
as marvellous; Гё and; вҲһЕёв—ҠЛңГ” this (soul); вҖўГЈГҝвҖ” (scarce) another; oГҺГЎГҠГҠпЈҝГҒГғ hears; ГјГҠГҲГ п¬ӮГҠ on hearing;
вҖўГҒВ¬ even; вҲһЕёв—ҠЛңГ” this (soul); вҲһЕёв—ҠЛңГ” this (soul); п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ know; Её not; Гё and; вҲһп¬Ӯ indeed; вҲ‘В§ГҒpГғЛңГ” some.
Scarcely someone perceives this soul as marvellous, scarce another, likewise,
speaks thereof as marvellous, and scarce another hears of it as marvellous; while
there are some who know it not even on hearing of it.                             (29)
*
вҖўЕ’вүҘГҠВёЕёГҠЕ’ГҠВ¬ГҒГғГғГҠвҖ” В¬ГҲЕёpГҠЕ’вүҘГҠВёЕёВў ВӘГғГҠвҖ”вҖ“ ЕёГ’ГғпЈҝ Гғп¬Ӯ Её ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠВў Г п¬ӮВў ГғГІГҠ вҲ‘В§ГҠ В¬ГҒвҒ„UЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮЕёГҠH
вҖ“
There is a Mantra in the KaВўhopaniВ¶ad, containing almost the same ideas, which runs as follows:Гі
ГјГҠп¬ӮГЎГҠГҠГҝГҠГҒВ¬ вҖҷвҖһГҲUГҒГ·ГҝГҠпЈҝВё Её вҲӮUГЁГҝвҖ” oГҺГЎп¬ӮГЈГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ вҖҷвҖһUп¬ӮГҠпЈҝ ГҝВў Её ГҒп¬ӮlГҲвҖ”вҖ“
вҖўГҠpГҝГҠпЈҝВё п¬ӮQВ§ГҠ вҲ‘ГҲВ§вүҘГҠвҲӮUГҠпЈҝЛҳSГҝ вҖ№Г©Е“ГҠЛҳЛҳpГҝГҠпЈҝВё ГҙГҠГҠГғГҠ вҲ‘ГҲВ§вүҘГҠвҲӮUГҠЕёГҲГҒвүҘГҠCГ”UвҖ”H
(I.ii.7)
Г«Г«That (truth about the soul) which many are not privileged even to hear, and which, though heard,
cannot be known in reality by many, the expounder of it also is marvellous. The man of exceptional
parts, succeeding in realizing it, is also very rare: and its knower also is a marvellous individual, instructed
by an exceptionally able and proficient teacher.ГӯГӯ
world, and when that individual perceives
the soul he sees it as something marvellous.
The soul is not perceived even as worldly
objects are objectively perceived through the
senses, mind and intellect. This vision is
By saying Г«Hardly anyone perceives
this soul as marvellous,Гӯ the Lord intends to
show that the soul is something wonderful,
so that the individual who succeeds in
perceiving it is very rare to meet with in this

=== PAGE 91 ===

90
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
transcendental and unique. When nothing
but the soul exists in the consciousness of a
man, the soul perceives itself by itself. During
this perception the seer, the act of seeing and
the object of sight cannot be differentiated.
Therefore, that seeing is Г«marvellousГӯ.
By the words Г«scarce another likewise
speaks thereof as marvellous,Гӯ the Lord
shows that all great souls who have realized
the Self cannot describe the character of the
soul, so as to make others understand it.
Those exalted souls alone who have fully
realized the truth about God and are well-
versed in the Vedas and other scriptures can
describe the soul, and their description too
is marvellous. That is to say, the character
of the soul cannot be described even as an
object of the world is described, so as to
convey to another a correct description of the
same. This description is transcendental and
wonderful in character.
All the illustrations employed to expound
the character of the soul throw light only on
a partial aspect of the soul. None of them
brings out its character fully. There being no
object in the world analogous to the soul,
nothing can illustrate it fully. Nevertheless,
realized souls indicate its character by many
a marvellous hint, following both the positive
and negative methods; this is what is meant
by Г«speaking of the soul as marvellous.Гӯ In
reality the soul, being outside the range of
speech, cannot be definitely and clearly
described in words.
Г«Scarce another hears of it as marvellousГӯ:
by these words the Lord shows that among
masses of men, he who takes interest in
hearing the description of the soul and is
possessed of virtuous conduct, purity of
heart, reverence as well as faith in God is
indeed very rare, and his hearing too is
marvellous. That is to say, objects of the
world which he formerly considered as real,
attractive and embodying happiness, and the
physical body etc., which he regarded as his
very self, he now hears of as transient,
perishable, embodiments of sorrow and
material in character, and of the soul as
something quite different from them; this fills
him with wonder. For, the truth about the
soul is something which he had never heard
of or understood before, and it bears no
affinity with any worldly object; hence its
description sounds to him as something very
strange. Moreover, he listens to it with rapt
and undivided attention and is bewitched, as
it were, to hear it. This is what is meant by
Г«hearing of it as marvellous.Гӯ
Г«By saying there are some who know it
not even on hearing of itГӯ, the Lord intends
to show that one who is not endowed with full
reverence and faith, and lacks purity of mind
and subtlety of intellect, will fail to grasp the
true nature of the soul even on hearing of it,
owing to doubt and lurking misconception.
Hence, it is most difficult for an unqualified
person to understand this truth.
The word Г«Г…вҖ№caryavatГӯ should be taken
as an adverb qualifying the verbs Г«perceivesГӯ,
Г«speaksГӯ and Г«hearsГӯ. In this sense it can be
understood as qualifying the subject and
object as well.
Describing thus the difficulty and marvellous nature of perception, description and
hearing of the truth about the soul, the Lord now concludes the treatment of SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga,
or the Yoga of knowledge, by advising Arjuna in the next verse that the soul being ever
incapable of being slain, he should not grieve for any being whatsoever.
Е’пЈҝвҖһUГӢ ГҒЕёГ Гҝв—Ҡп¬ӮГӨГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГҝВў Е’пЈҝвҖһпЈҝU вҖҡп¬ӮВёSГҝ Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғвҖ“
ГғSв—ҠГҠГ вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё Её Г п¬ӮВў вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝГҒГёГғГҲв—ҠвҖһВёUГҒвҖҡUH 30H

=== PAGE 92 ===

* Chapter II *
91
Saying Г«this soul residing in the bodies
of all can never be slainГӯ, the Lord shows
that in the bodies of all beings of the world,
there resides but one soul. The diversity of
bodies is reflected in the soul due to ignorance;
in reality there is no diversity in the soul.
And this ultimate reality, the soul, can never
be slain; it can never be destroyed by
anybody, by any means whatsoever.
In the sentence Г«Therefore, it does not
behove you to grieve for any beingГӯ, the use
of the word Г«ThereforeГӯ, which is indicative
of cause, is intended to show that it being
definitely demonstrated and proved in this
chapter that the soul is ever imperishable,
and it being beyond anybodyГӯs power to kill
it, Arjuna should not grieve for anybody.
How can there be any occasion for grief
when the soul can never cease to exist at any
time, nor can it be destroyed by any means ?
Therefore, instead of indulging in grief, Arjuna
should prepare himself for the fight.
Е’пЈҝвҖһUГӢ soul; ГҒЕёГ Гҝв—ҠЛң ever; вҖўп¬ӮГӨГҝвҖ” incapable of being slain; вҖўГҝв—ҠЛң this; Е’пЈҝвҖһпЈҝU (residing) in the
bodies; вҖҡп¬ӮВёSГҝ of all; Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғ O descendant of Bharata, Arjuna; ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛң therefore; вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ all;
Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё beings; Её not; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛң you; вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝГҒГёГғГҲв—ҠЛң to grieve for; вҖўвҖһUВёГҒвҖҡ ought.
Arjuna, this soul dwelling in the bodies of all can never be slain; therefore, you
should not mourn for anyone.
 (30)
Having demonstrated so far, from the point of view of SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga, the unity and
the eternal and imperishable character of the soul, which is everlasting, stainless,
enlightened, impartial, changeless and a non-doer, and declaring the body to be perishable,
it has been proved that it is unreasonable to lament either for the soul or for the body,
or, for the matter of that, for the separation of the soul from the body. Incidentally, it
has also been shown that even if the soul be regarded as subject to birth and death,
grieving for it does not stand to reason, and Arjuna is, therefore, commanded to fight.
Now, in the next seven verses, the Lord proceeds to demonstrate that it was unreasonable
to grieve even according to the code of honour laid down for a KВ¶atriya; hence Arjuna
is again encourged to enter the fight.
Sп¬ӮЕ“в—ҠВёв—ҠГҒВ¬ ГёГҠп¬ӮпЈҝЛҮГҝ Её ГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГҒГӘВ¬ГғГҲв—ҠвҖһВёUГҒвҖҡвҖ“
Е“ГӘГҝГҠВёГҒh ГҝГҲhГҠГ«ВҝЛӣпЈҝUГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГЈГҝГ ЛҮГҠГҒГІГҠГҝSГҝ Её ГҒп¬ӮlГғпЈҝH 31H
Sп¬ӮЕ“в—ҠВёв—ҠЛң your own duty; вҖўГҒВ¬ too; Гё and; вҖўп¬ӮпЈҝЛҮГҝ considering; Её not; ГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГҒГӘВ¬ГғГҲв—ҠЛң to waver;
вҖўвҖһВёUГҒвҖҡ you ought; Е“ГӘГҝГҠВёГғЛң than a righteous; ГҒвҖһU for; ГҝГҲhГҠГғЛң war; ГјГҠпЈҝГҝвҖ” more welcome; вҖўГЈГҝГғЛң any
other thing; ЛҮГҠГҒГІГҠГҝSГҝ for a man of the warrior class; Её not; ГҒп¬ӮlГғпЈҝ exists.
Besides, considering your own duty too, you should not waver; for there is
nothing more welcome for a man of the warrior class than a righteous war. (31)
from the point of view of his own duty as
a member of the warrior class; for it was the
natural duty of a KВ¶atriya not to run away
from battle (vide XVIII.43).
The indeclinable Г«HiГӯ is indicative of
cause. The use of this word is intended to
show that the apology for the above exhortation
follows in the second half of the verse,
In the sentence Г«Besides, considering
your own duty too you should not waverГӯ,
the use of the word Г«tooГӯ is intended to show
that apart from the fact that the soul being
immortal, and the body transient, lamentation
for them, or shrinking from fight, did not
stand to reason, Arjuna should not entertain
any fear even if he considered the problem

=== PAGE 93 ===

92
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
which says that there is nothing more
welcome for a KВ¶atriya than a righteous war.
Here the Lord shows that a war which has
been launched not from any wicked motive
or out of greed, in which no injustice is
perpetrated, but which is conducted in
conformity with the laws of morality (Dharma),
and which devolves on one as a matter of
duty, and has been waged for upholding
equity and justice;Гіsuch a war alone is, to
a member of the KВ¶atriya class, more
conducive to spiritual good than any other
form and aspect of Dharma. There is no
better and no more fruitful Dharma to a
KВ¶atriya than participation in such a war; for
a KВ¶atriya, who carries on a righteous war
by righteous means, can very easily attain
heaven or even liberation.
the point of a pin (MahВөa., Udyoga., 127.25).вҖ“
It was then that the PВөaЖ’Е’avas were forced to
make preparations for war; therefore, so far
as the PВөaЖ’Е’avas were concerned, it was an
Г«unsolicited warГӯ. By declaring this war as
Г«an open gateway to heavenГӯ, it has been
pointed out that a warrior meeting his death
in such a righteous war obtains direct access
to heaven, and that nothing can hinder him
on the way to heaven.
By the sentence Г«Happy are the KВ¶atriyas
who get such an opportunityГӯ, it is shown
that every KВ¶atriya does not come across
such a righteous war. It is only the most
fortunate among the KВ¶atriyas who are brought
face to face with such a war as a matter of
duty. It was ArjunaГӯs great luck that he could
get the opportunity of engaging himself in
such a righteous war without his seeking. He
should, therefore, in no case think of turning
away from it.
In this verse, addressing Arjuna as
Г«PВөarthaГӯ, the Lord reminds him of the message
of ArjunaГӯs mother, PГҰthВөa, also known as
KuntвҲӮ, which the Lord had carried from
HastinВөapura. The message ran as follows:Гі
Г«Г«Please tell Arjuna, and BhвҲӮma, who
ever keep themselves ready to fight, that the
occasion looking forward to which a KВ¶atriya
mother begets a son has arrived.*ГӯГӯ
Speaking of the war as an Г«unsolicited
opportunityГӯ, the Lord wants to bring home
to Arjuna that it was not of their own seeking
that they were faced with that crisis. The
PВөaЖ’Е’avas had tried all possible means to
bring about an amicable settlement, but
Duryodhana had turned down the proposal
of returning without the arbitrament of war
the kingdom of the PВөaЖ’Е’avas kept under
DuryodhanaГӯs charge as a trust. He had clearly
declared that he would not give the PВөaЖ’Е’avas
even as much land as could be covered by
ГҝЕ’ГҺГ«ВҝUГҝГҠ 
ГёГҠпЈҝВ¬В¬ГӣГҠВў 
Sп¬ӮВӘВёmГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠВ¬ГҠп¬ӮГҺГғв—ҠЛңвҖ“
вҖҡГҲГҒПҖЕёвҖ” ЛҮГҠГҒГІГҠГҝГҠвҖ” В¬ГҠГ•Вё вҲӮUГ·ГЈГғпЈҝ ГҝГҲhв—ҠГӢЕ’ГҺвүҘГҠв—ҠЛңВ§H 32H
ГҝЕ’ГҺГ«ВҝUГҝГҠ of its own accord; Гё and; В©UВ¬В¬ГӣГҠв—ҠЛң (that has); Sп¬ӮВӘВёmГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛң вҖўВ¬ГҠп¬ӮГҺГғв—ҠЛң an open
gateway to heaven; вҖҡГҲГҒПҖЕёвҖ” lucky; ЛҮГҠГҒГІГҠГҝГҠвҖ” KВ¶atriyas; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthВөa, Arjuna; вҲӮUГ·ГЈГғпЈҝ get;
ГҝГҲhв—ҠЛң (an opportunity for) war; ГҹВёЕ’ГҺвүҘГҠв—ҠЛң such.
Arjuna, lucky are the KВ¶atriyas who get such an unsolicited opportunity for
war, which is an open gateway to heaven.                                    (32)
*
вҲһГғhЕёTГҝГҠпЈҝп¬ӮГҠГ«ГҝГҠпЈҝ ГҒЕёГ ГҝГҠпЈҝlГҲQВ§ГҠпЈҝ 
п¬ӮГҺвҲ‘В§ГҠпЈҝЕ’вҒ„UвҖ” вҖ“ ГҝЕ’Г•Z ЛҮГҠГҒГІГҠГҝГҠ вҖҡГҚГғпЈҝ ГғSГҝ вҲ‘В§ГҠвҖ№ГҠпЈҝЛҳГҝв—ҠГҠВӘГғвҖ”H
(MahВөa., Udyoga., 137.9-10)
вҖ“
ГҝГҠп¬ӮГҒh ГғГӢЛҮГЎГҠГҝГҠ вҖҡГҚГ«ГҝГҠ ГҒп¬ӮГӨГҝпЈҝЕ’ВӘЛқпЈҝГЎГҠ вҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠп¬ӮвҖ“ ГғГҠп¬ӮЕ’ГҘГҝВ¬ГҒвҒ„UГ ГҝГҠГ–ГҝВў Г·ГҚв—ҠпЈҝЕёВёвҖ” В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬ӮГҠЕёЛң В¬ЛқГҒГғH

=== PAGE 94 ===

* Chapter II *
93
The word Г«AthaГӯ in this verse is intended
to introduce another viewpoint. It shows that
the verse will prove the advisability of
ArjunaГӯs participation in the battle from
another point of view also.
In the above two verses the Lord had
made it amply clear to Arjuna that the war
with which Arjuna found himself faced being
a righteous war, it was ArjunaГӯs duty to
participate in it. The Lord now proceeds to
tell him that if, in spite of that, he withdrew
from the fight, he would be guilty of falling
from his Г«SvadharmaГӯ, or the allotted duty of
a KВ¶atriya, and the world-wide fame he had
acquired by attaining victory in fight over
demons like the NivВөatakavacas etc., and by
his engagement with BhagavВөan вҖәiva, would
be utterly destroyed and lost. Over and above
that, neglect in the performance of an obligatory
duty would make him guilty of sin. Therefore,
fear of sin, which he advanced as his reason
for withdrawal from the fight, and his
nervousness and fright, were wholly unjustified
and inopportune.
Bringing out the advantage of participation in such a righteous war, the Lord shows
in the next verse the harm that would follow if Arjuna refused to participate in it.
вҖўГ• ГёпЈҝГ»п¬ӮГҒв—Ҡв—ҠВў Е“ГӘГҝZ вҖҡXЛқГ”UГҠв—ҠВў Её вҲ‘В§ГҒвҒ„UcГҝГҒвҖҡвҖ“
ГғГғвҖ” Sп¬ӮЕ“в—ҠZ вҲ‘В§ГӢГҸГғ Гё ГҒвҖһUГ п¬ӮГҠ В¬ГҠВ¬в—Ҡп¬ӮГҠГҘSГҝГҒвҖҡH 33H
вҖўГ• again; ГёпЈҝГғЛң if; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛң you; Гҹв—Ҡв—ҠЛң this; Е“ГӘГҝВёв—ҠЛң righteous; вҖҡXЛқГ”UГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛң war; Её not; вҲ‘В§ГҒвҒ„UcГҝГҒвҖҡ will
wage; ГғГғвҖ” then; Sп¬ӮЕ“в—ҠВёв—ҠЛң your duty; вҲ‘В§ГӢГҒГғВёв—ҠЛң reputation; Гё and; ГҒвҖһUГ п¬ӮГҠ falling from; В¬ГҠВ¬в—ҠЛң sin;
вҖўп¬ӮГҠГҘSГҝГҒвҖҡ you will incur.
Now, if you refuse to fight this righteous war, then, shirking your duty and
losing your reputation, you will incur sin.                                 (33)
вҖўвҲ‘В§ГӢГҸГғ ГёГҠГҒВ¬ Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё вҲ‘В§Г•ГҒГҝcГҝГҒГЈГғ ГғпЈҝЛҳвҲҡГҝГҝГҠв—ҠЛңвҖ“
вҖҡГӘГ·ГҠГҒп¬ӮГғSГҝ 
ГёГҠвҲ‘В§ГӢГҢГғв—ҠВёвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠЕ’ГҒГғГҒвҒ„UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝH 34H
вҖўвҲ‘В§ГӢГҢГғв—ҠЛң ill-fame; Гё nay; вҖўГҒВ¬ also; Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё people; вҲ‘В§Г•ГҒГҝcГҝГҒГЈГғ will spread; ГғпЈҝ your; вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝГҠв—ҠЛң
undying; вҖҡГӘГ·ГҠГҒп¬ӮГғSГҝ for one enjoying popular esteem; Гё and; вҖўвҲ‘В§ГӢГҢГғвҖ” infamy; в—ҠвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠГғЛң than
death; вҖўГҒГғГҒвҒ„UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is worse.
Nay, people will also pour undying infamy on you; and infamy brought on a
man enjoying popular esteem is worse than death.                        (34)
By the words Г«Infamy brought on a
man enjoying popular esteem is worse than
deathГӯ, the Lord seeks to show that if Arjuna
came to the conclusion that he would stand
to lose nothing by public infamy, that would
not be the right conclusion for him. For, to
a man enjoying wide fame, as well as the
love and esteem of the people, loss of credit
and honour is more painful than even death.
Therefore, when confronted with such infamy,
he would fail to resign himself to it; for he
Use of the adverb Г«alsoГӯ in the sentence
Г«People will also pour undying infamy on youГӯ
shows that withdrawal from the fight would
not only make Arjuna fall from his duty, lose
his reputation and expose him to sin; but the
celestials, В§RВ¶is and all people of the earth
would speak ill of him in many ways. And
that infamy would not be slight in character
and short of duration, but would be everlasting.
Therefore, the thought of withdrawing from the
fight was wholly unjustified for him.

=== PAGE 95 ===

94
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
was reputed throughout the world as a hero
and a great man, and his fame had spread
far and wide, from heaven to the nether
worlds.
that loss of fame throughout the world and
impairment of prestige among friends who
held him in high regard as a hero were not
the only form of injury from which Arjuna
would suffer, but enemies like Duryodhana,
who were ever bent on doing him mischief,
and derived pleasure from injury caused to
him, would now come forward to denounce
his prowess, might and skill in battle, and
would shower many disparaging and
unbecoming words on him. They would
Verse 34 referred to the Г«infamyГӯ that
would be permanently indulged in by the
people in general, while this verse speaks of
the words of reproach that would be uttered
by enemies like Duryodhana to ArjunaГӯs
face. Public scandal and infamy cause acute
sorrow and distress to men of honour and
position alone, not to all. But words of reproach
and denunciation uttered by an enemy directly
to oneГӯs face cause extreme pain even to
ordinary men. Therefore, the Lord points out
Г·ГҝГҠВәЛқГЎГҠГҠЕ’ГҲВ¬вҒ„UГғВў в—ҠВўSГҝГЈГғпЈҝ Г п¬ӮГҠВў в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„UГ•ГҠвҖ”вҖ“
ГҝпЈҝВ·ГҠВў Гё Г п¬ӮВў вҖҷвҖһГҲUв—ҠГғГҠпЈҝ Г·ГҚГ п¬ӮГҠ ГҝГҠSГҝГҒвҖҡ вҲӮUГҠГүГҠп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңВ§H 35H
Г·ГҝГҠГғЛң out of fear; вҒ„UГЎГҠГҠГғЛң from battle; В©В¬вҒ„UГғв—ҠЛң (as) having desisted; в—ҠВўSГҝГЈГғпЈҝ will regard;
Г п¬ӮГҠв—ҠЛң you; в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„UГ•ГҠвҖ” (those) great warrior-chiefs; ГҝпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠЛң by whom; Гё and; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛң you; вҖҷвҖһГҲUв—ҠГғвҖ” held
in high esteem; Г·ГҚГ п¬ӮГҠ being; ГҝГҠSГҝГҒвҖҡ will attain; вҲӮUГҠГүГҠп¬Ӯв—ҠЛң smallness.
And the warrior-chiefs who thought highly of you, will now despise you, thinking
that it was fear which drove you away from battle.                             (35)
context, it has been attempted to bring home
to ArjunaГӯs mind that if he desisted from
battle, the MahВөarathвҲӮs would never think that
the motive of his doing so was either pity
or compassion for his relations, or any
conviction that war was a sin. They would
naturally jump to the conclusion that Г«fearГӯ
was the real motive, and would think that
Arjuna ran away from the battle in order to
save his life. Such being the position, to
desist from battle in that state would be the
height of indiscretion on ArjunaГӯs part.
By saying that Г«the warrior-chiefs who
thought highly of Arjuna will begin to
despise himГӯ, the Lord means to bring out
that great warriors like BhвҲӮВ¶ma, DroЖ’a and
вҖәalya etc., on the one hand, and VirВөaВўa,
Drupada, SВөatyaki and DhГҰВ¶Вўadyumna etc., on
the other, who had all along held Arjuna in
very high esteem, and regarded him as a
great hero, a great warrior and a virtuous
man, would begin to think lightly of him,
if Arjuna ran away from the battle.
Raising the question of Г«fearГӯ in this
вҖўп¬ӮГҠГ«Гҝп¬ӮГҠЕ’ГҠВўp вҖҷвҖһГҚUГЈп¬ӮГҒЕ’cГҝГҒГЈГғ Гғп¬ӮГҠГҒвҖһUГғГҠвҖ”вҖ“
ГҒЕёГЈЕ’ГЈГғSГғп¬Ӯ вҖҡГҠв—ҠГўГҝZ ГғГғГҠпЈҝ Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖГғвҒ„ВўU ЕёГҲ ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ”В§H 36H
вҖўп¬ӮГҠГ«Гҝп¬ӮГҠЕ’ГҠЕёЛңГ” unbecoming words; Гё and; вҖҷвҖһГҚUЕёЛңГ” many; п¬ӮГҒЕ’cГҝГҒГЈГғ will speak; Гғп¬Ӯ your; вҖўГҒвҖһUГғГҠвҖ”
enemies; ГҒЕёГЈЕ’ГЈГғвҖ” disparaging; Гғп¬Ӯ your; вҖҡГҠв—ҠГўГҝВёв—ҠЛңГ” might; ГғГғвҖ” than this; Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖГғвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” more distressing;
ЕёГҲ indeed; ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛң what (can there be).
And your enemies, disparaging your might, will speak many unbecoming words;
what can be more distressing than this?                                  (36)

=== PAGE 96 ===

* Chapter II *
95
proclaim from house-tops that Arjuna was no
warrior, and had been a eunuch from his
very birth, and would denigrate his GВөaЖ’Е’вҲӮva
bow, as also his prowess!
Pointing out that there could be nothing
more distressing than that, the Lord wanted
to expose the fallacy of ArjunaГӯs view that
his happiness lay in desisting from battle, and
that participation in it would bring him sorrow.
The Lord sought to make it clear by these
arguments that desisting from battle would prove
to be the greatest source of misery to him.
resulted in a victory for the Kauravas, and
Arjuna met his death on the battle-field, he
would not be a loser inasmuch as such death
itself would be a direct passport to heaven.
And if, on the other hand, the crown of victory
went to him, he would enjoy undisputed
sovereignty over the earth. From both these
points of view, participation in the war was
the most expedient course. Therefore, Arjuna
was exhorted to arise, shaking off his faint-
heartedness, and take up his position on the
chariot, determined to fight.
In verse 6 of this chapter, Arjuna had
given expression to the confusion of his mind
by saying that he did not know which was
preferable for him, to fight or not to fight; nor
did he know whether he would win the battle,
or would be conquered by the Kauravas. With
reference to that statement of Arjuna, the Lord
shows in this verse that whether he is killed
in action on the battle-field, or attains victory,
he will stand to win both ways, and thus
proves that participation in battle was the best
course for Arjuna. That is to say, if the fight
Advancing thus far many reasons to demonstrate the various forms of loss that would
accrue from non-participation in the battle, the Lord now proceeds to show the advantages
that would follow from participation in the battle, both from the point of view of this
world and of the next, and commands Arjuna to prepare himself for the fight.
вҖһUГғГҠпЈҝ п¬ӮГҠ В¬ЛқГҠГҘSГҝГҒвҖҡ Sп¬ӮВӘZ ГҒВЎГ п¬ӮГҠ п¬ӮГҠ Г·ГҠпЈҝЛҮГҝвҖҡпЈҝ в—ҠвҖһUГӢв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГғSв—ҠГҠЕ’ГҲГҒГ»ГҠDГ”U вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ ГҝГҲhГҠГҝ вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғГҒЕёpГҝвҖ”H 37H
вҖһUГғвҖ” slain (in battle); п¬ӮГҠ either; В¬ЛқГҠГҘSГҝГҒвҖҡ you will win; Sп¬ӮВӘВёв—ҠЛң heaven; ГҒВЎГ п¬ӮГҠ conquering;
п¬ӮГҠ or; Г·ГҠпЈҝЛҮГҝвҖҡпЈҝ you will enjoy; в—ҠвҖһUГӢв—ҠЛң (sovereignty of) the earth; ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛң therefore; В©UГҒГ»ГҠDГ”U stand
up; вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ O son of KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna; ГҝГҲhГҠГҝ for the fight; вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғГҒЕёpГҝвҖ” determined.
Die, and you will win heaven; conquer, and you enjoy sovereignty of the earth;
therefore, stand up, Arjuna, determined to fight.                          (37)
In the preceding verse, the Lord declared rulership over earth or the attainment of heaven
as the reward of participating in the war; but Arjuna had stated before that he did not want
to destroy his race even for the sovereignty of the three worlds, not to speak of rulership over
the earth. Therefore, the next verse shows how one, who does not hanker either for the pleasures
of kingship or of heaven, should engage himself in a fight as a matter of duty.
вҖҡГҲПҖЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖпЈҝ вҖҡв—ҠпЈҝ вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г п¬ӮГҠ вҲӮUГҠГ·ГҠГ”вҲӮUГҠГ·ГҠГ’ ВЎГҝГҠВЎГҝГҠГ’вҖ“
ГғГғГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҲhГҠГҝ ГҝГҲГ–ГҝSп¬Ӯ ЕёГ’п¬ӮВў В¬ГҠВ¬в—Ҡп¬ӮГҠГҘSГҝГҒвҖҡH 38H
вҖҡГҲПҖЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖпЈҝ pleasure and pain; вҖҡв—ҠпЈҝ вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г п¬ӮГҠ treating alike; вҲӮUГҠГ·ГҠвҲӮUГҠГ·ГҠГ’ gain and loss; ВЎГҝГҠВЎГҝГҠГ’
victory and defeat; ГғГғвҖ” then; ГҝГҲhГҠГҝ for the battle; ГҝГҲГ–ГҝSп¬Ӯ get ready; Её not; вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” (fighting)
thus; В¬ГҠВ¬в—ҠЛңГ” sin; вҖўп¬ӮГҠГҘSГҝГҒвҖҡ you will incur.

=== PAGE 97 ===

96
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
To make no distinction in the mind
between victory and defeat, gain and loss,
and pleasure and pain, that may follow as
the result of the battle, that is to say, to have
no feeling of attachment and repulsion or joy
and grief, in regard to these is what is meant
by Г«treating pleasure and pain etc., alikeГӯ. By
asking Arjuna to get ready for the fight only
then, the Lord means to say that if Arjuna
had really no desire for the pleasures of
kingship or of heaven, he should in that case
also wholly abandon the feeling of diversity
in regard to the result of a battle, and
cultivating thus a feeling of equanimity, he
should engage himself in the war as a matter
of duty. A fight conducted in this spirit
brings everlasting and supreme peace.
Then the Lord points out that if Arjuna
fought in that spirit, he would not be guilty
of sin. This is in reply to ArjunaГӯs argument
advanced in Chapter I in favour of desisting
from battle, viz., that slaughter of kinsmen
would involve him in sin (I.36, 39, 45).
Here, in clear words, the Lord shows that
if Arjuna participated in the battle, treating
pleasure and pain, victory and defeat etc.
alike, i.e., cultivating an attitude of indifference
towards the result of the battle, he would
not be touched by the slightest trace of sin,
and would also be released from the bondage
of actions in the shape of reward and
punishment.
Treating alike victory and defeat, gain and loss, pleasure and pain, get ready
for the battle; fighting thus you will not incur sin.
 (38)
Up to this point, the Lord established the propriety of engaging in the fight from
the point of view of SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga and the duty of a KВ¶atriya, and exhorted Arjuna to
fight in a spirit of equanimity. Now desiring to establish the same thing from the point
of view of Karmayoga, He introduces the subject of Karmayoga in the next verse.
вҲһВ·ГҠ ГғпЈҝЛҳГҒГ·ГҒвҖһUГғГҠ вҖҡГҠГҰЛңUГ…ГҝпЈҝ вҖҷГҲГҒhГҝГҠпЈҝВёВӘпЈҝ ГҒГ п¬Ӯв—ҠГҠВў oГҺГЎГҠГҲвҖ“
вҖҷГҲhKГҠ ГҝГҲQВ§ГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҝГҠ В¬ГҠГ•Вё вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҷГЈЕ“Вў В¬ЛқвҖһUГҠSГҝГҒвҖҡH 39H
вҲһВ·ГҠ this; ГғпЈҝ to you; вҖўГҒГ·ГҒвҖһUГғГҠ has been presented; вҖҡГҠГҰЛңUГ…ГҝпЈҝ from the point of view of
JВӨВөanayoga; вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” attitude of mind; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝ (as presented) from the point of view of Karmayoga
(the Yoga of selfless action); ГғГҲ now; Гҹв—ҠГҠв—ҠЛң the same; oГҺГЎГҠГҲ hear; вҖҷГҲhKГҠ attitude of mind; ГҝГҲQВ§вҖ”
equipped; ГҝГҝГҠ with which; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthВөa, Arjuna; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҷГЈЕ“в—ҠЛң the shackles of Karma
(action); В¬ЛқвҖһUГҠSГҝГҒвҖҡ you will be able to throw off completely.
Arjuna, this attitude of mind has been presented to you from the point of view
of JВӨГҘnayoga; now hear the same as presented from the standpoint of Karmayoga
(the Yoga of selfless action). Equipped with this attitude of mind, you will be able
to throw off completely the shackles of Karma.                           (39)
from the point of view of JВӨВөanayoga, He
means to indicate that from verse 11 to verse
30 above He has shown how through the
practice of JВӨВөanayoga the capacity to treat
everything and every experience alike could
be attained, and how the JВӨВөanayogвҲӮ, realizing
with the help of discrimination the true nature
The words Г«EВ¶Вөa BuddhiВЁГӯ in this verse
refer to the spirit of equanimity, cultivating
which the Lord advised Arjuna, in the preceding
verse, to engage himself in the fight; for
Г«EВ¶ВөaГӯ invariably points to the thing that lies
nearest to it. Therefore, when the Lord says
that He has presented this attitude of mind

=== PAGE 98 ===

* Chapter II *
97
of the soul, should perform in a spirit of
equanimity the duties attaching to the order
of society and stage in life he is placed in.
We shall try to show in the following lines
how this spirit of equanimity has been
described in the verses referred to above.
The perception by man of difference or
diversity in the various objects of this world
is due to his ignorance about the true nature
of the soul. When through realization of the
true nature of the soul, there remains in his
view no difference between the soul and
Oversoul, and except Brahma, the embodiment
of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss, nothing else
exists in his consciousness, it is no longer
possible for him to entertain an idea of diversity
in that unity. That is why in verse 11 of this
chapter the Lord declared that grief for the
dead or the living which was due to the idea
of diversity rooted in error or ignorance, was
wholly improper, and thus exhorted Arjuna
to give it up. In verses 12 and 13, showing
the eternal and unattached character of the
soul, it has been brought out that the distinction
observed between the states of life and death
was due only to ignorance, and the wise
man, possessed of knowledge of the soul,
does not make any distinction between them:
for the soul is ever the same, changeless and
eternal. Thereafter declaring the contacts
between the senses and their objects, which
gave rise to the idea of diversity through
the conflicting feelings of heat and cold,
pleasure and pain, etc., as transient by nature,
Arjuna has been advised to ignore themГіto
maintain an attitude of equanimity in regard
to them (II.14); and praising the wise man
who treats pleasure and pain alike, the Lord
has declared him to be quite eligible for
immortality (II.15). Then, defining what is
real and what is unreal, and exhorting Arjuna
to fight (II.16-18), and declaring those who
regarded the soul as capable of killing or
being killed as ignorant, and establishing the
non-doership, eternity and immutability of
the soul, it was proved that the destruction of
the body did not bring about the destruction
of the soul; and thus it was shown that it did
not behove Arjuna to grieve for any being
because of distinction between the state of
life and death (II.19-30). Thus these verses
describe the spirit of equanimity, arising out
of a knowledge of the true nature of the soul,
reached through discrimination between the
real and unreal.
The word Г«ImВөamГӯ also refers to the
attitude of equanimity as described in the
preceding verse. By saying Г«now hear the
same as presented from the standpoint of
KarmayogaГӯ, the Lord indicates that He would
now proceed to describe in the following
verses what this attitude of equanimity meant
from the point of view of Karmayoga, how
it was cultivated during the practice of
Karmayoga, and what was its fruit. Arjuna
was, therefore, exhorted to hear these ideas
with due attention and care.
Verses 31 to 37 were intended to show
that Arjuna being a KВ¶atriya, it was his duty
to fight and hence it was altogether unbecoming
of him to desist from battle, and also how
both from the point of view of this world and
of the next it was advantageous for Arjuna to
face the enemy in battle. Again, in verse 38
it was pointed out that when the fight was
inevitable, it should be fought in such a way
that it might not prove to be the cause of
bondage. That is why, both from the point of
view of JВӨВөanayoga and of Karmayoga, the
attitude of equanimity has been shown to be
necessary and indispensable. The present verse
establishes the connection of this attitude of
equanimity with both the forms of spiritual
discipline, viz., JВӨВөanayoga and Karmayoga,
according to what is known in SaвүҲskrit as
the Г«Е’пЈҝвҖһUвҲӮUГӢЕ’ГӢВ¬вҲ‘В§ГЈГҝГҠГҝГӯ or the Г«maxim of the lamp

=== PAGE 99 ===

98
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
placed over the thresholdГӯ, which by its peculiar
position serves to light the rooms on both the
sides.
JвҲӮvВөatmВөa or the embodied soul is held
in bondage by the latencies of good and evil
deeds performed in countless lives, and
reaching the human state it again starts it
career of fresh deeds under the impulses of
egoism, desire and attachment, and gets more
and more entangled. By Г«shackles of KarmaГӯ
is meant the total store of accumulated
residues of good and evil actions, performed
in countless previous lives, which cause the
JвҲӮva ever to move in the cycle of births and
deaths, not only in the human species, but
in other species as well. By renouncing,
according to the principles of Karmayoga, all
attachment with Karma, and the desire for
its fruit, and treating success and failure
alike, i.e., freed from the feelings of attachment
and repulsion, joy and grief, etc., when one
robs oneГӯs past and present actions of their
capacity to bear fruit,Гіin other words, when
Karma is reduced to the position of a Г«fried
seedГӯ which does not sprout,Гіhe is said to
have Г«thrown off or destroyed the shackles
of KarmaГӯ through the cultivation of even-
mindedness.
Introducing the subject of Karmayoga in the above verse, the Lord now proceeds
to describe the secret of its glory.
ЕёпЈҝвҖһUГҠГҒГ·вҲ‘ЛқВ§в—ҠЕёГҠвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒSГғ В¬ЛқГ Гҝп¬ӮГҠГҝГҠпЈҝ Её ГҒп¬ӮlГғпЈҝвҖ“
Sп¬ӮГҖВ¬в—ҠГҘГҝSГҝ Е“в—ҠВёSГҝ ГІГҠГҠГҝГғпЈҝ в—ҠвҖһUГғГҠпЈҝ Г·ГҝГҠГғЛңH 40H
Её not; ГҹвҖһU in this path (of disinterested action); вҖўГҒГ·вҲ‘ЛқВ§в—ҠЕёГҠвүҘГҠвҖ” loss of effort; вҖўГҒSГғ (there)
is; В¬ЛқГ Гҝп¬ӮГҠГҝвҖ” (fear of) contrary result; Её not; ГҒп¬ӮlГғпЈҝ (there) is; Sп¬ӮГҖВ¬в—ҠЛң a little; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; вҖўSГҝ
Е“в—ҠВёSГҝ of this discipline; ГІГҠГҠГҝГғпЈҝ protects; в—ҠвҖһUГғвҖ” Г·ГҝГҠГғЛң from great fear (of birth and death).
In this path (of disinterested action) there is no loss of effort, nor is there fear
of contrary result. Even a little practice of this discipline saves one from the terrible
fear of birth and death.                                                (40)
contrary result in this path,Гӯ the Lord means
that an action is apt to produce good or evil,
favourable or unfavourable result, only when
it is prompted by some interested motive; but
there being no desire in Karmayoga, it
cannot lead to any contrary result. In the
adoration offered with a motive to the Devas,
manes, or men of this world, if there is a
lapse causing displeasure in the object of
adoration, some harm might accrue to the
SГҘdhaka; but in the disinterested or motiveless
performance of sacrifice, charity, austerity,
service and other actions, no harm will
accrue even if there is any lapse. To take
another illustration, a dose of medicine is
taken to control a malady; but if it is not
If a man, engaged in the pursuit of
agriculture, after sowing the seed in his plot
of land, fails either to protect it, or to water
it, the seed gets destroyed. Unlike this, the
practice of Karmayoga, once commenced, is
never lost, even if it is abandoned before its
completion. This is what is meant by saying
Г«there is no loss of effort in the path of
Karmayoga.Гӯ Impressions of the practice of
Karmayoga take root in the mind of the
practicant, and compel him in his next
birth to resume the thread where it was left
(VI. 43-44). The practice in never lost. That
is why the Lord designates it as Г«SatГӯ
(XVII.27).
Again, by saying Г«there is no fear of

=== PAGE 100 ===

* Chapter II *
99
a correct remedy; it produces the contrary
effect by aggravating the malady. Unlike
this, the practice of Karmayoga does not
conduce to any such undesirable result (VI.
40). That is to say, if it fails to bring the
SГҘdhaka to a realization of the supreme state,
owing to the Yoga not having reached its
consummation, the follower of this path has
neither to take birth in the lower order of
creation, nor go through the tortures of hell,
in consequence of evil deeds done in previous
births, or as a result of incidental unavoidable
injury done to creatures in the course of
sacrificial or other meritorious performances;
nor is he deprived of the enjoyments of this
world or of the next, earned through virtuous
deeds done in previous lives. Such a SГҘdhaka
invariably attains after death the higher worlds
to which men of virtuous deeds alone are
entitled and staying there for a long time
takes birth in the family of pious and wealthy
men or in a family of YogвҲӮs, and through
the habit formed in his previous existence
resumes the practice of Yoga (VI.41-44).
Here the word Г«PratyavВөayaГӯ cannot be
interpreted to mean Г«hindranceГӯ in the practice
of Karmayoga, as some have done. For
contact with worldly enjoyments and the
association of erring, worldly-minded and
unbelieving people obtained through the sins
of previous births may cause hindrance in
the practice of Karmayoga; but certainly
disinterested action can never lead to any
undesirable consequences. Therefore, it is
but meet and proper to interpret the clause
as meaning Г«there is no fear of contrary
resultГӯ, as we have done, instead of taking
the word to mean Г«hindranceГӯ.
The words Г«Asya DharmasyaГӯ (of this
path) undoubtedly refer to Г«KarmayogaГӯ or
the path of disinterested action indicated by
the word Г«YogaГӯ in the preceding verse as
opposed to Г«SВөaвҲҶkhyaГӯ or Г«JВӨВөanayogaГӯ, the
path of knowledge. Г«KarmayogaГӯ is a
compound word consisting of two components,
Г«KarmaГӯ and Г«YogaГӯ. Good action, approved
by the scriptures, is denoted by the term
Г«KarmaГӯ, and evenness of mind is known as
Г«YogaГӯ (II.48); therefore, performance of
duty, as laid down in the scriptures, with
reference to oneГӯs VarЖ’a, Г…вҖ№rama, nature
and circumstances, without being possessed
by the sense of meum, attachment, lust,
anger, greed and infatuation, etc., and
maintaining proper equanimity, is Karmayoga.
It is also known as the Yoga of Equanimity,
Yoga of Intellect and as Action for GodГӯs
sake under the several names of Г«Tadartha-
karmaГӯ, Г«Madartha-karmaГӯ and Г«Mat-karmaГӯ.
By the words Г«Even a little practice of
this discipline (of Karmayoga) protects one
from great fearГӯ the Lord shows that when
the practice of Karmayoga reaches its
consummation, that very moment it brings
man face to face with God Himself, and
brings about God-realization. Therefore, the
glory of Karmayoga, in its consummate state,
cannot be too highly extolled. But leaving
aside that consummation, if man succeeds in
practising Karmayoga even partially, that is
to say, without reaching a state when he is
unshakable from equanimity, if he can perform
some of his duties maintaining an attitude of
equanimity towards pleasure and pain,
success and failure etc., and if that attitude
remains stable at the moment of death it will
immediately bring him the realization of
Brahma, and lead to his absorption in Brahma
(II.72); or, if he takes a rebirth, he will be
induced again to strive and advance with the
practice and will be, finally, brought to a
realization of the supreme state (VI.41-45).
Thus Karmayoga is bound to bring about the
deliverance of the SГҘdhaka sooner or later.
Performing with the motive of self-interest,
for thousands of years, greatest of sacrifices

=== PAGE 101 ===

100
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
and charities, and severe forms of askesis,
vows and fasts and pilgrimages etc., cannot
and will not bring about manГӯs deliverance
from the ocean of existence, but very simple
or ordinary works of livelihood like begging
for alms, fighting, agriculture and commerce,
artisanship, rendering of physical service,
etc., as enjoined by the scriptures, when
done with equanimity, and in the right spirit,
can and will deliver a man in a moment from
the bondage of the world. For in the matter
of deliverance, cultivation of the right attitude
is more important than action itself, and has
precedence over action.
As its ultimate result, selflessness brings
about deliverance from the world. It is
neither lost till it has achieved the final end,
nor does it yield any other fruit. In its
ultimate result, making the SГҘdhaka fully
selfless, it brings about his salvation. That
is why even a little practice of Karmayoga
is considered to possess so much of glory.
Though there is no doubt that even a
Г«little practiceГӯ of Karmayoga will bring
about the liberation of a soul, there is no rule
that it will do so within a specified time.
None can tell whether deliverance will be
brought about in this very life, or in the next
birth. For that Г«Г«little practiceГӯГӯ will gradually
grow into the fullest state of development of
Karmayoga, and then deliverance will be
brought to the soul, in its natural course, as
the final consummation. Therefore, men who
possess energy and want to attain their
highest welfare speedily should attempt to
attain the full state of equanimity with all
the enthusiasm and attention they can
command.
Of all the sources of fear, the greatest,
to which an embodied being is subject, is the
fear of death. Therefore, the constant repetition
of the ever recurring series of life and death,
from eternity to eternity, is the worst of fears
that could be imagined by the mind. The
Lord has referred to this fear of ever recurring
life and ever recurring death in a subsequent
chapter, as the Г«Г«ocean of birth and deathГӯГӯ
(XII.7). Like the infinite waves in an ocean,
countless waves of life and death appear and
disappear in the ocean of metempsychosis. It
may somehow be possible to count the waves
of the ocean; but who will count the number
of deaths a JвҲӮva will go through till it succeeds
in attaining the true knowledge of God?
None can really do so. Thus, Г«protection
from great fearГӯ, in the present verse, means
taking 
across 
the 
infinite 
ocean 
of
metempsychosis in the form of death, i.e.,
freeing from the bondage of life and death
through absorption in the transcendent Brahma,
the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and
Bliss.
Thus showing the greatness of Karmayoga, the Lord now proposes to enter into an
exposition on the practice of Karmayoga; but before doing so He first brings out the
distinction between the determinate, equipoised and stable intellect of the perfect
KarmayogвҲӮ, the possession of which is extremely necessary in Karmayoga, and the scattered
intellect of men moved by desires, which is an obstacle in the practice of Karmayoga:
вҲҡГҝп¬ӮвҖҡГҠГҝГҠГҒГ в—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠ вҖҷГҲГҒhвҒ„пЈҝUвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вҖһU вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ЕёГЈЕ’ЕёвҖ“
вҖҷвҖһГҲUвүҘГҠГҠПҖГҠ sГ”ЕёГЈГғГҠp вҖҷГҲhГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳвҲҡГҝп¬ӮвҖҡГҠГҒГҝЕёГҠв—ҠЛңВ§H 41H
вҲҡГҝп¬ӮвҖҡГҠГҝГҠГҒГ в—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠ determinate; вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” intellect; вҲһвҲ‘В§ГҠ (is) directed singly (towards one ideal);
ГҹвҖһUГ” in this (Yoga); вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ЕёГЈЕ’Её O delighter of the Kuru race, Arjuna; вҖҷвҖһГҲUвүҘГҠГҠПҖГҠвҖ” (are) scattered
in many directions; ГҒвҖһU indeed; вҖўЕёГЈГғГҠвҖ” endlessly diverse; Гё and; вҖҷГҲhГҝвҖ” thoughts;
вҖўвҲҡГҝп¬ӮвҖҡГҠГҒГҝЕёГҠв—ҠЛң of the undecided.

=== PAGE 102 ===

* Chapter II *
101
The intellect which determines only one
thing, and remains unshakably fixed to it, in
other words, which points to God and God
alone, and remains steadfast in God, and
referring to which verse 39 says that one
equipped with it gets freed from the shackles
of Karma,Гіit is that determinate intellect, in
the form of unalterable equanimity, which is
described in this verse as Г«VyavasВөayВөatmikВөa
BuddhiГӯ. It is in this sense that the term
Г«BuddhiГӯ will be found used at many places
in this chapter. By calling it Г«one-pointedГӯ,
it is indicated that it cognizes only one entity
viz., God, the embodiment of Truth,
Knowledge and Bliss; the various forms of
sensuous enjoyment and the means of attaining
them, fall entirely beyond the range of its
cognition. It is also referred to as a stable
mind or equipoised mind.
Those who do not possess this determinate
intellect, and whose mind is deluded by the
feeling of diversity caused by ignorance, it is
such men wanting in discrimination and deeply
attached to enjoyments of the world who are
denoted by the term Г«AvyavasВөayinВөamГӯ in this
verse. Declaring their intellect as Г«scattered in
many directions and endlessly diverseГӯ, it is
intended to bring out that men who devote
themselves to the performance of sacrifice,
etc., with some selfish or interested motives,
do so with various objects in view; if some
of them take to a particular form of ritual for
obtaining a particular form of enjoyment,
others crave for other forms of enjoyment,
and engage in other forms of ritual for obtaining
their object. Besides, even while engaged in
a particular form of ritual with a particular
object in view, they seek the fulfilment of
various desires and the attainment of various
forms of enjoyment. They view differently
the various things of the world and the various
events that take place here. They regard
some people as objects of their love, and
others as objects of hatred. Even a particular
object, they look upon as partially agreeable
and partially disagreeable. Thus they view
every object, even individual and every
event of this world differently and their
thoughts about them, again, are endlessly
diverse.
Arjuna, in this Yoga (of disinterested action) the intellect is determinate and
directed singly towards one ideal; whereas the intellect of the undecided (ignorant
men moved by desires) wanders in all directions, after innumerable aims.    (41)
Thus after describing the character of a determinate intellect, which is so very essential
for a SГҘdhaka following the path of disinterested action, and the intellect of men moved
by desire, which is worthy of being relinquished, the next three verses are devoted to
a description of the character, outlook on life, and conduct of men devoted to action with
a selfish motive, in order to prove that the very thought of self-interest, and worldly
enjoyment and worldly prosperity ought to be rejected:
ГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡв—ҠГҠВў В¬ГҲГҒcВ¬ГғГҠВў п¬ӮГҠГёВў В¬Лқп¬ӮЕ’ГЈГ ГҝГҒп¬ӮВ¬ГҒpГғвҖ”вҖ“
п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’п¬ӮГҠЕ’вҒ„UГғГҠвҖ” В¬ГҠГ•Вё ЕёГҠГЈГҝЕ’SГғГӢГҒГғ п¬ӮГҠГҒЕ’ЕёвҖ”H 42H
вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёвҖ” Sп¬ӮВӘВёВ¬вҒ„UГҠ ВЎГЈв—ҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ»В§вҲӮUВ¬ЛқЕ’ГҠв—ҠЛңвҖ“
ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГҠГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠпЈҝВ·вҖҷвҖһГҲUвҲӮUГҠВў 
Г·ГҠпЈҝВӘГ’EГҝВёВӘГҒГғВў 
В¬ЛқГҒГғH 43H

=== PAGE 103 ===

102
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«KВөamaГӯ, forming part of the
compound word Г«KВөamВөatmВөanaВЁГӯ used here,
is the equivalent of Г«enjoymentГӯ. He who,
being deeply attached to worldly enjoyments,
gets absorbed in their thought, and wholly
forgets even his human state in his mad
pursuit of them, has been described in the
verse as a Г«KВөamВөatmВөaГӯ, i.e., one obsessed by
desire of enjoyment.
 The Vedas contain injunctions for many
diverse rituals for the attainment of enjoyments
of this world as well as of the next, with
descriptions of the fruits of such rituals. Men
who are deeply attached to such injunctions
of the Vedas and to the enjoyments which
they hold out as rewards for carrying out
those injunctions are referred to in these
verses as Г«VedavВөadaratВөaВЁГӯ i.e., men devoted
to the letter of the Vedas. The word
Г«VedavВөadaratВөaВЁГӯ surely does not refer to those
who are deeply attached to such injunctions
of the Vedas as are intended to promote
detachment from the world, and propound
the real nature of God; for those who are
devoted to such injunctions, and understand
their true meaning and significance, do not
declare that attainment of heaven is the supreme
goal of life, and that there is nothing beyond
heaven. Therefore, the word Г«VedavВөadaratВөaВЁГӯ
in these verses refers only to those who are
ignorant of the truth that the primary aim of
the four Vedas is to propound the reality
about God, who is the only object whom
they seek to know (XV.15). It is because of
their ignorance of this truth that these men
get attached to the rituals prescribed in the
Vedas for the satisfaction of worldly desires
and to their fruits.
Those who look upon attainment of
heaven or the celestial world as the supreme
goal of life, nay, in whose eyes nothing is
greater than the attainment of that world and,
as such, who always remain indifferent to
practices leading to God-Realization, are
described in these verses as Г«SvargaparВөaВЁГӯ.
And the adjective Г«NВөanyadastвҲӮtivВөadinaВЁГӯ, i.e.,
those who argue that there is nothing beyond
heaven, refers to those persons, devoid of
right judgment and discrimination, who ever
remain merged in the enjoyments of the
Г·ГҠпЈҝВӘГ’EГҝВёВ¬ЛқвҖҡQВ§ГҠЕёГҠВў 
ГғГҝГҠВ¬NUГғГёпЈҝГғвҖҡГҠв—ҠЛңвҖ“
вҲҡГҝп¬ӮвҖҡГҠГҝГҠГҒГ в—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠ вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” вҖҡв—ҠГҠЕ“ГҠГ’ Её ГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГӢГҝГғпЈҝH 44H
ГҝГҠв—ҠЛң such; Гҹв—ҠГҠв—ҠЛң this; В¬ГҲГҒcВ¬ГғГҠв—ҠЛң flowery; п¬ӮГҠГёв—ҠЛң speech; В¬Лқп¬ӮЕ’ГҒГЈГғ utter; вҖўГҒп¬ӮВ¬ГҒpГғвҖ” (those) unwise
men; п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’п¬ӮГҠЕ’вҒ„UГғГҠвҖ” devoted to the letter of the Vedas; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthВөa, Arjuna; Её, вҖўГЈГҝГғ,
вҖўГҒSГғ, ГҹГҒГғ, п¬ӮГҠГҒЕ’ЕёвҖ” arguing that there is nothing beyond heaven; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёвҖ” full of worldly
desires; Sп¬ӮВӘВёВ¬вҒ„UГҠвҖ” looking upon heaven as the supreme goal; ВЎГЈв—ҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ»В§вҲӮUВ¬ЛқЕ’ГҠв—ҠЛң holding out rebirth
as the fruit of such acts; ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГҠГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠпЈҝВ·вҖҷвҖһГҲUвҲӮUГҠв—ҠЛң recommending many rituals of various kinds;
Г·ГҠпЈҝВӘГ’EГҝВёВӘГҒГғВў В¬ЛқГҒГғ for the attainment of pleasure and power; Г·ГҠпЈҝВӘГ’EГҝВёВ¬ЛқвҖҡQВ§ГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛң of those who are
deeply attached to pleasure and power; ГғГҝГҠВ¬NUГғГёпЈҝГғвҖҡГҠв—ҠЛң of those whose minds are carried
away by that speech; вҲҡГҝп¬ӮвҖҡГҠГҝГҠГҒГ в—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠ determinate; вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” intellect; вҖҡв—ҠГҠЕ“ГҠГ’ on the truth relating
to God; Её ГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГӢГҝГғпЈҝ is never concentrated.
Arjuna, those who are full of worldly desires and devoted to the letter of the Vedas,
who look upon heaven as the supreme goal and argue that there is nothing beyond
heaven, are unwise. They utter flowery speech recommending many rituals of various
kinds for the attainment of pleasure and power with rebirth as their fruit. Those whose
minds are carried away by such words, and who are deeply attached to pleasure and
worldly power, cannot attain the determinate intellect concentrated on God. (42,43,44)

=== PAGE 104 ===

* Chapter II *
103
world, and in whose eyes beyond such
pleasures of the world as are afforded by the
possession of a wife, children, wealth, honour,
fame, social prestige etc., and the enjoyments
and pleasures, that are obtained in heaven,
there is no such object of life as MokВ¶a, or
salvation, for the attainment of which man
should strive. In their view, attainment of
heaven is the supreme goal of life, and this
they consider to be the objective of the
Vedas as well. They advocate this ideal, and
propagate it publicly for the acceptance of
the world. By declaring such people as
Г«unwiseГӯ and wanting in judgment, the Lord
intends to show that had they determined
their goal of life and duty after discriminating
between truth and untruth, reality and unreality,
they would not have entangled themselves
in this fashion in the cobweb of worldly
desires. Therefore, man should always exercise
his judgment in the determination of his
duty.
Use of the adjectives Г«ImВөamГӯ and Г«YВөamГӯ
with the word Г«VВөacamГӯ indicates that the
declaration of such pedantic men that there
is no higher ideal in life than the attainment
of heavenly enjoyments and the Vedic texts
quoted by them, enjoining many rites and
practices for obtaining enjoyments and worldly
power, and holding out rebirth as their fruit,
carry away the minds of these pedants as
well as of those who listen to them. By
describing their speech as Г«floweryГӯ, it is
meant to show that there is nothing of real
merit in those words, and that they attract
the mind of the hearer only to the nominal
and momentary pleasures of fleeting
enjoyments. Like the odourless PalВөaвҖ№a flower
they have a very attractive appearance, on
account of which men attached to worldly
enjoyments and pleasures fall an easy prey
to their temptation.
The Г«Г«determinate intellectГӯГӯ, mentioned
in this verse, is the same which has been
referred to in verse 41, and Г«Г«SamВөadhiГӯГӯ
should be taken to mean that in which the
mind is absorbed during contemplation (вҖҡв—ҠГҠЕ“ГӢГҝГғпЈҝ
вҖўГҒSв—ҠЕёЛң вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ”) viz., God. And by saying that
Г«Г«those whose mind is carried away by these
flowery words and who are deeply attached
to worldly enjoyments and power cannot
attain this intellect fixed on GodГӯГӯ, it is
intended to show that their mind being
attached to enjoyments and power, ever
remains unsteady and fickle, and they are as
a rule extremely selfish by nature. That is
why the conclusion of their mind in respect
of God is never unshakable or firm.
Demonstrating above that people obsessed by desires, and attached to enjoyments
and worldly prosperity, do not attain the determinate intellect, the Lord, in order to instruct
Arjuna in Karmayoga, now advises him to be free from attachment to enjoyments and
power, and cultivate equanimity:
ГІГҠГ’ВӘГҲГЎГҝГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҝГҠ п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГҠ ГҒЕёSГІГҠГ’ВӘГҲГЎГҝГҠпЈҝ Г·п¬ӮГҠВЎВёГҲЕёвҖ“
ГҒЕёmВёГЈmГҠпЈҝ ГҒЕёГ ГҝвҖҡГ»п¬ӮSГ•ГҠпЈҝ ГҒЕёГҝГҠпЈҝВёВӘЛҮГҠпЈҝв—Ҡ вҖўГҠГ в—Ҡп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңВ§H 45H
ГІГҠГ’ВӘГҲГЎГҝГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҝГҠвҖ” deal with the evolutes of the three GuЖ’as (modes of PrakГҰti). viz., sense-
enjoyments and the means of attaining such enjoyments; п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГҠвҖ” the Vedas; ГҒЕёSГІГҠГ’ВӘГҲГЎГҝвҖ” indifferent
to these enjoyments and their means; Г·п¬Ӯ be; вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё O Arjuna; ГҒЕёmВёГЈmвҖ” rising above pairs
of opposites (such as pleasure and pain, etc.); ГҒЕёГ ГҝвҖҡГ»п¬ӮSГ•вҖ” established in the Eternal
ExistenceГіGod; ГҒЕёГҝГҠпЈҝВёВӘЛҮГҠпЈҝв—ҠвҖ” absolutely unconcerned about the fulfilment of wants and the
preservation of what has already been attained; вҖўГҠГ в—Ҡп¬ӮГҠЕёЛң having a self-controlled mind.

=== PAGE 105 ===

104
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Sattva, Rajas and TamasГіthese are the
three GuЖ’as or modes of PrakГҰti; the evolutes
of these three GuЖ’as are known by the name
of Г«TraiguЖ’yaГӯ. The term Г«TraiguЖ’yaГӯ, therefore,
covers all objects of the world that contribute
to, and all actions that are instrumental in
bringing about, enjoyment and prosperity.
Books which contain a description of these,
with 
all 
their 
details, 
are 
called
Г«TraiguЖ’yaviВ¶ayВөaВЁГӯ. In this verse, the Vedas
have been described as such because the
major part of the Vedas deals with KarmakВөaЖ’Е’a,
or rituals for the satisfaction of worldly desires.
Complete freedom from all attraction,
attachment and desire for all the evolutes of
the three GuЖ’as in the form of enjoyments
of this world and the next, and for every
form of action leading to such enjoyments,
is what is meant by becoming Г«NistraiguЖ’yaГӯ.
Г«NistraiguЖ’yaГӯ here does not mean total
renunciation of every form of activity; for
such total renunciation of action and objects
of the world is not possible for a human
being (III.5). The body he owns is also an
evolute of the GuЖ’as, and it is not possible
for him to renounce it. Therefore, becoming
Г«NistraiguЖ’yaГӯ should be interpreted to mean
renunciation of all identification with, and
attraction, attachment and desire for, the
body and its activities, and for all enjoyments
that are obtained as the fruit of such activities.
In other words, it points to a state of
existence which has risen above the influence
of the three GuЖ’as and their evolutes.
Pleasure and pain, gain and loss, good
and bad reputation, honour and ignominy,
favourable and unfavourable circumstances,
these states and sentiments, indicative of
mutual opposition, are known as the pairs
of opposites. Arjuna has been advised to
maintain equanimity when faced with them,
and not to give way to joy or grief, attraction
or repulsion. This is what is meant by rising
above the pairs of opposites.
God, alone, the embodiment of Truth,
Knowledge and Bliss, is eternally existent.
He is the only Reality. Therefore, meditating
constantly on the eternal, imperishable,
omniscient Supreme Person, to become
inseparably united with Him, is what is
meant by being Г«Г«established in the Eternal
ExistenceГӯГӯ. The text describes this state by
the term Г«NityasattvasthaВЁГӯ, which may also
be interpreted to mean Г«ever established in
the Sattva GuЖ’aГӯ; but the first interpretation
given above conveys a better and more
comprehensive meaning, inasmuch as the
fulfilment of Karmayoga lies in rising above
the influence of all the GuЖ’as and realizing
God.
Attainment of an unattained object is
called Г«YogaГӯ, and preservation of what is
already attained is called Г«KВ¶emaГӯ. Even after
renunciation of the desire for worldly
enjoyments, the desire for Г«YogakВ¶emaГӯ at
least for the maintenance of the body remains;
therefore, Arjuna has been exhorted in this
verse to give up that desire as well by being
asked to become Г«NiryogakВ¶emaГӯ. In other
words, he has been asked to wean himself
completely from all attachments and senses
of possession and never to care for the
possession or preservation of any object
whatsoever.
Arjuna, the Vedas thus deal with the evolutes of the three GuЖ’as (modes of
PrakГҰti), viz., worldly enjoyments and the means of attaining such enjoyments; be
thou indifferent to these enjoyments and their means, rising above pairs of opposites
like pleasure and pain etc., established in the Eternal Existence (God), absolutely
unconcerned about the fulfilment of wants and the preservation of what has been
already attained, and self-controlled.                                             (45)

=== PAGE 106 ===

* Chapter II *
105
The term Г«Г…tmВөaГӯ, forming part of the
word Г«Г…tmavВөanГӯ used in this verse, denotes
the mind coupled with the senses. So long as
the mind, intellect and the senses of a man are
not fully brought under his control, that is to
say, so long as they do not behave as friends
but continue to be at variance with him, he
cannot be called an Г«Г…tmavВөanГӯ. Therefore, he
alone who has perfectly disciplined and subdued
his mind, intellect and senses is entitled to be
called Г«Г…tmavВөanГӯ, or one in possession of his
Г«selfГӯ. The SГҘdhaka whose mind, intellect,
senses and body are not thoroughly subdued
will find it extremely difficult to practise the
Г«Yoga of EquanimityГӯ, and he who has
controlled them will find it easy to attain this
Yoga (VI.36). That is why the Lord advises
Arjuna in the verse to be an Г«Г…tmavВөanГӯ by
bringing his mind, senses and body completely
under control.
and satisfied for all time to come. Therefore,
in order to attain this state, one should wholly
abandon all desire and attachment for worldly
enjoyments obtainable as the fruit of Vedic
rituals, and become absolutely free from the
influence of the three GuЖ’as.
The present verse may also be interpreted
to mean that just as one who stands at the
brink of a sheet of water overflowing on all
sides takes for his use as much water as he
requires, even so, the wise man who has
known Brahma makes use of such portions
of the Vedas as suit his purpose. But the
interpretation that we have put on the verse
conveys a better meaning; for the world is
absolutely of no use to the wise man who
has realized Brahma (III.18).
By means of the above illustaration, the
Lord has described the satiety of illumined
saints. The intention is to show that just as
the man who stands at the brink of a lake
overflowing 
with 
sweet, 
life-giving,
wholesome and unfathomable water has no
use for small tanks, ponds, wells etc., because
all his needs relating to water are met by the
water of the lake, even so, he who, renouncing
all attachment for objects of enjoyment, comes
to realize God, in other words, he who attains
the ocean of supreme bliss in the form of God,
or Integral Brahma, does not depend for his
happiness and gratification on objects of
enjoyment attained by way of reward for rituals
recommended in the Vedas. His desires get
fulfilled by extinction, and he becomes thirstless
In the preceding verse, telling Arjuna that the Vedas deal only with the evolutes of
the three GuЖ’as, he was asked to be free from attachment to all worldly enjoyments and
their means, which are evolved from the three GuЖ’as. He now proceeds to point out
the glory of God-Realization, which follows from such detachment.
ГҝГҠп¬ӮГҠЕёГ•Вё В©UЕ’В¬ГҠЕёпЈҝ вҖҡп¬ӮВёГғвҖ” вҖҡГӘГҘвҖ№ГҲГғГҠпЈҝЕ’вҲ‘пЈҝВ§вҖ“
ГғГҠп¬ӮГҠГЈвҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёВ·ГҲ п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’пЈҝВ·ГҲ вҖҷЛқГҠrГҠГ”ГЎГҠSГҝ ГҒп¬ӮВЎГҠЕёГғвҖ”Г”H 46H
ГҝГҠп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” as much; вҖўГ•ВёвҖ”Г”В§ (there is) use; В©UЕ’В¬ГҠЕёпЈҝ for a small well; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГғвҖ” вҖҡГӘГҘвҖ№ГҲГғГҠпЈҝЕ’вҲ‘пЈҝВ§ (to a man
standing) at the brink of a sheet of water overflowing on all sides; ГғГҠп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” (there is) that
much (use); вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёВ·ГҲ п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’пЈҝВ·ГҲ for all the Vedas; вҖҷЛқГҠrГҠГ”ГЎГҠSГҝ ГҒп¬ӮВЎГҠЕёГғвҖ” to an illumined BrВөahmaЖ’a.
A BrВөahmaЖ’a, who has obtained enlightenment, has as much use for all the Vedas
as one standing at the brink of a sheet of water, overflowing on all sides, has for
a small reservoir of water.                                              (46)

=== PAGE 107 ===

106
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The duty enjoined on a person with due
regard to his VarЖ’a or order in society,
Г…вҖ№rama or stage in life, and also his nature
and circumstances is referred to by the word
Г«KarmaГӯ in the present verse. Sinful acts
prohibited by the scriptures do not fall under
this category; for man has no sanction to
perform them, he does so only under the
impulse of likes and dislikes, and such
actions are unauthorized on his part. That is
why persons guilty of such acts are punished
by being subjected to suffering and torture
in hell etc. In this verse when the Lord says,
Г«your right is to work onlyГӯ He intends to
convey the following ideas:Гі
(1) Freedom of will is allowed to a
human being alone. Therefore, if through the
performance of his own duty he goes on
carrying out the injunctions of the Lord, and
renouncing all attachment to those actions
and their fruits, utilizes them as a means to
God-realization, he can easily succeed in
realizing God. Being in possession of a
human body, Arjuna enjoyed freedom of
action; it, therefore, behoved him to make
the best use of that opportunity.
(2) Man has a right to action alone, not
to the renunciation of action. If out of egoism
he forcibly tries to renounce all action, he
will not succeed in the attempt (III.5); for his
nature will compel him to act (III.33; XVIII.59,
60). In this way he will be abusing his
authority, and by refusing to perform an
obligatory duty he will also have to bear the
evil consequences of violating the commands
of the scriptures. Therefore, it was obligatory
on Arjuna to perform his duty resolutely, and
not to renounce it.
(3) Just as Government issues licences to
people for possession of arms and ammunition
of various descriptions and using them in self-
defence or for the protection of others, subject
to certain rules and regulations, which are
duly explained to them, and anyone misusing
the power is punished, and also forfeits the
licence, even so being endowed with a human
body with the appurtenances of a mind, intellect
and senses, one is given the power and authority
to do fresh acts for attaining liberation from
the bondage of mundane existence in the form
of life and death, and for doing good to others.
He who makes the best use of this opportunity
gets liberated from the bondage of Karma,
and attains the supreme state. But he who
misuses the opportunity becomes liable to
punishment; his authority is snatched away
from him, in other words, he is again consigned
to the lower order of creation. Knowing this
secret, man should make the best use of this
opportunity.
Describing thus the glory of Karmayoga, represented by equanimity, and its fruit,
the Lord now devotes two verses to an exposition of the character of Karmayoga, and
exhorts Arjuna to perform his duties properly establishing himself in Karmayoga.
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҝпЈҝп¬ӮГҠГҒЕ“вҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„USГғпЈҝ в—ҠГҠ В»В§вҲӮпЈҝUВ·ГҲ вҲ‘В§Е’ГҠГёЕёвҖ“
в—ҠГҠ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ»В§вҲӮUвҖһпЈҝUГғГҲГ·ГҚВёв—ҠГҠВё ГғпЈҝ вҖҡXГ”UГҠпЈҝЛҳSГ п¬ӮвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒГЎГҠH 47H
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒГЎГҠ to work; вҲһп¬Ӯ only; вҖўГҒЕ“вҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UвҖ” right (there is); ГғпЈҝ your; в—ҠГҠ never; В»В§вҲӮпЈҝUпЈҝВ·ГҲ to (its) fruits;
вҲ‘В§Е’ГҠГёЕё в—ҠГҠ never; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ»В§вҲӮUвҖһпЈҝUГғГҲвҖ” cause of actions to bear fruit; Г·ГҚвҖ” в—ҠГҠ be not; ГғпЈҝ your; вҖҡXГ”UвҖ”
attachment; вҖўSГғГҲ be; вҖўвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒГЎГҠ to inaction.
Your right is to work only, but never to the fruit thereof. Do not be the cause
of the fruit of action; nor let your attachment be to inaction.
(47)

=== PAGE 108 ===

* Chapter II *
107
By saying that man has no right to the
fruits of his actions, the Lord intends to bring
out that man is not free in the matter of
obtaining the fruit of his actions. He knows
not what action of his will bear what type
of fruit, nor how and when he will get that
fruit. He cannot get that fruit when he desires
to get it; nor can he avoid it. He desires one
thing, and gets something else in return.
Many men crave to obtain various forms of
enjoyment, but it is not in their hands to get
an opportunity for such enjoyment. They do
not seek separation from, or contact with,
certain people; but they are forced on them.
Dispensation of the fruit of actions is wholly
under the control of Providence, and man is
totally helpless in the matter. True, sacrificial
performance recommended in the scriptures,
as such performance of a PutreВ¶Вўi sacrifice
for obtaining a male issue etc., when completed
in accordance with the scriptural injunctions
in all their details, are sure to yield the
desired fruit, and men who have such desires
may, indeed, perform them; but even such
ordained fruit is not under the control of the
performer of the sacrifice, but lies in the
hands of the deity who is sought to be
appeased through such a sacrifice. Therefore,
it is nothing but ignorance to be obsessed
by desire for the possession of wealth,
power, honour, fame and prestige etc., in this
life and for the attainment of celestial worlds
hereafter. Moreover, all these objects are
altogether insignificant and transient and
have no stability. Therefore, Arjuna was
advised not to crave for the fruit of any
action whatsoever.
Does this mean that even the desire for
salvation should be excluded from the mind?
Our answer to this is that the desire for
salvation, being a noble desire, is no doubt
helpful in attaining salvation, though it is
better to have no desire at all. But without
obtaining an insight into the truth and reality
of God, it is exceedingly difficult to be free
from this desire and perform action without
any selfish motive, regarding it as a sacred
duty to carry out the commandments of God.
Therefore, it is not improper to entertain the
desire for salvation. The very idea that
exclusion of the desire for salvation will
hasten salvation is nothing but nursing the
desire for salvation in an indirect form.
Entertaining a desire, attachment, hope
or craving for actions approved of by the
scriptures and performed with the body,
mind and intellect, as well as for their fruit
is what is meant by becoming instrumental
in making oneГӯs actions bear fruit; for he
alone who gets attached to actions and their
fruits reaps their fruit, and not he who
renounces all desire for, and attachment to,
actions as well as their fruit (XVIII.12).
Therefore, in asking Arjuna Г«not to be
instrumental in making his action bear fruitГӯ,
the Lord intends to say that for the attainment
of supreme peace Arjuna should perform his
duties, wholly renouncing all attachments
and desires.
He who acts in the aforesaid manner
can never be instrumental in making his
actions bear fruit in the shape of pleasure and
pain. All his actions, good and evil, lose their
capacity to bear fruit. Attachment being the
sole incentive to sinful acts, he in whom
attachment and desire are wholly absent can
never commit a fresh sin, while his past
sins are burnt by the fire of his current
actions, which are devoid of attachment and
desire. In this way he can never induce the
fruit of sinful acts, and having renounced
the fruit of virtuous deeds, he does not
induce the fruit of virtuous deeds in the
shape of earthly or heavenly enjoyments.
All the actions of the man who acts in this
way without attachment and desire are

=== PAGE 109 ===

108
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
neutralized (IV.23), and he attains the blissful
supreme state (II.51).
At the conclusion of the verse asking
Arjuna not to have any attachment for
inaction, the Lord has shown that just as one
who indulges in prohibited action, as opposed
to action sanctioned by the scriptures, misuses
the right to preform action, even so non-
performance of a duty allotted to him with
due regard to his order in society, stage in
life as well as his nature and circumstances
constitutes a misuse of that right. Renunciation
of an obligatory duty is in no way justified.
Its abandonment through ignorance is,
therefore, a TВөamasika form of renunciation
(XVIII.7), and the relinquishment of oneГӯs
duty out of a sense of physical discomfort
involved in its performance is a RВөajasika
form of renunciation (XVIII.8). Without
performing oneГӯs allotted duties, one cannot
reach the fruition of the path of Karmayoga
(III.4). Therefore, the Lord advises Arjuna
to avoid attachment to inaction, or non-
performance of prescribed duties by all means.
has very close relationship with equanimity,
and the two states help each other in their
mutual growth. It is, therefore, that the Lord
advises Arjuna in this verse to do his duty
relinquishing attachment, and remaining
indifferent to success and failure.
Through the constant practice of
indifference to success and failure of actions
man reaches ultimately the state of unshakable
stability in equanimity, and such a stability
in equanimity is the culmination of Karmayoga.
Therefore, when the Lord exhorts Arjuna to
perform his duties established in Yoga, he
intends to bring home to ArjunaГӯs mind that
equanimity practised with reference to success
and failure of actions alone will not do; he
will have to practise equanimity in the
The present verse delineates the process
of practising Karmayoga. When the SГҘdhaka
of Karmayoga relinquishes attachment both
to action and its fruit, he ceases to have likes
and dislikes, and is, therefore, no longer
swayed by the feelings of joy and sorrow,
which are the outcome of the former. In that
state alone it is possible to maintain equanimity
in success and failure. Equanimity in success
and failure cannot be attained so long as
these weaknesses persist. Again, through the
practice of equanimity in success and failure,
i.e., in the crowning and frustration of oneГӯs
efforts and in the agreeable and disagreeable
consequences of the same one can finally
attain the state of freedom from likes and
dislikes; thus relinquishment of attachment
In the above verse, Arjuna has been instructed to avoid being instrumental in making
his action bear fruit, as also to shun attachment to inaction. The question, therefore,
naturally arises: how should he work? The next verse deals with that question.
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘSГ•вҖ” вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ вҖҡXГ”ВўU Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ Е“ЕёTГҝвҖ“
ГҒвҖҡhKГҒвҖҡhKГҠпЈҝвҖ” вҖҡв—ҠГҠпЈҝ Г·ГҚГ п¬ӮГҠ вҖҡв—ҠГ п¬ӮВў ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘ В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝH 48H
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘSГ•вҖ” dwelling in Yoga; вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ perform; вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ (your) duties; вҖҡXГ”Uв—ҠЛңГ” attachment;
Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ renouncing; Е“ЕёTГҝ O Arjuna (lit., a winner of riches); ГҒвҖҡhKГҒвҖҡhKГҠпЈҝвҖ” in success and
failure (both); вҖҡв—ҠвҖ” even-minded; Г·ГҚГ п¬ӮГҠ getting; вҖҡв—ҠГ п¬Ӯв—ҠЛң evenness (of mind); ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖ” Yoga; В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ
is called.
Arjuna, perform your duties established in Yoga, renouncing attachment, and
be even-minded in success and failure; evenness of mind is called Г«YogaГӯ.     (48)

=== PAGE 110 ===

* Chapter II *
109
performance of every act by being free from
likes and dislikes with reference to every
object, every being, nay, to the act itself and
its fruit.
The word Г«YogaГӯ bears a peculiar
meaning in the GвҲӮtВөa and the Lord conveys
that peculiar meaning by defining it as
equanimity. The Lord thus establishes identity
between Yoga and equanimity, and shows
that one can become a YogвҲӮ by attaining
equanimity through any discipline whatsoever.
Therefore, in order to qualify himself for
Karmayoga, Arjuna is asked to perform his
duties establishing himself in equanimity.
Detailing, in the above words, the process of Karmayoga and disparaging action
prompted by desire and selfish motive and glorifying the spirit of equanimity, the Lord
now commands Arjuna to resort to equanimity.
Е’ГҚвҒ„пЈҝUГЎГҠ sГ”п¬ӮвҒ„ВўU вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё вҖҷГҲГҒhГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠhЕёTГҝвҖ“
вҖҷГҲhГҠГ’ вүҘГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠв—ҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГ«ВҝU вҲ‘ГҺВ§В¬ГЎГҠГҠвҖ” В»В§вҲӮUвҖһпЈҝUГғп¬ӮвҖ”H 49H
Е’ГҚвҒ„пЈҝUГЎГҠ much; ГҒвҖһU for; вҖўп¬ӮвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” inferior; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГ” action (with a selfish motive); вҖҷГҲГҒhГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠГғЛңГ” in
comparison with (this) Yoga (in the form of equanimity); Е“ЕёTГҝ O Arjuna; вҖҷГҲhГҠГ’ in (this)
equipoise of mind; вүҘГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” refuge; вҖўГҒГЈп¬ӮГ«ВҝU seek; вҲ‘ГҺВ§В¬ГЎГҠГҠвҖ” poor (and wretched); В»В§вҲӮUвҖһпЈҝUГғп¬ӮвҖ” (those
who are) instrumental in making their actions bear fruit (in the form of pleasure and pain).
Action (with a selfish motive) is far inferior to this Yoga in the form of equanimity.
You do seek refuge in this equipoise of mind, Arjuna; for poor and wretched are
those who are instrumental in making their actions bear fruit.              (49)
interpretation of the word Г«BuddhiyogaГӯ in
this context as Г«JВӨВөanayogaГӯ will be out of
tune with the line of argument which the
Lord has been pursuing. For, with reference
to the JВӨВөanayogвҲӮ it is out of place to say that
renouncing the fruit of actions he attains the
blissful supreme state. Since he does not
claim the authorship of any action at all,
renunciation of the fruit of actions is out of
question for a JВӨВөanayogвҲӮ.
By declaring action with a selfish motive
as far inferior to the Yoga of equanimity, the
Lord has shown that the fruit of actions
prompted by desire is the attainment of
fleeting and momentary pleasure, whereas
the fruit of Karmayoga is realization of God.
Thus there is no comparison whatsoever
between the two. The word Г«KarmaГӯ in this
verse cannot be interpreted in the sense of
prohibited action, for such action is altogether
The word Г«BuddhiyogВөatГӯ, in this verse,
has been used in the sense of Karmayoga,
in which duties are performed with an
equipoised mind renouncing all attachments
and desires, and not in the sense of JВӨВөanayoga;
for from verse 39, where the Lord says,
Г«Г«now hear the same as presented from the
standpoint of Karmayoga.ГӯГӯ He has been
dwelling on Karmayoga without any reference
to JВӨВөanayoga. Besides, in this verse itself,
people who crave for the fruit of their
actions have been denounced as Г«Г«poor and
wretchedГӯГӯ, and, in the next verse, glorifying
the SГҘdhaka who is endowed with equanimity.
Arjuna has been exhorted to practise
Karmayoga; and, in verse 51, it has been
declared that the wise man endowed with
equanimity, renouncing the fruit of his actions,
attains the blissful supreme state. All this
evidence makes it perfectly clear that

=== PAGE 111 ===

110
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
worth renouncing and its fruit is nothing but
untold misery and suffering. Therefore, it
cannot be cited as a fit subject of comparison
to bring out the glory of the Yoga of
Equanimity.
Similarly, the word Г«BuddhauГӯ, in this
verse, stands for equanimity, which is being
discussed here. By exhorting Arjuna to seek
refuge in equanimity, the Lord has shown
that the easiest way to reach the state of
supreme bliss lies through the constant
practice of maintaining evenness of mind
with reference to every action one may
perform, every moment of life, and under
every circumstance.
Those who make themselves accountable
for the fruit of their actions by conceiving
attachment and entertaining desire for them
as well as for their fruit have been described
by the Lord as poor and wretched in spirit,
meaning thereby that they are objects of
pity. By implication, therefore, He advises
Arjuna not to be poor and wretched like
them.
him, virtuous deeds performed by him in
accordance with the scriptural injunctions,
being characterized by absence of attachment
to their fruit, are reduced to the category of
Г«inactionГӯ (IV.20). Therefore they too are as
good as 'renounced'. By advising Arjuna to
exert himself for this Yoga of equanimity,
the Lord intends to bring it home to ArjunaГӯs
mind that such a yogвҲӮ gets liberated in this
very life and, therefore, He expects Arjuna
also to attain that state.
By saying that Yoga constitutes Г«skill in
actionГӯ the Lord seeks to make it clear that
action by its very nature leads to bondage,
and man cannot remain inactive even for a
moment and has to engage himself in some
How does the YogвҲӮ endowed with
equanimity shed both good and evil in this
very life ? He does so in the sense that
established in equanimity, he rids himself in
this very life of the residue of all virtuous
and sinful deeds performed by him in this
as well as in countless past lives, persisting
in the form of tendencies stored in the mind.
He ceases to have any connection with those
actions, hence they cannot bear fruit in the
form of a rebirth. For, through the performance
of disinterested action for the good of the
world, all his actions are neutralized (IV.23).
Similarly, virtuous and sinful deeds of his
current life also fall from him inasmuch as
while sinful acts are bodily renounced by
Thus commanding Arjuna to take recourse to equanimity, the Lord devotes the next
two verses to the glorification of noble souls who are endowed with equanimity, and again
instructs Arjuna to practise Karmayoga and describes its reward.
вҖҷГҲГҒhГҝГҲQВ§ГҠпЈҝ ВЎвҖһUГҠГғГӢвҖһU В©UГ·пЈҝ вҖҡГҲвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғЕ’ГҲcвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғпЈҝвҖ“
ГғSв—ҠГҠlГҠпЈҝВӘГҠГҝ ГҝГҲГ–ГҝSп¬Ӯ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡГҲ вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’вүҘГҠвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ”H 50H
вҖҷГҲГҒhГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” (one) endowed with equanimity; ВЎвҖһUГҠГҒГғ sheds; ГҹвҖһU in this (life); В©UГ·пЈҝ both;
вҖҡГҲвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғЕ’ГҲcвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғпЈҝГ” good and evil; ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” therefore; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠГҝ (for the practice of this) Yoga (of
equanimity); ГҝГҲГ–ГҝSп¬Ӯ exert yourself; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖ” this Yoga (of equanimity); вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡГҲ вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’вүҘГҠвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” (constitutes)
skill in action.
Endowed with equanimity, one sheds in this life both good and evil. Therefore,
strive for the practice of this Yoga of equanimity. Skill in action lies in (the practice
of this) Yoga.                                                          (50)

=== PAGE 112 ===

* Chapter II *
111
action or another. Under such circumstances,
practice of the Yoga of equanimity is the
easiest and best device to obtain release from
the bondage of Karma. He who performs
actions armed with the Yoga of equanimity
is not bound by them due to this equanimity.
Therefore, in the practice of equanimity lies
skill in action. Whereas the SГҘdhaka of
this Yoga only tries to perform his duties
with an equipoised mind, consummation of
equanimity is attained only in the state of
perfection.
objects, which are the products of the three
GuЖ’as, is the cause of manГӯs rebirth (XIII.21);
and the YogвҲӮ established in equanimity is
completely rid of this attachment, hence he
can no longer be reborn.
The term Г«AnВөamayam PadamГӯ refers to
the Supreme Abode of God, which is marked
by the total absence of torments in the form
of likes and dislikes, good and evil actions,
morbid feelings like joy and sorrow, and all
other evils; which is, again, wholly beyond
PrakГҰti and the evolutes of PrakГҰti and is
totally identical with God, and reaching
which man does not return to this mortal
world. Therefore, attainment of the Supreme
Abode of God, realization of the formless,
attributeless state of Brahma, the embodiment
of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss, or of God
in form possessed of innumerable attributes,
attainment of the supreme state, or of
immortalityГіall these point to the realization
of the same God and the same state of
spiritual experience. In reality, there is no
difference between them; differences lie only
in the points of view of the SГҘdhakas.
The word Г«HiГӯ, in the above verse, is
indicative of cause. By using it the Lord
intends to show that the present verse will
explain how skill in action lies in performing
actions with an equipoised mind. The word
Г«BuddhiyuktВөahГӯ refers to the KarmayogвҲӮs who
are already endowed with equanimity, as
stated above, that is to say, are firmly
established 
in 
equanimity. 
The 
term
Г«ManвҲӮВ¶iЖ’aВЁГӯ explains that they alone are truly
wise and learned, who by establishing
themselves in this state of equanimity have
attained the goal of their human existence.
Those who, even after obtaining human birth,
which is an open door to salvation, remain
merged in worldly enjoyments are indeed not
wise (V.22). When through stability in the
Yoga of equanimity one ceases to have any
connection with the fruit of actions performed
in the current life as well as in countless past
lives, and is exempted once for all from the
cycle of births and deaths, he is said to have
obtained release from the bondage of Karma
through renunciation of the fruit accruing
from his actions. For, attachment to worldly
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВЎВў вҖҷГҲГҒhГҝГҲQВ§ГҠ ГҒвҖһU В»В§вҲӮВўU Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ в—ҠЕёГӢГҒВ·ГЎГҠвҖ”вҖ“
ВЎГЈв—ҠвҖҷГЈЕ“ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕёв—ҠГҲВёQВ§ГҠвҖ” В¬Е’Вў ВӘГ«ВҝUГЈГ ГҝЕёГҠв—ҠГҝв—ҠЛңГ”H 51H
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВЎв—ҠЛңГ” accruing from actions; вҖҷГҲГҒhГҝГҲQВ§ГҠвҖ” possessing an equipoised mind; ГҒвҖһU for; В»В§вҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ”U
the fruit; Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ renouncing; в—ҠЕёГӢГҒВ·ГЎГҠвҖ” wise men; ВЎГЈв—ҠвҖҷГЈЕ“ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕёв—ҠГҲВёQВ§ГҠвҖ” freed from the shackles
of birth; В¬Е’в—ҠЛңГ” the (supreme); ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГЈГғ attain; вҖўЕёГҠв—ҠГҝв—ҠЛңГ” blissful state.
For, wise men possessing equipoised mind, renouncing the fruit of actions and
freed from the shackles of birth, attain the blissful supreme state.
(51)
The Lord has shown above that through the practice of Karmayoga, the Supreme
Abode of God or the supreme state of Bliss can be attained. Here, Arjuna may possibly,

=== PAGE 113 ===

112
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Г«MohakalilaГӯ, spoken of in this verse,
refers to the Г«infatuationГӯ mentioned in verse
2 of this chapter as Г«KaвҖ№malaГӯ which had
overtaken ArjunaГӯs mind as a result of his
affection for, and his apprehension for the
death of his relations and friends. It was this
infatuation which had produced a confusion
in ArjunaГӯs mind, and rendered him incapable
of properly ascertaining his duty. This
infatuation is a kind of impurity, which
obscures the mind, and does not allow the
intellect to come to a proper decision, and
shuts out the truth from it.
Eradication of this impurity through
discrimination between the abiding and the
fleeting, as well as between that which ought
to be done and that which should be avoided,
brought about by SatsaвҲҶga, or the association
of saintly souls, and thereby determining
oneГӯs legitimate duty and performing it
disinterestedly, devoting the mind solely to
God and renouncing all worldly attachments
and desires,Гіthis is what is meant by oneГӯs
mind crossing the mire of delusion.
The term Г«вҖәrutaГӯ covers all the enjoyable
objects of this world and the next that had been
seen, heard of or enjoyed till then, and the term
Г«вҖәrotavyaГӯ indicates all that might be seen, heard
of or enjoyed thereafter. Total extinction of
attachment to all these, regarding them as
transient and conducive to sorrow, is what is
meant by Г«NirvedaГӯ, or the attitude of
indifference to the same. The Lord tells Arjuna
in this verse that when after the disappearance
of infatuation his mind will regain its natural
state of transparency, he will then develop
genuine indifference towards all the ephemeral
objects of this world and the next.
ask when and how he may be able to reach that Abode, or that state. Therefore, the
next two verses deal with that question.
ГҝЕ’ГҠ ГғпЈҝ в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUвҲ‘В§ГҒвҲӮUвҲӮВўU вҖҷГҲГҒhвҲҡГҝВёГҒГғГғГҒвҒ„UcГҝГҒГғвҖ“
ГғЕ’ГҠ ВӘГЈГғГҠГҒвҖҡ ГҒЕёп¬ӮпЈҝВёЕ’Вў ГјГҠГҠпЈҝГғвҲҡГҝSГҝ ГјГҠГҲГғSГҝ ГёH 52H
ГҝЕ’ГҠU when; ГғпЈҝ your; в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUвҲ‘В§ГҒвҲӮUвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ”U the mire of delusion; вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” mind; вҲҡГҝГҒГғГғГҒвҒ„UcГҝГҒГғ will have
fully crossed; ГғЕ’ГҠ then; ВӘГЈГғГҠГҒвҖҡ you will attain; ГҒЕёп¬ӮпЈҝВёЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” indifference; ГјГҠГҠпЈҝГғвҲҡГҝSГҝ to the enjoyments
which are (yet) to be heard of; ГјГҠГҲГғSГҝ to the enjoyments which have been heard of;
Гё and.
When your mind will have fully crossed the mire of delusion, you will then grow
indifferent to the enjoyments of this world and the next that have been heard of
as well as to those that are yet to be heard of.                           (52)
ГјГҠГҲГҒГғГҒп¬ӮВ¬ЛқГҒГғВ¬ГӣГҠГҠ ГғпЈҝ ГҝЕ’ГҠ SГ•ГҠSГҝГҒГғ ГҒЕёpвҲӮUГҠвҖ“
вҖҡв—ҠГҠЕ“ГҠп¬ӮГёвҖ№ГҠ вҖҷГҲГҒhSГғЕ’ГҠ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—Ҡп¬ӮГҠГҘSГҝГҒвҖҡH 53H
ГјГҠГҲГҒГғГҒп¬ӮВ¬ЛқГҒГғВ¬ГӣГҠГҠU confused by hearing conflicting statements; ГғпЈҝ your; ГҝЕ’ГҠГ”U when; SГ•ГҠSГҝГҒГғ
will rest; ГҒЕёpвҲӮUГҠ steady; вҖҡв—ҠГҠЕ“ГҠГ’ (in meditation) on God; вҖўГёвҲӮUГҠГ” undistracted; вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” intellect;
ГғЕ’ГҠ then; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ” union (with God); вҖўп¬ӮГҠГҘSГҝГҒвҖҡ you will attain.
When your intellect, confused by hearing conflicting statements, will rest steady
and undistracted in meditation on God, you will then attain Yoga, i.e., everlasting
union with God.                                                             (53)

=== PAGE 114 ===

* Chapter II *
113
The intellect gets distracted and
bewildered when it hears various statements
about the enjoyments of this world and the
next, and the means of obtaining them; it
cannot, therefore, unwaveringly stick to one
resolution, and one idea. It favours one idea
today and leans towards another view
tomorrow. Such a distracted and wavering
intellect has been referred to in this verse as
Г«вҖәrutivipratipannВөaГӯ or confused by hearing
conflicting statements. Such an intellect is
said to suffer from the fault of distraction
(ГҒп¬ӮЛҮГҠпЈҝВ¬Е’ГҠпЈҝВ·).
Now, when that intellect, having crossed
the mire of delusion and fully recoiled from
the enjoyments of this world and the next,
and freeing itself wholly from the fault of
distraction, takes to the practice of meditation
on God, and gets unshakably and firmly
concentrated on God alone, it is said to have
rested, steady and undistracted, in meditation
on God.
The term Г«YogaГӯ in this verse means
attainment of perpetual and complete union
with God. For this is brought about only
when the mind being freed from the three
faults of impurity, distraction and obscurity,
and endowed with discrimination and
dispassion, rests firmly concentrated on God.
Immediately after this Arjuna asks the Lord
about the marks of the God-realized soul,
possessed of a stable mind, which also goes
to confirm that the term Г«YogaГӯ in this
context has been used in the sense of union
with God, or God-realization.
In verse 50, Arjuna was asked to strive
for the practice of Yoga, whereas this verse
refers to the Г«YogaГӯ which is attained as the
goal after acquiring stability of mind. That
is why the term Г«YogaГӯ in this verse has been
interpreted in the sense of God-realization.
The two words Г«YogaГӯ and Г«YogвҲӮГӯ have
been used in the GвҲӮtВөa in different senses in
different contexts, some of which are given
below with examples for the convenience of
the readers:Гі
YOGA
(1) Yoga of Action (Karmayoga)ГіVI.3:
Here action has been enjoined on him who
seeks to climb to the heights of Yoga.
Therefore, Г«YogaГӯ stands for Karmayoga.
(2) Yoga of Meditation (DhyВөanayoga)Гі
VI.19: The mind of the YogвҲӮ having been
declared in this verse to be as steady as the
flame of a lamp kept in a place sheltered
from the wind, it is apparent that the term
Г«YogaГӯ has been used here in the sense of
meditation.
(3) Yoga 
of 
Even-mindedness
(Samatvayoga)ГіII.48: Here Arjuna has been
enjoined to perform his duties, while established
in Yoga, renouncing attachment and viewing
success and failure alike. Hence Г«YogaГӯ
denotes the Yoga of Even-mindedness.
(4) Divine Glory (IX.5): The Lord asks
Arjuna in this verse to behold His wonderful
power; therefore, the term Г«YogaГӯ here means
the divine power and glory.
(5) Yoga of Devotion (Bhaktiyoga)Гі
XIV.26: The verse speaks of the worshipper
who worships God constantly and exclusively.
Therefore, the term Г«YogaГӯ here is an equivalent
of Bhaktiyoga. There is explicit mention of
the word Г«BhaktiyogaГӯ in the verse itself.
(6) Yoga consisting of eight limbs (IV.28):
The Term Г«YogaГӯ in this verse cannot be
taken in the sense of SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga or
Karmayoga, for both these words are more
comprehensive in their meaning than what
is actually conveyed by this word in the
verse under reference. All the practices
mentioned in this verse as so many sacrifices
are covered by SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga and Karmayoga.
Therefore, it seems proper to take the word
Г«YogaГӯ used in this verse in the sense of
Г«AВ¶ВўВөaвҲҶgayogaГӯ, or the Yoga of Eight Limbs.

=== PAGE 115 ===

114
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
(7) SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga (XIII.24): In this verse,
the word SВөaвҲҶkhya being used as an attribute
of Yoga, it clearly indicates SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga.
The word Г«YogaГӯ occurring in other
places should similarly be interpreted according
to the context.
YOGвҲ«
(1) God (X.17): Having been used, as
a form of address for BhagavВөan вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a,
the term Г«YogвҲӮГӯ here means God.
(2) Knower of self (VI.32): As the Г«YogвҲӮГӯ
mentioned in this verse is represented as viewing
all alike, on the analogy of his own self, the
term means here Г«the knower of selfГӯ.
(3) A Devotee who has attained
perfection (XII.14): As the verse speaks of
one who has surrendered the mind and
intellect to God, and the term is used as an
attribute of the devotee, Г«YogвҲӮГӯ in this verse
means a devotee who has realized the goal.
(4) KarmayogвҲӮ (V.11): The YogвҲӮ referred
to in this verse having been represented as
performing actions, without attachment, only
for the sake of self-purification, the term
Г«YogвҲӮГӯ, occurring in it should be interpreted
to mean a KarmayogвҲӮ (follower of the Path
of Action).
(5) SВөaвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ (V.24): Realization of
identity with Brahma having been mentioned
as the goal to be reached by him, the Г«YogвҲӮГӯ,
referred to in it means the SВөaвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ
(follower of the Path of knowledge).
(6) BhaktiyogвҲӮ (VIII.14): Referring as it
does to constant meditation on God with an
undivided mind, the term Г«YogвҲӮГӯ in this verse
means the BhaktiyogвҲӮ (follower of the Path
of Devotion).
(7) A practising YogвҲӮ (VI.45): The verse
speaks of the highest goal being reached
through diligent practice; hence Г«YogвҲӮГӯ here
means only a practising YogвҲӮ.
(8) DhyВөanayogвҲӮ (VI.10): The verse
exhorts the YogвҲӮ to retire to a secluded place
and, concentrating his mind, to practise constant
meditation on God; therefore, the term here
should be taken to mean a DhyВөanayogвҲӮ
(follower of the Path of Meditation).
(9) One who performs religious acts
with some worldly motive (VIII.25): The
verse speaks of the YogвҲӮ returning to the
mortal world; therefore, the term here should
be taken to mean one who performs religious
acts with the intent of gaining some selfish
motive.
In the above verses, the Lord told Arjuna that when his mind would have crossed
the mire of delusion and he would develop indifference towards the enjoyment of this
world and the next, and when his mind would rest steady and undistracted in meditation
on God, he would realize God, or attain union with Him. With reference to this, desiring
to know the marks and conduct of the perfect YogвҲӮ, possessed of a stable mind, Arjuna
asks the Lord:
вҖўВЎВёГҲЕё В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
ГҒSГ•ГғВ¬ЛқГҙГҠSГҝ вҲ‘В§ГҠ Г·ГҠВ·ГҠ вҖҡв—ҠГҠГҒЕ“SГ•SГҝ вҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠп¬ӮвҖ“
ГҒSГ•ГғЕ“ГӢвҖ” ГҒвҲ‘ВўВ§ В¬ЛқГ·ГҠВ·пЈҝГғ ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠвҖҡГӢГғ п¬ӮЛқВЎпЈҝГғ ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ”H 54H
ГҒSГ•ГғВ¬ЛқГҙГҠSГҝ one stable of mind; вҲ‘В§ГҠ what; Г·ГҠВ·ГҠ (is) the definition; вҖҡв—ҠГҠГҒЕ“SГ•SГҝ and
established in SamВөadhi (perfect in God); вҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠп¬Ӯ O KГҰВ¶Ж’a; ГҒSГ•ГғЕ“ГӢвҖ” (the man) of stable
mind; ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛң how; В¬ЛқГ·ГҠВ·пЈҝГғ speaks; ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛң how; вҖўГҠвҖҡГӢГғ sits; п¬ӮЛқВЎпЈҝГғ moves (conducts himself);
ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” how.

=== PAGE 116 ===

* Chapter II *
115
The word Г«KesavaГӯ is a compound
word composed of several parts, viz., Ka,
A, вҲ«вҖ№a and Va. Ka stands for BrahmВөa (the
Creator), A for ViВ¶Ж’u (the Preserver) and вҲ«вҖ№a
for вҖәiva; and he whose Va, i.e., Body is
identical with the above three aspects of the
Deity is known as KeвҖ№ava. Addressing the
Lord as Г«KeвҖ№avaГӯ, in this verse, Arjuna wants
to indicate that being the Almighty, Omniscient
God, the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer
of the entire universe, вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a alone was
capable of giving a proper answer to his
questions.
In the preceding verse Arjuna was told
by the Lord that when his mind would rest
steady in SamВөadhi, that is to say, when it
would be unshakably fixed in meditation on
God, he would attain Yoga, or union with
God. With reference to that statement Arjuna
now desires to know the marks of the man
who has attained perfection, i.e., who has
realized God, and whose mind and intellect
have become perfectly and unshakably
stable in God. In order to bring out this
point 
clearly, 
Arjuna 
has 
used 
the
adjective Г«SamВөadhisthasyaГӯ after the word
Г«SthitaprajВӨasyaГӯ (of the God-realized soul).
The above characteristics of the perfect
or God-realized soul might be taken as
representing his inactive as well as active
state. Arjuna also refers to both the states in
his query. Г«How does he speak?Гӯ and Г«How
does he walkГӯ? refer to the active state of
the perfect soul; and Г«How does he sitГӯ refers
to his state of inaction. The word Г«BhВөaВ¶ВөaГӯ
in this verse has not been taken in the sense
of Г«speechГӯ, because the word Г«PrabhВөaВ¶etaГӯ
in the second line also refers to his mode
of Г«speechГӯ. Г«BhВөaВ¶ВөaГӯ, therefore, has been
interpreted as Г«Г·ГҠcГҝГғпЈҝ вҲ‘В§ГўГҝГғпЈҝ вҖўЕёГҝГҠГӯ, i.e., Г«that
which brings out the characteristic qualities
of a thing.Гӯ According to this derivation of
the word, Г«BhВөaВ¶ВөaГӯ has been rendered as a
Г«signГӯ or Г«markГӯ in our translation of the
verse. Thus Arjuna asks: Г«What are the
marks of a God-realized soul?Гӯ
The perfect soul who has realized God
exhibits special characteristics in all his ways
of life. Therefore, even his ordinary speech,
his mode of sitting and his gait bring out
certain special characteristics. But here the
verbs Г«speaksГӯ, Г«sitsГӯ and Г«walksГӯ have not
been used in that ordinary sense. The intention
of Arjuna in asking the mode of speech of
the perfect man is to know what layers of
thought inspire his speech. Similarly the verb
Г«sitsГӯ refers to his state of inaction, and Arjuna
by his query wants to know what is the state
of the perfect man when he is not engaged in
any form of action. And, lastly, the words
Г«How does he walk?Гӯ mean Г«How does he
conduct himself in the world?Гӯ
Arjuna said: KГҰВ¶Ж’a, what are the characteristies of a God-realized soul, stable
of mind and established in SamВөadhi (perfect tranquillity of mind)? How does the
man of stable mind speak, how does he sit, how does he walk?           (54)
In the preceding verse, Arjuna asked four questions about the perfect being who has
realized God. The Lord answers these questions right up to the end of this chapter,
interspersing the discourse now and then with other topics relevant to the points at issue.
The verse which follows contains a short reply to the first question of Arjuna.
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲп¬ӮГҠГё
В¬ЛқВЎвҖһUГҠГҒГғ ГҝЕ’ГҠ вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠГЈвҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГЈВ¬ГҠГ•Вё в—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝВӘГғГҠЕёЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГЈГҝпЈҝп¬ӮГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠ ГғГҲCГ”UвҖ” ГҒSГ•ГғВ¬ЛқГҙГҠSГғЕ’ГҠпЈҝГ«ГҝГғпЈҝГ”H 55H

=== PAGE 117 ===

116
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«KВөamВөanГӯ, with the adjective
Г«SarvВөanГӯ, stands for all those desires, whether
strong or weak which appear in the mind
of man, due to whatever reason it may be,
for contact with, or separation from, any
object belonging to this world or the next.
There are many fine shades of difference
among desires, which are variously termed
in SanskГҰit as VВөasanВөa, SpГҰhВөa, IcchВөa, and
TГҰВ¶Ж’Вөa, etc. An attempt will be made below
to bring out these nice distinctions indicative
of different states of the mind. Completely
ridding oneself of all these forms of desire
once for all is what is meant by Г«Г«thoroughly
dismissing the cravings of the mind.ГӯГӯ
VВөasanВөa is a subtble and unmanifest form
of desire, proceeding from likes and dislikes,
for the preservation of all that is dear, viz.,
oneГӯs body, wife, progeny, wealth, honour
and prestige, etc., and for the destruction of
all that is repulsive. The next stage is
represented by Г«SpГҰhВөaГӯ, or the feeling of
want or indispensability in respect of an
agreeable object, arising from a consciousness
of its absence. This feeling of Г«wantГӯ represents
a more developed form of desire. Desire for
the possession of an agreeable object which
is lacking and for the destruction of that
which is disagreeable, when manifest, takes
the form of Г«IcchВөaГӯ or Г«wish.Гӯ This represents
the fully developed form of desire. The last
stage is represented by Г«TГҰВ¶Ж’ВөaГӯ or seeking to
possess more and more, even though one
may be amply provided with all objects of
enjoyment,Гіa devoted and faithful wife, an
obedient son, abundant riches, etc. This is
the grossest form of desire.
By adding the adjective Г«ManogatВөanГӯ to
the word Г«KВөamВөanГӯ, it has been shown that
the mind is the seat of all desires (III.40);
therefore, when along with the intellect the
mind also rests stable in God, all these forms
of desire will vanish. Thus it should be taken
for granted that so long as the desires
existing in the mind of a SГҘdhaka are not
totally eradicated, his intellect has not become
stable.
After the total cessation of all desires
of the mind when the SГҘdhaka directly
perceives the true nature of the eternal, ever
pure and ever awakened Supreme Self,
wholly beyond this objective world, and
rests in perpetual calm, he is known as
Г«Г«satisfied in the Self through the SelfГӯГӯ. In
Chap. III. verse 17 also a God-realized soul
has been referred to as gratified with the Self
and contented in the Self alone. When
through the continuous and devoted practice
of Karmayoga the YogвҲӮ finally reaches this
state, then alone it should be understood that
his intellect has become unshakably fixed in
God or that he has realized God. This is
what is meant by saying Г«then he is called
stable of mindГӯ.
В¬ЛқВЎвҖһUГҠГҒГғ thoroughly cast off; ГҝЕ’ГҠ when; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠЕёЛңГ” cravings; вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёЕёЛңГ” all; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O Arjuna; в—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝВӘГғГҠЕёЛңГ”
belonging to the mind; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҒЕё in the Self; вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠ through the (joy of the) Self;
ГғГҲCГ”UвҖ” satisfied; ГҒSГ•ГғВ¬ЛқГҙГҠвҖ” stable of mind; ГғЕ’ГҠГ” then; В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is called.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavВөan said: Arjuna, when one thoroughly casts all cravings of the mind,
and is satisfied in the Self through (the joy of) the Self, then he is called Г«stable of
mindГӯ.                                                                  (55)
Of the four questions of Arjuna about the characteristics of the God-realized soul,
the first is so comprehensive that the other three questions are covered by it. Viewed in
this light, all the remaining verses of this chapter may be regarded as embodying the
LordГӯs reply to that one question. But in order to demarcate the other three questions,
the next two verses may be regarded as containing the answer to the second question

=== PAGE 118 ===

* Chapter II *
117
The saint who has realized God remains
wholly unperturbed in sorrow. That is to say,
his intellect having become unshakably fixed
in God, even the greatest of sorrows cannot
move him (VI.22); he becomes proof against
all sorrows. If his body is cut to pieces by
weapons, or is subjected to pain caused by
unbearable heat, cold and rain and struck by
lightning, or if he is overtaken by a severe
disease, or suddenly loses his dearest object
in the world, or is subjected to the worst
form of ignominy, reproach and vilification
without rhyme or reason, nay, if he has to
undergo all other forms of extreme torture,
anguish and suffering that may be imagined
in this world, all at once, they will fail to
produce the least perturbation in his mind.
Therefore, the words he will utter will betray
not the least trace of any anxiety or worry.
If he shows any anxiety in his bodily
expression or speech in imitation of the ways
of the world, it is no anxiety in the real sense
of the term.
Again, the mind of the God-realized soul
has no thirst for pleasures of the world. That is
to say, he takes pleasure and pain alike, and
remains ever balanced in both these forms of
experience (XII.13; XIV.24). Just as the greatest
sorrow cannot shake the balance of his mind,
even so the highest form of pleasure cannot
induce the least craving for it in his mind. That
is why his words never express any form of
craving. If in order to imitate the ways of the
world, he ever indicates through mind and
speech a longing for any kind of pleasure, it is
no real longing.
So passion, fear and anger have no
place in the mind and speech of the God-
realized soul. No occurrence of any kind can
ever induce the least attachment, fear, or
anger in his mind. Therefore, his speech also
will be free from passion, fear and anger,
and will exhibit both tranquillity and guileless
simplicity. He may at any time for the sake
of the world give expression to attachment,
fear and anger through action of body and
speech, yet they can never be swayed by any
morbid feeling. It may be possible for a
clever man, possessed of exceptional self-
control, to use words which are altogether
free from such feelings, but his mind cannot
remain unaffected by such feelings. That is
why, in the course of His reply to the
question: Г«How does the God-realized soul
speak?Гӯ the Lord, instead of referring merely
to his external speech, has given a description
of the sentiments ruling his mind. This
should make it clear to us that the speech
of the YogвҲӮ, possessed of a stable mind,
should be a faithful index to the state of his
mind, wholly pure and entirely free from
morbidity.
of Arjuna, viz., how a God-realized soul speaks, or in other words, what are the layers
of thought which inspire his speech.
Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖпЈҝcп¬ӮЕёГҲГҒmВӘAв—ҠЕёГҠвҖ” вҖҡГҲПҖпЈҝВ·ГҲ ГҒп¬ӮВӘГғSВ¬ГҺвҖһUвҖ”Г”вҖ“
п¬ӮГӢГғвҒ„UГҠВӘГ·ГҝвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“вҖ” 
ГҒSГ•ГғЕ“ГӢв—ҠГҲВёГҒЕёLВ§Г«ГҝГғпЈҝH 56H
Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖпЈҝВ·ГҲ amid sorrows; вҖўЕёГҲГҒmГҮЕёв—ҠЕёГҠвҖ” whose mind remains unperturbed; вҖҡГҲПҖпЈҝВ·ГҲ ГҒп¬ӮВӘГғSВ¬ГҺвҖһUвҖ” whose
thirst for pleasures has altogether disappeared; п¬ӮГӢГғвҒ„UГҠВӘГ·ГҝвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“вҖ”Г” who is free from passion,
fear and anger; ГҒSГ•ГғЕ“ГӢвҖ” stable of mind; в—ҠГҲГҒЕёГ”вҖ” the sage; В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is called.
He, whose mind remains unperturbed amid sorrows, whose thirst for pleasures
has altogether disappeared, and who is free from passion, fear and anger, is called
a sage Г«stable of mindГӯ.                                                (56)

=== PAGE 119 ===

118
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The expression Г«not attached to anything,
anywhereГӯ in this verse shows that in the
YogвҲӮ possessed of a stable mind, worldly
attachments of all kinds cease to exist. That
is to say, whereas in men possessed of a
worldly mind attachment and infatuation for
wife, children, brothers, friends and relations
etc., are natural, and the words that fall from
their lips drop as expressions of their gross
love and infatuation, such is not the case
with the YogвҲӮ of stable mind. He does not
love any creature with a feeling of mineness
or attachment, for any being whatsoever.
Hence his speech too is wholly free from
the taint of attachment and is full of unalloyed
love. Attachment is the root of morbid
feelings like lust, anger etc. Therefore, when
attachment itself is eradicated from his mind,
all other morbid feelings too should be
understood to have naturally ceased to exist.
The terms Г«goodГӯ and Г«evilГӯ in this verse
stand for what they call agreeable and
disagreeable or favourable and unfavourable.
To the YogвҲӮ possessed of a stable mind,
nothing belonging to this world appear as
favourable or unfavourable; therefore, the
word Г«goodГӯ should be taken to mean that
which appears to be favourable to his mind,
senses and body, while Г«evilГӯ signifies that
which appears as unfavourable from the
worldly point of view. The word Г«TatГӯ has
been used twice with reference to good and
evil in order to show that such favourable
and unfavourable objects in the world are
infinite in number. When the YogвҲӮ comes in
touch with any of them, he remains unaffected.
That is what is intended to be brought out
by the verse.
When an ordinary man of the world
comes in contact with what appears as
agreeable to him, his mind gets transported
with joy. The joy of his mind finds expression
through his words as well, and he offers
praises to that agreeable object. But when
the YogвҲӮ possessed of a stable mind comes
in contact with what is most agreeable to
him, his mind does not give way to the
morbid feeling of joy (V.20). Therefore, his
speech also remains altogether free from the
morbid feeling of joy and he never offers
to any agreeable object or being exaggerated
praises gushing out of unrestrained pleasure.
If for the sake of the world his body ever
exhibits pleasure, or his words seem to offer
praises, they are not under the sway of the
morbid feeling of joy.
Just as the attainment of an agreeable
object reacts agreeably on the mind of an
He alone who possesses the above
characteristics is a Г«MuniГӯ (one who has
controlled his speech) in the true sense of
the term; and his intellect alone has attained
real stability. He whose mind and senses
are diseased cannot be called a man of
stable mind, even if his speech exhibits
self-control and stability. This is what is
meant by saying: Г«such a sage is stable of
mind.Гӯ
ГҝвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠГҠЕёГҒГ·FпЈҝвҖһUSГғГ»ГҠГ В¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝ вүҘГҠГҲГ·ГҠвүҘГҠГҲГ·в—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ЕёГҠГҒГ·ЕёГЈЕ’ГҒГғ Её mпЈҝГҒCГ”U ГғSГҝ В¬ЛқГҙГҠГҠ В¬ЛқГҒГғГҒDГ”UГғГҠH 57H
ГҝвҖ” who; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠ everywhere (anything, anywhere); вҖўЕёГҒГ·SЕёпЈҝвҖһUвҖ” not attached; ГғГғЛңГ” ГғГғЛңГ” this
and that; В¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝ meeting with; вүҘГҠГҲГ·ГҠвүҘГҠГҲГ·в—ҠЛңГ” good and evil; Её not; вҖўГҒГ·ЕёГЈЕ’ГҒГғ rejoices; Её nor; mпЈҝГҒCГ”UГ”
recoils; ГғSГҝ his; В¬ЛқГҙГҠГҠ mind; В¬ЛқГҒГғГҒDГ”UГғГҠ (is) stable.
He who is not attached to anything and meeting with good and evil, neither
rejoices nor recoils, his mind is stable.                                           (57)

=== PAGE 120 ===

* Chapter II *
119
ordinary man of the world, even so, he recoils
from a disagreeable object, which produces a
great distraction in his mind, and begins to
denounce it in venomous words. In the mind
of the YogвҲӮ possessed of stable intellect,
however, not the least amount of hatred will
be roused by contact with even the most
disagreeable object. It will produce no distraction
or perturbation in his mind. He will ever
remain calm, unperturbed and equipoised,
when coming in touch with anything beloning
to this world (V.20). That is why he will never
vindictively denounce or censure any
disagreeable object or being. If, for the
guidance of the world, such a saint ever
denounces anything or any being, or employs
words of censure with reference to it, they are
not expressions of censure in the real sense of
the term; for there exists no repulsion in his
mind for anything or any being.
He alone who is possessed of the marks
stated above, that is to say, on whose mind
and senses no occurrence of any kind and
neither contact with, nor separation from
anything or any being whatsoever can produce
an unhealthy reaction, should be regarded as
a YogвҲӮ possessed of a stable mind.
It has already been pointed out that
when Arjuna asked the Lord how a God-
realized soul spoke, his question did not
relate to external speech alone, as understood
in the ordinary sense of the term. Had it been
a question of words alone, any dissembler
or hypocrite could learn by heart and use the
best expressions to create an impression that
he was a great, spiritually developed soul.
Really speaking, what matters is: the sentiments
that inspire oneГӯs speech. The Lord refers
here to the speech which has for its background
the mental state as described in these two
verses. That is why instead of making any
direct reference to speech, the Lord has
described here the mental state of the God-
realized soul.
and intellect. All this has been picturesquely
described by comparing the process with the
drawing in of the limbs of a tortoise from all
directions, and its lying motionless like a piece
of inert stone. If the functions of the different
senses are only externally stopped and they
The verse speaks of withdrawing the
senses, that are fully controlled, from all objects
of sense-enjoyment at the time of meditation,
and not allowing the senses to be attracted by
those objects of enjoyment and by depriving
them of their power to lead astray the mind
Concluding thus the reply to the second question of Arjuna concerning the speech
of the God-realized soul, the Lord now takes up his third question, viz., how the God-
realized soul Г«sitsГӯ, and shows that his rest consists in complete control over the senses
and their withdrawal from their respective objects, after being freed from all attachment
and attraction for them.
ГҝЕ’ГҠ вҖҡВўвҖһUвҒ„UГғпЈҝ ГёГҠГҝВў вҲ‘ГҚВ§в—ҠГҠпЈҝВёЛҳXГ”UГҠЕёГӢп¬Ӯ вҖҡп¬ӮВёвүҘГҠвҖ”вҖ“
ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГЎГҠГӢГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГ•пЈҝВёГЁГҝSГғSГҝ В¬ЛқГҙГҠГҠ В¬ЛқГҒГғГҒDГ”UГғГҠH 58H
ГҝЕ’ГҠ when; вҖҡВўвҖһUвҒ„UГғпЈҝ withdraws; Гё and; вҖўГҝв—ҠЛңГ” such (a man); вҲ‘ГҚВ§в—ҠВёвҖ” a tortoise; вҖўXГ”UГҠГҒЕё (draws
in its) limbs; Гҹп¬Ӯ as; вҖҡп¬ӮВёвүҘГҠвҖ” from all directions; ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠГ” (his) senses; ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГ•пЈҝВёГЁГҝвҖ” from the
sense-objects; ГғSГҝ his; В¬ЛқГҙГҠГҠ mind; В¬ЛқГҒГғГҒDГ”UГғГҠ is stable.
When, like a tortoise, which draws in its limbs from all directions, he withdraws
all his senses from the sense-objects, his mind is considered as stable.
 (58)

=== PAGE 121 ===

120
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
are withdrawn from contact with gross objects
of enjoyment, internally the senses continue
to function by constantly leaning towards the
objects of enjoyment. That is why men
generally in their dream state or reverie
experience sense-enjoyments in their subtle
form. The word Г«SarvaвҖ№aВЁГӯ in the verse has
been used to show that the man of a stable
mind withdraws his senses from even such
subtle enjoyments.
He alone who has controlled his senses
thoroughly as shown above, and who is thus
able to wean his senses from their objects
completely can have a stable mind. He
whose senses are not controlled, cannot have
a stable intellect; for the senses will then
forcibly drag his mind and intellect after
them and lead them on to sense-enjoyments.
senses through his senses.
The verse shows that even the
unenlightened man who has given up sense-
enjoyments has outwardly withdrawn his
senses from sense-objects, as the tortoise
draws in its limbs; but his taste for such
objects will persist,Гіhis attachment for them
will not disappear. That is why his senses
will continue internally to run after those
objects and will thus keep his mind oscillating.
This is what is meant by the Lord when He
says that though the sense-objects turn away
from that man, the taste for them persists.
The following illustrations will make the
point clear.
For fear of ailment, or fear of death, or
due to any other cause a man, who is addicted
to sense-enjoyment, gives up the enjoyment
of one or more objects. For the time he
abstains from the enjoyment of a particular
In the general acceptance of the term,
the word Г«NirВөahВөaraГӯ is understood to mean
one who gives up food and observes a
complete fast. But the word has not been
used in that sense in this verse, for the word
Г«ViВ¶ayВөaВЁГӯ used in plural shows that abstinence
not only from food but from sense-enjoyments
in general is meant here. Through the
renunciation of food only one object of the
senses, viz, taste, is given up; the other
objects, namely, sound, touch, colour and
smell are not renounced. Therefore, the word
Г«foodГӯ (Г…hВөara) should be understood in a
wider sense; thus understood, every sense
has its own Г«foodГӯ in the shape of the object
of its enjoyment. According to this
interpretation, the words Г«NirВөahВөarasya DehinaВЁГӯ
should be taken to mean that human being,
identifying himself with the body, who has
given up the enjoyment of all the objects of
Replying to the third question of Arjuna, the preceding verse described how the God-
realized soul rested. Now with a view to dealing with some supplementary problems arising
out of that question, the next verse proceeds to bring out the distinction between sense-
control as practised by the ordinary man and the sense control of the God-realized soul.
ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҝГҠ ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕёп¬ӮГғВёГЈГғпЈҝ ГҒЕёвҒ„UГҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„USГҝ Е’пЈҝГҒвҖһUЕёвҖ”вҖ“
вҒ„UвҖҡп¬ӮВЎZ вҒ„UвҖҡГҠпЈҝЛҳГҘГҝSГҝ В¬вҒ„ВўU Е’ГҺВ¶Г”UГҠ ГҒЕёп¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝH 59H
ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҝГҠвҖ” sense-objects; ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕёп¬ӮГғВёГЈГғпЈҝ turn away; ГҒЕёвҒ„UГҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„USГҝ Е’пЈҝГҒвҖһUЕёвҖ” from the abstemious person;
вҒ„UвҖҡп¬ӮВЎВёв—ҠГ”ЛңГ” to the exclusion of the taste (for them); вҒ„UвҖҡвҖ” the taste; вҖўГҒВ¬Г” also; вҖўSГҝ of him (the
man of stable mind); В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” the Supreme; Е’ГҺВ¶Г”UГҠ on (his) realizing; ГҒЕёп¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝ disappears.
Sense-objects turn away from him, who does not enjoy them with his senses;
but the taste for them persists. This relish also disappears in the case of the man
of stable mind when he realizes the Supreme.                                 (59)

=== PAGE 122 ===

* Chapter II *
121
object or objects, the object or objects practically
cease to exist for him. Even so, if he gives up
the enjoyment of all objects, all objects will
cease to exist for him for the time being; but
such a renunciation, inspired as it is by
constraint, fear or any other motive, is made
notwithstanding his attachment for those objects.
Such a renunciation cannot bring about real
cessation of attachment or attraction for the
things of the world.
When a hypocrite, in order to deceive
people, gives up outwardly all activities of
the five senses of perception and the five
organs of action, all objects of the senses will
outwardly cease to exist for him; but owing
to the persistence of attachment for those
objects, he will mentally continue to dwell
on them (III.6). Therefore, his attachment for
those objects remains as strong as ever.
In order to attain mystic powers, or with
a view to obtaining any other form of worldly
enjoyment, a man desiring worldly happiness
may externally renounce the activities of all
the ten organs, and may cease to dwell on
them even mentally at the time of meditation
or when absorbed in SamВөadhi; and yet his
attraction for sense-enjoyments will continue,
his attachment for them will persist.
In this way, through outward renunciation
of objects, the objects no doubt will cease to
exist, but the attraction for them will not cease.
Herein lies the distinction between restraint
of the senses as practised by an ignorant man
and that practised by a wise man.
Construing the word Г«RasaГӯ as mental
enjoyment, the word Г«RasavarjamГӯ may be
interpreted to mean that such a person
though bodily renouncing objects of enjoyment,
mentally goes on enjoying the same; but
inasmuch 
as 
such 
mental 
enjoyment
presupposes attachment for the object of
enjoyment, the interpretation of Г«RasaГӯ as
attachment covers this meaning as well.
Secondly, mental enjoyment of objects of
senses can be avoided even before God-
realization with the help of a resolute will
or discrimination or by recourse to reason;
whereas the realization of God lays the axe
at its very root, viz., attachment, and herein
lies the fulfilment of God-realization, not
merely in suspending enjoyment with the
mind of objects of the senses. Therefore, the
interpretation of the word Г«RasaГӯ as given
above is quite reasonable and proper.
The word Г«AsyaГӯ, in the second line of
the verse, refers to the YogвҲӮ of stable mind,
who is the subject of discussion in these
verses. This second line of the verse says
that inasmuch as the YogвҲӮ possessed of a
stable mind obtains a direct vision of God,
the ocean of supreme Bliss, he ceases to
have the faintest trace of any attachment for
worldly objects. For attachment for worldly
objects proceeds from Nescience*, which
disappears totally when there is a direct
vision of God. It is only due to their
infatuation that ordinary men of the world
find happiness in sense-enjoyments; that is
why they feel attracted towards sense-
enjoyments, whereas in reality there lies not
the least happiness in sense-enjoyments.
Whatever happiness is imagined to be derived
from sense-enjoyments is nothing but a very
faint reflection of a fraction of the Bliss
* вҖўГҒп¬ӮlГҠГҒSв—ҠГғГҠвҒ„UГҠВӘmпЈҝВ·ГҠГҒГ·ГҒЕёп¬ӮпЈҝвүҘГҠГҠвҖ” Г„вҖ№пЈҝвүҘГҠГҠвҖ” (Yoga-SВөutras II.3)
Г«Г«Nescience, the knot between Spirit and Matter, making Matter appear as Spirit, attachment, hatred
and fear of deathГіthese five are termed as the five KleвҖ№as or sources of pain.ГӯГӯ
вҖўГҒп¬ӮlГҠ ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠв—ҠГҲГ»ГҠвҒ„пЈҝUВ·ГҠв—ҠЛң (Ibid. II.4)
Г«Г«Of these five, Nescience is the root of the following four, viz., egotism, partiality and prejudice etc.ГӯГӯ

=== PAGE 123 ===

122
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
which lies in God, the embodiment of
supreme Bliss. Just as the light appearing in
the moon that shines in a moon-lit night is
nothing but a reflection of the sunГӯs light,
and with the rising of the sun the light of
the moon disappears, even so the happiness
which one finds in the possession and
enjoyment of worldly objects is nothing but
a reflection of the Bliss obtaining in the All-
blissful God. Therefore, he who realizes that
embodiment of supreme Bliss, viz., God,
neither finds any happiness in the enjoyment
of worldly objects (II.69), nor feels even the
least attraction from them.
For, God is such a wonderful,
transcendent and supernatural object of
attraction that when He is actually realized,
the soul feels so enchanted; enraptured and
ravished that it losses its very identity. Who
can in that state think of any other object?
That is why it has been said that on the
realization of God all attachment for objects
of enjoyment gets eradicated once for all.
Thus in the restraint of senses evinced
by a man of realization it is not the sense-
objects alone which lose all attraction for
him; nay, attachment itself gets totally wiped
out. Nescience ceases once for all. Herein
lies the speciality of sense-restraint as practised
by the YogвҲӮ possessed of a stable mind.
It may be asked here: Where lies the harm if this attachment does not disappear
and if the senses are not restrained? The next verse throws light on this point.
ГҝГғГғГҠпЈҝ sГ”ГҒВ¬ вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ В¬ГҲLВ§В·SГҝ ГҒп¬ӮВ¬ГҒpГғвҖ”вҖ“
ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠ В¬Лқв—ҠГҠГ•ГӢГҒЕё вҖһUвҒ„UГҒГЈГғ В¬ЛқвҖҡГ·Вў в—ҠЕёвҖ”H 60H
ГҝГғГғвҖ”Г” of the striving; ГҒвҖһU for; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ O son of KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna; В¬ГҲLВ§В·SГҝ ГҒп¬ӮВ¬ГҒpГғвҖ”
wise man; ГҹГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠ В¬Лқв—ҠГҠГ•ГӢГҒЕё the turbulent senses; вҖһUвҒ„UГҒГЈГғГ” carry away; В¬ЛқвҖҡГ·в—ҠЛңГ” forcibly; в—ҠЕёвҖ” the mind.
Turbulent by nature, the senses even of a wise man, who is practising self-control,
forcibly carry away his mind, Arjuna.                                   (60)
stable in God. And because the senses thus
forcibly carry away the mind of man, the
Lord urges in the following verse that having
controlled all the senses and collecting the
mind and devoting oneself to Him, one
should engage himself in the practice of
meditation. In this way, the word Г«HiГӯ
establishes the connection of this verse with
the verse immediately preceding it as well
as the verse which succeeds it.
The adjective Г«turbulentГӯ has been used
with reference to Г«sensesГӯ to demonstrate the
fact that so long as the senses of a man are
not subdued by him, and so long as his
attachment for objects of the senses persists,
his senses will continue to tempt his mind
towards sense-enjoyments and will not allow
Like a lamp placed over the threshold,
which throws its light in rooms lying on both
sides of the door, the word Г«HiГӯ connects this
verse with the verse preceding it as well as
with the verse which follows it. The preceding
verse showed that from him, who merely
renounced enjoyment of sense-objects, only
sense-objects withdrew, but not the taste for
their enjoyment. Here it may be asked:
Where lies the harm if the taste for enjoyment
does not disappear? In answer to this, the
present verse shows that so long as attachment
for the enjoyment of sense-objects remains
embedded in the mind of man, his senses
will on account of that attachment forcibly
lead him to the enjoyment of sense-objects;
hence, his mind and intellect cannot rest

=== PAGE 124 ===

* Chapter II *
123
it to attain stability; they will continue to stir
the mind and make it restless.
The word Г«PuruВ¶asyaГӯ with its two
adjectives Г«YatataВЁГӯ and Г«VipaвҖ№citaВЁГӯ refers
to the wise and devoted SГҘdhaka, who from
his study of the scriptures and by exercising
his independent judgement and discrimination
has become aware of the evils of sense-
enjoyment, and who, though striving to
restrain the senses from their objects, has not
yet succeeded in overcoming his attachment
for sense-objects and has consequently not
been able to subdue his senses. The word
Г«ApiГӯ is intended to show that when the
unruly senses taking advantage of his
attachment for sense-enjoyments forcibly lead
the mind of even an intelligent and diligent
SГҘdhaka, possessed of discrimination, to
the enjoyment of sense-objects, there is no
wonder that the generality of men should be
found indulging in their senses. Therefore,
he who desires to attain the state of a YogвҲӮ
possessed of a stable mind should make
special efforts to control his senses, totally
renouncing attachment for objects of the
world.
to sit for the practice of meditation on God,
collecting his scattered mind, and devoting
himself heart and soul to God. The same advice
has been given in Chapter VI also in the course
of the description of DhyВөanayoga (VI.14).
The SГҘdhaka who having subdued mind and
senses engages himself in the practice of
meditation will soon attain stability of intellect,
which will bring him within easy reach of
God-realization.
The first half of this verse advises the
SГҘdhaka to control his senses, collect his scatter
mind and sit for meditation devoting himself
heart and soul to God. The second half shows
the reason why he should do so. Therefore,
when it says: Г«he whose senses are under his
In order to show that control should be
exercised over all the senses, the adjective
Г«SarvВөaЖ’iГӯ has been used to qualify the word
Г«sensesГӯ in this verse. For even one
undisciplined sense distracts the mind and
intellect of a SГҘdhaka and places obstacles
in the path of his spiritual progress (II.67).
Therefore, a SГҘdhaka who seeks God-
realization should carefully and diligently
subdue all his senses.
After subduing the senses if the mind is
not brought under control, it will dwell on
objects of the world and bring about the fall of
the SГҘdhaka; and the mind and intellect, unless
they are fixed on God, cannot rest stable. That
is why the present verse advises the SГҘdhaka
Thus demonstrating the necessity of practising sense-control, the Lord points out the
duty of a SГҘdhaka and in the end declares again that sense-control is a means of attaining
the state of a God-realized soul possessed of a stable mind.
ГғГҠГҒЕё вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ вҖҡВўГҝГӘГҝ ГҝГҲQВ§ вҖўГҠвҖҡГӢГғ в—ҠГ В¬вҒ„UвҖ”вҖ“
п¬ӮвүҘГҠпЈҝ ГҒвҖһU ГҝSГҝпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠ ГғSГҝ В¬ЛқГҙГҠГҠ В¬ЛқГҒГғГҒDГ”UГғГҠH 61H
ГғГҠГҒЕё them; вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ all; вҖҡВўГҝГӘГҝ having controlled; ГҝГҲQ вҖ” with his mind fully collected; вҖўГҠвҖҡГӢГғ
should sit down (for meditation); в—ҠГ В¬вҒ„UвҖ” devoting (oneself heart and soul) to Me; п¬ӮвүҘГҠпЈҝ (are
brought) under control; ГҒвҖһUГ” for; ГҝSГҝ whose; ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠ senses; ГғSГҝ his; В¬ЛқГҙГҠГҠ mind; В¬ЛқГҒГғГҒDГ”UГғГҠ (has
become) stable.
Therefore, having controlled all the senses and concentrating his mind, he should
sit for meditation, devoting himself heart and soul to Me. For, he whose senses are
under his control, is known to have a stable mind.                                         (61)

=== PAGE 125 ===

124
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
control, is known to have a stable mind,Гӯ it
should be taken to mean that totally renouncing
all attachment, sense of possession and desire,
and controlling the mind and senses, the intellect
should be fixed on God. For, that SГҘdhaka
alone can keep his intellect steadfast on God
whose mind and senses are subdued; he whose
mind and senses have not been brought under
control, will never succeed in keeping his
intellect stable. It is, therefore, extremely
necessary for every human being to bring his
mind and senses under complete control.
The next two verses show the harm which befalls a man if he fails to control his
mind and senses and to devote himself heart and soul to God.
ГӨГҝГҠГҝГғГҠпЈҝ 
ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҝГҠГЈВ¬ГҲВўвҖҡвҖ” 
вҖҡXГ”USГғпЈҝВ·ГҚВ¬ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝвҖ“
вҖҡXГ”UГҠГ вҖҡTГҠГҝГғпЈҝ вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҖ” вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠГ вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“ГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒГ·ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝH 62H
ГӨГҝГҠГҝГғвҖ” dwelling on; ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҝГҠЕёЛң sense-objects; В¬ГҲВўвҖҡвҖ” of the man; вҖҡXГ”UвҖ” attachment; ГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ to them;
В©UВ¬ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝ springs up; вҖҡXГ”UГҠГғЛң from attachment; вҖҡTГҠГҝГғпЈҝ is born; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҖ” desire; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠГғЛң from desire
(unfulfilled); вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“вҖ” anger; вҖўГҒГ·ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝ ensues.
The man dwelling on sense-objects develops attachment for them; from
attachment springs up desire, and from desire (unfulfilled) ensues anger.     (62)
Г«with the realization of the Supreme, their
relish for objects of the world disappears,Гӯ
the Lord has already pointed out the total
absence of attachment in them. In the case
of others, however, it is liable to appear in
a more or less pronounced form.
By constantly dwelling on objects of
enjoyment man develops an intensive form
of attachment for them. This awakens in his
mind a keen desire to obtain various forms
of enjoyment. This is what is meant by
attachment giving rise to desire. And when
some hindrance appears in the fulfilment of
this desire, he develops animosity towards
the cause of this hindrance, and this animosity
grows into anger. This is what is meant by
desire producing anger.
He who finds pleasure and attraction in
the enjoyments of the world, who has no
control over the mind and does not meditate
on God, lacking as he does love for and
dependence on God, will go on dwelling in
his mind on the objects of senses. Thus, ever
meditating on the objects of the senses,
he develops deep attachment for those
objects of enjoyment. Then he loses all self-
control, and his mind becomes restless.
All these ideas are included in the brief
statement of the Lord that Г«Г«the man dwelling
on sense-objects develops attachment for
them.ГӯГӯ
It is out of question for those who have
already realized God to develop attachment
by dwelling on sense-objects. By saying:
вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“ГҠjп¬ӮГҒГғ вҖҡГӘв—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUвҖ” вҖҡГӘв—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҠГ Sв—ҠГҺГҒГғГҒп¬ӮГ·Лқв—ҠвҖ”вҖ“
Sв—ҠГҺГҒГғГ·ЛқВўвүҘГҠГҠЕ’ЛңвҖҷГҲГҒhЕёГҠвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝ вҖҷГҲГҒhЕёГҠвүҘГҠГҠГ В¬ЛқГЎГҠвүҘГҝГҒГғH 63H
вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“ГҠГғЛң from anger; Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ arises; вҖҡГӘв—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUвҖ” delusion; вҖҡГӘв—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҠГғЛң from delusion; Sв—ҠГҺГҒГғГҒп¬ӮГ·Лқв—ҠвҖ”
confusion of memory; Sв—ҠГҺГҒГғГ·ЛқВўвүҘГҠГҠГғЛң confusion of memory; вҖҷГҲГҒhЕёГҠвүҘГҠвҖ” loss of reason; вҖҷГҲГҒhЕёГҠвүҘГҠГҠГғЛң
loss of reason; В¬ЛқГЎГҠвүҘГҝГҒГғ goes to complete ruin.

=== PAGE 126 ===

* Chapter II *
125
When anger is aroused in the heart of
a man, it deprives him of his power of
discrimination. He is unable to weigh the
pros and cons of a question. He will not
heed the consequences of whatever he does
in a fit of anger. Such is the nature of
delusion caused by anger.
When this delusion grows, oneГӯs memory
gets confused; man forgets in what relationship
he stands with those around him, what he
should do and what he should not, how he
had planned to do a thing, and what he is
actually doing now. He is thus unable to carry
out his premeditated plans as his memory of
the past is torn asunder. Such is the confusion
of memory produced by delusion.
When memory is confused in the above
manner, the mind finds itself unable to determine
what one should do and what one should not.
This is what is meant by loss of reason. When
a man is reduced to this state, it becomes easy
for him to give up the path of duty and to
follow the forbidden path. Such a man will
exhibit acrimony, harshness, pusillanimity,
violence, 
vindictiveness, 
wretchedness,
stupidity, silliness and many other evil traits in
his behaviour. He is thus soon degraded from
his previous state of existence and is thrown
after death into wombs of various sub-human
species or into the infernal regions. That is
how loss of reason brings about his complete
ruin.
From anger arises infatuation, from infatuation, confusion of memory, from
confusion of memory, loss of reason, and from loss of reason one goes to complete
ruin.                                                                   (63)
Detailing thus the process of fall of the individual who has no control over his mind
and senses, the Lord while commencing His reply to the fourth question of Arjuna, viz.,
how the YogвҲӮ of stable mind walks, first explains in the following two verses how a SГҘdhaka,
who has control over his mind and senses, moves among sense-objects, and what is his
reward.
вҒ„UГҠВӘmпЈҝВ·ГҒп¬ӮГҝГҲQГ’В§SГғГҲ 
ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҝГҠГҒЕёГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГ’pвҒ„UЕёЛңвҖ“
вҖўГҠГ в—Ҡп¬ӮвүҘГҝГ’ГҢп¬ӮЕ“пЈҝГҝГҠГ в—ҠГҠ 
В¬ЛқвҖҡГҠЕ’в—ҠГҒЕ“ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғH 64H
вҒ„UГҠВӘmпЈҝВ·ГҒп¬ӮГҝГҲQГ’В§вҖ” free from likes and dislikes; ГғГҲ but; ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҝГҠЕёЛң the (various) sense-objects;
ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГ’вҖ” through (his) senses; ГёвҒ„UЕёЛң enjoying; вҖўГҠГ в—Ҡп¬ӮвүҘГҝГ’вҖ” disciplined by the mind; ГҒп¬ӮЕ“пЈҝГҝГҠГ в—ҠГҠ the
self-controlled striver; В¬ЛқвҖҡГҠЕ’в—ҠЛң placidity (of mind); вҖўГҒЕ“ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғ attains.
But the self-controlled SГҘdhaka, while enjoying the various sense-objects through
his senses, which are disciplined and free from likes and dislikes, attains placidity
of mind.                                                               (64)
world. The word Г«TuГӯ in this verse has been
used to bring out this distinction.
The compound word Г«VidheyВөatmВөaГӯ refers
to the SГҘdhaka whose mind has been properly
disciplined and subdued. The senses of all
ordinary men of the world are wayward and
do not submit to their control. They are
always guided by likes and dislikes. Therefore,
The foregoing verses contained a
description of the process of fall of the
individual who had no control over his mind
and senses, and the present verse as well as
the next are devoted to a description of the
reverse process of spiritual ascent of the
SГҘdhaka who has control over the senses and
the mind and has no attachment for the

=== PAGE 127 ===

126
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
he who enjoys the objects of senses as a
slave of these senses, tries by fair or foul
means to accumulate such objects and enjoy
them, and entertaining likes or dislikes for
such enjoyments, feels either happy or
miserable. He does not experience any spiritual
joy. But the senses of the self-controlled
SГҘdhaka remain under his control, and are
free from likes and dislikes; he, therefore,
moves among sense-enjoyments obtained as
his due in accordance with his order in
society, stage in life and circumstances,
without being swayed by likes and dislikes.
All the activities of his senses, i.e., whatever
he sees and hears, whatever words he utters,
the diet he takes, his sleep and waking hours,
his moving to and from and the various
postures of his bodyГіall these are regulated
and disciplined and are carried on strictly in
conformity with the injuctions of the scriptures.
All his activities are free from likes and
dislikes, and such passions as lust, anger and
greed, etc. This is what is meant by his
enjoying the various sense-objects through
senses which are disciplined and free from
likes and dislikes.
In verse 59 it was stated that pending
realization of God, attachment for objects of
the world does not disappear; and the present
verse says that stability of mind can be
attained after acquiring placidity through
enjoyment of sense-objects divorced from
likes and dislikes. Therefore, it appears from
this verse that likes and dislikes can be
overcome even before God-realization. In
this way though the two statements appear
to be mutually contradictory, in reality there
is no conflict btetween them. Verse 59
speaks of total extinction of attachment and
aversion, while the present verse tells us the
process of eradicating attachment and aversion
by speaking of enjoying sensuous pleasures
through senses freed from likes and dislikes.
Verse 40 of Chapter III declares the senses,
mind and intellect as the seat of desire. This
proves that even though the senses may be
free from likes and dislikes, the latter may
lurk in a subtle form in the mind and intellect
of the SГҘdhaka. Verse 59 above, however,
shows that attachment and aversion are
wholly absent in a man who is stable of
mind, not that his senses alone are free from
likes and dislikes.
Preventing the contact of the senses
with their objects or external renunciation of
sense-objects, control of the senses, and
freeing the senses from likes and dislikesГі
all these are helpful in God-realization. But
of these three processes control of the senses
is more useful than, and superior to external
renunciation of objects, whereas freeing the
senses from likes and dislikes is even more
useful than and superior to sense-control.
Though external renunciation of sense-
objects too is no doubt helpful in God-
realization, nevertheless so long as the senses
are not disciplined, and likes and dislikes are
not overcome, mere external renunciation of
sense-enjoyments will neither enable one to
get rid of sense-objects completely nor to
achieve any tangible results, nor is it a fact
that sense-control is impossible of attainment
without external renunciation of sense-objects.
For control of the senses can be easily
accomplished through other practices like
offering adoration and service to God,
repetition of the Divine Name etc., and after
the attainment of sense-control, renunciation
of sense-enjoyments becomes easy. He whose
senses are disciplined, and under his control,
can renounce any object whenever he likes.
That is why sense-control is more important
than external renunciation of sense-enjoyments.
In this way control of the senses is also
helpful in God-realization; but without freeing
the senses from likes and dislikes mere

=== PAGE 128 ===

* Chapter II *
127
sense-control will not enable one to get rid
of sense-objects completely and thereby realize
God. Nor is it a fact that freedom of the
senses from likes and dislikes is impossible
without external renunciation of sense-objects
or control of the senses. By realizing the
evanescence of worldly enjoyments through
association with saints, self-study and reflection,
as well as by GodГӯs grace and practising
meditation and Japa etc., likes and dislikes
can be overcome; and he whose senses are
free from likes and dislikes will find it easy
to renounce external objects and discipline
his senses, as a matter of course. He who
is free from likes and dislikes with regard
to the objects of the senses, can realize God
even though moving among them. That is
why freedom of the senses from likes and
dislikes is more important than, and superior
to, both external renunciation of sense-
enjoyments and discipline of the senses.
Proper use of oneГӯs disciplined senses,
without being swayed by likes and dislikes,
renders the heart of the SГҘdhaka pure and
transparent; that is why it enjoys spiritual
bliss and an abiding peace and tranquillity
(XVIII.37); it is that joy and tranquillity
which is referred to here by the word
Г«PrasВөadamГӯ (placidity of mind). Purity of
heart, which is the direct cause of this
joy and tranquillity, and food offered to
God, which is conducive to purity of heart,
are also signified by the term Г«PrasВөada.Гӯ
But inasmuch as the next verse speaks
of a man who has attained this Г«PrasВөadaГӯ as
Г«PrasannacetasaВЁГӯ, possessed of a tranquil
mind, it appears but reasonable to interpret
the word Г«PrasВөadamГӯ occurring in this
verse as signifying placidity of mind or
spiritual joy.
contact with disagreeable objects, and may
be classified under three heads, viz., (1)
Г…dhyВөatmika or arising from bodily or mental
distemper; (2) Г…dhidaivika or arising from
outward natural causes; and (3) Г…dhibhautika,
caused by other animals and men. The word
Г«DuВЁkhВөanВөamГӯ in this verse refers to all these
forms of suffering. Loss of, or contact with
any object fails to bring sorrow to the
SГҘdhaka who has tasted of the SВөattvika
spiritual joy mentioned above. He ever remains
Sorrow is the direct outcome of sin.
When the sins of man are washed away
through the practice of Karmayoga, the heart
gets purified, and a pure heart alone can
experience the SВөattvika spiritual joy referred
to above. Hence it is but reasonable to say
that SВөattivika joy terminates all sorrow
(XVIII.36-37).
The various forms of suffering which
men of the world undergo are directly
traceable to loss of agreeable objects, or
В¬ЛқвҖҡГҠЕ’пЈҝ вҖҡп¬ӮВёЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖГҠГ”ЕёГҠВў вҖһUГҠГҒЕёвҒ„USГҝГҠпЈҝВ¬ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝвҖ“
В¬ЛқвҖҡГӣГҠГёпЈҝГғвҖҡГҠпЈҝ sГ”ГҠвүҘГҠГҲ вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” В¬ГҝВёп¬ӮГҒГғDГ”UГғпЈҝH 65H
В¬ЛқвҖҡГҠЕ’пЈҝ with the attainment of placidity (of mind); вҖҡп¬ӮВёЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛң of all sorrows; вҖһUГҠГҒЕёвҖ”
cessation; вҖўSГҝ his; В©UВ¬ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝ takes place; В¬ЛқвҖҡГӣГҠГёпЈҝГғвҖҡвҖ” of (such) a person of tranquil mind; ГҒвҖһU
indeed; вҖўГҠвүҘГҠГҲ soon; вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” the intellect; В¬ГҝВёп¬ӮГҒГғDГ”UГғпЈҝ (withdrawing itself from all sides) is firmly
established (in God).
With the attainment of such placidity of mind, all his sorrows come to an end;
and the intellect of such a person of tranquil mind, soon withdrawing itself from
all sides, becomes firmly established in God.                                (65)

=== PAGE 129 ===

128
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
steeped in joy and bliss. This is what is
meant by the cessation of all sorrows.
The second half of the verse shows that
when the heart of the SГҘdhaka becomes
pure, and he succeeds in attaining the joy
of the spirit, his mind will not give up that
joy and tranquillity even for a moment. All
the distractions of his mind, therefore,
disappear, and his intellect soon gets firmly
established in God. Nothing remains in his
consciousness except God, the embodiment
of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss.
Although the question of Arjuna did not
relate to the SГҘdhaka, he was himself a SГҘdhaka
in the spiritual path, whom the Lord was
seeking to elevate to the state of a perfect YogвҲӮ.
Therefore, in order to give him a clear idea
of how a YogвҲӮ of stable mind conducts himself,
the Lord has first spoken of the way in which
a SГҘdhaka conducts himself, and finally
concludes the subject in verse 71, describing
the ways of conduct of the YogвҲӮ who has
attained perfection. A complete answer to
ArjunaГӯs question is contained in the concluding
verse, while these verses serve as an
introduction to the same. Therefore, it is but
reasonable to hold that the answer to ArjunaГӯs
fourth question commences from this verse.
enjoyment the mind of such a man is ever
distracted; that is why he cannot rightly
determine his duty, and establish his intellect
in God. Such an undisciplined man, who is
a slave of his mind and senses, not only lacks
the Г«determinate reasonГӯ; what is worse, he
cannot even think of God. To say nothing
of establishing his mind and intellect in God,
his strong attachment for worldly objects
does not allow him even to think of God;
his mind remains constantly engrossed in
The word Г«AyuktasyaГӯ in the present
verse refers to the sensually-minded man
lacking in judgment and discrimination, who
has no control over his mind and senses, and
who is strongly attached to enjoyment of the
senses; while Г«BuddhiГӯ (determinate intellect)
signifies the determinate and one-pointed
intellect referred to in verse 41. By saying
that the worldly man mentioned above, lacks
this intellect, the Lord indicates that due to
attachment and desire for various forms of
Having described thus how the SГҘdhaka who, having subdued the mind and the senses,
moves among sense-objects without attachment attains joy, tranquillity and the stable mind
of a perfect YogвҲӮ, the Lord proceeds in the following two verses to show the other side
of the picture, viz., how the worldly man whose mind and senses are uncontrolled remains
debarred from happiness and tranquillity, and the process how his intellect gets distracted
through association with worldly objects.
ЕёГҠГҒSГғ вҖҷГҲГҒhвҒ„UГҝГҲQВ§SГҝ Её ГёГҠГҝГҲQВ§SГҝ Г·ГҠп¬ӮЕёГҠвҖ“
Её ГёГҠГ·ГҠп¬ӮГҝГғвҖ” вүҘГҠГҠГҒГЈГғвҒ„UвүҘГҠГҠГЈГғSГҝ вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГғвҖ” вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛңH 66H
Её вҖўГҒSГғ (there) is not; вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” (determinate) reason; вҖўГҝГҲQВ§SГҝ of him who has not been able
to control his mind; Её Гё nor (there is); вҖўГҝГҲQВ§SГҝ of him who has not controlled his mind; Г·ГҠп¬ӮЕёГҠ
thought (of God); Её Гё nor again; вҖўГ·ГҠп¬ӮГҝГғвҖ” of the unthinking man; вүҘГҠГҠГҒГЈГғвҖ” peace; вҖўвүҘГҠГҠГЈГғSГҝ of
one lacking peace of mind; вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГғвҖ” how (can there be); вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛң happiness.
He who has not controlled his mind and senses can have no determinate intellect
nor contemplation. Without contemplation he can have no peace; and how can there
be happiness for one lacking peace of mind?
(66)

=== PAGE 130 ===

* Chapter II *
129
thoughts of the world and its enjoyments.
By saying that the man lacking self-
control can have no peace of mind, it is
intended to show that inasmuch as he does
not think of God, the ocean of supreme bliss
and tranquillity, the mind of the worldly man
remains ever distracted, and his heart remains
constantly burning and agitated under the
impulse of love and hatred, lust and anger,
greed and jealousy, etc. Therefore, his mind
knows no peace. And without peace of
mind, there can be no happiness. That is to
say, unless the mind is tranquil, true happiness
cannot make its appearance. The happiness
which is erroneously imagined to be derived
from contact between the senses and their
objects, or from sleep, sloth and carelessness
is no happiness in the real sense of the term.
Being conducive to sorrow, such a happiness
is nothing but sorrow.
capsize and sink. But if an expert sailor can
manipulate the sail so as to make the wind
favourable to him, the boat can no longer
be driven away from its course; on the
contrary, the wind will help it to reach its
goal. Similarly, if a man whose mind and
senses are not disciplined endeavours to fix
his intellect on God, his senses dragging the
mind along with them may react on his
intellect in two ways. Drawing it away from
God, they may employ it in devising means
of acquiring various objects of enjoyment, or
they may lead it to sinful pursuits and bring
about its degradation. But they fail to divert
the intellect of the man whose mind and
senses are disciplined; on the other hand,
they help the intellect to reach its destined
goal, viz., God. Verses 64 and 65 have
argued the same thing that has been
propounded here.
The verse speaks of any one sense to
The preceding verse stated that the man
who lacked self-control could neither have
determinate reason, nor thought of God, nor
again peace of mind, nor happiness. In order
to make this point clearer, the present verse
gives the reasons for this. This is brought
out by the word Г«HiГӯ, which is indicative of
cause.
In the simile employed in this verse,
Buddhi or the faculty of discrimination has
been compared to a boat; the sense to which
the mind is joined has been likened to the
wind; the world has been compared to the
ocean and the various objects of the senses,
viz., sound, touch, colour, taste and smell,
are compared to the waters of the ocean. A
strong wind may react on a boat proceeding
towards its destination in two ways. The boat
may be diverted from its proper course and
be tossed about in the high seas, with the
huge breakers washing its deck, or it may
ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГЎГҠГҠВў ГҒвҖһU ГёвҒ„UГғГҠВў ГҝГЈв—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҳЕёГҲГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГӢГҝГғпЈҝвҖ“
ГғЕ’SГҝ вҖһUвҒ„UГҒГғ В¬ЛқГҙГҠГҠВў п¬ӮГҠГҝГҲЕёГҠВёп¬ӮГҒв—Ҡп¬ӮГҠГӘГ·ГҒвҖҡH 67H
ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛң of the senses; ГҒвҖһU because; ГёвҒ„UГғГҠв—ҠЛң moving; ГҝГғЛң to which; в—ҠЕёвҖ” the mind; вҖўЕёГҲ
attached;  ГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГӢГҝГғпЈҝ remains; ГғГғЛң that sense (alone); вҖўSГҝ of him (the man lacking self-control);
вҖһUвҒ„UГҒГғ takes away; В¬ЛқГҙГҠГҠв—ҠЛң discrimination; п¬ӮГҠГҝГҲвҖ” the wind; ЕёГҠп¬Ӯв—ҠЛң a boat; Гҹп¬Ӯ as; вҖўГӘГ·ГҒвҖҡ upon the
waters.
As the wind carries away a boat upon the waters, even so, of the senses
moving among sense-objects, the one to which the mind is attached takes away his
discrimination.                                                           (67)

=== PAGE 131 ===

130
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
which the mind is joined vitiating the judgment
of an individual, and not the combination of
all the senses. This is intended to bring out
the powerful nature of the senses. It means
that there is nothing to be wondered at if
all the senses acting together succeed in
diverting the intellect of an individual, when
even one sense to which the mind is joined
is quite sufficient to entrap it in the snare
of sense-enjoyments and divert it from its
proper course. We come across typical instances
of a single sense bringing about the destruction
of a being. The deer meets its death for lack
of control over the sense of hearing; the
elephant meets its doom through lack of
control over the sense of touch, the moth
perishes through lack of conrol over sight,
the fish loses its life through lack of control
over taste, and the bee dies for lack of
control over smell. Even so, the intellect of
man can be diverted from its course by a
single sense to which the mind lends its
support.
The sixth case-ending in the word
Г«IndriyВөaЖ’ВөamГӯ has been used to denote selection
out of a lot (вҖўп¬ӮЕ“ГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠ). Therefore, the relative
pronoun Г«YatГӯ (which) should be taken to
refer to that one among the senses, to which
the mind is joined. And since the two
pronouns Г«YatГӯ and Г«TatГӯ (that) are correlated,
the word Г«TatГӯ also should be taken to refer
to the sense which is singled out. In the
phrase Г«Anu VidhвҲӮyateГӯ, Г«AnuГӯ is not a
prefix, but an indeclinable belonging to the
class known as Г«KarmapravacanвҲӮyasГӯГӯ and
serving the purpose of a preposition; hence
the second case-ending has been used with
reference to the relative pronoun Г«YatГӯ, and
the verb Г«VidhвҲӮyateГӯ being of an active-cum-
passive form, its very object Г«ManaВЁГӯ (mind)
has been used as a subject in the nominative
case. Again, the next verse is introduced
with the word Г«TasmВөatГӯ (therefore) and speaks
of him whose senses are disciplined as
possessed of a stable mind; for this reason
also it appears but reasonable to interpret
the pronouns Г«YatГӯ and Г«TatГӯ as referring
to the one Г«senseГӯ and not to the word
Г«ManaВЁГӯ.
It will not be out of place to point out
in this connection that without being joined
by the mind, a sense by itself has not the
power to carry away the intellect; but the
mind by itself, without the help of any sense,
is capable of dragging the intellect and
warping its judgment.
Showing thus how the intellect of a worldly-minded man who has no control over
his senses and mind is diverted, the Lord proceeds in the following verse to emphasize
again the indispensability of sense-control for attaining stability of mind, and describes
the state of the YogвҲӮ who is possessed of a stable mind.
ГғSв—ҠГҠlSГҝ в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ ГҒЕёВӘГҺвҖһUГӢГғГҠГҒЕё вҖҡп¬ӮВёвүҘГҠвҖ”вҖ“
ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГЎГҠГӢГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГ•пЈҝВёГЁГҝSГғSГҝ В¬ЛқГҙГҠГҠ В¬ЛқГҒГғГҒDГ”UГғГҠH 68H
ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛң therefore; ГҝSГҝ whose; в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ O mighty-armed Arjuna; ГҒЕёВӘГҺвҖһUГӢГғГҠГҒЕё restrained; вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҖЎГҠвҖ”
completely; ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠ senses; ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГ•пЈҝВёГЁГҝвҖ” from (the various) sense-objects; ГғSГҝ his; В¬ЛқГҙГҠГҠ mind;
В¬ЛқГҒГғГҒDГ”UГғГҠ (is) stable.
Therefore, Arjuna, he, whose senses are completely restrained from their objects,
is said to have a stable mind.                                              (68)

=== PAGE 132 ===

* Chapter II *
131
The preceding verse stated that the
indisciplined senses of that worldly-minded
man who lacks self-control, entrapping
his mind in the snare of sense-enjoyments,
divert his intellect and do not allow it to
remain steadfast and firm. The word Г«TasmВөatГӯ
has been used at the beginning of this verse
to show that the mind and senses, therefore,
must need be controlled.
He who possesses long, stout and
powerful arms is called a Г«MahВөabВөahuГӯ. This
form of address is indicative of heroic qualities
in the object of address. By using the word
with reference to Arjuna, the Lord intended
to point out to him that he was a foremost
hero and a great fighter, therefore it should
not be difficult for him to subdue his mind
and senses and tame them.
It is the nature of senses like the sense
of hearing etc., to run after their corresponding
objects, viz., sound, touch, taste, sight and
smell, without any hitch. Because the embodied
soul has gone on uninterruptedly enjoying the
objects of senses through these senses from
time without beginning, the senses have
developed a natural attraction for them. To
stop once for all this natural inclination of the
senses to run after sense-objects, to change
their character of hankering after sense-
enjoyments, to eradicate their attachment for
sense-objects, and to rob them of their power
to distract the mind and the intellectГіthis is
what is meant by restraining them completely
from their objects. When the man who has
thus disciplined his senses suspends their
activities during meditation, those senses during
that state of suspension can neither perceive
their corresponding objects, nor produce any
distraction in the mind by their subtle impulses.
They get merged in the mind, as it were, for
the time being, and when on the conclusion
of meditation the meditator re-awakens to
consciousness of the external world and resumes
the activities of his senses, they perform their
function regularly by perceiving their
corresponding objects without feeling the least
attachment for them. They can no longer drag
the mind with them; on the other hand, they
will follow the lead of the mind itself in every
matter. When for the guidance of the world
the YogвҲӮ of stable mind considers it advisable
to enjoy a particular sense-object approved of
by the scriptures, and with that end in view
allows a particular sense to function for a
certain period of time, that sense alone will
enjoy that object and no other for that definite
period; no other sense can obtrude itself
against his will and freely enjoy any other
object. Thus acquiring complete mastery over
the senses, and making them subservient by
fully depriving them of their freedom of action
is what is meant by complete restraint of the
senses from their objects.
Although the text of the second half of
verse 58 is identical with that of the second
half of this verse, they have been interpreted
in a slightly different way because of the
difference in the first halves of the two verses.
In verse 58, while replying to ArjunaГӯs third
question as to how the YogвҲӮ of stable mind
sits, the Lord described the inactive state of
the God-realized soul and employed the
illustration of the drawing in of limbs by the
tortoise to explain how he withdraws his senses
from sense-objects. Though the senses can
be externally withdrawn from the sense-objects
even by an ordinary worldly-minded man,
the withdrawal referred to there is a special
type of withdrawal, inasmuch as it constitutes
characteristic of the YogвҲӮ of stable mind.
Control of the mind and senses which are
free from attachment is also covered by this
withdrawal. In the present verse, however,
the Lord is describing the natural state of the
stable-minded YogвҲӮ; hence the word used
here with reference to the senses is Г«NigГҰhвҲӮtВөaniГӯ
meaning that the senses are restrained or
controlled. Such a complete restraint of the

=== PAGE 133 ===

132
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
senses is possible only when they have no
attachment for sense-enjoyments. The prefix
Г«NiГӯ and the adverb Г«SarvaвҖ№aВЁГӯ also support
this interpretation. Thus, though there is no
difference between the actual spiritual level
of the persons referred to in the two verses,
the former of the two verses deals with the
Г«inactiveГӯ state of the stable-minded YogвҲӮ,
while the latter shows his natural level of
existence; that is the only difference.
In conclusion, the verse points out that
he alone who has in the above manner
subdued all his senses together with the mind
possesses a stable mind; he whose mind and
senses are not restrained and controlled will
not be able to steady his mind and intellect.
enlightened. Therefore, the word Г«nightГӯ in
this verse should not be taken in its literal
sense to mean the dark period following
sunset. It has been used in a metaphorical
sense and conveys the idea of darkness resulting
from obstruction of vision. Just as the owl
due to some thing inherent in its vision sees
only darkness even when the day is fully
bright, even so, the man without discrimination
cannot see the self-luminous, eternally conscious
and supremely blissful God owing to his
vision of discrimination and knowledge being
obstructed by the veil of ignorance hanging
from time without beginning on his mindГӯs
The word Г«SaвүҲyamвҲӮГӯ in this verse refers
to the YogвҲӮ, who having controlled the mind
and senses, has realized God, and who has
been referred to in this chapter as the YogвҲӮ
possessed of a stable mind. This is borne out
by the fact that in the second half of the verse
he has been spoken of as Г«PaвҖ№yataВЁГӯ, which
means one who is illumined, a seer.
The experiences of the ignorant man of
the world and the man of Knwoledge are as
widely divergent as night and day; in order
to bring out this truth the metaphor of the
night has been employed in this verse to
describe the states of the ignorant and the
Thus, having shown, on the one hand, the harm accruing from indulgence of the
mind and senses, and on the other, the advantages following from the practice of their
restraint, and having emphasized the fact that in order to attain the state of the stable-
minded YogвҲӮ it is indispensable to practise restraint of the senses and mind, overcoming
likes and dislikes, the Lord described the state of such a YogвҲӮ. The Lord now proceeds
to describe the natural states of the ordinary worldly-minded man and the YogвҲӮ of stable
mind who has realized God through control of his mind and senses, bringing out their
difference by means of the illustration of day and night.
ГҝГҠ ГҒЕёвүҘГҠГҠ вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠВў ГғSГҝГҠВў ВЎГҠВӘГҢГғ вҖҡВўГҝв—ҠГӢвҖ“
ГҝSГҝГҠВў ВЎГҠВӘЛқГҒГғ Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё вҖҡГҠ ГҒЕёвүҘГҠГҠ В¬вүҘГҝГғГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҲЕёпЈҝвҖ”H 69H
ГҝГҠ (that) which; ГҒЕёвүҘГҠГҠ (is) night; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛң to all beings; ГғSГҝГҠв—ҠЛң in that state (of Divine
Knowledge and supreme Bliss); ВЎГҠВӘГҢГғ keeps awake; вҖҡВўГҝв—ҠГӢ the God-realized YogвҲӮ;
ГҝSГҝГҠв—ҠЛң in which; ВЎГҠВӘЛқГҒГғ keep awake; Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё (all) beings; вҖҡГҠ that (state of transient worldly
happiness); ГҒЕёвҖЎГҠГҠ night; В¬вүҘГҝГғвҖ” в—ҠГҲЕёпЈҝвҖ” to the truth knowing seer.
That which is night to all beings, in that state (of Divine Knowledge and supreme
Bliss) the God-realized YogвҲӮ keeps awake. And that (the ever-changing, transient
worldly happiness) in which all beings keep awake is night to the seer.     (69)

=== PAGE 134 ===

* Chapter II *
133
eye. The direct experience of supreme
tranquillity and eternal bliss resulting from
the dawning of the sun of God-realization,
though luminous as the bright day, is as night
to men of ignorance, who have no knowledge
of the virtues, glory, mystery and truth of
God; for they have shut their eyes to it, and
have no idea of what that experience of
supreme Bliss is like. It is this state of God-
realization that is referred to as Г«nightГӯ in the
first half of the verse, and which though
Г«nightГӯ to all beings, is like daylight to the
God-realized YogвҲӮ. The fact that the stable-
minded YogвҲӮ, having realized the true nature
of God, constantly dwells in Him has been
metaphorically described here as his keeping
awake in that state which appears as Г«nightГӯ
to all beings.
Though every enjoyment of this world
and the next is perishable, momentary, transient
and full of suffering, yet enveloped as he is
by the darkness of ignorance from time
without beginning, the worldly-minded man
regards it as everlasting, and full of joy. To
him, there is no joy greater than the enjoyment
of worldly pleasures. Thus attached to sense-
enjoyments, the generality of men are found
constantly striving to obtain objects of enjoyment
and find pleasure in obtaining them. This is
what is meant by all beings keeping awake
in them. The joy derived from contact of the
senses with their objects, or from carelessness,
sloth and slumber, being enveloped in the
darkness of ignorance, is, in reality, dark as
night. Nevertheless ignorant beings keep
awake in it, viewing it as day-light, even as
a sleeping man while dreaming feels in his
dream that he is awake. But even as a man
awakened from the dream state ceases to
have any connection with the dream world,
the God-realized man of wisdom is conscious
of nothing else than God, who is the
embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss.
In place of this visible world he sees only
its foundation or substratum, viz., God.
Therefore, all enjoyments of the world and
the joy derived from such enjoyments are as
night to him.
Showing thus, through the metaphor of the night, the difference between the man
of wisdom and the unenlightened ignorant person, the Lord now employs the simile of
the ocean in order to show that the man of Knowledge attains supreme peace, whereas
the ignorant man, seeking worldly enjoyments, does not.
вҖўГҠВ¬ГҚГҝВёв—ҠГҠГЎГҠв—ҠГёвҲӮUВ¬ЛқГҒГғDГ”ВўU вҖҡв—ҠГҲВәЛқв—ҠГҠВ¬вҖ” В¬ЛқГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҒГЈГғ ГҝmГғЛңвҖ“
ГғmГ вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠ ГҝВў В¬ЛқГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҒГЈГғ вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё вҖҡ вүҘГҠГҠГҒГЈГғв—ҠГҠВ¬AГҠпЈҝГҒГғ Её вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГӢH 70H
вҖўГҠВ¬ГҚГҝВёв—ҠГҠГЎГҠв—ҠЛң brimming on all sides; вҖўГёвҲӮUВ¬ЛқГҒГғDГ”Uв—ҠЛң undisturbed (from its position); вҖҡв—ҠГҲВәЛқв—ҠЛң the
ocean; вҖўГҠВ¬вҖ” the waters (of different rivers); В¬ЛқГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҒГЈГғ enter; ГҝmГғЛң as; ГғmГғЛң likewise; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠвҖ”
enjoyments; Гҝв—ҠЛң (in) whom; В¬ЛқГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҒГЈГғ merge themselves; вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё all; вҖҡвҖ” he; вүҘГҠГҠГҒГЈГғв—ҠЛң peace; вҖўГҠВ¬AГҠпЈҝГҒГғ
attains; Её (does) not; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГӢ he who hankers after (such) enjoyments.
As the waters of different rivers enter the ocean, which, though full on all sides,
remains undisturbed; likewise, he in whom all enjoyments merge themselves without
causing disturbance attains peace; not he who hankers after such enjoyments.                        (70)
and yet it may be possible by means of a
simile to give at least a partial idea of that
transcendent state. Thus the simile of the
The real state of the God-realized soul
cannot be fully described by comparing it
with anything belonging to this material world;

=== PAGE 135 ===

134
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
ocean employed in this verse may be understood
to mean that just as the ocean is full of
unfathomable water, even so the stable minded
God-realized YogвҲӮ is full of infinite joy. Just
as the ocean requires no water, even so the
man of knowledge requires no worldly
enjoyment; he is fully satiated. Just as the sea
is immovable and knows no spate even when
tossed by a tornado or gale and even though
all the rivers discharge their waters into it,
even so the YogвҲӮ who has established himself
in union with God remains immovable and
unshaken under all circumstances. The greatest
tragedy of life or the greatest worldly loss, on
the one hand, and the greatest cause of worldly
joy or the removal of the greatest cause of
worldly sorrow, on the other, will not make
the least difference in his mental equilibrium.
Established in God, the embodiment of Truth,
Knowledge and Bliss, he remains ever
immovable in one state of mental existence,
untouched by any modification whatsoever.
The word Г«KВөamВөaВЁ, in this verse does
not mean desires, but objects of desire,
according to the derivation Г«вҲ‘В§ГҠГӘГҝГЈГғпЈҝ ГҹГҒГғ вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠвҖ”Гӯ.
Г«Sarve KВөamВөaВЁГӯ, therefore, means Г«all objects
of enjoymentГӯ. Since the desires of a stable-
minded YogвҲӮ have altogether ceased, it will
be quite meaningless to say that desires enter
into such a YogвҲӮ. Hence the interpretation
of the word Г«KВөamВөaВЁГӯ as Г«desiresГӯ will be
wholly unwarranted. Even though the ocean
requires no water, countless streams of water
continue to enter it; yet they fail to occasion
any flood or spate in the ocean, as sudden
accession of water does in rivers and lakes.
The ocean neither leaves its position nor
crosses its boundary line; on the other hand,
all the water that flows into it gets absorbed
in it without producing any change in it.
Even so, though the God-realized YogвҲӮ has
not the least use for any object of worldly
enjoyment, various forms of worldly enjoyment
continue to flow to him under the impulse
of his PrВөarabdha or destiny. In other words,
according to his PrВөarabdha, his mind, intellect
and senses continue to come in contact with
various 
objects, 
both 
agreeable 
and
disagreeable; yet they fail to produce any
unhealthy reaction on his mind in the shape
of joy or grief, attraction or repulsion, lust
or anger, greed or infatuation, fear or anxiety,
or shake him from his immovable state or
make him transgress the bounds of the
scriptures. That is to say, the contact with
those objects does not cause the least
disturbance in his mental equilibrium, and
without creating any agitation in his mind,
they lose their identity in his blissful state
of existence. This is what is meant by their
merging into the God-realized YogвҲӮ, even as
the waters of the rivers merge into the ocean;
and the interpretation of Г«KВөamВөaВЁГӯ as Г«objects
of enjoymentГӯ fits in with this explanation.
The statement that Г«Г«Such a YogвҲӮ alone
attains peace, and not he who hankers after
enjoymentsГӯГӯ, is intended to show that the
YogвҲӮ whose desires are thus set at rest, who
has not the least use for any object of
enjoyment, to whom objects of enjoyment
come under the impulse of PrВөarabdha, and
lose their identity, and who does not himself
entertain any desire for enjoyment, he alone
attains supreme peace; whereas the man who
craves for enjoyments never attains peace.
For the mind of the latter ever remains
distracted by cravings of various kinds. And
where there is distraction there can be no
peace. Worry, heart-burning and sorrow have
their permanent habitation there.
The reply to the third question of Arjuna
as to how the stable-minded YogвҲӮ sits was
commenced by the Lord in verse 58 and
concluded in verse 61, as is indicated by the
use of the word Г«Г…sвҲӮtaГӯ (sits) in that latter
verse. Thereafter, in verses 62 and 63 the

=== PAGE 136 ===

* Chapter II *
135
Lord incidentally pointed out how indulgence
in the thoughts of worldly enjoyments brings
about oneГӯs downfall by developing attachment
for them and then commenced His reply to the
fourth question of Arjuna from verse 64. The
use of the word Г«CaranГӯ used in that verse
clearly brings out this departure in the line of
thought. In the course of this reply, the simile
of the boat upon the waters being carried
away by the wind has been employed in verse
67 to show how even one of the wandering
senses of the worldly-minded man takes away
his discrimination. The word Г«CaratВөamГӯ has
been used in that verse as well.
Besides, the present verse says that all
enjoyments enter him and merge themselves
in him. In the inactive state, all the doors through
which the enjoyments enter the mind of the
YogвҲӮ remain closed, inasmuch as his senses
are devoid of contact with sense-objects in that
state. But in the state to which the present verse
refers, the senses continue to function; that is
why objects of enjoyment can enter him. In
this state he is unshakably established in God,
but not Г«inactiveГӯ so far as the world is
concerned. Therefore, it is but reasonable to
hold that the present verse contains the LordГӯs
reply to the fourth question of Arjuna.
The fourth question of Arjuna, viz., how the stable-minded YogвҲӮ walks, related to
the God-realized saint alone; but inasmuch as it had direct relation with conduct, the
Lord pointed out in reply to that question in verses 64 to 70 the conduct which speedily
enables a man to attain stability of mind, as well as the conduct which shuts out the
possibility of attaining that state, and also the actual state of the man who has attained
such stability. The next verse contains a direct reply to the fourth question of Arjuna and
describes the mode of conduct of the stable-minded YogвҲӮ.
ГҒп¬ӮвҖһUГҠГҝ вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠГЈГҝвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГЈГҠЛңГ” В¬ГҲв—ҠГҠВўpвҒ„UГҒГғ ГҒЕёвҖ”SВ¬ГҺвҖһUвҖ”вҖ“
ГҒЕёв—ҠВёв—ҠГҠпЈҝ ГҒЕёвҒ„UвҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„UвҖ” вҖҡ вүҘГҠГҠГҒГЈГғв—ҠГҒЕ“ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғH 71H
ГҒп¬ӮвҖһUГҠГҝ giving up; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠЕёЛң desires; ГҝвҖ” who; вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёЕёЛң all; В¬ГҲв—ҠГҠЕёЛң the man; ГёвҒ„UГҒГғ moves; ГҒЕёвҖ”SВ¬ГҺвҖһUвҖ”
free from yearning; ГҒЕёв—ҠВёв—ҠвҖ” free from the feeling of Г«mineГӯ; ГҒЕёвҒ„UвҖһVГ”UГҠвҒ„UвҖ” free from egoism; вҖҡвҖ”
he; вүҘГҠГҠГҒГЈГғв—ҠЛң peace; вҖўГҒЕ“ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғ attains.
He who has given up all desires, and moves free from attachment, egoism and
thirst for enjoyment attains peace.                                        (71)
his self and cannot conceive of his existence
apart from the body; and that is why he feels
happy or miserable with the happiness or
otherwise of the body. This form of
identification with the body is known as
Г«AhaвҲҶkВөaraГӯ or egoism. And he who has no
such identification with the body is called
Г«NirahaвҲҶkВөaraВЁГӯ.
Again, the worldly-minded, ignorant
man entertains the feeling of Г«mineГӯ with
regard to his gross body, including the mind,
The word Г«KВөamВөanГӯ taken with the
adjective Г«SarvВөanГӯ, means the cravings of all
kinds for any form of enjoyment of this
world and the next; and to rid oneself
completely once for all of all such cravings
is what is meant by Г«giving up all desiresГӯ,
in this verse.
The ordinary, ignorant man of the world
identifies himself with the gross body, in
which are included the mind, intellect and
senses. That is why he regards the body as

=== PAGE 137 ===

136
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
intellect and the senses, and in respect of all
beings and things related to the body, viz.,
wife, progeny, brothers, relations and friends,
and house, property and power, etc. He has
the same feeling in respect of all the activities
of the body, and the enjoyments that are
derived as a reward for such activities. He
regards all these as his own. Such a feeling
of Г«mineГӯ is known by the term Г«MamatВөaГӯ,
or attachment. The word Г«NirmamaВЁГӯ,
therefore, means one who has no such
feeling of Г«mineГӯ in respect of anything
whatsoever or calls nothing as his own.
The feeling of want or indispensability
in respect of something which is agreeable
and which one does not have is known as
Г«SpГҰhВөaГӯ, or yearning for the same. The word
Г«NiВЁspГҰhaВЁГӯ, therefore, means one who has
no such want or yearning, Г«SpГҰhВөaГӯ is a
subtler form of desire, hence separate mention
has been made of its renunciation, as apart
from the renunciation of desires which are
referred to by the word Г«KВөamВөan.Гӯ
He who moves among the objects of
senses, that is to say, he who carries on all
the activities of the body, mind and senses,
which are approved of by the scriptures,
such as seeing and hearing, taking of food,
sleeping and waking etc., according to oneГӯs
order in society, stage in life, nature and
circumstances, just for the sake of guidance
of the world and remaining free from egoism,
attachment and yearning is said to be Г«moving
in the world free from egoism, attachment
and thirst for enjoyment and renouncing all
desiresГӯ.
Г«SpГҰhВөaГӯ being an offspring of attachment,
there can be no objection to the word
Г«NiВЁspГҰhaГӯ being interpreted as free from
attachment; but the real meaning of the word
Г«SpГҰhВөaГӯ is a subtle form of desire, and not
attachment. Therefore, instead of interpreting
the word Г«NiВЁspГҰhaГӯ as free from attachment,
it is better and more appropriate to construe
it as free from thirst or yearning.
The verse speaks of the perfect soul
who has attained full peace of mind. That
is why even after showing him as desireless
and free from yearning, two more qualifications
have been added as essential marks of his
character, viz., absence of the sense of
possession and freedom from egoism. For,
generally speaking, even on attaining
desirelessness and freedom from yearning if
one continues to have a sense of possession
and the feeling of egotism, he cannot be
called a perfect soul. And he too is not
perfect, who though desireless, free from
yearning and devoid of the sense of possession,
is not yet free from egoism. With the
disappearance of egoism, all other weaknesses
automatically disappear. So long as egoism
persists, desire, yearning and the sense of
possession can remain lurking in the mind
in some form or other. And so long as there
is the least trace of desire, yearning and the
sense of possession lurking somewhere in
the mind, full tranquillity cannot be had. The
phrase Г«вҖәВөantiвүҲ AdhigacchatiГӯ also shows
that full tranquillity is referred to here. Such
a consummate and eternal peace can never
be attained so long as the sense of possession
and egoism persist. Hence it was but reasonable
to add absence of the sense of possession
and freedom from egoism as distinctive
marks of the perfect soul besides desirelessness
and freedom from yearning.
It is no doubt true that when the ego
is eliminated, desire, yearning and sense of
possession too disappear; for ego is the root
of all. Removal of the cause will automatically
lead to the elimination of the effects. Thus
the mention of Г«egolessnessГӯ was enough to
characterize the perfect soul. Nevertheless, in
order to bring home to ArjunaГӯs mind a very
clear idea of what a perfect soul is like, the

=== PAGE 138 ===

* Chapter II *
137
mention of the other three characteristics of
desirelessness, freedom from yearning, and
absence of the sense of possession is also
quite justifiable.
Describing in this verse how a God-
realized soul moves in the world, the Lord
has replied to the fourth question of Arjuna
relating to the perfect YogвҲӮ of stable mind.
By declaring at the end of the verse that such
a YogвҲӮ attains peace, the Lord has shown
that he alone who moves among the sense-
objects in this way is the perfect soul who
has realized God, the embodiment of supreme
peace.
what is his duty, and what he is actually
doing. This ignorance is known as Г«MohaГӯ or
infatuation and the JвҲӮva has been labouring
under this delusion from time without beginning,
and it is due to this that he is moving in this
whirligig of worldly existence. Overcoming
all egotism, sense of possession, attachment
and desire when man at last succeeds in
reaching the above state of God-realization,
this delusion which has existed from time
without beginning gets eradicated and will
not appear again. This is what is meant by
saying that Г«Г«having reached this state the
YogвҲӮ overcomes delusion.ГӯГӯ
He who succeeds in attaining this state
during his life-time is the best flower of
humanity. He who enjoys this Brahmic Bliss
while living is liberated in this very life and
is termed as a JвҲӮvanmukta. But even he who
succeeds at the last moment of his life either
suddenly or as a reward of his SВөadhanВөa in
fixing his mind unshakably on Brahma or
The state of stable existence in God
realized soul has been referred to in this
verse as Г«BrВөahmвҲӮ SthitiГӯ. The adjective Г«EВ¶ВөaГӯ
points to that which has formed the subject
of discussion in the foregoing verses. The
word Г«SthitiГӯ preceded by the adjectives
Г«EВ¶ВөaГӯ and Г«BrВөahmвҲӮГӯ, therefore, refers to the
state of the God-realized saint of stable mind,
the description of which is found interspersed
in all the verses from verse 55 to the end
of the chapter. And to attain this state is to
remain constantly and unshakably absorbed
in God,Гіthe embodiment of Truth, Knowledge
and Bliss,Гіabsolutely free from egosim, the
sense of possession, attachment, yearning
and desire, and altogether undisturbed by
favourable or unfavourable circumstances.
The JвҲӮva merged in ignorance does not
know what is Brahma (the Absolute), who is
God, what is the nature of this world, what
is MВөayВөa, what is the relation obtaining between
all these, who is he, wherefrom he has come,
Having thus answered all the four questions of Arjuna, the Lord now concludes the
chapter by pointing out the magnitude of the state of a God-realized soul:
вҲһВ·ГҠ вҖҷЛқГҠrГҠГ”ГӢ ГҒSГ•ГҒГғвҖ” В¬ГҠГ•Вё ЕёГ’ЕёГҠВў В¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝ ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҲsГ”ГҒГғвҖ“
ГҒSГ•Г п¬ӮГҠSГҝГҠв—ҠГЈГғвҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝUЛҳГҒВ¬ 
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҠВёГЎГҠв—ҠГҺГ«ВҝUГҒГғH 72H
вҲһВ·ГҠ such; вҖҷЛқГҠrГҠГ”ГӢ ГҒSГ•ГҒГғвҖ” (is) the state of the God-realized soul; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthВөa, Arjuna;
Её not; вҲһЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” this (state); В¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝ having reached; ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҲsГ”ГҒГғ (he) give way to infatuation; ГҒSГ•Г п¬ӮГҠ
being established; вҖўSГҝГҠв—ҠЛңГ” in this (state); вҖўГЈГғвҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝU at the last moment, at the moment of death;
вҖўГҒВ¬ even; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҠВёГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Brahmic Bliss; ВҙВ§Г«ВҝUГҒГғ attains.
Arjuna, such is the state of the God-realized soul; having reached this state,
he overcomes delusion. And established in this state, even at the last moment, he
attains Brahmic Bliss.                                                          (72)

=== PAGE 139 ===

138
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
God alone, free from egoism, the sense of
possession, attachment, yearning and desire,
is able to enjoy the Bliss of Brahmic existence.
The state of equanimity reached even
at the time of departure from this world
brings about the SГҘdhakaГӯs deliverance that
very moment. But even if his mental
equilibrium gets disturbed at the last moment,
his spiritual practice will not be lost. He will
attain what is known as the state of a YogвҲӮ
fallen from Yoga; and the latencies of even-
mindedness practised by him during this
life will reawaken the spirit of equanimity
in him (VI.40Гі44), and striving with greater
vigour, he will at last succeed in realizing
God.
Лҷ ГғГ вҖҡГҒЕ’ГҒГғ ГјГҠГӢв—ҠjВӘп¬ӮeГӢГғГҠвҖҡГҚВ¬ГҒЕёВ·Г вҖҡГҲ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГҝГҠВў
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠпЈҝ ГјГҠГӢвҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠВЎГҲВёЕёвҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’пЈҝ вҖҡГҠГҰЛңUГ…ГҝГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ
ЕёГҠв—Ҡ ГҒmГғГӢГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГӨГҝГҠГҝвҖ”H 2H
Thus, in the UpaniВ¶ad sung by the Lord, the Science of Brahma,
the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and
Arjuna, ends the Second Chapter entitled Г«Г«SВөaвҲҶkhyayogaГӯГӯ
(the Yoga of Knowledge).
U

=== PAGE 140 ===

Лҷ
вҖәrвҲӮmadbhagavad-GвҲӮtГҘ
Chapter III
The present chapter establishes, from various points of view, that performance of
prescribed duties is obligatory on all. It fully explains how every individual member of
society should carry on the duties and functions laid down for his own order
in society and stage in life, why he should perform them, what harm will
accrue to him if such duties are not performed, what is gained by their
performance, what action leads to bondage and what leads to liberation. All these points
pertaining to Karmayoga have thus been discussed in this chapter more and in greater
detail than in any other chapter of the GвҲӮtВөa. Other topics have been very rarely introduced
in it, and where introduced have been lightly touched upon. That is why the chapter has
been given the name of Г«Г«KarmayogaГӯГӯ or the Yoga of Action.
In verses 1 and 2 of this chapter Arjuna, who had not been able to follow what
the Lord was driving at, implores the Lord, as if somewhat complainingly, to tell him
definitely how he may obtain the highest good. In reply to this, the Lord
lays down in verse 3 the two courses of discipline and shows, in verse
4, that renunciation of action is obligatory in neither. Pointing out in verse
5 that none can remain wholly inactive even for a moment, in verse 6 He pronounces
them as hypocrites, who outwardly restraining the organs of sense and action mentally
go on dwelling on objects of senses. Verse 7 praises the YogвҲӮ who controlling by the
mind his organs of sense and action carries on his activities with the help of those organs
without the least attachment. Verses 8 and 9 show that action is superior to inaction and
that life cannot be maintained without action, and exhort Arjuna to perform his duty
disinterestedly and without any attachment. Verses 10 to 12 point out that having been
enjoined by the Creator, BrahmВөa, performance of actions is obligatory on all; and verse
13 declares that partaking of what is left over after sacrifice absolves one of all sins and
calls those who do not perform sacrifice as sinners. Verses 14 and 15 describe the cycle
of creation and show that the all-pervading God is ever present in a sacrificial act. Verse
16 denounces those who do not follow the wheel of creation referred to above. Verses
17 and 18 show that the illumined saint who has realized the Self has no obligation, and
has no use whatsoever for things done or not done; and establishing on these grounds,
in verse 19 that action is necessary and declaring at the same time that disinterested action
leads to God-realization, Arjuna is instructed to do his duty without attachment. Citing
Janaka and others as examples of those who had attained perfection through action and
showing that action is necessary even for the maintenance of the world order, verse 20
proves the utility of maintaining such order. Pointing out in verse 21 that the generality
of men follow whatever a great man does and teaches, in verses 22 to 24 the Lord cites
His own example to show the advantage of performing action and the harm accruing from
non-performance of the same. Verses 25 and 26 lay down that even the wise man should
Title of the
Chapter
Summary of
the Chapter

=== PAGE 141 ===

140
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
act for the maintenance of the world order. Verses 27 and 28 differentiate the perfect
man of knowledge from the generality of men attached to action and verse 29 lays down
that the wise should not unsettle the mind of the ignorant. Verse 30 instructs Arjuna to
fight in a spirit of dedication to God, renouncing hope and nervous excitement as well
as the sense of possession. Verse 31 says that the devout soul who follows this teaching
of the Lord is released from the bondage of action; and verse 32 declares that he who
finds fault with this doctrine, and does not follow it, is deluded and lost. Verse 33 shows
that no one can help acting according to his nature. Verse 34 urges man not to be swayed
by likes and dislikes, while verse 35 shows that oneГӯs own duty is preferable to anotherГӯs
duty, which is fraught with fear. On Arjuna asking in verse 36 as to who drives man
to sinful action, the Lord replies in verse 37 that the root of all sin is desire, which is
the greatest enemy of man. In verses 38 to 41 the Lord declares that desire is insatiable
like fire and veils Knowledge and pointing out where it resides, advises Arjuna to kill
it after controlling the senses. In verse 42, the Self has been declared as far superior to
the senses, the mind and the intellect, and verse 43 concludes the chapter urging on Arjuna
to subdue the mind by the intellect, and kill the enemy in the form of desire.
From verse 11 to verse 30 in Chapter II the Lord dealt with the nature of the Self,
and discussed SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga, or the Yoga of Knowledge. Thereafter, from verse 39 to verse
53 He expounded Karmayoga or the Path of Action in the form of
equanimity. Then, in answer to ArjunaГӯs query, the Lord described from
verse 54 right up to the end of the chapter the marks, conduct and
glory of the God-realized soul, possessed of a stable mind, who had attained that state
through the practice of Karmayoga. Glorifying Karmayoga in the course of that exposition,
the Lord clearly defined its character in verses 47 and 48 urging on Arjuna to act. In
verse 49 He declared action with a selfish motive as far inferior to Karmayoga in the
form of equanimity, in verse 50 praising the mean of action endowed with equanimity,
He urged on Arjuna to engage in the practice of Karmayoga; and verse 51 declares
that the wise man endowed with equanimity attains the blissful supreme state. When Arjuna
heard this exposition, he could not make out the real meaning of the instruction. Interpreting
the word Г«BuddhiГӯ (used in the sense of equanimity in verses 49 to 51) as Г«KnowledgeГӯ
his mind got confused and it appeared to him as if the Lord was glorifying Knowledge
in comparison to Action. Nay, the words of the Lord, though explicit appeared to him
ambiguous and involved. Therefore, with a view to having his doubts cleared and in order
to know wherein definitely lay his highest good, Arjuna asks the following question:Гі
вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
Г–ГҝГҠГҝвҖҡГӢ ГёпЈҝГ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠSГғпЈҝ в—ҠГғГҠ вҖҷГҲГҒhВЎВёЕёГҠЕ’ВёЕёвҖ“
ГғГҒГ вҲ‘ВўВ§ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒГЎГҠ ГүГҠГҠпЈҝвҒ„пЈҝU в—ҠГҠВў ГҒЕёГҝГҠпЈҝВЎГҝГҒвҖҡ вҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠп¬ӮH 1H
Г–ГҝГҠГҝвҖҡГӢ superior; ГёпЈҝГғЛң if; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠвҖ” to Action; ГғпЈҝ by you; в—ҠГғГҠ (is) considered; вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ”
Knowledge; ВЎЕёГҠЕ’ВёЕё O вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a; ГғГғЛң then; ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛң why; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒГЎГҠ ГүГҠГҠпЈҝвҒ„пЈҝU to (this) terrible deed;
в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛң me; ГҒЕёГҝГҠпЈҝВЎГҝГҒвҖҡ do you urge; вҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠп¬Ӯ O KГҰВ¶Ж’a.
Arjuna said: KГҰВ¶Ж’a, if You consider Knowledge as superior to Action, why then
do You urge me to this dreadful action, O KeвҖ№ava !                                      (1)
Link of the
Discourse

=== PAGE 142 ===

* Chapter III *
141
The Lord nowhere asserted in the
preceding chapter that Knowledge was superior
to Action; but failing to grasp the real
meaning and import of the LordГӯs statement
Г«BuddhiyogaГӯ for the Knowledge and was
thus led to conclude that the Lord was
declaring Action as far inferior to Knowledge.
In reality, however, the word Г«BuddhiyogaГӯ
in that verse was not used in the sense of
Knowledge; it was expressive of Karmayoga
characterized by equanimity, while the word
Г«KarmaГӯ occurring therein referred to action
with an interested motive. For, in that verse
the Lord speaks of those who crave for the
fruit of action as extremely poor and wretched
and declaring action with a selfish motive as
inferior, exhorts Arjuna to take recourse to
Karmayoga, consisting in equanimity. But
Arjuna failed to grasp the spirit of the LordГӯs
instruction, and hence the question as set
forth in the present verse arose in his
mind.
The word Г«BuddhiГӯ, used in this verse,
cannot be taken in the sense of Karmayoga
as consisting in equanimity.  For, here, the
word forms part of ArjunaГӯs question.  Failing
to grasp the trend of the LordГӯs argument,
he has been construing Г«BuddhiГӯ to mean
knowledge, and it is therefore that he has
put the present question. Had he understood
Г«BuddhiГӯ in the sense of Karmayoga, there
would have been no ground for him to ask
the present question. Arjuna was taking
Г«BuddhiГӯ to mean Г«JВӨВөanaГӯ or Knowledge;
therefore, following the line of ArjunaГӯs
thought the word Г«BuddhiГӯ in this verse has
been interpreted as Knowledge.
Having failed to understand the true
import of the LordГӯs teaching, Arjuna thought
that through such injunctions as Г«Г«Therefore,
Arjuna, fightГӯГӯ, Г«Г«Your right is to work
onlyГӯГӯ, Г«Г«perform your duties established in
YogaГӯГӯ, etc., he was being urged to that very
action which had been denounced by the
Lord as inferior and insignificant. Therefore,
as if in a complaining mood, Arjuna asked
the Lord, in the above words, why he was
being driven to the commission of a dreadful
sin in the form of participation in the war.
The Lord is addressed in this verse as
Г«JanВөardanaГӯ and Г«KeвҖ№avaГӯ. Both these words
are significant as will be clear from the
following interpretation., Г«JanВөardanaГӯ is a
compound word consisting of two parts
Г«JanaГӯ and Г«ArdanaГӯ. Г«ArdanaГӯ means Г«an
object of prayer (вҖўГ•ВёГғпЈҝ ГҝГҠГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ) and Г«JanaГӯ
means men in general. Thus, taken together,
the word Г«JanВөardanaГӯ signifies Г«He who is
approched by all for the fulfilment of their
prayer.Гӯ and the word Г«KeвҖ№avaГӯ is formed of
four component parts, viz., Г«KaГӯ, an equivalent
of BrahmВөa, the Creator, Г«AГӯ, a name of
ViВ¶Ж’u, the Preserver, Г«вҲ«В¶aГӯ, an epithet of
вҖәiva, the Destroyer, and Г«VaГӯ, which is an
abbreviation of Г«VapuГӯ or body. Thus taken
together KeвҖ№ava means Г«He who is identical
with the three Deities mentioned above or
embodies in Himself all the three Deities
taken together. Addressing the Lord by these
names, Arjuna seeks to convey that he has
already taken refuge in the Lord and
approached Him with a submission for
guidance and instruction as regards his course
of duty (II.7), and that he is again approaching
the Lord, who is God Himself, with that
prayer.  He solicits the Lord to favour him
with advice and guidance, showing what is
decidedly the best course for him.
вҲҡГҝГҠГҒв—ҠГјГҠпЈҝГЎГҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ п¬ӮГҠГ„ГҝпЈҝЕё вҖҷГҲГҒhВў в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҝвҖҡГӢп¬Ӯ в—ҠпЈҝвҖ“
ГғЕ’пЈҝвҲ‘ВўВ§ п¬ӮЕ’ ГҒЕёГҒpГ Гҝ ГҝпЈҝЕё ГјГҠпЈҝГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳвҖһUв—ҠГҠГҘЕёГҲГҝГҠв—ҠЛңГ”H 2H

=== PAGE 143 ===

142
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Expressions which do not explicitly
recommend any particular course of discipline
after arriving at a definite conclusion, and
which embody various suggestions, jumbled
together, and thus mystify the hearer and
lead him nowhere are what is referred to by
the words Г«VyГҘmiвҖ№reЖ’a VГҘkyenaГӯ in the
present verse. Arjuna having failed to grasp
the purport of the Lord, His words appeared
to him as involved and puzzling. For, when
he was told that action was inferior to
Buddhiyoga and was accordingly asked to
have recourse to Buddhi (II.49), he thought
the Lord was glorifying Knowledge and
denigrating Action, and was urging him to
take to knowledge. Again, when the Lord
said that Г¬the SГҘdhaka who is endowed with
Buddhi sheds in this life both good and evilГ®,
(II.50), Arjuna thought that, in the opinion
of the Lord, he who gave up all action in
the form of virtue and vice was endowed
with Buddhi or Knowledge. As against these
statements when the Lord said, Г¬Your right
is to work onlyГ® (II.47), and Г¬perform your
actions established in YogaГ® (II.48), Arjuna
thought the Lord was urging him to action.
Besides, when in verse II.45, the Lord asked
him to transcend the evolutes of the three
GuЖ’as (NistraiguЖ’ya) and be self-controlled
(Г…tmavГҘn), he understood the instruction as
enjoining renunciation of action; and when
the Lord said, Г¬Therefore, Arjuna, fightГ®
(II.18), Г¬Therefore, get ready for the fight,Г®
(II.38), Г¬Exert yourself for the practice of this
YogaГ® (II.50), he thought he was being
urged to engage himself in action. The above
statements thus appeared to him mutually
contradictory. Therefore, using the word
Г«IvaГӯ twice in this verse, Arjuna wants to
bring out that even though in reality the Lord
was laying before him clearly and distinctly
two divergent courses of discipline, and that
He was not using involved expressions in
His statements, and being his dearest friend
and well-wisher, He did not say anything so
as to puzzle his mind, on the contrary,
whatever the Lord said was intended to
dispel the delusion in his mind yet due to
his own ignorance, it appeared to him as if
the Lord was mystifying him by using
expressions which were involved and mutually
contradictory.
No doubt the confusion arose in ArjunaГӯs
mind as soon as he heard verses 49 and 50
of the second chapter, and in fact he ought
to have got his doubts cleared then and there
instead of waiting till the end of the chapter,
and should have asked the question
immediately after the Lord winded up the
discussion in verse 53. But hearing as he did
from the lips of the lord in verse 53 that
when his mind would succeed in getting
over delusion, and would rest stable in God,
he would attain union with God, or realize
God, he was possessed with a keen desire
to know the distinguishing marks and conduct
of the God-realized soul. It was, therefore,
that he shelved the previous question for the
time being, and questioned the Lord first
about the marks of the God-realized soul;
and no sooner did the Lord conclude His
reply to that question that he placed his
вҲҡГҝГҠГҒв—ҠГјГҠпЈҝГЎГҠ Гҹп¬Ӯ п¬ӮГҠГ„ГҝпЈҝЕё by (these) seemingly involved expressions; вҖҷГҲГҒhв—ҠЛңГ” mind; в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҝГҒвҖҡ You
are puzzling; Гҹп¬Ӯ as it were; в—ҠпЈҝ my; ГғГғЛңГ” therefore; вҲһвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” one; п¬ӮЕ’ tell (me); ГҒЕёГҒpГ Гҝ a definite
conclusion; ГҝпЈҝЕё by which; ГјГҠпЈҝГҝвҖ” the highest good; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛң I; вҖўГҠГҘЕёГҲГҝГҠв—ҠЛңГ” may obtain.
You are, as it were, puzzling my mind by these seemingly involved expressions;
therefore, tell me the one definite discipline by which I may obtain the highest
good.                                                                  (2)

=== PAGE 144 ===

* Chapter III *
143
original doubt before the Lord. Had he raised
this doubt before, the topic of the marks and
conduct of the God-realized YogвҲӮ would
have been thrown into the back-ground, and
could not be discussed in the setting in which
it has been discussed.
By asking the Lord to tell him definitely
the one discipline by which he could obtain
the highest good, Arjuna intends to bring
out that since whatever instruction he had
received up to that point appeared to him as
full of contradictions, he had not been able
to determine his duty. He could not make
out whether the Lord desired him to fight,
or to renounce all actions; if he was to
engage in fight, how he was to carry it on;
and if the Lord wanted him to renounce
actions, what he should do after such
renunciation. Therefore, he humbly submitted
to the Lord that He should chalk out his duty
and lay down for him after careful consideration
a definite course of discipline by following
which he might reach the highest goal of
existence.
The word Г«вҖәreyaВЁГӯ used in this verse
does not mean objects of enjoyment in this
world or the next; for Arjuna had declared
long before, in II.8 that undisputed sovereignty
over the earth and lordship over the gods
could not drive away his grief. Therefore,
Г«вҖәreyaВЁГӯ, to him meant complete eradication
of grief and infatuation and attainment of
that imperishable Reality wherein lies
everlasting peace and eternal bliss. Therefore,
it has been rendered into English as Г«highest
goodГӯ.
states or modes of SГҘdhanГҘ or spiritual
discipline. In one state man starts with a
belief in the identity of the soul and the
Oversoul, and regards himself as one with
Brahma (Absolute); whereas in the other he
recognizes God as the Almighty Lord, Creator,
The words Г«Asmin LokeГӯ refer to the
human world; for man alone is qualified to
adopt the discipline of either JВӨГҘnayoga or
Karmayoga. The word Г«NiВ¶ВўhГҘГӯ means a
state. Adding the adjective Г«DvividhГҘГӯ to it
the Lord shows that there are two principal
With the intention of pointing out, as desired by Arjuna, that one definite course of
discipline for him was Karmayoga with devotion as the dominant factor, the Lord first
answers his question by showing in the next verse that He did not use any Г¬involved
expressionГ®, but that His instructions were clear and distinct.
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲUп¬ӮГҠГё
вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ЛҳГҒSв—ҠГҒГЈmГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГҠ ГҒЕёDГ”UГҠ В¬ГҲвҒ„UГҠ В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§ГҠ в—ҠГҝГҠЕёГүГҠвҖ“
ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝЕё вҖҡГҠГҰЛңUГ…ГҝГҠЕёГҠВў вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝЕё ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ”H 3H
вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ вҖўГҒSв—ҠЕёЛңГ” in this world; ГҒmГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГҠ ГҒЕёDГ”UГҠ a twofold course (of spiritual discipline); В¬ГҲвҒ„UГҠ
of yore; В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§ГҠ has been enunciated; в—ҠГҝГҠ by Me; вҖўЕёГүГҠ O sinless one, Arjuna; ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝЕё
(the SВөadhanВөa proceeds) along the path of Knowledge; вҖҡГҠГҰЛңUГ”Г…ГҝГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” in case of the followers
of SВөaвҲҶkhyayoga; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝЕё (it proceeds) along the path of Action; ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” in the case of
the KarmayogвҲӮs.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavВөan said: Arjuna, in this world two courses of SВөadhanВөa (Spiritual
discipline) have been enunciated by Me in the past.  In the case of the SВөaвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ,
the SВөadhanВөa proceeds along the path of Knowledge; whereas in the case of the
KarmayogвҲӮ, it proceeds along the path of Action.                           (3)

=== PAGE 145 ===

144
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Ruler and Destroyer of the universe, and
himself as an humble and obedient servant
of the Lord.
In the former state man feels that it is
the GuЖ’as, born of PrakГҰti, that move among
the GuЖ’as (III.28), and he has no connection
with them; and under this belief he disclaims
the idea of doership in respect of all the
activities of his body, mind and senses. He
wholly renounces the feeling of egoism, the
sense of possession, attachment and desire
with reference to any action or its fruit, and
identifying himself with Brahma, the
embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss,
remains constantly established in It, nay,
becomes one with It (V.24; VI.27). This is
the path of Knowledge. Attaining this state,
the YogвҲӮ transcends joy, grief and desire, and
begins to view all alike (XVIII.54); he sees
the entire world present in the Self as a
dream, and sees the Self as pervading the
whole universe (VI.29). The culmination of
this SГҘdhanГҘ is reached in God-realization.
The discipline of Karmayoga consists in
honestly performing, as a matter of duty,
such actions as are prescibed by the scriptures
with due regard to oneГӯs order in society,
stage in life, nature and circumstances, as
obligatory on him, renouncing the sense of
possession, attachment and desire in respect
of all such actions and their fruit, and
maintaining an attitude of indifference towards
their fruition or otherwise as also towards
their final outcome (II.47-48), and finally in
climbing to the highest Yoga by overcoming
attachment for sense-enjoyments, as well as
for the activities of the senses, and renouncing
all thoughts of the world (VI.4). And the
discipline of Karmayoga with Bhakti
(Devotion) as its dominant factor consists in
offering to God all oneГӯs actions and their
fruit (IX.27-28), regarding Him as all-powerful,
the final substratum, all-pervasive, the universal
friend, and the inspirer of all, and oneГӯs own
self as in every way dependent on Him;
performing all actions according to His behests
and inspiration in a spirit of adoration to Him
and as His tool, without entertaining the least
attachment, sense of possession or desire in
respect of those actions or their fruit, and
remaining ever contented with whatever is
ordained by Him; and finally in remaining
constantly engaged in the thoughts of His
Name, virtues, glories and essence (X.9;
XII.6; XVIII.57). The YogвҲӮ who reaches this
state of perfection in Karmayoga overcomes
all evils in the form of likes and dislikes, lust
and anger etc., and begins to view all alike;
for he sees his Lord dwelling in the hearts
of all beings (XV.15; XVIII.61) and sees
everything as God (VII.7Гі12; IX.16Гі19).
The consummation of this state is reached
in God-realization.
By saying that He enunciated these two
courses of discipline in the past as well, the
Lord seeks to point out to Arjuna that they
were not being put before him as new
revelations of truth; at the beginning of
creation, as well as in course of His various
manifestations that took place later, He had
taught these two disciplines separately. Even
so while revealing the non-dual character of
the soul in verses 11 to 30 of chapter II he
had exhorted Arjuna to fight according to the
principle of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga (II.18); and
introducing the subject of Karmayoga in
verse 39 and discussing the discipline of
Karmayoga with its fruit in verses 40 to 53,
He had instructed him to carry on the fight
and perform other duties establishing himself
in the Yoga of Equanimity (II.47Гі50). And
in order to demarcate the two courses of
discipline, He had clearly stated in verse 39,
that the verses preceding it, had dealt with
SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga, and the verses following it,
would be devoted to a discussion of

=== PAGE 146 ===

* Chapter III *
145
Karmayoga. Therefore, ArjunaГӯs complaint
that the Lord had used Г«involved expressions
in His instruction to him had no leg to stand
upon.
Addressing Arjuna as Г«AnaghaГӯ (O
sinless one) on this particular occasion, the
Lord meant to say that one who was addicted
to sin, or was tainted with sin, could not
attain perfection in any one of these two
disciplines: but sinless as he was, Arjuna
could easily attain perfection in them, and
it was, therefore, that the Lord had taught
them to him.
By saying that the Г¬SГҘdhanГҘ of the
SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ proceeds along the path of
Knowledge while that of the KarmayogвҲӮ
along the path of Action.Г® The Lord seeks
to bring out that culmination of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga
is reached when by constantly following that
discipline one ceases to identify oneself with
the body; whereas perfection in Karmayoga
is reached when through the continued practice
of that discipline one overcomes the sense
of possession, attachment and desire in respect
of oneГӯs actions and their fruit, and acquires
an attitude of indifference towards success
and failure. There are two distinct types of
SГҘdhakas qualified to follow the aforesaid
two paths and their aptitude for any one of
them is determined by their tendencies of
previous births faith and predilection. And
the two disciplines are quite distinct and
independent of each other.
The two disciplines being fundamentally
different, it is not possible for anyone to
follow both of them simultaneously. For in
SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga the soul is identified with the
Oversoul, who is meditated on in His absolute
and formless aspect, the embodiment of
Truth, Knowledge and Bliss; whereas in
Karmayoga while performing Action without
attachment to its fruit one has to meditate on
the Name, virtues, glory and reality of God
as an object of worship and regarding Him
as all-pervading, all-powerful and the Lord
of all beings. In this way the two disciplines
canot be followed by the same man at one
and the same time.
The preceding verse showed that perfection in the discipline of Knowledge is attained
through the practice of JВӨГҘnayoga, whereas perfection in the discipline of Action is attained
through the practice of Karmayoga. In order to establish this very point it is shown in
the next verse that renunciation of action does not lead to perfection in either of the two
disciplines.
Её 
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЕёГҠвҒ„UГӘГ·ГҠГӣГҠГ’cвҲ‘В§ГӘГҝZ 
В¬ГҲLВ§В·ГҠпЈҝЛҳoAГҲГғпЈҝвҖ“
Её Гё вҖҡГӣГҝвҖҡЕёГҠЕ’пЈҝп¬Ӯ ГҒвҖҡГҒhВў вҖҡв—ҠГҒЕ“ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғH 4H
Её neither; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” вҖўЕёГҠвҒ„UГӘГ·ГҠГғЛңГ” without undertaking actions; ЕёГ’cвҲ‘В§ГӘГҝВёв—ҠЛңГ” actionlessness; В¬ГҲLВ§В·вҖ”
man; вҖўoAГҲГғпЈҝ attains; Её Гё nor; вҖҡГӣГҝвҖҡЕёГҠГғЛңГ” through renunciation (of actions); вҲһп¬Ӯ merely; ГҒвҖҡГҒhв—ҠЛңГ”
perfection; вҖҡв—ҠГҒЕ“ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғ reaches.
Man does not attain freedom from action (culmination of the discipline of Action)
without entering upon action; nor does he reach perfection (culmination of the
discipline of Knowledge) merely by ceasing to act.                          (4)
the bondage of action once for all, even
though engaged in all sorts of activities; in
other words, his actions do not lead to
The word Г«NaiВ¶karmyamГӯ, in this verse,
refers to the state of perfection in Karmayoga.
He who has attained this state is released from

=== PAGE 147 ===

146
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
bondage (IV.22, 41). That is why this state is
referred to as Г«NaiВ¶karmyamГӯ or freedom from
action. This state is reached only by performing
oneГӯs duties in a disinterested way, and cannot
be attained without performing action.
Therefore, release from the bondage of action
can be obtained only by performing oneГӯs
duties in a selfless way, and not by shirking
them. That is what is meant by the statement:
Г¬Man does not attain freedom from action
without entering upon action.Г®
The Lord had instructed Arjuna to give
up attachment for action and the desire for its
fruit, and declared that such renunciation
would lead to freedom from the bondage of
action (II.51). This might lead Arjuna to
think that if he totally gave up all actions, he
would be automatically released from their
bondage, and hence there was no need to
participate in action. In order to avoid such a
misconception, the Lord uttered the note of
warning in the very first verse containing the
instruction on Karmayoga: Г¬Let not your
attachment be to inactionГ®. He further declares
in chapter VI that Г¬to the comtemplative soul
who desires to climb to the heights of
Karmayoga, action without motive is the
only way to attain to those heightsГ®. (VI.3)
Therefore, in order to show that manГӯs
disinclination to act from fear of physical
exertion, or due to any other similar weakness,
is an obstacle in the path of Karmayoga, the
Lord says that Г¬Man does not attain freedom
from action without entering upon ActionГ®.
The word Г«SiddhimГӯ in this verse refers
to perfection in JВӨГҘnayoga, which leads to
the attainment of knowledge. Attaining this
state, the SГҘdhaka identifies himself with
Brahma; he no longer perceives any difference
between the soul and the Oversoul, and
becomes one with Brahma. That is why this
state has been designated as Г«SiddhiГӯ, or
perfection. This perfection in JВӨГҘnayoga is
attained by performing the duties appropriate
to oneГӯs social order and stage in life,
without claiming their doership, renouncing
the sense of possession, attachment and
desire in respect of all enjoyments, and
through constant practice of meditation on
God as identical with the self, and not
merely, by renunciation of action. For without
the extinction of egosim, the sense of possession
and attachment one cannot be firmly established
in identity with God. In fact, this state is
reached when in all activities of the body,
mind and senses, the SГҘdhaka does not feel
himself the doer; but remains only as an
onlooker or witness of those activities (XIV.19).
Therefore, the SГҘdhaka following the path
of Knowledge too, instead of attempting to
give up the performance of duties appropriate
to his social order and stage in life, should
renounce the sense of doership and the sense
of possession, attachment and desire. It is to
bring out this idea that the Lord says: Г¬Man
does not reach perfection merely by ceasing
to actГ®.
The two words Г«AnГҘrambhГҘtГӯ and
Г«SaвүҲnyasanГҘtГӯ, 
though 
appearing 
as
synonymous, have been used by the Lord in
two different senses. By the use of
Г«AnГҘrambhГҘtГӯ He seeks to point out that non-
performance of an obligatory duty is an obstacle
in the attainment of perfection in Karmayoga.
The word Г«SaвүҲnyasanГҘtГӯ, however, shows
that renunciation of action by itself does not
constitute an obstacle in JВӨГҘnayoga. It simply
says that perfection will not be reached by
such renunciation alone; for the attainment of
perfection the SГҘdhaka will be required to
renounce the sense of doership in action and
establish himself in identity with Brahma, the
embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss.
Therefore, external renunciation of action is
not of primary importance in the case of
JВӨГҘnayogвҲӮ; it is internal renunciation that counts.

=== PAGE 148 ===

* Chapter III *
147
The KarmayogвҲӮ, however, must not refrain
from action in any case. The use of the two
words Г«AnГҘrambhГҘtГӯ and Г«SaвүҲnyasanГҘtГӯ has
been adopted to bring out this difference.
Nevertheless, his body existing before the
eyes of the world as a concatenation of the
mind, intellect, senses and so on, goes on
like an automaton doing something or other
in name only, according to his own PrГҘrabdha
or the PrГҘrabdha of the people around him;
but inasmuch as he has no sense of doership,
such action on his part is no action in the
real sense of the term. There can be no
objection, however, to the combination of his
mind, intellect and senses etc., being included
under the term Г«KaвҖ№citГӯ. For being a product
of the three GuЖ’as, it is not above the GuЖ’as;
nay, it is on account of his rising above the
influence of that body that the man of
Knowledge is said to have transcended the
three GuЖ’as.
The word Г«SarvaВЁГӯ generally denotes all
living beings; but in the present context its
application should be restricted to human
beings alone; for man alone is entitled to
perform actions. And to act under the
impulse of oneГӯs nature, which is formed out
of the latencies of deeds performed in
previous lives, is what is meant by Г¬being
The word Г«KarmaГӯ (action) forming part
of the compound word Г«AkarmakГҰtГӯ (refraining
from action) includes all activities of the
body, mind and senses such as movement,
rest, satisfaction of hunger and thirst, going
to sleep, waking, thought, reflection, dreaming,
meditation and absorption in SamГҘdhi.
Therefore, so long as man carries his body,
he is bound to perform action in one form
or another according to his nature. This is
what is meant by saying Г¬None can remain
wholly inactive even for a moment.Г® What
he can do is to renounce the sense of
doership in action, give up the sense of
possession, attachment and the desire for its
fruit. To renounce these, is to renounce
action altogether.
Strictly speaking, the man of knowledge,
who has transcended the three GuЖ’as or
modes of PrakГҰti, falls beyond the purview
of the word Г«KaвҖ№citГӯ used in this verse. For,
inasmuch as he ceases to have anything to
do either with the GuЖ’as, or with their
evolutes, it cannot be said of him that he acts
under the impulse of the three GuЖ’as.
Thus showing that non-performance of duty is an obstacle in reaching perfection in
the path of Karmayoga, and declaring that external renunciation of action is of minor
importance in reaching perfection in JВӨГҘnayoga, the Lord now proceeds to place before
Arjuna various reasons to demonstrate the necessity of performing action, with a view
to urging him to action, and in the first instance to pronounce total renunciation of action
as physically impossible.
Её ГҒвҖһU вҲ‘В§ГҒpГ ЛҮГҠГЎГҠв—ҠГҒВ¬ ВЎГҠГғГҲ ГҒГғDГ”UГ ГҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғЛңГ”вҖ“
вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝВёГғпЈҝ sГ”п¬ӮвүҘГҠвҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҖ” В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғВЎГ’ВӘГҲВёГЎГҠГ’вҖ”H 5H
Её not; ГҒвҖһU surely; вҲ‘В§ГҒpГғЛңГ” no one; ЛҮГҠГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” for a moment; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; ВЎГҠГғГҲ ever; ГҒГғDГ”UГҒГғ
remains; вҖўвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғЛңГ” inactive; вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝВёГғпЈҝ is made to perform; ГҒвҖһU because; вҖўп¬ӮвүҘГҠвҖ” helplessly; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё action;
вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҖ” everyone; В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғВЎГ’вҖ” ВӘГҲГЎГҠГ’вҖ” by nature-born qualities.
Surely, none can ever remain inactive even for a moment; for, everyone is
helplessly driven to action by modes of PrakГҰti (nature-born qualities).                         (5)

=== PAGE 149 ===

148
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
helplessly driven to action by oneГӯs nature-
born qualities.Г®
In the SГҘвҲҶkhya system of Indian
philosophy, the term Г«PrakГҰtiГӯ denotes the
state of equilibrium obtaining among the
three GuЖ’as; but the Lord holds them to be
evolutes of PrakГҰti. In order to make this
point clear, the Lord has added the adjective
Г«PrakГҰtijaiВЁГӯ, to the noun Г«GuЖ’aiВЁ in the
present verse. Similarly, in several other
verses of the GвҲӮtГҘ, the Lord has spoken of
the three GuЖ’as as evolutes of PrakГҰti (XIII.19,
21; XIV.5; XVIII.40). The term Г«PrakГҰtiГӯ
here denotes the eternal and prime Nature
of God, which is the cause of the objective
material world, which is nothing but a
conglomeration of the three GuЖ’as and their
modifications. It is also known by such terms
as the unmanifest, the undifferentiated, Mahat-
Brahma etc.
of perception; but the Lord remains silent on
this question. In the next verse as well the
Lord speaks of practising Karmayoga with
the help of the Karmendriyas; but one
cannot undertake this Yoga by means of the
organs of action such as speech, etc., alone,
and the help of the senses of perception
will also be required for the practice of
Karmayoga.
It is, therefore, quite justifiable to take
the word Г«KarmendriyГҘЖ’iГӯ as covering all the
ten organs which are employed for carrying
on worldly activities, and forcibly suspending
the functions of hearing etc., is what is meant
by wilful external restraint of the organs of
sense and action.
In this connection it should be borne in
mind that he who endeavours to restrain the
senses forcibly from running after sense-objects
The word Г«KarmendriyГҘЖ’iГӯ in this verse
does not bear its generally accepted sense of
the organs of action; it should be taken to
mean all the ten organs of perception and
action, with the help of which man carries
on his external activities, i.e. perceives external
objectsГіviz., the senses of hearing, touch,
sight, taste and smell as well as the organ
of speech, hands and feet, the organ of
generation and the organ of defecation; for,
the GвҲӮtГҘ nowhere mentions separately the
five organs of perception under the appellation
of Г«JВӨГҘnendriyasГӯ. Besides, if the word is
interpreted to mean only the organs of action
such as speech etc., senses like the sense of
hearing etc., are left unrestrained, so that the
picture of the hypocrite remains incomplete.
Moreover, it becomes obligatory to state here
what use the hypocrite makes of his senses
The preceding verse stated that none could remain without action even for a moment.
To this one might raise the objection that one could refrain from action by forcibly
suspending the functions of the senses. Therefore, in the next verse, the Lord shows that
external suspension of the functions of the senses does not constitute renunciation of action.
вҲ‘В§в—ҠпЈҝВёГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠ вҖҡВўГҝГӘГҝ Гҝ вҖўГҠSГғпЈҝ в—ҠЕёвҖҡГҠ Sв—ҠвҒ„UЕёЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГ•ГҠВёГҒГЈп¬Ӯв—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҠГ в—ҠГҠ ГҒв—ҠГўГҝГҠГёГҠвҒ„UвҖ” вҖҡ В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝH 6H
вҲ‘В§в—ҠпЈҝВёГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠ the organs of sense and action; вҖҡВўГҝГӘГҝ (outwardly) restraining; ГҝвҖ” who; вҖўГҠSГғпЈҝ
sits; в—ҠЕёвҖҡГҠ mentally; Sв—ҠвҒ„UЕёЛңГ” dwelling on; ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГ•ГҠВёЕёЛңГ” the objects of (those) sense; ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҠГ в—ҠГҠU the
fool; ГҒв—ҠГўГҝГҠГёГҠвҒ„UвҖ” a hypocrite; вҖҡвҖ”U he; В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is called.
He who outwardly restraining the organs of sense and action, keeps mentally
dwelling on the objects of senses, that man of deluded intellect is called a hypocrite. (6)

=== PAGE 150 ===

* Chapter III *
149
in order to bring them under control, so as to
be able to concentrate his thoughts on God,
and yet owing to the wandering of his mind
cannot help dwelling on sense-objects, will
not be classed as a hypocrite. He is a spiritual
aspirant; for, like the hypocrite, it is not his
object to meditate on objects of enjoyment.
He desires from the bottom of his heart to
control the mind as well; but due to past
habits, attachment for worldly objects and
the force of latencies of past Karma, his mind
reverts to worldly objects in spite of himself.
He cannot, therefore, be blamed for this
obduracy of the mind; and it is but natural for
the mind to act in this wayward way during
the initial stages of oneГӯs SГҘdhanГҘ or spiritual
discipline.
The word Г«SaвүҲyamyaГӯ in this verse
cannot be taken to mean controlling the
organs of senses and action. For he who has
controlled his senses cannot be a hypocrite
in the proper sense of the term. Sense-control
is a part of the Yogic practices. Г«SaвүҲyamyaГӯ
has, therefore, been rightly interpreted as
meaning mere outward restraint of the organs
of sense and action.
The word Г«IndriyГҘrthГҘnГӯ means the
corresponding objects of the ten senses.
Verse 9 of Chapter V uses the word
Г«IndriyГҘrthГҘnГӯ in the same sense.
Just as the heron sits motionless at the
brink of a sheet of water in order to deceive
the fish, which constitute its food, even so,
the hypocrite puts on a cloak of self-control,
though inwardly he has no desire to control
his mind. Inasmuch as he thus practises
dissimulation he is called a dissembler or
hypocrite.
Declaring this outward restraint of the senses from sense-objects as mere hypocrisy,
the Lord now praises the yogвҲӮ who renouncing all attachment employs his senses in the
disinterested performance of duties.
ГҝГҒSГ п¬ӮГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠ в—ҠЕёвҖҡГҠ ГҒЕёГҝГӘГҝГҠвҒ„UГ·ГғпЈҝЛҳВЎГҲВёЕёвҖ“
вҲ‘В§в—ҠпЈҝВёГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГ’вҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠвҖҡQВ§вҖ” вҖҡ ГҒп¬ӮГҒвүҘГҠcГҝГғпЈҝH 7H
ГҝвҖ” who; ГғГҲ on the other hand; ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠ the organs (of sense and action); в—ҠЕёвҖҡГҠ by
the mind; the power of the will; ГҒЕёГҝГӘГҝ controlling; вҖўГҠвҒ„UГ·ГғпЈҝ undertakes; вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё O Arjuna; вҲ‘В§в—ҠпЈҝВёГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГ’вҖ”
through (those) organs; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ” the Yoga of Action; вҖўвҖҡQВ§вҖ” (remaining) unattached; вҖҡвҖ” he;
ГҒп¬ӮГҒвүҘГҠcГҝГғпЈҝ excels.
On the other hand, he who controlling the organs of sense and action by the
power of his will, and remaining unattached, undertakes the Yoga of Action through
those organs, Arjuna, he excels.                                           (7)
other senses under control, nor can Karmayoga
be practised through these five organs alone.
For without the proper exercise of the senses
of perception like the sense of hearing etc.,
practice of Karmayoga will not be possible.
Therefore, all the ten senses should be taken
as covered by the two words mentioned
above. In verse 41 of this chapter, the
Lord again uses the word Г«IndriyГҘЖ’iГӯ with
The word Г«TuГӯ has been used in an
antithetical sense to differentiate the yogвҲӮ,
who while performing action keeps the mind
and senses under control, from him, who
outwardly renounces action. Here, again, the
words Г«IndriyГҘЖ’iГӯ and Г«KarmendriyaiВЁГӯ both
denote all the ten organs; for if they are taken
to mean the five organs of action alone,
merely controlling them will not bring all the

=== PAGE 151 ===

150
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Г«NiyamyaГӯ and exhorts Arjuna to control all
his senses.
The word Г«NiyamyaГӯ in this verse cannot
be taken in the sense of stopping the function
of the senses; for Karmayoga cannot be
practised when the senses have altogether
ceased to function. The practice of Karmayoga
through the organs of perception and action
consists in performing all actions such as
sacrifice, charity, austerity, study of and
imparting instruction in the scriptures,
governance of a kingdom, carrying on business
transactions and menial service, and carrying
on all the functions of the senses such as
satisfaction of hunger and thirst, falling asleep
and waking, movement and rest etc., enjoying
the various sense-objects such as sound, etc.,
through senses which are properly disciplined
and controlled, maintaining an attitude of
indifference to success and failure, and
renouncing attraction for and aversion to
oneГӯs prescribed duties as well as with regard
to all enjoyments of this world and the next,
that may be obtained as their reward. verse
64 and 65 of chapter II speak of this very
practice of Karmayoga resulting in the
attainment of placidity of mind, which in its
turn brings about the cessation of all forms
of misery.
By saying Г¬he excelsГ® the Lord praises
the KarmayogвҲӮ by declaring him to be
superior to all ordinary men of the world.
It does not mean that he is declared as
superior only to the hypocrite referred to in
the previous verse; for the hypocrite mentioned
above is a dissembler possessed of demoniacal
qualities. In comparison to him, even a
worldly-minded man performing action which
is sanctioned by the scriptures, with an
interested motive, is much superior. Therefore,
to declare the KarmayogвҲӮ, possessed of
divine qualities, as superior to hypocrite
would be as ridiculous as calling a chaste
woman higher than a whore, and would be
belittling her under cover of praise. Therefore,
the words, Г¬he excelsГ® should be interpreted
to mean that he is superior to all ordinary
men of the world, and should thus be
regarded as an unstinted and undisguised
tribute to the KarmayogвҲӮ.
circumstances of an individual; and by
commanding Arjuna to perform it, the Lord
seeks to dispel the delusion in his mind
which had led him to imagine that the Lord
had used Г¬involved expressionsГ® in His
The word Г«KarmaГӯ preceded by the
adjective Г«NiyatamГӯ in this verse stands for
Г«SvadharmaГӯ, or oneГӯs own duty, as laid
down in the scriptures, with due regard to
the order in society, stage in life, nature and
Replying to ArjunaГӯs query as to why he was being urged to such a dreadful action
as warfare, the Lord declared one who merely outwardly renounced action as a hypocrite,
and praised the KarmayogвҲӮ and now commands Arjuna to perform his allotted duty:Гі
ГҒЕёГҝГғВў вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё Г п¬ӮВў вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё Г–ГҝГҠГҝГҠпЈҝ sГ”вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠвҖ”вҖ“
вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„UГҝГҠГІГҠГҠГҒВ¬ Гё ГғпЈҝ Её В¬ЛқГҒвҖҡhKпЈҝЕ’вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠвҖ”H 8H
ГҒЕёГҝГғв—ҠЛңГ” (your) prescribed; вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ perform; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё duty; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” you; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё action; Г–ГҝГҠГҝвҖ” (is) superior;
ГҒвҖһU for; вҖўвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠвҖ” to inaction; вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„UГҝГҠГІГҠГҠ the maintenance of body; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; Гё besides; ГғпЈҝ your;
Её cannot; В¬ЛқГҒвҖҡhKпЈҝГғЛңГ” be accomplished; вҖўвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠвҖ” through inaction.
Therefore, do you perform your allotted duty; for action is superior to inaction.
Abstaining from action, you cannot even maintain your body.                 (8)

=== PAGE 152 ===

* Chapter III *
151
teachings to him, and to seek his definite
instructions as to what he should do. In the
present verse the Lord lays down that definite
discipline for Arjuna. For reasons mentioned
above, renunciation of action was in no way
desirable for him; that is why he should
strictly observe his Г«SvadharmaГӯ as enjoined
by the scriptures. As a KВ¶atriya, it was
ArjunaГӯs duty to fight; though apparently full
of violence and involving bloodshed, fighting
was not a Г¬dreadful actionГ® so far as he was
concerned. On the other hand, if carried on
in a disinterested spirit, it was calculated to
bring him the highest good. Therefore, he
should give up all doubts, and prepare
himself for the fight.
There was a lurking misconception in
ArjunaГӯs mind that, in the eyes of the Lord,
withdrawal from action was superior to
participation in action; the Lord is seeking to
dispel this delusion when he definitely asserts
that action is superior to inaction, He purports
to say that performance of oneГӯs ordained duty
leads to purification of the heart and expiation
of sins, whereas neglect of duty exposes one
to sin and makes him a victim of error, sloth
and sleep, etc., which bring about his fall
(XIV.18). That is why performance of action
is in every way superior to its non-performance.
Performance of duty even with some interested
motive, or with a view to expiating sins, is
far better than its non-performance; there
should be no wonder then, that its selfless
performance should be immensely superior
to inaction.
Lastly, the Lord points out, that one
would find it impossible to live if he totally
renounced all activities. He must do some
thing at least for the maintenance of his
body, under such circumstances, if he
renounced his prescribed duties, his downfall
was inevitable. Therefore, from every point
of view, performance of duty was better than
non-performance of the same.
Here it may be asked: Г¬When even virtuous deeds, such as the performance of
sacrifice, charities and austerities etc; prescribed by the scriptures, have been regarded
as the cause of bondage, how can action be superior to inaction ? In order to meet this
objection, the Lord says:
ГҝГҙГҠГҠГ•ГҠВёГ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГЈГҝГІГҠ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠпЈҝЛҳГҝВў вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҷГЈЕ“ЕёвҖ”вҖ“
ГғЕ’Г•Z вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ в—ҠГҲQВ§вҖҡXГ”UвҖ” вҖҡв—ҠГҠГёвҒ„UH 9H
ГҝГҙГҠГҠГ•ГҠВёГғЛң вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠвҖ” вҖўГЈГҝГІГҠГ” except when action is performed for the sake of sacrifice; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§вҖ”
world, mankind; вҖўГҝв—ҠЛңГ” this; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҷГЈЕ“ЕёвҖ” (is) bound by its own actions; ГғЕ’Г•Вёв—ҠЛңГ” for the sake
of sacrifice (alone); вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё (your) duty; вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ O son of KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna; в—ҠГҲQВ§вҖҡXГ”UвҖ” free from
attachment; вҖҡв—ҠГҠГёвҒ„U diligently perform.
Man is bound by his own action except when it is performed for the sake of
sacrifice. Therefore, Arjuna, do you diligently perform your duty, free from
attachment, for the sake of sacrifice alone.                                 (9)
to bondage. On the other hand, through
selfless performance of duty, man attains
purity of heart and realizes God. This is what
is meant by the LordГӯs statement that Г¬man
is bound by his own action except when it
When a duty laid down in the scriptures
is performed with a view to maintaining the
institution of sacrifice in the form of
performance of duty, and in a detached way,
without any desire for fruit, it does not lead

=== PAGE 153 ===

152
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
is performed for the sake of the sacrifice.Г®
With the exception of such benevolent actions,
all other actions falling under the category
of either virtue or vice lead to bondage
inasmuch as they are conducive to rebirth.
Man has perforce to take birth in various
wombs in order to reap the fruit of good
and evil actions that he performs with an
interested motive; these repeated births
and deaths constitute what is known as
bondage. That is why the man who performs
actions with an interested motive, or is
engaged in sinful acts, is bound by such
actions. Therefore, in order to attain liberation
from the bondage of Karma, man should
perform actions prescribed by the scriptures
selflessly, and only in the spirit of performing
a duty.
Man alone is qualified to perform either
good or evil actions. Other beings do not
possess this qualification, therefore, they are
not capable of doing anything new which
may be characterized as either virtue or vice.
Birth in other wombs is attained only to reap
the fruit of actions done in a human life. That
is why the actions of other beings do not
cause their bondage. Only actions performed
in a human life cause bondage. In order to
bring out this idea the words Г«Ayam LokaВЁГӯ,
meaning the world of human beings, have
been used in this verse.
By exhorting Arjuna Г¬to perform his
duty efficiently, without attachment, and
for the sake of sacrifice alone,Г® the Lord
indicates that action done in a detached way
for the sake of sacrifice cannot bring bondage
to man; nay, even the stock of past merits
and sins earned by such a man is wiped
off (IV.23). That is why Arjuna is being
asked to perform all actions efficiently and
zealously in a disinterested way, wholly
renouncing the sense of possession and
attachment, and with a view to preserving
the continuity of obligatory acts prescribed
by the scriptures.
The adjective Г«MuktasaвҲҶgaВЁГӯ used in
the verse indicates that action should be
performed without entertaining the feeling of
Г«mineГӯ and attachment in respect of oneГӯs
actions as well as their fruit. In other words,
renunciation of the fruit of action should be
accompanied by the renunciation of attachment
and the feeling of Г«mineГӯ in respect of oneГӯs
actions and their fruit.
The preceding verse stated that action done for the sake of sacrifice did not lead
to bondage.  Therefore, the question naturally arises: What is sacrifice ? Why should it
be performed ? How is it that man performing action for the sake of sacrifice does not
suffer bondage ? The Lord, therefore, proceeds to answer these questions in the following
verses producing the testimony of the Creator, BrahmГҘ:
вҖҡвҖһUГҝГҙГҠГҠвҖ” В¬ЛқВЎГҠвҖ” вҖҡГҺВ¶Г”UГҠ В¬ГҲвҒ„UГҠпЈҝп¬ӮГҠГё В¬ЛқВЎГҠВ¬ГҒГғвҖ”вҖ“
вҖўЕёпЈҝЕё В¬ЛқвҖҡГҒп¬ӮcГҝГӨп¬Ӯв—ҠпЈҝВ· п¬ӮГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒSГ п¬ӮCГ”UвҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠЕ“ГҲвҲ‘Лң H 10H
вҖҡвҖһUГҝГҙГҠГҠвҖ” along with; В¬ЛқВЎГҠвҖ” mankind; вҖҡГҺВ¶Г”UГҠ having created; В¬ГҲвҒ„UГҠ at the beginning of creation;
В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё said (to them); В¬ЛқВЎГҠВ¬ГҒГғвҖ”Г” the Lord of creation, BrahmГҘ; вҖўЕёпЈҝЕё by this; В¬ЛқвҖҡГҒп¬ӮcГҝГӨп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” you
shall prosper; вҲһВ·вҖ” this; п¬ӮвҖ” to you; вҖўSГғГҲ may prove to be; ГҹCГ”UвҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠЕ“ГҲвҲ‘ЛңВ§Г” the giver of desired
enjoyments.
Having created mankind with their duties specified, at the beginning of creation,
the Creator, BrahmГҘ, said to them, Г¬You shall prosper by this; may this yield the
enjoyments you seek.                                                    (10)

=== PAGE 154 ===

* Chapter III *
153
The word Г«PrajВөaВЁГӯ accompanied by the
adjective Г«SahayajВӨВөaВЁГӯ, refers to all human
beings who are qualified to perform sacrifices,
in other words, who are entitled to perform
their dutyГіГ«SvadharmaГӯГіin the shape of
offerings to gods, charities, austerities, personal
service etc., as enjoined by the scriptures
with due regard to their order in society and
stage in life, and who have been referred to
in the preceding verse by the words Г«Ayam
LokaВЁГӯ. And the word Г«AnenaГӯ refers to the
various forms of action enjoined by the
scriptures with due regard to the VarЖ’a,
Г…вҖ№rama, nature and circumstances of an
individual such as the performance of sacrifices,
charities, austerities, breathcontrol, control of
the senses, acquiring and imparting knowledge,
governance of a state, warfare, agriculture,
trade and commerce, bodily service and
other duties, which all come under the
general name of sacrifice in the form of
Г«SvadharmaГӯ.
The commandment of the Creator, as
quoted in the verse, viz., Г«You shall prosper
by this; may this yield the enjoyments you
seekГӯ, represents the benediction pronounced
by the creator on the humanity at large.  The
Creator thereby assured man that it was for
his sake that He had evolved the institution
of sacrifice in the form of Svadharma or
oneГӯs allotted duty and that if man followed
his Svadharma with all its limbs he would
continue to prosper, and would suffer no fall
and would ultimately rise to a superior level
of existence; and further, that sacrifice in the
form of performance of oneГӯs prescribed
duties would continue to fulfil oneГӯs earthly
requirements as well.
fostering the gods. And construing the word
Г«sacrificeГӯ in the wider sense of performance
of Svadharma,Гіwhich is typified here by
the offering of oblations to the sacred fire,Гі
service of the В°RВ¶is, manes, spirits and genii,
men, beasts, birds and all other species of
living beings and attempts to make them
happy; and foster them, should be included
in this sacrifice.
With reference to the gods, the Creator
says Г¬Let the gods foster You.Г® That is to
say, just as it is obligatory for man to nourish
and foster the gods, even so it is the duty
of the gods to meet his needs and help his
advancement. Thus the Creator enjoins the
The word Г«AnenaГӯ in this verse refers
to sacrifice in the form of performance of
Г«SvadharmaГӯ or oneГӯs own duty, which is the
subject of discussion here. But the verse
enjoins upon us the performance of sacrifice
in the form of Г«SvadharmaГӯ only indirectly
by inculcating the necessity of offering
oblations to gods with the chanting of
Vedic Mantras as a typical instance of
such Г«SvadharmaГӯ.  Hence the word Г«AnenaГӯ
should be understood to imply the offering
of oblations to gods as a typical form of
sacrifice; and offering nourishment to them
in the shape of such oblations and meeting
their other requirements is what is meant by
Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠГЈГ·ГҠп¬ӮГҝГғГҠЕёпЈҝЕё ГғпЈҝ Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠ Г·ГҠп¬ӮГҝГЈГғГҲ п¬ӮвҖ”вҖ“
В¬вҒ„USВ¬вҒ„ВўU Г·ГҠп¬ӮГҝГЈГғвҖ” ГјГҠпЈҝГҝвҖ” В¬вҒ„Uв—Ҡп¬ӮГҠГҘSГҝГ•H 11H
Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” the gods; Г·ГҠп¬ӮГҝГғ foster; вҖўЕёпЈҝЕёГ” through this; ГғпЈҝ those; Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠвҖ” gods; Г·ГҠп¬ӮГҝГЈГғГҲ may
foster; п¬ӮвҖ” you; В¬вҒ„USВ¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” each other; Г·ГҠп¬ӮГҝГЈГғвҖ” fostering; ГјГҠпЈҝГҝвҖ”Г” good; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛң the highest; вҖўп¬ӮГҠГҘSГҝГ•Г”
you will attain.
Г¬Foster the gods through this (sacrifice), and let the gods be gracious to you.
Each fostering the other disinterestedly, you will attain the highest good.        (11)

=== PAGE 155 ===

154
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
gods as well that they should, in their turn,
foster mankind and do their duty by them.
Thus doing their duty by each other
through disinterested service, men as well as
the gods will not only attain material prosperity,
but will succeed in obtaining even the
highest good in the form of MokВ¶a or
salvation. This is what is meant by the
Creator when he says, Г«Thus fostering one
another selflessly you will attain the highest
good?Гӯ The intention of the Creator seems
to be that so far as the gods are concerned,
they should try in a disinterested way to
help and foster man even if man fails to
offer them sacrifices, worship and other
forms of service; whereas for man his
commandment is that he should offer worship,
sacrifices and service to the gods for the
growth and nourishment of the gods alone,
in a disinterested way. Similarly, he should
offer his disinterested services to the В°RВ¶is,
manes, fellow-men, beasts, birds, worms
and insects etc., and try to make them
happy.
ГҹCГ”UГҠГЈГ·ГҠпЈҝВӘГҠГҒГЈвҖһU п¬ӮГҠпЈҝ Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠ Е’ГҠSГҝГЈГғпЈҝ ГҝГҙГҠГ·ГҠГҒп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ”вҖ“
ГғГ’Е’ВёГ»ГҠГҠЕёВ¬ЛқЕ’ГҠГҝГ’ГЁГҝГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝ Г·ГҲГұпЈҝ SГғпЈҝЕё вҲһп¬Ӯ вҖҡвҖ”H 12H
ГҹCГ”UГҠЕёЛңГ” Г·ГҠпЈҝВӘГҠЕёЛңГ” the desired enjoyments; ГҒвҖһU surely; п¬ӮвҖ” on you; Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠвҖ” gods; Е’ГҠSГҝГЈГғпЈҝ will
(continue to) bestow; ГҝГҙГҠГ·ГҠГҒп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ” fostered by sacrifice; ГғГ’вҖ” by them; Е’Г»ГҠГҠЕёЛңГ” the gifts bestowed;
вҖўВ¬ЛқЕ’ГҠГҝ without giving (in return); вҲһГЁГҝвҖ” to them; ГҝвҖ” who; Г·ГҲГұпЈҝ enjoys; SГғпЈҝЕёвҖ” (is) a thief; вҲһп¬Ӯ
undoubtedly; вҖҡвҖ” he.
Г¬Fostered by sacrifice, the gods will surely bestow on you unasked all the desired
enjoyments.Г® He who enjoys the gifts bestowed by them, without offering anything
to them in return, is undoubtedly a thief.                                           (12)
etc., and in order to make him happy and
meet his other needs have been nourishing
the beasts, birds, trees, medicinal herbs,
creepers and grass etc. Man is indebted to
the gods for all this service.  He who without
repaying this debt and offering to the gods
their rightful due in the form of sacrificial
oblations, makes use of these bounties of his
own personal ends is as ungrateful, and as
great a thief, as a son who having received
in his early days all the fostering care and
affection of his loving parents does not
render any service to them in their old age,
nor offers them вҖәrГҘddha (food) and TarpaЖ’a
(water) after their death; or, as a man who
having received help from a friend when in
difficulty does not repay his obligation to the
best of his ability; or as an adopted son, who
having inherited a fortune from his adoptive
parents does not render any service to them.
When the Creator said that fostered by
sacrifice, the gods would surely bestow on
man all the desired enjoyments unasked, he
meant that, for his own part man should go
on scrupulously performing his duty.  If man
did not fail in the performance of his duty,
there could be no doubt that fostered and
nourished by his sacrifices, the gods would
ever continue to supply him with all the
means of leading a happy and contented life;
for the gods were bound to perform their part
of duty.
Reproducing up to this point the words
of the Creator, the Lord shows in the second
half of the present verse that in pursuance
of the instructions of the Creator the gods
have from the very beginning of creation
been supplying man with all that he requires
to carry on his existence, viz., foodgrains,
water, fruits, flowers, metals and minerals,

=== PAGE 156 ===

* Chapter III *
155
From the very beginning of creation man
has been nourishing and fostering the gods
through the performance of sacrifices, and the
gods have been supplying him with desired
enjoyments.  This tradition of mutual service
between the gods and man has come down
from the beginning of time.  Those who have
maintained this tradition of mutual service, and
fostered the gods through sacrificial acts in
the past, or who are doing so even now are
certainly no thieves; but he who enjoys worldly
pleasures and amenities bestowed on  him by
the gods as the reward of sacrifices offered
by others, and does not repay their obligations
himself by offering oblations to them deserves
to be called a thief.  Just as a man appropriating
for himself the milk of a cow reared and
nurtured by another on the plea that since it
is human beings who serve the cow, and he
too is a human being and hence entitled to
take its milk, will be considered a thief, even
so he who enjoys desired enjoyments bestowed
on him by the gods fostered and nourished
by the sacrifices of another, without giving
anything to the gods in return, should
resonably be regarded as a thief.
Thus adducing the testimony of the Creator, BrahmГҘ, the Lord established the necessity
of performing sacrifices, etc., and censured those who do not offer sacrifices by calling
them thieves. Now, in the following verse He praises those who perform these obligatory
acts, and reproaches those sinful men who perform action only for the maintenance of
their own bodies.
ГҝГҙГҠГҒвүҘГҠCГ”UГҠГҒвүҘГҠЕёвҖ” вҖҡГЈГғГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҲГ«ГҝГЈГғпЈҝ вҖҡп¬ӮВёГҒвҲ‘В§ГҒГҖвҖҷВ·Г’вҖ”вҖ“
Г·ГҲTГғпЈҝ ГғпЈҝ Г п¬ӮГүГҠВў В¬ГҠВ¬ГҠ ГҝпЈҝ В¬ГёГЈГ ГҝГҠГ в—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠГғЛңГ”H 13H
ГҝГҙГҠГҒвүҘГҠCГ”UГҠГҒвүҘГҠЕёвҖ” partaking of the remains of sacrifice; вҖҡГЈГғвҖ” the virtuous; в—ҠГҲГ«ГҝГЈГғпЈҝ are absolved;
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГҒвҲ‘В§ГҒГҖвҖҷВ·Г’вҖ” of all sins; Г·ГҲTГғпЈҝГ” eat; ГғпЈҝ they; ГғГҲ only; вҖўГүГҠв—ҠЛңГ” sin; В¬ГҠВ¬ГҠвҖ” ГҝпЈҝ the sinful ones who;
В¬ГёГҒГЈГғ cook (food); вҖўГҠГ в—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠГғЛңГ” for the sake of (nourishing) their body (alone).
The virtuous who partake of what is left over after sacrifice are absolved of
all sins. Those sinful ones who cook for the sake of nourishing their bodies alone,
partake of sin only.                                                                (13)
and MaharВ¶is enlighten them with knowledge;
the manes bestow their fostering care and
affection on their children and are generally
interested in their well-being; man serves all
beings by his actions, and the beasts, birds,
plants etc., have their very being surrendered
to the service of others.  Among these five,
man bears on his shoulders the responsibility
of nourishing and fostering all beings because
of his capacity, qualifications and resources.
That is why man serves all beings through
the performance of actions enjoined by the
scriptures.  The Five Great Sacrifices represent
The word Г«YajВӨaГӯ, in this verse, though
primarily used in the sense of the Five Great
Sacrifices, covers all good works enjoined
by the scriptures and involving human activity.
The efficient working of the world order,
and the proper maintenance and growth of
all beings in creation, depends on the
interaction of the five orders of beings, viz.,
gods, В°RВ¶is, manes, human beings and other
creatures.  All receive their subsistence and
nourishment through the co-operation of these
five orders of beings. The gods supply the
desired enjoyments to all beings; the В°RВ¶is

=== PAGE 157 ===

156
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
here all good actions enjoined by the scripures
and done for the service of the people. It is
obligatory for man to recognize that all these
beings have their share in whatever he earns
by his own effort; for he earns his livelihood
and enjoys the fruit of his labours with the
help and co-operation of all these beings. It
is, therefore, that he alone who partakes of
what is left over after sacrifice, that is, takes
his own humble share after offering these
beings their respective dues, and does not
take the lionГӯs share himself, has been
designated by the scriptures as the partaker
of nectar. He who does not follow this course,
and depriving others of their dues devotes
whatever he earns entirely to his own personal
ends, eats only sin. Food obtained through
different avenues of work is consumed only
after being cooked, and since sacrifice to the
gods and the rite known as VaiвҖ№vadeva (in
which morsels of food are offered to the
various deities through fire before meals)
cannot be performed without offering such
food to the fire, emphasis has been laid here
on the performance of Havana (offering of
oblations to the sacred fire) and the ritual of
Г«BalivaiвҖ№vadevaГӯ. But the Five Great Sacrifices
are not accomplished merely by offering
oblations to the sacred fire and performing
the rite of BalivaiвҖ№vadeva. The real partaker
of the remains of sacrifice is he who takes for
his own use only as much of his earnings as
is left after offering to others their due share.
The word Г«YajВӨasiВ¶ВўГҘвҖ№inaВЁГӯ in this verse refers
to such a selfless KarmayogвҲӮ.
The word Г«SantaВЁГӯ in this verse refers
to the practicant, and not to the realized soul;
for the question of absolution from sin
cannot arise in the case of the perfect soul,
and the verse speaks of absolution from sin.
The word Г«SantaВЁ no doubt, applies to
the God-realized soul; but in the present
context the word only means a practicant
who acts selflessly. God-realized souls too
perform sacrificial acts, but they do so
not for obtaining absolution from sin, but
under the natural impulse of maintaining the
world-order.
Man bears on his head a load of sins
committed by him in past lives, and in the
course of his current life too he is led to
commit sins that are incidental to the vocation
he follows for his livelihood, however honest
and lawful it may be. According to the maxim;
Г¬All undertakings are involved in sinГ®
(XVIII.48), offering oblations to the sacred
fire, governance of the people, warfare,
agriculture, trade, industry, and all other means
of livelihood involve in their pursuit the element
of violence in one form or other.  The oven,
millstone, broom, mortar and vessels for
storing water in a household cause loss of
life to innumerable ants, insects and animalcules
every day. Besides, many sins are committed
by man in numerous other ways due to
inadvertence etc. The good being who performs
the Five Great Sacrifices in a selfless spirit,
keeping only the service of the people in
view, and with the sole object of making
others happy, and considering lifeГӯs fulfilment
to lie only in such service, nay, who utilizes
his money earned by honest and legitimate
means in rendering appropriate service to
others to the best of his ability and as a form
of sacrifice, and accepts for himself only
what is left over after that sacrifice as PrasГҘda
or remnant of food offered to a deity to keep
up life only for the sake of service get liberated
from the shackles of all past and present
sins and attains the state of Eternal Brahma
(IV.31). That is why a SГҘdhaka following
this course has been called a saint. The
words Г¬he gets absolved of all sinsГ®, occurring
in the above verse, should be taken in the
above sense.
Absolution from the five incidental sins,

=== PAGE 158 ===

* Chapter III *
157
which are unavoidably incurred every day
in every household, is attained even by a
worldly minded man who acts in accordance
with the scriptural ordinance with the object
of gaining worldly pleasures, and offers
every being its legitimate due by performing
religious rites such as the daily offering of
oblations to the sacred fire and BalivaiвҖ№vadeva
etc., as an expiation for those sins. The
application in the present verse  of the word
Г«SantaВЁГӯ for the sacrificer, and the use of the
adjective Г«SarvaiВЁГӯ (all) with Г«KilbiВ¶aiВЁГӯ (sins),
however, indicates, that the saintly soul who
performs the Five Sacrifices and other such
acts in a selfless spirit as explained above,
obtains absolution from all his sins, past and
present.
The cooking of food and eating the
same, referred to in the second half of the
verse, represents all forms of enjoyment that
can be enjoyed through the senses.  He who
obtains the objects of such enjoyment and
enjoys them after sharing them with others,
and that too in a selfless spirit in order to
be able to serve the public, gets absolved of
sin in the above manner. And he who with
an interested motive allows to other beings
their legitimate share, and thereafter takes
for himself his own share of enjoyment, is
no sinner either. But he who accumulates
objects of enjoyment only for his personal
gratification,Гіfor the nourishment of his
own body and senses,Гіand enjoys them for
his own sake depriving others of their share
accumulates only sin by sinful means and
enjoys nothing but sin. For neither are his
actions inspired by the spirit of sacrifice, nor
does he allow others their proper and legitimate
share. Thus his earnings and enjoyments
both being sinful, he has been pronounced
a sinner, and his enjoyment has been declared
a sin (vide ManusmГҰti. III.118).*
Here it may be asked: What harm if one does not perform such a sacrifice?
Anticipating this question the Lord propounds the necessity of performing sacrifices for
maintaining the world-order:
вҖўГӣГҠГҠjп¬ӮГҒГЈГғ Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё В¬ВЎВёГЈГҝГҠЕ’ГӣГҠвҖҡГӘГ·п¬ӮвҖ”вҖ“
ГҝГҙГҠГҠjп¬ӮГҒГғ В¬ВЎВёГЈГҝГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҙГҠвҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡв—ҠГҲjп¬ӮвҖ”H 14H
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҠпЈҝjп¬ӮВў ГҒп¬ӮГҒh вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҠЛҮГҠвҒ„UвҖҡв—ҠГҲjп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГғSв—ҠГҠГ вҖҡп¬ӮВёВӘГғВў вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” ГҒЕёГ ГҝВў ГҝГҙГҠпЈҝ В¬ЛқГҒГғГҒDГ”UГғв—ҠЛңH 15H
вҖўГӣГҠГҠГғЛңГ” from foods; Г·п¬ӮГҒГЈГғ are evolved; Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕёГ” (all) beings; В¬ВЎВёГЈГҝГҠГғЛңГ” (is) from rain; вҖўГӣГҠвҖҡГӘГ·п¬ӮвҖ”
production of food; ГҝГҙГҠГҠГғЛңГ” from sacrifice; Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ ensues; В¬ВЎВёГЈГҝвҖ” rain; ГҝГҙГҠвҖ” (and) sacrifice;
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡв—ҠГҲjп¬ӮвҖ” is rooted in prescribed action; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГ” action; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҠпЈҝjп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” as having its origin in the
Vedas; ГҒп¬ӮГҒh know; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” (and) the Vedas; вҖўЛҮГҠвҒ„UвҖҡв—ҠГҲjп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” as proceeding from the Indestructible
(God); ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” hence (it is proved that); вҖҡп¬ӮВёВӘГғв—ҠЛңГ” вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” the all-pervading Infinite; ГҒЕёГ Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” always;
ГҝГҙГҠпЈҝ in sacrifice; В¬ЛқГҒГғГҒDГ”UГғв—ҠЛңГ” (is) present.
All beings are evolved from food; production of food is dependent on rain; rain
*
вҖўГүГҠВў вҖҡ вҲ‘пЈҝВ§п¬ӮвҖ№Вў Г·ГҲГҰЛңUГ”В§QпЈҝВ§ ГҝвҖ” В¬ГёГ ГҝГҠГ в—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠГғЛңГ”вҖ“
Г¬He who cooks food merely for his own sake eats only sinГ®.

=== PAGE 159 ===

158
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«AnnaГӯ or Г«foodГӯ should be
taken in a comprehensive sense, and not
merely as representing foodgrains like wheat,
gram, etc. All types of gross and subtle
articles of food, which go to nourish the
bodies of different types of beings are covered
by the word Г«AnnaГӯ as used in this verse.
Therefore, the statement that Г¬all beings are
evolved from foodГ® means that food when
consumed and assimilated is gradually
transformed into sperm and ovum etc., from
whose combination all types of beings take
their birth, and it is food again which goes
to nourish their bodies even after birth.
Therefore, food is the cause of the birth,
growth and nourishment of beings. The вҖәruti
says: Г¬It is from food that these beings take
their birth, and it is food again on which they
live after being born.Г® (Taitt. Up. III.2)*
Again, the production of food existing in any
form or shape gross or subtle, in this world
mainly depends upon water; for water, in the
gross or subtle state, is present everywhere,
and the source of water is rain.  This is what
is meant by the statement that Г¬Production
of food is dependent on rain.Г®
Of all types of beings in GodГӯs creation
it is man alone on whom devolves the
responsibility for the maintenance, nourishment
and protection of every other type of beings.
Realizing this responsibility whatever man
does with his mind, speech and body for the
maintenance and welfare of all other beings,
the cumulative effect of all such activities is
known as Г«sacrificeГӯ; offering of oblations to
the sacred fire, charities and austerities, earning
oneГӯs livelihood and all other duties are thus
covered by the term Г«sacrificeГӯ. Of course,
offering of oblations to the sacred fire being
the foremost among them, the scriptures declare
that rain ensues as the result of oblations
offered to the fire and rain in its turn brings
into existence all created beings through the
production of food. But the term Г«sacrificeГӯ
here does not imply offering of oblations
alone. Every good action perfromed in an
altruistic spirit should be taken as covered by
the term Г«sacrificeГӯ.
The statement that Г¬rain ensues from
sacrificeГ®, is to be understood in the sense
that rain is caused by the sacrifice offered
by man in the form of the performance of
his duties.  Here it may be contended that
there are so many lands where sacrifices are
not performed, and yet there is no dearth of
rainfall there. Our reply to this contention is
that if the record of human activities in that
land is gone into, it will be found that
altruistic actions in one form or other are
being performed there. Over and above this,
sacrifices have been performed from the
beginning of creation, as the result of which
the lands in question are being supplied with
rainfall; and so long as the effect of those
sacrifices continues and does not exhaust
itself, the lands will continue to receive their
share of rainfall. But if man ceases to
perform sacrifices, the aforesaid accumulation
of the effect of previous sacrifices will in
course of time get exhausted, and thereafter
rainfall will cease, making it difficult for the
inhabitants of this globe to maintain their
lives or find their nourishment. Therefore, it
is incumbent on man to perform his duty in
the form of a sacrifice.
When verse 14 says that sacrifice is
rooted in prescribed action it means to show
that the scriptures have prescribed various
ensues from sacrifice, and sacrifice is rooted in prescribed action. Know that prescribed
action has its origin in the Vedas, and the Vedas proceed from the Indestructible (God);
hence the all-pervading Infinite (Brahma) is always present in sacrifice.                     (14,15)
*
вҖўГӣГҠГҠhKпЈҝп¬Ӯ ПҖГҒГҖп¬Ӯв—ҠГҠГҒЕё Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё ВЎГҠГҝГЈГғпЈҝ, вҖўГӣГҠпЈҝЕё ВЎГҠГғГҠГҒЕё ВЎГӢп¬ӮГҒГЈГғвҖ“

=== PAGE 160 ===

* Chapter III *
159
forms of sacrifice to suit different types of
men with due regard to their order in society,
stage in life, nature and circumstances, and
all of them are performed through the activity
of the mind, senses and body. No sacrifice
can be accomplished without action as
enjoined by the scriptures. The point has
been made clear in verse 32 of Chapter IV
of the GвҲӮtГҘ.
The word Г«BrahmaГӯ has been used in
various senses in the GвҲӮtГҘ in different
contexts.  It means Г«GodГӯ in verses 3 and
24 of Chap. VIII; Г«PrakГҰtiГӯ in verses 3 and
4 of Chap. XIV; Г«BrahmГҘГӯ (the Creator) in
verse 17 of Chap. VIII, and again in verse
37 of Chap. XI; Г«VedasГӯ in verse 32 of
Chap. IV, and again in verse 24 of Chap.
XVII; and the BrГҘhmaЖ’a class in verse 42
of Chap. XVIII. Here the subject of discussion
is origin of prescribed action and man obtains
his knowledge of prescribed duties from the
Vedas, or from scriptures which follow the
Vedas. Therefore, the word Г«BrahmaГӯ
appearing in the first line of verse 15 should
be interpreted to mean the Vedas. In addition
to the above reason, the line itself states that
Г«BrahmaГӯ proceeds from Г«AkВ¶araГӯ or the
Indestructible God. This supports the
interpretation we have put upon the word;
for it can neither mean God, who is Himself
Г«AkВ¶araГӯ, nor PrakГҰti, that is beginningless.
It would, therefore, be meaningless to speak
of God or PrakГҰti as having proceeded from
Г«AkВ¶araГӯ, or Indestructible God.  Nor can the
word refer to Г«BrahmГҘГӯ or the BrГҘhmaЖ’a
class in this context; for they are not the
subjects of discussion. When the verse states
that prescribed action has its origin in the
Vedas, it means to show that sacrifice is
accomplished through actions duly performed
according to rules after ascertaining from
the Vedas and other scriptures what is the
duty of a particular individual and how
it is to be performed. Such actions are
known either from the Vedas or from the
scriptures which follow the Vedas. Therefore,
for the due performance of sacrifice every
man should obtain a knowledge of
his duty.
God is eternal; therefore the Vedas
which embody His commandments, are also
eternal. No doubt can be entertained about
this essential fact. Therefore, when the verse
says that the Vedas proceed from God, it
does not mean that the Vedas were non-
existent before and came into existence
afterwards; but it means that the Vedas are
brought into manifestation by God at the
beginning of creation and get absorbed into
Him at the time of final dissolution of
creation. In order to show that the Vedas do
not owe their existence to any person,Гі they
are not man-made, the verse states that
the Vedas proceed from God, who is
indestructible. The statement thus establishes
that the Vedas have no beginning. It is, in
this sense, again that verse 23 of Chap. XVII
speaks of the Vedas as having originated
from God.
The word Г«BrahmaГӯ in the second half
of verse 15 stands for the all-pervading,
almighty God, who is the support and
substratum of all; and the word Г«TasmГҘtГӯ
(therefore), followed by the statement that
Г¬the all-pervading God is always present in
sacrificeГ® shows that since the Vedas, which
contain the rules of every form of sacrifice,
are the word of God, the soul of sacrifice,
the all-pervading God Himself, ever remains
present in sacrifice performed according
to the rules prescribed in them. In other
words, Sacrifice itself is a direct manifestation
of God. Therefore, every individual seeking
God-realization should make it a point to
perform his duty according to the commands
of God.

=== PAGE 161 ===

160
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«CakramГӯ, or wheel, in this
verse refers to the cyclic process of creation
as described in verse 14 above. For sacrifice
proceeds from actions of man enjoined by
the scriptures; sacrifice in its turn brings about
rainfall and rainfall helps in the production of
food; food promotes the growth of beings;
and man again, who is one of these beings,
performs works which are turned into sacrifice,
and so on. This process of creation has thus
been going on for ever in a circle. It is to
bring out this idea that the word Г«CakramГӯ
together with its adjunct Г«Evam PravartitamГӯ
(thus set going) has been used. Carefully
performing oneГӯs duty according to oneГӯs own
sphere of duty or Г«SvadharmaГӯ, as determined
by oneГӯs order in society, stage in life, nature
and circumstances, and for which a special
responsibility attaches to one, is what is meant
by following this Г¬wheel of creation.Г®
Therefore, the YogвҲӮ who performs his duty
renouncing attachment and desire, and only
with a view to maintaining the efficient working
of this wheel of creation, and has no selfish
end to serve thereby; realizes God Himself,
who is present in that sacrifice in the form of
performance of Svadharma.
Non-performance of oneГӯs duty is what
is meant by failing to follow the wheel of
creation referred to above. And the term
Г«sensualГӯ refers to him who forgetting his
own duty, and attached to sense-objects,
constantly indulges in the enjoyment of
worldly objects through his senses and the
sole object of whose life is to gratify his
senses through such enjoyments by whatever
means it may be possible. He who abandons
his duty in this way, acting as he does under
the impulse of his craving for enjoyments,
becomes self-willed, and solely preoccupied
with his own selfish ends remains indifferent
to the interests of others, which exerts an
unhealthy influence on others and disturbs
the smooth working of the universe. The
whole creation suffers thereby. Therefore, he
who neglecting his duty creates confusion in
the world order commits a great offence; and
again, in order to achieve his own selfish
ends, he goes on accumulating wealth and
power by unrighteous means throughout his
life. That is why he has been declared as
Г«sinfulГӯ. He remains totally debarred from
attaining the supreme goal of human existence
viz., gratifying all beings in this world
through the performance of duty, and thereby
realizing God, the embodiment of supreme
beatitude, at the same time, and idly fritters
away his valuable life through life-long
indulgence in sense-enjoyments. Therefore,
the verse says of him: Г¬he lives in vain.Г®
Showing the wheel of creation to be thus dependent on sacrifice, and declaring God
to be present in sacrifice, the Lord now proceeds to establish the necessity of performing
oneГӯs duty as a form of sacrifice by censuring those who do not follow the wheel of creation,
i.e., neglect the performance of their prescribed duties.
вҲһп¬ӮВў В¬Лқп¬ӮГҢГғГғВў ГёвҲ‘ЛқВўВ§ ЕёГҠЕёГҲп¬ӮГғВёГҝГғГӢвҖһU ГҝвҖ”вҖ“
вҖўГүГҠГҠГҝГҲГҒвҒ„UГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠвҒ„UГҠв—ҠГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠпЈҝГүГҠВў В¬ГҠГ•Вё вҖҡ ВЎГӢп¬ӮГҒГғH 16H
вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” thus; В¬Лқп¬ӮГҢГғГғв—ҠЛңГ” set in motion; ГёвҲ‘ЛқВ§в—ҠЛңГ” the wheel (of creation); Её not; вҖўЕёГҲп¬ӮГғВёГҝГҒГғ follows;
ГҹвҖһU here, in this world; ГҝвҖ” who; вҖўГүГҠГҠГҝГҲвҖ” sinful; ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠвҒ„UГҠв—ҠвҖ” sensual; в—ҠГҠпЈҝГүГҠв—ҠЛңГ” in vain; В¬ГҠГ•ВёГ” O son
of PГҰthГҘ Arjuna; вҖҡвҖ” he; ВЎГӢп¬ӮГҒГғ lives.
Arjuna, he who does not follow the wheel of creation thus set in motion in this world
(i.e., does not perform his duties), leads a sinful and sensual life, he lives in vain.       (16)

=== PAGE 162 ===

* Chapter III *
161
Here it may be asked: To what type of men attaches the responsibility of following
the wheel of creation as stated above? In order to show that responsibility for the
performance of oneГӯs duty lies on every human being other than the God-realized saint,
the next two verses declare that the enlightened soul has no obligation to discharge, giving
reasons for the same:
ГҝSГ п¬ӮГҠГ в—ҠвҒ„UГҒГғвҒ„пЈҝUп¬Ӯ SГҝГҠЕ’ГҠГ в—ҠГғГҺ#p в—ҠГҠЕёп¬ӮвҖ”вҖ“
вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГЈГҝпЈҝп¬Ӯ Гё вҖҡГЈГғГҲCГ”USГғSГҝ вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝZ Её ГҒп¬ӮlГғпЈҝH 17H
ГҝвҖ” who; ГғГҲ but; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠвҒ„UГҒГғвҖ” rejoicing in the Self; вҲһп¬Ӯ only; SГҝГҠГғЛңГ” is, may be; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГғГҺ#вҖ”
gratified with the Self; Гё and; в—ҠГҠЕёп¬ӮвҖ” the man; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҒЕё in the self; вҲһп¬Ӯ only; Гё and; вҖҡГЈГғГҲCГ”UвҖ”
contented; ГғSГҝ for him; вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝВёв—ҠЛңГ” duty, obligation; Её not; ГҒп¬ӮlГғпЈҝ exists.
He, however, who takes delight in the Self alone and is gratified with the Self,
and is contented in the Self, has no duty.                                 (17)
reflecting on the character of God alone.
This is what is meant by his delighting in
the Self.
The adjective Г«Г…tmatГҰptaВЁГӯ indicates that
all the desires of the God-realized soul
having reached their state of fulfilment, he
does not find any object in the world worthy
of attainment, nor does he have the least use
for any worldly object whatsoever. Established
in identity with God, he feels gratified for
all time.
By speaking of the God-realized soul
as contented in the Self, the verse shows that
he remains ever contented in God; the
greatest temptation of the world fails to lure
him. He will on no account and under no
circumstance feel dissatisfied; he maintains
no connection with any object of the world,
and transcending for ever all morbid feelings
like joy and sorrow he remains ever contented
in God.
The verse says that such a soul has no
duty. It thereby, shows that the soul possessing
the attributes stated above has realized God;
therefore, all his duties have come to an end,
and the object of his existence has been fully
achieved. All the duties enjoined upon us
have only one end in view, viz., to realize
God, the embodiment of supreme blessedness.
The word Г«TuГӯ in this verse differentiates
the enlightened soul from the generality of
men, in whose case performance of allotted
duty has in the preceding verses been declared
as indispensable and obligatory, and failure
on whose part to perform their duty earns
for them the ignominious appellation of
Г«sinfulГӯ, and renders their life unfruitful.
The qualifying expressions Г¬taking delight
in the SelfГ®, Г¬gratified with the SelfГ®, and
Г¬contented in the SelfГ®Гіall these refer to the
God-realized saint. The word Г«MГҘnavaВЁГӯ
indicates that every human being is capable
of reaching this state after going through the
necessary spiritual discipline; for it is open
to every human soul to realize God.
The word Г«Г…tmaratiВЁ followed by the
indeclinable Г«EvaГӯ indicates that the God-
realized saint looks upon this objective world
even as one who has awakened from the
dream state looks back upon his dream
experience. Therefore, he entertains not the
least attraction for any object of the world,
and does not indulge in the enjoyment of
worldly objects, but remains unshakably
established in identity with God and God
alone. For this reason his mind and intellect
do not take delight in worldly objects; they
remain naturally engaged in determining and

=== PAGE 163 ===

162
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Therefore, he who has realized the object of
his life will have nothing else to do. In that
very realization all his duties reach their
fulfilment.
The God-realized soul ceases to have
any relation with his body, mind and intellect;
therefore, he does nothing as a matter of
fact. Nevertheless as a result of past habits,
by force of PrГҘrabdha, his mind, intellect
and body continue, in the eyes of the world,
to perform actions conforming to the
injunctions of the scriptures. Being untouched
by the ego, and untainted by any form of
attachment or desire, such actions are
extremely pure and ideal for others; and yet
it should be borne in mind that the scriptures
have no jurisdiction over the God-realized
soul.
ЕёГ’п¬Ӯ ГғSГҝ вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғпЈҝЕёГҠГ•ГҠпЈҝВё ЕёГҠвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғпЈҝЕёпЈҝвҖһU вҲ‘В§pЕёвҖ“
Её ГёГҠSГҝ вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ вҲ‘В§ГҒpЕ’Г•ВёвҲҡГҝВ¬ГҠГјГҠГҝвҖ”H 18H
Её (exists) not; вҲһп¬Ӯ either; ГғSГҝ for him; вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғпЈҝЕё for things done; вҖўГ•ВёвҖ” use; Её there is
no use; вҖўвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғпЈҝЕё for things not done; ГҹвҖһU here, in this world; вҲ‘В§pЕё any; Её (there is) not;
Гё and; вҖўSГҝ for this (man); вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ on all creatures; вҲ‘В§ГҒpГғЛңГ” any; вҖўГ•ВёвҲҡГҝВ¬ГҠГјГҠГҝвҖ” selfish
dependence.
In this world that great soul has nothing to gain by action nor by abstaining
from action; nor has he selfish dependence of any kind on any being.
 (18)
after the dawn of Knowledge he ceases to
have any relation with the trivial happiness
resulting from the gratification of the mind
and the senses; he gets merged for all time in
eternal bliss, and himself becomes an
embodiment of bliss. Therefore, he who feels
that something remains to be done or renounced
by him in order to enable him to attain some
particular form of happiness is no man of
Knowledge in the true sense of the term, but
holds himself to be an illumined soul, mistaking
a particular stage in SГҘdhanГҘ as the state of
perfection. The marks of an enlightened soul
mentioned in verse 17 do not admit of his
entertaining any such belief. In order to
establish this very fact the Lord states again
in the Uttara-GвҲӮtГҘГі
Г¬The YogвҲӮ who has had his thirst fully
quenched by a potion of the nectar of
Knowledge, and has realized the object of
his existence, has no duty left for him. If he
has any duty left, he is not a man of
Knowledge.Г® (I.22, Uttara-GвҲӮtГҘ)*
The preceding verse stated that the God-
realized saint has no duty; the same statement
is confirmed here by arguments. The great
soul who has realized God constantly remains
contented in God, therefore, he has no worldly
or other worldly end to serve through
performance of any action, or renunciation of
the same; for all his needs and requirements
have come to an end, and there is nothing
left for him to attain. Therefore, it is no longer
obligatory for him to do anything, or to refrain
from any activity; he is absolutely beyond
the control of the scriptures. If his body, which
is nothing but a combination of the mind and
senses, takes to the performance of some
action, the scriptures do not compel him to
abandon the same; and if they fail to perform
any action, the scriptures do not compel him
to act. The man of knowledge need not,
therefore, believe that in order to enjoy the
bliss of liberation from bondage in this very
life he is required even after enlightenment
either to renounce action or to perform it; for
* ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠв—ҠГҺГғпЈҝЕё ГғГҺ#SГҝ вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғвҲ‘ГҺВ§Г ГҝSГҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёвҖ”вҖ“ Её ГёГҠГҒSГғ ГҒвҲ‘ВўВ§ГҒГёГғЛңГ” вҲ‘В§ГғВёвҲҡГҝв—ҠГҒSГғ ГёпЈҝГӣГҠ вҖҡ ГғГ»п¬ӮГҒп¬ӮГғЛңГ”H

=== PAGE 164 ===

* Chapter III *
163
Just as the man of Knowledge has no
purpose to serve either by undertaking any
action or by renouncing the same, even so
he has no interested connection with any
being whatsoever. This has been brought out
by the Lord in this verse through the statement
that Г¬he has no selfish dependence of any
kind on any creature.Г® It shows that the
SГҘdhaka who is striving for God-realization,
but whose identification with the body has
not yet totally disappeared, may not crave
for anything for his own personal gratification.
Yet for the maintenance of his body he has
to keep up selfish connection in one form
or other with other beings. Therefore, it is
incumbent on him to undertake or renounce
certain actions in accordance with the
injunctions of the scriptures. But the God-
realized man of Knowledge, having no
identification with the body, does not care
even for his life; under such circumstances
his body is maintained and all its requirements
automatically met by the force of his PrГҘrabdha.
Therefore, he does not maintain any selfish
relation with any being; and that is why he
has no duty left in the world, the object of
his life having been fully realized.
Does this mean that God-realized soul
does not act at all ? No, he does not; and
yet in the eyes of the world actions are
automatically performed through his body
under the impulse of PrГҘrabdha for the
maintenance of the world order. But inasmuch
as he has no connection with those actions,
they are not recognized as coming  under
the definition of Г«actionГӯ at all.
Upto this point the Lord established by various arguments that until a man has realized
God, the embodiment of supreme beatitude, it is indispensable for him to follow his
Г«SvadharmaГӯ, i.e., to perform in a disinterested spirit duties devolving on him by virtue
of his order in society and stage in life; and though all duties cease in the case of the
God-realized soul, nevertheless under the impulse of his PrГҘrabdha his mind and senses
continue to act for the maintenance of the world order.  Now, drawing ArjunaГӯs attention
to the above discussion, the Lord commands him to perform his duty without attachment:Гі
ГғSв—ҠГҠЕ’вҖҡQВ§вҖ” вҖҡГғГғВў вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝZ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё вҖҡв—ҠГҠГёвҒ„UвҖ“
вҖўвҖҡQВ§ГҠпЈҝ sГ”ГҠГёвҒ„UГЈвҲ‘В§в—ҠВё В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠВ¬AГҠпЈҝГҒГғ В¬ГҚLВ§В·вҖ”H 19H
ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” therefore; вҖўвҖҡQВ§вҖ” unattached; вҖҡГғГғв—ҠЛңГ” constantly; вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝВёв—ҠЛңГ” worth doing obligatory;
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё duty; вҖҡв—ҠГҠГёвҒ„U perform well; вҖўвҖҡQВ§вҖ” without attachment; ГҒвҖһU because; вҖўГҠГёвҒ„UЕёЛңГ” doing; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё
work; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” the Supreme; вҖўГҠВ¬AГҠпЈҝГҒГғ attains; В¬ГҚLВ§В·вҖ” man.
Therefore, go on efficiently doing your duty constantly without attachment. Doing
work without attachment man attains the Supreme.                                (19)
due regard to his order in society and stage
in life.
The word Г«AsaktaВЁГӯ indicates that Arjuna
was required to perform his duty without
attachment for it, or for the enjoyments that
would follow as a reward for its performance.
Renunciation of attachment implies renunciation
of desire as well; for it is from attachment
The word Г«TasmГҘtГӯ connects this verse
with the preceding one and pointing to the
arguments advanced by the Lord in favour
of the performance of Г«SvadharmaГӯ impresses
on Arjuna that from a consideration of all
those reasons it was clear that this highest
good lay in the performance of Г«SvadharmaГӯ.
Therefore, he must perform his duty with

=== PAGE 165 ===

164
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
that desire springs up (II.62). It is, therefore,
that renunciation of the desire for fruit has
not been separately mentioned.
In verse 5 of this chapter the Lord has
already shown that it is not possible for any
one to remain inactive even for a moment;
this proves that man is constantly engaged
in action in one form or another. Therefore,
using the word Г«SatatamГӯ in the verse, the
Lord intends to point out to Arjuna that in
every action he does, every moment of his
life, he should give up attachment for it as
well as for its fruit; in other words, he should
do nothing under an impulse of attachment.
By using the adjective Г«KГҘryamГӯ with
the word Г«KarmaГӯ, the Lord has shown that
Arjuna should only perform his duty allotted
to him with due regard to his order in
society, stage in life, nature and circumstances.
He should not perform what is anotherГӯs
duty, or action prohibited by the scriptures,
or idle action, or action for the fulfilment of
a desire.
The word Г«SamГҘcaraГӯ (Sam+Г…cara)
shows that the duty has to be performed
carefully, correctly and efficiently. If instead
of this it is carelessly done the efficiency of
the work is likely to suffer, which may cause
delay in our reaching the supreme goal.
The second half of the verse shows the
fruit of Karmayoga, when it says that Г¬doing
work without attachment man attains the
Supreme.Г® That is to say, he who performs
his duty in the above manner renouncing
attachment for the work and its fruit, gets
liberated from the bondage of Karma, and
succeeds in realizing God. Such is the glory
of Karmayoga and Arjuna is, therefore,
exhorted by the Lord to perform every action
in the above manner.
In the preceding verse, the Lord stated that he who acts without attachment realizes
God. In support of it He cites in the next verse the instances of Janaka and others, and
thereby impresses on Arjuna the desirability of engaging in action.
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГ’п¬Ӯ ГҒвҖһU вҖҡВўГҒвҖҡГҒhв—ҠГҠГҒSГ•ГғГҠ ВЎЕёвҲ‘В§ГҠЕ’ГҝвҖ”UвҖ“
вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§вҖҡГҰUЛңГ”ВӘЛқвҖһUв—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮГҠГҒВ¬ 
вҖҡГӘВ¬вүҘГҝГЈвҲ‘В§ГғГҲВёв—ҠвҖһВёUГҒвҖҡH 20H
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠ through action (performed without attachment); вҲһп¬Ӯ only; ГҒвҖһU therefore; вҖҡВўГҒвҖҡГҒhв—ҠЛң Г”
perfection; вҖўГҠГҒSГ•ГғГҠвҖ” reached; ВЎЕёвҲ‘В§ГҠЕ’ГҝвҖ” (wise) men like Janaka; вҖ№ГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§вҖҡГҰЛңUГ”ВӘЛқГ”UвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” maintenance of the
world order; вҲһп¬Ӯ only; вҖўГҒВ¬ too; вҖҡГӘВ¬вүҘГҝЕёЛңГ” having an eye to; вҲ‘В§ГғГҲВёв—ҠЛңГ” to act; вҖўвҖһВёUГҒвҖҡ you ought.
It is through action (without attachment) alone that Janaka and other wise men
attained perfection. Having in view the maintenance of the world order, too, you
should take to action.                                                          (20)
preceding verse, that Г¬doing work without
attachment man attains God,Г® is supported
in this verse by citing the example of Janaka
and other great souls who had attained
perfection by performing action without
attachment. This shows that many great souls
had till that time succeeded in realizing
God through the practice of Karmayoga
(characterized by the absence of the feeling
The word Г«JanakГҘdayaВЁГӯ, in the present
verse, points to all great souls like AвҖ№vapati,
IkВ¶vГҘku, PrahlГҘda, AmbarвҲӮВ¶a and others,
who had appeared on earth prior to the
delivery of the present teaching, and who
performed their duties as Janaka did, without
claiming their authorship, and free from
attachment and desire, with the sole object
of realizing God. The statement in the

=== PAGE 166 ===

* Chapter III *
165
of meum, attachment and desire) which was
not a new form of spiritual discipline those
days. Therefore, there is no reason to doubt
that it is an independent discipline and a sure
way to God-realization.
Really speaking, God is realized only
through Knowledge. But he whose heart
gets purified through action without attachment
attains that Knowledge as a matter of course
through the grace of God (IV.38); and the
KarmayogвҲӮ who keeps his mind fixed on
God realizes Him in no time (V.6). It is,
therefore, that action without attachment has
been declared here as a means to God-
realization.
Maintaining the working of the world
process by helping rather than hindering its
orderly progress is what is meant by the
word Г«LokasaвҲҶgrahaГӯ in this verse. The Lord
means to say that the responsibility for the
maintenance and protection of all beings lies
on man. Therefore, he who by efficiently
performing his own duties with due regard
to his order in society, stage in life, nature
and circumstances helps others by the example
of his own life to follow their own respective
Г«SvadharmaГӯ, and give up wickedness and
vice, supports the Г«world orderГӯ by his
action. When the Lord says that having an
eye to the maintenance of the world order
too Arjuna should take to action. He shows
that while action without attachment is
indispensable in the case of every seeker of
blessedness for the attainment of the supreme
object of existence, viz., God-realization, he
should go on acting even from the point of
view of maintaining the world order. In other
words, he must continue to perform his
duties realizing that neglect of duty on his
part would put others who took him for their
ideal and followed in his footsteps on a
wrong track and lead them to neglect their
duties, thus causing disturbance and disorder
in the world-process. Therefore, looking to
the interest of the world order it was improper
for Arjuna to give up the performance of his
duty.
A man of Knowledge has no duty of
his own; therefore, whatever he does, he
does only for the maintenance of the world
order. But even the practicant, who has not
yet attained perfection, can work in the
interest of the world order, taking the man
of knowledge for his ideal. Of course,
he cannot enact this role fully well. For
selfishness cannot be totally eradicated till
there is complete cessation of Ignorance; and
so long as there is the least trace of selfishness
in man, it is not possible for him
to work only for the maintenance of the
world order.
Though the man of Knowledge has no
personal duty, it does not mean that whatever
he does he does merely for show. Doing a
thing merely for show without entertaining
the least regard for it, is a form of hypocrisy.
The man of Knowledge can never be guilty
of hypocrisy. He does only that which he
regards as essential and necessary from the
point of view of maintaining the world order.
He has neither the spirit of exhibition, nor
attachment, nor desire, nor egoism. It is not
possible for others to know what it is that
inspires the actions of a man of Knowledge.
That is why his actions are considered to be
extraordinary and out of the common.
In the preceding verse Arjuna was advised by the Lord to take to action, looking
to the interest of the world order. In connection with this it may be asked, how does
action lead to the maintenance of the world order? This is taken up for discussion in
the next verse.

=== PAGE 167 ===

166
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«вҖәreВ¶ВўhaВЁГӯ, in this verse, refers
to an illumined saint, or man of Knowledge,
who has become known throughout the world
for his noble virtues and ideal conduct, and is
held in reverence by the generality of men
and enjoys their confidence. If such a great
man scrupulously performs the duties
devolving on him by virtue of his order in
society and stage in life, other common people
automatically follow his example and remain
engaged in performing the duties pertaining
to their VarЖ’a and Г…srama with faith and
reverence. This contributes to the efficient
working of the world order, which goes on
smoothly without any let or hindrance. But if
an illumined saint or man of Knowledge
gives up the performance of duties pertaining
to his VarЖ’a and Г…вҖ№rama, this creates an
impression on the mind of the common people
that no real virtue inheres in action; had there
been any real worth in actions, they would
not have been neglected by such a great soul;
and following his lead, they unhesitatingly
give up the performance of duties and the
observance of rules pertaining to their VarЖ’a
and Г…вҖ№rama. Thus a terrible confusion follows
and the whole world order is thrown into a
state of chaos and disorder. Therefore, looking
to the interests of the world order the man of
Knowledge should go on carefully and
efficiently performing all the duties appropriate
to his VarЖ’a and Г…вҖ№rama; he should neither
neglect nor abandon those duties.
The common run of men begin to
follow whatever the great man establishes by
his precept and practice as the standard of
morality, and perform their duties exactly on
the lines laid down by the great man. This
is what is meant by the statement that
Г¬whatever standard is set up by the great
man, is followed by the generality of men.Г®
Therefore, the great and noble man of
Knowledge, holding a position of honour in
society, should in the interest of the world
order very carefully perform his own duties
and thus teach men to perform their duties.
He should take particular care to see that by
precept or practice he may not prejudice
any useful custom or usage prevailing in a
VarЖ’a or Г…вҖ№rama and conserving the
interests of humanity, or any item of tradition
having connection with the basic virtues of
man.
The whole of humanity does not follow
a particular course of action. Duties of men
vary according to place, time, social conditions,
circumstances and the VarЖ’a and Г…вҖ№rama to
which they belong. It is not possible for a
great and noble soul to practise severally all
those duties himself so as to teach men their
respective duties. Therefore, whatever action,
sanctioned by the Vedas or by usage, he
approves and pronounces by word of mouth
to be proper and good, is accepted as a
standard and followed by the people. This
is what the Lord means by adding the second
half, which appears only a repetition of the
first half.
ГҝlЕ’ГҠГёвҒ„UГҒГғ 
ГјГҠпЈҝDГ”USГғГ»ГҠЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮпЈҝГғвҒ„UГҠпЈҝ 
ВЎЕёвҖ”вҖ“
вҖҡ ГҝГ В¬Лқв—ҠГҠГЎГҠВў вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ГғпЈҝ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§SГғЕ’ЕёГҲп¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝH 21H
ГҝГғЛңГ” ГҝГғЛңГ” whatever; вҖўГҠГёвҒ„UГҒГғ does; ГјГҠпЈҝDГ”UвҖ” a great man; ГғГғЛңГ” ГғГғЛңГ” (perform) that thing; вҲһп¬Ӯ alone;
ГҹГғвҒ„UвҖ” other; ВЎЕёвҖ” men (too); вҖҡвҖ” he; ГҝГғЛңГ” which; В¬Лқв—ҠГҠГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ГғпЈҝ sets up as a standard; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§вҖ” the
generality of men; ГғГғЛңГ” that; вҖўЕёГҲп¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝ follow.
For, whatever a great man does, that very thing other men also do; whatever
standard he sets up, the generality of men follow the same                 (21)

=== PAGE 168 ===

* Chapter III *
167
Arjuna has been addressed by the name
of Г«PГҘrthaГӯ in the present verse. This name
derives its origin from his mother, who bore
two names, PГҰthГҘ and KuntвҲӮ. In her childhood,
so long as she lived with her real father
вҖәВөurasena, she was called by the name of
PГҰthГҘ; but after her adoption by Kuntibhoja
she came to be known as KuntвҲӮ. The words
Г«PГҘrthaГӯ and Г«KaunteyaГӯ owe their origin to
these two names. Addressing Arjuna as
Г«PГҘrthaГӯ in this verse, BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
shows His endearment to him and points out
His close relationship with him on the
motherГӯs side, in order, as if, to assure him
while urging him to action that what He was
preaching to him was not something
commonplace or low. As a cousin, and dear
relation, the Lord assures Arjuna that He is
preaching to the latter what He Himself
actually practises in life, and what is bound
to do the highest good to him.
The Lord says that there is nothing in
all the three worlds for Him to do. He means
to point out that since man is primarily
concerned with this world, duties are prescribed
for him in this world with a view to the
realization of the fourfold object of life, viz.,
Dharma (virtue), Artha (wealth), KГҘma
(enjoyment) and MokВ¶a (liberation), He is,
however, no mortal man but God Himself,
the ordainer of duties for all beings, and is,
therefore, present in all the three worlds,Гі
heaven, earth and the subterranean regions.
Yet He has no duty to perform in any of
these three worlds.
By the statement that there was nothing
in the three worlds unattained by the Lord,
and yet He continued to work, He shows
that though he required nothing for Himself
and was not bound by any duty, being the
universal Lord Himself, who had all His
desires accomplished, yet He worked in the
interest of the world order out of compassion
for all, and did not renounce activity. Therefore,
no man should give up action under the false
idea that since he has no attachment for
enjoyments, nor requires anything for himself
as the fruit of his actions he has no reason
to work, or that having already attained the
supreme state, it is no longer necessary for
him to act. For, even though he may not
have any other reason to work, he should
continue to act at least in the interest of the
world order.
Thus showing how the actions of great men contribute to the interests of the world
order, the Lord now proceeds in the next three verses to establish the necessity of performing
the duties appropriate to oneГӯs VarЖ’a and Г…вҖ№rama by citing His own example.
Её в—ҠпЈҝ В¬ГҠГ•ГҠВёГҒSГғ вҲ‘В§ГғВёвҲҡГҝВў ГҒГІГҠВ·ГҲ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§В·ГҲ ГҒвҲ‘В§@ЕёUвҖ“
ЕёГҠЕёп¬ӮГҠ#в—Ҡп¬ӮГҠ#вҲҡГҝВў п¬ӮГғВё вҲһп¬Ӯ Гё вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒГЎГҠH 22H
Её not; в—ҠпЈҝ for Me; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthГҘ Arjuna; вҖўГҒSГғ (there) is; вҲ‘В§ГғВёвҲҡГҝв—ҠЛңГ” duty; ГҒГІГҠВ·ГҲ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§В·ГҲ
in the three worlds; ГҒвҲ‘В§@Её not to do; Её (is) not; вҖўЕёп¬ӮГҠ#в—ҠЛңГ” unattained; вҖўп¬ӮГҠ#вҲҡГҝв—ҠЛңГ” anything
worth attaining; п¬ӮГғпЈҝВё I persist; вҲһп¬Ӯ only; Гё and; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒГЎГҠ in action.
Arjuna, there is no obligatory duty in all the three worlds for Me to do, nor is there
anything worth attaining, unattained by Me; yet I continue to work.
(22)
ГҝГҒЕ’ sГ”вҖһВўU Её п¬ӮГғпЈҝВёГҝВў ВЎГҠГғГҲ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҝГғГҒГЈВәЛқГғвҖ”UвҖ“
в—Ҡв—Ҡ п¬ӮГ в—ҠГҠВёЕёГҲп¬ӮГғВёГЈГғпЈҝ в—ҠЕёГҲcГҝГҠвҖ” В¬ГҠГ•Вё вҖҡп¬ӮВёвүҘГҠвҖ”H 23H

=== PAGE 169 ===

168
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
In the preceding verse the Lord stated
that though He had no duty to perform, yet
He continued to work. With reference to this
it may be asked. Why does the Lord engage
in action, if really He has no duty to
perform? The Lord gives His reason in two
verses, which is indicated by the word Г«HiГӯ
used in this verse.
The LordГӯs descent on earth takes place
in order to establish the rule of righteousness
in society. Therefore, it can never be possible
for Him, at any time, to neglect the
performance of, or cease to perform any duty
with all its limbs with sufficient vigilance and
care. Nevertheless, in order to put forward
a reason for His engaging in action, He says
that if He did not perform action at any time,
great harm would come to the world. In
other words, being the Creator, Destroyer
and Controller of the entire universe and
being the Ideal Person for laying down
propriety of conduct, if He ever neglected
His duty a great disorganization would set
in the world-process. This has been made
clear by the Lord by the use of the words
Г«YadiГӯ and Г«JГҘtuГӯ in the present verse.
Lastly, the Lord says that people follow
His way in all matters. Thereby He shows
that some people regarded Him as very
powerful and great, while some regarded
Him as the Ideal Person; therefore, in whatever
way He performed an action, people
automatically tried to do it in that very way
and thus imitated His ways. Under the
circumstance, if He neglected the performance
of any duty, that is to say, if he failed to
do a thing efficiently and carefully, people
would at once begin to imitate Him and
would thus be deprived both of worldly
happiness and of the highest good. Therefore,
in order to teach the world how to act, He
duly performed every action with great vigilance
and care, and never allowed any inadvertence
to cause a lapse.
ГҝГҒЕ’ if; ГҒвҖһU for; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; Её п¬ӮГғпЈҝВёГҝв—ҠЛңГ” do not engage; ВЎГҠГғГҲ ever; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒГЎГҠ in action; вҖўГғГҒГЈВәЛқГғвҖ”
unwearied; в—Ҡв—Ҡ My; п¬ӮГ в—ҠВё way; вҖўЕёГҲп¬ӮГғВёГЈГғпЈҝ follow; в—ҠЕёГҲcГҝГҠвҖ” men; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son PГҰthГҘ, Arjuna; вҖҡп¬ӮВёвүҘГҠвҖ”
in all matters.
Should I not engage in action scrupulously at any time, great harm will come
to the world; for, Arjuna, men follow My way in all matters.              (23)
В©UГ вҖҡГӢЕ’пЈҝГҝГҲГҒвҒ„Uв—ҠпЈҝ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠ Её вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГҝГҠZ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё ГёпЈҝЕ’вҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”UвҖ“
вҖҡVГ”UвҒ„USГҝ Гё вҲ‘В§ГғГҠВё SГҝГҠв—ҠГҲВ¬вҖһUГЈГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡв—ҠГҠвҖ” В¬ЛқВЎГҠвҖ”H 24H
В©UГ вҖҡГӢЕ’пЈҝГҝГҲвҖ” will perish; Гҹв—ҠпЈҝ these; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠвҖ” worlds; Её вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГҝГҠВёв—ҠЛңГ” do not perform; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё action; ГёпЈҝГғЛңГ”
if; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; вҖҡVГ”UвҒ„USГҝ of confusion; Гё and; вҲ‘В§ГғГҠВё cause; SГҝГҠв—ҠЛңГ” I should prove to be; В©UВ¬вҖһUГЈГҝГҠв—ҠЛңГ” (and)
should destroy; Гҹв—ҠГҠвҖ” these; В¬ЛқВЎГҠвҖ” people.
If I cease to act, these worlds will perish; nay, I should prove to be the cause
of confusion and of the destruction of these people.                       (24)
Therefore, the clause Г¬if I cease to actГ®, does
not merely repeat the clause Г¬should I not
engage in action carefullyГ® occurring in the
preceding verse. Different ideas have been
enunciated in the two verses.
When the Lord says, Г¬If I cease to act,
In the preceding verse the Lord showed
the harm that would accrue if he did not
carefully and properly perform his duties;
while in the present verse He speaks of the
harm that would accrue if He did not act,
i.e., if He renounced action altogether.

=== PAGE 170 ===

* Chapter III *
169
these worlds will perish,Г® He shows that if
He renounced action, other people too would
do likewise, considering all works enjoined
by the scriptures to be nothing but useless
waste of time and energy; and under the
impulse of love and hatred and carried away
by the downward course of Nature, they
would begin to indulge in arbitrary and
wicked actions, and following the example
of one another all would become selfish,
corrupt and immoral. Thus, attached to worldly
enjoyments, and taking no account of the
injury that might be done to others, they
would begin to indulge in sinful actions
prohibited by the scriptures and detrimental
to the best interests of humanity for gaining
their own selfish ends. As a result of this,
they would be deprived of the fruit of human
existence, and would be thrown after death
into the wombs of lower species of beings,
or into hell.
The word Г«SaвҲҶkarasyaГӯ in the present
verse means every type of confusion in the
social order. According to his order in
society, stage in life, nationality, community,
nature, place, geographical surroundings, the
age in which he lives, the nation to which
he belongs and his individual circumstances,
everybody has his own particular Dharma
or duty to perform. Ignoring the rules laid
down by the scriptures if people fail to
perform their duty, the whole social order
gets disturbed, and the duties of the various
classes get mixed up. Thus falling off from
their respective duties, they all reach a
degraded state, so that they not only lose
their virtue, deviate from their duty and are
degraded from their social order, but the
human element of their character gets almost
lost. Therefore, in this verse, the Lord shows
that if he abandoned the duties as enjoined
by the scriptures, He would thereby be
instrumental in creating confusion in the
social order by showing the people by His
example the way to abandon duties enjoined
on them by the scriptures.
When man falls from his duty and all-
round confusion prevails over all the ranks
of society, he grows extremely selfish and
getting addicted to sense-enjoyments, starts
on a course of mutual destruction by various
means. For the sake of trivial and momentary
pleasures he does not hesitate to put an end
to the life of a fellow-man. Tyranny becomes
the order of the day, and the world is visited
by natural calamities of various types, which
destroy its resources of food and drink and
bring many forms of suffering to man in the
form of epidemics, droughts, floods, famines,
fires, earthquakes and the fall of meteors.
Men begin to die like flies and the whole
world is threatened with destruction. Referring
to this dreadful contingency the Lord says,
Г¬I should be the cause of destruction of these
people,Г® and thereby shows that if He
abandoned the duties enjoined by the scriptures,
He would be responsible in the above
manner for making people throw off all
forms of restraint, and thus bringing about
their eventual destruction.
Thus describing in three verses, by citing His own example, the consequences, on
the one hand, of not doing action carefully, and on the other, of total renunciation of
action, and proving that in the interest of the world order it is obligatory for all to perform
their allotted duty, the Lord now urges on even the man of Knowledge to perform action
with a view to maintenance of the world order:
вҖҡQВ§ГҠвҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҝГҒп¬ӮmГҠВўвҖҡГҠпЈҝ ГҝГ•ГҠ вҲ‘ГҲВ§п¬ӮВёГҒГЈГғ Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғUвҖ“
вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГҝГҠВёГҒmmГҠВўSГғГ•ГҠвҖҡQВ§ГҒpвҲ‘В§ГӢВ·ГҲВёвҲӮUГҠпЈҝВёвҲ‘В§вҖҡГҰЛңUГ” ВӘЛқвҖһUв—ҠГ”ЛңГ”
H 25H

=== PAGE 171 ===

170
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«KarmaЖ’iГӯ, in this verse refers
to the duties enjoined by the scriptures on
every individual with due regard to his order
in society, stage in life, nature and
circumstances, and does not include either
prohibited action or purposeless action; for
the Lord inculcates the necessity of keeping
the unwise engaged in such action, and urges
on the wise men also to perform their duty
like the unwise.
The expression Г¬the unwise attached to
actionГ®, in this verse, stands for those worldly-
minded men of action who scrupulously perform
the duties enjoined upon them by the scriptures
strictly according to their sphere of action and
possess full faith in devotion to and attachment
for the scriptures as well as the works enjoined
by them and their fruit. Being attached to
action, they can neither be classed with the
KarmayogвҲӮs of pure and SГҘttvika intent, striving
for blessedness, nor with the immoral TГҘmasika
men possessed of a demoniac, fiendish or
delusive nature, inasmuch as they reverently
perform works enjoined by the scriptures. They
should therefore, be taken to belong to the
class of men possessing a nature which partakes
of the elements of Sattva and Rajas both, and
who have been referred to in verses 42 to 44
of Chap. II under the name of the Г«unwiseГӯ in
verses 20 to 23 of Chap. VII under the epithet
Г«AlpamedhasГҘmГӯ (of meagre intelligence) and
in verses 20, 21, 23 and 24 of Chap. IX as
the Г«worshippers of other godsГӯ.
The devotion, zeal and earnestness with
which a mother nurses her child, on account
of her natural affection and attachment for
the child as well as the prospect of receiving
some return for her services in her old age,
cannot be found elsewhere; even so, he who
possesses natural attachment for actions and
the enjoyments that are obtained through them,
and faith in the scriptures which prescribe
them, duly performs all actions enjoined by
the scriptures, with all their attendant limbs,
with sincere faith, reverence and earnestness.
This cannot be expected from one who
possesses neither faith in the scriptures, nor
any aptitude for actions enjoined by the
scriptures. By the use of the words Г«YathГҘГӯ
and Г«TathГҘГӯ in this verse, the Lord has therefore
shown that even though the wise man is
altogether free from egoism, the sense of
doership, attachment and desire, nevertheless
with the sole object of maintaining the world
order he should scrupulously perform all works
enjoined by the scriptures, with their attendant
limbs, even as the unwise attached to action
do.
The adjective Г«AsaktaВЁГӯ, meaning
Г«without attachmentГӯ, used with the word
Г«VidvГҘnГӯ makes it clear that the latter has to
be understood in the sense of a wise man
who has realized God, and not in the sense
of one who possesses mere book knowledge;
for mere book knowledge does not make one
free from attachment.
The word Г«CikвҲӮrВ¶uВЁ (seeking), occuring
in the second half of the verse, shows that
even the man of Knowledge is not altogether
free from desire. But it should be clearly
understood that the desire which exists in an
illumined soul is not an ordinary but an
extraordinary type of desire. Words can
neither describe nor convey any idea of the
вҖҡQВ§ГҠвҖ” attached; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒГЎГҠ to action; вҖўГҒп¬ӮmГҠВўвҖҡвҖ” the unwise; ГҝГ•ГҠ as; вҲ‘ГҲВ§п¬ӮВёГҒГЈГғ act; Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғ O
descendant of Bharata, Arjuna; вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГҝГҠВёГғЛңГ” should act; ГҒп¬ӮmГҠЕёЛңГ” the wise man; ГғГ•ГҠ so; вҖўвҖҡQВ§вҖ”
unattached; ГҒГёвҲ‘В§ГӢВ·ГҲВёвҖ” seeking; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§вҖҡГҰЛңUГ”ВӘЛқвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” maintenance of the world order.
Arjuna, as the unwise act with attachment, so should the wise man, seeking
maintenance of the world order, act without attachment.                   (25)

=== PAGE 172 ===

* Chapter III *
171
desire arising in the mind of one who is
entirely free from desire. Only this much can
be said with regard to this desire that it is
a nominal desire and appears only in order
to keep all ordinary people engaged in the
performance of their duties. This type of
desire is found to exist in God as well, and
is really speaking no desire at all. Therefore,
the word Г«CikвҲӮrВ¶uВЁГӯ should be understood to
mean that only the right type of activity
proceeds from the wise man in the interest
of the world order so that the ordinary men
going to imitate him may not abandon their
duties and thereby bring ruin to themselves.
As a matter of fact, no other motive can be
ascribed to the actions of a saint.
Её вҖҷГҲГҒhГ·пЈҝЕ’Вў ВЎЕёГҝпЈҝЕ’ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠВў вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡГҒXГ”UЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ”UвҖ“
ВЎГҠпЈҝВ·ГҝпЈҝГ вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ ГҒп¬ӮmГҠГЈГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” вҖҡв—ҠГҠГёвҒ„UЕёЛңГ”H 26H
Её should not; вҖҷГҲГҒhГ·пЈҝЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” unsettling the mind; ВЎЕёГҝпЈҝГғЛңГ” cause; вҖўГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠв—ҠГ”ЛңГ” of the ignorant;
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡГҒXГ”UЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” attached to action; ВЎГҠпЈҝВ·ГҝпЈҝГғЛңГ” should get them to perform; вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ all (their)
duties; ГҒп¬ӮmГҠЕёЛңГ” the wise man; ГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” established (in the Self); вҖҡв—ҠГҠГёвҒ„UЕёЛңГ” duly performing (them
himself).
A wise man, established in the Self, should not unsettle the mind of the ignorant
attached to action, but should get them to perform all their duties, duly performing
his own duties.                                                        (26)
may undermine their faith or create doubt in
their mind about the necessity of performing
obligatory duties, or about the scriptures that
deal with them; for if their faith in these is
undermined they would, in the name of
Knowledge and disinterested action give up
whatever actions enjoined by the scriptures
they have been performing even with an
interested motive. That would, instead of
raising them to a higher level of spiritual
existence, degrade them to a lower level than
their present one. Therefore, the Lord does
not mean to say that the unwise should not
be given any instruction about Knowledge or
that they should not be enlightened about the
secret of selfless action; His intention is only
to show that the wise man should never allow
the thought to enter the mind of the ignorant
that action is unnecessary for the realization
of Truth or that action is no more necessary
after such realization. Nor should they be
allowed to entertain the idea that where there
is no desire for fruit, there is no necessity for
the pursuit of action; nor again should they
As in the preceding verse, the word
Г«VidvГҘnГӯ, with the adjective Г«YuktaВЁГӯ, in this
verse, stands for the wise man, who is free
from attachment and firmly established in
union with God.
Creating doubt in oneГӯs mind about the
propriety of a religious practice followed by
him for his spiritual evolution is what is meant
by unsettling oneГӯs mind. Thus, if a man who
is deeply attached to action and has faith in
religious practices and in the scriptures
prescribing such practices as well as in the
enjoyments of the other world is presented
with a point of view which undermines his
faith in those practices as well as in the scriptures
dealing with those practices, it will be
tantamount to creating confusion in his mind.
Therefore, when the Lord says in the present
verse that the wise man should not unsettle
the mind of the ignorant attached to action,
He means that while instructing such men
about selfless action or about realization of
the Ultimate Truth, the wise man should take
particular care not to utter or do anything which

=== PAGE 173 ===

172
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
be kept tied down to the erroneous conception
that the highest goal of human existence is to
attain heaven through the performance of action
with an interested motive and with attachment
to its fruit, and that there is no duty higher
than this. On the other hand, while trying to
banish from their mind all worldly attachment
and desire, the wise man should endeavour
by his conduct and instruction to keep the
unwise engaged in the performance of their
duties with the same amount of faith and
reverence.
It is no doubt true that when the unwise
perform the duties enjoined by the scriptures,
they do so with faith and reverence in their
heart. But when they hear discourses on the
realization of Truth, or on the necessity of
renouncing desire for the fruit of actions,
they generally fail to grasp the true import
of those teachings, and begin wrongly to
imagine that action is unnecessary for the
attainment of true Knowledge or for one
who has no attachment for its fruit. Necessarily,
therefore, action in his estimate occupies a
lower place in the field of spiritual discipline.
Influenced by this line of thought they
develop an inclination towards renunciation
of action, and in the end, giving up out of
ignorance the performance of obligatory duties,
become easy victims of sloth and error.
Therefore, in this verse, the Lord urges on
the wise man to perform efficiently and
without attachment all his duties and thereby
set up an ideal before others which may not
undermine their faith and interest in action
enjoined by the scriptures and whereby they
may be encouraged to perform their actions
scrupulously and selflessly or without claiming
their doership, and thereby realize the object
of their human existence.
Thus urging on the wise man, in two verses, to perform duties enjoined by the scriptures
from the point of maintaining the world order, the Lord proceeds in the next two verses to
differentiate the man of knowledge from the common run of men attached to action.
В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғпЈҝвҖ” ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§Гҝв—ҠГҠГЎГҠГҠГҒЕё ВӘГҲГЎГҠГ’вҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ вҖҡп¬ӮВёвүҘГҠвҖ”вҖ“
вҖўвҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„UГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҠГ в—ҠГҠ 
вҲ‘В§ГғГҠВёвҖһUГҒв—ҠГҒГғ 
в—ҠГЈГҝГғпЈҝH 27H
В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғпЈҝвҖ” of PrakГҰti (Primordial Matter); ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§Гҝв—ҠГҠГЎГҠГҠГҒЕё are being performed; ВӘГҲГЎГҠГ’вҖ” by modes;
вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ (all) actions; вҖҡп¬ӮВёвүҘГҠвҖ” in every way; вҖўвҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„UГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҠГ в—ҠГҠ whose mind is deluded by egoism;
вҲ‘В§ГғГҠВё (am) the doer; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; ГҹГҒГғ so; в—ҠГЈГҝГғпЈҝ thinks.
In fact, all actions are being performed by the modes of PrakГҰti (Primordial
Nature). He, whose mind is deluded by egoism, thinks, Г¬I am the doerГ®.       (27)
a sound, that of the skin to touch something,
that of the eye to see a form, that of the
tongue to taste, that of the nose to smell, that
of speech to utter sound, that of the hands
to grasp something, that of the feet to move,
and that of the organs of defecation and
urination to pass excreta. The word Г«actionsГӯ
includes all these functions. Therefore, when
the Lord says in this verse that Г«all actions
are being performed by the modes of
PrakГҰtiГӯ, He intends to bring out that whatever
It is the three qualities of Sattva, Rajas
and TamasГіborn of PrakГҰtiГіwhich are
transformed into twenty-three categories,
consisting of the intellect, ego and mind, the
five subtle elements of ether, etc., the ten
organs of perception and action and the five
objects of senses, viz., sound, etc. All these
are modes of PrakГҰti. Among these, the
function of the intellect is to analyse and
ascertain an object, that of the mind is to
reflect on an object, that of the ear to hear

=== PAGE 174 ===

* Chapter III *
173
actions take place in this world, are nothing
but the operation of the aforesaid modes
of PrakГҰti, and the absolute and formless
Г…tmГҘ (Self) has really nothing to do with
them.
The body is nothing but an aggregate
of the above twenty-three categories, viz.,
the intellect, ego and mind, the five subtle
elements, the ten organs of perception and
action, and the five objects of the senses. The
feeling of Г«IГӯ in respect of this body, or in
other words deep-rooted self-identification with
the same, is called the Г«egoГӯ. The unwise
man, whose mind is completely deluded by
this feeling of Г«IГӯ which has come down from
time without beginning, in other words, whose
power of discrimination has been lost, on
account of which he is unable to differentiate
the Spirit from Matter and does not realize
Himself as pure Spirit, altogether distinct
from the body, or as an eternal fraction of
God is referred to in this verse by the word
Г«AhaвҲҶkГҘravimВөuЕ’hГҘtmГҘГӯ. The word cannot,
therefore, be interpreted to mean the SГҘdhaka
following the path of Karmayoga, who is
free from attachment and endowed with
discrimination. For his mind is not deluded
by the ego; on the other hand, he is engaged
in the attempt to eradicate the ego.
Even though, as a matter of fact, the
soul has no relation with actions, the unwise
man, identifying himself with the body
consisting of the twenty-three elements,
associates himself with the different actions
of the body, and thus assumes himself to be
the doer of those actions. In other words, he
thinks it is he who resolves, he who reflects,
he who hears, he who sees, he who eats,
he who drinks, sleeps, walks, and so on, and
thus traces every action to himself. That is
why action becomes the cause of bondage
to him; and that is why in order to reap the
fruits of those actions he has to go through
the process of repeated births and deaths.
ГғГ»п¬ӮГҒп¬ӮГ»ГҠГҲ в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ ВӘГҲГЎГҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҠВӘГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ”вҖ“
ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠ ВӘГҲГЎГҠпЈҝВ·ГҲ п¬ӮГғВёГЈГғ ГҹГҒГғ в—ҠГ п¬ӮГҠ Её вҖҡГ®ГҠГғпЈҝГ”H 28H
ГғГ»п¬ӮГҒп¬ӮГғЛңГ” the knower of Truth; ГғГҲ but; в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ O mighty-armed Arjuna; ВӘГҲГЎГҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҠВӘГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ”
about the respective spheres of GuЖ’as (modes of PrakГҰti) and actions; ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠвҖ” the modes
of PrakГҰti; ВӘГҲГЎГҠпЈҝВ·ГҲ among the GuЖ’as (in the shape of objects of perception); п¬ӮГғВёГЈГғпЈҝ move; ГҹГҒГғ
so; в—ҠГ п¬ӮГҠ holding; Её not; вҖҡГ®ГҠГғпЈҝ gets attached (to them).
However, he, who has true insight into the respective spheres of GuЖ’as (modes
of PrakГҰti) and their actions, holding that it is the GuЖ’as (in the form of the senses,
mind, etc.,) that move among the GuЖ’as (objects of perception), does not get attached
to them, Arjuna.                                                       (28)
commentary of the preceding verse. The
three dispositions of the mind, known as
SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika which
determine the character of action as SГҘttvika,
RГҘjasika or TГҘmasika, and with reference to
which a man is spoken of as possessed of
SГҘttvika qualities, another as possessed of
RГҘjasika qualities, and a third as possessed
of TГҘmasika qualities,Гіall these modifications
The word Г«TuГӯ, in this verse, has been
used to bring out clearly the difference of
outlook between the man of knowledge and
the man of ignorance, as described in verse
27 above.
The word Г«GuЖ’avibhГҘgaГӯ denotes the
twenty-three categories which are the products
of the three GuЖ’asГіSattva, Rajas and Tamas,
and which have been referred to in the

=== PAGE 175 ===

174
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
of the mind also fall under category of the
GuЖ’as.
The word Г«KarmavibhГҘgaГӯ denotes the
different actions that proceed from the above
GuЖ’as, and have been described in the
course of the commentary on the preceding
verse, the sense of doership and attachment
with regard to which cause manГӯs bondage.
Both these categories of the GuЖ’as and their
actions are nothing but extensions of the
modes of PrakГҰti. Therefore, they all pertain
to matter, and are by nature ephemeral,
perishable, subject to modifications, illusory,
and appearing without any real foundation
like an unsubstantial dream. True insight into
both these categories consists in realizing the
fact that the soul stands apart from both these
categories of the GuЖ’as and their actions and
has no relation with them whatsoever, that
it is wholly devoid of attributes, formless,
changeless, eternal, pure, free and the very
embodiment of knowledge.
The JВӨГҘnayogвҲӮ who has thus obtained
true insight into the categories of the GuЖ’as
and actions, attributes every action of the
mind, intellect, senses and the body to the
fact that it is the products of these GuЖ’as
in the shape of all instruments of perception
such as the mind, intellect and senses that
are moving within the sphere of their respective
objects, which are also products of the
GuЖ’as and that he has no relation with either.
It is, therefore, that he does not get attached
either to any actions or to the fruits of such
actions in the shape of agreeable or disagreeable
experiences; in other words, he does not
associate himself with either. He looks upon
both the GuЖ’as and their actions as transient,
material and subject to change and perishable
and himself as eternal, pure, awakened,
changeless, a non-doer and absolutely
unattached. Verses 8 and 9 of Chapter V,
and, again, verse 19 of Chap. XIV reiterate
the same truth.
Showing thus the distinction between the outlook of the generality of men attached
to action and that of the JВӨГҘnayogвҲӮ, the Lord now urges on the exalted soul who has
fully realized the nature of the Self not to unsettle the ignorant folk attached to action.
В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғпЈҝВӘГҲВёГЎГҠвҖҡГӘв—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҠвҖ” 
вҖҡГ®ГҠГЈГғпЈҝ 
ВӘГҲГЎГҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡГҲвҖ“
ГғГҠЕёвҲ‘ГҺВ§Г FГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГЈЕ’ГҠГЈвҲ‘ГҺВ§Г FГҒп¬ӮГӣГҠ ГҒп¬ӮГёГҠвҲӮUГҝпЈҝГғЛңГ”H 29H
В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғпЈҝвҖ” of PrakГҰti; ВӘГҲГЎГҠвҖҡГӘв—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҠвҖ” completely deluded by the GuЖ’as; вҖҡГ®ГҠГЈГғпЈҝ remain attached;
ВӘГҲГЎГҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡГҲ to (those) GuЖ’as and actions; ГғГҠЕёЛңГ” those; вҖўвҲ‘ГҺВ§Г FГҒп¬ӮЕ’вҖ” insufficiently knowing; в—ҠГЈЕ’ГҠЕёЛңГ”
fools; вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г FГҒп¬ӮГғЛңГ” the man of perfect Knowledge; Её ГҒп¬ӮГёГҠвҲӮГҝпЈҝГғЛңГ” should not unsettle (the minds of).
Those who are completely deluded by the GuЖ’as (modes) of PrakГҰti remain
attached to those GuЖ’as and actions; the man of perfect Knowledge should not unsettle
the mind of those ignorants of imperfect understanding.                             (29)
and attachment for the same and out of desire
for obtaining enjoyments in this world and
the next. It cannot refer to those sinless men
of a SГҘttvika nature who are engaged in
spiritual discipline with the object of God-
realization; for they are not deluded by the
modes of PrakГҰti. Nor can it refer to men
The word Г«GuЖ’asammВөuЕ’hГҘВЁГӯ in this
verse stands for those worldly-minded and
unenlightened men attached to action who
have already been referred to in verse 25 and
26, whose nature is constituted of RajoguЖ’a
mixed up with the quality of Sattva, and who
are engaged in performing actions with faith

=== PAGE 176 ===

* Chapter III *
175
of TГҘmasika temperament, who are addicted
to prohibited action; for having no faith in
the scriptures, they neither perform nor have
any attachment for the performance of
prescribed duties. Therefore, there can be no
question of dissuading one from undermining
the faith of these men of a TГҘmasika nature
in action; on the other hand, their faith in
the scriptures has to be fostered with a view
to winning them over from their addiction
to prohibited actions and induce them to take
up the performance of prescribed duties with
diligence and care.
Г¬Deluded by the GuЖ’as, these worldly-
minded men remain attached to the GuЖ’as
and actions.Г® By making this statement, the
Lord intends to show that such men possess
no knowledge of any happiness that lies
beyond the range of PrakГҰti; in their view
highest form of happiness lies in the enjoyments
of the world. That is why they remain
attached to enjoyments, which are products
of the three GuЖ’as, as well as to actions
which are the means of obtaining such
enjoyments. They never seek or endeavour
to free themselves from the bondage of these
GuЖ’as.
The words Г«AkГҰtsnavidaВЁГӯ and Г«MandГҘnГӯ,
accompanied by the word Г«TГҘnГӯ show that
men of the type described above, who work
with interested motives, although they have
no full knowledge of the real truth or of the
highest goal of human existence, nevertheless
because they possess faith in the duties
prescribed by the scriptures and their fruits,
do possess some amount of knowledge,
however insufficient. Therefore, they are
much superior to those unruly and wayward
men of a TГҘmasika nature, who regard vice
as virtue and virtue as vice. They are not
totally devoid of intelligence, only they are
men of meagre intelligence. Therefore their
actions, instead of leading to God-realization,
bring them perishable enjoyments of the
world.
The word Г«KГҰtsnavitГӯ, in the present
verse, stands for the illumined saint, who
having thoroughly understood the truth about
the spheres of the GuЖ’as and their actions
as described above has fully realized the true
nature of God. By asking such men not to
unsettle the mind of those men of insufficient
knowledge, the Lord means that it is not
advisable to dissuade men who have faith
in action and perform actions with interested
motives from actions enjoined by the scriptures
or to weaken their faith and interest in the
performance of such actions by placing
before them argumetns showing that action
involves much strain and exertion, that action
is of no avail, that the world is but an
illusion, and that all action leads to bondage;
for this may lead to their downfall. The real
truth of spiritual knowledge should, therefore,
be brought home to them keeping undisturbed
their faith in actions prescribed by the scriptures,
in the fruits of such actions, as well as in
the scriptures prescribing them. At the same
time, they should be taught to perform
SГҘttvika actions (XVIII.23) with faith, diligence
and earnestness, or practise the SГҘttvika
form of renunciation (XVIII.9), giving up
attachment, the sense of doership and the
desire for fruit, so that they may easily
understand the truth and be properly initiated
into its secrets.
In response to ArjunaГӯs prayer to tell him definitely the one discipline by which he
might obtain the highest good, the Lord established from verse 4 up to this point that
in whatever state one may be, he should continue to perform the duties prescribed for
him by the scriptures, according to his order in society, stage in life, nature and
circumstances. In order to establish this point, the Lord made the following observations
one after another in the preceding verses:

=== PAGE 177 ===

176
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
(1)
Without performing action, man does not attain actionlessness, or perfection in
Karmayoga (III.4).
(2)
Merely by renouncing action, man does not attain perfection in JВӨГҘnayoga (III.4).
(3)
Man cannot remain totally inactive even for a moment (III.5).
(4)
Outwardly renouncing action and mentally dwelling on the objects of senses, is
hypocrisy (III.6).
(5)
He who performs action selflessly, controlling the mind and senses, is the best of
men (III.7).
(6)
Action is superior to inaction (III.8).
(7)
Abstaining from action, one cannot even maintain the body (III.8).
(8)
Action performed for the sake of sacrifice causes no bondage, but leads to
salvation (III.9).
(9)
Action has been enjoined upon man by the Creator, BrahmГҘ, and selfless performance
of action leads to the highest good (III.10,11).
(10)
He who enjoys objects without performing his duty is a thief (III.12).
(11)
He who derives his sustenance from what is left over after sacrifice, just for the sake
of keeping up his body, gets absolved of all sins (III.13).
(12)
He who, without performing sacrifices, cooks food only for nourishing his body is
a sinner (III.13).
(13)
He who, abandoning his duties, hinders the operation of the wheel of creation,
leads a sinful life and lives in vain (III.16).
(14)
Doing work without attachment, man attains God (III.19).
(15)
It was through action that Janaka and others reached perfection in ancient times
(III.20).
(16)
Other men imitate what a great man does; therefore, a great man should perform
action (III.21).
(17)
God has no duty, and yet He works with a view to maintaining the world order
(III.22).
(18)
The wise man has no duty, and yet he should work in the interest of the world order
(III.25).
(19)
A wise man should in no way deter men from the performance of their duty by
renouncing action himself or by instructing men to do so, but should perform
duties himslef and get others to do the same (III.26).
(20)
The man of perfect knowledge should not unsettle the minds of men attached to
action by instructing them to renounce their prescribed duties (III.29).
Showing by these arguments the indispensable necessity of performing action, the
Lord now, in response to ArjunaГӯs Prayer contained in verse 2, tells him the best discipline
for the attainment of highest good, and commands Arjuna to fight.
в—ҠГҒГҝ вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ вҖҡГӣГҝSГҝГҠГӨГҝГҠГ в—ҠГёпЈҝГғвҖҡГҠвҖ“
ГҒЕёвҒ„UГҠвүҘГҠГӢГҢЕёв—ҠВёв—ҠГҠпЈҝ Г·ГҚГ п¬ӮГҠ ГҝГҲГӨГҝSп¬Ӯ ГҒп¬ӮВӘГғГ–п¬ӮвҒ„UвҖ”H 30H
в—ҠГҒГҝ to Me; вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ all; вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ actions; вҖҡГӣГҝSГҝ dedicating; вҖўГӨГҝГҠГ в—ҠГёпЈҝГғвҖҡГҠ with (your) mind
fixed on the Self (Me); ГҒЕёвҒ„UГҠвүҘГҠГӢвҖ” without hope; ГҒЕёв—ҠВёв—ҠвҖ” devoid of the feeling of Г«mineГӯ; Г·ГҚГ п¬ӮГҠ
becoming; ГҝГҲГӨГҝSп¬Ӯ fight; ГҒп¬ӮВӘГғГ–п¬ӮвҒ„UвҖ” cured of mental agitation.

=== PAGE 178 ===

* Chapter III *
177
The word Г«CetasГӯ forming part of the
compound word Г«AdhyГҘtmacetasГҘГӯ stands
for the mind which has developed faith in
God, the inner witness of all hearts, after a
due recognition of His virtues, glory and real
nature, and thinking of Him constantly and
under every circumstance. He who dedicates
his actions to God with the help of such a
mind realizes God to be almighty, all-pervading
and omniscient, the support of all, the universal
Lord, the supreme object of realization, the
supreme goal, the greatest well-wisher, the
best and dearest friend, and supremely kind.
Recognizing the body accompanied by the
mind and senses and all their actions as well
as all objects of the world as belonging to
God, he renounces all attachment and the
sense of possession with regard to them. He
believes that he is absolutely powerless, that
it is God Himself who lends him the necessary
power and is getting everything duly performed
by him according to His own will and that
he is a mere tool in His hands. In this way
he regards himself as wholly subordinate to
God, and goes on performing all actions as
a mere puppet for His sake and under His
inspiration and guidance, and according to
His directions, mentally renouncing all
connection with those actions and with their
fruits, and taking everything as belonging to
Him. Such a man is said to have dedicated
all his actions to God with the mind fixed
on Him. Verse 6 of Chap. XII, and verses
57 and 66 of Chap. XVIII similarly speak
of surrendering all actions and duties to
God.
The sense of possession, hope and mental
agitation cease to exist in him who has thus
dedicated all his actions and duties to God
and always keeps his mind fixed on Him. It
is in order to bring home this truth to Arjuna
that the Lord advises him in this verse to
engage himself in the fight after conquering
these evils. The Lord intends to show that
transferring the responsibility for all his actions
to Him, Arjuna should rid himself of all
morbid feelings such as hope and the sense
of possession, love and hatred, joy and grief,
etc., and should carry on the fight according
to His commands after that. Therefore, so
long as while performing actions or enjoying
their fruit a SГҘdhaka is found to have the
feeling of possession and desire with regard
to those actions and their fruit, or so long as
his mind is subject to morbid feelings such as
attraction and repulsion, joy and grief, etc., it
should be clearly understood that all his actions
have not been dedicated to God.
Therefore, dedicating all actions to Me, with your mind fixed on Me, the Self of
all, free from desire and the feeling of meum and cured of mental agitation, fight. (30)
Thus revealing to Arjuna the definite discipline that would lead to his highest good,
and commanding him to fight, the Lord proceeds in the next verse to declare the fruit
of the practice of this discipline:
ГҝпЈҝ в—ҠпЈҝ в—ҠГғГҒв—ҠЕ’Вў ГҒЕёГ Гҝв—ҠЕёГҲГҒГғDГ”UГҒГЈГғ в—ҠГҠЕёп¬ӮГҠвҖ”вҖ“
ГјГҠhГҠп¬ӮГЈГғГҠпЈҝЛҳЕёвҖҡГҚГҝГЈГғГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҲГ«ГҝГЈГғпЈҝ ГғпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒГ·вҖ”H 31H
ГҝпЈҝ who; в—ҠпЈҝ My; в—ҠГғв—ҠЛңГ” teaching; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this; ГҒЕёГ Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” always; вҖўЕёГҲГҒГғDГ”UГҒГЈГғ follow; в—ҠГҠЕёп¬ӮГҠвҖ” the men;
ГјГҠhГҠп¬ӮГЈГғвҖ” (and) devout; вҖўЕёвҖҡГҚГҝГЈГғвҖ” uncavilling; в—ҠГҲГ«ГҝГЈГғпЈҝ are released; ГғпЈҝ they; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒГ·вҖ”
from (the bondage of) actions.
Even those men, who, with an uncavilling and devout mind, always follow this
teaching of Mine, are released from the bondage of all actions.              (31)

=== PAGE 179 ===

178
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The use of the word Г«MГҘnavГҘВЁ with the
adjective Г«YeГӯ in this verse brings out the fact
that the pursuit of the discipline thus revealed
to Arjuna is not intended to be confined to
any particular community, or to any particular
individual. All men are qualified to pursue it.
Dedicating all their duties and actions to God
in the above manner, men belonging to any
and every caste or order, nationality or
community may follow it.
The two words Г«вҖәraddhГҘvantaВЁГӯ and
Г«AnasВөuyantaВЁГӯ used in the verse indicate that
those who find fault with the Lord, and look
upon Him as an ordinary human being rather
than God Himself, and have no faith in Him,
are not qualified for the pursuit of this
discipline. It can be pursued only by him who
never finds fault with the Lord, and always
cherishes faith in and devotion to the Lord.
Therefore, those who desire to pursue this
discipline should acquire these qualifications.
Without these qualifications, it is difficult even
to understand the implications of this discipline,
to say nothing of pursuing it.
The teaching of the Lord is no doubt
eternally true; hence the adjective Г«NityamГӯ
may as well be taken to qualify the word
Г«MatamГӯ. But in the context of this verse,
it appears more appropriate to treat it as an
adjunct to Г«AnutiВ¶ВўhantiГӯ. It thus means that
the SГҘdhaka should dedicate once for all his
actions to God and should carry on all his
duties in that spirit of dedication. The use
of the word Г«evenГӯ (Api) in the clause Г«even
they get releasedГӯ is intended to show that
when by pursuing this discipline it is possible
even for ordinary men to get over the
binding effect of actions i.e., to attain freedom
for all time from the bondage of births and
deaths, and realize God, the very embodiment
of supreme bliss, it should be much easier
for Arjuna to attain that state.
Describing thus the fruit of following the above teaching, the Lord now shows the
harm in not following it.
ГҝпЈҝ Г п¬ӮпЈҝГғЕ’ГЁГҝвҖҡГҚГҝГЈГғГҠпЈҝ ЕёГҠЕёГҲГҒГғDГ”UГҒГЈГғ в—ҠпЈҝ в—ҠГғв—ҠГ”ЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГҙГҠГҠЕёГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҠВўSГғГҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГҒh 
ЕёCГ”UГҠЕёГёпЈҝГғвҖҡвҖ”H 32H
ГҝпЈҝ (they) who; ГғГҲ but; вҲһГғГғЛңГ” this; вҖўГЁГҝвҖҡГҚГҝГЈГғвҖ” carping (at Me); Её not; вҖўЕёГҲГҒГғDГ”UГҒГЈГғ follow;
в—ҠпЈҝ My; в—ҠГғв—ҠЛңГ” teaching; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГҙГҠГҠЕёГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҠЕёЛңГ” deluded in the matter of all knowledge; ГғГҠЕёЛңГ” those; ГҒп¬ӮГҒh
know; ЕёCГ”UГҠЕёЛңГ” lost; вҖўГёпЈҝГғвҖҡвҖ” fools.
They, however, who, finding fault with this teaching of Mine, do not follow it,
take those fools to be deluded in the matter of all knowledge as lost.
 (32)
all actions to Him, and so onГіthis is what is
meant by Г¬finding fault with this teaching.Г®
And following the above arguments he who
refuses to renounce the sense of possession,
attachment and desire, and instead of offering
all actions to God, follows the dictates of his
own will and abandons the duties and actions
enjoined by the scriptures, is said to flout this
teaching of the Lord.
The word Г«AcetasaВЁГӯ refers to those
stupid and depraved men of a TГҘmasika
The word Г«TuГӯ indicates that the present
verse describes the fate of those who follow
a course which is quite the reverse of that
followed by the SГҘdhakas referred to in the
preceding verse.
Treating the Lord as an ordinary human
being, and entertaining or propagating the idea
that He has imparted this teaching in order to
elicit the homage of the people, and that it is
absurd to think that one gets released from
the bondage of Karma by merely surrendering

=== PAGE 180 ===

* Chapter III *
179
disposition, whose mind is full of evil thoughts
and evil impulses and who possess neither
discrimination nor self-control. This is the
reason why this type of men get perverted,
on account of which they entertain wrong
notions about the means of happiness in this
world and the next; that is why they get
addicted to evil ways. This brings about their
degradation in this world, as well as in the
next. They fall from their human state, and
on leaving this body have to expiate their
sins by taking birth in the lower species of
animals such as a dog or a swine, or go
through the terrible tortures of hell.
The preceding verse stated that those who do not follow the above teaching of the
Lord are lost. On this it may be asked: What harm will accrue to the man, who instead
of performing his duties in accordance with the above teaching of the Lord, wilfully
renounces all activities? In answer to this, the Lord says:
вҖҡЕ’ГҺвүҘГҠВў ГёпЈҝCГ”UГғпЈҝ Sп¬ӮSГҝГҠвҖ” В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғпЈҝГҙГҠГҠВёЕёп¬ӮГҠЕёГҒВ¬вҖ“
В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғВў ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё ГҒЕёВӘЛқвҖһUвҖ” ГҒвҲ‘ВўВ§ вҲ‘В§ГҒвҒ„UcГҝГҒГғH 33H
вҖҡЕ’ГҺвүҘГҠв—ҠЛңГ” according to the tendencies; ГёпЈҝCГ”UГғпЈҝ acts; Sп¬ӮSГҝГҠвҖ” В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғпЈҝвҖ” of his own nature; ГҙГҠГҠЕёп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ”
the wise (man); вҖўГҒВ¬ too; В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” (their) nature; ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ follow; Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё (all) living  creatures;
ГҒЕёВӘЛқвҖһUвҖ” restraint; ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” what; вҲ‘В§ГҒвҒ„UcГҝГҒГғ can do.
All living creatures follow their tendencies; even the wise man acts according
to the tendencies of his own nature. What can restraint do?
 (33)
saint, who knows the real truth about God.
The word Г«ApiГӯ shows that when even
the wise man, who has risen above all the
GuЖ’as, acts according to the tendencies of
his own nature, much less can the ignorant
man, who is completely under the sway of
PrakГҰti, forcibly arrest the course of PrakГҰti.
In this connection it must be conceded
that the nature of even God-realized saints
varies in each individual case. This difference
is inevitable owing to differences in the
course of discipline which was followed by
them, as also diversity in the nature of the
PrГҘrabdha which has been responsible for
their birth.
The illumined soul, in fact, has nothing
to do with the latencies of Karma, nor does
he perform any action. Of course, seeds of
PrГҘrabdha, sowed by him in his previous
lives remain stored in his mind, and it is by
force of these seeds that his intellect, mind
and senses function of their own accord
By the statement that Г«all living creatures
follow their tendenciesГӯ the Lord shows in
this verse that just as the water of the various
rivers naturally flows towards the ocean, and
none can forcibly obstruct its course, even
so, all living beings tied down to their own
nature are drifting along the course of nature
towards Nature itself. Therefore, it is not
possible for anybody to renounce all his
activities forcibly. Of course, even as the
course of a river can be turned from one
direction to another, so can man by changing
the aim of his life turn the course of life from
one direction to another. In other words,
renouncing likes and dislikes, he can utilize
his actions as aids to God-realization.
The word Г«PrakГҰtiГӯ here denotes the
distinctive nature of an individual, representing
the sum-total of tendencies of actions done
in previous lives and stored up in his
mind.
The Г«JВӨГҘnavГҘnГӯ refers to the God-realized

=== PAGE 181 ===

180
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
without any agent just for the fruition of that
PrГҘrabdha and in the interest of the world
order. Attributing these actions of the intellect,
mind and sense to the man of Knowledge
from the point of view of the world, it is
asserted that Г¬the wise man too acts according
to the tendencies of his own nature.Г® Inasmuch
as the actions of the wise man take place
without any agent, they are altogether free
from likes and dislikes; and the sense of
doership as well as the feeling of possession
are also absent in them. That is why they
are nothing more than mere gestures of
action, and cannot be called actions as such.
This is what the Lord seeks to convey by
the use of the verb Г«CeВ¶ВўateГӯ.
The wise man, in fact, ceases to have
any connection with the mind; much less can
he have any connection with the modifications
of the mind in the shape of noble qualities
or morbid feelings. But it must be remembered
in this connection that even the mind of the
wise man becomes exceptionally pure. A
SГҘdhaka succeeds in realizing God only
when through the constant practice of
meditation on God the evils of impurity and
distraction and the veil of ignorance have
totally disappeared from the mind. Therefore,
morbid feelings like egoism, the sense of
possession, attraction and repulsion, joy and
grief, hypocrisy and duplicity, lust and anger,
greed and infatuation and so on, which have
their root in Nescience, cannot exist in that
mind; they totally disappear from it. That is
why in the exceptionally pure and unsullied
mind of the saint, virtues like equanimity,
contentment, 
compassion, 
forgiveness,
desirelessness and tranquillity etc., naturally
reveal themselves, and it is under the impulse
of these sentiments that actions enjoined by
the scriptures continue to be performed by
his mind, senses and body in the interest of
the world order. All forms of vice and evil
conduct take leave of him for good.
Although in the stories narrated in the
PurГҘЖ’as and the class of literature known by
the name of Г«ItihГҘsaГӯ (history) we come across
a number of episodes which go to show that
evil impulses of lust, anger etc., appear even
in the mind of wise men and perfect souls,
and influence the actions proceeding from their
senses, it must be remembered in this connection
that positive injunctions (Vidhi-VГҘkyas)
contained in the scriptures possess a greater
force than such episodes; and ordinances of
an interdictory nature (NiВ¶edha-VГҘkyas) are
even more authoritative than positive
injunctions. Moreover, it is difficult to make
out the inner meaning of the episodes we
come across in the stories of the PurГҘЖ’as and
other books. The right conclusion, under such
circumstances, seems to be that if the mind of
any of the saints referred to in those stories
was really possessed by the evil impulses of
lust, anger etc., and their actions were also
swayed by them, they were not, really speaking,
God-realized saints; for, nowhere in the
scriptures do we come across positive
injunctions which may lead us to conclude
that such evil propensities do exist in the mind
of an illumined soul. On the other hand, we
find the scriptures denying at many places
the existence of evil propensities in an
enlightened soul. Even in the GвҲӮtГҘ, wherever
we find the characteristics of God-realized
saints mentioned, they are invariably declared
to be totally free from attraction and repulsion,
lust and anger and other forms of vice and
evil conduct (V.26, 28; XII.17). If however,
in the interest of the world order, they ever
found it necessary to act under these impulses
as in a drama, such an action on their part
cannot be held to be blame-worthy.
By saying Г¬what  use is external restraint?Г®
the Lord shows that none can forcibly
remain inactive even for a moment (III.5);

=== PAGE 182 ===

* Chapter III *
181
he would be helplessly driven by his nature
to act (XVII.59, 60). Therefore, instead of
seeking to obtain release from the bondage
of Karma through renunciation of prescribed
duties, one should attempt to free himself
from such bondage while continuing to
perform actions enjoined by oneГӯs own
nature. One can succeed only by following
this latter method. Renunciation of prescribed
duties, on the other hand, would make him
wayward and unruly, and would further
tighten the knot of bondage and bring about
his downfall.
Evil actions, prohibited by the scriptures,
proceed from attraction and repulsion; whereas
noble deeds sanctioned by the scriptures are
mainly inspired by faith, devotion and other
virtues. Man is free to renounce evils like
attraction and repulsion, lust and anger, etc.,
and awaken faith, devotion and other virtues.
Therefore, abandoning vices, and cherishing
in his heart faith in and devotion to God and
the scriptures, man should perform his duties
for the pleasure of God. He who performs
action, keeping this ideal before him, can never
be guilty of any prohibited action. He will
perform only virtuous deeds; and they too
will always be conducive to liberation and
will never lead to bondage. In other words,
man is not free to restrain his actions; he will
invariably be driven to action. But every body
is free to reform his nature by cultivating the
SГҘttvika virtues. Even as his nature will
progressively improve, his actions will
automatically become purer and purer.
Therefore, depending on God, everyone should
attempt to reform his nature. This is the only
way to elevate oneself.
If everybody must act according to the tendencies of his nature, what should he do
to attain freedom from the bondage of Karma? In answer to this question, the Lord says:
ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝSГҝпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝSГҝГҠГ•пЈҝВё вҒ„UГҠВӘmпЈҝВ·ГҠГ’ вҲҡГҝп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғГҠГ’вҖ“
ГғГҝГҠпЈҝЕёВё п¬ӮвүҘГҠв—ҠГҠВӘГ«ВҝпЈҝUГ»ГҠГҠГ’ sГ”SГҝ В¬ГҒвҒ„UВ¬ГҒГЈГ•ЕёГҠГ’H 34H
ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝSГҝ ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝSГҝ of each sense; вҖўГ•пЈҝВё in the object; вҒ„UГҠВӘmпЈҝВ·ГҠГ’ attraction and repulsion; вҲҡГҝп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғГҠГ’
are rooted; ГғГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” of these two; Её not; п¬ӮвүҘГҠв—ҠЛңГ” under the sway; вҖўГҠВӘГ«ВҝпЈҝUГғЛңГ” one should come; ГғГҠГ’
both of them (are); ГҒвҖһU because; вҖўSГҝ his; В¬ГҒвҒ„UВ¬ГҒГЈГ•ЕёГҠГ’ enemies (standing in the way of his
redemption).
Attraction and repulsion are rooted in all sense-objects. Man should never allow
himself to be swayed by them, because they are the two principal enemies standing
in the way of his redemption.                                              (34)
contact or from which they get dissociated.
Man feels attracted towards an object,
being or even what appears favourable to
him,Гіwhich reacts agreeably on his mind.
And he conceives an aversion for that which
reacts disagreeably on his mind or appears
unfavourable to him. Agreeability and
disagreeability do not inhere in a particular
object as such, it is the attitude of mind with
regard to it which makes the same thing
The word Г«IndriyasyaГӯ has been used
twice in this verse with reference to the word
Г«ArtheГӯ. The intention of this is to show that
the word covers all the senses of preception
viz., the eye, the ear etc., and all the organs
of action viz., speech etc., and the mind, and
to indicate that attraction and repulsion are
rooted severally in the various objects of
each of these senses including the mind, i.e.,
in each object with which they come in

=== PAGE 183 ===

182
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
appear as agreeable to one individual and
disagreeable to another. And the same thing,
which appears agreeable to a particular
individual at one time, appears disagreeable
to the same individual at another. Therefore,
attraction and repulsion lie hidden in all
sense-objects. That is to say, one feels
attraction and aversion for all things; for,
whenever man comes into contact with them,
or is disunited from them, attraction and
repulsion make their appearance.
While performing duties and actions
prescribed by the scriptures, oneГӯs mind and
senses are sure to come in contact with
sense-objects, or get disunited from them; but
during such contact or dissociation he who
does not conceive an object, being or event
as favourable or unfavourable, and remaining
even-minded in success and failure, victory
and defeat, gain or loss etc., does not give
way to joy or grief, is said to be above
attraction and repulsion. For, it is only when
a man is swayed by these impulses, that he
perceives diversity everywhere and gives
way to the morbid feelings of joy and grief.
Therefore, surrendering himself to God, man
should try to rise completely above attraction
and repulsion.
Giving way to attraction and repulsion
due to ignorance, and regarding the transient
worldly enjoyments as the source of happiness,
man strays away from the path leading to
spiritual bliss. The two impulses of attraction
and repulsion, deceiving the SГҘdhaka, entangle
him in the mesh of worldly objects and thus
placing obstacles in the path of his spiritual
progress, rob him of his invaluable possession
in the shape of human existence. The result
is that he cannot realize the highest object
of human existence, and coming under the
sway of these impulses, abandons his own
duty, and adopts the duty of another, or
resorts to various forms of prohibited acts for
the sake of worldly enjoyments. As the result
of this, he meets with a tragic fate even after
death. That is why the impulses of attraction
and repulsion have been referred to as the
two principal enemies of man standing in the
way of his redemption.
Suppose a traveller who is proceeding
towards his destined goal meets some robbers
on the way, who make friendly gestures to
him and conspiring with his fellow-travellers
and the driver of his coach and others
succeed with their help in misguiding his
judgment. Nay, by tempting him with offers
of fictitious enjoyments they entrap him by
their cajoling words and turning him away
from his destination take him to an unknown
forest in the opposite direction, where they
strip him of all his possessions and throw
him into a deep pit. Even so, these two
impulses of attraction and repulsion appear
in a friendly garb before the SГҘdhaka on the
spiritual path and quietly enter his mind and
senses, and robbing him of his judgment and
throwing before him the temptation of worldly
enjoyments, drag him into evil ways. Thereby
the course of his SГҘdhanГҘ or spiritual discipline
is arrested and he has to go through terrible
suffering in hell as the result of his evil
deeds.
At this point, the thought might arise in ArjunaГӯs mind that he might easily succeed
in getting rid of the impulses of attraction and repulsion by engaging in peaceful pursuits,
and maintaining himself by alms, instead of taking to a dreadful pursuit like participation
in a fight. Anticipating this, the Lord says:
ГјГҠпЈҝГҝГҠГЈSп¬ӮЕ“в—ҠГҠпЈҝВё ГҒп¬ӮВӘГҲГЎГҠвҖ” В¬вҒ„UЕ“в—ҠГҠВёГ Sп¬ӮЕёГҲГҒDГ”UГғГҠГғЛңГ”вҖ“
Sп¬ӮЕ“в—ҠпЈҝВё ГҒЕёЕ“ЕёВў ГјГҠпЈҝГҝвҖ” В¬вҒ„UЕ“в—ҠГҠпЈҝВё Г·ГҝГҠп¬ӮвҖһUвҖ”H 35H

=== PAGE 184 ===

* Chapter III *
183
The 
adjectives 
Г«ViguЖ’aВЁГӯ 
and
Г«SvanuВ¶ВўhitГҘt, qualifying Г«SvadharmaВЁГӯ and
Г«ParadharmГҘtГӯ respectively carry the sense of
Г«partiallyГӯ Г«performedГӯ and Г«full of meritsГӯ in
addition to their primary meaning of Г«devoid
of meritГӯ and Г«well performedГӯ respectively.
One should also remember in this connection
that the special duties of the BrГҘhmaЖ’a are
higher than those of the VaiвҖ№ya and the
KВ¶atriya etc., inasmuch as they involve the
practice of virtues like non-violence etc., to
a greater degree than in the case of the latter.
Even so the duties prescribed for the recluse
are higher and more sacred than the duties
of a householder, and the duties of the
VaiвҖ№ya and the KВ¶atriya are nobler than the
duty of the вҖәВөudra. Understood in this light,
the words Г«the duty of another, well performedГӯ
signify duties which though full of merits,
and scrupulously performed with all their
limbs, are yet not prescribed for the performer,
but have been prescribed for others. The
statement that Г¬oneГӯs own duty, though
devoid of merit, is preferable to the duty of
another well performedГ®, should, therefore,
be taken to mean that just as it is always
good and meritorious for a woman to serve
her own husband, even though the latter may
have a repulsive appearance and may be
devoid of merits, even so the duty prescribed
for a particular individual, though deficient
in merit and imperfectly performed, is good
and beneficial for him. This is all the more
true of a duty which is full of all virtues,
and which has at the same time been
thoroughly performed in all its details.
Actions which have been prescribed for
a particular individual by the scriptures with
due regard to his order in society, stage in
life, nature and circumstances constitute his
own duty. This should be taken to mean that
lying, hypocrisy, theft, violence, swindling,
adultery and other prohibited actions are no
manГӯs duty; and even so, optional acts,
performed with a particular object in view,
are obligatory for none; hence, they too fall
beyond the range of oneГӯs duty. Besides
these, the duties specifically prescribed for
members of a particular order in society or
for a particular Г…вҖ№rama or stage in life, and
which men belonging to any other VarЖ’a or
Г…вҖ№rama are not qualified to perform, constitute
the specific duty or Г«SvadharmaГӯ of men of
that VarЖ’a or Г…вҖ№rama. Duties such as the
study of the Vedas, performance of sacrifices
etc., to which all members of the twice-born
classes are entitled, constitute the duty of the
twice-born; and pursuits which are open to
men and women of all classes and orders,
such as the practice of devotion to God,
truthfulness, service of oneГӯs parents, control
over the mind and senses, and observance
of the vows of continence, non-violence,
non-stealing contentment, compassion, charity,
forgiveness, purity and humility etc., constitute
the common duty of man.
Here it may be asked: How is the duty
of one particular individual as agaisnt the
duty of another to be determined in a society
which neither follows the system of social
organization known as the VarЖ’ГҘвҖ№rama
Dharma (which divides society into four orders
ГјГҠпЈҝГҝГҠЕёЛңГ” (is) preferable; Sп¬ӮЕ“в—ҠВёвҖ” in (the performance of) oneГӯs own duty; ГҒп¬ӮВӘГҲГЎГҠвҖ” devoid of
merit; В¬вҒ„UЕ“в—ҠГҠВёГғЛңГ” Sп¬ӮЕёГҲГҒDГ”UГғГҠГғЛңГ” to the duty of another well performed; Sп¬ӮЕ“в—ҠпЈҝВёвҖ” oneГӯs own duty; ГҒЕёЕ“Еёв—ҠЛң
death; ГјГҠпЈҝГҝвҖ” (is) conducive of good; В¬вҒ„UЕ“в—ҠВёвҖ” anotherГӯs duty; Г·ГҝГҠп¬ӮвҖһUвҖ” (is) fraught with fear.
OneГӯs own duty, though devoid of merit, is preferable to the duty of another
well performed. Even death in the performance of oneГӯs own duty brings blessedness;
anotherГӯs duty is fraught with fear.                                      (35)

=== PAGE 185 ===

184
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
or VarЖ’as and the life-span of each individual
into four stages or Г…вҖ№ramas), nor believes in
the eternal religion of the Vedas? Our answer
to this is that in fact, the system of division of
society into four VarЖ’as and four Г…вҖ№ramas
should be followed by every human society,
and the eternal religion as propounded in the
Vedas should be respected by all. In societies
not organized according to the VarЖ’ГҘвҖ№rama
system, therefore, it is very difficult to determine
the duty of one individual as against the duty
of another. Nevertheless, religion is being
held at a discount these days, and the GвҲӮtГҘ
contains the message of redemption for all
humanity, irrespective of caste, creed or
nationality. Therefore, it may be held that the
nature of an individual is determined, among
other things, by the community or society in
which he is born, the blood which runs
through his veins, the character of the culture
and traditions in which he has been brought
up from his birth till the attainment of maturity
when he may be expected to exercise his
own judgment, and, lastly, by the latencies of
actions performed by him in his previous
births, and it is this nature which determines
his natural aptitude for a particular calling for
his livelihood. Hence, in a society which is
not regulated by the discipline of VarЖ’ГҘвҖ№rama,
an individual should take up that work as his
duty, which is suited to his nature and
circumstances. In other words, he should
regard that as his own duty, which in the
opinion of a prophet or a great soul is good
for his welfare in this world and the next;
which he carries on with the best of motives
as something obligatory for him; which does
not interfere with the duty or interest of
another, and which has been regarded as part
of the common duties of men in every age
and clime. And contrary to this, the duty
which is natural to another from the above
points of view, and is not natural for him, is
anotherГӯs duty, so far as he is concerned.
The word Г«ViguЖ’aВЁГӯ means lacking in
merit. The KВ¶atriyaГӯs duty is to fight and punish
the wicked and so on, and it appears to lack
in the virtues of non-violence and peace.
Similarly, agriculture and other duties assigned
to the VaiвҖ№ya also involve destruction of life
and many other defects; therefore, compared
to the peaceful duties of the BrГҘhmaЖ’a, they
are inferior or lacking in merit. And the duties
of the вҖәudra are of a lower order even than
the duties of the VaiвҖ№ya and the KВ¶atriya.
Besides, the omission of a limb in the
performance of oneГӯs duties constitutes a
deficiency in their performance. In this way
though oneГӯs own duty may be devoid of
merit and may involve some omissions in
the course of its performance, it is more
conducive to his welfare than the duty of
another; this is what is sought to be indicated
by adding the adjective Г«ViguЖ’aВЁГӯ to
Г«SvadharmaГӯ.
If one meets with no calamity in the
performance of oneГӯs duty and succeeds in
carrying it on throughout his life, he will
without doubt attain either heaven or liberation,
whichever is foremost in his thoughts. But
if he has to face some danger in the
performance of his duty and ignoring the
danger sticks to his duty, as the result of
which he meets with death, such a death too
will bring him blessedness. This is what the
Lord seeks to convey by the statement that
Г¬even death in the performance of oneГӯs own
duty brings blessedness.Г® In the PurГҘЖ’as and
other ancient books of history we come
across numerous instances of how those who
laid down their valuable life at the altar of
duty or suffered mortal pangs for the sake
of duty attained blessedness.
Vindicating the duty of a KВ¶atriya king
DilвҲӮpa offered his own precious life to the
lion in exchange for a cow, and achieved

=== PAGE 186 ===

* Chapter III *
185
his object thereby. In order to be able to fulfil
his vow of unfailing hospitality king вҖәibi
courted death by offering a hawk live flesh
chopped from his own body, in exchange
for the flesh of a pigeon, and thereby gained
the object of his life. In order to vindicate
his duty of offering devotion to the Lord,
PrahlГҘda cheerfully underwent various forms
of tyranny and persecution threatening his
very life, and thereby attained the supreme
good. Many more instances of this kind
can be cited from the ancient books. The
MahГҘbhГҘrata says:Гі
Г¬Man should never forsake Dharma or
duty out of lust, fear or greed; nay, not even
for the sake of preserving his life. For
Dharma is eternal, and pleasure and pain are
fleeting; even so, the JвҲӮva or the life principle
is eternal, whereas the cause of life is
transitory.Г®*
(SvargГҘrohaЖ’a-Parva V.33)
Therefore, even when faced with death,
man should cheerfully embrace it, but should
on no account abandon his duty. Therein lies
his good from every point of veiw.
Lastly, the verse says that anotherГӯs
duty is fraught with fear. The Lord intends
to point out here that even if the performance
of anotherГӯs duty appears to be easy enough,
nevertheless it should be looked upon as a
source of fear. For instance, if the вҖәudra (the
labourer) and the VaiвҖ№ya (the trader) were
to adopt the duties of the higher VarЖ’as, they
will incur sin, and will have to suffer tortures
in hell, for accepting service and homage
from members of the higher VarЖ’as and
depriving them of their rightful means of
livelihood. Even so, if the BrГҘhmaЖ’a, and
the KВ¶atriya were to adopt the duties of the
two lower VarЖ’as, they are not only degraded
from their own VarЖ’a but have also to taste
the bitter fruit of sin involved in depriving
others without any emergency of their rightful
means of living. The same thing holds good
in the case of duties appropriate to an
Г…вҖ№rama, and all other duties. Hence it is not
at all necessary for any individual to adopt
the duty of another for his own spiritual
good. However full of merits the duty of
another may appear to be, it is intended for
him alone for whom it has been prescribed;
for others, it is fraught with fear, and is not
likely to lead to blessedness.вҖ“
ManГӯs welfare lies only in the performance of his own duty; adoption of anotherГӯs
duty and performance of prohibited acts are detrimental from every point of view. Desiring
to know why even after realizing this fact man is dragged against his will, judgment and
sense of duty to sinful ways, Arjuna asks the Lord:
вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
вҖўГ• вҲ‘пЈҝВ§Её В¬ЛқГҝГҲQВ§ГҠпЈҝЛҳГҝВў В¬ГҠВ¬Вў ГёвҒ„UГҒГғ В¬ГҚLВ§В·вҖ”вҖ“
вҖўГҒЕёГ«ВҝUГӣГҠГҒВ¬ п¬ӮГҠcГЎГҠпЈҝВёГҝ вҖҷвҲӮUГҠГҒЕ’п¬Ӯ ГҒЕёГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВЎГғвҖ”H 36H
*
Её ВЎГҠГғГҲ вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠГӣГҠ Г·ГҝГҠГӣГҠ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝГ·ГҠhв—ҠВё Г ГҝВЎпЈҝГ®ГҠГӢГҒп¬ӮГғSГҝГҠГҒВ¬ вҖһпЈҝUГғГҠпЈҝвҖ”вҖ“ ГҒЕёГ ГҝГҠпЈҝ Е“в—ҠВёвҖ” вҖҡГҲПҖЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖпЈҝ Г п¬ӮГҒЕёГ ГҝпЈҝ ВЎГӢп¬ӮГҠпЈҝ ГҒЕёГ ГҝГҠпЈҝ вҖһпЈҝUГғГҲвҒ„USГҝ Г п¬ӮГҒЕёГ ГҝвҖ”H
вҖ“
The Г«Code of ManuГӯ also contains a similar statement, which runs as under:Гі
п¬ӮвҒ„ВўU Sп¬ӮЕ“в—ҠГҠпЈҝВё ГҒп¬ӮВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ Её В¬ГҠвҒ„UГ„ГҝвҖ” Sп¬ӮЕёГҲГҒDГ”UГғвҖ”вҖ“ В¬вҒ„UЕ“в—ҠпЈҝВёГЎГҠ ВЎГӢп¬ӮЕёЛңГ” ГҒвҖһU вҖҡlвҖ” В¬ГғГҒГғ ВЎГҠГҒГғГғвҖ”H (X.97)
Г¬OneГӯs own duty, though deficient in merits, is superior to anotherГӯs duty performed efficiently and
well, for a man living by anotherГӯs duty soon falls from his own social order.Г®

=== PAGE 187 ===

186
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The Lord stated before in verse 60 of
Chapter II that even the mind of the wise man
is carried away by force by the turbulent senses.
In practice also we observe that an intelligent
man of judgment and common sense, realizing
by direct experience of inferring the bitter fruit
of sinful acts, does not willingly lend himself
to the commission of a sinful act, knowing
that it is wrong to commit sins, and yet like
an ailing man taking unwholesome food, he
is forcibly driven to such acts. Therefore, by
putting the above question, Arjuna seeks to
obtain the definite verdict of the Lord as to
who forces man to commit sin. Is it God
Himself, who lures him to sinful ways and
hence he finds himself unable to resist the
temptation? or is he compelled by the force
of his PrГҘrabdha to indulge in sinful acts ? or
is there something else which is responsible
for this state of affairs?
вҖўГ•Г” then; вҲ‘пЈҝВ§Её by whom; В¬ЛқГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” impelled; вҖўГҝв—ҠЛңГ” this; В¬ГҠВ¬в—ҠЛңГ” sin; ГёвҒ„UГҒГғ commits; В¬ГҚLВ§В·вҖ” man;
вҖўГҒЕёГ«ВҝUЕёЛңГ” against his will; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; п¬ӮГҠcГЎГҠпЈҝВёГҝ O descendant of VГҰВ¶Ж’i, KГҰВ¶Ж’a; вҖҷвҖ№ГҠГғЛңГ” by force;
Гҹп¬Ӯ as though; ГҒЕёГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВЎГғвҖ” driven.
Arjuna said: Now impelled by what, KГҰВ¶Ж’a, does this man commit sin even
involuntarily, as though driven by force?                                (36)
In reply to the above question, BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a says:
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲп¬ӮГҠГё
вҲ‘В§ГҠв—Ҡ вҲһВ· вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“ вҲһВ· вҒ„UВЎГҠпЈҝВӘГҲГЎГҠвҖҡв—ҠГҲjп¬ӮвҖ”вҖ“
в—ҠвҖһUГҠвүҘГҠЕёГҠпЈҝ в—ҠвҖһUГҠВ¬ГҠГҘв—ҠГҠ ГҒп¬ӮhKпЈҝЕёГҒв—ҠвҖһU п¬ӮГ’ГҒвҒ„UГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ”H 37H
вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҖ” desire (itself); вҲһВ·вҖ” this; вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“вҖ” (appears as) wrath; вҲһВ·вҖ” this (again); вҒ„UВЎГҠпЈҝВӘГҲГЎГҠвҖҡв—ҠГҲjп¬ӮвҖ”
begotten of the element of Rajas; в—ҠвҖһUГҠвүҘГҠЕёвҖ” (is) ravenous; в—ҠвҖһUГҠВ¬ГҠГҘв—ҠГҠ (and) grossly wicked; ГҒп¬ӮГҒh
know; вҲһЕёв—ҠЛңГ” this; ГҹвҖһU in this case; п¬ӮГ’ГҒвҒ„UГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the enemy.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: It is desire begotten of the element of Rajas, which appears
as wrath; nay, it is insatiable and grossly wicked. Know this to be the enemy in
this case.                                                              (37)
samudbhavaВЁГӯ (begotten of Rajas) should be
taken as qualifying Г«KГҘmaВЁГӯ or desire.
It has already been pointed out that
anger ensues from desire. Therefore, with the
eradication of desire anger too gets
automatically eradicated. That is the reason
why in His subsequent dissertation on this
subject the Lord speaks of Г«desireГӯ alone as
the enemy. This should not, however, lead
one to imagine that desire alone is the root
of all sins, and that anger has nothing to do
with them. That is why while introducing the
subject the Lord mentions both Г«desireГӯ and
Г«angerГӯ as the enemies of man.
The quality of Rajas fosters attachment,
It was shown in verse 35 that the
impulses of attraction and repulsion residing
in every object of the senses are the two
robbers who constantly rob man of his
spiritual wealth. In order to show that it is
these two impulses which when appearing
in a grosser form are known by the names
of desire and anger, and that, of these two
again desire is the dominant force, for it is
a grosser form of attraction and because
anger has its root in desire (II.62), that the
adjective Г«EВ¶aВЁГӯ has been used twice in
this verse, once after Г«KГҘmaВЁГӯ and again
after Г«KrodhaВЁГӯ. Desire springs up from
attraction; therefore, the adjective Г«RajoguЖ’a

=== PAGE 188 ===

* Chapter III *
187
and vice versa. Therefore, both of them have
been treated as essentially one (XIV.7).
Hence desire originates from both of them.
By speaking of desire as insatiable by
nature, it has been shown that it can never
be satiated by enjoyment. Just as clarified
butter and fuel, when added to the fire,
strengthen it, even so the more we indulge
in sense-enjoyments the stronger is our appetite
for enjoyment.
Therefore, one should never imagine
that he will be able to conquer the enemy
in the shape of desire by pursuing the policy
of appeasement or bribe and offering the bait
of enjoyments to it; he must follow the policy
of chastisement with regard to the same.
Desire has been further described in the
verse as grossly wicked. The word actually
used is Г«MahГҘpГҘpmГҘГӯ literally meaning Г«a
great sinnerГӯ. The intention of this is to show
that desire is the root of all evils. Man is
forced to commit sin against his will neither
by PrГҘrabdha nor by God; it is desire alone
which leads man to develop attachment for
various objects of enjoyment, and drags him
to sinful acts. It is therefore that the Lord
speaks of it as grossly wicked.
In the end the Lord asks Arjuna to
know desire to be the enemy in this case.
The intention of this is to show that one who
drags us to a situation which spells either a
great disaster or death to us should be treated
as an enemy, and should be disposed of as
early as possible. This devil of a desire drives
man to sinful acts against his will and better
judgment and lands him into terrible suffering
in the shape of repeated births and deaths
and tortures in hell. Hence this should be
regarded as the greatest enemy of man on
the spiritual path. God being the very
embodiment of compassion, and the greatest
friend of all created beings, can never lead
anyone to sin; while PrГҘrabdha is merely
concerned with the enjoyment of the fruits
of actions done in a previous life. It does
not possess the capacity to lead anyone to
sin. The only enemy, therefore, that drives
a man to sinful acts is Г«desire.Гӯ
The preceding verse declared Г«desireГӯ to be the root of all evils, and the enemy which
compels man to commit sin even against his will. In this connection it may be asked: How does
desire compel man to commit sin? The next three verses show that it covers up the spiritual
light of man, and thus depriving him of inner vision throws him into the abyss of sin.
Е“ГҚв—ҠпЈҝЕёГҠГҒп¬ӮЛқГҝГғпЈҝ п¬ӮГҒqГ”UГҝВёГ•ГҠЕ’вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝВё в—ҠвҲӮпЈҝUЕё ГёвҖ“
ГҝГ•ГҠпЈҝГҖвҖҷпЈҝЕёГҠп¬ӮГҺГғГҠпЈҝ ВӘГ·ВёSГғГ•ГҠ ГғпЈҝЕёпЈҝЕ’в—ҠГҠп¬ӮГҺГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 38H
Е“ГҚв—ҠпЈҝЕё by smoke; вҖўГҠГҒп¬ӮЛқГҝГғпЈҝ is covered; п¬ӮГҒqГ”UвҖ” fire; ГҝГ•ГҠ as; вҖўГҠЕ’вүҘГҠВёвҖ” a mirror; в—ҠвҲӮпЈҝUЕё by dirt;
Гё and; ГҝГ•ГҠ (and) as; В©UГҖвҖҷпЈҝЕё by amnion; вҖўГҠп¬ӮГҺГғвҖ” (stands) enclosed; ВӘГ·ВёвҖ” a foetus; ГғГ•ГҠ so; ГғпЈҝЕё
by it; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this (Knowledge); вҖўГҠп¬ӮГҺГғв—ҠЛңГ” (stands) veiled.
As fire is covered by smoke, mirror by dust, and embryo by the amnion, so
is Knowledge covered by Г«desireГӯ.
 (38)
and obscuration. Here smoke represents the
evil of distraction or restlessness. Just as
smoke, though ever unsteady, covers up fire,
even so the evil of distraction, which is of
the nature of restlessness, shrouds Knowledge.
The analogy of smoke, dirt and amnion
employed in this verse is intended to show
that it is Г«desireГӯ itself which veils the
spiritual light of man by transforming itself
into the threefold evils of impurity, distraction

=== PAGE 189 ===

188
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
For until the mind has become calm and
steady, Knowledge cannot illumine it; it
remains dormant and hidden. Again, dust is
the symbol of impurity. Just as when dust
accumulates on the surface of a mirror, it can
no longer reflect any object, even so when
the mind gets soiled by impurities in the form
of sin, it is no longer able to reveal the true
nature of things or point out our duty. That
is why with an impure or sinful mind one
cannot correctly judge things for oneself.
Even so, Г«amnionГӯ stands for the veil of
ignorance that shuts out the light of truth.
Just as the embryo remains enclosed on all
sides by the amnion, and no part of it is
visible, even so our Knowledge is veiled by
ignorance. He whose mind is deluded by
ignorance gets attached to the delights of
sleep, indolence etc., and never exercises his
reasoning faculty. It is desire alone which
makes the mind restless by fostering the thirst
for various forms of enjoyment; it is desire,
again, which heaps impurities on the mind
by leading a man to sins of various kinds;
and it is desire which completely robs man
of his reason by exciting his infatuation for
sleep, lethargy and indolence. That is why
it has been spoken of here as covering up
Knowledge in all the three ways.
In the preceding verse Arjuna was
asked to know Г«desireГӯ as the enemy of man,
and the following verse explicitly mentions
Г«KnowledgeГӯ as being covered up by desire,
which makes it perfectly clear that the
pronoun Г«TenaГӯ in this verse stands for
Г«desireГӯ and Г«IdamГӯ for Г«KnowledgeГӯ. It is
therefore that the two words have been
interpreted as above.
Making it clear that the word Г«TenaГӯ in the preceding verse stands for Г«desireГӯ, and
Г«IdamГӯ for Г«KnowledgeГӯ, the Lord now compares desire with fire, and calls it insatiable.
вҖўГҠп¬ӮГҺГғВў ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠпЈҝГғпЈҝЕё ГҙГҠГҠГҒЕёЕёГҠпЈҝ ГҒЕёГ Гҝп¬ӮГ’ГҒвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠвҖ“
вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠMВ§В¬пЈҝГЎГҠ вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ Е’ГҲcВ¬ГҚвҒ„пЈҝUГЎГҠГҠЕёвҲӮпЈҝUЕё ГёГ”H 39H
вҖўГҠп¬ӮГҺГғв—ҠЛңГ” (stands) veiled; ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” Knowledge; вҲһГғпЈҝЕё by this; ГҙГҠГҠГҒЕёЕёвҖ” of the wise; ГҒЕёГ Гҝп¬ӮГ’ГҒвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠ
eternal foe; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠMВ§В¬пЈҝГЎГҠ disguised as desire; вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ O son of KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna; Е’ГҲcВ¬ГҚвҒ„пЈҝUГЎГҠ insatiable;
вҖўЕёвҲӮпЈҝUЕё like fire; Гё and.
And, Arjuna, Knowledge stands covered by this eternal enemy of the wise, known
as desire, which is insatiable like fire.                                    (39)
these attributes with Г«desireГӯ is intended to
show that like ordinary fire, the fire of desire
too is insatiable. Even as man goes on
enjoying the objects of the world, his appetite
for them grows like the fire. It will never
be satiated. After passing a long life of
intensive enjoyments, King YayГҘtвҲӮ is reported
to have declared in the end:Гі
Г¬Desire is never satisfied by the enjoyment
of objects of desire; on the other hand, like
the fire to which clarified butter is added,
it grows stronger through enjoyment of
The indeclinable Г«AlamГӯ means Г«enoughГӯ-
Г«no more of it nowГӯГіand denotes the idea
of satisfaction or satiety; while Г«AnГӯ is a
negative prefix, equivalent to Г«notГӯ. Thus
Г«AnalaГӯ (Г«AnГӯ + Г«AlamГӯ) signifies that which
knows no Г«AlamГӯ or satiety. Fire will consume
any amount of fuel that may be thrown into
it, and yet it will not be satiated. This
characteristic attribute of fire has won for it
the significant appellation of Г«AnalaГӯ. The
word Г«DuВ¶pВөuraГӯ also means that which is
hard to satiate or satisfy. The association of

=== PAGE 190 ===

* Chapter III *
189
objects.Г®* вҖәrвҲӮmad-BhГҘgavata (IX.XIX.14)
The word Г«JВӨГҘninaВЁГӯ, in this verse, refers
to SГҘdhakas possessing discrimination and
striving for the attainment of true Knowledge.
This enemy in the form of Г«desireГӯ does not
allow the ideas of discrimination, dispassion
and disinterestedness to get firmly rooted in
the mind of the SГҘdhaka, and presents obstacles
in the path of his spiritual progress. That is
why it has been spoken of as an eternal
enemy of the wise. Truly speaking, desire is
the enemy of all beings, inasmuch as it drags
everyone to the path of degradation. But the
man without discrimination, when enjoying
objects of enjoyments, erroneously regards it
as a friend, due to his attachment for such
objects; while men possessed of discrimination,
who know the real truth about it, view it as
positively mischievous. That is why instead
of calling it an Г«eternal enemyГӯ of the unwise,
it has been spoken of as an Г«eternal enemyГӯ
of the wise.
The word Г«KГҘmaГӯ, forming part of the
compound word Г«KГҘmarВөupeЖ’aГӯ occurring in
this verse, denotes the desire for enjoyment
of worldly objects, which is looked upon as
a vice, nay, the renunciation of which has
been advised in the GвҲӮtГҘ on various occasions
(II.71; VI.24), and which has been spoken
of in Chap. XVI as a door to hell (XVI.21).
The blessed desire for communion with
God, or for the practices of adoration and
meditation, or for the performance of SГҘttvika
forms of action is not covered by this term.
For, this latter type of desire is conducive
to the spiritual well-being of the practicant
and being helpful in eradicating the desire
for worldly enjoyments can never be hostile
to his best interests. Hence the word Г«KГҘmaГӯ,
wherever it appears in the GвҲӮtГҘ, should be
interpreted in the sense of craving for union
with that which is agreeable and for avoiding
the unwelcome, or in the senses of objects
of enjoyment. Similarly, the words Г«RГҘgaГӯ
and Г«SaвҲҶgaГӯ, meaning attraction or attachment,
occurring  in verse 34 and elsewhere, should
be construed to mean attachment for worldly
enjoyments, which is the root of desire, and
not in the sense of attraction or love for
God.
The word Г«JВӨГҘnamГӯ, in this verse, stands
for the light of divine Truth. Speaking of it as
Г¬covered by desireГ®, the verse intends to show
that just as the foetus though enclosed by the
amnion succeeds in bursting open the aminon
and emerging out of it, and just as the fire
when it blazes up disperses and dissolves the
smoke which had hitherto been enveloping
it, even so when through the instruction of a
saint or the teachings of the scriptures the
light of divine Truth gets kindled within the
soul, it shines forth piercing the veil of desire
which had hitherto screened it. Hence, though
covering the light of Truth, the veil of desire
is really very feeble and weak when compared
to the former.
Speaking thus of the light of Truth as covered by desire, the Lord with a view to
revealing the means of killing the latter shows where it resides and how it deludes the
embodied soul:
ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠ в—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝ вҖҷГҲГҒhвҒ„USГҝГҠГҒЕ“DГ”UГҠЕёв—ҠГҲГ«ГҝГғпЈҝвҖ“
вҲһГғГ’ГҢп¬Ӯв—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҝГ ГҝпЈҝВ· 
ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠГҠп¬ӮГҺГ Гҝ 
Е’пЈҝГҒвҖһUЕёв—ҠЛңГ”H 40H
ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠ the senses; в—ҠЕёвҖ” the mind; вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” (and) the intellect; вҖўSГҝ its; вҖўГҒЕ“DГ”UГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” seat;
* Её ВЎГҠГғГҲ вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҖ” вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠЕёГҠв—ҠГҲВ¬Г·ГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝЕё вүҘГҠГҠГӘГҝГҒГғвҖ“ вҖһUГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҠ вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠп¬ӮГ в—ҠпЈҝВёп¬Ӯ Г·ГҚГҝ вҲһп¬ӮГҠГҒГ·п¬ӮЕ“ВёГғпЈҝH

=== PAGE 191 ===

190
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Inasmuch as the mind, the intellect and
the senses are not ordinarily under the
control of man, Г«desireГӯ holds its sway over
them. This is what the Lord means when He
speaks of the senses, the mind and the
intellect as the seat of desire. Therefore, he
who seeks his spiritual good should lose no
time to drive out this enemy in the form of
desire from  his mind, intellect and senses,
or to suppress and crush it in their very
stronghold, failing which, like an enemy
entrenched in oneГӯs own house, it will
destroy his valuable possession in the shape
of human existence.
Again, when the verse says that screening
the light of Truth through the mind, the
intellect and the senses, this enemy in the
form of desire deludes the embodied soul,
it shows that entering the mind, intellect and
senses of the practicant Г«desireГӯ obscures his
judgment, and leading him to believe that
happiness lies in sense-enjoyments, drags
him to the path of sin. This brings about his
degradation and ruin. Therefore, man should
soon awake to this danger and beware of
this enemy.
An attempt is being made below to
convey to the reader a correct idea of the
teaching of this verse by means of a parable:Гі
There was a monarch, King Conscient
by name. He had a Prime Minister known
by the name of Mr. Wise. He had a deputy
who worked directly under him. He was
called Mr. Fickle. The King, with his Prime
Minister and Deputy Prime Minister resided
in his capital, Cordis. The Kingdom was
divided into ten districts, each under the
control of a Magistrate. Well-bred by nature,
King Conscient was a man of ripe judgment
and active habits. The people of the kingdom
were all happy and prosperous. The state
was advancing from day to day. One day
a famous swindler, Charmer by name, made
his appearance there. Charmer was a great
intriguer and a past master in fraudulence;
he was a man of exceptionally sweet words,
though full of poison in his heart. He
charmed everyone, he came in contact with.
He appeared in the guise of a trader and
approaching the different District Magistrates
asked for permission to carry on free trade
throughout the kingdom. The magistrates
were offered handsome bribes. They felt
tempted by his offer, but they could do
nothing without the concurrence of the higher
authorities. Following the advice of the
counterfeit trader, Charmer, they all took him
to their immediate officer, Mr. Fickle, the
Deputy Prime Minister. He too was offered
a tempting bribe by the spurious trader and
fell an easy prey to the latterГӯs enticing
words. Thereupon Mr. Fickle took him to
his chief, Mr. Wise. Though possessed of
great wisdom, Mr. Wise was after all a weak
man; he could not properly weigh the pros
and cons of a question and arrive at a definite
conclusion. Therefore, as a rule, he was
guided by the advice of his deputy, Mr.
Fickle, and the ten District Magistrates.
These subordinate officers, too for their part,
used very often to take undue advantage of
the weakness of their chief. Therefore, putting
blind faith on the words of Mr. Fickle and
the District Magistrates, he too was caught
in the trap of the swindler tradesman and
agreed to grant him a trade licence, but
В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is declared (to be); вҲһГғГ’вҖ” through these; ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҝГҒГғ deludes; вҲһВ·вҖ” it; ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the light of
Truth; вҖўГҠп¬ӮГҺГ Гҝ screening; Е’пЈҝГҒвҖһUЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the embodied soul.
The senses, the mind and the intellect are declared to be its seat; screening the
light of Truth (wisdom) through these, it (desire) deludes the embodied soul.         (40)

=== PAGE 192 ===

* Chapter III *
191
added in the end that a licence for the whole
State could not be granted without the
special sanction of the ruler of the State.
Finally, at the suggestion of the dissembler,
the Prime Minister took him to the king
himself. A clever man as he was, the
swindler presented to the king a most seducing
picture of the great prosperity he would bring
to the entire kingdom. The king also fell a
victim to temptation, and therefore granted
him permission to carry on unrestricted trade
over the whole kingdom and open offices
all over the State. Winning over the district
officers as well as the two Ministers by a
liberal dose of unlawful gratification, Charmer
quickly spread his organization over the
whole kingdom.
His influence gradually extended over
the entire State and without any let or hindrance
he began to bleed the people white. The
district officers and the two Ministers were
given their due, which sealed their lips, and
he won over the king as well by allowing
him a share of the wealth derived from the
undue exploitation of the people. By his deft
moves and sweet and unguent words, he
slowly and quickly demoralized the king and
all his greedy officers, and made them
powerless, idle and addicted to vice; while
secretly and silently he went on increasing
his own strength and tightening his hold over
the whole kingdom. Thus robbing the kingdom
of all its wealth, he finally captured and
imprisoned the king himself.
The parable ends here. The characters
of the parable personify the different categories
dealt with in the above verse. King Conscient
represents the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ or the emobodied
soul; the Prime Minister, Mr. Wise, is none
else than the intellect; the Deputy Prime
Minister, Mr. Fickle, is our familiar mind,
and the capital of the kingdom, Cordis, is
the heart. The ten Magistrates are the ten
organs, the ten districts are the seats of the
ten organs, and the arch swindler, Charmer,
represents Г«desireГӯ. The temptation of the
enjoyment of worldly objects is the bribe or
illegal gratification. Robbing the king means
enticing the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ to indulge in wordly
enjoyments and thus diverting it from the
path of true happiness. And incarceration of
the king means deluding the embodied soul
by veiling his knowledge and forcibly rendering
him incapable of realizing the supreme end
of human existence.
The intention of all this is to show that
this formidable enemy of man in the spiritual
path, viz., Г«desireГӯ takes hold of the senses,
mind and intellect by tempting them with
ideas of false happiness to be derived from
enjoyment of worldly objects, and covering
the knowledge of the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ through the
instrumentality of the mind, intellect and
senses, throws it into the dark cell of
transmigration. Nay, depriving him of the
real wealth in the form of God-realization,
this arch enemy of man robs him of the
inestimable blessings of a human birth.
Describing thus the tyranny of this arch enemy, desire, and showing the places where
it remains hidden and carries on its nefarious activities, the Lord now tells Arjuna the
device of killing it, and commands him to dispose it of.
ГғSв—ҠГҠГ»п¬ӮГҒв—ҠГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГЎГҝГҠЕ’ГҠГ’ ГҒЕёГҝГӘГҝ Г·вҒ„UГғВ·ВёГ·вҖ“
В¬ГҠГҘв—ҠГҠЕёВў В¬ЛқВЎГҒвҖһU sГ”пЈҝЕёВў ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҒп¬ӮГҙГҠГҠЕёЕёГҠвүҘГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ”H 41H
ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” therefore; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” you; ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠ (your) senses; вҖўГҠЕ’ГҠГ’ first; ГҒЕёГҝГӘГҝ controlling; Г·вҒ„UГғВ·ВёГ·

=== PAGE 193 ===

192
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«TasmГҘtГӯ in this verse, indicates
cause. By using the words Г«TasmГҘtГӯ and
Г«Г…dauГӯ with the direction to control the
senses the Lord shows that Г«desireГӯ is the
root of all evils; it first attacks and occupies
the senses, and through the senses it deludes
the mind and intellect, and then the embodied
soul. Thus the mind, intellect and senses are
its stronghold: Therefore, the campaign of
destruction of the enemy should start with
the reclamation of the senses. When it is
dislodged from its citadel, it will be easy to
kill this enemy. Therefore, in order to be able
to get rid of this enemy one should control
the senses first, and thereafter the mind.
Now the question is, how to control the
senses ? The senses can be controlled through
intensive practice and cultivation of dispassion
or freeing the mind of its attraction for
worldly enjoyments. These are the two means
prescribed for controlling the mind as well
(VI.35). Dispassion consists in cultivating
aversion to the enjoyments of the world and
the next, realizing that the RГҘjasika type of
joy, derived from contact between the senses
and the TГҘmasika type derived from sleep,
indolence and error, are really momentary,
perishable and sorrowful. And practice consists
in employing the senses in the hearing and
chanting of, and reflection on, GodГӯs name,
virtues, form and activities as well as in
disinterested public service, regulating their
functions by strength of will according to the
injunctions of the scriptures and not allowing
them to run wild and act in a wayward
fashion. By adopting both these methods, the
senses as well as the mind can be brought
under control.
The word Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ in this verse points to
true knowledge of the greatness, glory and
mystery of the absolute and formless aspect
of God; and the term Г«VijВӨГҘnaГӯ refers to the
true knowledge of formless God with attributes
as well as of the transcendent manifestation
of God in a Divine form, and His sports,
secrets, glories, greatness and virtues. Desire,
the arch enemy of man, is ever busy suppressing
by its deluding power the craving of the mind
for the attainment of Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ and Г«VijВӨГҘnaГӯ
referred to above. In other words, it obstructs
the practices that one carries on for the
attainment of JВӨГҘna and VijВӨГҘna under the
impulse of this craving, and does not allow
JВӨГҘna and VijВӨГҘna to manifest themselves;
that is why Г«desireГӯ has been spoken of as the
Г«obscurerГӯ of JВӨГҘna and VijВӨГҘna. The root
Г«NaвҖ№Гӯ, from which the word Г«NГҘвҖ№anaГӯ has
been derived, has two implicationsГіviz., (i)
to obscure a thing, and (ii) to destroy it
completely by rooting it out. In the present
verse the word Г«NГҘвҖ№anaГӯ should be understood
to convey the first meaning because the
preceding verses have already spoken of
Knowledge as covered by Г«desireГӯ. Г«DesireГӯ
has no power to destroy or root out JВӨГҘna
and VijВӨГҘna; for desire proceeds from
ignorance, which is eradicated as soon as JВӨГҘna
and VijВӨГҘna make their appearance, and once
this ignorance gets eradicated, destruction of
JВӨГҘna and VijВӨГҘna becomes out of question.
O best of the Bharatas, Arjuna; В¬ГҠГҘв—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” evil; В¬ЛқВЎГҒвҖһU kill; ГҒвҖһU surely; вҲһЕёв—ҠЛңГ” this (thing);
ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҒп¬ӮГҙГҠГҠЕёЕёГҠвүҘГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” obstructing knowledge and wisdom.
Therefore, Arjuna, you must first control your senses, and then kill this evil
thing which obstructs JВӨГҘna (Knowledge of the Absolute or NirguЖ’a Brahma) and
vijВӨГҘna (Knowledge of SГҘkГҘra Brahma or manifest Divinity).               (41)
The preceding verse stated that controlling the senses, the arch enemy in the form
of desire should be killed. In this connection it may be asked: So long as the senses,

=== PAGE 194 ===

* Chapter III *
193
The KaВўhopaniВ¶ad metaphorically speaks
of the body as a coach, and of the senses
as horses (I.iii.3, 4). Horses are possessed of
life and are superior to the coach and can
draw it after them according to their will.
Even so, the senses alone take the body
wherever they like; therefore, they are stronger
than the body, and are sensitive too. Again,
the physical body is perceptible to the eye,
but not so the senses; hence they are subtler,
too, than the body.
Besides this, the superiority of the senses
over the body, and their being subtler and
more powerful are obvious too.
The KaВўhopaniВ¶ad (I.iii.10, 11) says:Гі
Г¬Greater than the senses are their objects;
greater than the objects of the senses is the
mind; greater than the mind is the intellect;
greater than the intellect is the Cosmic
Intelligence or Mahat-tattva; greater than the
Mahat-tattva is the Unmanifest or PrakГҰti
(Primordial Matter); and greater than the
Unmanifest is PuruВ¶a (Spirit or Soul). There
is nothing superior to and subtler than the
PuruВ¶a. That is the final limit and that is the
supreme goal.Г® The Lord, however, makes
no mention of the objects of the senses, the
Г«Mahat-tattvaГӯ and the Unmanifest. The reason
for their omission is that He has furnished
us with a mere outline of the progressive
series mentioned in the UpaniВ¶ad; for, with
a view to urging one to kill Г«desireГӯ the
superiority of the soul alone requires to be
demonstrated, and it is needless to point out
the superiority of objects of the senses,
Mahat-tattva and the Unmanifest.
The KaВўhopaniВ¶ad speaks of the objects
of the senses as superior to the senses,
because the objects of the senses, there
represent the five TanmГҘtrГҘs, which are
unquestionably subtler than the senses; hence
it is but reasonable to declare them as greater
than the senses.
In the present verse the Lord speaks of
the mind as superior to, and subtler and more
powerful than, the senses, and even so of the
intellect as superior to, and subtler and more
powerful than, the mind. But in Chapter II
He says that Г¬the senses even of a wise man
who is practising self-control forcibly carry
away his mind, turbulent as they are by
nature.Г® (II.60), and further tells us that Г¬of
the senses moving among sense-objects, the
one to which the mind is joined takes away
manГӯs discriminationГ® (II.67). These statements
lead one to conclude that the senses are not
mind and intellect are completely under the sway of desire, and the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ too stands
deluded by it, how can it be possible to control the senses and kill desire ? Anticipating
this question, the Lord points to the true character of the soul, and reminds Arjuna of
its supreme power:
ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠ В¬вҒ„UГҠГЎГҝГҠвҖһГҲUГҒвҒ„UГҒГЈВәЛқГҝпЈҝГЁГҝвҖ” В¬вҒ„ВўU в—ҠЕёвҖ”вҖ“
в—ҠЕёвҖҡSГғГҲ В¬вҒ„UГҠ вҖҷГҲГҒhГҝГҠпЈҝВё вҖҷГҲhпЈҝвҖ” В¬вҒ„UГғSГғГҲ вҖҡвҖ”Г”H 42H
ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠГ” the senses; В¬вҒ„UГҠГҒГЎГҠ (are) greater (than the body); вҖўГҠвҖһГҲUвҖ” they say; ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝпЈҝГЁГҝвҖ” than
the senses; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” greater; в—ҠЕёвҖ” (is) the mind; в—ҠЕёвҖҡвҖ” than the mind; ГғГҲ even; В¬вҒ„UГҠ greater; вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ”
(is) the intellect; ГҝвҖ” (and) who; вҖҷГҲhпЈҝвҖ” than the intellect; В¬вҒ„UГғвҖ” (is) far greater; ГғГҲ even; вҖҡвҖ”
(is) He (the Self).
The senses are said to be greater than the body; but greater than the senses
is the mind. Greater than the mind is the intellect; and what is greater than the
intellect is He (the Self).                                                 (42)

=== PAGE 195 ===

194
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
only more powerful than the mind, but
conjoined with the mind they are even more
powerful than the intellect. Thus the Lord
seems to be contradicting in this verse His
earlier statements. But deeper thought would
reveal that in reality there is no contradiction
between the two types of statements. The
KaВўhopaniВ¶ad has made this point amply
clear by using the metaphor of the coach. It
says that the Self or Soul represents the
owner of the coach, intellect the coachman,
the body corresponds to the coach, the mind
to the reins, the senses to the horses, and the
objects of senses like sound etc., constitute
the track on which the coach moves.* Though
in the usual course the coachman should be
under the control of the owner of the coach,
the reins should be under the control of the
coachman, and the horses should be under
the control of the reins; nevertheless in the
case of the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ whose coachman in the
form of the intellect is devoid of judgment
and discrimination, and does not therefore
hold the reins in the form of the mind properly,
the horses in the form of the senses become
unruly and wayward and, forcibly dragging
the coach along a wrong path, finally overturn
it.вҖ  This proves that so long as the soul or
JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ does not exercise control over the
intellect, mind and senses, and forgetting its
inherent power submits to their control, the
senses misleading the mind and intellect
succeed in dragging them forcibly behind
them along the wrong path. That is to say,
the senses first of all win over the mind by
tempting it with prospects of enjoyment; then
the senses in conjunction with the mind win
over the intellect; and they all combine to
bring the soul under their thumb. Nevertheless,
in reality, the mind is stronger than the senses,
the intellect is stronger than the mind, and the
soul is the strongest of all. That is why the
KaВўhopaniВ¶ad says that he whose coachman
in the form of the intellect is wise and
discriminating, whose rein in the form of the
mind is properly controlled, and whose horses
in the form of the senses are well-disciplined,Гі
such a soul, possessed of a pure heart, reaches
the supreme state, wherefrom he does not
return.вҖЎ The GвҲӮtГҘ also speaks of the Self
which has conquered the mind, intellect and
senses as oneГӯs friend, and the self which has
no control over the mind, intellect and senses
as oneГӯs enemy (VI.6). Therefore, the
uncontrolled senses, though inherently weaker
than the mind and the intellect, gain ascendancy.
This was the intention of the statements made
in Chapter II, whereas in the present verse
the true position of the senses in the scheme
of things has been brought out. Therefore,
there is no real contradiction between the
two statements.
The KaВўhopaniВ¶ad speaks of the Mahat-
tattva as greater than the intellect, the
Unmanifest as greater than the Mahat-tattva
(cosmic intelligence), and the PuruВ¶a as
greater even than the Unmanifest, and further
declares the PuruВ¶a to be the end and farthest
limit of greatness, beyond which there is
nothing.$ In order to bring out the spirit of
*
вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёВў 
вҒ„UГҒГ•ЕёВў ГҒп¬ӮГҒh вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„ВўU вҒ„UГ•в—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮГғГҲ вҖ“ вҖҷГҲГҒhВў ГғГҲ вҖҡГҠвҒ„UГҒГ•Вў ГҒп¬ӮГҒh в—ҠЕёвҖ” В¬ЛқВӘЛқвҖһUв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ ГёH
ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠ  вҖһUГҝГҠЕёГҠвҖһГҲUГҒп¬ӮВёВ·ГҝГҠВўSГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ
ВӘГҠпЈҝГёвҒ„UГҠЕёЛңГ” вҖ“
(KaВўhopaniВ¶ad I.iii.3-4)
вҖ 
ГҝSГ п¬ӮГҒп¬ӮГҙГҠГҠЕёп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” Г·п¬ӮГ ГҝГҝГҲQпЈҝВ§Её в—ҠЕёвҖҡГҠ вҖҡЕ’ГҠвҖ“ ГғSГҝпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГЎГҝп¬ӮвүҘГҝГҠГҒЕё Е’ГҲCГ”UГҠEГҠ Гҹп¬Ӯ вҖҡГҠвҒ„UГ•пЈҝвҖ”H
(Ibid., I.iii.5)
вҖЎ
ГҝSГғГҲ ГҒп¬ӮГҙГҠГҠЕёп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ ГҝГҲQпЈҝВ§Её в—ҠЕёвҖҡГҠ вҖҡЕ’ГҠ вҖ“ ГғSГҝпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҠГҒГЎГҠ п¬ӮвүҘГҝГҠГҒЕё вҖҡЕ’EГҠ Гҹп¬Ӯ вҖҡГҠвҒ„UГ•пЈҝвҖ”H
ГҝSГғГҲ ГҒп¬ӮГҙГҠГҠЕёп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ вҖҡв—ҠЕёSвҲ‘В§вҖ” вҖҡЕ’ГҠвүҘГҠГҲГҒГёвҖ” вҖ“ вҖҡ ГғГҲ ГғГ В¬Е’в—ҠГҠВ¬AГҠпЈҝГҒГғ ГҝSв—ҠГҠЕ’ЛңГ”Г·ГҚГҝГҠпЈҝ Её ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝH
(KaВўhopaniВ¶ad I.iii.6, 8)
$
ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝпЈҝГЁГҝвҖ” В¬вҒ„UГҠ sГ”Г•ГҠВё 
sГ”Г•пЈҝВёГЁГҝp В¬вҒ„ВўU в—ҠЕёвҖ” вҖ“ в—ҠЕёвҖҡSГғГҲ В¬вҒ„UГҠ вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖҷВёГҲhпЈҝвҒ„UГҠГ в—ҠГҠ в—ҠвҖһUГҠЕёЛңГ” В¬вҒ„UвҖ”H
в—ҠвҖһUГғвҖ” 
В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠвҲҡГҝQВ§в—ҠвҲҡГҝQВ§ГҠГғЛңГ” 
В¬ГҲLВ§В·вҖ”
В¬вҒ„UвҖ” вҖ“ В¬ГҲLВ§В·ГҠГӣГҠ В¬вҒ„ВўU ГҒвҲ‘В§ГҒ@ГғЛңГ” вҖҡГҠ вҲ‘В§ГҠDГ”UГҠ вҖҡГҠ В¬вҒ„UГҠ ВӘГҒГғвҖ”H (Ibid., I.iii.10-11)

=== PAGE 196 ===

* Chapter III *
195
this вҖәruti text clearly the word Г«ParataВЁГӯ in
this verse has been interpreted as meaning
Г¬far greater or very much beyondГ®. The soul
being the substratum, cause, illuminator and
inspirer of everything, and the subtlest, most
pervasive, most excellent and most powerful
of all that exists, it is quite in the fitness of
things to speak of the soul as Г¬far greater
than the intellectГ®.
Some people contend that Г«desireГӯ being
the subject of discussion of these verses, and
specially as in the next verse the Lord
exhorts Arjuna to kill desire, it would be
more natural to take the pronoun Г«SaВЁГӯ (he)
as standing for Г«DesireГӯ, rather than for the
Г«SelfГӯ. It is no doubt true that extermination
of desires is the subject of discussion in the
present context, but not its exaltation. The
soul possesses the power to kill desire. The
present verse has been added to show that
once man comes to realize the strength of
the soul, he can easily establish full control
over the intellect, mind and senses and kill
desire. If Г«desireГӯ was to be regarded as very
much superior to the senses, mind and the
intellect, it would be meaningless to ask
Arjuna to kill it with the help of the latter.
Besides, interpretation of the word Г«SaВЁГӯ as
Г«desireГӯ would run counter to the intention
of the KaВўhopaniВ¶ad. Hence the word Г«SaВЁГӯ,
in this verse does not mean Г«desireГӯ, but
refers to that supreme Reality, the eternally
pure and awakened soul, whose vision
as described in Chapter II drives away the
very attachment for enjoyment of the sense-
objects.
The Lord now asks Arjuna to regard the soul as superior to everything else, as shown
in the preceding verse, and to kill the enemy in the form of desire.
вҲһп¬ӮВў вҖҷГҲhпЈҝвҖ” В¬вҒ„ВўU вҖҷГҲЕ’ЛңГ”ГӨп¬ӮГҠ вҖҡВўSГғГЁГҝГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠвҖ“
ВЎГҒвҖһU вүҘГҠГІГҠГҲВў в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠMВ§В¬Вў Е’ГҲвҒ„UГҠвҖҡЕ’в—ҠЛңГ”H 43H
вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” thus; вҖҷГҲhпЈҝвҖ” than the intellect; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” (that which is) higher; вҖҷГҲЕ’ЛңГ”ГӨп¬ӮГҠ knowing; вҖҡВўSГғГЁГҝ
subduing; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the mind; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠ by reason; ВЎГҒвҖһU kill; вүҘГҠГІГҠГҲв—ҠЛңГ” enemy; в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ O mighty-
armed Arjuna; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠMВ§В¬в—ҠЛңГ” disguised as desire; Е’ГҲвҒ„UГҠвҖҡЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” difficult to overcome.
Thus, Arjuna, knowing the Self which is higher than the intellect and subduing
the mind by reason, kill this enemy in the form of Г«desireГӯ that is hard to overcome.
(43)
destroyed. Therefore, realization of the truth
about the Self is the principal means of
eradicating desire. That is why the Lord asks
Arjuna to kill desire, realizing the soul to be
far greater even than the intellect. The truth
about the soul is deeply mysterious and
extremely difficult to understand. It is only
the select few, possessed of a subtle intellect,
who can understand it, hearing its exposition
from the lips of a saint. The KaВўhopaniВ¶ad
says: Г¬The Self hidden in all beings remains
unperceived by them; only man possessed of
The light of Truth in man has been
covered by ignorance from time without
beginning; that is why he has been forgetful
of his true self which, though superior to
everything else, yet forgetting its inherent
power, has submitted to the control of its
enemy in the form of Г«desireГӯ. Even on
hearing the truth from others, as well as from
the scriptures, people do not regard the soul
as really supreme. If they realize their spiritual
nature, desire, which is only another name
of passion or attachment, can be very easily

=== PAGE 197 ===

196
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
a subtle vision can realize it with the help
of their sharp and subtle intellect.Г®*
The gross body, the senses, the mind,
the intellect and the JвҲӮva or embodied soulГі
all these are indicated by the word Г«Г…tmГҘГӯ.
Of these, control of the senses has already
been advised in verse 41. Sense-control
implies the control of the body as well, and
the soul is the controller itself. Thus there
remain only the mind and the intellect; of
these the intellect has been declared to be
more powerful than the mind, hence it can
control the mind. That is the reason why the
term Г«Г…tmГҘГӯ has been interpreted to mean
Г«mindГӯ and Г«Г…tmanГҘГӯ to mean the Г«intellectГӯ.
In Chapter VI, the Lord prescribes two
sovereign recipes for the control of the mind,
viz., intensive practice and cultivation of
dispassion (VI.35). Man naturally entertains
either attraction for, or aversion to, each object
of the senses. During the contact of the senses
with their objects, whenever there arises an
occasion for the play of the impulses of
attraction and repulsion, he should very carefully
try with the help of cool reasoning not to come
under their influence; in this way gradually
the forces of attraction and repulsion will
begin to diminish. Г«DispassionГӯ means inducing
in the mind, through reasoning, a distaste for
sense-enjoyments by bringing home to it,
again and again, the pain and evil involved in
them; whereas Г«practiceГӯ consists in practising
self-denial in oneГӯs dealings with the world,
attempting to concentrate the mind on God
during meditation, and repeatedly engaging in
efforts to withdraw the mind from sense-
enjoyments and fix it on God.
True, the soul possesses infinite strength,
and can itself uproot and destroy the enemy
of man, desire. In fact, it is the strength
derived from the soul that makes everything
else powerful and active in the world. But
the tragedy of it is that it remains forgetful
of its strength. And just as a mighty emperor,
forgetting his power through ignorance, may
subordinate himself to the will of his petty
attendants and servants, who are all-together
powerless before him, and tamely submit to
their control, even so, regarding itself as
subordinate to the intellect, mind and senses,
the soul blindly acquiesces in all their wayward
and unruly actions prompted by desire. That
is how desire, hidden in the intellect, mind
and senses, tempts the soul with prospects
of enjoyment, and keeps it entangled in the
world. If realizing its true character and
strength the soul asserts itself and exercising
restraint over the intellect, mind and senses
and disallowing them to act as they like,
commands them with authority to drive out
desire hidden as a thief, the intellect, mind
and senses will not have the courage to
disobey its commands, nor can desire remain
lurking there even for a moment. It is really
surprising that deriving their very existence
and activity from the soul, and drawing all
their power and strength therefrom, they
have suppressed the soul itself and are doing
whatever they like. Therefore, it is necessary
that knowing itself, and realizing its inherent
power, the soul should assert itself and
exercise its control over the intellect, mind
and senses. It is the intellect, mind and senses
which have harboured the thief and are
getting out of control. If these are brought
under control, desire can be easily killed.
This is, really speaking, the only way open
to the inactive soul to kill desire. That is why
the Lord asks Arjuna to subdue the mind by
the intellect in order to kill this enemy.
* вҲһВ· вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёВ·ГҲ Г·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ ВӘГҚвҖҰГҠпЈҝГ в—ҠГҠ Её В¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҠГғпЈҝвҖ“ Е’ГҺвүҘГҝГғпЈҝ Г п¬ӮГҮ ЛқГҝГҝГҠ вҖҷГҲhKГҠ вҖҡГҚЛҮв—ҠГҝГҠ вҖҡГҚЛҮв—ҠЕ’ГҢвүҘГҠГҒГ·вҖ”H
(KaВўha. I.iii.12)

=== PAGE 198 ===

* Chapter III *
197
Г«DesireГӯ possesses no inherent power of
its own. Finding shelter in the intellect, mind
and senses, which drive their strength from
the soul, desire has fortified itself there; and
so long as the intellect, mind and senses have
their own way, it continues through them to
draw upon the strength of the soul. That is
why desire is considered to be so powerful;
and it is, therefore, that is has been spoken
of as Г«hard to overcomeГӯ. But this desire is
hard to overcome only so long as the soul
does not assert itself; and fails to bring the
intellect, mind and senses under control.
Arjuna has been addressed in the present
verse as Г«MahГҘbГҘhuГӯ which means one
possessed of long and powerful arms. The
word is indicative of supreme strength and
power. Speaking of desire as Г«hard to
overcomeГӯ, the Lord commands Arjuna to kill
it; and in the course of this command addresses
him as Г«MahГҘbГҘhuГӯ, reminding  him of the
infinite strength possessed by the soul. In
addition to this, the note of address indicates
that the command to Arjuna comes from God
Himself, the endless repository of infinite and
inconceivable divine potency, deriving a small
fraction of which the Devas and protectors of
the Regions govern and regulate the universe,
and getting an infinitesimal part of which an
ordinary JвҲӮva can acquire immense power.
Therefore, when God Himself regards Arjuna
to be capable of destroying desire and
commands him to do so, there can be no
doubt that he will easily succeed in
vanquishing and killing it, however powerful
and hard to overcome it may appear to be.
Лҷ ГғГ вҖҡГҒЕ’ГҒГғ ГјГҠГӢв—Ҡjв—ҠВӘп¬ӮeГӢГғГҠвҖҡГҚВ¬ГҒЕёВ·Г вҖҡГҲ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГҝГҠВў
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠпЈҝ ГјГҠГӢвҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠВЎГҲВёЕёвҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’пЈҝ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ
ЕёГҠв—Ҡ ГғГҺГғГӢГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГӨГҝГҠГҝвҖ”H 3H
Thus, in the UpaniВ¶ad sung by the Lord, the Science of Brahma, the scripture
of Yoga, the dialogue between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and Arjuna, ends the third
chapter entitled Г«Г«Karmayoga, The Yoga of ActionГӯГӯ.
U

=== PAGE 199 ===

Title of the
Chapter
Summary of
the Chapter
Лҷ
вҖәrвҲӮmadbhagavad-GвҲӮtГҘ
Chapter IV
The title given to this chapter is Г¬JВӨГҘna-Karma-SaвүҲnyГҘsa-Yoga.Г® The word Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ
here is synonymous with Spiritual Wisdom, or Knowledge of Reality; Г«KarmaГӯ stands for
Karmayoga or the Path of Action, and Г«SaвүҲnyГҘsaГӯ means SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga, or
the Path of Knowledge; Discrimination and scriptural or book knowledge
are also covered by the term Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ. While bringing out the secret and truth
of His descent on earth, the Lord has discussed in this chapter Karmayoga and
SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga, the Path of Action and the Path of Knowledge, as well as Knowledge of
the truth about the Supreme Spirit, which follows as the consummation of the two paths
as well as from an insight into the truth relating to the descent of the Lord. It is, therefore,
that this chapter has been given the title of Г¬The Yoga of Knowledge as well as the
disciplines of Action and Knowledge.Г®
Stating in verses 1 and 2 how the practice of Karmayoga was taught by father to
son in ancient times, the Lord devotes verse 3 to its praise. In verse 4, Arjuna questions
the Lord about His birth, in reply to which the Lord says in verse 5 that
both Arjuna and He had passed through many births, and that He had
knowledge of them all but not Arjuna. Revealing in verses 6, 7 and 8 the
truth about His descent on earth, as well as the secret, time and occasion of the same, the
Lord states in verses 9 and 10 that knowledge of the divine character of His birth and
activities and dependence on God lead to God-realization. Verse 11 contains the statement
of the Lord that he reciprocates the feelings of those who adore Him. Verse 12 shows that
the fruit of the worship of other gods in the shape of worldly enjoyments is speedily attained,
in verses 13 and 14 the Lord says that though He is the author of the whole creation, He
should be considered to be a non-doer, and further speaks of His actions as being of a
transcendent nature, adding that one knowing this is not bound by actions. Citing in verse
15 the example of ancient seekers of liberation the Lord instructs Arjuna to take to the
performance of disinterested action. In verses 16 to 18 the Lord promises to reveal the secret
of Karma, and declaring the ways of action to be mysterious and their knowledge essential,
praises the YogвҲӮ who sees inaction in action and action in inaction. Verses 19 to 23 reveal
separately the marks and conduct of the sage who actually sees inaction in action and action
in inaction, as well as of the SГҘdhaka who strives to do so. Enumerating in verses 24 to 30,
the various forms of sacrifice, e.g., BrahmayajВӨa (a sacrifice in which everything such as the
oblation, the ladle, the fire, and the sacrificer himself are looked upon as Brahma), DevayajВӨa
(or the worship of gods) and sacrifice in the form of perception of identity etc., all sacrificers
are declared as knowers of the truth about sacrifice and sinless; and in verse 31 it is pointed
out that the partakers of nectar in the form of the remains of sacrifice attain the eternal
Brahma, while for him, who does not offer sacrifice, neither this world nor the other is
happy. In verse 32 all these forms of sacrifice are declared as capable of being accomplished

=== PAGE 200 ===

* Chapter IV *
199
through action, while verse 33 asserts that sacrifice through Knowledge is superior to that
performed with material things. In verses 34 and 35 Arjuna is asked to approach wise seers
for instruction in Truth relating to God and the Knowledge of such Truth is extolled. Verse
36 says that the ocean of sin can be crossed with the help of the raft of Knowledge. In verse
37 Knowledge is spoken of as a fire which reduces all actions to ashes or robs them of their
capacity to bear fruit; while verse 38 declares that Knowledge is the best purifier and that
the KarmayogвҲӮ who has attained purity of heart, automatically attains Knowledge. Verse 39
shows that he alone who possesses faith and other virtues is qualified to attain Knowledge,
the fruit of which is supreme peace. Denouncing in verse 40 the ignorant, faithless and
doubting soul, in verse 41 the Lord gives the assurance that the KarmayogвҲӮ whose doubts
are set at rest is freed from the binding effect of Karma. The chapter is concluded in verse
42 with an exhortation to Arjuna to cut asunder his doubt born of ignorance with the sword
of Knowledge, and establishing himself in Karmayoga to take up the fight.
In verses 4 to 29 of the last chapter the Lord showed from various points of view the
necessity of performing oneГӯs prescribed duties, and in verse 30 He instructed Arjuna to act
dedicating all his actions to God and renouncing all desire, attachment and
the sense of possession, according to the rules of Karmayoga which emphasizes
devotion. Then, in verses 31 to 35 He praised those who followed this
doctrine, and denounced those who did not; and emphasizing that one should not come
under the sway of attraction and repulsion, stressed once more the performane of oneГӯs own
duty. Then, on ArjunaГӯs query in verse 36, the Lord pointed out from verse 37 to the end
of the chapter that Desire was the root of all evils, which should be rooted out by controlling
the senses and the mind by the intellect. But the truth relating to Karmayoga is extremely
difficult to understand; therefore, with the intention of throwing more light on the subject,
the Lord describes in the first three verses of Chapter IV how Karmayoga was handed down
from ancient times, and proving that this Yoga had existed from time without beginning,
eulogizes it.
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲUп¬ӮГҠГё
Гҹв—ҠВў ГҒп¬Ӯп¬ӮSп¬ӮГғпЈҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘВў В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§п¬ӮГҠЕёвҖһUв—ҠвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҒп¬Ӯп¬ӮSп¬ӮГҠГЈв—ҠЕёп¬ӮпЈҝ В¬ЛқГҠвҖһU в—ҠЕёГҲГҒвҒ„UЛҮп¬ӮГҠвҲ‘В§п¬ӮпЈҝЛҳвҖҷЛқп¬ӮГӢГғЛңГ”H 1H
Гҹв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” this; ГҒп¬Ӯп¬ӮSп¬ӮГғпЈҝ to the Sun-god; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ” Yoga; В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§п¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” taught; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ”
imperishable; ГҒп¬Ӯп¬ӮSп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” the Sun-god; в—ҠЕёп¬ӮпЈҝ to (his own son) Manu; В¬ЛқГҠвҖһU conveyed; в—ҠЕёГҲвҖ” (and)
Manu (in his turn); ГҹЛҮп¬ӮГҠвҲ‘В§п¬ӮпЈҝ to (his son) King IkВ¶vГҘku; вҖўвҖҷЛқп¬ӮГӢГғЛңГ” imparted.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: I taught this immortal Yoga to VivasvГҘn (Sun-god); VivasvГҘn
conveyed it to Manu (his son); and Manu imparted it to (his son) IkВ¶vГҘku.        (1)
and commanded Arjuna in verse 30 to carry
on the fight in accordance with the principle
of Karmayoga, coupled with devotion. Control
of mind being indispensable in the practice
of Karmayoga, He advised Arjuna at the end
of the chapter to subdue the mind by the
Introducing the subject of Karmayoga
in verse 39 of Chapter II, the Lord dealt with
it in detail till the end of that chapter.
Thereafter, in Chapter III, in reply to ArjunaГӯs
query He put forward various reasons to
show the necessity of engaging in Action,
Link of the
Discourse

=== PAGE 201 ===

200
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
intellect, and thereby kill desire, the inveterate
enemy of man.
From all this it becomes clear that
mostly the subject of Karmayoga alone in
all its various aspects has been discussed till
the end of that chapter, and the word Г«ImamГӯ
in the present verse should naturally refer to
the subject under discussion. The word
Г«YogaГӯ in this verse should, therefore, be
interpreted as referring to Karmayoga.
Besides this, the Sun-god, Manu, and
other personages mentioned by the Lord,
through whom this Yoga has been handed
down to posterity are all householders and
KarmayogвҲӮs; and in verse 15 of this chapter,
citing the example of ancient seekers of
liberation, the Lord commands Arjuna to
perform action, which also seems to strengthen
the view that the word Г«YogaГӯ in this verse
should be interpreted to mean Karmayoga.
It may be contended here that the words
Г«Г…tmГҘnam Г…tmanГҘ SaвүҲstabhyaГӯ in the
concluding verse of Chapter III refer to the
practice of SamГҘdhi, or absorption of the
mind; and inasmuch as the root Г«YujГӯ, from
which the word Г«YogamГӯ is derived, also
carries the sense of entering into SamГҘdhiГі
Г«Yuj SamГҘdhauГӯ, it will be more appropriate
to interpret the word Г«YogamГӯ as Г«entering
into SamГҘdhiГӯ.
Our reply to this contention is that in
the verse referred to above Arjuna has been
asked to kill desire, the great enemy of man,
by subduing the mind with the help of the
intellect. Cultivation of selflessness is the
central point of Karmayoga, which can be
attained only through the eradication of
desire; and it has been declared indispensable
for the KarmayogвҲӮ to conquer and subdue
his mind and senses (II.64). Therefore,
controlling the mind and senses by the
intellect, and eradication of desire,Гіall these
are parts of the discipline of Karmayoga; and
as shown above, the intention of the Lord
in asking Arjuna to subdue the mind by the
intellect and kill desire is to urge him on to
take up the practice of Karmayoga. Hence
it is but reasonable to interpret the word
Г«YogaГӯ as Karmayoga, and not HaВўhayoga
or SamГҘdhiyoga.
The intention of the Lord in pointing
out that the Yoga referred to here was first
taught to the Sun-god and that through him
it was handed down to other kings of the
solar dynasty is to trace the origin and history
of this tradition, as well as to show that of
all people on the earth, the KВ¶atriyas were
the first to adopt and propagate this teaching
among them, and that the practice has been
in vogue from eternity.
вҲһп¬ӮВў 
В¬вҒ„UГӘВ¬вҒ„UГҠВ¬ЛқГҠ#ГҒв—Ҡв—ҠВў 
вҒ„UГҠВЎВ·ВёГҝГҠпЈҝ 
ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҲвҖ”вҖ“
вҖҡ вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝUЕёпЈҝвҖһU в—ҠвҖһUГғГҠ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ ЕёCГ”UвҖ” В¬вҒ„UГЈГғВ¬Г”H 2H
вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” thus; В¬вҒ„UГӘВ¬вҒ„UГҠВ¬ЛқГҠ#в—ҠЛңГ” transmitted in succession (from father to son); Гҹв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” (this) Yoga;
вҒ„UГҠВЎВ·ВёГҝвҖ” royal sages; ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҲвҖ” knew; вҖҡвҖ” that; вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝUЕё since; ГҹвҖһU here, on this earth; в—ҠвҖһUГғГҠ long; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖ”
Yoga; ЕёCГ”UвҖ” has disappeared; В¬вҒ„UГЈГғВ¬Г” O scorcher of enemies, Arjuna.
Thus transmitted in succession from father to son, Arjuna, this Yoga remained
known to the RГҘjarВ¶is (royal sages). Through long lapse of time, this Yoga got lost
to the world.                                                                 (2)
of ancient days for several generations before
His advent. It was, therefore, easy to learn
it and know its secret from precept and
The verse shows that taught by father
to son, the practice of Karmayoga remained
in vogue among the famous KВ¶atriya kings

=== PAGE 202 ===

* Chapter IV *
201
example in those days, but that was not the
case in His time.
He who is both a king and a В°RВ¶i (a seer),
in other words, a Ruler who also knows the
truth of the Vedas is called a Г«RГҘjarВ¶iГӯ.
The statement that the Г¬Yoga remained
known to the RГҘjarВ¶isГ® does not mean that it
was unknown to others; such an interpretation
would be altogether unwarranted. There is
no doubt, however, that royal sages have been
in the front rank so far as the knowledge and
practice of Karmayoga are concerned. That
is why instances are met with in ancient history
of men belonging to other orders of society
going to the RГҘjarВ¶is for instruction in
Karmayoga. Therefore, the intention of the
Lord in making the above statement appears
to be that the practice of Karmayoga having
been in vogue at one time among the royal
sages and Arjuna also being a member of the
royal order, he possessed an inborn qualification
to practise it, and would therefore find the
practice easy too.
So long as the tradition continued to be
handed down from father to son, the practice
of Karmayoga remained alive as a spiritual
discipline. But even as people gradually
developed attachment for worldly enjoyments,
the number of SГҘdhakas qualified to practise
Karmayoga began to decline, and this process
steadily went on till the holy tradition became
almost extinct. That is why the Lord says
that for a long time past people possessing
knowledge of, and an attitude for, the practice
of Karmayoga had more or less disappeared
from the earth.
Verse 1 of this chapter calls this Yoga
as immortal, and the present verse says that
it had long since disappeared from the earth.
These two statements appear to be mutually
contradictory. That which is immortal can
never cease to be; and if it gets lost, how
can it be called immortal? The solution of
this difficulty lies in the fact that all spiritual
disciplines intended for God-realization, such
as Karmayoga, JВӨГҘnayoga, Bhaktiyoga etc.,
possess an eternal character. That is to say,
they never become totally extinct. Since God
Himself is eternal, the principles definitely
and authoritatively laid down by Him for His
own realization can never be perishable;
they must be eternal as God Himself. Whenever
GodГӯs creation manifests itself, these eternal
laws of God also make their appearance; and
when there is dissolution of creation, they
too disappear. But this does not mean that
they become totally extinct. In order to show
this eternal character of Karmayoga, verse 1
spoke of it as immortal. Therefore, when the
present verse says that long since it had
disappeared, it should be understood to mean
that for a long time great spiritual souls
possessed of the knowledge of this Yoga had
ceased to appear on earth, so that it had more
or less disappeared from the earth; not that
it had totally ceased to exist. For the Real
never ceases to be. According to the LordГӯs
statement in verse 1, this Yoga is manifested
by God at the beginning of creation; then
during the interval preceding the final
dissolution sometimes it disappears, and
sometimes it makes its appearance again, due
to various causes and circumstances. With
the completion of the circle of creation, it
dissolves itself into God alongwith the creation.
It is in this sense that the Lord speaks of
its disappearance; in reality, however, it is
immortal and never ceases to be.
вҖҡ вҲһп¬ӮГҠГҝВў в—ҠГҝГҠ ГғпЈҝЛҳl ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖ” В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§вҖ” В¬ГҲвҒ„UГҠГғЕёвҖ”вҖ“
Г·QВ§ГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒГ”вҖҡ в—ҠпЈҝ вҖҡПҖГҠ ГёпЈҝГҒГғ вҒ„UвҖһUSГҝВў sГ”пЈҝГғЕ’ГҲГ»ГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ”H 3H
вҖҡвҖ” вҲһп¬Ӯ that very; вҖўГҝв—ҠЛңГ” this; в—ҠГҝГҠ by Me; ГғпЈҝ to you; вҖўl today; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖ” Yoga; В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§вҖ” has

=== PAGE 203 ===

202
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The Lord reminds Arjuna of his being
a great devotee of long standing and beloved
friend as an apology for His unfolding to him
a great secret which cannot be divulged to
any and every one.
The words Г«SaВЁ EvaГӯ and Г«PurГҘtanaВЁГӯ
establish the eternal character of this Yoga;
the word Г«TeГӯ indicates ArjunaГӯs special
qualification to receive the secret; and the
word Г«AdyaГӯ indicates the occasion or
circumstances of the revelation of the secret.
All this bring out that it was the same Yoga,
which the Lord had revealed first to the Sun-
god, and which had been handed down from
generation to generation from the beginning
of creation, that He was going to reaveal that
day to Arjuna on the battle-field, finding the
latter extremely agitated and perplexed and
possessed of a mind surrendered to the Lord,
and, therefore, well-qualified to receive the
secret, so that he might get over his grief and
attain the highest good. In addition to the
spirit of self-surrender, sincere and anxious
questions arising out of the deepest layer of
the heart make a man supremely qualified to
receive the truth. Arjuna had really established
his qualification that day (II.7) as he had
never done before. That was why the Lord
condescended to reveal the secret to him.
By calling it a Г¬supreme secretГ® the
Lord intends to show that freeing man, as
it does, from all forms of misery and bondage,
this Yoga is capable of leading Arjuna to
an easy realization of God, the embodiment
of supreme bliss; that is why it is supreme
in character and a closely guarded secret.
Besides this, the Lord further indicates
thereby that by speaking of Himself as
having taught this Yoga to the Sun-god and
others and by declaring that He had imparted
the same gospel to Arjuna, who was His
devotee, the Lord has disclosed to him His
divine character, which is a profound secret
and should never be divulged to those who
do not possess the necessary qualification to
receive it.
been imparted; В¬ГҲвҒ„UГҠГғЕёвҖ” ancient; Г·QВ§вҖ” devotee; вҖўГҒвҖҡ you are; в—ҠпЈҝГ” My; вҖҡПҖГҠ friend; Гё and; ГҹГҒГғ
therefore; вҒ„UвҖһUSГҝв—ҠЛңГ” secret; ГҒвҖһU because; вҲһГғГғЛңГ” this; В©UГ»ГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” supreme.
The same ancient Yoga, which is a supreme secret, has this day been imparted
to you by Me, because you are My devotee and friend.
 (3)
It may be asked here: Г¬BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a manifested Himself as late as towards
the close of the DvГҘpara Age, whereas the Sun-god, Manu and IkВ¶vГҘku appeared much
earlier, viz., at the dawn of creation; how then, can it be believed that it was вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
who taught this Yoga to the most ancient Sun-god?Г® Therefore, with a view to having
this point cleared and in order to obtain an insight into the secret of Divine descent on
earth, Arjuna puts the following question:
вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
вҖўВ¬вҒ„ВўU Г·п¬ӮГғГҠпЈҝ ВЎГЈв—Ҡ В¬вҒ„ВўU ВЎГЈв—Ҡ ГҒп¬Ӯп¬ӮSп¬ӮГғвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҲ‘В§Г•в—ҠпЈҝГғГҒmВЎГҠЕёГӢГҝГҠВў Г п¬Ӯв—ҠГҠЕ’ГҠГ’ В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§п¬ӮГҠГҒЕёГҒГғH 4H
вҖўВ¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” (was) later; Г·п¬ӮГғвҖ”Г” Your; ВЎГЈв—ҠГ” birth; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” (was) earlier; ВЎГЈв—Ҡ birth; ГҒп¬Ӯп¬ӮSп¬ӮГғвҖ” of the
Sun-god; вҲ‘В§Г•в—ҠЛңГ” how; вҲһГғГғЛңГ” this (Yoga); ГҒп¬ӮВЎГҠЕёГӢГҝГҠв—ҠЛңГ” I am to believe; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” you; вҖўГҠЕ’ГҠГ’ at the
beginning (of creation); В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§п¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” taught; ГҹГҒГғ this.
Arjuna said: You are of recent origin, while the birth of VivasvГҘn dates back

=== PAGE 204 ===

* Chapter IV *
203
Arjuna already knew it that вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
was no ordinary human being, but was
Almighty God Himself, the supreme Brahma
manifested as a superman; for he had heard
the glory of the Lord from the lips of no less
a personage than BhвҲӮВ¶ma on the occasion of
the great RГҘjasВөuya sacrifice performed by
King YudhiВ¶Вўhira (Maha., SabhГҘ., 38.23, 29),
which was corroborated by the statements of
various В°RВ¶is. That was why in the course of
his exile in the forest he once spoke to the
Lord about His glories (MahГҘ., Vana., 12.11-
43). Moreover, he had had direct experience
of the LordГӯs supernatural powers demonstrated,
for instance, at the time of His killing вҖәiвҖ№upГҘla,
and on other occasions of an allied nature.
Nevertheless, in order to hear directly from
the lips of the Lord the secret of Divine
descent, and with a view to having the doubt
arising in the mind of the generality of people
cleared, Arjuna puts the present question to
the Lord. It was well-known to all that вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a had taken birth only a few years ago
as a son of Vasudeva, while the Sun-god had
appeared at the beginning of creation from the
womb of Aditi. Under the circumstance, without
obtaining a proper insight into the secret of it,
how could the almost impossible statement be
believed that вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a had taught that Yoga
to the Sun-god at the dawn of creation and
that the Sun-god handed it down to his
posterity? Arjuna, therefore, humbly requested
the Lord by this question to bless him by
unravelling the secret.
to remote antiquity. How, then, am I to believe that You taught this Yoga at the
beginning of creation?
 (4)
In reply to the above question of Arjuna the Lord, with a view to throwing light
on the subject of Divine descent, and revealing His omniscience, says:
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲUп¬ӮГҠГё
вҖҷвҖһГҚUГҒЕё в—ҠпЈҝ вҲҡГҝГғГӢГғГҠГҒЕё ВЎГЈв—ҠГҠГҒЕё Гғп¬Ӯ ГёГҠВЎВёГҲЕёГ”вҖ“
ГғГҠГЈГҝвҖһВўU п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ Её Г п¬ӮВў п¬ӮпЈҝГ Г• В¬вҒ„UГЈГғВ¬Г”H 5H
вҖҷвҖһГҚUГҒЕё many; в—ҠпЈҝ Mine; вҲҡГҝГғГӢГғГҠГҒЕё have gone before; ВЎГЈв—ҠГҠГҒЕё births; Гғп¬Ӯ thine; Гё and; вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё
O Arjuna; ГғГҠГҒЕё them; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ know; вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ all; Её not; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” you; п¬ӮпЈҝГ Г• know; В¬вҒ„UГЈГғВ¬ O
chastiser of foes.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: Arjuna, you and I have passed through many births, I know
them all; you do not remember, O chastiser of foes.
 (5)
many people He had given spiritual instruction
in His previous manifestations of various
kinds. Therefore, the statement that He taught
this Yoga to the Sun-god should cause no
wonder to Arjuna, nor should it be regarded
as an impossibility. Arjuna should understand
it in the sense that at the beginning of the
existing Kalpa He revealed this Yoga to the
Sun-god as NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a, the Prime Person.
When the Lord says: Г«I know them all,
you do not remember,Гӯ He indicates His own
In the present verse, the Lord says that
Arjuna should not think that Arjuna and He
had come into existence only the other day,
and that they did not exist before. They are
both without beginning and eternal. Apart
from His own ever existent and eternal form,
He had manifested Himself as the divine
Fish, Tortoise, Boar, man-lion, the celestial
Dwarf, and in various other forms. His latest
manifestation as a son of Vasudeva was no
doubt recent; but Arjuna had no idea to how

=== PAGE 205 ===

204
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
omniscience, on the one hand, and the finite
knowledge of the JвҲӮva, on the other. He means
that not being omniscient, Arjuna had no
knowledge of the reasons which had prompted
Him to assume various divine Forms, the
nature of those Forms, the time and occasion
of His manifestation, and the sports He enacted
in those Forms. Arjuna had lost the memory
of his own previous births as well as of all
the previous manifestations of the Lord; that
was why he puts the above question. But no
occurrence of the world remains hidden from
the view of the Lord; there is no past or future
for Him, everything is present before His eyes.
Being omniscient, He knows all JвҲӮvas and
everything relating to them (VII.26). Therefore,
Arjuna should not entertain the least doubt
about the truth of the statement that it was the
Lord Himself who taught this Yoga to the Sun-
god at the beginning of creation.
Hearing it from the Lord that He had passed through many births one is naturally
tempted to enquire how He is born, and what is the difference between His birth and
the birth of any other being? In order to make this clear, the Lord reveals in the next
verse the secret of His birth.
вҖўВЎГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ вҖҡГӣГҠвҲҡГҝГҝГҠГ в—ҠГҠ Г·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠв—ҠГӢEвҒ„UГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ вҖҡЕёЛңГ”вҖ“
В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғВў Sп¬ӮГҠв—ҠГҒЕ“DГ”UГҠГҝ вҖҡГӘГ·п¬ӮГҠГӘГҝГҠГ в—Ҡв—ҠГҠГҝГҝГҠГ”H 6H
вҖўВЎвҖ” unborn; вҖўГҒВ¬ though; вҖҡЕёЛңГ” being; вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝГҠГ в—ҠГҠ imperishable; Г·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of (all) beings; ГҹВёEвҒ„UвҖ”
the Lord; вҖўГҒВ¬ though; вҖҡЕёЛңГ” being; В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” Nature; Sп¬ӮГҠв—ҠЛңГ” My; вҖўГҒЕ“DГ”UГҠГҝ keeping under control;
вҖҡГӘГ·п¬ӮГҠГҒв—Ҡ I become manifest; вҖўГҠГ в—Ҡв—ҠГҠГҝГҝГҠ through My own YogamГҘyГҘ (divine potency).
Though birthless and deathless, and the Lord of all beings, I manifest Myself
through My own YogamГҘyГҘ (divine potency), keeping My Nature (PrakГҰti) under
control.                                                                 (6)
and free, who is sporting in that form for the
good of the world.
The word Г«PrakГҰtimГӯ with the adjective
Г«SvГҘmГӯ stands for primordial Nature, referred
to in verses 7 and 8 of Chapter IX, and
which has been spoken of again as Г«Mahad
BrahmaГӯ in Chapter XIV of the GвҲӮtГҘ. And
the word Г«Г…tmamГҘyayГҘГӯ denotes YogamГҘyГҘ,
the divine potency or transcendental power,
referred to in verse 25 of Chapter VII, by
which the Lord holds the entire creation and
manifests Himself from time to time, assuming
various forms, and shrouded by which He
remains incognito. Keeping His primordial
Nature under control, the Lord manifests
Himself through His YogamГҘyГҘ. Primordial
Nature brings the world into existence, whereas
Г«YogamГҘyГҘГӯ is the LordГӯs divine potency, or
Transcendental Power.
By calling Himself birthless and deathless
the Lord means to say that He never takes
birth, as ordinary beings do, nor dies; yet He
appears taking birth and dying like ordinary
beings. Even so, though the Lord of all
created beings, He appears just like an ordinary
human being. That is to say, people not
knowing the secret of Divine descent imagine,
at the time of His manifestation as the Divine
fish, Tortoise, Boar or in human forms that
He has taken birth, and when He disappears
from their midst they take Him to have
perished. Nay, when He enacts His divine
sports in any such forms, they disdain Him
looking upon Him as an ordinary mortal
(IX.11). Inasmuch as He remains veiled by
His YogamГҘyГҘ (VII.25) they cannot realize
that it is the Almighty God Himself, the Lord
of all creation, who is ever pure, awakened

=== PAGE 206 ===

* Chapter IV *
205
The Lord states in this verse that He
manifests Himself through His own YogamГҘyГҘ,
keeping PrakГҰti or Nature under His control.
Thereby He shows the difference between
His birth and the birth of ordinary beings of
the world. Other beings take birth under the
subordination of PrakГҰti in various wombsГі
good, bad and indifferentГіand undergo
pleasurable or painful experiences according
to their past Karma; but such is not the case
with God. God manifests Himself of His
own accord from time to time through His
own YogamГҘyГҘ keeping PrakГҰti under His
control, and enacts various divine sports
assuming various forms suited to those sports.
That birth of the Lord is independent and
transcendent in character, and is not brought
about by Karma as in the case of the JвҲӮvas.
In the case of the ordinary JвҲӮva birth
and death are determined by his Karma, and
not by his will. He has to remain pent up
in the womb of his mother and lead a
miserable existence there. During birth he
has to undergo the ordeal of passing through
the vagina of his mother; thereafter his body
grows through the efflux of time and perishes
in due course, when it is said the JвҲӮva is
dead. Compelled by his Karma, he again
takes birth in another form; and the process
goes on repeating till he is liberated from the
bondage of births and deaths. But appearance
and disappearance of the Lord stand on a
different footing altogether, and are wholly
dependent on GodГӯs will. God can manifest
Himself any time He likes, anywhere He
likes and in any form He likes, and can
similarly disappear at His own sweet will.
In a moment He can expand Himself and
assume a huge proportion, and the very next
moment He can reduce Himself to a very
small size and can change His form at will.
The reason for this is that He is not ruled
by PrakГҰti, but PrakГҰti has to follow His will.
Therefore, just as changes in the form of the
Lord, as described in Chapter XI,Гіwhen He
first showed Arjuna His Universal Form,
then His divine four-armed Form, and lastly
His human form,Гіdo not mean birth and
death, even so the LordГӯs manifestation in
any form whatsoever, and His concealing
that form do not indicate birth and death, but
constitute only different aspects of His eternal
Sport.
Some people presume that BhagavГҘn
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’aГӯs birth must have taken place from
the womb of DevakвҲӮ following the same
laws of birth as operate in the case of other
beings. But this presumption has no foundation,
in fact. A study of that portion of вҖәrвҲӮmad
BhГҘgavata which deals with the birth of
BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a will reveal the fallacy
of this presumption. It is stated therein that
mother DevakвҲӮ beheld the Lord manifested
before her in His four-armed Divine Form,
holding the conch, the discus, the club and the
lotus in His four hands, and offered her prayers
to the Lord. Later on at the request of the
mother, the Lord assumed a babyГӯs form.*
Thus it would appear that the birth of the
Lord did not take place from the womb of
*
В©UВ¬вҖҡВўвҖһUвҒ„U 
ГҒп¬ӮEГҠГ в—ҠГӣГҠЕ’ГҠпЈҝ 
MВ§В¬в—ҠвҲӮUГҠГ’ГҒвҲ‘В§вҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вүҘГҠWГёвҲ‘ЛқВ§ВӘЕ’ГҠВ¬kГҒГјГҠГҝГҠ 
ВЎГҲCГ”ВўU 
ГёГғГҲГ·ГҲВёВЎв—ҠЛңГ”H
Г¬O soul of the universe, pray withdraw this superhumanГіdivine form consisting of four arms holding
the conch, discus, club and lotus.Г® (вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata X.iii.30)
ГҹГ ГҝГҲГ„Г п¬ӮГҠЛҳЛҳвҖҡГӢhГҒвҒ„USГғГҚcГЎГҠГӢВҘ Г·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҠГ в—Ҡв—ҠГҠГҝГҝГҠвҖ“
Г¬Having thus spoken, the glorious Hari became quiet, and His own supreme power and will instantly
assumed the form of a human child while his parents looked on.Г® (Ibid., X.iii.46)

=== PAGE 207 ===

206
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
mother DevakвҲӮ, but He revealed Himself of
His own accord. In order to enact the sport
of birth, however, it was shown to the world
as if He remained for ten months in the
womb of the mother, and was born at the
proper time.
On hearing the above secret of the LordГӯs manifestation from the lips of the Lord
Himself, one is naturally inclined to ask when and with what motive does the Lord manifest
Himself as stated above. In the next two verses, therefore, the Lord reveals the occasion,
ground and object of His manifestation:
ГҝЕ’ГҠ ГҝЕ’ГҠ ГҒвҖһU Е“в—ҠВёSГҝ ГҮвҲӮUГҠГҒЕёГ·Вёп¬ӮГҒГғ Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғвҖ“
вҖўГЁГҝГҲГ Г•ГҠЕёв—ҠЕ“в—ҠВёSГҝ ГғЕ’ГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёВў вҖҡГҺВЎГҠГӘГҝвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”H 7H
ГҝЕ’ГҠ ГҝЕ’ГҠ whenever; ГҒвҖһU indeed; Е“в—ҠВёSГҝ of virtue; ГҮвҲӮUГҠГҒЕёвҖ” decline; Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ there is; Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғ O
descendant of Bharata, Arjuna; вҖўГЁГҝГҲГ Г•ГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” (there is) rise; вҖўЕ“в—ҠВёSГҝ (and) of evil; ГғЕ’ГҠ then;
вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” Myself; вҖҡГҺВЎГҠГҒв—Ҡ body forth; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I.
Arjuna, whenever righteousness is on the decline, and unrighteousness is in the
ascendant, then I body Myself forth.                                       (7)
weak and helpless people, the barometer of
virtue and morality in society falls very low,
and that of vice and immorality rises high, it
will mean decline of virtue and preponderance
of vice. For instance, during the Satyayuga,
when HiraЖ’yakaвҖ№ipu ruled over the world,
vice and immorality prevailed; innocent men
were tyrannized over and people were forced
to abandon all forms of spiritual practice like
meditation, Japa, austerities, worship, recital
of sacred texts, performance of sacrifices,
charity etc. The gods were cudgelled out of
their abodes in heaven and were driven from
pillar to post like flocks of sheep. A devotee
like PrahlГҘda was subjected to various forms
of persecution. That was the moment when
God suddenly appeared in the form of a man-
lion and rescuing PrahlГҘda from the grip of
his tyrannical father, established virtue and
righteousness on a solid foundation. Similar
conditions prevailed on the occasion of other
manifestations of the Lord as well.
There is no fixed period of time for the
manifestation of God; and it cannot be
positively asserted that He will manifest
Himself in a particular Yuga or age, in a
particular year and month, and on a particular
date. Nor is there any rule to show how
many times, and in how many forms, will
the Lord appear in a particular Yuga. In
order to bring out this fact clearly the word
Г«YadГҘГӯ has been used twice in this verse.
The intention is to show that the Lord
manifests Himself whenever He feels it
necessary to do so in view of the decline
of virtue and preponderance of vice.
God alone knows what is that decline
of virtue and preponderance of vice like,  which
compels Him to manifest Himself. It is not
possible for man to judge it correctly. But by
way of conjecture it may be stated that when
as a result of the tyranny and injustice of the
strong and wicked over saintly and virtuous
souls, devotees of God and other innocent,
В¬ГҒвҒ„UГІГҠГҠГЎГҠГҠГҝ вҖҡГҠЕ“ГҚЕёГҠВў ГҒп¬ӮЕёГҠвүҘГҠГҠГҝ Гё Е’ГҲcвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
Е“в—ҠВёвҖҡВўSГ•ГҠВ¬ЕёГҠГ•ВёГҠГҝ вҖҡГӘГ·п¬ӮГҠГҒв—Ҡ ГҝГҲВӘпЈҝ ГҝГҲВӘпЈҝH 8H

=== PAGE 208 ===

* Chapter IV *
207
The word Г«SГҘdhВөunГҘmГӯ in this verse
stands for those who observe the rules of
non-violence, truth, non-thieving, continence,
etc., which have a universal application, and
duly perform duties pertaining to their order
in society and stage in life, such as the
performance of sacrifices, charity and
austerities, teaching and governance of the
people, etc., who are naturally disposed to
do good to others, who are the infinite
repositories of all forms of virtue, and the
very embodiments of right conduct and are
by nature devotees of God, given to the
devout practices of hearing, chanting and
remembrance of GodГӯs name; form, virtues,
glory and sports, etc. And Г¬protection of the
virtuousГ® means deliverance of such persons
from the terrible wrongs of wicked and evil-
minded men, bestowing on them the highest
spiritual state after their death and conferring
on them the highest good by wiping out the
entire stock of their accumulated sins through
His very sight etc., and enacting divine
sports so that by hearing and chanting, and
reflecting and meditating on them people
may find an easy way to redemption.
The word Г«DuВ¶kГҰtГҘmГӯ stands for the
antithesis of a Г«SГҘdhuГӯ as described above.
It refers to wicked men possessing a demoniac
disposition, who persecute innocent and
virtuous men and devotees of God, are
repositories of vices like lying, hypocrisy,
theft, adultery etc., who are unbelievers by
nature, and are engaged in amassing wealth
by objectionable methods, and with whom
it has become a habit to wage war against
God and the Vedas and other scriptures. And
Г¬destruction of evil-doersГ® means chastising
such wicked and evil-minded people with a
view to freeing them from the clutches of
evil and sin, and depriving them of their
body by means of war or any other expedient,
directly or through the instrumentality of
other beings.
Here it may be asked: Why does God,
who is extremely compassionate, find it
necessary to punish and chastise these wicked
men instead of reforming their character through
persuasion and remonstrance? Our answer to
this question is that the very chastisement by
the Lord, and death at His hands, which
means depriving them of their demoniac body,
is an act of compassion on the part of the
Lord; for, the Lord only wipes out their sins
and purifies them through such punishment
and death. It should never be imagined that
punishment by God involves the least
relaxation of His compassion. When an abscess
is formed in a particular limb of a child, its
parents attempt, in the first instance, to suppress
it by the use of some medicine; but when it
is found that no medicine will avail in its
case and that the least delay will cause the
poison to spread to other parts as well, they
immediately get the abscess opened and will
not hesitate even to have the limb amputated,
if necessary, in the interests of the other
limbs. Even so, the Lord tries to reform the
wicked, first by persuasion and instruction,
according to the policy of conciliation, as He
did in the case of Duryodhana, and then
even by threat of punishment. But when He
finds that such instruction and threat do not
avail, and their wickedness is gradually
assuming proportions, He, in the last resort,
takes recourse to punishment, or even causes
В¬ГҒвҒ„UГІГҠГҠГЎГҠГҠГҝ for the protection; вҖҡГҠЕ“ГҚЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of the good; ГҒп¬ӮЕёГҠвүҘГҠГҠГҝ for the extirpation of; Гё and;
Е’ГҲcвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of evil-doers; Е“в—ҠВёвҖҡВўSГ•ГҠВ¬ЕёГҠГ•ГҠВёГҝ for firmly establishing virtue; вҖҡГӘГ·п¬ӮГҠГҒв—Ҡ am born; ГҝГҲВӘпЈҝ ГҝГҲВӘпЈҝ
from age to age.
For the protection of the virtuous, for the extirpation of evil-doers, and for establishing
Dharma (righteousness) on a firm footing, I manifest Myself from age to age.             (8)

=== PAGE 209 ===

208
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
them to be killed, as a method of expiation of
their sins. Those among the wicked, whose
stock of past Karma has been good, but
whose conduct in the current life has become
vicious due to some special cause or association
with evil, He liberates by inflicting the penalty
of death by His own hands. All these actions
of the Lord are nothing but expressions of
His extreme compassion.
The Lord awakens in the minds of the
people faith in and reverence for the Vedas
and other scriptures, the other world, saints
and God by carrying out the injunctions of
the scriptures in His own personal life, and
demonstrating the glory of righteousness by
the use of His inspiring and powerful words
and messages, and other such means, and
developing among the people a natural love
and reverence for virtues and right conduct,
makes them strongly cling to them. All these
items of activity are included in the process
of establishing Dharma.
It is not necessary that God should
manifest Himself only when there is an
occasion for discharging all the three functions,
viz., protection of the virtuous, destruction of
evil-doers and establishment of Dharma
together. He can manifest Himself at His
discretion in order to carry out any two
objects, or even one of these objects.
It is true God is powerful enough to
accomplish anything He likes by His mere
will, without manifesting Himself; in fact, He
does so. But when He manifests Himself in
a visible form, He does so as an act of
special grace, with a view to affording
people the rare opportunity of liberating
themselves through His sight and touch as
well as through direct exchange of words
with Him, and also with a view to conferring
on His loving devotees the proud privilege
of participation in and enjoyment of His
Divine Sports. People can easily cross the
ocean of transmigration through constant
remembrance of His enchanting form revealed
in such manifestations, and through the
hearing and chanting of and meditation on
His Name, virtues, glory, exalted nature and
the Divine Sports enacted by Him. This
process of wholesale liberation of souls in
bondage cannot be set in motion unless the
Lord appears in person amidst us.
When the Lord says, Г¬I manifest Myself
from age to age,Г® He thereby shows that in
every age, whenever the decline of
righteousness goes beyond limits, He manifests
Himself again and again, or as many times
as circumstances require. There is no such
rule that He comes down only once in a
particular age.
Revealing thus the occasion, ground and object of His manifestation, the Lord now
shows in the next verse the fruit of real knowledge of the divine character of His birth
and activities:
ВЎГЈв—Ҡ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё Гё в—ҠпЈҝ ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝв—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮВў ГҝГҠпЈҝ п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠ ГғГ»п¬ӮГғвҖ”вҖ“
Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ Е’пЈҝвҖһВўU В¬ГҲЕёВЎВёГЈв—Ҡ ЕёГ’ГҒГғ в—ҠГҠв—ҠпЈҝГҒГғ вҖҡГҠпЈҝЛҳВЎГҲВёЕёH 9H
ВЎГЈв—Ҡ birth; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё action; Гё and; в—ҠпЈҝ My; ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝв—ҠЛңГ” (is) divine; вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” so; ГҝвҖ” who; п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠ knows;
ГғГ»п¬ӮГғвҖ” in reality; Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ on leaving; Е’пЈҝвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” (his) body; В¬ГҲЕёвҖ” again; ВЎГЈв—Ҡ birth; Её not; вҲһГҒГғ attains;
в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” to Me; вҲһГҒГғ comes; вҖҡвҖ” he; вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё O Arjuna.
Arjuna, My birth and activities are divine. He, who knows this in reality, is
not reborn on leaving his body, but comes to Me.                             (9)

=== PAGE 210 ===

* Chapter IV *
209
The All-powerful God, the Supreme
Brahma, is, truly speaking, wholly beyond
birth and death. The process of His birth is
not the same as in the case of the JвҲӮva. He
simply enacts the sport of birth in order to
draw and attract the minds of His devotees
through His divine sports and to delight them
by His sight, touch and speech, as an act
of special grace, to spread His fame throughout
the world and thereby wipe out the sins of
the people through the hearing, chanting and
remembrance of the same, and lastly, to
establish righteousness in the world through
the extirpation of evil-doers. There is no taint
of evil in that supernatural birth of the Lord.
For the good of the world, He assumes a
celestial, human or sub-human form and
manifests Himself before the people. That
Form of the Lord is not made of any material
stuff: therefore, it is divine, spiritual, effulgent,
pure and transcendent. The GuЖ’as or modes
of PrakГҰti and latencies of Karma do not
constitute the cause of His birth. He does
not take birth as one subject to the control
of MГҘyГҘ, but appears in a celestial, human
or subhuman form through His own divine
potency, keeping Nature under His control,
to confer His grace on the JвҲӮvas of the world.
Realizing this truth, that is to say, reposing
full faith in it, without entertaining the least
doubt or mental reservation with regard to
the same, and viewing the Lord manifested
in a human form, not as an ordinary mortal,
but as Almighty God Himself, the Lord of
the entire creation, the Knower of all hearts,
the Supreme Brahma, and the very embodiment
of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss,Гіthis is
what is meant by knowing in reality the
divine character of the LordГӯs birth. The
same truth has been explained in verse 6 of
this chapter. Verses 24 and 25 of Chapter
VII, and verses 11 and 12 of Chapter IX
denounce those who not knowing this truth
treat the Lord as an ordinary human being;
while verse 3 of Chapter X praises those
who know this truth in reality.
He who thus comes to know in reality
the divine character of the LordГӯs birth will
find even a momentГӯs separation from the
Lord unbearable. Because of his supreme
reverence and exclusive love for the Lord
he will be found completely merged in His
thought.
The Lord has no personal interest in
whatever He does by way of creating the
universe, or carrying on his sports connected
with a particular manifestation; it is simply
in order to shower His grace on humanity
that He carries on multifarious activities in
course of His various manifestations (III.22,23).
Though He carries on all activities through
His own PrakГҰti, He is essentially a non-doer
and is never bound by those actions, inasmuch
as He does not claim their authorship, nor
does He crave for their fruit (IV.13,14).
Whatever He does, He does for the good
of the world (IV.8). Every activity of His,
has the good of the people behind it. Though
the sole and undisputed Lord and ruler of
countless millions of universes, He treats all
beings with compassion shorn of egoism and
an impartiality full of love (IX.29). Howsoever
man approaches Him, even so does He seek
him (IV.11); He brings full security and
personally attends to the needs of His devotees
(IX.22), confers divine wisdom on them
(X.10,11), and assumes the role of a helmsman
to take those who have boarded the bark of
Devotion speedily across the ocean of birth
and death (XII.7). In this way, all activities
of the Lord are totally free from evils like
attachment, egoism and desire, and are
absolutely pure and stainless. They are carried
on only for the good of the people and for
the spread of morality, righteousness and
pure love, devotion etc., in the world. Though

=== PAGE 211 ===

210
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
engaged in all these activities, the Lord has
really no connection with them; He remains
beyond and above them, essentially a non-
doer. Realizing this truth, that is to say,
reposing full faith in it without entertaining
any doubt or mental reservation with regard
to the same, is what is meant by knowing
in reality the divine character of the activities
of the Lord. The activities of one who comes
to know this in reality become pure and
transcendent in character: that is to say, he
too begins to treat all beings with compassion,
impartiality; righteousness, propriety, humility
and disinterested love.
Here it may be asked: Does one attain
God by realizing the divine character of the
birth of the Lord and His activities both, or
even one of them to the exclusion of the
other? Our answer to this is that the
knowledge of the divine character of even
one of them is sufficient to bring about the
realization of God (IV.14; X.3). Under such
circumstances realization of God becomes
much easier for him who has come to know
in reality the divine nature of both. The Lord
says that he who knows the above truth in
reality is not reborn on leaving his body.
What becomes of him then ? As an answer
to this probable query, the Lord says, Г¬He
attains MeГ®. And it is an indisputable fact
that he who reaches His abode cannot be
born again (VIII.16).
The statement of the Lord that he who
comes to know the above truth in reality
goes to Him on leaving his body, should not
lead one to imagine that he realizes God only
after death, and not while living. As a matter
of fact he directly perceives God the moment
he realizes this truth fully. The point which
is sought to be stressed here is that after
death he does not return to this mortal world,
but goes to the LordГӯs supreme Abode.
The Lord proceeds in the next verse to show that the fruit of realizing the divine
nature of His birth and activities, as described above, has been attained from time
immemorial:
п¬ӮГӢГғвҒ„UГҠВӘГ·ГҝвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“ГҠ в—ҠГЈв—ҠГҝГҠ в—ҠГҠв—ҠГҲВ¬ГҠГҒГјГҠГғГҠвҖ”вҖ“
вҖҷвҖһUп¬ӮГҠпЈҝ ГҙГҠГҠЕёГғВ¬вҖҡГҠ В¬ГҚГғГҠ в—ҠjГҠп¬Ӯв—ҠГҠВӘГғГҠвҖ”H 10H
п¬ӮГӢГғвҒ„UГҠВӘГ·ГҝвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“ГҠвҖ” completely rid of attachment, fear and anger; в—ҠГЈв—ҠГҝГҠвҖ” (wholly) absorbed
in Me; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” on Me; В©UВ¬ГҠГҒГјГҠГғГҠвҖ” depending; вҖҷвҖһUп¬ӮвҖ” many; ГҙГҠГҠЕёГғВ¬вҖҡГҠ by the penance of (the
aforesaid) Knowledge; В¬ГҚГғГҠвҖ” purified; в—ҠjГҠп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” My being; вҖўГҠВӘГғГҠвҖ” (have) entered into.
Completely rid of attachment, fear and anger, wholly absorbed in Me, depending
on Me, and purified by the penance of wisdom, many have become one with Me
even in the past.                                                       (10)
who are absolutely free from all these three
modifications of the mind are referred to by
the compound word Г«VвҲӮtarГҘgabhayakrodhГҘВЁГӯ.
He who has come to know in reality the
divine character of the birth and activities of
God, develops exclusive love for God; hence
he will not feel even the least attachment for
anything in the world except God. Having
The word Г«RГҘgaГӯ stands for attachment,
and the feeling of uneasiness produced
in the mind at the possibility of an
impending danger or calamity is known as
Г«fearГӯ. And the excitement man feels against
one who has done him an injury, or
transgressed the bounds of propriety, or
acted against his will is termed Г«angerГӯ. They

=== PAGE 212 ===

* Chapter IV *
211
realized the truth about God, he begins to
feel directly everywhere the existence of
God; and as he finds God in every being
and every object, he becomes for ever free
of fear. Whatever treatment he may receive
from others, he regards as ordained by the
will of God, and looks upon all incidents of
the world as a part of the divine play;
therefore, the morbid feeling of anger can
never arise in his mind on any account. Thus
through the grace of God, devotees, who
have realized the divine character of the
LordГӯs birth and activities, are freed forever
from ordinary human imperfections and
weaknesses; this is what is sought to be
conveyed by the use of the adjective
Г«VвҲӮtarГҘgabhayakrodhГҘВЁГӯ in this verse.
The devotees of God who, on account
of their exclusive love for God see God and
God alone everywhere, are referred to here
by the word Г«ManmayГҘВЁГӯ. The use of this
adjective indicates that the devotee who
succeeds in realizing God through knowledge
of the truth of His divine birth and activities,
naturally develops exclusive love for God.
Therefore, his mind gets totally merged in
God, and he sees God everywhere (VI.30;
VII.18-19).
The word Г«MГҘmupГҘвҖ№ritГҘВЁГӯ stands for
those who have taken refuge in God, who
depend on God for everything, and remain
ever content in God, and having no duty to
perform for themselves, act in the spirit of
rendering service to God to carry out His
behest and regarding everything as belonging
to him. The use of this adjective in the verse
indicates that the devotees who have realized
God have their self fully surrendered to God,
and depend on God for everything; and all
the marks of the devotee who has in reality
surrendered himself to God find their fullest
development in him.
The subject of discussion in these verses
is Devotion, and not Knowledge, and the
preceding verse spoke of true knowledge
about the divine character of the birth and
activities of God as leading to God-realization.
The present verse is a corroboration of the
statement made in the preceding verse.
Therefore, the word Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ forming part of
the compound word Г«JВӨГҘnatapasГҘГӯ has been
interpreted as meaning knowledge of the
divine character of the birth and activities of
God, and not the knowledge of Self. The
penance of this knowledge develops exclusive
love for God, which wipes out all the sins
and afflictions of the devotee and frees his
mind from all imperfections and vices and
his activities become as divine as that of
God. He never loses sight of God, who is
always present before his eyes. This is what
is meant by the statement that such devotees,
being purified by the penance of wisdom,
become one with God.
With reference to the statement made in the preceding verses that the devotee who
comes to know in reality the divine character of the birth and activities of the Lord, attains
Him. The question arises as to how and in what form do they attain Him. In answer
to this the Lord says:
ГҝпЈҝ ГҝГ•ГҠ в—ҠГҠВў В¬ЛқВ¬lГЈГғпЈҝ ГғГҠВўSГғГ•Г’п¬Ӯ Г·ВЎГҠГӘГҝвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
в—Ҡв—Ҡ п¬ӮГ в—ҠГҠВёЕёГҲп¬ӮГғВёГЈГғпЈҝ в—ҠЕёГҲcГҝГҠвҖ” В¬ГҠГ•Вё вҖҡп¬ӮВёвүҘГҠвҖ”H 11H
ГҝпЈҝ who; ГҝГ•ГҠ however, in whatever way; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; В¬ЛқВ¬lГЈГғпЈҝ seek; ГғГҠЕёЛңГ” them; ГғГ•ГҠ so; вҲһп¬Ӯ
even; Г·ВЎГҠГҒв—Ҡ approach; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; в—Ҡв—Ҡ My; п¬ӮГ в—ҠВё path; вҖўЕёГҲп¬ӮГғВёГЈГғпЈҝ follow; в—ҠЕёГҲcГҝГҠвҖ” (all) men; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O
son of PГҰthГҘ, Arjuna; вҖҡп¬ӮВёвүҘГҠвҖ” in every way.

=== PAGE 213 ===

212
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
In this verse the Lord shows that His
devotees adore Him in various ways. They
attribute different forms to Him according to
their own conception and adore and think
of Him in that form alone. Therefore, God
too reveals Himself before a devotee in the
same form in which he has been thinking
of Him. Before a worshipper of the divine
form of ViВ¶Ж’u, He reveals Himself in the
form of ViВ¶Ж’u; before a worshipper of вҖәrвҲӮ
RГҘma, He reveals Himself as вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma;
before an adorer of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, He appears
as вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a; before a worshipper of вҖәiva,
He appears as вҖәiva; before the worshippers
of the Divine Mother, He takes the form of
the Divine Mother, and is attained by the
worshipper of His formless, all-pervading
aspect in that very aspect. Similarly, appearing
before the worshipper of His other forms
such as the divine Fish, Tortoise, Man-lion,
Dwarf etc., in those very forms, He redeems
them from bondage. Besides. howsoever and
with whatever sentiment devotees seek Him,
He also approaches them in the same way
and reciprocates their sentiment. The Lord
thinks of the devotee who thinks of Him;
He pines for the devotee who pines for Him;
He cannot bear separation from the devotee
who cannot bear separation from Him; He
offers His all to the devotee who offers his
all to Him. Those who treat Him as a friend
like the cowherd boys of VГҰndГҘvana, He
also treats them as friends. Those who love
Him as a child as Nanda and YaвҖ№odГҘ did,
He approaches as a child and thereby redeems
them. Even so, those who like RukmiЖ’вҲӮ
worship Him as their husband, He behaves
with them as a husband; those who like
HanumГҘn serve Him as the Lord and Master,
He accepts their services as the Lord and
Master, and those who like the GopвҲӮs adore
Him as a lover, He meets them as a lover
and redeems them by allowing them to
participate in, and enjoy His divine sports.
In the second half of the verse the Lord
says that all men follow His path in every
way. Thereby He shows that if He returns
the love and goodwill of His devotees, the
generality of men too who follow His ways
will likewise learn to love one another
disinterestedly and behave with one another
in a friendly and proper way. He further
indicates that it is incumbent on Him to do
so in order to establish the above practice
in the world, and thus fulfil the object of
His descent on earth, viz., the promotion
and establishment of virtue and righteousness
(IV.7-8).
Arjuna, howsoever men seek Me, even so do I approach them; for all men follow
My path in every way.                                                  (11)
If such is the case, why do men worship the other gods instead of worshipping the
supreme Lord? In answer to this, the Lord says:
вҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUЛҮГҠГЈГғвҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠВў ГҒвҖҡГҒhВў ГҝВЎГЈГғ ГҹвҖһU Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ГҒЛҮГҠВ¬ЛқВў ГҒвҖһU в—ҠГҠЕёГҲВ·пЈҝ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ ГҒвҖҡГҒhГ·Вёп¬ӮГҒГғ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВЎГҠH 12H
вҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUГ”ЛҮГҠГЈГғвҖ” seeking; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of (their) activities; ГҒвҖҡГҒhв—ҠЛңГ” the fruition; ГҝВЎГЈГғпЈҝ worship, offer
sacrifice to; ГҹвҖһU in this; Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ” the gods; ГҒЛҮГҠВ¬Лқв—ҠЛңГ” quickly; ГҒвҖһU for; в—ҠГҠЕёГҲВ·пЈҝ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ world of human
beings; ГҒвҖҡГҒhвҖ” success; Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ comes, is attained; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВЎГҠ born of actions.
In this world of human beings, men seeking the fruition of their activities worship
the gods; for success born of actions follows quickly.                       (12)

=== PAGE 214 ===

* Chapter IV *
213
Men alone possess the qualification to
worship gods like Indra through the
performance of sacrifices and other forms of
worship; other beings do not possess this
qualification. This is indicated by the word
Г«LokeГӯ qualified by the adjectives Г«IhaГӯ and
Г«MГҘnuВ¶eГӯ.
People who are attached to worldly
enjoyments seek the fruition of their activities
in the form of acquiring worldly possessions
such as a wife, progeny, wealth, a house to
live in, honour and fame etc.; and since their
judgment is clouded by cravings of various
kinds, they take to the worship of celestials
like Indra for the fulfilment of their desires
(VII.20,21,22; IX.23,24) and do not worship
God Himself; for the worshippers of those
gods attain the fruits of their actions quickly.
Ordinarily it is not in the nature of the
celestials to see whether the bestowal of a
particular gift on a worshipper will be
conducive to his interest or not; they are only
concerned with the due completion of a
ritual. On the ritual being completed in all
its details, they invariably grant its ordained
fruit, if it is, within their power to grant it.
That is, however, not the case with God. His
dispensations with regard to a devotee are
always guided by considerations of his real
interest. If the devotee worships Him even
with an interested motive, He fulfils only
those desires of the devotee whose satisfaction
will turn his face from worldly enjoyments
and accentuate his love for, and faith in,
God. Therefore, worldly-minded men do not
see quick results following the practice of
devotion to God, and hence these dull-witted
men take to the worship of the celestials
in order to obtain quick results of their
actions.
Verse 9 proclaimed God-realization to be the fruit of knowledge of the divine character
of the birth and activities of God. Previous to that the divine character of GodГӯs birth
had been adequately explained, but the divine character of His activities had nowhere
been clearly brought out. Therefore, the next two verses deal with this subject revealing
that his actions such as the creation of the world etc., are marked by absence of the
sense of doership, partiality and desire.
ГёГҠГғГҲп¬ӮВёГЎГҝZ в—ҠГҝГҠ вҖҡГҺCГ”ВўU ВӘГҲГЎГҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҠВӘвүҘГҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ГғSГҝ вҲ‘В§ГғГҠВёвҒ„Uв—ҠГҒВ¬ в—ҠГҠВў ГҒп¬ӮhKвҲ‘В§ГғГҠВёвҒ„Uв—ҠвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ”H 13H
ГёГҠГғГҲп¬ӮВёГЎГҝВёв—ҠЛңГ” the four orders of society (the BrГҘhmaЖ’a, the KВ¶atriya, the VaiвҖ№ya and the
вҖәВөudra); в—ҠГҝГҠ by Me; вҖҡГҺCГ”Uв—ҠЛңГ” were created; ВӘГҲГЎГҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҠВӘвүҘГҠвҖ” classifying them according to the
mode of PrakГҰti predominant in each and apportioning corresponding duties to them; ГғSГҝ
of this creation; вҲ‘В§ГғГҠВёвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” the author; вҖўГҒВ¬ in spite of being; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; ГҒп¬ӮГҒh know; вҖўвҲ‘В§ГғГҠВёвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”
a non-doer; вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ” the imperishable Lord.
The four orders of society (viz., the BrГҘhmaЖ’a, the KВ¶atriya, the VaiвҖ№ya and the
вҖәВөudra) were created by Me, classifying them according to the GuЖ’as (modes of PrakГҰti)
predominant in each and apportioning corresponding duties to them; though the
originator of this creation, know Me, the Immortal Lord, to be a non-doer.
 (13)
Tamas (inertia) constituting the nature of an
individual is determined by the type of
The relative proportion of the qualities
of Sattva (harmony), Rajas (motion) and

=== PAGE 215 ===

214
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
actions performed by him in course of his
previous births from time without beginning,
and which have not yet borne fruit. At the
beginning of creation, when God creates
men, He determines their birth according to
these qualities and latencies of their Karmas.
That is to say, those in whom the quality
of Sattva predominates are ordained to be
born as BrГҘhmaЖ’as; those in whom the
quality of Rajas with an admixture of Sattva
predominates are caused to be born as
KВ¶atriyas; those in whom Rajas with an
admixture of Tamas preponderates are made
to take birth as VaiвҖ№yas; and finally those
in whom Tamas with an admixture of Rajas
preponderates are caused to be born among
the вҖәВөudras. It is God, again, who lays down
the respective duties of each of the four
orders so created according to their natural
inclinations. That is why the scriptures enjoin
that the BrГҘhmaЖ’a should practise control of
the mind and senses, the KВ¶atriya should
exhibit valour and energy, the VaiвҖ№ya should
engage in agriculture, rearing of cows etc.,
while the вҖәВөudra should devote himself to
physical service (XVIII.41Гі44). In this way
the four orders of society are created by God
classifying them according to the qualities
predominant in each and apportioning
corresponding duties to them. The social
organization, which is thus set up, continues
from age to age. So long as purity of blood
is maintained, so long as procreation takes
place through the union of parents of the
same order and there is no admixture of
blood due to the union of heterogenous
elements, the system of classification of
society as set forth above goes on unimpaired.
Even when there is confusion, the system
continues to work, partially though.
The subject of discussion here is action
and worship and man alone is qualified to
perform them. Hence the principle enunciated
in this verse refers only to man. But the
principal itself has a universal application
and it should therefore be understood that
other beings too such as gods, manes and
creatures of the sub-human species as well
are created by God according to the qualities
and actions of the JвҲӮvas. Therefore, the
statement that Г¬God created the four orders
of society, classifying them according to
their qualities and apportioning corresponding
duties to themГ® is intended to show that the
Lord does not evince least partiality or
prejudice in creating the world and other
activities.
It may be asked here: What should be
the principle of dividing the society into
VarЖ’as or castes,Гіbirth or conduct? Our
answer to this question is that birth and
conduct both being contributory factors
determining the caste of an individual, a man
becomes fully entitled to the membership of
a particular caste only when he is born in
that caste and also follows the course of
conduct prescribed for that caste. But the
ruling factor is birth; hence birth should be
recognized as the basis of classifying the
VarЖ’as. It the parents of an individual belong
to the same caste and no confusion of castes
in any form is allowed to take place in the
matter of birth, no confusion of duties will
easily ensue in ordinary circumstances. But
if on account of undesirable association,
impure diet and a wrong type of education
and culture etc., there is some deviation in
certain cases from the course of conduct laid
down for the various castes, the social order
can be maintained if caste is determined by
birth. Strict adherence to the course of
conduct prescribed for oneГӯs caste, however,
is nonetheless essential. If the duties allotted
to a particular caste are entirely given up by
that caste, the maintenance of the social order
becomes most difficult. And therefore, birth

=== PAGE 216 ===

* Chapter IV *
215
should be the guiding principle in determining
oneГӯs vocation in life and conjugal relations,
whereas conduct should be recognized as the
principal factor in determining oneГӯs spiritual
growth. For instance, if he who is a BrГҘhmaЖ’a
by birth does not follow the rules of conduct
prescribed for a BrГҘhmaЖ’a, he cannot attain
salvation; on the other hand, if a вҖәВөudra,
though of good conduct and practising self-
control as a duty common to all, follows the
vocation of a BrГҘhmaЖ’a and earns his living
by the same, he incurs sin.
Some are of opinion that since the system
of division of society into VarЖ’as has become
defunct now, it would be better if the VarЖ’a
of an individual is determined not by birth,
but by the function he performs in society. In
our humble opinion, however, it would not
be advisable to tamper with the system in
that way. For, in the first place, though the
system has become somewhat disorganized
and 
weak 
due 
to 
various 
adverse
circumstances, it has not yet become extinct.
Secondly, it is God Himself who ordains the
JвҲӮvas to take birth in the different VarЖ’as to
reap the fruits of their past actions. Man has
no power to change the dispensation of God.
Thirdly, it would be impossible to determine
the VarЖ’a of an individual on the basis of the
conduct and activity of an individual. A great
disparity is observed in the conduct of children
of the same parents; nay, the same individual
acts like a BrГҘhmaЖ’a during certain periods
of the day, and like a вҖәВөudra during other
periods. How will it be possible, under the
circumstances, to assign him a particular VarЖ’a?
And should a manГӯs VarЖ’a be determined by
his function, who will choose to accept a
lower rank in society? Difficulties will arise
in matters of interdining and marriage; the
result will be that the social organization will
be thrown into complete disorder and the
working of the caste system will be greatly
hampered. Therefore, conduct alone should
not be regarded as the criterion in determining
oneГӯs VarЖ’a.
In Chapter XIV it is stated that a man
who possesses a SГҘttvika nature or who dies
when Sattva is predominant in him ascends
to heaven; he who possesses a RГҘjasika
temperament or who dies when Rajas
preponderates is born among men; while he
who possesses a TГҘmasika disposition or
who expires when Tamas is in the ascendant
is born in a species of sub-human creatures.
But here the Lord says that an individual
having the preponderance of Sattva is born
as a BrГҘhmaЖ’a and he in whom Rajas
preponderates is born among the KВ¶atriyas,
and so on. Though these statements appear
on the surface to be mutually contradictory,
there is really no contradiction between
them. It is true that a person who is rooted
in Rajas or who expires during the ascendency
of Rajas, is born among men. This proves
that the quality of Rajas is predominant in
men as a class; but among men, again, all
are not on a par so far as the proportion of
these qualities is concerned. There are grades
and differences of quality among them,
according to which an individual having the
quality of Sattva predominant in him is born
as a BrГҘhmaЖ’a; he in whom Rajas mixed
with Sattva prevails is born among the
KВ¶atriyas; he in whom Rajas mixed with
Tamas preponderates is born as a VaiвҖ№ya; he
who has a preponderance of Tamas mixed
with Rajas is born among the вҖәВөudras; and
he in whom Tamas alone is predominant, the
other qualities being quite dormant, takes
birth in a still lower species.
Another anomaly which presents itself
before us is that in verse 10 of Chapter IX,
the Lord speaks of His PrakГҰti as bringing
forth the entire universe, while here He
speaks of Himself as the Creator. These two

=== PAGE 217 ===

216
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
statements, also, though appearing on the
surface to be contradictory are really not
contradictory. For, in the verse referred to
above, He speaks of PrakГҰti as bringing forth
the creation, not by itself but under His own
supervision. PrakГҰti being inert Matter, it
cannot distinguish the different GuЖ’as and
Karmas or bring forth creation without the
will of God. Therefore, wherever the GвҲӮtГҘ
speaks of PrakГҰti as bringing forth the creation
it should be understood as doing so under
the influence and supervision of God. And
similarly where it speaks of God as the
Creator, the statement should be construed
to mean that He creates the universe, not
directly but through His PrakГҰti.
By proclaiming that though the originator
of this creation, He is essentially a non-doer;
the Lord brings out the divine character of
His activities. It means that the activities of
God are not tainted by the impulses of attraction
and repulsion or by the sense of doership. He
remains ever beyond those activities; it is His
PrakГҰti which does everything under His
influence and supervision. Therefore, though
in the worldly sense God is believed to be
the doer in all such activities, in reality,
however, He remains totally indifferent and
ever unattached to action (IX.9-10). The
statement in the verse that He is a non-doer
particularly brings out this fact. When even a
man of Knowledge, who acts without
attachment to the fruit of actions and the
sense of doership, is not considered to be a
doer, and ceases to have any connection with
the fruit of those actions, what wonder, then,
that God should call Himself a non-doer ?
Really speaking the LordГӯs activities are in
every way transcendetnal and out of the
common.
Её в—ҠГҠВў вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ ГҒвҲӮUГӘВ¬ГҒГЈГғ Её в—ҠпЈҝ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГ”В»В§вҲӮпЈҝU SВ¬ГҺвҖһUГҠвҖ“
ГҹГҒГғ в—ҠГҠВў ГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒГ·ВЎГҠЕёГҠГҒГғ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒГ·ЕёВё вҖҡ вҖҷГӨГҝГғпЈҝГ”H 14H
Её (there is) none; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ actions; ГҒвҖ№ГӘВ¬ГҒГЈГғ taint; Её not; в—ҠпЈҝ My; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ»В§вҲӮпЈҝU for the
fruit of actions; SВ¬ГҺвҖһUГҠ craving; ГҹГҒГғ thus; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; ГҝвҖ” who; вҖўГҒГ·ВЎГҠЕёГҠГҒГғ knows in reality; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒГ·вҖ”
by actions; Её not; вҖҡвҖ” (even) he; вҖҷГӨГҝГғпЈҝ is bound.
Since I have no craving for the fruit of actions, actions do not taint Me. Even
he who thus knows Me in reality is not bound by actions.
 (14)
does only for the good of the world (IV.8),
free from the feeling of possession, attachment,
desire for fruit and the sense of doership. He
has no connection with His activities. Hence
all His activities are divine in character and
that is why they do not cause Him any
bondage.
It has been stated above that even though
performing all actions, God is really speaking
a non-doer and has no connection with them,
that His activities evince no partiality or
prejudice and He possesses not the least
attachment, sense of possession or desire for
Inasmuch as men performing actions
have the feeling of meum, attachment, desire
for the fruit of actions and the sense of
doership present in them, the latencies of
those actions get stored up in their mind and
bring them rebirth after death and various
forms of joy and sorrow. This is what is
meant by oneГӯs being tainted by actions. The
Lord says in the first half of this verse that
He possesses not the least hankering for any
form of enjoyment derived as the fruit of
actions; in other words, He requires nothing
for Himself (III.22). Whatever He does, He

=== PAGE 218 ===

* Chapter IV *
217
the fruits of His actions; therefore, those
actions cannot cause Him bondage. The saint
who thus comes to know in reality this secret
of GodГӯs actions begins himself to act like
God, purely with a view to the maintenance
of the world order, and free from the feeling
of possession, attachment, desire for fruit and
the sense of doership. It is, therefore, that his
actions do not bind him. It can safely be
concluded from this that those who are prompted
by some desire and possess identification
with and attachment for actions and their
fruit have not understood the divine character
of the activities of God.
cannot be freed from the bondage of action.
That was why the ancient seekers for liberation,
realizing the divine character of His
activities, likewise performed their respective
duties, with due regard to their order in
society and stage in life and in a quite
disinterested spirit, renouncing the feeling of
possession and the sense of doership as well
as attachment and the desire for fruit. Therefore,
if Arjuna sought liberation from the bondage
of Karma, he should follow in the footsteps
of the ancient seekers for liberation and
perform his own duty disinterestedly, never
thinking of renouncing the same.
He who desires to realize God, the
embodiment of supreme Bliss, through
liberation from the bondage of births and
deaths, who has turned his back on the
enjoyments of the world knowing them to
be ephemeral and sorrowful, and who has
no craving for the enjoyments of this world
or the next, is called a Г«MumukВ¶uГӯ, or seeker
for liberation. Arjuna too was a Г«MumukВ¶uГӯ
and had sought to abandon his duty fearing
lest he might be bound by his actions.
Therefore, citing the example of ancient
seekers for liberation, the Lord explains to
him that by mere renunciation of action one
Describing thus the divine character of His activities and the value of knowing this
secret in reality, the Lord now cites the example of the ancient seekers for liberation and
commands Arjuna to follow in their footsteps and act in a disinterested spirit:
вҲһп¬ӮВў ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғВў вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё В¬ГҚп¬ӮГ’ВёвҒ„UГҒВ¬ в—ҠГҲв—ҠГҲЛҮГҠГҲГҒГ·вҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ вҲ‘В§в—ҠГ’Вёп¬Ӯ ГғSв—ҠГҠГ»п¬ӮВў В¬ГҚп¬ӮГ’ВёвҖ” В¬ГҚп¬ӮВёГғвҒ„ВўU вҲ‘ГҺВ§Гғв—ҠЛңГ”H 15H
вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” thus; ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ having known; вҲ‘ГҺВ§Гғв—ҠЛңГ” was performed; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё action; В¬ГҚп¬ӮГ’ВёвҖ” by the ancient;
вҖўГҒВ¬ even; в—ҠГҲв—ҠГҲЛҮГҠГҲГҒГ·вҖ”Г” seekers for liberation; вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ perform; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё action; вҲһп¬Ӯ verily; ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” therefore;
Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” you (too); В¬ГҚп¬ӮГ’ВёвҖ” by the ancients; В¬ГҚп¬ӮВёГғвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” from the very beginning, ever; вҲ‘ГҺВ§Гғв—ҠЛңГ” performed.
Having known thus, action was performed even by the ancient seekers for
liberation; therefore, do you also perform such actions as have been performed by
the ancients from the beginning of time.                                  (15)
Thus the Lord instructed Arjuna to perform action in a disinterested spirit. But one
cannot duly perform oneГӯs duty without knowing in reality what constitutes action and
what is inaction. Therefore, the Lord promises to reveal to Arjuna the truth about action,
showing its intricate nature and the value of its knowledge, in order that Arjuna may
really understand the truth about transcendent actions, which are free from the feeling
of possession, the sense of doership, attachment and the desire for fruit.

=== PAGE 219 ===

218
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«KavayaВЁГӯ in this verse stands
for men of intelligence, well-versed in the
scriptures. The verse says that even they are
at a loss to understand what is action and what
is inaction. The intention is to show that their
deep study of the truth and secret of Karma
as expounded in the scriptures in various ways
does not enable them to understand correctly
what act done with what motive, or renounced
with what motive, will be classed as Г«actionГӯ,
and what act done with what motive, or
renounced with what motive will be classed
as Г«inactionГӯ. The word Г«ApiГӯ shows that when
even men of great learning and wisdom are
at a loss to understand the truth of this matter,
there is no wonder that ordinary men should
get confused and puzzled over it. The Lord
thus seeks to convey that the mystery of action
is extremely difficult to unravel.
The truth about action, which the Lord
promised to expound, has been explained
from verses 18 to 32 of this chapter. Knowledge
of this truth consists in correctly comprehending
what action done with what motive, or
renounced with what motive, leads to bondage
in the form of rebirth, and what action done
with what motive or renounced with what
motive, does not lead to bondage. He who
comes to know this truth in reality can never
perform an action, or practise renunciation
of action, which may lead to bondage.
Whatever he does, he does only for the
pleasure of God, or with a view to maintenance
of the world order, renouncing the feeling
of possession, attachment, the desire for fruit
and the sense of doership. That is why
knowing this truth, one gets freed from the
bondage of Karma.
ГҒвҲ‘ВўВ§ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠпЈҝВёГҒГғ вҲ‘В§п¬ӮГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГҘГҝГІГҠ в—ҠГҠпЈҝГҒвҖһUГғГҠвҖ”вҖ“
ГғГ»ГҠпЈҝ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё В¬Лқп¬ӮЛҮГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ ГҝГ–ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ в—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҝвҖҡпЈҝЛҳвүҘГҠГҲГ·ГҠГғЛңГ”H 16H
ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” what (is); вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё action; ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” what (is); вҖўвҲ‘В§в—ҠВё inaction; ГҹГҒГғ over this; вҲ‘В§п¬ӮГҝвҖ” men of
intelligence; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; вҖўГІГҠ question; в—ҠГҠпЈҝГҒвҖһUГғГҠвҖ” are puzzled; ГғГғЛңГ” (the truth about) that; ГғпЈҝ to
you; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё action; В¬Лқп¬ӮЛҮГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ I shall expound; ГҝГғЛңГ” which; ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ knowing; в—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҝвҖҡпЈҝ you will be
freed; вҖўвүҘГҠГҲГ·ГҠГғЛңГ” from (its) evil (binding) effect.
What is action and what is inaction? Even men of intelligence are puzzled over
this question. Therefore, I shall expound to you the truth about action, knowing which
you will be freed from its evil effects (binding nature).                     (16)
In this connection, one may naturally argue that Г«actionГӯ means that which ought
to be done and has the sanction of the scriptures, whereas Г«inactionГӯ signifies refraining
from action of all kinds; hence there is nothing to be puzzled about, and nothing to be
known in particular in this matter. But the question of Г«actionГӯ and  Г«inactionГӯ is not so
easy to solve and one is required to go deeper into the truth. In order to bring out this
idea, the Lord says:Гі
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ sГ”ГҒВ¬ вҖҷГҠпЈҝhвҲҡГҝВў вҖҷГҠпЈҝhвҲҡГҝВў Гё ГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘В§в—ҠГ”ВёГЎГҠвҖ”вҖ“
вҖўвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠp вҖҷГҠпЈҝhвҲҡГҝВўГ” ВӘвҖһUЕёГҠ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ ВӘГҒГғвҖ”H 17H
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠвҖ” (the truth) about action; ГҒвҖһU for; вҖўГҒВ¬ also; вҖҷГҠпЈҝhвҲҡГҝв—ҠЛңГ” must be known; вҖҷГҠпЈҝhвҲҡГҝв—ҠЛңГ” must
be known; Гё and; ГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠвҖ” (the truth about prohibited action (as well); вҖўвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠвҖ” (the truth)

=== PAGE 220 ===

* Chapter IV *
219
Ordinarily, every one knows that
Г«actionГӯ means a duty enjoined by the
scriptures. But knowing this much, one
cannot comprehend the true nature of action;
for change of motive changes the very
character of action. That is why the Lord
states in the verse that the truth about action
must be known. Therefore, what action
performed in what way, and with what
motive, deserves the appellation of Г«actionГӯ,
and what particular action enjoined by the
scriptures should one perform under a given
circumstance, and how, is correctly known
to those exalted souls alone who are well-
versed in the scriptures and have realized the
truth as well. Hence, in order to be able to
perform a duty appropriate to oneГӯs order in
society and stage in life according to oneГӯs
competence one should approach a great
soul who has realized the truth, and knowing
the true nature of the duty from him should
perform it according to his guidance and
direction. This is what is meant by the
statement of the Lord that Г¬the truth about
action must be known.Г®
Even so, people generally imagine that
Г«inactionГӯ means suspension of all activities
of the mind, speech and body. But knowing
this much alone one cannot understand the
true character of Г«inactionГӯ. For, according
to the motive behind it, even such Г«inactionГӯ
in the shape of suspension of activities of
the mind, speech and body may assume the
character of Г«actionГӯ or even Г«prohibited
actionГӯ, and what people regard as Г«actionГӯ
may be transformed into Г«inactionГӯ or
Г«prohibited action.Гӯ Therefore, an illumined
soul alone knows in reality what action done
in what way, and with what motive, or what
renunciation, practised in what way and with
what motive, constitutes Г«inactionГӯ and how
one should perform it under a given
circumstance. Therefore, those who seek
liberation from the bondage of Karma
should approach such a great soul and fully
knowing from him the true nature of Г«inactionГӯ
should practise inaction according to his
direction. This is what is meant by the
statement that Г¬the truth of inaction must be
known.Г®
The word Г«prohibited actionГӯ generally
conveys to the popular mind the idea of sins
like lying, hypocrisy, theft, adultery, violence
etc. But knowing this much alone one cannot
know in reality the character of prohibited
actions; for ignorant men, unacquainted with
the real intention of the scriptures, sometimes
take it into their head to regard a virtue as
vice, and a vice as virtue. Having regard to
the VarЖ’a, Г…вҖ№rama and competence of an
individual, what is Г«dutyГӯ or prescribed action
for him is Г«viceГӯ or prohibited action for
another. For instance, it is the prescribed
duty of a вҖәВөudra to earn his livelihood by
rendering personal service to the members of
the other orders; but such service is prohibited
in the case of the BrГҘhmaЖ’a. Similarly,
earning of livelihood by accepting gifts, by
imparting knowledge of the Vedas and by
officiating as a priest during the performance
of sacrifices is the duty of the BrГҘhmaЖ’a, but
a vice in the case of others. For the householder
it is a legitimate duty to accumulate wealth
earned by honest means and have copulation
about inaction; Гё and; вҖҷГҠпЈҝhвҲҡГҝв—ҠЛңГ” must be known; ВӘвҖһUЕёГҠ (are) mysterious; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠвҖ” of action; ВӘГҒГғвҖ”
the ways.
The truth about action must be known and the truth of inaction also must be
known; even so, the truth about prohibited action must be known. For, mysterious
are the ways of action.                                                   (17)

=== PAGE 221 ===

220
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
with his wedded wife after her menstruation
every month; but for the SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮ, who has
renounced the world, it is a sin even to see
or touch gold and woman. Therefore, the
true character of prohibited action must be
properly understood in order to be able to
renounce lying, hypocrisy, theft, adultery,
violence etc., which  are prohibited for all,
as well as actions which are prohibited for
members of a particular class or classes of
society. The character of prohibited action
too can be correctly revealed only by a great
soul who possesses the knowledge of truth.
This is what is meant by the statement that
Г¬even so the truth about prohibited action
must be understood.Г®
By saying that Г¬the ways of action are
mysterious,Г® the Lord intends to show that
everyone cannot determine what is action,
what is inaction and what is prohibited
action. Even a man possessed of learning
and intellectual power sometimes fails to
determine their true nature. Therefore, it is
necessary to understand their truth by
approaching a great soul who knows the
truth in reality.
order in society and those which are essential
for keeping the body and soul together, when
they are performed without attachment, the
desires for fruit, the feeling of possession and
egoism, do not bear fruit in the form of pleasure
and pain in this world or the next, nor do
they lead to rebirth; on the other hand,
neutralizing the latencies of all previous
Karmas, both good and evil they bring about
liberation from the bondage of worldly
existence. To know this secret is to see
inaction in action. He who thus sees inaction
in action duly performs his allotted duties
renouncing attachment, the desire for fruit
and the sense of possession. Therefore, even
though performing actions he does not get
As ordinarily understood, the word
Г«KarmaГӯ or action denotes all activities of mind,
intellect, senses and body. Of these, again,
duties which are enjoined by the scriptures
are classed as Karma or Г«actionГӯ; whereas sinful
actions, prohibited by the scriptures, are known
as Vikarma or prohibited actions. Sinful
actions prohibited by the scriptures require to
be wholly given up; therefore, they have not
been taken into consideration in this verse.
The point to be considered, therefore, is what
is meant by seeing inaction in action which is
prescribed by the scriptures? All duties enjoined
by the scriptures, such as the performance of
sacrifices, practising charity and austerity as
well as all vocational duties pertaining to oneГӯs
Declaring in this way the truth about action to be mysterious, and the knowledge
of that truth to be essential, so as to arouse the interest and faith of the hearer in that
truth, the Lord now proceeds to expound that truth as already promised:
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠВё ГҝвҖ” В¬вүҘГҝпЈҝЕ’вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒГЎГҠ Гё вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё ГҝвҖ”вҖ“
вҖҡ вҖҷГҲГҒhв—ҠГҠГЈв—ҠЕёГҲcГҝпЈҝВ·ГҲ вҖҡ ГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г FвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғЛңГ”H 18H
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒГЎГҠ in action; вҖўвҲ‘В§в—ҠВё inaction; ГҝвҖ” who; В¬вүҘГҝпЈҝГғЛңГ” sees; вҖўвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒГЎГҠ in inaction; Гё and; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё
action; ГҝвҖ” who; вҖҡвҖ” he; вҖҷГҲГҒhв—ҠГҠЕёЛңГ” (is) wise; в—ҠЕёГҲcГҝпЈҝВ·ГҲ among men; вҖҡвҖ” (and) that; ГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” YogвҲӮ;
вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г FвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғЛңГ” one who has performed all actions.
He who sees inaction in action, and action in inaction, is wise among men; he
is a YogвҲӮ, who has performed all actions.                                 (18)

=== PAGE 222 ===

* Chapter IV *
221
tainted by them; it is in this sense that he is
called Г¬wise among menГ®. He has realized
God, hence the verse calls him a YogвҲӮ; and
since there is no duty left for him,Гіhe has
the object of his life fulfilled,Гіhe is spoken
of as having Г¬performed all actionsГ®.
To the popular mind Г¬inactionГ® means
the renunciation of all activities of mind,
speech and body. Even this renunciation, if
it is resorted to with attachment, the desire
for fruit, the sense of possession and egoism,
proves to be the cause of rebirth. Nay, if it
is made out of disregard for oneГӯs duties, or
for mere show, this renunciation of action,
or Г«inactionГӯ is converted into a positive sin
or prohibited action. To know this secret is
to see Г«actionГӯ in Г«inactionГӯ. He who comes
to know this secret will not renounce duties
pertaining to his order in society and stage
in life either for fear of physical discomfort
involved in their performance, or impelled by
attraction or repulsion, or again out of
ignorance, or for obtaining honour, fame and
prestige, or any other worldly gain. Therefore,
he neither falls away from his duty, nor
exposes himself to rebirth by allowing his
renunciation to be tainted by the sense of
possession, attachment, desire for fruit and
egoism; hence he is Г¬wise among menГ®. He
is united with God, therefore, he is a YogвҲӮ,
and there is no duty left for him; therefore
Г¬he has performed all actionsГ®.
Some people suggest that the word
Г«KarmaГӯ should be interpreted as meaning
oneГӯs current (KriyamГҘЖ’a) actions, Г«VikarmaГӯ
as denoting the diversified latencies of past
actions stored up in the mind (SaВӨcita), and
Г«AkarmaГӯ as meaning oneГӯs PrГҘrabdha Karma,
or part of oneГӯs SaВӨcita Karma which has
begun to bear fruit. Г«Seeing Akarma in
KarmaГӯ should thus be taken to mean
perceiving or foreseeing, while performing a
new action, that the same action will in
course of time ripen into PrГҘrabdha, and
appear in the shape of its fruit. Even so,
Г«seeing Karma in AkarmaГӯ should be taken
to mean tracing the painful or pleasurable
experiences of life brought about by oneГӯs
PrГҘrabdha to oneГӯs own past actions; which
were no doubt KriyamГҘЖ’a when they were
performed. According to this interpretation
he who sees Г«AkarmaГӯ in Г«KarmaГӯ and
Г«KarmaГӯ in Г«AkarmaГӯ will naturally refrain
from sinful acts and devote himself to such
pursuits alone as are sanctioned by the
scriptures, as they will appear to him as
involving pain and pleasure respectively.
This interpretation they say is quite logical
and appealing and is equally warranted by
the scriptures inasmuch as the above
classification of actions has been recognized
by the scriptures.
The interpretation is clever, no doubt,
and seeing Г«AkarmaГӯ in Г«KarmaГӯ and Г«KarmaГӯ
in Г«AkarmaГӯ in this sense will be quite useful
and wise too: but this will reduce the knotty
problem of Karma into a very simple affair
and it will be difficult to reconcile this with
statements such as Г¬Even the wise are
puzzled over this questionГ® (вҲ‘В§п¬ӮГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГҘГҝГІГҠ в—ҠГҠпЈҝГҒвҖһUГғГҠвҖ”)
Г¬Mysterious are the ways of actionГ® (ВӘвҖһUЕёГҠ
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ ВӘГҒГғвҖ”), Г¬Knowing which you will be
freed from the bondage of actionГ® (ГҝГ–ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ
в—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҝвҖҡпЈҝЛҳвүҘГҠГҲГ·ГҠГғЛңГ”) Г¬He is a YogвҲӮ, who has performed
all actionsГ® (вҖҡ ГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г FвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғЛңГ”), Г¬Him even
the wise call a sage,Г® (Гғв—ҠГҠвҖһГҲUвҖ” В¬ГҒГЎВ«UГғВў вҖҷГҲЕ“ГҠвҖ”), Г¬He
does nothing at allГ® (ЕёГ’п¬Ӯ ГҒвҲ‘В§ГҒ@ГғЛңГ” вҲ‘В§вҒ„UГҠпЈҝГҒГғ вҖҡвҖ”) etc.
Therefore, the interpretation, though useful
to some extent, is quite inappropriate, and
out of tune with the context.
Here it may be asked, Г¬Is it possible for
the SГҘdhaka to see inaction in action, and
action in inaction as stated above, and attain
liberation thereby, or is it the man of perfection
alone who can see action and inaction in this
way?Г® Our answer to this question is that

=== PAGE 223 ===

222
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
what is actual to a perfect soul is the ideal to
be attained by the SГҘdhaka. Therefore, whereas
the liberated soul knows the truth about action
as a matter of course, the SГҘdhaka can get
liberated by learning the truth from him, and
realizing it by practice. This is what is meant
by the Lord when He says in verse 16: Г¬I
shall expound to you the truth about action,
knowing which you will be freed from the
binding effect of action.Г®
Г«KГҘmaГӯ or Г«DesireГӯ signifies the longing
in any form for the possession of objects of
enjoyment, e.g., a wife, progeny, wealth, a
house to live in, honour and prestige and
fame in this world and heavenly bliss in the
other. And Г«SaвҲҶkalpaГӯ means thinking of any
of these objects with the feeling of agreeability,
possession and egoism, and entertaining a
liking or disliking for them. Desire is an
offspring of such thoughts; and thought is the
parent of desire. Thought of an object leads
to attachment and attachment in its turn gives
rise to desire (II.62). Thus all those actions
which have no desire for contact with, or
separation from, any object at their back,
which are wholly free from the feeling of
possession, egoism and attachment, and are
as if mechanically performed with a view to
maintenance of the world order are referred
to here by the adjective Г«KГҘmasaвҲҶkalpavarjitГҘВЁГӯ.
The 
word 
Г«SaвҲҶkalpaГӯ 
cannot 
be
interpreted as a mere thought, as some are
apt to do, because no action is possible
The word Г«SamГҘrambhГҘВЁГӯ in this verse,
covers all duties prescribed by the scriptures,
e.g., performing sacrifices and practising
austerity and charity as well as vocational
duties pertaining to oneГӯs order in society
and natural for oneГӯs circumstances and
those necessary for keeping oneГӯs body and
soul together. The word Г«Г…rambhaГӯ denotes
activity in general. The man of wisdom
never does anything which is either prohibited
or purposeless; this is what is indicated by
adding the prefix Г«SamГӯ to the word
Г«Г…rambhaГӯ. During the stage of practice, the
actions of men are not entirely free from
desire and worldly thoughts; some of them
do get tainted by desire and thoughts of the
world. As for the actions of the saint who
has reached perfection through the practice
of Karmayoga, they are invariably free from
desire and thoughts of the world. None of
his acts is tainted by desire or thoughts of
the world or bears a character which is
denounced by the scriptures.
Revealing thus the glory of seeing inaction in action, and action in inaction, the Lord
further elucidates the point by discussing in the next five verses in various ways the non-
attachment of the SГҘdhaka as well as the realized soul who see inaction in action, and
action in inaction, as stated above.
ГҝSГҝ вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё вҖҡв—ҠГҠвҒ„UГӘГ·ГҠвҖ” вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҖҡVГ”UГҖВ¬п¬ӮГҢВЎГғГҠвҖ”вҖ“
ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠГҒВӘAЕ’ГҮЕ“вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГЎГҠВў Гғв—ҠГҠвҖһГҲUвҖ” В¬ГҒГЎВ«UГғВў вҖҷГҲЕ“ГҠвҖ”H 19H
ГҝSГҝ whose; вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё all; вҖҡв—ҠГҠвҒ„UГӘГ·ГҠвҖ” undertakings; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҖҡVГ”UГҖВ¬п¬ӮГҢВЎГғГҠвҖ” (are) free from desire and
thoughts (of the world); ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠГҒВӘAЕ’ГҮЕ“вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” (all) whose actions are burnt up by the fire of
wisdom; Гғв—ҠЛңГ” him; вҖўГҠвҖһUГҲвҖ” call; В¬ГҒГЎВ«UГғв—ҠЛңГ” a sage; вҖҷГҲЕ“ГҠвҖ” (even) the wise.
Even the wise call him a sage, whose undertakings are all free from desire and
thoughts of the world, and whose actions are burnt up by the fire of wisdom. (19)

=== PAGE 224 ===

* Chapter IV *
223
without its antecedent thought; thought
invariably precedes every activity of mind,
speech and body. To say nothing of other
activities, even ordinary physical functions,
such as eating, drinking, walking and so on
are impossible to carry on without the
prompting of thought. How, then, can, duties
enjoined by the scriptures, which are referred
to here by the word Г«SamГҘrambhГҘВЁГӯ be
performed without such prompting? Therefore,
it does not appear reasonable to interpret the
word Г«SaвҲҶkalpaГӯ as a mere thought or idea.
The word Г«JВӨГҘnГҘgniГӯ or fire of wisdom,
stands for the true knowledge of God which
dawns as a result of perfection in any form of
discipline. Just as fire reduces fuel to ashes,
even so the fire of wisdom reduces all actions
to ashes (IV.37). It is in order to bring out its
affinity in this respect with fire that wisdom
has been referred to as Г«fire.Гӯ Just as a seed
fried on fire is a seed only in name, inasmuch
as it loses its capacity to sprout, even so when
actions lose their capacity to bear fruit due to
the action of wisdom, they are said to have
been burnt up by the fire of wisdom.
The word Г«BudhГҘВЁГӯ stands for wise
men who have perceived the truth. The fact
that even such men call him a sage, who
has attained perfection through the practice
of Karmayoga, constitutes the greatest tribute
to him. The Lord thereby intends to show
that scrupulous performance, in all their
details, of duties prescribed in the scriptures
in the interest of the world order, without
entertaining the feeling of posession, attachment
and the sense of doership with respect to
them and even though one has nothing to
gain from their performance, requires much
patience, gravity, courage and wisdom; it is,
therefore, that even men of wisdom declare
such a man to be a sage, that is, one who
has realized the truth.
is what is meant by giving up attachment to
actions. And renunciation of the feeling of
possession, attachment and desire with regard
to all the enjoyments of this world and the
next, which are obtained as the fruit of such
performance, is what is meant by giving up
attachment to the fruit of actions.
After renouncing attachment to actions
and their fruit, the SГҘdhaka should give up
the feeling of Г«IГӯ and Г«mineГӯ with respect to
Man develops a natural attachment for
the duties he performs in the shape of sacrifices,
charity, penance, and vocational duties
sanctioned by the scriptures, as well as such
duties as are essential for keeping the body
and soul together, so much so that he cannot
help performing them, and gets so much
absorbed in their performance that he forgets
even God and loses consciousness of all other
things. Freedom from this type of attachment
Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ»В§вҲӮUГҠвҖҡXГ”ВўU ГҒЕёГ ГҝГғГҺ#ГҠпЈҝ ГҒЕёвҒ„UГҠГјГҠГҝвҖ”вҖ“
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҝГҒГ·В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГ»ГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ ЕёГ’п¬Ӯ ГҒвҲ‘В§ГҒ@Г вҲ‘В§вҒ„UГҠпЈҝГҒГғ вҖҡвҖ”H 20H
Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ having (totally) given up; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ»В§вҲӮUГҠвҖҡXГ”Uв—ҠЛңГ” attachment to actions and their fruit;
ГҒЕёГ ГҝГғГҺ#вҖ” ever content; ГҒЕёвҒ„UГҠГјГҠГҝвҖ” who no longer depends on the world; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒГЎГҠ in action;
вҖўГҒГ·В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГ»ГҠвҖ” duly engaged; вҖўГҒВ¬ even (though); Её not; вҲһп¬Ӯ at all; ГҒвҲ‘ВўВ§ГҒГёГғЛңГ” nothing; вҲ‘В§вҒ„UГҠпЈҝГҒГғ does;
вҖҡвҖ” he.
He who, having totally given up attachment to actions and their fruit, no longer
depends on the world, and is ever content, does nothing at all, though fully engaged
in action.                                                                (20)

=== PAGE 225 ===

224
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
the body. This will banish from his mind the
consciousness of a particular object or
individual being the very prop of his existence
and absolutely necessary or indispensable for
the maintenance of his body. This is what
is meant by ceasing to depend on the world.
Having reached this state, man no longer
needs anything belonging to this world; all
his desires naturally get fulfilled. Having
realized God, who is the embodiment of
supreme Bliss, he constantly remains immersed
in joy, and he remains unaltered under all
circumstances. This is what the Lord means
by calling him Г¬ever satisfiedГ®.
In the second half of the verse, the
prefix Г«AbhiГӯ added to the world Г«PravГҰttaВЁГӯ
shows that even such a man can efficiently
perform all the duties enjoined on him by the
scriptures with due regard to his order in
society and stage in life, in all their details,
with due attention and discriminaion. The
indeclinable Г«ApiГӯ indicates that while one
who has not been able to overcome the
feeling of possession, egoism and the attachment
for fruit cannot obtain liberation from the
bondage of Karma even by renouncing them,
this ever satisfied YogвҲӮ even though performing
all actions, does not fall a prey to the binding
effect of Karma. And the indeclinable Г«EvaГӯ
shows that he does not maintain the least
connection with his activities. In this way,
though performing all his duties, he actually
remains a non-doer. The verse, therefore,
makes it clear that the emancipated soul who
sees inaction in action, and action in inaction,
having all his desires fulfilled, has no duty
left for him (III.17). He needs nothing for
himself. Therefore, whatever action he does,
or whatever action he withdraws himself
from, has the approval of the scriptures, and
he does so without attachment and in the
interest of the world order, hence his actions
do not come under the definition of Г«actionГӯ
at all.
The preceding verses stated that the man of wisdom, even though performing all
duties sanctioned by the scriptures, such as sacrifice, charity, penance etc., only in the
interest of the world order, without the feeling of possession, attachment, the desire for
fruit and egoism, is really speaking a non-doer. That is why actions do not bind him.
Now it may be argued that since such a SГҘdhaka, emulating the example of an enlightened
soul, does not give up his obligatory and occasional duties, and goes on performing all
his duties disinterestedly, it stands to reason that he does not incur sin. But the SГҘdhaka
who does not perform duties enjoined by the scriptures such as sacrifice etc., and just
in order to keep his body and soul together only attends to his daily routine such as
answering the calls of nature, ablution and taking his food etc., must surely incur sin.
In order to meet this argument, the Lord says:
ГҒЕёвҒ„UГҠвүҘГҠГӢГҝВёГғГҒГёГ»ГҠГҠГ в—ҠГҠ 
Г ГҝQВ§вҖҡп¬ӮВёВ¬ГҒвҒ„UВӘЛқвҖһUвҖ”вҖ“
вүҘГҠГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„ВўU вҲ‘пЈҝВ§п¬ӮвҲӮВўU вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё вҲ‘ГҲВ§п¬ӮВёГӣГҠГҠВ¬AГҠпЈҝГҒГғ ГҒвҲ‘В§ГҒГҖвҖҷВ·в—ҠЛңГ”H 21H
ГҒЕёвҒ„UГҠвүҘГҠГӢвҖ” (and) who has no craving; ГҝГғГҒГёГ»ГҠГҠГ в—ҠГҠ (he) who has subdued (his) mind and
body; Г ГҝQВ§вҖҡп¬ӮВёВ¬ГҒвҒ„UВӘЛқвҖһUвҖ” who has given up all objects of enjoyment; вүҘГҠГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” bodily; вҲ‘пЈҝВ§п¬ӮвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” only;
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё action; вҲ‘ГҲВ§п¬ӮВёЕёЛңГ” performing; Её not; вҖўГҠВ¬AГҠпЈҝГҒГғ incurs; ГҒвҲ‘В§ГҒГҖвҖҷВ·в—ҠЛңГ” sin.
Having subdued his mind and body, and having given up all objects of enjoyment,
and free from craving, he who performs sheer bodily actions, does not incur sin. (21)

=== PAGE 226 ===

* Chapter IV *
225
The word Г«NirГҘвҖ№вҲӮВЁГӯ, in this verse, denotes
one who does not stand in need of any
worldly object and neither expects nor desires
to derive through any action or through any
individual any form of worldly enjoyment,
and who has totally renounced all forms of
wish, desire and craving etc. The word
Г«YatacittГҘtmГҘГӯ stands for one whose mind
and senses, being free from attraction and
repulsion, are not influenced by contact with
the objects of senses like sound, touch, taste
etc., and whose body also is perfectly amenable
to his control, be he a householder or a
recluse, and lastly he who claims nothing as
his own and has renounced all worldly
possessions, no matter whether he is a
householder or a recluse, is referred to by
the term Г«TyaktasarvaparigrahaВЁГӯ.
The three adjectives referred to above
are intended to show that if the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ
who has thus given up all connection with
external objects and remains ever satisfied in
the Self refrains from actions like the
performance of sacrifices and practising charity
etc., and merely attends to his bodily needs,
such as taking food etc., he will not incur
sin. For, he has not renounced those duties
due to any attachment or desire for fruit, or
through ignorance and impelled by the ego.
The renunciation on his part, being free from
attachment, the desire for fruit and the
prompting of the ego, has the full sanction
of the scriptures, and is therefore conducive
in every way to the interests of the world.
The word Г«KilbiВ¶amГӯ here denotes the
sin accruing from failure to perform oneГӯs
prescribed duties such as the performance of
sacrifices and practising charity, or from
unavoidable and unintentional destruction of
life involved in activities for maintaining the
body. The great soul spoken of above does
not expose himself to the sin resulting from
neglect of duty, nor to the sins attendant on
sheer maintenance of the body. This is what
is meant by the statement that Г¬performing
sheer bodily action, he does not incur sin.Г®
The preceding verses go to establish that the God-realized man of perfection has
no use either for things done, or for things not done; therefore, whether performing actions
or refraining from them, he is ever free from the binding effect of action. Now, the Lord
proceeds to show that even the SГҘdhaka who sees inaction in action, and action in inaction,
while performing his duties is not bound by his actions:
ГҝЕ’ГҺГ«ВҝUГҠвҲӮUГҠГ·вҖҡГЈГғГҲCГ”UГҠпЈҝ mГЈmГҠГғГӢГғГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГ вҖҡвҒ„UвҖ”вҖ“
вҖҡв—ҠвҖ” ГҒвҖҡhГҠп¬ӮГҒвҖҡhГҠГ’ Гё вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г п¬ӮГҠГҒВ¬ Её ГҒЕёвҖҷГӨГҝГғпЈҝГ”H 22H
ГҝЕ’ГҺГ«ВҝUГҠвҲӮUГҠГ·вҖҡГЈГғГҲCГ”UвҖ” (he who is) contented with whatever is got unsought; mГЈmГҠГғГӢГғвҖ” (who
has) transcended all pairs of opposites (like joy and sorrow); ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГ вҖҡвҒ„UвҖ” (is) free from jealousy;
вҖҡв—ҠвҖ” equipoised; ГҒвҖҡhГҠГ’ in success; вҖўГҒвҖҡhГҠГ’ in failure; Гё and; вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г п¬ӮГҠ acting; вҖўГҒВ¬ even (though);
Её not; ГҒЕёвҖҷГӨГҝГғпЈҝ is bound.
The KarmayogвҲӮ, who is contented with whatever is got unsought, is free from
jealousy and has transcended all pairs of opposites (like joy and grief), and is
equipoised in success and failure, is not bound by his action.                         (22)
destiny without any desire for obtaining it,
or through the will of another, is called
Anything favourable or otherwise,
obtained under the force of PrГҘrabdha or

=== PAGE 227 ===

226
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Г«YadГҰcchГҘlГҘbhaГӯ. And Г«YadГҰcchГҘlГҘbhasa-
ntuВ¶ВўaВЁГӯ means one who feels satisfied with
whatever is obtained in this way. Such a
man, if he obtains something agreeable does
not feel attracted towards it; that is to say,
he neither desires its continuance nor seeks
to multiply it. Even so, when he comes face
to face with an undesirable object, he neither
feels repelled by it nor seeks its destruction.
He regards both as the fruit of his PrГҘrabdha,
and remains calm and cheerful under all
circumstances.
The word Г«MatsaraГӯ denotes the morbid
feeling of jealously excited by the sight of
others, advance in learning, wisdom, wealth,
honour, fame, or any other object or virtue.
The evil of jealousy remains hidden even in
those who regard themselves as possessed of
learning and wisdom. One may develop
jealousy even towards friends and relatives,
whom one loves. Apart from the feelings of
joy and grief and other such morbid feelings,
the KarmayogвҲӮ is free from the vice of
jealousy as well. Hence he is spoken of as
Г«VimatsaraВЁГӯ.
The words Г«SiddhiГӯ and Г«AsiddhiГӯ have
a twofold meaning. Г«SiddhiГӯ means the
thorough accomplishment, without any let or
hindrance, of a duty such as the performance
of a sacrifice; whereas Г«AsiddhiГӯ means failure
to carry through a duty on account of some
obstacle or hindrance. Г«SiddhiГӯ also means the
fruition of an activity or realization of the object
of an undertaking; and Г«AsiddhiГӯ means the
opposite of success, i.e., failure. To make no
distinction between the success and failure of
an undertaking or between its successful
conclusion and miscarriage, or in other words,
not to feel attracted towards and elated in
success or completion of an undertaking and
not to feel an aversion for and dejected in the
failure or baulking of a plan, is what is meant
by remaining Г«equipoised in success and failureГӯ.
Man has the inherent right to work
(II.47); for having created mankind along
with the spirit of sacrifice or duty, the
Creator commanded man to work (III.10).
Therefore, by refusing to work in obedience
to this command man incurs sin (III.16).
Besides, it is hardly possible for man to
renounce work altogether (III.5); everyone is
helplessly driven to action in one form or
another according to his natural tendencies.
Thus the statement Г¬even though acting, he
is not boundГ® simply means that just as the
SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ, who has given up worldly
enjoyments and performs sheer bodily actions,
is not tainted by sin, even though refusing
to carry on his other duties; even so the
KarmayogвҲӮ, though performing his prescribed
duties, does not fall a prey to the binding
effect of actions.
Here it may be asked: Does the fulfilment of performing actions in the above way
lie only in their causing no bondage; or they lead us further? In answer to this, the Lord
says:
ВӘГғвҖҡXГ”USГҝ в—ҠГҲQВ§SГҝ ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғГёпЈҝГғвҖҡвҖ”вҖ“
ГҝГҙГҠГҠГҝГҠГёвҒ„UГғвҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё вҖҡв—ҠВӘЛқВў В¬ЛқГҒп¬ӮвҲӮUГӢГҝГғпЈҝH 23H
ВӘГғвҖҡXГ”USГҝ of him whose attachment has disappeared; в—ҠГҲQВ§SГҝ of him who is free (from
identification with the body and the feeling of Г«mineГӯ); ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғГёпЈҝГғвҖҡвҖ” of him whose mind
is established in the Knowledge (of Self); ГҝГҙГҠГҠГҝ for the sake of sacrifice; вҖўГҠГёвҒ„UГғвҖ” of him
who works; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё the totality of; вҖҡв—ҠВӘЛқв—ҠЛңГ” actions; В¬ЛқГҒп¬ӮвҲӮUГӢГҝГғпЈҝ get dissolved.

=== PAGE 228 ===

* Chapter IV *
227
Г«JВӨГҘnГҘvasthitacetasaВЁГӯ stands for the
JВӨГҘnayogвҲӮ who sees Brahma everywhere and
in everything and whose mind, therefore,
remains ever consciuous of God during
every action.
The duty devolving on a man by virtue
of his order in society, stage in life and
circumstances is YajВӨa or sacrifice for him.
Action for the sake of duty alone, or for
maintaining the tradition of duty for the sake
of duty, without any reference to self-interest,
is what is signified by the expression Г«working
for the sake of sacrificeГӯ. Verse 9 of Chapter
III referred to similar action through the
word Г«KarmaЖ’aВЁГӯ qualified by the adjective
Г«YajВӨГҘrthГҘtГӯ, which when taken together
means Г«work for the sake of sacrificeГӯ.
The word Г«KarmaГӯ, qualified by the
adjective Г«SamagramГӯ, means the totality of
past actions, done in the current as well as in
all previous lives of the KarmayogвҲӮ, stored
up in his mind in the form of latencies, as
also actions which are being performed by
him as stated above. Actions are said to melt
away when they lose their capacity to cause
any form of bondage. The actions of the
KarmayogвҲӮ mentioned above not only do not
cause any bondage, but just as ignited grass
thrown into a heap of grass is itself reduced
to ashes and at the same time reduces the
heap to ashes, even so actions burnt in the
fire of absence of attachment, desire for fruit
and the feeling of possession melt away
along with the whole stock of past Karmas,
and thereafter none of his actions can ever
bear fruit.
All his actions melt away, who is free from attachment, who has no identification
with the body and does not claim it as his own, whose mind is established in the
knowledge of Self and who works merely for the sake of sacrifice.         (23)
The preceding verse stated that all actions of the KarmayogвҲӮ who works only for
the sake of sacrifice melt away. The word Г«SacrificeГӯ there should not, however, be taken
to mean only the religious act of pouring clarified butter into the sacred fire, nor should
it be understood that working for the sake of sacrifice means acts contributory to the
performance of such a sacrifice. The word Г«sacrificeГӯ in this context signifies the duty
which has been laid down for an individual with due regard to his order in society, stage
in life and circumstances; and working for the sake of sacrifice means the disinterested
performance of necessary actions for the fulfilment of that duty, and in the interest of
the world order. In order to elucidate this point the Lord describes in the next seven
verses, as so many forms of sacrifice, the duties in the form of practices undertaken by
different men with the object of God-realization.
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҠВ¬ВёГЎГҠВў вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” вҖһUГҒп¬ӮвҖҷЛқВёrГҠГ”ГҠВӘAГҠГ’ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГЎГҠГҠ вҖһГҲUГғв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”Г’п¬Ӯ ГғпЈҝЕё ВӘГЈГғвҲҡГҝВў вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡв—ҠГҠГҒЕ“ЕёГҠГ”H 24H
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” Brahma (the Absolute); вҖўВ¬ВёГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the ladle etc., (lit., that with which the oblation
is poured into the fire); вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” Brahma; вҖһUГҒп¬ӮвҖ” the oblation; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҠВӘAГҠГ’ into Brahma manifested as
fire; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГЎГҠГҠ by Brahma (manifested as the sacrificer); вҖһГҲUГғв—ҠЛңГ” the act of pouring oblations;
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” вҲһп¬Ӯ Brahma alone; ГғпЈҝЕё by him; ВӘГЈГғвҲҡГҝв—ҠЛңГ” the goal to be attained; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡв—ҠГҠГҒЕ“ЕёГҠ who is
absorbed in Brahma as sacrifice.

=== PAGE 229 ===

228
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The Practice of seeing Brahma in
everything in accordance with the spirit of
the вҖәruti text: Г¬All this is verily Brahma
etc.,Г®* is spoken of as a form of sacrifice
in this verse. The intention is to show that
the practice of seeing all things appearing
diversely as the agent, the action and the
instrument of action etc., as Brahma is verily
a sacrifice inasmuch as it is a means of God-
realization. In this sacrifice, the ladle, the
oblation, the act of pouring oblation, the
sacrificer and the fire are not represented by
different things; to the sacrificer of this type,
everything is Brahma. For he who performs
this sacrifice views the mind and intellect
etc., with which he tries to conceive the
world as Brahma, the SГҘdhaka, the practice
itself and every other thing as no other than
Brahma; he sees everything as Brahma. He,
therefore, conceives no difference between
them at all.
In the metaphor used in this verse, the
word Г«ArpaЖ’amГӯ cannot be interpreted as
meaning Г«the act of pouring oblationГӯ, for
there is another word Г«HutaвүҲГӯ indicative of
that action. Interpreting Г«ArpaЖ’amГӯ in that
sense would, therefore, expose the verse to
the fault of tautology. In verse 16 of Chapter
IX as well, the act of pouring oblation into
the fire is indicated by the word Г«HutaвүҲГӯ.
The word Г«ArpaЖ’amГӯ, therefore, has been
interpreted to mean the instrument of pouring
oblations according to the derivation Г«Arpyate
AnenaГӯГіГ«with which something is offeredГӯГі
in other words, the Г«ladleГӯ with which the
oblation is poured into the fire.
Seeing Brahma everywhere incessantly,
or in other words, viewing everything as no
other than Brahma, is what is meant by being
Г¬absorbed in Brahma as the act of such
sacrificeГ®. And the statement that Г¬Brahma
alone is the goal to be reached by such a
SГҘdhakaГ® shows that such a practice surely
leads to God-realization; the SГҘdhaka who
takes recourse to this practice cannot attain
any other fruit.
In the practice of seeing Brahma everywhere as a form of sacrifice, Brahma
is the ladle (with which the oblation is poured into the fire, etc.); Brahma, again,
is the oblation; Brahma is the fire, Brahma itself is the sacrificer, and so Brahma
itself constitutes the act of pouring the oblation into the fire. And, finally, Brahma
is the goal to be reached by him who is absorbed in Brahma as the act of such
sacrifice.
(24)
Describing thus the sacrifice of seeing everything as Brahma, the Lord now proceeds
to mention the sacrifice in the form of offering worship to gods and perception of identity
between the soul and the Oversoul:
Е’Г’п¬Ӯв—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮГҠВ¬вҒ„пЈҝU 
ГҝГҙГҠВў 
ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёвҖ” 
В¬ГҝГҲВёВ¬ГҠвҖҡГғпЈҝГ”вҖ“
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҠВӘAГҠп¬ӮВ¬вҒ„пЈҝU 
ГҝГҙГҠВў 
ГҝГҙГҠпЈҝЕёГ’п¬ӮГҠпЈҝВ¬ВЎГҲuГ”UГҒГғH 25H
Е’Г’п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” God; вҲһп¬Ӯ at all; вҖўВ¬вҒ„пЈҝU other; ГҝГҙГҠв—ҠЛңГ” sacrifice only in the shape of worship to
gods; ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёвҖ” YogвҲӮs; В¬ГҝГҲВёВ¬ГҠвҖҡГғпЈҝ duly offer; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҠВӘAГҠГ’ into the fire of Brahma; вҖўВ¬вҒ„пЈҝU (while) others;
ГҝГҙГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the very sacrifice in the shape of the self; ГҝГҙГҠпЈҝЕё вҲһп¬Ӯ only through the sacrifice known
as the perception of identity; В©UВ¬ВЎГҲuГ”UГҒГғ pour.
*
вҖҡп¬ӮZ ПҖГҒГҖп¬ӮЕ’Вў вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”вҖ“ (ChГҘndogya UpaniВ¶ad III.XIV.1)

=== PAGE 230 ===

* Chapter IV *
229
The word Г«YoginaВЁГӯ in this verse stands
for the SГҘdhakas who perform sacrifices and
other duties enjoined by the scriptures
renouncing the feeling of possession, attachment
and the desire for fruit. It is qualified by the
adjective Г«ApareГӯ in order to bring out the
distinction between these SГҘdhakas and those
referred to in the preceding verse, who see
Brahma everywhere, or in other words, to
show that the course of discipline followed
by these, is different from that described in
the foregoing verse, and that the qualifications
required for the two SГҘdhanГҘs are also of
a divergent nature.
The word Г«YajВӨamГӯ, qualified by the
adjective Г«DaivamГӯ, denotes all actions, such
as worship, offering oblations through the
fire, practices of Japa, charity and feeding
of BrГҘhmaЖ’as, etc., intended to propitiate the
various deities recognized by the scriptures,
viz., BrahmГҘ (the Creator), вҖәiva (the Destroyer
of the Universe), вҖәakti (the Divine Energy),
GaЖ’eвҖ№a (the God of Prosperity), the Sun-
god, the Moon-god, Indra (the god of rain),
VaruЖ’a (the god of water) and so on. Due
performance of this sacrifice consists in
scrupulously following these practices with
faith and reverence according to the scriptural
ordinance and as a matter of duty without
entertaining the feeling of possession, attachment
and desire for fruit and with the sole object
of God-realization. The Lord thereby shows
that they too, who offer worship to gods in
the above manner, work for the sake of
sacrifice.
The distinction between the soul and
the Oversoul is being felt from time without
beginning because of ignorance and due to
the limitation of the body. This perception
of diversity, born as it is of ignorance, is set
aside by the practice of Knowledge. In other
words, by revolving in the mind and
contemplating on the truth learnt from the
scriptures and from the lips of the preceptor
the soul is dissolved or merged into the
Oversoul or Brahma, the embodiment of
eternal Knowledge and Bliss, existing beyond
the realm of PrakГҰti. This complete identification
of the individual soul with the Oversoul is
what is meant by Г¬pouring into the fire of
Brahma the very sacrifice in the shape of the
self through the sacrifice known as the
perception of identityГ®. In the eyes of the
JВӨГҘnayogвҲӮ who performs this sacrifice, nothing
but God in His formless, absolute aspect, the
embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss,
exists in realityГіnot even himself, or any
other thing of the objective world. He ceases
to have any connection with the external
world, which is a product of the three GuЖ’as
or modes of PrakГҰti. For him the world
wholly ceases to exist.
The 
practice 
of 
seeing 
Brahma
everywhere, as described in the preceding
verse, and the perception of identity between
the soul and God mentioned in the present
verse, both are practised by the YogвҲӮ following
the path of Knowledge; and in both these forms
of sacrifice Brahma or the Oversoul represents
the fire. Therefore, they seem to be identical
in character; and union with Brahma, the
embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss,
through identity being the goal of both, there
is no real difference between the two. Only
their methods of practice are different; that is
why they have been mentioned separately. The
practice described in the preceding verse
consists in seeing Brahma everywhere and in
everything according to the wellknown вҖәruti
text: Г¬All this is verily BrahmaГ® (ChГҘndogya.,
III.xiv.1); and the practice enunciated in the
present verse consists in dissociating oneself
from the objective world, and seeing the soul
and the Oversoul as one.
Other YogвҲӮs duly offer sacrifice only in the form of worship to gods, while
others perform sacrifice by offering the self by the Self itself in the fire of Brahma. (25)

=== PAGE 231 ===

230
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The practice of self-discipline has been
spoken of in this verse as Г«fireГӯ only in order
to treat it as a form of sacrifice; and as the
different senses have to be controlled
individually and severally, the word Г«fireГӯ
has been used in its plural form.
In Chapter II the senses have been
spoken of as turbulent by nature; it is further
stated there that they forcibly carry away the
mind of the SГҘdhaka (II.60). Therefore,
offering of the senses as sacrfice into the fires
of self-discipline means controlling and
subduing the senses by depriving them of
their freedom and their power to carry away
the mind, and restraining and withdrawing
them from the enjoyments of the world. The
process has been described through the
simile of the tortoise drawing in its limbs in
verse 58 of Chapter II.
The sense-control referred to here is
totally different from the restraint of senses
practised by the hypocrite, as described in
verse 6 of Chapter III. The hypocrite has
been spoken of as merely stopping the
functions of hearing, seeing, taking of food,
etc., or in other words as merely restraining
the senses from their objects, but not as
subduing the senses; for it is distinctly stated
there that the hypocrite continues to dwell
on the objects of senses even when restraining
them. The present verse, however, does not
speak of mere outward restraint of the
senses, but talks of sense-control as such.
Senses which are thoroughly disciplined can
no longer drag the mind to worldly objects.
Hence he who keeps his senses under check,
as an act of hypocrisy, without properly
controlling them will go on dwelling in the
mind on worldly objects; while he who has
subdued his senses with the object of God-
realization will cease to dwell mentally on
the objects of the world. His mind will
constantly dwell on God. That is the distinction
between the false sense-restraint practised by
a hypocrite and true sense-control as practised
by a sincere aspirant.
Like the practice of sense-control referred
to in the first half of this verse, the senses
too have been spoken of in the latter half
as so many fires in order to invest the
disinterested and unattached use of the senses
with the character of a sacrifice, and the
word Г«fireГӯ has been given a plural form in
order to show that every sense has to be
trained separately to act in a detached way.
By perceiving, through senses which are
disciplined and free from likes and dislikes,
only such objects as are legitimately obtained
Describing thus the two sacrifices in the form of worship of gods and perception
of identity, the Lord now proceeds to deal with sacrifices in the form of sense-control
and offering of sense-objects to the senses respectively:
ГјГҠГҠпЈҝГІГҠГҠЕ’ГӢЕёГӢГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГЎГҝГЈГҝпЈҝ вҖҡВўГҝв—ҠГҠГҒВӘAВ·ГҲ ВЎГҲuГ”UГҒГғвҖ“
вүҘГҠГ©Е’ГҠЕ’ГӢГҒГЈп¬ӮВ·ГҝГҠЕёГЈГҝ ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒВӘAВ·ГҲ ВЎГҲuГ”UГҒГғH 26H
ГјГҠГҠпЈҝГІГҠГҠЕ’ГӢГҒЕё ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠ (their) senses of hearing, etc.; вҖўГЈГҝпЈҝ others; вҖҡВўГҝв—ҠГҠГҒВӘAВ·ГҲ into the fires of
self-discipline; ВЎГҲuГ”UГҒГғ offer (as sacrifice); вүҘГҠГ©Е’ГҠЕ’ГӢЕёЛңГ” ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҝГҠЕёЛңГ” sound and the other sense-objects;
вҖўГЈГҝпЈҝ other YogвҲӮs (again); ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒВӘAВ·ГҲ into the fires of the senses; ВЎГҲuГ”UГҒГғ offer.
Others offer as sacrifice their senses of hearing etc., into the fires of self-discipline.
Other YogвҲӮs, again, offer sound and other objects of perception into the fires of the
senses.                                                                 (26)

=== PAGE 232 ===

* Chapter IV *
231
according to oneГӯs order in society, stage in
life and circumstances, the  objects are made
to lose their existence in the senses (II.64); in
other words, they are robbed of their power
to produce, during their enjoyment or at any
other time, any unhealthy reaction on the mind
or the senses. This is what is meant by Г¬offering
sound and other objects of perception into
the fires of the sensesГ®. The intention is to
say that while hearing censure or praise or
any other agreeable or disagreeable words
through the ears, seeing pleasant or unpleasant
scenes through the sight, tasting something
palatable or unpalatable through the palate,
and even so, perceiving through the other
senses in a detached way all other objects
legitimately obtained by force of PrГҘrabdha
or destiny, the YogвҲӮs referred to above keep
the mind balanced, and do not allow it to be
swayed either by attraction and repulsion or
joy and grief etc., and depriving the sense-
objects of their power to agitate the mind and
senses, go on merging them in the senses.
For when attachment and fascination for sense-
objects and the sense of their being delightful
have disappeared, their enjoyment cannot affect
the SГҘdhaka in any way; like hay thrown
into fire, they are all reduced to ashes.
The next verse describes the sacrifice in the form of Yoga of self-control:
вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГЎГҠГӢГҒГЈВәЛқГҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ ГёГҠВ¬вҒ„пЈҝUвҖ“
вҖўГҠГ в—ҠвҖҡВўГҝв—ҠГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠВӘAГҠГ’ ВЎГҲuГ”UГҒГғ ГҙГҠГҠЕёЕ’ГӢГҒВ¬ГғпЈҝH 27H
вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ all; ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ functions of the senses; В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ functions of the vital airs;
Гё and; вҖўВ¬вҒ„пЈҝU others; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠвҖҡВўГҝв—ҠГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠВӘAГҠГ’ into the fire of Yoga in the shape of self-control; ВЎГҲuГ”UГҒГғ
sacrifice; ГҙГҠГҠЕёЕ’ГӢГҒВ¬ГғпЈҝ kindled by wisdom.
Others sacrifice all the functions of their senses and the functions of the vital airs
(PrГҘЖ’a) into the fire of Yoga in the form of self-control, kindled by wisdom.
 (27)
in two ways. In one of these processes, the
functions of the vital airs and the senses are
suspended in the first instance, and thereafter
the mind is absorbed in the object of meditation.
In the second process, by continued practice
of meditation the mind gets fixed on the
object of meditation; this is known as the
state of meditation, and as the meditation gets
deeper and deeper, the mind is eventually
absorbed in the object of meditation; this is
what they call the state of SamГҘdhi. The
present verse describes this second process
of DhyГҘnayoga. SamГҘdhiyoga, therefore,
consists in duly absorbing the mind in the
God of oneГӯs own conception and belief,Гі
whether it is God with form and attributes,
or the formless and absolute aspect of God.
In this state of absorption not only does the
The word Г«Г…tmasaвүҲyamayogaГӯ, or Г«Yoga
of self-controlГӯ, used in this verse stands for
SamГҘdhiyoga or the Yoga of absorption of
the mind into God. With a view to investing
it with the character of a sacrifice, the word
Г«AgniГӯ or Г«fireГӯ has been compounded with
it. In order to differentiate the state of
SamГҘdhi, or complete absorption of the mind
into the Self, from the state of deep slumber,Гі
in other words, to show that consciousness
remains fully awakened in the state of
SamГҘdhi, which is not a state of absolute
blankness, and in order to complete the
metaphor, the fire of SamГҘdhi is said to be
kindled by wisdom or consciousness and not
smouldering.
DhyГҘnayoga, or absorption of the mind
in the object of meditation, is accomplished

=== PAGE 233 ===

232
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
mind stop working, but the senses too
automatically suspend all their functions of
sight, hearing, smell, touch and taste, grasping
and discharging, speech and motion, and the
vital airs suspend their activities of respiration
and movement. In other words, they are all
merged in the Self or God. This is what is
meant by sacrificing the functions of the
senses and the vital airs in the fire of
SamГҘdhiyoga.
Describing in these words the practice of SamГҘdhi as a form of sacrifice, the Lord
now makes a brief reference to other sacrifices such as the one performed with material
things, sacrifice in the form of austerities, sacrifice through the practice of Yoga, and
sacrifice in the shape of wisdom through the study of sacred texts.
ВәЛқвҲҡГҝГҝГҙГҠГҠSГғВ¬ГҠпЈҝГҝГҙГҠГҠ 
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҝГҙГҠГҠSГғГ•ГҠВ¬вҒ„пЈҝUвҖ“
Sп¬ӮГҠГӨГҝГҠГҝГҙГҠГҠЕёГҝГҙГҠГҠp ГҝГғГҝвҖ” вҖҡВўГҒвүҘГҠГғп¬ӮЛқГғГҠвҖ”H 28H
ВәЛқвҲҡГҝГҝГҙГҠГҠвҖ” some perform sacrifice with material possessions; ГғВ¬ГҠпЈҝГҝГҙГҠГҠвҖ” some offer sacrifice
in the shape of austerities; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҝГҙГҠГҠвҖ” sacrifice through the practice of Yoga; ГғГ•ГҠ even so;
вҖўВ¬вҒ„пЈҝU others; Sп¬ӮГҠГӨГҝГҠГҝГҙГҠГҠЕёГҝГҙГҠГҠвҖ” perform sacrifice in the shape of wisdom through the study
of sacred texts; Гё and; ГҝГғГҝвҖ” striving souls, earnest seekers; вҖҡВўГҒвүҘГҠГғп¬ӮЛқГғГҠвҖ” observing austere
vows.
Some perform sacrifice with material possessions; some offer sacrifice in the form
of austerities; others sacrifice through the practice of Yoga; while some striving souls,
observing austere vows, perform sacrifice in the form of wisdom through the study
of sacred texts.                                                         (28)
expression Г«sacrifice with material possessionsГӯ,
when carried on in the above spirit. The
householder alone is qualified to perform this
form of sacrifice. Those belonging to the
SaвүҲnyГҘsa and other Г…вҖ№ramas (stages) are not
entitled to earn money and spend it in the
above way for public good. By using the
word Г«DravyayajВӨaГӯ i.e., Г«sacrifice with material
possessionГӯ, the Lord intends to show that
disinterested performance of actions involving
expenditure of money in the cause of public
good with the object of realizing God is also
included in action Г¬performed for the sake of
sacrificeГ®.
Г«Sacrifice in the shape of penanceГӯ
represents all activities involving hardship
and endurance carried on without the feeling
of possession, attachment and the desire for
fruit, for purifying the mind and senses with
Sacrifice with material possessions means
devoting oneГӯs wealth, obtained by righteous
means, through performance of duties enjoined
by oneГӯs order in society, to the service of
people giving up the sense of possession,
attachment and the desire for fruit. Construction
of wells, tanks, temples and DharmaвҖ№ГҘlГҘs or
public houses for free lodging of travellers,
providing food, cloth, water, medicine, and
books etc., to the starving, afflicted, invalid,
helpless and ailing as well as to mendicants;
gifting according to oneГӯs capacity and the
qualifications and requirements of the recipient,
cow, land, cloth and jewellery etc., to learned
and austere BrГҘhmЖ’as of exemplary conduct
and well-versed in the Vedas; and even so,
expending money, according to oneГӯs
resources, with a view to gratifying all other
creatures,Гіall these are included in the

=== PAGE 234 ===

* Chapter IV *
233
the object of God-realization. Observing
fasts and other austere vows, suffering physical
hardships for the sake of duty, observing
silence, exposing the body to the sun, fire
and cold blasts etc., using not more than a
single cloth for covering oneГӯs privities with,
or at the most a pair of clothes, giving up
the use of foodgrains and living on fruits and
milk alone, dwelling in a forest, and other
forms of penance prescribed by the scriptures
and practised in the above spirit are included
in the sacrifice. VГҘnaprasthas (those belonging
to the third Г…вҖ№rama, who retire to a forest
hermitage and lead an austere and strictly
religious life) are entitled to perform this
sacrifice more than anyone else; while members
of the other three Г…вҖ№ramas also may take up
these practices according to the injunctions
of the scriptures. In other words, members
of all the four Г…вҖ№ramas are entitled to
perform this sacrifice according to their
respective qualifications.
The actual meaning of the word
Г«YogayajВӨaГӯ, Г«sacrifice through the practice
of YogaГӯ, is known to no one else than the
Lord Himself; for we get no indication of
it in the verse. But in all probability, so far
as one can guess, it refers to Г«AВ¶ВўГҘngayogaГӯ,
or the Yoga of Eight Limbs taught by sage
PataВӨjali in his Г¬Aphorisms on YogaГ® and
consisting in complete merging of the mind.
Therefore, the word Г«YogayajВӨГҘВЁГӯ occurring
in this verse should be taken to stand for
those SГҘdhakas who practise the well-known
eight limbs of Yoga with the object of God-
realization, renouncing the feeling of
possession, attachment and the desire for
fruit. These practices also, when carried on
in this spirit, are included in action done for
the sake of sacrifice. Hence the actions of
those SГҘdhakas as well, are neutralized and
bring them the realization of eternal Brahma.
According to MaharВ¶i PataВӨjali the eight
limbs of Yoga are as follows: Yama, Niyama,
Г…sana, PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma, PratyГҘhГҘra, DhГҘraЖ’ГҘ,
DhyГҘna and SamГҘdhi.*
Of these the first five, viz., Yama,
Niyama, Г…sana, PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma and PratyГҘhГҘra,
constitute the external limbs, and the last
three, viz., DhГҘraЖ’ГҘ, DhyГҘna and SamГҘdhi
represent the internal limbs. These latter bear
the collective name of Г«SaвүҲyamaГӯ.вҖ 
Г«AhiвүҲsГҘГӯ or abstaining from inflicting
the least form of suffering on any being;
Г«SatyaГӯ or speaking the truth in agreeable yet
guileless words and with the best of motives;
Г«AsteyaГӯ or refraining from stealing or usurping
anotherГӯs property; Г«BrahmacaryaГӯ or abstaining
from sexual commerce in thought, word and
deed at all times and under all circumstances;
and Г«AparigrahaГӯ or nonaccumulation of
objects of enjoyment beyond the bare
necessaries of life: these five taken together
constitute Yama.вҖЎ
вҖәauca, i.e., external and internal purity
of every kind; SantoВ¶a or remaining satisfied
under all circumstances, favourable or
unfavourable, and in joy and suffering both;
Tapas, or observing fasts and other vows on
EkГҘdaвҖ№вҲӮ (the 11th of every fortnight) and
other holy days; SvГҘdhyГҘya or study of
spiritually elevating scriptures and practice of
KвҲӮrtana etc., of the Divine Name; and
вҲ«вҖ№varapraЖ’idhГҘna or surrender of everything
to God and carrying out His behests; these
five are known as Niyamas.вҖқ
*
Гҝв—ҠГҒЕёГҝв—ҠГҠвҖҡЕёВ¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠГҝГҠв—ҠВ¬ЛқГ ГҝГҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„UЕ“ГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠГӨГҝГҠЕёвҖҡв—ҠГҠЕ“ГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳCГ”UГҠГ„XГ”UГҠГҒЕёвҖ“ (Yoga-SВөutras II.29)
вҖ 
ГІГҠГҝв—ҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГІГҠ вҖҡВўГҝв—ҠвҖ”вҖ“ (Ibid., III.4)
вҖЎ
вҖўГҒвҖһВўUвҖҡГҠвҖҡГ ГҝГҠSГғпЈҝГҝвҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГёГҝГҠВёВ¬ГҒвҒ„UВӘЛқвҖһUГҠ Гҝв—ҠГҠвҖ”вҖ“ (Ibid., II.30)
вҖқ
вүҘГҠГҠГ’ГёвҖҡГЈГғГҠпЈҝВ·ГғВ¬вҖ”Sп¬ӮГҠГӨГҝГҠГҝпЈҝEвҒ„UВ¬ЛқГҒГЎГҠЕ“ГҠЕёГҠГҒЕё ГҒЕёГҝв—ҠГҠвҖ”вҖ“ (Ibid., II.32)

=== PAGE 235 ===

234
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Г…sana means sitting in a steady and
easy pose.*
On the attainment of full control over
oneГӯs posture when the two movements of
breath, viz., inhalation and exhalation are
stopped, it is called PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma.вҖ  Filling up
the lungs with external air is inhalation, and
the expulsion or throwing out of internal air
is known as the process of exhalation. When
both these processes are suspended, it is
called PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma.
There are three forms of PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma,
viz; External, Internal and Optional; they are
either long or short according to the range
of the inhalation and exhalation, the duration
of each act and the number of times it is
repeated.вҖЎ
Shutting out the air thrown out of the
lungs is known as an External Pause (вҖҷГҠsГ”
вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГӘГ·вҲ‘В§). Its process is: exhale the air with
eight repetitions of the mystic world Г«OMГӯ,
hold the breath with sixteen repetitions of the
same and inhale with four repetitions. This
whole process is called the External (вҖҷГҠsп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠ)
form of PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma.
Holding the air inhaled from outside is
called an Internal Pause (вҖўГҠГЁГҝГЈГғвҒ„U вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГӘГ·вҲ‘В§). Its
process is: inhale the air with four repetitions
of Г«OГҖГӯ, hold the breath with sixteen repetitions
of Г«OГҖГӯ, and exhale with eight repetitions.
This whole process of inhalation, internal
pause and exhalation is called the Internal
(вҖўГҠГЁГҝГЈГғвҒ„Uп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠ) form of PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma.
The Г«Optional PauseГӯ (SГғГӘГ·п¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠ вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГӘГ·вҲ‘В§)
consists is holding oneГӯs breath either outside
or inside wherever it may be done with ease.
Its process is Г«inhale the air with four
repetitions of Г«OГҖГӯ and then exhale it with
eight repetitions; and hold the breath wherever
it can be done with ease in the course of
this processГӯ. This process of inhalation and
exhalation and holding the breath after either
is known as the Optional (SГғГӘГ·п¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠ) form of
PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma.
These are the main types of PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma,
which can be further divided into many more
sub-types. For instance, inhalation, exhalation
and holding of breath may be practised with
the same number of repetitions of Г«OГҖГӯ
without any variation in their duration.
The space inside the body extending
from the navel right up to the nostrils,
through which the breath flows, represents
the Г«internal passageГӯ and external space
covering a distance of about 10 inches from
the nostrils is known as the Г«external passageГӯ
of the breath. The SГҘdhaka who draws air
up to the navel during the act of inhalation
should drive it out up to a distance of about
ten inches during exhalation; he who draws
air up to the heart only should drive it out
up to about eight inches; he who draws it
up to the throat should drive it out up to
about 5 inches; and he who draws it only
up to the other end of the nostrils should
drive it out up to three inches only. PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma
is long or short in proportion to the length
or shortness of breath.
*
ГҒSГ•вҒ„UвҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠГҠвҖҡЕёв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“ (Ibid., II.46)
Г…sanas are many. Among them SiddhГҘsana, PadmГҘsana, and SvastikГҘsana: these three are regarded
as more useful for SГҘdhakas desiring to achieve self-control. Whichever of these Г…sanas is adopted, it
is essential that the spine, head and neck should be kept in a straight line and the gaze should be fixed
either on the tip of the nose or between the eye-brows. If the SГҘdhaka does not feel languid, he may
as well close his eyes. The Г…sana or posture in which one may easily continue for a sufficient length
of time is the best for him.
вҖ 
ГғГҒSв—ҠЕёЛңГ” вҖҡГҒГғ EГҠвҖҡВ¬ЛқEГҠвҖҡГҝГҠпЈҝВӘВёГҒГғГҒп¬ӮГ«ВҝпЈҝUЕ’вҖ” В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠГҝГҠв—ҠвҖ”вҖ“ (Ibid., II.49)
вҖЎ
вҖҷГҠsГ”ГҠГЁГҝГЈГғвҒ„USГғГӘГ·п¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠЕ’пЈҝВёвүҘГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮUвҖҡВўГ…ГҝГҠГҒГ·вҖ” В¬ГҒвҒ„UЕ’ГҺCГ”UГҠпЈҝ Е’ГӢГүГҠВёвҖҡГҚЛҮв—ҠвҖ”вҖ“ (Ibid., II.50)

=== PAGE 236 ===

* Chapter IV *
235
The number of repetitions of a Mantra
or sacred formula accompanying the PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma
and the duration of the PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma are
closely related with one another, hence there
should be no deviation with regard to them.
For instance, if the act of inhalation
with four repetitions of Г«OГҖГӯ, takes one
second, the pause with sixteen repetitions
and the exhalation with eight should take
four and two seconds respectively. If he can
do so with ease the SГҘdhaka may increase
the duration of the act and the number of
repetitions of the Mantra any number of
times he likes according to his capacity. The
PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma can be lengthened or shortened
even by lengthening or shortening its duration
and multiplying or reducing the number of
repetitions of the Mantra accompanying the
same.
The suspension of breath which
automatically takes place as a result of
renouncing or ignoring all external objects
of the senses viz., sound, touch, colour, taste
and smell, and internal objects of the mind
such as thoughts and doubts,Гіthat is to say,
on oneГӯs ceasing to dwell on various objects
is the fourth type of PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma.*
In the first three types of PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma
referred to above, mind-control comes through
control of breath, whereas in the fourth type
mentioned above the breath gets automatically
suspended through control of the mind and
the senses. In this PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma, there is no
definite rule as to where the breath may be
held; it may be held anywhere, and there is
no rule about duration and number either.
Г«PratyГҘhГҘraГӯ is that state in which the
senses get lost as it were in the mind through
dissociation from their corresponding object.вҖ 
Fixing the mind on a particular spot is
called DhГҘraЖ’ГҘ.вҖЎ In other words DhГҘraЖ’ГҘ
consists in focussing or riveting the mind on
any particular object which is sought to be
meditated upon, no matter whether it is gross
or subtle, external or internal.
Here the object of realization being
God, all the three limbs of DhГҘraЖ’ГҘ, DhyГҘna
and SamГҘdhi should be practised with
reference to God.
Incessant flow of the mental substance
towards the object of meditation, like the
flow of the GaвҲҶgГҘ towards the ocean or like
the unbroken flow of oil which takes place
when it is transferred from one vessel to
another, is called DhyГҘna or meditation.вҖқ
SamГҘdhi or Absorption is only a more
developed form of DhyГҘna, in which only
the object of meditation remains, and the
meditator virtually loses consciousness of his
self.# When through repeated practice of
meditation the mind of the meditator assumes
the form of the object of meditation and the
meditator himself gets absorbed, as it were,
in that object, that is to say, loses consciousness
of his self as something different from that
object, it is known as SamГҘdhi. In meditation
the triangular consciousness of meditator,
meditation and object of meditation persists.
In SamГҘdhi, however only the object of
meditation remains; in other words the
meditator, meditation and object of meditation
resolve themselves into one, viz., the object.
*
вҖҷГҠsГ”ГЁГҝГЈГғвҒ„UГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҝГҠЛҮГҠпЈҝВ¬ГӢ ГёГғГҲГ•ВёвҖ”вҖ“ (Ibid., II.51)
вҖ“
Sп¬ӮГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҝГҠвҖҡГӘВ¬ЛқГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝ ГҒГёГ»ГҠSп¬ӮMВ§В¬ГҠЕёГҲвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„U Гҹп¬ӮпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГЎГҠГҠВў В¬ЛқГ ГҝГҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„UвҖ”вҖ“ (Ibid., II.54)
вҖЎ
Е’пЈҝвүҘГҠвҖҷГЈЕ“ГҒpГ»ГҠSГҝ Е“ГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠвҖ“ (Ibid., III.1)
вҖқ
ГғГІГҠ В¬ЛқГ ГҝГҝГ’вҲ‘В§ГғГҠЕёГғГҠ ГӨГҝГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“ (Ibid., III.2)
#
ГғЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠГ•Вёв—ҠГҠГІГҠГҒЕёГ·ГҠВёвҖҡВў Sп¬ӮMВ§В¬вүҘГҠГҚГЈГҝГҒв—Ҡп¬Ӯ вҖҡв—ҠГҠГҒЕ“вҖ”вҖ“ (Ibid., III.3)

=== PAGE 237 ===

236
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Verse 27 spoke of sacrifice in the form
of Г«Г…tmasaвүҲyamayogaГӯ, or Yoga in the
shape of self-control, and the present verse
speaks of YogayajВӨa or sacrifice through the
practice of Yoga. The difference between the
two lies in the fact that in Г…tmasaвүҲyamayoga
emphasis has been laid on the three internal
practices of DhГҘraЖ’ГҘ, DhyГҘna and SamГҘdhi
and not on the other limbs of Yoga, viz.,
Yama, Niyama, Г…sana, PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma, and
PratyГҘhГҘra; for the ground of these latter is
already covered by the former practices. In
YogayajВӨa, however, all the practices have
to be followed one after another.
All the sacrifices mentioned in these
verses, being conducive to God-realization,
can be classed under Karmayoga or JВӨГҘnayoga,
the two principal ways to God-realization.
Therefore, the word Г«YogaГӯ in this verse
cannot be interpreted to mean either JВӨГҘnayoga
or Karmayoga in particular, but should be
construed as meaning the Yoga of eight
limbs as stated above.
Sacrifice in the shape of wisdom through
the study of sacred texts can be performed
by individuals belonging to all the Г…вҖ№ramas,
hence the word Г«YatayaВЁГӯ in the verse has
been interpreted as Г«striving soulsГӯ, and not
as referring to those belonging to the fourth
stage, viz., SaвүҲnyГҘsa. It is no doubt true that
inasmuch as the SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮs are not called
upon like householders to perform duties of
the obligatory and occasional types, or to
earn their bread, they can devote more time
and energy to the study of the scriptures. But
even among them it is only the Г«striving
soulsГӯ that can do so; hence the interpretation
of the word Г«YatayaВЁГӯ as Г«striving soulsГӯ
seems to be quite reasonable and proper.
Besides, study of the scriptures is principally
enjoined in the Brahmacarya. Г…вҖ№rama or
student life as well, and the word Г«YatayaВЁГӯ
has been used with reference to those who
are engaged in the study of the sacred texts.
Therefore, it cannot be interpreted as referring
to the SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮs alone.
The word Г«SaвүҲвҖ№itavratГҘВЁГӯ refers to those
who carefully observe the vow of exemplary
conduct in the shape of non-violence,
truthfulness, non-stealing, continence, non-
possession etc., and are free from the evils
of attraction and repulsion, egoism and pride
etc. The word Г«YajВӨaГӯ does not occur with
Г«SaвүҲвҖ№itavratГҘВЁГӯ therefore it has been interpreted
as a mere qualification of Г«YatayaВЁГӯ instead
of taking it as denoting a distinct form of
sacrifice.
Study of scriptures discussing the truth
about God and describing His glory, virtues
and activities as well as throwing light on
his two main aspects, viz; that with form and
attributes and that without form and attributes,
recitation of psalms and songs in praise of
God, chanting of His names and virtues and
the study of Vedas, and VedГҘвҲҶgas (a class
of literature helpful in the study of the
Vedas): all these are included in the connotation
of the word Г«SvГҘdhyГҘyaГӯ. When  such
Г«SvГҘdhyГҘyaГӯ is carried on intelligently and
without the feeling of possession, attachment
and the desire for fruit, it is designated as
Г«SvГҘdhyГҘyajВӨГҘnayajВӨaГӯ or sacrifice in the
shape of wisdom through the study of sacred
texts. By compounding the word Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ
with the word Г«SvГҘdhyГҘyaГӯ it has been
indicated that study itself is a form of
sacrifice, viz., Г«sacrifice in the form of
wisdomГӯ. That is why the Lord calls the
study of the GвҲӮtГҘ also as a Г«JВӨГҘnayajВӨaГӯ
(XVIII.70).
Referring thus briefly to four types of sacrifice, including the sacrifice with material
possessions, the Lord now proceeds to describe in two verses sacrifices in the form of
breath-control, paying a compliment at the same time to all SГҘdhakas performing the
various forms of sacrifice:

=== PAGE 238 ===

* Chapter IV *
237
The verb Г«JuhvatiГӯ has been used in
order to invest the practice of PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma
with the character of a sacrifice. The intention
is to show that PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma too is a form
of sacrifice. Therefore, the practice of
PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma, if carried on without the feeling
of possession, attachment and the desire for
fruit, and with the object of God-realization,
is included in acts done for the sake of
sacrifice; it therefore leads to liberation from
the bondage of Karma, and brings man God-
realization.
The subject of Yoga is indeed mysterious
and most difficult to understand. The secrets
of it are known only to the YogвҲӮs who have
direct experience of these matters; and they
alone can throw sufficient light on the subject.
Whatever is being submitted in this connection
here is only based on a study of the scriptures
and deductions made therefrom. The scriptures
have enunciated various types of PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma.
The Lord Himself knows which of them is
referred to in the present verse. The reader
should remember in this connection that the
rectum is declared to be the seat of the vital
air known as Г«ApГҘnaГӯ, and the heart to be the
seat of the Г«PrГҘЖ’aГӯ air. Inhalation, or the
drawing in the external air, is known as the
course of the ApГҘna air. For the seat of the
ApГҘna air is located in the lower part of the
body and the external air, when drawn into
the body has a downward course. Even so,
exhalation or the expulsion of air from within
is treated as the course of the PrГҘЖ’a air. For
the seat of the PrГҘЖ’a air is located in the
upper part of the body and the air within,
when expelled from the body, moves in an
upward direction. In the sacrifice through
PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma referred to in this verse the ApГҘna
air represents the sacrificial fire and the PrГҘЖ’a
вҖўВ¬ГҠЕёпЈҝ ВЎГҲuГ”UГҒГғ В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠВў В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠпЈҝЛҳВ¬ГҠЕёВў ГғГ•ГҠВ¬вҒ„пЈҝUвҖ“
В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠВ¬ГҠЕёВӘГғГӢ LВ§Е’ЛңГ”ГӨп¬ӮГҠ В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠГҝГҠв—ҠВ¬вҒ„UГҠГҝГЎГҠГҠвҖ”H 29H
вҖўВ¬вҒ„пЈҝU ГҒЕёГҝГғГҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„UГҠвҖ” В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠГЈВ¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠпЈҝВ·ГҲ ВЎГҲuГ”UГҒГғUвҖ“
вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёЛҳГҘГҝпЈҝГғпЈҝ ГҝГҙГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҙГҠЛҮГҠГҒВ¬ГғвҲ‘В§ГҖв—ҠВ·ГҠвҖ”H 30H
вҖўВ¬ГҠЕёпЈҝ into the act of inhalation; ВЎГҲuГ”UГҒГғ pour; В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the act of exhalation; В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠпЈҝ into the
act of exhalation; вҖўВ¬ГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” (offer) the act of inhalation; ГғГ•ГҠ even so (others); вҖўВ¬вҒ„пЈҝU still others;
В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠВ¬ГҠЕёВӘГғГӢ the processes of exhalation and inhalation both; LВ§Е’ЛңГ”ГӨп¬ӮГҠ controlling; В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠГҝГҠв—ҠВ¬вҒ„UГҠГҝГЎГҠГҠвҖ”
(and) given to (the practice of) PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma (breath-control); вҖўВ¬вҒ„пЈҝU other YogвҲӮs; ГҒЕёГҝГғГҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„UГҠвҖ”
having regulated (their) diet; В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠЕёЛңГ” (all their) vital airs; В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠпЈҝВ·ГҲ into those very vital airs;
ВЎГҲuГ”UГ”ГҒГғ offer; вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё all; вҖўГҒВ¬ verily; вҲһГғпЈҝ these (SГҘdhakas); ГҝГҙГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ’вҖ” (and) understanding (the
meaning of) sacrificial worship; ГҝГҙГҠЛҮГҠГҒВ¬ГғвҲ‘В§ГҖв—ҠВ·ГҠвҖ” (having their) sins consumed away by
sacrifice.
Other YogвҲӮs offer the act of exhalation into that of inhalation; even so, others
the act of inhalation into that of exhalation. There are still others given to the practice
of PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma (breath-control), who, having regulated their diet and controlled the
processes of exhalation and inhalation both, pour their vital airs into the vital airs
themselves. All these have their sins consumed away by sacrifice and understand
the meaning of sacrificial worship.                                     (29, 30)

=== PAGE 239 ===

238
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
air constitutes the oblation poured into the
same. Therefore, it is the process of holding
the breath after deep inhalation, or PВөuraka
PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma as it is called, which is referred to
here as offering the PrГҘЖ’a air into the ApГҘna.
For in the course of this PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma when the
SГҘdhaka deeply inhales air through the nostrils,
the external air drawn in by him gets united
with the PrГҘЖ’a air centred in the heart and
both of them pass through the navel and
disappear into the ApГҘna. In this practice the
external air is repeatedly inhaled and held
within the body, hence this form of PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma
is also known as Г…bhyantara Kumbhaka or
Internal Pause.
In the process of offering the ApГҘna air
into the PrГҘЖ’a, it is the PrГҘЖ’a air which
represents the fire, whereas the ApГҘna
represents the oblation. Therefore, it is the
process of holding the breath after deep
exhalation, which is referred to here as
offering the ApГҘna air into the PrГҘna. For
in the course of this PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma, when the
SГҘdhaka drives out the air within through the
nostrils, and shuts it out, it is the PrГҘЖ’a air
seated in the heart which comes out first and
stays outside, and then the ApГҘna air meets
it and gets absorbed into it. Since the internal
air is repeatedly exhaled and held outside in
this PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma, it is also known as Г«BГҘhya
KumbhakaГӯ or External pause.
The word Г«NiyatГҘhГҘrГҘВЁГӯ refers to those
who take in a limited quantity only SГҘttvika
foods (XVII.8) which are favourable to the
practice of PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma as laid down in the
scriptures on Yoga, neither eating too much,
nor observing a complete fast; for the GвҲӮtГҘ
lays down elsewhere (VI.16) that success in
Yoga is achieved only by those who are
regulated in diet (VI.17), and not by those
who are either voracious eaters or do not eat
at all (VI.16).
The adjective Г«PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘmaparГҘyaЖ’ГҘВЁГӯ has
been used with reference to those who are
devoted to the practice of PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma; and
regard this practice as the principal means
of God-realization.
All the YogвҲӮs who practise the various
forms of PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma as stated above may be
said to be regulated in diet and devoted to
PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma. Hence there can be no objection
to the two adjectives Г«NiyatГҘhГҘrГҘВЁГӯ and
Г«PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘmaparГҘyaЖ’ГҘВЁГӯ being taken by
implication as qualifying all of them. But
their proximity in the above verses with
those alone who Г¬pour the vital airs into the
vital airsГ® or practise Г«Absolute Pause (Kevala
Kumbhaka as it is technically called) justifies
their being related to these latter alone. Of
course, by implication, as stated above, they
can be related as well to those who offer
the PrГҘЖ’a air into the ApГҘna, and the ApГҘna
into the PrГҘЖ’a.
The air within the body has been
classified under five heads, viz., PrГҘЖ’a, ApГҘna,
SamГҘna, UdГҘna and VyГҘna. Of these, the
PrГҘЖ’a air is believed to be located in the
heart, the ApГҘna in the rectum, the SamГҘna
in the navel, the UdГҘna in the throat, and
the VyГҘna is believed to be spread all over
the body. These five types of air are jointly
known as the PaВӨcaprГҘЖ’as. In verse 30,
therefore, the word Г«PrГҘЖ’aГӯ has been used
in the plural form in order to invest the
practice of controlling and suspending the
function of all the five airs mentioned above
with the character of a sacrifice. In this
sacrifice, fire and clarified butter both are
represented by the PrГҘЖ’as. In this process,
there is no offering of the PrГҘЖ’a into the
ApГҘna or of ApГҘna into PrГҘЖ’a, that is to say,
the acts of inhalation and exhalation both are
suspended and all the five airs are restrained
in their respective seats. This is what is

=== PAGE 240 ===

* Chapter IV *
239
meant by controlling the course of both the
PrГҘЖ’a and ApГҘna airs and pouring the vital
airs into the vital airs. In this practice neither
the external air is inhaled and held within,
nor the internal air is exhaled and stopped
without. The functions of the five airs are
suspended in their very seats of existence.
That is why the practice is designated as
Г«Kevala KumbhakaГӯ or Г«Absolute PauseГӯ.
Here one may ask: Is it unavoidably
necessary to join Mantra-Japa with the various
forms of PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma referred to in the above
verses? If so, should one repeat the word
Г«OГҖГӯ alone or may substitute any other
name of God for it? In reply to this it may
be submitted that PraЖ’ava or Г«OГҖГӯ is a name
of God, the Supreme Brahma, who is the
embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss
(XVII.23). Therefore, utterance of the word
Г«OГҖГӯ is considered to be a duty at the
commencement of every good action
(XVII.24). Hence the Divine Name should
invariably be joined with each and every one
of the sacrifices mentioned in the context. Of
course, in the place of PraЖ’ava, other names
of God such as вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma, вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, вҖәrвҲӮ
вҖәiva, and so on may be used according to
the faith and inclination of the SГҘdhaka. For
the repetition of all these names of God bears
fruit according to the faith and reverence of
the SГҘdhaka. Again, all the practices enumerated
above have been invested with the character
of a sacrifice, and a sacrifice performed
without the use of Mantras has been declared
as TГҘmasika in character (XVII.13). This is
another reason why the Divine Name should
invariably be used as a sacred formula during
these practices. In the sacrifice through breath-
control or PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma, the revolutions of any
one process of PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma can be reckoned
by counting numbers or through other
mechanical devices such as striking one
finger against another; but being divorced
from Mantra-Japa, it will lose the character
of a SГҘttvika form of sacrifice. Therefore, use
of the Divine Name during the practice of
PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma should be regarded as indispensable
and essential. Meditation on the Form of
oneГӯs chosen Deity should also accompany
this practice.
The statement contained in verse 23
above that Г¬all actions of those who work
for the sake of sacrifice melt awayГ® has been
elucidated in this verse when it says that all
the SГҘdhakas referred to in this context have
their sins consumed away by sacrifice and
understand the meaning of sacrificial worship.
The intention is to show that all the types
of SГҘdhakas referred to from verse 24 to
verse 30, carrying on their respective practices
for the sake of sacrifice and without the
sense of possession, attachment and the
desire for fruit are able to wipe out through
them the whole stock of their past actions,
both good and evil, accumulated in the form
of latencies; therefore, they have understood
the meaning of sacrificial worship. On the
other hand, those who take up one or more
of these practices with interested motives for
the realization of any worldly aim, though
they are much better than those who perform
no sacrifice at all, cannot be liberated from
the bondage of Karma, inasmuch as they
have not understood the meaning of sacrificial
worship and do not work for the sake of
sacrifice.
Praising thus the SГҘdhakas who perform sacrifice as stated above, the Lord now
proceeds to establish the necessity of performing sacrifices showing what is gained through
their performance, and what is lost through their non-performance:

=== PAGE 241 ===

240
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
As ordinarily understood, sacrifice consists
in the pouring of clarified butter etc., into
the sacred fire as offering to the gods, and
the remnant of such oblations is the nectar
referred to here. Even so, in the Five Great
Sacrifices and other such rites enjoined in
SmГҰti texts, food is offered to the gods, В°RВ¶is,
manes, human beings and other creatures;
and what is left over after such offering may
also be taken as referred to by the word
Г«YajВӨaвҖ№isВўГҘmГҰtaГӯ occurring in this verse. But
over and above these, the Lord has also
mentioned in the above verses under the
name of Г«sacrificeГӯ a number of other practices
of God-realization such as Knowledge, self-
control, penance, Yoga, study of scriptures,
PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma etc., which have no relation with
food whatsoever. Therefore, Г¬nectar that is
left over after sacrificeГ® should be taken to
mean placidity of mind or the SГҘttvika form
of joy (II.64-65; XVIII.36-37) which comes
as a direct result of purity of heart attained
through these practices, inasmuch as it is
conducive to the nectar-like experience of
God-realization;  and to remain ever satisfied
in that joy resulting from purity of heart is
to enjoy that nectar.
The Lord assures us in the first half of
this verse that those who perform sacrifices
referred to above attain the eternal Brahma.
Whether they do so in their current life or
in a subsequent life depends on the degree
of ripeness of their SГҘdhanГҘ. He whose
practice does not lack in the correct spirit or
sentiment can attain God in this very life,
and speedily too; but he whose practice is
deficient in one way or other attains success
only when the deficiency has been made up.
But the practice itself never goes in vain, and
the SГҘdhaka is sure to attain God-realization
in due course (VI.40). In order to show this,
the Lord states in a general way that such
YogвҲӮs Г¬attain the eternal BrahmaГ®.
One may ask here : Does the word
Г«BrahmaГӯ here mean Brahma with attributes
or without attributes ? It must be remembered
in this connection that Brahma with attributes
and Brahma without attributes are not two
entities, but only two aspects of the same
God, the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge
and Bliss. The difference between the SaguЖ’a
(Qualified) and NirguЖ’a (Absolute) aspects
of God lies only in the conception and belief
of the SГҘdhaka. In reality, there is no
difference between the two. When the eternal
Brahma is realized, all differences cease.
He who does not perform, in any case,
any of the sacrifices mentioned above, or any
other form of sacrifice mentioned in the
scriptures, and in this way neglects the
essential duties of man is referred to in this
verse by the term Г«AyajВӨasyaГӯ. Of all created
ГҝГҙГҠГҒвүҘГҠCГ”UГҠв—ҠГҺГғГ·ГҲВЎГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” вҖҡЕёГҠГғЕёв—ҠЛңГ”UвҖ“
ЕёГҠГҝВў вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠпЈҝЛҳSГ ГҝГҝГҙГҠSГҝ вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГЈГҝвҖ” вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§вҖҡГ»ГҠв—ҠH 31H
ГҝГҙГҠГҒвүҘГҠCГ”UГҠв—ҠГҺГғГ·ГҲВЎвҖ” the YogвҲӮs who enjoy the nectar that is left over after a sacrifice; ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ
attain; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” вҖҡЕёГҠГғЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the eternal Brahma (Absolute); Её not; вҖўГҝв—ҠЛңГ” this; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§вҖ” world; вҖўГҒSГғ is
(happy); вҖўГҝГҙГҠSГҝ to the man who offers no sacrifice; вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГғвҖ” how (can be happy); вҖўГЈГҝвҖ” the
other world; вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§вҖҡГ»ГҠв—Ҡ the best among the Kurus, Arjuna.
Arjuna, YogвҲӮs, who enjoy the nectar that has been left over after the performance
of a sacrifice, attain the eternal Brahma. To the man who does not offer sacrifice,
even this world is not happy; how, then, can the other world be happy?    (31)

=== PAGE 242 ===

* Chapter IV *
241
beings man alone is qualified to follow these
practices; but he who neglects these practices
is not only deprived of Mukti or liberation
from bondage, but even heavenly enjoyment
is withheld from him; and there is no peace
for him even in this human life, which is
a gateway to Liberation. For he who does
not engage in spiritual practices is ever
consumed by the fire of worries and anxieties
of various kinds. How, then, can he attain
peace in other births which are primarily
concerned with the enjoyment of fruits of
past actions and in which there are no means
to the attainment of true happiness open to
the JвҲӮva. For it is the fruit of actions, good
or bad, done in course of a human life that
one reaps in other lives. Therefore, he who
does not perform his duties while in a human
body can never expect to attain happiness
in any other species of life.
In this connection it may be urged that
in this world even those who not only do not
perform noble deeds enjoined by the scriptures
but indulge in actions forbidden by  the
scriptures are found to have a wife, children,
wealth, honour, fame, prestige, and other
means of happiness sought after by men.
How are we to reconcile this with the statement
that he who does not offer sacrifice is not
happy in this world? Our answer to this
question is that even the means of happiness
attained by such individuals are the outcome
of their past good deeds enjoined by the
scriptures, and not of present sinful deeds.
Their happiness here should never be attributed
to their present sins, or to renunciation of
virtuous deeds in the present existence. Besides,
the  happiness they seem to enjoy in their
present life is no happiness at all in the
proper sense of the term. Therefore, what the
Lord intends to show here is that because of
his stupidity the man without spiritual practice
cannot enjoy true or the SГҘttvika form of joy
even in this human existence, which is an
open door to the realization of God, the
embodiment of supreme bliss; on the other
hand, due to his craving for various forms of
enjoyment he has to remain constantly merged
in the ocean of grief and anxiety.
If it is asked whether service of parents
by the son, service of the husband by the
wife, service of the teacher by the pupil and
similar virtuous deeds enjoined by the scriptures
are included in works performed for the sake
of sacrifice, and whether those who perform
such acts are entitled to attain the eternal
Brahma, our answer is that all such actions
are part and parcel of manГӯs duties. Therefore,
when pursuits like warfare, agriculture and
trade etc., carried on disinterestedly as a
behest of God with a view to preserving the
institution of sacrifice in the form of
performance of oneГӯs prescribed duties, are
included in sacrifice and even those who
perform them attain the eternal Brahma, what
wonder that services rendered to the parents
by the son, to the husband by the wife and to
the teacher by the pupil treating them as the
very embodiments of God, or seeing God as
present in them, or considering the service
itself to be an indispensable duty, done
disinterestedly only for the gratification of
the objects of service, should be regarded as
acts done for the sake of sacrifice, bringing
man to the realization of eternal Brahma.
Of the various practices enumerated in
this chapter under the name of sacrifice, the
two practices enunciated in verse 24 and the
latter half of verse 25 respectively, viz., (1)
that of seeing Brahma in allГіBrahmayajВӨa
and (2) perceiving identity between the Self
and God, can be adopted only by the YogвҲӮ
who follows the path of Knowledge, and not
by the KarmayogвҲӮ; for in these two practices
the SГҘdhaka canot be conceived as apart from
God. Barring these two, the other practices
can be followed by the JВӨГҘnayogвҲӮ and the
KarmayogвҲӮ both without any let or hindrance.

=== PAGE 243 ===

242
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
In verse 16 the Lord promised that He would expound the truth about action to
Arjuna, knowing which he would be freed from the evil effects of action. In accordance
with that promise He discussed the truth about action in verses 18 to 31, and proceeds
now to conclude the discussion in the following verses:
вҲһп¬ӮВў вҖҷвҖһГҲUГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГҠ ГҝГҙГҠГҠ ГҒп¬ӮГғГғГҠ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҲПҖпЈҝГ”UвҖ“
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВЎГҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГҒh ГғГҠГЈвҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёЕёпЈҝп¬ӮВў ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҝвҖҡпЈҝH 32H
вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” even so; вҖҷвҖһГҲUГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГҠ ГҝГҙГҠГҠвҖ” many (other) forms of sacrificial worship; ГҒп¬ӮГғГғГҠвҖ” (have been)
set forth in detail; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГЎГҠвҖ” of the Vedas; в—ҠГҲПҖпЈҝ through the mouth; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВЎГҠЕёЛңГ” begotten of action
(of the mind, senses and body); ГҒп¬ӮГҒh know; ГғГҠЕёЛңГ” them; вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёЕёЛңГ” all; вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” thus; ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ knowing
(the truth about them); ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҝвҖҡпЈҝ you shall be freed from the bondage of action (through
their performance).
Many such forms of sacrifice have been set forth in detail in the Vedas;
know them all as involving the action of mind, senses and body. Thus knowing the
truth about them, you shall be freed from the bondage of action (through their
performance).
(32)
descent from God, the supreme Deity, it is
just the same to speak of the Vedas, BrГҘhmaЖ’as
and sacrifices as proceeding from BrahmГҘ or
from God. Even so, various forms of sacrifices
have been set forth in detail in the Vedas,
the Vedas have been revealed by BrahmГҘ
and BrahmГҘ, again, has taken his descent
from the supreme Deity. Hence it makes no
difference whether we speak of sacrifices as
proceeding from God, or from BrahmГҘ, or
from the Vedas. But elsewhere the GitГҘ itself
speaks of sacrifices as having proceeded
from the Vedas (III.15), and the Vedas no
doubt deal with sacrifices in detail; therefore,
the word Г«BrahmaЖ’aВЁГӯ in this verse has
been interpreted as meaning the Vedas, and
this interpretation seems to be correct and
proper.
By the statement Г¬Know them all as
begotten of the action of mind, senses and
body,Г® the Lord asks Arjuna to note three
things with regard to actions:Гі
(1) Sacrifices in the form of spiritual
practices enumerated in these verses, as well
In this verse the Lord shows that the
sacrifices enumerated by Him in the foregoing
verses in no way exhaust the list; besides
them there are many other forms of sacrifice,
such as worship through a symbol etc., laid
down in the Vedas as so many means of
God-realization, which when performed without
egoism, the feeling of possession, attachment
and the desire for fruit are included in works
performed for the sake of sacrifice alone.
Like the sacrifices mentioned by the Lord
they too are conducive to liberation from the
bondage of action, and God-realization.
The word Г«BrahmaЖ’aВЁГӯ in this verse
can as well be interpreted to mean BrahmГҘ
(the creator) or God Himself, the supreme
Deity, as some are apt to do. For verse 10
of Chapter III says that it is BrahmГҘ who
created mankind along with the spirit of
sacrifice, and again verse 23 of Chapter
XVII says that the BrГҘhmaЖ’as, the Vedas
and sacrifices were created by God Himself.
It must be remembered in this connection
that inasmuch as BrahmГҘ himself takes his

=== PAGE 244 ===

* Chapter IV *
243
as all other sacrifices in the form of duties
prescribed in the scriptures are accomplished
through the action of mind, senses and body.
Some of them involve the action of mind
alone, others that of mind as well as the
senses, while some others involve the action
of all, viz., the mind, senses and body. There
is no sacrifice which can be accomplished
without the functioning of any of these. In
practices which involve the suspension of the
functions of body, senses and vital airs, or
those in which the functions of the mind in
the form of thoughts and doubts etc., are
suspended, the SГҘdhaka should treat this
suspension as an Г«actionГӯ, and should practise
it without the desire for fruit, attachment and
the feeling of possession; else it may lead
to bondage.
(2) All duties prescribed by the scriptures,
and all practices for God-realization, going
by the common name of Г«sacrificeГӯ, are
performed through the action of mind, senses
and body, which are the products of PrakГҰti;
the soul has nothing to do with them.
Therefore, the YogвҲӮ in the path of Knowledge
should never consider himself the doer with
regard to any action or practice.
(3) Without action in the form of activity
of the mind, senses and body, God-realization,
or liberation from the bondage of Karma,
cannot be attained (III.4). All practices
enunciated for the attainment of liberation
from the bondage of Karma have to be
carried on through the activities of the mind,
senses and body. Therefore, SГҘdhakas who
desire to realize God or seek liberation from
the binding effects of Karma, should invariably
devote themselves to some form of spiritual
practice renouncing egoism, the feeling of
possession, the desire for fruit and attachment
for actions.
In the last quarter of the verse the Lord
says: Г¬Thus knowing the truth about sacrifices,
you will be freed from the bondage of
action.Г® It means that the truth about sacrifices
should be known in the light of what has
been stated about action in verses 18 to 31
of this chapter. For, action performed with
a knowledge of this truth does not lead to
bondage, but destroys all the latencies of
Karma stored up in the mind and brings
liberation to the SГҘdhaka.
The Lord mentioned a number of sacrifices in the above verses and stated in the
end that many more would be found mentioned in the Vedas. The question, therefore,
naturally arises: Which is the best of them all? The Lord answers this question below:
ГјГҠпЈҝГҝГҠГЈВәЛқвҲҡГҝв—ҠГҝГҠlГҙГҠГҠГ–ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҝГҙГҠвҖ” 
В¬вҒ„UГЈГғВ¬Г”UвҖ“
вҖҡп¬ӮZ вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒПҖвҲӮВўU В¬ГҠГ•Вё ГҙГҠГҠЕёпЈҝ В¬ГҒвҒ„UвҖҡв—ҠГҠГҘГҝГғпЈҝH 33H
ГјГҠпЈҝГҝГҠЕёЛңГ” (is) superior; ВәЛқвҲҡГҝв—ҠГҝГҠГғЛңГ” ГҝГҙГҠГҠГғЛңГ” to sacrifice performed with material possession; ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҝГҙГҠвҖ”
sacrifice through Knowledge; В¬вҒ„UГЈГғВ¬ O chastiser of foes; вҖҡп¬ӮВёв—ҠЛңГ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё the totality of actions;
вҖўГҒПҖвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” without exception; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthГҘ, Arjuna; ГҙГҠГҠЕёпЈҝ in Knowledge; В¬ГҒвҒ„UвҖҡв—ҠГҠГҘГҝГғпЈҝ
culminates.
Arjuna, sacrifice through Knowledge is superior to sacrifice performed with
material things. For, all actions without exception culminate in Knowledge, O son
of KuntвҲӮ.                                                                 (33)
the term Г«DravyayajВӨaГӯ. Thus offering with
due ceremony clarified butter, sugar, curd,
The sacrifice in which material things
play an important part is referred to here by

=== PAGE 245 ===

244
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
milk, sesamum seeds, barley, rice, dry fruits,
sandal wood, camphor, incense, fragrant
herbs etc., as oblation to the sacred fire,
bestowing suitable gifts on the deserving and
poor, construction of wells, tanks, DharmaвҖ№ГҘlГҘs
etc., for the use of the public, performance
of the rite of Г«BalivaiвҖ№vadeva (offering morsels
of cooked food before meals to gods etc.)
and all other acts enjoined by the scriptures
and requiring the use of material things are
included in Г«DravyayajВӨaГӯ. In the practices
enunciated above, this form of sacrifice
appears under the names of Г«DaivayajВӨaГӯ or
sacrifice in the shape of offering worship to
gods, sacrifice in the form of offering sound
and other objects of perception into the fire
of the senses, and again as Г«DravyayajВӨaГӯ or
sacrifice with material possessions. Practices
other than these, viz., those involving the
exercise of discrimination and reason as well
as spiritual insightГіare included in sacrifice
through Knowledge. In declaring sacrifice
through Knowledge as superior to sacrifice
performed with material things, the Lord
intends to show that if a SГҘdhaka, instead
of performing Agnihotra (maintaining the
sacred fire and offering oblations to it),
feeding BrГҘhmaЖ’as, bestowing suitable gifts
on the deserving and poor and performing
other good acts prescribed by the scriptures
according to his place in society and involving
the use of material things, takes up any one
of the noble practices involving the exercise
of discrimination, reason etc., such as practice
of self-control, study of the scriptures,
investigation into truth, practice of Yoga etc.,
he should not be regarded as having renounced
all good actions; on the other hand, he
should be recognized as engaged in a work
of superior merit. For even a sacrifice performed
with material things is conducive to liberation
only when it is done with full insight into
the truth about sacrifices, renouncing the
feeling of possession, attachment and the
desire for fruit, or else it will lead to
bondage; and the above SГҘdhaka renounces
the worldly objects even externally and his
practices do  not involve destruction of life
in any form or shape. That is another reason
why they are superior. For the attainment of
true knowledge, cultivation of the proper
mental attitude is more important than material
things. That is why the Lord declares sacrifice
through Knowledge as superior to sacrifice
performed with material things.
The word Г«KarmaГӯ in this verse, with
the adjective Г«AkhilamГӯ and Г«SarvamГӯ stands
for the various forms of sacrifice mentioned
in the foregoing verses and all other sacrifices
in the form of good actions detailed in the
Vedas (IV.32). By saying that Г¬all actions
without exception culminate in KnowledgeГ®
the Lord intends to show that the highest
goal to be reached through these practices
is the attainment of true Knowledge of God.
He who succeeds in realizing God through
the attainment of true Knowledge has nothing
else to be achieved.
Thus it will appear that the two words
Г«JВӨГҘnayajВӨaГӯ and Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ occurring in this verse
do not mean one and the same thing, JВӨГҘnayajВӨa,
stands for practices involving more than anything
else the exercise of discrimination, reason and
self-control, which are generally included under
the word Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ, and carried on for the
attainment of true Knowledge; while Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ
stands for the fruit of all these practices in the
form of true Knowledge of God. This difference
in the meaning of the two words should be
carefully noted.

=== PAGE 246 ===

* Chapter IV *
245
The word Г«TatГӯ in this verse stands for
the Г«Knowledge of TruthГӯ or the Г«Reality of
GodГӯ, which was praised in the preceding
verse as the fruit of all spiritual practices. By
commanding Arjuna to attain this Knowledge,
the Lord intends to show that without knowing
the reality of God man can never expect to
obtain liberation from the bondage of Karma
in the shape of births and deaths; therefore,
Arjuna should make it a point to attain that
Г«KnowledgeГӯ.
Although the Lord repeatedly spoke to
Arjuna about the reality of God, he could
not properly grasp the truth, which showed
that he was somewhat lacking in faith and
reverence. Therefore, in order to remove this
deficiency in Arjuna and wake him up, the
Lord exhorts him to approach other wise
men and obtain this Knowledge from them.
The word Г«SevГҘГӯ or service means
living in close proximity with the teacher
with a devout and faithful mind, carrying out
his behests and trying to please him in every
way by acting in accordance with his wishes.
Г«ParipraвҖ№naГӯ means questioning anyone,
with reverence and faith, with a view to
ascertaining the truth about God. Moot
questions like Г«Who am I?Гӯ, Г«What is MГҘyГҘ?Гӯ,
Г«What is the truth about God?Гӯ, Г«What is the
relation between God and me?Гӯ, Г«What is
bondage?Гӯ, Г«What is liberation?Гӯ, Г«What
practices will lead to God-realization?Гӯ, when
put to the teacher with a guileless heart, and
with the object of knowing the truth, will
fall under the category of Г«ParipraвҖ№naГӯ.
Questions asked with the object of mere
controversy and discussion cannot be called
Г«ParipraвҖ№naГӯ.
The Lord shows in this verse that for
the attainment of Knowledge, faith, reverence
and guilelessness of heart are of primary
importance. The intention is to make it clear
that spiritual instruction given to a man
devoid of faith and reverence cannot be
properly received and retained by him.
Illumined souls need no prostrations, personal
service, respect and homage for themselves.
But they do not feel inclined to discuss the
higher truths when someone asks them
impertinent questions with a heart full of
pride and mischief and with a view to testing
their Knowledge. Therefore, he who desires
to attain Knowledge should in the first
instance approach the preceptor with faith
Praising thus the sacrifice through Knowledge and its fruit, the attainment of true
Knowledge of God, the Lord now commands Arjuna in two verses to attain this knowledge
and shows how to attain it, and to what it leads:
ГғГҒmГҒh В¬ЛқГҒГЎГҠВ¬ГҠГғпЈҝЕё В¬ГҒвҒ„UВ¬ЛқoAпЈҝЕё вҖҡпЈҝп¬ӮГҝГҠГ”UвҖ“
В©UВ¬Е’пЈҝЛҮГҝГҒГЈГғ ГғпЈҝ ГҙГҠГҠЕёВў ГҙГҠГҠГҒЕёЕёSГғГ»п¬ӮЕ’ГҢвүҘГҠЕёвҖ”H 34H
ГғГғЛңГ” that (Knowledge); ГҒп¬ӮГҒh understand the true nature of (by approaching a preceptor);
В¬ЛқГҒГЎГҠВ¬ГҠГғпЈҝЕё by prostrating yourself before him; В¬ГҒвҒ„UВ¬ЛқoAпЈҝЕё (and) by questioning him (with an
open and guileless heart); вҖҡпЈҝп¬ӮГҝГҠ by rendering him service; В©UВ¬Е’пЈҝЛҮГҝГҒГЈГғ will instruct in; ГғпЈҝ to
you; ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” (that) Knowledge; ГҙГҠГҠГҒЕёЕёвҖ” (those) wise men; ГғГ»п¬ӮЕ’ГҢвүҘГҠЕёвҖ” seers of Truth.
Understand the true nature of that Knowledge by approaching illumined soul. If
you prostrate at their feet, render them service, and question them with an open and
guileless heart, those wise seers of Truth will instruct you in that Knowledge.
(34)

=== PAGE 247 ===

246
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
and reverence in his heart, and surrendering
himself absolutely to the preceptor serve him
to the best of his ability, and ask him
questions concerning God according to
preceptorГӯs convenience and leisure. If he
conducts himself in this way, a flood-tide of
Knowledge will surge in the mind of the
wise instructor to help the disciple with true
Knowledge, even as the udder of the cow
gets wet with milk out of affection for her
calf, or milk begins to flow through the
motherГӯs breasts out of affection for her
child. That is why the вҖәruti says:Гі
Г¬For the Knowledge of Truth, the seeker
of Knowledge should humbly approach the
God-realized man possessed of Knowledge
of the Vedas, taking a handful of sacrificial
wood, or any other present with himГ®.*
By 
adding 
the 
qualification
Г«TattvadarвҖ№inaВЁГӯ (seers of Truth) to the word
Г«JВӨГҘninaВЁГӯ the Lord intends to say that
instruction in the Knowledge of Truth can
be imparted only by the wise seersГіwell-
versed in the Vedas and knowing the reality
about God, and not by ordinary men, or
those who possess only scriptural knowledge.
The word Г«JВӨГҘninaВЁГӯ has been given the
plural form as a mark of respect for the wise
seer, and not to indicate that many wise men
will instruct the SГҘdhaka about Truth.
ГҝГ–ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ Её В¬ГҲЕёв—ҠГҠпЈҝВёвҖһUв—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮВў ГҝГҠSГҝГҒвҖҡ В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬ӮвҖ“
ГҝпЈҝЕё Г·ГҚГғГҠГЈГҝвүҘГҠпЈҝВ·пЈҝГЎГҠ ВәЛқЛҮГҝSГҝГҠГ в—ҠГЈГҝГ•ГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҒГҝH 35H
ГҝГғЛңГ” which; ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ knowing or realizing; Её not, no more; В¬ГҲЕёвҖ” again; в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” delusion; вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ”
like this; ГҝГҠSГҝГҒвҖҡ you will be subjected to; В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬Ӯ O (celebrated) son of PГҘЖ’Е’u, Arjuna;
ГҝпЈҝЕё through which; Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё beings; вҖўвүҘГҠпЈҝВ·пЈҝГЎГҠ one and all; ВәЛқЛҮГҝГҒвҖҡ you will see; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҒЕё (first)
in your own self; вҖўГ•ГҠпЈҝ (and) then; в—ҠГҒГҝ in Me (the Oversoul).
Arjuna, when you have reached enlightenment, ignorance will delude you no
more. In the light of that knowledge you will see the entire creation first within your
own Self, and then in Me (the Oversoul).
 (35)
God, questions like, Г«Who am I?Гӯ, Г«What is this
world?Гӯ, Г«What is MГҘyГҘ?Гӯ, Г«What is Brahma?Гӯ
etc., cease to trouble the SГҘdhaka. In that state
attachment with beings and objects connected
with the body due to identification between
the soul and the body, pleasure and pain
caused by contact with and separation from
them under the false belief that birth and death
of the body means birth and death of the soul,
and all other morbid feelings caused by
delusion, viz., attraction and repulsion, joy
and grief, etc., disappear. The material sun,
for that matter, sets in the evening, when the
world is again overtaken by darkness; but the
The word Г«YatГӯ in this verse refers to the
Truth about God taught by the wise seer, as
indicated in the preceding verse, and full
realization of God according to that instruction
is what is meant by realizing that Truth. When
the Lord says, Г¬Ignorance will delude you no
more,Г® He thereby shows that after realizing
God through the instruction of the wise seer,
Arjuna would no more fall a victim to delusion
and grief as expressed by him in verse 28-47
of Chapter I, and verses 6 and 8 of Chapter
II. For just as after sunrise the darkness
enveloping the earth at night is bound to
disappear, even so after the realization of
* ГғГҒmГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠГ•Z вҖҡ ВӘГҲLВ§в—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮГҠГҒГ·ВӘГ«ВҝпЈҝUГғЛңГ” вҖҡГҒв—ҠГ В¬ГҠГҒГЎГҠвҖ” ГјГҠГҠпЈҝГҒГІГҠГҝВў вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒЕёDГ”Uв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“ (MuЖ’Е’aka, I.ii.12)

=== PAGE 248 ===

* Chapter IV *
247
sun of Knowledge, having once risen, never
sets again. This Knowledge of the Truth of
God is eternal and stable; it never ceases to
be; therefore, when once God is realized,
delusion can never make its appearance again.
The вҖәruti says:Гі
Г¬When to the wise man all beings
appear as his own self, seeing unity everywhere
he overcomes grief and delusion.Г®*
The Lord says in this verse that having
realized the Truth about God, Arjuna would
see all beings in his own self. Thereby He
intends to show that having received instruction
in the truth about God from wise men he
would recognize the Self as all-pervading
and infinite, and viewing all beings as alike
would begin to treat all as his own self. That
is to say, just as a man awakened from a
dream sees the whole dream-world as nothing
but a memory within him and perceives
nothing else really apart from himself, even
so in this state the SГҘdhaka sees the whole
world as identical with himself and comprised
within him (VI.29). With the dawning of this
Knowledge of Self, grief and delusion disappear
once for all.
Seeing all beings in the Oversoul or God,
the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and
Bliss is the fruit of perceiving everything in
the Self. This is what is known as the attainment
of the Supreme state, attainment of the all-
blissful Brahma and entering into God. The
ego altogether disappears in him who has
reached this state. He loses all consciousness
of his separate existence; God and God alone
remains in his consciousness. Even the statement
that he sees everything existing in God is not
the absolute truth; it is only how the scriptures
describe the truth. For in his eye the distinction
between subject and object does not exist;
then, who is to see whom? The state of such
a YogвҲӮ is beyond description; words can only
hint at it with the help of metaphors and symbols.
It is only from the point of view of the mind,
intellect and body of that man of Knowledge,
as they exist in the eyes of the world, that he
is said to perceive all beings in God, the
embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss.
For in the eyes of such a YogвҲӮ the world as
it appears to us is really nothing but Brahma,
even as ice is the same as water, clouds are
the same as the sky and ornaments of gold
are the same as gold; no object or being exists
apart from God. The state of Г«BrahmabhВөutaГӯ
or being identified with Brahma, referred to
in verse 27 of Chapter VI, and seeing the
Self present in all beings and all beings existing
in the Self, as stated in verse 29 of the same
Chapter, are equivalent to the first stage
described in the present verse; whereas the
state described in verse 28 of the same Chapter
under the name of Г«Brahma-SaвүҲsparвҖ№aГӯ or
the eternal bliss of oneness with God is
equivalent to the second stage,Гіwhich is the
outcome of the first,Гіviz., seeing all beings
in God. In Chapter XVIII as well, in the course
of the dissertation on JВӨГҘnayoga, the Lord
first speaks of the YogвҲӮГӯs becoming
Г«BrahmabhВөutaГӯ or Г«one with BrahmaГӯ in verse
54; whereas in the next verse He describes
how the YogвҲӮ enters into Him through supreme
Devotion (ParГҘ Bhakti) in the form of
Knowledge. The present verse delineates the
very same process.
Describing thus the process of acquiring the Knowledge of truth from wise men and
the fruit of such Knowledge, the Lord now reveals the glory of that Knowledge.
* ГҝГҒSв—ҠЕёЛңГ” вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ Г·ГҚГғГҠГЈГҝГҠГ в—ҠГ’п¬ӮГҠГ·ГҚГҒmВЎГҠЕёГғвҖ”вҖ“ ГғГІГҠ вҲ‘В§ГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUвҖ” вҲ‘В§вҖ” вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ вҲһвҲ‘В§Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЕёГҲВ¬вүҘГҝГғвҖ”H (вҲ«вҖ№opaniВ¶ad)

=== PAGE 249 ===

248
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
By using the words Г«CetГӯ and Г«ApiГӯ in
this verse, the Lord intends to point out to
Arjuna that he was not actually a sinner, that
he was a man possessed of divine virtues
(XVI.5), that he was the LordГӯs devotee and
friend (IV.3); sin, therefore, could find no
place in him. But the Knowledge the Lord
was speaking of possessed such wonderful
potency and efficacy that even if he were
the worst type of sinner, he would be able
to get over any number of sins with the help
of that Knowledge. The greatest of sins
would not be able to obstruct his progress.
A sinner is not ordinarily qualified for
Knowledge; therefore, it is difficult for him
to get the boat of Knowledge whereby he
may be able to cross the vast ocean of his
sins. But if through the Grace of God or that
of saints, or by any other means, he somehow
succeeds in obtaining Knowledge, he will be
immediately redeemed, even though he may
be the greatest of sinners. This is what the
Lord seeks to convey through this verse.
Acts of virtue also, when performed
with an interested motive, lead to bondage.
Therefore, it is quite true that one is able to
cross the ocean of sins only when one is free
from the bondage of all actionsГіvirtuous as
well as sinful. But man is ever free to
abandon the acts of virtue, and can as well
renounce the fruit of such acts whenever he
chooses to do so; but it is not within his
power to cross the ocean of sins without
Knowledge. Therefore, freedom from the
bondage of virtue should be taken as implied
by a reference to the crossing over of all sins
by the raft of Knowledge.
Just as a man who has taken his seat on
board a ship very easily goes to the other
shore riding over the seas, even so he who is
established in Knowledge regarding himself
as wholly aloof from the world, changeless,
eternal and infinite, very easily crosses over
all sins done by him in the course of innumerable
past lives as well as in the current life; in other
words, he obtains complete freedom once for
all from the bondage of all actions. This is
what is meant by oneГӯs crossing over all sins
by the raft of Knowledge.
The word Г«EvaГӯ in the verse indicates
certainty. It brings out the fact that it is
possible for a man corssing the sea by a boat
to get drowned if the vessel strikes against
a rock or a gale overtakes it. But the boat
in the form of Knowledge is eternal; he who
takes refuge in it is sure to cross over all
sins, and there is not the least probability of
his suffering a fall.
вҖўГҒВ¬ ГёпЈҝЕ’ГҒвҖҡ В¬ГҠВ¬пЈҝГЁГҝвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёГЁГҝвҖ” В¬ГҠВ¬вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г»ГҠв—ҠвҖ”вҖ“
вҖҡп¬ӮZ ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҘвҖ№п¬ӮпЈҝЕёГ’п¬Ӯ п¬ӮГҺГҒВЎЕёВў вҖҡГЈГғГҒвҒ„UcГҝГҒвҖҡH 36H
вҖўГҒВ¬ even; ГёпЈҝГғЛңГ” if; вҖўГҒвҖҡ you are; В¬ГҠВ¬пЈҝГЁГҝвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёГЁГҝвҖ” of all sinners; В¬ГҠВ¬вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г»ГҠв—ҠвҖ” the foulest sinner;
вҖҡп¬ӮВёв—ҠЛңГ” the whole; ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҘвҖ№п¬ӮпЈҝЕё by the raft of Knowledge; вҲһп¬Ӯ surely; п¬ӮГҺГҒВЎЕёв—ҠЛңГ” (ocean of) sins; вҖҡГЈГғГҒвҒ„UcГҝГҒвҖҡ
you will (be able to) cross.
Even if you were the foulest of all sinners, this Knowledge alone would carry
you, like a raft, across all your sins.
 (36)
An illustration taken from the world is incapable of representing a spiritual truth
in its entirety and can reveal it only partially. In the next verse, therefore, the Lord further
brings out the glory of knowledge through the illustration of the fire.

=== PAGE 250 ===

* Chapter IV *
249
The word Г«SarvakarmГҘЖ’iГӯ means not only
all oneГӯs past and present Karmas but also
their fruits in the form of pleasure and pain,
and their causes in the shape of ignorance
and egoism, the feeling of possession, the
impulses of attraction and repulsion and all
other modifications of the mind. The eradication
of all these by the fire of Knowledge is borne
out by the вҖәruti as well, which says:Гі
Г¬On the realization of God in all his
aspects the knot of ingorance within the heart
of a man gets snapped, that is to say,
identification with the gross body disappears;
all doubts are set at rest once for all; and
all Karmas with their fruits are eradicated.Г®*
In verse 19 of this chapter, the same
idea has been expressed by the adjective
Г«JВӨГҘnГҘgnidagdhakarmГҘЖ’amГӯ.
*
*
*
The latencies of actions done in this life
as well as in previous lives remain stored up
in manГӯs mind and are known as Г«SaВӨcitaГӯ
Karmas. Such of these latencies as are ripe
to bear fruit in the current life are called
Г«PrГҘrabdhaГӯ Karmas, and new actions that
are performed in the current life are known
as Г«KriyamГҘЖ’aГӯ Karmas. The moment the
fire of Knowledge manifests itself the whole
stock of Г«SaВӨcitaГӯ Karmas in the form of
latencies disappears. And inasmuch as the
man of Knowledge comes to realize his
aloofness from the mind, intellect and the
body, these latter, even though going through
the experiences brought about by PrГҘrabdha,
fail to produce any unhealthy reactions like
joy and grief on his mind. In this way his
PrГҘrabdha Karmas also get extinct so far
as he is concerned. As regards his current
actions, they do not leave any impressions
at all inasmuch as he no longer entertains
the feeling of doership or possession,
nor attachment and desire with respect to
them. Therefore, such actions cease to be
actions at all.
Thus all his actions are neutralized. And
when the actions are neutralized, how can
they bear any fruit ? And in the absence of
any latencies of past actions his mind can no
longer be subject to modifications like attraction
and repulsion, joy and grief, etc. Therefore,
alongwith his Karmas, all morbid feelings and
all fruits of Karma also get extinct.
ГҝГ•Г’Е“ГҠВўГҒвҖҡ вҖҡГҒв—ҠhГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒВӘAГ·ВёSв—ҠвҖҡГҠГ вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ГғпЈҝЛҳВЎВёГҲЕёвҖ“
ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠГҒВӘAвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ Г·Sв—ҠвҖҡГҠГ вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ГғпЈҝ ГғГ•ГҠH 37H
ГҝГ•ГҠ as; вҲһЕ“ГҠВўГҒвҖҡ the fuel; вҖҡГҒв—ҠhвҖ” вҖўГҒВӘAвҖ” the blazing fire; Г·Sв—ҠвҖҡГҠГ вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ГғпЈҝ turns to ashes; вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё
O Arjuna; ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠГҒВӘAвҖ” the fire of Knowledge; вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ all actions; Г·Sв—ҠвҖҡГҠГ вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ГғпЈҝ turns to ashes;
ГғГ•ГҠ even so.
For, as the blazing fire turns the fuel to ashes, Arjuna, even so, the fire of
Knowledge turns all actions to ashes.                                      (37)
* ГҒГ·lГғпЈҝ NUЕ’ГҝВӘЛқГҒГЈГ•ГҒвүҘВҝUlГЈГғпЈҝ вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝГҠвҖ”вҖ“ ЛҮГҠГӢГҝГЈГғпЈҝ ГёГҠSГҝ вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ ГғГҒSв—ҠЕёЛңГ” Е’ГҺCГ”пЈҝU В¬вҒ„UГҠп¬ӮвҒ„пЈҝUH (MuЖ’Е’. Up; II.ii.8)
Thus in verses 34 to 37 the Lord not only exhorted Arjuna to attain the Knowledge
of Truth by rendering service to the wise, but also pointed out the fruit of that Knowledge
and its glory. At this point it may be asked: Is this Knowledge attained after hearing
the Truth from the wise and going through the practices of JВӨГҘnayoga like reflection and
meditation etc., or is there any other means of attaining it? In answer to this the Lord
further reveals in the next verse the glory of Knowledge, and adds that it can be
automatically attained through the practice of Karmayoga as well.

=== PAGE 251 ===

250
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Practices which wipe out manГӯs sins and
purify him, e.g., the performance of sacrifices,
charity, penance, adoration and  worship, vows
and fasts, breath-control, control of the senses
and mind, self-restraint, Japa and meditation,
a bath in sacred rivers like the GaвҲҶgГҘ and the
YamunГҘ and in the confluence of the GaвҲҶgГҘ
and the YamunГҘ etc.,Гіnone of these can
compare with true Knowledge as a purifier;
for they are all means to the attainment of
Knowledge, and Knowledge is their fruit or
goal. These practices are regarded as purifying
only because they are helpful in the revelation
of Knowledge. Through Knowledge man
comes to realize the truth about God; and
completely rid of sins like lying, hypocrisy,
theft and adultery, of all morbid feelings like
attraction and repulsion, joy and grief, egoism
and the sense of possession, etc., as well as
of ignorance, the root of all evils, he becomes
absolutely pure. His mind, senses and body
as well become exceptionally pure; the result
is that even those who see or touch his person,
make obeisance to him or even think of him,
speak to him or come in touch with him in
any other way, with reverence in their heart,
get purified. Hence there is nothing on earth
as purifying as the Knowledge of truth about
God.
The indeclinable Г«IhaГӯ in this verse refers
to this material world, which is a product of
PrakГҰti, showing thereby that of all that exists
in this world of MГҘyГҘ, Knowledge is the best
purifier, and there is nothing else so purifying
as that. But this does not mean that as a
means of purification it is even superior to
God, who is wholly beyond the realm of
PrakГҰti,Гіall-pervading and all-powerful, the
supreme Lord of all the worlds, the ocean of
virtues,Гіwho is possessed of attributes as
also devoid of attributes at the same time,
and is with form as well as formless, the
Controller of PrakГҰti, the friend of all and the
substratum of all. He is the embodiment of
highest purity; Knowledge derives its purity
only from the fact that it serves as a means to
His Realization. In fact, there is nothing
equivalent to God, much less superior to
Him. That is why Arjuna extols the Lord in
the following words: Г¬You are the Ultimate
Reality, the supreme Abode, the greatest
purifierГ® (X.12); and the great BhвҲӮВ¶ma also
said, Г¬God is the greatest of all purifiers, and
the most propitious among all auspicious
objects.Г® (MahГҘ. Anu., 189-90).
The words Г«KГҘlena YogasaвүҲsiddhaВЁГӯ
stand for the YogвҲӮ whose heart, through a
prolonged practice of Karmayoga, has become
transparent and pure due to the disappearance
of attraction and repulsion, who has attained
perfection in Karmayoga, and all of whose
actions are divorced from the feeling of
possession, attachment and the desire for
fruit, and are performed for the sake of God
Её ГҒвҖһU ГҙГҠГҠЕёпЈҝЕё вҖҡЕ’ГҺвүҘГҠВў В¬ГҒп¬ӮГІГҠГҒв—ҠвҖһU ГҒп¬ӮlГғпЈҝвҖ“
ГғГ Sп¬ӮГҝВў ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖҡВўГҒвҖҡhвҖ” вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝUЕёГҠГ в—ҠГҒЕё ГҒп¬ӮГЈЕ’ГҒГғH 38H
Её none; ГҒвҖһU undoubtedly; ГҙГҠГҠЕёпЈҝЕё вҖҡЕ’ГҺвүҘГҠв—ҠЛңГ” (as great) as Knowledge; В¬ГҒп¬ӮГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” purifier; ГҹвҖһU here,
on earth; ГҒп¬ӮlГғпЈҝ (there) is; ГғГғЛңГ” that (Knowledge); Sп¬ӮГҝв—ҠЛңГ” automatically; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖҡВўГҒвҖҡhвҖ” вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝUЕё (one)
purified through a prolonged practice of Karmayoga; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҒЕё in the Self; ГҒп¬ӮГЈЕ’ГҒГғ discovers.
In this world there is no purifier as great as Knowledge; he who has attained
purity of heart through a prolonged practice of Karmayoga, automatically sees the
light of Truth in the Self in course of time.                                      (38)

=== PAGE 252 ===

* Chapter IV *
251
and according to His injunctions. Therefore,
the statement in the verse that the perfect
KarmayogвҲӮ automatically sees the light of
Truth in the Self means that the moment his
practice reaches its culmination, the light of
Truth dawns on his mind of itself through
the Grace of God. That is to say, for
attaining that light he has neither to adopt
any other practice, nor to lead a life of strict
discipline under a Guru or Master.
to testing their knowledge, exhibiting his
own learning, or for gaining honour and
prestige or even for displaying his faith. But
he will not thereby attain Knowledge; for
sacrifice, charity, penance and any other
action, done without faith, has been declared
to be fruitless (XVII.28). Therefore, faith is
the principal factor contributing to the
attainment of Knowledge. The greater the
degree of faith one brings to bear on his
practice for Knowledge, the sooner is it able
to bring about the revelation of Truth.
It is faith which gives the impetus to
oneГӯs SГҘdhanГҘ or spiritual practice; and
earnestness is the test of faith. Indolence,
sloth and other evils make their appearance
during the SГҘdhanГҘ due to lack of faith. That
is why one cannot push oneГӯs SГҘdhanГҘ with
earnestness. SГҘdhakas unacquainted with the
meaning of faith overestimate their inadequate
faith; and when it fails to bring the desired
result, they take no notice of their lack of
The word Г«вҖәraddhГҘГӯ means faith in the
excellence and infallibility of the Vedas and
other scriptures, the commandments of God
and the teachings of holy men, with as much
certainty as in the existence of this perceptible
objective world, and accompanied by the
feeling of highest reverence for them as well
as belief in the existence of the other world.
He who is possessed of such unflinching
faith is called Г«вҖәraddhГҘvГҘnГӯ. The statement
that the man of faith attains illumination,
therefore, means that such a man alone can
approach the wise seers with humility and
submission and obtaining instruction from
them through prostration, service and meek
questioning, can attain the light of Truth by
following the path of Knowledge or Action.
He who lacks faith can never be regarded
as qualified to receive this light.
A man can approach the wise even
without faith, and can even bow to him,
serve him and ask him questions with a view
Revealing thus the glory of Knowledge, and showing that SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga and
Karmayoga are the two ways of realizing it, the Lord now discusses who is qualified
for the revelation of that Truth, and declares the attainment of supreme peace as its fruit.
ГјГҠhГҠп¬ӮГҠВ°ГҖвҖ№Г·ГғпЈҝ ГҙГҠГҠЕёВў ГғГ В¬вҒ„UвҖ” вҖҡВўГҝГғпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝвҖ”UвҖ“
ГҙГҠГҠЕёВў вҲӮUГ©ГӨп¬ӮГҠ В¬вҒ„UГҠВў вүҘГҠГҠГҒГЈГғв—ҠГҒГёвҒ„пЈҝUГЎГҠГҠГҒЕ“ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғH 39H
ГјГҠhГҠп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” (and is) full of faith; вҲӮUГ·ГғпЈҝ attains; ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the light of Truth; ГғГ В¬вҒ„UвҖ” (is) exclusively
devoted to spiritual practice; вҖҡВўГҝГғпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝвҖ” he who has mastered his senses; ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the light of
Truth; вҖ№Г©ГӨп¬ӮГҠ having attained; В¬вҒ„UГҠв—ҠЛңГ” вүҘГҠГҠГҒГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ” supreme peace (in the form of God-realization);
вҖўГҒГёвҒ„пЈҝUГЎГҠ without delay, immediately; вҖўГҒЕ“ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғ attains.
He who has mastered his senses, is exclusively devoted to his practice and is
full of faith, attains Knowledge; having had the revelation of Truth, he immediately
attains supreme peace (in the form of God-realization).                     (39)

=== PAGE 253 ===

252
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
earnestness, and jump to the conclusion that
God-realization does not come even to one
possessed of faith. But it is an error on their
part to think so. The truth of the matter is
that the degree of earnestness one evinces
in oneГӯs SГҘdhanГҘ depends on the amount of
faith one has. Suppose a man loves money
and starts a business. If he believes that he
will get money through that business, he will
take to it so whole-heartedly that he will not
grudge undergoing any amount of physical
discomfort due to irregularity in meals, sleep,
rest and so on. On the other hand, increase
of wealth will bring more and more delight
to his heart. Even so, it is faith which brings
earnestness in other matters also. Therefore,
when one comes to develop faith in Knowledge
of the truth relating to God, which opens the
door to the realization of God,Гіthe
embodiment of eternal Knowledge and Bliss,
and the bestower of supreme peace and
supreme happiness,Гіand in the means of
attaining that Knowledge, it is but natural for
him to bring extreme earnestness to bear on
his practice. Lack of earnestness in oneГӯs
practice is a sure sign of lack of faith. In
order to indicate this fact, the adjective
Г«TatparaВЁГӯ (Г«exclusively devoted to spiritual
practiceГӯ) has been added to the word
Г«вҖәraddhГҘvГҘnГӯ.
It is no doubt true that through intensive
practice pursued with faith, sins are destroyed
and attraction for the enjoyments of the world
ceases, so that it is easy to control the mind
and senses, and thereafter to attain true
Knowledge of God as well. But the SГҘdhaka
who does not know this secret comes to regard
even slack and slovenly practice as vigorous
and intensive. This does not bring him success,
and the result is that in despair he gives up
the practice altogether. By the use of the
adjective Г«SaвүҲyatendriyaВЁГӯ, therefore, the Lord,
cautions the SГҘdhaka that till he succeeds in
controlling his mind and senses he should
with full faith and firm resolution go on
increasing the intensity of his practice; for the
test of intensive practice carried on with full
faith is complete mastery over the senses. The
more intensive the practice pursued with faith,
the greater is the control over the senses.
Deficiency in practice should, therefore, be
measured by the deficiency of sense-control,
and the deficiency of faith should be measured
by the deficiency in practice. The adjective
Г«SaвүҲyatendriyaВЁГӯ has been used to make this
point clear.
The statement that having gained
Knowledge he immediately attains supreme
peace, indicates that just as the moment the
sun makes its appearance in the horizon,
darkness is lifted and all objects become visible;
even so, the moment the reality of God is
known, ignorance disappears and God is
revealed (V.16). The intention is to show that
the extinction of ignorance and all its progeny
in the shape of latent desires, as well as of
morbid feelings like attraction and repulsion,
joy and grief, etc., and of all KarmasГіgood
and evil both, as well as attainment of the
Knowledge of God and revelation of GodГі
all these take place simultaneously and it is
the direct perception of God, the embodiment
of Knowledge and Bliss, that has been referred
to here as the attainment of supreme peace.
Showing thus that the man of faith attains Knowledge and Knowledge leads to the
attainment of supreme peace, the Lord now censures him who lacks faith, is devoid of
discrimination and is at the same time possessed by doubt.
вҖўГҙГҠpГҠГјГҠgЕ“ГҠЕёp вҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝГҠГ в—ҠГҠ ГҒп¬ӮЕёвүҘГҝГҒГғUвҖ“
ЕёГҠГҝВў вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒSГғ Её В¬вҒ„UГҠпЈҝ Её вҖҡГҲПҖВў вҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ”H 40H

=== PAGE 254 ===

* Chapter IV *
253
The word Г«AjВӨaВЁГӯ in this verse stands
for the man who is devoid of discriminating
intelligence and reason, i.e., who lacks the
capacity to differentiate between truth and
untruth, the Self and non-Self, so that he is
unable to decide what is duty and what is not
duty. The word Г«AвҖ№raddadhГҘnaВЁГӯ stands for
the man who lacks faith in God and the other
world, in the scriptures which deal with the
means of God-realization and contain
references to the other world, in the wise
men and their teachings as well as in the
fruits of practices taught by them. And
Г«SaвүҲвҖ№ayГҘtmГҘГӯ stands for the doubting soul,
who cannot arrive at any conclusion about
the existence of God and the other world, or
about any other thing whatsoever; and
entertains doubt about everything. The word
Г«SaвүҲвҖ№ayГҘtmГҘГӯ along with the adjectives Г«AjВӨaВЁГӯ
and Г«AвҖ№raddadhГҘnaВЁГӯ means the doubting
soul lacking in discrimination and devoid of
faith. Being devoid of intelligence such a
man cannot correctly grasp the import of the
Vedas and other scriptures, or the teachings
of wise men and the practices taught by
them; and because of lack of faith in whatever
he understands, he entertains doubt at every
step and cannot, therefore, decide what he
should do and what he should not do. It is,
therefore, but natural that he fritters away his
human life in vain and remains totally deprived
of the supreme good it would have surely
brought to him had he made the best use of
it. This is what is meant by the statement that
such a man Г¬is lost to the spiritual pathГ®.
On the other hand, he who possesses
the power to discriminate in every matter, and
is endowed with faith in the Vedas and other
scriptures as well as in the teachings of saints,
does not come to ruin in the above manner.
Like Arjuna, he can with the help of faith
and reason remove his doubts for all time
and take to the path of duty, and attaining
success can achieve the end of human
existence. Even so, the ignorant man lacking
discrimination, if endowed with faith, can,
because of that faith, resolutely adopt a
particular course of SГҘdhanГҘ prescribed by
an enlightened man and attain the highest object
of his life through the grace of the wise man
(XIII.25). But the doubting soul who possesses
neither discrimination nor faith is left without
any means to remove his doubts, and therefore
surely takes a downward course until faith
and discrimination dawn upon him.
The verse says that Г¬for the doubting
soul there is neither this world nor the world
beyond, nor even happiness.Г® Thereby it
shows that a spiritual fall is not the only loss
he suffers. So long as a man is possessed
by doubt, and is not able to remove it, he
cannot expect to prosper in the world by
obtaining wealth, glory and fame etc., nor
can he enjoy the blessings of heaven after
death nor even the joys of this world; for
it is not possible for him to attain success
in any sphere so long as he continues to
entertain doubt in his mind, and fails to arrive
at a definite conclusion. Therefore, doubt
should be removed at any cost.
вҖўГҙГҠвҖ” he who lacks discrimination; Гё and; вҖўГјГҠgЕ“ГҠЕёвҖ” (is) devoid of faith; Гё and; вҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝГҠГ в—ҠГҠ
possessed of doubt; ГҒп¬ӮЕёвүҘГҝГҒГғ is lost (to the spiritual path); Её neither; вҖўГҝв—ҠЛңГ” this; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§вҖ” world;
вҖўГҒSГғ there is; Её nor; В¬вҒ„UвҖ” the other world, or the world beyond; Её nor (even); вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ” happiness;
вҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ” for such a doubting soul.
He who lacks discrimination, is devoid of faith, and is at the same time possessed
of doubt, is lost to the spiritual path. For the doubting soul there is neither this world
nor the world beyond, nor even happiness.                               (40)

=== PAGE 255 ===

254
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«YogasaвүҲnyastakarmГҘЖ’amГӯ
here cannot be taken to refer to a follower
of the path of Knowledge who has renounced
all his actions according to the spirit of
JВӨГҘnayoga. For renunciation of action is not
the subject of discussion here. In the very
next verse the Lord commands Arjuna to
fight establishing himself in Yoga, and refers
to the statement made in the present verse
as the ground for this command, as is
indicated by the word Г«TasmГҘtГӯ (therefore).
The Lord would not have exhorted Arjuna
to act that way had he extolled in this
verse the JВӨГҘnayogвҲӮ who had renounced all
actions according to the spirit of JВӨГҘnayoga.
Therefore, instead of taking the word
Г«YogasaвүҲnyastakarmГҘЖ’amГӯ in that sense, it
should be interpreted as referring to the
KarmayogвҲӮ who has dedicated all his actions
to God according to the spirit of Karmayoga,
totally renouncing the feeling of possession,
attachment and desire with regard to those
actions and their fruit (III.30; V.10). This
interpretation appears more to agree with the
trend of thought as pursued in these verses.
The word Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ forming part of the
compound word Г«JВӨГҘnasaвүҲchinnasaвүҲвҖ№ayamГӯ
stands for the power of discrimination, which
goes to the root of a thing and dispels all
doubt with regard to it. Derived from the root
Г«ГҙГҠГҠГӯ (to know), the word Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ means
knowledge. The GвҲӮtГҘ has used it, as shown
below, in various senses according to the
context:Гі
(a) In verse 12 of Chapter XII, meditation
has been declared to be superior to Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ,
and renunciation of the fruit of actions to
be even superior to meditation. The word
Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ, therefore, has been used there in the
sense of discrimination developed through a
study of the scriptures and the teachings of
saints.
(b) In verse 17 of Chapter XIII, the
word Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ appears as an adjective qualifying
the object of Knowledge. Therefore, the
word stands there for God Himself, the very
embodiment of eternal Knowledge and Bliss.
(c) In verse 42 of Chapter XVIII,
Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ forms part of the natural duties of
the BrГҘhmaЖ’a; therefore, it has been interpreted
to mean the study and teaching of the
scriptures.
(d) In verses 36 to 39 of this chapter,
the word has been used everywhere in the
sense of Knowledge of the truth about God;
for Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ has been spoken of there as
Thus declaring doubt coupled with lack of discrimination and lack of faith as an
obstacle to the attainment of Knowledge, the Lord now praises the KarmayogвҲӮ, free of
doubt and self-possessed, with a view to encouraging Arjuna to take to the practice of
Karmayoga, overcoming his doubt by discrimination.
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖҡГӣГҝSГғвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГЎГҠВў ГҙГҠГҠЕёвҖҡГҒГңВҝUГӣГҠвҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝв—ҠЛңГ”UвҖ“
вҖўГҠГ в—Ҡп¬ӮГЈГғВў Её вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ ГҒЕёвҖҷЕ“AГҒГЈГғ Е“ЕёTГҝH 41H
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖҡГӣГҝSГғвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” him who has dedicated all his actions to God according to the spirit
of Karmayoga; ГҙГҠГҠЕёвҖҡВўГҒГңВҝUГӣГҠвҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝв—ҠЛңГ” him whose doubts have been torn to shreds by wisdom;
вҖўГҠГ в—Ҡп¬ӮГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ” him who is Self-possessed; Её not; вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ actions; ГҒЕёвҖҷЕ“AГҒГЈГғ bind. Е“ЕёTГҝ O Arjuna.
Arjuna, actions do not bind him who has dedicated all his actions to God
according to the spirit of Karmayoga, whose doubts have been dispelled by wisdom,
and who is Self-possessed.
 (41)

=== PAGE 256 ===

* Chapter IV *
255
reducing all actions to ashes, as carrying
across all sins, the best purifier, the outcome
of perfection of Karmayoga and the immediate
cause of supreme peace. Even so, in verse
16 of Chapter V, it has been spoken of as
revealing the Supreme, and in verses 1 and
2 of Chapter XIV as the utmost wisdom;
hence there too it means Knowledge of the
truth relating to God. In other places as well
it should be understood in this sense according
to the context.
(e) The Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ referred to in verse 21
of Chapter XVIII is the means of cognizing
the various objects as manifold and diverse;
hence it means knowledge of the RГҘjasika
type.
(f) In verse 11 of Chapter XIII, it stands
as a collective name for the various means
of attaining wisdom.
(g) In verse 3 of Chapter III, being
conjoined with the word Г«YogaГӯ, it means
JВӨГҘnayoga or SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga, the path of
Knowledge. Similarly in other places too the
word occurs in the sense of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga.
Even so, there are other places in the
GвҲӮtГҘ where the word Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ has been used
in other senses. The reader should read those
meanings according to the context.
Some people are apt to take the word
Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ here in the sense of Knowledge of
the truth relating to God. But this is not
correct, because Knowledge of the truth
relating to God immediately uproots all
forms of doubts and reveals God, so that it
is no longer necessary to adopt any other
practice for realizing God, the Knowledge
referred to above being the consummation of
all practices. But here in the very next verse
the Lord commands Arjuna to establish
himself in Karmayoga cutting asunder with
the sword of knowledge the doubt existing
in his heart. As explained above the word
should, therefore, be understood in this verse
in the sense of wisdom which dispels doubts.
Questions arising in the mind of a man
who is given to reasoning are known as
doubts. The following are some of the
typical questions that generally arise in the
mind of a doubting soul; Does God exist or
not? If He exists, what is He like? Does the
other world exist or not? If it exists, how
is one to believe in it and where does it exist?
Are the body, senses, mind and intellect the
same as the soul, or different from the soul?
Are they constituted of matter or of spirit?
Are they all-pervading or finite? Who is the
doer and enjoyer, the embodied soul or
PrakГҰti? Is the soul one, or there are many
souls? If one, how? And if many, how? Is
the embodied soul free or dependent? If
dependent, how and on whom? Which is the
better way to attain liberation from the
bondage of Karma,Гіtotal renunciation of
actions, or their performance on the lines of
Karmayoga, or to follow the discipline of
SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga etc.?
Thinking over these questions with the
help of reason and arriving at a definite
conclusion about them, one should decide
oneГӯs duty. This is what is meant by dispelling
oneГӯs doubts by wisdom.
The word Г«Г…tmГҘГӯ forming part of
Г«Г…tmavantamГӯ used in this verse stands for
the mind and senses and Г«Г…tmavantamГӯ
refers to him who has established full control
over his mind and senses,Гіwho has subjugated
the mind and senses.
The actions which such a man performs
are not only approved of by the scriptures
but are altogether free from the feeling of
possession, attachment and the desire for
fruit; that is why they are no longer capable
of binding him. This is what is sought to
be conveyed by the second half of the verse.

=== PAGE 257 ===

256
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Using the word Г«TasmГҘtГӯ, indicative of
reason, the Lord has encouraged Arjuna to
establish himself in Karmayoga. The intention
is to draw his attention to the statement
contained in the preceding verse, viz., that
actions do not bind him who acts in accordance
with the spirit of Karmayoga, and induces
Arjuna to do likewise.
The note of address used for Arjuna in
this verse is Г«BhГҘrataГӯ. The significance of
this is to remind Arjuna of the ideal character
of the royal sage Bharata as a man of action
who was at the same time extremely devoted
to spiritual practices. Arjuna being a descendant
of Bharata, he should try to emulate his great
ancestor in courage, patience and depth of
wisdom and earnestly take up the performance
of his duty.
The adjective Г«AjВӨГҘnasambhВөutamГӯ used
with the word Г«SaвүҲвҖ№ayamГӯ shows that
ignorance is the cause of doubt. Therefore,
the moment ignorance is destroyed by wisdom,
doubts also disappear. The adjective Г«HГҰtsthaвүҲГӯ
indicates that the heart or mind is the seat
of these doubts; therefore, one who possesses
control over the mind can easily overcome
them.
The fact that the Lord asks Arjuna to
get over his doubts raises the question whether
the latter was actually a victim of doubts. In
order to get a reply to this question let us
refer to the sequence of events as depicted in
the GвҲӮtГҘ. In this connection it will appear that
Arjuna originally regarded war as justifiable
and it was, therefore, that he came fully
prepared to the field of battle to meet his foe
and requested the Lord to place his chariot
between the two armies. But when he saw
his friends and relations assembled on both
sides ready to risk their lives, he was overtaken
by infatuation and grief and began to look
upon war as a great sin (I.28-47). The Lord
thereupon commanded him to shake off his
faint-heartedness (II.3), but still he could not
decide his course of action. He found himself
at his witГӯs end and exclaimed: Г¬How shall I
fight elders like BhвҲӮВ¶ma and DroЖ’a (II.4); we
do not know what is good for us, nor do we
know who will win (II.6); tell me what is
decidedly good for me, my mind is puzzled
with regard to my duty (II.7).Г® From all this
it is clear that doubt existed in ArjunaГӯs mind
and his faculty of discrimination had been
somewhat dulled by infatuation; that is why
he was unable to determine his duty. Besides,
in Chapter VI, Arjuna distinctly says that
Praising thus the follower of the path of Action, the Lord concludes the chapter with
an exhortation to Arjuna to establish himself in Karmayoga and fight:
ГғSв—ҠГҠЕ’ГҙГҠГҠЕёвҖҡГӘГ·ГҚГғВў NUГ SГ•Вў ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠГҒвҖҡЕёГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ”Г”UвҖ“
ГҒВҝUГ»п¬ӮГ’ЕёВў вҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝВў ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠГҠГҒГғDГ”UГҠпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠDГ”U Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғH 42H
ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” therefore; вҖўГҙГҠГҠЕёвҖҡГӘГ·ГҚГғв—ҠЛңГ” born of ignorance; NUГ SГ•в—ҠЛңГ” existing in your heart; ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠГҒвҖҡЕёГҠ
with the sword of wisdom; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ” of yours; ГҒВҝUГ»п¬ӮГҠ slashing to pieces; вҲһЕёв—ҠЛңГ” this; вҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝв—ҠЛңГ” doubt;
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ” Karmayoga in the form of even-temperedness; вҖўГҠГҒГғDГ”U be established in; В©UГҒГ»ГҠDГ”U (and)
stand up; Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғ O descendant of Bharata, Arjuna.
Therefore, Arjuna, slashing to pieces with the sword of wisdom this doubt in
your heart, born of ignorance, establish yourself in Karmayoga in the form of even-
mindedness, and stand up (for the fight).                                 (42)

=== PAGE 258 ===

* Chapter IV *
257
none other than the Lord could clear his
doubt (VI.39); and  having heard the entire
teaching of the GвҲӮtГҘ says that he stood free
from doubts (XVIII.73). The Lord also repeats
every now and then, in the course of His
discourse, that Arjuna should not doubt His
statement, which was undoubtedly true (VIII.7;
XII.8). This also proves that ArjunaГӯs mind
was possessed by doubt and it was on account
of this doubt  that he had got ready to
renounce his own duty in the form of
participation in war. Therefore, by asking
Arjuna to slash the doubt in his heart, the
Lord showed that he should be ready to
carry out His behests without entertaining the
least doubt in his mind.
By using the word Г«Г…tmanaВЁГӯ with
Г«SaвүҲвҖ№ayamГӯ the Lord indicated that Arjuna
was His own friend and devotee, and as such
he should be capable of slashing and removing
the doubts existing in the hearts of all other
people; but if he could not do so, he should
at least be able to remove the doubts in his
own heart.
Лҷ ГғГ вҖҡГҒЕ’ГҒГғ ГјГҠГӢв—ҠjВӘп¬ӮeГӢГғГҠвҖҡГҚВ¬ГҒЕёВ·Г вҖҡГҲ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГҝГҠВў ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠпЈҝ
ГјГҠГӢвҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠВЎГҲВёЕёвҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’пЈҝ ГҙГҠГҠЕёвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ
ЕёГҠв—Ҡ ГёГғГҲГ•ГҠпЈҝВёЛҳГӨГҝГҠГҝвҖ”H 4H
Thus, in the UpaniВ¶ad sung by the Lord, the Science of Brahma,
the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and Arjuna,
ends the fourth chapter entitled Г«Г«The Yoga of Knowledge
as well as the disciplines of Action and KnowledgeГӯГӯ.
U

=== PAGE 259 ===

Лҷ
вҖәrвҲӮmadbhagavad-GвҲӮtГҘ
Chapter V
The chapter deals with the paths of Action and Knowledge both. Term Г«SaвүҲnyГҘsaГӯ
is an equivalent of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga or the Path of Knowledge. That is why
the chapter has been given the title of Г¬KarmasaвүҲnyГҘsayogaГ® or Г¬The Yogas
of Action and Knowledge.Г®
The chapter opens with ArjunaГӯs query regarding the relative superiority of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga
or Karmayoga. Answering the question in the second verse, the Lord says that though
both are conducive to spiritual good, yet Karmayoga, or the Path of Action,
is superior to KarmasaвүҲnyГҘsa, or the Path of Knowledge. Pointing out the
greatness of the KarmayogвҲӮ in the third, the fourth and the fifth verses, He
establishes the oneness of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga and Karmayoga on the ground of identity of their
fruit. In the sixth it is stated that without practising Karmayoga perfection in SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga
is difficult to attain, whereas Karmayoga brings realization of God in no time. Describing
the detachment of the KarmayogвҲӮ in the seventh, the non-doership of the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ
has been brought out in the eighth and ninth verses. The tenth and eleventh verses praise
those who act in a spirit of dedication to God, as well as the KarmayogвҲӮ who is
predominantly a man of action, and also point out that the actions of KarmayogвҲӮs make
for self-purification. The twelfth verse shows that the KarmayogвҲӮ attains ever-lasting peace,
whereas he who acts with a selfish motive gets bondage. Depicting the state of the
SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ in the thirteenth, it is stated in the fourteenth and fifteenth that the Absolute
determines not the doership nor the doings of beings, nor even their contact with the fruit
of actions, nor does It associate Itself with the virtue or sin of anyone; and that beings
get deluded only because their knowledge stands veiled by ignorance. After revealing the
glory of Knowledge in the sixteenth, the exclusive practice of JВӨГҘnayoga is described in
the seventeenth. Verses 18 to 20 describe the state of the exalted soul who is constantly
established in identity with Brahma, how he views all alike and attains the highest goal.
Verse 21 shows the way to the attainment of eternal Bliss and also speaks of its actual
attainment. Verse 22 declares enjoyments to be a source of suffering and transient, adding
that men possessing discerning knowledge do not indulge in them. Verse 23 calls him
a yogвҲӮ and happy man, who can control the urgings of lust and anger. Verses 24 to 26
describe the state of perfection in SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga, and the marks of the man of wisdom
who has attained Brahma, the abode of eternal peace. Verses 27 and 28 deal with the
practice of Meditation and its fruit in a nutshell. And finally in verse 29 the chapter is
concluded by announcing the highest peace to be the result of knowing God as the enjoyer
of all sacrifices and austerities, the supreme Lord of all the worlds and the disinterested
friend of all beings.
In the third and fourth chapters Arjuna heard from the blessed lips of the Lord the
praise of karmayoga in various forms, and received exhortations and injunctions from
the Lord to adopt it for practice. He also heard that through the practice of karmayoga,
Title of the
Chapter
Summary of
the Chapter

=== PAGE 260 ===

* Chapter V *
259
knowledge of the truth relating to God is automatically attained (IV.38) Again,
at the end of chapter IV, he received the LordГӯs command to establish himself
in karmayoga, and take up the fight. But now and then he also heard in
the course of these instructions words in praise of JВӨГҘnayoga, or the Yoga of knowledge,
e.g., when the Lord spoke of sacrifice in the form of seeing Brahma in everything or
in the form of perception of identity or when He asked Arjuna to attain knowledge by
prostrating himself before the wise, and so on. Arjuna, therefore, could not decide which
of the two paths was better for him. In order, therefore, to get the  point cleared up
by the Lord Himself, he says:
вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡВў вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠВў вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ В¬ГҲЕёГҝГҠпЈҝВёВӘВў Гё вүҘГҠВўвҖҡГҒвҖҡвҖ“
ГҝГ«ВҝЛӣпЈҝUГҝ вҲһГғГҝГҠпЈҝвҒ„пЈҝUвҲ‘Вў ГғГЈв—ҠпЈҝ вҖҷЛқГҚГҒвҖһU вҖҡГҲГҒЕёГҒpГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 1H
вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga or the path of knowledge; вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ O KГҰВ¶Ж’a; В¬ГҲЕёвҖ” then; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ”
(вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ”) karmayoga or the path of action; Гё and; вүҘГҠВўвҖҡГҒвҖҡ you extol; ГҝГғЛңГ” which; ГјГҠпЈҝГҝвҖ” conducive
to (my) good; вҲһГғГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” of these two; вҲһвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” one; ГғГғЛңГ” that; в—ҠпЈҝ for me; вҖҷЛқГҚГҒвҖһU declare; вҖҡГҲГҒЕёГҒpГғв—ҠЛңГ”
definitely.
Arjuna said: KГҰВ¶Ж’a, You extol sГҘвҲҶkhyayoga (the Yoga of Knowledge) and then
the Yoga of Action. Pray, tell me which of the two is decidedly conducive to my good. (1)
Link of the
Discourse
constantly established in identity with God,
and to see Brahma ever and everywhere: it
is this attitude of a JВӨГҘnayogвҲӮ which is
referred to here by the word Г«Karma
saвүҲnyГҘsaГӯ. It is this form of JВӨГҘnayoga
which has been praised in the fourth chapter
and ArjunaГӯs  query, therefore, relates to this.
Replying to Arjuna, the Lord speaks of
Г«SaвүҲnyГҘsaГӯ and Г«KarmayogaГӯ both as leading
to the highest good or final beatitude and
naming this Г«SaвүҲnyГҘsaГӯ as Г«SГҘвҲҶkhyaГӯ in the
fourth and fifth verses and reverting to the
word Г«SaвүҲnyГҘsaГӯ in the sixth, He makes it
clear that by Г«KarmasaвүҲnyГҘsaГӯ He means
SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga or JВӨГҘnayoga and not the
actual renunciation of actions. Besides,
according to the Lord, mere renunciation of
actions not only does not lead to supreme
Bliss (III.4), but is not practicable either
(III.5; XVIII.11). Therefore, Г«KarmasaвүҲnyГҘsaГӯ
here should be taken to mean JВӨГҘnayoga and
not the actual renunciation of actions.
The root Г«kГҰВ¶Гӯ from which the word
Г«KГҰВ¶Ж’aГӯ is derived, means to attract or drawГӯ,
and the suffix Г«naГӯ denotes bliss. The Lord
is ever blissful and hence attracts everybody
towards Himself. This is the reason of his
being called Г«KГҰВ¶Ж’aГӯ. Here, by addressing the
Lord as Г«KГҰВ¶Ж’aГӯ, Arjuna seeks to convey that
being the omnipotent and omniscient Lord
of the whole creation, He alone is capable
of answering his questions. Nowhere in
chapter IV has the Lord extolled actual
renunciation of actions nor has he ordered
Arjuna anywhere to follow this course. On
the other hand, He has asked him at several
places (IV.15,42) to act in a disinterested
way. Hence Г«KarmaЖ’ГҘm saвүҲnyГҘsamГӯ here
does not mean their actual renunciation. To
renounce the feeling of doership with respect
to all actions and to feel that it is the modes
of prakГҰti in the shape of the senses that are
moving among the modes of prakГҰti in the
shape of their objects (III.28); to remain

=== PAGE 261 ===

260
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
At first sight it would appear that
Arjuna was repeating here the same question
which he had already asked at the beginning
of Chapter III. But on careful examination
it will be found that he did not refer there
to Г«JВӨГҘnayogaГӯ and Г«KarmayogaГӯ as such.
The question that troubled ArjunaГӯs mind at
that time was: If the Lord considered JВӨГҘna
or Knowledge as superior to Karma, why
should He urge him to engage in a terrible
action like warfare? He was unable to make
out the purport of His words which appeared
ambiguous; and, therefore, he wanted to
know His mind definitely on this point. The
point at issue here is quite different. At this
place he neither regards JВӨГҘna as superior to
Karma or action nor considers the words of
the Lord as ambiguous. He is conscious of
the fact that the Lord is praising both
Г«JВӨГҘnayogaГӯ; and Г«KarmayogaГӯ (IV.32) and
is treating them as separate (III.3). And
admitting this fact he seeks to know which
of the two is the better course for him. This
proves that Arjuna is not repeating here his
question of the third chapter.
It is no doubt true that the Lord has
commanded Arjuna in clear words to adopt
the path of Karmayoga in verse 19 and 30
of Chapter III and verses 15 and 42 of
Chapter IV. But it is equally clear that in
verses 24 to 30 of Chapter IV the Lord has,
under the common name of YajВӨa or sacrifice,
referred to various practices based on
Karmayoga and JВӨГҘnayoga both, and in that
connection extolled JВӨГҘnayajВӨa or sacrifice
through Knowledge as superior to sacrifice
performed with material things (IV.33), and
further urged him to take lessons in Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ
or Knowledge from sages who had seen the
reality and glorified such JВӨГҘna (IV.34-35).
Again, He clearly stated that through perfection
in Karmayoga one automatically attains
Knowledge (IV.38). Thus hearing both the
paths praised by the Lord, Arjuna could not
definitely single out any one course of action
for himself. Hence he is quite justified in
putting a question like this in order to elicit
the definite opinion of the Lord. He wants
to know what course he should adopt for
attaining true wisdom, whether he should
follow the discipline of Knowledge by hearing
and pondering over the words of those
possessed of real Knowledge, or should take
to Karmayoga by performing actions without
attachment and in a disinterested way and
dedicating them to God?
Now the Lord proceeds to answer ArjunaГӯs question:
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲUп¬ӮГҠГё
вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡвҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҝГҠпЈҝВӘp ГҒЕёвҖ”ГјГҠпЈҝГҝвҖҡвҲ‘В§вҒ„UГҠп¬ӮГҲГ·ГҠГ’вҖ“
ГғГҝГҠпЈҝSГғГҲ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡГҠГ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮГҒвүҘГҠcГҝГғпЈҝГ”H 2H
вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡвҖ” the Yoga of Knowledge; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖ” the Yoga of Action; Гё and; ГҒЕёвҖ”ГјГҠпЈҝГҝвҖҡвҲ‘В§вҒ„UГҠГ’ (are)
conducive to the highest good; В©UГ·ГҠГ’ both; ГғГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” of the two; ГғГҲ but; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡГҠГғЛңГ” to the Yoga
of Knowledge; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖ” the Yoga of Action; ГҒп¬ӮГҒвүҘГҠcГҝГғпЈҝ (is) superior.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: The Yoga of Knowledge and the Yoga of Action both lead
to supreme Bliss. Of the two, however, the Yoga of Action, being easier of practice,
is superior to the Yoga of Knowledge.                                     (2)

=== PAGE 262 ===

* Chapter V *
261
The word Г«NyГҘsaГӯ means renunciation,
and with the prefix Г«SamГӯ added to it, it
denotes 
complete 
renunciation. 
And
renunciation here signifies renunciation of
the sense of doership in respect of all activities
carried on by mind, speech and body, as well
as of identification with the body and the
feeling of Г«mineГӯ with regard to the objects of
the world. The words Г«SaвүҲnyГҘsaГӯ and
Г«SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮГӯ have been used in the GвҲӮtГҘ in
different senses, varying according to the
context. For instance, Г«SaвүҲnyГҘsaГӯ denotes
dedication of oneГӯs actions to God in III. 30,
XII.6 and XVIII.57, the abandonment of
actions with an interested motive in XVIII.2,
mental renunciation of works in V.13,
Karmayoga in VI.2, and actual renunciation
of bodily activity in III.4 and XVIII.7; while
it stands for Г«SГҘвҲҶkhyayogaГӯ or the Path of
Knowledge in V.6 and XVIII. 49. Even so a
follower of the Path of Action has been
referred to as Г«SГҘвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮГӯ in VI.1 and XVIII.12,
and as Г«SГҘвүҲnyГҘsayogayuktГҘtmГҘГӯ in IX.28.
This shows that the GвҲӮtГҘ does not use the
word Г«SaвүҲnyГҘsaГӯ in the same sense
everywhere. Its meaning varies according to
the context. Here the Lord sets out to discuss
the comparative merits of Г«SГҘвҲҶkhyayogaГӯ and
Г«KarmayogaГӯ. Hence Г«SaвүҲnyГҘsaГӯ obviously
means Г«SГҘвҲҶkhyayogaГӯ. The Lord has made
this abundantly clear by using the word
Г«SГҘвҲҶkhyaГӯ itself in the fourth and fifth verses.
Therefore, it is but reasonable to take
Г«SaвүҲnyГҘsaГӯ in the sense of Г«SГҘвҲҶkhyayogaГӯ.
here.
The statement that Г«the Yoga of
Knowledge and the Yoga of Action both
lead to supreme BlissГӯ cannot be taken to
mean, as some are apt to do, that the two
disciplines collectively lead to supreme Bliss
and not singly. The reason is that the two
disciplines cannot be followed at once by
one and the same man. For during his
practice the KarmayogвҲӮ treats his actions, the
fruit thereof, God and himself as separate
entities and does everything as an offering
to the Lord renouncing its fruit as well as
attachment for it (III.30; V.10; IX.27-28;
XII.10 and XVIII.56-57). The SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ,
on the other hand, feeling that it is the GuЖ’as
born of MГҘyГҘ that are moving among the
GuЖ’as (III.28) or in other words that the
senses are moving among their objects (V.8-
9), renounces the sense of doership in respect
of all the activities carried on by mind,
speech and body and remains established in
identity with the all-pervading oversoul, the
embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss.
The KarmayogвҲӮ feels that he is the doer of
his own actions (V.11), whereas the
SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ does not (V.8-9). The KarmayogвҲӮ
dedicates his actions to God (IX.27-28); the
SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ does not even recognize the
operations of the mind and senses carried on
without a conscious doer of falling under the
category of action (XVIII.17). The KarmayogвҲӮ
views God as separate from Himself (XII.6-
7); the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ admits no distinction
(XVIII.20). The KarmayogвҲӮ admits the
existence of PrakГҰti and its evolutes (XVIII.61);
the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ recognizes the existence of
none else than the one absolute Reality
(XIII.30). The KarmayogвҲӮ believes in the
existence of actions and their fruit; the
SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ neither recognizes the existence
of actions and their fruit as apart from the
Absolute nor holds himself related to them
in any way. Thus their courses of discipline
as well as their outlook are poles apart. Such
being the case, no one can tread both the
paths simultaneously. Besides, had it been
true that the two disciplines taken together
lead to supreme Bliss, it would have been
meaningless on the part of Arjuna to ask the
Lord to point out any one of them which
might be decidedly good for him. Nor would

=== PAGE 263 ===

262
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
there be any meaning in the LordГӯs declaring
Karmayoga as superior to SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga or
in His statement that both the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ
and the KarmayogвҲӮ reach the same destination.
Therefore, it is but reasonable to hold the
two paths as independent of each other.
Though both lead to the same goal, viz.,
realization of God, the embodiment of supreme
Bliss, through real wisdom, yet for a man
of action like Arjuna the practice of Karmayoga
was easier and hence better than SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga.
Although, as stated above, the two
disciplines are conducive to supreme Bliss,
singly and independently of each other, it is
not without reason that the Lord declares
Karmayoga as superior to SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga. In
the first place, a KarmayogвҲӮ is always a
SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮ or renouncer of actions even though
engaged in actions and he gets freed from the
bondage of births and deaths very easily
without any effort of trouble (V.3). He quickly
attains God (V.6); and constantly enjoys His
protection (IX.22). And, lastly, even a little
practice of Karmayoga is capable of delivering
one from the great fear of birth and death
(II.40). The path of Knowledge, on the other
hand, is a rugged one and bristling with
thorns (XII.5); and it is difficult to tread for
one who has not pursued the discipline of
Karmayoga in the first instance (V.6). It is
for these reasons that Karmayoga has been
declared superior to JВӨГҘnayoga.
without any difficulty or exertion.
*
*
*
Attraction and repulsion are the two most
formidable enemies of man retarding his
progress on the path of spirituality. It is they
who throw him into the bondage of Karma.
Subduing these impulses, the KarmayogвҲӮ acts
for the sake of God and through His Grace is
easily freed from the bondage of actions.
The latencies of good and evil actions
that are rooted in ignorance, and their fruits
constitute the bondage of men. Bound by
them the embodied soul incessantly goes on
The KarmayogвҲӮ neither hates anybody
nor craves for anything. He wholly transcends
the pairs of opposites. In fact, SaвүҲnyГҘsa or
renunciation too represents the same state.
He alone who is free from likes and dislikes
is a true SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮ; for he is neither required
to enter the order of SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮs nor to tread
the path of Knowledge. Therefore, by
declaring that a KarmayogвҲӮ should be ever
considered a SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮ (renouncer), the Lord
glorifies him and certifies that he is a
renouncer even though performing all actions,
and is freed from the bondage of actions
Karmayoga has been declared as superior to SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga. In order to establish
this very point, the Lord now praises the KarmayogвҲӮ in the following verse:
ГҙГҠпЈҝГҝвҖ” вҖҡ ГҒЕёГ ГҝвҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡГӢ ГҝГҠпЈҝ Её mпЈҝГҒCГ”U Её вҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUЛҮГҠГҒГғвҖ“
ГҒЕёmВёГЈmГҠпЈҝ ГҒвҖһU в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ вҖҡГҲПҖВў вҖҷГЈЕ“ГҠГ В¬Лқв—ҠГҲГ«ГҝГғпЈҝГ”H 3H
ГҙГҠпЈҝГҝвҖ” should be; вҖҡвҖ” he (a KarmayogвҲӮ); ГҒЕёГ ГҝвҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡГӢ ever considered a renouncer; ГҝвҖ” who;
Её neither; mпЈҝГҒCГ”U hates (anyone); Её nor; вҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUЛҮГҠГҒГғ desires; ГҒЕёmВёГЈmвҖ” he who is free from the pairs of
opposites; ГҒвҖһU for; в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ O mighty-armed Arjuna; вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ” easily; вҖҷГЈЕ“ГҠГғЛңГ” from bondage; В¬Лқв—ҠГҲГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ
is freed.
The KarmayogвҲӮ, who neither hates nor desires, should ever be considered a
renouncer. For, Arjuna, he who is free from the pairs of opposites is easily liberated
from bondage.                                                          (3)

=== PAGE 264 ===

* Chapter V *
263
revolving in the whirligig of births and
deaths. Getting beyond this cycle of births
and deaths for ever is what is meant by being
freed from bondage.
Establishing the superiority of Karmayoga over SaвҲҶkhyayoga on the ground of its
being easier in practice, the Lord now reveals in the following two verses their identity
so far as their fruit is concerned, which is nothing short of supreme Bliss as already
pointed out in the second verse:
вҖҡГҠГҰЛңUГ…ГҝГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠГ’ В¬ГҺГ•ГҮвҖҷГҠвҲӮUГҠвҖ” В¬Лқп¬ӮЕ’ГҒГЈГғ Её В¬ГҒГЎВ«UГғГҠвҖ”вҖ“
вҲһвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҘГҝГҠГҒSГ•ГғвҖ” вҖҡГӘГҝВӘГҲГ·ГҝГҠпЈҝГҢп¬ӮГЈЕ’ГғпЈҝ В»В§Г”вҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ”H 4H
вҖҡГҠГҰЛңUГ…ГҝГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠГ’ the paths of Knowledge and Action (referred to above); В¬ГҺГ•вҲ‘ЛңВ§Г” yielding
different results; вҖҷГҠвҲӮUГҠвҖ” the ignorant (lit., those of unripe intellect); В¬Лқп¬ӮЕ’ГҒГЈГғ declare; Её not
(so); В¬ГҒГЎВ«UГғГҠвҖ” the wise; вҲһвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” in one; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; вҖўГҠГҒSГ•ГғвҖ” established; вҖҡГӘГҝвҲ‘ЛңВ§Г” firmly; В©UГ·ГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” of
both; ГҒп¬ӮГЈЕ’ГғпЈҝ obtains; В»В§вҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” fruit (viz., God-realization).
It is the ignorant, not the wise, who say that SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga and Karmayoga lead
to divergent results. For, one who is firmly established in either, gets the fruit of
both, which is the same, viz., God-realization.                                    (4)
In this connection it should be borne in
mind that SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga is not the same as
Knowledge of the supreme Reality; it is the
name of a path or discipline leading to that
Knowledge and pursued in accordance with
the teachings of those who have known the
Reality. For, in verse 24 of Chapter XIII,
DhyГҘnayoga (the Yoga of Meditation),
Karmayoga (the Yoga of Action) and
SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga (the Yoga of Knowledge) have
been spoken of as separate ways of approach
of self-realization, quite independent of one
another. Therefore, it is but reasonable to say
that SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga enables one to attain
liberation through a Knowledge of the supreme
Reality. Speaking of the path of Knowledge
in verses 49 to 55 of Chapter XVIII, the Lord
says that becoming one with Brahma, which
is only another name of attaining perfection
in SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga, one attains ParГҘ Bhakti or
supreme Devotion, which is the same as real
Knowledge, and that through ParГҘ Bhakti one
realizes and enters into God. This makes it
clear that the practice of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga leads
to the actual Knowledge of the Reality, which
SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga and Karmayoga both are
conducive to the attainment of Bliss or final
beatitude by bringing Knowledge of the highest
Truth. Notwithstanding this fact, those who
believe that they yield divergent results, and
distinguish between the two paths on this
ground are lacking in wisdom. For even
though the SГҘdhanГҘ in the two disciplines
proceeds on different lines, they are one and
the same so far as their result is concerned.
That the practice of Karmayoga leads
to the attainment of final beatitude through
the Knowledge of Reality is borne out by
the following statements of the Lord:ГіГ¬I
confer upon them that Yoga of wisdom
through which they attain MeГ® (X.10); Г¬In
order to shower My Grace on them, I dispel
the darkness of their heart by the light of
TruthГ® (X.11), Г¬Having attained purity of
heart through the practice of Karmayoga, he
automatically achieves RealizationГ® (IV.38),
etc. But SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga itself, they say, is
Knowledge of the Reality, how, then, can
it be said to bring liberation through a
Knowledge of the Reality?

=== PAGE 265 ===

264
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
is followed by the attainment of liberation.
An understanding or insight which
represents Knowledge of the supreme Reality
is known as Г«PaЖ’Е’ГҘГӯ and one endowed with
such an understanding is called a Г«PaЖ’Е’itaГӯ.
Therefore, perfect souls possessing actual
Knowledge of Reality are here referred to
by the word Г«PaЖ’Е’itГҘВЁГӯ.
*
*
*
Both the disciplines lead to the same end,
namely, realization of God through real
Knowledge. Hence it is but meet and proper
to say that one firmly established in any one of
these attains the fruit of both. But it would be
meaningless to say so if perfection in
SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga were the result of Karmayoga,
and SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga in its turn would lead to the
attainment of liberation in the shape of God-
realization. In that case the result of the two
disciplines would not be the same. For, according
to the latter interpretation, one who is firmly
established in SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga has already
achieved (in the shape of perfection in
SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga) the fruit of Karmayoga. Hence
it would be meaningless to say that one firmly
established in SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga attains the fruit of
Karmayoga. Even so, if one who is firmly
established in Karmayoga attains God-realization
only through perfection in SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga, he
obtains the fruit of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga through
SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga alone, and not direct. Thus the
statement of the Lord that one firmly established
in any one of these disciplines obtains the result
of both would have no meaning at all. Therefore,
the only conclusion that we can draw from
this statement is that the two disciplines are
independent of each other and they lead to the
same end. This interpretation alone gives
meaning to the LordГӯs statement that one firmly
established in any one of the two disciplines
attains the result of both. In verse 24 of Chapter
XIII too the Lord recognizes both as independent
means of Self-realization.
*
*
*
It will appear that Arjuna opens the
controversy in the very first verse of this
chapter by using the words Г«KarmasaвүҲnyГҘsaГӯ
and Г«KarmayogaГӯ and the Lord too adopts
the same terminology in answering his question
in verse 2. But in order to avoid the word
Г«KarmasaвүҲnyГҘsaГӯ 
being 
erroneously
interpreted as actual renunciation of actions
and the word Г«KarmayogaГӯ being construed
to mean mere activity of any kind, the Lord
uses the words Г«SГҘвҲҶkhyaГӯ and Г«YogaГӯ instead
and thereby makes it clear that he has used
the two words in the sense of the paths of
Knowledge and Action, respectively.
The use of the word Г«ApiГӯ emphasizes
the fact that the two disciplines are altogether
independent and can bring God-realization
without the help of each other.
ГҝГ вҖҡГҠГҰЛңUГ…ГҝГ’вҖ” В¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝГғпЈҝ SГ•ГҠЕёВў ГғlГҠпЈҝВӘГ’вҒ„UГҒВ¬ ВӘГӘГҝГғпЈҝвҖ“
вҲһвҲ‘ВўВ§ вҖҡГҠГҰЛңUГ…ГҝВў Гё ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘВў Гё ГҝвҖ” В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғ вҖҡ В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғГ”H 5H
ГҝГғЛңГ” which; вҖҡГҠГҰЛңUГ…ГҝГ’вҖ” by SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga; В¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝГғпЈҝ is attained; SГ•ГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” state; ГғГғЛңГ” the same; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГ’вҖ”
by KarmayogвҲӮs; вҖўГҒВ¬ as well; ВӘГӘГҝГғпЈҝ is reached; вҲһвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” (as) one; вҖҡГҠГҰЛңUГ…Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga; Гё
and; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ” Karmayoga; Гё alone; ГҝвҖ” who; В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғ sees; вҖҡвҖ” he; В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғ sees.
The (supreme) state which is reached by the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ is attained also by
the KarmayogвҲӮ. Therefore, he alone who sees SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga and Karmayoga as one,
so far as their result goes, really sees.
 (5)

=== PAGE 266 ===

* Chapter V *
265
It has been explained in the commentary
on the second verse how SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga and
Karmayoga are quite independent of each other
and how their SГҘdhanГҘ also proceeds in quite
different directions. This should not, however,
lead anyone to doubt that they lead to the
same destination. One can easily understand
this by the illustration of the roundness of the
earth. A man proceeding to New York in
America from India will reach his destination
if he follows the correct route, no matter whether
he takes an eastward course or moves in a
westerly direction. Even so, the SГҘdhaka is
sure to attain God, who is the supreme goal
both of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga and Karmayoga, if he
firmly adheres to one of these two paths,
notwithstanding the differences in their courses
of discipline.
beforehand.Г® Suppose there is an aspirant
who holds that the whole of this phenomenal
world is but a dream and unreal: it is falsely
superimposed on Brahma, which is the only
Reality. At the same time his heart is not
pure: the evils of attraction and repulsion,
anger and lust, are still present in him. If he
makes no attempt to purify his heart and
takes to the practice of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga straight
off on the mere strength of his intellectual
belief, it will not be easy for him to attain
perfection in SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga as described in
verses 11 to 30 of Chapter II and verses 49
to 55 of Chapter XVIII. For so long as there
is identification with the body, and attachment
for enjoyments, and so long as the SГҘdhaka
feels attracted towards that which is agreeable
and recoils from that which is repelling, it
will be difficult for him even to grasp the
true meaning of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga,Гіwhich consists
in renouncing the sense of doership in
The indeclinable Г«TuГӯ points to the
peculiarity that though their fruit is identical,
yet in practice SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga is more difficult
than Karmayoga.
One with mighty-arms is called a
Г«MahГҘbГҘhuГӯ. Figuratively the word Г«BГҘhuГӯ
or Г«armГӯ is used for a brother or friend. By
addressing Arjuna as Г«MahГҘbГҘhuГӯ, the Lord
means to encourage him by conveying that
he, who has got a brother in pious-minded
YudhiВ¶Вўhira and friend in Him, the supreme
Deity, should have no cause for anxiety. The
path runs smooth for him in every way.
Although SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga and Karmayoga
are independent of each other, Karmayoga
or the path of Action is comparatively easy,
whereas SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga or the path of
Knowledge is rather rugged and arduous. It
is with a view to emphasizing this difference
that the Lord says: Г¬SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga is difficult
to practise without having practised Karmayoga
Having spoken of the common good of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga and Karmayoga, the Lord now
brings out the superiority of Karmayoga so far as its practice is concerned:
вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡSГғГҲ 
в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ 
Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖв—ҠГҠ#ГҲв—ҠГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГғвҖ”вҖ“
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҝГҲQВ§ГҠпЈҝ 
в—ҠГҲГҒЕёвҖҷЛқВёrГҠГ” 
ЕёГҒГёвҒ„пЈҝUГЎГҠГҠГҒЕ“ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғГ”H 6H
вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡвҖ” (perfection in) SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga; ГғГҲ but; в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ O mighty armed Arjuna; Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖв—ҠЛңГ”
(is) difficult; вҖўГҠ#ГҲв—ҠЛңГ” to attain; вҖўГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГғвҖ”Г” without Karmayoga; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” a KarmayogвҲӮ; в—ҠГҲГҒЕёвҖ” one
who keeps his mind fixed on God; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” God; ЕёГҒГёвҒ„пЈҝUГЎГҠ in no time; вҖўГҒЕ“ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғ reaches.
Without Karmayoga, however, SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga (i.e., renunciation of doership in relation
to all activities of the mind, senses and body) is difficult to accomplish; whereas the
KarmayogвҲӮ, who keeps his mind fixed on God, reaches Brahma in no time, Arjuna. (6)

=== PAGE 267 ===

266
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
respect of all actions and remaining constantly
established in identity with the Absolute and
formless Brahma, the embodiment of Truth,
Knowledge and Bliss,Гіmuch more so to
tread the path. Besides, his mind being
impure and deluded, he will have no faith
in God, the controller of the whole universe
and the Dispenser of the fruits of actions,
nor in heaven and hell and other such
rewards and punishments for oneГӯs actions.
Consequently he will very likely give up
virtuous deeds which involve strenuous effort
and may fall an easy prey to the lure of
vicious enjoyments due to an attraction for
sense objects and other such evils, and be
thus lost to the path of Bliss. Therefore, it
is essential for a man who holds that
SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga is the only path to God-
realization, to purge his mind of likes and
dislikes and other such impurities through the
disinterested performance of virtuous deeds
like sacrifice, charity, askesis, etc., before he
proceeds to tread the path of Knowledge.
Only then can his practice of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga
be smoothly carried through, and then alone
can he achieve success therein easily. It is
in this sense that the accomplishment of
SaвүҲnyГҘsa has been spoken of as difficult
without the practice of Karmayoga.
The word Г«YogayuktaВЁГӯ with the
adjective Г«MuniВЁГӯ stands for the KarmayogвҲӮ,
who considering everything as belonging to
God does not lose his balance of mind either
in success or in failure and renouncing
attachment as well as the desire for fruits,
performs all his duties in accordance with the
LordГӯs commandments, and with faith and
devotion dwells upon the name, virtues,
glory and reality of God.
Some people take the word Г«MuniВЁГӯ to
mean a SГҘdhaka who has restrained his speech
or conquered his senses. Obviously there can
be no objection to this interpretation, because
a KarmayogвҲӮ who dwells in his mind upon
GodГӯs Reality must necessarily be reserved
in speech and have control over his senses.
The word Г«BrahmaГӯ can be taken to
mean both God with attributes and the
Absolute, because they are just the sameГі
two aspects of the same Reality.
Now describing the marks of a KarmayogвҲӮ, the Lord speaks of his remaining unaffected
by actions:
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҝГҲQВ§ГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҲhГҠГ в—ҠГҠ ГҒп¬ӮГҒВЎГғГҠГ в—ҠГҠ ГҒВЎГғпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝвҖ”вҖ“
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠГ в—ҠГ·ГҚГғГҠГ в—ҠГҠ вҲ‘ГҲВ§п¬ӮВёГӣГҠГҒВ¬ Её ГҒвҲӮUГҘГҝГғпЈҝH 7H
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” the KarmayogвҲӮ; ГҒп¬ӮвҖЎГҠГҲhГҠГ в—ҠГҠ whose heart is pure; ГҒп¬ӮГҒВЎГғГҠГ в—ҠГҠ who has fully conquered
his mind; ГҒВЎГғпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝвҖ” who has mastered his senses; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠГ в—ҠГ·ГҚГғГҠГ в—ҠГҠ who has identified his Self
with the Self of all beings; вҲ‘ГҲВ§п¬ӮВёЕёЛңГ” performing action; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; Её ГҒвҲӮUГҘГҝГғпЈҝ is not tainted.
The KarmayogвҲӮ, who has fully conquered his mind and mastered his senses,
whose heart is pure, and who has identified his Self as the Self of all beings (viz,
God), remains untainted, even though performing action.                    (7)
it is difficult to remain equipoised in success
and failure. Hence, until the mind and senses
are fully controlled and perfect purity of
heart is attained, a SГҘdhaka cannot be called
So long as oneГӯs mind and senses are
not controlled, they naturally run after sense-
enjoyments; and so long as impurities in the
form of likes and dislikes exist in the mind,

=== PAGE 268 ===

* Chapter V *
267
a real KarmayogвҲӮ. The adjective Г«YogayuktaВЁГӯ,
Г«ViвҖ№uddhГҘtmГҘГӯ, Г«VijitГҘtmГҘГӯ and Г«JitendriyaВЁГӯ
have, therefore, been used to indicate that
he alone is KarmayogвҲӮ in whom all these
virtues reside, and he alone realizes Brahma
without delay.
God is the real Self of all beings from
BrahmГҘ, the creator, down to the tiniest
blade of grass. Therefore, he who regards
God as his Self i.e., the Inner Controller and
performs all his actions according to His
promptings and guidance and who has
no sense of Г«mineГӯ with regard to the
body, mind intellect or any other thing
except God is referred to here by the word
Г«SarvabhВөutГҘtmabhВөutГҘtmГҘГӯ.
The SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ does not consider
himself to be the doer of any action.
Notwithstanding the fact that his mind, intellect
and senses continue to perform all actions, he
does not associate himself with any of those
activities, but only feels that it is the modes
of PrakГҰti that are moving among themselves
and that he has nothing to do with them. Such
being the case, it is but meet and proper that
he should remain untainted by actions, but
the wonder of wonders is that the KarmayogвҲӮ
too, who regards himself as a doer, is not
bound by actions though performing them for
the sake of God and according to His
directions. The indeclinable Г«ApiГӯ has been
used to reveal this speciality of the KarmayogвҲӮ.
Referring briefly in verse 2 to the identity of the fruits of Karmayoga and SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga,
the former was declared superior to the latter because of its being easier in practice.
Again, praising the KarmayogвҲӮ in the third, the identity of their fruits and their being
independent of each other were fully dealt with in the fifth and sixth verses. Pointing out
in the first half of verse 6 that SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga is difficult to accomplish without Karmayoga,
the latter was declared to be easy of practice in the second half. This was followed by
a reference to the marks of a KarmayogвҲӮ in the seventh. It has thus been made clear
that in spite of their fruit being the same, the two paths are different from each other.
Hearing this, one should naturally desire to know the distinctive character of  both.
Anticipating this, the Lord first proceeds to describe in verses 8 and 9 the attitude of
a SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ while moving in the world:
ЕёГ’п¬Ӯ ГҒвҲ‘В§ГҒ@Г вҲ‘В§вҒ„UГҠпЈҝв—ҠГӢГҒГғ ГҝГҲQВ§ГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГЈГҝпЈҝГғ ГғГ»п¬ӮГҒп¬ӮГғЛңГ”вҖ“
В¬вүҘГҝГңoГҺГЎп¬ӮГЈSВ¬ГҺвүҘГҠГҒTГүГҠЛқГӣГҠoAГЈВӘГ«ВҝГЈSп¬ӮВ¬ГңEвҖҡЕёЛңГ” 
H 8H
В¬ЛқвҲӮUВ¬ГҒГЈп¬ӮвҖҡГҺВЎГЈВӘГҺЛҶГӣГҠГҲГҒГЈв—ҠВ·ГҒГӣГҠГҒв—ҠВ·ГӣГҠГҒВ¬ 
вҖ“
ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГЎГҠГӢГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГ•пЈҝВёВ·ГҲ 
п¬ӮГғВёГЈГғ 
ГҹГҒГғ 
Е“ГҠвҒ„UГҝЕёЛңГ”H 9H
Её nothing; вҲһп¬Ӯ undoubtedly; ГҒвҲ‘В§ГҒ@ГғЛңГ” nothing; вҲ‘В§вҒ„UГҠпЈҝГҒв—Ҡ I do; ГҹГҒГғ so; ГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ;
в—ҠГЈГҝпЈҝГғ should think (that); ГғГ»п¬ӮГҒп¬ӮГғЛңГ” who knows the reality; В¬вүҘГҝЕёЛңГ” seeing; oГҺГЎп¬ӮЕёГ”ЛңГ” hearing; SВ¬ГҺвүҘГҠЕёЛңГ”
touching; ГҒВЎГүГҠЛқЕёЛңГ” smelling; вҖўoAЕёЛңГ” eating or drinking; ВӘГ«ВҝUЕёЛңГ” moving or walking; Sп¬ӮВ¬ЕёЛңГ” sleeping;
EвҖҡЕёЛңГ” breathing; В¬ЛқвҲӮUВ¬ЕёЛңГ” speaking; ГҒп¬ӮвҖҡГҺВЎЕёЛңГ” answering the calls of nature; ВӘГҺЛҶГ”UЕёЛңГ” grasping
(something); В©UГҒГЈв—ҠВ·ЕёЛңГ” opening the eyes; ГҒЕёГҒв—ҠВ·ЕёЛңГ” closing the eyes; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠ the organs
of sense and action; ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГ•пЈҝВёВ·ГҲ among the objects of senses; п¬ӮГғВёГЈГғпЈҝ are moving; ГҹГҒГғ thus;
Е“ГҠвҒ„UГҝЕёЛңГ” holding.

=== PAGE 269 ===

268
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The whole of this phenomenal world is
ephemeral and transient, hence illusory like a
mirage or the dream-world. It is superimposed
through ignorance on Brahma, the embodiment
of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss, who alone is
Real. Thus distinguishing between the Real
and the unreal, he who remains constantly
established in identity with the Absolute
formless aspect of God, the supreme RealityГі
he alone is a Г«TattvavitГӯ and a Г«YuktaГӯ. These
two adjectives have been used to represent
the true character of a SГҘdhaka following the
path of Knowledge.
*
*
*
A man awakened from a dream knows
that the actions which appeared to him as
being performed by his body, mind, the vital
airs and senses during the dream state were
neither actually performed nor was he in any
way connected with them. Even so, the
SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ, who knows the reality of things
and remains constantly established in identity
with the Immutable and Actionless Brahma,
should, while performing the various functions
of seeing, hearing etc. feel that it is the mind,
the vital airs and the senses (which are all
illusory by nature) that are moving among
their respective objects, which are equally
illusory; in fact, nothing is actually happening
nor is he connected with any of these in any
way. Here it may be contended that even
those who are not yet free from likes and
dislikes, anger and lust, and other such evils,
but at the same time pose as SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮs,
can argue that they are in no way connected
with whatever actions, good or bad, that are
being performed by their mind and senses.
How are we to distinguish a genuine
SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ from a bogus one? In this
connection it should be remembered that by
mere profession one does not actually become
a SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ nor can one cease to have
any connection with oneГӯs actions. In the
eyes of the true and genuine SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ,
the whole of this phenomenal world is illusory
like a dream; therefore, he ceases to have any
attraction for anything in this world. Attraction
and repulsion altogether disappear from his
mind and no trace is left in him of evils like
lust, anger, greed, infatuation, egoism and so
on. So there being no incentive to prohibited
actions, every activity of his unsullied mind
and senses has the sanction of the scriptures
and redounds to the common weal. That is
the test of a true SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ. So long as a
follower of the path of Knowledge finds the
least trace of attraction and repulsion or lust
and anger in his heart, he should consider his
practice faulty.
*
*
*
There are no hard and fast rules regarding
the form of activity which a SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ
engages in. Due to differences of caste, stage
in life, temperament, nature of the past Karma
responsible for birth, association and habit,
the activities of all SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮs are not of a
uniform nature. The five participles Г«seeingГӯ,
Г«hearingГӯ, Г«touchingГӯ, Г«smellingГӯ and Г«eatingГӯ
refer to the functions of all the five organs of
sense, viz., the eye, the ear, the tactile sense,
the nose and the palate respectively. Г«walkingГӯ,
Г«graspingГӯ and Г«speakingГӯ denote the functions
of the feet, hands and tongue (speech)
respectively, and Г«answering the calls of natureГӯ
covers the functions of the organs of
reproduction and defecation. Г«BreathingГӯ points
The SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ, however, who knows the reality of things, must believe that
he does nothing, even though seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, eating or drinking,
walking, sleeping, breathing, speaking, answering the calls of nature, grasping and
opening or closing the eyes, holding that it is the senses alone that are moving among
their objects.                                                          (8, 9)

=== PAGE 270 ===

* Chapter V *
269
to the function of the five vital airs. Even so,
Г«openingГӯ and Г«closingГӯ of the eyes represent
the functions of the five outer winds of the
body known as Г«KВөurmaГӯ etc., and finally
Г«sleepingГӯ denotes the functions of the inner
sense or mind. In this way, reference to the
activities of all the senses, vital airs and the
inner sense shows that according to his order
in society, stage in life, nature, past Karma
and association a SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ can perform
all actions approved of by the scriptures,
such as eating and drinking, carrying on
business, preaching, reading and writing,
hearing, thinking, etc., for the maintenance
of his body or for the common weal.
*
*
*
Verse 28 of Chapter III says that Г¬It is
the GuЖ’as or modes of PrakГҰti that move
among the GuЖ’as;Г® verse 29 of Chapter XIII
speaks of all actions being done by PrakГҰti
or Nature; whereas in this verse it is stated
that Г¬the senses are moving among their
objectsГӯ. All these statements point to the
same conclusion. The senses as well as their
objects are products of the three GuЖ’as, and
GuЖ’as in their turn are evolutes of PrakГҰti.
Therefore, it is just the same to say that
PrakГҰti is the doer of all actions, or that the
GuЖ’as are moving among the GuЖ’as or the
senses are moving among their objects. The
same thing has been expressed in three
different ways in different context just in
order to lay special emphasis on this point.
It is noteworthy in this connection that
even though the activities of the vital airs as
well as of the mind have been mentioned in
this verse along with the functions of the senses,
the Lord urges on the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ to believe
that it is the senses that are moving among
their objects in each case. The reason is not
far to seek. In all forms of activity it is the
senses that play the predominant part. The vital
airs too have been referred to as the senses.
And being the inner sense, mind as well is
one of them. The word Г«IndriyaГӯ thus covers
all, viz., the mind as well as the vital airs.
The indeclinable Г«EvaГӯ has been used
to denote complete absence of the sense of
doership with regard to action. The intention
is to show that the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ should
never and not in the least degree consider
himself to be the doer of actions.
Having thus described the course of discipline to be followed by a SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ the
Lord now proceeds to describe in the next two verses the course of discipline for
KarmayogвҲӮs along with its fruit.
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГЎГҝГҠЕ“ГҠГҝ вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ вҖҡXГ”ВўU Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ вҲ‘В§вҒ„UГҠпЈҝГҒГғ ГҝвҖ”вҖ“
ГҒвҲӮUГҘГҝГғпЈҝ Её вҖҡ В¬ГҠВ¬пЈҝЕё В¬kВ¬ГІГҠГҒв—Ҡп¬ӮГҠГӘГ·вҖҡГҠH 10H
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒГЎГҠ to God; вҖўГҠЕ“ГҠГҝ offering; вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ (all) actions; вҖҡXГ”Uв—ҠЛңГ” attachment; Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ shaking
off; вҲ‘В§вҒ„UГҠпЈҝГҒГғ acts; ГҝвҖ” who; ГҒвҲӮUГҘГҝГғпЈҝ Её remains untouched; вҖҡвҖ” he; В¬ГҠВ¬пЈҝЕё by sin; В¬kВ¬ГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the lotus
leaf; Гҹп¬Ӯ as; вҖўГӘГ·вҖҡГҠ (remains untouched) by water.
He who acts offering all actions to God, and shaking off attachment, remains
untouched by sin, as the lotus leaf by water.                             (10)
practising charity and askesis and performing
all other duties prescribed by the scriptures,
such as eating drinking etc., carried on for
Practising devotion to God, offering
worship to the deities, rendering service to
parents and other elders, performing sacrifice,

=== PAGE 271 ===

270
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
the maintenance of the body, and vocations
of life pursued for earning oneГӯs livelihood
according to oneГӯs order in society and stage
in life: all these are covered by the word
Г«KarmГҘЖ’iГӯ. And he who performs them all
for the sake of God and according to His
injunction and desire, and under His guidance
and inspiration as a mere puppet, without the
least attachment for them and regarding
everything as belonging to God, is said to
have offered all his actions to God.
The word Г«attachmentГӯ (SaвҲҶgam) here
means the attachment one bears for oneГӯs
wife, progeny, wealth, house and all other
objects of enjoyment, for heaven and other
higher world attained hereafter, for oneГӯs
own body and all oneГӯs actions and for
abstract things such as honour, fame and
prestige etc.
*
*
*
As a rule, the KarmayogвҲӮ performing
only such actions as are prescribed by the
scriptures never commits a sin; under these
circumstances there can be no fear of his
being contaminated by sin. Why, then, has it
been thought necessary to add that he is not
contaminated by sin ? The reason for this is
that prescribed actions too are not absolutely
stainless. Every activity involves the
perpetration of sin in one form or other
through destruction of life unavoidably and
involuntarily caused. That is why the Lord
says elsewhere that Г¬all undertakings, indeed,
are involved in sin, even as fire in smokeГ®
(XVIII.48). Therefore, he who acts under the
impulse of attachment and the desire for fruit,
simply for enjoyment and bodily comfort,
can never avoid sin. It is desire and attachment
which lead to bondage. Hence, it is but
reasonable to say that he who is free from all
traces of attachment and desire is not tainted
by sins even though performing actions.
вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝпЈҝЕё в—ҠЕёвҖҡГҠ вҖҷГҲhKГҠ вҲ‘пЈҝВ§п¬ӮвҲӮГ’ГҒвҒ„UГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГ’вҒ„UГҒВ¬вҖ“
ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёвҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё вҲ‘ГҲВ§п¬ӮВёГҒГЈГғ вҖҡXГ”ВўU Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠГ в—ҠвүҘГҠГҲhГҝпЈҝH 11H
вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝпЈҝЕё with (their) body; в—ҠЕёвҖҡГҠ with (their) mind; вҖҷГҲhKГҠ with (their) intellect; вҲ‘пЈҝВ§п¬ӮвҲӮГ’UвҖ” free
from the feeling of Г«mineГӯ; ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГ’вҖ” with (their) senses; вҖўГҒВ¬ alone; ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёвҖ” the KarmayogвҲӮs;
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё action; вҲ‘ГҲВ§п¬ӮВёГҒГЈГғ perform; вҖҡXГ”Uв—ҠЛңГ” attachment; Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ shaking off; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠвүҘГҠГҲhГҝпЈҝ for the sake of
self-purification.
The KarmayogвҲӮs perform action only with their senses, mind, intellect and body
as well, without the feeling of mine in respect of them and shaking off attachment,
simply for the sake of self-purification.                                   (11)
he performs all his duties in an absolutely
unselfish and disinterested spirit, acting under
the inspiration and guidance of God, just like
an instrument.
It may be asked here: Г¬In the preceding
verse 10, the Lord spoke of the man who,
offering all actions to God, works in a
detached spirit; and He talks of the same
detachment in the present verse as well.
Here the adjective Г«KevalaiВЁГӯ denotes
absence of the feeling of Г«mineГӯ. Even
though it qualifies Г«IndriyaiВЁГӯ alone, it should
be taken by implication to qualify Г«ManasГҘГӯ,
Г«BuddhyГҘГӯ and Г«KГҘyenaГӯ as well. The intention
is to show that a KarmayogвҲӮ does not
entertain the feeling of Г«mineГӯ in respect of
the mind, intellect, body and senses; he
considers them as belonging to God. And

=== PAGE 272 ===

* Chapter V *
271
Does this not amount to tautology on the part
of the Lord? Our reply to this question is
that in verse 10 the Lord referred to the
KarmayogвҲӮ in whom the element of Devotion
preponderates, whereas in the present verse
He talks of the KarmayogвҲӮ who is
predominantly a man of action. Just as in
verses 8 and 9 the Lord described how and
in what spirit the mind, intellect, sense, vital
airs and body of a SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ acted, in the
present verse He tells us how and in what
spirit the KarmayogвҲӮ who is predominantly
a man of action works. Thus there is no
tautology here.
The statement that a KarmayogвҲӮ who performs his actions in the above manner is
not touched by sin but attains purity of heart, raises the question whether the practice
of Karmayoga leads only to purification of the heart or brings some higher reward as
well and where lies the harm if one performs noble actions with an interested motive
instead. Therefore, in order to throw light on this question the Lord now says:
ГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ»В§вҲӮВўU Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ вүҘГҠГҠГҒГЈГғв—ҠГҠВ¬AГҠпЈҝГҒГғ ЕёГ’ГҒDГ”UвҲ‘В§ГӢв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖўГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„пЈҝUГЎГҠ В»В§вҲӮпЈҝU вҖҡQВ§ГҠпЈҝ ГҒЕёвҖҷГӨГҝГғпЈҝH 12H
ГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” the karmayogвҲӮ; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ»В§вҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” the fruit of actions; Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ offering (to God); вүҘГҠГҠГҒГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ” peace
(in the shape of God-realization); вҖўГҠВ¬AГҠпЈҝГҒГғ attains; ЕёГ’ГҒDГ”UвҲ‘В§ГӢв—ҠЛңГ” everlasting; вҖўГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” he who works
with a selfish motive; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„пЈҝUГЎГҠ through desire; В»В§вҲӮпЈҝU to the fruit; вҖҡQВ§вҖ” attached; ГҒЕёвҖҷГӨГҝГғпЈҝ gets
tied down.
Offering the fruit of actions to God, the KarmayogвҲӮ attains everlasting peace
in the form of God-realization; whereas he who works with a selfish motive, being
attached to the fruit of actions through desire, gets tied down.             (12)
the word Г«faithГӯ, it carries the sense of
Г«endowed withГӯ. Even so, in verse 8 of this
chapter it has been used in the sense of a
SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ. Having been  used with reference
to an illumined soul who holds that it is the
senses which are moving among their
respective objects and considers himself above
all actions, it has been rightly interpreted to
mean a Г«SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮГӯ there. But here it has
been used with reference to one who has
renounced the fruit of all oneГӯs actions;
therefore, here it must be taken to mean a
Г«KarmayogвҲӮГӯ.
Derived from the word Г«NiВ¶ВўhГҘГӯ, the
adjective Г«NaiВ¶ВўhikвҲӮГӯ means Г«born of NiВ¶ВўhГҘГӯ
or perfection in a particular discipline.
Therefore, the words Г«NaiВ¶ВўhikвҲӮ вҖәГҘntiВЁГӯ have
been rightly interpreted to mean God-realization
In verse 8, the word Г«YuktaВЁГӯ was
interpreted to mean a SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ. But here
it has been taken in the sense of a Г«KarmayogвҲӮГӯ;
for, as shown above, the meaning of a word
varies according to the context. It will be
found that the word Г«YuktaВЁГӯ has been used
in the GвҲӮtГҘ in different senses in various
contexts. It is derived from the root Г«YujГӯ,
which means Г«to joinГӯ. In verse 61 of
Chapter II, Г«YuktaГӯ has been used in the
sense of one who has collected and composed
oneГӯs mind. In verse 8 of Chapter VI, it
stands for one who has known the Truth and
realized God; in verse 17, being used in
connection with diet and recreation, it signifies
Г«regulatednessГӯ, and in verse 18 it conveys
the idea of a Г«YogвҲӮГӯ practising meditation.
In verse 22 of Chapter VII, occurring with

=== PAGE 273 ===

272
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
achieved through perfection in Karmayoga.
The word Г«AyuktaВЁГӯ ordinarily carries
the sense of an idler or a careless or slothful
person. Here, however, it has been used with
reference to one who is attached to the fruit
of actions through desire; hence it has been
rightly interpreted as one who works with
an interested motive.
Г«BondageГӯ here is nothing else than
being born again and again in the various
orders of creation as a result of actions
performed with an interested motive.
Here it has been stated that the KarmayogвҲӮ remains untainted by his actions and
attains peace in the shape of God-realization, whereas the man who works with an
interested motive gets into bondage in the shape of birth and death. But the picture of
the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ was left incomplete. Taking up the broken thread again, the Lord now
proceeds to describe the state of the SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga.
вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ в—ҠЕёвҖҡГҠ вҖҡГӣГҝSГҝГҠSГғпЈҝ вҖҡГҲПҖВў п¬ӮвүҘГҠГӢвҖ“
Еёп¬ӮmГҠвҒ„пЈҝU В¬ГҲвҒ„пЈҝU Е’пЈҝвҖһUГӢ ЕёГ’п¬Ӯ вҲ‘ГҲВ§п¬ӮВёГӣГҠ вҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГҝЕёЛңГ”H 13H
вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ all actions; в—ҠЕёвҖҡГҠ mentally; вҖҡГӣГҝSГҝ relegating; вҖўГҠSГғпЈҝ rests (in God, embodiment
of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss); вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ” happily; п¬ӮвүҘГҠГӢ the self-controlled; Еёп¬ӮmГҠвҒ„пЈҝU В¬ГҲвҒ„пЈҝU to the
house of nine gates in the shape of this body; Е’пЈҝвҖһUГӢ man (the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ); Её nor; вҲһп¬Ӯ
indeed; вҲ‘ГҲВ§п¬ӮВёЕёЛңГ” doing; Её neither; вҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГҝЕёЛңГ” getting done by others.
The self-controlled SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ, doing nothing himself and getting nothing done
by others, rests happily in God, the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss,
mentally relegating all actions to the mansion of nine gates (the body with nine
openings).                                                              (13)
The SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ no longer identifies
himself with the body and the senses nor
regards them as his own; therefore, he
neither claims the doership of actions performed
by them nor holds himself even indirectly
responsible for them. And the indeclinable
Г«EvaГӯ has been used to emphasize this point.
It is contended by some that according
to the principle of contiguity the words
Г«NevadvГҘre PureГӯ ought to have been
connected with the verb Г«Г…steГӯ rather than with
the words preceding it. The sentence should,
therefore, read: Г¬Having mentally relinquished
all actions the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ exists in the body
of nine gates...Г® It is, however, no compliment
to a SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ to say that he resides in the
body. In fact, it detracts from his worth. Every
Tom, Dick and Harry resides in the body. It
Although a SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ, as judged by
his own viewpoint, ceases to have any
connection with the body, mind and senses,
and remains constantly established in identity
with God, the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge
and Bliss, still, in the eyes of the world, he
is no more than one encased in a mortal
body. Hence he has been called a Г«DehвҲӮГӯ.
The same word has been used in verse 20
of Chapter XIV also with reference to one
who has risen above the three GuЖ’as or
modes of PrakГҰti. And the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ has
been called a Г«VaвҖ№iГӯ (self-controlled) because
from the worldly point of view the activities
of his mind, intellect, and senses are regulated
according to the injunctions of the scriptures
and conducive to the interests of the world
order.

=== PAGE 274 ===

* Chapter V *
273
is a truism which need not be affirmed of a
SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ. The glory of a SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ lies
in relegating actions to the body, that is to
say, to material objects like the senses and so
on. Only  a SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ can do so; the
average man cannot. Hence the prose order
that has been adopted is quite correct.
The nine cavities of the human body
referred to as nine gates in this verse are:
a pair of eyes, a pair of ears, a pair of nostrils
and a mouthГіall located in the head or
uppermost part of the human body, and the
organs of reproduction and defecation situated
in the lowest extremity of the trunk. Being
the seats of four out of five senses of
perception and three out of the five organs
of action, these nine cavities represent the ten
Indriyas; and hence relegating actions to the
body of these nine gates is equivalent to
relegating the functions of the  ten Indriyas
to the Indriyas themselves. Being the seat of
all the ten Indriyas as well as the mind, the
body too denotes the aggregate of all the
instruments of action. Hence the Lord simply
reiterates in this verse what He stated in
verses 8 and 9 above. Only He has adopted
a changed phraseology in order to heighten
the effect. In verses 8 and 9 He named the
activities of the senses, whereas here He has
referred to the seats of those senses. That is
all the difference. There is, however, no
difference in the sense.
*
*
*
Actually renouncing all forms of activity
one cannot even carry on oneГӯs existence.
Therefore, a SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮГӯs renunciation is
only mental, a renunciation through the
faculty of discrimination and reasoning of
doership as well as of instrumentality in
respect of all actions. It is in order to
bring out this idea clearly that the verb
Г«SaвүҲnyasyaГӯ has been qualified by the word
Г«ManasГҘГӯ.
*
*
*
Although the text simply says that the
SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ rests (DehвҲӮ Г…ste) and makes no
mention of the resting place, the verb Г«restsГӯ
requires a complement in the form of a
locative. According to the established canons
of exegesis it is a common practice among
commentators to supply ellipses by means of
words implied in the text. Here the subject of
discussion is a SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ; and a
SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ as a matter of fact can rest
happily in God alone; the embodiment of Truth,
Knowledge and Bliss, and nowhere else. It is
therefore, that the words Г«in GodГӯ have been
added after Г«restsГӯ in the translation.
One may ask here: If the Self is neither the doer of actions nor does it prompt the
senses etc., to act, how is it, then, that all men regard themselves as the doer and also
reap the fruit of their actions?
Её вҲ‘В§ГғГҺВёГ п¬ӮВў Её вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§SГҝ вҖҡГҺВЎГҒГғ В¬ЛқГ·ГҲвҖ”Г”вҖ“
Её 
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ»В§вҲӮUвҖҡВўГҝГҠпЈҝВӘВў 
Sп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮSГғГҲ 
В¬Лқп¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝH 14H
Её nor; вҲ‘В§ГғГҺВёГ п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” doership; ЕёГ” neither; вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ the doings; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§SГҝ of men; вҖҡГҺВЎГҒГғ determines;
В¬ЛқГ·ГҲвҖ” God; Её nor even; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ»В§вҲӮUвҖҡВўГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ”U contact with the fruit of actions; Sп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮвҖ” Nature (alone);
ГғГҲ but; В¬Лқп¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝ functions.
God determines not the doership nor the doings of men, nor even their contact
with the fruit of actions; but it is Nature alone that functions.              (14)

=== PAGE 275 ===

274
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«PrabhuВЁГӯ in this verse denotes
the almighty God, the creator, preserver and
destroyer of the whole creation. The scriptures,
wherever they speak of God as responsible
for the creation etc., of the universe, refer
only to God with attributes.
By declaring that God determines not
the doership of man the Lord seeks to
convey that the doership of men with reference
to their actions is not ordained by God.
Under the spell of egotism the ignorant
regard themselves as the doer (III.27). To be
more explicit, God does not pre-ordain that
one must perform a certain good or evil act;
for in that case the injunctions and interdictions
of the scriptures would become futile and
meaningless. By declaring that God does not
bring about the contact of men with the fruit
of their actions either, the Lord signifies that
through ignorance men associate themselves
with their actions, some by assuming their
doership through attachment and others by
getting attached to their fruits.
Had these been predetermined by God,
it would become impossible for man to shake
off the bondage of karma and there would
be no chance for his deliverance. A striver
would, therefore, do well to dissociate himself
from his actions by resigning them in the
aforesaid manner either to Nature (V.8-9) or
to God (V.10) again by wholly renouncing
the fruit of his actions as well as attachment.
This is what is meant by the statement of
the Lord that Г¬God determines not the
doership nor the doings of men, nor even
their contact with the fruit of actions.Г®
It has been stated above that the soul
has nothing to do with the doership of actions
and has no connection either with the actions
or their fruit. And the present verse says that
God too determines not the doership of actions
and so on. The question, therefore naturally
arises: How are they to be accounted for ?
To answer this question the Lord says that all
this is being done by PrakГҰti, or nature,
appearing in the form of its three GuЖ’asГі
Sattva, Rajas and Tamas,Гіall morbid feelings
such as likes and dislikes etc., and good and
evil actions and their latencies. All JвҲӮvas who
have not risen above it have been united with
it from time without beginning. That is why
they are possessed of the sense of doership,
that is to say, deluded by egoism they come
to regard themselves as the doer (III.27); and
that is why they are associated with their actions
as well as with their fruits and get bound by
them. In reality, however, the soul has got
nothing to do with these. This is what is sought
to be conveyed by the statement that Г¬It is
Nature which functions.Г®
Here it may be asked: Does the Lord Himself reap the fruit of the good and evil actions
of the striver who has dissociated himself from the fruits of his actions by offering them as
well as his actions to the Lord? The Lord meets this question in the following verse:
ЕёГҠЕ’Г»ГҠпЈҝ вҲ‘В§SГҝГҒГёГ В¬ГҠВ¬Вў Её ГёГ’п¬Ӯ вҖҡГҲвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғВў ГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҲвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҖўГҙГҠГҠЕёпЈҝЕёГҠп¬ӮГҺГғВў ГҙГҠГҠЕёВў ГғпЈҝЕё в—ҠГҲsГ”ГҒГЈГғ ВЎГЈГғп¬ӮвҖ”H 15H
Её not; вҖўГҠЕ’Г»ГҠпЈҝ receives; вҲ‘В§SГҝГҒГёГғЛңГ” of anyone; В¬ГҠВ¬в—ҠЛңГ” sin; ЕёГ” not; Гё and; вҲһп¬ӮГ”U either; вҖҡГҲвҲ‘ГҺВ§Гғв—ҠЛңГ”
virtue; ГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҲвҖ” the omnipresent Lord; вҖўГҙГҠГҠЕёпЈҝЕё in ignorance; вҖўГҠп¬ӮГҺГғв—ҠЛңГ” (is) enveloped; ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ”
Knowledge; ГғпЈҝЕё thereby; в—ҠГҲsГ”ГҒГЈГғ are falling a prey to delusion; ВЎГЈГғп¬ӮвҖ” beings.
The omnipresent God does not receive the virtue or sin of anyone. Knowledge
is enveloped in ignorance; hence it is that beings are constantly falling a prey to
delusion.                                                               (15)

=== PAGE 276 ===

* Chapter V *
275
The word Г¬VibhuВЁГ® stands here for
God Almighty with attributes but devoid of
form, residing in the heart of all (XIII.17;
XV.15; XVIII.61) and controlling the
operations of the whole world by His will.
The statement of the Lord that Г¬God does
not receive the virtue or sin of anyoneГ® is
intended to convey that even though all
actions are performed by men through His
energy,Гіin other words, it is He who
endows men with energy, intelligence and
senses etc., according to their past Karma,Гі
He does not receive the actions performed
by them. In other words, He does not reap
their fruit Himself.
It may be contended here that in the last
verse of this very chapter as well as in the
twenty-fourth verse of Chapter IX, the Lord
Himself says that He is the enjoyer of all
sacrifices and austerities. How are we to
reconcile those statements with that contained
in this verse ? It should be noted in this
connection that the whole universe is a
manifestation of God with attributes. Hence it
is God Himself who enjoys all sacrifices in the
form of divinities. Nevertheless, in reality God
has nothing to do with our actions or their
fruit. This is what is sought to be conveyed
by the statement that God does not receive the
virtue or sin of anyone. The idea is that even
though enjoying all sacrifices in the form of
gods and men, and though accepting articles
and actions offered by devotees, He is really
unconnected with them in the same way as He
is unborn though accepting birth (IV.6) and
remains a non-doer though performing the
functions of creation, preservation and destruction
of the universe (IV.13). Hence it is but
reasonable to say that God does not receive
the virtues of anyone.
ГҙГҠГҠЕёпЈҝЕё ГғГҲ ГғЕ’ГҙГҠГҠЕёВў ГҝпЈҝВ·ГҠВў ЕёГҠГҒвүҘГҠГғв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠГҠГҒЕ’Г Гҝп¬ӮГ–ГҙГҠГҠЕёВў 
В¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҠГҝГҒГғ 
ГғГ В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”H 16H
ГҙГҠГҠЕёпЈҝЕё by true Knowledge; ГғГҲ but; ГғГғЛңГ” that; вҖўГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” ignorance; ГҝпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” whose; ЕёГҠГҒвүҘГҠГғв—ҠЛңГ” (has
been) set aside; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ” of God; ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” theirs; вҖўГҠГҒЕ’Г Гҝп¬ӮГғЛңГ” like the sun; ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” (that) Knowledge;
В¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҠГҝГҒГғ reveals; ГғГғЛңГ” that; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” the supreme.
In the case, however, of those whose said ignorance has been desstroyed by true
Knowledge of God, that wisdom shining like the sun reveals the Supreme.   (16)
As the sun, dispelling darkness, reveals
the true nature of all objects, even so
Knowledge dispels ignorance and reveals the
true nature of God. In other words, those
who have attained real Knowledge never
and in no circumstance fall a victim to
delusion. This is what is sought to be
conveyed by the analogy of the sun.
Verse 15 spoke of JвҲӮvas being deluded
by ignorance. The indeclinable Г«TuГӯ has
been used here to differentiate the Self-
realized souls from the common run of men,
who are thus deluded. That is to say, those
whose ignorance has been driven away by
true Knowledge of God, attained through the
practice of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga, are not so deluded.
It has been stated above that true Knowledge leads to God-realization. Now, with
a view to revealing up to verse 26 the processes of God-realization through JВӨГҘnayoga
and the characteristics, conduct, greatness and mental state of God-realized souls, the
Lord in the first instance speaks below of the attainment of God through the exclusive
practice of JВӨГҘnayoga:

=== PAGE 277 ===

276
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
A follower of the path of Knowledge
should come to realize, through the teachings
of the scriptures and the preceptor, that the
whole world is but illusory and that God, the
embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss,
is the only reality. He should then give up all
thoughts of material objects, and in order to
rest his mind firmly in God should meditate
on his blissful aspect. Revolving the idea of
bliss again and again in his mind, he should
bring home to it the fact that everywhere
there is joy and joy aloneГіperfect joy,
boundless joy, tranquil joy, solid joy, steady
joy, constant joy, everlasting joy, conscious
joy, joy which is identical with wisdom,
supreme joy, great joy, unending joy,
unthinkable joy, spiritual joy, nothing but
joy. By constantly reflecting on this truth
when the mind rests firmly in identity with
God, the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge
and Bliss, it is said to have wholly merged in
Him.
On the mind being thus merged in God,
the truth about God is brought home to the
intellect as vividly as though directly perceived.
When by constant meditation on this truth
so ascertained the intellect loses its identity
and becomes one with God, the embodiment
of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss, it is said to
have wholly merged in Him.
Mind and intellect are the principal factors
that draw an imaginary line between the soul
and the oversoul. Therefore, until the mind
and intellect are wholly merged in Him in the
aforesaid manner, the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ is unable
to identify himself with God. On the mind
and intellect being merged in Him as stated
above, the SГҘdhaka is rid of the delusion that
differentiates between the soul and the oversoul,
and the tripartite consciousness of meditator,
the object meditated upon and the process of
meditation disappear, so that there remains God
alone, the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge
and Bliss. This is what is meant by establishing
oneself in identity with God.
When the delusion that differentiates
between the soul and the oversoul has been
got rid of in the manner described above, and
the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ is firmly established in identity
with God, the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge
and Bliss, nothing remians in his consciousness
as matter of fact, except God. His mind, intellect,
vital airs, etc., all become one with God. The
word Г¬TatparГҘyaЖ’ГҘВЁГ®, therefore, denotes such
men as have actually become one with God,
the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and
Bliss, by directly perceiving Him.
In the previous verse Г«TatГӯ has been used
as an adjective qualifying Г«ParamГӯ the Supreme.
A demonstrative pronoun always refers to the
noun immediately preceding it; hence the
pronoun Г«TatГӯ forming part of the compound
ГғЕ’ЛңГ”вҖҷГҲhГҝSГғЕ’ГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёSГғГҒГӣГҠDГ”UГҠSГғГ В¬вҒ„UГҠГҝГЎГҠГҠвҖ”Г” вҖ“
ВӘГ«ВҝUГЈГ ГҝВ¬ГҲЕёвҒ„UГҠп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠВў 
ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҒЕёЕ“ВёГҚГғвҲ‘В§ГҖв—ҠВ·ГҠвҖ”H 17H
ГғЕ’ЛңГ”вҖҷГҲhГҝвҖ” whose intellect is wholly merged in Him; ГғЕ’ГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёвҖ” whose mind is merged
in Him; ГғГҒГӣГҠDГ”UГҠвҖ” who are constantly established in identity with Him; ГғГ В¬вҒ„UГҠГҝГЎГҠГҠвҖ” (and) who
have become one with Him; ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГЈГғ attain; вҖўВ¬ГҲЕёвҒ„UГҠп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the state whence there is no return;
ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҒЕёЕ“ВёГҚГғвҲ‘В§ГҖв—ҠВ·ГҠвҖ” whose sins have been wiped out by wisdom.
Those whose mind and intellect are wholly merged in Him, who remain constantly
established in identity with Him, and have finally become one with Him, their sins
being wiped out by wisdom, reach the state whence there is no return.     (17)

=== PAGE 278 ===

* Chapter V *
277
words Г«TadbuddhayaВЁГӯ etc., occurring in this
verse, naturally refers to the supreme Reality
which has been stated in that verse to be
revealed by true Knowledge. Therefore, with
due regard to the context the word has been
correctly interpreted as God, the embodiment
of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss.
The word JВӨГҘna forming part of the
compound word Г«JВӨГҘnanirdhВөutakalmaВ¶ГҘВЁГӯ
denotes the true Knowledge of Reality which
has been referred to in the foregoing verse
as driving away ignorance and revealing
God. Г«KalmaВ¶aГӯ (lit., a sin), forming part of
the same word, includes the latencies of
oneГӯs past action, both good and evil, and
evils 
like 
partiality 
and 
prejudice,
distraction and obscurity. All these, being
responsible for throwing the soul into bondage,
are really sins; Г«NirdhВөutaГӯ implies their complete
annihilation. 
Therefore, 
the 
word
Г«JВӨГҘnanirdhВөutakalmaВ¶ГҘВЁГӯ shows that the true
Knowledge of Reality obtained through the
aforesaid course of discipline, consisting of
merging the mind etc., in God and so on,
wipes out oneГӯs sins accumulated in the
shape of impurities, distraction and obscurity
of the mind, leaving no trace of them behind.
The word Г«ApunarГҘvГҰttimГӯ refers to
God; on reaching whom one does not return
to this mortal world even as a man who has
awakened from a dream ceases to have any
connection with the world thereof, and who
has been spoken of as Г«Tat ParamГӯ in the
preceding verse and has been variously
termed in the GвҲӮtГҘ as Г«AkВ¶aya SukhaГӯ (eternal
Bliss), Г«NirvГҘЖ’a BrahmaГӯ (Brahma who is all
peace), Г«Uttama SukhaГӯ (the highest Bliss),
Г¬ParamГҘ GatiГӯ (the supreme Goal), Г«Parama
DhГҘmaГӯ (the supreme Abode) Г«Avyaya PadaГӯ
(the 
immortal 
abode) 
and 
Г«Divya
ParamapuruВ¶aГӯ (the supreme Divine PuruВ¶a)
and who is realized through true Knowledge.
Having stated the means of God-realization, the Lord now proceeds to describe the
undifferentiating attitude of God-realized souls:
ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГҒп¬ӮЕёГҝвҖҡГӘВ¬ГӣГҠпЈҝ вҖҷЛқГҠrГҠГ”ГЎГҠпЈҝ ВӘГҒп¬Ӯ вҖһUГҒSГғГҒЕёГ”вҖ“
вүҘГҠГҲГҒЕё ГёГ’п¬Ӯ EВ¬ГҠвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ Гё В¬ГҒГЎВ«UГғГҠвҖ” вҖҡв—ҠЕ’ГҢвүҘГҠЕёвҖ”Г”H 18H
ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГҒп¬ӮЕёГҝвҖҡГӘВ¬ГӣГҠпЈҝ endowed with learning and culture; вҖҷЛқГҠrГҠГ”ГЎГҠпЈҝ on a BrГҘhmaЖ’a; ВӘГҒп¬Ӯ on a
cow; вҖһUГҒSГғГҒЕё on an elephant; вүҘГҠГҲГҒЕё on a dog; Гё and; вҲһп¬Ӯ too; EВ¬ГҠвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ on a pariah; Гё and;
В¬ГҒГЎВ«UГғГҠвҖ” the wise; вҖҡв—ҠЕ’ГҒвүҘГҠГ”ВёЕёвҖ” look with the same eye.
The wise look with equanimity on all, whether it be a BrГҘhmaЖ’a endowed with
learning and humility, a cow, an elephant, a dog or a pariah.                     (18)
examples have been judiciously picked up
from diverse orders of creation. A learned
and cultured BrГҘhmaЖ’a represents the best
specimen of humanity, whereas a вҖәvapГҘka
(a pariah living on the flesh of dogs) occupies
the lowest rank in society. Even so, the cow,
the elephant and the dog respectively represent
the highest, the middle and the lowest types
among the quadrupeds. Everybody has to
The word Г«PaЖ’Е’itГҘВЁГӯ here denotes high-
souled men of perfection who have realized
the Truth. All distinctions disappear from the
mind of saints who have realized the Truth.
In their eyes nothing exists except God, the
supreme Reality, the embodiment of Truth,
Knowledge and Bliss. Therefore, he sees
one uniform existence everywhere. In order
to explain this sense of unity in diversity,

=== PAGE 279 ===

278
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
observe a distinction in his dealings with all
these. For instance, all take cowГӯs milk, but
none would have the milk of a bitch.
Similarly, an elephant can be used for riding
purposes but a dog cannot. That which
serves as good food for the animals may not
always be fit for human consumption. The
scriptures enjoin that a good BrГҘhmaЖ’a
should be respected and adored, but prescribe
no such thing in respect of a pariah. Therefore,
by means of these varied examples, it has
been clearly brought out that the knower of
Reality looks with the same eye even on
those in dealing with whom distinction must
need be observed in life. Never and on no
account does the feeling of diversity enter
his mind.
But this does not mean that a wise man
observes no distinction in his dealings with
different persons or objects. In fact, such a
thing is not possible. Distinction must be
observed in oneГӯs dealings with all up to a
resonable limit as prescribed by the scriptures.
A wise man does observe in his dealings all
such distinctions as are necessary and proper
in the eyes of the world. He will treat a
BrГҘhmaЖ’a even as a BrГҘhmaЖ’a should be
treated and will deal with the pariah as one
ought to do; even so, he will use a cow, an
elephant and a dog as well in a befitting way.
Nevertheless he percieves God alike in
everybody and bears the same love towards
all. A man does not behave with the various
members of his own body, such as the head,
the hands and the feet, in the same way and
observes the same distinction between them
as between the four orders of society, viz., a
BrГҘhmaЖ’, a KВ¶atirya, a VaiвҖ№ya and a вҖәВөudra.
He does not put his hands and feet to the
same use as his head and mouth, nor does he
take the same work from his head as from his
hands and feet; nay he does not show the
same amount of regard and attention to all
his limbs and his method of cleaning them
also differs. Nevertheless he regards them all
as equally his own; hence he feels their ease
or pain alike and bears the same amount of
love for the whole body. His love for and the
feeling of Г«mineГӯ with regard to the different
parts of his body know no distinction. Even
so the exalted soul who has realized the
Truth, sees God everywhere; hence even
though observing due distinction in his dealings
from the point of view of the world, he loves
and identifies himself with all in an equal
degree. And, therefore, just as on a particular
limb of oneГӯs body being hurt or likely to be
hurt one tries to heal it or ward off the
impending danger to it, even so when a
particular individual or a group of individuals
is in distress, the wise man will duly try to
remove their distress during his active life.
Having thus described the sense of unity possessed by a seer, the Lord now declares
that unity is the same as God, and glorifies those who are established in unity:
ГҹвҖһГ’Uп¬Ӯ ГғГ’ГҢВЎГғвҖ” вҖҡВӘГҠпЈҝВё ГҝпЈҝВ·ГҠВў вҖҡГҠГӘГҝпЈҝ ГҒSГ•ГғВў в—ҠЕёвҖ”вҖ“
ГҒЕёЕ’ГҠпЈҝВёВ·Вў ГҒвҖһU вҖҡв—ҠВў вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” ГғSв—ҠГҠЕ’ЛңГ”вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒГЎГҠ ГғпЈҝ ГҒSГ•ГғГҠвҖ”Г”H 19H
ГҹвҖһU вҲһп¬Ӯ even here, in this very life; ГғГ’вҖ” by those; ГҒВЎГғвҖ” is conquered; вҖҡВӘВёвҖ” the mortal
plane; ГҝпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” whose; вҖҡГҠГӘГҝпЈҝ in unity; ГҒSГ•Гғв—ҠЛңГ” is established; в—ҠЕёвҖ” mind; ГҒЕёЕ’ГҠпЈҝВёВ·в—ҠЛңГ” is untouched by
evil; ГҒвҖһU for; вҖҡв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” is the same to all; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” the Absolute; ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” hence; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒГЎГҠ in the Eternal;
ГғпЈҝ they; ГҒSГ•ГғГҠвҖ” (are) established.

=== PAGE 280 ===

* Chapter V *
279
Those who see unity everywhere are
said to have been established in unity. This
perception of unity in diversity frees them
from the bondage of birth and death in this
very life. That is to say, even though they
carry on their mundane existence in the eyes
of the world, they cease to have any connection
with their body, and hence with everything
else in this world. This is what is meant by
the conquest of the mortal plane.
Sattva, Rajas and Tamas,Гіall these
modes of PrakГҰti are fraught with evils of
every kind and the whole world being a
product of these, is full of evils. All evils
in the shape of partiality and prejudice,
infatuation and the sense of diversity etc.,
make their appearance due to contact with
these GuЖ’as. God, the embodiment of Truth,
Knowledge and Bliss, is altogether free from
these GuЖ’as. Hence, He is free from blemish
and knows no distinction. In the same way,
the knower of reality too transcends these
three GuЖ’as. Hence he is completely rid of
all evils in the shape of likes and dislikes,
infatuation, the sense of possession, egoism
etc., and gets established in unity. The words
Г«HiГӯ and Г«TasmГҘtГӯ have been used to signify
that unity is a symbol of the Absolute. Hence
those whose mind rests in unity are actually
established in the Absolute. Though in the
eyes of the world they appear as existing in
the world made up of the three GuЖ’as and
the body, yet, as a matter of fact, being
established in unity, they have no connection
with this world made up of the three GuЖ’as
or with the body. They exist in the Absolute
alone.
It may be contended here that it is quite
reasonable to speak of Rajas and Tamas as
the abode of all evils; for at several places in
the GвҲӮtГҘ they are declared as responsible for
all mischief and the SГҘdhaka is enjoined again
and again to get rid of them. But the quality
of Sattva is helpful in realizing God; how is
it that the Lord treats it on the same footing
as the other two qualities and calls it the abode
of evil ? In this connection it may be submitted
that the quality of Sattva is no doubt superior
to Rajas and Tamas and is also helpful in the
uplift of man; yet, being associated with egoistic
pleasure and Knowledge, it has been declared
by the Lord as instrumental in bringing about
bondage (XIV.6). In fact, without being
completely rid of all the three GuЖ’as, a SГҘdhaka
cannot be declared as absolutely free from
blemish and cannot be wholly established in
unity. Hence, while speaking of those who
have transcended the three GuЖ’as, it is not
unreasonable to declare SattvaguЖ’a too as full
of evil.
Even here is the mortal plane conquered by those whose mind is established
in equanimity; since the Absolute is untouched by evil and is the same to all, hence
they are established in Brahma, the ParamГҘtmГҘ.                                         (19)
The Lord now proceeds to describe the marks of a sage who has attained the Absolute
and Formless Brahma, the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss, and has
consequently lost all sense of diversity:
Её В¬ЛқNUcГҝпЈҝГҒГ В¬ЛқГҝВў В¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝ ЕёГҠпЈҝГҒmВЎпЈҝГ В¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝ ГёГҠГҒВ¬ЛқГҝв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҒSГ•вҒ„UвҖҷГҲГҒhвҒ„UвҖҡГӘв—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҠпЈҝ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ЛңГ” вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒГЎГҠ ГҒSГ•ГғвҖ”Г”H 20H
Её not; В¬ЛқNUcГҝпЈҝГғЛңГ” (who) rejoices; ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝв—ҠЛңГ” what is pleasing; В¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝ obtaining; Её not; В©UГҒmВЎпЈҝГғЛңГ” feels
perturbed; В¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝ obtaining; Гё and; вҖўГҒВ¬ЛқГҝв—ҠЛңГ” the unpleasant; ГҒSГ•вҒ„UвҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” endowed with firm

=== PAGE 281 ===

280
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Things which are agreeable to the mind,
intellect, senses and body are called Г«pleasantГӯ.
The ignorant suffer from attachment for such
things and feel delighted on obtaining them.
The knower of Reality, however, being
established in unity, does not feel the least
attachment for anything. Hence he does not
rejoice on coming in contact, as a result of
some good action done in the past, with
anything which is agreeable to the mind,
intellect, senses and body. For, he has
altogether ceased to identify himself with, or
entertain the feeling of possession or attachment
with regard to all these. Even so, things
which are disagreeable to the mind, intellect,
senses and body are known as Г«unpleasantГӯ,
and the ignorant entertain a feeling of aversion
for such things. That is why they get upset
and feel very miserable on coming in contact
with them. But the knower of Reality is
absolutely free from aversion. Hence he does
not feel perturbed or miserable even on
coming in contact with that which is most
disagreeable to his mind, senses and body.
In the eyes of the sage who has realized
the Truth nothing is real in this world except
the one Absolute. Therefore, his intellect is
ever steady and firm. Even when he is
confronted in the eyes of the world with
honour and ignominy, or joy and sorrow of
various kinds, his intellect is never shaken
from its stability in the Absolute. It remains
ever and under all circumstances immovably
fixed in the Absolute, the embodiment of
Truth, Knowledge and Bliss.
The use of the word Г«AsammВөuЕ’haВЁГӯ
signifies that the mind of the wise man is
absolutely free from doubts, errors and
infatuation. All his doubts disappear along
with their root, viz., ignorance.
The word Г«BrahmavitГӯ denotes one who
has attained full Knowledge of the reality of
Brahma, the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge
and Bliss. Such a Г«BrahmavitГӯ comes to
know every thing not only about Brahma but
also about the world, the relation of the
world with Brahma, the soul and the Oversoul,
the difference between the individual soul
and God, and so on. Nothing about Brahma
remains to be known by him who has come
face to face with the Reality.
Such a knower of Brahma remains
constantly established in Brahma all the time,
no matter whether he is awake, dreaming or
fast asleep. The idea is that at no time and in
no circumstance does he dwell in the body.
Having become one with the Absolute, he is
never and on no account disunited from Him,
He remains unaltered in all circumstances. That
is why he has been called Г«BrahmaЖ’i SthitaВЁГӯ.
reason; вҖўвҖҡГӘв—ҠГҚвҖҰUвҖ” free from doubt; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮГғЛңГ” the knower of Brahma; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒГЎГҠ in Brahma; ГҒSГ•ГғвҖ”
exists.
He who, with reason firm and free from doubt, rejoices not on obtaining what
is pleasant and does not feel perturbed on meeting with the unpleasant, that knower
of Brahma lives eternally in identity with Brahma.                        (20)
The characteristics of a person established in Brahma having thus been described,
the Lord now proceeds to point out the means of attaining such a state of mind and
the fruit thereof:
вҖҷГҠsГ”SВ¬вүҘГҠпЈҝВёcп¬ӮвҖҡГ”QВ§ГҠГ в—ҠГҠ ГҒп¬ӮГЈЕ’Г ГҝГҠГ в—ҠГҒЕё ГҝГ вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖҡ 
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҝГҲQВ§ГҠГ в—ҠГҠ 
вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛҮГҠГҝв—ҠoAГҲГғпЈҝH 21H

=== PAGE 282 ===

* Chapter V *
281
Object of senses such as sound, touch
colour, taste and smell etc., are denoted by
the word Г«BГҘhyasparseВ¶uГӯ. And he who has
with the help of his reason driven out from
his mind all attachment for these, who has
withdrawn his mind from all enjoyments and
who has developed a feeling of indifference
towards them, is referred to here by the
words Г«BГҘhyasparвҖ№eВ¶u AsaktГҘtmГҘГӯ.
The joy which is spoken of as dwelling
in the mind is the joy that one derives from
constant and ceaseless meditation on God,
the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and
Bliss. He who takes delight in sense-enjoyments
alone can never experience this joy. In fact,
there is no joy in external enjoyments, but
only a semblance of it. The joy born of
dispassion is far greater than this semblance
of joy and the happiness resulting from
quietism is of a still higher nature. But the
joy which is derived from constant and
unbroken meditation on God surpasses all.
The phrase Г«Eternal BlissГӯ stands here
for the Imperishable God who is ever the
same and is the very embodiment of supreme
Bliss. And the enjoyment of this bliss consists
in realizing oneГӯs identity with Him, as a
result of constant and unbroken meditation.
No other joy can stand in comparison with
this. The joy that one finds in worldly
enjoyments is utterly negligible and momentary.
The joy born of dispassion and that resulting
from quietism, being conducive to the joy
derived from meditation, are comparatively
lasting; while the joy derived from meditation,
being the direct cause of God-realization, is
still more lasting. But none of these joys,
connected with the period of spiritual practice,
can be called Г«eternalГӯ. Eternal Bliss is the
same as God.
вҖҷГҠsГ”SВ¬вүҘГҠпЈҝВёВ·ГҲГ” to external enjoyments; вҖўвҖҡQВ§ГҠГ в—ҠГҠ one whose mind is unattached; ГҒп¬ӮГЈЕ’ГҒГғ derives
(through meditation); вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҒЕё (dwells) in the mind; ГҝГғЛңГ” which; вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ” (that) joy (of a SГҘttvika
type); вҖҡвҖ” he; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҝГҲQВ§ГҠГ в—ҠГҠ becoming one with Brahma (through meditation); вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ” Bliss;
вҖўЛҮГҠГҝв—ҠЛңГ” eternal; вҖўвүҘЕёГҲГғпЈҝ enjoys.
He whose mind remains unattached to sense-objects, derives through meditation
the SГҘttvika joy which dwells in the mind; then that YogвҲӮ, having completely identified
himself through meditation with Brahma, enjoys eternal Bliss.               (21)
Having thus declared renunciation of attachment for sense-objects as conducive to
God-realization, the Lord now indirectly calls upon Arjuna in the following verse to
renounce attachment for sense-objects, proclaiming them to be the source of suffering and
transient:Гі
ГҝпЈҝ ГҒвҖһU вҖҡВўSВ¬вүҘГҠВёВЎГҠ Г·ГҠпЈҝВӘГҠ Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖГҝГҠпЈҝЕёГҝ вҲһп¬Ӯ ГғпЈҝвҖ“
вҖўГҠlГЈГғп¬ӮГЈГғвҖ” вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ Её ГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ вҒ„Uв—ҠГғпЈҝ вҖҷГҲЕ“вҖ”H 22H
ГҝпЈҝГ” which; ГҒвҖһU verily; вҖҡВўSВ¬вүҘГҠВёВЎГҠвҖ” born of sense-contacts; Г·ГҠпЈҝВӘГҠвҖ” pleasures; Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖГҝГҠпЈҝЕёГҝвҖ” вҲһп¬Ӯ only
a source of suffering; ГғпЈҝ they; вҖўГҠlГЈГғп¬ӮГЈГғвҖ” having a beginning and an end, fleeting; вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ
O son of KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna; Её does not; ГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ in them; вҒ„Uв—ҠГғпЈҝ indulge; вҖҷГҲЕ“вҖ” the wise man.
The pleasures which are born of sense-contacts are verily a source of suffering
only (though appearing as enjoyable to worldly-minded people). They have a

=== PAGE 283 ===

282
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The unintelligent moth, which cannot
foresee the result of its instinctive action,
erroneously considers the flame to be a
source of joy, rushes towards it to hug it and
falling into it undergoes severe roasting and
scorches itself to death. Even so, the ignorant
man, considering sense-enjoyments to be a
source of joy, gets attached to them, and
seeks to enjoy them and reaps great sorrows
and sufferings through their enjoyment.
He who enjoys sense-objects, regarding
them as a source of delight gets attached to
them; attachment begets other evils like lust,
anger etc., and from lust and anger spring
up all sorts of vices and rogueries, which
take possession of his heart. The result is that
his life gets involved in sin and consequently
he has to undergo terrible sufferings and
tortures both here and hereafter.
Man 
erroneously 
regards 
sense-
enjoyments like sexual intercourse as a source
of joy. But in the long run they bring about
loss of strength, virility, longevity, and the
energy of his mind, intellect, vital organs and
senses; and in the event of their transgressing
the limit imposed by the scriptures, they bring
him terrible tortures of hell in the next world
and prove to be a source of untold suffering.
Besides this, when an ignorant man
sees another with more objects of enjoyment
than he has, the fire of jealousy gets kindled
in his heart and begins to burn him.
Again, if sense-objects enjoyed with a
relish get lost due to a freak of destiny, the
impressions left by them arouse their memory
again and again; and as man recalls them he
is filled with sorrow. He weeps and cries
over them and is tormented with a sense of
frustration. All this proves that enjoyments
derived from contact with sense-objects are
only a source of suffering as a matter of fact
and have no trace of joy in them. They
appear delightful only through ignorance and
perverted vision. That is why the Lord declares
them to be a source of suffering only.
Sense-enjoyments are fleeting and
momentary as a dream or a flash of lightning.
This is what is meant by calling them
Г«Г…dyantavantaВЁГӯ. In reality there is no joy
in them; but due to ignorance they appear
as full of joy. Hence even if we assume them
to be a source of joy in some degree, that
joy too is not lasting but only ephemeral. For
that which is fleeting itself cannot give
permanent joy. In verse 14 of the second
chapter the sense-objects have been declared
as transient, because they come and go.
ArjunaГӯs mother, KuntвҲӮ, was very
intelligent, sensible, self-controlled and averse
to sense-enjoyments. Though belonging to the
fair sex, which is traditionally associated with
frailty, she spent all her life in piety combined
with dispassion and devotion. Therefore, by
addressing Arjuna as Г«KaunteyaГӯ the Lord
reminds him of the greatness of his mother
and conveys to him the hint that having been
born of such a saintly and pious mother, it
was beyond expectation that he would ever
feel attracted towards sense-enjoyments.
Sense-enjoyments are really fleeting,
ephemeral and full of sorrow; yet the ignorant
and undiscriminating, shutting their eyes to
this fact indulge in them and undergo all
sorts of suffering and agony. But the wise
and the discriminating ponder over their
fleeting and ephemeral nature and finding in
them the seeds of evils like lust and anger,
sin and misery, realise that renunciation of
attachment for them will bring eternal Bliss.
That is why they refuse to indulge in them.
beginning and an end (they come and go). Arjuna, it is for this reason that a wise
man does not indulge in them.                                          (22)

=== PAGE 284 ===

* Chapter V *
283
Here the indeclinables Г«IhaГӯ and Г«EvaГӯ
have been used to denote the importance of
the human body. In superhuman or celestial
forms there is a superabundance of luxuries
and enjoyments; whereas in sub-human forms
dullness reigns supreme. Therefore, one cannot
find means to conquer lust and anger in all
those forms. Hence by adopting the use of
Г«IhaГӯ and Г«EvaГӯ the Lord warns us, as it
were, to acquire through earnest endeavour
the strength to endure the urges of lust and
anger calmly in this very life before casting
off the mortal frame. If through negligence
and carelessness this rare boon of human
existence is frittered away in accumulating
and enjoying sense-objects alone vain
repentence will be the only course left to us.
It is laid down in the Kena upaniВ¶ad:
Г¬If one comes to know the Reality in
this human life, it is very satisfactory; if one
fails to realize it here, it is an incalculable
lossГ®* (II.5).
The body is perishable; it is sure to drop
off sooner or later and no one knows which
is going to be the last moment for one.
Hence lust and anger should be conquered
before the hour of death arrives. At the same
time, through spiritual practice, the SГҘdhaka
should acquire necessary strength to resist
the repeated onslaughts of these arch-enemies
in the form of lust and anger, and frustrate
their attempt to upset him by their urgings.
He must see to it that these enemies in the
form of lust, anger, etc., disappear and take
leave of him with all their force, even as the
waters of so many rivers get lost into the
ocean along with their currents.
Man bears a natural attraction for woman,
and the desire to possess a wife,  progeny,
wealth, a house to live in or an abode in
heaven and other objects of enjoyment of the
mind and senses that are seen or heard of,
and for which one bears a natural attraction,
is known as Г«KГҘmaГӯ or lust. And the stirring
of thoughts of various kinds produced in the
mind due to this desire constitutes what is
known as the urge of Г«KГҘmaГӯ. Even so,
when a man comes in touch with objects
which are disagreeable to the mind, intellect
and senses, or when he finds himself thwarted
in his attempt to obtain the object of his
desire, he feels a natural aversion for the
object or individual that stands in his way.
The agitation caused in his mind by this
aversion is known as Г«angerГӯ. And the
currents and cross-currents of thought stirred
Having declared sense-enjoyments to be a source of suffering inasmuch as they beget
lust and anger, the Lord, while revealing the importance of the human body, praises the
man who conquers enemies like lust and anger, which are difficult to conquer:
вүҘГҠвҲ‘AВ§ГҠпЈҝГғГӢвҖһГ’Uп¬Ӯ ГҝвҖ” вҖҡГҠпЈҝвҖҰГҲВўU В¬ЛқГҠГ„вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„UГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҠГЎГҠГҠГғЛңГ”вҖ“
вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“ГҠпЈҝjп¬ӮВў п¬ӮпЈҝВӘВў вҖҡ ГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” вҖҡ вҖҡГҲПҖГӢ ЕёвҒ„UвҖ”H 23H
вүҘГҠвҲ‘AВ§ГҠпЈҝГҒГғ is able; ГҹвҖһU here, in this human life; вҲһп¬Ӯ even; ГҝвҖ” who; вҖҡГҠпЈҝвҖҰГҲUв—ҠЛңГ” to withstand; В¬ЛқГҠвҲ‘ЛңВ§Г”
вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„UГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҠГЎГҠГҠГғЛңГ” before casting off the body; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“ГҠпЈҝjп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” of lust and anger; п¬ӮпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ” the urges;
вҖҡвҖ” that; ГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” (is) a YogвҲӮ; вҖҡвҖ” (and) he (again); вҖҡГҲПҖГӢ (is) happy; ЕёвҒ„UвҖ” man.
He alone, who is able to withstand in this very life, before casting off this body,
the urges of lust and anger is a YogвҲӮ, and he alone is a happy man.            (23)
* ГҹвҖһU ГёпЈҝЕ’п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГӢЕ’Г• вҖҡГ Гҝв—ҠГҒSГғ Её ГёпЈҝГҒЕ’вҖһUГҠп¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГӢГЈв—ҠвҖһUГғГӢ ГҒп¬ӮЕёГҒCГ”UвҖ”вҖ“

=== PAGE 285 ===

284
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
up by it are what they call its Г«urgingsГӯ. And
to acquire the power of not allowing them
to have their way is what is meant by being
able to stand them.
The word Г«YuktaВЁГӯ here stands for one
who has subdued his mind and senses, and is
thus qualified to tread the path of Knowledge.
Everybody in the world seeks happiness.
But very few know what is real happiness
and how to attain it. Due to this ignorance
they run away with the wrong idea that
happiness consists only in enjoying the objects
of senses. That is why they hanker after them
and strive to attain them. And when they find
themselves balked in their efforts, they are
seized with anger. But as a rule one who
is habitually under the sway of lust and anger
can never be happy. One who is under the
sway of desire and the one who is under
the sway of anger, both betake themselves
to all sorts of mischiefs and vicesГіthe
former for the sake of a wife, progeny,
wealth and honour, etc. and the latter with
view to harming others. They thereby expose
themselves to illness, grief, ignominy, infamy,
perturbation, unrest, anxiety and various kinds
of agonies in this world and have to undergo
tortures in hell and sufferings of various
kinds in the lower species of animals, such
as birds and, beasts, insects and reptiles,
when born hereafter (XVI.18-20). In this
way they never attain happiness, and always
suffer pain. Those, on the other hand, who
having realized that enjoyments breed misery
and are ephemeral in nature have fully
subdued their enemies in the form of lust and
anger and have completely extricated
themselves from their grip, are always happy.
This is what is sought to be conveyed by
the concluding portion of the above verse.
He alone is a real Г«NaraГӯ or man, who
having thus subdued his evil propensities like
lust and anger and developed dispassion and
quietism, attains God, the embodiment of
Truth, Knowledge and Bliss. The word
Г«NaraВЁГӯ signifies such a person, no matter
to which sex he belongs.
Man is deluded by ignorance and is a
slave of attachment. Hence he falls an easy
prey to the lure of sense-enjoyments, which
are charming only to look at, and forgets
God. The result is that he gives himself up
to evil propensities like lust and anger and
remains engrossed in stuffing his belly, sleep,
carnality and quarrel like lowly beasts and
devils. He is not a man but a peculiar type
of unsightly animal without horns and tail
and even more degraded than the beast, not
only useless but positively obnoxious to the
world. Following the example and trying to
imitate the virtues of a real Г«NaraГӯ, a God-
realized soul, he who has conquered his
enemies like lust and anger also deserves the
title of Г«NaraВЁГӯ. It is in this latter sense that
the word Г«NaraВЁГӯ has been used in this verse.
The verse obviously refers to a SГҘdhaka
following the path of Knowledge and cannot
be taken as a true picture of the man who has
realized the goal. For one cannot be said to
have realized the goal merely by being able
to conquer lust and anger. A perfect soul, on
the other hand, has no trace of lust or anger
in him. This is what the Lord says in verse 26
below. Again, the man referred to above has
been spoken of as merely Г¬happyГ®. Had the
verse referred to a perfect soul, who has
attained Г«Eternal BlissГӯ mentioned in verse 21
supra, an adjective like Г«supremely happyГӯ or
some other such qualification should have
been used. The joy attained by this man is the
same as has been referred to in the first half
of verse 21 above as derived from meditation
on God. Therefore, the subject of this verse
should be taken to be a SГҘdhaka only.

=== PAGE 286 ===

* Chapter V *
285
Here the word Г«AntaВЁГӯ denotes God,
who indwells or permeates the whole universe,
and not the inner sense. Г«AntaВЁsukhaВЁГӯ,
therefore, refers to the man who finds no joy
in worldly pleasures consisting in the enjoyment
of external objects of senses, which he
regards as ephemeral like a dream, but finds
joy in God alone, who is the embodiment
of supreme Bliss and is immanent in all.
Such a man does not even recognize the
existence of external enjoyments, much less
their being a source of joy. Hence he does
not indulge in them, and renouncing attachment
for all these, takes delight in God alone. In
other words, he is constantly absorbed in
meditation on God, the embodiment of
supreme Bliss, as identical with him. This is
what is meant by the word Г«AntarГҘrГҘmaВЁГӯ,
Again, God is the supreme light of all
lights (XIII.17). The whole world is illumined
by His effulgence. Ever conscious of such
a God, the embodiment of supreme
Knowledge, as his own Self, the man referred
to above remains constantly established in
Him. Nay, in the eyes of such a man no
phenomenal object has any reality apart
from God, the embodiment of supreme
Bliss. This is what is meant by his being
Г«AntarjyotiВЁГӯ.
He, on the other hand, is not Г«AntarjyotiГӯ,
to whom the whole world appears as real
and who under the spell of ignorance thinks
of the visible world alone, even as a dreaming
man while asleep thinks of the dream only.
For God, the embodiment of supreme
Knowledge, is screened from his view.
The indeclinable Г«EvaГӯ is related with
all the three adjectives Г«AntaВЁsukhaВЁГӯ,
Г«AntarГҘrГҘmaВЁГӯ and Г«AntarjyotiВЁГӯ and denotes
exclusiveness, the intention is that the YogвҲӮ
ceases to have any connection with this
phenomenal world, inasmuch as he finds his
joy, gratification and light in God alone.
The word Г«BrahmabhВөutaВЁГӯ indicates
the final stage of a SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ. The SГҘdhaka
following the path of Knowledge renounces
egoism, the sense of possession and all evil
propensities like lust and anger, and incessantly
goes on meditating upon God as his own
Self. In this way, when he becomes one with
Him and does not maintain his separate
identity in the least degree, he is said to have
completely identified himself with God and
is known as Г«BrahmabhВөutaВЁГӯ. This constitutes
The Lord now describes in the following verse the final stage, with its fruit, of a
SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ who has, in the aforesaid manner, succeeded in conquering lust and anger
after realizing the external enjoyments to be a source of suffering and renouncing
attachment:
ГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГЈГғвҖ”вҖҡГҲПҖГҠпЈҝЛҳГЈГғвҒ„UГҠвҒ„UГҠв—ҠSГғГ•ГҠГЈГғГ–ГҝГҠпЈҝВёГҒГғвҒ„пЈҝUп¬Ӯ ГҝвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҖҡ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҠВёГЎГҠВў вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”Г·ГҚГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒЕ“ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғH 24H
ГҝвҖ” who; вҖўГЈГғвҖ”вҖҡГҲПҖвҖ” (is) happy within himself; вҖўГЈГғвҒ„UГҠвҒ„UГҠв—ҠвҖ”Г” enjoys within himself (the delight
of the soul); ГғГ•ГҠ and; вҖўГЈГғГ–ГҝГҠпЈҝВёГҒГғвҖ” is illumined by the inner light; вҲһп¬Ӯ verily; ГҝвҖ” who; вҖҡвҖ”
that; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҠВёГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Brahma who is all Peace; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”Г·ГҚГғвҖ” identified with Brahma;
вҖўГҒЕ“ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғ attains.
He who is happy within himself, enjoys within himself the delight of the soul,
and, even so, is illumined by the inner light (light of the soul), such a YogвҲӮ
(SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ) identified with Brahma attains Brahma, who is all Peace.                  (24)

=== PAGE 287 ===

286
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
the final stage or culmination of his SГҘdhanГҘ.
The term Г«BrahmanirvГҘЖ’amГӯ denotes
God, who is all peace, the embodiment of
Truth, Knowledge and Bliss, Attributeless,
Formless and Absolute. And to attain
Г«BrahmanirvГҘЖ’aГӯ is to perceive directly
oneГӯs identity with God. This is the fruit
of the culmination of a SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮГӯs
SГҘdhanГҘ 
indicated 
by 
the 
adjective
Г«BrahmabhВөutaВЁГӯ. The вҖәruti also says:
Г¬Becoming one with the Absolute, he realizes
the AbsoluteГ®* (BГҰh. up., IV.iv.6).
This 
state 
of 
God-realization 
is
variously termed as the attainment of Eternal
peace, the attainment of Eternal Bliss, the
attainment of the Absolute, the attainment of
Liberation and the attainment of the supreme
Goal.
The following two verses describe the characteristics of those who have thus realized
God, the supreme Reality:
вҲӮUГ·ГЈГғпЈҝ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҠВёГЎГҠв—ҠГҺВ·ГҝвҖ” ЛҮГҠГӢГЎГҠвҲ‘В§ГҖв—ҠВ·ГҠвҖ”вҖ“
ГҒВҝUГӣГҠmГ’Е“ГҠ ГҝГғГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҒвҖһUГғпЈҝ вҒ„UГғГҠвҖ”H 25H
вҲӮUГ·ГЈГғпЈҝ attain; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҠВёГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Brahma, who is all peace; ВҙВ§В·ГҝвҖ” the seers, the knowers of
Reality; ЛҮГҠГӢГЎГҠвҲ‘В§ГҖв—ҠВ·ГҠвҖ” whose sins have been wiped out; ГҒВҝUГӣГҠmГ’Е“ГҠвҖ” whose doubts have been
slashed to pieces (through the sword of Knowledge); ГҝГғГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёвҖ” whose mind is controlled and
firmly rests in God; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҒвҖһUГғпЈҝ вҒ„UГғГҠвҖ” who are actively engaged in the service of all
beings.
The seers whose sins have been destroyed, whose doubts have been dispelled
by Knowledge, whose disciplined mind is firmly established in God and who are
actively engaged in the service of all beings, attain Brahma, who is all Peace. (25)
the stainless mind of a God-realized soul.
This is what is meant by the adjective
Г«ChinnadvaidhГҘВЁГӯ.
A Г«YatГҘtmГҘ is he whose disciplined
mind, being absolutely free from the evils of
unsteadiness etc., is fully merged in God.
With the realization of God, all distinctions
of Г«mineГӯ and Г«thineГӯ disappear.
A God-realized soul views all beings as
his own Self. Therefore, even as an ignorant
man identifying himself with his body remains
actively engaged in its service, so does the
wise man, equally identifying himself with
all, naturally keeps himself engaged in the
service of all beings. This is what is meant
by the words Г«SarvabhВөutahite RatГҘВЁГӯ.
But what is stated above with regard
Latencies of actions performed in this
as well as in other lives, evils such as likes
and dislikes and heaps of their tendencies,
accumulated in manГӯs mind, are all covered
by the word Г«KalmaВ¶aГӯ or sin, inasmuch as
they lead to bondage. With the attainment
of God-realization all these get eradicated,
and no trace of an evil is left in manГӯs mind.
Thus absence of the evil of Г«impurityГӯ is
shown by the use of the adjective
Г«KВ¶вҲӮЖ’akalmaВ¶ГҘВЁГӯ.
The word Г«DvaidhaГӯ denotes doubt or
a state of quandary induced by ignorance.
With the true Knowledge of God, all doubts
disappear alongwith their cause, viz.,
ignorance. In other words, no trace of the
evils of distraction and obscurity is left in
* вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”Г’п¬Ӯ вҖҡЕёЛңГ” вҖңГ”вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҠГҘГҝпЈҝГҒГғвҖқвҖ“

=== PAGE 288 ===

* Chapter V *
287
to a wise man is true only from the
standpoint of the world and is intended just
to give an idea of his ideal behaviour. Really
speaking, in the eyes of a wise man no such
thing as Г«all beingsГӯ exists apart from God,
the only Reality, nor does he claim to serve
them.
The word Г«В°RВ¶iГӯ is derived from the root
Г«В°RВ¶Гӯ which denotes motion, and by implication
carries the sense of knowledge or a vision
of Reality. Accordingly a Г«В°RВ¶iГӯ is one who
has thoroughly grasped the real Truth.
Therefore, it is quite reasonable to interpret
Г«В°RВ¶iГӯ as meaning the knower of Brahma. The
use of the adjectives Г«KВ¶вҲӮЖ’akalmaВ¶ГҘВЁГӯ,
Г«ChinnadvaidhГҘВЁГӯ and Г«YatГҘtmГҘnaВЁГӯ, also
support this interpretation.
The вҖәruti says: Г¬With the realization of
God, who is both the cause of this universe
and the universe itself, the knot of ignorance
in the heart of the God-realized soul is
broken, all doubts are slashed to pieces and
the latencies of all actions wiped out.Г®*
(MuЖ’Е’. Up., II.ii.8)
вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“ГҒп¬ӮГҝГҲQВ§ГҠЕёГҠВў ГҝГғГӢЕёГҠВў ГҝГғГёпЈҝГғвҖҡГҠв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖўГҒГ·ГғГҠпЈҝ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҠВёГЎГҠВў п¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ’ГғГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ”H 26H
вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“ГҒп¬ӮГҝГҲQВ§ГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” to those who are free from lust and anger; ГҝГғГӢЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” to those wise
men; ГҝГғГёпЈҝГғвҖҡГҠв—ҠЛңГ” to those who have subdued their mind; вҖўГҒГ·ГғвҖ” all round; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҠВёГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Brahma,
the abode of eternal peace; п¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝ is present; ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ’ГғГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” to those who have realized God.
To those wise men who are free from lust and anger, who have subdued their mind
and have realized God, Brahma, the abode of eternal peace, is present all-round.     (26)
Г«ViditГҘtmanГҘmГӯ in this verse are intended to
indicate complete absence of the evils of
impurity, distraction and obscurity respectively;
and thus the attainment of complete knowledge
of God has been shown here. It is, therefore,
quite reasonable to construe the word Г«YatвҲӮГӯ
as meaning a Г«self-controlled man of
KnowledgeГӯ who has realized God through
the practice of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga.
In the eyes of the God-realized soul,
God alone, who is the supreme Reality and
the embodiment of Knowledge and Bliss,
exists here, there and everywhere, in all
directions, above as well as below, outside
as well as inside, at all times and every
moment. Nothing else than Brahma, the one
without a second, has any reality. This is
what is meant by the statement that Г¬to the
wise man God is present all round.Г®
The mind of the wise is absolutely pure.
Hence no trace of morbid feelings like
lust and anger remains therein. This is what
is indicated by the use of the term
Г«KГҘmakrodhaviyuktГҘnГҘmГӯ. Whatever is done
through the agency of the mind and senses of
such lofty souls is naturally conducive to the
interests of others. If in his active life and
according to the needs of the moment his mind
and senses display lust or anger which is
consistent with the injunctions of the scriptures,
it should be taken to be a mere sport enacted
in the interests of the world order. It is just
like the behaviour of an actor in a play.
The evils of impurity, distraction and
obscurity are the three great obstacles in the
path of Knowledge. The wise alone are
completely free from them. The adjectives
Г«KГҘmakrodhaviyuktГҘnГҘmГӯ, Г«YatacetasГҘmГӯ and
* ГҒГ·lГғпЈҝ NUЕ’ГҝВӘЛқГҒГЈГ•ГҒвүҘВҝUlГЈГғпЈҝ вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝГҠвҖ”вҖ“ ЛҮГҠГӢГҝГЈГғпЈҝ ГёГҠSГҝ вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ ГғГҒSв—ҠЕёЛңГ” Е’ГҺCГ”пЈҝU В¬вҒ„UГҠп¬ӮвҒ„пЈҝUH

=== PAGE 289 ===

288
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Each individual has been in contact with
external objects from time without beginning;
his mind is, therefore crowded with impressions
left by them, which are countless in number.
Regarding sense-objects as charming and
delightful, man ever goes on dwelling on
them, with the result that old impressions,
stored up in the mind, get revived one after
another and continue to stir the fire of
attachment and desire burning in his heart.
His mind is, therefore, never at rest. Nay,
memories of past experiences keep haunting
his mind even when he occasionally sits
down to meditate on God in some secluded
corner, renouncing sense-objects externally.
The result is that he is unable to meditate
upon God. Constant thoughts of sense-objects
are the main obstacle in his way. And this
chain does not end so long as one regards
these objects as delightful. It is, therefore,
that the Lord asks us to realize by dint of
reason and dispassion all external objects as
ephemeral, transient, full of sorrow and a
source of suffering, and wipe off all their
impressions from our mind. Then and then
alone will the mind be tranquil and steady.
*
*
*
If we keep our eyes wide open and go
on gazing all round, our attention will be
naturally diverted and we shall not be able to
collect and concentrate our mind; if, on the
other hand, we close our eyes, we are apt to
Realization of God through both the paths of Action and Knowledge, and the
characteristics of God-realized souls have been spoken of in the above verses. In order to
show that followers of the paths of Knowledge and Action both can with advantage
practise meditation after duly controlling their mind and senses with the help of dispassion;
the Lord now proceeds to describe in brief the Yoga of Meditation (DhyГҘnayoga) with its
fruit:
SВ¬вүҘГҠГҠВёГЈвҲ‘ГҺВ§Г п¬ӮГҠ вҖҷГҒвҖһUвҖҷГҠВёsГ”ГҠВўpЛҮГҠГҲpГ’п¬ӮГҠГЈГғвҒ„пЈҝU Г·ЛқГҲп¬ӮГҠпЈҝвҖ”вҖ“
В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠВ¬ГҠЕёГҠГ’ вҖҡв—ҠГҠГ’ вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г п¬ӮГҠ ЕёГҠвҖҡГҠГЁГҝГЈГғвҒ„UГёГҠГҒвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠГ’H 27H
ГҝГғпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝв—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝвҖҷГҲГҒhв—ҠВёГҲГҒЕёв—ҠГҠпЈҝВёЛҮГҠВ¬вҒ„UГҠГҝГЎГҠвҖ” 
вҖ“
ГҒп¬ӮВӘГғпЈҝГ«ВҝUГҠГ·ГҝвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“ГҠпЈҝ ГҝвҖ” вҖҡЕ’ГҠ в—ҠГҲQВ§ вҲһп¬Ӯ вҖҡвҖ”H 28H
SВ¬вүҘГҠГҠВёЕёЛңГ” sense-enjoyments; вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г п¬ӮГҠ вҖҷГҒвҖһUвҖ” shutting out (of the mind by refusing to think of
them); вҖҷГҠsГ”ГҠЕёЛңГ” external; ГёЛҮГҠГҲвҖ” the gaze; Гё and; вҲһп¬Ӯ verily; вҖўГЈГғвҒ„пЈҝU (вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г п¬ӮГҠ) Г·ЛқГҲп¬ӮГҠпЈҝвҖ” (fixing) on the
space between the eye-brows; В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠВ¬ГҠЕёГҠГ’ the PrГҘЖ’a and the ApГҘna breaths; вҖҡв—ҠГҠГ’ вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г п¬ӮГҠ having
regulated; ЕёГҠвҖҡГҠГЁГҝГЈГғвҒ„UГёГҠГҒвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠГ’ flowing within the nostrils; ГҝГғпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝв—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝвҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” who has brought his
senses, mind and reason under control; в—ҠГҲГҒЕёвҖ” contemplative soul; в—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҠВ¬вҒ„UГҠГҝГЎГҠвҖ” intent on
liberation; ГҒп¬ӮВӘГғпЈҝГ«ВҝUГҠГ·ГҝвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“вҖ” (is) free from desire, fear and anger; ГҝвҖ” who; вҖҡЕ’ГҠ ever; в—ҠГҲQВ§вҖ”
(is) liberated; вҲһп¬Ӯ verily; вҖҡвҖ” that.
Shutting out all thoughts of external enjoyments, with the gaze fixed on the space
between the eye-brows, having regulated the PrГҘЖ’a (outgoing) and the ApГҘna
(ingoing) breaths flowing within the nostrils; he who has brought his senses, mind
and intellect under control,Гіsuch a contemplative soul intent on liberation and free
from desire, fear and anger, is ever liberated.                          (27,28)

=== PAGE 290 ===

* Chapter V *
289
fall an easy prey to sloth and drowsiness.
That is why we have been asked to keep the
gaze fixed on the space between the eye-
brows. Beside; there are other reasons also
connected with the science of Yoga. We are
told that in the space between the eye-brows
is located the bi-petalled spiritual plexus known
as the Г«Г…jВӨГҘ-CakraГӯ. In the vicinity of this
plexus lie the seven sheaths, the last of which
is known as Г«UnmanвҲӮГӯ; having reached this
last sheath, the soul does not return to this
mortal world. It is for this reason that the
YogвҲӮs fix their gaze on the Г«Г…jВӨГҘ-CakraГӯ.
The next step we have been called upon
to take is to regulate the flow of the outgoing
and ingoing breaths. Let us remember in this
connection that the natural flow of the outgoing
and ingoing breaths is uneven. Sometimes
they flow through the left nostril and sometimes
through the right. When flowing through the
left, they are said to be flowing through the
passage of Г«IЕ’aГӯ, and when flowing through
the right, they are said to be flowing through
the passage of Г«PingalГҘГӯ. In such a state,
manГӯs mind remains unsteady. To maintain
an even flow of the PrГҘЖ’a and the ApГҘna
breaths through both the nostrils is what is
meant by regulating their flow. This is also
known as directing their flow through the
channel of Г«SuВ¶umЖ’ГҘГӯ. When passing through
the Г«SuВ¶umЖ’ГҘГӯ the flow of the PrГҘЖ’a and
ApГҘna breaths is very thin and gentle. In this
state the unsteadiness and restlessness of the
mind automatically disappear, and it gets
easily concentrated on God.
In order to maintain an even flow of the
two breaths, the ApГҘna breath should be
inhaled through the left nostril, and the PrГҘЖ’a
breath exhaled through the right. The order
should be changed alternately. Mental repetition
of GodГӯs Name should continue side by side
with this process and an endeavour should
be made to see to it that the processes of
exhalation and inhalation take an equal amount
of time, and to make their flow even and
thinner. Through continuous practice when
the flow of both becomes even, gentle and
thin and they cease to be felt outside the nose
and within the throat and so on, it should be
understood that the prГҘЖ’a and ApГҘna breaths
have become regulated and thin.
The adjective Г«NГҘsГҘbhyantaracГҘriЖ’auГӯ
has been used just to indicate that the
processes of exhalation and inhalation have
to be regulated and made even, and not to
be suspended in this practice.
*
*
*
The senses are noted for their way-
wardness; they run after any object they like
and any time they please, of their own free
will. The mind too is ever unsteady and loath
to give up its habits; and the intellect does
not firmly adhere to one supreme conviction.
To reduce them to orderliness and submission
and turn them inwards or Godwards by
regular training with the help of reason and
dispassion is what is meant by bringing them
under control. This being done, the senses
will not wantonly indulge in their respective
objects but will tamely follow our will and
remain tied down to where we direct them
to be; the mind will get concentrated according
to our will, and the intellect will firmly and
resolutely adhere to one conclusion of our
choice. It is believed, and rightly so, that the
fifth limb of the Г…В¶ВўГҘвҲҶgayoga or the Yoga
of eight limbs, viz., Г«PratyГҘhГҘraГӯ (which
consists in withdrawing the senses from their
objects) is easily accomplished through control
of the senses; the next limb, viz., Г«DhГҘraЖ’ГҘГӯ
(focussing the mind on a particular spot)
becomes easy through subjugation of mind;
and control over the intellect makes the
seventh limb, viz., DhyГҘna or meditation
(fastening the intellect to one conclusion)
easy. Therefore, in the practice of meditation

=== PAGE 291 ===

290
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
subjugation of all these three is essential.
*
*
*
MokВ¶a or Liberation is the same as
God-realization, the attainment of the Supreme
Goal or the Highest Abode or Mukti (Release).
This is a state which lies beyond the range
of mind and speech. Only this much can be
said with regard to it that in this state man
is released completely and once for all, from
all the shackles of Karma and becomes the
very embodiment of supreme Blessedness
and the highest Bliss, infinite and unique in
character. He who has thoroughly devoted
his senses, mind and intellect to the attainment
of this Liberation or God, is ever and
unceasingly striving after this end, nay,
whose sole aim is to realize God and who
does not consider anything else as worth
seeking for, is signified by the word
Г«MokВ¶aparГҘyaЖ’aВЁГӯ.
Г«MuniГӯ literally means one who is given
to contemplation. Hence the word Г«MuniВЁГӯ
stands here for him who, having a firm belief
in the omnipresence of God, is always busy
contemplating on Him even in his active life
as in the hours of meditation.
*
*
*
Desire is always preceded by a feeling
of want; fear has its root in an apprehension
of mishap; while anger ensues when someone
interferes with the attainment of oneГӯs  desire
or when oneГӯs will is not carried out. He
who attains perfection through the practice
of meditation as described above feels the
presence of God and God alone every where
and at every time and misses Him nowhere.
What, then, can he wish for? When there
is no reality other than God and when God,
who is ever-existent, eternal, limitless and
imperishable, never loses anything, why should
there be any fear following from an
apprehension of mishap? And when he
ceases to have any desire or longing, having
fully and eternally realized God, how and
on whom will he be angry? Therefore, in
this state, his mind will never and under no
circumstance entertain a desire of any sort
either during his active life or even in a
dream, nor can he have any cause for fear,
nor, again, will he feel angry under any
circumstance. This is what is meant by the
adjective Г«VigatecchГҘbhayakrodhaВЁГӯ.
The indeclinable Г«EvaГӯ denotes certainty.
That is to say, the exalted soul who has by
means of the above practices completely rid
himself of desire, fear and anger stands
liberated under all circumstances, viz., during
meditation as well as in active life and no
matter whether he is alive or dead. He has
without doubt obtained complete freedom
once for all from the trammels of the world,
and has realized God.
In the course of His reply to ArjunaГӯs query, the Lord discussed the nature of
Karmayoga and SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga, spoke of the attainment of God through both these
disciplines and described the characteristics of those who have attained perfection through
either. Then He briefly dealt with DhyГҘnayoga or the path of Meditation too as auxiliary
to both disciplines. Now for the man who finds himself unable to follow any of these
three paths, subduing his mind and senses in the manner stated above, the Lord gives
below a brief description of Bhaktiyoga (the Yoga of Devotion), which easily leads to
the attainment of the highest Goal.
Г·ГҠпЈҝQВ§ГҠвҒ„Вў 
ГҝГҙГҠГғВ¬вҖҡГҠВў 
вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠвҖһпЈҝUEвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖҡГҲNUЕ’Вў вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠВў ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ в—ҠГҠВў вүҘГҠГҠГҒГЈГғв—ҠГҺГ«ВҝUГҒГғH 29H

=== PAGE 292 ===

* Chapter V *
291
Practice of virtues like non-violence,
truth etc., service and adoration of parents
and other elders, of gods as well as the
BrГҘhmaЖ’as, affording relief to the afflicted,
and distressed, the poor and the oppressed,
with love and regard, the adequate means
adopted for alleviating their suffering, and all
other virtuous actions such as the performance
of a sacrifice, charity etc., are included in
Г«sacrificeГӯ and Г«austeritiesГӯ. God is the soul
of all beings (X.20). Therefore, it is God
Himself existing in the form of gods, the
BrГҘhmaЖ’as, the afflicted and the distressed,
who receives all services and worship.
Therefore, truly speaking, He is the only
enjoyer of all sacrifices and austerities (IX.24).
Not knowing the reality and power of God,
men regard the gods and men whom they
serve and adore as the recipients of their
sacrifices and service etc; hence the reward
which they get in lieu thereof is only finite
and perishable (VII.23). They do not attain
real peace. But the man who knows the
reality and glory of God sees God Himself
seated in all as their very self. Therefore,
conscious of His presence in all beings,
when he serves them he feels that in the form
of gods, the BrГҘhmaЖ’as, the afflicted and the
distressed, etc., he is serving none else than
the all-pervading Lord, the highest object of
his worship and love. A man finds excessive
joy and a unique mental peace in the service
of him whom he regards as deserving of
honour and regard, for whom he has reverence
and respect, or for whom he cherishes an
iota of true love in his heart. Does a devoted
son feel any fatigue in the service of his
father, an affectionate mother in looking after
her son and a loving wife in attending on
her lord? Does a true disciple or follower
evade on any account the service of his
venerable preceptor or spiritual guide? One
feels ever inspired with new vigour in
serving the object of oneГӯs esteem, veneration
or love, and will never be fed up with his
or her service. Such a man will never think
that he is in any way obliging the object of
his service nor will he attach any importance
to his services. On the other hand he will
take such an opportunity of service as a
proud privilege. The more he is able to serve,
the greater is the degree of modesty and true
humility he manifests. Far from feeling that
he is doing an obligation to the object of his
service he is afraid every moment lest he be
deprived of that privilege. He takes to this
service only because it fills his mind with
unique peace. But this peace does not deter
him from the path of service, becuase his
heart is ever brimming with excessive joy
and unsatiated with it he feels inclined to
serve more and more. When service evoked
by worldly esteem, veneration and love is
so sincere, so earnest and so peace-giving,
no one can tell how much and what kind
of transcendent joy and unique and heavenly
peace a devotee must be experiencing, who
perceives in all his most beloved Lord, the
highest object of worship for the whole
world, the Supreme Deity of all deities,
Г·ГҠпЈҝQВ§ГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” the enjoyer; ГҝГҙГҠГғВ¬вҖҡГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of (all) sacrifices and austerities; вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠвҖһпЈҝUEвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” the supreme
Lord of all the worlds; вҖҡГҲNUЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” the disinterested friend; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of all beings; ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ having
known (in reality); в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; вүҘГҠГҠГҒГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ” peace; ВҙВ§Г«ВҝUГҒГғ attains.
Having known Me in reality as the enjoyer of all sacrifices and austerities, the
supreme Lord of all the worlds, and the disinterested friend of all beings, My devotee
attains peace.                                                            (29)

=== PAGE 293 ===

292
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Omnipotent, and the Eternal Abode of the
highest glory and unthinkable majesty, and
worships Him with a sincerity full of genuine
faith and intense love continuously flowing
towards Him in a stream of the purest and
sweetest nectar. Those alone who enjoy this
rare privilege through the Grace of God can
realize this.
*
*
*
God is the Lord and Master of Indra
(Regent of the eastern quarter), VaruЖ’a
(Regent of the western quarter), Kubera
(Regent of the northern quarter), Yama
(Regent of the southern quarter) and other
regional guardians of the world, as also of
the Lords of different universes controlling
the affairs of their respective universes. Hence
the вҖәruti says: Г¬To Him, the supreme Lord
of all LordsГ®* (Svet. Up., VI.7).
The Lord creates, maintains and dissolves
the myriads of world-systems as a part of
His Cosmic Play through His indescribable
divine potency known by the name of MГҘyГҘ,
and duly controlling them all, still remains
aloof from all. To know God as Omnipotent,
the controller and supervisor of all, and the
Overlord of all Lords in this way is to know
Him as the Г¬Supreme Lord of all worldsГ®.
The devotee who has thus known Him
comes to realize His great glory and divinity
and cannot forget Him even for a moment.
Altogether free from fear and anxiety, he
dwells exclusively upon Him. Enemies like
lust and anger, which disturb the calm of
oneГӯs mind, cannot even approach him. In
his eyes, there is none greater than God.
Therefore, he is always and constantly
absorbed in meditation on God, the boundless
ocean of supreme peace and bliss. This is
how he attains peace.
Again, there is nothing in the whole
world, which is unattained by God and for
which He may have any selfish connection
with anyone. He is always and at every
moment fully satisfied (III.22). But being the
very embodiment of compassion, He naturally
provides for the well-being of all as an act
of Grace to all, and appearing amidst us
again and again performs such a variety of
wonderful deeds that men obtain redemption
by merely chanting them. The good of the
world is involved in all His activities. He
confers a boon even on those whom He kills
or chastises. No dispensation of His is
devoid of compassion and love. Hence God
is the disinterested friend of all creatures.
People do not know this secret; that is why
they rejoice and grieve on coming in contact
with what is agreeable and disagreeable
respectively in the eyes of the world; and
that is why they have no peace of mind. He
who comes to know and believe that God
is his disinterested friend and lover and that
whatever He does is conducive to his welfare,
remains ever joyful. He regards every thing
that happens as a blessed dispensation of the
all-merciful God, full of love and kindness.
Hence he obtains everlasting Peace. There
remains no cause for his mental peace being
disturbed in any way. Even in the world we
find that if an ordinary man stands in the
good grace of a high officer wielding great
power and authority or some ruler or king,
and comes to know that such and such a
man of authority and power really wishes
him well and is ready to protect him, he
considers himself very lucky and shaking off
all anxiety and fear is transported with joy,
even though the said officer or ruler is not
altogether unselfish, nor all-powerful, nor the
master of all. It will be difficult for us to
judge how much and what kind of unearthly
* Гғв—ҠГӢEвҒ„UГҠГЎГҠГҠВў В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠВў в—ҠвҖһпЈҝUEвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“

=== PAGE 294 ===

* Chapter V *
293
joy and unique peace will be attained by us
if God Himself, who is all-powerful and all-
seeing, the Supreme Lord of all the worlds,
the Controller and inner Witness of all, and
an ocean of infinite and unthinkable virtues,
proclaims Himself to be our disinterested
friend and we for our part put faith in His
words and acknowledge Him as our Friend !
Now the question is, Do we attain peace
only if we know that God is possessed of all
the three attributes mentioned in this verse or
by simply knowing Him to be possessed of
any one of these virtues ? Our answer is that
even he who realizes Him as endowed with
only one of the above virtues obtains peace,
to say nothing of him who knows Him to be
possessed of all the three attributes. For even
the former cannot but adore Him with exclusive
devotion. As a result of this adoration the
Grace of God begins to descend on him, and
through Divine Grace he speedily realizes
His nature, glory, reality and virtues, and
attains perfect peace. And when he compares
himself, a mean and insignificant creature,
with the Supreme Lord of the whole creation,
who rests eternally in His infinite and
unthinkable glory, who is adored by the
whole order of gods and great В°RВ¶is or sages,
is the sole enjoyer of all sacrifices and
austerities, and the Supreme Lord of all Lords
and myriads of universes, and feels such a
Lord to be his loving friend, his joy and
peace know no bounds. Nay, he will feel
that he is the most lucky of all creatures, the
most favoured of all human beings. One
cannot imagine with what gratitude of heart
unknown before, with what peculiar feelings
surging within him, and with what ecstasy of
joy he throws himself once for all at the holy
feet of the Lord !
*
*
*
To realize God as the enjoyer of all
sacrifices and austerities, the Supreme Lord
of all the worlds, and the disinterested friend
of all creatures, and to realize His Nature,
glory, reality and attributes, one should cultivate
devout 
and 
loving 
association 
with
exalted souls, hear and ponder over the
teachings of the scriptures and should
fervently pray to Him throwing oneself
completely at His mercy, so that through His
Grace everything will be revealed and the
seeker will develop exclusive devotion to
Him.
The word MГҘm, in this verse stands for
the integral Divinity who, though unborn,
imperishable and the Supreme Lord of all
beings, appears from time to time in our
midst through His YogamГҘyГҘ or divine
potency to revel in Sports, summoning His
PrakГҰti to His aid, who is now preaching to
Arjuna in the form of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and who
is both attributeless and with attributes, formless
as well as endowed with Form, manifest as
well as unmanifest, existing in all forms, the
supreme Reality and Oversoul, Omnipotent,
all-pervading, the substratum of all and the
Supreme Lord of all spheres.
Лҷ ГғГ вҖҡГҒЕ’ГҒГғ ГјГҠГӢв—ҠjВӘп¬ӮeГӢГғГҠвҖҡГҚВ¬ГҒЕёВ·Г вҖҡГҲ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГҝГҠВў ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠпЈҝ
ГјГҠГӢвҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠВЎГҲВёЕёвҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’пЈҝ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ
ЕёГҠв—Ҡ В¬@в—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГӨГҝГҠГҝвҖ”H 5H
Thus, in the UpaniВ¶ad sung by the Lord, the Science of Brahma, the scripture
of Yoga, the dialogue between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and Arjuna, ends the fifth
chapter entitled Г¬The Yogas of Action and Knowledge.Г®
U

=== PAGE 295 ===

Лҷ
вҖәrвҲӮmadbhagavad-GвҲӮtГҘ
Chapter VI
This chapter discusses at length DhyГҘnayoga or the Yoga of Meditation as auxiliary
to the practice of both Karmayoga and SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga. Control over the body, senses, mind
and intellect is extremely necessary in DhyГҘnayoga. The body, senses, mind
and intellectГіall these are designated by the term Г«Г…tmГҘГӯ (Self) and the
chapter specially deals with their control; therefore, it has been given the
title of Г¬The Yoga of Self-Control.Г®
Verse 1 of this chapter contains a tribute to the KarmayogвҲӮ. Establishing the identity
of Г«SaвүҲnyГҘsaГӯ and Г«KarmayogaГӯ in verse 2, the Lord describes in verse 3 the means as
well as the fruit of attaining perfection in Karmayoga. Verse 4 shows the
marks of the man who has climbed to the heights of Yoga. Verse 5
encourages man to attain to the heights of Yoga, and lays down his duty.
Verse 6 explains how Г¬oneГӯs own Self is oneГӯs friend, and oneГӯs own Self is oneГӯs enemy,Г®
and verse 7 shows the fruit of subduing the body, mind, senses etc. Verses 8 and 9 describe
the marks and glory of the God-realized soul. Urging the necessity of practising DhyГҘnayoga
in verse 10, the Lord discusses in verses 11 to 14 one after another the place and seat suitable
for the practice of meditation as well as the mode of practising it. Dealing with the fruit of
the practice of DhyГҘnayoga in verse 15, the Lord prescribes in verses 16 and 17 rules
regarding diet, recreation, and sleep etc., suitable for DhyГҘnayoga and the fruit of following
those rules. Describing in verse 18 the marks of one who has attained the final stage in the
practice of DhyГҘnayoga, the Lord depicts in verse 19 the state of a YogвҲӮГӯs mind by adopting
the analogy of a light. Describing in verses 20 to 22 the state of mind of one who has
realized God through the practice of DhyГҘnayoga, He terms it as Г«YogaГӯ in verse 23, and
urges the advisability of attaining it. Detailing in verses 24 and 25 the process of meditation
on God as the One indistinguishable with the SГҘdhaka, the Lord urges in verse 26 the
necessity of withdrawing the mind again and again from objects of senses and concentrating
it on God. Verses 27 and 28 declare that the practice of DhyГҘnayoga leads to the attainment
of Г¬everlasting blissГ®. Describing in verse 29 the state of the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ during his active
life, the Lord depicts in verse 30 the final stage in the practice of the BhaktiyogвҲӮ or follower
of the path of Devotion, and how he sees God everywhere and in all beings. Verse 31
describes the marks and glory of the YogвҲӮ, who has realized God through the practice of
Devotion, and verse 32, of the aspirant who has reached that consummation through the
practice of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga. Declaring in verse 33 stability in Yoga in the form of equability
as difficult of attainment owing to restlessness of the mind, Arjuna pronounces the mind also
in verse 34 as exceedingly difficult to control. Confirming the statement of Arjuna, the Lord
shows in verse 35 the ways of controlling the mind. Verse 36 says that Yoga is difficult to
attain for one whose mind is not subdued, but easy of attainment by one who has control
over it. Questioning the Lord in verses 37 and 38 about the fate of one who has fallen from
Title of the
Chapter
Summary of
the Chapter

=== PAGE 296 ===

* Chapter VI *
295
Yoga, in verse 39 Arjuna implores Him to clear his doubts. The Lord answers ArjunaГӯs
queries in verses 40 to 45 showing that those who have fallen from Yoga do not meet with
an evil destiny, but ascend to heaven after death and are reborn in the house of pious and
wealthy men, whereas such among them as are full of dispassion are born in the family of
enlightened YogвҲӮs, wherein they instinctively regain the understanding of their previous
birth; that even those born in a rich family feel drawn towards God by the force of their past
tendencies; and in conclusion He reveals the glory of seeking Yoga in the shape of
equability and describes the ultimate destiny of him who takes birth in the family of YogвҲӮs.
Describing the glory of a YogвҲӮ, the Lord exhorts Arjuna in verse 46 to become a YogвҲӮ, and
concludes the chapter in verse 47 by praising, of all the YogвҲӮs, him (Arjuna), who devoutly
adores the Lord with exclusive devotion.
In the beginning of Chapter V Arjuna requested the Lord to tell him definitely whether
Г«KarmasaвүҲnyГҘsaГӯ (SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga) or Г«KarmayogaГӯ was decidedly conducive to his highest
good. In reply to this the Lord declared both the disciplines as leading
to the highest goal, but pronounced Karmayoga as superior inasmuch as
it is easier of practice. He then thoroughly discussed the nature, modes
of practice and fruit of both the disciplines, and briefly introduced the subject of
DhyГҘnayoga as well, taking it as exceedingly useful in the practice of both the above
disciplines, and as a principal means of God-realization. But Arjuna was neither clearly
instructed as to which of the two disciplines he should adopt for practice, nor all the
limbs and aspects of DhyГҘnayoga were brought out in detail in that Chapter. Chapter
VI is, therefore, introduced in order to discuss the subject of DhyГҘnayoga in detail with
all its limbs, and begins with a praise of Karmayoga in the following words, with a view
to inducing Arjuna to take to Karmayoga mixed with Bhakti (devotion):
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲп¬ӮГҠГё
вҖўЕёГҠГҒГјГҠГғвҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ»В§вҲӮВўU вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝZ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё вҲ‘В§вҒ„ГҠпЈҝГҒГғ ГҝвҖ”вҖ“
вҖҡ вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡГӢ Гё ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ Гё Её ГҒЕёвҒ„UГҒВӘAЕёВё ГёГҠГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝвҖ”H 1H
вҖўЕёГҠГҒГјГҠГғвҖ” depending not; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ»В§вҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” on the fruit of actions; вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝВёв—ҠЛңГ” obligatory; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГ” acts; вҲ‘В§вҒ„UГҠпЈҝГҒГғ
performs; ГҝвҖ” who; вҖҡвҖ” he; вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡГӢ (is) a SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮ (SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ); Гё and; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ a YogвҲӮ (KarmayogвҲӮ);
Гё and; Её (is) no SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮ; ГҒЕёвҒ„ГҒUВӘAвҖ” he who has merely renounced the sacred fire; Её Гё nor;
вҖўГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝвҖ” he who has merely given up all activity.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: He who does his duty without expecting the fruit of actions
is a SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮ (SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ) and a YogвҲӮ (KarmayogвҲӮ) both. He is no SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮ
(renouncer) who has merely renounced the sacred fire; even so, he is no YogвҲӮ, who
has merely given up all activity.                                                     (1)
Link of the
Chapter
For, he who possesses attachment for
enjoyments or actions cannot wholly renounce
dependence on the fruit of actions. Attachment
naturally stimulates desire for the fruit of
actions. Therefore, he who has given up
Although the Lord says nothing in this
verse about renunciation of attachment, and
speaks only of giving up dependence on the
fruit of actions, the former should be taken
as implied in the latter type of renunciation.

=== PAGE 297 ===

296
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
dependence on the fruit of actions should  be
understood to have given up attachment as
well. Everything is not expressly mentioned
every time, and whatever is omitted in a
particular context should be taken as implied
by its mention elsewhere. Where renunciation
of the desire for fruit is mentioned without
any reference to renunciation of attachment
(II.51; XVIII.11), the latter type of renunciation
as well should be understood as implied
therein. Similarly, where renunciation of
attachment is mentioned without any reference
to renunciation of the desire for fruit (III.19;
VI.4), the latter should be regarded as implied.
All enjoyments of this world and the
next, such as the possession of a wife, progeny,
wealth, honour, fame and the enjoyments of
heaven etc., should be treated as included in
the fruit of actions. Whatever an ordinary man
does, he does it with reference to a particular
motive or fruit. That is why his actions throw
him repeatedly into the whirligig of births and
deaths. Therefore, regarding all enjoyments
of this world and the next as transient,
momentary and a source of suffering, one
should wholly give up attachment, the sense
of possession and the desire for fruit. This is
what is meant here by renunciation of
dependence on the fruit of actions.
All good actions, such as the performance
of sacrifice and the practice of charity and
austerities, as well as those performed either
for keeping the body and soul together or in
the interest of the public with due regard to
oneГӯs order in society and stage in life, and
sanctioned by the scriptures, are all worthy
actions. They should always be duly, earnestly
and diligently performed in accordance with
the scriptural ordinance, and as a matter of
duty, to the best of oneГӯs ability.
A KarmayogвҲӮ of this type, having
renounced all thoughts of the world, attains
that true Knowledge which is the fruit of
both the disciplines of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga and
Karmayoga. That is why he is regarded as
partaking of the virtues of both the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ
and the KarmayogвҲӮ.
The word Г«NiragniВЁГӯ denotes one who
has entered the order of SaвүҲnyГҘsa through
renunciation of the sacred fire. He who
having renounced the sacred fire has entered
the order of SaвүҲnyГҘsa, but has not been able
to develop in himself the characteristies of
a JВӨГҘnayogвҲӮ, is no SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮ in the true sense
of the term; for he has renounced only the
sacred fire and not the sense of doership in
respect of all his actions, nor the feeling of
mineness, attachment and his self-identification
with the body. This is what the Lord means
when He says that Г¬he is no SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮ, who
has merely renounced the sacred fire.Г®
The word Г«AkriyaЖ’Гӯ stands for one who
has totally abandoned all forms of activity
and is wholly absorbed in meditation. He is
no YogвҲӮ in the real sense of the term, who
having abandoned all activities has taken to
meditation, but whose mind is full of evils
like egoism, the feeling of possession, likes
and dislikes, and desire; for he too has
renounced only external activities, and not
the feeling of mineness, egotism, attachment,
desire and anger etc. This is what the Lord
means when He says that Г¬he is no YogвҲӮ,
who has not given up thoughts of the
world.Г®
Contrary to this, he who has entered the
order of SaвүҲnyГҘsa, having totally renounced
the sacred fire and at the same time possesses
all the marks of a JВӨГҘnayogвҲӮ as described in
verses 8,9,13,24,25 and 26 of Chapter V, is
the ideal SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮ. It is only to bring out
the glory of such great souls among SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮs
that even non-SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮs manifesting in
themselves the characteristics of a JВӨГҘnayogвҲӮ

=== PAGE 298 ===

* Chapter VI *
297
are given the honorific title of Г«SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮ.
There can be no other reason for calling
them SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮs.
Even so, he who having renounced
all activities remains constantly engaged in
meditation and whose mind is altogether free
from evils like the sense of possession, likes
and dislikes, lust and anger, and who has
thus given up all thoughts of the world, is
an ideal YogвҲӮ.
In the preceding verse the Lord called him who does his duty without reference to
its fruit both a SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮ and a YogвҲӮ. In this connection it may be asked: If Г«SaвүҲnyГҘsaГӯ
and Г«YogaГӯ represent two different states, how can it be possible for the SГҘdhaka referred
to above to possess the characteristics of both? The question is answered in the next verse,
which establishes identity between Г«SaвүҲnyГҘsaГӯ and Г«YogaГӯ:
ГҝВў вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡГҒв—ҠГҒГғ В¬ЛқГҠвҖһГҲUГҝГҠпЈҝВёВӘВў ГғВў ГҒп¬ӮГҒh В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬ӮвҖ“
Её sГ”вҖҡГӣГҝSГғвҖҡVГ”UГҖВ¬ГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ вҲ‘В§pЕёH 2H
Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” which; вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” ГҹГҒГғ as SaвүҲnyГҘsa; В¬ЛқГҠвҖһГҲUвҖ” they speak of; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ” (to be the same as) Yoga;
Гғв—ҠЛңГ” that; ГҒп¬ӮГҒh you know; В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬Ӯ O son of PГҘЖ’Е’u, Arjuna; Её does not; ГҒвҖһU for; вҖўвҖҡГӣГҝSГғвҖҡVГ”UГҖВ¬вҖ”
who has not given up thoughts of the world; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ a YogвҲӮ; Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ become; вҲ‘В§pЕё anyone.
Arjuna, you must know that what they call SaвүҲnyГҘsa is no other than Yoga; for
none becomes a YogвҲӮ, who has not given up his thoughts of worldly desires.     (2)
the world, the mind cannot be completely
united with God. That is why renunciation
of thoughts of the world is indispensable for
all aspirants. One SГҘdhaka retires to some
secluded corner and takes to the practice of
meditation on God with the help of Г…sana,
PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma, etc., another tries to remain
constantly engaged in disinterested action for
the sake of God and in obedience to His
commands; while a third devotes a part of
his time to the practice of meditation and a
part to the performance of disinterested action.
None of these can be called a YogвҲӮ or a
YogГҘrВөuЕ’ha (one who has climbed to the
heights of Yoga), until and unless he has
wholly renounced all thoughts of the world.
Perfection in Yoga is attained by a SГҘdhaka
only when freed from all attachment for
actions and worldly objects, he entirely
renounces all thoughts of the world. A
SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ too will become a SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮ
in the true sense of the term only when
To be established in identity with God,
eradicating the sense of doership in respect
of all activities of the body, senses and mind,
is what is meant by Г«SaвүҲnyГҘsaГӯ. This represents
the final stage in the practice of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga.
And Г«YogaГӯ means the attainment of
actionlessness, which is the highest stage of
Karmayoga reached through renunciation of
the sense of possession, attachment and
desire. Thoughts of the world are totally
absent in both these states, and the Supreme
Reality or God whom the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ
attains is no other than the God attained by
the KarmayogвҲӮ. It is in this sense that
Г«SaвүҲnyГҘsaГӯ and Г«YogaГӯ have been declared
in this verse as one.
The word Г«SaвҲҶkalpaГӯ means indulging
in thoughts of the world with the feeling of
possession as well as in terms of likes and
dislike. Total absence of such thoughts is
what is implied by their renunciation.
Without wholly renouncing thoughts of

=== PAGE 299 ===

298
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
his mind is altogether free from thoughts
of the world. It is in this sense that
SaвүҲnyГҘs has been declared as one with
Yoga.
duties consistent with oneГӯs order in society,
stage in life, position and circumstances, without
attachment and the desire for fruit is a stepping-
stone to the attainment of perfection in Yoga.
It was for this very reason that the Lord
stated in verse 4 of Chapter III that one
cannot attain freedom from action without
entering upon action.
The word Г«вҖәamaВЁГӯ cannot be interpreted
to mean actual renunciation of activity. For
verses 2 and 4 both speak of renunciation of
thoughts of the world. Etymologically also
the word Г«вҖәamaВЁГӯ means attainment of
tranquillity through control of the mind. The
GвҲӮtГҘ uses the word in the same sense in
XVIII.42 as well. And thoughts of the world
completely cease only when the mind has
been brought under control  and has attained
tranquillity. Besides this, it is not possible to
renounce activity altogether. Therefore, it is
but reasonable to interpret the word Г«вҖәamaВЁГӯ
as meaning absence of thoughts of the
world.
The word Г«KГҘraЖ’amГӯ in the second half
of the verse, used with reference to Г«вҖәamaВЁГӯ,
The word Г«MuneВЁГӯ in this verse has
been used with reference to the man who
seeks to climb to the heights of Yoga as a
means to God-realization. Hence it should be
taken to mean the SГҘdhaka of a contemplative
nature given to meditation on God.
The word Г«KarmaГӯ includes all actions
consistent with oneГӯs order in society, stage
in life, and status, and enjoined by the scriptures.
Performed without attachment and the desire
for fruit, all such actions can prove helpful in
the attainment of perfection in Yoga.
Although we concede that perfection in
Yoga can be attained even by him who has
renounced all actions and practises meditation
in a secluded corner, it should be remembered
in this connection that the practice of meditation
in seclusion too is a form of mental activity.
And the SГҘdhaka, who thus retires into
seclusion and practises meditation, has all the
same to perform bodily functions in the shape
of answering the calls of nature, ablution,
taking of food and drink and so on for the
maintenance of his body. Therefore, it is
quite reasonable to say that performance of
Praising Karmayoga in these words, the Lord now goes on to point out the means
of attaining it as well as its fruit:
вҖўГҠLВ§LВ§ЛҮГҠГҠпЈҝв—ҠГҲВёЕёпЈҝГҝГҠпЈҝВёВӘВў 
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё 
вҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠв—ҠГҲГ«ГҝГғпЈҝвҖ“
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠMВ§вҖҰUSГҝ ГғSГҝГ’п¬Ӯ вүҘГҠв—ҠвҖ” вҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠв—ҠГҲГ«ГҝГғпЈҝH 3H
вҖўГҠLВ§LВ§ЛҮГҠГҠпЈҝвҖ” desirous of climbing; в—ҠГҲЕёпЈҝвҖ” to him who is given to contemplation; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ” to the
heights of Yoga; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё (disinterested) action; вҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” a stepping-stone (to the attainment of
Yoga); В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is spoken of (as); ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠMВ§вҖҰUSГҝ ГғSГҝ for the same man when he is established in
Yoga; вҲһп¬Ӯ only; вүҘГҠв—ҠвҖ” absence of all thoughts of the world; вҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the way (to blessedness);
В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is stated (to be).
To the contemplative, who desires to climb to the heights of Karmayoga,
disinterested action is spoken of as the stepping-stone; for the same man when he
is established in Yoga, absence of all thoughts of the world is said to be the way
to blessedness.                                                           (3)

=== PAGE 300 ===

* Chapter VI *
299
cannot be taken to mean the cause of or
incentive to action. For the word Г«вҖәamaВЁГӯ,
as shown above, denotes tranquillity of mind
in the form of absence of thoughts of the
world. Such a tranquillity cannot be conducive
to action. Whatever actions are done by the
man who is established in Yoga are impelled
only by his own PrГҘrabdha or destiny or that
of other beings. Therefore, it is not logical
to hold Г«вҖәamaВЁГӯ to be the cause of action
in his case. The only reasonable interpretation
is to regard it as conducive to God-realization.
to in such glowing terms is one who has not
yet attained Yoga. Therefore, it does not stand
to reason that he who has renounced all
SaвҲҶkalpas is incapable of action. This proves
that renunciation of SaвҲҶkalpas does not mean
cessation of all mental activities. The word
Г«SaвҲҶkalpaГӯ stands here for thoughts of the
world which are tainted by the feeling of
possession, attachment and aversion. It is the
renunciation of such thoughts which is implied
here by the word Г«SarvasaвҲҶkalpa-saвүҲnyГҘsaГӯ.
Such renunciation does not interfere in any
way with the scrupulous performance of action.
Those in whose eyes there is no reality except
God, accept or reject a thing taking it to be
nothing else than God. Such acceptance or
renunciation on their part cannot be said to be
impelled by thoughts of the nature pointed out
above. Such action in the form of acceptance
and rejection of objects can be performed
even by illumined souls. It is with reference
to such illumined souls that the Lord says
elsewhere that Г«though engaged in all forms
Attachment is the root of desire (II.62).
When one ceases to have attachment for
sense-objects and actions, desire will cease
automatically and as a matter of course.
There can be no effect without cause. Therefore,
absence of desire should be taken as implied
in absence of attachment.
The word Г«SarvasaвҲҶkalpasaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮГӯ does
not mean one whose mind or thinking faculty
has altogether ceased to operate. If
Г«SarvasaвҲҶkalpasaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮГӯ meant the suspender
of all mental activities, description of the
mental state of the Г«YogГҘrВөuЕ’haГӯ would become
impossible. For he who has not attained that
state has no idea as to what it means; while
he who has attained it would be unable to
describe it due to his mind having ceased to
operate. Who is, then, to describe that
indescribable state? Moreover, in Chapter IV
the Lord has stated in clear words that Г¬he
whose undertakings are free from desire and
SaвҲҶkalpa is called a sageГ® (IV.19); and it
cannot be asserted that the exalted soul referred
The preceding verse speaks of the Г«YogГҘrВөuЕ’haГӯ or one who is established in Yoga.
One is naturally tempted to ask: What is the definition of Г«YogГҘrВөuЕ’haГӯ? The next verse
answers this query by describing the marks of the man who is established in Yoga:
ГҝЕ’ГҠ ГҒвҖһU ЕёпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГ•пЈҝВёВ·ГҲ Её вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёSп¬ӮЕёГҲВ·Г®ГҠГғпЈҝвҖ“
вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҖҡVГ”UГҖВ¬вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡГӢ 
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠMВ§вҖҰUSГғЕ’ГҠпЈҝГ«ГҝГғпЈҝH 4H
ГҝЕ’ГҠ when; ГҒвҖһU indeed; Её neither; ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГ•пЈҝВёВ·ГҲ to the objects of senses; Её nor; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡГҲ to actions;
вҖўЕёГҲВ·Г®ГҠГғпЈҝ (one) feels attached; вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҖҡVГ”UГҖВ¬вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡГӢ one who has renounced all thoughts (of the
world); ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠMВ§вҖҰUвҖ” established in Yoga; ГғЕ’ГҠ then; В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is said (to be).
When a man ceases to have any attachment either for the objects of senses or
for actions, and has renounced all thoughts of worldly desires, he is said to have
climbed to the heights of Yoga.                                                   (4)

=== PAGE 301 ===

300
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
of activities, he dwells in MeГ® (VI.31).
Men are found attached not only to
sense-enjoyments but to certain activities as
well. Hence it was necessary to mention
attachment for objects and actions separately.
Attachment for action may linger even after
one has given up attachment for sense-
enjoyments; for we find thoughtless people
attached even to vain pursuits. Therefore, in
order to show total absence of attachment in
the YogГҘrВөuЕ’ha, it was necessary to mention
the absence of both kinds of attachments.
Describing thus the state of a Г«YogГҘrВөuЕ’haГӯ or perfection in Yoga, which leads to
the attainment of the Supreme State, the Lord now points out the duty of man encouraging
him to attain that state:
В©UhвҒ„пЈҝUЕ’ГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠЛҳЛҳГ в—ҠГҠЕёВў 
ЕёГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—Ҡп¬ӮвҖҡГҠЕ’ГҝпЈҝГғЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГ’п¬Ӯ sГ”ГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝ вҖҷГЈЕ“ГҲвҒ„UГҠГ в—ҠГ’п¬Ӯ ГҒвҒ„UВ¬ГҲвҒ„UГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ”H 5H
В©UhвҒ„пЈҝUГғЛңГ” should lift or rescue (from the ocean of metempsychosis); вҖўГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠ by oneself,
by oneГӯs own efforts; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” oneself; Её should not; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” oneself; вҖўп¬ӮвҖҡГҠЕ’ГҝпЈҝГғЛңГ” degrade;
вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠ вҲһп¬Ӯ oneГӯs own self; ГҒвҖһU for; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ” вҖҷГЈЕ“ГҲвҖ” (is) oneГӯs friend; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠ вҲһп¬Ӯ (and) oneГӯs own
self; ГҒвҒ„UВ¬ГҲвҖ” вҖўГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ” (is) oneГӯs enemy.
One should lift oneself by oneГӯs own efforts and should not degrade oneself;
for oneГӯs own self is oneГӯs friend, and oneГӯs own self is oneГӯs enemy.        (5)
care that the rare opportunity vouchsafed to
him in the shape of a human life is not
thrown away, and should make the most of
it by pursuing a course of discipline like
Karmayoga, SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga or Bhaktiyoga.
This is what is meant by lifting oneself by
oneГӯs own efforts. Contrary to this, he who
indulges in sinful deeds under the impulse
of evils like attraction and repulsion, lust and
anger, greed and infatuation, and is
consequently deprived of the supreme fruit
of human existence, viz., God-realization,
and paves the way for birth in the lower
forms of life like swine and dogs etc., is
said to be degrading himself. The UpaniВ¶ads
present a ghastly picture of the doom of
such souls, branding them as spiritual
suicides.*
Subject to ignorance, the embodied soul
has been floundering in the mire of
transmigration, which is full of sorrows, from
time without beginning, and passing through
various states of existence, good, bad and
indifferent, undergoes terrible suffering of
various kinds. Finding the JвҲӮva in this miserable
plight, the All-merciful Lord confers on him
the rare boon of a human body,Гіwhich is
the only body suitable for spiritual practice,
and is, therefore, coveted even by gods,Гі
and thus affords him a golden opportunity
whereby he can by pursuing a course of
spiritual discipline get out of the slough of
metempsychosis even in one birth, if he so
desires, and easily attain God, the embodiment
of supreme Bliss.
Therefore, a man should take particular
* вҖўвҖҡГҲГҝГҠВё ЕёГҠв—Ҡ ГғпЈҝ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠ вҖўГЈЕ“пЈҝЕё Гғв—ҠвҖҡГҠЛҳЛҳп¬ӮГҺГғГҠвҖ”вҖ“ ГғГҠГ¶SГғпЈҝ В¬ЛқпЈҝГ ГҝГҠГҒГ·ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГЈГғ ГҝпЈҝ вҲ‘пЈҝВ§ ГёГҠГ в—ҠвҖһUЕёГҠпЈҝ ВЎЕёГҠвҖ”H
Those demoniac regions in the form of the lower forms of life, such as the swine, dogs and so on,
and the infernal regions are enveloped in darkness (the darkness of ignorance). Those who commit suicide
are condemned to such lower states.
(вҲ«В¶a UpaniВ¶ada 3)

=== PAGE 302 ===

* Chapter VI *
301
Calling upon the JвҲӮva to lift himself by
his own efforts, the Lord assures him that
PrГҘrabdha or destiny, howsoever unpropitious
it may be, does not stand in the way of oneГӯs
progress. In other words, it lies in oneГӯs own
hands to elevate or degrade oneself. PrГҘrabdha
has nothing to do with it. If a man exerts
himself, he is sure to get out of the slough
of degradation and attain to the highest
summit of progress. Man should, therefore,
constantly strive with the utmost care and
diligence to elevate himself, lift himself from
where he is. Completely renouncing attraction
and repulsion, lust and anger, enjoyment of
worldly objects, lethargy, negligence, as well
as sinful conduct, he should practise virtues
like sense-control, mind-control, forbearance,
discrimination and dispassion. Giving up
thoughts of the world, he should try to
concentrate his mind on God with reverence
and love, and should endeavour to realize
God thorugh practices of adoration and
meditation, service and association with saints.
And until this consummation is reached, he
should not recede an inch nor pause even
for a moment. Pinning his faith on the Divine
grace, he should not allow himself to falter
in the least and taking his courage in both
hands should patiently and resolutely press
forward on the path of progress. ManГӯs
progress is measured by the extent to which
he has been able to reform his nature and
mend his ways. Progress or advance consists
in reforming oneГӯs nature and mending
oneГӯs ways; and contrary to this, debasement
of oneГӯs nature and conduct constitutes
degradation or fall.
Those whom one regards as oneГӯs friends
due to attachments and worldly relations are
really speaking no friends at all, inasmuch as
they contribute to his bondage. Saints and
holy men, and even selfless strivers on the
spiritual path are no doubt oneГӯs true friends,
inasmuch as they help one to attain freedom
from bondage. But their friendship and good-
will too is realized only when one takes the
initiative by developing in oneГӯs heart genuine
reverence and love for them and conceiving
them to be oneГӯs true friends, and follows the
line of conduct laid down by them. This  makes
it clear that oneГӯs own self is oneГӯs friend.
Even so, it is equally certain that one is harmed
only by viewing another person as oneГӯs
enemy. Otherwise none can cause any spiritual
harm to any body. This proves that really
speaking he who strives to redeem himself is
his own friend, and he who acts otherwise is
his own enemy. Therefore man has no friend
or enemy other than his own self. This is
what the Lord means when He says that Г«oneГӯs
own self is oneГӯs friend, and oneГӯs own self
is oneГӯs enemy.Гӯ
It has been pointed out above that oneГӯs own self is oneГӯs friend, and oneГӯs own
self is oneГӯs enemy. In order to elucidate this point, the Lord now goes on to show what
sort of man is his own friend, and what sort of man is his own enemy:
вҖҷГЈЕ“ГҲвҒ„UГҠГ в—ҠГҠГ в—ҠЕёSГғSГҝ ГҝпЈҝЕёГҠГ в—ҠГ’п¬ӮГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠ ГҒВЎГғвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҖўЕёГҠГ в—ҠЕёSГғГҲ вүҘГҠГІГҠГҲГ п¬ӮпЈҝ п¬ӮГғпЈҝВёГғГҠГ в—ҠГ’п¬Ӯ вүҘГҠГІГҠГҲп¬ӮГғЛңГ”H 6H
вҖҷГЈЕ“ГҲвҖ” the friend; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠ oneГӯs body taken together with the senses and mind; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ” ГғSГҝ
to that embodied soul; ГҝпЈҝЕё by whom; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠ вҲһп¬Ӯ his very self; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠ the embodied soul; ГҒВЎГғвҖ”
(has been) conquered; вҖўЕёГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ” to him who has not been able to conquer his self in the shape
of mind, senses and body; ГғГҲ and; вүҘГҠГІГҠГҲГ п¬ӮпЈҝ п¬ӮГғпЈҝВёГғ behaves inimically; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠ вҲһп¬Ӯ his own self; вүҘГҠГІГҠГҲп¬ӮГғЛңГ”
like an enemy.

=== PAGE 303 ===

302
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Conquest of the body, senses and mind
consists in their complete subjugation and
subordination. This can be achieved through
constant and repeated practice and cultivation
of dispassion with discrimination. When the
body, senses and mind have been so thoroughly
trained and disciplined that they easily lend
themselves to any practice to which they may
be applied for the sake of God-realization, and
refuse to be led astray, they may be regarded
as having been completely subdued. He whose
body, senses and mind are mastered easily
redeems himself from the quagmire of worldly
existence and attains the object of his life
through realization of God, the embodiment
of Supreme Bliss. That is why such a man is
called his own friend.
Body, senses and mind collectively
constitute the self, the lower self of man. He
who has no control over these, that is to say,
whose body, senses and mind are wayward
and unruly and run after objects of enjoyment
without any check or hindrance, and who
cannot apply them according to his will to
spiritual practices favourable to the attainment
of his cherished goal, is referred to here by
the word Г«AnГҘtmГҘГӯ (one who is not self-
possessed). A slave to his mind, senses and
body, just like the ailing man who takes a
forbidden diet, he performs acts which are
antagonistic to his spiritual welfare. Due to
egoism and the feeling of possession, attraction
and repulsion, lust and anger, greed and
infatuation and so on, he falls a victim to
error, sloth and self-indulgence, and thereby
throws round his feet the shackles of sinful
acts. And just as an enemy robs a man of
the means of happiness and compels him to
go through misery and suffering, even so
instead of applying his body, senses and mind
to spiritual practices he devotes them to sense
enjoyments and throwing himself again and
again into hell and subjecting himself to
repeated birth in various forms of life, compels
himself to undergo terrible suffering for an
indefinite period of time. Since no one hates
oneГӯs own self, one cannot really mean ill
to one-self; nevertheless, blinded by ignorance
and under the influence of attachment one
begins to regard suffering as happiness and
evil as good, and sets about marring oneГӯs
own real interests. This is what is meant by
the statement that Г¬his very self behaves
antagonistically like his enemyГ®.
OneГӯs own Self is the friend of the Self by whom the lower self (consisting of
the mind, senses and body) has been conquered; even so, the very Self of him who
has not conquered his lower self behaves antagonistically like an enemy.      (6)
In order to make it clear how one who has mastered his body, mind and senses
is his own friend, the next verse goes to point out the fruit of subduing the self in the
shape of the body, mind and senses:
ГҒВЎГғГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ” В¬ЛқвүҘГҠГҠГЈГғSГҝ В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠГҠ вҖҡв—ҠГҠГҒвҖһUГғвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вүҘГҠГӢГғГҠпЈҝcГЎГҠвҖҡГҲПҖЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖпЈҝВ·ГҲ ГғГ•ГҠ в—ҠГҠЕёГҠВ¬в—ҠГҠЕёГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ”H 7H
ГҒВЎГғГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ” В¬ЛқвүҘГҠГҠГЈГғSГҝ (in the consciousness) of the self-controlled man who is perfectly
serene; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠГҠ God or the Supreme Spirit (the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss);
вҖҡв—ҠГҠГҒвҖһUГғвҖ” (is) rooted; вүҘГҠГӢГғГҠпЈҝcГЎГҠвҖҡГҲПҖЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖпЈҝВ·ГҲ in the midst of cold and heat, joy and sorrow; ГғГ•ГҠ
as well as; в—ҠГҠЕёГҠВ¬в—ҠГҠЕёГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” in the midst of honour and ignominy.

=== PAGE 304 ===

* Chapter VI *
303
The words Г«heat and coldГӯ, Г«joy and
sorrowГӯ, Г«honour and ignominyГӯ are only
symbolical. They stand here for all worldly
objects, experiences and events connected
with the body, mind and senses. The state
of mind referred to in this verse is the one
in which contact with or passing away of
any object or experience or occurrence does
not produce any unhealthy reaction on the
mind in the shape of attraction and aversion,
joy and grief, desire, fear, jealousy, lust,
anger, distraction etc. In this state the mind
remains equipoised and unruffled under
all circumstances.
He who has mastered his body, senses
and mind can remain calm, and above all
modifications of the mind, at all times and
under all circumstances, and can realize God
and thereby redeem himself from the quagmire
of mundane existence. Therefore, he is his
own friend. This is what is intended to be
conveyed by this verse.
The word Г«SamГҘhitaВЁГӯ shows that in the
eyes of such a man God is ever present
everywhere and perceptibly pervades every
atom.
The Supreme Spirit is rooted in the knowledge of the self-controlled man whose
mind is perfectly serene in the midst of pairs of opposites, such as cold and heat,
joy and sorrow, honour and ignominy.
 (7)
It has been pointed out above that conquest of body, senses and mind leads to God-
realization. This naturally leads one to enquire the marks of a God-realized soul. The next
two verses, therefore, describe the marks of a God-realized soul, and thus glorify him:
ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҒп¬ӮГҙГҠГҠЕёГғГҺ#ГҠГ в—ҠГҠ вҲ‘ГҚВ§вүҲUSГ•ГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮГҒВЎГғпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ГҝГҲQВ§ ГҹГ ГҝГҲГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ вҖҡв—ҠвҲӮUГҠпЈҝCГ”UГҠвүҘв—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠ@ЕёвҖ”H 8H
ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҒп¬ӮГҙГҠГҠЕёГғГҺ#ГҠГ в—ҠГҠ whose mind is sated with JВӨГҘna (Knowledge of NirguЖ’a Brahma or
Absolute Reality) and VijВӨГҘna (Knowledge of Manifest Divinity or SaguЖ’a Brahma); вҲ‘ГҚВ§вүҲUSГ•вҖ”
(who is) unmoved under all circumstances; ГҒп¬ӮГҒВЎГғпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝвҖ” whose senses are completely
mastered; ГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” united with God or God-realized; ГҹГҒГғ as; В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is spoken of; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ (such)
a YogвҲӮ; вҖҡв—ҠвҲӮUГҠпЈҝCГ”UГҠвүҘв—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠ@ЕёвҖ” to whom earth, stone and gold are all alike.
The YogвҲӮ whose mind is sated with JВӨГҘna (Knowledge of NirguЖ’a Brahma) and
VijВӨГҘna (Knowledge of Manifest Divinity), who is unmoved under all circumstances,
whose senses are completely mastered, and to whom earth, stone and gold are all
alike, is spoken of as a God-realized soul.                                 (8)
as well as the manifest and unmanifest
aspects of God, and who has no desire left
in him to know anything more, is referred
to here by the adjective Г«JВӨГҘnavijВӨГҘnatГҰptГҘtmГҘГӯ.
The word Г«KВөuВўaГӯ denotes the smithГӯs
anvil, which has to bear repeated hammer
blows and yet remains firm and unshaken.
Even so, he who remains firm and unshaken
in the face of the greatest sorrows and sufferings
The word Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ stands here for true
Knowledge of, and insight into, the glory
and greatness of the formless and attributeless
aspect of God; whereas Г«VijВӨГҘnaГӯ means true
Knowledge of formless God with attributes
as well as of God endowed with a form, and
His sports, secret, glory, greatness and virtues
etc. He who has thoroughly grasped the true
nature of both, the Г«SaguЖ’aГӯ and Г«NirguЖ’aГӯ,

=== PAGE 305 ===

304
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
of various kinds and whose mind is no longer
subject to any unhealthy reactions, and who
is ever firmly established in God, is referred
to here by the adjective Г«KВөuВўasthaВЁГӯ.
Having realized all objects of the world
as illusory and fleeting such a man ceases
to have the least attachment for any of them.
Finding no relish in worldly objects, his
senses, therefore, recoil from such objects
and embrace only those objects to which he
directs them according to his own will and
discretion in the interest of the world order.
They neither act nor move independently,
nor create any disturbance in the mind.
These are the marks of one whose senses
are completely mastered.
As he sees God in everything, earth,
stone and gold make no difference to him.
He feels no special attraction for gold as one
who is merged in ignorance does, nor does
he entertain any aversion for earth and stone,
but regards all of them as equal. This is what
is sought to be conveyed by the adjective
Г«SamaloВ¶ВўГҘвҖ№makГҘВӨcanaВЁГӯ.
вҖҡГҲNUГҒГЈв—ҠГІГҠГҠГҝГҲВёЕ’ГҠвҖҡГӢЕёв—ҠГӨГҝSГ•mпЈҝcГҝвҖҷГЈЕ“ГҲВ·ГҲГ” 
вҖ“
вҖҡГҠЕ“ГҲcп¬ӮГҒВ¬ Гё В¬ГҠВ¬пЈҝВ·ГҲ вҖҡв—ҠвҖҷГҲГҒhГҢп¬ӮГҒвүҘГҠcГҝГғпЈҝH 9H
вҖҡГҲNUГҒГЈв—ҠГІГҠГҠГҝВёГҲЕ’ГҠвҖҡГӢЕёв—ҠГӨГҝSГ•mпЈҝcГҝвҖҷГЈЕ“ГҲВ·ГҲ upon well-wishers, friends, foes, neutrals, mediators, the
objects of hatred and relatives; вҖҡГҠЕ“ГҲВ·ГҲ upon the virtuous; вҖўГҒВ¬ as well; Гё and; В¬ГҠВ¬пЈҝВ·ГҲ on the
sinful; вҖҡв—ҠвҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” he who looks with the same eye; ГҒп¬ӮГҒвүҘГҠcГҝГғпЈҝ stands supreme.
He who looks upon well-wishers, friends and foes, neutrals as well as
mediators, inimicals, relatives, the virtuous and the sinful with equanimity, stands
supreme.
 (9)
One is naturally apt to be partial to
oneГӯs well-wishers and friends, neutrals,
mediators, men of virtue and oneГӯs own
relatives. Even so, one is naturally inclined
to entertain a feeling of aversion or hatred
for foes, objects of hatred and sinful persons.
Men of judgment and reason too are found
to have a natural attraction for the former and
a natural aversion for the latter. It is exceedingly
difficult to be free from attraction and repulsion
with respect to types of men so diametrically
opposed to one another in nature, and to lose
all sense of distinction between them. He
who looks upon these two antagonistic types
of men with equanimity will have no difficulty
in maintaining such an attitude in respect
of all others. It is in order to bring out this
point, that the Lord has used the word Г«ApiГӯ
in this verse.
A Г«SuhГҰdГӯ or well-wisher is one who
is naturally disposed to love and oblige
others without any motive or condition and
without expecting any return for his services
and love; whereas Г«friendshipГӯ involves mutual
benevolence and service. That is the difference
between a well-wisher and a friend.
Even so an Г«AriГӯ or foe is he who seeks
or tries to harm under provocation, and a
Г«DveВ¶yaГӯ or object of hatred is he who
behaves inimically without any rhyme or
reason and thus provokes hatred or aversion.
A Г«MadhyasthaГӯ or mediator is he who
intervenes between two contending parties
with a view to reconciling them and tries to
do justice to both by impartial judgement;
while an Г«UdГҘsвҲӮnaГӯ or neutral is he who is
absolutely unconcerned or unconnected with
either.

=== PAGE 306 ===

* Chapter VI *
305
Since such a man sees God everywhere
and in all beings, the differences of conduct,
nature and behaviour of such diverse types
of men as friends and foes, saints and
sinners, fail to produce any reaction on his
mind. In other words, the idea of diversity
never enters his mind under any circumstances
and on any account whatsoever. This is what
the Lord seeks to convey by the word
Г«SamabuddhiВЁГӯ.
The word Г«YogвҲӮГӯ in this verse does not
refer to one who has attained perfection in
Yoga, but to the SГҘdhaka who is qualified
to practise DhyГҘnayoga, inasmuch as he is
asked in this verse to practise meditation.
It is most difficult to practise meditation
in the midst of a crowd. Nay, even the
presence of another individual is apt to
involve the SГҘdhaka in talk with him and
thus interfere with his practice. That is why
meditation should be practised all alone. This
is the significance of the adjective Г«EkГҘkвҲӮГӯ
used in the verse.
Only secluded places like the forest or
a mountain cave are suitable for the practice
of meditation. The practice of DhyГҘnayoga
is not possible in a place which is frequented
by many people. That is why the verse calls
upon the SГҘdhaka to live in seclusion for the
Г«NirГҘвҖ№iВЁГӯ is one who neither seeks nor
needs in the least degree any object of
enjoyment of this world or the next in any
form and under any circumstances whatsoever.
Accumulation of objects of enjoyment
is known as Г«ParigrahaГӯ. Г«AparigrahaГӯ,
therefore, means one who has renounced all
objects of enjoyment. A householder will be
known as Г«Aparigraha even if he stocks
things provided he does not claim them as
his own. As for a BrahmacГҘrвҲӮ (one who
dwells in the house of a preceptor as a
student with a vow of strict celibacy and
discipline), a VГҘnaprastha (one who leads a
life of austere penance in a forest) and a
SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮ (a recluse or hermit who has
renounced the world) they should on no
account possess anything which the scriptures
do not permit them to possess.
In verse 6 it has been stated that he who has conquered his Г«selfГӯ in the form of
the body, senses and mind is his own friend; and verse 7 stated that the JвҲӮtГҘtmГҘ or the
self-controlled man realized the supreme Spirit. Again, verses 8 and 9 described the marks
of the God-realized soul and praised him. The question, therefore, naturally arises: What
should the Г«JвҲӮtГҘtmГҘГӯ do to realize God? How can he attain his goal speedily? Anticipating
this question, the subject of DhyГҘnayoga is taken up for discussion:
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ ГҝГҲTГӢГғ вҖҡГғГғв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёВў вҒ„UвҖһUГҒвҖҡ ГҒSГ•ГғвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҲһвҲ‘В§ГҠвҲ‘В§ГӢ ГҝГғГҒГёГ»ГҠГҠГ в—ҠГҠ ГҒЕёвҒ„UГҠвүҘГҠГӢвҒ„UВ¬ГҒвҒ„UВӘЛқвҖһUвҖ”H 10H
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ the YogвҲӮ; ГҝГҲTГӢГғ should engage (in meditation on God); вҖҡГғГғв—ҠЛңГ” constantly; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ”
his mind; вҒ„UвҖһUГҒвҖҡ in seclusion; ГҒSГ•ГғвҖ” living; вҲһвҲ‘В§ГҠвҲ‘В§ГӢ all by himself; ГҝГғГҒГёГ»ГҠГҠГ в—ҠГҠ who has controlled
his body along with the mind and senses; ГҒЕёвҒ„UГҠвүҘГҠГӢвҖ” who is free from desires; вҖўВ¬ГҒвҒ„UВӘЛқвҖһUвҖ” who is
void of possessions.
Living in seclusion all by himself, the YogвҲӮ who has controlled his mind and
body, and is free from desires and void of possessions, should constantly engage his
mind in meditation.                                                     (10)

=== PAGE 307 ===

306
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
practice of meditation.
The word Г«Г…tmГҘГӯ in this verse stands
for the mind and intellect, which are collectively
known as the inner sense or Г«AntaВЁkaraЖ’aГӯ.
Absortion of the mind and intellect in the
thought of God is what is meant by engaging
them in meditation.
The word Г«SatatamГӯ signifies that
nothing should be allowed to come in the way
of oneГӯs meditation. The practice should be
unbroken in nature, i.e., without a gap or
diversion in the flow of one single thought.
The self-controlled man has been advised to practise DhyГҘnayoga. Proceeding,
therefore, to describe the practice in detail, the Lord now discusses the question of the
place and posture suited to the practice in the following verse:
вүҘГҠГҲГёГҠГ’ Е’пЈҝвүҘГҠпЈҝ В¬ЛқГҒГғDГ”UГҠГҘГҝ ГҒSГ•вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠвҖҡЕёв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ЕёГҠГ ГҝГҲГҒГ«ВҝЛӣUГғВў ЕёГҠГҒГғЕёГӢГёВў ГёГ’вҲӮUГҠГҒВЎЕёвҲ‘ГҲВ§вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝГ»ГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”H 11H
вүҘГҠГҲГёГҠГ’ Е’пЈҝвүҘГҠпЈҝ in a place free from dirt and other impurities; В¬ЛқГҒГғDГ”UГҠГҘГҝ having placed; ГҒSГ•вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”
firmly; вҖўГҠвҖҡЕёв—ҠЛңГ” seat; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ” his; Её вҖўГ ГҝГҲГҒГ«ВҝЛӣUГғв—ҠЛңГ” neither very elevated; Её вҖўГҒГғЕёГӢГёв—ҠЛңГ” nor very low;
ГёГ’вҲӮUГҠГҒВЎЕёвҲ‘ГҲВ§вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝГ»ГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” with KuвҖ№a grass, a deerskin and cloth spread thereon, one upon another.
Having firmly placed his seat in a spot which is free from dirt and other impurities
with the sacred KuвҖ№a grass, a deerskin and a cloth spread thereon, one upon the
other (KuвҖ№a below, deerskin in the middle and cloth uppermost), neither very high
nor very low.                                                              (11)
elevated, the SГҘdhaka in the course of
meditation has the risk of dropping down from
it and getting hurt in the event of his meditation
being disturbed by languor or sleep. And if it
is too low, it will allow a free passage to heat
and cold of the floor and to small insects like
ants etc., which may interfere with his
meditation. Hence the Lord says that the seat
should be neither very high nor very low.
Again, a seat made of wood or stone having
a hard surface is likely to set oneГӯs legs aching.
Hence the Lord lays down that in order to
make the seat soft it should be spread all over
with KuвҖ№a grass in the first instance, and the
KuвҖ№a grass covered by a deerskin, and a piece
of cloth should be spread on the deerskin*.
The KuвҖ№a grass placed below the deerskin will
protect the deerskin from decay and the piece
The spot selected for the practice of
DhyГҘnayoga should not only have clean
surroundings, but should have been swept of
all dust, smeared all over with cowdung, clay
or any other natural disinfectant and purifying
substance or rubbed and washed, and thus
cleaned of all dirt and defilement. A suitable
place on the bank of sacred rivers like the GangГҘ
and the YamunГҘ, a mountain-cave, a temple,
a place of pilgrimage or a garden or anyother
place having a pure atmosphere, which may
be easily obtained, and is clean, undefiled and
secluded, should be selected by the SГҘdhaka
for the practice of meditation.
The word Г«Г…sanaГӯ in this verse denotes
a seat made of either a wooden plank, or a
slab of stone, on which one can conveniently
sit for some length of time. If the seat is too
* When selecting the deerskin one should make sure that the skin belongs to an animal who died a
natural death, and not of one which was deliberately killed. A skin obtained through destruction of life can
never be helpful in spiritual practice.

=== PAGE 308 ===

* Chapter VI *
307
of cloth spread on the deerskin will prevent
the hair of the deerskin from sticking to the
body. Hence it is that the Lord advises the
SГҘdhaka to spread all the three, in due
succession, on oneГӯs seat.
The word Г«Г…tmanaВЁГӯ shows that the
seat should be oneГӯs own. One should
not use anotherГӯs seat for the practice of
meditation. That is why the word Г«Г…tmanaВЁГӯ
has been used with the word Г«Г…sanamГӯ or
seat.
The seat should be firmly and properly
adjusted on the floor, so that it may not shake
or move. For movement or shaking is likely
to interfere with oneГӯs practice. That is what
is meant by the words Г«Sthiram PratiВ¶ВўhГҘpyaГӯ.
The following verse lays down what the SГҘdhaka of DhyГҘnayoga should do next
after firmly placing his seat in a neat and tidy spot.
ГғГІГҠГ’вҲ‘В§ГҠВӘЛқВў в—ҠЕёвҖ” вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г п¬ӮГҠ ГҝГғГҒГёГ»ГҠпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝвҖ”Г”вҖ“
В©UВ¬ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҝГҠвҖҡЕёпЈҝ 
ГҝГҲГңГ–ГҝГ”ГҠlГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҲhГҝпЈҝH 12H
ГғГІГҠ on that; вҲһвҲ‘В§ГҠВӘЛқв—ҠЛңГ” в—ҠЕёвҖ” вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г п¬ӮГҠ concentrating the mind; ГҝГғГҒГёГ»ГҠпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝвҖ” having controlled
the functions of the mind and senses; В©UВ¬ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҝ sitting; вҖўГҠвҖҡЕёпЈҝ seat; ГҝГҲГңГ–ГҝГҠГғЛңГ” should practise;
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ” Yoga; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҲhГҝпЈҝ for self-purification.
And occupying that seat, concentrating the mind and controlling the functions
of the mind and senses, he should practise Yoga for self-purification.          (12)
of all their activities is what is meant by
sense-control.
Concentration of mind means focussing
the mind on the object of meditation. In
the present context, the object of meditation
is God. Therefore, the verse speaks of
concentrating the mind on God. This has
been made clear by the Lord Himself in
verse 14 by the use of the adjective Г«MaccittaВЁГӯ
(having the mind fixed on Me).
The Lord further says that meditation
should be practised for purification of the
self. The intention of this statement is to
bring home to the SГҘdhaka that the attainment
of any form of worldly glory or worldly
success should not be the object of the
practice of meditation. The practice should
be undertaken for the eradication of evil
propensities and imperfections like attraction,
repulsion and sins resulting therefrom, as
well as of ignorance and distraction, and
with the sole object of realizing God.
The posture of the body which a SГҘdhaka
should maintain while practising meditation
has been dealt with in the next verse.
Consistent with those principles, he may
adopt either the Swastika, Siddha, or Padma
posture of the legs, or any other posture
which is convenient and easy for him to
maintain for a sufficient length of time. That
is why the present verse speaks in a general
way of occupying the seat, and does not
mention any particular posture to be adopted
by him.
The word Г«CittaГӯ represents the mind
and intellect both, otherwise known as the
inner sense. The function of the mind and
intellect is to think and ascertain. When
they altogether cease to think of and
ascertain the objects of the world, and
completely withdraw themselves from the
same, one is said to have controlled their
functions. The term Г«IndriyaГӯ stands for the
ten organs of perception and action. Suspension

=== PAGE 309 ===

308
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
In the preceding verse the SГҘdhaka has been advised to practise DhyГҘnayoga. In
order to throw further light on the subject the next two verses lay down in detail how
the SГҘdhaka should sit, what mental outlook he should have, what rules he should observe,
and how and what he should meditate on:
вҖҡв—ҠВў вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝГҒвүҘГҠвҒ„UГҠпЈҝВӘЛқГӢп¬ӮВў Е“ГҠвҒ„UГҝГӣГҠГёвҲӮВўU ГҒSГ•вҒ„UвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҖҡГӘВ¬ЛқпЈҝЛҮГҝ ЕёГҠГҒвҖҡвҲ‘В§ГҠВӘЛқВў Sп¬ӮВў ГҒЕ’вүҘГҠpГҠЕёп¬ӮвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҝЕёЛңГ”H 13H
вҖҡв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” straight; вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝГҒвүҘГҠвҒ„UГҠпЈҝВӘЛқГӢп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” the trunk, head and neck; Е“ГҠвҒ„UГҝЕёЛңГ” keeping; вҖўГёвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” steady;
ГҒSГ•вҒ„UвҖ” (remaining) firm; вҖҡГӘВ¬ЛқпЈҝЛҮГҝ fixing the gaze on; ЕёГҠГҒвҖҡвҲ‘В§ГҠВӘЛқв—ҠЛңГ” the tip of nose; Sп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” his; ГҒЕ’вүҘГҠвҖ”
(in other directions); Гё and; вҖўЕёп¬ӮвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҝЕёЛңГ” not looking.
Holding the trunk, head and neck straight and steady, remaining firm and fixing
the gaze on the tip of his nose, without looking in any other direction.         (13)
has to be fixed on God and in no case on
the point of the nose.
Sleep, lethargy, distraction and pairs of
opposites like heat and cold are considered
as obstacles in the practice of DhyГҘnayoga.
These evils can be easily avoided by adopting
the means suggested in this verse. The
possibility of an attack of sleep and lethargy
is ruled out by holding the trunk, head and
neck straight and steady, and by keeping the
eyes open. Fixing of the gaze at the tip of
the nose and refusing to look about precludes
the possibility of distraction by external
objects, and firmness in posture removes the
fear of interference by pairs of opposites like
heat and cold. That is why the Lord lays
down that one should sit as stated above for
the practice of meditation.
Keeping the spinal column erect and
bringing the trunk, neck and head in a
straight line without bending or moving any
of these limbs is what is meant by keeping
them straight and steady.
The use of the word Г«SthiraВЁГӯ over and
above this, shows that other parts of the
body, such as the hands and feet should also
be kept steady and should not be moved; for
the movement of any limb is not desirable
in the course of meditation, as it is likely to
divert the mind from the object of meditation.
The gaze should be fixed on the tip of
the nose. This means that the eyes should
neither be closed, nor allowed to look in
other directions. The object of fixing the
gaze on the point of the nose is to avoid
distraction and dozing. The mind, however,
Whether one meditates on the SaguЖ’a or NirguЖ’a aspect of God depends on the
aptitude and qualification of the SГҘdhaka. The directions given above apply equally to
both the forms of meditation.
В¬ЛқвүҘГҠГҠГЈГғГҠГ в—ҠГҠ ГҒп¬ӮВӘГғГ·ГӢвҖҷЛқВёrГҠГ”ГёГҠГҒвҒ„Uп¬ӮЛқГғпЈҝ ГҒSГ•ГғвҖ”Г”вҖ“
в—ҠЕёвҖ” вҖҡВўГҝГӘГҝ в—ҠГҒГ¬ГҠГ»ГҠГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҲQВ§ вҖўГҠвҖҡГӢГғ в—ҠГ В¬вҒ„UвҖ”H 14H
В¬ЛқвүҘГҠГҠГЈГғГҠГ в—ҠГҠ (and) keeping himself perfectly calm; ГҒп¬ӮВӘГғГ·ГӢвҖ” free from fear; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГёГҠГҒвҒ„Uп¬ӮЛқГғпЈҝ to
the vow of continence; ГҒSГ•ГғвҖ” pledged; в—ҠЕёвҖ” the mind; вҖҡВўГҝГӘГҝ holding in restraint; в—ҠГҒГ¬ГҠГ»ГҠвҖ” with
the mind fixed on Me; ГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” the vigilant yogвҲӮ; вҖўГҠвҖҡГӢГғ should sit; в—ҠГ В¬вҒ„UвҖ” absorbed in Me.

=== PAGE 310 ===

* Chapter VI *
309
Though 
the 
word 
Г«BrahmacaryaГӯ
essentially means something else, conserving
the vital fluid or observing complete chastity
constitutes one of its main senses; and it is this
sense which fits in with the present context as
well. The vital fluid is an invaluable thing in
the possession of man, which should be
carefully preserved in order to gain and conserve
bodily, mental and spiritual strength. That is
why among the four Г…вҖ№ramas or stages of life
forming one of the main pillars of the Г…ryan
cultural organization, Brahmacarya or student
life (which is a symbol of chastity and is
invariably associated with strict celibacy) is
the very first Г…вҖ№rama, and the foundation of
the other three Г…вҖ№ramas viz., married life, a life
of austerity and seclusion, and renunciation).
The BrahmacГҘrвҲӮ, or the student who has taken
the vow of celibacy, has to follow a number
of rules which are exceedingly helpful in the
observance of complete chastity. The vital
fluid duly preserved through the practice of
Brahmacarya generates a peculiar electric
current in the body which is so brilliant and
powerful that its very radiance makes the
breath and mind steady, and thought begins
automatically to flow in one unbroken current
towards the object of meditation. This unbroken
unity of the current of thought is called
meditation. Nowadays people generally fail in
their attempt  to practise meditation, because
they cannot fix their mind on the object of
meditation. One of the main reasons why they
cannot do so is that they have not preserved
the vital fluid through observance of
Brahmacarya. Leading a regulated life of self-
restraint in the married state is also a form of
Brahmacarya, and is very helpful in the practice
of meditation; but he who has scrupulously
observed the vow of Brahmacarya from the
very beginning of adult life, and has not
suffered any loss of the vital fluid, will find
it very easy to attain speedy success in the
practice of meditation. The Code of Manu and
other scriptures lay down an ideal code of
conduct for the BrahmacГҘrвҲӮ. The following
are some of the main items of the Code: Г¬The
BrahmacГҘrвҲӮ should take a bath daily, should
not use an unguent, eye-salve, oil or perfumery;
he should not wear a wreath of flowers or
ornaments, should not participate in music
and dance, should not have shoes on his feet
nor use an umbrella; he should not sleep on
a cot or participate in gambling; he should not
look at women nor ever indulge in talk of
women. He should be regular and simple in
his diet, should not have soft clothes on his
body, should worship gods and В°RВ¶is and
serve and adore the preceptor. He should not
enter into disputation with any body, nor
speak ill of others; he should always speak the
truth, should not insult another, should practise
complete non-violence, should totally renounce
lust, anger and greed, should sleep alone and
should never allow any loss of the vital fluid.Г®
These, in short, constitute the rules of
Brahmacarya. Speaking of the vow of
Brahmacarya in the verse, the Lord also hints
at the organization of society into the four
Г…вҖ№ramas or stages of life. Conservation of the
vital fluid is very essential even for those
belonging to the other Г…вҖ№ramas who take to
the practice of DhyГҘnayoga, and the above
rules are exceedingly helpful in the practice of
continence. This is what constitutes the vow
of chastity and he who carefully observes the
vow is said to be resolute in it.
*
*
*
Firm in the vow of complete chastity and fearless, keeping himself perfectly calm
and with the mind held in restraint and fixed on Me, the vigilant YogвҲӮ should sit
absorbed in Me.                                                         (14)

=== PAGE 311 ===

310
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
God is present everywhere, and the
YogвҲӮ practising meditation wants to see God.
Why, then, should he entertain any fear? The
SГҘdhaka should, therefore, remain fearless at
the time of meditation. If he entertains the
least fear in his mind, he will naturally feel
distracted in a lonely place. During the
meditation, therefore, the SГҘdhaka should
hold the firm and right belief that God is
almighty, and being ubiquitous, is always
present by his side, and that in His presence
there can be no cause for fear. Even if due
to PrГҘrabdha the SГҘdhaka accidentally meets
with death during his meditation, such a
death will eventually bring him the highest
good. A true DhyГҘnayogвҲӮ will hold firmly
to this view; that is why the verse speaks
of him as Г«fearlessГӯ*.
*
*
*
At the time of meditation all evil
propensities like attraction and repulsion, joy
and grief, lust and anger, and all worldly
thoughts and doubts should be driven out of
the mind. In this way the mind should be
purged of all impurities and made serene
with the help of dispassion. This is what is
meant by the adjective Г«PraвҖ№ГҘntГҘtmГҘГӯ used in
the verse.
The YogвҲӮ practising meditation should
be on his guard against sleep, lethargy,
carelessness and other such obstacles. If he
is ever lax, his mind and senses may hoodwink
him and create obstacles in meditation. The
adjective Г«YuktaВЁГӯ has been used to bring
out this point.
The mind is fickle and elusive by
nature. It will not stick to one object and will
try to elude our grasp and run away if we
try to restrain it. Practice of DhyГҘnayoga is
impossible without controlling the mind.
Therefore, withdrawing the mind completely
from external objects at the time of meditation
and fixing it exclusively on the object of
meditation, or in other words, merging it in
God is what is meant by bringing the mind
thoroughly under control.
A continuous flow of thought towards
one object is called meditation. What should
be the object of oneГӯs meditation? This is
made clear by the Lord when He says, Г¬The
mind has to be fixed on Me.Г® The mind
automatically clings to the object of its true
love. The YogвҲӮ practising meditation should,
therefore, obtain an insight into the virtues,
glory, truth and mystery of God, who is our
best friend, greatest well-wisher and the
supreme object of love, and withdrawing his
love from the world, should regard Him
alone as the goal and try to fix his mind
exclusively on Him.
He who seeks to concentrate his mind
on God, taking Him to be his goal, must
naturally be devoted to God. Therefore, by
using the word Г«MatparaВЁГӯ (devoted to Me),
the Lord intends to show that the SГҘdhaka
following the path of Meditation should take
Him alone to be his supreme goal, supreme
refuge, supreme support, supreme Lord and
the supreme object of love and should
always depend on Him and should welcome
every dispensation of the Lord, regarding
Him as his sole and supreme protector,
helper, lord, nay, his very soul, life-breath
and everything. This is what is meant by
being Г«devoted to GodГӯ.
The use of the words Г«MaccittaВЁГӯ (with
his mind fixed on Me) and Г«MatparaВЁГӯ
(devoted to Me) indicates that meditation on
the Absolute aspect of God as one with the
meditator is not intended to be referred to here.
Therefore, it should be understood that the verse
describes the process of meditation on the
SaguЖ’a aspect of God, treating the object of
meditation as distinct from the meditator.
* вҖўГҠЕёГЈЕ’ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮmГҠГӣГҠ ГҒп¬ӮГ·пЈҝГҒГғ вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГғpЕёвҖ“

=== PAGE 312 ===

* Chapter VI *
311
But does that SaguЖ’a aspect represent
the formless aspect of the Almighty and All-
supporting God, or one of His manifestations
as вҖәrвҲӮ вҖәaвүҲkara, вҖәrвҲӮ ViВ¶Ж’u, вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma, вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a, or any other embodied form of the
Lord ? The answer to this is that the SГҘdhaka
should meditate on the form of God on
which he can easily fix his mind according
to his own aptitude, temperament and
qualifications, understanding fully the virtues,
glory, truth and mystery of God*. For God
is one, and all these forms and manifestations
are His own. Therefore, it would be wrong
to imagine that the verse advocates meditation
on a particular form or aspect of God.
For the Knowledge and guidance of the
SГҘdhaka, verbal images are given below of
a few embodied forms of God:Гі
MEDITATION ON BHAGAVГ…N
вҖәAГғKARA IN A TRANCE
In a most secluded spot on the famous
peak of the HimГҘlayas known as Mount
GaurвҲӮвҖ№aвүҲkara, BhagavГҘn вҖәiva is sitting cross-
legged in the pose termed as Г«PadmГҘsanaГӯ,
absorbed in meditation. The colour of His
body is exceptionally white with a light touch
of red spread over it. His body is motionless,
straight and tall. The ashy TripuЖ’Е’ra (a mark
consisting of three horizontal lines with a
vertical line crossing them in the middle)
adorns His extensive forehead; the tufts of
matted hair on His head, reddish brown in
colour, are tied with snakes after the fashion
of a braid. Small garlands of the RudrГҘkВ¶a
bead encircle both His ears. The dark colour
of the bear-skin which is wrapped round His
body is heightened by the blue lustre emanating
from His throat. His three eyes (the third
being in the centre of the forehead) have
their gaze fixed on the point of the nose. A
bright light is emanating from His steady and
motionless eyes, which is diffused all round.
The palms of His hands lying crosswise on
His lap look like a full-blown lotus.
In the state of SamГҘdhi He has suspended
all the functions of the vital airs within His
body, which has given Him the appearance
of an unassuming cloud, full of water and
about to discharge showers, or of a calm and
waveless ocean, or a bright and steady light
placed in a spot protected from winds.
* The virtues, glory, truth and mystery of God cannot be precisely stated or exhausted. Whatever is
stated with regard to them is like revealing the sun by means of an earthly light. Nevertheless, the least
remembrance, hearing and chanting of GodГӯs glory and virtues possess purifying properties of the first
magnitude. That is why the scriptures undertake to describe them. In the light of the scriptures, they may
be understood as follows:Гі
Infinite and boundless equability, serenity, compassion, love, forgiveness, sweetness, parental affection,
gravity, generosity, friendliness etc., of a transcendental type constitute the virtues of God. Consummate
strength, majesty, dignity, energy, prowess, and capacity to accomplish what is impossible, form part of the
Г«gloryГӯ of God. Just as the atom of water, vapour, cloud, rain-drop and hail-stone,Гіall these are the same
as water, even so the SaguЖ’a and NirguЖ’a aspects of God. God in form and formless God, the manifest and
unmanifest, matter and spirit, the animate and inanimate creation, the real and the unrealГіall these, and
whatever lies beyond these, are God Himself. This is the Г«truthГӯ relating to God. The sight of GodГӯs Form,
exchange of words with Him, the touch of His person, thinking of Him and chanting His Name and glories
and praise, worship and obeisance offered to Him confer the highest sanctity even on the vilest sinner. God
Himself, who is unborn and imperishable, omniscient as well as omnipotent, and equally existent
everywhere, and who is the supreme Lord of all the worlds, manifests Himself in a divine form, and His
divine virtues, glory and truth etc., are really speaking so incomprehensible, infinite and transcendent that
none but Him can know them in their entirety and reality. Herein lies His Г«mysteryГӯ.

=== PAGE 313 ===

312
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
MEDITATION ON BHAGAVГ…N VIВ®В°NU
On the lotus of the SГҘdhakaГӯs own
heart, or on a thousand-petalled red lotus in
front of him, a little above the ground, stands
BhagavГҘn ViВ¶Ж’u heightening the beauty of
the lotus by His presence. The colour of His
body resembles that of the rainy cloud; all
His limbs are exquisitely beautiful and adorned
with ornaments of various kinds. A heavenly
odour emanates from His Divine Body.
Wearing a serene look, His moon-like face
is brimming with beauty. He has four long
and beautiful arms. His neck and rosy cheeks
are exceptionally beautiful and captivating;
an enchanting smile adorns His face; His
ruddy lips and aquiline nose are simply
enthralling. Crocodile-shaped ear-rings adorn
both His ears. The chin is most beautiful to
look at. His large and beautiful eyes, resembling
a pair of lotuses, are two perennial founts
of compassion, love, tranquillity, equability,
knowledge, bliss and light. The  shoulders
are a bit elevated. A piece of fine silk of
a golden hue is  wrapped round His blue
Body and presents a beautiful contrast with
it. The вҖәrвҲӮvatsa mark (a golden streak)
adorns His chest which is the abode of
LakВ¶mвҲӮ, the Goddess of wealth. Of His two
right hands, the upper one bears the bright
circular weapon, Cakra, and the lower one
holds the celebrated club, KaumodakвҲӮ.
Similarly, the upper left hand holds the large
white conch named PГҘВӨcajanya, which ever
brings victory to Him, while the lower left
hand has a beautiful red lotus. A necklace
of jewels adorns His neck; and a garland of
sylvan flowers with leaves of the TulasвҲӮ plant
interspersed with them, the VaijayantвҲӮ garland
and the diamond known as Kaustubha fully
hang on and adorn His breast. His feet are
adorned with bejewelled anklets, making a
jingling sound, and the head with a brilliant
diadem. His broad, elevated and bright
forehead bears the beautiful mark known as
Г«ВӘUrdhvapuЖ’Е’raГӯ (consisting of two vertical
lines joined by a curved line at the base. His
wrists, arms, waist and fingers are adorned
with bejewelled bangles, armlets, waist-bands
and rings respectively. His dark, curly hair
is most beautiful to look at. A brilliant lustre
surrounds His form,Гіa lustre as bright as
the light of myriads of sun appearing together
and yet cool,Гіand throws out infinite currents
of love and bliss.
MEDITATION ON BHAGAVГ…N
вҖәRвҲ« RГ…MA
On a bejewelled throne of exceptional
beauty sits BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘmacandra together
with His divine Consort, вҖәrвҲӮ SвҲӮtГҘ. Possessed
of the colour of fresh green turf, large eyes
resembling a pair of lotuses and an enchanting
face, He bears the mark known as
ВӘUrdhvapuЖ’Е’ra on His broad forehead. The
dark and curly hair on His head are covered
by a diadem as bright as the sun. His lovely
and graceful form fascinates even the mind
of ascetics, who have renounced the world
and is covered with a piece of fine silk of
golden hue. A necklace of jewels and a
garland of heavenly flowers hang round His
neck. His body is daubed with sandal-paste.
He wields a bow and an arrow in His hands;
His rosy lips are brightened by a sweet smile.
On His left hand sits His consort, вҖәrвҲӮ SвҲӮtГҘ,
possessed of a bright golden complexion,
wearing a blue вҖәГҘrвҲӮ and holding a red lotus
in Her hand. Divine ornaments adorn Her
limbs. The charm of the Divine Pair is
incomparable and fascinates the eye.
MEDITATION ON BHAGAVГ…N
вҖәRвҲ« KВ°RВ®В°NA
(1)
The scene is laid on the bank of the
JumunГҘ in VГҰndГҘvana. In a bower of AвҖ№oka

=== PAGE 314 ===

* Chapter VI *
313
trees, adorned with new leaves, stands
BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a in the midst of His
playmates, the cowherd boys. The complexion
of His Body is blue with a swarthy tinge
about it, like that of a newly-formed cloud,
and the yellow silk on His swarthy Form
appears like the rainbow in a dark cloud. The
garland of sylvan flowers hanging from His
neck radiates the sweet smell of flowers and
TulasвҲӮ leaves. The VaijayantвҲӮ garland adorns
His chest. Curly locks of dark and glossy
hair hang about His rosy cheeks. His lotus-
like face is exceptionally beautiful and fascinates
the three worlds. A sweet smile is playing
on His ruddy lips. A crown of peacock-
feathers adorns His lovely head; a pair of
bright earrings hang from His ears, radiating
their light on His glossy cheeks. His lovely
Form is scattering beauty all round. Sticking
KarЖ’ikГҘra flowers in both His ears, He has
painted His body with weird minerals and
has adorned it with new leaves of various
colours. There is the вҖәrвҲӮvatsa mark on His
breast, and the Kaustubha gem hangs from
His neck. His eye-brows are strung like the
bow, His rosy lips are exceedingly soft and
beautiful. The lotus-like eyes are large and
slanting. They are radiating powerful currents
of love and ecstasy which attract everybody
and inspire a flood of love and joy in every
heart. Standing with three charming bends
in His divine Body, He is playing a sweet
tune on His flute, rapidly moving His agile
and soft fingers on its holes.
MEDITATION ON BHAGAVГ…N вҖәRвҲ« KВ°RВ®В°NA
(2)
The scene is laid on the battle field of
KurukВ¶etra; heroes armed to the teeth stand
in battle-array at their respective posts to
participate in the memorable conflict. In the
midst of them all, the huge and glorious chariot
of Arjuna is drawn up. The flag of the chariot
hanging from a high pole glitters with the
marks of the moon and stars. The great devotee
and hero, вҖәrвҲӮ HanumГҘn, is seated on the flag,
and there are smaller flags waving in the air
on all sides of the chariot. BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
is seated on the fore part of the chariot. Dark
blue in colour, He is the very acme of beauty.
Dressed like a warrior and hero with armour
on, He can be easily distinguished by the
yellow silk He wears on His body. His
countenance is the very embodiment of serenity.
The light of wisdom illumines every pore of
His body. His large and reddish eyes scatter
the light of Knowledge. He holds the reins of
the horses in one hand, and the other is raised
in the mystic posture known as JВӨГҘnamudrГҘ
(with the thumb and the first finger joined
together, and the other fingers disjoined from
them) as He delivers to Arjuna with great
serenity, composure and presence of mind,
the incomparable message of the GвҲӮtГҘ. A sweet
smile plays on His lips. By significant
movements of His eyes He is explaining His
viewpoint to Arjuna and dispelling the doubts
of his mind.
The fruit of DhyГҘnayoga, practised as above, is stated below:
ГҝГҲTГӣГҠпЈҝп¬ӮВў вҖҡЕ’ГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёВў ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ ГҒЕёГҝГғв—ҠГҠЕёвҖҡвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вүҘГҠГҠГҒГЈГғВў ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҠВёГЎГҠВ¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠВў в—ҠГ вҖҡВўSГ•ГҠв—ҠГҒЕ“ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғH 15H
ГҝГҲTЕёЛңГ” applying (to Me); вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” thus; вҖҡЕ’ГҠ constantly; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” his mind; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ the YogвҲӮ;
ГҒЕёГҝГғв—ҠГҠЕёвҖҡвҖ” of disciplined mind; вүҘГҠГҠГҒГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ” everlasting Peace; ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҠВёГЎГҠВ¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” consisting of supreme
Bliss; в—ҠГ вҖҡВўSГ•ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” abiding in Me; вҖўГҒЕ“ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғ attains.

=== PAGE 315 ===

314
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The practice of DhyГҘnayoga and its fruit have been described above. The next two
verses lay down rules regarding diet, recreation, sleep, etc., suited to the practice of
DhyГҘnayoga:
ЕёГҠГ ГҝoAГғSГғГҲ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒSГғ Её ГёГ’вҲ‘В§ГҠГЈГғв—ҠЕёoAГғвҖ”Г”вҖ“
Её ГёГҠГҒГғSп¬ӮВ¬AвүҘГҠГӢвҲӮUSГҝ ВЎГҠВӘЛқГғГҠпЈҝ ЕёГ’п¬Ӯ ГёГҠВЎГҲВёЕёH 16H
Её nor; вҖўГ ГҝoAГғвҖ” for him who overeats; ГғГҲ neither; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖ” (this) Yoga; вҖўГҒSГғ is; Её Гё nor;
вҲһвҲ‘В§ГҠГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ” вҖўЕёoAГғвҖ” for him who does not eat at all; Её not; Гё even so; вҖўГҒГғSп¬ӮВ¬AвүҘГҠГӢвҲӮUSГҝ for him
who is given to excessive sleep; ВЎГҠВӘЛқГғвҖ” Её вҲһп¬Ӯ Гё nor even for him who is (ceaselessly)
awake; вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё Arjuna.
Arjuna, this Yoga is neither for him who overeats, nor for him who observes
complete fast; it is neither for him who is given to too much sleep, nor even for
him who keeps awake for too long.                                           (16)
and observing total fasts occasionally entail
a severe strain on oneГӯs energy of mind,
senses and vital organs. In that state of all-
round depletion of energy the SГҘdhaka can
neither sit steadily in the posture referred to
above for any length of time, nor can fix
his mind on God. This interferes with his
practice of meditation. It is, therefore, laid
down that the SГҘdhaka of DhyГҘnayoga
should neither eat too much or more than
he can digest, nor observe a complete fast.
Similarly, a reasonable amount of sleep
relieves exhaustion of the body and refreshes
Thus, constantly applying his mind to Me, the YogвҲӮ of disciplined mind attains
everlasting Peace, consisting of Supreme Bliss, which abides in Me.
 (15)
is the same which has been spoken of elsewhere
as Г«peace in the shape of God-realizationГӯ (V.12),
Г«immortal peaceГӯ (IX.31) and Г«supreme peaceГӯ
(XVIII. 62), and which is also referred to as
attainment of God, attainment of the Supreme
Divine Person and attainment of the Supreme
goal, and so on. This peace represents the acme
of infinite and peerless joy and it constantly
and unshakably abides in God, the greatest friend
and well-wisher of the soul, the ocean of Bliss,
nay, the very embodiment of Bliss. It is this
peace which the SГҘdhaka of DhyГҘnayoga
eventually attains.
The word Г«NiyatamГҘnasaВЁГӯ stands for
one who has thoroughly disciplined his
mind. Such a SГҘdhaka alone can practise
DhyГҘnayoga, as stated above. This is brought
out by the adjective Г«NiyatamГҘnasaВЁГӯ used
with the word Г«YogвҲӮГӯ.
Constant application of the mind to God
means ceaselessly dwelling on the reality of
God through the mind and intellect, the mind
flowing towards the object of meditation like
the unbroken flow of oil, and getting merged
into it.
The lasting Peace mentioned in this verse
The word Г«YogaГӯ generally applies to
all the paths leading to God-realization. But
inasmuch as the subject of discussion in
these verses is DhyГҘnayoga, the word Г«YogaГӯ
in the present verse should be treated as
referring to DhyГҘnayoga, which roots out all
suffering for ever, and leads to the attainment
of God, the ocean of supreme Bliss and
supreme Peace.
Eating too much induces sleep and
lethargy and creates various disorders in the
system through the accumulation of undigested
matter. Even so, relinquishing food altogether

=== PAGE 316 ===

* Chapter VI *
315
it; but if carried to excess, it produces dullness
and makes one a constant victim of lethargy,
so that he finds it difficult even to sit steadily
for any length of time. Besides this, too much
sleep obviously encroaches upon valuable
moments of our human existence to no purpose,
which itself is a serious loss. By keeping
exaggerated vigils, on the other hand, one is
never able to overcome exhaustion of body
or attain freshness. The body, senses and vital
organs get slack, the body falls a victim to
disorders of various kinds, and is constantly
under the spell of sleep and lethargy. In this
way too much sleep and keeping excessive
vigils both are harmful to the practice of
DhyГҘnayoga. Therefore, in order to keep his
body in sound health and to avoid interference
in his practice of DhyГҘnayoga, the SГҘdhaka
should neither sleep too much when judged
from the requirements of his body and his
nature, health and age, nor should he abstain
from sleep altogether.
ГҝГҲQВ§ГҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„UГҒп¬ӮвҖһUГҠвҒ„USГҝ 
ГҝГҲQВ§ГёпЈҝCГ”USГҝ 
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡГҲГ”вҖ“
ГҝГҲQВ§Sп¬ӮВ¬AГҠп¬ӮвҖҷГҠпЈҝЕ“SГҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖвҖһUГҠH 17H
ГҝГҲQВ§ГҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„UГҒп¬ӮвҖһUГҠвҒ„USГҝ by him who is regulated in diet and recreation; ГҝГҲQВ§ГёпЈҝCГ”USГҝ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡГҲ by him
who is regulated in performing actions; ГҝГҲQВ§Sп¬ӮВ¬AГҠп¬ӮвҖҷГҠпЈҝЕ“SГҝ by him who is regulated in sleep
and wakefulness; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖ” the Yoga; Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ is accomplished; Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖвҖһUГҠ which rids one of woe.
Yoga, which rids one of woe, is accomplished only by him who is regulated
in diet and recreation, regulated in performing actions, and regulated in sleep and
wakefulness.                                                            (17)
Regulated and reasonable diet and
recreation tend to promote the quality of
Sattva (harmony) in oneГӯs body, senses and
mind, and enhance their purity, placidity and
liveliness, all of which facilitate the practice
of DhyГҘnayoga.
Duties enjoined by the scriptures with
due regard to oneГӯs order in society, stage
in 
life, 
condition, 
circumstances 
and
environment constitute what is known as
Karma or action. Such action when performed
in the proper way and to a reasonable extent
is called regulated action. For instance, actions
like practice of devotion to God, worship of
celestials, service of the indigent and distressed,
offering of respect to parents, the preceptor
and elders in general, performance of sacrifices,
practice of charity and penance, actions
contributory to the maintenance of oneГӯs
body, such as begging of food, (for recluses
and BrahmacГҘrвҲӮs, etc.), study of scriptures
and teaching them, and trade etc., and merely
Regulation of diet and recreation means
the regulation, not only of their nature or
kind, but of their quantity or degree as well.
For instance, food that one takes should be
such as has been obtained by fair and legitimate
means according to the rules laid  down for
oneГӯs order in society and stage in life, and
as is allowed by the scriptures and possesses
SГҘttvika properties (XVII.8). It should not be
such as tends to induce Rajas (excitement)
and Tamas (inertia), and should be free from
impurities and suited to oneГӯs nature,
circumstances and taste, and helpful in the
practice of Yoga. Its quantity too should
strictly conform to oneГӯs requirements and
best interests and should be determined with
due regard to oneГӯs health and power of
digestion as well as to the interests of oneГӯs
spiritual practice. Even so, recreation should
be indulged in only to the extent it is necessary
and useful for a particular individual, and
should be innocent in character.

=== PAGE 317 ===

316
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
bodily action, such as taking of bath and
answering the calls of nature etc.,Гіall these
should be done as enjoined by the scriptures
and approved of by the virtuous, taking care
that they encourage self-dependence and are
helpful in the practice of DhyГҘnayoga, without
interfering with othersГӯ interest, or inflicting
suffering or imposing a burden on another.
These actions should be performed only to
the extent they are necessary for the individual
performing them, so that he may be able to
maintain  his existence by fair means and
get sufficient time for the practice of
DhyГҘnayoga. By regulating his actions in
this way, he is able to maintain his body,
senses and mind in sound health and good
working order and can easily accomplish
DhyГҘnayoga.
Sleeping for six hours in the middle of
the night, and keeping awake during the first
and last quarters as well as during the day-
time, are generally considered as regulated
sleep and wakefulness. Though this is the
general rule, it is not indispensable that all
should devote the second and third quarters
of the night exclusively to sleep. The SГҘdhaka
of DhyГҘnayoga should regulate his hours of
sleep and wakefulness according to his nature
and the requirements of his body. If he can
manage with four or five hours of sleep
without any adverse effect on his health and
without feeling sleepy or languid during his
meditation, he should devote only that much
time to sleep instead of six hours.
*
*
*
The word Г«YuktaГӯ should be taken to
mean that diet, recreation, activity, sleep and
wakefulness of the SГҘdhaka should not
offend against the injunctions of the scriptures,
and should be kept within bounds, considering
the temperament, health and taste of the
SГҘdhaka.
*
*
*
Success in DhyГҘnayoga leads to the
realization of God, the boundless ocean of
supreme Bliss and supreme Peace, which
wipes out all oneГӯs sorrows and sufferings
with their very root once for all. Having
reached this state the SГҘdhaka has no more
to go through the ordeal of birth and death,
nor does he ever fall a victim to worry, grief,
fear and anxiety etc. He remains, wholly and
for all time, merged in the unruffled ocean
of Bliss. The adjective Г«DuВЁkhahГҘГӯ (which
rids one of woe) has been used with the
word Г«YogaВЁГӯ in order to bring out this idea.
Having laid down rules regarding diet and recreation etc., suitable for the practice
of DhyГҘnayoga, the Lord now proceeds to describe the marks which appear in a SГҘdhaka
meditating on the absolute, formless Divinity during the final stage in his SГҘdhanГҘ:
ГҝЕ’ГҠ 
ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕёГҝГғВў 
ГҒГёГ»ГҠв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠГЈГҝпЈҝп¬ӮГҠп¬ӮГҒГғDГ”UГғпЈҝвҖ“
ГҒЕёвҖ”SВ¬ГҺвҖһUвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠпЈҝГЁГҝГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҲQВ§ ГҹГ ГҝГҲГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ ГғЕ’ГҠH 18H
ГҝЕ’ГҠ when; ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕёГҝГғв—ҠЛңГ” thoroughly disciplined; ГҒГёГ»ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the mind; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҒЕё on God; вҲһп¬Ӯ
exclusively; вҖўп¬ӮГҒГғDГ”UГғпЈҝ gets focussed; ГҒЕёвҖ”SВ¬ГҺвҖһUвҖ” free from yearning; вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠпЈҝГЁГҝвҖ” for all enjoyments;
ГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” established in Yoga; ГҹГҒГғ as; В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is spoken of; ГғЕ’ГҠ then.
When the mind which is thoroughly disciplined gets focussed on God alone, then
the person who is free from yearning for all enjoyments is said to be established
in Yoga.                                                               (18)

=== PAGE 318 ===

* Chapter VI *
317
The use of the adjective Г«ViniyatamГӯ,
with Г«mindГӯ is intended to show that it is only
a thoroughly disciplined mind which can be
irrevocably fixed on God. When the mind,
being completely free from carelessness,
lethargy and distraction, gets fully and
unshakably established in God alone i.e.,
loses consciousness of all other objects but
God, it is said to be focussed on God.
When a man gets exclusively established
in God, the ocean of supreme Peace and
supreme Bliss, and overcomes all attraction
for the transient, momentary and perishable
enjoyments of this world and the next,
he no more requires or craves for any
worldly object. This is what is meant by
oneГӯs being free from yearning for all
enjoyments.
The Word Г«YuktaВЁГӯ in this verse indicates
the state of perfection in DhyГҘnayoga. The
intention is to show that when through the
continued practice of DhyГҘnayoga the two
marks stated above become fully manifest in
the YogвҲӮ, he should be understood to have
attained the final stage in the practice of
DhyГҘnayoga.
One may feel tempted here to ask: What is the state of the thoroughly disciplined
mind when it is thus focussed on God during meditation? The question is answered in
the following verse:
ГҝГ•ГҠ Е’ГӢВ¬ГҠпЈҝ ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҠГғSГ•ГҠпЈҝ ЕёпЈҝXГ”UГғпЈҝ вҖҡГҠпЈҝВ¬в—ҠГҠ Sв—ҠГҺГғГҠвҖ“
ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёГҠпЈҝ ГҝГғГҒГёГ»ГҠSГҝ ГҝГҲTГғГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ”H 19H
ГҝГ•ГҠ as; Е’ГӢВ¬вҖ” a light; ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҠГғSГ•вҖ” kept in a windless place; Её not; ГҹXГ”UГғпЈҝ flickers; вҖҡГҠ such;
В©UВ¬в—ҠГҠ picture; Sв—ҠГҺГғГҠ is stated (to be); ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёвҖ” of the YogвҲӮ; ГҝГғГҒГёГ»ГҠSГҝ of the disciplined mind;
ГҝГҲTГғвҖ” of him who is practising; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ” meditation; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ” on God.
As a flame does not flicker in a windless place, such is stated to be the picture
of the disciplined mind of the YogвҲӮ practising meditation on God.           (19)
mind, protected as it is from all sides during
meditation, ceases its restless movements and
remains uniformly luminous like the steady
flame of a burning lamp. That is why the
mind has been compared to a candle flame
rather than to an immovable mountain devoid
of light.
It is only the disciplined mind of the
YogвҲӮ, which can remain immovably fixed in
meditation on God, and no other. This is
what is brought out by the use of the
adjective Г«YataГӯ before Г«CittasyaГӯ.
The word Г«DвҲӮpaГӯ stands here for the
flame of a burning candle or lamp. A steady
light serves as a fitting illustration for the
state of a steady mind. No other simile could
depict it so well. A mountain peak, for
instance, is devoid of light and is naturally
steady; hence it has no point of affinity with
the mind. The flame of a burning light is,
however, both bright and unsteady like the
mind; therefore, it is akin to the mind. Just
as a flame does not flicker when it is
sheltered from wind, even so, a disciplined
Describing thus the marks of the SГҘdhaka who has attained the final stage in
DhyГҘnayoga, as also of his disciplined mind, the Lord now proceeds to describe in the
next three verses the state of one who has realized God, the embodiment of Truth,
Knowledge and Bliss, through the practice of DhyГҘnayoga.

=== PAGE 319 ===

318
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«YogasevayГҘГӯ means practice
of DhyГҘnayoga. When through the continued
practice of DhyГҘnayoga the mind gets firmly
established in God alone, it is said to have
become Г«NiruddhaГӯ, i.e., subdued or brought
under control.
The mind of the YogвҲӮ no sooner gets
fully established in God than it naturally
withdraws itself completely from the world.
In that state, the world no longer finds any
place in his mind. Though externally it may
appear that his mind withdraws from the
world only during SamГҘdhi or absorption
and thinks of the world at other times, really
speaking, it maintains no relation with the
world at all, at any time. Such a mind is said
to have become still.
The word Г«YatraГӯ in this verse denotes
the state which has been referred to in verse
23 below as Г«YogaГӯ, and in which the
SГҘdhaka of DhyГҘnayoga realizes God and
gets detached from the world once for all.
The indeclinable Г«EvaГӯ has been used to
show that besides the joy of God-realization,
he knows no other joy which the world can
give him. The intention is to show that
having realized God, the ocean of supreme
Bliss and supreme Peace, the YogвҲӮ remains
constantly and ever merged in that Bliss and
does not stand in the least need of any form
of worldly joy.
Meditation, which leads to God-
realization, should be practised as follows:
Taking oneГӯs seat in a secluded spot, as
described in verses 11 to 13 above, and
renouncing all other thoughts, the mind
should be fixed on the following idea: God
alone, the Absolute Reality, the one embodiment
of Consciousness and Bliss, exists. There is
no reality apart from Him. He alone is
projected everywhere. He alone is consicous
of His own existence; for He alone is the
embodiment of Consciousness. He is eternal,
changeless, unlimited, boundless, infinite,
without parts and stainless. The mind, the
intellect, the ego, the seer, the act of seeing
and the object of sight, and everything else
are in reality nothing but superimpositions on
Brahma, and are, in fact, Brahma Himself.
He is Bliss itself and is unspeakable. That
embodiment of Bliss is itself blissful. That
Bliss is whole, eternal, everlasting, unborn,
imperishable, supreme, final, existence itself,
consciousness 
itself, 
wisdom 
itself,
unchangeable, immovable, constant, free from
disease, knowledge itself, infinite and tranquil.
Meditating thus on that embodiment of Bliss,
the thought should revolve round the idea
that nothing exists besides Him. If any other
thought arises in the mind, it should be
regarded as having proceeded from that very
embodiment of Bliss, and as nothing but
Bliss, and should be thus merged in Bliss.
By constantly revolving this idea in the mind
ГҝГІГҠГҠпЈҝВ¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГғпЈҝ ГҒГёГ»ГҠВў ГҒЕёLВ§hВў ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖҡпЈҝп¬ӮГҝГҠвҖ“
ГҝГІГҠ ГёГ’п¬ӮГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёВў В¬вүҘГҝГӣГҠГҠГ в—ҠГҒЕё ГғГҲcГҝГҒГғH 20H
ГҝГІГҠ in which state; В©UВ¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГғпЈҝ becomes still; ГҒГёГ»ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the mind; ГҒЕёLВ§hв—ҠЛңГ” curbed; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖҡпЈҝп¬ӮГҝГҠ through
the practice of Yoga; ГҝГІГҠ in which; Гё and; вҲһп¬Ӯ only; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠ through subtle reason (purified
by meditation on God); вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” God; В¬вүҘГҝЕёЛңГ” realizing; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҒЕё in God (the embodiment of
Truth, Knowledge and Bliss); ГғГҲcГҝГҒГғ rejoices.
The state in which the Citta (mind-stuff), subdued through the practice of Yoga,
becomes completely tranquil, and in which, realizing God through subtle reasoning,
purified by meditation on God, the soul rejoices only in God.                                       (20)

=== PAGE 320 ===

* Chapter VI *
319
when all other thoughts are merged in the
all-blissful and all-conscious God, and no
other thought except the one blissful God
remains, the SГҘdhaka is unshakably established
in the all-blissful God. When through the
regular and daily practice of the above form
of meditation the world becomes one with
Brahma in his consciousness, or, in other
words, when everything is changed into
Brahma, the very embodiment of supreme
Bliss and supreme Peace, realization of
Brahma becomes easy to him.
referred to in this verse is by itself of the
nature of eternal consciousness. Because it
wholly transcends MГҘyГҘ, it is beyond the
reach of the intellect; nevertheless even as
the sky is reflected in an unsoiled and clean
mirror, the joy referred to here is reflected in
the intellect that has been steadied, sharpened
and refined by the practice of adoration,
meditation, discrimination and dispassion etc.
That is why it has been spoken of as
Г«BuddhigrГҘhyamГӯ.
The SГҘttvika form of joy derived from
meditation on God is also quite different from
the other forms of worldly joy inasmuch as it
leads to the supersensuous and eternal joy
which is apprehended through the sharp and
refined intellect. But it is enjoyed only at the
time of meditation, and is not always of the
same degree; and it represents only a state of
the mind. Hence it cannot be called
imperishable or everlasting. The joy referred
to here, which is the same as God, is the fruit
of the joy derived from meditation. Therefore,
The joy referred to in this verse has been
qualified by three adjectives, viz., Г«eternalГӯ,
Г«supersensuousГӯ and Г«apprehended only through
the subtle and purified intellectГӯ, in order to
distinguish the joy which is the very essence
of God from the SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika and
TГҘmasika types of joy described in verses 36
to 39 of Chapter XVIII. The joy of the world
is momentary, perishable, the root of suffering
and alloyed with suffering; the joy which is
the essence of God is not of this nature. It is
superior even to the SГҘttvika form of joy, and
altogether different from it; it is eternal and
ever unchangeable, because it is the same as
God and there is no reality other than that.
The adjective Г«Г…tyantikamГӯ has been used to
bring out this idea. The RГҘjasika form of joy,
derived from sense-objects, is enjoyed through
the senses; the joy referred to in the verse
cannot be so enjoyed. It is synonymous with
the supreme Eternal or God, who transcends
the senses. This is brought out by the adjective
Г«AtвҲӮndriyamГӯ (supersensuous). Again, the joy
вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠГҠГ ГҝГҒГЈГғвҲ‘ВўВ§ ГҝГ»ГҠЕ’ЛңГ”вҖҷГҲГҒhВӘЛқГҠsГ”в—ҠГғГӢГҒГЈВәЛқГҝв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠ ГҝГІГҠ Её ГёГ’п¬ӮГҠГҝВў ГҒSГ•ГғpвҲӮUГҒГғ ГғГ»п¬ӮГғвҖ”H 21H
вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ” joy (there is); вҖўГҠГ ГҝГҒГЈГғвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” eternal; ГҝГғЛңГ” which; ГғГғЛңГ” that; вҖҷГҲГҒhВӘЛқГҠsГ”в—ҠЛңГ” which can be
apprehended only through the (subtle and purified) intellect; вҖўГғГӢГҒГЈВәЛқГҝв—ҠЛңГ” supersensuous, beyond
the grasp of the senses; п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠ (the soul) experiences; ГҝГІГҠ in which state; Её not; Гё and; вҲһп¬Ӯ
verily; вҖўГҝв—ҠЛңГ” this (YogвҲӮ); ГҒSГ•ГғвҖ” (wherein) established; ГёвҲӮUГҒГғ moves; ГғГ»п¬ӮГғвҖ” from the reality
(of God).
Nay, in which the soul experiences the eternal and super-sensuous joy which
can be intuited only through the subtle and purified intellect, and wherein established
the said YogвҲӮ moves not from Truth on any account.                      (21)

=== PAGE 321 ===

320
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
it is quite different from the SГҘttvika form of
joy. In this way the use of the three adjectives
referred to above is intended to make it clear
that the joy referred to here is not something
that can be experienced like the SГҘttvika joy
mentioned in Chapter XVIII. On the other
hand, it is the same as God, who is
automatically revealed when the meditator,
the object of meditation and the act of
meditation become one.
The word Г«TattvaГӯ or Truth signifies
God, who is the only Truth or Reality. The
God-realized YogвҲӮ is ever established in God
and is never and on no account disunited
from Him. This is what is meant by the
statement that he Г¬moves not from TruthГ®.
ГҝВў вҲӮUГ©ГӨп¬ӮГҠ ГёГҠВ¬вҒ„ВўU вҲӮUГҠГ·Вў в—ҠГЈГҝГғпЈҝ ЕёГҠГҒЕ“вҲ‘ВўВ§ ГғГғвҖ”вҖ“
ГҝГҒSв—ҠГҒГЈSГ•ГғГҠпЈҝ Её Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖпЈҝЕё ВӘГҲLВ§ГЎГҠГҠГҒВ¬ ГҒп¬ӮГёГҠГҖГҝГғпЈҝH 22H
Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” which; вҲӮUГ©ГӨп¬ӮГҠ attaining; Гё and; вҖўВ¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” any other (gain); вҲӮUГҠГ·в—ҠЛңГ” gain (in the form of
God-realization); в—ҠГЈГҝГғпЈҝ reckons; Её not; вҖўГҒЕ“вҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” greater; ГғГғвҖ” than that; ГҝГҒSв—ҠЕёЛңГ” in which; ГҒSГ•ГғвҖ”
established; Её is not; Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖпЈҝЕё ВӘГҲLВ§ГЎГҠГҠ by heavy sorrow; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; ГҒп¬ӮГёГҠГҖГҝГғпЈҝ shaken.
And having obtained which he does not reckon any other gain as greater than
that, and established in which he is not shaken even by the heaviest of sorrows; (22)
the greatest trials and tribulations. Ordinary
trials and tribulations do not count much
inasmuch as they can be borne even by men
of fortitude and forbearance. The YogвҲӮ,
however, who has realized God remains firm
and unshaken as a rock even when he is
faced with the most terrible and unbearable
ordeals. Incision with a sharp edged weapon,
bodily pain occasioned by exposure to most
unbearable heat, cold, shower and lightning,
excruciating pain caused by physical ailment
the saddest bereavement, greatest ignominy,
insult and reproach, and all other causes of
acute suffering fail to disturb his equanimity
even if they all combine. The reason is not
far to seek. The YogвҲӮ who has realized God,
ceases, really speaking to have any connection
with his body; he appears to own it only in
the eyes of the world. Due to his PrГҘrabdha
or destiny his body, senses and mind come
in contact with and get disjoined from
objects of the world; for instance, they may
be brought face to face with or dissociated
from cold and heat, honour and ignominy,
praise and censure and other favourable and
The word Г«YamГӯ refers to the state of
God-realization, spoken of in the next verse
as Yoga, and characterized as free from the
contact of sorrow. Having realized God, the
repository of supreme Bliss and supreme
Peace, the YogвҲӮ has all his desires fulfilled
in this state. To him all the enjoyments of
this world as well as of the next, dominion
over and riches of the three worlds, honour
and fame extending over the entire universe,
and all other means of worldly happiness
appear as transient, momentary, insipid,
worthless, trivial and insignificant. Hence he
does not regard any object of this world as
worthy of attainment, much less reckon any
such gain as greater than what he has already
achieved and realized.
Just as the greatest enjoyments of the
world and the greatest worldly glory appear
tasteless and insignificant to a God-realized
soul, who never craves for them and remains
absolutely unconcerned on his failure to
obtain them or on their loss and is not in
the least shaken from his state of equilibrium,
even so he remains unshaken in the face of

=== PAGE 322 ===

* Chapter VI *
321
unfavourable circumstances. But there being
no enjoyer of pleasure and pain, his mind
can never be subject to unhealthy modifications
of any sort under any circumstances, and for
any reason whatsoever. He remains ever
irrevocably established in God.
The next verse specifies the state which has been extolled and outlined in verses 20,21
and 22 above, and encourages the SГҘdhaka to attain it:
ГғВў ГҒп¬ӮlГҠЕ’ЛңГ” Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖвҖҡВўГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҒп¬ӮГҝГҠпЈҝВӘВў ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖҡГҒГңГҙГҠГғв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖҡ ГҒЕёpГҝпЈҝЕё ГҝГҠпЈҝQВ§вҲҡГҝГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒЕёГҒп¬ӮВёГЎГЎГҠГёпЈҝГғвҖҡГҠH 23H
Гғв—ҠЛңГ” that (state); ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГғЛңГ” (the SГҘdhaka) should know; Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖвҖҡВўГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҒп¬ӮГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ” which is free from the
contact of sorrow (in the form of transmigration);  ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖҡГҒГңГҙГҠГғв—ҠЛңГ” (and is) called Yoga; вҖҡвҖ” that;
ГҒЕёpГҝпЈҝЕё resolutely; ГҝГҠпЈҝQВ§вҲҡГҝвҖ”Г” should be practised; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖ” Yoga; вҖўГҒЕёГҒп¬ӮВёГЎГЎГҠГёпЈҝГғвҖҡГҠ with an unwearied
mind.
That state, called Yoga, which is free from the contact of sorrow (in the form
of transmigration), should be known. Nay, this Yoga should be resolutely practised
with an unwearied mind.                                                 (23)
of this contact, sorrows and sufferings also
come to an end for all time. In order to bring
out this idea the word Г«SaвүҲyogaГӯ (contact)
has been inserted between Г«DuВЁkhaГӯ and
Г«ViyogaГӯ, although the word Г«DuВЁkhaviyogamГӯ
would have sufficed to convey the idea of
cessation of sorrow in this state.
The Yoga-sВөutras of PataВӨjali also say:Гі
Г¬The great sorrow in the form of future
births and deaths is called Г«HeyaГӯ (that which
ought to be avoided).Г®* (II.16)
Г¬The cause of Г«HeyaГӯ or suffering is the
contact between the subject and the object.Г®вҖ 
(II.17.)
Г¬Ignorance is the root of that contact.Г®вҖЎ
(II.24.)
Г¬The termination of that contact between
the subject and the object through the
eradication of Ignorance is known as Г«HГҘnaГӯ
(shutting out the Г«HeyaГӯ); this represents the
aloofness (Kaivalya) of the subject.Г®вҖқ (II.25.)
Ceasing for good to have any connection
with the world, which is only another name
of sorrow, is what is meant by attaining
freedom from contact with sorrow. It is not
that the YogвҲӮГӯs body, senses and mind
altogether suspend their functions of movement,
hearing, seeing and reflecting or ascertaining
etc., in this state. His body, senses, mind and
intellect continue to perform all their functions
according to his PrГҘrabdha or destiny. But
inasmuch as nothing remains in his
consciousness except God, he ceases in
reality to have any connection with those
functions. This is true of him both during
meditation and at other times.
The root of sorrow in the form of repeated
birth and death lies in the contact between the
subject and the object, or in other words, in
the liaison due to ignorance between the soul
and the objective world, the beginning of
which cannot be traced. With the termination
* вҖһпЈҝUГҝВў Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖв—ҠЕёГҠВӘГғв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖ  ВәЛқcвүҲГҺUЕ’ГҺвүҘГҝГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” вҖҡВўГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ вҖһпЈҝUГҝвҖһпЈҝUГғГҲвҖ”вҖ“
вҖЎ ГғSГҝ вҖһпЈҝГғГҲвҒ„UГҒп¬ӮlГҠвҖ“
вҖқ ГғЕ’Г·ГҠп¬ӮГҠГ вҖҡВўГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠГ·ГҠп¬ӮГҠпЈҝ ГҙГҠГҠЕёВў ГғЕ’ЛңГ”Е’ГҺвүҘГҠпЈҝвҖ” вҲ‘Г’В§п¬ӮГҖГҝв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“

=== PAGE 323 ===

322
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The state of God-realization, which has
been extolled and outlined in the preceding
three verses, is termed Г«YogaГӯ. This is
indicated by the adjective Г«YogasaвүҲjВӨitamГӯ
going with the word Г«TamГӯ in the verse.
The word Г«VidyГҘtГӯ shows that one
should approach a God-realized soul and
study the scriptures and thereby ascertain
the character and glory of the state described
in verses 20 to 23 and the method of
practising it.
The word Г«NirviЖ’Ж’aГӯ means one who
is possessed by ennui or the feelings of
boredom. Failing to observe any tangible
results following from the SГҘdhanГҘ, the
SГҘdhaka after a few days of practice begins
to lose heart and finds the strain too much
for him. He sees no end to his efforts and
begins to doubt whether they will ever be
crowned with success. A mind which is free
from this feeling of boredom, and is full of
perseverance and zeal, is called Г«AnirviЖ’Ж’aГӯ.
The use of the word Г«AnirviЖ’Ж’acetasГҘГӯ is,
therefore, intended to urge on the SГҘdhaka
to drive out this feeling of boredom entirely
from his mind. He should always be on his
guard against such feelings as may turn  his
mind from his SГҘdhanГҘ or slacken his
perseverance and zeal, and should take to the
practice of Yoga with an earnest mind.
The word Г«NiвҖ№cayaГӯ signifies faith and
reverence. The use of the word Г«NiвҖ№chayenaГӯ
is, therefore, intended to emphasize that the
SГҘdhaka of Yoga should possess full faith
in and reverence for his practice, for the
scriptures dealing with the same, for the
teachers of Yoga and also for the fruit of
such practice, and should devote himself to
it with firm determination and application
and regard it as the primary duty of life, and
success in his SГҘdhanГҘ in the shape of God-
realization to be the goal of his life.
Naming the state of God-realization as Г«YogaГӯ, it has been declared manГӯs definite
duty to attain it. The next two verses delineate the process of meditation on God as one
with the SГҘdhaka with the object of attaining this state:
вҖҡVГ”UГҖВ¬В¬ЛқГ·п¬ӮГҠГЈвҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠВўSГ ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёЕёвүҘГҠпЈҝВ·ГғвҖ”вҖ“
в—ҠЕёвҖҡГ’п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝВӘЛқГҠв—ҠВў 
ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕёГҝГӘГҝ 
вҖҡв—ҠГЈГғГғвҖ”H 24H
вҖҡVГ”UГҖВ¬В¬ЛқГ·п¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” arising from thoughts of the world; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠЕёЛңГ” desires; Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ renouncing;
вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёЕёЛңГ” all; вҖўвүҘГҠпЈҝВ·ГғвҖ” completely; в—ҠЕёвҖҡГҠ by the mind; вҲһп¬Ӯ verily; ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝВӘЛқГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” the whole pack of
the senses; ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕёГҝГӘГҝ fully restraining; вҖҡв—ҠГЈГғГғвҖ” from all sides.
Completely renouncing all desires arising from worldly thoughts and cravings
and fully restraining all the senses from all sides by the mind,
 (24)
it clear that thoughts of the world are the
ultimate cause of desire.
The words Г«SarvГҘn KГҘmГҘnГӯ denote all
desires for the enjoyments of this world as
well as the next in their intense as well as
moderate and mild forms. Thus all the
gradations and phases of desire such as the
latent desire for survival, craving, wish, thirst
Verse 62 of Chapter II spoke of desire as
springing up from attachment, whereas in this
verse it is stated to have its origin in thoughts
of the world. There is, however, no contradiction
between the two statements, inasmuch as the
verse referred to above speaks of attachment
as having its origin in thoughts of sense-objects
and giving rise in its turn to desire. This makes

=== PAGE 324 ===

* Chapter VI *
323
and hope etc., are comprised in them; and
since thoughts of the world are spoken of
as their root, Г«attachmentГӯ too should be
naturally taken as included therein.
Absence of even the least trace of the
latent desire for survival, attachment, craving,
wish, longing, hope or thirst for any object
of enjoyment is what is sought to be conveyed
by Г«complete renunciation of all desiresГӯ. A
pot containing clarified butter may be emptied
of all its contents, and yet its inner surface
will continue to be greasy. A box containing
camphor, saffron or musk, even when emptied
of its contents, will retain the smell of what
it contained. Similarly, desires too, even
when driven out of the mind, leave their
traces behind. Г«Complete renunciation of all
desiresГӯ involves the erasure or abrasion of
these traces as well.
It is the nature of the senses to run after
worldly objects. They are, however, enabled
to apprehend an object only when they succeed
in carrying the mind with them. If the mind is
weak, they easily succeed in dragging it after
them. But when the mind is made one-pointed
with the help of a purified and resolute intellect,
the senses get crippled as it were and are unable
to move among the objects of enjoyment
without the aid of the mind. That is why taking
his seat for the practice of DhyГҘnayoga
according to the instruction contained in verses
11 to 13 above, the YogвҲӮ should with the help
of discrimination and dispassion completely
withdraw all his senses through the mind from
all external objects, and allowing none of them
to run after any object, turn them wholly
inwards, controlling their power to run after
objects of enjoyment. This is what is meant
by Г«fully restraining all the senses from all sides
by the mindГ®.
вүҘГҠЕёГ’вҖ” 
вүҘГҠЕёГ’LВ§В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠпЈҝЕ’ЛңГ”вҖҷГҲhKГҠ 
Е“ГҺГҒГғВӘГҺвҖһUГӢГғГҝГҠвҖ“
вҖўГҠГ в—ҠвҖҡВўSГ•Вў в—ҠЕёвҖ” вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г п¬ӮГҠ Её ГҒвҲ‘В§ГҒ@Е’ГҒВ¬ ГҒГёГЈГғГҝпЈҝГғЛңГ”H 25H
вүҘГҠЕёГ’вҖ” вүҘГҠЕёГ’вҖ” through gradual practice; В©UВ¬вҒ„Uв—ҠпЈҝГғЛңГ” he should attain tranquillity; вҖҷГҲhKГҠ Е“ГҺГҒГғВӘГҺвҖһUГӢГғГҝГҠ
through reason controlled by steadfastness; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠвҖҡВўSГ•в—ҠЛңГ” в—ҠЕёвҖ” вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г п¬ӮГҠ fixing the mind on God;
Её should not; ГҒвҲ‘В§ГҒ@ГғЛңГ” anything (other than God); вҖўГҒВ¬ whatsoever; ГҒГёГЈГғГҝпЈҝГғЛңГ” think of.
He should through gradual practice attain tranquillity; and fixing the mind
on God through reason, controlled by steadfastness, he should not think of anything
else.                                                                   (25)
form of the very object on which it has been
habitually dwelling, and to cling to it. The
only way to wean it from its old habit is
to form a new habit stronger than and
opposed to the former, and compel it to
adopt the new habit by cajoling, threatening
and restraining it by an unwearied, resolute
and steadfast will. Impatience and overhaste
will not avail. If the will remains steadfast
and the practice is continued, the mind will
be completely weaned before long from its
old habit and will adopt the new one. It will
In the preceding verse the SГҘdhaka was
advised to withdraw the senses completely
from external objects with the help of the
mind. But so long as the mind continues to
indulge in thoughts of the world, it can
neither fully concentrate itself on God, nor
can withdraw the senses completely from
their objects. It has been the habit of the
mind from time without beginning to indulge
in thoughts of the world; it has to be weaned
from that lifelong habit and fixed on God.
It is the nature of the mind to assume the

=== PAGE 325 ===

324
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
get as strongly attached to the new pursuit
as it was to the old. When a young child
catches hold of a sharp knife or a pair of
scissors, the mother slowly and gently wrests
it from the hands of the child through
persuasion or even by threat, if necessary.
Even so, the mind should be completely
freed of all thoughts of the world, bringing
home to it through the intellect possessed of
discrimination and dispassion the transient
and momentary character of all worldly
enjoyments, and presenting to it the horrible
picture of the bondage and the tortures of
hell etc., which are sure to follow if it gets
entangled in those enjoyments. This is what
the Lord seeks to convey by asking us to
attain tranquillity through gradual practice.
So long as the mind does not wholly
give up thoughts of the objects of enjoyment,
the SГҘdhaka should daily sit for meditation,
and restraining the senses from external
objects in the first instance, should thereafter
gradually try with the help of the intellect to
empty the mind of all worldly thoughts and
at the same time attempt to fix it on God
through steadfast reason. An intellect which
is naturally tainted with attachment, doubt
and error due to lack of insight into the truth
and secret of God can never attain fixity and
steadfastness. Nor can such an intellect exercise
its steadying influence on the mind and enable
it to concentrate itself on God. But on obtaining
an insight into the truth and secret of God
through association with wise men when the
intellect becomes one pointed, it ceases to
indulge in the objects of this phenomenal
world and takes delight in God alone. In the
conception of such an intellect nothing exists
apart from God. In that state it succeeds in
completely withdrawing the mind from the
objects of the world, and engaging it in the
thoughts of God, gradually leading the mind
to identify itself with God. This is what is
meant by fixing the mind on God through
reason controlled by steadfastness.
So long as the mind does not get absorbed
in and identified with God, or in other words,
so long as one is not able to realize God, one
cannot be sure of its remaining constantly fixed
on the object of meditation viz., God. That is
why practice in the most intensive form is
necessary to keep it always fixed on God.
Therefore, when the Lord says that the SГҘdhaka
should not think of anything else but God,
His intention seems to be to emphasize that
once the SГҘdhaka sitting for meditation is able
through intensive practice to fix his mind on
God, he should take care that it does not even
for a moment withdraw itself from God and
revert to worldly objects. This alertness on
the part of the SГҘdhaka is very helpful in
acquiring steadfastness in practice. Even as
the practice grows in intensity as a result of
daily meditation, the SГҘdhaka should be more
careful not to allow the mind to wander
elsewhere, but keep it more steadily fixed on
God for a greater length of time.
The process of fixing the mind on God
during meditation is as follows:ГіAdopting
the procedure detailed in verses 1 to 14
above, and seated in a secluded spot for
meditation, the SГҘdhaka should first of all
free the mind of all thoughts of the world
and attempt to fix it exclusively on God.
Whatever object appears before his mind at
that time, should be discarded at once as a
figment. Eliminating in this way every thought
that arises in the mind, the existence of the
body, senses, mind and intellect too should
be repudiated. By negating everything in this
way when the entire objective world disappears
from the mind, the faculty of negation alone
will remain. Even though this faculty is
useful and harmless, this too has got to be
eliminated by strength of will. Or, subsequent
to the negation of the entire objective world,

=== PAGE 326 ===

* Chapter VI *
325
it will automatically cease. Whatever will
then remain is the incomprehensible Truth.
This Truth is Absolute and unconditioned
and complete by itself. It is unspeakable and
unthinkable. Therefore, negating in this way
the objective world as well as the body,
senses, mind, intellect and the ego, and
finally the negating faculty itself, the SГҘdhaka
should attempt to establish himself in the
Truth which lies beyond the range of thought.
The SГҘdhaka has been asked to fix the mind on God, and to think of nothing else
than God. But if due to the force of old habit the mind gets out of control and begins
to run after worldly objects, what should the SГҘdhaka do? Anticipating this query, the
Lord says:
ГҝГғГҠпЈҝ ГҝГғГҠпЈҝ ГҒЕёpвҒ„UГҒГғ в—ҠЕёp@вҲӮUв—ҠГҒSГ•вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГғГғSГғГғГҠпЈҝ ГҒЕёГҝГӘГҝГ’ГғЕ’ГҠГ в—ҠГЈГҝпЈҝп¬Ӯ п¬ӮвүҘГҠВў ЕёГҝпЈҝГғЛңГ”H 26H
ГҝГғвҖ” ГҝГғвҖ” in pursuit of whatever (object of sense, such as sound and so on); ГҒЕёpвҒ„UГҒГғ wanders;
в—ҠЕёвҖ” the mind; Гё@вҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” fidgety; вҖўГҒSГ•вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” restless; ГғГғвҖ” ГғГғвҖ” from every such object; ГҒЕёГҝГӘГҝ restraining
or pulling back; вҲһГғГғЛңГ” it (the mind); вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҒЕё вҲһп¬Ӯ on God alone; п¬ӮвүҘГҠв—ҠЛңГ” ЕёГҝпЈҝГғЛңГ” should fix.
Drawing back the restless and fidgety mind from all those objects after which
it runs, he should repeatedly fix it on God.                               (26)
world, which are a source of suffering and
sorrow; but though secondary when compared
to that real cause, the main reason from the
point of view of practice is its lifelong habit
of indulging in worldly thoughts. Therefore,
it is urged in this verse that the moment it
comes to the notice of the SГҘdhaka in course
of his meditation that his mind has run away
in pursuit of other objects, he should drag
it back at once with great caution and
firmness and without the least hesitation, and
concentrate it on God. He should repeat again
and again this practice of drawing back the
mind from the objects of the world and
concentrating it on God. He should not mind
in the least its prayers and entreaties, its
blandishments and endearments, its allurements
and threats. The least slackness on his part
will encourage its waywardness. Under such
circumstances, yielding to its importunities
and allowing it to linger somewhere even for
a while will be tantamount to giving out of
infatuation unwholesome food to an ailing
person, and placing a sharp knife in the
The mind is extremely restless and
fidgety; it will not easily stick to a particular
object for any length of time. As for a new
habit, the mind will refuse to submit to it
every time you try to inculcate it upon the
mind. The SГҘdhaka fixes the mind on God
with great effort, and complacently imagines
that he has succeeded in his effort; but lo! the
very next moment he finds that it has given
him the slip, and has run far, far away. That
is why in the preceding verse it has been
urged that the SГҘdhaka should remain alert,
and should not allow the mind to think of
anything else than God. But in spite of all his
alertness, the mind will elude his grasp in an
unguarded moment and will be so quick in
running away that for some time the SГҘdhaka
will fail to notice when it slipped away and
where it is gone. Ignorance and delusion is
undoubtedly the real reason why the mind
recoils from God, the boundless ocean of
Bliss and Peace, and the embodiment of Truth
and Knowledge, and runs after and indulges
in the transient and ephemeral objects of the

=== PAGE 327 ===

326
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
hands of a baby, and thereby endangering
their lives. Caution is the watchword of
spiritual practice. If the SГҘdhaka gives way
to laxity and feebleness at this juncture he
will not succeed in DhyГҘnayoga. Therefore,
he should observe the utmost care and
repeatedly try to withdraw the mind from
worldly objects and fix it on God.
*
*
*
The Lord is dwelling here on the
identity of the soul with the Oversoul. In
order to bring out this point, the word
Г«Г…tmaniГӯ has been interpreted as Г«GodГӯ in
this as well in the preceding verse.
The next verse deals with the fruit of withdrawing the mind from all sides and
concentrating it on God.
В¬ЛқвүҘГҠГҠГЈГғв—ҠЕёвҖҡВў sГ”пЈҝЕёВў ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёВў вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠГҲГ»ГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
В©UВ¬Г’ГҒГғ 
вүҘГҠГҠГЈГғвҒ„UВЎвҖҡВў 
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”Г·ГҚГғв—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҖв—ҠВ·в—ҠЛңГ”H 27H
В¬ЛқвүҘГҠГҠГЈГғв—ҠЕёвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” to him whose mind is perfectly serene; ГҒвҖһU because; вҲһЕёв—ҠЛңГ” ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёв—ҠЛңГ” to this YogвҲӮ;
вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ” happiness; В©UГ»ГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” supreme; В©UВ¬Г’ГҒГғ comes (as a matter of course); вүҘГҠГҠГЈГғвҒ„UВЎвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” to him whose
passion is subdued; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”Г·ГҚГғв—ҠЛңГ” to him who is identified with Brahma (the embodiment of
Truth, Knowledge and Bliss); вҖўвҲ‘В§ГҖв—ҠВ·в—ҠЛңГ” to him who is sinless.
For, to the YogвҲӮ whose mind is perfectly serene, who is sinless, whose passion
is subdued, and who is identified with Brahma, the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge
and Bliss, supreme happiness comes as a matter of course.                 27)
acts done with an interested motive, as some
have taken it to mean. Refraining from
virtuous acts done with an interested motive
is covered by the word Г«вҖәГҘntarajasamГӯ. Hence
the word Г«AkalmaВ¶amГӯ should be taken to
signify abstention from sinful acts alone.
Attachment, the feeling of want, desire,
greed, thirst and action with an interested
motiveГіall these have their root in Rajas
(XIV.7,12), and it is these again which foster
the element of Rajas. The word Г«вҖәГҘntarajasamГӯ,
therefore, stands for one who is free from
all these. Distraction of mind in the shape
of restlessness is also a product of RajoguЖ’a,
but the absence of this evil has already been
covered by the word Г«PraвҖ№ГҘntamanasamГӯ.
That is why it has not been mentioned again
in this connection.
By constantly revolving in his mind the
idea that he is not the body, but he is
Brahma, the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge
As a result of ripe judgment and dispassion
the mind ceases to indulge in thoughts of
the world, and overcoming restlessness
and distraction becomes absolutely steady
and perfectly serene. Possessed of such
a mind he who is firmly established in
God is referred to here by the word
Г«PraвҖ№ГҘntamanasamГӯ.
The mode of PrakГҰti known as Г«TamasГӯ
or darkness (which is the same as ignorance)
and all its products, such as carelessness,
sloth, excessive sleep, infatuation, and the
various forms of vices and evil conduct,
which are known as Г«impuritiesГӯ of the mind,
and which drag one downwards in the scale
of evolutionГіall these are covered by the
word Г«KalmaВ¶aГӯ. And he who is absolutely
free from all these evils is denoted here by
the word Г«AkalmaВ¶amГӯ. The word cannot be
interpreted to mean one who has given up
all sorts of sinful activities as well as virtuous

=== PAGE 328 ===

* Chapter VI *
327
and Bliss, the SГҘdhaka gets firmly established
in God, the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge
and Bliss. One who has thus established
himself in identity with Brahma is called
Г«BrahmabhВөutaГӯ. The word stands here for a
SГҘdhaka who has reached an advanced stage
in the path of oneness with God. Such a
SГҘdhaka has the elements of Rajas and
Tamas subdued in him, but he has not yet
risen wholly above all the three GuЖ’as.
Judged from his own point of view, he is
no doubt established in Brahma; but really
speaking he has not yet attained Brahma. Of
course, one who is thus firmly established
in Brahma, speedily attains Brahma through
Knowledge of Truth. It is, therefore, that the
next verse speaks of attainment of eternal
Bliss, as the fruit of this state. This attainment
of Г«eternal BlissГӯ is the same as attainment
of Brahma. It is in this very sense that the
word Г«BrahmabhВөutaВЁГӯ has been used in verse
24 of Chapter V as well, and there this state
has been shown to bring in its wake,
attainment of Г«Brahma, the abode of PeaceГӯ.
In verse 54 of Chapter XVIII too a
Г«BrahmabhВөutaГӯ is said to attain Г«ParГҘ BhaktiГӯ
which is the same as Knowledge of Truth,
and thereby to attain God (XVIII.55).
Therefore, the word Г«BrahmabhВөutamГӯ here
does not stand for the perfect soul, who has
realized God.
Rooted in pure Sattva (the element of
harmony) which lies beyond the modes of
Tamas and Rajas, or the Principles of darkness
and activity, when the SГҘdhaka is able to
concentrate his mind on God, the embodiment
of eternal Knowledge and Bliss, as identical
with him, he derives a SГҘttvika form of joy
from such meditation. It is this joy which is
referred to here by the words Г«Uttamam
SukhamГӯ, or supreme happiness. It is the
same type of joy which has been spoken of
as Г«SukhamГӯ or unmixed joy in the first half
of verse 21 of Chapter V, and as Г«AntaВЁsukhaГӯ,
or joy within, in verse 24 of the same
Chapter.
Describing thus the state of the YogвҲӮ, who has identified himself with Brahma through
the practice of meditation on God as one with himself, the Lord reveals the fruit of such
identification in the next verse.
ГҝГҲTГӣГҠпЈҝп¬ӮВў вҖҡЕ’ГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёВў ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ ГҒп¬ӮВӘГғвҲ‘В§ГҖв—ҠВ·вҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҖҡГҲПҖпЈҝЕё 
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”вҖҡВўSВ¬вүҘГҠВёв—ҠГ ГҝГЈГғВў 
вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠoAГҲГғпЈҝГ”H 28H
ГҝГҲTЕёЛңГ” uniting (with God); вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” thus, in this way; вҖҡЕ’ГҠ constantly; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” his self; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ
ГҒп¬ӮВӘГғвҲ‘В§ГҖв—ҠВ·вҖ” the sinless YogвҲӮ; вҖҡГҲПҖпЈҝЕё easily; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”вҖҡВўSВ¬вүҘГҠВёв—ҠЛңГ” (in the shape of) attainment of God;
вҖўГ ГҝГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ” eternal, everlasting; вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ” bliss; вҖўoAГҲГғпЈҝ enjoys.
The sinless YogвҲӮ, thus uniting his Self constantly with God, easily enjoys the
eternal Bliss of oneness with Brahma.                                    (28)
is able to establish himself firmly in constant
identity with God, or in other words, remains
in the Brahma-Consciousness, he is said to
have united his Self with God.
Identification with the Unmanifest or
formless Divinity is no doubt extremely
The word Г«YogвҲӮГӯ here stands for a
SГҘdhaka who mediates on God as one with
himself and has reached an advanced stage
in his SГҘdhanГҘ.
Renouncing all thoughts of the world as
laid down in verse 20 above when the SГҘdhaka

=== PAGE 329 ===

328
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
difficult to attain for one who is identified
with the body, as pointed out in verse 5 of
Chapter XII. This has been made clear by
the use of the word Г«DehavadbhiВЁГӯ (those
who are centred in the body) in that verse.
In this verse, however, the Lord is speaking
of the SГҘdhaka following the path of
Knowledge, who no longer identifies himself
with the body, and is established in Brahma,
as the word Г«BrahmabhВөutamГӯ used in the
last verse shows. The SГҘdhaka whose
consciousness is no longer centred in the
body, and who has identified himself with
Brahma, naturally finds it easy to attain the
Bliss of oneness with Brahma. Thus there
is no mutual contradiction between the two
statements, referring as they do to SГҘdhakas
living in different planes of consciousness.
*
*
*
Whatever joys are recognized in the
world, even the highest of them does not fall
in the category of true happiness. For there is
none among them which is superior to all
other forms of happiness, and ever remains
unchanged. That is why the вҖәruti says:Гі
Г¬That which is infinite or great beyond
all, is true happiness. There is no joy in that
which is finite. Happiness lies in infinity.
Efforts should be made in particular to know
the Infinite aloneГ®.*
The вҖәruti or Vedic lore brings out the
distinction between the Г«finiteГӯ and the Г«InfiniteГӯ
in the following words:Гі
Г¬The Г«InfiniteГӯ represents that plane of
consciousness in which no other is seen, no
other is heard, and no other is cognized, and
the state in which another is seen, another
is heard and another is cognized represents
the Г«finiteГӯ. That which is Infinite is immortal.
That which is finite is mortal.Г®вҖ 
That which exists today and will cease
tomorrow can never be true happiness. Even
if we regard it as partially coming under the
definition of happiness, it is extremely paltry
and insignificant. Comparing the various
types of happiness, the sage YГҘjВӨavalkya
says:ГіГ¬He who owns a kingdom extending
over the entire globe, and possesses the
highest worldly glory and all the objects of
worldly enjoyment, such as a wife, progeny,
wealth, land, a sound health, honour and
fame etc., is the happiest of men; for such
is supreme happiness in the eyes of man.
Hundred times greater than this is the joy
of the world of PitГҰs or manes; hundred times
greater than that is the joy of the abode of
Gandharvas; hundred times greater than the
last is the joy of those who are born as
celestials to enjoy the fruit of their meritorious
acts; hundred times greater than that is the
joy of the eternal gods; hundred times greater
than that is the joy of the abode of PrajГҘpatis
or Lord of creation; hundred times greater
is the joy of Brahmaloka (the abode of
BrahmГҘ, the creator). This is the joy attained
by sinless and desireless вҖәrotriyas (those
who have mastered the Vedas); for the
вҖәrotriya who has no thirst for enjoyments is
Brahmaloka incarnate.Г® (BГҰh., Up., IV. iii.33)
A God-realized soul, however, enjoys that
infinite, eternal, incomprehensible Bliss which
cannot be compared with any other joy, and
which constitutes his very being. This is
what is meant by enjoyment of the eternal
Bliss of oneness with Brahma.
It is this infinite joy, which has been
termed as Г«Г…tyantikam SukhamГӯ, or eternal
and supersensuous joy in verse 21 and as
Г«AkВ¶ayam SukhamГӯ (joy which knows no
diminution) in verse 21 of Chapter V.
* ГҝГҠпЈҝ п¬ӮГ’ Г·ГҚв—ҠГҠ ГғГ вҖҡГҲПҖВў ЕёГҠГҖВ¬пЈҝ вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠГҒSГғ, Г·ГҚв—ҠГ’п¬Ӯ вҖҡГҲПҖВў Г·ГҚв—ҠГҠ Г п¬ӮпЈҝп¬Ӯ ГҒп¬ӮГҒВЎГҙГҠГҠГҒвҖҡГғвҲҡГҝвҖ”  (ChГҘnd. Up., VII xxiii.1)
вҖ  ГҝГІГҠ ЕёГҠГЈГҝГ В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғ ЕёГҠГЈГҝГ«ВҝГҺUГЎГҠГҠпЈҝГҒГғ ЕёГҠГЈГҝГҒmВЎГҠЕёГҠГҒГғ вҖҡ Г·ГҚв—ҠГҠГ• ГҝГІГҠГҠГЈГҝГ В¬вүҘГҝГ ГҝГЈГҝГ«ВҝГҺUГЎГҠГҠпЈҝГ ГҝГЈГҝГҒmВЎГҠЕёГҠГҒГғ ГғЕ’ГҖВ¬Вў ГҝГҠпЈҝ п¬ӮГ’ Г·ГҚв—ҠГҠ
ГғЕ’в—ҠГҺГғв—ҠГ• ГҝЕ’ГҖВ¬Вў ГғГЈв—ҠГ ГҝВёв—ҠЛңГ”
(Ibid., VII. XXiV.1)

=== PAGE 330 ===

* Chapter VI *
329
Having thus shown the form of meditation practised by the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ seeking
identity with God, as well as its fruit, the Lord now proceeds to describe his mental attitude
in life as actually lived in the world:
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғSГ•в—ҠГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёВў вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё ГёГҠГ в—ҠГҒЕёГ”вҖ“
ГҹВёЛҮГҠГғпЈҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҝГҲQВ§ГҠГ в—ҠГҠ вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠ вҖҡв—ҠЕ’вүҘГҠВёЕёвҖ”Г”H 29H*
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғSГ•в—ҠЛңГ” present in all beings; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the Self; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё all beings; Гё and; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҒЕё
(as assumed) in the Self; ГҹВёЛҮГҠГғпЈҝ sees; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҝГҲQВ§ГҠГ в—ҠГҠ he who is united in identity with the all-
pervading, infinite Consciousness; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠ вҖҡв—ҠЕ’вүҘГҠВёЕёвҖ” (and) seeing unity everywhere.
The YogвҲӮ who is united in identity with the all-pervading, infinite Consciousness;
and whose vision everywhere is even, beholds the Self present in all beings, and all
beings as assumed in the Self.                                                    (29)
existence. Realizing this truth, he who sees
the one Self, permeating the whole creation,
animate as well as inanimate, as its substratum,
even as the dreamer sees his own self
projected in the form of the entire dream-
world, or in other words, he who realizes
the fact that the Self alone is manifested in
the form of the different beings, and that
nothing exists apart from the Self, is said to
Г«see the Self present in all beingsГӯ. Similarly,
just as he who has awakened from a dream
of a reverie sees the world of his dream or
reverie as nothing but a projection of his
thought, and existing in his own self, even
so the SГҘdhaka referred to above sees the
entire creation, animate as well as inanimate,
as nothing but a projection of the Self. This
is what is meant by seeing Г¬all beings as
assumed in the SelfГ®. In order to bring out
this distinction clearly, the Lord speaks of
the Self as actually present in all beings
(SarvabhВөutastham) and uses no such word
denoting actual existence while speaking of
seeing all beings in the Self.
The word Г«YogayuktГҘtmГҘГӯ stands for
the YogвҲӮ, who is established in identity with
the Absolute and formless Brahma, the
embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss,
and is referred to as Г«BrahmayogayuktГҘtmГҘГӯ
(One who has completely identified himself
through meditation with Brahma) in verse 21
of Chapter V and as Г«BrahmabhВөutaГӯ or
identified with BrahmaГӯ in verse 24 of the
same chapter; in verses 24 and 27 of this
chapter and in verse 54 of Chapter XVIII.
Verse 18 of Chapter V and verse 32
of this chapter describe how the illumined
soul sees unity everywhere. Even so, the
YogвҲӮ referred to in this verse, conducting
himslef well and in the proper way as
approved of by the scriptures with all beings
of the world, constantly sees in all the same
indivisible consciousness which constitutes
his own being. This is what is meant by his
seeing unity everywhere.
*
*
*
God is the only reality; the objective
world appearing apart from Him has no
* There is a parallel verse in the вҲ«вҖ№a UpaniВ¶ad, which runs as follows:Гі
ГҝSГғГҲ 
вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ 
Г·ГҚГғГҠГЈГҝГҠГ в—ҠГЈГҝпЈҝп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲВ¬вүҘГҝГҒГғвҖ“
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ 
ГёГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёВў 
ГғГғГҠпЈҝ 
Её 
ГҒп¬ӮВЎГҲВӘГҲГҘвҖҡГғпЈҝH
Г¬But he who sees all beings in the Self, and the self in all beings, no longer hates anyoneГ® (вҲ«вҖ№a Up.,6)

=== PAGE 331 ===

330
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Just as ether exists in the cloud, and the
cloud in ether, even so God is present in
every being, and every being exists in God.
He who realizes this fact is spoken of as
seeing God present in all beings, and all
beings existing in God. It may be asked here:
In what sense does the SГҘdhaka see God
present in all beings and all beings existing
in God ? Does it mean that God inheres in
all objects, as a cause inheres in its effect;
or that God pervades all beings and the latter
stand pervaded by him; or again that God
is the Support of all beings and the latter are
supported by Him ? To my mind all these
relations can be taken to subsist between
God and His creation. For just as ether is
a remote cause of a cloud, even so God is
the ultimate cause of the whole of this
animate and inanimate creation; it is He who
pervades all even as ether pervades the
cloud; and He again is the sole support of
all, even as ether is the support of all, even
as ether is the support of the cloud.
According to the вҖәruti text: Г«вҖўГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҠГҠЕ’ЛңГ”
п¬ӮГҠГҝГҲп¬ӮГҠВёГҝГҠпЈҝвҒ„UГҒВӘAвҒ„UВӘAпЈҝвҒ„UГҠВ¬вҖ”Гӯ (Taitta. Up., II.1), air is
evolved from ether, fire from air, and from
fire is evolved water, which is the same as
a cloud. Ether is the first of the five elements
and is the cause of the other four. PrakГҰti
or Primordial Matter is the ultimate cause of
ether; and it is PrakГҰti which brings forth the
entire creation under the supervision of God.
This PrakГҰti is nothing but a potency of
God, and is therefore identical with God.
Looked at from this point of view the whole
of this animate and inanimate creation is
evolved from God. Therefore, it is but
reasonable to say that He is the final cause
of the entire creation. The Lord Himself says
in the GвҲӮtГҘ (X.8):Гі
Г¬I am the source of all creation;
everything in the world moves because of
Me.Г®*
Likewise, just as ether permeates every
particle of water in the cloud through and
through, even so God permeates every particle
of matter in the whole of this animate and
inanimate creation. Г¬All this is permeated by
Me in My unmanifest aspect (as ice by
water)Г® (GвҲӮtГҘ IX.4).вҖ 
Having thus spoken of the YogвҲӮ following the path of Knowledge, and the final stage
of his SГҘdhanГҘ in the shape of seeing unity everywhere, the Lord now describes the final
stage of SГҘdhanГҘ of a follower of the path of Devotion, and how he sees God in every
being:
ГҝГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠВў В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғ вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠ вҖҡп¬ӮZ Гё в—ҠГҒГҝ В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғГ”вҖ“
ГғSГҝГҠвҖһВўU Её В¬ЛқГЎГҠвүҘГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ вҖҡ Гё в—ҠпЈҝ Её В¬ЛқГЎГҠвүҘГҝГҒГғГ”H 30H
ГҝвҖ” who; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” me (the Universal Self or VГҘsudeva as He is called); В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғ sees; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠ
(present) in all beings; вҖҡп¬ӮВёв—ҠЛңГ” the totality of beings; Гё and; в—ҠГҒГҝ (existing) in Me (the Universal
Self or VГҘsudeva); В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғ sees; ГғSГҝ to him; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; Её В¬ЛқГЎГҠвүҘГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ am never out of sight; вҖҡвҖ”
he; Гё and; в—ҠпЈҝ to Me; Её В¬ЛқГЎГҠвүҘГҝГҒГғ never goes out of sight.
He who sees Me (the Universal Self) present in all beings, and all beings in Me,
never loses sight of Me, nor do I ever lose sight of him.
(30)
* вҖўвҖһВўU вҖҡп¬ӮВёSГҝ В¬ЛқГ·п¬ӮГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГ»ГҠвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮZ В¬Лқп¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝвҖ“
вҖ  в—ҠГҝГҠ ГғГғГҒв—ҠВәВў вҖҡп¬ӮZВЎВӘЕ’вҲҡГҝQВ§в—ҠГҚГҒГғВёЕёГҠвҖ“

=== PAGE 332 ===

* Chapter VI *
331
Again, just as ether is the support, not
only of the cloud, but of all the other four
elements, viz., air, fire, water and earth, none
of which can exist without ether, even so
God is the sole and supreme Support of the
entire universe, consisting of animate and
inanimate creation (X.42).
*
*
*
Just as when an expert actor appears in
different garbs, one who is acquainted with
the actor and his voice etc., recognizes him
in all such garbs; even so, all the different
forms of beings in this world are nothing but
so many garbs of God. We do not recognize
them as such, that is why we hold them as
separate from God, and entertain fear and
hesitation with regard to them and recoil
from serving them. But he who recognizes
His presence in all beings, may certainly
observe outward distinction in his dealings
with different beings on account of the
differences of garb; yet in his heart of hearts
he will adore them all. If our father, or any
other dear relation appears before us in a
different guise, and we succeed in recognizing
him, shall we spare any services and attentions
to him? That is why GosvГҘmвҲӮ TulasвҲӮdГҘsa
says:ГіГ¬Knowing the whole creation to be
a manifestation of вҖәrвҲӮ SвҲӮtГҘ and вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma, I
offer my salutation to all joining the two
palms.Г®*
Just as вҖәrвҲӮ Baladeva, the elder brother
of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, beheld вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a in the calves
as well as in the cowherd boys and all that
they had with them,вҖ  or just as the cowherd-
maids of Vraja saw вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a everywhereвҖЎ
*
вҖҡГӢГҝ вҒ„UГҠв—Ҡв—ҠГҝ вҖҡвҖҷ ВЎВӘ ВЎГҠЕёГӢвҖ“ вҲ‘В§вҒ„UВ©В°U В¬ЛқЕёГҠв—Ҡ ВЎГҠпЈҝГҒвҒ„U ВЎГҲВӘ В¬ГҠЕёГӢH
вҖ 
The incident occurred in the land of Vraja (the beautiful tract of land lying in the vicinty of
Mathura). On the sandy bank of the YamunГҘ, surrounded by His playmates, BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a was one
day having His midday repast and engaged in His boyish sports. With the flute stuck into the cloth tied
round His waist, He held the horn and the cane in His left arm-pit and pickles of lemon etc., in the interstices
of His fingers; and with rice and butter in His right palm, He stood in the midst of His companions and
jested with them, laughing loudly Himself and making His friends rock with laughter. The cowherd boys
were all absorbed in dining with вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a. In the meanwhile, the calves had proceeded afar in search of
pasture. Holding the morsel of rice in His hand as described above, the Lord took leave of His friends and
ran in search of the calves. The sight of this sport of the Lord deluded BrahmГҘ, the Creator, who stole away
both the calves and the cowherd boys. Coming to know who had done this, and in order to delight the
mothers of the boys and the mother cows and frustrate the prank of BrahmГҘ, the Lord Himself assumed the
forms of the calves and boys. He appeared as a true copy of each calf and boy he replaced, in forms as well
as in the constitution of his limbs, in the shape and size of the articles the boy possessed, viz., his staff,
horn, flute, sling, clothes and ornaments, and also his nature, qualities, size, age, name and habits, and thus
gave an ocular demonstration of the truth that the whole creation is full of God. вҖәrвҲӮ Baladeva at first could
not make out anything. Later on, he observed that the affection of the mothers for their boys and of the
mother cows for calves which had been long weaned, had grown by leaps and bounds. This aroused his
suspicion. Observing with a discerning eye, therefore, he saw that all the calves and their care-takers, the
cowherd boys, and all that they possessed were no other than вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and was filled with wonder.
Later on, BrahmГҘ so saw the boys and calves etc., as the same as вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a; thereupon he extolled
the Lord and craved for His forgiveness (вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata X.xiii).
вҖЎ
A cowherd-maid who has her eyes coloured by love says:Гі
In whichever direction I look, I find
The landscape full of вҖәyГҘma (dark blue).
The bowers and groves are dark.
The water of the YamunГҘ is dark,
The sky and clouds are dark.
All colours are merged in the dark hue.

=== PAGE 333 ===

332
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
and at every time with their love-intoxicated
eyes, even so the devotee should find his
chosen Deity manifest everywhere as вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a, вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma, вҖәrвҲӮ ViВ¶Ж’u, вҖәrвҲӮ вҖәaвҲҶkara, the
Divine Mother or any other embodied form.
That is how we can see God as present in
an embodied form in the whole world.
Likewise, just as Arjuna saw the entire
universe in BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’aГӯs Universal
Form*, and mother YaвҖ№odГҘ saw it in the
cavity of baby вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’aГӯs mouthвҖ  and
KГҘkabhuвҖ№unЕ’i, the crow-saint, saw it within
the bellyвҖЎ of BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘmacandra,
even so the devotee should see it as part and
People say this is something novel.
Am I mad, or the dark pupil of
The peoplesГӯ eyes is changed?
The heart of the moon and the scion
Of the Sun are dark, the musk is dark,
As well as Cupid, the conqueror of the world
The neck of the blue-necked вҖәiva is also dark,
As if the dark colour has been broadcast all over the earth,
The letters of the Vedas appear dark, the point of
The tapering light is also dark.
Not to speak of men and gods, the Formless Brahma
Itself has assumed a dark Form.
* Vide GвҲӮtГҘ, Chapter XI.
вҖ  As an infant, BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a had been giving incomparable joy to the hearts of mother YaвҖ№odГҘ
and the men and women of Vraja by His childish plays of a marvellous nature. One day He
ate up a quantity of earth. Thereupon, snubbing Him, the mother said, Г¬O wilful child! Why should you
have stealthily eaten earth?Г® The Lord opened His mouth and said, Г¬Mother, if you do not believe Me,
examine My mouth.Г® Looking into the mouth, YaвҖ№odГҘ was taken aback in wonder. She observed in the small
mouth of the baby the entire creation, including the animate and inanimate worlds, the sky, the ten
directions (including the four cardinal points, the four intermediate corners, and the upper and lower
directions), mountains, islands, oceans, the earth, air, fire, the moon, stars, the deities presiding over the
senses, the senses and mind, objects of senses like sound etc., the three GuЖ’as of MГҘyГҘ or PrakГҰti, the JвҲӮvas
and their various forms, and the whole of Vraja. She wondered whether she was awake or dreaming. Finally,
she was seized with fear and bowing to Him surrendered herself to the Lord. Thereupon вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a exercised
His charm on her, and motherly affection being roused in her breast, she took up the child in her arms and
began to caress Him (вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata X. viii).
вҖЎ The great devotee, KГҘkabhuвҖ№uЖ’Е’i, was enjoying the sight of the child-like sports of BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ
RГҘmacandra. One day, moving on all fours, вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma gave a chase to KГҘkabhuвҖ№uЖ’Е’i. The latter took wing,
and the Lord extended His arm to capture the flying bird, KГҘkabhuвҖ№uЖ’Е’i went on flying till he reached
Brahmaloka, the abode of BrahmГҘ; but there too he found вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘmaГӯs arm pursuing him. A distance of about
an inch only separated him from the hand of вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma. He exerted his utmost to elude His grasp, but the
arm of вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma was equally obstinate in pursuing him. Losing his nerve, the crow BhuвҖ№uЖ’Е’i now closed
his eyes. When he opened them again, he found himself in AyodhyГҘ (the home of вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma) from where
he had flown, вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma laughed at this, whereupon the crow was involuntarily drawn into His wide open
mouth. A graphic account of his subsequent experiences is narrated by him to GaruЕ’a, the king of birds,
in GosvГҘmвҲӮ TulasвҲӮdГҘsaГӯs RГҘmacaritamГҘnasa which is reproduced below:Гі
Г¬In His abdomen did I see, O Lord of birds, a multitude of universes. There were innumerable spheres,
most wonderful to look at, each surpassing another in the skill of its execution. There did I find millions
of BrahmГҘs and вҖәivas, countless suns, moons and stars, innumerable deities presiding over different regions
and gods of death and punishment, numberless mountains and vast stretches of land, oceans, rivers, lakes,
endless tracts of forests and an extensive creation comprising a vast range of different species, such as gods,
В°RВ¶is, Siddhas, NГҘgas, human beings, Kinnaras, the four orders of creation, consisting of both moving
and immobile creatures. viz., mammals, hatched creatures, such as birds and reptiles etc., creatures born of

=== PAGE 334 ===

* Chapter VI *
333
parcel of the Deity he worships. This is
another way of seeing the world as existing
in God with attributes.
A vision of the embodied form of God,
the boundless ocean of beauty, love, glory and
magnanimity, and the embodiment of sweetness
and bliss, is difficult to attain even for gods.
And once the devotee beholds this transcendent
form, which is an embodiment of Truth,
Knowledge and Bliss, the bond of union
between him and his Lord becomes indissoluble
and permanent. This is what is meant by the
statement that Г«he is never lost to Me, nor am
I ever lost to himГӯ.
One who seeks a vision of God with
attributes and Form, must have faith in an
embodied divine Form. The worshipper of
such a Form must have the firm conviction
that the Deity he worships is the highest
manifestation of Divinity, and is all-powerful,
and that He represents both the Absolute and
the Qualified aspects of God. (If the SГҘdhaka
regards any other aspects or form of God as
higher than the object of his worship, he
cannot attain the highest goal through the
worship of that Deity.) He should then get an
image or picture of the Deity of his choice,
and taking it to be a visible and living
embodiment of the Deity should offer it
worship, praises and prayer. And meditating
on this form, he should gradually develop his
love and devotion for it. At the time of
worship he should firmly believe that the
image of the Lord is not something material
but a living God, who eats, drinks, walks,
smiles and speaks. If the SГҘdhaka is able to
develop genuine faith, the Lord will manifest
Himself through that very image as a living
Incarnation and fulfil the devoteeГӯs life and
turn it into an embodiment of Bliss by giving
perspiration (such as lice) and plant life. I saw there things unseen and unheard of, and beyond the range
even of the mind; how, then, can those wonders be described in words. I visited a number of universes,
spending a hundred years in each of them.
Г¬Every universe had its own creator (BrahmГҘ), Protector (ViВ¶Ж’u), Destroyer (вҖәiva), Manus (progenitors
of mankind) and guardians of the different directions (DikpГҘlas). Every universe had a different types of
humanity, demigods (Gandharvas), astral beings (BhВөutas), ghosts (VetГҘlas), Kinnaras (another species of
demigods having the head of a horse), night haunters (NiвҖ№ГҘcaras), quadrupeds, birds, serpents, gods, demons,
and all other creatures, each having a number of varieties or subdivisions. Even the lands, rivers, oceans,
lakes, mountains and all other phenomena were different.
Г¬In each universe did I see myself and many wonderful things. Every universe, O respected one, had
its own AyodhyГҘ, with the river SarayВөu, having different men and women including DaвҖ№aratha, KauвҖ№alyГҘ,
Bharata, and other brothers, each having a different form in each universe. вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma had taken His descent
in each and I witnessed His childish sports in every one of them. Everything I saw was different in each
universe, and most wonderful too, O mount of вҖәrвҲӮ Hari! But вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma was the same everywhere, though
I passed through countless universes. Driven by the wind of infatuation, I wandered through universe after
universe; but everywhere I saw the same вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma, having the same loveliness of form and indulging in
the same pranks of childhood.
Г¬It appeared as if I spent one hundred Kalpas (1 Kalpa=4,32,00,00,000) years in my journey through
the numerous universes. At the end of my wanderings I came to my hermitage and spent some time there.
There I heard the news of my LordГӯs advent in AyodhyГҘ. The news filled me with love and I flew with all
expedition to AyodhyГҘ, transported with joy. There I saw the grand festivities in connection with the birth
of вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma being held in the manner stated by me before. In this way I saw a number of universes in вҖәrвҲӮ
RГҘmaГӯs abdomen. They were all beyond description, one could only enjoy their sight. Therein I saw once
more вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma, the abode of compassion and wisdom and the Lord of MГҘyГҘ. I thought again and again;
but my mind being stuck in the mire of delusion could not decide anything. I saw everything in an hour
or so, and my mind began to reel at this, being seized with the utmost infatuation. Observing the confusion
of my mind, вҖәrвҲӮ RaghuvвҲӮra, the abode of mercy, laughed. And as he laughed, I was thrown out of His mouth,
O wise bird.Г®

=== PAGE 335 ===

334
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
an ocular demonstration of His love and
affection to the devotee.* Thereafter, through
the grace of God, He may obtain even a
direct vision of the Deity. There is no definite
time-limit for the attainment of this vision.
The period may be short or long according to
the earnestness of the SГҘdhaka and the degree
of his dependence on Divine Grace. Once he
succeeds in obtaining a direct vision of God,
it becomes easy for him, through the grace of
God, to see Him anywhere and at any timeГі
whenever and wherever he likes. In what
plane of thought the man who has seen God
face to face, lives, is known only to him who
has actually gone through this transcendent
experience; others can say nothing about it.
Over and above the worship of the image
or picture of the Deity of his choice, another
practice for securing a vision of God in Form
anywhere and everywhere is to practise
meditation on that Form, daily and regularly,
in a secluded spot, and engrave deeply on the
tablet of oneГӯs mind and image of that Form.
When the mind is able to form an image, the
SГҘdhaka should retire to some secluded corner
and with open eyes create a mental image of
that Form in the void and try to scan it. Depending
on the grace of God if one repeats the practice
again and again with faith, reverence and
determination, he will succeed before long in
beholding in the void a vivid mental picture of
the Deity, perfect in all details, as if smiling
and speaking to him. This can be achieved by
continued and resolute practice. When the
SГҘdhaka is thus able to cast his thoughts into
the mould of the form of his Deity, a vivid
picture of the Deity will appear before his
eyes wherever he likes, the moment he
concentrates his thoughts on Him. When he
acquires facility in this practice, the SГҘdhaka
should thereafter take up the practice of mentally
eliminating whatever objects may meet his
eye even casually while moving from one
place to another,Гіtrees, creepers, men, beasts
and birds etc.,Гіand replace them by the Form
of the Deity. The practice may ultimately enable
him to visualize easily the Form of the Deity
in everything, and in place of everything.
Thereafter, through the grace of God, he may
obtain a real vision of God, and then succeed
in seeing God everywhere directly, and in the
real sense of the term.
Speaking thus of God-realization through the practice of seeing God everywhere, the
Lord now proceeds to reveal the marks and glory of the man who has thus been able
to realize God:Гі
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҒSГ•ГғВў ГҝГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠВў Г·ВЎГ ГҝпЈҝвҲ‘В§Г п¬Ӯв—ҠГҠГҒSГ•ГғвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ•ГҠ п¬ӮГғВёв—ҠГҠЕёГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ вҖҡ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ в—ҠГҒГҝ п¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝГ”H 31H
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҒSГ•Гғв—ҠЛңГ” residing in all beings (as their very Self); ГҝвҖ” who; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me (the embodiment
of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss); Г·ВЎГҒГғ adores; вҲһвҲ‘В§Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛң вҖўГҠГҒSГ•ГғвҖ”Г” established in union (with Me);
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ•ГҠ in all forms of activity; п¬ӮГғВёв—ҠГҠЕёвҖ” engaged; вҖўГҒВ¬ even though; вҖҡвҖ” that; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ YogвҲӮ; в—ҠГҒГҝ in
Me; п¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝ abides.
The YogвҲӮ who is established in union with Me, and worships Me as dwelling
in all beings (as their very Self), abides in Me, no matter what he does.    (31)
Meditating every moment and everywhere
exclusively on the Deity of his choice, the
SГҘdhaka loses all consciousness of his own
separate existence, and gets so deeply absorbed
in Him that in His consciousness nothing remains
but the Deity. This state of God-realization is
* In the case of MвҲӮrГҘbГҘвҲӮ and other saints of the middle ages God is said to have manifested Himself
through images. Such a manifestation of the Lord through an image is known as an ArcГҘvatГҘra.

=== PAGE 336 ===

* Chapter VI *
335
referred to here by the words Г«Ekatvam
Г…sthitaВЁГӯ (established in union with Me).
Just as the element of water runs through
all the modifications of water such as vapour,
cloud, fog, rain-drop and snow etc., even so
God and God alone pervades the whole
universe consisting of animate and inanimate
creation. To know and realize this fact is
what is meant by worshipping the Lord
residing in all beings. He who adores the
Lord in this way has been declared as the
greatest saint (VII.19).
The devotee who has realized God actually
sees everything as God Himself. In that state
whatever actions are performed by him through
his body, speech and mind are, in his view,
performed only in relation to God. His hands,
when engaged in the service of another, render
service to Him alone in that form; gratifying
another by means of pleasing words, he gratifies
the Lord Himself; casting his eyes on another,
he casts his eyes on God alone; if he accompanies
anyone to a particular place, he accompanies
God Himself and moves in His direction. Thus
whatever activities he performs, he performs
them in God and in relation to God. That is
what is meant by the statement that Г¬he abides
in God, no matter what he does.Г®
Though directly perceiving iron in all
articles made of iron such as a knife, a pair
of scissors, a frying-pan, a wire, a crow-bar,
a hammer, a sword and the point of an arrow,
one makes appropriate use of each one of
these articles; even so, the God-realized devotee,
while seeing God everywhere and in every
being, can behave appropriately with every
being according to the injunctions of the
scriptures. There will be, no doubt, a world
of difference between his conduct and the
conduct of an ordinary man. An ordinary man
of the world may bring the greatest amount of
care and consideration to bear on his dealings
with his fellow-creatures; yet, inasmuch as he
fails to perceive God in every being, and
looks upon a fellow-being as other than himself,
and since his actions are bound to be tainted
with self-interest at least to some extent, there
is every possibility of his doing something
which may be prejudicial to othersГӯ interests.
But the devotee who constantly sees God
everywhere and in every being will naturally
perform acts which are conducive to the
common good. He is utterly incapable of
doing anything which may really mar othersГӯ
interests even in the least degree.*
The words Г«no matter what he doesГ®
occurring in this verse should not lead anyone
to think that the GвҲӮtГҘ allows full latitude to
the God-realized devotee to commit even sinful
deeds. For a God-realized devotee of the type
mentioned here is incapable of doing anything
which may be characterized as sinful. The
Lord has stated in unambiguous terms that it
is Г«desireГӯ, which is the root of all evils (III.37);
that Г«desireГӯ is the offspring of Г«attachmentГӯ
(II.62); and that attachment wholly disappears
from the mind of the God-realized saint (II.59).
Under such circumstances, it is impossible
for the God-realized devotee to indulge in
prohibited or sinful acts. Besides that, the
statement of the Lord that Г¬whatsoever a great
man does, other men also do the same,Г®
naturally throws a great responsibility on the
shoulders of the man of wisdom. That is
another reason why it is not possible for him
to do anything sinful.
* BhagavГҘn вҖәaвҲҶkara also says in the RГҘmacaritamГҘnasa of GosvГҘmвҲӮ TulasвҲӮdГҘsaГі
Г«Г«UmГҘ, those who are devoted to вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘmaГӯs feet,
Devoid of lust, pride and anger,
See the world as full of their own Lord;
With whom shall they quarrel, then?ГӯГӯ
Extolling thus the saint who has realized God through the practice of Devotion, the
Lord describes below the undifferentiating outlook and glory of him who has realized
God through the practice of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga:

=== PAGE 337 ===

336
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Just as a man identifies himself equally
with every limb of his body, even so the
YogвҲӮ referred to in this verse identifies
himself equally with the whole universe
consisting of animate and inanimate creation.
This is what is meant by looking on all as
one on the analogy of his own self.
Inasmuch as a man identifies himself
equally with all the limbs of his body, he
looks upon the pleasurable and painful
experiences of all limbs with a similar eye;
even so since the YogвҲӮ referred to above
identifies himself equally with the whole
world, he looks upon the pleasurable and
painful experiences of all with equanimity.
This is what is meant by looking upon  the
joy and sorrow of all with a similar eye  on
the analogy of oneГӯs own self. The intention
is to show that since the YogвҲӮ looks upon
all as his own self, the whole universe is
transformed into his very self. There remains
nothing in this world, which has a separate
identity from him. No one in this world
would ever inflict the least pain on oneself
in any form whatsoever. On the other hand,
man is naturally engaged in unceasing and
unremitting efforts to make himself happy;
and while doing so he does not feel that he
has put himself under any obligation or
conferred any boon on himself, and does not,
therefore, seek gratitude in return; nor does
he take pride in his being devoted to duty.
He seeks to gratify himself only because he
cannot help it, because it is ingrained in his
nature to do so. Even so, the YogвҲӮ referred
to in this verse would never inflict the least
pain on any creature in any form and would
constantly endeavour by natural impulse to
bring happiness to all.
(The ideal of Г«Universal BrotherhoodГӯ
is recognized as a very high ideal in the
West, and it is a high ideal indeed. But due
to diversity of interests, a clash is more or
less unavoidable even among brothers. But
there can be no diversity of interests where
there is the feeling of identity, or in other
words, where one regards another as his own
self; and there can be no fear of a conflict
where there is no diversity of interests. It is
due to such lofty ideals preached in the GвҲӮtГҘ
that the gospel of the GвҲӮtГҘ has received the
highest honour even from the thinkers
of the West.)
Whether the God-realized YogвҲӮ, referred
to in this verse, is actually conscious of the
joys and sorrows of the entire universe consisting
of animate and inanimate creation, or they
have only a seeming reality to him, is a
question most difficult to answer. He can
neither be said to be conscious of such
experiences nor can they be said to possess a
seeming reality in his eyes ! When in the eyes
of the God-realized man everything other than
God ceases to exist, how can he be conscious
of anything else ? And if they possessed only
a seeming reality in his eyes, why should he
вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠГ’В¬ГӘГҝпЈҝЕё вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠ вҖҡв—ҠВў В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғ ГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳВЎГҲВёЕёГ”вҖ“
вҖҡГҲПҖВў п¬ӮГҠ ГҝГҒЕ’ п¬ӮГҠ Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖВў вҖҡ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГғвҖ”H 32H
вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠГ’В¬ГӘГҝпЈҝЕё on the analogy of his own Self; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠ on all (beings); вҖҡв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” as one; В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғ
looks; ГҝвҖ” who; вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё O Arjuna; вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ” joy; п¬ӮГҠ and; ГҝГҒЕ’ п¬ӮГҠ or even; Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖв—ҠЛңГ” sorrow; вҖҡвҖ” that;
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ YogвҲӮ; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠвҖ” supreme; в—ҠГғвҖ” is deemed.
Arjuna, he who looks on all as one, on the analogy of his own self, and looks
upon the joys and sorrows of all equallyГіsuch a YogвҲӮ is deemed to be the highest
of all.                                                                 (32)

=== PAGE 338 ===

* Chapter VI *
337
try to avoid infliction of pain on others and to
gratify them? Therefore, a God-realized soul
alone knows what his actual feelings and
outlook are on such matters. They cannot be
expressed in words. Nevertheless, in order to
give a rough idea of his point of view it may
be stated that he is never actually conscious
of anything but God; they only possess seeming
reality to him in the eyes of the world. All the
same, his actions are extremely noble, consistent
and systematic.
That such a God-realized soul tries to
alleviate the suffering of the whole world even
though such suffering exists only in the eyes
of the world, and not in the consciousness of
the saint himself, is not to be wondered at.
Therein lies his speciality. He performs actions
in the most efficient way, even though they
possess no reality in his eyes, and even though
he has no selfish interest in them. Nevertheless
we can form some idea of His action from the
following illustration. Suppose a number of
young children, playing with pebbles and
stones, clods of earth and pieces of straw, take
to quarrelling among themselves for these trifling
and insignificant objects, and hurting one another
due to ignorance spoil their pastime. A wise
man, even though realizing the futility and
insignificance of their quarrel, intervenes and
expostulates with them. He gives a patient
hearing to both sides and deftly tries to pacify
them. The endeavours of the God-realized
YogвҲӮ to alleviate the sorrows and sufferings of
the afflicted world are roughly of this nature.
It is impossible to form a correct idea, with the
help of any analogy of the ineffable mood of
a God-realized soul, who has nothing to do
with wealth, honour, fame, and prestige, or
any other object connected with the world, for
whom nothing remains to be achieved, and in
whose eyes everything other than God ceases
to exist. Illustrations taken from the world do
not fully represent his true nature. They serve
to illustrate only a particular aspect of the
truth.
The use of the adjective Г«ParamaВЁГӯ with
the word Г«YogвҲӮГӯ is intended to show that the
Lord is speaking here of a God-realized soul,
and not of a practising YogвҲӮ. It should be
remembered that equability or even-mindedness
is an essential attribute of the God-realized
soul, no matter through which path he has
reached the goal. Wherever the Lord speaks
of the God-realized soul, He stresses the
importance of even-temperament. A man
may be possessed of a number of virtues;
but if he is found lacking in equability, it
can be safely concluded that he has not yet
realized God. For one who has not yet been
able to develop evenmindedness cannot be
entirely free from attraction and repulsion or
conceive a natural fellow-feeling for all
creatures. He alone is the best or God-
realized YogвҲӮ, who has attained equability.
Hearing this teaching of the Lord about equability, and finding it most difficult for
him to get firmly established in that state due to restlessness of his mind, Arjuna says:
вҖўВЎВёГҲЕё В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
ГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГҝВў ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘSГ п¬ӮГҝГҠ В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§вҖ” вҖҡГҠГӘГҝпЈҝЕё в—ҠЕ“ГҲвҖҡГҚЕ’ЕёвҖ“
вҲһГғSГҝГҠвҖһВўU Её В¬вүҘГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ Гё@вҲӮUГ п¬ӮГҠГҒГ SГ•ГҒГғВў ГҒSГ•вҒ„UГҠв—ҠЛңГ”H 33H
ГҝвҖ” which; вҖўГҝв—ҠЛңГ” this; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖ” Yoga; Г п¬ӮГҝГҠ by You; В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§вҖ” has been spoken of; вҖҡГҠГӘГҝпЈҝЕё in the form
of equanimity; в—ҠЕ“ГҲвҖҡГҚЕ’Её O KГҰВ¶Ж’a (lit., Slayer of the demon Madhu); вҲһГғSГҝ of this; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; Её not;
В¬вүҘГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ perceive; Гё@вҲӮUГ п¬ӮГҠГғЛңГ” owing to restlessness (of mind); ГҒSГ•ГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” ГҒSГ•вҒ„UГҠв—ҠЛңГ” lasting stability.

=== PAGE 339 ===

338
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«YogaГӯ here refers to the state
of equability, which is attained as the
culmination of the practices of Karmayoga,
Bhaktiyoga, DhyГҘnayoga, JВӨГҘnayoga etc.
Although it is true that restlessness of mind
interferes with the practice of DhyГҘnayoga
alone, the word Г«YogaГӯ cannot be interpreted
in this verse as referring to DhyГҘnayoga. For,
while the subject discussed in the verses
ending with the 28 would lead us to interpret
the word Г«YogaГӯ as DhyГҘnayoga, verses 31
and 32 describe the attitude of the God-
realized soul during his active life. ArjunaГӯs
submission also evidently relates to Г«equabilityГӯ,
described in those two verses, as the fruit
of all practices. Hence the word Г«YogaГӯ has
been interpreted as meaning the Yoga of
Equability.
Г«RestlessnessГӯ 
means 
lack 
of
concentration; this is mainly due to attraction
and repulsion. And equability can never exist
in a mind which is swayed by attraction and
repulsion; for equability is incompatible with
these two impulses. That is why restlessness
of mind is considered as an obstacle in the
attainment of equability.
Arjuna said: KГҰВ¶Ж’a, owing to restlessness of mind I do not perceive the lasting
stability of this Yoga in the form of equanimity, which You have just spoken of.    (33)
Declaring restlessness of mind as an obstacle to the attainment of Yoga in the shape
of equability, Arjuna now pleads that the mind is most difficult to control:
Гё@вҲӮВўU ГҒвҖһU в—ҠЕёвҖ” вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ В¬Лқв—ҠГҠГҒГ• вҖҷвҲӮUп¬ӮЕ’ЛңГ”Е’ГҺвҖҰUв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГғSГҝГҠвҖһВўU ГҒЕёВӘЛқвҖһВўU в—ҠГЈГҝпЈҝ п¬ӮГҠГҝГҠпЈҝГҒвҒ„Uп¬Ӯ вҖҡГҲЕ’ГҲcвҲ‘В§вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”H 34H
Гё@вҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” (is) unsteady; ГҒвҖһU because; в—ҠЕёвҖ” the mind; вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ O KГҰВ¶Ж’a; В¬Лқв—ҠГҠГҒГ• turbulent; вҖҷвҖ№п¬ӮГғЛңГ”
(and) powerful; Е’ГҺвҖҰUв—ҠЛңГ” tenacious; ГғSГҝ thereof;  вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; ГҒЕёВӘЛқвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” subjugation; в—ҠГЈГҝпЈҝ I regard; п¬ӮГҠГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” of
the wind; Гҹп¬Ӯ as; вҖҡГҲЕ’ГҲcвҲ‘В§вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” very difficult.
For, KГҰВ¶Ж’a, the mind is very unsteady, turbulent, tenacious and powerful;
therefore, I consider it as difficult to control as the wind.                  (34)
and sets up a commotion and excitement in
the body and senses even as a churner
agitates milk or curd.
In verse II.60 the Lord spoke of the
senses as Г«turbulentГӯ by nature, while here
Arjuna calls the mind Г«turbulentГӯ. There is
no contradiction; however, between the two
statements inasmuch as coming in contact
with the objects of enjoyment the senses tend
to agitate and excite the mind and vice versa,
and forming an unholy alliance they excite
the intellect as well (II.67). That is why both
the senses and the mind have been declared
as Г«turbulentГӯ.
Arjuna submitted to the Lord in the
preceding verse that restlessness of mind was
a great obstacle in the attainment of lasting
equability. The natural reply to this would be
that he should subjugate the mind, and thus
overcome its restlessness. But to Arjuna
subjugation of the mind was a most uphill
task; that is why he invites the attention of
the Lord once more to the restlessness of mind.
By using the adjective Г«PramГҘthiГӯ (lit.,
that which churns) with reference to the
mind, Arjuna intends to show that in addition
to being unsteady as a flickering flame of
lamp, the mind is also turbulent by nature

=== PAGE 340 ===

* Chapter VI *
339
The mind is not only unsteady and
turbulent, but also powerful as a mad elephant.
Just as repeated thrusts of a sharp spike on
the head fail to bring a powerful elephant
to its senses, and it continues to act waywardly,
even so though smitten again and again by
the goad of discrimination, the unruly mind
refuses to get out of the dreary forest of
sense-enjoyments.
Apart from being unsteady, turbulent
and powerful, the mind is also unyielding or
tenacious as an iguana. Whatever it takes a
fancy for, it clutches with all its force and
more or less identifies itself with that object.
*
*
*
It is most difficult to control the air that
courses incessantly through the body in the
shape of inhalation and exhalation, through
violence, reason, discrimination and force
etc. Even so, Arjuna deems it most difficult
to control the unsteady, turbulent, tenacious
and powerful mind moving constantly among
the objects of enjoyment. This is what is
sought to be conveyed by the second half
of the verse.
*
*
*
The Lord draws and attracts the devoteeГӯs
heart to Him. This is one reason why He
is known by the name of Г«KГҰВ¶Ж’aГӯ (lit., one
who attracts). Addressing the Lord by this
name in the present verse, Arjuna appears
to make the submission that his mind being
very unsteady he finds it most difficult to
control by his own efforts. But it is easy for
the Lord to draw his mind to Him by His
own inherent character. Arjuna, therefore,
prays that his mind may be drawn and
attracted by the Lord to Him.
Confirming ArjunaГӯs view about the difficulty of controlling the mind, the Lord suggests
below the ways and means of controlling the mind:
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲп¬ӮГҠГё
вҖўвҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝВў в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ в—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝ Е’ГҲГҢЕёВӘЛқвҖһВўU ГёвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖўГЁГҝГҠвҖҡпЈҝЕё ГғГҲ вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ п¬ӮГ’вҒ„UГҠГҮГҝпЈҝГЎГҠ Гё ВӘГҺsГ”ГғпЈҝH 35H*
вҖўвҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝв—ҠЛңГ” without doubt; в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ O mighty-armed Arjuna; в—ҠЕёвҖ” the mind; Е’ГҲГҢЕёВӘЛқвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” (and)
difficult to curb; ГёвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” (is) unsteady; вҖўГЁГҝГҠвҖҡпЈҝЕёГ” through practice; ГғГҲ but; вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ O son of KuntвҲӮ;
п¬ӮГ’вҒ„UГҠГҮГҝпЈҝГЎГҠ through dispassion; ГёГ” and; ВӘГҺsГ”ГғпЈҝ it can be controlled.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: The mind is restless no doubt, and difficult to curb, Arjuna;
but it can be brought under control by repeated practice (of meditation) and by
the exercise of dispassion, O son of KuntвҲӮ.                                (35)
as Г«AbhyГҘsaГӯ or practice. The question that
is being considered in these verses is, how
to fix the mind on God. Therefore, Г«AbhyГҘsaГӯ
or practice here consists in directing the
flow of oneГӯs thoughts repeatedly towards
In order to cast the mind-substance into
the mould of a desired object, the mind has
repeatedly to be weaned from other objects
and fixed on the object of meditation.
Repetition of this attempt is what is known
* There is a parallel aphorism in the Yoga-SВөutras of PataВӨjali, which runs as below:Гі
вҖўГЁГҝГҠвҖҡп¬ӮГ’вҒ„UГҠГҮГҝГҠГЁГҝГҠВў ГғГҒГӣГҠвҒ„UГҠпЈҝЕ“вҖ”вҖ“
Г¬The mind can be controlled through practice (of meditation) and dispassionГ®
(Yoga-SВөutras I.12)

=== PAGE 341 ===

340
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
God, the object of meditation.*
The practice referred to above should
be carried on with the firm conviction that
God is the supreme and almighty Lord of
all, and the highest and the only Truth, and
that the supreme object of life is to realize
Him. Various forms of practice have been
enunciated in the scriptures. Some of them
are given below:Гі
(1) With the help of faith, reverence
and steadfast reason, the mind should be
repeatedly concentrated on God (VI.26).
(2) Whatever object the mind may run
after, the Deity of oneГӯs choice should be
dwelt upon in that very object.
(3) One should practise offering mental
worship to God.
(4) One should constantly repeat, in a
disinterested way, with utmost reverence and
love, through speech, breath, beating of the
pulse, throat or the mind, any of the names
of oneГӯs Deity, such as вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma, вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a,
вҖәiva, ViВ¶Ж’u, the Sun-god, the Divine Mother
and so on, regarding such a name to be
GodГӯs own name.
(5) One should repeatedly dwell on the
teachings of the scriptures relating to God,
with reverence and love, and try to translate
them into practice.
(6) One should cultivate association with
God-realized souls, listen to their salutary
advice with faith and devotion and try to
carry them out in actual practice (XIII.25).
(7) One should offer repeated prayers
to God with a sincere and agonized heart,
imploring that the mindГӯs restlessness may
disappear and it may get concentrated on
Him.
Besides these, there are many other
forms of practice laid down in the scriptures.
But one should remember in this connection
that oneГӯs practice will meet with success
only when it is carried on with faith and
reverence, and is continued without a break
for a sufficient length of time.вҖ  Suppose a
SГҘdhaka tries to fix his mind on a particular
practice today, takes up another tomorrow,
and commences yet another a few days later,
without pinning his faith on any one of them.
Or he takes up a practice today, fails to do
it tomorrow and resumes it after an interval
of three or four days; or he falls a victim
to ennui, loses his patience and gives up the
practice. Such an inconstant, irregular and
desultory practice can never lead to success.
The word Г«VairГҘgyaГӯ or dispassion means
complete cessation of attraction and hankering
for the objects of this world and the next.вҖЎ
Joy and sorrow fail to produce any unhealthy
reaction on the mind of him who is possessed
of dispassion. He gradually attains that
immovable and unshakable internal detachment
or consummate dispassion,вҖқ which does not
allow the mind to be drawn by any object
under any circumstance whatsoever.
There are many practices for the cultivation
of dispassion, some of which are given
below:Гі
(1) One should constantly impress on
oneГӯs mind by recourse to reason, the absence
* ГғГІГҠ ГҒSГ•ГғГҠГ’ Гҝ%ГҠпЈҝЛҳГЁГҝГҠвҖҡвҖ”вҖ“ (Yoga-SВөutras I.13)
Г¬Of these two methods, the attempt to make the mind steady is called practice.Г®
вҖ  вҖҡ ГғГҲ Е’ГӢГүГҠВёвҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮUЕёГ’вҒ„UГЈГғГҝВёвҖҡГ вҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГҠвҖҡпЈҝГҒп¬ӮГғГҠпЈҝ Е’ГҺвҖҰUГ·ГҚГҒв—ҠвҖ”вҖ“ (Ibid., I.14)
вҖЎ Е’ГҺCГ”UГҠЕёГҲГјГҠГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҝГҒп¬ӮГғГҺcГЎГҠSГҝ п¬ӮвүҘГҠГӢвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UвҖҡВўГҙГҠГҠ п¬ӮГ’вҒ„UГҠГҮГҝв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“ (Ibid., I.15)
вҖқ ГғГ В¬вҒ„ВўU В¬ГҲLВ§В·Г…ГҝГҠГғпЈҝВӘГҲВёГЎГҠп¬ӮГ’ГғГҺcГЎГҝв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“ (Ibid., I.16)
Г¬Supreme, or the highest form of dispassion represents absence of thirst for all the three GuЖ’as or
modes of PrakГҰti. It is attained through the Knowledge of PuruВ¶a or Spirit, who is altogether different
from PrakГҰti.Г®

=== PAGE 342 ===

* Chapter VI *
341
of any charm, love or delight in the objects
of the world.
(2) One should always remember and
realize that the objects of the world are
transient and subject to sorrows and evils in
the shape of birth and death, old age and
disease, and are the source of fear.
(3) One should study elevating scriptures
revealing the real truth about God and the
world.
(4) One should cultivate association with
men possessed of the highest form of
dispassion. In the absence of direct association,
one should keep before oneГӯs mental eyes
and dwell on the likenesses and lives of
saints possessed of such dispassion.
(5) One should realize the ephemeral
nature of the world through the sight of old,
dilapidated mansions, and the ruins of deserted
towns and villages.
(6) Perceiving the one and indivisible
existence of Brahma, one should refuse to
recognize the separate existence of anything
else.
(7) One should hear again and again,
from the lips of qualified souls, the
indescribable virtues, glory, truth, love and
mysteries of God and the glories of His
divine sports as well as of His transcendental
beauty and sweetness, and knowing the truth
about them should have full faith in them
and feel enraptured by them.
Similar to those mentioned above, there
are other practices also, which may be
adopted with advantage for the cultivatiion
of dispassion.
Constant Г«practiceГӯ and cultivation of
Г«dispassionГӯ, both are necessary for bringing
the mind under control. Г«PracticeГӯ is like a
beautiful channel for the flow of thought-
currents in the direction of God, and
Г«dispassionГӯ is like an embankment to restrain
the flow of the mind towards the objects of
enjoyment. But it should be borne in mind
that they are helpful to each other. Practice
promotes dispassion and vice versa. Therefore,
the mind can be subdued and brought under
control even by adopting one of these methods
in the proper way.
Arjuna has been addressed in this verse
by the term Г«MahГҘbГҘhuГӯ, that is, one possessed
of long and powerful arms, because he was
a world-renowned hero, who had vanquished
in battle the greatest of warriors among
celestials, demons and mortal men. The
intention of using this mode of address is to
remind Arjuna of his own prowess and
encourage him to fight and conquer the
mind. The Lord gives a clear hint to him
that it does not befit a hero like him to feel
afraid of the mind and lose heart; if he takes
courage, he is sure to win.
The foregoing verse suggested the means of subduing the mind. The question
here arises: Where lies the harm if the mind is not subdued? In answer to this, the
Lord says:
вҖўвҖҡВўГҝГғГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ Е’ГҲcВ¬ЛқГҠВ¬ ГҹГҒГғ в—ҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҒГғвҖ”вҖ“
п¬ӮвүҘГҝГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠ ГғГҲ ГҝГғГғГҠ вүҘГҠГ„ГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳп¬ӮГҠ#ГҲв—ҠГҲВ¬ГҠГҝГғвҖ”Г”H 36H
вҖўвҖҡВўГҝГғГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠ By him whose mind is not subdued; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖ” yoga; Е’ГҲcВ¬ЛқГҠВ¬вҖ” (is) difficult to
achieve; ГҹГҒГғ such (is); в—ҠпЈҝ My; в—ҠГҒГғвҖ” conviction; п¬ӮвүҘГҝГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠ by him who has brought the mind
under control; ГғГҲ while; ГҝГғГғГҠ and is (ceaselessly) striving; вүҘГҠГ„ГҝвҖ” вҖўп¬ӮГҠ#ГҲв—ҠЛңГ” can be (easily)
attained; В©UВ¬ГҠГҝГғвҖ” through practice.

=== PAGE 343 ===

342
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The mind of him who has not brought
it under control by Г«practiceГӯ and exercise of
dispassion is a slave to attraction and repulsion;
and impelled by these it continues to frisk
and frolick in the world like a mischievous
monkey. And when the mind is so deeply
attached to enjoyments, his intellect also
remains unstable and Г«scattered in all directions,
(II.41Гі44). That is why it is stated that the
attainment of equability is extremely difficult
for one who has no control over the mind.
A subdued mind gives up all its vagrancy
and turbulent nature, and loses its vehemence
and perversity. Like a simple, unsophisticated,
quiet and submissive disciple, it becomes so
obedient that it tamely applies itself at any
moment to whatever pursuit it may be
directed to for any length of time. It no
longer shows the least demur in carrying out
oneГӯs behests nor does it feel any urge to
roam about under the prompting of the
senses. It does not desist from a particular
pursuit of its own accord, nor does it fall
a victim to ennui; nor again does it make
any mischief. With great composure it gets
so thoroughly absorbed in the object of
meditation that it becomes difficult even to
distinguish its separate identity. These are the
marks of a subdued mind.
The word Г«TuГӯ in the present verse has
been used to distinguish the man who has
subdued his mind from him who has not yet
been able to control it.
Even after attaining control over the
mind, if one does not strive hard to merge
the mind completely in God, he will not
achieve the Yoga of equability as a matter
of course. Therefore, in order to point out
the necessity of effort even after that, the
YogвҲӮ possessed of a subdued mind has been
spoken of as Г«ceaselessly strivingГӯ.
There are many practices for the attainment
of equability after the mind has been properly
subdued. Some of them are given below:Гі
(1) Renouncing all objects of enjoyment
as well as the desire for them, the mind
should be constantly and all the time fixed
on God, the embodiment of Knowledge and
Bliss, through reason which is not only
purified and steadfast but also endowed with
discrimination and dispassion, and devoted
to God; and no other thought should be
allowed to enter the mind (VI.25).
(2) The SГҘdhaka should try to see the
one all-pervading God, the embodiment of
eternal Knowledge and Bliss, as filling up
the entire universe, consisting of animate and
inanimate creation, on all sides, both within
and without, above and below, and should
regard himself, as also the whole of the
objective world, as identical with God, even
as the same ether permeates the cloud on all
sides, within and without, above and below,
and is its material cause (XIII.15).
(3) Realizing that whatever activities
are being carried on in this world through
body, senses and mind are being performed
by the GuЖ’as, or in other words, it is the
senses which are acting on the objects of
senses, one should recognize oneself as
altogether unconnected with those activities
and as their witness. And establishing oneself
in identity with God, the eternal embodiment
of Knowledge and Bliss, one should perceive
through the cosmic intellect all objects as
ephemeral and existing in the mere thought
Yoga is difficult of achievement for one whose mind is not subdued by him;
however, who has the mind under control, and is ceaselessly striving, it can be easily
attained through practice. Such is My conviction.                          (36)

=== PAGE 344 ===

* Chapter VI *
343
of that formless and infinite Consciousness
which is his own Self (V.8-9; XIV.19).
(4) Regarding any of the embodied
Forms of God, such as that of вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma,
KГҰВ¶Ж’a, вҖәiva, ViВ¶Ж’u, the Sun-god, the Divine
Mother, or the Universal Form, as the supreme
Form of God, the witness of all hearts, all-
pervading, omniscient, all powerful,  supremely
compassionate and lovable, one should install
an image or picture of the Deity, according
to oneГӯs choice, or should mentally realize
Him as actually present, either within or
without oneГӯs heart, and should constantly
fix oneГӯs mind on Him with utmost reverence
and love and worship Him by offering
leaves, flowers and fruits or other articles of
worship, and perform Japa of His name.
(5) Duties enjoined by the scriptures
should be performed without attachment or
the desire for fruit, and remaining even-
tempered in success and failure (II.48); or
actions, such as the performance of sacrifices
and service, practising charity and penance etc.,
enjoined by the scriptures, should be performed
with faith and reverence for the sake of God
alone, and regarding everything as belonging
to God (XII.10); or, mentally surrendering all
actions as well as oneself to God, and
renouncing the feeling of Г«mineГӯ and attachment,
and constantly remembering God, one should
behave like a tool in the hands of God, gladly
doing whatever and in whatsoever manner He
gets one to do (XVIII.57).
There are many other practices besides
these; and the practice recommended for the
subjugation of mind, if carried on with
reverence and love even after obtaining
control over the mind, for the realization of
God, will also help the SГҘdhaka to attain the
Yoga of Equability.
Subjugation of mind having been declared as most essential for the attainment of
perfection in Yoga, the question arises: What becomes of the SГҘdhaka after death, who
possesses no control over the mind, and yet having faith in the practice of Yoga, strives
for God-realization? This is what Arjuna asks in the following verse:
вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
вҖўГҝГҒГғвҖ” ГјГҠhГҝГҠпЈҝВ¬пЈҝГғГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠГ¬ГҠГҒвҲӮUГғв—ҠГҠЕёвҖҡвҖ”вҖ“
вҖўВ¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖҡВўГҒвҖҡГҒhВў вҲ‘В§ГҠВў ВӘГҒГғВў вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғГ”H 37H
вҖўГҝГҒГғвҖ” (but) who has not (yet) been able to subdue his passions; ГјГҠhГҝГҠ with faith;
В©В¬пЈҝГғвҖ” (one who is) endowed; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠГғЛңГ” from Yoga; ГёГҒвҲӮUГғв—ҠГҠЕёвҖҡвҖ” whose mind (therefore) is diverted
(at the time of death); вҖўВ¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝ failing to reach; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖҡВўГҒвҖҡГҒhв—ҠЛңГ” perfection in Yoga (God-realization);
вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” what; ВӘГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” fate; вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ O KГҰВ¶Ж’a; ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғ meets with.
Arjuna said: KГҰВ¶Ж’a, what becomes of the aspirant who, though endowed with
faith, has not been able to subdue his passions, and whose mind is, therefore, diverted
from Yoga (at the time of death), and who thus fails to reach perfection in Yoga
(God-realization)?                                                            (37)
occasion for the present question on the part
of Arjuna. Besides this, slackness of effort
is out of question in the case of a man
endowed with faith; even so, it is out of
The preceding verse pointed out that
Yoga was difficult of achievement for one
whose mind had not been properly subdued.
That statement served as the ground or

=== PAGE 345 ===

344
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
question for a subdued mind to get diverted
on any account. These are the reasons why
the word Г«AyatiВЁГӯ in this verse has been
interpreted to mean one Г«possessed of an
unsubdued mindГӯ, and not one who is
Г«lacking in effortГӯ.
The word Г«YogaГӯ stands here for
equability attained through any of the disciplines
of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga, Bhaktiyoga, DhyГҘnayoga
and Karmayoga etc., carried on with the
object of God-realization. A mind which
loses its balance or ceases to think of God
is said to be diverted from Yoga. This
diversion of the mind from Yoga at the time
of death may be due to various reasons,
such as restlessness of the mind, attachment,
desire, physical pain, loss of consciousness
and so on.
The 
word 
Г«YogasaвүҲsiddhimГӯ, 
or
perfection in Yoga, stands here for God-
realization, which is the fruit of equability
attained through the practice of any of the
forms of Yoga mentioned above. And failure
to realize God owing to diversion of the
mind, at the time of death, either from
equability or from the thought of God, is
what is meant here by failure to achieve
perfection in Yoga.
In answer to ArjunaГӯs question, the
Lord speaks of the state of existence attained
by the SГҘdhaka after death and refers to his
next birth, which make it definitely clear that
ArjunaГӯs question relates to the SГҘdhakaГӯs
state at the time of death. Moreover, the
word Г«GatiГӯ also is generally used to denote
the state attained after death; this also goes
to confirm the view that the question refers
to the state at the time of death. The words,
Г«YogГҘt CalitamГҘnasaВЁГӯ cannot, therefore, be
taken to mean one who has given up the
practice of Yoga and taken to sense-
enjoyments even during his life-time.
вҲ‘В§ГҒГ¬ГҠГӣГҠГҠпЈҝГ·ГҝГҒп¬ӮГ·ЛқCГ”UГҒвүҘВҝUГӣГҠГҠГ·ЛқГҒв—Ҡп¬Ӯ ЕёвүҘГҝГҒГғвҖ“
вҖўВ¬ЛқГҒГғDГ”UГҠпЈҝ в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҠпЈҝ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГЎГҠвҖ” В¬ГҒГ•H 38H
вҲ‘В§ГҒГ¬ГҠГғЛңГ” Её is he not; В©UГ·ГҝГҒп¬ӮГ·ЛқCГ”UвҖ” deprived of both God-realization and heavenly enjoyment;
ГҒВҝUГӣГҠГҠГ·Лқв—ҠЛңГ” Гҹп¬ӮГ” like the torn cloud; ЕёвүҘГҝГҒГғ lost? вҖўВ¬ЛқГҒГғDГ”UвҖ” without anything to stand upon; в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ
O KГҰВ¶Ж’a of mighty arms; ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҚвҖҰUвҖ” strayed; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГЎГҠвҖ” В¬ГҒГ• from the path leading to God-realization.
KГҰВ¶Ж’a, strayed from the path leading to God-realization and without anything
to stand upon, is he not lost like the scattered cloud, deprived of both God-realization
and heavenly enjoyment?                                               (38)
not obtain the enjoyments of heaven after
death, and his mind being diverted from
practices leading to God-realization at the
time of death he fails to realize God. Arjuna,
therefore, apprehends that, just as a piece of
cloud torn from the main body of a cloud
gets dissolved, unless united with another
cloud, even so deprived of both heaven and
God-realization, the SГҘdhaka referred to above
gets lost, and suffers a spiritual fall.
Diversion of the mind from practices
leading to God-realization due to restlessness
of the mind and lack of discrimination and
dispassion, and consequent failure to realize
God is what is meant by straying from the
path leading to God-realization and having
nothing to stand upon.
Arjuna intends here to show that a
SГҘdhaka who has performed action all his
life without any desire for fruit surely does

=== PAGE 346 ===

* Chapter VI *
345
Raising the above question, Arjuna now prays to the Lord for its solution:
вҲһГғГЈв—ҠпЈҝ вҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝВў вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ ВҝпЈҝUГ»ГҠГҲв—ҠвҖһВёUSГҝвүҘГҠпЈҝВ·ГғвҖ”вҖ“
Г п¬ӮЕ’ГЈГҝвҖ” вҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝSГҝГҠSГҝ ВҝпЈҝUГ»ГҠГҠ Её вҖһUKГҲГ”В¬В¬lГғпЈҝH 39H
вҲһГғГғЛңГ” this; в—ҠпЈҝ my; вҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝв—ҠЛңГ” doubt; вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ O KГҰВ¶Ж’a; ВҝпЈҝUГ»ГҠГҲв—ҠЛңГ” to slash; вҖўвҖһВёUГҒвҖҡ it behoves You;
вҖўвүҘГҠпЈҝВ·ГғвҖ” completely; Г п¬ӮЕ’ГЈГҝвҖ” other than You; вҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝSГҝ вҖўSГҝ of this doubt; ВҝпЈҝUГ»ГҠГҠ one who slashes;
Её may not; ГҒвҖһU because; В©UВ¬В¬lГғпЈҝ be (easily) found.
KГҰВ¶Ж’a, only You are capable to slash this doubt of mine completely; for none
other than You can dispel this doubt.
 (39)
had strengthened ArjunaГӯs faith in вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’aГӯs
divinity. It is, therefore, that he professes his
faith, in the Lord by submitting that it would
not be possible for him to find anyone other
than the Lord, who could completely dispel
the doubt of his mind, and that He alone is
capable of doing it. He means to say that
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a being the omniscient and almighty
Lord, the Knower of all hearts and the
Maker and Administrator of all laws, the
secret of the states of existence after death
of the infinite number of JвҲӮvas belonging to
the countless millions of universes must be
fully known to Him, and that all incidents
that were taking place in the different worlds
at that time, had taken place before or were
going to take place thereafter were ever like
an open book to Him. It was, therefore,
extremely easy for Him to reveal the fate of
the YogвҲӮs who strayed from the path of
Yoga. When the Lord Himself out of His
supreme compassion was present before
Arjuna, whom else should he ask about it,
and really speaking no one else was capable
of unravelling the mystery. Therefore, Arjuna
humbly prays to the Lord to reveal the truth
to him and clear the doubt of his mind.
Here Arjuna seeks to know something
about the existence of the SГҘdhaka after
death. Life after death is a mystery which
no one can solve with the help of reason
and argument. He alone who is thoroughly
acquainted with all the effects of Karma, the
laws of the universe and the secrets of the
other worlds can penetrate it. Celestials, who
are the guardians of the different regions,
sages, seers and ascetics possessing the
power of unrestricted access to all the different
regions, and YogвҲӮs who can see and know
events taking place in the different worlds,
are aware of these things to a certain extent;
but their knowledge too is limited in its
scope. The entire secret is known only to
God, who is the sole Lord of the universe.
Arjuna was already aware of BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’aГӯs power and glory. Besides this, he
had heard shortly before from the LordГӯs
own lips that He possessed a knowledge of
the innumerable births of Arjuna (IV.5), that
He was unborn, immortal and the Lord of
all creatures (IV.6), that He created with due
regard to their respective GuЖ’as or traits and
Karmas or actions (IV.13), that He was the
Г«supreme Lord of all the worldsГӯ (V.29); this
ArjunaГӯs question was whether the SГҘdhaka who strayed from the path of Yoga got
lost like the torn cloud, being deprived of both God-realization and heavenly enjoyment.
The Lord vouchsafes His reply to that question in the following verse:

=== PAGE 347 ===

346
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Degradation from the level of existence
already attained by one is what is meant by
the word Г«VinГҘвҖ№aВЁГӯ in this verse. Hence if
the SГҘdhaka referred to above is reborn on
this earth, he is not degraded to a state lower
than that already attained by him. And if he
ascends to higher regions such as heaven he
meets with no fall either; on the other hand,
he is exalted to a higher position. In this way
he does not meet with a fall either here or
hereafter. Wherever he abides, he continues
to advance steadily on the Godward path.
The Lord has thus briefly answered ArjunaГӯs
query regarding the possibility of the SГҘdhaka
being deprived both of God-realization and
heavenly enjoyment. The idea is that the
SГҘdhaka is neither deprived of the enjoyments
of this world or of the next nor of God-
realization in the shape of perfection in Yoga.
The second half of the verse says that a
SГҘdhaka striving for God-realization never goes
to doom. Here it may be contended that since
everyone has a number of sins committed in
previous lives outstanding against him, there
is every possibility of his meeting with an
evil destiny after death in consequence of those
sins. In this connection let us take the example
of a judgment. A debtor who, though in default
in the matter of payment, is not dishonest in
intention and has handed over all that he
possessed to his creditor. He has also been
paying all his surplus earnings to the creditor,
and sincerely desires to continue this till the
debt is cleared off. Under such circumstances,
a creditor who is possessed of a tender heart
spares him the ignominy of civil imprisonment
and allows him time to clear the outstandings
so long as he maintains his honesty of intention.
Even so, the all-merciful God, perceiving the
sincerity of the SГҘdhaka striving for God-
realization, suspends the requital of his sins
and affords him an opportunity to redeem
himself by following a particular course of
spiritual discipline. When an ordinary creditor
allows his debtor an opportunity to clear his
debt, there is no wonder that God, who is
supremely compassionate, should afford the
SГҘdhaka an opportunity to free himself from
bondage.
To this it may be objected that the royal
sage Bharata, who had been carrying on
spiritual practices purely with the motive of
self-redemption, was thrown into the womb
of a deer as the PaurГҘЖ’ika story goes. How
are we to reconcile this with the above
statement of the Lord? Our reply to this
contention is that although Bharata had
reached an advanced stage in his SГҘdhanГҘ,
he fell a victim to infatuation through
compassion and developed attachment for a
young deer. The result was that, at the time
of death, he lost sight of his goal and his
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲп¬ӮГҠГё
В¬ГҠГ•Вё ЕёГ’п¬ӮпЈҝвҖһU ЕёГҠв—ҠГҲГІГҠ ГҒп¬ӮЕёГҠвүҘГҠSГғSГҝ ГҒп¬ӮlГғпЈҝвҖ“
Её ГҒвҖһU вҲ‘В§ГҖГҝГҠГЎГҠвҲ‘ГҺВ§Г вҲ‘В§ГҒpЕ’ЛңГ”Е’ГҲВӘВёГҒГғВў ГғГҠГғ ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғH 40H
В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthГҘ, Arjuna; Её neither; вҲһп¬Ӯ either; ГҹвҖһU here; Её nor; вҖўв—ҠГҲГІГҠ hereafter; ГҒп¬ӮЕёГҠвүҘГҠвҖ”
fall; ГғSГҝ for him; ГҒп¬ӮlГғпЈҝ (there) is; Её not; ГҒвҖһU for; вҲ‘В§ГҖГҝГҠГЎГҠвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғЛңГ” who strives for self-redemption (i.e.,
God-realization); вҲ‘В§ГҒpГғЛңГ” anyone; Е’ГҲВӘВёГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” evil destiny; ГғГҠГғ O dear one; ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғ meets with.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: Dear Arjuna, there is no fall for him either here or
hereafter. For none who strives for self-redemption (i.e., God-realization) ever meets
with evil destiny.                                                        (40)

=== PAGE 348 ===

* Chapter VI *
347
thought was centred on the deer, which
brought him the life of a deer in the next
birth; for it is an inexorable law of Nature
that whatever object one thinks of at the time
of death, that very object he unquestionably
attains at the next birth (VIII.6). But though
born as an animal, Bharata cannot be said
to have met with an evil destiny; for even
in that existence he distinctly remembered
the incidents of his previous life and continued
to lead a life as pure and regulated as an
advanced SГҘdhaka, renouncing all forms of
attachment and infatuation. Possessed of
great discrimination and living on dry leaves
alone, he attained the body of a BrГҘhmaЖ’a
in his very next birth and speedily attained
the supreme state by force of habit formed
in the previous life (VI.44). The example of
Bharata, therefore, does not in any way
disprove the principle laid down in the
present verse. The moral that we should
draw from this story is that the goal of God-
realization should never be lost sight of.
Again, it may be urged in this connection
that we come across many people in this world,
who, though associating with holy men and
practising adoration and meditation etc., for
their spiritual advancement are nevertheless
seen perpetrating sinful acts. What happens
to such people? In our humble opinion even
such people do not meet with an evil destiny.
Those who have faith in the scriptures as well
as in exalted souls get fully convinced that
acts of sin will bring them terrible sufferings
and the dreadful tortures of hell. Therefore,
they try to avoid even those sins which are
apt to be perpetrated by them due to previous
habit. Side by side they carry on the practices
of meditation and adoration etc., so that they
gradually attain purity of heart. Under such
circumstances, there remains no cause for
deliberate commission of sin on their part.
Therefore, even if one is a sinner by nature,
the salutary influence of SatsaвҲҶga and the
practices of adoration and meditation will soon
enable him to get rid of the habit of committing
sins and make him virtuous. He gradually
rises in the scale of evolution and cannot suffer
a fall (IX.30-31).
The word Г«TГҘtaГӯ is an expression of
endearment. By using it as a mode of address
for Arjuna in this verse, the Lord assures him
that He regarded him not only as a great devotee
but as a dear friend as well. He means to
convey thereby that when an ordinary SГҘdhaka
who strives for His realization does not meet
with an evil destiny, but rises in the scale of
evolution, there should be no cause for Arjuna,
who was so dear to the Lord, to worry at all
about his fate.
The statement of the Lord that the SГҘdhaka fallen from Yoga does not meet with
an evil fate, raises the question: What fate does, he actually meets with? Anticipating this
question, the Lord says:
В¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝ В¬ГҲГЎГҝвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғГҠВў вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠЕёГҲГҒВ·Г п¬ӮГҠ вүҘГҠГҠEГғГӢвҖ” вҖҡв—ҠГҠвҖ”вҖ“
вүҘГҠГҲГёГӢЕёГҠВў ГјГҠГӢв—ҠГғГҠВў ВӘпЈҝвҖһпЈҝU ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГ·ЛқCГ”UГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒГ·ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝH 41H
В¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝ reaching; В¬ГҲГЎГҝвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” inhabited by those who perform meritorious deeds; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠЕёЛңГ” the
worlds; В©UГҒВ·Г п¬ӮГҠ having resided (there); вүҘГҠГҠEГғГӢвҖ” вҖҡв—ҠГҠвҖ” for countless years; вүҘГҠГҲГёГӢЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” ГјГҠГӢв—ҠГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of
pious and prosperous parents; ВӘпЈҝвҖһпЈҝU in the house; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГ·ЛқCГ”UвҖ” he who has fallen from Yoga;
вҖўГҒГ·ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝ takes birth.
Such a person who has strayed from Yoga, obtains the higher worlds (heaven

=== PAGE 349 ===

348
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
A SГҘdhaka following the path of
Knowledge, Devotion, Meditation or Action
and whose mind gets diverted from the goal
at the moment of death, due to faults like
restlessness etc., worldly attachments, physical
ailment and other such causes is known as
fallen from Yoga.
The above verse says that such a man
attains the higher worlds to which men of
meritorious deeds alone are entitled and
subsequently takes birth in the house of pious
and wealthy men. From this it is clear that he
neither goes to hell nor takes birth in the
lower forms of life. But it may be contended
here that celestial regions which are inhabited
by men of meritorious deeds, as well as the
households of wealthy men abound in objects
of enjoyments, so that one who goes to these
regions or takes birth in such households has
every chance of getting attached to sense-
enjoyments and may also take to sinful deeds
later on for obtaining such enjoyments. Both
these states, being thus instrumental in bringing
about oneГӯs downfall, are virtually nothing
short of an evil destiny.
Our answer to this contention is that the
expression Г«PuЖ’yakГҰtГҘвүҲ LokГҘnГӯ (worlds
inhabited by men of meritorious deeds)
covers all the celestial worlds located on a
higher plane than the earth right up to
Brahmaloka or the abode of BrahmГҘ (the
creator). The practice of the Yogas mentioned
above is so efficacious and meritorious that
the SГҘdhaka fallen from this practice never
goes to the regions where he may fall a
victim to sense-enjoyments and meet his
doom, nor does he take birth in the house
of a wealthy man who is devoid of virtue
and has a vile conduct, where he may bring
about his own downfall. That is why the
Lord adds the adjective Г«вҖәucвҲӮnГҘmГӯ with the
word Г«вҖәrвҲӮmatГҘmГӯ and thereby shows that he
is born in the house of pious and noble souls
who are not only wealthy but possess a
spotless moral character as well. This cannot
even indirectly be called an evil destiny.
It is attachment to oneГӯs actions and
their fruit which makes them bear fruit (II.47).
The length of oneГӯs residence in the higher
world for enjoying the fruit of oneГӯs meritorious
acts depends, therefore, on the degree of
attachment that lies hidden in oneГӯs heart. As
for those who have no attachment for
enjoyment and are possessed of dispassion,
ascend not to the higher regions but are
directly born in the family of YogвҲӮs.
etc.) to which men of meritorious deeds alone are entitled, and having resided there
for very many years, takes birth of pious and prosperous parents.                  (41)
Speaking thus of destiny of ordinary SГҘdhakas fallen from Yoga, the Lord now
goes to show the enviable fate of SГҘdhakas of an advanced type, who are free from attachment:
вҖўГ•п¬ӮГҠ ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёГҠв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮпЈҝU Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ Е“ГӢв—ҠГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҲһГғГҒh Е’ГҲвҲӮВёUГ·ГғвҒ„ВўU вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ ВЎГЈв—Ҡ ГҝЕ’ГӢЕ’ГҺвүҘГҠв—ҠЛңГ”H 42H
вҖўГ•п¬ӮГҠ or else; ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” YogвҲӮs; вҲһп¬Ӯ indeed; вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮпЈҝU in a family; Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ may be born;
Е“ГӢв—ҠГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of enlightened; вҲһГғГғЛңГ” that; ГҒвҖһU verily; Е’ГҲвҲӮВёUГ·ГғвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” (is) very difficult to obtain; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ in (this)
world; ВЎГЈв—Ҡ birth (there is); ГҝГғЛңГ” which; ГҹВёЕ’ГҺвүҘГҠв—ҠЛңГ” such.
Or, if he is possessed of dispassion, then (not attaining to those regions) he is born
in the family of enlightened YogвҲӮs; but such a birth in this world is very difficult to
obtain.
 (42)

=== PAGE 350 ===

* Chapter VI *
349
The indeclinable Г«AthavГҘГӯ has been
used to distinguish the SГҘdhakas mentioned
in this verse from those referred to in the
previous one.
Some contend here that all those who
fall away from Yoga invariably ascend to the
higher regions, and after enjoying the pleasures
obtained in those worlds some of them take
birth in the house of pious and  wealthy men,
while others are born in a family of YogвҲӮs.
This interpretation, however, does not appear
to be correct for the simple reason that it
would be a sort of punishment for the
SГҘdhaka who is possessed of genuine dispassion
to be compelled to reside for a number of
years in the celestial regions and enjoy the
pleasures of those regions. Such postponement
of God-realization cannot be the reward of
true dispassion. Therefore, the interpretation
that we have put on this verse is the correct
intrepretation.
The fact that such men of dispassion are
born in a family of YogвҲӮs proves it beyond
doubt that this last type of YogвҲӮs must belong
to the householder class; for it goes without
saying that children are born in oneГӯs married
life alone. And the use of the word Г«DhвҲӮmatГҘmГӯ
for such YogвҲӮs leaves no room for doubt that
real knowledge of the truth about God can
be attained by all, no matter to what order
or class they belong. The GвҲӮtГҘ conclusively
establishes this truth (III.20; IV.19; XVIII.56)
and a number of instances can be quoted
from other scriptures as well in support of
this contention. Great souls like MaharВ¶i
VasiВ¶Вўha, YГҘjВӨavalkya, VyГҘsa, Janaka, AвҖ№vapati
and Raikva attained Knowledge even while
they lived as householders.
Interpreting the word Г«YoginГҘmГӯ in this
verse as a practising YogвҲӮ rather than an
illumined YogвҲӮ, will frustrate the use of the
adjective. Г«DhвҲӮmatГҘmГӯ, the meaning of which
is obvious. Besides, by speaking of birth in
the house of such YogвҲӮs as exceedingly difficult
to attain (Durlabhataram) the Lord makes it
clear that such YogвҲӮs must be far superior to
the pious and wealthy men referred to in the
previous verse. Therefore, it is but reasonable
to interpret the word Г«YoginГҘmГӯ qualified by
the adjective Г«DhвҲӮmatГҘmГӯ as meaning those
who have reached perfection in the form of
enlightenment.
Facilities that may be obtained for the
practice of Yoga through birth in a family
of YogвҲӮs cannot be had either in heaven, or
in the house of rich men, or anywhere else
in the world. One who is born in a family
of YogвҲӮs finds oneself placed from the very
beginning of oneГӯs career in an environment
which is most favourable to the practice of
Yoga, so that one can start such practices
very early in life; and, secondly, the вҖәrutis
prove that one born in the family of a man
of Knowledge cannot remain merged in
ignorance.*
Considering the glory and greatness of
illumined souls, whose very contact has been
recognized as difficult to obtain,вҖ  almost
inaccessible and yet infallible, the value of a
birth in their family cannot be overestimated.
Therefore, it is but reasonable to speak of
such a birth as very difficult to obtain.
* ЕёГҠSГҝГҠвҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮГ вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҲӮпЈҝU Г·п¬ӮГҒГғвҖ“ ГғвҒ„UГҒГғ вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝвҲ‘Вў ГғвҒ„UГҒГғ В¬ГҠГҘв—ҠГҠЕёВў ВӘГҲвҖһUГҠВӘЛқГҒГЈГ•ГЁГҝГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҲQВ§ГҠпЈҝЛҳв—ҠГҺГғГҠпЈҝ Г·п¬ӮГҒГғвҖ“
(MuЖ’Е’. Up. III. ii.9)
Г¬In the family of a Knower of Brahma, none remains ignorant of Brahma. Transcending both grief
and sin, and freed from the knot of ignorance in the heart, the member of such a family becomes immortal,
i.e., attains freedom for all time from birth and death.Г®
вҖ  в—ҠвҖһUГ вҖҡXГ”USГғГҲ Е’ГҲвҲӮВёUГ·ГҠпЈҝЛҳВӘГӘГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳв—ҠГҠпЈҝГүГҠpвҖ“
 (NГҘrada: Aphorisms on Bhakti. 39)
The next verse describes the situation in which the SГҘdhaka fallen from Yoga finds
himself on taking birth in a family of YogвҲӮs:

=== PAGE 351 ===

350
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The verse immediately preceding this
speaks of the birth of a YogabhraВ¶Вўa in a
family of YogвҲӮs and also shows that a life
in the celestial regions does not intervene
between this birth and the previous one.
Hence the word Г«TatraГӯ should be taken to
refer to his birth in a family of YogвҲӮs, and
not in that of pious and wealthy men.
Needless to say that the SГҘdhaka who takes
birth in the house of pious and wealthy men
too feels drawn towards God and is withdrawn
from worldly enjoyments by force of habit
formed in his previous birth. This is made
clear in the next verse.
The word Г«BuddhiГӯ forming part of the
compound Г«BuddhisaвүҲyogamГӯ in this verse
refers to the partial evenmindedness acquired
ГғГІГҠ ГғВў вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖҡВўГҝГҠпЈҝВӘВў вҲӮUГ·ГғпЈҝ В¬ГҠГ’п¬ӮВёЕ’пЈҝГҒвҖһUвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҝГғГғпЈҝ Гё ГғГғГҠпЈҝ Г·ГҚГҝвҖ” вҖҡВўГҒвҖҡhГҠГ’ вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ЕёГЈЕ’ЕёГ”H 43H
ГғГІГҠ there, in that birth; Гғв—ҠЛңГ” that; вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖҡВўГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ”U spiritual insight (i.e., latencies of even-
mindedness); вҲӮUГ·ГғпЈҝ he (automatically) regains; В¬ГҠГ’п¬ӮВёЕ’пЈҝГҒвҖһUвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” acquired in his previous birth; ГҝГғГғпЈҝ
strives; Гё and; ГғГғвҖ” through that; Г·ГҚГҝвҖ” again (with renewed vigour); вҖҡВўГҒвҖҡhГҠГ’ for perfection
(in the form of God-realization); вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ЕёГЈЕ’Её O delighter of the Kurus, Arjuna.
Arjuna, he automatically regains in that birth the latencies of even-mindedness
of his previous birth; and through that he strives harder than ever for perfection
(in the form of God-realization).                                                        (43)
by the SГҘdhaka through the practice of
Karmayoga, Bhaktiyoga, DhyГҘnayoga or
JВӨГҘnayoga carried on in his previous birth.
The latencies of this equability pre-existing
in his mind are automatically roused by the
favourable environment in which he finds
himself in his new birth. This is what is
meant by his regaining the spiritual insight
of his previous birth. And the indeclinable
Г«TataВЁГӯ formed from the demonstrative pronoun
Г«TatГӯ (that) by adding the suffix Г«TasГӯ refers
to the noun immediately preceding it, viz.,
Г«BuddhisaвүҲyogamГӯ. That is to say, due to
the latencies of equability acquired by him
in his previous birth being roused in him,
the SГҘdhaka strives for God-realization with
greater vigour than before.
Now, while describing the situation of the YogabhraВ¶Вўa who takes birth in the family
of pious and wealthy men, the value of seeking enlightenment on Yoga is brought out
in the next verse:
В¬ГҚп¬ӮГҠВёГЁГҝГҠвҖҡпЈҝЕё ГғпЈҝЕёГ’п¬Ӯ ГҒOГ”UГҝГғпЈҝ sГ”п¬ӮвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ вҖҡвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ГҒВЎГҙГҠГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„UГҒВ¬ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘSГҝ вүҘГҠГ©Е’вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҠГҒГғп¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝH 44H
В¬ГҚп¬ӮГҠВёГЁГҝГҠвҖҡпЈҝЕёГ”U ГғпЈҝЕё by force of the aforesaid habit acquired in his previous birth; вҲһп¬Ӯ only;
ГҒOГ”UГҝГғпЈҝ feels drawn (towards God); ГҒвҖһU verily; вҖўп¬ӮвүҘГҠвҖ” under the sway of his senses; вҖўГҒВ¬ even
though; вҖҡвҖ” he (the other one who takes birth in the family of pious and wealthy men);
ГҒВЎГҙГҠГҠвҖҡГҲвҖ” the seeker of enlightenment; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘSГҝ of Yoga (in the form of even-
mindedness); вүҘГҠГ©Е’вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” the Vedas (i.e., the fruit of actions performed with some interested
motive as laid down in the Vedas); вҖўГҒГғп¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝ transcends.
The other one (who takes birth in a pious and rich family), though under the
sway of his senses, feels drawn towards God by force of the habit acquired in his

=== PAGE 352 ===

* Chapter VI *
351
The word Г«SaВЁГӯ in this verse has been
interpreted as referring to the YogabhraВ¶Вўa
who is born in the house of pious and
wealthy men, and not the other one mentioned
in the previous verse; for he who is born
directly in a family of YogвҲӮs, having been
shown above as full of dispassion, cannot
be believed to be under the sway of his
senses; hence the use of the words Г«AvaвҖ№aВЁ
ApiГӯ does not fit in with his description.
Besides, since he is born in a family of
YogвҲӮs, where he automatically gets the benefit
of SatsaвҲҶga (talks on spiritual matters) it does
not appear reasonable to hold the habit of
his previous birth alone as responsible for his
feeling drawn towards God. Therefore, it is
but reasonable to interpret the word Г«SaВЁГӯ as
referring to the YogabhraВ¶Вўa who is born in
the family of the rich.
The house of wealthy men who are at
the same time pious and devoted to right and
virtuous conduct does not offer any opportunity
to its children to get entangled in enjoyments
as the house of ordinary rich men does;
nevertheless, if for any reason the YogabhraВ¶Вўa
falls a victim to the lure of objects of
enjoyment like wife, progeny, wealth, honour
and fame etc., he is impelled by force of
habit formed in his previous birth to take up
practices leading to God-realization. This is
what is sought to be conveyed by the use
of the word Г«ApiГӯ with Г«AvaвҖ№aВЁГӯ.
Latencies of previous birth are mainly
responsible for drawing the heart of a man
who is given over to worldly enjoyments
towards God, and thus freeing him from
the clutches of worldly enjoyments. This is
the force of the indeclinable Г«EvaГӯ going
with the word Г«PВөurvГҘbhyГҘsenaГӯ, used in this
verse.
The use of the indeclinable Г«ApiГӯ after
Г«JijВӨГҘsuВЁГӯ is intended to extol Yoga in the
form of equability. The Lord intends to show
that when even he who seeks enlightenment
on Yoga, possesses faith in Yoga, and strives
to attain it, transcends the enjoyments of this
world as well as the next, which are obtained
as the fruit of action performed with an
interested motive as laid down in the Vedas,
it should be much easier for the YogabhraВ¶Вўa
who has been practising Yoga from birth to
birth to attain that state.
previous birth; nay, even the seeker of enlightenment on Yoga (in the form of even-
mindedness) transcends the fruit of actions performed with some interested motive
as laid down in the Vedas.                                                          (44)
Describing thus the destiny of the YogabhraВ¶Вўa who is born in the family of the rich,
and extolling the seeker of enlightenment on Yoga, the Lord discusses once more the destiny
of the YogabhraВ¶Вўa who takes birth in the family of YogвҲӮs:
В¬ЛқГҝ%ГҠlГғв—ҠГҠЕёSГғГҲ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ вҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҲhГҒвҲ‘В§ГҒГҖвҖҷВ·вҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҖўЕёпЈҝвҲ‘В§ВЎГЈв—ҠвҖҡВўГҒвҖҡhSГғГғГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠГҒГғ В¬вҒ„UГҠВў ВӘГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 45H
В¬ЛқГҝ%ГҠГғЛңГ” diligently; ГҝГғв—ҠГҠЕёвҖ” practising; ГғГҲ but; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ the YogвҲӮ; вҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҲhГҒвҲ‘В§ГҒГҖвҖҷВ·вҖ” (and) being
thoroughly purged of sin; вҖўЕёпЈҝвҲ‘В§ВЎГЈв—ҠвҖҡВўГҒвҖҡhвҖ” attaining perfection (in this very life) with the
help of latencies of many births; ГғГғвҖ” forthwith; ГҝГҠГҒГғ attains; В¬вҒ„UГҠв—ҠЛңГ” ВӘГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” the supreme state.
The YogвҲӮ, however, who diligently takes up the practice attains perfection in
this very life with the help of latencies of many births, and being thoroughly purged
of sin, forthwith reaches the supreme state.                               (45)

=== PAGE 353 ===

352
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The indeclinable Г«TuГӯ has been used to
differentiate the YogabhraВ¶Вўa who is born in
a family of YogвҲӮs from him who takes birth
in the family of the rich, as well as from
the seeker of enlightenment on Yoga.
Verse 43 stated that the YogabhraВ¶Вўa
who is born in a family of YogвҲӮs strives in
that life harder than ever for the attainment
of perfection in Yoga. The adjectival phrase
Г«PrayatnГҘdyatamГҘnaВЁГӯ (diligently taking up
practice) has been used with the word Г«YogвҲӮГӯ
in order to show that it is that very YogвҲӮ
who reaches the supreme state. The fruit of
his diligent effort, which was not mentioned
in that verse, has been explicitly stated here.
Verse 43 also stated that the latencies of
practice carried on by that YogabhraВ¶Вўa in his
previous birth are automatically roused as a
result of his taking birth in a family of YogвҲӮs.
The adjective Г«Anekajanma-saвүҲsiddhaВЁГӯ has
been used in this verse to make that very
point clear. The intention is to show that the
practice carried on by him through many
previous births, as well as in this birth, is
responsible for his attaining perfection in
Yoga or reaching the culmination of his
SГҘdhanГҘ; for it is with the help of latencies of
his previous births that he strives harder than
ever in this birth and thereby reaches the
culmination of his practice.
The use of the word Г«SaвүҲвҖ№uddhakilbiВ¶aВЁГӯ
is intended to show that no trace of sin is
left in the YogвҲӮ who diligently takes up the
practice of Yoga.
Realization of God, the supreme Reality
is what is referred to here as attainment of
supreme state. It is this very state which is
variously known as attainment of the supreme
Goal, attainment of the supreme Abode and
attainment of eternal Peace.
Concluding the topic of the destiny of a YogabhraВ¶Вўa, the Lord now glorifies the
YogвҲӮ and exhorts Arjuna to become a YogвҲӮ:
ГғВ¬ГҒSп¬ӮГЁГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒЕ“вҲ‘В§ГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ ГҙГҠГҠГҒЕёГЁГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ в—ҠГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒЕ“вҲ‘В§вҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҲ‘В§ГҢв—ҠГЁГҝpГҠГҒЕ“вҲ‘В§ГҠпЈҝ 
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ 
ГғSв—ҠГҠlГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ 
Г·п¬ӮГҠВЎГҲВёЕёГ”H 46H
ГғВ¬ГҒSп¬ӮГЁГҝвҖ” to the ascetics; вҖўГҒЕ“вҲ‘В§вҖ” (is) superior; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ the YogвҲӮ; ГҙГҠГҠГҒЕёГЁГҝвҖ” to those versed
in sacred lore; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; в—ҠГғвҖ” is held; вҖўГҒЕ“вҲ‘В§вҖ” superior; вҲ‘В§ГҢв—ҠГЁГҝвҖ” to those who perform action
(with some interested motive); Гё and; вҖўГҒЕ“вҲ‘В§вҖ” (is) superior; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ the YogвҲӮ; ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” therefore;
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ a YogвҲӮ; Г·п¬Ӯ be; вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё O Arjuna.
The YogвҲӮ is superior to the ascetics; he is regarded as superior even to those
versed in sacred lore. The YogвҲӮ is also superior to those who perform action with
some interested motive. Therefore, Arjuna, you do become a YogвҲӮ.          (46)
takes to the practice of JВӨГҘnayoga for the
realization of God. In the present context it
refers to the man of learning who has
understood things with the help of his intellect
and reason and in the light of scriptures and
the teachings of the preceptor.
The word Г«KarmibhyaВЁГӯ here stands for
those who perform sacrifice, worship, charity,
service and other noble actions enjoined by
the scriptures, with the motive of obtaining
Renunciation of worldly enjoyments
accompanied by sense-control, and endurance
of all sufferings connected with the mind, senses
and body, as a form of religious duty and with
an interested motive, is what is known as Г«TapasГӯ
or askesis; and he who practises Г«TapasГӯ or
askesis is called a Г«TapasvвҲӮГӯ or ascetic.
The word Г«JВӨГҘnibhyaВЁГӯ in the present
verse stands neither for the wise man who
has realized God, nor for the SГҘdhaka who

=== PAGE 354 ===

* Chapter VI *
353
wife, progeny, wealth and the enjoyments of
the higher worlds etc.
The ascetic as well as the man of
learning both, being actuated by interested
motives, could have been easily covered by
the word Г«KarmibhyaВЁГӯ. Hence there was no
necessity of mentioning them separately. But
the word Г«KarmibhyaВЁГӯ has not been used
in such a wide sense. The word refers only
to those who perform duties prescribed in the
scriptures such as sacrifice, charity, etc., in
which action is predominant. In the ascetic,
however, control of mind and senses and not
action is the dominant factor. Even so, the
man of learning is primarily a man of
intellect. Keeping this distinction in view, the
Lord has thought fit to mention the ascetic
and the man of learning separately and did
not include them in the category of KarmвҲӮs.
The word Г«YogвҲӮГӯ in this verse stands for
one who has attained perfection in the shape
of even-mindedness through any of the Yogas,
such as JВӨГҘnayoga, DhyГҘnayoga, Bhaktiyoga,
and Karmayoga. In this connection it should
be remembered that the GвҲӮtГҘ recognizes only
two main disciplines or paths, viz., the path
of Knowledge or JВӨГҘnayoga and the path of
Action or Karmayoga. Bhaktiyoga is the same
as Karmayoga. Emphasis on Bhakti or
Devotion gives it the name of Bhaktiyoga;
whereas emphasis on action gives it the
appellation of Karmayoga. DhyГҘnayoga, or
meditation, is helpful in the practice of both
JВӨГҘnayoga and Karmayoga. Practised with a
feeling of identity with God, it proves helpful
in JВӨГҘnayoga; and carried on with a
consciousness of oneГӯs separate existence, it
is helpful in Karmayoga.
Declaring in the preceding verse that the YogвҲӮ excelled all, the Lord exhorted Arjuna
to become a YogвҲӮ. But he reserved His definite opinion as to which of the many practices
discussed by Him in course of these chapters, such as JВӨГҘnayoga, DhyГҘnayoga, Bhaktiyoga
and Karmayoga, should be taken up for practice by Arjuna. It is, therefore, that the Lord
now draws Arjuna to Himself by calling the man who offers Him exclusive love as the
best among YogвҲӮs.
ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёГҠв—ҠГҒВ¬ 
вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёВ·ГҠВў 
в—ҠeГғпЈҝЕёГҠГЈГғвҒ„UГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠГ”вҖ“
ГјГҠhГҠп¬ӮГҠГЈГ·ВЎГғпЈҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠВў вҖҡ в—ҠпЈҝ ГҝГҲQВ§Гғв—ҠГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГғвҖ”Г”H 47H
ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” YogвҲӮs; вҖўГҒВ¬ too; вҖҡп¬ӮВёпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of all; в—ҠЕ’ЛңГ”ВӘГғпЈҝЕё вҖўГЈГғвҒ„UГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠ with his mind focussed on Me;
ГјГҠhГҠп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” full of reverence endowed with faith; Г·ВЎГғпЈҝ (constantly) adores; ГҝвҖ” (the YogвҲӮ) who;
в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; вҖҡвҖ” he; в—ҠпЈҝ by Me; ГҝГҲQВ§Гғв—ҠвҖ” the best YogвҲӮ; в—ҠГғвҖ” is considered.
Of all YogвҲӮs, again, he who devoutly worships Me with his mind focussed on
Me is considered by Me to be the best YogвҲӮ.                             (47)
been referred to in this verse by the term
Г«YoginГҘmГӯ combined with Г«ApiГӯ and the
adjective Г«SarveВ¶ГҘmГӯ, which follows it.
He whose belief in the existence of
God, in His AvatГҘras or Descents, in His
teachings, in His incomprehensible and infinite,
divine virtues, in His name and stories, in
His glory, power, greatness and majesty, is
The 
term 
Г«YogaГӯ 
represents 
the
culmination of all the practices for God-
realization discussed in verses 24Гі30 of
Chapter IV under the name of Г«sacrificeГӯ,
and all other practices for God-realization
mentioned so far in the GвҲӮtГҘ. Therefore, there
may be diverse types or classes of YogвҲӮs,
following different paths. All these have

=== PAGE 355 ===

354
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
as strong and unshakable as his belief in
anything directly cognized by his senses, is
called a Г«devoutГӯ or Г«faithfulГӯ soul.
He who comes to realize the Lord as
the highest Being, the repository of all
virtues, all-powerful, and the highest object
of love, develops exclusive love for Him,
with the result that his mind and intellect get
exclusively and irrevocably fixed on Him.
Such a mind and intellect are referred to here
by the words Г«Madgatena AntarГҘtmanГҘГӯ.
It is no doubt true that oneГӯs mind and
intellect may be focussed on the Lord even
through fear and hatred; and the fixing of
oneГӯs mind and intellect on God, due to
whatever feeling it may be, brings the highest
blessing on the soul. But the Lord is speaking
here of applying oneГӯs mind and intellect to
Him through love, and not through fear and
hatred. For, he whose mind and intellect get
riveted on God through fear and hatred can
neither be called devout, nor can he be
recognized as a supreme YogвҲӮ. Immediately
after this, the Lord introduces the very first
verse of Chapter VII with the phrase
Г«MayyГҘsaktamanГҘВЁГӯ (with the mind attached
to Me) which is indicative of exclusive love.
Besides this, it is the practice of lovingly
devoting oneГӯs mind and intellect to Him that
has been extolled by the Lord from place
to place in the GвҲӮtГҘ (VII.17; IX.14; X.10).
Therefore, it is but reasonable to take the
words Г«MadgatenaГӯ as implying attachment
or love.
The word Г«MГҘmГӯ, used by the Lord
with reference to him, stands for the Integral
Brahma or the Supreme Person, comprising
both the Qualified and Absolute aspects, the
greatest repository of the highest knowledge,
strength, energy, prowess and splendour, the
infinite 
ocean 
of 
beauty, 
sweetness,
magnanimity and compassion, the greatest
friend and well-wisher, the supreme lover,
and embodiment of transcendent and
incomprehensible Bliss, eternally existent,
unborn and immortal, the knower of all
hearts, omniscient, all-powerful adorned with
all the divine virtues, the universal Soul,
enacting various forms of enchanting divine
sports 
possessing 
the 
highest 
and
incomprehensible glory, creating, preserving
and destroying the entire universe as a mere
play through the agency of His MГҘyГҘ or
deluding power, the Ocean of Bliss, nay, the
very embodiment and an eternal fount of joy.
The verb Г«BhajateГӯ means withdrawing
the mind and intellect, from all other objects
and focussing them exclusively on the Lord,
and constantly adoring and meditating on Him
with supreme faith and love every moment
of oneГӯs conscious existence as well as during
sleep, and while carrying on all forms of bodily
activity as well as in seclusion.
By calling such a devotee as the greatest
YogвҲӮ, the Lord is glorifying His loving
devotee. He appears to say that ordinarily
speaking the ascetic, the man of Knowledge
and the man of action, all are dear to Him,
and dearer than all these is the YogвҲӮ who
is engaged in spiritual practice for His
Realization. But the devotee who offers his
exclusive love to Him knowing Him in His
entirety, and regarding Him as the supreme
object of love keeps his mind and intellect
focussed on Him day and night, without
requiring, craving for or caring for anything
else, and who like the child depending on
its mother, knows no one else than God, is
the dearest object of His heart.
A motherГӯs heart is ever overflowing
with affection for her child; she finds ever
new joy in looking on her beloved child, day
and night. The combined love of countless
such mothers cannot be compared even to a
drop of the boundless and incomprehensible
ocean of motherly affection which lies enclosed

=== PAGE 356 ===

* Chapter VI *
355
in the heart of the Lord. With such a heart
the Lord keeps looking on His loving devotees
of the type mentioned above, and every
movement and gesture of such devotees fills
Him with infinite joy. The sum total of the
various types of joy that the whole world has
been deriving from time without beginning
cannot be compared even to a drop of the
infinite ocean of joy that the Lord represents.
Though embodying such a boundless ocean
of infinite joy, the Lord continues to derive
joy from the very sight of the movements
and activities of the devotee whose mind and
intellect are focussed on Him through love !
The Lord does not find adequate words to
praise such a devotee ! The devotee belongs
to Him and is the LordГӯs very own. Who can
be dearer to the Lord than the devotee? He
alone who is dearest to the Lord is the best
of all; it is, therefore, but natural that the
Lord considers him to be the best devotee
and the best YogвҲӮ.
Лҷ ГғГ вҖҡГҒЕ’ГҒГғ ГјГҠГӢв—ҠjВӘп¬ӮeГӢГғГҠвҖҡГҚВ¬ГҒЕёВ·Г вҖҡГҲ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГҝГҠВў
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠпЈҝ ГјГҠГӢвҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠВЎГҲВёЕёвҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’пЈҝ вҖўГҠГ в—ҠвҖҡВўГҝв—ҠГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ
ЕёГҠв—Ҡ В·DГ”UГҠпЈҝЛҳГӨГҝГҠГҝвҖ”H 6H
Thus, in the UpaniВ¶ad sung by the Lord, the Science of Brahma, the scripture
of Yoga, the dialogue between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and Arjuna, ends the
sixth chapter entitled Г«The Yoga of Self-ControlГӯ.
U

=== PAGE 357 ===

Лҷ
вҖәrвҲӮmadbhagavad-GвҲӮtГҘ
Chapter VII
The eighteen chapters of the GвҲӮtГҘ have been divided into three groups of six chapters
each, dealing with Karmayoga, Bhaktiyoga and JВӨГҘnayoga respectively. This, however,
does not mean that the groups exclusively deal with only one type of Yoga,
and contain no reference to the other two types. A group is generally named
after the type of Yoga which has been primarily dealt with in it. The first
chapter of the first of these groups is only of an introductory nature containing
no reference to any of the Yogas. Chapter II deals with SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga (JВӨГҘnayoga) from
verses 11 to 30. After that from verse 39 to the end of Chapter III, Karmayoga has been
discussed in detail. In Chapters IV and V the topics of Karmayoga and JВӨГҘnayoga have
been promiscuously dealt with. The main theme of Chapter VI is DhyГҘnayoga, though
Karmayoga and other Yogas too have been discussed here and there according to the
needs of the occasion. Thus though all the principal Yogas have been discussed in this
first group of six chapters, the subject of Karmayoga has been dealt with more elaborately
in this than in the other two groups. Hence this group may be recognized as primarily
dealing with Karmayoga.
All the chapters of the intermediate group viz., Chapters VII to XII, mainly and
elaborately deal with Bhaktiyoga, although other subjects too have been incidentally
discussed here and there. It is, therefore, quite in the fitness of things to regard this second
group as dealing primarily with Bhaktiyoga.
Chapters XIII and XIV, forming part of the last group of six chapters, evidently deal
with JВӨГҘnayoga. Chapter XV discusses Bhaktiyoga; Chapter XVI contains an exposition
of the godly and demoniac properties; Chapter XVII classifies types of faith, food and
sacrifice, charity; askesis etc., while Chapter XVIII, being the concluding chapter of the
GвҲӮtГҘ, discusses all the three Yogas of Karma, Bhakti and JВӨГҘna and finally the teaching
of the Bhagavad-GвҲӮtГҘ culminates in Bhaktiyoga with an emphasis on surrender to God.
Notwithstanding all this, it cannot be gainsaid that the discussion of JВӨГҘnayoga in this
last group exceeds in volume the discussion of this subject in the first and second groups.
Hence this group may be described as primarily dealing with JВӨГҘnayoga.
Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ means consummate knowledge of the formless and attributeless aspect of God
with the secret of Its glory and greatness; while Г«VijВӨГҘnaГӯ means a thorough knowledge
of the sports, mysteries, glory and greatness etc., of the qualified aspect of
God both with and without form. Knowledge of God which comprises both
Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ and Г«VijВӨГҘnaГӯ represents the knowledge of the integral Divinity. The
present chapter deals with this integral Divinity as well as with the practices which lead
to Its knowledge and the qualified souls possessing such knowledge. It is therefore that
the chapter has been named as Г¬The Yoga of JВӨГҘna and VijВӨГҘna.Г®
In the first verse of this chapter the Lord asks Arjuna to hear a discussion of the
integral Divinity. In the second He promises to speak of JВӨГҘna and VijВӨГҘna and praises
Division of
the GвҲӮtГҘ
Title of the
Chapter

=== PAGE 358 ===

* Chapter VII *
357
them; whereas verse 3 shows the difficulty of knowing the truth relating to God. In the
fourth and the fifth, He describes the two PrakГҰtis or NaturesГіthe higher as well as the
lower, and in the sixth He declares this twofold PrakГҰti to be the womb
of all beings, and Himself to be the ultimate Cause of the entire creation.
In the seventh He declares the whole universe to be His own manifestation,
and illustrates the fact of His pervading all as their essence by the analogy of a string
of yarn-beads; and the same point is elaborated in verses 8 to 12. Pointing out in the
thirteenth why people fail to know God in reality, in the fourteenth He declares His MГҘyГҘ
to be extremely difficult to get over and points out the way to cross it. Showing in verse
15 how sinful men of a deluded intellect fail to worship God, He speaks of the four
types of His virtuous devotees in the sixteenth. Declaring the superiority of the enlightened
devotee in the seventeenth, in the eighteenth He pronounces all the types of devotees as
noble, and the man of wisdom as His own self. The nineteenth shows the rarity of the
enlightened devotee. Speaking of the worshippers of other deities in the twentieth, He
shows in the twenty-first how He stabilizes their faith in those very deities and indicates
the fruit of such worship in the twenty-second. Declaring in the twenty-third the fruit of
the worship of other deities to be perishable, He shows how those who adore Him attain
the supreme reward in the shape of His own realization. Giving reasons in twenty-fourth
and the twenty-fifth why ignorant folk fail to obtain an insight into His virtues, glory and
reality, in the twenty-sixth He declares that while He knows all beings, none knows Him.
Pointing out the reason of this ignorance in the twenty-seventh, He describes in the twenty-
eighth the marks of devotees who worship Him with a firm resolve and exclusive devotion.
The chapter is concluded by glorifying the knowledge of His integral being in the twenty-
ninth and thirtieth.
In the last verse of Chapter VI, the Lord declared that in His opinion the YogвҲӮ who
devoutly and lovingly worshipped Him with his mind focussed on Him was the best of
all. But so long as a man does not know the reality, virtues and glory
of the Lord it is exceedingly difficult for him to perform such worship
unceasingly with the mind; and at the same time it is essential to know
the mode of such worship. Therefore, with a view to describing His integral reality, along
with His virtues and glory, as well as the practice of devotion with its various processes,
the Lord now introduces Chapter VII and asking Arjuna first of all to listen to it carefully,
promises to speak of JВӨГҘna and VijВӨГҘna in the next verse.
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲUп¬ӮГҠГё
в—ҠЖ’ГҝГҠвҖҡQВ§в—ҠЕёГҠвҖ” В¬ГҠГ•Вё ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘВў ГҝГҲTГЈв—ҠЕ’ГҠГјГҠГҝвҖ”вҖ“
вҖўвҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝВў вҖҡв—ҠВӘЛқВў в—ҠГҠВў ГҝГ•ГҠ ГҙГҠГҠSГҝГҒвҖҡ ГғГ«ВҝГҺUГЎГҠГҲH 1H
в—ҠГҒГҝ вҖўГҠвҖҡQВ§в—ҠЕёГҠвҖ” with (your) mind attached to Me (through exclusive love); В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of
KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ” Yoga; ГҝГҲTЕёЛңГ” practising; в—ҠЕ’ГҠГјГҠГҝвҖ” with Me as your sole refuge; вҖўвҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝв—ҠЛңГ”
without any shadow of doubt; вҖҡв—ҠВӘЛқв—ҠЛңГ” in entirety (with all My splendour, strength and majesty
etc.); в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me (the Self of all); ГҝГ•ГҠ how; ГҙГҠГҠSГҝГҒвҖҡ you will know; ГғГғЛңГ” that; oГҺГЎГҠГҲ hear.
Summary of
the Chapter
Link of the
Chapter

=== PAGE 359 ===

358
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Г¬MayyГҘsaktamanГҘВЁГ® has been used by
the Lord for him whose mind is entirely free
from attachment for all forms of enjoyment
of this world and the next, and withdrawing
itself from all sides has got so deeply
attached to God, the sole object of supreme
Love and the Repository of all virtues, that
just as the fish cannot live without water
even for an instant he cannot bear even a
momentГӯs separation from the Lord nor can
he tolerate His slipping out of his memory
even for a moment.
Even so, he who has totally given up
dependence on all objects of the world, and
renouncing all forms of worldly hope and
reliance has pinned his faith on God alone,
and who, knowing the almighty Lord to be
his great asylum and supreme goal, has
thrown his whole responsibility on Him
alone and become free from anxiety for ever,
is referred to by the Lord as Г¬MadГҘвҖ№rayaВЁГ®.
The subject of discussion in the present
chapter is Bhaktiyoga, or the Yoga of Devotion.
Therefore, practice of Yoga referred to here
means practice of perpetual and constant
remembrance of God with faith and devotion,
fixing the mind and intellect stably on
Him.
God cannot be defined or circumscribed.
He permeates the countless millions of
universes, and they are all His manifestations.
Whatever exists in these universes or beyond
them rests in Him. He is eternal, true and
ancient. He is the repository of all virtues,
omnipotent, omniscient, all-pervading, all-
sustaining and all-formed and takes the shape
of this world of His own accord through His
YogamГҘyГҘ. In reality, there is nothing apart
from Him; the manifest and the unmanifest,
the qualified and the unqualified, everything
is He. Knowing His reality thus without the
least doubt or misconception is what is meant
by knowing Him in entirety and without any
shadow of doubt.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: Arjuna, now listen how with the mind attached to Me
(through exclusive love) and practising Yoga with absolute dependence on Me, you
will know Me (the Repository of all power, strength and glory and other attributes,
the Universal Soul) in entirety and without any shadow of doubt.            (1)
ГҙГҠГҠЕёВў ГғпЈҝЛҳвҖһВўU вҖҡГҒп¬ӮГҙГҠГҠЕёГҒв—ҠЕ’Вў п¬ӮЛҮГҝГҠГӘГҝвүҘГҠпЈҝВ·ГғвҖ”вҖ“
ГҝГ–ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ ЕёпЈҝвҖһU Г·ГҚГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГЈГҝГ–ГҙГҠГҠГғвҲҡГҝв—Ҡп¬ӮГҒвүҘГҠcГҝГғпЈҝH 2H
ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” Knowledge of God in His absolute formless aspect; ГғпЈҝ to you; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; вҖҡГҒп¬ӮГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ”
coupled with VijВӨГҘna or Knowledge of the qualified aspect of God, both with form and
without form; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this; п¬ӮЛҮГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ shall speak of; вҖўвүҘГҠпЈҝВ·ГғвҖ” in its entirety; ГҝГғЛңГ” which; ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ having
known; Её not; ГҹвҖһU here, in this world; Г·ГҚГҝвҖ” again; вҖўГЈГҝГғЛңГ” anything else; ГҙГҠГҠГғвҲҡГҝв—ҠЛңГ” to be known;
вҖўп¬ӮГҒвүҘГҠcГҝГғпЈҝ remains.
I shall unfold to you in its entirety this wisdom (Knowledge of God in His absolute,
formless aspect) alongwith the Knowledge of the qualified aspect of God (both with
form and without form), having known which nothing else remains yet to be known
in this world.                                                           (2)
even so, the whole of this chapter should be
treated as identical with JВӨГҘna and VijВӨГҘna,
inasmuch as it is replete with the teaching
of JВӨГҘna, VijВӨГҘna.
Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ and Г«VijВӨГҘnaГӯ lead to a proper
Whatever has been taught in this chapter
is conducive to the attainment of Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ and
Г«VijВӨГҘnaГӯ as explained above. Therefore, just
as in Chapter XIII the virtues leading to
JВӨГҘna have been termed as Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ itself,

=== PAGE 360 ===

* Chapter VII *
359
realization of the integral being of God. This
entire universe is nothing but an insignificant
part of that integral being. For him who has
known this integral reality of God, naturally
there remains nothing to be known. In the
concluding verse of Chapter X, the Lord
Himself says: Г¬What use of your knowing
all this multiplicity, Arjuna? Know only this
much that I stand holding this entire universe
by a spark of My glory.Г®
Promising thus to speak of Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ and Г«VijВӨГҘnaГӯ, the Lord proceeds in the next
verse to demonstrate the rarity of true knowledge of His integral being:
в—ҠЕёГҲcГҝГҠГЎГҠГҠВў вҖҡвҖһUdпЈҝВ·ГҲ вҲ‘В§ГҒplГғГҒГғ ГҒвҖҡhГҝпЈҝвҖ“
ГҝГғГғГҠв—ҠГҒВ¬ ГҒвҖҡhГҠЕёГҠВў вҲ‘В§ГҒpГЈв—ҠГҠВў п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠ ГғГ»п¬ӮГғвҖ”H 3H
в—ҠЕёГҲcГҝГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of men; вҖҡвҖһUdпЈҝВ·ГҲ among thousands; вҲ‘В§ГҒpГғЛңГ” hardly one; ГҝГғГҒГғ strives; ГҒвҖҡhГҝпЈҝ for
perfection (in the shape of God-realization); ГҝГғГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of those striving; вҖўГҒВ¬ again; ГҒвҖҡhГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ”
YogвҲӮs; вҲ‘В§ГҒpГғЛңГ” some rare one; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠ knows; ГғГ»п¬ӮГғвҖ” in reality.
Hardly one among thousands of men strives to realize Me; of those striving YogвҲӮs,
again, some rare one (devoting himself exclusively to Me) knows Me in reality.   (3)
do not even turn their face towards the path
of God-realization due to excessive attachment
to enjoyments occasioned by the latencies of
their past lives, and through want of deficiency
of faith in and love for God. Scarce one among
thousands, whose latencies of previous births
are favourable, and who possesses some
amount of faith in and reverence for God, holy
men and the scriptures and comes in contact
with saints, due to the store of oneГӯs past merits
and through the special grace of God, takes
to this path and strives for God-realization.
Again, of those who strive for God-
realization, the SГҘdhanГҘ or practice of all
does not attain to the same level owing to
differences in the latencies of their past lives,
as well as in the intensity of their faith,
devotion, association with saints and effort.
Obstacles of various kinds also continue to
come in their way in the shape of egotism,
mineness, desire, attachment and evil association
etc. Therefore, there are very few persons
whose faith, devotion and SГҘdhanГҘ attain a
degree of perfection and who as the result
of such perfection are able to realize God
in that very life.
The use of the adjective Г«SiddhГҘnГҘmГӯ
The use of the word Г«ManuВ¶yГҘЖ’ГҘmГӯ in
this verse indicates, firstly, that birth in the
human species is exceedingly difficult to attain.
It is obtained through the exceptional grace
of God; for everyone belonging to this species
is qualified by virtue of oneГӯs birth to strive
for God-realization. Differences of nationality,
caste, Г…вҖ№rama (stage in life) or country
constitute no bar to oneГӯs striving for this end.
Secondly, it suggests that freedom of will is
denied to all except the human species: hence
creatures belonging to the other species cannot
strive for God-realization. As for sub-human
creatures such as birds, beasts, insects and
reptiles, they possess neither the power nor
the capacity to strive for this end. And beings
higher than man such as gods etc., even though
they possess the power, cannot strive for God-
realization on account of super-abundance of
enjoyments and lack of qualification in
particular. If anyone belonging to the sub-
human species or to the ethereal regions ever
comes to realize God, it should be attributed
to the special grace either of God Himself or
of a God-realized saint.
Though blessed with human birth as a
fruit of divine grace, the vast majority of men

=== PAGE 361 ===

360
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
with reference to the striving souls should
be understood to indicate that in comparison
with sensual men weltering in the morass of
worldly enjoyments, those who strive for
perfection in the shape of God-realization are
as good as Г«perfectГӯ.
to speak of matter as consisting of eight
divisions or twentythree. The Г«AparГҘГӯ PrakГҰti,
being objective and material in nature, is
altogether different from and lower than the
Г«ParГҘГӯ PrakГҰti, or the subjective conscious life-
principle. It is this PrakГҰti which is the cause
of the world and by which the JвҲӮva gets bound.
That is why it is termed as Г«AparГҘГӯ, or lower.
The JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ or individual soul is beyond
all distinction of sex. In order to bring out
this fact, the same life-principle or consciousness
has been referred to now in the masculine
gender as Г«PuruВ¶aГӯ, (XV.16) and Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ
or Г«Knower of the FieldГӯ (XIII.1), and now
in the neuter gender as Г«AdhyГҘtmaГӯ (VII.29;
VIII.3). It is that very principle which has
been spoken of here in the feminine gender
as Г«ParГҘ PrakГҰtiГӯ or the Higher nature.
The whole of this objective world has
The earth, water, fire, air and ether
referred to in this verse denote the five subtle
elements, which are the causes of the five
gross elements as well as of the five objects
of the senses, viz., sound, etc., and which
have been called TanmГҘtrГҘs in the SГҘвҲҶkhya
and Yoga terminology.
Mind, intellect and ego are the three
aspects or phases of mind or the internal
sense; hence they should be understood to
mean the Г«cosmic Mind.Гӯ
In verse 5 of Chapter XIII, the evolutes
of Primordial Matter have been enumerated
as 23 in number. But the five objects of senses,
viz., Г«soundГӯ etc., being the evolutes of the
five subtle elements, and the ten organs (of
perception and action) being the evolutes of
the mind, those fifteen are covered by the above
eight categories. Therefore, it is just the same
Upto this point the Lord promised to speak of Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ and Г«VijВӨГҘnaГӯ and extolled
them. Now, while introducing the subject, He first reveals the character of His higher
and lower Natures:
Г·ГҚГҒв—ҠвҒ„UГҠВ¬ГҠпЈҝЛҳЕёвҲӮUГҠпЈҝ п¬ӮГҠГҝГҲвҖ” ПҖВў в—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝ вҖҷГҲГҒhвҒ„пЈҝUп¬Ӯ ГёвҖ“
вҖўвҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„U ГҹГғГӢГҝВў в—ҠпЈҝ ГҒГ·ГӣГҠГҠ В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғвҒ„UCГ”UЕ“ГҠH 4H
вҖўВ¬вҒ„пЈҝUГҝГҒв—ҠГғSГ п¬ӮГЈГҝГҠВў В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғВў ГҒп¬ӮГҒh в—ҠпЈҝ В¬вҒ„UГҠв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ВЎГӢп¬ӮГ·ГҚГғГҠВў в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҝпЈҝЕ’Вў Е“ГҠГҝВёГғпЈҝ ВЎВӘГғЛңГ”H 5H
Г·ГҚГҒв—ҠвҖ” earth; вҖўГҠВ¬вҖ” water; вҖўЕёвҲӮUвҖ” fire; п¬ӮГҠГҝГҲвҖ” air; ПҖв—ҠЛңГ” ether; в—ҠЕёвҖ” mind; вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” reason; вҲһп¬Ӯ also;
Гё and; вҖўвҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„вҖ”U ego; ГҹГҒГғ so; ГҹГҝв—ҠЛңГ” this (is); в—ҠпЈҝ My; ГҒГ·ГӣГҠГҠ divided; В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғвҖ” Nature; вҖўCГ”UЕ“ГҠ eightfold;
вҖўВ¬вҒ„UГҠ (My) lower (nature); ГҹГҝв—ҠЛңГ” this one (of eightfold composition); ГҹГғвҖ” than this; ГғГҲ (is)
indeed; вҖўГЈГҝГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the other; В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” nature; ГҒп¬ӮГҒh know; в—ҠпЈҝ My; В¬вҒ„UГҠв—ҠЛңГ” higher (conscious); ВЎГӢп¬ӮГ·ГҚГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ”
constituting the life-principle; в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ O mighty-armed Arjuna; ГҝГҝГҠ by which; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this
(entire); Е“ГҠГҝВёГғпЈҝ is sustained; ВЎВӘГғЛңГ” universe.
Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, reason and also egoГіthese constitute My
nature divided into eight parts. This indeed is My lower (material) nature; the other
than this, by which the whole universe is sustained, know it to be My higher nature
in the form of JвҲӮva (the life-principle), O Arjuna.
 (4,5)

=== PAGE 362 ===

* Chapter VII *
361
been referred to in this verse by the term
Г«JagatГӯ, or universe. The conscious JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ
or individual soul sustains this universe. The
whole range of objective reality rests on the
subject, and all that is knowable is dependent
on the knower. The object is not capable of
sustaining the subject, nor is the knowable
capable of sustaining the knower. The objective
world of matter cannot exist unless it is
sustained by the Г«ParГҘ PrakГҰtiГӯ or Higher
Nature of the Lord in the form of the
conscious individual soul.
Delineating thus the character of the higher and lower natures, ParГҘ and AparГҘ
PrakГҰtis of God, the Lord now shows that they are the cause of the entire creation, and
that He Himself is the Supreme Cause of the universe, which is a combination of the
two PrakГҰtis.
вҲһГғlГҠпЈҝЕёГӢГҒЕё 
Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё 
вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГЎГҠГӢГ ГҝГҲВ¬Е“ГҠвҒ„UГҝвҖ“
вҖўвҖһВўU вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г FSГҝ ВЎВӘГғвҖ” В¬ЛқГ·п¬ӮвҖ” В¬ЛқвҲӮUГҝSГғГ•ГҠH 6H
вҲһГғlГҠпЈҝЕёГӢГҒЕё have evolved from this twofold PrakГҰti; Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё beings; вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ all; ГҹГҒГғ this;
В©UВ¬Е“ГҠвҒ„UГҝ know; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” (and) I; вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г FSГҝ ВЎВӘГғвҖ” of the entire creation; В¬ЛқГ·п¬ӮвҖ”Г” (am) the source; В¬ЛқвҲӮUГҝвҖ”
the end; ГғГ•ГҠ as well as.
Arjuna, know that all beings have evolved from this twofold PrakГҰti, and that
I am the source of the entire creation, and into Me again it disappears.      (6)
dissolved in the atmosphere, or in other
words, the atmosphere is its sole cause and
support, even so the whole universe springs
from God, stays in God and finally disappears
into God, or in other words, God is its sole,
supreme cause and ultimate support. This
very point has been elucidated in verses 4,
5 and 6 of Chapter IX as well. It should,
however, be remembered in this connection
that God is not material or subject to change
like the atmosphere. An analogy is only
meant to hint at a truth. Really speaking,
GodГӯs manifestation in the form of this
universe is nothing but a charming sport
of His.
The word Г«BhВөutГҘniГӯ in this context
stands for the various orders of living beings
in the universe, high and low, animate as
well as inanimate. All living beings owe their
origin, existence and growth to the combination
of these two PrakГҰtis. Therefore, these two
are the cause of their manifestation. This
very fact has been reiterated in verse 26 of
Chapter XIII substituting the words Г«KВ¶etraГӯ
and Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ for the Г«AparГҘГӯ and the
Г«ParГҘГӯ PrakГҰti respectively.
The word Г«JagatГӯ stands for the entire
universe consisting of sentient and insentient
creation. Just as the cloud springs from the
atmosphere, stays in the atmosphere and gets
Thus, when God Himself is the sole cause and ultimate support of the entire creation,
it naturally follows that it is a manifestation of God and is pervaded by God. Now, in
order to elucidate this very point, the Lord says:
в—ҠГ»ГҠвҖ” В¬вҒ„UГғвҒ„ВўU ЕёГҠГЈГҝГҒГ вҲ‘В§ГҒ@Е’ГҒSГғ Е“ЕёTГҝвҖ“
в—ҠГҒГҝ вҖҡп¬ӮВёГҒв—ҠЕ’Вў В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝГғВў вҖҡГҚГІГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҒГЎГҠВӘГЎГҠГҠ Гҹп¬ӮH 7H
в—ҠГ»ГҠвҖ” В¬вҒ„UГғвҒ„в—ҠЛңГ” besides Me; Её not; вҖўГЈГҝГғЛңГ” else; ГҒвҲ‘В§ГҒ@ГғЛңГ” anything; вҖўГҒSГғ (there) is; Е“ЕёTГҝ

=== PAGE 363 ===

362
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
It may be contended here that whereas
in the foregoing verse the Lord declared
Himself to be the cause and support of this
universe, He denies the existence, in this verse,
of any thing other than Him, which shows
the identity of the universe with God. Although
these two statements appear as mutually
contradictory, there is no real contradiction
between them. Just as the vast expanse of ether
is the cause and support of the cloud, which
again is the same as ether inasmuch as it has
no existence apart from its cause; even so, God
being the cause and support of the universe,
the universe is but a manifestation of God,
and nothing else than God. Therefore, both
the statements referred to above are correct.
It is customary in India to make a rosary
of yarn-beads by forming successive knots
on a thread, and treating such knots as so
many beads. Now just as yarn and yarn
alone is present in the thread as well as in
the knots formed thereon, even so the whole
of this creation is threaded on God. That is
to say, God alone permeates all. This is what
is sought to be conveyed by the second half
of the verse.
O Arjuna (lit., a conqueror of riches); в—ҠГҒГҝ on Me; вҖҡп¬ӮВёв—ҠЛңГ” ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” all this (universe); В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝГғв—ҠЛңГ” is
threaded; вҖҡГҚГІГҠпЈҝ on a thread; в—ҠГҒГЎГҠВӘГЎГҠГҠвҖ” Гҹп¬Ӯ as clusters of yarn-beads.
There is nothing else besides Me, Arjuna. Like clusters of yarn-beads formed
by knots on a thread, all this (universe) is threaded on Me.                          (7)
By the illustration of yarn and yarn-beads, the Lord demonstrated that it is He who has
taken all forms and it is He again who pervades all. Now, in order to elucidate this very
point, He mentions in the next four verses all those principal entities by which this universe
is sustained and declares that it is He who permeates them all as their very essence.
вҒ„UвҖҡГҠпЈҝЛҳвҖһUв—ҠГҘвҖҡГҲ вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ В¬ЛқГ·ГҠГҒSв—Ҡ вүҘГҠГҒвүҘГҠвҖҡГҚГҝВёГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ”вҖ“
В¬ЛқГЎГҠп¬ӮвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮВёп¬ӮпЈҝЕ’пЈҝВ·ГҲ вүҘГҠГ©Е’вҖ” ПҖпЈҝ В¬ГҠГ’LВ§В·Вў ЕёГҺВ·ГҲH 8H
вҒ„UвҖҡвҖ” the sapidity; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I (am); вҖўГҘвҖҡГҲ in water; вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ O son of KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna; В¬ЛқГ·ГҠГ” the
light; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ am; вүҘГҠГҒвүҘГҠвҖҡГҚГҝВёГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” in the moon and the sun; В¬ЛқГЎГҠп¬ӮвҖ” (the sacred syllable) OГҖ; вҖҡп¬ӮВёп¬ӮпЈҝЕ’пЈҝВ·ГҲ
of all the Vedas; вүҘГҠГ©Е’вҖ” the sound; ПҖпЈҝ in ether; В¬ГҠГ’LВ§В·в—ҠЛңГ” virility; ЕёГҺВ·ГҲ (and) in men.
Arjuna, I am the sapidity in water and the light in the moon and the sun; I
am the sacred syllable OГҖ in all the Vedas, the sound in ether, and the manliness
in men.                                                                 (8)
the sun in the shape of their light; He is the
sacred syllable OГҖ, which is the sum and
substance of the Vedas ! He is the principle
of sound, which constitutes the essence of
ether, and again He is the principle of
manliness, which constitutes the essence of
man.
The principle which constitutes the
support of a thing, and pervades it, that
principle alone is the life and being of that
object, and that alone is declared to be its
essence. The Lord accordingly says that He
is the essence of water in the form of
sapidity, He is the essence of the moon and
В¬ГҲГЎГҝГҠпЈҝ ВӘГЈЕ“вҖ” В¬ГҺГҒГ•вҲҡГҝГҠВў Гё ГғпЈҝВЎpГҠГҒSв—Ҡ ГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮвҖҡГҠГ’вҖ“
ВЎГӢп¬ӮЕёВў вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ ГғВ¬pГҠГҒSв—Ҡ ГғВ¬ГҒSп¬ӮВ·ГҲH 9H

=== PAGE 364 ===

* Chapter VII *
363
Following the line of thought in the
preceding verse, the Lord shows in this verse
that it is He who pervades and sustains the
earth, fire, the living beings as well as the
men of austere penance as their very essence
in the form of odour, brilliance, the life-
principle and askesis respectively.
The use of the adjective Г«PuЖ’yaВЁГӯ with
the word Г«GandhaВЁГӯ is intended to show that
Г«odourГӯ here does not mean the object of
the olfactory sense, but the subtle principle of
odour (Gandha-TanmГҘtrГҘ,) which is the origin
of the earth. Even so, sapidity and sound too
should be understood to refer to the
corresponding TanmГҘtrГҘs which constitute the
causes of the elements of water and ether
respectively and not to the objects of the senses
of taste and hearing. The word Г«SarvabhВөuteВ¶uГӯ
stands for all living beings, both animate and
inanimate, and Г«lifeГӯ stands for the principle
of vitality, which sustains all living beings
and distinguishes them from lifeless objects.
В¬ГҲГЎГҝвҖ” ВӘГЈЕ“вҖ” (I am) pure odour; В¬ГҺГҒГ•вҲҡГҝГҠв—ҠЛңГ” in the earth; Гё and; ГғпЈҝВЎвҖ” (pure) brilliance; Гё
and; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ (I) am; ГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮвҖҡГҠГ’ in fire; ВЎГӢп¬ӮЕёв—ҠЛңГ” (their) life; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ in all beings; ГғВ¬вҖ” austerity;
Гё and; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ am; ГғВ¬ГҒSп¬ӮВ·ГҲ in men of askesis.
I am the pure odour (the subtle principle of odour) in the earth and the brightness
in fire; nay, I am the life in all beings and the austerity in men of askesis.   (9)
вҖҷГӢВЎВў в—ҠГҠВў вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠВў ГҒп¬ӮГҒh В¬ГҠГ•Вё вҖҡЕёГҠГғЕёв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖҷГҲВёГҒhв—ҠГғГҠв—ҠГҒSв—Ҡ ГғпЈҝВЎSГғпЈҝВЎГҒSп¬ӮЕёГҠв—ҠвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”H 10H
вҖҷГӢВЎв—ҠЛңГ” seed; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me (alone); вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of all beings; ГҒп¬ӮГҒh know; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthГҘ,
Arjuna; вҖҡЕёГҠГғЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the eternal; вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” the intelligence; вҖҷГҲГҒhв—ҠГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of the intelligent; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ am; ГғпЈҝВЎвҖ”
the glory; ГғпЈҝВЎГҒSп¬ӮЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” (and) of the glorious; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I.
Arjuna, know Me to be the eternal seed of all beings. I am the intelligence of
the intelligent; the glory of the glorious am I.                                  (10)
ascertains all objects and which controls and
regulates the mind and senses is called
Buddhi (the intellect). He whose cognitive
faculty is highly developed is referred to as
a man of intelligence. This cognitive faculty
being a part of the AparГҘ PrakГҰtiГӯ, or lower
Nature of God, the Lord says that He is the
reasoning faculty which is the essential feature
of the intelligent. Even so, Tejas, or glory,
stands for the power of influencing others.
A person possessing this power in abundance
is called Г«gloriousГӯ. This power also being
a part of the Г«AparГҘ PrakГҰtiГӯ of God, the Lord
speaks of both these powers as the same as
Himself.
The word Г«SanГҘtanaГӯ means that which
has existed for ever and will never perish.
God alone is the ultimate substratum of the
whole creation, both animate and inanimate,
and everything originates from Him. It is,
therefore, quite in the fitness of things that He
should declare Himself to be the Г«eternal seedГӯ
of the entire creation. In IX.18 the Lord calls
Himself the Г«imperishable seedГӯ, and again in
X.39 He refers to Himself as Г¬the seed of all
beingsГ®. An ordinary material seed is neither
without beginning nor imperishable. God alone
is such a seed. Hence the Lord calls himself
the Г«eternal seedГӯ.
The pure cognitive faculty which
вҖҷвҲӮВўU вҖҷвҲӮUп¬ӮГғГҠВў ГёГҠвҖһВўU вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҒ„UГҠВӘГҒп¬Ӯп¬ӮГҢВЎГғв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
Е“в—ҠГҠВёГҒп¬ӮLВ§hГҠпЈҝ Г·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒSв—Ҡ Г·вҒ„UГғВ·ВёГ·H 11H

=== PAGE 365 ===

364
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The might which is accompanied with
desire, passion, egoism and anger etc., is the
demoniacal type of might referred to in XVI.18
and the renunciation of which has been stressed
in XVIII.53. Even so, conjugal desire, which
runs counter to virtue, being a principal element
of the demoniacal nature, is the root of all
evils (III.37), a gate to hell and worth giving
up (XVI.21). The might and desire which
are of a different type from those referred to
above, i.e., irreproachable might and a pure
desire alone are worth possessing.
By addressing Arjuna as the best among
the Bharatas, the Lord indicated that Arjuna,
being descended from Bharata, possessed
neither the demoniac type of might, nor the
foul and impious type of desire. He was
possessed of a might which was free from
desire and passion and of a sexual desire
which was in consonance with righteousness.
The Lord speaks of such might and such
desire as His own manifestation.
вҖҷвҲӮв—ҠЛңГ” the might; вҖҷвҲӮUп¬ӮГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of the mighty; Гё and; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I (am); вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҒ„UГҠВӘГҒп¬Ӯп¬ӮГҢВЎГғв—ҠЛңГ” free from
passion and desire; Е“в—ҠГҠВёГҒп¬ӮLВ§hвҖ” not conflicting with virtue or scriptural injunctions; Г·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ in
beings; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҖ” (sexual) desire; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ (I) am; Г·вҒ„UГғВ·ВёГ· O best among Bharatas.
Arjuna, of the mighty I am the might, free from passion and desire; in beings I am
Г«KГҘmaГӯ, the conjugal desire, not conflicting with virtue or scriptural injunctions.
(11)
Thus declaring Himself to be present in all important things as their very essence,
the Lord indirectly proved that He was all-pervasive and all-formed. He now winds up
the topic by calling Himself the root cause of the entire creation, which is an evolute
of the three modes of PrakГҰti.
ГҝпЈҝ ГёГ’п¬Ӯ вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГҠ Г·ГҠп¬ӮГҠ вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡГҠSГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡГҠp ГҝпЈҝвҖ“
в—ҠГ»ГҠ вҲһп¬ӮпЈҝГҒГғ ГғГҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГҒh Её Г п¬ӮвҖһВўU ГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ ГғпЈҝ в—ҠГҒГҝH 12H
ГҝпЈҝ Гё вҲһп¬Ӯ and whichever; вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГҠвҖ” born of Sattva (the quality of goodness); Г·ГҠп¬ӮГҠвҖ” entities
(there are); вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡГҠвҖ” born of Rajas (the principle of activity); ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡГҠвҖ” (and) born of Tamas
(the principle of inertia); Гё and; ГҝпЈҝ (those) that; в—ҠГ»ГҠвҖ” from Me; вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; ГҹГҒГғ thus; ГғГҠЕёЛңГ” them
(all); ГҒп¬ӮГҒh know; Её (are) not; ГғГҲ but (in reality); вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; ГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ in them; ГғпЈҝ (and) they; в—ҠГҒГҝ
in Me.
Whatever other entities there are, born of Sattva (the quality of goodness), and
those that are born of Rajas (the principle of activity) and Tamas (the principle of
inertia), know them all as evolved from Me alone. In reality, however, neither do
I exist in them, nor do they in Me.                                         (12)
her ultimate substratum, and that it is under
His sportive direction that she carries on her
functions of creating, multiplying and dissolving
everything, is what is meant by knowing them
as evolved from God.
To take a familiar illustration, though the
atmosphere is the support of the cloud appearing
therein, it remains absolutely uncontaminated
by the cloud. The cloud is not always present
Mind, intellect, ego, the senses, the objects
of senses, the TanmГҘtrГҘs (subtle states of the
five elements), the five elements, all good and
evil qualities and actions, and whatever other
entities there are, they are all included in entities
born of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. All these
entities evolve and develop from the Г«AparГҘ
PrakГҰtiГӯ or lower nature of God. And to know
that this PrakГҰti belongs to God, who alone is

=== PAGE 366 ===

* Chapter VII *
365
in the atmosphere; and being fleeting by nature
it has, as a matter of fact, no abiding reality
either. But the atmosphere exists even when
there is no cloud; even where there is no
cloud, the atmosphere is there nonetheless; its
existence is not dependent on the existence of
the cloud. In reality, the cloud itself is not
something different from the atmosphere, it
appears as arising in and from the atmosphere.
Accordingly, inasmuch as the cloud has no
separate existence as a matter of fact, the
atmosphere is at no time in the cloud, and ever
exists in its own being, Even so, though God
is the cause and substratum of all the evolutes
of the three modes of PrakГҰti, in reality they do
not exist in Him, nor He in them. He is always
and in every state beyond the GuЖ’as or modes
of Nature, and He ever exists in His own
Being. That is why he says, Г¬Neither do I
exist in them, nor they in Me.Г® For further
elucidation of this point, the reader is referred
to verses 4 and 5 of Chapter IX.
and a source of joy, and deluded by the glamour
of their supposed charm and blissful nature
forget the supreme object of life. That is why
they turn their face away from the thought
and knowledge of the virtues, glory, truth,
identity and mysteries of God and falling a
prey to doubt and misconception show
irreverence to God. Completely taken up as
they are with the evolutes of the three GuЖ’as,
their faculty of judgment has got so blunted
that they fail to recognize any duty or goal of
life other than the accumulation of objects
and their enjoyment.
The reasoning faculty of these men
deluded by worldly enjoyments does not
reach beyond the perishable realm of the three
GuЖ’as; hence they fail to recognize God, who
The objects by which the world is herein
said to be deluded are the same as described
in the preceding verse. The adjectives Г«TribhiВЁГӯ
and Г«GuЖ’amayaiВЁГӯ are intended to show that
all the entities referred to here are of three
kinds according, as they are evolved from
the three GuЖ’as. And the word Г«JagatГӯ refers
to all animate creatures for the question of
delusion hardly arises in the case of inanimate
objects. Therefore, the statement of the Lord
in this verse seems to indicate that all embodied
creatures of the world, human beings not
excepted, are, guided by their respective
temperament, disposition and bent of mind
and come to regard these objects, which are
evolved from the three modes of PrakГҰti and
are transitory and full of sorrow, as eternal
The Lord has thus far shown that the whole world is His own manifestation and
is pervaded by Him. Here, then, the question arises: Why do people fail to recognize
God though He is thus present everywhere and is so near to them? In reply to this, the
Lord says:
ГҒГІГҠГҒГ·ВӘГҲВёГЎГҠв—ҠГҝГ’Г·ГҠВёп¬ӮГ’вҒ„пЈҝUГҒГ·вҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮВёГҒв—ҠЕ’Вў ВЎВӘГғЛңГ”вҖ“
в—ҠГҠпЈҝГҒвҖһГғВў ЕёГҠГҒГ·ВЎГҠЕёГҠГҒГғ в—ҠГҠв—ҠпЈҝГЁГҝвҖ” В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ”H 13H
ГҒГІГҠГҒГ·вҖ” three kinds of; ВӘГҲГЎГҠв—ҠГҝГ’вҖ” evolved from the three modes of Nature; Г·ГҠп¬ӮГ’вҖ” by entities;
вҲһГҒГ·вҖ” these; вҖҡп¬ӮВёв—ҠЛңГ” entire; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this; ВЎВӘГғЛңГ” creation; в—ҠГҠпЈҝГҒвҖһUГғв—ҠЛңГ” (is) deluded; Её not; вҖўГҒГ·ВЎГҠЕёГҠГҒГғ
recognizes; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; вҲһГЁГҝвҖ” from these; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” (standing) apart; вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ” the imperishable Being.
The whole of this creation is deluded by these objects evolved from the three
modes of PrakГҰtiГіSattva, Rajas and Tamas; that is why the world fails to recognize
Me, standing apart from these, the imperishable Being.                           (13)

=== PAGE 367 ===

366
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
is wholly above these and imperishable.
In XV.18 as well the Lord declares
Himself as altogether beyond what He calls
Г«KВ¶araГӯ or perishable Matter. The same principle
which is named as Г«KВ¶araГӯ in that context has
been termed here as Г«AparГҘ PrakГҰtiГӯ and
Г«objects evolved from the three GuЖ’asГӯ. That
which has been spoken of there as Г«AkВ¶ara
PuruВ¶aГӯ, has been referred to as Г«ParГҘ PrakГҰtiГӯ
in this chapter; and what has been termed as
Г«PuruВ¶ottamaГӯ there has been referred to as
Г«MГҘmГӯ in the present context.
The Lord declared the world as deluded by the evolutes of the three GuЖ’as. This
led Arjuna to enquire whether there existed any means of getting rid of this delusion.
The All-merciful Lord, who is the inner Witness of all hearts, understood this. He, therefore,
now indicates the means of getting over His MГҘyГҘ pronouncing it as difficult to cross:
Е’Г’п¬ӮГӢ sГ”пЈҝВ·ГҠ ВӘГҲГЎГҠв—ҠГҝГӢ в—Ҡв—Ҡ в—ҠГҠГҝГҠ Е’ГҲвҒ„UГ ГҝГҝГҠвҖ“
в—ҠГҠв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ ГҝпЈҝ В¬ЛқВ¬lГЈГғпЈҝ в—ҠГҠГҝГҠв—ҠпЈҝГғГҠВў ГғвҒ„UГҒГЈГғ ГғпЈҝH 14H
Е’Г’п¬ӮГӢ most wonderful; ГҒвҖһU because; вҲһВ·ГҠ this; ВӘГҲГЎГҠв—ҠГҝГӢ consisting of the three GuЖ’as; в—Ҡв—Ҡ
My; в—ҠГҠГҝГҠ veil; Е’ГҲвҒ„UГ ГҝГҝГҠГ” (is) difficult to break through; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; ГҝпЈҝ who; В¬ЛқВ¬lГЈГғпЈҝ
constantly adore; в—ҠГҠГҝГҠв—ҠЛңГ” veil; вҲһГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” this; ГғвҒ„UГҒГЈГғ (are able to) cross; ГғпЈҝ they.
For, this most wonderful MГҘyГҘ (veil) of Mine, consisting of the three GuЖ’as
(modes of Nature), is extremely difficult to breakthrough; those, however, who
constantly adore Me alone, are able to cross it.
 (14)
He who looks upon God alone as his
supreme refuge, supreme resort, dearest object
of love and supreme goal, and regarding
everything as belonging to Him, or existing
only for His purpose, has renounced the
sense of possession and attachment in respect
of his body, wife, progeny, wealth, home
and fame etc.; nay, who uses them all only as
the means of worshipping the Lord and remains
ever satisfied with whatever is ordained for
him by God, nay, who is ever alert in carrying
out the behest of God, and remaining constantly
engaged in the remembrance of God keeps
himself ever united with Him in every way,
is regarded as constantly adoring God. This
is what is known as exclusive surrender to
God. It is only such devotees that are able to
cross MГҘyГҘ.
It is the Г«AparГҘ PrakГҰtiГӯ with its evolutes
that is referred to here as Г«MГҘyГҘГӯ. He who
having surrendered Himself to God, who is
the Lord of MГҘyГҘ, and thoroughly grasped
The word Г«EВ¶ГҘГӯ, which is a demonstrative
adjective, refers to something directly
perceptible by the senses; and PrakГҰti is
perceptible only through her evolutes. This
should be taken to mean that the same PrakГҰti,
which was referred to in the preceding verse
in the form of her evolutes under the name of
Г«GuЖ’amayaiВЁГӯ BhГҘvaiВЁ, (evolutes of the three
GuЖ’as), has been mentioned here under the
name of Г«MГҘyГҘГӯ. The GuЖ’as as well as their
evolutes in the shape of this material and
phenomenal world exist only in this MГҘyГҘ;
that is why it has been spoken of as consisting
of the three GuЖ’as. This MГҘyГҘ is not of an
ordinary type like that employed by conjurers
and demons; it is GodГӯs own most wonderful
power. That is why it has been called DaivвҲӮ
(unearthly). And, finally, by calling it Г«MineГӯ
and extremely difficult to break through, the
Lord indicates that He being the Lord of this
MГҘyГҘ, man cannot easily get over it without
taking refuge in Him.

=== PAGE 368 ===

* Chapter VII *
367
through His grace the secret of this MГҘyГҘ
has been completely dissociated from it and
has realized God, who is beyond MГҘyГҘ, is
said to have crossed the MГҘyГҘ.
Showing thus the difficulty of getting over MГҘyГҘ, the Lord declared His adoration
as the means of crossing it. The question now arises: If such is the case, how is it that
pepole do not constantly worship God? In reply to this, the Lord says:
Её в—ҠГҠВў Е’ГҲcвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғЕёГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҠвҖ” В¬ЛқВ¬lГЈГғпЈҝ ЕёвҒ„UГҠЕ“в—ҠГҠвҖ”вҖ“
в—ҠГҠГҝГҝГҠВ¬NUГғГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠ вҖўГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„ВўU Г·ГҠп¬Ӯв—ҠГҠГҒГјГҠГғГҠвҖ”H 15H
Её not; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; Е’ГҲcвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғЕёвҖ” of evil deeds; в—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҠвҖ” fools; В¬ЛқВ¬lГЈГғпЈҝ adore; ЕёвҒ„UГҠЕ“в—ҠГҠвҖ” vile among
men; в—ҠГҠГҝГҝГҠ вҖўВ¬NUГғГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠвҖ” those whose wisdom has been carried away by MГҘyГҘ; вҖўГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„в—ҠЛңГ”
demoniac; Г·ГҠп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” nature; вҖўГҠГҒГјГҠГғГҠвҖ” are of.
Those whose wisdom has been carried away by MГҘyГҘ, and who are of demoniac
nature, such foolish and vile men of evil deeds do not adore Me.
 (15)
low and reprehensible acts for obtaining
such enjoyments. The word Г«NarГҘdhamГҘВЁГӯ
refers to this type of men. The expression
Г«MГҘyayГҘpahГҰtajВӨГҘnГҘВЁГӯ denotes those whose
judgment has been warped through height of
perversity and irreverence and who, therefore,
refusing to recognize the Vedas and other
scriptures and noble teachings handed down
by tradition from preceptor to disciple, and
having no belief in God, the law of recompense
and rebirth, remain entangled in the cobweb
of fallacious and captious reasoning and
unbelief and harm others. Men of a demoniac
disposition who besides possessing the above
attributes have embraced such demoniac
propensities as hypocrisy, arrogance, pride,
harshness, lust, anger, greed, infatuation etc.,
never adore God.
The word Г«DuВ¶kГҰtinaВЁГӯ, here refers to
those who have committed sins in their past
lives and are deliberately engaged in committing
sins in their current life too. Again, those
who, far from knowing what is PrakГҰti
(Matter), what is PuruВ¶a or Spirit, what is
God, and in what relation does the individual
soul stand to God and vice versa, do not
even know, nor care to know, that the object
of human existence is to attain God and that
manГӯs primary duty is to adore Him, are
referred to here as Г«MВөuЕ’hГҘВЁГӯ. Even so there
are men who are vile in thought and deedГі
who through excess of attachment for
enjoyment, thoughtlessness and lethargy, are
wont to dissipate their lives in enjoying
the pleasures of the senses alone and are
constantly engaged in the performance of
The preceding verse stated that sinful men possessed of the demoniac nature do not
worship God. The question, therefore, arises: What type of men worship Him, then? In
reply to this, the Lord says:
ГёГғГҲГҢп¬ӮЕ“ГҠ Г·ВЎГЈГғпЈҝ в—ҠГҠВў ВЎЕёГҠвҖ” вҖҡГҲвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғЕёГҠпЈҝЛҳВЎГҲВёЕёвҖ“
вҖўГҠГғГҠпЈҝВё ГҒВЎГҙГҠГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„UГ•ГҠВёГ•ГӢВё ГҙГҠГҠЕёГӢ Гё Г·вҒ„UГғВ·ВёГ·H 16H
ГёГғГҲГҢп¬ӮЕ“ГҠвҖ” (these) four types of; Г·ВЎГЈГғпЈҝ worship; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; ВЎЕёГҠвҖ” devotees; вҖҡГҲвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғЕёвҖ” of noble
deeds; вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё O Arjuna; вҖўГҠГғВёвҖ” the afflicted; ГҒВЎГҙГҠГҠвҖҡГҲвҖ” the seeker for knowledge; вҖўГ•ГҠВёГ•ГӢВё the seeker
after worldly possessions; ГҙГҠГҠЕёГӢ The man of wisdom; Гё and; Г·вҒ„UГғВ·ВёГ· O best among the Bharatas.

=== PAGE 369 ===

368
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«SukГҰtinaВЁГӯ in this verse
refers to those who have by performing
virtuous acts through successive lives reformed
their nature and got habituated to noble
deeds, and who under the impulse of past
tendencies or through the influence of holy
association perform only noble deeds as
enjoined by the Lord in the current life too.
Virtuous acts lead to a knowledge of the
glory and greatness of God and promote
faith in Him; and faith is conducive to the
practice of Bhajana (adoration of God). This
shows that the adjective Г«SukГҰtinaВЁГӯ qualifies
all the four types of devotees referred to in
the verse. In other words, all devotees who
adore God with faith are invariably Г«virtuousГӯ,
whatever the motive of their worship.
A devotee of the Г«ArthГҘrthвҲӮГӯ type is he
who cherishes in his heart the craving for
one or more enjoyments of this world or the
next, such as the possession of a wife,
progeny, wealth, honour, eminence, fame
and heavenly bliss etc., but who depends on
God and God alone for the satisfaction of
his desire, and practises adoration with
reverence and faith for such satisfaction.
Devotees like SugrвҲӮva and VibhвҲӮВ¶aЖ’a
are recognized as belonging to this class, and
the name of Dhruva is cited as the foremost
among them. UttГҘnapГҘda, the elder son of
SvГҘyambhuva Manu, had two consorts, SunвҲӮti
and Suruci by name. SunвҲӮti gave birth to
Dhruva, and Suruci to Uttama. The king was
particularly fond of his second wife, Suruci.
One day, while child Dhruva sought the lap
of his father, he was snubbed by Suruci, who
tore him away saying, Г¬You are an unlucky
chap, having taken birth from the womb of
SunвҲӮti. Had you been intended for sharing
the royal throne, you would have been born
of me. Therefore, go and take to the worship
of вҖәrвҲӮ Hari; then alone will you gain the
object of your desireГ®. The insulting behaviour
of the stepmother cut the boy to the quick;
with tears in his eyes, he ran to his mother
SunвҲӮti and related the whole incident to her.
SunвҲӮti said, Г¬Dear child ! The remarks of
mother Suruci are quite true. Without adoring
God, you will not attain the object of your
desire.Г® Hearing the words of his mother, the
boy immediately left his home in order to
practise adoration with the motive of gaining
the kingdom. The sage NГҘrada met the boy
on the way and tried to persuade him to
return. He even told the boy that he would
get the kingdom for him; but the boy did
not swerve from his resolve. The sage then
imparted to the boy the sacred formula Г«Om
Namo Bhagavate VГҘsudevГҘyaГӯ (obeisance to
BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ ViВ¶Ж’u), taught him how to
meditate on the four-armed figure of the
Lord, and blessed him. Retiring to the forest
of Madhuvana stretching along the bank of
the JamunГҘ, the boy started his austerities.
Horrors and temptation of various kinds
came up before him to deter him from his
purpose; but nothing could shake his resolution.
At last, pleased with his devotion, the Lord
revealed Himself before the boy. Receiving
the news from DevarВ¶i NГҘrada, King
UttГҘnapГҘda, accompanied by his younger
son Uttama and the two queens, proceeded
to the forest to bring his boy back. They met
Dhruva on the way. He looked the very
embodiment of austerity. Alighting from his
elephant, the king picked up the child and
hugged him to his bosom. He brought him
back to his capital with great pomp and
festivity. At last, handing over the kingdom
to Dhruva, the king adopted the life of
Four types of devotees of noble deeds worship Me, Arjuna, the seeker after
worldly possessions, the afflicted, the seeker for knowledge, and the man of wisdom,
O best of Bharatas.                                                       (16)

=== PAGE 370 ===

* Chapter VII *
369
austere penance (VГҘnaprastha) and repaired
to the forest.
A devotee of the Г«Г…rtaГӯ type is he who
practises worship of God with absolute faith
and unflinching devotion for the alleviation of
physical or mental agony; or with a view to
securing relief from adversity, fear of enemies,
ailment, ignominy, or the fear of being attacked
by thieves, dacoits, desperadoes or beasts of
prey, getting unnerved by such fear.
The famous elephant of the Puranic
legend, the captive kings in the court of
JarГҘsandha and many others belong to this
class of devotees; but the name of DraupadвҲӮ,
the devoted and faithful consort of the
PГҘЖ’Е’avas, is cited as the foremost devotee
of this class.
Daughter of King Drupada, DraupadвҲӮ
rose from the sacrificial altar. Having a
beautiful swarthy complexion, she was also
called by the name of KГҰВ¶Ж’ГҘ. DraupadвҲӮ had
infinite virtues; she was an extremely devoted
and faithful wife, an ideal housewife, and a
true devotee of God. She knew BhagavГҘn
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a as the fullest manifestation of
Divinity,Гіas God Himself, the embodiment
to Truth, Knowledge and Bliss; and the Lord
too for His part never concealed from her
even His most secret pastimes. She was even
aware of the transcendent sports connected
with the pure Divine Love that manifested
itself in the cowherd damsels of BrindГҘvana,
and which were not known even to the
husbands and children of the blessed GopвҲӮs.
It was therefore that while being stripped off
her garment by the Kauravas she addressed
Him as the Г«Beloved of the GopвҲӮsГӯ.
Under instructions from Duryodhana,
wicked DuВЁвҖ№ГҘsana dragged her to the Kaurava
Court and began to strip her off her only
saree on her person to denude her and
finding no indication of succour from any
quarter and feeling altogether helpless DraupadвҲӮ
thought of the divine вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, her supreme
supporter and greatest friend. She had the
firm conviction in her heart that the Lord
would surely appear as soon as she remembered
Him; for it would be impossible for Him to
resist her plaintive cries. She addressed the
following appeal to the Lord:Гі
Г¬O Govinda, the Protector of cows !
O Resident of DvГҘrakГҘ ! O KГҰВ¶Ж’a, Beloved
of the GopвҲӮs ! O KeвҖ№ava ! Is it unknown to
You that I am being humiliated by the
Kauravas? O Master ! O Lord of LakВ¶mвҲӮ,
goddess of prosperity, O King of Vraja !
O Allayer of suffering ! O JanГҘrdana, save
me from floundering in the ocean of the
KauravaГӯs, tyranny ! O KГҰВ¶Ж’a ! O Attracter
of Souls ! O great YogвҲӮ! O Universal soul !
O Creator of the universe ! O Govinda !
Protect this languishing suppliant creature
fallen into the clutches of the Kauravas !Г®*
This plaintive appeal from DraupadвҲӮ
melted the heart of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, the Lord of the
universe. Overwhelmed with compassion and
leaving the bed on which He lay at DvГҘrakГҘ,
the All-merciful Lord ran to save her.вҖ 
The Lord appeared in the guise of cloth
in that devilish court of the Kauravas ! Saris
of various colours and designs began to emerge
one after another from the one which DraupadвҲӮ
had on her person as DuВЁвҖ№ГҘsana snatched at
them in his attempt to denude her. Heaps of
*
ВӘГҠпЈҝГҒп¬ӮГЈЕ’  mГҠвҒ„UвҲ‘В§ГҠп¬ӮГҠГҒвҖҡЕёЛңГ” 
вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ ВӘГҠпЈҝВ¬ГӢВЎЕёГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҖ“ вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’вҒ„Uп¬ӮГ’вҖ” В¬ГҒвҒ„UГ·ГҚГғГҠВў в—ҠГҠВў ГҒвҲ‘ВўВ§ Её ВЎГҠЕёГҠГҒвҖҡ вҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠп¬ӮH
вҖһпЈҝU 
ЕёГҠГ• 
вҖһпЈҝU 
вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠЕёГҠГ•
 п¬ӮЛқВЎЕёГҠГ•ГҠГҢГғЕёГҠвүҘГҠЕёвҖ“ вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’вҒ„Uп¬ӮГҠГЎГҠВёп¬Ӯв—ҠВӘAГҠВў 
в—ҠГҠв—ҠГҲhвҒ„USп¬Ӯ 
ВЎЕёГҠЕ’ВёЕёH
вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ в—ҠвҖһUГҠГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёЛңГ” ГҒп¬ӮEГҠГ в—ҠЕёЛңГ” ГҒп¬ӮEГ·ГҠп¬ӮЕё вҖ“ В¬ЛқВ¬ГӣГҠГҠВў В¬ГҠГҒвҖһU ВӘГҠпЈҝГҒп¬ӮГЈЕ’ вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§в—ҠГӨГҝпЈҝЛҳп¬ӮвҖҡГӢЕ’ГғГӢв—ҠЛңГ”H
(MahГҘbhГҘrata, SabhГҘparva 67)
вҖ 
Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠвүҘГҠЖ’ГҝГҠвҖҡЕёВў В¬Е’ЛңГ”ГЁГҝГҠВў вҲ‘ГҺВ§В¬ГҠвҲӮГҲвҖ” вҲ‘ГҺВ§В¬ГҝГҠГЁГҝВӘГҠГғЛңГ”вҖ“

=== PAGE 371 ===

370
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Saris were piled up in the royal court !
DraupadвҲӮГӯs dearest friend came to her rescue
in the very nick of time and saved her honour!
DuВЁвҖ№ГҘsana sank to the ground exhausted.
A devotee of the Г«JijВӨГҘsuГӯ type is he
who practises devotion to the Lord with the
sole motive of knowing God in reality
(XIV.26), caring not for wealth, women,
progeny, house and other objects and
unmindful of disease and danger.
Among devotees of this class, the names
of ParвҲӮkВ¶it and many others are mentioned;
but the name of Uddhava is the best known
of them all. Chapters VII to XXX of Book
XI of вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata embody the divine
teachings of BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a to Uddhava,
which are popularly known by the name of
Uddhava-GвҲӮtГҘ.
A devotee of the Г«JВӨГҘnвҲӮГӯ type is he who
has realized God, in whose eyes God alone
remains as the abiding reality,Гіthere is
nothing else than God,Гіand whose desires
have altogether ceased as a result of that
realization, and who therefore worships God
under the natural impulse of his heart.
вҖәrвҲӮ вҖәukadeva, Sanaka and his three
brothers, DevarВ¶i NГҘrada, BhвҲӮВ¶ma and others
are well-known figures belonging to this
category. PrahlГҘda too was recognized as a
devotee of this type even in his boyhood. He
received spiritual instruction from DevarВ¶i
NГҘrada, while he was yet in the womb of his
mother. He was sprung from the loins of the
demon king HiraЖ’yakaвҖ№ipu. HiraЖ’yakaвҖ№ipu
hated вҖәrвҲӮ Hari, while PrahlГҘda was a great
devotee of the Lord. Therefore, HiraЖ’yakaвҖ№ipu
subjected him to hard persecution. He caused
him to be bitten by poisonous snakes, trampled
under the feet of elephants, hurled from palace-
tops, thrown into the sea and offered to fire.
His teachers also tried to dispose of him. But
on every such occasion the Lord came to his
rescue. For his sake the Lord manifested
Himself in the form of a man-lion and put an
end to the bloody career or HiraЖ’yakaвҖ№ipu.
Apart from fearlessness, which was a sure
sign of PrahlГҘdaГӯs enlightenment, the sublime
teaching that he imparted to his fellow students
while receiving his schooling at the preceptorГӯs
house during his very childhood also proves
his state of enlightenment. For the beautiful
story of his life the reader is referred to the
BhГҘgavata and the ViВ¶Ж’upurГҘЖ’a.
The use of the indeclinable Г«CaГӯ at the
end of the verse is intended to distinguish
the JВӨГҘnвҲӮ from the other types of devotees
and also to bring out his superiority over the
rest. The glory of the JВӨГҘnвҲӮ Bhakta discussed
in verses 17, 18 and 19 below has been
adumbrated by the use of this indeclinable.
Devotees who worship God in any
form or shape with unflinching faith are all
noble souls. It is therefore that the Lord
refers to all the four types of devotees as
Г«virtuousГӯ in this and Г«nobleГӯ in the eighteenth
verse. But if we assess the relative value of
each type according to the spirit of this verse,
it will appear that the Г«Г…rtaГӯ type of devotees
is superior to the Г«ArthГҘrthвҲӮГӯ, and Г«JijВӨГҘsuГӯ
to 
the 
Г«Г…rtaГӯ, 
the 
JВӨГҘnвҲӮ 
being
superior even to the Г«JijВӨГҘsuГӯ. For the ArthГҘrthвҲӮ
worships God for the sake of worldly
enjoyments, taking them to be the source of
happiness. He is not fully conversant with
the glory of God; that is why he does not
develop full love for God, and that is why
he craves for enjoyments. A devotee of the
Г«Г…rtaГӯ type asks nothing from God for the
sake of enjoyment. Although this proves that
he loves God more than the Г«ArthГҘrthвҲӮГӯ, his
love is certainly shared to some extent by
bodily comforts, honour, fame, etc. It is
therefore that when faced with a grave
danger or ignominy he cries out to God for
protection against the same. A devotee of the
Г«JijВӨГҘsuГӯ type neither seeks pleasure or

=== PAGE 372 ===

* Chapter VII *
371
enjoyment nor loses his nerve in the face of
worldly danger. His only interest lies in
knowing the truth about God. This shows
that although he has no attachment for
worldly enjoyments, the craving for liberation
nevertheless lingers in Him. Therefore, his
love, though distinct from and higher than
that of the Г«ArthГҘrthвҲӮГӯ, and the Г«Г…rtaГӯ types
of devotees, is yet deficient as compared to
the love of the Г«JВӨГҘnвҲӮГӯ. The Г«JВӨГҘnвҲӮГӯ, however,
who knows the truth of the integral Divinity,
constantly and lovingly adores God as a
matter course, without any other motive or
interest. Therefore, he is the best of all.
Addressing Arjuna as the best among
the Bharatas the Lord seeks to indicate that
he was a Г«virtuousГӯ man, and was therefore
already engaged in the practice of adoration.
Referring thus to the four types of devotees, the Lord now proceeds to praise the Divine
Love possessed by the Г«JВӨГҘnвҲӮГӯ, and establishes his superiority over the other types of devotees.
ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠВў ГҙГҠГҠЕёГӢ ГҒЕёГ ГҝГҝГҲQВ§ вҲһвҲ‘В§Г·ГҒQВ§ГҢп¬ӮГҒвүҘГҠcГҝГғпЈҝвҖ“
ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝГҠпЈҝ ГҒвҖһU ГҙГҠГҠГҒЕёЕёГҠпЈҝЛҳГ ГҝГ•Вёв—ҠвҖһВўU вҖҡ Гё в—Ҡв—Ҡ ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҖ”H 17H
ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of these; ГҙГҠГҠЕёГӢ the man of wisdom; ГҒЕёГ ГҝГҝГҲQВ§вҖ”Г” ever established in Me; вҲһвҲ‘В§Г·ГҒQВ§вҖ”
possessed of exclusive devotion; ГҒп¬ӮГҒвүҘГҠcГҝГғпЈҝ excels; ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҖ” dear; ГҒвҖһU for; ГҙГҠГҠГҒЕёЕёвҖ” to the enlightened
devotee (who knows Me in reality); вҖўГ ГҝГ•Вёв—ҠЛңГ” extremely; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I (am); вҖҡвҖ” he (the enlightened
devotee); Гё and; в—Ҡв—Ҡ to Me; ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҖ” (is) extremely dear.
Of these, the best is the man of wisdom, ever established in Me and possessed
of exclusive devotion. For, I am extremely dear to the wise man (who knows Me
in reality), and he is extremely dear to Me.                                 (17)
altogether freed from all attachments and
desires, and are merged wholly in God,Гі
who can measure the depth of love such a
devotee cherishes for the Lord. He who has
renounced for the sake of God all craving for
the pleasures and enjoyments of this world
and the next, which are so dear and agreeable
and extremely rare in the eyes of worldly
minded men,Гіothers cannot even imagine
how dearly such a devotee loves the Lord and
in what great esteem he holds Him. That is
why the Lord says in this verse, Г¬Extremely
dear am I to the man of wisdom.Г® And it goes
without saying that he who holds God so dear
should be extremely dear to God. For, in the
first place, God Himself is an embodiment of
Love by His very nature,* Nay, it is from a
drop of that boundless ocean of nectarine love
The word Г«NityayuktaВЁГӯ refers to him
who is ever and constantly established in
God alone, having lost all consciousness of
the world, of his own body, nay, of his very
Г«selfГӯ; and the word Г«EkabhaktiВЁГӯ stands for
him who cherishes motiveless and concentrated
love for God alone. The man of wisdom,
who knows the truth about God, has both
these virtues fully developed in him; it is
therefore that the two adjectives have been
used with reference to him.
A devotee who has fully realized the
truth and mysteries of God, who sees everything
as God, and beholds Him everywhere and at
every time, nay, in whose eyes nothing remains
apart from God, and whose mind and intellect,
having realized God as the sole and supreme
Reality and the most beloved of all, are
*
вҒ„UвҖҡГҠпЈҝ п¬ӮГ’ вҖҡвҖ”вҖ“ вҒ„UвҖҡГ¶sГ”пЈҝп¬ӮГҠГҝВў вҲӮUГ©ГӨп¬ӮГҠЛҳЛҳЕёГЈЕ’ГӢ Г·п¬ӮГҒГғH (TaittirвҲӮya UpaniВ¶ad II.7)
Г¬God is love absolute; it is from this love that soul derives its joyГ®.

=== PAGE 373 ===

372
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
that the entire creation derives its joy.
Secondly, it has been proclaimed by the Lord:
Г¬Howsoever men approach Me, even so do
I seek them.Г® What wonder, then, that God
should bestow His utmost love on such a
devotee? It is therefore that He says: Г¬Such a
devotee is extremely dear to Me.Г®
Showing the height and depth of love
possessed by the God-realized devotee, who
has full knowledge of the virtues, glory and
reality of God, the present verse praises him
as the best of all devotees.
The Lord declared the enlightened devotee as the best of all, and extremely dear
to Him. One may ask here: Does this mean that the other types of devotees are not so
good and dear to Him? In reply to this, the Lord says:
В©UЕ’ГҠвҒ„UГҠвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮВё вҲһп¬ӮГ’ГғпЈҝ ГҙГҠГҠЕёГӢ Г п¬ӮГҠГ в—ҠГ’п¬Ӯ в—ҠпЈҝ в—ҠГғв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖўГҠГҒSГ•ГғвҖ” вҖҡ ГҒвҖһU ГҝГҲQВ§ГҠГ в—ҠГҠ в—ҠГҠв—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲГ»ГҠв—ҠГҠВў ВӘГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 18H
В©UЕ’ГҠвҒ„UГҠвҖ” (are) noble; вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёГ” all; вҲһп¬Ӯ verily; вҲһГғпЈҝ these; ГҙГҠГҠЕёГӢ the man of wisdom; ГғГҲ however;
вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠ self; вҲһп¬Ӯ indeed; в—ҠпЈҝ My; в—ҠГғв—ҠЛңГ” (such is My) belief; вҖўГҠГҒSГ•ГғвҖ” (is) firmly established; вҖҡвҖ”
he (the enlightened devotee); ГҒвҖһU for; ГҝГҲQВ§ГҠГ в—ҠГҠ having his mind and intellect merged in Me;
в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” (in) Me; вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; вҖўЕёГҲГ»ГҠв—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the highest; ВӘГҒГғв—ҠГ”ЛңГ” goal.
Indeed, all these are noble, but the man of wisdom is My very Self: such is
My view. For such a devotee, who has his mind and intellect merged in Me, is firmly
established in Me alone, the highest goal.
 (18)
but she would seek if from her beloved
husband alone. She would not even cast a
glance at another, much less rely on another,
nor does she know anyone else. Even so the
devotees referred to above depend on God
and God alone. That is why the Lord calls
them all as noble. It is therefore that He says
in verse 23: Г¬My devotees, howsoever they
worship Me, in the end come to Me alone.Г®
Such is the fruit of devotion to God proclaimed
in IX.25 as well.
The indeclinable Г«TuГӯ is intended to
differentiate the Г«JВӨГҘnвҲӮГӯ from the other types
of devotees mentioned above. It shows that
even though all of them are good and dear to
the Lord, the man of wisdom excels them all.
By calling the JВӨГҘnвҲӮ His own self, the
Lord shows that there is no difference
whatsoever between the man of wisdom and
Himself. Such a devotee is the same as God,
and God is the same as the devotee; there
is absolute identity between the two.
Among the four types of devotees referred
to in this context, the man of wisdom being
unquestionably the best, the other three, viz.,
the Г«ArthГҘrthвҲӮГӯ, the Г«Г…rtaГӯ and the Г«JijВӨГҘsuГӯ
too, are devoted to the worship of God and
possess firm and supreme faith in Him. They
have definitely come to the conclusion that
God is almighty, omniscient, the universal
Lord, supremely compassionate and the greatest
friend, and  that their hopes and aspirations
can be realized through Him and Him alone.
Armed with this conviction and knowledge,
they give up dependence on everything else
and devote their life to practices such as the
worship and remembrance, adoration and
service of the Lord. They scrupulously refrain
from doing anything which may weaken
their faith in God even to the slightest degree.
Their desires have not altogether ceased; but
they seek their fulfilment from God and God
alone. It is not unnatural for a devoted and
faithful wife to want something for herself;

=== PAGE 374 ===

* Chapter VII *
373
Such a devotee ever remains constantly
and unshakably fixed in God, regarding Him
alone as the supreme and ultimate goal and
the supreme refuge. This is what is meant
by his being Г¬firmly established in God, the
highest goal.Г®
Now, in order to show the rarity of such an enlightened devotee, the Lord says:
вҖҷвҖһГҚЕёГҠВў ВЎГЈв—ҠЕёГҠв—ҠГЈГғпЈҝ ГҙГҠГҠЕёп¬ӮГҠГЈв—ҠГҠВў В¬ЛқВ¬lГғпЈҝвҖ“
п¬ӮГҠвҖҡГҲЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮВёГҒв—ҠГҒГғ вҖҡ в—ҠвҖһUГҠГ в—ҠГҠ вҖҡГҲЕ’ГҲвҲӮВёUГ·вҖ”H 19H
вҖҷвҖһГҚЕёГҠв—ҠЛң ВЎГЈв—ҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of a series of births; вҖўГЈГғпЈҝГ” in the very last; ГҙГҠГҠЕёп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” the enlightened person;
в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; В¬ЛқВ¬lГғпЈҝ worships; п¬ӮГҠвҖҡГҲЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮвҖ” (is) God; вҖҡп¬ӮВёв—ҠЛңГ” all (this); ГҹГҒГғ thus; вҖҡвҖ” that; в—ҠвҖһUГҠГ в—ҠГҠ exalted
soul; вҖҡГҲЕ’ГҲвҲӮВёUГ·вҖ” (is) very rare.
In the very last of all births the enlightened person worships Me, realizing
that all this is God. Such a great soul is very rare, indeed.
 (19)
Г«VijВӨГҘnaГӯ has been praised in verse 2 of this
chapter; and the word Г«JВӨГҘnavГҘnГӯ refers to
the loving devotee who has attained that
knowledge, viz., the knowledge of Brahma
without attributes, together with Г«VijВӨГҘnaГӯ or
the knowledge of qualified Brahma with and
without form, and of whom verse 3 says:
Г¬Some rare one knows Me in reality.Г® It is
for this reason that in verse 18 the Lord
speaks of him as His very self.
The whole creation is a manifestation
of God, and there is nothing apart from God:
to perceive this truth directly once for all,
and to remain ever established in it is to
worship Him realizing that Г¬All this is God.Г®
People in the world do not in the first
place conceive a liking for the practice of
adoration. If a rare one among thousands takes
a fancy to it, his nature compels him to relax
his efforts and therefore to give up the practice
altogether. Even if a man puts forth a special
effort, through deficiency of faith and devotion
he continues to divert it towards the satisfaction
of his desires, with the result that he too fails
to realize God. This proves that God-realized
souls are very rare in this world. Hence it is
but reasonable to assume that exalted souls
of the type referred to above are very difficult
to get in this world.
The very birth in which a man attains
the rank of an enlightened devotee is the last
of his many births. For having realized God
in this way one is never born again. That
constitutes his last birth.
One is apt to interpret the first half of
this verse to mean that man attains the rank
of an enlightened devotee only after practising
devotion with an interested motive for
successive births. Such an interpretation,
however, would make it inevitable for devotees
of the Г«ArthГҘrthвҲӮГӯ, Г«Г…rtaГӯ and Г«JiВӨГҘsuГӯ types
to go through many rounds of births. But
such a view is negatived by a number of
statements of the Lord in which He says that
all types of His devotees attain Him (VII.23;
IX.25); and nowhere in that connection does
He lay it down as compulsory for them to
go through a number of births. Of course,
in the event of his practice being slack
through deficiency of faith and love a devotee
may have to go through many births; but if
his faith and love are highly developed and
his practice is intense, he can realize God
in one single birth. Time is no determining
factor here.
The word Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ forming part of
Г«JВӨГҘnavГҘnГӯ refers to the same wisdom the
attainment of which along with that of

=== PAGE 375 ===

374
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
If anyone comes in contact with such
a noble soul, he should be regarded as
exceptionally fortunate. DevarВ¶i NГҘrada says
in this Г«Aphorisms on BhaktiГӯ:Гі
в—ҠвҖһUГ вҖҡXГ”USГғГҲ 
Е’ГҲвҲӮВёUГ·ГҠпЈҝЛҳВӘГӘГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳв—ҠГҠпЈҝГүГҠpH29H
Г¬Association with great souls is not
only rare but hard to obtain, though unfailing
in its effect.Г®
In verse 15 it was stated that men of a demoniac disposition who are given to evil deeds
do not worship God; while in verses 16 to 19 we were told that virtuous men worship God.
The Lord now proceeds to speak of those who, though performing noble deeds, are yet
swayed by desire and worship other gods according to the prompting of their own nature.
вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГ’SГғГ’SГғГ’NВёГғГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠвҖ” 
В¬ЛқВ¬lГЈГғпЈҝЛҳГЈГҝЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ГғВў ГғВў ГҒЕёГҝв—Ҡв—ҠГҠSГ•ГҠГҝ В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§Г ГҝГҠ ГҒЕёГҝГғГҠвҖ” Sп¬ӮГҝГҠГ”H 20H
вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГ’вҖ” ГғГ’вҖ” ГғГ’вҖ” by various desires; NГғГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠвҖ”Г” having their wisdom carried away; В¬ЛқВ¬lГЈГғпЈҝ
worship; вҖўГЈГҝЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ” other deities; Гғв—ҠЛңГ” Гғв—ҠЛңГ” ГҒЕёГҝв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” vows relating to each deity; вҖўГҠSГ•ГҠГҝ
undertaking; В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§Г ГҝГҠ nature; ГҒЕёГҝГғГҠвҖ” prompted; Sп¬ӮГҝГҠ by their own.
Those whose wisdom has been carried away by various desires, being prompted
by their own nature, worship other deities, adopting rules/rites relating to each.     (20)
other hand, devotees who worship God and
whose wisdom has been spoken of in the
present verse as carried away by various
forms of desires are endowed with faith and
eligible for the celestial abode (VII.23; IX.25)
and are believed to possess a nature
predominantly SГҘttvika with a mixture of
Rajas. Thus there is a world of difference
between the two types of men described in
the two verses.
Actions performed by an individual
through successive births leave their impressions
behind, which are stored in the mind. The
sum-total of these impressions goes to constitute
what is known as the nature of that individual.
This is what is referred to here by the word
Г«PrakГҰtyГҘГӯ. Each individual possesses a
distinctive nature of his or her own. The
inclination that one feels in oneГӯs mind to
worship different deities is what is meant by
being prompted by that nature.
The deities referred to in this verse are
the sun-god, the moon-god, the gods of fire,
air, water and death, Indra, the Lord of
paradise, and other gods mentioned in the
The repetition of the word Г«TaiВЁГӯ in this
verse shows that the desires of all persons
are not of a uniform character. These desires
of a heterogeneous character cloud the vision
of man, who is at a loss to understand who
he is, what is his duty, what is the relation
between God and the individual soul, what
is the purpose of human life and what is it
that distinguishes human life from other
lives, and fails to realize that his salvation
lies in the practice of adoration, rather than
in getting lost in enjoyments. This obscuration
of judgment is what is meant by oneГӯs
wisdom being carried away by various desires.
The worshippers of gods referred to in
this verse should not be confused with those
who have been spoken of as Г«MГҘyayГҘpahГҰta-
jВӨГҘnГҘВЁГӯ in verse 15 on account of the expression
Г«HГҰtajВӨГҘnГҘВЁГӯ used with reference to them.
Those referred to in verse 15 have been
characterized by the Lord as sinful, stupid,
vile among men and possessed of a demoniac
disposition. This shows that the element of
Tamas is predominant in them; hence they
are liable to damnation (XVI.16, 19). On the

=== PAGE 376 ===

* Chapter VII *
375
scriptures. By rules relating to the worship of
each are meant the various rules connected
with Japa or muttering of the Mantra sacred
to each deity, meditation, adoration, salutation,
NyГҘsa (assigning the component parts of a
Mantra to the various limbs of oneГӯs body),
Havana (pouring oblations into the sacred
fire), vows and fasts, etc., forming part of
such worship. The rules of worship etc., vary
according to the desire actuating the mind of
the worshipper, and the nature of the deity
worshipped; that is why the word Г«TamГӯ has
been used twice in the verse.
There is one more point worth
remembering in this connection. A man is
said to worship some other deity only when
he views the deity as apart from God, the
supreme Deity. If, however, he worships the
deity as no other than God and in accordance
with His commands, either disinterestedly or
with a view to pleasing God, he actually
worships God Himself rather than any other
deity, and the reward of such worship too
is God-realization.
The next two verses tell us how and in what form are the worshippers of gods rewarded
for their worship:
ГҝГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠВў ГҝГҠВў ГғЕёГҲВў Г·QВ§вҖ” ГјГҠhГҝГҠГҢГёГғГҲГҒв—ҠГ«ВҝUГҒГғвҖ“
ГғSГҝ ГғSГҝГҠГёвҲӮUГҠВў ГјГҠhГҠВў ГғГҠв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ ГҒп¬ӮЕ’Е“ГҠГӘГҝвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”H 21H
ГҝвҖ” ГҝвҖ” who so; ГҝГҠв—ҠЛңГ” ГҝГҠв—ҠЛңГ” whatever; ГғЕёГҲв—ҠЛңГ” (celestial) form; Г·QВ§вҖ” devotee (craving for some
return); ГјГҠhГҝГҠ with reverence; вҖўГҢГёГғГҲв—ҠЛңГ” to worship; ГҹГ«ВҝUГҒГғ seeks; ГғSГҝ ГғSГҝ of that particular
devotee; вҖўГёвҲӮUГҠв—ҠЛңГ” stable; ГјГҠhГҠв—ҠЛңГ” faith; ГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” вҲһп¬Ӯ in that very form; ГҒп¬ӮЕ’Е“ГҠГҒв—Ҡ render; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I.
Whatever celestial form a devotee (craving for some worldly object) chooses
to worship with reverence, I stabilize the faith of that particular devotee in that very
form.                                                                   (21)
repeating the Mantra sacred to that particular
deity as many times as is laid down in the
scriptures. The devotees should also perform
sacrifice offering oblations to the sacred fire
in the name of the deity, meditate on his or
her form, adore the Sun, Moon, Fire and
other gods whose physical forms are directly
perceptible to the eyes, and offer them
obeisance etc. This is what is meant by
worshipping the gods with faith.
The demonstrative adjective Г«TГҘmГӯ
occurring in the second half of this verse has
been connected with Г«TanumГӯ in the first half,
instead of being taken to quality the noun
Г«вҖәraddhГҘmГӯ in the second half, which is more
proximate to it, only because Г«TГҘmГӯ is a
correlative of Г«YГҘmГӯ and these two always
go together according to the rules of SaвүҲskГҰta
grammer (ГҝГ»ГҠЕ’ГҠпЈҝГҢЕёГ ГҝвҖҡГӘвҖҷГЈЕ“вҖ”). Even if it is taken
The use of the words Г«YaВЁГӯ and Г«YГҘmГӯ
twice in this verse is intended to bring out
the diversity both of the devotees and the
deities worshipped by them. This shows that
there are various types of devotees with
interested motives, and the deities they worship
are also numerous varying according to the
desire and temperament of those devotees.
The word Г«вҖәraddhayГҘГӯ in this verse
implies unmitigated faith in the existence of
divine intelligences, in their glory and virtues,
and in the methods of their worship and its
rewards. Endowed with such faith the
worshipper instals with due ceremony an
image made of metal or wood, clay or stone
according to the pattern laid down in the
scriptures, or a painting, or as an alternative
forms a mental picture, and offers worship
with prescribed articles according to rules,

=== PAGE 377 ===

376
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
to qualify Г«вҖәraddhГҘmГӯ it will make no
difference in the sense of the verse; for in
that case it will have to be construed as Г«directed
towards that particular god (ГғГ»ГҠГ»ГҠЕёГҲГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҒГҝГЎГҠГӢв—ҠЛңГ”)Гӯ
вҖҡ ГғГҝГҠ ГјГҠhГҝГҠ ГҝГҲQВ§SГғSГҝГҠвҒ„UГҠЕ“Еёв—ҠГӢвҖһUГғпЈҝвҖ“
вҲӮUГ·ГғпЈҝ Гё ГғГғвҖ” вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠГЈв—ҠГҝГ’п¬Ӯ ГҒп¬ӮГҒвҖһUГғГҠГҒГЈвҖһU ГғГҠЕёЛңГ”H 22H
вҖҡвҖ” he (the devotee referred to in the preceding verse); ГғГҝГҠ ГјГҠhГҝГҠ with such faith;
ГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” endowed; ГғSГҝ of that particular deity (whom he chooses to worship); вҖўГҠвҒ„UГҠЕ“Еёв—ҠЛңГ” worship;
ГҹВёвҖһUГғпЈҝ undertakes; вҲӮUГ·ГғпЈҝ obtains; Гё and; ГғГғвҖ” through that deity; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠЕёЛңГ” desired enjoyments;
в—ҠГҝГҠ by Me; вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; ГҒп¬ӮГҒвҖһUГғГҠЕёЛңГ” ordained; ГҒвҖһU verily; ГғГҠЕёЛңГ” those.
Endowed with such faith, he worships that particular deity and obtains through
that deity without doubt his desired enjoyments, as verily ordained by Me.           (22)
of administration in a well established
Government. If such an officer desires to
reward the services of an individual, he can
bestow only as much as the individual is entitled
to receive under rules for such services, and
as the officer is empowered to give.
Some people in this verse connect the
word Г«HitГҘnГӯ (conducive to good) with Г«KГҘmГҘnГӯ
(enjoyments). But such an interpretation will
be unwarranted for the simple reason that
objects of enjoyment are anything but conducive
to the interests of anyone in the real sense
of the term.
In this verse the Lord shows that equipped
with the faith stabilized by Him the devotee
worships the deity of his choice according to
the rules laid down in the scriptures, and as
a reward for such worship obtains from the
deity only such of his coveted enjoyments as
have been preordained by the Lord. The
celestials have not been authorized to give
either more or less than what is ordained by
the Lord. This shows that the position of the
celestials in the divine government is more or
less similar to that of constitutionally functioning
officers presiding over different departments
Now, disparaging the fruit of worship of other gods referred to above as perishable,
the Lord glorifies the reward of His own worship.
вҖўГЈГғп¬ӮГ»ГҠГҲ В»В§вҲӮВўU ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠВў Гғjп¬ӮГ ГҝГҖВ¬в—ҠпЈҝЕ“вҖҡГҠв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠГЈЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮГҝВЎГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ в—ҠjQВ§ГҠ ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ в—ҠГҠв—ҠГҒВ¬Г”H 23H
вҖўГЈГғп¬ӮГғЛңГ” having an end, perishable; ГғГҲ however; В»В§вҖ№в—ҠЛңГ” fruit; ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” by these; ГғГғЛңГ” that; Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ
is; вҖўГҖВ¬в—ҠпЈҝЕ“вҖҡГҠв—ҠЛңГ” people of small understanding; Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” the gods; Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҝВЎвҖ” the worshippers of
gods; ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ attain; в—ҠjQВ§ГҠвҖ” My devotees (howsoever they worship Me); ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ (eventually)
come; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” to Me; вҖўГҒВ¬ alone.
The fruit gained by these people of small understanding, however, is perishable.
The worshippers of gods attain the gods; whereas My devotees, howsoever they
worship Me, eventually come to Me and Me alone.                        (23)
and have been denounced in verse 15 as
stupid and possessed of a devilish disposition,
inasmuch as they are not addicted to sin and
worship the higher intelligences according to
the procedure laid down in the scriptures,
Though disparaged as Г¬men of small
understandingГ®, the worshippers of gods
referred to in this verse are far superior to the
vile men who while abstaining from the
worship of God are engaged in sinful acts,

=== PAGE 378 ===

* Chapter VII *
377
and are neither wholly devoid of intelligence
nor possessed of a demoniac nature. They
are certainly inferior to the devotees of God
and deficient in intellect inasmuch as they
worship the other deities as apart from God,
and that too under the prompting of desires
and for obtaining objects of enjoyment. Had
their intellect not been deficient, they would
have certainly grasped the truth that it is God
Himself who in the form of so many deities
receives all kinds of worship and oblations
offered into the sacred fire that God alone is
the supreme Lord of all (V.29; IX.24). It is
because of this deficiency of intellect that
they obtain an utterly insignificant and
perishable reward for their sacrificial
performances 
and 
other 
stupendous
undertakings involving such arduous labour.
Had they been wise and taken so much pains
over the worship of God Himself with a
sense of His glory, or had they worshipped
the other deities as identical with the supreme
Deity and with a view to pleasing Him, They
could have attained with that much labour
that great and rare fruit wherein lies the
fulfilment of human existence.
Reaching the abode of the deity
worshipped by them the devotees of gods
attain nearness of the deity and a form similar
to that of the deity and obtain celestial
enjoyments peculiar to that region; that is
what is meant by attaining the gods. This is
the highest fruit obtained through worship of
the gods; but all worshippers of gods do not
obtain even this fruit. Many of them, who
take to such worship for obtaining trivial and
momentary enjoyments like the possession of
a wife, progeny, wealth, honour and distinction
etc., do not go beyond obtaining their desired
objects of enjoyment. A few of them whose
faith in their chosen deity has particularly
developed and who love the deity more than
the enjoyments of the world and remember
the object of worship at the moment of death,
migrate to the celestial worlds. But it should
be borne in mind that the gods, the enjoyments
obtained through them, and the worlds
inhabited by them are all perishable. It is
therefore that the fruit of their worship has
been denounced as Г«perishableГӯ.
Constant residence by the side of the
Lord in His own supreme eternal divine
Abode, or union with God through identity
with Him, both these are covered by the term
Г¬God-realization.Г® In the eyes of the devotee
of the enlightened type the whole world is a
manifestation of God, so that he is already
united with God at all times; hence the question
of attaining God does not arise in his case at
all. The devotee of the Г«JijВӨГҘsuГӯ type too,
seeking as he does to know the truth about
God, realizes Him as soon as the knowledge
of that Truth dawns upon him. As for the
other two types, viz., the ArthГҘrthвҲӮ and the
Г…rta, they too attain none else than God
through His grace. God is supremely merciful
and the greatest friend of a soul. He does
only that which is conducive to the best
interests of the devotee,Гіwhich ensures his
speedy access to Him. He sternly refuses to
grant the prayer or avert the calamity of a
devotee, even though the latter is insistent in
his demand through ignorance, if by granting
that prayer or averting that danger He should
really be doing a disservice to him. He fulfils
only those desires the satisfaction of which
enhances the devoteeГӯs faith in, and love for
the Lord. In this way the devotees of God,
besides realizing the object of their desire,
eventually succeed in realizing God Himself.
The use of the word Г«ApiГӯ at the end of the
verse is intended to bring out this point.
In case a devotee having once forged a
devotional link with God, with whatever object
it may be, seeks to undo it, it is GodГӯs nature
not to allow him to do so. Herein lies the

=== PAGE 379 ===

378
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
glory of devotion to God. Having conferred
on the devotee the object of his desire, or
even withholding such object from him, if
the same is likely to prove injurious in the
long run, the spirit of devotion of God does
not die. It stays in a dormant state within the
heart to the devotee, and draws him to God
whenever an opportunity presents itself. The
boon of devotion once obtained, through
whatever cause it may be, does not leave the
devotee, even after many births, till it has
brought him face to face with God. And once
the devotee has realized God, the question of
remission of devotion does not arise at all. In
that state the devotee, the spirit of devotion
and the deity become indistinguishably one.
The question here arises: If God is so full of love, and such a boundless ocean of
mercy, that He invariably vouchsafes His realization to his worshippers howsoever they
may worship Him, how is it that all of us do not take to His worship? In reply to this
query, the Lord says:
вҖўвҲҡГҝQВўВ§ вҲҡГҝГҒQВ§в—ҠГҠВ¬ГӣГҠВў в—ҠГЈГҝГЈГғпЈҝ в—ҠГҠв—ҠвҖҷГҲhГҝвҖ”Г”вҖ“
В¬вҒ„ВўU 
Г·ГҠп¬Ӯв—ҠВЎГҠЕёГЈГғГҠпЈҝ 
в—Ҡв—ҠГҠвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЕёГҲГ»ГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ”H 24H
вҖўвҲҡГҝQВ§в—ҠЛңГ” beyond the reach of mind and senses; вҲҡГҝГҒQВ§в—ҠЛңГ” вҖўГҠВ¬ГӣГҠв—ҠЛңГ” to have assumed a finite
form through birth (as an ordinary human being); в—ҠГЈГҝГЈГғпЈҝ believe; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” My; вҖўвҖҷГҲhГҝвҖ” the ignorant;
В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” supreme; Г·ГҠп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” nature; вҖўВЎГҠЕёГЈГғвҖ” not knowing; в—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” Me (the supreme Spirit who is all
truth, all knowledge and all bliss); вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ” undecaying; вҖўЕёГҲГ»ГҠв—Ҡв—ҠГ”ЛңГ” unsurpassable.
Not knowing My supreme nature, unsurpassable and undecaying, the ignorant
persons regard Me, the supreme Spirit beyond the reach of mind and senses, the
embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss, to have assumed a finite form through
birth (as an ordinary human being).                                                 (24)
His protection out of His infinite compassion
and love for the suppliant that the Lord
manifests Himself in various forms with all
His power, maintaining His character as the
unborn, imperishable, supreme Lord, and
plunges the entire creation in an unbounded
and unruffled ocean of supreme joy through
His transcendent sports. This is what has
been referred to here as the eternal, unsurpassed
and supreme nature of God.
Being altogether beyond the ken of the
material mind and senses, both the Absolute
and the Qualified aspects of God are really
unmanifest and supersensuous. God Almighty,
who is unborn immortal and unmanifest,
manifests Himself before the world in human
and other forms, concealing His identity
behind the veil of His YogamГҘyГҘ; His
The word Г«AbuddhayaВЁГӯ refers to the
ignorant people who have no faith in the
virtues, glory, reality and sports etc., of the
Lord, and whose intellect is not only clouded
with infatuation and bewildered by thoughts
of the world but is also wholly enmeshed
in the web of sophistry. It is something
beyond their comprehension that the entire
creation is but an amplification of the twofold
Nature of God, and that being the ultimate
substratum of this twofold nature, God alone
is supreme, and there is none who surpasses
Him. His inconceivable and indescribable
reality, character, glory and incomparable
virtues cannot be rightly grasped through
mind or described through speech. It is just
in order to extend His helping hand to the
creatures of this world and take them under

=== PAGE 380 ===

* Chapter VII *
379
reality, therefore, remains practically unmanifest
all the time. It is therefore that ignorant men,
who have no knowledge of the truth,
mysteries, virtues, and glory of the Lord,
instead of regarding Him as the unborn and
immortal Deity, who is beyond the reach of
the mind and senses, look upon Him as an
ordinary human being having a finite form.
Those who are inclined to the parochial
view that God is ever unmanifest and
unqualified and can never manifest Himself,
are apt to take this verse to mean that Г¬only
ignorant men look upon God who is really
unmanifest, i.e., formless and absolute, as
having assumed a qualified and concrete
human form.Г® But this interpretation does not
appear to be sound, inasmuch as both the
Qualified and Absolute aspects of God are
approved and recognized by the scriptures.
The Lord Himself says, Г¬Though unborn
and immortal, and the Lord of all beings,
I embody Myself forth from age to age,
keeping My Nature (PrakГҰti) under control,
for protecting the virtuous, destroying the
evil-doers, and establishing Dharma on a
firm footing and so on (IV.6, 7 and 8). The
alternative interpretation given above, therefore,
conflicts with this statement of the Lord and
demolishes the doctrine of Divine Descent,
which can never be the intention of the GвҲӮtГҘ.
Neither can the verse be interpreted to
mean that Г¬Only ignorant fools hold God
with attributes appearing in a visible human
form as unmanifest, that is, without attributes
and without form.Г® For the same Lord who
is visible in an embodied form with attributes
is also without form and attributes. Therefore,
how can a man who knows this real truth
be dubbed as ignorant ? The Lord Himself
says: Г¬All this is pervaded by Me in My
unmanifest aspect (IX.4).Г® Therefore, the
construction that has been put upon
this verse appears to be the only sound
interpretation.
It may be asked here: Why do people regard the Almighty Lord, appearing in human
form, as an ordinary mortal? In reply to this, the Lord says:
ЕёГҠвҖһВўU В¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҠвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮВёSГҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠГҠГҝГҠвҖҡв—ҠГҠп¬ӮГҺГғвҖ”Г”вҖ“
в—ҠГҚвҖҰГҠпЈҝЛҳГҝВў ЕёГҠГҒГ·ВЎГҠЕёГҠГҒГғ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠв—ҠВЎв—ҠвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ”H 25H
Её (am) not; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; В¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҠвҖ” manifest; вҖҡп¬ӮВёSГҝ to all; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠГҠГҝГҠвҖҡв—ҠГҠп¬ӮГҺГғвҖ” veiled by (My)
YogamГҘyГҘ (divine potency); в—ҠГҚвҖҰUвҖ” ignorant; вҖўГҝв—ҠЛңГ” this; Её not; вҖўГҒГ·ВЎГҠЕёГҠГҒГғ recognizes; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§вҖ”Г”
world; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; вҖўВЎв—ҠЛңГ” unborn; вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ” (and) imperishable.
Veiled by My YogamГҘyГҘ (divine potency), I am not manifest to all. Hence these
ignorant folk fail to recognize Me, the unborn and imperishable Supreme Deity (i.e.,
consider Me as subject to birth and death).                               (25)
when he impersonates another character
disguises his identity through his MГҘyГҘ or
histrionic tricks. This is what is meant by the
Lord being veiled by Г«YogamГҘyГҘГӯ.
When the Lord keeps Himself veiled by
His YogamГҘyГҘ, the vision of ordinary men
cannot pierce that veil; hence the majority
of men regard Him as an ordinary human
The word Г«YogamГҘyГҘГӯ denotes that
divine potency of God by which He appears
in and conceals various forms, and which is
referred to asГіГ…tma-Г«MГҘyГҘГӯ in IV.6, When
the Lord manifests Himself in a human or
other such form, He spreads the charm of
this MГҘyГҘ all about Himself and remains
hidden behind this veil, even as an actor

=== PAGE 381 ===

380
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
being like themselves. This is what is meant
by His not being manifest to all. He reveals
His identity to those alone who are His
loving devotees and possess full faith in an
reverence for His virtues, glory, true character
and pastimes, and to whom He desires to
make Himself known.
In common parlance we speak of the
sun being veiled by the cloud; but, in reality,
the sun never gets veiled, only the vision of
people is obstructed by the cloud. If the sun
got really veiled, there could be no light
anywhere in any part of the universe. Even
so, God is never really veiled by MГҘyГҘ; if
He got veiled, no devotee could ever gain
a true vision of God. It is only with reference
to the foolish and ignorant folk that he is
said to be veiled. As a matter of fact, even
the analogy of the sun does not apply to
God; for a finite thing can never bear
comparison with the infinite. The illustration
of the sun has been employed only to convey
a rough idea of the truth.
The use of the demonstrative adjective
Г«AyamГӯ before Г«LokaВЁГӯ indicates that the
words refer to all kinds of ordinary ignorant
people, other than the devotees of God, no
matter whether they are virtuous or sinful,
and not to any particular class.
Due to lack of reverence and love for
the Lord the ordinary ignorant folk, not
knowing His real nature, virtues, glory, sports
and mysteries, labour under the delusion that
вҖәri KГҰВ¶Ж’a was an ordinary human being like
themselves subject to birth and death. They
fail to recognize the fact that He was the
unborn and imperishable God Himself, the
embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss.
The Lord referred to Himself above as veiled by His YogamГҘyГҘ. This should not,
however, be taken to mean that just as a man hiding himself behind a thick curtain can
neither see nor be seen by those on the other side of the curtain, even so God too fails
to perceive those who are unable to see Him. In order to clarify this and also to indicate
that YogamГҘyГҘ is only a potency of God wholly subservient to Him and can never screen
His Divine Knowledge, the Lord says:
п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГҠвҖһВўU вҖҡв—ҠГғГӢГғГҠГҒЕё п¬ӮГғВёв—ҠГҠЕёГҠГҒЕё ГёГҠВЎГҲВёЕёГ”вҖ“
Г·ГҒп¬ӮcГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠ Гё Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё в—ҠГҠВў ГғГҲ п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ Её вҲ‘В§pЕёГ”H 26H
п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ know; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; вҖҡв—ҠГғГӢГғГҠГҒЕё belonging to the past; п¬ӮГғВёв—ҠГҠЕёГҠГҒЕё existing at present; Гё and;
вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё O Arjuna; Г·ГҒп¬ӮcГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠ those that are yet to come; Гё so also; Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё (all) beings; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ”
Me; ГғГҲ but; п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ knows; Её вҲ‘В§pЕё none (who is devoid of faith and devotion).
Arjuna, I know all beings, past as well as present, nay, even those that are yet
to come; but none (devoid of faith and devotion) knows Me.
 (26)
He also knows how, in what particular
species of life and in what part of the
universe each one of them has been born in
the present Kalpa, and what they are doing.
Similarly, He knows how and what form
each one of them will take and where will
it be born in the coming Kalpas and what
it will do.
The word Г«BhВөutГҘniГӯ in this verse stands
for all living beings, both moving and immobile,
such as gods, men, beasts, birds, insects and
moths etc. The Lord says that He knows
how and in what different species all these
beings were born and existed at different
times during the numberless Kalpas that have
gone by, and what they did in those forms.

=== PAGE 382 ===

* Chapter VII *
381
Even this statement has been made only
from the point of view of the world, inasmuch
as the distinction of past, present and future
does not exist in the eyes of God. In His
unitary consciousness, which constitutes His
very being, everything is ever patent and
present. In fact, He is the great spirit of Time
(MahГҘkГҘla), the basis of all conceptions of
time; hence nothing is hidden from His view.
The use of the indeclinable Г«TuГӯ is
intended to bring out the utter dissimilarity
of God from the JвҲӮvas.
In verse 3 of this chapter the Lord has
already said, Г¬Among thousands of men
scarce one knows Me in reality.Г® Again, in
verse 30, we shall read: Г¬They know My
intergral being, comprising AdhibhВөuta,
Adhidaiva and AdhiyajВӨa.Г® In XI.54 also the
Lord will be found to say, Г¬Through single-
minded devotion, can I be directly known
in essence, perceived by men, and, even
entered into.Г® Therefore, the word Г«KaвҖ№canaГӯ
in this verse should be understood to mean
Г«anyone among the ordinary ignorant men,
other than the LordГӯs own devoteesГӯ. It
is in order to bring out this point that the
words Г¬devoid of faith and devotionГ® have
been added after Г«KaвҖ№canaГӯ within brackets.
The next verse speaks of delusion in the
shape of pairs of opposites (born of attraction
and repulsion) as the cause of ignorance,
which too proves that devotees who are free
from likes and dislikes are in a position to
know Him.
This gives rise to the question: How is it that none of the ignorant men who are
devoid of faith and devotion is able to know Him? The Lord proceeds to answer this
question in the next verse:
ГҹГ«ВҝUГҠmпЈҝВ·вҖҡв—ҠГҲГ Г•пЈҝЕё 
mГЈmв—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһпЈҝUЕё 
Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғвҖ“
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё вҖҡГӘв—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһВўU вҖҡВӘпЈҝВё ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ В¬вҒ„UГЈГғВ¬H 27H
ГҹГ«ВҝUГҠmпЈҝВ·вҖҡв—ҠГҲГ Г•пЈҝЕё mГЈmв—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһпЈҝUЕё through delusion in the shape of pairs of opposites (such as
pleasure and pain etc.) born of desire and hatred; Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғ O descendant of Bharata, Arjuna;
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё all living creatures; вҖҡГӘв—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” to infatuation; вҖҡВӘпЈҝВё in this world; ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғГ” are falling a prey;
В¬вҒ„UГЈГғВ¬ O chastiser of foes.
O valiant Arjuna, through delusion in the form of pairs of opposites (such as
pleasure and pain etc.), born of desire and aversion, all living creatures in this world
are falling a prey to infatuation.
 (27)
instrumental in tightening the hold of ignorance
on the JвҲӮva. That is why these two have been
called by the name of Г«delusionГӯ.
The word Г«SarvabhВөutГҘniГӯ stands for the
generality of men, excluding the devotees
who worship God with true reverence and
faith. Falling a prey to infatuation in the
form of pairs of opposites like joy and
grief, pleasure and pain etc., born of desire
and hatred, they lose sight of the supreme
goal of their life and ignore the practice
The words Г«IcchГҘГӯ and Г«DveВ¶aГӯ in this
verse stand for Г«attractionГӯ and Г«repulsionГӯ,
which have been referred to by the Lord in
III.34 as the two principal enemies standing
in the way of manГӯs spiritual progress, and
which have been further, declared, under the
names of Г«desireГӯ and Г«wrathГӯ as the two
main incentives to sin and the enemies of
mankind (III.37). The pairs of opposites like
joy and grief, pleasure and pain etc., which
proceed from these two impulses are

=== PAGE 383 ===

382
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
of adoration and remembrance of God.
Regarding the transient and momentary
enjoyments of the world, which are productive
of sorrow and fear, as a fount of delight, they
continue to waste their precious lives in
accumulating and enjoying those pleasures.
This is what is meant by their falling a prey
to infatuation.
The adjective Г«SarvaГӯ compounded with Г«BhВөutГҘniГӯ is apt to create a wrong impression
in the mind of the hearer that all beings without exception are falling a prey to infatuation
in the shape of pairs of opposites. Therefore, in order to obviate this misconception, the
Lord says:
ГҝпЈҝВ·ГҠВў Г п¬ӮГЈГғВӘГғВў В¬ГҠВ¬Вў ВЎЕёГҠЕёГҠВў В¬ГҲГЎГҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГғпЈҝ mГЈmв—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҒЕёв—ҠГҲВёQВ§ГҠ Г·ВЎГЈГғпЈҝ в—ҠГҠВў Е’ГҺвҖҰUп¬ӮЛқГғГҠвҖ”Г”H 28H
ГҝпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” whose; ГғГҲ but; вҖўГЈГғВӘГғUв—ҠЛңГ” (has) come to an end; В¬ГҠВ¬в—ҠЛңГ” sin; ВЎЕёГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” В¬ГҲГЎГҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠГ”Лң of
men of virtuous deeds (performed in a disinterested spirit); ГғпЈҝ those; mГЈmв—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҒЕёв—ҠГҲВёQВ§ГҠвҖ” freed
from delusion in the shape of pairs of opposites such as pleasure and pain, joy and grief,
etc. (born of attraction and repulsion); Г·ВЎГЈГғпЈҝ worship (in every way); в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; Е’ГҺвҖҰUп¬ӮЛқГғГҠвҖ” of
firm resolve.
But those men of virtuous deeds whose sins have come to an end, being freed
from delusion in the form of pairs of opposites (born of attraction and repulsion),
worship Me with a firm resolve in every way.                            (28)
of firm resolve who remaining wholly
undaunted by the greatest of temptations and
impediments triumph over them all by dint
of their adoration, and most resolutely adhere
to their pious and devotional views and vows
without budging an inch from them.
Г«Worshipping God in every wayГӯ means
recognizing Him as all-pervading, all-
supporting, all-powerful, the Universal Soul
and the Highest and Best Person and devoting
all oneГӯs external and internal organs exclusively
to His service. In other words, to ascertain the
truth about God by the intellect, to reflect by
the mind on the virtues, glory and reality of
God and the secrets of His sports, to chant His
names and praises by the lips, to offer salutation
to Him by bowing the head, to employ the
hands in His worship as well as in the service
of the miserable and the distressed etc., who
are His living embodiments, to use the eyes
in beholding His images, to use the feet in
visiting temples and sacred places etc., and
The indeclinable Г«TuГӯ has been used to
distinguish the great devotees of God from
the ordinary men of the world.
The first half of the verse refers to those
blessed souls who have been performing
through successive births, noble deeds enjoined
by the scriptures, such as the performance
of sacrifices, charity and penance, etc., and
practising devotion to God, who being
prompted by latencies of past lives and good
association perform noble deeds in a
disinterested way and practise adoration of
God even in the current life and who have
attained purity of heart due to the total
eradication of all evils in the shape of vicious
tendencies and activities.
He alone is said to be free from delusion
in the shape of pairs of opposites, who never
and under no circumstance loses his balance
of mind either in the midst of worldly joys
and sorrows etc., or in their absence.
Г«DГҰЕ’havratГҘВЁГӯ refers to those devotees

=== PAGE 384 ===

* Chapter VII *
383
offering all oneГӯs possessions wholly and
solely to God to make oneself completely
subservient to His and His will aloneГіall this
is included in His all-round worship.
This naturally raises the question: What does such a sinless and virtuous devotee,
who worships God with a firm resolve, seek, and what is the reward obtained by him?
In reply to this the Lord says in the next two verses that such a devotee of firm resolve
comes to know Him properly in His integral being, i.e., attains Him:
ВЎвҒ„UГҠв—ҠвҒ„UГЎГҠв—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҠГҠГҝ в—ҠГҠв—ҠГҠГҒГјГҠГ Гҝ ГҝГғГҒГЈГғ ГҝпЈҝвҖ“
ГғпЈҝ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” ГғГҒmЕ’ГҲвҖ” вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г Fв—ҠГӨГҝГҠГ в—ҠВў вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё ГёГҠГҒПҖвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ”H 29H
вҖҡГҠГҒЕ“Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕ“Е’Г’п¬ӮВў в—ҠГҠВў вҖҡГҠГҒЕ“ГҝГҙГҠВў Гё ГҝпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҲвҖ”вҖ“
В¬ЛқГҝГҠГЎГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝUЛҳГҒВ¬ Гё в—ҠГҠВў ГғпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҲГҝГҲВёQВ§ГёпЈҝГғвҖҡвҖ”H 30H
ВЎвҒ„UГҠв—ҠвҒ„UГЎГҠв—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҠГҠГҝ for deliverance from old age and death; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; вҖўГҠГҒГјГҠГ Гҝ taking refuge
in; ГҝГғГҒГЈГғ strive; ГҝпЈҝ who; ГғпЈҝ they; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” Brahma (the Absolute); ГғГғЛңГ” that; ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҲвҖ” know; вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г Fв—ҠЛңГ”
вҖўГӨГҝГҠГ в—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” the whole AdhyГҘtma (the totality of JвҲӮvas or embodied souls); вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё Karma (action);
Гё and; вҖўГҒПҖвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” the entire field; вҖҡГҠГҒЕ“Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕ“Е’Г’п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” together with AdhibhВөuta (the field of Matter)
and Adhidaiva (BrahmГҘ, i.e., the Creator); в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me (in My integral being); вҖҡГҠГҒЕ“ГҝГҙГҠв—ҠЛңГ” along
with AdhiyajВӨa (the unmanifest Divinity dwelling in the heart of all beings as their witness);
Гё and; ГҝпЈҝ who; ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҲвҖ” know (thus); В¬ЛқГҝГҠГЎГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝU at the hour of death; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; Гё and; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ”
Me (alone); ГғпЈҝ they (too); ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҲвҖ” know; ГҝГҲQВ§ГёпЈҝГғвҖҡвҖ” possessed of a steadfast mind.
They who, having taken refuge in Me, strive for deliverance from old age and
death, know Brahma (the Absolute), the whole AdhyГҘtma (the totality of JвҲӮvas or
embodied souls), and the entire field of Karma (action) as well as My integral being,
comprising AdhibhВөuta (the field of Matter), Adhidaiva (BrahmГҘ) and AdhiyajВӨa (the
unmanifest Divinity dwelling in the heart of all beings as their witness). And they
who, possessed of a steadfast mind, know thus even at the hour of death, they too
know Me alone.                                                     (29,30)
already said, Г¬Foolish and wretched men of
evil deeds, who have embraced the demoniac
nature, do not worship MeГ® (VII.15); it is
therefore that in verse 27 as well, while
pointing out the reason why people fail to
know God, it has been stated that Г¬through
delusion in the shape of pairs of opposites
such as pleasure and pain etc., born of desire
and hatred, all beings remain wholly merged
in ignorance.Г® The mind of men of this type
remains crowded with desires for various
kinds of enjoyments, and the desire for
deliverance from birth and death, which
follows the eradication of all other desires,
Deliverance from old age and death is
impossible so long as one does not secure
immunity from birth; and immunity from
birth is attained only when the JвҲӮva is wholly
freed from the bondage of Karma caused by
ignorance, and realizes God. Realization of
God, again, is attained only through constant
practice of adoration carried on at all times
with firm determination and in a disinterested
way. And such adoration is possible only
when man, taking recourse to the company
of holy men, is freed from sins and totally
renounces all the demoniac impulses of the
mind. In this very chapter the Lord has

=== PAGE 385 ===

384
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
does not awaken in their mind at all. It
is therefore that while pronouncing His
verdict as to who is eligible for consummate
knowledge of God it has been stated in verse
28 that his sins having come to an end, he
performs virtuous deeds, and being free from
the pairs of opposites such as pleasure and
pain etc., worships God with a firm resolve.
The mind of such a sinless person alone is
possessed with the blessed  desire of being
rid of the whirling of birth and death, and
knowing and attaining God at the earliest
moment. It is therefore that the Lord says,
he alone who, giving up dependence on all
worldly objects depends wholly and solely
on God and keeps his mind and intellect
constantly devoted to God alone with
unwavering faith is said to strive having
taken refuge in God.
In verse 1 of this chapter the Lord said
to Arjuna, Г¬With the mind attached to Me
(в—ҠЖ’ГҝГҠвҖҡQВ§в—ҠЕёГҠвҖ”) and practising Yoga (ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘВў ГҝГҲTЕёЛңГ”)
with complete dependence on Me (в—ҠЕ’ГҠГјГҠГҝвҖ”)
you will know Me in entirety.Г® In these two
concluding verses, substituting the word
Г«YuktacetasaВЁГӯ (possessed of a stead-fast mind)
for Г«MayyГҘsaktamanГҘВЁГӯ, Г«MГҘm Г…вҖ№rityaГӯ (taking
refuge in Me) for Г«MadГҘвҖ№rayaВЁГӯ and Г«YatantiГӯ
(strive) for Г¬YogaвүҲ YuВӨjanГ®, the Lord repeats
the same idea, and says that he who strives
having taken refuge in Him and worships Him
with a firm resolve as mentioned in verse 28
above and with his mind fixed on Him knows
Him in His integral being.
The word Г«BrahmaГӯ, qualified by the
adjective Г«TatГӯ points to the absolute and
formless supreme Reality or supreme Spirit,
the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and
Bliss; and knowledge of Brahma means full
realization and direct perception of the truth
of that Supreme Reality or Supreme Spirit.
The term Г«AdhyГҘtmaГӯ, with its attribute
Г«KГҰtsnaГӯ, stands for the totality of individual
souls, referred to by the Lord in this chapter
as His Higher Nature (ParГҘ PrakГҰti), and in
Chapter XV as the Г«AkВ¶araГӯ, or imperishable
soul. And Knowledge of Г«AdhyГҘtma, means
knowledge of the fact that it is God Himself,
the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and
Bliss, who appears as many in the form of
the individual souls; in fact, the whole
Г«AdhyГҘtmaГӯ, or the totality of JвҲӮvas, has no
separate existence from God. Again, the
primeval volition of God, also known as
Г«VisargaГӯ (discharge of spirits), from which
all beings and all activities originate, is
referred to as Г«KarmaГӯ (this will be discussed
in greater detail while explaining verse 3 of
Chapter VIII). And knowledge of the entire
field of action consists in knowing the fact
that being GodГӯs volition, this Г«KarmaГӯ is
identical with God.
The term Г«AdhibhВөutaГӯ covers the whole
range of perishable matter, which the Lord
has referred to in this chapter as His lower
Nature (AparГҘ PrakГҰti), and in Chapter XV
as the Г«KВ¶ara PuruВ¶aГӯ. The Creator
(HiraЖ’yagarbha) who ensouls the totality of
subtle bodies and who has been spoken of
as Г«BrahmГҘГӯ in Chapter VIII is referred to
as Г«AdhidaivaГӯ; and the term Г«AdhiyajВӨaГӯ
stands for that unmanifest aspect of God who
pervades within the heart of all beings as the
Inner Witness, as has been referred  to in
verses, 4, 5 and 6 of Chapter IX.
Brahma, or the absolute, AdhyГҘtma or
the totality of JвҲӮvas, Karma or the primeval
volition of God, AdhibhВөuta or the field of
Matter, Adhidaiva or BrahmГҘ (Creator) and
AdhiyajВӨa or the Inner WitnessГіall these
are different aspects of one and the same
God. The totality of these constitute His
integral being. It was this integral being that
the Lord promised in the beginning of this
chapter to discuss. Again, it is this very
integral Divinity that He has referred to in

=== PAGE 386 ===

* Chapter VII *
385
verse 7, saying, Г¬There is nothing else
whatsoever besides Me, ArjunaГ®, and in
verse 12 saying, Г¬Whatever other entities are
born of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, know them
all as evolved from Me aloneГ®, as well as
in verse 19 saying, Г¬All this is GodГ®, and
the Chapter has been concluded with a
description of that very being in the words
as stated above. To know all this, that is to
say, to realize that just as the atom of water,
vapour, cloud, smoke, water and iceГіall
these are nothing but different forms of
water, even so Brahma, AdhyГҘtma, Karma,
AdhibhВөuta, Adhidaiva, and AdhiyajВӨa, all
these are nothing but God, is the same as
gaining the knowledge of Integral Brahma
or God.
The word Г«ApiГӯ added after Г«PrayГҘЖ’akГҘleГӯ
in the second half of verse 30 indicates that
to say nothing of those who come to know
God is His entirety as mentioned above
according to the maxim Г¬Everything is GodГ®,
before death, even those who come to know
Him in His entirety even at the hour of death,
know Him in reality, i.e., attain Him. The
word Г«ApiГӯ has been similarly used while
glorifying the state of Brahmic Bliss and the
end of Chapter II too.
Лҷ ГғГ вҖҡГҒЕ’ГҒГғ ГјГҠГӢв—ҠjВӘп¬ӮeГӢГғГҠвҖҡГҚВ¬ГҒЕёВ·Г вҖҡГҲ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГҝГҠВў ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠпЈҝ
ГјГҠГӢвҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠВЎГҲВёЕёвҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’пЈҝ ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҒп¬ӮГҙГҠГҠЕёГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ
ЕёГҠв—Ҡ вҖҡ#в—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГӨГҝГҠГҝвҖ”H 7H
Thus, in the UpaniВ¶ad sung by the Lord, the science of Brahma,
the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
and Arjuna, ends the seventh chapter entitled
Г«The Yoga of JВӨГҘna (Knowledge of NirguЖ’a
Brahma) and VijВӨГҘna (Knowledge
of manifest Divinity)Г®.
U

=== PAGE 387 ===

Лҷ
вҖәrвҲӮmadbhagavad-GвҲӮtГҘ
Chapter VIII
The words Г«AkВ¶araГӯ and Г«BrahmaГӯ stand for both the qualified (VIII.21,24) and absolute
(VIII.3,11) aspects of God, and the appellation of God Г«OMГӯ is also designated as Г«AkВ¶araГӯ
and Г«BrahmaГӯ (VIII.13). The present chapter has been given the title of
Г«AkВ¶arabrahmayogaГӯ (The Yoga of the Indestructible Brahma) inasmuch
as it deals with both the qualified and absolute aspects of God, as well as
with Г«OMГӯ.
Verses 1 and 2 of this chapter embody the seven questions asked by Arjuna regarding
Brahma, AdhyГҘtma and so on. Briefly answering these questions in verses 3 to 5 and
stressing in the sixth the importance of the last thought at the time of
death, the Lord exhorts Arjuna in the seventh to think of Him at all times.
Verses 8 to 10 delineate the Yogic process of giving up the ghost while
contemplating with devotion on the qualified and absolute aspects of God, and also point
out the reward of such death. Glorifying the absolute aspect of the Spirit and showing
the method of Japa and meditation on the Absolute through the process of Yogic
concentration, as well as the fruit of such meditation in verses 11 to 13, the Lord declares
in the fourteenth that an easy way to attain Him is to think of Him at all times with exclusive
love. Pointing out in the fifteenth and the sixteenth that there is no more of rebirth for
him who has realized God and that all the worlds in creation are subject to appearance
and disappearance, the Lord defines the day and night of BrahmГҘ and mentions the
appearance as well as the disappearance of all created beings in verses 17 to 19. Establishing
in the twentieth the existence of another eternal Unmanifest beyond the unmanifest PrakГҰti,
the Lord continues to speak of It in the twenty-first and the twenty-second under such
names as the Г«IndestructibleГӯ, Г«the supreme GoalГӯ, Г«the supreme AbodeГӯ, and Г«the supreme
PersonГӯ, and declares exclusive Devotion as the means of attaining the same. Describing
in verses 23 to 26 the bright and the dark paths and the states to which they lead, the
Lord praises in the twenty-seventh the YogвҲӮ who knows the truth about these two paths
and exhorts Arjuna to be a YogвҲӮ. He concludes the chapter with the twenty-eight, pointing
out therein the reward of knowing this secret.
Calling upon Arjuna in verses 1 to 3 of Chapter VII to hear the truth relating
to His integral Self, the Lord undertook to discuss the same and extolled those who
possessed a knowledge of the same. He expounded the same truth in
ways more than one and also explained at length the cause of not
knowing it up to the twenty-seventh and finally concluded the chapter
by praising the devotee who knows Him in entirety along with Brahma, AdhyГҘtma,
Karma, AdhibhВөuta, Adhidaiva and AdhiyajВӨa. Failing to grasp fully the inwardness
of Brahma, AdhyГҘtma, Karma, AdhibhВөuta, Adhidaiva and AdhiyajВӨa as described in
verses 29 and 30 and the secret of knowing God at the time of death, Arjuna proceeds
to ask his seven questions concerning these seven categories in the first two verses
of this chapter.
Title of the
Chapter
Summary of
the Chapter
Link of the
Chapter

=== PAGE 388 ===

* Chapter VIII *
387
вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
ГҒвҲ‘ВўВ§ ГғЕ’ЛңГ”вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠГӨГҝГҠГ в—ҠВў ГҒвҲ‘ВўВ§ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё В¬ГҲLВ§В·ГҠпЈҝГ»ГҠв—ҠвҖ“
вҖўГҒЕ“Г·ГҚГғВў Гё ГҒвҲ‘ВўВ§ В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§в—ҠГҒЕ“Е’Г’п¬ӮВў ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҲГ«ГҝГғпЈҝH 1H
ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” what (is); ГғГғЛңГ” that; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” Brahma (Absolute); ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” what (is); вҖўГӨГҝГҠГ в—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” AdhyГҘtma (Spirit);
ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” what (is); вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГ” Karma (Action); В¬ГҲLВ§В·ГҠпЈҝГ»ГҠв—Ҡ O Best among men; вҖўГҒЕ“Г·ГҚГғв—ҠЛңГ” AdhibhВөuta (Matter);
Гё and; ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” what; В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§в—ҠЛңГ” has been designated as; вҖўГҒЕ“Е’Г’п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” Adhidaiva (divine intelligence);
ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” what; В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is spoken of as.
Arjuna said : KГҰВ¶Ж’a, what is that Brahma (Absolute), what is AdhyГҘtma (Spirit),
and what is Karma (Action)? What is called AdhibhВөuta (Matter) and what is termed
as Adhidaiva?
(1)
Or, again, does it denote the act of creation
of this universe by God? ArjunaГӯs intention
is to have this point elucidated.
Similarly, does the word Г«AdhibhВөutaГӯ
mean the five gross elements, or the whole
order of living beings, the entire range of
objective reality or any other substance?
ArjunaГӯs query: Г«What is called AdhibhВөuta ?Гӯ
is intended to clear up this doubt.
Finally, Arjuna wants to know whether
the term Г«AdhidaivaГӯ means a particular deity
presiding over some material phenomenon,
or destiny, or HiraЖ’yagarbha (the Creator),
the individual soul, or any other entity.
Addressing the Lord as Г«PuruВ¶ottamaГӯ
in this verse, Arjuna intends to convey that
He is the best of all persons, omniscient,
omnipotent, the controller and support of all.
He thereby suggests that no one else in the
world can answer his queries as satisfactorily
and correctly as the Lord can do.
The word Г«BrahmaГӯ is used to denote
various entities such as the Vedas, the
Creator, the absolute Divinity, PrakГҰti
(Primordial matter) and Om etc. The object
of ArjunaГӯs question is to know which of
the above entities is referred to in the present
context.
Similarly, the word Г«AdhyГҘtmaГӯ signifies
the body, the senses, mind, intellect, the
individual soul, the Oversoul and many more
such entities. Arjuna seeks to know by this
verse which of the above is meant by the
Lord when He speaks of Г«AdhyГҘtmaГӯ in the
present context.
It is doubtful whether Г«KarmaГӯ denotes
activity in general or noble pursuits such as
the performance of sacrifices, charity and so
on. Or does it signify the threefold varieties
of past action, such as Г«PrГҘrabdhaГӯ (that
which has begun to bear fruit in the shape
of a pleasurable or painful experience) etc.?
вҖўГҒЕ“ГҝГҙГҠвҖ” вҲ‘В§Г•Вў вҲ‘В§ГҠпЈҝЛҳГІГҠ Е’пЈҝвҖһпЈҝUЛҳГҒSв—ҠГЈв—ҠЕ“ГҲвҖҡГҚЕ’ЕёвҖ“
В¬ЛқГҝГҠГЎГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝU Гё вҲ‘В§Г•Вў ГҙГҠпЈҝГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒвҖҡ ГҒЕёГҝГғГҠГ в—ҠГҒГ·вҖ”H 2H
вҖўГҒЕ“ГҝГҙГҠвҖ” AdhiyajВӨa (the Lord of all sacrifices); вҲ‘В§Г•в—ҠЛңГ” how (does it dwell); вҲ‘В§вҖ” who (is);
вҖўГІГҠ here; Е’пЈҝвҖһпЈҝU вҖўГҒSв—ҠЕёЛңГ” in this body; в—ҠЕ“ГҲвҖҡГҚЕ’Её O killer of the demon Madhu, i.e., вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a; В¬ЛқГҝГҠГЎГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝU
at the hour of death; Гё and; вҲ‘В§Г•в—ҠЛңГ” how; ГҙГҠпЈҝГҝвҖ” to be realized; вҖўГҒвҖҡ (You) are; ГҒЕёГҝГғГҠГ в—ҠГҒГ·вҖ” by those
of steadfast mind.
KГҰВ¶Ж’a, who is AdhiyajВӨa here and how does he dwell in the body? And how are
You to be realized at the time of death by those of steadfast mind?                (2)

=== PAGE 389 ===

388
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The object of ArjunaГӯs query in this verse
is to know whether the term Г«AdhiyajВӨaГӯ denotes
any particular deity, or God, who is the inner
witness, or any other being. He further wants
to know as to how that Г«AdhiyajВӨaГӯ resides in
the bodies of the various living beings, and
why it is called by that name.
The word Г«NiyatГҘtmabhiВЁГӯ in this verse
refers to those whom the Lord described as
Г«YuktacetasaВЁГӯ in the concluding verse of
Chapter VII. With regard to those men of
steadfast mind Arjuna now seeks to know
how they fix their mind on God before
realizing Him at the moment of death. Is it
by means of breath-control, or Japa, or
remembrance, or meditation, or SamГҘdhi?
Out of the seven questions asked by Arjuna above, the Lord now takes up first of
all those relating to Brahma, AdhyГҘtma and Karma, and briefly answers them seriatim
in the following verse:
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲп¬ӮГҠГё
вҖўЛҮГҠвҒ„Вў вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠВў Sп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮГҠпЈҝЛҳГӨГҝГҠГ в—Ҡв—ҠГҲГ«ГҝГғпЈҝвҖ“
Г·ГҚГғГ·ГҠп¬ӮГҠпЈҝjп¬ӮвҲ‘В§вҒ„ГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮвҖҡВӘВёвҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡГҒГңГҙГҠГғвҖ”H 3H
вҖўЛҮГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” Indestructible; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” Brahma; В¬вҒ„Uв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” the supreme; Sп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮвҖ” oneГӯs own self (the
individual soul); вҖўГӨГҝГҠГ в—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” AdhyГҘtma (the Spirit); В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is called; Г·ГҚГғГ·ГҠп¬ӮГҠпЈҝЕ’ЛңГ”Г·п¬ӮвҲ‘В§вҒ„вҖ”Г” that which
brings forth the existence of beings; ГҒп¬ӮвҖҡВӘВёвҖ”Г” the discharge (of spirits); вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡГҒГңГҙГҠГғвҖ” is termed
as Karma (Action).
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: The supreme Indestructible is Brahma; oneГӯs own Self (the
individual soul) is called AdhyГҘtma; and the discharge of spirits (Visarga), which
brings forth the existence of beings, is called Karma (Action).                       (3)
of God in the form of the individual soul,
which constitutes His own being. When this
changeless aspect or higher nature of God
permeates the lower or material Nature in the
shape of body, senses, mind and intellect,
etc., which all go by the name of self, and
presides over them, it is termed as Г«AdhyГҘtmaГӯ.
Therefore, the word Г«AdhyГҘtmaГӯ with its
qualifying adjunct Г«KГҰtsnaГӯ in VII.29 should
be interpreted to mean Г«the totality of conscious
spirits of individual souls.Гӯ This conscious
higher Nature, being a part of God, is
identical with God; therefore, the totality of
JвҲӮvas, or Г«AdhyГҘtmaГӯ as it is called, is also
identical with, or the same as, God.
The word Г«BhВөuta forming part of the
compound word Г«BhВөutabhГҘvodhavakaraВЁГӯ
stands for all living beings, both sentient and
insentient. The Г«VisargaГӯ or discharge which
By adding the qualification Г«supremeГӯ
to the word Г«IndestructibleГӯ, the Lord intends
to convey that the word Г«BrahmaГӯ mentioned
in VII.29 stands for the absolute, formless
Divinity, the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge
and Bliss, and not for the Vedas, BrahmГҘ
(the Creator), PrakГҰti (primordial Matter), or
any other substance, Г«SupremeГӯ means the
subtlest and the best. Whatever entities are
denoted by the terms Г«BrahmaГӯ and Г«AkВ¶araГӯ
the supreme Reality or God (who is the
embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss)
alone is the highest and the best of them all;
therefore, the words Г«Supreme IndestructibleГӯ
in this verse refer to the supreme Reality or
the Oversoul. This supreme Reality or
Oversoul is in reality the same as God.
Г«SvabhГҘvaГӯ (SvaВЁ BhГҘvaВЁ) means oneГӯs
own being. It is the conscious, higher Nature

=== PAGE 390 ===

* Chapter VIII *
389
brings forth the existence of beings and
advances their cause, and which is the very
basis of the creation and preservation of the
universe, is called Karma or action. During
the final dissolution, all creatures of the
universe, along with their individual latencies
of Karma, get absorbed into God, and their
varying natures similarly lose themselves into
PrakГҰti or primordial Matter in a manner
which almost tantamounts to absorption. At
the beginning of the next creation when God
wills: Г¬I am One, let Me be manyГ®, they are
brought forth again. It is this primeval resolve
of God which is referred to as the discharge
of spirits or consciousness in the womb of
inert Nature. This constitutes the conjunction
of Spirit with Matter. This, again, represents
the great discharge; and it is this discharge
which is called Г«VisargaГӯ. It is this process
which is responsible for bringing forth the
various creatures. It is, therefore, that the
Lord says, Г¬The birth of all beings follows
from this combination of Matter and SpiritГ®.
(XIV.3) This is what is meant by the springing
into existence of beings. Therefore, it should
be understood here that by Г«VisargaГӯ is meant
that primeval resolve of God which brings
forth the existence of all living beings and
advances their cause. And it is the great feat
of God in the shape of this Visarga which
quickens inert Matter with life and activates
it, with the result that there is an unceasing
flow of endless Karmas in the universe till
the very end of creation through final
dissolution. Therefore, it is this Г«VisargaГӯ
which goes by the name of Karma (action).
It is this which the Lord refers to as Г«the
entire field of Karma or actionГӯ in VII.29.
This great discharge by God, which brings
forth the existence of beings, is itself a great
cosmic sacrifice. From this great sacrifice
have originated the various other forms
of sacrifice in the world; and the process
of offering oblations of clarified butter etc.,
during such sacrifices has also been termed
as Г«VisargaГӯ. These sacrifices also bring
forth the existence of beings. The code of
Manu says:Гі
Г¬The oblation thrown into the sacred
fire in accordance with the Vedic injunctions
goes to the sun, and showers descend from
the sun; even so, crop follows from rainfall
and creatures take their descent from food.Г®*
(III.36)
This Г«VisargaГӯ known by the name of
Г«KarmaГӯ is in reality nothing but the primeval
resolve of God. Therefore, it is also identical
with God.
The Lord now proceeds to answer adseriatim ArjunaГӯs queries about AdhibhВөuta,
Adhidaiva and AdhiyajВӨa.
вҖўГҒЕ“Г·ГҚГғВў ЛҮГҠвҒ„UГҠпЈҝ Г·ГҠп¬ӮвҖ” В¬ГҲLВ§В·pГҠГҒЕ“Е’Г’п¬ӮГғв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖўГҒЕ“ГҝГҙГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳвҖһUв—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮГҠГІГҠ 
Е’пЈҝвҖһпЈҝU 
Е’пЈҝвҖһUГ·ГҺГғГҠВў 
п¬ӮвҒ„UH 4H
вҖўГҒЕ“Г·ГҚГғв—ҠЛңГ” (are) AdhibhВөuta; ЛҮГҠвҒ„UвҖ” Г·ГҠп¬ӮвҖ” (all) perishable objects; В¬ГҲLВ§В·вҖ” the shining PuruВ¶a
(BrahmГҘ); Гё and; вҖўГҒЕ“Е’Г’п¬ӮГғв—ҠЛңГ” (is) Adhidaiva; вҖўГҒЕ“ГҝГҙГҠвҖ” AdhiyajВӨa (as the inner witness of all);
вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I (the all-pervading Deity); вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; вҖўГІГҠ Е’пЈҝвҖһпЈҝU in this body; Е’пЈҝвҖһUГ·ГҺГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” п¬ӮвҒ„UГ” O best among
embodied beings, i.e., Arjuna.
All perishable objects are AdhibhВөuta; the shining PuruВ¶a (BrahmГҘ) is Adhidaiva;
and in this body I Myself, dwelling as the inner witness, am AdhiyajВӨa, O Arjuna !  (4)
*
вҖўВӘAГҠГ’ В¬ЛқГҠSГғГҠвҖһГҲUГҒГғвҖ” вҖҡГӘГҝВӘГҠГҒЕ’Г Гҝв—ҠГҲВ¬ГҒГғDГ”UГғпЈҝвҖ“ вҖўГҠГҒЕ’Г ГҝГҠГ®ГҠГҠГҝГғпЈҝ п¬ӮГҺГҒCГ”Uп¬ӮГҺВёCГ”пЈҝUвҒ„UГӣГҠВў ГғГғвҖ” В¬ЛқВЎГҠвҖ”H

=== PAGE 391 ===

390
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The lower Nature of God, and all its
evolutes which are perishable in character, are
covered by the term Г«KВ¶arabhГҘvaГӯ. It is this
very category which has been spoken of as
Г«KВ¶etraГӯ (the body) in Chapter XIII, and as the
Г«KВ¶araГӯ PuruВ¶a or perishable entity in Chapter
XV. This Г«KВ¶arabhГҘvaГӯ is present before us in
the form of the body, senses, mind, intellect,
ego, the elements and the various objects of
senses, and is dependent on the JвҲӮva; in other
words, it is sustained by the conscious higher
nature of God, which is the same as the soul
or spirit. It is collectively known as AdhibhВөuta.
In Chapter VII, the Lord has already declared
the AparГҘ or lower (insentient) nature also as
His own nature. Hence the Г«KВ¶arabhГҘvaГӯ
referred to in this verse necessarily belongs to
God, and is therefore identical with God. The
Lord Himself says, Г¬I am being and non-
being both.Г® (IX.19).
The word Г«PuruВ¶aГӯ in this verse stands
for the Г«First PersonГӯ or Г«BrahmГҘГӯ, who is
known 
by 
the 
names 
of 
SВөutrГҘtmГҘ,
HiraЖ’yagarbha and PrajГҘpati as well. It is he
who represents the vital energy or life of the
whole creation, sentient and insentient. All
divine intelligences or deities constitute his
limbs. He is the controller, lord and progenitor
of all. That is why he is termed as Г«AdhidaivaГӯ
(the presiding deity). It is God Himself who
takes the form of Adhidaiva. Therefore, he
too is identical with God.
ArjunaГӯs query with reference to
AdhiyajВӨa was twofold, viz., who is AdhiyajВӨa
and how does he dwell in the body ? The
Lord answers both these questions in one
sentence. The Lord Himself is the enjoyer
and lord of all sacrifices (V.29; IX.24), and
it is He who dispenses the fruit of all actions
(VII.22). Therefore, He says in this verse, Г¬I
Myself am AdhiyajВӨaГ®. The indeclinable Г«EvaГӯ
used in this connection should be taken to
imply that even Г«AdhibhВөutaГӯ and Г«AdhidaivaГӯ
are not distinct from Him. Now in reply to
the first part of the query the Lord explicitly
says that He is Himself Г«AdhiyajВӨaГӯ; but with
reference to the question how he dwells in
the body, He has simply hinted that He
dwells Г«in this bodyГӯ. It is the all-pervasive
aspect of God in the form of the inner witness
which dwells in the body; that is why the
meaning of the Lord has been made explicit
by adding the words Г«as the inner witnessГӯ in
the translation. In His all-pervasive form as
the inner witness God indwells all; it is
therefore that referring to Himself as the
Divine Person in verses 8 and 10 of this
chapter, and as the Г«eternal UnmanifestГӯ in
the twentieth, He brings out His all-pervasive
and all-sustaining character in the twenty-
second. Verses 4 and 5 of Chapter IX also
reveal the all-pervasive character of the
Unmanifest aspect of God. The Lord speaks
of that unmanifest, subtle and all-pervasive
aspect of His as Г«AdhiyajВӨaГӯ in this verse,
and in order to show His identity with it
openly declares Г¬I am Myself AdhiyajВӨaГ®.
In addressing Arjuna as Г«the best of all
embodied beingsГӯ, the LordГӯs intention is to
convey that Arjuna was a devotee of the Lord
and was thus capable of grasping His meaning
from a mere hint. The hint given by the Lord,
viz., that He Himself is Г«AdhiyajВӨaГӯ, should
therefore suffice to make it clear to him that
He is everything. It should not be difficult
for Arjuna to understand this.
Replying thus to six of the seven queries of Arjuna, the Lord now commences His
reply to the seventh and the last question relating to the time of death.
вҖўГЈГғвҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝU Гё в—ҠГҠв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ Sв—ҠвҒ„UГЈв—ҠГҲГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ вҲ‘В§вҲӮпЈҝUп¬ӮвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҝвҖ” В¬ЛқГҝГҠГҒГғ вҖҡ в—ҠjГҠп¬ӮВў ГҝГҠГҒГғ ЕёГҠSГ ГҝГІГҠ вҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝвҖ”UH 5H

=== PAGE 392 ===

* Chapter VIII *
391
The indeclinable Г«CaГӯ has been used in
this verse in the sense of Г«ApiГӯ (even). By the
use of this word the Lord has brought out the
importance of birth in the human species.
The point is to show that birth in the human
species is attained by the grace of God only
after the JвҲӮva has passed through eight million
and four hundred thousand sub-human
species. If man fails to realize God even after
obtaining such a rare opportunity, there is no
knowing what a sorry plight he may come to
when he will be blessed with a human body
again. Realizing this, one can turn to account
oneГӯs human life up to the very last moment,
if he cares to do so. Thus making a special
occasion of the hour of death, the Lord
says that to say nothing of those who think
exclusively of Him at all times, even he
who remembers Him even upto the last
moment of his life undoubtedly realizes Him.
Thus without minimizing the efficacy of
constant remembrance of God, the Lord lays
down that one who remembers God even
at the moment of departure from the body
attains God.
The word Г«MГҘmГӯ (Me) in this verse
stands for that integral Divinity which the
Lord undertook in the very opening verse
of Chapter VII to discuss, and which He
actually discussed with proper explanation in
verses 29 and 30 of the same chapter. All
aspects of God are included in that integral
Divinity. Even if anyone, therefore, fixes his
mind on a particular form knowing it to be
God, it is Him alone that one remembers.
And the names, virtues, glory and stories
etc., connected with His various descents
also serve to awaken His thought, for in
recalling these, God is automatically recalled.
Hence to remember the names, virtues, glory
and sports etc., of God is equivalent to
remembrance of God Himself.
Interposition of the word Г«EvaГӯ between
Г«MГҘmГӯ and Г«SmaranГӯ indicates that giving up
the thought of oneГӯs father and mother, kith
and kin, wife and progeny, wealth and
power, honour and prestige and even heavenly
bliss etc., such a man remembers God alone.
The organ of thought is mind. The use of
the word Г«EvaГӯ, which shuts out every other
thought, therefore indicates that his mind is
fixed exclusively on God.
Attainment of the divine state covers
both liberation in any of its six forms, such
as SГҘyujya or oneness with the Lord, and
realization of the Absolute. Which particular
state the SГҘdhaka attains is dependent on his
choice. A SГҘdhaka reaches the state on
which he sets his heart.
Concluding the verse by saying, Г¬there
is no doubt about itГ®, the Lord lays particular
emphasis on the fact that he who remembers
Him at the last moment of his  life is sure
to realize Him, no matter where and when
he dies, and how he has conducted himself
in the past. His liberation is assured.
вҖўГЈГғвҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝU at the hour of death; Гё even; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; Sв—ҠвҒ„UЕёЛңГ” thinking of; в—ҠГҲГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ leaving;
вҲ‘В§вҲӮпЈҝUп¬ӮвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” the body; ГҝвҖ” who; В¬ЛқГҝГҠГҒГғ departs; вҖҡвҖ” he; в—ҠjГҠп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” My own state; ГҝГҠГҒГғUГ” attains; Её not; вҖўГҒSГғ
there is; вҖўГІГҠ about this; вҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝвҖ” doubt.
He who departs from the body thinking of Me alone even at the time of death,
attains My state; there is no doubt about it.                                                                      (5)
It has been stated above that he who dies with his thought fixed on God attains
God and God alone. This naturally raises the question whether this holds good particularly
in the case of God-remembrance alone or it is true of every other thought. Anticipating
this question the Lord says:

=== PAGE 393 ===

392
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«BhГҘvaГӯ in this verse stands
for all categories of being, both material and
spiritual, such as God, celestial beings, men,
beasts, birds, insects, moths, plants, land,
house etc.
The word Г«AnteГӯ (last moment) here
denotes the point of time when the individual
soul, together with the life-breath, senses,
mind and intellect, gets disjoined from the
physical body.
*
*
*
Verses 14 and 15 of Chapter XIV declare
the three modes of PrakГҰti viz. Sattva, Rajas
and Tamas (the principles of harmony, motion
and inertia) as the factors determining oneГӯs
birth in a higher or lower species; whereas
verse 16 of the same chapter attributes such
birth to the SГҘttvika,  RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika
character of oneГӯs activities in life. The present
verse, however, holds the last thought at the
time of death responsible for the nature of
oneГӯs coming birth. The seeming contradiction
between these two kinds of statements will
disappear if we examine them more closely,
which we shall presently do.
Whatever action a man performs leaves
its impressions on his mind in the form of a
tendency. The mind thus remains crowded
with innumerable tendencies of this kind. ManГӯs
thoughts and remembrances are determined
by these latencies as assisted by an exciting
cause. When latencies of the SГҘttvika type
come to the forefront due to the predominance
of SГҘttvika actions, manГӯs character becomes
predominantly SГҘttvika, and his thoughts also
become SГҘttvika. Even so, when the RГҘjasika
and TГҘmasika tendencies gain the upper hand
due to predominance of RГҘjasika or TГҘmasika
actions, manГӯs character becomes predominantly
RГҘjasika or TГҘmasika and his thoughts also
conform to his character. Thus there being
unity between action, character and thought,
there can be no objection to our calling any
of them as the determining cause of a future
birth. For that makes no difference as a matter
of fact.
Now one can easily understand that a
man dying with the thought of a celestial,
human being, animal or plant or any other
living object uppermost in his mind is reborn
in a corresponding species. But how does
a man who dies with the thought of a
lifeless material object, such as land or a
house, attain the object on his next birth? Our
answer to this question is that a person
dying with the thought of land, house etc.,
takes birth in a higher or lower species
according to his nature and the character of
his actions. And born in that birth, he gets
material objects such as land and house etc.,
which were the centres of his thought at the
dying moment in his former life. That is to
say, in whatever species he is born, he will
be connected with such objects in that very
life. Just as the owner of a house identifies
himself with the house, so does a bird
building a nest in it, or a mouse or ant or
any other animal making holes in it and
ГҝВў ГҝВў п¬ӮГҠГҒВ¬ Sв—ҠвҒ„UГЈГ·ГҠп¬ӮВў Г ГҝВЎГ ГҝГЈГғпЈҝ вҲ‘В§вҲӮпЈҝUп¬ӮвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГғВў Гғв—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮГ’ГҒГғ вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ вҖҡЕ’ГҠ ГғjГҠп¬ӮГ·ГҠГҒп¬ӮГғвҖ”UH 6H
Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” whatever; п¬ӮГҠ вҖўГҒВ¬ no matter; Sв—ҠвҒ„UЕёЛңГ” thinking of; Г·ГҠп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” entity; Г ГҝВЎГҒГғ (one) leaves; вҖўГЈГғпЈҝ
at the last (moment); вҲ‘В§вҲӮUпЈҝп¬ӮвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” the body; Гғв—ҠЛңГ” Гғв—ҠЛңГ” that and that; вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; вҲһГҒГғ (one) attains; вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ
O son of KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna; вҖҡЕ’ГҠ ever; ГғjГҠп¬ӮГ·ГҠГҒп¬ӮГғвҖ” absorbed in its thought.
Arjuna, thinking of whatever entity one leaves the body at the time of death, that
and that alone one attains, being ever absorbed in its thought.                                      (6)

=== PAGE 394 ===

* Chapter VIII *
393
living in those holes identify itself with it.
This should make it clear that in every
species of life one can indirectly obtain any
kind of material object.
*
*
*
It stands to reason that thinking of
whatever object man leaves the body at the
time of death, he attains that very object. But
the question remains: why do we think of
a particular object at the time of death? In
reply to this question the Lord says that as
a general rule only that thought appears at
the time of death, which has constantly
engaged our mind. Just as chemists and
druggists infuse certain medicinal properties
into a substance by soking it again and again
in a particular type of a fluid, even so, man
gets absorbed in the thought of an object
which he repeatedly revolves in his mind
under the influence of latencies of past
actions as well as of his present association,
environment, attachment, desire, fear and
studies. The word Г«SadГҘГӯ points to the
constancy of thought. That is to say, whatever
thought we constantly and repeatedly revolve
in our mind for a sufficient length of time
gets crystallized into a habit. This is what
is meant by Г¬constantly remaining absorbed
in a particular thoughtГ®. The general rule is
that whatever thought is crystallized into a
habit automatically comes to the surface of
the mind at the moment of death.
Although in the majority of cases only
that thought which has been upper-most in
our mind throughout life comes to the forefront
at the moment of death, there are exceptions
to this rule. As in the case of JaЕ’a Bharata,
who died with the thought of a fawn which
he had nurtured only during the last days of
his life, the thought that has constantly and
exclusively engaged our mind during the
concluding portion of our life even for a
short period supersedes our old habits of
thought and appears on the surface of our
mind at the time of death.
How our posthumous state is determined
by the last thought at the hour of death can
be clearly understood with the help of a
homely illustration. All of us know our
impression in a photograph exactly conforms
to the pose that we adopt just at the moment
when the photo is taken. So does the thought
of a man at the moment of death determines
what form he is going to assume in the
next birth. Our mind at the time of death
represents the film of a camera; the thought
appearing in it at that time resembles the
impression taken on the film; and the physical
form that we assume in our next birth
represents the actual photo. Therefore, just
as the photographer alerts us to get ready for
the photo, and just as he who shakes his
limbs at that moment, heedless of the
photographerГӯs warning, spoils his own
picture, even so, God, who creates all forms,
gives the warning to man that the time of
taking the picture of his next embodiment
is very near, the photo may be taken at
any moment, and if he does not take care,
his picture may be spoiled. Taking heed in
this case consists in practising constant
remembrance of God; and thinking of
objects other than God is equivalent to
spoiling the picture.
Thinking of whatever object a man dies, that very object does he attain in his next
life. And generally that thought alone haunts a man at the time of death, which has mostly
engaged his mind during his lifetime. This having been established, it becomes indispensable
for one who aspires for God-realization to remember God at the last moment of oneГӯs
life. When that last moment may suddenly arrive, no one knows. Therefore, in the next
verse, the Lord exhorts Arjuna to think of Him at all times and fight.

=== PAGE 395 ===

394
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«TasmВөatГӯ connects this verse
with the preceding two verses. The intention
is to emphasize that the human body is
transient; the end may come any moment.
If constant remembrance of God does not
become habitual with us and life departs
from the body even while we are engaged
in the thought of enjoyments of the world,
human life, which is a passport for God-
realization, will have been frittered away in
vain. Therefore, remembrance of God should
be constantly practised.
The case for constant God-remembrance
is thus fully established and it is but reasonable
for the Lord to exhort Arjuna to practise the
same. But why should the Lord command
him in the same breath to fight as well ?
Our answer to this question is that Arjuna
was a KВ¶atriya by birth, and participation in
a righteous war is the duty of a KВ¶atriya
enjoined upon him by his very birth. Warfare
should, therefore, be understood here to
cover all activities performed with a view to
discharging the obligations devolving on a
man by virtue of his VarЖ’a or order in
society and Г…вҖ№rama or stage in life. Actions
performed in a disinterested spirit as a behest
from God and with a view to discharging
the duties enjoined upon him by his VarЖ’a
and Г…вҖ№rama, make for purification of the
heart. Besides this, verses 4 to 30 of Chapter
III advance many other weighty reasons
establishing the necessity of performing oneГӯs
duty, a careful consideration of which will
lead us to conclude that the duties attaching
to oneГӯs VarЖ’a and Г…вҖ№rama must necessarily
be performed. Commanding Arjuna to fight
the Lord intends to bring out this point.
The use of the indeclinable Г«CaГӯ is
intended to give priority to remembrance
over all other duties. Warfare and other
duties enjoined by oneГӯs VarЖ’a and Г…вҖ№rama
are performed according to the need of the
situation, and in conformity with certain
prescribed rules at the time appointed for
them; and it is in that way that they ought
to be performed. As for remembrance of
God, however, man needs must perform it
at all times and under all circumstances.
One may ask here : How can it be
possible to carry on side by side remembrance
of God, on the one hand, and such strenuous
functions enjoined by oneГӯs VarЖ’a and Г…вҖ№rama
as participation in a fight, on the other. Our
answer is that they can be easily carried on
together. There are diverse ways of doing it,
varying according to the ideas, taste and
competence of SГҘdhakas. The devotee who
possesses adequate knowledge of GodГӯs virtues
and glory and loves none but Him, and who
knows the world not only as a creation of
God but as really identical with Him and also
as a stage for divine sports, ever sees God as
if present before his eyes in every particle of
matter even as PrahlВөada and the cowherd
damsels of Vraja did; therefore, it is quite
easy for him to carry on other activities side
by side with constant remembrance of God.
ГғSв—ҠГҠГ вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёВ·ГҲ вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝUВ·ГҲ в—ҠГҠв—ҠЕёГҲSв—ҠвҒ„U ГҝГҲГӨГҝ ГёГ”вҖ“
в—ҠЖ’ГҝГҢВ¬Гғв—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝвҖҷГҲГҒhв—ҠГҠВёв—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮГ’cГҝSГҝвҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝв—ҠЛңГ”  H 7H
ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” therefore; вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёВ·ГҲ вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝUВ·ГҲ at all times; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; вҖўЕёГҲSв—ҠвҒ„U think at all times of; ГҝГҲГӨГҝUГ” fight;
Гё and; в—ҠЖ’ГҝГҢВ¬Гғв—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝвҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” having set your mind and intellect on Me; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; вҲһcГҝГҒвҖҡ
you will come to; вҖўвҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝUв—ҠЛңГ” without doubt.
Therefore, Arjuna, think of Me at all times and fight. With mind and reason
thus set on Me, you will doubtless come to Me.                            (7)

=== PAGE 396 ===

* Chapter VIII *
395
Even so, the SГҘdhaka who having developed
an aversion for worldly enjoyments has made
God the principal object of his love, and who
performs duties as enjoined by his VarЖ’a and
Г…вҖ№rama in a disinterested spirit as a behest
from God Himself and only for His sake,
can also perform other actions side by side
with constant remembrance of God. Just as
a rope-dancer performs acrobatic feats of
various kinds while minding the balance of
his feet on the rope, or even as a chauffeur
chats with the inmates of his car and also
goes on watching the road so as to avoid an
accident, all the time focussing his attention
on the wheel, even so, the duties attaching to
oneГӯs VarЖ’a and Г…вҖ№rama can be efficiently
performed even while constantly remembering
God.
Grasping by the intellect the virtues and
glory of God as well as the truth relating
to Him and making a firm resolve with
supreme faith, and constantly dwelling with
the mind on God no less than on His virtues
and glory with exclusive faith and loveГіthis
is what is meant by setting oneГӯs mind and
reason on God. The phrase Г«Madgatena
AntarВөatmanВөaГӯ at the end of Chapter VI
expresses the same idea.
ArjunaГӯs seventh query was briefly answered in verse 5, which describes the
destiny of one who dies with the thought of God uppermost in his mind. The same question
is now dealt with in detail in the following three verses, which describe the final state
reached by the YogвҲӮs who having controlled the mind through the Yoga of discipline dwell
on the AdhiyajВӨa aspect of God, i.e., the formless unmanifest God with attributes.
вҖўГЁГҝГҠвҖҡГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҝГҲQпЈҝВ§Её ГёпЈҝГғвҖҡГҠ ЕёГҠГЈГҝВӘГҠГҒв—ҠЕёГҠГ”вҖ“
В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠВў В¬ГҲLВ§В·Вў ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝВў ГҝГҠГҒГғ В¬ГҠГ•ГҠВёЕёГҲГҒГёГЈГғГҝЕёЛңГ”UH 8H
вҖўГЁГҝГҠвҖҡГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҝГҲQпЈҝВ§Её disciplined through Yoga in the form of practice of meditation; ГёпЈҝГғвҖҡГҠ
with the mind; ЕёГҠГЈГҝВӘГҠГҒв—ҠЕёГҠ not wandering after anything else; В¬вҒ„Uв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” supremely effulgent; В¬ГҲLВ§В·в—ҠЛңГ”
Being, i.e., God; ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝв—ҠЛңГ” divine; ГҝГҠГҒГғ attains; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthВөa (KuntвҲӮ), Arjuna; вҖўЕёГҲГҒГёГЈГғГҝЕёЛңГ”
constantly engaged in contemplation (of God).
Arjun, he who with his mind disciplined through Yoga in the form of practice
of meditation and thinking of nothing else, is constantly engaged in contemplation
of God, attains the supremely effulgent divine PuruВ¶a (God).                 (8)
subject of discussion here being God, the word
should be taken to refer to a mind which remains
exclusively fixed on God.
The supremely effulgent divine PuruВ¶a
mentioned in this verse is the same as the all-
pervading, formless and unmanifest God with
attributes, who creates, sustains and destroys
the universe, and who has been referred to as
Г«AdhiyajВӨaГӯ in verse 4 and as Г«the supreme
PuruВ¶aГӯ in verse 22 of this chapter. Knowing
Him in reality through constant meditation, and
becoming one with Him as what is meant by
attaining that supreme divine PuruВ¶a.
Practice of the limbs of Yoga such as
Yama, Niyama, Г…sana, PrВөaЖ’ВөayВөama, PratyВөahВөara,
DhВөaraЖ’Вөa and DhyВөana is called Г«AbhyВөasayogaГӯ.
A mind which has been thoroughly
disciplined through this Yoga and remains
constantly engaged in practice is called
Г«AbhyВөasayogayuktaГӯ.
A mind which when employed in the
thought of a specific object does not deviate
from it even for a moment to think of any
other object, or in other words, which remains
constantly and exclusively fixed on the object
of meditation is known as Г«NВөanyagВөamin.Гӯ The

=== PAGE 397 ===

396
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Bringing out the glory of the supreme
divine PuruВ¶a, the Lord says that He is ever
in the know of everything. There is nothing
in the physical, astral and causal worlds, past,
present or future, visible or invisible, which
He does not really know; hence He is all-
wise. He is the beginning of all; no one
existed or ever came into being before Him,
nor has He any cause or origin. He Himself
is the origin of everything, and is the most
ancient of all. Hence He is ageless. He is the
universal Lord and is all powerful and the
indweller of all. He alone is the controller of
all; and it is He who duly dispenses the fruit
of noble deeds and misdeeds of all. Hence
He is the Ruler of all. Although He is so
powerful, He is exceptionally subtle. He is
the greatest of all great truths or principles
and is ever present in all. That is why He is
realized only by the most acute intellect of
men of subtle vision. It is therefore that He is
called subtler than the subtle. Even though so
subtle, He is verily the support of the entire
universe; it is He who holds, sustains and
nourishes everything and everybody. Therefore,
He is the sustainer of all. Though He permeates
all, and is ever engaged in sustaining and
nourishing all, He is nevertheless far beyond
all, and so transcendent in character, that the
mind is utterly incapable of conceiving Him
in reality. He is the original source of the
power of conception possessed by the mind,
and the power of ratiocination possessed by
the intellect. They derive their vitality and
activity from the life-current flowing from
Him. He ever sees them, and sees all, and
continues to energize them; but they cannot
perceive Him. Hence He is beyond conception.
Though inconceivable, He is all effulgence
and ever lends radiance to all. Even as the
sun is self-luminous, and illumines the whole
universe by its light, so does that self-luminous
supreme Being ever illumines all by His
uninterrupted divine light of Knowledge. That
is why He is spoken of as eternally shining
like the sun. In Him who is an embodiment
of such transcendent, eternal and infinite
Knowledge, the darkness of nescience or
ignorance cannot even be conceived. Just as
the sun has never witnessed darkness, even
so He is ever wholly beyond the darkness of
ignorance. Nay, even as the inky darkness
of night is dispelled by the very twilight
appearing before sunrise, so does the ignorance
even of a man wholly engrossed in worldly
enjoyments gets dissipated by the bright rays
of His luminous Knowledge. It is therefore
that He is said to be far beyond darkness or
ignorance. One should always remember such
a God, who is the embodiment of pure
Having spoken about the attainment of the divine PuruВ¶a, the Lord now proceeds
to describe Him.
вҲ‘В§ГҒп¬ӮВў 
В¬ГҲвҒ„UГҠГЎГҠв—ҠЕёГҲвүҘГҠГҠГҒвҖҡГғГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠГЎГҠГҠпЈҝвҒ„UГЎГҠГӢГҝГҠВўвҖҡв—ҠЕёГҲSв—ҠвҒ„пЈҝUlвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҖҡп¬ӮВёSГҝ Е“ГҠГғГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠГҒГёГЈГ ГҝMВ§В¬в—ҠГҠГҒЕ’Г Гҝп¬ӮГЎГҠZ Гғв—ҠвҖҡвҖ” В¬вҒ„USГғГҠГғЛңГ”UH 9H
вҲ‘В§ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” all-wise; В¬ГҲвҒ„UГҠГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” ageless; вҖўЕёГҲвүҘГҠГҠГҒвҖҡГғГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” Ruler of all; вҖўГЎГҠГҠпЈҝвҖ” вҖўГЎГҠГӢГҝГҠВўвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” minuter than
the minutest; вҖўЕёГҲSв—ҠвҒ„пЈҝUГғЛңГ” contemplates on; ГҝвҖ” who; вҖҡп¬ӮВёSГҝ Е“ГҠГғГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” sustainer of all; вҖўГҒГёГЈГ ГҝMВ§В¬в—ҠЛңГ”
having a form beyond human conception; вҖўГҠГҒЕ’Г Гҝп¬ӮГЎГҠВёв—ҠЛңГ” refulgent as the sun; Гғв—ҠвҖҡвҖ” В¬вҒ„USГғГҠГғЛңГ”
far beyond the darkness of ignorance.
He who contemplates on the all-wise, ageless Being, the Ruler of all, subtler than
the subtle, the universal sustainer, possessing a Form beyond human conception,
refulgent like the sun and far beyond the darkenss of ignorance;            (9)

=== PAGE 398 ===

* Chapter VIII *
397
existence, absolute knowledge and unmixed
bliss.*
Although the present verse gives us to
understand that God being inconceivable by
nature, the mind and intellect of man are
unable to grasp Him, yet knowing Him as
endowed with the marks mentioned in this
verse we can certainly remember and
contemplate on Him again and again; and
such remembrance and contemplation alone
enables us to realize Him in the end. It is
therefore that mention has been made of the
practice of God-remembrance, and it was but
reasonable to do so.
capacity to regulate its function according to
will, acquired through the practice of such
Yoga. In the space between the two eyebrows
is located a spiritual centre which the authorities
on Yoga call Г«Г…jВӨГҘcakraГӯ. It is described as
consisting of two petals with a triangular Yoni.
The spirits of fire, the sun and the moon join
in this triangle. At the time of departure for
what is known the great beyond, adepts in
Yoga collect the five vital airs by the power
of Yoga and lock them up once for all in this
centre. It is not an easy task, a good deal of
practice is required to hold the vital airs in
the Г…jВӨГҘcakra in this way. There are seven
sheaths in the vicinity of this Г…jВӨГҘcakra, which
Supreme love for God is called Bhakti or
devotion.вҖ“ Г«BhaktyВөa YuktaВЁГӯ, therefore, means
one who is possessed of such Love. Г«LoveГӯ is
a relative term which always presupposes an
object. This shows that the form of discipline
referred to here is not worship of the absolute,
formless Brahma as identical with oneself,
which is otherwise known as JВӨВөanayoga
(the discipline of knowledge), but Bhakti or
devotion, which presupposes an object of
worship other than the worshipper.
AbhyГҘsayoga or the Yoga of eight limbs,
referred to in verse 8 above, is the Yoga spoken
of in this verse. Г«Power of YogaГӯ, therefore,
means control over the life-breath and the
Describing thus the supreme divine PuruВ¶a, the Lord now proceeds to tell us the
mode of SВөadhana and its reward.
В¬ЛқГҝГҠГЎГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝU в—ҠЕёвҖҡГҠГёвҲӮпЈҝUЕё Г·Г„Г ГҝГҠ ГҝГҲQВ§ГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖҷвҲӮпЈҝUЕё ГёГ’п¬ӮГ”вҖ“
Г·ЛқГҲп¬ӮГҠпЈҝв—ҠВёГӨГҝпЈҝ В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠв—ҠГҠп¬ӮпЈҝвүҘГҝ вҖҡГӘГҝвҲ‘ЛңВ§Г” вҖҡ ГғВў В¬вҒ„ВўU В¬ГҲLВ§В·в—ҠГҲВ¬Г’ГҒГғ ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝв—ҠЛңГ”UH 10H
В¬ЛқГҝГҠГЎГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝUГ” (even) at the hour of departure (from this world); в—ҠЕёвҖҡГҠ вҖўГёвҲӮпЈҝUЕё (contemplating
on God) with an unshaken mind; Г·Г„Г ГҝГҠ ГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” full of devotion; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҖҷвҲӮпЈҝUЕё by dint of Yoga;
Гё then; вҲһп¬Ӯ verily; Г·ЛқГҲп¬ӮГҠпЈҝвҖ” в—ҠГӨГҝпЈҝ in the space between the two eyebrows; В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the life-breath;
вҖўГҠп¬ӮпЈҝвүҘГҝ holding; вҖҡГӘГҝвҲ‘ЛңВ§ firmly; вҖҡвҖ” he; Гғв—ҠЛңГ” that; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” supreme; В¬ГҲLВ§В·в—ҠЛңГ” Being; В©UВ¬Г’ГҒГғ attains;
ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝв—ҠЛңГ” divine.
Having by the power of Yoga firmly held the life-breath in the space between the
two eyebrows even at the time of death, and then contemplating on God with a steadfast
mind, full of devotion, he reaches verily that supreme divine PuruВ¶a (God).      (10)
*
The вҖәvetВөaвҖ№vatara UpaniВ¶ad contains a Mantra which bears a close resemblance with this verse.
It runs as follows:Гі
п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГҠвҖһUв—ҠпЈҝГғВў В¬ГҲLВ§В·Вў в—ҠвҖһUГҠГЈГғв—ҠГҠГҒЕ’Г Гҝп¬ӮГЎГҠZ Гғв—ҠвҖҡвҖ” В¬вҒ„USГғГҠГғЛңГ”вҖ“
Гғв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ’Г п¬ӮГҠГҒГғв—ҠГҺГ ГҝГҲв—ҠпЈҝГҒГғ ЕёГҠГЈГҝвҖ” В¬ГЈГ•ГҠ ГҒп¬ӮlГғпЈҝЛҳГҝЕёГҠГҝH
(III.8)
Г¬I know that great Being who is refulgent like the sun and far beyond the darkness of ignorance.
It is only by knowing Him that one is able to transcend death; there is no other way to attain GodГ®.
вҖ 
вҖҡГҠ В¬вҒ„UГҠЕёГҲвҒ„UГҒQВ§вҒ„UГӢEвҒ„пЈҝUвҖ“ (SВөГҘЖ’Е’ilya-SВөutras, 2)

=== PAGE 399 ===

398
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
are known by the names of Indu, BodhinвҲӮ,
NГҘda, ArdhacandrikГҘ, MahГҘnГҘda, KalГҘ
(embodying the sun, moon and fire) and
UnmanвҲӮ. Reaching the UnmanвҲӮ sheath through
the vital airs, the JвҲӮva realises the Supreme
PuruВ¶a or God. There is no compulsory rebirth
for him now. Either he does not take birth at
all, or even if he does so he comes to this
world of his own accord, or by the will of
God, for the good of the world.
The process of this SГҘdhanГҘ can be learnt
only by direct instruction from a master who
has practical knowledge of Yoga. None should
make any attempt to practise it merely with
the help of books; for such an attempt is
calculated to do more harm than good.
With reference to mind the word Г«AcalaГӯ
has been used in the same sense here as
Г«NГҘnyagГҘmin, in verse 8 of this chapter. In
other words, a mind which when once fixed
on the object of meditation remains rooted
there and does not deviate in the least is
called Г«AcalaГӯ (VI.19).
The supreme divine PuruВ¶a referred to
in this verse is the same as has been
described in verses 8 and 9 above.
Only those great men of wisdom who
are knowers of the Veda can speak something
about that Brahma; no one else is entitled
to do so. They tell us that Brahma is
Г«IndestructibleГӯ; in other words, it is that
great Reality which never undergoes loss
or diminution in any shape or form in
any circumstance, and whichever remains
immortal, absolute and unchanged. The
Lord is speaking here of the same unmanifest
Indestructible whose worship is mentioned
in XII.3.
That which imparts the knowledge of
God is called the Veda. This Veda has been
handed down to us in the form of the four
SaвүҲhitГҘs or collections of hymns and the
exegetic literature known as the BrГҘhmaЖ’as,
such as Aitareya etc. The life and centre of
the Veda is the supreme Brahma or Oversoul.
He is the meaning of the Veda. The great
men of wisdom who know this meaning and
knowing it strive ceaselessly for its realization,
and ultimately succeed in realizing it,Гіthey
alone are the true knowers of the Veda.
Verse 5 made a brief reference to the destiny of an ordinary person who dies with
the thought of God uppermost in his mind. Verses 8 and 10 then described the final state
of YogвҲӮs who meditate on the formless transcendent unmanifest aspect of God with
attributes, known as AdhiyajВӨa. And now, while devoting verses 11 to 13 to a description
of the final state of YogвҲӮs who worship the supreme indestructible absolute formless Brahma,
the Lord first of all glorifies that Brahma and undertakes to speak about Him.
ГҝЕ’ЛҮГҠвҒ„ВўU п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҠпЈҝ п¬ӮЕ’ГҒГЈГғ ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҒГЈГғ ГҝlГғГҝГҠпЈҝ п¬ӮГӢГғвҒ„UГҠВӘГҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ГҝГҒЕ’Г«ВҝUГЈГғГҠпЈҝ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГёГҝZ ГёвҒ„UГҒГЈГғ ГғГ»ГҠпЈҝ В¬Е’Вў вҖҡГҰЛңUГ”ВӘЛқГ”вҖһпЈҝUГЎГҠ В¬Лқп¬ӮЛҮГҝпЈҝГ”UH 11H
ГҝГғЛңГ” which; вҖўЛҮГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” the Indestructible; п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГҒп¬ӮЕ’вҖ” the knowers of the Veda; п¬ӮЕ’ГҒГЈГғ term (as);
ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҒГЈГғ enter; ГҝГғЛңГ” which; ГҝГғГҝвҖ” striving recluses; п¬ӮГӢГғвҒ„UГҠВӘГҠвҖ” free from passion; ГҝГғЛңГ” which; ГҹГ«ВҝUГЈГғвҖ”
desiring; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГёГҝВёв—ҠЛңГ” celibacy; ГёвҒ„UГҒГЈГғ (they) practise; ГғГғЛңГ” that; ГғпЈҝ to you; В¬Е’в—ҠЛңГ” (supreme) state;
вҖҡГҰЛңUГ”ВӘЛқГ”UвҖһпЈҝUГЎГҠ with brevity; В¬Лқп¬ӮЛҮГҝпЈҝ (I) shall speak of.
I shall tell you briefly about that Supreme goal (viz., God who is an embodiment
of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss), which the knowers of the Veda term as the
Indestructible, which striving recluses free from passion merge into, and desiring
which the celibates practise Brahmacarya.                                            (11)

=== PAGE 400 ===

* Chapter VIII *
399
The word Г«YatayaВЁГӯ here refers to those
recluses who are men of strong dispassion
qualified for God-realization, established
in Brahma and possessed of spiritual
qualifications of high order.
The word Г«ViвҖ№antiГӯ (enter) in this verse
has not been used in the sense that we speak
of entering a house or apartment from without.
It denotes the process of identification, which
represents the climax of SГҘdhana. Brahma or
God, being our own Self, is ever present
with us. Our error or misconception lies in
mistaking that which is already attained as
something unattained. The removal of this
misconception or ignorance is what is meant
by entering in God.
Etymologically speaking, Г«BrahmacaryaГӯ
means to live and move in Brahma, or to
walk in the path leading to Brahma, i.e., to
follow practices which may enable one to
advance on the Godward path. It is such
practices that are termed as the rule of
conduct laid down for a Г«BrahmacГҘrвҲӮГӯ,* and
which form part of the obligatory duties
attaching to the stage of Brahmacarya or
student life, and must be followed by all
SГҘdhakas to the best of their ability and
according to their own circumstances.
The basic principle of Brahmacarya is
conservation and purification of the generative
fluid. This greatly helps God-realization
through the eradication of desires. The semen
of those who have taken a vow of perpetual
celibacy and have turned its flow upwards
does not take a downward course under any
circumstance whatsoever; that is why they
advance easily on the path leading to God-
realization. At a lower rung of the ladder stand
those whose generative fluid does have a
downward flow, but who manage to conserve
it by wholly abstaining from sexual  indulgence
in thought, word and deed. This too is
tantamount to Brahmacarya. With reference
to this latter the GaruЕ’a-PurГҘЖ’a says:Гі
Г¬Abstaining from sex-indulgence in
thought, word and deed everywhere, at
every time and under all circumstances is
called Brahmacarya.Г®вҖ 
The institution of Г…вҖ№ramas too has God-
realization for its object. Brahmacarya is the
first of the four Г…вҖ№ramas. It is incumbent on
those who belong to this Г…вҖ№rama to observe
the rules of Brahmacarya with scrupulous
care. It is, therefore, that the Lord says,
Г¬Desirous of attaining Brahma, the celibates
practise Brahmacarya.Г®
The Lord undertakes in this verse to
tell Arjuna something about the supreme
Brahma or Oversoul referred to above, viz.,
Г¬who that Brahma is, and through what kind
of practice followed at the time of death can
one realize Him.Г®вҖЎ
The next two verses actually describe what the preceding verse promised to tell.
вҖҡп¬ӮВёmГҠвҒ„UГҠГҒГЎГҠ вҖҡВўГҝГӘГҝ в—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝ NUГҒЕ’ ГҒЕёLВ§ГӨГҝ ГёГ”вҖ“
в—ҠГҚГӨГЈГҝГҠВёЕ“ГҠГҝГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ” В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠв—ҠГҠГҒSГ•ГғГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘЕ“ГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ”UH 12H
*
Vide commentary on VI.14
вҖ 
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠ в—ҠЕёвҖҡГҠ п¬ӮГҠГёГҠ вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёп¬ӮSГ•ГҠвҖҡГҲ вҖҡп¬ӮВёЕ’ГҠвҖ“ вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠ в—ҠГ’Г•ГҲЕёГ ГҝГҠВӘГҠпЈҝ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГёГҝZ В¬ЛқГёЛҮГҝГғпЈҝH (238.6)
вҖЎ
The KaВўhopaniВ¶ad also contains a Mantra which is analogous to the above verse:Гі
вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГҠ ГҝГ В¬Е’в—ҠГҠв—ҠЕёГҒГЈГғ ГғВ¬ГҠГ¶Г”ГҒвҖҡ вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ Гё ГҝmЕ’ГҒГЈГғвҖ“
ГҝГҒЕ’Г«ВҝUГЈГғГҠпЈҝ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГёГҝZ ГёвҒ„UГҒГЈГғ ГғГ»ГҠпЈҝ В¬Е’Вў вҖҡВўВӘЛқвҖһпЈҝUГЎГҠ вҖҷЛқп¬ӮГӢГӘГҝГҠпЈҝГҒв—ҠГ ГҝпЈҝГғГғЛңГ”H
(I.ii.15)
Г¬I shall briefly tell you about the goal which all the Vedas proclaim, nay, which all austerities are
declared as leading to, and seeking which celibates observe the vow of Brahmacarya. Om is the word
for that stateГ®.

=== PAGE 401 ===

400
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The five senses of perception, viz., the
sense of hearing etc., and the five organs of
action, such as the organ of speech etc.,Гі
these are the ten media for contacting worldly
objects; hence they are termed as doors.
Besides these, the different centres in the
body which are the seats of these senses and
organs are also called doors. Withdrawing
these from external objects, that is, suspending
all their functions such as hearing etc., and
at the same time controlling all their seats,
the senses should be turned inwards. This
is what is meant by closing the doors of the
senses. The process is known as PratyГҘhГҘra
in the terminology of Yoga.
Situated between the navel and the
throat, the heart has been compared to a
lotus, and is supposed to be the seat of the
mind and the vital airs. Emptied of all
thoughts, the ever-wandering mind is confined
within the region of the heart. The process
is described in the verse as Г«fixing the mind
in the heart.Гӯ
After fixing the mind in the heart, the
vital airs have to be raised upwards through
an ascending nerve, and placed in the head.
In course of this process the mind too
follows the breath, and gets fixed in the
head. This very process is termed in the
Science of Yoga as Г«DhГҘraЖ’ГҘГӯ.
Restraining the senses as laid down
above, and fixing the mind and the vital airs
firmly in the head is the same as remaining
steadfast in Yogic concentration. The use of
the word Г«AtmanaВЁГӯ before Г«YogadhГҘraЖ’ГҘmГӯ
is intended to convey that the mind has to
be concentrated on God, and not on any
other deity or Nature.
The word Om is an appellation of the
indestructible supreme Reality or God, who
is one without a second; and the name and
the object named being recognized as
essentially one, it is quite in the fitness of
things to speak of Om as the one Г«indestructible
syllableГӯ and also as Brahma (vide. X.25).
The KaВўhopaniВ¶ad also says:Гі
Г¬This indestructible syllable is Brahma,
this indestructible syllable is the supreme.
Knowing this very syllable man is able to
attain whatever he may like to have.Г®*
It may be asked here: How can it be
possible for one to utter the word Om when
all the senses, including the organ of speech
as well as the mind have been restrained and
вҖўГҠпЈҝГҒв—ҠГ ГҝпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠЛҮГҠвҒ„ВўU вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” вҲҡГҝГҠвҖһUвҒ„UГЈв—ҠГҠв—ҠЕёГҲSв—ҠвҒ„UЕёЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҝвҖ” В¬ЛқГҝГҠГҒГғ Г ГҝВЎГЈЕ’пЈҝвҖһВўU вҖҡ ГҝГҠГҒГғ В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠВў ВӘГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ”UH 13H
вҖҡп¬ӮВёmГҠвҒ„UГҠГҒГЎГҠ all the doors (of the senses); вҖҡВўГҝГӘГҝ having closed; в—ҠЕёвҖ” the Mind; NUГҒЕ’ within
(the cavity of) the heart; ГҒЕёLВ§ГӨГҝ firmly holding; Гё and; в—ҠГҚГҒГӨВёЕё in the head; вҖўГҠЕ“ГҠГҝ fixing; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ”
on God; В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the life-breath; вҖўГҠГҒSГ•ГғвҖ” remaining steadfast in; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘЕ“ГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Yogic concentration;
вҖўГҠпЈҝв—ҠЛңГ” Om (the sacred PraЖ’ava or ever new appellation of God); ГҹГҒГғ this; вҲһвҲ‘В§ГҠЛҮГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” the
one indestructible Brahma (God); вҲҡГҝГҠвҖһUвҒ„UЕёЛңГ” uttering; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me (the Absolute); вҖўЕёГҲSв—ҠвҒ„UЕёЛңГ” meditating
on; ГҝвҖ” who; В¬ЛқГҝГҠГҒГғ departs (from this world); Г ГҝВЎЕёЛңГ” leaving; Е’пЈҝвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” the body; вҖҡвҖ” he; ГҝГҠГҒГғ reaches;
В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” ВӘГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” the highest goal.
Having controlled all the senses, and firmly holding the mind in the cavity of
the heart, and then drawing the life-breath to the head, and thus remaining steadfast
in Yogic concentration on God, he who leaves the body and departs uttering the
one Indestructible Brahma, OГҖ, and dwelling on Me in My absolute aspect, reaches
the supreme goal.
 (12-13)
*
вҲһГғhKпЈҝп¬ӮГҠЛҮГҠвҒ„ВўU вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” вҲһГғhKпЈҝп¬ӮГҠЛҮГҠвҒ„Вў В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“ вҲһГғhKпЈҝп¬ӮГҠЛҮГҠвҒ„Вў ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ ГҝГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҒЕ’Г«ВҝUГҒГғ ГғSГҝ ГғГғЛңГ”H (I.ii.16)

=== PAGE 402 ===

* Chapter VIII *
401
the vital airs have been fixed in the head? Our
answer to this is that the verse does not insist
on vocal utterance. Utterance here means
utterance by the mind.
As the verse refers to the last moments
of the YogвҲӮ who follows the path of
Knowledge, the word Г«MГҘmГӯ here stands for
the absolute formless Brahma, the embodiment
of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss. Just as by
declaring in verse 4 that He Himself is
AdhiyajВӨa in this body, the Lord has shown
His identity with the AdhiyajВӨa aspect of God;
even so, He has used the word Г«MГҘmГӯ in this
context to bring out His identity with Brahma.
One should not wonder here how to
carry on together the mental repetition of OГҖ
as well as meditation on Brahma, the meaning
of OГҖ. For it is certainly within the power of
the mind to carry on both the practices
together. It is a common experience that even
though externally engaged in a particular
activity, people are mentally busy with other
thoughts as well besides those pertaining to
the work in hand. There are very few people
who, when externally engaged in a particular
action uninterruptedly, think of nothing else
than the action itself. Nay, often it so happens
that though externally speaking or doing one
thing man is revolving just the opposite thing
in his mind side by side with the thought of
his external occupation. When one experiences
no difficulty in this, why should there be any
difficulty in carrying on in a lonely place
mental repetition of the appellation of God,
viz., OГҖ, side by side with meditation on God
Himself? Mental repetition of the Name
should, on the other hand, prove helpful in
fixing oneГӯs thought on the object named. The
great sage PataВӨjali too says that till the stage
of what is called Savikalpa SamГҘdhi, the
distinction of word, its meaning and the
consciousness of its meaning persists in the
mind (vide Yoga SВөutras I.41). Hence it is but
natural that a thought of the name of the object
meditated upon should exist in the mind side
by side with that of the object itself. PataВӨjali
says:ГіГ¬The sacred syllable OГҖ (also called
PraЖ’ava) is the name of God. Repetition of
this Name and meditation on the object
signified by it, viz., God, should be carried on
together.Г® (ГғSГҝ п¬ӮГҠГёвҲ‘В§вҖ” В¬ЛқГЎГҠп¬ӮвҖ”вҖ“ ГғГ®ГҠВ¬SГғЕ’Г•ВёГ·ГҠп¬ӮЕёв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
Ibid, II.27-58).
Realization of the absolute, formless
Brahma as identical with oneself is what is
meant by Г«reaching the supreme goal, in this
verse. Lasting freedom from the cycle of births
and deaths, attainment of liberation or MokВ¶a
and realization of Г«NirvГҘЖ’a BrahmaГӯ are only
different names for this supreme state.
In verses 8 to 10 above the object of
worship, viz., the supreme PuruВ¶a, has been
described as omniscient, the ruler and sustainer
of all, and self-luminous like the sun. All
these are divine attributes of the all-pervading
God. Verses 11 to 13, however, mention no
such attribute as may present any difficulty
in treating them as dealing with the absolute,
formless Brahma. Moreover, in the former
verses the worshipper has been characterized
as Г«full of devotionГӯ, which indicates that the
mode of worship referred to therein is the
one in which the worshipper and the object
of worship are held as different, and realization
of the supreme divine PuruВ¶a or God with
attributes has been declared to be the reward
of his worship. In these verses, however, the
subject of discussion being the mode of
worship in which the worshipper and the
worshipped are one, no such qualification
has been used with reference to the
worshipper, and attainment of the supreme
goal (absolute Brahma) has been declared to
be the fruit of his worship. Over and above
this, verse 11 also undertakes to broach a
new subject. At the same time, if all the six
verses are treated as dealing with one subject,

=== PAGE 403 ===

402
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
the references to Yoga contained in them
should have to be regarded as suffering from
the defect of repetition. All these arguments
seem to establish conclusively that the six
verses referred to above deal with two
subjects and not one.
remembrance here consists in constantly and
repeatedly dwelling on a mental image of His
divine form or on His divine names, virtues,
glory and sports etc.
When the love-intoxicated devotee who
remembers the Lord with exclusive devotion
can no longer bear his separation from Him,
the Lord too begins to feel His separation
from the devotee unbearable. For His vow is:
Г¬Howsoever men approach Me, even so do
I seek them.Г® (IV.11) And when God Himself
longs to meet the devotee, who can stand in
His way? That is why the verse says that
God is easily attainable by such a devotee.
But the question is, Г¬Is it an easy thing
to be in constant thought of the Lord at all
times?Г® Our answer to this question is that
for one who is possessed of reverence and
love for God and the God-realized saints,
and who firmly believes that by constantly
He whose mind having lost all
attraction for everything else remains constantly
and lovingly attached to God alone, who is
the 
repository 
of 
supreme 
Love,
is one who is said to be possessed of
Г«an undivided mindГӯ. The word Г«SatatamГӯ
indicates that remembrance of God should
go on uninterruptedly without even a
momentГӯs break; and the word Г«NityaвҖ№aВЁГӯ
shows that such uninterrupted remembrance
should be carried on throughout oneГӯs life
without a dayГӯs respite.
The verse speaks of constant remembrance
of God with a heart full of love, and contains
expressions like Г«IГӯ and Г«heГӯ which are indicative
of distinction between the worshipper and the
object of worship. Therefore, the word Г«MГҘmГӯ
or Г«MeГӯ used in it stands for BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a,
the Supreme Person, who is an embodiment
of Divinity with attributes. And even so
The modes of practice followed at the hour of death by the YogвҲӮs who worship the
formless God with attributes and the absolute formless Brahma respectively have been
thus described with their fruits; but such practice during the last moments can be followed
only by those who have brought their mind under control through previous practice of
Yoga. For an ordinary man it is most difficult to fix the mind as laid down above at
the last moment either on the unmanifest Divinity with attributes, or on the absolute formless
Brahma. Under such circumstances one is naturally led to enquire an easy way to God-
realizaiton. To this the Lord now replies that constant and uninterrupted thought of God
is an easy way to His realization.
вҖўЕёГЈГҝГёпЈҝГғГҠвҖ” вҖҡГғГғВў ГҝГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠВў Sв—ҠвҒ„UГҒГғ ГҒЕёГ ГҝвүҘГҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ГғSГҝГҠвҖһВўU вҖҡГҲвҲӮUГ·вҖ” В¬ГҠГ•Вё ГҒЕёГ ГҝГҝГҲQВ§SГҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёвҖ”Г”UH 14H
вҖўЕёГЈГҝГёпЈҝГғГҠвҖ” not thinking of anyone else; вҖҡГғГғв—ҠЛңГ” continuously; ГҝвҖ” who; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me (the supreme
Person); Sв—ҠвҒ„UГҒГғ thinks of; ГҒЕёГ ГҝвүҘГҠвҖ” always; ГғSГҝ to that; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; вҖҡГҲвҲӮUГ·вҖ” easily attainable; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of
PГҰthГҘ (KuntвҲӮ), Arjuna; ГҒЕёГ ГҝГҝГҲQВ§SГҝ ever absorbed in Me; ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёвҖ” YogвҲӮ.
Arjuna, whosoever always and constantly thinks of Me with undivided mind,
to that YogвҲӮ ever absorbed in Me I am easily attainable.                   (14)

=== PAGE 404 ===

* Chapter VIII *
403
remembering God at all times one can easily
attain Him, it is no doubt easy to be in
constant thought of the Lord through His
grace. But it is certainly difficult for one who
lacks faith and love, who has no knowledge
of GodГӯs virtues and glory, and who does
not enjoy the privilege of being in touch with
a God-realized saint.
becomes a source of sorrow when either it
ceases to be, or when he himself is forced to
part with it. Besides this, the sense of
imperfection attaching to all objects and states
of existence and the fear of destruction attendant
upon them all, is a perennial source of pain.
Sins committed through attachment in the
course of accumulation and enjoyment of
objects which appear delightful also lead to
various forms of suffering and tortures in
hell. Rebirth being thus full of sorrow and
sorrow alone from the time of entering the
womb till death, it has been characterized as
the abode of sorrow; and contact with the
various species of life and the enjoyments
obtained therein being transient, it has been
further described as transitory by nature.
The great souls referred to above are
no more subjected to rebirth only because
those devotees, possessed of exclusive love
for God, succeed in realizing Him. The rule
is that he who is once able to realize God,
who is an endless ocean of all joys and the
supreme support and asylum of all, and who
is also called the Supreme Spirit or the
Supreme Person, is never and under no
circumstance disunited from Him. That is
why the Lord says that after God-realization
one is no more subjected to rebirth.
Through constant practice of adoration
and meditation carried on with utmost faith
and love when the SГҘdhaka reaches the
climax of SГҘdhanГҘ, after attaining which no
SГҘdhanГҘ remains to be done, and the SГҘdhaka
immediately obtains direct perception of
God, he is said to have reached the Г«highest
perfection.Гӯ And the term Г«MahГҘtmГҘnaВЁГӯ
(great souls) has been used with reference
to those enlightened devotees who have
reached this state of perfection.
The transmigration of an individual soul
from one species of life to another, under the
impulse of Karma, cannot cease till he has
attained God. This transmigration of a soul
under the impulse of Karma is called rebirth.
And there is no species of life whatsoever
which is not full of sorrow and transient.
Death itself is a positive proof of the
transitoriness of life, but even of such objects
with which we come in contact during our
life, there is none which ever remains the
same, and contact with which may last for
ever. That which appears agreeable today,
becomes disagreeable tomorrow when its
present form undergoes some change, or when
our mental attitude towards the same is
changed. Even that which man regards as
positively conducive to happiness in life
By declaring in the next verse that God-realized souls are never born again, the
Lord now reveals that a God-realized saint is never disunited from God.
в—ҠГҠв—ҠГҲВ¬пЈҝГ Гҝ В¬ГҲЕёВЎВёГЈв—Ҡ Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖГҠвҲӮUГҝв—ҠвүҘГҠГҠEГғв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ЕёГҠВ¬AГҲп¬ӮГҒГЈГғ в—ҠвҖһUГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёвҖ” вҖҡВўГҒвҖҡГҒhВў В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠВў ВӘГғГҠвҖ”Г”UH 15H
в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; В©UВ¬пЈҝГ Гҝ having come to; В¬ГҲЕёВЎВёГЈв—Ҡ rebirth; Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖГҠвҲӮUГҝв—ҠЛңГ” the abode of sorrow; вҖўвүҘГҠГҠEГғв—ҠЛңГ”
transitory; Её not; вҖўГҠВ¬AГҲп¬ӮГҒГЈГғ are subjected to; в—ҠвҖһUГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёвҖ” great souls; вҖҡВўГҒвҖҡГҒhв—ҠЛңГ” perfection; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ”
the highest; ВӘГғГҠвҖ” having attained.
Great souls, who have attained the highest perfection, having come to Me, are no
more subject to rebirth, which is the abode of sorrow, and transient by nature. (15)

=== PAGE 405 ===

404
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
BrahmГҘ is the name of the fourfaced deity
who taking his birth from the lotus in the
navel of God, at the beginning of creation
brings forth the entire universe. He is known
as prajГҘpati, HiraЖ’yagarbha and SВөutrГҘtmГҘ as
well. It is he who has been referred to as the
Г«AdhidaivaГӯ in verse 4 of this chapter. The
heavenly region where he has his abode and
which forms the uppermost limit of this material
universe is known as the Г«BrahmalokaГӯ or
Г«BrahmabhuvanaГӯ. The word Г«LokГҘВЁГӯ covers
all the divisions of the universe, higher as
well as lower, such as BhВөuВЁГӯ BhuvaВЁ, SvaВЁ,
Atala, Vitala and so on, which are presided
over by so many celestial regents or guardians
known as LokapГҘlas.
Worlds which are by their very nature
liable to disappear with the dissolution of the
universe and to appear again at the beginning
of every creation, and the inhabitants of
which are subject to rebirth, are called
Г«punarГҘvartinaВЁГӯ.
The statement that great souls who have realized God are never reborn, indicates
that other souls are subject to rebirth. Therefore, one is naturally tempted to enquire up
to what limit JвҲӮvas are compelled to return even after reaching it. In reply to this, the
Lord says:
вҖўГҠвҖҷЛқrГҠГ”Г·ГҲп¬ӮЕёГҠГҖвҲӮГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠвҖ” 
В¬ГҲЕёвҒ„UГҠп¬ӮГҢГғЕёГҠпЈҝЛҳВЎГҲВёЕёUГ”вҖ“
в—ҠГҠв—ҠГҲВ¬пЈҝГ Гҝ ГғГҲ вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ В¬ГҲЕёВЎВёГЈв—Ҡ Её ГҒп¬ӮlГғпЈҝГ”UH 16H
вҖўГҠвҖҷЛқrГҠГ”Г·ГҲп¬ӮЕёГҠГғЛңГ” from the heavenly realm of BrahmГҘ (the Creator) downwards; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠвҖ” (all)
the worlds; В¬ГҲЕёвҒ„UГҠп¬ӮГҢГғЕёвҖ” liable to appear and reappear; вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё O Arjuna; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; В©UВ¬пЈҝГ Гҝ reaching;
ГғГҲ but; вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ O son of KuntвҲӮ; В¬ГҲЕёВЎВёГЈв—Ҡ rebirth; Её not; ГҒп¬ӮlГғпЈҝГ”U there is.
Arjuna, all the worlds from Brahmaloka (the heavenly realm of the Creator,
BrahmГҘ) downwards are liable to birth and rebirth. But, O son of KuntвҲӮ, on attaining
Me there is no rebirth. (For, while I am beyond Time, regions like Brahmaloka,
being conditioned by time, are transitory.)
 (16)
The statement that all the worlds from Brahmaloka downwards are liable to appear
and disappear raises the question: What is it that renders them liable to appearance and
disappearance? Anticipating this question the Lord now proceeds to establish the transitory
nature of all the worlds by stating the duration of BrahmГҘГӯs day and night.
вҖҡвҖһUdГҝГҲВӘВ¬ГҝВёГЈГғв—ҠвҖһUГҝВёЕ’ЛңвҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ 
ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҲвҖ”UГ”вҖ“
вҒ„UГҠГҒГІГҠВў ГҝГҲВӘвҖҡвҖһUdГҠГЈГғГҠВў ГғпЈҝЛҳвҖһUГҠпЈҝвҒ„UГҠГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҠпЈҝ ВЎЕёГҠвҖ”UH 17H
вҖҡвҖһUdГҝГҲВӘВ¬ГҝВёГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ” as covering a thousand MahГҘyugas; вҖўвҖһUвҖ” (is) the day; ГҝГғЛңГ” (that) which;
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГЎГҠвҖ” of BrahmГҘ (the Creator); ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҲвҖ” (who) know (from realization); вҒ„UГҠГҒГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” (and so his)
night; ГҝГҲВӘвҖҡвҖһUdГҠГЈГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” as extending to a thousand MahГҘyugas; ГғпЈҝ those; вҖўвҖһUГҠпЈҝвҒ„UГҠГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ’вҖ” (are) knowers
of (the reality about) Time; ВЎЕёГҠвҖ” YogвҲӮs.
Those YogвҲӮs who know from realization BrahmГҘГӯs day as covering a thousand
MahГҘyugas, and so his night as extending to another thousand MahГҘyugas, know
the reality about Time.                                                  (17)

=== PAGE 406 ===

* Chapter VIII *
405
The word Г«YugaГӯ in this verse stands
for a Г«celestial YugaГӯ, which consists of one
set of the four earthly Yugas, viz., Satyayuga,
TretГҘ, DvГҘpara and Kali. The measure of
time of the celestial is reckoned as 360 times
longer than the measure obtaining on the
earth. In other words, a day and night of
twenty-four hours of the celestials is equivalent
to one terrestrial year; one celestial month
consists of thirty earthly years, and three
hundred and sixty earthly years constitute
one celestial year. Twelve thousand such
celestial years go to form a Г«celestial YugaГӯ.
It is also called a Г«MahГҘyugaГӯ or Г«CaturyugвҲӮГӯ
which consists of 12000x360 or 43,20,000
human years. According to the celestial measure,
every Kaliyuga extends to twelve hundred
years, every DvГҘpara consists of two thousand
four hundred years, each TretГҘ lasts for three
thousand six hundred years, and each
Satyayuga runs for four thousand eight hundred
years. The aggregate of these four Yugas
comes to 12,000 years. This constitutes a
celestial Yuga. Thousand such celestial Yugas
go to make a day of BrahmГҘ, and the same
number of Yugas constitute his night.
Reckoned in human years the duration of the
different Yugas is as follows:Гі
KaliyugaГі1200x360 or 4,32,000 years
DvГҘparaГі2400x360 or 8,64,000 years
(Twice as much as Kaliyuga)
TretГҘГі3600x360 or 12,96,000 years
(Three times as much as Kaliyuga)
SatyayugaГі4800x360 or 17,28,000 years
(Four times as much as Kaliyuga)
TotalГі12000x360 or 43,20,000 years.
The above figure represents one celestial
Yuga. Thousand such celestial Yugas or
4,32,00,00,000 human years go to make a
day of BrahmГҘ, and his night also is of the
same length. The subject has been fully dealt
with in verses 64 to 73 of chapter I of
ManusmГҰti (the Code of Manu). The day of
BrahmГҘ is known as a Г«KalpaГӯ (cycle) or
Г«SargaГӯ (the period of creation) and the night
as Г«PralayaГӯ or dissolution. Thirty rounds of
such days and nights taken together make
one Brahmic month, twelve such months
make one Brahmic year, and hundred such
years constitute the span of BrahmГҘГӯs life.
By stating the duration of BrahmГҘГӯs day and
night, the Lord indicates that even BrahmГҘГӯs
life and abode are thus finite and limited by
time; hence they are also transient. When
such is the case with the life and abode of
BrahmГҘ, there is no wonder that the
worlds lower than the Brahmaloka and the
bodies of beings inhabiting them should be
transient.
Having come to know the duration of
BrahmГҘГӯs day and night, man becomes
cognizant of the transitory character of
Brahmaloka as well as of all the worlds
enclosed within its circle. He then comes
to realize that when the worlds themselves
are transitory, the enjoyments obtained
therein should be much more fleeting and
perishable. And that which is transitory and
perishable can never bring lasting happiness.
Therefore, it is the height of folly to get
attached to enjoyments of this world and the
next and strive to obtain them, and to fritter
away the human existence by indulging in
frivolities. The span of a manГӯs life is very
short. Therefore wisdom lies in devoting
oneself to the remembrance of God with a
heart full of love, and realizing Him at the
earliest moment, wherein lies the fruition of
human existence. And he alone who realizes
this knows the truth about Time in the form
of day and night, and makes the best use
of his valuable time.
Showing thus the length of BrahmГҘГӯs day and night, the Lord now tells us of the
repeated appearance of all embodied beings at the coming of each such day and of their
dissolution at each such nightfall, thereby revealing their transitory character.

=== PAGE 407 ===

406
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«VyaktiГӯ stands for that which
is perceived by the mind and senses. All
embodied beings can be so perceived.
Therefore, the word Г«VyaktayaВЁГӯ qualified
by the adjective Г«SarvГҘВЁГӯ denotes all embodied
beings that are manifest, no matter whether
they are gods, human beings, manes, beasts,
birds or any other creatures.
The word Г«AvyaktaГӯ (Unmanifest) here
refers to the lower PrakГҰti of God in its subtle
state, also known as the subtle body of
BrahmГҘ, that is the state anterior to the
evolution of the five gross elements.
At the commencement of BrahmГҘГӯs
day, that is to say, when BrahmГҘ emerges
from the state of deep sleep and enters the
waking life, there appears a change in the
subtle state of PrakГҰti, which assumes a gross
form, and all embodied beings become
connected in different ways with that gross
form of PrakГҰti according to their respective
Karma. This is what has been spoken of in
this verse as the emanation of all embodied
beings from the unmanifest.
At the end of a thousand celestial Yugas,
when BrahmГҘ passes from the awakened state
to a state of deep sleep, that marks the
commencement of the cosmic night. At that
time PrakГҰti gives up its gross form and reverts
to the subtle state and all embodied beings,
being deprived of their gross bodies, get
embedded into the subtle state of PrakГҰti. This
is what is meant by the merging of all embodied
beings in the  subtle body of BrahmГҘ, known
as the Unmanifest. The soul itself, being unborn
and imperishable, does not in reality go through
the process of emanation and dissolution.
Therefore, the emanation of beings in this
context should be construed to mean the
crystallization of the subtle element of PrakГҰti,
connected with the beings rooted in PrakГҰti,
into the gross form, and their dissolution should
be taken to mean the melting of the gross
forms back into the subtle state.
The Г«UnmanifestГӯ referred to in this
verse as the subtle state of PrakГҰti or Matter
is essentially the same as the PrakГҰti mentioned
in verses 7 and 8 of Chapter IX. Only they
represent two different phases of the same
substance. In other words, the Г«UnmanifestГӯ
mentioned in this verse stands for the Г«AparГҘГӯ
or lower PrakГҰti which has been shown in
VII.4 as eightfold divided. Verses 7 and 8
of Chapter IX, on the other hand, speak of
PrakГҰti or Matter in its primordial and
indescribable state prior to its division into
eight forms. The same primordial PrakГҰti,
when it passes from the causal to the subtle
state, comes to be known as the Г«AparГҘГӯ or
lower PrakГҰti with its eight divisions.
вҖўвҲҡГҝQВ§ГҠЕ’ЛңГ”вҲҡГҝQВ§ГҝвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёвҖ” В¬ЛқГ·п¬ӮГЈГ ГҝвҖһUвҒ„UГҠВӘв—ҠпЈҝUГ”вҖ“
вҒ„UГҠГІГҝГҠВӘв—ҠпЈҝ В¬ЛқвҲӮUГӢГҝГЈГғпЈҝ ГғГІГҠГ’п¬ӮГҠвҲҡГҝQВ§вҖҡГңГҙГҠвҲ‘пЈҝВ§Г”UH 18H
вҖўвҲҡГҝQВ§ГҠГғЛңГ” from the Unmanifest (i.e., BrahmГҘГӯs subtle body); вҲҡГҝQВ§ГҝвҖ”Г” embodied beings
(both sentient and insentient); вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёвҖ” all; В¬ЛқГ·п¬ӮГҒГЈГғ emanate; вҖўвҖһUвҒ„UГҠВӘв—ҠпЈҝ at the coming of the cosmic
day; вҒ„UГҠГІГҝГҠВӘв—ҠпЈҝ (and) at the cosmic nightfall; В¬ЛқвҲӮUГӢГҝГЈГғпЈҝ merge; ГғГІГҠ into that; вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; вҖўвҲҡГҝQВ§вҖҡГңГҙГҠвҲ‘пЈҝВ§
subtle body of BrahmГҘ, known as the Unmanifest.
All embodied beings emanate from the Unmanifest (i.e., BrahmГҘГӯs subtle body)
at the coming of the cosmic day; at the cosmic nightfall they merge into the same
subtle body of BrahmГҘ, known as the Unmanifest.                         (18)
Even though at the commencement of BrahmГҘГӯs night all beings get dissolved into
the Unmanifest, they do not attain immunity from rebirth till they succeed in realizing

=== PAGE 408 ===

* Chapter VIII *
407
The word Г«BhВөutagrГҘmaВЁГӯ in this verse
stands for living beings in general including
both sentient and insentient creatures. The
qualifying words Г«SaВЁГӯ, Г«EvaГӯ and Г«AyamГӯ
used with reference to the same show that
the selfsame beings who merge in the
Unmanifest at the cosmic nightfall, and who
have been referred to in the preceding verse
as Г«SarvГҘВЁ VyaktayaВЁГӯ, rise again at the
cosmic dawn. Their merging into the
Unmanifest neither brings them liberation
nor does it bring about the cessation of their
separate existence. That is why immediately
after the period of the cosmic night ends,
they all manifest themselves, obtaining physical
bodies suited to their respective qualities and
karmas. The Lord says that the multitude of
beings, both sentient and insentient, which
thus repeatedly merge into the Unmanifest
and then emanate from it again and again,
and which are directly visible to us, are ever
the same; these have not newly appeared.
By using the word Г«BhВөutvГҘГӯ twice in
the verse, the Lord shows that the processes
of emanation of beings from the Unmanifest
and their merging into the same have gone
on repeatedly from time without beginning.
Even on the completion of BrahmГҘГӯs life of
a hundred years reckoned according to his
measure, when the gross body of BrahmГҘ
too gets dissolved into primordial PrakГҰti,
and along with him all embodied beings also
merge into the same, this circuit of their
appearance and disappearance does not come
to an end. They continue to appear and
disappear even after that (IX.8). So long as
an embodied being does not realize God, he
will thus continue to emanate from PrakГҰti
and merge into her again and again.
The 
adjective 
Г«AvaвҖ№aВЁГӯ 
qualifies
Г«BhВөutagrГҘmaВЁГӯ. He who is subject to another,
and is not free, is said to be Г«AvaвҖ№aВЁГӯ. All
embodied beings emanating from the
Unmanifest and again merging into the
Unmanifest are subject to their own individual
nature, which is a product of their respective
traits and karmas existing from time without
beginning. Being subject to such nature, each
being is compelled to undergo repeated births
and deaths. That is why in XIII.21 the Lord
says that it is the soul bound by PrakГҰti who
enjoys the guЖ’as born of PrakГҰti in the form
of pleasure and pain, and that it is his
association with PrakГҰti which is responsible
for his birth in higher and lower species. This
makes it clear that the soul, while reaching
beyond the realm of PrakГҰti, succeeds in
realizing God, does not take birth again.
It may be asked here: Who is it that
ordains with due precision and care the
God, and continue to revolve in the whirligig of births and deaths. In order to show this,
the Lord says:
Г·ГҚГғВӘЛқГҠв—ҠвҖ” вҖҡ вҲһп¬ӮГҠГҝВў Г·ГҚГ п¬ӮГҠ Г·ГҚГ п¬ӮГҠ В¬ЛқвҲӮUГӢГҝГғпЈҝUГ”вҖ“
вҒ„UГҠГІГҝГҠВӘв—ҠпЈҝЛҳп¬ӮвүҘГҠвҖ” 
В¬ГҠГ•Вё 
В¬ЛқГ·п¬ӮГ ГҝвҖһUвҒ„UГҠВӘв—ҠпЈҝГ”UH 19H
Г·ГҚГғВӘЛқГҠв—ҠвҖ” multitude of beings; вҖҡвҖ” вҲһп¬Ӯ вҖўГҝв—ҠЛңГ” this selfsame; Г·ГҚГ п¬ӮГҠ Г·ГҚГ п¬ӮГҠ emanating again and
again; В¬ЛқвҲӮUГӢГҝГғпЈҝ is dissolved; вҒ„UГҠГІГҝГҠВӘв—ҠпЈҝ at the coming of the cosmic night; вҖўп¬ӮвүҘГҠвҖ” under compulsion
of its nature; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthГҘ (KuntвҲӮ), Arjuna; В¬ЛқГ·п¬ӮГҒГғ rises (again); вҖўвҖһUвҒ„UГҠВӘв—ҠпЈҝ at the
commencement of the cosmic day.
Arjuna, this multitude of beings, being born again and again, is dissolved under
compulsion of its nature at the coming of the cosmic night, and rises again at the
commencement of the cosmic day.                                        (19)

=== PAGE 409 ===

408
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
repeated birth of all embodied beings according
to their respective traits and karma: is
it PrakГҰti, God Himself or BrahmГҘ (the
Creator)? Our answer to this question is
that there being reference to the day and
night of BrahmГҘ in this as well as in the
preceding verses, it is to be understood that
it is BrahmГҘ himself who brings forth beings
again and again clothing them with forms
appropriate to their respective traits and
karmas. At the end of the final dissolution,
when BrahmГҘ has not yet come into being,
the act of creation is done by God Himself;
but after the birth of a new BrahmГҘ, the
function of creation is carried on by him
alone.
The process of creation described in
verses 7 to 10 of Chapter IX and again in
verses 3 to 4 of Chapter XIV has reference
to the very first creation after the Final
Dissolution, whereas the process described
in these verses refers to the creation at the
commencement of a day of BrahmГҘ and on
the termination of a Brahmic night.
The question now is: Is this Unmanifest, to which all beings return at the
commencement of a Brahmic night, and from which again they emanate at the beginning
of a Brahmic day, the highest truth or state? Or is there anything higher than this? In
reply to this possible query, the Lord says:
В¬вҒ„USГғSв—ҠГҠГ»ГҠГҲ Г·ГҠп¬ӮГҠпЈҝЛҳГЈГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳвҲҡГҝQВ§ГҠпЈҝЛҳвҲҡГҝQВ§ГҠГ вҖҡЕёГҠГғЕёвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ГҝвҖ” вҖҡ вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёВ·ГҲ Г·ГҚГғпЈҝcГҠГҲ ЕёвүҘГҝГ вҖҡГҲ Её ГҒп¬ӮЕёвүҘГҝГҒГғГ”UH 20H
В¬вҒ„UвҖ” much higher; ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” than this; ГғГҲ even; Г·ГҠп¬ӮвҖ” Existence (there is); вҖўГЈГҝвҖ” yet another
(distinct); вҖўвҲҡГҝQВ§вҖ” unmanifest; вҖўвҲҡГҝQВ§ГҠГғЛңГ” Unmanifest; вҖҡЕёГҠГғЕёвҖ” eternal; ГҝвҖ” which; вҖҡвҖ” that
(supreme divine Person); вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёВ·ГҲ Г·ГҚГғпЈҝcГҠГҲ ЕёвүҘГҝГ вҖҡГҲ with the destruction of all beings; Её not; ГҒп¬ӮЕёвүҘГҝГҒГғ
perishes.
Far beyond even this Unmanifest, there is yet another unmanifest Existence, that
Supreme Divine Person, who does not perish even though all beings perish. (20)
of the same class or category. While the former
is insentient, perishable and objective, this
latter Г«UnmanifestГӯ is the sentient, imperishable
subject. Besides, the latter Unmanifest is the
Lord, Controller and Supervisor of the former,
and therefore much superior to, and altogether
different from the same. It has been called
Г«eternalГӯ inasmuch as it has no beginning or
end.
Г«All beingsГӯ in this verse stand for the
whole multitude of embodied beings, both
sentient and insentient, who appear during
BrahmГҘГӯs day and disappear during his
night, including their mind, senses, bodies,
objects of enjoyment and abodes, etc. The
absorption of these beings, divested of their
The word Г«AvyaktГҘtГӯ taken together with
the demonstrative adjective Г«TasmГҘtГӯ, in this
verse, refers to the Unmanifest mentioned in
verse 18 above, in which all embodied beings
merge during a Brahmic night. Another
unmanifest Existence or Substance, distinct from
this, is the one spoken of in verse 4 of this chapter
as Г«AdhiyajВӨaГӯ, in verse 9 as the Г«all wise eternal
BeingГӯ etc., in verse 10 as the supreme Divine
Person, in verse 22 as the Г«Supreme PersonГӯ,
and in IX.4 as the Г«Unmanifest aspectГӯ of God.
By calling this latter as Г«higherГӯ than and
Г«differentГӯ from the former, the Lord establishes
its decided superiority to and diversity from the
former Unmanifest. That is to say, though both
these substances are Г«UnmanifestГӯ, they are not

=== PAGE 410 ===

* Chapter VIII *
409
gross and subtle bodies, into the primordial
PrakГҰti, or undifferentiated MГҘyГҘ, during the
Final Dissolution, is what has been spoken
of here as their destrution. Even at that time
the supreme Divine PuruВ¶a or God, who is
the supervisor of that PrakГҰti, and has been
referred to here as the eternal Unmanifest,
exists in His own glory, absorbing within
Himself all those beings together with PrakГҰti
itself. This is what is meant by the statement
that Г¬this eternal Unmanifest does not perish,
even though all beings perish.Г®
Verses 8 and 10 declare realization of the supreme Divine PuruВ¶a as the fruit of
worship of the AdhiyajВӨa aspect of God; verse 13 similarly pronounces attainment of the
supreme goal as the reward of worship of the supreme indestructible Absolute; whereas
verse 14 holds out God-realization as the boon obtainable from the worship of BhagavГҘn
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a or God with form and attributes. In order that the above three states of realization
may not be misconstrued as distinct from one another, the Lord while declaring their
oneness shows that after their realization there is no rebirth.
вҖўвҲҡГҝQВ§ГҠпЈҝЛҳЛҮГҠвҒ„U ГҹГ ГҝГҲQВ§SГғв—ҠГҠвҖһГҲUвҖ” В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠВў ВӘГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҝВў В¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝ Её ГҒЕёп¬ӮГғВёГЈГғпЈҝ ГғhГҠв—Ҡ В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠВў в—Ҡв—ҠГ”UH 21H
вҖўвҲҡГҝQВ§вҖ” the Unmanifest; вҖўЛҮГҠвҒ„UвҖ” ГҹГҒГғ as the Indestructible; В©UQВ§вҖ” has been spoken of; Гғв—ҠЛңГ”
that; вҖўГҠвҖһГҲUвҖ” (they) call; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” ВӘГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” the supreme Goal; Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” (and) which (eternal Unmanifest);
В¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝ attaining; Её not; ГҒЕёп¬ӮГғВёГЈГғпЈҝ they return (to this mortal world); ГғГғЛңГ” that (is); Е“ГҠв—Ҡ Abode
or State; В¬вҒ„Uв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” supreme; в—Ҡв—Ҡ My.
The same Unmanifest which has been spoken of as the Indestructible is also
called the Supreme Goal; that again is My supreme Abode, attaining which they
return not to this mortal world.                                                (21)
all knowledge and all bliss, and also divine
and sentient in character, is in reality identical
with God. Therefore, the Г«supreme AbodeГӯ
mentioned in this verse stands for the LordГӯs
eternal Abode, His very being and His divine
state. That is to say, there is no difference in
reality between the attainment of the eternal
Abode of God, of the divine state and of
God Himself. Similarly, there is no real
difference between the attainment of the
indestructible Unmanifest, of the supreme Goal
and of God. Diversity of fruit exists only in
the eyes of the SГҘdhakas following different
courses of discipline. It is therefore that the
fruit has been called by different names. There
being no essential difference between the
various fruits, they have been shown as identical
in the present verse.
The 
words 
Г«UnmanifestГӯ 
and
Г«IndestructibleГӯ, in this verse, stand for the
same Г«AdhiyajВӨaГӯ who has been referred to
as the Г«eternal UnmanifestГӯ in the preceding
verse, and as the Г«supreme Divine PuruВ¶aГӯ
in verse 10 of this chapter.
The words Г«supreme GoalГӯ denote the
state of liberation or final beatitude, which
is the highest object worth attaining, the
attainment of which leaves nothing to be
attained, and which brings the total cessation
of all forms of suffering as soon as it is
attained. Therefore, Г«supreme GoalГӯ stands
here for the absolute formless Divinity, the
embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss,
who is spoken of as the Г«supreme
IndestructibleГӯ. (Ch. VIII.13).
The eternal Abode of God, being all truth,

=== PAGE 411 ===

410
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Showing thus the identity of the eternal Unmanifest with the supreme Goal and the
supreme Abode, the Lord now proceeds to tell us the means of attaining that eternal
unmanifest supreme PuruВ¶a.
В¬ГҲLВ§В·вҖ” вҖҡ В¬вҒ„UвҖ” В¬ГҠГ•Вё Г·Г„Г ГҝГҠ вҲӮUГЁГҝSГ п¬ӮЕёГЈГҝГҝГҠвҖ“
ГҝSГҝГҠГЈГғвҖ”SГ•ГҠГҒЕё Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё ГҝпЈҝЕё вҖҡп¬ӮВёГҒв—ҠВәВў ГғГғв—ҠЛңГ”UH 22H
В¬ГҲLВ§В·вҖ” PuruВ¶a; вҖҡвҖ” that; В¬вҒ„UвҖ” (eternal unmanifest) supreme; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthГҘ (KuntвҲӮ),
Arjuna; Г·Г„Г ГҝГҠ Devotion; вҲӮUГЁГҝвҖ” (is) attainable; ГғГҲ indeed; вҖўЕёГЈГҝГҝГҠ through exclusive; ГҝSГҝ
вҖўГЈГғвҖ”SГ•ГҠГҒЕё residing in whom; Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё all beings; ГҝпЈҝЕё (and) by whom; вҖҡп¬ӮВёв—ҠЛңГ” all this; ГҹЕ’в—Ҡ ГғГғв—ҠЛңГ”
(is) pervaded.
Arjuna, that eternal unmanifest Supreme PuruВ¶a in whom all beings abide, and
by whom all this is pervaded, is attainable only through exclusive Devotion.     (22)
PuruВ¶a has already been discussed in verses
8 to 10 above, it will be seen that there is some
difference between the subject matter of those
verses and that of the present verse. Whereas
the above verses merely deal with the practice
attained by YogвҲӮs at the hour of death with its
reward, the present verse speaks of exclusive
devotion which can be practised at all times
by all kinds of people, and of the realizaiton
of God through such practice. It is in order to
deal with this latter aspect of devotion that the
subject of that worship has been taken up again
for discussion in the present verse.
Exclusive 
devotion 
consists 
in
surrendering everything to the almighty
God, who sustains all and is the inner
witness of all, remaining supremely contented
at all times with His dispensation, and
constantly thinking of Him with undivided
love in every way. Realizing the virtues,
nature and essence of God through such
exclusive Devotion, the SГҘdhaka gets absorbed
in the object of his worship and speedily
attains the object of his existence by directly
perceiving Him. This is what is meant by
realizing God through exclusive devotion.
Just as the four elements of air, fire,
water and earth are part and parcel of ether,
which is their sole cause and substratum,
even so, the entire creation consisting of
sentient and insentient beings is part and
parcel of God, has emanated from God and
on God alone does it rest. This is what is
meant by the statement that all beings reside
in the supreme PuruВ¶a. Similarly, the statement
that Г«all this is pervaded by the supreme
PuruВ¶aГӯ should be understood to mean that
just as air, fire, water and earth are all pervaded
by ether, even so, the entire creation is pervaded
by God. This very idea has been elaborated
in verses 4, 5 and 6 of Chapter IX.
The Г«Supreme PuruВ¶aГӯ mentioned in this
verse stands for the all-pervading Г«AdhiyajВӨaГӯ
aspect of God. The formless God with
attributes, whose worship has been discussed
in verses 8, 9 and 10 of this chapter, and
the eternal Unmanifest referred to in verse
20 are just the same as this Г«AdhiyajВӨaГӯ. It
is in this aspect of God that all beings are
said to reside, and it is by Him alone that
all beings are spoken of as pervaded.
Although the worship of this unmanifest
In the course of His answer to the seventh question of Arjuna, the Lord clearly
explained how man realizes God at the last moment of his life. Incidentally He also
mentioned that without God-realization there is no escape for the JвҲӮva from the round

=== PAGE 412 ===

* Chapter VIII *
411
The word Г«KГҘlaГӯ (time) here stands for
the path on which the deities presiding over
the different periods of time exercise their
authority within their respective limits. That
which has been spoken of as Г«KГҘlaГӯ in this
verse, has been referred to as the Г«brightГӯ and
the Г«darkГӯ paths in the twenty-sixth, and as
the two SГҰtis (paths) in verse 27. Besides,
the words Г«AgniВЁГӯ, Г«JyotiВЁГӯ and Г«DhВөumaВЁГӯ
too do not represent divisions of time.
Therefore, it will not be correct to interpret
the word Г«TatraГӯ, appearing in verses 24 and
25, as referring to Г«timeГӯ and it is quite in
order to construe Г«KГҘlaГӯ in the sense of a
path falling within the jurisdiction of the
deities presiding over the different periods
of time.
Here it may be asked: When such is the
case, why do people consider it auspicious
for the deceased if one dies during the bright
fortnight and when the sun takes a northerly
course ? Our answer to this question is that
in a sense the popular belief referred to
above is also correct; for death during those
periods brings the soul immediately in contact
with the deities presiding over them. Therefore,
a soul departing from this world during those
periods reaches his destination easily and
quickly. But this should not lead one to
conclude that an individual departing at night,
or during the dark fortnight, or when the sun
takes a southerly course, does not proceed
along the bright path or ArcimГҘrga as it is
called in the UpaniВ¶ads. In this connection it
should be understood that a departing soul
will take that very path by which he is to
travel, irrespective of the time of death. Of
course, it is true that if a soul qualified to
traverse the bright path dies during the night,
his contact with the deity presiding over the
day-time will be established only at daybreak,
and meanwhile he will remain in the charge
of the resplendent fire-god. Even so, if he
dies during the dark fortnight, his contact
with the deity presiding over the bright fortnight
will be established only when the bright
fortnight commences, and till then he will
remain in the charge of the deity presiding
over the day-time. In the same way, if he
departs during the southerly course of the
sun, his contact with the deity presiding over
the northerly course will be established when
the sun actually takes a northerly direction,
and in the meantime he will remain in the
of births and deaths even though he may ascend even up to Brahmaloka. But with regard
to those who reach the state from which there is no return, the Lord did not mention
in that connection as to how and by which path they go. Even so, with regard to those
who pass on to a state from which they have to return, the route by which they travel
was not mentioned. The Lord, therefore, now introduces the two paths in the next verse.
ГҝГІГҠ вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝU Г п¬ӮЕёГҠп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠв—ҠГҠп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠВў ГёГ’п¬Ӯ ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёвҖ”вҖ“
В¬ЛқГҝГҠГғГҠ ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ ГғВў вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮВўU п¬ӮЛҮГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ Г·вҒ„UГғВ·ВёГ·Г”UH 23H
ГҝГІГҠ вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝU at which time; ГғГҲ and; вҖўЕёГҠп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the state of non-return; вҖўГҠп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the state from
which they have to return; Гё and; вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёвҖ” the YogвҲӮs; В¬ЛқГҝГҠГғГҠвҖ” having departed
(from this world); ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ attain; Гғв—ҠЛңГ” вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” that time, i.e., the two respective paths; п¬ӮЛҮГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ
I shall describe; Г·вҒ„UГғВ·ВёГ· O best of Bharatas, Arjuna.
Arjuna, I shall now tell you the time (path) departing when YogвҲӮs do not return,
and also the time (path) departing when they do return.                   (23)

=== PAGE 413 ===

412
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
charge of the deity presiding over the bright
fortnight. Mutatis-mutandis the same rule applies
in the case of those who are qualified to
travel by the southern path.
The use of the word Г«YoginaВЁГӯ (YogвҲӮs)
in this verse shows that it does not speak
of the transmigration of ordinary mortals
who migrate from one species to another in
this very world or proceed to hell. The
description, contained in this as well as in
the following verses, of the Г«brightГӯ and the
Г«darkГӯ paths is a description of the migration
of only superior types of men who are
devoted to worship of God, or to such noble
pursuits as the performance of sacrifices,
charity and austerity etc.
The prefix Г«PraГӯ before Г«YГҘtГҘВЁГӯ is
intended to indicate the departure of souls
proceeding to the higher worlds. By using
the word Г«VakВ¶yГҘmiГӯ, the Lord undertakes
to reveal to Arjuna the difference between
the two paths, one leading to the regions
from which one has to return and the other
leading to a state of non-return, the names
by which the two paths are known, and the
deities who preside over them.
Of the two paths which the foregoing verse undertook to describe, the Lord now
proceeds to speak of the one leading to the state from which there is no return.
вҖўГҒВӘAГ–ГҝГҠпЈҝВёГҒГғвҒ„UвҖһUвҖ” вүҘГҠГҲГ„вҖ№вҖ” В·ГЎв—ҠГҠвҖҡГҠ В©UГ»ГҠвҒ„UГҠГҝГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГғГІГҠ В¬ЛқГҝГҠГғГҠ ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГЈГғ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҠпЈҝ ВЎЕёГҠвҖ”Г”UH 24H
вҖўГҒВӘAвҖ” Г–ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒГғвҖ” the fire-god, who is all-effulgence; вҖўвҖһUвҖ” the deity presiding over day-light;
вүҘГҠГҲГ„вҖ№вҖ”U the deity presiding over the bright fortnight; В·ГЎв—ҠГҠвҖҡГҠвҖ” В©UГ»ГҠвҒ„UГҠГҝГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the deity presiding
over the six months of the northward course of the sun; ГғГІГҠ by that path (which is presided
over by all the aforesaid deities); В¬ЛқГҝГҠГғГҠвҖ” departed; ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГЈГғ reach; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” God; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮЕ’вҖ” ВЎЕёГҠвҖ”
the YogвҲӮs who have known Brahma.
(Of the two paths) the one is that in which are stationed the all-effulgent fire-
god and the deities presiding over daylight, the bright fortnight, and the six months
of the northward course of the sun, respectively; proceeding along it after death,
YogвҲӮs, who have known Brahma, being successively led by the above gods, finally
reach Brahma.                                                               (24)
to the deity presiding over daylight. And if
such a worshipper dies during the day, he
immediately hands over the departing soul
to the god of daylight.
The word Г«AhaВЁГӯ stands for the deity
presiding over daylight, whose form is much
brighter than that of the fire-god. He has
jurisdiction over the entire range of what is
known as the BhВөuloka, including the
atmospheric region, and his function is to
establish contact between the soul who travels
by the path following the northerly course
of the sun and the deity presiding over the
bright fortnight. That is to say, if a SГҘdhaka
The word Г«JyotiВЁГӯ (effulgence) is a
qualification of Г«AgniВЁГӯ, which stands for the
god of fire. The UpaniВ¶ads speak of this god
by the name of Г«ArciВЁГӯ, which is a synonym
of Г«JyotiВЁГӯ. The god of fire is all effulgence
of an ethereal character; his jurisdiction
extends over the whole terrestrial globe
including the ocean, and his function is to
bring the soul qualified to travel by the path
following the northerly course of the sun in
contact with the deity presiding over daylight.
If such a soul dies during the hours of the
night, this god keeps him in his charge
overnight and hands him over after sunrise

=== PAGE 414 ===

* Chapter VIII *
413
dies during the dark fortnight, he has to
remain under the care of the god of daylight
till the arrival of the bright fortnight, when
he is handed over to the deity presiding over
the same. And if he dies during the bright
fortnight, the god of daylight immediately
takes the SГҘdhaka to the furthest limit of his
own jurisdiction and hands him over to the
deity presiding over the bright fortnight.
The word Г«вҖәuklaВЁГӯ stands for the deity
presiding over the bright fortnight. His form
is even more resplendent than that of the god
of daylight. His jurisdiction extends even beyond
the sphere of the earth, and covers the entire
region lying between the earth, and heaven
in which the sun shines for a whole human
fortnight and nights are also of the same length.
His function is to take the SГҘdhaka travelling
by the path which follows the northerly course
of the sun to the very limit of his jurisdiction
and hand him over to the deity presiding over
the northerly course of the sun. If a SГҘdhaka
dies during the southerly course of the sun,
this deity too, like the other deities mentioned
above, takes care of the former till the sun
turns towards the north; and if a soul departs
during the northerly course, he immediately
hands over the latter to the deity presiding
over the northerly course of the sun.
The six months of the year, when the
sun moves in a northerly direction, are called
Г«UttarГҘyaЖ’aГӯ or the northward course of the
sun. The words Г«SaЖ’mГҘsГҘВЁ UttarГҘyaЖ’amГӯ in
the verse refer to the deity presiding over this
northward course of the sun. His form is
even more resplendent than that of the deity
of the bright fortnight. His jurisdiction extends
even beyond the intermediate region to those
heavenly regions where the sun shines for
as many as six months of the human calendar,
and the nights too are of the same length.
His function is to take the departing soul
who travels by the path following the northerly
course of the sun to the furthest limit of his
jurisdiction and hand him over to the deity
presiding over the year, as described in the
UpaniВ¶ads (vide ChГҘnd. Up. IV.xv.5; V.x.1, 2;
BГҰ. Up. VI.ii.15). The god of the year then
takes the soul to the abode of the sun-god,
from where the latter takes him to the moon-
god and the moon-god to the god of lightning
in the latterГӯs abode. Attendants of the
supreme Lord then arrive there from His
abode and take the SГҘdhaka to that region,
where at last he is brought face to face with
God. It should be remembered here that the
word Г«CandraГӯ (moon) figuring in this
description does not refer to the planet which
moves round the earth, or to the deity
presiding over the same.
The word Г«BrahmavidaВЁГӯ in this context
stands for worshippers who have obtained,
through the scriptures and the teachings of
preceptors, indirect knowledge of the truth
about Brahma without attributes, or of the
virtues, glory, reality and essence of God
with attributes, as well as for the KarmayogвҲӮ
devoted to disinterested action. It does not
refer to the illumined saints who have already
realized God; for in the case of these latter
migration after death from one place to
another does not stand to reason. The вҖәruti
also says: Г¬His life-breath does not leave the
bodyГ® (BГҰ. Up.); Г¬It gets dissolved in the
body itselfГ® (Ibid; III.ii.11); Г¬Becoming Brahma
Itself, he realizes Brahma,Г® (IV.iv.6).* The
devotee who has realized God with attributes
may either ascend to the supreme Abode of
God along the path described above or may
lose his identity in the very being of God
according to his choice.
The word Г«BrahmaГӯ here stands for
God with attributes. Reaching Brahma means
direct vision of God obtained after reaching
*
Её ГғSГҝ В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠ sГ”вҖ°Г вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠв—ҠГҒГЈГғвҖ“ вҖўГІГҠГ’п¬Ӯ вҖҡв—Ҡп¬ӮвҲӮUГӢГҝГЈГғпЈҝвҖ“ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”Г’п¬Ӯ вҖҡЕёЛңГ” вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҠГҘГҝпЈҝГҒГғвҖ“

=== PAGE 415 ===

414
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
the LordГӯs eternal indestructible Abode, which
is variously known as Satyaloka or the
supreme Abode, as SГҘketaloka, Goloka, or
VaikuЖ’Вўhaloka, and even as Brahmaloka.
The reader should, however, note that this
Brahmaloka is not the same as mentioned in
verse 16 of this chapter and characterized as
subject to appearance and disappearance.
Describing thus the path travelling by which one does not return, the Lord now speaks
of the path going by which the SГҘdhaka returns to this mortal world.
Е“ГҚв—ҠГҠпЈҝ вҒ„UГҠГҒГІГҠSГғГ•ГҠ вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠвҖ” В·ГЎв—ҠГҠвҖҡГҠ Е’ГҒЛҮГҠГЎГҠГҠГҝЕёв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГғГІГҠ ГёГҠГЈВәЛқв—ҠвҖҡВў Г–ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒГғГҝГҠпЈҝВёВӘГӢ В¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝ ГҒЕёп¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝГ”UH 25H
Е“ГҚв—ҠвҖ” the deity presiding over smoke; вҒ„UГҠГҒГІГҠвҖ” the goddess presiding over the night-time;
ГғГ•ГҠU even so; вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠвҖ” the deity presiding over the dark fortnight; В·ГЎв—ҠГҠвҖҡГҠвҖ” Е’ГҒЛҮГҠГЎГҠГҠГҝЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the deity
presiding over the six months of the southward journey of the Sun; ГғГІГҠ (travelling) by
that path; ГёГҠГЈВәЛқв—ҠвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” Г–ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒГғвҖ” the lustre of the moon; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ the SГҘdhaka who performs actions
with an interested motive; В¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝ attaining; ГҒЕёп¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝ returns (to this mortal world).
The other path is that wherein are stationed the gods presiding over smoke, night,
the dark fortnight, and the six months of the southward course of the sun; the YogвҲӮ
(devoted to action with an interested motive) taking to this path after death is led by
the above gods, one after another, and attaining the lustre of the moon (and enjoying
the fruit of his meritorious deeds in heaven) returns to this mortal world.        (25)
part of the day, while the goddess of night
holds her sway over the other part where
there is night. In this way the sphere of
authority of these deities shifts according to
the rotation of the earth round the sun in
course of a day. The function of the goddess
of night is to take the SГҘdhaka departing by
the path following the southward course of
the sun beyond her jurisdiction to the
intermediate region lying between the earth
and heaven and hand him over to the deity
presiding over the dark fortnight. If the
SГҘdhaka dies during the bright fortnight, he
is kept by this deity in her own charge till
the arrival of the dark fortnight; and if he
dies during the dark fortnight, he is immediately
committed to the charge of the deity presiding
over the same.
The word Г«KГҰВ¶Ж’aВЁГӯ stands for the deity
presiding over the dark fortnight. His form
too is all darkness. His jurisdiction extends
over the intermediate region lying between
the earth and heaven, where the sun shines
The word Г«DhВөumaВЁГӯ in this verse stands
for the deity presiding over smoke, which
is a symbol of darkness. The form of this
deity is all darkness. Like the fire-god, he
has his jurisdiction over the entire globe
including the ocean. His function is to take
SГҘdhakas travelling by the path following the
southward course of the sun to the goddess
presiding over night. When a SГҘdhaka of this
class passes away during the day-time, he
is taken care of by this deity during the day
and at the commencement of the night
handed over to the goddess of night.
The word Г«RГҘtriВЁГӯ should be similarly
understood to mean the deity presiding over
night. The form of this deity also is all
darkness. Like the god of daylight, he has
jurisdiction over the entire range of this
planet including the atmospheric region. Of
course, it should be borne in mind in this
connection that the god of daylight exercises
his authority over that part of the globe alone
where there is daylight during a particular

=== PAGE 416 ===

* Chapter VIII *
415
for a whole terrestrial fortnight, and nights
too are of the same duration. His authority
is, however, equally shared by the deity
presiding over the bright fortnight, who
holds his sway in that part of the intermediate
region where the moon shines during a
particular period of the month; whereas this
deity exercises his authority over the other
part where there is no moonlight during that
part of the month. In this way the sphere
of authority of these two deities as well shifts
according to the revolution of the moon
round our planet in course of a month. His
function is to hand over the SГҘdhaka departing
by the path following the southward course
of the sun to the deity presiding over this
course. When a SГҘdhaka of this class departs
during the northward course of the sun, he
is taken care of by this deity till the sun
returns to the southward course; and if he
dies during the southward course, he is
immediately handed over to the deity presiding
over the same.
The six months of the year, when the
sun takes the southward course, are known
as the Г«DakВ¶iЖ’ГҘyanaГӯ. In the present context,
however, the word stands for the deity who
presides over this southward course. The
form of this deity too is all darkness. The
jurisdiction of this deity extends over the
celestial worlds beyond the intermediate region,
where the sun shines for a period equivalent
to six earthly months, and nights also are of
the same length. His authority over these
worlds is, however, equally shared by the
deity presiding over the northern course of
the sun, who holds his sway over those parts
of the heavenly worlds where the sun shines
during a particular part of the year; whereas
the god of the southward course exercises
his authority over the other parts where
darkness prevails during that particular period.
The sphere of authority of these two deities,
therefore, shifts according to the revolution
of the earth round the sun in course of a
year. The function of this deity is to take
the SГҘdhaka proceeding to the heavenly
regions by the path following the southward
course of the sun beyond the limit of his
jurisdiction, and hand him over to the deity
presiding over the world of the Manes as
described in the UpaniВ¶ads. This latter deity
hands him over to the deity presiding over
the heavens, and this last deity takes him to
the moon-world (ChГҘn. Up.V.x.4). The moon-
world here implies all the worlds up to
Brahmaloka, which are subject to appearance
and disappearance. The reader should,
however, note that the world of the Manes,
or PitГҰloka, as referred to in the UpaniВ¶ads
is not that PitГҰloka which is a part of the
intermediate region, and where the sun shines
for a full human fortnight and nights also are
of the same length.
Men who perform meritorious deeds for
obtaining the heaven-world etc., also exercise
control over their senses. From this point of
view, it is quite in order to call them YogвҲӮs.
Besides, a man fallen from Yoga also ascends
to heaven by this path and returns to this
mortal plane after residing there for some
time. Since he too belongs to the class of
persons who travel by this path, the use of
the term Г«YogвҲӮГӯ is quite appropriate in this
case. By using the word Г«YogвҲӮГӯ in this
context the Lord further indicates that this
path is not for men of a TГҘmasika disposition
given to sinful pursuits, but for those who
are entitled to the higher worlds by virtue
of their devotion to duties enjoined by
scriptures (II. 42, 43, 44 and IX. 20, 21 etc.).
The deity presiding over the moon-
world possesses a form whose lustre is
refreshingly cool. The word Г«JyotiВЁГӯ here
signifies an effulgent form resembling that of
the moon-god; and he who attains such a

=== PAGE 417 ===

416
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
form is said to have attained the lustre of
the moon. This means that the SГҘdhaka who
ascends to the moon-world is endowed with
a celestial form possessing a cool lustre and
enjoys heavenly pleasures as a reward for
his meritorious deeds. On the expiry, however,
of the time-limit allotted for his residence
there he has to return to this mortal world.
This he is compelled to do when the stock
of merits responsible for his residence there
as well as for the enjoyment of heavenly
pleasures gets exhausted through enjoyment.
In course of his return journey to this
terrestrial lane he assumes various shapes
and forms. For instance he descends from
the moon-world to ether. Lower down he
assumes the form of air, and is then transformed
into smoke. From the state of smoke he
enters vapour; from vapour he takes the form
of a cloud and from the cloud he comes
down to the earth in the form of rain-drops
and thereby enters the seeds of foodgrains
like wheat, barley, rice, sesamum, beans etc.,
or other herbs and plants. Through them he
gradually enters the semen of a male living
being and in the process of his union with
a female makes his way through semen-
drops into the latterГӯs womb. In this way he
is reborn into a species determined by his
previous Karmas (ChГҘn. Up. V.x. 5, 6, 7).
Describing thus the two paths that follow the northward and southward courses
respectively of the sun, the Lord now proceeds to declare them as eternal and thus winds
up the topic.
вүҘГҠГҲГ„вҖ№вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠпЈҝ ВӘГғГӢ sГ”пЈҝГғпЈҝ ВЎВӘГғвҖ” вүҘГҠГҠEГғпЈҝ в—ҠГғпЈҝГ”вҖ“
вҲһвҲ‘В§ГҝГҠ 
ГҝГҠГ ГҝЕёГҠп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠв—ҠГЈГҝГҝГҠп¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝ 
В¬ГҲЕёвҖ”Г”UH 26H
вүҘГҠГҲГ„вҖ№вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠпЈҝ bright and dark (otherwise known as DevayГҘna or the path of gods and
PitГҰyГҘna or the path of Manes); ВӘГғГӢ paths; ГҒвҖһU because; вҲһГғпЈҝ these two; ВЎВӘГғвҖ” of the world;
вүҘГҠГҠEГғпЈҝ (as) eternal; в—ҠГғпЈҝ are considered; вҲһвҲ‘В§ГҝГҠ (proceeding) by one of them; ГҝГҠГҒГғ one reaches;
вҖўЕёГҠп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the supreme state from which there is no return; вҖўГЈГҝГҝГҠ (and proceeding) by the
other; вҖўГҠп¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝ В¬ГҲЕёвҖ” one comes back (to this mortal world).
These two paths of the world, the bright and the dark, are considered to be
eternal. Proceeding by one of them, one reaches the supreme state from which there
is no return; and proceeding by the other, one returns to the mortal world, being
subject to birth and death.
 (26)
enter His own supreme Abode by endowing
him with a human body. If he makes the
best use of his life on that occasion, he can
certainly reach the destined goal by traversing
any of these two paths. In this way both
these paths have indirect relation with every
living being. These two paths have existed
for all beings from time without beginning,
and will ever exist for them. It is for this
reason that they have been called Г«eternalГӯ.
Even though during the Final Dissolution,
The word Г«JagataВЁГӯ in this verse stands
for the totality of living beings, both sentient
and insentient, who live and move in the
various regions of the universe, upper as well
as lower; for all classes of beings can
proceed by either of these two paths on
obtaining the necessary qualificaiton. Some
time or other in course of his peregrination
through the eight million odd species of life,
God vouchsafes to every JвҲӮva a golden
opportunity to attain the celestial regions or

=== PAGE 418 ===

* Chapter VIII *
417
when all the worlds merge in God, these two
paths and the deities presiding over them also
disappear in God, nevertheless they are
created again, as of old, when there is a new
creation. Therefore, there can be no objection
to their being called eternal.
The path which leads to the supreme
Abode of God is full of light and heavenly
in character. The deities too presiding over
this path are all effulgent, and the heart of
those who travel by this path is also ever
illumined by the light of wisdom. It is for
these reasons that this path has been termed
as the Г«brightГӯ path. On the other hand, the
path which leads to the celestial regions
including the Brahmaloka, or the abode of
BrahmГҘ, is dark when compared with the
Г«brightГӯ path; the deities too presiding over
it are constituted of darkness; and those who
depart by this path also remain deluded by
ignorance. Hence this second path has been
styled as Г«darkГӯ.
The word Г«AnГҘvГҰttimГӯ in this verse
stands for the supreme Abode of God,
attaining which the SГҘdhaka does not return
to this mortal plane. In verse 24 it was stated
that the YogвҲӮs departing by the Г«brightГӯ path
finally reach Brahma or God. The word
Г«AnГҘvГҰttimГӯ has been used in this verse just
in order to make it clear that on attaining
Brahma or God one does not take birth
again; hence He is also termed as Г«AnГҘvГҰttiГӯ.
By using the expression Г«PunaВЁ Г…vartateГӯ,
the Lord indicates that all the worlds attained
through the Г«darkГӯ path are subject to
appearance and disappearance. The intention
is to show that the worlds which are reached
through the Г«darkГӯ path are all perishable.
Hence he who departs along this path has
to return to the mortal plane.
Now, while praising the YogвҲӮ who possesses knowledge of these two paths, the Lord
exhorts Arjuna to become a YogвҲӮ.
ЕёГ’ГғпЈҝ вҖҡГҺГғГӢ В¬ГҠГ•Вё ВЎГҠЕёГЈГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ в—ҠГҲsГ”ГҒГғ вҲ‘В§pЕёГ”вҖ“
ГғSв—ҠГҠГ вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёВ·ГҲ вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝUВ·ГҲ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҝГҲQВ§ГҠпЈҝ Г·п¬ӮГҠВЎВёГҲЕёГ”UH 27H
Её not; вҲһГғпЈҝ these two; вҖҡГҺГғГӢ paths; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of KuntвҲӮ; ВЎГҠЕёЕёЛңГ” knowing; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ YogвҲӮ; в—ҠГҲsГ”ГҒГғ
gets deluded; вҲ‘В§pЕё any; ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” therefore; вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёВ·ГҲ вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝUВ·ГҲ at all times; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” Г·п¬Ӯ be steadfast
in Yoga; вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё O Arjuna.
Knowing thus the secret of these two paths, O son of KuntвҲӮ, no YogвҲӮ gets deluded.
Therefore, Arjuna, at all times be steadfast in Yoga in the form of equanimity (i.e.,
strive constantly for My realization).                                        (27)
devoted to disinterested action or worship,
and the JВӨГҘnayogвҲӮ, who renounces the sense
of doership, both depart by the bright path
and reach the supreme Abode of God,
whence they have no more to return. Realizing
this truth full well and with perfect faith is
what is meant by knowing the secret of these
two paths.
All SГҘdhakas who follow any of the
paths recommended in the вҖәГҘstras as a means
The word Г«SГҰtвҲӮГӯ, together with the
demonstrative adjective Г«EteГӯ, stands for the
two paths described in the preceding verses.
The virtuous soul who either performs religious
acts or worships gods with an interested
motive leaves this world by the Г«darkГӯ path
and attains the heaven-world according to
the relative worth of his Karma, returning to
earth when the stock of his merits gets
exhausted (IX.20,21). Even so, the KarmayogвҲӮ,

=== PAGE 419 ===

418
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
to God-realization, such as Karmayoga or
the Yoga of action, DhyГҘnayoga or the Yoga
of Meditation. Bhaktiyoga or the Yoga of
Devotion, and JВӨГҘnayoga or the Yoga of
Knowledge, are to be known as YogвҲӮs.
Among such YogвҲӮs whoever succeeds in
realizing the truth about the two paths referred
to above does not get deluded. This is what
is indicated by the use of the word Г«KaвҖ№canaГӯ
in this verse. Even though pursuing any of
the aforementioned Yogas he who does not
know the secret of these two paths has a
natural tendency to get attached to the
enjoyments of this world or the next, and
fall from Yoga. This is what is meant by
his being deluded. On the other hand, he
who knows the secret of these two paths
does not get attached to any form of enjoyment,
realizing as he does that enjoyments obtained
in any of the worlds up to Brahmaloka are
perishable and trivial, and remains constantly
engaged in practices leading to God-realization.
This is what is meant by his not getting
deluded.
The importance of Yoga as a discipline
for God-realization is so great that the YogвҲӮ
who is established in such a Yoga fully
realizes the truth about these two paths, so
that he no longer falls into the delusion of
getting attached to any form of enjoyment.
It is therefore that the Lord asks Arjuna to
devote himself with reverence to the constant
practice of Karmayoga with special emphasis
on devotion, for the pleasure of the Lord
Himself. This is the force of the use of the
word Г«TasmГҘtГӯ in this verse. Verse 7 of this
chapter also contained a similar exhortation
for Arjuna for it was this form of practice
that Arjuna was eminently qualified for.
The exhortation referred to above is
intended to emphasize the fact that the span
of life allotted to a human being is extremely
short, and one may be overtaken by death at
any moment. If, therefore, a man does not
strive to devote every moment of his life to a
spiritual discipline, his SГҘdhanГҘ will suffer
from occasional breaks. And if death overtakes
him during any such break he will be
compelled to take birth again as one fallen
from Yoga. Therefore, it is incumbent on
every human being to remain constantly
engaged in practices leading to God-realization.
In this way the Lord exhorted Arjuna to be steadfast in Yoga. He now concludes
the chapter by glorifying the man who is established in Yoga, and pointing out the fruit
of applying himself to spiritual practice in accordance with the spirit of the profound truth
revealed in the chapter.
п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’пЈҝВ·ГҲ ГҝГҙГҠпЈҝВ·ГҲ ГғВ¬вҖ”вҖҡГҲ ГёГ’п¬Ӯ Е’ГҠЕёпЈҝВ·ГҲ ГҝГ В¬ГҲГЎГҝВ»В§вҲӮUВў В¬ЛқГҒЕ’CГ”Uв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖўГ ГҝпЈҝГҒГғ ГғГ вҖҡп¬ӮВёГҒв—ҠЕ’Вў ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ’Г п¬ӮГҠ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ В¬вҒ„ВўU SГ•ГҠЕёв—ҠГҲВ¬Г’ГҒГғ ГёГҠlв—ҠЛңГ”UH 28H
п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’пЈҝВ·ГҲ to (a study of) the Vedas; ГҝГҙГҠпЈҝВ·ГҲ to (the performance of) sacrifices; ГғВ¬вҖ”вҖҡГҲ to (the
practice of) austerities; Гё as well as; вҲһп¬Ӯ doubtless; Е’ГҠЕёпЈҝВ·ГҲ (and) to the practice of charities;
ГҝГғЛңГ” which; В¬ГҲГЎГҝВ»В§вҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” the reward; В¬ЛқГҒЕ’CГ”Uв—ҠЛңГ” has been ascribed (in the scriptures); вҖўГ ГҝпЈҝГҒГғ transcends;
ГғГғЛңГ” that; вҖҡп¬ӮВёв—ҠЛңГ” all; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this (profound truth); ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ’Г п¬ӮГҠ realizing; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ the YogвҲӮ; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” supreme;
SГ•ГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” state; В©UВ¬Г’ГҒГғ attains; Гё and; вҖўГҠlв—ҠЛң Г”beginningless.
The YogвҲӮ, realizing this profound truth, doubtless transcends all the rewards
ascribed in the scriptures for the study of the Vedas, as well as for the performance
of sacrifices, austerities and charities, and attains the primal supreme state.
 (28)

=== PAGE 420 ===

* Chapter VIII *
419
The word Г«YogвҲӮГӯ here stands for the
SГҘdhaka who constantly applies himself,
with reverence and devotion, to any one of
the practices that have been recommended
in the scriptures as a means to God-realization.
Г«IdamГӯ covers the entire body of teachings
contained in this chapter. And realization of
this profound truth consists in thoroughly
grasping the meaning of whatever has been
taught in this chapter, viz., the worship of
both the qualified and absolute aspects of
God, as well as of God with form and
without form, the virtues, glory and greatness
of God, practices leading to God-realization,
the worlds from which man has to return and
the state of being which brings cessation of
rebirth and so on.
The word Г«VedasГӯ covers all the four
Vedas together with the branches of learning
that are considered as auxillary to them, as
well as all other scriptures agreeing with the
Vedas. Г«SacrificeГӯ means all kinds of ritual
acts enjoined by the scriptures, such as worship,
offering of oblations into the sacred fire, and
so on. Similarly Г«austeritiesГӯ means all forms
of askesis recognized by the вҖәГҘstras, such as
the observance of religious vows, keeping
fasts, practice of sense-control, performance
of oneГӯs own obligatory duties and so on.
Even so Г«CharitiesГӯ include all kinds of gifts
sanctioned by the вҖәГҘstras, such as the gift of
food, the gift of learning, the gift of land etc.,
and all philanthropic acts.  The word Г«PuЖ’yaГӯ
forming part of the compound word
Г«PuЖ’yaphalamГӯ stands for the store of religious
merit that accrues from a study of the Vedas
and the performance of sacrifices, charities,
austerities, and other  religious acts, carried
on with reverence and devotion and with an
interested motive; and the attainment of the
various celestial worlds up to Brahmaloka
and of the enjoyments obtained there is the
fruit of such merit promised in the Vedas and
other scriptures. Knowing all these worlds,
as well as the enjoyments obtained in them,
as transient and momentary, when one ceases
to have any attraction for them, and cultivating
complete indifference towards them actually
leaves them far behind, one is said to have
transcended all the rewards promised in the
scriptures.
The word Г«SthГҘnamГӯ in this verse,
together with the adjectives Г«ParamГӯ and
Г«Г…dyamГӯ qualifying it, stands for that which
has been spoken of in this very chapter as
the supreme Abode of God, whence one
does not return to the whirligig of births and
deaths, and which is at the beginning of all,
beyond all and superior to all. To realize it,
and then enter it is what is meant by attaining
it. Attainment of the supreme Goal, the
supreme State or the Divine State, and
Realization of the Divine PuruВ¶a are only
other names for it.
Лҷ ГғГ вҖҡГҒЕ’ГҒГғ ГјГҠГӢв—ҠjВӘп¬ӮeГӢГғГҠвҖҡГҚВ¬ГҒЕёВ·Г вҖҡГҲ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГҝГҠВў
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠпЈҝ ГјГҠГӢвҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠВЎГҲВёЕёвҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’пЈҝ вҖўЛҮГҠвҒ„UвҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ
ЕёГҠв—ҠГҠCГ”Uв—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГӨГҝГҠГҝвҖ”H 8H
Thus, in the UpaniВ¶ad sung by the Lord, the science of Brahma,
the scripture of Yoga, the Dialogue between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
and Arjuna, ends the eighth chapter entitled
Г¬The Yoga of Indestructible BrahmaГ®.
U

=== PAGE 421 ===

Title of the
Chapter
Summary of
the Chapter
Лҷ
вҖәrвҲӮmadbhagavad-GвҲӮtГҘ
Chapter IX
The knowledge imparted by the Lord in this chapter has been called by Him the
sovereign science and the sovereign secret. Therefore, this chapter has
been given the title of Г¬Yoga of the sovereign science and the sovereign
secretГ®.
In verses 1 and 2 of this chapter, the Lord undertakes to impart to Arjuna once more
the knowledge of both the absolute and embodied aspects of Divinity, and sings the glory
of that Knowledge. Verse 3 declares that people having no faith in this
knowledge revolve in the whirligig of births and deaths. In verses 4 to 6
the Lord describes, at the outset, the all-pervasive and detached character
of His unmanifest aspect, and indicating His divine power of Yoga declares in the end that
all beings abide in Him even as air abides in ether. Thereafter, verses 7 to 10 tell us how
at the time of final dissolution all beings enter GodГӯs PrakГҰti, how at the beginning of creation
they are again brought forth by PrakГҰti under His supervision, and how while engaged in such
acts of creation and dissolution, God ever remains unattached to them. Denouncing in verses
11 and 12 those who being unacquainted with GodГӯs supreme glory despise Him, the Lord
tells us in verses 13 and 14 the way in which those great souls who are acquainted with His
glory adore Him. Verse 15 speaks of the JВӨГҘnayogвҲӮ, who worships God through his offering
of Knowledge as one with him, as well as of those who worship Him in various ways in
diverse celestial forms, such as the moon-god, the sun-god, Indra (the Lord of paradise) and
the god of fire etc., knowing them as distinct from themselves as well as from God. Describing
His identity along with His virtues, glory and various manifestations, in verses 16 to 19 the
lord tells us that the whole of this universe, both in its manifest and unmanifest form, is His
own manifestation. Verses 20 and 21 declare that those who perform sacrifices and other
religious acts for obtaining the enjoyments of heaven, ascend to heaven only to return to this
world when their allotted span is over. Verse 22 embodies the LordГӯs vow of personally
supplying the needs and safeguarding the interests of devotees who constantly remember Him
in a disinterested spirit. In verses 23 to 25 the Lord declares that even those who worship
other deities indirectly worship Him, though with a mistaken approach, and that such devotees
do not know Him in reality; the result being that whereas worshippers of the other gods go
to those gods, His own worshippers attain Him. Showing devotion to be comparatively easy
of practice in verse 26, Arjuna is exhorted in the twenty-seventh to offer all his acts to God;
while verse 28 declares God-realization to be the fruit of such offering. Declaring in verse
29 that He is equally present in all beings; the Lord glorifies in the thirtieth and the thirtyfirst
the adoration practised by him who is exclusively devoted to Him. In verse 32 the Lord tells
us that surrender to Him ensures attainment of the supreme goal to women, VaiвҖ№yas (members
of the agriculturist and mercantile classes), вҖәВөudras (those belonging to the artisan and labouring
classes) and even to those of sinful birth. In verses 33 and 34 the Lord praises the pious
BrГҘhmaЖ’as and devout royal sages, declares the human body to be mortal and exhorting
Arjuna to surrender himself to Him, discusses the true character of surrender with all its limbs.

=== PAGE 422 ===

* Chapter IX *
421
At the beginning of Chapter VII, the Lord undertook to impart to Arjuna the knowledge
of NirguЖ’a Brahma along with the knowledge of manifest Divinity. Discussing that subject
accordingly, He finally spoke of realizing God together with what He called
Brahma. AdhyГҘtma, Karma, AdhibhВөuta, Adhidaiva and AdhiyajВӨa, and also
of fixing oneГӯs thought on God at the hour of death. Thereupon, in Chapter
VIII, Arjuna addressed seven questions to the Lord in order to seek enlightenment on the
above terms, as well as on the subject of worshipping God at the last hour. The Lord briefly
answered six of these questions in verses 3 and 4 of that chapter, while all the remaining
verses were taken up in answering the seventh. Thus the discussion of JВӨГҘna or the
Knowledge of NirguЖ’a Brahma along with VijВӨГҘna or the Knowledge of manifest Divinity,
started in Chapter VII, having not been completed, the Lord takes up the subject again in
Chapter IX for a clearer exposition. And in order to establish the link of this discourse with
the subject discussed in Chapter VII, He undertakes in the very first verse to unfold the
Knowledge of NirguЖ’a Brahma along with the Knowledge of manifest Divinity once more.
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲп¬ӮГҠГё
ГҹЕ’Вў ГғГҲ ГғпЈҝ ВӘГҲsГ”Гғв—ҠВў В¬Лқп¬ӮЛҮГҝГҠГӘГҝЕёвҖҡГҚГҝп¬ӮпЈҝвҖ“
ГҙГҠГҠЕёВў ГҒп¬ӮГҙГҠГҠЕёвҖҡГҒвҖһUГғВў ГҝГ–ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ в—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҝвҖҡпЈҝЛҳвүҘГҠГҲГ·ГҠГғЛңГ”H 1H
ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this; ГғГҲ once more; ГғпЈҝ to you; ВӘГҲsГ”Гғв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” most secret; В¬Лқп¬ӮЛҮГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ shall discuss at length;
вҖўЕёвҖҡГҚГҝп¬ӮпЈҝ who are uncarping; ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the Knowledge of NirguЖ’a Brahma; ГҒп¬ӮГҙГҠГҠЕёвҖҡГҒвҖһUГғв—ҠЛңГ” along
with the knowledge of manifest Divinity; ГҝГғЛңГ” which; ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ knowing; в—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҝвҖҡпЈҝ you shall be
free; вҖўвүҘГҠГҲГ·ГҠГғЛңГ” from the evil of worldly existence.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: To you, who are devoid of the carping spirit, I shall now unfold
the most secret knowledge of NirguЖ’a Brahma alongwith the knowledge of manifest
Divinity, knowing which you shall be free from the evil of worldly existence.         (1)
Title of the
Discourse
carping spirit, is disqualified for it. In XVIII.67
the Lord explicitly states that the teaching of
the GвҲӮtГҘ should never be imparted to one
who finds fault with Him.
The word Г«JВӨГҘnamГӯ with the adjectives
Г«IdamГӯ and Г«VijВӨГҘnasahitamГӯ stands here for
the knowledge of the Absolute, formless
Brahma as well as that of the qualified aspect
of God with form and without form along with
the secret of their respective glory and greatness,
and the instructions leading to that knowledge,
contained in Chapters VII, VIII and IX.
The fault of Г«AsВөuyГҘГӯ consists in belittling
the merits of men possessing merits, finding
fault with their virtues, reviling them and
attributing false blame to them. He who is
entirely free from this evil of Г«AsВөuyГҘГӯ by his
very nature is called Г«AnasВөuyuГӯ.*
By calling Arjuna Г«AnasВөuyuГӯ or
uncarping, the Lord indicates that he alone
who has faith in Him, and is free from the
fault-finding spirit, is qualified to receive the
instruction contained in this chapter; while
he who is lacking in faith, and full of the
*
Our scriptures define Г«AnasВөuyГҘГӯ as follows:Гі
Её ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠЕёЛңГ” ВӘГҲГҒГЎГҠЕёГҠпЈҝ вҖһUГҒГЈГғ SГғГҠГ’ГҒГғ в—ҠГЈЕ’ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠЕёГҒВ¬вҖ“
ЕёГҠГЈГҝЕ’ГҠпЈҝВ·пЈҝВ·ГҲ 
вҒ„Uв—ҠГғпЈҝ 
вҖҡГҠЕёвҖҡГҚГҝГҠ В¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГӢГҒГғВёГғГҠH 
(AtrismГҰti, 34)
Г¬He who does not detract from the merits of those possessing merits, praises even those of scanty
worth and does not take delight in the faults of others is said to possess the virtue of AnasВөuyГҘ.Г®

=== PAGE 423 ===

422
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
This knowledge has been described as
Г«GuhyatamamГӯ, Г«the most secret thingГӯ,
because of all secrets in the world the
knowledge of the true character, love, virtues,
glory, greatness and splendour etc., of the
integral Divinity or PuruВ¶ottama and the
conception of surrender to Him are the most
secret of all. Teachings of a similar nature
embodied in verse 20 of Chapter XV and
verse 64 of Chapter XVIII as well have been
called most secret by the Lord.
The world Г«evilГӯ here stands for all forms
of suffering and actions which are responsible
for the same, vices of all kinds, the shackles
of worldly existence in the form of birth and
death, and the origin of them all, viz., Ignorance.
Being rid of the evil of worldly existence,
therefore, means securing complete and lasting
immunity from all these and realizing God,
the embodiment of supreme Bliss.
In order to inspire ArjunaГӯs faith in, and love for, the teaching which He promised
to impart in the preceding verse, viz., the knowledge of absolute formless Brahma along
with the knowledge of the qualified aspect of God, both with and without form, and in
order to stimulate in him an ardent desire to hear it and carry it into practice, the Lord
now reveals the true glory of such knowledge.
вҒ„UГҠВЎГҒп¬ӮlГҠ 
вҒ„UГҠВЎВӘГҲsГ”Вў 
В¬ГҒп¬ӮГІГҠГҒв—ҠЕ’в—ҠГҲГ»ГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
В¬ЛқГ ГҝЛҮГҠГҠп¬ӮВӘв—ҠВў Е“ГӘГҝZ вҖҡГҲвҖҡГҲПҖВў вҲ‘В§ГғВёГҲв—ҠвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ”H 2H
вҒ„UГҠВЎГҒп¬ӮlГҠ a sovereign science; вҒ„UГҠВЎВӘГҲsГ”в—ҠЛңГ” a soveregin secret; В¬ГҒп¬ӮГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” most holy; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this
Knowledge (of absolute formless Brahma along with the Knowledge of the qualified aspect
of God with and without form); В©UГ»ГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” most excellent; В¬ЛқГ ГҝЛҮГҠГҠп¬ӮВӘв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” directly enjoyable; Е“ГӘГҝВёв—ҠЛңГ”
attended with virtue; вҖҡГҲвҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ” вҲ‘В§ГғГҲВёв—ҠЛңГ” very easy to practise; вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ” (and) imperishable.
This knowledge of both the NirguЖ’a and SaguЖ’a aspects of Divinity is a sovereign
science, a sovereign secret, supremely holy, most excellent, directly enjoyable, attended
with virtue, very easy to practise and imperishable.                        (2)
been fully dealt with in this knowledge.
Besides this, the Lord has unfolded His
whole secret here and revealed the truth that
He, who stood before Arjuna as вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a,
was none else than the Creator and Destroyer
of the whole universe, the substratum of all,
the Almighty Lord, the supreme Brahma,
and the supreme person, and that Arjuna
should completely surrender himself to Him.
Such a supreme secret could be revealed
only before a qualified and faithful devotee
like Arjuna, who was free from the carping
spirit, and not before anybody and everybody.
It is therefore that the Lord calls this knowledge
Г«a sovereign secretГӯ.
The word Г«IdamГӯ stands for the same
Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ and Г«VijВӨГҘnaГӯ, i.e., knowledge of
both the NirguЖ’a and SaguЖ’a aspects of
God, which the Lord undertook to unfold
in the preceding verse. The Knowledge
referred to here is superior to all other known
and unknown forms of knowledge; for him
who has truly assimilated this knowledge,
nothing remains to be known. It is therefore
that it has been spoken of as a Г«sovereign
scienceГӯ. The true nature of the qualified and
absolute, as well as of the manifest and
unmanifest aspects of God, His virtues, glory
and greatness, the process of His worship
and the fruit of such worship, all this has

=== PAGE 424 ===

* Chapter IX *
423
This knowledge is so edifying and
ennobling in character that whosoever hears
of and reflects on it and acts according to
it with faith is completely rid of all sins and
vices and is hallowed for all time to come.
It is therefore that it has been called Г«supremely
holyГӯ, and of all that is good and noble in
the world, it is the noblest and the best;
therefore, it has been characterized as Г«most
excellentГӯ.
The fruit of this knowledge of both the
NirguЖ’a and SaguЖ’a aspects of God is not
something invisible like effect of offering
oblations to oneГӯs departed ancestors. Even
as the SГҘdhaka advances on the path of self-
surrender to God, he is rid of his vices, evil
ways and sufferings, and begins to enjoy
supreme peace and incomparable bliss. Nay,
he who fully attains this knowledge immediately
realizes God, the ocean of supreme peace
and supreme bliss, supremely loving, highly
compassionate and friendly to all. It is
therefore that the Lord calls it Г«directly
enjoyableГӯ. And besides it does not come in
conflict with any other Dharmas or duties,
such as those enjoined by oneГӯs VarЖ’a or
grade in society and Г…вҖ№rama or stage in life;
and being a supreme virtue in itself, it is
superior to every other form of virtue. Hence
it is Г«attended with virtueГӯ or full of virtue.
Action performed with some interested
motive ceases after yielding its fruit. Even
so, worldly knowledge, once acquired, is
forgotten unless kept alive by constant
reference. This knowledge of the NirguЖ’a
and SaguЖ’a aspects of God is, however,
proof against decay. Once duly acquired, this
knowledge never gets lost under any
circumstance whatsoever. Moreover, its fruit
too is imperishable. Hence it is called Г«Г…vyayaГӯ
or imperishable. This should not, however,
lead anyone to conclude that because this
knowledge is of such a great moment, it must
be very difficult indeed to act according to
it and attain it. In order to obviate this
misapprehension the Lord says: Г¬It is very
easy to practise.Г® The long and short of it
is that the practice of self-surrender to God,
as advised in this chapter, is exceptionally
easy. For it involves no exertion of any kind,
nor does it require any external urdertaking
or preparation. To say nothing of those who
have attained perfection in it, the SГҘdhaka
treading this path begins to enjoy supreme
peace and incomparable bliss from the very
beginning of his practice.
If the knowledge of both the NirguЖ’a and SaguЖ’a aspects of God is of such a great
moment, and its practice also so very easy, one is tempted to ask: Why does everybody
not adopt the same? In order to show that failure to adopt it is mainly attributable to
want of faith, the Lord now proceeds to denounce those who do not repose faith in this
knowledge.
вҖўГјГҠgЕ“ГҠЕёГҠвҖ” В¬ГҲLВ§В·ГҠ Е“в—ҠВёSГҝГҠSГҝ В¬вҒ„UГЈГғВ¬Г”вҖ“
вҖўВ¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝ в—ҠГҠВў ГҒЕёп¬ӮГғВёГЈГғпЈҝ в—ҠГҺГ ГҝГҲвҖҡВўвҖҡГҠвҒ„Uп¬ӮГ в—ҠВёГҒЕёГ”H 3H
вҖўГјГҠgЕ“ГҠЕёГҠвҖ”Г” reposing no faith; В¬ГҲLВ§В·ГҠвҖ” people; Е“в—ҠВёSГҝ вҖўSГҝ in this Dharma; В¬вҒ„UГЈГғВ¬Г” O scorcher
of foes, Arjuna; вҖўВ¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝ failing to reach; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; ГҒЕёп¬ӮГғВёГЈГғпЈҝГ” revolve; в—ҠГҺГ ГҝГҲвҖҡВўвҖҡГҠвҒ„Uп¬ӮГ в—ҠВёГҒЕёГ” in the path
of the world of death.
Arjuna, people having no faith in this Dharma, failing to reach Me, continue
to revolve in the path of the world of birth and death.                                           (3)
The word Г«DharmasyaГӯ, with the
demonstrative adjective Г«AsyaГӯ qualifying it,
stands for the knowledge of the NirguЖ’a and
SaguЖ’a aspects of God, which has been extolled

=== PAGE 425 ===

424
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
in the preceding verse, and which has been
discussed in the whole of this chapter. Г«Reposing
no faith in this DharmaГӯ means entertaining
doubt and misconception about the statements
contained in this chapter regarding the essential
character, glory, virtues and greatness of God,
the means to His realization and the fruit of
such realization as untrue, far from possible
and contrary to facts, belittling them as nothing
but sentiments couched in an attractive garb,
and entertaining other such notions which run
counter to faith.
Г«AвҖ№raddadhГҘnГҘВЁГӯ (lacking in faith) refers
to those who having no faith in the essential
character, virtues, glory and greatness etc. of
God, do not practise devotion to Him in any
form and fritter away their human existence,
which is such a rare acquisition, in enjoying
worldly pleasures and obtaining the means
to such enjoyment.
In course of his peregrination through
eight million and four hundred thousand
varieties of existence as living beings, the
JвҲӮva rarely attains the human body through
the grace of God for securing liberation from
the cycle of births and deaths, and realizing
God. Even after obtaining such a rare boon
in the shape of human existence, those who
fail to practise adoration and meditation etc.,
through lack of faith in the teachings of the
Lord are unable to realize God and begin
to revolve as heretofore in the whirligig of
births and deaths. This is what the Lord
seeks to convey through this verse.
Commencing His teaching on the NirguЖ’a and SaguЖ’a aspects of God, which He
promised to impart and extolled in the foregoing verses, the Lord now proceeds first of
all to describe His Unmanifest aspect along with Its glory.
в—ҠГҝГҠ 
ГғГғГҒв—ҠЕ’Вў 
вҖҡп¬ӮZ 
ВЎВӘЕ’вҲҡГҝQВ§в—ҠГҚГҢГғЕёГҠГ”вҖ“
в—ҠГ SГ•ГҠГҒЕё вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё Её ГёГҠвҖһВўU ГғпЈҝcп¬Ӯп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғвҖ”Г”H 4H
в—ҠГҝГҠГ” by Me; ГғГғв—ҠЛңГ” is permeated (as ice by water); ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this; вҖҡп¬ӮВёв—ҠЛңГ” entire; ВЎВӘГғЛңГ” universe;
вҖўвҲҡГҝQВ§в—ҠГҚГҢГғЕёГҠ as unmanifest Divinity; в—ҠГ SГ•ГҠГҒЕё rest on (the idea within) Me; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕёГ” all beings;
Её not; Гё and; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” (therefore, really speaking,) I; ГғпЈҝВ·ГҲГ” in them; вҖўп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғвҖ” (am) present.
The whole of this universe is permeated by Me as unmanifest Divinity (like ice
by water), and all beings rest on the idea within Me. Therefore, really speaking,
I am not present in them.                                                                  (4)
the whole universe consisting of the entire
sentient and insentient creation.
Even as the air, fire, water and earth
are permeated by ether, an ornament of gold
is permeated by gold, and earthenware is
permeated by earth, so is the entire universe
permeated by the unmanifest aspect of God
with attributes, who is its Creator. The вҖәruti
says:Гі
Г¬Whatever sentient and insentient creation
there is in this universe, all that is permeated
by God.Г®* (IвҖ№opaniВ¶ad, II.I)
The word Г«AvyaktamВөurtinГҘГӯ stands for
that all-pervading, formless Divinity with
attributes, who has been referred to as
Г«AdhiyajВӨaГӯ in verse 4 of Chapter VIII, as
the Г«supreme Divine PuruВ¶aГӯ in verses 8 and
10, as Г«the all-wise eternal BeingГӯ in verse
9, as the Г«UnmanifestГӯ and Г«IndestructibleГӯ in
verses 20 and 21, and as Г«the supreme
PuruВ¶a attainable only through exclusive
DevotionГӯ in verse 22.
The word Г«JagatГӯ, with the adjectives
Г«IdamГӯ and Г«SarvamГӯ qualifying it, stands for
*
ГҹВёвүҘГҠГҠп¬ӮГҠSГҝГҒв—ҠЕ’Г¶Г”вҖҡп¬ӮZ ГҝГҒГ вҲ‘В§@ ВЎВӘГ ГҝГҠВў ВЎВӘГғЛңГ”вҖ“

=== PAGE 426 ===

* Chapter IX *
425
The word Г«SarvabhВөutГҘniГӯ in this verse
stands for all sentient and insentient beings,
including their bodies, senses, mind, intellect,
and their objects, as well as the abodes of
such beings. Laying hold of His PrakГҰti, God
Himself creates, sustains, and destroys the
universe; it is He who holds this entire
creation in an infinitesimal part of His Being
(X.42); and He alone is the goal, sustainer,
abode, support, restingplace, origin, end and
repository of all (IX.18). In this way the
existence of all beings depends on God. It
is therefore that the verse speaks of all beings
as resting in God.
Though permeating every atom of this
universe, even as the atmosphere pervades
every particle of a cloud, God is entirely
beyond the world, and absolutely unconnected
with it. He remains intact even when the
entire universe is no more, just as the
atmosphere remains intact even after the
dispersal of the cloud. God does not cease
with the cessation of the world. He shines in
His glory even where there is no trace of any
material existence. This is what the Lord
seeks to bring out when He says that really
speaking, He is not in beings. In other words,
He is eternally existent in His own Self.
The statement of the Lord: Г«I am not
in them,Гӯ may be explained in other ways
also as given below:Гі
Just as all living beings and objects seen
in a dream being in the dreamer, the latter
is not wholly limited by the objects of his
dream, but exists beyond them as well, even
so God, though permeating the whole universe,
is not limited by it inasmuch as the latter
exists in a fraction of His Being. Thus, being
greater than the world, and its substratum,
He is not in the world alone.
Secondly, a dreamer, though directly
perceiving all the objects of dream in the
course of his dream, has really no connection
whatsoever with such objects or with the acts
of his dream, and remains wholly beyond
and unconnected with the dream-world; he
existed before the dream, exists even while
dreaming, and will exist after waking from
the dream. Even so God ever exists and does
not cease even when the whole world ceases
to exist. On the other hand, He shines in His
own glory even where there is no trace of
the world. Thus, being altogether beyond the
world, and unattached to it, He is not in the
world.
Thirdly, just as the objects perceived in
a dream being really non-different from the
dreamer, nay, his very self, he is not in them,
but he alone exists, even so, the world being
identical with God, nay, the very Self of
God, He is not in the world, but He alone is.
Thus, being the substratum of the world,
and wholly beyond it, and the world being
His very Self, God is not in the world. From
the monistic standpoint this view also is quite
correct.
Её Гё в—ҠГ SГ•ГҠГҒЕё Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё В¬вүҘГҝ в—ҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠГ’EвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
Г·ГҚГғГ·ГҺГӣГҠ Гё Г·ГҚГғSГ•ГҠпЈҝ в—Ҡв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠГҠ Г·ГҚГғГ·ГҠп¬ӮЕёвҖ”Г”H 5H
Её not; ГёГ” and; в—ҠГ SГ•ГҠГҒЕё abiding in Me; Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё (all those) beings; В¬вүҘГҝ behold; в—ҠпЈҝ Mine;
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ” (the wonderful power of) My divine Yoga; вҲһпЈҝEвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” Г·ГҚГғГ·ГҺГғЛңГ” the Sustainer of beings; Её not;
Гё and; Г·ГҚГғSГ•вҖ” dwelling in beings; в—Ҡв—Ҡ Mine; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠ Self; Г·ГҚГғГ·ГҠп¬ӮЕёвҖ” the Creator of beings.
Nay, all those beings abide not in Me; but behold the wonderful power of My
divine Yoga; though the Sustainer and Creator of beings, Myself in reality dwells
not in those beings.                                                      (5)
The preceding verse stated that all
beings abide in God; whereas in the present
verse the Lord says, Г¬Those beings do not
abide in Me.Г® How are these contradictory

=== PAGE 427 ===

426
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
statements to be reconciled ? By inviting
Arjuna to behold the wonderful power of
His divine Yoga in this connection the Lord
indicates that what appears impossible on the
face of it can be made possible by the
miraculous power of His divine Yoga. Just
as a cloud both does and does not exist in
the atmosphere, even so the world exists, and
also does not exist in Him. The entire world
is a creation of His power of Yoga, and He
is its substratum; therefore all beings exist in
Him. And notwithstanding this, He is wholly
beyond them all; hence the world does not
exist in Him. Therefore, so long as the world
exists in oneГӯs conception, everything abides
in God; the world has no other substratum
than God. And when a man realizes God,
nothing exists in his conception but God;
therefore in the eyes of him who has attained
this state, the world does not exist in God.
The statement of the Lord contained in
this verse can also be interpreted in a
different way so as to confirm rather than
contradict what He stated in the preceding
verse. When it is conceded that as the dream-
world rests on the thought of the dreamer,
even so the entire universe hangs on GodГӯs
thought alone, and that really speaking there
is no existence apart from God, it will be
easy to understand the statement of the Lord
that Г«those beings do not abideГӯ in Him. If
so, how does the world appear before the
eyes? What is the secret of its appearance?
Anticipating this question the Lord says,
Г¬That is a miracle of My wonderful power
of Yoga. The world does appear in Me, and
in reality nothing exists apart from Me. How
wonderful !Г® That is to say, so long as the
world exists in the eyes of man, everything
abides in God; the world has no other
substratum than God. And in reality God
alone is everything, nothing exists but God.
On realizing God, the SГҘdhaka directly
perceives this truth. In the eyes of such a
God-realized soul nothing exists apart from
God. Therefore, it is quite correct to say that
those beings do not really exist in
God. From the monistic standpoint this
interpretation appears to be quite sound.
The words Г«AiвҖ№varam YogamГӯ denote
the wonderful power, possessed by none
other than God, of remaining absolutely
detached from everything, even though creating
and sustaining everything, and pervading the
whole creation. While inviting Arjuna to
behold the wonderful power of His divine
Yoga, the Lord refers to all the facts mentioned
in this and the preceding verse.
By using the words Г«Mama Г…tmГҘГӯ the
Lord refers to His qualified, formless aspect.
For it is this formless aspect of God possessed
of attributes, that creates and sustains this
universe. This is what the Lord means by
speaking of His Self as Г«the Sustainer and
Creator of beingsГӯ. But, nevertheless God is
in reality wholly beyond this world. It is,
therefore, that the verse says: Г¬He dwells not
in those beings.Г®
In the preceding verses the Lord stated that all beings are permeated by, and dwell
in His unmanifest aspect. In order to elucidate the point further, the idea is explained
in the following verse by means of an illustration.
ГҝГ•ГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҠГҒSГ•ГғГҠпЈҝ ГҒЕёГ ГҝВў п¬ӮГҠГҝГҲвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠВӘГҠпЈҝ в—ҠвҖһUГҠЕёЛңГ”вҖ“
ГғГ•ГҠ вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё в—ҠГ SГ•ГҠЕёГӢГ ГҝГҲВ¬Е“ГҠвҒ„UГҝГ”H 6H
ГҝГ•ГҠГ” just as; вҖўГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҠГҒSГ•ГғвҖ”Г” ГҒЕёГ Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” (is) ever present in ether (because born of ether); п¬ӮГҠГҝГҲвҖ”
air; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠВӘвҖ” moving everywhere; в—ҠвҖһUГҠЕёЛңГ” the extensive; ГғГ•ГҠ even so; вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё all beings
(because they have originated from My thought); в—ҠГ SГ•ГҠГҒЕё (are) dwelling in Me; ГҹГҒГғ thus;
В©UВ¬Е“ГҠвҒ„UГҝ know.

=== PAGE 428 ===

* Chapter IX *
427
In order to bring out the similarity of
all beings with air, the terms Г«MahГҘnГӯ and
Г«SarvatragaВЁГӯ have been used with reference
to air. That is to say, just as the air has access
all round, even so all beings are ever
wandering from one state of existence to
another; and just as the air is very extensive
in volume, even so the multitude of beings
is very large.
The air has its origin in ether, it stays
in ether, and also disappears into ether. This
is what is sought to be conveyed by the use
of the word Г«NityamГӯ with reference to
Г«Г…kГҘвҖ№asthitaВЁГӯ. The intention is to show that
at every moment and under all circumstances
ether is the substratum of air.
Like ether, God is uniform, formless,
actionless, infinite, unattached and immutable;
and like the air, all beings spring from God,
abide in God and finally merge into God. This
is what is sought to be conveyed by the simile
employed in this verse. Sprung from ether,
remaining in and finally disappearing into ether,
air can never and under no circumstance remain
apart from ether, but ever remains in it; and
yet ether has no connection whatsoever with
the air or its movement and other changes in
it, and is always beyond it. Even so, since
the emanation, existence and dissolution of
beings are events that take place only in the
thought of God, the whole multitude of beings
exist in God alone; and yet God is entirely
beyond those beings, and is always wholly
immune from all sorts of changes.
While discussing the knowledge of the NirguЖ’a and SaguЖ’a aspects of God, and its
glory, the Lord depicted so far the all-pervasive, unattached and immutable character of
His formless aspect just with a view to revealing the truth about it. Now, while elucidating
His character as the creator of beings, He refers in the next two verses to the destruction
of being during the final dissolution, and to their emanation at the beginning of the next
creation, with a view to explaining the truth of His acts of creation etc.
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғВў ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ в—ҠГҠГҒв—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҲ‘В§ГҖВ¬ЛҮГҠГҝпЈҝ В¬ГҲЕёSГғГҠГҒЕё вҲ‘В§ГҖВ¬ГҠЕ’ГҠГ’ ГҒп¬ӮвҖҡГҺВЎГҠГӘГҝвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”H 7H
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё all beings; вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝГ” O son of KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna; В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” PrakГҰti; ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ enter; в—ҠГҠГҒв—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠЛңГ”
Mine; вҲ‘В§ГҖВ¬ЛҮГҠГҝпЈҝ during the final dissolution; В¬ГҲЕёвҖ” again; ГғГҠГҒЕё them; вҲ‘В§ГҖВ¬ГҠЕ’ГҠГ’ at the beginning
of creation; ГҒп¬ӮвҖҡГҺВЎГҠГҒв—Ҡ send forth; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I.
Arjuna, during the final dissolution all beings enter My PrakГҰti (the Prime
Cause), and at the beginning of creation, I send them forth again.            (7)
Just as the extensive air, which is moving everywhere, (being born of ether)
ever remains in ether, likewise, know that all beings (who have originated from My
thought) abide in Me.                                                    (6)
A whole daytime of BrahmГҘ is known
as a Г«KalpaГӯ, and his nights are also of the
same duration. Taking this as a unit we can
gauge the extent of a whole lifetime of
BrahmГҘ consisting of a hundred years. The
word Г«KalpakВ¶ayaГӯ denotes the expiry of a
whole lifetime of BrahmГҘ. It is also known
as the final dissolution (MahГҘpralaya).
The word Г«SarvabhВөutГҘniГӯ stands for all
sentient and insentient beings, including their
body, senses, mind, intellect, objects of
enjoyment and abodes etc.
Г«PrakГҰtiГӯ denotes the prime cause of the
universe, or Primordial Nature, which has

=== PAGE 429 ===

428
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
been referred to as Г«MahadbrahmaГӯ in verses
3 and 4 of Chapter XIV, and which is also
called Г«PradhГҘnaГӯ or undifferentiated Matter.
By calling it Г«MГҘmikГҘmГӯ (Mine) the Lord
indicates that this PrakГҰti is His own Energy.
During the final dissolution all embodied
beings, including their body, senses, mind,
intellect, objects of enjoyment and abodes,
get dissolved into PrakГҰti. In other words,
they return to Primordial Nature along with
their causal body, consisting of the latencies
of their guЖ’as and karmas. This is what is
meant by the entering of all beings in PrakГҰti.
It will be remembered that verses 18
and 19 of Chapter VIII also speak of the
emanation of beings from the Unmanifest at
the commencement of the cosmic day, and
of their merging into the same at the
commencement of the cosmic night. It will,
therefore, be relevant to ask here: Is that
Г«UnmanifestГӯ the same as the PrakГҰti referred
to in this verse? And is there any difference
between the dissolution of beings into that
Unmanifest and the entering of beings in this
PrakГҰti? A reference to those verses will
show that the Unmanifest spoken of there
refers to the formless or subtle state of
PrakГҰti, and not to Primordial Nature. All
embodied beings dissolve into that Unmanifest
with their subtle bodies, whereas they merge
into Primordial PrakГҰti with their causal
bodies. In the former state, BrahmГҘ
(the Creator) does not lose his identity; he
only sleeps. And in the latter state BrahmГҘ
himself disappears. Thus there is a world
of difference even between the dissolution
of beings referred to in the above-mentioned
verses and the final dissolution spoken
of here.
Again, in verse 6 of Chapter VII, the
Lord stated that the entire creation disappeared
into Him; whereas, in the present verse, He
speaks of beings merging in PrakГҰti. Both
these statements are correct; in fact, they
represent the same thing. It has been already
submitted that PrakГҰti is GodГӯs own energy
or power; and energy or power can never
be separated from its possessor. In this way
dissolution in PrakГҰti is just the same as
dissolution in God. Therefore, this verse
speaks of all beings entering PrakГҰti. And
since this PrakГҰti belongs to God and has
God for its substratum, it is He in whom
everything dissolves. In this way both these
statements convey the same thing.
At the end of the period of final
dissolution, which is of the same length as
the span of BrahmГҘГӯs life consisting of a full
hundred years of his measurement, the desire
arises in God for evolving a new creation,
so as to enable the JвҲӮvas to work out their
respective karmas. The point of time when
this desire springs up in God is referred to
here as Г«KalpГҘdiГӯ or the beginning of creation.
It is also known as the commencement of
a Г«MahГҘsargaГӯ or new creation after final
dissoluiton. At that time God revolves from
His thought BrahmГҘ or HiraЖ’yagarbha with
his abode for starting the process of creation
of beings. This is what is meant by His
sending forth beings at the beginning of
every new creation.
В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғВў Sп¬ӮГҠв—Ҡп¬ӮCГ”UГЁГҝ ГҒп¬ӮвҖҡГҺВЎГҠГҒв—Ҡ В¬ГҲЕёвҖ” В¬ГҲЕёвҖ”Г”вҖ“
Г·ГҚГғВӘЛқГҠв—ҠГҒв—Ҡв—ҠВў 
вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г Fв—Ҡп¬ӮвүҘГҠВў 
В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғпЈҝп¬ӮВёвүҘГҠГҠГғЛңГ”H 8H
В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” PrakГҰti or Nature; Sп¬ӮГҠв—ҠЛңГ” My own; вҖўп¬ӮCГ”UГЁГҝ wielding; ГҒп¬ӮвҖҡГҺВЎГҠГҒв—Ҡ (I) release (according
to their respective karmas); В¬ГҲЕёвҖ” В¬ГҲЕёвҖ” again and again, repeatedly; Г·ГҚГғВӘЛқГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” multitude of beings;
Гҹв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” this; вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г Fв—ҠЛңГ” all; вҖўп¬ӮвүҘГҠв—ҠЛңГ” compelled; В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғпЈҝвҖ” of their own individual nature; п¬ӮвүҘГҠГҠГғЛңГ” by force.
Wielding My Nature I release, again and again, (according to their respective
karmas) all this multitude of beings subject to the influence of their own nature.  (8)

=== PAGE 430 ===

* Chapter IX *
429
Nature, and the individual nature of a JвҲӮva
is a part of that cosmic Nature. Remaining
tied down to this individual nature is what
is meant by Г«being subject to the influence
of their own natureГӯ.
He who having surrendered himself to
God cuts asunder the bond of this nature,
no longer remains under its subjection. He
reaches God, beyond PrakГҰti, and realizes
Him (VII.14).
So long as the JвҲӮva remains under the
subjection of his nature, He brings them forth
again and again at the beginning of every
round of creation in different species as
heretofore according to their respective GuЖ’as
and Karmas.
The word Г«PrakГҰtimГӯ, with the adjective
Г«SvГҘmГӯ qualifying it, stands for Primordial
Nature, in which, according to the preceding
verse, all beings enter. And when God
recalls this PrakГҰti, which lies hidden within
Him in the form of a potentiality for carrying
on the work of creation etc., He is said to
wield His Nature for that purpose.
Г«BhВөutagrГҘmamГӯ accompanied by Г«ImamГӯ
and Г«KГҰtsnamГӯ stands for the totality of
embodied beings, both sentient and insentient,
already referred to by the term Г«SarvabhВөutГҘniГӯ
occurring in the foregoing verse. The word
Г«PrakГҰteВЁГӯ refers to the individual nature of
these beings, formed out of their respective
GuЖ’as and Karmas. GodГӯs PrakГҰti is cosmic
Even while thus engaged in the act of creation etc., of the universe, God is never bound
by His actions. With a view to revealing this secret of divine action, the Lord now says:
Её Гё в—ҠГҠВў ГғГҠГҒЕё вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ ГҒЕёвҖҷГӨЕёГ”ГҒГЈГғ Е“ЕёTГҝГ”вҖ“
В©UЕ’ГҠвҖҡГӢЕёп¬ӮЕ’ГҠвҖҡГӢЕёв—ҠвҖҡQВўВ§ 
ГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ 
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡГҲГ”H 9H
Её not; Гё and; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me (the supreme Spirit); ГғГҠГҒЕё those; вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ actions; ГҒЕёвҖҷГӨЕёГҒГЈГғ bind;
Е“ЕёTГҝ O conqueror of riches, Arjuna; В©UЕ’ГҠвҖҡГӢЕёп¬ӮГғЛңГ” apart as it were; вҖўГҠвҖҡГӢЕёв—ҠЛңГ” standing; вҖўвҖҡQВ§в—ҠЛңГ”
unattached; ГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡГҲ to those actions.
Arjuna, those actions, however, do not bind Me, unattached as I am to such
actions, Myself standing apart, as it were.                                     (9)
standing apart as it were from those actions.
It is only because He remains unattached to
those actions and their fruit, and because He
entertains no sense of doership or partiality
in respect of such actions, that those actions
do not bind him.
This shows that even in the case of
others the easiest way to get rid of bondage
in the form of fruits of actions, such as birth
and death, joy and grief, pleasure and pain
etc., is what has been stated above. He who,
knowing this secret of Karma, acts without
attachment to fruits, and without the sense
of doership, easily escapes from the binding
effect of Karma.
Г«Tesu KarmasuГӯ refers to all such acts
as are performed by God for the creation,
maintenance and destruction etc., of the
universe, and which have already been briefly
referred to in the preceding verse. God has
no attachment whatsoever for those actions
or their fruit: this is what is meant by His
remaining unattached to those actions. And
He remains altogether unconcerned with,
and devoid of the sense of doership and
partiality in respect of all those activities for
the creation etc., of beings which are being
carried on under His supervision by PrakГҰti
according to the GuЖ’as and Karmas of those
beings. This is what the Lord means by His

=== PAGE 431 ===

430
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
In order to explain the absence of doership ascribed to Him in the above verse by
the words Г«UdГҘsвҲӮnavad Г…sвҲӮnam,Гӯ the Lord now says:
в—ҠГҝГҠГӨГҝЛҮГҠпЈҝГЎГҠ В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғвҖ” вҖҡГҚГҝГғпЈҝ вҖҡГёвҒ„UГҠГёвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖһпЈҝUГғГҲЕёГҠЕёпЈҝЕё 
вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ 
ВЎВӘГҒmВ¬ГҒвҒ„Uп¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝГ”H 10H
в—ҠГҝГҠ вҖўГӨГҝЛҮГҠпЈҝГЎГҠ with Me as the supervisor; В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғвҖ”Г” PrakГҰti (Nature); вҖҡГҚГҝГғпЈҝГ” brings forth;
вҖҡГёвҒ„UГҠГёвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” (the whole creation) consisting of sentient and insentient beings; вҖһпЈҝUГғГҲЕёГҠГ” вҖўЕёпЈҝЕё due
to this cause (alone); вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ O son of KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna; ВЎВӘГғЛңГ” (the wheel of) SaвүҲsГҘra; ГҒп¬ӮВ¬ГҒвҒ„Uп¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝ
is going round.
Arjuna, with Me Presiding, Nature brings forth the whole creation, consisting
of both sentient and insentient beings; it is due to this cause that the wheel of SaвүҲsГҘra
is going round.
(10)
from Him and it is through His energy that
it brings forth the entire creation.
In short, it is GodГӯs supervision and the
doership of PrakГҰti, that are responsible for
all such activities as the creation, maintenance
and destruction of the universe. This is what
is sought to be conveyed by the latter half
of the verse.
In verse 13 of Chapter IV and again
in verse 8 of this chapter, the Lord stated
that it was He who brought forth the multitude
of beings in their different forms, whereas
in the present verse He says that the whole
creation consisting of sentient and insentient
beings is evolved by PrakГҰti. Though these
two 
statements 
appear 
as 
mutually
contradictory, there is really speaking no
contradiction between them. Statements in
which the Lord declares Himself to be the
Creator of the world should be understood
to mean that He does not actually create the
world Himself, but that He does so through
the medium of His energy, viz., PrakГҰti,
which He wields on such occasions. And
where He speaks of Nature as carrying on
the creation etc., of the world it should be
understood that the latter does so under His
supervision; for she derives her existence and
activity from Him. She cannot do anything
independently without the backing of God.
It is, therefore, that the Lord said in verse 8,
By calling Himself a mere supervisor,
the Lord indicates that with reference to the
processes of creation etc., of this universe the
Lord stands as a mere presiding Spirit to
whom Nature owes its existence and activity;
and that deriving its existence and  activity
from Him, it is His PrakГҰti which carries on
all such activities as the creation of this
unvierse.
The cultivator himself unites the seed
with the earth as a supervisor; the earth then
brings forth varieties of plants according to
the seeds sown by the cultivator. So does
God sow the seed of life in PrakГҰti as
supervising agent (XIV.3). In this way when
union between Matter and Spirit has been
brought about, PrakГҰti evolves the entire
creation of both sentient and insentient beings
in various species of life according to the
respective karma of each being.
This illustration has been given only to
convey a rough idea of the process; in reality
however, there is no similarity between the
cultivator and God. For the cultivator, on the
one hand, has a limited knowledge and
limited power and is confined to a limited
space, and he cannot make the earth yield
anything by communicating his own strength
or energy. God, on the other hand, is all-
knowing, all-powerful and all-pervading.
Nature itself derives its existence and activity

=== PAGE 432 ===

* Chapter IX *
431
Г¬Wielding My Nature, I bring forth the
creation;Г® whereas in the present verse He
says: Г¬With Me as the supervisor, Nature
evolves the universe.Г® In reality, these two
statements represent the same fact from two
different points of view.
While discussing the knowledge of the SaguЖ’a and NirguЖ’a aspects of God as
promised by Him, the Lord dealt with in verses 4 to 6 of this chapter the secret and
glory of His formless aspect with attributes. Thereafter, showing in verses 7 to 10, His
non-attachment and indifference to all such activities as the creation of the world, He
pointed out the secret of the transcendence of such actions. Now, in order to bring out
the importance of his qualified and embodied aspect, the way to adore Him through
devotion, and the secret of His virtues and glory, He proceeds in the next two verses
to denounce those men of a demoniac disposition, who are ignorant of His greatness.
вҖўп¬ӮВЎГҠЕёГҒГЈГғ в—ҠГҠВў в—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҠ в—ҠГҠЕёГҲВ·ГӢВҘ ГғЕёГҲв—ҠГҠГҒГјГҠГғв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
В¬вҒ„ВўU Г·ГҠп¬Ӯв—ҠВЎГҠЕёГЈГғГҠпЈҝ в—Ҡв—Ҡ Г·ГҚГғв—ҠвҖһпЈҝUEвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”H 11H
вҖўп¬ӮВЎГҠЕёГҒГЈГғ think low of; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; в—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҠвҖ”Г” fools; в—ҠГҠЕёГҲВ·ГӢв—ҠЛңГ” ГғЕёГҲв—ҠЛңГ” a human semblance; вҖўГҠГҒГјГҠГғв—ҠЛңГ”
having assumed; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” Г·ГҠп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” supreme nature; вҖўВЎГҠЕёГЈГғвҖ”Г” not knowing; в—Ҡв—Ҡ Mine; Г·ГҚГғв—ҠвҖһпЈҝUEвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” the
supreme Lord of (the entire) Creation.
Fools, not knowing My supreme nature, think low of Me, the Overlord of the
entire creation, who have assumed the human form. (That is to say, they take Me,
who have appeared in human form through My YogamГҘyГҘ for the deliverance of
the world, for an ordinary mortal.)                                      (11)
divine potency (IV.6Гі8). Those who are
ignorant of this secret and have no faith in
it are referred to here as not knowing the
supreme nature of the Lord.
The word Г«MВөuЕ’hГҘВЁГӯ (fools), in this verse,
stands for men possessed of a fiendish and
demonical nature, referred to in the next verse
as well as in VII.15, and whose distinguishing
marks have been discussed in verses 7 to 20
of Chapter XVI. Not knowing His transcendent
glory as the supreme Lord of all embodied
beings, from BrahmГҘ, the Creator, down to
the tiniest insect such fools look down upon
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a as an ordinary human being just
like themselves, and therefore disobey His
commands and level absurd charges against
Him. This is what is meant when the Lord
says, Г¬Fools think low of Me.Г®*
The substantive Г«BhГҘvamГӯ with its
qualification Г«ParamГӯ, in this verse, stands for
that supreme glory of the Lord, which has
been represented in verses 4 to 6 in the form
of attributes such as Г«all-pervasivenessГӯ etc.,
nay, which has been further referred to as
His Г«divine YogaГӯ, and which has been
spoken of in verse 24 of Chapter VII as
screened from the knowledge of the unwise.
Out of compassion for all embodied souls
and in order to take them all under His
protection, and with a view to establishing
Dharma, redeeming His devotees and enacting
various other sports, the all-pervading and
all-powerful God, who is the substratum of
all, and who creates and destroys the whole
universe, Himself appeared in a human form
as вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a through His own YogamГҘyГҘ of
* The venerable BhismГҘ related to Duryodhana a dialogue between BrahmГҘ and other celestials about
BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a. That gives an indication of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a's glory. Cautioning the celetials, BrahmГҘ said:

=== PAGE 433 ===

432
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
those whose knowledge bears no fruitful
result, and is founded neither on truth, nor
on reasoning (XVIII.22). Regarding worldly
enjoyments, real and delightful, men who
possess no knowledge of GodГӯs glory remain
addicted to such enjoyments. They erroneously
believe that the highest joy consists only in
the enjoyment of sensuous pleasures, and
that there is nothing higher than that (XVI.11);
it is, therefore, that they remain deprived of
true happiness. Hence they have been spoken
of as Г«MoghajВӨГҘnГҘВЁГӯ. Misusing their faculty
of knowledge, such men wantonly throw it
away.
Those whose mind is distracted, and is
ever unsteady, because of its attachment to
the various objects of the world, are called
Г«VicetasaВЁГӯ. The mind of men possessed of
a demoniac temperament goes on frisking
every moment from one thought to another.
The term Г«MoghГҘвҖ№ГҘВЁГӯ stands for men
possessed of hopes and aspirations which
never reach their fulfilment. Such vain hopes
are always nursed by men of the demoniac
type, who have no idea of GodГӯs glory and
power (XVI.10Гі12). Hence they have been
spoken of as Г«MoghГҘвҖ№ГҘВЁГӯ in this verse.
Г«MoghakarmГҘЖ’aВЁГӯ refers to those whose
activities in the form of sacrificial performance,
charity and austere penance etc., are futile,
i.e., do not yield the fruit promised in the
scriptures. Sacrifices etc., performed without
faith, and in contravention of scriptural
ordinance, by low types of worldly-minded
men, who possess no faith in God nor in
the scriptures, bring them no fruit either in
this world or in the next. That is why such
men have been called Г«MoghakarmГҘЖ’aВЁГӯ, or
indulging in futile actions (XVI.23; XVII.28).
The word Г«MoghajВӨГҘnГҘВЁГӯ stands for
в—ҠГҠпЈҝГүГҠГҠвүҘГҠГҠ в—ҠГҠпЈҝГүГҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠпЈҝГүГҠГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠ ГҒп¬ӮГёпЈҝГғвҖҡвҖ”вҖ“
вҒ„UГҠЛҮГҠвҖҡГӢв—ҠГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„UГӢВҘ ГёГ’п¬Ӯ В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғВў в—ҠГҠпЈҝГҒвҖһUЕёГӢВҘ ГҒГјГҠГғГҠвҖ”Г”H 12H
в—ҠГҠпЈҝГүГҠГҠвүҘГҠГҠвҖ” cherishirg vain hopes; в—ҠГҠпЈҝГүГҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГЎГҠвҖ” indulging in futile pursuits; в—ҠГҠпЈҝГүГҠГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠвҖ”Г” possessing
fruitless knowledge; ГҒп¬ӮГёпЈҝГғвҖҡвҖ” bewildered persons; вҒ„UГҠЛҮГҠвҖҡГӢв—ҠЛңГ”  fiendish; вҖўГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„UГӢв—ҠЛңГ” demoniac; Гё and;
вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” nature; в—ҠГҠпЈҝГҒвҖһUЕёГӢв—ҠЛңГ” delusive; ГҒГјГҠГғГҠвҖ” have adopted.
Those bewildered persons with vain hopes, futile actions and fruitless knowledge
and are possessed of a fiendish, demoniacal and delusive nature.                 (12)
Г«Г«BhagavГҘn VГҘsudeva (son of Vasudeva) the supreme Lord of all the worlds, is worthy of adoration to you
all. вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, who bears the marks of BhagavГҘn ViВ¶Ж’u Himself, viz., His conch, discus, and club, wields
extraordinary power. Never despise Him as an ordinary human being. He is the supreme secret, the supreme
goal, the supreme Reality and the supreme glory. He is indestructible, unmanifest, eternal, the supreme Effulgence,
the Supreme Bliss and the Supreme Truth. No celestial nor the lord of heaven, Indra, much less any human
being, should ever ignore Lord VГҘsudeva, the possessor of infinite strength, treating Him as a human being. He
is the Ruler of all senses. Fools, who declare Him to be an ordinary man, are the most vile among men. This great
Master of Yoga is the very soul of the entire creation. He bears the distinguishing mark of вҖәrвҲӮvatsa (a curl of
golden hair on the chest). He is the same as the most illustrious ViВ¶Ж’u, who has a lotus sprung from His navel.
Those who insult Him holding Him to be an ordinary mortal, and fail to recognize Him in His true colour, are
possessed of a TГҘmasika disposition. BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a bears a typical diadem on His head and the celebrated
Kaustubha jewel on His chest, and dispels the fear of His friends. He who treats him with contumely is condemned
to the most terrible hell.
вҲһп¬ӮВў ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ’Г п¬ӮГҠ ГғГ»п¬ӮГҠГ•Z вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠЕёГҠв—ҠГӢEвҒ„пЈҝUEвҒ„UвҖ”вҖ“ п¬ӮГҠвҖҡГҲЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠпЈҝвҖ” Еёв—ҠSвҲ‘В§ГҠГҝВёвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§вҖ” вҖҡГҲвҒ„UГҠпЈҝГ»ГҠв—ҠГҠвҖ”H  (MahГҘ., BhвҲӮВ¶ma. 66.23)
Г«Г«O great celestials, knowing thus His essential character, all should humbly bow their heads to
BhagavГҘn VГҘsudeva, the Supreme Lord of all creation.ГӯГӯ

=== PAGE 434 ===

* Chapter IX *
433
That is why such persons have been spoken
of as Г«VicetasaВЁГӯ, or bewildered.
He who is disposed, like fiends, to bear
ill will towards others without any rhyme or
reason, as well as to injure others and inflict
suffering on them is said to possess a
Г«fiendish nature.Гӯ Even so, the tendency to
persecute others, and rob them of their
legitimate dues or possessions out of lust or
greed, and with a view to achieving oneГӯs
own selfish ends is called a Г«demoniac
dispositionГӯ. And lastly, the proclivity to
inflict suffering on others through error of
judgment or delusion, is known as the
delusive nature. Instead of trying to renounce
such vicious propensities he who deliberately
clings to them, believing them to be good
and desirable, is said to have Г«embraced such
natures.Гӯ Men who have no knowledge of
the glory of God generally do so; that is why
they have been spoken of as having embraced
such a nature.
The use of the indeclinable Г«EvaГӯ indicates
that such men invariably embrace the fiendish,
demoniacal and delusive nature, and never
adopt the divine nature.
cultivate such virtues is what is meant by
Г«imbued with the divine natureГӯ.
Г«MahГҘtmГҘГӯ means one who possesses a
great soul. And a great soul is he who has
clung to God in every way with the object
of achieving his great aim of God-realization.
Therefore, the term Г«MahГҘtmГҘnaВЁГӯ has been
used in the present verse to indicate those
disinterested devotees of God who love none
else than God, who are ever steeped in
divine love, and who are from every point
of view qualified for God-realization.
The word Г«MГҘmГӯ (Me) refers to God
with attributes, or PuruВ¶ottama (the Supreme
The indeclinable Г«TuГӯ has been employed
in this verse with a view to bringing out the
contrast between the low types of ingorant
men, possessed of the demoniac nature, as
described in verses 11 and 12 above, and
the superior type of men, possessed of
special merit, described in the present verse.
The word Г«PrakГҰtimГӯ, along with the
adjective Г«DaivвҲӮmГӯ qualifying it, singnifies virtues
of the SГҘttvika type, which essentially belong
to God (Deva) and lead one to the realization
of God, and which have been mentioned in
verses 1 to 3 of Chapter XVI under 26 different
names, such as Г«FearlessnessГӯ etc. To adopt and
Denouncing in the above words men possessed of the demoniac nature, who have
no idea of the glory of God, the Lord now proceeds to describe the marks of the superior
type of devotees, who are conversant with the glory of God, love none else than God,
and have embraced the divine nature, with a view to revealing the truth about devotion
to the SaguЖ’a aspect of God.
в—ҠвҖһUГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёSГғГҲ в—ҠГҠВў В¬ГҠГ•Вё Е’Г’п¬ӮГӢВҘ В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғв—ҠГҠГҒГјГҠГғГҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
Г·ВЎГЈГ ГҝЕёГЈГҝв—ҠЕёвҖҡГҠпЈҝ ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕ’в—ҠвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ”H 13H
в—ҠвҖһUГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёвҖ” great souls; ГғГҲ on the other hand; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthГҘ (KuntвҲӮ), Arjuna;
Е’Г’п¬ӮГӢв—ҠЛңГ” В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” the divine nature; вҖўГҠГҒГјГҠГғГҠвҖ” having embraced; Г·ВЎГҒГЈГғ (constantly) worship;
вҖўЕёГЈГҝв—ҠЕёвҖҡвҖ” with one-pointedness of mind; ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ knowing; Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” the prime source of all
lives; вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ” the imperishable eternal.
On the other hand, Arjuna, great souls who are imbued with the divine nature,
knowing Me as the prime source of all beings and the imperishable, eternal, worship
Me constantly with one-pointedness of mind.                                    (13)

=== PAGE 435 ===

434
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Person) as the GвҲӮtГҘ calls Him. It is God with
attributes who is responsible for the creation,
maintenance and destruction of all sentient
and insentient beings including the worlds
inhabited by them, as well as their body,
senses, mind, intellect and objects of enjoyment
(VII.6; IX.18; X.2,4,5,6,8). He who realizes
this truth can be said to recognize God as
the prime source of all lives. Again, God is
unborn and imperishable; it is only to shower
His grace on the various JвҲӮvas that He
assumes and hides the human form as a
matter of sport. It is He who is termed as
the imperishable and indestructible Supreme
Brahma or the supreme Spirit. He does not
perish even when all beings perish (VIII.20).
He who realizes this fact can be said to
recognize God as Г«the imperishable Eternal.Гӯ
The term Г«AnanyamanasaВЁГӯ stands for
devotees possessed of exclusive love for
God, whose mind does not feel attracted
towards anything else than God, and to
whom even a momentГӯs separation from God
appears quite unbearable. Such a devotee
constantly worships God in the manner
described in the next verse, as well as in X.9.
The Lord now proceeds to tell us how the love-intoxicated devotees referred to above
worship God.
вҖҡГғГғВў вҲ‘В§ГӢГғВёГҝГЈГғГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠВў ГҝГғГЈГғp Е’ГҺвҖҰUп¬ӮЛқГғГҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
Еёв—ҠSГҝГЈГғp в—ҠГҠВў Г·Г„Г ГҝГҠ ГҒЕёГ ГҝГҝГҲQВ§ГҠ В©UВ¬ГҠвҖҡГғпЈҝГ”H 14H
вҖҡГғГғв—ҠЛңГ” constantly; вҲ‘В§ГӢГғВёГҝГЈГғвҖ” chanting (My names and glories); в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” to Me; ГҝГғГЈГғвҖ” striving
(for My realization); Гё and; Е’ГҺвҖҰUп¬ӮЛқГғГҠвҖ” (those devotees) of firm resolve; Еёв—ҠSГҝГЈГғвҖ” bowing (again
and again); Гё and; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; Г·Г„Г ГҝГҠ with (single-minded) devotion; ГҒЕёГ ГҝГҝГҲQВ§ГҠвҖ” ever united
(with Me through meditation); В©UВ¬ГҠвҖҡГғпЈҝ worship.
Constantly chanting My names and glories and striving for My realization, and
bowing again and again to Me, those devotees of firm resolve, ever united with Me
through meditation, worship Me with single-minded devotion.                (14)
other words, the loving devotees of God are
ever engaged in the worship of God, now
chanting His names or singing his glories,
now bowing to Him, now striving to realize
Him through service and other ways and all
the time keeping the mind fixed on him.
Expatiating on the incomparable virtues,
glory, greatness and sports etc., of God before
devotees through religious discourses and
lectures etc., muttering or loudly chanting, either
singly or in company, the sacred Names of
God, such as RГҘma, KГҰВ¶Ж’a, Govinda, Hari,
NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a, VГҘsudeva, KeвҖ№ava, MГҘdhava, вҖәiva
and so on, visualizing God to be present before
the SГҘdhaka; singing the praises, glory or stories
of God with full faith and love, in a subdued
or loud tone, either standing or squatting, and
Those who are steadfast in their vow
and firm in their resolve, are called
Г«DГҰЕ’havratГҘВЁГӯ. The loving devotees of God
are adamantine in their resolve, unwavering
in their faith, firm in their conclusion and
resolute in their vows. The most terrible
calamities and the mightiest obstacles fail to
deter them from their practice or shake them
from their resolution or opinion. It is therefore
that the Lord speaks of them as Г«devotees
of firm resolveГӯ.
The adverb Г«SatatamГӯ denotes continuity
of practice. It mainly qualifies the verb
Г«UpГҘsateГӯ. Chanting of GodГӯs names and
glories and offering salutations etc., to Him
being parts of worship, the word can be
indirectly said to refer to them as well. In

=== PAGE 436 ===

* Chapter IX *
435
to the accompaniment of music and dance or
without the same; offering praises or praying
to God through the utterance of beautiful
poems and psalms, and all other activites of
an allied nature are covered by the participle
Г«KвҲӮrtayantaВЁГӯ.
The word Г«YatantaВЁГӯ should be understood
to mean offering worship to God, rendering
bodily and other services to all regarding them
as the very embodiment of God, hearing of the
virtues, glory and stories etc., of God from the
lips of His devotees, and practising with zeal
and assiduity all other limbs of devotion not
directly mentioned in this verse.
Visiting a temple and prostrating oneself
with faith and love before the sacred image
of God enshrined therein; bowing before an
image or picture of God installed in oneГӯs
own house; making obeisance to the divine
names represented in letters; offering salutations
to the feet of an image or picture of God
or to the marks thereof; bowing before
sacred books discussing the truth, mysteries,
love, and glory of God and narrating His
sweet stories; and bowing with due respect,
reverence and love, with a voice choked
with emotion and with mind,  speech and
body all whom one meets looking upon them
as an embodiment of God, or recognizing
God to be present in their heart,Гіall this is
covered by the words Г«bowing again and
again to God.Гӯ
The word Г«NityayuktГҘВЁГӯ has been used
with reference to those devotees who constantly
keep their mind fixed on God even while
they are walking or moving about, standing
or sitting, lying asleep or awake, and performing
all sorts of activities or practising meditation
in seclusion.
Exclusive love mixed with faith and
reverence is called devotion. Worshipping God
with devotion, therefore, means carrying on
without interruption all the practices enumerated
above with faith and exclusive love.
Describing thus the mode of worship practised by devotees possessing exclusive love
for God; and conversant with His virtues, glory etc., the Lord now reveals the mode of
worship practised by other types of worshippers.
ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҝГҙГҠпЈҝЕё ГёГҠГҘГҝГЈГҝпЈҝ ГҝВЎГЈГғГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠв—ҠГҲВ¬ГҠвҖҡГғпЈҝГ”вҖ“
вҲһвҲ‘В§Г п¬ӮпЈҝЕё В¬ГҺГ•Г„Г п¬ӮпЈҝЕё вҖҷвҖһГҲUЕ“ГҠ ГҒп¬ӮEГғГҠпЈҝв—ҠГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ”H 15H
ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҝГҙГҠпЈҝЕё through their offering of Knowledge; Гё вҖўГҒВ¬ and still others; вҖўГЈГҝпЈҝ others (those
who tread the path of Knowledge); ГҝВЎГЈГғвҖ” worshipping; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me (in My Absolute, formless
state); В©UВ¬ГҠвҖҡГғпЈҝ betake themselves (to Me); вҲһвҲ‘В§Г п¬ӮпЈҝЕё as one (with themselves); В¬ГҺГ•Г„Г п¬ӮпЈҝЕё through
diversity (i.e., taking Me in diverse celestial forms); вҖҷвҖһГҲUЕ“ГҠ in many ways; ГҒп¬ӮEГғГҠпЈҝв—ҠГҲПҖв—ҠЛң (worship
Me in) a universal Form facing all sides.
Others (who follow the path of Knowledge) betake themselves to Me through
their offering of Knowledge, worshipping Me (in My absolute, formless aspect) as
one with themselves; while still others worship Me in My Universal Form in many
ways, taking Me as manifested in diverse celestial forms.                   (15)
It is the absolute, formless aspect of
God that is worshipped through the offering
of Knowledge. Hence the word Г«MГҘmГӯ has
been interpreted in that sense. By using the
The Word Г«AnyeГӯ (others) has been
used in the verse to distinguish the JВӨГҘnayogвҲӮs
from the category of devotees mentioned
above.

=== PAGE 437 ===

436
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
word Г«MГҘmГӯ in this connection, the Lord
establishes His identity with the attributeless
Brahma, who is absolute Truth, pure
Knowledge and unmixed Bliss.
The Г«offering of KnowledgeГӯ mentioned
in this verse is the same as jВӨГҘnayoga, or
the discipline of Knowledge, referred to in
III.3. He who worships God through the
practice of JВӨГҘnayoga believes that the activities
carried on by the body, senses and  mind
represent only the reaction of the guЖ’as, born
of MГҘyГҘ, on the guЖ’as themselves, and
therefore does not entertain the sense of
doership in respect of those activities. He
views the whole objective existence as
analogous to water appearing in a mirage  or
as the world seen in a dream. He refuses
to recognize the existence of anything other
than the absolute, formless Brahma or God,
who is absolute Truth, pure Knowledge and
unmixed Bliss. It is His talk that he hears,
His truth that he reflects on and His essence
that he constantly meditates upon. In this
way he is ever engaged in the practice of
constantly remaining in a state of atonement
with Brahma. This is what is meant by
worshipping God through the offering of
Knowledge.
The indeclinables Г«CaГӯ and Г«ApiГӯ have
been used to bring out the distinction between
the JВӨГҘnayogвҲӮs referred to above and the
other type of worshippers mentioned in this
verse.
God Himself is present before us in the
form of the universe. Therefore, the various
celestials mentioned in the scriptures, such
as the moon-god, the sun-god, the god of
fire, Indra (the lord of paradise), and VaruЖ’a
(the god of water), who represent so many
limbs of His Universal Form, are in reality
nothing but the different aspects of God.
And even all beings are manifestions of God.
Regarding them as nothing else than God
and to serve them by oneГӯs own duties in
a selfless spirit is worshipping God in His
universal Form in many ways. (XVIII.46).
In order to make it clear how the worship of the Absolute and that of the different
celestials too is regarded as the worship of God Himself, the Lord now proceeds to establish
in the next four verses that the whole universe, and whatever lies beyond it, is nothing
but God Himself.
вҖўвҖһВўU вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГғГҲвҒ„UвҖһВўU ГҝГҙГҠвҖ” Sп¬ӮЕ“ГҠвҖһUв—ҠвҖһUв—ҠГҠГ’В·Е“в—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
в—ҠГЈГІГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳвҖһUв—ҠвҖһUв—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮГҠГ–Гҝв—ҠвҖһUв—ҠГҒВӘAвҒ„UвҖһВўU 
вҖһГҲUГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 16H
вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” (am) I; вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГғГҲвҖ” the Vedic ritual; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” (am) I; ГҝГҙГҠвҖ” the sacrifice; Sп¬ӮЕ“ГҠ the offering to the
departed; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” (am) I; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I (am); вҖўГҠГ’В·Е“в—ҠЛңГ” the herbage and foodgrains; в—ҠГЈGвҖ” the sacred formula;
вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” (am) I; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” (am) I; вҲһп¬Ӯ indeed; вҖўГҠГ–ГҝUв—ҠЛңГ” the clarified butter; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” (am) I; вҖўГҒВӘAвҖ” the (sacred)
fire; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” (am) I; вҖһГҲUГғв—ҠЛңГ” (even) the act of offering oblations (into the fire).
I am the Vedic ritual, I am the sacrifice, I am the offering to the departed;
I am the herbage and foodgrains; I am the sacred formula; I am the clarified butter,
I am the sacred fire, and I am verily the act of offering oblations into the fire. (16)
name of Г«KratuГӯ. Similarly, the rituals enjoined
by the SmГҰtis, such as the five great sacrifices
and so on, are known by the name of
Г«YajВӨaГӯ; and the food offered to the Manes
is termed as Г«SvadhГҘГӯ. The Lord declares that
all these constitute His Being. And whatever
In this verse the Lord indicates that all
ritual acts enjoined by the Vedas and SmГҰti
texts for the propitiation of the different gods
and manes, as well as the various means of
performing them, are the same as God
Himself. The Vedic rituals are called by the

=== PAGE 438 ===

* Chapter IX *
437
plants, foodgrains and medicinal herbs are
required for the performance of these functions
are also His manifestations. Even so, the
Mantras or sacred incantations employed in
these performances are His verbal images.
He is the clarified butter and other materials
offered in these sacrifices. He constitutes the
sacred fires known by the names of
Г«GГҘrhapatyaГӯ, Г«Г…havanвҲӮyaГӯ, Г«DakВ¶iЖ’ГҘgniГӯ and
so on, used in these sacrifices, and lastly, He
Himself is the act of offering oblations into
the fire, which constitutes a sacrifical
performance. That is to say, the articles
required for the performance of sacred rituals
sanctioned by the scriptures, such as a
sacrifice, вҖәrГҘddha (a ceremony intended to
gratify the soul of oneГӯs departed ancestors)
and so on, the sacred formulae used in these
performances, the altar at which the oblation
is offered to the deity, and all activities of
the mind, speech and body connected with
such performancesГіall these represent Him.
It is in order to prove His identity with
everything mentioned in this verse that the
Lord has used the word Г«IГӯ with every one
of the objects enumerated by Him. The use
of Г«EvaГӯ emphasizes the fact that there is
nothing in this world apart from God. In this
way it is God who is manifested in the form
of various objects; they appear different from
God only because we are ignorant of the
truth about Him.
ГҒВ¬ГғГҠвҖһUв—ҠSГҝ ВЎВӘГғГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠГғГҠ Е“ГҠГғГҠ ГҒВ¬ГғГҠв—ҠвҖһUвҖ”Г”вҖ“
п¬ӮпЈҝlВў В¬ГҒп¬ӮГІГҠв—ҠГҠпЈҝVГ”UГҠвҒ„U ВҙВ§Г„вҖҡГҠв—Ҡ ГҝВЎГҲвҒ„пЈҝUп¬Ӯ ГёГ”H 17H
ГҒВ¬ГғГҠ father; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” (am) I; вҖўSГҝ ВЎВӘГғвҖ” of this universe; в—ҠГҠГғГҠ mother; Е“ГҠГғГҠ sustainer and
he who awards to each the fruit of his action; ГҒВ¬ГғГҠв—ҠвҖһUвҖ” grandsire; п¬ӮпЈҝlв—ҠЛңГ” the one worth knowing;
В¬ГҒп¬ӮГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” purifier; вҖўГҠпЈҝVГ”UГҠвҒ„UвҖ” the sacred syllable OГҖ; ВҙВ§вҲ‘ЛңВ§Г” the В§Rgveda; вҖҡГҠв—Ҡ the SГҘmaveda; ГҝВЎГҲвҖ”
the Yajurveda; вҲһп¬Ӯ indeed; Гё and.
I am the sustainer and ruler of this universe, its father, mother and grandfather,
the one worth knowing, the purifier, the sacred syllable OГҖ, and the three Vedas,
viz., В§Rk, YajuВ¶ and SГҘma.                                                   (17)
That which is worth knowing is called
Г«VedyaГӯ. God alone is the one supreme
Truth knowable through all the Vedas (XV.15).
It is therefore that the Lord declares Himself
as the Г«One worth knowingГӯ.
That which is pure itself, and easily
purifies others by wiping out their sins, is
called Г«PavitraГӯ. God is supremely holy; and
His very sight, talk with Him, and the mere
thought of Him go to make one exceedingly
pure. Moreover, all that is purifying in this
world, viz., the practice of Japa or muttering
of a sacred formula, austerities, sacred vows
and holy places etc., is the very self of God;
nay, the purificatory virtue possessed by these
has also been derived from God. All this is
The word Г«JagataВЁГӯ stands for the entire
creation consisting of both sentient and
insentient beings. The whole of this has
emanated from God, who alone is its supreme
cause. It is, therefore, that the Lord refers
to Himself as the Father and Mother of the
universe. He holds the universe in a fraction
of His being (X.42), and it is He who awards
to each the fruit of his actions; hence the
Lord calls Himself the sustainer of the
universe. Again, because He Himself is the
progenitor of BrahmГҘ and the other PrajГҘpatis
(gods and В§RВ¶is presiding over creation) who
carry on the actual work of creation therefore
the Lord speaks of Himself as the Г«grandfatherГӯ
of the universe.

=== PAGE 439 ===

438
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
sought to be conveyed by the Lord when He
calls Himself Г«PavitraГӯ or the Purifier.
The sacred syllable Г«OГҖГӯ is an appellation
of God; it is also known by the name of
Г«PraЖ’avaГӯ. Verse 13 of Chapter VIII has
referred to it as Brahma and advocated its
recitation. It is in order to reveal the identity
of the Name with the object signified, that
the Lord says in this verse, Г¬I am the sacred
syllable OГҖ.Г®
The Vedas have been revealed by God,
and our knowledge of God is derived from
them; it is therefore that the Lord declares
the three VedasГіВ§Rk, SГҘma and YajuВ¶ as
identical with Himself.
The indeclinable Г«CaГӯ has been used to
conjoin or synthesize all the ideas expressed
in this verse; and the word Г«EvaГӯ is intended
to negative the existence of anything else
than God. The idea is that everything
mentioned in this verse is identical with God,
and that nothing exists apart from God.
ВӘГҒГғГ·ВёГғГҠВё В¬ЛқГ·ГҲвҖ” вҖҡГҠЛҮГҠГӢ ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҠвҖҡвҖ” вүҘГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠВў вҖҡГҲNUГғЛңГ”вҖ“
В¬ЛқГ·п¬ӮвҖ” В¬ЛқвҲӮUГҝвҖ” SГ•ГҠЕёВў ГҒЕёЕ“ГҠЕёВў вҖҷГӢВЎв—ҠвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ”H 18H
ВӘГҒГғвҖ” the supreme goal; Г·ГғГҠВё supporter; В¬ЛқГ·ГҲвҖ” lord; вҖҡГҠЛҮГҠГӢ witness; ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҠвҖҡвҖ” abode; вүҘГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ”
shelter; вҖҡГҲNUГғЛңГ” a well-wisher seeking no return; В¬ЛқГ·п¬ӮвҖ”Г” origin; В¬ЛқвҲӮUГҝвҖ” end; SГ•ГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” resting-place;
ГҒЕёЕ“ГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” store-house; вҖҷГӢВЎв—ҠЛңГ” вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ” imperishable seed (am I).
I am the supreme goal, supporter, lord, witness, abode, refuge, well-wisher
seeking no return, origin and end, resting-place, store-house (to which all beings
return at the time of universal destruction), and the imperishable seed.                   (18)
the god of death and all other gods carry
on their respective functions (KaВўha. Up.
II.iii.3). It is therefore that the Lord refers
to Himself as Г«PrabhuГӯ or lord.
God is the knower and seer of all the
worlds, of all embodied beings and of all
their doings, good, bad or indifferent. There
is not a single action of any kind whatsoever,
belonging to the past, present or future,
which can escape the eye of God. The
degree of omniscience possessed by Him is
unequalled. His omniscience is par excellence.
It is therefore that the Lord declares Himself
to be the Г«witnessГӯ.
A place of abode is called Г«NivГҘsaВЁГӯ.
It is in God alone that all beings dwell at
every time and under every circumstance no
matter whether they are on their legs or at
rest, standing or sitting, awake or asleep,
being born in this world or giving up the
ghost. Hence the Lord speaks of Himself as
the Г«NivГҘsaГӯ or Abode.
A thing which is worth attaining is
indicated by the term Г«GatiГӯ. The highest object
worth attaining in the form of the eternal abode
is God; it is therefore that the Lord calls Himself
by the term Г«GatiГӯ or goal. The terms Г«ParГҘ
GatiГӯ or Г«ParamГҘ GatiГӯ (supreme Goal or
supreme State) and Г«AvinГҘвҖ№вҲӮ PadaГӯ (Eternal
State), also indicate the same state.
He who supports or maintains is called
Г«BhartГҘГӯ. The protector and supporter of the
whole world is God Himself; hence the Lord
speaks of Himself in this verse as Г«BhartГҘГӯ
or supporter.
A master, who rules, is known by the
term Г«PrabhuГӯ. God alone is the supreme
ruler of all. He is the great lord of all lords,
the supreme deity of all deities, the supreme
Master of masters, the Lord of all the worlds
and the supreme God, the highest object of
worship (вҖәveta. Up. VI.7). It is through fear
of Him that the sun-god, the god of fire,
Indra (the lord of paradise), the wind-god,

=== PAGE 440 ===

* Chapter IX *
439
One under whom shelter is taken, is
referred to as Г«вҖәaraЖ’amГӯ or refuge. God is
unequalled in His love for those who take
shelter under Him, in his solicitude for the
protection of the suppliant, and in his anxiety
to alleviate the suffering of those who seek
His protection. In the RГҘmГҘyaЖ’a of VГҘlmвҲӮki,
the Lord says:Гі
Г¬I grant him security from all, who
surrenders himself to Me even once saying,
Г¬I am Thine,Г® and seeks My protection; such
is my vow.Г®* (VI.18.33).
It is therefore that the Lord refers to
Himself as Г«вҖәaraЖ’amГӯ or refuge.
A kind-hearted and loving person who
is naturally and gratuitously solicitous for the
welfare of another, and actually does good
to others without expecting any return, is
known as a Г«SuhГҰdГӯ or disinterested friend.
God is the motiveless benefactor, the supreme
well-wisher, and the greatest and most loving
friend of all living beings; it is therefore that
the Lord calls Himself a Г«SuhГҰdГӯ or disinterested
friend. In the concluding verse of Chapter
V as well the Lord similarly said, Г¬Having
known Me as the disinterested friend of all
living beings, My devotee attains supreme
peace.Г® (V.29).
The creation, maintenance and destruction
of this universe are carried on by the mere
will of God. It is therefore that the Lord
declares Himself to be the origin and end,
as well as the resting-place.
A place where things are stored for a
long time is called a Г«NidhГҘnaГӯ or storehouse.
During the final dissolution Nature in her
unmanifest state with all embodied  beings
lies dormant for a considerable length of time
in a fraction of God as a deposit. It is
therefore that the Lord speaks of Himself as
the Г«NidhГҘnaГӯ or store-house.
That which knows no destruction or
decay, and never ceases to be, is called
Г«AvyayaГӯ or imperishable. God is the
imperishable cause of all sentient and insentient
beings. All beings emanate from Him; He
is the ultimate substratum of all. It is therefore
that the Lord calls Himself the Г«imperishable
seedГӯ. In VII.10, He similarly declares Himself
to be the Г«eternal seed of all beingsГӯ, and
again in X.39 He calls Himself Г«the seed of
all beingsГӯ.
Although the word Г«AhamГӯ, I, has been
repeated with every object mentioned in
verse 16 and has been employed at least
once in verse 17 as well, the Lord does not
use it even once in the present verse. The
reason is not far to seek. Words like Г«KratuГӯ,
Г«YajВӨa,Гӯ Г«SvadhГҘГӯ, Г«AuВ¶adhaГӯ, Г«MantraГӯ, Г«Г…jyaГӯ,
Г«В§RkГӯ, Г«YajuВ¶Гӯ etc., used in the preceding
verses, are naturally such as to denote objects
other than God. Therefore, in order to show
His identity with those things, the Lord used
the word Г«AhamГӯ, I, in connection with
them. All the words occurring in the present
verse, however, are attributes of God;
moreover, the word Г«AhamГӯ used in the
preceding verse is connected with this verse
as well. Therefore, it was unnecessary to
repeat the word Г«AhamГӯ in the present verse.
ГғВ¬ГҠГӘГҝвҖһUв—ҠвҖһВўU п¬ӮВ·Z ГҒЕёВӘГҺЛҶГ”UГҠГӘГҝГҲГ вҖҡГҺВЎГҠГҒв—Ҡ ГёГ”вҖ“
вҖўв—ҠГҺГғВў ГёГ’п¬Ӯ в—ҠГҺГ ГҝГҲp вҖҡЕ’вҖҡГ¬ГҠГ”ГҠвҖһUв—ҠВЎГҲВёЕёГ”H 19H
ГғВ¬ГҠГҒв—Ҡ radiate heat (as the sun); вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I (Myself); вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I (Myself); п¬ӮВ·Вёв—ҠЛңГ” rainfall; ГҒЕёВӘГҺЛҶГ”UГҠГҒв—Ҡ hold
back; В©UГ вҖҡГҺВЎГҠГҒв—ҠГ” send forth; Гё as well as; вҖўв—ҠГҺГғв—ҠЛңГ” (am) immortality; Гё and; вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; в—ҠГҺГ ГҝГҲвҖ” death;
Гё and; вҖҡГғЛңГ” вҖўвҖҡГғЛңГ” being (as well as) non-being; Гё also; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” (am) I; вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё O Arjuna.
*
вҖҡвҲ‘ГҺВ§Е’пЈҝп¬Ӯ В¬ЛқВ¬ГӣГҠГҠГҝ Гғп¬ӮГҠSв—ҠГӢГҒГғ Гё ГҝГҠГёГғпЈҝвҖ“ вҖўГ·ГҝВў вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғпЈҝГЁГҝГҠпЈҝ Е’Е’ГҠГӘГҝпЈҝГғЕ’ЛңГ”п¬ӮЛқГғВў в—Ҡв—ҠH

=== PAGE 441 ===

440
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
By the first half of the verse the Lord
indicates that the sun as well, which imparts
through its rays light and heat to the world,
and sucking water in the form of vapour
from the ocean and other reservoirs of water,
holds it in the atmosphere, and then, in due
course, sends it down for the good of the
world in due proportion in the form of
showers, is His own Self.
Г«AmГҰtaГӯ is that which takes one beyond
the realm of death and makes one immortal.
The nectar which is said to be obtained in
the heaven-world, and a drink of which
renders the celestials immune from death as
it is known on this earth, does not however
make them absolutely proof against destruction.
The supreme nectar which brings complete
security from destruction is God Himself,
whose realization makes one secure for all
time from the scourge of death. It is therefore
that the Lord speaks of Himself as Г«immortality,
and it is for this very reason that liberation
from birth and death is also known as
Г«immortalityГӯ.
The destructive principle which makes
an end of all is called Г«deathГӯ. Both creation
and destruction are supremely necessary for
the proper functioning of the worldprocess,
and both these acts are performed by the
sportive Lord. It is He who abides in the
form of MahГҘkГҘla (the supreme Spirit of
Destruction) for bringing about the destruction
of all the worlds when the time comes for
it. The Lord Himself says in verse XI.32:
Г¬I am the inflamed KГҘla the destroyer of the
worlds.Г® It is therefore that He declares
Г«deathГӯ to be His very self.
The imperishable Self, which never
ceases to be, is known as Г«SatГӯ (Being); and
all that is perishable and transient goes by
the name of Г«AsatГӯ (non-being) (II.16). It is
these two categories that have been referred
to in Chapter XV as the Г«AkВ¶araГӯ and
Г«KВ¶araГӯ PuruВ¶as, or the imperishable and
perishable entities. It is these two, again,
which constitute the ParГҘ and AparГҘ PrakГҰtis,
or the higher and lower Natures of God,
which are identical with God. It is therefore
that the Lord declares Himself as being and
non-being both.
The indeclinable Г«CaГӯ immediately
following the words Г«SatГӯ and Г«AsatГӯ indicates
that Brahma, which transcends being and
non-being both (XI.37), and which lies
beyond the connotation of the words Г«SatГӯ
and Г«AsatГӯ, is also identical with God.
I radiate heat as the sun, and hold back as well as send forth showers, Arjuna.
I am immortality as well as death; even so, I am being and non-being, both. (19)
Describing in verses 13 to 15 the various forms of worship of both, His SaguЖ’a
and NirguЖ’a aspects, the Lord brought out in verses 16 to 19 His identity with the whole
universe. Now that this is established, it stands to reason that the worship of Indra and
other celestials too indirectly constitutes His own worship. But those who, instead of
realizing this, worship these latter gods as other than the supreme Deity and with their
mind attached to the reward of such worship, fail to realize God and obtain only perishable
results from such worship. In order to show this, the Lord now devotes the next two verses
to a description of such worship with its fruit.
ГІГҠГ’ГҒп¬ӮlГҠ в—ҠГҠВў вҖҡГҠпЈҝв—ҠВ¬ГҠвҖ” В¬ГҚГғВ¬ГҠВ¬ГҠ ГҝГҙГҠГ’ГҒвҒ„UВ¶Г”UГҠ Sп¬ӮВӘВёГҒГғВў В¬ЛқГҠГ•ВёГҝГЈГғпЈҝвҖ“
ГғпЈҝ В¬ГҲГЎГҝв—ҠГҠвҖҡГҠl вҖҡГҲвҒ„пЈҝUГЈВәЛқвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠoAГҒГЈГғ ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝГҠГҒГЈЕ’ГҒп¬Ӯ Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГ·ГҠпЈҝВӘГҠЕёЛңГ”H 20H
ГІГҠГ’ГҒп¬ӮlГҠвҖ” those who perform action with some interested motive as laid down in the

=== PAGE 442 ===

* Chapter IX *
441
The three Vedas called by the names
of В§Rk, SГҘma and YajuВ¶ and collectively
known as the Г«VedatrayвҲӮГӯ or Г«TrвҲӮvidyГҘГӯ. And
the word Г«TraividyГҘВЁГӯ refers to those who
are devoted and attached to the letter of the
three VedaВ¶, i.e., to the details of sacrifices
as mentioned in the three Vedas and their
fruit, and are given to the performance of
such sacrifices. Similarly the word Г«SomapГҘВЁГӯ
stands for those who drink the juice of the
Soma plant according to the rules laid down
in the scriptures for the potation of such juice
in the cource of sacrifices. Even so those
who have been purged of sins that stand as
an impediment to the attainment of heaven,
through the proper performance of such
Vedic rituals, are referred to here by the
word Г«PВөutapГҘpГҘВЁГӯ. All these terms refer to
that class of men who are ignorant of the
universal form of God, who are devoted to
and fond of the Vedic ritual and avoiding
sinful acts habitually perform acts of sacrifice
with an interested motive and in accordance
with the scriptural injunctions.
The word Г«PВөutapГҘpГҘВЁГӯ cannot be taken
to mean those whose sins have been completely
washed away. For the next verse speaks of
their returning to the world of mortals on the
exhaustion of the stock of their merits. Had
all their sins been eradicated, they ought to
have attained liberation the very moment
their stock of merits got exhausted. For when
the stock of both sin and virtue has been
exhausted, no more cause for rebirth remains.
Under such circumstances no question of
rebirth should arise in their case. But the next
verse definitely states that they return to this
world; therefore, the interpretation of the
word given above seems to be quite correct.
The word Г«MГҘmГӯ in this verse stands
for Indra and other celestials, who constitute
the limbs of God. Worshipping these gods
with faith through sacrificial performances
and other forms of worship according to the
procedure laid down in the scriptures is what
is meant by Г«worshipping Me through
sacrificesГӯ. The intention of the Lord is to
show that Indra and the other gods being His
own limbs, worship offered to them indirectly
constitutes His own worship. But due to
ignorance, men who are prompted by interested
motives do not recognize this truth. That is
why they fail to realize God.
Attainment of heaven is called Г«SvargatiГӯ.
Worshipping the gods through Vedic rituals
and praying to them for granting an abode
in heaven is what is meant by Г«seeking
access to heavenГӯ.
The word Г«SurendralokamГӯ, with the
adjective Г«PuЖ’yamГӯ qualifying it, has been used
to indicate all the celestial worlds, from the
abode of Indra or the third heaven to the abode
of BrahmГҘ or the seventh heaven, that are
attained as the fruit of meritorious deeds like
the performance of sacrifices etc. Though
strictly speaking it refers to the abode of Indra
three Vedas; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; вҖҡГҠпЈҝв—ҠВ¬ГҠвҖ” those who drink the sap of the Soma plant; В¬ГҚГғВ¬ГҠВ¬ГҠвҖ” those
who have been purged of their sin; ГҝГҙГҠГ’вҖ” through (the performance of) sacrifices; ГҹВ¶Г”UГҠ
worshipping; Sп¬ӮВӘВёГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” access to heaven; В¬ЛқГҠГ•ВёГҝГЈГғпЈҝ aspire for; ГғпЈҝ those (persons); В¬ГҲГЎГҝв—ҠЛңГ” obtained
as reward for their meritorious deeds; вҖўГҠвҖҡГҠl attaining; вҖҡГҲвҒ„пЈҝUГЈВәЛқвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” IndraГӯs realm of paradise;
вҖўoAГҒГЈГғ enjoy; ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝГҠЕёЛңГ” celestial; ГҒЕ’ГҒп¬Ӯ in heaven; Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГ·ГҠпЈҝВӘГҠЕёЛңГ” pleasures of gods.
Those who perform action with some interested motive as laid down in these
three Vedas and drink the sap of the Soma plant, and have thus been purged of
sin, worshipping Me through sacrifices, seek access to heaven; attaining IndraГӯs
paradise as the result of their virtuous deeds, they enjoy the celestial pleasures of
gods in heaven.                                                        (20)

=== PAGE 443 ===

442
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
only, it should therefore be understood to
cover here all the worlds stated above. Reaching
those worlds as a reward for their meritorious
deeds, and tasting both through their mind
and senses the pleasures of the gods, which
cannot be obtained on earth, is what is
meant by Г«enjoying the heavenly pleasures of
godsГӯ.
means to the attainment of heaven. Duly
observing such practices, and regarding the
enjoyments of heaven as the highest object
of life, is what is meant by being devoted to
Г«TrayвҲӮdharmaГӯ.
Men with an interested motive, who are
ignorant of the truth about God, fail to surrender
themselves to God with an undivided mind,
and swayed by their desire for enjoyment,
take recourse to the form of Dharma stated
above. It is, therefore, that the fruit of their
actions is transitory, and it is for this reason
that they have to return to the mortal world.
But those, who having given up dependence
on these practices, leading to the enjoyment
of heaven, take refuge in God and God alone,
succeed in realizing Him and thereby attain
complete freedom from all forms of bondage.
It is, therefore, that these men, having
accomplished the object of their life, are never
born in this world again.
In comparison with the terrestrial world
the dimensions of the celestial regions, the
extent and variety of the enjoyments obtained
there, the degree of their pleasurableness, the
bodily and mental capacity to enjoy them and
the highest limit of longevity reached there,
are all immeasurably larger and longer. It is
in this sense that the heaven-world has been
spoken of as Г«extensiveГӯ.
When the fruit of the merits, for the
enjoyment of which one goes to heaven, has
been enjoyed, it is said that the stock of oneГӯs
merits has got exhausted. And as soon as the
stock of such merits is exhausted, the JвҲӮva,
who once possessed them, is hurled back to
the mortal world to enjoy the fruit of his
remaining virtues and sins. This is  what is
meant by his Г«returning to this mortal worldГӯ.
The word Г«TrayвҲӮdharmamГӯ stands for the
aggregate of ritual acts recommended in the
three VedasГіВ§Rk, YajuВ¶ and SГҘmaГіas a
ГғпЈҝ ГғВў Г·ГҲГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ Sп¬ӮВӘВёвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘ВўВ§ ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҠвҲӮВўU ЛҮГҠГӢГЎГҠпЈҝ В¬ГҲГЎГҝпЈҝ в—ҠГ ГҝВёвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘ВўВ§ ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҒГЈГғвҖ“
вҲһп¬ӮВў 
ГІГҠГҝГӢЕ“в—ҠВёв—ҠЕёГҲВ¬ЛқВ¬ГӣГҠГҠ 
ВӘГғГҠВӘГғВў 
вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠ 
вҲӮUГ·ГЈГғпЈҝH 21H
ГғпЈҝ they; Гғв—ҠЛңГ” that; Г·ГҲГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ having enjoyed; Sп¬ӮВӘВёвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” heaven-world; ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҠвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” extensive; ЛҮГҠГӢГЎГҠпЈҝ
on (the stock of) their merit being exhausted; В¬ГҲГЎГҝпЈҝ в—ҠГ ГҝВёвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” the world of mortals; ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҒГЈГғ
return to; вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” thus; ГІГҠГҝГӢЕ“в—ҠВёв—ҠЛңГ” the ritual (with interested motive) recommended by the three
Vedas (as leading to heaven); вҖўЕёГҲВ¬ЛқВ¬ГӣГҠГҠвҖ”Г” devoted to; ВӘГғГҠВӘГғв—ҠЛң repeatedly come and go (i.e.,
ascend to heaven by virtue of their merits and return to earth when their fruit has been
enjoyed); вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠвҖ” those seeking (worldly) enjoyments; вҲӮUГ·ГЈГғпЈҝГ” attain.
Having enjoyed the extensive heaven-world, they return to this world of mortals
on the stock of their merits being exhausted. Thus devoted to the rituals with interested
motive recommended by the three Vedas (as the means of attaining heavenly bliss),
and seeking worldly enjoyments, they repeatedly come and go (i.e., ascend to heaven
by virtue of their merits and return to earth when their fruit has been enjoyed). (21)
In verses 13 and 14, the Lord described the mode of devotion practised by loving
devotees who possess a knowledge of His imperishable Self. In verse 15 while referring
to the worship of the Absolute through the practice of JВӨГҘnayoga, as well as to the worship,

=== PAGE 444 ===

* Chapter IX *
443
The word Г«AnanyГҘВЁГӯ refers to those
faithful devotees who having withdrawn
their attachment from all forms of enjoyment
of the world have bestowed their love
unshakably and irrevocably on God and God
alone, to whom separation from God is quite
unbearable, who acknowledge no other deity
than God, and who recognize God alone as
their supreme asylum, supreme goal and
supreme object of love.
The word Г«MГҘmГӯ (Me) in this verse
stands for God with attributes, or the Supreme
Person (PuruВ¶ottama), as the GвҲӮtГҘ calls Him.
Realizing His virtues, glory, truth and secret,
and thinking of Him constantly without any
break even while walking or moving about,
standing or sitting, awake or asleep, or while
practising meditation in seclusion, he who
carries on all his activities in a disinterested
spirit as a behest from God and for His
pleasure, is said to Г«worship Him while
constantly thinking of HimГӯ.
Г«YogaГӯ means obtaining what is
unobtained; while Г«KВ¶emaГӯ indicates the
preservation of what has been already obtained.
Ensuring his protection against all possible
odds and risks and preserving whatever
materials or resources necessary for God-
realization are already acquired by the devotee
and supplying his further needs in that
direction, the Lord brings him face to face
with His reality. This is what is meant by
Г«carrying on the YogakВ¶ema of His devoteesГӯ.
The life of PrahlГҘda serves as a beautiful
illustration of this truth. Even though his
father, HiraЖ’yakaвҖ№ipu, placed mighty obstacles
in his way, the Lord gave him protection
under every circumstance, and in the end
brought him face to face with His reality.
One may ask here: Does the Lord also
carried on in other ways, of celestials like the sun-god, the moon-god, the gods of fire
etc., who are so many limbs, as it were, of god in His Universal Form, He pointed out
that such worship also constituted His worship. Thereafter, in verses 16 to 19 He showed
that he was manifested not only in the form of those celestials, but also in the form of
all the materials with which worship is offered to Him, and that He is the father, mother,
grandfather, sustainer and ruler of the universe. Not only that, He is being and non-being
both. Showing thus the universal character of His Self, He declared in verses 20 and
21 that those who worship Him in the form of the celestials, with some interested motive,
recognizing the separate existence of gods, are virtuous men no doubt, but that having
tasted the enjoyments in heaven they have to return to the mortal world, and cannot attain
His imperishable state. He now declares the fruit of devotion practised by devotees who
have already been referred to in verses 13 and 14, and which could not be stated owing
to the insertion of other topics.
вҖўЕёГЈГҝГҠГҒpГЈГғГҝГЈГғГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠВў ГҝпЈҝ ВЎЕёГҠвҖ” В¬ГҝГҲВёВ¬ГҠвҖҡГғпЈҝвҖ“
ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠВў ГҒЕёГ ГҝГҠГҒГ·ГҝГҲQВ§ГҠЕёГҠВў ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘЛҮГҠпЈҝв—ҠВў п¬ӮвҖһUГҠГӘГҝвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”H 22H
вҖўЕёГЈГҝГҠвҖ” loving none else; ГҒГёГЈГғГҝГЈГғвҖ” (constantly) dwelling on; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me (the supreme Deity);
ГҝпЈҝ who; ВЎЕёГҠвҖ” devotees; В¬ГҝВёГҲВ¬ГҠвҖҡГғпЈҝ worship in a disinterested spirit; ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” ГҒЕёГ ГҝГҠГҒГ·ГҝГҲQВ§ГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of those
ever united in thought (with Me); ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘЛҮГҠпЈҝв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” supplying needs and safeguarding interests; п¬ӮвҖһUГҠГҒв—ҠГ”
arrange; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I.
The devotees, however, who, solely loving Me, constantly think of Me, and
worship Me in a disinterested spirit, to those ever united in thought with Me, I bring
full security and personally look after all their needs.                          (22)

=== PAGE 445 ===

444
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
personally attend to the earthly needs of his
devotees and protect his worldly possession
as well? It should be remembered in this
connection that it is the Lord Himself who
maintains and supports the numberless beings,
great and small, of the whole universe. Caring
little whether one adores Him or not, the
Lord carries on His shoulders the entire
responsibility of maintaining the whole universe
with the natural feelings of highest love and
affection. When such is the case, there is no
wonder that He should undertake the
responsibility of maintaining those who are
exclusively devoted to Him. The fact is that
God Himself holds the entire charge of looking
after those devotees who remain constantly
engaged in His thought alone, and are little
concerned about anything else than God.
To take a homely illustration, a small
babe who entirely depends upon its mother,
knows no one else than her and never worries
as to which of its things should be looked
after, and as to what it will need at a particular
moment. It is the look-out of the mother to
see which of its things should be preserved
with care: it is she who forsees what will be
needed for the babe at a particular moment;
and it is the mother, again who looks after its
things, and makes necessary provison for it
at the right moment. Even so, in the case of
him who is exclusively devoted to God and
constantly united in thought with Him, it is
God alone who determines what is needed
by him and which of his worldly or spiritual
possessions need be preserved; and it is He
again who looks after his possessions and
also supplies his needs.
So long as a child continues to be in
the charge of its mother and entirely depends
on her, the mother pays little heed to its
judgment and does that which is conducive
to its real interests. Even so, and much more
than that, God does precisely that wherein
lies the real good of the devotee. It is God
who determines what will be necessary for
a devotee of the type mentioned above at
a particular time, and what should be preserved
for him; and the judgment of God is always
full of blessings for the devotee. And it is
God who bears the responsibility for the
protection of his interests and for securing
what is unobtained by him. The disinction
between worldly and other-worldly interests
is not the point at issue here, nor are we
concerned here with the acquisition of this
thing or that. OneГӯs true interest lies in the
non-acquisition and non-possession of things
whose acquisition or possession makes one
forgetful of God and addicted to the enjoyments
of the world, and which, therefore, really
mars oneГӯs interests. Even so, a devoteeГӯs
real good lies in the acquisition and preservation
of things whose absence or neglect interferes
with the remembrance of God, and thus
stands in the way of his attaining real
blessedness and mars his real interests.
The statement that God Himself bears on
His shoulders the responsibility of conferring
true blessedness on, and serving the best
interests of the devotee, means that bearing in
mind what things obtained or preserved will
bring him lasting good, it is God Himself who
secures or preserves such things for the devotee,
no matter whether they are connected with his
earthly life, or with his spiritual practice.
This should make it definitely clear that
the entire responsibility even for the livelihood
of the devotee who solely depends on God,
and does everything with his mind constantly
and exclusively engaged in His loving
remembrance, and who neither craves nor
depends upon, nor even thinks of anything
else, lies on God. The almighty, omniscient,
all-seeing God, who is the greatest friend of
the devotee, looks after him in every way.
Hence there can be no error in supplying his
needs or protecting his possessions, nor can
His dispensation lead to any contrary result.

=== PAGE 446 ===

* Chapter IX *
445
The dispensation of God in his case brings
him joy and peace, fills him with love, and
is supremely helpful in bringing him face to
face with God without delay. That is why
the word Г«YogaГӯ has been interpreted as
meaning God-realization, and the word Г«KВ¶emaГӯ
as meaning preservation of the means for
such Realization.
It has been stated above that the whole responsibility in respect of the devotee who
adores God with an exclusive mind is borne by God Himself. The Lord now declares
that the SГҘdhakas who worship other deities with some interested motive, treating them
as other than the supreme Deity, worship Him with a mistaken approach.
ГҝпЈҝЛҳГҘГҝГЈГҝЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮГғГҠ Г·QВ§ГҠ ГҝВЎГЈГғпЈҝ ГјГҠhГҝГҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ”вҖ“
ГғпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ в—ҠГҠв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ ГҝВЎГЈГ ГҝГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ“В¬ГҚп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ”H 23H
ГҝпЈҝ who; вҖўГҒВ¬ even (though); вҖўГЈГҝЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ” other deities; Г·QВ§ГҠвҖ” the devotees (with interested
motives); ГҝВЎГЈГғпЈҝГ” worship; ГјГҠhГҝГҠ with faith; вҖўГҒГЈп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ” endowed; ГғпЈҝ they; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me;
вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ O son of Kunti, Arjuna; ГҝВЎГҒГЈГғ worship; вҖўГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ“В¬ГҚп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” (though) with a
mistaken approach.
Arjuna, even those devotees who, endowed with faith, worship other gods (with
some interested motive) worship Me alone, though with a mistaken approach. (23)
them with some interested motive, treating
them as other than God, are said to Г«worship
God with a mistaken approachГӯ.
On the other hand, those who worship
the various deities with reverence in a
disinterested spirit and in accordance with
the procedure laid down in the scriptures
with the motive of God-realization, treating
them as so many manifestations of the
supreme Deity, inasmuch as they are all
limbs of the supreme Being, are said to
worship God in the right spirit through the
worship of those deities. The fruit of such
worship is also God-realization.
Treating even strangers as manifestations
of God, King Rantideva served them with
food, enduring the pangs of hunger himself,
and thus offered disinterested worship to
God. As the fruit of such worship, he
succeeded in realizing God. Similarly,
whosoever offers service to the celestials,
oneГӯs preceptor, the BrГҘhmaЖ’a, a guest, a
stranger, oneГӯs parents and all other beings
for the pleasure of God and as a behest of
The words Г«вҖәraddhayГҘ AnvitГҘВЁГӯ refer to
those who possess a devout and unwavering
faith in the gods enumerated in the Vedas,
in the worship of those gods and in the fruit
of such worship in the form of attainment
of heaven etc. The use of these qualifying
words is intended to convey that those who
worship the deities mentioned above through
sacrificial performances and other such acts
without faith and for mere show cannot be
included in this category. They fall under the
category of those who are possessed of the
demoniac temperament (XVI.17; XVII.13).
Worshipping 
with 
faith, 
through
sacrificial and other acts recommended in the
scriptures, a particular god whose worship
had been enjoined in the вҖәГҘstras for the
satisfaction of a particular desire,Гіthis is
what is meant by worshipping other gods.
Those who fail to realize the truth that the
various deities are but limbs of the one
supreme Deity, who is the Lord of all, and
that really speaking it is God who is manifested
in the form of those deities, and who worship

=== PAGE 447 ===

446
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
God, treating them as identical with Him
really serves God in the right spirit through
that service, and the fruit of such service is
also God-realization.
He who duly worships the other deities
with faith and love, though with some
interested motive, without realizing the above
truth, really worships God alone, for it is
God alone who is the enjoyer of all sacrifices
and the supreme Lord of all, and because
it is He who is manifested in every form.
Nevertheless, lacking as it does in the right
spirit, such worship is not recognized as the
right method of worshipping God. It is for
this reason that instead of bringing God-
realization in its wake, such worship brings
only the enjoyments of heaven as its fruit.
This vast difference in the concomitant result
is brought about due to ignorance about the
reality of God.
sacrifices and the supreme Lord of all.
The word Г«TeГӯ (they) refers to men with
interested motives who worship God, though
with a mistaken approach, through worship
of the celestials as described in the preceding
verse. And failure to recognize God as the
enjoyer of all sacrifices and the supreme
Lord of all the worlds, due to ignorance
about His reality combined with His virtues
and glory as described in verses 16 to 19
above, is what is meant by Г«not knowing
Him in realityГӯ.
The word Г«AtaВЁГӯ is indicative of cause.
The use of the verb Г«CyavantiГӯ with it shows
that due to the cause mentioned above, i.e.,
due to want of knowledge about the truth
of God, the worshippers of gods referred to
above fail to attain the highest fruit in the
form of God-realization, and gaining the
comparatively insignificant reward in the
shape of enjoyments of heaven, remain tied
to the whirligig of births and deaths.
Inasmuch as it is God Himself who is
manifested in the form of this universe, the
various gods, who are recognized as the
enjoyers of the different rituals in the form of
sacrifice, worship and so on, are so many
limbs of God, and God Himself is the soul of
them all (X.20). Therefore, it is God Himself
who enjoys the various sacrifices and other
sacred rites. It is God Himself who creates,
sustains and destroys the whole universe
through His power of Yoga, and duly regulates
all. He is the ruler of Indra (the lord of
paradise), VaruЖ’a (the god of water), Yama
(the god of death), PrajГҘpati (the deity presiding
over creation), and all other regional lords
and celestials. Hence He is the supreme Lord
of all created beings (V.29).
The indeclinable Г«TuГӯ has been used
here to denote antithesis. It is intended to
emphasize the colossal ignorance of those
who fail to recognize the glory of God not
withstanding His being the enjoyer of all
Showing thus that the worshippers of other deities worship Him with a mistaken
approach, the Lord now explains why such worshippers fail to realize God.
вҖўвҖһВўU ГҒвҖһU вҖҡп¬ӮВёГҝГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠВў Г·ГҠпЈҝQВ§ГҠ Гё В¬ЛқГ·ГҲвҒ„пЈҝUп¬Ӯ ГёвҖ“
Её ГғГҲ в—ҠГҠв—ҠГҒГ·ВЎГҠЕёГҒГЈГғ ГғГ»п¬ӮпЈҝЕёГҠГғвүҘГ«Гҝп¬ӮГҒГЈГғ ГғпЈҝГ”H 24H
вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” (am) I; ГҒвҖһU because; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГҝГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of all sacrifices; Г·ГҠпЈҝQВ§ГҠ the enjoyer; Гё and; В¬ЛқГ·ГҲвҖ” the
lord; вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; Гё as well; ЕёГ” not; ГғГҲ but; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me (the supreme Deity); вҖўГҒГ·ВЎГҠЕёГҒГЈГғГ” know;
ГғГ»п¬ӮпЈҝЕё in reality; вҖўГғвҖ” hence; Г«Гҝп¬ӮГҒГЈГғГ” fall (are subjected to rebirth); ГғпЈҝ they.
For, I am the enjoyer and also the lord of all sacrifices; but they who do not know
Me in reality (as the supreme Deity), they fall (i.e., return to life on earth).
 (24)

=== PAGE 448 ===

* Chapter IX *
447
Worshiping the gods, observing the
rules laid down for their worship, performing
sacrifices in their honour, performing Japa of
the Mantra sacred to them and feeding
BrГҘhmaЖ’as for their propitiation, all these are
known as vows for the propitiation of the
Devas. Men who observe these vows are
referred to here as Г«DevavratГҘВЁГӯ. And attaining
as a reward for such worship the abode of
these gods and obtaining enjoyments similar
to those enjoyed by them, or attaining a
celestial form resembling the form of such
godsГіall this is denoted by the phrase
Г«going to the godsГӯ.
In III.11 and IV.25 worship of the gods
has been declared as conducive to blessedness,
whereas verses 20, 21, 24 and 25 of this
chapter show that such worship leads only
to the attainment of the transient heaven-
world and throws the JвҲӮva into the whirl-
pool of birth and death. Though on the face
of it these statements appear quite contradictory,
there is really speaking no contradiction
between them. The fact of the matter is that
Chapter III and IV of the GвҲӮtГҘ speak of
worshipping the gods in a disinterested spirit,
hence such worship has been declared to be
conducive to the highest good; for worship
of gods carried on in a disinterested spirit
makes for purification of the heart and is
thereby conducive to the highest good. But
the worship of gods referred to in these
verses is one that is performed with an
interested motive. Hence such worship cannot
be said to yield anything more than the
attainment of gods. The highest reward that
such worship can confer upon the worshippers
is residence in the abode of those gods till
their life-time. Therefore, their return to the
mortal world is inevitable.
Similarly, performing the sacred rites of
вҖәrГҘddha and TarpaЖ’a (i.e., offering food and
water respectively) in honour of oneГӯs departed
ancestors, feeding BrГҘhmaЖ’as, offering
oblations to the sacred fire and performing
Japa, recitation and worship for  their sake
and observing vows and rules of conduct
enjoined by the scriptures for their
propitiationГіall these are included in the
worship of the manes. And men who adopt
these practices for the sake of the manes are
referred to here as Г«PitГҰvratГҘhГӯ. Those who
perform these ritual acts with an interested
motive migrate after their death to the world
of the manes and assuming the form of the
manes taste the enjoyments of that region.
The devotees of God are no longer subject to birth and death, whereas the worshippers
of other deities remain subject to this law. What is the reason for this? Anticipating this
query the Lord now says:
ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ Е’пЈҝп¬Ӯп¬ӮЛқГғГҠ Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠГҒГЈВ¬ГғГҺГҺГЈГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ ГҒВ¬ГғГҺп¬ӮЛқГғГҠвҖ”вҖ“
Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ Г·ГҚГғпЈҝГ–ГҝГҠ ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ в—ҠlГҠГҒВЎЕёГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ”H 25H
ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ go; Е’пЈҝп¬Ӯп¬ӮЛқГғГҠвҖ” those who are vowed to the gods; Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” to the gods; ГҒВ¬ГғГҺГҺЕёЛңГ” the manes;
ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ reach; ГҒВ¬ГғГҺп¬ӮЛқГғГҠвҖ” those who are vowed to the manes; Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё the spirits; ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ reach; Г·ГҚГғпЈҝГ–ГҝГҠвҖ”
those who adore the spirits; ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ attain; в—ҠlГҠГҒВЎЕёвҖ” (and) those who worship Me; вҖўГҒВ¬ alone;
в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me.
Those who are votaries of gods go to the gods; those who are votaries of manes
reach the manes; those who adore the spirits, reach the spirits and those who worship
Me, come to Me alone. (That is why My devotees are no longer subject to birth
and death).                                                                (25)

=== PAGE 449 ===

448
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
This is what is meant by Г«going to the
manesГӯ. The maximum reward that one can
get through these practices is to dwell in the
abode of the manes till the life-time of the
lords of that world. In the long run, however,
one is bound to return to this world.
The verse should not be interpreted as
discouraging the worship of the gods and
manes. Such worship needs must be performed
by all with due ceremony consistent with
oneГӯs VarЖ’a or grade in society and Г…вҖ№rama
or stage in life. Of course, if it is done with
some interested motive, it will disappear after
yielding the maximum reward; if, on the
other hand, it is performed by way of duty
as a behest from God, and in the spirit of
offering worship to Him, it becomes
instrumental in bringing the supreme reward
in the form of God-realization. Therefore,
this verse should be understood to mean that
while one must perform the worship of gods
and manes, an attempt should be made to
cultivate the disinterested spirit with regard
to such worship.
The word Г«BhВөutejyГҘВЁГӯ stands for those
who worship ghosts and spirits duly observing
the rules of such worship, offer oblations into
the sacred fire or practise charity etc., with
a view to propitiating the spirits. Attaining
the form of such spirits and obtaining
enjoyments appropriate to them is what is
meant by Г«going to the spirits.Гӯ The worship
of ghosts and spirits is TГҘmasika in character,
and leads only to unwelcome results. Therefore,
one can never be encouraged to indulge in
this form of worship.
The word Г«MadyГҘjinaВЁГӯ refers to those
devotees who worship, adore and meditate
on God with attributes, either with or without
form, practise Japa of His Name, hear His
glories and sing them, and adopt various
other practices of devotion. And attaining
His divine abode, living in close proximity
with Him, assuming a divine form or
absorption in HimГіall this is meant by
attaining God.
To say nothing of the devotee who
worships God with or without form in a
disinterested spirit, even he who adores Him
with an interested motive attains Him. This
is what is indicated by the use of the
indeclinable Г«ApiГӯ at the end of this verse.
Though devotion to God confers on the devotee the highest boon in the form of God-
realization, its practice, far from being difficult, is exceptionally easy. In order to show
this, the Lord says:
В¬ГІГҠВў В¬ГҲcВ¬Вў В»В§вҲӮВўU ГғГҠпЈҝГҝВў ГҝГҠпЈҝ в—ҠпЈҝ Г·Г„Г ГҝГҠ В¬ЛқГҝГ«ВҝUГҒГғвҖ“
ГғЕ’вҖһВўU 
Г·Г„Г ГҝГҲВ¬NUГғв—ҠoAГҠГҒв—Ҡ 
В¬ЛқГҝГғГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ”Г”H 26H
В¬ГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” a leaf; В¬ГҲcВ¬в—ҠЛңГ” a flower; В»В§вҲӮв—ҠЛңГ” a fruit; ГғГҠпЈҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ” water (etc.); ГҝвҖ” whosoever; в—ҠпЈҝ to Me;
Г·Г„Г ГҝГҠ with love; В¬ЛқГҝГ«ВҝUГҒГғ offers; ГғГғЛңГ” that (article); вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; Г·Г„Г ГҝГҲВ¬NUГғв—ҠЛңГ” offered with love; вҖўoAГҠГҒв—Ҡ
partake of (with delight, appearing in person before him); В¬ЛқГҝГғГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ” by that disinterested
devotee of sinless mind.
Whosoever offers to Me with love a leaf, a flower, a fruit or water, I appear
in person before that disinterested devotee of sinless mind, and delightfully partake
of that article offered by him with love.                                  (26)
anyone and everyone can offer Him leaves,
flowers, fruits, and water etc., no matter to
By using the word Г«YaВЁГӯ (whosoever)
in this connection, the Lord indicated that

=== PAGE 450 ===

* Chapter IX *
449
which caste or community he belongs and
whatever his Г…вҖ№rama or stage in life. The
Lord does not discriminate between one
individual and another on the ground of
physical prowess, external appearance, wealth,
age, birth, merits and learning etc. The only
condition is that the sentiment of the devotee
who offers these things should be absolutely
pure and loving like that of Vidura and
вҖәabarвҲӮ, to quote two notable examples.
The mention of leaves, flowers, fruits
and water as articles of worship indicate that
anything, which can be easily had even by
an ordinary individual without any exertion
or expenditure, can be offered to God.
Having all His desires fulfilled, God does not
thirst for this thing or that. He thirsts only
for love. And he who offers something to
God with a heart overflowing with love and
filled with gratitude to think how magnanimous
it is of the Lord that He should condescend
to accept with pleasure even the smallest gift
from the hands of an humble creature like
the offerer, offered with love.
He whose mind is pure is called a
PrayatГҘtmГҘ. By using this word, the Lord
indicates that if the motive of the offerer is
not pure, He does not accept the offering in
any case, even if the same is offered with an
outward show of extreme politeness and
consists of the best articles. Declining the
invitation of Duryodhana, He called on Vidura,
and fondly dined at his house simply because
the latter had a pure heart. He partook of the
parched rice brought by SudГҘmГҘ with great
relish, satiated the whole universe by putting
into His mouth a stray leaf left in the cooking
utensil of DraupadвҲӮ, accepted with His own
lotus hands the flower offered by the famous
elephant figuring in the PurГҘЖ’as, appearing
in person before him, partook of the fruits
offered by вҖәabarвҲӮ at her own cottage and
blessed Rantideva by accepting the water
offered by him. In this way He accepts with
pleasure whatever offering is made by a
devotee with a heart full of love.
Incidents from the life of these devotees,
relevant to the subject under discussion in
particular, are briefly reproduced below:Гі
VIDURA
After completing twelve years exile in
the forest and one yearГӯs incognito existence
when the PГҘЖ’Е’avas demanded of Duryodhana
the restoration of their kingdom, the latter
gave a flat refusal. Thereupon BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a Himself went to the Kaurava Court to
negotiate on behalf of the PГҘЖ’Е’avas. To
maintain an outward show of courtesy on
that occasion, Duryodhana had made elaborate
preparations for the reception of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a.
When invited to dinner, the Lord refused to
dine with him. Questioned by Duryodhana
as to the reason for this refusal, the Lord
gave the following reply. Г¬Meals are taken
under two circumstances,Г® He said, Г¬Where
there is love, one partakes of,  with great
pleasure, whatever is available, in the house.
Or, when one is starving, one has to fill the
belly with whatever is available anywhere,
regardless of the sentiment with which the
food may be served. Both these conditions
are absent in the present case. You have no
love in you, and I am not dying of hunger
either.Г® With these words the Lord left his
royal palace and proceeded uninvited to
ViduraГӯs cottage. The good old BhвҲӮВ¶ma and
elders like DroЖ’a, KГҰpa, BГҘhlвҲӮka and others
called at ViduraГӯs and invited the Lord to
their own houses. But the Lord refused to go
anywhere else, and blessed Vidura by
partaking of the dishes offered by him with
the utmost love (vide MahГҘbhГҘrata, Udyoga
Parva, 91). So runs the popular Indian song:Гі
Г¬Refusing the rich dishes of Duryodhana,
the Lord partook of boiled vegetables at
ViduraГӯs.Г®

=== PAGE 451 ===

450
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
SUDГ…MГ…
SudГҘmГҘ had been a school-fellow of
BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a. Both had received their
schooling at Ujjain under a common teacher
SГҘndвҲӮpani. SudГҘmГҘ was wellversed in the
Vedas, averse to worldly enjoyments, calm
and collected and a man of exemplary self-
restraint. After completing their studies the
two friends parted company and left for their
respective homes.
SudГҘmГҘ was extremely indigent and
poor so far as material possessions are
concerned. On a certain occasion this
BrГҘhmaЖ’a with his family had to starve
continuously for a number of days due to
want of food. Emaciated by starvation, the
wife of SudГҘmГҘ was extremely moved by
the miserable plight of her children. She
knew that the Lord of DvГҘrakГҘ, BhagavГҘn
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, was a friend of her husband. After
a good deal of hesitation, therefore, and
trembling with fear, she described her
sufferings to her husband and requested him
to proceed to DvГҘrakГҘ. She knew equally
well that her husband was absolutely
disinterested; therefore she added, Г¬My lord,
I know you have no craving for riches; but
without money it is very difficult to maintain
a household; therefore, in my opinion, it is
essential and desirable too that you should
go and see your friend.Г®
SudГҘmГҘ understood that unnerved by
her privations his wife was anxious to send
him to вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a in search of wealth. He,
however, 
had 
serious 
misgivings 
in
approaching his friend with such a request,
and reproached her saying, Г«Good heavens !
Are you so mad as to send me to DvГҘrakГҘ
to fetch money? Does a true BrГҘhmaЖ’a ever
crave for wealth? Our only concern is to
remember the Lord under all circumstances.
When oppressed by hunger, can we not go
out and beg our food?Г®
Г¬All this is very well,Г® said SudГҘmГҘГӯs
wife; Г¬but the days are so hard that one
cannot even depend on the charity of others.
Just have a look at my tattered clothes and
these starving children of yours. I have no
craving for wealth. I do not insist that you
should ask Him for a kingdom, or for
abundant riches. In our present stricken
condition, you should only go and see him
once.Г® Hesitating for a long time SudГҘmГҘ at
last decided to go; for he thought that would
afford him a golden opportunity to obtain the
rare sight of BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a. But how
could he go without taking some present for
his friend? Г¬O blessed lady,Г® he said to his
wife, Г¬If you have anything in the house
worthy of being presented to вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a,
please let me have it.Г® SudГҘmГҘГӯs request was
quite reasonable; but the poor woman was
helpless. There was not a single grain of rice
in the house. SudГҘmГҘГӯs wife, therefore, kept
quiet. But she knew her husband would not
leave his house unless he was provided with
something. Therefore, with great diffidence
she approached her next-door neighbour.
Although she had little hope from her, the
lady of the house was good enough to lend
her four handfuls of parched rice. Tying
these few handfuls of rice in a dirty piece
of tattered cloth, the poor woman handed it
over to her husband as a present for BhagavГҘn
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a.
SudГҘmГҘ reached the city of DvГҘrakГҘ
after a long and tiresome journey. After
repeated enquiries, he at last found himself
at the portals of the right royal mansion of
BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a. The poet Narottama
gives in Hindi a beautiful word-picture of
what followed. According to him, the porter
received the stranger kindly and offering him
a seat at the gate, the former went into the
presence of the Lord and gave Him the
following report:Гі

=== PAGE 452 ===

* Chapter IX *
451
Г¬My Lord; a stranger waits at the door:
From where he hails, no one knows.
No turban on his head, nor garment
on his person;
His loin-cloth is torn, the toga poor;
No shoes he has to cover his feet.
The poor, emaciated BrГҘhmaЖ’a that he
appears to be
Came and stood at the gate,
Looking at the beauty of the city with
wondering eyes.
The abode of the destitutesГӯ friend he
enquires about,
And calls himself SudГҘmГҘ.Г®
Hearing the very name of Г«SudГҘmГҘГӯ, the
Lord forgot Himself and hurriedly got up
from His seat. The crown was left uncared
for, the yellow robe dropped from his body,
He could not find time even to put on His
sandals and rushed towards the gate. Seeing
the miserable plight of SudГҘmГҘ from a
distance, the Lord said:Гі
Г¬O friend, what a helpless condition
you have been reduced to !Г®
Then the Lord noticed the network of
thorns
Sticking at the soles of SudГҘmГҘГӯs feet.
Alas ! friend, what a terrible suffering
you have undergone !
Why did you not turn up here before ?
Why did you waste so many days ?Г®
At the sight of SudГҘmГҘГӯs destitution,
The Ocean of Compassion wept with
grief.
The water kept for washing the feet of
SudГҘmГҘ was not even touched.
He washed them with His own profuse
tears !
(Narottama)
There was no occasion to touch the
water kept in the large brazen-vessel for
washing the feet of SudГҘmГҘ. Washing them
with the tears of His eyes, the Lord held His
friend tight to His bosom. Thereafter  He
took him with great attention inside His
palace and seated him on His own couch.
Collecting the articles of worship with His
own hands, the Lord duly washed SudГҘmГҘГӯs
feet Himself; and even though His very
presence hallowed the three worlds, He bore
that water on His own head. The LordГӯs
principal consort, вҖәrвҲӮ  RukmiЖ’вҲӮ, also expressed
her desire to wash the feet of their honoured
guest. The Lord readily gave his consent
saying; Г¬Let the other queens also come and
wash his feet, and sprinkling the water
touched by his feet over the entire palace,
let them purify the palace as well as their
body and mind.Г® Holding in one hand a vase
of gold filled with water, вҖәrвҲӮ RukmiЖ’вҲӮ thereupon
washed SudГҘmГҘГӯs feet with other.
Г¬Lo ! She whom the gods ever address
As the mother of the universe, and
redeemer of the world,
They look upon Her today washing the
feet of a destitute.Г®
Smearing the body of His beloved
friend with an excellent quality of sandalpaste
and other scented articles, such as the paste
of aloe wood and saffron, and offering him
incense and light, the Lord treated him to
a sumptuous meal and offered him betelleaves
and pieces of nuts. SudГҘmГҘГӯs body was
badly soiled with dust and emaciated. The
veins and arteries of his body had stuck out
at various places. A piece of tattered cloth
covered his body. But recognizing him to be
a dear friend of her Lord, RukmiЖ’вҲӮ who was
no other than LakВ¶mвҲӮ, the goddess of wealth,
fondly waited with all her associates on the
utterly destitute BrГҘhmaЖ’a holding in her
hands a fan and a chowrie with bejewelled
handles. Clasping SudГҘmГҘГӯs hands, BhagavГҘn
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a began to review the charming
incidents of their boyhood.
After some time, the Lord cast a loving

=== PAGE 453 ===

452
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
gaze at SudГҘmГҘ, and with a smile on His lips
asked him whether he had brought any present
for Him. Г¬I hold in high esteem,Г® He added,
Г¬even the most insignificant thing lovingly
offered to Me by a devotee; for I hunger for
love. On the other hand, immense treasures
offered by one who does not possess devotion
in his heart cannot satisfy Me.Г®
Even after this clear hint from the Lord,
SudГҘmГҘ could not part with the bundle of
parched rice he had so fondly brought with
him. Seeing the royal grandeur and untold
wealth of the Lord, he felt very shy in
exhibiting that poor stuff. The Lord, who
knows the innermost secret of all hearts, had
no difficulty in divining the cause of his visit,
and said to Himself, Г¬This BrГҘhmaЖ’a is a
disinterested devotee and friend of Mine. He
never adored Me with the motive of gaining
wealth in the past, nor is he actuated by any
such motive even now; that is why he is
withholding from Me this present of parched
rice. But he has come to Me at the request
of his devoted wife; I shall accordingly
confer on him that wealth (in the shape of
worldly enjoyments and liberation) which is
difficult of access even to the celestials.Г®
Having thus resolved and casting a
searching glance into the bundle of parched
rice held tightly by SudГҘmГҘ under his arm-
pit, the Lord forcibly dislodged it from its
secure position. Made of an old tattered
cloth, the bundle gave way, scattering the
contents on the floor.
Thereupon, in accents of deep love, the
Lord said:Гі
Г¬O friend, this loving present brought
by you affords Me supreme delight. These
parched rice will satisfy Me, and (with Me)
the entire universe.Г®*
So saying, the Lord started picking up
the scattered grains of rice one by one,
putting them into His mouth and masticating
them. Partaking in this way of the offering
lovingly brought by a devotee, the Lord gave
an ocular demonstration of His incomparable
love for the devotee.
Joyfully spending some days at DvГҘrakГҘ
in the blessed company of the Lord, SudГҘmГҘ
at last returned to his home and found it
totally transformed. By the sportive will of
the Lord, his dilapidated cottage with a
thatched roof containing many holes had
given place to a palace with turrets of gold.
SudГҘmГҘ accepted this as a pastime of the
Lord. He said to himself, Г¬How noble and
praiseworthy it is of my divine Friend that
He fulfils the desire of the seeker by bestowing
on him all that he wants secretly without his
knowledge. But I am no seeker of wealth.
My one repeated prayer is that вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
may continue to be my well-wisher, friend
and loving companion in all my lives, and
I may remain exclusively devoted to Him.
I have no craving for this wealth. What I
care for is the purest form of devotion to the
Lord, who is the repository of all virtues, and
the blessed company of His devotees. It is
an act of Grace on His part that He withholds
wealth from us, for the pride of wealth brings
about oneГӯs downfall. It is therefore that
He does not confer worldly possessions,
kingdom and supremacy on His shortsighted
devotees.Г®
Г«SudГҘmГҘ lived as a householder
throughout his life, though he had no attachment
for anything, and devoted all his time to the
practice of adoration.
DRAUPADвҲ«
During their exile in the forest, the
PГҘЖ’Е’avas were passing their period of privation
*
ЕёГЈп¬ӮпЈҝГғЕ’ГҲВ¬ЕёГӢГғВў в—ҠпЈҝ В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠВ¬ЛқГӢГЎГҠЕёВў вҖҡПҖпЈҝвҖ“ ГғВ¬ВёГҝГЈГ ГҝXГ”U в—ҠГҠВў ГҒп¬ӮEв—ҠпЈҝГғпЈҝ В¬ГҺГ•ГҲвҲ‘В§ГғГЎВ«ГҲUвҲӮUГҠвҖ”H
(вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata X.Ixxxi.9)

=== PAGE 454 ===

* Chapter IX *
453
and suffering; while the vile Duryodhana
and his evil-minded associates, due to their
inherent wickedness, were busy devising
means for their extirpation. On a certain
occasion, Duryodhana propitiated the sage
DurvГҘsГҘ by his services and asked for a
boon. He said, Г¬My elder cousin, the high-
souled YudhiВ¶Вўhira, who is noted for his
piety, is living in the forest with his brothers.
Kindly accept his hospitality one day with
all your pupils, ten thousand in number. I
would, however, pray that you should call
on him at a time when all have dined and
when the blessed DraupadвҲӮ has finished her
meal and may be peacefully enjoying her
dayГӯs rest.Г® Acting under the advice of his
designing ministers, Duryodhana thought that
after DraupadвҲӮ had taken her meal, the
cooking utensil granted to her by the Sun-
god could yield no more food. He thought
that would excite the wrath of the irascible
ascetic, who would reduce the PГҘЖ’Е’ava to
ashes by his curse, and the object for gaining
which Duryodhana had been taking so much
pains would thus be easily achieved. DurvГҘsГҘ,
who possessed a guileless heart, could not
make out the real motive of DuryodhanaГӯs
request; he, therefore, readily granted it.
Accordingly, one day, DurvГҘsГҘ appeared in
the KГҘmyaka, a forest. Having had their
meals, the PГҘЖ’Е’avas and their consort DraupadвҲӮ
were sitting at ease and chatting, when
DurvГҘsГҘ made his appearance with his battalion
of ten thousand pupils. YudhiВ¶Вўhira and his
four brothers rose from their seats to receive
the honoured guest, and after paying their
respects to him invited him to take his meal.
Accepting their invitation, DurvГҘsГҘ went to
the river for a bath. DraupadвҲӮ, however, felt
much disturbed. But who could save her
from an awkward predicament like the one
in which she found herself except her dear
friend, вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a? Remembering the Lord,
she said, Г¬O KГҰВ¶Ж’a, O Divine Cowherd, O
refuge of the forlorn, O befriender of the
refugee, You alone can rescue me from this
calamity.Г®
Г¬Just as You delivered me the other day
from the clutches of DuВЁвҖ№ГҘsana in an open
assembly, even so You should extricate me
from this difficulty.Г®*
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a happened to be with RukmiЖ’вҲӮ
at that time in His palace at DvГҘrakГҘ.
Hearing the prayer of DraupadвҲӮ, and knowing
her to be in distress, the blessed Lord, who
is so fond of His devotees, immediately left
RukmiЖ’вҲӮГӯs side and ran post haste to meet
DraupadвҲӮ. The rapidity of motion of the
Supreme Lord cannot be conceived by the
human mind, there could, therefore, be no
delay in His reaching the KГҘmyaka forest.
In a moment He was with DraupadвҲӮ. DraupadвҲӮ
felt as if life had returned to her lifeless body.
Greeting the Lord, she described to Him the
predicament with which she was faced. Г¬Tell
Me all this afterwards,Г® the Lord retorted, Г¬I
am terribly hungry; first, give Me something
to eat.Г® Г¬I remembered You, my beloved
Lord only because of my difficulty in procuring
food. I have finished my meal, and there is
nothing left in that vessel,Г® rejoined DraupadвҲӮ.
The Lord, who is very jovial, could not be
easily satisfied. He said:Гі
Г¬DraupadвҲӮ, I am oppressed by hunger
and fatigue. I can brook no jest now. Make
haste, bring the vessel presented to you by
the sun-god, and show it to Me.Г®вҖ 
DraupadвҲӮ could not resist His entreaty
*
Е’ГҲвҖ”вүҘГҠГҠвҖҡЕёГҠЕ’вҖһВўU В¬ГҚп¬ӮZ вҖҡГ·ГҠГҝГҠВў в—ҠГҠпЈҝГҒГёГғГҠ ГҝГ•ГҠвҖ“ ГғГ•Г’п¬Ӯ вҖҡВўвҲ‘В§вүҲUГҠЕ’Sв—ҠГҠГЈв—ҠГҠв—ҠГҲhГғГҲВёГҒв—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖһВёUГҒвҖҡH
(MahГҘ. Vana. 263.15)
вҖ 
вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠпЈҝ Её Еёв—ҠВёвҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮUГҠпЈҝЛҳГҝВў ЛҮГҠГҲГ«ВҝЛӣUв—ҠпЈҝГЎГҠГҠГғГҲвҒ„пЈҝU в—ҠГҒГҝвҖ“ вүҘГҠГӢГүГҠЛқВў ВӘГ«ВҝU в—Ҡв—Ҡ SГ•ГҠвҲӮUГӢв—ҠГҠЕёГҒГҝГ п¬ӮГҠ В¬ЛқЕ’вүҘГҠВёГҝH
(MahГҘ. Vana. 263.23)

=== PAGE 455 ===

454
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
any more. She brought the vessel and placed
it before the Lord. The LordГӯs penetrating
vision discovered a vegetable leaf sticking
somewhere in the vessel. Г¬DraupadвҲӮ,Г® He
said, Г¬You told Me there was nothing in the
vessel; but this single leaf is enough to satisfy
all the three worlds !Г® The Lord, who is the
enjoyer of all sacrifices, immediately took
out the leaf and putting it into His mouth
said:Гі
Г¬Let God, who is the soul of the
universe and enjoyer of sacrifices, derive
satisfaction from this leaf.Г®*
At the same time He asked Sahadeva
to go and fetch the В§RВ¶is for dinner.
Meantime a strange thing happened on
the riverside. The ascetics had hardly finished
their SandhyГҘ when they felt that their
stomach had become suddenly loaded, and
they began to belch. The pupils approached
their preceptor and said, Г¬Sir, we feel as if
our stomach has been loaded up to the very
throat. How shall we do justice to the
invitation of the PГҘЖ’Е’avas?Г® DurvГҘsГҘ, who
was going through the same strange experience
himself, at once replied, Г¬Dear ones, let us
leave this place immediately. The PГҘЖ’Е’avas
are extremely pious and learned, and men
of great moral stamina; and they are exclusively
devoted to BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a. They can
reduce us to ashes, if they take it into their
head, even as a flame reduces a heap of
cotton to ashes. My experience with AmbarвҲӮВ¶a
is still fresh in my memory, and I am terribly
afraid of the devotees of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a.Г® Hearing
these words from the lips of DurvГҘsГҘ, his
pupils immediately dispersed and ran away
in different directions. Sahadeva found none
present on the river bank.
Г¬Now let Me return to DvГҘrakГҘ,Г® said
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a to the PГҘЖ’Е’avas; Г¬you are all
virtuous souls. Those who are constantly
devoted to virtuous conduct never suffer.Г®вҖ 
THE LORD OF ELEPHANTS
The great tusker figuring in the PurГҘЖ’as
lived on the TrikВөuВўa hill. Oppressed by the
summer heat, he once reached the bank of a
beautiful and extensive lake in the garden of
VaruЖ’a (the god of water), called В§RtumГҘn,
accompanied by a number of male and female
elephants. He rushed into the lake and, having
quaffed its sweet ambrosial water to his heartГӯs
content, began to sport in it with his female
companions and their youngs. In that lake
lived an alligator possessed of inordinate
strength, who got hold of one of the feet of
the lord of elephants. Exerting all his strength
the latter tried to disengage his foot from the
alligatorГӯs mortal grip, but without success.
The alligator now began to drag the elephant
into deep waters. All the male and female
companions of the elephant tried hard to
rescue their chief, joining trunk with trunk,
and pulling the elephant in the direction of
the bank; but in vain. The tug-of-war continued
for a long time. Losing all hope, the lord of
elephants at last sought refuge with the Lord.
He said:Гі
Г¬Like a mighty serpent, possessed of
terrible speed, Death pursues all in every
direction. God undoubtedly protects him
who is afraid of this monster and seeks His
protection from it. I, therefore, take refuge
in Him; for it is out of His fear that this
monster runs hither and thither in pursuit of
mortals.Г® (вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata VIII.ii.33) вҖЎ
The lord of elephants mentally offered
a beautiful prayer to God. His cry of anguish
*
ГҒп¬ӮEГҠГ в—ҠГҠ В¬ЛқГӢГҝГғГҠВў Е’пЈҝп¬ӮSГғГҲCГ”UpГҠГҒSГ п¬ӮГҒГғ ГҝГҙГҠГ·ГҲвҲ‘ЛңГ”В§вҖ“
(MahГҘ. Vana. 263.25)
вҖ 
Е“в—ҠВёГҒЕёГ ГҝГҠSГғГҲ ГҝпЈҝ вҲ‘пЈҝВ§ГҒГёГӣГҠ ГғпЈҝ вҖҡГӢЕ’ГҒГЈГғ вҲ‘В§ГҒвҖһВёUГҒГёГғЛңГ”H
(MahГҘ. Vana. 263.44)
вҖЎ
ГҝвҖ” вҲ‘В§pЕёпЈҝвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝ вҖҷГҒвҲӮUЕёГҠпЈҝЛҳГЈГғвҲ‘В§ГҠпЈҝвҒ„UВӘГҠГғЛңГ” В¬ЛқГёГЎВ«Uп¬ӮпЈҝВӘГҠЕ’ГҒГ·Е“ГҠп¬ӮГғГҠпЈҝ Г·ГҺвүҘГҠв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
Г·ГӢГғВў 
В¬ЛқВ¬ГӣГҠВў 
В¬ГҒвҒ„UВ¬ГҠГҒГғ 
ГҝjГҝГҠГЈв—ҠГҺГ ГҝГҲвҖ” 
В¬ЛқЕ“ГҠп¬ӮГ ГҝвҒ„UГЎГҠВў 
Гғв—ҠГӢв—ҠГҒвҖһUH
(вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘ. 8.2.33)

=== PAGE 456 ===

* Chapter IX *
455
reached the ears of the Lord, who got
impatient to save His devotee. A poet has
depicted the incident very beautifully in the
following words:Гі
Г¬In order to rescue the lord of elephants
caught in the deadly grip of the alligator
BhagavГҘn NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a left His couch in nervous
haste without caring for his attendants,
unmindful of the Kaustubha gem, shouting
for His club even before leaving the bed,
without even looking at His Consort, LakВ¶mвҲӮ,
and mounting the back of GaruЕ’a even
without spreading anything on it. May He
protect us!Г®*
Riding on GaruЕ’a, the Lord reached the
place of occurrence in no time. The Lord
of elephants saw him in the air mounted on
the back of GaruЕ’a, and holding aloft a lotus
with his trunk said in a sinking voice in
extreme agony, Г¬O NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a, O Supreme
Master, I offer obeisance to You.Г®
The Lord accepted the lotus offered by
the devotee with love, and severing the head
of the alligator with His circular weapon,
SudarвҖ№ana, delivered the tusker from a great
peril.
вҖәABARвҲ«
вҖәabarвҲӮ was a Bhil woman. Though low-
born, she was a great devotee of the Lord.
She had spent a large part of her life in
rendering secret services to the sages living
in the DaЖ’Е’aka forest. Sweeping the track
through which the sages passed for their
daily bath, covering plots with a rugged
surface with sand, cutting wood from the
forest and piling it up in the hermitageГі
these were the self-imposed duties she had
adopted by way of her daily routine. A sage,
MataвҲҶga by name, took pity on her, imparted
the holy name to her, and while departing for
the abode of Brahma told her that BhagavГҘn
вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma would grace her with a visit to her
cottage and that His very sight would fulfil
the object of her life. Till then he asked her
to remain at that place in expectation of that
auspicious moment, keeping herself engaged
in the practice of adoration.
вҖәabarвҲӮГӯs mind got addicted to Bhajana,
and she began to spend her days in anxious
expectation of вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘmaГӯs visit. Her expectancy
began to grow in intensity as the days rolled
on. Expecting the Lord every moment, and
fearing lest thorns might prick the soles of His
feet, she would every now and then go and
sweep the track leading to her cottage up to
a long distance and sprinkle it with water. She
would plaster the courtyard with cow-dung
and mud and prepare a beautiful dais of cow-
dung and earth for the Lord to sit on. Resorting
to the woods she would pluck the most
delicious fruits avaiable there and keep them
in cups made of leaves. She would repeat this
process from day to day. There was no
knowing how many times in the course of a
day she swept the path, plastered the courtyard,
prepared seats and plucked fruits. At last, one
day, the Lord visited вҖәabarвҲӮГӯs cottage. вҖәabarвҲӮГӯs
joy knew no bounds. It will not be out of place
to reproduce in this connection the scene as
depicted in the RГҘmacaritamГҘnasa of GosvГҘmвҲӮ
TulasвҲӮdГҘsa:Гі
Г¬Finding вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma in her cottage, the
heart of вҖәabarвҲӮ gladdened; she rejoiced to
find sage MataвҲҶgaГӯs prediction come true.
He had lotus-like eyes, unusually long arms,
a crown of matted hair on His head, and a
garland of sylvan flowers on His bosom.
Seeing вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma and LakВ¶maЖ’a, who were
distinguishable by their swarthy and white
*
В¬ГҝВёVГ”ВўU ГҒп¬ӮвҖҡГҺВЎЕёЛңГ” ВӘГЎГҠГҠЕёВӘГЎГҠГҝЕёЛңГ” Г·ГҚВ·ГҠв—ҠГҒГЎГҠВў ГҒп¬ӮSв—ҠвҒ„UГӣГҠГҲГ»ГҠГҠЕёГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ ВӘЕ’ГҠВӘЕ’пЈҝГҒГғ ГҒЕёВӘЕ’ЕёЛңГ” В¬kГҠв—ҠЕёГҠвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҝЕёЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҒЕёВӘВёГ«ВҝUГӣГҠВ¬ГҒвҒ„UГ«ВҝUЕ’Вў 
ПҖВӘВ¬ГҒГғВў 
ГёГҠвҒ„UГҠпЈҝвҖһUв—ҠГҠГЎГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳп¬ӮГғГҲ 
ВӘЛқГҠвҖһUВӘЛқSГғв—ҠГғXГ”UВ¬ГҲXГ”Uп¬ӮвҖҡв—ҠГҲhГҠвҒ„UГҠГҝ 
ЕёГҠвҒ„UГҠГҝГЎГҠвҖ”H

=== PAGE 457 ===

456
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
complexion respectively. вҖәabarвҲӮ fell prostrate
on the ground encircling their feet within her
arms. Overwhelmed with love, she found
herself tongue-tied. Again and again she
bowed her head at Their lotus feet.Г®
вҖәabarвҲӮ then worshipped the Lord and
placed fruits before Him. Praising her devotion
in highest terms, the Lord accepted her
worship and conferred the highest blessing
on her by partaking of the fruits lovingly
offered by her. The poet TulasвҲӮdГҘs depicts
in glowing terms how much the Lord relished
those fruits. He says:Гі
Г¬Wherever the Lord was ever entertained,
whether at His own home, at the preceptorГӯs
residence, at a friendГӯs house or even at His
father-in-lawГӯs, nowhere and at no time did
He enjoy the dishes so well, nor did He find
them as delicious as the fruits of вҖәabarвҲӮ. This
is what He explicitly acknowledged on every
such occasion.Г®*
RANTIDEVA
King Rantideva was the son of King
SaвҲҶkГҰti. A powerful ruler, Rantideva was
extremely compassionate by nature. Observing
the woes and sufferings of the poor, he gave
away all he possessed in charity. Having
been thus reduced to straits, he could maintain
himself and his family with great difficulty.
Even in that state he gave away to the poor
whatever he got, and remained without food
himself. Reduced to utter destitution, the
king thus led a life of extreme misery with
all the members of his family.
On a certain occasion the king had to
go without food and water for full forty-eight
days. Oppressed by hunger and thirst, his
limbs began to tremble. On the morning of
the forty-ninth day he got some ghee, rice
boiled in milk, porridge and water. Forty-
eight days, complete fast had rendered the
king and his family extremely weak. The
limbs of all were shaking.
When Rantideva was about to partake
of this food, a BrГҘhmaЖ’a who was quite
unknown to him appeared on the scene. Out
of a crore it is very easy to give away a
lakh of rupees in charity for nameГӯs sake;
but it is most difficult for a starving person
to part with his food. The great devotee
Rantideva, however, who saw God present
everywhere, gave away a share of his food
to the BrahmaЖ’a with due respect and
reverence. Satisfied with the kingГӯs hospitality,
the BrГҘhmaЖ’a went away.
After entertaining the BrГҘhmaЖ’a, the
king was about to share the remaining food
with his family, when another stranger
belonging to the вҖәВөudra class made his
appearance. With the thought of вҖәrвҲӮ Hari
foremost in his mind, the king gave away
a part of this food to that destitute. Meanwhile
a third stranger appeared with a number of
dogs and begged food for himself and his
dogs on the plea of hunger.
The devout king received this stranger
also with due attention and, reverentially
placing the whole of the remaining food at
the disposal of the new comer and his dogs,
bowed to him.
There was now left only a small quantity
of water barely enough to appease the thirst
of a single individual. The king was about to
quaff it, when an outcast appeared  before him
and made the following submission in a
pathetic tone, Г¬O great king! I am extremely
tired and exhausted. Low and impure as I am,
please favour me with a little water to drink.Г®
Hearing this piteous appeal of the pariah,
and knowing him to be really exhausted, the
king was moved with great compassion, and
he uttered the following nectar-like words:Гі
* The story of вҖәabarвҲӮ has been adapted from the RГҘmacaritamГҘnasa of GosvГҘmвҲӮ TulasвҲӮdГҘs and other
similar works.

=== PAGE 458 ===

* Chapter IX *
457
Г¬I crave not from God the highest form
of destiny with the eight superhuman faculties,
nor freedom from rebirth. My only prayer
is that dwelling in the heart of all beings I
may undergo their suffering, so that they
may be rid of all sorrow.
Г¬[This man is dying of thirst, and he
is piteously seeking water from me in order
to save his life.] By offering this life-giving
drink to this humble creature who is anxious
to live, my hunger, thirst, exhaustion, bodily
suffering, lowness of spirit, languor, grief,
depression 
and 
infatuation, 
all 
have
disappeared.Г®*
(вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata IX.xxi.12-13).
With these words on his lips the tender-
hearted king Rantideva, though half-dead
himself due to thirst, reverentially and cheerfully
gave the whole of that water to the pariah.
The aforesaid strangers were no other
than the three lords of creation, BrahmГҘ,
ViВ¶Ж’u and вҖәiva, who confer boons of various
kinds on those who seek them, and who
appeared through their delusive potency in the
guise of a BrГҘhmaЖ’a and others in order to test
the piety of the great king, Rantideva. They
were supremely delighted to observe the power
of endurance and depth of devotion exhibited
by the king, and appeared before him in their
actual form. Obtaining thus a direct vision of
the three Lords all at once, the king bowed
before them, but did not ask for any boon,
even though called upon to do so.
For, renouncing all forms of worldly
attachment and desires, the king had fixed
his mind exclusively on God. In this way
Rantideva, who was exclusively devoted to
God, completely merged his thoughts in God
and God alone; and he being thus identified
with God, the veil of MГҘyГҘ, consisting of
the three GuЖ’as, lifted like a dream from
before his eyes. Due to his association the
other members of his family too wholly
devoted themselves to BhagavГҘn NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a,
and attained the supreme state to which
YogвҲӮs alone are entitled.
The use of the compound adjective
Г«BhaktyupahГҰtamГӯ is intended to convey that
the Lord refuses to accept things that are
offered to Him with a cold heart. Where
there is love, and the devotee feels genuine
delight both in offering a thing to God and
in its acceptance by the Lord, He not only
accepts such an offering, but may even force
His way into the house of such a devotee
and eat things from his store, as He did in
the case of the blessed GopвҲӮs of Vraja. For
in reality God hungers and thirsts for love,
and not for things of the world.
By the words Г«AhamГӯ and Г«AвҖ№nГҘmiГӯ the
Lord indicates that appearing in person before
such a devotee He eats the articles offered
by him with a pure and loving heart. That
is to say, when He is present in the world
in a human or other garb, He goes to the
devotee in person, while at other times He
manifests Himself before the devotee in the
form desired by the devotee, and fulfils the
object of his existence by eating whatever
is offered to him.
This naturally raises the question in ArjunaГӯs mind as to what he should do under
the circumstances. Anticipating this question the Lord lays down the duty for Arjuna:
ГҝГ вҲ‘В§вҒ„UГҠпЈҝГҒВ· ГҝЕ’oAГҠГҒвҖҡ ГҝГ®ГҠГҲвҖһUГҠпЈҝГҒВ· Е’Е’ГҠГҒвҖҡ ГҝГғЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҝГ»ГҠВ¬SГҝГҒвҖҡ вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ ГғГ вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§cп¬Ӯ в—ҠЕ’В¬ВёГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ”H 27H
*
Её  вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҝпЈҝЛҳвҖһВўU ВӘГҒГғв—ҠГӢEвҒ„UГҠГ В¬вҒ„UГҠв—ҠCГ”UГҢhГҝГҲQВ§ГҠв—ҠВ¬ГҲЕёГ·Вёп¬ӮВў п¬ӮГҠ вҖ“ вҖўГҠГҸГ»ГҠ В¬ЛқВ¬lпЈҝЛҳГҒПҖвҲӮUЕ’пЈҝUвҖһUГ·ГҠВЎГҠв—ҠГЈГғвҖ”ГҒSГ•ГғГҠпЈҝ ГҝпЈҝЕё Г·п¬ӮГЈГ ГҝЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖГҠвҖ”H
ЛҮГҠГҲГ»ГҠГҺвүҲЛңUГ”ГјГҠв—ҠГҠпЈҝВӘГҠГІГҠВ¬ГҒвҒ„UГјГҠв—Ҡp  Е’Г’ГЈГҝВў Г„вҖ№в—ҠвҖ” вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҠЕ’в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҠвҖ”вҖ“ вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҺГ»ГҠГҠвҖ” вҲ‘ГҺВ§В¬ГЎГҠSГҝ ВЎГЈГғГҠпЈҝГҢВЎВЎГӢГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҠпЈҝВЎГӢВёп¬ӮВЎвҲӮUГҠВ¬ВёГЎГҠГҠГЈв—ҠпЈҝH

=== PAGE 459 ===

458
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
By using the five verbs Г«KaroВ¶iГӯ, Г«AвҖ№nГҘsiГӯ,
Г«JuhoВ¶iГӯ, Г«DadГҘsiГӯ and Г«TapasyasiГӯ with the
pronoun Г«YatГӯ joined to each, the Lord has
enumerated in a nutshell all the duties of
man. That is to say, the words Г«Yat KaroВ¶iГӯ
cover all kinds of pursuits other than the
performance of sacrifices, charity and austerity,
viz., all activities carried on by man for
earning his livelihood consistent with his
grade in society and stage in life, social
duties, and all other duties enjoined by the
scriptures, such as the practice of adoration,
meditation etc. Even so all activities intended
to keep the body and soul together, such as
taking food and drink etc., are included in
Г«Yat AвҖ№nГҘsiГӯ, and all practices connected
with worship and the offering of oblations
in fire etc., are comprised in Г«Yat JuhoВ¶iГӯ.
Similarly all acts of charity and service are
included in Г«Yat DadГҘsiГӯ, and all acts of self-
restraint and all forms of austere penance
(XVII.14Гі17) are covered by Г«Yat TapasyasiГӯ.
The common run of men identify
themselves with, and feel attached to, such
actions and crave for their fruit. Therefore,
renouncing the feeling of identification with,
and attachment for, all actions and the
craving for their fruit, the devotee should
realize that the whole universe belongs to
God, that his own mind, intellect, body and
senses also belong to God, and he himself
belongs to God, so that whatever sacrificial
and other acts are performed by him also
belong to Him. Nay, he should further
realize that like the showman making the
puppet dance, it is God alone who is getting
every thing done by him, and that it is God
Himself who enjoys all those acts in various
forms, he being a mere instrument and
nothing else. And realizing this he should
perform the aforesaid actions in a disinterested
spirit as a behest from God and for His
pleasure alone. This is what is meant by
doing those actions as an offering to God.
Undertaking an action with another
motive and subsequently offering it to God,
offering an action to God even while
performing it, offering the same to God as
soon as it is completed, or offering its fruit
to GodГіall these processes are included in
the act of offering an action to God. In fact,
these are the initial stages of offering oneГӯs
actions to God. Total offering of actions to
God as indicated in the foregoing paragraph
is accomplished only by going through the
above processes.
ГҝГғЛңГ” whatever; вҲ‘В§вҒ„UГҠпЈҝГҒВ· you do; ГҝГғЛңГ” whatever; вҖўoAГҠГҒвҖҡ you eat; ГҝГғЛңГ” whatever; ВЎГҲвҖһUГҠпЈҝГҒВ· you
offer as oblation to the sacred fire; Е’Е’ГҠГҒвҖҡ you bestow (as a gift); ГҝГғЛңГ” whatever; ГҝГғЛңГ” whatever;
ГғВ¬SГҝГҒвҖҡ you do by way of penance; вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ O son of KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna; ГғГғЛңГ” (all) that; вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§cп¬Ӯ
в—ҠЕ’В¬ВёГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” offer to Me.
Arjuna, whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you offer as oblation to
the sacred fire, whatever you bestow as a gift, whatever you do by way of penance,
do that as an offering to Me.                                                       (27)
It may be asked here: What will be the result of offering all oneГӯs actions to God
in the manner stated above? Anticipating this query the Lord says:
вүҘГҠГҲГ·ГҠвүҘГҠГҲГ·В»В§вҲӮГ’UвҒ„пЈҝUп¬ӮВў в—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҝвҖҡпЈҝ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҷГЈЕ“ЕёГ’вҖ”вҖ“
вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҝГҲQВ§ГҠГ в—ҠГҠ ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҲQВ§ГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠв—ҠГҲВ¬Г’cГҝГҒвҖҡГ”H 28H
вүҘГҠГҲГ·ГҠвүҘГҠГҲГ·В»В§вҲӮГ’вҖ” in the shape of good and evil consequences; вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” thus; в—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҝвҖҡпЈҝ you will
be freed; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҷГЈЕ“ЕёГ’вҖ” from the bonds of Karma; вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҝГҲQВ§ГҠГ в—ҠГҠ with your mind established

=== PAGE 460 ===

* Chapter IX *
459
The use of the indeclinable Г«EvamГӯ in
this 
verse 
indicates 
that 
the 
word
Г«SaвүҲnyГҘsayogaГӯ here does not stand for
SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga, or JВӨГҘnayoga, but has been
used in the sense of offering all action to
God as enjoined in the preceding verse.
Г«SaвүҲnyГҘsayogayuktГҘtmГҘГӯ, therefore, refers
to him in whose mind and intellect the idea
of offering all actions to God, as enjoined
in the previous verse, has got deeply rooted.
Attaining heaven, or being condemned
to hell, birth in the species of beasts, birds,
human beings or other creatures, and going
through pleasurable or painful experiences as
a result of oneГӯs noble or sinful deedsГіthese
constitute the good and evil consequences
referred to in this verse; and it is these
consequences which are spoken of as the
shackles of Karma. For it is the compulsory
enjoyment of the fruit of actions that constitutes
the binding effect of Karma. He who offers
all his actions to God in the manner indicated
in the preceding verse is exempted from their
consequences in the form of rebirth and of
pleasurable or painful experiences. This is
what is meant by securing Г«freedom from the
bondage of Karma in the shape of good and
evil consequences.Гӯ Attainment of the supreme
abode of God after death, or coming face to
face with God during oneГӯs life-time is what
is meant by Г«attaining God after being freed
from the bondage of KarmaГӯ.
It is no doubt true that he who dedicates
his activities to God naturally abstains from
evil practices. But he must have perpetrated
many evil deeds prior to his starting this
practice, in his current life as well as in the
numberless lives that have preceded it.
Moreover, according to the principles laid
down by the Lord in XVIII.48 that Г¬all
undertakings are tainted with some blemish,
just as fire is clouded by smoke,Г® one is
liable to sins that are incidental to the
performance of oneГӯs allotted duties. The
devotee who offers all his actions to God
is absolved of all such sins. This is what the
Lord means when He speaks of such a
devotee being exempted from both the good
and evil consequences of actions.
When all good actions are offered to
God in the manner indicated in the preceding
verse, they result in God-realization alone.
But acts of virtue done with an interested
motive bring enjoyment as their fruit, both
in this world and in the next. Actions which
bring enjoyment in its wake throw one into
the whirl-pool of transmigration and cause
bondage through attachment and the craving
for enjoyment. Therefore, it is but reasonable
to speak of their fruit as causing bondage.
But this should not lead one to conclude that
all good actions are worth renouncing. They
must be performed under every circumstance;
but instead of expecting any return for them,
one should go on dedicating them to God.
When this is done, our actions, instead of
causing bondage, will bring God-realization
in their wake.
in the Yoga of Renunciation (offering of all actions to God); ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҲQВ§вҖ” (and) freed from them;
в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me (alone); В©UВ¬Г’cГҝГҒвҖҡ you will attain.
With your mind thus established in the Yoga of renunciation (offering of all
actions to Me), you will be freed from the bonds of Karma in the form of good
and evil consequences; and freed from them, you will attain Me.            (28)
The statement that God is attained only by those who practise devotion to Him in
the way mentioned above, and not by others, exposes Him to the charge of partiality.
Therefore, while meeting this charge, the Lord says:

=== PAGE 461 ===

460
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
God is equally present in all beings
from BrahmГҘ down to the smallest clump of
grass as their inner witness. Therefore, He
looks upon all with an equal eye, has no
partiality for or prejudice against anyone.
This is what is meant by the first half of this
verse.
Constantly dwelling with reverence and
love on God with or without form, hearing,
reflecting on and chanting the names, glory,
virtues, greatness and stories of God, offering
obeisance to Him, lovingly worshipping Him
with leaves, flowers and other articles of
oneГӯs choice and offering all oneГӯs actions
to GodГіall these practices are included in
the devout worship of God.
God seeks His devotees in the same
way as they approach Him. Just as God does
not slip out of the devoteeГӯs mind, even so
the devotee does not pass out of His mind.
This is what the Lord means when He says
that such a devotee abides in God. And
inasmuch as the stainless heart of such
devotees brims over with divine love, God
is ever directly visible in their heart. This is
what the Lord seeks to convey by declaring
Himself as present in them.
That is to say, although according to
verse 4 of this chapter, God in His unmanifest
aspect pervades all sentient and insentient
beings and all beings, both sentient and
insentient, ever dwell in Him, it is the devoteeГӯs
love that makes it possible for the Lord to
enshrine them in His heart as a special case,
as also to stand revealed in their heart. It is
therefore that the Lord says to DurvГҘsГҘ:Гі
Г¬The devotees are My own heart, as it
were, and I am the heart of the devotees.
They know none but Me, and I know not
in the least anyone but My devotees.Г® (вҖәrвҲӮmad
BhГҘgavata IX.iv.68).*
The sun, though shedding its light
equally everywhere, casts its reflection only
on transparent objects like the looking-glass,
and not on opaque things like wood etc., and
yet there is no partiality in it. Even so, the
fact that God is accessible only to His
devotees and to none else betrays no partiality
on His part. On the other hand, it reveals
nothing but the glory of devotion.
вҖҡв—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҳвҖһВўU вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ Её в—ҠпЈҝ mпЈҝcГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒSГғ Её ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҖ”вҖ“
ГҝпЈҝ Г·ВЎГҒГЈГғ ГғГҲ в—ҠГҠВў Г·Г„Г ГҝГҠ в—ҠГҒГҝ ГғпЈҝ ГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ ГёГҠГҘГҝвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”H 29H
вҖҡв—ҠвҖ” (am) equally; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ in all beings; Её none; в—ҠпЈҝ to Me; mпЈҝcГҝвҖ” hateful; вҖўГҒSГғ
there is; Её nor; ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҖ” dear; ГҝпЈҝ who; Г·ВЎГҒГЈГғ worship; ГғГҲ but; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; Г·Г„Г ГҝГҠ with love; в—ҠГҒГҝ
(abide) in Me; ГғпЈҝ they; ГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ (stand revealed) in them; Гё and; вҖўГҒВ¬ too; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I.
I am equally present in all beings; there is none hateful or dear to Me.
They, however, who devoutly worship Me, abide in Me; and I too stand revealed
to them.                                                                (29)
While revealing His undifferentiating attitude towards those who worship Him, the
Lord now declares in the next two verses that even the vilest sinner practising devotion
to Him attains lasting peace, and thus brings out the special glory of devotion.
вҖўГҒВ¬ ГёпЈҝГ вҖҡГҲЕ’ГҲвҒ„UГҠГёГҠвҒ„UГҠпЈҝ Г·ВЎГғпЈҝ в—ҠГҠв—ҠЕёГЈГҝГ·ГҠвҲ‘ЛңВ§Г”вҖ“
вҖҡГҠЕ“ГҲвҒ„пЈҝUп¬Ӯ вҖҡ в—ҠГЈГғвҲҡГҝвҖ” вҖҡГӘГҝГҮвҲҡГҝп¬ӮГҒвҖҡГғГҠпЈҝ ГҒвҖһU вҖҡвҖ”Г”H 30H
вҖўГҒВ¬ even; ГёпЈҝГғЛңГ” if; вҖҡГҲЕ’ГҲвҒ„UГҠГёГҠвҒ„UвҖ” the vilest sinner; Г·ВЎГғпЈҝ worships; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; вҖўЕёГЈГҝГ·ГҠвҲ‘ЛңВ§Г” devoted
*
вҖҡГҠЕ“п¬ӮГҠпЈҝ NUЕ’ГҝВў в—ҠsГ”Вў вҖҡГҠЕ“ГҚЕёГҠВў NUЕ’ГҝВў Г п¬ӮвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“ в—ҠЕ’ГЈГҝГ»ГҠпЈҝ Её ВЎГҠЕёГҒГЈГғ ЕёГҠвҖһВўU ГғпЈҝГЁГҝГҠпЈҝ в—ҠЕёГҠВӘГҒВ¬H

=== PAGE 462 ===

* Chapter IX *
461
The use of the indeclinable Г«ApiГӯ in
this verse is intended to emphasize
His undifferentiating attitude towards His
worshippers. That is to say, one should not
wonder if men of righteous conduct and
ordinary sinners should be redeemed by His
worship; even the vilest sinner can be so
redeemed.
The indeclinable Г«CetГӯ has been used to
indicate that men of sinful conduct do not
as a rule take to His loving worship because
of their attachment to worldly enjoyments
and vice. Nevertheless, if through the revival
of some past good tendency, or  due to an
atmosphere of God-consciousness, study of
the scriptures or the holy association of
saints, or by hearing the virtues, glory,
greatness and mysteries of God a sinner
develops faith in the devotion to God and
takes to his adoration, he too secures
redemption.
The word Г«SudurГҘcГҘraВЁГӯ stands for men
whose conduct is most vile, who are addicted
to prohibited food, drink and acts and who,
being dominated by their evil nature, bad
habits and attachment for enjoyment, cannot
wholly give up their immoral practices. If by
hearing or reading accounts of the divine
virtues and glory etc., or due to some other
cause such a sinner comes to look upon God
as the supreme Reality, and depending
exclusively on God recognizes Him with
supreme faith and love as the sole object of
his worship, he is said to be exclusively
devoted to Him. And being thus devoted to
God, he who dwells on His divine essence,
hears, reflects on and chants His names,
virtues, glory and greatness, offers obeisance
to Him, worships Him with leaves, flowers
and various other objects of his choice and
offers his virtuous acts to Him is said to
worship Him with exclusive devotion.
Such a devotee, even though desiring
and striving to give up his immoral practices
in toto may not be able to abandon any
particular vice completely, being helplessly
driven to it by his evil nature and vicious
habit. Nevertheless, says the Lord, he should
be looked upon as a saint and not as a
wicked person. For he has arrived at the
definite conclusion that God is the redeemer
of the fallen, a disinterested friend of all,
almighty, supremely compassionate and
omniscient, the universal Lord and the supreme
Reality; that the highest duty of man is to
worship Him; and that His adoration will not
only eradicate all his sins and sinful proclivities
but bring him face to face with God as a
matter of course through His grace. There
can be no higher or saner resolve than this
in the eyes of God, and he who makes this
resolve is acknowledged by the Lord as His
devotee. Nay the Lord guarantees that his
devotion will soon convert him into a Perfectly
virtuous soul. Therefore, it is but reasonable
that such a devotee should be accounted a
virtuous soul rather than a sinner or an evil-
minded person.
In verse 15 of Chapter VII the Lord
stated that men of evil deeds do not worship
Him; whereas in the present verse He states
that the vilest sinner can worship Him, and
thereby become a saint. Although the two
statements appear as mutually contradictory,
to none else; вҖҡГҠЕ“ГҲвҖ” a saint; вҲһп¬Ӯ verily; вҖҡвҖ” he; в—ҠГЈГғвҲҡГҝвҖ” should be accounted; вҖҡГӘГҝвҲ‘ЛңВ§Г” вҲҡГҝп¬ӮГҒвҖҡГғвҖ”
(has) rightly resolved; ГҒвҖһU because; вҖҡвҖ” he.
Even if the vilest sinner worships Me with exclusive devotion, he should be
reckoned a saint, for he has rightly resolved. (He is positive in his belief that there
is nothing like devoted worship of God).                                  (30)

=== PAGE 463 ===

462
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
it will be found on closer examination that
really speaking there is no contradiction
between them. Thus it will be seen that the
men of evil deeds, referred to in the above
verse of Chapter VII, are not only addicted
to sin, but they have neither faith in God nor
any knowledge about Him, nor again are
they keen to avoid the perpetration of sins. It
is therefore that those foolish unbelievers
have been characterized as Г«men of deluded
wisdomГӯ, Г«vile among menГӯ, and Г«men who
have embraced the demoniac natureГӯ etc.
The sinner spoken of in the present verse,
however, is one who though addicted to sin,
is nonetheless anxious to avoid the perpetration
of sins. He is devoted to GodГӯs virtues,
glory, essence and names, and has arrived at
the definite conclusion that God, who is the
only redeemer of the fallen and is supremely
compassionate, is the supreme Reality; that
He is the supreme object of his worship, that
His adoration is the highest duty of a human
being, and that through His Grace all his sins
will be eradicated, and he will easily attain
Him. It is therefore that he has been
characterized as one who has Г«rightly resolvedГӯ,
and who is devoted to none else than God.
Adoration of God thus becomes quite natural
to him. As for unbelievers, since they have
no faith in God, it is hardly possible for them
to take to the practice of adoration. Thus
there is no contradiction whatsoever between
the two statements of the Lord, both of
which are correct in their own context.
ГҒЛҮГҠВ¬ЛқВў Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ Е“в—ҠГҠВёГ в—ҠГҠ вүҘГҠEГ«ВҝUГҠГҒГЈГғВў ГҒЕёВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғГ”вҖ“
вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ В¬ЛқГҒГғВЎГҠЕёГӢГҒвҖһU Её в—ҠпЈҝ Г·QВ§вҖ” В¬ЛқГЎГҠвүҘГҝГҒГғГ”H 31H
ГҒЛҮГҠВ¬Лқв—ҠЛңГ” speedily; Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ (he) becomes; Е“в—ҠГҠВёГ в—ҠГҠ virtuous; вүҘГҠEГ«ВҝUГҠГҒГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ”В§Г” lasting peace; ГҒЕёВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғГ”
(and) attains; вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ O son of KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna; В¬ЛқГҒГғВЎГҠЕёГӢГҒвҖһU know (it) for certain; Её not; в—ҠпЈҝ My;
Г·QВ§вҖ” devotee; В¬ЛқГЎГҠвүҘГҝГҒГғ falls.
Speedily he becomes virtuous and attains lasting peace. Know it for certain,
Arjuna, that My devotee never suffers a fall.                                      (31)
says in praise of devotees as well as of
devotion as undoubtedly true, and have it
indelibly impressed on his mind.
The verb Г«NaвҖ№yatiГӯ with Г«PraГӯ prefixed
to it means Г«undergoes a fallГӯ. What the Lord
intends to convey by the use of this word is
that a devotee of God gradually rises in the
scale of spiritual evolution and never suffers
a fall. In other words, he neither experiences
a spiritual set-back nor meets with an evil
destiny in the shape of birth in a sub-human
species or tortures in hell. Gradually freed
from vice and evil conduct, he soon becomes
a virtuous soul and attains supreme peace.
BHAKTA BILVAMAГғGALA
As an instance in point, we may cite the
The devotee referred to in the preceding
verse is not only freed in his very lifetime
and without delay from all vices and immoral
practices, but acquires the divine virtues
mentioned in verses 1 and 3 of Chapter XVI,
and thus becomes eligible for God-realization.
And Г«lasting peaceГӯ here means peace which,
once attained, is never lost, viz., peace in the
shape of God-realization, referred to as
Г«NaiВ¶ВўhikвҲӮ вҖәГҘntiГӯ in V.12, Г«everlasting peace,
consisting of supreme blissГӯ in VI.15 and as
Г«supreme peaceГӯ in XVIII.62.
The verb Г«PratijГҘnвҲӮhiГӯ is derived from
the root Г«JВӨГҘГӯ (to know) with Г«PratiГӯ prefixed
to it. It, therefore, means Г«know it for certainГӯ
or Г«vouch for it.Гӯ By using this word the
Lord asks Arjuna to believe whatever He

=== PAGE 464 ===

* Chapter IX *
463
example of BilvamaвҲҶgala, author of the
devotional poem Г¬вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’akarnГҘmГҰtaГ®, who
appeared only a few centuries ago.
BilvamaвҲҶgala was the son of a devout
BrГҘhmaЖ’a, RГҘmadГҘsa by name, who lived in
a village on the bank of the KГҰВ¶Ж’avвҲӮЖ’ГҘ in
south India. He was fairly educated, quiet in
disposition, cultured and virtuous by nature;
but having lost his father in early youth he
fell in evil company and turned a moral rake.
The house of a public woman was his favourite
resort, and habitual indulgence in sins was
his only occupation throughout the day. He
had given his heart to a public woman,
CintГҘmaЖ’i by name. CintГҘmaЖ’i lived on the
other side of the river. Once it so happened
that BilvamaвҲҶgala could not visit his paramour
for a whole day. It was the death anniversary
of his father. Although his physical body
remained confined within the four walls of
his house, his mind revelled in her company
throughout the day. The sun had set by the
time the вҖәrГҘddha ceremony was over.
BilvamaвҲҶgala was now ready to depart. People
tried to dissuade him on the ground that the
day was sacred to the memory of his father;
but he was adamant. BilvamaвҲҶgala hurriedly
left his home and reached the bank of the
river. A fearful storm with torrential rain
overtook him there. The anxious boatmen
moored their boats to the bank and took
shelter under the trees. The night assumed a
dismal aspect. BilvamaвҲҶgala pleaded hard
with the boatmen to ferry him across the
river, and offered them the temptation of a
liberal fare; but nobody was willing to risk
his life on any terms whatsoever. No risk,
however, was too great for BilvamaвҲҶgala,
who was bent upon visiting his sweetheart at
all costs. Unmindful of consequences he
jumped into the river. The corpse of a woman
in an advanced stage of decomposition was
drifting along the current. Due to the prevailing
darkness, however, nothing could be easily
distinguished. The eyes of BilvamaвҲҶgala, on
the other hand, were blinded by passion. He
mistook the corpse for a log of wood, and
clutched at it. Nothing conscious of the corpse,
or of its stench, he reached the other bank by
sheer good luck, and ran to CintГҘmaЖ’iГӯs
cottage. The door was closed. But no barrier
was too much for his yearning heart. He
made up his mind to enter the house by
scaling the wall. Groping for something to
help him he seized at what appeared to him
a strong rope soft as silk, but which was
actually a deadly cobra, hanging with its
head and neck thrust into a hole in the wall.
BilvamaвҲҶgala climbed the wall with the help
of its tail. He was not, however, bitten by the
snake. The Lord had so willed it. Entering
the house he woke up CintГҘmaЖ’i. She was,
however, taken aback to see him at that odd
hour. Г¬How did you manage to cross the
river during this fearful night, and enter the
house?Г® she asked. BilvamaвҲҶgala told her
how he swam across the river with the help
of a log of wood, and scaled the wall of the
house with the help of a rope. It had now
stopped raining. CintГҘmaЖ’i came out with a
light in her hand to ascertain the truth of his
statement, and discovered to her consternation
that the rope by which BilvamaвҲҶgala had
scaled the wall was no other than a deadly
cobra, and that the piece of log with the help
of which he had crossed the river was a
stinking corpse. BilvamaвҲҶgala also now saw
what those things actually were and shuddered
at their very sight. CintГҘmaЖ’i now upbraided
him saying Г¬You, moral rake, you are a
BrГҘhmaЖ’a by birth, and the day was sacred
to the memory of your father; but due to your
infatuation for this bundle of mere flesh and
blood you abandoned all your virtues and
sacred duties and came running all the way
at this dreadful hour with the help of a corpse

=== PAGE 465 ===

464
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
and a deadly snake ! But the figure which
you are so passionately fond of and which
you regard as exceptionally attractive today
will be reduced to the same condition one
day in which you find the corpse lying in
front of you. Fie upon this lustful propensity
of yours ! Had you been so enamoured of
that swarthy beauty, the enchanter of all
hearts, and sallied forth to meet Him with the
same degree of restlessness, you would have
surely attained the object of your existence
by realizing Him.Г®
The admonition of the harlot worked
like a miracle. The chords of BilvamaвҲҶgalaГӯs
heart now responded to a new melody. The
fire of wisdom blazed forth in his heart and
reduced all his impurities to ashes. As soon
as his heart got purged, the flood-gate of
divine love was flung open, and tears began
to flow in an unending stream through his
eyes. Clasping CintГҘmaЖ’iГӯs feet BilvamaвҲҶgala
said, Г¬Mother, by opening my inward eye
you have really blessed me. Mentally accepting
her as his spiritual guide he bowed low at her
feet. The rest of the night was spent by
CintГҘmaЖ’i singing to him the sports of love
of BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, which made a deep
impression on BilvamaвҲҶgalaГӯs mind. As soon
as the day broke, he left CintГҘmaЖ’iГӯs house
as a maniac completely absorbed in the sacred
thought of BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, the real
CintГҘmaЖ’i (the wish-yielding gem) for the
whole world. The first act in the drГҘmГҘ of
BilvamaвҲҶgalaГӯs life thus came to a close.
Approaching saint Somagiri, who lived
on the bank of the river KГҰВ¶Ж’avвҲӮЖ’ГҘ,
BilvamaвҲҶgala obtained initiation into the
sovereign Mantra sacred to вҖәrвҲӮ GopГҘla (the
Divine Cowherd) and started the practice of
adoration in right earnest. Chanting the names
of God he began to move about in the
countryside. A longing for the direct perception
of God was roused in his mind; but his
immoral propensities had not yet wholly
disappeared. Compelled by evil habit his
mind once more felt enamoured of a young
lady. Following her footsteps, BilvamaвҲҶgala
halted at the door of her house. The owner
of the house was surprised to see a BrГҘhmaЖ’a
waiting at the threshold with a dismal look
on his countenance. Questioned by him
BilvamaвҲҶgala revealed his mind to him with
a guileless heart and said, Г¬I long to see the
girl but once to my heartГӯs content. Please
send her to me here.Г® The young lady was
none other than the wife of the wealthy
merchant with whom BilvamaвҲҶgala was
holding this conversation. The good merchant
saw nothing inherently wrong in this request
and was anxious to accommodate the
BrГҘhmaЖ’a as far as he could. He, therefore,
entered the house to call his wife. Meantime
BilvamaвҲҶgalaГӯs mind turned into a turbulent
ocean, in which thought-waves of various
kinds were furiously raging.
BilvamaвҲҶgala had already turned a
devotee of God; how could there be any fall
for him? His vision had been clouded by
ignorance. The Lord, who is extremely fond
of the poor and miserable, opened his eye
of wisdom. BilvamaвҲҶgala woke to the
wretched condition of his mind; his heart
was filled with remorse and he plucked two
big thorns from an adjoining wood-apple tree
with what intention nobody knew. Meantime,
the wife of the wealthy merchant made her
appearance there. Looking at her intently for
some time, BilvamaвҲҶgala mentally reproached
his eyes and said, Г¬O detestable eyes ! but
for you I would not have been reduced to
this wretched condition.Г® Mentally uttering
these words BilvamaвҲҶgala, in a fit of
momentary weakness or whatever it may be,
thought it best at that moment to punish his
wayward eyes and instantly thrust the pair
of thorns into them ! Streams of blood began

=== PAGE 466 ===

* Chapter IX *
465
to flow from his eyes. Laughing and dancing,
BilvamaвҲҶgala rent the air with the chanting
of the Divine Names. The merchant and his
wife were distressed at this sad turn, but they
were quite helpless in the matter. Remnants
of impurity lying hidden in the inmost
recesses of BilvamaвҲҶgalaГӯs heart got washed
away, and he was extremely impatient now
to meet the Г¬Protector of the forlornГ® as
speedily as possible.
The terrible pangs of separation from his
most beloved вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a turned the blinded
eyes of BilvamaвҲҶgala into a perennial fount
of tears. Having no feeling of hunger and
thrist, he had lost all distinction of sleep and
wakefulness as well. Rending the air with
the shouts of Г«KГҰВ¶Ж’aГӯ, BilvamaвҲҶgala roamed
from forest to forest and from village to village.
That the Г«Friend of the poorГӯ, for whom he
had deliberately put out his eyes, and the
Beloved for whose sake he had spurned a
life of luxury and ease, should be so tardy to
appear was too much for a lover who was
pining to meet Him, How could вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a,
who is all love, remain nonchalant under
such circumstances? Appearing in the guise of
a small cowherd boy the Lord approached
BilvamaвҲҶgala, and spoke to him in accents
the melody of which enchanted even the mind
of sages. Г¬O blind singer,Г® He said, Г¬you
must be feeling awfully hungry. Here is a
sweet dish and a glass of water. Please accept
them.Г® Enthralled by the very melody of His
voice BilvamaвҲҶgalaГӯs heart leapt with joy as
he partook of that rare dish touched by His
blessed hands. Г¬Tell me, dear !Г® he enquired
of the boy, Г¬where do you live ? What is
your name, and what is your occupation ?Г®
Г¬My dwelling is near at handГ®, replied
the boy. Г¬I bear no particular name; but I
respond to any name by which I may be
called. My work is to tend the cows.
Whosoever loves me, gets my love in return.Г®
BilvamaвҲҶgala felt enraptured by the music
of the childГӯs voice, which surpassed even
the melody of the flute. The boy, while
parting company with BilvamaвҲҶgala, assured
the latter that he would provide him with
food everyday. BilvamaвҲҶgala gladly accepted
this gratuitous offer and requested the boy
to see him everyday. The boy disappeared
and took with him the heart of BilvamaвҲҶgala
too. True to his word, he visited BilvamaвҲҶgala
everyday with a dish of dainty food.
BilvamaвҲҶgala had not the least suspicion
that the boy was none else than вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a,
for whose sake he had accepted a mendicantГӯs
role, and put out his eyes with thorns. But
the boy had cast such a spell on his mind
that he could brook no talk other than that
of the boy. He said to himself one day, Г¬I
came here leaving behind all objects of
worldly attachment, but a new source of
attachment awaited me. Freed from the
allurement of woman I have fallen a prey
to the charm of this boy.Г® While this thought
was agitating BilvamaвҲҶgalaГӯs mind, the
sportive boy quietly came near him and said
in a maddening voice, Г¬O venerable Sir,
what are you thinking about? Have you a
mind to visit VГҰndГҘvana ?Г® BilvamaвҲҶgalaГӯs
soul rejoiced at the very mention of VГҰndГҘvana;
but pointing out his helplessness due to lack
of vision he said, Г¬O friend, how can a blind
man like me aspire to visit VГҰndГҘvana ?Г®
Г¬Take hold of this end of my stick,Г® the boy
replied, Г¬I shall take you to VГҰndГҘvana.Г® A
thrill of joy passed through BilvamaвҲҶgala
when he heard this. Holding the other
end of the stick the Lord Himself acted
as BilvamaвҲҶgalaГӯs guide and led him to
VГҰndГҘvana. Praise be to this tender-heartedness
of the Lord ! He personally guides the
devotee, and shows him the path ! Not long
afterwards the boy said, Г¬Here you are in
VГҰndГҘvana. I am off now.Г® BilvamaвҲҶgala

=== PAGE 467 ===

466
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
caught hold of the boy by the arm. At the
very touch of his person BilvamaвҲҶgala felt
as if a current of electricity had passed
through his body; all the faculties of his
senses were illumined by a flood of SГҘttvika
light. Blessed with the divine vision he
discovered that the boy was none other than
his beloved Lord. A shiver ran through his
body and tears of joy streamed forth from
his eyes. He caught the arm of the blessed
Lord all the tighter and said, Г¬Lord ! I have now
recognized you. I have caught hold of you
after a long time. You cannot elude me
now.Г® The Lord tried to disengage His arm
from the blind manГӯs grip; but BilvamaвҲҶgala
would not let Him go.
With a sudden jerk the Lord freed His
arm from the grasp of BilvamaвҲҶgala. How
could poor, blind BilvamaвҲҶgala withstand
Him with the help of whose strength MГҘyГҘ
kept the entire creation prostrate at her feet?
But BilvamaвҲҶgala had tied the Lord with a
knot which even He could not easily undo.
Baffled by the Lord, BilvamaвҲҶgala said, Г¬Are
You really leaving me ? But remember this:Гі
Г¬KГҰВ¶Ж’a, it is no wonder that You are
leaving me, freeing Your arm by force. But
I shall acknowledge Your manliness only
when You manage to slip out of my heart.Г®*
Starting his career as a libertine,
BilvamaвҲҶgala turned a devotee, who was
saved when faced with an imminent fall, and
finally succeeded in attaining the object of
his life by realizing God. The sweet and
inspiring poems he composed in an ecstatic
mood during his journey to VГҰndГҘvana are
collected in the form of the Г¬KГҰВ¶Ж’akarЖ’ГҘmГҰtaГ®.
In the very opening verse of that beautiful
collection, proclaiming CintГҘmaЖ’i as his guide
and preceptor, he offers obeisance to her in
the following words:Гі
Г¬All glory to CintГҘmaЖ’i, the dispeller of
my ignorance, to Somagiri, my preceptor,
and last, but not the least, to BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a, my Teacher, who wears on His head
a crown adorned with the peacock-feather,
and whose feet, that serve as the wish-
yielding tree, are courted by the goddess of
victory.Г®вҖ“
Like the great sage вҖәrвҲӮ вҖәukadeva,
BilvamaвҲҶgala also enjoyed the nectar of the
sweet sports of BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a; it is
therefore that he has been aptly given the
nickname of Г«LвҲӮlГҘвҖ№ukaГӯ.
Showing thus lack of discrimination in Him on the basis of moral and immoral
conduct, the Lord now proceeds to reveal in the text two verses that He makes no distinction
between high and low birth, and glorifying devotion in the form of self-surrender to God,
commands Arjuna to take to the practice of adoration.
в—ҠГҠВў ГҒвҖһU В¬ГҠГ•Вё вҲҡГҝВ¬ГҠГҒГјГҠГ Гҝ ГҝпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ SГҝГҲвҖ” В¬ГҠВ¬ГҝГҠпЈҝЕёГҝвҖ”вҖ“
ГҒSГІГҠГҝГҠпЈҝ п¬ӮГ’вүҘГҝГҠSГғГ•ГҠ вүҘГҠГҚВәЛқГҠSГғпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ В¬вҒ„ГҠВў ВӘГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 32H
в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; ГҒвҖһU verily; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthГҘ (KuntвҲӮ), Arjuna; вҲҡГҝВ¬ГҠГҒГјГҠГ Гҝ taking refuge in;
ГҝпЈҝ вҖўГҒВ¬ whoever; SГҝГҲвҖ” (they) may be; В¬ГҠВ¬ГҝГҠпЈҝЕёГҝвҖ” those of vile birth; ГҒSГІГҠГҝвҖ” women; п¬ӮГ’вүҘГҝГҠвҖ” members
of the trading and agriculturalist classes; ГғГ•ГҠ as well as; вүҘГҠГҚВәЛқГҠвҖ”Г” those belonging to the labouring
and artisan classes; ГғпЈҝ they; вҖўГҒВ¬ too; ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ reach; В¬вҒ„UГҠв—ҠЛңГ” ВӘГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” the supreme goal.
*
вҖһUSГғв—ҠГҲГҒГ ЛҮГҠГҘГҝ ГҝГҠГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒвҖҡ вҖҷвҲӮUГҠГғЛңГ” вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЕ’ЛңГ”Г·ГҲГғв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“ NUЕ’ГҝГҠlГҒЕ’ ГҒЕёГҝГҠВёГҒвҖҡ В¬ГҠГ’LВ§В·Вў ВӘГЎГҠГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ ГғпЈҝH
вҖ“
ГҒГёГЈГғГҠв—ҠГҒГЎГҠВЎВёГҝГҒГғ 
вҖҡГҠпЈҝв—ҠГҒВӘвҒ„UВӘГҲВёLВ§в—ҠпЈҝ 
ГҒвүҘГҠЛҮГҠГҠВӘГҲLВ§p 
Г·ВӘп¬ӮГҠГҒГңВҝUГҒПҖГҒВ¬Г«ВҝUв—ҠГҠГ’ГҒвҲӮUвҖ”вҖ“
ГҝГ В¬ГҠЕ’вҲ‘В§ГҖВ¬ГғLВ§В¬ГҖвҲӮп¬ӮвүҘГҠпЈҝПҖвҒ„пЈҝUВ·ГҲ 
вҲӮUГӢвҲӮUГҠSп¬ӮГҝГӘп¬ӮвҒ„UвҒ„UвҖҡВў 
вҲӮUГ·ГғпЈҝ 
ВЎГҝГјГҠГӢвҖ”H

=== PAGE 468 ===

* Chapter IX *
467
People who are born as a result of past
sins among low classes such as the pariah
are referred to here as Г«PГҘpayonayaВЁГӯ (those
of vile birth). Besides these, members of
such non-Г…ryan or Barbarian races such as
the HВөuЖ’as, the BhвҲӮlas the Khasis, the Yawans
and so on are also recognized by the вҖәГҘstras
as falling under the category of Г«PГҘpayonayaВЁГӯ.
The word Г«PГҘpayonayaВЁГӯ in this verse stands
for all of them. Birth in a low caste or
community constitutes no barrier to the practice
of devotion to God. Unadulterated love is
the only qualification required for this practice.*
Among these classes have appeared in ancient
and modern times many great devotees who
realized God by dint of their unsullied
devotion. The names of Guha, who belonged
to the class known as the NiВ¶ГҘdas, and others
are the best known among them.
GUHA, THE CHIEF OF
THE NIВ®Г…DAS
Guha, who belonged to the class known
as the NiВ¶ГҘdas, ruled over вҖәГҰвҲҶgaverapura. He
was a great devotee of God. While on His
way to the forest BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ, RГҘma
together with вҖәrвҲӮ SвҲӮtГҘ and LakВ¶maЖ’a;
accepted the hospitality of Guha. The Lord
recognized him as a friend; it was therefore
that he was embraced and clasped to the
bosom by Bharata when the latter met him
later. GosvГҘmвҲӮ TulasвҲӮdГҘsa says in his
RГҘmacaritamГҘnasa:Гі
Г¬When he saw him (Guha) lying prostrate
before him, Bharata took him up by the hand
clasped him to his bosom. He felt at that
moment as if his own brother LakВ¶maЖ’a was
there, and his heart overflowed with love.Г®
The adjective Г«PГҘpayonayaВЁГӯ in this
verse cannot be taken to be a qualification
of women, VaiвҖ№yas and вҖәВөudras. The VaiвҖ№yas
rank among the Г«twice-bornГӯ classes. The
вҖәГҘstras recognize their full right to study the
Vedas and perform sacrifices and other
Vedic rites. Therefore, falling as they do
under the category of the twice-born classes,
they could not have been referred to as of
vile birth. Besides, while discussing the
destiny of JвҲӮvas, varying according to the
quality of their past Karma, the ChГҘndogya
UpaniВ¶ad distinctly says:Гі
Г¬Among them, those who perform
meritorious deeds in this world soon attain
superior birth, i.e., are born among the
BrГҘhmaЖ’a, the KВ¶atriyas or the VaiвҖ№yas.
Whereas those who perform evil deeds in
this world attain vile birth, i.e., are born as
dogs, swine or outcasts.Г®вҖ  (V.x.7)
This conclusively proves that the VaiвҖ№yas
Arjuna, women, VaiвҖ№yas (members of the trading and agriculturist classes)
вҖәВөudras (those belonging to the labouring and artisan classes), as well as those of
impious birth (such as the pariah), whoever they may be, taking refuge in Me, they
too attain the supreme goal.                                                   (32)
*
ЕёГҠГҒSГғ ГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ ВЎГҠГҒГғГҒп¬ӮlГҠMВ§В¬вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҖ№Е“ЕёГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГҠГҒЕ’Г·пЈҝЕ’вҖ”вҖ“ (NГҘrada: Aphorisms on Bhakti 72)
Г¬Birth, scholarship, external appearance, pedigree, wealth and occupation etc., make no difference in
devotees.Г®
вҖўГҠГҒЕёГЈlГҝГҠпЈҝГЈГҝГҒЕ“ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГғпЈҝ В¬ГҠвҒ„UГӘВ¬ГҝГҠВёГғЛңГ” вҖҡГҠв—ҠГҠГЈГҝп¬ӮГғЛңГ”вҖ“ (вҖәГҘЖ’Е’ilya: Aphorisms on Bhakti 78)
Г¬Tradition upholds the title of all men including those of vile birth to the practice of Devotion, even
as to the practice of common virtues such as non-violence etc.Г®
Г·Г„Г ГҝГҠвҖһUв—ҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҝГҠ ВӘЛқГҠsГ”вҖ” ГјГҠhГҝГҠЛҳЛҳГ в—ҠГҠ ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҖ” вҖҡГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“ Г·ГҒQВ§вҖ” В¬ГҲЕёГҠГҒГғ в—ҠГҒГӣГҠDГ”UГҠ EВ¬ГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠЕёГҒВ¬ вҖҡГӘГ·п¬ӮГҠГғЛңГ”H
(BhГҘgavata XI.xiv.21)
Г¬O Uddhava ! I, the beloved Г«selfГӯ of the holy ones, can be captivated only through devotion.
Devotion to Me sanctifies even outcaste by birth.Г®
вҖ 
Гғl ГҹвҖһU вҒ„Uв—ҠГЎГҠГӢГҝГёвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠ вҖўГЁГҝГҠвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝ вҖһU ГҝГ»ГҠпЈҝ вҒ„Uв—ҠГЎГҠГӢГҝГҠВў ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒЕёв—ҠГҠВ¬lпЈҝвҒ„UЕёЛңГ” вҖҷЛқГҠrГҠГ”ГЎГҠГҝГҠпЈҝГҒЕёВў п¬ӮГҠ ЛҮГҠГҒГІГҠГҝГҝГҠпЈҝГҒЕёВў п¬ӮГҠ п¬ӮГ’вүҘГҝГҝГҠпЈҝГҒЕёВў п¬ӮГҠГ• Гҝ ГҹвҖһU
вҲ‘В§В¬ГҚГҝГёвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠ вҖўГЁГҝГҠвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝ вҖһU ГҝГ»ГҠпЈҝ вҲ‘В§В¬ГҚГҝГҠВў ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒЕёв—ҠГҠВ¬lпЈҝвҒ„UГңEГҝГҠпЈҝГҒЕёВў п¬ӮГҠ вҖҡГҚвҲ‘В§вҒ„UГҝГҠпЈҝГҒЕёВў п¬ӮГҠ ГёГҠГЎВ«UГҠвҲӮUГҝГҠпЈҝГҒЕёВў п¬ӮГҠвҖ“

=== PAGE 469 ===

468
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
cannot be counted among those of vile birth.
As for women, those belonging to the
BrГҘhmaЖ’a, KВ¶atriya and VaiвҖ№ya classes are
recognized as entitled to perform sacrifices
and other Vedic rituals alongwith their
husbands. Hence they too do not come under
the category of Г«PГҘpayonayaВЁГӯ. The greatest
objection to this interpretation lies in the fact
that it precludes the possibility of the pariah
and others attaining the highest goal through
devotion, which is admitted by all the вҖәГҘstras
and which marks the crowning glory of
devotion.* Therefore, instead of treating
Г«PГҘpayonayaВЁГӯ as a qualification of women,
VaiвҖ№yas and вҖәВөudras it would be much more
reasonable to interpret the word as referring
to men lower in birth even than the вҖәВөudras.
Women, VaiвҖ№yas and вҖәВөudras too have
had a number of devotees. As instances in
point, short accounts are given below of the
celebrated YajВӨapatnвҲӮs, SamГҘdhi, and SaВӨjaya.
YAJГ‘APATNвҲ«S
A few BrГҘhmaЖ’as were engaged in
performing a sacrifice at VГҰndГҘvana. With
the concurrence of BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a His
cowherd playmates approached the BrГҘhmaЖ’as
and asked them for food. The sacrificing
BrГҘhmaЖ’as drove them away with a rebuke.
The boys thereupon approached the wives of
the BrГҘhmaЖ’as. The very name of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
drove them into raptures and they went to вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a carrying articles of food with them.
One of the BrГҘhmaЖ’as prevented his wife
from going and forcibly locked her up. Her
love for вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a swelled to such an extent
that meditating on the form of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a as
conceived by her through hearsay she cast
off her physical encasement and joined the
Lord before all the rest (BhГҘgavata X.23).
SAMГ…DHI
SamГҘdhi was the son of a wealthy
merchant, DrumiЖ’a by name. Covetous of his
wealth, his wife and children conspired against
him and drove him out of home. Retiring to
the forest he met there a certain king, called
Suratha, He too had repaired to the forest,
having suffered at the hands of his faithless
ministers, generals and his own kith and kin.
So both were sailing in the same boat.
Ultimately they both sought refuge with the
Divine Mother, who is all truth, all knowledge
and all bliss, and shaking off all attachment
to worldly enjoyments they betook themselves
to the worship of the Goddess. On their
completing three years of worship the Goddess
appeared before them and asked them to seek
some boon from Her. The craving for worldly
enjoyment still lurked in King SurathaГӯs mind;
he, therefore, asked for objects of enjoyment.
The mind of SamГҘdhi, however, was full of
dispassion. He had realized the momentary
and sorrowful nature of the world; therefore,
he sought the knowledge of the divine truth.
By grace of the Goddess his ignorance was
*
ГҒвҲ‘В§вҒ„UГҠГғвҖһГҚUГЎГҠГҠГЈЕ“ЛқВ¬ГҲГҒвҲӮUГЈЕ’В¬ГҲГҖвҲ‘В§вҖҡГҠ 
вҖўГҠГ·ГӢвҒ„UвҲ‘В§VГ”UГҠ 
Гҝп¬ӮЕёГҠвҖ” 
ПҖвҖҡГҠЕ’ГҝвҖ”вҖ“
ГҝпЈҝЛҳГЈГҝпЈҝ Гё В¬ГҠВ¬ГҠ ГҝЕ’ГҲВ¬ГҠГјГҠГҝГҠГјГҠГҝГҠвҖ” вүҘГҠГҲhKГҒГЈГғ ГғSв—ҠГ’ В¬ЛқГ·ГҒп¬ӮcГЎГҠп¬ӮпЈҝ Еёв—ҠвҖ”H
(вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata II.iv.18)
Г¬Obeisance to BhagavГҘn ViВ¶Ж’u, the Lord of the universe, taking shelter under whose devotees
members of the low-born classes such as the KirГҘtas, the HВөuЖ’as, the Г…ndhras, the Pulindas, the Pukkasas,
the Г…bhвҲӮras, the KaвҲҶkas, the Yavanas and the Khasas and even others who are steeped in sin become pure.Г®
вҲҡГҝГҠЕ“SГҝГҠГёвҒ„UГЎГҠВў Е“ЛқГҲп¬ӮSГҝ Гё п¬ӮГҝГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮlГҠ ВӘВЎпЈҝГЈВәЛқSГҝ вҲ‘В§ГҠ вҲ‘В§ГҠ ВЎГҠГҒГғГҢп¬ӮЕ’ГҲвҒ„USГҝ ГҝГҠЕ’п¬ӮВ¬ГғпЈҝLВ§ВӘЛқSГҝ ГҒвҲ‘ВўВ§ В¬ГҠГ’LВ§В·в—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҲ‘ГҲВ§Г©ВЎГҠГҝГҠвҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠЕёГӢГҝMВ§В¬в—ҠГҒЕ“вҲ‘ВўВ§ ГҒвҲ‘ВўВ§ ГғГ вҖҡГҲЕ’ГҠв—ҠAГҠпЈҝ Е“ЕёВў Г·Г„Г ГҝГҠ ГғГҲcГҝГҒГғ вҲ‘пЈҝВ§п¬ӮвҲӮВўU Её Гё ВӘГҲГЎГҠГ’Г·ВёГҒQВ§ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠЕ“п¬ӮвҖ”H
Г¬What righteous conduct did the hunter possess? Was Dhruva advanced in age? What erudition did
the lord of elephants possess? Did Vidura claim any high descent? What was the prowess exhibited by
Ugrasena, the YГҘdava king? Did KubjГҘ (the hump-backed maid-servant of KaвүҲsa) have an attractive
appearance? What wealth did SudГҘmГҘ claim? The Lord is pleased only by devotion, and not by merits; for
He is fond of devotion alone.Г®

=== PAGE 470 ===

* Chapter IX *
469
dispelled, and he attained the true Knowledge
of God. (MГҘrkaЖ’Е’eya-PurГҘЖ’a 81Гі93;
Brahmavaivarta-PurГҘЖ’a 62-63)
SAВӘNJAYA
SaВӨjaya was the son of a charioteer,
GГҘvalguЖ’a by name. He was exceptionally
quiet and polite by nature, and possessed the
knowledge of both the NirguЖ’a and SaguЖ’a
aspects of God. Nay, he was devoted to
righteous conduct, fearless, truthful, self-
controlled, pious and outspoken, was a great
devotee of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and possessed knowledge
of the reality about Him. He had intimacy
with Arjuna from their early boyhood, hence
he had the freedom to enter the inner
apartments of Arjuna whenever he liked.
When he called on the PГҘЖ’Е’avas to negotiate
on behalf of the Kauravas, Arjuna was
resting in the gynaeceum. BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a, DraupadвҲӮ and SatyabhГҘmГҘ (вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’aГӯs
favourite consort) were also there. Returning
to the Kaurava Court, SaВӨjaya gave a beautiful
and lucid account of his meeting with them.
(MahГҘ., Udyoga., LIX.)
During the MahГҘbhГҘrata war the sage
VedavyГҘsa gifted him with supersensuous
vision, with the help of which he succeeded
in reporting to King DhГҰatrГҘВ¶Вўra all incidents
connected with the war.
The reality about вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a was known
only to a few exalted souls like MaharВ¶i
VedavyГҘsa, SaВӨjaya, Vidura and BhвҲӮВ¶ma.
Addressed by DhГҰtarГҘВ¶Вўra, SaВӨjaya once said,
Г¬I do not follow the promptings of AvidyГҘ
(Nescience) under the spell of attachment to
wife and children, nor do I practise any
virtue without offering the same to God. I
have come to know the reality about вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a, the object of universal prayer, only
through purity of heart and the practice of
Bhaktiyoga.Г® Discussing the reality and prowess
of the Lord, SaВӨjaya further said, Г¬The Discuss
wielded by the noble-minded вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a is
five cubits in diameter, but it can assume any
dimension according to His will. That circular
weapon, radiating a flood of light, has come
into being in order to fathom the relative
strength of all. It is fatal to the Kauravas but
most friendly to the PГҘЖ’Е’avas. вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a,
who possesses inordinate strength, killed as a
mere sport terrible demons like NarakГҘsura,
and вҖәaвүҲbarГҘsura, and proud tyrants like KaвүҲsa
and вҖәiвҖ№upГҘla. вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, who is most handsome
and supremely powerful, can subjugate the
earth, heaven and the intermediate space by
His mere thought..... If the entire universe
ranges itself on one side and вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a alone
on the other, He will be found to excel in
substance. He can by His mere will reduce
the world to ashes, but the whole world is
incapable of harming Him in the least. Where
there is truth, where there is virtue, where
there is a sense of shame in sinning against
God and where there is straightforwardness,
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a is there; and where вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a is,
victory is bound to follow.* The supreme
Person, вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, who is the soul of the
entire creation, rules and guides the earth,
heaven and the intermediate region as a mere
sport; as if deluding all these people and
using the PГҘЖ’Е’avas as His tools He seeks to
extirpate your unrighteous and foolish sons.
By His own power BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
constantly revolves the wheel of time, the
wheel of creation and the wheel of successive
ages. I utter the bare truth when I say that
BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a Himself is the sole Lord
of Time, Death and the entire universe,
consisting of sentient and  insentient creation.
Just as the farmer gathers his corn when the
crop is ready, so does вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, the supreme
Lord of Yoga, even though sustaining the
universe, undertakes to destroy it too. He
deludes all by His great delusive power; but
* ГҝГғвҖ” вҖҡГ ГҝВў ГҝГғГҠпЈҝ Е“в—ҠГҠпЈҝВё ГҝГғГҠпЈҝ OГ”UГӢвҒ„UГҠВЎВёп¬ӮВў ГҝГғвҖ”вҖ“ ГғГғГҠпЈҝ Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ ВӘГҠпЈҝГҒп¬ӮГЈЕ’ГҠпЈҝ ГҝГғвҖ” вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠSГғГғГҠпЈҝ ВЎГҝвҖ”H
(MahГҘ., Udyoga., 68Гі9)

=== PAGE 471 ===

470
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
those who take refuge in Him never get
deluded.*
Thereafter, SaВӨjaya gave out to King
DhГҰtarГҘВ¶Вўra the various names of BhagavГҘn
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and their beautiful meanings.
SaВӨjaya too tried his very best to prevent
the MahГҘbhГҘrata war, but in vain. When
DhГҰtarГҘВ¶Вўra proceeded to the forest, SaВӨjaya
also accompanied his master.
By using the word, Г«ApiГӯ twice in this
verse the Lord shows absolute lack of
discrimination in Him on the score of high
and low birth. The intention of this statement
of the Lord seems to be that it is altogether
immaterial to Him whether His devotee is
a woman, a VaiвҖ№ya or a вҖәВөudra i.e., of lower
rank when compared to a BrГҘhmaЖ’a or a
KВ¶atriya, or even a pariah, who is regarded
as still lower. Whoever worships Him, taking
refuge in Him, attains the supreme state.
Taking refuge in the Lord here means
surrendering oneself to Him with absolute
faith according to the spirit of verse 34
below. This consists in remaining ever
contented under every circumstance, taking
it to be a dispensation of God; constantly
hearing, chanting and reflecting on the names,
form, virtues and stories of the Lord,
recognizing Him alone as the goal, supporter
and Lord; worshipping Him with faith and
devotion, bowing to Him, carrying out His
behests, and offering all actions to Him.
Attainment of the supreme Goal by such
devotees means direct communion with God.
The intention is to show that men
and women of any caste whatsoever, who
surrender themselves to God in the manner stated
above, attain direct communion with Him.
ГҒвҲ‘ВўВ§ В¬ГҲЕёвҖҷЛқГҠВёrГҠГ”ГЎГҠГҠвҖ” В¬ГҲГЎГҝГҠ Г·QВ§ГҠ вҒ„UГҠВЎВ·ВёГҝSГғГ•ГҠвҖ“
вҖўГҒЕёГ Гҝв—ҠвҖҡГҲПҖВў вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҒв—Ҡв—ҠВў В¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝ Г·ВЎSп¬Ӯ в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ”H 33H
ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” how much more; В¬ГҲЕёвҖ” then; вҖҷЛқГҠrГҠГ”ГЎГҠГҠвҖ”Г” BrГҘhmaЖ’as; В¬ГҲГЎГҝГҠвҖ” holy; Г·QВ§ГҠвҖ” devout; вҒ„UГҠВЎВ·ВёГҝвҖ”
royal sages; ГғГ•ГҠ and; вҖўГҒЕёГ Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” transient; вҖўвҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ” joyless (and); вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” human life; Гҹв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” this;
В¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝ having obtained; Г·ВЎSп¬ӮГ” (constantly) worship; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me.
How much more, then, if they be holy BrГҘhmaЖ’as and royal sages devoted to
Me! Therefore, having obtained this joyless and transient human life, constantly
worship Me.                                                                      (33)
conduct. This adjective is intended to qualify
the BrГҘhmaЖ’as alone; for the word
Г«RГҘjarВ¶ayaВЁГӯ applies only to those members
of the royal class who are spotless in
character and noble in conduct like the В§RВ¶is
(sages). Hence the use of the qualification
Г«PuЖ’yГҘhГӯ would be redundant in their case.
The word Г«BhaktГҘВЁ, however, should
be connected with BrГҘhmaЖ’as and royal
sages both; for, it is Bhakti which has been
spoken of here as responsible for attaining
the supreme goal.
By using the words Г«KimГӯ and Г«PunaВЁГӯ,
the Lord intends to convey that when even
the vilest sinner (IX.30) and members of the
low-born classes such as the pariah (IX.32)
succeed in attaining the supreme state through
the practice of adoration, there should be no
wonder that devotees who rank high both
in lineage and moral character and conduct,
viz., pious BrГҘhmaЖ’as and royal sages, should
do so by taking refuge in Him.
The word Г«PuЖ’yГҘВЁГӯ, stands for those
who are pious by nature and virtuous in
*
ГҝпЈҝ Гғв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ В¬ЛқВ¬lГЈГғпЈҝ Её ГғпЈҝ в—ҠГҲsГ”ГҒГЈГғ в—ҠГҠЕёп¬ӮГҠвҖ”вҖ“
(MahГҘ., Udyoga., 68Гі69)

=== PAGE 472 ===

* Chapter IX *
471
Countless devotees have appeared among
the BrГҘhmaЖ’as and the royal sages. It is just
to give a faint indication of their greatness
that a reference is made below to MaharВ¶i
SutвҲӮkВ¶Ж’a and the royal sage AmbarвҲӮВ¶a.
SUTвҲ«KВ®В°NA
MaharВ¶i SutвҲӮkВ¶Ж’a used to reside in the
DaЖ’Е’aka forest. He was a disciple of the
great Agastya. An ascetic of no mean order
possessing a remarkable spiritual glory, he
was a great devotee as well. He had to his
credit the deliverance of a VaiвҖ№ya, named
DuВ¶paЖ’ya, who had turned into a devil due
to his sins. (Skanda., Brahma., 22) SutвҲӮkВ¶Ж’a
was exclusively devoted to BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ
RГҘma. When he heard that accompained by
вҖәrвҲӮ SвҲӮtГҘ, who was no other than the Divine
Mother, вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma was coming to the DaЖ’Е’aka
forest, his joy knew no bounds. Indulging
in pious dreams of various kinds he went
forward to meet the Lord. In the ecstasy of
love he lost all consciousness of his external
surroundings. He forgot his own identity as
well as his destination, and did not know in
which direction he was proceeding and
whether there was any track before him or
not. Now he would turn round and then
advance in the same direction again: and
now he would begin to dance singing praises
of the Lord ! Hiding Himself behind a tree
the Lord of Raghus looked on the ecstatic
mood of His devotee. Observing the intensity
of the sageГӯs love the Lord, who dispels the
fear of transmigration, revealed Himself in
SutвҲӮkВ¶Ж’aГӯs heart. Obtaining a vision of the
Lord within his own heart, SutвҲӮkВ¶Ж’a now  sat
motionless in the middle of the track. A thrill
of joy ran through his whole body. The Lord
of Raghus then approached him. вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma
was extremely delighted to see him in that
rapturous mood.
The Lord of Raghus tried in many ways
to awaken the sage from his trance; but the
latter, who was enjoying the bliss of absorption
in the Lord, would not wake up. When,
however, the Lord withdrew His divine form
from the sageГӯs heart, he felt uneasy and got
up. But as soon as he opened his eyes, he
saw before him the trio of вҖәrвҲӮ SвҲӮtГҘ, LakВ¶amaЖ’a
and вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma, the abode of bliss, who is
easily distinguishable by His swarthy and
beauteous form. The reward of his austerities
stood revealed before him. His life became
supremely blessed ! (вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘmacaritamГҘnasa,
AraЖ’yakГҘЖ’Е’a).
AMBARвҲ«В®A
RГҘjarВ¶i AmbarвҲӮВ¶a was the illustrious son
of King NГҘbhГҘga, a grandson of Vaivasvata
Manu (the progenitor of the present race of
living beings). He was an emperor who ruled
over the entire terrestrial region. But knowing
as he did that all earthly glory is as unreal
as the world seen in a dream, he had
dedicated his whole life to God. His mind,
together with all his senses, remained ever
engaged in the service of God.
On one occasion the king with his
queen took the vow of observing a fast on
every EkГҘdaвҖ№вҲӮ (eleventh lunar day of the
dark and bright fortnights) for a whole year
with a view to propitiating the Lord. On the
day following the last EkГҘdaвҖ№вҲӮ of the year
worship was offered to the Lord with due
ceremony. When the king was about to
break his fast, the sage DurvГҘsГҘ called on
him with a batch of his pupils. Receiving
the sage with all honour the king invited him
to dinner. The sage accepted the royal
invitation, and went to the bank of the
YamunГҘ to perform his daily routine of
midday worship. The twelfth lunar day was
to expire only about half an hour later. A
fast observed on an EkГҘdaвҖ№вҲӮ day gets nullified
if it is not broken in course of the twelfth.
And it would be inhospitable on his part if
he broke his fast before feeding an honoured

=== PAGE 473 ===

472
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
guest like DurvГҘsГҘ. The king, therefore,
sought the advice of learned BrГҘhmaЖ’as in
this dilemma and with their concurrence
formally broke his fast by sipping a little
water out of that in which the feet of the
LordГӯs image had been washed, and awaited
the return of the sage to entertain him. After
finishing his daily routine when sage DurvГҘsГҘ
returned to the kingГӯs palace, and came to
know by supernatural power acquired through
religious austerities that the king had broken
his fast during his absence, he lost his
temper, and with an angry look spoke as
follows to the pious king, who stood before
him with joined palms as a culprit: Г¬Look
at the impertinent and sacrilegious behaviour
of this vile king, who is intoxicated with the
pride of wealth ! He is no longer a devotee
of ViВ¶Ж’u. He has begun to look upon himself
as the Deity. Having invited me as a guest,
he has broken his fast before feeding me.
Let him taste the fruit of this impertinence!Г®
With these words the irascible sage plucked
a lock of matted hair from his head and
threw it on the ground with great violence,
when immediately, like a deadly fire, a
terrible demoness of the class known as
Г«KГҰtyГҘГӯ manifested herself, and rushed at the
king, sword in hand, shaking the earth by
her heavy treads. AmbarвҲӮВ¶a, however, who
had unwavering faith in God, stood undaunted
where he was, without receding a step. He
who sees God everywhere can have no
cause for fear; why should he be afraid of
anyone?
The demoness had hardly reached
AmbarвҲӮВ¶a when the LordГӯs discus known as
SudarвҖ№ana instantaneously reduced her to
ashes, even as terrible forest fire burns down
a hissing serpent. The discus now pursued
the sage in order to wreak vengeance on
him. Unnerved by this unforeseen turn of
events the sage ran for life; but the discus
still doggedly pursued him. DurvГҘsГҘ wandered
in all directions and traversed all the fourteen
regions of the universe, but he found shelter
nowhere. No one afforded him or even
promised him help. As a last resort he went
to VaikuЖ’Вўha (the eternal abode of BhagavГҘn
ViВ¶Ж’u), and falling at the feet of the Deity
he cried out in distress, Г¬Lord ! Ignorant of
Your glory I have insulted Your devotee.
Kindly exonerate me from this fault. By
merely chanting Your name even the denizens
of hell are rid of the tortures. Therefore, pray,
forgive this fault of mine.Г®
The Lord replied as follows:Гі
Г¬O BrГҘhmaЖ’a ! I am completely under
the domination of My devotee. I am not free.
The devotee is extremely dear to Me and
rules over My heart. I hold My own Self,
and even My own Consort, Goddess LakВ¶mвҲӮ,
as of no account when compared to the
virtuous soul who is extremely devoted to
Me, and who looks upon Me as his supreme
goal. How can I forsake the devotee who
having renounced his wife, progeny, home,
family, wealth, life, and the entire prospects
of this world and the next for My sake solely
depends on Me ? Just as a devoted and
faithful wife wins over her virtuous Lord by
dint of her unadulterated love, even so the
devotee who has his mind fixed on Me and
looks upon all with the same eye wins Me
over by his unalloyed devotion. To say
nothing of perishable worlds like heaven
etc., he would not accept even the four types
of final beatitude (residence in the abode of
God, close proximity to the Deity, acquiring
a form similar to the form of the Deity and
fusion with the Deity) to which he gets
entitled by virtue of his devotion. He regards
everything as valueless when compared to
Divine Love.Г®
Finally the Lord said, Г¬BrГҘhmaЖ’a, if
you seek deliverance from this calamity, you

=== PAGE 474 ===

* Chapter IX *
473
should approach the blessed King AmbarвҲӮВ¶a
himself, and crave his pardon. Then alone
you will attain peace and happiness.Г® Thus
commanded by the Lord, DurvГҘsГҘ turned
back towards the terrestrial region.
The great devotee AmbarвҲӮВ¶a, on this
side, was passing through a peculiar state of
mind. Ever since the Discus started in pursuit
of DurvГҘsГҘ, the royal sage had been pining
out of sympathy for the latter. The BrГҘhmaЖ’a
had gone away without taking food, and the
thought that it was due to him that the
BrГҘhmaЖ’a had to run so hard for fear of
death pricked his conscience all the time.
Under such circumstances, the king felt he
had no right to take food himself. Reflecting
thus AmbarвҲӮВ¶a gave up food from that very
moment and lived on water alone. DurvГҘsГҘ
returned after a full year, but AmbarвҲӮВ¶a
budged not an inch from his vow.
DurvГҘsГҘ clutched the feet of the royal
sage as soon as he returned to his palace.
AmbarвҲӮВ¶a felt much abashed at this and humbly
prayed to SudarвҖ№ana (the discus of Lord
ViВ¶Ж’u) in the following words: Г¬If I do not
entertain in my heart the least amount of
revulsion for the sage, and if God, who is the
Self of all living beings, is pleased with me,
let yourself be appeased and deliver the sage
from this calamity.Г® The prayer appeased
SudarвҖ№ana. DurvГҘsГҘ, who was tormented with
fear, was himself again and marks of joy and
gratitude were clearly visible on his face.
(вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata IX.4-5)
*
*
*
Birth as a human being is exceptionally
rare. It is obtained as result of great merit, and
through special grace of God. It is vouchsafed
only for God-realization. The life of that being
alone is fruitful, who having obtained the
human body strives for God-realization. On
the other hand, he who seeks gratification of
self through this remains deprived of the true
blessings of human birth. For human life is
wholly joyless; there is not the least trace of
happiness anywhere in it. Contact with sense-
enjoyments, which is regarded by man as a
form of delight, is really painful inasmuch as
it throws him, again and again, into the
whirlpool of births and deaths. Therefore,
instead of regarding human life as delightful,
man should realize as speedily as possible the
object for attaining which this human existence
has been vouchsafed to him. For frail as this
human body is, no one knows which moment
it may cease to function. Hence one should
wake up to the gravity of the situation. Neither
should a man fall into the snare of enjoyments,
taking human existence to be a source of
delight, nor should he put off the practice of
adoration, considering the human body as
eternal. If this life gets frittered away due to
his own negligence, nothing but fruitless
repentance will be left open to him. The вҖәrutвҲӮ
says:Гі
Г¬If God is realized in this very life, well
and good. If, however, He is not realized
in the course of this life, one will be a great
loser.Г®* (Kena, Up. II.5).
Therefore the Lord says that having
obtained the human body one should constantly
and exclusively devote oneself to the practice
of adoration and should not forget Him even
for a moment.
The word Г«MГҘmГӯ in this verse stands
for the qualified aspect of God, and adoration
consists in devoting oneself to God in the
way indicated in the following verse, viz.,
dedicating oneГӯs mind, intellect, senses and
body etc., to God and God alone. Speedy
attainment of God is possible through the
practice of Bhajana alone, and in God-
realization alone lies the fulfilment of the
object of human existence. It is therefore that
the Lord exhorts Arjuna in this verse to
practise Bhajana or adoration of God.
*
ГҹвҖһU ГёпЈҝЕ’п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГӢЕ’Г• вҖҡГ Гҝв—ҠГҒSГғ Её ГёпЈҝГҒЕ’вҖһUГҠп¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГӢГЈв—ҠвҖһUГғГӢ ГҒп¬ӮЕёГҒCГ”UвҖ”вҖ“

=== PAGE 475 ===

474
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Knowing 
God 
as 
almighty 
and
omniscient, the supreme Ruler of all the
worlds, beyond all as well as all-formed,
absolute as well as relative, formless as well
as with form, the ocean of beauty, sweetness
and power and the very embodiment of
supreme Love, when the SГҘdhaka gets truly
acquainted with the virtues, glory, truth and
secret of God, and comes to the definite
conclusion that God alone is the supreme
object of his love, nothing in this world
retains the least charm for him. In that state
he entertains no attraction even for the
rarest enjoyment of this world. When the
SГҘdhaka reaches this stage, his mind naturally
recoils from all objects of this world and the
next, and he devotes himself with exclusive
love and supreme reverence to constant
remembrance of God and God alone. Such
loving remembrance of God becomes the
very prop of his life, and he cannot afford
to forget Him even for a moment. The
devotee who has attained this state is referred
to here as Г«ManmanГҘВЁГӯ (he whose mind is
absorbed in God).
A devotee of God is he who resigns
Himself to the will of God, taking Him to
be the supreme goal, the sole supporter and
lord, nay, the supreme refuge and the best
friend and protector; who is ever contented
with every dispensation of God; who carries
out his commands; who keeps his mind,
intellect and senses absorbed in hearing,
chanting and remembering His names, virtues,
glory and stories etc., and does everything
for the sake of His pleasure.
Visiting temples and offering proper
worship to the sacred image of God, installing
an image of oneГӯs beloved Deity in oneГӯs
own home, if convenient, and offering  worship
to the same with due ceremony, faith and
love; installing a mental image of the Deity
in the cavity of oneГӯs own heart or in the
open space just in front of the SГҘdhaka, and
offering mental worship to the same, showing
due reverence to His commandments, to the
scenes of His sacred sports, and to His portraits
etc., keeping oneself engaged in activities
connected with His service and worshipping
Him through disinterested performance of
sacrifices; looking upon oneГӯs parents and
other elders and BrГҘhmaЖ’as in particular, and
all living beings in general, as so many
manifestations of God, or knowing God to
be present in all as the inner witness, and
offering them due worship and honour, and
sincerely trying to gratify and render good
offices to them with mind, body and material
resources: all these acts are included in what
is known as the worship of God.
Revealing the glory of Bhajana in the foregoing verses, Arjuna was eventually exhorted
to practise the same. The Lord, therefore, now delineates the process of Bhajana, or self-
surrender to God, and concludes the Chapter.
в—ҠГЈв—ҠЕёГҠ Г·п¬Ӯ в—ҠjQВ§ГҠпЈҝ в—ҠlГҠВЎГӢ в—ҠГҠВў Еёв—ҠSвҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§вҖ“
в—ҠГҠГ”в—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮГ’cГҝГҒвҖҡ ГҝГҲГ„Г п¬ӮГ’п¬Ӯв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёВў в—ҠГ В¬вҒ„UГҠГҝГЎГҠвҖ”H 34H
в—ҠГЈв—ҠЕёГҠвҖ” Г·п¬Ӯ fix your mind on Me; в—ҠjQВ§вҖ”Г” be devoted to Me; в—ҠlГҠВЎГӢ (Г·п¬Ӯ) worship Me;
в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Еёв—ҠSвҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§Г” (and) make obeisance to Me; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” to Me; вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; вҲһcГҝГҒвҖҡГ” you shall come;
ГҝГҲГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ linking (with Me); вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” thus; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” your self; в—ҠГ В¬вҒ„UГҠГҝГЎГҠвҖ”Г” solely depending on Me.
Fix your mind on Me, be devoted to Me, worship Me and make obeisance to
Me; thus uniting yourself to Me and entirely depending on Me, you shall come to
Me.                                                                 (34)

=== PAGE 476 ===

* Chapter IX *
475
The word Г«MГҘmГӯ in this verse refers to
that integral Divinity who is the creator,
destroyer and controller of the whole universe,
all-sustaining, all-powerful, all-pervading, all-
knowing, the universal friend and well-wisher,
the abode of all virtues, the supreme and best
Person; who is both absolute and Г«SaguЖ’aГӯ
as well as with form and without form; who
sustains all as ViВ¶Ж’u,  creates all as BrahmГҘ,
and destroys all as Rudra; who appears in
our midst from age to age in various divine
forms such as the Fish, Tortoise, Boar, Man-
Lion, вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma, вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and so on, and
enacts wonderful sports in this world; and
who manifests Himself in various forms as
desired by His devotees, and takes them
under His protection. And paying due homage
in a devout and reverent spirit with oneГӯs
mind, speech and body to the God with or
without form, to an image or portrait of the
Deity, to His blessed feet or marks thereof, to
the scriptures expounding the truth, secret,
love, glory and enchanting sports of the Lord,
to saints and holy men who are the living
images of God, nay, to all living beings of
the universe, taking them as so many
manifestations of God or considering God
to be present in them as the inner witnessГі
all this is included in offering obeisance to
God.
The word Г«Г…tmГҘnamГӯ (self) in this verse
stands for the body, including the mind,
intellect and senses. And applying them all to
God in the way indicated above is what is
meant by linking the self with Him.
Complete dependence on  God consists
in thus offering everything to Him in the
manner suggested above, and looking upon
Him as the supreme object worth attaining,
supreme goal, supreme refuge and oneГӯs all-
in-all.
The word  Г«EvaГӯ has been used for the
sake of emphasis. The Lord thereby seeks
to emphasize the fact that by striving on
the lines suggested above Arjuna would
undoubtedly attain Him. And obtaining a
direct vision of God during oneГӯs very life-
time, knowing Him in reality and entering
His very being, or ascending to His divine
abode, living in close proximity with Him, or
obtaining a form similar to the Divine Form:
all these are included in God-realization.
Лҷ ГғГ вҖҡГҒЕ’ГҒГғ ГјГҠГӢв—ҠjВӘп¬ӮeГӢГғГҠвҖҡГҚВ¬ГҒЕёВ·Г вҖҡГҲ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГҝГҠВў ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠпЈҝ
ГјГҠГӢвҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠВЎГҲВёЕёвҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’пЈҝ вҒ„UГҠВЎГҒп¬ӮlГҠвҒ„UГҠВЎВӘГҲsГ”ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ ЕёГҠв—Ҡ
Еёп¬Ӯв—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГӨГҝГҠГҝвҖ”H 9H
Thus, in the UpaniВ¶ad sung by the Lord, the science of Brahma,
the scripture of Yoga, the Dialogue between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
and Arjuna, ends the ninth Chapter entitled
Г¬The Yoga of the Sovereign Science
and the Sovereign Secret.Г®
U

=== PAGE 477 ===

476
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Title of the
Chapter
Summary of
the Chapter
Лҷ
вҖәrвҲӮmadbhagavad-GвҲӮtГҘ
Chapter X
The chapter mainly deals with the special manifestations of God; hence it
has been given the title of VibhВөutiyoga, or the Yoga of Divine
manifestations.
In the opening verse of this chapter the Lord undertakes to confide once more the
supreme gospel and invites Arjuna to hear the same. In the second and third He describes
His own glory under the name of Г«YogaГӯ and indicates the fruit of its
knowledge. Briefly enumerating His special manifestations in verses 4 to 6,
He gives out the fruit of knowing them as well as His Yoga in the seventh.
Detailing in the eighth and ninth the mode of worship practised by His wise devotees
possessing exclusive love for Him, He describes the fruit of such worship in the tenth and
eleventh. Thereafter, extolling the Lord in verses 12 to 15 Arjuna requests Him in verses 16
to 18 to describe in detail His special manifestations and power of Yoga once more. Pointing
out the range of His divine manifestations as infinite and undertaking to name only the chief
among them in the nineteenth, the Lord recounts them in verses 20 to 39. Reiterating the fact
that the range of His divine manifestations is infinite, the Lord winds up this topic in the
fortieth. And the chapter is concluded with a description of His Divine glory under the name
of Г«YogaГӯ in the forty-first and forty-second verses.
The exposition of JВӨГҘna and VijВӨГҘna (the Knowledge of NirguЖ’a and SaguЖ’a Brahma)
contained in chapters VII to IX having become too abstruse, the Lord
introduces this chapter in order to expound the truth clearly once more in a
different way. In the very opening verse of this chapter the Lord undertakes
to discuss the same subject.
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲп¬ӮГҠГё
Г·ГҚГҝ вҲһп¬Ӯ в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ oГҺГЎГҠГҲ в—ҠпЈҝ В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠВў п¬ӮГёвҖ”вҖ“
ГҝГ»ГҠпЈҝЛҳвҖһВўU В¬ЛқГӢГҝв—ҠГҠГЎГҠГҠГҝ п¬ӮЛҮГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ ГҒвҖһUГғвҲ‘В§ГҠГӘГҝГҝГҠГ”H 1H
Г·ГҚГҝвҖ” вҲһп¬ӮГ” once again; в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ O mighty-armed (Arjuna); oГҺГЎГҠГҲ hear; в—ҠпЈҝ My; В¬вҒ„Uв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” supreme;
п¬ӮГёвҖ”Г” word; ГҝГғЛңГ” which; ГғпЈҝ to you; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; В¬ЛқГӢГҝв—ҠГҠГЎГҠГҠГҝ who are (so) loving; п¬ӮЛҮГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ shall speak;
ГҒвҖһUГғвҲ‘В§ГҠГӘГҝГҝГҠГ” out of solicitude for (your) welfare.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: Arjuna, hear once again My supreme word, which I shall
speak to you, who are so loving, out of solicitude for your welfare.                 (1)
Link of the
Chapter
subject discussed in chapters VII to IX is
being taken up once more, though in a different
way.
The use of the words Г«BhВөuyaВЁГӯ and
Г«EvaГӯ (once again) in the beginning of the
verse is intended to make it clear that the

=== PAGE 478 ===

* Chapter X *
477
The supreme word (Paramam VacaВЁ)
is that which unravels the mystery of the
most secret virtues, glory and truth of the
supreme Person, God, and is conducive to
His Realization. The words Г«Paramam VacaВЁГӯ
in this verse, therefore, refer to the LordГӯs
teaching in the present Chapter, which is
intended to unfold the secret of His virtues,
glory and truth. By exhorting Arjuna to hear
it once again, the Lord seeks to convey that
the truth relating to Bhakti or devotion to
Him is exceptionally difficult to understand;
hence he should hear it with great attention,
reverence and love, considering it most essential
to hear it again and again.
By using the adjective Г«PrвҲӮyamГҘЖ’ГҘyaГӯ
for Arjuna, the Lord says in effect, Г¬Arjuna,
the love you bear in your heart for Me is
exceedingly great, and you listen to My
words with utmost reverence and love,
relishing them as nectar. It is therefore that
without the least hesitation, and even
unasked by you, I am repeatedly unravelling
to you the mystery of My most secret
virtues, glory and truth. All this is due to
your love.Г® And the use of the word
Г«HitakГҘmyayГҘГӯ indicates that ArjunaГӯs love
and devotion had filled the LordГӯs heart with
solicitude for the latterГӯs welfare. Therefore,
whatever the Lord proposed to tell him was
naturally an expression of His solicitude for
his welfare.
Taking up the subject proposed to be discussed in this chapter, the Lord first gives in
the following five verses a short description of His Yogic power and divine glory.
Её в—ҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҲвҖ” вҖҡГҲвҒ„UВӘГЎГҠГҠвҖ” В¬ЛқГ·п¬ӮВў Её в—ҠвҖһUВ·ВёГҝвҖ”вҖ“
вҖўвҖһUв—ҠГҠГҒЕ’ГҒвҖһВёU Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠЕёГҠВў в—ҠвҖһUВ·ГӢВёГЎГҠГҠВў Гё вҖҡп¬ӮВёвүҘГҠвҖ”Г”H 2H
Её nor; в—ҠпЈҝ My; ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҲвҖ”Г” know; вҖҡГҲвҒ„UВӘГЎГҠГҠвҖ” gods; В¬ЛқГ·п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” birth (manifestation in human or other
forms out of mere sport); Её neither; в—ҠвҖһUВ·ВёГҝвҖ” great sages; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; вҖўГҠГҒЕ’вҖ” (am) the prime cause;
ГҒвҖһUГ” because; Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of gods; в—ҠвҖһUВ·ГӢВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of the great seers (as well); Гё and; вҖҡп¬ӮВёвүҘГҠвҖ”Г” in all respects.
Neither gods nor the great sages know the secret of My birth (i.e., My manifestation
in human or other forms out of mere sport); for, I am the prime cause in all respects
of gods as well as of the great seers.                                                      (2)
form of the Universe for releasing an infinite
stream of multifarious sports. The word
Г«PrabhavamГӯ refers to all these manifestations
of God. On what particular occassions, in
what particular forms, for what particular
reasons and in what particular manner does
God manifest Himself are divine secrets the
reality of which is not known even to the
gods and sages, who possess knowledge of
pretersensual things, much less to ordinary
men of the world. This is what is meant by
the first half of this verse.
The word Г«SuragaЖ’ГҘВЁГӯ stands for the
various classes or types of gods recognized
by the вҖәГҘstras, such as the eleven Rudras, the
God manifests Himself by His own
incomparable YogвҲӮc power in the forms of
BrahmГҘ, ViВ¶Ж’u and Rudra for the creation,
maintenance and destruction of the universe
respectively. He appears in our midst from
time to time in different divine forms such as
вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma, вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, the Divine Fish and the
Divine Tortoise etc., for the destruction of
the wicked and protection of His devotees,
for establishing righteousness on a firm footing
and for redeeming the creatures of the world
by enacting wonderful sports of various kinds.
Nay, He assumes various forms as desired
by His devotees in order to bless them with
His sight and further manifests Himself in the

=== PAGE 479 ===

478
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
eight Vasus, the twelve Г…dityas, PrajГҘpati,
the fortynine Maruts, the twin AsvinвҲӮkumГҘras,
Indra and so on. And the word Г«MaharВ¶ayaВЁГӯ
should be taken to refer to the seven great
sages, whose account is given in the
commentary on verse 6 of this chapter.
By the latter half of this verse the Lord
seeks to convey that the gods and all sages
from whom this world has evolved have
originated from Him; He is both their
material and instrumental cause; and whatever
learning, wisdom, energy, lustre and power
are possessed by them are all derived from
Him.
ГҝГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠв—ҠВЎв—ҠЕёГҠГҒЕ’Вў Гё п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠвҖһпЈҝUEвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖўвҖҡГӘв—ҠГҚвҖҰUвҖ” вҖҡ в—ҠГ ГҝВёпЈҝВ·ГҲ вҖҡп¬ӮВёВ¬ГҠВ¬Г’вҖ” В¬Лқв—ҠГҲГ«ГҝГғпЈҝГ”H 3H
ГҝвҖ” who; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; вҖўВЎв—ҠЛңГ” unborn; вҖўЕёГҠГҒЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” without beginning; Гё and; п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠ knows (in reality);
вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠвҖһпЈҝUEвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” supreme Lord of the universe; вҖўвҖҡГӘв—ҠГҚвҖҰUвҖ”Г” undeluded; вҖҡвҖ”Г” he; в—ҠГ ГҝпЈҝВёВ·ГҲ among men; вҖҡп¬ӮВёВ¬ГҠВ¬Г’вҖ”
of all sins; В¬Лқв—ҠГҲГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is purged.
He who knows Me in reality as birthless and without beginning, and as the
supreme Lord of the Universe, he, undeluded among men, is purged of all sins.  (3)
protector of all. And to grasp this truth
properly with unquestioning faith is to know
God as the supreme Lord of the universe.
The latter half of this verse seeks to
bring out the fruit of knowing God as unborn,
without beginning and the supreme Lord of
the Universe as explained above. The intention
is to show that of all men in this world, he
alone who possesses a correct knowledge of
GodГӯs glory, as indicated above, knows God
in reality.
Again, he alone who knows God in reality
is Г«undeluded among menГӯ; the rest are all
deluded. And he who has thoroughly grasped
the reality of God naturally devotes the precious
moments of his life to the constant practice of
adoration in every way (XV.19); like sensually-
minded people he does not remain engrossed
in worldly enjoyments, taking them to be a
source of delight. Hence being thoroughly
purged of all sins of his present birth and past
lives, he easily succeeds in realizing God.
Though Г«manifesting Himself in various
forms through His own YogamГҘyГҘ (divine
potency), God is really birthless (IV.6), and
is not born like other earthly beings. He
simply plays the role of being born in order
to gratify His devotees and establish
righteousness on earth. To grasp this truth
correctly with unquestioning faith and reverence
is to know God as birthless. Even so, God
is the beginning or ultimate cause of all, but
has no beginning Himself; He is eternal and
dateless, and like other things he cannot be
said to have started His career from a
particular point of time. And to apprehend
this truth properly with full faith and reverence
is to know God as without beginning. Again,
whatever regional gods there are, such as
Indra, VaruЖ’a, Yama, PrajГҘpati and others,
who are held to be divine in rank, God is
the supreme Lord of them all; He is the
supreme Almighty, the controller, guide,
creator, destroyer, supporter, nourisher and
вҖҷГҲГҒhГҙГҠГҠВёЕёв—ҠвҖҡГӘв—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUвҖ” ЛҮГҠв—ҠГҠ вҖҡГ ГҝВў Е’в—ҠвҖ” вүҘГҠв—ҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҖҡГҲПҖВў Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖВў Г·п¬ӮГҠпЈҝЛҳГ·ГҠп¬ӮГҠпЈҝ Г·ГҝВў ГёГҠГ·Гҝв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ ГёГ”H 4H

=== PAGE 480 ===

* Chapter X *
479
The function of the mind which determines
what ought to be done and what ought not to
be done, what is worthy of acceptance and
what is worth rejecting, what is good and what
is evil, is called Г«BuddhiГӯ or reason.
The term Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ covers every form of
knowledge, from ordinary worldly knowledge
to the knowledge of the reality of God.
Regarding worldly enjoyments, which
appear everlasting and delightful to all
sensually-minded men, as transient, momentary
and sorrowful, and refusing to be infatuated
by them is called Г«AsammohaГӯ or unclouded
understanding.
Harbouring evil intentions, doing an ill
turn, usurping oneГӯs possessions, offering insult,
causing hurt, using harsh or abusive language,
indulging in calumny or malicious gossip,
practising incendiarism, administering poison,
committing murder and causing direct or
indirect harm,Гіall these are offences which
easily provoke anger and retaliation. Total
absence of the spirit of retaliation even under
such provocation and notwithstanding the
power to retaliate, and seeking exemption for
the offender from all punishment in this as
well as in the next world is what is known as
forbearance.
Г«VeracityГӯ means representing in sweet
and loving words what has been actually
seen with the eyes, heard through the ears, or
apprehended through the mind exactly as it
has been seen, heard or apprehended.
Г«DamaГӯ consists in exercising restraint
over the senses running after sense-objects,
subjugating them and checking their
waywardness; whereas Г«вҖәamaГӯ means subduing
the mind by exercising full control over the
same.
Г«SukhaГӯ denotes joys of all kinds derived
from contact with agreeable objects and the
withdrawal of disagreeable ones. Even so
Г«sorrowГӯ covers all forms of suffering* caused
by separation from agreeable objects and
contact with disagreeable ones.
Г«BhavaГӯ means coming into existence of
the entire universe consisting of animate and
inanimate beings at the time of creation; and
its disappearance at the time of universal
destruction is indicated by the word Г«AbhГҘvaГӯ.
вҖўГҒвҖһВўUвҖҡГҠ вҖҡв—ҠГғГҠ ГғГҲГҒCГ”USГғВ¬ГҠпЈҝ Е’ГҠЕёВў ГҝвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГҝвүҘГҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
Г·п¬ӮГҒГЈГғ Г·ГҠп¬ӮГҠ Г·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠВў в—ҠГ»ГҠ вҲһп¬Ӯ В¬ГҺГ•ГҒГҮп¬ӮЕ“ГҠвҖ”Г”H 5H
вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” reason; ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” right knowledge; вҖўвҖҡГӘв—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUвҖ” clear understanding; ЛҮГҠв—ҠГҠГ” forbearance; вҖҡГ Гҝв—ҠЛңГ”
truthfulness; Е’в—ҠвҖ”Г” control of the senses; вүҘГҠв—ҠвҖ” control of the mind; вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ” joy; Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖв—ҠЛңГ” sorrow; Г·п¬ӮвҖ”Г”
evolution; вҖўГ·ГҠп¬ӮвҖ”Г” dissolution; Г·Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” fear; Гё and; вҖўГ·Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” fearlessness; вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; Гё and; вҖўГҒвҖһВўUвҖҡГҠ
non-violence; вҖҡв—ҠГғГҠ equanimity; ГғГҲГҒCГ”UвҖ” contentment; ГғВ¬вҖ” austerity; Е’ГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” charity; ГҝвүҘГҠвҖ” fame;
вҖўГҝвүҘГҠвҖ” obloquy; Г·п¬ӮГҒГЈГғ emanate; Г·ГҠп¬ӮГҠвҖ” traits; Г·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” in creatures; в—ҠГ»ГҠвҖ” from Me; вҲһп¬Ӯ as well;
В¬ГҺГ•ГҒГҮп¬ӮЕ“ГҠвҖ” diverse.
Reason, right knowledge, clear understanding, forbearance, veracity, control over
the senses and mind, joy and sorrow, evolution and dissolution, fear and fearlessness,
non-violence, equanimity, contentment, austerity, charity, fame and obloquyГіthese
diverse traits of creatures emanate from Me alone.                                (4, 5)
* Suffering has been classified in Hindu вҖәГҘstras under three heads: viz., (i) Г…dhibhautika or that
caused through the agency of men, beasts, birds, insects, moths and other creatures; (ii) Г…dhidaivika or
that resulting from natural calamities such as drought, excessive rainfall, earthquake, stroke of lightning
and famine etc., and (iii) Г…dhyГҘtmika or that caused by distemper of the body, senses or mind.

=== PAGE 481 ===

480
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Agitation or perturbation of the mind
caused by impending harm or cause of death
is called Г«BhayaГӯ (fear); and total absence of
fear resulting from a sense of the omnipresence
of God, or from any other cause, is known as
Г«AbhayaГӯ (fearlessness).
Г«AhiвүҲsГҘГӯ or non-violence means non
infliction of suffering in any form and at any
time even in a small degree on any being
whatsoever in thought, word and deed.
Г«SamatГҘГӯ or equanimity denotes constant
equipoise of mind, free from partiality and
prejudice, in the midst of objects, actions and
incidents etc., which are likely to throw one
off oneГӯs balance such as joy and sorrow,
gain and loss, victory and defeat, praise and
blame, honour and ignominy, friend and foe,
etc.
Г«TuВ¶ВўiГӯ 
or 
contentment 
is 
that
uncomplaining attitude of mind which
reconciles itself to every lot, taking it as the
outcome of oneГӯs own good or evil destiny
or as a decree of Providence.
Г«TapasГӯ or austerity consists in enduring
hardships for the sake of oneГӯs Dharma or
duty, and Г«DГҘnaГӯ or charity consists in
surrendering oneГӯs own proprietary rights for
the benefit of others. Even so, good and bad
reputation are known as Г«YaвҖ№aГӯ and Г«AyaвҖ№aГӯ,
respectively.
All these characteristics and feelings
existing in diverse creatures and varying
according to the temperament of each owe
their very existence to His backing, power
and presence. This is what is meant by the
second half of verse 5.
It may be observed here that while in
the above two verses the antitheses of Г«SukhaГӯ,
Г«BhavaГӯ, Г«AbhayaГӯ and Г«YaвҖ№aГӯ, viz., Г«DuВЁkhaГӯ,
Г«AbhГҘvaГӯ, Г«BhayaГӯ and Г«AyaвҖ№aГӯ have been
spoken of as proceeding from God, those of
Г«KВ¶amГҘГӯ, Г«SatyaГӯ, Г«DamaГӯ and Г«AhiвүҲsГҘГӯ etc.,
have not been so mentioned. How is that to
be accounted for ? The reason is not far to
seek. It will be seen that entities like sorrow,
dissolution, fear and obloquy etc., appear in
this world just in order to enable beings to
work out their evil destiny. Their emanation
from God, who dispenses the fruit of our
actions and controls the universe, is therefore
quite in order. Vices and evil propensities
like anger, mendacity, self-indulgence and
violence etc., which are the antitheses of
forbearance, veracity, sense-control and
nonviolence etc., on the other hand, do not
proceed from God. The GвҲӮtГҘ attributes these,
elsewhere, to Г«desireГӯ, born of ignorance (vide
III.37), and exhorts us to renounce them
along with their root cause. That is why the
antitheses of virtues and noble propensities
like veracity etc., have not been mentioned in
the present verse.
в—ҠвҖһUВ·ВёГҝвҖ” вҖҡ# В¬ГҚп¬ӮпЈҝВё ГёГ п¬ӮГҠвҒ„UГҠпЈҝ в—ҠЕёп¬ӮSГғГ•ГҠГ”вҖ“
в—ҠjГҠп¬ӮГҠ в—ҠГҠЕёвҖҡГҠ ВЎГҠГғГҠ ГҝпЈҝВ·ГҠВў вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ Гҹв—ҠГҠвҖ” В¬ЛқВЎГҠвҖ”Г”H 6H
в—ҠвҖһUВ·ВёГҝвҖ” вҖҡ# the seven great seers; В¬ГҚп¬ӮпЈҝВё ГёГ п¬ӮГҠвҒ„UвҖ” their four elders (Sanaka and others); в—ҠЕёп¬ӮвҖ”
the fourteen Manus or progenitors of mankind (such as SvГҘyambhuva and his successors);
ГғГ•ГҠГ” and; в—ҠЕ’ЛңГ”Г·ГҠп¬ӮГҠвҖ” (who are all) devoted to Me; в—ҠГҠЕёвҖҡГҠвҖ” ВЎГҠГғГҠвҖ” were born of My will; ГҝпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” from
whom; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ in the world; Гҹв—ҠГҠвҖ” В¬ЛқВЎГҠвҖ”Г” all these creatures (have come into being).
The seven great seers, their four elders (Sanaka and others), and the fourteen
Manus or progenitors of mankind (such as SvГҘyambhuva and his successors), who are
all devoted to Me, were born of My will; from them all these creatures in the world
have come into being.                                                                              (6)

=== PAGE 482 ===

* Chapter X *
481
While describing the marks of the seven
great seers, the scripture says:Гі
вҲһГғГҠЕёЛңГ” Г·ГҠп¬ӮГҠЕёЕ“ГӢГҝГҠЕёГҠ ГҝпЈҝ ГёГ’Гғ ВҙВ§В·ГҝГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГғГҠвҖ”вҖ“
вҖҡ#Г’ГғпЈҝ вҖҡ#ГҒГ·pГ’п¬Ӯ ВӘГҲГЎГҠГ’вҖ” вҖҡ#В·ВёГҝвҖ” Sв—ҠГҺГғГҠвҖ”H
Е’ГӢЕ“ГҠВёГҝГҲВ·ГҠпЈҝ 
в—ҠГЈГІГҠвҲ‘ГҺВ§Гғ 
ГҹВёEвҒ„UГҠ 
ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝГёЛҮГҠГҲВ·вҖ”вҖ“
п¬ӮГҺhГҠвҖ” В¬ЛқГ ГҝЛҮГҠЕ“в—ҠГҠВёГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ ВӘГҠпЈҝГІГҠВ¬Лқп¬ӮГғВёвҲ‘В§ГҠp ГҝпЈҝH
(VГҘyu-PurГҘЖ’a LXI.93-94)
Г¬And those who dwell on the above
sentiments of celestial seers*, are recognized
as В°RВ¶is or seers. They are seven in number
and are possessed of the following seven virtues;
hence they are called SaptarВ¶is. They are all
long-lived and composers of Vedic Mantras
or hymns, possessed of divine powers and
transcendent vision and profound in merits,
learning and age. They are credited with an
intuitive or direct perception of Dharma or
the divine law and are the founders of particular
lines or stocks of families.Г® It is these who
propagate creation and regulate Dharma.вҖ 
These seven seers or SaptarВ¶is, as they
are called, change in every Manvantara or
tenure of office of a Manu. The SaptarВ¶is
mentioned in this verse have been spoken of
by the Lord as MaharВ¶is, or great seers, and
as born of His will. Therefore, they are of a
higher order than В°RВ¶is or ordinary seers.
SaptarВ¶is of this class find mention in the
вҖәГҘnti-Parva of the MahГҘbhГҘrata. With
reference to these, God Himself, the Supreme
PuruВ¶a, speaks as follows to BrahmГҘ and the
other celestials:Гі
в—ҠвҒ„UГӢГҒГёвҒ„UГҒXГ”UвҒ„UГҠpГҠГҒГІГҠвҖ” В¬ГҲвҲӮUSГ ГҝвҖ” В¬ГҲвҲӮUвҖһUвҖ” вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГғГҲвҖ”вҖ“
п¬ӮГҒвҖҡDГ”U ГҹГҒГғ вҖҡ#Г’ГғпЈҝ в—ҠГҠЕёвҖҡГҠ ГҒЕёГҢв—ҠГғГҠ ГҒвҖһU ГғпЈҝH
вҲһГғпЈҝ п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҲГ…ГҝГҠ п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГҠГёГҠГҝГҠВёp вҲ‘В§ГҒГҖВ¬ГғГҠвҖ”вҖ“
В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠЕ“ГҢв—ҠГЎГҠpГ’п¬Ӯ В¬ЛқГҠВЎГҠВ¬Г ГҝпЈҝ Гё вҲ‘В§ГҒГҖВ¬ГғГҠвҖ”H
(MahГҘ., вҖәГҘnti., 340.69-70)
Г¬MarвҲӮci, AвҲҶgirГҘ, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha,
Kratu and VasiВ¶ВўhaГіthese seven great seers
have been begotten by you out of your mind.
They are all proficient in the Vedas, and I
have made them the principal teachers of the
Vedas. They direct the worldly way of life,
and have been appointed by Me to carry on
the duty of PrajГҘpati, the deity presiding over
creation.Г®
They are the SaptarВ¶is of the very first
Manvantara, 
viz., 
the 
SvГҘyambhuva
Manvantara, of the present Kalpa (Vide
HarivaвүҲвҖ№a, VII.8-9). Therefore, it is these
seven seers who are referred to in the present
verse as Г«Sapta MaharВ¶ayaВЁГӯ.вҖЎ
*
For the marks of celestial seers vide commentary on verses 12 and 13 of this chapter.
вҖ 
These seven seers are advocates of the worldly ways of life. Their views and mode of life are
described as below:Гі
В·вүҲЛңUГ”вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГ·вҒ„UГғГҠ ГҒЕёГ ГҝВў  вүҘГҠГҠГҒвҲӮUЕёГҠпЈҝ ВӘГҺвҖһUв—ҠпЈҝГҒЕ“ЕёвҖ”вҖ“ ГғГҲГҖГҝГ’вҲҡГҝВёп¬ӮвҖһUвҒ„UГҒГЈГғ Sв—Ҡ вҖўЕ’ГҺCГ”пЈҝвҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖһпЈҝUГғГҲГҒГ·вҖ”H
вҖўВӘЛқГҠГӘГҝГ’п¬ӮВёГғВёГҝГҒГЈГғ Sв—Ҡ вҒ„UвҖҡГ’pГ’п¬Ӯ  Sп¬ӮГҝВўвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғГ’вҖ”вҖ“ вҲ‘ГҲВ§вүҲГҲUГҒГӘвҖҷЕё ВҙВ§ГҒhв—ҠГЈГғГҠпЈҝ вҖҷГҠsГ”ГҠГЈГғвҒ„UГҒЕёп¬ӮГҠГҒвҖҡЕёвҖ”H
вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғГҠГҒЕ’В·ГҲ  ГҝГҲВӘГҠГ…ГҝпЈҝВ·ГҲ вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёcп¬ӮпЈҝп¬Ӯ В¬ГҲЕёвҖ” В¬ГҲЕёвҖ”вҖ“ п¬ӮГЎГҠГҠВёГјГҠв—ҠвҲҡГҝп¬ӮSГ•ГҠЕёВў ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГғпЈҝ В¬ЛқГ•в—ҠВў ГғГҲ п¬ӮГ’H
(VГҘyu-PurГҘЖ’a 61.95-97)
Г¬These great seers are constantly engaged in the six pursuits enjoined upon a BrГҘhmaЖ’a, viz., the
study and teaching of the Vedas, performing sacrifices and officiating as priests in sacrifices performed by
other and bestowing and accepting gifts. They maintain Gurukulas or seminaries in their hermitages for
imparting instruction to BrahmacГҘrвҲӮs and marry and preserve the sacred fire only for the continuity of the
race. They have matrimonial and other relations only with those who belong to the same VarЖ’a or caste,
and enjoy irreproachable objects of their own creation. They maintain wife and children, own cattle and
other possession, and live both within and without the world of matter. At the beginning of every Yuga
it is these seers who establish, for the first time, the insitution of VarЖ’as and Г…вҖ№ramas (the division of society
into various grades and stages of life) again and again.
вҖЎ All these seven seers are PrajГҘpatis of great religious austerity, possessing uncommon spiritual glow
and wisdom. Being creators of beings, they are known as the Г«Seven BrahmГҘsГӯ (MahГҘ., вҖәГҘnti., 208-3,4,5).
Their brief sketches are given below:Гі

=== PAGE 483 ===

482
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The words Г«Sapta MaharВ¶ayaВЁГӯ in the
present verse cannot be interpreted to mean
the seven seers of the present Manvantara,
viz., ViвҖ№vГҘmitra, Jamadagni, BharadvГҘja,
Gautama, Atri, VasiВ¶Вўha and KaвҖ№yapa, because
besides Atri and VasiВ¶Вўha none of these was
born of the will either of God Himself or of
BrahmГҘ (the Creator). Therefore, instead of
(1) MARвҲ«CI
This seer is held to be a part manifestation of a fraction of God. He has many wives, the chief of them
being SambhВөuti, a daughter of PrajГҘpati, DakВ¶a, and DharmavratГҘ, the daughter of a BrГҘhmaЖ’a named
Dharma. He has a large stock of descendants. MaharВ¶i KaвҖ№yapa is one of his own sons. A portion of the
Padma-PurГҘЖ’a was recited to him by BrahmГҘ. Almost all the PurГҘЖ’as, the MahГҘbhГҘrata and the Vedas too
contain copious references to him. BrahmГҘ delivered the Brahma-PurГҘЖ’a first of all to this sage. He is
constantly engaged in the work of creation and maintenance of the world. Detailed accounts of this sage are
to be found in the VГҘyu, Skanda, Agni, Padma, MГҘrkaЖ’Е’eya and ViВ¶Ж’u-PurГҘЖ’as and the MahГҘbhГҘrata etc.
(2) AГғGIRГ…
He is a seer possessed of uncommon spiritual glow. He has many wives, three of whom are more
prominent. Of these SurВөupГҘ, daughter of MarвҲӮci, bore BГҰhaspati; SvarГҘt, daughter of sage Kardama, gave
birth to five sons, viz., Gautama, VГҘmadeva and others; and PathyГҘ, daughter of SvГҘyambhuva Manu,
brought forth three sons, ViВ¶Ж’u and others. (VГҘyu-PurГҘЖ’a. LXV.); whereas Г…treyвҲӮ, daughter of Agni, gave
birth of many sons collectively known as the Г…вҲҶgirasas (Brahma-PurГҘЖ’a). According to some scriptures
BГҰhaspati was born of his wife вҖәubhГҘ, (MahГҘbhГҘrata).
(3) ATRI
This seer has his abode in the south. AnasВөuyГҘ, who is famous for her feminine chastity, is his consort.
AnasВөuyГҘ is a co-uterine sister of BhagavГҘn Kapila, being born of Kardama and DevahВөuti. BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ
RГҘma accepted the hospitality of this great lady during His sojourn in the forest. Adorning the divine
Mother, вҖәrвҲӮ SвҲӮtГҘ, with ornaments and clothes of various kinds, AnasВөuyГҘ also delivered to her her historic
message on the duties of a virtuous woman.
 Commanded by BrahmГҘ to propagate the race, the great sage Atri, who is the most prominent among
all expounders of the Vedas, repaired to the В°RkВ¶a mountain with his wife, AnasВөuyГҘ, and devoted himself
to the practice of austerities. Both Atri and his wife are great devotees of God. They performed rigorous
penance and sought direct communion with God as a reward for their penance. Surrendering themselves to
God, the Lord of the entire universe, they engaged themselves in constant thought of the Lord. The crown
of their head emitted the fire of Yoga, which began to burn the three worlds. Pleased with their penance,
the holy Trinity, BrahmГҘ, ViВ¶Ж’u and вҖәaвҲҶkara, simultaneously appeared before these devotees to bless them.
Obtaining a direct vision of the three deities all at once, the seer and his wife had the object of their life
fulfilled and they began to extol the Lord in a voice choked with emotion. The Lord insisted on their asking
a boon. Having been commanded by BrahmГҘ to procreate, Atri replied, Г¬I invoked the Lord and sought His
vision for obtaining a son, and I find all the three of You before me! You are all beyond human conception.
How is it, then, that You have condescended to bless me thus? Pray, tell me.Г® Hearing these words of Atri,
the three gods smiled and said, Г¬O sage, you are of unfailing resolve. We three are the same as the object
of your contemplation, three aspects of the same truth. You will have three sons, who will be part
manifestations of Ourselves. As for yourself you have all your desires already fulfilled.Г® Having uttered these
words, the Trinity disappeared and thereafter incarnated themselves as the sons of Atri. A part of BhagavГҘn
ViВ¶Ж’u appeared as DattГҘtreya, a part of BrahmГҘ took the form of Candra (the moon-god), while a part of
вҖәiva incarnated itself as the sage DurvГҘsГҘ. Such is the glory of devotion! Those very gods who are beyond
human conception assumed the forms of human children and sported in the lap of AnasВөuyГҘ (VГҘlmвҲӮkiГӯs
RГҘmГҘyaЖ’a, VanakГҘЖ’Е’a, вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata, Bk. IV).
(4) PULASTYA
He is a great ascetic, pious and full of spiritual glow. He is an eminent Master of Yoga and a great
adept in this branch of Knowledge. Once upon a time when sage ParГҘвҖ№ara was performing a grand sacrifice

=== PAGE 484 ===

* Chapter X *
483
referring to these seven seers, the Г«Sapta
MaharВ¶ayaВЁГӯ of the present verse should be
taken to mean the seers of the first Manvantara
of the present Kalpa.
The words, Г«CatvГҘraВЁ PВөurveГӯ should be
taken to mean the eldest in creation, viz., Sanaka,
Sanandana, SanГҘtana and SanatkumГҘra. They
are GodГӯs own manifestations and appeared
of their own will as the result of BrahmГҘГӯs
austere penance. BrahmГҘГӯs own words with
reference to them are:Гі
Г¬The Lord Himself appeared in the form
of the four seers, Sanaka, Sanandana, SanГҘtana
and SanatkumГҘra, who are collectively known
with the object of extirpating the RГҘkВ¶asas, Pulastya on the advice of VaвҖ№iВ¶Вўha requested ParГҘвҖ№ara to stop
it, and the sacrifice was stopped at the instance of Pulastya. Highly pleased with this geniality of ParГҘвҖ№ara,
Pulastya granted him a boon whereby ParГҘвҖ№ara acquired knowledge of all the вҖәГҘstras.
Pulastya had several sons through his wives, SaвҲҶdhyГҘ, PratвҲӮcвҲӮ, PrвҲӮtвҲӮ and HavirbhВөu. Dattoli, more
popularly known as Agastya, and the celebrated sage NidГҘgha are his sons. ViвҖ№ravГҘ, the father of Kubera,
RГҘvaЖ’a, KuвүҲbhakarЖ’a and VibhвҲӮВ¶aЖ’a, is also a son of Pulastya. The various PurГҘЖ’as and the MahГҘbhГҘrata
contain numerous references to him. The ViВ¶Ж’u, Brahmavaivarta, KВөurma, вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata and VГҘyu-
PurГҘЖ’as and the Udyoga-Parva of the MahГҘbhГҘrata, among others, contain detailed accounts of this seer.
(5) PULAHA
This great seer is possessed of great prowess and wisdom. Obtaining divine knowledge from
sage Sanandana, he imparted the same to sage Gautama. Through his wives, KВ¶amГҘ, daughter of
PrajГҘpati DakВ¶a and Gati, daughter of sage Kardama, he got many children (vide KВөurma, ViВ¶Ж’u and вҖәrвҲӮmad
BhГҘgavata PurГҘЖ’as).
(6) KRATU
This great seer also possesses exceptional spiritual glow. He married KriyГҘ, daughter of sage  Kardama,
and Sannati, daughter of PrajГҘpati DakВ¶a. He begot eight thousand В°RВ¶is collectively known as the
VГҘlakhilyas, who stand facing the sun-god near His chariot and move with the latter uttering his praises.
The PurГҘЖ’as contain many references to these В°RВ¶is (vide вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata, Bk. IV; ViВ¶Ж’u-PurГҘЖ’a, Pt.I).
(7) VASIВ®В§THA
The austerity, spiritual glow, forbearance and piety of this great seer are universally known. The
PurГҘЖ’as record divergent accounts of his birth, which are all correct, relating as they do to different Kalpas
or cycles of creation. The name of his wife is ArundhatвҲӮ, who is an exceptionally virtuous woman and the
foremost of all loyal and devoted wives. VasiВ¶Вўha was the family priest of the Kings of the Solar Race. It was
the temptation of seeing with his own eyes, and living in the holy company of, BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma, the
ideal and perfect Man, that induced him to accept this office, and he constantly strove for the welfare of the
solar race. Obtaining вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma as his own disciple, he deemed the mission of his life as having been fulfilled.
It is said that once there was a controversy between VasiВ¶Вўha and ViвҖ№vГҘmitra. The subject of discussion
was: Which is superiorГіausterity or SatsaвҲҶga (the company of holy men)? VasiВ¶Вўha maintained the superiority
of SatsaвҲҶga, while ViвҖ№vГҘmitra declared austerity as of greater value. Finally the question was referred to вҖәeВ¶a,
the serpent-god, for arbitration. Hearing the point at issue BhagavГҘn вҖәeВ¶a replied, Г¬O blessed ones, both of
you can see that the weight of the entire globe rests on my head. If either of you relieves me of this burden
for a short while, I may have breathing time to think over the question and settle your dispute.Г® ViвҖ№vГҘmitra
had great faith in his own austerities; he, therefore, sought to lift up the earth by parting with the fruit of ten
thousand years of his penance, but in vain. The earth began to quake. Thereupon VasiВ¶Вўha easily lifted the
earth by parting with the fruit of only half a second of the SatsaвҲҶga practised by him, and remained standing
with the load for a long time. ViвҖ№vГҘmitra then enquired of the arbitrator: How is it that you do not pronounce
your decision even though so much time has elapsed? Г¬O great seer !Г® вҖәeВ¶a smilingly replied, Г¬the question
stands decided by itself without my arbitration. When ten thousand yearsГӯ penance cannot equal half-a-
secondГӯs SatsaвҲҶga, you can yourself decide which is superior.Г® Knowing thus the glory of SatsaвҲҶga, the two
sages returned to their abodes, much delighted at heart.
VasiВ¶Вўha got this name because he is endowed with Vasu, or the eight siddhis (occult powers), and

=== PAGE 485 ===

484
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
as the four Г«SanasГӯ (embodiments of austerity),
as the result of the ceaseless penance done
by me at the beginning of creation with the
object of creating the different worlds. They
fully expounded the true nature of the soul,
which had been lost to the world during the
dissolution at the end of the preceding Kalpa,
whereby seers realized the truth in their own
heart.Г® (вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata II.vii.5)*.
Here it may be observed that Sanaka
and others had no issue at all, whereas the
present verse says that all these creatures in
the world have descended from the seers and
Manus mentioned therein. Therefore, the
construction put upon the words Г«CatvГҘraВЁ
PВөurveГӯ presents a contradiction in terms. But
this contradiction is only apparent, and not
real. For the Sanaka brothers, being the pioneers
of the path of Renunciation (NivГҰtti), are the
teachers of the whole universe. Hence all
those who follow the path shown by them
are in a way their disciples and may therefore
be taken to be their progeny.
In the course of a cosmic day as many
as fourteen Manus appear and hold office in
succession, and the tenure of office of each
Manu is called a Г«ManvantaraГӯ. A Manvantara
consists of a little more than seventy-one
Г«CaturyugвҲӮsГӯ or rounds of the four Yugas
(Satyayuga, TretГҘ, DvГҘpara and Kaliyuga).
Reckoned in human years, a Manvantara
extends to 30,67,20,000 odd years; whereas
according to the computation of the celestials,
it consists of 8,52,000 odd years (ViВ¶Ж’u-PurГҘЖ’a
1.3).вҖ“ Each Manvantara has its own SaptarВ¶is
or group of seven seers for regulating the
operation of Dharma or the Divine Law and
maintaining the universe. With the change of
a Manu at the conclusion of a Manvantara,
other functionaries of the universe, such as
the seven seers, gods, Indra, and the sons of
Manu also change. The names of the Manus
of the present Kalpa are: SvГҘyambhuva,
SvГҘrociВ¶a, Uttama, TГҘmasa, Raivata CГҘkВ¶uВ¶a,
Vaivasvata, 
SГҘvarЖ’i, 
DakВ¶asГҘvarЖ’i,
BrahmasГҘvarЖ’i, DharmasГҘvarЖ’i, RudrasГҘvarЖ’i,
is the best of all householders. The enemies of man in the shape of lust, anger, greed, infatuation etc., could
not even enter the precincts of his hermitage. Though fully able to retaliate, he felt no provocation and
did not inflict the least injury on ViвҖ№vГҘmitra, the murderer of his hundred sons. Pleased with him, Lord вҖәiva
granted to him lordship over the BrГҘhmaЖ’as. Among those who possess true knowledge of SanГҘtana Dharma,
the name of VasiВ¶Вўha deserves to be cited first of all. Detailed accounts of his life appear in the RГҘmГҘyaЖ’a,
MahГҘbhГҘrata, DevвҲӮ-BhГҘgavata, the ViВ¶Ж’u, Matsya, VГҘyu, вҖәiva and LiвҲҶga PurГҘЖ’as and other books.
*
Гғ#Вў ГғВ¬ГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮГҒп¬ӮЕ“вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҒвҖҡвҖҡГҺЛҮГҠГҝГҠ в—ҠпЈҝ вҖўГҠЕ’ГҠГ’ вҖҡЕёГҠГ Sп¬ӮГғВ¬вҖҡвҖ” вҖҡ ГёГғГҲвҖ”вҖҡЕёГҠпЈҝЛҳГ·ГҚГғЛңГ”вҖ“
В¬ЛқГҠГ„вҲ‘В§ГҖВ¬вҖҡГӘГҘвҖ№п¬ӮГҒп¬ӮЕёCГ”UГҒв—ҠвҖһUГҠГ в—ҠГғГ»п¬ӮВў 
вҖҡГӘГҝВӘЛңГ” 
ВЎВӘГҠЕ’в—ҠГҲЕёГҝГҠпЈҝ 
ГҝЕ’ГёЛҮГҠГғГҠГ в—ҠЕёЛңГ”H
вҖ“
According to SВөuryasiddhГҘnta (an old and authoritative treatise on Astronomy) the duration of
a Manvantara etc., has been computed as below:Гі
A CaturyugвҲӮ (one full round of the Satya, TretГҘ, DvГҘpara and Kali Yugas) consists of 43,20,000 human
years or 12,000 celestial years. This period is also called a Г«MahГҘyugaГӯ. Seventy-one rounds of such
MahГҘyugas go to make a Г«ManvantaraГӯ. A period equal in duration to a Satyayuga or 17,28,000 human
years intervenes the expiration of each Manvantara and the commencement of another, and is technically
known as a SandhyГҘ or twilight. During this SandhyГҘ occurring at the end of each Manvantara the earth
goes under water. In every Kalpa or Cosmic day there are fourteen Manvantaras with an equal number of
twilights. Besides these, there is one more twilight of the same duration at the beginning of each Kalpa.
In this way the fourteen Manvantaras comprised in each Kalpa consist of 71 CaturyugвҲӮs each, besides 15
twilights each of the duration of a Satyayuga. The 14 Manvantaras thus comprise in all 14x71=994
MahГҘyugas plus 15 twilights, which go to make another 6 MahГҘyugas. In this way each Kalpa comprises
994+6=1,000 MahГҘyugas. The following figures represent the duration of each of these divisions of them:Гі

=== PAGE 486 ===

* Chapter X *
485
DevasГҘvarЖ’i, and IndrasГҘvarЖ’i.* At the end
of a Kalpa consisting of fourteen Manvantaras
the entire group of Manus changes.
All these seers and Manus are full of
reverence and love for God; it is for this
reason that the qualification Г«MadbhГҘvГҘВЁГӯ
has been used with reference to them.
Although the scriptures speak of the
seven seers as well as of Sanaka, Sanandana
and others as having been born of the mind
of BrahmГҘ, the Lord refers to them here as
having been born of His own will. This
discrepancy can be explained by the fact that
it is God Himself who assumes the form of
BrahmГҘ for the creation of the universe.
Therefore, there is no contradiction when the
Lord speaks of those born of BrahmГҘГӯs mind
as having been born of His own will.
Solar or human years
Celestial years or
the years of gods
One CaturyugвҲӮ (MahГҘyuga or celestial Yuga)
43,20,000
12,000
Seventy-one CaturyugвҲӮs
30,67,20,000
8,52,000
Sandhi or twilight at the beginning of each Kalpa
17,28,000
4,800
Fourteen SandhyГҘs following the Manvantaras
2,41,92,000
67,200
One Manvantara with its Sandhi
30,84,48,000
8,56,800
Fourteen Manvantaras with their
corresponding Sandhis
4,31,82,72,000
1,19,95,200
Fourteen Manvantaras with the twilight at the
beginning of each Kalpa, or one full Kalpa
4,32,00,00,000
1,20,00,000
Kalpa is only another name for a cosmic day, and each cosmic day is followed by a cosmic night of the
same length. The full length of BrahmГҘГӯs life is a hundred years according to this measure. This period of time
is technically known as Г«ParaГӯ. Having completed half of his period, BrahmГҘ is now passing through the other
half. The present time represents the first day or Kalpa of his fifty-first year. Since the beginning of this Kalpa
six Manvantaras with their SandhyГҘs have already passed; whereas the number of SandhyГҘs, including the one
occurring at the beginning of the Kalpa, that have elapsed so far is seven. The present is the seventh or
Vaivasvata Manvantara, of which 27 Caturyugas have passed. We are now passing through the twilight at the
beginning of the Kaliyuga of the 28th Caturyuga. (SВөuryasiddhГҘnta, MadhyamГҘdhikГҘra, 15 to 24).
Up to the SaвүҲvat year 2074 (2016 A.D.) of the Vikrama Era, Kaliyuga has completed 5,118 years.
The SandhyГҘ occurring at the beginning of each Kaliyuga extends to 36,000 years. According to this
calculation 30,952 years of the SandhyГҘ itself remain to be completed.
* For a detailed account of these Manus see Chapters 1, 5 and 13 of Bk.VIII of вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata.
Their names slightly vary in the various PurГҘЖ’as. The names given here have been taken from the
BhГҘgavata.
The next verse proceeds to declare the reward of knowing the glory and manifestations
of God described in the preceding five verses.
вҲһГғГҠВў ГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҚГҒГғВў ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘВў Гё в—Ҡв—Ҡ ГҝГҠпЈҝ п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠ ГғГ»п¬ӮГғвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҖҡГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГӘВ¬пЈҝЕё ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝЕё ГҝГҲГ–ГҝГғпЈҝ ЕёГҠГІГҠ вҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝвҖ”Г”H 7H
вҲһГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” this; ГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҚГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” supreme divine glory; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ” supernatural power; Гё and; в—Ҡв—Ҡ Mine;
ГҝвҖ” who; п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠ knows; ГғГ»п¬ӮГғвҖ” in reality; вҖҡвҖ” he; вҖўГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГӘВ¬пЈҝЕё ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝЕё through unfaltering devotion;
ГҝГҲГ–ГҝГғпЈҝ gets established (in Me); Её there is no; вҖўГІГҠ about this; вҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝвҖ” doubt.

=== PAGE 487 ===

486
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The 
word 
Г«VibhВөutimГӯ, 
with 
the
demonstrative adjective Г«EtГҘmГӯ qualifying it,
covers entities like Buddhi (the faculty of
determining the nature of things) etc., and
great seers and others declared by the Lord
in the preceding three verses as emanating
from Him, as well as the objects, abstract
ideas and gods referred to by Him in such
statements as Г¬I am the sapidity in water
(VII.8)Г® and Г¬I am the Vedic ritual, I am the
sacrifice (IX.16)Г® and so on.
And the word Г«YogamГӯ stands for that
transcendent and marvellous power of God,
the secret of which is not fully known either
to the gods or to the great sages (X.2,3),
which accounts for the fact that, though
Himself both the material and instrumental
cause of entities born of Sattva, Rajas and
Tamas, He always remains apart from them,
justifying the statement Г«neither I exist in
them, nor they in Me (VII.12)Г® by dint of
which, while carrying on the creation,
maintenance and destruction etc., of the whole
universe He governs the entire creation
according to certain definite laws; which makes
Him the supreme Lord of all the worlds, the
disinterested friend of all beings, the enjoyer
of all sacrifices and other noble acts, the
sustainer of all and all-powerful; by which
He holds the entire universe in a fraction of
His being (X.42) and manifests Himself of
His own free will, age after age, in various
forms for various purposes and while doing
all this remains entirely aloof from all actions,
from the entire creation and from all
transformations, such as birth etc., and which
has been spoken of in IX.5 as His wonderful
power of divine Yoga.
In this way the entire universe is GodГӯs
own creation, and everything subsists in a
fraction of His being. Therefore, whatever
object in the world appears as endowed with
power and has some speciality about it, or
better still the whole creation, should be
regarded as a manifestation of, or the same
as, God; while God himself should be
recognized as the creator and destroyer of the
entire universe, the almighty and universal
lord, the sustainer of all, supremely
compassionate, the disinterested friend and
inner controller of all. This is what is meant
by Г«knowing in reality the supreme glory
and supernatural power of God.Гӯ
The word Г«YogenaГӯ accompanied by
the adjective Г«AvikampenaГӯ qualifying it, stands
for that unflinching and exclusive devotion
to God (vide GвҲӮtГҘ XI.54) which is also
named as Г«undivided devotionГӯ in XIII.10,
and as Г«the Yoga of exclusive devotionГӯ in
XIV.26, which has been referred to in VII.1
under the name of Г«YogaГӯ, and the character
of which has been discussed in verses 13, 14
and 34 of the Chapter IX and in verse 9 of
the present chapter. And realizing God through
such devotion is what is meant by getting
united with, or established in God.
He who knows in reality this supreme divine glory and supernatural power of
Mine, gets established in Me through unfaltering Devotion; of this there is no doubt. (7)
Having spoken of God-realization through the practice of unfaltering devotion, the
Lord now discusses in two verses the character of this Yoga of Devotion.
вҖўвҖһВўU вҖҡп¬ӮВёSГҝ В¬ЛқГ·п¬ӮГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГ»ГҠвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮZ В¬Лқп¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝГ”вҖ“
ГҹГҒГғ в—ҠГ п¬ӮГҠ Г·ВЎГЈГғпЈҝ в—ҠГҠВў вҖҷГҲЕ“ГҠ Г·ГҠп¬ӮвҖҡв—ҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ”Г”H 8H
вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I (the soul of the universe); вҖҡп¬ӮВёSГҝ of all; В¬ЛқГ·п¬ӮвҖ”Г” (am) the source; в—ҠГ»ГҠвҖ” because of Me;

=== PAGE 488 ===

* Chapter X *
487
The whole universe has emanated from
God; hence God is both the material and
efficient cause of the entire creation, and
therefore the best of all. To recognize this
fact is to know that He is the source of all
creation.
The wheel of this creation is revolving
through GodГӯs own power of Yoga; it is
through His ruling power that the sun, moon
stars and planets like the earth are regularly
coursing within their respective orbits; it is
under His direction that all living beings are
working out their own destiny after being
born in the higher or lower order of creation
according to their good or evil actions. In this
way to recognize God as the ruler and director
of all is to know that everything in the world
moves becuase of God.
The word Г«BudhГҘВЁГӯ, qualified by the
adjective Г«BhГҘvasamanvitГҘВЁГӯ, stands for those
enlightened devotees who are full of exclusive
love for God, have unflinching faith in Him
and are solely devoted to Him, and who
have full knowledge of His virtues and glory.
Thus recognizing God as the creator,
destroyer and director of the entire universe,
he who constantly remembers and embraces
the Lord through the mind, intellect and
senses, with utmost faith and love, as described
in the following verse, is said to worship
Him according to the spirit of the present
verse.
вҖҡп¬ӮВёв—ҠЛңГ” everything (in the world); В¬Лқп¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝГ” moves; ГҹГҒГғ thus; в—ҠГ п¬ӮГҠ knowing; Г·ВЎГЈГғпЈҝ (constantly)
worship; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me (the supreme Deity); вҖҷГҲЕ“ГҠвҖ” the wise; Г·ГҠп¬ӮвҖҡв—ҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ” full of devotion.
I am the source of all creation and everything in the world moves because of Me;
knowing thus, the wise, full of devotion, constantly worship Me.                    (8)
в—ҠГҒГ¬ГҠГ»ГҠГҠ в—ҠeГғВ¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠ вҖҷГҠпЈҝЕ“ГҝГЈГғвҖ” В¬вҒ„USВ¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҲ‘В§Г•ГҝГЈГғp в—ҠГҠВў ГҒЕёГ ГҝВў ГғГҲcГҝГҒГЈГғ Гё вҒ„Uв—ҠГҒГЈГғ ГёГ”H 9H
в—ҠГҒГ¬ГҠГ»ГҠГҠвҖ”Г” those who keep their mind fixed on Me; в—ҠЕ’ЛңГ”ВӘГғВ¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠвҖ” those who have surrendered
their lives to Me; вҖҷГҠпЈҝЕ“ГҝГЈГғвҖ”Г” В¬вҒ„USВ¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛң enlightening one another (about My glories); вҲ‘В§Г•ГҝГЈГғвҖ”
conversing; Гё and; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; ГҒЕёГ Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” ever; ГғГҲcГҝГҒГЈГғ remain contented; Гё and; вҒ„Uв—ҠГҒГЈГғ take delight (in
Me); Гё and.
With their mind fixed on Me, and their lives surrendered to Me, conversing and
enlightening one another about My glories, My devotees ever remain contented and
take delight in Me.
 (9)
never forget God even for a moment.
And the word Г«MadgataprГҘЖ’ГҘВЁГӯ has been
used with reference to those who live and
breathe solely and entirely for God and whose
senses also function for His sake alone; to
whom even a momentГӯs separation from God
is unbearable, who eat and drink, walk and
move, sleep and keep awake, and carry on
all other activities for His sake alone, and
have no personal interest in those activities.
Loving and faithful devotees of God
fondly indulge in discussing with, and bringing
The word Г«MaccittГҘВЁГӯ refers to those
devotees, who, knowing God as their supreme
lover and greatest friend, nay, their nearest
and dearest one and highest goal, have their
mind exclusively fixed on Him (VIII.14; IX.22);
who have no attraction, attachment or love
for anything else than God; who are ever
engrossed in the thought of His name, virtues,
glory, sports and being; and who, even while
acting in accordance with the scriptural
injunctions and performing ordinary functions
of the body, much less at the time of meditation,

=== PAGE 489 ===

488
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
home to, one another the virtues, glory, truth,
sports and mysteries of God on the basis of
their personal experiences and arguing their
case with great skill. This is what is meant by
enlightening one another about the greatness
of God.
Reciting and chanting GodГӯs names,
virtues, glory, stories and character and
popularizing them through sermons and
discourses and offering praises to God etc.,
are all included in speaking of God.
Feeling supreme gratification in doing
all this is what is meant by Г«ever remaining
contented.Гӯ Hearing, reflecting on, chanting
and reciting the names, virtues, glory,
stories and character etc., of God are solely
responsible for the peace, joy and gratification
enjoyed by the devotee who remains ever
contented as mentioned above. Worldly objects
have nothing to do with his joy and
gratification.
Duly hearing, reflecting on and chanting
the names, virtues, glory, stories, character,
truth and mysteries of God, and doing
everything according to His liking, behest
and direction for the sole object of developing
love for Him, such a devotee ever visualizes
Him as actually present before his eyes, and
constantly enjoys His sight and touch, chats
with Him and carries on various other sports
with Him. This is what is meant by ever
taking delight in God.
The Lord now tells us in the next two verses how He rewards the devotees who adore
Him in the above manner.
ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠВў вҖҡГғГғГҝГҲQВ§ГҠЕёГҠВў Г·ВЎГғГҠВў В¬ЛқГӢГҒГғВ¬ГҚп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
Е’Е’ГҠГҒв—Ҡ вҖҷГҲГҒhГҝГҠпЈҝВӘВў ГғВў ГҝпЈҝЕё в—ҠГҠв—ҠГҲВ¬ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ ГғпЈҝГ”H 10H
ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” On those; вҖҡГғГғГҝГҲQВ§ГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” ever united (through devotion with Me); Г·ВЎГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” worshipping
(Me); В¬ЛқГӢГҒГғВ¬ГҚп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” with love; Е’Е’ГҠГҒв—Ҡ I confer; вҖҷГҲГҒhГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ” Yoga of wisdom; Гғв—ҠЛңГ” what; ГҝпЈҝЕё by which;
в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; В©UВ¬ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ come to; ГғпЈҝ they.
On those ever united through devotion with Me and worshipping Me with love,
I confer that Yoga of wisdom by which they come to Me.
 (10)
ramanti caГӯ is succinctly expressed in
Г«PrвҲӮtipВөurvakam BhajatГҘm. The intention is to
convey that the devotees referred to in the
preceding verse, far from worshipping God
out of any desire for enjoyment, constantly
adore Him in the manner stated in the preceding
verse, disinterestedly and with exclusive
love, without seeking any return for their
devotion.*
The Lord infuses into the mind of His
The demonstrative pronoun Г«TeВ¶ГҘmГӯ
stands for the loving and disinterested devotees
of God referred to in the preceding two
verses as Г«BudhГҘВЁГӯ and Г«MaccittГҘВЁГӯ etc.
Similarly, the adjective Г«SatatayuktГҘnГҘmГӯ
represents the aggregate of all the qualifications
mentioned in the preceding verse such as
Г«MaccittГҘВЁГӯ Г«MadgataprГҘЖ’ГҘВЁГӯ, Г«Parasparam
BodhayantaВЁГӯ and Г«MГҘm KathayantaВЁГӯ. Again,
the idea conveyed by the words Г«TuВ¶yanti ca
*
A devotee of this type says in the BhГҘgavata:Гі
Её ЕёГҠвҲ‘В§В¬ГҺDГ”ВўU Её в—ҠвҖһпЈҝUГЈВәЛқГҒЕ“cГЎГҝВў Её вҖҡГҠп¬ӮВёГ·ГҠГ’в—ҠВў Её вҒ„UвҖҡГҠГҒЕ“В¬Г Гҝв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
Её ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҒвҖҡhГӢвҒ„UВ¬ГҲЕёГ·Вёп¬ӮВў п¬ӮГҠ вҖҡв—ҠTвҖҡ Г п¬ӮГҠ ГҒп¬ӮвҒ„UвҖһUЖ’Гҝ вҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUЛҮГҠпЈҝH
(VI.xi.25)
       (Next Page)

=== PAGE 490 ===

* Chapter X *
489
devotees the capacity to grasp correctly the
truth relating to the absolute, formless Divinity
along with the secret of Its glory and greatness,
as also the truth relating to His qualified aspect
with and without form along with His sports,
mysteries, greatness and glory etc. This is what
is meant by Г«conferring the Yoga of wisdomГӯ.
It is this Buddhiyoga which has been spoken
of in Chapters VII and IX above as Г«JВӨГҘna
coupled with VijВӨГҘnaГӯ; and direct realization
of God through this Yoga of wisdom is what
is meant by attaining Him.
ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲвҲ‘В§ГӘВ¬ГҠГ•Вёв—ҠвҖһUв—ҠГҙГҠГҠЕёВЎВў 
Гғв—ҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ЕёГҠвүҘГҠГҝГҠГӘГҝГҠГ в—ҠГ·ГҠп¬ӮSГ•ГҠпЈҝ ГҙГҠГҠЕёЕ’ГӢВ¬пЈҝЕё Г·ГҠSп¬ӮГғГҠГ”H 11H
ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” in order to shower; вҲһп¬ӮГ” Myself; вҖўЕёГҲвҲ‘В§ГӘВ¬ГҠГ•Вёв—ҠЛңГ” My grace on them; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; вҖўГҙГҠГҠЕёВЎв—ҠЛңГ” born
of ignorance; Гғв—ҠвҖ”Г” the darkness; ЕёГҠвүҘГҠГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ dispel; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГ·ГҠп¬ӮSГ•вҖ” dwelling in their heart; ГҙГҠГҠЕёЕ’ГӢВ¬пЈҝЕё
Г·ГҠSп¬ӮГғГҠ by the shining lamp of wisdom.
In order to shower My grace on them, I, dwelling in their heart, dispel their
darkness born of ignorance by the shining lamp of wisdom.                            (11)
The word Г«JВӨГҘnadвҲӮpenaГӯ, with the
adjective Г«BhГҘsvatГҘГӯ qualifying it, signifies
that transcendent wisdom, free from the faults
of doubt and error etc., which has been
spoken of as Г«BuddhiyogaГӯ or the Yoga of
wisdom in the preceding verse, and as Г«JВӨГҘna
coupled with VijВӨГҘnaГӯ in Chapters VII and
IX, and whereby one is able to know full
well the truth relating to the absolute, formless
Divinity along with Its grandeur and glory,
as well as that relating  to the qualified aspect
of God with and without form along with
His sports, mysteries, glory and greatness
etc., and to dispel the darkness of ignorance
through such wisdom is to tear away from
the heart of the devotee the veil of ignorance
which obstructs the knowledge of Truth.
As a matter of fact, the light of wisdom
dispels the darkness of ignorance and brings
God-realization at the same time. If, however,
some sequence is maintained between the two
processes, it should be understood that the
removal of ignorance takes place earlier and
is immediately followed by God-realization.
By the statement that the Lord Himself
dispels the darkness of ignorance of the
devotee, He seeks to convey that the devotee
need not undertake any other SГҘdhanГҘ for
the purpose. The object is achieved through
the mercy of God alone.
The word Г«TamaВЁГӯ qualified by the
adjective Г«AjВӨГҘnajamГӯ, stands for the veiling
power of ignorance that has existed from time
without beginning, and due to which man fails
to realize the virtues, glory and character of
God. By the statement Г¬dwelling in the heart I
dispel their ignoranceГ® the Lord reveals the
glory of devotion and exculpates Himself from
the charge of partiality. The Lord thereby seeks
to convey that He constantly resides in the
heart of all as their Inner Controller, and yet
people do not feel His presence within their
heart; that is why He fails to dispel the ignorance
of their heart. His loving devotees, however,
as indicated in the preceding verse, constantly
see Him as if actually present in their heart; it
is therefore that He easily dispels the darkness
of their ignorance.
Г¬O all-virtuous Lord ! without Thee I seek neither abode in the uppermost heaven nor the position
of BrahmГҘ (the Creator), neither sovereignty over the entire globe nor dominion over the nether worlds,
neither the achievements of Yoga nor even lasting freedom from rebirth.Г®

=== PAGE 491 ===

490
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
By the first half of the twelfth verse Arjuna
intends to say that the absolute known as the
Г«transcendent EternalГӯ is no other than вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a; that His supreme Abode too, being
the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and
Bliss, divine in character and hence identical
with God, is the same as вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a; and that
His names, virtues, glory, stories and character,
when heard, reflected on and chanted, are
supremely purifying in every way.
The Lord discussed in Chapter VII the subject which He introduced in the very opening
verse of that chapter as leading to a knowledge of His integral Self and which He undertook
in the next verse to expound under the name of Г«JВӨГҘna, and VijВӨГҘnaГӯ, or the knowledge of
the NirguЖ’a and SaguЖ’a aspect of God. Thereafter in Chapter VIII, He threw further light
on the same subject even while answering the seven questions of Arjuna. But since His
method of exposition was different in that chapter, He undertook once more at the beginning
of Chapter IX to discuss the subject of JВӨГҘna and VijВӨГҘna and expounded it at full length
in all its details. Again, in order to elucidate the subject further and in a different language,
the Lord undertook in the opening verse of Chapter X to discuss the subject again; and
having devoted the next five verses to a description of His Yogic power and glories, He
declared in the seventh that knowledge of the latter leads to His own realization through
unfaltering devotion. Thereafter, describing in the eighth and the ninth the mental attitude
and conduct of those engaged in worshipping Him through the discipline of Bhakti, the Lord
wound up the topic by pointing out in the tenth and eleventh the fruit of such worship, viz.,
the attainment of the Yoga of wisdom, which dispels the darkenss of ignorance and leads
to God-realization, thereupon realizing that knowledge of the Yogic power and glories of
God are exceedingly helpful in God-realization, Arjuna now devotes the next seven verses
to praises of the Lord, praying in the end that the Lord may be pleased to describe in detail
His own Yogic power and glories.
вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
В¬вҒ„ВўU вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” В¬вҒ„ВўU Е“ГҠв—Ҡ В¬ГҒп¬ӮГІГҠВў В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠВў Г·п¬ӮГҠЕёГ”ЛңГ”вҖ“
В¬ГҲLВ§В·Вў вүҘГҠГҠEГғВў ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝв—ҠГҠГҒЕ’Е’пЈҝп¬Ӯв—ҠВЎВў ГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҲв—ҠЛңГ”H 12H
вҖўГҠвҖһГҲUSГ п¬ӮГҠв—ҠГҺВ·ГҝвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҢВ·ЕёГҠВёвҒ„UЕ’SГғГ•ГҠГ”вҖ“
вҖўГҒвҖҡГғГҠпЈҝ Е’пЈҝп¬ӮвҲӮUГҠпЈҝ вҲҡГҝГҠвҖҡвҖ” Sп¬ӮГҝВў ГёГ’п¬Ӯ вҖҷЛқп¬ӮГӢГҒВ· в—ҠпЈҝГ”H 13H
В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” the transcendent Eternal; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” Е“ГҠв—ҠГ” the supreme abode; В¬ГҒп¬ӮГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” В¬вҒ„Uв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” (and) the
greatest purifier; Г·п¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” You; В¬ГҲLВ§В·в—ҠЛңГ” вүҘГҠГҠEГғв—ҠЛңГ” ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝв—ҠЛңГ” the eternal divine PuruВ¶a; вҖўГҠГҒЕ’Е’пЈҝп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” the primal
Deity; вҖўВЎв—ҠЛңГ” unborn; ГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҲв—ҠЛңГ” all-pervading; вҖўГҠвҖһГҲUвҖ” speak of; Г п¬ӮГҠв—ҠЛңГ” You; ВҙВ§В·ГҝвҖ” the seers; вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёГ” all;
Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҢВ·вҖ” ЕёГҠвҒ„UЕ’вҖ” the celestial sage NГҘrada; ГғГ•ГҠ even so; вҖўГҒвҖҡГғвҖ” Е’пЈҝп¬ӮвҲӮUвҖ” the sages Asita and
Devala; вҲҡГҝГҠвҖҡвҖ” the great sage VyГҘsa; Sп¬ӮГҝв—ҠЛңГ” Yourself; Гё and; вҲһп¬Ӯ too; вҖҷЛқп¬ӮГӢГҒВ· proclaim;
в—ҠпЈҝ to Me.
Arjuna said: You are the transcendent Eternal, the supreme Abode and the greatest
purifier; all the seers speak of You as the eternal divine PuruВ¶a, the primal Deity,
unborn and all-pervading. Likewise speak the celestial sage NГҘrada, the sages Asita
and Devala and the great sage VyГҘsa; and Yourself too proclaim this to me.    (12,13)

=== PAGE 492 ===

* Chapter X *
491
The word Г«В°RВ¶ayaВЁГӯ*, qualified by the
adjective Г«SarveГӯ, stands for В°RВ¶is like
MГҘrkaЖ’Е’eya, AвҲҶgirГҘ and so on, whom
Arjuna mentions as the authority for his
statement.вҖ 
The following are the marks of a DevarВ¶i
or celestial sage:Гі
Г¬Seers living in the celestial regions
should be known as the blessed DevarВ¶is.
Besides them, there are other DevarВ¶is as
well who are distinguished by their knowledge
of the past, present and future and strict
adherence to truth. In other words, celestials,
BrГҘhmaЖ’as, and members of the royal class
who are self-illumined and have established
contact with the world of their own free will,
who are famed throughout the world for their
austerity, who have imparted spiritual
knowledge to devotees (like PrahlГҘda) even
in their motherГӯs womb, who are the revealers
of Mantras or sacred formulas, who by virtue
of their supernatural powers (Siddhis) have
unrestricted access everywhere, and are ever
surrounded by В°RВ¶is, are all DevarВ¶is.вҖЎГ® (VГҘyu-
PurГҘЖ’a LXI.88,90,91,92)
There are many DevarВ¶is, the names of
some of whom are given below:Гі
Е’пЈҝп¬ӮВ·ГӢВё 
Е“в—ҠВёВ¬ГҲГІГҠГҠГ’ 
ГғГҲ 
ЕёвҒ„UЕёГҠвҒ„UГҠГҝГЎГҠГҠп¬ӮГҲГ·ГҠГ’вҖ“
п¬ӮГҠвҲӮUГҒПҖГҖГҝГҠвҖ” вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГғГҠпЈҝвҖ” В¬ГҲГІГҠГҠвҖ” вҲ‘В§Е’Вёв—ҠвҖ” В¬ГҲвҲӮUвҖһUSГҝ ГғГҲH
В¬п¬ӮВёГғГҠпЈҝ 
ЕёГҠвҒ„UЕ’pГ’п¬Ӯ 
вҲ‘В§вүҘГҝВ¬SГҝГҠГ в—ҠВЎГҠп¬ӮГҲГ·ГҠГ’вҖ“
ВҙВ§В·ГҒГЈГғ Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” ГҝSв—ҠГҠГ»ГҠпЈҝ ГғSв—ҠГҠgпЈҝп¬ӮВ·ВёГҝвҖ” Sв—ҠГҺГғГҠвҖ”H
(VГҘyu-PurГҘЖ’a LX.83Гі85)
*
ВҙВ§В·ГӢГ ГҝпЈҝВ· ВӘГғГҠГ’ Е“ГҠГғГҲвҖ” ГјГҠГҲГғГҠГ’ вҖҡГ ГҝпЈҝ ГғВ¬SГҝГ• вҖ“ вҲһГғГғЛңГ” вҖҡВўГҒЕёГҝГғВў ГҝГҒSв—ҠЕёЛңГ” вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГЎГҠГҠ вҖҡ ВҙВ§ГҒВ·вҖ” Sв—ҠГҺГғвҖ”H
ВӘГ ГҝГ•ГҠВёЕ’ГҺВ·ГғпЈҝЕ“ГҠВёГғГҠпЈҝЕёГҠВёв—ҠГҒЕёп¬ӮВёГҺГҒГ»ГҠвҒ„UГҠГҒЕ’ГғвҖ”
вҖ“ ГҝSв—ҠГҠЕ’пЈҝВ· 
Sп¬ӮГҝГӘГ·ГҚГғSГғSв—ҠГҠГ¬ГҠ 
ВҙВ§ГҒВ·ГғГҠ 
Sв—ҠГҺГғГҠH
(VГҘyu-PurГҘЖ’a LIX. 79.81)
Г¬The root Г«В°RВ¶Гӯ is used in the sense of motion, (Knowledge), hearing truth and austerity. BrahmГҘ,
the Creator, has given the title of Г«В°RВ¶iГӯ to him who definitely combines in himself all these virtues. The
word is derived from the root Г«В°RВ¶Гӯ signifying motion, and the name of В§RВ¶i has been given to these seers
because they were born of themselves in the beginning of creation.Г®
вҖ 
Describing the glory of BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a to Duryodhana, the patriarch BhвҲӮВ¶ma, the great
embodiment of truth and virtue, said:Гі
Г¬BhagavГҘn VГҘsudeva (the son of Vasudeva) is the object of worship of all gods and the best of
all beings. He is virtue personified and the knower of the secret of Dharma, the bestower of boons and
the satisfier of all desires; He is the doer, the deed and the Lord Himself. The past, present and future,
the morning and evening twilights, the four quarters, the heaven and all laws are the creations of this
very Lord. It is this high-souled and imperishable Lord who created the В°RВ¶is, austerity and the PrajГҘpatis,
who have brought forth the entire creation. He is the Creator of SaвҲҶkarВ¶aЖ’a himself, the eldest of all creation.
вҖәeВ¶a (the serpent-god), popularly known as Г«AnantaГӯ (the eternal being), who carries the weight of the
entire globe including the mountains on his head, also emanated from Him. It is He who takes the form
of the divine Boar, the Man-Lion, and the divine Dwarf; He is the father and mother of all. There is
none superior to Him. Г«KeвҖ№avaГӯ as He is called, He is the embodiment of supreme lustre and the grandfather
of all beings; the seers call Him HГҰВ¶ikeвҖ№a. He is the teacher, the forefather and the preceptor. He who
wins the favour of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a attains the imperishable abode. He who, when confronted with danger, seeks
refuge in вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and offers praises to Him, attains supreme happiness.Г®
ГҝпЈҝ Гё вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠВў В¬ЛқВ¬lГЈГғпЈҝ ГғпЈҝ Её в—ҠГҲsГ”ГҒГЈГғ в—ҠГҠЕёп¬ӮГҠвҖ”вҖ“ Г·ГҝпЈҝ в—ҠвҖһUГҒГғ в—ҠВӘAГҠВўp В¬ГҠГҒГғ ГҒЕёГ ГҝВў ВЎЕёГҠЕ’ВёЕёвҖ”вҖ“
(MahГҘbhГҘrata, BhвҲӮВ¶ma-Parva, LXVII.24)
Г¬Those who take refuge in вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a never get deluded. вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a ever protects those who are involved
in great danger.Г®
вҖЎ
Е’пЈҝп¬ӮвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§В¬ЛқГҒГғDГ”UГҠp ГҙГҠпЈҝГҝГҠ Е’пЈҝп¬ӮВ·ВёГҝвҖ” вүҘГҠГҲГ·ГҠвҖ”H
Е’пЈҝп¬ӮВ·ВёГҝSГғГ•ГҠГЈГҝпЈҝ 
Гё 
ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠВў 
п¬ӮЛҮГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ
вҲӮUЛҮГҠГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” вҖ“ Г·ГҚГғГ·вҲҡГҝГ·п¬ӮГ–ГҙГҠГҠЕёВў 
вҖҡГ ГҝГҠГҒГ·вҲҡГҝГҠNUГғВў 
ГғГ•ГҠH
вҖҡГӘвҖҷГҲhГҠSГғГҲ Sп¬ӮГҝВў ГҝпЈҝ ГғГҲ вҖҡГӘвҖҷhГҠ ГҝпЈҝ Гё п¬ӮГ’ Sп¬ӮГҝв—ҠЛңГ” вҖ“ ГғВ¬вҖҡпЈҝвҖһU В¬ЛқГҒвҖҡhГҠ ГҝпЈҝ ВӘГ·пЈҝВё ГҝГ’p В¬ЛқГЎГҠГҠпЈҝГҒЕ’Гғв—ҠЛңГ”H
в—ҠГЈГІГҠвҲҡГҝГҠвҖһUГҠГҒвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ 
ГҝпЈҝ 
Гё 
вҲһпЈҝEГҝГҠВёГғЛңГ” 
вҖҡп¬ӮВёВӘГҠp 
ГҝпЈҝвҖ“ ГҹГ ГҝпЈҝГғпЈҝ ВҙВ§ГҒВ·ГҒГ·ГҝВёГҲQВ§ГҠ Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҒmВЎЕёГҺВ¬ГҠSГғГҲ ГҝпЈҝH

=== PAGE 493 ===

492
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Г¬The two sons of Dharma, Nara and
NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a, KratuГӯs sons, collectively known
as the VГҘlakhilyas, Kardama, son of Pulaha,
Parvata, NГҘrada and the two sons of KaвҖ№yapa,
Asita and Vatsara, because they can exercise
control even over the celestials, are called
DevarВ¶is.Г®
DevarВ¶i NГҘrada, Asita, Devala and VyГҘsa
Гіall these great В°RВ¶is know of the real truth
about God, and are great lovers and devotees
of God, and possessed of supreme wisdom.*
They are regarded as highly respected
and truthful sages of their time; that is why
their names have been specially mentioned in
*
Though there have been more than one person bearing the name of NГҘrada, history records no
two DevarВ¶is of this name. The scriptures speak of him as the Г«mindГӯ of God. Possessing supreme knowledge
of the divine Truth and supreme love for God, he is a celibate of the order known as ВӘUrdhvaretГҘs (so-
called because their generative fluid or creative energy has attained an upward flow). He is the foremost
teacher of Bhakti or Devotion. The world owes a great deal to him. It was he who inspired great devotees
like PrahlГҘda, Dhruva and AmbarвҲӮВ¶a, and showed them the way to Bhakti; and the world further vowes
to him two incomparable gems of Indian literature, viz., вҖәrвҲӮmad-BhГҘgavata and the RГҘmГҘyaЖ’a of VГҘlmвҲӮki.
It was he who imparted instruction even to a man of great spiritual wisdom like вҖәrвҲӮ вҖәukadeva.
In his previous incarnation, NГҘrada was the son of a maid-servant who used to scour the unclean
utensils of great sages. When he was only five years of age, His mother died of an accident. Thus freed
from all worldly ties, he left all human habitation and retired into the woods, where he sat under the
foot of a big tree and began to meditate on God. In the course of this meditation, his thoughts got focussed
on one point and the Lord revealed Himself in his heart. But having blessed him with a glimpse of His
soul-enchanting beauty for a short while, He suddenly disappeared from his view. Feeling greatly disturbed
at His sudden disappearance, he concentrated his mind once more and began to meditate on the Lord,
but failed to obtain His vision any more. Meanwhile he heard an ethereal voice say, Г¬O child, you will
not be blessed with My vision any more in your present incarnation. Having cast off this mortal coil
you will attain Me as one of My own associates.Г® These words of the Lord brought him great consolation,
and he moved about in the world, free from attachment, awaiting the last moment. At the appointed hour
he left physical body, and in the next Kalpa he assumed a divine form and was reborn from the mind
of BrahmГҘ. Since then, observing a vow of unbroken celibacy, he has been singing the glories of the
Lord to the accompaniment of his lute (BhГҘgavata I.vi).
Chapter V of MahГҘbhГҘrata, SabhГҘ-Parva, contains the following account of DevarВ¶i NГҘrada:Гі
Г¬DevarВ¶i NГҘrada knows the real meaning of the Vedas and UpaniВ¶ads, is adored by the celestials,
has specialized in the branch of literature known as the ItihГҘsas and PurГҘЖ’as, possesses knowledge of
the events of the previous Kalpas, knows the essence of virtue and justice and is the best scholar of вҖәikВ¶ГҘ
(phonetics), Kalpa (the science of ritual), VyГҘkaraЖ’a (grammar), Г…yurveda (the science of medicine) and
other branches. Nay, he is an expert in reconciling scriptural injunctions of a contradictory nature, a
powerful orator, well-versed in politics, possessed of great intelligence, memory and wisdom, a poet, clever
in distinguishing good from evil, capable of ascertaining the reality of things by employing the various
methods of reasoning, proficient in discovering the beauties and fallacies of syllogistic reasoning and
capable of meeting the objections of scholars like BГҰhaspati. He knows in reality the truth about Dharma
(religious merit), Artha (worldly riches), KГҘma (enjoyment) and MokВ¶a (liberation), is capable of directly
perceiving by his Yogic power every incident taking place in this world as well as in the higher and
lower worlds, clever in distinguishing the paths of Knowledge and Action, expert in giving lessons to
the gods and demons on dispassion, a master statesman proficient in the Knowledge of war and peace,
an adept in determining what should be done and what should not be done, incomparable in the
employment of the six expedients of royal policy, well-versed in all the scriptures, and well-versed in
the science of warfare, a master of music, a great devotee of God, a repository of all learning and virtues,
the very prop of morality and the universal friend, and has access everywhere.Г® The UpaniВ¶ads, PurГҘЖ’as
and ItihГҘsas are replete with his sacred stories.
*
*
*

=== PAGE 494 ===

* Chapter X *
493
the verse. And, moreover, they are ever
engaged in singing the praises of God. The
chief mission of their life is to propagate the
glory of God. The MahГҘbhГҘrata too contains
several references to these and many other В°RВ¶is
and MaharВ¶is singing the glories of God. The
patriarch BhвҲӮВ¶ma recapitulates in the BhвҲӮВ¶ma-
Parva what one or other of those sages spoke
with reference to BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a.*
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a has already referred to His
own incomparable glory in IV.6 to 9; V.29;
VII.7 to 12; IX.4 to 11, and 16 to 19; and
X.2, 3, 8. This is what Arjuna has in mind
when he says that вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a is revealing His
own glory to him. Arjuna is, therefore,
convinced that what he says in these verses
about вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a is, quite correct, and he has
no doubt about it.
The sages Asita and Devala are related as father and son. The KВөurma-PurГҘЖ’a contains the following
reference to them:Гі
вҲһГғГҠЕёГҲГ В¬ГҠl  В¬ГҲГІГҠГҠВўSГғГҲ 
В¬ЛқВЎГҠвҖҡГЈГғГҠЕёвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠГғЛңГ” вҖ“ вҲ‘В§вүҘГҝВ¬вҖ” В¬ГҲГІГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠSГғГҲ ГёГёГҠвҒ„U вҖҡГҲв—ҠвҖһUГ»ГҠВ¬вҖ”H
ГғSГҝГ’п¬ӮВў  ГғВ¬ГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГ ГҝГ•Z В¬ЛқГҠЕ’ГҲГ·ГҚВёГғГҠГ’ 
вҖҡГҲГғГҠГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҠГ’ вҖ“ п¬ӮГ вҖҡвҒ„UpГҠГҒвҖҡГғpГ’п¬Ӯ 
ГғГҠп¬ӮГҲГ·ГҠГ’ 
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”п¬ӮГҠГҒЕ’ЕёГҠГ’H
вҖўГҒвҖҡГғSГҝГ’вҲ‘В§В¬ГЎГҠГҠВёГҝГҠВў 
вҖҷЛқГҒrГҠГ”DГ”UвҖ” 
вҖҡв—ҠВ¬lГғ вҖ“ ЕёГҠв—ҠAГҠ п¬ӮГ’ Е’пЈҝп¬ӮвҲӮUвҖ” В¬ГҲГІГҠГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠГёГҠГҝГҠпЈҝВё в—ҠвҖһUГҠГғВ¬ГҠвҖ”H
(KВөurma-PurГҘЖ’a XIX.1,2,5)
Г¬Having begotten these sons with the object of multiplying creation, the sage KaвҖ№yapa began once
more to practise hard penance with the intention of getting more sons. As the result of his severe penance
he got two more sons. Vatsara and Asita by name. Both of them possessed divine knowledge and were
teachers of Veda. Asita begot through his wife, EkaparЖ’ГҘ, a son, Devala by name, who was well-versed
in the Vedas, a teacher of Yoga and a great ascetic.Г®
Asita and Devala are both seers of the В°Rgveda. В°RВ¶i Devala attained perfection through the worship
of Lord вҖәiva. Both these seers are ancient and highly accomplished В°RВ¶is. PratyВөuВ¶a, one of the eight Vasus,
also had son who was known as RВ¶i Devala (HarivaвүҲвҖ№a, III.44).
*
*
*
The sage VedavyГҘsa is believed to be a part manifestation of God. He was born in an Island (DvвҲӮpa),
which got him the title of Г«DvaipГҘyanaГӯ. On account of his dark complexion he was known as Г«KГҰВ¶Ж’a
DvaipГҘyanaГӯ; and because he arranged the Vedas, he was called Г«VedavyГҘsaГӯ. He is the son of the great
sage ParГҘвҖ№ara. His motherГӯs name was SatyavatвҲӮ. As soon as he was born he retired into the woods with
the intention of practising austerities. He has full knowledge of the reality about God and is a peerless
poet. He is a boundless and fathomless ocean of knowledge, the farthest limit of erudition and the highest
perfection of poetry. The unfolding of VyГҘsaГӯs heart and speech constitute the very lustre and foundation
of worldГӯs knowledge.
The BrahmasВөutras were written by BhagavГҘn VyГҘsa himself. He was, again, the author of such a
wonderful scripture as the MahГҘbhГҘrata. The eighteen principal PurГҘЖ’as and many more subsidiary PurГҘЖ’as
were compiled by him. The history of India bears testimony to this fact. It is from the gift of wisdom
bequeathed by VyГҘsa that the whole world is seeking light today.
Every DvГҘpara has its own VyГҘsa for arranging the Vedas. The present VyГҘsa, KГҰВ¶Ж’a DvaipГҘyana,
son of ParГҘвҖ№ara is the 28th VedavyГҘsa of the current or Vaivasvata Manvantara. He taught В°Rgveda to
his principal disciple Paila, Yajurveda to VaiвҖ№ampГҘyana, SГҘmaveda to Jaimini and Atharvaveda to Sumantu,
and further taught the ItihГҘsas and PurГҘЖ’as to the great and highly talented sage RomaharВ¶aЖ’a, who was
a SВөuta (charioteer) by birth.
*  DevarВ¶i NГҘrada said, Г¬BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a is the Creator of all the worlds, omniscient and the
supreme Lord of all deities and SГҘdhyas.Г®
The sage MГҘrkaЖ’Е’eya said, Г¬вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a is the sacrifice of sacrifices and the penance of penances,
and embodies in Himself the past, present and future.Г®
BhГҰgu said, Г¬He is the god of gods and the most ancient ViВ¶Ж’u.Г®
VyГҘsa said, Г¬He confers Indrahood on Indra, and is the Supreme Deity of all deities.Г®
AвҲҶgirГҘ said, Г¬He is the Creator of all beings.Г®

=== PAGE 495 ===

494
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The monosyllable word Г«KaГӯ represents
BrahmГҘ (the Creator), Г«AГӯ signifies ViВ¶Ж’u
(the Protector) and Г«вҲ«вҖ№aГӯ is a synonym of вҖәiva
(Destroyer of the universe). KeвҖ№ava, therefore,
is the Deity who represents all these three
aspects of God. Addressing вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a as
Г«KeвҖ№avaГӯ in this verse, Arjuna, therefore,
intends to convey that unquestionably He is
the Supreme Lord responsible for the creation,
sustenance and destruction of the whole
universe.
The pronouns Г«EtatГӯ and Г«YatГӯ, used in
this verse, point to all that has been stated by
the Lord from the beginning of Chapter VII
to verse 11 of the present Chapter regarding
his own virtues, glory, character, greatness
mystery and supernatural powers etc., and
which constitutes a direct admission on His
part of His divinity. And recognizing вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
as God Himself, the integral Brahma, the
вҖҡп¬ӮВёв—ҠпЈҝГғЕ’ГҺГғВў в—ҠГЈГҝпЈҝ ГҝГЈв—ҠГҠВў п¬ӮЕ’ГҒвҖҡ вҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠп¬ӮГ”вҖ“
Её ГҒвҖһU ГғпЈҝ Г·ВӘп¬ӮГЈвҲҡГҝГҒQВўВ§ ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҲЕ’пЈҝВёп¬ӮГҠ Её Е’ГҠЕёп¬ӮГҠвҖ”Г”H 14H
вҖҡп¬ӮВёв—ҠЛңГ” вҲһГғГғЛңГ” all that; ВҙВ§Гғв—ҠЛңГ” (as) true; в—ҠГЈГҝпЈҝ I believe; ГҝГғЛңГ” what; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; п¬ӮЕ’ГҒвҖҡ You tell; вҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠп¬Ӯ
O KГҰВ¶Ж’a; Её nor; ГҒвҖһUГ” indeed; ГғпЈҝ Your; Г·ВӘп¬ӮЕёЛңГ” O Lord; вҲҡГҝГҒQВ§в—ҠЛңГ” manifestations (through sport); ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҲвҖ”
know; Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠвҖ” gods; Её neither; Е’ГҠЕёп¬ӮГҠвҖ” demons.
KГҰВ¶Ж’a, I believe as true all that You tell me. Lord, neither demons nor gods are
aware of Your manifestations through sport (lвҲӮlГҘ).                                           (14)
SanatkumГҘra and others said, Г¬His head pervades the heavens and His arms cover the earth; all the
three worlds are contained in His belly. He is the eternal PuruВ¶a. The SГҘdhaka can know Him only after
attaining purification of the heart. He is considered to be the Best even among seers who are sated through
Self-realization; and He is the ultimate resort even of the lofty-minded royal sages, who never turn their
back on the field of battle (MahГҘ., BhвҲӮВ¶ma., Cap. 68).
In Chapter XII of the MahГҘbhГҘrata, Vana-Parva, the great devotee among women, DraupadвҲӮ, quotes
the following words of a number of sages:Гі
The sages Asita and Devala said, Г¬вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a Himself is the PrajГҘpati (the Lord of creation) during
the primal creation of beings, and is the sole creator of all the worlds.Г®
ParaвҖ№urГҘma said, Г¬He is ViВ¶Ж’u Himself; none can vanquish Him. He is the sacrifice, the sacrificer
and the deity worshipped through sacrifice.Г®
NГҘrada said, Г¬He is the supreme Lord of all deities known as the SГҘdhyas, as well as of all
blessings.Г®
Г¬Just as a child plays at will with its dolls, so does вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a sport in the company of BrahmГҘ,
вҖәiva, Indra and the other gods.Г®
Besides the above, BhagavГҘn VyГҘsa says in the MahГҘbhГҘrata:Гі
Г¬There is a sacred town in SaurГҘВ¶tГҰa (the modern Kathiawad), named DvГҘrakГҘ, wherein resides
BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, the most ancient and supreme PuruВ¶a.  He is SanГҘtana Dharma personified. Brahmans
well-versed in the Vedas and men who have realized the Self declare high-souled вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a to be SanГҘtana
Dharma itself. He is the most sacred of all sacred objects, the holiest of the holy, and the most auspicious
of all auspicious things. BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, possessed of lotus-like eyes, is the eternal god of all the
gods in the three worlds. He is the imperishable soul and perishable matter, the conscious self, the supreme
Lord and one endowed with a form which is beyond human conception.Г® (MahГҘ., Vana., 8.24 to 27).
In вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata DevarВ¶i NГҘrada, addressing the pious king YudhiВ¶Вўhira, says, Г¬O king, of all
men you are indeed highly blessed, inasmuch as sages, who lend sanctity to the worlds, frequently visit
your palaces, and the supreme Brahma Himself lives here in the guise of a human being. Indeed, вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
is the supreme Brahma whom sages seek to realize as the bliss of absolute repose. He is your beloved
friend, your maternal cousin, the object of your worship, your Guide and teacher. Tell me, then, who can
compare with you in the matter of good luck?Г® (вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata VII.xv.75-76).

=== PAGE 496 ===

* Chapter X *
495
embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss,
the god of gods, the creator and destroyer of
the universe, all-sustaining, all-pervading and
omnipotent, the ruler and inner controller of
all, and not entertaining the least doubt about
the truth of His statements is what is meant
by believing all that He says as true.
The ViВ¶Ж’u-PurГҘЖ’a says:Гі
вҲһпЈҝEГҝВёSГҝ вҖҡв—ҠВӘЛқSГҝ Е“в—ҠВёSГҝ ГҝвүҘГҠвҖҡвҖ” ГҒГјГҠГҝвҖ”вҖ“
ГҙГҠГҠЕёп¬ӮГ’вҒ„UГҠГҮГҝГҝГҠпЈҝpГ’п¬Ӯ В·ГЎГЎГҠГҠВў Г·ВӘ ГҹГғГӢвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠH
(VI.v.74)
Г¬Entire glory, entire virtue, entire renown,
entire prosperity, entire wisdom and total
dispassionГіthese six are collectively known
as Г«BhagaГӯ.Г®
He who combines in Himself all these
virtues is called Г«BhagavГҘnГӯ.
The ViВ¶Ж’u-PurГҘЖ’a further says:Гі
В©UГ В¬ГҒГ»ГҠВў В¬ЛқвҲӮUГҝВў ГёГ’п¬Ӯ Г·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠв—ҠГҠВӘГҒГғВў ВӘГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠ ГҒп¬ӮlГҠв—ҠГҒп¬ӮlГҠВў Гё вҖҡ п¬ӮГҠГ«ГҝГҠпЈҝ Г·ВӘп¬ӮГҠГҒЕёГҒГғH
(VI.v.78)
Г¬He who is aware of the creation and
dissolution of the universe, of the appearance
and disappearance of beings, as well as of
VidyГҘ (wisdom) and AvidyГҘ (nescience),
should be designated as Г«BhagavГҘnГӯ.Г®
By addressing вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a as Г«BhagavГҘnГӯ,
Arjuna means to say that he is God Himself,
the repository of all glory and omniscient.
The word Г«VyaktimГӯ denotes all the
various forms assumed by God by way of
sport from time to time for the creation,
maintenance and destruction of the universe,
for the rehabilitation of virtue, for redeeming
the devotees by blessing them with His sight,
for the protection of gods and destruction of
the demons, and for various other reasons.
By saying that the secret of His manifestation
in various forms is known neither to the
demons nor to the gods, Arjuna intends to
convey that even though the demons are
endowed with the capacity to assume various
forms by dint of their MГҘyГҘ or conjuring
power and the gods are capable of perceiving
supersensuous 
objects, 
yet 
they 
are
unable to perceive the divine character of His
various forms, or to comprehend His divine
power, and art of assuming those forms, the
occasion for such manifestation and the
inwardness of His sports. Much less can
an ordinary mortal expect to know these
things.
Sп¬ӮГҝв—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёВў п¬ӮпЈҝГ Г• Г п¬ӮВў В¬ГҲLВ§cГҠГҠпЈҝГ»ГҠв—ҠвҖ“
Г·ГҚГғГ·ГҠп¬ӮЕё 
Г·ГҚГғпЈҝвүҘГҠ 
Е’пЈҝп¬ӮЕ’пЈҝп¬Ӯ 
ВЎВӘГ В¬ГғпЈҝH 15H
Sп¬ӮГҝв—ҠГ”ЛңГ” вҲһп¬Ӯ Yourself; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠ by Yourself; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” Yourself; п¬ӮпЈҝГ Г• know; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” You; В¬ГҲLВ§В·ГҠпЈҝГ»ГҠв—Ҡ
O supreme PuruВ¶a; Г·ГҚГғГ·ГҠп¬ӮЕё O creator of beings; Г·ГҚГғпЈҝвүҘГҠ O Ruler of all creatures; Е’пЈҝп¬ӮЕ’пЈҝп¬Ӯ O god
of gods; ВЎВӘГ В¬ГғпЈҝ O Lord of the universe.
O Creator of beings, O Ruler of creatures, God of gods, the Lord of the universe,
O supreme PuruВ¶a, You alone know what You are by Yourself.                   (15)
entire creation; His virtues, glory, sports
greatness, and forms etc. are all infinite. Hence
no one else can have full knowledge of His
virtues etc., they are known to Him and Him
alone. And His knowledge of His own Self is
not like the knowledge of an external object
acquired by an individual through his or her
intellect, and with the help of the scriptures etc.
By the vocatives used in this verse for
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, Arjuna seeks to convey that He is
the creator of the whole universe, the controller
and supporter of all, the object of universal
adoration and higher than perishable matter
and the imperishable soul, known as His
Г«AparГҘГӯ and Г«ParГҘГӯ nature respectively.
Again, вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a is the beginning of the

=== PAGE 497 ===

496
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
God being the very embodiment of knowledge,
He knows Himself through Himself. There is
no distinction of knower, knowledge and the
object of knowledge in Him.
п¬ӮQГҲВ§в—ҠвҖһВёUSГҝвүҘГҠпЈҝВ·пЈҝГЎГҠ ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝГҠ sГ”ГҠГ в—ҠГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҚГғГҝвҖ”вҖ“
ГҝГҠГҒГ·ГҢп¬ӮГ·ГҚГҒГғГҒГ·вҲӮUГҠпЈҝВёвҲ‘В§ГҠГҒЕёв—ҠГҠВўSГ п¬ӮВў вҲҡГҝГҠГҘГҝ ГҒГғDГ”UГҒвҖҡH 16H
п¬ӮQГҲВ§в—ҠЛңГ” вҖўвҖһВёUГҒвҖҡ are able to describe; вҖўвүҘГҠпЈҝВ·пЈҝГЎГҠ in full; ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝГҠвҖ” divine; ГҒвҖһU indeed; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҚГғГҝвҖ” Your
glories; ГҝГҠГҒГ·вҖ” ГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҚГҒГғГҒГ·вҖ” by which glories; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠЕёЛңГ” Гҹв—ҠГҠЕёЛңГ” (all) these worlds; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” You (alone);
вҲҡГҝГҠГҘГҝ pervading; ГҒГғDГ”UГҒвҖҡ You stand.
Indeed, You alone can describe in full Your divine glories, whereby You pervade
all these worlds.
(16)
half of this verse. Again, by the latter half of
the verse Arjuna seeks to convey that he
would not be contented with a description of
only those glories which are manifested
in this mortal world alone, but that he should
like to hear a full account of all His glories
by which He stands revealed in various forms
in all the worlds including the celestial
regions.
The word Г«Г…tmavibhВөutayaВЁГӯ qualified
by the adjective Г«DivyГҘВЁГӯ, covers all those
objects or beings in the universe that are
possessed of lustre, strength, learning, glory,
virtue and power. Since all those glories are
GodГӯs own manifestations and because no
one other than He knows them in their entirety,
He alone and no one else can describe them
in full. This is what Arjuna means by the first
вҲ‘В§Г•Вў ГҒп¬ӮlГҠв—ҠвҖһВўU ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘВўSГ п¬ӮГҠВў вҖҡЕ’ГҠ В¬ГҒвҒ„UГҒГёГЈГғГҝЕёЛңГ”вҖ“
вҲ‘пЈҝВ§В·ГҲ вҲ‘пЈҝВ§В·ГҲ Гё Г·ГҠп¬ӮпЈҝВ·ГҲ ГҒГёГЈГ ГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒвҖҡ Г·ВӘп¬ӮГЈв—ҠГҝГҠH 17H
вҲ‘В§Г•в—ҠЛңГ” how; ГҒп¬ӮlГҠв—ҠЛңГ” may know; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёЛңГ” O Master of Yoga; Г Г”п¬ӮГҠв—ҠЛңГ” You; вҖҡЕ’ГҠ ever;
В¬ГҒвҒ„UГҒГёГЈГғГҝЕёЛң meditating on; вҲ‘пЈҝВ§В·ГҲ вҲ‘пЈҝВ§В·ГҲ in what particular; Гё and; Г·ГҠп¬ӮпЈҝВ·ГҲГ” forms; ГҒГёГЈГ ГҝвҖ” вҖўГҒвҖҡ You are
to be meditated upon; Г·ВӘп¬ӮЕёЛңГ” O Lord; в—ҠГҝГҠ by me.
O Master of Yoga, through what process of continuous meditation shall I know
You? And in what particular forms, O Lord, are You to be meditated upon by me? (17)
forming part of this universe of sentient and
insentient beings, should be taken to be His
manifestations and meditated upon as such.
In other words, Arjuna wants to know how
and in what particular forms he should
constantly think of Him so as to be able to
comprehend His virtues, glory, truth and
secrets easily.
Arjuna puts two questions to the Lord
in the present verse. Firstly, he seeks to
know some device whereby he may be
able to practise constant remembrance of the
Lord with faith and love, and may know
Him fully well along with His virtues,
glory and reality. And, secondly, he is
anxious to be told which particular objects,
ГҒп¬ӮSГғвҒ„пЈҝUГЎГҠГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘВў ГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҚГҒГғВў Гё ВЎЕёГҠЕ’ВёЕёГ”вҖ“
Г·ГҚГҝвҖ” вҲ‘В§Г•Гҝ ГғГҺГҒ#ГҢвҖһU oГҺГЎп¬ӮГғГҠпЈҝ ЕёГҠГҒSГғ в—ҠпЈҝЛҳв—ҠГҺГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 18H
ГҒп¬ӮSГғвҒ„пЈҝUГЎГҠ in detail; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ” Your; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ” power of Yoga; ГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҚГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” glory; Гё and; ВЎЕёГҠЕ’ВёЕёГ” O
KГҰВ¶Ж’a; Г·ГҚГҝвҖ” once more; вҲ‘В§Г•ГҝГ” tell me; ГғГҺГҒ#вҖ” satiety; ГҒвҖһUГ” because; oГҺГЎп¬ӮГғвҖ” (in) hearing; Её вҖўГҒSГғ is
not; в—ҠпЈҝ to me; вҖўв—ҠГҺГғв—ҠЛңГ” Your nectar-like words.

=== PAGE 498 ===

* Chapter X *
497
He of whom all men seek their desired
objects is called JanГҘrdana (ВЎЕёГ’вҖ” вҖўlВёГғпЈҝ). By
addressing вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a as Г«JanГҘrdanaГӯ, Arjuna
indicates that all men approach Him for the
attainment of their desired objects, and also
that He is fully capable of granting all their
prayers. Arjuna thereby hopes that his prayer
too will be granted by the Lord.
Г«YogaГӯ is that divine potency of God by
which He manifests Himself in the form of
this universe and thereby reproduces Himself
in various forms; and His manifestation in
those forms is called His Г«VibhВөutiГӯ or glory.
Both these words have already occurred in
verse 7 above, and their meaning has been
fully explained in our commentary on the
same. Realization of God through unfaltering
devotion has been mentioned in that verse as
the reward of knowing His Yoga and VibhВөuti
in reality. Therefore, with a view to knowing
full well the secret of His Yoga and VibhВөuti,
Arjuna requests the Lord to describe them in
detail again and again.
The words of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a appear very sweet
to Arjuna; he finds such a stream of joy flowing
from them that his mind never gets wearied
of drinking of it. The more he drinks of that
nectar, the more his thirst for the same grows.
He feels as if he should go on drinking that
nectar for ever. Therefore, he prays that вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a should go on pouring that divine nectar
into his ever thirsty ears. He should not feel
deterred by the thought that such and such a
thing has already been said or that the subject
has been amply thrashed out so that there is
no need to dilate on it any more.
KГҰВ¶Ж’a, tell me once more in detail of Your power of Yoga and Your glory; for
I know no satiety in hearing Your nectar-like words.                                  (18)
In response to this prayer of Arjuna for a detailed and full description of His power
of Yoga and glory, the Lord first points out the limitless range of His magnitude and then
undertakes to describe only His outstanding glories.
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲп¬ӮГҠГё
вҖһГЈГғ ГғпЈҝ вҲ‘В§Г•ГҒГҝcГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝГҠ sГ”ГҠГ в—ҠГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҚГғГҝвҖ”вҖ“
В¬ЛқГҠЕ“ГҠГЈГҝГғвҖ” вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ГјГҠпЈҝDГ”U ЕёГҠSГ ГҝГЈГғГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮSГғвҒ„USГҝ в—ҠпЈҝH 19H
вҖһUГЈГғ now; ГғпЈҝ to you; вҲ‘В§Г•ГҒГҝcГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ shall relate; ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝГҠвҖ” divine; ГҒвҖһU indeed; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҚГғГҝвҖ”Г” My
glories; В¬ЛқГҠЕ“ГҠГЈГҝГғвҖ” in broad detail; вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ГјГҠпЈҝDГ”U O chief of Kurus, Arjuna; Её вҖўГҒSГғГ” there is not; вҖўГЈГғвҖ”UГ”
limit; ГҒп¬ӮSГғвҒ„USГҝГ” в—ҠпЈҝ to My magnitude.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: Arjuna, now I shall tell you My conspicuous divine glories;
there is no limit to My magnitude, indeed.                                                      (19)
denote only such objects or beings which
manifest the majesty, strength, learning, glory,
lustre and power of God in a special degree.
With reference to such glories the Lord says
in this verse that they are limitless, so that it
was wholly impossible to describe them all
in full. Hence He undertakes to describe only
the most conspicuous among them.
In the preceding verse Arjuna requested
By addressing Arjuna as Г«KuruвҖ№reВ¶ВўhaГӯ
the Lord seeks to convey that, being the best
among Kurus, he was qualified to hear the
description of His glories.
The whole universe being a manifestation
of God, all objects comprised therein are, in
a general way, manifestation of His glory;
but they are not His divine glories. The
words Г«divine gloriesГӯ should be taken to

=== PAGE 499 ===

498
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
the Lord to describe in detail (in full) His
power of Yoga as well as His glory. With
reference to this prayer the Lord says that it
was not possible to give a full description of
even His outstanding glories much less of all
His glories.*
As promised in the preceding verse the Lord now first of all describes His divine glories
in verses 20 to 39:Гі
вҖўвҖһUв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠГҠ ВӘГҲВ«UГҠвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠ вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠвүҘГҠГҝГҒSГ•ГғвҖ”вҖ“
вҖўвҖһUв—ҠГҠГҒЕ’p в—ҠГӨГҝВў Гё Г·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠв—ҠГЈГғ вҲһп¬Ӯ ГёH 20H
вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠ the (universal) self; ВӘГҲВ«UГҠвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠU O Arjuna (lit., a conqueror of sleep);
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠвүҘГҠГҝГҒSГ•ГғвҖ”Г” seated in the hearts of all beings; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I (am); вҖўГҠГҒЕ’вҖ” the beginning; ГёГ” and; в—ҠГӨГҝв—ҠЛңГ”UГ”
the middle; ГёГ” and; Г·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of (all) beings; вҖўГЈГғвҖ”Г” the end; вҲһп¬ӮГ” alone; Гё even so.
Arjuna, I am the universal Self seated in the hearts of all beings; so I alone am
the beginning, the middle and also the end of all beings.                                 (20)
*
The universe consists of an infinite number of objects and an infinite variety of creatures. For
their proper regulation and control these diverse orders of objects, ideas and beings have been classified
into various broad divisions or groups under GodГӯs immutable laws; and each broad division or group has
been placed under the control of a supervisor or chief, so that the processess of their creation, maintenance
and destruction may be carried on strictly according to law. The Rudras, Vasus. Г…dityas, SГҘdhyas,
ViвҖ№vedevas, Maruts, PitГҰdevas, Manus and SaptarВ¶is etc., are the various order of these functionaries or
chiefs. They are believed to have both an embodied and unembodied form. All of them represent, so many
glories of God.
The ViВ¶Ж’u-PurГҘЖ’a says:Гі
вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё Гё Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠ в—ҠЕёп¬ӮвҖ” вҖҡв—ҠSГғГҠвҖ” вҖҡ#В·ВёГҝГҠпЈҝ ГҝпЈҝ в—ҠЕёГҲвҖҡГҚЕёп¬ӮpвҖ“ ГҹГЈВәЛқp ГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГҝВў ГҒГІГҠЕ’вүҘГҠпЈҝвүҘГҠГ·ГҚГғГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮcГЎГҠГҠпЈҝвҒ„вүҘГҠпЈҝВ·ГҠSГғГҲ ГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҚГғГҝSГғГҠвҖ”H
(III.i.46)
Г¬All the gods, all Manus, the seven seers, as well as the sons of Manus, and Indra, the chief of gods,Гі
all these are special manifestations or glories of BhagavГҘn ViВ¶Ж’u.Г®
Besides the above, special representatives are duly chosen from the various order of creations for the
proper functioning of creation. In this selection, the choice particularly falls on those who manifest GodГӯs
lustre, energy, strength, learning, knowledge and power in a special degree. It is, therefore, that the Lord
speaks of them all as His glories or manifestations.
In Chapter LXX of the VГҘyu-PurГҘЖ’a we read the following account:ГіГ¬The creation of beings by
KaвҖ№yapa having been over, the said PrajГҘpati selected from the various orders of creation those who excelled
their group in merit and glory and for the governance of those groups made them lords over the rest. Thus
the moon was made the king of the stars and planets; BГҰhaspati was appointed as the chief of Г…вҲҶgirasas
(the son of AвҲҶgirГҘ); вҖәukrГҘcГҘrya was appointed as the head of the BhГҘrgavas (the scions of BhГҰgu; ViВ¶Ж’u
was made the chief of the Г…dityas (sons of Aditi); PГҘvaka (the god of fire), of the Vasus; DakВ¶a, of the
PrajГҘpatis (Lords of creation); PrahlГҘda, of the Daityas; Indra, of the Maruts;  NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a, of the SГҘdhyas;
вҖәaвҲҶkara, of the Rudras; VaruЖ’a was made the ruler of the waters; Kubera, of the YakВ¶a (a class of demigods);
вҖәВөulapГҘЖ’i (Bhairava), of the BhВөutas and PiвҖ№ГҘcas; the ocean, of the rivers; Citraratha, of the Gandharvas (the
celestial bards); UccaiВЁвҖ№ravas, of the horses; the lion, of the beasts; the bull, of he quadrupeds; GaruЕ’a, of
the birds; вҖәeВ¶a, of the snakes and other reptiles; VГҘsuki, of the NГҘgas; TakВ¶aka, of other varieties of snakes
and NГҘgas; the HimГҘlaya range, of the mountains; Vipracitti, of the DГҘnavas; Vaivasvata, of the manes;
Parjanya (the god of rains), of the seas, rivers and clouds; KГҘma (the god of Love), of the ApsarГҘs (celestial
hymphs); SaвүҲvatsara the year, of the various divisions of time such as the seasons and months etc.;
SudhГҘmГҘ, of the East, KetumГҘn, of the West and Vaivasvata Manu was made the king of all human beings.
The administration and maintenance of the entire creation is being carried on by these functionaries.Г® The
description of the glories of God contained in the present chapter agrees in many respects with the above
description.

=== PAGE 500 ===

* Chapter X *
499
Г«GuЕ’ГҘkГҘГӯ means sleep. And a conqueror
of sleep is called Г«GuЕ’ГҘkeвҖ№aГӯ. Addressing
Arjuna by this word, the Lord is complimenting
him on his attentiveness. The word Г«Г…tmГҘГӯ,
qualified, by the compound adjective
Г«SarvabhВөutГҘвҖ№ayasthitaВЁГӯ, signifies the conscious
spirit or soul residing in the heart of all living
beings and referred to elsewhere as the Г«ParГҘГӯ
PrakГҰti (higher nature) and the Г«KвҖ№etrajВӨaГӯ
(Knower of the field)Гіvide VII.5; XIII.1.
Being a fragment of God (XV.7), it is in
essence the same as God Himself (XIII.2). It
is therefore that the Lord declares the soul as
identical with Him.
The word Г«BhВөutГҘnГҘmГӯ stands for all
embodied beings both sentient and insentient.
The creation, maintenance and destruction of
beings proceed from God. All beings emanate
from Him, exist in Him, and even at the time
of final dissolution get merged in Him. In other
words, He is the root cause and substratum
of all. This is what is meant by the Lord when
He calls Himself the beginning, the middle
and also the end of all beings.
вҖўГҠГҒЕ’Г ГҝГҠЕёГҠв—ҠвҖһВўU ГҒп¬ӮcГЎГҠГҲГ–ГҝГҠпЈҝВёГҒГғВ·ГҠВў вҒ„UГҒп¬ӮвҒ„ВўUвүҘГҠГҲв—ҠГҠЕёЛңГ”вҖ“
в—ҠвҒ„UГӢГҒГёв—ҠВёLВ§ГғГҠв—ҠГҒSв—Ҡ ЕёЛҮГҠГІГҠГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠвҖһВўU вүҘГҠвүҘГҠГӢH 21H
вҖўГҠГҒЕ’Г ГҝГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among the (twelve) sons of Aditi; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”U I (am); ГҒп¬ӮcГЎГҠГҲвҖ” ViВ¶Ж’u; Г–ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒГғВ·ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” (and)
among the luminaries; вҒ„UГҒп¬ӮвҖ” вҖўВўвүҘГҠГҲв—ҠГҠЕёЛңГ” the radiant sun; в—ҠвҒ„UГӢГҒГёвҖ”Г” the glow; в—ҠLВ§ГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of the Maruts
(wind-gods, forty-nine in number); вҖўГҒSв—ҠГ” am; ЕёЛҮГҠГІГҠГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠГ”ЛңГ”UГ” (and) among stars; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; вүҘГҠвүҘГҠГӢГ” (their
Lord) the moon.
I am ViВ¶Ж’u among the twelve sons of Aditi, and the radiant sun among the
luminaries; I am the glow of the Maruts* (the fortynine wind-gods), and the moon
among the stars.                                                                           (21)
* The names of the forty-nine wind-gods are: Sattvajyoti, Г…ditya, Satyajyoti, Tiryagjyoti, Sajyoti,
JyotiВ¶mГҘn, Harita, В°Rtajit, Satyajit, SuВ¶eЖ’a, Senajit, Satyamitra, Abhimitra, Harimitra, KГҰta, Satya, Dhruva,
DhartГҘ, VidhartГҘ, VidhГҘraya, DhvГҘnta, Dhuni, Ugra, BhвҲӮma, Abhiyu, SГҘkВ¶ipa, вҲ«dГҰk, AnyГҘdГҰk, YГҘdГҰk, PratikГҰt,
В°Rk, Samiti, SaвүҲrambha, вҲ«dГҰkВ¶a, PuruВ¶a, AnyГҘdГҰkВ¶a, Cetasa, SamitГҘ, SamidГҰkВ¶a, PratidГҰkВ¶a, Maruti, Sarata,
Deva, DiвҖ№a, YajuВ¶, AnudГҰk, SГҘma, MГҘnuВ¶a and ViвҖ№ (vide VГҘyu-PurГҘЖ’a LXVII.123Гі130). The GaruЕ’a-
PurГҘЖ’a and other PurГҘЖ’as give slightly different names. But the name Г«MarвҲӮciГӯ is not to be found anywhere.
It is for this reason that the word Г«MarвҲӮciГӯ has not been interpreted as the name of a wind-god, but as the
glow or rays of all the Maruts.
The sons born of DakВ¶aГӯs daughter, MarutvatвҲӮ, are also called Maruts (vide HarivaвүҲвҖ№a). The PurГҘЖ’as
describe their birth in different ways and under different names in the different Manvantaras.
вҖ 
Е“ГҠГғГҠ ГҒв—ҠГІГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГҝВёв—ҠГҠ вүҘГҠвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝ п¬ӮLВ§ГЎГҠSГ п¬ӮВўвүҘГҠ вҲһп¬Ӯ ГёвҖ“ Г·ВӘГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬Ӯп¬ӮSп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” В¬ГҚВ·ГҠ Гё вҖҡГҒп¬ӮГғГҠ Е’вүҘГҠв—ҠSГғГ•ГҠH
вҲһвҲ‘В§ГҠЕ’вүҘГҠSГғГ•ГҠ Г п¬ӮCГ”UГҠ mГҠЕ’вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝГҒп¬ӮcГЎГҠГҲLВ§Г«ГҝГғпЈҝвҖ“ ВЎГүГҠГЈГҝВЎSГғГҲ 
вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёВ·ГҠв—ҠГҠГҒЕ’Г ГҝГҠЕёГҠВў 
ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠГҒЕ“вҲ‘В§вҖ”H
(MahГҘ., Г…ai., LXV.15-16)
sun is the most resplendent, of all; hence
among all luminaries the Lord has singled
out the sun as His own self.
The fortynine Maruts or wind-gods were
born of the spiritual glow of goddess DitiГӯs
religious observance in the shape of meditation
on God. It was because of that spiritual glow
that they could not be slaughtered in their
The twelve sons of Aditi, viz., DhГҘtГҘ,
Mitra, AryamГҘ, Indra, VaruЖ’a, AвүҲвҖ№a, Bhaga,
VivasvГҘn, PВөuВ¶ГҘ, SavitГҘ, TvaВ¶ВўГҘ and ViВ¶Ж’u,
are known as the twelve Г…dityas. ViВ¶Ж’uвҖ  is
their Lord and the best of them all. It is therefore
that the Lord calls ViВ¶Ж’u His own self.
Among luminous objects such as the
sun, moon, stars, lightning and fire etc., the

=== PAGE 501 ===

500
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
motherГӯs womb.* Hence the Lord speaks of
that glow of theirs as His own Self.
Being the Lord of the twentyseven
asterism, or lunar mansions, such as AвҖ№vinвҲӮ,
BharaЖ’вҲӮ, KГҰttikГҘ and so on, and the chief of
all other stars, the moon is one of the chief
glories of God. Hence the Lord speaks of the
moon as His own self.
п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГҠЕёГҠВў вҖҡГҠв—Ҡп¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒSв—Ҡ Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠЕёГҠв—ҠГҒSв—Ҡ п¬ӮГҠвҖҡп¬ӮвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГЎГҠГҠВў в—ҠЕёpГҠГҒSв—Ҡ Г·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠв—ҠГҒSв—Ҡ ГёпЈҝГғЕёГҠH 22H
п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among the Vedas; вҖҡГҠв—Ҡп¬ӮпЈҝЕ’вҖ” вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ I am SГҘmaveda; Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among the gods; вҖўГҒSв—ҠГ”
I am; п¬ӮГҠвҖҡп¬ӮвҖ” Indra; ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of the organs of perception etc.; в—ҠЕёвҖ” the mind;  ГёГ” and; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ I
am; Г·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ”UГ” in living beings; вҖўГҒSв—ҠГ” ГёпЈҝГғЕёГҠ I am the consciousness (life-energy).
Among the Vedas, I am the SГҘmaveda; among the gods, I am Indra. Among the
organs of perception i.e., senses, I am the mind; and I am consciousness (life-energy)
in living beings.                                                                               (22)
hearing, touch, taste, smell and speech, hands
and feet, the organs of generation and
evacuation and the mind, the last-named,
viz., the mind, is not only the controller and
director of the rest, but the subtlest and best
of them all; hence it occupies the foremost
place among them. It is, therefore, that the
Lord declares it to be His own Self.
The word Г«CetanГҘГӯ in this verse signifies
the principle of consciousness existing in
beings, which is a faculty of the mind, whereby
they experience pleasure and pain and cognize
other objects, and which has been enumerated
Among the four Vedas,ГіВ°Rk, YajuВ¶, SГҘma
and Atharva,Гіthe SГҘmaveda is full of sweetest
psalms and the most charming praises of God;
hence it occupies the foremost place among
the Vedas. It is, therefore, that the Lord speaks
of the SГҘmaveda as His own Self.
Being the king and ruler of all gods,
such as the sun-god, moon-god, the god of
fire and the god of air etc., Indra is the
foremost of them all. Hence the Lord calls
him His own Self.
Of the eleven Indriyas or organs of
perception etc., viz., the organs of sight,
* Having lost many of her sons in the war with gods, Diti propitiated her husband, KaвҖ№yapa, by her
loving services. KaвҖ№yapa, who was the foremost of all ascetics, pleased her in his turn by granting her a
boon. Diti asked of him most glorious son capable of killing Indra. The great sage KaвҖ№yapa granted her
the desired boon, and while conferring that terrible boon told her that if she could bear the foetus in her
womb for a hundred years observing strict purity and self-restraint, and keeping her mind constantly fixed
on God, she would surely get a son capable of killing Indra. Knowing the foetus in DitiГӯs womb as his deadly
enemy, Indra, the chief of celestials, too made his appearance there to serve Diti with great humility. He
kept himself by her side all the twentyfour hours waiting for an opportunity to do something whenever he
found some lapse in her purity. At last, only a few days before the expiry of a hundred years, it so happened
that Diti went to bed, one day, without washing her feet and was soon overtaken by sleep. Availing himself
of that opportunity, Indra entered her womb with his weapon, a thunderbolt, in hand, and split the great
foetus into seven parts. Smitten by the thunderbolt, the foetus raised a loud cry. Indra tried to hush it up
by repeatedly whispering into its ears Г«MГҘ rodiВЁГӯ (donГӯt cry). Finding that, though split into seven parts,
the foetus was still alive, Indra got much exasperated and again split each of those seven parts into seven
each. Even though multiplied fortynine times, the foetus still remained alive. Indra was now convinced that
it would not die. These fortynine parts became known as the mighty Maruts or wind-gods. They got
the collective name of Г«MarutsГӯ from IndraГӯs words addressed to them: Г«MГҘ rodiВЁГӯ (donГӯt cry). (see ViВ¶Ж’u-
PВөurГҘЖ’a, Part I, Ch. 21).

=== PAGE 502 ===

* Chapter X *
501
in XIII.6 as an evolute of the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ. It is
the main faculty responsible for the various
experiences of living beings, hence the Lord
speaks of it as His own Self.
Soma, AhaВЁ, Anila, Anala, PratyВөuВ¶a and
PrabhГҘsaвҖЎ. Anala or the god of fire is the
chief among them and carries oblations to the
gods. He is also regarded as the mouth of
God. It is, therefore, that the Lord calls the
god of fire His very self.
The Meru mountain is believed to be
the centre of the stars and the main divisions
of the world and the repository of gold
and jewels. Its peaks are the highest in the
world. Being thus the chief of mountains, the
Meru has been declared to be the very self of
the Lord.
The eleven Rudras are: Hara, BahurВөupa,
Tryambaka, AparГҘjita, VГҰВ¶ГҘkapi, вҖәaвүҲbhu,
KapardвҲӮ, Raivata, MГҰgavyГҘdha, вҖәarva and
KapГҘlвҲӮ.* Of these, вҖәaвүҲbhu or вҖәaвҲҶkara is the
lord of the rest, and the bestower of blessedness
and blessedness itself. Therefore, the Lord
declares him to be His very self.
KuberaвҖ  is the chief of the YakВ¶as and
RГҘkВ¶asas, and the best among them; he is
best known as a regional god or LokapГҘla
and the Lord of riches. Therefore, the Lord
said that He was Kubera.
The eight Vasus are: Dhara, Dhruva,
LВ§ВәЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠВў вүҘГҠVГ”UвҒ„UpГҠГҒSв—Ҡ ГҒп¬ӮГ»ГҠпЈҝвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝ ГҝЛҮГҠвҒ„UЛҮГҠвҖҡГҠв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
п¬ӮвҖҡГҚЕёГҠВў В¬ГҠп¬ӮвҲ‘В§pГҠГҒSв—Ҡ в—ҠпЈҝLВ§вҖ” ГҒвүҘГҠПҖГҒвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠв—ҠвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”H 23H
LВ§ВәЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of the eleven Rudras (gods of destruction); вүҘГҠVГ”UвҒ„UвҖ” Lord вҖәiva; Гё and; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ I am;
ГҒп¬ӮГ»ГҠпЈҝвүҘГҠвҖ” (I am) the Lord of riches, Kubera; ГҝЛҮГҠвҒ„UЛҮГҠвҖҡГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of the YakВ¶as and RГҘkВ¶asas; п¬ӮвҖҡГҚЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of
the (eight) Vasus; В¬ГҠп¬ӮвҲ‘В§вҖ” the god of fire; Гё and; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ I am; в—ҠпЈҝLВ§вҖ” (I am) the mountain Meru;
ГҒвүҘГҠПҖГҒвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among the mountains; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I.
Among the eleven Rudras (gods of destruction), I am вҖәiva; among the YakВ¶as and
RГҘkВ¶asas, I am the Lord of riches, Kubera. Among the eight Vasus, I am the god of
fire; and among the mountains, I am the Meru.                                     (23)
В¬ГҲвҒ„UГҠпЈҝЕ“вҖҡГҠВў Гё в—ҠГҲГ…ГҝВў в—ҠГҠВў ГҒп¬ӮГҒh В¬ГҠГ•Вё вҖҷГҺвҖһUSВ¬ГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖҡпЈҝЕёГҠЕёГӢЕёГҠв—ҠвҖһВўU SвҲ‘В§ГЈЕ’вҖ” вҖҡвҒ„UвҖҡГҠв—ҠГҒSв—Ҡ вҖҡГҠВӘвҒ„UвҖ”Г”H 24H
*
вҖһUвҒ„Up 
вҖҷвҖһГҲUMВ§В¬p 
ГІГҝГӘвҖҷвҲ‘В§pГҠВ¬вҒ„UГҠГҒВЎГғвҖ”вҖ“ п¬ӮГҺВ·ГҠвҲ‘В§ГҒВ¬p вүҘГҠГӘГ·ГҲp вҲ‘В§В¬Е’ГӢВё вҒ„Г’Uп¬ӮГғSГғГ•ГҠH
в—ҠГҺВӘвҲҡГҝГҠЕ“p вүҘГҠп¬ӮВёp вҲ‘В§В¬ГҠвҖ№ГӢ Гё ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҠГӘВ¬ГғпЈҝвҖ“ вҲһвҲ‘В§ГҠЕ’вүҘГҠГ’ГғпЈҝ вҲ‘В§ГҒГ•ГғГҠ LВ§ВәЛқГҠГҒГ№Г·ГҲп¬ӮЕёпЈҝEвҒ„UГҠвҖ”H
(HarivaвүҲвҖ№a, I.iii.51-52)
вҖ  Kubera is a grandson of the sage Pulastya and a son of ViвҖ№ravГҘ. He was born of DevavarЖ’inвҲӮ, a
daughter of sage BharadvГҘja. Pleased with his long and arduous penance, BrahmГҘ asked him to seek a boon
from him. He sought from him the custodianship of the riches of the universe. BrahmГҘ thereupon said, Г¬I
am also anxious to appoint someone as the fourth guardian of the universe; therefore, I call upon you to
accept this high office as Indra, Yama and VaruЖ’a have done.Г® It was BrahmГҘ again who made a gift to
him of the celebrated aerial car known as PuВ¶paka. Since then Kubera has held the office of the god of riches.
RГҘvaЖ’a, KuвүҲbhakarЖ’a and others were born of his step-mother, KaikasвҲӮ (VГҘlmikiГӯs RГҘmГҘyaЖ’a, UttarakГҘвҲҶЕ’a,
III). The celebrated NalakВөubara and MaЖ’igrвҲӮva, who had been turned into a pair of Arjuna trees by the curse
of NГҘrada and were redeemed by BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, were the sons of no other than Kubera. (Vide вҖәrвҲӮmad
BhГҘgavata X.10)
вҖЎ Е“вҒ„UГҠпЈҝ Е“ЛқГҲп¬Ӯp вҖҡГҠпЈҝв—Ҡp вҖўвҖһUpГ’п¬ӮГҠГҒЕёвҲӮUГҠпЈҝЛҳЕёвҲӮUвҖ”вҖ“ В¬ЛқГ ГҝГҚВ·p В¬ЛқГ·ГҠвҖҡp п¬ӮвҖҡп¬ӮГҠпЈҝЛҳCГ”UГҠГ’ В¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГӢГҒГғВёГғГҠвҖ”H
    (MahГҘ., Г…di., LXVI. 18)

=== PAGE 503 ===

502
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
В¬ГҲвҒ„UГҠпЈҝЕ“вҖҡГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among the priests; Гё and; в—ҠГҲГ…Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” (their) chief; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; ГҒп¬ӮГҒh know; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son
of PГҰthГҘ, Arjuna; вҖҷГҺвҖһUSВ¬ГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” BГҰhaspati; вҖҡпЈҝЕёГҠЕёГӢЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among warrior-chiefs; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; SвҲ‘В§ГЈЕ’вҖ” am Skanda
(the generalissimo of the gods); вҖҡвҒ„UвҖҡГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among the reservoirs of water; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ am; вҖҡГҠВӘвҒ„UвҖ”Г” ocean.
Among the priests, Arjuna, know Me to be their chief, BГҰhaspati. Among
warrior-chiefs, I am Skanda (the generalissimo of the gods); and among the reservoirs
of water, I am the ocean.                                                                             (24)
A son of Lord вҖәivaвҖ , he is the generalissimo
of the gods. He is the foremost of all generals
in the world. It is therefore, that the Lord
declares him to be His very Self.
Among all seats of water in the world,
the oceanвҖЎ is the largest and is believed to be
their lord. Hence the ocean is their chief
representative; and it is, therefore, that the
Lord declares it to be His own Self.
BГҰhaspati* is the preceptor of Indra, the
chief of the celestials, the family priest of the
gods, the greatest repository of learning and
wisdom, the foremost of all the priests of the
world and the head of the Г…вҲҶgirasas (sons of
AвҲҶgirГҘ). Therefore, BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a calls
him His own self.
Skanda is also known by the name of
KГҘrtikeya. He has six heads and twelve arms.
в—ҠвҖһUВ·ГӢВёГЎГҠГҠВў 
Г·ГҺВӘГҲвҒ„UвҖһВўU 
ГҒВӘвҒ„UГҠв—ҠSГӘГҝпЈҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛҮГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҝГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠВў ВЎВ¬ГҝГҙГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒSв—Ҡ SГ•ГҠп¬ӮвҒ„UГҠГЎГҠГҠВў ГҒвҖһUв—ҠГҠвҲӮUГҝвҖ”Г”H 25H
в—ҠвҖһUВ·ГӢВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among the great seers; Г·ГҺВӘГҲвҖ” the sage BhГҰgu; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; ГҒВӘвҒ„UГҠв—ҠЛңГ” (and) among words;
вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ am; вҲһвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” вҖўЛҮГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” the one syllable OM; ГҝГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among sacrifices; ВЎВ¬ГҝГҙГҠвҖ” the
sacrifice of Japa; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ I am; SГ•ГҠп¬ӮвҒ„UГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” (and) among the immovables; ГҒвҖһUв—ҠГҠвҲӮUГҝвҖ” the HimГҘlaya
mountain.
Among the great seers, I am BhГҰgu; among words, I am the sacred syllable OM.
Among sacrifices, I am the sacrifice of Japa (muttering of sacred formulas); and
among the immovables, the HimГҘlaya.                                                          (25)
bounded by limits, in other words, that which
is infinite in extent, and which, though
all-pervasive, is yet visible to us, is called Г«MahatГӯ.
And those wise men who having transcended
the limits of the human intellect depend
entirely on Him, who is infinite in virtues
MaharВ¶is there are many; their distinctive
marks and the names of the ten most prominent
of them are given below:Гі
Г¬The mind-born sons of BrahmГҘ are all
independent in the matter of birth and endowed
with supernatural powers. That which is not
* BГҰhaspati is the most illustrious son of MaharВ¶i AвҲҶgirГҘ. He was the chief of the seven seers that held
office in the second or SvГҘrociВ¶a Manvantara of the present Kalpa (HarivaвүҲвҖ№a, VII.12; Matsya-PurГҘЖ’a
IX.8). He is a great scholar. It was he who taught the Vedas with their limbs and other auxiliary branches
of learning, the six systems of philosophy, the SmГҰti texts and Г…gama etc., to the Lord when he assumed
the form of a Dwarf (BГҰhaddharma-PurГҘЖ’a, Madhya., XVI.69Гі73). It was his son, Kaca, who learnt the
science of reviving the dead from вҖәukrГҘcГҘrya. BГҰhaspati is the family priest of Indra, the chief of celestials.
The sublime teachings that he imparted to Indra from time to time form a most useful study for the humanity.
Accounts of these teachings are to be found in the вҖәГҘnti and AnuвҖ№ГҘsana Parvas of the MahГҘbhГҘrata.
вҖ 
In some books he is held to be born of DakВ¶aГӯs daughter, SwГҘhГҘ, through Agni, the god of fire
(MahГҘbhГҘrta, Vanaparva, 223). The MahГҘbhГҘrata and the PurГҘЖ’as contain wonderful stories about him.
вҖЎ
The word Г«oceanГӯ in this verse means all the oceans taken together.

=== PAGE 504 ===

* Chapter X *
503
(MahГҘntam В°RВ¶anti), are called MaharВ¶is. BhГҰgu,
MarвҲӮci, Atri, AвҲҶgirГҘ Pulaha, Kratu, Manu,
DakВ¶a, VasiВ¶Вўha and PulastyaГіthese are the
ten principal MaharВ¶is. They all sprang of their
own will from the mind of BrahmГҘ and are
possessed of supernatural powers. Because
God Himself appeared through BrahmГҘ in the
form of these seers, they are called MaharВ¶is.Г®*
(VГҘyu-PurГҘЖ’a LIX.82-83, 89-90).
BhГҰguвҖ  is the chief of all great seers.
He is a great devotee of God, highly
enlightened and full of spiritual glow: hence
the Lord declares him to be His own self.
The substantive Г«GirГӯ (the uninflected
form of Г«GirГҘmГӯ) denotes a word expressive
of meaning, and the word OM, also known
as the Г«PraЖ’avaГӯ is termed as the Г«one syllableГӯ
(VIII.13). Of all significant words Г«PraЖ’avaГӯ
stands the foremost; for it is an appelation of
God (XVII.23). The repetition of this word
brings God-realization and there is identity
between word and its meaning. Hence the
Lord speaks of the Г«PraЖ’avaГӯ as His own self.
Japa or repetition of the Divine Name
involves no violence in any form, and the
practice of Japa leads to the direct perception
of God. The Code of Manu also speaks very
highly of Japa.вҖЎ
Hence Г«JapayajВӨaГӯ excels all other forms
of sacrifice, and it is in order to bring out the
superiority of Г«JapayajВӨaГӯ to every other
sacrifice that the Lord calls it His very Self.
That which has a fixed position or is
immovable is called Г«SthГҘvaraГӯ. Mountains,
because they are immovable, fall under the
category of Г«SthГҘvarasГӯ.
The HimГҘlaya is the foremost of them
all. It is a most sacred place for the practice
of austerities and is helpful in the attainment
of liberation. The divine sages Nara and
NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a performed their austerities on the
Himalayan peaks. On top of this, the HimГҘlaya
is the king of mountains. Hence the Lord
speaks of it as His very self.
*
ГҹВёEвҒ„UГҠвҖ” Sп¬ӮГҝв—ҠГҲЕ’ЛңГ”Г·ГҚГғГҠ в—ҠГҠЕёвҖҡГҠ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГЎГҠвҖ” вҖҡГҲГғГҠвҖ” вҖ“ ГҝSв—ҠГҠГӣГҠ вҖһUГЈГҝГғпЈҝ в—ҠГҠЕёГ’в—ҠВёвҖһUГҠЕёЛңГ” В¬ГҒвҒ„UВӘГғвҖ” В¬ГҲвҒ„UвҖ”H
ГҝSв—ҠГҠЕ’ГҺВ·ГҒГЈГғ  ГҝпЈҝ Е“ГӢвҒ„UГҠ в—ҠвҖһUГҠГЈГғВў вҖҡп¬ӮВёГғГҠпЈҝ ВӘГҲГЎГҠГ’вҖ” вҖ“ ГғSв—ҠГҠГЈв—ҠвҖһUВ·ВёГҝвҖ” В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§ГҠ вҖҷГҲhпЈҝвҖ” В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЕ’ГҒвүҘГҠВёЕёвҖ”H
Г·ГҺВӘГҲв—ҠВёвҒ„UГӢГҒГёвҒ„UГҒГІГҠp  вҖўГҒXГ”UвҒ„UГҠвҖ” В¬ГҲвҖ№вҖһUвҖ” вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГғГҲвҖ” вҖ“ в—ҠЕёГҲЕ’ВёЛҮГҠГҠпЈҝ п¬ӮГҒвҖҡDГ”Up В¬ГҲвҲӮUSГ ГҝpпЈҝГҒГғ ГғпЈҝ Е’вүҘГҠH
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠЕёвҖҡГҠ sГ”пЈҝГғ В©UЕ’ЛңГ”Г·ГҚГғГҠвҖ” Sп¬ӮГҝв—ҠГӢEвҒ„UГҠвҖ”вҖ“ В¬Лқп¬ӮГғВёГғ ВҙВ§В·пЈҝГҝВёSв—ҠГҠГЈв—ҠвҖһUГҠВўSГғSв—ҠГҠЕёЛңГ” в—ҠвҖһUВ·ВёГҝвҖ”H
вҖ 
Among the mind-born sons of BrahmГҘ, BhГҰgu is a prominent figure. He has successively held the
position of one of the seven seers in the SvГҘyambhuva, CГҘkВ¶uВ¶a and other Manvantaras. In his line have
appeared a number of seers, revealers of Mantras or sacred hymns, and founders of independent Gotras or
families. He holds a position of great eminence among the seers. He married KhyГҘti, a daughter of DakВ¶a,
who gave birth to two sons, DhГҘtГҘ and VidhГҘtГҘ by name, and a daughter named вҖәrвҲӮ. This latter became the
Consort of BhagavГҘn NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a. The celebrated sage Cyavana too was begotten by him. His sons JotiВ¶mГҘn,
вҖәukГҰti, HaviВ¶mГҘn, TapodhГҰti, Nirutsuka and AtibГҘhu have figured as the chief among the seven seers in
different Manvantaras. He is one of the greatest seers and revealers of Mantras. It was he who tested the
SГҘttvika character of вҖәrвҲӮ ViВ¶Ж’uГӯs forbearance by kicking His chest. In commemoration of that incident
BhagavГҘn ViВ¶Ж’u still bears on His chest the mark of the kick in the shape of a footprint. Having been
entrusted with the work of creation, BhГҰgu, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, AвҲҶgirГҘ, MarвҲӮci, DakВ¶a, Atri and VasiВ¶Вўha
are also known as the Г¬Nine BrahmГҘsГ®. Almost all the PurГҘЖ’as are replete with references to this sage (vide
HarivaвүҲвҖ№a, the Matsya, вҖәiva, BrahmГҘЖ’Е’a, DevвҲӮ-BhГҘgavata, MГҘrkaЖ’Е’eya, Padma, VГҘyu and the BhГҘgavata
PurГҘЖ’as and the MahГҘbhГҘrata).
вҖЎ
ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ“ГҝГҙГҠГҠГ®ГҠВ¬ГҝГҙГҠГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮГҒвүҘГҠCГ”UГҠпЈҝ Е’вүҘГҠГҒГ·ВӘГҲВёГЎГҠГ’вҖ”вҖ“ В©UВ¬ГҠВўвүҘГҠГҲвҖ” SГҝГҠГ«ВҝUГғВӘГҲГЎГҠвҖ” вҖҡГҠвҖһUdГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠЕёвҖҡвҖ” Sв—ҠГҺГғвҖ”H
Г¬JapayajВӨa is ten times more valuable than a ritual; the same, when practised in a low whisper; is a
hundred times more valuable while mental Japa is a thousand times more valuable than the same.Г®
вҖўEГ Г•вҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮВёп¬ӮГҺЛҮГҠГҠГЎГҠГҠВў Е’пЈҝп¬ӮВ·ГӢВёГЎГҠГҠВў Гё ЕёГҠвҒ„UЕ’вҖ”Г”вҖ“
ВӘГЈЕ“п¬ӮГҠВёГЎГҠГҠВў ГҒГёГІГҠвҒ„UГ•вҖ” ГҒвҖҡhГҠЕёГҠВў вҲ‘В§ГҒВ¬вҲӮUГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҲГҒЕёвҖ”Г”H 26H

=== PAGE 505 ===

504
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The holy fig tree* (ficus religiosa) is
held to be the ruler of the kingdom of plants
and the most sacred of all trees; hence the
Lord declares it to be His very self.
For the marks of a DevarВ¶i or celestial
sage the reader is referred to the commentary
on verses 12 and 13 above, where they have
been already discussed. NГҘrada is the chief
of all such DevarВ¶is. Besides this, he is a
great devotee, a highly enlightened soul and
an expert revealer of Mantras. Hence it is
that the Lord declares him to be His very
Self. For a detailed account of NГҘrada, the
reader is referred to the footnote under the
commentary on verses 12 and 13.
The Gandharvas are a particular class of
celestial beings. They are celestial musicians
and actors. In the celestial regions they are
considered to be most handsome and attractive
in appearance. The abode of the Gandharvas
or Gandharvaloka is situated above the abode
of the Guhyakas and below that of the
VidyГҘdharas. Like the gods and the manes,
there are two varieties of GandharvasГіearthly
and celestial. A human being ascending to
the abode of the Gandharvas by dint of his
merits after death is an Г«earthlyГӯ Gandharva;
while he who is a Gandharva from the
beginning of a Kalpa is called a celestial
Г«GandharvaГӯ. The celestial Gandharvas are
again divided into two classesГіГ«MauneyasГӯ
and Г«PrГҘdheyasГӯ. Two of sage KaвҖ№yapaГӯs
wives bore the names of Muni and PradhГҘ,
respectively. Most of the ApsarГҘs and
Gandharvas took their birth from them. Sixteen
celestial Gandharva, viz., BhвҲӮmasena, Ugrasena,
SuparЖ’a, 
VaruЖ’a, 
Gopati, 
DhГҰtarГҘВ¶Вўra,
SВөuryavarcГҘ, SatyavГҘk, ArkaparЖ’a, Prayuta,
BhвҲӮma, Citraratha, вҖәГҘliвҖ№irГҘ, Parjanya, Kali
and NГҘrada, being the progeny of Muni, are
called Г«MauneyasГӯ. Another group of fourteen
Gandharvas, viz., Siddha, PВөurЖ’a, Barhi,
вҖўEГ Г•вҖ” (I am) the AвҖ№vattha (the holy fig tree); вҖҡп¬ӮВёп¬ӮГҺЛҮГҠГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of all trees; Е’пЈҝп¬ӮВ·ГӢВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among the
celestial sages; Гё and; ЕёГҠвҒ„UЕ’вҖ” the sage NГҘrada; ВӘГЈЕ“п¬ӮГҠВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among the Gandharvas (the celestial
musicians); ГҒГёГІГҠвҒ„UГ•вҖ” Citraratha (the king of Gandharvas);  ГҒвҖҡhГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among the Siddhas (perfect
souls); вҲ‘В§ГҒВ¬вҲӮUвҖ” в—ҠГҲГҒЕёвҖ”Г” (am) the sage Kapila.
Among all trees, I am the AвҖ№vattha (the holy fig tree); among the celestial sages,
NГҘrada; among the Gandharvas (celestial musicians), Citraratha; and among the
Siddhas, I am the sage Kapila.                                                          (26)
*
Г¬The PurГҘЖ’as speak in very high terms of the AвҖ№vattha tree. The Skanda-PurГҘЖ’a says:Гі
в—ҠГҚвҲӮпЈҝU 
ГҒп¬ӮcГЎГҠГҲвҖ” 
ГҒSГ•ГғГҠпЈҝ 
ГҒЕёГ ГҝВў 
SвҲ‘В§ГЈЕ“пЈҝ 
вҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠп¬Ӯ 
вҲһп¬Ӯ 
ГёвҖ“
ЕёГҠвҒ„UГҠГҝГЎГҠSГғГҲ 
вүҘГҠГҠПҖГҠвҖҡГҲ 
В¬ГІГҠпЈҝВ·ГҲ 
Г·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” 
вҖһUГҒвҒ„UвҖ”H
В»В§вҲӮпЈҝUЛҳГ«ГҝГҲГғГҠпЈҝ 
Её 
вҖҡВўЕ’пЈҝвҖһUвҖ” 
вҖҡп¬ӮВёЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮГ’вҖ” 
вҖҡв—ҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГғвҖ”H
вҖҡ 
вҲһп¬Ӯ 
ГҒп¬ӮcГЎГҠГҲВәЛқГҲВёв—Ҡ 
вҲһп¬ӮВў 
в—ҠГҚГғГҠпЈҝВё 
в—ҠвҖһUГҠГ в—ҠГҒГ·вҖ” 
вҖҡпЈҝГҒп¬ӮГғВ¬ГҲГЎГҝв—ҠГҚвҲӮUвҖ”вҖ“
ГҝSГҝГҠГјГҠГҝвҖ” 
В¬ГҠВ¬вҖҡвҖһUdвҖһUГЈГғГҠ 
Г·п¬ӮпЈҝГӣГҠГҺГЎГҠГҠВў 
вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠЕ’ГҲГүГҠГҠпЈҝ 
ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠвҖҰKвҖ”H
(Skanda-PurГҘЖ’a, NГҘgara-KhaЖ’Е’aГі247, 41, 42, 44)
Г¬In the root of the holy fig tree resides ViВ¶Ж’u; in the trunk, KeвҖ№ava; in the branches, NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a; in
the leaves, Lord Hari, and in the fruits abides Acyuta in conjunction with all the gods. There is not the
least doubt about this. This tree is ViВ¶Ж’u Himself appearing in a concrete form; exalted souls worship the
sacred root of this tree. Dependence on this tree wipes out thousands of menГӯs sins, grants their prayers and
bestows merit.Г®
Besides this, work on Indian medicine also speak highly of this tree; its leaves, fruit and barkГіall
possess medicinal properties. They are made use of in treating ailments such as impurity of blood, excess
of phlegm wind and bile, a burning sensation all over the body, vomitting, dropsy, want of appetite,
poisoning, cough, remittent fever, hiccough, a bruise in the heart, disease of the nose, dry spreading itches,
worms, leprosy, a sore on the skin, a burn etc.

=== PAGE 506 ===

* Chapter X *
505
PВөurЖ’ГҘyu, BrahmacГҘrвҲӮ, RatiguЖ’a, SuparЖ’a,
ViвҖ№vГҘvasu, Sucandra, BhГҘnu, AtibГҘhu, HГҘhГҘ,
HВөuhВөu and Tumburu, being born of PradhГҘ,
are called Г«PrГҘdheyasГӯ (MahГҘbhГҘrata, Г…di.,
LXV). Among them, HГҘhГҘ, HВөuhВөu, ViвҖ№vГҘvasu,
Tumburu, Citraratha and others are more
prominent than the rest; and Citraratha is
considered to be the ruler of them all. Citraratha
is highly proficient in celestial music, and a
master of this art. It is therefore, that the Lord
calls him His very self. Accounts of these
Gandharvas are contained in the Agni,
MГҘrkaЖ’Е’eya, VГҘyu and KГҘlikГҘ PurГҘЖ’as, the
MahГҘbhГҘrata, Г…di-Parva and other scriptures.
A Г«SiddhaГӯ is one who has attained
supernatural powers of all kinds obtaining of
the physical and astral planes, and is fully
endowed with noble virtues such as
righteousness, wisdom, glory and dispassion
etc. There are thousands of such Siddhas,
Kapila being the foremost of them all. Lord
Kapila is a direct manifestation of God. He
took his descent from the womb of DevahВөuti,
wife of the great YogвҲӮ, Kardama, in order to
impart divine knowledge to his mother. At
the time of his birth the Creator, BrahmГҘ
himself, made his appearance in the hermitage
of Kardama and said to DevahВөuti:Гі
Г¬Held in high esteem by the teachers of
SГҘвҲҶkhya, this lord of the Siddhas will enhance
your glory and will be known throughout the
world by the name of Г«KapilaГӯ.* (вҖәrвҲӮmad
BhГҘgavata III.xxiv.19)
Kapila is eternally endowed by nature
with 
virtues 
like 
knowledge, 
glory,
righteousness and dispassion etc. There is
none among the Siddhas who can even stand
comparison with him, much less excel him. It
is, therefore, that the Lord calls sage Kapila
His own self.
was also obtained during the churning of the
ocean. That is why the Lord declares it to be
His own self.
A king devoted to his duty and
adorned with virtues enumerated in the
scriptures urges his subjects to righteous acts,
deterring them from sinful pursuits, and protects
them; hence he is regarded as superior to
other men. Such kings exhibit the divine
power more than ordinary men. It is, therefore,
that the Lord calls him His own self.
В©UГ¬ГҠГ’Г”вҖ”ГјГҠп¬ӮвҖҡв—ҠEГҠЕёГҠВў ГҒп¬ӮГҒh в—ҠГҠв—Ҡв—ҠГҺГғГҠпЈҝjп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҲһпЈҝвҒ„UГҠп¬ӮГғВў ВӘВЎпЈҝГЈВәЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠВў ЕёвҒ„UГҠГЎГҠГҠВў Гё ЕёвҒ„UГҠГҒЕ“В¬в—ҠЛңГ”H 27H
В©UГ«Г«ГҠГ’вҖ”ГјГҠп¬ӮвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” (the celestial horse named) UccaiВЁвҖ№ravГҘ; вҖўEГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among horses; ГҒп¬ӮГҒh know;
в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; вҖўв—ҠГҺГғГҠпЈҝЕ’ЛңГ”Г·п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” (begotten of the churning of the ocean) along with nectar; вҲһпЈҝвҒ„UГҠп¬ӮГғв—ҠЛңГ” (the
celestial elephant called) AirГҘvata; ВӘВЎпЈҝГЈВәЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among mighty elephants; ЕёвҒ„UГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among men; Гё
and; ЕёвҒ„UГҠГҒЕ“В¬в—ҠЛңГ” the king.
Among horses, know Me to be the celestial horse, UccaiВЁвҖ№ravГҘ, begotten of the
churning of the ocean, alongwith nectar; among mighty elephants, AirГҘvata (IndraГӯs
elephant); and among men, the king.                                                       (27)
The celestial horse, UccaiВЁвҖ№ravГҘ, was
received during the churning of the ocean. along
with nectar. Hence it is counted as one of the
fourteen gems of the world and is regarded as
the king of horses. It is therefore that the Lord
calls UccaiВЁвҖ№ravГҘ, His own self.
The leader of a herd of elephants is
called Г«GajendraГӯ. Among such Gajendras
too the celestial elephant AirГҘvata, owned by
Indra, is the best of all and is regarded as
their chief. Like the horse UccaiВЁвҖ№ravГҘ, it
*
вҖўГҝВў ГҒвҖҡhВӘГЎГҠГҠЕ“ГӢвүҘГҠвҖ” вҖҡГҠВўГ…ГҝГҠГёГҠГҝГ’ВёвҖ” вҖҡГҲвҖҡГӘв—ҠГғвҖ”вҖ“ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ вҲ‘В§ГҒВ¬вҲӮU ГҹГ ГҝГҠГ…ГҝГҠВў ВӘГЈГғГҠ ГғпЈҝ вҲ‘В§ГӢГҒГғВёп¬ӮЕ“ВёЕёвҖ”H

=== PAGE 507 ===

506
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The term Г«NarГҘdhipaГӯ can also be taken
to refer to the Manu presiding over a particular
Manvantara, since he is the lord of men of
that Manvantara. It is well-known that PrajГҘpati
appointed Vaivasvata Manu as the Lord of
men of the existing Manvantara.
в—ҠЕёГҲcГҝГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠГҒЕ“В¬ГҒГғВў ГёвҲ‘ЛқпЈҝВ§ п¬ӮГ’п¬ӮSп¬ӮГғВў в—ҠЕёГҲв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
(VГҘyu-PurГҘЖ’a LXX.18)
вҖўГҠГҝГҲЕ“ГҠЕёГҠв—ҠвҖһВўU п¬ӮГ–ГҠЛқВў Е“пЈҝЕёГҚЕёГҠв—ҠГҒSв—Ҡ вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠЕ“ГҲвҲ‘ЛңВ§Г”вҖ“
В¬ЛқВЎЕёpГҠГҒSв—Ҡ вҲ‘В§ГЈЕ’В¬ВёвҖ” вҖҡВ¬ГҠВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠГҒSв—Ҡ п¬ӮГҠвҖҡГҲГҒвҲ‘В§вҖ”Г”H 28H
вҖўГҠГҝГҲЕ“ГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among weapons; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; п¬ӮГ–ГҠЛқв—ҠЛңГ” the thunderbolt (the weapon of Indra); Е“пЈҝЕёГҚЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ”
among cows; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ I am; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠЕ“ГҲвҲ‘ЛңВ§Г” the celestial cow named KГҘmadhenu (the cow of plenty);
В¬ЛқВЎЕёвҖ” followed by procreation; Гё and; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ I am; вҲ‘В§ГЈЕ’В¬ВёвҖ” generative passion, urge; вҖҡВ¬ГҠВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ”
among serpents; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ am; п¬ӮГҠвҖҡГҲГҒвҲ‘В§вҖ”Г” VГҘsuki (the king of serpents).
Among weapons, I am the thunderbolt; among cows, I am the celestial cow,
KГҘmadhenu (the cow of plenty). I am the the generative passion which leads to
procreation (as enjoined by the scriptures); among serpents, I am VГҘsuki.                          (28)
Him. The same idea was expressed in verse
11 of Chapter VII by adding the qualification
Г«DharmГҘviruddhaВЁГӯ (not inconsistent with
virtue) to the word Г«KГҘmaВЁГӯ (sexual desire).
The intention is to show that sexual enjoyment
indulged in by sensual men for the gratification
of the sense is beastly and hardly consistent
with virtue; only such enjoyment as is indulged
in by men of self-control only for the sake of
procreation, and as enjoined by the scriptures,
is consistent with virtue and, therefore, good.
Hence it finds a place among the glories of
God.
VГҘsuki, being the king of serpents and
a devotee of God, is regarded as the best of
serpents. Hence the Lord declares him to be
His own self.
Among all the weapons of the universe
the thunderbolt (IndraГӯs weapon) is the most
powerful, because it embodies the glory of
sage DadhвҲӮciГӯs austerities and the lustre of
God Himself; and it is said to be unfailing in
effect (вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata VI.xi.19-20). Hence
the Lord speaks of it as His very self.
The celestial cow KГҘmadhenu (the cow
of plenty) is the best of all cows. She can satisfy
all the desires of gods and men and was begotten
during the churning of the ocean. Hence the
Lord declares her to be His own self.
Г«KandarpaГӯ is an appellation of the god
of sexual love. By adding the qualification
Г«PrajanaГӯ to it, the Lord shows that only that
sexual urge which leads to procreation as
enjoined by the scriptures is identical with
вҖўЕёГЈГғpГҠГҒSв—Ҡ ЕёГҠВӘГҠЕёГҠВў п¬ӮLВ§ГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠЕ’вҖҡГҠв—ҠвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҒВ¬ГғГҺГҺГЎГҠГҠв—ҠГҝВёв—ҠГҠ ГёГҠГҒSв—Ҡ Гҝв—ҠвҖ” вҖҡВўГҝв—ҠГғГҠв—ҠвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”H 29H
вҖўЕёГЈГғвҖ”Г” Ananta (the serpent-god); ГёГ” and; вҖўГҒSв—ҠГ” am; ЕёГҠВӘГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among the NГҘgas (a special
class of serpents); п¬ӮLВ§ГЎГҠвҖ” VaruЖ’a (the god of water); ГҝГҠЕ’вҖҡГҠв—ҠЛңГ” (the lord) of aquatic creatures;
вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; ГҒВ¬ГғГҺГҺГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among the manes; вҖўГҝВёв—ҠГҠ AryamГҘ (the head of the PitГҰs); Гё and; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ am; Гҝв—ҠвҖ”Г”
Yama (the god of death); вҖҡВўГҝв—ҠГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among rulers; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I.
Among NГҘgas (a special class of serpents), I am the serpent-god, Ananta; and I
am VaruЖ’a, the lord of waters and aquatic creatures. Among the manes, I am AryamГҘ
(the head of the PitГҰs); and among rulers, I am Yama (the god of death).                       (29)

=== PAGE 508 ===

* Chapter X *
507
The serpent-god вҖәeВ¶a is the king of all
NГҘgas and is endowed with a thousand heads.
Serving as a cosy bed for the Lord and
rendering other services to Him, he is constantly
engaged in gratifying Him. Besides he is a
great devotee of the Lord, and often
manifesting himself along with the Lord, he
participates in His divine sports. His birth
also is attributed to God* Hence he is declared
to be the LordГӯs own self.
VaruЖ’a, being the Lord of all aquatic
creatures and deities presiding over the waters,
the guardian of a quarter of the universe, a
celestial being and a devotee of God, is held
to be an outstanding personality. Hence the
Lord speaks of him as His own self.
There are seven principal manes;вҖ 
KavyavГҘha, Anala, Soma, Yama, AryamГҘ,
the AgniВ¶vГҘttas and the BarhiВ¶ads. AryamГҘ,
being the head of the PitГҰs, is recognized as
the best of them all; therefore, the Lord
speaks of him as His own self.
Among all the rulers on earth, as well as
in the celestial world, Yama (the god of
death) is the greatest. The awards of Yama
are all equitable and righteous, salutary as
well as expiatory in character. He is an
enlightened devotee of God and the guardian
of a quarter of the universe. Hence the Lord
speaks of him as His own Self.вҖЎ
В¬ЛқtГ”UГҠЕ’pГҠГҒSв—Ҡ Е’Г’Г ГҝГҠЕёГҠВў вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮUвҖ” вҲ‘В§вҲӮUГҝГғГҠв—ҠвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
в—ҠГҺВӘГҠГЎГҠГҠВў Гё в—ҠГҺВӘпЈҝГЈВәЛқГҠпЈҝЛҳвҖһВўU п¬ӮГ’ЕёГғпЈҝГҝp В¬ГҒЛҮГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ”H 30H
*
вүҘГҠпЈҝВ·Вў ГёГҠвҲ‘В§ГҖВ¬ГҝgпЈҝп¬Ӯв—ҠЕёГЈГғВў ГҒп¬ӮEMВ§ГҒВ¬ГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“ ГҝГҠпЈҝ Е“ГҠвҒ„UГҝГҒГғ Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё Е“вҒ„UГҠВў ГёпЈҝв—ҠГҠВў вҖҡВ¬п¬ӮВёГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ”H
(MahГҘ., BhiВ¶ma., LXVII.13)
Г¬This supreme Deity brought forth the celestial NГҘga, Ananta by name, who embodies in himself the
whole creation and supports on his head the entire globe including the mountains as well as all living
beings.Г®
вҖ 
вҲ‘В§вҲҡГҝп¬ӮГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝЛҳЕёвҲӮUвҖ” вҖҡГҠпЈҝв—ҠГҠпЈҝ Гҝв—ҠpГ’п¬ӮГҠГҝВёв—ҠГҠ ГғГ•ГҠвҖ“ вҖўГҒВӘAcп¬ӮГ”ГҠГ»ГҠГҠ вҖҷГҒвҖһВёUВ·Е’Г№ГҝpГҠГЈГ ГҝГҠ sГ”в—ҠГҚГғВёГҝвҖ”H
(вҖәiva., Dharma., LXIII.2)
In some books we read the following names: SukГҘla, Г…вҲҶgirasa, SusvadhГҘ, SomapГҘ, VairГҘja, the
AgniВ¶vГҘttas and the BarhiВ¶ads (HarivaвүҲвҖ№a, PВөurva, XVIII). The names may have differed in the different
Manvantaras.
вҖЎ
In the court of Yama no one is treated with partiality on any score, nor is there any scope for
recommendation, bribery or flattery. His laws are inexorable. It is therefore that he is considered the greatest
among rulers. Indra (the lord of paradise), Agni (the god of fire), NirГҰti (the goddess of death), VaruЖ’a (the
god of water), VГҘyu (the god of air), Kubera (the god of riches), вҲ«вҖ№ГҘna (вҖәiva) and BrahmГҘГіthese are the
ten regional gods (vide BГҰhaddharma-PurГҘЖ’a, Uttara., 9). They are the guardians of all the quarters of the
universe.
It is said that to the virtuous Yama presents a naturally genial aspect; whereas to the sinners he appears
in a dark and ghastly form with bloodshot eyes, terrible jaws, a tongue shooting like lightning, and dreadful
bristling hair and with the rod of Punishment raised in his hand  (Skanda., KГҘвҖ№вҲӮ., PВөurvГҘrdha, VIII.55,56).
Yama is possessed of supreme wisdom. It was he who imparted the knowledge of the Self to NaciketГҘ.
The story of NaciketГҘ appears in the KaВўhopaniВ¶ad, the MahГҘbhГҘrata AnuвҖ№ГҘsana-Parva and the VГҘrГҘha-
PurГҘЖ’a. Over and above this he is a great devotee of God. The glories of God, as well as of the Divine
Name, sung by him before his messengers in вҖәrвҲӮmada BhГҘgavata VI.iii, ViВ¶Ж’u-PurГҘЖ’a III.vii, and Skanda-
PurГҘЖ’a, KГҘвҖ№вҲӮ-KhaЖ’Е’a, PВөurvГҘrdha. Ch. VIII, should be carefully studied by all without fail.
But occasionally there appear on earth men who bring even Yama to his witГӯs end. The Skanda-
PurГҘЖ’a records the story of a famous emperor, KвҲӮrtimГҘn by name, who was a great devotee of God. Through
his lofty teachings, all his subjects were inspired with piety and devotion. By virtue of his religious merits,

=== PAGE 509 ===

508
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The progeny of Diti are known as Daityas.
PrahlГҘda has been recognized as the best of
the Daityas inasmuch as he is endowed with
all good qualities, an extremely pious soul, a
faithful, loving and disinterested devotee of
God, and the ruler of the Daityas. Hence the
Lord speaks of him as His very self.
The word Г«KГҘlaГӯ denotes time with its
various divisions, e.g., a moment, an hour, a
day, a fortnight, a month, a year and so on.
It is the basis of all astronomical calculations.
Hence the Lord declares it to be identical
with Himself.
The lion is recognized as the king of all
beasts. It is the strongest, the boldest and the
bravest of animals and has a most dignified
bearing. Hence the Lord counts it among His
glories.
GaruЕ’a, son of VinatГҘ, is the king of
birds. Being the largest and most powerful of
all birds, he is regarded as the best of them.
Over and above this, he is a great devotee of
God and the LordГӯs own carrier. Hence the
Lord declares him to be His own Self.
В¬ЛқtГ”UГҠЕ’вҖ”Г” (the famous devotee) PrahlГҘda; ГёГ” and; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ am; Е’Г’Г ГҝГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among the Daityas; вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮUвҖ”
Time; вҲ‘В§вҲӮUГҝГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among reckoners; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; в—ҠГҺВӘГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among quadrupeds; Гё even so; в—ҠГҺВӘпЈҝГЈВәЛқвҖ” the
king of beasts, lion; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I (am); п¬ӮГ’ЕёГғпЈҝГҝвҖ”Г” GaruЕ’a (son of VinatГҘ); ГёГ” and; В¬ГҒЛҮГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among birds;
Among the Daityas, I am the great devotee, PrahlГҘda; and among reckoners, I am
Time; among quadrupeds, I am the lion, and among birds, I am GaruЕ’a.           (30)
the souls that were already rotting in the abode of Yama gradually began to be redeemed; while those who
had newly left their mortal coil attained the supreme state. Thus fresh entry into the abode of Yama was
completely stopped. The result was that in due course not a single soul was left in his abode. Thereupon
Yama lodged a complaint with BrahmГҘ, who in his turn referred him to BhagavГҘn ViВ¶Ж’u. The latter told
him that there was no help so long as the pious and devoted Emperor KвҲӮrtimГҘn ruled over the earth. But
such a state of affairs could not last for ever. (Skanda, ViВ¶Ж’u., Vai., XI.xii.13)
В¬п¬ӮЕёвҖ” В¬п¬ӮГғГҠв—ҠГҒSв—Ҡ вҒ„UГҠв—ҠвҖ” вүҘГҠSГІГҠГ·ГҺГғГҠв—ҠвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ВӨГҠВ·ГҠГЎГҠГҠВў в—ҠвҲ‘В§вҒ„UpГҠГҒSв—Ҡ dГҠпЈҝГғвҖҡГҠв—ҠГҒSв—Ҡ ВЎГҠqГ”Uп¬ӮГӢГ”H 31H
В¬п¬ӮЕёвҖ”Г” the wind; В¬п¬ӮГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among the purifiers; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ am; вҒ„UГҠв—ҠвҖ” вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma; вүҘГҠSГІГҠГ·ГҺГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” (and)
among wielders of weapons; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; ВӨГҠВ·ГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among fishes; в—ҠвҲ‘В§вҒ„UвҖ” the alligator; Гё and; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ
am;  dГҠпЈҝГғвҖҡГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among rivers; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ am; ВЎГҠqГ”Uп¬ӮГӢ the GaвҲҶgГҘ.
Among purifiers, I am the wind; among warriors, I am вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma. Among fishes,
I am the alligator; and among streams, I am the GaвҲҶgГҘ.                              (31)
RГҘma, the Lord shows that it is He who
assumes different forms for carrying on different
kinds of sports in different ages. There is no
difference between вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma and вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a;
for it is He who appears in the form of вҖәrвҲӮ
RГҘma.
Among fishes, the alligator is the largest
and most powerful. It is on account of this
distinction that the Lord declares it to be His
own Self.
The river GaвҲҶgГҘ or BhГҘgвҲӮrathвҲӮ, is the
Some commentators have interpreted the
word Г«PavatГҘmГӯ to mean those possessed of
swift motion, though such an interpretation is
not supported by grammar. The wind has
been regarded as the best even among those
possessing speed as well as among purifiers.
Hence the superiority of the wind is established
from both the points of view.
The word Г«RГҘmaГӯ in this verse refers to
BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘmacandra, son of king
DaвҖ№aratha. By declaring His identity with вҖәrвҲӮ

=== PAGE 510 ===

* Chapter X *
509
best of all rivers. Having its origin in the
water which washed the feet of the Lord, it
is held to be most sacred in character.* The
PurГҘЖ’as and ItihГҘsas sing its glory in the
highest terms.
Besides this, the story goes that on one
occasion BhagavГҘn ViВ¶Ж’u Himself melted
and began to flow like water. Finding His
way into the water-pot of BrahmГҘ in that
liquid form, He became known as the GaвҲҶgГҘ.
Thus being no other than Brahma transformed
into a liquid, the GaвҲҶgГҘ possesses infinite
glory. Hence the Lord declares it to be His
own self.вҖ 
*
Е“ГҠГғГҲвҖ” 
вҲ‘В§в—ҠГЎВ«UвҲӮГҲUВЎвҲӮВўU 
ГғЕ’ГҲLВ§вҲ‘ЛқВ§в—ҠSГҝ 
В¬ГҠЕ’ГҠп¬ӮЕёпЈҝВЎЕёВ¬ГҒп¬ӮГІГҠГғГҝГҠ 
ЕёвҒ„пЈҝUГЈВәЛқвҖ“
Sп¬ӮЕ“ВёГҲГЈГҝГ·ГҚГӣГҠГ·ГҒвҖҡ вҖҡГҠ В¬ГғГғГӢ ГҒЕёв—ҠГҠГҒCГ”ВёU вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГІГҠГҝВў Г·ВӘп¬ӮГғГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠЕ’пЈҝп¬Ӯ вҲ‘В§ГӢГҒГғВёвҖ”H
(вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata VIII.xxi.4)
Г¬O king, that water poured from the pot of BrahmГҘ (the Creator), and hallowed by washing the feet
of the Lord, turned to be heavenly counterpart of the holy GaвҲҶgГҘ (MandГҘkinвҲӮ). Descending on earth from
the heavens, like the spotless fame of the Lord, it continues to sanctify the three worlds to this day.Г®
Её 
sГ”пЈҝГғГ В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠpГҝZ 
Sп¬ӮЕ“ГҲВёГЈГҝГҠ ГҝГҒЕ’вҖһUГҠпЈҝГҒЕ’Гғв—ҠЛң Г”вҖ“ вҖўЕёГЈГғГёвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠГӘГ·ГҠпЈҝВЎВ¬ЛқвҖҡГҚГғГҠГҝГҠ 
Г·п¬ӮГҒГ«ВҝUЕ’вҖ”H
вҖҡВўГҒЕёп¬ӮпЈҝвүҘГҝ в—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҒSв—ҠГңВҝЛӣUhГҝГҠ в—ҠЕёГҲГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳв—ҠвҲӮUГҠвҖ”вҖ“ ГІГҠГ’ВӘГҲГЎГҝВў Е’ГҲSГ ГҝВЎВў ГҒвҖһUГ п¬ӮГҠ вҖҡlГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠГғГҠSГғЕ’ГҠГ в—ҠГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ”H
(Ibid., IX.ix.14-15)
Г¬By firmly and devoutly fixing their unsullied mind on the lotus-feet of the Lord, sages have speedily
attained identity with Him, renouncing the world, which is a product of the three GuЖ’as or modes of PrakГҰti,
so difficult to renounce. Hence what has been stated above in praise of the holy GaвҲҶgГҘ, which cuts asunder
the bonds of earthly existence, and has proceeded from the same lotus feet of the Lord, is no cause for any
great wonder.Г®
вҖ 
When the great goddess SatвҲӮ, daughter of DakВ¶a and Mother of the whole universe, dropped her
body, and her consort, BhagavГҘn вҖәiva, embarked on a life of rigorous penance, the gods began to invoke
the goddess, who revealed herself before them. The gods thereupon implored her to seek the hand of Lord
вҖәiva once more. The goddess assured them that she would descend in two forms in the house of HimГҘlaya,
the king of mountains, from the womb of MenakГҘ, daughter of Sumeru. Thereupon she first appeared as
the GaвҲҶgГҘ. Offering praises to her, the gods took her to heaven. Assuming an embodied form, she thence
repaired to the KailГҘsa mountain with BhagavГҘn вҖәaвҲҶkara, and at the request of BrahmГҘ established herself
in the water-pot of BrahmГҘ in her formless aspect (вҖўГЈГғЕ“ГҠВёЕёГҠВўвүҘГҠГ·ГҠВӘпЈҝЕё ГҒSГ•ГғГҠ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”вҲ‘В§в—ҠГЎВ«UвҲӮUГҠГ’). BrahmГҘ carried her in that
water-pot to Brahmaloka, his own abode. Thereafter, on one occasion, BhagavГҘn вҖәaвҲҶkara paid a friendly
visit to VaikuЖ’Вўha (the abode of BhagavГҘn ViВ¶Ж’u), accompanied by goddess GaвҲҶgГҘ. There, at the request
of ViВ¶Ж’u, Lord вҖәiva entertained Him with songs. Whatever tune he sang materialized before them. As
вҖәaвҲҶkara sang the tune technically known by the name of вҖәrвҲӮ, the spirit of that tune also materialized.
Enchanted by that melody, BhagavГҘn NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a, who is Rasa (Bliss) personified, turned into a fluid and
glided along. Thereupon BrahmГҘ said to himself, Г«The melody that has emerged from Brahma (the eternal
principle of sound) is BrahmГҘ Itself, and BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ Hari, who is Brahma-embodied, has also melted on
this occasion; let the GaвҲҶgГҘ, who is identical with Brahma, absrob this liquid Brahma.Гӯ Reflecting thus, he
brought his water-pot into contact with that flowing form of NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a. As soon as this was done, the whole
of that liquid got mixed with the GaвҲҶgГҘ, and the formless GaвҲҶgГҘ now assumed the form of water. BrahmГҘ
then returned to his abode. Later on, when BhagavГҘn ViВ¶Ж’u, appearing as the Divine Dwarf, covered the
entire heaven-world with one of His feet consisting of Sattva, BrahmГҘ washed that foot with the water
contained in his water-pot. At the touch of that water, the divine foot got rooted there, and even after the
disappearance of Lord, the foot stayed along with the GaвҲҶgГҘ in heaven. The same GaвҲҶgГҘ, which emerged
from that foot, was later brought down to earth by BhagвҲӮratha, after great exertion in the shape of austere
penance, for the deliverance of his ancestors. Here too it was BhagavГҘn вҖәaвҲҶkara who bore her on his head.
This wonderful, beautiful and instructive story dealing with the glory of the GaвҲҶgГҘ appear in the
BГҰhaddharma-PurГҘЖ’a. Madhya-KhaЖ’Е’a, Chapter 12 to 28.

=== PAGE 511 ===

510
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
вҖўЛҮГҠвҒ„UГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒSв—Ҡ mГЈmвҖ” вҖҡГҠв—ҠГҠГҒвҖҡвҲ‘В§SГҝ ГёГ”вҖ“
вҖўвҖһUв—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮГҠЛҮГҠГҝвҖ” вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮUГҠпЈҝ Е“ГҠГғГҠвҖһВўU ГҒп¬ӮEГғГҠпЈҝв—ҠГҲПҖвҖ”Г”H 33H
вҖўЛҮГҠвҒ„UГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among sounds represented by the alphabet; вҖўвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UвҖ”Г” Г«AГӯ (the sound represented
by the first letter of the alphabet); вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ I am; mГЈmвҖ” (I am) the copulative compound; вҖҡГҠв—ҠГҠГҒвҖҡвҲ‘В§SГҝ
of the different varieties of compounds in SaвүҲskГҰt grammar; ГёГ” and; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” вҲһп¬Ӯ I alone (am);
вҖўЛҮГҠГҝвҖ” вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮUвҖ” the endless Time or the Devourer to Time itself; Е“ГҠГғГҠ the sustainer (of all); вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”
I (am); ГҒп¬ӮEГғГҠпЈҝв—ҠГҲПҖвҖ” having oneГӯs face on all sides.
Among the sounds represented by the various letters, I am Г«AГӯ (the sound
represented by the first letter of the alphabet); of the different kinds of compounds in
вҖҡВӘГҠВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠГҠГҒЕ’вҒ„UГЈГғp 
в—ҠГӨГҝВў 
ГёГ’п¬ӮГҠвҖһUв—ҠВЎВёГҲЕёГ”вҖ“
вҖўГӨГҝГҠГ в—ҠГҒп¬ӮlГҠ ГҒп¬ӮlГҠЕёГҠВў п¬ӮГҠЕ’вҖ” В¬Лқп¬ӮЕ’ГғГҠв—ҠвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”H 32H
вҖҡВӘГҠВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of creation; вҖўГҠГҒЕ’вҖ” the beginning; вҖўГЈГғвҖ”Г” the end; ГёГ” and; в—ҠГӨГҝв—ҠЛңГ” the middle; Гё and;
вҲһп¬Ӯ as well; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I (am); вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё O Arjuna; вҖўГӨГҝГҠГ в—ҠГҒп¬ӮlГҠ the knowledge of the soul or
metaphysics; ГҒп¬ӮlГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of knowledge; п¬ӮГҠЕ’вҖ”Г” the reasoning (adopted for determining the truth);
В¬Лқп¬ӮЕ’ГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” (and) in disputants; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I.
Arjuna, I am the beginning, the middle and the end of all creations. Of all
knowledge, I am the knowledge of the soul (metaphysics); among disputants, I am the
right type of reasoning.                                                                  (32)
knowledge and that is why the Lord declares
it to be His own self.
There are three forms of argumentation
known by the names of Г«JalpaГӯ, Г«VitaЖ’Е’ГҘГӯ
and Г«VГҘdaГӯ. A disputation which is held with
a view to establishing oneГӯs own viewpoint
and for the demolition of the adversaryГӯs
standpoint irrespective of which is right and
which is wrong, is called Г«JalpaГӯ. That which
is resorted to only for the demolition of the
opponentГӯs standpoint is known as Г«VitaЖ’Е’ГҘГӯ;
while reasoning with the pure motive of
arriving at the right conclusion is known by
the name of Г«VГҘdaГӯ. While Г«JalpaГӯ and
Г«VitaЖ’Е’ГҘГӯ give rise to anger, hatred, violence,
pride and other evils, Г«VГҘdaГӯ is helpful in
ascertaining the truth and attaining oneГӯs
spiritual goal. So, while Г«JalpaГӯ and Г«VitaЖ’Е’ГҘГӯ
are worth giving up, Г«VГҘdaГӯ is worth adopting
wherever necessary. It is because of this
merit possessed by Г«VГҘdaГӯ that the Lord
declares it as one of His glories.
In verse 20 above, the Lord declared
Himself as the beginning, the middle and
also the end of all beings; and in the present
verse He says that He is the beginning, the
middle and the end of all creations. There is
no tautology here; for whereas the word
Г«BhВөutГҘnГҘmГӯ in verse 20 stands for sentient
beings alone, the word Г«SargГҘЖ’ГҘmГӯ in the
present verse stands for the whole creation
consisting of sentient and insentient beings
and including all the worlds.
Г«AdhyГҘtmavidyГҘГӯ or BrahmavidyГҘ is that
branch of knowledge which deals with the
Self, throws light on the Self and enables the
soul to realize Brahma easily. All other branches
of knowledge in the world, known as well as
unknown, are inferior to BrahmavidyГҘ; for
they strengthen the bonds of ignorance rather
than break them. Through BrahmavidyГҘ,
however, the knot of ignorance is untied for
ever and the truth relating to God realized.
Hence it is superior to all other branches of

=== PAGE 512 ===

* Chapter X *
511
The sound represented by Г«AГӯ is the
first of all vowels and consonants and it runs
through the sounds represented by all other
letters. The вҖәruti also says: Г¬All speech is
represented by the sound Г«AГӯ.Г®* For these
reasons the sound Г«AГӯ is the best of all other
sounds. Hence the Lord declares it to be His
own self.
The copulative compound is the best of
all compounds, inasmuch as all its components
carry equal emphasis.вҖ  Hence the Lord
enumerates it as one of His glories.
The word Г«KГҘlaГӯ occurring in verse 30
denotes Time as understood in terms of its
various divisions such as a Kalpa, Yuga,
year, half-year, month, day, hour, minute,
second and so on. It is an evolute of PrakГҰti
and ceases to exist in what is known as the
MahГҘpralaya, or Final Dissolution. Therefore,
it is not Г«unendingГӯ. The Г«TimeГӯ referred to
in the present verse, however, is the same
as the supreme Brahma or God Himself,
who is constant, eternal and everlasting
and without beginning or end. Hence the
word has been qualified by the adjective
Г«endlessГӯ (AkВ¶ayaВЁ). Thus there is a world
of difference between the Г«TimeГӯ referred
to in verse 30 and the Г«TimeГӯ spoken of
in the present verse. One is a product of
PrakГҰti, while the other is wholly beyond
PrakГҰti.вҖЎ
Speaking of Himself as Г¬the sustainer of
all, having His face on all sidesГ®, the Lord
brings out His identity with the Cosmic Form
of God. The intention is to show that the all-
formed and all-pervading God, the sustainer
and nourisher of all, is the same as вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a,
and no other.
grammar, I am the copulative compound. I am verily the endless Time (the devourer
of Time, God); I am the sustainer of all, having My face on all sides.             (33)
*
вҖўвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГҠпЈҝ п¬ӮГ’ вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВё п¬ӮГҠвҲ‘ЛңВ§Г”вҖ“ (Aitareya BrГҘhmaЖ’a, PВөurvГҘrdha, III.6)
вҖ 
In SaвүҲskГҰt grammar there are four varieties of compounds, viz., (1) AvyayвҲӮbhГҘva, (2) TatpuruВ¶a,
(3) BahuvrвҲӮhi, and (4) Dvandva. The other two compounds, KarmadhГҘraya and Dvigu, are covered by the
TatpuruВ¶a. In the AvyayвҲӮbhГҘva compound, emphasis lies on the first word of the compound. For example,
in the compound word Г«AdhihariГӯ, meaning Г«in HariГӯ, the indeclinable Г«AdhiГӯ denotes the seventh case-
ending; and this is what is sought to be conveyed by this compound. In the TatpuruВ¶a compound, however,
the emphasis lies on the second word. For example, of the two components of the compound word Г«SвҲӮtГҘpatiГӯ,
the emphasis lies on Г«PatiГӯ (husband): for the whole expression signifies вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma, husband of SвҲӮtГҘ. In the
compound called Г«BahuvrвҲӮhiГӯ, the compounded whole signifies an object other than the meaning of the two
components. For example, the compound word Г«PвҲӮtГҘmbaraГӯ refers to the person wearing a yellow garment.
Neither of the two components constituting this word, viz., Г«PвҲӮtaГӯ (yellow) and Г«AmbaraГӯ (garment) carry
emphasis individually; both of them taken together point to a third objects, viz., the Lord who wears a
yellow robe. In the form of compound known as Dvandva (the copulative compound), however, all the
components carry equal emphasis. For example, the compound word Г«RГҘmalakВ¶maЖ’auГӯ refers to RГҘma and
LakВ¶maЖ’a both. Hence both the components forming this compound carry equal emphasis.
вҖЎ
There are three varieties of KГҘla:Гі
(1) Г«KГҘlaГӯ in the sense of Time.
(2) Г«KГҘlaГӯ in the form of PrakГҰti. The period immediately following the MahГҘpralaya; of Final
Dissolution, during which PrakГҰti exists in a state of equillibrium, is Time in the form of PrakГҰti.
(3) The eternal and everlasting God Himself, the embodiment of Knowledge and Bliss.
Higher and subtler than Г«KГҘlaГӯ in the gross form of Time is Г«KГҘlaГӯ in the form of PrakГҰti, which is
incomprehensible to the intellect; whereas Г«KГҘlaГӯ in the shape of God is even subtler and higher than, and
far superior to, KГҘla in the form of PrakГҰti. Really speaking, God is wholly beyond time and space; but where
we speak of PrakГҰti and its evolute, the world of matter, God alone, who is all Knowledge and all Bliss,
and who is the source, substratum and inspirer of all, is the real Г«KГҘlaГӯ. It is He who is referred to here as
the Г«endless TimeГӯ.

=== PAGE 513 ===

512
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
It is God Himself who appears as Death
to destroy all. That is why He speaks of
Death as His very self in the present verse.
He has already stated in verse IX.19 that He
is Death and Immortality both.
Even as God appearing as Death destroys
all living beings, i.e., disunites them from their
body, so does He unite them with other bodies
and thus causes their birth. This is what is
meant when the Lord declares Himself to be
the origin of all that are to be born.
PrasВөuti, daughter of SvГҘyambhuva Manu,
was married to DakВ¶a PrajГҘpati and gave
birth to twentyfour daughters. KвҲӮrti, MedhГҘ,
DhГҰti, SmГҰti, and KВ¶amГҘ are included in
them. Of these, KвҲӮrti, MedhГҘ and DhГҰti were
given in marriage to Dharma; SmГҰti was
married to AвҲҶgirГҘ, and KВ¶amГҘ to sage Pulaha.
вҖәrвҲӮ is a daughter of BhГҰgu, born of DakВ¶aГӯs
daughter Г«KhyГҘtiГӯ; her hand was espoused
by BhagavГҘn NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a. And Г«VГҘkГӯ is an
offspring of BrahmГҘ. All these seven are
deities presiding over the seven virtues indicated
by their names, viz., glory, prosperity, speech,
memory, intelligence, steadfastness and
forbearance, and are recognized as the best
among women. It is, therefore, that the Lord
speaks of them as His glories.
в—ҠГҺГ ГҝГҲвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҖһUвҒ„UpГҠвҖһUв—ҠГҲjп¬Ӯp Г·ГҒп¬ӮcГҝГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҲ‘В§ГӢГҢГғвҖ” ГјГҠГӢп¬ӮГҠВёBВ§ ЕёГҠвҒ„UГӢГЎГҠГҠВў Sв—ҠГҺГҒГғв—ҠпЈҝВёЕ“ГҠ Е“ГҺГҒГғвҖ” ЛҮГҠв—ҠГҠГ”H 34H
в—ҠГҺГ ГҝГҲвҖ” the Death; вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҖһUвҒ„UвҖ”Г” that annihilates all; ГёГ” and; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I am; В©Ujп¬ӮвҖ” (I am) the origin; ГёГ”
even so; Г·ГҒп¬ӮcГҝГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of all that shall be; вҲ‘В§ГӢГҢГғвҖ”Г” glory; ГјГҠГӢвҖ”Г” prosperity; п¬ӮГҠвҲ‘ЛңВ§Г” speech; Гё and; ЕёГҠвҒ„UГӢГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ”
of feminities; Sв—ҠГҺГҒГғвҖ” memory; в—ҠпЈҝЕ“ГҠГ” intelligence; Е“ГҺГҒГғвҖ” steadfastness; ЛҮГҠв—ҠГҠ forbearance.
I am the all-destroying Death that annihilates all, and the origin of all that shall
be born. Of feminities, I am KвҲӮrti, вҖәrвҲӮ, VГҘk, SmГҰti, MedhГҘ, DhГҰti and KВ¶amГҘ (the
goddesses presiding over glory, prosperity, speech, memory, intelligence, steadfastness
and forbearance, respectively).                                                           (34)
вҖҷГҺвҖһUГ вҖҡГҠв—Ҡ ГғГ•ГҠ вҖҡГҠв—ҠAГҠВў ВӘГҠГҝГІГҠГӢ ВҝUГЈЕ’вҖҡГҠв—ҠвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
в—ҠГҠвҖҡГҠЕёГҠВў в—ҠГҠВӘВёвүҘГҠГӢВ·ГҠпЈҝВёЛҳвҖһUв—ҠГҺГғГҚЕёГҠВў вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҖҡГҲв—ҠГҠвҲ‘В§вҒ„UвҖ”Г”H 35H
вҖҷГҺвҖһUГ вҖҡГҠв—ҠГ” the class of вҖәrutis known as BГҰhatsГҘma; ГғГ•ГҠГ” likewise; вҖҡГҠв—ҠAГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among all the вҖәrutis
that can be sung; ВӘГҠГҝГІГҠГӢ the metre known as GГҘyatrвҲӮ; ВҝUГЈЕ’вҖҡГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among the Vedic hymns; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”
I (am); в—ҠГҠвҖҡГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among the twelve months (of the Hindu calendar); в—ҠГҠВӘВёвүҘГҠГӢВ·ВёвҖ”Г” the month known
as MГҘrgaвҖ№вҲӮrВ¶a (corresponding approximately to November); вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I (am); ВҙВ§ГғГҚЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among the
six seasons (successively appearing in India in course of a year); вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҖҡГҲв—ҠГҠвҲ‘В§вҒ„UвҖ”Г” the spring season
(lit., the season of flowers).
Likewise, among the вҖәrutis that can be sung, I am the BГҰhatsГҘma; while among
the Vedic hymns, I am the hymn known as GГҘyatrвҲӮ. Again, among the twelve months
of the Hindu calendar, I am the month known as Г«MГҘrgaвҖ№вҲӮrВ¶aГӯ (corresponding
approximately to November-December); and among the six seasons (successively
appearing in India in the course of a year), I am the spring season.                (35)
the variety known as BГҰhatsГҘma* is the most
prominent and therefore the best. Hence the
Among the different varieties (Rathantara
etc.) of hymns appearing in the SГҘmaveda,
* BГҰhatsГҘma is a special variety of psalms finding place in the SГҘmaveda and devoted to the praises of God
under the name of Indra. These psalms are sung towards the end of the sacrifice known by the name of AtirГҘtra.

=== PAGE 514 ===

* Chapter X *
513
Lord speaks of it as His very self.
The GГҘyatrвҲӮ is the most important of all
the hymns or metrical compositions comprised
in the Vedas. The glory of the GГҘyatrвҲӮ is
scattered through the entire body of sacred
literature consisting of the Vedas, SmГҰti-texts,
ItihГҘsas and PurГҘЖ’as.* It is due to this excellence
of the GГҘyatrвҲӮ that the Lord speaks of it as
His very self.
In the days of the MahГҘbhГҘrata, the
year used to begin with the month of MГҘrgaвҖ№вҲӮrВ¶a
(MahГҘ., Anu., Ch. 106 and 109). Hence it is
the first of the twelve months. Besides, the
scriptures promise great rewards to those
who observe sacred vows and fastsвҖ  in this
month. The offering of the newly harvested
crop to the sacred fire has been recommended
in this very month. The RГҘmГҘyaЖ’a of VГҘlmвҲӮki
speaks of this month as the ornament of the
year. Thus the month of MГҘrgaвҖ№вҲӮrВ¶a is superior
to all other months of the year in many
respects. Hence the Lord declares it to be His
very self.
The spring is the best of all seasons and
has been recognized as their queen. During
this season the whole plant kingdom wears a
sprightly appearance and is clothed in fresh
leaves and flowers even without water. The
weather in this season is neither too hot nor
too cold, and almost all creatures feel cheerful
and happy. That is why the Lord declares it
to be His own self.
* The following extracts from the scriptures will throw light on the glory of the GГҘyatrвҲӮ:Гі
ВӘГҠГҝГІГҠГӢ ВҝUГЈЕ’вҖҡГҠВў в—ҠГҠГғпЈҝГҒГғвҖ“
(NГҘrГҘyaЖ’opaniВ¶ad, 34)
Г¬GГҘyatrвҲӮ is the mother of all the Vedas.Г®
вҖҡп¬ӮВёп¬ӮпЈҝЕ’вҖҡГҠвҒ„UГ·ГҚГғГҠ 
 ВӘГҠГҝГІГҝГҠSГғГҲ 
вҖҡв—ҠГёВёЕёГҠ вҖ“ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҠЕ’ГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ вҖҡВўГӨГҝГҠГҝГҠВў ГғГҠВў ГӨГҝГҠГҝГҒГЈГғ ВЎВ¬ГҒГЈГғ ГёH
(DevвҲӮ-BhГҘgavata XI.xvi.15)
Г¬Worship of the GГҘyatrвҲӮ constitutes the essence of all the Vedas. Even gods like BrahmГҘ meditate on
and repeat the GГҘyatrвҲӮ every morning and evening.Г®
ВӘГҠГҝГІГҝГҲВ¬ГҠвҖҡЕёГҠ 
 ГҒЕёГ ГҝГҠ 
вҖҡп¬ӮВёп¬ӮпЈҝЕ’Г’вҖ” 
вҖҡв—ҠГӢГҒвҒ„UГғГҠ вҖ“ ГҝГҝГҠ ГҒп¬ӮЕёГҠ Г п¬ӮЕ“вҖ”В¬ГҠГғГҠпЈҝ вҖҷЛқГҠrГҠГ”ГЎГҠSГҝГҠГҒSГғ вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ•ГҠH
(Ibid., XII.viii.89)
Г¬All the Vedas declare worship of the GГҘyatrвҲӮ as an obligatory duty (for those invested with the sacred
thread). Neglect of this brings about the downfall of the BrГҘhmaЖ’a in every way.Г®
вҖўГ·ГӢCГ”ВўU вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВ¬AГҠпЈҝГҒГғ В¬ЛқГҠВ¬AГҲГҝГҠГғЛңГ” вҲ‘В§ГҠв—Ҡв—ҠГӢГҒГҘвҖҡГғв—ҠЛңГ” вҖ“ ВӘГҠГҝГІГҠГӢ 
п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ВЎЕёЕёГӢ 
ВӘГҠГҝГІГҠГӢ 
В¬ГҠВ¬ЕёГҠГҒвүҘГҠЕёГӢH
ВӘГҠГҝГІГҝГҠвҖ” В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠВў ЕёГҠГҒSГғ ГҒЕ’ГҒп¬Ӯ ГёпЈҝвҖһU Гё В¬ГҠп¬ӮЕёв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“ вҖһUSГғГІГҠГҠГЎГҠВ¬ЛқЕ’ГҠ 
Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГӢ 
В¬ГғГғГҠВў 
ЕёвҒ„UвҲ‘В§ГҠГЎГҠВёп¬ӮпЈҝH
(вҖәaвҲҶkhasmГҰti, XII.24-25)
Г¬A member of the twice-born classes performing the worship of the GГҘyatrвҲӮ attains the world of his
seeking and the enjoyments craved for him. GГҘyatrвҲӮ is the mother of all the Vedas and the destroyer of all
sins. There is nothing more purifying than the GГҘyatrвҲӮ either in heaven or on earth. Goddess GГҘyatrвҲӮ rescues
those who are going to fall in the ocean of hell by holding out her hand to them.Г®
ВӘГҠГҝГІГҝГҠSГғГҲ В¬вҒ„ВўU ЕёГҠГҒSГғ вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝЕ“ЕёВў В¬ГҠВ¬вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” вҖ“ в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҲҡГҝГҠNUГҒГғвҖҡВўГҝГҲQВ§ГҠВў 
В¬ЛқГЎГҠп¬ӮпЈҝЕё 
Гё 
вҖҡВўВЎВ¬пЈҝГғЛңГ”H
(SaвүҲvartasmГҰti, 218)
Г¬Nothing is more efficacious than the GГҘyatrвҲӮ in expiating oneГӯs sins. One should repeat the sacred
GГҘyatrвҲӮ-Mantra along with PraЖ’ava (the syllable OM) and the three mystic words (VyГҘhГҰtis).Г®
ЕёГҠГҒSГғ ВӘXГ”UГҠвҖҡв—ҠВў ГғГӢГ•Z Её Е’пЈҝп¬ӮвҖ” вҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠп¬ӮГҠГғЛңГ” В¬вҒ„UвҖ”вҖ“ ВӘГҠГҝГІГҝГҠSГғГҲ В¬вҒ„ВўU ВЎГҘГҝВў Её Г·ГҚГғВў Её Г·ГҒп¬ӮcГҝГҒГғH
(BГҰh., YogвҲӮ-YГҘjВӨavalkya, X.10)
Г¬There is no holy place equal in sanctity to the GaвҲҶgГҘ, and no deity superior to BhagavГҘn ViВ¶Ж’u.
And there has neither been, nor will there be, any mystic formula greater than the GГҘyatrвҲӮ.
вҖ 
вүҘГҠГҲГ„вҖ№пЈҝ 
в—ҠГҠВӘВёГҒвүҘГҠвҒ„пЈҝU 
В¬ЛҮГҠпЈҝ 
ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВ·jГғГҲВёвҒ„UЕёГҲГҙГҠГҝГҠ вҖ“ вҖўГҠвҒ„UГ·пЈҝГғ 
п¬ӮЛқГғГҒв—ҠЕ’Вў 
вҖҡГҠп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§ГҠГҒв—ҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠГҒЕ’ГғвҖ”В§H
(вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata VI.xix.12)
Г¬In the bright fortnight of the MГҘrgaвҖ№вҲӮrВ¶a, for the first time, a woman should undertake, with the
permission of her husband, this sacred vow of Г«PuвүҲsavanaГӯ, which fulfils all desiresГ®.

=== PAGE 515 ===

514
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
God is present in all living beings
and objects, good, bad or middling, existing
in this world. It is His presence and inspiration
that lend activity to the whole creation. There
is hardly any substance which is devoid of
the presence or power of God. Of all such
beings and objects exhibiting the SГҘttvika,
RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika qualities, only that being
or object which is possessed of some
extraordinary virtue, exceptional glory and
special attraction exhibits the presence and
power of God in a special degree. It is from
this point of view that the Lord has briefly
mentioned in this connection even abstract ideas
and virtues like victory, resolution, glory,
righteousness and knowledge along with
sentient beings like gods, demons, men, beasts,
birds and serpents etc., and inanimate objects
like the thunderbolt, senses, mind and ocean.
It is for brevityГӯs sake that the Lord has
mentioned only the main categories or groups.
The intention is to show that whatever being,
object, action or concept may be thought of,
He alone should be contemplated in that form.
It is from this point of view, and not with the
object of extolling gambling and encouraging
people to practise it, that of all deceitful practices
the Lord declares it to be His own self.
In this connection it should be
remembered that the Lord speaks of the most
ferocious and bloodthirsty lion and shark as
well as the all-consuming fire and all-devouring
Death as His very self. This does not mean
that anybody should take into his head to
play with a lion or a shark, jump into fire or
deliberately enter the jaws of death. The
objection that lies in adopting these courses
of action holds good in the case of gambling
as well.
Glory, victory, resolution and goodnessГі
all these virtues and achievements are helpful
in God-realization; hence the Lord declares
them as His own self. This declaration is
further intended to show that the glory of the
glorious really belongs to Him. He who
prides himself on it as a manifestation of his
own power commits a blunder. Even so, all
such virtues and achievements as the victory
of the victorious, the resolution of the resolute
and the goodness of the good are also His.
Priding oneself on these also constitutes the
height of folly.* Besides the above idea the
statement also indicates that those who are
blessed with these virtues should be regarded
as noble inasmuch as the divine glory is
manifested in them in a special degree.
lГҚГғВў ВҝUвҲӮUГҝГғГҠв—ҠГҒSв—Ҡ ГғпЈҝВЎSГғпЈҝВЎГҒSп¬ӮЕёГҠв—ҠвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ВЎГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒSв—Ҡ вҲҡГҝп¬ӮвҖҡГҠГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒSв—Ҡ вҖҡГ»п¬ӮВў вҖҡГ»п¬Ӯп¬ӮГғГҠв—ҠвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”H 36H
lГҚГғв—ҠЛңГ” gambling; ВҝUвҲӮUГҝГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among all deceitful practices; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ am; ГғпЈҝВЎвҖ” glory; ГғпЈҝВЎГҒSп¬ӮЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of
the glorious; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; ВЎГҝвҖ”Г” the victory (of the victorious); вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ am; вҲҡГҝп¬ӮвҖҡГҠГҝвҖ” the resolve (of the
resolute); вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ am; вҖҡГ»п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” goodness; вҖҡГ»п¬Ӯп¬ӮГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of the good; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I.
I am gambling among deceitful practices, and the glory of the glorious. I am the
victory of the victorious, the resolve of the resolute, the goodness of the good.    (36)
*
There is a story in the KenopaniВ¶ad which runs as under. Once upon a time the gods of heaven
scored a victory over the demons through the grace of God. The fame and glory of the gods filled all
quarters. Intoxicated by their triumph, the gods turned their face from God and said to each other: Г¬The
victory is, indeed ours. We have vanquished the demons by dint of our own valour and shrewdness. It is
for this reason that the world worships us and sings songs commemorating our victory.Г® In order to do a
good turn to the gods by humbling their pride, the Supreme Being or Brahma sportively manifested such
a wonderful form, the very sight of which puzzled the mind of the gods. In order to discover the identity
of that wonderful Being in the form of a YakВ¶a or demigod, the gods approached their leader, the god of

=== PAGE 516 ===

* Chapter X *
515
п¬ӮГҺcГЎГҠГӢЕёГҠВў п¬ӮГҠвҖҡГҲЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒSв—Ҡ В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬ӮГҠЕёГҠВў Е“ЕёTГҝвҖ”Г”вҖ“
в—ҠГҲЕёГӢЕёГҠв—ҠГҘГҝвҖһВўU вҲҡГҝГҠвҖҡвҖ” вҲ‘В§п¬ӮГӢЕёГҠв—ҠГҲвүҘГҠЕёГҠ вҲ‘В§ГҒп¬ӮвҖ”H 37H
п¬ӮГҺcГЎГҠГӢЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among the members of the VГҰВ¶Ж’i clan of KВ¶atriyas; п¬ӮГҠвҖҡГҲЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮвҖ” вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a (son of
Vasudeva); вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ am; В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬ӮГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of the sons of PГҘЖ’Е’u (viz. YudhiВ¶Вўhira and others); Е“ЕёTГҝвҖ”
Arjuna (lit., a conqueror of riches); в—ҠГҲЕёГӢЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among the sages; вҖўГҒВ¬ too; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; вҲҡГҝГҠвҖҡвҖ”Г” the great
sage VedavyГҘsa; вҲ‘В§п¬ӮГӢЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” among the wise; В©UвүҘГҠЕёГҠ вҲ‘В§ГҒп¬ӮвҖ” the wise вҖәukrГҘcГҘrya (the famous
preceptor of the demon kings).
I am KГҰВ¶Ж’a among the VГҰВ¶Ж’is; Arjuna, among the sons of PГҘЖ’Е’u; VyГҘsa, among
the sages, and the sage вҖәukrГҘcГҘrya among the wise.                                  (37)
fire, and said to him, Г¬O god of fire, you are the most glorious of all of us. Please go and ascertain who
this YakВ¶a really is.Г® The god of fire gave his assent and assured them of the success of his mission. He
then approached the YakВ¶a, but was so overpowered by his brilliance that he had no courage even to speak.
At last the divine YakВ¶a accosted the god of fire and asked him who he was. The god of fire replied, Г¬My
name is widely known. They call me both by the name of Agni and JГҘtavedГҘ.Г® Г¬This is all right;Г® rejoined
the Supreme Being, Г¬but O god of fire, tell Me what prowess you possess and what you are capable ofГ®.
Г¬O YakВ¶a !Г® the god of fire retorted, Г¬I can reduce to ashes whatever exists on earth or in the intermediate
region, animate or inanimate.Г®
Throwing a dry blade of grass before the god of fire, the Supreme Being asked him to burn it. The
god of fire exerted all his strength, and tried every means to burn it, but failed to do so. Hanging down
his head in shame and without saying a word more to the YakВ¶a, he returned to the gods with a sense of
frustration writ large on his face and reported that he had failed to discover the identity of the YakВ¶a.
Now it was the turn of the wind-god to approach the YakВ¶a; but he too had the same experience as
the god of fire and could not utter a single word. On the YakВ¶a enquiring who he was, the wind-god replied,
Г¬I am wind personified; my name and virtues are widely known. I constantly blow and carry smell from
one place to another. As I move in the intermediate region I am also called by the name of MГҘtariвҖ№vГҘГ®.
The Supreme Being asked him what he was capable of. The wind-god replied that he could blow away all
that existed on earth or in the intermediate region. Throwing the same dry blade of grass before him, the
Supreme Being asked him to blow it away. Exerting all his strength, the wind-god failed even to move the
blade of grass. Feeling much ashamed at this, he returned forthwith to the gods and reported that he had
failed to make out who the YakВ¶a was.
Indra, the Lord of paradise, was the next to approach the YakВ¶a. Finding him full of pride and egotism,
Brahma in the form of the YakВ¶a disappeared from the scene. In order to crush IndraГӯs pride, He did not
even condescend to speak to him. Though much abashed at this initial rebuff, Indra did not lose heart and
started meditation on God. Presently he noticed in the sky goddess UmГҘ, daughter of HimavГҘn (the deity
presiding over the HimГҘlayas) standing before him in all her splendour and adorned with the best of
ornaments of all kinds. Indra was delighted to see goddess PГҘrvatвҲӮ and thought that since she constantly
lived with BhagavГҘn вҖәiva, the embodiment of Knowledge, she must be aware who the YakВ¶a was. Therefore,
approaching her with great humility, he asked her to disclose the identity of the YakВ¶a who having revealed
himself before him, had forthwith disappeared. UmГҘ replied, Г¬the YakВ¶a was no other than Brahma. It was
Brahma who vanquished the demons. You were merely His instruments. Your glory increased because of
this victory of Brahma. It was His victory that had enhanced your glory and made you objects of worship.
It is your vanity that make you feel triumphant and glorified. Give up this false pride and know that
whatever happens is attributable to Him.Г®
This revelation made by UmГҘ opened the eyes of Indra and humbled his pride. Awakened to a sense
of the power of Brahma, Indra returned to his abode in heaven and imparted the knowledge of Brahma to
the gods of fire and wind as well. Thus these two gods also came to know Brahma. It was this knwledge
of Brahma which gave these three precedence over all other gods. Of these three, again, Indra occupies the
highest place, because he was the first to know Brahma.

=== PAGE 517 ===

516
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
By calling VГҘsudeva His own self, the
Lord 
establishes 
identity 
between 
a
manifestation of God and God himself. The
intention is to show that it is the integral
Brahma or the Supreme Person, the unborn,
immortal and almighty Overlord of all created
beings, who manifested Himself as вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a,
son of Vasudeva (IV.6). Therefore, he who
regards the Lord as an ordinary human being
commits an egregious blunder.
Even though YudhiВ¶Вўhira was the eldest
of the PГҘЖ’Е’avas, a highly virtuous soul and a
great devotee of God, yet it is Arjuna who is
recognized as the greatest of the PГҘЖ’Е’avas.
The reason for this is that when the Lord
appeared as the sage NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a, Arjuna was
present with Him in the form of Nara. Over
and above this, he was the dearest friend
and a great lover of the Lord. That is why
the Lord declares him to be His very self.*
A Г«MuniГӯ is one who meditates on God
and makes a deep study of the Vedas
and other scriptures. BhagavГҘn VedavyГҘsa
divided the Vedas after thoroughly examining
them, and is the author of the MahГҘbhГҘrata,
the various PurГҘЖ’as and many other
scriptures. He is a part manifestation of God,
and a repository of all noble virtues. Being
thus the foremost of all sages, VyГҘsa has
been declared by the lord as the same as
Himself.
The word Г«KaviВЁГӯ stands for a learned
and wise man. The great вҖәukrГҘcГҘrya is the
lord of the BhГҘrgavas (sons of BhГҰgu), an
adept in all branches of learning, and in the
science of reviving the dead, and the foremost
of the wise. Hence he has been declared to
be the very self of the Lord.вҖ 
*
The Lord Himself says in the MahГҘbhГҘrata:Гі
ЕёвҒ„USГ п¬Ӯв—ҠГҒвҖҡ 
Е’ГҲhВёВ·Вё 
вҖһUГҒвҒ„UЕёГҠВёвҒ„UГҠГҝГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ 
sГ”вҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“ вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝU вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҒв—Ҡв—ҠВў В¬ЛқГҠ#ГҠГ’ ЕёвҒ„UЕёГҠвҒ„UГҠГҝГЎГҠГҠп¬ӮГҺВ·ГӢH
вҖўЕёГЈГҝвҖ” В¬ГҠГ•Вё в—ҠГ»ГҠSГ п¬ӮВў Г п¬ӮГ»ГҠpГҠвҖһВўU ГғГ•Г’п¬Ӯ Гё вҖ“ ЕёГҠп¬ӮГҝГҠпЈҝвҒ„UГЈГғвҒ„ВўU вүҘГҠГ„ГҝВў п¬ӮпЈҝГҒЕ’ГғГҲВў Г·вҒ„UГғВ·ВёГ·H
(MahГҘ., Vana., XII.46-47)
Г¬O unconquerable Arjuna ! you are the divine Nara and I am God NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a Himself. At one time both
of us came down to earth in the form of the sages Nara and NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a. Therefore, O Arjuna, you are none
other than Myself, and I am no other than you. O best of the Bharatas ! no one can discriminate between
you and Me.Г®
вҖ 
Among the seven sons, Cyavana and others, of the great sage BhГҰgu, вҖәukra is the principal figure.
Through the worship of God вҖәaвҲҶkara, he obtained knowledge of the science of reviving the dead and a
body free from death and old age and as strong as adamant. It was through the grace of God вҖәaвҲҶkara, again,
that he acquired proficiency in the science of Yoga and attained the position of a teacher of Yoga. He is
the family priest of the demons. His other names are KГҘvya, Kavi and UвҖ№anГҘ. He married the mind-born
daughter of the manes, known by the name of Go. В®aЖ’Е’a and Amarka, the celebrated teachers of PrahlГҘda,
were the sons of вҖәukra. A master of many secret and rare Mantras, proficient in many sciences and
exceptionally wise, вҖәukra is a great adept in politics. His monumental work on political science, known
by the name of Г«вҖәukranвҲӮtiГӯ is widely known. It was from him that Kaca, the son of BГҰhaspati, learnt the
science of revival of the dead. Many wonderful and instructive stories connected with вҖәukra appear in the
MahГҘbhГҘrata, as well as in the BhГҘgavata, VГҘyu, Brahma, Matsya and Skanda PurГҘЖ’as and other works.
Е’ГЎВ«UГҠпЈҝ Е’в—ҠГҝГғГҠв—ҠГҒSв—Ҡ ЕёГӢГҒГғвҒ„UГҒSв—Ҡ ГҒВЎВӘГӢВ·ГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
в—ҠГҠГ’ЕёВў ГёГ’п¬ӮГҠГҒSв—Ҡ ВӘГҲsГ”ГҠЕёГҠВў ГҙГҠГҠЕёВў ГҙГҠГҠЕёп¬ӮГғГҠв—ҠвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”H 38H
Е’ГЎВ«UвҖ” the ruling power; Е’в—ҠUГҝГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” in rulers; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ (I) am; ЕёГӢГҒГғвҖ” righteousness; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ (I) am;
ГҒВЎВӘГӢВ·ГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” in those who seek to conquer; в—ҠГҠГ’Еёв—ҠЛңГ” reticence; Гё and; вҲһп¬Ӯ too (am I); вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ (I) am;
ВӘГҲsГ”ГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” (the custodian) of secrets; ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the wisdom; ГҙГҠГҠЕёп¬ӮГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of the wise; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I.

=== PAGE 518 ===

* Chapter X *
517
Deterring the unrighteous and unruly
element from sinful conduct, the fear of
punishment urges them to right action. It is
through self-restraint that the mind and
senses of man are controlled and help him in
God-realization. It is through fear of punishment
that all living beings perform their respective
functions. Hence the authority possessed by
gods, kings and rulers who rule according to
law has been declared by the Lord to be the
same as Himself.
The word Г«NвҲӮtiГӯ, in this verse, stands
for righteousness. It is righteousness alone
which brings one true victory. A Government
which abandons righteousness, and follows
the path of unrighteousness, is doomed.
Therefore, righteousness, is the best means
I am the subduing power in rulers; I am righteousness in those who seek to
conquer. Of things to be kept secret, I am the custodian in the form of reticence; and
I am the wisdom of the wise.                                                              (38)
for the attainment of victory. Hence the Lord
declares righteousness to be the same as
Himself.
Secrets can be maintained only through
reticence. Without restraint over speech, it is
exceptionally 
difficult 
to 
preserve 
a
secret. Reticence being thus the best custodian
of secrets, the Lord speaks of it as His own
self.
The word Г«JВӨГҘnavatГҘmГӯ stands for those
truly wise men who have realized the supreme
Brahma or God. Their knowledge alone is
the best of all knowledge. Hence the Lord
declares such knowledge to be His own self.
In verse 17 of Chapter XIII too the Lord
likewise declares Himself to be the same as
Knowledge.
ГҝГ¬ГҠГҠГҒВ¬ вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠВў вҖҷГӢВЎВў ГғЕ’вҖһUв—ҠВЎВёГҲЕёГ”вҖ“
Её ГғЕ’ГҒSГғ ГҒп¬ӮЕёГҠ ГҝГ SГҝГҠГЈв—ҠГҝГҠ Г·ГҚГғВў ГёвҒ„UГҠГёвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”H 39H
ГҝГғЛңГ” which; ГёГ” and; вҖўГҒВ¬ too; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of all beings; вҖҷГӢВЎв—ҠЛңГ” (is) the seed; ГғГғЛңГ” that; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I
(am); вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё O Arjuna; Её not; ГғГғЛңГ” such; вҖўГҒSГғГ” there is; ГҒп¬ӮЕёГҠ without; ГҝГғЛңГ” which; SГҝГҠГғЛңГ” may exist;
в—ҠГҝГҠ Me; Г·ГҚГғв—ҠЛңГ” ГёвҒ„UГҠГёвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” any being, moving or inert.
Arjuna, I am even That which is the seed of all life. For there is no creature,
moving or unmoving, which exists without Me.                                      (39)
with all. That is to say, all creatures, animate
or inanimate, are pervaded by Him, and
there is no creature whatsoever which is
devoid of His presence. Therefore, regarding
all beings as identical with God, and
knowing them as pervaded by Him, one
should think of God alone in the form
of whatever presents itself before his mind.
This concludes the reply to ArjunaГӯs
question contained in X.17, viz., in what
particular forms He should be meditated upon
by him.
God alone is the ultimate support and
substratum of the whole of this animate and
inanimate creation; it is from Him that everything
originates. Hence He alone is the seed or
ultimate cause of all. It is for this reason that
in VII.10 He has been declared as the Г¬eternal
seedГ® of all beings, and in IX.18 as the
Г¬imperishable seedГ®. Hence, in the present
verse, He proclaims His identity with the
seed of all beings.
By the latter half of this verse the Lord
reveals His omnipresence and His identity
In verse 19 the Lord stated that there was no end to His divine glories, and therefore
undertook to enumerate only His conspicuous glories. Accordingly, from verse 20 to 39, He

=== PAGE 519 ===

518
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
By the first half of this verse the Lord
indicates that even His divine glories are
unlimited, much more His ordinary glories.
Even as the particles of water and earth
cannot be counted, so it is impossible to
count His glories. They are so numerous that
they can neither be known nor described by
anyone. His glories are endless in the countless
universes, and none can ever expect to find
their limit.
By the second half of the verse the Lord
intends to convey that the extent of His
divine glories described in this chapter represents
only a small fraction of them and that their
full description is very difficult. Hence He
concludes the discussion of those glories.
described those glories. Now He winds up the topic revealing once more the infinite variety
of His divine glories.
ЕёГҠГЈГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒSГғ в—Ҡв—Ҡ ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝГҠЕёГҠВў ГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҚГғГӢЕёГҠВў В¬вҒ„UГЈГғВ¬Г”вҖ“
вҲһВ· ГғГҚgпЈҝвүҘГҠГғвҖ” В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§ГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҚГғпЈҝГҢп¬ӮSГғвҒ„UГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҝГҠГ”H 40H
Её вҖўГЈГғвҖ” вҖўГҒSГғ there is no limit; в—Ҡв—Ҡ My; ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” ГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҚГғГӢЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” to divine manifestations; В¬вҒ„UГЈГғВ¬Г”
O vanquisher of foes, Arjuna; вҲһВ·вҖ” this; ГғГҲ however; В©UgпЈҝвүҘГҠГғвҖ” in brief; В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§вҖ” has been described;
ГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҚГғпЈҝвҖ”Г” of (My) glory; ГҒп¬ӮSГғвҒ„UвҖ” extent; в—ҠГҝГҠ by Me.
Arjuna, there is no limit to My divine manifestations. This is only a brief
description by Me of the extent of My glory.                                          (40)
In verse 18 Arjuna requested the Lord to describe His glories and His power of Yoga.
Having described them accordingly, He now briefly describes His power of Yoga.
ГҝlГҒmГ·ГҚГҒГғв—ҠГ вҖҡГ»п¬ӮВў 
ГјГҠГӢв—ҠЕ’ГҚГҢВЎГғв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ 
п¬ӮГҠГ”вҖ“
ГғГ»ГҠЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠп¬ӮВӘГ«ВҝU Г п¬ӮВў в—Ҡв—Ҡ ГғпЈҝВЎГҠпЈҝВҘЛҳвүҘГҠвҖҡГӘГ·п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ”H 41H
ГҝГғЛңГ” ГҝГғЛңГ” whatever; ГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҚГҒГғв—ҠГғЛңГ” glorious; вҖҡГ»п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” being; ГјГҠГӢв—ҠГғЛңГ” brilliant; в„ўВ§ГҢВЎГғв—ҠЛңГ” powerful; вҲһп¬Ӯ
indeed; п¬ӮГҠ and; ГғГғЛңГ” ГғГғЛңГ” вҲһп¬Ӯ that very; вҖўп¬ӮВӘГ«ВҝU know; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” you; в—Ҡв—Ҡ ГғпЈҝВЎГҠпЈҝВҘЛҳвүҘГҠвҖҡГӘГ·п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” a part
manifestation of My effulgence.
Every such being as is glorious, brilliant and powerful, know that to be a part
manifestation of My glory.                                                               (41)
The electric current gives us light, turns
our fans, draws water for us and works our
radio machine and performs many other
functions at various places. It is, however, a
settled fact that wherever any such activity
takes place, it is all due to the electrical
power; in fact, it is a manifestation of a
fraction of the electric current. Even so,
whatever speciality we observe in a particular
living being or object should be regarded as
a part manifestation of the divine glory.
The word Г«SattvamГӯ, qualified by
the adjectives Г«VibhВөutimatГӯ, Г«вҖәrвҲӮmatГӯ and
Г«ВӘUrjitamГӯ covers all living beings or inanimate
objects that are possessed of virtues like
glory, elegance and comeliness etc., and
endowed with strength, energy, valour or
any other power. And regarding every living
being or object endowed with all or even one
of those qualities as a fraction of the divine
glory is what is meant by knowing it as a
part manifestation of the divine effulgence.

=== PAGE 520 ===

* Chapter X *
519
The indeclinable Г«AthavГҘГӯ introduces an
alternative suggestion or something different
from what has been stated above. It is intended
to convey that the Lord is now going to say
something different from, and more remarkable
than, what has already been confided to him,
viz., a description of His outstanding glories
as contained in verses 20 to 39 and of the
various media of His manifestation enumerated
in verse 41.
Although at the request of Arjuna the
Lord described His conspicuous glories in
the foregoing verses, it is not all that he
should know. The most important thing is
that which He is now going to reveal, and
which Arjuna is now called upon to grasp
thoroughly. Everything else will then be
automatically clear to him, and nothing more
will remain still to be known by him.
The word Г«JagatГӯ, qualified by the
adjectives Г«IdamГӯ and Г«KГҰtsnamГӯ, stands for
the entire universe consisting of the different
worlds and all animate and inanimate beings
inhabiting them with their mind, senses
and body, objects and places of enjoyment
etc. That the Lord holds countless such
universes in a fragment of His being
through His own Yogic power is what is
sought to be conveyed by the latter half of
this verse.
Having thus referred to the manifestation of a fraction of His glory or Yogic power in
all principal objects and beings, the Lord now reveals that He holds the entire universe by
a mere fraction of His Yogic power.
вҖўГ•п¬ӮГҠ вҖҷвҖһГҲUЕёГ’ГғпЈҝЕё ГҒвҲ‘ВўВ§ ГҙГҠГҠГғпЈҝЕё Гғп¬ӮГҠВЎГҲВёЕёвҖ“
ГҒп¬ӮCГ”UГЁГҝГҠвҖһUГҒв—ҠЕ’Вў вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г Fв—ҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠВўвүҘГҠпЈҝЕё ГҒSГ•ГғГҠпЈҝ ВЎВӘГғЛңГ”H 42H
вҖўГ•п¬ӮГҠ or; вҖҷвҖһГҲUЕёГҠ in detail; вҲһГғпЈҝЕё all this; ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” what; ГҙГҠГҠГғпЈҝЕё by knowing;  Гғп¬Ӯ will you gain;
вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё O Arjuna; ГҒп¬ӮCГ”UГЁГҝГ” holding; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this; вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г Fв—ҠЛңГ” entire; вҲһвҲ‘В§ГҠВўвүҘГҠпЈҝЕёГ” by a fraction (of My
Yogic power); ГҒSГ•ГғвҖ”U stand; ВЎВӘГғЛңГ” universe.
Or, what will you gain by knowing all this in detail, Arjuna? Suffice it to say that
I hold this entire universe by a fraction of My Yogic power.                      (42)
Лҷ ГғГ вҖҡГҒЕ’ГҒГғ ГјГҠГӢв—ҠjВӘп¬ӮeГӢГғГҠвҖҡГҚВ¬ГҒЕёВ·Г вҖҡГҲ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГҝГҠВў
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠпЈҝ ГјГҠГӢвҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠВЎГҲВёЕёвҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’пЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҚГҒГғГ”ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ
ЕёГҠв—Ҡ Е’вүҘГҠв—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГӨГҝГҠГҝвҖ”H 10H
Thus, in the UpaniВ¶ad sung by the Lord, the science of Brahma,
the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
and Arjuna, ends the tenth chapter entitled
Г¬The Yoga of Divine GloriesГ®.
U

=== PAGE 521 ===

520
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Title of the
Chapter
Summary of
the Chapter
Лҷ
вҖәrвҲӮmadbhagavad-GвҲӮtГҘ
Chapter XI
At the request of Arjuna, the Lord reveals to him His Cosmic Body in this chapter.
A major part of the chapter is solely devoted to a description of the Cosmic
Body and praises offered by Arjuna to the Lord manifested in that
form; hence it has been given the title of Г¬The Yoga of the Vision of the
Cosmic Body.Г®
Verses 1 to 4 of this chapter contain tributes of praise to the Lord and His teaching, and
ArjunaГӯs prayer for a vision of His Cosmic Body, From the fifth to the eighth He calls upon
Arjuna to behold in His body the whole universe consisting of gods, men,
beasts, birds and all other animate and inanimate beings with many wonderful
sights never seen before, and finally offers to vouchsafe the divine eye to him.
Reporting the revelation by the Lord of His Cosmic Body to Arjuna in the ninth, SaВӨjaya
describes from the tenth to the thirteenth the form as seen by Arjuna. The fourteenth
describes how Arjuna bowed to the Lord with reverence, full of wonder and joy at the sight
of that form. From the fifteenth to the thirtyfirst, Arjuna offers praises to the Cosmic Body
and describes what he beheld in that form, and finally requests the Lord to reveal His identity
to him. From the thirty-second to the thirtyfourth the Lord declares Himself as KГҘla, the
destroyer of the worlds, and BhвҲӮВ¶ma, DroЖ’a and all other brave warriors as already killed
by Him, and finally encourages and enjoins Arjuna to fight. Thereafter, verses 35 to 46
describe how Arjuna, wonderstruck and terrified at the words of the Lord, offers his praises
and obeisance to Him and begging His forgiveness prays Him to reveal His four-armed
divine form. Revealing the glory and rarity of His Cosmic Body in the fortyseventh and
fortyeighth, the Lord consoles Arjuna in the fortyninth and directs him to behold the four-
armed divine form. In the fiftieth, SaВӨjaya describes how the Lord first revealed the four-
armed form, and then resumed the human semblance. In the fiftyfirst, Arjuna tells the Lord
how he was composed and returned to his normal state at the sight of the LordГӯs delightful
human form. Thereafter, pointing out in the fiftysecond and fiftythird the rarity of the vision
of His four-armed Divine Form, the Lord declares in the fifty-fourth that the same can be
easily seen, known and entered into through single-minded devotion. The chapter is
concluded after revealing in the fiftyfifth the true nature and reward of exclusive devotion.
Having briefly described His glory and power of Yoga and the value of knowing them
in the first seven verses of Chapter X, the Lord devoted verses 8 to 11 of that
chapter to a discussion of Bhaktiyoga (the path of Devotion) and its fruit.
Thereupon, from the twelfth to the eighteenth, Arjuna extolled the Lord and
requested Him to describe in detail His divine glories and power of Yoga. Then, having
described His glories up to the fortieth, the Lord finally revealed the glory of His power of
Yoga and concluded the chapter by declaring that the entire universe is held in a mere
Link of the
Discourse

=== PAGE 522 ===

* Chapter XI *
521
fraction of His Being. This last statement aroused in ArjunaГӯs mind the desire to obtain a
direct vision of that infinite being of the Lord (a fraction of which holds the entire universe).
Therefore, extolling the Lord and His teaching in the first four verses of this chapter, Arjuna
requests Him to vouchsafe a direct vision of the Cosmic Body.
вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
в—ҠЕ’ЕёГҲВӘЛқвҖһUГҠГҝ 
В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠВў 
ВӘГҲsГ”в—ҠГӨГҝГҠГ в—ҠвҖҡГҒГңГҙГҠГғв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҝГ»п¬ӮГҝГҠпЈҝQВўВ§ п¬ӮГёSГғпЈҝЕё в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҠпЈҝЛҳГҝВў ГҒп¬ӮВӘГғГҠпЈҝ в—Ҡв—ҠH 1H
в—ҠЕ’ЕёГҲВӘЛқвҖһUГҠГҝ out of kindness to me; В¬вҒ„Uв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” ВӘГҲsГ”в—ҠЛңГ” most profound; вҖўГӨГҝГҠГ в—ҠвҖҡГҒГңГҙГҠГғв—ҠЛңГ” of spiritual
wisdom; ГҝГғЛңГ” which; Г п¬ӮГҝГҠГ” by You; В©UQВ§в—ҠЛңГ” has been spoken; п¬ӮГёвҖ”Г” word; ГғпЈҝЕёГ” thanks to that; в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUвҖ”Г”
ignorance; вҖўГҝв—ҠЛңГ” this; ГҒп¬ӮВӘГғвҖ” has entirely disappeared; в—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” my.
Arjuna said: Thanks to the most profound words of spiritual wisdom that You
have spoken out of kindness to me; this delusion of mine has entirely disappeared. (1)
through the grace of God Himself he comes
to recognize the divine grace, and when
he perceives as if with his own eyes that
whatever is happening is happening through
the grace of God, he is filled with gratitude
and exclaims from the bottom of his heart,
Г¬O Lord, I am worth nothing at all, and am
wholly unqualified. All this is an exhibition
of Your grace alone.Г® With a heart full of
gratitude, Arjuna likewise says in this verse,
Г¬Lord, I am hardly qualified to hear all that
You have  said about Your own power and
glory. It is out of sheer kindness that You
have 
revealed 
this 
closely 
guarded
secret of Yours to me.Г® That is the implication
of the word Г«MadanugrahГҘyaГӯ, used in this
verse.
The word Г«VacaВЁГӯ qualified by the
adjectives 
Г«ParamaвүҲГӯ, 
Г«GuhyaвүҲГӯ 
and
Г«AdhyГҘtmasaвүҲjВӨitamГӯ, covers the supreme
words of wisdom referred to in X.1 and
acutally contained in verses 2 to 11, the
subsequent description of His glories and
power of Yoga given in verses 20 to 42 in
response to ArjunaГӯs further query, and lastly
the exposition of the truth and inner meaning
of His virtues, glory, power and identity
embodied in Chapters VII to IX under the
ArjunaГӯs heart was filled with joy, love
and gratitude when he heard the divine glory
of the Lord, who is an ocean of love, revealed
by Him in the beginning of Chapter X with
the remark that he was confiding all that to
him out of solicitude for him, knowing his
intense love for Him. Arjuna thought how
kind it was of the Lord, who is the supreme
Ruler of all the worlds, to acknowledge an
insignificant creature like him as his endearing
lover and go on openly revealing to him the
closely guarded secrets of His own glory. He
now remembered the words of the sages, and
singing His praises with utmost faith, he
renewed his loving prayer to the Lord for a
detailed description of His power of Yoga
and glories. The Lord responded to his prayer
and gave him a brief description of His
glories and Yoga. ArjunaГӯs heart now bore
the stamp of divine grace on it. He was
beside himself with joy at this unusual
exhibition of divine grace on him.
The supreme benefit or divine grace is
practically denied to the SГҘdhaka so long as
he remains conscious of his own effort, spiritual
practice or capacity. He cannot easily climb
to the higher rungs of spiritual ladder without
the help of the divine grace. When, however,

=== PAGE 523 ===

522
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
name of Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ and Г«VijВӨГҘnaГӯ that is,
Knowledge of both NirguЖ’a Brahma and
qualified Divinity. In the course of these
teachings, the Lord has fully revealed His
identity. This is what is sought to be conveyed
by the use of the adjectives Г«ParamamГӯ
Г«GuhyamГӯ and Г«AdhyГҘtma-saвүҲjВӨitamГӯ with
the noun Г«VacaВЁГӯ in the present verse.
The Lord has Himself characterized as
most secret all those teachings in which He
has dealt with His own reality, virtues and
glory and exhorted Arjuna to take refuge in
Him, and in which he has plainly told Arjuna
that his friend вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a standing before him
was no other than the Almighty God Himself,
the creator and destroyer of the whole universe,
who represents both the NirguЖ’a and SaguЖ’a
aspects and is both embodied and disembodied,
who lies entirely beyond MГҘyГҘ, and is the
substratum and support of all.
ArjunaГӯs delusion or ignorance consisted
in his lack of full knowledge of the virtues,
glory, power and being of God. Through the
above teachings of the Lord he has now
partially realized these virtues, glory, power,
mystery and reality of God and come to
know that вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a is God Himself. This is
what is meant by his disillusionment.
Г·п¬ӮГҠГҘГҝГҝГҠГ’ ГҒвҖһU Г·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠВў ГјГҠГҲГғГҠГ’ ГҒп¬ӮSГғвҒ„UвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҝГҠГ”вҖ“
Г п¬ӮГ»ГҠвҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠвҲӮUВ¬ГІГҠГҠЛҮГҠ в—ҠГҠвҖһUГҠГ ГӘГҝв—ҠГҒВ¬ ГёГҠвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ”H 2H
Г·п¬ӮГҠГҘГҝГҝГҠГ’ (an account of) the evolution and dissolution; ГҒвҖһU because; Г·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of beings; ГјГҠГҲГғГҠГ’
have been heard; ГҒп¬ӮSГғвҒ„UвүҘГҠвҖ” in detail; в—ҠГҝГҠ by me; Г п¬ӮГ»ГҠвҖ” from You;  вҲ‘В§в—ҠвҲӮUВ¬ГІГҠГҠЛҮГҠ O lotus-eyed Lord;
в—ҠвҖһUГҠГ ГӘГҝв—ҠЛңГ” glory; вҖўГҒВ¬ also; Гё and; вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ” (Your) immortal.
For, KГҰВ¶Ж’a, I have heard from You in detail an account of the evolution and
dissolution of beings, and also Your immortal glory.                                   (2)
is altogether unconcerned; though all-pervasive,
He remains wholly untouched by the virtues
and vices of things; though dispensing the
fruits of good and evil deeds in the shape of
joys and sorrows, He is free from the faults
of cruelty and discrimination; and manifested
in the forms of PrakГҰti (Matter), KГҘla (Time)
and all regional gods, He is the almighty
Ruler of all. This is the immortal glory of the
Lord referred to in the latter half of the verse.
It is from God that all animate and
inanimate beings emanate; it is by Him that
they are maintained and into Him that they
all enter. Arjuna has repeatedly heard this in
detail from the lips of the Lord in Chapters
VII to X. This is what he means by the first
half of this verse.
Though creating, maintaining and
destroying the whole universe, God is in
reality a non-doer; though controlling all, He
вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠпЈҝГғlГ•ГҠГ Г• 
Г п¬Ӯв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёВў 
В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠпЈҝEвҒ„UГ”вҖ“
ВәЛқcвүҲГҲГҒв—ҠГ«ВҝUГҠГҒв—Ҡ 
ГғпЈҝ 
MВ§В¬в—ҠГ’EвҒ„ВўU 
В¬ГҲLВ§В·ГҠпЈҝГ»ГҠв—ҠГ”H 3H
вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” so; вҲһГғГғЛңГ” this (is); ГҝГ•ГҠ what; вҖўГҠГ Г• declare to be; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” you; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” Yourself; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠпЈҝEвҒ„U
O Supreme Lord; ВәЛқcвүҲГҲв—ҠЛңГ” to perceive (with my own eyes); ГҹГ«ВҝUГҠГҒв—Ҡ I long; ГғпЈҝ Your; MВ§В¬в—ҠЛңГ” form;
вҲһпЈҝEвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” divine (i.e., possessed of wisdom, glory, energy, strength, valour and effulgence);
В¬ГҲLВ§В·ГҠпЈҝГ»ГҠв—Ҡ O Supreme Person.
Lord, You are precisely what You declare Yourself to be. But I long to see Your
divine form possessed of wisdom, glory, energy, strength, valour and effulgence, O
PuruВ¶ottama, the Supreme Being !                                                                             (3)

=== PAGE 524 ===

* Chapter XI *
523
By addressing the Lord as Г«ParameвҖ№vara.
Arjuna seeks to convey that вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a was
the supreme Lord of the entire creation, and
thus capable of doing everything. He could,
therefore, easily reveal to Arjuna the divine
form which he longed to see. Again, by
addressing Him as Г«PuruВ¶ottamaГӯ he shows
that вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a was the Supreme Person,
beyond both the perishable and the
imperishable. Arjuna, accordingly hoped that
He would condescend to fulfil his desire for
a vision of the divine form.
Whatever has been spoken by the Lord
about Himself in the course of the description
of His virtues, glory, reality and divine powers
is wholly true; Arjuna had not the least doubt
about it. This is what he means by the first
half of this verse.
The word Г«RВөupamГӯ, qualified by the
adjective Г«AiвҖ№varam,Гӯ stands for that divine
form of the Lord which exhibits, in a
pronounced form, all divine virtues and powers
such as unbounded and undying knowledge,
energy, strength, valour and effulgence etc.,
and a fraction of which holds the entire
universe. ArjunaГӯs longing to see that form
showed that he had never seen it before.
Hearing of it from the Lord (X.42) he had
developed an irresistible yearning to see that
form, and he now felt and believed that the
object of his existence would be easily
acomplished by a vision of that form.
It may be contended here that ArjunaГӯs
longing to see that form betrays lack of
faith on his part in the words of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a;
for if he had implicit faith in His words
and entertained not the least doubt about it,
why should he need an ocular proof ?
We shall, however, presently see that the
objection is wholly untenable. Suppose a
man who always spoke the truth and
possessed a philosopherГӯs stone or any other
wonderful object, confided the secret to a
friend, and the latter was fully convinced of
the presence of that wonderful object with
the former. If, however, this report excites
his curiosity and stimulates in him the desire
to see it with his own eyes simply because he
had not seen it before, the desire itself or his
giving vent to the same does not necessarily
imply lack of faith in the words of that
truthful man. Even so, since Arjuna had
never seen that wonderful form before, the
desire on his part to see it and his giving
expression to that desire cannot be interpreted
as having proceeded from lack of faith. On
the other hand, the desire to see it presupposes
his faith.
в—ҠГЈГҝвҖҡпЈҝ ГҝГҒЕ’ ГғГ«ВҝUГ„ГҝВў в—ҠГҝГҠ ВәЛқcвүҲГҲГҒв—ҠГҒГғ В¬ЛқГ·ГҠпЈҝГ”вҖ“
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝEвҒ„U ГғГғГҠпЈҝ в—ҠпЈҝ Г ГёВў Е’вүҘГҠВёГҝГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ”H 4H
в—ҠГЈГҝвҖҡпЈҝ think; ГҝГҒЕ’ if; ГғГғЛңГ” that (form); вүҘГҠГ„Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” в—ҠГҝГҠ ВәЛқcвүҲГҲв—ҠЛңГ” is capable of being seen by me; ГҹГҒГғГ”
so; В¬ЛқГ·ГҠпЈҝ O Lord; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝEвҒ„UГ” O Lord of Yoga; ГғГғвҖ” then; в—ҠпЈҝГ” to me; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” You; Е’вүҘГҠВёГҝ reveal; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ”
вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ” that imperishable form.
KГҰВ¶Ж’a, if You think that it can be seen by me, then, O Lord of Yoga, reveal to
me Your imperishable form.                                                             (4)
that divine form, the Lord could easily render
him fit for the same by His own grace and
power. And by addressing вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a as
Г«YogeвҖ№varaГӯ Arjuna seeks to convey that
being the Master of all Yogas He could, if
He liked, easily enable Arjuna to see His
The use of the vocative Г«PrabhoГӯ with
reference to вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a indicates that being
the creator, preserver and destroyer of the
whole creation, and the inner controller of
all, He is all-powerful. Therefore, even if
Arjuna was not duly qualified for a vision of

=== PAGE 525 ===

524
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
divine form. Indeed, when even an ordinary
YogвҲӮ is capable of revealing his glory in
ways more than one, it should be much
easier for вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a to do so.
As stated above, Arjuna believed that
the glory of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a was exactly as it had
been depicted by Himself, and he entertained
not the least doubt about it. He was also
convinced that even if the Lord failed to
reveal that form before him, such failure on
His part would neither prove that the Lord of
all Masters of Yogas was incapable of doing
it, nor would it detract in the least from his
faith in His words. This much was, however,
certain that his yearning for a vision of that
divine form was irresistible. And as the knower
of all hearts, it was open to the Lord to
examine and ascertain whether that desire
was genuine and intense. If it was found
true, it established his eligibility for that vision.
For, being a veritable wish yielding tree to
His devotees, the longing of the devoteeГӯs
heart was all that He cared for, and no other
qualifications. Arjuna, therefore, prayed that
if the Lord deemed fit he should reveal that
form to him.
Thus requested by Arjuna, His supremely loving and faithful devotee, the Lord
proceeds to describe His Cosmic Body in the next three verses, and enjoins Arjuna to behold
the same.
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲUп¬ӮГҠГё
В¬вүҘГҝ в—ҠпЈҝ В¬ГҠГ•Вё MВ§В¬ГҠГҒГЎГҠ вүҘГҠГғвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГ• вҖҡвҖһUdвүҘГҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ЕёГҠЕёГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГҠГҒЕё ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝГҠГҒЕё ЕёГҠЕёГҠп¬ӮГЎГҠГҠВёвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғГӢГҒЕё ГёH 5H
В¬вүҘГҝ behold; в—ҠпЈҝ My; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthГҘ (KuntвҲӮ), Arjuna; MВ§В¬ГҠГҒГЎГҠГ” forms; вүҘГҠГғвүҘГҠвҖ” in hundreds;
вҖўГ• presently; вҖҡвҖһUdвүҘГҠвҖ”Г” and thousands; ЕёГҠЕёГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГҠГҒЕё multifarious; ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝГҠГҒЕё divine; ЕёГҠЕёГҠп¬ӮГЎГҠГҠВёвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғГӢГҒЕёГ” of
various colours and shapes; Гё and.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: Arjuna, behold presently My manifold, multifarious, divine
forms of various colours and shapes in their hundreds and thousands.                             (5)
species, such as gods, human beings and
other lower forms of beings, both animate
and inanimate.
The use of the word Г«DivyГҘniГӯ in this
verse indicates that the multitudinous forms
seen in the Cosmic Body were all marvellous
and transcendent in character, having been
brought forth by His wornderful power of
Yoga.
The words Г«вҖәataвҖ№aВЁГӯ and Г«SahasraвҖ№aВЁГӯ
here are indicative of an infinite number. The
Lord thus calls upon Arjuna to witness
innumerable forms huddled together in His
Cosmic Body.
The word Г«NГҘnГҘvidhГҘniГӯ indicates that
the forms comprised in the Cosmic Body
were not homogeneous but heterogeneous in
character, i.e., they belonged to different
В¬вүҘГҝГҠГҒЕ’Г ГҝГҠГЈп¬ӮвҖҡГҚГЈLВ§ВәЛқГҠЕёГҒEЕёГҠГ’ 
в—ҠLВ§ГғSГғГ•ГҠГ”вҖ“
вҖҷвҖһГҚГЈГҝЕ’ГҺcвүҲВ¬ГҚп¬ӮГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ 
В¬вүҘГҝГҠpГҝГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ 
Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғГ”H 6H
В¬вүҘГҝГ” witness; вҖўГҠГҒЕ’Г ГҝГҠЕёЛңГ” the (twelve) sons of Aditi; п¬ӮвҖҡГҚЕёЛңГ” the (eight) Vasus; LВ§ВәЛқГҠЕёЛңГ” the
(eleven) Rudras; вҖўГҒEЕёГҠГ’Г” the two AвҖ№vinвҲӮkumГҘras (the physicians of gods); в—ҠLВ§ГғвҖ”Г” (and) the
Maruts (forty-nine in number); ГғГ•ГҠ and also; вҖҷвҖһГҚUГҒЕё many more; вҖўЕ’ГҺcвүҲВ¬ГҚп¬ӮГҠВёГҒГЎГҠUГ” never seen before;
В¬вүҘГҝГ” behold; вҖўГҠpГҝГҠВёГҒГЎГҠГ” marvellous forms; Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғ O descendant of BhГҘrata, Arjuna.

=== PAGE 526 ===

* Chapter XI *
525
The words Г«Г…dityГҘnГӯ etc., denote the
principal varieties of gods residing in heaven.
By naming these varieties in particular, the
Lord intends to convey that all the gods of
heaven were to be seen in His Cosmic Body.
The individual names of and other particulars
about these principal varieties of gods have
already been given in the commentary on
verses 21 and 23 of Chapter X. Hence it is
needless to repeat them here.
Behold in Me, Arjuna, the twelve sons of Aditi, the eight Vasus, the eleven
Rudras, the two AвҖ№vinвҲӮkumГҘras* (the twin-born physicians of gods) and the forty-nine
Maruts (wind-gods), and witness many more wonderful forms never seen before.
(6)
* The twin-born AвҖ№vinвҲӮkumГҘras are believed to have been born of SaвҲҶjВӨГҘ, wife of the sun-god (see
ViВ¶Ж’u-PurГҘЖ’a III.ii.7; Agni-PurГҘЖ’a 273.4). Some authors hold that they were born of Aditi through KaвҖ№yapa
(VГҘlmвҲӮkiГӯs RГҘmГҘyaЖ’a, Г…raЖ’ya, XIV.14); while others maintain that they sprang from BrahmГҘГӯs ears (VГҘyu-
PurГҘЖ’a LXV.57). All these accounts are true, being the records of different Kalpas. The two brothers
received their spritual knowledge from the sage DadhyaвҲҶ (В°Rgveda I.XVII.116.12, DevвҲӮ-BhГҘgavata VII.36).
Propitiated by SukanyГҘ, daughter of King вҖәaryГҘti and wife of sage Cyavana, they rejuvenated the old
and blind Cyavana and restored his vision (DevвҲӮ-BhГҘgavata VII.4-5). Many stories about these twin gods
are told in the PurГҘЖ’as, the MahГҘbhГҘrata and the RГҘmГҘyaЖ’a.
ГҹвҖһГ’UвҲ‘В§SГ•Вў ВЎВӘГ вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г FВў В¬вүҘГҝГҠl вҖҡГёвҒ„UГҠГёвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
в—Ҡв—Ҡ Е’пЈҝвҖһпЈҝU ВӘГҲВ«UГҠвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠ ГҝГ¬ГҠГҠГЈГҝЕ’ЛңГ”ВәЛқcвүҲГҲГҒв—ҠГ«ВҝUГҒвҖҡГ”H 7H
ГҹвҖһU here; вҲһвҲ‘В§SГ•в—ҠЛңГ” concentrated; ВЎВӘГғЛңГ” вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г Fв—ҠЛңГ” the entire creation; В¬вүҘГҝ behold; вҖўl now;
вҖҡГёвҒ„UГҠГёвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” consisting of both animate and inanimate beings; в—Ҡв—Ҡ Е’пЈҝвҖһпЈҝU in My Body; ВӘГҲВ«UГҠвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠ O
conqueror of sleep, Arjuna; ГҝГғЛңГ” whatever; Гё and; вҖўГЈГҝГғЛңГ” else; ВәЛқcвүҲГҲв—ҠЛңГ” to see; ГҹГ«ВҝUГҒвҖҡГ” you desire.
Arjuna, behold as concentrated within this body of Mine the entire creation consisting
of both animate and inaminate beings, and whatever else you desire to see.           (7)
therefore signifies the entire universe
consisting of all such creatures, together with
their bodies and senses, places of enjoyment
and objects of enjoyment. By inviting Arjuna
to behold the entire creation in a part of His
body seated before him in his chariot the
Lord gave an ocular demonstration before
Arjuna of the statement contained in the
concluding verse of Chapter X, viz., that He
held the entire universe in a fraction of His
Being.
By asking Arjuna to behold whatever
else he desired to see, the lord intends to
convey that, besides the universe as it existed
then, Arjuna could directly perceive at that
moment in a part of His Body any spectacle
expressive of the LordГӯs virtues and glory
By addressing Arjuna as Г«GuЕ’ГҘkeвҖ№aГӯ
the Lord invites him to observe the Cosmic
Body with due care and attention, so as to
leave no room for any doubt or misconception
with regard to the same.
The indeclinable Г«AdyaГӯ in this verse
has been used in the sense of Г«nowГӯ. The
Lord thereby indicates that He was very
prompt in revealing the form which Arjuna
desired to see; in fact, He revealed it the
moment Arjuna expressed the desire to see it.
The word Г«CaraГӯ stands for all creatures
possessing motion, e.g., beasts, birds, insects,
moths gods and human beings etc; while
Г«AcaraГӯ denotes things devoid of motion,
e.g., hills trees etc. The word Г«JagatГӯ, qualified
by the adjectives Г«KГҰtsnamГӯ and Г«SacarГҘcaramГӯ,

=== PAGE 527 ===

526
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
etc., scenes of his own victory and the enemyГӯs
defeat, or any other incident relating to the
past, present or future, that he should like to
witness.
When Arjuna failed to see the divine form even though repeatedly enjoined in the
preceding three verses, the Lord, who is the inner witness of all and knew the cause of
ArjunaГӯs failure to see that form, now offers to bestow the gift of divine vision on him.
Её ГғГҲ в—ҠГҠВў вүҘГҠГ„ГҝвҖҡпЈҝ ВәЛқcвүҲГҲв—ҠЕёпЈҝЕёГ’п¬Ӯ Sп¬ӮГёЛҮГҠГҲВ·ГҠГ”вҖ“
ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝВў Е’Е’ГҠГҒв—Ҡ ГғпЈҝ ГёЛҮГҠГҲвҖ” В¬вүҘГҝ в—ҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠГ’EвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”H 8H
Её not; ГғГҲ however; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; вүҘГҠГ„ГҝвҖҡпЈҝГ” you are able; ВәЛқcвүҲГҲв—ҠЛңГ” to perceive; вҖўЕёпЈҝЕё with these; вҲһп¬Ӯ
indeed; Sп¬ӮГёЛҮГҠГҲВ·ГҠ (physical) eyes of yours; ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝв—ҠЛңГ” the divine; Е’Е’ГҠГҒв—ҠГ” I vouchsafe; ГғпЈҝ to You; ГёЛҮГҠГҲвҖ”
eye; В¬вүҘГҝ behold; в—ҠпЈҝ My; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ” вҲһпЈҝEвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” divine power of Yoga.
But surely you cannot see Me with these human eyes of yours; therefore, I
vouchsafe to you the divine eye. With this you behold My divine power of Yoga. (8)
realization. The exhortation to visualize the
whole universe in a part of His being
through spiritual enlightenment had already
been given by the Lord to Arjuna at the end
of Chapter X, and the same had also been
accepted by Arjuna. The fact that Arjuna
longs to perceive with his own eyes the
divine form of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a endowed with
strength, energy, valour and effulgence even
after this acceptance, and that the Lord Himself
is inviting Arjuna to behold the entire universe
as concentrated in the very form present
before his eyes, precludes the assumption
that the vision was nothing but a form of
spiritual realization.
Apart from this, the description given
by the Lord of His Cosmic Body also
confirms the view that the divine form in
which Arjuna beheld the various phenomena
of the whole universe as well as the future
events of the war and their consequences,
was present before his eyes. This drives us to
the conclusion that the cosmos in which
Arjuna found himself present was different
from the cosmos as seen by him in the body
of the Lord. Had it been otherwise, it would
not have been possible to see the entire space
between heaven and earth and all the quarters
covered by the Cosmic Body. At the sight of
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a was glad that Arjuna sought
to obtain a vision of His divine form endowed
with His wonderful power of Yoga; and the
Lord for His own part was prepared to reveal
that form to him. But at the same time He
was afraid that His transcendent form could
not be seen with the ordinary physical eyes,
and that Arjuna lacked the faculty which was
needed for obtaining a vision of that form.
This is what is meant by the first half of this
verse.
By His own power of Yoga the Lord
bestowed on Arjuna a kind of Yogic faculty
in order to enable him to obtain a vision of
the Cosmic Body. This faculty endowed him
with supernatural power and qualified him
for a vision of that divine form. It is this
Yogic faculty which is referred to here by
the words Г«DivyaвүҲ CakВ¶uВЁГӯ. A similar type
of divine vision was vouchsafed to SaВӨjaya
by the divine VedavyГҘsa at the commencement
of the MahГҘbhГҘrata war.
A close study of this episode does not
warrant the conlcusion that the vision of the
Cosmic Body by Arjuna consisted only in
realizing through spiritual wisdom that the
entire objective world is a manifestation of
God, or that the Г«divine eyeГӯ said to have
been conferred on him was no other than this

=== PAGE 528 ===

* Chapter XI *
527
that dreadful form of the Lord, Arjuna, was
already seized with wonder, bewilderment,
fear and confusion. This also goes to disprove
the theory that the Lord had simply awakened
Arjuna through spiritual enlightenment to a
sense of His identity with the objective
universe. Had it been so, Arjuna would have
no cause for fear, agony, bewilderment
confusion and so on.
Nor can it be held that just as distant
sounds can be heard and distant scenes
witnessed with the help of scientific instruments
like the modern Radio/Television, Arjuna
was likewise equipped by the Lord with an
instrument which enabled him to obtain an
unobstructed view of the whole universe
from where he stood, and that the same has
been spoken of in this verse as the divine
eye. For instruments like the Radio/Television
enable one to hear and set only such distant
sounds and witness only such distant scenes
as are being generated or occurring at that
very moment in a particular part of the world.
Things occuring in the various parts of the
universe cannot be seen or heard with the
help of a single instrument all at once at one
and the same place. Nor can such an instrument
enable one to read the thoughts of another, or
foresee future events. Besides, there is nothing
in this context to indicate that Arjuna beheld
the Cosmic Body of the Lord with the aid of
a scientific instrument. Therefore, such an
assumption, would be wholly unwarranted.
Of course, on the basis of scientific inventions
like the Radio/Television etc., the sceptical
minds of the present generation can be
persuaded to a certain extent to believe that
when it is possible to hear distant sounds and
see distant sights with the help of physical
instruments like the Radio/Television, the
possibility of beholding the Cosmic Body of
the Lord by dint of the Yogic power bestowed
by Him can never be questioned. At the
same time it should be borne in mind in this
connection that it was no conjuring trick on
the part of the Lord, which made Arjuna
behold scenes and occurrences without any
corresponding reality as in a dream. The
form which Arjuna saw was an undisguised
reality, and the sole means of perceiving it
was the divine eye in the form Yogic power
obtained through the grace of God.
The form which Arjuna saw was divine
in essence. It was through His own wonderful
power of Yoga that the lord had evolved that
form and showed it to Arjuna. Hence
the very sight of that form automatically revealed
His wonderful power of Yoga. The word
Г«YogamГӯ, qualified by the adjective Г«AiвҖ№varamГӯ,
therefore, denotes the Cosmic Body of the
Lord together with His wonderful power of
Yoga, which was instrumental in evolving it;
and by exhorting Arjuna to behold such Yoga
the Lord practically invites the latter to witness
His power of Yoga through a sight of His
Cosmic Body.
SaВӨjaya now proceeds to describe in the next five verses the nature of the divine
Cosmic Body revealed by the Lord to Arjuna after blessing him with the divine vision.
вҖҡTГҝ В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠГҲГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ ГғГғГҠпЈҝ вҒ„UГҠВЎГЈв—ҠвҖһUГҠГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝEвҒ„UГҠпЈҝ вҖһUГҒвҒ„UвҖ”Г”вҖ“
Е’вүҘГҠВёГҝГҠв—ҠГҠвҖҡ 
В¬ГҠГ•ГҠВёГҝ 
В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠВў 
MВ§В¬в—ҠГ’EвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”H 9H
вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” so; В©UГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ saying; ГғГғвҖ” then; вҒ„UГҠВЎЕёЛңГ” O king; в—ҠвҖһUГҠГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝEвҒ„UвҖ” the supreme Master of Yoga;
вҖһUГҒвҒ„UвҖ” the Lord who takes away all sins; Е’вүҘГҠВёГҝГҠв—ҠГҠвҖҡГ” revealed; В¬ГҠГ•ГҠВёГҝ to the son of PГҰthГҘ (KuntвҲӮ),
Arjuna; В¬вҒ„Uв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” supremely; MВ§В¬в—ҠЛңГ” divine form; вҲһпЈҝEвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” glorious.

=== PAGE 529 ===

528
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
By using the words Г«MahГҘyogeвҖ№varaВЁГӯ
and Г«HariВЁГӯ with reference to вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a,
SaВӨjaya brings home to DhГҰtarГҘВ¶Вўra the
wonderful potency and power of the Lord,
and thereby cautions him. The intention is to
convey that вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a was no ordinary human
being, but God Himself. The greatest of
YogвҲӮs cannot reveal the divine Cosmic Body
which вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a showed to Arjuna, and
which SaВӨjaya was now going to describe.
God alone can reveal such a form.
That which is pure, superb and
transcendent is called Г«ParamaГӯ, and anything
exhibiting the virtues, glory and effulgence
of God and clothed with His divine power of
Yoga is called Г«AiвҖ№varaГӯ of divine. The Cosmic
Body revealed by the Lord to Arjuna was
transcendent and divine in character, superb
and all-effulgent, and not something mundane
or material. It was out of kindness to His
most beloved devotee Arjuna, and with a
view to awakening him to a sense of His
wonderful glory, that the Lord evolved and
manifested this form of His own wonderful
power of Yoga. This is what is meant by the
use of the word Г«RВөupamГӯ qualified by the
adjectives Г«Paramam, and Г«AiвҖ№varamГӯ in the
above verse.
SaВӨjaya said: My lord ! having spoken thus, вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, the supreme Master of
Yoga, forthwith revealed to Arjuna His supremely glorious divine Form.          (9)
вҖўЕёпЈҝвҲ‘В§п¬ӮГ„ГІГҠЕёГҝЕёв—ҠЕёпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠjГҲГғЕ’вүҘГҠВёЕёв—ҠЛңГ”      вҖ“
вҖўЕёпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝГҠГ·вҒ„UГЎГҠВў 
ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝГҠЕёпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠпЈҝlГғГҠГҝГҲЕ“в—ҠЛңГ”H 10H
ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝв—ҠГҠГҖГҝГҠГӘвҖҷвҒ„UЕ“вҒ„ВўU 
ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝВӘГЈЕ“ГҠЕёГҲвҲӮпЈҝUВ¬Еёв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёpГҝВёв—ҠГҝВў 
Е’пЈҝп¬Ӯв—ҠЕёГЈГғВў 
ГҒп¬ӮEГғГҠпЈҝв—ҠГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ”H 11H
вҖўЕёпЈҝвҲ‘В§п¬ӮГ„ГІГҠЕёГҝЕёв—ҠЛңГ” possessing many mouths and eyes; вҖўЕёпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠЕ’ЛңГ”Г·ГҲГғЕ’вүҘГҠВёЕёв—ҠЛңГ” presenting many a
wonderful sight; вҖўЕёпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝГҠГ·вҒ„UГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” decked with many divine ornaments; ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝГҠЕёпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠпЈҝlГғГҠГҝГҲЕ“в—ҠЛңГ”
wielding many uplifted weapons; ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝв—ҠГҠГҖГҝГҠГӘвҖҷвҒ„UЕ“вҒ„в—ҠЛңГ” wearing divine wreaths and garments;
ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝВӘГЈЕ“ГҠЕёГҲвҲӮпЈҝUВ¬Еёв—ҠЛңГ” anointed all over with divine sandal-pastes; вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёpГҝВёв—ҠГҝв—ҠЛңГ” full of all wonders;
Е’пЈҝп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” the supreme Deity (God); вҖўЕёГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ” inifinite; ГҒп¬ӮEГғГҠпЈҝв—ҠГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ” having faces on all sides, cosmic
in form.
Arjuna saw the supreme Deity possessing many mouths and eyes, presenting
many a wonderful sight, decked with many divine ornaments, wielding many uplifted
divine weapons, wearing divine garlands and clothes, anointed all over with divine
sandal-pastes, full of all wonders, infinite and having faces on all sides.        (10, 11)
that Cosmic Body of the Lord, Arjuna beheld
innumerable such sights; hence it has been
called Г«AnekГҘdbhutadarвҖ№namГӯ.
An ornament which is exceptionally
brilliant and supramundane is called a
Г«DivyГҘbharaЖ’aГӯ. The form which Arjuna saw
was adorned with innumerable such divine
ornaments; hence it has been spoken of as
Г«AnekadivyГҘbharaЖ’amГӯ.
The divine  form which Arjuna saw has
been described as having the moon and the
sun for its two principal eyes (XI.19); but
apart from them, it possessed many other
mouths and eyes. That is why it is called
Г«Anekavaktranayanam.Гӯ
A sight which has never been seen
before, and which is strange and marvellous
in character, is called Г«AdbhutadarвҖ№anamГӯ. In

=== PAGE 530 ===

* Chapter XI *
529
Weapons used in warfare are termed
as Г«Г…yudhaГӯ. Any such weapon exhibiting
supernatural qualities and effulgence is called
a Г«divine weaponГӯ. For example, the weapons
of ViВ¶Ж’u, viz., the Discus, Club, Bow etc.,
are all divine weapons. The Lord as seen by
Arjuna held in His uplifted hands many such
Г«divineГӯ weapons; hence the verse refers to
Him as Г«DivyГҘnekodyatГҘyudhamГӯ.
He who is decked with many superb,
brilliant and supernatural wreaths and garments
is called Г«DivyamГҘlyГҘmbaradharaГӯ. The Lord
in His Cosmic Form had many such garlands
hanging from His neck and was also clad in
various kinds of beautiful and shining
costumes; hence the above adjective has been
used with reference to Him.
Any fragrant substance which is far
superior to other fragrant substances like the
sandal-paste and possesses a supernatural odour
which can be perceived only by a divinized
sense, and not by the material senses, is
called a Г«Divya GandhaГӯ. A form which is
besmeared all over with fragrant substances
of such a superb and divine character is
known as Г«Divya-gandhГҘnulepanam.Гӯ
Everything forming part of that Cosmic
Body, viz., the countless mouths, eyes,
ornaments weapons, wreaths, garments and
fragrant substances, was wonderful. Hence
the verse describes it as Г«SarvГҘвҖ№caryamayamГӯ
(full of all wonders).
That which is infinite and is unbounded
by space is called Г«AnantaГӯ. The Cosmic
Body of the Lord beheld by Arjuna was
limitless in dimension; hence the term Г«AnantaГӯ
has been applied with reference to it.
The numberless faces forming part of
that Cosmic Body of the Lord were spread
all over the universe; hence He has been
styled Г«ViвҖ№vatomukhaГӯ.
A being possessed of lustre and worthy
of adoration is called a Г«DevaГӯ. The Cosmic
Body of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a was supremely effulgent;
hence He is referred to as Г«DevaГӯ in this
verse.
The next verse describes the effulgence of the supreme Deity manifested in that Cosmic
Form.
ГҒЕ’ГҒп¬Ӯ 
вҖҡГҚГҝВёвҖҡвҖһUdSГҝ 
Г·п¬ӮпЈҝlГҲВӘВ¬Е’ГҲГҒГ Г•ГғГҠГ”вҖ“
ГҝГҒЕ’ Г·ГҠвҖ” вҖҡЕ’ГҺвүҘГҠГӢ вҖҡГҠ SГҝГҠjГҠвҖҡSГғSГҝ в—ҠвҖһUГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ”Г”H 12H
ГҒЕ’ГҒп¬Ӯ in the sky; вҖҡГҚГҝВёвҖҡвҖһUdSГҝ of a thousand sons; Г·п¬ӮпЈҝГғЛңГ” if there be; ГҝГҲВӘВ¬ГғЛңГ” all at once; В©UГҒГ Г•ГғГҠ
bursting forth; ГҝГҒЕ’ hardly; Г·ГҠвҖ” effulgence; вҖҡЕ’ГҺвүҘГҠГӢ be like; вҖҡГҠГ” (even) that; SГҝГҠГғЛңГ” would prove;
Г·ГҠвҖҡвҖ” to the splendour; ГғSГҝ в—ҠвҖһUГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ” of that all-pervading Lord.
If there be the effulgence of a thousand suns bursting forth all at once in the sky,
even that would hardly be like the splendour of the mighty Lord.                 (12)
suns shining all at once in the sky could not
approach the splendour of the Cosmic Body
of the Lord. The reason for this is that while
the effulgence of the sun is transient, material
and finite, the splendour of the Cosmic Body
of the Lord was eternal, divine, transcendent
and infinite.
By comparing the splendour of the Lord
with the effulgence of a thousand suns
appearing all at once in the sky the verse
practically declares it as incomparable. In
other words, just as a thousand stars twinkling
together in the sky cannot compare with the
sun, even so, the effulgence of a thousand
SaВӨjaya now proceeds to describe how Arjuna beheld the entire universe in that
brilliant and wonderful form of the Lord.

=== PAGE 531 ===

530
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«TadГҘГӯ (then) refers to the
time when the Lord blessed Arjuna with the
divine eye, and invited him to behold His
Cosmic Body together with His wonderful
power of Yoga (XI.8).
The use of the qualifications Г«AnekadhГҘ
PravibhaktamГӯ and Г«KГҰtsnamГӯ with the word
Г«JagatГӯ is intended to convey that Arjuna beheld,
in the person of the supreme Deity, the entire
universe with its manifold divisions in the shape
of enjoyers like the gods, human beings, beasts,
birds, moths, insects and trees etc., places of
enjoyment (of pleasure and pain) like the earth,
the intermediate region, heaven and the lower
or subterranean regions and the innumerable
objects of their enjoyment. In other words, it
was not that he saw only a particular part of
the universe, or that he saw all these divisions
jumbled together in a confused mass, but he
saw the universe extended as it is, with all its
details clearly defined.
Arjuna actually saw with his divine eye
what he was told by the Lord at the end of
Chapter X, viz., that He stood holding the
entire universe in a part of His being. This is
what is sought to be conveyed by the use of
the word Г«EkasthamГӯ (concentrated at one
place) in the present verse.
The indeclinable Г«TatraГӯ connects the
verse with the description contained in the
foregoing verses and qualifies the person of
the supreme Deity, BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, who
is the best of all persons, and the object of
worship even of the highest gods like BrahmГҘ.
ГғГІГҠГ’вҲ‘В§SГ•Вў ВЎВӘГ вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г FВў В¬ЛқГҒп¬ӮГ·QВ§в—ҠЕёпЈҝвҲ‘В§Е“ГҠГ”вҖ“
вҖўВ¬вүҘГҝgпЈҝп¬ӮЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮSГҝ 
вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„пЈҝU 
В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬ӮSГғЕ’ГҠГ”H 13H
ГғГІГҠ in that; вҲһвҲ‘В§SГ•в—ҠЛңГ” concentrated at one place; ВЎВӘГғЛңГ” вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г Fв—ҠЛңГ” the whole universe; В¬ЛқГҒп¬ӮГ·QВ§в—ҠЛңГ”
divided; вҖўЕёпЈҝвҲ‘В§Е“ГҠГ” manifold; вҖўВ¬вүҘГҝГғЛңГ” beheld; Е’пЈҝп¬ӮЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮSГҝГ” of the supreme Deity, BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a; вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„пЈҝU Body; В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬ӮвҖ” the son of PГҘЖ’Е’u, Arjuna; ГғЕ’ГҠ then.
Concentrated at one place in the person of that supreme Deity, Arjuna then
beheld the whole universe with its manifold divisions.                                (13)
The next verse describes the sequel to the perception by Arjuna of the Cosmic Body of
the Lord as stated obove.
ГғГғвҖ” вҖҡ ГҒп¬ӮSв—ҠГҝГҠГҒп¬ӮCГ”UГҠпЈҝ NUCГ”UвҒ„UГҠпЈҝв—ҠГҠ Е“ЕёTГҝвҖ”Г”вҖ“
В¬ЛқГЎГҠГӘГҝ ГҒвүҘГҠвҒ„UвҖҡГҠ Е’пЈҝп¬ӮВў вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғГҠTГҒвҲӮUвҒ„UГ·ГҠВ·ГғГ”H 14H
ГғГғвҖ” therefore; вҖҡвҖ” that; ГҒп¬ӮSв—ҠГҝГҠГҒп¬ӮCГ”UвҖ”Г” overcome with wonder; NUCГ”UвҒ„UГҠпЈҝв—ҠГҠГ” with the hair standing
on end; Е“ЕёTГҝвҖ” Arjuna (lit., a conqueror of riches); В¬ЛқГЎГҠГӘГҝ making obeisance to; ГҒвүҘГҠвҒ„UвҖҡГҠU with
his head (bent low); Е’пЈҝп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” the shining Lord; вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғГҠTГҒвҲӮUвҖ”Г” with his palms joined together; вҖўГ·ГҠВ·ГғГ”
spoke.
Then Arjuna, full of wonder and with the hair standing on end, reverentially
bowed his head to the divine Lord, and with joined palms addressed Him thus. (14)
Arjuna had accumulated untold riches
by conquering a number of princes. This
earned him the title of Г«DhanaВӨjaya.Гӯ Again,
the use of the adjectives Г«VismayГҘviВ¶ВўaВЁГӯ and
Г«HГҰВ¶ВўaromГҘГӯ with Г«DhanaВӨjayaВЁГӯ is intended
The use of the word Г«TataВЁГӯ (thereafter)
in this verse is intended to show how the
sight of that wonderful and glorious form
of the Lord reacted on ArjunaГӯs mind and
body.

=== PAGE 532 ===

* Chapter XI *
531
to show that Arjuna was overwhelmed with
joy and wonder at the sight of that divine
form. Arjuna had never seen such a glorious
form of the Lord before; hence the sight of
that form impressed his mind to a certain
extent with the infinite glory of the Lord. In
other words, he now appreciated the divine
glory even though partially. Hence his joy
and wonder knew no bounds.
The word Г«DevamГӯ in the present verse
refers to the all-effulgent Cosmic Body of the
Lord. The sight of that majestic Form of the
Lord, full of innumerable wonderful sights,
supremely effulgent and invested with infinite
glory, created such a deep impression on
ArjunaГӯs mind that the sentiment of friendship
he had cherished for the Lord from his early
days vanished all of a sudden as it were from
his heart, and he looked very small in his
own eyes in comparison with the infintie
glory of the Lord. He was inspired with a
feeling of deep reverence for the Lord, and
the intensity of that feeling reacting on his
body like an electric current, bent down his
head that very moment and laid it at the feet
of the Lord. Thereafter with folded hands he
began to offer his praises to the Lord with
utmost humility and reverence.
Thus overwhelmed with joy and wonder, and describing the sight seen by him within
the LordГӯs Cosmic Body, Arjuna now offers his praises to that Form.
вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
В¬вүҘГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠВўSГғп¬Ӯ Е’пЈҝп¬Ӯ Е’пЈҝвҖһпЈҝU вҖҡп¬ӮГҠZSГғГ•ГҠ Г·ГҚГғГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠпЈҝВ·вҖҡYГ”UГҠЕёЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҠГЎГҠв—ҠГӢвүҘГҠВў вҲ‘В§в—ҠвҲӮUГҠвҖҡЕёSГ•в—ҠГҺВ·ГӢВҘp вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёЕёГҲвҒ„UВӘГҠВўp ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝГҠЕёЛңГ”H 15H
В¬вүҘГҝГҠГҒв—ҠГ” I behold; Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” gods; Гғп¬Ӯ within Your; Е’пЈҝп¬Ӯ O Lord; Е’пЈҝвҖһпЈҝU body; вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёЕёЛңГ” all; ГғГ•ГҠГ” and;
Г·ГҚГғГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠпЈҝВ·вҖҡYГ”UГҠЕёЛңГ” hosts of different beings; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҠГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” BrahmГҘ (the creator); ГҹВёвүҘГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Lord вҖәiva;
вҲ‘В§в—ҠвҲӮUГҠвҖҡЕёSГ•в—ҠЛңГ” perched on his lotus-seat; ВҙВ§В·ГӢЕёЛңГ” В°RВ¶is; ГёГ” and; вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёЕёЛңГ” all; В©UвҒ„UВӘГҠЕёЛңГ” serpents; ГёГ” and;
ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝГҠЕёЛңГ” celestial.
Arjuna said: Lord, I behold within Your body all gods and hosts of different
beings, BrahmГҘ throned on his lotus-seat, вҖәiva and all В°RВ¶is and celestial serpents. (15)
Similarly, BrahmГҘ and вҖәiva are objects
of adoration even for the gods and fall in the
category of divine beings; hence they have
been mentioned apart from the gods with
whom they are generally ranked. The lotus-
seat on which BrahmГҘ is said to be throned
is none other than the lotus sprung from the
navel of BhagavГҘn ViВ¶Ж’u. The use of the
adjective Г«KamalГҘsansthamГӯ (throned on his
lotus-seat) with Г«BrahmГҘЖ’amГӯ, therefore, shows
that Arjuna beheld in the body of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
not only BrahmГҘ but his progenitor ViВ¶Ж’u as
well, who is only another form of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a.
Among 
earthly 
beings 
В°RВ¶is 
are
regarded as the best; and even so, celestial
The use of the vocative Г«DevaГӯ for вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a is indicative of the feeling of extreme
reverence and devotion which inspired Arjuna
at the sight of the effulgent and wonderful
form of the Lord.
The words Г«Tava DeheГӯ indicate that
Arjuna beheld all the sights described by him
in this verse in the very body of the Lord
present before his eyes.
Of the various orders of creation inhabiting
the universe, gods are recognized as the best
and the highest. That is the reason why
Arjuna mentions them apart from the
multitudes of different beings, in which they
are also included.

=== PAGE 533 ===

532
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
serpents like VГҘsuki and others rank as the
highest among the denizens of the nether
worlds. That is why they have been mentioned
apart from the multitudes of different beings,
in which they are naturally included.
By mentioning thus the principal types
of beings inhabiting the earth, the celestial
regions and the nether worlds, Arjuna shows
that he beheld all the three words in the body
of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a.
вҖўЕёпЈҝвҲ‘В§вҖҷГҠвҖһГҚUЕ’вҒ„Uп¬ӮГ„ГІГҠЕёпЈҝГІГҠВў В¬вүҘГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ Г п¬ӮГҠВў вҖҡп¬ӮВёГғГҠпЈҝЛҳЕёГЈГғMВ§В¬в—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ЕёГҠГЈГғВў Её в—ҠГӨГҝВў Её В¬ГҲЕёSГғп¬ӮГҠГҒЕ’Вў В¬вүҘГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ ГҒп¬ӮEпЈҝEвҒ„U ГҒп¬ӮEMВ§В¬Г”H 16H
вҖўЕёпЈҝвҲ‘В§вҖҷГҠвҖһГҚUЕ’вҒ„Uп¬ӮГ„ГІГҠЕёпЈҝГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” endowed with numerous arms, bellies, mouths and eyes; В¬вүҘГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ I see;
Г п¬ӮГҠв—ҠЛңГ”U You; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГғвҖ” вҖўЕёГЈГғMВ§В¬в—ҠЛңГ” (and) having innumerable forms extended on all sides; ЕёГ” neither;
вҖўГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ” the end; Её nor; в—ҠГӨГҝв—ҠЛңГ” the middle; Её nor; В¬ГҲЕёвҖ”Г” again; Гғп¬ӮГ” Your; вҖўГҠГҒЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” the beginning; В¬вүҘГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ
I behold; ГҒп¬ӮEпЈҝEвҒ„U O Lord of the universe; ГҒп¬ӮEMВ§В¬Г” O Lord manifested in the form of the
universe.
O lord of the universe, I see You endowed with numerous arms, bellies, mouths,
and eyes and having innumerable forms extended on all sides. O Lord, manifested as
You are in the form of the universe, I see neither Your beginning, nor middle, nor
even Your end.                                                                           (16)
manifestation, that is to say, He is both its
efficient and material cause.
The statement that Arjuna saw no
beginning, middle or end of the Lord
shows, that the Cosmic Body of the Lord
was infinite on all sides. Arjuna saw no limit
to it.
The use of the vocatives Г«VisveвҖ№varaГӯ
and Г«ViвҖ№varВөupaГӯ with reference to вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
is intended to convey that He is the creator
and destroyer as well as the supreme Ruler
of the whole universe, appointing all to their
respective duties, and that this universe is,
really speaking, nothing but His own
ГҒвҲ‘В§вҒ„UГӢГҒвүҲUЕёВў ВӘГҒЕ’ЕёВў ГёГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГЎГҠВў Гё ГғпЈҝВЎГҠпЈҝвҒ„UГҠГҒвүҘГҠВў вҖҡп¬ӮВёГғГҠпЈҝ Е’ГӢГҒ#в—ҠГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
В¬вүҘГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ Г п¬ӮГҠВў Е’ГҲГҢЕёвҒ„UГӢЛҮГҝВў вҖҡв—ҠГЈГғГҠgГӢ#ГҠЕёвҲӮUГҠвҲ‘ВёВ§lГҲГҒГғв—ҠВ¬Лқв—ҠпЈҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ”H 17H
ГҒвҲ‘В§вҒ„UГӢГҒвүҲUЕёв—ҠЛңГ”U adorned with diadems; ВӘГҒЕ’Еёв—ҠЛңГ” armed with mace; ГёГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” wielding discus;
Гё and; ГғпЈҝВЎГҠпЈҝвҒ„UГҠГҒвүҘГҠв—ҠЛңГ” a mass of splendour; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГғвҖ”Г” all round; Е’ГӢГҒ#в—ҠГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ” glowing; В¬вүҘГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ I behold;
Г п¬ӮГҠв—ҠЛңГ” You; Е’ГҲГҢЕёвҒ„UГӢЛҮГҝв—ҠЛңГ” hard to gaze at; вҖҡв—ҠГЈГғГҠГғЛңГ” on all sides; Е’ГӢ#ГҠЕёвҲӮUГҠвҲ‘ВёВ§lГҲГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” having the brilliance
of a blazing fire and the sun; вҖўВ¬Лқв—ҠпЈҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ” immeasurable.
I see You endowed with diadems, mace and discus, a mass of splendour glowing
all round, having the brilliance of a blazing fire and the sun, hard to gaze at and
immeasurable on all sides.                                                               (17)
to give and accurate idea of the splendour
and brilliance of the Cosmic Body. The
splendour and brilliance of the Cosmic Body
resembled the effulgence of a blazing fire and
the sun only in kind and not in degree; It was
infinitely more resplendent than the latter. The
brilliance of fire and the sun is visible only in
By speaking of the Lord as Г«KirвҲӮВўinaвүҲГӯ,
Г«GadinaвүҲГӯ and Г«CakriЖ’aвүҲГӯ Arjuna shows
that He retained the famous emblems of
BhagavГҘn ViВ¶Ж’u even in that wonderful form.
The adjective Г«DвҲӮptГҘnalГҘrkadyutiвүҲГӯ has
been used over and above Г«Sarvato
DвҲӮptimantaвүҲГӯ and Г«TejorГҘвҖ№iвүҲГӯ just in order

=== PAGE 534 ===

* Chapter XI *
533
a particular part of the universe, whereas the
brilliance of the Cosmic Body could be seen
everywhere and on all sides.
Clothed as it was with a most wonderful
type of effulgence, that resplendent form of
the Lord dazzled the human eyes; they could
not bear its sight. Hence it has been spoken
of as Г«DurnirвҲӮkВ¶yamГӯ (difficult to gaze at) for
the common man. Arjuna, however, was
blessed with the divine eye only for a vision
of that Form; and it was with that eye that he
perceived It. Hence, though producing a
blinding effect on the eyes of others, it was
not so in the case of Arjuna.
By speaking of the Lord as Г«SamantГҘt
AprameyaвүҲГӯ Arjuna indicates that it was not
possible by any means to know His virtues,
glory, power and identity in their entirety.
Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛҮГҠвҒ„ВўU В¬вҒ„в—ҠВў п¬ӮпЈҝГҒЕ’ГғвҲҡГҝВў Г п¬Ӯв—ҠSГҝ ГҒп¬ӮESГҝ В¬вҒ„ВўU ГҒЕёЕ“ГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
Г п¬Ӯв—ҠвҲҡГҝГҝвҖ” вүҘГҠГҠEГғЕ“в—ҠВёВӘГҠпЈҝ#ГҠ вҖҡЕёГҠГғЕёSГ п¬ӮВў В¬ГҲLВ§В·ГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГғГҠпЈҝ в—ҠпЈҝH 18H
Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” You (are); вҖўЛҮГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” В¬вҒ„Uв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” the supreme Indestructible or God; п¬ӮпЈҝГҒЕ’ГғвҲҡГҝв—ҠЛңГ”U worthy of being
known; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” You (are); вҖўSГҝ ГҒп¬ӮESГҝ of this universe; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” ГҒЕёЕ“ГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the ultimate refuge; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” You
(are); вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝвҖ” imperishable; вүҘГҠГҠEГғЕ“в—ҠВёВӘГҠпЈҝ#ГҠ the protector of the ageless Dharma; вҖҡЕёГҠГғЕёвҖ” the
eternal; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” You; В¬ГҲLВ§В·вҖ” Being; в—ҠГғвҖ” в—ҠпЈҝ are considered by me.
You are the supreme Indestructible worthy of being known; You are the ultimate
refuge of this universe. You are, again, the protector of the ageless Dharma; I consider
You to be the eternal, imperishable Being.                                             (18)
effect, rests in God, and is sustained by Him;
hence He is its ultimate resort.
The religion propounded by the Vedas
has existed from time without beginning
and shall exist for ever. Hence it has been
referred to here as Г«вҖәГҘвҖ№vata DharmaГӯ or
Г«SanГҘtana DharmaГӯ as it is now called.
Descending again and again on this earth
God Himself protects this Dharma; hence
Arjuna speaks of Him here as Г«вҖәГҘвҖ№vata-
dharmagoptГҘГӯ or Protector of the eternal
Religion.
By referring to вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a as Г«Avyaya
SanГҘtana PuruВ¶aГӯ Arjuna shows that He was
no other than God Almighty, otherwise known
as the eternal supreme PuruВ¶a, the imperishable
and immutable creator and destroyer of the
universe.
The word Г«AkВ¶araвүҲГӯ, qualified by the
adjective Г«VeditavyaвүҲГӯ and Г«ParamaвүҲГӯ, stands
for the absolute and formless supreme Divinity
or Brahma, the embodiment of Truth,
Knowledge and Bliss, the ultimate Reality
which souls aspiring for liberation seek to
know and for the knowledge of which seekers
of Truth devote themselves to various forms
of spiritual practice, and which has been
referred to as Brahma in VIII.3. By predicating
this term of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, Arjuna shows that the
sight of His Cosmic Body had convinced
him of His identity with the absolute or
supreme Brahma.
Г«NidhГҘnaГӯ means a resting-place or refuge.
By speaking of the Lord as the Г«NidhГҘnaГӯ or
ultimate resort of this universe, Arjuna shows
that the entire universe both as cause and
вҖўЕёГҠГҒЕ’в—ҠГӨГҝГҠГЈГғв—ҠЕёГЈГғп¬ӮГӢГҝВёв—ҠЕёГЈГғвҖҷГҠвҖһГҲВўU 
вүҘГҠГҒвүҘГҠвҖҡГҚГҝВёЕёпЈҝГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
В¬вүҘГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ Г п¬ӮГҠВў Е’ГӢ#вҖһГҲUГғГҠвүҘГҠп¬ӮГ„ГІГҠВў Sп¬ӮГғпЈҝВЎвҖҡГҠ ГҒп¬ӮEГҒв—ҠЕ’Вў ГғВ¬ГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 19H

=== PAGE 535 ===

534
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
In verse 16 Arjuna has already told the
Lord that he saw neither His beginning nor
middle nor end, and he repeats the same thing
in the present verse as well when he says that
he saw Him without beginning, middle or end.
On closer examination, however, it will be
found that the latter statement is no mere
repetition of the former. While the former
statement was intended to bring out the infinitude
of His Cosmic Body, the present verse seeks
to convey that He is entirely free from the six
types of modification such as birth etc., and
therefore eternal. Of the three substantives
forming part of the compound word
AnГҘdimadhyГҘntamГӯ, Г«Г…diГӯ denotes the first type
viz., birth; Г«MadhyaГӯ represents the four
intermediate stages of existence, growth,
transformation and decay; while Г«AntaГӯ stands
for the last stage of destruction or death. He
who is free from all these modifications is called
Г«AnГҘdimadhyГҘntaГӯ. Therefore, the real meaning
of ArjunaГӯs statement in this verse is that he
sees the Lord as entirely free from the six types
of modification, viz., birth, existence, growth,
transformation, decay and death.
The word, Г«VвҲӮryaГӯ is a comprehensive
term covering different shades of meaning, viz.,
prowess, strength, glory and energy etc. By
speaking of the Lord as Г«AnantavвҲӮryaГӯ in this
verse Arjuna seeks to convey that His prowess,
strength, energy and glory were unlimited.
Although the form which Arjuna saw
had faces on all sides, as stated in verse 11
above, the chief of them had the sun and the
moon as its two eyes, and its mouth burning
like blazing fire. This is what is meant by
speaking of the Lord as Г«вҖәaвҖ№isВөuryanetraГӯ and
Г«DвҲӮptahutГҘвҖ№avaktraГӯ.
вҖўЕёГҠГҒЕ’в—ҠГӨГҝГҠГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ” having no beginning, middle or end; вҖўЕёГЈГғп¬ӮГӢГҝВёв—ҠЛңГ” Possessing unlimited
prowess; вҖўЕёГЈГғвҖҷГҠвҖһГҲUв—ҠЛңГ” endowed with numberless arms; вүҘГҠГҒвүҘГҠвҖҡГҚГҝВёЕёпЈҝГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” having the sun and the moon
for oneГӯs eyes; В¬вүҘГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ I behold; Г п¬ӮГҠв—ҠЛңГ” You; Е’ГӢ#вҖһГҲUГғГҠвүҘГҠп¬ӮГ„ГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” having blazing fire for oneГӯs mouth;
Sп¬ӮГғпЈҝВЎвҖҡГҠГ” by oneГӯs radiance; ГҒп¬ӮEв—ҠЛңГ” ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this universe; ГғВ¬ГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ” scorching.
I see You without beginning, middle or end, possessing unlimited prowess and
endowed with numberless arms, having the moon and the sun for Your eyes, and
blazing fire for Your mouth, and scorching this universe by Your radiance.     (19)
lГҠп¬ӮГҠВ¬ГҺГҒГ•вҲҡГҝГҠпЈҝГҒвҒ„UЕ’в—ҠГЈГғвҒ„ВўU ГҒвҖһU вҲҡГҝГҠ#Вў Г п¬ӮГҝГ’вҲ‘пЈҝВ§Её ГҒЕ’вүҘГҠp вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёвҖ”Г”вҖ“
Е’ГҺВ¶Г”UГҠjГҲГғВў MВ§В¬в—ҠГҲВӘЛқВў Гғп¬ӮпЈҝЕ’Вў вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГІГҠГҝВў В¬ЛқвҲҡГҝГҒГ•ГғВў в—ҠвҖһUГҠГ в—ҠЕёЛңГ”H 20H
lГҠп¬ӮГҠВ¬ГҺГҒГ•вҲҡГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” between heaven and earth; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this; вҖўГЈГғвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” the interspace; ГҒвҖһU indeed; вҲҡГҝГҠ#в—ҠЛңГ”
is filled; Г п¬ӮГҝГҠГ” вҲһвҲ‘пЈҝВ§Её by You alone; ГҒЕ’вүҘГҠвҖ”Г” the quarters; ГёГ” and; вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёвҖ” all; Е’ГҺВ¶Г”UГҠ seeing; вҖўjГҲГғв—ҠЛңГ”
transcendent; MВ§В¬в—ҠЛңГ” form; В©UВӘЛқв—ҠЛңГ” terrible; Гғп¬ӮГ” Your; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГІГҠГҝв—ҠЛңГ” all the three worlds;
В¬ЛқвҲҡГҝГҒГ•Гғв—ҠЛңГ” feel alarmed; в—ҠвҖһUГҠГ в—ҠЕёЛңГ” O Soul of the universe.
The interspace between heaven and earth and all the quarters are entirely filled
by You alone. Seeing this transcendent, dreadful Form of Yours, O Soul of the
universe, all the three worlds feel greatly alarmed.                                               (20)
well as all the quarters. No space was
to be found where that cosmic Body was
not present. Side by side Arjuna also
witnessed the transcendental and terrible
form of the Lord which was so frightful that
Describing God as the Soul of the entire
universe, by using the vocative Г«MahГҘtmanГӯ,
Arjuna means to say that that Cosmic Body
of the Lord was so extensive as to encompass
all the space between heaven and earth as

=== PAGE 536 ===

* Chapter XI *
535
casting a look at it, the inhabitants of all these
worldsГіthe heaven, the mortal world and
the world comprising the space in between,
being struck with fear, were in a great state
of alarm and their condition was extremely
pitiable.
way. This is what Arjuna meant by his
statement that some with palms joined out of
fear were uttering the LordГӯs names and
praises.
Arjuna further saw that multitudes of
MaharВ¶is like MarвҲӮci, AвҲҶgirГҘ and BhГҰgu, and
Siddhas of all descriptions, known as well as
unknown, on the other hand, far from being
seized with fear at the sight of that terrible
form, were praying for the well-being of the
whole universe and singing paeans of praise
to the Lord, knowing as they did the real
secret of His identity. This is what is meant
by the latter half of this verse.
The demonstrative adjective Г«AmвҲӮГӯ is
used with reference to objects that lie beyond
the range of oneГӯs sight. By using this word
with Г«SurasaвҲҶghГҘВЁГӯ Arjuna seeks to convey
that he saw those very gods whom he had
seen some years back during his visit to
heaven.
Seeing hosts of gods entering the terrible
form of the Lord, the rest of them lost all
hope of surviving their companions, and
the thought of their impending doom filled
them with fear. With joined palms therefore,
they began to utter the names and glories of
the Lord and tried to propitiate Him in that
LВ§ВәЛқГҠГҒЕ’Г ГҝГҠ п¬ӮвҖҡп¬ӮГҠпЈҝ ГҝпЈҝ Гё вҖҡГҠГӨГҝГҠ ГҒп¬ӮEпЈҝЛҳГҒEЕёГҠГ’ в—ҠLВ§ГғpГҠпЈҝcв—ҠВ¬ГҠpГ”вҖ“
ВӘГЈЕ“п¬ӮВёГҝЛҮГҠГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„UГҒвҖҡhвҖҡYГ”UГҠ п¬ӮГӢЛҮГҠГЈГғпЈҝ Г п¬ӮГҠВў ГҒп¬ӮГҒSв—ҠГғГҠpГ’п¬Ӯ вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёГ”H 22H
LВ§ВәЛқГҠГҒЕ’Г ГҝГҠвҖ” the (eleven) Rudras and the (twelve) sons of Aditi; п¬ӮвҖҡп¬ӮвҖ”Г” (the eight) Vasus; ГҝпЈҝ
who; Гё and; вҖҡГҠГӨГҝГҠвҖ” the SГҘdhyas; ГҒп¬ӮEпЈҝГ” the ViвҖ№vedevas; вҖўГҒEЕёГҠГ’ the two AвҖ№vinвҲӮkumГҘras; в—ҠLВ§ГғвҖ”Г”
the Maruts (wind-gods); Гё and; в„ўВ§cв—ҠВ¬ГҠвҖ”Г” the manes; Гё and; ВӘГЈЕ“п¬ӮВёГҝЛҮГҠГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„UГҒвҖҡhвҖҡYГ”UГҠ multitudes of
Gandharvas, YakВ¶as, Asuras and Siddhas; п¬ӮГӢЛҮГҠГЈГғпЈҝ gaze upon; Г п¬ӮГҠв—ҠЛңГ” You; ГҒп¬ӮГҒSв—ҠГғГҠвҖ”Г” amazed; Гё
as well as; вҲһп¬Ӯ indeed; вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёГ” all (these).
The eleven Rudras, twelve Г…dityas and eight Vasus, the SГҘdhyas and ViвҖ№vedevas,
the two AвҖ№vinвҲӮkumГҘras and forty-nine Maruts, as well as the manes and multitudes of
Gandharvas, YakВ¶as, Asuras and Siddhas, all these gaze upon You in amazement. (22)
viz., the Rudras, Г…dityas, Vasus and Maruts
have already been given in the commentaries
Brief notes on four of the twelve classes
of superhuman beings mentioned in this verse,
вҖўв—ҠГӢ ГҒвҖһU Г п¬ӮГҠВў вҖҡГҲвҒ„UвҖҡYГ”UГҠ ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҒГЈГғ вҲ‘пЈҝВ§ГҒГёjГӢГғГҠвҖ” В¬ЛқГҠTвҲӮUГҝГҠпЈҝ ВӘГҺГЎГҠГҒГЈГғГ”вҖ“
Sп¬ӮSГғГӢГ ГҝГҲГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ в—ҠвҖһUГҢВ·ГҒвҖҡhвҖҡYГ”UГҠвҖ” SГғГҲп¬ӮГҒГЈГғ Г п¬ӮГҠВў SГғГҲГҒГғГҒГ·вҖ” В¬ГҲcвҲ‘В§вҲӮUГҠГҒГ·вҖ”Г”H 21H
вҖўв—ҠГӢ those; ГҒвҖһUГ” very; Г п¬ӮГҠв—ҠЛңГ” You; вҖҡГҲвҒ„UвҖҡYГ”UГҠвҖ” hosts of gods; ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҒГЈГғ enter; вҲ‘пЈҝВ§ГҒГёГғЛңГ” (while) some;
Г·ГӢГғГҠвҖ” terrified; В¬ЛқГҠTвҲӮUГҝвҖ” with palms joined together; ВӘГҺГЎГҠГҒГЈГғГ” utter (Your names and praises);
Sп¬ӮГҒSГғГ” Let there be peace; ГҹГҒГғ so; В©UГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ saying; в—ҠвҖһUГҢВ·ГҒвҖҡhвҖҡYГ”UГҠвҖ” hosts of MaharВ¶is and Siddhas;
SГғГҲп¬ӮГҒГЈГғГ” extol; Г п¬ӮГҠв—ҠЛңГ” You; SГғГҲГҒГғГҒГ·вҖ”Г” В¬ГҲcвҲ‘В§вҲӮUГҠГҒГ·вҖ” through excellent hymns.
Hosts of gods are entering You; some with palms joined out of fear are recounting
Your names and glories. Multitudes of MaharВ¶is and Siddhas, saying Г«Let there be
peaceГӯ, are extolling You by excellent hymns.
(21)

=== PAGE 537 ===

536
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
on verses 21 and 23 of Chapter X, and in
the footnote below the 21st; while the
AвҖ№vinвҲӮkumГҘras have been dealt with in the
footnote below XI.6. The names of the twelve
SГҘdhyas are Manas, AnumantГҘ, PrГҘЖ’a, Nara,
YГҘna, Citti, Haya, Naya, HaвүҲsa, NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a,
Prabhava and Vibhu.* And the ten ViвҖ№vedevas
are Kratu, DakВ¶a, вҖәrava, Satya, KГҘla, KГҘma,
Dhuni, KuruvГҘn, PrabhavГҘn and RocamГҘna.вҖ 
The SГҘdhyas and ViвҖ№vedevas represent two
of the eight divisions of celestials mentioned
in this verse (See BrahmГҘЖ’Е’a., LXXI.2).
Those who eat hot and steaming rice
are called ВӘUВ¶mapГҘs. The code of Manu (III.237)
says that the manes eat hot rice. Hence the
word Г«ВӘUВ¶mapГҘВЁГӯ in this verse should be
taken to represent the manesвҖЎ in general.
The Gandharvas are believed to have
been born of the three wives of KaвҖ№yapa,
viz., Muni, PrГҘdhГҘ and AriВ¶ВўГҘГӯ. They have
expert knowledge of the different melodies
and are supposed to be proficient in the arts
of dancing and instrumental music prevalent
in heaven. The YakВ¶as are believed to have
been born of sage KaвҖ№yapaГӯs wife, KhasГҘ.
They are also represented in the suite of
attendants of BhagavГҘn вҖәaвҲҶkara. Kuvera is
the recognized head of the YakВ¶as and noble
RГҘkВ¶asas. The Daityas, DГҘnavas and RГҘkВ¶asas,
who are the sworn enemies of the Devas, are
collectively known as the Asuras. The offspring
of KaвҖ№yapaГӯs wife Diti are called Daityas,
while those of Danu are named as DГҘnavas.
The RГҘkВ¶asas were born in diverse ways.
Kapila and others are known by the name of
Г«SiddhaГӯ.
numerous arms, bellies, faces and eyes, he
only described in that verse the details of that
Although Arjuna has already spoken of
the Cosmic Body in verse 16 as possessed of
*
в—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝЛҳЕёГҲв—ҠГЈГғГҠ В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠp ЕёвҒ„UГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠЕёp п¬ӮГӢГҝВёп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” H
ГҒГёГҒГ»ГҠвҖһВёUГҝГҠпЈҝ  ЕёГҝpГ’п¬Ӯ  вҖһВўUвҖҡГҠпЈҝ ЕёГҠвҒ„UГҠГҝГЎГҠSГғГ•ГҠ вҖ“ В¬ЛқГ·п¬ӮГҠпЈҝЛҳГ• ГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҲpГ’п¬Ӯ вҖҡГҠГӨГҝГҠ mГҠЕ’вүҘГҠ ВЎГҒГҙГҠвҒ„пЈҝUH
(VГҘyu. LXVI.15-16)
The twelve SГҘdhyas mentioned in the above verse were born of the womb of DakВ¶aГӯs daughter,
SГҘdhyГҘ, the consort of Dharma. The Skanda-PurГҘЖ’a gives slightly different names, viz., Manas, AnumantГҘ,
PrГҘЖ’a, Nara, ApГҘna, Bhakti, Bhaya, Anagha, HaвүҲsa, NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a, Vibhu and Prabhu (Skanda., PrabhГҘsa.,
XXI.17-18). The difference can be easily explained by the difference of Manvantaras.
вҖ 
ГҒп¬ӮEпЈҝЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠSГғГҲ  ГҒп¬ӮEГҠГҝГҠ  ВЎГҒГҙГҠвҒ„пЈҝ U Е’вүҘГҠ  ГҒп¬ӮГјГҠГҲГғГҠвҖ”вҖ“
вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГғГҲЕ’ВёЛҮГҠвҖ” ГјГҠп¬ӮвҖ” вҖҡГ ГҝвҖ” вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮUвҖ” вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠпЈҝ  Е“ГҲГҒЕёSГғГ•ГҠвҖ“ вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§п¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” В¬ЛқГ·п¬ӮГҠВўpГ’п¬Ӯ вҒ„UГҠпЈҝГёв—ҠГҠЕёp ГғпЈҝ Е’вүҘГҠH
(VГҘyu. LXVI.31-32)
The ten ViвҖ№vedevas were born of the womb of DharmaГӯs wife, ViвҖ№vГҘ, daughter of DakВ¶a. Some PurГҘЖ’as
give altogether different names. The difference is due to the difference of Manvantaras.
вҖЎ
The names of the principal manes have been given in the commentary on X.29.
MВ§В¬Вў в—ҠвҖһUГ»ГҠпЈҝ вҖҷвҖһГҲUп¬ӮГ„ГІГҠЕёпЈҝГІГҠВў в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ вҖҷвҖһГҲUвҖҷГҠвҖһГҚULВ§В¬ГҠЕ’в—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖҷвҖһГҚЕ’вҒ„ВўU вҖҷвҖһГҲUЕ’ВўCГ”ЛӣUГҠвҲ‘В§вҒ„UГҠвҲӮВўU Е’ГҺВ¶Г”UГҠ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠвҖ” В¬ЛқвҲҡГҝГҒГ•ГғГҠSГғГ•ГҠвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”H 23H
MВ§В¬в—ҠЛңГ” form; в—ҠвҖһUГғЛңГ” colossal; ГғпЈҝ Your; вҖҷвҖһГҲUп¬ӮГ„ГІГҠЕёпЈҝГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” having many mouths and eyes; в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ O
mighty-armed Lord; вҖҷвҖһГҲUвҖҷГҠвҖһГҚULВ§В¬ГҠЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” endowed with numerous arms, thighs and feet; вҖҷвҖһГҚUЕ’вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”
having a number of bellies; вҖҷвҖһГҲUЕ’ВўCГ”ЛӣUГҠвҲ‘В§вҒ„UГҠвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” looking fierce with many teeth; Е’ГҺВ¶Г”UГҠ seeing; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠвҖ”Г”
(all) the worlds; В¬ЛқвҲҡГҝГҒГ•ГғГҠвҖ” are terrified; ГғГ•ГҠ as well as; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I.
Lord, seeing this stupendous and dreadful Form of Yours, possessing numerous
mouths and eyes, many arms, thighs and feet, many bellies and many teeth, the worlds
are terror-stricken; so am I.                                                               (23)

=== PAGE 538 ===

* Chapter XI *
537
form as seen by him; whereas the present
verse speaks of all the worlds and of Arjuna
himself being terrified at the sight of that
form. That is the apology for his repeating
the same idea in this verse.
Even so, in verse 20 Arjuna has already
spoken of all the three worlds feeling greatly
alarmed at the limitless expanse and dreadfulness
of that Form. In the present verse, however,
he speaks of himself too being terrified at the
sight of the numerous faces, eyes, arms,
thighs, feet, bellies and teeth of that terrible
Form. This exonerates him from the charge
of redundancy.
ЕёГ·вҖ”SВ¬ГҺвүҘГҠВў Е’ГӢ#в—ҠЕёпЈҝвҲ‘В§п¬ӮГЎГҠZ вҲҡГҝГҠГ»ГҠГҠЕёЕёВў Е’ГӢ#ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҠвҲӮUЕёпЈҝГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
Е’ГҺВ¶Г”UГҠ ГҒвҖһU Г п¬ӮГҠВў В¬ЛқвҲҡГҝГҒГ•ГғГҠГЈГғвҒ„UГҠГ в—ҠГҠ Е“ГҺГҒГғВў Её ГҒп¬ӮГЈЕ’ГҠГҒв—Ҡ вүҘГҠв—ҠВў Гё ГҒп¬ӮcГЎГҠГҠпЈҝГ”H 24H
ЕёГ·вҖ”SВ¬ГҺвүҘГҠв—ҠЛңГ” touching the heavens; Е’ГӢ#в—ҠЛңГ” radiant; вҖўЕёпЈҝвҲ‘В§п¬ӮГЎГҠВёв—ҠЛңГ” multi-coloured; вҲҡГҝГҠГ»ГҠГҠЕёЕёв—ҠЛңГ” having
oneГӯs mouth wide open; Е’ГӢ#ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҠвҲӮUЕёпЈҝГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” possessing large flaming eyes; Е’ГҺВ¶Г”UГҠ seeing; ГҒвҖһU because;
Г п¬ӮГҠв—ҠЛңГ” you; В¬ЛқвҲҡГҝГҒГ•ГғГҠГЈГғвҒ„UГҠГ в—ҠГҠГ” having oneГӯs inner self frightened; Е“ГҺГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” self-control; Её not; ГҒп¬ӮГЈЕ’ГҠГҒв—Ҡ I
find; вүҘГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” peace; Гё and; ГҒп¬ӮcГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ O ViВ¶Ж’u (lit., all-pervading Lord).
Lord, seeing Your Form reaching the heavens, effulgent, multi-coloured, having
its mouth wide open and possessing large flaming eyes, I, with my inmost self
frightened, have lost self-control and find no peace.                                   (24)
of that terrible form. That is the justification
for his describing the tremendous height of
that Form once more in this verse.
Even so, in verse 17 above Arjuna
simply referred to the all-round effulgence of
the Form as seen by him; whereas the present
verse speaks of his own loss of self-composure
and presence of mind. That is the apology
for using in this verse the adjective Г«DвҲӮptamГӯ,
which is only a repetition of Г«DвҲӮptimantamГӯ
used in verse 17.
Similarly, even though Arjuna has already
expressed his fright at the sight of the
tremendous size of the Cosmic Body, he
mentions in the present verse the additional
fact of his losing self-control and peace of
mind. That justifies to a certain extent the
repetition of the word Г«PravyathitaГӯ as a member
of a compound in this verse.
By addressing the Lord as Г«ViВ¶Ж’uГӯ Arjuna
seeks to convey that it was ViВ¶Ж’u (the Protector
of the universe) Himself who appeared on
earth in the form of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a in order to
lighten the burden of the earth. Arjuna thereby
made a covert suggestion that the Lord should
conceal His Cosmic Body and manifest
Himself in the form of ViВ¶Ж’u in order to
relieve his agony.
Although in verse 20 above Arjuna has
already indicated the immeasurable height of
the Lord by declaring that the entire space
between heaven and earth was filled by Him
alone, he only spoke of all the three worlds
feeling greatly alarmed at the sight of the
inordinate length and breadth of the Cosmic
Body; while the present verse speaks of
ArjunaГӯs being frightened himself, losing his
self-control and finding no peace at the sight
Е’ВўCГ”ЛӣUГҠвҲ‘В§вҒ„UГҠвҲӮUГҠГҒЕё Гё ГғпЈҝ в—ҠГҲПҖГҠГҒЕё Е’ГҺВ¶Г”Г’Uп¬Ӯ вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮUГҠЕёвҲӮUвҖҡГҒГӣГҠГ·ГҠГҒЕёГ”вҖ“
ГҒЕ’вҖЎГҠГҠпЈҝ Её ВЎГҠЕёпЈҝ Её вҲӮUГ·пЈҝ Гё вүҘГҠв—ҠВё В¬ЛқвҖҡГӢЕ’ Е’пЈҝп¬ӮпЈҝвүҘГҠ ВЎВӘГҒГӣГҠп¬ӮГҠвҖҡГ”H 25H
Е’ВўCГ”ЛӣUГҠвҲ‘В§вҒ„UГҠвҲӮUГҠГҒЕё frightful on account of their awesome teeth; Гё and; ГғпЈҝГ” Your; в—ҠГҲПҖГҠГҒЕё faces; Е’ГҺВ¶Г”UГҠ
seeing; вҲһп¬ӮГ” even; вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮUГҠЕёвҲӮUвҖҡГҒГӣГҠГ·ГҠГҒЕё blazing like the huge fires at the time of universal destruction;

=== PAGE 539 ===

538
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Although in verse 23 Arjuna has already
referred to the dreadful aspect of the LordГӯs
numerous faces, he simply spoke therein of
his being frightened at the sight of those
faces; whereas in the present verse he mentions
the additional fact of his bewilderment and
loss of happiness. That accounts to a certain
extent for the repetition of the word
Г«BahudaвүҲВ¶ВўrГҘkarГҘlamГӯ occurring in verse 23
as Г«DaвүҲВ¶ВўrГҘkarГҘlamГӯ in this verse, although
such repetitions are mainly attributable to his
confused state of mind.
Arjuna 
had 
already 
heard 
from
authoritative sources that вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a was the all-
pervading Lord of all celestials, and the ultimate
refuge of the entire universe, and also believed
that it was so. Now that he directly perceived
His Cosmic Body, no doubt was left in his mind
about His being the Lord of celestials and the
abode of the universe. This is what he seeks to
convey  by the use of the vocatives Г«DeveвҖ№aГӯ
and Г«JagannivГҘsaГӯ for the Lord.
Although Arjuna had thus witnessed the
divine glory of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, the sight of His
Cosmic Body, had reduced him to a very sad
plight. His self-control and presence of mind
had taken leave of him, and he felt utterly
amazed and confused. He, therefore, now
implores вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a to have mercy on him and
withdraw His terrible Cosmic Form appearing
before his eyes. This is what is meant by his
asking вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a to be kind to him.
ГҒЕ’вүҘГҠвҖ” the quarters; Её ВЎГҠЕёпЈҝГ” I am at a loss to discern; Её not; вҲӮUГ·пЈҝГ” I find; Гё and; вүҘГҠв—ҠВёГ” peace; В¬ЛқвҖҡГӢЕ’ be
pleased; Е’пЈҝп¬ӮпЈҝвүҘГҠ O Lord of celestials; ВЎВӘГҒГӣГҠп¬ӮГҠвҖҡГ” O Abode of the universe.
Seeing Your faces frightful on account of their awesome teeth, and blazing like the
fire at the time of universal destruction, I am utterly bewildered and find no peace;
therefore, have mercy on me, O Lord of celestials! O Abode of the universe!    (25)
вҖўв—ҠГӢ Гё Г п¬ӮГҠВў Е“ГҺГғвҒ„UГҠcвүҲЛӣSГҝ В¬ГҲГІГҠГҠвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё вҖҡвҖһГ’Uп¬ӮГҠп¬ӮГҒЕёВ¬ГҠвҲӮUвҖҡYГ”Г’UвҖ”вҖ“
Г·ГӢcв—ҠГҠпЈҝ ВәЛқГҠпЈҝГЎГҠвҖ” вҖҡГҚГғВ¬ГҲГІГҠSГғГ•ГҠвҖҡГҠГ’ вҖҡвҖһUГҠSв—ҠЕ’ГӢГҝГ’вҒ„UГҒВ¬ ГҝГҠпЈҝЕ“в—ҠГҲГ…ГҝГ’вҖ”Г”H 26H
п¬ӮГ„ГІГҠГҠГҒГЎГҠ ГғпЈҝ Г п¬ӮвҒ„Uв—ҠГҠГЎГҠГҠ ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҒГЈГғ Е’ВўcвүҲЛӣГҠвҲ‘В§вҒ„UГҠвҲӮUГҠГҒЕё Г·ГҝГҠЕёвҲ‘В§ГҠГҒЕёвҖ“
вҲ‘пЈҝВ§ГҒГёГҒmвҲӮUВӘAГҠ Е’вүҘГҠЕёГҠГЈГғвҒ„пЈҝUВ·ГҲ вҖҡГЈЕ’ГҺвүҘГҝГЈГғпЈҝ ГёГҚГҢГЎГҠГғГ’LВ§Г»ГҠв—ҠГҠXГ”Г’UвҖ”Г”H 27H
вҖўв—ҠГӢ those; Гё and; Г п¬ӮГҠв—ҠЛңГ” (are entering) You; Е“ГҺГғвҒ„UГҠcвүҲЛӣSГҝ В¬ГҲГІГҠГҠвҖ” the sons of DhГҰtarГҘВ¶Вўra; вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё all; вҖҡвҖһU
with; вҲһп¬Ӯ indeed; вҖўп¬ӮГҒЕёВ¬ГҠвҲӮUвҖҡYГ”Г’UвҖ” hosts of kings; Г·ГӢcв—ҠвҖ” the granduncle BhвҲӮВ¶ma; ВәЛқГҠпЈҝГЎГҠвҖ” the preceptor
DroЖ’a; вҖҡГҚГғВ¬ГҲГІГҠвҖ” KarЖ’a lit., the foster-child of a charioteer); ГғГ•ГҠГ” as well as; вҖўвҖҡГҠГ’Г” that; вҖҡвҖһUГ” with;
вҖўSв—ҠЕ’ГӢГҝГ’вҖ” ranging on our side; вҖўГҒВ¬ as well; ГҝГҠпЈҝЕ“в—ҠГҲГ…ГҝГ’вҖ”Г” the principal warriors; п¬ӮГ„ГІГҠГҠГҒГЎГҠ mouths; ГғпЈҝ
Your; Г п¬ӮвҒ„Uв—ҠГҠГЎГҠГҠвҖ” rushing headlong; ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҒГЈГғ are entering (into); Е’ВўcвүҲЛӣГҠвҲ‘В§вҒ„UГҠвҲӮUГҠГҒЕё terrible on account of
their awesome teeth; Г·ГҝГҠЕёвҲ‘В§ГҠГҒЕё fearful; вҲ‘пЈҝВ§ГҒГёГғЛңГ” (while) some; ГҒп¬ӮвҲӮUВӘAГҠвҖ” stuck up; Е’вүҘГҠЕёГҠГЈГғвҒ„пЈҝUВ·ГҲ in the
gaps between Your teeth; вҖҡГЈЕ’ГҺвүҘГҝГЈГғпЈҝ are seen; ГёГҚГҢГЎГҠГғГ’вҖ” В©UГ»ГҠв—ҠГҠXГ”Г’UвҖ” with (their) heads crushed.
All those sons of DhГҰtarГҘВ¶Вўra with hosts of kings are entering You. BhвҲӮВ¶ma, DroЖ’a
and yonder KarЖ’a, with the principal warriors on our side as well, are rushing headlong
into Your fearful mouths, looking all the more terrible on account of their awesome teeth;
some are seen stuck up in the gaps between Your teeth with their heads crushed. (26-27)
Arjuna had seen standing in battle array only
a moment ago.
The word Г«AvanipГҘlasaвҲҶghaiВЁГӯ refers to
The words Г«AmвҲӮ DhГҰtarГҘВ¶Вўrasya PutrГҘВЁГӯ
occurring in this verse should be taken to
mean those very sons of DhГҰtarГҘВ¶Вўra whom

=== PAGE 540 ===

* Chapter XI *
539
those hosts of kings who had joined the army
of Duryodhana as his allies and comrades in
arms.
The patriarch BhвҲӮВ¶ma, and Г…cГҘrya DroЖ’a,
the common preceptor of the PГҘЖ’Е’avas and
Kauravas both, were the greatest and principal
warriors on the Kaurava side. According to
Arjuna, it was most difficult to vanquish or
kill them. That is the apology for his
making special mention of these two warriors.
Again, Arjuna entertained a natural
feeling of rivalry in respect of the great hero
and warrior, KarЖ’a. The words Г«Asau
SВөutaputraВЁГӯ should, therefore, be taken to
mean that KarЖ’a who in the eyes of Arjuna
had exaggerated notions of his own valour
and entertained a very low opinion of other
great warriors.
In the next two verses Arjuna illustrates the way in which he found the warriors on both
sides entering the dreadful mouths of the Lord, first by the analogy of rivers coursing
towards the sea, and then by that of moths rushing into the blazing fire.
ГҝГ•ГҠ ЕёЕ’ГӢЕёГҠВў вҖҷвҖһUп¬ӮГҠпЈҝЛҳГӘвҖҷГҲп¬ӮпЈҝВӘГҠвҖ” вҖҡв—ҠГҲВәЛқв—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮГҠГҒГ·в—ҠГҲПҖГҠ ВәЛқп¬ӮГҒГЈГғвҖ“
ГғГ•ГҠ Гғп¬ӮГҠв—ҠГӢ ЕёвҒ„UвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§п¬ӮГӢвҒ„UГҠ ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҒГЈГғ п¬ӮГ„ГІГҠГҠГЎГҝГҒГ·ГҒп¬ӮГ–п¬ӮвҲӮUГҒГЈГғГ”H 28H
ГҝГ•ГҠ as; ЕёЕ’ГӢЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of rivers; вҖҷвҖһUп¬ӮвҖ” myriad; вҖўГӘвҖҷГҲп¬ӮпЈҝВӘГҠвҖ”Г” streams; вҖҡв—ҠГҲВәЛқв—ҠЛңГ” the ocean; вҲһп¬Ӯ only;
вҖўГҒГ·в—ҠГҲПҖГҠвҖ” in the direction of; ВәЛқп¬ӮГҒГЈГғ rush; ГғГ•ГҠ so; Гғп¬Ӯ Your; вҖўв—ҠГӢ those; ЕёвҒ„UвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§п¬ӮГӢвҒ„UГҠвҖ”Г” warriors of
the mortal world; ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҒГЈГғ enter; п¬ӮГ„ГІГҠГҠГҒГЎГҠГ” mouths; вҖўГҒГ·ГҒп¬ӮГ–п¬ӮвҲӮUГҒГЈГғ flaming on all sides.
As the myriad streams of rivers rush towards the sea alone, so do those warriors
of the mortal world enter Your flaming mouths.                                     (28)
case, Arjuna shows that like rivers, which
have a natural tendency to flow towards the
ocean and finally lose their names and identity
in the ocean, those valiant devotees too were
marching with their faces turned towards
God and eventually attaining union with Him.
By speaking of the mouths of the Lord
as flaming on all sides (Abhivijavalanti) Arjuna
shows that just as the ocean is full of water
on all sides, and the waters of the rivers
become one with it on entering it, even so
the mouths of the Lord were blazing furiously
on all sides, and the brave devotees who
entered them lost their external forms in the
flames of those blazing mouths and, becoming
fiery themselves, attained oneness with Him.
The present verse speaks of the entry
into the mouths of the Lord, of BhвҲӮВ¶ma,
DroЖ’a and other notable warriors, who had
been striving for God-realization and were
compelled to take up arms much against their
will, and who were destined to attain union
with God by falling on the battle-field. That
is why they have been glorified as
Г«NaralokavвҲӮrГҘВЁГӯ (warriors of the mortal world).
Distinguished as they were in the trial of
physical strength, they were equally brave in
fighting their internal foes in the shape of
lust, anger etc., and had thus won their laurels
in the field of spiritual struggle for God-
realization as well. By applying the analogy
of rivers rushing towards the ocean in their
ГҝГ•ГҠ В¬ЛқЕ’ГӢ#Вў Г–п¬ӮвҲӮUЕёВў В¬ГғXГ”UГҠ ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҒГЈГғ ЕёГҠвүҘГҠГҠГҝ вҖҡв—ҠГҺhп¬ӮпЈҝВӘГҠвҖ”вҖ“
ГғГ•Г’п¬Ӯ ЕёГҠвүҘГҠГҠГҝ ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҒГЈГғ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠSГғп¬ӮГҠГҒВ¬ п¬ӮГ„ГІГҠГҠГҒГЎГҠ вҖҡв—ҠГҺhп¬ӮпЈҝВӘГҠвҖ”Г”H 29H
ГҝГ•ГҠ as; В¬ЛқЕ’ГӢ#в—ҠЛңГ” Г–п¬ӮвҲӮUЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the blazing fire; В¬ГғXГ”UГҠвҖ” moths; ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҒГЈГғ rush into; ЕёГҠвүҘГҠГҠГҝ for extinction
(out of their folly); вҖҡв—ҠГҺhп¬ӮпЈҝВӘГҠвҖ” with quickened speed; ГғГ•ГҠ вҲһп¬Ӯ even so; ЕёГҠвүҘГҠГҠГҝГ” for annihilation;

=== PAGE 541 ===

540
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The present verse speaks of the entry
into the mouths of the Lord of those ordinary
warriors, other than the devotees of God
mentioned in the preceding verse, who had
voluntarily entered the war and were going
to meet their doom. It is, therefore, that
Arjuna compares them with moths, who
foolishly court their own destruction.
ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҒГЈГғ enter; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠвҖ” (all those) people; Гғп¬Ӯ Your; вҖўГҒВ¬ too; п¬ӮГ„ГІГҠГҠГҒГЎГҠ mouths; вҖҡв—ҠГҺhп¬ӮпЈҝВӘГҠвҖ” with great
rapidity.
As moths rush with great speed into the blazing fire for extinction out of
infatuation, even so, all these people are with great rapidity entering Your mouths to
meet their doom.                                                                                     (29)
Describing thus with the help of illustrations the entry into LordГӯs mouths of warriors
in both the armies, Arjuna now reveals the process of their destruction by the Lord.
вҲӮпЈҝГҒUвҲӮUsГ”вҖҡпЈҝ ВӘЛқвҖҡв—ҠГҠЕёвҖ” вҖҡв—ҠГЈГғГҠГҖвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠГЈвҖҡв—ҠВӘЛқГҠГЈп¬ӮЕ’ЕёГ’Г–п¬ӮВёвҲӮUГҒjвҖ”вҖ“
ГғпЈҝВЎГҠпЈҝГҒГ·вҒ„UГҠВ¬ГҚГҝВё ВЎВӘГ вҖҡв—ҠВӘЛқВў Г·ГҠвҖҡSГғп¬ӮГҠпЈҝВӘЛқГҠвҖ” В¬ЛқГғВ¬ГҒГЈГғ ГҒп¬ӮcГЎГҠГҠпЈҝГ”H 30H
вҲӮпЈҝГҒUвҲӮUsГ”вҖҡпЈҝ You lick; ВӘЛқвҖҡв—ҠГҠЕёвҖ” devouring; вҖҡв—ҠГЈГғГҠГғЛңГ” on all sides; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠЕёЛңГ” вҖҡв—ҠВӘЛқГҠЕёЛңГ” all those people;
п¬ӮЕ’ЕёГ’вҖ” Г–п¬ӮвҲӮUГҒjвҖ” through Your blazing mouths; ГғпЈҝВЎГҠпЈҝГҒГ·вҖ”Г” with radiance; вҖўГҠВ¬ГҚГҝВё filling; ВЎВӘГғЛң вҖҡв—ҠВӘЛқв—ҠЛңГ” the
entire universe; Г·ГҠвҖҡвҖ” splendours; Гғп¬Ӯ Your; В©UВӘЛқГҠвҖ” terrible; В¬ЛқГғВ¬ГҒГЈГғ are burning; ГҒп¬ӮcГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ O ViВ¶Ж’u
(all pervading Lord).
Swallowing through Your blazing mouths all those people on all sides, You are
licking your lips, O Lord ViВ¶Ж’u! Your terrible rays are devouring the whole universe
with their fierce glow and are scorching it.                                                                                  (30)
In spite of this, You are licking your lips with
Your tongue, with a feeling of unsatiation and
with the blaze of Your horrible glow, the entire
world is becoming extremely afflicted.
Arjuna, frightened by viewing that dreadful
form of God and describing it, says that, O,
Lord, you are swallowing by your terrific mouths
from whom horrible flames are radiating forth.
Requested by Arjuna in verse 3 above to reveal His glorious divine form, the Lord
manifested His Cosmic Body before him; but the very sight of that dreadful form struck
terror into his heart, and filled him with curiosity as to who вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a really was and what
He proposed to do with that most terrible form of His. Accordingly, he now approaches the
Lord with the following question:
вҖўГҠГ…ГҝГҠГҒвҖһU в—ҠпЈҝ вҲ‘В§ГҠпЈҝ Г·п¬ӮГҠЕёГҲВӘЛқMВ§В¬ГҠпЈҝ Еёв—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҳSГғГҲ ГғпЈҝ Е’пЈҝп¬Ӯп¬ӮвҒ„U В¬ЛқвҖҡГӢЕ’вҖ“
ГҒп¬ӮГҙГҠГҠГғГҲГҒв—ҠГ«ВҝUГҠГҒв—Ҡ Г·п¬ӮГЈГғв—ҠГҠlВў Её ГҒвҖһU В¬ЛқВЎГҠЕёГҠГҒв—Ҡ Гғп¬Ӯ В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠв—ҠЛңГ”H 31H
вҖўГҠГ…ГҝГҠГҒвҖһU tell; в—ҠпЈҝ me; вҲ‘В§вҖ” who; Г·п¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” You; В©UВӘЛқMВ§В¬вҖ”Г” possessing such a terrible form; Еёв—ҠвҖ”
obeisance; вҖўSГғГҲ let there be; ГғпЈҝ to You; Е’пЈҝп¬Ӯп¬ӮвҒ„U O best of gods; В¬ЛқвҖҡГӢЕ’Г” be pleased; ГҒп¬ӮГҙГҠГҠГғГҲв—ҠЛңГ” to know
in particular; ГҹГ«ВҝUГҠГҒв—Ҡ I desire; Г·п¬ӮГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ” You; вҖўГҠlв—ҠЛңГ” the Primal Being; Её not; ГҒвҖһU because; В¬ЛқВЎГҠЕёГҠГҒв—Ҡ
I know; Гғп¬Ӯ Your; В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” purpose.
Tell me who You are with a form so terrible. My obeisance to You, O best of
gods; be kind to me, I wish to know You, the Primeval Being, in particular; for I know
not Your purpose.                                                                         (31)

=== PAGE 542 ===

* Chapter XI *
541
Arjuna really did not know the motive
of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a in revealing that frightful form
in which he saw the warriors on both sides
meet with their doom, and what He proposed
to do in the immediate future. Arjuna,
therefore, seeks enlightenment on this point
from the Lord when he says; Г«I know not
Your purpose.Гӯ
Showing the reason for His assuming the terrible form, the Lord now answers ArjunaГӯs
queries in a serial order.
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲп¬ӮГҠГё
вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮUГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒSв—Ҡ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ЛҮГҠГҝвҲ‘ГҺВ§Г В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺhГҠпЈҝ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠГЈвҖҡв—ҠГҠвҖһUГғВёГҲГҒв—ҠвҖһU В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГ»ГҠвҖ”вҖ“
ВҙВ§ГғпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ Г п¬ӮГҠВў Её Г·ГҒп¬ӮcГҝГҒГЈГғ вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё ГҝпЈҝЛҳп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғГҠвҖ” В¬ЛқГ ГҝЕёГӢвҲ‘пЈҝВ§В·ГҲ ГҝГҠпЈҝЕ“ГҠвҖ”Г”H 32H
вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮUвҖ” KГҘla (the eternal Time-Spirit); вҖўГҒSв—ҠГ” I am; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ЛҮГҠГҝвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғЛңГ” the destroyer of the worlds;
В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺhвҖ” mighty; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠЕёЛңГ” (these) people; вҖҡв—ҠГҠвҖһUГғГҲВёв—ҠЛңГ” to exterminate; ГҹвҖһU at this time; В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГ»ГҠвҖ” (I am)
engaged; ВҙВ§ГғпЈҝ without; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; Г п¬ӮГҠв—ҠЛңГ” you; Её Г·ГҒп¬ӮcГҝГҒГЈГғГ” shall not survive; вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё all (these); ГҝпЈҝ who;
вҖўп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғГҠвҖ”Г” arrayed; В¬ЛқГ ГҝЕёГӢвҲ‘пЈҝВ§В·ГҲГ” in the enemyГӯs ranks; ГҝГҠпЈҝЕ“ГҠвҖ” warriors.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: I am mighty KГҘla (the eternal Time-Spirit), the destroyer of
the worlds. I am out to exterminate these people. Even without you all those warriors
arrayed in the enemyГӯs camp must die.                                                  (32)
course by telling him that he would not be
able to save his kinsmen even if he desisted
from war and refused to strike them, for their
doom had been sealed. When the Lord Himself
was determined on their destruction, their
chances for survival were nil. Therefore, Arjuna
would do well not to retire from the battle,
and his true interests lay in taking up arms
against the enemy at the LordГӯs behest. This
is what the Lord seeks to impress on ArjunaГӯs
mind by the latter half of this verse.
Even though Arjuna beheld the warriors
on both sides rushing in the Cosmic Body of
the Lord to meet their doom, the Lord refers
in this verse to the warriors of the Kaurava
army alone. The reason is not far to seek.
Since the warriors on his own side were not
to be killed by Arjuna, it could not be said
with reference to them that they would not
survive even if Arjuna spared them. Apart
from this, the Lord was quite justified in
making the above assertion even with a view
to encouraging Arjuna. The Lord was thus
trying, as it were, to impress on ArjunaГӯs
The statement; Г¬I am mighty KГҘla, the
destroyer of the worldsГ® answers the first
part of ArjunaГӯs query, viz., Г¬Who are you ?Г®
The Lord thereby seeks to convey that He
was God Himself, the creator, sustainer and
destroyer of the whole universe. At that
particular moment, however, He was playing
the role of the Destroyer, KГҘla.
The LordГӯs assertion that He was out to
exterminate people supplies the answer to the
second part of ArjunaГӯs query implied in the
words Г¬I know not Your purpose.Г® He thereby
intends to convey that all His efforts at that
moment were directed towards exterminating
people and that it was to bring home this
truth to him that He had shown to Arjuna the
hideous sight of universal destruction on the
screen of His Cosmic Body.
It will be remembered here that Arjuna
was seized with a fit of faint heartedness when
he saw his own preceptors, uncles, cousins
and other relatives arrayed for battle, and was
more or less inclined to retire from the field
of battle. The Lord warns him against such a

=== PAGE 543 ===

542
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
mind the fact that the warriors arrayed in the
enemyГӯs camp were as good as dead, and
that their extermination would not entail much
exertion on his part.
Thus replying to ArjunaГӯs query the Lord shows in the next two verses the all-round
advantages of participation in the war and, encouraging Arjuna to fight, says:
ГғSв—ҠГҠГ»п¬Ӯв—ҠГҲГҒГ»ГҠDГ”U ГҝвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝ вҲӮUГ·Sп¬Ӯ ГҒВЎГ п¬ӮГҠ вүҘГҠГІГҠГҚГЈГ·ГҲГҰЛңUЛҮп¬Ӯ вҒ„UГҠГ–ГҝВў вҖҡв—ҠГҺhв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
в—ҠГҝГ’п¬ӮГ’ГғпЈҝ ГҒЕёвҖһUГғГҠвҖ” В¬ГҚп¬ӮВёв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ ГҒЕёГҒв—ҠГ»ГҠв—ҠГҠГІГҠВў Г·п¬Ӯ вҖҡвҲҡГҝвҖҡГҠГҒГёЕёЛңГ”H 33H
ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” therefore; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” You; В©UГҒГ»ГҠDГ”U arise; ГҝвүҘГҠвҖ” glory; вҲӮUГ·Sп¬Ӯ win; ГҒВЎГ п¬ӮГҠ conquering; вүҘГҠГІГҠГҚЕёЛңГ” foes;
Г·ГҲГҰЛңUЛҮп¬Ӯ enjoy; вҒ„UГҠГ–Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” вҖҡв—ҠГҺhв—ҠЛңГ” the affluent kingdom; в—ҠГҝГҠ вҲһп¬Ӯ by Me alone; вҲһГғпЈҝГ” all these (warriors);
ГҒЕёвҖһUГғГҠвҖ” have been killed; В¬ГҚп¬ӮВёв—ҠЛңГ” вҲһп¬Ӯ even before; ГҒЕёГҒв—ҠГ»ГҠв—ҠГҠГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” a mere instrument; Г·п¬Ӯ do you
become; вҖҡвҲҡГҝвҖҡГҠГҒГёЕёЛңГ” O ambidextrous bowman, Arjuna.
Therefore, do you arise and win glory; conquering foes, enjoy the affluent
kingdom. These warriors stand already slain by Me; be you only an instrument,
Arjuna.                                                                                       (33)
would not be really required to kill his foes,
since he had actually seen with his own eyes
that they had all been already killed by the
Lord. Arjuna would only enjoy the reputation
of having vanquished and killed his enemies.
Therefore, he should not entertain the least
scruple about killing them.
There is one more idea underlying the
LordГӯs advice to Arjuna to work as His
symbolic tool. The Lord thereby seeks to
impress on ArjunaГӯs mind the fact that he
would incur no sin by killing those warriors:
for he was only serving as an instrument in
killing them in a passage of arms that had
devolved on him as a duty by virtue of his
being a member of the warrior class. Far
from incurring any sin, he would on the
other hand be performing his duty as a
KВ¶atriya. Therefore, without entertaining any
misgiving on this point, he should throw
himself in the fight heart and soul, shaking
off egoism and the feeling of mineness.
When it was a settled fact that all the
warriors on the enemyГӯs side must die at all
events, no matter if Arjuna struck them
or stayed his hand, active participation in
the war was the only profitable course for him
from every point of view. On no account
should Arjuna desist from war under such
circumstances, 
but 
should 
stand 
up
enthusiastically and fight. This is what is sought
to be conveyed by the words Г«TasmГҘt UttiВ¶ВўhaГӯ.
By asking Arjuna to win glory and,
conquering foes, to enjoy the affluent kingdom
the Lord is giving a clear indication to him
that he was sure to attain victory over his
enemies.
Arjuna could pull the bow-string as easily
with the left as with his right hand. This had
earned him the title of Г«SavyasГҘcвҲӮГӯ. Addressing
him by this name, and asking him to be His
symbolic tool, the Lord seeks to convey that
it was exceptionally easy for him to vanquish
the heroes on the other side. Moreover, he
ВәЛқГҠпЈҝГЎГҠВў Гё Г·ГӢcв—ҠВў Гё ВЎГҝВәЛқГ•Вў Гё вҲ‘В§ГЎГҠZ ГғГ•ГҠГЈГҝГҠЕёГҒВ¬ ГҝГҠпЈҝЕ“п¬ӮГӢвҒ„UГҠЕёЛңГ”вҖ“
в—ҠГҝГҠ вҖһUГғГҠВўSГ п¬ӮВў ВЎГҒвҖһU в—ҠГҠ вҲҡГҝГҒГ•DГ”UГҠ ГҝГҲГӨГҝSп¬Ӯ ВЎпЈҝГғГҠГҒвҖҡ вҒ„UГЎГҠпЈҝ вҖҡВ¬%ГҠЕёЛңГ”H 34H
ВәЛқГҠпЈҝГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Г…cГҘrya DroЖ’a; ГёГ” and; Г·ГӢcв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ”U the patriarch BhвҲӮВ¶ma; Гё and; ВЎГҝВәЛқГ•в—ҠЛңГ” King Jayadratha;
ГёГ” and; вҲ‘В§ГЎГҠВёв—ҠЛңГ” the celebrated KarЖ’a; ГғГ•ГҠГ” even so; вҖўГЈГҝГҠЕёЛңГ” вҖўГҒВ¬ even other; ГҝГҠпЈҝЕ“п¬ӮГӢвҒ„UГҠЕёЛңГ” heroic

=== PAGE 544 ===

* Chapter XI *
543
Г…cГҘrya DroЖ’a was a past master in
archery and the use of other weapons of war,
and was exceptionally proficient in the art of
warfare. The tradition was that he could not
be slain so long as he carried a weapon in his
hand. Arjuna, therefore, looked upon him as
Г«invincibleГӯ; moreover, since DroЖ’a had been
his teacher, Arjuna considered it sinful to kill
him. BhвҲӮВ¶ma too was a world-renowned
warrior. He had discomfited even an invincible
hero like ParaвҖ№urГҘma. Besides this, he had
obtained a boon from his father, вҖәГҘntanu, to
the effect that Death itself would be powerless
to take his life against his will. All these facts
had led Arjuna to believe that it was no easy
task to conquer BhвҲӮВ¶ma. Moreover, he held it
to be a sin to kill the great patriarch with his
own hands. On more than one occasion he
had expressed his inability to slay BhвҲӮВ¶ma.
Jayadratha* was a great warrior himself,
and being a great devotee of BhagavГҘn
вҖәaвҲҶkara, had obtained a rare boon from the
latter, which had made him even more difficult
to conquer. Having married DuryodhanaГӯs
sister, DuВЁвҖ№alГҘ, he stood in the relation of a
cousin-in-law to the PГҘЖ’Е’avas. On account
of this natural tie of affection and kinship,
Arjuna was not inclined to kill him either.
KarЖ’a too was regarded by Arjuna as in
no way inferior to himself as a warrior. It
was well-known throughtout the world that
KarЖ’a alone was a suitable match for Arjuna
on the field of battle. A great hero and fighter
himself, KarЖ’a had acquired exceptional
knowledge of the science of arms from the
great ParaвҖ№urГҘma.
By the words Г«AnyГҘn YodhavвҲӮrГҘnГӯ the
Lord implies heroes like Bhagadatta, BhВөurвҲӮвҖ№ravГҘ
and вҖәalya, whom Arjuna looked upon as very
great warriors and conquest of whom was no
easy job in his eyes. By naming BhвҲӮВ¶ma, DroЖ’a
and others separately and referring to the other
warriors; в—ҠГҝГҠГ” by Me; вҖһUГғГҠЕёЛңГ” slain; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” you; ВЎГҒвҖһUГ” kill; в—ҠГҠ вҲҡГҝГҒГ•DГ”UГҠвҖ” fear not; ГҝГҲГӨГҝSп¬Ӯ (therefore) fight;
ВЎпЈҝГғГҠГҒвҖҡ you shall conquer; вҒ„UГЎГҠпЈҝ in the passage of arms; вҖҡВ¬%ГҠЕёЛңГ” the enemies.
Do you kill DroЖ’a and BhвҲӮВ¶ma, Jayadratha and KarЖ’a and other brave warriors,
who stand already killed by Me; fear not. Fight and you will surely conquer the
enemies in the war.                                                                       (34)
* Jayadratha was the son of the Ruler of Sind, VГҰddhakВ¶atra by name. He was married to DuВЁвҖ№alГҘ
the only daughter of King DhГҰtarГҘВ¶Вўra. Once during the exile of the PГҘЖ’Е’avas in the forest, he carried
off DraupadвҲӮ in their absence. When, on their return to the forest abode, BhвҲӮma and his brothers
heard about this abduction, they at once followed Jayadratha and freeing DraupadвҲӮ from his clutches
made him a captive. At YudhiВ¶ВўhiraГӯs intervention, however, he was allowed to go after having his
head shaved as a mark of punishment. During the KurukВ¶etra war, while Arjuna was engaged in a
fight with the SaвүҲsaptakas, Jayadratha detained YudhiВ¶Вўhira, BhвҲӮma, Nakula and Sahadeva at the entrance
of the battle-array called CakravyВөuha, thus forbidding their entry into the VyВөuha and preventing them
from bringing succour to Abhimanyu, who was consequently surrounded and killed by a number of
warriors. Thereupon Arjuna took a vow that if he failed to kill Jayadratha before sunset the next
day, he would end his life by entering a blazling fire. The warriors of the Kaurava army tried their
utmost to save Jayadratha, but all their efforts failed due to a clever strategem adopted by BhagavГҘn
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a; and Arjuna succeeded in severing JayadrathaГӯs head from his trunk before the sun actually
went down. Jayadratha was armoured with a boon to the effect that he who dropped his severed
head on the ground would have his own head smashed into a hundred pieces that very moment.
Therefore, under instructions from BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, the friend of His devotees, Arjuna sent the
head of Jayadratha flying through the air by his arrows, and dropped it on the lap of JayadrathaГӯs
father, VГҰddhakВ¶atra, who was sitting on the bank of the sacred tank called SamantapaВӨcaka and
who had his skull broken into a hundred pieces as soon as his sonГӯs head dropped from his lap.
(MahГҘbhГҘrata DroЖ’aparva)

=== PAGE 545 ===

544
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
warriors in a general way the Lord assured
Arjuna that he should not entertain the least
doubt about his victory over any of them,
however formidable he may be.
By asking Arjuna not to be frightened
at the sight of His dreadful form, the Lord
assures him that He was none other than вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a, who was so dear to him.
Arjuna was not sure whether he would
win the war or would be vanquished by the
enemy (II.6). In order to remove this doubt
from his mind the Lord now makes the
categorical statement that victory would be
won by the PГҘЖ’Е’avas.
SaВӨjaya now reveals to DhГҰtarГҘВ¶Вўra ArjunaГӯs reactions to the above exhortation of the
Lord and how he responded to the same.
вҖҡTГҝ В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
вҲһГғГ«ВҝЛӣвҖ°UГ п¬ӮГҠ п¬ӮГёЕёВў вҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠп¬ӮSГҝ вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғГҠTГҒвҲӮUп¬ӮпЈҝВёВ¬в—ҠГҠЕёвҖ” ГҒвҲ‘В§вҒ„UГӢвүҲUГӢвҖ“
Еёв—ҠSвҲ‘ГҺВ§Г п¬ӮГҠ Г·ГҚГҝ вҲһп¬ӮГҠвҖһU вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠВў вҖҡВӘeЕ’Вў Г·ГӢГғГ·ГӢГғвҖ” В¬ЛқГЎГҠГӘГҝUГ”H 35H
вҲһГғГғЛңГ” this; ГјГҠГҲГ п¬ӮГҠ hearing; п¬ӮГёЕёв—ҠЛңГ” utterance or exhortation; вҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠп¬ӮSГҝ of KeвҖ№ava (a name of вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a); вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғГҠTГҒвҲӮUвҖ” joining his palms; п¬ӮпЈҝВ¬в—ҠГҠЕёвҖ”Г” trembling (with fear); ГҒвҲ‘В§вҒ„UГӢвүҲUГӢГ” Arjuna; Еёв—ҠSвҲ‘ГҺВ§Г п¬ӮГҠ
bowing his head; Г·ГҚГҝвҖ” вҲһп¬Ӯ once more; вҖўГҠвҖһU spoke; вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” to вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a; вҖҡВӘЕ’ЛңГ”ВӘЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” in faltering
accents; Г·ГӢГғГ·ГӢГғвҖ” much terrified; В¬ЛқГЎГҠГӘГҝГ” bowing (again).
SaВӨjaya said: Hearing these words of BhagavГҘn KeвҖ№ava, Arjuna tremblingly
bowed to Him with folded hands, and bowing again in extreme terror spoke to вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a in faltering accents.                                                              (35)
vent to by bowing to Him again and again
with folded hands.
The use of the indeclinable Г«BhВөuyaВЁГӯ
shows that even after hearing the above words
of consolation from the Lord, Arjuna began
to offer his praises to the Lord even as he
had done only a few moments back.
When Arjuna commenced once more to
offer his praises to the Lord, his heart melted
due both to wonder and fear, tears began to
flow from his eyes, and his voice was choked
with emotion. That is why the words he
uttered were indistinct and broken. This is
what is sought to be conveyed by the adverbial
compound Г«SagadgadamГӯ.
Arjuna was so much upset at the sight
of that dreadful form of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a that even
the above words of consolation from the
Lord did not assuage his fear, and he
addressed the following prayer to the Lord in
the same mood of consternation. This is what
SaВӨjaya seeks to convey by the above
statement.
Arjuna generally wore on his head a
celestial crown (KirвҲӮВўa) as brilliant as the sun;
hence he came to be known by the name of
Г«KirвҲӮВўвҲӮ.*
Arjuna was filled with great reverence
at the sight of that infinitely glorious form of
the Lord. It was this feeling which he gave
*
В¬ГҲвҒ„UГҠ вүҘГҠвҲ‘пЈҝЛқВ§ГЎГҠ в—ҠпЈҝ Е’Г»ГҠВў ГҝГҲГӨГҝГғГҠпЈҝ Е’ГҠЕёп¬ӮВ·ВёГ·Г’вҖ”вҖ“ ГҒвҲ‘В§вҒ„UГӢвүҲВўU в—ҠГҚГҒГӨВёЕё вҖҡГҚГҝГҠВёГ·Вў ГғпЈҝЕёГҠвҖһГҲUв—ҠГҠZ ГҒвҲ‘В§вҒ„UГӢГҒвүҲUЕёв—ҠЛңГ”H
(MahГҘ., VirГҘ., XL.iv.17)
Arjuna said to Uttara, son of King VirГҘВўa, Г¬This diadem, possessing the brilliance of the sun was
placed on my head by Indra as a token to his pleasure when I fought the great DГҘnava warriors the other
day. That is why people call me by name of KiriВўвҲӮГ®.

=== PAGE 546 ===

* Chapter XI *
545
Here it should be noted that Arjuna
alone beheld the Cosmic Body of the Lord
with the help of the divine vision granted
to him by the Lord Himself, and not the
world in which Arjuna stood. Therefore, the
exultation etc., of the world, the fleeing of
the RГҘkВ¶asas in terror and the salutations
offered by the SiddhasГіall these were parts
of the Cosmic Body. That is to say, the
description given by Arjuna relates to the
Cosmic Body as seen by him, and not to the
external world in which Arjuna stood. The
Cosmic Body Itself presented all these
spectacles to him.
Verses 36 to 46 below embody ArjunaГӯs praises, salutations and apologetic prayer to
the Lord. Beginning with the word Г«SthГҘneГӯ, Arjuna justifies the exultation of the world.
вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
SГ•ГҠЕёпЈҝ NUВ·ГӢвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠ Гғп¬Ӯ В¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГӢГ ГҝГҠВё ВЎВӘГ В¬ЛқNUcГҝГ ГҝЕёГҲвҒ„UГ–ГҝГғпЈҝ ГёвҖ“
вҒ„UЛҮГҠГҠВўГҒвҖҡ Г·ГӢГғГҠГҒЕё ГҒЕ’вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝ ВәЛқп¬ӮГҒГЈГғ вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё Еёв—ҠSГҝГҒГЈГғ Гё ГҒвҖҡhвҖҡYГ”UГҠвҖ”Г”H 36H
SГ•ГҠЕёпЈҝ well it is; NUВ·ГӢвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠ O KГҰВ¶Ж’a (lit. the inner controller of beings); Гғп¬Ӯ В¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГӢГ ГҝГҠВё by
chanting Your names, virtues and glory; ВЎВӘГғЛңГ” the universe; В¬ЛқNUcГҝГҒГғ exults; вҖўЕёГҲвҒ„UГ–ГҝГғпЈҝ is filled
with love; Гё and; вҒ„UЛҮГҠГҠВўГҒвҖҡ demons; Г·ГӢГғГҠГҒЕё terrified; ГҒЕ’вүҘГҠвҖ” in all directions; ВәЛқп¬ӮГҒГЈГғ are fleeing; вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё
all; Еёв—ҠSГҝГҒГЈГғ make obeisance; Гё and; ГҒвҖҡhвҖҡYГ”UГҠвҖ” hosts of Siddhas.
Arjuna said: Lord, well it is the universe exults and is filled with love by chanting
Your names, virtues and glory; terrified RГҘkВ¶asas are fleeing in all directions, and all
the hosts of Siddhas are bowing to You.                                               (36)
Using the word Г«SthГҘneГӯ in the preceding verse, Arjuna showed the propriety of the
Siddhas offering salutations etc., to the Lord. Establishing the same thing in the next four
verses he now offers repeated salutations to the Lord.
вҲ‘В§Sв—ҠГҠГ¬ГҠ ГғпЈҝ Её Еёв—ҠпЈҝвҒ„UГЈв—ҠвҖһUГҠГ в—ҠЕёЛңГ” ВӘвҒ„UГӢГҝвҖҡпЈҝ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГЎГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГҘГҝГҠГҒЕ’вҲ‘В§ГІГҠпЈҝВёвҖ“
вҖўЕёГЈГғ Е’пЈҝп¬ӮпЈҝвүҘГҠ ВЎВӘГҒГӣГҠп¬ӮГҠвҖҡ Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛҮГҠвҒ„ВўU вҖҡЕ’вҖҡГ»ГҠГ В¬вҒ„ВўU ГҝГғЛңГ”H 37H
вҲ‘В§Sв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” wherefore; ГёГ” and; ГғпЈҝ they; Её Еёв—ҠпЈҝвҒ„UЕёЛңГ” should not bow; в—ҠвҖһUГҠГ в—ҠЕёЛңГ” O great soul; ВӘвҒ„UГӢГҝвҖҡпЈҝ to
the greatest of the great; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГЎГҠвҖ” вҖўГҒВ¬ of BrahmГҘ himself; вҖўГҠГҒЕ’вҲ‘В§ГІГҠпЈҝВё to the first progenitor; вҖўЕёГЈГғ
O infinite being; Е’пЈҝп¬ӮпЈҝвүҘГҠ O Lord of celestials; ВЎВӘГҒГӣГҠп¬ӮГҠвҖҡ O abode of the universe; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” You (are);
вҖўЛҮГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” the Indestructible (Brahma); вҖҡГғЛңГ” (is) existent; вҖўвҖҡГғЛңГ” nonexistent; ГғГ В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” (and) beyond
both; ГҝГғЛңГ” which.
O great soul, why should they not bow to You, who are the progenitor of BrahmГҘ
himself and the greatest of the great? O infinite Lord of celestials! O Abode of the
universe, You are that which is existent (Sat), that which is non-existent (Asat) and also
that which is beyond both, viz., the indestructible Brahma.                         (37)
is the Ruler even of the celestials and that the
universe not only exists in Him but is also
pervaded by Him. Therefore it is quite in the
fitness of things that all beings should offer
their salutations to Him.
By addressing the Lord as Г«MahГҘtmanГӯ,
Г«AnantaГӯ, Г«DeveвҖ№aГӯ and Г«JagannivГҘsaГӯ, Arjuna
shows that He is the all-pervading soul of all
animate and inanimate beings; that His form,
virtues and glory etc., are all infinite; that He

=== PAGE 547 ===

546
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The 
adjectives 
Г«GarвҲӮyaseГӯ 
and
Г«BrahmaЖ’ospyГҘdikartreГӯ indicate that He is
the progenitor not only of this universe but
of BrahmГҘ himself, who created it. Therefore,
being the best of all, and the supreme object of
their worship, He deserves the homage of all.
The imperishable soul, which never
ceases to be, is designated as Г«SatГӯ; while all
perishable and transient objects are termed as
Г«AsatГӯ. It is these which have been referred
to as the Г«ParГҘГӯ and Г«AparГҘГӯ PrakГҰtis in
Chapter VII and as the Г«AkВ¶araГӯ and Г«KВ¶araГӯ
PuruВ¶as respectively in Chapter XV. Beyond
these two is the supreme Indestructible God
Himself, the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge
and Bliss. In justification of his offering
salutations etc., to the Lord, Arjuna says that
they are all identical with the Lord.
Г п¬Ӯв—ҠГҠГҒЕ’Е’пЈҝп¬ӮвҖ” В¬ГҲLВ§В·вҖ” В¬ГҲвҒ„UГҠГЎГҠSГ п¬Ӯв—ҠSГҝ ГҒп¬ӮESГҝ В¬вҒ„ВўU ГҒЕёЕ“ГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
п¬ӮпЈҝГ»ГҠГҠГҒвҖҡ п¬ӮпЈҝlВў Гё В¬вҒ„ВўU Гё Е“ГҠв—Ҡ Г п¬ӮГҝГҠ ГғГғВў ГҒп¬ӮEв—ҠЕёГЈГғMВ§В¬Г”H 38H
Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” You; вҖўГҠГҒЕ’Е’пЈҝп¬ӮвҖ” (are) the primal deity; В¬ГҲLВ§В·вҖ” В¬ГҲвҒ„UГҠГЎГҠвҖ” the most ancient Person; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” You;
вҖўSГҝ ГҒп¬ӮESГҝ of this universe; В¬вҒ„в—ҠЛңГ” ГҒЕёЕ“ГҠЕёв—ҠЛң the ultimate resort;  п¬ӮпЈҝГ»ГҠГҠГ” the knower; вҖўГҒвҖҡ are; п¬ӮпЈҝlв—ҠЛңГ”
the knowable; ГёГ” and; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” the supreme; Гё and; Е“ГҠв—Ҡ Abode; Г п¬ӮГҝГҠГ” by You; ГғГғв—ҠЛңГ” (stands)
pervaded; ГҒп¬ӮEв—ҠЛңГ” the (entire) universe; вҖўЕёГЈГғMВ§В¬ assuming endless forms.
You are the primal Deity, the most ancient Person; You are the ultimate resort
of this universe. You are both the knower and the knowable, and the highest abode.
It is You who pervade the universe, O Infinite One! assuming endless forms.   (38)
By speaking of the Lord as Г«VedyamГӯ,
Arjuna indicates that He is the supreme Brahma
or God, who is the only object worth knowing,
whose knowledge is the highest goal of human
existence, and who has been referred to in
verses 12 to 17 of Chapter XIII as the object
of Knowledge.
By referring to the Lord as Г«Param DhГҘmaГӯ,
Arjuna shows His identity with the highest
abode, which is the final resort of all liberated
souls, and attaining which man does not
return to the mortal world.
By speaking of the Lord as Г¬the ultimate
resort of this universeГ® Arjuna shows that at
the time of final dissolution the whole of this
universe gets merged into God and ever
exists in a fraction of His being.
By referring to the Lord as Г«VettГҘГӯ
(knower), Arjuna indicates that it is He who
possesses real and full knowledge of the
past, present and future worlds, and is the
eternal witness of all. That is why God is
omniscient; and there is none who can equal
Him in omniscience.
п¬ӮГҠГҝГҲГҝВёв—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒВӘAп¬ӮВёLВ§ГЎГҠвҖ” вүҘГҠвүҘГҠГҠVГ”UвҖ” В¬ЛқВЎГҠВ¬ГҒГғSГ п¬ӮВў В¬ЛқГҒВ¬ГғГҠв—ҠвҖһUpвҖ“
Еёв—ҠГҠпЈҝ Еёв—ҠSГғпЈҝЛҳSГғГҲ вҖҡвҖһUdвҲ‘ГҺВ§Г п¬ӮвҖ” В¬ГҲЕёp Г·ГҚГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ Еёв—ҠГҠпЈҝ Еёв—ҠSГғпЈҝH 39H
п¬ӮГҠГҝГҲвҖ” VГҘyu (the wind-god); Гҝв—ҠвҖ” Yama (the god of death); вҖўГҒГҮЕёвҖ”Г” Agni (the god of fire);
п¬ӮLВ§ГЎГҠвҖ” VaruЖ’a (the god of water); вүҘГҠвүҘГҠГҠVГ”UвҖ” the moon-god; В¬ЛқВЎГҠВ¬ГҒГғвҖ” the Lord of creation,
BrahmГҘ; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” You (are); В¬ЛқГҒВ¬ГғГҠв—ҠвҖһUвҖ” the father even of BrahmГҘ (the grandfather); ГёГ” and; Еёв—ҠвҖ”
obeisance; Еёв—ҠвҖ” (further) obeisance; ГғпЈҝ to You; вҖўSГғГҲГ” let there be; вҖҡвҖһUdвҲ‘ГҺВ§Г п¬ӮвҖ” a thousand times;
В¬ГҲЕёвҖ” Гё repeatedly; Г·ГҚГҝвҖ” вҖўГҒВ¬Г” once more; Еёв—ҠвҖ” obeisance; Еёв—ҠвҖ” (further) obeisance; ГғпЈҝ to You.
You are VГҘyu (the wind-god), Yama (the god of death), Agni (the god

=== PAGE 548 ===

* Chapter XI *
547
By identifying the Lord with VГҘyu, Yama
and other gods Arjuna indicates that in addition
to the gods mentioned above all other gods
who are worthy of salutation are comprised
in God, being fractions of His being. Therefore,
He alone is worthy of receiving salutations
from all in every respect.
Being 
the 
father 
of 
KaвҖ№yapa,
DakВ¶aprajГҘpati and the seven sages etc., who
actually created the whole universe, BrahmГҘ
is the grandfather of all beings; and the
creator of BrahmГҘ is God Himself. Therefore,
He is the great-grandfather of all. From this
point of view also He is worthy of receiving
salutations from all.
The repeated use of the indeclinable
Г«NamaВЁГӯ with the adverbial compound
Г«SahasrakГҰtvaВЁГӯ by Arjuna shows that actuated
as he was by the feeling of deep reverence
for the Lord mixed with fear, he did not feel
tired of bowing to Him, and wanted to go on
with his salutations.
of fire), the moon-god, VaruЖ’a (the god of water), BrahmГҘ (the Lord of Creation),
nay, the father of BrahmГҘ Himself. Hail, hail to You a thousand times; salutations,
repeated salutations to You once again.                                                                                 (39)
Еёв—ҠвҖ” В¬ГҲвҒ„USГғГҠЕ’Г• В¬ГҺcвҲҶГғSГғпЈҝ Еёв—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҳSГғГҲ ГғпЈҝ вҖҡп¬ӮВёГғ вҲһп¬Ӯ вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҖ“
вҖўЕёГЈГғп¬ӮГӢГҝГҠВёГҒв—ҠГғГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘ЛқВ§в—ҠSГ п¬ӮВў вҖҡп¬ӮZ вҖҡв—ҠГҠВ¬AГҠпЈҝГҒВ· ГғГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒвҖҡ вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҖ”H 40H
Еёв—ҠвҖ” obeisance; В¬ГҲвҒ„USГғГҠГғЛңГ” from front; вҖўГ•Г” as well as; В¬ГҺcвҲҶГғвҖ” from behind; ГғпЈҝГ” to You; Еёв—ҠвҖ”
obeisance; вҖўSГғГҲ let there be; ГғпЈҝ to You; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГғвҖ” from all sides; вҲһп¬Ӯ indeed; вҖҡп¬ӮВё O soul of all;
вҖўЕёГЈГғп¬ӮГӢГҝВёГ” O lord possessing infinite prowess; вҖўГҒв—ҠГғГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘ЛқВ§в—ҠвҖ” possessing infinite might; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” You;
вҖҡп¬ӮВёв—ҠЛңГ” the whole (universe); вҖҡв—ҠГҠВ¬AГҠпЈҝГҒВ· pervade; ГғГғвҖ” therefore; вҖўГҒвҖҡ You are. вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҖ” all.
O Lord of infinite prowess, my salutations to You from the front and from
behind. O soul of all, my obeisance to You from all sides indeed. You, who possess
infinite might, pervade all; therefore, You are all.                                             (40)
conception of any mortal.
In the first half of this verse Arjuna has
already addressed the Lord as Г«SarvaГӯ. In
the latter half he establishes His universal
character. There is not an iota of space where
He is not; there is no particle of matter
which is not permeated by Him. Therefore,
He is all in all. Apart from God the world
had no reality whatsoever in the eyes of
Arjuna.
By addressing the Lord as Г«SarvaГӯ, Arjuna
seeks to convey that He is the soul of all,
pervades all and is identical with all; no atom
of space is devoid of Him. Therefore, it is
but natural for Arjuna to offer his salutation
from all sides to Him who is present
everywhere.
By referring to the Lord as Г«Amita-
vikramaВЁГӯ Arjuna shows that the strength
He is capable of exerting is beyond the
Offering praises and salutations to the Lord in the above manner, Arjuna now craves
in the following two verses His forgiveness for the offences committed by him through word
and deed due to lack of true knowledge about His virtues, mysteries and glory.
вҖҡПҖпЈҝГҒГғ в—ҠГ п¬ӮГҠ В¬ЛқвҖҡГ·Вў ГҝЕ’ГҲQВўВ§ вҖһпЈҝU вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ вҖһпЈҝU ГҝГҠЕ’п¬Ӯ вҖһпЈҝU вҖҡПҖпЈҝГҒГғвҖ“
вҖўВЎГҠЕёГғГҠ в—ҠГҒвҖһUв—ҠГҠЕёВў Гғп¬ӮпЈҝЕ’Вў в—ҠГҝГҠ В¬Лқв—ҠГҠЕ’ГҠГ В¬ЛқГЎГҠГҝпЈҝЕё п¬ӮГҠГҒВ¬Г”H 41H

=== PAGE 549 ===

548
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«MahimГҘnaвүҲГӯ, qualified by
the demonstrative adjective Г«IdaвүҲГӯ refers to
the incomparable and boundless glory,
greatness, excellence and potency of the Lord,
which Arjuna actually saw during his vision
of the Cosmic Body.
The participial adjective Г«AjВӨГҘnatГҘГӯ
qualifying the pronoun Г«MayГҘГӯ is intended as
an excuse for the impropriety of behaviour
shown by Arjuna towards вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a. Arjuna
thereby claimed that the offences unwittingly
committed by him would be forgiven by the
Lord.
It was due to his ignorance about the
LordГӯs incomparable and infinite glory that
he had treated Him as an equal; and it was,
therefore, that he never paid any regard,
during his conversations with the Lord, to
His exalted position as the object of universal
adoration. This undoubtedly constituted a
serious blunder on his part. He treated as an
equal One whose feet even the greatest of
gods and sages deemed a privilege to adore!
This is what is sought to be conveyed by the
words Г«Sakheti MatvГҘГӯ and Г«PramГҘdГҘtГӯ.
The familiar forms of address used by
Arjuna in respect of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a are quoted by
him as an instance of the irreverence shown
by him towards the latter. Although there
was no comparison between him and вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a, who was no other than God Himself,
he went on foolishly regarding Him as an
ordinary friend, and instead of using terms of
respect for Him continued to address Him by
name in a familiar way. This is what he now
repents for.
The word Г«AcyutaГӯ stands for one who
never falls from his glory and exalted state of
being. Addressing the Lord by this name
Arjuna indicates that, even though he committed
a great offence by insulting Him through his
unseemly behaviour, such impropriety of
behaviour on his part could not really harm
Him in any way. Nothing in the world could
shake His position and nobody could ever
bring dishonour to Him; for He is always
Г«AcyutaГӯ or unshaken.
Over and above the instances of
impropriety cited in verse 41, Arjuna proceeds
in the next verse to mention other forms of
ГҝГ¬ГҠГҠп¬ӮвҖһUГҠвҖҡГҠГ•Вёв—ҠвҖҡГ вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒвҖҡ ГҒп¬ӮвҖһUГҠвҒ„UвүҘГҠЖ’ГҝГҠвҖҡЕёГ·ГҠпЈҝВЎЕёпЈҝВ·ГҲвҖ“
вҲһвҲ‘В§ГҠпЈҝЛҳГ•п¬ӮГҠГҘГҝГ«ГҝГҲГғ ГғГ вҖҡв—ҠЛҮГҠВў ГғГ ЛҮГҠГҠв—ҠГҝпЈҝ Г п¬ӮГҠв—ҠвҖһUв—ҠВ¬Лқв—ҠпЈҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ”H 42H
вҖҡПҖГҠ (You are my) friend; ГҹГҒГғ thus; в—ҠГ п¬ӮГҠ thinking; В¬ЛқвҖҡГ·в—ҠЛңГ” importunately; ГҝГғЛңГ” whatever;
В©UQВ§в—ҠЛңГ” has been said; вҖһпЈҝU вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ Hey KГҰВ¶Ж’a; вҖһпЈҝU ГҝГҠЕ’п¬Ӯ Hey descendant of Yadu; вҖһпЈҝU вҖҡПҖпЈҝГ” Hey comrade;
ГҹГҒГғ thus; вҖўВЎГҠЕёГғГҠГ” not knowing; в—ҠГҒвҖһUв—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” greatness; Гғп¬Ӯ Your; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this; в—ҠГҝГҠ by me; В¬Лқв—ҠГҠЕ’ГҠГғЛңГ”
thoughtlessly; В¬ЛқГЎГҠГҝпЈҝЕё through affection; п¬ӮГҠ or; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; ГҝГғЛңГ” the way in which; Гё and;
вҖўп¬ӮвҖһUГҠвҖҡГҠГ•Вёв—ҠЛңГ” for the sake of fun; вҖўвҖҡГ вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғвҖ” вҖўГҒвҖҡ You have been slighted (by me); ГҒп¬ӮвҖһUГҠвҒ„UвүҘГҠЖ’ГҝГҠвҖҡЕёГ·ГҠпЈҝВЎЕёпЈҝВ·ГҲ
while at play, reposing, sitting or at meals; вҲһвҲ‘В§вҖ” alone; вҖўГ•п¬ӮГҠ or; вҖўГҒВ¬Г” even; вҖўГ«ГҝГҲГғ O sinless
one;  ГғГ вҖҡв—ҠЛҮГҠв—ҠЛңГ” in the presence of those (companions); ГғГғЛңГ” for all that (misdemeanour); ЛҮГҠГҠв—ҠГҝпЈҝГ”
seek forgiveness; Г п¬ӮГҠв—ҠЛңГ” from You; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; вҖўВ¬Лқв—ҠпЈҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ” who are Immeasurable.
The way I have importunately called out, either through intimacy or thoughtlessly,
Г¬Hey KГҰВ¶Ж’a ! Hey YГҘdava ! Hey Comrade !Г® and so on, unaware of the greatness of
Yours, and thinking You only to be a friend, and the way in which You, O Acyuta!
the Infallible! have been slighted by me in jest, while at play, reposing, sitting or at
meals, either alone or even in the presence of othersГіfor all that, O Immeasurable
Lord, I crave forgiveness from You.
(41, 42)

=== PAGE 550 ===

* Chapter XI *
549
objectionable conduct on his part. The
indeclinable Г«YatГӯ has been repeated in the
very beginning of verse 42 to introduce these
other forms of misdemeanour, and the
conjunction Г«CaГӯ is intended to conjoin them
with those mentioned in the preceding verse.
Intimacy, thoughtlessness and funГіthese
are the three factors responsible for lack of
regard on the part of an individual for anotherГӯs
honour or dishonour. Intimacy knows no
decorum; thoughtlessness naturally contributes
to lapses; and it becomes difficult to maintain
propriety of speech when one is in a jocular
mood. For the disrespect shown to a man worthy
of reverence, these three factors may be jointly
or individually responsible. Of these three
factors, intimacy and thoughtlessness have
already been dealt with in the preceding verse;
while the present verse points the third factor,
viz., fun, by using the adverbial compound
Г«AvahГҘsГҘrthamГӯ (for the sake of fun).
A similar expression of regret is attributed
to Arjuna in вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata as well,
where he says:Гі
Г¬While reposing, sitting, walking,
indulging in tall talk or dining with вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a,
I had developed such intimacy with Him that
occasionally I used to taunt Him saying Г¬O
friend, you are indeed a truthful man.Г® But
that noble soul out of His inherent greatness
overlooked all those faults of mine even as a
friend overlooks the faults of his friend, or a
father condones the faults of his son.Г®*
(I.XV.19)
The demonstrative pronoun Г¬TatГ® sums
up all the offences of the kind mentioned in
verses 41 and 42, and by speaking of the
Lord as Г«AprameyamГӯ, Arjuna indicates the
inconceivable nature of His form and glory.
In fact, no one can apprehend them fully.
What little knowledge about Him is possessed
by anyone is wholly attributable to His grace.
It was due to His supreme grace that Arjuna,
who had been ignorant of His greatness so
long and consequently behaved disrespectfully
towards Him, had come to realize His glory
to a certain extent. Even then it could not be
asserted that He had known it fully. Far from
knowing it fully, he had not yet apprehended
even that much of His glory which the Divine
Grace sought to bring home to him. But
what little he had understood had fully
convinced him that He was God almighty
Himself. He had now come to realize that the
way in which he had behaved with the Lord
treating Him as his equal, was unseemly on
his part, and he humbly sought His pardon
for all his past impudence.
Having thus craved the indulgence of the Lord, Arjuna proceeds to describe His glory
in the next two verses, establishing thereby His capacity to forgive him, and invokes His
favour once more.
ГҒВ¬ГғГҠГҒвҖҡ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§SГҝ ГёвҒ„UГҠГёвҒ„USГҝ Г п¬Ӯв—ҠSГҝ В¬ГҚГ–Гҝp ВӘГҲLВ§ВӘВёвҒ„UГӢГҝГҠЕёЛңГ”вҖ“
Её Г п¬ӮГ вҖҡв—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҳSГ ГҝГЁГҝГҒЕ“вҲ‘В§вҖ” вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГЈГҝГҠпЈҝ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГІГҠГҝпЈҝЛҳГҘГҝВ¬ЛқГҒГғв—ҠВ¬ЛқГ·ГҠп¬ӮH 43H
ГҒВ¬ГғГҠ the father; вҖўГҒвҖҡ are; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§SГҝ ГёвҒ„UГҠГёвҒ„USГҝ moving and unmoving creation; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” You; вҖўSГҝ
of this; В¬ГҚГ–ГҝвҖ” worthy of adoration; Гё and; ВӘГҲLВ§вҖ”Г” ВӘвҒ„UГӢГҝГҠЕёЛңГ” the greatest teacher; Её not; Г п¬ӮГ вҖҡв—ҠвҖ” Your
equal; вҖўГҒSГғГ” there is; вҖўГЁГҝГҒЕ“вҲ‘В§вҖ” any better; вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГғвҖ” how (then); вҖўГЈГҝвҖ” another; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГІГҠГҝпЈҝ in (all) the
three worlds; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; вҖўВ¬ЛқГҒГғв—ҠВ¬ЛқГ·ГҠп¬ӮГ” O Lord of incomparable might.
*
вүҘГҠЖ’ГҝГҠвҖҡЕёГҠвүҲUЕёГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘В§Г Г•ЕёГ·ГҠпЈҝВЎЕёГҠГҒЕ’cп¬ӮГ’Г„ГҝГҠЕ’ЛңГ” п¬ӮГҝSГҝ ВҙВ§Гғп¬ӮГҠГҒЕёГҒГғ ГҒп¬ӮВ¬ЛқвҲӮUГ©Е“вҖ”вҖ“
вҖҡГ…ГҝГҲвҖ” вҖҡПҖпЈҝп¬Ӯ ГҒВ¬ГғГҺп¬ӮГ»ГҠЕёГҝSГҝ вҖҡп¬ӮZ вҖҡпЈҝвҖһпЈҝU в—ҠвҖһUГҠЕёЛңГ” в—ҠГҒвҖһUГғГҝГҠ вҲ‘ГҲВ§в—ҠГғпЈҝвҒ„UГүГҠВў в—ҠпЈҝH

=== PAGE 551 ===

550
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
By speaking of the Lord as Г¬the Father
of this creation, the greatest teacher and worthy
of adorationГ®, Arjuna seeks to justify his claim
for forgiveness. The whole of this universe
has sprung from the Lord; therefore, He is its
Father. Of all great gods, sages and other
powerful beings BrahmГҘ is the greatest; for
he is the first born of this creation, and it is
he who teaches all according to their respective
capacity through the eternal light of God. But
BrahmГҘ himself takes his descent from God
and it is from Him, again that he derives his
wisdom. Therefore, He is the greatest of all
beings, greater than the greatest, and the only
and the great teacher of all. Even gods like
BrahmГҘ and sages like VasiВ¶Вўha, who are
objects of supreme adoration and ever worthy
of salutation even for the gods and sages that
are worshipped by the world, deem it a proud
privilege to obtain even a momentГӯs opportunity
to offer direct worship or praises to Him.
Therefore, He is the supreme object of worship
even for all adorable beings, and it is quite
natural for Arjuna to expect that He should
condone his faults.
By the second half of this verse Arjuna
shows that in the whole universe there is
none who can even approach the infinite and
inconceivable virtues, glory and greatness of
God. God alone is His own compeer. And
when there is none equal to Him, the possibility
of anyone surpassing Him cannot even be
conceived of. If, therefore, the Lord, who
was all compassion, did not forgive his faults,
there could be no hope of his being pardoned
by anyone else.
You are the Father of this moving and unmoving creation, nay, the greatest
teacher worthy of adoration. O Lord of incomparable might, in all the three worlds
there is none else even equal to You; how, then, can anyone be better than You? (43)
ГғSв—ҠГҠГ В¬ЛқГЎГҠГӘГҝ В¬ЛқГҒГЎГҠЕ“ГҠГҝ вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝВў В¬ЛқвҖҡГҠЕ’ГҝпЈҝ Г п¬ӮГҠв—ҠвҖһUв—ҠГӢвүҘГҠв—ҠГӢВ«Kв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҒВ¬ГғпЈҝп¬Ӯ В¬ГҲГІГҠSГҝ вҖҡПҖпЈҝп¬Ӯ вҖҡГ…ГҝГҲвҖ” ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҖ” ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝГҠГҝГҠвҖһВёUГҒвҖҡ Е’пЈҝп¬Ӯ вҖҡГҠпЈҝвҖҰГҲUв—ҠЛңГ”H 44H
ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” therefore; В¬ЛқГЎГҠГӘГҝ bowing (to You); В¬ЛқГҒГЎГҠЕ“ГҠГҝГ” prostrating (at Your feet); вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝв—ҠЛңГ” (my)
body; В¬ЛқвҖҡГҠЕ’ГҝпЈҝ seek to propitiate; Г п¬ӮГҠв—ҠЛңГ” You; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; ГҹВёвүҘГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the Ruler of all; ГҹВёВ«Kв—ҠЛңГ” worthy of praise;
ГҒВ¬ГғГҠ a father; Гҹп¬Ӯ as; В¬ГҲГІГҠSГҝ with (his) son; вҖҡПҖГҠ a friend; Гҹп¬Ӯ as; вҖҡГ…ГҝГҲвҖ”Г” with (his) friend; ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҖ” a
husband; ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝГҠГҝГҠвҖ” (as) with (his) beloved spouse; вҖўвҖһВёUГҒвҖҡ You ought; Е’пЈҝп¬Ӯ O Lord; вҖҡГҠпЈҝвҖҰГҲUв—ҠЛңГ” to bear.
Therefore, Lord, prostrating my body at Your feet and bowing low I seek to
propitiate You, the ruler of all and worthy of all praise. It behoves You to bear with
me even as a father bears with his son, a friend with his friend and a husband with
his beloved spouse.
(44)
courage to seek His forgiveness with all
humility.
By referring to the Lord as Г«вҲ«вҖ№amГӯ and
Г«вҲ«Е’yamГӯ Arjuna seeks to convey that He is
the sole and supreme Ruler of all, who not
only regulates the whole universe, but is the
ruler and controller even of gods like Indra
(the Lord of paradise), Г…ditya (the sun-god),
VaruЖ’a (the god of water), Kubera (the god
The word Г«TasmГҘtГӯ refers to the exalted
virtues of the Lord, mentioned in the preceding
verse, which render Him easy to placate. In
other words, the incomparable greatness and
glory possessed by the Lord were such as
made it incumbent on Him to take pity on,
and be favourably disposed towards, a
distressed soul like Arjuna, who had taken
shelter under Him. That is why Arjuna took

=== PAGE 552 ===

* Chapter XI *
551
of riches) and Yama (the god of death), who
are the guardians of the world. And the
extent of His virtues, glory and greatness
is so vast that even if the whole universe
goes on singing His praises for ever, their
limit cannot be reached. Hence He alone is
worthy of praise. Arjuna felt that he had
neither adequate knowledge nor the requisite
eloquence whereby he could sing His
praises and win His favour. He felt utterly
incompetent to praise Him. He thought
whatever words he would utter in praise of
His glory would fail to touch even the fringe
of that glory, and would thus detract from the
same. Hence the only course left to him was
to throw himself at His feet like a log of
wood, i.e., bow to Him with all his limbs,
and seek His favour through the grace of
the dust of His feet. That is how Arjuna
invoked His favour and asked Him to overlook
his faults.
It has already been shown in verses 41
and 42 above that thoughtlessness, intimacy
and fun are the three factors which jointly or
severally contribute to an offence of slight.
By citing the examples of father and son,
friend and friend, and husband and wife,
Arjuna requests the Lord to condone all his
lapses attributable to any of the three causes
mentioned above. That is to say, just as a
father forgives the fault of his son committed
out of ignorance and thoughtlessness, a friend
puts up with the indignities heaped on him
by his friend in a spirit of fun, and a husband
condones the lapses of his wife occasioned
by intimacy, Arjuna expects the Lord to
forgive all his faults proceeding from the
three causes mentioned above.
Craving the indulgence of the Lord for his trespasses in this way, Arjuna requests Him
in the next two verses to reveal His four-armed form.
вҖўЕ’ГҺCГ”UВ¬ГҚп¬ӮZ NUГҒВ·ГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒSв—Ҡ Е’ГҺВ¶Г”UГҠ Г·ГҝпЈҝЕё Гё В¬ЛқвҲҡГҝГҒГ•ГғВў в—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝ в—ҠпЈҝГ”вҖ“
ГғЕ’пЈҝп¬Ӯ в—ҠпЈҝ Е’вүҘГҠВёГҝ Е’пЈҝп¬ӮMВ§В¬Вў В¬ЛқвҖҡГӢЕ’ Е’пЈҝп¬ӮпЈҝвүҘГҠ ВЎВӘГҒГӣГҠп¬ӮГҠвҖҡH 45H
вҖўЕ’ГҺCГ”UВ¬ГҚп¬ӮВёв—ҠЛңГ” (Yours wondrous form) never seen before; NUГҒВ·ГғвҖ” delighted; вҖўГҒSв—ҠГ” I am; Е’ГҺВ¶Г”UГҠ
seeing; Г·ГҝпЈҝЕё by fear; Гё and; В¬ЛқвҲҡГҝГҒГ•Гғв—ҠЛңГ” is tormented; в—ҠЕёвҖ” mind; в—ҠпЈҝ my; ГғГғЛңГ” that; вҲһп¬Ӯ only; в—ҠпЈҝ to
me; Е’вүҘГҠВёГҝ (pray) reveal; Е’пЈҝп¬ӮMВ§В¬в—ҠЛңГ” four-armed divine form (of ViВ¶Ж’u); В¬ЛқвҖҡГӢЕ’ be gracious; Е’пЈҝп¬ӮпЈҝвүҘГҠ
O Lord of celestials; ВЎВӘГҒГӣГҠп¬ӮГҠвҖҡ O Abode of the universe.
Having seen Your wondrous form, which was never seen before, I feel transported
with joy; at the same time my mind is tormented by fear. Pray! reveal to me that divine
form, the form of ViВ¶Ж’u with four arms; O Lord of celestials, Abode of the universe,
be gracious.                                                                                                                   (45)
form. But the very next moment, when he
became conscious of the dreadfulness of that
form, he trembled with fear, and felt much
perturbed.
The above statement of Arjuna is
significant. He thereby humbly requests the
Lord to withdraw that form from his sight as
speedily as possible.
The demonstrative adjective Г«TatГӯ points
By the first half of this verse Arjuna
points to the alternate feelings of joy and fear
aroused in him by the sight of that wondrous
form. When he looked to the virtues, glory
and greatness of the Lord as revealed in His
Cosmic Body, his joy knew no bounds and
he congratulated himself on the infinite
compassion and unparalleled love shown to
him by the Lord in revealing His transcendent

=== PAGE 553 ===

552
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
to something out of sight. It further denotes
that which has been seen before, but is now
out of sight. And the use of the indeclinable
Г«EvaГӯ has a restrictive force. The compound
word Г«DevarВөupamГӯ, qualified by Г«TatГӯ,
therefore, refers to the four-armed divine form
of ViВ¶Ж’u residing in VaikuЖ’Вўha. If the word
Г«TatГӯ alone occurred in the verse, it could be
interpreted as referring to the human garb in
which the Lord appeared before Arjuna. But
the word Г«DevaГӯ joined to Г«RВөupamГӯ makes it
clear that the form referred to here was other
than human i.e., belonging to the heaven world.
By addressing the Lord as Г«DeveвҖ№aГӯ and
Г«JagannivГҘsaГӯ Arjuna shows that He was
none else than the all-pervading Lord of the
universe. Hence He alone could reveal that
divine Form to Him.
By asking the Lord to be gracious,
Arjuna solicits Him to withdraw speedily the
dreadful Cosmic Form and be pleased to
reveal before him the four-armed divine form.
ГҒвҲ‘В§вҒ„UГӢГҒвүҲUЕёВў ВӘГҒЕ’ЕёВў ГёвҲ‘ЛқВ§вҖһUSГғГҒв—ҠГ«ВҝUГҠГҒв—Ҡ Г п¬ӮГҠВў ВәЛқcвүҲГҲв—ҠвҖһВўU ГғГ•Г’п¬ӮГ”вҖ“
ГғпЈҝЕёГ’п¬Ӯ MВ§В¬пЈҝГЎГҠ ГёГғГҲГ·ВёГҲВЎпЈҝЕё вҖҡвҖһUdвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ Г·п¬Ӯ ГҒп¬ӮEв—ҠГҚГғпЈҝВёГ”H 46H
ГҒвҲ‘В§вҒ„UГӢГҒвүҲUЕёв—ҠЛңГ” adorned with a diadem; ВӘГҒЕ’Еёв—ҠЛңГ” armed with a club; ГёвҲ‘ЛқВ§вҖһUSГғв—ҠЛңГ” (and) holding a
discus in one of Your hands; ГҹГ«ВҝUГҠГҒв—Ҡ desire; Г п¬ӮГҠв—ҠЛңГ” You; ВәЛқcвүҲГҲв—ҠЛңГ” to see; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; ГғГ•ГҠ вҲһп¬Ӯ even so;
ГғпЈҝЕё in that; вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; MВ§В¬пЈҝГЎГҠ form; ГёГғГҲГ·ВёГҲВЎпЈҝЕё four-armed; вҖҡвҖһUdвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ O Lord with a thousand arms;
Г·п¬Ӯ do You appear; ГҒп¬ӮEв—ҠГҚГғпЈҝВё O Universal Being.
I wish to see You adorned in the same way with a diadem on the head, and
holding a mace and a discus in two of Your hands. O Lord with a thousand arms, O
Universal Being, appear again in the same four-armed Form.
(46)
following are our reasons for holding this
view:Гі
(1) If the four-armed form were the
natural form of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, it was needless to
speak of It as holding a mace and a discuss
in two of Its hands; for Arjuna used constantly
to see that form. Nay, even the use of the
word Г«CaturbhujenaГӯ with reference to it would
have been redundant. It would have been
quite enough for Arjuna to request the Lord
to reveal the form which has been before him
only a few minutes back.
(2) The word Г«DevarВөupamГӯ (divine
form), occurring in the preceding verse, bears
a contrast with the word Г«MГҘnuВ¶am RВөupamГӯ
(human form) used in verse 51 below. This
further proves that the word Г«DevarВөupamГӯ
refers to ViВ¶Ж’u.
(3) The use of the indeclinable Г«BhВөuyaВЁГӯ
with the words Г«Svakam RВөupamГӯ in verse 50
below and that of Г«PunaВЁГӯ with Г«SaumyavapuВЁГӯ
The Lord had taken a vow not to take
up arms during the MahГҘbhГҘrata war, and
He was seated in ArjunaГӯs chariot holding a
whip in one hand and the reins in another.
But, before seeing Him in the two-armed
human form once more, Arjuna wanted to
behold His four-armed divine form holding
weapons of war like the mace and the discus.
This is what he seeks to convey by the use
of the indeclinables Г«TathГҘГӯ and Г«EvaГӯ.
The word Г«RВөupeЖ’aГӯ, qualified by the
demonstrative adjective Г«TenaГӯ, refers to the
four-armed divine form mentioned in the
preceding verse by the words Г«TatГӯ, Г«RВөupamГӯ.
The use of the indeclinable Г«EvaГӯ in this
verse indicates that even though Arjuna was
generally wont to see the two-armed human
form of the Lord, he now longed to see the
four-armed divine form alone.
The four-armed form, referred to in this
verse, means the divine form of ViВ¶Ж’u. The

=== PAGE 554 ===

* Chapter XI *
553
also proves that the Lord first revealed His
four-armed divine form, and thereafter His
two-armed human form.
(4) The 
use 
of 
the 
adjective
Г«SudurdarвҖ№amГӯ in verse 52 below shows that
the form under question was something
exceptionally rare; and the same verse further
adds that even gods were always eager to
behold that Form. If the four-armed form
were natural to вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, It would have
been open to the perception even of human
beings; why should the gods, in that case, be
ever eager to see that Form ? If, on the other
hand, it is urged that the words Г«Idam RВөupamГӯ
occurring in verse 50 below refer to the
Cosmic Body, such a terrible form was even
beyond the conception of gods. Thus it is
clear that it is that form of ViВ¶Ж’u residing in
VaikuЖ’Вўha that the gods are ever eager to
behold.
(5) The Cosmic Body has been glorified
in verse 48 below, beginning with the words
Г«Na VedayajВӨГҘdhyayanaiВЁГӯ (I cannot be
perceived through the study of Vedas or
rituals etc.). The same idea has been repeated
in verse 53, beginning with Г«NГҘham Vedairna
TapasГҘГӯ (Neither through study of  the Vedas
nor through penance etc., can I  be seen in
this Form). Construing both these verses as
glorifying the Cosmic Body would expose
the Lord to the charge of tautology. This as
well proves that before revealing the human
form the Lord appeared before Arjuna in the
four-armed divine form, and that verse 53
was uttered in praise of the same.
(6) In verse 24 of this chapter, and
again in verse 30, Arjuna addresses the Lord
as Г«ViВ¶Ж’uГӯ. This also indicates ArjunaГӯs longing
to see the Lord in the form of ViВ¶Ж’u.
All these arguments go to prove that
Arjuna solicits the Lord in the present verse
to show him the four-armed form of ViВ¶Ж’u.
By addressing the Lord as Г«SahasrabГҘhoГӯ
(possessed of a thousand arms) and
Г«ViвҖ№vamВөurteГӯ (Universal Being), Arjuna
requests Him to withdraw His Universal Form.
Revealing in the next two verses the glory of His Cosmic Body and the rarity of its
perception, the Lord consoles Arjuna in verse 49 and invites him to behold the four-armed
form as requested above.
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲп¬ӮГҠГё
в—ҠГҝГҠ В¬ЛқвҖҡГӣГҠпЈҝЕё Гғп¬ӮГҠВЎГҲВёЕёпЈҝЕ’Вў MВ§В¬Вў В¬вҒ„ВўU Е’ГҢвүҘГҠГғв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠГғЛңГ”вҖ“
ГғпЈҝВЎГҠпЈҝв—ҠГҝВў ГҒп¬ӮEв—ҠЕёГЈГғв—ҠГҠlВў ГҝГЈв—ҠпЈҝ Г п¬ӮЕ’ГЈГҝпЈҝЕё Её Е’ГҺCГ”UВ¬ГҚп¬ӮВёв—ҠЛңГ”H 47H
в—ҠГҝГҠ by Me; В¬ЛқвҖҡГӣГҠпЈҝЕё pleased (with you); Гғп¬Ӯ to you; вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё O Arjuna; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this; MВ§В¬в—ҠЛңГ” Body;
В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” supreme; Е’ГҢвүҘГҠГғв—ҠЛңГ” has been shown; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠГғЛңГ” through My own power of Yoga; ГғпЈҝВЎГҠпЈҝв—ҠГҝв—ҠЛңГ”
effulgent; ГҒп¬ӮEв—ҠЛңГ” Cosmic; вҖўЕёГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ” (and) infinite; вҖўГҠlв—ҠЛңГ” primal; ГҝГғЛңГ” which; в—ҠпЈҝ Mine; Г п¬ӮЕ’ГЈГҝпЈҝЕё by
anyone other than you; Её Е’ГҺCГ”UВ¬ГҚп¬ӮВёв—ҠЛңГ” was never seen before.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: Arjuna! pleased with you I have shown you, through
My power of Yoga, this supreme, effulgent, primal and infinite Cosmic Form, which
was never seen before by anyone other than you.
(47)
above had moved His heart, and it was with
a view to enlightening him about His own
virtues, glory and truth that He had mercifully
shown His transcendent form to him. Under
The use of the adjective Г«PrasannenaГӯ
with Г«MayГҘГӯ shows that the devotion Arjuna
bore towards the Lord and the fervent prayer
that he addressed to Him in verses 3 and 4

=== PAGE 555 ===

554
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
such circumstances, Arjuna had no cause for
fear, agony or bewilderment. The Lord,
therefore, wondered why he should be so
much perturbed with fear.
The compound word Г«Г…tmayogГҘtГӯ denotes
that the Cosmic Body of the Lord could not
be perceived by all and at all times. It could
be seen only when He vouchsafed its vision
through His own power of Yoga, and by
him alone who is gifted with the divine eye,
and by none else. Thus it was a great privilege
to obtain a vision of that form.
The use of the adjectives Г«IdamГӯ, Г«ParamГӯ,
Г«TejomayamГӯ, Г«Г…dyamГӯ, Г«AnantamГӯ and
Г«ViвҖ№vamГӯ with the substantive Г«RВөupamГӯ is
intended to bring home to Arjuna the greatness
of His transcendent and wonderful Cosmic
Body. The Lord thus told Arjuna that the
form in which He appeared before him was
most excellent and divine in character; it
was an infinite mass of divine lustre, the
primal cause and creator of all, and boundless
in extent; its limit could not be found anywhere.
What Arjuna saw was not a complete
picture. It was only a fragment of that great
Form.
There was a world of difference between
the Cosmic forms revealed by вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a to
mother YaвҖ№odГҘ in His own mouth and to
BhвҲӮВ¶ma and others in the court of the Kauravas,
on the one hand, and the Cosmic Body
revealed on this occasion to Arjuna, on the
other. All these three forms have been
described differently in our sacred books. In
the form revealed to Arjuna, BhвҲӮВ¶ma, DroЖ’a
and the other heroes were seen entering the
flaming mouths of the Lord. Such a Cosmic
form was never shown by the Lord to anyone
before. Thus there is no incongruity in the
above statement of the Lord.
Её п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГҝГҙГҠГҠГӨГҝГҝЕёГ’ЕёВё Е’ГҠЕёГ’ЕёВё Гё ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГҠГҒГ·ЕёВё ГғВ¬ГҠпЈҝГҒГ·LВ§ВӘЛқГ’вҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҲһп¬ӮВўMВ§В¬вҖ” вүҘГҠГ„Гҝ вҖўвҖһВўU ЕёГҺвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ ВәЛқcвүҲГҲВўU Г п¬ӮЕ’ГЈГҝпЈҝЕё вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§В¬Лқп¬ӮГӢвҒ„UГ”H 48H
Её nor; п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГҝГҙГҠГҠГӨГҝГҝЕёГ’вҖ” through study of the Vedas or of rituals; ЕёГ” nor again; Е’ГҠЕёГ’вҖ” through
gifts; ЕёГ” neither; Гё and; ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГҠГҒГ·вҖ” through actions (enjoined by the вҖәГҘstras); Её nor; ГғВ¬ГҠпЈҝГҒГ·вҖ”Г” В©UВӘЛқГ’вҖ”
through austere penances; вҲһп¬ӮВўMВ§В¬вҖ” assuming such as a (cosmic) form; вүҘГҠГ„ГҝвҖ” am capable; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”
I; ЕёГҺвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ in (this) world of human beings; ВәЛқcвүҲГҲв—ҠЛңГ” of being seen; Г п¬ӮЕ’ГЈГҝпЈҝЕёГ” by anyone else than you;
вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§В¬Лқп¬ӮГӢвҒ„UГ” O great hero of the Kuru race.
Arjuna, in this mortal world I cannot be seen in this Form by anyone other than
you, either through study of the Vedas or by rituals, or, again, through gifts, actions
or austere penances.                                                                      (48)
Г«YajВӨГҘdhyayanaГӯ.
Г«DГҘnaГӯ consists in gifting to another,
with due regard to the latterГӯs qualifications,
oneГӯs wealth or other possessions, food, water,
knowledge, cattle, land etc., with a cheerful
heart for the recipientГӯs benefit and enjoyment.
Performing sacrifices enjoined by the
Vedas and SmГҰti texts, and all other pursuits
sanctioned by the scriptures and followed for
the sake of discharging oneГӯs duty as prescribed
by oneГӯs VarЖ’a or grade in society and
Study of the Vedas with all the
supplementary sciences and other auxiliary
branches of Knowledge under a qualified
teacher well-versed in the Vedic lore, and
thoroughly grasping their meaning is called
Г«VedГҘdhyayana.Гӯ Even so, receiving instruction
in the various rituals from teachers skilled in
the performance of sacrifices, and acquiring
practical knowledge of the same by attending
sacrifices performed with due ceremony under
the supervision of such teachers is known as

=== PAGE 556 ===

* Chapter XI *
555
Г…вҖ№rama or stage in life are covered by the
term Г«KriyГҘГӯ.
Observing fasts recommended in the
вҖәГҘstras under the name of Г«KГҰcchraГӯ and
Г«CГҘndrГҘyaЖ’aГӯ etc., and other stringent rules
of life, subduing the mind and senses with
strong determination and reason, undergoing
severe bodily and mental suffering for the
sake of oneГӯs duty, and various other forms
of askesis undertaken in accordance with the
scriptural ordinanceГіall these are included
under the category of Г«austere penances.Гӯ
Declaring that it was impossible to
obtain a vision of His Cosmic Body through
the above practices, and thereby revealing its
transcendent glory the Lord congratulates
Arjuna on his being able, through His own
grace and goodwill, to behold the Form
which could not be seen by any other
means. The feelings of fear, agony and
bewilderment etc., obsessing ArjunaГӯs mind
at that moment were, therefore, altogether,
inopportune and unjustified.
Man alone is qualified to study the Vedas
and rituals, practise charity, perform penance
and undertake various other forms of activities.
And it is through the human body alone that
one acquires various other qualifications by
performing fresh actions of various kinds.
The other worlds of the universe are primarily
places where one works out oneГӯs destiny.
The use of the word Г«NГҰlokeГӯ is intended to
bring out this glory of the mortal world. The
intention is to point out that when that Form
of the Lord cannot be seen by anybody
through such practices even in this world,
much less can it be seen in the other worlds
without such practices.
By addressing Arjuna as Г«KurupravвҲӮraГӯ
the Lord shows that Arjuna was the greatest
hero of the Kuru race, and it was unbecoming
of a hero like him to be overcome with fear.
This was another reason why he should not
give way to fear.
в—ҠГҠ ГғпЈҝ вҲҡГҝГ•ГҠ в—ҠГҠ Гё ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҚвҖҰUГ·ГҠп¬ӮГҠпЈҝ Е’ГҺВ¶Г”UГҠ MВ§В¬Вў ГүГҠГҠпЈҝвҒ„Uв—ҠГӢЕ’ГҺГҰЛңUГ”в—Ҡв—ҠпЈҝЕ’в—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҲҡГҝВ¬пЈҝГғГ·ГӢвҖ” В¬ЛқГӢГғв—ҠЕёГҠвҖ” В¬ГҲЕёSГ п¬ӮВў ГғЕ’пЈҝп¬Ӯ в—ҠпЈҝ MВ§В¬ГҒв—ҠЕ’Вў В¬ЛқВ¬вүҘГҝUГ”H 49H
в—ҠГҠГ” let there not be; ГғпЈҝ to you; вҲҡГҝГ•ГҠ perturbation; в—ҠГҠ there should not be; Гё and; ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҚвҖҰUГ·ГҠп¬ӮвҖ”
perplexity; Е’ГҺВ¶Г”UГҠ seeing; MВ§В¬в—ҠЛңГ” form; ГүГҠГҠпЈҝвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” terrible; ГҹВёЕ’ГҺвҲ‘ЛңВ§Г” such as this; в—Ҡв—Ҡ Mine; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this;  вҲҡГҝВ¬пЈҝГғГ·ГӢГ”вҖ”
freed from fear; В¬ЛқГӢГғв—ҠЕёГҠвҖ” delighted at heart; В¬ГҲЕёвҖ” again; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” you; ГғГғЛңГ” вҲһп¬Ӯ that very; в—ҠпЈҝ Mine; MВ§В¬в—ҠЛңГ”
form; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this (four-armed); В¬ЛқВ¬вүҘГҝ behold.
Seeing such a dreadful Form of Mine as this, be not perturbed or perplexed; with
a fearless and tranquil mind, behold once again the same four-armed Form of Mine
(bearing the conch, discus, mace and lotus).                                           (49)
in the matter and withdraw the terrible form
just for his consolation. Arjuna need not,
therefore, feel perturbed or perplexed any more.
When the Lord was thus going to
withdraw the form which caused fear and
bewilderment to Arjuna, and reveal the four-
armed form coveted by him, he should shake
off all fear and should cheer up. This is what
is sought to be conveyed by the adjectives
Г«VyapetabhвҲӮВЁГӯ and Г«PrвҲӮtamanГҘВЁГӯ.
By the first half of this verse the Lord
indicates that the sight of the Cosmic Body,
which was so difficult to obtain, and which
had been vouchsafed to Arjuna as mark of His
pleasure, should not have caused perplexity
and perturbation to Arjuna. Nevertheless, when
that dreadful vision was proving a source of
fear and bewilderment to him, and he desired
that He should withdraw that form from his
eyes, the Lord was willing to meet his wishes

=== PAGE 557 ===

556
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The use of the demonstrative adjectives
Г«TatГӯ and Г«IdamГӯ with the substantive Г«RВөupamГӯ
is intended to show that Arjuna had now
before his eyes and could very well see the
four-armed divine form which had been shown
to him before, and for a vision of which he
was now praying to the Lord. In other words,
the Cosmic Body had disappeared from his
view and had been replaced by the four-
armed divine form. The Lord, therefore,
exhorted Arjuna to drive out fear from his
mind and behold His four-armed form with a
complacent mind.
The word Г«PunaВЁГӯ used in the verse
conveys the impression that the Lord had
revealed His four-armed form of Arjuna on a
previous occasion as well. The use of the
words Г«Tat EvaГӯ and Г«Tena EvaГӯ occurring in
his prayer contained in verses 45 and 46
above go to confirm this view.
SaВӨjaya now tells DhГҰtarГҘВ¶Вўra what вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a did after inviting Arjuna to behold His
four-armed Form.
вҖҡTГҝ В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
ГҹГ ГҝВЎВёГҲЕёВў п¬ӮГҠвҖҡГҲЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮSГғГ•ГҠпЈҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ Sп¬ӮвҲ‘ВўВ§ MВ§В¬Вў Е’вүҘГҠВёГҝГҠв—ҠГҠвҖҡ Г·ГҚГҝвҖ”вҖ“
вҖўГҠEГҠвҖҡГҝГҠв—ҠГҠвҖҡ Гё Г·ГӢГғв—ҠпЈҝЕёВў Г·ГҚГ п¬ӮГҠ В¬ГҲЕёвҖ” вҖҡГҠГ’ГӘГҝп¬ӮВ¬ГҲв—ҠВёвҖһUГҠГ в—ҠГҠH 50H
ГҹГҒГғ thus; вҖўВЎГҲВёЕёв—ҠЛңГ” to Arjuna; п¬ӮГҠвҖҡГҲЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮвҖ” вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a (son of Vasudeva); ГғГ•ГҠ in the same way;
В©UГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ having spoken; Sп¬ӮвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” MВ§В¬в—ҠЛңГ” His own (four-armed) form; Е’вүҘГҠВёГҝГҠв—ҠГҠвҖҡ revealed; Г·ГҚГҝвҖ”Г” again;
вҖўГҠEГҠвҖҡГҝГҠв—ҠГҠвҖҡ brought relief to; Гё and; Г·ГӢГғв—ҠЛңГ” вҲһЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the frightened Arjuna; Г·ГҚГ п¬ӮГҠ assuming; В¬ГҲЕёвҖ”Г”
once more; вҖҡГҠГ’ГӘГҝп¬ӮВ¬ГҲвҖ” genial form; в—ҠвҖһUГҠГ в—ҠГҠГ” the high-souled вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a.
SaВӨjaya said: Having spoken thus to Arjuna, BhagavГҘn VГҘsudeva again revealed
to him in the same way His own four-armed Form; and then, assuming a genial form,
the high-souled вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a consoled the frightened Arjuna.
(50)
moment. And with regard to the human form
it was unnecessary to say that the Lord
manifested it (DarвҖ№ayГҘmГҘsa). For once the
Cosmic Body was withdrawn from his view,
the LordГӯs natural form as a human being
would have automatically appeared before
Arjuna. There could be no question of showing
it; for Arjuna would have himself seen that
form. The use of the adjective Г«SvakamГӯ with
Г«RВөupamГӯ, and of the verb Г«DarвҖ№ayГҘmГҘsaГӯ,
therefore, conveys the impression that it was
the LordГӯs divine four-armed form eternally
residing in VaikuЖ’Вўha, as distinguished from
the human form which was present before all
and had been manifested for the sake of
carrying on His human sports, as well as
from the Cosmic Body manifested through
His power of Yoga, which Arjuna longed to
BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a manifested Himself
in this world as a son of Vasudeva, and He
resides in the heart of all beings as their very
Self. Therefore, He bears the title of VГҘsudeva
as one of His many appellations.
Г«Svakam RВөupamГӯ means oneГӯs own form.
Speaking in a wider sense, even the Cosmic
Body belonged to вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a Himself and
was thus His own body; even so, the human
garb in which He was ever present before all
was equally His. But the use of the adjective
Г«SvakamГӯ with Г«RВөupamГӯ must have been
intended to refer to a third form, different
from the two forms mentioned above. For
the Cosmic Body was already present before
Arjuna; and since he was feeling perturbed at
the sight of that form, its revelation before
him was altogether out of question at that

=== PAGE 558 ===

* Chapter XI *
557
see and which the Lord now revealed to him.
He whose Self or personality is great is
called a MahГҘtmГҘ. BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a is the
soul of all beings, hence He is spoken of as
a MahГҘtmГҘ. The word Г«вҖәaumyavapuВЁГӯ refers
to the most pleasing and placid human form,
the swarthy form in which вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a always
appeared before all.
When вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, having withdrawn His Cosmic Body and revealed His four-armed
form, finally assumed His natural human form and soothed Arjuna, the latter returned to
his normal self and said:
вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
Е’ГҺВ¶Г”пЈҝUЕ’Вў в—ҠГҠЕёГҲВ·Вў MВ§В¬Вў Гғп¬Ӯ вҖҡГҠГ’ГӘГҝВў ВЎЕёГҠЕ’ВёЕёвҖ“
ГҹЕ’ГҠЕёГӢв—ҠГҒSв—Ҡ вҖҡВўп¬ӮГҺГ»ГҠвҖ” вҖҡГёпЈҝГғГҠвҖ” В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғВў ВӘГғвҖ”H 51H
Е’ГҺВ¶Г”UГҠ seeing; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this; в—ҠГҠЕёГҲВ·в—ҠЛңГ” MВ§В¬в—ҠЛңГ” human form; Гғп¬Ӯ Yours; вҖҡГҠГ’ГӘГҝв—ҠЛңГ” placid; ВЎЕёГҠЕ’ВёЕё O KГҰВ¶Ж’a;
ГҹЕ’ГҠЕёГӢв—ҠЛңГ” now; вҖўГҒSв—ҠГ” I have; вҖҡВўп¬ӮГҺГ»ГҠвҖ” (I have) become; вҖҡГёпЈҝГғГҠвҖ” composed; В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” to (my) normal self;
ВӘГғвҖ” became.
Arjuna said: KГҰВ¶Ж’a, seeing this gentle human form of Yours, I have regained my
composure and am my ownself again.                                                           (51)
etc. The use of the phrases Г«SacetГҘВЁ
SaвүҲvГҰttaВЁГӯ and Г«PrakГҰtim GataВЁГӯ indicates
the disappearance of those feelings. The
intention is to show that the sight of the
enchanting and lovely human form had
restored his mental equilibrium. And morbidities
like fear, excitement and shivering etc.,
which 
had 
taken 
possession 
of 
his
mind, senses and body respectively, having
now left him, he had recovered his normal
state.
The 
LordГӯs 
human 
form 
was
exceptionally lovely, attractive and gentle;
and the Г«gentle formГӯ mentioned in the
preceding verse also referred to His human
form. It was with the intention of bringing
out this idea that the adjectives Г«SaumyamГӯ
and Г«MГҘnuВ¶amГӯ have been used with the
substantive Г«RВөupamГӯ in the present verse.
The sight of the LordГӯs Cosmic Body
had aroused in the mind of Arjuna morbid
feelings like fear, agony and bewilderment
Hearing the above words of Arjuna the Lord now reveals in two verses the rarity of
vision and glory of His four-armed divine form.
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲUп¬ӮГҠГё
вҖҡГҲЕ’ГҲЕ’ВёвүҘГҠВёГҒв—ҠЕ’Вў MВ§В¬Вў Е’ГҺcвүҲп¬ӮГҠЕёГҒвҖҡ ГҝГЈв—Ҡв—ҠвҖ“
Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠ вҖўГҘГҝSГҝ MВ§В¬SГҝ ГҒЕёГ ГҝВў Е’вүҘГҠВёЕёвҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUГ”ГҒЛҮГҠГЎГҠвҖ”H 52H
вҖҡГҲЕ’ГҲЕ’ВёвүҘГҠВёв—ҠЛңГ” (is) most difficult to perceive; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” that; MВ§В¬в—ҠЛңГ” (four-armed) form; Е’ГҺcвүҲп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” вҖўГҒвҖҡГ” you
have (just) seen; ГҝГғЛңГ” which; в—Ҡв—Ҡ Mine; Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠвҖ” gods; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; вҖўSГҝ MВ§В¬SГҝГ” of this form; ГҒЕёГ Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” ever;
Е’вүҘГҠВёЕёвҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUГ”ГҒЛҮГҠГЎГҠвҖ” (are) eager to behold.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: This form of Mine (with four arms) which you have just
seen is exceedingly difficult to perceive. Even the gods are always eager to behold this
form.
(52)

=== PAGE 559 ===

558
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The demonstrative adjective Г«IdamГӯ points
to an object near at hand; hence in the present
context it refers to the four-armed form
manifested after the disappearance of the
Cosmic Body. By speaking of it as most
difficult to perceive, the Lord seeks to convey
that the eternal four-armed form, existing
beyond MГҘyГҘ and adorned with divine
attributes, which Arjuna saw only a few
minutes before, could be perceived only by
one who is exclusively devoted to the Lord
and on whom the divine grace is fully bestowed.
The use of the indeclinable Г«ApiГӯ after
Г«DevГҘВЁГӯ is intended to convey that when
gods themselves are always yearning to behold
that form, and yet all of them are unable to
see it, it is much more difficult for ordinary
human beings to perceive it.
ЕёГҠвҖһВўU п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’Г’ЕёВё ГғВ¬вҖҡГҠ Её Е’ГҠЕёпЈҝЕё Её ГёпЈҝГ–ГҝГҝГҠвҖ“
вүҘГҠГ„Гҝ вҲһп¬ӮВўГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГҠпЈҝ ВәЛқcвүҲГҲВўU Е’ГҺcвүҲп¬ӮГҠЕёГҒвҖҡ в—ҠГҠВў ГҝГ•ГҠH 53H
Её neither; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’Г’вҖ” by the Vedas; Её nor; ГғВ¬вҖҡГҠГ” by penance; Её nor (again); Е’ГҠЕёпЈҝЕё by
charity; Её nor (even); Гё and; ГҹГ–ГҝГҝГҠ by ritual; вүҘГҠГ„ГҝвҖ” (am) capable of; вҲһп¬ӮВўГҒп¬ӮЕ“вҖ” endowed with
such a form; ВәЛқcвүҲГҲв—ҠЛңГ” being seen; Е’ГҺcвүҲп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” вҖўГҒвҖҡГ” you have seen; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; ГҝГ•ГҠ as.
Neither by study of the Vedas nor by penance, nor again by charity, nor even by
ritual can I be seen in this form (with four arms) as you have seen Me.          (53)
that through single-minded devotion He can
be seen in His four-armed divine form, known
in essence and even entered into. Thus it should
be definitely understood that actions such as
the performance of sacrifices, charity and
penance, carried on in a disinterested spirit
for the sake of God and as an offering to
God, being parts of devotion, are conducive
to God-realization; and not those performed
with an interested motive. That is to say, actions
such as the performance of sacrifices, penance
etc., mentioned above cannot by themselves
lead to God-perception. God-vision is
vouchsafed only through His grace by lovingly
surrendering oneself to Him in a disinterested
spirit.
The present verse cannot be taken to
refer to the Cosmic Body inasmuch as the
same has already been glorified in almost
identical words in verse 48. Hence to interpret
the present verse also as spoken in praise of
the Cosmic Body would be exposing the
Lord to the charge of tautology. Moreover,
with regard to the Cosmic Body it has been
declared by the Lord that it could not be seen
by anyone else, other than Arjuna; whereas
In verse 27 and 28 of Chapter IX the
Lord invited Arjuna to dedicate to Him
whatever he offered as oblation to the sacred
fire, whatever he bestowed as a gift and
whatever he did by way of penance, assuring
him that he would thereby be freed from the
bonds of Karma and attain Him. Again, We
are told in XVII.25 that the seekers of liberation
perform acts of sacrifice, penance and charity
without seeking any return. This leads to the
conclusion that the performance of sacrifices,
charity, and austere penance are positively
conducive to liberation and God-realization.
In the present verse, however, the Lord says
that His four-armed divine form can be seen
neither by study of the Vedas nor by penance,
nor again by charity, nor even by ritual.
Although these statements appear as mutually
contradictory, there is really no contradiction
between them; for offering of actions to God
is a part of the practice of exclusive devotion.
While discussing the subject of exclusive
devotion in verse 55 below, the Lord Himself
speaks of the devotee as Г«MatkarmakГҰtГӯ
(performing actions for My sake); whereas in
verse 54 He proclaims in unequivocal terms

=== PAGE 560 ===

* Chapter XI *
559
He goes on to suggest the means of perceiving
the form under reference in the following
verse. Therefore, the way in which we have
interpreted the present verse is fully justified.
Having discarded the means by which He could not be perceived, the Lord now
suggests the means by which He can be directly perceived.
Г·Г„Г ГҝГҠ Г п¬ӮЕёГЈГҝГҝГҠ вүҘГҠГ„Гҝ вҖўвҖһUв—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮВўГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГҠпЈҝЛҳВЎГҲВёЕёвҖ“
ГҙГҠГҠГғГҲВў ВәЛқcвүҲГҲВўU Гё ГғГ»п¬ӮпЈҝЕё В¬Лқп¬ӮпЈҝcвүҲГҲВўU Гё В¬вҒ„UГЈГғВ¬H 54H
Г·Г„Г ГҝГҠ devotion; ГғГҲ but; вҖўЕёГЈГҝГҝГҠ through exclusive; вүҘГҠГ„ГҝвҖ” (am) capable; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; вҲһп¬ӮВўГҒп¬ӮЕ“вҖ”Г”
endowed with such a form; вҖўВЎГҲВёЕёГ” O Arjuna; ГҙГҠГҠГғГҲв—ҠЛңГ” being known; ВәЛқcвүҲГҲв—ҠЛңГ” of being (actually) seen;
Гё and; ГғГ»п¬ӮпЈҝЕё in essence; В¬Лқп¬ӮпЈҝcвүҲГҲв—ҠЛңГ” being merged into; ГёГ” and; В¬вҒ„UГЈГғВ¬ O scorcher of enemies.
Through single-minded devotion, however, I can be seen in this form (with four
arms); nay, known in essence and even merged into, O valiant Arjuna.           (54)
God? Our reply to this contention is that
the practice of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga has been
declared as a means of realizing the attributeless
Brahma or the Absolute; and this is wholly
true. But it cannot be maintained that the
practice of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga will bring one
face to face with the divine four-armed
form of God endowed with attributes. For
God is not bound to appear in an embodied
form before one who treads the path of
knowledge. Again, perception of God
with attributes is the  subject that is being
discussed in these verses. Hence it is
but reasonable to speak of single-minded
devotion as the only means of attaining God-
vision etc.
Developing exclusive love for God and
devoting once for all oneГӯs mind, senses,
body, wealth and all other worldly possessions
and even oneГӯs own dear and near ones
entirely to His service, regarding them as
belonging to Him, is what is spoken of here
as Г«single-minded devotionГӯ. It has been dealt
with at length in the following verse while
discussing the marks of devotees possessed
of such devotion.
It may be contended here that
SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga or the Path of Knowledge
too has been declared elsewhere as leading
to God-realization. How, then, can it be
said that exclusive devotion is the only means
of perceiving, knowing and entering into
Perception and Knowledge of, and absorption into, God, having been declared as
easily attainable through single-minded devotion, one is naturally inclined to ask: What is
single-minded devotion? Anticipating this question the Lord now proceeds to discuss the
marks of one who is possessed of such devotion.
в—ҠГ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГЈв—ҠГ В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠпЈҝ в—ҠjQВ§вҖ” вҖҡXГ”Uп¬ӮГҢВЎГғвҖ”вҖ“
ГҒЕёп¬ӮГ’ВёвҒ„UвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ ГҝвҖ” вҖҡ в—ҠГҠв—ҠпЈҝГҒГғ В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬ӮH 55H
в—ҠГ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғЛңГ” given to performing all his duties only for My sake; в—ҠГ В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠвҖ” (is) dependent on
Me; в—ҠЕ’ЛңГ”Г·QВ§вҖ”Г” (is) devoted to Me; вҖҡXГ”Uп¬ӮГҢВЎГғвҖ” (is) free from attachment; ГҒЕёп¬ӮГ’ВёвҒ„UвҖ” (is) free from
malice; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ towards all beings; ГҝвҖ” who; вҖҡвҖ” he (the man possessed of exclusive devotion);
в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; вҲһГҒГғ reaches. В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬Ӯ O son of PГҘЖ’Е’u, Arjuna.
Arjuna, he who performs all his duties for My sake, depends on Me, is devoted
to Me, has no attachment, and is free from malice towards all beings, reaches Me. (55)

=== PAGE 561 ===

560
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
He who has renounced all forms of
selfishness, the sense of possession and
attachment, and regarding everything as
belonging to God, and himself as a mere
instrument, carries on all his duties such as
the performance of sacrifices, charity, penance
and all bodily functions and worldly
transactions in a disinterested spirit only for
the pleasure of God and according to His
commands, is referred to here as Г«MatkarmakГҰtГӯ.
Г«MatparamaВЁГӯ is he who looks upon
God alone as his supreme refuge and highest
goal, the only object worthy of being
approached for protection, the best of all
beings, all-sustaining and all-powerful, the
universal friend, nay, his dearest and nearest
one and all-in-all, and always takes every
dispensation of God most cheerfully.
Again, a devotee of God is he who,
having developed exclusive love for Him,
remains absorbed in Him, and is ever
uninterruptedly engaged in hearing, chanting
and reflecting on His name, form, virtues,
glory and stories etc., and knows no peace
without these practices even for a moment,
and is ever most eagerly looking forward to
a vision of God.
The term Г«SaвҲҶgavarjitaВЁГӯ refers to one
who is entirely free from attachment for all
objects of enjoyment of this world and the
next, e.g., body, wife, children, home, wealth,
family, honour, fame and heavenly bliss etc.,
and has no love whatsoever for anything else
than God.
He who being armed with the conviction
that all living beings are but manifestation of
God, or that God alone pervades them all,
conceives no hatred for anyone even on
receiving the worst treatment from others is
referred to here as free from malice towards
all.
The pronouns Г«YaВЁГӯ and Г«SaВЁГӯ refer to
an individual possessing single-minded
devotion to God as defined in the above
verse. And attaining God here means obtaining
a vision of God with attributes, knowing
Him in essence, and entering into Him as
mentioned in the preceding verse.
Лҷ ГғГ вҖҡГҒЕ’ГҒГғ ГјГҠГӢв—ҠjВӘп¬ӮeГӢГғГҠвҖҡГҚВ¬ГҒЕёВ·Г вҖҡГҲ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГҝГҠВў
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠпЈҝ ГјГҠГӢвҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠВЎГҲВёЕёвҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’пЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮEMВ§В¬Е’вүҘГҠВёЕёГ”ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ
ЕёГҠв—ҠГ’вҲ‘В§ГҠЕ’вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГӨГҝГҠГҝвҖ”H 11H
Thus, in the UpaniВ¶ad sung by the Lord, the science of Brahma,
the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and
Arjuna, ends the eleventh chapter entitled Г¬The
Yoga of Vision of the Cosmic BodyГ®.
U

=== PAGE 562 ===

* Chapter XII *
561
Title of the
Chapter
Summary of
the Chapter
Link of the
Discourse
Лҷ
вҖәrвҲӮmadbhagavad-GвҲӮtГҘ
Chapter XII
The twelfth chapter of the GвҲӮtГҘ deals with Devotion to God along with various forms
of spiritual discipline and discusses the marks of devotees. It begins and ends
with devotion. Only three verses of this chapter are devoted to a discussion
of the discipline of Knowledge, and that too as a part of the discussion on
devotion. That is why this chapter has been given the title of Г¬The Yoga of DevotionГ®.
The chapter opens with a question from Arjuna as to which of the two is superiorГі
the worshipper of God with form and attributes or the worshipper of the formless and
attributeless Brahma. Verse 2 contains the LordГӯs reply to above question,
declaring the worshipper of God with form and attributes as superior. The
third and fourth describe the characteristics of the formless and attributeless
Brahma and declare that worship of the Absolute also leads to the realization of God; while
verse 5 shows that worship of the Unmanifest is difficult for one who is centred in the body.
The sixth and seventh contain the assurance of the Lord that He personally comes to the
rescue of the devotee who, surrendering all actions to Him, constantly and exclusively thinks
of Him. In verse 8 The Lord commands Arjuna to surrender his mind and intellect to Him,
assuring him that he will thereby realize Him. Thereafter, from the ninth to the eleventh, He
successively exhorts Arjuna to practise concentration of mind, or, in the event of his failure
to surrender his mind and intellect, to work for His sake, or to relinquish the fruit of all
actions if he finds himself unable to work for His sake. Verse 12 declares renunciation of
the fruit of action as the best form of discipline and as immediately leading to the attainment
of lasting peace. Thereafter, from the thirteenth to the nineteenth the Lord discusses the
marks of His beloved, enlightened and saintly devotees; whereas in the last or twentieth
verse He declares those SГҘdhakas as extremely dear to Him, who hold such enlightened
devotees as their model and reverently follow in their footsteps.
From Chapter II right up to the end of Chapter XI the Lord glorifies at various places
the worship of God with form and attributes. Chapters VII to XI, among others, specially
bring out the glory and importance of such worship. Side by side with this,
verses 17 to 26 of Chapter V, verses 24 to 29 of Chapter VI, verses 11 to 13
of Chapter VIII and many other verses besides these show the importance of
the worship of the formless and attributeless Brahma. Finally, declaring God-realization as
the reward of exclusive devotion to God with form and attributes towards the end of Chapter
XI, the Lord paid a special tribute in the concluding verse of that chapter to him who is
devoted to such a God. This raised the question in ArjunaГӯs mind as to which of the two
is betterГіthe worshipper of the formless and attributeless Brahma, or the worshipper of
God with form and attributes. Accordingly Arjuna put the following question to the Lord:

=== PAGE 563 ===

562
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The words Г«AvyaktamГӯ, qualified by
the adjective Г«AkВ¶aramГӯ, evidently stands here
for the formless and attributeless Brahma,
who is Truth, Knowledge and Bliss solidified.
Even though the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ or the individual
soul can also be referred to as Г«AkВ¶araГӯ and
Г«AvyaktaГӯ such an interpretation of these
terms is not intended by Arjuna; for the
worshipper of the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ cannot possibly
be superior to the worshipper of God with
attributes, and nowhere in the foregoing verses
does the Lord prescribe the worship of the
individual soul.
Although the worshippers of both the
qualified and absolute aspects of God are
noble and praiseworthy in the eyes of Arjuna,
he is anxious to know the relative worth and
excellence of the two types of worshippers.
This is what he seeks to elicit from the Lord
through the above question.
The indeclinable Г«EvamГӯ refers to the
process of single-minded devotion described
in verse 55 of the preceding chapter.
The personal pronoun Г«TvГҘmГӯ, though
obviously referring in this verse to BhagavГҘn
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, should be interpreted in a wider
sense as covering the various embodied forms
assumed by God during His various descents
on earth, as well as the form in which He
ever resides in His divine abode, and which
people represent in various forms and call by
various names according to their own
respective persuasion and belief; for all those
forms are identical with BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a.
Constantly meditating on such a personal
God and devoting all oneГӯs senses to His
service with supreme faith and love and in a
disinterested spirit, this is what is meant by
adoring Him as supreme Reality while
remaining constantly engaged in His thought.
вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
вҲһп¬ӮВў вҖҡГғГғГҝГҲQВ§ГҠ ГҝпЈҝ Г·QВ§ГҠSГ п¬ӮГҠВў В¬ГҝВёГҲВ¬ГҠвҖҡГғпЈҝвҖ“
ГҝпЈҝ ГёГҠГҘГҝЛҮГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠвҲҡГҝQВўВ§ ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠВў вҲ‘пЈҝВ§ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҒп¬ӮГ»ГҠв—ҠГҠвҖ”H 1H
вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” in the aforesaid manner; вҖҡГғГғГҝГҲQВ§ГҠвҖ” constantly engaged (in adoring and meditating
on You); ГҝпЈҝ who; Г·QВ§ГҠвҖ” loving devotees; Г п¬ӮГҠв—ҠЛңГ” You (i.e., God with attributes); В¬ГҝГҲВёВ¬ГҠвҖҡГғпЈҝ worship
(as the supreme Reality); ГҝпЈҝ who; Гё and; вҖўГҒВ¬ alone; вҖўЛҮГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” вҖўвҲҡГҝQВ§в—ҠЛңГ” the indestructible
Unmanifest Brahma (who is Truth, Knowledge and Bliss solidified); ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of both these
(types of worshippers); вҲ‘пЈҝВ§ who (are); ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҒп¬ӮГ»ГҠв—ҠГҠвҖ” the best knowers of Yoga.
Arjuna said: The devotees exclusively and constantly devoted to You as stated
just earlier, adore You as possessed of form and attributes, and those who adore as
the supreme Reality only, the indestructible unmanifest Brahma, (who is Truth,
Knowledge and Bliss solidified)Гіof these two types of worshippers who are the best
knowers of Yoga?                                                                          (1)
In reply to the above question of Arjuna, the Lord gives His verdict in favour of the
worshippers of God with form and attributes.
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲUп¬ӮГҠГё
в—ҠЖ’ГҝГҠп¬ӮпЈҝвүҘГҝ в—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝ ГҝпЈҝ в—ҠГҠВў ГҒЕёГ ГҝГҝГҲQВ§ГҠ В©UВ¬ГҠвҖҡГғпЈҝвҖ“
ГјГҠhГҝГҠ В¬вҒ„UГҝГҠпЈҝВ¬пЈҝГғГҠSГғпЈҝ в—ҠпЈҝ ГҝГҲQВ§Гғв—ҠГҠ в—ҠГғГҠвҖ”H 2H

=== PAGE 564 ===

* Chapter XII *
563
в—ҠГҒГҝ on Me; вҖўГҠп¬ӮпЈҝвүҘГҝ focussing; в—ҠЕёвҖ” the mind; ГҝпЈҝГ” who; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me, (i.e., God with attributes);
ГҒЕёГ ГҝГҝГҲQВ§ГҠвҖ” constantly engaged (in adoring and meditating on Me); В©UВ¬ГҠвҖҡГғпЈҝ worship; ГјГҠhГҝГҠ В¬вҒ„UГҝГҠ
with supreme faith; В©UВ¬пЈҝГғГҠвҖ” endowed; ГғпЈҝ they; в—ҠпЈҝ by Me; ГҝГҲQВ§Гғв—ҠГҠвҖ” the best of all YogвҲӮs; в—ҠГғГҠвҖ” are
considered.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: I consider them to be the best YogвҲӮs, who endowed with
supreme faith, and ever united through steadfast devotion to Me, worship Me with
their mind centred on Me.                                                                      (2)
evident, the existence of God, His various
descents, His utterances, power, virtues, glory,
sports and greatness etc., is what is known as
supreme faith; and he who cultivates absolute
dependence on God like the great devotee
PrahlГҘda is said to be Г«endowed with supreme
faithГӯ.
The adjective Г«YuktatamГҘhГӯ is a synonym
of the word Г«YogavittamГҘВЁГӯ (knowers of
Yoga) used in the preceding verse.
Like the celebrated cowherd damsels of
Vraja, a devotee has his mind absorbed in
God almighty, who is the supreme object of
love, the inner controller of all and the
repository of all virtues, and is ever engaged
in loving meditation on His virtues, glory
and essence even while attending to his daily
round of activities.* This is what is meant by
the first half of this verse.
Accepting with reverence, as more than
The verdict of the Lord contained in the foregoing verse in favour of the worshippers
of God with form and attributes raises the question whether the worshippers of the formless
and attributeless Brahma are not the best knowers of Yoga. The question is answered in the
next two verses.
ГҝпЈҝ 
Г п¬ӮЛҮГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠГҒЕёЕ’пЈҝВёвүҘГҝв—ҠвҲҡГҝQВўВ§ 
В¬ГҝГҲВёВ¬ГҠвҖҡГғпЈҝвҖ“
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠВӘв—ҠГҒГёГЈГ ГҝВў Гё вҲ‘ГҚВ§вүҲUSГ•в—ҠГёвҲӮВўU Е“ЛқГҲп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ”H 3H
вҖҡГҒГӣГҠГҝГӘГҝпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝВӘЛқГҠв—ҠВў 
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠ 
вҖҡв—ҠвҖҷГҲhГҝвҖ”вҖ“
ГғпЈҝ В¬ЛқГҠВ¬AГҲп¬ӮГҒГЈГғ в—ҠГҠв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҒвҖһUГғпЈҝ вҒ„UГғГҠвҖ”H 4H
ГҝпЈҝ who; ГғГҲ however; вҖўЛҮГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” the indestructible (Brahma); вҖўГҒЕёЕ’пЈҝВёвүҘГҝв—ҠЛңГ” indefinable; вҖўвҲҡГҝQВ§в—ҠЛңГ”
unmanifest; В¬ГҝВёГҲВ¬ГҠвҖҡГғпЈҝГ” constantly adore (as their very self); вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠВӘв—ҠЛңГ” Omnipresent; вҖўГҒГёГЈГ Гҝв—ҠЛңГ”
beyond the grasp of mind and intellect; Гё and; вҲ‘ГҚВ§вүҲUSГ•в—ҠЛңГ” changeless; вҖўГёвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” immovable; Е“ЛқГҲп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ”
constant; вҖҡГҒГӣГҠГҝГӘГҝ fully controlling; ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝВӘЛқГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” the aggregate of their senses; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠ towards all;
вҖҡв—ҠвҖҷГҲhГҝвҖ” even-minded; ГғпЈҝ they; В¬ЛқГҠВ¬AГҲп¬ӮГҒГЈГғ attain; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; вҲһп¬ӮГ” alone; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҒвҖһUГғпЈҝ to the welfare of
all beings; вҒ„UГғГҠвҖ”Г” devoted.
*
ГҝГҠ 
Е’ГҠпЈҝвҖһUЕёпЈҝЛҳп¬ӮвҖһUЕёЕёпЈҝ 
в—ҠГ•ЕёГҠпЈҝВ¬вҲӮпЈҝUВ¬В¬ЛқпЈҝWпЈҝWЕёГҠГ·ВёLВ§ГҒЕ’ГғГҠпЈҝЛҮГҠГЎГҠв—ҠГҠВЎВёЕёГҠЕ’ГҠГ’вҖ“
ВӘГҠГҝГҒГЈГғ ГёГ’Еёв—ҠЕёГҲвҒ„UQВ§ГҒЕ“ГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГјГҠГҲвҲ‘В§ГЎвҲҶЛңUГ”ГҝГҠпЈҝ Е“ГЈГҝГҠ п¬ӮЛқВЎГҒSГІГҠГҝ В©ULВ§вҲ‘ЛқВ§в—ҠГҒГёГ»ГҠГҝГҠЕёГҠвҖ”H
(вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata X.44.15)
Г¬Blessed are the GopвҲӮs of Vraja, who have their mind absorbed in the thought of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and
sing His glories with a heart full of love, eyes bedewed with tears and a voice choked with emotion even
while milking their cows, pounding the corn for removing the husk, churning the curds, plastering the
courtyard with cow-dung, swinging infants in the cradle, lulling their crying children to sleep, sprinkling
water on the floors and sweeping them, and doing everything else.Г®

=== PAGE 565 ===

564
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
That which is all-pervading like
etherГіfills every atom of spaceГіis called
Г«SarvatragaГӯ.
Г«AnirdeвҖ№yaГӯ is that which cannot be
defined, which cannot be represented or
indicated by any device or illustration.
That which never undergoes change
under any circumstance whatsoever, and ever
remains in the same state of existence, is
called Г«KВөuВўasthaГӯ.
That which is eternal and certain, whose
existence is free from doubt and which never
ceases to be, is called Г«DhruvaГӯ.
Г«AcalaГӯ signifies that which is incapable
of motion and vibration both.
Г«AvyaktaГӯ means that which is beyond
the grasp of, or imperceptible by, the senses,
and which is devoid of any shape or form.
Г«AkВ¶araГӯ is that which can never and on
no account be destroyed.
All these attributes are characteristics of
the absolute, formless Brahma. And the best
way to worship Brahma is to realize Its true
character as pointed out above and constantly
meditate on it as oneГӯs own Self.
Even as a man lacking true wisdom is
devoted to his own welfare, worshippers of
the Absolute, identified as they are with all
beings, are equally devoted to the good of all
creatures. This is what is meant by the adjectival
phrase Г«SarvabhВөutahite RatГҘВЁГӯ.
Similarly, 
the 
phrase 
Г«Sarvatra
SamabuddhayaВЁГӯ indicates that those who
worship the absolute, formless Brahma in the
aforesaid manner lose all sense of distinction
between one self and another. Seeing no
reality apart from Brahma in the whole
universe, they naturally become even-minded
towards all.
The assurance contained in the present
verse, viz., that the worshippers of the absolute
also come to the Lord, proclaims His identity
with the absolute. The intention is to show
that in reality the one supreme Brahma or
God alone has been represented in different
forms for being worshipped by different
individuals according to their respective
qualifications. Of these, the transcendent and
inconceivable absolute aspect of God, which
is beyond the reach of mind and speech, is
in fact one whereas the SaguЖ’a or relative
aspect of God is twofold in character viz.,
(i) possessed of form and (ii) devoid of form.
That which pervades the whole universe and
is the support of all, and which by its
inconceivable power sustains and nourishes
all, is the unmanifest or formless qualified
aspect of God, вҖәrвҲӮ вҖәiva, вҖәrвҲӮ ViВ¶Ж’u, вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma,
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and so on are the embodied forms
of God; whereas this universe represents the
Cosmic Forms of God. Therefore, realization
of the absolute resulting from the type of
adoration mentioned above means the
attainment of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a; for the absolute is
the same as God and God is the same as the
absolute. The two are identical. The same
idea is echoed in XIV.27, where the Lord
declares Himself as the support of Brahma
(вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ ГҒвҖһU В¬ЛқГҒГғDГ”UГҠвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”).
In Chapter XI the Lord says that through
single-minded devotion one can see Him,
know Him in essence, and even enter into
Him (XI.54). This shows that while true
knowledge and realization of God are shared
with the devotee even by the worshipper of
the Absolute, God is not bound to grant the
vision of His embodied form to the latter.
The worshipper of the SaguЖ’a aspect of
God, however, obtains this vision as well.
Herein lies the superiority of the devotee.
Those, however, who fully controlling all their senses and even-minded towards
all, and devoted to the welfare of all beings, constantly adore as their very Self the
unthinkable, omnipresent, imperishable, indefinable, eternal, immovable, unmanifest
and changeless Brahma, they too come to Me.                                      (3, 4)

=== PAGE 566 ===

* Chapter XII *
565
The pronoun Г«TeВ¶ГҘmГӯ, qualified by the
adjective Г«AvyaktГҘsaktacetasГҘmГӯ, refers to the
worshippers of the absolute (who is Truth,
Knowledge and Bliss solidified) mentioned
in the preceding verse. By calling their path
as more rugged the Lord shows that the truth
relating to the Absolute is extremely difficult
to grasp. It can be understood only by those
whose intellect is unsullied, steady and
penetrating and who have no identification
with the body. It beats the comprehension of
the common man. Hence the worship of the
Absolute involves considerable strain in its
initial stages.
The latter half of the verse explains how
the worship of the Absolute involves greater
strain. The intention is to show that so long
as there is identification with the body, the
truth relating to the Absolute is most difficult
to grasp.
Here it may be contended that whereas
the present verse declares the worship of the
Unmanifest as involving greater strain, verse
2 of Chapter IX shows JВӨГҘna and VijВӨГҘna,
i.e. knowledge of the NirguЖ’a and SaguЖ’a
aspects of God as easy to attain (вҲ‘В§ГғГҲВёв—ҠЛңГ” вҖҡГҲвҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ”),
and is followed by a description of the
Unmanifest in verses 4, 5 and 6. Though
these two statements appear as mutually
contradictory, there is, as a matter of fact, no
contradiction between them. For the words
Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ and VijВӨГҘnaГӯ in Chapter IX have a
special reference to the virtues, glory and
reality of the qualified aspect of God; hence
it is the practice of surrender to God with
attributes that has been declared as Г«easy to
practiseГӯ in that context. Again, the word
Г«AvyaktaГӯ occurring in verse 4 of that Chapter
stands for the formless God with attributes.
That is why He has been spoken of as the
sustainer and nourisher of beings, all pervading
and as responsible for the creation etc., of
all beings, even though standing aloof from
all.
Again, it may be argued that after
delineating the process of worship of the
Absolute in verses 24 to 27 of Chapter VI
the Lord declares in verse 28 that the SГҘdhaka
who sedulously follows this practice easily
attains supreme bliss in the shape of God-
realization. That too should not be taken as
conflicting in any way with the statement
contained in the present verse. For the verses
mentioned above refer to the YogвҲӮ who has
been rid of all sins, in whom the impulses of
Rajas (activity) and Tamas (inertia) have been
Thus discussing the worship of the Absolute and its reward, the Lord now declares that
atonement with the Unmanifest is difficult to attain for those who are centred in the body,
and that the path leading to such atonement is also rugged.
Г„вҖ№пЈҝвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒЕ“вҲ‘В§ГғвҒ„USГғпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠвҲҡГҝQВ§ГҠвҖҡQВ§ГёпЈҝГғвҖҡГҠв—ҠЛңГ”  вҖ“
вҖўвҲҡГҝQВ§ГҠ ГҒвҖһU ВӘГҒГғЕ’ГҲВёвҖ”ПҖВў Е’пЈҝвҖһUп¬ӮГҒjвҒ„Uп¬ӮГҠГҘГҝГғпЈҝH 5H
Г„вҖ№пЈҝвүҘГҠвҖ” the strain; вҖўГҒЕ“вҲ‘В§ГғвҒ„UвҖ” (is) greater; ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” вҖўвҲҡГҝQВ§ГҠвҖҡQВ§ГёпЈҝГғвҖҡГҠв—ҠЛңГ” for those aforesaid persons
who have their mind attached to the Unmanifest; вҖўвҲҡГҝQВ§ГҠ oneness; ГҒвҖһU because; ВӘГҒГғвҖ” with the
Unmanifest (Absolute); Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖв—ҠЛңГ” with difficulty; Е’пЈҝвҖһUп¬ӮГҒjвҖ” by those centred in the body; вҖўп¬ӮГҠГҘГҝГғпЈҝГ”
is attained.
Of course, the strain is greater for those who have their mind attached to the
Unmanifest, for oneness with the Unmanifest (Absolute) is attained with difficulty by
those who are centred in the body (the embodied).                                                      (5)

=== PAGE 567 ===

566
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
stilled, and who stands identified with Brahma,
and not to those who are centred in the body.
Hence it is but reasonable to say that realization
of Brahma comes to them easily and as a
matter of course.
Here it may be asked: Do the worshippers
of the Absolute alone have to undergo
considerable strain in course of their practice,
and not the worshippers of God with attributes?
Our reply is: No, the worshippers of God with
attributes have not to undergo much strain.
For, in the first place, the worship of God with
attributes is easy to practise. Secondly, the
worshipper of God with attributes depends
exclusively on God and is constantly engaged
in His thought; hence God Himself helps him
in every way. Why, then, should he undergo
any strain in course of his practice?
Thus declaring God-realization through the worship of the attributeless and formless
Brahma as difficult to attain for those centred in the body, the Lord now shows in the
following two verses that He is speedily and easily attained through worship of His qualified
aspect.
ГҝпЈҝ ГғГҲ вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ в—ҠГҒГҝ вҖҡГӣГҝSГҝ в—ҠГ В¬вҒ„UГҠвҖ”вҖ“
вҖўЕёГЈГҝпЈҝЕёГ’п¬Ӯ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝЕё в—ҠГҠВў ГӨГҝГҠГҝГЈГғ В©UВ¬ГҠвҖҡГғпЈҝH 6H
ГҝпЈҝ who; ГғГҲ on the other hand; вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ all actions; в—ҠГҒГҝ to Me; вҖҡГӣГҝSГҝ surrendering;
в—ҠГ В¬вҒ„UГҠвҖ” depending on Me; вҖўЕёГЈГҝпЈҝЕё with single-minded; вҲһп¬ӮГ” alone; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝЕёГ” devotion; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me (God
with attributes); ГӨГҝГҠГҝГЈГғвҖ”Г” (constantly) meditating on Me; В©UВ¬ГҠвҖҡГғпЈҝГ” worship.
On the other hand, those depending exclusively on Me, and surrendering all
actions to Me, worship Me (God with attributes), constantly meditating on Me with
single-minded devotion,                                                                    (6)
does he conceive any attachment for them
and is altogether unconcerned about their
fruit. All his activities conform to the canons
of the scriptures and are governed by the
idea that he is a mere instrument, utterly
incapable of doing anything, and that it is
God who is getting everything done by him
according to His own will.
Г«Single-minded 
devotionГӯ 
means
exclusive and disinterested love, combined
with utmost reverence for God. He who
cultivates this love recognizes no one else
other than God as his own and feels that He
is everything to him. Again, such a love is
wholly untainted by selfishness, egoism and
inconstancy; it is consummate in every respect
and unshakable. It is wholly undivided and
is so intense that it makes it impossible for
the lover to forget the Beloved even for a
The indeclinable Г«TuГӯ is intended to
distinguish the worshippers of God with
attributes from the worshippers of the Absolute.
Those who depend on God remain
undaunted and unperturbed like the great
devotee PrahlГҘda even when faced with trials
and tribulations of various kinds. Nay, they
take those sorrows and sufferings not  only
as a boon from God but as something agreeable,
and surrender themselves to God, knowing
Him to be the supreme lover, the highest
goal, the greatest friend and worth resorting
to in every way. All this is conveyed by the
adjectival compound Г«MatparГҘВЁГӯ.
Again, he who surrenders all actions to
God performs all his duties according to His
directions and hints as a mere puppet, denying
himself freedom of action, he neither
acknowledges those actions as his own nor

=== PAGE 568 ===

* Chapter XII *
567
moment. And worshipping God through such
devotion is to listen to and sing His virtues,
glory and stories, and loudly chant or mutter
His names.
ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠвҖһВўU 
вҖҡв—ҠГҲhГғГҠВё 
в—ҠГҺГ ГҝГҲвҖҡВўвҖҡГҠвҒ„UвҖҡГҠВӘвҒ„UГҠГғЛңГ”вҖ“
Г·п¬ӮГҠГҒв—Ҡ ЕёГҒГёвҒ„UГҠГ В¬ГҠГ•Вё в—ҠЖ’ГҝГҠп¬ӮпЈҝГҒвүҘГҠГғГёпЈҝГғвҖҡГҠв—ҠЛңГ”H 7H
ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of those persons; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; вҖҡв—ҠГҲhГғГҠВё deliverer; в—ҠГҺГ ГҝГҲвҖҡВўвҖҡГҠвҒ„UвҖҡГҠВӘвҒ„UГҠГғЛң from the ocean of worldly
existence, which is synonymous with mortality; Г·п¬ӮГҠГҒв—Ҡ I become; ЕёГҒГёвҒ„UГҠГғЛңГ” without delay, speedily;
В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthГҘ (KuntвҲӮ), Arjuna; в—ҠГҒГҝ on Me; вҖўГҠп¬ӮпЈҝГҒвүҘГҠГғГёпЈҝГғвҖҡГҠв—ҠЛңГ” having their mind fixed.
These, Arjuna, I speedily deliver from the ocean of birth and death, their mind
being fixed on Me.                                                                          (7)
undergo birth and death so long as he does
not realize God. That is why this world has
been compared to an ocean.
God speedily exempts from birth and
death once for all, and brings face to face
with Himself in this very life, those devotees
who constantly worship Him with their mind
and intellect fixed on Him, as stated above;
or He takes them after death to His supreme
abode. Nay, even as a boatman takes one in
his boat across a river, so does God warding
off all difficulties and dangers confronting
the devotee, takes him across the terrible
ocean of worldly existence to His own supreme
abode. This is what is meant by his delivering
the devotee from the ocean of birth and
death.
The demonstrative pronoun Г«TeВ¶ГҘmГӯ,
qualified by the adjectival phrase Г«Mayi
Г…veвҖ№itacetasГҘmГӯ refers to the loving devotees
worshipping God with attributes and spoken
of in the preceding verse as having their
mind and intellect merged once for all in
God.
Everything in this world is embraced by
death. With the exception of God nothing
which makes its appearance in the universe
is ever immune, even for a moment, from
the buffets of death. And even as countless
waves continue to rise and fall on the surface
of the ocean, so do births and deaths constantly
take place in this world. It may be possible to
count the waves of the ocean, but there is no
knowing how many times a soul will have to
Thus showing in the above verses that worship of God with attributes is easier to
practise than that of the Absolute, the Lord now commands Arjuna to take to the former,
fixing his mind and intellect on God as indicated above.
в—ҠЖ’ГҝпЈҝп¬Ӯ в—ҠЕё вҖўГҠЕ“Г Sп¬Ӯ в—ҠГҒГҝ вҖҷГҲГҒhВў ГҒЕёп¬ӮпЈҝвүҘГҠГҝвҖ“
ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҒвҖҡcГҝГҒвҖҡ в—ҠЖ’ГҝпЈҝп¬Ӯ вҖўГғ в„ўВ§ГӨп¬ӮZ Её вҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝвҖ”H 8H
в—ҠГҒГҝ on Me; вҲһп¬Ӯ only; в—ҠЕёвҖ” the mind; вҖўГҠЕ“Г Sп¬Ӯ fix; в—ҠГҒГҝ (and) in Me; вҖҷГҲГҒhв—ҠЛңГ” (your) intellect;
ГҒЕёп¬ӮпЈҝвүҘГҠГҝ establish; ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҒвҖҡcГҝГҒвҖҡ you shall abide; в—ҠГҒГҝГ” in Me; вҲһп¬Ӯ only; вҖўГғвҖ” в„ўВ§ГӨп¬ӮВёв—ҠЛңГ” thereafter; Её (there
is) not; вҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝвҖ” doubt.
Therefore, fix your mind on Me, and establish your intellect in Me alone;
thereafter you will abide solely in Me. There is no doubt about it.                  (8)
enshrined in the heart of all. He is an ocean
of 
countless 
virtues 
like 
compassion
Pervading the whole universe consisting
of animate and inanimate beings, God is

=== PAGE 569 ===

568
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
omniscience, amiability and cordiality etc.
Nay, He is supreme, transcendent and
omnipotent, all love and joy, the best of all
beings and worth resorting to. He who, having
thoroughly grasped the truth and mystery of
His virtues, glory and sports, is ever unshaken
in his conclusions is said to have established
his intellect in God. And he who, having
wholly withdrawn his attachment from
everything else than his most beloved
PuruВ¶ottama or God, merges his mind in
Him alone and remains constantly engaged
in His thought in the aforesaid manner, is
said to have fixed his mind on God.
He who is thus able to fix his mind and
intellect on God speedily attains Him.
Although this is a fact, very few people
actually fix their mind and intellect on God.
The reason is not far to seek. Being ignorant
of the truth and mystery of GodГӯs virtues
etc., people have no love and reverence for
Him; and since their attachment, which is
rooted in ignorance, is still there, worldly
enjoyments continue to absorb their thought.
Such is the condition of most of the people
in this world. That is why the generality of
men do not as a rule fix their mind and
intellect on God.
This attachment, which has its root in
ignorance and is responsible for our evil
habit of dwelling on worldy enjoyments,
can, however, be got rid of through knowledge
of the truth and mystery of the divine virtues,
glory and sports. And this knowledge may
be gained through the association of exalted
souls who are aware of the truth and secret
of GodГӯs virtues etc., by emulating their
virtues and example, and by diligently following
the path chalked out by them, giving up
enjoyments, lethargy and error.
At this point it may be asked: If a man fails to fix his mind and intellect on God as
suggested above, what should he do? Anticipating this question, the Lord says:
вҖўГ• ГҒГёГ»ГҠВў вҖҡв—ҠГҠЕ“ГҠГғГҲВў Её вүҘГҠвҲ‘AВ§ГҠпЈҝГҒВ· в—ҠГҒГҝ ГҒSГ•вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖўГЁГҝГҠвҖҡГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝЕё ГғГғГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠГҒв—ҠГ«ВҝUГҠ#ГҲВў Е“ЕёTГҝH 9H
вҖўГ• in case; ГҒГёГ»ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the mind; вҖҡв—ҠГҠЕ“ГҠГғГҲв—ҠЛңГ” to fix; Её вүҘГҠвҲ‘AВ§ГҠпЈҝГҒВ· you cannot; в—ҠГҒГҝ on Me;
ГҒSГ•вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” steadily; вҖўГЁГҝГҠвҖҡГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝЕёГ” through the Yoga of repeated practice; ГғГғвҖ” then; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; ГҹГ«ВҝU seek;
вҖўГҠ#ГҲв—ҠЛңГ” to attain; Е“ЕёTГҝГ” O Arjuna (lit., conqueror of riches).
If you cannot steadily fix the mind on Me, Arjuna, then seek to attain Me through
the Yoga of repeated practice.                                                              (9)
Г«AbhyГҘsayogaГӯ means repeatedly striving
through various devices, to fix the mind  on
God with a view to His realization. Thus
endeavouring again and again, for the sake
of God-realization, to fix the mind on any
name, form, virtue and sport, etc. of God
which attracts him, and for which he has got
some reverence, is what is meant by seeking
to attain God through the Yoga of repeated
practice.
Practices of various kinds have been
The teaching of the GвҲӮtГҘ, though
immediately directed towards Arjuna, is
intended for the benefit of the whole world.
The temperament of all SГҘdhakas in the world
is not uniform; that is why the same mode of
spiritual practice cannot suit all. Only different
types of spiritual discipline suit different
temperaments. Hence the Lord suggests a
different course of discipline for those who
find themselves unable to fix their mind and
intellect on God.

=== PAGE 570 ===

* Chapter XII *
569
recommended in the вҖәГҘstras for focussing the
mind on God. Of them the following few
devices appear particularly suited to the bulk
of the SГҘdhakas:Гі
(1) It is a matter of common experience
that, when we close our eyes in front of the
sun, we see through our mental eye a mass
of splendour uniformly extending all around
us. Concluding with the mind that the mass
of effulgence constituting the Godhead is
thousands of times brighter than the above
light, attempt should be made again and
again to fix oneГӯs mind on that shining, all-
effulgent form of God.
(2) Knowing God Almighty to be present
everywhere, even as fire is ever present in a
match, and the sole object of love, He should
be lovingly conceived with all His virtues
and glory wherever the mind goes. Such a
practice brings the devotee face to face with
the all-pervasive God even as friction reveals
the fire hidden in a match.
(3) Withdrawing the mind from the object
it runs after, try to fix it again and again with
reverence and love on a mental or material
image (made of clay, stone or wood), or a
picture of your chosen Deity, be it BhagavГҘn
ViВ¶Ж’u, вҖәiva, RГҘma or KГҰВ¶Ж’a, or on the Japa
of His sacred names.
(4) Repeating the sacred syllable OM
without pause in imitation of the humming of
the bee, contemplate on God, again and
again, in that sound.
(5) Practise constant Japa of the Divine
Name in rhythm with every natural flow of
the ingoing and outgoing breath.
(6) Diligently pursue the study of sacred
books with a view to grasping the secret of
GodГӯs name, form, virtue, sports and glory.
(7) Practise PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma or control of
breath as described in IV.29.
If any of these practices is pursued
with reverence, faith and devotion, it will
gradually eradicate all sins, remove all obstacles
and finally bring the SГҘdhaka face to face
with God. Therefore, the practice should be
continued with exemplary zeal and diligence.
Of course, the fruition of his efforts may
be speeded up or delayed according to the
spiritual level and qualification of the SГҘdhaka
and the progress made by him on the path
of SГҘdhana. Therefore, if the realization
of the fruit is delayed, the SГҘdhaka should
neither give up nor slacken the practice,
regarding it as difficult, or due to ennui or
sloth.
It may be asked here : If a SГҘdhaka is unable to follow the Yoga of repeated practice,
what should he do? Anticipating this question, the Lord says:
вҖўГЁГҝГҠвҖҡпЈҝЛҳГҘГҝвҖҡв—ҠГ•ГҠпЈҝВёЛҳГҒвҖҡ в—ҠГ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠпЈҝ Г·п¬ӮГ”вҖ“
в—ҠЕ’Г•Вёв—ҠГҒВ¬ вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ вҲ‘ГҲВ§п¬ӮВёГҒГЈвҖҡГҒhв—Ҡп¬ӮГҠГҘSГҝГҒвҖҡH 10H
вҖўГЁГҝГҠвҖҡпЈҝ to (the pursuit of) such practice; вҖўГҒВ¬Г” even; вҖўвҖҡв—ҠГ•ВёвҖ” unequal; вҖўГҒвҖҡ (if) you are;
в—ҠГ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ¬вҒ„Uв—ҠвҖ” intent on performing actions for Me; Г·п¬Ӯ be; в—ҠЕ’Г•Вёв—ҠЛңГ” for My sake; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ
actions; вҲ‘ГҲВ§п¬ӮВёЕёЛңГ” performing; ГҒвҖҡГҒhв—ҠЛңГ” perfection (in the shape of My Realization); вҖўп¬ӮГҠГҘSГҝГҒвҖҡ you
shall attain.
If You are unequal even to the pursuit of such practice, be intent to work for Me;
you shall attain perfection (in the form of My realization) even by performing actions
for My sake.                                                                               (10)

=== PAGE 571 ===

570
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Although, as a matter of fact, it was in
no way difficult for Arjuna to fix his mind on
God, or realize Him through the Yoga of
repeated practice as stated above, the Lord
asks him not to despair even if he found
himself unequal to the task, and suggests a
third alternative. For, as already pointed out
above, different types of practices are suited
to different individuals due to difference in
temperament. This is what is meant by the
first half of this verse.
The compound word Г«MatkarmaГӯ denotes
those actions which are performed only for
the sake of God or are connected with His
service or adoration, nay, in which the SГҘdhaka
has no trace of self-interest and for which he
appropriates no credit to himself nor conceives
any attachment whatsoever. The word has
already appeared in the concluding verse of
Chapter XI, and has been duly explained.
He who recognizes God and God alone
as his supreme refuge and highest goal and
goes on constantly performing through mind,
speech and body actions enjoined by the
scriptures, such as sacrifices, charity and
penance, with utmost reverence and love
only for the pleasure of God and as a matter
of duty is said to be Г«intent on work for
God.Гӯ
By the second half of this verse the
Lord indicates that even actions performed
for His sake constitute an independent and
easy means to His Realization. God can be
attained even by those who work for Him, in
the same way as by those who adore and
meditate on Him. Therefore, performing
actions for His sake is in no way inferior to
the other practices mentioned above.
Here one may ask: If the SГҘdhaka finds himself unable even to perform action for
GodГӯs sake as stated above, what should he do? Anticipating this question, the Lord says:
вҖўГ•Г’ГғЕ’ГҘГҝвүҘГҠQВ§ГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒвҖҡ вҲ‘В§ГғZГҲ в—ҠlГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠГҠГҒГјГҠГғвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ»В§вҲӮUГ ГҝГҠВӘВў ГғГғвҖ” вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ ГҝГғГҠГ в—Ҡп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ”H 11H
вҖўГ• if; вҲһГғГғЛңГ” this; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; вҖўвүҘГҠQВ§вҖ” unable; вҖўГҒвҖҡ you are; вҲ‘В§ГғГҲВёв—ҠЛңГ” to do; в—ҠlГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ” the Yoga of
My realization; вҖўГҠГҒГјГҠГғвҖ” devoted to; вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ»В§вҲӮUГ ГҝГҠВӘв—ҠЛңГ” renunciation of the fruit of all actions; ГғГғвҖ”
then; вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ take recourse to; ГҝГғГҠГ в—Ҡп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” having subdued (your) mind and intellect etc.
If, taking recourse to the Yoga of My realization, you are unable even to do this,
then, subduing your mind and intellect etc., relinquish the fruit of all actions.    (11)
acquired control over his mind, intellect, senses
and body. The mind and senses etc., unless
they are brought under control, forcibly drag
one into the mire of enjoyments; and caught
in the mire of enjoyments one cannot give up
attachment to or yearning for the fruit of all
actions in the shape of enjoyments. Therefore,
recognizing the supreme need of self-control
in renouncing the fruit of all actions the Lord
advises Arjuna to subdue his mind and senses.
One may ask here: How is it that the
In reality, it was not at all difficult for
Arjuna to tread the path of Action coupled
with Devotion; nay, it was rather easy for
him. Nevertheless, if he regarded it as actually
difficult, the Lord now suggests a fourth type
of discipline for him. This is what is sought
to be conveyed by the first half of this verse.
The world Г«Г…tmanГӯ, forming part of the
compound Г«YatГҘtmavГҘnГӯ stands for the body
including the mind, intellect and senses.
Therefore, Г«YatГҘtmavГҘnГӯ is he who has

=== PAGE 572 ===

* Chapter XII *
571
Lord does not insist on self-control as a part
of the spiritual practices enjoined in verses 6
to 10 above? The reason is not far to seek. It
will be seen that verses 6, 7 and 8 of this
chapter deal with those who practise single-
minded devotion to God. Since such loving
devotees of God have no attraction for the
enjoyments of the world, their mind and
intellect remain naturally indifferent towards
the world and centred on God. Hence there
was no occasion for insisting on their
subjugation in those verses.
Verse 9 speaks of the Yoga of repeated
practice 
or 
AbhyГҘsayoga; 
and 
since
Г«AbhyГҘsayogaГӯ covers all practices for fixing
the mind and intellect on God there was no
necessity of insisting on self-control separately
in that verse. And verse 10 speaks of the
path of Action coupled with Devotion, which
presupposes dependence on God; and all
actions of the SГҘdhaka following this path
are aslo performed only for the sake of God.
Hence it was unnecessary to ask Arjuna to
control his mind and senses etc., as a separate
discipline. The present verse, however, enjoins
the practice of Karmayoga in the shape of
renunciation of the fruit of all actions, in which
control of the mind and intellect is
indispensable. For if the mind, intellect and
senses are not kept under control while
performing all the duties of the world
appropriate to oneГӯs grade in society and stage
in life, it is very easy for the mind, intellect
and the senses to develop attachment and
craving for and the sense of possession in
respect of sense-enjoyments; and so long as
they are present total renunciation of the fruit
of actions cannot be accomplished. That is
why Arjuna has been specially warned in this
verse to subdue his mind and intellect etc.
Г¬All actionsГ® in this verse include the
performance of sacrifices, charity, austerity,
social service and all other activities approved
of by the SГҘstras and carried on for the sake
of oneГӯs livelihood or for bare maintenance
in conformity with oneГӯs grade in society and
stage in life. While duly performing these
actions, he who renounces all connection
with, attachment to, and the craving for, their
fruit in the form of enjoyments of this world
and the next is said to renounce the fruit of
all actions.
Here it should be noted that prohibited
actions, such as telling lies, practising duplicity
and committing adultery, violence and theft
etc., are not included in the Г«SarvakarmaГӯ
referred to in this verse. Attachment to
and the craving for enjoyments alone is
responsible for sinful acts of this kind, which
bring about manГӯs degradation from every
point of view. That is why the scriptures
advise actual and total renunciation of such
acts; when such actions themselves stand
prohibited, renunciation of their fruit is
altogether out of question.
It will be recalled here that the Lord, in
the first instance, called upon Arjuna to fix
his mind and intellect on Him; He next
recommended the Yoga of repeated practice;
thereafter He asked Arjuna to work for His
sake; and, finally, He exhorted him to renounce
the fruit of all actions. It will be further seen
that the Lord advises an alternative course
only in the event of ArjunaГӯs inability to
follow the one previously suggested. The
method adopted by the Lord, however, does
not imply any disparity in the fruit of the
various practices recommended by Him; for
they all bear the same fruit, viz., God-realization.
Nor is it intended to convey that the practice
suggested as an alternative is easier than the
one recommended before; for such is not
actually the case. A practice which is easy
for one may be difficult for another. On this
ground it is reasonable to suppose that the
four practices have been recommended only

=== PAGE 573 ===

572
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
to suit the varying qualifications of different
types of SГҘdhakas.
Careful analysis will reveal that the
practice enjoined in verse 8 is easy and
suitable for the SГҘdhaka in whose mental
constitution there is predominance of love for
God with attributes, and who has a natural
reverence for God, and an inborn attraction
for His virtues, glory and mysteries and the
stories of His sports.
The practice recommended in verse 9 is
easy and useful for the SГҘdhaka who has no
natural love for God but who, being endowed
with faith, seeks to concentrate his mind on
God through resolute practice.
Again, the SГҘdhaka who has reverence
for God with attributes, and a natural  attraction
for pursuits such as the performance of
sacrifices, charity and penance, and has got
faith in the worship and adoration of images
etc., of God, will find the practice suggested
in verse 10 easy and suited to his temperament.
And the SГҘdhaka who has no natural
love and reverence for God with attributes
and form, who recognizes God as only all-
pervading and formless, who has a natural
bias for worldly pursuits and works of public
good, and who because of his greater faith in
and attraction for external activities cannot
attune his mind even to the Yoga of repeated
practice recommended in verse 9, will find
the practice enjoined in the present verse
easy and suited to his nature.
Now offering all actions to God, as
mentioned in verse 6 above, performing all
actions for His sake, and renouncing the fruit
of all actionsГіall these three are different
forms of Karmayoga; and as pointed out
above, they all lead to God-realization. Hence
there is no disparity whatsoever in their fruit.
They have been differentiated only because
of the difference in the mental attitude of the
SГҘdhakas as well as in the process of their
practice. In the first two processes the sentiment
of devotion is predominant, whereas in the
third the emphasis lies on the renunciation of
the fruit of actions. Herein lies the main
difference among them. Besides this, the
SГҘdhaka who has offered all his actions to
God considers himself as a mere puppet in
His hands; he feels that he is capable of
doing nothing, that his mind, intellect, senses
and all other organs belong to God, who gets
everything done by them according to His
own will, the SГҘdhaka himself having nothing
to do with those acts or their fruit. Inspired
by such feelings, the SГҘdhaka entertains not
the least attraction or aversion for his actions
or their fruit; taking all pleasurable or painful
experiences that fall to his lot in consequence
of his PrГҘrabdha (good or evil destiny) as a
boon from God, he remains ever cheerful.
That is why, developing the feeling of oneness
towards all, he speedily succeeds in realizing
God.
He who works for GodГӯs sake does not,
like the above-mentioned SГҘdhaka, feel that
he does nothing and that it is God who gets
everything done by him. He looks upon God
as the object of highest worship, supremely
loving and the greatest friend and well-wisher,
and considers it his supreme duty to serve
Him and carry out His behests. That is
why, realizing His presence throughout the
universe, he remains engaged in performance
of sacrifices, charity and penance; earning
his livelihood and performing other duties for
the maintenance of his body in conformity
with his grade in society and stage in life,
as well as in pursuits connected with the
worship and adoration etc., of God with a
view to His service and according to His
behests as conveyed through the scriptures.
And since all his activities are carrried on
according to His behests and for the sake
of His service (XI.55), he is freed from

=== PAGE 574 ===

* Chapter XII *
573
attachment and desire for all such activities
and their fruit, and speedily attains God.
The SГҘdhaka who relinquishes the fruit
of all actions, however, neither considers
himself to be a tool in the hands of God nor
does he feel that he does everything for His
sake. He holds that manГӯs right is to work
only, but never to the fruit thereof (II.47-51),
so that his duty lies only in performing
sacrifices, charity, austerity, social service
and all other activities enjoined by the вҖәГҘstras,
such as earning oneГӯs livelihood and attending
to oneГӯs bodily needs etc., according to oneГӯs
grade in society and stage in life. That is why
he totally renounces all connection with,
attachment to and desire for the fruit of such
actions in the shape of the enjoyments of this
world and the next (XVIII.9); and being
completely rid of attraction and aversion
thereby, he quickly realizes God.
Thus, though the fruit of all the three
practices is one and the same, viz., God-
realization, the difference in the mental outlook
of the SГҘdhakas as well as in the process of
their practice accounts for three different
practices having been enunciated by the Lord.
Recommending alternative practices one after another in verses 8 to 11 in the event of
ArjunaГӯs failure to adopt the one already suggested, the Lord finally insisted on his
Г«relinquishing the fruit of all actionsГӯ. This may naturally lead one to imagine that
Г«renunciation of the fruit of actionsГӯ must be an inferior type of SГҘdhana as compared to the
other forms of spiritual discipline previously recommended. In order to remove such a doubt
from ArjunaГӯs mind, the Lord glorifies such renunciation in the next verse.
ГјГҠпЈҝГҝГҠпЈҝ ГҒвҖһU ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠГЁГҝГҠвҖҡГҠГ–ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠhKГҠЕёВў ГҒп¬ӮГҒвүҘГҠcГҝГғпЈҝГ”вҖ“
ГӨГҝГҠЕёГҠГ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ»В§вҲӮUГ ГҝГҠВӘSГ ГҝГҠВӘГҠГ«ВҝUГҠГҒГЈГғвҒ„UЕёГЈГғвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” Г”H 12H
ГјГҠпЈҝГҝвҖ” (is) better; ГҒвҖһU because; ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” knowledge; вҖўГЁГҝГҠвҖҡГҠГғЛңГ” than practice (without discernment);
ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠГғЛңГ” to knowledge; ГӨГҝГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” meditation (on God); ГҒп¬ӮГҒвүҘГҠcГҝГғпЈҝ is superior; ГӨГҝГҠЕёГҠГғЛңГ” (even) than
meditation; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ»В§вҲӮUГ ГҝГҠВӘвҖ” renunciation of the fruit of actions (is better); Г ГҝГҠВӘГҠГғЛңГ” from renunciation;
вүҘГҠГҠГҒГЈГғвҖ” (follows) peace; вҖўЕёГЈГғвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” immediately.
Knowledge is better than practice without discernment, meditation on God is
superior to knowledge, and renunciation of the fruit of actions is even superior to
meditation; for peace immediately follows from renunciation.                       (12)
there would be no sense in comparing them
with meditation, or with the renunciation of
the fruit of actions. Therefore, the word
Г«AbhyГҘsaГӯ here denotes effort involving
cessation of worldly activities, or in other
words, practices such as the practice of
PrГҘЖ’ГҘyГҘma or breath-control, the attempt to
achieve a particular Г…sana or Yogic posture,
the practice of mind-control, the muttering of
a sacred formula, recitation of hymns in praise
of a deity, study of the Vedas etc., habitually
carried on without discernment and involving
The word Г«AbhyГҘsaГӯ in this verse does
not stand for Г«AbhyГҘsayogaГӯ or the Yoga of
repeated practice. For, it is taken to mean the
Г«Yoga of repeated practiceГӯ undertaken with
discernment for the realization of the Absolute,
it would be meaningless to compare it with
Г«KnowledgeГӯ inasmuch as such a practice is
accompanied with knowledge. Even so, if
the word is interpreted to mean practices
undertaken for Karmayoga, or the practices
of meditation, such practices form part of
Karmayoga and meditation respectively; hence

=== PAGE 575 ===

574
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
no renunciation of desires or attachment, and
to which one naturally feels inclined under
the influence of faith, environment and inborn
disposition.  Even so, the word Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ here
does not mean the Path of Knowledge, or
Knowledge itself in the form of true realization.
For, if it is taken to mean JВӨГҘnayoga, it
cannot be divorced from meditation which is
part and parcel of that discipline; and if it is
held to be an equivalent of true Knowledge,
it is the fruit of all forms of discipline. In that
case there would be no meaning in comparing
it with mechanical practice, meditation or
renunciation of the fruit of actions, much less
in declaring meditation or even renunciation
of the fruit of actions as superior to it. The
word Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ in the present context should,
therefore, be construed to mean discriminative
knowledge or intellectual perception of a
high order, gained either through a study of
the scriptures or through association with
saints, with the help of which man is no
doubt able to distinguish the eternal from the
ephemeral, matter from the spirit, good from
evil, sin from virtue, and so on. But since his
mind is yet impure and distracted, a man
possessing such knowledge neither feels
inclined to take to any practice or discipline
nor is he able to renounce the fruit of actions
and attachment, nor being freed from all
relationship with the world he gets firmly
and unshakably established in God.
Both Г«AbhyГҘsaГӯ and Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ as interpreted
above are in their own way helpful in God-
realization. Both can lead to this consummation
if they are accompanied with faith, devotion
and the disinterested spirit. Nevertheless, when
a comparison is made between them,
knowledge proves superior to practice; for
practice without discernment cannot be so
helpful in God-realization as knowledge devoid
of practice can. In order to show this very
fact, the verse speaks of knowledge as better
than practice.
The word Г«DhyГҘnaГӯ too in this verse
does not refer to DhyГҘnayoga or the path of
Meditation. That is to say, it neither stands
for meditation on the attributeless Brahma,
practised for the sake of God-realization
according to the procedure of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga
nor for meditation on God, the repository of
all virtues, practised with faith and devotion
only for the sake of His Realization, wholly
renouncing the fruit of actions and attachment.
For both these forms of meditation involve
knowledge and renunciation of the fruit of
actions; hence comparison between either of
these two forms of meditation, on the one
hand, and knowledge or relinquishment of
the fruit of actions, on the other, is out of
question. Hence the word Г«DhyГҘnaГӯ, in the
present context, should be interpreted to mean
meditation on any of the various forms of
God, practised without discernment and with
some interested motive.
Both Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ and Г«DhyГҘnaГӯ, as interpreted
above, are in their own way helpful in God-
realization. They both lead to such
consummation when accompanied with faith,
devotion 
and 
the 
disinterested 
spirit.
Nevertheless, when a comparison is made
between them, meditation will prove superior
to knowledge; for knowledge by itself, without
meditation, cannot be so useful as meditation
practised without knowledge. When one attains
success in meditation, the impurity and
distraction of the mind gradually disappear;
but they cannot be eradicated through mere
knowledge. It is with this idea that meditation
has been declared as superior to knowledge.
Г«KarmaphalatyГҘgaГӯ is the same as
Г«SarvakarmaphalatyГҘgaГӯ referred to in verse
11 above. The type of meditation referred to
above is also helpful in God-realization; but
such realization cannot be easily attained so
long as manГӯs desire and attachment are not

=== PAGE 576 ===

* Chapter XII *
575
eradicated. 
Therefore, 
meditation 
not
accompanied with renunciation of the fruit of
actions cannot be so useful as renunciation of
the fruit of, and attachment to, all actions can
even without meditation. It should be particularly
noted in this connection that the present verse
is not intended to assess the relative value of
AbhyГҘsayoga. JВӨГҘnayoga, DhyГҘnayoga and
Karmayoga. On the other hand, it discusses
the comparative merits of mechanical practice,
knowledge and meditation as defined above;
and while pointing out the superiority of the
second to the first and of the third to the second,
it declares renunciation of the fruit of all actions
as superior to all. That is to say, even though
the practices of AbhyГҘsa, JВӨГҘna and DhyГҘna,
which involve the cessation of worldly
activities, are successively higher, and more
SГҘttvika in character, than pursuits involving
worldly activity such as the performance of
sacrifices, charity, warfare, trade and social
service etc., nevertheless oneГӯs own duty,
through humblest in character, acquires the
capacity to yield the highest result, viz., God-
realization, when performed with complete
renunciation of its fruit and attachment. What
wonder, then, that other-wordly pursuits like
AbhyГҘsa, JВӨГҘna and DhyГҘna should lead to
God-realization when carried on with that
object. Therefore, instead of drawing
comparison between the various disciplines for
God-realization, man should choose for himself
one which is suited to his temperament, and
which he may be able to adopt easily and
speedily, and devote himself to its practice with
faith and reverence.
Recommending in the above verses several practices for God-realization as so many
limbs of devotion, the Lord declared that they all lead to God-realization. This naturally
arouses in oneГӯs mind the desire to know the marks of a God-realized devotee absorbed in
divine love, and in order to satisfy such curiosity the Lord now describes in the next seven
verses the marks of enlightened devotees who have realized God.
вҖўmпЈҝCГ”UГҠ вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠВў в—ҠГ’ГІГҠвҖ” вҲ‘В§LВ§ГЎГҠ вҲһп¬Ӯ ГёГ”вҖ“
ГҒЕёв—ҠВёв—ҠГҠпЈҝ ГҒЕёвҒ„UвҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„UвҖ” вҖҡв—ҠЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖвҖҡГҲПҖвҖ” ЛҮГҠв—ҠГӢГ”H 13H
вҖҡГЈГғГҲCГ”UвҖ” вҖҡГғГғВў ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ ГҝГғГҠГ в—ҠГҠ Е’ГҺвҖҰUГҒЕёpГҝвҖ”Г”вҖ“
в—ҠЖ’ГҝГҢВ¬Гғв—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝвҖҷГҲГҒhГҝГҠпЈҝВё в—ҠjQВ§вҖ” вҖҡ в—ҠпЈҝ ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҖ”Г”H 14H
вҖўmпЈҝCГ”UГҠ (is) free from malice; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” towards all creatures; в—ҠГ’ГІГҠвҖ”Г” friendly; вҲ‘В§LВ§ГЎГҠвҖ”
compassionate; вҲһп¬Ӯ indeed; Гё and; ГҒЕёв—ҠВёв—ҠвҖ” devoid of the feeling of meum; ГҒЕёвҒ„UвҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„UвҖ” free from
egoism; вҖҡв—ҠЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖвҖҡГҲПҖвҖ” treating pleasure and pain alike; ЛҮГҠв—ҠГӢГ” forgiving by nature; вҖҡГЈГғГҲCГ”вҖ”Г” contented;
вҖҡГғГғв—ҠЛңГ” ever; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ mentally united with Me; ГҝГғГҠГ в—ҠГҠ having subdued his mind, senses and body;
Е’ГҺвҖҰUГҒЕёpГҝвҖ”Г” firm of resolve; в—ҠЖ’ГҝГҢВ¬Гғв—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝвҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” who has surrendered his mind and reason to Me; ГҝвҖ”
who; в—ҠjQВ§вҖ” My own devotee; вҖҡвҖ” that; в—ҠпЈҝ to Me; ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҖ”Г” (is) dear.
He who is free from malice towards all beings, friendly and compassionate, and
free from the feelings of Г«IГӯ and Г«mineГӯ, balanced in joy and sorrow, forgiving by
nature, ever-contented and mentally united with Me, nay, who has subdued his mind,
senses and body, has a firm resolve, and has surrendered his mind and reason to
Me,Гіthat devotee of Mine is dear to Me.                                                                             (13,14)

=== PAGE 577 ===

576
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Though directly connected with the
adjective Г«AdveВ¶ВўГҘГӯ only, the compound word
Г«SarvabhВөutГҘnГҘmГӯ in the first of the above two
verses has indirect reference to Г«MaitraВЁГӯ and
Г«KaruЖ’aВЁГӯ as well. The intention is to show
that the devotee who has realized God is not
only free from malice towards all beings, but
he is also their disinterested friend and naturally
compassionate to them all.
It may be contended here that a God-
realized soul sees unity everywhere; how,
then, can he cherish distinctive emotions like
friendliness and compassion ? Our answer to
this question is that the SГҘdhaka treading the
path of devotion cultivates from the very
beginning the virtues of Г«friendlinessГӯ and
Г«compassionГӯ in a special degree; hence they
become a part of his nature and are therefore
easily discernible in his dealings even on his
attaining perfection. Besides this, even as
God is naturally full of boundless compassion
and love etc., it is but meet and proper that
His devotee too who has attained perfection,
should possess these virtues.
The 
adjectives 
Г«NirmamaВЁГӯ 
and
NirahankГҘraВЁ, are intended to convey that
the enlightened devotee of God, inasmuch as
he entertains the same feeling towards all,
neither recognizes anyone as his own nor
identifies himself with his own body; yet he
cherishes motiveless love for all beings and
is compassionate towards all. Herein lies his
greatness. Even the devotee who is yet on
the way to God-realization can similarly show
compassion and love to all; but he cannot be
completely rid of Г«IГӯ and Г«mineГӯ.
The words Г«SukhaГӯ and Г«DuВЁkhaГӯ,
forming 
part 
of 
the 
compound
Г«SamaduВЁkhasukhaВЁГӯ do not stand here for
the feelings of Г«joyГӯ and Г«griefГӯ but for the
causes of Г«joyГӯ and Г«griefГӯ respectively. Men
who are steeped in ignorance have an
attachment for pleasure and aversion for pain;
hence pleasure excites the feeling of joy and
pain that of grief in their heart. But the
enlightened devotee, having lost all distinction
between pleasure and pain, never experiences
joy and grief under any circumstance
whatsoever. The вҖәruti also says: вҖһUВ·ВёвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ ВЎвҖһUГҠГҒГғГі
Г¬the man of wisdom wholly abandons joy and
grief.Г® (KaВўha I.ii.12). When as a result of evil
destiny some ailment appears in his body, he
will no doubt have the consciousness of
suffering in the shape of bodily pain; and when
his body is in sound health, he will have the
consciousness of happiness in the form of
absence of bodily pain. But, being free from
likes and dislikes, he has no experience of joy
and grief. Similarly, he will not experience
joy and grief even when he is brought in
contact with, or separated from, any agreeable
or disagreeable object, or faced with any
favourable or adverse circumstance. This is
what is meant by his remaining balanced in
pleasure and pain.
He who instead of seeking to punish the
wrongdoer gives him security from fear is
said to be forgiving by nature. The enlightened
devotees of God possess an infinite store of
forgiveness. Having come to realize all as so
many manifestations of God, they do not in
fact hold anyone to blame for any incident.
That is why they do not seek to punish
anyone for a wrong done to them. This is
what the Lord seeks to convey by speaking
of his devotees as Г¬forgiving by nature.Г® The
meaning of Г«forgivenessГӯ has been explained
at length in the commentary on X.4 under
the name of Г«forbearanceГӯ.
The word Г«YogвҲӮГӯ in this verse stands for
the enlightened devotee who has realized
God through the practice of devotion. Having
directly perceived God, who is an inexhaustible
and endless storehouse of supreme Bliss,
such a devotee remains ever contented. At
no time and under no circumstance does he
grumble over the lack of any worldly
possession. He has all his desires fulfilled;
therefore, no incident of the world robs him
of his contentment. This is what the Lord

=== PAGE 578 ===

* Chapter XII *
577
means by speaking of His devotee as Г«ever-
contentedГӯ.
The contentment enjoyed by worldly
minded men is momentary; discontent
reappears as soon as the object which brought
them contentment by satisfying their desire
disappears. That is why they cannot have
perpetual contentment.
The body, senses and mind of the
enlightened devotees of God are ever subject
to their control. In other words, such devotees
can never be swayed by their mind and
senses. That is why they are not liable to any
evil propensity or conduct. This is  what the
Lord means by speaking of His devotee as
Г«YatГҘtmГҘГӯ.
Г«DГҰЕ’haniвҖ№cayaВЁГӯ is he who has fully
determined the true nature of God by his
intellect, who directly feels the presence of
God everywhere, and whose intellect can
never and on no account be shaken from its
conviction with regard to God due to change
of mood, activity or painful experience etc.
As the devotee goes on constantly
meditating on God through the mind, and
determining His nature through the intellect,
his mind and intellect get merged in Him for
ever. This is what is meant by offering them
to God.
To sum up, the enlightened devotee who
cherishes motiveless and exclusive love for
God, who is unshakably established in Him
and is never disjoined from Him, whose mind
and intellect stand dedicated to Him, to whom
God is life, wealth, the vital breath and
everything else, and who is a mere puppet in
His hands, is declared by the Lord as dear to
Him.
ГҝSв—ҠГҠГӣГҠГҠпЈҝГҒmВЎГғпЈҝ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠпЈҝ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠГӣГҠГҠпЈҝГҒmВЎГғпЈҝ Гё ГҝвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҖһUВ·ГҠВёв—ҠВ·ВёГ·ГҝГҠпЈҝmпЈҝВӘГ’в—ҠГҲВёQВ§ГҠпЈҝ ГҝвҖ” вҖҡ Гё в—ҠпЈҝ ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҖ”Г”H 15H
ГҝSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” from whom; Её not; В©UГҒmВЎГғпЈҝГ” shrinks; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§вҖ” (any) creature; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠГғЛңГ” from (any) creature;
Её not; В©UГҒmВЎГғпЈҝ shrinks; Гё and; ГҝвҖ” who; вҖһUВ·ГҠВёв—ҠВ·ВёГ·ГҝГҠпЈҝmпЈҝВӘГ’вҖ” from delight, envy, fear and perturbation
etc.; в—ҠГҲQВ§вҖ” (is) free; ГҝвҖ” who; вҖҡвҖ” he; Гё and; в—ҠпЈҝ to Me; ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҖ” (is) dear.
He who is not a source of annoyance to his fellow-creatures, and who in his turn
does not feel vexed with fellow-creatures, and who is free from delight and envy,
perturbation and fear, is dear to Me.
(15)
compassion and love, and who is naturally
disposed to do good to all, can never be a
source of annoyance to anyone.
Again, the enlightened devotee who has
realized God develops the feeling of oneness
towards all. Therefore, he does not deliberately
and of his own initiative behave in such a
way as to provoke ill-will in others. That is
why others too do not as a rule behave in a
way which causes annoyance to him.
Nonetheless, it cannot be asserted without
fear of contradiction that no other being can
ever be a source of bodily or mental suffering
to him. Therefore, it should be definitely
Realizing 
the 
presence 
of 
God
everywhere, the devotee can never deliberately
cause suffering, agony, fear and perturbation
to anyone; on the other hand, he is naturally
inclined to render good offices to all, and to
promote their best interests. Hence no one
should ever feel annoyed with him. If anyone
ever feels vexed with him through some
error, it is the evil propensities of that individual
in the shape of likes and dislikes and jealousy
etc., born of ignorance, that are mainly
responsible for the feeling of vexation, and
not the devotee himself. For the God-realized
devotee, who is the very embodiment of

=== PAGE 579 ===

578
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
understood that the enlightened devotee too
may under force of PrГҘrabdha have occasions
of sorrow and suffering at otherГӯs hands, but
being completely free from likes and dislikes,
he does not feel perturbed even in the face of
the greatest calamity (VI.22). That is why the
enlightened devotee never feels annoyed with
any being whatesoever.
The first half of the verse merely says
that the devotee does not feel annoyed or
offended with any other being. Although this
shuts out in his case the possibility of annoyance
caused by another, it does not preclude the
contingency of his feeling perturbed over an
incident, or annoyed with an object, of his
own seeking or with which he may be
confronted without his seeking. Therefore,
by reiterating in the second line the fact of
his being free from perturbation, the Lord
indicates that His devotee is never subject to
any form of annoyance whatsoever.
Contact with an agreeable object sends
a thrill into the body and excites a pleasurable
sensation in the mind; while that with a
disagreeable one causes irritation and
annoyance. Thus, even though the absence
of delight and perturbation itself is an indication
of the devotee being free from all morbid
feelings, it does not clearly bring out their
total absence. Hence in order to make it
definitely clear that the devotee is entirely
free from all emotions, the Lord adds that he
is free from envy and fear as well.
In fact, just as a man feels delighted on
attaining the objects of his desire such as
honour, fame, wealth etc., so should he feel
delighted to see others obtaining those very
objects in the same or even in a greater
measure than himself. But, instead of feeling
delighted in such cases, people generally
entertain a feeling of envy towards them.
Even sensible men are found obsessed with
this feeling. Similarly, contact with objects
repugnant to oneГӯs liking as well as to the
canons of morality and virtue is seen causing
annoyance; while contact or even the possibility
of contact with objects which, though consistent
with morality and virtue, are yet conducive
to sorrow and suffering is seen causing fear.
To say nothing of others, fear of death
overtakes even sensible men. The enlightened
devotee of God, however, comes to realize
the presence of God everywhere and recognizes
all activities as a pastime of God; hence he is
no longer subject to envy, perturbation or
fear. This is what is meant by characterizing
him as free from envy, perturbation and
fear.
вҖўЕёВ¬пЈҝЛҮГҠвҖ” вүҘГҠГҲГҒГёЕ’ВёЛҮГҠ В©UЕ’ГҠвҖҡГӢЕёГҠпЈҝ ВӘГғвҲҡГҝГ•вҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёвҒ„UГӘГ·В¬ГҒвҒ„UГ ГҝГҠВӘГӢ ГҝГҠпЈҝ в—ҠjQВ§вҖ” вҖҡ в—ҠпЈҝ ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҖ”Г”H 16H
вҖўЕёВ¬пЈҝЛҮГҠвҖ” expecting nothing; вүҘГҠГҲГҒГёвҖ” pure (both internally and externally); Е’ЛҮГҠвҖ”Г” wise; В©UЕ’ГҠвҖҡГӢЕёвҖ”
impartial; ВӘГғвҲҡГҝГ•вҖ” free from distractions; вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёвҒ„UГӘГ·В¬ГҒвҒ„UГ ГҝГҠВӘГӢ renouncing the feeling of doership in
all undertakings; ГҝвҖ”Г” who; в—ҠjQВ§вҖ” My devotee; вҖҡвҖ” that; в—ҠпЈҝ to Me; ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҖ”Г” (is) dear.
He who expects nothing, who is both internally and externally pure, is wise and
impartial, and has risen above all distractions, and who renounces the feeling of
doership in all undertakings,Гіsuch a devotee of Mine is dear to Me.                 (16)
for anything. He gets satiated. This is what is
meant by speaking of him as Г«AnapekВ¶aВЁГӯ.
It may be contended here that no activity
of any kind is possible in the absence of any
The devotee who has realized God has
absolutely no concern with any object
whatsoever, that is why he does not entertain
even the least desire, craving, or hidden bias

=== PAGE 580 ===

* Chapter XII *
579
desire or want, and without activity one
cannot keep his body and soul together.
How, then, does a devotee live? Our reply to
this question is that activity is possible even
in the absence of desire or want under the
impulse of PrГҘrabdha or destiny; therefore,
the life of a devotee is maintained by his
PrГҘrabdha. That is to say, the mind, speech
and body of the devotee continue to perform
all their functions automatically under the
impulse of his PrГҘrabdha without any desire,
craving or volition on his part (IV.19). Hence
the maintenance of his body presents no
difficulty.
Purity finds its highest expression in the
devotee. His mind, intellect, senses and body
etc., become so pure that his very sight and
touch lend purity to others, to say nothing of
those who converse with him. The place
where such a devotee resides attains a holy
character; nay, the whole atmosphere and
surroundings of the place, including land and
water etc., are hallowed by his presence.
True intelligence lies in accomplishing
the object for the realization of which human
birth has been vouchsafed to us. The attainment
of the primary object of human life consists in
realizing God, the supreme lover, universal
friend and Lord of the universe, through the
practice of exclusive devotion. The enlightened
devotee has been declared as Г«wiseГӯ only in
order to show that he has realized God.
Partiality consists in giving false evidence
in a court of law delivering an unjust award
in the capacity of an arbitrator or judge while
adjudging or sitting in judgement over a
dispute, or attempting in any other way to
benefit or harm unduly one of the two
contending parties out of regard for a kinsman,
relative or friend, or out of malice or any
other consideration. He who is free from
such partiality is said to be Г«impartialГӯ.
The use of the adjectival compound
Г«GatavyathaВЁГӯ is intended to convey that the
devotee does not feel distracted even when
he has reason to feel distracted; that is to say,
his mind does not give way to anxiety, sorrow
or grief in any form or shape. The intention
is to show that the devotee does, as a result
of his PrГҘrabdha, undergo sorrows and
sufferings in the shape of a bodily ailment or
loss of wife, children, house and wealth, etc;
but notwithstanding all this, his mind remains
unperturbed.
Whatever is happening in the world is a
part of the divine play; it is the play of the
deluding potency of God known as MГҘyГҘ.
He gets whomsoever He chooses to  do
whatever and whenever He likes. Man falsely
arrogates to himself the credit for a particular
action, and claims certain powers etc. A
devotee of God, however, comes to realize
this truth; hence he ever conceives himself to
be a puppet in His hands. He gladly plays
whatever part the Lord desires him to play at
a particular moment. Nursing not even the
least taint of egoism within himself, he does
nothing at all of his own accord. Hence,
while doing everything in the eyes of the
world, he is really a Г«SarvГҘrambhaparityГҘgвҲӮГӯ
inasmuch as he is free from the feeling of
doership in respect of all his undertakings.
ГҝГҠпЈҝ Её NUcГҝГҒГғ Её mпЈҝГҒCГ”U Её вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝГёГҒГғ Её вҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUЛҮГҠГҒГғГ”вҖ“
вүҘГҠГ”ГҲГ·ГҠвүҘГҠГҲГ·В¬ГҒвҒ„UГ ГҝГҠВӘГӢ Г·ГҒQВ§в—ҠГҠГЈГҝвҖ” вҖҡ в—ҠпЈҝ ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҖ”Г”H 17H
ГҝвҖ”Г” who; Её never; NUcГҝГҒГғ rejoices; Её nor; mпЈҝГҒCГ”U hates; Её nor; вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝГёГҒГғ grieves; ЕёГ” nor again;
вҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUЛҮГҠГҒГғГ” desires; вүҘГҠГҲГ·ГҠвүҘГҠГҲГ·В¬ГҒвҒ„UГ ГҝГҠВӘГӢ (is) a relinquisher of both good and evil actions; Г·ГҒQВ§в—ҠГҠЕёЛңГ” man
full of devotion; ГҝвҖ” (and) who; вҖҡвҖ” that; в—ҠпЈҝ to Me; ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҖ” (is) dear.

=== PAGE 581 ===

580
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Attainment of a desired object and the
parting of that which is unwelcome bring joy
to all beings. Hence the negation of rejoicing
here means the negation of joy resulting from
the attainment of a desired object and from
the parting of that which is unwelcome. The
words Г«Yo na hГҰВ¶yatiГӯ  are, therefore, intended
to convey that the enlightened devotee never
experiences joy on any account. To such a
devotee, God alone, who is all-powerful, all-
sustaining and supremely compassionate, is
the highest object of love; and such a God
stands ever realized by him. He is, therefore,
ever immersed in supreme bliss. He does not
entertain the least attraction or aversion for
anything in this world. Thus there is nothing
agreeable or disagreeable in his eyes and
hence there can be no question of his feeling
delighted on the attainment of a desired
object and the disappearance of an unwelcome
one.
Again, a devotee of God recognizes the
entire universe as identical with God; hence
he can never and on no account nurse any
grudge against any being or object whatsover.
The feeling of hatred totally disappears from
his mind once for all.
As for joy, the devotee of God is immune
from the feeling of grief as well.  The attainment
of an unwelcome object and the loss of that
which is agreeable causes grief to all. The
devotee of God, however, views every
dispensation of the supremely merciful and
sportive Lord as full of His  grace; hence it
never appears unfavourable to him. Knowing
as he does the secret of divine sport, he remains
ever absorbed in the realization of His
supremely blissful nature. How, then, can there
be any grief to him? Besides this, God alone,
who is all-pervading and all-sustaining, is the
best and dearest object of the devoteeГӯs heart,
and he knows no separation from His Beloved;
whereas the appearance and disappearance
of worldly objects do not help or harm him
in any way. That is further reason why he
does not grieve over the loss of agreeable
objects and contact with that which is
unwelcome in the eyes of the world.
Man craves for those agreeable things
which are missed by him. The devotee, having
realized God, is eternally merged in supreme
bliss and supreme repose, and is thus satiated.
He never misses anything; all his wants
disappear; and he gets established in an
undisturbed state of mind. Hence there
remains no reason for him to crave for worldly
objects.
The word Г«SubhaГӯ, forming part of the
adjectival compound Г«вҖәubhГҘвҖ№ubhaparityГҘgвҲӮГӯ
stands for the performance of sacrifices, charity,
penance and other activities enjoined by the
вҖәГҘstras for the earning of oneГӯs livelihood
and maintenance of the body according to
oneГӯs grade in society and stage in life; while
Г«AвҖ№ubhaГӯ denotes sinful acts like telling a lie,
practising duplicity, thieving, violence and
adultery etc. The enlightened devotee of God
renounces both these forms of action. For he
offers to God all good actions performed
through his body, senses and mind, and
maintains not the least connection with them;
nor does he entertain any attachment for such
actions or the desire for their fruit. That is
why such actions of his are not accounted as
actions at all (IV.20). And since he has no
likes and dislikes, he is never guilty of sinful
acts. Hence the Lord speaks of him as having
relinquished both good and evil actions.
He who neither rejoices nor hates, nor grieves, nor desires and who renounces
both good and evil actions and is full of devotion, is dear to Me.                  (17)

=== PAGE 582 ===

* Chapter XII *
581
Inasmuch as the devotee bears no ill
will towards any creature whatsoever, there
is no friend or foe in his eyes; yet people go
the length of conceiving him as an enemy
from their own point of view either because
they foolishly imagine that he is doing them
harm, or because his temperament does not
appear agreeable to them, or because they
bear jealousy towards him. Even so others
regard him as a friend from their own point
of view. But the devotee, who sees God
everywhere throughout the universe, views
all alike. There is no distinction of friend and
foe in his eyes, and his conduct towards all
is one of supreme love at all times. It becomes
a part of his nature to serve all alike, regarding
them as manifestations of God. Just as the
tree makes no distinction between one who
chops its limbs and another who waters its
roots, and serves both equally with its shade,
fruits and flowers etc., even so all distinctions
disappear from the mind of the devotee. The
undifferentiating attitude of the devotee is
even superior to that of the tree. Since in the
eyes of the devotee nothing exists apart from
God, there is no room for differentiation in
him. Hence he has been spoken of as alike to
friend and foe.
Even though the devotee is alive to
honour and ignominy, heat and cold, pleasure
and pain, and other such agreeable or
disagreeable experiences when his mind, senses
and body go through such experiences, these
latter do not at all arouse any morbid feelings
in his mind in the shape of attraction and
aversion or joy and grief etc. He remains
equipoised under all circumstances. He neither
craves for the agreeable nor recoils from the
disagreeable; he never loses his balance of
mind under any circumstance even in the
smallest degree. As he sees God everywhere,
distinction totally disappears from his mind.
It is with this idea that the devotee has been
declared as balanced in all these contrary
experiences.
Attachment or attraction for the world is
the root of all evils. Even if a man externally
gives up all connection with the world, but
retains in his mind attachment for the same,
such a renunciation cannot do him much
good. On the other hand, when attachment
has disappeared from the mind, there can be
no harm even in maintaining, like King Janaka
and others, outward, connection with the
world without entertaining the senses of
possession and attachment with regard to the
same. In fact, he alone who has thus got
rid of attachment is Г«SangavivarjitaВЁГӯ in the
real acceptance of the term. The same idea
has been brought out in II.57. Hence
Г«SangavivarjitaВЁГӯ cannot be interpreted to mean
one who has given up all connection with
the world.
Verse 13 above speaks of the devotee
as entertaining a friendly feeling towards all
beings, whereas in the present verse he has
вҖҡв—ҠвҖ” вүҘГҠГІГҠГҠГ’ Гё ГҒв—ҠГІГҠпЈҝ Гё ГғГ•ГҠ в—ҠГҠЕёГҠВ¬в—ҠГҠЕёГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вүҘГҠГӢГғГҠпЈҝcГЎГҠвҖҡГҲПҖЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖпЈҝВ·ГҲ вҖҡв—ҠвҖ” вҖҡXГ”UГҒп¬Ӯп¬ӮГҢВЎГғвҖ”Г”H 18H
вҖҡв—ҠвҖ”Г” (is) balanced; вүҘГҠГІГҠГҠГ’Г” to foe; Гё as well as; ГҒв—ҠГІГҠпЈҝ to friend; Гё and; ГғГ•ГҠГ” and; в—ҠГҠЕёГҠВ¬в—ҠГҠЕёГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ”
to honour and ignominy; вүҘГҠГӢГғГҠпЈҝcГЎГҠвҖҡГҲПҖЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖпЈҝВ·ГҲ to heat and cold; pleasure and pain (and other
contrary experiences); вҖҡв—ҠвҖ” (is) alike; вҖҡXГ”UГҒп¬Ӯп¬ӮГҢВЎГғвҖ” (is) free from attachment.
He who is alike to friend and foe, as well as to honour and ignominy, who is alike
in heat and cold, pleasure and pain and other contrary experiences, and is free from
attachment;
(18)

=== PAGE 583 ===

582
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
been declared as free from attachment. Though
these 
statements 
appear 
as 
mutually
contradictory, in reality there is no contradiction
between them. The feeling of friendliness
which the devotee bears towards all beings is
devoid of attachment, and is faultless and
unadulterated. The love of worldly-minded
men is rooted in attachment. That is why the
two statements smack of contradiction on
the face of it, although there is no real
contradiction. Friendliness is a virtue, and
God Himself is endowed with the same;
whereas attachment is a weakness, and being
the root of all vices, it is worth giving up.
How can such a weakness exist in a devotee
of God?
ГғГҲГҖГҝГҒЕёГЈЕ’ГҠSГғГҲГҒГғв—ҠГҠГ’ВёЕёГӢ вҖҡГЈГғГҲCГ”UГҠпЈҝ ГҝпЈҝЕё вҲ‘пЈҝВ§ЕёГҒГёГғЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖўГҒЕёвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ГғвҖ” ГҒSГ•вҒ„Uв—ҠГҒГғГ·ВёГҒQВ§в—ҠГҠГЈв—ҠпЈҝ ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝГҠпЈҝ ЕёвҒ„UвҖ”Г”H 19H
ГғГҲГҖГҝГҒЕёГЈЕ’ГҠSГғГҲГҒГғвҖ”Г” taking praise and reproach alike; в—ҠГҠГ’ЕёГӢ given to contemplation; вҖҡГЈГғГҲCГ”UвҖ” (is)
contented; ГҝпЈҝЕё вҲ‘пЈҝВ§ЕёГҒГёГғЛңГ” with anything and everything; вҖўГҒЕёвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ГғвҖ” (is) devoid of the feeling of
ownership and attachment in respect of oneГӯs dwelling-place; ГҒSГ•вҒ„Uв—ҠГҒГғвҖ” stable of mind;
Г·ГҒQВ§в—ҠГҠЕёЛңГ” full of devotion; в—ҠпЈҝ Me; ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҖ” (is) dear; ЕёвҒ„UвҖ” (that) man.
He who takes praise and reproach alike, and is given to contemplation and is
contented with any means of subsistence whatsoever, entertaining no sense of ownership
and attachment in respect of his dwelling-place and is full of devotion to Me, that
person of stable mind is dear to Me.                                                            (19)
from speech, and yet goes on dwelling on
the objects of the senses, practises only
outward silence. Even external silence practised
with the object of emptying the mind of
worldly thoughts purifying and controlling
oneГӯs speech is profitable. But the present
verse discusses the marks of the beloved
devotee of God, whose speech is naturally
flawless and restrained. Thus it cannot be
said that he merely abstains from speech. On
the other hand, the organ of speech of the
devotee is almost incessantly engaged in
chanting the names and glories of God, which
is of supreme benefit to the world, Moreover,
it is through His devotees that God propagates
the cult of Devotion. Therefore, it cannot be
conceived that the devotee who abstains from
speech is dear to God, and not the one who
makes use of his speech. In XVIII.68 and 69
he who propagates the message of the GвҲӮtГҘ is
declared by the Lord as one who renders the
dearest service to Him. This noble mission
cannot be undertaken by one who abstains
A devotee of God does not entertain the
least identification with, or the feeling of
Г«mineГӯ in respect of his name or body.
Therefore, he neither delights in praise nor
laments over reproach; he entertains the same
feeling towards both. Realizing the presence
of God everywhere, he makes not the least
distinction between those who praise him
and those who reproach him. This is what is
meant by his taking praise and reproach
alike.
The word Г«MaunвҲӮГӯ ordinarily means one
who observes a vow of silence. But silence
does not consist in merely holding oneГӯs
tongue. For man speaks not only through his
organ of speech, he goes on speaking even
through the mind. Ceaselessly dwelling on
the objects of the senses is what is meant by
speaking through the mind. The mind of the
devotee gets so deeply absorbed in God that
it thinks of nothing else than God; it is ever
engrossed in His thought alone. This is silence
in the real sense of the term. He who abstains

=== PAGE 584 ===

* Chapter XII *
583
from speech. Besides this, Г«MaunaГӯ appears
once more in XVII.16 as forming part of
mental penance. Had the word Г«MaunaГӯ been
intended by the Lord to mean abstinence
from speech, He would have mentioned it
under the head of vocal penance. But He has
not done so. This also proves that the word
Г«MaunaГӯ denotes here silence of the mind,
which is the characteristic of a Muni (sage).
And he who is characterized by this
qualification of a muni is a MaunвҲӮ, or one
given to contemplation. Abstinence from
speech can be practised even wilfully, hence
it is of no great importance either. Hence the
word Г«MaunaГӯ should be interpreted here to
mean the habit of contemplation, rather than
abstinence from speech. Restraint of speech
is naturally implied in this habit.
It is but natural and reasonable that the
devotee who is exclusively devoted to
contemplation on God, and whose mind is
never crossed by any other thought, should
not undertake any activity for the maintenance
of his body, and that it is God alone who
personally attends even to his worldly
requirements and safeguards his worldly
interests. Nevertheless, the word Г«Yena Kenacit
SantuВ¶ВўaВЁГӯ used with reference to the devotee
do not imply that he abstains from disinterested
and lawful activity for the maintenance of his
body according to his grade in society and
stage in life. They simply mean that the
devotee remains contented with whatever he
obtains as a result of such activity according
to his PrГҘrabdha or destiny. As a matter of
fact, a devotee of God has nothing to do with
the acquisition or loss of worldly objects.
Having realized his most beloved Deity, he
remains ever satisfied. Therefore, the intention
of the words Г«Yena Kenacit SantuВ¶ВўaВЁГӯ appears
to be that the acquisition and loss of external
objects cause no difference in his composure.
He remains reconciled to whatever he gets
according to his PrГҘrabdha, no matter whether
it gives him objects of pleasure or pain.
He who has no house of his own is
called Г«AniketaГӯ. The word, therefore, primarily
refers to those devotees of God who have
renounced the life of a householder and
adopted the life of a SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮ or recluse. It
also refers to those other devotees who, having
offered all their possessions to God, have
become wholly destitute, whose house and
other immovable property, wealth and power,
learning and intellect have all reverted to
God, no matter whether they are celebates,
householders or hermits. Just as an enlightened
soul, who has no feeling of identification
with or attachment to his body, nor regards it
as his own, is called bodiless (Videha) even
though possessed of a body, in the same way
he who has no attachment to his dwelling
and does not regard it as his own is Г«AniketaГӯ
or without a dwelling even though living
under a roof.
Due to his having realized God, all the
doubts of a devotee disappear root and branch
and he comes to have unwavering faith in
Him. His resolve is firm and unshakable.
Therefore, like ordinary men, he never turns
away either from virtue or from God under
the influence of morbid feelings like lust,
anger, greed, infatuation and fear etc. That is
why he has been spoken of as Г«SthiramatiВЁГӯ
(stable of mind). For further light on the
implicaiton of this word the reader is referred
to the commentary on II.55 to 72.
While discussing the marks of His
beloved devotees in five groups in verses 13
to 19 above, the Lord repeats the assurance
Г«such a devotee is dear to MeГӯ each time. In
this connection it should be noted that all the
marks discussed in the above verses are marks
of the devotees of God, and they are all in
agreement with the scriptures and highly
commendable; but it is quite natural that the

=== PAGE 585 ===

584
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
virtues and conduct even of devotees may
slightly differ owing to the difference in
their temperament etc. All the marks are
not common to each and every devotee.
Evenmindedness and tranquillity are no doubt
common to all, and none of them is subject
to morbid feelings like attraction and aversion,
joy and grief etc. That is why we find some
repetition in the above verses. A careful
examination, however, will reveal that the
feelings of attraction and aversion, as well as
of joy and grief, have been negated either
expressly or by implication in all the five
groups. In the very first group Г«AdveВ¶tГҘГӯ
negates aversion, Г«NirmamaВЁГӯ, rules out
attraction, and Г«SamaduВЁkhasukhaВЁГӯ eliminates
joy and grief. The second group negates the
feelings of joy, anger, fear and perturbation;
this automatically eliminates attraction and
aversion as well as joy and grief. In the third
group, Г«AnapekВ¶aВЁГӯ rules out attraction,
Г«UdГҘsвҲӮnaВЁГӯ 
negates 
aversion, 
and
Г«GatavyathaВЁГӯ, eliminates joy and grief. In
the fourth group, Г«Na KГҘвҲҶkВ¶atiГӯ negates
attraction, Г«Na DveВ¶ВўiГӯ eliminates aversion,
and Г«Na HГҰВ¶yati Na вҖәocatiГӯ rules out joy and
grief. Similarly, in the fifth or last group
Г«SangavivarjitaВЁГӯ and Г«SantuВ¶ВўaВЁ, negate
attraction and aversion respectively and
Г«вҖәвҲӮtoВ¶Ж’asukhaduВЁkheВ¶u SamaВЁГӯ eliminates joy
and grief. The word Г«SantuВ¶ВўaВЁ, too occurs
twice in this context. This proves that immunity
from morbid feelings like attraction and
aversion, joy and grief, etc., on the one hand,
and the presence of positive virtues like
evenmindedness and tranquillity, on the other,
are indispensable in all cases. Other
characteristics may slightly differ due to
difference in the temperament of the devotee.
It is because of this variation that the Lord
has classified the devotees into five different
categories and discussed their marks separately.
He who possesses all the marks of even one
of these groups is a devotee dear to the Lord.
Careful thought will reveal that the marks
discussed in these verses are not the marks of
those treading the path of Devotion, but of
those perfect souls who have realized God
through the practice of Devotion. For, in the
first place, these marks have been discussed
only after enunciating the means of God-
realization and its rewards; and, secondly,
they are analogous to the marks of saints
who have transcended the GuЖ’as and realized
the Truth, described in XIV.22 to 25. Hence
they cannot be treated as the marks of those
who are yet on the way to God-realization.
*
*
*
The chapter deals with the Yoga of
devotion: that is why it has been given the
title of Bhaktiyoga. ArjunaГӯs query and the
LordГӯs reply thereto both deal with the subject
of worship and it is for this very reason that
the Lord repeats the dictum Г«such a devotee
of Mine is dear to Me.Гӯ This leads us to the
conclusion that the marks mentioned in the
above verses are the marks of those who
have attained highest perfection through the
practice of devotion.
It may be asked here: Does any line of
demarcation continue to exist between those
who have attained highest perfection through
the path of Action, Devotion or Knowledge ?
Our reply to this question is that although
their actual state of realization or the supreme
Truth realized by them is just the same, their
conduct may continue to vary due to difference
in their temperament. The statement of the
Lord that Г¬Even the wise man behaves in
conformity with his own natureГ® (III.33) also
proves that the conduct and disposition of all
wise men continue to differ even after their
enlightenment.
*
*
*
Absence of egoism and the sense of
possession and immunity from the morbid

=== PAGE 586 ===

* Chapter XII *
585
feelings of attraction and aversion, joy and
grief, lust and anger, etc., which are all born
of ignorance, and the presence of even-
mindedness and supreme tranquillity are found
equally in all God-realized souls; but friendliness
and compassion are the distinctive marks of
the noble soul who has realized God through
the path of Devotion.  Even so, indifference
towards the world, towards oneГӯs own body
and towards activity in general is a special
characteristic of saints who have realized the
supreme state by following the path of
Knowledge. Similarly, activity without
attachment and with due emphasis on self-
control is the characteristic mark of those who
have realized God through the practice of
Karmayoga.
The marks of the saint who has realized
God through the practice of Karmayoga have
been discussed in a number of verses
commencing  from verse 55 and ending with
verse 72 of Chapter II; the marks of the God-
realized soul who has transcended the GuЖ’as
through the path of Knowledge appear in
XIV.22 to 25; and verses 13 to 19 of the
present chapter describe the marks of the
souls who has realized God by treading the
path of devotion.
Describing thus the marks of the perfect devotee who has realized God, the Lord now
extols, as extremely dear to Him those devotees who, endowed with supreme faith and the
spirit of self-surrender, most diligently and scrupulously cultivate those qualities as model
virtues, and thus concludes His reply to ArjunaГӯs query contained in the opening verse of
this chapter.
ГҝпЈҝ ГғГҲ Е“ГӘГҝГҠВёв—ҠГҺГғГҒв—ҠЕ’Вў ГҝГ•ГҠпЈҝQВўВ§ В¬ГҝГҲВёВ¬ГҠвҖҡГғпЈҝвҖ“
ГјГҠgЕ“ГҠЕёГҠ в—ҠГ В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠ Г·QВ§ГҠSГғпЈҝЛҳГғГӢп¬Ӯ в—ҠпЈҝ ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝГҠвҖ”Г”H 20H
ГҝпЈҝ who; ГғГҲГ” but; Е“ГӘГҝГҠВёв—ҠГҺГғв—ҠЛңГ” nectar of pious wisdom; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this; ГҝГ•ГҠпЈҝQВ§в—ҠЛңГ” set forth above; В¬ГҝГҲВёВ¬ГҠвҖҡГғпЈҝ
partake of in a disinterested way; ГјГҠgЕ“ГҠЕёГҠвҖ” endowed with faith; в—ҠГ В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠвҖ” solely devoted to Me;
Г·QВ§ГҠвҖ” devotees; ГғпЈҝ those; вҖўГғГӢп¬Ӯ extremely; в—ҠпЈҝ to Me; ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝГҠвҖ” dear.
Those devotees, however, who partake in a disinterested way of this nectar of
pious wisdom set forth above, endowed with faith and solely devoted to Me, they are
extremely dear to me.                                                                    (20)
glory, supernatural power and stories etc., as
in something directly perceived by his senses.
And those who look upon the most loving
and compassionate Lord as their highest goal
and supreme refuge, nay, the very prop of
their life and their all-in-all, are referred to
here as Г«MatparamГҘВЁГӯ.
*
*
*
Really speaking, the marks of the God-
realized devotee described in the forgoing
seven verses constitute the true religion of
humanity. The fulfilment of human existence
lies in following the ideal of these devotees;
for by following their ideal the SГҘdhaka is
Verses 13 to 19 above discuss the marks
of the perfect devotee who has realized God;
whereas the present verse extols those noble
devotees who are yet on the way to God-
realization, and are thus different from the
God-realized devotee, and who cultivate the
above mentioned qualities of the latter as
model virtues. It is this distinction which is
intended to be brought out by the indeclinable
Г«TuГӯ.
The word Г«вҖәraddadhГҘnГҘВЁГӯ stands for
those who have reverent faith in the descents
and utterances of the all-pervading and all-
powerful Lord, as well as in His virtues,

=== PAGE 587 ===

586
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
freed for ever from the cruel grasp of death
and succeeds in realizing God, who is
immortality itself. It is in order to bring out
this idea that the above marks of the devotee
have been spoken of as DharmyГҘmГҰta or the
Г«nectar of pious wisdomГӯ.
*
*
*
The perfect devotee who has realized
God is naturally endowed with the above
attributes and becomes eternally one with
Him. Hence the presence of these virtues in
him is not to be wondered at. But it is really
wonderful that those faithful devotees who
have not yet realized God should nevertheless
pin their faith in Him and solely depend on
Him, offering with supreme reverence their
body, mind, wealth and all other possessions
to Him, nay, should remain constantly engaged
in His loving remembrance with no other
motive than His realization and should
unceasingly endeavour to mould their life
according to the above model. That is why
such devotees are exeptionally dear to Him.
God remains indebted to such loving devotees
till He has satisfied them by conferring on
them the privilege of constant association
with Him: such is His esteem for these devotees.
It is, therefore, but reasonable that the Lord
should declare such devotees as even Г«dearerГӯ
than the God-realized devotee.
Лҷ ГғГ вҖҡГҒЕ’ГҒГғ ГјГҠГӢв—ҠjВӘп¬ӮeГӢГғГҠвҖҡГҚВ¬ГҒЕёВ·Г вҖҡГҲ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГҝГҠВў ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠпЈҝ
ГјГҠГӢвҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠВЎГҲВёЕёвҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’пЈҝ Г·ГҒQВ§ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ ЕёГҠв—Ҡ
mГҠЕ’вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГӨГҝГҠГҝвҖ”H 12H
Thus, in the UpaniВ¶ad sung by the Lord, the science of
Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the Dialogue
between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and Arjuna, ends
the twelfth chapter entitled
Г¬The Yoga of DevotionГ®.
U

=== PAGE 588 ===

* Chapter XIII *
587
Title of the
Chapter
Summary of
the Chapter
Link of the
Discourse
Лҷ
вҖәrвҲӮmadbhagavad-GвҲӮtГҘ
Chapter XIII
The Г«KВ¶etraГӯ (body) and the Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ (soul) are entirely different from each other. It
is only due to ignorance that they are being identified, as it were.
The Г«KВ¶etraГӯ is material, mutable, transitory and perishable; whereas the
Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ (knower of the KВ¶etra) is conscious, of the same essence as
Knowledge, immutable, eternal and imperishable. In the present chapter both
the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ and the Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ have been differentiated in the above manner. Hence it has
been given the name of Г¬The Yoga of discrimination between the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ and the knower
of the KВ¶etra.Г®
The opening verse of this chapter defines what is Г«KВ¶etraГӯ (body) and what is
Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ (soul). Establishing the identity of the soul with the Oversoul, Verse 2 declares
Wisdom to consist precisely in the knowledge of the KВ¶etra and the KВ¶etrajВӨa.
Undertaking, in the third, to describe the nature and characteristics etc., of the
KВ¶etra, as well as the nature and glory of the KВ¶etrajВӨa, and citing in the
fourth the authority of the seers, the Vedas and the BrahmasВөutras, the Lord discusses in the
fifth and the sixth verses the nature of the KВ¶etra and its evolutes. Verses 7 to 11 enumerate
twenty SГҘttvika traits and moral virtues such as Г«absence of prideГӯ etc., under the name of
Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ or wisdom, so called because they lead to the realization of Truth. Thereafter
describing in verses 12 to 17 the nature of the Oversoul, which is capable of being realized
through Knowledge, the Lord enumerates in verse 18 the topics discussed up to that point,
and declares God-realization to be the fruit of Г«KnowledgeГӯ as discussed in this context.
Then, taking up another topic under the head of Г«PrakГҰtiГӯ (Matter) and Г«PuruВ¶aГӯ (Spirit),
verses 19 to 22 discuss the nature of Matter and its evolutes, on the one hand, and the nature
of and the truth about the PuruВ¶a or Spirit, on the other. Pointing out in the twenty-third the
reward of knowing PrakГҰti with its three GuЖ’as as well as the PuruВ¶a, the Lord describes in
the twenty-fourth and the twenty-fifth the various means of God-realization. Declaring in the
twenty-sixth the emanation of all beings, moving as well as motionless, from the union of
the KВ¶etra and KВ¶etrajВӨa, or Matter and Spirit, the Lord brings out in verses 27 to 30 the
glory as well as the reward of realizing the truth that Г¬God dwells equally in all, that He is
imperishable and a non-doer, and that all action are done only by Nature, and that everything
is a projection from the divine principle and abides in it.Г® Driving home, from the thirty-first
to the thirty-third, the glory of the Self and showing by the use of similes the non-agency
and uncontaminated nature of the Soul, the Lord finally declares, in the thirty-fourth, God-
realization as the reward of knowing the distinction between the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ and Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ.
In the opening verse of Chapter XII Arjuna asked the Lord about the
comparative merit of the worshippers of God with attributes, on the one hand,
and of those of God without attributes on the other. In reply to this query the

=== PAGE 589 ===

588
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
perishable and subject to change. The conscious
Self is wholly different from the aforesaid
material world of objective reality. It is the
knower and lord of the latter and runs through
it. That is why it is spoken of as the Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ
or knower of the Field. It is this knowing
conscious Self who is referred to as Г«ParГҘ
PrakГҰtiГӯ or the Higher Nature in Chapter VII,
as Г«AdhyГҘtmaГӯ or the Spirit in VIII.3 and as
the Г«AkВ¶ara PuruВ¶aГӯ or Indestructible Soul in
XV.16. This spiritual substance is a great
mystery; that is why the Lord speaks of it in
different contexts, now in the feminine gender,
now in the neuter and a third time in the
masculine gender. In reality, the soul is entirely
free from all modifications, sexless, eternal,
changeless and consciousГіof the same essence
as Knowledge.
The pronoun Г«TatГӯ forming part of the
compound word Г«TadvidaВЁГӯ stands for both
the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ and the Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ. Hence the
word Г«TadvidaВЁГӯ refers to those who fully
The use of the demonstrative adjective
Г«IdamГӯ with reference to Г«вҖәarвҲӮramГӯ shows that
the body is perceived and known by soul;
hence it is objective, and thus entirely different
from the Self, who is the subject. And just as
seeds sown in a field yield the corresponding
crop in course of time, even so seeds of Karma
sown in the body yield their fruit at the
appointed time. Hence the body is called the
Г«FieldГӯ. Besides this, it is subject to constant
decay. That is another reason why it is called
the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ (from the root Г«KВ¶iГӯ to decay);
and that is why it is spoken of as the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ
(perishable) PuruВ¶a in Chapter XV. The
denotation of Г«KВ¶etraГӯ has been given in a
nutshell in verse 5 of this chapter.
The latter half of this verse points to the
inner Self, who is the subject. The entire
range of objective reality, which is open to
knowledge, such as the mind, intellect, the
senses, the elements and the objects of sensesГі
all these are material in their constitution,
Lord, while briefly showing in verse 2 the superiority of those who worship God with
attributes, discussed from the third to the fifth the character and reward of the worship of
the Absolute and the strain and stress involved in such worship in the case of those who are
centred in the body. Thereafter, verses 6 to 20 discussed the glory, reward and process of
worship of God with attributes and the marks of the devotees of God, and this brought the
chapter to a close. The truth, glory and the means to the realization of the Absolute could
not, however, be elaborately dealt with. Therefore, the truth relating to the absolute, formless
God, or the subject of JВӨГҘnayoga, is being taken up for elaborate discussion in the present
chapter. The beginning is made with a definition of Г«KВ¶etraГӯ (body) and Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ (soul).
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲUп¬ӮГҠГё
ГҹЕ’Вў 
вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„ВўU 
вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ 
ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠГҒв—ҠГ ГҝГҒГ·Е“ГӢГҝГғпЈҝвҖ“
вҲһГғlГҠпЈҝ п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠ ГғВў В¬ЛқГҠвҖһГҲUвҖ” ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠГҙГҠ ГҹГҒГғ ГғГҒmЕ’вҖ”H 1H
ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this; вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„в—ҠЛңГ” body; вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ O son of KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna; ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” ГҹГҒГғ as the KВ¶etra (Field);
вҖўГҒГ·Е“ГӢГҝГғпЈҝ is termed; вҲһГғГғЛңГ” it; ГҝвҖ” who; п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠГ” knows; Гғв—ҠЛңГ” him; В¬ЛқГҠвҖһГҲUвҖ” speak of; ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠГҙГҠ ГҹГҒГғ as the
KВ¶etrajВӨa (Knower of the Field); ГғГҒmЕ’вҖ” knowers of the truth about them.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: The body, Arjuna, is termed as the Field (KВ¶etra); and he who
knows it, is called the knower of the Field (KВ¶etrajВӨa) by the sages discerning the truth
about both.
(1)

=== PAGE 590 ===

* Chapter XIII *
589
know both in their real character. The use of
Г«thisГӯ word is intended to show that the
appellation Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ has been given to the
soul by sages who have realized the truth;
hence there is no room for entertaining any
doubt with regard to the nature of the soul.
have been quite in order in a context where
the emphasis was on Devotion. In the present
context, however, the main theme is JВӨГҘna or
Self-realization; Bhakti or Devotion figures
here only as a means to the attainment of
Knowledge. Hence Bhakti has been assigned
a secondary place in the scheme of this Chapter.
Therefore, the way in which we have
interpreted the verse as bringing out the identity
of the soul with the Oversoul appears to be
the correct interpretation.
The Г«KВ¶etraГӯ or body is liable to appear
and disappear, material in constitution, transient,
coming within the purview of knowledge
and ephemeral. The Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ or soul, on
the other hand, is the eternal and conscious
subject, immutable, stainless and ever existing
in the same state of being. Hence the two are
entirely different from one another; it is
ignorance alone which makes them appear as
identical. In the opinion of the Lord, true
Knowledge or wisdom consists in the
realization of this truth. There is no room for
doubt or error in this view.
The first half of this verse establishes
the identity of the soul with the Oversoul. As
a matter of fact, there is no difference
whatsoever between the soul and the Oversoul.
The apparent difference is due to the association
of the soul with matter. That is why while
describing the characteristics of absolute,
formless God XII.3, the Lord uses almost the
same terminology as He did in II.24-25 while
describing the character of the Self. What the
Lord seeks to impress upon Arjuna is that the
KВ¶etrajВӨa or the conscious soul seated in all
the KВ¶etras, being a particle of His own Self
(XV.7), is not, in reality, different from Him;
that it is God Himself who appears as the
JivГҘtmГҘ or individual soul.
The first half of this verse could as well
be interpreted to mean that side by side with
the individual soul the Oversoul also dwells
in all the KВ¶etras as the inner witness, in which
case the sentence would have to be translated
as under: Г¬Know the KВ¶etrajВӨa (individual
soul), as well as Myself, as dwelling in all
KВ¶etras or bodies.Г® Such an interpretation would
Defining thus the words Г«KВ¶etraГӯ and Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ, the Lord now establishes the identity
of the soul with the Oversoul and defines Knowledge.
ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠГҙГҠВў ГёГҠГҒВ¬ в—ҠГҠВў ГҒп¬ӮГҒh вҖҡп¬ӮВёЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠпЈҝВ·ГҲ Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғвҖ“
ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠГҙГҠГҝГҠпЈҝГҙГҠГҠВёЕёВў 
ГҝГ»ГҠГ–ГҙГҠГҠЕёВў 
в—ҠГғВў 
в—Ҡв—ҠH 2H
ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠГҙГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the KВ¶etrajВӨa or Self; Гё and; вҖўГҒВ¬ too; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Myself; ГҒп¬ӮГҒh know; вҖҡп¬ӮВёЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠпЈҝВ·ГҲ in all the
KВ¶etras or living organisms; Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғ O descendant of Bharata; Arjuna; ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠГҙГҠГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ”Г” of the KВ¶etra
and the KВ¶etrajВӨa, (i.e., of Matter with its evolutes and the Spirit); ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” wisdom or spiritual
enlightenment; ГҝГғЛңГ” that; ГғГғЛңГ” that (is); ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” which is knowledge; в—ҠГғв—ҠЛңГ” в—Ҡв—Ҡ (that is) My view.
Know Myself to be the KВ¶etrajВӨa (individual soul) in all the KВ¶etras (Fields),
Arjuna. And it is the knowledge of KВ¶etra (Field) and KВ¶etrajВӨa (Knower) (i.e., of
Matter with its evolutes and the Spirit) which I consider as Wisdom.
(2)
The truth about the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ and the Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ being fully known, the delusion in the
form of this world disappears and God-realization takes place; therefore, in order to bring
out distinctly the ideas of Г«KВ¶etraГӯ and Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ, the Lord says:

=== PAGE 591 ===

590
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The use of the demonstrative adjective
Г«TatГӯ before Г«KВ¶etramГӯ, in this verse, is intended
to show that the present verse undertakes to
give further particulars about the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ as
defined in verse 1; while the relative adjective
Г«YatГӯ used as a predicate in relation to the
substantive Г«KВ¶etramГӯ, conveys the intention
of the Lord to reveal the denotation of Г«KВ¶etraГӯ,
which has been given in verse 5 below.
Again, the qualifying word Г«YГҘdГҰkГӯ, used
with reference to Г«KВ¶etramГӯ, conveys the
intention of the Lord to tell us what such
Г«KВ¶etraГӯ is like, and this has been pointed out
in verses 26 and 27 of this chapter by declaring
all created beings as liable to appear and
disappear.
The evolutes of Г«KВ¶etraГӯ, referred to in
the compound adjective Г«YadvikГҘriГӯ, have
been enumerated in verse 6 of this chapter.
The words Г«YataВЁ YatГӯ (whence is what)
convey the intention of the Lord to trace the
origin of the various categories brought together
under the common name of Г«KВ¶etraГӯ, and this
has been done in the second half of verse 19
and the first half of verse 20.
The demonstrative pronoun Г«SaВЁГӯ in the
second half of this verse refers to the Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ
and the relative adjective Г«YaВЁГӯ, used as a
predicate in relation to it conveys the intention
of the Lord to reveal its true character. This
has been declared by the Lord as twofold,
viz., (1) rooted in matter, and (2) existing in
its real state. For example, speaking of it as
Г«without beginningГӯ in verse 19, as Г«undergoing
pleasurable and painful experiencesГӯ in the
twentieth, and as Г«taking good and evil birthГӯ
in the twentyfirst, the Lord refers to the spirit
as rooted in matter; while verse 22 and verses
27 to 30 revealing its identity with the
Oversoul, refer to its real character.
The glory of the soul, referred to in
the compound adjective Г«YatprabhГҘvaВЁГӯ has
been described in verses 31 to 33 of this
chapter.
ГғГ ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠВў ГҝГ¬ГҠ ГҝГҠЕ’ГҺBВ§ ГҝГҒmвҲ‘В§ГҠГҒвҒ„U ГҝГғp ГҝГғЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖҡ Гё ГҝГҠпЈҝ ГҝГ В¬ЛқГ·ГҠп¬Ӯp ГғГ вҖҡв—ҠГҠвҖҡпЈҝЕё в—ҠпЈҝ oГҺГЎГҠГҲH 3H
ГғГғЛңГ” that; ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” KВ¶etra or body; ГҝГғЛңГ” what; Гё and; ГҝГҠЕ’ГҺвҲ‘ЛңВ§Г” what itГӯs nature; Гё and (again);
ГҝГҒmвҲ‘В§ГҠГҒвҒ„UГ” with what modification; ГҝГғвҖ” whence; Гё and (further); ГҝГғЛңГ” (is) what; вҖҡвҖ”Г” that (KВ¶etrajВӨa
or soul); Гё and (finally); ГҝвҖ” who; ГҝГ В¬ЛқГ·ГҠп¬ӮвҖ” possessed of what glory; Гё and; ГғГғЛңГ” (all) that; вҖҡв—ҠГҠвҖҡпЈҝЕё
in brief; в—ҠпЈҝГ” from Me; oГҺГЎГҠГҲ hear.
What that KВ¶etra (Field) is and what is its nature, what are its modifications and
from what causes, what effects have arisen, who that KВ¶etrajВӨa is and what his gloryГі
hear all this from Me in brief.                                                                (3)
The Lord now expresses His regard for the В°RВ¶is, the Vedas and the BrahmasВөutras by
quoting their authority on the subject of Г«KВ¶etraГӯ and Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ, which He has just now
undertaken to discuss in brief.
ВҙВ§ГҒВ·ГҒГ·вҖҷВёвҖһГҲUЕ“ГҠ ВӘГӢГғВў ВҝUГЈЕ’ГҠпЈҝГҒГ·ГҢп¬ӮГҒп¬ӮЕ“Г’вҖ” В¬ГҺГ•вҲ‘ЛңВ§Г”вҖ“
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”вҖҡГҚГІГҠВ¬Е’Г’pГ’п¬Ӯ 
вҖһпЈҝUГғГҲв—ҠГҒjГҢп¬ӮГҒЕёГҒpГғГ’вҖ”H 4H
ВҙВ§ГҒВ·ГҒГ·вҖ” by the В°RВ¶is or seers; вҖҷвҖһГҲUЕ“ГҠ in manifold ways; ВӘГӢГғв—ҠЛңГ” (the truth about the KВ¶etra and
KВ¶etrajВӨa or Matter and Spirit) has been expounded; ВҝUГЈЕ’ГҠпЈҝГҒГ·вҖ” ГҒп¬ӮГҒп¬ӮЕ“Г’вҖ” in different Vedic chants;

=== PAGE 592 ===

* Chapter XIII *
591
The ancient seers, to whom the Vedic
chants have been revealed, and who are the
accredited authors of other scriptures and
SmГҰti texts, have expounded in detail and in
various ways the true meaning of Г«KВ¶etraГӯ
and Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ and all matters connected
with them in the SmГҰtis as well as in the
Epics and PurГҘЖ’as. The sum and substance
of what the В°RВ¶is have said on the subject has
been succinctly stated by the Lord in the
following verses.
The word Г«ChandobhiВЁГӯ, with the
adjective Г«VividhaiВЁГӯ qualifying it, refers to
the four Vedas, В°Rk, YajuВ¶, SГҘma and Atharva,
including the SaвүҲhitГҘ or hymnical texts as
well as the exegetical portion, known by the
name of the BrГҘhmaЖ’as. All the UpaniВ¶ads
should also be regarded as included in the
same. The truth regarding the KВ¶etra and the
KВ¶etrajВӨa, stated in a nutshell in this chapter
by the Lord, has been expounded at length at
several places and in diverse ways in those
sacred scriptures.
The compound word Г«BrahmasВөutra-
padaiВЁГӯ obviously refers to the famous
Г¬Aphorisms on VedГҘntaГ® by sage BГҘdarГҘyaЖ’a,
opening with Г«AthГҘto BrahmajijВӨГҘsГҘГӯ (Now
commences the enquiry into Brahma or the
Absolute), inasmuch as the qualifications used
with the word fit in quite well with this
work. The latter half of the verse thus shows
that the Lord is also giving here in a nutshell
the very essence of the reasoned exposition
contained in the BrahmasВөutras of the truth
about the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ and the Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ, originally
discussed in the Vedas and SmГҰti-texts.
В¬ГҺГ•вҲ‘ЛңВ§ (has been stated) separately; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”вҖҡГҚГІГҠВ¬Е’Г’вҖ” texts of the BrahmasВөutras; Гё and; вҲһп¬Ӯ as well;
вҖһпЈҝUГғГҲв—ҠЕ’ЛңГ”ГҒГ·вҖ”Г” ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕёГҒpГғГ’вҖ” (discussed) in the conclusive and reasoned way.
The truth about the KВ¶etra and the KВ¶etrajВӨa has been expounded by the seers
in manifold ways; again, it has been separately stated in different Vedic chants and
also in the conclusive and reasoned texts of the BrahmasВөutras.                      (4)
Citing thus the authority of the seers the Vedas and the BrahmasВөutras, the Lord now
speaks, in the following two verses, of the KВ¶etra as well as its evolutes, referred to in verse
3 above by the words Г«YatГӯ and Г«YadvikГҘriГӯ respectively.
в—ҠвҖһUГҠГ·ГҚГғГҠГЈГҝвҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„UГҠпЈҝ 
вҖҷГҲГҒhвҒ„UвҲҡГҝQВ§в—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ 
ГёГ”вҖ“
ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠ Е’вүҘГҠГ’вҲ‘ВўВ§ Гё В¬@ ГёпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝВӘГҠпЈҝГёвҒ„UГҠвҖ”H 5H*
в—ҠвҖһUГҠГ·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё the five elements; вҖўвҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„UвҖ” the ego; вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ”Г” the intellect; вҖўвҲҡГҝQВ§в—ҠЛңГ” the Unmanifest
or Primordial Matter; вҲһп¬Ӯ as well; Гё and; ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠ Е’вүҘГҠ the ten organs (of perception and
action); вҲһвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” the one mind; Гё and; В¬@ five; Гё even so; ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝВӘГҠпЈҝГёвҒ„UГҠвҖ” objects of senses.
* Statements similar to this are met with both in the SГҘвҲҶkhyakГҘrikГҘ of вҲ«вҖ№varakГҰВ¶Ж’a and the Yoga-
SВөutras of sage PataВӨjali e.g.,
в—ҠГҚвҲӮUВ¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғвҒ„UГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғв—ҠВёвҖһUЕ’ГҠlГҠвҖ” В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғГҝвҖ” вҖҡ#вҖ“ В·ГҠпЈҝВ«UвүҘГҠвҲ‘В§SГғГҲ ГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГҠпЈҝ Её В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғЕёВё ГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғвҖ” В¬ГҲLВ§В·вҖ”H
(SГҘвҲҶkhyakГҘrikГҘ, 3)
There is one Primordial Matter, which is the effect of none. The Mahat-Tattva (the principle of Cosmio
Intelligence), AhaвҲҶkГҘra or the Ego and the five TanmГҘtrГҘs (the Principles of sound, touch, colour, taste and
smell)Гіthese seven are both causes and effects; they are the causes of the five elements and the effects of
Primordial Matter. The eleven Indriyas consisting of the five senses of perception, the five organs of action
and the mind, and the five gross elementsГіthese sixteen are mere effects; they are not the causes of any

=== PAGE 593 ===

592
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«MahГҘbhВөutГҘniГӯ in this verse
refers to the five TanmГҘtrГҘs or the subtle
states of the five elements, which are the
causes of the five gross elements as well as
of objects of perception, viz., sound, etc.,
and which have been enumerated in Chapter
VII above under the names of Г«BhВөumiГӯ, (earth),
Г«Г…paВЁГӯ (water), Г«AnalaГӯ (fire), Г«VГҘyuГӯ (air)
Г«KhaГӯ (ether).
Г«AhaвҲҶkГҘraГӯ or the Ego is an aspect of
the cosmic Mind. It is the cause of the five
TanmГҘtrГҘs, the mind and all the senses, and
is an effect of the Mahat-Tattva. It is also
known as the principle of Г«I-nessГӯ (the feeling
of Г«IГӯ).
Г«BuddhiГӯ, also known as the Mahat-
Tattva and Cosmic Intelligence, is an aspect
of the cosmic Mind, and represents the faculty
of determination or judgment.
The word Г«AvyaktaГӯ (Unmanifest) stands
for Primordial Matter, which is the cause of
all categories from Mahat-Tattva onwards,
and is known by the name of Г«PradhГҘnaГӯ in
SГҘвҲҶkhya philosophy, and which has been
referred to as Г«Mahad BrahmaГӯ in Chapter
XIV and as Г«PrakГҰtiГӯ in verse 19 of the
present chapter.
The tongue, hands, and feet, the
generative organ and the organ of defecationГі
these are the five organs of action; while the
senses of hearing, touch, sight, taste and
smell constitute the five senses of perception.
These are the ten Indriyas referred to in the
latter half of this verse. The principle of Ego
or AhaвҲҶkГҘra is the cause of them all.
The word Г«EkamГӯ stands for the mind,
which represents the cogitative faculty of the
cosmic Mind, and whose function is to reflect
and speculate. This is also an evolute of the
Ego.
Sound, touch, colour, taste and smell,
which are the objects of the five senses of
perception, are denoted by the words Г«PaВӨca
IndriyagocarГҘВЁГӯ.
other effect. Of these the eleven Indriyas are the effects of the ego, while the five gross elements are the
evolutes of the five TanmГҘtrГҘs. PuruВ¶a or the Spirit, however, is neither the cause nor the effect of anything
else. He is altogether unattached.
In the Yoga-SВөutras we read: ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠпЈҝВ·ГҠГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠпЈҝВ·ГҒвҲӮUXГ”Uв—ҠГҠГІГҠГҠГҒвҲӮUXГ”UГҠГҒЕё ВӘГҲГЎГҠВ¬п¬ӮГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ (II.19) Г¬The ViвҖ№eВ¶as, that is, the five
senses of perception, the five organs of action, the mind and the five gross elements; the AviвҖ№eВ¶as, that
is, the ego and the five TanmГҘtrГҘs, the LiвҲҶgamГҘtra, that is, Mahat-Tattva; and the AliвҲҶga or Primordial
MatterГіthese twentyfour categories represent the varying phases of the GuЖ’as. They are called Г«DГҰвҖ№yaГӯ
or objective existencesГ®.
What has been termed as Г«DГҰвҖ№yaГӯ in the Yoga-Sutras has been referred to as the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ in the GвҲӮtГҘ.
The five elements, the ego, the intellect, the Unmanifest (Primordial Matter), the
ten organs (of perception and action), the mind, and the five objects of sense (sound,
touch, colour, taste and smell);Гі                                                          (5)
ГҹГ«ВҝUГҠ mпЈҝВ·вҖ” вҖҡГҲПҖВў Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖВў вҖҡYГ”UГҠГғpпЈҝГғЕёГҠ Е“ГҺГҒГғвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҲһГғГ ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠВў 
вҖҡв—ҠГҠвҖҡпЈҝЕё 
вҖҡГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠГҲЕ’ГҠNUГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 6H
ГҹГ«ВҝUГҠ desire; mпЈҝВ·вҖ” aversion; вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ” pleasure; Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖв—ҠЛңГ” pain; вҖҡYГ”UГҠГғвҖ” the physical body; ГёпЈҝГғЕёГҠ
consciousness; Е“ГҺГҒГғвҖ” (and) firmness; вҲһГғГғЛңГ” this; ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” KВ¶etra; вҖҡв—ҠГҠвҖҡпЈҝЕё briefly; вҖҡГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” inclusive
of evolutes; В©UЕ’ГҠNUГғв—ҠЛңГ” has been stated.
Also desire, aversion, pleasure, pain, the physical body, consciousness, firmness:
thus is the KВ¶etra, with its evolutes, briefly stated.                                         (6)

=== PAGE 594 ===

* Chapter XIII *
593
The word Г«IcchГҘГӯ in this verse denotes a
passionate longing for the acquisition of an
object which one regards as a source of
gratification and as relieving oneГӯs pain. There
are variours phases of this longing, which are
covered by such expressions as desire, thirst,
hope, craving, yearning etc. It is a modification
of the mind; hence it has been reckoned as
an evolute of the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ.
Antipathy towards a thing which one
conceives to be a source of pain or as interfering
with oneГӯs pleasure or comfort is called DveВ¶a.
Animosity, jealously, hatred, anger etc., are
some of its gross forms. This is also a
modification of the mind. Hence it has been
counted as an evolute of the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ.
The pleasurable feeling aroused in the
mind by the presence of that which is agreeable
and the disappearance of that which is
disagreeable is called Sukha. Being a
modification of the mind, it is also regarded
as an evolute of the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ.
The agony caused in the mind by the
presence of that which is disagreeable and
the disappearance of that which is agreeable
is called Г«DuВЁkhaГӯ. This too represents a
modification of the mind and as such has
been recognized as an evolute of the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ.
Г«SaвҲҶghГҘtaГӯ here stands for the corporeal
or physical body, composed of the five gross
elements, which is left behind, open to the
view of all, even on the departure of the
subtle body after death. Being a modification
of the five gross elements stated above, it has
also been regarded as an evolute of the
Г«KВ¶etraГӯ.
The word Г«CetanГҘГӯ signifies consciousness
or the cognizing faculty of the mind, by
which we feel pleasure and pain and cognize
all other objects, and which has already been
mentioned in X.22. Being a faculty of the
mind, it has also been counted as an evolute
of the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ.
Г«DhГҰtiГӯ denotes Г«firmnessГӯ. It is the same
quality which has been mentioned in XVIII.33,
34 and 35 as of three kinds, viz., SГҘttvika,
RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika, and the SГҘttvika
type of which has been included in the divine
virtues enumerated in XVI.3. Being a
modification of the mind, it has also been
recognized as an evolute of the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ.
Thus far have the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ and its evolutes
been briefly mentioned, the former in verse 5
and the latter in the present one. This is what
the Lord seeks to convey through the last
quarter of the above verse.
Speaking thus of the nature of the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ and its evolutes, the Lord now enumerates
in the next five verses, under the name of Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ the virtues which make for JВӨГҘna or
spiritual wisdom, which has been declared in verse 2 above as consisting in the knowledge
of the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ and the Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ.
вҖўв—ҠГҠГҒЕёГ п¬Ӯв—ҠЕ’ГҒГӘГ·Г п¬Ӯв—ҠГҒвҖһВўUвҖҡГҠ 
ЛҮГҠГҠГҒГЈГғвҒ„UГҠВЎВёп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖўГҠГёГҠГҝГҠпЈҝВёВ¬ГҠвҖҡЕёВў вүҘГҠГҠГ’ГёВў SГ•Г’ГҝВёв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠГҒп¬ӮГҒЕёВӘЛқвҖһUвҖ”H 7H
вҖўв—ҠГҠГҒЕёГ п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” absence of pride; вҖўЕ’ГҒГӘГ·Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” freedom from hypocrisy; вҖўГҒвҖһВўUвҖҡГҠ non-violence or
non-infliction of pain on any creature whatsoever; ЛҮГҠГҠГҒГЈГғвҖ” forbearance; вҖўГҠВЎВёп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” uprightness of
body, speech and mind; вҖўГҠГёГҠГҝГҠпЈҝВёВ¬ГҠвҖҡЕёв—ҠЛңГ” devout service of the preceptor; вүҘГҠГҠГ’Гёв—ҠЛңГ” purity (both
internal and external); SГ•Г’ГҝВёв—ҠЛңГ” steadfastness of mind; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҒп¬ӮГҒЕёВӘЛқвҖһUвҖ” (and) control of body, mind
and the senses.

=== PAGE 595 ===

594
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Г«MГҘnitvaГӯ or self-esteem consists in
looking upon oneself as an eminent person,
and an object of reverence and worship or a
towering personality, and coveting honour,
fame, respect and adoration from others, or
feeling delighted when all these come unasked
for. And absence of all this is Г«AmГҘnitvaГӯ or
absence of pride. Far from rejoicing when
honour, respect and worship etc., are offered
to him, the man who has fully developed this
virtue feels disgusted with all these and grows
indifferent towards them.
Г«DambhitvaГӯ consists in exhibiting oneself
as a devout or charitably-disposed man, a
devotee, 
one 
possessed 
of 
spiritual
enlightenment, or a saint, and in simulating
piety, generosity, liberality, devotion to God,
practice of Yoga and observance of religious
vows and fasts etc., or any other virtue for
the sake of honour, prestige and worship
etc., out of greed for wealth or with the
object of deceiving others. And Г«AdambhitvamГӯ
denotes complete absence of Г«DambhitvaГӯ.
Being entirely free from the desire for honour
and fame, the man who has fully developed
this virtue feels shy even in making known
to others his genuine pious sentiments, noble
virtues and devotional practices. It is, therefore,
out of question for him to display virtues
which he does not acutally possess.
Г«AhiвүҲsГҘГӯ means total abstenation from
violence or infliction of pain in any form or
shape on any creature whatsoever through
body, speech or mind, e.g., harbouring ill-
will towards another in oneГӯs mind; abusing
or vilifying another, using harsh language, or
uttering unpleasant and harmful words with
reference to another; and dealing a physical
blow or causing hurt to another or inflicting
injury in any form whatsoever on others. The
SГҘdhaka who has fully developed Г«AhiвүҲsГҘГӯ
ceases to bear enmity or ill-will towards
anyone; therefore no harm is ever done by
him to any creature whatsoever, nor is anyone
eventually aggrieved by him, nor again does
he actually cause fear to anyone. The great
sage PataВӨjali goes so far as to say that even
carnivorous animals living near him shed
their natural animosities.*
Г«KВ¶antiГӯ means forbearance. He who has
developed this quality never entertains the idea
of punishing a wrong-doer even indirectly.
He nurses no thought of revenge, nor would
he have the evil-doer punished for his wrongs
here or hereafter. In fact, he refuses to recognize
his faults as such, and wholly forgets them.
The idea has been explained at some length
in the commentary on X.4.
Г«Г…rjavaГӯ means straightness of mind,
speech and behaviour. The SГҘdhaka who has
fully developed this quality has straight dealings
with all; crookedness is entirely absent in
him. In other words, his dealings are wholly
free from artifice, duplicity or dishonesty. He
is ever straight and above board.
He who imparts knowledge and teaches
good precepts is called an Г…cГҘrya. Living
with such a teacher and devoutly striving in
every way with body, speech and mind to
bring him happiness, making obeisance to
him, obeying his commands and behaving in
conformity with his wishesГіall this is included
in Г«Г…cГҘryopГҘsanaГӯ.
Г«вҖәaucaГӯ means purity. Purity of money
is secured by honest and truthful dealings,
while purity of diet is ensured by food procured
through well-earned money. Conduct is purified
by correct and appropriate behaviour, and
the body is purified by cleaning it with water,
earth etc. All this is external purity. Internal
Absence of pride, freedom from hypocrisy, non-violence, forbearance, uprightness
of speech and mind etc., devout service of the preceptor, internal and external purity,
steadfastness of mind and control of body, mind and the senses.
(7)
* вҖўГҒвҖһВўUвҖҡГҠВ¬ЛқГҒГғDГ”UГҠГҝГҠВў ГғГ вҖҡГҒГӣГҠЕ“ГҠГ’ п¬ӮГ’вҒ„UГ ГҝГҠВӘвҖ”вҖ“ (Yoga-SВөutras II.35)

=== PAGE 596 ===

* Chapter XIII *
595
purity comes when the mind gets purged of
all evils such as partiality and prejudice,
chicanery and dissimulation etc. Both these
forms of purity are covered by the term
Г«вҖәaucaГӯ.
Г«SthairyaГӯ denotes firmness, i.e., remaining
unshaken even in the face of the greatest
trials and tribulations, danger or sorrow,
swerving not an inch in any case from oneГӯs
sacred obligation and duty under the influence
of lust, anger, fear or greed, and the
disappearance of all fickleness from the mind
and intellect.
The word Г«Г…tmanГӯ, forming part of the
compound word Г«Г…tmavinigrahaГӯ, here stands
for the body, including the mind and senses.
Г«Г…tmavinigrahaГӯ, therefore, means control over
the mind, senses and the body. The mind,
intellect and senses of the SГҘdhaka who has
acquired complete mastery over his self act
as his obedient servants; they can no longer
entangle him into cobweb of sensuous
pleasures, and remain constantly engaged in
spiritual practice according to his will.
ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГ•пЈҝВёВ·ГҲ 
п¬ӮГ’вҒ„UГҠГҮГҝв—ҠЕёвҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„U 
вҲһп¬Ӯ 
ГёГ”вҖ“
ВЎГЈв—Ҡв—ҠГҺГ ГҝГҲВЎвҒ„UГҠвҲҡГҝГҠГҒЕ“Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖЕ’ГҠпЈҝВ·ГҠЕёГҲЕ’вүҘГҠВёЕёв—ҠЛңГ” 
H 8H
ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГ•пЈҝВёВ·ГҲ towards the objects of enjoyment (of this world and the next); п¬ӮГ’вҒ„UГҠГҮГҝв—ҠЛңГ” absence
of attachment; вҖўЕёвҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„UвҖ” absence of egotism; вҲһп¬Ӯ as well; Гё and; ВЎГЈв—Ҡв—ҠГҺГ ГҝГҲВЎвҒ„UГҠвҲҡГҝГҠГҒЕ“Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖЕ’ГҠпЈҝВ·ГҠЕёГҲЕ’вүҘГҠВёЕёв—ҠЛңГ”
pondering again and again on the pain and evils inherent in birth, death, old age and disease
etc.
Dispassion towards the objects of enjoyment of this world and the next, and also
absence of egotism, pondering again and again on the pain and evils inherent in birth,
death, old age and disease.                                                                (8)
species of beings. Death also involves terrible
sufferings to the JвҲӮva. One has to leave under
compulsion the body and the home which one
has regarded as oneГӯs own for a whole life
time. An idea of the agonies of death can be
formed from the despondent looks and bodily
suffering of a dying person. The sufferings
of old age too are not negligible; the organs
get enfeebled, the senses lose their power, the
body becomes worn out; the mind is ever tossed
by longings of various kinds, and one is reduced
to a helpless condition. The hardships
undergone in such a state are indeed terrible.
Even so the agonies of ailment too are extremely
painful. The body gets emaciated, sufferings
of various kinds become unbearable and one
has to depend on others for so many things.
It is indeed a helpless state. These are the various
forms of suffering inherent in birth, death, old
age and disease.
Г«IndriyГҘrtheВ¶u 
VairГҘgyamГӯ 
denotes
complete absence of attachment for all the
objects of enjoyment of this world and the
next in the form of sound, touch, colour,
taste and smell, which are relished by the
mind and the senses, and which though
ignorantly regarded as a source of delight
are really productive of sorrow.
Г«AnahankГҘraГӯ means complete absence
of identification with the mind, intellect and
the body, which though other than the self
are ignorantly regarded as the self.
The pangs of birth are no ordinary pangs.
First of all, the helpless JвҲӮva undergoes various
forms of suffering, for a considerable length
of time, in the womb of the mother. Then,
during the process of birth, it has to suffer
unbearable pain while coming out of the womb.
The JвҲӮva has to go through these pangs in
the course of repeated births in the various

=== PAGE 597 ===

596
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Birth, death, old age and disease are
undergone by JвҲӮvas as a result of their sins.
Hence they are all full of evils. Constantly
dwelling on this idea is what is meant by
seeing evils in them.
As a matter of fact with the exception of
the conscious Self there is nothing in this
world which is free from these four evils.
A house is built, this constitutes its birth;
a part of it is broken, this represents its
diseased condition, the broken part is repaired,
the evil is remedied; the house becomes old,
this represents its old age; it is now past
repairs. Reaching the state of dilapidation it
collapses; this represents its death. All things,
great and small, go through this process.
Thus observing all objects of the world as
subject to birth, death, old age and disease,
one should cultivate dispassion towards
them.
identification can be set aside only by
overcoming the feeling of mineness. Hence the
sense in which we have interpreted the word
Г«AnabhiВ¶vangaГӯ seems to be the correct sense
of the term.
Contact 
with 
agreeable 
persons,
actions, events and objects and the
disappearance of what is disagreeable is
welcome (IВ¶Вўa) to all. Similarly, the
disappearance of what is agreeable, and contact
with what is disagreeable is Г«unwelcomeГӯ
(AniВ¶Вўa) to all. Absence of joy in the presence
of what is agreeable and on the disappearance
of what is disagreeable, and absence of grief,
fear and anger in the presence of what is
disagreeable and on the disappearance of
what is agreeable, that is, remaining unmoved,
even-tempered and equipoised under all
circumstancesГіthis is what is meant by
Г«equipoise of mind both in favourable and
unfavourable circumstancesГӯ.
Close association with oneГӯs wife and
children, home and wealth etc., generally
makes for special attachment to them. Even
after one has developed dispassion towards
ordinary objects of senses, this attachment
for wife, son etc., often remains lurking behind.
That is why absence of attachment for these
has been separately and specially mentioned
in this verse over and above dispassion towards
objects of enjoyment, mentioned in verse 8
above, which ordinarily covers the absence
of all forms of attachment.
The word Г«AnabhiВ¶vangaГӯ cannot be taken
to mean Г«absence of egotismГӯ as the same has
already been referred to in the preceding verse
by the term Г«AnahankГҘraГӯ. It is the feeling of
mineness which is responsible for close
identification with oneГӯs wife and children etc.
That is why the joys and sorrows, as well as
the gain and loss, of the latter make one
personally 
happy 
and 
unhappy. 
This
вҖўвҖҡГҒQВ§вҒ„UЕёГҒГ·cп¬ӮXГ”UвҖ” 
В¬ГҲГІГҠЕ’ГҠвҒ„UВӘГҺвҖһUГҠГҒЕ’В·ГҲГ”вҖ“
ГҒЕёГ ГҝВў Гё вҖҡв—ҠГҒГёГ»ГҠГ п¬ӮГҒв—ҠcвүҲГҠГҒЕёcвүҲГҠпЈҝВ¬В¬ГҒГ»ГҠВ·ГҲH 9H
вҖўвҖҡГҒQВ§вҖ”Г” absence of attachment; вҖўЕёГҒГ·cп¬ӮXГ”UвҖ” absence of the feeling of mineness; В¬ГҲГІГҠЕ’ГҠвҒ„UВӘГҺвҖһUГҠГҒЕ’В·ГҲГ”
to son, wife, home etc.; ГҒЕёГ Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” constant; Гё and; вҖҡв—ҠГҒГёГ»ГҠГ п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” equipoise of mind; ГҹcвүҲГҠГҒЕёcвүҲГҠпЈҝВ¬В¬ГҒГ»ГҠВ·ГҲ
in favourable and unfavourable circumstances.
Absence of attachment and the feeling of mineness in respect of son, wife, home etc.,
and constant equipoise of mind both in favourable and unfavourable circumstances. (9)
в—ҠГҒГҝ ГёГҠЕёГЈГҝГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝЕё Г·ГҒQВ§вҒ„UвҲҡГҝГҒГ·ГёГҠГҒвҒ„UГЎГҠГӢвҖ“
ГҒп¬ӮГҒп¬ӮQВ§Е’пЈҝвүҘГҠвҖҡпЈҝГҒп¬ӮГ п¬Ӯв—ҠвҒ„UГҒГғВЎВёЕёвҖҡВўвҖҡГҒЕ’ 
H 10H

=== PAGE 598 ===

* Chapter XIII *
597
Г«AnanyayogaГӯ means getting exclusively
united with God as the highest of all beings
and as oneГӯs sole lord, worth resorting to, the
supreme goal, the highest refuge, oneГӯs father,
mother, brother and friend, the greatest
benefactor, the nearest relation and everything,
and treating nobody else as oneГӯs own.
And cultivating steady, consummate and
unadulterated love for God conceived as above
and practising constant remembrance of and
meditation on Him is what is meant by
unflinching devotion to Him through exclusive
attachment.
The man who practises such devotion
ceases to have any trace of selfishness or
egotism in him and he no longer claims
anything belonging to this world as his own.
He is connected with the world only through
God, he ceases to have any direct relation
with anybody. He views everything as
belonging to God, and is constantly engaged
in meditating on God in a disinterested spirit
with reverence and love. Whatever he does,
he does for the sake of God.
Any secluded, lonely and consecrated
place, e.g., a temple or seat of religious
austerity, that bank of a holy river like the
Ganges, a sacred woodland or mountain cave
etc., which is free from bustle and noise and
is uninhabited by others, which when used
as a residence evokes no objection and causes
no vexation to others, which is free from dirt,
refuse, pebbles and thorns, which has lovely
natural surroundings which has a salubrious
climate and a holy atmosphere, which is free
from infectious diseases, and is not infested
by carnivorous animals, and which is free
from violence and surcharged with SГҘttvika
vibrations, is called Г«ViviktadeвҖ№aГӯ; and residing
in such a place with the object of carrying on
practices for Self-realization is what is referred
to here as Г«ViviktadeвҖ№asevitvamГӯ.
The word Г«JanasaвүҲsadiГӯ in present context
means the company of men steeped in error
and attached to worldly enjoyments. And
abhorring such company as a positive hindrance
to spiritual life is what is meant by finding no
enjoyment in the company of men. Association
with saints, exalted souls and aspirants, on the
other hand, is helpful to spiritual practice;
therefore, Г«JanasaвүҲsadiГӯ should not be taken
to refer to the company of such men.
в—ҠГҒГҝГ” to Me (the supreme Lord); Гё and; вҖўЕёГЈГҝГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝЕёГ” through exclusive attachment of mind;
Г·ГҒQВ§вҖ” devotion; вҖўвҲҡГҝГҒГ·ГёГҠГҒвҒ„UГЎГҠГӢ unflinching; ГҒп¬ӮГҒп¬ӮQВ§Е’пЈҝвүҘГҠвҖҡпЈҝГҒп¬ӮГ п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” living in secluded and holy places;
вҖўвҒ„UГҒГғвҖ” absence of enjoyment; ВЎЕёвҖҡВўвҖҡГҒЕ’ in the company of worldly people.
Unflinching devotion to Me through exclusive attachment, living in secluded and
holy places, and finding no enjoyment in the company of worldly people;           (10)
вҖўГӨГҝГҠГ в—ҠГҙГҠГҠЕёГҒЕёГ ГҝГ п¬ӮВў 
ГғГ»п¬ӮГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠГ•ВёЕ’вүҘГҠВёЕёв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҲһГғГ–ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҒв—ҠГҒГғ В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§в—ҠГҙГҠГҠЕёВў ГҝЕ’ГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГЈГҝГ•ГҠH 11H
вҖўГӨГҝГҠГ в—ҠГҙГҠГҠЕёГҒЕёГ ГҝГ п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” constancy in self-knowledge; ГғГ»п¬ӮГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠГ•ВёЕ’вүҘГҠВёЕёв—ҠЛңГ” seeing (God as) the
object of true knowledge; вҲһГғГғЛңГ” (all) this; ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” (is) Knowledge; ГҹГҒГғ thus; В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§в—ҠЛңГ” has been said;
вҖўГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” (is) ignorance; ГҝГғЛңГ” (and) what (is); вҖўГғвҖ”Г” than this; вҖўГЈГҝГ•ГҠ contrary.
Constancy in Self-knowledge and seeing God as the object of true knowledge; all
this is declared as knowledge; and what is contrary to this is called ignorance.         (11)
which appear as perishable, material and subject
to modification and change are not-Self; the
The Self or spirit is eternal, conscious,
changeless and imperishable. All other objects

=== PAGE 599 ===

598
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Self has absolutely no relation with them.
Г«AdhyГҘtma-JВӨГҘnaГӯ or self-knowledge consists
in thus realizing the truth of the Self through
the scriptures and teachings of the preceptor.
And conclusively determining this truth by
the intellect, and dwelling on it constantly
with the mind is what is meant by Г«constancy
in Self-knowledge.Гӯ
The object of true knowledge is the
integral Brahma or God, who is Truth,
Consciousness and Bliss solidified; for it is He
who is realized through such knowledge.
Constantly visualizing that transcendent Reality
as equally present everywhere is what is meant
by Г«seeing the object of true knowledge.Гӯ
The virtues enumerated in the preceding
verses, from Г«AmГҘnitvamГӯ in verse 7 to
Г«TattvajВӨГҘnГҘrthadarвҖ№anamГӯ in the present one,
are all conducive to the attainment of
Knowledge; therefore they have also been
given the name of Knowledge. The intention
of this is to make it clear that the statement of
the Lord contained in verse 2 above, viz.,
that the knowledge of Г«KВ¶etraГӯ and Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ
is what He considers as true knowledge, should
not lead the reader to think that having
understood that Г«KВ¶etraГӯ stands for the body
and Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ denotes the indwelling subject
or Self, he has attained true knowledge. On
the other hand, true knowledge is that which
follows the realization of the truth about
Г«KВ¶etraГӯ and Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ attained through the
practice of the twenty virtues mentioned above.
It is in order to reveal this truth to the reader
that these virtues have been declared as
synonymous with Knowledge. Thus an
enlightened soul must possess these virtues
from the very start. It is, however, not
indispensable that all these qualities should
appear simultaneously in all SГҘdhakas. Of
course, many of these virtues, which are useful
to all, e.g., absence of pride, freedom from
hypocrisy etc., are invariably present in every
case. Other virtues, such as Г«unflinching
devotionГӯ, Г«living in seclusionГӯ, Г«constancy in
Self-knowledgeГӯ, Г«seeing God as the object
of true knowledgeГӯ etc., may be optional
according to the mode of discipline followed
by a SГҘdhaka.
The opposites of these virtues, viz., lust
for honour and glory, hypocrisy, violence,
anger, duplicity, crookedness, malice, impurity,
fickleness, covetousness, attachment, egotism,
the sense of mineness, differentiation, impiety,
association with evil man and other such evil
propensities are conducive to the growth of
ignorance, which is the cause of birth and
death, and degrade the  soul.  Hence they are
the same as ignorance and as such should be
totally abandoned.
Hearing thus of the means to knowledge under the appellation of Knowledge, one may
ask: What is that which should be known through the Knowledge acquired by such means,
and what is the result of that Knowledge? Anticipating this question, the Lord undertakes
to describe the object of Knowledge and, holding out the Г¬attainment of immortalityГ® as its
reward, devotes the next six verses to a description of God, the object of Knowledge.
ГҙГҠпЈҝГҝВў ГҝГ»ГҠГ В¬Лқп¬ӮЛҮГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ ГҝГ–ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠв—ҠГҺГғв—ҠoAГҲГғпЈҝвҖ“
вҖўЕёГҠГҒЕ’в—ҠГ В¬вҒ„ВўU вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” Её вҖҡГ»ГҠГӣГҠГҠвҖҡЕ’ГҲГ«ГҝГғпЈҝH 12H
ГҙГҠпЈҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ” (is) worth knowing; ГҝГғЛңГ” which; ГғГғЛңГ” that; В¬Лқп¬ӮЛҮГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ I shall speak at length about; ГҝГғЛңГ”
(and) which; ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ having known; вҖўв—ҠГҺГғв—ҠЛңГ” supreme bliss; вҖўoAГҲГғпЈҝ one attains; вҖўЕёГҠГҒЕ’в—ҠГғЛңГ” ruling over
beginningless entities; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” supreme; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” Brahma (Absolute); Её neither; вҖҡГғЛңГ” being; ГғГғЛңГ” that; Её
nor; вҖўвҖҡГғЛңГ” non-being; В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is declared.

=== PAGE 600 ===

* Chapter XIII *
599
The word Г«JВӨeyamГӯ in this verse stands
for Brahma or God, both absolute and
qualified, who is all truth, all consciousness
and all bliss; for, in this very context, the
Lord speaks of this object of knowledge as
both attributeless and as the enjoyer of attributes
or modes of PrakГҰti.
The word Г«AmГҰtaГӯ denotes God who is
an embodiment of supreme bliss. The intention
is to show that through the knowledge of the
supreme Brahma or God, who is the only
object worth knowing, man gets freed for all
time from the bondage of mundane existence
in the form of repeated births and deaths, and
attains supreme Bliss. It is this supreme Bliss
which is also spoken of as attainment of the
supreme goal or the supreme state.
In verse 19 of this very chapter, the Lord
speaks of both PrakГҰti (Matter) and the individual
soul as beginningless. Being the Lord of both,
the supreme Brahma or the supreme PuruВ¶a
has been referred to here as Г«AnГҘdimatГӯ (holding
sway over beginningless entities).
The use of the word Г«BrahmaГӯ qualified
by the adjective Г«ParamГӯ, is intended to show
that the object of Knowledge referred to here
is no other than the absolute, formless Brahma
or God, who is Truth, Consciousness and
Bliss solidified. The word Г«BrahmaГӯ can also
be taken to denote the Vedas, BrahmГҘ (the
Creator) and PrakГҰti; hence it has been qualified
by the adjective Г«ParamГӯ in order to show
that the object of Knowledge spoken of in
this verse is something different from all these.
That which is established by proof is
called Г«SatГӯ (being). The existence of God,
who is eternal and imperishable and stands
self-proved, cannot be established by any proof;
for all derive their existence from God, who
is beyond all proof. вҖәruti also says: Г¬How
can that knowing subject be known?Г® He is
entirely different from objects which can be
known through various means of cognition;
hence God cannot be called Г«SatГӯ. And that
which has no existence in reality is spoken of
as Г«AsatГӯ (non-being); but it is not true to say
that the supreme Brahma or God has no
existence. He surely exists; nay, the existence
of all else is proved by His existence. Hence
He cannot be called Г«AsatГӯ (non-being) either.
That is why God is beyond both Г«SatГӯ (being)
and Г«AsatГӯ (non-being).
In IX.19 the Lord said that He was
Г«beingГӯ and Г«non-beingГӯ both; whereas in the
present verse He says that God, who is the
only object worth knowing, is neither Г«SatГӯ
(being) nor Г«AsatГӯ (non-being). Although the
above two statements appear as contradictory,
the contradiction is more apparent than real.
For when a positive assertion is made with
reference to God, it is stated that all that
exists is Brahma; and when an attempt is
made to describe Him by the negative method,
it is said that He is Г«neither this nor thatГӯ, but
that He certainly is. In the previous statement
a positive assertion is made with regard to
God; hence it was but reasonable for the
Lord to say, Г¬I am being and non-being
both.Г® But, truly speaking, words cannot
describe the real character of God either by
the positive or by the negative method.
Whatever is said about Him is only intended
to serve as a hint just as we try to locate the
new moon with the help of a bough which
appears adjacent to it; words are utterly
incapable of representing His true character.
вҖәruti also says:Гі
ГҝГғГҠпЈҝ п¬ӮГҠГёГҠпЈҝ ГҒЕёп¬ӮГғВёГЈГғпЈҝ вҖўВ¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝ в—ҠЕёвҖҡГҠ вҖҡвҖһUвҖ“
I shall speak to you at length about that which ought to be known, and knowing
which one attains supreme Bliss. That supreme Brahma, who is the lord of the (two)
beginningless entitiesГі(PrakГҰti and JвҲӮva)Гіis said to be neither Sat (being) nor Asat
(non-being).
(12)

=== PAGE 601 ===

600
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Г¬Failing to reach Whom, speech together
with the mind returneth (that is Brahma).Г®
(Tait up. II.9) It is in order to bring this out
clearly that in the present verse the Lord
negatively describes God as neither Г«SatГӯ
(being) nor Г«AsatГӯ (non-being). He means to
say that the true character of the object of
knowledge sought to be described by Him is
beyond the ken of mind or speech; therefore,
whatever will be said about Him should be
taken to be only a faint indication of His
character and nothing more.
Undertaking thus to describe the reality of what is worth knowing (JВӨeya), the Lord
briefly described that truth; but the truth of that object of Knowledge is deeply profound.
Hence, in order to give an idea of that truth to the SГҘdhaka the Lord further describes it
in detail through such attributes as Г«all-pervasivenessГӯ, etc.
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГғвҖ”В¬ГҠГҒГЎГҠВ¬ГҠЕ’Вў ГғГ вҖҡп¬ӮВёГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒЛҮГҠГҒвүҘГҠвҒ„UГҠпЈҝв—ҠГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГғвҖ”ГјГҠГҲГҒГғв—ҠГҖвҲӮГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ вҖҡп¬ӮВёв—ҠГҠп¬ӮГҺГ Гҝ ГҒГғDГ”UГҒГғUH 13H
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГғвҖ”В¬ГҠГҒГЎГҠВ¬ГҠЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” having hands and feet on all sides; ГғГғЛңГ” It (is); вҖҡп¬ӮВёГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒЛҮГҠГҒвүҘГҠвҒ„UГҠпЈҝв—ҠГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ” having
eyes, heads and faces in all directions; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГғвҖ”ГјГҠГҲГҒГғв—ҠГғЛңГ” (and) having ears all round; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ (for) in
the universe; вҖҡп¬ӮВёв—ҠЛңГ” all; вҖўГҠп¬ӮГҺГ Гҝ pervading; ГҒГғDГ”UГҒГғU It stands.
It has hands and feet on all sides, eyes, head and mouth in all directions, and ears
all-round; for It stands pervading all in the universe.                                (13)
of food wherever His devotees offer it to
Him; there is no place where His mouth does
not exist. In other words, God, who is the
only object worth knowing, is the Witness of
all, is all-seeing, and is capable of accepting
the homage and offerings of all.
The statement that Г¬He has ears all
roundГ® likewise describes the all-pervasiveness
of God. It means that He can hear everywhere.
Wherever His devotees offer Him praises or
prayers or make entreaties to Him, He clearly
hears them all.
The concluding assertion that Г¬He stands
pervading all in the universeГ® also proves in
a comprehensive sense the all-pervasive
character of that which is worth knowing.
Just as ether, being the cause of air, fire,
water and earth, stands pervading all those
elements, even so, God, being the cause of
the entire universe consisting of the animate
and inanimate creation, stands pervading them
all. Therefore, everything is full of God.
The assertion that God has hands on all
sides signifies that He is capable of accepting
an offering wherever it is offered to Him.
Similarly, the statement that He has feet every-
where implies that He accepts the prostrations
made at His feet by a devotee wherever he offers
them. For, omnipotent as He is, He can perform
the function of all His senses and other faculties
everywhere. His grasping faculty and moving
faculty are all-pervasive.
The statement that Г¬He has eyes, head
and mouth in all directionsГ®, also shows the
all-pervasive character of that which is worth
knowing. Since he has eyes everywhere,
there is no space where His eyes do not
function; hence nothing is hidden from His
view. Inasmuch as He has His Head
everywhere, flowers etc., placed on His head
by the devotees as a mark of honour reach
His head wherever they are offered; there is
no place devoid of His head. Having His
mouth everywhere, He can accept an article

=== PAGE 602 ===

* Chapter XIII *
601
The first half of this verse shows that even
the qualified aspect of God, who is the only
object worth knowing, is exceptionally
marvellous and transcendent in character. That
is to say, the assertion made in verse 13 above
that he has hand and feet and all other senses
functioning everywhere, should not lead one
to think that He has hands and feet and other
organs analogous to those of other living beings.
Though altogether devoid of such senses, He
is capable of perceiving the respective objects
of those senses. That is why He has been
declared as having all the senses everywhere
and yet devoid of all senses. вҖәruti also says:Гі
Г¬He (God) grasps and rapidly moves
without hands and feet; he sees without eyes
and hears without ears.Г® (вҖәve. Up. III.19.)*
Hence He is possessed of a transcendent
character; this is what is sought to be conveyed
in the present and the following two verses.
The assertion that Г¬though unattached,
He is the sustainer of allГ® shows that, unlike
worldly parents who maintain and support
their family out of attachment for the latter,
God or the supreme Brahma sustains and
nourishes all without any attachment. That is
why He has been spoken of as the disinterested
friend and benefactor of all beings (V.29). In
other words, God, who is all-pervading and
the only object worth knowing, is entirely
free from the taint of attachment. Yet He
sustains and nourishes all due to His contact
with PrakГҰti. Herein lies His transcendence.
The concluding statement that Г¬though
really beyond all attributes, God is the enjoyer
of qualitiesГ® also establishes His transcendent
character. The intention is to show that, though
enjoying all qualities or modes of PrakГҰti,
God is never tainted by the modes of PrakГҰti
even as other beings are. Though in reality
He is entirely beyond the modes of PrakГҰti,
He is yet the enjoyer of all qualities by
reason of His contact with PrakГҰti. This is
another example of His transcendence.
Speaking of God as having His hands and feet and all other senses capable of
functioning everywhere, the Lord now proceeds to establish the transcendent character of
His being.
вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёГҒГЈВәЛқГҝВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠГ·ГҠвҖҡВў 
вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҒп¬Ӯп¬ӮГҢВЎГғв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖўвҖҡQВўВ§ вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҺГ¬ГҠГ’п¬Ӯ ГҒЕёВӘГҲВёГЎГҠВў ВӘГҲГЎГҠГ·ГҠпЈҝГ„ГғГҺ ГёH 14H
вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёГҒГЈВәЛқГҝВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠГ·ГҠвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” perceiving all sense-objects; вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҒп¬Ӯп¬ӮГҢВЎГғв—ҠЛңГ” (it is really speaking)
devoid of all senses; вҖўвҖҡQВ§в—ҠЛңГ” (though) unattached; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҺГғЛңГ” (is) the sustainer of all; ГёГ” and; вҲһп¬Ӯ
nonetheless; ГҒЕёВӘГҲВёГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” (though) attributeless; ВӘГҲГЎГҠГ·ГҠпЈҝГ„ГғГҺ (is yet) the enjoyer of GuЖ’as or modes of
PrakГҰti; Гё and (again).
Though perceiving all sense-objects, It is, really speaking, devoid of all senses.
Nay, though unattached, It is the sustainer of all nonetheless; and though attributeless,
It is the enjoyer of GuЖ’as (the three modes of PrakГҰti).                                   (14)
вҖҷГҒвҖһUвҒ„UГЈГғp 
Г·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠв—ҠГёвҒ„ВўU 
ГёвҒ„Uв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ 
ГёГ”вҖ“
вҖҡГҚЛҮв—ҠГ п¬ӮГҠГ»ГҠЕ’ГҒп¬ӮГҙГҠпЈҝГҝВў Е’ГҚвҒ„USГ•Вў ГёГҠГҒГЈГғвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ Гё ГғГғЛңГ”H 15H
вҖҷГҒвҖһUвҖ” вҖўГЈГғвҖ”Г” (It exists) without and within; Гё and; Г·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” all beings (both moving and
unmoving);  вҖўГёвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” (and) unmoving; ГёвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” (It is) moving; вҲһп¬Ӯ as well; Гё and; вҖҡГҚЛҮв—ҠГ п¬ӮГҠГғЛңГ” by reason
*
вҖўВ¬ГҠГҒГЎГҠВ¬ГҠЕ’ГҠпЈҝ ВЎп¬ӮЕёГҠпЈҝ ВӘЛқвҖһUГӢГғГҠ В¬вүҘГҝГ ГҝГёЛҮГҠГҲвҖ” вҖҡ oГҺГЎГҠГҠпЈҝГ ГҝвҲ‘В§ГЎГҠВёвҖ”вҖ“

=== PAGE 603 ===

602
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Just as an iceberg floating in the sea is
pervaded, both inside and outside, by water,
even so all animate and inanimate beings are
pervaded, both inside and outside, by God,
who is the only object worth knowing.
The above statement that God exists
both within and without all animate and
inanimate beings should not lead anyone to
imagine that the moving and unmoving
creation itself is something different from
Him. In order to make this clear, the Lord
further says that the animate and inanimate
creation too constitutes His being. That is to
say, just as a block of floating ice has water
both within and without, and the ice is really
the same as water and nothing but water,
even so the whole animate and inanimate
creation is the same as God and nothing
but God.
One may ask here: If everything is God,
how is it that all people do not know Him?
Anticipating this query, the Lord further says
that just as the common people cannot perceive
the molecules of water existing in the sunГӯs
rays,Гіthey find it hard to perceive those
molecules,Гіeven so the all-pervading supreme
Brahma or God, being far subtler even than
the 
molecules 
of 
water, 
beats 
the
comprehension of the common people and is
thus incomprehensible.
There is no space within or without this
entire universe, where, God is not. Hence He
is too near and far as well; for God, who is
Consciousness and Bliss solidified, ever fills
all places which man regards as distant and
near. Hence He is too near to those reverent
soul who know this truth; while He is far
away to the irreverent.
of Its subtlety; ГғГғЛңГ” It; вҖўГҒп¬ӮГҙГҠпЈҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ” (is) incomprehensible; Е’ГҚвҒ„USГ•в—ҠЛңГ” standing afar; Гё and (finally);
вҖўГҒГЈГғвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ close at hand; Гё as well as; ГғГғЛңГ” (is) That.
It exists without and within all beings, and constitutes the moving and unmoving
creation as well. And by reason of Its subtlety, It is incomprehensible; It is close at
hand, and stands afar too.*                                                                       (15)
вҖўГҒп¬ӮГ·Г„ГғВў Гё Г·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ ГҒп¬ӮГ·QВ§ГҒв—Ҡп¬Ӯ Гё ГҒSГ•Гғв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
Г·ГҚГғГ·ГғГҺВё Гё ГғГ–ГҙГҠпЈҝГҝВў ВӘЛқГҒвҖҡcГЎГҠГҲ В¬ЛқГ·ГҒп¬ӮcГЎГҠГҲ ГёГ”H 16H
вҖўГҒп¬ӮГ·QВ§в—ҠЛңГ” (in its undivided aspect) integral like space; Гё and yet; Г·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ in (all) beings
(both animate and inanimate); ГҒп¬ӮГ·Г„Гғв—ҠЛңГ” divided; Гҹп¬Ӯ as it were; Гё and; ГҒSГ•Гғв—ҠЛңГ” appears to stand;
Г·ГҚГғГ·ГғГҺВё (is) the sustainer and nourisher of beings (as ViВ¶Ж’u); Гё and; ГғГғЛңГ” that; ГҙГҠпЈҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ” God, who
is the only object worth knowing; ВӘЛқГҒвҖҡcГЎГҠГҲ the destroyer (as Rudra); В¬ЛқГ·ГҒп¬ӮcГЎГҠГҲ the creator of all
(as BrahmГҘ); Гё and.
Though integral like space in Its undivided aspect, It appears divided, as it were,
in all animate and inanimate beings. And that Godhead, which is the only object worth
knowing, is the sustainer of beings (as ViВ¶Ж’u), the destroyer (as Rudra) and the creator
of all (as BrahmГҘ).                                                                        (16)
*
вҖәruti also says:Гі
ГғЕ’пЈҝВЎГҒГғ ГғГӣГҠГ’ВЎГҒГғ ГғЕ’ЛңГ”Е’ГҚвҒ„пЈҝU ГғmГҒГЈГғвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вҖ“ ГғЕ’ГЈГғвҒ„USГҝ вҖҡп¬ӮВёSГҝ ГғЕ’ГҲ вҖҡп¬ӮВёSГҝГҠSГҝ вҖҷГҠsГ”ГғвҖ”H
(вҲ«вҖ№a. Up. 5)
Г¬It moves and it does not move; it is far and it is near too. It is within this all as well as without
the entire creationГ®.

=== PAGE 604 ===

* Chapter XIII *
603
The first line of this verse establishes
the unity of God, who is the only object
worth knowing. Just as the all pervading
space, though really one and indivisible,
appears divided as it were because of its
being enclosed by different pots, even so
God, though really undivided, appears divided
as it were in the form of the Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ,
residing in all beings, both animate and
inanimate. This diversity is only apparent; in
reality, God is one, and He fills all space.
The latter half of this verse shows that
Almighty God, who is the only object worth
knowing, is the creator, sustainer and destroyer
of the entire creation, both animate and
inanimate, and performs these functions in
three different forms. In other words, He
alone is BrahmГҘ, ViВ¶Ж’u and вҖәiva.
Г–ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒГғВ·ГҠв—ҠГҒВ¬ ГғГ®ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒГғSГғв—ҠвҖҡвҖ” В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҲГ«ГҝГғпЈҝвҖ“
ГҙГҠГҠЕёВў ГҙГҠпЈҝГҝВў ГҙГҠГҠЕёВӘГӘГҝВў NUГҒЕ’ вҖҡп¬ӮВёSГҝ ГҒп¬ӮГҒDГ”UГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 17H
Г–ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒГғВ·ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of lights; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; ГғГғЛңГ” that (supreme Brahma); Г–ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒГғвҖ” the light; Гғв—ҠвҖҡвҖ” В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” (and)
entirely beyond MГҘyГҘ (Illusion); В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is said (to be); ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” (It is) Knowledge itself; ГҙГҠпЈҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ”
worth knowing; ГҙГҠГҠЕёВӘГӘГҝв—ҠЛңГ” (and) worth attaining through real wisdom; NUГҒЕ’ in the heart; вҖҡп¬ӮВёSГҝ
of all; ГҒп¬ӮГҒDГ”UГғв—ҠЛңГ” (is) particularly abiding.
That supreme Brahma is said to be the light of all lights and entirely beyond
MГҘyГҘ. That godhead is Knowledge itself, worth knowing, and worth attaining through
real wisdom, and is particularly abiding in the hearts of all.                          (17)
The word Г«TamasaВЁГӯ in this verse stands
for darkness and ignorance. And the godhead
referred to here is self effulgent and Knowledge
itself; Darkness and ignorance cannot exist
near Him. Hence He has been spoken of as
entirely beyondГіaltogether fromГіMГҘyГҘ.
The word Г«JВӨГҘnamГӯ (Knowledge) denotes
the essential nature of God. The use of this
attribute shows that God is consciousness or
Knowledge itself.
Again, the qualification Г«JВӨeyaГӯ used
with reference to It is intended to reveal that
the highest duty of man is to know God, the
only object worth knowing, the discussion of
which has been commenced from verse 12
above. Hence it behoves all to exert themselves
fully to know Its truth, rather than fritter
away their precious lives in pursuit of worldly
enjoyments.
The word Г«JВӨeyamГӯ indicates that it is
essential to know God. Here it may be asked:
The godhead referred to above is the
illuminator of all external lights such as the
sun, moon, lightning and stars, of all psychic
lights viz., the intellect, mind and senses etc.,
and of all celestial lights in the shape of
deities presiding over the different worlds
and objects. Even the power of illumination
inherent in all these is only a fraction of God.
That is why He is the light of all lights, i.e.,
the illuminator of all, the source of all light;
He is illuminated by none. вҖәruti also says:Гі
Г¬Neither the sun nor the moon, nor stars
shine in that realm; nor again does lightning
flash there. How, then, can this fire shed its
lustre ? All these reflect His light; all this
borrows its light from His.Г® (KaВўhopaniВ¶ad
II.ii.15 and вҖәve. Up., VI.14)* The GвҲӮtГҘ also
says in XV.12 that Г¬the light in the sun,
which illumines the entire universe, and that
which exists in the moon and in the fire,
know it to be My effulgence.Г®
*
Её ГғГІГҠ вҖҡГҚГҝГҠпЈҝВё Г·ГҠГҒГғ Её ГёГЈВәЛқГғГҠвҒ„UвҲ‘ВўВ§ ЕёпЈҝв—ҠГҠ ГҒп¬ӮlГҲГғГҠпЈҝ Г·ГҠГҒГЈГғ вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГҝв—ҠГҒВӘAвҖ”вҖ“
Гғв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ 
Г·ГҠГЈГғв—ҠЕёГҲГ·ГҠГҒГғ 
вҖҡп¬ӮZ 
ГғSГҝ 
Г·ГҠвҖҡГҠ 
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГҒв—ҠЕ’Вў 
ГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҠГҒГғH

=== PAGE 605 ===

604
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
How is He to be known? Anticipating this
query, the Lord says that He can be known
by means of true wisdom acquired through
the practice of virtues like Г«absence of prideГӯ
etc., referred to in the foregoing verses as
conducive to Knowledge. God should be
known by acquiring true wisdom through the
practice of the above virtues.
Although God is equally present
everywhere, it is in the heart that He is
particularly manifested. To take a homely
illustration, the light of the sun, though diffused
everywhere in a uniform degree, is particularly
reflected in a mirror etc.; while it emits fire
when reflected in a sun-stone. The reflection
is not so strong in other objects. Even so the
human heart is the seat of GodГӯs manifestation.
In the heart of an illumined soul, of course,
He stands directly manifested. It is in order to
bring this out clearly that God has been
spoken of as particularly seated in the hearts
of all.
Thus briefly describing the true nature of the KВ¶etra. Knowledge and the object worth
knowing, the Lord now points out the reward, of knowing this subject.
ГҹГҒГғ ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠВў ГғГ•ГҠ ГҙГҠГҠЕёВў ГҙГҠпЈҝГҝВў ГёГҠпЈҝQВўВ§ вҖҡв—ҠГҠвҖҡГғвҖ”вҖ“
в—ҠjQВ§ 
вҲһГғГҒmГҙГҠГҠГҝ 
в—ҠjГҠп¬ӮГҠГҝГҠпЈҝВ¬В¬lГғпЈҝГ”H 18H
ГҹГҒГғ thus; ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the KВ¶etra (Field); ГғГ•ГҠ as well as; ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” Knowledge; ГҙГҠпЈҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ” God (Who is)
the only object worth knowing; Гё and; В©UQВ§в—ҠЛңГ” has been discussed; вҖҡв—ҠГҠвҖҡГғвҖ” in a nutshell; в—ҠjQВ§вҖ”
My devotee; вҲһГғГғЛңГ” this; ГҒп¬ӮГҙГҠГҠГҝ knowing in reality; в—ҠjГҠп¬ӮГҠГҝ В©UВ¬В¬lГғпЈҝГ” attains to My Being.
Thus the truth of the KВ¶etra and knowledge, as well as of the object worth
knowing, i.e., God, has been briefly discussed; knowing this in reality, My devotee
enters into My Being.                                                                             (18)
the path of Knowledge can easily reach
the supreme state by surrendering himself
to God.
Realization of the fact that the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ
is an evolute of PrakГҰti, unconscious, mutable,
transient and perishable, resolute adoption of
the virtues and practices conducive to
Knowledge, and arriving through such means
at a correct notion of both the Absolute and
Qualified aspects of GodГіthis is what is
meant by knowing the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ, Knowledge
and that which ought to be known. And
realizing God, who is the only object worth
knowing, is what is referred to here as entering
into His Being.
The true denotation of Г«KВ¶etraГӯ along
with its evolutes has been discussed in verses
5 and 6. The twenty accessories to Knowledge
have been mentioned under the name of
Knowledge in verses 7 to 11; while the true
character of God, who is the only object
worth knowing, has been discussed in verse
12 to 17 above.
The word Г«MadbhaktaВЁГӯ in this verse
stands for the devotee of God engaged in the
practices of devotion such as His adoration,
meditation on His being, carrying out His
commandments, worship and devotional
service etc. The use of this word is intended
to show that even the SГҘdhaka who treads
In verse 3 above, the Lord invited Arjuna to hear in a nutshell four things with
reference to the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ and two things with regard to the Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ or the conscious
subject. Then, after discussing at the very outset the true nature of the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ and its
evolutes, He incidentally enumerated the virtues and practices leading to a correct knowledge

=== PAGE 606 ===

* Chapter XIII *
605
The word Г«PrakГҰtiГӯ in this verse stands
for GodГӯs own primoridal Nature, that has
existed from time without beginning. It is no
other than what has been spoken of as Г«Mahad-
BrahmaГӯ in Chapter XIV. Again, it is this
very PrakГҰti that has been referred to in
VII.4-5 under the name of Г«AparГҘ PrakГҰtiГӯ or
lower Nature, and as Г«KВ¶etraГӯ in verse 5
above. The only difference is that whereas
the above verses speak of this Primordial
PrakГҰti with her evolutes, viz., mind, intellect,
ego and the five gross elements etc., the
present verse treats of primordial Nature alone.
The use of the particles Г«CaГӯ and Г«EvaГӯ
is intended to convey that PrakГҰti and PuruВ¶a
stand on the same footing so far as
Г«beginninglessnessГӯ is concerned, or that the
two are identical in this respect. And the
object of declaring both as Г«without beginningГӯ
is to show that the JвҲӮvahood of the JвҲӮva, i.e.,
his association with PrakГҰti is not something
adventitious, but has existed from time without
beginning, and even so this PrakГҰti, which is
GodГӯs own energy or potency, should be
recognized as beginningless.
The 
word 
Г«VikГҘrГҘnГӯ 
stands 
for
modifications such as desire and aversion, joy
and sorrow etc., enumerated in verse 6 of this
very chapter; while Г«GuЖ’ГҘnГӯ stands for the
three GuЖ’as, or modes of PrakГҰti, viz., Sattva,
Rajas, Tamas, and all material objects evolved
therefrom. The intention of the Lord in declaring
both these to be Nature-born is to show that
PrakГҰti is not synonymous with the three
GuЖ’asГіSattva, Rajas and Tamas; it is
something without beginning. In the beginning
of creation, the three GuЖ’as are born of PrakГҰti
(SrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata II.v.22 and XI.xziv.5). It
is in order to make this point clear that in
XIV.5 the Lord mentions the three GuЖ’as by
name and declares them as Nature-born. Again,
in verse 5 of Chapter III, verse 40 of Chapter
XVIII, and verse 21 of the present Chapter the
Lord speaks of the three GuЖ’as as Nature-
born. Verses 27 and 28 of Chapter III as well
refer to the three GuЖ’as as evolutes of PrakГҰti.
Therefore, the three GuЖ’asГіSattva, Rajas and
TamasГіwith their evolutes, and likewise all
modifications should be recognized as born of
PrakГҰti or Nature.
of the truth relating to the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ and the Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ, and further discussed the true nature
of God, who is the only object worth knowing. But He did not tell the character of the
Г«KВ¶etraГӯ and did not state which particular effect follows from which cause; nor did He
discuss the true nature of the KВ¶etrajВӨa and its glory. Therefore, in order to take up the
thread of the discussion the Lord reverts to the topic under the name of Г«PrakГҰtiГӯ and
Г«PuruВ¶aГӯ (Matter and Spirit). Declaring in this connection, first of all, the datelessness of
PrakГҰti and PuruВ¶a, He proclaims all modifications and qualities to be Nature-born.
В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғВў В¬ГҲLВ§В·Вў ГёГ’п¬Ӯ ГҒп¬ӮhKЕёГҠЕ’ГӢ В©UГ·ГҠп¬ӮГҒВ¬вҖ“
ГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГҠВўp ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠВўpГ’п¬Ӯ ГҒп¬ӮГҒh В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғвҖҡГӘГ·п¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ”H 19H
В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” PrakГҰti (Matter); В¬ГҲLВ§В·в—ҠЛңГ” PuruВ¶a (Spirit); ГёГ” and; вҲһп¬Ӯ indeed; ГҒп¬ӮГҒh know; вҖўЕёГҠЕ’ГӢГ”
beginningless; В©UГ·ГҠГ’ both; вҖўГҒВ¬ too; ГҒп¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГҠЕёЛңГ” modifications (such as likes and dislikes); Гё and;
ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠЕёЛңГ” all objects of the nature of the three GuЖ’as; Гё and; вҲһп¬Ӯ indeed; ГҒп¬ӮГҒh know; В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғвҖҡГӘГ·п¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ”
born of PrakГҰti.
PrakГҰti and PuruВ¶a, know both these as beginningless. And know all modifications
such as likes and dislikes etc., and all objects constituted of the three GuЖ’as as born
of PrakГҰti.                                                                                   (19)

=== PAGE 607 ===

606
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The five subtle elements, ether, air, fire,
water and earth, and the five objects of
senses, viz., sound, touch, colour, taste and
smellГіthese ten constitute what has been
referred to as Г«KГҘryaГӯ in this verse. And the
three internal or psychic organs, viz., the
intellect, the ego and the mind, the five
senses of perception, viz., the sense of hearing,
the tactile sense, the senses of sight and taste
and the olfactory sense, and the five organs
of action, viz., the tongue, hands and feet,
and the organs of generation and defecationГі
these thirteen are covered by the term Г«KaraЖ’aГӯ.
It is from PrakГҰti that these twentythree
categories are evolved; PrakГҰti alone is their
material cause; hence PrakГҰti has been declared
to be the cause of their evolution.
The order of their evolution is as follows.
PrakГҰti gives rise to the Mahat-Tattva (the
principle of Cosmic Intelligence), from the
Mahat-Tattva follows AhaвҲҶkГҘra (the Cosmic
Ego), AhaвҲҶkГҘra brings forth the five TanmГҘtrГҘs,
mind and the ten organs of perception and
action; and the five TanmГҘtrГҘs in their turn
are believed to evolve the five gross elements.
This is borne out by the following verse
(verse 22) of the SГҘвҲҶkhya-KГҘrikГҘ:Гі
В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғпЈҝв—ҠВёвҖһUГҠВўSГғГғГҠпЈҝЛҳвҖһВўUвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„USГғSв—ҠГҠЕ’ЛңГ” ВӘГЎГҠp В·ГҠпЈҝВ«UвүҘГҠвҲ‘В§вҖ”вҖ“
ГғSв—ҠГҠЕ’ГҒВ¬ В·ГҠпЈҝВ«UвүҘГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠГғЛңГ” В¬@ГЁГҝвҖ” В¬@Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕёH
The GвҲӮtГҘ speaks of the five subtle elements
in place of the five TanmГҘtrГҘs, while in place
of the five gross elements it mentions the five
objects of the senses. This is the only difference
between the two versions.
In some editions of the GвҲӮtГҘ, we find the
word Г«KГҘraЖ’aГӯ substituted for Г«KaraЖ’aГӯ in the
present verse. If we accept this variant, the
word Г«KГҘryaГӯ should be understood to stand
for the following sixteen categories, viz., the
five senses of perception. The five organs of
action, mind and the five objects of senses;
for they are all effects of some cause, and are
not themselves the cause of others. And the
word Г«KГҘraЖ’aГӯ should be taken to cover the
intellect, the ego and the five subtle elements.
For the intellect is the cause of the ego; the
ego is the cause of the mind, senses and the
five subtle elements; and the five subtle
elements in their turn are the causes of the
five objects of senses.
Although other scriptures recognize four
aspects of the AntaВЁkaraЖ’a or inner sense,
viz., Buddhi (Intellect), AhaвҲҶkГҘra (Ego), Citta
(the faculty of cogitation or reflection) and
Manas (Mind), the Lord does not recognize
Citta and Manas as two diverse faculties; he
reckons them as only two names of one and
the same faculty. The SГҘвҲҶkhya and Yoga
In verse 3 above Arjuna was invited to hear whence is what, this has been partly
discussed in the latter half of the preceding verse. Now, concluding the discussion in the first
half of the next verse, the Lord discusses in the second half as well as in verse 21 the nature
of the PuruВ¶a (Spirit) as seated in PrakГҰti.
вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝВёвҲ‘В§вҒ„UГЎГҠвҲ‘В§ГғГҺВёГ п¬ӮпЈҝ 
вҖһпЈҝUГғГҲвҖ” 
В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғLВ§Г«ГҝГғпЈҝвҖ“
В¬ГҲLВ§В·вҖ” вҖҡГҲПҖЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖГҠЕёГҠВў Г·ГҠпЈҝГ„ГғГҺГ п¬ӮпЈҝ вҖһпЈҝUГғГҲLВ§Г«ГҝГғпЈҝГ”H 20H
вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝВёвҲ‘В§вҒ„UГЎГҠвҲ‘В§ГғГҺВёГ п¬ӮпЈҝ in bringing forth the evolutes as well as the organs; вҖһпЈҝUГғГҲвҖ”Г” the cause; В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғвҖ”
PrakГҰti or Nature; В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is said (to be); В¬ГҲLВ§В·вҖ” the individual soul; вҖҡГҲПҖЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of joys and
sorrows; Г·ГҠпЈҝГ„ГғГҺГ п¬ӮпЈҝ in the experience; вҖһпЈҝUГғГҲвҖ” the cause; В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is declared (to be).
PrakГҰti is said to be responsible for bringing forth the evolutes and the
instruments; while the individual soul is declared to be the cause for the experiences
of joys and sorrows.                                                                                  (20)

=== PAGE 608 ===

* Chapter XIII *
607
systems also uphold the same view. That is
why, instead of four, the Lord speaks here of
only three aspect of the Mind or AntaВЁkaraЖ’a.
Here it may be urged that the word
Г«PuruВ¶aГӯ stands for the conscious Self or
Г…tmГҘ, and the Self is regarded as stainless
and pure; how, then, has the PuruВ¶a been
declared as responsible for the experience of
joys and sorrows? Our submission in this
connection is that PrakГҰti, being unconscious,
cannot possibly have any experience of
pleasure or pain; while the PuruВ¶a or Spirit
is unattached, hence that too is not the
experiencer really speaking. It is only through
its contact with PrakГҰti that the puruВ¶a
appears to be the experiencer; and this contact
between PuruВ¶a and PrakГҰti has no beginning,
hence the PuruВ¶a has been recognized as
responsible for the experiences of joys and
sorrows. It is in order to make this point clear
that the next verse explicitly says that it is the
PuruВ¶a, seated in PrakГҰti, who senses objects
of the nature of the three GuЖ’as evolved
from PrakГҰti. That is why the PuruВ¶a, weaned
from PrakГҰti, has no semblance of such
experiences.
В¬ГҲLВ§В·вҖ” В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғSГ•ГҠпЈҝ ГҒвҖһU Г·ГҲГұпЈҝ В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғВЎГҠГЈВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠЕёЛңГ”вҖ“
вҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠВў ВӘГҲГЎГҠвҖҡXГ”UГҠпЈҝЛҳSГҝ вҖҡЕ’вҖҡlГҠпЈҝГҒЕёВЎГЈв—ҠвҖҡГҲГ”H 21H
В¬ГҲLВ§В·вҖ” В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғSГ•вҖ” the PuruВ¶a seated in PrakГҰti; ГҒвҖһU only; Г·ГҲГҰЛңUГ”QпЈҝВ§ experiences; В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғВЎГҠЕёЛңГ” ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠЕёЛңГ”
objects of the nature of the three GuЖ’as evolved from PrakГҰti; вҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” (is) responsible; ВӘГҲГЎГҠвҖҡXвҖ”
attachment with these GuЖ’as (alone); вҖўSГҝ of this (embodied soul); вҖҡЕ’вҖҡlГҠпЈҝГҒЕёВЎГЈв—ҠвҖҡГҲ for birth in
good and evil wombs.
Only the PuruВ¶a in association with PrakГҰti experiences objects of the nature of
the three GuЖ’as evolved from PrakГҰti. And it is attachment with these GuЖ’as that is
responsible for the birth of this soul in good or evil wombs.                                               (21)
under the category of Г«evilГӯ wombs. Contact
of the JвҲӮva or embodied soul with the three
GuЖ’as, Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, existing,
from time without beginning, and his attachment
for worldly objects, which are the evolutes of
those GuЖ’as, is what is referred to as
Г«GuЖ’asaвҲҶgaВЁГӯ. The latent desires of a man
are determined by his attachment for a particular
GuЖ’a or its evolutes; and it is these latent
desires which decide the nature of his rebirth.
That is why contact with the GuЖ’as has been
declared as responsible for oneГӯs birth in
good or evil wombs.
In this connection it may be noted that
in IV.13 the Lord claimed to have brought
into being the four orders of society dividing
people according to their qualities (GuЖ’as)
and actions. In VIII.6, He declared that
The substantive Г«GuЖ’ГҘnГӯ, qualified by
Г«PrakГҰtijГҘnГӯ, denotes the three qualities or
modes, Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, born of
PrakГҰti, as well as their evolutes, viz., all
mundane objects of the nature of sound,
touch, colour, taste and smell. An individual
soul is said to be seated in PrakГҰti so long as
it is invested with any of the three bodiesГі
gross, subtle and causalГіborn of PrakГҰti.
That is why the Self or Spirit senses the
Nature-born qualities so long as it is associated
with PrakГҰti. It ceases to be the enjoyer on its
being dissociated with PrakГҰti; for, in reality,
the PuruВ¶a is eternally detached in character.
The human and all other higher species,
such as the celestial species and so on, are
Г«goodГӯ wombs; while all subhuman species,
e.g., beasts, birds, trees and creepers etc., fall

=== PAGE 609 ===

608
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
whatever a man thinks of at the last moment
before leaving his body, that very object he
attains in his next life. And in the present
verse He attributes oneГӯs birth in good or evil
wombs to contact with the GuЖ’as. How are
these versions to be reconciled?
Our submission in this connection is that
there is no incongruity whatsoever between
these three statements. On closer examination
all the three statements will be found in one
way or other to attribute oneГӯs birth in good
and evil wombs to contact with the GuЖ’as. (1)
God evolves the four orders of society on the
basis of the GuЖ’as and Karmas of each
individual. In this division contact of the JвҲӮvas
with the GuЖ’as naturally operates as the
determining factor. (2) Man develops special
attachment for one of the three GuЖ’as according
to the nature of his pursuits and the kind of
company he keeps; and the inclinations or
tendencies formed as a result of those actions
are also of a cognate type. Again, his thought
at the last moment of his life is determined by
those proclivities and his birth in good or evil
wombs is, in its turn, decided by his thought at
the last moment. Hence contact with the GuЖ’as
is the ultimate cause even of oneГӯs birth in
good or evil wombs. (3) In the present verse,
of course, contact with the GuЖ’as has been
expressly stated to be the cause of such birth.
Therefore, all the three statements bring out
the same truth.
Having thus described the character of the PuruВ¶a seated in PrakГҰti, the Lord now
delineates the transcendent character of the Self, establishing identity between God and the
individual soul at the same time.
В©UВ¬ВәЛқCГ”UГҠЕёГҲв—ҠГЈГғГҠ Гё Г·Г ГҠГҠВё Г·ГҠпЈҝQВ§ГҠ в—ҠвҖһпЈҝUEвҒ„UвҖ”вҖ“
В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠпЈҝГҒГғ ГёГҠГҘГҝГҲQВ§ГҠпЈҝ Е’пЈҝвҖһпЈҝUЛҳГҒSв—ҠГЈВ¬ГҲLВ§В·вҖ” В¬вҒ„UвҖ”Г”H 22H
В©UВ¬ВәЛқCГ”UГҠ the seer or witness; вҖўЕёГҲв—ҠГЈГғГҠ the (true) guide; Гё and; Г·ГғГҠВё the sustainer; Г·ГҠпЈҝQВ§ГҠ the
experiencer (as the embodied soul); в—ҠвҖһпЈҝUEвҒ„UвҖ” the Overlord; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠГҠ the Absolute; ГҹГҒГғ as; Гё and;
вҖўГҒВ¬ also; В©UQВ§вҖ” has been spoken of; Е’пЈҝвҖһпЈҝU вҖўГҒSв—ҠЕёЛңГ” (dwelling) in this body; В¬ГҲLВ§В·вҖ” the Spirit; В¬вҒ„UвҖ” (is
really the same as) the Supreme.
The Spirit dwelling in this body, is really the same as the Supreme. He has been
spoken of as the Witness, the true Guide, the Sustainer of all, the Experiencer (as the
embodied soul), the Overlord and the Absolute as well.
(22)
the knowing subject. The diversity which
appears to exist between the two is only due
to the latter being limited by a body.
The same supreme Eternal is called by
different names due to different causes. In
reality and substance, however, there is no
diversity in Brahma. Thus, for instance, as
the inner controller of all He alone observes
the good and evil deeds of men: hence He is
called Г¬UpadraВ¶ВўГҘГӯ (Witness). The very same
God, residing in the heart of all, gives proper
The assertion that the Spirit dwelling in
this body is realy the same as the Supreme
indicates the transcendent character of the
knowing Self. The intention is to say that the
conscious Self, which, on account of its
being conditioned by bodies evolved from
PrakГҰti, erroneously appears to have assumed
an individual character, is, in reality, the
same as the Supreme, who is  entirely beyond
this PrakГҰti; for virtually there is no difference
whatsoever between the supreme Eternal and

=== PAGE 610 ===

* Chapter XIII *
609
advice to those who seek it; hence He is
called Г«AnumantГҘГӯ or Guide. In the form of
ViВ¶Ж’u He alone protects and sustains the
whole universe; therefore, He is called the
Г«BhartГҘГӯ or Г«SustainerГӯ. Again, it is He who,
in the form of celestials, partakes of the
oblations offered in all sacrifices, and in the
form of various beings undergoes all sorts of
experiences; hence He is called the Г«BhoktГҘГӯ
or Enjoyer. He alone is the supreme Lord
ruling over gods or guardians of the world
and even divine lords like BrahmГҘ, the Creator;
hence He is called by the name of Г«MaheвҖ№varaГӯ
or the Overlord; and in reality, He ever
remains entirely beyond the GuЖ’as; therefore,
He is called the ParamГҘtmГҘ or Absolute. This
is what is sought to be conveyed by the
present verse.
Describing thus the character of PrakГҰti together with the GuЖ’as, as also of the PuruВ¶a,
the Lord now declares the reward of knowing them in reality.
Гҝ вҲһп¬ӮВў п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠ В¬ГҲLВ§В·Вў В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғВў Гё ВӘГҲГЎГҠГ’вҖ” вҖҡвҖһUвҖ“
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ•ГҠ п¬ӮГғВёв—ҠГҠЕёГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ Её вҖҡ Г·ГҚГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒГ·ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝГ”H 23H
ГҝвҖ” who; вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” thus; п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ”Г»ГҠ knows (in reality); В¬ГҲLВ§В·в—ҠЛңГ” the PuruВ¶a or Spirit; В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” PrakГҰti or
Nature; Гё and; ВӘГҲГЎГҠГ’вҖ” вҖҡвҖһU together with the GuЖ’as; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ•ГҠ in every way; п¬ӮГғВёв—ҠГҠЕёвҖ” acting; вҖўГҒВ¬ even;
Её not; вҖҡвҖ” he; Г·ГҚГҝвҖ” again; вҖўГҒГ·ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝ is born.
He who thus knows the PuruВ¶a (Spirit) and PrakГҰti (Nature), together with the
GuЖ’as, even though performing his duties in everyway, is not reborn again.
 (23)
to show that he who knows the PuruВ¶a and
PrakГҰti with the three GuЖ’as, as stated above,
be he a BrГҘhmaЖ’a, a KВ¶atriya, a VaiвҖ№ya or a
вҖәВөudra, and to whatever Г…вҖ№rama or stage in
life (such as Brahmacarya etc.) he belongs,
even though duly performing all the duties
enjoined by the вҖәГҘstras for that particular
caste and Г…вҖ№rama, really does nothing and
hence is never born again.
Since evils like lust and anger wholly
cease to exist in an enlightened soul who has
realized the Self (V.26), it is never possible
for him to indulge in prohibited acts. That is
why his conduct is recognized as standard
(III.21). 
Hence 
the 
words 
Г«SarvathГҘ
VartamГҘnaВЁГӯ, followed by the indeclinable
Г«ApiГӯ, cannot be interpreted to mean that
such an enlightened soul is never born again
even if he indulges in prohibited acts; for it is
evil impulses like lust and anger that lead to
sin. In reply to ArjunaГӯs query, the Lord has
expressly stated this in III.37.
Knowledge of the PuruВ¶a consists in
realizing the character and glory of the PuruВ¶a
as delineated in this chapter. In other words,
true realization of the fact that all knowing
selves that appear to have a separate existence
are identical with the supreme Eternal, that
the diversity appearing in them is due to their
contact with PrakГҰti, really speaking there is
no difference between them, and that God is
eternal, pure, awakened, free, imperishable and
wholly beyond PrakГҰti, and to establish oneself
in identity with that embodiment of Truth,
Consciousness and Bliss once for all, is what
is meant by Г«knowing the PuruВ¶a in realityГӯ.
And grasping the truth that the three GuЖ’as
are evolutes of PrakГҰti, that the whole universe
is nothing but a projection of PrakГҰti, and that
it is perishable, unconscious, momentary and
transient, is what is meant by Г«knowing PrakГҰti
together with the GuЖ’as in realityГӯ.
The use of the indeclinable Г«ApiГӯ with
the words Г«SarvathГҘ VartamГҘnaВЁГӯ is intended

=== PAGE 611 ===

610
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The PuruВ¶a ceases to have anything
to do with PrakГҰti the moment he comes
to know the truth about both; for their
contact has been held to be imaginary, unreal
and brought about by mere ignorance.
The contact of the PuruВ¶a with PrakГҰti and
its GuЖ’as lasts only so long as they are
not fully known and it is only till then that
he continues to be born again and again
in various species (XIII.21). That is why
one is not reborn after knowing their true
nature.
On hearing the glory of the Knowledge of PrakГҰti with the three GuЖ’as and of the
PuruВ¶a, one may be tempted to enquire how this knowledge may be gained. Therefore, in
the next two verses, the Lord mentions various disciplines to be followed by men of different
aptitudes for the realization of Truth.
ГӨГҝГҠЕёпЈҝЕёГҠГ в—ҠГҒЕё В¬вүҘГҝГҒГЈГғ вҲ‘пЈҝВ§ГҒГёЕ’ГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠвҖ“
вҖўГЈГҝпЈҝ вҖҡГҠГҰUГ”ЛңГ…ГҝпЈҝЕё ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝЕё вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝЕё ГёГҠВ¬вҒ„пЈҝUГ”H 24H
ГӨГҝГҠЕёпЈҝЕёU by meditation; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҒЕёГ” in the heart; В¬вүҘГҝГҒГЈГғ behold; вҲ‘пЈҝВ§ГҒГёГғЛңГ” some (men); вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the
supreme Spirit or Self; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠ through (their refined and sharp) intellect; вҖўГЈГҝпЈҝ (certain) others;
вҖҡГҠГҰЛңUГ”Г…ГҝпЈҝЕё ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝЕё through the Yoga of Knowledge; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝЕё (behold It) through the discipline of
Action; Гё and; вҖўВ¬вҒ„пЈҝU (still) others.
Some by meditation behold the supreme Spirit in the heart with the help of their
refined and sharp intellect; others realize It through the Yoga of Knowledge, and still
others, through the Yoga of Action i.e., Karmayoga.                                        (24)
formless Brahma viewed as identical with
oneГӯs Self, and it is realization of God as
identical with oneГӯs Self that has been declared
to be the reward of such meditation. But
even those SГҘdhakas who meditate on the
qualified Divinity with or without form as
apart from themselves can realize the absolute
formless Brahma, who is Truth, Consciousness
and Bliss solidified as identical with oneГӯs
Self, if they seek such reward.
The words Г«SГҘвҲҶkhyenaГӯ and Г«YogenaГӯ,
taken together, stand for SaвҲҶkhyayoga or the
discipline of Knowledge. This has been
discussed at length in verses 11 to 30 of
Chapter II, as also in verses 8,9 and 13 of
Chapter V, in verse 19 of Chapter XIV and
elsewhere according to context. Realizing that
all material objects are nothing but illusion,
like water in a mirage, or that which appears
in a dream, so that it is only the GuЖ’as, which
are born of PrakГҰti, that react on the GuЖ’as, a
follower of the path of Knowledge gives up
Г«DhyГҘnaГӯ denotes constant meditation
on God, practised in a clean and secluded spot
in accordance with the procedure laid down in
verses 11 to 13 of Chapter VI, i.e., firmly
squatting on an appropriate seat, withdrawing
the senses from their objects, controlling the
mind and forgetting everything else than God.
The intellect gets purified through such practice
of meditation; and realizing the supreme Eternal,
who is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss
solidified, through such refined and sharp
intellect within the heart is what is meant by
beholding the Self by meditation in the Self
and through the Self.
Verse 22 above has established identity
between the soul and the Oversoul, and it is
in the light of this identity that the Lord
discusses the different forms of discipline for
the attainment of the ultimate goal in the
form of Realization of the Self. Therefore,
judging from the context, the meditation referred
to in this verse is meditation on the absolute,

=== PAGE 612 ===

* Chapter XIII *
611
the sense of doership in respect of all activities
of the mind, senses and the body, and ever
established in identity with the all-pervading
God, who is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss
solidified, refuses to recognize the separate
existence of anything other than God. And
directly perceiving, through such practice, the
identity of the soul with the Oversoul and thus
realizing the Absolute, is what is meant by
beholding the Self in the Self through the
practice of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga.
SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga can be easily practised
only by a qualified soul who is endowed
with the four equipments, viz., (1) Viveka or
Discrimination, (2) VairГҘgya or Dispassion,
(3) В®aВў Sampatti or the sixfold riches, and (4)
MumukВ¶utva, the quest for freedom.
1. VIVEKA
Discrimination between the real and the
unreal, as well as between the eternal and the
fleeting is called Viveka. Discriminaiton sifts
the one from the other. Viveka is the same as
realization of Truth. This consummation of
Viveka is attained by constantly sifting the
Self from the non-self, under all circumstances,
and in every object. When Viveka actually
dawns, difference between the real and the
unreal, between the eternal and the transient,
begins to be directly experienced as that between
milk and water. The next equipage is:Гі
2. VAIRГ…GYA
Once the real is sifted from the unreal,
and the eternal from the passing, with the
help of discrimination, attraction for the unreal
and the passing naturally ceases. This is what
they call VairГҘgya. If the hankering for
enjoyments persists in the mind and we make
a show of aversion to and disgust for the
world, that is no dispassion. There is total
negation of RГҘga or attachment in dispassion;
VairГҘgya, really speaking, is another name
for mental detachment. The mind of those
who develop true dispassion entirely cease to
have any thirst or attachment for the various
forms of enjoyment extending up to the abode
of BrahmГҘ (the Creator). Turning their back
upon the unreal and the transient they remain
constantly intent on the real and the eternal.
This is what constitutes dispassion. So long
as this  type of dispassion does not appear
Viveka should be regarded as deficient. When
discrimination is complete, the awakening of
dispassion is inevitable.
3. THE SIXFOLD RICHES
As a result of such discrimination and
dispassion, the SГҘdhaka comes to acquire
sixfold riches of the highest value. So long as
this wealth is not fully acquired, discrimination
and dispassion should be regarded as positively
deficient; for when the SГҘdhaka is fully
endowed with discrimination and dispassion,
it is easy for him to acquire this wealth. This
wealth is known by the name of Г«В®aВўsampattiГӯ
(the sixfold riches) and the following are the
six factors constituting it:Гі
1.
вҖәama. 
Complete 
subjugation,
quiescence and stillness of the mind is called
вҖәama. When discrimination and dispassion
are fully developed, the mind naturally becomes
quiescent and still.
2.
Dama. Complete mastery over the
senses and their finding no relish in the
objects of enjoyment is called Г«DamaГӯ.
3. Uparati. Withdrawal of the mind
from all worldly objects is known as Г«UparatiГӯ.
When the mind and the senses cease to have
any relish for the objects of enjoyment, the
SГҘdhaka will naturally turn his back on them.
This indifference must be cultivated with
respect to every form of enjoyment,Гіnot
simply externally but internally. The mind
should never think of even the rare pleasures
of Brahmaloka or the seventh heaven with
intent to enjoy them. This is what is known
as Г«UparatiГӯ.

=== PAGE 613 ===

612
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
4.
TitikВ¶ГҘ. TitikВ¶ГҘ ordinarily means
maintaining oneГӯs balance of mind in the
face of Dvandvas or pairs of opposites, such
as heat and cold, pleasure and pain, honour
and ignominy; but the Г«TitikВ¶ГҘГӯ which follows
in the wake of Viveka, VairГҘgya, вҖәama,
Dama and Uparati must be something different
from ordinary endurance as indicated above.
The Dvandvas can neither cease in this world
nor can any one wholly avoid them. Putting
up with them anyhow is also quite good; but
the best thing is to rise above the realm of
contraries and to look on them as a dispassionate
observer. Such indeed is TitikВ¶ГҘ in the real
sense of the term. When this state is reached,
heat and cold or honour and ignominy can
no longer touch a man.
5.
вҖәraddhГҘ. Unceasing faith in the
existence of the Self as in something directly
perceived is called вҖәraddhГҘ. вҖәraddhГҘ, first of
all, centers round the вҖәГҘstras or sacred books,
the personality of the religious preceptor and
spiritual practice etc., faith in the Self develops
thereby. But so long as complete faith is not
developed in the spiritual Self, the intellect
cannot get established in the one integral,
stainless, formless and attributeless Brahma
as its goal.
6.
SamГҘdhГҘna. SamГҘdhГҘna means total
absorption of the mind and intellect in God.
In other words, just as Arjuna, while
demonstrating his skill in archery in the
presence of Г…cГҘrya DroЖ’a, beholds only the
neck of the dummy bird placed on a tree,
even so when oneГӯs mind and intellect
constantly perceive God alone as their sole
objective, that is Г«SamГҘdhГҘnaГӯ.
4. MUMUKВ®UTVA
In this way when discrimination,
dispassion and the sixfold virtues are acquired,
the SГҘdhaka naturally seeks absolute freedom
from the bondage of ignorance, and
withdrawing his mind from everything else,
and without looking in any other direction,
runs exclusively after God. This running after
God with the utmost speed on his part, i.e.,
his intense practice itself is an indication of
his keenest desire to realize God. This is
what they call Г«MumukВ¶utvaГӯ  or the quest of
liberation.
*
*
*
The word Г«KarmayogaГӯ in this verse
stands for the course of discipline which has
been discussed, along with its reward in
Chapter II from verse 40 up to the end of the
Chapter. In other words, Karmayoga consists
in performing all oneГӯs prescribed duties,
appropriate to the VarЖ’a (grade in society)
and Г…вҖ№rama (stage in life) to which one
belongs, according to the scriptural injunctions
in a disinterested spirit, renouncing all
attachment and reward, and treating success
and failure alike. And realizing the supreme
eternal Spirit, who is Truth, Consciousness
and Bliss solidified, as oneГӯs own Self through
this discipline is what is meant by beholding
the Self in the Self through Karmayoga.
Here it must be remembered that, even
though maintaining this identity apart from
God during the period of his SГҘdhanГҘ, the
SГҘdhaka who aims at unity in the end realizes
Brahma as his own Self. And the subject
under discussion in this verse is to ascertain
the practices through which God can be
realized as oneГӯs own Self. That is why this
verse speaks of realizing the supreme eternal
Spirit as oneГӯs own Self even through the
practice of Karmayoga.
вҖўГЈГҝпЈҝ Г п¬ӮпЈҝп¬Ӯв—ҠВЎГҠЕёГЈГғвҖ” ГјГҠГҲГ п¬ӮГҠГЈГҝпЈҝГЁГҝ В©UВ¬ГҠвҖҡГғпЈҝвҖ“
ГғпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ ГёГҠГҒГғГғвҒ„UГЈГ ГҝпЈҝп¬Ӯ в—ҠГҺГ ГҝГҲВў ГјГҠГҲГҒГғВ¬вҒ„UГҠГҝГЎГҠГҠвҖ”Г”H 25H

=== PAGE 614 ===

* Chapter XIII *
613
The Particle Г«TuГӯ in this verse indicates
that the Lord now proceeds to speak of other
SГҘdhakas different from those mentioned in
the preceding verse. In other words, the present
verse points out the way to the redemption of
those who cannot fully grasp the spirit of the
practices mentioned above.
The pronoun Г«AnyeГӯ, qualified by the
adjectival phrase Г«Evam AjГҘnantaВЁГӯ, refers to
those SГҘdhakas who are too dullwitted to grasp
in full the spirit of any one of the practices
mentioned in the preceding verse, viz.,
DhyГҘnayoga, SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga and Karmayoga.
SatyakГҘma, son of JabГҘlГҘ, approached
the great sage HГҘridrumata, who claimed his
descent from Gautama, in quest of the
knowledge of Brahma. Having had a talk
with him, the teacher selected from his herd
four hundred weak and extremely emaciated
cows and asked SatyakГҘma to follow them.
Driving them towards the forest, as enjoined
by his preceptor, with great reverence,
enthusiasm and joy, SatyakГҘma said, Г¬I shall
return when their number swells to a thousand.Г®
Taking them to a safe retreat abounding in
herbage and water, he came back only when
their number had swollen to a thousand. The
result was that he attained God-realization
while he was yet on his way back to his
preceptorГӯs hermitage (ChГҘndogya, IV.iv.9).
Receiving instructions from such men of
wisdom, who have realized the Truth, and
carrying them out with extreme reverence
and love is what is meant by Г«worshipping
even as they have heard from others.Гӯ
The compound adjective Г«вҖәrutiparГҘyaЖ’ГҘВЁГӯ
refers to those who take with reverence and
love to the diligent practice of what they have
heard. The use of the indeclinable Г«ApiГӯ is
intended to show that when even such men of
small understanding are doubtless able to
conquer death by worshipping as they have
heard from others, there can be no doubt about
the redemption of SГҘdhakas who follow one
of the three disciplines stated above.
The word Г«MГҰtyumГӯ in this verse stands
for mundane existence in the shape of repeated
births and death. The use of the verb Г«TarantiГӯ,
with Г«AtiГӯ prefixed to it, is intended to show
that those who worship as indicated above
attain lasting union with the supreme eternal
Spirit, who is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss
solidified, and are never born again. In short,
the words Г«MГҰtyum AtitarantiГӯ in this verse
convey the same idea as has been brought
out by the words Г«he is not born againГӯ in
verse 23 and Г«beholding the Self in the Self
in verse 24 above.
вҖўГЈГҝпЈҝГ” others (viz., the dull-witted); ГғГҲ however; вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” thus; вҖўВЎГҠЕёГЈГғвҖ”U not knowing; ГјГҠГҲГ п¬ӮГҠ
hearing; вҖўГЈГҝпЈҝГЁГҝвҖ”Г” from others (those who have realized the Truth); В©UВ¬ГҠвҖҡГғпЈҝ worship (accordingly);
ГғпЈҝ those; вҖўГҒВ¬ too; Гё and; вҖўГҒГғГғвҒ„UГҒГЈГғ (are able to) cross; вҲһп¬Ӯ indeed; в—ҠГҺГ ГҝГҲв—ҠЛңГ” the ocean of mundane
existence in the shape of death; ГјГҠГҲГҒГғВ¬вҒ„UГҠГҝГЎГҠГҠвҖ”U (persons) given to hearing.
Other dull-witted persons, however, not knowing thus, worship even as they have
heard from others (i.e., the Knowers of truth); and even they who are thus devoted to
what they have heard, are able to cross the ocean of mundane existence in the shape
of death.
(25)
Mentioning thus the various means to God-realization, the Lord now describes in the
next two verses the character of the KВ¶etra, as promised in verse 3 above, by declaring it
as subject to birth and death, and glorifies the knower of the real truth about the Self.
ГҝГҠп¬ӮГ вҖҡTГҠГҝГғпЈҝ ГҒвҲ‘В§ГҒ@Г вҖҡГ»п¬ӮВў SГ•ГҠп¬ӮвҒ„UВЎXГ”Uв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠГҙГҠвҖҡВўГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠГ»ГҠГҒmГҒh 
Г·вҒ„UГғВ·ВёГ·Г”H 26H

=== PAGE 615 ===

614
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The adjectives Г«YГҘvatГӯ and Г«KiВӨcitГӯ signify
totality. Beings possessing locomotion, e.g.,
the celestials, human beings, beasts and birds
etc., fall under the category of Г«JaвҲҶgamaГӯ
(animate); 
while 
creatures 
devoid 
of
locomotion, such as trees, creepers, rocks
etc., are known as Г«SthГҘvaraГӯ (inanimate).
Therefore, the substantive Г«SattvamГӯ qualified
by the three adjectives Г«YГҘvatГ®, Г«KiВӨcitГӯ and
Г«SthГҘvarajaвҲҶgamamГӯ covers the entire creation
of animate and inanimate beings.
The term Г«KВ¶etraГӯ denotes the aggregate
of twentyfour categories enumerated in verse
5 of this chapter and which have been, referred
to under the name of Г«AparГҘ PrakГҰtiГӯ or the
lower Nature in VII.4 and 5. And the conscious
principle which is the knower of this KВ¶etra,
and which has been spoken of as Г«ParГҘГӯ
PrakГҰtiГӯ (the higher Nature) in verse VII.5, is
called Г«KВ¶etrajВӨa.Гӯ Contact of this Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ,
i.e., of the PuruВ¶a seated in PrakГҰti, with the
gross bodies evolved from Nature has been
referred to in this verse as the union of
KВ¶etra and the KВ¶etrajВӨa; and the emanation
of beings in different shapes and forms through
various types of wombs or species is what
has been spoken of in this verse as their birth
from such union.
ГҝГҠп¬ӮГғЛңГ” вҖҡTГҠГҝГғпЈҝГ” is born; ГҒвҲ‘В§ГҒ@ГғГ”ЛңГ” whatsoever; вҖҡГ»п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ”U being; SГ•ГҠп¬ӮвҒ„UВЎXГ”Uв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” immobile or mobile
i.e., inanimate or animate; ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠГҙГҠвҖҡВўГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠГғЛңГ” (as emanated) from the union of the KВ¶etra and the
KВ¶etrajВӨa (Matter and Spirit); ГғГғЛңГ” that (all); ГҒп¬ӮГҒh know; Г·вҒ„UГғВ·ВёГ·Г” O best among the Bharatas,
Arjuna.
Arjuna, whatsoever being, animate or inanimate, is born, know it as emanated
from the union of Г«KВ¶etraГӯ (Matter) and the Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ (Spirit).                       (26)
вҖҡв—ҠВў вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёВ·ГҲ Г·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ ГҒГғDГ”UГЈГғВў В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠпЈҝEвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҒп¬ӮЕёвүҘГҝГ Sп¬ӮГҒп¬ӮЕёвүҘГҝГЈГғВў ГҝвҖ” В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғ вҖҡ В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғГ”H 27H
вҖҡв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” equally; вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёВ·ГҲ Г·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲГ” in all beings (both animate and inanimate); ГҒГғDГ”UГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ” abiding;
В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠпЈҝEвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” the supreme Lord; ГҒп¬ӮЕёвүҘГҝГ вҖҡГҲ evanescent; вҖўГҒп¬ӮЕёвүҘГҝГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ”U imperishable; ГҝвҖ” who; В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғ sees;
вҖҡвҖ” he (alone); В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғ (really) sees.
He alone truly sees, who sees the supreme Lord as imperishable, and abiding
equally in all perishable beings, both animate and inanimate.                       (27)
is eternal and imperishable; and it is really
the same in all living beings, who appear as
different through difference of bodies. This is
what is sought to be conveyed in the present
verse.
The word Г«ParameвҖ№varamГӯ in this verse
stands for that immutable Spirit, existing entirely
beyond PrakГҰti, which has been declared in
verse 22 above as the Witness, the Guide,
the Sustainer, the Experiencer, the Overlord
and the supreme Spirit, and shown to be one
with the Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ or the knowing Self.
This supreme PuruВ¶a though essentially an
embodiment of absolute Truth, Consciousness
The substantive Г«BhВөuteВ¶uГӯ qualified by
the two adjectives Г«VinaвҖ№yatsuГӯ and Г«SarveВ¶uГӯ,
denotes all creatures undergoing repeated
births and deaths, whose contact with, and
dissociation from, the different subtle and gross
bodies is held to be the cause of their birth and
death. The use of the word Г«SarveВ¶uГӯ is intended
to cover the totality of beings; while the adjective
Г«VinaвҖ№yatsuГӯ has been used in order to show
that they are all liable to perish by virtue of
their identity with the body.
It should be remembered in this
connection that it is the body which is liable
to perish, and not the soul. The Self or Spirit

=== PAGE 616 ===

* Chapter XIII *
615
and Bliss, and existing entirely beyond PrakГҰti,
is spoken of as the Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ and the
experiencer of the GuЖ’as evolved from PrakГҰti
due to Its contact with PrakГҰti. Seeing the
one imperishable, immutable Spirit, the real
Self of all living beings, as eternally and
equally abiding in their bodies, identity with
which has earned for those beings the title of
Г«perishableГӯ, is what is meant by Г«seeing the
supreme Lord as imperishable and equally
abiding in all living beingsГӯ.
The present verse speaks of the Self as
One and immutable, i.e., free from all
modifications such as birth and death etc.
Therefore, he alone really sees, who sees this
one eternal conscious Self as immutable,
imperishable, equally abiding everywhere and
unattached as shown above. The vision of
those who view it as subject to birth and
death, and as happy or otherwise, due to its
identity with the body, is faulty; that is why,
even though seeing, they do not see at all.
In the preceding verse it has been stated that he alone really sees who sees that
supreme Lord as imperishable and equally abiding in all beings; justifying the above
statement the Lord now declares attainment of the supreme state as the reward of such
vision.
вҖҡв—ҠВў В¬вүҘГҝГҒГЈвҖһU вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠ вҖҡв—Ҡп¬ӮГҒSГ•Гғв—ҠГӢEвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
Её ГҒвҖһUЕёSГ ГҝГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёВў ГғГғГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠГҒГғ В¬вҒ„UГҠВў ВӘГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 28H
вҖҡв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” (as) one; В¬вүҘГҝЕёЛңГ” seeing; ГҒвҖһU because; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠГ” in all; вҖҡв—Ҡп¬ӮГҒSГ•Гғв—ҠЛңГ” equally seated; ГҹВёEвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” the
(supreme) Lord; Её not; ГҒвҖһUЕёГҒSГғ (who) kills; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠ by himself; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the Self; ГғГғвҖ” thereby;
ГҝГҠГҒГғ (he) attains; В¬вҒ„UГҠв—ҠЛңГ” ВӘГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” the supreme state.
By seeing the supreme Lord equally present in all, he does not kill the Self by
himself, and, thereby attains the supreme state.
 (28)
and cognize themselves as different from
others, and finite in character. Therefore,
inasmuch as they recognize the birth and
death of physical bodies as their own birth
and death, they undergo repeated births in
different species and continue to die again
and again. This is what is meant by their
killing themselves by their self. He however,
who sees the one Supreme Lord as equally
present in all neither views himself as other
than God nor feels that he has any connection
with those physical bodies. Hence he does
not see his own end in the death of the
physical body; and that is why he does not
kill himself by his own self. In short, he gets
established in identity with the supreme eternal
Spirit, who is all-knowing and imperishable
and an embodiment of Truth, Consciousness
and Bliss; that is why he secures lasting
The indeclinable Г«HiГӯ in this verse, implies
cause. The use of this particle is intended to
show that since he who is endowed with an
equal vision does not kill himself and reaches
the supreme state, therefore, his vision alone
is correct.
The one supreme Spirit, who is Truth,
Consciousness and Bliss solidified, is equally
present everywhere. It is due to ignorance
that He appears different in different bodies;
really, there is no difference in Him. Clearly
apprehending and realizing the above truth is
what is meant by Г«seeing the supreme Lord,
equally present everywhere, as one.Гӯ Those
who have no knowledge of this truth lack
equal vision; for, they distinguish one individual
from another. They regard some as their
beloved and well-wishers, while they look
upon others as disagreeable and unfriendly

=== PAGE 617 ===

616
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
immunity from birth and death.
The Г«ParГҘ GatiГӯ referred to in this verse
is the same as has been spoken of elsewhere
as the supreme state, attaining which one has
no longer to return and which is the goal of
all spiritual practices.
Describing thus the glory and reward of seeing the eternal Spirit who is Consciousness
and Bliss solidified as equally present everywhere, the Lord now glorifies, in the next verse,
the man who sees that Spirit as a non-doer.
В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§Г ГҝГ’п¬Ӯ Гё вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§Гҝв—ҠГҠГЎГҠГҠГҒЕё вҖҡп¬ӮВёвүҘГҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ГҝвҖ” В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғ ГғГ•ГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠвҲ‘В§ГғГҠВёвҒ„ВўU вҖҡ В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғГ”H 29H
В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§Г ГҝГҠ вҲһп¬Ӯ by PrakГҰti alone; Гё and; вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ (all) actions; ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§Гҝв—ҠГҠГЎГҠГҠГҒЕё being done; вҖҡп¬ӮВёвүҘГҠвҖ” in
all respects; ГҝвҖ”Г” who; В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғ sees; ГғГ•ГҠ and; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the Self; вҖўвҲ‘В§ГғГҠВёвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” a non-doer; вҖҡвҖ” he (alone);
В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғ (truly) sees.
And he who sees that all actions are performed in everyway by nature (PrakГҰti)
and the Self as the non-doer, he alone truly sees.                                             (29)
Thus the same thing has been stated in all the
three places, there is hardly any difference in
the three statements. They are all intended to
show the non-doership of the Self.
The Self is eternal, pure, awakened,
free and devoid of all modifications; it has no
connection whatsoever with PrakГҰti. That is
why it is neither the doer of any action nor
the experiencer of the fruit of actions. The
direct perception of this truth is what is
meant by seeing the Self as the non-doer.
And the assertion that such realization is the
only true realization is intended to glorify this
vision. The intention is to show that the
vision of those who view the Self as the
doer of all actions and the experiencer of
their fruit, due to its contact with the mind,
intellect and body, is mistaken and therefore
incorrect.
Verse 27 and 28 of Chapter III and
verse 19 of Chapter XIV speak of all actions
being performed by the GuЖ’as or modes of
PrakГҰti, and verses 8 and 9 of Chapter V
speak of the senses acting on sense-objects;
whereas the present verse indirectly exhorts
us to see all actions being done by PrakГҰti.
These three statements, though apparently
differing from one another, point to the same
conclusion, as we shall see below.
The three GuЖ’asГіSattva, Rajas and
TamasГіare all evolutes of PrakГҰti; and the
senses, mind and intellect etc., as well as the
objects of sensesГіall these are extensions of
the GuЖ’as alone. Therefore, speaking of the
senses as acting on sense-objects, of the GuЖ’as
as acting on the GuЖ’as, and of all actions
being performed by the GuЖ’as is the same as
declaring all actions being done by PrakГҰti.
Thus glorifying the realization of the Self as the non-doer, the Lord now points out the
reward of perceiving Its unity.
ГҝЕ’ГҠ 
Г·ГҚГғВ¬ГҺГ•ГҮГ·ГҠп¬Ӯв—ҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§SГ•в—ҠЕёГҲВ¬вүҘГҝГҒГғГ”вҖ“
ГғГғ вҲһп¬Ӯ Гё ГҒп¬ӮSГғГҠвҒ„ВўU вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” вҖҡГӘВ¬lГғпЈҝ ГғЕ’ГҠГ”H 30H
ГҝЕ’ГҠ when; Г·ГҚГғВ¬ГҺГ•ГҮГ·ГҠп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” the diversified existence of beings; вҲһвҲ‘В§SГ•в—ҠЛңГ” (as) rooted in the one
(supreme Spirit); вҖўЕёГҲВ¬вүҘГҝГҒГғ (man) perceives; ГғГғвҖ” вҲһп¬Ӯ from that alone; Гё and; ГҒп¬ӮSГғГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” the

=== PAGE 618 ===

* Chapter XIII *
617
The compound word Г«BhВөutapГҰthagbhГҘ-
vamГӯ in this verse stands for the manifold
variety of animate and inanimate beings who
are said to emanate from the union of Г«KВ¶etraГӯ
and the Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ (XIII.26), and in whom
the SГҘdhaka has been indirectly advised to
see God as equally present (Ibid.,27). And
just as a man who has just woken from a
dream perceives the motley show of beings
seen in his dreaming state in his own self and
also recognizes that they were all projections
of his being, that, in fact there was nothing in
that dream-world other than himself, that he
alone saw himself in divergent forms, even
so the man of right vision sees all creatures
as existing in God, and everything as emanating
from Him.
The indeclinables Г«YadГҘГӯ and Г«TadГҘГӯ
signify immediate sequence of time. The use
of these two words is intended to show that
the realization of Brahma or attainment of
oneness with God follows immediately after
the perception of the above truth, that the
process involves no amount of delay. It is
this attainment of oneness with Brahma, who
is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss solidified,
that is otherwise known as attainment of
the supreme state, attainment of liberation,
and realization of supreme peace and lasting
Bliss.
spreading forth (of all beings); вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” the Supreme (who is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss
solidified); вҖҡГӘВ¬lГғпЈҝ (he) attains; ГғЕ’ГҠ that very moment.
The moment man perceives the diversified existence of beings as rooted in the one
Supreme Spirit, and the spreading forth of all beings from the same, that very moment
he attains Brahma (who is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss solidified).             (30)
two words Г«AnГҘditvГҘtГӯ and Г«NirguЖ’atvГҘtГӯ
therefore, shows that the subject of discussion,
viz., the Self, is both without beginning, and
without attributes; therefore, it is actionless,
untainted and indestructible-wholly beyond
the six forms of modifications such as birth,
death and so on.
The demonstrative adjective Г«AyamГӯ
That which has no origin or cause,
which is never born anew, and which has
existed for ever, is called Г«AnГҘdiГӯ or without
beginning, and Г«NirguЖ’aГӯ is that which lies
entirely beyond PrakГҰti and her GuЖ’as, and
which has no real connection at any time,
and under any circumstance whatsoever, with
the GuЖ’as and their evolutes. The use of the
On being told that the Self is equally present in all beings, changeless and inactive, one
wonders how, even though dwelling in all bodies, the Self can remain untouched by their
evils, and a non-doer. In order to remove this doubt, the Lord now describes in the following
three verses the glory of the Self, as promised in verse 3 above.
вҖўЕёГҠГҒЕ’Г п¬ӮГҠГҒГӣГҠВӘГҲВёГЎГҠГ п¬ӮГҠГ В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠГҠГҝв—ҠвҲҡГҝГҝвҖ” 
Г”вҖ“
вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„USГ•ГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ Её вҲ‘В§вҒ„UГҠпЈҝГҒГғ Её ГҒвҲӮUГҘГҝГғпЈҝГ”H 31H
вҖўЕёГҠГҒЕ’Г п¬ӮГҠГғЛңГ” being without beginning; ГҒЕёВӘГҲВёГЎГҠГ п¬ӮГҠГғЛңГ” (and) being attributeless; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠГҠ the
supreme Spirit; вҖўГҝв—ҠЛңГ” this; вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝвҖ” indestructible; вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„USГ•вҖ” вҖўГҒВ¬ though dwelling in the body;
вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ O son of Kunti, Arjuna; Её вҲ‘В§вҒ„UГҠпЈҝГҒГғ does nothing (in fact); Её nor; ГҒвҲӮUГҘГҝГғпЈҝ gets contaminated.
Arjuna, being without beginning and without attributes, this indestructible Supreme
Spirit, though dwelling in the body, in fact does nothing, nor gets contaminated. (31)

=== PAGE 619 ===

618
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
points to that which has been discussed
immediately before. The use of this adjective
along with the word Г«ParamГҘtmГҘГӯ, therefore,
shows that the supreme Spirit referred to in
this verse is the same as has  been spoken of
as Г«ParameвҖ№varaГӯ (the supreme Lord) in verse
27, as Г«вҲ«вҖ№varaГӯ (Lord) in verse 28, as the
Г«AtmГҘГӯ (Self) in verse 29, and as Г«BrahmaГӯ
(the Supreme) in verse 30 above. In other
words the use of Г«AyamГӯ is intended to show
that all these terms are identical in meaning.
It may be asked here: If all these terms
refer to the same entity, why was it necessary
to use different words for the same thing?
Our submission in this connection is that in
verse 3 above the Lord undertook to reveal
to Arjuna the character and glory of the
Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ (the knowing Self). Therefore,
the Lord has deliberately used different words
expressive of the divine principle in order to
reveal the essential character of the KВ¶etrajВӨa,
which is identical with the supreme eternal
Spirit.
In reality, the Self has no connection
whatsoever with the GuЖ’as of PrakГҰti and
their evolutes in the form of the intellect,
mind, senses and the body; it exists entirely
beyond the GuЖ’as. Just as ether, though
present in the clouds, does not become their
originator, nor is it affected by them, even so
the Self is never the doer of actions nor does
it get contaminated by the bodies. The Lord
Himself elucidates this point in the next two
verses with the help of illustrations.
In support of his statement that the Self, though residing in the body, does not get
contaminated by it, the Lord further says:
ГҝГ•ГҠ вҖҡп¬ӮВёВӘГғВў вҖҡГҠГ’ЛҮГӘГҝГҠЕ’ГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҠВў ЕёГҠпЈҝВ¬ГҒвҲӮUГҘГҝГғпЈҝГ”вҖ“
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠГҠп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғГҠпЈҝ Е’пЈҝвҖһпЈҝU ГғГ•ГҠГ в—ҠГҠ ЕёГҠпЈҝВ¬ГҒвҲӮUГҘГҝГғпЈҝГ”H 32H
ГҝГ•ГҠ as; вҖҡп¬ӮВёВӘГғв—ҠЛңГ” the all-pervading; вҖҡГҠГ’ЛҮГӘГҝГҠГғЛңГ” by reason of its subtlety; вҖўГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҠв—ҠЛңГ” ether; Её
В©UВ¬ГҒвҲӮUГҘГҝГғпЈҝ is not tainted; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠ every where; вҖўп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғвҖ” seated; Е’пЈҝвҖһпЈҝU in the body; ГғГ•ГҠ so; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠ the
Self; Её В©UВ¬ГҒвҲӮUГҘГҝГғпЈҝ is not affected (by the attributes of the body owing to its attributeless
character).
As the all-pervading ether is not tainted by reason of its subtlety, though
permeating the body, the Self is not affected by the attributes of the body due to Its
subtle character.                                                                  (32)
even so though permeating the entire body, and
because it is extremely subtle and exists entirely
beyond the GuЖ’as, the Self is not affected in
the least by the good and evil qualities of the
intellect, mind, senses and the body.
By the analogy of ether, the verse proves
the stainless character of the Self. The idea is
that just as, though equally present in the air,
fire, water and earth, ether is in no way
contaminated by their good and evil qualities,
The Lord now explains how the Self is not the doer, though dwelling in the body.
ГҝГ•ГҠ В¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҠГҝГ ГҝпЈҝвҲ‘В§вҖ” вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г FВў вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҒв—Ҡв—ҠВў вҒ„UГҒп¬ӮвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠВў ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠГӢ ГғГ•ГҠ вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г FВў В¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҠГҝГҒГғ Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғГ”H 33H
ГҝГ•ГҠГ” as; В¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҠГҝГҒГғ lights; вҲһвҲ‘В§вҖ” the ones; вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г Fв—ҠЛң entire; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” universe; Гҹв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” this; вҒ„UГҒп¬ӮвҖ” un;
ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” KВ¶etra (Field); ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠГӢ the (one) Г…tmГҘ or Self; ГғГ•ГҠГ” so; вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г Fв—ҠЛңГ” entire; В¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҠГҝГҒГғ illumines; Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғГ”
O descendant of Bharata, Arjuna.

=== PAGE 620 ===

* Chapter XIII *
619
The illustration of the sun has been used
in this verse to demonstrate the non-doership
of the Self, and the qualification Г«EkaВЁГӯ to bring
out its non-dual character. That is to say, just
as the one sun lights up the entire universe, so
does the one Self infuse life and activity into
the whole world of matter referred to in verses
5 and 6 above under the name of Г«KВ¶etraГӯ and
its evolutes. And through different mental
apparatuses the Self appears to manifest itself
differently in different bodies. Nevertheless, like
the sun, the Self neither performs the actions
pertaining to the bodies nor does it cause them
to be performed, nor is it tainted by evils like
duality or partiality etc. That immortal Self ever
remains pure, conscious, actionless, immutable,
unchanged, impartial and stainless under every
circumstance.
Arjuna, as the one sun illumines this entire universe, so the one Г…tmГҘ (Spirit)
illumines the whole KВ¶etra (Field).                                                         (33)
Having thrown light on the six points raised in verse 3 above, the Lord now winds up
the chapter, holding out God-realization as the reward of fully grasping the whole teaching
contained therein.
ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠГҙГҠГҝГҠпЈҝвҒ„пЈҝUп¬Ӯв—ҠГЈГғвҒ„ВўU 
ГҙГҠГҠЕёГёЛҮГҠГҲВ·ГҠГ”вҖ“
Г·ГҚГғВ¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғв—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҠВў Гё ГҝпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҲГҝГҠВёГҒГЈГғ ГғпЈҝ В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”H 34H
ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠГҙГҠГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ”Г” between the KВ¶etra and the KВ¶etrajВӨa; вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” thus; вҖўГЈГғвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” the difference;
ГҙГҠГҠЕёГёЛҮГҠГҲВ·ГҠГ” with the eye of wisdom; Г·ГҚГғВ¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғв—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҠв—ҠЛңГ” (the phenomenon of) liberation from PrakГҰti
with her evolutes; ГёГ” and; ГҝпЈҝ whosoever; ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҲвҖ”Г” perceive; ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ attain; ГғпЈҝ they; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛң the Supreme
(Brahma or God).
Those who thus perceive with the eye of wisdom the difference between the
KВ¶etra (field) and KВ¶etrajВӨa (knower of the field), and the phenomenon of liberation
from PrakГҰti with her evolutes, reach the Supreme, eternal Spirit.
 (34)
unattached, pure, of the same stuff as
Knowledge, and the One; that the two being
wholly diverse in character, the KВ¶etrajВӨa is
entirely different from the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ; that the
apparent identity of the two is rooted in
ignorance; that, in reality, the Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ has
no connection whatsoever with the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ.
This is what is meant by perceiving with the
eye of wisdom the difference between the
Г«KВ¶etraГӯ and the Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ.
Of the three components of the compound
word Г«BhВөutaprakГҰtimokВ¶amГӯ, Г«BhВөutaГӯ stands
for the entire realm of objective reality, which
is an evolute of PrakГҰti; whereas Г«PrakГҰtiГӯ
represents the seed of this creation. Therefore,
Г«BhВөutaprakГҰtimokВ¶aГӯ means complete liberation
from PrakГҰti and her evolutes. And while
The compound word Г«JВӨГҘnacakВ¶uВ¶ГҘГӯ in
this verse refers to that realization of Truth
which in the opinion of the Lord, as given in
verse 2 above, constitutes true Knowledge,
nay, which has been declared in V.16 as the
means of dispelling ignorance, and which is
attained by such means as Г«AmГҘnitvaГӯ (absence
of pride) etc.
By means of such wisdom one is able
to realize that the cosmic body consisting of
the twentyfour categories, beginning with the
five subtle elements, enumerated in verse 5,
is known by the name of Г«KВ¶etraГӯ, that it is
knowable, subject to change, perishable,
mutable, material and transient; whereas the
Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ (the Soul) is its knower, conscious,
changeless, actionless, eternal, imperishable,

=== PAGE 621 ===

620
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
realizing in the aforesaid manner the difference
between the KВ¶etra and the KВ¶etrajВӨa, when
the soul gets disunited from Г«PrakГҰtiГӯ and is
established in identity with its real Self, the
supreme Spirit, one is said to have realized
liberation from PrakГҰti with her evolutes.
The dreaming man, on being reminded
anyhow of his waking state, comes to know
that he was dreaming, therefore, he wakes up
the moment it strikes him that waking in his
real body is the only means of escape from
the woes of the dream state. Even so the
JВӨГҘnayogвҲӮ or the SГҘdhaka following the path
of Knowledge, while perceiving the difference
between the KВ¶etra and the KВ¶etrajВӨa, comes
to realize at the same time that his apparent
connection with the KВ¶etra was due to his
having erroneously taken it to be real, therefore,
riddance from such connection consists in
getting established in identity with oneГӯs real
or divine Self, who is Truth, Consciousness
and Bliss solidified. Such a man is said to
have come to know his liberation from PrakГҰti
with her evolutes.
The moment this truth is realized the
entire realm of objective reality disappears
along with ignorance, and God-realization
takes place immediately.
Лҷ ГғГ вҖҡГҒЕ’ГҒГғ ГјГҠГӢв—ҠjВӘп¬ӮeГӢГғГҠвҖҡГҚВ¬ГҒЕёВ·Г вҖҡГҲ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГҝГҠВў ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠпЈҝ
ГјГҠГӢвҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠВЎГҲВёЕёвҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’пЈҝ ЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠЛҮГҠпЈҝГІГҠГҙГҠГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҠВӘГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ ЕёГҠв—Ҡ
ГІГҠГҝГҠпЈҝЕ’вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГӨГҝГҠГҝвҖ”H 13H
Thus, in the UpaniВ¶ad sung by the Lord, the science of  Brahma,
the scripture of Yoga, the Dialogue between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
and Arjuna, ends the thirteenth chapter entitled
Г¬The Yoga of Discrimination between
the KВ¶etra and KВ¶etrajВӨaГ®.
U

=== PAGE 622 ===

* Chapter XIV *
621
Title of the
Chapter
Summary of
the Chapter
Лҷ
вҖәrвҲӮmadbhagavad-GвҲӮtГҘ
Chapter XIV
The present chapter discusses matters relating to the three GuЖ’as,ГіSattva, Rajas and
TamasГіviz., their essential character, evolutes, cause and power, how and under what
circumstances they throw the embodied soul into bondage, as well as the
nature of that bondage, and, finally, the marks of the soul who has risen
above the GuЖ’as and realized God. In order to inculcate the advisability, in
the first instance, viz., during the period of oneГӯs SГҘdhanГҘ or spiritual discipline, of shaking
off Rajas and Tamas and adopting Sattva, and finally of giving up all connection with the
GuЖ’as, the three GuЖ’as have been separately dealt with. Hence this chapter has been given
the title of Г«The Yoga of Division of the three GuЖ’as.Г®
In verses 1 and 2 of this chapter the Lord glorifies Wisdom, the discussion of which
follows later, and introduces the subject. Detailing in the third and fourth the process of
evolution of all beings from the union of PrakГҰti and PuruВ¶a, in the fifth the
Lord declares the three GuЖ’as,ГіSattva, Rajas and Tamas,Гіas the cause of
bondage of the embodied soul. Verses 6 to 8 discuss in their order of
sequence the nature of the three GuЖ’as and the way in which they bind the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ.
Mentioning in the ninth which GuЖ’a drives the soul to what, and showing in the tenth how
one GuЖ’a prevails over the other two, the Lord discusses in verses 11 to 13 the marks
indicating the preponderance of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas respectively. Discussing in the
fourteenth and the fifteenth the fate of the man who dies during the preponderance of each
of the three GuЖ’as, the Lord details in the sixteenth the corresponding fruits of actions of the
SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika Types. Declaring in the seventeenth that the quality of
Sattva gives rise to knowledge, the quality of Rajas begets greed and the quality of Tamas
breeds error, stupor and ignorance, the Lord details in the eighteenth the corresponding fate
of the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ established in each of the three GuЖ’as. Verses 19 to 20 proclaim the reward
of viewing actions as being performed by the GuЖ’as, and the Г…tmГҘ as standing beyond the
GuЖ’as and a non-doer, as well as of transcending the three GuЖ’as. In verse 21, Arjuna
inquires of the Lord about the marks and conduct of one who has risen above the GuЖ’as,
and about the means of rising above them. In response to this, the Lord discusses in verses
22 to 25 the marks and conduct of the man who has risen above the three GuЖ’as, and points
out in the twentysixth the means as well as the reward of rising above them. The Lord then
concludes the chapter by declaring Himself in the last or twentyseventh verse as the
foundation of Brahma, immortality, and so on inasmuch as they are all identical with Him.
In the course of Chapter XIII, the Lord first of all defined Г«KВ¶etraГӯ and Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ and
declared their knowledge alone as true Knowledge, and accordingly discussed the denotation,
character, and evolutes of the Г«KВ¶etraГӯ and the order of evolution of its
constituents and the essential character and glory of the Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ Introducing
the topic of the GuЖ’as under the name of PrakГҰti and PuruВ¶a in verse 19, the
Link of the
Discourse

=== PAGE 623 ===

622
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Lord declared the three evolutes of PrakГҰti, and added in the twenty-first that attachment to
the three GuЖ’as alone was responsible for oneГӯs repeated birth in good and evil wombs. In
this connection one is naturally tempted to know the diverse characteristics of the three
GuЖ’as, how they bind the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ to the body, the type of birth one attains through
attachment to a particular GuЖ’a, the means of ridding oneself of the three GuЖ’as, and the
marks and conduct of the soul who has been rid of them. Chapter XIV has, therefore, been
introduced to elucidate all these points. The same JВӨГҘna or Wisdom that has been dealt with
in Chapter XIII has to be clearly brought out and elaborately discussed in this chapter;
therefore, glorifying that Wisdom in two verses, the Lord first of all undertakes to resume
its discussion.
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲUп¬ӮГҠГё
В¬вҒ„ВўU Г·ГҚГҝвҖ” В¬Лқп¬ӮЛҮГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠЕёГҠВў ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠГҲГ»ГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҝГ–ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ в—ҠГҲЕёГҝвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё В¬вҒ„UГҠВў ГҒвҖҡГҒhГҒв—ҠГғГҠпЈҝ ВӘГғГҠвҖ”H 1H
В¬вҒ„в—ҠЛңГ” supreme; Г·ГҚГҝвҖ” again; В¬Лқп¬ӮЛҮГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ I shall expound; ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of wisdoms; ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” wisdom;
В©UГ»ГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” the best; ГҝГғЛңГ” which; ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠГ” knowing, acquiring; в—ҠГҲЕёГҝвҖ” sages; вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВё all; В¬вҒ„UГҠв—ҠЛңГ” highest; ГҒвҖҡГҒhв—ҠЛңГ”
perfection; ГҹГғвҖ” (liberated) from this (mundane existence); ВӘГғГҠвҖ” have attained.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: I shall expound once more the supreme wisdom, the best of
all kinds of wisdom, acquiring which all sages have attained highest perfection, being
liberated from this mundane existence.                                                                (1)
order that it may be fully understood. The
method of exposition, of course, is different
this time.
The word Г«MunayaВЁГӯ stands for those
wise men who have attained the supreme
state through the practice of JВӨГҘnayoga or the
discipline of Knowledge; and the highest
perfection reached by these wise men is the
same which is spoken of as Г«the attainment
of supreme BrahmaГӯ, and which has been
variously described as Г«supreme PeaceГӯ,
Г«everlasting happinessГӯ and the Г«state from
which there is no returnГӯ etc.
The word Г«ItaВЁГӯ (hence) signifies mortal
existence. The use of this word shows that
the sages referred to in this verse have ceased
for all time to maintain any connection with
this woeful world consisting of death.
The word Г«JВӨГҘnГҘnГҘmГӯ in this verse covers
the entire body of teachings, varied in  character,
contained in the Vedas, SmГҰti texts, PurГҘЖ’as
and other sacred literature, and intended to
throw light on different subjects. Of these,
the Lord undertakes in this verse to discuss
that true wisdom, which, while differentiating
between PrakГҰti and PuruВ¶a, reveals the true
character of PuruВ¶a. This wisdom brings direct
realization of God and, freeing the embodied
soul from the bondage of PrakГҰti, liberates it
for ever; hence it has been declared as the
best and highest of all wisdom.
The use of the indeclinable Г«BhВөuyaВЁГӯ is
intended to show that this wisdom has been
discussed even before; but being most profound
and abstruse, it is difficult to understand.
Hence it is taken up for discussion again in
ГҹЕ’Вў ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠГҲВ¬ГҠГҒГјГҠГ Гҝ в—Ҡв—Ҡ вҖҡГҠЕ“ГӘГҝВёв—ҠГҠВӘГғГҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҖҡВӘпЈҝВёЛҳГҒВ¬ ЕёГҠпЈҝВ¬ВЎГҠГҝГЈГғпЈҝ В¬ЛқвҲӮUГҝпЈҝ Её вҲҡГҝГ•ГҒГЈГғ ГёH 2H

=== PAGE 624 ===

* Chapter XIV *
623
The demonstrative adjective Г«IdamГӯ has
been used before Г«JВӨГҘnamГӯ in order to make
it clear that whatever has been stated in this
verse is in praise of that very wisdom which
has already been discussed in Chapter XIII,
and is going to be discussed in the present
Chapter as well. And those who, having
realized in the light of the wisdom referred to
in this context the true nature of PrakГҰti and
PuruВ¶a, have reached entirely beyond PrakГҰti
and her GuЖ’as, and remain established in
identity with the absolute, formless supreme
Spirit, who is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss
solidified, are said to have taken recourse to
or practised this wisdom.
The words Г«Mama sГҘdharmyamГҘgatГҘВЁГӯ
in the present verse convey the same idea as
has been expressed by Г«ParГҘm Siddhim GatГҘВЁГӯ
(attained highest perfection) in the preceding
one. That is to say, realizing the attributeless
aspect of God as oneГӯs own Self is what is
meant by attaining His Being.
The latter half of this verse is intended
to convey that those who, taking recourse to
and practising the wisdom taught in this chapter,
have realized the supreme eternal Spirit as
their very Self, cease to have any connection
with the creation or dissolution of the universe.
For the principal factor determining oneГӯs birth
in good or evil wombs in contact with the
GuЖ’as, and liberated souls stand entirely
beyond the GuЖ’as; hence there is no return
for them. And when there is no birth, the
question of death does not arise at all.
ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this; ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” wisdom; В©UВ¬ГҠГҒГјГҠГ Гҝ taking recourse to or practising; в—Ҡв—ҠГ” My; вҖҡГҠЕ“ГӘГҝВёв—ҠЛңГ” Being;
вҖўГҠВӘГғГҠвҖ” (persons who have) entered into; вҖҡВӘпЈҝВё at the cosmic dawn; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; Её В©UВ¬ВЎГҠГҝГЈГғпЈҝ are not
born again; В¬ЛқвҲӮUГҝпЈҝ during the cosmic night or final dissolution; ЕёГ” nor; вҲҡГҝГ•ГҒГЈГғГ” feel disturbed; Гё and.
Those who, by practising this wisdom, have entered into My Being are not born
again at the cosmic dawn nor feel disturbed even during the cosmic dissolution (MahГҘ
Pralaya).
(2)
Thus undertaking to teach that wisdom again, and glorifying it, the Lord now
introduces the subject by declaring in two verses how the entire world emanates from
PrakГҰti and PuruВ¶a.
в—Ҡв—Ҡ ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒЕёв—ҠВёвҖһUЕ’ЛңГ”вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” ГғГҒSв—ҠГЈВӘГ·Z Е’Е“ГҠГӘГҝвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖҡГӘГ·п¬ӮвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠВў ГғГғГҠпЈҝ Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғH 3H
в—Ҡв—ҠГ” My; ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒЕёвҖ”Г” (is) the womb (of all creatures); в—ҠвҖһUГғЛңГ” вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” primordial Nature known as the
great Brahma; ГғГҒSв—ҠЕёЛңГ” in that (womb); ВӘГ·Вёв—ҠЛңГ” the seed (of all life); Е’Е“ГҠГҒв—Ҡ place; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” (and) I;
вҖҡГӘГ·п¬ӮвҖ” the birth; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of all beings; ГғГғвҖ” from that (union of Matter and Spirit); Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ
comes to be. Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғ O descendant of Bharata, Arjuna.
My primordial Nature, known as the great Brahma, is the womb of all creatures;
in that womb I place the seed of all life. The creation of all beings follows from that
union of Matter and Spirit, O Arjuna.                                                  (3)
cause). The idea has already been explained
in the commentary on IX.7. By calling it
Г«MamaГӯ (Mine), the Lord shows that this
PrakГҰti has been connected with Him from
time without beginning. The material or efficient
The Substantive Г«BrahmaГӯ, qualified by
the adjective Г«MahatГӯ, stands for primordial
Nature, which is the cause of entire creation
and is also termed as Г«AvyaktaГӯ (the
Unmanifest) and Г«PradhГҘnaГӯ (the primary

=== PAGE 625 ===

624
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
cause and the womb of a mother are called
Г«YoniГӯ. By giving this name to PrakГҰti, the
Lord shows that she is the material cause as
well as the womb of the various bodies of all
living beings.
The word Г«GarbhamГӯ in this verse stands
for the totality of conscious selves or egos
referred to in Chapter VII as Г«ParГҘ PrakГҰtiГӯ or
the higher Nature. And linking the egos that
had been lying merged in God alongwith
their SaвүҲskГҘras or latencies during the cosmic
night, with PrakГҰti at the cosmic dawn is
what is meant by placing the seed of all life
in the womb known as PrakГҰti.
The demonstrative adverb Г«TataВЁГӯ (thence)
refers to the union of Matter and Spirit
brought about in this way by God; while
Г«SarvabhВөutГҘnГҘmГӯ stands for the totality of living
beings appearing in various forms, e.g.,
celestials, human beings, beasts, birds and so
on according to the latencies of their past deeds.
Г«SambhavaВЁГӯ signifies the appearance of these
creatures in various subtle or astral forms
through this conjunction of Matter and Spirit.
The first offspring of this union, appearing at
the dawn of creation, is HiraЖ’yagarbha (the
astral form of BrahmГҘ, the Creator) and the
subtle bodies of other creatures follow next.
By the latter half of this verse the Lord
conveys that the subtle and gross froms of these
beings are all constituted of Matter, while the
conscious spirit dwelling in them is a particle
of God. It is the union of PrakГҰti and God
that brings forth all embodied beings; hence
PrakГҰti is their Mother, and God, their Father.
The word Г«MВөurtayaВЁГӯ stands for the
totality of living beings clothed in various
bodies of different shapes and colours and
belonging to different species, such as celestials,
human beings, RГҘkВ¶asas or demons, beasts,
birds and so on; and Г«SambhavantiГӯ denotes
their incarnation in the aforesaid species.
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГҝГҠпЈҝГҒЕёВ·ГҲ вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ в—ҠГҚГғВёГҝвҖ” вҖҡГӘГ·п¬ӮГҒГЈГғ ГҝГҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ГғГҠвҖҡГҠВў вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” в—ҠвҖһUlГҠпЈҝГҒЕёвҒ„UвҖһВўU вҖҷГӢВЎВ¬ЛқЕ’вҖ” ГҒВ¬ГғГҠH 4H
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГҝГҠпЈҝГҒЕёВ·ГҲ all the species (of various kinds); вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ O son of KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna; в—ҠГҚГғВёГҝвҖ”
embodied beings; вҖҡГӘГ·п¬ӮГҒГЈГғ appear; ГҝГҠвҖ” as many; ГғГҠвҖҡГҠв—ҠЛңГ” their; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” в—ҠвҖһUГғЛңГ” the great Brahma or
PrakГҰti; ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒЕёвҖ” (is) the conceiving mother; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” (and) I (am); вҖҷГӢВЎВ¬ЛқЕ’вҖ” ГҒВ¬ГғГҠ the seed-giving father.
Of all embodied beings that appear in all the species of various kinds, Arjuna,
PrakГҰti or Nature is the conceiving Mother, while I am the seed-giving Father.   (4)
In verse 21 of Chapter XIII it was stated that attachment to the GuЖ’as is responsible
for the birth of the embodied soul in good or evil wombs. Following this line of thought, the
Lord spoke in verses 3 and 4 above of embodied souls being born in species of various
kinds; but the verses contain no reference to the GuЖ’as. Therefore, while introducing this
topic in order to make it clear what these GuЖ’as are, what is meant by getting attached to
them, attachment to what particular GuЖ’a causes good birth or otherwise and so on, the
Lord in course of the next four verses first of all declares that the GuЖ’as are evolved from
PrakГҰti, then mentions them separately by name and lastly discusses their nature as well as
the way in which they bind the JвҲӮva.
вҖҡГ»п¬ӮВў вҒ„UВЎSГғв—Ҡ ГҹГҒГғ ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠвҖ” В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғвҖҡГӘГ·п¬ӮГҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ГҒЕёвҖҷЕ“AГҒГЈГғ в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ Е’пЈҝвҖһпЈҝU Е’пЈҝГҒвҖһUЕёв—ҠвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ”H 5H

=== PAGE 626 ===

* Chapter XIV *
625
disgusted with and losing all interest in the
world, man gets absorbed in the thought of
the 
supreme 
Spirit, 
who 
is 
Truth,
Consciousness and Bliss solidified. Besides
this, 
his 
mind 
and 
all 
his 
senses
are rid of sorrow and lethargy, and become
more animated. It is these characteristics of
Sattva that are indicated by the word
Г«NirmalatvГҘtГӯ and the word Г«SattvamГӯ has
вҖҡГ»п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” the quality of Sattva (harmony); вҒ„UВЎвҖ”Г” the quality of Rajas (motion); Гғв—ҠвҖ” (and) the
quality of Tamas (inertia); ГҹГҒГғ these; ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠвҖ” (three) GuЖ’as; В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғвҖҡГӘГ·п¬ӮГҠвҖ” born of Nature; ГҒЕёвҖҷЕ“AГҒГЈГғ
tie down; в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ O mighty-armed one, Arjuna; Е’пЈҝвҖһпЈҝU to the body; Е’пЈҝГҒвҖһUЕёв—ҠЛңГ” вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ” the imperishable
soul.
Sattva, Rajas and TamasГіthese three GuЖ’as born of Nature tie down the
imperishable soul to the body, O Arjuna!                                                   (5)
reference to the same shows that in reality
the soul as such is immutable, hence there
can be no bondage for it. It regards itself
as bound only due to ignorance that has
haunted it from time without beginning. These
three GuЖ’as induce in the soul a sense of
possession, attachment and a feeling of
identification in respect of enjoyments and
bodies corresponding to themselves; this is
what is meant by their tying the soul to the
body. In other words, what binds the soul is
its feeling of identification, attachment and
sense of possession in respect of bodies evolved
from the three GuЖ’as, and of objects connected
therewith.
The use of the words Г«SattvamГӯ, Г«RajasГӯ
and Г«TamasГӯ is intended to point out the
diversity, the names and the number of the
GuЖ’as. That is to say, GuЖ’as are three in
number, they are known by the names of
Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, and they are diverse
in character. They are called Г«PrakГҰti-SambhavaГӯ
(born of Nature) in order to show that they
are all evolutes of PrakГҰti, and that the whole
material creation is an amplification of these
three GuЖ’as.
The word Г«DehinamГӯ is intended to
convey that the GuЖ’as react only on those
who look upon the body as their self; while
the use of the adjective Г«AvyayamГӯ with
The Lord now depicts the essential character of Sattva, and the way in which it binds
the soul.
ГғГІГҠ вҖҡГ»п¬ӮВў ГҒЕёв—ҠВёвҲӮUГ п¬ӮГҠГ В¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠЕёГҠв—ҠГҝв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖҡГҲПҖвҖҡXГ”пЈҝUЕё 
вҖҷЕ“AГҠГҒГғ 
ГҙГҠГҠЕёвҖҡXГ”пЈҝUЕё 
ГёГҠЕёГүГҠГ”H 6H
ГғГІГҠГ” of these GuЖ’as; вҖҡГ»п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” the quality of Sattva (harmony); ГҒЕёв—ҠВёвҲӮUГ п¬ӮГҠГғЛңГ” because of its
being immaculate; В¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” (is) illuminating; вҖўЕёГҠв—ҠГҝв—ҠЛңГ” (and) flawless; вҖҡГҲПҖвҖҡXГ”пЈҝUЕё attachment with
happiness; вҖҷЕ“AГҠГҒГғ it binds; ГҙГҠГҠЕёвҖҡXГ”пЈҝUЕё through attachment to knowledge; ГёГ” and; вҖўЕёГүГҠ O sinless
one, Arjuna.
Of these, Sattva being immaculate, is illuminating and flawless, Arjuna; it binds
through attachment with happiness and knowledge.                                            (6)
The quality of Sattva is absolutely pure
in character and untainted by any form of
evil; hence it is illuminating and free from
morbidity of any kind. It lends illumination
to the mind and the senses, and uprooting
sorrow, distraction, depravities, evil propensities
and vices, brings peace. When the quality of
Sattva is in the ascendant, the restlessness of
the mind automatically disappears, and feeling

=== PAGE 627 ===

626
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
been qualified by the adjectives Г«PrakГҘвҖ№akamГӯ
and Г«AnГҘmayamГӯ in order to bring out the
essential character of Sattva.
The word Г«SukhaГӯ, forming part of the
compound word Г«SukhasaвҲҶgenaГӯ in this verse,
denotes the SГҘttvika form of happiness defined
in verses 36 and 37 of Chapter XVIII. During
the experience of this happiness the feeling
of identification that the soul comes to develop
with it, arrests the progress of the soul on
the path of spiritual evolution and debars it
from the attainment of liberation in the current
life. This is what is meant by the quality of
Sattva binding the soul through identification
with happiness.
Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ means the faculty of knowledge.
On the unfoldment of this faculty the feeling
of identification that the soul comes to
develop with it debars it from attaining the
state which lies beyond the three GuЖ’as.
This is what is meant by the SattvaguЖ’a
binding the soul through identification with
wisdom.
By addressing Arjuna as Г«AnaghaГӯ (sinless
one), the Lord shows that being sinless by
nature, Arjuna had no fear of bondage.
The Lord now proceeds to discuss the essential character of Rajas and shows how it
binds the soul.
вҒ„UВЎГҠпЈҝ вҒ„UГҠВӘГҠГ в—ҠвҲ‘ВўВ§ ГҒп¬ӮГҒh ГғГҺcГЎГҠГҠвҖҡXГ”UвҖҡв—ҠГҲjп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГғГҒГӣГҠвҖҷЕ“AГҠГҒГғ вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡXГ”пЈҝUЕё Е’пЈҝГҒвҖһUЕёв—ҠЛңГ”H 7H
вҒ„UВЎвҖ” the quality of Rajas; вҒ„UГҠВӘГҠГ в—ҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” of the nature of passion; ГҒп¬ӮГҒhГ” know; ГғГҺcГЎГҠГҠвҖҡXГ”UвҖҡв—ҠГҲЕ’ЛңГ”Г·п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ”
(as) born of desire and attachment; ГғГғЛңГ” it; ГҒЕёвҖҷЕ“AГҠГҒГғ binds; вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ O son of KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna;
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡXГ”пЈҝUЕёГ” through attachment to actions (and their fruit); Е’пЈҝГҒвҖһUЕёв—ҠЛңГ” (this) soul.
Arjuna, know the quality of Rajas, which is of the nature of passion, as born of
desire and attachment. It binds the soul through attachment to actions and their fruit. (7)
is in order to make this point clear that at
some places RajoguЖ’a has been declared to
be the cause of desire etc., while at other
places desire etc., have been declared to be
the cause of RajoguЖ’a. The compound word
Г«TГҰВ¶Ж’ГҘsaвҲҶgasamudbhavamГӯ in this very verse
can be interpreted in both ways. If it is
interpreted to mean that which is born of
TГҰВ¶Ж’ГҘ (desire) and SaвҲҶga (attachment)Гі
ГғГҺcГЎГҠГҠвҖҡXГ”UГҠГЁГҝГҠВў вҖҡв—ҠГҲjп¬ӮГҒГғГіRajoguЖ’a turns out to
be an effect of the latter. If, on the other
hand, it is taken to mean that from which
TГҰВ¶Ж’ГҘ (desire) and SaвҲҶga (attachment)
emanateГіГғГҺcГЎГҠГҠвҖҡXГ”UГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” вҖҡв—ҠГҲjп¬ӮГҠпЈҝ ГҝSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ”ГіRajoguЖ’a
turns out to be the cause. On the analogy of
the seed and the tree, both these conclusions
are true, hence Г«TГҰВ¶Ж’ГҘsaвҲҶgasamudbhavamГӯ
can be interpreted both ways.
Г«KarmasaвҲҶgaГӯ means establishing oneГӯs
The quality of Rajas manifests itself in
the form of passion or attachment. RГҘga or
passion is its gross manifestation hence the
quality of Rajas has been characterized as
being of the nature of passion.
Here it may be urged that desire itself
has been declared elsewhere as an offspring
of RajoguЖ’a (vide III.37 and XIV.12). How,
then, are we to understand that RajoguЖ’a is
begotten of Г«desireГӯ and Г«attachmentГӯ ? In this
connection it may be submitted that the quality
of Rajas develops through desire and
attachment, while cupidity and attachment in
their turn are developed through RajoguЖ’a.
They are interdependent like the seed and the
tree. Of these, Rajas is analogous to the seed;
while desire, attachment etc., correspond to
the tree. The seed is a product of the tree,
and yet it is the cause of the tree as well. It

=== PAGE 628 ===

* Chapter XIV *
627
connection with actions and their fruit by
claiming to be their doer, and expecting a
particular fruit from them. Through this
connection with actions and their fruit RajoguЖ’a
keeps the soul tied down to this mundane
existence consisting of birth and death. This
is what the Lord seeks to convey by the latter
half of this verse.
this connection it may be submitted that
ignorance grows through TamoguЖ’a and
TamoguЖ’a in its turn grows through ignorance.
Like the seed and the tree, they too are
interdependent: ignorance is analogous to the
seed, while TamoguЖ’a corresponds to the tree.
Therefore, at some places TamoguЖ’a is stated
to be the cause, while at others it is declared to
be a product of ignorance.
Fruitless activity of the mind and senses
and neglect of duties enjoined by the вҖәГҘstras
or sacred books is called Г«PramГҘdaГӯ (error).
Г…lasya is inactivity or disinclination to perform
oneГӯs duty. And drowsiness, the state of
dream and deep sleepГіall these are covered
by Г«NidrГҘГӯ. Restraining the soul through all
these from practices leading to liberation,
TamoguЖ’a keeps it tied down to mundane
existence consisting of birth and death. This
is what is meant by binding  the soul through
error, sloth and sleep.
The quality of Tamas (inertia) stupefies
the mind and senses, depriving them of their
cognitive faculty. This is what is meant by
the Lord when He speaks of TamoguЖ’a as
deluding those who regard the body as their
self. All those living beings who have
connection with the mind and senses and
identify themselves with the body or claim it
as their own regard their own self as benumbed
when their mind and senses get benumbed
during sleep. Those liberated souls, however,
who have ceased to regard the mind, senses
and body as their own self, no longer recognize
any connection with them; hence the Lord
speaks of TamoguЖ’a as the deluder of Г«all
those who look upon the body as their own
selfГӯ.
Here it may be urged that verse 17 of this
very chapter speaks of ignorance as a product
of TamoguЖ’a. How, then, are we to understand
that TamoguЖ’a has its root in ignorance? In
The Lord now describes the character of TamoguЖ’a and the way in which it binds the soul.
Гғв—ҠSГ п¬ӮГҙГҠГҠЕёВЎВў ГҒп¬ӮГҒh в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUЕёВў вҖҡп¬ӮВёЕ’пЈҝГҒвҖһUЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
В¬Лқв—ҠГҠЕ’ГҠвҲӮUSГҝГҒЕёВәЛқГҠГҒГ·SГғГҒГӣГҠвҖҷЕ“AГҠГҒГғ 
Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғГ”H 8H
Гғв—ҠвҖ”Г” the quality of Tamas (inertia); ГғГҲ however; вҖўГҙГҠГҠЕёВЎв—ҠЛңГ” (as) born of ignorance; ГҒп¬ӮГҒh
know; в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the deluder; вҖҡп¬ӮВёЕ’пЈҝГҒвҖһUЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of all those who look upon the body as their own self;
В¬Лқв—ҠГҠЕ’ГҠвҲӮUSГҝГҒЕёВәЛқГҠГҒГ·вҖ” through error, sloth and sleep; ГғГғЛңГ” it; ГҒЕёвҖҷЕ“AГҠГҒГғ binds (the soul); Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғГ” O
descendant of Bharata, Arjuna.
And know Tamas, the deluder of all those who look upon the body as their own self,
as born of ignorance. It binds the soul through error, sloth and sleep, Arjuna.
(8)
Delineating thus the character of the three GuЖ’as,ГіSattva, Rajas and Tamas,Гіand showing
how they bind the soul, the Lord now describes the natural function of the three GuЖ’as.
вҖҡГ»п¬ӮВў вҖҡГҲПҖпЈҝ вҖҡTГҝГҒГғ вҒ„UВЎвҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒГЎГҠ Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғГ”вҖ“
ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠГҠп¬ӮГҺГ Гҝ ГғГҲ Гғв—ҠвҖ” В¬Лқв—ҠГҠЕ’пЈҝ вҖҡTГҝГ ГҝГҲГғГ”H 9H

=== PAGE 629 ===

628
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Г«SukhaГӯ here denotes the SГҘttvika type
of joy (XVIII.36,37). Weaning man from
worldly enjoyments and activities, as well as
from error, sloth and sleep, SattvaguЖ’a
induces SГҘttvika joy through contemplation
on the Self, etc. This is what is meant when
the Lord speaks of SattvaguЖ’a as driving one
to joy.
Г«KarmaГӯ stands for action with an
interested motive enjoined by the вҖәГҘstras
(and bearing fruit in the form of enjoyments
of this world and the next). Awakening the
desire for enjoyments of various kinds,
RajoguЖ’a stirs man to activity with a view to
obtaining those enjoyments. This is what the
Lord means when He speaks of RajoguЖ’a as
rousing man to action.
When TamoguЖ’a preponderates, it
sometimes robs man of his faculty of judgment,
which determines what is right and what is
wrong; while at others it induces sleep by
dulling his mind and senses. This is what it
seeks to convey when the verse speaks of
TamoguЖ’a as darkening oneГӯs wisdom. And
inducing delinquency and prompting man to
idle pursuitsГіthis is what is meant by inciting
him to error.
The particle Г«TuГӯ in this verse is intended
to show that TamoguЖ’a does not rest contented
with merely obscuring manГӯs wisdom, but does
something else too; while Г«UtaГӯ shows that
just as obscuring manГӯs wisdom it incites him
to error, even so it induces sleep and sloth.
That is to say, when it clouds manГӯs judgment,
it incites him to error; and when it dulls and
benumbs his consciousness in the shape of
alertness of his mind and senses, it induces
lethargy and sleep.
вҖҡГ»п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” the quality of Sattva; вҖҡГҲПҖпЈҝ to happiness; вҖҡTГҝГҒГғ draws; вҒ„UВЎвҖ” (and) the quality of
Rajas; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒГЎГҠГ” to action; Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғГ” O descendant of Bharata, Arjuna; ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” вҖўГҠп¬ӮГҺГ Гҝ obscuring wisdom;
ГғГҲ on the other hand; Гғв—ҠвҖ” (while) the quality of Tamas; В¬Лқв—ҠГҠЕ’пЈҝ to error; вҖҡTГҝГҒГғ incites; В©UГғ as
well as (sleep and sloth).
Sattva draws one to happiness, and Rajas to action; while Tamas, clouding
wisdom, incites one to error, as well as sleep and sloth, Arjuna.                                            (9)
The next verse shows the way in which these GuЖ’as operate when they actually react
on the JвҲӮva.
вҒ„UВЎSГғв—ҠpГҠГҒГ·Г·ГҚГҝ вҖҡГ»п¬ӮВў Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғвҖ“
вҒ„UВЎвҖ” вҖҡГ»п¬ӮВў Гғв—ҠpГ’п¬Ӯ Гғв—ҠвҖ” вҖҡГ»п¬ӮВў вҒ„UВЎSГғГ•ГҠГ”H 10H
вҒ„UВЎвҖ” the quality of Rajas; Гғв—ҠвҖ” the quality of Tamas; Гё and; вҖўГҒГ·Г·ГҚГҝ overpowering; вҖҡГ»п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ”
the quality of Sattva; Г·п¬ӮГҒГғГ” prevails; Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғГ” O descendant of Bharata, Arjuna; вҒ„UВЎвҖ” the quality
of Rajas (prevails); вҖҡГ»п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” (overpowering) the quality of Sattva; Гғв—ҠвҖ” the quality of Tamas; Гё
and; вҲһп¬Ӯ even; Гғв—ҠвҖ” the quality of Tamas (prevails); вҖҡГ»п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ”ЛңГ” (overpowering) the quality of Sattva;
вҒ„UВЎвҖ” (and) the quality of Rajas; ГғГ•ГҠ so.
Overpowering Rajas and Tamas, Arjuna, Sattva prevails; overpowering Sattva
and Tamas, Rajas prevails; even so, overpowering Sattva and Rajas, Tamas prevails.*
(10)
* вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata mentions the following ten factors as conducive to the growth of the GuЖ’as:Гі
вҖўГҠВӘв—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҳВ¬вҖ” В¬ЛқВЎГҠ Е’пЈҝвүҘГҠвҖ” вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮUвҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё Гё ВЎГЈв—Ҡ ГёвҖ“
ГӨГҝГҠЕёВў в—ҠГЈГІГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГ• вҖҡВўSвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГҠпЈҝ Е’вүҘГҠГ’ГғпЈҝ ВӘГҲГЎГҠвҖһпЈҝUГғп¬ӮвҖ”H (XI.xiii.10)

=== PAGE 630 ===

* Chapter XIV *
629
When the quality of Sattva begins to
function, thwarting the operation of Rajas and
Tamas, the body, senses and mind, being
flooded with illumination, discrimination and
dispassion, enter into a state of extreme
tranquillity and happiness. Hence during that
time the effects of RajoguЖ’a viz., greed, activity
and the craving for enjoyment etc., and those
of TamoguЖ’a, viz., sleep, sloth and error etc.,
cannot appear. In this way, overpowering Rajas,
and Tamas, the quality of Sattva gives rise to
knowledge, illumination and happiness etc.
This is what is meant by the preponderance of
Sattva over Rajas and Tamas.
Even so, when the quality of Rajas begins
to function, overpowering the operation of
Sattva and Tamas, the body, senses and mind
are seized with a spell of restlessness, unrest,
greed, the craving for enjoyment and an
irresistible urge to undertake activities of various
kinds. Hence the effects of SattvaguЖ’a, viz.,
illumination, discrimination and tranquillity etc.,
almost disappear. The effects of TamoguЖ’a,
viz., sleep and sloth etc., also get suppressed.
This is what is meant by the quality of Rajas
preponderating over Sattva and Tamas.
Similarly, when the quality of Tamas
begins to function, overtaking the operation
of Sattva and Rajas, dullness etc., prevail in
the body, senses and mind; one feels inclined
to lapse into error and the faculty of judgment
gets blurred. Hence the effects of Sattva,
viz., illumination and knowledge, and those
of Rajas, viz., the propensity to work and the
craving for enjoyment etc., almost vanish;
they are no longer able to manifest themselves.
This is what is meant by the quality of
Tamas prevailing over Sattva and Rajas.
Г«AsminГӯ with Г«DeheГӯ is intended to bring out
the importance of human birth. The intention
is to show that an opportunity for the growth
of SattvaguЖ’a can be had in the human body
alone, and it is in this birth alone that man
can attain liberation with the help of that
GuЖ’a. Creatures born in other species do not
enjoy this privilege.
Height of animation and the feeling of
When the quality of Sattva is predominant,
man should scrupulously endeavour to devote
his mind to the practices of meditation and
adoration etc. Then alone can the flow of
SattvaguЖ’a endure for a considerable time.
If, on the other hand, he neglects the
opportunity, TamoguЖ’a or RajoguЖ’a may
soon overpower it and start functioning itself.
The use of the demonstrative adjective
The preceding verse thus showed how each of the three GuЖ’as prevails over the other
two. Here one would naturally feel inclined to know the marks of the preponderance of each
GuЖ’a; therefore, the Lord, first of all, discusses the marks of the predominance of SattvaguЖ’a.
вҖҡп¬ӮВёmГҠвҒ„пЈҝUВ·ГҲ 
Е’пЈҝвҖһпЈҝUЛҳГҒSв—ҠГЈВ¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҠ 
В©UВ¬ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝГ”вҖ“
ГҙГҠГҠЕёВў ГҝЕ’ГҠ ГғЕ’ГҠ ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГҒmп¬ӮГҺhВў вҖҡГ»п¬ӮГҒв—ҠГ ГҝГҲГғГ”H 11H
вҖҡп¬ӮВёmГҠвҒ„пЈҝUВ·ГҲ (as well as) in the mind and senses; Е’пЈҝвҖһпЈҝUГ” вҖўГҒSв—ҠЕёЛңГ” in this body; В¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҠвҖ” light; В©UВ¬ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝГ”
dawns; ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” (and) discernment; ГҝЕ’ГҠГ” when; ГғЕ’ГҠ then; ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГғЛңГ” one should know; ГҒп¬Ӯп¬ӮГҺhв—ҠЛңГ” (is)
predominant; вҖҡГ»п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” the quality of Sattva; ГҹГҒГғ thus; В©UГғ that.
When light and discernment dawn in this body, as well as in the mind and senses,
then one should know that Sattva is predominant.                                   (11)
Г¬The sacred lore, water, progeny, place, time, occupation, birth, thought, mystic formulas and
purificatory ritesГіthese ten factors are conducive to the GuЖ’as, i.e., to their growth.Г® That is to say, these
factors promote that very GuЖ’a with which they are associated.

=== PAGE 631 ===

630
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
lightness in the body and the growth of
perspicuity and keenness in the mind and
sensesГіthis is what is meant by the dawn of
light. And the dawn of wisdom or discernment
consists in the awakening of the faculty of
judgment distinguishing between truth and
falsehood, right and wrong. When light and
wisdom both make their appearance, the mind
automatically recoils from the world and is
flooded as it were with quietude, joy and
tranquillity, and the feelings of attraction and
aversion, sorrow and grief, anxiety, fear,
fidgetiness, sleep, sloth and error etc., almost
disappear.
Describing thus the marks indicating the growth of SattvaguЖ’a, the Lord now discusses
the marks which betoken the growth of RajoguЖ’a.
вҲӮUГҠпЈҝГ·вҖ” В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠвҒ„UГҠвҒ„UГӘГ·вҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠвүҘГҠв—ҠвҖ” SВ¬ГҺвҖһUГҠГ”вҖ“
вҒ„UВЎSГҝпЈҝГғГҠГҒЕё ВЎГҠГҝГЈГғпЈҝ ГҒп¬Ӯп¬ӮГҺhпЈҝ Г·вҒ„UГғВ·ВёГ·Г”H 12H
вҲӮUГҠпЈҝГ·вҖ” greed; В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠвҖ” activity; вҖўГҠвҒ„UГӘГ·вҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” undertaking of actions with an interested
motive; вҖўвүҘГҠв—ҠвҖ” restlessness; SВ¬ГҺвҖһUГҠГ” (and) a thirst for enjoyment; вҒ„UВЎГҒвҖҡ RajoguЖ’a; вҲһГғГҠГҒЕё all these;
ВЎГҠГҝГЈГғпЈҝ prevail; ГҒп¬Ӯп¬ӮГҺhпЈҝUГ” with the preponderance of; Г·вҒ„UГғВ·ВёГ·Г” O chief of Bharatas, Arjuna.
With the preponderance of Rajas, Arjuna, greed, activity, undertaking of actions
with an interested motive, restlessness and a thirst for enjoyment prevail.
 (12)
viz., sleep, sloth and so on, get neutralized,
man begins to feel the need for various
forms of enjoyment. His mind is swayed by
greed and obsessed with a strong desire for
accumulation of wealth, he begins to feel the
urge for various forms of activities, his mind
becomes restless, and he takes to various
activities in response to that urge. This is
what happens during the preponderance of
RajoguЖ’a.
The use of the vocative Г«BharatarВ¶abhaГӯ
for Arjuna is intended to convey that being
the chief of Bharatas, Arjuna was free from
evils like greed etc., which are products of
RajoguЖ’a.
Greed is lust for wealth, prompted by
which man is ever busy devising means of
multiplying his possessions, refuses to part
with them even when there is a suitable
occasion for doing so and, while engaged in
amassing wealth, seeks even to usurp the
rights of others, minding not what is right
and what is wrong. The urge or inclination,
felt in the mind, to undertake various forms
of activities is called Г«PravГҰttiГӯ; and Г«SpГҰhГҘГӯ
consists in recognizing any mundane object
as indispensable for oneself. With the
preponderance of RajoguЖ’a, when the effects
of SattvaguЖ’a, viz., perspicuity, discrimination
and tranquillity etc., and those of TamoguЖ’a,
Describing thus the marks which indicate the preponderance of RajoguЖ’a, the Lord
now discusses the marks of the growth of TamoguЖ’a.
вҖўВ¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳВ¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠp В¬Лқв—ҠГҠЕ’ГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһU вҲһп¬Ӯ ГёГ”вҖ“
Гғв—ҠSГҝпЈҝГғГҠГҒЕё ВЎГҠГҝГЈГғпЈҝ ГҒп¬Ӯп¬ӮГҺhпЈҝ вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ЕёГЈЕ’ЕёГ”H 13H
вҖўВ¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҠвҖ” obtuseness, of mind and senses; вҖўВ¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠвҖ” disinclination to perform oneГӯs obligatory
duties; Гё and; В¬Лқв—ҠГҠЕ’вҖ” frivolity; в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUвҖ” the torpid state of mind; вҲһп¬Ӯ indeed; Гё and; Гғв—ҠГҒвҖҡ  TamoguЖ’a;
вҲһГғГҠГҒЕё (all) these; ВЎГҠГҝГЈГғпЈҝ appear; ГҒп¬Ӯп¬ӮГҺhпЈҝUГ” with the growth of; вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ЕёГЈЕ’ЕёГ” O delighter of Kurus, Arjuna.

=== PAGE 632 ===

* Chapter XIV *
631
Perspicuity of the mind and senses is
called Г«PrakГҘвҖ№aГӯ and the reverse of it, viz.,
obtuseness of the mind and senses, is called
Г«AprakГҘвҖ№aГӯ. This should be taken to include
lack of the other marks of SattvaguЖ’a.
Г«ApravГҰttiГӯ is the antithesis of PravГҰtti, referred
to in the preceding verse as an effect of
RajoguЖ’a. Thus it means want of inclination
to perform oneГӯs obligatory duties. Absence
of the other marks of RajoguЖ’a should also
be taken as included in it. Г«PramГҘdaГӯ means
neglect of duties enjoined by the вҖәГҘsrtas and
addiction to idle pursuits. The torpid state of
mind, which obscures oneГӯs judgment, and
the state of sleep are covered by Г«MohaГӯ. When
TamoguЖ’a preponderates, the mind and senses
become blank, man finds no relish in activity
of any kind; he feels inclined to remain idle
and do nothing. He neglects his duties and
indulges in frivolous pursuits; his mind gets
stupefied, his memory fails him. He is overtaken
by drowsiness or sleep or lapses into a dream;
his judgment takes leave of him and his faculty
of understanding is also lost. All these marks
appear when TamoguЖ’a is in the ascendant.
Hence when any of these marks appears in
man, he should know that TamoguЖ’a has the
upper hand in him.
With the growth of Tamas, Arjuna, obtuseness of the mind and senses, disinclination
to perform oneГӯs obligatory duties, frivolity and stuporГіall these appear.        (13)
Describing thus the respective marks which indicate the growth of the three GuЖ’as, the
Lord now points out in the following two verses the destiny which awaits a man who dies
during the preponderance of a particular GuЖ’a.
ГҝЕ’ГҠ вҖҡГ»п¬ӮпЈҝ В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺhпЈҝ ГғГҲ В¬ЛқвҲӮUГҝВў ГҝГҠГҒГғ Е’пЈҝвҖһUГ·ГҺГғЛңГ”вҖ“
ГғЕ’ГҠпЈҝГ»ГҠв—ҠГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҠВў 
вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠЕёв—ҠвҲӮUГҠГЈВ¬ЛқГҒГғВ¬lГғпЈҝH 14H
ГҝЕ’ГҠ when; вҖҡГ»п¬ӮпЈҝ В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺhпЈҝ during the preponderance of SattvaguЖ’a; ГғГҲ indeed; В¬ЛқвҲӮUГҝв—ҠЛңГ” (his)
death; ГҝГҠГҒГғ meets; Е’пЈҝвҖһUГ·ГҺГғЛңГ” (this) man; ГғЕ’ГҠ then; В©UГ»ГҠв—ҠГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” attained by men of noble deeds;
вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠЕёЛңГ” вҖўв—ҠвҲӮUГҠЕёЛңГ” the stainless ethereal worlds (such as heaven etc.); В¬ЛқГҒГғВ¬lГғпЈҝ he obtains.
When a man dies during the preponderance of Sattva, he obtains the stainless
ethereal worlds (heaven, etc.,) attained by men of noble deeds.                      (14)
of SattvaguЖ’a.
The word Г«DehabhГҰtГӯ signifies that
destinies of various kinds in the form of
rebirth await only those who are embodied,
i.e., who look upon the body as their own
self or claim it as their own. Those liberated
souls, who do not thus regard the body as
their Self, are never born again.
The use of the adjective Г«AmalГҘnГӯ with
the substantive Г«LokГҘnГӯ shows that the worlds
attained by those who give up the ghost
during the preponderance of SattvaguЖ’a are
free from impurities, i.e., evils, and afflictions
of all kinds; they are full of ethereal light,
The use of the adverbs Г«YadГҘГӯ and
Г«TadГҘГӯ is intended to convey that the verse
describes the destiny of those who, though
naturally established in any other GuЖ’as,
give up the ghost during the preponderance
of SattvaguЖ’a. When the soul of such a man
alongwith his mind, senses and vital airs
leaves his physical body at a time when the
quality of Sattva is predominant in him due
to the impelling force of some past Karma or
any other cause, that is to say, when Г«lightГӯ
and Г«wisdomГӯ prevail in his body, senses and
mind as described in verse 11 above, he is
said to have died during the preponderance

=== PAGE 633 ===

632
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
pure and SГҘttvika in essence. The word
Г«UttamaГӯ, forming part of the compound word
Г«UttamavidГҘmГӯ, stands for actions and worship
enjoined by the вҖәГҘstras or sacred books; and
Г«UttamavidГҘmГӯ refers to those who know the
secret of such actions and worship, i.e., perform
them in a disinterested spirit. Due to association
with SattvaguЖ’a, he who dies during the
preponderance of that quality migrates to
those very regions that are attained by such
men through their disinterested action and
worship.
вҒ„UВЎГҒвҖҡ В¬ЛқвҲӮUГҝВў ВӘГ п¬ӮГҠ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡГҒXГ”UВ·ГҲ ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝГ”вҖ“
ГғГ•ГҠ В¬ЛқвҲӮUГӢЕёSГғв—ҠГҒвҖҡ в—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҝГҠпЈҝГҒЕёВ·ГҲ ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝH 15H
вҒ„UВЎГҒвҖҡ during the preponderance of Rajas; В¬ЛқвҲӮUГҝв—ҠЛңГ” death; ВӘГ п¬ӮГҠ meeting; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡГҒXГ”UВ·ГҲ among
those attached to action; ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝГ” he is born; ГғГ•ГҠ (even) so; В¬ЛқвҲӮUГӢЕёвҖ” dead; Гғв—ҠГҒвҖҡ during the
preponderance of Tamas; в—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҝГҠпЈҝГҒЕёВ·ГҲ in the species of senseless creatures (such as insects, beasts
etc.); ВЎГҠГҝГғпЈҝ is born.
Dying when Rajas predominates, he is born among those attached to action; even
so, the man who has expired during the preponderance of Tamas is born in the species
of senseless creatures such as insects and beasts etc.                                       (15)
In the same way a man is said to have
died during the predominance of TamoguЖ’a
when his soul, including his mind, senses   and
vital airs, abandons his physical body at a time
when TГҘmasika propensities like frivolity etc.,
mentioned in verse 13 above preponderate, and
birth among TГҘmasika creatures such as moths
and insects, beasts and birds, trees and creepers,
etc., is what is meant by being born in the
wombs of senseless creatures.
When the soul of a man, alongwith his
mind, senses and vital airs, casts off the
physical body at a time when RГҘjasika feelings,
such as greed, activity etc., mentioned in
verse 12 above, are predominant, he is said
to have died during the preponderance of
RajoguЖ’a. KarmasaвҲҶgiВ¶uГӯ refers to men who
are attached to actions and their fruit; therefore,
birth among those who are attached to action
means birth as a human being.
It has been pointed out above how death during the ascendancy of the three GuЖ’as,Гі
Sattva, Rajas and Tamas,Гіyields different results. Hearing this, one is naturally tempted to
know why one GuЖ’a should predominate now, and another at another time. In order to
satisfy this curiosity the Lord says:
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠвҖ” вҖҡГҲвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғSГҝГҠвҖһГҲUвҖ” вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮГ”вҲ‘ВўВ§ ГҒЕёв—ҠВёвҲӮВўU В»В§вҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҒ„UВЎвҖҡSГғГҲ В»В§вҲӮВў Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖв—ҠГҙГҠГҠЕёВў Гғв—ҠвҖҡвҖ” В»В§вҲӮв—ҠЛңГ”H 16H
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠвҖ” вҖҡГҲвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғSГҝ of a noble deed; вҖўГҠвҖһГҲUвҖ” they declare; вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮГ”вҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” SГҘttvika or characterized by
the quality of SattvaГіsuch as happiness, wisdom and dispassion etc.; ГҒЕёв—ҠВёвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” stainless; В»В§вҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ”
reward; вҒ„UВЎвҖҡвҖ” of the RГҘjasika type (of actions); ГғГҲ indeed; В»В§вҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” fruit; Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖв—ҠЛңГ” suffering; вҖўГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ”
(is stated to be) ignorance; Гғв—ҠвҖҡвҖ” (and) of the TГҘmasika type (of actions); В»В§вҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” result.
The reward of a righteous act, they say, is SГҘttvika i.e., faultless in the form of
happiness, wisdom and dispassion etc., sorrow is declared to be the fruit of a RГҘjasika
act, and ignorance, the fruit of a TГҘmasika act.                                              (16)

=== PAGE 634 ===

* Chapter XIV *
633
The substantive Г«KarmaЖ’aВЁГӯ qualified
by the adjective Г«SukГҰtasyaГӯ, in this verse
stands for those SГҘttvika actions that are
enjoined by the вҖәГҘstras or sacred books and
performed in a disinterested spirit. The SГҘttvika
and faultless fruit of such actions is no other
than the pure impulses of wisdom and
dispassion frequently arising in the mind due
to the impelling force of those actions, and
the attainment, after death, of worlds full of
ethereal light and free from all forms of
sorrow and evil, referred to in verse 14.
RГҘjasika actions are those which are
performed with a view to obtain enjoyments,
are prompted by egotism and involve much
exertion (XVIII.24). They entail suffering in
the form of exertion, not only during their
performance, but continue to cause affliction
even afterwards.
The tendencies formed as a result of
these actions repeatedly awaken in the mind
the RГҘjasika impulses of enjoyment, desire,
greed and activity etc., which distract the
mind and make it restless and miserable.
Even enjoyments that are obtained as a result
of these actions though appearing as delightful
through ignorance, are really full of woe.
And the whirlpool of birth and death in
which one is repeatedly thrown in order to
reap the fruit of these actions is unquestionably
a great calamity. In this way these actions
yield nothing but sorrow.
Again, TГҘmasika actions are those that
are performed out of ignorance and without
any forethought, and which are full of evils
like violence etc. (XVIII.25). The tendencies
formed as a result of such actions darken the
mind all the more and one is reborn after death
in the species of stupid creatures, species in
which the element of Tamas is predominant;
this is what is meant by the statement that
ignorance is the fruit of a TГҘmasika act.
Here it may be contended that while
discussing the effects of the three GuЖ’as, the
Lord has abruptly taken up the question of
the consequences of oneГӯs actions, which
appears to be a digression on His part. This
is however, not the case. For in the foregoing
verses the Lord has discussed the respective
consequences 
of 
dying 
during 
the
preponderance of each of the three GuЖ’as;
therefore, a discussion of the tendencies of
past actions responsible for the growth of a
particular GuЖ’a was also essential. That is
why the question of actions has been taken
up. The intention is to show that the SaвүҲskГҘras
or tendencies of all the three types of actions,Гі
viz., SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika,Гіremain
stored up in the heart of every individual.
Out of these, the type of SaвүҲskГҘras that
come to the surface at a particular time stimulate
corresponding impulses in the mind, and it is
these impulses that take the form of actions.
Actions give rise to SaвүҲskГҘras; the latter in
their turn develop qualities of a corresponding
type; these qualities determine our thought at
the last moment; the thought of our last
moment decides the nature of our next birth
as well as the course of our activities in that
birth. This is how the cycle goes on moving.
The special results that follow from the
predominance of SГҘttvika and other thought
at the last moment as pointed out in the
foregoing verses are also dependent in a
general way on the type of actions, SГҘttvika,
RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika, done prior to that
crucial moment; it is this idea that has been
sought to be conveyed in the present verse,
which is, therefore, in no way disconnected
with the context. For it is the GuЖ’as and
Karma both which determine oneГӯs birth in a
good or evil womb (IV.13).
Verses 11, 12 and 13 discussed the marks indicating the growth of the three GuЖ’asГі
Sattva, Rajas and Tamas; thereafter the Lord pointed out the result of dying during the
ascendancy of these GuЖ’as, one after another. This would naturally lead us to enquire why

=== PAGE 635 ===

634
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
the dawn of wisdom etc., should be regarded as a token of the growth of qualities like Sattva
etc. Therefore, in order to enable one to infer the existence of cause from the appearance
of its effect, qualities like Sattva etc., are being shown to be responsible for the appearance
of wisdom.
вҖҡГ»п¬ӮГҠГ вҖҡTГҠГҝГғпЈҝ ГҙГҠГҠЕёВў вҒ„UВЎвҖҡГҠпЈҝ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝГ· вҲһп¬Ӯ ГёГ”вҖ“
В¬Лқв—ҠГҠЕ’в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҠГ’ Гғв—ҠвҖҡГҠпЈҝ Г·п¬ӮГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ ГёГ”H 17H
вҖҡГ»п¬ӮГҠГғЛңГ” from the quality of Sattva (harmony); вҖҡTГҠГҝГғпЈҝ is born; ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” wisdom; вҒ„UВЎвҖҡвҖ”Г” from
the quality of Rajas (activity); вҲӮUГҠпЈҝГ·вҖ” greed; вҲһп¬Ӯ indeed; Гё and; В¬Лқв—ҠГҠЕ’в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҠГ’Г” obstinate error and
stupor; Гғв—ҠвҖҡвҖ”Г” (even so) from the quality of Tamas (inertia); Г·п¬ӮГғвҖ” arise; вҖўГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” ignorance; вҲһп¬Ӯ
also; Гё and.
Wisdom follows from Sattva, and greed, undoubtedly, from Rajas; likewise,
obstinate error, stupor, as also ignorance follow from Tamas.                     (17)
undertakings of actions with an interested
motive and all other RГҘjasika impulses.
The use of the particle Г«EvaГӯ is intended
to show that TamoguЖ’a not only breeds
error, stupor and ignorance, but also induces
sleep, sloth, opacity, inactivity and all other
TГҘmasika propensities.
The use of the word Г«JВӨГҘnam,
(wisdom) in this verse is only symbolical;
it should be regarded as inclusive of
light, joy, peace and all other SГҘttvika
qualities.
Similarly, Г«LobhaГӯ (greed) should he
taken to include activity, attachment, desire,
Mentioning thus the effects of three GuЖ’as, viz., wisdom etc., the Lord now describes
the different destinies awaiting those who are established in the three GuЖ’as, in order that
one may strive to be established in SattvaguЖ’a, and discard both Rajas and Tamas.
в„ўВ§ГӨп¬ӮZ ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГЈГғ вҖҡГ»п¬ӮSГ•ГҠ в—ҠГӨГҝпЈҝ ГҒГғDГ”UГҒГЈГғ вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡГҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ВЎГүГҠГЈГҝВӘГҲГЎГҠп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠSГ•ГҠ вҖўЕ“ГҠпЈҝ ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГЈГғ ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡГҠвҖ”Г”H 18H
в„ўВ§ГӨп¬ӮВёв—ҠЛңГ” upwards; ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГЈГғ wend their way; вҖҡГ»п¬ӮSГ•ГҠвҖ” those abiding in Sattva; в—ҠГӨГҝпЈҝ in the
middle; ГҒГғDГ”UГҒГЈГғ stay; вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡГҠвҖ” those of a RГҘjasika nature; ВЎГүГҠГЈГҝВӘГҲГЎГҠп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠSГ•ГҠвҖ” those enveloped in the
effects of TamoguЖ’a; вҖўЕ“вҖ” ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГЈГғ go down; ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡГҠвҖ”Г” men of a TГҘmasika temperament.
Those who abide in the quality of Sattva wend their way upwards; while those
of a RГҘjasika disposition stay in the middle. And those of a TГҘmasika temperament,
enveloped as they are in the effects of TamoguЖ’a, go down.*                     (18)
Attainment, after death, of these regions by
men of a SГҘttvika nature is what is meant by
their Г«rising to the higher regions.Гӯ
Instead of migrating after death to any
other region, men of a RГҘjasika disposition
are reborn in this mortal world as human
The indeclinable Г«ВӘUrdhvamГӯ in this verse
covers all the regions higher than the earth,
which have been referred to in verse 14
above as the Г«faultless worlds gained by men
of noble deedsГӯ, and in VI.41 as Г«the worlds
attained by men of meritorious deeds alone.Гӯ
* Verse 10 of Chapter XXXIX of the Г…вҖ№vamedha-Parva of the MahГҘbhГҘrata is similarly worded.

=== PAGE 636 ===

* Chapter XIV *
635
beings. This is what is meant by their Г«staying
in the middle.Гӯ
Г«JaghanyaГӯ means low or reproachable.
The word Г«JaghanyaguЖ’aГӯ, therefore, stands
for TamoguЖ’a. And its effects such as error,
stupor, ignorance, obtusenses, inactivity and
sleep etc., are what are referred to here as its
VГҰttis. He who remains steeped in these is
said to abide in them. Such a man is spoken
of as having a TГҘmasika disposition. On
leaving their human body these TГҘmasika
men are reborn in lower species such as
insects, moths, beasts, birds and trees etc., or
undergo terrible suffering in the form of
tortures in the Infernal regions known by the
names of Raurava, KumbhвҲӮpГҘka and so on.
This is what is meant by their sinking down.
Here it may be contended that verse 14
and 15 above state similar things about those
who die during the ascendancy of any one of
the three GuЖ’as. This exposes the Lord to
the charge of tautology. On closer examination,
however, it will be found that there is no
repetition here. Thus it will be seen that the
words Г«YadГҘГӯ and TadГҘГӯ, which are adverbs
of time, occur in verse 14. This shows that
though a man may be naturally established in
any other GuЖ’a, his destiny after death is
determined by the GuЖ’a which  preponderates
in him at the time of death; this is what is
sought to be conveyed in those verses. The
present verse, however, describes the different
destinies awaiting those who are naturally
and permanently established in Sattva and
other qualities. Hence there is no tautology
here.
A reference to verse 15 above will show
that it declared birth in the species of senseless
creatures as the only destiny awaiting those
who die during the sway of TamoguЖ’a. In
the present verse, however, the indeclinable
Г«AdhaВЁГӯ has been interpreted to include
condemnation to hell as well. The reason is
not far to seek. It will be seen that verse 15
describes the lot of those men of a SГҘttvika
or RГҘjasika temperament who depart from
this world when the element of Tamas is
predominant in them. That is why it uses the
word Г«MВөuЕ’hayoniВ¶u JГҘyateГӯ rather than Г«AdhaВЁ
GacchantiГӯ; for it is contact with TamoguЖ’a
which brings about their birth in such species,
as we hear of the royal sage Bharata being
reborn as a deer even though he was
established in SattvaguЖ’a. But men of a
TГҘmasika disposition, who are ever enveloped
in the effects of TamoguЖ’a, are liable even to
be condemned to hell. In XVI.20 the Lord
explicitly says that being cast into demoniacal
wombs, such men of a TГҘmasika disposition
sink into still lower depths.
In XIII.21 contact with the GuЖ’as was declared to be solely responsible for oneГӯs birth
in good and evil wombs; accordingly, verses 5 to 18 of the present chapter described at
length the essential character of the three GuЖ’as and the final destiny etc., of those who are
bound by the evolutes of these GuЖ’as. The above discussion is intended to teach us that man
should first of all establish himself in SattvaguЖ’a, rejecting Tamas and Rajas, and should
thereafter discard the SattvaguЖ’a and rise above the GuЖ’as. The next two verses, therefore,
discuss the means of rising above the three GuЖ’as as well as its reward.
ЕёГҠГЈГҝВў ВӘГҲГЎГҠпЈҝГЁГҝвҖ” вҲ‘В§ГғГҠВёвҒ„ВўU ГҝЕ’ГҠ ВәЛқCГ”UГҠЕёГҲВ¬вүҘГҝГҒГғГ”вҖ“
ВӘГҲГЎГҠпЈҝГЁГҝp В¬вҒ„ВўU п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠ в—ҠjГҠп¬ӮВў вҖҡГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒЕ“ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғГ”H 19H
Её not; вҖўГЈГҝв—ҠЛңГ” ВӘГҲГЎГҠпЈҝГЁГҝвҖ” anything else than the (three) GuЖ’as; вҲ‘В§ГғГҠВёвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” (as) the doer; ГҝЕ’ГҠ when;
ВәЛқCГ”UГҠГ” the seer; вҖўЕёГҲВ¬вүҘГҝГҒГғ sees; ВӘГҲГЎГҠпЈҝГЁГҝвҖ” the three GuЖ’as; Гё and; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” Me (the supreme Spirit, who

=== PAGE 637 ===

636
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The use of the indeclinable Г«YadГҘГӯ, which
is an adverb of time, as well as of the word
Г«DraВ¶ВўГҘГӯ, in this verse, is intended to convey
that it describes an extraordinary state of
mind. The intention is to show that man in
his ordinary mood looks upon himself as an
embodied being and is ever conscious of his
being both a doer and experiencer,Гіhe never
regards himself as a disinterested observer
having no connection with his actions and
their consequences. The present verse however,
refers to the time when, gaining wisdom
through scriptures as well as the teachings of
the preceptor, man begins to conceive himself
as a spectator.
At the time when the senses, mind and
the vital airs etc., are carrying on all their
normal functions in the shape of hearing,
seeing, eating and drinking, reflection and
cogitation, sleeping, sitting and so on, such a
man constantly visualizes himself as established
in identity with the formless and attributeless
Brahma, who is Truth, Consciousness and
Bliss solidified, and feels that it is the senses,
mind, intellect and the vital airs etc., (which
are evolutes of the three GuЖ’as) that are
acting on their objects which are evolutes of
the same GuЖ’as (V.8,9), or in other words,
that it is the GuЖ’as that react on the GuЖ’as
(III.28) and that he himself has no connection
whatsoever with them. This is what is meant
by perceiving no agent other than the GuЖ’as.
That which lies wholly beyond the three
GuЖ’as is the integral Brahma or supreme Spirit,
which is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss
solidified. He who recognizes God as
absolutely unconnected with the GuЖ’as and
views his identity with that formless and
attributeless Brahma, who perceives no entity
other than the aforesaid Brahma, that is to
say, perceives God and God alone everywhere
and at all times, is said to know Him in reality.
What follows this knowledge is the direct
realization of Brahma as one with himself. This
realization constitutes what has been referred
to here as entering into the being of God.
is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss solidified) standing entirely beyond; п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠ knows (in
reality); в—ҠjГҠп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” My being; вҖҡвҖ” he; вҖўГҒЕ“ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғ attains.
When the seer perceives no agent other than the three GuЖ’as, and realizes Me, the
supreme Spirit, standing entirely beyond these GuЖ’as, he attains to My being.          (19)
ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠЕёпЈҝГғГҠЕёГғГӢГ Гҝ ГІГҠГӢГЈЕ’пЈҝвҖһUГӢ Е’пЈҝвҖһUвҖҡв—ҠГҲjп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ”вҖ“
ВЎГЈв—Ҡв—ҠГҺГ ГҝГҲВЎвҒ„UГҠЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖГ’ГҢп¬Ӯв—ҠГҲQВ§ГҠпЈҝЛҳв—ҠГҺГғв—ҠoAГҲГғпЈҝ 
Г”H 20H
ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠЕёЛңГ” GuЖ’as; вҲһГғГҠЕёЛңГ” these; вҖўГғГӢГ Гҝ transcending; ГІГҠГӢЕёЛңГ” the three; Е’пЈҝвҖһUГӢ the embodied soul;
Е’пЈҝвҖһUвҖҡв—ҠГҲjп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” causing the body; ВЎГЈв—Ҡв—ҠГҺГ ГҝГҲВЎвҒ„UГҠЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖГ’ from birth, death, old age and all kinds of
sorrow; ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҲQВ§вҖ” freed; вҖўв—ҠГҺГғв—ҠЛңГ” supreme bliss; вҖўoAГҲГғпЈҝ attains.
Having transcended the aforesaid three GuЖ’as, which have caused the body,
and freed from birth, death, old age and all kinds of sorrow, the embodied soul
(JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ) attains supreme bliss.                                                                                        (20)
The use of the demonstrative adjective
Г«EtГҘnГӯ with Г«GuЖ’ГҘnГӯ is intended to show that
the verse speaks of transcending the same
GuЖ’as whose character has been discussed
in this chapter, and which tie down the
The use of the word Г«DehвҲӮГӯ is intended
to covney that the same soul who once
regarded himself as dwelling in a body attains
Brahma or God when he transcends the three
GuЖ’as.

=== PAGE 638 ===

* Chapter XIV *
637
soul to the body. The compound adjective
Г«DehasamudbhavГҘnГӯ shows that this physical
body, which is a conglomeration of the
following twentythree categories, viz., the
intellect, ego, mind, the five senses of
perception, the five organs of action, the five
gross elements and the five objects of senses,
is nothing but an evolute of the three GuЖ’as
born of PrakГҰti; therefore, to regard it as
oneГӯs own is to get attached to the three
GuЖ’as. Even so the numeral adjective Г«TrвҲӮnГӯ
emphasizes that the GuЖ’as are three in number,
and that liberation is attained only when one
has transcended them all. Having transcended
Rajas and Tamas, if a man remains tied to
SattvaguЖ’a, even that may stand in the way
of his liberation and cause his rebirth. Therefore,
SattvaguЖ’a too must be transcended. The
Self or the Spirit is really free from all
attachment, it is altogether unconnected with
the GuЖ’as; and yet due to ignorance, that has
existed from time without beginning, the JвҲӮva
feels that he has been connected with the
GuЖ’as. To sever this connection with the
help of wisdom, and to realize oneself as
identical with the  formless and attributeless
Brahma, who is Truth, Consciousness and
Bliss solidified, and as altogether unconnected
with the GuЖ’as is what is meant by transcending
the three GuЖ’as.
Birth and death, as well as the states of
infancy, youth and senility are states of the
body; even so all forms of suffering, such as
mental agony and bodily ailment etc., affect
the body alone, which is a conglomeration of
mind, senses and the vital airs etc. Therefore,
those who have no real connection whatever
with the body are, really speaking ever
unaffected by changes in the body in the
form of birth, death and old age etc., even
though they remain in the body in the eyes
of the world. Therefore, severing all
connection with the body through the realization
of Truth is what is meant by complete immunity
from birth, death, old age and sorrow. What
follows next, viz., the direct realization of the
immortal Brahma, who is Truth, Consciousness
and Bliss solidified, as oneГӯs own Self, which
has been spoken of in verse 19 above as
Г«entering into the being of GodГӯГіthis is
what consitutes the attainment of supreme
bliss.
Hearing the esoteric truth that having transcended the three GuЖ’as man attains
supreme bliss during his very life-time, Arjuna puts the following question to the Lord,
desiring to know the characteristics and conduct of one who has transcended the three
GuЖ’as, as well as the means of rising above the GuЖ’as.
вҖўВЎВёГҲЕё В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
вҲ‘Г’В§ГҢвҲӮUXГ’Г”USГІГҠГӢГЈВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠЕёпЈҝГғГҠЕёГғГӢГғГҠпЈҝ Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ В¬ЛқГ·ГҠпЈҝГ”вҖ“
ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠГёГҠвҒ„UвҖ” вҲ‘В§Г•Вў ГёГ’ГғГҠВўSГІГҠГӢГЈВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠЕёГҒГғп¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝГ”H 21H
вҲ‘Г’В§вҖ” ГҒвҲӮUXГ”Г’UвҖ” (distinguished) by what marks; ГІГҠГӢЕёЛңГ” three; ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠЕёЛңГ” GuЖ’as or modes of PrakГҰti; вҲһГғГҠЕёЛңГ”
these; вҖўГғГӢГғвҖ” he who has transcended; Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ is; В¬ЛқГ·ГҠпЈҝ O Lord; ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠГёГҠвҒ„UвҖ” (and) of what conduct;
вҲ‘В§Г•в—ҠЛңГ” how, by what means; Гё and; вҲһГғГҠЕёЛңГ” these; ГІГҠГӢЕёЛңГ” three; ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠЕёЛңГ” GuЖ’as; вҖўГҒГғп¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝГ” does he transcend.
Arjuna said: What are the marks of him who has risen above the three GuЖ’as,
and what is his conduct? And how, Lord, does he rise above the three GuЖ’as? (21)

=== PAGE 639 ===

638
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The repeated use of the adjectives Г«EtГҘnГӯ
and Г«TrвҲӮnГӯ with the word Г«GuЖ’ГҘnГӯ in these
verses is intended to convey that the question
of Arjuna relates to those very GuЖ’as which
have been discussed at length in the present
chapter.
The first question relates to the marks
that have been recognized in the scriptures as
distinguishing those who have transcended
the three GuЖ’asГіmarks which constitute the
very nature of those who have risen above
the GuЖ’as and serve as a model for the
SГҘdhakas to follow.
By his second question, which relates to
the conduct of him who has risen above the
GuЖ’as, Arjuna seeks to know how he behaves
with those who come in contact with him,
how he lives and carries on his day-to-day
activities.
By addressing the Lord as Г«PrabhoГӯ
Arjuna hints that He was the supreme
Ruler, Creator, Destroyer, and the almighty
Lord of the whole universe, so that He
alone was capable of throwing full light
on the subject; and that was what prompted
Arjuna to put the aforesaid question to
Him.
The last question relates to the means of
rising above the three GuЖ’as. That is to say,
Arjuna wanted to know whether there was
any way, easier than what had been stated in
verse 19 above, by following which man
could speedily transcend the three GuЖ’as
without much exertion.
With reference to the above questionnaire of Arjuna, the Lord proceeds to answer in
the next four verses the first two questions relating to the Г«marksГӯ and Г«conductГӯ of him who
has risen above the GuЖ’as.
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲп¬ӮГҠГё
В¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҠВў Гё В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠВў Гё в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ Гё В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬ӮГ”вҖ“
Её mпЈҝГҒCГ”U вҖҡГӘВ¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГ»ГҠГҠГҒЕё Её ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҺГ»ГҠГҠГҒЕё вҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUЛҮГҠГҒГғГ”H 22H
В¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГҠвүҘГҠв—ҠЛңГ” light (which is born of Sattva); ГёГ” and; В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” activity (which is born of Rajas);
ГёГ” and; в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” stupor (which in born of Tamas); вҲһп¬Ӯ also; Гё and; В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬ӮГ” O son of PГҘЖ’Е’u, Arjuna;
Её neither; mпЈҝГҒCГ”U (he who) hates; вҖҡГӘВ¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГ»ГҠГҠГҒЕё (when) prevalent; ЕёГ” nor; ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҺГ»ГҠГҠГҒЕёГ” having ceased;
вҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUЛҮГҠГҒГғ longs for.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: Arjuna, he who abhors not light (which is born of Sattva) and
activity (which is born of Rajas) and even stupor (which is born of Tamas), when
prevalent, nor longs for them when they have ceased.                               (22)
in his body, senses and mind, he feels no
aversion for it; nor does he long for its return
when it has disappeared. Its appearance and
disappearance make no difference to him.
The urge to undertake activities of various
kinds is called Г«PravГҰttiГӯ, The other effects of
RajoguЖ’a, such as lust, greed, craving and
attachment etc., are no longer present in him
who has transcended the GuЖ’as. Of course
activity of some sort is undertaken by the
When sloth and dullness have disappeared
from the body, senses and mind, and a feeling
of lightness, purity and liveliness pervades
them, such a feeling is known by the name
of Г«PrakГҘвҖ№aГӯ or light. Wisdom, tranquillity
and joy are ever present in the man who has
risen above the GuЖ’as. They are never absent
in him. That is why the verse speaks of
Г«lightГӯ alone among the effects of SattvaguЖ’a.
That is to say, if light automatically appears

=== PAGE 640 ===

* Chapter XIV *
639
body and senses of even such a man, but the
same is covered by the term Г«PravГҰttiГӯ. That
is why, of all the effects of RajoguЖ’a, the
verse emphasizes the absence of attachment
and aversion for Г«PravГҰttiГӯ or activity alone.
That is to say, when there is an urge in the
mind of him who has risen above the GuЖ’as
to undertake any action, or when the same is
actually undertaken by his body, he feels no
aversion for the same; and when this is not
the case, he does not hanker for it either. The
appearance and disappearance of an urge or
activity make no difference to him.
Г«MohaГӯ is that stupefying tendency of
the mind, which induces drowsiness, dream
and deep slumber etc., and robs the body,
senses and mind of light, born of SattvaguЖ’a.
The other effects of TamoguЖ’a, such as
ignorance etc., cease to exist in him who has
transcended the GuЖ’as, for ignorance cannot
even enter the outskirts of wisdom and, in
the absence of any doer, erring is out of
question. Therefore, of all the effects of
TamoguЖ’a, the verse emphasizes the absence
of attachment and aversion for Г«MohaГӯ or
stupor alone. That is to say, when the body
of the man who has risen above the three
GuЖ’as is swayed by effects of TamoguЖ’a
in the shape of drowsiness, dream or deep
slumber, he feels no aversion for the same;
and when they relax their hold on them, he
does not long for their return. Their appearance
and disappearance make no difference to
him.
В©UЕ’ГҠвҖҡГӢЕёп¬ӮЕ’ГҠвҖҡГӢЕёГҠпЈҝ ВӘГҲГЎГҠГ’ГҝГҠпЈҝВё Её ГҒп¬ӮГёГҠГҖГҝГғпЈҝГ”вҖ“
ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠ п¬ӮГғВёГЈГғ ГҹГ ГҝпЈҝп¬Ӯ ГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳп¬ӮГҒГғDГ”UГҒГғ ЕёпЈҝXГ”UГғпЈҝГ”H 23H
В©UЕ’ГҠвҖҡГӢЕёп¬ӮГғЛңГ” like one unconcerned; вҖўГҠвҖҡГӢЕёвҖ” sitting; ВӘГҲГЎГҠГ’вҖ” by the GuЖ’as or modes of PrakГҰti;
ГҝвҖ” who; Её ГҒп¬ӮГёГҠГҖГҝГғпЈҝ is not disturbed; ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠвҖ” the GuЖ’as; п¬ӮГғВёГЈГғпЈҝ move (among the GuЖ’as); ГҹГҒГғГ” so
(knowing); вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; ГҝвҖ” who; вҖўп¬ӮГҒГғDГ”UГҒГғ remains established in identity with God (who is
Truth, Consciousness and Bliss solidified); Её ГҹXГ”UГғпЈҝ (and) never falls off (from that state).
He who, sitting like one unconcerned, is not disturbed by the GuЖ’as and who,
knowing that the GuЖ’as alone move among the GuЖ’as, remains established in identity
with God, and never falls off from that state.                                                         (23)
are driven by them, even against their will, to
activities of various kinds and forced to reap
their fruit; they disturb their peace of mind by
bringing them joy and sorrow and cause them
to migrate from one species of life to another.
They, however, cease to have any influence
on him who has no connection with them.
He remains ever unchanged and unaffected
in the midst of changes undergone by the
body, senses and mind, which are the products
of these GuЖ’as, and in spite of his contact
with, and separation from, various objects of
the world. This is what is meant by his
remaining undisturbed by the GuЖ’as.
Г«UdГҘsвҲӮnaГӯ is he who maintains an attitude
of indifference towards incidents and things
with which he has absolutely no connection
whatsoever. Since the man who has risen
above the three GuЖ’as ceases to have any
connection whatsoever with those GuЖ’as and
their evolutes, viz., the body, senses and
mind and all other objects and events, he
stands like a witness, as it were. In reality,
however, this state of indifference too is only
accidental to him, he is unconnected even
with that. This is what is meant by speaking
of him as sitting like a witness.
JвҲӮvas who are connected with the GuЖ’as

=== PAGE 641 ===

640
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The words Г«GuЖ’ГҘВЁ vartante iti evaГӯ in
the present verse echo in the same idea as
has been brought out in the latter half of III.28.
The intention is to show that all organs, such
as the senses, mind, intellect and vital airs
etc., and all objects of senses, such as sound
etc., are extensions of the GuЖ’as. Therefore,
the moving of the senses, mind and intellect,
etc., among their respective objects is nothing
but the moving of the GuЖ’as among the
GuЖ’as. The Self or Spirit has nothing to do
with them. It is eternal, conscious, wholly
unattached, ever unchanging and the same as
Truth, Consciousness and Bliss.
Г«Na iвҲҶgateГӯ means Г«never movesГӯ. The
idea is that not only the GuЖ’as are incapable
of shaking him who has transcended them,
but he for his own part never loses his
balance of mind. For once the JвҲӮva is
established in identity with the integral Brahma
or Supreme Spirit, who is Truth, Consciousness
and Bliss solidified, it no longer retains its
separate identity. Who is, then, to lose his
balance and how?
вҖҡв—ҠЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖвҖҡГҲПҖвҖ” Sп¬ӮSГ•вҖ” вҖҡв—ҠвҲӮUГҠпЈҝCГ”UГҠвүҘв—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠ@ЕёвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ГғГҲГҖГҝГҒВ¬ЛқГҝГҠГҒВ¬ЛқГҝГҠпЈҝ Е“ГӢвҒ„USГғГҲГҖГҝГҒЕёГЈЕ’ГҠГ в—ҠвҖҡВўSГғГҲГҒГғвҖ”Г”H 24H
вҖҡв—ҠЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖвҖҡГҲПҖвҖ” treating woe and joy alike; Sп¬ӮSГ•вҖ” (ever) established in the Self; вҖҡв—ҠвҲӮUГҠпЈҝCГ”UГҠвүҘв—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠ@ЕёвҖ”
regarding a clod of earth, a stone and a piece of gold as equal in value; ГғГҲГҖГҝГҒВ¬ЛқГҝГҠГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҖ” receiving
the agreeable and the disagreeable in the same spirit; Е“ГӢвҒ„UвҖ” wise; ГғГҲГҖГҝГҒЕёГЈЕ’ГҠГ в—ҠвҖҡВўSГғГҲГҒГғвҖ” viewing
censure and praise alike.
He who is ever established in the Self, takes pain and pleasure alike, regards a
clod of earth, a stone and a piece of gold as equal in value, is possessed of wisdom,
accepts the pleasant as well as the unpleasant in the same spirit, and views censure and
praise alike;
(24)
of joys and sorrows continue to appear and
disappear in the body, senses and mind of
the man who has risen above the GuЖ’as and
has accordingly ceased to have any connection
with them, he does not identify himself with
those joys and sorrows; he remains ever
balanced. This is how he takes joy and
sorrow alike.
A lump made out of the mixture of clay
and cow dung used in plastering mud hovels,
as well as the refuse of iron are known by
the name of Г«LoВ¶ВўaГӯ. Holding such a lump as
well as a stone and a piece of gold as neither
acceptable nor worth rejecting is what is
meant by regarding them as equal in value.
The statement that a Г«GuЖ’ГҘtвҲӮtaГӯ makes no
distinction between them is intended to show
that whatever objects there are in the worldГі
which people regard as either superb, second
Г«SvasthaГӯ is he who is established in his
real Self. The use of this word is
intended to convey that he alone who is
established in the Self can remain balanced
in joy and sorrow. The idea is that the
common run of men are, as a rule, centred in
one or other of the three bodiesГіphysical,
astral and causalГіall of which are evolved
from Г«PrakГҰtiГӯ or Matter; therefore, they are
centred in Г«PrakГҰtiГӯ (PrakГҰtistha), and not in
the Self. And such men only move among
the GuЖ’as or modes of PrakГҰti (XIII.21),
hence they cannot take joy and sorrow alike.
The man who has transcended the GuЖ’as
ceases to have any connection whatsoever
with PrakГҰti and its evolutes; that is why he
is Г«SvasthaГӯГіestablished in his own Self,
who is the same as Truth, Consciousness and
Bliss. Therefore, even though circumstances

=== PAGE 642 ===

* Chapter XIV *
641
rate or of a mean orderГіare equal in his
eyes; for he views all objects as illusory like
water in a mirage, he has no bias for or
against any particular object.
A man of wisdom, i.e., who is stable of
mind, is called Г«DhвҲӮraГӯ. He who has transcended
the GuЖ’as never loses his balance of mind
even in the face of the greatest joy or sorrow
(VI.21.22). That is why his reason ever remains
steadfast.
That which is agreeable to the body,
senses, mind and intellect, and which
strengthens, helps and soothes them is said to
be Г«pleasantГӯ in the eyes of the world; while
that which is disagreeable and hostile to
them, which wears them away and mortifies
them, is considered Г«unpleasantГӯ from the
worldly point of view. In spite of the contact
of the body, senses and mind with multifarious
objects and beings of both these types, he
who has no bias for or against any of those
objects is said to Г«receive the ageeable and
the disagreeable in the same spiritГӯ.
Inasmuch as the GuЖ’ГҘtвҲӮta ceases to have
any connection with the body, senses and
mind, he has no bias for or against any object
which comes in contact with his body etc.
The idea is that to the common run of men,
contact with what is agreeable and the removal
of that which is disagreeable are a source of
attraction and joy; whereas contact with what
is disagreeable and the loss of that which is
agreeable excite a feeling of aversion and
sorrow. Such is, however, not the case with
him who has risen above the GuЖ’as; he is
ever completely beyond the feeling of attraction
and aversion, joy and grief.
Г«NindГҘГӯ or censure consists in exposing
the real or imaginary faults of another, while
Г«StutiГӯ or praise consists in expatiating on his
virtues. Both these are related mainly to the
Г«nameГӯ of an individual, and partly to his
body. Since the GuЖ’ГҘtвҲӮta ceases to have any
connection whatsoever with the Г«bodyГӯ and
its Г«nameГӯ, Г«censureГӯ or Г«praiseГӯ  causes him
neither grief nor delight; the calumniator does
not excite his wrath, nor does the panegyrist
earn his pleasure. He remains balanced under
all circumstances. This is how he views
censure and praise alike.
в—ҠГҠЕёГҠВ¬в—ҠГҠЕёГҝГҠпЈҝSГғГҲГҖГҝSГғГҲГҖГҝГҠпЈҝ ГҒв—ҠГІГҠГҠГҒвҒ„UВ¬ЛҮГҠГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёвҒ„UГӘГ·В¬ГҒвҒ„UГ ГҝГҠВӘГӢ ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠГғГӢГғвҖ” вҖҡ В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝH 25H
в—ҠГҠЕёГҠВ¬в—ҠГҠЕёГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” to honour and ignominy; ГғГҲГҖГҝвҖ” (who is) indifferent; ГғГҲГҖГҝвҖ” alike; ГҒв—ҠГІГҠГҠГҒвҒ„UВ¬ЛҮГҠГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ”
to the cause of a friend as well as to that of an enemy; вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёвҒ„UГӘГ·В¬ГҒвҒ„UГ ГҝГҠВӘГӢ (and) has renounced
the sense of doership in all undertakings; ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠГғГӢГғвҖ” one who has risen above the three GuЖ’as;
вҖҡвҖ” he; В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is spoken of (as).
He who is indifferent to honour and ignominy, is alike to the cause of a friend as
well as to that of an enemy, and has renounced the sense of doership in all undertakings,
is said to have risen above the three GuЖ’as.                                            (25)
towards him who insults them. The GuЖ’ГҘtвҲӮta,
however, inasmuch as he ceases to have any
connection with the body, neither feels delighted
when the latter is honoured, nor is he filled
with grief when it is treated with ignominy.
In his eyes, the object of honour and dishonour,
the agent who is responsible for such treatment,
as well as the acts constituting theseГіeverything
Honour and ingominy are mainly
related to the body. Therefore, those worldly-
minded people who look upon the body as
their self have a liking for honour, and an
aversion for ignominy. Consequently, honour
brings them delight, while dishonour fills
them with grief; and they love him who
honours them and are even inimically disposed

=== PAGE 643 ===

642
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
is illusory and analogous to a dream; that is
why honour and ignominy do not arouse in
him the feelings of attraction and aversion or
delight and grief. That is how he maintains
an attitude of indifference to honour and
ignominy both.
Even though the GuЖ’ГҘtвҲӮta entertains no
feeling of friendship or enmity towards any
creature for his own part, and hence there is
no friend or foe in his eyes, yet people find
their own sentiment of friendship or enmity
reflected in him. It is in this sense that the
Lord speaks of him as alike to the cause of a
friend and to that of an enemy. That is to say,
whereas ordinary men of the world identify
themselves with, and extend their love to, those
who are on friendly terms with them, as well
as to their relatives and well-wishers, and help
them even by sacrificing their own interests,
while they hate those who are inimically
disposed towards them as well as their relatives
and well-wishers, wish harm to them and
employ their energy in actually harming them,
a GuЖ’ГҘtвҲӮta does not. He maintains an attitude
of impartiality towards both the parties, and
cherishing no love or hatred for any, is
habitually engaged in doing good to all alike.
He harms none, has no bias for or against
anyone. This is how he is alike to the cause
of a friend as well as to that of an enemy.
The noun Г«Г…rambhaГӯ forming part of the
compound word SarvГҘrambhaparityГҘgвҲӮ in this
verse does not denote any action whatsoever.
The use of this compound adjective with
reference to a GuЖ’ГҘtвҲӮta is, therefore, intended
to convey that he does not claim the doership
in respect of any actions, conforming to the
scriptural injunctions, habitually performed by
his body, mind and intellect by force of his
PrГҘrabdha or destiny in the interest of the
world order, i.e., with the object of weaning
the people away from evil ways and reclaiming
them to the path of rectitude.
The concluding words of this verse,
viz., Г«GuЖ’ГҘtвҲӮtaВЁГӯ sa ucyateГӯГіГӯhe is said to
have risen above the three GuЖ’asГӯ,Гіsum up
the LordГӯs reply to two of ArjunaГӯs three
questions. That is to say, a GuЖ’ГҘtвҲӮta is he
who is endowed with all the virtues described
in verses 22, 23, 24 and 25 of this chapter; it
is these which constitute his distinguishing
marks and these again which typify his conduct
and behaviour. Therefore, so long as oneГӯs
heart shows the least trace of partiality and
prejudice, a sense of disparity, joy and grief,
ignorance and egotism, one should know
that he has not yet attained the state of a
GuЖ’ГҘtвҲӮta.
Replying in the above words to the first two questions of Arjuna, the Lord now deals
with his third question concerning the means of rising above the GuЖ’as. The Lord had
already stated in verse 19 above that the means of attaining that state is to remain constantly
established in the formless and attributeless Brahma, who is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss
solidified, realizing himself to be a non-doer. And besides this a sustained effort to imbibe
the qualities and conduct of a GuЖ’ГҘtвҲӮta described in the above four verses, holding them as
the ideal worth approaching, is also recognized as a means of reaching that state.
Nevertheless, since Arjuna desired to know whether there was any easier way other than
those mentioned above, the Lord suggests such a way to Arjuna as desired by him.
в—ҠГҠВў Гё ГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳвҲҡГҝГҒГ·ГёГҠвҒ„пЈҝUГЎГҠ Г·ГҒQВ§ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝЕё вҖҡпЈҝп¬ӮГғпЈҝГ”вҖ“
вҖҡ ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠГЈвҖҡв—ҠГғГӢГ ГҝГ’ГғГҠГЈвҖҷЛқrГҠГ”Г·ГҚГҝГҠГҝ вҲ‘В§ГҖВ¬ГғпЈҝH 26H
в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; Гё too; ГҝвҖ” who; вҖўвҲҡГҝГҒГ·ГёГҠвҒ„пЈҝUГЎГҠ Г·ГҒQВ§ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝЕё through the Yoga of exclusive devotion;
вҖҡпЈҝп¬ӮГғпЈҝГ” constantly worships; вҖҡвҖ” he; ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠЕёЛңГ” (three) GuЖ’as; вҖҡв—ҠГғГӢГ Гҝ fully transcending; вҲһГғГҠЕёЛңГ” these;
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”Г·ГҚГҝГҠГҝ for attaining Brahma; вҲ‘В§ГҖВ¬ГғпЈҝ becomes eligible.

=== PAGE 644 ===

* Chapter XIV *
643
The noun Г«BhaktiyogenaГӯ, qualified by
the adjective Г«AvyabhicГҘreЖ’aГӯ, denotes that
undivided love for God which has no selfish
motive behind it and presupposes extreme
reverence and which follows the belief that
He alone is the highest object of worship and
worth approaching for protection, that He is
the supreme goal and the ultimate resort, that
He is our Lord, father and mother, brother
and kinsman, our greatest benefactor, and what
not, and that we have none else than Him to
call our own. In other words, Г«AvyabhicГҘra
BhaktiyogaГӯ is that exclusive love which is
absolutely untainted by self-interest, egotism
and infidelity, and ever complete in all respects,
which is unshakeable, and altogether
undivided, and which may make it unbearable
for us to forget the Lord even for a moment.
And he who is constantly engaged in
hearing of, singing and dwelling on the LordГӯs
virtues, glory and pastimes, reciting and
muttering His names, contemplating on His
being and other such practices, who looks
upon the mind, intellect, body and other organs
and everything else as belonging to God, and
who continues to perform all actions in a
disinterested way and for His sake in the
manner enjoined by Him and as an act of
service to Him, regarding himself as a mere
tool in His hands, is said to worship Him
through the Yoga of exclusive devotion.
The personal pronoun Г«MГҘmГӯ in this
verse refers to God with attributes, who is
all-powerful, all-pervading, all-sustaining and
supremely merciful, the inner Ruler of all,
the creator and destroyer of the entire universe,
the disinterested friend of all, the supreme
lover.
The use of the demonstrative adjective
Г«EtГҘnГӯ with the substantive Г«GuЖ’ГҘnГӯ is intended
to convey that the latter stands for the three
modes of Г«PrakГҰtiГӯГіSattva, Rajas and
Tamas,Гіwhich form the subject of discussion
in the present chapter; and he who ceases to
have any connection whatsoever with the
aforesaid GuЖ’as and their evolutes in the
form of the body, senses, mind, intellect and
all mundane objects, is said to have
transcended these GuЖ’as.
The 
moment 
man 
succeeds 
in
transcending the GuЖ’as as stated above, he
not only becomes eligible for attaining as his
very Self the formless and attributeless Brahma,
who is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss
solidified, and after attaining whom nothing
remains to be attained, but actually attains
Him immediately after. That is what is meant
by the words Г«BrahmabhВөuyГҘya KalpateГӯ.
He too who constantly worships Me through the Yoga of exclusive devotion,Гі
transcending these three GuЖ’as, becomes eligible for attaining Brahma.           (26)
The above verse holds out the attainment of the formless and attributeless Brahma as
the reward of worshipping Gods with attributes; verse 19 says that a GuЖ’ГҘtвҲӮta enters into
the being of God; whereas verse 20 declares the attainment of supreme Bliss (AmГҰta) as the
fruit of rising above the three GuЖ’as. Therefore, in order to remove from the mind of Arjuna
any doubt regarding the disparity of these rewards the Lord establishes their identity in the
concluding verse of this chapter.
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ ГҒвҖһU В¬ЛқГҒГғDГ”UГҠвҖһUв—Ҡв—ҠГҺГғSГҝГҠвҲҡГҝГҝSГҝ ГёГ”вҖ“
вүҘГҠГҠEГғSГҝ Гё Е“в—ҠВёSГҝ вҖҡГҲПҖSГҝГ’вҲ‘В§ГҠГҒГЈГғвҲ‘В§SГҝ ГёH 27H
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГЎГҠвҖ” (supreme) Brahma; ГҒвҖһU because; В¬ЛқГҒГғDГ”UГҠ the ground; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I (am); вҖўв—ҠГҺГғSГҝ of
immortality; вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝSГҝ of the (aforesaid) imperishable; Гё and; вүҘГҠГҠEГғSГҝ of the eternal; Гё and;
Е“в—ҠВёSГҝ virtue; вҖҡГҲПҖSГҝ joy; вҲһпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠГҒГЈГғвҲ‘В§SГҝ of unending (immutable); ГёГ” and (again).

=== PAGE 645 ===

644
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The use of the adjective Г«AvyayasyaГӯ
with the substantive Г«BrahmaЖ’aВЁГӯ shows that
the latter stands here for the formless and
attributeless supreme Spirit, and not for PrakГҰti.
And the intention of the Lord in declaring
Himself as the ground of that imperishable
Brahma is to convey that the latter is not
different from Him, who is the same as God
possessed of attributes, and that He is not
different from Brahma. In reality, вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
and Brahma are not two different entities, but
represent one and the same Reality. Therefore,
the attainment of Brahma, referred to in the
preceding verse, is the same as the realization
of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a or God with attributes. For, it is
the one supreme Brahma or God who is said
to be endowed with different forms in order
that He may be worshipped by men of varying
capacities. Of these, the absolute or attributeless
aspect, which transcends MГҘyГҘ and is
inconceivable and beyond the reach of mind
and speech, is one and only one; while God
with attributes is both with and without form.
That which pervades the entire universe, which
is all-supporting, which sustains and nourishes
all, is the qualified unmanifest or formless
aspect. вҖәrвҲӮ вҖәiva, вҖәrвҲӮ ViВ¶Ж’u, вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma, вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a and others are the manifest forms of
God, while this entire universe is His cosmic
Body.
The word Г«AmГҰtasyaГӯ also refers to
Brahma, realizing whom man becomes
immortal, that is, secures lasting immunity
from transmigration in the form of birth and
death. By referring to Himself as the ground
of immortality, the Lord shows that He is no
other than that Г«immortalityГӯ, so that the
attainment of Г«immortalityГӯ referred to in verse
20 of this chapter and verse 12 of Chapter
XIII is the same as His own realization.
The substantive Г«DharmasyaГӯ qualified
by the adjective Г«вҖәГҘвҖ№vatasyaГӯ denotes the eternal
virtue which has been spoken of in the
concluding verse of Chapter XII as
Г«DharmyГҘmГҰtaГӯ or the nectar of pious wisdom,
and referred to in the present chapter as the
marks of him who has transcended the three
GuЖ’as. By declaring Himself as the ground
of such virtue, the Lord intends to convey
that, being conducive to His realization, it
constitutes His own being; for he who practises
it attains no other reward than Himself.
The noun Г«SukhasyaГӯ, qualified by the
adjective Г«AikГҘntikasyaГӯ stands for that
everlasting supreme Bliss which has been
referred to in verse 21 of Chapter V as
Г«undiminished joyГӯ, as Г«unending blissГӯ in
verse 21 of Chapter VI and as Г«everlasting
joyГӯ in verse 28 of the same chapter. By
speaking of Himself as the ground of that
Bliss, the Lord shows that such everlasting
supreme Bliss is the same as Himself, and
nothing else than Him; hence the attainment
of that Bliss is the same as His own realization.
For, I am the basis of Infinite Brahma, the Immutable, the Immortal, as also of
Eternal Dharma (Virtue) and Absolute Bliss.
(27)
Лҷ ГғГ вҖҡГҒЕ’ГҒГғ ГјГҠГӢв—ҠjВӘп¬ӮeГӢГғГҠвҖҡГҚВ¬ГҒЕёВ·Г вҖҡГҲ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГҝГҠВў
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠпЈҝ ГјГҠГӢвҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠВЎГҲВёЕёвҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’пЈҝ ВӘГҲГЎГҠГІГҠГҝГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҠВӘГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ
ЕёГҠв—Ҡ ГёГғГҲЕ’ВёвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГӨГҝГҠГҝвҖ”H 14H
Thus, in the UpaniВ¶ad sung by the Lord, the science of Brahma,
the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
and Arjuna, ends the fourteenth chapter entitled
Г¬The Yoga of Division of the three GuЖ’asГ®.
U

=== PAGE 646 ===

* Chapter XV *
645
Title of the
Chapter
Summary of
the Chapter
Лҷ
вҖәrвҲӮmadbhagavad-GвҲӮtГҘ
Chapter XV
The present chapter is devoted to a discussion of the virtues, glory and essential
character of the Supreme Person or God with attributes, who is the almighty lord,
creator, and destroyer of the entire universe, the inner ruler and disinterested
friend of all, all-pervading, supremely merciful, all-supporting and worth
approaching for shelter. Speaking of the KВ¶ara PuruВ¶a (KВ¶etra), the AkВ¶ara
PuruВ¶a (KВ¶etrajВӨa) and the Supreme person (God), it explains at length how God is superior
to both Г«KВ¶araГӯ and Г«AkВ¶araГӯ why He is called the Г«Supreme PersonГӯ, what is the value of
knowing Him as the Supreme Person and how can He be realized. That is why the chapter
has been designated as Г¬The Yoga of the Supreme Person.Г®
Verses 1 and 2 of this chapter metaphorically refer to the universe in terms of a PвҲӮpala
tree. Declaring in the third that the beginning or end or even stability of this tree of universe
are not actually perceived, the Lord exhorts us to fell it with the formidable
axe of dispassion; while in the fourth He advises us to seek refuge in God,
the Primeval Person, in order to realize Him in the form of the supreme State.
Describing in verse 5 the marks of those who reach that supreme State, the Lord declares
in the sixth that the supreme State referred to above is supremely effulgent and that there is
no return from it. Thereafter, verses 7 to 11 discuss, among other things, the nature of the
JвҲӮva or embodied soul, how it migrates from one body to another alongwith the mind and
senses and how, abiding in the body, it enjoys worldly pleasures through them, and declare
in the end that the man of wisdom alone can know the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ in all his states and that a
man possessing an impure heart is incapable of knowing it under any circumstance.
Declaring in the twelfth that the light existing in the Sun, who illumines the whole universe,
as well as in the moon etc., is His own effulgence, in the thirteenth and the fourteenth He
speaks of Himself as having entered the earth and thereby sustaining all beings, as nourishing
all in the form of the moon, and as digesting all food in the form of the gastric fire. In the
fifteenth He speaks of Himself as indwelling the hearts of all, as the source of memory, etc.,
of all beings, as that which ought to be known through the Vedas, and as the knower of the
Vedas and the originator of VedГҘnta. Declaring in the sixteenth that all beings are referred
to as KВ¶ara, and that the immutable Self is spoken of as AkВ¶ara, He speaks in the seventeenth
of the imperishable, all-pervading and all-sustaining God as the Supreme Person, and as
distinct from both. Pointing out in the eighteenth the reason why the Lord is known as the
Supreme Person, He concludes the chapter by glorifying in the nineteenth the man who
knows Him as the Supreme Person and extolling in the twentieth the knowledge of this most
esoteric teaching.

=== PAGE 647 ===

646
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Having discussed at length in verses 5 to 18 of Chapter XIV the essential character of
the three GuЖ’as their evolutes as well as their binding nature, the destinies
of a higher, lower and intermediate order awaiting those who are bound by
the GuЖ’as and so on, the Lord pointed out in the nineteenth and the twentieth
the means as well as the reward of transcending the GuЖ’as. Thereafter in response to
ArjunaГӯs query, He described in verses 22 to 25 the marks and conduct of him who has risen
above the GuЖ’as, and proclaimed in verse 26 that the Yoga of exclusive devotion to God
with attributes was an easier way of transcending the three GuЖ’as, and becoming eligible
for attaining Brahma. Therefore, with the object of awakening undivided love for God,
which has been referred to in Chapter XIV as the Yoga of exclusive devotion to Him, the
Lord now introduces Chapter XV in order to discuss the virtues, glory and essential
character of the Supreme Person or God with attributes as well as the principal means of
transcending the GuЖ’as, viz., dispassion and selfГіsurrender to Him. In order, first of all,
to arouse dispassion towards the world, the Lord speaks of the world in the following three
verses in the terms of a PвҲӮpala tree and exhorts us to cut it down with the axe of dispassion.
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲUп¬ӮГҠГё
в„ўВ§ГӨп¬ӮВёв—ҠГҚвҲӮUв—ҠЕ“вҖ”вүҘГҠГҠПҖв—ҠEГ Г•Вў 
В¬ЛқГҠвҖһГҲUвҒ„UвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ВҝUГЈЕ’ГҠВўГҒвҖҡ ГҝSГҝ В¬ГЎГҠГҠВёГҒЕё ГҝSГғВў п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ вҖҡ п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГҒп¬ӮГғЛңГ”H 1H
в„ўВ§ГӨп¬ӮВёв—ҠГҚвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” having its roots in God (the Primeval Person); вҖўЕ“вҖ”вүҘГҠГҠПҖв—ҠЛңГ” whose stem is
represented by BrahmГҘ (the Creator); вҖўEГ Г•в—ҠЛңГ” the PвҲӮpala tree (in the form of this creation); В¬ЛқГҠвҖһГҲUвҖ”
they declare; вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ” imperishable; ВҝUГЈЕ’ГҠВўГҒвҖҡ Vedas; ГҝSГҝ of which; В¬ГЎГҠГҠВёГҒЕё (are declared to be)
the leaves; ГҝвҖ” who; Гғв—ҠЛңГ” that (tree in the form of creation); п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ knows (in reality alongwith its
root); вҖҡвҖ”Г” he; п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГҒп¬ӮГғЛңГ” (is) the knower of (the purport of) the Vedas.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: He who knows the PвҲӮpala tree (in the form of creation), which
is said to be imperishable, with its roots in the Primeval Being (God), whose stem is
represented by BrahmГҘ (the Creator), and whose leaves are the Vedas, is a knower
of (the purport of) the Vedas.                                                             (1)
Link of the
Discourse
below the earthГӯs surface, this tree of creation
has its root extending upwards, that is a most
extraordinary phenomenon.
During the evolution of this tree of
creation, BrahmГҘ or the Creator appears first
of all; hence it is BrahmГҘ who represents its
stem. The abode of BrahmГҘ is situated in
a lower plane as compared to the eternal Abode
of the Primeval Being, NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a, and his rank
too is lower than that of the Lord. It is from the
Primeval Being, NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a, that BrahmГҘ takes
His descent and it is He who controls Him.
Hence this tree of creation has been spoken of
as having its stem lower than its root.
The tree in the form of this creation has
sprung and grown from the Primeval Being
NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a; this has been stated in verse 4 as
well as in several other verses. That Primeval
Being or God is eternal and infinite, as well
as the foundation of all, and resides in the
form of God with attributes in His eternal
Abode situated above all other regions;
therefore, He is termed as Г«ВӘUrdhvaГӯ. The tree
in the form of this cosmos has emanated
from that almighty God, the Lord of MГҘyГҘ;
hence it is spoken of as Г«ВӘUrdhava-MВөulaГӯ or
having its root above. While other ordinary
trees have their roots extending downwards

=== PAGE 648 ===

* Chapter XV *
647
Being subject to change, this tree of creation
is perishable, transient and momentary in
character; yet it has existed from time without
beginning and one never finds its continuity
broken; hence it is called Г«AvyayaГӯ or
imperishable. For in the form of God Almighty
its root is eternal and imperishable. But really
speaking, this tree of creation is not imperishable.
Had it been so, it would not have been stated
in verse 3 below that it does not turn out what
it is represented to be, nor would there be any
sense in exhorting anyone to fell it with the
formidable axe of dispassion.
Leaves grow out of the stem of a tree
and contribute to the protection and growth
of the tree. The Vedas have flowed from
BrahmГҘ, who represents the stem of this
tree of creation; and it is acts enjoined
by the Vedas that are conducive to the
growth and protection of the world. Hence
the Vedas have been represented as the leaves
of this tree.
Brought forth by MГҘyГҘ or the illusory
power of God Almighty, this creation is
liable to appear and disappear like a tree and
is momentary in character; therefore, refusing
to be trapped by its glamour, one should take
refuge in God, who is the Lord of MГҘyГҘ, and
has created this universe. Knowing this truth,
and cultivating dispassion and indifference
towards the world he who surrenders himself
to God, he alone is a real knower of the
Vedas; for it is God alone who has been
declared in verse 15 below as worth knowing
through all the Vedas. He who comes to
know this character of the tree of creation
develops indifference towards it and takes
refuge in God; and it is self-surrender to God
that constitutes the main theme of the Vedas.
This is what is meant by the statement that he
who knows the tree of creation is the knower
of Vedas.
вҖўЕ“pГҠпЈҝГӨп¬ӮZ В¬ЛқвҖҡГҺГғГҠSГғSГҝ вүҘГҠГҠПҖГҠ ВӘГҲГЎГҠВ¬Лқп¬ӮГҺhГҠ ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҝВ¬Лқп¬ӮГҠвҲӮUГҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҖўЕ“p в—ҠГҚвҲӮUГҠГЈГҝЕёГҲвҖҡГЈГғГғГҠГҒЕё вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёЕёГҲвҖҷГЈЕ“ГӢГҒЕё в—ҠЕёГҲcГҝвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§Г”H 2H
вҖўЕ“вҖ” downwards; Гё as well as; В©UГӨп¬ӮВёв—ҠЛңГ” upwards; В¬ЛқвҖҡГҺГғГҠвҖ” (are) extended; ГғSГҝ of the aforesaid
tree of creation; вүҘГҠГҠПҖГҠвҖ” branches (in the shape of the different orders of creation such as gods,
human beings and sub-human creatures etc.,); ВӘГҲГЎГҠВ¬Лқп¬ӮГҺhГҠвҖ” fed by (water in the form of) the
three GuЖ’as; ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҝВ¬Лқп¬ӮГҠвҲӮUГҠвҖ” having sense-objects for their tender leaves; вҖўЕ“вҖ” in the lower
regions; Гё as well as (in the higher regions); в—ҠГҚвҲӮUГҠГҒЕёГ” roots (too); вҖўЕёГҲвҖҡГЈГғГғГҠГҒЕё are spread
everywhere; вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёЕёГҲвҖҷГЈЕ“ГӢГҒЕё binding (the soul) according to (its) actions; в—ҠЕёГҲcГҝвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§Г” in the human
body.
Fed by the three GuЖ’as and having sense-objects for their tender leaves, the
branches of the aforesaid tree (in the shape of the different orders of creation) extend
both downwards and upwards; and its roots, which bind the soul according to its
actions in the human body, are spread in all regions, higher as well as lower.     (2)
aforesaid tree as fed by the GuЖ’as. And it is
in these branches in the form of the different
species of living beings that all the five objects
of senses, viz., sound, touch, colour, taste, and
smell appear; that is why these sense-objects
have been compared to tender leaves.
It is attachment to the GuЖ’as that is
responsible for oneГӯs birth in good and evil
wombs (XIII.21); and it is from the GuЖ’as
again, that all the worlds as well as the bodies
of living beings are evolved; this is what is
meant by speaking of the branches of the

=== PAGE 649 ===

648
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
All the divisions of this cosmos from
Brahmaloka (the abode of BrahmГҘ) down to
the nethermost region, known by the name
of PГҘtГҘla, as well as the different orders of
creation inhabiting them, constitute the
numerous branches of this tree; and their
spreading everywhere from the highest to the
lowest region is what is meant by their
extending both downwards and upwards.
The feelings of Г«IГӯ and Г«mineГӯ and the
latent type of desires, which are all born of
AvidyГҘ or Nescience, represent the roots of
this tree. They sway the hearts of all living
beings who inhabit the various divisions of
the universe from Brahmaloka down to the
nethermost world, and are liable to appear
and disappear, hence they have been spoken
of as extending in all regions, higher as well
as lower. And freedom of will is enjoyed by
human beings alone and actions performed
through the human body under the impulse
of egotism, the feeling of meum and latent
desires have been held to be the cause of
bondage; that is why these roots bind the
soul according to its actions in the human
body. All other species are meant for
experiencing pleasure and pain, they do not
enjoy freedom of action; hence roots in the
form of egotism, the sense of meum and
latent desires, even though present in them,
cannot bind the soul according to its actions
in those orders of creation.
Её MВ§В¬в—ҠSГҝпЈҝвҖһU ГғГ•ГҠпЈҝВ¬вҲӮUГЁГҝГғпЈҝ ЕёГҠГЈГғГҠпЈҝ Её ГёГҠГҒЕ’ЕёВё Гё вҖҡГӘВ¬ЛқГҒГғDГ”UГҠГ”вҖ“
вҖўEГ Г•в—ҠпЈҝЕёВў вҖҡГҲГҒп¬ӮMВ§вҖҰUв—ҠГҚвҲӮUв—ҠвҖҡXГ”UвүҘГҠSГІГҠпЈҝГЎГҠ Е’ГҺвҖҰпЈҝUЕё ГҒВҝUГ»п¬ӮГҠH 3H
Её (for) neither; MВ§В¬в—ҠЛңГ” character; вҖўSГҝ of this tree of creation; ГҹвҖһU here (on mature thought);
ГғГ•ГҠ of the kind it has been represented to be; В©UВ¬вҲӮUГЁГҝГғпЈҝ is found; Её not; вҖўГЈГғвҖ” end; ЕёГ” Гё nor
again; вҖўГҠГҒЕ’вҖ” (there is) beginning; Её Гё nor; вҖҡГӘВ¬ЛқГҒГғDГ”UГҠ (there is) stability; вҖўEГ Г•в—ҠЛңГ” PвҲӮpala tree; вҲһЕёв—ҠЛңГ”
this; вҖҡГҲГҒп¬ӮMВ§вҖҰUв—ҠГҚвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” most firmly rooted; вҖўвҖҡXГ”UвүҘГҠSГІГҠпЈҝГЎГҠ Е’ГҺвҖҰпЈҝUЕё with the formidable axe of dispassion;
ГҒВҝUГ»п¬ӮГҠ felling.
The nature of this tree of creation does not, on mature thought, turn out what it
is represented to be; for it has neither beginning nor end, nor even stability. Therefore,
cutting down this PвҲӮpala tree, which is most firmly rooted in the form of the world,
with the formidable axe of dispassion;                                                                                   (3)
without beginning or end, and having no
stability, the Lord intends to show its
indescribable nature. The idea is that although
this tree of creation is traditionally believed
to have a beginning as well as an end,
inasmuch as it is known to spring up at the
beginning of a cosmic day and disappear at
the end of it, one does not know when this
serial process of its appearance and
disappearance actually started and how long
it will continue. Even during its actual existence
it is in a state of constant flux; what it was a
moment ago it ceases to be the very next
moment. In this way, one does not discover
On mature thought as well as on the
realization of Truth the nature of this tree of
creation does not turn out what it has been
represented to be in the вҖәГҘstras, what it
actually appears and what we hear about it;
for even in thoughtful moments we realize its
perishable and momentary character, while
with the realization of Truth it ceases once
for all to have any connection with us. In
the eyes of him who has realized the Truth,
it gets extinct. That is why verse 16 speaks
of it as the Г«KВ¶araГӯ PuruВ¶a, or a perishable
entity.
By speaking of the tree of creation as

=== PAGE 650 ===

* Chapter XV *
649
the beginning or even the stability of this tree
of creation.
The roots of this tree of creation in the
form of the feelings of Г«IГӯ and Г«mineГӯ and the
latent type of desires, which are all born of
Nescience, having been constantly nourished
from time without beginning, have become
extremely strong. Therefore, so long as the
axe is not applied to them, the tree of creation
cannot be destroyed. Even if we lop its trunk,
that is to say, even if we sever all outward
connection with the world, the tree of creation
cannot be felled unless we give up the feelings
of Г«IГӯ and Г«mineГӯ as well as our latent desires.
It is in order to bring out this idea, as well as
to show that it is a most uphill task to cut
these roots, that the tree has been spoken of
as very firmlyrooted. Realizing through oneГӯs
critical judgment the perishable and momentary
character of the entire universe, he who no
longer finds any joy, agreeability or attraction
in the various enjoyments of this world and
the next,Гіsuch as wife and children, wealth
and home, honour and fame, popular esteem
and heavenly bliss etc.,Гіin other words, he
who altogether ceases to have any attachment
for them is said to have developed a strong
dispassion; and it is this dispassion that has
been referred to here under the name of
Г«AsaвҲҶga-вҖәastraГӯ. And he who gives up with
the help of this dispassion all thought of this
world, consisting of animate and inanimate
creation,Гіin other words, he who develops
indifference towards it, and further gives up
the feelings of Г«IГӯ and Г«mineГӯ as well as his
latent desires is said to have felled the aforesaid
tree of mundane existence with the formidable
axe of dispassion.
The Lord now tells us what further step should be taken after one has felled the tree
of mundane existence with the axe of dispassion.
ГғГғвҖ” В¬Е’Вў ГғГ В¬ГҒвҒ„Uв—ҠГҠГҢВӘГғвҲҡГҝВў ГҝГҒSв—ҠГЈВӘГғГҠ Её ГҒЕёп¬ӮГғВёГҒГЈГғ Г·ГҚГҝвҖ”Г”вҖ“
Гғв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ ГёГҠlВў В¬ГҲLВ§В·Вў В¬ЛқВ¬lпЈҝ ГҝГғвҖ” В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠвҖ” В¬ЛқвҖҡГҺГғГҠ В¬ГҲвҒ„UГҠГЎГҠГӢH 4H
ГғГғвҖ” after that; В¬Е’в—ҠЛңГ” supreme state, viz., God; ГғГғЛңГ” that; В¬ГҒвҒ„Uв—ҠГҠГҢВӘГғвҲҡГҝв—ҠЛңГ” should be diligently
sought after; ГҝГҒSв—ҠЕёЛңГ” to which; ВӘГғГҠвҖ” having attained; Её no; ГҒЕёп¬ӮГғВёГҒГЈГғ they return; Г·ГҚГҝвҖ” again; Гғв—ҠЛңГ”
that; вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; Гё and; вҖўГҠlв—ҠЛңГ” primeval; В¬ГҲLВ§В·в—ҠЛңГ” Being (BhagavГҘn NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a); В¬ЛқВ¬lпЈҝ I take refuge
in; ГҝГғвҖ” from whom; В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠвҖ” creation; В¬ЛқвҖҡГҺГғГҠ has progressed; В¬ГҲвҒ„UГҠГЎГҠГӢ the flow of this beginningless.
Thereafter a man should diligently seek for that supreme state, viz., God, having
attained to which they return no more to this world; and having fully resolved that he
stands dedicated to that Primeval Being (God NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a) Himself, from whom the flow
of this beginningless creation has progressed, he should dwell and meditate on Him. (4)
meditation the essential character, virtues
and glory of the almighty and all-sustaining
God is what is meant by seeking after that
supreme State. The idea is that developing
complete indifference towards the world
through dispassion coupled with critical
sagacity, as advised in verse 3 above, one
should strive to attain that supreme State or
God by taking recourse to contemplation and
meditation.
The noun Г«PadamГӯ in this verse denotes
that which has been spoken of as Г«ВӘUrdhvaГӯ
in the opening verse of this chapter, and as
Г«MГҘmГӯ (Me) in verse 26 of Chapter XIV and
Г«AhamГӯ in the very next verse, and which
has been referred to at other places under
various names, such as the supreme State,
the immortal State, the supreme Goal and
the supreme Abode. And striving again and
again to realize through contemplation and

=== PAGE 651 ===

650
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The qualifying clause Г«attaining to which
they return no more to this worldГӯ is intended
to convey that the supreme State which we
have been exhorted to seek is no other than
the Lord Himself. In other words, the noun
Г«PadamГӯ in this verse refers to the same
almighty, all-supporting and all-sustaining God
or supreme Person, attaining to whom men
know no return. Verse 21 of Chapter VIII
also inculcates the same idea.
Self-surrender to that Primeval Being
God from whom this beginningless cycle of
creation has started its career and from whom
this cosmic tree has spread out its branches,
is the only way to transcend this mundane
existence once for all and realize Him. This
is what is sought to be conveyed by the latter
half of this verse.
The substantive Г«PuruВ¶amГӯ, qualified by
the adjectives Г«TamГӯ and Г«Г…dyamГӯ, signifies
that very God or supreme Person who has
already been referred to by the words Г«TatГӯ
and Г«PadamГӯ in the first half of this verse and
whose Г«MГҘyГҘ-вҖәaktiГӯ or illusive power has
been declared as responsible for bringing
forth and expanding this ancient cosmic tree.
The use of the verb Г«PrapadyeГӯ is intended to
impress upon our mind that one should strive
to realize that supreme State or God only by
taking refuge in Him. The idea is that one
should continue to strive for His realization
in the aforesaid manner, taking care not to be
tainted even by a tinge of pride and reposing
full faith in God with a feeling of absolute
and exclusive dependence on Him and relying
on His strength alone.
The use of the particle Г«EvaГӯ is intended
to impress on our mind that for God-Realization
one should take refuge in Him and Him
alone.
The Lord now points out the marks of those who succeed in realizing Him by taking
refuge in the above manner in that Primeval Being or God, who is the same as the supreme
State.
ГҒЕёв—ҠГҠВёЕёв—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҠ ГҒВЎГғвҖҡXГ”UЕ’ГҠпЈҝВ·ГҠ вҖўГӨГҝГҠГ в—ҠГҒЕёГ ГҝГҠ ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕёп¬ӮГҺГ»ГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
mГЈmГ’ГҢп¬Ӯв—ҠГҲQВ§ГҠвҖ” вҖҡГҲПҖЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖвҖҡГңГҙГҠГ’ВӘВёГ«ВҝUГЈГ Гҝв—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҠвҖ” В¬Е’в—ҠвҲҡГҝГҝВў ГғГғЛңГ”H 5H
ГҒЕёв—ҠГҠВёЕёв—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҠвҖ” free from pride and delusion; ГҒВЎГғвҖҡXГ”UЕ’ГҠпЈҝВ·ГҠвҖ” who have conquered the evil of
attachment; вҖўГӨГҝГҠГ в—ҠГҒЕёГ ГҝГҠвҖ” who are constantly abiding in God; ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕёп¬ӮГҺГ»ГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠвҖ” whose cravings
have altogether ceased; mГЈmГ’вҖ” from (all) pairs of opposites; ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҲQВ§ГҠвҖ” completely immune;
вҖҡГҲПҖЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖвҖҡГңГҙГҠГ’вҖ” going by the names of pleasure and pain; ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГЈГғ reach; вҖўв—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҠвҖ” the wise; В¬Е’в—ҠЛңГ”
(supreme) State; вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ” imperishable; ГғГғЛңГ” that.
Those wise men who are free from pride and delusion, who have conquered the
evil of attachment and are constantly abiding in God, whose cravings have altogether
ceased and who are completely immune from all pairs of opposites going by the names
of pleasure and pain, attain that supreme immortal state.                              (5)
do not entertain the least idea of their own
superiority in point of birth, merits, wealth,
power and learning etc., and who have risen
above honour, fame and prestige, as well as
above TГҘmasika propensities like indiscretion
and delusion etc.
The word Г«MГҘnaГӯ forming part of the
compound adjective Г«NirmГҘnamohГҘВЁГӯ in this
verse, signifies honour, fame and prestige;
while Г«MohaГӯ denotes indiscreation, error,
delusion and other TГҘmasika propensities.
Therefore, Г«NirmГҘnamohГҘВЁГӯ are those who

=== PAGE 652 ===

* Chapter XV *
651
Г«JitasaвҲҶgadoВ¶ГҘh, are those who no longer
entertain the least attachment for the enjoyments
of this world and the next, whose mind
remains unexcited even in the midst of worldly
pleasures.
The word Г«AdhyГҘtmaГӯ forming part of
the compound adjective Г«AdhyГҘtmanityГҘВЁГӯ in
this verse, stands for the essential character
of God. Therefore, Г«AdhyГҘtmanityГҘВЁГӯ are those
who stand eternally united with God, who
are never disunited from Him even for a
moment and whose mood is ever unshakeable.
The word Г«KГҘmaГӯ, forming part of the
compound adjective Г«VinivГҰttakГҘmГҘВЁГӯ covers
all kinds of desires of various gradations,
such as craving, thirst, want, latent desire and
longing etc., all of which have delicate shades
of meaning. Therefore, Г«VinivГҰttakГҘmГҘВЁГӯ are
those who have no desire of any kind and in
any of these forms lurking in their mind.
Pairs of opposites, such as heat and
cold, agreeable and disagreeable, honour and
ignominy, praise and censure etc., have been
given the names of joy and sorrow inasmuch
as they are conducive to joy and sorrow. He
who transcends these, that is to say, he who
is not in the least susceptible to morbid feelings
such as attraction and aversion, joy and grief,
etc., in the presence or absence of any of
these contraries is said to be completely immune
from pairs of opposites going by the names
of joy and sorrow.
The word Г«AmВөuЕ’hГҘВЁГӯ refers to those
illumined saints who are entirely free from
delusion or ignorance. It is this word which
stands in the relation of a substantive to all
compound adjectives preceding it.
The supreme immortal state referred to
in this verse is the same as the almighty and
all-supporting God, whom we have been
exhorted to seek after and dedicate ourselves
to in verse 4 above.
This naturally leads one to enquire the nature of the supreme immortal State attained
by men possessing the above marks. The Lord, therefore, proceeds to extol that supreme
State, which is the same as God.
Её ГғjГҠвҖҡГҝГғпЈҝ вҖҡГҚГҝГҠпЈҝВё Её вүҘГҠвүҘГҠГҠVГ”UГҠпЈҝ Её В¬ГҠп¬ӮвҲ‘В§вҖ”Г”вҖ“
ГҝeГ п¬ӮГҠ Её ГҒЕёп¬ӮГғВёГЈГғпЈҝ ГғhГҠв—Ҡ В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠВў в—Ҡв—ҠГ”H 6H
Её not; ГғГғЛңГ” that supreme self-effulgent state; Г·ГҠвҖҡГҝГғпЈҝ can illumine; вҖҡГҚГҝВёвҖ” the sun; ЕёГ” nor;
вүҘГҠвүҘГҠГҠVГ”UвҖ” the moon; Её nor (even); В¬ГҠп¬ӮвҲ‘В§вҖ” fire; ГҝГғЛңГ” which; ВӘГ п¬ӮГҠ having reached; Её neither; ГҒЕёп¬ӮГғВёГЈГғпЈҝ
(they) return (to this world); ГғГғЛңГ” that (is); Е“ГҠв—Ҡ Abode; В¬вҒ„Uв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” supreme; в—Ҡв—Ҡ My.
Neither the sun nor the moon nor fire can illumine that supreme self-effulgent
state, attaining to which they never return to this world; that is My supreme Abode.
(6)
being etc., all taken together. In other words,
that attaining to which one reaches wholly
beyond this mundane existence once for all
represents His supreme  Abode, free from
MГҘyГҘ or illusion; and that constitutes His
very being. It is that which they call by such
names as the Unmanifest, the Indestructible
and the supreme Goal (VIII.21). With reference
The latter half of this verse is intended
to convey that the eternal Abode of God,
being the same as Truth, Consciousness and
Bliss, transcendent and spiritual in character,
and His own manifestation, is really identical
with Him. Therefore, the words Г«Paramam
DhГҘmaГӯ in this verse denote the eternal Abode
of God as well as His essential character and

=== PAGE 653 ===

652
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
to It the вҖәruti says*:Гі
Г¬Where the sun shines not, where winds
blow not, where the moon sheds not her
lustre, where stars twinkle not, where fire
burns not, where death finds no access, where
sorrows enter not and reaching where the
YogвҲӮs return not, which is the goal of the
YogвҲӮs and is hailed by gods, that is the
supreme State, ever delightful, supremely
blissful, tranquil, enternal and ever blessed.вҖ 
The 
demonstrative 
pronoun 
Г«TatГӯ
occurring in the first half of this verse stands
for same integral Brahma or PuruВ¶ottama who
has been referred to in verse 5 above under the
name of the Г«supreme immortal StateГӯ, and the
statement that Г¬It cannot be illumined by the
sun, moon or fireГ® is intended to reveal Its
inconceivable, incomprehensible and ineffable
character. The idea is that the sun, moon and
fire, which brighten the whole universe, and
even the senses of sight, mind and speech, which
are respectively presided over by the three gods
mentioned above,Гіnone of these can illumine
that supreme State. This should also be
understood to mean that whatever luminaries
other than those referred to above are believed
to exist, are incapable either individually or
collectively to illumine that supreme State; for
it is from the light of BrahmaГіfrom a fraction
of Its being and consciousnessГіthat they all
derive their light (XV.12). And this is quite in
the fitness of things; for how can a luminary
illumine the very source, of its light? How can
the eye, speech, mind or any other organ portray
Brahma, who is entirely out of their reach? вҖәruti
also says:Гі
Г¬Wherefrom speech alongwith mind return
without having attained to It, that is Brahma
or GodвҖЎ (BrahmopaniВ¶ad).Г® Hence that
immortal state is entirely beyond speech and
mind etc., Its essential character can neither
be represented nor explained.
Verses 1 to 3 of this chapter described the KВ¶ara PuruВ¶a under the name of the cosmic
tree or the tree of mundane existence, declared the actions performed by the AkВ¶ara PuruВ¶a
or embodied soul in the human body and under the prompting of egotism, the sense of
meum and attachment as responsible for its slavery to the KВ¶ara PuruВ¶a and finally
proclaimed self-surrender to the Primal Being or Creator as the only means of securing
freedom from that bondage. This leads one to enquire the nature of the JвҲӮva which is thus
bound, as well as its essential character, and further as to who knows the JвҲӮva and how.
Therefore with a view to elucidating all these points, the Lord first of all depicts the nature
of the embodied soul.
*
The вҖәruti also says:Гі
Её ГғГІГҠ вҖҡГҚГҝГҠпЈҝВё Г·ГҠГҒГғ Её ГёГЈВәЛқГғГҠвҒ„UвҲ‘ВўВ§ ЕёпЈҝв—ҠГҠ ГҒп¬ӮlГҲГғГҠпЈҝ Г·ГҠГҒГЈГғ вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГҝв—ҠГҒВӘAвҖ”вҖ“
Гғв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ 
Г·ГҠГЈГғв—ҠЕёГҲГ·ГҠГҒГғ 
вҖҡп¬ӮZ 
ГғSГҝ 
Г·ГҠвҖҡГҠ 
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГҒв—ҠЕ’Вў 
ГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҠГҒГғH
(KaВўhopaniВ¶ad II.ii.15)
Г¬The sun cannot illumine that integral Brahma or God; nor can the moon nor the stars nor even
this lightning shed Its lustre on It. How, then, can this physical fire light It ? For all these reflect the
light of Brahma alone when It shines; and it is by the light of Brahma that all this is illumined.Г®
вҖ  ГҝГІГҠ Её вҖҡГҚГҝВёSГғВ¬ГҒГғ ГҝГІГҠ Её п¬ӮГҠГҝГҲп¬ӮГҠВёГҒГғ ГҝГІГҠ Её ГёГЈВәЛқв—ҠГҠ Г·ГҠГҒГғ ГҝГІГҠ Её ЕёЛҮГҠГІГҠГҠГҒГЎГҠ Г·ГҠГҒГЈГғ ГҝГІГҠ ЕёГҠГҒВӘAЕ’ВёвҖһUГҒГғ ГҝГІГҠ Её в—ҠГҺГ ГҝГҲвҖ” В¬ЛқГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҒГғ
ГҝГІГҠ Её Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖГҠГҒЕё В¬ЛқГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҒГЈГғ вҖҡЕ’ГҠЕёГЈЕ’Вў В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠЕёГЈЕ’Вў вүҘГҠГҠГЈГғВў вүҘГҠГҠEГғВў вҖҡЕ’ГҠГҒвүҘГҠп¬ӮВў вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҠГҒЕ’п¬ӮГҒГЈЕ’ГғВў ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘГӨГҝпЈҝГҝВў В¬вҒ„ВўU В¬Е’Вў ГҝГІГҠ ВӘГ п¬ӮГҠ Её ГҒЕёп¬ӮГғВёГЈГғпЈҝ
ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёвҖ”вҖ“
(BГҰhajjГҘbГҘla Upa. VIII. 6)
вҖЎ
ГҝГғГҠпЈҝ п¬ӮГҠГёГҠпЈҝ ГҒЕёп¬ӮГғВёГЈГғпЈҝ вҖўВ¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝ в—ҠЕёвҖҡГҠ вҖҡвҖһUвҖ“

=== PAGE 654 ===

* Chapter XV *
653
The compound word Г«JвҲӮvalokeГӯ in this
verse denotes the dwelling-place of the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ,
viz., the Г«bodyГӯ. It covers all the three types
of bodies, viz., the physical, the astral and
the causal. By declaring the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ dwelling
in these as eternal and as a particle of His
own being, the Lord seeks to convey that it
is He who creates, sustains and maintains the
universe (XIV.3,4) by investing the multitude
of JвҲӮvas resting in their causal bodies with an
astral and a physical body each; hence He is
the supreme Father of all; therefore, even as
a son is a particle of his father, the totality of
JвҲӮvas or embodied beings is a fragment of
God. Again, there is affinity of character
between God and the embodied soul; even
as God is spiritual in essence, the embodied
soul is essentially the same; hence the JвҲӮva is
a particle of God Himself. For, that which is
spiritual itself can be a fragment of something
equally spiritual, and not of that which is
material. Like God Himself, the embodied
soul too is without beginning or end; hence
it is eternal and no other than God Himself.
Besides this, according to the monistic
standpoint, the only correct interpretation is
that just as the boundless expanse of space,
which is equally and indivisibly present
everywhere, appears as though divided due
to its contact with a pitcher and a house etc.,
and just as the limited space existing in that
pitcher etc., is reckoned as a part of the
boundless space, even so, God, though equally
and indivisibly present everywhere, appears
as if divided due to His contact with different
bodies (XIII.16) and the JвҲӮvas dwelling in
those bodies are regarded as so many particles
of God. This is what is meant by the Lord
when He says that the embodied soul is a
particle of His own being.
The use of the particle Г«EvaГӯ with Г«MamaГӯ
is intended to convey that being a particle of
God as shown above, the embodied soul is
essentially no other than God.
The Indriyas or senses of perception are
evolutes of PrakГҰti; and the body in which
they are located is likewise an evolute of PrakГҰti;
this is what is sought to be conveyed by the
use of the adjective Г«PrakГҰtisthГҘniГӯ with
Г«IndriyГҘЖ’iГӯ. Again, the five senses of perception
and the mindГіthese six are mainly responsible
for all sensory experiences; the organs of action
too are ineffectual without them. That is why
the Indriyas have been declared as only  six in
number, although in XIII.5 the number is
mentioned to be eleven. The five organs of
action should, therefore, be taken as included
in the senses of perception.
When the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ migrates from one
body to another, it draws from the previous
body the five senses and the mind and takes
them alongwith it. This is what is meant by
the latter half of this verse. Because the mind
and the senses are mainly responsible for all
sensory experiences, it is these six which are
said to be drawn by the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ. The word
Г«ManaВЁГӯ, forming part of the compound
adjective Г«ManaВЁВ¶aВ¶ВўhГҘniГӯ in this verse stands
for what is known as the AntaВЁkaraЖ’a (the
inner sense), which includes Buddhi (reason).
в—Ҡв—ҠГ’п¬ӮГҠВўвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝ ВЎГӢп¬ӮвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ ВЎГӢп¬ӮГ·ГҚГғвҖ” вҖҡЕёГҠГғЕёвҖ”Г”вҖ“
в—ҠЕёвҖ”В·DГ”UГҠЕёГӢГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠ В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғSГ•ГҠГҒЕё вҲ‘В§В·ВёГҒГғГ”H 7H
в—Ҡв—Ҡ вҲһп¬Ӯ My own; вҖўВўвүҘГҠвҖ” (is) a particle; ВЎГӢп¬ӮвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ in the living organism; ВЎГӢп¬ӮГ·ГҚГғвҖ” вҖҡЕёГҠГғЕёвҖ” the
eternal JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ or embodied soul; в—ҠЕёвҖ”В·DГ”UГҠГҒЕё ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГҒГЎГҠ the five senses with the mind as the
sixth; В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғSГ•ГҠГҒЕё resting in PrakГҰti; вҲ‘В§В·ВёГҒГғГ” (it is that which) draws (round itself).
The eternal JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ in this body is a particle of My own being; and it is that alone
which draws around itself the mind and the five senses, which abide in PrakГҰti.     (7)

=== PAGE 655 ===

654
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
And when the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ draws the mind and
the senses, it draws them through no other
medium than the PrГҘЖ’as or vital airs; the six
organs mentioned in this verse should,
therefore, be taken to include the five organs
of action as well as the five vital airs.
It may be asked here: When, how and what for does the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ draw to itself the mind
and the five senses, and what are the five senses referred to above? The Lord answers this
possible query in the following two verses.
вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„ВўU 
ГҝЕ’п¬ӮГҠВ¬AГҠпЈҝГҒГғ 
ГҝГ¬ГҠГҠГҘГҝГҲГ вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠв—ҠГғГӢEвҒ„UвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ВӘГҺвҖһUГӢГ п¬ӮГ’ГғГҠГҒЕё вҖҡВўГҝГҠГҒГғ п¬ӮГҠГҝГҲВӘВёГЈЕ“ГҠГҒЕёп¬ӮГҠвүҘГҠГҝГҠГғЛңГ”H 8H
вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” ГҝГғЛңГ” (from) the body which; вҖўп¬ӮГҠВ¬AГҠпЈҝГҒГғ it puts on; ГҝГғЛңГ” (to that) which; Гё then; вҖўГҒВ¬ too;
В©UГ вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠв—ҠГҒГғ casts off or leaves behind; ГҹВёEвҒ„UвҖ” (even so) the controller of the body etc., viz., the
embodied soul; ВӘГҺвҖһUГӢГ п¬ӮГҠ taking; вҲһГғГҠГҒЕё these six (viz., the mind and the five senses); вҖҡВўГҝГҠГҒГғ
migrates; п¬ӮГҠГҝГҲвҖ” the wind; ВӘГЈЕ“ГҠЕёЛңГ” scents; Гҹп¬Ӯ even as (wafts); вҖўГҠвүҘГҠГҝГҠГғЛңГ” from the seat (of odours).
Even as the wind wafts scents from their seats, so too the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ, who is the Lord
of the body etc., taking the mind and the senses from the body, which it leaves behind,
forthwith migrates to the body which it acquires.
(8)
includes the intellect while the Indriyas are
inclusive of the five organs of action as well
as the five vital airs, as indicated in the
commentary on that verse. Hence Г«EtГҘniГӯ in
the present context stands for the astral body,
which is an aggregate of the seventeen
categories mentioned above. The idea in
referring to the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ by the term Г«вҲ«вҖ№waraГӯ
is to show that it is the controller and lord of
all the ten Indriyas as well as of the mind and
intellect; that is why it is capable of transferring
them from one body to another.
Although the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ, being a particle
of God Himself, is really eternal and
immovable,Гіit cannot migrate from one body
to another (vide II.24),Гіyet, being connected
with the astral body, it appears to move from
one physical body to another through the
astral body; this is what is indicated by the
use of the verb Г«SaвүҲyГҘtiГӯ (migrates). The
same idea has been brought out in II.22 as
well.
The word Г«Г…вҖ№ayГҘtГӯ in this verse stands
for those objects which naturally possess sweet
odour, such as flowers, sandal-wood,  saffron,
musk and so on. The body from which the
mind etc., are drawn, in other words, that
which the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ leaves behind, has been
compared in this verse to the seat of fragrance;
while the mind etc., have been likened to the
scents; for fragrance is nothing but the subtle
element of a fragrant substance. Even so the
JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ has been compared to the wind. Just
as the wind wafts the fragrance of flowers
etc., from one place to another, so does the
JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ draw the astral body, which is an
aggregate of the senses, mind, intellect and
the vital airs, from one physical body, viz.
the body which it casts off, and unites it with
another, viz., that which it puts on.
The demonstrative pronoun Г«EtГҘniГӯ stands
for the mind and the five senses, referred to
in verse 7 above. Г«ManasГӯ being indicative of
the inner sense or AntaВЁkaraЖ’a as it is called,
ГјГҠГҠпЈҝГІГҠВў ГёЛҮГҠГҲвҖ” SВ¬вүҘГҠВёЕёВў Гё вҒ„UвҖҡЕёВў ГүГҠЛқГҠГЎГҠв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ ГёГ”вҖ“
вҖўГҒЕ“DГ”UГҠГҝ 
в—ҠЕёpГҠГҝВў 
ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҝГҠЕёГҲВ¬вҖҡпЈҝп¬ӮГғпЈҝH 9H

=== PAGE 656 ===

* Chapter XV *
655
The JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ is said to assoiate with the
mind and the senses only when it identifies
itself with these. The statement that it enjoys
the objects of senses through the mind and
the senses is intended to convey that, really
speaking, the Self or Spirit is neither the
doer of actions nor the experiencer of sense-
objects or of joys and sorrows etc., as a
consequence of those actions; it derives
this character from its dateless connection
with PrakГҰti and its evolutes, which has its
root in ignorance. In XIII.21 also we have
seen that it is the PuruВ¶a seated in PrakГҰti
who enjoys the GuЖ’as born of PrakГҰti. The
вҖәruti also says: Г¬It is the Self, joined with
the mind, intellect and senses that is termed
as the enjoyer by the wiseГ®* (KaВўhopaniВ¶ad
I.iii.4).
ГјГҠГҠпЈҝГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the auditory sense or the sense of hearing; ГёЛҮГҠГҲвҖ” the sense of sight; SВ¬вүҘГҠВёЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the tactile
sense or the sense of touch; Гё and; вҒ„UвҖҡЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the sense of taste; ГүГҠЛқГҠГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the olfactory sense or the
sense of smell; вҲһп¬ӮГ” only; Гё and; вҖўГҒЕ“DГ”UГҠГҝ associated with; в—ҠЕёвҖ” the mind; Гё and; вҖўГҝв—ҠЛңГ” this
(JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ); ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҝГҠЕёЛңГ” sense-objects; В©UВ¬вҖҡпЈҝп¬ӮГғпЈҝ enjoys.
It is this JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ, while associated with the senses of hearing, sight, touch, taste
and smell, as well as the mind, that enjoys the objects of senses.                        (9)
The JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ has been declared as connected with the three GuЖ’as, as that which
migrates from one body to another and as that which enjoys the objects of senses while
dwelling in the body. This may lead one to enquire as to who knows this Self and how, and
who is unable to know it. Anticipating this query the Lord says:
В©UГ вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠв—ҠГЈГғВў ГҒSГ•ГғВў п¬ӮГҠГҒВ¬ Г·ГҲTГҠЕёВў п¬ӮГҠ ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГғв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҠ ЕёГҠЕёГҲВ¬вүҘГҝГҒГЈГғ В¬вүҘГҝГҒГЈГғ ГҙГҠГҠЕёГёЛҮГҠГҲВ·вҖ”H 10H
В©UГ вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠв—ҠГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ” departing (from this body); ГҒSГ•Гғв—ҠЛңГ” dwelling (in the body); п¬ӮГҠ or; вҖўГҒВ¬Г” even;
Г·ГҲTГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” enjoying (the objects of senses); п¬ӮГҠ or (again); ВӘГҲГЎГҠГҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГғв—ҠЛңГ” (thus) connected with the
three GuЖ’as; ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҠвҖ” the ignorant; Её not; вҖўЕёГҲВ¬вүҘГҝГҒГЈГғ know; В¬вүҘГҝГҒГЈГғ realize; ГҙГҠГҠЕёГёЛҮГҠГҲВ·вҖ” those
endowed with the eye of wisdom.
The ignorant know not the soul departing from, or dwelling in the body, or
enjoying the objects of senses i.e., even when it is connected with the three GuЖ’as; only
those endowed with the eye of wisdom are able to realize it.                        (10)
who are endowed with the faculty of judgment,
know the real character of the Self even
when it is connected with the GuЖ’as
or modes of PrakГҰti. In other words they
realize that the Self is really speaking entirely
beyond PrakГҰti, pure, unattached and the
same as consciousness itself under all
circumstances viz., while departing from,
or dwelling in the body and enjoying the
objects of senses.
The word Г«GuЖ’ГҘnvitamГӯ stands for the
soul as seated in PrakГҰti. The use of the
particle Г«ApiГӯ is intended to convey that even
though the soul departs from, and dwells in,
the body and enjoys the objects of senses in
the presence of all, the ignorant fail to realize
its true character; much less can they realize
the Self devoid of all activity and existing
beyond the three GuЖ’as.
Men of wisdom, on the other hand,
*
вҖўГҠГ в—ҠпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝв—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝГҝГҲQВўВ§ Г·ГҠпЈҝQпЈҝВ§Г ГҝГҠвҖһГҲUв—ҠВёЕёГӢГҒВ·ГЎГҠвҖ”вҖ“

=== PAGE 657 ===

656
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The Г«striving YogвҲӮsГӯ too are those
SГҘdhakas of an advanced type whose mind
is pure and amenable to their control, who
have been referred to in the preceding verse
as endowed with the eye of wisdom and
who are constantly engaged in hearing,
contemplation, meditation and other such
spiritual practices. The demonstrative pronoun
Г«EnamГӯ stands for the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ or embodied
soul who is the subject of discussion in these
verses and who is said to be enshrined in the
heart in so far as he is connected with the
body; and the correct knowledge of his real
character, which is the same as eternal and
pure Consciousness and Bliss, is what is
meant by Г«realizing this Self.Гӯ
Г«AkГҰtГҘtmГҘnaВЁГӯ are those whose mind is
impure and unsteady, that is to say, who
have neither wholly succeeded in washing
off the impurities of their mind through the
practice of disinterested action etc., nor ever
undertaken adequate and substained efforts
to steady their mind through the practice of
devotion etc. And those foolish men, who
are devoid of intelligence, are spoken of as
Г«AcetasaВЁГӯ. Therefore, those men of a RГҘjasika
and TГҘmasika disposition whose mind is tainted
with the evils of impurity, distraction and
opacity are referred to here as Г«AkГҰtГҘtmГҘnaВЁГӯ
and Г«AcetasaВЁГӯ. Such men cannot realize the
truth relating to the Self even if they persist
in their effort to know it through mere study
of sacred books instead of trying to purify
their mind. This is what is meant by the latter
half of this verse.
In verse 10 above it was stated that fools
cannot realize the Self; only those men of
understanding who are endowed with the eye
of wisdom can know it. The present verse,
however, says that striving YogвҲӮs alone are
able to realize the Self, not those ignorant
men whose mind is impure. Although these
two statements appear to bring out two different
ideas, they really drive at the same truth. The
word Г«MВөuЕ’hГҘВЁГӯ in verse 10 stands for ordinary,
unintelligent persons; while Г«JВӨГҘnacakВ¶uВ¶aВЁГӯ
refers to those wise men who are endowed
with a critical acumen. Even so, the word
Г«YoginaВЁГӯ in the present verse stands for
SГҘdhakas of an advanced type, who have a
SГҘttvika disposition and a critical mind; while
Г«AcetasaВЁГӯ refers to men of a RГҘjasika and
TГҘmasika disposition. Therefore, while verse
10 pointed out in a general way as to who
are able to know the Self and who are not,
the Lord makes Himself more explicit in the
present verse, where He says that while men
of a discerning nature succeed in realizing
the Self through sustained effort, the ignorant
fail to do so in spite of their best endeavours.
ГҝГғГЈГғГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёpГ’ЕёВў В¬вүҘГҝГЈГ ГҝГҠГ в—ҠГЈГҝп¬ӮГҒSГ•Гғв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҝГғГЈГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГҘГҝвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёГҠпЈҝ ЕёГ’ЕёВў В¬вүҘГҝГЈГ ГҝГёпЈҝГғвҖҡвҖ”H 11H
ГҝГғГЈГғвҖ” striving; ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒВӘЕёвҖ” the YogвҲӮs; Гё also; вҲһЕёв—ҠЛңГ” this (Self); В¬вүҘГҝГҒГЈГғ realize; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҒЕё in (their)
heart; вҖўп¬ӮГҒSГ•Гғв—ҠЛңГ” enshrined; ГҝГғГЈГғвҖ” вҖўГҒВ¬ even though striving; вҖўвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёвҖ” (but) whose heart has
not been purified; ЕёГ” not; вҲһЕёв—ҠЛңГ” this (self); В¬вүҘГҝГҒГЈГғ know; вҖўГёпЈҝГғвҖҡвҖ” the ignorant.
Striving YogвҲӮs too are able to realize this Self enshrined in their heart. The
ignorant, however, whose heart has not been purified, know not this Self in spite of
their best endeavours.                                                                    (11)
Verse 6 raises the following questions in the mind of the reader, viz., (1) How is it that
the sun, moon, fire and other luminaries, who light up the whole universe, cannot illumine
God? And (2) why does the soul not return to this world after attaining to the supreme

=== PAGE 658 ===

* Chapter XV *
657
By declaring that the light existing in
the sun, moon and fire is His own effulgence,
the Lord seeks to convey that whatever
illuminating power there is in the three
luminaries mentioned above, as well as in the
organs presided over by these gods, viz.,
the eye, mind and speech, is only a part of
His own effulgence. When even the light
existing in all these luminaries is a part of
His own effulgence, it is much easier to
understand that the light existing in other
objects, which derive their light from
these luminaries, is GodГӯs own light. That
is why the Lord says in verse 6 that the sun,
moon and fire are unable to illuminate His
being.
abode of God? In reply to the second question the Lord declared in verse 7 that the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ
is an eternal particle of God, and in the course of the next four verses depicted its essential
character, nature and behaviour and glorified those who know its real character. In order
to answer the first question the Lord now proceeds to delineate His essential character
alongwith His virtues, glory and divinity in the following four verses.
ГҝЕ’ГҠГҒЕ’Г ГҝВӘГғВў ГғпЈҝВЎГҠпЈҝ ВЎВӘjГҠвҖҡГҝГғпЈҝЛҳГҒПҖвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҝГ¬ГҠГЈВәЛқв—ҠГҒвҖҡ ГҝГ¬ГҠГҠВӘAГҠГ’ ГғГ»ГҠпЈҝВЎГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮГҒh в—ҠГҠв—ҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ”H 12H
ГҝГғЛңГ” which; вҖўГҠГҒЕ’Г ГҝВӘГғв—ҠЛңГ” existing in the sun; ГғпЈҝВЎвҖ” the light; ВЎВӘГғЛңГ” universe; Г·ГҠвҖҡГҝГғпЈҝ illumines;
вҖўГҒПҖвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” the entire; ГҝГғЛңГ” which; ГёГЈВәЛқв—ҠГҒвҖҡ (exists) in the moon; ГҝГғЛңГ” (and) which; Гё and; вҖўВӘAГҠГ’ (exists)
in the fire; ГғГғЛңГ” that; ГғпЈҝВЎвҖ” effulgence; ГҒп¬ӮГҒh know; в—ҠГҠв—ҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” My.
The light in the sun, that illumines the entire solar world, and that which shines
in the moon and that which shines in the fire too, know that light to be Mine.  (12)
ВӘГҠв—ҠГҠГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҝ Гё Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё Е“ГҠвҒ„UГҝГҠГӘГҝвҖһUв—ҠГҠпЈҝВЎвҖҡГҠГ”вҖ“
В¬ГҲcГЎГҠГҠГҒв—Ҡ ГёГҠГ’В·Е“ГӢвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёвҖ” вҖҡГҠпЈҝв—ҠГҠпЈҝ Г·ГҚГ п¬ӮГҠ вҒ„UвҖҡГҠГ в—ҠвҲ‘В§вҖ”Г”H 13H
ВӘГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the soil; вҖўГҠГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҝ permeating; Гё and; Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё (all) creatures; Е“ГҠвҒ„UГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ I sustain; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I;
вҖўГҠпЈҝВЎвҖҡГҠ by (My) vital power; В¬ГҲcГЎГҠГҠГҒв—Ҡ I nourish; Гё and; вҖўГҠпЈҝВ·Е“ГӢвҖ” herbs or plants in general; вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёвҖ”
all; вҖҡГҠпЈҝв—ҠвҖ” the moon; Г·ГҚГ п¬ӮГҠ becoming; вҒ„UвҖҡГҠГ в—ҠвҲ‘В§вҖ” nectarine, full of nectar.
And permeating the soil, it is I who support all creatures by My vital energy; and
becoming the nectarine moon, I nourish all plants.                                   (13)
calling the moon Г«RasГҘtmakaВЁГӯ the Lord seeks
to convey that the moon is not only full of
nectar or nectarine in essence but infuses
nectar into all.
The Г«OВ¶adhвҲӮВЁГӯ covers the entire vegetable
kingdom consisting of trees, creepers, grass
etc., and comprising all their limbs such as
leaves, blossoms and fruits etc. By the latter
half of this verse the Lord shows that just as
the illuminating power in the moon is a part
of His own effulgence, even so the nourishing
power in the moon is a part of His own
energy or power.
By mentioning the earth or soil as an
illustration, the Lord thereby declares that the
sustaining power which pervades the whole
universe is a part of His own being. The idea
is that the power of sustaining all creatures,
that appears to belong to the earth, and likewise
whatever sustaining power is claimed by any
other substance, does not really belong to the
earth or any other substance; it is a part of
GodГӯs own energy or power. This is what is
meant by the first half of this verse.
Г«RasГҘtmakaВЁГӯ is that which has Г«RasaГӯ
or nectar as its own being or essence. By

=== PAGE 659 ===

658
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
вҖўвҖһВўU п¬ӮГ’EГҠЕёвҒ„UГҠпЈҝ Г·ГҚГ п¬ӮГҠ В¬ЛқГҠГҒГЎГҠЕёГҠВў Е’пЈҝвҖһUв—ҠГҠГҒГјГҠГғвҖ”вҖ“
В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠВ¬ГҠЕёвҖҡв—ҠГҠГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” В¬ГёГҠГӘГҝГӣГҠВў ГёГғГҲГҢп¬ӮЕ“в—ҠЛңГ”H 14H
вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; п¬ӮГ’вҖЎп¬ӮГҠЕёвҒ„UвҖ” the fire; Г·ГҚГ п¬ӮГҠ becoming; В¬ЛқГҠГҒГЎГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of living beings; Е’пЈҝвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” вҖўГҠГҒГјГҠГғвҖ” lodged in
the body; В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠВ¬ГҠЕёвҖҡв—ҠГҠГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” united with the PrГҘЖ’a (exhalation) and ApГҘna (inhalation) breaths;
В¬ГёГҠГҒв—Ҡ I digest; вҖўГӣГҠв—ҠЛңГ” ГёГғГҲГҢп¬ӮЕ“в—ҠЛңГ” the food of four kinds.
Taking the form of fire (as VaiвҖ№vГҘnara) lodged in the body of all creatures and
united with the PrГҘЖ’a (exhalation) and ApГҘna (inhalation) breaths, it is I who digest
the four kinds of food.                                                                                          (14)
pudding; curds, curry etc.), (iii) Lehya (that
which is licked with the tongue, e.g., honey,
caВўanвҲӮ (sauce) etc.) and (iv) CoВ¶ya (that which
is sucked, e.g., the juice of sugarcane, mango
etc.). What the Lord seeks to convey by the
latter half of this verse is that just as the
illuminating power in the fire is a part of His
own effulgence, even so the heating power
in it, i.e., its digestive and appetizing power
is also a part of His energy or potency.
The fire which maintains the temperature
in the body and helps in the digestion of food
is referred to here as Г«VaiвҖ№vГҘnaraВЁГӯ. Food has
been classified in Indian dietetics under four
main heads according to the process of
swallowing it. They are as follows: (i) BhakВ¶ya
(solid food that requires to be masticated before
it can be swallowed, e.g., bread, rice, cake
etc.), (ii) Bhojya (that can be directly
swallowed without being masticated, e.g., gruel,
Developing in this way the idea adumbrated in X.41, the Lord declared in the
foregoing verses that the illuminating, sustaining, nourishing, digesting and all other powers
are a part of His own power or energy. In other words, just as it is a part of the same
electric power that is instrumental in agitating the air by rotating the fan, diffusing light by
lighting up electric lamps, working the flour mill, boiling water etc., and manifesting sounds
through the radio etc., even so it is a part of GodГӯs own energy which operates in illumining
through the sun, moon and fire etc., sustaining through earth etc., nourishing through the
moon and digesting food through the gastric fire. So saying, the Lord now proceeds to
delineate His essential character marked by virtues such as omnipresence, omniscience etc.,
and declares Himself as worth knowing in everyway.
вҖҡп¬ӮВёSГҝ ГёГҠвҖһВўU NUГҒЕ’ вҖҡГҒГӣГҠГҒп¬ӮCГ”UГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГ»ГҠвҖ” Sв—ҠГҺГҒГғГҙГҠГҠВёЕёв—ҠВ¬ГҠпЈҝвҖһUЕёВў ГёГ”вҖ“
п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’Г’p вҖҡп¬ӮГ’ВёвҒ„UвҖһUв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ п¬ӮпЈҝlГҠпЈҝ п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГҠГЈГғвҲ‘ГҺВ§mпЈҝЕ’ГҒп¬ӮЕ’пЈҝп¬Ӯ ГёГҠвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”H 15H
вҖҡп¬ӮВёSГҝ of all; Гё and; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; NUГҒЕ’ in the heart; вҖҡГҒГӣГҠГҒп¬ӮCГ”UвҖ” seated (as the inner controller);
в—ҠГ»ГҠвҖ” (proceed) from Me; Sв—ҠГҺГҒГғвҖ” memory; ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” knowledge; вҖўВ¬ГҠпЈҝвҖһUЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the ratiocinative faculty; Гё
again; п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’Г’вҖ” the Vedas; Гё and; вҖҡп¬ӮГ’ВёвҖ” through all; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” вҲһп¬Ӯ I alone; п¬ӮпЈҝlвҖ” (am) worth knowing;
п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГҠГЈГғвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғЛңГ” the origin of VedГҘnta; п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГҒп¬ӮГғЛңГ” the knower of the Vedas (too); вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; Гё and;
вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I (am).
It is I who remain seated in the hearts of all creatures as the inner controller; and
it is I who am the source of memory, knowledge and the ratiocinative faculty. Again,
I am the only object worth knowing through the Vedas; I alone am the origin of
VedГҘnta and the knower of the Vedas, too.
(15)

=== PAGE 660 ===

* Chapter XV *
659
Although God is equally present
everywhere, He is particularly seated in the
heart of all creatures as the inner controller of
all; hence the heart is the special seat of His
manifestation. That is why the Lord declares
more than once that He is enshrined in the
hearts of all (XIII.17; XVIII.61); for He is
directly perceived in the heart of those whose
mind is pure and pellucid.
Г«SmГҰtiГӯ consists in recollecting any object
or incident that has been actually seen or heard
or perceived in any other way in the past. The
faculty of ascertaining the real character of
any object is called JВӨГҘna. Г«ВӘUhanaГӯ is a general
term covering doubt, misapprehension and all
other forms of fallacious reasoning or judgment;
and the removal of such doubts etc., is called
Г«ApohanaГӯ. It is God Himself, the inner Ruler
seated in the heart of all, who rouses the above-
mentioned faculties in the minds  of all according
to their respective Karmas. This is what is
meant by the Lord when He says that He is
the source of memory etc.
God is the sole objective of the Vedas. In
other words, whatever is taught in the Vedas,
no matter whether it relates to the ritual (Karma),
worship (UpГҘsanГҘ) or spiritual knowledge
(JВӨГҘna), ultimately aims at arousing a feeling
of aversion towards the world and enabling
aspirants of all grades and qualifications to
realize God. Therefore, they alone who realize
God through the Vedas correctly understand
them. Those, on the other hand, who remain
entangled in worldly enjoyments do not correctly
understand the Vedas.
Г«VedГҘntaГӯ means arriving at the real
meaning or intention of the Vedas. In other
words, resolving all doubts relating to the Vedas
and reconciling all contradictions in God is
what is meant by VedГҘnta. By proclaiming
Himself as the father of VedГҘnta, the Lord
seeks to convey that it is God alone, who
brings solace to man by truly reconciling all
apparent conradiction in the Vedas. And it is
He, who knows the correct intention of the
Vedas. This is what He means by declaring
Himself as the only Г«VedavidГӯ (knower of the
Vedas).
Discussing in verses 1 to 6 the tree of creation and the advisability of uprooting it by
strong dispassion, self-surrender to God, the marks of those who succeed in realizing God,
and the glory of the supreme Abode of God, which is the same as God Himself, the Lord
wound up the discussion relating to the KВ¶ara PuruВ¶a. Taking up from verse 7 the
discussion relating to the worshipper or the AkВ¶ara PuruВ¶a, also known by the name of JвҲӮva,
the Lord described his essential character, power, nature and behaviour in the following
four verses and wound up the topic by glorifying the knower of the Self. From verse 12 He
started the discussion relating to the PuruВ¶ottama or supreme Person, who is the object of
worship for the JвҲӮva, and concluded the discussion in the fifteenth, describing in four verses
the virtues, glory and essential character of God. Now, in order to recapitulate the substance
of the three topics till the end of the chapter, the Lord delineates in the following verse the
essential character of the KВ¶ara and AkВ¶ara PuruВ¶as.
mГҠГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҠГ’ В¬ГҲLВ§В·ГҠГ’ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ ЛҮГҠвҒ„UpГҠЛҮГҠвҒ„U вҲһп¬Ӯ ГёГ”вҖ“
ЛҮГҠвҒ„UвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё вҲ‘ГҚВ§вүҲUSГ•ГҠпЈҝЛҳЛҮГҠвҒ„U В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝГ”H 16H
mГҠГ’ two kinds of; Гҹв—ҠГҠГ’ these; В¬ГҲLВ§В·ГҠГ’ PuruВ¶as; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ (there are) in this world; ЛҮГҠвҒ„UвҖ” the
perishable; Гё and; вҖўЛҮГҠвҒ„UвҖ” the imperishable; вҲһп¬Ӯ too; Гё and; ЛҮГҠвҒ„UвҖ” (are spoken of as) the
perishable; вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ Г·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё (the bodies of) all beings; вҲ‘ГҚВ§вүҲUSГ•вҖ” the JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ or embodied soul; вҖўЛҮГҠвҒ„UвҖ”
the imperishable; В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is called.

=== PAGE 661 ===

660
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The use of the two adjectives Г«DvauГӯ
and Г«ImauГӯ with Г«PuruВ¶auГӯ is intended to
convey that the two categories mentioned in
this verse under the names of Г«KВ¶araГӯ and
Г«AkВ¶araГӯ form part of the three categories
that are being discussed in the present chapter.
And the word Г«PuruВ¶auГӯ refers to no other
than the two categories discussed under the
names of the Г«AparГҘ and Г«ParГҘГӯ PrakГҰtis in
Chapter VII (verses 4-5), under the names of
Г«AdhibhВөutaГӯ and Г«AdhyГҘtmaГӯ in Chapter VIII
(verses 4 and 3), under the names of Г«KВ¶etraГӯ
and Г«KВ¶etrajВӨaГӯ in Chapter XIII (verse 1) and
under the names of Г«AвҖ№vatthaГӯ and Г«JвҲӮvaГӯ in
this very chapter. By speaking of the one as
Г«KВ¶araГӯ and the other as Г«AkВ¶araГӯ the Lord
seeks to convey that the two are entirely
different from each other.
The word Г«BhВөutГҘni, in this verse denotes
all the three bodies of a JвҲӮva, viz., the physical,
the astral and the causal. It is these three
types of bodies that have been referred to
under the collective name of Г«KВ¶etraГӯ in the
opening verse of Chapter XIII and their
constituent elements enumerated in verse 5
of the same chapter. Understood in this light
the word Г«BhВөutГҘniГӯ, qualified by the adjective
Г«SarvГҘЖ’iГӯ would come to mean the entire
world of matter. This world of matter is
perishable and transient. This is what is borne
out by such statements as Г«All these bodies
have been spoken of as perishableГӯ (II.18)
and Г«All perishable objects are AdhibhВөutaГӯ
(VIII.4). The word Г«KВөuВўasthaГӯ denotes the
Self dwelling in all bodies. The Self continues
to be the same under all circumstances,
it never changes; hence it is termed as
Г«KВөuВўasthaГӯ or immutable. And it is beyond
decay, destruction or extinction; hence it is
imperishable.
The perishable and the imperishable tooГіthese are the two kinds of PuruВ¶as in
this world. Of these, the bodies of all beings are spoken of as the perishable; while the
JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ or the embodied soul is called imperishable.                                 (16)
God from the Г«KВ¶araГӯ and AkВ¶araГӯ PuruВ¶as
mentioned in the preceding verse. The intention
is to show that the Supreme Person is distinct
from and far superior to both.
The words Г«Yo lokatrayam ГҘviвҖ№ya
bibhartiГӯ in the latter half of this verse constitute
The Г«Uttama PuruВ¶aГӯ mentioned in this
verse is no other than the Supreme Person or
God, who is eternal, pure, enlightened free,
all-powerful, supremely compassionate and full
of all virtues. The use of the particle Г«TuГӯ and
the adjective Г«AnyaВЁГӯ is intended to distinguish
Describing thus the essential character of the KВ¶ara and AkВ¶ara PuruВ¶as, the Lord now
discusses in the following two verses the essential character of the Supreme Person or God,
who is superior to both, and also tells us what has earned Him the title of PuruВ¶ottama (the
Supreme Person).
В©UГ»ГҠв—ҠвҖ” В¬ГҲLВ§В·SГ п¬ӮГЈГҝвҖ” В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠпЈҝГ ГҝГҲЕ’ГҠNUГғвҖ”вҖ“
ГҝГҠпЈҝ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГІГҠГҝв—ҠГҠГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҝ ГҒвҖҷГ·Г ГҝВёвҲҡГҝГҝ ГҹВёEвҒ„UвҖ”Г”H 17H
В©UГ»ГҠв—ҠвҖ” В¬ГҲLВ§В·вҖ” the Supreme Person; ГғГҲ however; вҖўГЈГҝвҖ” (is yet) other (than both these);
В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠГҠ (and) the supreme Spirit; ГҹГҒГғ as; В©UЕ’ГҠNUГғвҖ” has been spoken of; ГҝвҖ” who; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГІГҠГҝв—ҠЛңГ” (all) the
three worlds; вҖўГҠГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҝ having encompassed; ГҒвҖҷГ·ГҒГғВё upholds and maintains (all); вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝвҖ” ГҹВёвүҘп¬ӮвҒ„UвҖ”
the imperishable Lord.
Yet, the Supreme Person is other than these, who, having encompassed all the
three worlds, upholds and maintains all, and has been spoken of as the imperishable
Lord and the supreme Spirit.                                                                  (17)

=== PAGE 662 ===

* Chapter XV *
661
a definition of the Supreme Person or
PuruВ¶ottama. In other words, the Supreme
Person or PuruВ¶ottama is no other than the
all-supporting and all-pervading God who,
having entered the whole universe, upholds
the two categories Г«KВ¶araГӯ and Г«AkВ¶araГӯ
referred to under the common name of
Г«PuruВ¶aГӯ, and maintains all living beings.
The words Г«Who is spoken of as the
imperishable Lord and the Supreme SpiritГӯ
constitute another definition of the Supreme
Person. The idea is that the PuruВ¶ottama
referred to in this verse is no other than the
Supreme Spirit who, having interpenetrated
all the three worlds, perishes not even after
their dissolution and remains ever unaffected
and unchanged, who is the Controller and
Ruler as well as the almighty Lord of both
the Г«KВ¶araГӯ and Г«AkВ¶araГӯ PuruВ¶as and is at
the same time beyond all GuЖ’as, untainted
and the very Self of all.
The вҖәvetГҘвҖ№vatara UpaniВ¶ad contains the
following definition of the three categoriesГі
KВ¶ara, AkВ¶ara and вҲ«вҖ№vara:Гі
Г¬KВ¶ara is the same as PradhГҘna or PrakГҰti;
while its enjoyer, the immortal Self, is the
AkВ¶ara. The one Deity (PuruВ¶ottama) rules
over both PrakГҰti and Г…tmГҘГ® (I.10).*
ГҝSв—ҠГҠГ ЛҮГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠГғГӢГғГҠпЈҝЛҳвҖһUв—ҠЛҮГҠвҒ„UГҠЕ’ГҒВ¬ 
ГёГҠпЈҝГ»ГҠв—ҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҖўГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒSв—Ҡ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’пЈҝ Гё В¬ЛқГҒГ•ГғвҖ” В¬ГҲLВ§В·ГҠпЈҝГ»ГҠв—ҠвҖ”Г”H 18H
ГҝSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” because; ЛҮГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” the perishable (world of matter, also called the KВ¶etra); вҖўГғГӢГғвҖ” (am
wholly) beyond; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; вҖўЛҮГҠвҒ„UГҠГғЛңГ” to the imperishable (soul); вҖўГҒВ¬ too; Гё and; В©UГ»ГҠв—ҠвҖ” (am) superior;
вҖўГғвҖ” therefore; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ am; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ in the world; п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’пЈҝ in the Vedas (too); Гё and; В¬ЛқГҒГ•ГғвҖ” (I am) known;
В¬ГҲLВ§В·ГҠпЈҝГ»ГҠв—ҠвҖ” (as) the PuruВ¶ottama.
Since I am wholly beyond the perishable world of matter or KВ¶etra, and am
superior even to the imperishable soul, JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ, hence I am known as the PuruВ¶ottama
in the world as well as in the Vedas.                                                              (18)
soul, being a part of His own being, is
immortal and spiritual. Yet He is undoubtedly
superior to the soul inasmuch as, while the
soul rests in PrakГҰti, He is beyond PrakГҰti,
i.e., wholly above the GuЖ’as. Hence, while
the soul has limited knowledge, He is all-
knowing; the soul is the controlled, while He
is the controller; the soul is the worshipper,
while He is his lord and object of worship;
the soul has limited powers, while He is all-
powerful. Thus He is superior to the soul in
every way.
The indeclinables Г«YasmГҘtГӯ and Г«AtaВЁГӯ,
which are generally used to indicate a cause
and effect respectively, are intended to show
that what has been stated in the first half of
this verse justifies the claim of the Lord to
the title of Г«PuruВ¶ottamaГӯ.
By using the personal pronoun Г«AhamГӯ
(Г«IГӯ) in this verse, the Lord unfolds to Arjuna
the supreme mystery that He Himself is the
PuruВ¶ottama as defined in the preceding verse.
By speaking of Himself as beyond the
perishable, the Lord seeks to convey that He
is absolutely unconnected with, and entirely
different from, the KВ¶ara PuruВ¶a. In other
words, He is wholly unattached to the entire
world of matter, which is nothing but a
conglomeration of the three GuЖ’as or modes
of PrakГҰti and is perishable by nature, and
which has been referred to in Chapter XIII
under the name of Г«вҖәarвҲӮraГӯ (body) and Г«KВ¶etraГӯ
(field). By calling Himself superior to the
imperishable, the Lord intends to show that
He is certainly not beyond the imperishable
just as He is beyond the perishable; for the
* ЛҮГҠвҒ„Вў В¬ЛқЕ“ГҠЕёв—Ҡв—ҠГҺГғГҠЛҮГҠвҒ„ВўU вҖһUвҒ„UвҖ” ЛҮГҠвҒ„UГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёГҠп¬ӮГӢвүҘГҠГғпЈҝ Е’пЈҝп¬Ӯ вҲһвҲ‘В§вҖ”вҖ“

=== PAGE 663 ===

662
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The Lord now proceeds to glorify the man who thus recognizes Him as the Supreme
Person, and gives below his distinctive marks.
ГҝГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯв—ҠвҖҡГӘв—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҠпЈҝ ВЎГҠЕёГҠГҒГғ В¬ГҲLВ§В·ГҠпЈҝГ»ГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖҡ вҖҡп¬ӮВёГҒп¬ӮjВЎГҒГғ в—ҠГҠВў вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҠп¬ӮпЈҝЕёГ” Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғH 19H
ГҝвҖ” who; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” in this way; вҖўвҖҡГӘв—ҠГҚвҖҰUвҖ” the wise man; ВЎГҠЕёГҠГҒГғ realizes; В¬ГҲLВ§В·ГҠпЈҝГ»ГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” as the
Supreme Person; вҖҡвҖ” that; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГҒп¬ӮГғЛңГ” all-knowing man; Г·ВЎГҒГғ (constantly) worships; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me (the
all-pervading Lord) alone; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҠп¬ӮпЈҝЕё with his whole being; Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғ O descendant of Bharata,
Arjuna.
Arjuna, the wise man who thus realizes Me as the Supreme Person, knowing all,
he constantly worships Me (the all-pervading Lord) with his whole being.        (19)
who has not only realized the true character
of both KВ¶ara and AkВ¶ara, but knows the reality
about PuruВ¶ottama too, who is far superior to
both,Гіhe alone is Г«SarvavidГӯ or one who
possesses true knowledge of all entities; hence
he has been declared as such.
He who recognizes the Lord as
PuruВ¶ottama shifts his love from the entire
universe and focusses it wholly and solely on
God, the supreme Beloved. He employs his
reason in reposing full faith in the virtues, glory,
truth, mystery, sports, essential character and
greatness of God. He devotes his mind to the
reverent and loving thought of His names,
virtues, glory, pastimes and essential character
etc., employs his ears in hearing them, speech
in reciting and eyes in seeing them and renders
services to Him according to His behests,
taking everything as belonging to Him and
recognizing His presence everywhere and
gratifying all through the performance of His
obligatory duties. This is how he worships Him
with his whole being. And the fact that such
a man Г«worships Him with his whole beingГӯ
has been mentioned simply in order to
distinguish him as one who recognizes the Lord
as PuruВ¶ottama. The idea is that he, who comes
to recognize the Lord as beyond the KВ¶ara
and superior to the AkВ¶ara, constantly worships
God and God alone as mentioned above: this
is what constitutes the test of his recognizing
the Lord as PuruВ¶ottama.
The indeclinable Г«EvamГӯ refers to what
has been stated in the preceding two verses.
The personal pronoun Г«MГҘmГӯ in this verse
stands for the almighty, all-supporting and all-
pervading God, who is responsible for the
creation, maintenance and destruction etc., of
the whole universe, the greatest friend and
undisputed Ruler of all, adorned with all good
qualities, supremely compassionate, the greatest
lover and the inner controller of all. And he
who is fully convinced and reverently believes
that such a God is superior to both the KВ¶ara
and AkВ¶ara PuruВ¶as, as indicated in the
preceding two verses, that He is the supreme
PuruВ¶a who is both beyond the GuЖ’as and
adorned with all good qualities, who is with
and without form at the same time, and who
is manifest as well as unmanifest, is said to
know such God as Г«PuruВ¶ottama.Гӯ
Г«AsammВөuЕ’haГӯ (undeluded) is he whose
knowledge is free from doubt, misapprehension
and other faults, and who has no tinge of
delusion about him. The use of this word is,
therefore, intended to convey that he alone
truly knows, who recognizes вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a as
the almighty Lord or Supreme Person Himself,
and refuses to believe that he was an ordinary
human being.
Г«SarvavidГӯ is he who knows full well all
that is worth knowing. In this Chapter all entities
have been discussed under three heads, viz.,
KВ¶ara. AkВ¶ara and PuruВ¶ottama. Therefore, he

=== PAGE 664 ===

* Chapter XV *
663
Thus glorifying the man who recognizes Him as PuruВ¶ottama, the Lord now concludes
the chapter by pointing out the reward of grasping the teaching imparted in this chapter,
which He declares as most esoteric.
ГҹГҒГғ ВӘГҲsГ”Гғв—ҠВў вүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠГҒв—ҠЕ’в—ҠГҲQВўВ§ в—ҠГҝГҠЕёГүГҠГ”вҖ“
вҲһГғЕ’ЛңГ”вҖҷГҲЕ’ЛңГ”ГӨп¬ӮГҠ вҖҷГҲГҒhв—ҠГҠГЈSГҝГҠГ вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғвҲ‘ГҺВ§Г Гҝp Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғH 20H
ГҹГҒГғ thus, in this way; ВӘГҲsГ”Гғв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” most esoteric; вүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” gospel or teaching; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this; В©UQВ§в—ҠЛңГ” (has
been) imparted; в—ҠГҝГҠ by Me; вҖўЕёГүГҠ O sinless one; вҲһГғГғЛңГ” this; вҖҷГҲЕ’ЛңГ”ГӨп¬ӮГҠ grasping (in essence); вҖҷГҲГҒhв—ҠГҠЕёЛңГ”
truly wise; SГҝГҠГғЛңГ” (man) becomes; вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғвҲ‘ГҺВ§Г ГҝвҖ” fully satisfied; Гё and; Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғ Arjuna.
Arjuna, this most esoteric teaching has thus been imparted by Me; grasping it in
essence man becomes truly wise and his mission in life is accomplished.                 (20)
as He has done in this chapter; therefore, He
expects that Arjuna too should not communicate
this secret to an undeserving person. And
since this teaching has been imparted by the
almighty and all-knowing God Himself, it is
the quintessence of all the Vedas and other
sacred books. This is what the Lord seeks to
impress on ArjunaГӯs mind by stressing the
fact that the teaching has been imparted by
HimselfГіГ«MayГҘГӯ uktamГӯ.
He who, having fully realized the virtues,
glory, truth and essential character etc., of the
Lord, comes to recognize Him as no other
than the Supreme Person mentioned in verses
17 and 18 above, is said to have grasped this
teaching in essence. His wisdom consists in
directly realizing that Supreme Person or
God; and the man who realizes God will
have discharged all his obligationsГіattained
the fruit of them all. This is what is meant
by his having accomplished the mission of
his life.
By addressing Arjuna as Г«AnaghaГӯ
(sinless), the Lord seeks to convey that Arjuna
had a pure and unsullied heart, hence he was
qualified to hear and assimilate His most
esoteric teaching.
The noun вҖәГҘstramГӯ qualified by the
adjective Г«IdamГӯ and preceded by the
indeclinable Г«ItiГӯ refers to the chapter which
is going to conclude with the present verse;
viz., Chapter XV. Г«IdamГӯ signifies that which
is still in progress and Г«ItiГӯ marks the end of
it. They thus refer to the chapter which is
just going to conclude. And the chapter has
been designated as Г«вҖәГҘstraГӯ just by way of
respect.
By speaking of this teaching as
Г«GuhyatamamГӯ the Lord seeks to convey that
the virtues, glory, truth and mystery of God
with attributes form the principal theme of
this chapter; hence it should be kept most
secret. The Lord does not reveal before all
and sundry His virtues, glory, truth and divinity
Лҷ ГғГ вҖҡГҒЕ’ГҒГғ ГјГҠГӢв—ҠjВӘп¬ӮeГӢГғГҠвҖҡГҚВ¬ГҒЕёВ·Г вҖҡГҲ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГҝГҠВў
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠпЈҝ ГјГҠГӢвҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠВЎГҲВёЕёвҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’пЈҝ В¬ГҲLВ§В·ГҠпЈҝГ»ГҠв—ҠГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ
ЕёГҠв—Ҡ В¬@Е’вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГӨГҝГҠГҝвҖ”H 15H
Thus, in the UpaniВ¶ad sung by the Lord, the science of
Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue
between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and Arjuna, ends the
fifteenth chapter entitled Г¬The Yoga
of the Supreme Person.Г®
U

=== PAGE 665 ===

664
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Title of the
Chapter
Summary of
the Chapter
Лҷ
вҖәrвҲӮmadbhagavad-GвҲӮtГҘ
Chapter XVI
In the present chapter the Lord discusses separately and in detail, under the name of
divine properties, moral virtues and practices which are godly in character and conducive to
God-realization, and under the name of demoniac properties, evil propensities
and immoral practices which are devilish in character. This He does in order
that one may adopt the former and reject the latter after properly distinguish
ing between them. Hence this chapter has been designated as the Г¬Yoga of Discrimination
between the godly and demoniac properties.Г®
Describing in detail in verses 1 to 3 the marks of him who is born with divine
properties, the Lord discusses in brief the demoniac properties in the fourth. In the fifth He
declares that the divine properties are conducive to liberation, while the
demoniac propensities lead to bondage, and heartens Arjuna by telling him
that he is born with divine virtues. In the sixth He mentions two types of
created beingsГіthe godly group and the devilish groupГіand proposes to discuss the
demoniac properties in detail. Thereafter, verses 7 to 20 describe the evil impulses, evil
propensities and evil practices of men possessing a devilish nature, as well as the evil destiny
that awaits them after death. Declaring in the twentyfirst that lust, anger and greed, which
are the chief among the demoniac propensities, are the three gates of hell, the Lord proclaims
in the twentysecond that the SГҘdhaka who is free from these attains the supreme goal by
practising the divine virtues in a disinterested spirit. Condemning in the twentythird those
who having cast aside the scriptural ordinance are guided by their own will, the Lord
concludes the chapter by insisting in the twentyfourth that oneГӯs actions should be guided
by the scriptures.
In verse 15 of Chapter VII and verses 11 and 12 of Chapter IX it was stated that fools
who have embraced the demoniac and fiendish nature despise the Lord rather than adore
Him. And in verses 13 and 14 of Chapter IX the Lord declared that exalted
souls who have embraced the divine nature, knowing Him as the prime
source of all lives and imperishable, constantly worship Him in everyway
with exclusive love. But as other topics continued to engage His attention, the distinguishing
marks of the divine and demoniac temperaments could not be discussed on that occasion.
Then, in verse 19 of Chapter XV it was pointed out that those illumined saints who recognize
the Lord as the Supreme Person worship Him with their whole being. This naturally fills one
with curiosity as to the marks of those saintly beings who have embraced the divine nature
and, having recognized the Lord as the Supreme Person, worship Him with their whole
being, as well as of those ignorant men who, having embraced the demoniac nature, adore
Him not. Therefore, in order to describe in detail the distinctive marks and disposition of the
two types of men, the Lord now introduces the present chapter. The opening three verses
Link of the
Discourse

=== PAGE 666 ===

* Chapter XVI *
665
of this chapter discuss in detail the natural characteristics of men of a SГҘttvika disposition
who are endowed with divine properties.
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲUп¬ӮГҠГё
вҖўГ·ГҝВў 
вҖҡГ»п¬ӮвҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҲГҒhГҙГҠГҠВёЕёГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҲҡГҝп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГҒГғвҖ”Г”вҖ“
Е’ГҠЕёВў Е’в—Ҡp ГҝГҙГҠp Sп¬ӮГҠГӨГҝГҠГҝSГғВ¬ вҖўГҠВЎВёп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ”H 1H
вҖўГ·ГҝUв—ҠЛңГ” (absolute) fearlessness; вҖҡГ»п¬ӮвҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҲГҒhвҖ” perfect purity of mind; ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвҲҡГҝп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГҒГғвҖ” constant
fixity in the Yoga of meditation for the sake of Self-realization; Е’ГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” charity (in its SГҘttvika
form); Е’в—ҠвҖ” control of the senses; ГёГ” and; ГҝГҙГҠвҖ” worship of God and other deities, as well as of
oneГӯs elders, including the performance of Agnihotra (pouring oblation into the sacred fire)
and other sacred duties; Гё and; Sп¬ӮГҠГӨГҝГҠГҝвҖ” study or teaching of the Vedas and other sacred
books and chanting of GodГӯs names and praises; ГғВ¬вҖ”Г” Suffering hardships for the discharge
of oneГӯs sacred obligations; вҖўГҠВЎВёп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” uprightness of mind as well as of the body and senses.
Absolute fearlessness, perfect purity of mind, constant fixity in the Yoga of
meditation for the sake of Self-realization, and even so, charity in its SГҘttvika form,
control of the senses, worship of God and other deities as well as of oneГӯs elders
including the performance of Agnihotra (pouring oblations into the sacred fire) and
other sacred duties, study and teaching of the Vedas and other sacred books as well
as the chanting of GodГӯs names and glories, suffering hardships for the discharge of
oneГӯs sacred obligations and uprightness of mind as well as of the body and senses; (1)
food, clothing, knowledge, medicine and other
things in a disinterested spirit, as a matter of
duty and with due regard to the place, time,
and recipient of the gift (XVII.20).
Г«DamaГӯ consists in diverting the senses
from their objects and bringing them under
oneГӯs own control.
Г«YajВӨaГӯ means offering worship to God
and other deities, the BrГҘhmaЖ’as or members
of the priestly class, saints, a newcomer and
oneГӯs own parents and other elders, and
includes all sacrificial performances such
as Havana (offering daily oblations to the
sacred fire), BalivaiвҖ№vadeva (offering a
portion of the daily meal to all creatures
and presenting oblations to fire before meals)
etc.
Г«SvГҘdhyГҘyaГӯ includes the study and
teaching of the Vedas and all other sacred
books dealing with the virtues, glory, truth,
essential character and divine pastimes of
God, such as the great Epics and PurГҘЖ’as,
Nervous excitement caused by the
apprehension of losing something which is
agreeable and meeting with something which
is unwelcome is called Г«BhayaГӯ or fear, e.g.,
the fear of loss of prestige, fear of ignominy,
fear of scandal, fear of ailment, fear of
punishment by law, fear of ghosts and evil
spirits and fear of death etc. The total absence
of all these fears is called Г«AbhayaГӯ or absolute
fearlessness.
The inner sense or mind is called Г«SattvaГӯ.
Hence Sattva-saвүҲsuddhiГӯ means the complete
elimination from the mind of all morbid feelings
such as partiality and prejudice, delight and
grief, the feelings of Г«IГӯ and Г«mineГӯ infatuation
and jealousy etc.,  as well as of impure and
sinful impulses of all kinds.
True knowledge of God is called Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ,
and constant absorption of mind in the thought
of a God with a view to His realization is
what is meant hereby Г«JВӨГҘnayogavyavasthitiГӯ.
Г«DГҘnaГӯ (charity) consists in giving away

=== PAGE 667 ===

666
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
and the chanting of His names and praises
etc.
Г«TapasГӯ consists in mortifying oneГӯs mind
and senses by suffering hardships for the
discharge of oneГӯs sacred obligations. This is,
however not the same Г«TapasГӯ as has been
discussed in Chapter XVII under three separate
heads, in so far as it relates to the body, speech
and mind; for items like non-violence,
truthfulness, purity Г«SvГҘdhyГҘyaГӯ and Г…rjava etc.,
which have been included in Г«TapasГӯ in that
chapter, have been mentioned here separately.
the senses and mind.
The excitement coupled with a feeling
of aversion that a man feels in his mind either
due to his bad temper or when he is subjected
to insult, injury or calumny, or when someone
acts against his will, abuses him or commits
a wrong in his presence, is Г«KrodhaГӯ in its
internal form. This internal feeling of
indignation subsequently seeks outer expression
in the form of a burning sensation in the
body and mind, a distortion of the face and
blood-shot eyes. All these betoken an advanced
stage of anger. Both these stages, the former
of which burns the angry man alone, while
the latter burns the object of anger too, are
covered by the term Г«KrodhaГӯ or anger.
Absence of anger in all these forms is referred
to in this verse as Г«AkrodhaГӯ.
Г«TyГҘgaГӯ or renunciation, in this verse,
consists in disclaiming the doership in
Inflicting pain in any shape, whether in
an intense, moderate or mild form, out of
greed, ignorance or anger on any living
being whatsoever at any time or place,
personally or causing another to do so, even
countenancing anyone who does so,Гіall these
are acts of violence indeed. Taking a vow
not to perpetrate such violence on any account
through mind, speech or body, that is to say,
wishing ill to none, taking particular care not
to use abusive language, harsh words or
harmful language with respect to another,
and refusing to kill, torment or harm anyone
through oneГӯs bodyГіall these are comprised
in nonviolence.
Truthfulness or veracity consists in
taking all possible care to speak agreeable
and wholesome words in an honest attempt
to represent faithfully to others what has
been seen, heard or experienced through
вҖўГҒвҖһВўUвҖҡГҠ вҖҡГ Гҝв—ҠвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“SГ ГҝГҠВӘвҖ” вүҘГҠГҠГҒГЈГғвҒ„UВ¬Г’вүҘГҠГҲЕёв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
Е’ГҝГҠ Г·ГҚГғпЈҝcп¬ӮГ”вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲӮГҲUГҘГ п¬ӮВў в—ҠГҠЕ’Вёп¬ӮВў OГ”UГӢвҒ„UГёГҠВ¬вҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ”H 2H
вҖўГҒвҖһВўUвҖҡГҠГ” non-violence in thought, word and deed; вҖҡГ Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” truthfulness and geniality of
speech; вҖўвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“вҖ” absence of anger even on provocation; Г ГҝГҠВӘвҖ” disclaiming the doership in
respect of action; вүҘГҠГҠГҒГЈГғвҖ” quietude or composure of mind; вҖўВ¬Г’вүҘГҠГҲЕёв—ҠЛңГ” abstaining from slander; Е’ГҝГҠ
compassion; Г·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ towards all creatures; вҖўвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲӮГҲUГҘГ п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” absence of attachment to the objects of
senses even during their contact with the senses; в—ҠГҠЕ’Вёп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” mildness; OГ”UГӢвҖ” a sense of shame in
violating the injunctions of the scriptures or even established conventions; вҖўГёГҠВ¬вҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” (and)
abstaining from frivolous pursuits;
Non-violence in thought, word and deed, truthfulness and geniality of speech,
absence of anger even on provocation, disclaiming doership in respect of actions,
quietude or composure of mind, abstaining from slander, compassion towards all
creatures, absence of attachment to the objects of senses even during their contact with
the senses, mildness, sense of shame in transgressing against the scriptures or social
conventions, and abstaining from frivolous pursuits;                                          (2)

=== PAGE 668 ===

* Chapter XVI *
667
respect of all actions. Such renunciation is
preceded, in the case of the JВӨГҘnayogвҲӮ, by
the belief that it is the GuЖ’as alone that are
acting on the GuЖ’as, and that the SГҘdhaka
has nothing to do with those actions; while
the devotee believes that he is a mere puppet
in the hands of the Lord, that it is the Lord
who causes his mind, speech and body to
perform all their functions just as He pleases
that the devotee is neither capable of doing
anything by himself nor does he actually do
anything. Renunciation can also be taken to
consist in giving up the feeling of meum,
attachment, the desire for fruit and self-interest
in respect of oneГӯs actions even though
continuing to perform oneГӯs obligatory duties.
Or again it may mean the renunciation of all
objects, thoughts and activities which hinder
oneГӯs spiritual progress.
Г«вҖәГҘntiГӯ is that SГҘttvika type of placidity
which appears in a mind which is free from
all distractions and has banished all thought
of the world.
Discovering or exposing the faults of
others, and even so reproaching or slandering
another go by the name of Г«PaiвҖ№unaГӯ. And
total absence of this tendency is called
Г«ApaiвҖ№unaГӯ.
The urge that a man feels in his mind to
relieve by any means whatsoever the suffering
of any living being who is found in distress,
without expecting any return, and to make
him happy in everyway is called DayГҘ or
compassion. Taking a vow not to inflict pain
on another is called Г«AhiвүҲsГҘГӯ or non-violence,
and the impulse to make others happy is known
by the name of Г«DayГҘГӯ. Here lies the difference
between Г«AhiвүҲsГҘГӯ and Г«DayГҘГӯ.
Feeling attracted towards the objects of
senses on their coming into contact with the
senses, and the longing that is felt in the
mind for the possession of such objects when
one sees others enjoying them is called
Г«LoluptvaГӯ; and the total absence of this
Г«LoluptvaГӯ is what they call Г«AloluptvaГӯ.
Shedding sternness in every form when
the mind, speech and behaviour of a man
become extremely mild, he is said to have
acquired what is known as Г«MГҘrdava.
Having resolved not to violate the
injunctions of the Vedas and other sacred
books or even the established usage, the
hesitation that one feels in violating them is
known as Г«HrвҲӮГӯ.
Rocking oneГӯs hands and feet etc., tearing
pieces of straw, scratching the ground under
oneГӯs feet indulging in incoherent talks and
wild thoughts and similar other fruitless
activities of the hands and feet, speech and
mind constitute what is known as Г«CГҘpalaГӯ; it
is also called Г«PramГҘda; Г«AcГҘpalaГӯ is the total
negation of Г«CГҘpalaГӯ.
ГғпЈҝВЎвҖ” ЛҮГҠв—ҠГҠ Е“ГҺГҒГғвҖ” вүҘГҠГҠГ’Гёв—ҠВәЛқГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҠпЈҝ ЕёГҠГҒГғв—ҠГҠГҒЕёГғГҠвҖ“
Г·п¬ӮГҒГЈГғ вҖҡГӘВ¬Е’Вў Е’Г’п¬ӮГӢв—ҠГҒГ·ВЎГҠГғSГҝ Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғГ”H 3H
ГғпЈҝВЎвҖ” sublimity; ЛҮГҠв—ҠГҠ forbearance; Е“ГҺГҒГғвҖ” fortitude; вүҘГҠГҠГ’Гёв—ҠЛңГ” external purity; вҖўВәЛқГҠпЈҝвҖһUвҖ” bearing
enmity to none; ЕёГҠГҒГғв—ҠГҠГҒЕёГғГҠГ” absence of self-esteem; Г·п¬ӮГҒГЈГғ are (the marks); вҖҡГӘВ¬Е’в—ҠЛңГ” Е’Г’п¬ӮГӢв—ҠЛңГ” the gifts
divine; вҖўГҒГ·ВЎГҠГғSГҝ of him who is born with; Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғ O descendant of Bharata, Arjuna.
Sublimity, forbearance, fortitude, external purity, bearing enmity to none and
absence of self-esteemГіthese are, O Arjuna, the marks of him, who is born with the
divine endowments.                                                                                      (3)
who are given to the pursuit of the pleasures
of sense and are of a vile disposition to
Г«TejasГӯ is that peculiar property, possessed
by noble souls, which compels even those

=== PAGE 669 ===

668
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
desist from wrong-doing in their presence
and take to noble pursuits according to their
advice.
Harbouring no intention to punish, or
cause to be punished, a wrong-doer, having
no inclination to retaliate, treating his offences
as no offence at all and ignoring them
altogetherГіthis is what they call Г«KВ¶amГҘГӯ or
forbearance. Г«AkrodhaГӯ has been characterized
as a mere negation of anger, whereas
forbearance precludes the desire even to punish
an offence according to law. Here lies the
difference between Г«AkrodhaГӯ and Г«KВ¶amГҘГӯ.
To remain self-possessed even when
confronted with the greatest calamity, danger
or sorrow, and not to deviate from the path
of righteousness or duty under the influence
of lust, anger, fear or greed in called Г«DhГҰtiГӯ
or fortitude.
Money is purified through honest and
truthful dealings, even so oneГӯs diet is purified
through provisions purchased with such
money, oneГӯs conduct is edified through
appropriate behaviour and the body is purified
through cleaning with water and clay etc. All
this is included in external purity. Internal
purity has been separately mentioned in verse
1 under the name of Г«SattvasaвүҲвҖ№uddhiГӯ.
Bearing no grudge or enmity in the least
degree even towards those who behave as
enemies is called Г«AdrohaГӯ.
Regarding oneself as superior, exalted
or worthy of adoration and cherishing a special
craving for honour, fame, prestige and respect
etc., and feeling overjoyed on attaining these
even though not hankering after them,Гіthis
is what they call Г«AtimГҘnitГҘГӯ or overestimating
oneself. And the total negation of these is
called Г«NГҘtimГҘnitГҘГӯ.
Г«DevaГӯ means God. Therefore, Г«DaivвҲӮ
SampadГӯ is a collective name for the noble
virtues and practices which are conducive to
God-realization and are divine in character.
They are also known by the name of Г«DaivвҲӮ
PrakГҰtiГӯ or divine nature.
The latter half of this verse is intended
to convey that the above two and a half verses
viz., verses 1 and 2 and the first half of verse
3 enumerate under the name of Г«DaivвҲӮ SampadГӯ
twentysix noble virtues and practices.
Therefore, he alone who is naturally endowed
with these virtues or who has acquired them
through practice is said to be possessed of
Г«DaivвҲӮ SampadГӯ or the divine gift.
Having thus described the marks of him who is endowed with Г«DaivвҲӮ SampadГӯ, which
is worth acquiring, the Lord now discusses in brief the marks of him, who is possessed of
demoniac properties, which are worth renouncing.
Е’ГӘГ·ГҠпЈҝ Е’В¬ГҠпЈҝВёЛҳГҒГ·в—ҠГҠЕёp вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“вҖ” В¬ГҠLВ§cГҝв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ ГёвҖ“
вҖўГҙГҠГҠЕёВў ГёГҠГҒГ·ВЎГҠГғSГҝ В¬ГҠГ•Вё вҖҡГӘВ¬Е’в—ҠГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„UГӢв—ҠЛңГ”H 4H
Е’ГӘГ·вҖ” hypocrisy; Е’В¬ВёвҖ” arrogance; вҖўГҒГ·в—ҠГҠЕёвҖ” pride; Гё and; вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“вҖ” anger; В¬ГҠLВ§cГҝв—ҠЛңГ” harshness; вҲһп¬ӮГ”
too; Гё and; вҖўГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” ignorance; Гё and; вҖўГҒГ·ВЎГҠГғSГҝ (as marks) of him who is born with; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O
son of PaГҰthГҘ, Arjuna; вҖҡГӘВ¬Е’в—ҠЛңГ” вҖўГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„UГӢв—ҠЛңГ” demoniac properties.
Hypocrisy, arrogance, pride and anger, harshness and ignorance tooГіthese are
the marks of him, who is born with demoniac properties.
(4)
peity, generosity, devotion, religious discipline
or practice of Yoga or assuming any other
role which may serve oneГӯs end, for the sake
Г«DambhaГӯ or hypocrisy consists in posing
as a virtuous man, a devotee, a man of
wisdom or a saint or making a false show of

=== PAGE 670 ===

* Chapter XVI *
669
of honour, fame, prestige and respect etc.,
out of cupidity or with intent to cheat another.
Г«DarpaГӯ or arrogance is the feeling of
pride arising out of a consciousness of oneГӯs
learning, wealth, extensive family, noble birth,
youth, strength and power etc., on account of
which man look down upon others and shows
disrespect to them.
Г«AbhimГҘnaГӯ or pride consists in regarding
oneself as superior, exalted or worthy of
adoration, hankering after honour, fame,
prestige and respect etc., and feeling delighted
on attaining these.
The excitement coupled with a feeling of
aversion that a man feels in his mind either
due to his bad temper or due to association
with men who are irascible by nature, or when
he is subjected to insult, injury or calumny, or
when someone acts against his will, abuses
him or commits a wrong in his presenceГі
which rouses a spirit of revenge in his mind,
suffuses his eyes with blood, makes his lips
throb, distorts his face, deprives him of his
reason, and dulls his sense of duty.
Г«PГҘruВ¶yaГӯ is sternness or the total negation
of mildness. Railing at or taunting another
and speaking bitter words to anyone constitute
harshness of speech; even so, want of humility
is sternness of body and the spirit of revenge
and the feeling of hard-heartedness as opposed
to forbearance and compassion represent
sternness of mind.
Г«AjВӨГҘna, or ignorance here means lack
of correct knowledge about truth and untruth,
virtue and sin etc., or forming a wrong notion
about them.
Those unbelievers who are ungodly and
deny His existence are called Asuras; and the
evil propensities and immoral practices that
are found to exist in them are known as the
demoniac properties or Г«Г…surвҲӮ SampadГӯ as
the Lord chooses to call them.
Describing thus the marks of those who are endowed with the divine and the demoniac
nature, respectively, the Lord now tells us the fruit of the two and cheers Arjuna by declaring
him as born with the divine virtues.
Е’Г’п¬ӮГӢ вҖҡГӘВ¬ГҒmв—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҠГҠГҝ ГҒЕёвҖҷГЈЕ“ГҠГҝГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„UГӢ в—ҠГғГҠвҖ“
в—ҠГҠ вүҘГҠГҲГёвҖ” вҖҡГӘВ¬Е’Вў Е’Г’п¬ӮГӢв—ҠГҒГ·ВЎГҠГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒвҖҡ В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬ӮГ”H 5H
Е’Г’п¬ӮГӢ вҖҡГӘВ¬ГғЛңГ” the divine endowment; ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҠГҠГҝ as conducive to liberation; ГҒЕёвҖҷГЈЕ“ГҠГҝ as
conducive to bondage; вҖўГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„UГӢ (and) the demoniac gift; в—ҠГғГҠ has been recognized; в—ҠГҠ вүҘГҠГҲГёвҖ”
(therefore) grieve not; вҖҡГӘВ¬Е’в—ҠЛңГ” Е’Г’п¬ӮГӢв—ҠЛңГ” the divine propensities; вҖўГҒГ·ВЎГҠГғвҖ” вҖўГҒвҖҡ you are born with;
В¬ГҠГЎВ«Uп¬Ӯ O son of PГҘЖ’Е’u, Arjuna.
The divine endowment has been recognized as conducive to liberation, and the
demoniac one as leading to bondage; grieve not, Arjuna, for you are born with divine
propensities.                                                                                  (5)
sacred books, as well as of holy men. This is
what is meant by the statement that the divine
gift has been recognized as conducive to
liberation.
Even so, the demoniac gift briefly
mentioned in verse 4 aboveГіas consisting of
evil propensities and immoral practices, which
The divine gift as consisting of the
SГҘttvika virtues and practices enumerated in
verses 1 to 3 above secures absolute and
lasting freedom from the bondage of mundane
existence and unites one with God, who is
Truth, Consciousness and Bliss, solidified.
Such is the opinion of the Vedas and other

=== PAGE 671 ===

670
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
have the element of Tamas with an  admixture
Rajas preponderating in them, involves man
in the trammels of worldly existence and leads
to his downfall. The Vedas and other scriptures
as well as holy men bear testimony to this fact.
This is what is meant by the declaration that
the demoniac gift has been recognized as
conducive to bondage.
The latter half of this verse is intended
to inspire Arjuna by assuring him that he was
naturally endowed with all the virtues
constituting the divine gift. And since the
latter brings about freedom from the bondage
of worldly existence, there could be no doubt
about his attaining blessedness. Hence he
had no reason to grieve for.
The divine gift has been dealt with at length at the beginning of this chapter as well
as before, but the demoniac gift has been very briefly touched so far. The Lord, therefore,
takes up the subject now in the order to discuss in detail the nature as well as the conduct
and behaviour of men possessing a demoniac disposition.
mГҠГ’ Г·ГҚГғвҖҡВӘГҠГ’Вё вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ЛҳГҒSв—ҠГЈЕ’Г’п¬Ӯ вҖўГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„U вҲһп¬Ӯ ГёвҖ“
Е’Г’п¬ӮГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮSГғвҒ„UвүҘГҠвҖ” В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§ вҖўГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„ВўU В¬ГҠГ•Вё в—ҠпЈҝ oГҺГЎГҠГҲГ”H 6H
mГҠГ’ Г·ГҚГғвҖҡВӘГҠГ’Вё (there are) two types of created beings or men; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ вҖўГҒSв—ҠЕёЛңГ” in this world; Е’Г’п¬ӮвҖ”
of those, the one possessing a divine nature; вҖўГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„UвҖ” the other possessing a demoniac
disposition; вҲһп¬Ӯ only; Гё and; Е’Г’п¬ӮвҖ” (viz.) the one possessing a divine nature; ГҒп¬ӮSГғвҒ„UвүҘГҠвҖ” in detail;
В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§вҖ” has been dealt with; вҖўГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” (about) those possessing a demoniac disposition; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son
of PГҰthГҘ, Arjuna; в—ҠпЈҝ from Me; oГҺГЎГҠГҲ (now) hear (in detail).
There are only two types of men in this world, Arjuna,Гіthe one possessing a
divine nature and the other possessing a demoniac disposition. Of those, the one
possessing a divine nature has been dealt with at length; now hear in detail from Me
about those possessing demoniac disposition.                                           (6)
the other, which is dominated by Tamas
blended with Rajas, possesses a demoniac
disposition. Men possessing a fiendish or
delusive nature should be taken as included
in the type possessing a demoniac disposition.
The nature, conduct and behaviour of
those possessing a divine disposition have
been discussed at length in verses 1 to 3 of
this chapter as well as in other chapters; but
the nature, conduct and behaviour of those
possessing a demoniac disposition have been
touched only briefly. Therefore, the Lord
now undertakes to describe them in detail
in the following verses in order that they
may be eschewed in toto. This is what is
sought to be conveyed in the latter half of
this verse.
Г«SargaГӯ means creation, and Г«BhВөutasargaГӯ
signifies an order of created beings. Г«Asmin
lokeГӯ refers to the world of human beings
and the present chapter discusses the
characteristics of human beings; that is why
Г«BhВөutasargauГӯ has been translated as two
orders or types of human beings.
The use of the particle Г«EvaГӯ, which
restricts the number of the types of human
beings to two only, is intended to convey
that although there are many types of human
beings, the two mentioned in the present
verse are the chief among them, as other
types are included in them.
Of the two types of human beings
mentioned here, the one which is SГҘttvika in
character possesses a divine disposition; while

=== PAGE 672 ===

* Chapter XVI *
671
Such action alone is worth performing
or binding upon man as is conducive to his
true well-being here as well as hereafter.
Man should undertake such action only. And
such action as is attended with evil
consequences is worth eschewing and one
should abstain from that. The first half of this
verse is intended to convey that those possessing
a demoniac disposition never realize that they
should undertake only such actions as are
worth undertaking and should abstain from
those which are worth eschewing; hence
they are guided in their activities by their
own whims or caprices.
Г«вҖәaucaГӯ signifies external as well as
internal purity, which has been discussed at
length in the commentary on XIII.7; Г«Г…cГҘraГӯ
comprises such noble activities as form an
inseparable part of such purity; and Г«SatyaГӯ
consists in speaking words which are sincere,
wholesome and true, as has been shown in
the commentary on verse 2 of this very
chapter. Men possessing a demoniac disposition
have none of these virtues; on the other
hand, their life is marred by impurity,
immorality and mendacity.
Thus inviting Arjuna to hear attentively the marks of those possessing a demoniac
disposition, the Lord now proceeds to describe them.
В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠВў Гё ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠВў Гё ВЎЕёГҠ Её ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҲвҒ„UГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„UГҠвҖ”вҖ“
Её вүҘГҠГҠГ’ГёВў ЕёГҠГҒВ¬ ГёГҠГёГҠвҒ„UГҠпЈҝ Её вҖҡГ ГҝВў ГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ ГҒп¬ӮlГғпЈҝH 7H
В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” right activity; Гё and; ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” right abstinence from activity; Гё even; ВЎЕёГҠвҖ” men; Её
not; ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҲвҖ” know; вҖўГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„UГҠвҖ” possessing a demoniac disposition; Её neither; вүҘГҠГҠГ’Гёв—ҠЛңГ” purity (internal or
external); Её nor; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; Гё and; вҖўГҠГёГҠвҒ„UвҖ” (good) conduct; Её nor; вҖҡГ Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” truthfulness; ГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ in
them; ГҒп¬ӮlГғпЈҝ there is.
Men possessing a demoniac disposition know not what is right activity and what
is right abstinence from activity. Hence they possess neither purity (external or
internal) nor good conduct, nor even truthfulness.                                      (7)
Thus showing lack of discrimination, purity and good conduct etc., in those possessing
a demoniac disposition, the Lord now describes their atheistic outlook.
вҖўвҖҡГ Гҝв—ҠВ¬ЛқГҒГғDГ”ВўU 
ГғпЈҝ 
ВЎВӘЕ’ГҠвҖһГҲUвҒ„UЕёГӢEвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖўВ¬вҒ„USВ¬вҒ„UвҖҡГӘГ·ГҚГғВў 
ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠГЈГҝГ вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҖһГ’UГғГҲвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ”H 8H
вҖўвҖҡГ Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” having no reality, absolutely unreal; вҖўВ¬ЛқГҒГғDГ”Uв—ҠЛңГ” (is) without any foundation; ГғпЈҝ these
people (men possessing a demoniac disposition); ВЎВӘГғЛңГ” the world; вҖўГҠвҖһГҲUвҖ” say; вҖўЕёГӢEвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” (and)
godless; вҖўВ¬вҒ„USВ¬вҒ„UвҖҡГӘГ·ГҚГғв—ҠЛңГ” brought forth by mutual union (of the male and female); ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” вҖўГЈГҝГғЛңГ”
what else (than this); вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҖһГ’UГғГҲвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” (therefore) conceived in lust.
Men possessing a demoniac disposition say this world is without any foundation,
absolutely unreal and godless, brought forth by mutual union of the male and female
and hence conceived in lust; what else than this?                                     (8)
universe, consisting of animate and inanimate
creation, has no basis in the shape of God or
the moral law nor has it any abiding reality.
The present verse represents the arbitrary
and fanciful ideas of those who possess a
demoniac disposition. They believe that this

=== PAGE 673 ===

672
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
That is to say, no living  being had any
existence prior to its birth nor does a creature
have any life after death, nor does it have
any creator, controller or ruler like God; it
has been brought forth by mutual union of
the male and female and it has no other
object to fulfil except the gratification of
carnal desires.
This naturally tempts one to enquire the nature and conduct of those who hold such
atheistic views. Anticipating this query the Lord now describes the distinctive traits of such
unbelievers in the following four verses.
вҲһГғГҠВў Е’ГҺГҒCГ”Uв—Ҡп¬ӮCГ”UГЁГҝ ЕёCГ”UГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёГҠпЈҝЛҳГҖВ¬вҖҷГҲhГҝвҖ”Г”вҖ“
В¬ЛқГ·п¬ӮГЈГ ГҝГҲВӘЛқвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГЎГҠвҖ” ЛҮГҠГҝГҠГҝ ВЎВӘГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒвҖһUГғГҠвҖ”H 9H
вҲһГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” this; Е’ГҺГҒCГ”Uв—ҠЛңГ” (false) view; вҖўп¬ӮCГ”UГЁГҝГ” clinging to; ЕёCГ”UГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёвҖ”Г” those who have lost their self;
вҖўГҖВ¬вҖҷГҲhГҝвҖ”Г” slow-witted; В¬ЛқГ·п¬ӮГҒГЈГғ prove equal; В©UВӘЛқвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГЎГҠвҖ”Г” of terrible deeds; ЛҮГҠГҝГҠГҝ ВЎВӘГғвҖ” to the
destruction of the world; вҖўГҒвҖһUГғГҠвҖ” foes (of all).
Clinging to this false view, these slow-witted men of vile disposition and terrible
deeds, are enemies of mankind, bent on destruction of the world.
(9)
too. And they habitually perform with their
mind, speech and body gruesome deeds that
tend to intimidate, oppress and exterminate
the animate and inanimate creation.
Again, whatever these people do with
their intellect, mind, speech or body during
their lifetime is solely intended to torment
or obliterate the entire creation consisting
of animate and inanimate beings. This is
what is meant by the statement that they are
only capable of bringing ruination to the
world.
The activities of these men of a demoniac
disposition are all governed by the atheistic
outlook mentioned above; this is what is
meant by the words Г«EtГҘвүҲ dГҰВ¶ВўiвүҲ avaВ¶Вўabhya.Гӯ
These men of atheistic persuasions deny
the existence of the soul; they are body-
centred or materialists. Hence their nature
gets debased; they never feel inclined to
perform any virtuous deed. All their resolves
are made with an eye to sensuous enjoyment.
Their mind is ever busy hatching evil designs
against others; in this way they harm themselves
вҲ‘В§ГҠв—Ҡв—ҠГҠГҒГјГҠГ Гҝ Е’ГҲcВ¬ГҚвҒ„ВўU Е’ГӘГ·в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЕ’ГҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҠЕ’ЛңГ”ВӘГҺвҖһUГӢГ п¬ӮГҠвҖҡЕ’ЛңГ”ВӘЛқГҠвҖһUГҠГЈВ¬Лқп¬ӮГғВёГЈГғпЈҝЛҳвүҘГҠГҲГҒГёп¬ӮЛқГғГҠвҖ” H 10H
вҲ‘В§ГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” longing; вҖўГҠГҒГјГҠГ Гҝ holding on to; Е’ГҲcВ¬ГҚвҒ„в—ҠЛңГ” insatiable; Е’ГӘГ·в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЕ’ГҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ”Г” (men) full of
hypocrisy, pride and arrogance; в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҠГғЛңГ” through ignorance; ВӘГҺвҖһUГӢГ п¬ӮГҠ hold on; вҖўвҖҡЕ’ЛңГ”ВӘЛқГҠвҖһUГҠЕёЛңГ” false
doctrines; В¬Лқп¬ӮГғВёГЈГғпЈҝ move (in this world); вҖўвүҘГҠГҲГҒГёп¬ӮЛқГғГҠвҖ” men of impure conduct.
Cherishing insatiable desires and holding on to false doctrines through ignorance,
these men of impure conduct move in this world, full of hypocrisy, pride and
arrogance.                                                                                  (10)
selfish ends in the shape of honour, wealth,
adoration and prestige etc. Г«MГҘnaГӯ or pride
consists in regarding oneself as worthy of
honour or adoration; and Г«MadaГӯ or arrogance
Г«DambhaГӯ or hypocrisy consists in
assuming according to the needs of the
occasion an appearance which gives one an
air of superiority, in order to achieve oneГӯs

=== PAGE 674 ===

* Chapter XVI *
673
is the same as remaining intoxicated with the
pride of oneГӯs fine person, merit, birth, power,
learning, rank, wealth and progeny etc. All
these evils are present in men of a demoniac
disposition; hence they have been spoken of
as Г«DambhamГҘna madГҘnvitГҘВЁГӯ.
The Г«KГҘmaГӯ or desire to acquire the
various enjoyments of the world can never be
satisfied; hence it has been characterized as
Г«DuВ¶pВөuramГӯ or insatiable. And entertaining in
oneГӯs mind a firm resolve to satisfy this longing
is what is meant by cherishing such a longing.
Evolving heretic doctrines of various
kinds, they remain obstinately clinging to
them. This is what is meant by their embracing
false doctrines.
Г«AвҖ№ucivratГҘВЁГӯ means that their diet, their
mode of living, their manner of talking, their
trade and commerce, their monetary transactions
and their social dealings and behaviour, all
are evil and governed by heterodox principles.
The verb Г«PravartanteГӯ shows that these
people are guided in their behaviour by their
own whims or caprices.
ГҒГёГЈГғГҠв—ҠВ¬ГҒвҒ„Uв—ҠпЈҝГҝГҠВў Гё В¬ЛқвҲӮUГҝГҠГЈГғГҠв—ҠГҲВ¬ГҠГҒГјГҠГғГҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠпЈҝВ¬Г·ГҠпЈҝВӘВ¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠ вҲһГғГҠп¬ӮГҒЕ’ГҒГғ ГҒЕёГҒpГғГҠвҖ”H 11H
ГҒГёГЈГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” cares; вҖўВ¬ГҒвҒ„Uв—ҠпЈҝГҝГҠв—ҠЛңГ” innumerable; Гё and; В¬ЛқвҲӮUГҝГҠГЈГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” ending (only) with death; В©UВ¬ГҠГҒГјГҠГғГҠвҖ”
giving themselves up to; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠпЈҝВ¬Г·ГҠпЈҝВӘВ¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠвҖ” devoted to the enjoyment of sensuous pleasures;
вҲһГғГҠп¬ӮГғЛңГ” this much (is joy); ГҹГҒГғ so; ГҒЕёГҒpГғГҠвҖ” (are) firm in their belief.
Giving themselves up to innumerable cares ending only with death, they remain
devoted to the enjoyment of sensuous pleasures and are firm in their belief that this
is the highest limit of joy.                                                                (11)
luxuries of various kinds is the sole aim of
their existence. Their life is thus wholly directed
towards the realization of this end and they
are fully convinced that the enjoyment of
sensuous pleasure is the only joy worth the
same. This is the idea brought out in the
latter half of this verse.
The cares with which these people are
engrossed are so limitless that they can neither
be numbered nor can their extent be gauged.
They do not cease till a whole lifetime is over
and persist till the last moment. This is what is
meant by the first half of this verse.
The accumulation and enjoyment of
вҖўГҠвүҘГҠГҠВ¬ГҠвүҘГҠвүҘГҠГғГ’вҖҷВёhГҠвҖ” вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“В¬вҒ„UГҠГҝГЎГҠГҠвҖ”вҖ“
ГҹВёвҖһUГЈГғпЈҝ 
вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГ·ГҠпЈҝВӘГҠГ•Вёв—ҠГЈГҝГҠГҝпЈҝЕёГҠГ•ВёвҖҡ@ГҝГҠЕёЛңГ”H 12H
вҖўГҠвүҘГҠГҠВ¬ГҠвүҘГҠвүҘГҠГғГ’вҖ” by a hundred ties of expectation; вҖҷhГҠвҖ” held in bondage;
вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“В¬вҒ„UГҠГҝГЎГҠГҠвҖ” wholly giving themselves up to lust and anger; ГҹВёвҖһUГЈГғпЈҝ strive (to obtain);
вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГ·ГҠпЈҝВӘГҠГ•Вёв—ҠЛңГ” for the enjoyment of sensuous pleasures; вҖўГЈГҝГҠГҝпЈҝЕё by unfair means; вҖўГ•ВёвҖҡ@ГҝГҠЕёЛңГ”
hoards of money and other objects.
Held in bondage by hundreds of ties of expectation and wholly giving themselves
up to lust and anger, they strive to amass by unfair means hoards of money and other
objects for the enjoyment of sensuous pleasures.                                      (12)
gratification and they cherish innumerable
hopes of various kinds to see those projects
The mind of men possessing a demoniac
disposition revels in various projects of sense-

=== PAGE 675 ===

674
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
materialize. Their mind is now tossed by the
hope of this enjoyment, the very next moment
it feels drawn towards another and clings to
a third at another moment; in this way they
are never free from the shackles of hope.
This is what is meant by the phrase
Г«Г…вҖ№ГҘpГҘвҖ№aвҖ№ataiВЁ baddhГҘВЁГӯ.
For the realization of these hopes they
never depend on God or any other deity,
noble act or pious thought, but take recourse
to lust and anger alone. Hence they have
been spoken of as wholly given up to lust
and anger.
He who attempts to usurp othersГӯ
possessions etc., by taking recourse to such
unlawful or unauthorized means as thieving,
robbery, dacoity, lying, chicanery, duplicity,
hypocrisy, violence, diplomacy, gambling,
fraudulence, poisoning, false accusation and
intimidation etc. under the prompting of lust
and anger, is said to strive for the accumulation
of wealth by unfair means.
Having discussed in the preceding four verses the distinctive marks and conduct of men
possessing a demoniac disposition, the Lord now proceeds to describe in the following four
verses their resolves, which are prompted by delusion and the feelings of Г«IГӯ and Г«mineГӯ as
well as their evil destiny.
ГҹЕ’в—Ҡl в—ҠГҝГҠ вҲӮUГ©Е“ГҒв—Ҡв—ҠВў В¬ЛқГҠГҘSГҝпЈҝ в—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝвҒ„UГ•в—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҹЕ’в—ҠSГғГӢЕ’в—ҠГҒВ¬ в—ҠпЈҝ Г·ГҒп¬ӮcГҝГҒГғ В¬ГҲЕёЕ“ВёЕёв—ҠЛңГ”H 13H
ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this; вҖўl today; в—ҠГҝГҠ by me; вҲӮUГ©Е“в—ҠЛңГ” has been secured; Гҹв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” (and) this; В¬ЛқГҠГҘSГҝпЈҝ shall (now)
realize; в—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝвҒ„UГ•в—ҠЛңГ” ambition; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this (much); вҖўГҒSГғГ” is (already); ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this; вҖўГҒВ¬ (and) yet; в—ҠпЈҝ with
me; Г·ГҒп¬ӮcГҝГҒГғ shall be; В¬ГҲЕёвҖ” again; Е“Еёв—ҠЛңГ” wealth.
They say to themselves, Г«This much has been secured by me today and now I shall
realize this ambition. So much wealth is already with me and yet again this shall be
mine.                                                                                      (13)
attaining the object of their desire in the
past to their personal endeavour and also
look to the same for their success in realizing
further objects of their desire. They are
conscious of the fact that they are already
masters of a considerable fortune and power
and confidently hope to have more not long
afterwards.
The word Г«ManorathaГӯ in this verse
stands for the thought of wife, progeny,
wealth, land, house, honour, fame and all
other objects that are sought for by the mind.
The present verse is, therefore, intended to
convey that men possessing a demoniac
disposition indulge in egotistic thoughts of
various kinds. They attribute their success in
вҖўвҖҡГҠГ’ в—ҠГҝГҠ вҖһUГғвҖ” вүҘГҠГІГҠГҲвҖһВёUГҒЕёcГҝпЈҝ ГёГҠВ¬вҒ„UГҠЕёГҒВ¬вҖ“
ГҹВёвүҘп¬ӮвҒ„UГҠпЈҝЛҳвҖһUв—ҠвҖһВўU Г·ГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ ГҒвҖҡhГҠпЈҝЛҳвҖһВўU вҖҷвҲӮUп¬ӮГҠГЈвҖҡГҲПҖГӢH 14H
вҖўвҖҡГҠГ’ that; в—ҠГҝГҠ by me; вҖһUГғвҖ” has been killed; вүҘГҠГІГҠГҲвҖ” enemy; вҖһUГҒЕёcГҝпЈҝ shall kill; Гё and; вҖўВ¬вҒ„UГҠЕёЛңГ” (those)
others; вҖўГҒВ¬ too; ГҹВёEвҒ„UвҖ” the lord (of all); вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I (am); вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I (am); Г·ГҠпЈҝВӘГӢ the enjoyer (of all pleasures);
ГҒвҖҡhвҖ” endowed with all powers; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I (am); вҖҷвҲӮUп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” (and am) mighty; вҖҡГҲПҖГӢ (and) happy.
Г«That enemy has been slain by me and I shall kill the others too. I am the Lord
of all, the enjoyer of all  pleasures; I am endowed with all powers, and am mighty and
happy.
 (14)

=== PAGE 676 ===

* Chapter XVI *
675
Men of a demoniac disposition, who
regard the enjoyment of sensuous pleasures
as the summum bonum of life, are slaves of
lust and anger. They have no faith in God,
religion or the law of recompense. Therefore,
intoxicated with pride they feel that there
was none in this world who could stand in
their way or oppose them with impunity.
Therefore, boiling with rage, they haughtily
brag in a stern voice that such and such a
man, who was so mighty and such a world-
renowned and influential personality, was
despatched by them in no time because he
stood on inimical terms with them; nay, others
too, who are at loggerheads with them or
will be inimically disposed towards them
shall be easily killed by them, however
powerful they may be. This is what is meant
by the first half of this verse.
Besides being egotistic, these people are
intoxicated with pride as well. They feel that
no one in this world is greater than they, that
they can kill or protect, uproot or establish,
whomsoever they like. Hence with great
pride they say, Г«Oh, we are absolutely free,
everything lies in our own hands; who else
than us is powerful, we are the masters of
all fortune. Nay, we are the Lord of all lords,
the supreme Person too. Every one should
worship us. We are not only the masters of
fortune, we also enjoy it. We have never met
with failure in our life; to whatever task
we have set ourselves, our efforts have
invariably been crowned with success. Our
life has been ever successful; nay, we are
endowed with a prophetic vision, future events
become known to us beforehand. We know
everything, nothing is hidden from us. Nay,
we are supremely powerful; our mental or
physical strength is so great that anyone who
depends on it will be able to conquer the
world through it. Due to all these reasons we
are very happy; all worldly joys are ever at
our service and will continue to serve us.Г®
That is the idea brought out in the latter half
of this verse.
boast of their wealth and big family. These
people boastfully declare that there is no limit
The first half of the fifteenth verse shows
how these men of a demoniac disposition
вҖўГҠвҖҰUKГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒГ·ВЎЕёп¬ӮГҠЕёГҒSв—Ҡ вҲ‘В§ГҠпЈҝЛҳГЈГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒSГғ вҖҡЕ’ГҺвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҝГҠвҖ“
ГҝЛҮГҝпЈҝ Е’ГҠSГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ в—ҠГҠпЈҝГҒЕ’cГҝ ГҹГ ГҝГҙГҠГҠЕёГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҠпЈҝГҒвҖһUГғГҠвҖ”H 15H
вҖўЕёпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҒГёГ»ГҠГҒп¬ӮГ·ЛқГҠГЈГғГҠ 
в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUВЎГҠвҲӮUвҖҡв—ҠГҠп¬ӮГҺГғГҠвҖ”вҖ“
В¬ЛқвҖҡQВ§ГҠвҖ” вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГ·ГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝВ·ГҲ В¬ГғГҒГЈГғ ЕёвҒ„UвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ЛҳвүҘГҠГҲГёГҠГ’H 16H
вҖўГҠвҖҰUKвҖ” wealthy; вҖўГҒГ·ВЎЕёп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” having a big family; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ I am; вҲ‘В§вҖ” who else; вҖўГЈГҝвҖ” вҖўГҒSГғ is;
вҖҡЕ’ГҺвүҘГҠвҖ” в—ҠГҝГҠ equal to me; ГҝЛҮГҝпЈҝ I will sacrifice (to gods); Е’ГҠSГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ I will give (alms); в—ҠГҠпЈҝГҒЕ’cГҝпЈҝ I will
make merry; ГҹГҒГғ thus; вҖўГҙГҠГҠЕёГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҠпЈҝГҒвҖһUГғГҠвҖ” deluded by ignorance; вҖўЕёпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҒГёГ»ГҠГҒп¬ӮГ·ЛқГҠГЈГғГҠвҖ” with their minds
bewildered by numerous thoughts; в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUВЎГҠвҲӮUвҖҡв—ҠГҠп¬ӮГҺГғГҠвҖ”Г” enveloped in the mesh of delusion; В¬ЛқвҖҡQВ§ГҠвҖ”Г”
addicted; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГ·ГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝВ·ГҲ to the enjoyments of sensuous pleasures; В¬ГғГҒГЈГғ they fall; ЕёвҒ„UвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ вҖўвүҘГҠГҲГёГҠГ’ into
the foulest hell.
Г«I am wealthy and own a large family; who else is equal to me? I will sacrifice to
gods, I will give alms, will make merry.Гӯ Thus blinded by ignorance, enveloped in the
mesh of delusion and addicted to the enjoyment of sensuous pleasures, their minds
bewildered by numerous thoughts, these men of devilish disposition fall into the foulest
hell.
 (15-16)

=== PAGE 677 ===

676
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
to their wealth, their kinsmen and relatives,
their friends and associates, their followers
and companions. At a single call from them
countless men are ready to follow them. In
this way none can match them in wealth and
man-power.
The verbs Г«YakВ¶yeГӯ and Г«DГҘsyГҘmiГӯ give
expression to their false pride relating to the
performance of sacrifices and charity. The
idea is that men possessing a demoniac
disposition never perform nor seek to perform
the SГҘttvika type of sacrifices; likewise they
never practise nor seek to practise the SГҘttvika
form of charity. They make an external show
of sacrifices and charity simply in order to
create an impression on others and boastfully
declare that none can vie with them in the
performance of sacrifices and charity.
The verb Г«ModiВ¶yeГӯ gives expression to
their false pride relating to merriment. Indulging
in boasts of various kinds they proudly picture
to their mind the delight that will be theirs,
how they will be transported with joy and
enjoy life to their heartГӯs content.
The ignorance with which they are said
to be blinded is no other than the egotism
revealed in verses 13 and 14 above as well
as in the present verses.
The compound adjective Г«Anekacitta
vibhrГҘntГҘВЁГӯ shows that men possessing a
demoniac disposition are unable to fasten
their attention on any one object, they are
fickle minded.
Г«KГҘmabhogeВ¶u PrasaktГҘВЁГӯ shows that
such men look upon the gratification of
the senses as the sole object of their existence;
that is responsible for their excessive
attachment to the enjoyment of sensuous
pleasures.
The words Г«AвҖ№ucau Narake PatantiГӯ
describe the evil destiny of men possessing a
demoniac disposition. The idea is that men of
this type perpetrate sins of various kinds for
the gratification of their senses and are
condemned to frightful hells of various
appellations, which are full of suffering and
abound in obnoxious substances such as faeces,
urine, blood, pus and so on.
In verse 15 above it was stated that men possessing a demoniac disposition vauntingly
proclaim their intention to Г«perform sacrificesГӯ; the Lord accordingly reveals the nature of
their sacrificial performances in the following verse.
вҖўГҠГ в—ҠвҖҡГӘГ·ГҠГҒп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ” SГғГ©Е“ГҠ Е“Еёв—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЕ’ГҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ГҝВЎГЈГғпЈҝ ЕёГҠв—ҠГҝГҙГҠГ’SГғпЈҝ Е’ГӘГ·пЈҝЕёГҠГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ“В¬ГҚп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ”H 17H
вҖўГҠГ в—ҠвҖҡГӘГ·ГҠГҒп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ” self-conceited; SГғГ©Е“ГҠвҖ” haughty; Е“Еёв—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЕ’ГҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ”Г” intoxicated by wealth and
honour; ГҝВЎГЈГғпЈҝ perform sacrifice; ЕёГҠв—ҠГҝГҙГҠГ’вҖ” perform sacrifices only in name; ГғпЈҝ those; Е’ГӘГ·пЈҝЕё for
ostentation; вҖўГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ“В¬ГҚп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” without following the sacred rituals.
Intoxicated by wealth and honour, those self-conceited and haughty men
perform sacrifices only in name for ostentation, without following the sacred rituals.
(17)
too arrogant to behave politely with anybody,
not even with those who are worthy of their
adoration.
The 
sacrifices 
they 
perform 
are
merely nominal and devoid of faith and are
Г«Г…tmasambhГҘvitГҘВЁГӯ are those who are
in their own estimation superior to all in
every respect, honourable, noble and worthy
of adoration.
Similarly Г«StabdhГҘВЁГӯ are those who are

=== PAGE 678 ===

* Chapter XVI *
677
only intended to impress others. They
are thus TГҘmasika in character and that
is why they lead to hell; for the Lord
says in Chapter XIV above that men of a
TГҘmasika disposition fall into hell. For a
detailed exposition of what is called
Г«TГҘmasa YajВӨaГӯ the reader is referred to
XVII.13.
Describing thus the nature of their sacrificial performances, the Lord now delineates
their own disposition, which is responsible for their evil fate.
вҖўвҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„Вў вҖҷвҲӮВўU Е’В¬Z вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠВў вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“Вў Гё вҖҡВўГҒГјГҠГғГҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
в—ҠГҠв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠВ¬вҒ„UЕ’пЈҝвҖһпЈҝUВ·ГҲ 
В¬ЛқГҒmВ·ГЈГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГЁГҝвҖҡГҚГҝвҲ‘В§ГҠвҖ”H 18H
вҖўвҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„в—ҠЛңГ” egotism; вҖҷвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” brute force; Е’В¬Вёв—ҠЛңГ” arrogance; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” lust; вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“в—ҠЛңГ” anger etc.; Гё and;
вҖҡВўГҒГјГҠГғГҠвҖ”Г” given over to; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠВ¬вҒ„UЕ’пЈҝвҖһпЈҝUВ·ГҲ (dwelling) in their own body as well as in those
of others; В¬ЛқГҒmВ·ГЈГғвҖ” despise; вҖўГЁГҝвҖҡГҚГҝвҲ‘В§ГҠвҖ” calumniating others.
Given over to egotism, brute force, arrogance, lust and anger etc., and calumniating
others, they despise Me dwelling in their own bodies as well as in those of others.
(18)
is intended to cover many more evils besides
those explicitly mentioned in the verse, viz.,
hypocrisy, greed, infatuation and so on.
Г«AsВөuyГҘГӯ consists in discovering and
condemning the faults of others, repudiating
their virtues and painting them as a vice.
Men possessing a demoniac disposition are
habituated to this. To say nothing of others,
they cavil even at God and holy men. This is
what is sought to be conveyed by adding the
prefix Г«AbhiГӯ before Г«AsВөuyakГҘВЁГӯ, which shows
that none escapes their censorious eye.
In the latter half of this verse the Lord
shows that men of a demoniac disposition, who
antagonize others and seek to oppress them in
various ways and also suffer themselves, thereby
bear malice to Him, inasmuch as He dwells in
them as well as in others as their inner controller.
To antagonize or hate another, to harm another
and to inflict suffering on another is to hate
God Himself dwelling in oneГӯs own body as
well as in those of others.
Full of egotism, these men possessing a
demoniac disposition proclaim themselves as
the lord of all, the enjoyer of all luxuries,
accomplished in every way, mighty and happy.
Nothing is impossible in their eyes. Resorting
to brute force, they antagonize others and
proceed to intimidate, assault and involve them
into trouble. They consider none as a match
for their might. Full of arrogance they boast of
their big fortune and large family. They recognize
none as their equal. Given over to lust, they
indulge in immoral acts of various kinds. And
obsessed by anger they threaten to kill whosoever
acts in opposition to their will or dares to offend
them. Abandoning themselves in this way to
egotism etc., they indulge in dreams and idle
talks of various kinds; and whatever they do is
prompted and backed by all these evil
propensities. They never take their stand on
God, religion or sacred lore. This is what is
meant by the first half of this verse.
The use of the conjunctive particle Г«CaГӯ
Thus describing in verses 7 to 18 the evil propensities and immoral practices etc., of
those possessing a demoniac disposition, the Lord now condemns such people in strongest
terms and describes their evil fate in the following two verses just in order to evoke a feeling
of repugnance towards those evil traits and practices.

=== PAGE 679 ===

678
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The demonstrative pronoun Г«TГҘnГӯ,
qualified by the adjectives Г«DviВ¶ataВЁГӯ
Г«AвҖ№ubhГҘnГӯ, Г«KrВөurГҘnГӯ and Г«NarГҘdhamГҘnГӯ, refers
to men possessing a demoniac disposition
who have been spoken of at length in the
foregoing verses. Their vile propensities and
immoral practices alone are responsible for
their evil destiny: this is what is sought to be
conveyed by the use of the above qualifications.
The idea is that these vile men bear malice to
all, bring corruption into society by their
sinful activities of various kinds perpetrate
many cruel acts in a callous manner, and
harm others without any provocation.
Г«Demoniac 
wombsГӯ 
represent 
all
subhuman species of living beings such as the
lion, the tiger, beasts, birds, insects and moths,
reptiles, scorpions, dogs, crows and others.
Г«AjasramГӯ implies that they are cast into
such demoniac wombs times without number;
while the use of the indeclinable Г«EvaГӯ with
Г«Г…surвҲӮВ¶u YoniВ¶uГӯ rules out the possibility of
their being born in higher species such as
gods, manes or human beings.
ГғГҠЕёвҖһВўU ГҒmВ·ГғвҖ” вҲ‘ЛқГҚВ§вҒ„UГҠГЈвҖҡВўвҖҡГҠвҒ„пЈҝUВ·ГҲ ЕёвҒ„UГҠЕ“в—ҠГҠЕёЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҒЛҮГҠВ¬ГҠГӘГҝВЎdв—ҠвүҘГҠГҲГ·ГҠЕёГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„UГӢcп¬ӮпЈҝп¬Ӯ 
ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒЕёВ·ГҲH 19H
ГғГҠЕёЛңГ” those; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; ГҒmВ·ГғвҖ” hating; вҲ‘ЛқГҚВ§вҒ„UГҠЕёЛңГ” (and) cruel; вҖҡВўвҖҡГҠвҒ„пЈҝUВ·ГҲГ” in the world; ЕёвҒ„UГҠЕ“в—ҠГҠЕёЛңГ” vilest
among men; ГҒЛҮГҠВ¬ГҠГҒв—Ҡ cast; вҖўВЎdв—ҠЛңГ” repeatedly; вҖўвүҘГҠГҲГ·ГҠЕёЛңГ” sinful; вҖўГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„UГӢВ·ГҲ into demoniacal; вҲһп¬ӮГ” only;
ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒЕёВ·ГҲ wombs.
These haters, sinful, cruel and vilest among men, I cast again and again into
demoniacal wombs in this world.                                                       (19)
вҖўГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„UГӢВҘ ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒЕёв—ҠГҠВ¬ГӣГҠГҠ в—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҠ ВЎГЈв—ҠГҒЕёГ” ВЎГЈв—ҠГҒЕёГ”вҖ“
в—ҠГҠв—ҠВ¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝГ’п¬Ӯ вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ ГғГғГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠГЈГ ГҝЕ“в—ҠГҠВў ВӘГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 20H
вҖўГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„UГӢв—ҠЛңГ” ГҝГҠпЈҝГҒЕёв—ҠЛңГ” demoniac wombs; вҖўГҠВ¬ГӣГҠГҠвҖ”Г” attain; в—ҠГҚвҖҰUГҠвҖ” those stupid souls; ВЎГЈв—ҠГҒЕё ВЎГЈв—ҠГҒЕёГ” life
after life; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; вҖўВ¬ЛқГҠГҘГҝГ” not reaching; вҲһп¬Ӯ indeed; вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ O son of KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna; ГғГғвҖ” (even)
in comparison to them; ГҝГҠГҒГЈГғ sink down; вҖўЕ“в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” ВӘГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” to still lower planes.
Failing to reach Me, Arjuna, these stupid persons are born life after life in
demoniac wombs and then verily sink down to still lower planes.                            (20)
is what is implied by the words Г«MГҘmГӯ
AprГҘpyaГӯ. The all-merciful Lord takes pity
as it were on this plight of the human soul
and thereby warns him not to forfeit the
title to God-realization, which is a birthright
with him, by embracing a demoniac
disposition.
Men of this type are cast into demoniac
wombs time without number and never attain
a higher birth. This is what is meant by the
first half of this verse.
The words Г«Tato YГҘntiГӯ AdhamГҘвүҲ GatimГӯ
Even though it is out of the question
for such stupid persons possessing a demoniac
nature to attain to a higher plane of spiritual
existence to say nothing of God-realization,Гі
the human soul is eligible for this
consummation. Having earned this title,
men who lose sight of it and embrace
the demoniac nature abandoning the path
leading to God-realization in the shape of
a divine disposition, are debarred from
God-realization even after attaining the
golden opportunity of a human birth. This

=== PAGE 680 ===

* Chapter XVI *
679
are intended to convey that there is no end
to the misery of such stupid souls. Repeated
birth in demoniac wombs does not purge
them of their sins and they fall into frightful
hells such as KumbhвҲӮpГҘka, MahГҘraurava,
TГҘmisra and AвҲҶdhatГҘmisra etc., which are
full of untold suffering and represent a still
lower condition of being.
The declaration of the Lord that men of a devilish disposition are repeatedly born in
demoniac wombs and are hurled into frightful hells may lead one to enquire as to how they
can escape this evil fate and attain the supreme goal. The Lord, therefore, exhorts us to give
up the three evils forming part of the demoniac nature, which are mainly responsible for all
evil destinies, and points out the way to attain the supreme goal.
ГҒГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“Вў ЕёвҒ„UвҲ‘В§SГҝпЈҝЕ’Вў mГҠвҒ„ВўU ЕёГҠвүҘГҠЕёв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҖ” вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“SГғГ•ГҠ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝГ·SГғSв—ҠГҠЕ’пЈҝГғГ ГІГҠГҝВў Г ГҝВЎпЈҝГғЛңГ”H 21H
ГҒГІГҠГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ“в—ҠЛңГ” triple; ЕёвҒ„UвҲ‘В§SГҝ hell; ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” these; mГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” gates of; ЕёГҠвүҘГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” bringing about the downfall;
вҖўГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ” of the soul; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҖ” desire; вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“вҖ” anger; ГғГ•ГҠ and; вҲӮUГҠпЈҝГ·вҖ”Г” greed; ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” therefore; вҲһГғГғЛңГ” ГІГҠГҝв—ҠЛңГ”
all these three; Г ГҝВЎпЈҝГғЛңГ” one should shun.
Desire, anger and greedГіthese triple gates of hell bring about the downfall of the
soul. Therefore, one should shun all these three.                                     (21)
soul referred to in this verse should be taken
to mean its degradation. Ever since man
falls a prey to desire, anger and greed, the
standard of his thoughts, feelings and
conduct begins to deteriorate. Desire, anger
and greed drive him to actions which ruin
his body, fill his mind with evil thoughts,
impair his reason, and vitiate all his activities,
with the result that his life here is robbed of
its joy, peace and purity and is transformed
into a vale of tears, and he is cast into
demoniac wombs and hells hereafter. That
is why these three evils have been declared
as responsible for the ruination of the
soul.
When it is settled that desire, anger and
greed, which are born of ignorance and are
the root of all evils, are solely responsible
for degradation in every form, it behoves us
to eschew them altogether without delay
regarding them as no less injurious than a
deadly poison. This is what is meant by the
words Г«TasmГҘdetattrayaвүҲ TyajetГӯ occurring
at the end of the verse.
The craving for objects of enjoyment
such as wife and children is known as Г«KГҘmaГӯ;
it is under the impulse of desire that men
commit sins of various kinds, such as thieving,
adultery and partaking of prohibited food.
The excitement caused by the frustration of
oneГӯs plans is called Г«KrodhaГӯ; obsessed by
anger, men resort to violence, retaliation and
other sinful acts of varying description. A
passionate longing for wealth and other
possessions is known by the name of Г«LobhaГӯ.
Avaricious men refuse to part with their
money on appropriate occasions and remain
engaged in acquiring and accumulating wealth
even by unfair means. This involves them
into sins of a major type such as lying,
duplicity, thieving and perfidy etc. Sins
lead to the attainment of hells like TГҘmisra,
AвҲҶdhatГҘmisra and so on; that is why these
three evils have been spoken of as gates
of hell.
The word Г«Г…tmanaВЁГӯ stands for the
JвҲӮvГҘtmГҘ or embodied soul. The soul, however,
never perishes; hence the destruction of the

=== PAGE 681 ===

680
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The compound word Г«TamodvГҘraiВЁГӯ,
qualified by the adjectives Г«EtaiВЁГӯ and
Г«TribhiВЁГӯ, refers to desire, anger and greed
which have been spoken of in the preceding
verse as the three gates of hell. Hells
like TГҘmisra and AвҲҶdhatГҘmisra are full of
darkness; they are attained as a result of vices
and evil propensities which are born of
the darkness of ignorance; and creatures
inhabiting those regions are ever enveloped
in the darkness of woe and ignorance.
Hence they are spoken of as Tamas or
darkness. Desire, anger and greedГіthese three
pave the way for these regions; hence they
have been referred to as Г«TamodvГҘraiВЁГӯ. He
alone who is altogether free from these
can strive for his spiritual uplift. And having
attained a human body, he alone who
works his own salvation in this way is
Г«manГӯ (NaraВЁ) in the real acceptation of
the term. This is what is sought to be
conveyed by the use of the word Г«NaraВЁГӯ in
this context.
Men who are slaves of desire, anger
and greed bring about their own degradation;
while those who are free from these strive for
their salvation. Therefore, having given up
desire, anger and greed, those who cultivate
in a disinterested spirit divine properties in
the shape of moral virtues and good conduct
as prescribed in the вҖәГҘstras are said to work
for their salvation.
вҲһГғГ’ГҢп¬Ӯв—ҠГҲQВ§вҖ” вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ Гғв—ҠГҠпЈҝmГҠвҒ„Г’UГҒSГІГҠГҒГ·ЕёВёвҒ„UвҖ”вҖ“
вҖўГҠГёвҒ„UГ ГҝГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ” ГјГҠпЈҝГҝSГғГғГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠГҒГғ В¬вҒ„UГҠВў ВӘГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 22H
вҲһГғГ’вҖ” from these; ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҲQВ§вҖ”Г” freed; вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ O son of KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna; Гғв—ҠГҠпЈҝmГҠвҒ„Г’UвҖ” ГҒГІГҠГҒГ·вҖ” three gates
of hell; ЕёвҒ„UвҖ” man; вҖўГҠГёвҒ„UГҒГғ works for; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ” his own; ГјГҠпЈҝГҝвҖ” salvation; ГғГғвҖ” thereby; ГҝГҠГҒГғ attains;
В¬вҒ„UГҠв—ҠЛңГ” ВӘГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” the supreme goal.
Freed from these three gates of hell, man works for his own salvation and thereby
attains the supreme goal i.e., God.                                                      (22)
One may ask here: He who acts according to his own belief rather than practise divine
virtues, does he attain the supreme goal or not? Anticipating this query the Lord says:
ГҝвҖ” вүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ“в—ҠГҲГ вҖҡГҺГ–Гҝ п¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝ вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГғвҖ”вҖ“
Её вҖҡ ГҒвҖҡГҒhв—Ҡп¬ӮГҠВ¬AГҠпЈҝГҒГғ Её вҖҡГҲПҖВў Её В¬вҒ„UГҠВў ВӘГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 23H
ГҝвҖ” who; вүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ“в—ҠЛңГ” the injunctions of the scriptures; В©UГ вҖҡГҺГ–ГҝГ” having cast aside; п¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝ acts
(arbitrarily); вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГғвҖ” according to his own sweet will; Её neither; вҖҡвҖ” he; ГҒвҖҡГҒhв—ҠЛңГ” perfection;
вҖўп¬ӮГҠВ¬AГҠпЈҝГҒГғГ” attains; Её nor; вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ” happiness; Её nor again; В¬вҒ„UГҠв—ҠЛңГ” ВӘГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ” the supreme goal.
Having cast aside the injunctions of the scriptures, he who acts in an arbitrary
way according to his own sweet will, such a person neither attains perfection, nor the
supreme goal, nor even happiness.                                                                       (23)
demoniac properties and to cultivate auspicious
qualities and conduct forming part of the
divine endowment. Flouting the injunctions
of these вҖәГҘstras, which throw light on what
one ought to do and what one should abstain
from doing, he who is guided by his own
reason and is prompted by the desire to win
The word Г«вҖәГҘstrasГӯ covers the Vedas as
well as the whole body of sacred literature
based on the Vedas, viz., the SmГҰtis, the
PurГҘЖ’as and the Epics (the RГҘmГҘyaЖ’a and
the MahГҘbhГҘrata). It is from these scriptures
or sacred books that we learn how to renounce
the practices and behaviour representing the

=== PAGE 682 ===

* Chapter XVI *
681
honour, fame and prestige etc., is said to act
in an arbitrary way.
The acts of him who casts aside the
injunctions of the scriptures lead to his downfall
in case they are positively prohibited by the
вҖәГҘstras, i.e., of a sinful character. Hence they
are out of consideration here. If, on the other
hand, his acts are prompted by some desire,
even though approved by his own reason,
they bring no reward to the doer inasmuch as
they are performed in an arbitrary way and
flout the injunctions of the scriptures. That is
to say, far from reaching the supreme goal,
he is not even able to acquire occult powers
such as the ability to assume an atomic form
or attain perfection in the form of paradise,
nor does he enjoy the SГҘttvika type of
happiness in this world.
The declaration made by the Lord that arbitrary acts flouting the injunctions of the
вҖәГҘstras yield no fruit, may lead one to enquire as to what should be done under the
circumstances. Anticipating this query the Lord says:
ГғSв—ҠГҠГ«ВҝUГҠSГІГҠВў В¬Лқв—ҠГҠГЎГҠВў ГғпЈҝ вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝГҠВёвҲ‘В§ГҠГҝВёвҲҡГҝп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғГҠГ’вҖ“
ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ вүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГҠЕёГҠпЈҝQВўВ§ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё вҲ‘В§ГғГҲВёГҒв—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖһВёUГҒвҖҡГ”H 24H
ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” therefore; вүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the scripture (alone); В¬Лқв—ҠГҠГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” is (your) authority; ГғпЈҝ for you;
вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝГҠВёвҲ‘В§ГҠГҝВёвҲҡГҝп¬ӮГҒSГ•ГғГҠГ’Г” matter of determining what should be done and what should not be done;
ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ knowing (this); вүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГҠЕёГҠпЈҝQВ§в—ҠЛңГ” ordained by the scriptures; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё action; вҲ‘В§ГғГҲВёв—ҠЛңГ” to perform;
ГҹвҖһU in this; вҖўвҖһВёUГҒвҖҡ you ought.
Therefore, the scripture alone is your guide in determining what should be done
and what should not be done. Knowing this, you ought to perform only such action
as is ordained by the scriptures.                                                         (24)
Recognizing in this way the authority of
the scriptures, Arjuna is advised in the latter
half of this verse to perform in the right way
duties of an obligatory nature prescribed in
the вҖәГҘstras, and no such actions as are prohibited
by them. And such virtuous acts too as are
sanctioned by the scriptures should be
performed only in a disinterested spirit, for
only those acts that are performed in a
disinterested spirit have been declared in the
вҖәГҘstras as conducive to God-realization.
The Vedas and other scriptures based
on them, viz., the SmГҰtis, the PurГҘЖ’as and the
Epics, guide us in determining what one
should do and what one should abstain from
doing; therefore, one should accept the authority
of the вҖәГҘstras in such matters rather than act
in an arbitrary way. That is to say, one
should perform only such acts as are ordained
by the scriptures, and abstain from those
which are prohibited by them. This is what is
meant by the first half of this verse.
Лҷ ГғГ вҖҡГҒЕ’ГҒГғ ГјГҠГӢв—ҠjВӘп¬ӮeГӢГғГҠвҖҡГҚВ¬ГҒЕёВ·Г вҖҡГҲ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГҝГҠВў ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠпЈҝ
ГјГҠГӢвҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠВЎГҲВёЕёвҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’пЈҝ Е’Г’п¬ӮГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„UвҖҡГӘВ¬ГҒmГ·ГҠВӘГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ ЕёГҠв—Ҡ
В·ГҠпЈҝВ«UвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГӨГҝГҠГҝвҖ”H 16H
Thus, in the UpaniВ¶ad sung by the Lord, the science of Brahma,
the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
and Arjuna, ends the sixteenth chapter entitled
Г¬The Yoga of Division between the Divine
and the Demoniacal Properties.Г®
U

=== PAGE 683 ===

682
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Title of the
Chapter
Summary of
the Chapter
Link of the
Discourse
Лҷ
вҖәrвҲӮmadbhagavad-GвҲӮtГҘ
Chapter XVII
At the beginning of this chapter Arjuna enquires about the position of those who are
endowed with faith. In reply to this question the Lord classifies faith into three types and
points out that it is faith which determines the character of a man. Thereafter,
showing the connection of faith with worship, sacrifice, austerity etc., He
proclaims in the concluding verse that the actions of those who are devoid of
faith are as good as not done. Since the three types of faith have thus been separately
expounded in this chapter, it has been given the appellation of вҖәraddhГҘtrayavibhГҘgayoga or
the Г¬Yoga of division of three kinds of faith.Г®
In the opening verse of this chapter Arjuna enquires of the Lord about the position of
those who having cast aside the injunctions of the вҖәГҘstras, worship God with faith. In reply
to this question the Lord discusses in the second verse the three types of
innate faith varying according to the three GuЖ’as or modes of PrakГҰti; the
third declares that the character of a man is determined by his faith; the fourth
tells us how men possessing the SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika types of faith worship
gods, demigods, devils and spirits respectively; the fifth and sixth decry those who practise
austere penance not sanctioned by the scriptures; the seventh calls upon Arjuna to hear the
different types of food, sacrifice, penance and gift, the eighth, ninth and tenth discuss the
SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika types of food; the eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth similarly
discuss the characteristics of the SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika types of sacrifice.
Describing in the fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth the nature of bodily austerity, austerity
of speech and austerity of the mind respectively, the Lord defines the SГҘttvika form of
austerity in the seventeenth, and the RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika forms in the eighteenth and
nineteenth. The twentieth, twenty-first and twenty-second elucidate the distinctive features of
the SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika forms of charity. The twenty-third glorifies the sacred
words Г¬OM TAT SAT.Г® The twenty-fourth explains the use of the syllable Г¬OMГ®, the
twenty-fifth that of Г¬TATГ® and the twenty-sixth and twenty-seventh that of Г¬SATГ®. And the
chapter is concluded by proclaiming in the last or twenty-eighth verse that sacrifice, charity,
austerity and other acts performed without faith, bring no reward here or hereafter and are
as good as not done at all.
At the beginning of Chapter XVI the Lord first of all described under the name of
Г¬divine endowmentГ® the virtues and conduct prescribed in the вҖәГҘstras and practised in a
disinterested spirit, and then discussed the demoniac properties which are
discountenanced by the вҖәГҘstras. At the same time He affirmed His law of
casting into hell men possessing a demoniac disposition and proclaimed that
lust, anger and greed are the main evils forming part of the demoniac properties and are
gates of hell; renouncing these he who strives for his spiritual welfare attains the supreme

=== PAGE 684 ===

* Chapter XVII *
683
goal. Thereafter He declared that having cast aside the scriptural injunctions, he who acts
in an arbitrary way and does only that which is approved by his own judgment, gets no
reward for his actions; his efforts aiming at perfection bring him no perfection, his
endeavours aiming at happiness fail to bring him happiness and attainment of the supreme
goal is quite out of the question for him. Arjuna was, therefore, advised to follow in a
disinterested spirit the injunctions of the вҖәГҘstras, which are competent to determine what
should be done and what should not be done. While conceding that the actions of those who
act in an arbitrary way flouting the scriptural injunctions yield no fruit at all. Arjuna is,
however, reminded of those who reverently perform sacred acts such as worship, sacrifice
and so on, even though casting aside the injunctions of the scriptures through ignorance or
otherwise, and is eager to know where they stand. Giving expression to this curiosity of his,
Arjuna puts the following question to the Lord:
вҖўВЎВёГҲЕё В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
ГҝпЈҝ вүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ“в—ҠГҲГ вҖҡГҺГ–Гҝ ГҝВЎГЈГғпЈҝ ГјГҠhГҝГҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠВў ГҒЕёDГ”UГҠ ГғГҲ вҲ‘В§ГҠ вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ вҖҡГ»п¬Ӯв—ҠГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ вҒ„UВЎSГғв—ҠвҖ”Г”H 1H
ГҝпЈҝ who; вүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ“в—ҠЛңГ” the injunctions of the scriptures; В©UГ вҖҡГҺГ–ГҝГ” disregarding; ГҝВЎГЈГғпЈҝ worship
(gods and others); ГјГҠhГҝГҠ with faith; вҖўГҒГЈп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ” endowed; ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” their; ГҒЕёDГ”UГҠ position; ГғГҲ then; вҲ‘В§ГҠ (is)
what; вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ O KГҰВ¶Ж’a; вҖҡГ»п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” partaking of the nature of Sattva; вҖўГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ or; вҒ„UВЎвҖ” partaking of the
nature of Rajas; Гғв—ҠвҖ” (or) partaking of the nature of Tamas.
Arjuna said: Those, who, endowed with faith, worship gods and others disregarding
the injunctions of the scriptures, where do they stand, KГҰВ¶Ж’a,Гіin Sattva, Rajas or
Tamas?
 (1)
question. Knowledge of the scriptural
injunctions is denied to them due to adverse
circumstances and unfavourable surroundings,
for want of leisure or through lack of industry
and study etc.; and it is this ignorance which
is responsible for their failure to respect the
injunctions of the вҖәГҘstras.
The word Г«NiВ¶ВўhГҘГӯ in this verse stands
for oneГӯs state or condition of being. For
while answering the query of Arjuna contained
in this verse, the Lord says in verse 3 below
that faith constitutes the very being of man;
whatever the nature of his faith, that verily he
is. That is to say, his condition of being
corresponds to the nature of his faith. This
state or condition of oneГӯs being is known by
the name Г«NiВ¶ВўhГҘГӯ.
In verse 6 of Chapter XVI the Lord
referred to two types of men, viz., those
Even though the men referred to in the
present verse stand on the same footing as
the one mentioned in verse 23 of Chapter
XVI in so far as both these types of men cast
aside the scriptural injunctions, their cases no
doubt differ. Verse 23 of Chapter XVI speaks
of him who disdainfully flouts the injunctions
of the вҖәГҘstras, while the present verse refers
to those who disregard them through ignorance
or want of knowledge. The former has no
regard for the вҖәГҘstras; he does only that
which is approved of by his own judgment.
That is why he is said to act in an arbitrary
way according to his own sweet willГі(п¬ӮГғВёГғпЈҝ
вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГғвҖ”). Those referred to in the present
verse, however, are said to worship gods and
others with faith (ГҝВЎГЈГғпЈҝ ГјГҠhГҝГҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ”Г”); thus faith
or reverence is present in them. Where there
is faith, contemptuous disregard is out of the

=== PAGE 685 ===

684
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
blessed with a divine nature and those
possessing a demoniac disposition. Of these,
the former perform actions enjoined by the
scriptures in a disinterested spirit, and thereby
attain liberation. Those possessing a demoniac
disposition, again, are either TГҘmasika men
who perpetrate sinful acts, or those who are
dominated by Rajas blended with Tamas and
perform noble deeds of their own liking,
ignoring the scriptural injunctions. The former
are born in sub-human species or cast into
hells, while the latter get no reward for their
noble actions. They have none the less to
reap the evil consequences of their sinful
deeds. While all these facts relating to those
who possess a divine or demoniac disposition
were thoroughly understood by Arjuna, he
had some doubts about those who worship
gods and others with faith, though disregarding
the scriptural injunctions for want of knowledge
about them. It was not clear to him whether
they should be recognized as possessing a
divine nature or a demoniac disposition. This
is what he seeks to know by asking the
question embodied in the latter half of this
verse.
From the above exposition it is clear
that men of this world can be classified under
the following five heads:Гі
(1) Those who not only follow the
injunctions of the вҖәГҘstras but are endowed
with faith as well;
(2) Those who are lacking in faith even
though they respect the scriptural injunctions
to some extent;
(3) Those who, though endowed with
faith, are yet unable to follow the injunctions
of the вҖәГҘstras;
(4) Those who are neither endowed with
faith nor respect the scriptural injunctions;
and
(5) Those who flout the scriptural
injunctions in a disdainful spirit.
Now the question is, how to distinguish
men belonging to each of these five groups,
what is their destiny and in which particular
verses of the GвҲӮtГҘ do they find mention.
(1) In this connection it may be submitted
that men belonging to the first category, viz.,
those who are not only endowed with faith
but also follow the injunctions of the вҖәГҘstras,
are again of two kinds; (i) those who perform
their duties in a disinterested spirit, and (ii)
those who work with an interested motive.
Those SГҘttvika men who are blessed with the
divine endowment and act in a disinterested
spirit attain liberation; they are mainly referred
to in the first three verses of Chapter XVI as
well as in verses 11,14,17, and 20 of the
present chapter. Those who are dominated
by Rajas blended with Sattva and work with
an interested motive attain supernatural powers,
happiness and higher worlds such as heaven
etc.; these find mention in verses 42 to 44 of
Chapter II, verse 12 of Chapter IV, verses 20
to 22 of Chapter VII and verses 20,21 and
23 of Chapter IX.
(2) Those who are lacking in faith even
though they perform sacrifices and other acts
and practise charity and austerity etc., following
to a certain extent the injunctions of the
вҖәГҘstras, get no reward for those acts, which
go in vain and are of no use to them here or
hereafter. These have been mentioned in verse
28 of the present chapter.
(3) Those who, though casting aside
the injunctions of the вҖәГҘstras through ignorance,
are yet endowed with faith are either SГҘttvika
or RГҘjasika or TГҘmasika in character
according to the nature of their faith. Their
destiny too corresponds to their nature. These
have been referred to in verses 2,3 and 4 of
this chapter.
(4) Those men of a demoniac disposition
who neither believe in the scriptures nor
possess faith and who, therefore, lead a sinful

=== PAGE 686 ===

* Chapter XVII *
685
life acting on the impulse of lust, anger and
greed are cast into hells or born in the lower
species. These find mention in verse 15 of
Chapter VII, verse 12 of Chapter IX, verses
7 to 20 of Chapter XVI and verses 5,6 and
13 of this Chapter.
(5) Those who follow their own will
and do whatever is approved by their own
judgment, flouting the injunctions of the вҖәГҘstras
in a disdainful spirit, are either TГҘmasika men
who perform acts which are forbidden by the
scriptures, or such as are dominated by Rajas
blended with Tamas and perform noble deeds.
Of these, the former are condemned to hell
and other evil fate and have been referred to
in sub-para 4 above; whereas the latter get no
reward whatsoever inasmuch as they set at
naught the injunctions of the scriptures, as
has been mentioned in verse 23 of Chapter
XVI. Let it be noted in this connection that
sinful acts perpetrated by these men invariably
lead to evil consequences such as birth in a
sub-human species and tortures in hell.
The references quoted above by way of
authority are by no means exhaustive: there
are other verses too dealing with these five
types of men. We have, however, refrained
from citing all of them in this context.
The Lord vouchsafes a brief reply to ArjunaГӯs query in the following two verses:
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲп¬ӮГҠГё
ГҒГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГҠ Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ ГјГҠhГҠ Е’пЈҝГҒвҖһUЕёГҠВў вҖҡГҠ Sп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮВЎГҠГ”вҖ“
вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГӢ вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡГӢ ГёГ’п¬Ӯ ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡГӢ ГёпЈҝГҒГғ ГғГҠВў oГҺГЎГҠГҲГ”H 2H
ГҒГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГҠ of three kinds; Г·п¬ӮГҒГғГ” is; ГјГҠhГҠ faith; Е’пЈҝГҒвҖһUЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of men; вҖҡГҠ that; Sп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮВЎГҠ innate (not
based on the study of scriptures); вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГӢ of a SГҘttvika character; вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡГӢ of a RГҘjasika type;
Гё and; вҲһп¬Ӯ only; ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡГӢ of a TГҘmasika nature; Гё and; ГҹГҒГғ in this way; ГғГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of that; oГҺГЎГҠГҲ hear
(from Me).
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: That (untutored) innate faith of men is of three kindsГі
SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika. Hear of it from Me.                                     (2)
casting aside the injunctions of the scriptures.
вҖәraddhГҘ which follows from a study of the
scriptures is called Г«вҖәГҘstrajГҘГӯ (proceeding from
study of the scriptures); while Г«вҖәvabhГҘvajГҘГӯ is
that which is inborn and conforms to the
tendencies formed as a result of oneГӯs actions
in the current as well as in previous lives.
The word Г«DehinГҘmГӯ in this verse stands
for the generality of men who naturally identify
themselves with their body.
The word Г«вҖәraddhГҘГӯ, qualified by the
adjectives Г«SГҘГӯ and Г«SvabhГҘvajГҘГӯ, refers to the
faith existing in men who perform sacrifices
and other duties in a spirit of reverence, though
вҖҡГ»п¬ӮГҠЕёГҲMВ§В¬ГҠ вҖҡп¬ӮВёSГҝ ГјГҠhГҠ Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғвҖ“
ГјГҠhГҠв—ҠГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГҝВў В¬ГҲLВ§В·ГҠпЈҝ ГҝГҠпЈҝ ГҝГ«ВҝЛӣUhвҖ” вҖҡ вҲһп¬Ӯ вҖҡвҖ”Г”H 3H
вҖҡГ»п¬ӮГҠЕёГҲMВ§В¬ГҠ shaped to their mental disposition; вҖҡп¬ӮВёSГҝ of all (men); ГјГҠhГҠ faith; Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ is; Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғ
O descendant of Bharata, Arjuna; ГјГҠhГҠв—ҠГҝвҖ” (is) constituted of faith; вҖўГҝв—ҠЛңГ” this; В¬ГҲLВ§В·вҖ” man; ГҝвҖ”
who; ГҝГ«ВҝЛӣUhвҖ” possessing the kind of faith he does; вҖҡвҖ” he (himself); вҲһп¬Ӯ indeed; вҖҡвҖ” (is) that.
The faith of all men conforms to their mental disposition, Arjuna. Faith constitutes
a man; whatever the nature of his faith, verily he is that.
 (3)

=== PAGE 687 ===

686
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The pronoun Г«SarvasyaГӯ stands for those
very men who regard the body as their self
and have been referred to as Г«DehinГҘmГӯ in
the preceding verse. This shows that the
verse speaks of the generality of men who
are identified with their body. For the Lord
says in the latter half of this very verse.
Г«Whatever the nature of faith man possesses,
that verily he is.Гӯ This dictum can apply only
to him who regards the body as his self, and
not to the man of wisdom who has transcended
the three GuЖ’as.
ManГӯs nature conforms to the kind of
actions he performs, which are either SГҘttvika,
RГҘjasika or TГҘmasika. And nature is imbedded
in the mind; hence his frame of mind is
believed to reflect his nature. Hence to call
oneГӯs faith inborn is just the same as to
speak of it as conforming to oneГӯs mental
constitution. Thus there is no anomaly on the
part of the Lord in speaking of faith as
Г«SvabhГҘvajГҘГӯ at one place and as Г«SattvГҘnurВөupГҘГӯ
at another.
The real being of the PuruВ¶a or soul is
beyond the GuЖ’as or modes of PrakГҰti, as is
stated in verse 22 of Chapter XIII. The present
verse, however, speaks of the PuruВ¶a who is
seated in PrakГҰti and is connected with the
three GuЖ’as born of PrakГҰti. For diversity
attributable to the GuЖ’as is possible only in
the PuruВ¶a who is seated in PrakГҰti. Diversity
due to the GuЖ’as is out of the question in the
case of him who is beyond the three GuЖ’as.
Hence there is no contradiction in speaking
of the soul as Г«ParaВЁГӯ (wholly beyond the
three GuЖ’as) at one place and as Г«вҖәraddhГҘmayaГӯ
at another. The Lord points out here that a
manГӯs state or condition of being corresponds
to the nature of his faith, which is either
SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika or TГҘmasika, according to
the frame of his mind. That is to say, the kind
of faith a man possesses represents his very
being. Establishing in this way the identity of
faith, the state of being and the very being or
self of man, the Lord answers the query of
Arjuna relating to the state of being of those
who worship with faith even though casting
aside the injunctions of the вҖәГҘstras.
It has been stated above that a manГӯs NiВ¶ВўhГҘ or state of being corresponds to his faith;
this may lead one to enquire the means of ascertaining the state of being of a particular
individual. Anticipating this query the Lord says:
ГҝВЎГЈГғпЈҝ вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГҠ Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠГЈГҝЛҮГҠвҒ„UЛҮГҠГҠВўГҒвҖҡ вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡГҠвҖ”вҖ“
В¬ЛқпЈҝГғГҠГЈГ·ГҚГғВӘГЎГҠГҠВўpГҠГЈГҝпЈҝ ГҝВЎГЈГғпЈҝ ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡГҠ ВЎЕёГҠвҖ”H 4H
ГҝВЎГЈГғпЈҝ worship; вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГҠвҖ” men of SГҘttvika disposition; Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” gods; ГҝЛҮГҠвҒ„UЛҮГҠГҠВўГҒвҖҡ YakВ¶as (demigods)
and demons; вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡГҠвҖ” men of RГҘjasika temperament; В¬ЛқпЈҝГғГҠЕёЛңГ” the spirits of the dead; Г·ГҚГғВӘГЎГҠГҠЕёЛңГ” ghosts;
Гё and; вҖўГЈГҝпЈҝ others; ГҝВЎГЈГғпЈҝ worship; ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡГҠвҖ” ВЎЕёГҠвҖ” (viz.,) men of TГҘmasika disposition.
Men of SГҘttvika disposition worship gods; those of RГҘjasika temperament worship
demigods and demons; while others, who are of TГҘmasika disposition, worship the
spirits of the dead and ghosts.
 (4)
similar disposition; and according to the maxim
that a worshipper bears affinity to the deity,
it is stated here that the worshippers of gods
are SГҘttvika by natureГіtheir NiВ¶ВўhГҘ is of
The general rule is that a man is judged
by his conduct. Applying this test it can be
safely assumed that the worshippers of gods,
who possess SГҘttvika disposition, must have

=== PAGE 688 ===

* Chapter XVII *
687
SГҘttvika type. The words Г«DevГҘnГӯ in this
verse should be taken to include the Sun-
god, the moon-god, the god of fire, the wind-
god, Indra (the lord of paradise), VaruЖ’a (the
god of water), Yama (the god of judgment),
the two AвҖ№vinвҲӮkumГҘras (the twin-born
physicians of gods), the ViвҖ№vedevas and other
gods mentioned in the вҖәГҘstras.
Worship of gods being a SГҘttvika pursuit,
those who practise it have been declared as
SГҘttvika; but perfectly SГҘttvika is he who takes
to a SГҘttvika pursuit in a disinterested spirit.
Just as the worshippers of gods are
SГҘttvika by nature, it can likewise be presumed
that the worshippers of YakВ¶as and demons
have RГҘjasika temperament while those of
ghosts, spirits and devils are TГҘmasika by
nature.
The destiny of these worshippers varies
according to the object of their worship. The
worshippers of gods attain a celestial body;
those of demigods and demons are reborn as
demigods and demons; while the worshippers
of ghosts and spirits attain the form, traits and
condition etc., of ghosts and spirits. Verse 25
of Chapter IX points to the  same conclusion.
The above verse speaks of those who, though casting aside the scriptural injunctions,
worship different objects with an innate faith which is threefold in character; but nothing has
been said about those who not only flout the injunctions of the scriptures but are also lacking
in faith, and who practise austere penance etc. The question, therefore, arises: To which
category do these people belong? The Lord answers this query in the following two verses.
вҖўвүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠГҒп¬ӮГҒвҖһUГғВў ГүГҠГҠпЈҝвҒ„ВўU ГғГҘГҝГЈГғпЈҝ ГҝпЈҝ ГғВ¬ГҠпЈҝ ВЎЕёГҠвҖ”вҖ“
Е’ГӘГ·ГҠвҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„UвҖҡВўГҝГҲQВ§ГҠвҖ” 
вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҒ„UГҠВӘвҖҷвҲӮUГҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ”H 5H
вҖўвүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠГҒп¬ӮГҒвҖһUГғв—ҠЛңГ” of an arbitrary kind not enjoined by the scriptures; ГүГҠГҠпЈҝвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” dire; ГғГҘГҝГЈГғпЈҝ practise;
ГҝпЈҝ who; ГғВ¬вҖ” penance; ВЎЕёГҠвҖ” men; Е’ГӘГ·ГҠвҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„UвҖҡВўГҝГҲQВ§ГҠвҖ” full of hypocrisy and egotism; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠвҒ„UГҠВӘвҖҷвҲӮUГҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГғГҠвҖ”
obsessed with desire, attachment and pride of power.
Men who practise severe penance of an arbitrary type, not sanctioned by the
scriptures, and who are full of hypocrisy and egotism and are obsessed with desire,
attachment and pride of power;                                                          (5)
up with pride. That is why they have been
spoken of as Г«DambhГҘhaвҲҶkГҘrasaвүҲyuktГҘВЁГӯ.
These people are deeply attached
to worldly enjoyments; the result is that
their thirst for those enjoyments is ever
on the increase. They believe that they
will secure whatever they seek, and that
they possess infinite strength which is
sufficient to foil all attempts to interfere
with their plans. This is what the Lord
seeks to convey by calling such people
Г«KГҘmarГҘgabalГҘnvitГҘВЁГӯ.
The word Г«TapasГӯ, qualified by the
adjectives Г«AвҖ№ГҘstravihitamГӯ and Г«GhoramГӯ,
denotes austere penance which is not sanctioned
by the scriptures, which does not conform to
the scriptural injunctions, which seeks to mortify
the body and the senses through pretentious
displays of various kinds and which is dreadful
to look at.
Those who perform such dire penances
discountenanced by the scriptures are lacking
in faith. They set up a fine show in order to
impress and cheat others and are ever puffed
вҲ‘В§вүҘГҠВёГҝГЈГғвҖ” 
вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„USГ•Вў 
Г·ГҚГғВӘЛқГҠв—Ҡв—ҠГёпЈҝГғвҖҡвҖ”вҖ“
в—ҠГҠВў ГёГ’п¬ӮГҠГЈГғвҖ”вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„USГ•Вў ГғГҠГҒГЈп¬ӮhKГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„UГҒЕёpГҝГҠЕёЛңГ”H 6H

=== PAGE 689 ===

688
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The compound word Г«BhВөutagramamГӯ
stands here for the aggregate of twenty-three
categories, viz., the five gross elements, mind,
intellect, ego, the ten organs of perception
and action and the five objects of senses,
which have already been mentioned in XIII.5
under the name of KВ¶etra.
Those who perform dire penance of an
arbitrary type, not sanctioned by the scriptures,
not only emaciate and weaken their psycho-
physical organism, which is nothing but a
conglomeration of the twenty-three elements
enumerated above, but also torment God
dwelling within their heart by their dreadful
pursuits. For God is seated in the heart of all
as their very Self. Hence to torment oneГӯs
own self or the self of others is to torment
God Himself. It is in this sense that these
people are said to torment the elements as
well as God.
The word Г«AcetasaВЁГӯ refers to those
stupid men who violate the injunctions of the
вҖәГҘstras and are lacking in intelligence, and
whose intellect is clouded.
вҲ‘В§вүҘГҠВёГҝГЈГғвҖ” emaciating; вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„USГ•в—ҠЛңГ” constituting their body; Г·ГҚГғВӘЛқГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” the elements; вҖўГёпЈҝГғвҖҡвҖ”
senseless people; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me (the supreme Spirit); Гё and; вҲһп¬Ӯ also; вҖўГЈГғвҖ”вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„USГ•в—ҠЛңГ” dwelling in the
heart; ГғГҠЕёЛңГ” those; ГҒп¬ӮГҒh Know; вҖўГҠвҖҡГҲвҒ„UГҒЕёpГҝГҠЕёЛңГ” having demoniac disposition.
And who emaciate the elements constituting their body as well as Me, the
supreme Spirit, dwelling in their heart,Гіknow those senseless people to have demoniac
disposition.                                                                                    (6)
Having pointed out the marks of those who are endowed with faith of a threefold
character as well as of those who perform dire penance, the Lord now undertakes to classify
food, sacrifice, penance and charity under three heads, viz., SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika and
TГҘmasika, in order that one may choose the SГҘttvika type and reject the RГҘjasika and
TГҘmasika ones.
вҖўГҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„USГ п¬ӮГҒВ¬ вҖҡп¬ӮВёSГҝ ГҒГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГҠпЈҝ Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҖ”вҖ“
ГҝГҙГҠSГғВ¬SГғГ•ГҠ Е’ГҠЕёВў ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠВў Г·пЈҝЕ’ГҒв—Ҡв—ҠВў oГҺГЎГҠГҲH 7H
вҖўГҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„UвҖ” food; ГғГҲ and; вҖўГҒВ¬ as well; вҖҡп¬ӮВёSГҝ to all (according to their innate disposition); ГҒГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“вҖ”
of three kinds; Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ is; ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҖ” agreeable; ГҝГҙГҠвҖ” sacrifice; ГғВ¬вҖ” penance; ГғГ•ГҠ even so; Е’ГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” (and)
charity (too); ГғпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” their; Г·пЈҝЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” distinction; Гҹв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” this; oГҺГЎГҠГҲ hear (from Me).
Food also, which is agreeable to different men according to their innate disposition,
is of three kinds. And, likewise, sacrifice, penance and charity too are of three kinds
each; hear their distinction from Me.                                                    (7)
subject of discussion in this chapter.
The constitution of a manГӯs mind is
determined by the kind of food he takes and,
as has been stated in verse 3 above, a manГӯs
faith corresponds to his mental constitution.
If a manГӯs diet is pure, his mind too will be
pure as a matter of course. Г¬Purity of mind
follows from purity of dietГ®* (ChГҘndogya
The use of the indeclinable Г«ApiГӯ after
Г«Г…hГҘraВЁГӯ shows that just as faith and worship
have been divided under three heads, viz.,
SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika, even so
food also is of three kinds.
The pronoun Г«SarvasyaГӯ stands for the
whole human race; for food is taken by all
men and it is human beings who form the
*
вҖўГҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„UвүҘГҠГҲhГҠГ’ вҖҡГ»п¬ӮвүҘГҠГҲГҒhвҖ”вҖ“

=== PAGE 690 ===

* Chapter XVII *
689
UpaniВ¶ad VII.xxvi.2). And purity of thought
and feelings, of faith and other qualities, and
even so of actions too depends on purity of
mind. It was, therefore, that the Lord thought
it necessary to discuss the subject of food in
this connection even without any reference from
Arjuna. Besides, while worship of gods and
others is not universally practised, food is a
thing which concerns all. Just as a man is
believed to have a SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika or
TГҘmasika disposition according as he worships
gods who are SГҘttvika by nature, demigods
and demons who have a RГҘjasika temperament,
or ghosts and spirits who have a TГҘmasika
disposition, even so of the SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika
and TГҘmasika types of food, the one which
is dear to him determines the mode of PrakГҰti
by which he is dominated. It is this idea which
has been particularly emphasized by the use
of the adjective Г«PriyaВЁГӯ. Hence a man can as
well be judged by the nature of his diet. It is
for this reason that the Lord declares food to
be of three kinds in this verse. His further motive
in doing so was to help people choose the
SГҘttvika type and reject the RГҘjasika and
TГҘmasika ones. What is true of food should
be understood to hold good in the case of
sacrifice, charity and penance as well.
are called Г«Г…rogyavivardhanГҘВЁГӯ.
(5) When there is a feeling of
contentment, SГҘttvika delight and freshness
in the heart and when signs of joy born of a
guileless heart are visible on oneГӯs face and
other limbs of the body, one is said to be
happy. Foods which promote such happiness
are called Г«SukhavivardhanГҘВЁГӯ.
(6) Amiability of disposition and a
pleasing look on the face and other parts of
the body is what is referred to here as Г«PrвҲӮtiГӯ.
And foods which enhance this PrвҲӮti are called
Г«PrвҲӮtivivardhanГҘВЁГӯ.
The compound adjective Г«Г…yuВЁsattva-
balГҘrogyasukhaprвҲӮtivivardhanГҘВЁГӯ thus covers
(1) Г«Г…yuВЁГӯ means life; foods which
augment vitality and thereby prolong oneГӯs
life are called Г«Г…yurvivardhanГҘВЁГӯ.
(2) The word Г«SattvaГӯ here stands for
the intellect. Foods which tend to make oneГӯs
intellect pure or transparent, sharp, accurate
and subtle are said to be Г«SattvavivardhanГҘВЁГӯ.
(3) Bodily and mental vigour, which
contributes to oneГӯs success in a noble
enterprise is called Г«BalaГӯ. Foods which
augment this inner and outer strength or
energy 
are 
referred 
to 
here 
as
Г«BalavivardhanГҘВЁГӯ.
(4) Foods which serve as a natural
antidote for oneГӯs mental and physical ailments
In the above verse the Lord invited Arjuna to hear the classification of food, sacrifices,
penance and charity. Accordingly He proceeds to describe in the following verse the
SГҘttvika types of food, which are worth taking.
вҖўГҠГҝГҲвҖ”вҖҡГ»п¬ӮвҖҷвҲӮUГҠвҒ„UГҠпЈҝГҮГҝвҖҡГҲПҖВ¬ЛқГӢГҒГғГҒп¬Ӯп¬ӮЕ“ВёЕёГҠвҖ” 
вҖ“
вҒ„USГҝГҠвҖ” ГҒFГҮЕ“ГҠвҖ” ГҒSГ•вҒ„UГҠ NUlГҠ вҖўГҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„UГҠвҖ” вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝГҠвҖ”H 8H
вҖўГҠГҝГҲвҖ”вҖҡГ»п¬ӮвҖҷвҲӮUГҠвҒ„UГҠпЈҝГҮГҝвҖҡГҲПҖВ¬ЛқГӢГҒГғГҒп¬Ӯп¬ӮЕ“ВёЕёГҠвҖ” promoting longevity, intelligence, vigour, health, happiness
and cheerfulness; вҒ„USГҝГҠвҖ” juicy; ГҒFГҮЕ“ГҠвҖ” succulent; ГҒSГ•вҒ„UГҠвҖ” sustaining; NUlГҠвҖ” naturally agreeable;
вҖўГҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„UГҠвҖ” foods, i.e., edibles; вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝГҠвҖ” (are) dear to the SГҘttvika type of men.
Foods which promote longevity, intelligence, vigour, health, happiness and
cheerfulness, and which are juicy, succulent, substantial and naturally agreeable, are
liked by men of SГҘttvika nature.                                                        (8)

=== PAGE 691 ===

690
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
all articles of food of a SГҘttvika type, such as
milk, clarified butter, vegetables, fruits, sugar,
wheat, barley, grams and rice etc.
The adjectives Г«RasyГҘВЁГӯ, Г«SnigdhГҘВЁГӯ,
Г«SthirГҘВЁГӯ and Г«HГҰdyГҘВЁГӯ are intended to
distinguish such articles from those of a non-
SГҘttvika character.
(1) Milk, sugar and other substances
having a sweet flavour are referred to here as
Г«RasyГҘВЁГӯ.
(2) Clarified and unclarified butter, oils
extracted from SГҘttvika substances and other
fatty products are called Г«SnigdhГҘВЁГӯ.
(3) Foods which sustain the body for a
long time and give strength are spoken of as
Г«SthirГҘВЁГӯ.
(4) Foods which are not made of foul or
impure substances and excite a SГҘttvika appetite
on their very sight are known as Г«HГҰdyГҘВЁГӯ.
Edibles of four kinds, viz., BhakВ¶ya
(those which have to be chewed before they
can be swallowed), Bhojya (those which are
directly swallowed), Lehya (those which are
licked) and CoВ¶ya (those which are sucked)
are referred to here as Г«Г…hГҘrГҘВЁГӯ. The subject
has been fully dealt with in the commentary
on verse 14 of Chapter XV, which speaks of
these four kinds of food under the name of
Г«Caturvidham AnnamГӯ.
Even though the Lord undertook in the
preceding verse to classify food under three
heads, viz., SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika.
He has thought fit to mention here foods that
are dear to men of SГҘttvika disposition, rather
than those which are SГҘttvika themselves.
The reason is not far to seek. A man loves
that very food which partakes of the GuЖ’a
predominant in him. Hence when we talk of
foods which are liked by men of a particular
disposition, we indirectly mention the class
to which such foods belong. This indirect
method has been employed in order to show
that the disposition of a man can be judged
by the kind of food he loves.
Having mentioned the diet of SГҘttvika men, which deserves to be adopted by all, the
Lord now describes in the following two verses the diet of RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika men,
which should be shunned by all.
вҲ‘В§вүҲUГ”ЛңГ”п¬ӮГӘвҲӮUвҲӮUп¬ӮГЎГҠГҠГ ГҝГҲcГЎГҠГғГӢЛҮГЎГҠMВ§ЛҮГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҠГҒвҖһUЕёвҖ” вҖ“
вҖўГҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„UГҠ вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡSГҝпЈҝCГ”UГҠ Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҝВ¬ЛқЕ’ГҠвҖ”H 9H
вҲ‘В§вүҲUГ”ЛңГ”п¬ӮГӘвҲӮUвҲӮUп¬ӮГЎГҠГҠГ ГҝГҲcГЎГҠГғГӢЛҮГЎГҠMВ§ЛҮГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҠГҒвҖһUЕёвҖ” bitter, sour, salty, overhot, pungent, dry and burning;
вҖўГҠвҖһUГҠвҒ„UГҠвҖ” foods; вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡSГҝ to a man of RГҘjasika temperament; ГҹCГ”UГҠвҖ” (are) dear; Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҝВ¬ЛқЕ’ГҠвҖ”
causing suffering, grief and sickness.
Foods which are bitter, sour, salty, overhot, pungent, dry and burning, and which
cause suffering, grief and sickness, are dear to the RГҘjasika.
(9)
lemon etc., may be classed as acid foods,
alkalis and salts of various kinds are included
in salty foods; foods which are taken while
they are yet steaming are classed as overhot;
chillies etc., are typical pungent foods; parched
grains may serve as examples of dry foods
and mustard seeds etc., may be taken to
Neem and Karela etc., fall under the
category of bitter foods. Some interpret the
word Г«KaВўuГӯ as pungent and include pepper
etc., in this class. But the separate mention of
the word Г«TikВ¶Ж’aГӯ, which evidently stands
for pungent foods, justifies our construing
the word Г«KaВўuГӯ as bitter. Tamarind and

=== PAGE 692 ===

* Chapter XVII *
691
represent burning foods. The pain which is
experienced in the throat etc., at the time of
taking such foods, the burning sensation felt
in the tongue, palate etc., the acidity of teeth,
the difficulty experienced in chewing articles,
the watering of eyes and nose, hiccup etc.,Гі
all these are included in the suffering which
such foods are known to entail. The sense of
remorse one feels after taking such foods is
referred to here as вҖәoka or grief, and the
distemper caused by them is spoken of as
Г…maya or disease. The foods mentioned above
bring all these in their wake. Hence they
have been called Г«DuВЁkhaвҖ№okГҘmayapradГҘВЁГӯ,
and hence they should be discarded.
The use of the compound adjective
Г«RГҘjasapriyГҘВЁГӯ with reference to Г«Г…hГҘrГҘВЁГӯ is
intended to convey that such foods are of a
RГҘjasika type. Hence those who like such
foods should be classed as RГҘjasika men.
ГҝГҠГғГҝГҠв—ҠВў ВӘГғвҒ„UвҖҡВў В¬ГҚГҒГғ В¬ГҝГҲВёГҒВ·ГғВў Гё ГҝГғЛңГ”вҖ“
В©UГҒГ«ВҝUCГ”Uв—ҠГҒВ¬ ГёГҠв—ҠпЈҝГӨГҝВў Г·ГҠпЈҝВЎЕёВў ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡГҒВ¬ЛқГҝв—ҠЛңГ”H 10H
ГҝГҠГғГҝГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” half-cooked; ВӘГғвҒ„UвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” insipid; В¬ГҚГҒГғ putrid; В¬ГҝГҲВёГҒВ·Гғв—ҠЛңГ” stale; Гё and; ГҝГғЛңГ” which (is);
В©UГҒГ«ВҝUCГ”Uв—ҠЛңГ” polluted; вҖўГҒВ¬ too; Гё and; вҖўв—ҠпЈҝГӨГҝв—ҠЛңГ” (which is) impure; Г·ГҠпЈҝВЎЕёв—ҠЛңГ” (that) food; ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡГҒВ¬ЛқГҝв—ҠЛңГ” (is)
dear to TГҘmasika men.
Food which is ill-cooked or not fully ripe, insipid, putrid, stale and polluted, and
which is impure too, is dear to men of TГҘmasika disposition.                       (10)
etc.) or which are rendered foul through
fermentation or any other chemical process.
Food which has been cooked the day
before is called Г«ParyuВ¶itaГӯ or stale. Foods
which are allowed to stay overnight get spoiled
and give rise to many diseases in case one
chooses to partake of them. Fruits also which
were plucked long ago and have accordingly
been spoiled should be regarded as stale.
Food which is left on oneГӯs dish after
one has partaken of it is called Г«UcchiВ¶ВўaГӯ.
Animal foods involving destruction of
life, such as meat, eggs etc., and prohibited
intoxicants such as spirituous liquor, toddy
etc.,Гіwhich are impure by their very nature
or which have been polluted by evil association
of any kind,Гіthrough contact with any impure
substance, place, utensil or person, or because
of their connection with foul money earned
by unfair or unrighteous meansГіall these
are included in the category of impure food.
The use of such articles has been banned
even in the worship of gods.
The use of the particles Г«CaГӯ and Г«ApiГӯ
Etymologically speaking, Г«YГҘtayГҘmamГӯ
means that which was cooked three hours
before. But the separate mention of Г«ParyuВ¶itamГӯ
(stale food) as falling under the category to
TГҘmasika food precludes such interpretation.
If Г«YГҘtayГҘmamГӯ is taken to mean that which
was cooked only three hours before, there is
no meaning in including stale food in the
category of TГҘmasika food. For when food
cooked only three hours before is branded as
TГҘmasika, that which has stayed overnight is
all the more so, so that there was no need to
mention it separately. It is for this reason that
Г«YГҘtayГҘmamГӯ has been interpreted as half-
cooked or half-ripe. Nevertheless, if anyone
insists on interpreting it as cooked three hours
before, there is no objection either.
A juicy substance (e.g., an orange or
sugarcane) which has lost its succulent character
due to exposure or contact with fire etc., or
on account of its being out of season, is
called Г«GatarasamГӯ.
Putrid foods are those which contain a
naturally offensive smell (e.g., onion, garlic

=== PAGE 693 ===

692
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
is intended to convey that besides those articles
which suffer from the above defects in a
large or small measure, hemp drugs (GГҘВ°jГҘ
and BhГҘВ°ga), tobacco, cigarettes and bidis
extracts, distilled spirits, impure medicines
and all other articles which give rise to
TamoguЖ’a are TГҘmasika in character.
By speaking such food as dear to men
of a TГҘmasika disposition the Lord indirectly
pronounces it to be TГҘmasika in character;
and the fact that they like such food is
indicative of their TГҘmasika disposition.
which is undertaken in a disinterested spirit
with the firm belief that a man must perform
the sacrifice which the вҖәГҘstras prescribe for
him with due regard to his VarЖ’a (grade in
society) and Г…вҖ№rama (stage in life), and that
failure to perform such a sacrifice is to disobey
the commandment of God.
The compound word Г«AphalГҘkГҘвҲҶkВ¶ibhiВЁГӯ
stands for those who expect no return for
their sacrifice in the shape of wife, progeny,
wealth, house, honour, fame, prestige, victory,
heavenly bliss or any other enjoyment of this
world or the next or the eradication of any
evil or suffering (vide VI.1). A sacrifice which
is undertaken with an interested motive cannot
be wholly SГҘttvika even if it is performed in
accordance with the scriptural injunctions;
indifference to its fruit is supremely essential
for investing it with a wholly SГҘttvika
character.
The use of the compound adjective
Г«VidhidГҰВ¶ВўaВЁГӯ with Г«YajВӨaВЁГӯ is intended to
convey that of the many sacrifices enjoined
by the Vedas, as well as of those enjoined by
the SmГҰti texts that alone which is prescribed
in the вҖәГҘstras as binding on a particular
VarЖ’a (grade in society) or Г…вҖ№rama (stage in
life) is SГҘttvika in character. A sacrifice which
is performed in an arbitrary way contrary to
the scriptures is not SГҘttvika.
Pouring oblations of clarified butter etc.,
into the sacred fire for the propitiation of
gods and others, or duly worshipping anyone
in any other form by offering him anything
whatsoever is what is spoken of as Г«YajВӨaГӯ.
Again, he who takes into his head that
no incentive to work is left for the man who
does not expect any return for his work, will
never undertake any sacrifice in a disinterested
spirit. Therefore, that sacrifice alone is SГҘttvika,
Having thus pointed out the three divisions of food, the Lord now proceeds to classify
sacrifices under three heads. Out of these, He first of all gives the characteristics of a
SГҘttvika YajВӨa, which is worth performing.
вҖўВ»В§вҲӮUГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUГҒЛҮГҠГҒГ·ГҝВёГҙГҠГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ“Е’ГҺcвүҲГҠпЈҝ Гҝ ГҹГ–ГҝГғпЈҝвҖ“
ГҝcвүҲвҲҡГҝв—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮпЈҝГҒГғ в—ҠЕёвҖ” вҖҡв—ҠГҠЕ“ГҠГҝ вҖҡ вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§вҖ”H 11H
вҖўВ»В§вҲӮUГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUГҒЛҮГҠГҒГ·вҖ” by those who expect no return; ГҝГҙГҠвҖ”Г” sacrifice; ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ“Е’ГҺcвүҲвҖ” ordained by
scriptural injunctions; ГҝвҖ”Г” which; ГҹГ–ГҝГғпЈҝГ” is offered; ГҝcвүҲвҲҡГҝв—ҠЛңГ” вҲһп¬Ӯ sacrifices must be performed; ГҹГҒГғ
thus; в—ҠЕёвҖ” the mind; вҖҡв—ҠГҠЕ“ГҠГҝГ” satisfying; вҖҡвҖ” that; вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§вҖ” (is) SГҘttvika in character.
The sacrifice which is offered, as ordained by scriptural injunctions, by men who
expect no return and who believe that such sacrifices must be performed, is SГҘttvika
in character.                                                                                 (11)
The Lord now describes the characteristics of a RГҘjasika sacrifice.
вҖўГҒГ·вҖҡГЈЕ“ГҠГҝ ГғГҲ В»В§вҲӮВўU Е’ГӘГ·ГҠГ•Вёв—ҠГҒВ¬ ГёГ’п¬Ӯ ГҝГғЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҹГ–ГҝГғпЈҝ Г·вҒ„UГғГјГҠпЈҝcвҲҶ ГғВў ГҝГҙГҠВў ГҒп¬ӮГҒh вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ”H 12H

=== PAGE 694 ===

* Chapter XVII *
693
вҖўГҒГ·вҖҡГЈЕ“ГҠГҝ keeping in view; ГғГҲ but; В»В§вҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” the fruit; Е’ГӘГ·ГҠГ•Вёв—ҠЛңГ” mere show; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; Гё or;
вҲһп¬ӮГ” for the sake of; ГҝГғЛңГ” which; ГҹГ–ГҝГғпЈҝГ” is offered; Г·вҒ„UГғГјГҠпЈҝDГ”U O best of Bharatas, Arjuna; Гғв—ҠЛңГ” that;
ГҝГҙГҠв—ҠЛңГ” sacrifice; ГҒп¬ӮГҒh know; вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” of the RГҘjasika type.
That sacrifice, however, which is performed for the sake of mere show or even
with an eye to its fruit, know it to be RГҘjasika, Arjuna.                             (12)
The Lord now proceeds to describe the characteristics of a TГҘmasika sacrifice, which
is wholly worth abstaining from.
ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ“вҖһUГӢЕёв—ҠвҖҡГҺCГ”UГҠГӣГҠВў 
в—ҠГЈГІГҠвҖһUГӢЕёв—ҠЕ’ГҒЛҮГҠГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГјГҠhГҠГҒп¬ӮвҒ„UГҒвҖһUГғВў ГҝГҙГҠВў ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡВў В¬ГҒвҒ„UГёЛҮГҠГғпЈҝГ”H 13H
ГҒп¬ӮГҒЕ“вҖһUГӢЕёв—ҠЛңГ” without regard for the scriptural injunctions; вҖўвҖҡГҺCГ”UГҠГӣГҠв—ҠЛңГ”U in which no food is
offered; в—ҠГЈГІГҠвҖһUГӢЕёв—ҠЛңГ” without sacred chant; вҖўЕ’ГҒЛҮГҠГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” without sacrificial fees; ГјГҠhГҠГҒп¬ӮвҒ„UГҒвҖһUГғв—ҠЛңГ” devoid
of faith; ГҝГҙГҠв—ҠЛңГ” sacrifice; ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” of the TГҘmasika type; В¬ГҒвҒ„UГёЛҮГҠГғпЈҝГ” they call.
A sacrifice which is not in conformity with scriptural injunctions, in which no
food is offered, and no sacrificial fees are paid, which is without sacred chant of hymns
and devoid of faith, is said to be TГҘmasika.                                                               (13)
next or for the eradication of any evil is said
to have been undertaken with an interested
motive.
A sacrifice which has been undertaken
with an interested motive is RГҘjasika in
character even if it is enjoined by the scriptures
and has been performed with reverence: even
so, that which is undertaken for the sake of
mere show is equally RГҘjasika. That which
suffers from both these defects is, therefore,
much more so. This is what is sought to be
conveyed by the use of the particles Г«EvaГӯ,
Г«ApiГӯ and Г«CaГӯ in the first half of this verse.
The disjunctive particle Г«TuГӯ is intended
to distinguish the RГҘjasika type of sacrifices
from the SГҘttvika type mentioned in the
preceding verse.
A sacrifice which is undertaken with a
view to establishing oneГӯs reputation as one
devoted to sacrifices, even though one has
no faith in sacrificial performances, is said to
be undertaken for mere show.
Again, a sacrifice which is performed
for securing a wife, progeny, wealth, house,
honour, fame, prestige, victory, heavenly bliss
or any other enjoyment of this world or the
have not been employed in accordance with
the scriptural injunctions, or in which such
formulas have been occasionally omitted for
want of respect for them.
Г«AdakВ¶iЖ’amГӯ is that in which no sacrificial
fees have been paid to the officiating priests
and no gifts made to other BrГҘhmaЖ’as.
Lastly, Г«вҖәraddhГҘvirahitamГӯ is that which
is actuated by self-conceit, arrogance, delusion,
hypocrisy, and egotism etc., and is marked
by lack of reverence.
Г«VidhihвҲӮnamГӯ is that which is not enjoined
by the вҖәГҘstras or in which there is no respect
for the scriptural injunction or which has
been performed in an arbitrary way setting
aside the injunctions of the scriptures.
Г«AsГҰВ¶ВўГҘnnamГӯ is that in which there is no
feeding of BrГҘhmaЖ’as and no gifts of food.
Г«MantrahвҲӮnamГӯ is that in which there
is no sacred chant as enjoined by the
scriputures,Гіin which either no sacred
formulas have been employed at all or they

=== PAGE 695 ===

694
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«DevaГӯ stands here for BrahmГҘ
(the Creator), вҖәiva (the god of destruction),
the sun-god, the moon-god, DurgГҘ (вҖәivaГӯs
Consort), Agni (the god of fire), VaruЖ’a (the
god presiding over waters), Yama (the god
of judgment), Indra (the lord of paradise) and
all other gods mentioned in the вҖәГҘstrasГіwhose
worship has been enjoined in the вҖәГҘstras. The
word Г«DvijaГӯ, though denoting in its wider
application all the three higher castes, viz.,
the BrГҘhmaЖ’a, (the priestly class), the KВ¶atriya
(the warrior class) and the VaiвҖ№ya (the trading
class), stands exclusively for the BrГҘhmaЖ’a;
for the latter alone is an object of worship for
all. The word Г«GuruГӯ in this verse covers oneГӯs
parents, preceptor, aged folk and those who
are superior in VarЖ’a (grade in society),
Г…вҖ№rama (stage in life) and age, etc. And the
word Г«PrГҘjВӨaГӯ denotes saintly and wise men
who possess adequate knowledge of God.
Treating all these with due respect and attention,
bowing to them, prostrating oneself at their
feet, washing their feet, offering them
sandalpaste, flowers, incense, light, food etc.,
rendering them appropriate services etc., and
making reasonable attempts to gratify themГі
all these are included in their worship.
The word Г«вҖәaucaГӯ has been used here in
the restricted sense of mere external purity.
For purity of speech has been mentioned
separately in verse 15 and purity of mind in
verse 16. Г«вҖәaucaГӯ consists in cleaning oneГӯs
body with water, earth etc., and keeping all
oneГӯs bodily activities pure (XVI.3).
Г«Г…rjavaГӯ means straightness. Having been
mentioned as a part of bodily penance, it
signifies absence of crookedness in the form
of stiffness and twisting of the body.
Г«BrahmacaryaГӯ consists in abstaining from
sexual commerce in all its bodily forms and
carefully preserving oneГӯs seminal fluid.
Г«AhiвүҲsГҘГӯ means taking a vow never to
inflict with oneГӯs body the least suffering in
any form on any creature whatsoever.
The above virtues and practices are mainly
connected with the body, or in other words,
the body plays the principal part in them; and
they wash away all the impurities of the
body and the senses and purify them. Hence
they are known as bodily penance.
Having thus described the characteristics of the threefold YajВӨa, the Lord now takes up
the subject of Tapas, and in order to point out the characteristics of SГҘttvika penance in the
following four verses, first discusses the nature of bodily penance.
Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҒmВЎВӘГҲLВ§В¬ЛқГҠГҙГҠВ¬ГҚВЎЕёВў 
вүҘГҠГҠГ’Гёв—ҠГҠВЎВёп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” 
Г”вҖ“
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГёГҝВёв—ҠГҒвҖһВўUвҖҡГҠ Гё вүҘГҠГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„ВўU ГғВ¬ В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝГ”H 14H
Е’пЈҝп¬ӮГҒmВЎВӘГҲLВ§В¬ЛқГҠГҙГҠВ¬ГҚВЎЕёв—ҠЛңГ” worship of gods, the BrГҘhmaЖ’as, oneГӯs teachers, elders and great
souls; вүҘГҠГҠГ’Гёв—ҠЛңГ” purity; вҖўГҠВЎВёп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” straightness; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГёГҝВёв—ҠЛңГ” continence; вҖўГҒвҖһВўUвҖҡГҠ non-violence; Гё and;
вүҘГҠГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” bodily; ГғВ¬вҖ” penance; В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is called.
Worship of gods, the BrГҘhmaЖ’as, oneГӯs teachers, elders and great souls, purity,
straightforwardness, continence and non-violenceГіthese are called penance of the
body.
 (14)
The Lord now proceeds to describe the austerity of speech.
вҖўЕёГҲmпЈҝВӘвҲ‘В§вҒ„ВўU п¬ӮГҠГ„ГҝВў вҖҡГ ГҝВў ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝГҒвҖһUГғВў Гё ГҝГғЛңГ”вҖ“
Sп¬ӮГҠГӨГҝГҠГҝГҠГЁГҝвҖҡЕёВў ГёГ’п¬Ӯ п¬ӮГҠГҰЛңUГ”в—ҠГҝВў ГғВ¬ В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝH 15H

=== PAGE 696 ===

* Chapter XVII *
695
Words which cause no annoyance to
others and are absolutely untainted by
calumny and slander etc., are called
Г«AnudvegakaraГӯ. Similarly, truthful words are
those which state the bare truth in order to
convey to others a correct idea of what one
has actually seen, heard or experienced. Loving,
sweet, artless and gentle words, which are
pleasing to hear and are altogether free from
acerbity, pungency, coldness, sarcasm,
insolence and other faults, are known as
Г«PriyaГӯ. And words which are ultimately
beneficial to all, which are altogether free
from violence, malice, jealousy and animosity,
and are full of love, compassion and good
wishes are called Г«HitaГӯ.
The uttering of only, such words as
combine in themselves all the four virtues,
viz., unoffensiveness, veracity, agreeability
and wholesomeness, and are free from all
impurities of speech mentioned in the вҖәГҘstras,
can be recognized as the austerity of speech;
words which have the least tinge of these
impurities and lack in any of the aforesaid
virtues do not fall under the category of
complete austerity of speech. This is what is
sought to be conveyed by the use of the
particle Г«CaГӯ after Г«PriyahitamГӯ.
Reciting the Vedas and their auxiliaries
viz., works on grammar, phonetics etc., the SmГҰti
texts, the PurГҘЖ’as and Stotras or panegyrics to
God etc., according to oneГӯs qualifications,
uttering the praises, glory and names of God
and offering prayers etc., to GodГіall these
are included in Г«SvГҘdhyГҘyГҘbhyasanamГӯ.
All the above virtues and practices are
connected with speech; they eradicate all the
impurities of speech and purify it along with
the mind; hence they have been spoken of as
the austerity of speech.
вҖўЕёГҲmпЈҝВӘвҲ‘В§вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” causing no annoyance; п¬ӮГҠГ„Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” speech; вҖҡГ Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” truthful; ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝГҒвҖһUГғв—ҠЛңГ” agreeable and
wholesome; Гё and; ГҝГғЛңГ” which (is); Sп¬ӮГҠГӨГҝГҠГҝГҠГЁГҝвҖҡЕёв—ҠЛңГ” study of the Vedas and other вҖәГҘstras and
the practice of NГҘma-Japa or repetition of the Divine Name; ГёГ” and; вҲһп¬Ӯ verily; п¬ӮГҠГҰЛңUГ”в—ҠГҝв—ҠЛңГ” ГғВ¬вҖ”
the austerity of speech; В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is called.
Words which cause no annoyance to others and are truthful, agreeable and
wholesome, as well as the study of the Vedas and other вҖәГҘstras and the practice of
repetition of the Divine NameГіthis is known as the austerity of speech.          (15)
The Lord now tells us what is austerity of the mind.
в—ҠЕёвҖ”В¬ЛқвҖҡГҠЕ’вҖ” вҖҡГҠГ’ГӘГҝГ п¬ӮВў в—ҠГҠГ’Еёв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠГҒп¬ӮГҒЕёВӘЛқвҖһUвҖ”Г”вҖ“
Г·ГҠп¬ӮвҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҲГҒhГҒвҒ„UГ ГҝпЈҝГғГ»ГҠВ¬ГҠпЈҝ 
в—ҠГҠЕёвҖҡв—ҠГҲГ«ГҝГғпЈҝH 16H
в—ҠЕёвҖ”В¬ЛқвҖҡГҠЕ’вҖ” cheerfulness of mind; вҖҡГҠГ’ГӘГҝГ п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” placidity; в—ҠГҠГ’Еёв—ҠЛңГ” habit of contemplation on God;
вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҒп¬ӮГҒЕёВӘЛқвҖһUвҖ” control of the mind; Г·ГҠп¬ӮвҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҲГҒhвҖ” perfect purity of inner feelings; ГҹГҒГғ вҲһГғГғЛңГ” all this;
ГғВ¬вҖ”Г” в—ҠГҠЕёвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” austerity of the mind; В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is known as.
Cheerfulness of mind, placidity, habit of contemplation of God, control of the
mind and perfect purity of inner feelingsГіall this is called austerity of the mind. (16)
perturbation etc., and is filled with light and
vivacity, it is said to be cheerful.
Complete absence of such afflicting
morbidities as coldness, jealousy, violence,
Г«ManaВЁprasГҘdaВЁГӯ means purity and
cheerfulness of mind. In other words, when
the mind is freed from morbidities like dejection
and fear, anxiety and grief, agony and

=== PAGE 697 ===

696
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
vindictiveness, ferocity, ruthlessness etc., and
the constant placidity and coolness of the
mind is known as Г«SaumyatvamГӯ.
Г«MaunamГӯ means the constant application
of the mind to the thought of the virtues,
glory, truth, essential character, sports and
names etc., of God or to an enquiry about
Brahma or the Absolute.
When the restlessness of the mind totally
disappears and it gets steady and thoroughly
disciplined, it is said to be controlled. This is
what is known as Г«Г…tmavinigrahaВЁГӯ.
Г«BhГҘvasaвүҲвҖ№uddhiВЁГӯ means the complete
elimination from the mind of evil propensities
like partiality and prejudice, lust and anger,
greed and infatuation, arrogance and malice,
jealousy and animosity, scorn and contumely,
envy and intolerance, obstinate error and idle
thought, aversion to what is desirable and
contemplating what is unwelcome, on the
one hand, and the constant blossoming of
virtues like forbearance, love, politeness etc.,
on the other.
All the virtues mentioned in this verse
are connected with the mind, and eradicating
all it's impurities purify it; hence they
have been spoken of as the austerity of
the mind.
The Lord now defines SГҘttvika penance.
ГјГҠhГҝГҠ В¬вҒ„UГҝГҠ Гғ#Вў ГғВ¬SГғГҒГ ГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“Вў ЕёвҒ„Г’UвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҖўВ»В§вҲӮUГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUГҒЛҮГҠГҒГ·ГҝГҲВёQГ’В§вҖ” вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘ВўВ§ В¬ГҒвҒ„UГёЛҮГҠГғпЈҝH 17H
ГјГҠhГҝГҠ В¬вҒ„UГҝГҠ with supreme faith; Гғ#в—ҠЛңГ” practised; ГғВ¬вҖ”Г” penance; ГғГғЛңГ” that, above-mentioned;
ГҒГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“в—ҠЛңГ” threefold; ЕёвҒ„Г’UвҖ” men; вҖўВ»В§вҲӮUГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUГҒЛҮГҠГҒГ·вҖ”Г” expecting no return; ГҝГҲQГ’В§вҖ” self-disciplined; вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ”
SГҘttvika; В¬ГҒвҒ„UГёЛҮГҠГғпЈҝ (they) call.
This threefold penance performed with supreme faith by YogвҲӮs expecting no
return is called SГҘttvika.                                                                 (17)
than what we have in things which are open
to perception,Гіis called Г«supreme faithГӯ. And
the aforesaid penance, when it is performed
with exceptional reverence and zeal, remaining
unshaken under all circumstances and minding
not in the least the greatest obstacles or
hardships, is spoken of as Г«вҖәraddhayГҘ parayГҘ
taptamГӯ.
The use of the adjectives Г«TatГӯ and
Г«TrividhamГӯ with Г«TapaВЁГӯ is intended to convey
that the threefold penance relating to the
body, speech and mind, mentioned in the
preceding three verses alone, can be SГҘttvika
in character. Other forms of penance, such as
those referred to in verse 5 of this very
chapter as Г«not sanctioned by the scripturesГӯ
(AвҖ№ГҘstravihitam) and Г«dreadfulГӯ (Ghoram), are
never SГҘttvika. It further shows that although
the forms of penance enumerated in verses
Г«AphalГҘkГҘвҲҶkВ¶вҲӮГӯ is he who never and on
no account entertains the least craving for any
return whatsoever in the shape of enjoyments
of this world or the next or the cessation of
suffering; and he whose mind, intellect and
senses, being disciplined and untainted, can
never be excited by enjoyment of any kind
whatsoever, and who is entirely free from
attachment, 
is 
called 
Г«YuktaГӯ. 
Thus
demonstrating by the use of the above two
epithets the need of a disinterested spirit, the
Lord thereby shows that the threefold penance
described in the above three verses assumes
a wholly SГҘttvika character only when it is
performed by such disinterested persons.
Consummate and reverent faith in the
value, glory and essential character of the
above-mentioned threefold penance, as depicted
in the вҖәГҘstras,Гіa faith which is more living

=== PAGE 698 ===

* Chapter XVII *
697
14, 15 and 16 above are SГҘttvika in character,
they are wholly SГҘttvika only when they are
performed in the spirit indicated in the present
verse.
in the first half of this verse is intended to
show that austerity practised for attaining any
other selfish end is also included in the category
of RГҘjasika penance.
Austerity, whether of a profane or sacred
character, which is practised for mere
ostentation assuming the guise of an ascetic
with a view to gaining any selfish end through
fraudulence, even though one has no real
faith in penance,Гіthis is what is known as
practising austerity through Г«DambhaГӯ.
It should be noted in this connection
that a selfish motive alone brings down austerity
to the RГҘjasika level; it is much more so if it
is accompanied with ostentation.
There is no surety about our gaining the
object sought through such penance; hence
such austerity has been declared as Г«AdhruvaГӯ,
and it has been spoken of as Г«CalaГӯ because
whatever return we get for such penance
does not last for ever, it is bound to perish.
The use of the adjective Г«YatГӯ with
Г«TapasГӯ is intended to convey that whatever
penances have been mentioned in the вҖәГҘstras
in the form of sacred vows, fasts and self-
discipline fall under the category of RГҘjasika
penance if they are performed with some
interested motive.
The reputation that one gains in the
world, through publicity given to oneГӯs
austerities, as an ascetic of a very high order
unequalled in penance and a man of supreme
excellence is called Г«SatkГҘraГӯ. Г«MГҘnaГӯ consists
in welcoming a man as an ascetic, rising
before him, bowing to him, presenting him
with an address or showing respect to him
through any other gesture. And waving Г…ratвҲӮ
before him, washing his feet, offering him
leaves and flowers and other recognized forms
of worship, and carrying out his behestsГіall
these are known by the name of Г«PВөujГҘГӯ.
The use of the particles Г«CaГӯ and Г«EvaГӯ
The Lord now defines the RГҘjasika type of penance.
вҖҡГ вҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠГҠЕёВ¬ГҚВЎГҠГ•Z ГғВ¬ГҠпЈҝ Е’ГӘГ·пЈҝЕё ГёГ’п¬Ӯ ГҝГғЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГғпЈҝ ГғГҒЕ’вҖһU В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВўВ§ вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡВў ГёвҲӮUв—ҠЕ“ЛқГҲп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ”H 18H
вҖҡГ вҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠГҠЕёВ¬ГҚВЎГҠГ•Вёв—ҠЛңГ” for the sake of renown, honour or adoration; ГғВ¬вҖ” the penance; Е’ГӘГ·пЈҝЕё
(either in all sincerity or) by way of ostentation; Гё as well as; вҲһп¬Ӯ for any other selfish gain;
ГҝГғЛңГ” which; ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГғпЈҝ is performed; ГғГғЛңГ” that; ГҹвҖһU here; В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§в—ҠЛңГ” has been spoken of; вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” (as) RГҘjasika
in character; ГёвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” вҖўЕ“ЛқГҲп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” yielding an uncertain (and) momentary fruit.
The penance which is performed for the sake of renown, honour or adoration as
well as for any other selfish gain, either in all sincerity or by way of ostentation, and
yields an uncertain and momentary fruit, has been spoken of here as RГҘjasika. (18)
The Lord now defines penance of the TГҘmasika type, which is altogether worth
abstaining from.
в—ҠГҚвҖҰUВӘЛқГҠвҖһпЈҝUГЎГҠГҠГ в—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝ ГҝГ В¬ГӢВ«UГҝГҠ ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГғпЈҝ ГғВ¬вҖ”Г”вҖ“
В¬вҒ„USГҝГҠпЈҝГ вҖҡГҠЕ’ЕёГҠГ•Z п¬ӮГҠ ГғГ»ГҠГҠв—ҠвҖҡв—ҠГҲЕ’ГҠNUГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 19H

=== PAGE 699 ===

698
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«TГҘmasamГӯ in this verse refers
to the type of penance mentioned in verses 5
and 6 of this chapter, which is not sanctioned
by the scriptures but is conceived by oneГӯs own
mind and which is characterized by dreadful
acts of self-mortification, such as tying oneГӯs
feet to the bough of a tree and hanging with
oneГӯs head downwards, sitting on iron spikes
and so on, performed with some evil intent either
by way of ostentation or through ignorance.
This is what is sought to be conveyed by the
use of the adjective Г«YatГӯ with Г«TapaВЁГӯ.
Obstinately clinging to any practice
whatsoever as an act of penance without
knowing the true characteristics of austerity
is called Г«MВөuЕ’hagrГҘhaГӯ. And undertaking with
such obstinacy, as an act of penance, a
TГҘmasika 
practice 
characterized 
by
mortification of oneГӯs body, speech and
mind,Гіthis is what is meant by performing a
penance through perversity.
The word Г«Г…tmanaВЁГӯ in this verse stands
for oneГӯs mind, speech and body; and their
mortification is referred to here as Г«Г…tmanaВЁ
PвҲӮЕ’ayГҘГӯ. Therefore, an act of penance which
is not sanctioned by the scriptures and subjects
oneГӯs mind etc., or any of them to undue
hardships is said to be accompanied by self-
mortification.
Mortifying oneГӯs mind, speech and
body with intent to usurp or destroy others,
property, exterminate their family line or harm
them in any way,Гіthis is what is called
Г«ParasyotsГҘdanГҘrtham TapaВЁГӯ.
The use of the particle Г«VГҘГӯ is intended
to convey that an act of penance which has
any of these characteristics is TГҘmasika in
character.
в—ҠГҚвҖҰUВӘЛқГҠвҖһпЈҝUГЎГҠ through perversity; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ” self-mortification; ГҝГғЛңГ” which; В¬ГӢВ«UГҝГҠ accompanied
with; ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГғпЈҝ is performed; ГғВ¬вҖ” the penance; В¬вҒ„USГҝ В©UГ вҖҡГҠЕ’ЕёГҠГ•Вёв—ҠЛңГ” for harming another; п¬ӮГҠ or; ГғГғЛңГ” that;
ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” TГҘmasika (in character); В©UЕ’ГҠNUГғв—ҠЛңГ” has been declared to be.
Austerity which is practised through perversity and is accompanied by self-mortification
or is intended to harm others, such austerity has been declared as TГҘmasika.
 (19)
Having defined the three kinds of penance, the Lord now proceeds to mention the
threefold division of charity and with this end in view, defines the SГҘttvika type first.
Е’ГҠГғвҲҡГҝГҒв—ҠГҒГғ 
ГҝgГҠЕёВў 
Е’ГӢГҝГғпЈҝЛҳЕёГҲВ¬вҲ‘В§ГҠГҒвҒ„UГЎГҠпЈҝГ”вҖ“
Е’пЈҝвүҘГҠпЈҝ вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝU Гё В¬ГҠГІГҠпЈҝ Гё ГғgГҠЕёВў вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘ВўВ§ Sв—ҠГҺГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 20H
Е’ГҠГғвҲҡГҝв—ҠЛңГ” it is oneГӯs duty to give; ГҹГҒГғ with this idea; ГҝГғЛңГ” Е’ГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” a gift which; Е’ГӢГҝГғпЈҝ is
bestowed; вҖўЕёГҲВ¬вҲ‘В§ГҠГҒвҒ„UГЎГҠпЈҝ on one who is no benefactor; Е’пЈҝвүҘГҠпЈҝ in a fit place; вҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝU at a suitable time;
Гё and; В¬ГҠГІГҠпЈҝ to a deserving person; Гё and (also); ГғГғЛңГ” Е’ГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” that gift; вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” (as) SГҘttvika; Sв—ҠГҺГғв—ҠЛңГ”
has been declared.
A gift which is bestowed with a sense of duty on one from whom no return is
expected, at appropriate time and place, to a deserving person, that gift has been
declared as SГҘttvika.
 (20)
paramount duty to bestow gifts, enjoined by
the scriptures, with due regard to his grade in
society, stage in life, condition and
circumstances to devote his possessions to
Showing by the use of the words
Г«DГҘtavyamitiГӯ that a disinterested spirit is
essential for the full development of SattvaguЖ’a,
the Lord tells us in this verse that it is manГӯs

=== PAGE 700 ===

* Chapter XVII *
699
the good of others to the best of his ability.
Failing to do so he falls from the human state
and flouts the blessed commandment of God.
Therefore, that gift alone is wholly SГҘttvika
in character, which is bestowed with a pure
sense of duty without expecting any return
either here or hereafter.
Only that place and time are fit and
suitable for gratifying others through the gift
of a particular object, at which that object is
particularly needed. For instance, that place
and time alone are fit and suitable for the gift
of food and water, which are marked by the
prevalence of famine or draughtГіno matter
if that place is no place of pilgrimage and
that time has no special religious significance.
Besides these, ordinarily speaking, KurukВ¶etra,
HaridvГҘra, 
MathurГҘ, 
KГҘвҖ№вҲӮ, 
PrayГҘga,
NaimiВ¶ГҘraЖ’ya and other sacred places, and
all sacred occasions such as the solar and
lunar eclipses, the full moon and new moon,
SaвүҲkrГҘnti (the passage of the sun from one
zodiacal sign to another), EkГҘdaвҖ№вҲӮ (the eleventh
day of every dark and bright fortnight)Гі
which have been commended in the вҖәГҘstras
for charityГіare suitable places and occasions.
the words Г«DeвҖ№eГӯ and Г«KГҘleГӯ in this verse
refer to all these places and occasions.
He who is in need of a particular object
at 
a 
particular 
place 
and 
time 
is
a Г«PГҘtraГӯ or fit person to receive a gift of that
object at that very place and time. For instance,
all living beings who are hungry, thirsty, naked,
poor, sick, afflicted, forlorn and terror-stricken
are worthy of receiving gifts of food, water,
cloth, wherewithal to make both ends meet,
medicine, consolation, shelter and assurance
of safety respectively. The fitness of afflicted
creatures is not qualified by considerations of
caste, nationality or time. Their affliction alone
is a test of their fitness. Besides these, learned
BrГҘhmaЖ’as of excellent conduct, ideal
BrahmacГҘrвҲӮs or religious students, VГҘnaprasthas
or hermits living in a forest and SaвүҲnyГҘsвҲӮs or
recluses who have renounced the world, and
those who have taken a vow of service are fit
to receive, according to their respective
qualifications, gifts of money and other articles
which are within the means of the donor and
have been recommended for them by the
вҖәГҘstras.
It is certainly obligatory to render good
offices to, and try to gratify to oneГӯs level
best, those to whom one owes a debt of
gratitude. Nay, men of a noble disposition
cannot help obliging their benefactor. They
know that an attempt to return a true obligation
is to undervalue it; for a real obligation cannot
be repaid at all. Hence they render good
offices to him only for their own satisfaction;
and whatever they do, appears inadequate to
them. They remain overwhelmed with gratitude.
In вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘmacaritamГҘnasa of GosvГҘmвҲӮ
TulasвҲӮdГҘsa, BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma says to His
devotee, HanumГҘn:Гі
Г¬O monkey-god, there is none among
celestials, human beings and sages, who has
rendered such valuable services to Me as
you have done. How should I requite your
services? My mind is unable even to stand
your looks.Г®
In вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata, BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a proclaims His indebtedness to the
cowherd damsels of Vraja. Under such
circumstances, offering anything to a benefactor
can never be unjustifiable or a RГҘjasika act;
of course, it does not come within the purview
of Г«DГҘnaГӯ or charity. It is rather a natural
gesture expressive of oneГӯs gratitude. Those
who regard it as an act of charity really offer
insult to the benefactor; while those who are
unwilling to oblige a benefactor belong to
the category of ungrateful creatures. Hence
one must render good offices to oneГӯs
benefactor.
By insisting that a gift should be bestowed

=== PAGE 701 ===

700
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
on one who is not a benefactor, the Lord
seeks to convey that a donor should not
expect the least return from the donee or
recipient of the gift. That gift alone is SГҘttvika,
which is bestowed on him in whom one has
no selfish interest. As a matter of fact, the
Lord thereby simply warns the donor against
entertaining a selfish motive.
The Lord now defines a RГҘjasika gift.
ГҝГ»ГҠГҲ В¬ЛқГ ГҝГҲВ¬вҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГҠГ•Z В»В§вҲӮUв—ҠГҲГҒgвүҘГҝ п¬ӮГҠ В¬ГҲЕёвҖ”вҖ“
Е’ГӢГҝГғпЈҝ Гё В¬ГҒвҒ„UГҒГ„вҖ№cвүҲГ”ВўU ГғgГҠЕёВў вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡВў Sв—ҠГҺГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 21H
ГҝГғЛңГ” which; ГғГҲ however; В¬ЛқГ ГҝГҲВ¬вҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГҠГ•Вёв—ҠЛңГ” for getting a service in return; В»В§вҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” a reward; В©UГҒgвүҘГҝ
expecting; п¬ӮГҠ or; В¬ГҲЕёвҖ” then; Е’ГӢГҝГғпЈҝ is given; Гё and; В¬ГҒвҒ„UГҒГ„вҖ№cвүҲв—ҠЛңГ” in a grudging spirit; ГғГғЛңГ” that; Е’ГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ”
gift; вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” RГҘjasika (in character); Sв—ҠГҺГғв—ҠЛңГ” has been proclaimed.
A gift which is bestowed in a grudging spirit and with the object of getting a
service in return or in the hope of obtaining a reward, is called RГҘjasika.        (21)
Similarly, a gift which is bestowed on an
individual or institution with the object of gaining
honour, fame, prestige and enjoyments, either
of this world or the next, or for curing some
disease, is said to have been given in the hope
of obtaining a reward. Some people seek to
derive a number of benefits all at once from
a single gift, e.g., they anticipate that:Гі
(a) The donee or recipient of the gift
will feel obliged and will take sides with
them in a good or evil cause when the time
comes for it;
(b) They will gain reputation, which
will add to their prestige and bring honour to
them;
(c) Publicity through the press will create
an impression on the minds of the general
public that the donors are very rich; this will
give them a number of advantages in business
and they will be able to make maximum
profits;
(d) Good reputation will enable them to
secure high connections for their sons and
daughters, which will serve a number of their
ends;
(e) Their gift as a matter of course will
yield in the next world the maximum return
promised in the вҖәГҘstras.
The disjunctive particle Г«TuГӯ in this verse
is intended to distinguish the RГҘjasika from
the SГҘttvika type of gifts.
A donation which is given in a reluctant
and helpless mood under threat or coercion,
due to pressure exerted by respectable and
influential men, in response to an importunity
or with a covert feeling of discomfiture and
sorrow, is said to have been given in a
grudging spirit.
A gift bestowed on someone who is of
permanent utility or who is expected or
calculated to render some useful service, great
or small, later on, is no true gift, really
speaking that is something like a sum advanced
to ensure a service. For instance, on sacred
occasions like a SomavatвҲӮ AmГҘvasyГҘ (the
last day of a dark fortnight synchronizing
with a monday, which is a rare phenomenon)
it is customary these days to bestow a gift on
such BrГҘhmaЖ’as as are useful to ourselves or
to our friends or relatives, and who are expected
to render some service in future, or to donate
a sum to institutions or organizers of institutions
who are expected in return to serve our ends
in ways more than one. This is what is meant
by bestowing a gift with the object of getting
a service in return.

=== PAGE 702 ===

* Chapter XVII *
701
Calculations of this kind detract much
from the value of a gift.
The use of the particles Г«VГҘГӯ, Г«PunaВЁГӯ
and Г«CaГӯ is intended to convey that a gift is
RГҘjasika if it possesses any of the three traits
mentioned in the verse.
The Lord now defines a TГҘmasika gift.
вҖўЕ’пЈҝвүҘГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝU 
ГҝgГҠЕёв—ҠВ¬ГҠГІГҠпЈҝГЁГҝp 
Е’ГӢГҝГғпЈҝвҖ“
вҖўвҖҡГ вҲ‘ГҺВ§Гғв—Ҡп¬ӮГҙГҠГҠГғВў 
ГғГ»ГҠГҠв—ҠвҖҡв—ҠГҲЕ’ГҠNUГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 22H
вҖўЕ’пЈҝвүҘГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠвҲӮпЈҝU out of time and place; ГҝГғЛңГ” Е’ГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” a gift which; вҖўВ¬ГҠГІГҠпЈҝГЁГҝвҖ” to undeserving persons;
Гё and; Е’ГӢГҝГғпЈҝ is given; вҖўвҖҡГ вҲ‘ГҺВ§Гғв—ҠЛңГ” without good grace; вҖўп¬ӮГҙГҠГҠГғв—ҠЛңГ” (or) disdainfully; ГғГғЛңГ” that; ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ”
(as) TГҘmasika; В©UЕ’ГҠNUГғв—ҠЛңГ” has been spoken of.
A gift which is made without good grace and in a disdainful spirit, out of time and
place, and to undeserving person or persons, is said to be TГҘmasika.                          (22)
place paves the way for hell, hence it has
been denounced as Г«TГҘmasikaГӯ.
Those who need no gift and who have
been precluded by the вҖәГҘstras from receiving
a gift, e.g., he who marks a show of piety, a
hypocrite, an imposter, a cruel man, a
caluminator, he who is intent on achieving
his own selfish ends by depriving others of
their means of subsistence, he who affects
humility, he who takes forbidden articles
such as meat and wine, he who indulges in
mean pursuits such as thieving, adultery etc.,
a swindler, a gambler, an unbeliever and so
on, all these are unfit for receiving a gift. A
gift bestowed on them is fruitless and leads
the donor to hell; hence it is TГҘmasika in
character. This should, not, however, be taken
to debar anyone giving food, water, clothing
and medicine etc., to the hungry, thirsty,
naked and sick according to their respective
needs.
A gift which is given in a cold manner
without due attention to a deserving man,
who comes to receive it, i.e., without greeting
him, enquiring after his health, addressing
sweet and polite words to him and offering
him a seat etc., is known as Г«AsatkГҰtamГӯ.
Similarly, a gift which is made with an
adverse criticism and unpleasant remarks,
which is accompanied with a threat and a
strict warning not to appear again, and which
is given with words of ridicule or with an
insult offered through speech, body or gesture,
is called Г«AvajВӨГҘtamГӯ.
That time and place which are not suitable
for a gift, that is to say, in which a gift is
unnecessary or forbidden by the scriptures
(e.g., the gift of a cow in a place where
barberous or Mlecchas live or giving away
girl in marriage during an eclipse), are referred
to here by the compound word Г«AdeвҖ№akГҘleГӯ.
A gift which is made at such a time and
Thus, with a view to declaring sacrifice, austerity and charity etc., of the SГҘttvika type
as worth practising and those of the RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika types as worth renouncing,
sacrifice etc., have been classified under three heads each. The next topic is now introduced
in order to show that connection they have with God and how a flaw or defect in the
practice of the SГҘttvika types of sacrifice, austerity and charity is set right, and so on.
Лҷ ГғГ вҖҡГҒЕ’ГҒГғ ГҒЕёЕ’пЈҝВёвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГЎГҠГҒSГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“вҖ” Sв—ҠГҺГғвҖ”вҖ“
вҖҷЛқГҠrГҠГ”ГЎГҠГҠSГғпЈҝЕё п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГҠp ГҝГҙГҠГҠp ГҒп¬ӮГҒвҖһUГғГҠвҖ” В¬ГҲвҒ„UГҠH 23H

=== PAGE 703 ===

702
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Although there are countless names of
Brahma or Almighty God, the appellations,
OГҖ, TAT and SAT have been recognized
as the foremost in the Vedas and they are
specially connected with sacred pursuits like
sacrifice, austerity and charity. Hence these
three alone have been mentioned here.
The pronoun Г«TenaГӯ refers to Brahma
who bears the three appellations, rather than
to the appellations (NirdeвҖ№aВЁ) themselves.
Here it may be urged that while in
Chapter III above the entire creation including
sacrifices has been spoken of as having
emanated from BrahmГҘ, the Lord of creation
(III.10), the present verse declares the
BrГҘhmaЖ’as etc., as having evolved from God
Himself; how are these two statements to be
reconciled? In this connection it may be
submitted that BrahmГҘ, the lord of creation,
has taken his descent from God, while the
BrГҘhmaЖ’as, the Vedas and sacrifices etc.,
have all emanated from BrahmГҘ. Therefore,
at some places these have been spoken of as
having emanated from God Himself, while at
others they have been declared as having
evolved from BrahmГҘ, the lord of creation. It
is, however, just the same.
The word Г«BrГҘhmaЖ’ГҘВЁГӯ in this verse
should be taken to cover all created beings
from the BrГҘhmaЖ’a downwards; and Г«YajВӨГҘВЁГӯ
should be understood to include sacrifice,
austerity, charity and all other duties of an
obligatory nature enjoined by the scriptures.
The idea underlying this verse is that
the syllables OГҖ, TAT and SAT are
appellations of God, from whom this entire
creation consisting of the sacrificer, the act of
sacrifice and the body of rules governing
such sacrificial performances has emanated;
hence the utterance etc., of these appellations
corrects the flaws and defects of all these
performances. Utterance of the names of God
is, therefore, most essential at the beginning
of each undertaking.
Лҷ the syllable OГҖ; ГғГғЛңГ” the syllable TAT; вҖҡГғЛңГ” the syllable SAT; ГҹГҒГғU this; ГҒЕёЕ’пЈҝВёвүҘГҠвҖ”
appellation; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГЎГҠвҖ” of the Absolute (who is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss solidified); ГҒГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“вҖ”
threefold; Sв—ҠГҺГғвҖ”Г” has been declared; вҖҷЛқГҠrГҠГ”ГЎГҠГҠвҖ” the BrГҘhmaЖ’as; ГғпЈҝЕё by that; п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГҠвҖ” the Vedas; Гё and;
ГҝГҙГҠГҠвҖ” sacrifices etc.; Гё as well as; ГҒп¬ӮГҒвҖһUГғГҠвҖ” were created; В¬ГҲвҒ„UГҠГ” at the cosmic dawn.
OГҖ, TAT and SATГіthis has been declared as the threefold appellation of the
Absolute, who is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss. By That the BrГҘhmaЖ’as and the
Vedas as well as sacrifices were created at the cosmic dawn.
 (23)
Here it may be asked: What connection do these three names of GodГіOГҖ, TAT and
SATГіhave with sacrifice, austerity and charity etc.? Anticipating this query, the Lord first
tells us about the use of OГҖ.
ГғSв—ҠГҠЕ’ГҠпЈҝГҒв—ҠГ ГҝГҲЕ’ГҠNUГ Гҝ 
ГҝГҙГҠЕ’ГҠЕёГғВ¬вҖ”ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГҠвҖ”вҖ“
В¬Лқп¬ӮГғВёГЈГғпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГҠЕёГҠпЈҝQВ§ГҠвҖ” вҖҡГғГғВў вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”п¬ӮГҠГҒЕ’ЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ”H 24H
ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” therefore; вҖўГҠпЈҝв—ҠЛңГ” the syllable OГҖ; ГҹГҒГғ this; В©UЕ’ГҠNUГ Гҝ uttering; ГҝГҙГҠЕ’ГҠЕёГғВ¬вҖ”ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГҠвҖ”U acts of
sacrifice, charity and austerity; В¬Лқп¬ӮГғВёГЈГғпЈҝ proceed; ГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГҠЕёГҠпЈҝQВ§ГҠвҖ” enjoined by sacred precepts; вҖҡГғГғв—ҠЛңГ”
always; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”п¬ӮГҠГҒЕ’ЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of noble persons given to the recitation of Vedic chants.
Therefore, acts of sacrifice, charity and austerity as enjoined by sacred precepts
are always commenced by noble persons, given to the recitation of Vedic chants with
the invocation of the divine name, Г«OГҖГӯ.
 (24)

=== PAGE 704 ===

* Chapter XVII *
703
The present verse is primarily intended
to reveal the glory of the Divine Name. What
the Lord seeks to convey through this verse
is that, being a name of God from whom
acts of sacrifice etc., have proceeded, the
syllable OГҖ corrects by its very utterance the
flaws and defects of all such performances
and lends them a sacred and blessed
character. Such is the infinite glory of the
Divine Name. The word Г«BrahmavГҘdinГҘmГӯ
refers to those learned BrГҘhmaЖ’as, KВ¶atriyas
and VaiвҖ№yas who are qualified to perform
sacrifices and other sacred acts with reciting
the Vedic chants. They never and in no
case undertake any sacred performance
whatsoever without uttering the holy name
Г«OГҖГӯ. Therefore, everyone should emulate
their noble example.
Having thus spoken about the use of the syllable OГҖ, the Lord now tells us about the
use of another name of GodГіTAT.
ГғГҒЕ’Г ГҝЕёГҒГ·вҖҡГЈЕ“ГҠГҝ 
В»В§вҲӮВўU 
ГҝГҙГҠГғВ¬вҖ”ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГҠвҖ”вҖ“
Е’ГҠЕёГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГҠp ГҒп¬ӮГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГҠвҖ” ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГЈГғпЈҝ в—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUГҒЛҮГҠГҒГ·вҖ”H 25H
ГғГғЛңГ” (all this belongs to God who is denoted by the name of) TAT; ГҹГҒГғ with this idea;
вҖўЕёГҒГ·вҖҡГЈЕ“ГҠГҝU not expecting; В»В§вҲӮUв—ҠЛң return; ГҝГҙГҠГғВ¬вҖ”ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГҠвҖ”Г” acts of sacrifice and austerity; Е’ГҠЕёГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГҠвҖ”
acts of charity; Гё as well as; ГҒп¬ӮГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГҠвҖ” of various kinds; ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГЈГғпЈҝ are performed; в—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUГҒЛҮГҠГҒГ·вҖ” by
the seekers of blessedness.
With the idea that all this belongs to God, who is denoted by the appellation
Г«TATГӯ, acts of sacrifice and austerity as well as acts of charity of various kinds are
performed by the seekers of blessedness, expecting no return for them.                         (25)
mere instrument.
Ordinary men of the world, who follow
the injunctions of the scriptures and are
qualified to recite Vedic Mantras, are unable
to overcome the desire for fruit or the feelings
of Г«IГӯ and Г«mineГӯ. The seekers of beatitude,
however, who need nothing but God-
realization, perform every action for the sake
of God alone and according to His behest,
entirely giving up the feelings of Г«IГӯ and
Г«mineГӯ as well as attachment and the craving
for fruit. The Lord has thereby stressed the
value of relinquishing the desire for fruit.
The word Г«TATГӯ is a name of God. It
has been used in this verse along with the
particle Г«ItiГӯ in order to explain the object
of its utterance. The idea is that uttering
this name of God at the commencement of
every undertaking, seekers of beatitude
entirely give up the feelings of Г«IГӯ and
Г«mineГӯ by remembering that everything
belongs to God, from whom the whole
of this universe has emanated, and that it
is through His articles, according to His
behest and for His sake that acts of sacrifice
etc., are performed by them, they being a
Having spoken about the use of the appellation TAT, the Lord now tells us about the
use of the third name of God, viz., SAT, in the following two verses.
вҖҡjГҠп¬ӮпЈҝ 
вҖҡГҠЕ“ГҲГ·ГҠп¬ӮпЈҝ 
Гё 
вҖҡГҒЕ’Г ГҝпЈҝГғГ В¬ЛқГҝГҲГ–ГҝГғпЈҝвҖ“
В¬ЛқвүҘГҠSГғпЈҝ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒГЎГҠ ГғГ•ГҠ вҖҡГ«ВҝUГ©Е’вҖ” В¬ГҠГ•Вё ГҝГҲГ–ГҝГғпЈҝH 26H

=== PAGE 705 ===

704
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The compound word Г«SadbhГҘveГӯ in this
verse stands for eternity or the immortal truth
which lasts for ever, and such is the essential
character of God. Hence it is spoken of as
Г«SATГӯ.
The guileless and noble disposition
of the mind is called Г«SГҘdhubhГҘvaГӯ. It
is conducive to God-realization; hence
the name of God, Г«SATГӯ, forms part of
the compound word denoting it, viz.
Г«SadbhГҘvaГӯ.
A noble deed which is worth performing
and has been enjoined by the вҖәГҘstras is
spoken of as Г«PraвҖ№astaГӯ or praiseworthy.
Performed in a disinterested spirit, it leads to
God-realization. Hence the name of God,
Г«SATГӯ, is used with reference to it, that is to
say, it is called a Г«SatkarmaГӯ.
вҖҡЕ’ЛңГ”Г·ГҠп¬ӮпЈҝГ” in the sense of truth; вҖҡГҠЕ“ГҲГ·ГҠп¬ӮпЈҝ in the sense of goodness; Гё and; вҖҡГғЛңГ” SAT; ГҹГҒГғ вҲһГғГғЛңГ”
this name of God; В¬ЛқГҝГҲГ–ГҝГғпЈҝ is used; В¬ЛқвүҘГҠSГғпЈҝ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒГЎГҠ in the sense of a praiseworthy act (too); ГғГ•ГҠ
and; вҖҡГғвҖ” SAT; вүҘГҠГ©Е’вҖ” the term; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthГҘ (KuntвҲӮ), Arjuna; ГҝГҲГ–ГҝГғпЈҝ is used.
The name of God, Г«SATГӯ, is employed in the sense of truth and goodness. And the
word Г«SATГӯ is also used in the sense of a praiseworthy act, Arjuna.                (26)
ГҝГҙГҠпЈҝ ГғВ¬ГҒвҖҡ Е’ГҠЕёпЈҝ Гё ГҒSГ•ГҒГғвҖ” вҖҡГҒЕ’ГҒГғ ГёГҠпЈҝГ«ГҝГғпЈҝвҖ“
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё 
ГёГ’п¬Ӯ 
ГғЕ’Г•ГӢВёГҝВў 
вҖҡГҒЕ’Г ГҝпЈҝп¬ӮГҠГҒГ·Е“ГӢГҝГғпЈҝH 27H
ГҝГҙГҠпЈҝ in sacrifice; ГғВ¬ГҒвҖҡ in austerity; Е’ГҠЕёпЈҝ in charity; Гё and; ГҒSГ•ГҒГғвҖ” steadfastness; вҖҡГғЛңГ” Г«SatГӯ;
ГҹГҒГғ thus; Гё and; В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is spoken of; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё action; ГёГ” and; вҲһп¬Ӯ likewise; ГғЕ’Г•ГӢВёГҝв—ҠЛңГ” performed for the
sake of Him, i.e., God; вҖҡГғЛңГ” Г«SatГӯ; ГҹГҒГғ so; вҲһп¬Ӯ verily; вҖўГҒГ·Е“ГӢГҝГғпЈҝ is termed.
And steadfastness in sacrifice, austerity and charity is likewise spoken of as Г«SatГӯ,
and action for the sake of God is verily termed as Г«SatГӯ.                            (27)
as is performed according to the behest of
God and for His sake alone, in which the
doer has no selfish interest. Such action purifies
the heart of the doer and enables him to
realize God; hence it is called Г«SATГӯ.
The use of the particle Г«EvaГӯ after the
word Г«KarmaГӯ in the second half of this verse
is intended to convey that only such action as
is performed for the sake of God is really
Г«SatГӯ; other actions, inasmuch as their fruit is
evanescent, hardly deserve this epithet.
The words Г«YajВӨeГӯ, Г«TapasiГӯ Г«DГҘneГӯ in
this verse denote only the SГҘttvika forms
of sacrifice, austerity and charity; and
faith in and loving reverence for these,
which is also spoken of as Г«NiВ¶ВўhГҘГӯ, has
been referred to here as Г«SthitiГӯ. Being
conducive to God-realization, this Г«SthitiГӯ
or steadfastness in them is called by the
name of Г«SatГӯ.
The word Г«KarmaГӯ, qualified by the
adjective Г«TadarthвҲӮyamГӯ stands for such action
In this way the Lord pointed out the value of actions such as sacrifice, austerity and
charity etc., enjoined by the scriptures and performed with reverence. This naturally tempts
one to enquire about the result of those acts of sacrifice etc., which, though enjoined by the
вҖәГҘstras, are performed without faith. Anticipating this query, the Lord now concludes the
chapter with the following remarks.

=== PAGE 706 ===

* Chapter XVII *
705
An offering into the sacred fire, a gift
and an act of penance and other noble deeds
are able to purify the heart and bestow rewards
in this world or the next only when they are
accompanied with faith. Noble deeds done
without faith are fruitless; that is why they
have been declared as naught (Asat) and of
no avail here or hereafter.
There is no need of faith in perpetrating
forbidden acts and their fruit too does not
depend on oneГӯs faith. Moreover, they are
perpetrated by those men alone who do not
possess full faith in the вҖәГҘstras, exalted souls
and God Himself, and who do not believe
that sinful acts bear fruit; nevertheless they do
reap the painful consequences of such acts.
Therefore, the words Г«Yat KГҰtamГӯ do not include
sinful deeds. Besides this, having been
mentioned along with noble acts such as
sacrifice, charity and austerity, Г«Yat KГҰtamГӯ
can only denote actions of the same category.
Hence the statement that these actions are of
no avail here or hereafter cannot apply to sinful
deeds; for since they are purely productive of
sorrow, there is no possibility whatsoever of
their yielding any good results. Hence the
present verse speaks only of noble deeds
performed without faith, and not of vile deeds.
вҖўГјГҠhГҝГҠ вҖһГҲUГғВў Е’Г»ГҠВў ГғВ¬SГғ#Вў вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғВў Гё ГҝГғЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖўвҖҡГҒЕ’Г ГҝГҲГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ В¬ГҠГ•Вё Её Гё ГғГ В¬ЛқпЈҝГ Гҝ ЕёГҠпЈҝ ГҹвҖһUH 28H
вҖўГјГҠhГҝГҠ without faith; вҖһГҲUГғв—ҠЛңГ” that which is offered as an oblation; Е’Г»ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” that which is given;
ГғВ¬вҖ” Гғ#в—ҠЛңГ” austerity practised; вҲ‘ГҺВ§Гғв—ҠЛңГ” (noble act) is performed; Гё and; ГҝГғЛңГ” whatever; вҖўвҖҡГғЛңГ” naught;
ГҹГҒГғ so; В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is declared; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthГҘ (KuntвҲӮ), Arjuna;  Её Гё nor; ГғГғЛңГ” that (is of avail);
В¬ЛқпЈҝГ Гҝ hereafter; ЕёГҠпЈҝ neither; ГҹвҖһU here.
An oblation which is offered, a gift given, an austerity practised, and whatever
good deed is performed, if it is without faith, it is all termed as naught i.e., Г«AsatГӯ;
therefore, it is of no avail here or hereafter.                                                                     (27)
Лҷ ГғГ вҖҡГҒЕ’ГҒГғ ГјГҠГӢв—ҠjВӘп¬ӮeГӢГғГҠвҖҡГҚВ¬ГҒЕёВ·Г вҖҡГҲ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГҝГҠВў
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠпЈҝ ГјГҠГӢвҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠВЎГҲВёЕёвҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’пЈҝ ГјГҠhГҠГІГҠГҝГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҠВӘГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ
ЕёГҠв—Ҡ вҖҡ#Е’вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГӨГҝГҠГҝвҖ”H 17H
Thus, in the UpaniВ¶ad sung by the Lord, the science of Brahma, the scripture
of Yoga, the dialogue between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and Arjuna, ends the seventeenth
chapter entitled Г¬The Yoga of the Division of the Threefold FaithГ®.
U

=== PAGE 707 ===

706
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Title of the
Chapter
Summary of
the Chapter
Лҷ
вҖәrвҲӮmadbhagavad-GвҲӮtГҘ
Chapter XVIII
MokВ¶a consists in securing lasting freedom from the bondage of mundane existence in
the form of birth and death and realizing God, who is no other than supreme Bliss. Summing
up the substance of all previous chapters, the present one discusses, under the
names of Г«SannyГҘsaГӯ and Г«TyГҘgaГӯ respectively, the Paths of Knowledge and
Action, both of which are means to the attainment of MokВ¶a, in all their
details; and secondly, the teaching of the GвҲӮtГҘ has been wound up (XVIII.66) with an
exhortation to offer all actions to God, who is the same as MokВ¶a. It is for these reasons that
the chapter has been given the title of Г«MokВ¶a-SannyГҘsa-YogaГӯ.
In the opening verse of this chapter Arjuna expresses his desire to know the truth about
SannyГҘsa and TyГҘga: in the second and third the Lord records the views of other thinkers
on the subject; in the fourth and fifth He invites Arjuna to hear His own
conclusion about TyГҘga, and establishes the advisability of not relinquishing
oneГӯs obligatory duties, while in the sixth He gives His own considered
opinion in the matter of TyГҘga, and declares it as superior to the other views. Thereafter,
defining the TГҘmasika, RГҘjasika and SГҘttvika forms of TyГҘga in the seventh, eighth and ninth
respectively, He describes the marks of a TyГҘgвҲӮ (man of renunciation) of the SГҘttvika type in
the tenth and eleventh. Demonstrating the greatness of men of renunciation the Lord winds
up the topic of TyГҘga in the twelfth. Thereafter, inviting Arjuna to hear His dissertation on
SГҘвҲҶkhya, the Lord discusses up to the fifteenth the five factors which contribute to the
accomplishment of actions, viz., AdhiВ¶ВўhГҘna etc., according to the viewpoint of SГҘвҲҶkhya.
Denouncing in the sixteenth the man who regards the pure spirit as the doer, the Lord praises
in the seventeenth one who performs actions without claiming the doership. Mentioning the
threefold incentive to action as well as the three constituents of action in the eighteenth, the
Lord introduces the threefold division of knowledge and action as well as of the doer in the
nineteenth, and actually divides them under three heads, viz., SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika, and TГҘmasika
from the twentieth to the twenty-eighth. Introducing in the twenty-ninth the threefold division
of Buddhi (reason) and DhГҰti (firmness), the Lord divides them under three heads, viz., SГҘttvika,
RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika, from the thirtieth to the thirty-fifth. Dividing Sukha (joy) under three
heads, viz., SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika, from the thirty-sixth to the thirty-ninth, the
Lord winds up the topic of GuЖ’as and declares the whole world as made up of the three
GuЖ’as in the fortieth. Thereafter, introducing the topic of the natural functions of the four
grades of society in the forty-first, the Lord enumerates the natural functions of the BrГҘhmaЖ’as
in the forty-second, of the KВ¶atriyas in the forty-third and of the VaiвҖ№yas and вҖәВөudras in the
forty-fourth. Declaring in the forty-fifth that men can attain highest perfection through the
performance of their respective duties, the Lord tells us in the forty-sixth the method of attaining
it. Extolling the performance of oneГӯs own duty in the forty-seventh, He discourages renunciation
of the same in the forty-eighth. Thereafter, resuming the discussion of SannyГҘsayoga from
the forty-ninth and declaring that one can attain the highest perfection through SannyГҘsa, the

=== PAGE 708 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
707
Link of the
Discourse
Lord undertakes in the fiftieth to speak of the culmination of the Yoga of Knowledge and
discusses from the fifty-first to the fifty-fifth the Yoga of Knowledge with its fruit. Thereafter,
from the fifty-sixth to the fifty-eighth the Lord points out the glory and fruit of Karmayoga
which lays special emphasis on Bhakti and commands Arjuna to practise the same, warning
him at the same time of the risk involved in not obeying Him. Declaring in the fifty-ninth and
sixtieth the inability of Arjuna to abandon his natural duties due to his inherent nature, the
Lord commands him in the sixty-first and sixty-second to take refuge with all his being in
God, who is the Lord and inner controller of all. Winding up the topic in the sixty-third and
asking Arjuna to do as he pleased after weighing everything, the Lord invites him in the
sixty-fourth to hear once more the most esoteric truth, which is the quintessence of the whole
GвҲӮtГҘ. And imparting in the sixty-fifth and sixty-sixth that most esoteric gospel of exclusive
surrender along with its fruit, the Lord winds up the teaching of the GвҲӮtГҘ by asking Arjuna to
take refuge in Him. Thereafter, warning Arjuna in the sixty-seventh not to impart the teaching
of the GвҲӮtГҘ to four types of unqualified persons, the Lord stresses the importance of popularizing
the GвҲӮtГҘ among qualified persons in the sixty-eighth and sixty-ninth, of studying the GвҲӮtГҘ in
the seventieth, and of merely listening with faith to the recitation of the GвҲӮtГҘ in the seventy-
first. In the seventy-second the Lord asks Arjuna if he listened to the GвҲӮtГҘ with one-pointed
attention and whether his delusion was dispelled; and in the seventy-third Arjuna assures the
Lord that his delusion was dispelled, wisdom gained and all his doubts removed, and agrees
to do His bidding. Thereafter, from the seventy-fourth to the seventy-seventh SaВӨjaya glorifies
the teaching of the GвҲӮtГҘ in the form of a dialogue between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and Arjuna, and tells
DhГҰtarГҘВ¶Вўra how the thought of that dialogue as well as of the cosmic form of the Lord filled
him with wonder and joy again and again. And he winds up the chapter by proclaiming in
the seventy-eighth that the side with which BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and Arjuna had ranged
themselves was sure to win and attain glory etc.
The gospel of the GвҲӮtГҘ actually commenced from verse 11 of Chapter II. In verses 11
to 30 of that chapter the Lord taught JВӨГҘnayoga and, incidentally establishing the
advisability of waging war from the viewpoint of the code of morality laid
down for a KВ¶atriya, taught Karmayoga from verse 39 right up to the end
of the chapter. Thereafter, from Chapter III to Chapter XVII, the Lord
detailed a number of disciplines for God-realization, some from the viewpoint of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga
and others from that of Karmayoga. Having heard of all these, Arjuna now expresses the
desire to know separately and clearly the truth of SannyГҘsa or JВӨГҘnayoga and of TyГҘga or
Karmayoga which consists in relinquishing the attachment for fruit, in order to have the
essence of the teaching of all chapters in the present chapter.
вҖўВЎВёГҲЕё В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡSГҝ в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ ГғГ»п¬ӮГҒв—ҠГ«ВҝUГҠГҒв—Ҡ п¬ӮпЈҝГҒЕ’ГғГҲв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
Г ГҝГҠВӘSГҝ Гё NUВ·ГӢвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠ В¬ГҺГ•Г„вҲ‘пЈҝВ§ГҒвүҘГҠГҒЕёВ·ГҚЕ’ЕёГ”H 1H
вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡSГҝ of SannyГҘsa; в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ O mighty-armed Lord, вҖәrвҲӮ-KГҰВ¶Ж’a; ГғГ»п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” the truth; ГҹГ«ВҝUГҠГҒв—Ҡ
I seek; п¬ӮпЈҝГҒЕ’ГғГҲв—ҠЛңГ” to know; Г ГҝГҠВӘSГҝ of TyГҘga; Гё as well as; NUВ·ГӢвҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠ O HГҰВ¶вҲӮkeвҖ№a (вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a); В¬ГҺГ•вҲ‘ЛңВ§Г”
severally; вҲ‘пЈҝВ§ГҒвүҘГҠГҒЕёВ·ГҚЕ’ЕёГ” O slayer of the demon KeвҖ№вҲӮ (who had taken the form of a mighty horse
in order to kill вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a).

=== PAGE 709 ===

708
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
confused with each other.
A critical survey of this chapter will
show that the points mentioned above have
all been touched by the Lord in the course of
it. Thus the essential character of SannyГҘsa
(JВӨГҘnayoga) has been discussed in verses 13
to 17. The SГҘttvika virtues and actions
mentioned in verses 19 to 40 are helpful to
the practice of this discipline, while the RГҘjasika
and TГҘmasika traits and actions are hostile to
it. Verses 50 to 55 describe in detail the
mode as well as the fruit of the practice of
SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga with worship, while verse 17
gives the process of pure SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga.
Even so verse 6 reveals the essential
character of Karmayoga (which consists in
relinquishing the attachment for fruit). Verse
9 gives us under the name of Г«SГҘttvika TyГҘgaГӯ
the mode of practice of the pure or unmixed
type of Karmayoga. Verses 47 and 48
pronounce the performance of oneГӯs own
duty as helpful to the pursuit of this discipline
and the TГҘmasika and RГҘjasika types of
TyГҘga as mentioned in verses 7 and 8 as
impediments to it. Verses 45 and 46 discuss
Karmayoga blended with devotion, while
verses 56 to 66 speak of Karmayoga dominated
by Devotion. Verse 46 teaches us how to
practise Karmayoga blended with Bhakti;
while verse 57 tells us how to practise
Karmayoga with special emphasis on Bhakti.
The use of the vocatives Г«MahГҘbГҘhoГӯ,
Г«HГҰВ¶ikeвҖ№aГӯ and Г«KeвҖ№iniВ¶ВөudanaГӯ is intended to
convey that вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a being Almighty God
Himself, the Indweller of all and the destroyer
of all evils, knows full well what Arjuna,
seeks to learn from Him. Arjuna, therefore,
expects that the Lord would attend to his
prayer and enlighten him on the subject in
such a way as to enable him to grasp it fully
and correctly and to resolve all his doubts
completely.
In the present verse Arjuna seeks light on
the following points; what is the essential
character of SannyГҘsa? What type of ideas and
actions are helpful to it and what are prejudicial
to it? How is SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga practised with
worship and how is it practised without
worship? Even so, what is the essential character
of TyГҘga (i.e., Karmayoga, which consists in
relinquishing the attachment for fruit). How do
they practise Karmayoga of the unmixed type?
What practices are helpful to it and what hinder
it? What is Karmayoga mixed with Bhakti or
Devotion? What is the nature of Karmayoga
dominated by Bhakti? And how do they practise
Karmayoga mixed with Bhakti and Karmayoga
dominated by Bhakti while performing their
secular and sacred duties? Arjuna further
requests that the points of difference between
the two may be clearly brought out, so that
they may not be promiscuously blended or
Arjuna said: O mighty-armed вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, O HГҰВ¶вҲӮkeвҖ№a, O Slayer of KeвҖ№вҲӮ, I wish to
know severally the truth of SannyГҘsa and TyГҘga.
 (1)
Thus addressed by Arjuna, the Lord cites the diverse views of other thinkers on the subject
of SannyГҘsa and TyГҘga in two verses before expressing His own opinion in the matter.
ГјГҠГӢГ·ВӘп¬ӮГҠЕёГҲп¬ӮГҠГё
вҲ‘В§ГҠГӘГҝГҠЕёГҠВў вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠВў ГЈГҝГҠвҖҡВў вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡВў вҲ‘В§п¬ӮГҝГҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҲвҖ”Г”вҖ“
вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ»В§вҲӮUГ ГҝГҠВӘВў В¬ЛқГҠвҖһГҲUSГ ГҝГҠВӘВў ГҒп¬ӮГёЛҮГҠГЎГҠГҠвҖ”H 2H
вҲ‘В§ГҠГӘГҝГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of actions motivated by desires; ГЈГҝГҠвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” renunciation; вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” (as)
SannyГҘsa; вҲ‘В§п¬ӮГҝвҖ” (some) sages; ГҒп¬ӮЕ’ГҲвҖ” understand; вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ»В§вҲӮUГ ГҝГҠВӘв—ҠЛңГ” relinquishing the fruit of all
actions; В¬ЛқГҠвҖһГҲUвҖ” declare; Г ГҝГҠВӘв—ҠЛңГ” (as) TyГҘga; ГҒп¬ӮГёЛҮГҠГЎГҠГҠвҖ” (and) other discerning thinkers.

=== PAGE 710 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
709
Particular acts of sacrifice, charity,
penance and worship and other noble acts
that have been recommended in the вҖәГҘstras
for the attainment of agreeable objects such
as wife, progeny, wealth and an abode in
heaven etc., and for getting rid of that which
is disagreeable, such as disease and danger
etc., are referred to here as Г«KГҘmyГҘnГҘm
KarmaЖ’ГҘmГӯ. The word Г«KГҘmyГҘnГҘmГӯ further
indicates that such acts are optional and not
obligatory. That is to say, they may be
undertaken if one seeks some return for them;
but their omission on the part of those who
seek no return will bring no harm to them.
The first half of this verse is intended to
show that according to some sages SannyГҘsa
consists in merely giving up such optional
acts. In the opinion of these sages SannyГҘsвҲӮs
are those who duly perform only such duties
as must be performed daily or require to
be performed on special occasions, and
have given up the optional acts referred
to above.
Devotion to God, worship of other deities,
service of oneГӯs parents and other elders,
sacrifice, charity and penance and vocational
duties peculiar to oneГӯs grade in society and
stage in life and bodily functions such as taking
food, drink and so on, and all other duties of
an obligatory nature enjoined by the scriptures,
the omission of which interferes with morality,
religion and tradition are included in
Г«SarvakarmaГӯ. And Г«SarvakarmaphalatyГҘgaГӯ
consists in giving up the desire for all
enjoyments of this world as well as of the next,
such as wife, progeny, wealth, honour, fame,
prestige and heavenly bliss etc., obtained
through the performance of such acts, that is
to say, in associating no such action with the
idea of any reward.
By the latter half of this verse the Lord
seeks to convey that, in the eyes of those
who use their critical faculty in distinguishing
the eternal from the evanescent. TyГҘga consists
in relinquishing the fruit of all actions as
indicated above, and performing oneГӯs
obligatory duties alone; hence they perform
all their duties in such a spirit.
вҖәrвҲӮ BhagavГҘn said: Some sages understand SaвүҲyГҘsa as the giving up of all actions
motivated by desire; and other discerning thinkers declare that TyГҘga consists in
relinquishing the fruit of all actions.                                                      (2)
Г ГҝГҠГ–ГҝВў Е’ГҠпЈҝВ·п¬ӮГҒЕ’Г ГҝпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё В¬ЛқГҠвҖһГҲUв—ҠВёЕёГӢГҒВ·ГЎГҠвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ГҝГҙГҠЕ’ГҠЕёГғВ¬вҖ”вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё Её Г ГҝГҠГ–ГҝГҒв—ҠГҒГғ ГёГҠВ¬вҒ„пЈҝUH 3H
Г ГҝГҠГ–Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” (and therefore) worth giving up; Е’ГҠпЈҝВ·п¬ӮГғЛңГ” contains some measure of evil; ГҹГҒГғU (say)
thus; вҲһвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ some; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё (all) action; В¬ЛқГҠвҖһГҲUвҖ” declare (that); в—ҠЕёГӢГҒВ·ГЎГҠвҖ” men of wisdom; ГҝГҙГҠЕ’ГҠЕёГғВ¬вҖ”вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё
(that) acts of sacrifice, charity and penance; Её Г ГҝГҠГ–Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” (are) not to be given up; ГҹГҒГғГ” thus; ГёГ”
and; вҖўВ¬вҒ„пЈҝU others.
Some wise men declare that all actions contain a measure of evil, and are,
therefore, worth giving up; while others say that acts of sacrifice, charity and penance
are not to be given up.                                                                    (3)
hence even such duties as have been enjoined
on us are not wholly free from blemish. It is
in order to impress this idea that the Lord
By the first half of this verse the Lord
seeks to convey that every undertaking
invariably gets tainted with sin to some extent,

=== PAGE 711 ===

710
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
By addressing Arjuna as Г«BharatasattamaГӯ
and Г«PuruВ¶avyГҘghraГӯ the Lord seeks to convey
that of the three types of TyГҘga going to be
discussed by Him in the course of this chapter,
he is capable of practising the SГҘttvika form
of TyГҘga, which is only another name for
Г«KarmayogaГӯ or the Path of Action, and
should avoid the other two, viz., the RГҘjasika
and TГҘmasika types.
It will be remembered that in the opening
verse of this chapter, Arjuna requested the
Lord to reveal the truth of both SannyГҘsa and
TyГҘga; and of these two, the Lord proceeds
in this verse to discuss the Truth of TyГҘga in
the first instance. This is what is sought to be
conveyed by the use of the indeclinable Г«TatraГӯ
in this verse. Arjuna requested the Lord to
expound the truth of the two separately and
the Lord has hinted as His intention to discuss
the subject of TyГҘga alone without declining
his request. This shows that He will discuss
the subject of SannyГҘsa later on.
The use of the words Г«Me NiвҖ№cayamГӯ in
this verse is intended to convey that none of
the views so far expressed by Him fully
represents His own view, which is now
introduced by Him.
By referring to the three types of TyГҘga
mentioned in the вҖәГҘstras, the Lord indicates
that the view He holds on the subject is
supported by the scriptures. This He does in
order to show His regard for the scriptures.
According to other wise men, however,
acts of sacrifice, charity and penance are not
really tainted with blemish. They hold that
the sins of violence etc., with which
undertakings of all sorts are unavoidably found
tainted are really no sins; on the other hand,
having been enjoined by the scriptures, they
serve to purify the agent. Hence a man seeking
beatitude should shun only prohibited acts
and should not abstain from duties enjoined
by the вҖәГҘstras.
Himself says elsewhere in the course of this
very chapter that Г¬all undertaking, are involved
in sin as fire in smoke (XVIII.48).* Therefore,
some men of wisdom declare that the man
who seeks blessedness should actually give
up all kinds of actions including those that
must be performed daily, those that require to
be performed on special occasions and those
that are motivated by desire, or in other
words that he should enter the order of
SaвүҲnyГҘsa or Renunciation.
Having thus cited the divergent views of men of wisdom on the subject of SannyГҘsa and
TyГҘga, the Lord now proceeds to pronounce His own conclusion on the subject of TyГҘga.
ГҒЕёpГҝВў oГҺГЎГҠГҲ в—ҠпЈҝ ГғГІГҠ Г ГҝГҠВӘпЈҝ Г·вҒ„UГғвҖҡГ»ГҠв—ҠГ”вҖ“
Г ГҝГҠВӘГҠпЈҝ ГҒвҖһU В¬ГҲLВ§В·вҲҡГҝГҠГүГҠЛқ ГҒГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“вҖ” вҖҡГӘВ¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГӢГҢГғГғвҖ”H 4H
ГҒЕёpГҝв—ҠЛңГ” conclusion; oГҺГЎГҠГҲГ” hear; в—ҠпЈҝ My; ГғГІГҠ of SannyГҘsa and TyГҘga; Г ГҝГҠВӘпЈҝГ” on the subject of
TyГҘga (in the first instance); Г·вҒ„UГғвҖҡГ»ГҠв—ҠГ” O best of Bharatas; Г ГҝГҠВӘвҖ” TyГҘga; ГҒвҖһUГ” because; В¬ГҲLВ§В·вҲҡГҝГҠГүГҠЛқ
O tiger among men; ГҒГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“вҖ” of three kinds (viz., SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika); вҖҡГӘВ¬ЛқвҲ‘В§ГӢГҢГғГғвҖ”
has been declared to be.
Of SannyГҘsa and TyГҘga, first hear My conclusion on the subject of renunciation
(TyГҘga), Arjuna; for renunciation, O tiger among men, has been declared to be of
three kindsГіSГҘttvika, RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika.                                                         (4)
Thus calling the attention of Arjuna to His own view on the subject, and in order to
reveal the true nature of TyГҘga as understood by Him, the Lord first of all gives in two
verses His conclusion about the performance of commendable acts enjoined by the scriptures.
* вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёвҒ„UГӘГ·ГҠ ГҒвҖһU Е’ГҠпЈҝВ·пЈҝГЎГҠ Е“ГҚв—ҠпЈҝЕёГҠГҒГҮЕёГҒвҒ„Uп¬ӮГҠп¬ӮГҺГғГҠвҖ”вҖ“

=== PAGE 712 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
711
tells us in what spirit they are to be performed.
The word Г«ManiВ¶вҲӮЖ’ГҘmГӯ in this verse
stands for those wise seekers of liberation
who duly and scrupulously perform, in a
disinterested spirit and according to the sacred
precepts, the duties that have been assigned
to them by the scriptures with due regard to
their grade in society and stage in life. Instead
of causing bondage, the acts of sacrifice,
charity and penance performed by them serve
to purify their heart: hence one must perform
these acts in a disinterested spirit. This is
what is sought to be conveyed by the latter
half of this verse.
The first half of this verse impresses upon
Arjuna the obligatory nature of duties enjoined
by the the scriptures. The idea is that the man
to whom a particular duty has been assigned
by the вҖәГҘstras with due regard to his grade in
society and stage in lifeГіwho has been
enjoined to perform sacrifices and penance
and bestow gifts at a particular time and in a
particular mannerГіshould not shun that duty:
in other words, he should not flout the
injunctions of the scriptures; for far from
yielding any good results, their omission brings
the sin of default on oneГӯs head. Hence one
must perform these duties. The following verse
ГҝГҙГҠЕ’ГҠЕёГғВ¬вҖ”вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё Её Г ГҝГҠГ–ГҝВў вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝВёв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ ГғГғЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҝГҙГҠГҠпЈҝ Е’ГҠЕёВў ГғВ¬pГ’п¬Ӯ В¬ГҠп¬ӮЕёГҠГҒЕё в—ҠЕёГӢГҒВ·ГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ”H 5H
ГҝГҙГҠЕ’ГҠЕёГғВ¬вҖ”вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё acts of sacrifice, charity and penance; ЕёГ” (is) not; Г ГҝГҠГ–Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” worth giving up;
вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝВёв—ҠЛңГ” вҲһп¬Ӯ must be performed; ГғГғЛңГ” (on the other hand) that; ГҝГҙГҠвҖ” (for) sacrifice; Е’ГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” charity;
ГғВ¬вҖ” penance; Гё and; вҲһп¬Ӯ all these; В¬ГҠп¬ӮЕёГҠГҒЕё (are) purifiers; в—ҠЕёГӢГҒВ·ГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of wise men.
Acts of sacrifice, charity and penance are not worth giving up; they must be
performed. For sacrifice, charity and penanceГіall these are purifiers of the wise. (5)
вҲһГғГҠГЈГҝГҒВ¬ ГғГҲ вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ вҖҡXГ”ВўU Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ В»В§вҲӮUГҠГҒЕё ГёГ”вҖ“
вҲ‘В§ГғВёвҲҡГҝГҠЕёГӢГҒГғ в—ҠпЈҝ В¬ГҠГ•Вё ГҒЕёГҒpГғВў в—ҠГғв—ҠГҲГ»ГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ”H 6H
вҲһГғГҠГҒЕё these (acts of sacrifice, charity and penance); вҖўГҒВ¬ too; ГғГҲ as well as; вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ (all
other) acts; вҖҡXГ”Uв—ҠЛңГ” attachment; Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ renouncing; В»В§вҲӮUГҠГҒЕё fruits; Гё and; вҲ‘В§ГғВёвҲҡГҝГҠГҒЕё must be
performed; ГҹГҒГғ this (is); в—ҠпЈҝ My; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthГҘ (KuntвҲӮ), Arjuna; ГҒЕёГҒpГғв—ҠЛңГ” well-considered;
в—ҠГғв—ҠЛңГ” verdict; В©UГ»ГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” (and) supreme.
Hence these acts of sacrifice, charity and penance, and all other acts of duty too,
must be performed without attachment and expectation of reward: this is My well-
considered and supreme verdict, Arjuna.                                                                  (6)
food and drink and all other duties enjoined
by the вҖәГҘstras.
Г«SaвҲҶgamГӯ means attachment, not only to
the action itself, but to its fruit as well; while
Г«PhalГҘniГӯ means the desire for fruit in the
shape of enjoyments, of this world as well as
of the next, that may be obtained from those
acts. Г«SaвҲҶgam tyaktvГҘ phalГҘni caГӯ may also
be taken to mean that a seeker of liberation
The demonstrative pronoun Г«EtГҘniГӯ
naturally refers to such acts as have been
mentioned in the preceding verse viz., sacrifice,
charity and penance. And the use of the
particles Г«TuГӯ and Г«ApiГӯ along with Г«EtГҘniГӯ is
intended to include the service of elders,
such as oneГӯs parents etc., vocational duties
peculiar to oneГӯs grade in society and stage
in life, bodily functions such as taking oneГӯs

=== PAGE 713 ===

712
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
should abstain from prohibited acts as well as
from acts which are motivated by desire.
The words Г¬Iti Me niвҖ№citam matam-
uttamamГ® signify that such is the LordГӯs own
conception of TyГҘga. That is to say, in the
opinion of the Lord, TyГҘga consists in
performing oneГӯs allotted duties without
attachment and without any hope of reward;
for, he who performs his duties in the aforesaid
manner is freed from the bondage of actions
and attains the supreme state. He ceases to
have anything to do with his actions.
Now let us examine the views of other
sages referred to by the Lord as well as that
of the Lord Himself on their own merits and
see for ourselves how the LordГӯs own view
is decidedly superior to the other views. It
will thus be seen that the definitions of TyГҘga
and SannyГҘsa as pronounced by other sages
are far from ideal or perfect. For, even if one
actually abstains from actions which are
motivated by desire, other actions of an
obligatory or occasional type will lead to
bondage if one continues to entertain a feeling
of mineness, attachment and desire with regard
to those actions and their fruit. Even if one
gives up the desire for the fruit of all actions,
they may lead to bondage if one continues to
entertain the feeling of mineness and attachment
with respect to them. Without renouncing the
feeling of Г«IГӯ and Г«mineГӯ, attachment and
desire we cannot be freed from the bondage
of actions even if we shun our obligatory
duties, regarding all action as containing some
measure of evil; for by doing so we incur the
sin of neglecting a prescribed duty. Even so,
acts of sacrifice, charity and penance will
lead to bondage if one continues to perform
them without renouncing attachment and the
desire for their fruit. Therefore, SannyГҘsa
and TyГҘga as defined by those sages cannot
secure complete freedom from the bondage
of actions. Complete renunciation or TyГҘga
consists in renouncing the feeling of mineness
and attachment in respect of all oneГӯs actions,
as well as the desire for their fruit, as advised
by the Lord. By doing so one secures complete
freedom from the bondage of actions. For
action in itself is not conducive to bondage;
it is the feeling of mineness and attachment
with respect to it and the desire for its
fruit that lead to bondage. Herein lies the
superiority of the LordГӯs view over the views
of others.
Thus expressing His considered opinion in the matter, the Lord now defines in an
ascending order the three types of TyГҘga in the following three verses, and begins with the
marks of the TГҘmasika type. His object in doing so is to point out that of the three types of
TyГҘga mentioned in the scriptures, viz., SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika, the SГҘttvika type
alone is real TyГҘga and worth practising, while the other two types of TyГҘga are no TyГҘga
in the real sense of the term and are not worth practising, as well as to show that His view
is in complete accord with the SГҘstras.
ГҒЕёГҝГғSГҝ ГғГҲ вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡвҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ ЕёГҠпЈҝВ¬В¬lГғпЈҝГ”вҖ“
в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҠГ»ГҠSГҝ В¬ГҒвҒ„UГ ГҝГҠВӘSГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡвҖ” В¬ГҒвҒ„UвҲ‘В§ГӢГҒГғВёГғвҖ”Г”H 7H
ГҒЕёГҝГғSГҝ of a prescribed; ГғГҲ but; вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡвҖ” (actual) renunciation; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠвҖ” duty; ЕёГ” not; В©UВ¬В¬lГғпЈҝ
is advisable; в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҠГғЛңГ” through ignorance; ГғSГҝ its; В¬ГҒвҒ„UГ ГҝГҠВӘвҖ” abandonment; ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡвҖ” TГҘmasika in
character; В¬ГҒвҒ„UвҲ‘В§ГӢГҒГғВёГғвҖ”Г” has been declared.
(Prohibited acts and those that are motivated by desire should, no doubt, be given
up). But it is not advisable to abandon a prescribed duty. Such abandonment out of
ignorance has been declared as Г«TГҘmasikaГӯ.                                                (7)

=== PAGE 714 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
713
Sacrifice, charity, penance, study and
teaching, giving religious discourses, warfare,
governance of the people, rearing of cattle,
agriculture, trade, service, eating and drinking
and all other duties that have been enjoined
by the вҖәГҘstras as binding on a particular man
with due regard to his grade in society, stage
in life, temperament and circumstances, are
Г«Niyata KarmaГӯ for him. He who actually
gives up these duties fails to discharge
his obligation and thereby incurs sin; for
such neglect of duty causes a brake in the
continuity of action and brings about a
chaos in the whole world (III.23-24). Hence
it is not advisable to abandon oneГӯs allotted
duties.
The TyГҘga or renunciation on the part
of him who gives up his allotted duty,
erroneusly taking such renunciation to be a
means to liberation, is inspired by Tamas
inasmuch as it is actuated by ignorance; for
Moha or ignorance has been declared to be a
product of TamoguЖ’a (XIV.13,17). And it
has been pointed out by the Lord that men
possessing a TГҘmasika disposition fall in the
scale of spiritual evolution (XIV.18). Hence
the form of renunciation referred to above is
not such as enables one to secure freedom
from the bondage of Karma. On the other
hand, it brings about oneГӯs downfall inasmuch
as it involves one in the sin accruing from
neglect of duty.
Having characterized the TГҘmasika form of TyГҘga, the Lord now defines RГҘjasika
TyГҘga.
Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖГҒв—ҠГ ГҝпЈҝп¬Ӯ ГҝГ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝГ„вҖ№пЈҝвүҘГҠГ·ГҝГҠГ»ГҝВЎпЈҝГғГ”ЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖҡ вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г п¬ӮГҠ вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡВў Г ГҝГҠВӘВў ЕёГ’п¬Ӯ Г ГҝГҠВӘВ»В§вҲӮВўU вҲӮUГ·пЈҝГғЛңГ”H 8H
Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖв—ҠЛңГ” (is) of the nature of discomfort; ГҹГҒГғ so (thinking); вҲһп¬ӮГ” indeed; ГҝГғЛңГ” whatever; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГ”
action (is done); вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝГ„вҖ№пЈҝвүҘГҠГ·ГҝГҠГғЛңГ” for fear of physical strain; Г ГҝВЎпЈҝГғЛңГ” should anyone give up (his
duties); вҖҡвҖ” he; вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г п¬ӮГҠГ” practising; вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” Г ГҝГҠВӘв—ҠЛңГ” (such) RГҘjasika form of renunciation; Её вҲһп¬ӮГ” in no
case; Г ГҝГҠВӘВ»В§вҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” the fruit of renunciation; вҲӮUГ·пЈҝГғЛңГ” reaps.
Should anyone give up his duties for fear of physical strain, thinking that all
action is verily of the nature of discomfort,Гіpractising such RГҘjasika form of
renunciation, he reaps not the fruit of renunciation.                                    (8)
relaxation is said to abandon his duties for fear
of physical strain.
The latter half of this verse shows that he
who gives up his allotted duties and enters the
order of SannyГҘsa with such feelings, practises
what they call the RГҘjasika form of renunciation;
for attachment to the relaxation of mind, senses
and body is an offspring of RajoguЖ’a. Hence
he who practises this form of renunciation
fails to reap the fruit of true renunciation, viz.,
freedom from the shackles of Karma and
realization of God; for so long as there is the
feeling of mineness and attachment in respect
of oneГӯs mind, senses and body, one can never
be freed from the bondage of actions. Hence
The word Г«KarmaГӯ, qualified by the
relative adjective Г«YatГӯ, covers all actions
enjoined by the scriptures and mentioned in
the commentary on verse 7 above. The
performance of these actions involves exertion
of oneГӯs mind, senses and body; nay, in course
of it one is faced with many obstacles; one is
required to collect a lot of materials, to forgo
bodily comforts and suffer hardships by
undertaking sacred vows and fasts, and to
observe many restriction of various kinds.
Thinking thus, he who gives up actions
enjoined by the scriptures, such as sacrifice,
charity and penance etc., in order to avoid
exertion of mind, senses and body and to enjoy

=== PAGE 715 ===

714
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
this RГҘjasika form of renunciation is no
renunciation in the true acceptance of the term,
it is renunciation only in name. Therefore,
seekers of beatitude should not practise such
renunciation. Far from reaping the fruit of true
renunciation, he who practises this form of
renunciation is liable to incur the sin accruing
from neglect of oneГӯs allotted duties.
obligatory nature enjoined by the вҖәГҘstras, but
in totally giving up attachment and desire for
those actions, as well as for all objects obtained
as a result of such actions: giving up oneГӯs
allotted duties for any reason whatsoever
without renouncing attachment and desire
for the enjoyments of this world as well as
of the next, obtained as a result of those
actions, is no true renunciation. For renunciation
should result in the non-recognition of any
connection with actions; and this consummation
could be reached only by renouncing the
feeling of mineness, attachment and desire,
and not merely by giving up oneГӯs duties.
Therefore, SГҘttvika TyГҘga consists in
renouncing attachment and desire for the
fruit of all actions.
The word Г«KarmaГӯ, qualified by the
adjective Г«NiyatamГӯ, in this verse covers all
those duties which have been prescribed by
the вҖәГҘstras as binding on a particular man
with due regard to his grade in society, stage
in life, temperament and circumstances,
and which have been discussed in the
commentary on verse 6 above. This should
also be taken to mean that prohibited acts
and those which are motivated by desire
are not included in the category of Г«Niyata
KarmaГӯ.
By speaking of Karmayoga, which
consists in the active performance of duty, as
the SГҘttvika form of renunciation the Lord
shows that according to Him true renunciation
lies, not in renouncing oneГӯs duties of an
The Lord now defines the SГҘttvika, which is the best type of TyГҘga.
вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝВёГҒв—ҠГ ГҝпЈҝп¬Ӯ 
ГҝГ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё 
ГҒЕёГҝГғВў 
ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГғпЈҝЛҳВЎГҲВёЕёГ”вҖ“
вҖҡXГ”ВўU Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ В»В§Г”вҲӮВўU ГёГ’п¬Ӯ вҖҡ Г ГҝГҠВӘвҖ” вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГғвҖ”H 9H
вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝВёв—ҠЛңГ” it must be performed; ГҹГҒГғ with this idea; вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; ГҝГғЛңГ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГ” ГҒЕёГҝГғВў a prescribed duty
which; ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГғпЈҝГ” is performed; вҖўВЎВёГҲЕё O Arjuna; вҖҡXГ”Uв—ҠЛңГ” attachment; Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ renouncing; В»В§Г”вҲӮUв—ҠГ”ЛңГ” the
fruit; Гё and; вҲһп¬ӮГ” alone; вҖҡвҖ”Г” that; Г ГҝГҠВӘвҖ”Г” renunciation; вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§вҖ” of the SГҘttvika type; в—ҠГғвҖ”Г” has been
recognized (to be).
A prescribed duty which is performed simply because it has to be performed,
giving up attachment and fruit, that alone has been recognized as the SГҘttvika form
of renunciation.                                                                             (9)
It may be asked here: What is the idea of the man practising the SГҘttvika form of
renunciation in shunning prohibited acts and those that are motivated by desire, and in
performing duties of an obligatory nature? Anticipating this query, the Lord gives below the
characteristics of the final stage reached by the man practising the SГҘttvika form of
renunciation.
Её mпЈҝcвүҲKвҲ‘ГҲВ§вүҘГҠвҲӮВўU вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё вҲ‘ГҲВ§вүҘГҠвҲӮпЈҝU ЕёГҠЕёГҲВ·Г®ГҠГғпЈҝГ”вҖ“
Г ГҝГҠВӘГӢ вҖҡГ»п¬ӮвҖҡв—ҠГҠГҒп¬ӮcвүҲГҠпЈҝ в—ҠпЈҝЕ“ГҠп¬ӮГӢ ГҒВҝUГӣГҠвҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝвҖ”H 10H
Её not; mпЈҝГҒcвүҲ (he who) hates; вҖўвҲ‘ГҲВ§вүҘГҠвҖ№в—ҠЛңГ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё action which does not bring lasting happiness;

=== PAGE 716 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
715
austerity etc., and all other duties consistent
with oneГӯs grade in society and stage in life.
Performed in a disinterested spirit, these actions
are capable of wiping out manГӯs accumulated
sins of previous lives and freeing him from
the bondage of actions; hence they are spoken
of as Г«KuвҖ№alaГӯ (conducive to oneГӯs lasting
good). The words Г¬KuвҖ№ale na anuВ¶ajjateГ®,
therefore, mean that the performance of such
noble acts on the part of the man of SГҘttvika
renunciation is not actuated by attachment;
he performs them for the maintenance of the
world-order, renouncing the feeling of
mineness, attachment and the desire for fruit,
and with a sense of duty.
The man of a SГҘttvika disposition who
performs or shuns actions with a sense of duty
and without any partiality or prejudice is
convinced that the SГҘttvika TyГҘga in the form
of Karmayoga is the only perfect means of
securing freedom from the bondage of actions
and attaining the supreme state. This is what
is meant by the adjective Г«ChinnasaвүҲвҖ№ayaВЁГӯ.
The word Г«KarmaГӯ, qualified by the
adjective Г«AkuвҖ№alamГӯ, in this verse stands for
sinful acts prohibited by the вҖәГҘstras, as well
as for those that are motivated by desire; for,
while sinful acts cause oneГӯs birth in sub-
human species of various kinds and throw
one into the infernal regions, actions, motivated
by desire too bring about rebirth in order to
enable one to reap their fruit. Being thus
conducive to bondage, both these types of
action are called Г«AkuвҖ№alaГӯ. The man who
practises the SГҘttvika form of renunciation is
entirely free from likes and dislikes; hence
the shunning of prohibited and desire-born
acts on his part is not actuated by hatred. He
shuns them in the interest of the world order
and with a recognition of the fact that it is his
duty to shun acts which are not conducive to
lasting good. This is what is meant by words
Г«Na dveВ¶Вўi akuвҖ№alam Karma.Гӯ
Г«KuвҖ№aleГӯ denotes virtuous acts of the
obligatory and occasional types enjoined by
the scriptures, e.g., sacrifice, charity and
вҲ‘ГҲВ§вүҘГҠвҲӮпЈҝ to that which is conducive to blessedness; Её nor; вҖўЕёГҲВ·Г®ГҠГғпЈҝ gets attached; Г ГҝГҠВӘГӢГ” (and) a
man of true renunciation; вҖҡГ»п¬ӮвҖҡв—ҠГҠГҒп¬ӮcвүҲвҖ” (that man) imbued with the quality of SГҘttvika
(goodness); в—ҠпЈҝЕ“ГҠп¬ӮГӢ intelligent; ГҒВҝUГӣГҠвҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝвҖ” he whose doubts have been resolved.
He who neither hates action which does not bring lasting happiness, nor does he get
attached to that which is conducive to blessedness,Гіimbued with the quality of goodness,
he has all his doubts resolved, is intelligent and a man of true renunciation.        (10)
In the above verse the man of renunciation of the SГҘttvika type, i.e., the KarmayogвҲӮ
performing his duties in a disinterested spirit, has been called a man of true renunciation.
This raises the following question. The man who abstains from all sorts of action, as from
those that are prohibited or motivated by desire, can as well be a man of true renunciation;
how, then, does the Lord declare him alone who performs actions in a disinterested spirit
as a man of true renunciation? Anticipating this query, the Lord says:
Её ГҒвҖһU Е’пЈҝвҖһUГ·ГҺГғГҠ вүҘГҠГ„ГҝВў Г ГҝQГҲВўВ§ вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГЎГҝвүҘГҠпЈҝВ·ГғвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ГҝSГғГҲ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ»В§вҲӮUГ ГҝГҠВӘГӢ вҖҡ Г ГҝГҠВӘГӢГ ГҝГҒГ·Е“ГӢГҝГғпЈҝH 11H
Её cannot; ГҒвҖһU because; Е’пЈҝвҖһUГ·ГҺГғГҠ by anyone possessing a body; вүҘГҠГ„Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” Г ГҝQГҲВ§в—ҠЛңГ” be given up;
вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ (all) actions; вҖўвүҘГҠпЈҝВ·ГғвҖ” in their entirety; ГҝвҖ” who; ГғГҲ alone; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёВ»В§вҲӮUГ ГҝГҠВӘГӢ renounces the fruit
of actions; вҖҡвҖ” he; Г ГҝГҠВӘГӢГ” a man of renunciation; ГҹГҒГғ so; вҖўГҒГ·Е“ГӢГҝГғпЈҝ is called.
Since all actions cannot be given up in their entirety by anyone possessing a body,
he alone who renounces the fruit of actions is called a man of renunciation.      (11)

=== PAGE 717 ===

716
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The word Г«DehabhГҰtГҘГӯ covers all human
beings who maintain and nourish their body.
The first half of this verse is, therefore, intended
to convey that no human being can remain
inactive; for without action it is not possible
even to maintain oneГӯs body (III.8). Therefore,
to whatever Г…вҖ№rama or stage in life a man
belongs, so long as he is alive, he must
satisfy his hunger and thirst, keep his body
either in a sitting or a lying posture, stir and
move about, speak and do other things
according to his circumstances. Hence it is
not possible to give up all actions in their
entirety.
The compound word Г«KarmaphalatyГҘgвҲӮГӯ
stands for the KarmayogвҲӮ who performs duties
enjoined by the вҖәГҘstras, renouncing the feeling
of mineness, attachment and desire. Since
everybody must do something, none can remain
inactive. A man of true renunciation is he
who totally abstains from prohibited actions
and those that are motivated by desire and
performs duties enjoined by the вҖәГҘstras
according to the needs of the occasion,
completely renouncing the feeling of mineness,
attachment and desire in respect of those
actions as well as for their fruit. This is what
is meant by the latter half of this verse.
He who dwells with his mind on the
objects of the world, outwardly restraining
the functions of the senses, is no man of
renunciation; and even so he who gives up
duties enjoined by the вҖәГҘstras such as sacrifice,
charity and austerity etc., even though
attachment and the feeling of Г«IГӯ and Г«mineГӯ
are present in him, is no TyГҘgвҲӮ either.
In the above verse it has been stated that a man of renunciation is he who renounces
the fruit of actions. Here it may be urged that even though one may not expect any return
for oneГӯs actions, the latter cannot be undone without yielding their fruit; just as a seed sown
in the soil automatically gives birth to a tree in course of time, even so the fruit of actions
once performed must be reaped by all in one life or another. Such being the case, how can
one be a TyГҘgвҲӮ i.e., Г«free from the bondage of actionsГӯ by merely renouncing the fruit of
action? In order to meet this objection the Lord says:
вҖўГҒЕёcвүҲГ”UГҒв—ҠcвүҲВўU ГҒв—ҠГјГҠВў Гё ГҒГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“Вў вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠвҖ” В»В§вҲӮв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
Г·п¬ӮГ ГҝГ ГҝГҠГҒВӘЕёГҠВў В¬ЛқпЈҝГ Гҝ Её ГғГҲ вҖҡГӣГҝГҠГҒвҖҡЕёГҠВў Г„п¬ӮГҒГёГғЛңГ”H 12H
вҖўГҒЕёcвүҲв—ҠЛңГ” disagreeable; ГҹcвүҲв—ҠЛңГ” agreeable; ГҒв—ҠГјГҠв—ҠЛңГ” mixed; Гё and; ГҒГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“в—ҠЛңГ” threefold, of three
kinds; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠвҖ” the actions; В»В§вҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” the fruit; Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ does accrue; вҖўГ ГҝГҠГҒВӘЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of the unrenouncing; В¬ЛқпЈҝГ Гҝ
hereafter, after death; Её accrues; ГғГҲГ” but; вҖҡГӣГҝГҠГҒвҖҡЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” (of the actions) of those who have
renounced; Г„п¬ӮГҒГёГғЛңГ” not at any time.
Agreeable, disagreeable and mixedГіthreefold, indeed, is the fruit that accrues
hereafter from the actions of the unrenouncing. But there is none whatsoever for those
who have renounced.                                                                                     (12)
attachment and with a hope of reward.
Heavenly bliss or any other agreeable
enjoyments of the terrestrial plane, attained
as a result of various acts performed by such
men, constitute what is known as the welcome
fruit; and birth in subhuman species such as
The word Г«AtyГҘginГҘmГӯ refers to the
generality of those common folk who have
not renounced the feeling of mineness,
attachment and desire in respect of actions
performed by them and their fruit, that is to
say, who perform all their actions with

=== PAGE 718 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
717
beasts, birds, insects, moths and trees etc.,
tortures in hell or sufferings of any other kind
brought about by their sinful deeds are spoken
of as the unwelcome fruit. Even so, being
born as a human being, he who obtains
welcome enjoyments now and undergoes
unwelcome experiences at another time is
said to reap a mixed fruit. This is the threefold
fruit yielded by oneГӯs actions.
The actions performed, by these
unrenouncing men cannot be neutralized until
they have borne fruit, and continue to yield
their welcome or unwelcome fruit life after
life; that is why such men go on revolving
with the cycle of births and deaths.
In his current life man generally reaps
his Г«PrГҘrabdhaГӯ or destiny carved out of his
doings in previous lives; the fruit of his current
actions is seldom reaped in this life. Therefore,
the fruit of actions performed in course of one
human life is bound to be reaped in many lives.
This is what is sought to be conveyed by the
use of the word Г«PretyaГӯ.
The particle Г«TuГӯ is intended to distinguish
those that have renounced the fruit from the
unrenouncing, and establish their superiority
over the latter.
The word Г«SannyГҘsinГҘmГӯ in this verse
stands for those KarmayogвҲӮs who have
completely renounced the feeling of mineness,
attachment and desire in respect of actions
and their fruit, who have been referred to
under the name of Г«TyГҘgвҲӮГӯ in verse 10 above,
and termed both as a Г«SannyГҘsвҲӮГӯ and Г«YogвҲӮГӯ
in the opening verse of Chapter VI, and who
are shown in verse 51 of Chapter II to attain
the supreme blissful state.
Whatever actions are performed by such
men of renunciation are like fried seeds; they
are incapable of bearing fruit. And such
disinterested actions performed for the sake
of sacrifice also neutralize all good and evil
actions performed in previous lives (IV.23).
Hence none of their actions performed in this
life or in lives that have gone by ever yield
any fruit either here or hereafter, under any
circumstances; they are completely rid of the
bondage of actions.
In the opening verse of this chapter Arjuna requested the Lord to expound the truth of
SannyГҘsa and TyГҘga separately. In response to this prayer the Lord stated in verses 2 and
3 the diverse views of different sages on this question and explained at full length the truth
of TyГҘga or Karmayoga as understood by Him in verses 4 to 12. Now, in order to expound
the truth of SannyГҘsa or SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga, the Lord first of all mentions five factors contributory
to the accomplishment of actions from the SГҘвҲҶkhya point of view.
В¬@Г’ГғГҠГҒЕё в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ вҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠГҒЕё ГҒЕёвҖҷГҠпЈҝЕ“ в—ҠпЈҝГ”вҖ“
вҖҡГҠГҰЛңUГ…ГҝпЈҝ вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғГҠГЈГғпЈҝ В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§ГҠГҒЕё ГҒвҖҡhГҝпЈҝ вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ”H 13H
В¬@ five; вҲһГғГҠГҒЕё these, the following; в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ O mighty-armed one, Arjuna; вҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠГҒЕё factors
or contributory causes; ГҒЕёвҖҷГҠпЈҝЕ“Г” know (them); в—ҠпЈҝ from Me; вҖҡГҠГҰЛңUГ…ГҝпЈҝ in the branch of learning known
by the name of SГҘвҲҶkhya; вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғГҠГЈГғпЈҝ prescribing means for neutralizing all actions; В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§ГҠГҒЕё have been
mentioned; ГҒвҖҡhГҝпЈҝ вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” towards the accomplishment of all actions.
In the branch of learning known as SГҘвҲҶkhya, which prescribes means for
neutralizing all actions, five factors have been mentioned as contributory to the
accomplishment of all actions; know them all from Me, Arjuna.
 (13)
are enjoined by the вҖәГҘstras or prohibited by
them.
The compound word Г«SarvakarmaЖ’ГҘmГӯ
in this verse covers all actions, whether they

=== PAGE 719 ===

718
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
so, whatever diverse media or accessories are
employed for the performance of various-
actions 
are 
covered 
by 
the 
words
Г¬PГҰthagvidham KaraЖ’amГ®.
Moving from one place to another,
exerting oneГӯs hands, feet and other limbs, the
acts of inhalation and exhalation, drawing
together and stretching oneГӯs limbs, closing
and opening oneГӯs eyes and indulging in
speculations of various kindsГіthese and other
activities of divergent types are what have been
spoken of here as Г¬VividhГҘВЁ pГҰthak ceВ¶ВўГҘВЁГ®.
The word Г«DaivamГӯ in this verse stands
for the latencies of past actions, both good
and evil; Г«PrГҘrabdhaГӯ or destiny is also included
in it. Many people call it AdГҰВ¶Вўa or the
unseen destiny. The adjective Г«PaВӨcamamГӯ
has been added to it in order to show that this
completes the number, viz., five.
The word Г«AdhiВ¶ВўhГҘnamГӯ in this verse
primarily denotes the seat of activity, as well
as of the organs, viz., the body; while in the
secondary sense it can also be taken to refer
to the earthГӯs surface, which serves as the
ground on which various actions forming
part of a sacrifice are performed.
The word Г«KartГҘГӯ (agent) stands for the
soul as rooted in Matter. It is this very soul
that has been spoken of as the enjoyer in
verse 21 of Chapter XIII and as one deluded
by egotism, in verse 27 of Chapter III.
Mind, intellect and the ego are internal
organs; while the five senses of perception
and the five organs of actionГіthese ten
are the external instruments. Besides these,
the ladle etc., which are helpful in the
performance of a sacrifice etc., are all
included in the external instruments. Even
JВӨГҘnayoga or the means of true Knowledge,
and which tells us the process of neutralizing
all actions, viz., viewing all actions as being
performed by PrakГҰti or Nature and the Self as
wholly Non-doer. The five factors declared as
contributory to the accomplishment of all
actionsГіwhich conjointly operate to produce
an actionГіare also intended to establish the
non-doership of the Self.
Г«SГҘвҲҶkhyaГӯ means knowledge. The word
has been derived from the root Г«KhyГҘГӯ (to know)
with Г«SamГӯ prefixed to it. It is etymologically
explained as under: вҖҡГӘГҝвҲ‘ЛңВ§Г” Г…ГҝГҠГҝГғпЈҝ ГҙГҠГҠГҝГғпЈҝ В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠГҠ
вҖўЕёпЈҝЕё ГҹГҒГғ вҖҡГҠГҰЛңUГ”Г…ГҝВў ГғГ»п¬ӮГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” (Г«SГҘвҲҶkhyaГӯ is the means
of knowing God in reality; hence it means true
wisdom.) Therefore, the word Г«SГҘвҲҶkhyeГӯ
qualified, by the adjective Г«KГҰtГҘnteГӯ, refers to
that branch of knowledge which teaches
The Lord now enumerates the five factors:
вҖўГҒЕ“DГ”UГҠЕёВў ГғГ•ГҠ вҲ‘В§ГғГҠВё вҲ‘В§вҒ„UГЎГҠВў Гё В¬ГҺГ•ГҒГҮп¬ӮЕ“в—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҒп¬ӮГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГҠp В¬ГҺГ•BпЈҝВ§CГ”UГҠ Е’Г’п¬ӮВў ГёГ’п¬ӮГҠГІГҠ В¬@в—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ”H 14H
вҖўГҒЕ“DГ”UГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the seat (of action); ГғГ•ГҠ and; вҲ‘В§ГғГҠВё the agent; вҲ‘В§вҒ„UГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the organs; Гё and; В¬ГҺГ•ГҒГҮп¬ӮЕ“в—ҠЛңГ”
of different kinds; ГҒп¬ӮГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГҠвҖ” of various kinds; Гё and; В¬ГҺГ•вҲ‘ЛңВ§Г” ГёпЈҝCГ”UГҠвҖ” separate movements; Е’Г’п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ”
destiny; Гё and; вҲһп¬Ӯ likewise; вҖўГІГҠ in the matter, i.e., operating towards the accomplishment of
actions; В¬@в—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” the fifth.
The following are the factors operating towards the accomplishment of actions, viz.,
the body and the doer, the organs of different kinds and the different functions of manifold
kinds; and the fifth is Daiva, and destiny as well.
(14)
вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„Uп¬ӮГҠГҰЛңUГ”в—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝГҒГ·ГҝВёГ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё В¬ЛқГҠвҒ„UГ·ГғпЈҝ ЕёвҒ„UвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ГЈГҝГҠЖ’ГҝВў п¬ӮГҠ ГҒп¬ӮВ¬вҒ„UГӢГғВў п¬ӮГҠ В¬@Г’ГғпЈҝ ГғSГҝ вҖһпЈҝUГғп¬ӮвҖ”Г”H 15H

=== PAGE 720 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
719
вүҘГҠвҒ„UГӢвҒ„Uп¬ӮГҠГҰЛңUГ”в—ҠЕёГҠпЈҝГҒГ·вҖ” with the mind, speech and body; ГҝГғЛңГ” whatever; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё action; В¬ЛқГҠвҒ„UГ·ГғпЈҝ
undertakes, performs; ЕёвҒ„UвҖ” man; ГЈГҝГҠЖ’Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” right; п¬ӮГҠ or; ГҒп¬ӮВ¬вҒ„UГӢГғв—ҠЛңГ” otherwise; п¬ӮГҠ even; В¬@ five; вҲһГғпЈҝ
these; ГғSГҝ thereof; вҖһпЈҝUГғп¬ӮвҖ” (are) the contributory causes.
These five are the contributory causes of whatever actions, right or wrong, man
performs with the mind, speech and body.                                            (15)
Similarly, acts which have been forbidden
by the вҖәГҘstras for some classes of men in
view of their grade in society etc., and all
other sinful acts which run counter to the
principles of morality and religion, such as
lying, thieving, adultery, violence, drinking,
and taking prohibited food, belong to the
category of unrighteous acts.
The words Г«KarmaГӯ, qualified by the
relative adjective Г«YatГӯ, covers all actions, both
good and evil, the fruits of which have to be
reaped here or hereafter. None of these actions
can be accomplished without the joint operation
of the above five factors. The co-operation of
all these is essential for the performance of
any action whatsoever. If any of these five is
missing, no action can be possible. That is
why it has been stated in verse 17 below that
action which is performed without any conscious
agent is no action at all.
The use of word Г«NaraВЁГӯ in this verse is
intended to convey that it is in the human
body alone that the soul is free to perform
fresh actions of a virtuous or sinful type. All
other species of life are meant for pleasurable
and painful experiences alone; in them one
has to reap the consequences of oneГӯs past
actions and is denied freedom of will.
The word Г«вҖәarвҲӮraГӯ forming part of the
compound word Г«SarвҲӮravГҘвҲҶmanobhiВЁГӯ stands
for the physical body including the senses,
while Г«ManasГӯ covers all the aspects of the
mind or the internal organ.
Sacrifice, charity, austerity, study, warfare,
agriculture, rearing of cows, trade service and
all other duties enjoined by the вҖәГҘstras as binding
on a man according to his grade in society,
stage in life, temperament and circumstances,
and performed in a righteous manner, are
covered by the adjective Г«NyГҘyyamГӯ.
Having thus enumerated the five factors, AdhiВ¶ВўhГҘna etc., contributory to the
accomplishment of all actions according to the SГҘвҲҶkhya point of view, the Lord now first
denounces those who recognize the Self as the doer. This He does in order to impress upon
Arjuna that, really speaking, the Self has nothing to do with actions and that it is absolutely
untainted, immutable and a non-doer.
ГғГІГҠГ’п¬ӮВў вҖҡГҒГғ вҲ‘В§ГғГҠВёвҒ„Uв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёВў вҲ‘пЈҝВ§п¬ӮвҲӮВўU ГғГҲ ГҝвҖ”Г”вҖ“
В¬вүҘГҝГ ГҝвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғвҖҷГҲГҒhГ п¬ӮГҠГӣГҠ вҖҡ В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғ Е’ГҲв—ҠВёГҒГғГ”вҖ”H 16H
ГғГІГҠ in that matter, i.e., towards the accomplishment of actions; вҲһп¬ӮВў вҖҡГҒГғ notwithstanding
this; вҲ‘В§ГғГҠВёвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” as the doer; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” вҲ‘пЈҝВ§п¬ӮвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” the absolute (untainted) Self; ГғГҲ but; ГҝвҖ” who; В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғ
views; вҖўвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғвҖҷГҲГҒhГ п¬ӮГҠГғЛңГ” owing to an impure intellect; ЕёГ” not; вҖҡвҖ”Г” that; В¬вүҘГҝГҒГғГ” views (aright); Е’ГҲв—ҠВёГҒГғвҖ”
man of perverse understanding.
Notwithstanding this, however, he who, having an impure mind, regards the
absolute, taintless Self alone as the doer, that man of perverse understanding does not
view aright.                                                                                (16)
viz., AdhiВ¶ВўhГҘna etc., that contribute to the
accomplishment of all actions; the Self has
As has been shown in the preceding
verses, it is the five factors mentioned above,

=== PAGE 721 ===

720
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
really nothing to do with them. Hence it is
quite absurd to regard the Self as the doer.
Nevertheless, people foolishly arrogate to
themselves the doership of actions; how strange
is that! This is what is sought to be conveyed
by the words Г«Evam SatiГӯ.
The ignorant man of the world, whose
intellect has not been purified through
association with holy men and the study of
scriptures, and through spiritual practices such
as discrimination, reflection and control of
mind and body etc. is referred to here as
Г«AkГҰtabuddhiГӯ. The use of the ablative form
Г«AkГҰtabuddhitvГҘtГӯ is intended to show why
people regard the Self as the doer. The idea
is that even though, really speaking, the Self
has nothing to do with actions, yet, through
lack of discrimination man ignorantly embraces
the belief that the Self is the doer.
The adjective Г«KevalamГӯ used with
reference to Г«Г…tmГҘnamГӯ, is intended to reveal
the true character of the Self, which is Г«absoluteГӯ,
i.e., absolutely pure, immutable and unattached.
вҖәrutis also proclaim that Г¬the Self is, really
speaking, altogether unattached.Г®* (BГҰhad.,
up., IV.iii.15-16). Hence it is quite preposterous
to connect the Self, which is unattached, with
actions and regard it as the doer.
The word Г«DurmatiВЁГӯ has been used to
reveal that the reason of the man who views
the Self as the doer is perverted, that he lacks
the capacity to realize the essential character
of the Self. The truly discerning man is he
who views all actions as a game of PrakГҰti and
the Self as a non-doer in every sense, as declared
in verse 29 of Chapter XIII. As against this, he
who regards the Self as the doer is deluded by
ignorance and egotism (III.27); hence his view
is not correct, but erroneous.
Here it will be seen that of the five
factors declared as contributory to the
accomplishment of actions, four are products
of PrakГҰti, while the fifth, viz., the agent, is
no other than the Self rooted in PrakГҰti. In the
above exposition however, it is stated that
the Self is not the doer, but unattached. How
are we to reconcile these two self-contradictory
statements? In this connection it should be
noted that, really speaking, the Self is eternal,
pure, enlightened, immutable and wholly
unattached; it has nothing to do with PrakГҰti,
objects born of PrakГҰti, or actions. But due to
nescience, that has existed from time without
beginning, the unattached Self has been
connected, as it were, with PrakГҰti; therefore,
falsely identifying itself with the acts performed
by PrakГҰti, it arrogates to itself the doership
of those actions. The Self which thus claims
to be the doer is known as Г«PrakГҰtistha PuruВ¶aГӯ
(self rooted in PrakГҰti); it is only when it
arrogates to itself the doership of actions that
they are known by the name of Г«KarmaГӯ and
bear fruit. That is why the PrakГҰtistha PuruВ¶a
has to take birth in good and evil wombs and
to reap the consequences of those actions
(XIII.21). Therefore, the Г«KartГҘГӯ or agent,
mentioned in verse 14 above as one of the
five factors contributory to the accomplishment
of actions, is the PrakГҰtistha PuruВ¶a; whereas
the present verse speaks of the absolute, i.e.
unattached and untainted Self. Hence by
declaring it as the non-doer the Lord has
stated its real character. The fifth factor, viz.,
the agent, is no longer present in the actions
of the man who has realized the true nature
of the Self. That is why his actions cease to
be known as Г«KarmaГӯ. It is this very idea that
has been brought out in the next verse.
* вҖўвҖҡXГ”UГҠпЈҝ sГ”ГҝВў В¬ГҲLВ§В·вҖ”вҖ“
Denouncing the man who views the Self as the doer, in order to inculcate the truth that
the Self is absolutely untainted, immutable and a non-doer, the Lord now extols him who,
having realized the true nature of the Self, views it as a non-doer.

=== PAGE 722 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
721
the least connection with the actions performed
by them or with the fruit of those actions. It,
therefore, follows that the actions that are
performed by his mind, intellect and senses
in the interest of the world-order and due to
the impulse of his PrГҘrabdha or destiny are
all in accord with the вҖәГҘstras, and beneficent
to all. For the feeling of Г«IГӯ and Г«mineГӯ,
attachment and selfishness having disappeared,
there remains no incentive to the perpetration
of sinful acts. Therefore, just as when any
living being meets its death due to its PrГҘrabdha
or destiny through the agency of fire, air and
water etc., neither are the latter held responsible
for the death of that living being nor are they
bound by that action, even so the exalted
soul mentioned above, while discharging his
sacred obligations in the eyes of the world, is
not held responsible for his deeds nor gets
bound by their fruit even if he carries out the
hard-hearted duties of a KВ¶atriyaГіexterminates
the whole creation according to the exigencies
of the momentГіmuch less when he performs
noble acts such as sacrifice, charity and
austerity. That is to say, even though he
performs all sorts of actions, he remains
absolutely free from their binding effect.
The idea is that just as God, even though
carrying on the functions of creation,
maintenance and destruction etc. of the whole
universe, is really speaking not the doer in
respect of these functions (IV.13), and has
The relative pronoun Г«YasyaГӯ in this
verse refers to the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ (the SГҘdhaka
treading the path of Knowledge) who views
all actions as a game of PrakГҰti. No longer
regarding the body as his Self, such a man
altogether ceases to be the doer. That is to
say, he no longer entertains to the least degree
the sense of doership or duty in respect of
any action whatsoever performed by the mind,
senses and the body. This is what is meant
by the words Г«Na AhaвҲҶkГҰtaВЁ BhГҘvaВЁГӯ.
The SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ further ceases to
entertain the feeling of mineness, attachment
and desire in respect of actions and their fruit
in the shape of wife, progeny, wealth, house,
honour, fame, heavenly bliss and other objects
of this world and the next. He disclaims
connection with any action whatsoever or its
fruit; and inasmuch as he comes to realize all
actions and objects as momentary, perishable
and unreal like the actions and enjoyments of
a dream, they hardly leave any impression on
his mind. This is what is meant by the clause
Г«BuddhiВЁ na lipyateГӯ.
Thus it is clear that, inasmuch as the
SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ comes to realize in the aforesaid
manner the essential character of the Self,
egotism or the feeling of Г«IГӯ, which is born of
ignorance, entirely disappears from his mind;
and since he no longer entertains the feeling
of Г«IГӯ and Г«mineГӯ in respect of the mind,
intellect, senses and body, he ceases to have
ГҝSГҝ ЕёГҠвҖһUVГҺГ”ГғГҠпЈҝ Г·ГҠп¬ӮГҠпЈҝ вҖҷГҲГҒhГҝВёSГҝ Её ГҒвҲӮUГҘГҝГғпЈҝвҖ“
вҖһUГ п¬ӮГҠГҒВ¬ вҖҡ Гҹв—ҠГҠВ°ГҖвҖ№ГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠГӣГҠ вҖһUГҒГЈГғ Её ГҒЕёвҖҷГӨГҝГғпЈҝH 17H
ГҝSГҝ in whose mind; Её does not exist; вҖўвҖһUVГҺГ”ГғвҖ” Г·ГҠп¬ӮвҖ” the notion that Г¬I am the doerГ®; вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ”
reason; ГҝSГҝ whose; Её ГҒвҲӮUГҘГҝГғпЈҝ is not affected (by thoughts of mundane objects and activities);
вҖһUГ п¬ӮГҠГ” having killed; вҖўГҒВ¬ even; вҖҡвҖ” he; Гҹв—ҠГҠЕёЛңГ” all (these); вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠЕёЛңГ” people; Её neither; вҖһUГҒГЈГғ (really) kills;
Её nor; ГҒЕёвҖҷГӨГҝГғпЈҝ is bound (by sin).
He whose mind is free from the sense of doership, and whose reason is not
affected by worldly objects and activities, does not really kill, even having killed all
these people, nor does any sin accrue to him.                                                          (17)

=== PAGE 723 ===

722
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
nothing to do with them (IV.14; IX.9), even
so the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ has no connection
whatsoever with the actions performed by his
mind, intellect and senses. Of course, since
he has attained utmost purity of heart and has
become entirely free from the feelings of Г«IГӯ
and Г«mineГӯ, attachment and selfishness, his
mind, intellect and senses are incapable of
entertaining likes and dislikes, as well as of
sinful acts such as thieving, adultery, lying,
violence, duplicity, hypocrisy etc.; all his
activities are in accord with the вҖәГҘstras and
in keeping with his grade in society, stage in
life and circumstances. And this imposes no
strain on him inasmuch as it becomes a habit
with him.
Having thus established the non-doership of the Self in order to expound the truth of
SannyГҘsa (SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga), the Lord now enumerates the factors which motivate action as
well as the constituents of action in order to give a clear idea of the constituents of action
from the point of view of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga.
ГҙГҠГҠЕёВў ГҙГҠпЈҝГҝВў В¬ГҒвҒ„UГҙГҠГҠГғГҠ ГҒГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГҠ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГёГҠпЈҝЕ’ЕёГҠвҖ“
вҲ‘В§вҒ„UГЎГҠВў вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё вҲ‘В§ГғпЈҝВёГҒГғ ГҒГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“вҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡГҰЛңUГ”ВӘЛқвҖһUвҖ”H 18H
ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” knowledge; ГҙГҠпЈҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ” (and) the object of knowledge; В¬ГҒвҒ„UГҙГҠГҠГғГҠ the knower (the subject);
ГҒГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГҠ threefold; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГёГҠпЈҝЕ’ЕёГҠ (is) that which motivates action; вҲ‘В§вҒ„UГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the organs; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё (and) action;
вҲ‘В§ГғГҠВё (even so) the doer; ГҹГҒГғГ” thus; ГҒГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“вҖ” of three kinds; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёвҖҡГҰЛңUГ”ВӘЛқГ”UвҖһUвҖ” (are) the constituents of
action.
The knower, knowledge and the object of knowledgeГіthese three motivate
action. Even so, the doer, the organs and activityГіthese are the three constituents of
action.                                                                                      (18)
agent; the mind, intellect and the senses with
the instrumentality of which he carries on all
these functions are known by the name of
Г«KaraЖ’aГӯ and all these functions are spoken
of as Г«KarmaГӯ. It is these three factors which
combine to produce an action. For Г«KarmaГӯ
is accomplished only when man himself
assumes the role of an agent and performs an
action with the instrumentality of the mind,
intellect and senses; no Karma is possible
without this. Of the five factors mentioned in
verse 14 above as contributory to the
accomplishment of actions, the middle three,
excluding AdВЁiВ¶ВўhГҘna and Daiva, have been
given the name of KarmasaвҲҶgraha (constituents
of action); for, of the five factors these three
are the foremost.
Г«ParijВӨГҘtГҘГӯ or the knower is he who
ascertains the essential character of an object;
the faculty of mind by which he does so is
called Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ or knowledge and the object
whose essential character he ascertains is
called Г«JВӨeyaГӯ. These three, taken together,
motivate action; in other words, these three
goad man to action. For it is only when a
qualified man concludes with his cognitive
faculty that he has to perform such and such
action in such and such manner with the help
of such and such materials, that he feels
impelled to act.
The soul rooted in PrakГҰti, who performs
the acts of perceiving, hearing, grasping with
the mind, recollecting, eating, drinking and
all other functions is called Г«KartГҘГӯ or the
Having thus enumerated the three factors which motivate action as well as the three
constituents of action from the SГҘвүҲkhya point of view, the Lord now picks up, from among

=== PAGE 724 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
723
these six JВӨГҘna, Karma and KartГҘ and undertakes to classify them in their order of sequence
under three heads, viz., SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika, in order that one may choose the
SГҘttvika traits, which are helpful to the realization of Truth, and reject the RГҘjasika and
TГҘmasika, which are prejudicial to it.
ГҙГҠГҠЕёВў вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё Гё вҲ‘В§ГғГҠВё Гё ГҒГІГҠЕ“Г’п¬Ӯ ВӘГҲГЎГҠГ·пЈҝЕ’ГғвҖ”вҖ“
В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ ВӘГҲГЎГҠвҖҡГҰЛңГ”UГ…ГҝГҠЕёпЈҝ ГҝГ•ГҠп¬ӮГ«ВҝГҺUГЎГҠГҲ ГғГҠГЈГҝГҒВ¬H 19H
ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” knowledge; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё action; Гё and; вҲ‘В§ГғГҠВё the doer; Гё as well as; ГҒГІГҠЕ“ГҠ of three kinds; вҲһп¬Ӯ
only; ВӘГҲГЎГҠГ·пЈҝЕ’ГғвҖ” due to difference of qualities; В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ has been declared; ВӘГҲГЎГҠвҖҡГҰЛңUГ”Г…ГҝГҠЕёпЈҝ in the
branch of knowledge which deals with the GuЖ’as; ГҝГ•ГҠп¬ӮГғЛңГ” duly; oГҺГЎГҠГҲ hear (from Me); ГғГҠГҒЕё
them; вҖўГҒВ¬ too.
In the branch of knowledge dealing with the GuЖ’as or modes of PrakГҰti,
knowledge and action as well as the doer have been declared to be of three kinds
according to the GuЖ’a which predominates in each; hear them too duly from Me. (19)
entities; that is why the Lord has omitted to
classify the knower separately. And the threefold
division of Г«KaraЖ’aГӯ or the organs will follow
under the names of Buddhi (reason) and DhГҰti
(firmness), and that of the object of knowledge
under the name of Sukha. That is the reason
why the Lord has indicated His intention here
to classify in the first instance only three out of
the six factors mentioned in the preceding
verse.
The branch of knowledge which classifies
all objects under different heads according as
Sattva, Rajas or Tamas preponderates in them
is referred to here as Г«GuЖ’asaвҲҶkhyГҘneГӯ. By
inviting Arjuna to hear the threefold division
of JВӨГҘna, Karma and KartГҘ based on the
predominance of the three GuЖ’as, the Lord
shows His regard for that branch of knowledge.
It should be noted in this connection that
the knower and the doer are not two separate
As the Lord had undertaken to classify in their order of sequence JВӨГҘna, Karma and
KartГҘ, the Lord now begins with a definition of the SГҘttvika type of JВӨГҘna.
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ 
ГҝпЈҝЕёГ’вҲ‘ВўВ§ 
Г·ГҠп¬Ӯв—ҠвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠГӢЛҮГҠГғпЈҝвҖ“
вҖўГҒп¬ӮГ·QВўВ§ ГҒп¬ӮГ·QпЈҝВ§В·ГҲ ГғГ–ГҙГҠГҠЕёВў ГҒп¬ӮГҒh вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ”H 20H
вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ in all beings; ГҝпЈҝЕё by which (knowledge); вҲһвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” one; Г·ГҠп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” (divine) existence;
вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ” imperishable; ГҹВёЛҮГҠГғпЈҝГ” (man) perceives; вҖўГҒп¬ӮГ·QВ§в—ҠЛңГ” undivided, uniformly present; ГҒп¬ӮГ·QпЈҝВ§В·ГҲ
taken severally; ГғГғЛңГ” that; ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” knowledge; ГҒп¬ӮГҒh Know; вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” SГҘttvika.
That by which man perceives one imperishable divine existence as undivided and
equally present in all individual beings, know that knowledge to be SГҘttvika.    (20)
cave, in the celestial plane as well as in the
nether world, nay, in the whole universe
including all objects, even so he who views
all living beings, appearing as distinct from
one another in the eyes of the world, as well
as his own self as no other than God Himself,
The relative pronoun Г«YenaГӯ in this verse
stands for that realization, following from the
practice of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga, which has been
referred to in VI.29 and XIII.27. And just as
the man who knows the truth about ether,
perceives the same ether in a jar, a house, a

=== PAGE 725 ===

724
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
is said to perceive one divine existence as
undivided among individual beings.
By calling this realization as SГҘttvika the
Lord intends to convey that such knowledge
is the only real knowledge, while all other
worldly knowledge is only nominal and not
real, so that a man who seeks blessedness
should strive to acquire this knowledge alone.
The Lord now proceeds to define RГҘjasika knowledge.
В¬ГҺГ•Г„Г п¬ӮпЈҝЕё ГғГҲ ГҝГ–ГҙГҠГҠЕёВў ЕёГҠЕёГҠГ·ГҠп¬ӮГҠГЈВ¬ГҺГ•ГҒГҮп¬ӮЕ“ГҠЕёЛңГ”вҖ“
п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠ вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёВ·ГҲ Г·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ ГғГ–ГҙГҠГҠЕёВў ГҒп¬ӮГҒh вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ”H 21H
В¬ГҺГ•Г„Г п¬ӮпЈҝЕё as apart from one another; ГғГҲ but; ГҝГғЛңГ” ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the knowledge by which; ЕёГҠЕёГҠГ·ГҠп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ”
manifold existences; В¬ГҺГ•ГҒГҮп¬ӮЕ“ГҠЕёЛңГ” of diverse kinds; п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠГ” cognizes; вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёВ·ГҲ Г·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ in all beings; ГғГғЛңГ” that;
ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” knowledge; ГҒп¬ӮГҒh know; вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” RГҘjasika.
The knowledge by which man cognizes many existences of various kinds, as apart
from one another in all beings, know that knowledge to be RГҘjasika.             (21)
that each jar or house has its own limited
ether and associating it with the agreeable
or foul smell existing therein regards each
tract of ether as apart from another. This
belief of his is, however, erroneous. Even
so the belief that there are as many souls
as there are bodies, each in one, is misleading.
This is what is meant by calling this
knowledge as RГҘjasika. RГҘjasika knowledge
is no real knowledge, it is knowledge only
in name.
The man referred to in the present verse
believes that there are as many souls as there
are bodies, one in each, and that they are all
distinct from one another, even as every living
being has a distinct shape and form and a
temperament peculiarly its own. This is what
is meant by cognizing manifold existences of
various kinds as apart from one another in all
beings.
The idea is that the man who has no
knowledge of the truth about ether thinks
The Lord now defines TГҘmasika knowledge.
ГҝГ»ГҠГҲ вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г Fп¬ӮЕ’пЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҒSв—ҠГЈвҲ‘В§ГҠГҝпЈҝВё вҖҡQВ§в—ҠвҖһГ’UГғГҲвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖўГғГ»п¬ӮГҠГ•Вёп¬ӮЕ’ГҖВ¬Вў 
Гё 
ГғГ»ГҠГҠв—ҠвҖҡв—ҠГҲЕ’ГҠNUГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 22H
ГҝГғЛңГ” (the knowledge) which; ГғГҲ but; вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г Fп¬ӮГғЛңГ” as if it were the whole; вҲһвҲ‘В§ГҒSв—ҠЕёЛңГ” вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝпЈҝВё to one
(body, which is an) effect; вҖҡQВ§в—ҠЛңГ” clings; вҖўвҖһГ’UГғГҲвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” (and is) irrational; вҖўГғГ»п¬ӮГҠГ•Вёп¬ӮГғЛңГ” without any real
grasp of truth; вҖўГҖВ¬в—ҠЛңГ” trivial, or of little value; Гё and; ГғГғЛңГ” that; ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” TГҘmasika; В©UЕ’ГҠNUГғв—ҠЛңГ” has
been spoken of as.
Again, that knowledge which clings to one body as if it were the whole, and which is
irrational, has no real grasp of truth and is trivial, has been declared as TГҘmasika.    (22)
through which man comes to regard the
body, which is an evolute of matter, as his
own Self and, clinging to this belief, remains
attached to his ephemeral and perishable body
as his all, that is to say, identifies himself
with its joys and sorrows and looks upon its
destruction as his utter ruin, and fails to
The particle Г«TuГӯ in this verse is intended
to convey that this knowledge is of a much
lower order than the SГҘttvika and RГҘjasika types
of knowledge defined in the preceding verses.
The first half of this verse represents the
main characteristic of TГҘmasika knowledge.
The idea is that the perverted knowledge

=== PAGE 726 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
725
recognise the Self as distinct from the body
or all-pervading, is no knowledge in the real
acceptance of the term. Hence the Lord has
not even mentioned the word 'JВӨГҘna' in this
verse; for this perverted form of knowledge
is really the same as ignorance.
The use of the adjective Г«AhaitukamГӯ
(irrational) with this reference to this knowledge
is intended to convey that a reasonable man
will hardly entertain such a view; even a man
of small understanding is able to distinguish
between the material body and the conscious
Self by exercising his judgement; hence such
a perverted knowledge cannot exist where
there is reason and a critical sense.
That which is perceived or apprehended
through this knowledge is not real; that is to
say, this knowledge does not represent an
object in its real character. Hence it is perverted
form of knowledge and very insignificant;
that is why it is worth discarding. This is
what is sought to be conveyed by the use of
the adjective Г«AtattvГҘrthavatГӯ and Г«AlpamГӯ.
Such is the perverted form of knowledge
or belief entertained by men of a grossly
TГҘmasika disposition. That is but natural to
them inasmuch as ignorance has been said to
be an offspring of TamoguЖ’a.
The Lord now characterizes SГҘttvika action.
ГҒЕёГҝГғВў 
вҖҡXГ”UвҒ„UГҒвҖһUГғв—ҠвҒ„UГҠВӘmпЈҝВ·ГғвҖ” 
вҲ‘ГҺВ§Гғв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖўВ»В§вҲӮUВ¬ЛқпЈҝГҘвҖҡГҲЕёГҠ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё ГҝГ»ГҠГ вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҲГ«ГҝГғпЈҝH 23H
ГҒЕёГҝГғв—ҠЛңГ” is ordained (by the scriptures); вҖҡXГ”UвҒ„UГҒвҖһUГғв—ҠЛңГ” is not accompanied with the sense of
doership; вҖўвҒ„UГҠВӘmпЈҝВ·ГғвҖ”Г” without any attachment or aversion; вҲ‘ГҺВ§Гғв—ҠЛңГ” has been done; вҖўВ»В§вҲӮUВ¬ЛқпЈҝГҘвҖҡГҲЕёГҠ by
him who seeks no return; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё ГҝГғЛңГ” the action which; ГғГғЛңГ” that; вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” SГҘttvika; В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is called.
That action which is ordained by the scriptures and is not accompanied by the
sense of doership, and has been done without any attachment or aversion by one who
seeks no return, is called SГҘttvika.                                                        (23)
The word Г«SaвҲҶgaГӯ should, therefore, be
interpreted to mean the feeling of identification
that one develops with regard to oneГӯs actions
by 
claiming 
their 
doership. 
Hence
Г«SaвҲҶgarahitamГӯ should be taken to refer to
such actions as are performed without the
sense of doership and without identifying
oneself with oneГӯs body. Hence the use of
this adjective is intended to show that even
the aforesaid duties that have been enjoined
by the вҖәГҘstras are SГҘttvika only when they
are Г«SaвҲҶgarahitaГӯ, and not otherwise.
The compound adjective Г«Aphala-
prepsunГҘГӯ, stands for the unselfish man who,
having ceased to entertain the feeling of
mineness and attachment in respect of all
enjoyments of this world and the next, obtained
as a reward for oneГӯs actions, no longer
cherishes the least craving for those enjoyments,
Sacrifice, charity and austerity, vocational
duties and bodily functions and all other noble
acts enjoined by the scriptures as binding on
a particular man with due regard to his grade
in society, stage in life, temperament and
circumstances, are referred to here as Г«Niyatam
KarmaГӯ. The use of the participial adjective
Г«NiyatamГӯ is intended to convey that only such
obligatory duties as have been enjoined by
the scriptures, and are required to be performed
either daily or on special occasions, can be
SГҘttvika in character; those that have been
prohibited or are motivated by desire cannot
belong to this category.
The noun Г«SaвҲҶgaГӯ, forming part of the
compound adjective Г«SaвҲҶgarahitamГӯ, has not
been used in the sense of attachment in this
verse; for absence of attachment has been
included in the phrase Г«ArГҘgadveВ¶ataВЁ KГҰtamГӯ.

=== PAGE 727 ===

726
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
who does not seek to attain any selfish end
of his through any action whatsoever, who
does not need any object for himself.
The present verse shows that that action
alone is perfectly SГҘttvika, which answers all
the qualifications mentioned above. If any of
these characteristics is missing in a particular
action, its SГҘttvika character should be regarded
as wanting to that extent. Besides this, it
should also be taken to mean that JВӨГҘna or
realization follows from the quality of Sattva
and SГҘttvika actions alone; hence men who
seek to know the truth about God should
perform SГҘttvika actions alone, and should
not court bondage by performing RГҘjasika
and TГҘmasika actions.
Here it should be noted that the present
verse defines SГҘttvika action from the point
of view of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga; hence it precludes
the sense of doership by the term
Г«SaвҲҶgarahitamГӯ and the feeling of attraction
and aversion too by the word Г«ArГҘgadveВ¶ataВЁГӯ.
In verse 9, however, SГҘttvika TyГҘga has
been declared to consist merely in giving up
attachment and the craving for fruit of actions,
performed from the point of view of
Karmayoga. Hence there is no mention of
the absence of doership in that verse; on the
other hand, it advises the performance of
actions as a matter of duty. Here lies the
difference between SГҘttvika Karma and
SГҘttvika TyГҘga as defined in the two verses.
God-realization through Knowledge of Truth
is the reward of both; hence there is no real
difference between the two, the difference
lies only in their mode of practice.
The Lord now defines RГҘjasika action.
ГҝГ»ГҠГҲ вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠпЈҝГҘвҖҡГҲЕёГҠ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё вҖҡГҠвҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„пЈҝUГЎГҠ п¬ӮГҠ В¬ГҲЕёвҖ”вҖ“
ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГғпЈҝ 
вҖҷвҖһГҲUвҲӮUГҠГҝГҠвҖҡВў 
ГғВәЛқГҠВЎвҖҡв—ҠГҲЕ’ГҠNUГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 24H
ГҝГғЛңГ” which; ГғГҲ but; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠпЈҝГҘвҖҡГҲЕёГҠ by a man seeking enjoyments; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё the action; вҖҡГҠвҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„пЈҝUГЎГҠ by him
who is full of egotism; п¬ӮГҠ or; В¬ГҲЕёвҖ” and; ГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГғпЈҝГ” is performed; вҖҷвҖһГҲUвҲӮUГҠГҝГҠвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” involving much strain
or exertion; ГғГғЛңГ” that; вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” RГҘjasika; В©UЕ’ГҠNUГғв—ҠЛңГ” has been spoken of.
That action, however, which involves much strain and is performed by one who
seeks enjoyments or by a man full of egotism, has been spoken of as RГҘjasika.  (24)
do not involve any strain. The doer of RГҘjasika
actions, however, does identify himself with
the body, hence the toil and hardships involved
in his actions make him unhappy; that is why
he feels the strain while performing every action.
Besides this, the doer of SГҘttvika actions confines
himself to those duties alone which fall to his
lot from the sacred or secular point of view;
hence he does not expand his activities. But
the doer of RГҘjasika actions continues to
undertake new enterprises every day, hence
the scope of his activities gets much enlarged.
That is another reason why acts of weary toil
have been declared as RГҘjasika.
The compound word Г«KГҘmepsunГҘГӯ stands
The words Г«BahulГҘyГҘsam KarmaГӯ refer
to those desire-born and worldly undertakings
for which many activities of diverse kinds
have been prescribed, and which due to the
feeling of identification with oneГӯs body one
accomplishes with great exertion and grudge
regarding them as a burden. The use of the
compound adjective Г«BahulГҘyГҘsamГӯ is intended
to distinguish the RГҘjasika from the SГҘttvika
type of actions. The idea is that the doer of
SГҘttvika actions does not identify himself with
his body and has no sense of doership in
respect of his actions; hence he does not feel
the least exertion or hardship in performing
any action whatsoever. Therefore, his actions

=== PAGE 728 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
727
for the self-centred man who ever goes on
craving for enjoyments of various kinds,
entertaining as he does the feeling of mineness
and attachment in respect of them, and who
does everything for the sake of enjoyments of
this world and the next, such as wife, progeny,
wealth, house, honour, fame, prestige etc.
The use of the disjunctive particle Г«VГҘГӯ
in this verse is intended to convey that not
only those actions which aim at the acquisition
of objects of enjoyment but even those which,
though not motivated by the desire for
enjoyments, are prompted by egotism are
RГҘjasika in character. The idea is that even
those actions which are tainted by either of
these two evils viz., the craving for enjoyment
and egotism, are RГҘjasika, much more those
which are characterized by both.
The word Г«SГҘhaвҲҶkГҘreЖ’aГӯ stands for the
man who not only identifies himself with the
body but all of whose actions are prompted
by egotism, nay, who claims the doership of
actions, regards himself as nonpareil and makes
much of his capabilities and is also given to
bragging.
It has already been stated that RГҘjasika
actions yield a crop of sorrow (XIV.16) and
that the quality of Rajas binds man through
attachment of actions (XIV.7); hence a seeker
of liberation should never perform such actions.
This is what is meant by calling the above
actions RГҘjasika.
The Lord now characterizes TГҘmasika action.
вҖўЕёГҲвҖҷГЈЕ“Вў ЛҮГҠГҝВў ГҒвҖһВўUвҖҡГҠв—ҠЕёп¬ӮпЈҝЛҮГҝ Гё В¬ГҠГ’LВ§В·в—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҠЕ’ГҠвҒ„UГЁГҝГғпЈҝ 
вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё 
ГҝГ»ГҠГ»ГҠГҠв—ҠвҖҡв—ҠГҲГ«ГҝГғпЈҝГ”H 25H
вҖўЕёГҲвҖҷГЈЕ“в—ҠЛңГ” the upshot; ЛҮГҠГҝв—ҠЛңГ” loss (to oneself); ГҒвҖһВўUвҖҡГҠв—ҠЛңГ” injury to others; вҖўЕёп¬ӮпЈҝЛҮГҝ not counting;
Гё and; В¬ГҠГ’LВ§В·в—ҠЛңГ” oneГӯs own capacity; в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҠГғЛңГ” through (sheer) ignorance; вҖўГҠвҒ„UГЁГҝГғпЈҝ is undertaken; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё
the action; ГҝГғЛңГ” which; ГғГғЛңГ” that; ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” TГҘmasika; В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is spoken of.
That action which is undertaken through sheer ignorance, without regard for the
consequences or loss to oneself, injury to others and oneГӯs own capacity, is declared as
TГҘmasika.
(25)
possesses the requisite capacity. A TГҘmasika
action is that which does not take into account
all these considerations and is undertaken in
a reckless spirit. This is what the Lord seeks
to convey in the present verse.
Inspired as it is by ignorance, which is
a product of TamoguЖ’a, such a rash act is
called TГҘmasika. And it has already been
stated (XIV.18) that a TГҘmasika action leads
to AjВӨГҘna, i.e., birth in the species of stupid
creatures, such as swine, dogs, plants etc.,
or condemnation to hell. Hence those seeking
beatitude should never undertake such
an act.
Before launching an enterprise a man
should exercise his own judgment and foresee
its consequences, viz., whether it will lead to
happiness or sorrow. Again, he should consider
what will it cost him in the shape of money,
bodily strength and time, to what extent it
will interfere with Dharma or piety and what
other losses it will entail. Thirdly, he should
foresee in what way and to what extent it
will cause hardship to other human beings or
creatures and involve destruction of human
or other lives. And, fourthly, he should form
an estimate of the capacity that will be required
for accomplishing it and consider whether he
The Lord now defines a KartГҘ or doer of the SГҘttvika type.

=== PAGE 729 ===

728
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
в—ҠГҲQВ§вҖҡXГ”UГҠпЈҝЛҳЕёвҖһВўUп¬ӮГҠЕ’ГӢ 
Е“ГҺГ ГҝГҲГ вҖҡГҠвҖһUвҖҡв—ҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГғвҖ”Г”вҖ“
ГҒвҖҡhKГҒвҖҡhKГҠпЈҝГҢЕёГҢп¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UвҖ” вҲ‘В§ГғГҠВё вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§ В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝH 26H
в—ҠГҲQВ§вҖҡXГ”UвҖ” free from attachment; вҖўЕёвҖһВўUп¬ӮГҠЕ’ГӢ unegotistic; Е“ГҺГ ГҝГҲГ вҖҡГҠвҖһUвҖҡв—ҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГғвҖ” endowed with firmness
and zeal; ГҒвҖҡhKГҒвҖҡhKГҠпЈҝвҖ” in success and failure; ГҒЕёГҢп¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UвҖ” free from morbid feelings (such as
delight and grief etc.); вҲ‘В§ГғГҠВё a doer; вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§вҖ” SГҘttvika (in character); В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is spoken of (as).
Free from attachment, unegotistic, endowed with firmness and zeal and unswayed
by success and failureГіsuch a doer is said to be SГҘttvika.                          (26)
has achieved success or like one who seeks
some reward for his actions. A man who is
endowed with both these virtues, namely,
firmness and zeal, does not shirk his duty
even when faced with the heaviest odds, but
diligently pursues it through thick and thin,
surmounting all difficulties. These constitute
the distinguishing marks of such a man.
Ordinary men of the world are overjoyed
on the completion of an undertaking to which
they feel attached and which they look upon
as a means to the realization of their desired
end; even so, they feel very miserable when
it is interrupted and left half finished. Similarly,
the success and failure of an undertaking
awaken morbid feelings of various other kinds
in their heart. Therefore, that man of an
unruffled temperament who, having no feeling
of Г«IГӯ and Г«mineГӯ, attachment and the desire
for fruit, neither exults over the accomplishment
of an action nor grieves over its interruption
and who is subject to no other morbid feeling
either, that is to say, who remains equipoised
under every circumstance and at all times, is
called Г«SiddhyasiddhyoВЁ NirvikГҘraВЁГӯ.
He alone who possesses all the above
qualifications is a perfectly SГҘttvika doer; his
SГҘttvika nature will be found wanting to the
extent he lacks these qualifications. Such
SГҘttvika traits manifest the hidden light of
God, hence a seeker of liberation should
imbibe the virtues of a SГҘttvika doer.
Г«MuktasaвҲҶgaВЁГӯ is he who has ceased to
have any connection whatsoever with
actions and their fruit. That is to say, he
no longer entertains the least feeling of
mineness, attachment and desire in respect of
whatever is done by the mind, senses and
body, or with regard to its fruit in the shape
of honour, fame, prestige, wife, progeny,
wealth, house and other enjoyments of this
world and the next.
Again, Г«AnahaвүҲvГҘdвҲӮГӯ is he who, having
ceased to identify himself with the mind,
intellect, senses and body, which are other
than the Self, does not claim the doership in
respect of any of his actions. He, therefore,
never boasts, like men possessing a demoniac
disposition, of his having realized a particular
end, nor advertises his future designs. He
does not claim to be Г¬the lord, the enjoyer, a
mighty and happy man, having no compeerГ®
nor proclaims his intention to perform sacrifices
and bestow gifts (XVI.13-15) but talks in an
unaffected and unegotistic strain.
He who does not lose his balance
of mind even when confronted with the
greatest obstacles and difficulties while
discharging any sacred obligation is called
Г«DhГҰtisamanvitaВЁГӯ; while Г«UtsГҘhasamanvitaВЁГӯ
is he who is not deterred by failure or by the
thought that a man having no desire for fruit,
need not engage in action, but who is devoutly
eager to continue his efforts even as one who
The Lord now defines a doer of the RГҘjasika type.

=== PAGE 730 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
729
вҒ„UГҠВӘГӢ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГ”В»В§вҲӮUВ¬ЛқпЈҝГҘвҖҡГҲвҲӮВёГҲUГ©Е“ГҠпЈҝ ГҒвҖһВўUвҖҡГҠГ в—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҠпЈҝЛҳвүҘГҠГҲГҒГёвҖ”вҖ“
вҖһUВ·ВёвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГғвҖ” вҲ‘В§ГғГҠВё вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡвҖ” В¬ГҒвҒ„UвҲ‘В§ГӢГҢГғГғвҖ”H 27H
вҒ„UГҠВӘГӢ Passionate or full of attachment; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГ”В»В§вҲӮUВ¬ЛқпЈҝГҘвҖҡГҲвҖ” seeking the fruit of actions; вҲӮГҲUГ©Е“вҖ” (and)
greedy; ГҒвҖһВўUвҖҡГҠГ в—ҠвҲ‘В§вҖ” oppressive by nature; вҖўвүҘГҠГҲГҒГёвҖ” of impure conduct; вҖһUВ·ВёвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГғвҖ” affected by
joy and sorrow; вҲ‘В§ГғГҠВё a doer; вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡвҖ” RГҘjasika in character; В¬ГҒвҒ„UвҲ‘В§ГӢГҢГғГғвҖ” has been spoken of.
The doer who is full of attachment, seeks the fruit of actions and is greedy, who
is oppressive by nature and of impure conduct, and is affected by joy and sorrow, has
been called RГҘjasika.
(27)
continues to oppress others for the sake of
his own comfort and enjoyment, such a cruel
man is called Г«HiвүҲsГҘtmakaВЁГӯ.
He who has no regard for personal
cleanliness and morality, that is to say, who
neither cleans his body and clothes etc. by
the use of water and earth etc., nor maintains
the purity of his conduct through propriety of
behaviour, but who gives up cleanliness and
right conduct with a view to attaining
enjoyments of various kinds due to attachment
for the same, is called Г«AвҖ№uciВЁГӯ.
Г«HarВ¶aвҖ№okГҘnvitaВЁГӯ is he who is now
filled with delight and now plunged in grief
in course of every activity and at every
event, that is to say, whose mind is swayed
by joy and grief at every step inasmuch as he
cherishes a feeling of attraction and aversion
towards every action and its fruit.
A doer who is possessed of any of the
above characteristics belongs to the category
of a RГҘjasika doer; and a RГҘjasika doer
undergoes repeated births and deaths in different
species of life, he does not escape from the
whirligig of mundane existence. Hence a
seeker of liberation should not allow himself
to be a RГҘjasika doer.
He who entertains a feeling of mineness
and attachment in respect of actions and their
fruit in the shape of enjoyments of this world
and the next, that is to say, who remains
attached to whatever action he performs as
well as to its fruit, is called a Г«RГҘgвҲӮГӯ.
He who goes on craving for wife,
progeny, wealth, house, honour, fame,
prestige and various other enjoyments of this
world and the next, and does everything
with a view to attaining these enjoyments
alone, such a self-centred man is called
Г«KarmaphalaprepsuВЁГӯ.
The greedy man who on account of his
attachment to wealth and other possessions
refuses to spend money according to his
means even in a legitimate cause and cherishes
an ardent longing for amassing wealth by fair
means or foul, and who even seeks to usurp
the rights of others and strives to that end, is
called Г«LubdhaВЁГӯ.
He who is habitually disposed to inflict
suffering on others, by whatever means it
may be possible, who cares not the least for
the hardship of others while striving for the
realization of his own ambitions, his actions
being inspired by likes and dislikes, and who
The Lord now points out the characteristics of a TГҘmasika doer.
вҖўГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” В¬ЛқГҠвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғвҖ” SГғГ©Е“вҖ” вүҘГҠвҲҶUГҠпЈҝЛҳЕёГ’cвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғвҲ‘В§ГҠпЈҝЛҳвҲӮUвҖҡвҖ”вҖ“
ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҠЕ’ГӢ Е’ГӢГүГҠВёвҖҡГҚГІГҠГӢ Гё вҲ‘В§ГғГҠВё ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡ В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝH 28H
вҖўГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” lacking self-control and piety; В¬ЛқГҠвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғвҖ” uncultured, vulgar; SГғГ©Е“вҖ” arrogant; вүҘГҠвҲҶUвҖ”
deceitful; ЕёГ’cвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғвҲ‘В§вҖ” robbing others of their livelihood; вҖўвҲӮUвҖҡвҖ” slothful; ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҠЕ’ГӢ down-hearted;
Е’ГӢГүГҠВёвҖҡГҚГІГҠГӢ procrastinating; Гё and; вҲ‘В§ГғГҠВё doer; ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡвҖ” (as) TГҘmasika; В©UГ«ГҝГғпЈҝ is declared.

=== PAGE 731 ===

730
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Г«AyuktaВЁГӯ is he who has not been able
to subdue his mind and senses, but on the
other hand, who is under the control of his
mind and senses, and who is lacking in faith
and piety.
He who is naturally dull-witted and has
not received good education, who possesses
a childish nature, who has no knowledge of
his duty (XVI.7) and whose mind and senses
have not been improved by culture, is referred
to here as Г«PrГҘkГҰtaВЁГӯ.
The arrogant man who is very
hardhearted by nature, who has no element
of humility in him, and who is ever intoxicated
with pride, is called Г«StabdhaВЁГӯ.
The crafty swindler who secretly harms
others, concealing his malicious intentions,
and is ever contriving plans to do them an ill
turn, is referred to here as Г«вҖәaВўhaВЁГӯ.
Г«NaiВ¶kГҰtikaВЁГӯ is he who deprives others
of their means of subsistence.
The slothful man who is wont to remain
lying down all the twenty-four hours, who
does not feel inclined or encouraged to perform
any sacred or secular duty, and whose mind
and senses are ever steeped in indolence, is
spoken of here as Г«AlasaВЁГӯ.
The down-hearted man who grieves day
and night and whose worries know no end
(XVI.11) is called Г«ViВ¶ГҘdвҲӮГӯ.
And he who having taken up some
work does not finish it for a long time,Гіwho
goes on putting it off from day to day, so that
a work which could be finished in one day
takes many days and is yet left unfinished,
such a man of sluggish habits is called
Г«DвҲӮrghasВөutrвҲӮГӯ.
The evil traits mentioned in the above
verse are all products of TamoguЖ’a; hence
whoever possesses all these characteristics or
many of them should be regarded as a doer
of the TГҘmasika type. And men of a TГҘmasika
disposition fall in the scale of spiritual evolution
(XIV.18); they are born in sub-human species
of various kinds, such as beasts and birds,
insects and moths etc. (XIV.15). Hence a
man seeking beatitude should not allow any
of these characteristics to stay in him.
Having thus classified, JВӨГҘna, Karma and KartГҘ in order of sequence out of the factors
which motivate action as well as the constituents of action in order that the SГҘttvika traits,
which are helpful in the realization of Truth, may be imbibed and the RГҘjasika and
TГҘmasika propensities, which are prejudicial to such realization, may be discarded, the
Lord now undertakes to classify in their order of sequence Buddhi and DhГҰti under three
heads, viz., SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika.
вҖҷГҲhпЈҝГ·пЈҝВёЕ’Вў Е“ГҺГғпЈҝpГ’п¬Ӯ ВӘГҲГЎГҠГғГҒSГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“Вў oГҺГЎГҠГҲвҖ“
В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝГ«Гҝв—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠвүҘГҠпЈҝВ·пЈҝГЎГҠ В¬ГҺГ•Г„Г п¬ӮпЈҝЕё Е“ЕёГңВЎГҝH 29H
вҖҷГҲhпЈҝвҖ” of Buddhi (reason); Г·пЈҝЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” division; Е“ГҺГғпЈҝвҖ” of DhГҰti (firmness); Гё and; вҲһп¬Ӯ also; ВӘГҲГЎГҠГғвҖ”
based on the (predominance of) each GuЖ’a or mode of Nature; ГҒГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“в—ҠЛң the threefold; oГҺГЎГҠГҲ
hear; В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝГ«Гҝв—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” being told (by Me); вҖўвүҘГҠпЈҝВ·пЈҝГЎГҠ in full; В¬ГҺГ•Г„Г п¬ӮпЈҝЕё one by one; Е“ЕёTГҝ O conqueror
of riches, Arjuna.
Now hear, Arjuna, the threefold division, based on the predominance of each
GuЖ’a, of understanding (Buddhi) and firmness (DhГҰti) which I shall explain in detail,
one by one.
 (29)
Lacking piety and self-control, uncultured, arrogant, deceitful, inclined to rob
others of their livelihood, slothful, down-hearted and procrastinating, such a doer is
called TГҘmasika.                                                                              (28)

=== PAGE 732 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
731
The word Г«BuddhiГӯ in this verse denotes
the faculty of determination; it is also called
Г«AntaВЁkaraЖ’aГӯ or the internal organ. The JВӨГҘna
or knowledge which has been classified under
three heads in verses 20, 21 and 22 is a
product or function of Buddhi, which is the
source of it. Verse 18 mentions Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ as
one of the factors that motivate action; while
Buddhi has been included in the constituents
of action under the name of Г«KaraЖ’aГӯ or
instrument.
This constitutes the difference between
Buddhi and JВӨГҘna. The following verses
classify Buddhi which is the chief KaraЖ’a or
instrument, in order to bring out clearly the
threefold division of KaraЖ’as, which form
part of the constituents of action.
Г«DhГҰtiГӯ is the faculty of holding on to a
particular pursuit, belief or idea; it is also a
function of the intellect. It is through this
faculty that a man firmly adheres to a particular
activity or idea. Hence it is included in the
category of Г«KaraЖ’aГӯ. The word occurs in
verse 26 above among the characteristics of
a SГҘttvika doer; this is likely to give the
impression that DhГҰti is SГҘttvika only. But
the truth is otherwise; DhГҰti also is of three
kinds. It is in order to bring out this truth that
Г«DhГҰtiГӯ has been classified under three heads
in the following verses.
The obvious intention of the Lord in
classifying both Buddhi and DhГҰti under three
heads is to point out that only the SГҘttvika
types of these are worth cultivating, while
the RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika types are to be
given up.
In keeping with His promise to discuss the threefold divisions of Buddhi and DhГҰti, the
Lord first of all defines SГҘttvika Buddhi.
В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠВў Гё ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠВў Гё вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝГҠВёвҲ‘В§ГҠГҝпЈҝВё Г·ГҝГҠГ·ГҝпЈҝвҖ“
вҖҷГЈЕ“Вў в—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҠВў Гё ГҝГҠ п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠ вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” вҖҡГҠ В¬ГҠГ•Вё вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГӢH 30H
В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the path of (right) activity; Гё and; ГҒЕёп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the path of renunciation; Гё and;
вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝГҠВёвҲ‘В§ГҠГҝпЈҝВё what ought to be done and what should not be done; Г·ГҝГҠГ·ГҝпЈҝ (what is) fear and
(what is) fearlessness; вҖҷГЈЕ“в—ҠЛңГ” (what is) bondage; в—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҠв—ҠЛңГ” (what is) liberation; Гё and; ГҝГҠ which;
п¬ӮпЈҝГҒГ»ГҠ knows (correctly); вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” the intellect; вҖҡГҠ that (intellect); В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthГҘ (KuntвҲӮ),
Arjuna; вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГӢ is SГҘttvika.
The intellect which correctly determines the paths of activity and renunciation,
what ought to be done and what should not be done, what is fear and what is
fearlessness, and what is bondage and what is liberation, that intellect is Г«SГҘttvikaГӯ. (30)
the craving for reward. This is known as the
path of activity. And right knowledge of this
path consists in forming a correct idea about
the same and following it according to the
ideals of the ancient kings Janaka and AmbarвҲӮВ¶a
and that of great sages VasiВ¶Вўha, YГҘjВӨavalkya
and so on.
The other path is the path of renunciation.
It consists in completely abstaining from all
activities and enjoyments both externally and
internally and remaining constantly engaged
in hearing, reflection and contemplation or in
The way to God-realization is twofold.
The first consists in practising worship of
God, performing noble deeds enjoined by
the scriptures such as sacrifice, charity and
austerity, vocational duties consistent with
oneГӯs grade in society and stage in life, and
bodily functions such as eating and drinking
etc. All this has to be done in a disinterested
spirit for the sake of God-realization while
following the rules of any one of the first
three Г…вҖ№ramas or stages in life and giving up
the feeling of Г«IГӯ and Г«mineГӯ, attachment and

=== PAGE 733 ===

732
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The compulsion under which a JвҲӮva or
embodied soul has to go through an unending
series of births and deaths from time without
beginning due to its connection with good or
evil actions is called Г«BandhaГӯ or bondage.
And when all the ties of good and evil
Karma that bind a soul are cut asunder by the
grace of God through the practice of
Karmayoga, Bhaktiyoga, JВӨГҘnayoga or any
other discipline undertaken as a result of
association with holy men, and the soul attains
God-realization, it is said to have achieved
MokВ¶a or liberation.
The correct knowledge of Bandha
consists in grasping the true nature of bondage
as defined above and ascertaining the causes
which have thrown the JвҲӮva into bondage, as
well as the factors which go to tighten this
bond and so on; while true knowledge of
MokВ¶a consists in correctly apprehending what
is meant by securing freedom from this
bondage and discovering how and by what
means it can be secured.
To sum up, the SГҘttvika type of intellect
is that which is capable of correctly determining
all these points, which neither errs nor wavers
in its judgment on any of these issuesГі
which pronounces its correct verdict on
whatever point it is sought. The SГҘttvika type
of intellect frees man from the bondage of
mundane existence and leads to the attainment
of the supreme state; hence a seeker of
blessedness should improve his intellect by
cultivation of the above traits and make it
SГҘttvika.
the adoration and remembrance of God and
chanting His names etc., alongwith the practice
of control of mind and the senses, endurance
etc., while staying in the fourth Г…вҖ№rama of
SannyГҘsa and remaining aloof from all kinds
of worldly distractions. Again, all this has to
be done for the sake of God-realization and
renouncing the feelings of Г«IГӯ and Г«mineГӯ as
well as attachment. And right knowledge of
this path consists in forming a correct notion
of it and following it according to the ideals
of Sanaka and his three brothers, NГҘrada,
Lord В§RВ¶abhadeva and вҖәukadeva.
Г«KГҘryaГӯ is that which a man ought to do
at a particular place and on a particular occasion
considering his grade in society, stage in life,
temperament and circumstances; and that which
should be shunned by him on a particular
occasion is Г«AkГҘryaГӯ for him. Right knowledge
of Г«KГҘryaГӯ and Г«AkГҘryaГӯ, therefore, consists in
correctly determining whether an action, one
is called upon to perform, is worth performing
or whether one should abstain from it.
The nervous excitement caused in oneГӯs
mind by the presence of some disagreeable
object or occurrence or by the apprehension
of such an occurrence is called Г«BhayaГӯ or
fear; and the absence of such a feeling is
called Г«AbhayaГӯ or fearlessness. Right
knowledge of Bhaya and Abhaya, therefore,
consists in shaking off fear by knowing the
truth of both, i.e., ascertaining the causes
which go to make one feel nervous and the
way how to overcome this feeling and attain
the state of fearlessness.
The Lord now defines the RГҘjasika type of intellect.
ГҝГҝГҠ Е“в—ҠВёв—ҠЕ“в—ҠZ Гё вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝZ ГёГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠГҝВёв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ ГёвҖ“
вҖўГҝГ•ГҠп¬ӮГ В¬ЛқВЎГҠЕёГҠГҒГғ вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” вҖҡГҠ В¬ГҠГ•Вё вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡГӢH 31H
ГҝГҝГҠ by which; Е“в—ҠВёв—ҠЛңГ” what is right; вҖўЕ“в—ҠВёв—ҠЛңГ” what is wrong; Гё and; вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝВёв—ҠЛңГ” what ought to be
done; Гё as well as; вҖўвҲ‘В§ГҠГҝВёв—ҠЛңГ” what should not be done; вҲһп¬Ӯ also; Гё and; вҖўГҝГ•ГҠп¬ӮГғЛңГ” not as they are;
В¬ЛқВЎГҠЕёГҠГҒГғ (man) perceives; вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” intellect; вҖҡГҠ that; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthГҘ (KuntвҲӮ), Arjuna; вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡГӢ (is)
RГҘjasika.
The intellect by which man does not truly perceive what is Dharma and what is

=== PAGE 734 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
733
Virtues 
like 
non-violence, 
truth,
compassion, tranquillity, continence, endurance,
subjugation of the mind and senses as well as
sacrifice, charity and austerity, study and
teaching of the scriptures, governance of the
people, agriculture, rearing of cattle and service,
and all other noble pursuits enjoined by the
вҖәГҘstras with due regard to oneГӯs grade in
society and stage in lifeГіthe performance of
which, the вҖәГҘstras declare, is rewarded with
the enjoyments of this world and the nextГі
and acts of benevolence, all these are covered
by the term Г«DharmaГӯ.*
That which has been enjoined by the
* The вҖәГҘstras have glorified Dharma in glowing terms. BГҰhaddharma-PurГҘЖ’a has said as the
following:Гі
Dharma, which protects this universe and has been represented in the form of a bull, is believed
to have four legs. In the Satyayuga it is whole with four legs, in the TretГҘ age the number of its legs
is reduced to three, in the DvГҘpara it is further reduced to two, while in the Kali age only one leg remains.
The four legs of Dharma are: Truth, Compassion, Tranquillity and Non-violenceГі
вҖҡГ ГҝВў Е’ГҝГҠ ГғГ•ГҠ вүҘГҠГҠГҒГЈГғвҒ„UГҒвҖһВўUвҖҡГҠ ГёпЈҝГҒГғ вҲ‘В§ГӢГҢГғГғГҠвҖ” вҖ“ Е“в—ҠВёSГҝГҠп¬ӮГҝп¬ӮГҠSГғГҠГғ ГёГ п¬ӮГҠвҒ„UвҖ” В¬ГҚГЎГҠВёГғГҠВў ВӘГғГҠвҖ”H
Of these, Truth presents itself in the following twelve forms:Гі
вҖўГҒв—ҠГўГҝГҠп¬ӮГёЕёВў 
вҖҡГ ГҝВў 
Sп¬ӮГӢвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UВ¬ЛқГҒГғВ¬ГҠвҲӮUЕёв—ҠЛңГ” вҖ“ ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝп¬ӮГҠГ„ГҝВў ВӘГҲвҒ„UГҠпЈҝвҖ” вҖҡпЈҝп¬ӮГҠ Е’ГҺвҖҰВўU ГёГ’п¬Ӯ п¬ӮЛқГғВў вҲ‘ГҺВ§Гғв—ҠЛңГ”H
вҖўГҠГҒSГғГ„ГҝВў 
вҖҡГҠЕ“ГҲвҖҡXГ”Up ГҒВ¬ГғГҲв—ҠГҠВёГғГҲвҖ” 
ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝVГ”UвҒ„UвҖ” вҖ“ вүҘГҠГҲГҒГёГ п¬ӮВў ГҒmГҒп¬ӮЕ“Вў ГёГ’п¬Ӯ OГ”UГӢвҒ„UвҖҡ@Гҝ вҲһп¬Ӯ ГёH
Г¬Uttering no untruth, keeping oneГӯs promise, speaking agreeable words, service of the preceptor,
strict observance of a vow, piety, association with holy men, doing what pleases oneГӯs parents, external
purity, internal purity, shyness and keeping no possessions.Г®
Compassion expresses itself in the following six forms:Гі
В¬вҒ„UГҠпЈҝВ¬вҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UГҠпЈҝ Е’ГҠЕёВў 
Гё вҖҡп¬ӮВёЕ’ГҠ 
ГҒSв—ҠГғГ·ГҠВ·ГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” вҖ“ ГҒп¬ӮЕёГҝГҠпЈҝ 
ГЈГҝГҚЕёГғГҠГ·ГҠп¬ӮSп¬ӮГӢвҲ‘В§ГҠвҒ„UвҖ” 
вҖҡв—ҠГғГҠв—ҠГҒГғвҖ”H
Г¬Benevolence, charity, unfailing geniality of speech, meekness, modesty and evenness of temper.Г®
Tranquillity presents the following thirty characteristics:Гі
вҖўЕёвҖҡГҚГҝГҠГҖВ¬вҖҡГЈГғГҠпЈҝВ· 
ГҹГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҠГЎГҠГҠВў Гё 
вҖҡВўГҝв—ҠвҖ”вҖ“ вҖўвҖҡXГ”Uв—ҠГҠпЈҝ 
в—ҠГҠГ’Еёв—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮВў 
Е’пЈҝп¬ӮВ¬ГҚВЎГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“ГҠГ’ 
в—ҠГҒГғвҖ”H
вҖўвҲ‘ГҲВ§ГғГҒpjГҝГ п¬ӮВў 
Гё 
ВӘГҠГӘГ·ГӢГҝZ ГҒSГ•вҒ„UГҒГёГ»ГҠГғГҠвҖ“ вҖўMВ§ЛҮГҠГ·ГҠп¬ӮвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠ ГҒЕёвҖ”SВ¬ГҺвҖһUГ п¬ӮВў Е’ГҺвҖҰUГҠ в—ҠГҒГғвҖ”H
ГҒп¬Ӯп¬ӮВЎВёЕёВў 
sГ”вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝГҠВёГЎГҠГҠВў 
вҖҡв—ҠвҖ” 
В¬ГҚВЎГҠВ¬в—ҠГҠЕёГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” вҖ“ вүҘвҲӮUГҠГүГҠГҠ В¬вҒ„UВӘГҲГЎГҠпЈҝЛҳSГғпЈҝГҝВў вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГёГҝZ Е“ГҺГҒГғвҖ” ЛҮГҠв—ҠГҠH
вҖўГҠГҒГғГўГҝВў Гё  ВЎВ¬ГҠпЈҝ вҖһUГҠпЈҝв—ҠSГғГӢГ•ВёвҖҡпЈҝп¬ӮГҠЛҳЛҳГҝВёвҖҡпЈҝп¬ӮЕёв—ҠЛңГ” вҖ“ вҖўв—ҠГ вҖҡвҒ„UГҠпЈҝ 
вҖҷГЈЕ“в—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҠГҙГҠГҠЕёВў 
вҖҡВўГЈГҝГҠвҖҡГ·ГҠп¬ӮЕёГҠH
вҖҡГҒвҖһUcГЎГҠГҲГғГҠ вҖҡГҲЕ’ГҲвҖ”ПҖпЈҝВ·ГҲ вҖўвҲ‘В§ГҠВ¬ВёГЎГҝв—Ҡв—ҠГҚПҖВёГғГҠвҖ“
Г¬Absence of a cavilling spirit, contentment with a small amount or quantity, control of the senses,
freedom from attachment, taciturnity, devotion to the worship of gods, fearlessness, gravity, steadiness
of mind, absence of impassivity, freedom from craving of all sorts, a resolute will abstaining from prohibited
actions, equipoise in honour and ignominy, praising others, virtues, non-thieving, continence, fortitude,
forbearance, hospitality, practice of Japa or muttering of mystic formula, offering oblations into the sacred
fire, visiting sacred places, service of noble men, freedom from jealousy, knowledge of bondage and
freedom, a spirit of renunciation, endurance even in the face of great calamities, absence of stinginess
and absence of dull-wittedness.Г®
There are seven modes of AhiвүҲsГҘ or Non-violence:Гі
вҖўГҒвҖһВўUвҖҡГҠ 
Г п¬ӮГҠвҖҡЕёВЎГҝвҖ” 
В¬вҒ„UВ¬ГӢВ«UГҠГҒп¬Ӯп¬ӮВЎВёЕёв—ҠЛңГ” вҖ“ ГјГҠhГҠ ГёГҠГҒГғГўГҝвҖҡпЈҝп¬ӮГҠ Гё вүҘГҠГҠГЈГғMВ§В¬В¬ЛқЕ’вүҘГҠВёЕёв—ҠЛңГ”H
вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГӢГҝГғГҠ Гё вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠ вҖўГҠГ в—ҠвҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” В¬вҒ„UГҠГ в—ҠвҖҡГҲвҖ“
Г¬Control over oneГӯs squatting posture, abstaining from infliction of pain on others through mind,
speech or body, piety, hospitality, wearing a look of serenity, regarding all as oneГӯs own, and a feeling
of oneness with others.Г®
This is Dharma. Even a little practice of this Dharma is supremely beneficial and violation of it
is highly detrimental.
Adharma, what ought to be done and what should not be done,Гіthat intellect is
RГҘjasika.                                                                                    (31)

=== PAGE 735 ===

734
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
вҖәГҘstras as worth performing for a man at a
particular time and place with due regard to
his grade in society, stage in life, temperament
and circumstances, is KГҘrya for him; while
that which has been declared in the вҖәГҘstras
as not only worth abstaining from or forbidden
but as something which must not be performed
in any case, is AkГҘrya. Whereas sinful acts
prohibited by the вҖәГҘstras are worth abstaining
from for all, even out of noble acts enjoined
by the scriptures some are worth performing
for a particular class while others are worth
abstaining from for that very class. For example,
while service is worth performing for a вҖәВөudra
(a member of the labouring class) the
performance of sacrifice and study of Vedas
etc., are worth shunning for him; while the
practice of Viveka (discrimination between
real and unreal, eternal and evanescent, matter
and spirit etc.), VairГҘgya (dispassion), control
of the mind and senses and so on are worth
performing for a recluse, the performance of
sacrifices and practice of charity etc., are worth
shunning for him; performing sacrifices and
officiating at them, bestowing and accepting
gifts, and the study and teaching of the Vedas
are worth performing, while service as a means
of subsistence is worth abstaining from for
the BrГҘhmaЖ’a (a member of the priestly class);
even so, for VaiвҖ№ya (a member of the trading
class) agriculture, rearing of cows and trade
etc., are worth pursuing, while accepting gifts
is worth abstaining from. This proves that a
particular duty is not worth performing for all
simply because it is included in the category
of Dharma enjoined by the scriptures. In this
way, that which is Dharma can be worth
performing and worth shunning too. Here lies
the difference between Dharma and KГҘrya,
on the one hand, and between Adharma and
AkГҘrya, on the other. The intellect which is
at a loss to judge whether a particular course
of action, which a man is required to choose
or reject, is worth adopting or abstaining
from, and to decide what he should do and
how and what he should not, is said not to
perceive correctly what is KГҘrya and what is
AkГҘrya.
Such an intellect, which is unable to
determine the real nature of things, is never
established in Viveka and remains distracted
and fickle due to its contact with RajoguЖ’a;
hence it is RГҘjasika. And a RГҘjasika tendency
is said to result in sorrow; hence he who
seeks blessedness should eliminate the RГҘjasika
traits present in oneГӯs intellect through
association with saints, the study of good
books and cherishing noble ideas, and at
the same time strive to awaken and foster
SГҘttvika impulses.
ГҝГ•ГҠ Sп¬ӮГҖВ¬в—ҠЕ“в—ҠZ ГҒвҖһU ВЎЕёГҝпЈҝГ»ГҠГҲ в—ҠвҖһUГҠГ·Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” Sп¬ӮГҖВ¬в—ҠГҘГҝSГҝ Е“в—ҠВёSГҝ ГІГҠГҠГҝГғпЈҝ в—ҠвҖһUГғГҠпЈҝ Г·ГҝГҠГғЛңГ”H
(Ibid., PВөurvakhaЖ’Е’a, I.47)
Г¬Just as a little deviation from virtue is fraught with great danger, even so, a little practice of this
Dharma protects from great fear.Г®
Side by side with this Dharma, consisting of four limbs, a man should perform duties consistent
with his grade in society and stage in life.
The Lord now defines the TГҘmasika Buddhi.
вҖўЕ“в—ҠZ Е“в—ҠВёГҒв—ҠГҒГғ ГҝГҠ в—ҠГЈГҝГғпЈҝ Гғв—ҠвҖҡГҠп¬ӮГҺГғГҠвҖ“
вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГ•ГҠВёГҒГЈп¬ӮВ¬вҒ„UГӢГғГҠВўp вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” вҖҡГҠ В¬ГҠГ•Вё ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡГӢH 32H
вҖўЕ“в—ҠВёв—ҠЛңГ” (even) Adharma; Е“в—ҠВёв—ҠЛңГ” (it is) Dharma; ГҹГҒГғ thus; ГҝГҠ which; в—ҠГЈГҝГғпЈҝ imagines; Гғв—ҠвҖҡГҠ
ignorance; вҖўГҠп¬ӮГҺГғГҠ wrapped in; вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёГ•ГҠВёЕёЛңГ” (and sees) all other things; ГҒп¬ӮВ¬вҒ„UГӢГғГҠЕёЛңГ” contrary; Гё too;
вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” intellect; вҖҡГҠ that (intellect); В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthГҘ (KuntвҲӮ), Arjuna; ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡГӢ (is) TГҘmasika.

=== PAGE 736 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
735
Steeped in ignorance, the intellect which imagines even Adharma to be Dharma,
and sees all other things pervertedly, that intellect is TГҘmasika, Arjuna.
 (32)
benevolence and other virtues enjoined by
the scriptures as Adharma. This is equally
implied by the first half of this verse, which
can be interpreted the other way as well by
treating Г«DharmaГӯ as the object and
Г«AdharmamГӯ as a complement.
Just as this intellect imagines Adharma
to be Dharma, even so it mistakes sorrow for
joy, the evanescent for the eternal, the impure
for the pure, loss for gain, and so on. All
these instances of a distorted vision are included
in seeing all things pervertedly.
In other words, a TГҘmasika intellect is
that which has almost lost its critical faculty,
so that its verdict in all matters is warped.
This type of intellect brings down the human
soul in the scale of spiritual evolution; hence
those who seek beatitude should discard such
an intellect.
The intellect which regards denunciation
of God and other deities; defiance of the
authority of the scriptures, disrespect towards
oneГӯs parents, preceptor and others, violation
of the rules of VarЖ’a and Г…вҖ№rama, discontent,
hypocrisy, duplicity, adultery, lying, oppressing
others, taking prohibited food, acting as one
pleases, usurpation of othersГӯ rights and other
prohibited acts of a sinful nature as acts of
virtue is said to mistake Adharma for Dharma.
Such an intellect further regards fortitude,
forbearance, control of the mind and senses,
non-thieving, purity, discernment, right
knowledge, truthfulness, absence of anger,
worship of God and other deities, study of
sacred books, following the rules of VarЖ’a
and Г…вҖ№rama, carrying out the behests of
oneГӯs parents and other superiors, artlessness,
continence, taking SГҘttvika food, non-violence,
The Lord now defines SГҘttvika DhГҰti.
Е“ГҺГ ГҝГҠ ГҝГҝГҠ Е“ГҠвҒ„UГҝГғпЈҝ в—ҠЕёвҖ”В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГҠвҖ”вҖ“
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝЕёГҠвҲҡГҝГҒГ·ГёГҠГҒвҒ„UГЎГҝГҠ Е“ГҺГҒГғвҖ” вҖҡГҠ В¬ГҠГ•Вё вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГӢH 33H
Е“ГҺГ ГҝГҠ firmness; ГҝГҝГҠ by which; Е“ГҠвҒ„UГҝГғпЈҝ (man) controls; в—ҠЕёвҖ”В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝГҒвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҝГҠвҖ” the functions of the
mind, the vital airs and senses; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝЕё through the Yoga of meditation; вҖўвҲҡГҝГҒГ·ГёГҠГҒвҒ„UГЎГҝГҠ
unwavering; Е“ГҺГҒГғвҖ” firmness; вҖҡГҠ that; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthГҘ (KuntвҲӮ), Arjuna; вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§ГӢ (is) SГҘttvika.
The unwavering firmness by which man controls through the Yoga of meditation
the functions of the mind, the vital airs and the sensesГіthat firmness, Arjuna, is
SГҘttvika.                                                                                     (33)
The faculty of resolutely maintaining or
keeping up any activity, feeling or idea,Гі
sustained by which an activity, feeling or
idea does not languish but endures for a long
time,Гіsuch a faculty is called Г«DhГҰtiГӯ or
firmness. But so long as man continues with
the help of this firmness to clutch various
objects with different motives, its inconstancy
or fickleness does not cease. When, however,
man sets before him a fixed goal, the DhГҰti
becomes constant. SГҘttvika DhГҰti has only
one object, the realization of God. That is
why it is called Г«AvyabhicГҘriЖ’вҲӮГӯ.
The idea is that the DhГҰti which remains
fixed on one and only one object, viz., God-
realization, which never deviates from its
purpose, which has no diverse motives and
by which man keeps his mind and senses
etc., directed towards God for the sake of
His realization and ever maintains his control
over them, allowing them on no account to
waver and get attached to sense-objects,Гі

=== PAGE 737 ===

736
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
who seeks beatitude should endeavour to
make his DhГҰti SГҘttvika.
such a DhГҰti is SГҘttvika. This type of DhГҰti
enables man to attain God speedily; hence he
The Lord now characterizes RГҘjasika DhГҰti.
ГҝГҝГҠ ГғГҲ Е“в—ҠВёвҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠГ•ГҠВёГЈЕ“ГҺГ ГҝГҠ Е“ГҠвҒ„UГҝГғпЈҝЛҳВЎГҲВёЕёвҖ“
В¬ЛқвҖҡXГ”пЈҝUЕё В»В§вҲӮUГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUЛҮГҠГӢ Е“ГҺГҒГғвҖ” вҖҡГҠ В¬ГҠГ•Вё вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡГӢH 34H
ГҝГҝГҠ by which; ГғГҲ but; Е“в—ҠВёвҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠГҠГ•ГҠВёЕёЛңГ” Dharma (virtue), Artha (earthly possessions) and KГҘma
(worldly enjoyments); Е“ГҺГ ГҝГҠ DhГҰti or firmness; Е“ГҠвҒ„UГҝГғпЈҝ clutches; вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё O Arjuna; В¬ЛқвҖҡXГ”пЈҝUЕё with
extreme fondness; В»В§вҲӮUГҠвҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUЛҮГҠГӢ he who seeks a reward for his actions; Е“ГҺГҒГғвҖ” DhГҰti (firmness);
вҖҡГҠ that; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthГҘ (KuntвҲӮ); вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡГӢ (is) RГҘjasika.
The perseverance (DhГҰti), however, by which the man seeking a reward for his
actions clutches with extreme fondness virtues, earthly possessions and worldly
enjoyments,Гіthat perseverance (DhГҰti) is said to be RГҘjasika, Arjuna.
(34)
The Lord now defines TГҘmasika DhГҰti.
ГҝГҝГҠ Sп¬ӮВ¬AВў Г·ГҝВў вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝвҲ‘ВўВ§ ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҠЕ’Вў в—ҠЕ’в—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ ГёвҖ“
Её ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҲ@ГҒГғ Е’ГҲв—ҠпЈҝВёЕ“ГҠ Е“ГҺГҒГғвҖ” вҖҡГҠ В¬ГҠГ•Вё ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡГӢH 35H
ГҝГҝГҠ by which (firmness); Sп¬ӮВ¬Aв—ҠЛңГ” sleep; Г·Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” fear; вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” anxiety; ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҠЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” sorrow; в—ҠЕ’в—ҠЛңГ”
vanity; вҲһп¬Ӯ too; Гё and; Её not; ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҲ@ГҒГғ shakes off; Е’ГҲв—ҠпЈҝВёЕ“ГҠвҖ” an evil-minded person; Е“ГҺГҒГғвҖ” firmness;
вҖҡГҠ that; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of PГҰthГҘ (KuntвҲӮ) Arjuna; ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡГӢ (is) TГҘmasika.
The firmness by which an evil-minded person does not give up sleep, fear, anxiety,
sorrow and vanity as well, that firmness is TГҘmasika.
 (35)
of no other quality than RajoguЖ’a hence it
is RГҘjasika in character. And such a DhГҰti
binds man through actions; hence a seeker
of blessedness should strive to make his
DhГҰti SГҘttvika and not allow it to lapse into
RajoguЖ’a.
The idea is that the type of DhГҰti by
which a man clings to virtue, wealth and
enjoyments alone in the aforesaid manner,
paying little heed to the means of attaining
liberation, is connected with RajoguЖ’a
inasmuch as attachment and desire are products
The evil-minded man whose intellect is
extremely dull and impure and whose mind
is engrossed with ideas of harming others
and so on is referred to here as Г«DurmedhГҘВЁГӯ.
The word Г«SvapnaГӯ here includes sleep,
drowsiness and all other tendencies which go
to wrap the mind and senses in ignorance
and make them inactive and dull; Г«BhayaГӯ
denotes the feeling of uneasiness and distraction
caused in the mind by the apprehension of
loss of fortune or other possessions,
death, trouble, loss of happiness or any other
agreeable object and any other untoward
occurrence; Г«вҖәokaГӯ includes worries of various
kinds which torment the mind; and the
agony caused to the senses by such worries
is called Г«ViВ¶ГҘdaГӯ; this is only a concrete
form of Г«вҖәokaГӯ. And the feeling of intoxication
caused by richness in men and money
and physical strength etc., and divorced
from discernment, prudence and foresight, is
called Г«MadaГӯ; it is also known by other
names such as pride, arrogance and vanity.
Instead of trying to eliminate these and other

=== PAGE 738 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
737
unstriving. This is what is meant by speaking
of this joy as Г¬AbhyГҘsГҘt ramate yatra.Г®
Again, the man who finds enjoyment in
this type of joy is rid once for all of all kinds
of suffering,Гіincluding that which has its
origin in oneГӯs own body or mind, that which
is attributable to natural causes and that which
is caused by other animals, and succeeds in
realizing the supreme eternal Spirit, who is
Truth, Consciousness and Bliss solidified and
is an embodiment of supreme joy (V.21,24;
VI.28). This is what is meant by the clause
Г¬DuВЁkhГҘntaвүҲ ca nigacchati.Г®
The indeclinable Г¬AgreГ® denotes the time
when a man takes to the practice of Viveka
Just as the Lord classified JВӨГҘna, Karma,
KartГҘ, Buddhi and DhГҰti one after another,
even so He now undertakes to classify Sukha
under three heads in order that one may
choose the SГҘttvika type and reject the RГҘjasika
and TГҘmasika ones. This is what is sought to
be conveyed by the first half of verse 36.
The relative adverb Г«YatraГӯ refers to the
supreme Bliss attained by the YogвҲӮ whose mind
is perfectly serene (VI.27). This type of joy
is experienced only when a man withdraws
his attachment from all enjoyments of this world
and the next, taking them as ephemeral, and
practises constant meditation on the reality of
God (V.21); it remains a sealed book to the
Having thus classified Buddhi and DhГҰti under three heads, viz., SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika and
TГҘmasika, in order of sequence, in order that the SГҘttvika types of both may be chosen and
the other two types of each, viz., RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika, may be eschewed, the Lord now
undertakes to classify joy as well under three heads and begins with the characteristics of
SГҘttvika joy.
вҖҡГҲПҖВў ГҒГ п¬ӮЕ’ГҠЕёГӢВҘ ГҒГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“Вў oГҺГЎГҠГҲ в—ҠпЈҝ Г·вҒ„UГғВ·ВёГ·вҖ“
вҖўГЁГҝГҠвҖҡГҠВәЛқв—ҠГғпЈҝ ГҝГІГҠ Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖГҠГЈГғВў Гё ГҒЕёВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғH 36H
ГҝГ»ГҠЕ’ВӘЛқпЈҝ 
ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҒв—Ҡп¬Ӯ 
В¬ГҒвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠв—ҠпЈҝЛҳв—ҠГҺГғГҠпЈҝВ¬в—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГғГ вҖҡГҲПҖВў вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘ВўВ§ В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§в—ҠГҠГ в—ҠвҖҷГҲГҒhВ¬ЛқвҖҡГҠЕ’ВЎв—ҠЛңГ”H 37H
вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ” joy; ГғГҲ also; ГҹЕ’ГҠЕёГӢв—ҠЛңГ” now; ГҒГІГҠГҒп¬ӮЕ“в—ҠЛңГ” of three kinds; oГҺГЎГҠГҲ hear; в—ҠпЈҝ from Me; Г·вҒ„UГғВ·ВёГ· O best
among Bharatas; вҖўГЁГҝГҠвҖҡГҠГғЛңГ” through practice (of adoration, meditation and service to God etc.);
вҒ„Uв—ҠГғпЈҝ (the SГҘdhaka) finds enjoyment; ГҝГІГҠ in which; Е’ГҲвҖ”ПҖГҠГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ” the end of sorrow; Гё and; ГҒЕёВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғ
reaches; ГҝГғЛңГ” which (is of this type); ГғГғЛңГ” that (joy); вҖўВӘЛқпЈҝ in the beginning; ГҒп¬ӮВ·в—ҠЛң Гҹп¬Ӯ (though)
appearing as poison; В¬ГҒвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠв—ҠпЈҝ eventually, in the long run; вҖўв—ҠГҺГғГҠпЈҝВ¬в—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” (tastes) like nectar; ГғГғЛңГ”
(therefore) that; вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ” joy; вҖҡГҠГҒГ»п¬ӮвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” (as) SГҘttvika; В¬ЛқГҠпЈҝQВ§в—ҠЛңГ” has been declared; вҖўГҠГ в—ҠвҖҷГҲГҒhВ¬ЛқвҖҡГҠЕ’ВЎв—ҠЛңГ”
born of the placidity of mind brought about by meditation on God.
Now hear from Me the threefold joy too. That in which the SГҘdhaka (aspirant)
finds enjoyments through the practice of adoration, meditation and service to God etc.,
and whereby he reaches the end of sorrow,Гіsuch a joy, though appearing as poison in
the beginning, tastes like nectar in the end; hence that joy, born as it is of the placidity
of mind, brought about by meditation on God, has been declared as SГҘttvika.   (36-37)
TГҘmasika propensities such as carelessness
etc., from the mind, he who remains filled
with them is said to cling to Г«SvapnaГӯ, Г«BhayaГӯ
and so on.
This TГҘmasika DhГҰti is a source of evil
in every way; hence a seeker of blessedness
should immediately and wholly renounce this
form of DhГҰti.

=== PAGE 739 ===

738
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
(distinguishing the real from the unreal, the
eternal from the ephemeral and so on),
VairГҘgya (dispassion), control of the mind and
senses and endurance etc., as a means to the
attainment of SГҘttvika joy on hearing its glory.
It is a matter of common experience that on
hearing from his elders the glory of learning,
a boy tries to pursue his studies, but having
no real experience of its glory, he finds it most
unpleasant and difficult in the beginning to
prosecute his studies to the exclusion of play
and recreation. Even so, the man who strives
for the attainment of SГҘttvika joy finds it
extremely taxing and irksome to continue the
practice of Viveka, VairГҘgya, вҖәama, Dama,
TitikВ¶ГҘ and so on, abstaining from sense-
enjoyments. This is what is meant by the Lord
when He speaks of SГҘttvika joy as appearing
like poison in the beginning.
As a result of continued practice when
the SГҘdhaka begins to experience the joy
derived from meditation, it tastes like nectar to
him; at that time all worldly enjoyments begin
to appear insignificant, negligible and
disagreeable to him. This is what is sought to
be conveyed by the words Г«PariЖ’ГҘme
amГҰtopamamГӯ.
The SГҘttvika joy referred to above is
experienced only when the mind gets purified
through constant practice of meditation on
God. This is what is meant by the compound
adjective 
Г«Г…tmabuddhiprasГҘdajamГӯ. 
By
calling it SГҘttvika the Lord means that this
type of joy alone is joy par excellence, the
RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika types of joy being no
joy at all in the real sense of the term. They
are joy in name only, eventually they are the
same as sorrow; hence a man seeking his
redemption should constantly find enjoyment
in SГҘttvika joy alone, and not allow himself
to be caught into the trap of RГҘjasika and
TГҘmasika joys.
The Lord now defines RГҘjasika joy.
ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҝпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝвҖҡВўГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠlГ»ГҠЕ’ВӘЛқпЈҝЛҳв—ҠГҺГғГҠпЈҝВ¬в—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” 
вҖ“
В¬ГҒвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠв—ҠпЈҝ ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҒв—Ҡп¬Ӯ ГғГ вҖҡГҲПҖВў вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡВў Sв—ҠГҺГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 38H
ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҝпЈҝГҒГЈВәЛқГҝвҖҡВўГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠГғЛңГ” (proceeds) from the contact of the senses with their objects; ГҝГғЛңГ” which;
ГғГғЛңГ” that (joy); вҖўВӘЛқпЈҝ at first, at the time of enjoyment; вҖўв—ҠГҺГғГҠпЈҝВ¬в—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” (even though appearing) like
nectar; В¬ГҒвҒ„UГЎГҠГҠв—ҠпЈҝ in the end; ГҒп¬ӮВ·в—ҠЛң Гҹп¬Ӯ (is) like poison; ГғГғЛңГ” that; вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ” the delight; вҒ„UГҠВЎвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” (as)
RГҘjasika; Sв—ҠГҺГғв—ҠЛңГ” has been spoken of.
The delight which follows from the contact of the senses with their objects is
eventually poison-like, though appearing at first as nectar; hence it has been spoken
of as RГҘjasika.                                                                             (38)
The indeclinable Г«AgreГӯ in this verse
refers to the time when a man begins to
enjoy some object with his senses and mind
for the sake of attaining RГҘjasika joy. A man
experiences such delight only so long as he
enjoys some object with his senses and mind;
this is what is meant by the compound word
Г«ViВ¶ayendriyasaвүҲyogГҘtГӯ. And due to his
attachment for the same the joy appears
exceedingly agreeable to him; in the face of
such a joy he cares a straw for any unseen
joy. This is what is meant by the words
Г«Agre amГҰtopamamГӯ.
Like poison, enjoyment of this RГҘjasika
delight is fraught with bitter consequences. This
type of joy is joy only in appearance, it is no
joy in the real sense of the term. The idea is
that as man fondly enjoys worldly pleasures
with his senses and mind, regarding them as
joy itself, impressions of those enjoyments are
left on the mind, due to which he seeks once
more to obtain those very enjoyments; and with

=== PAGE 740 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
739
that end in view he impulsively perpetrates
sins of various kinds through attachment. And
in order to reap the evil consequences of such
sinful acts he has to be reborn in subhuman
species like insects, moths, beasts and birds
etc., and to undergo terrible suffering in hells
abounding in tortures.
With the growth of attachment for sense-
objects, failure to obtain them again fills a man
with grief and the absence of those objects too
makes him extremely miserable. Seeing others
more happy and prosperous than himself he is
filled with jealousy; and the loss of strength,
vitality, energy, intelligence and valour as well
as the feeling of exhaustion following in the
wake of enjoyment are very painful. Similarly
there are many other bitter consequences
too. Therefore, even though this momentary
pleasure derived from the contact of senses
with their objects is really speaking disagreeable
in every way, nevertheless, a sensual man
ignorantly and fondly enjoys pleasures
regardless of consequences and, taking them
to be joy itself, undergoes terrible suffering of
various kinds and in numerous ways as a
result thereof. His case is similar to that of an
ailing man who takes an unwholesome diet
due to attachment and love of flavour regardless
of consequences, and suffers in consequence
due to aggravation of his malady or meets
with death. Or his case may be compared to
that of a moth, which on account of its attachment
to colour, the object of sight, finds pleasure in
deliberately dashing against the flame of a
lamp, taking it to be an embodiment of joy,
but suffers in the end by getting singed and
dies.
This momentary pleasure appears as
agreeable to us only because of our attachment
to sense-objects, and attachment is a form of
RajoguЖ’a; hence it is RГҘjasika and binds
man through attachment. Therefore, a seeker
of beatitude should not allow himself to be
enticed into the trap of this type of delight.
The Lord now characterizes TГҘmasika delight.
ГҝЕ’ВӘЛқпЈҝ ГёГҠЕёГҲвҖҷГЈЕ“пЈҝ Гё вҖҡГҲПҖВў в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUЕёв—ҠГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ”вҖ“
ГҒЕёВәЛқГҠвҲӮUSГҝВ¬Лқв—ҠГҠЕ’ГҠпЈҝГ Г•Вў 
ГғГ»ГҠГҠв—ҠвҖҡв—ҠГҲЕ’ГҠNUГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 39H
ГҝГғЛңГ” which; вҖўВӘЛқпЈҝ during enjoyment; Гё and; вҖўЕёГҲвҖҷГЈЕ“пЈҝ in the end; Гё as well; вҖҡГҲПҖв—ҠЛңГ” the delight;
в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUЕёв—ҠЛңГ” вҖўГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ” stupefies the self; ГҒЕёВәЛқГҠвҲӮUSГҝВ¬Лқв—ҠГҠЕ’ГҠпЈҝГ Г•в—ҠЛңГ” (joy) derived from sleep, indolence and
obstinate error; ГғГғЛңГ” that; ГғГҠв—ҠвҖҡв—ҠЛңГ” TГҘmasika; В©UЕ’ГҠNUГғв—ҠЛңГ” has been called.
That which stupefies the self during its enjoyment as well as in the end,Гіderived
from sleep, indolence and obstinate error, such delight has been called TГҘmasika. (39)
mind and senses as well as the Spirit, which
identifies itself with them. And due to
attachment for this joy, man has to be reborn
in the end in the species of stupid and inanimate
creatures such as trees, mountains etc., hence
this joy is said to stupefy the Self even in the
end.
Similarly, the sense of comfort that one
feels on giving up exertion of the mind,
senses and body while one remains lying,
abstaining from all forms of activity, is referred
to as Г«Г…lasyottha SukhaГӯ or joy derived from
During sleep the function of our mind
and senses is suspended; this relieves us of
the suffering caused by exhaustion and gives
rest to these organs. The joy that we experience
thereby is referred to here as Г«Nidrottha SukhaГӯ
or joy derived from sleep. This joy lasts only
so long as we are asleep, it is anything but
constant; hence it is momentary or ephemeral.
Besides this, the mind, intellect and senses
lose their perspicacity, they are no longer
capable of perceiving anything. In this way
this joy is said to stupefy the self, viz., the

=== PAGE 741 ===

740
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
indolence. Like the joy derived from sleep,
this joy also robs the mind and senses of their
perspicacity and stupefies them during its
enjoyment; and inasmuch as it leads to rebirth
in the species of stupid creatures as a result
of infatuation and attachment, it stupefies the
Self even in the end.
Idle 
pursuits 
undertaken 
through
attachment for the sake of diversion and
foolish and deliberate neglect of dutyГіthis is
called Г«PramГҘdaГӯ or obstinate error. And the
delight that one ignorantly finds in taking to
idle pursuits because of the amusement they
afford, and in neglecting oneГӯs duty because
one is spared exertion thereby is Г«PramГҘdottha
SukhaГӯ or joy derived from obstinate error.
During the time a man is engaged in some
frivolous pursuit by way of recreation, he
fails to perceive what he should do and what
he should not; his faculty of judgment gets
obscured through ignorance. And it is only
when a manГӯs judgment gets clouded that he
neglects his duty. In this way this joy derived
from obstinate error stupefies the self during
its enjoyment. And in order to reap the
consequences of lying, duplicity, violence
and other sinful acts that one is liable to
commit due to ignorance and attachment in
course of such idle pursuits, as well as of the
neglect of duty involved therein, one is reborn
in vile species like swine and dogs and cast
into hells. In this way it stupefies the soul
even in the end.
Sleep, error and slothГіall these three
are products of TamoguЖ’a (XIV.17); hence
the joy that is derived from these is TГҘmasika
in character. And it is by depicting these as
agreeable that TamoguЖ’a binds the human
soul (XIV.8); hence a man seeking beatitude
should not allow himself to be caught in the
trap of this TГҘmasika joy, which is momentary,
stupefying and only apparent.
any other part of the universe.
The word Г«SattvamГӯ here denotes
existence in general, i.e., the totality of living
beings and other objects. What the Lord
seeks to drive at in this verse is that all
objects in the universe are products of the
three GuЖ’as born of PrakГҰti, viz., Sattva,
Rajas and Tamas; and it is attachment for
these GuЖ’as born of PrakГҰti that is responsible
for the birth of living beings in various species
(XIII.21). Therefore, of the living beings and
other objects existing on the terrestrial plane,
The word Г«PГҰthivyГҘmГӯ in this verse denotes
the terrestrial plane, all the subterranean regions
such as PГҘtГҘla etc., and all animate as well as
inanimate beings and objects comprised in
those regions Г«DiviГӯ stands for the sky or the
middle region existing immediately beyond
the earth and all living beings and objects
comprised therein. And the word Г«DeveВ¶uГӯ
signifies all gods as well as the different celestial
worlds and all objects existing in those worlds.
The indeclinable Г«PunaВЁГӯ is intended to cover
all other objects or living beings existing in
Having thus classified all the principal categories mentioned in verse 18 above under
three heads, viz., SГҘttvika, RГҘjasika and TГҘmasika, the Lord now winds up this topic by declaring
all the objects of this creation as characterized by the three GuЖ’as or modes of PrakГҰti.
Её ГғЕ’ГҒSГғ В¬ГҺГҒГ•вҲҡГҝГҠВў п¬ӮГҠ ГҒЕ’ГҒп¬Ӯ Е’пЈҝп¬ӮпЈҝВ·ГҲ п¬ӮГҠ В¬ГҲЕёвҖ”вҖ“
вҖҡГ»п¬ӮВў В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғВЎГ’в—ҠГҲВёQВўВ§ ГҝЕ’пЈҝГҒГ·вҖ” SГҝГҠГҒГ ГІГҠГҒГ·ВӘГҲВёГЎГҠГ’вҖ”H 40H
Её not; ГғГғЛңГ” that; вҖўГҒSГғ is (there); В¬ГҺГҒГ•вҲҡГҝГҠв—ҠЛңГ” on earth; п¬ӮГҠ or; ГҒЕ’ГҒп¬Ӯ in heaven; Е’пЈҝп¬ӮпЈҝВ·ГҲ among the
gods or celestials; п¬ӮГҠ or; В¬ГҲЕёвҖ” or anywhere else; вҖҡГ»п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” being; В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғВЎГ’вҖ” born of PrakГҰti or Nature;
в—ҠГҲQВ§в—ҠЛңГ” free; ГҝГғЛңГ” which; вҲһГҒГ·вҖ” from these; SГҝГҠГғЛңГ” may be; ГҒГІГҠГҒГ·вҖ” ВӘГҲГЎГҠГ’вҖ” three GuЖ’as.
There is no being on earth or in Г…kГҘвҖ№a or even among the gods or anywhere else,
who is free from these three GuЖ’as born of PrakГҰti.
 (40)

=== PAGE 742 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
741
in the middle region and in the celestial and
all other worlds, there is no object or living
being free from or beyond these three GuЖ’as.
For while all material creation is undeniably
for the same essence as the GuЖ’as, being a
product of the same, all living beings are
connected with those GuЖ’as as well as with
the objects which are their products; hence
they too are  characterized by the three GuЖ’as.
Here it may be urged that those who
have risen above the three GuЖ’as are also
comprised in GodГӯs creation; how, then, can
it be said that no living being in this universe
is free from the GuЖ’as ? In this connection it
may be submitted that even though in the
eyes of the world the GuЖ’ГҘtвҲӮta (he who has
risen above the three GuЖ’as) forms part of
the universe, really speaking, the creation
does not exist in his eyes nor does he abide
in GodГӯs creation or in the body for the
matter of that; it is in God alone that he lives
in eternal union with Him, hence he is identical
in essence with God. That is why he cannot
be counted among ordinary creatures. Of
course, if he is called a living being from the
point of view of his body, which is a
conglomeration of mind, intellect and senses
etc., and is perceptible to all, we see no
objection to it; for that conglomeration is
nothing but a product of the GuЖ’as, hence
how can it be declared as existing beyond the
GuЖ’as ? Thus it can be safely asserted that no
living being or object in this creation is free
from the three GuЖ’as.
In the opening verse of this chapter Arjuna sought enlightenment on the truth about
SaвүҲnyГҘsa and TyГҘga separately; hence with a view to expounding the truth of both, the
Lord first of all cited the opinion of various thinkers on the subject and then gave His own
definitions of TyГҘga (Renunciation) and a TyГҘgвҲӮ (men of renunciation) in verses 4 to 12
above. Thereafter, discussing the true conception of SaвүҲnyГҘsa (SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga) in verses 13
to 17, He classified in verses 18 to 40 principal categories such as JВӨГҘna, Karma and KartГҘ
etc., according to the predominance of the three GuЖ’as in order that one may adopt
SattvaguЖ’a which is helpful to the practice of SaвүҲnyГҘsa, and reject Rajas and Tamas, which
are prejudicial to the same, and wound up the topic by declaring in the end the entire
creation as characterized by the three GuЖ’as.
While discussing the nature of TyГҘga in the introductory verses of this chapter, the Lord
stated that it was not advisable to shirk oneГӯs prescribed duty (XVIII.7); on the other hand,
He declared real TyГҘga to consist in continuing to perform oneГӯs allotted duties while
renouncing attachment and the desire for fruit (XVIII.9). But in that context He did not
mention what duty is prescribed for whom. Therefore, in order to discuss in brief the true
nature of prescribed duties, the part played by Bhakti or Devotion in Karmayoga discussed
under the name of TyГҘga and to show that its practice ultimately leads to the attainment of
highest perfection, the Lord resumes discussion of the topic of Karmayoga under the name
of TyГҘga and undertakes to point out the natural duties allotted to the BrГҘhmaЖ’a, the
KВ¶atriya, the VaiвҖ№ya and the вҖәВөudra.
вҖҷЛқГҠrГҠГ”ГЎГҠЛҮГҠГҒГІГҠГҝГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҠВў вүҘГҠГҚВәЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠВў Гё В¬вҒ„UГЈГғВ¬вҖ“
вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ В¬ЛқГҒп¬ӮГ·QВ§ГҠГҒЕё Sп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮВ¬ЛқГ·п¬ӮГ’ВӘГҲВёГЎГҠГ’вҖ”H 41H
вҖҷЛқГҠrГҠГ”ГЎГҠЛҮГҠГҒГІГҠГҝГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of the BrГҘhmaЖ’a (the priestly class), the KВ¶atriya (the warrior class)
and the VaiвҖ№ya (the trading class); вүҘГҠГҚВәЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of the вҖәВөudras (the labouring class); Гё and; В¬вҒ„UГЈГғВ¬
O scourge of foes, Arjuna; вҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ the duties or functions; В¬ЛқГҒп¬ӮГ·QВ§ГҠГҒЕё have been divided;
Sп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮВ¬ЛқГ·п¬ӮГ’вҖ” ВӘГҲГЎГҠГ’вҖ” according to the inborn qualities.

=== PAGE 743 ===

742
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
The duties of the BrГҘhmaЖ’as, the KВ¶atriyas and the VaiвҖ№yas, as well as of the
вҖәВөudras, have been divided according to their inborn qualities, Arjuna.              (41)
it is in accordance with the manifestation of
these GuЖ’as that men are born in different
castes such as the BrГҘhmaЖ’as and so on.
Therefore, it is on the basis of these GuЖ’as
that the duties of the four VarЖ’as or grades of
society have been apportioned by the вҖәГҘstras.
The man who possesses an abundance of
unmixed Sattva is born as a BrГҘhmaЖ’a; hence
control of the mind and senses etc., have been
declared to be his natural duties or functions.
He whose nature is marked by an abundance
of Rajas mixed with Sattva is born as a KВ¶atriya;
hence exhibition of valour and interpidity have
been declared as his natural duties. He whose
nature possesses an abundance of Rajas
blended with Tamas is born as a VaiвҖ№ya; hence
agriculture and rearing of cows etc., have been
declared to be his natural avocation. And he
whose nature is dominated by Tamas mixed
with Rajas is born as a вҖәВөudra; hence service
of the other three classes has been declared
his natural duty. This very idea has been
explained at length in the commentary on verse
13 of Chapter IV.
The BrГҘhmaЖ’a, the KВ¶atriya and the
VaiвҖ№yaГіall these three belong to the category
of Dvijas or the twice-born. All the three are
entitled to wear the sacred thread (YajВӨopavвҲӮta)
and to study the Vedas and perform Vedic
rites such as sacrifices and so on. That is
why the three words Г«BrГҘhmaЖ’aГӯ, Г«KВ¶atriyaГӯ
and Г«ViвҖ№aГӯ have been compounded. The вҖәВөudras
are not included among the Dvijas and are
not competent to wear the sacred thread,
study the Vedas or perform sacrifices and
other Vedic rites. It is in order to bring out
this distinction that the word Г«вҖәВөudrГҘЖ’ГҘmГӯ has
been separately used.
The 
sum-total 
of 
tendencies 
or
predispositions formed as a result of actions
performed by a particular JвҲӮva through a
number of lives is known by the name of
SvabhГҘva or nature. It is in accordance with
this nature that the three GuЖ’as,ГіSattva, Rajas
and TamasГіmanifest themselves in the mind
of living beings. This is what is sought to be
conveyed by the use of the compound adjective
Г«SvabhГҘvaprabhavaiВЁГӯ before Г«GuЖ’aiВЁГӯ. Again,
According to the introduction given in the preceding verse the Lord first mentions the
natural duties of a BrГҘhmaЖ’a.
вүҘГҠв—ҠГҠпЈҝ Е’в—ҠSГғВ¬вҖ” вүҘГҠГҠГ’ГёВў ЛҮГҠГҠГҒГЈГғвҒ„UГҠВЎВёп¬Ӯв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ ГёвҖ“
ГҙГҠГҠЕёВў ГҒп¬ӮГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠГҠГҒSГғГ„ГҝВў вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё Sп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮВЎв—ҠЛңГ”H 42H
вүҘГҠв—ҠвҖ” subjugation of the mind; Е’в—ҠвҖ” subjugation of the senses; ГғВ¬вҖ” enduring hardships for the
discharge of oneГӯs sacred obligations;  вүҘГҠГҠГ’Гёв—ҠЛңГ” external and internal purity; ЛҮГҠГҠГҒГЈГғвҖ” forgiving the
faults of others; вҖўГҠВЎВёп¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” straightness of mind, senses and behaviour; вҲһп¬Ӯ all these (constitute);
Гё and; ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” (acquiring and imparting) knowledge (of the Vedas and other scriptures); ГҒп¬ӮГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ”
realization of the truth relating to God; вҖўГҠГҒSГғГ„Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” belief in the Vedas and other scriptures, God
and life after death etc; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё Sп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮВЎв—ҠЛңГ” the natural duties of a BrГҘhmaЖ’a.
Subjugation of the mind and senses, enduring hardships for the discharge of oneГӯs
sacred obligations, external and internal purity, forgiving the faults of others, uprightness
of mind, senses and conduct, belief in the Vedas and other scriptures, God and
life after death etc., study and teaching of the Vedas and other scriptures and
realization of the truth relating to GodГіall these constitute the natural duties of a
BrГҘhmaЖ’a.                                                                                   (42)

=== PAGE 744 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
743
вҖәama consists in subjugating and
composing the mindГіfreeing it from all
distractions and abandoning all thoughts of
worldly objects.
Subduing all the senses, withdrawing them
from external objects and employing them in
practices for God-realization is called Г«DamaГӯ.
Enduring hardships for the discharge of
oneГӯs sacred obligationsГіthat is to say,
observing the major vows of non-violence
etc., forgoing luxuries and leading a simple
life, observing a fast and other vows on
every EkГҘdaвҖ№вҲӮ (the eleventh day of every
dark and bright fortnight) and other sacred
days and living in the woodsГіall these are
included in Г«TapasГӯ.
Verse 3 of Chapter XVI speaks of external
purity under the name of Г«вҖәaucaГӯ, while the
opening verse of the same chapter mentions
purity of mind under the name of
Г«SattvasaвүҲвҖ№uddhiГӯ; the word Г«вҖәaucamГӯ in the
present verse covers both these forms of purity.
The word Г«вҖәaucamГӯ occuring in verse 7 of
Chapter XIII also implies both these kinds of
purity. That is to say, Г«вҖәaucamГӯ consists in
maintaining the purity of oneГӯs mind, senses
and body as well as of their activities, and not
allowing impurity of any kind to creep into them.
The idea of forbearance has been
explained at length in the commentary on
verse 4 of Chapter X under the name of
Г«KВ¶amГҘ and in that on verse 7 Chapter XIII
under the name of Г«KВ¶ГҘntiГӯ.*
Harbouring no perversity or crookedness
* Once upon a time king ViвҖ№vГҘmitra, son of GГҘdhi, accidentally arrived at the hermitage of the great
sage VasiВ¶Вўha. He was followed by a huge army. Through the grace of NandinвҲӮ, a celestial cow yielding all
desires, VasiВ¶Вўha treated the monarch alongwith his army to dishes of various kinds and gave him a present
of jewels, wearing apparel and ornaments. The wonderful cow caught the imagination of ViвҖ№vГҘmitra, who
asked VasiВ¶Вўha for the same. VasiВ¶Вўha refused to part with the cow on the plea that she had been kept by him
for the service of gods, the manes and newcomers, as well as for sacrificial purposes. ViвҖ№vГҘmitra was proud
of his strength in men and arms, he wanted to take her away by force. NandinвҲӮ approached VasiВ¶Вўha and
piteously told him that the hard-hearted men of the royal army mercilessly belaboured her with whips and
cudgels and wondered how he had shut his eyes to their tyranny. VasiВ¶Вўha gave her the following reply:Гі
ЛҮГҠГҒГІГҠГҝГҠГЎГҠГҠВў вҖҷвҲӮВўU ГғпЈҝВЎГҠпЈҝ вҖҷЛқГҠrГҠГ”ГЎГҠГҠЕёГҠВў ЛҮГҠв—ҠГҠ вҖҷвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ЛҮГҠв—ҠГҠ 
в—ҠГҠВў 
Г·ВЎГғпЈҝ 
ГҝSв—ҠГҠЕ’ЛңГ”ВӘГӘГҝГғГҠВў 
ГҝГҒЕ’ 
вҒ„UГҠпЈҝГёГғпЈҝH
(MahГҘbhГҘrata, Г…diparva, 175, 28)
Г¬The strength of KВ¶atriyas lies in their indomitable courage, while the strength of the BrГҘhmaЖ’as lies
in their forbearance. I cannot give up forbearance; you can leave me if you please.Г®
NandinвҲӮ assured the sage that none could take her by force if he did not forsake her. And VasiВ¶Вўha
in his turn gave her to understand that he had no intention to abandon her and that she was at liberty to
stay if she could.
Thereupon NandinвҲӮ assumed a terrible aspect, her tail began to rain fire; thereafter, a host of barbarous
tribes sprang up from her tail. The army of ViвҖ№vГҘmitra was utterly confounded. NandinвҲӮГӯs host did not kill
a single member of the royal army, they all fled in terror. ViвҖ№vГҘmitra saw none who could protect him. Then
he was filled with great wonder and said:Гі
ГҒЕ“ГҮвҖҷвҲӮВўU 
ЛҮГҠГҒГІГҠГҝвҖҷвҲӮВўU 
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГғпЈҝВЎГҠпЈҝвҖҷвҲӮВўU 
вҖҷвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
(MahГҘbhГҘrata, Г…diparva, 175, 44)
Г¬Fie upon the might of the KВ¶atriyas; the strength in the shape of spiritual glow of the BrГҘhmaЖ’as
is real strength.Г®
Thereafter king KalmГҘВ¶apГҘda, who had assumed the form of a demon under the force of an imprecation,
killed all the sons of VasiВ¶Вўha at the instigation of ViвҖ№vГҘmitra; yet VasiВ¶Вўha did not try to retaliate.
In the RГҘmГҘyaЖ’a of VГҘlmвҲӮki we have it that ViвҖ№vГҘmitra then renounced his sovereignty and undertook
austere penance, and as a result of his terrible penance extending over thousands of years he gradually
earned the titles of RГҘjarВ¶i (a royal sage) and MaharВ¶i (a great sage) and finally became known as a
BrahmarВ¶i (a sage among the BrГҘhmaЖ’as). At the instance of gods the forbearing MaharВ¶i VasiВ¶Вўha
acknowledged him a BrahmarВ¶i. In the endГі

=== PAGE 745 ===

744
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
ГҒп¬ӮEГҠГҒв—ҠГІГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ 
Е“в—ҠГҠВёГ в—ҠГҠ 
вҲӮUГ©ГӨп¬ӮГҠ 
вҖҷЛқГҠrГҠГ”ГЎГҝв—ҠГҲГ»ГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
В¬ГҚВЎГҝГҠв—ҠГҠвҖҡ 
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒВ·Z 
п¬ӮГҒвҖҡDГ”ВўU 
ВЎВ¬ГғГҠВў 
п¬ӮвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”H
(VГҘlmвҲӮki RГҘmГҘyaЖ’a, I.65.27)
Г¬Having attained the highest position of a BrГҘhmaЖ’a, the pious sage ViвҖ№vГҘmitra too offered his
homage to the BrГҘhmaЖ’a sage VasiВ¶Вўha, the best of those who mutter sacred formulas.
*
вҖўГӨГҝГҠВ¬Еёв—ҠГӨГҝГҝЕёВў 
ГҝВЎЕёВў 
ГҝГҠВЎЕёВў 
ГғГ•ГҠвҖ“
Е’ГҠЕёВў 
В¬ЛқГҒГғВӘЛқвҖһВўU 
ГёГ’п¬Ӯ 
вҖҷЛқГҠrГҠГ”ГЎГҠГҠЕёГҠв—ҠвҲ‘В§ГҖВ¬ГҝГғЛңГ”H
This is what is meant by declaring them as
the natural duties of a BrГҘhmaЖ’a. They,
however, include some common duties as well.
This should be taken to mean that although
they are not the natural duties of KВ¶atriyas
and others, yet they can be performed by them
with some effort inasmuch as God-realization
is open to all and sundry.
The duties mentioned above are
purely SГҘttvika in character, hence they are
particularly congenial to the temperament of
a BrГҘhmaЖ’a; that is why the Lord has thought
fit to include these alone in the duties of a
BrГҘhmaЖ’a; and has not gone into further
detail. They should, therefore, be supplemented
by other duties that have been mentioned in
ManusmГҰti (the Code of Manu) and other
works. Study and teaching of the Vedas,
performing sacrifices and officiating at them,
and accepting as well as bestowing giftsГі
are the six duties of a BrГҘhmaЖ’a mentioned
in ManusmГҰti.*
in the mind expressing through the senses
what one feels in the mind and allowing no
contortion in the bodyГіthis is what is meant
by straightness of the mind, senses and body.
Believing in the authority and infallibility
of the Vedas and other scriptures and in the
existence of God and life after death, putting
trust in the words of holy men and reposing
unwavering faith in piety and virtueГіall this
is covered by Г«Г…stikyamГӯ.
Г«JВӨГҘnam, consists in devoutly studying
and teaching the Vedas and other scriptures
and fully grasping their teachings.
And Г«VijВӨГҘnamГӯ means directly perceiving
the reality of God through practices taught in
the Vedas and other scriptures and
recommended by holy men.
A BrГҘhmaЖ’a is dominated by unmixed
Sattva; therefore, he has a natural bias for the
duties enumerated above; his temperament is
suited to the performance of these duties, hence
he experiences no difficulty in performing them.
Having thus mentioned the duties of a BrГҘhmaЖ’a, the Lord now points out the duties
of a KВ¶atriya.
вүҘГҠГҠГ’ГҝZ ГғпЈҝВЎГҠпЈҝ Е“ГҺГҒГғЕ’ГҠВёЛҮГҝВў ГҝГҲhпЈҝ ГёГҠГҘГҝВ¬вҲӮUГҠГҝЕёв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
Е’ГҠЕёв—ҠГӢEвҒ„UГ·ГҠп¬Ӯp ЛҮГҠГҠГІГҠВў вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё Sп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮВЎв—ҠЛңГ”H 43H
вүҘГҠГҠГ’ГҝВёв—ҠЛңГ” (exhibition of) valour; ГғпЈҝВЎвҖ” fearlessness; Е“ГҺГҒГғвҖ” firmness; Е’ГҠЛҮГҝв—ҠЛңГ” cleverness; ГҝГҲhпЈҝ from
battle; Гё and; вҖўГҒВ¬ all these (constitute); вҖўВ¬вҲӮUГҠГҝЕёв—ҠЛңГ” refusing to flee; Е’ГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” bestowing gifts;
ГҹВёEвҒ„UГ·ГҠп¬ӮвҖ” lordliness; Гё and; ЛҮГҠГҠГІГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of a KВ¶atriya; вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё Sп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮВЎв—ҠЛңГ” Г”the natural duty.
Exhibition of valour, fearlessness, firmness, diligence and dauntlessness in battle,
bestowing gifts, and lordlinessГіall these constitute the natural duty of a KВ¶atriya. (43)
Г«вҖәauryamГӯ consists in fearlessly offering
righteous opposition to the mightiest foe and
remaining ever ready to fight in a just cause
and putting up a sober and stout fight on the

=== PAGE 746 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
745
field of battle. The life of the great patriarch
BhвҲӮВ¶ma is a glowing example of this virtue.*
Г«TejasГӯ is that moral stamina by dint of
which a man firmly adheres to his duty under
all circumstances, resisting all pressure
exerted to the contrary, and due to which other
people hesitate to do anything wrong or that
which is not liked by him. It is also known
by other names such as majesty and glory etc.
He who does not get unnerved even
* BhвҲӮВ¶ma, the grand old man of the Kaurava army, remained a strict celibate all his life. He exhibited
in himself all the virtues of a KВ¶atriya. He received instruction in the use of arms from the avowed enemy
of the KВ¶atriya race, Lord ParaвҖ№urГҘma. When the latter pressed him hard to marry Princess AmbГҘ, the eldest
daughter of the King of KГҘвҖ№вҲӮ, he most respectfully declined in order to maintain his vow of celibacy. But
when ParaвҖ№urГҘma could not be reconciled in anyway and began to indulge in severe threats, he plainly told
him:Гі
Её 
Г·ГҝГҠГӣГҠГҠГҘГҝЕёГҲвҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝвүҘГҠГҠГӣГҠГҠГ•ВёвҲӮUГҠпЈҝГ·ГҠГӣГҠ 
вҲ‘В§ГҠГӘГҝГҝГҠвҖ“ ЛҮГҠГҠГІГҠВў Е“в—ҠВёв—ҠвҖһВўU ВЎsГ”ГҠГҒв—ҠГҒГғ в—ҠпЈҝ п¬ӮЛқГғв—ҠГҠГҒвҖһUГғв—ҠЛңГ”H
ГҝГ¬ГҠГҠГҒВ¬ вҲ‘В§Г Г•вҖҡпЈҝ 
вҒ„UГҠв—Ҡ 
вҖҷвҖһГҲUвүҘГҠвҖ” 
В¬ГҒвҒ„Uп¬ӮГ вҖҡвҒ„пЈҝU вҖ“ ГҒЕёГҒВЎВёГғГҠвҖ” ЛҮГҠГҒГІГҠГҝГҠ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ в—ҠГҝГ’вҲ‘пЈҝВ§ЕёпЈҝГҒГғ ГғГ«ВҝГҺUГЎГҠГҲH
Её  ГғЕ’ГҠ ВЎГҠГғп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” Г·ГӢcв—ҠвҖ” ЛҮГҠГҒГІГҠГҝГҠпЈҝ п¬ӮГҠГҒВ¬ в—ҠГҒmЕ“вҖ”вҖ“ В¬pГҠГ®ГҠГҠГғГҠГҒЕё ГғпЈҝВЎГҠВўГҒвҖҡ ГғГҺГЎГҠпЈҝВ·ГҲ Г–п¬ӮГҒвҲӮUГғВў Г п¬ӮГҝГҠH
вҲҡГҝВ¬ЕёпЈҝcГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ ГғпЈҝ Е’В¬Z ГҝГҲhпЈҝ вҒ„UГҠв—Ҡ Её вҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝвҖ”вҖ“
(MahГҘ., Udyoga., 178)
Г¬I cannot abandon the duty of a KВ¶atriya either out of fear, compassion, greed of wealth or for any
other gain; this is my cherished vow. As for your boast that for many years together you wiped out the
KВ¶atriyas single-handed more than once (as many as twenty-one times), hear, O RГҘma my reactions about
it. The fact is that the heyday of your glory did not witness the birth of BhвҲӮВ¶ma or any other KВ¶atriya of
his category. You have burnt only straw. Luminaries among the KВ¶atriyas appreared only later. Surely,
RГҘma, I shall curb your pride on the field of battle presently.Г®
ParaвҖ№urГҘma got enraged. A duel ensued between them and raged furiously for full twenty days and
three; but ParasurГҘma could not get the better of BhвҲӮВ¶ma. At last it was at the intervention of NГҘrada and
the celestial sages and of BhвҲӮВ¶maГӯs celestial mother, goddess GaвҲҶgГҘ herself, who bodily appeared on the
scene, on ParaвҖ№urГҘma dropping down his bow, that the conflict ended. BhвҲӮВ¶ma neither turned his back on
the battle-field nor laid down his arms first (MahГҘ., Udyoga., 185).
Out of the eighteen days that the MahГҘbhГҘrata war lasted, the great BhвҲӮВ¶ma held the field as the
commander-in-chief of the Kaurava forces for full ten days. During the remaining eight days many
generalissimos succeeded one after the other.
BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a had taken a vow not to take up arms during the MahГҘbhГҘrata war. They say
BhвҲӮВ¶ma took a counter-vow for some reason to the effect that he would compel the Lord to break His vow
and take up arms. Although the epic does not describe the episode in the same way, the celebrated Hindi
poet SВөuradГҘsa has drawn an exquisite pen-picture of BhвҲӮВ¶maГӯs vow, BhвҲӮВ¶maГӯ says:Гі
Г¬If I fail to make вҖәrвҲӮ Hari take up arms, I should prove to be a shame to mother GaвҲҶgГҘ and shall no
longer call myself a son of вҖәГҘntanu. I shall break the mighty chariot and shake it alongwith the flag which
bears a monkey (HanumГҘn) on its crest. Should I fail to do all this, I swear by the Lord Himself, let me not
attain the high destiny of a KВ¶atriya. I shall march in front of the PГҘЖ’Е’ava  host and shed a river of blood.
Without attaining victory I shall not turn my back on the field of battle so long as there is life in me.Г®
Be that as it may, the MahГҘbhГҘrata says, on the third day from the outbreak of the war, when BhвҲӮВ¶ma
waged a fierce fight, the Lord got enraged and dropped the reins of the horses, and taking up His discus,
which blazed like the sun, leapt down from the chariot revolving it in His hand. Seeing вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a armed with
a discus, all those assembled on the field gave a loud yell of fear. Like the fire at the dissolution of the
universe, the Lord darted with great speed towards BhвҲӮВ¶ma. Seeing вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a advance towards him, discus in
hand, the high-souled BhвҲӮВ¶ma did not get the least frightened and, heroically sounding the string of his bow,
addressed Him thus: Г¬O God of gods, O abode of the universe, O Lord of LakВ¶mвҲӮ (the goddess of prosperity).
O wielder of Discus, You are welcome; I bow to You, O Refuge of all, knock me down from this excellent car
by force. KГҰВ¶Ж’a! being slain at Your hands, I shall be highly blessed here as well as hereafter. O Lord of the
Yadus, You personally rushed to kill me; this  has enhanced my glory in all the three worlds.Г®
Arjuna ran, clasped the LordГӯs feet from behind and somehow persuaded Him to return.
(MahГҘ., BhвҲӮВ¶ma., 59)

=== PAGE 747 ===

746
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
when faced with the gravest danger,Гіe.g.,
on being mortality wounded on the battle-
field, on the death of his son, grandson or
any other near relation, on losing his all or on
being confronted with any other grave
disasterГіand remains devoted to his legitimate
duty and never shirks it, is said to have what
is called Г«DhГҰtiГӯ or firmness.
Once again, on the ninth day of the war, Lord beheld that the grand old man had let loose a hell of
destruction on the PГҘЖ’Е’ava host. Dropping down the rein of the horses, the Lord darted once more towards
BhвҲӮВ¶ma, whip in hand. And on every stride of the Lord the earth cracked, as it were, due to the fire of energy
of the Lord. The heroes of the Kaurava army lost their nerve and exclaimed: Г¬BhвҲӮВ¶ma is gone!Г® Г¬BhвҲӮВ¶ma
is no more!Г® Seeing the Lord rush towards him as a lion towards an elephant, BhвҲӮВ¶ma did not lose his
balance and, stringing his bow, the grand old man said:Гі
вҲһsГ”пЈҝГҒвҖһU В¬ГҲГЎВ«UвҒ„UГӢвҲ‘В§ГҠЛҮГҠ Е’пЈҝп¬ӮЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮЕёв—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҳSГғГҲ  ГғпЈҝвҖ“ в—ҠГҠв—Ҡl 
вҖҡГҠГ п¬ӮГғГјГҠпЈҝDГ”U 
В¬ГҠГғГҝSп¬Ӯ 
в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖһUп¬ӮпЈҝH
Г п¬ӮГҝГҠ ГҒвҖһU Е’пЈҝп¬Ӯ  вҖҡВўВӘЛқГҠв—ҠпЈҝ вҖһUГғSГҝГҠГҒВ¬ в—Ҡв—ҠГҠЕёГүГҠ вҖ“ ГјГҠпЈҝГҝ вҲһп¬Ӯ В¬вҒ„ВўU вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘пЈҝВ§ Г·п¬ӮГҒГғ вҖҡп¬ӮВёГғвҖ”H
вҖҡГӘГ·ГҠГҒп¬ӮГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒSв—Ҡ ВӘГҠпЈҝГҒп¬ӮГЈЕ’ ГІГҠГ’вҲӮUГҠпЈҝГ„ГҝпЈҝЕёГҠl  вҖҡВўГҝГҲВӘпЈҝвҖ“ В¬ЛқвҖһUвҒ„USп¬Ӯ ГҝГ•пЈҝCГ”ВўU п¬ӮГ’ Е’ГҠвҖҡГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒSв—Ҡ Гғп¬Ӯ ГёГҠЕёГүГҠH
(MahГҘ., BhвҲӮВ¶ma., 106.64Гі66)
Г¬O lotus-eyed Lord, O God of gods, my obeisance to You. O best of the Yadus, hail, hail to You;
slay me in this great battle. O sinless Lord, O KГҰВ¶Ж’a, meeting my death at Your hands today, I shall be
blessed in everyway in this world. O Protector of cows, honoured in this way by you I have been honoured
by all the three worlds. O sinless One, I am Your bond-slave; strike me at Your will.
Arjuna ran and clasped the hands of the Lord, but the latter did not stop and moved along, dragging
Arjuna behind Him. At last, when Arjuna reminded him of His vow and took a solemn pledge to kill BhвҲӮВ¶ma,
the Lord returned to His post.
Having fought for ten days when BhвҲӮВ¶ma was thinking of dropping his body, the seers and Vasus (a
class of gods) present in the sky told BhвҲӮВ¶ma that they approved of his idea. Thereafter, refusing to strike
вҖәikhaЖ’Е’вҲӮ, BhвҲӮВ¶ma the life long BrahmacГҘrвҲӮ, succumbed to the shafts of Arjuna and fell down on a bed of
arrows. While falling down BhвҲӮВ¶ma saw that the sun was still coursing in a southerly direction; hence he
did not give up the ghost. Goddess GangГҘ (BhвҲӮВ¶maГӯs mother) despatched great seers in the form of swans
to him. BhвҲӮВ¶ma told them that he would survive till the sun had changed its course and would give up the
ghost only at the proper hour. Hardly an inch of space had been left in BhвҲӮВ¶maГӯs body, which was not
penetrated by ArjunaГӯs shafts (MahГҘ., BhвҲӮВ¶ma., 119). His head alone was suspended in the air. The grey-
haired warrior asked for a pillow. Duryodhana and others ran with valuable soft cushions. BhвҲӮВ¶ma laughed
and said, Г¬My valiant sons, such pillows hardly fit in with the bed of a fallen warrior.Г® At last he asked
Arjuna to provide him with a pillow suited to his needs. Arjuna shot three arrows under the head of BhвҲӮВ¶ma
in such a way that it was raised and the shafts served him as a pillow. BhвҲӮВ¶ma was much pleased at this
and spoke to Arjuna thus:Гі
вҲһп¬Ӯв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ 
в—ҠвҖһUГҠвҖҷГҠвҖһUГҠпЈҝ 
Е“в—ҠпЈҝВёВ·ГҲ 
В¬ГҒвҒ„UГҒГғDГ”UГғГҠ вҖ“ Sп¬Ӯ#вҲҡГҝВў 
ЛҮГҠГҒГІГҠГҝпЈҝГЎГҠГҠВЎГҠГ’ 
вүҘГҠвҒ„UГғГҖВ¬ВӘГғпЈҝЕё 
п¬ӮГ’H
(Ibid., 120.49)
Г¬It is in this way that a KВ¶atriya who is strictly devoted to his duty should repose on a bed of arrows
while casting off his mortal coil on the field of battle.Г®
The great BhвҲӮВ¶ma was lying wounded on his bed of arrows. At this expert surgeons, proficient in the
art of extracting arrows, were summoned. BhвҲӮВ¶ma told them that he had attained the highest destiny of a
KВ¶atriya; the surgeons were, therefore, no longer of any use to him (Ibid., 120).
The wounds and cuts in the body of BhвҲӮВ¶ma were causing great pain to him. He asked for cold water.
People ran with jars of ice-cold water. BhвҲӮВ¶ma reminded them that he was lying on a bed of arrows and
was awaiting the change of course of the sun, and wondered what kind of drink they had brought for him.
At last he summoned Arjuna and told him that his throat was getting parched with thirst and asked him
to provide him with water as Arjuna was competent to do so. Arjuna mounted the chariot, strung his
illustrious bow, GГҘЖ’Е’вҲӮva, and shot an arrow consecrated with a mystical, formula called ParjanyГҘstra into
the ground to the right of his granduncle, BhвҲӮВ¶ma. Immediately there welled up a jet of nectar-like and
fragrant water and fell into BhвҲӮВ¶maГӯs mouth. BhвҲӮВ¶ma quaffed that drink to his heartГӯs content (Ibid., 121).
At the conclusion of the MahГҘbhГҘrata war King YudhiВ¶Вўhira called on BhвҲӮВ¶ma along with BhagavГҘn
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a. All leading sages and seers, who had realized God, were present on the scene. Seeing the Lord,

=== PAGE 748 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
747
BhвҲӮВ¶ma greeted and extolled Him. вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a told BhвҲӮВ¶ma that it would take some time before the sun would
change its course towards the north; in the meantime He requested BhвҲӮВ¶ma to relieve YudhiВ¶Вўhira of his
grief imparting to him the knowledge of the sacred lore that he had acquired. BhвҲӮВ¶ma submitted to the Lord
that his body was smarting with pain on account of its wounds, that his mind and intellect were fidgety,
that he was unable to speak, that he fainted every now and then, that it was by the LordГӯs grace alone that
he had been surviving till then. Moreover, he felt that it would be presumptuous on his part to speak,
anything in the presence of the Preceptor of the Universe. He was feeling tongue-tied, and therefore begged
to be excused. With tears of love gushing from His eyes the Lord spoke in a voice choked with emotion,
Г¬BhвҲӮВ¶ma dear, your exhaustion, fits of swoon, the sensation of burning agony, pangs of hunger and torporГі
everything shall presently disappear by My grace. Knowledge of every description shall flash on your mind,
your intellect shall have a fixed resolve, your mind shall be ever established in the quality of Sattva, your
reason shall begin to guide you in the matter of Dharma or any other branch of learning that you may fix
your mind upon.Г® He further told BhвҲӮВ¶ma that instead of doing it Himself He was asking him to speak only
in order that the fame and glory of His devotee may be enhanced. By the grace of God all the agonies that
BhвҲӮВ¶ma felt in his body disappeared then and there, his mind became alert and his intellect was fully
awakened. By dint of his lifelong chastity, intuition, wisdom and devotion of God, BhвҲӮВ¶ma, whose
knowledge was unfathomable, instructed YudhiВ¶Вўhira in all the aspects of Dharma with the same youthful
vigour as he had evinced on the field of battle for ten days, and brought solace to the latterГӯs heart, which
was tormented with grief (MahГҘ., вҖәГҘnti., AnuвҖ№ГҘsana).
Having lain on his bed arrows for full fifty days and eight, BhвҲӮВ¶ma resolved to give up his ghost on
the day the sun turned towards the north, and spoke to BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a as follows: Г¬O Deity, O Supreme
God of gods, O Lord who is adored by gods as well as demons, O Trivikrama (He who in His cosmic form
measured all the three worlds in three strides), O Wielder of the celebrated Conch, Discus and Mace, I offer
obeisance to You. O VГҘsudeva (all-pervading Lord), You are HiraЖ’yГҘtmГҘ (flaming like fire), the supreme
PuruВ¶a SavitГҘ (the Creator), VirГҘВў (one endowed with a cosmic Body), the embodied soul, atom-shaped, the
supreme Spirit and SanГҘtana (the everlasting one). O lotus-eyed one, O highest Person, pray redeem this
soul. O KГҰВ¶Ж’a, O Vaikuntha, O PuruВ¶ottama, now grant me leave to depart. I strongly admonished the dull-
headed Duryodhana to realize the truth that:Гі
ГҝГғвҖ” 
вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠSГғГғГҠпЈҝ 
Е“в—ҠГҠпЈҝВё 
ГҝГғГҠпЈҝ 
Е“в—ҠВёSГғГғГҠпЈҝ 
ВЎГҝвҖ”вҖ“
Г¬Where there is KГҰВ¶Ж’a, Dharma or righteousness is there, and where there is righteousness, victory is
assured.Г®
Г¬But the fool did not listen to my advice. I recognize You to be the Ancient Person Himself. You
are NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a Himself descended on earth.
вҖҡ 
в—ҠГҠВў 
Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЕёГҲВЎГҠЕёГӢГҒвҖһU 
вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠ 
в—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҝпЈҝ 
вҲ‘В§вҲӮпЈҝUп¬ӮвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
Г п¬ӮГҝГҠвҖһВўU 
вҖҡв—ҠЕёГҲГҙГҠГҠГғГҠпЈҝ 
ВӘГ«ВҝпЈҝUГҝВў 
В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠВў 
ВӘГҒГғв—ҠЛңГ”H
(MahГҘ; Anu; 167., 45)
Г¬KГҰВ¶Ж’a, pray! allow me to cast off my body. Leaving this body with Your leave I shall attain the
supreme state.Г®
The Lord gave His assent. Thereupon BhвҲӮВ¶ma stopped the inhalation and exhalation of his breath
through Yoga and gradually began to push it upwards. As the outgoing breath left a particular part of the
body in its upward journey, the shafts stuck into that part were immediately forced out and the wounds
got healed. In an instant all the arrows dropped out of BhвҲӮВ¶maГӯs body, not a single wound was left and his
vital breath forced its way upwards through what is known as Brahmarandhra (an apperture in the crown
of the head). People saw that a column of light issued from the Brahmarandhra and disappeared in the sky
in the twinkling of an eye.
The diligence shown in dispensing justice
to two or more contending parties, in
determining and discharging oneГӯs duty, in
fighting with the enemy and in dealing properly
with oneГӯs friends, foes and neutrals, is referred
to here as Г«DГҘkВ¶yam.Гӯ
He who never turns his back on the
field of battle even in the face of the gravest
danger, who offers righteous opposition to
the enemy under all circumstances and
continues to exert his strength against him
and remains fixed to his post risking his own

=== PAGE 749 ===

748
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
life, serves as an illustration of Г«Yuddhe
apalГҘyanamГӯ. Keeping this very ideal before
him the youthful hero Abhimanyu courted
death while contending with six great generals
single-handed, but refused to lay down his
arms (MahГҘ., DroЖ’a, 49.22). Even in the
medieval history of Rajasthan we come across
many such examples in which the valiant
Rajputs did not turn their back on the enemy
even on being vanquished in battle and laid
down their life by fighting single-handed
against hundreds and thousands.
Liberally bestowing oneГӯs possessions
on deserving persons according to their needs
is what is called Г«DГҘnamГӯ (XVII.20).
Г«IsvarabhГҘvaВЁГӯ consists in deterring the
people from wrong-doing and turning them
towards the right path, punishing the evil
doers, enforcing lawful obedience to oneГӯs
orders and taking care of and looking after
the people as oneГӯs own progeny in a loving
and disinterested spirit keeping in mind the
interests of the general public.
The temperament of the KВ¶atriyas is
dominated by RajoguЖ’a mixed with Sattva;
hence they have a natural bias towards these
duties, they experience no difficulty in
performing them. Of these duties, again, those
of a universal nature, such as firmness, charity
etc., being open to all, are neither Г«AdharmaГӯ
(prohibited) nor Paradharma (alien) for non-
KВ¶atriyas; they are, however, not their natural
duties. That is why their performance involves
exertion on their part. This is what is meant
by declaring the above duties as natural to
KВ¶atriya.
The ManusmГҰti or the Code of Manu
briefly mentions the following as the duties
for a KВ¶atriya. They are: (1) governance of
the people, (2) bestowing gifts, (3) performing
sacrifices (4) study of the Vedas and (5) non-
attachment to sensuous pleasures. The Lord,
however refers in this context to those duties
alone that bear special affinity to the
temperament of the KВ¶atriyas: hence He has
included in this verse only two of the five
duties prescribed by Manu, viz., governance
of the people and charity under the names of
Г«вҲ«svarabhГҘvaГӯ and Г«DГҘnaГӯ, which bear special
affinity to the KВ¶atriya temperament. The
other duties of the warrior class have not
been dealt with at length in this verse. Hence
the duties mentioned in this verse should be
taken to include other duties as well that
have been prescribed for the KВ¶atriyas in
other scriptures.
Г«KГҰВ¶iГӯ or agriculture consists in sowing
seeds of various crops in the soil and lawfully
rearing all kinds of foodstuffs such as wheat,
barley, grams, paddy, maize, peas, turmeric
and coriander, cotton, herbs of various kinds
and other pure substances useful for the
Having thus pointed out the natural duties of the KВ¶atriya, the Lord now mentions those
of the VaiвҖ№ya and the вҖәВөudra.
вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒВ·ВӘГҠГ’вҒ„UЛҮГҝп¬ӮГҠГҒГЎГҠГ–ГҝВў п¬ӮГ’вүҘГҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠВё Sп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮВЎв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
В¬ГҒвҒ„UГёГҝГҠВёГ в—ҠвҲ‘ВўВ§ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё вүҘГҠГҚВәЛқSГҝГҠГҒВ¬ Sп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮВЎв—ҠЛңГ”H 44H
вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒВ·ВӘГҠГ’вҒ„UЛҮГҝп¬ӮГҠГҒГЎГҠГ–Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” agriculture, rearing of cows and honest trade of merchandise; п¬ӮГ’вүҘГҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠВё
Sп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮВЎв—ҠЛңГ” (constitute) the natural duty of a VaiвҖ№ya or member of the trading class; В¬ГҒвҒ„UГёГҝГҠВёГ в—ҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ”
service (of the other classes); вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё duty; вүҘГҠГҚВәЛқSГҝ вҖўГҒВ¬ of the вҖәВөudra or member of the labouring
class also; Sп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮВЎв—ҠЛңГ” Г”(is) the natural.
Agriculture, rearing of cows and honest trade of merchandiseГіthese constitute the
natural duty of a VaiвҖ№ya (a member of the trading class). And service of the other classes
is the natural duty even of a вҖәВөudra (a member of the labouring class).
 (44)

=== PAGE 750 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
749
consumption of gods, human beings and
animals etc.
Keeping cows in oneГӯs own household
like Nanda and other cowherds, grazing them
in the woods. Serving them with fodder even
at oneГӯs own place according to their needs,
giving them water to drink and protecting
them from tigers and other destructive animals,
obtaining milk, curds, butter and other dairy
products from them and supplying the needs
of the public through these products, and
lawfully maintaining oneself along with oneГӯs
own family out of the sale proceeds of these
commoditiesГіall 
this 
is 
covered 
by
Г«GaurakВ¶yamГӯ. The cow is the chief among
cattle and it is also the most serviceable to
mankind; hence instead of using the word
Г«PaвҖ№upГҘlanamГӯ the Lord uses Г«GaurakВ¶yamГӯ.
Hence this should be taken to mean that the
rearing of other animals serviceable to man,
such as the buffalo, the camel, the horse and
the elephant etc., is also part of the duty of a
VaiвҖ№ya; of course, the rearing of the cow is
the most important of his duties.
Г«VГҘЖ’ijyamГӯ consists in buying and selling
in a righteous spirit commodities useful for
human beings and gods, beasts, birds and all
other living beings and supplying the needs
of the public by transporting them from one
place to another according to local needs.
Giving less or taking more in weight,
measurement and number etc., while
conducting a business transaction, giving an
inferior quality for a superior quality or taking
a superior quality for an inferior quality by
changing the quality of or adulterating a
commodity, taking more or giving less than
the stipulated amount by way of profit,
commission or brokerage, and even so
wrongfully appropriating othersГӯ dues by
resorting to lying, duplicity, stealing and
violence or any other unlawful means in any
business whatsoeverГіall these are foul
practices in trade. Honesty in trade consists
in avoiding all these foul practices and
conducting oneГӯs dealings in a truthful manner.
It is through such dealings that TulГҘdhГҘra
attained perfection.*
The temperament of VaiвҖ№ya is dominated
by RajoguЖ’a mixed with Tamas, hence he
comes to have a natural bias towards the
duties mentioned in this verse. His disposition
is suited to these pursuits; that is why
he experiences no difficulty in undertaking
them. This is what is meant by the words
Г«VaiвҖ№yakarma svabhГҘvajamГӯ.
In addition to these, the ManusmГҰti (the
Code of Manu) prescribes four more duties
for the VaiвҖ№ya, viz., performing sacrifices,
study of the Vedas, charity and money-
lending.вҖ“ The Lord, however, mentions here
only those duties which bear particular affinity
to the temperament of a VaiвҖ№ya. Noble pursuits
such as the performance of a sacrifice are
* In KГҘвҖ№вҲӮ (the modern Banaras) there was a VaiвҖ№ya trader, TulГҘdhГҘra by name. He was a great ascetic
and embodiment of virtue. He carried on business transaction with honesty and truthfulness.
A BrГҘhmaЖ’a, named JГҘjali, performed austere penance on the sea-shore. Birds built nests in his
matted hair; this made him proud of his austerity. Then a voice from heaven addressed him thus: Г¬JГҘjali,
you are not so pious as TulГҘdhГҘra; he does not feel proud like you.Г® JГҘjali went all the way to KГҘвҖ№вҲӮ
and saw that TulГҘdhГҘra traded in fruits and roots, condiments, clarified butter and so on. He received
the BrГҘhmaЖ’a kindly, treated him with respect, bowed to him, and then said, Г¬You have performed
rigorous penance on the sea-shore. Birds laid eggs in your matted hair, this elated you and now the
voice from heaven has brought you to this place. Pray tell me how can I be of service to You.Г® JГҘjali
was greatly surprised at this wonderful knowledge of TulГҘdhГҘra. Asked by JГҘjali, TulГҘdhГҘra gave a
beautiful dissertation on Dharma or duty. Hearing the secret of Dharma or virtue from the lips of
TulГҘdhГҘra, JГҘjali derived much solace. This beautiful anecdote is given in Chapters 261 to 264 of
вҖәГҘntiparva of the MahГҘbhГҘrata.
вҖ“
В¬вүҘГҠГҚЕёГҠВў вҒ„UЛҮГҠГЎГҠВў Е’ГҠЕёГҒв—ҠГ–ГҝГҠГӨГҝГҝЕёв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ ГёвҖ“ п¬ӮГҒГЎГҠвҲ‘ЛңВ§Г”В¬Г•Вў вҲ‘ГҲВ§вҖҡГӢЕ’Вў Гё п¬ӮГ’вүҘГҝSГҝ вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒВ·в—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ ГёH         (I. 90)

=== PAGE 751 ===

750
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
prescribed for all the twice-born classes (those
who are entitled to wear the sacred thread
and study the Vedas), hence they have not
been included in the natural duties of a VaiвҖ№ya;
and money-lending has been recognized as
inferior to other duties prescribed for the
VaiвҖ№yas, hence that too has not been
enumerated among the natural duties of a
VaiвҖ№ya. Besides these, subjugation of the
mind and senses and other practices conducive
to liberation, being open to all, are not excluded
from the natural duties of a VaiвҖ№ya; but since
a VaiвҖ№ya has no natural tendency towards
such practices, they have not been reckoned
among his natural duties.
Living by the service of the twiceborn
classes, viz., the BrГҘhmaЖ’as, the KВ¶atriyas
and the VaiвҖ№yas, carrying out their orders,
supplying their household with water, helping
them in their ablutions, affording them facilities
in carrying out their vocational duties, duly
helping them in their daily routine, tending
their animals, taking care of their belongings,
washing their clothes, shaving them and
gratifying them with all other kinds of services,
or manufacturing articles of common use by
manual skill and serving them with those
articles and making oneГӯs living by serving
them with those articles,Гіall these are covered
by the words Г«ParicaryГҘtmakam karmaГӯ.
The temperament of a вҖәВөudra is dominated
by TamoguЖ’a mixed with Rajas, hence he
comes to have a natural leaning towards the
above-mentioned acts of service. These duties
are suited to his temperament, that is why he
experiences no difficulty whatsoever in
performing them. This is what is meant by
calling them the natural duties of a вҖәВөudra.
Again, the use of the particle Г«ApiГӯ with
вҖәВөudrasyaГӯ is intended to convey that just as
other duties are natural for members of other
VarЖ’as or castes, even so in the case of the
вҖәВөudra service is natural duty. It further shows
that service is the only duty prescribed for a
вҖәВөudra* and the same is natural with him, so
that its performance is very easy for him.вҖ“
* вҲһвҲ‘В§в—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ 
ГғГҲ  вүҘГҠГҚВәЛқSГҝ В¬ЛқГ·ГҲвҖ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё 
вҖҡв—ҠГҠГҒЕ’вүҘГҠГғЛңГ” вҖ“ вҲһГғпЈҝВ·ГҠв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ 
п¬ӮГЎГҠГҠВёЕёГҠВў 
вүҘГҠГҲГјГҠГҚВ·ГҠв—ҠЕёвҖҡГҚГҝГҝГҠH
(Manu. I.91)
Г¬The Lord has prescribed only one duty for the вҖәВөudra, viz., ungrudging service to the twice-born
classes mentioned above.Г®
вҖ“ Today it is alleged that the division of society into four grades or orders is a selfish creation of
members of the higher or twice-born classes, who have been in power. But careful thought would reveal
that for the healthy organization of society VarЖ’adharma is most essential and it is no human creation either.
The institution of VarЖ’a is a creation of God. The Lord Himself says:Гі
ГёГҠГғГҲп¬ӮВёГЎГҝZ в—ҠГҝГҠ вҖҡГҺCГ”ВўU ВӘГҲГЎГҠвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒп¬ӮГ·ГҠВӘвүҘГҠвҖ”вҖ“
(GвҲӮtГҘ IV.13)
Г¬The four orders of society (viz., the BrГҘhmaЖ’a, the KВ¶atriya, the VaiвҖ№ya and the вҖәВөudra) have been
created by Me, classifying them according to the mode of PrakГҰti predominant in each and apportioning
corresponding duties to them.Г®
The great sages and seers of India who were endowed with a prophetic vision and had an intuition
of the past and future as well, directly perceived this divine truth and raising the edifice of society on the
solid foundation of this truth, gave it an ordered shape and made it peaceful and prosperous, morally sound,
Having thus enumerated the natural duties of the four VarЖ’as, the Lord now tells us,
in the following two verses, the mode of their performance which would easily enable the
performer to attain the highest perfection. The LordГӯs motive in doing so is to reveal the true
nature of Г«Karmayoga coupled with Devotion and its reward.
Sп¬ӮпЈҝ Sп¬ӮпЈҝ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҝГҒГ·вҒ„UГғвҖ” вҖҡВўГҒвҖҡГҒhВў вҲӮUГ·ГғпЈҝ ЕёвҒ„UвҖ”вҖ“
Sп¬ӮвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒЕёвҒ„UГғвҖ” ГҒвҖҡГҒhВў ГҝГ•ГҠ ГҒп¬ӮГЈЕ’ГҒГғ ГғГ«ВҝГҺUГЎГҠГҲH 45H

=== PAGE 752 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
751
active, unselfish, beneficient and secure. For the efficient organization of the human society the need of
a fourfold division has been felt at all time and in all climes and the same has existed and does exist in
all parts of the world. But the systematized form in which this division existed in this land of sages and
seers did not exist anywhere else.
For establishing and maintaining the rule of Dharma or righteousness in society and in order that the
society may continue to lead a happy life, and for diligently removing any clog that may present itself in the
smooth working of the society, for ending the vicious circle of Karma, for resolving tangles and for giving an
authoritative decision when the society is faced with a conflict of duties, what is needed is a clear and unfogged
brain. Even so muscular strength or prowess is essential for protecting Dharma as well as the society that has
taken its stand on Dharma. Wealth and food are essential for properly nourishing the brain and the muscles. And
for the proper discharge of these functions physical exertion or labour is equally essential.
That is why the BrГҘhmaЖ’a represents the brain of the social organism, the KВ¶atriya is its arm,  the
VaiвҖ№ya its thigh and the вҖәВөudra represents its feet. They are the four essential limbs of the same social
organism and depend for their protection and life on mutual help and co-operation. Contempt or contumely
being altogether out of the question, one cannot afford to entertain the least disregard for another. Nor is
there any idea of superiority or inferiority between them. All of them are superior in their own position and
sphere of activity. The BrГҘhmaЖ’a is superior by virtue of his knowledge and wisdom, the KВ¶atriya by virtue
of his valour, the VaiвҖ№ya by virtue of his wealth or material resources, and the вҖәВөudra by virtue of his
numerical strength or capacity for physical exertion. And all the four have their full utility. They have
sprung from the body of one and the same God,Гіthe BrГҘhmaЖ’a from His mouth, the KВ¶atriya from His arms,
the VaiвҖ№ya from His thighs and the вҖәВөudra from his feetГі
вҖҷЛқГҠrГҠГ”ГЎГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳSГҝ в—ҠГҲПҖв—ҠГҠвҖҡГӢЕ’ЛңГ” вҖҷГҠвҖһГҚU вҒ„UГҠВЎГЈГҝвҖ” вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғвҖ”вҖ“ в„ўВ§MВ§ ГғЕ’SГҝ ГҝЕ’ЛңГ”п¬ӮГ’вүҘГҝвҖ” В¬Е’ЛңГ”ГЁГҝГҠВў вүҘГҠГҚВәЛқГҠпЈҝ вҖўВЎГҠГҝГғH
(В§Rgveda-SaвүҲhitГҘ X.90.12)
But the respective strength of these orders or classes is neither conducive to the attainment of their
own selfish ends nor aims at self-exaltation by relegating others to a subordinate position. Duties have
been divided between them as between the essential limbs of the social organism according to their
respective capacity or aptitude. And all this has been done in order that one may discharge oneГӯs own
duty and enable others to do the same! Since duties have been properly apportioned without any idea
of superiority or inferiority, balance of power is maintained between the four orders. None can disregard
another or encroach upon the legitimate rights of another. Built as it is on the solid foundation of division
of duties on the basis of qualifications this institution of VarЖ’a is so well-organized that balance of power
is automatically maintained. By clearly and separately mentioning the duties of each order, God Himself
as well as the seers who have laid down rules for the conduct of society have afforded all enhanced facilities
for discharging their respective duties unhampered and the due discharge of oneГӯs own duty can never
disturb the balance of power.
By using the pronoun Г«SveГӯ twice in
this verse the Lord intends to convey that a
man reaches the supreme state by performing
whatever duty is natural to him. That is to
say, the same reward which is obtained by a
BrГҘhmaЖ’a through practices such as the
subjugation of his mind and senses and so
on, by a KВ¶atriya through exhibition of valour,
governance of the people, bestowing gifts,
and other such duties, and by a VaiвҖ№ya through
agriculture and other such pursuits is gained
by a вҖәВөudra through acts of service. Therefore,
whatever duty is natural to a man is conducive
to the highest good for him. For attaining
Sп¬ӮпЈҝ Sп¬ӮпЈҝ вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒГЎГҠ to his own natural duty; вҖўГҒГ·вҒ„UГғвҖ”Г” keenly devoted; вҖҡВўГҒвҖҡГҒhв—ҠЛңГ” the highest
perfection (in the form of God-realization); вҲӮUГ·ГғпЈҝ attains; ЕёвҒ„UвҖ” man; Sп¬ӮГ”вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГҒЕёвҒ„UГғвҖ” (a man) engaged
in his natural duty; ГҒвҖҡГҒhв—ҠЛңГ” (the highest) perfection; ГҝГ•ГҠ whereby; ГҒп¬ӮГЈЕ’ГҒГғ attains; ГғГғЛңГ” that (mode
of performance); oГҺГЎГҠГҲ hear.
Keenly devoted to his own natural duty, man attains the highest perfection in the
form of God-realization. Hear the mode of performance whereby the man engaged in
his inborn duty reaches that highest consummation.                                  (45)

=== PAGE 753 ===

752
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
blessedness a particular VarЖ’a need not adopt
the duties or vocation of another.
The word Г«SaвүҲsiddhimГӯ in this verse does
not stand for accomplishment in the shape of
purity of heart or the attainment of heaven or
the acquisition of supernatural powers such
as that of assuming an atomic form; it denotes
that highest consummation which is variously
Even though the aforesaid four divisions of society naturally exist in Europe and other countries as
well, there is no balance of power between them inasmuch as the divisions are not governed by definite
principles. That is why the intellect now prevail, over military strength, while at other times the masses or
the proletariate get the better of the capitalist. In the Indian division of society this does not happen
inasmuch as it prescribes separate duties for each group or division.
In the caste system adopted by the В°RВ¶is the BrГҘhmaЖ’a occupies the highest rank; he is the law-giver
of the society; it is his precepts that are respected by all. He is the teacher and guide of all; but he does
not accumulate riches nor wields the rod of punishment and has no relish for luxuries and enjoyments either.
Self-interest has no place in his life as it were. Spurning wealth and power and high position, he lives on
fruits and root and resides with his family in a forest far from the din and bustle of town life. He remains
engaged day and night in the performance of penance, the practice of virtue and the acquisition of
knowledge or wisdom. By dint of his remarkable power of religious austerities coupled with control of mind
and the senses, endurance, forbearance etc., he acquires the eye of wisdom, which is so difficult to attain,
and perceiving the truth in the transcendental light of that wisdom, propagates that truth in the society in
a selfless spirit through pious and morally upright men. He seeks no return for his services. He leads a most
simple life, depending on whatever the society voluntarily bestows on him or on whatever he gets by way
of alms. Such is the pious ideal of his life.
The KВ¶atriya rules over all. He punishes the offender and rewards men of good conduct. Wielding the rod
of punishment he does not allow the wicked to rear their head and protects Dharma and society from evil-doers,
burglars, dacoits and enemies. A KВ¶atriya meets out punishment, but does not frame the laws himself. He
follows the laws made by the BrГҘhmaЖ’as. It is in accordance with those laws that he levies taxes on the people
and, again, it is in accordance with those very laws that he spends the revenue so collected in a systematic
manner in the interest of the people. The laws are framed by the BrГҘhmaЖ’as and the stock of wealth lies in the
hands of the VaiвҖ№ya. The role of the KВ¶atriya is that of a constitutional manager and guardian only.
The sources of wealth, viz., trade, cattle and foodГіall these remain in the keeping of the VaiвҖ№ya. He
produces and multiplies wealth, but not for himself. Protected by the knowledge of the BrГҘhmaЖ’a and the
physical strength of the KВ¶atriya he spends the wealth in the interest of all the four castes in accordance
with the laws referred to above. He has no share in the administration of the state nor does he need it. For
the BrГҘhmaЖ’a and the KВ¶atriya never meddle with his trade, they never take his wealth with a selfish motive,
on the other hand, they protect it and with the help of their wisdom and prowess, manage things in such
an organized way that he is able to carry on his business efficiently and unhampered. Thus he has no
discontent in his heart. And he gladly accepts from the very start the leadership of the BrГҘhmaЖ’a and the
KВ¶atriya and also deems it necessary to do so; for therein lie his own interests. He willingly pays the tax
to the king, renders services to the BrГҘhmaЖ’a and duly provides food and clothing etc., to the вҖәВөudra with
honour, fully satisfying his needs.
Now comes the вҖәВөudra; he is naturally superior in number. In the вҖәВөudra physical strength predominates,
but intellectual capacity is a bit deficient in him. That is why physical exertion alone has been assigned
to him. And for the well-being of the community physical strength is most essential too. But his physical
strength is in no way less valuable than any other kind of strength. It is on the numerical strength of the
вҖәВөudra that the other three VarЖ’as take their stand. He is the basis or foundation. It is on the strength of the
feet that the body moves. That is why the other three VarЖ’as look upon the вҖәВөudra as their beloved limb.
In return for his labour the VaiвҖ№ya gives him ample money, the KВ¶atriya protects his wealth and family and
the BrГҘhmaЖ’a shows him the path of virtue, the way to God-realization. No other VarЖ’a robs him of his
termed as God-realization, attainment of the
supreme goal, of the eternal state, of the
supreme state or of Brahma who is all peace.
Besides this, the eternal duties of a BrГҘhmaЖ’a
include the  study and teaching of the Vedas
and God-realization; hence it is merely
preposterous to believe that these duties can
lead to anything else than the supreme state.

=== PAGE 754 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
753
In the first half of this verse the Lord
proclaimed that engaged in oneГӯs own duties
man attains the highest perfection. Here it
may be urged that actions, as a matter of fact,
bind a man; how, then, can a man who is
keenly devoted to them attain the highest
consummation? The Lord answers this possible
query in the latter half. That is to say. He
undertakes to point out unequivocally, in the
next verse, the way to attain the supreme
state even while engaged in those duties.
The word Г«NaraВЁГӯ denotes every human
being belonging to the four orders of society,
hence the latter half of the verse expounds that
evey human being is qualified to attain liberation.
It further shows that for the realization of God
one need not actually give up oneГӯs duties,
that a man can attain God by merely continuing
to perform without interruption duties
appropriate to his VarЖ’a or grade in society
and Г…вҖ№rama or stage in life with the object of
God-realization (XVIII.56).
livelihood for the realization of its own ends nor do the other VarЖ’as selfishly underpay him, nor do they
ill-treat him taking him to be inferior or lower in rank. They all believe that every VarЖ’a gets its own due,
that none puts another under any obligation. Yet all help one another and all advance his interests along
with theirs and consider his advancement as their own and his degradation as their own downfall. Under
such circumstances the вҖәВөudra, who is superior in number, remains contented; none of the four orders is
handicapped by another and none of them is subjected to ignominy at the hands of another.
Like four brothers forming a joint family, the four VarЖ’as remain engaged in discharging their
respective and essential duties, ungrudgingly divided according to the capacity of each, for the joint
advancement of their family. They add to the strength of the community by advancing the interests of one
another,Гіthe BrГҘhmaЖ’a by establishing the rule of virtues, the KВ¶atriya by exerting his valour, the VaiвҖ№ya
by using his material resources and the вҖәВөudra by employing the strength of physical exertion or labour.
Neither do they all seek to undertake the same work or occupation nor do they entertain any feeling of
superiority or inferiority in performing separate duties. That is how balance of power is maintained between
them and the cause of virtue is strengthened and promoted more and more. Such is the grand idea underlying
the institution of VarЖ’a or the caste system.
In this division of society into so many VarЖ’as or castes is based on the diversity of GuЖ’as or qualities and
Karma or duties. This however, does not mean that the VarЖ’a of a man is changed by his taking to an arbitrary
occupation. VarЖ’a has its root in birth and occupation is the principal factor in preserving its identity or
individual character. In this way birth and occupation both are essential in determining oneГӯs VarЖ’a. Those who
determine VarЖ’a by occupation alone do not really believe in VarЖ’a. If VarЖ’a is determined by occupation
alone, there is no knowing how many times a man will have to change his VarЖ’a in the course of a single day.
Society will no longer be governed by any order or law. There will be complete chaos. But no such thing exists
in the Indian caste system or VarЖ’adharma, as it is called. Had VarЖ’a been determined by occupation alone, the
Lord would not have taught in the GвҲӮtГҘ the duties of a KВ¶atriya to Arjuna, who had got ready to take up the
duties of a BrГҘhmaЖ’a at the commencement of the Battle. It is only in accordance with oneГӯs virtuous or sinful
acts performed in previous lives that one is born in different VarЖ’as or castes. He who is born in a particular
VarЖ’a or caste should perform the duties prescribed for that VarЖ’a alone; for that is his own Dharma or duty. And
death in the performance of oneГӯs duty has been proclaimed by the Lord as conducive to blessednessГіГ«Sп¬ӮЕ“в—ҠпЈҝВё
ГҒЕёЕ“ЕёВў ГјГҠпЈҝГҝвҖ”Гӯ At the same time Г«ParadharmaГӯ, the duty of another, has been declared as Г«fraught with danger.Гӯ This
is quite true; for the balance of power in society is maintained only when all perform their respective duties and
then only is the Dharma of a society maintained and promoted. The abandonment of oneГӯs duty and the
adoption of anotherГӯs duty are harmful both for the individual and the community. It is a matter for regret that
due to various causes disorganization has set in the caste system of the Aryan race. No caste or VarЖ’a is devoted
to its own duty. There is a general tendency to act according to oneГӯs own will and the evil consequences of this
tendency are becoming evident.
ГҝГғвҖ” В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠГ·ГҚВёГғГҠЕёГҠВў ГҝпЈҝЕё вҖҡп¬ӮВёГҒв—ҠЕ’Вў ГғГғв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
Sп¬ӮвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠ Гғв—ҠГЁГҝГ«ГҝВё ГҒвҖҡГҒhВў ГҒп¬ӮГЈЕ’ГҒГғ в—ҠГҠЕёп¬ӮвҖ”H 46H

=== PAGE 755 ===

754
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Realizing this with supreme faith and reverence
and wholly giving up the feeling of mineness,
attachment and the desire for fruit, he who
serves the whole universe through the
performance of His natural duties in
accordance with the  commandment of God
and for the sake of His pleasure only, or in
other words, he who performs his duties in a
selfless spirit in the above manner with a
view to gratifying all living beings, is said to
worship God through the performance of his
natural duties.
Any man, to whatever VarЖ’a or Г…вҖ№rama
he belongs, can attain God or the supreme
Spirit in the form of the highest perfection by
worshipping Him through his actions; God-
realization is equally open to all. A KВ¶atriya
who worships God through exhibition of
valour and other duties reaches the same
state which is attained by a BrГҘhmaЖ’a
worshipping Him through his religious
practices. Such as the control of mind and
senses etc., by dedicating those practices to
Him. Even so, a вҖәВөudra who worships God
through his acts of service reaches the same
supreme goal as is reached by the VaiвҖ№ya
worshipping Him through agriculture and
other appropriate pursuits. Hence that is a
most easy way to get rid of the shackles of
Karma and realize God. Therefore, a man
should practise worship of God by performing
his duties in the aforesaid spirit. This is what
is meant by the latter half of this verse.
In order to show how to worship God
through the performance of oneГӯs duties the
Lord first of all draws the attention of Arjuna,
in the first half of this verse, to His all-
pervading aspect along with His virtues, glory
and power. The idea is that while performing
each and every duty a man should bear in
mind that it is from God that the whole of
this universe including all animate and inanimate
beings has emanated, and that it is He who
pervades it, or in other words, it is God alone
who has revealed Himself in the form of this
universe through His YogamГҘyГҘ or deluding
potency. Hence this world is identical with
Him. How He pervades the whole of this
universe, has been made clear in the
commentary on verse 4 of Chapter IX.
God is the creator, preserver and destroyer
of this universe; He is all powerful, all
supporting, the director of all, the universal
soul, the inner controller of all and all-pervading.
The whole of this universe is His creation
and it is He who has revealed Himself through
His own YogamГҘyГҘ in the form of the universe;
hence the whole of this universe is His. The
body, senses, mind and intellect of the
worshipper, as well as whatever duties
appropriate to his VarЖ’a or grade in society,
such as sacrifice, charity and so on, are being
done by him, also belong to Him, and the
worshipper himself is His. And being the
Self of all gods and other living beings, it is
He who is the enjoyer of all acts (V.29).
In the preceding verse it was stated that a man attains the highest perfection by
worshipping God through the performance of his natural duties. This raises the question:
If a KВ¶atriya abstains from his stern duties such as fighting etc., and strives to attain God
by earning his livelihood through a peaceful avocation such as teaching etc., or even so if
ГҝГғвҖ” from whom; В¬Лқп¬ӮГҺГҒГ»ГҠвҖ” the emanation (has taken place); Г·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of (all) living beings;
ГҝпЈҝЕё (and) by whom; вҖҡп¬ӮВёв—ҠЛңГ” entire (universe); ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this; ГғГғв—ҠЛңГ” (is) pervaded; Sп¬ӮвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠ through his
own (natural) duties; Гғв—ҠЛңГ” Him (God); вҖўГЁГҝГ«ГҝВё worshipping; ГҒвҖҡГҒhв—ҠЛңГ” (the highest) perfection;
ГҒп¬ӮГЈЕ’ГҒГғ attains; в—ҠГҠЕёп¬ӮвҖ” man.
Man attains the highest perfection by worshipping through his own natural duties
Him, from whom the tide of creation has streamed forth and by whom all this universe
is pervaded.                                                                                (46)

=== PAGE 756 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
755
A Г«well-performedГӯ duty is that which is
accomplished with due attention to all its
details. The Lord, however, uses the
qualification Г«ViguЖ’aВЁГӯ with Г«SvadharmaВЁГӯ;
hence Г«ParadharmГҘtГӯ should be taken by
implication to be qualified by some such
adjective as Г«Possessed of merit.Гӯ Therefore,
the words Г¬SvanuВ¶ВўhitГҘt paradharmГҘtГ® should
be taken to mean a duty which, though
possessed of merit and performed with
scrupulous care, is not prescribed for the
performer, but only for others. The special
duties of a BrГҘhmaЖ’a are marked by a larger
proportion of noble virtues such as non-
violence etc., than the duties of a KВ¶atriya, a
VaiвҖ№ya and a вҖәВөudra; the duties pertaining to
the order of SaвүҲnyГҘsa possess more merits
than those pertaining to the life of a
householder; even so, the duties of a VaiвҖ№ya
and a KВ¶atriya are of greater merit than the
duties of a вҖәВөudra. But just as it is spiritually
beneficial for a wife to serve her husband in
any case, even though he has an ugly
appearance and is devoid of merit, even so
that duty alone which has been prescribed
for a man is good for him, no matter if it is
devoid of merit on the face of it and even
though it has not been fully acomplished in
all its details. This is what is conveyed by the
first half of this verse.
That duty alone which has been prescribed
for a man with due regard to his grade in
society, stage in life, temperament and
circumstances etc., is Г«SvadharmaГӯ or natural
duty for him. Lying, duplicity, thieving,
violence, cheating, adultery and other prohibited
acts are Г«SvadharmaГӯ for none; and actions
motivated by desire too are binding on none.
Hence they have not been recognized as the
Svadharma of any. Other than these, those
that have been declared as the special duties
attaching to a particular VarЖ’a or Г…вҖ№rama,
and for which men belonging to other VarЖ’as
and Г…вҖ№ramas are not eligible, are the exclusive
Svadharma of men belonging to that particular
VarЖ’a or Г…вҖ№rama; while those duties which
have been declared as open to every Dvija or
member of the twice-born classes, viz., the
study of the Vedas and the performance of
sacrifices etc., are the Svadharma of the twice-
born classes. Again, those duties of a general
or universal character for which men and
women of all classes and Г…вҖ№ramas are eligible,
viz., Devotion to God, truthfulness, service
of oneГӯs parents, control of the senses, chastity
and modesty etc., are the Svadharma of all.
The adjective Г«ViguЖ’aВЁГӯ signifies
deficiency of merit. The natural duty of a
KВ¶atriya is to engage in a conflict, and punish
the wicked etc. The duties of a VaiвҖ№ya such
as agriculture etc., are likewise characterized
by a preponderance of evils like destruction
a VaiвҖ№ya or a вҖәВөudra gives up his own duties regarding them as inferior to those of the higher
castes and seeks to realize God by following the vocation of a higher caste, will he be
justified in doing so or not? Anticipating this query the Lord deprecates the abandonment
of oneГӯs own duty declaring it as superior to anotherГӯs.
ГјГҠпЈҝГҝГҠГЈSп¬ӮЕ“в—ҠГҠпЈҝВё ГҒп¬ӮВӘГҲГЎГҠвҖ” В¬вҒ„UЕ“в—ҠГҠВёГ Sп¬ӮЕёГҲГҒDГ”UГғГҠГғЛңГ”вҖ“
Sп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮГҒЕёГҝГғВў вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё вҲ‘ГҲВ§п¬ӮВёГӣГҠГҠВ¬AГҠпЈҝГҒГғ ГҒвҲ‘В§ГҒГҖвҖҷВ·в—ҠЛңГ”H 47H
ГјГҠпЈҝГҝГҠЕёЛңГ” (is) better; Sп¬ӮЕ“в—ҠВёвҖ” oneГӯs own duty; ГҒп¬ӮВӘГҲГЎГҠвҖ” (even) devoid of merit; В¬вҒ„UЕ“в—ҠГҠВёГғЛңГ” Sп¬ӮЕёГҲГҒDГ”UГғГҠГғЛңГ”
than the duty of another well-performed; Sп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮГҒЕёГҝГғв—ҠЛңГ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё the duty ordained by his own
nature; вҲ‘ГҲВ§п¬ӮВёЕёЛңГ” performing; Её not; вҖўГҠВ¬AГҠпЈҝГҒГғ (man) incurs; ГҒвҲ‘В§ГҒГҖвҖҷВ·в—ҠЛңГ” sin.
Better is oneГӯs own duty, though devoid of merit, than the duty of another
well-performed; for, performing the duty ordained by his own nature, man does not
incur sin.                                                                                          (47)

=== PAGE 757 ===

756
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Hence the words Г«SvabhГҘvaniyataвүҲ KarmaГӯ
carry the same idea as is conveyed by
Г«SvadharmaГӯ. The man who performs such
duty is not held responsible for the sins of
violence etc. that are incidentally committed
during the lawful discharge of his duty; whereas
by adopting anotherГӯs duty one incurs the
sin of robbing another of his means of
livelihood even though the duty adopted is
comparatively free from evils, such as violence
etc. This is what is meant by the latter half of
this verse.
of life and so on; hence, when compared to
the peaceful duties of a Bв—ҠahmaЖ’a, they too
are devoid of merit. And as for the duties of
a вҖәВөudra, they are inferior even to those of a
VaiвҖ№ya and a KВ¶atriya. Besides this the omission
of a particular item or detail during the
performance of a duty also constitutes a defect
or imperfection.
A duty which has been prescribed by
the вҖәГҘstras for a man belonging to a particular
VarЖ’a or Г…вҖ№rama in accordance with his
temperament is Г«SvabhГҘvaniyataГӯ for him.
вҖҡвҖһUВЎВў вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ вҖҡЕ’ГҠпЈҝВ·в—ҠГҒВ¬ Её Г ГҝВЎпЈҝГғЛңГ”вҖ“
вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёвҒ„UГӘГ·ГҠ ГҒвҖһU Е’ГҠпЈҝВ·пЈҝГЎГҠ Е“ГҚв—ҠпЈҝЕёГҠГҒВӘAГҒвҒ„Uп¬ӮГҠп¬ӮГҺГғГҠвҖ”H 48H
вҖҡвҖһUВЎв—ҠЛңГ” вҲ‘В§в—ҠВё oneГӯs innate duty; вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ O son of KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna; вҖҡЕ’ГҠпЈҝВ·в—ҠЛң вҖўГҒВ¬ has a measure
of evil; Её Г ГҝВЎпЈҝГғЛңГ” (one) should not relinquish; вҖҡп¬ӮГҠВёвҒ„UГӘГ·ГҠвҖ” all undertakings; ГҒвҖһU because; Е’ГҠпЈҝВ·пЈҝГЎГҠ with
demerit; Е“ГҚв—ҠпЈҝЕё in smoke; вҖўГҒВӘAвҖ” Гҹп¬Ӯ as fire (is covered); вҖўГҠп¬ӮГҺГғГҠвҖ” are beset with.
Therefore, Arjuna, one should not relinquish oneГӯs innate duty, even though it
may have a measure of evil; for, even as fire is covered with smoke, all undertakings
are beset with some imperfection or the other.                                                                     (48)
Those duties alone which have been
prescribed for a particular man with due regard
to his grade in society, stage in life, temperament
and circumstances, are Г«SahajaГӯ or innate for
him. Therefore, the words Г«Sahajam KarmaГӯ
in this verse refer to those very duties or actions
which have been variously termed in the course
of this chapter as Г«SvadharmaГӯ, Г«SvakarmaГӯ,
Г«Niyata KarmaГӯ, Г«SvabhГҘvaniyata KarmaГӯ and
Г«SvabhГҘvaja KarmaГӯ.
The abandonment of such innate duties
as are possessed of excellent virtues being out
of the question, even those prescribed and
legitimate duties which ordinarily appear as
tainted with evils like violence etc., are not
really defective, though appearing as such,
and hence should not be given up. That is to
say, they too should be duly performed; for far
from incurring sin through their performance
one is liable to be held guilty for renouncing
them. This is what is meant by the first half of
this verse.
Just as fire is mixed with smoke, which
cannot be wholly separated from it, even so
every undertaking is tainted with demerit.
Every form of activity does involve in one
way or other destruction of life in some form;
for even in the case of those belonging to the
order of recluses activities such as answering
the calls of nature, bathing and begging alms
from door to door involve destruction of life
in some measure, and sacrifice and other acts
of the BrГҘhmaЖ’a too involve destruction of
small creatures due to the elaborate ritual.
Therefore, ordinarily speaking, the duties of
any VarЖ’a or Г…вҖ№rama whatsoever are not
altogether free from blemish; and none can
help doing some work (III.5). Hence even
after giving up his own duty a man must do
some work; and whatever he does will be
contaminated with sin. That is why a man
must not give up his own duty under the
belief that a particular action or duty is inferior
or tainted with evil; on the other hand, he

=== PAGE 758 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
757
fruit. By doing so a manГӯs heart gets purified
and he speedily attains God.
should rightly perform it renouncing the evils
of mineness, attachment and the desire for
In order to expound the truth of TyГҘga and SaвүҲnyГҘsa in response to ArjunaГӯs enquiry,
the Lord discussed the subject of TyГҘga in verses 4 to 12 and expounded SaвүҲnyГҘsa or the
path of Knowledge in verses 13 to 40 above. Then in order to enlighten Arjuna on the truth
relating to TyГҘga, which is only another name for Karmayoga or the path of Action, He
discussed from verse 41 up to the preceding verse the nature of innate actions and their
obligatory character, and showing the alliance of Bhakti with Karmayoga pointed out God-
realization as its reward. But while on the subject of SaвүҲnyГҘsa the Lord did not mention
its reward, nor did He point out how to practise SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga along with worship
disclaiming the doership of actions. Therefore, in order to point out the method and reward
of carrying this practice in seclusion with discrimination and dispassion, the Lord resumes
the discussion of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga.
вҖўвҖҡQВ§вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠ ГҒВЎГғГҠГ в—ҠГҠ ГҒп¬ӮВӘГғSВ¬ГҺвҖһUвҖ”вҖ“
ЕёГ’cвҲ‘В§ГӘГҝВёГҒвҖҡГҒhВў В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠВў вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡпЈҝЕёГҠГҒЕ“ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғH 49H
вҖўвҖҡQВ§вҖҷГҲГҒhвҖ” he whose intellect is unattached; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГІГҠ everywhere; ГҒВЎГғГҠГ в—ҠГҠ who has subdued
his mind; ГҒп¬ӮВӘГғSВ¬ГҺвҖһUвҖ” who is free from thirst for enjoyment; ЕёГ’cвҲ‘В§ГӘГҝВёГҒвҖҡГҒhв—ҠЛңГ” В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” the consummation
of actionlessness; вҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡпЈҝЕё through SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga (the path of Knowledge); вҖўГҒЕ“ВӘГ«ВҝUГҒГғ attains.
He whose intellect is not attached anywhere, whose thirst for enjoyment has
altogether disappeared and who has subdued his mind, reaches through SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga
(the path of Knowledge) the consummation of actionlessness.                       (49)
for the practice of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga. The idea
is that he alone who is endowed with
these three qualifications can attain true
knowledge of God through the practice of
SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga.
The word Г«SaвүҲnyГҘsenaГӯ in this verse
stands for JВӨГҘnayoga or the path of Knowledge.
It is also called SaвүҲnyГҘsayoga. The true
nature of this discipline has been discussed
in verses 51 to 53 below, Г«ParamГҘm
NaiВ¶karmyasiddhimГӯ means securing freedom
from the bondage of Karma and attaining
ture knowledge of God who is beyond all
change and who is Truth, Consciousness and
Bliss solidified, as a result of this practice.
Г«Sarvatra AsaktabuddhiВЁГӯ is he whose
attachment for the body including the mind
and the senses, for the activities performed
by them as well as for all enjoyments and for
the whole universe including animate and
inanimate beings has altogether disappeared,Гі
in other words, whose mind and intellect
no longer entertain a partiality or attraction
for anything. He whose thirst for enjoyment
has altogether ceased, who has no need for
any worldly object, is referred to here as
Г«VigataspГҰhaВЁГӯ; and JitГҘtmГҘ is he whose
mind and senses stand subdued. The use
of these three compound adjectives is
intended to point out those who are qualified
In the above verse it is stated that one attains the highest state of actionlessness through
SaвүҲnyГҘsa; this leads one to enquire what is the true nature of SaвүҲnyГҘsa (SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga) and
through what process one attains the consummation of actionlessness and then Brahma Itself.
Therefore, undertaking to discuss all these points the Lord invites Arjuna to hear His exposition.

=== PAGE 759 ===

758
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
as the Г«ParГҘ NiВ¶ВўhГҘГӯ of JВӨГҘna in the present
verse and as ParГҘ Bhakti in verse 54 below.
The realization of Brahma or the Absolute
follows immediately after the attainment of
this Г«SiddhiГӯ. This is what is indicated in the
first half of this verse.
The word Г«BrahmaГӯ stands for the eternal
and immutable supreme Spirit or the Absolute,
which is without form and attributes and
which is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss
solidified. And the attainment of Brahma
consists in merging oneГӯs identity in It through
the realization of Truth as mentioned in verse
55 below.
The substantive Г«NiВ¶ВўhГҘГӯ, qualified by
the adjective Г«ParГҘГӯ, denotes the final stage of
JВӨГҘnayoga (the path of Knowledge), which
is also termed as ParГҘ Bhakti and TattvajВӨГҘna
(the realization of Truth), which is the limit
of all SГҘdhanГҘs or spiritual discipline. The
sum total of practices forming part of the
discipline of Knowledge is called Г«JВӨГҘnaniВ¶ВўhГҘГӯ
and TattvajВӨГҘna, or the realization of Truth,
which is the reward of all such practices, is
called the Г«ParГҘ NiВ¶ВўhГҘ of KnowledgeГӯ.
The Г«SiddhiГӯ referred to in this verse is
the same as the Г«NaiВ¶karmyasiddhiГӯ mentioned
in the preceding verse; it has been spoken of
As undertaken in the preceding verse, the Lord now describes JВӨГҘnayoga in all its
details in the following three verses.
вҖҷГҲhKГҠ ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҲhГҝГҠ ГҝГҲQВ§ГҠпЈҝ Е“ГҺГ ГҝГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёВў ГҒЕёГҝГӘГҝ ГёвҖ“
вүҘГҠГ©Е’ГҠЕ’ГӢГҒГЈп¬ӮВ·ГҝГҠВўSГ ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ вҒ„UГҠВӘmпЈҝВ·ГҠГ’ вҲҡГҝГҲЕ’SГҝ ГёH 51H
ГҒп¬ӮГҒп¬ӮQВ§вҖҡпЈҝп¬ӮГӢ вҲӮUГүп¬ӮГҠГ”вүҘГҠГӢ ГҝГғп¬ӮГҠГ„вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝв—ҠГҠЕёвҖҡвҖ”вҖ“
ГӨГҝГҠЕёГҝГҠпЈҝВӘВ¬вҒ„UГҠпЈҝ ГҒЕёГ ГҝВў п¬ӮГ’вҒ„UГҠГҮГҝВў вҖҡв—ҠГҲВ¬ГҠГҒГјГҠГғвҖ”H 52H
вҖўвҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„ВўU вҖҷвҲӮВўU Е’В¬Z вҲ‘В§ГҠв—ҠВў вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“Вў В¬ГҒвҒ„UВӘЛқвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҲГ«Гҝ ГҒЕёв—ҠВёв—ҠвҖ” вүҘГҠГҠГЈГғГҠпЈҝ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”Г·ГҚГҝГҠГҝ вҲ‘В§ГҖВ¬ГғпЈҝH 53H
вҖҷГҲhKГҠ ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҲhГҝГҠ with a pure intellect; ГҝГҲQВ§вҖ” endowed; Е“ГҺГ ГҝГҠ through firmness (of a SГҘttvika
type); вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” the mind and senses; ГҒЕёГҝГӘГҝ restraining; Гё and; вүҘГҠГ©Е’ГҠЕ’ГӢЕёЛңГ” ГҒп¬ӮВ·ГҝГҠЕёЛңГ” sound and other
objects of sense; Г ГҝГ„Г п¬ӮГҠ turning oneГӯs back on; вҒ„UГҠВӘmпЈҝВ·ГҠГ’ attraction and aversion; вҲҡГҝГҲЕ’SГҝ wiping out;
Гё and; ГҒп¬ӮГҒп¬ӮQВ§вҖҡпЈҝп¬ӮГӢ living in a lonely and undefiled place; вҲӮUГүп¬ӮГҠвүҘГҠГӢ partaking of a light, SГҘttvika
and regulated diet; ГҝГғп¬ӮГҠГ„вҲ‘В§ГҠГҝв—ҠГҠЕёвҖҡвҖ” having controlled the mind, speech and body; ГӨГҝГҠЕёГҝГҠпЈҝВӘВ¬вҒ„UвҖ”
devoted to the Yoga of meditation; ГҒЕёГ Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” ever; п¬ӮГ’вҒ„UГҠГҮГҝв—ҠЛңГ” dispassion; вҖҡв—ҠГҲВ¬ГҠГҒГјГҠГғвҖ” taking a firm stand
on; вҖўвҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” egotism; вҖҷвҲӮUв—ҠЛңГ” violence; Е’В¬Вёв—ҠЛңГ” arrogance; вҲ‘В§ГҠв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” lust; вҲ‘ЛқВ§ГҠпЈҝЕ“в—ҠЛңГ” anger; В¬ГҒвҒ„UВӘЛқвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” luxuries;
ГҒвҖҡГҒhВў В¬ЛқГҠ#ГҠпЈҝ ГҝГ•ГҠ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ” ГғГ•ГҠВ¬AГҠпЈҝГҒГғ ГҒЕёвҖҷГҠпЈҝЕ“ в—ҠпЈҝвҖ“
вҖҡв—ҠГҠвҖҡпЈҝЕёГ’п¬Ӯ вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ ГҒЕёcвҲҶГҠ ГҙГҠГҠЕёSГҝ ГҝГҠ В¬вҒ„UГҠH 50H
ГҒвҖҡГҒhв—ҠЛңГ” that state of actionlessness; В¬ЛқГҠ#вҖ” having attained; ГҝГ•ГҠ through which (process); вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”
Brahma or the Absolute; ГғГ•ГҠ that (method); вҖўГҠВ¬AГҠпЈҝГҒГғ (man) attains; ГҒЕёвҖҷГҠпЈҝЕ“ know; в—ҠпЈҝ from Me;
вҖҡв—ҠГҠвҖҡпЈҝЕё in brief; вҲһп¬Ӯ only; вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ O son of KuntвҲӮ; ГҒЕёcвҲҶГҠ consummation; ГҙГҠГҠЕёSГҝ of JВӨГҘnayoga or
the path of Knowledge; ГҝГҠ which; В¬вҒ„UГҠ highest.
Arjuna, know from Me only briefly the process through which man having
attained actionlessness, which is the highest consummation of JВӨГҘnayoga (the path of
Knowledge), reaches Brahma.                                                             (50)

=== PAGE 760 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
759
is what is sought to be conveyed by the
compound adjective Г«YatavГҘkkГҘyamГҘnasaВЁГӯ.
Attraction and aversion lie hidden in all
enjoyments of sense, they are great enemies
of the SГҘdhaka (III.34). Therefore, wiping
out from oneГӯs mind all traces of attraction or
aversion for any enjoyment of this world or
the next, or for any living being, object,
activity or occurrenceГіthis is what is meant
by the phrase Г«RГҘgadveВ¶au vyudasyaГӯ; and
he who remains ever merged in dispassion is
said to have taken a firm stand on VairГҘgyaГі
Г«VairГҘgyam samupГҘвҖ№ritaВЁГӯ.
Г«AhaвҲҶkГҘraГӯ is the feeling of identification
with oneГӯs body, senses and mind; it is due
to this that man comes to regard himself as
the doer in relation to what is being done by
the mind, intellect and body. Therefore,
completely getting rid of this feeling of self-
identification with the body is what is meant
by giving up egotism. The audacity to bring
others under oneГӯs sway in a wrongful manner
through coercion is called Г«BalamГӯ or violence;
vain consciousness of oneГӯs riches, large family,
learning, birth and physical strength etc., is
known as Г«DarpaГӯ or arrogance; the longing
for obtaining the enjoyments of this world
and the next is spoken of as Г«KГҘmaГӯ; the
feeling of excitement or provocation aroused
in the mind when somebody acts against
oneГӯs will or behaves wrongfully,Гіwhich
manifests itself in the form of blood-shot
eyes, the throbbing of lips, a burning sensation
in the heart and a distortion of the face, is
termed as Г«KrodhaГӯ. The means of enjoyment
An intellect which retains no trace of
sins incurred in previous lives is referred to
here by the words Г«ViвҖ№uddhayГҘ BuddhyГҘГӯ,
and he who is possessed of such a purified
intellect is called Г«BuddhyГҘ viвҖ№uddhayГҘ yuktaВЁГӯ.
Г«LaghvГҘвҖ№вҲӮГӯ is he who is regulated in diet
(VI.17), that is to say, who takes articles of
food which are suitable for spiritual practice,
easily digestible and SГҘttvika in character
(XVII.8) and whose diet is suited to his
nature, needs and digestive capacity, governed
by certain rules and fixed in quantity.
The word Г«ViВ¶ayГҘnГӯ in this verse stands
for all worldly pleasures of sense. The man
referred to in this verse does not waste his
precious time in the enjoyment of such
pleasures. In order to carry on uninterrupted
spiritual practice he takes up his residence on
a river bank, in a place of worship, forest or
mountain cave or any other such place, which
has a holy atmosphere, is not frequented by
many, is naturally secluded and clean or has
been cleaned by sweeping and washing. This
is what is meant by the expressions Г«вҖәabdГҘdвҲӮn
viВ¶ayГҘn tyaktvГҘГӯ and Г«ViviktasevвҲӮГӯ.
Through unwavering firmness as defined
in verse 33 above, and with irreproachable
persistence he empties his mind of all thoughts
of mundane objects and does not allow the
senses to run after worldly enjoyments. This
is what is meant by the phrase Г«DhГҰtyГҘ ГҘtmГҘnam
niyamyaГӯ. And  through such discipline he
succeeds in subduing the mind, senses and
bodyГіrobs them of their freedom as well as
of their capacity to unsettle the intellect. This
ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҲГ«Гҝ giving up; ГҒЕёв—ҠВёв—ҠвҖ” devoid of the feeling of meum; вүҘГҠГҠГЈГғвҖ” tranquil of heart, calm; вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”Г·ГҚГҝГҠГҝ for
oneness with Brahma (who is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss); вҲ‘В§ГҖВ¬ГғпЈҝ becomes fit.
Endowed with a pure intellect and partaking of a light, SГҘttvika and regulated
diet, living in a lonely and undefiled place, having rejected sound and other objects of
sense, having controlled the mind, speech and body by restraining the mind and senses
through firmness of a SГҘttvika type, taking a resolute stand on dispassion, after having
completely got rid of attraction and aversion and remaining ever devoted to the Yoga
of meditation, having given up egotism, violence, arrogance, lust, anger and luxuries,
devoid of the feeling of meum and tranquil of heart,Гіsuch a man becomes qualified
for oneness with Brahma, who is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss.
(51, 52, 53)

=== PAGE 761 ===

760
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
taken together are known as Г«ParigrahaГӯ; hence
giving up Г«ParigrahaГӯ primarily means actually
shunning all luxuries or objects of enjoyment.
Broadly speaking, however, even he who
does accumulate objects, but not with the
idea of enjoying them, may be indirectly said
to renounce Г«ParigrahaГӯ.
Giving up all these and suspending the
function of the mind and senses through the
SГҘttvika form of DhГҰti and completely
eliminating 
all 
worldly 
thoughts, 
a
SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ constantly contemplates on
Brahma, who is Truth, Consciousness and
Bliss solidified, as his own self (VI.25). He
continues to dwell on the divine truth or
being of God at all timesГіwhile awake or
asleep, sitting or standing, and even while
performing unavoidable bodily functions such
as answering the calls of nature, bathing,
eating and drinking, and so on,Гіand regards
this as his supreme and paramount duty. This
is what is meant by remaining devoted to the
Yoga of meditation.
Г«NirmamaВЁГӯ is he who completely
renounces the feeling of Г«mineГӯ in respect of
the body including the mind and senses, in
respect of all living beings, actions and
enjoyments and even with regard to oneГӯs
birth, race, nationality, grade in society and
stage in lifeГіwho ceases to distinguish an
object, activity or living being as his own or
alien.
As a result of the above practices, the
mind of the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ is no longer distracted
by worldly thoughts and is ever pervaded by
an unruffled calm and pure, SГҘttvika joy.
The quietist who is possessed of such a
tranquil mind is called Г«вҖәГҘntaВЁГӯ.
A man who is endowed with all these
accomplishments not only becomes eligible
for oneness with Brahma but immediately
becomes one with the Absolute. That is to
say, the distinction between the soul and the
Oversoul no longer exists in his eyes and the
realization that he is no other than Brahma,Гі
who is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss
solidified,Гіgets firmly rooted in him. In that
state he beholds his own self as projected in
the whole universe and the whole universe
as conceived in his own being (VI.29).
Having thus discussed the true nature of SaвүҲnyГҘsa or SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga (the path of
Knowledge) in all its details, the Lord now points out the marks of the YogвҲӮ who has become
one with Brahma through the practice of that discipline, and tells us how he reaches the
culmination of JВӨГҘnayoga, termed as ParГҘ Bhakti.
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”Г·ГҚГғвҖ” В¬ЛқвҖҡГӣГҠГҠГ в—ҠГҠ Её вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝГёГҒГғ Её вҲ‘В§ГҠГҰUГ”ЛңЛҮГҠГҒГғвҖ“
вҖҡв—ҠвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёВ·ГҲ Г·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ в—ҠjГҒQВўВ§ вҲӮUГ·ГғпЈҝ В¬вҒ„UГҠв—ҠЛңГ”H 54H
вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”Г·ГҚГғвҖ” the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ who has become one with Brahma (who is Truth, Consciousness
and Bliss solidified); В¬ЛқвҖҡГӣГҠГҠГ в—ҠГҠ cheerful in mind; Её no longer; вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝГёГҒГғ grieves (for anyone); Её
nor; вҲ‘В§ГҠГҰЛңUЛҮГҠГҒГғ craves (for anything); вҖҡв—ҠвҖ” the same; вҖҡп¬ӮпЈҝВёВ·ГҲ Г·ГҚГғпЈҝВ·ГҲ to all beings; в—ҠЕ’ЛңГ”Г·ГҒQВ§в—ҠЛңГ” devotion
to Me; вҲӮUГ·ГғпЈҝ attains; В¬вҒ„UГҠв—ҠЛңГ” supreme.
Established in identity with Brahma (who is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss
solidified), and cheerful in mind, the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ no longer grieves nor craves for
anything. The same to all beings, such a YogвҲӮ attains supreme devotion to Me.  (54)
ever irrevocably established in identity with
God according to the spirit of the great formulas
Г¬I am BrahmaГ® (BГҰh. Up., I. iv.10), Г¬I am
ThatГ® and so on. Verse 24 of Chapter V and
The compound word Г«BrahmabhВөutaВЁГӯ
refers to the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ who has become
one with the Absolute, in whose eye everything
other than Brahma ceases to exist, who is

=== PAGE 762 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
761
verse 27 of Chapter VI also speak of the
YogвҲӮ who has reached this state as
Г«BrahmabhВөutaГӯ.
Г«PrasannГҘtmГҘГӯ is he whose mind is sinless,
free from impurities and unruffled, and ever
remains merged in pure delight. The use of
this adjective is intended to convey that
everything other than Brahma having ceased
to exist in the eyes of the man who has attained
oneness with Brahma, his mind is ever calm
and never gets excited on any account.
The words Г«Na вҖ№ocati na kГҘвҲҶkВ¶atiГӯ
represent the distinguishing marks of the YogвҲӮ
who has attained oneness with Brahma. The
idea is that having come to recognize Brahma
in everything such a YogвҲӮ no longer
differentiates any object from himself nor
regards anything as attractive nor entertains
the feeling of Г«mineГӯ with regard to anything.
That is why it makes no difference to him
when anyone gets united with or disjoined
from the body etc. Hence on no account and
in no circumstance whatsoever does he give
way to grief or anxiety in the least degree.
And he gets sated inasmuch as he ceases to
veiw anything as other than Brahma; hence
he craves for nothing.
The adjectival phrase Г«SarveВ¶u bhВөuteВ¶u
samaВЁГӯ is intended to show his feeling of
non-differentiation towards all beings. The
idea is that the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ referred to above
does not view any living being as other than
himself; hence he ceases to differentiate one
from another. He comes to develop the feeling
of oneness towards all. This very idea has
been brought out in verse 29 of Chapter VI
by the words Г«Sarvatra samadarвҖ№anaВЁГӯ.
The compound word Г«MadbhaktimГӯ,
qualified by the adjective Г«ParГҘmГӯ, denotes
that which is the fruit of JВӨГҘnayoga and
which is also termed as the culmination of
JВӨГҘna and the realization of Truth; for having
revealed the true nature of God it unites one
with Him.
Declaring thus that the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ who has become one with Brahma attains Г«ParГҘ
BhaktiГӯ, the Lord now points out its reward.
Г·Г„Г ГҝГҠ в—ҠГҠв—ҠГҒГ·ВЎГҠЕёГҠГҒГғ ГҝГҠп¬ӮГҠГЈГҝpГҠГҒSв—Ҡ ГғГ»п¬ӮГғвҖ”вҖ“
ГғГғГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠВў ГғГ»п¬ӮГғГҠпЈҝ ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГғпЈҝ ГғЕ’ЕёГЈГғвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”H 55H
Г·Г„Г ГҝГҠ through (that) devotion; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me (the supreme Spirit); вҖўГҒГ·ВЎГҠЕёГҠГҒГғ comes to know;
ГҝГҠп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” of what magnitude; ГҝвҖ” what (I am); Гё and; вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ (I); ГғГ»п¬ӮГғвҖ” in truth; ГғГғвҖ”Г” (and) through
that (devotion); в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; ГғГ»п¬ӮГғвҖ” in reality; ГҙГҠГҠГ п¬ӮГҠ having known; ГҒп¬ӮвүҘГҠГғпЈҝ merges (into My being);
ГғЕ’ЕёГЈГғвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” immediately.
Through that supreme devotion he comes to know Me in reality, what and who
I am; and thereby knowing Me truly, he forthwith merges into My being.
 (55)
The word Г«BhaktyГҘГӯ in this verse refers
to the same realization of Truth which has
been spoken of as Г«ParГҘm madbhaktimГӯ in
the preceding verse and as the culmination
of knowledge in verse 50. This is the fruit
of JВӨГҘnayoga, Bhaktiyoga, Karmayoga,
DhyГҘnayoga and all other disciplines; it is
through this that all SГҘdhakas attain true
knowledge of God and realize God Himself.
It is in order to point out the identity of the fruit
of all disciplines that the word Г«BhaktyГҘГӯ has
been used in this context dealing with JВӨГҘnayoga.
Synchronously with the attainment of this
ParГҘ Bhakti, which is only another name for
the realization of Truth, the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ,
referred to above, comes to know the real
character of God with the help of that
realization. The nature of His absolute, formless
aspect, His qualified formless aspect as well
as of His qualified aspect with form, and how

=== PAGE 763 ===

762
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
even though it follows the verb Г«JВӨГҘtvГҘГӯ,
does not imply sequence of time. The use of
the verb Г«JВӨГҘtvГҘ (having known) no doubt
gives one the impression that the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ
enters into the being of God some time after
realizing the truth about Him. But it is in
order to remove this impression that the Lord
uses the word Г«TadanantaramГӯ. The idea is
that there is no interval or lapse of time
between the knowledge of the true nature of
God and His own realization; true knowledge
of His essential character and entering into
His beingГіboth come together. God, being
the Self of all, is not really something
unattained by any; therefore, He is realized
as soon as His reality is known. Hence it is
in order to bring out this idea that the word
Г«TadanantaramГӯ, has been taken to mean
Г«immediatelyГӯ or Г«at onceГӯ. For the verb Г«JВӨГҘtvГҘГӯ
was enough to denote sequence of time; the
use of the word Г«TadanantaramГӯ would,
therefore, become superfluous or redundant
if it were taken in that sense.
he emerges with a form from the formless
state and how He withdraws His form and
reverts to the formless stateГіall this becomes
known to him. That is why diversity of any
kind ceases to exist in his eyes. It is in order
to reveal the identity of God in His qualified
aspect with the absolute, formless Brahma,
attained through the practice of JВӨГҘnayoga or
the discipline of Knowledge, that the Lord
has used the personal pronoun Г«MГҘmГӯ.
The indeclinable Г«TataВЁГӯ implies cause.
God-realization takes place as soon as the
essential character or true nature of God is
knownГіthere is no interval or lapse of time
between the two events; hence the word has
not been interpreted to mean Г«thereafterГӯ. The
word Г«TataВЁГӯ refers to a cause which forms
the subject of discussion; and it was also
necessary to repeat the cause alongwith the
verb Г«JВӨГҘtvГҘГӯ; hence Г«TataВЁГӯ should be taken
to refer to the Г«ParГҘ BhaktiГӯ mentioned in the
first half of the verse.
The compound adverb Г«TadanantaramГӯ,
Having thus expounded severally the truth relating to TyГҘga or Karmayoga on the one
hand and that of SaвүҲnyГҘsa or SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga on the other in response to the enquiry of
Arjuna, the Lord concluded here the discussion of SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga. He, however, did not tell
him which of the two disciplines should be followed by him. Therefore, with a view to
inducing him to adopt Karmayoga with special emphasis on Bhakti, the Lord now glorifies
Karmayoga dominated by Bhakti.
вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГЎГҝГҒВ¬ вҖҡЕ’ГҠ вҲ‘ГҲВ§п¬ӮГҠВёГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ в—ҠЕ’ЛңГ”вҲҡГҝВ¬ГҠГјГҠГҝвҖ”вҖ“
в—ҠГ В¬ЛқвҖҡГҠЕ’ГҠЕ’п¬ӮГҠВ¬AГҠпЈҝГҒГғ вүҘГҠГҠEГғВў В¬Е’в—ҠвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ”H 56H
вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ all (his) duties; вҖўГҒВ¬ though; вҖҡЕ’ГҠ ever; вҲ‘ГҲВ§п¬ӮГҠВёГЎГҠвҖ” performing; в—ҠЕ’ЛңГ”вҲҡГҝВ¬ГҠГјГҠГҝвҖ” (the
KarmayogвҲӮ) who has taken refuge in Me; в—ҠГ В¬ЛқвҖҡГҠЕ’ГҠГғЛңГ” by My grace; вҖўп¬ӮГҠВ¬AГҠпЈҝГҒГғ attains; вүҘГҠГҠEГғв—ҠЛңГ” В¬Е’в—ҠЛңГ”
вҖўвҲҡГҝГҝв—ҠЛңГ” the eternal, imperishable supreme state or abode.
The KarmayogвҲӮ, however, who depends on Me, attains by My grace the eternal,
imperishable state, though performing all actions.
 (56)
The 
compound 
adjective 
Г«Mad-
vyapГҘвҖ№rayaВЁГӯ in this verse refers to the man
who practises Karmayoga with special
emphasis on Bhakti. Such a KarmayogвҲӮ gives
up dependence on all actions and their fruit
in the shape of all enjoyments and takes
refuge in God alone. Having dedicated his
body, including the mind and senses, and all
its activities as well as their fruit to God, he
no longer treats them as his own, withdraws
his attachment from them and ceases to hanker
for anything, and remains exclusively devoted

=== PAGE 764 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
763
to Him. He looks upon God as his supreme
goal, the highest object of his love, his greatest
well-wisher, chief supporter and sole refuge,
and remains cheerful under all circumstances
taking them to be a dispensation of God.
That is to say, he never rejoices nor grieves
over the appearance or disappearance of any
worldly object or over any event and ever
depends on God. Whatever he does is according
to His behest, for His pleasure, and under
His guidance and inspiration regarding himself
as a mere instrument and working just as he
is made to work, and views himself as entirely
subject to His control. All this is covered by
the adjective Г«MadvyapГҘвҖ№rayaВЁГӯ.
The compound word Г«SarvakarmГҘЖ’iГӯ
covers all duties that have been prescribed in
the вҖәГҘstras with due regard to the VarЖ’a and
Г…вҖ№rama of an individual, that have been
referred to above by the terms Г«Niyatam
KarmaГӯ and Г«SvabhГҘvajam KarmaГӯ and which
conform to the commandments and directions
of God.
The use of the particle Г«ApiГӯ is intended
to glorify the man who practises Karmayoga
with special emphasis on Bhakti, and to
show that Karmayoga is easy to practise.
The idea is that while the SГҘвҲҶkhyayogвҲӮ realizes
God by renouncing all luxuries and enjoyments
and practising constant meditation on God in
a lonely place, the KarmayogвҲӮ who has taken
refuge in God realizes the same God even
while performing all duties appropriate to his
VarЖ’a or grade in society and Г…вҖ№rama or
stage in life. There is no disparity whatsoever
in the fruit of the two disciplines.
The substantive Г«PadamГӯ qualified by the
adjectives Г«вҖәГҘвҖ№vatamГӯ and Г«AvyayamГӯ, stands
for the almighty and all-supporting God, who
has existed from eternity and remains for ever,
who never ceases to be, and who is Truth,
Consciousness and Bliss solidified. He has
been called Г«PadamГӯ in order to show that He
alone is the supreme goal. The same principle
which has been termed as Г«SaвүҲsiddhiГӯ in verse
45 above, as Г«SiddhiГӯ in the next verse and as
Г«MГҘmГӯ or God in verse 55 above has been
referred to in the present verse as the eternal,
imperishable state. The idea is that the same
truth has been called by different names.
Impressed and pleased with the sentiment of
the man practising Karmayoga with special
emphasis on Bhakti, the Lord confers on him
of His own accord the Yoga of wisdom known
as ParГҘ Bhakti (X.10); realizing the true nature
of God through that Buddhiyoga the devotee
becomes one with or gets merged in God,
who is Truth, Knowledge and Bliss solidified.
This is what is meant by the latter half of this
verse.
Extolling thus the man who practises Karmayoga with the element of Bhakti preponderating
in it, the Lord now commands Arjuna to become such a KarmayogвҲӮ.
ГёпЈҝГғвҖҡГҠ вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ в—ҠГҒГҝ вҖҡГӣГҝSГҝ в—ҠГ В¬вҒ„UвҖ”вҖ“
вҖҷГҲГҒhГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠГҲВ¬ГҠГҒГјГҠГ Гҝ в—ҠГҒГ¬ГҠГ»ГҠвҖ” вҖҡГғГғВў Г·п¬ӮH 57H
ГёпЈҝГғвҖҡГҠ mentally; вҖҡп¬ӮВёвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ all duties or actions; в—ҠГҒГҝ to Me; вҖҡГӣГҝSГҝ resigning; в—ҠГ В¬вҒ„UвҖ”
exclusively devoted to Me; вҖҷГҲГҒhГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ” Yoga in the form of even-mindedness; В©UВ¬ГҠГҒГјГҠГ Гҝ (and)
adopting; в—ҠГҒГ¬ГҠГ»ГҠвҖ” вҖҡГғГғв—ҠЛңГ” with your mind constantly fixed on Me; Г·п¬Ӯ be.
Mentally resigning all your duties to Me, and taking recourse to Yoga in the
form of even-mindedness, be solely devoted to Me and constantly fix your mind
on Me.                                                                                           (57)
The man who resigns all his actions to
God feels that his mind, senses and body, the
activities performed by them and everything
in the world belong to Him, and accordingly

=== PAGE 765 ===

764
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
have taken recourse to the Yoga of equanimity.
He who is exclusively devoted to God
(Г«MatparaВЁГӯ) looks upon Him as his supreme
goal, highest asylum, greatest wellwisher,
dearest object of love and chief support. He is
ever contented with His dispensation and
remains devoted to practices of God-realization.
Even so Г«MaccittaВЁГӯ is he who has his
mind and intellect irrevocably fastened on God.
Conceiving not the least attachment for anyone
other than God, he remains solely engaged in
thinking of God in terms of exclusive love.
Even a momentГӯs gap in the thought of God
becomes unbearable to him. He continues to
perceive Him with his mind at all times, even
while he is sitting or standing, walking or
moving from one place to another, eating or
drinking, dreaming or awake, and doing
everything else. This is what Arjuna has been
asked to do in the concluding verse of Chapter
IX as also in verse 65 of the present chapter
by the wrods Г¬ManmanГҘ bhava.Г®
ceases to look upon any of these as his own,
withdraws attachment from them and no longer
craves for anything. He believes that he is
incapable of doing anything, that it is God
who infuses the necessary energy into him and
gets everything done by him according to His
own will, while he does nothing himself. And
believing thus, he continues to perform all
actions according to His behest, for His sake
and under His guidance and inspiration, acting
as a mere instrument or puppet.
Viewing success and failure, joy and
sorrow, gain and loss and similarly objects
and living beings as alike is what is referred
to here as Buddhiyoga. Therefore, believing
that whatever happens in the world is controlled
by the will and promptings of God, he who
no longer entertains the discriminative feelings
of attraction, and aversion, delight and
grief, etc., in respect of the various objects,
living beings and occurrences, and remains
equipoised under all circumstances, is said to
Having thus commanded Arjuna to practise Karmayoga with special emphasis on
Bhakti, the Lord now points out to him the reward of obeying His command and shows what
great harm will befall him in the event of his not obeying Him.
в—ҠГҒГ¬ГҠГ»ГҠвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮВёЕ’ГҲВӘГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ в—ҠГ В¬ЛқвҖҡГҠЕ’ГҠГ»ГҠГҒвҒ„UcГҝГҒвҖҡвҖ“
вҖўГ• ГёпЈҝГ»п¬Ӯв—ҠвҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„UГҠГӣГҠ ГјГҠГҠпЈҝcГҝГҒвҖҡ ГҒп¬ӮЕёГҰЛңUЛҮГҝГҒвҖҡH 58H
в—ҠГҒГ¬ГҠГ»ГҠвҖ” with your mind given to Me (in the aforesaid manner); вҖҡп¬ӮВёЕ’ГҲВӘГҠВёГҒГЎГҠ all difficulties;
в—ҠГ В¬ЛқвҖҡГҠЕ’ГҠГғЛңГ” by My grace; ГғГҒвҒ„UcГҝГҒвҖҡ you shall tide over; вҖўГ• and; ГёпЈҝГғЛңГ” if; Г п¬Ӯв—ҠЛңГ” you; вҖўвҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„UГҠГғЛңГ” from
egotism; Её ГјГҠГҠпЈҝcГҝГҒвҖҡ you will not listen; ГҒп¬ӮЕёГҰUГ”ЛңГ”ЛҮГҝГҒвҖҡ you will be lost.
With your mind thus given to Me, you shall, by My grace, tide over all difficulties.
But, if from egotism you do not care to listen to Me, you will be lost.                           (58)
Having resigned all his actions to God
in the manner suggested above, and constantly
fixing his mind on Him, Arjuna would be
required to do nothing more. By the LordГӯs
grace all his sorrows in this world as well as
in the next would be easily obviated. Rid of
all vices and evil propensities, he would be
exempted for ever from the great ordeal in
the shape of birth and death and would attain
God, who is eternal Bliss solidified. This is
what the Lord seeks to convey in the first
half of this verse.
Arjuna was a devotee and beloved friend
of the Lord; he was, therefore, sure to obey
Him. The Lord, however, warned Arjuna that
just as obedience to Him was highly beneficial,
disobedience to Him involved great risk;
therefore, if from self-conceit Arjuna did not
obey the Lord and acted according
to his own will he was doomed. In that case he

=== PAGE 766 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
765
that the Lord has already met this objection by
the use of the conditional conjunction Г«CetГӯ. It
is no doubt an axiomatic truth that a devotee
of God never falls; and it is equally true that
Arjuna was supremely devoted to the Lord.
That he should not listen to the Lord, and should
disobey Him, was, therefore, something out of
the question. Nevertheless, should he prove so
selfconceited as to disobey Him, he could no
longer be counted as a devotee of God, and in
that eventuality it was but reasonable that he
would fall.
would have no real peace or joy in this world
or the next and lapsing from his duty he would
fall from the spiritual level already attained by
him. This is what the Lord  seeks to impress
on Arjuna in the latter half of the verse.
The Lord has on a previous occasion
acknowledged Arjuna as his devotee (IV.3) and
has further proclaimed that his devotee never
falls (IX.31). In the present verse, however,
He warns Arjuna against a fall. How is this to
be reconciled with His former estimation of
Arjuna? In this connection it may be submitted
mere display of his vanity the Lord seeks to
convey that he would not be able to stick to
his resolve, i.e., he could not remain aloof
from war; for he was not free to act, he was
subject to his nature.
The word Г«PrakГҰtiГӯ in this verse denotes
the sum-total of tendencies formed as a result
of actions performed through a number of
lives, and manifesting themselves in the current
life of an individual in the form of temperament
or disposition; it is also called the nature of
an individual. It is this nature that determines
the birth of a soul in a community endowed
with an aptitude for a particular type of
actions; and it is under the influence of this
nature that different individuals are inclined
towards diverse types of actions. The words
Г«PrakГҰtiВЁ twГҘm niyokВ¶yatiГӯ are, therefore,
intended to impress upon Arjuna that the
nature, which has caused his birth in the
Commanded by the Lord on a previous
occasion to fight (II.3), Arjuna openly said,
Г¬I will not fightГ® (II.9). The first half of the
present verse has reference to that refusal on
the part of Arjuna. The idea is that the
resolve of Arjuna not to fight was nothing
but a display of vanity on his part: he was
not free to desist from war. It was, therefore,
most undesirable that Arjuna should thus
allow himself to be possessed by egotism
born of ignorance, and should accordingly
regard himself as wise, competent and free
and take upon himself on the strength of
such egotism the responsibility of accomplishing
a particular act in a particular way and make
up his mind to desist from a particular course
of action. This is what the Lord seeks to
impress upon Arjuna in the first half of this
verse.
By denouncing ArjunaГӯs resolve as a
In the preceding verse the Lord plainly told Arjuna that he was sure to fall if he proved
conceited enough to disobey Him. In support of this very statement the Lord now points out
in the following two verses that his resolve was not a sound one.
ГҝЕ’вҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠГҠГҒГјГҠГ Гҝ Её ГҝГҠпЈҝГ SГҝ ГҹГҒГғ в—ҠГЈГҝвҖҡпЈҝвҖ“
ГҒв—ҠГўГҝГ’В· вҲҡГҝп¬ӮвҖҡГҠГҝSГғпЈҝ В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғSГ п¬ӮГҠВў ГҒЕёГҝГҠпЈҝЛҮГҝГҒГғH 59H
ГҝГғЛңГ” if; вҖўвҖһUVГ”UГҠвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” egotism; вҖўГҠГҒГјГҠГ Гҝ taking your stand on; Её ГҝГҠпЈҝГ SГҝпЈҝ I will not fight; ГҹГҒГғ thus;
в—ҠГЈГҝвҖҡпЈҝ you think; ГҒв—ҠГўГҝГҠ (is) vain; вҲһВ·вҖ” this; вҲҡГҝп¬ӮвҖҡГҠГҝвҖ” resolve; ГғпЈҝ your; В¬ЛқвҲ‘ГҺВ§ГҒГғвҖ” nature; Г п¬ӮГҠв—ҠЛңГ” you;
ГҒЕёГҝГҠпЈҝЛҮГҝГҒГғ drive (to the act).
If, taking your stand on egotism, you think Г«I will not fightГӯ, vain is this resolve
of yours; nature will drive you to the act.                                             (59)

=== PAGE 767 ===

766
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
performing his duty, he needs must fight.
What Arjuna has been told about war on
account of his being a KВ¶atriya should be
understood by members of other castes to
apply to their own natural duties.
KВ¶atriya race, would perforce drive him even
against his will to war. To put up a heroic
fight when the occasion demanded it and not
to lose heart or flee from a battle was his
natural duty; hence Arjuna could not help
Sп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮВЎпЈҝЕё вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ ГҒЕёвҖҷhвҖ” Sп¬ӮпЈҝЕё вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠвҖ“
вҲ‘В§ГғГҲZ ЕёпЈҝГ«ВҝUГҒвҖҡ ГҝГЈв—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҠГ вҲ‘В§ГҒвҒ„UcГҝSГҝп¬ӮвүҘГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ ГғГғЛңГ”H 60H
Sп¬ӮГ·ГҠп¬ӮВЎпЈҝЕё born of your nature; вҲ‘В§ГҠГ’ГЈГғпЈҝГҝ O son of KuntвҲӮ, Arjuna; ГҒЕёвҖҷhвҖ” bound; Sп¬ӮпЈҝЕё вҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠ
by your own past action; вҲ‘В§ГғГҲВёв—ҠЛңГ” to do; Её ГҹГ«ВҝUГҒвҖҡ you are not willing; ГҝГғЛңГ” (the action) which; в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUГҠГғЛңГ”
through ignorance; вҲ‘В§ГҒвҒ„UcГҝГҒвҖҡ you will do; вҖўп¬ӮвүҘГҠвҖ” perforce; вҖўГҒВ¬ too; ГғГғЛңГ” that.
That action, too, which you are not willing to undertake due to ignorance, you
will perforce perform,Гіbound by your own duty born of your nature.
 (60)
to the process laid down in verse 57 above,
Arjuna would be free from the bondage of
Karma and realize the Lord; or else being
caught in the meshes of attraction and aversion
he would continue to drift in the ocean of
mundane existence in the form of birth and
death. This is what the Lord seeks to impress
on Arjuna in the present verse.
The idea is that a man who is being
carried away by the current of a river can
never be able to cross it by forcing his way
against the current; while he who moves
along the current by catching hold of a barge
or a log of wood or by floating on the
surface of water through the art of swimming
reaches the bank and even goes beyond it.
Similarly, the man who having been caught
in the stream of PrakГҰti struggles against it,
i.e., wilfully neglects his duties, cannot go
beyond Nature, but on the other hand gets
involved in it more and more; while he who
betaking himself to God or to Karmayoga
(the path of Action) or rising above PrakГҰti
according to the process of JВӨГҘnayoga,
continues to perform duties according to his
nature, is freed from the bondage of Karma
and transcends PrakГҰti, i.e., realizes God.
KuntвҲӮ, ArjunaГӯs mother, was a very brave
lady; while sending her message through вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a Himself, she urged the PГҘЖ’Е’avas to take
to war. Therefore, by addressing Arjuna as
KuntвҲӮГӯs son, He seeks to impress on him that
being the son of a brave mother and a heroic
soul himself, he would not be able to keep aloof
from war.
Arjuna was a KВ¶atriya, fighting was his
natural duty; hence it was not sinful for him
to participate in war. Under such circumstances,
it was in no way desirable for him to seek to
avoid it. That he was nevertheless unwilling
to perform his natural duty in the shape of
fighting in a righteous cause showed nothing
but want of thought on his part; otherwise
there was no sufficient ground for his shirking
the duty. This is what the Lord seeks to
convey by the words Г«Kartum na icchasi yat
mohГҘtГӯ.
Again, fighting was a natural duty with
Arjuna; hence he was bound by it, i.e.,
intimately connected with it. Under such
circumstances, it would drag him perforce to
it even against his will and impelled by his
nature he would have to do it. Therefore, if
he did it as the Lord bade him do, i.e., according
In the foregoing verses man has been declared as dependent on his nature in the matter
of performing actions. Here one may ask: PrakГҰti or nature is unconscious, how can it bring
anyone under its sway? The Lord, therefore, says:

=== PAGE 768 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
767
he dependГіon his own nature or on PrakГҰti
or God? For, at one place man has been
declared free as having the right to act (II.47),
and at another place as subject to his individual
nature (III.33) and at a third place as dependent
on God (X.8). In this very chapter he has
been declared as dependent on or subject to
his own peculiar nature in verses 59 and 60
and in the present verse as dependent on
God. This point evidently needs elucidation.
In this connection it may be submitted
that man is neither free to act nor to abstain
from action. That is why it has been said that
no living being can remain inactive even for
a moment (III.5). Even the statement that
man has the right to act is intended not to
declare him free but only to proclaim him as
dependent; for he has thereby been pronounced
as incapable of giving up action. Now as
regards the agency on which he depends, our
submission is that it is just the same to call
him as dependent on PrakГҰti, on his own
nature or on God. For, as a matter of fact,
PrakГҰti and nature are synonymous terms;
and as for God, He urges the different JвҲӮvas
or embodied souls to action through His
illusive power according to their individual
nature in quite an unconcerned way, i.e.,
remaining altogether unaffected or unattached.
Therefore, to call a man dependent on God is
just the same as to declare him subject to his
own nature. In the alternative case it is God
who is the lord and director of PrakГҰti, so that
even to call a man as subject to his own
Though the man who is seated in a
vehicle moves not himself, the motion of the
vehicle imparts locomotion to him; even so
though the Self is immovableГіis really
speaking wholly beyond all activity,Гіyet,
being identified with a body due to ignorance
that has existed from time without beginning,
the activity of the body is attributed to the
Soul. This is what the Lord means by
figuratively speaking of the body as a vehicle.
The driver who propels a vehicle remains
in the vehicle himself; even so God dwells in
the heart of all creatures and it is while seated
in their heart that He causes them to revolve
according to their Karma. Hence no decree
of God is liable to the least error; for all-
powerful, all-pervading and omniscient as
He is, He is fully aware of all the doings of
those creatures. This is what is meant by the
first half of this verse.
In order to reward or punish the various
JвҲӮvas or embodied souls according to the
doings of their previous lives, God causes
them to be born in different species. He
unites them with or disjoins them from various
objects, activities and living beings and urges
them to newer forms of activity in accordance
with their nature. This is how God causes
living beings to revolve through His MГҘyГҘ.
This raises the question of freedom of
will. Is man free to act according to his will
or does he depend for his actions on any
other agency? If he is dependent, what is the
nature of his dependence and on whom does
ГҹВёEвҒ„UвҖ” вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠВў NUgпЈҝвүҘГҠпЈҝЛҳВЎВёГҲЕё ГҒГғDГ”UГҒГғвҖ“
Г·ЛқГҠв—ҠГҝГЈвҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё ГҝГЈГІГҠГҠMВ§вҖҰUГҠГҒЕё в—ҠГҠГҝГҝГҠH 61H
ГҹВёEвҒ„UвҖ” God (who is their inner controller); UвҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠЕёГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of all beings; NgпЈҝвүҘГҠпЈҝ in the heart; вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё
O Arjuna; ГҒГғDГ”UГҒГғ abides; Г·ЛқГҠв—ҠГҝЕёЛңГ” turning round and round (according to their respective
Karmas); вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҚГғГҠГҒЕё all living beings; ГҝГЈGГҠMВ§вҖҰUГҠГҒЕё mounted on the vehicle of the body; в—ҠГҠГҝГҝГҠ by
His illusive power.
Arjuna, God abides in the heart of all beings, causing them to revolve, according
to their Karma by His illusive power Г«MГҘyГҘГӯ, as though mounted on a machine
(the body).
 (61)

=== PAGE 769 ===

768
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
his duties, and to encourage him to perform
his duties in a righteous spirit. Hence, though
bound by his own nature in performing
actions, he is not so fettered in the matter
of reforming this nature. Therefore, waking
up as a result of the teachings of the вҖәГҘstras
and holy men, if he takes refuge in Almighty
God, who is the director of PrakГҰti, and,
giving up morbid feelings such as those of
attraction and aversion etc., rightly performs
his natural duties in a disinterested spirit
according to the scriptural injunctions, he can
surely be redeemed.
nature is tantamount to calling him dependent
on God.
Here it may be asked: If man is absolutely
dependent, what is the way of redeeming
him and what need is there for scriptures
determining what a man should do and what
he should not. Our reply to this question is
that the вҖәГҘstras are not intended to divert a
man from his natural duties or to urge him
to acts which are antagonistic to his nature.
Their intention is to deter him from wrongful
acts which he is liable to commit under the
impulse of likes and dislikes while discharging
In the preceding verse it has been proved that man is not free to abandon his duties,
he is driven to his natural duties under the prompting of his own nature; for Almighty God,
who remains seated in the heart of all as their inner controller, causes all living beings to
revolve according to their own nature and it is not possible for man to resist His prompting.
The question, therefore, arises: If such is the case, what should a man do in order to get
rid of the bondage of Karma and attain supreme peace? Thereupon the Lord prescribes the
duty for Arjuna in the following verse:
Гғв—ҠпЈҝп¬Ӯ вүҘГҠГ”вҒ„UГЎГҠВў ВӘГ«ВҝU вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҠп¬ӮпЈҝЕё Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғвҖ“
ГғГ В¬ЛқвҖҡГҠЕ’ГҠГ В¬вҒ„UГҠВў вүҘГҠГҠГҒГЈГғВў SГ•ГҠЕёВў В¬ЛқГҠГҘSГҝГҒвҖҡ вүҘГҠГҠEГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 62H
Гғв—ҠЛңГ” Him (God); вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; вүҘГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” ВӘГ«ВҝU take refuge in; вҖҡп¬ӮВёГ·ГҠп¬ӮпЈҝЕё with all your being; Г·ГҠвҒ„UГғ
O descendant of Bharata; ГғГ В¬ЛқвҖҡГҠЕ’ГҠГғЛңГ” by His mere grace; В¬вҒ„UГҠв—ҠЛңГ” вүҘГҠГҠГҒГЈГғв—ҠЛңГ” supreme peace; SГ•ГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ”
state; В¬ЛқГҠГҘSГҝГҒвҖҡ you shall attain to; вүҘГҠГҠEГғв—ҠЛңГ” the eternal.
Take refuge in Him alone, with all your being, Arjuna. By His mere grace you
shall attain supreme peace and the eternal state.                                     (62)
The personal pronoun Г«TamГӯ refers to
the same almighty, all-supporting and all-
pervading God, who is the director and inner
controller of all and has been spoken of in
the preceding verse as seated in the heart of
all living beings. And he who, having offered
his mind, intellect, senses, and vital airs, as
well as all his wealth and relations etc., to
Him, throws his entire responsibility on Him,
is said to have taken refuge in him with all
his being.
That is to say, having devoutly ascertained
the virtues, glory, truth and essential character
of God, such a man looks upon Him alone as
his supreme goal and safest retreat, chief
support and total wealth; and recognizing
Him as his lord, protector, supporter, director
and greatest wellwisher, he depends on Him
in everyway and is rid of all fear. Regarding
everything as belonging to God and feeling
His presence everywhere, he gives up the
feeling of mineness and the sense of doership,
as well as attachment and desire, in respect
of all actions and serves God, seated in the
heart of all living beings, according to His
behests through the performance of his duties.
Whatever 
pleasurable 
or 
painful
experiences he is subjected to, he treats them
as a boon sent by God and remains ever satisfied.
He never feels the least aggrieved over any

=== PAGE 770 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
769
in the aforesaid manner begins to receive a
never-ending flood of grace from the supremely
compassionate, benevolent and almighty God,
which washes away all his sorrows and
bondage. Thus rid of all sorrows and bondage
the devotee is filled with supreme joy and
realizes the eternal Brahma or God, who is
Truth, Consciousness and Bliss solidified.
This is what is meant by his attaining supreme
peace and the eternal supreme abode through
the grace of God.
dispensation of Providence. Turning his back
on honour, fame and prestige he never entertains
the feeling of mineness or attachment in respect
of anything other than God. With utmost
reverence and exclusive attachment he ever
continues to hear, reflect on and recite the
divine names, virtues, glory, stories, truth and
essential character of God. All these sentiments
and practices are covered by taking refuge in
God with all oneГӯs being.
The devotee who takes refuge in God
Thus commanding Arjuna to take refuge in God, the inner controller of all, the Lord
now winds up His teaching on the subject and says:
ГҹГҒГғ ГғпЈҝ ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠГҠГ…ГҝГҠГғВў ВӘГҲsГ”ГҠeвҖ°sГ”ГғвҒ„ВўU в—ҠГҝГҠвҖ“
ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҺвүҘГҝГ’ГғЕ’вүҘГҠпЈҝВ·пЈҝГЎГҠ ГҝГ•пЈҝГ«ВҝUГҒвҖҡ ГғГ•ГҠ вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§H 63H
ГҹГҒГғ thus; ГғпЈҝ to you; ГҙГҠГҠЕёв—ҠЛңГ” wisdom; вҖўГҠГ…ГҝГҠГғв—ҠЛңГ” has been imparted; ВӘГҲsГ”ГҠЕ’ЛңГ” ВӘГҲsГ”ГғвҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” more secret
than secrecy itself; в—ҠГҝГҠ by Me; ГҒп¬Ӯв—ҠГҺвүҘГҝ pondering carefully; вҲһГғГғЛңГ” this (esoteric wisdom); вҖўвүҘГҠпЈҝВ·пЈҝГЎГҠ
fully; ГҝГ•ГҠ as; ГҹГ«ВҝUГҒвҖҡ you like; ГғГ•ГҠ accordingly; вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ do.
Thus, has this wisdom, more secret than secrecy itself, been imparted to you by
Me. Fully pondering over it, do as you like.                                                 (63)
The partcle Г«ItiГӯ in this verse marks the
conclusion of the gospel and covers all that
has been taught by the Lord from verse 11 of
Chapter II up to the preceding verse.
The word Г«JВӨГҘnamГӯ covers the entire
range of the LordГӯs teachingsГіwhatever He
has told Arjuna from verse 11 of Chapter II
to the preceding verse with a view to unfolding
in clear terms the secret of His virtues, glory,
truth, and essential character. The whole of
this teaching is conducive to the direct
knowledge of God, hence it has been termed
as Г«JВӨГҘnaГӯ (wisdom). Of all those secrets in
the secular as well as in the sacred domain
that have been considered as worth keeping
from general knowledge, the teaching which
gives a correct idea of the virtues, glory and
essential character of God has been recognized
as the most esoteric. The use of the qualification
Г«GuhyГҘt guhyataramГӯ with Г«JВӨГҘnamГӯ is,
therefore, intended to bring out the glory of
this teaching as well as to impress on ArjunaГӯs
mind the truth that these things should not be
revealed before the unqualified.
The personal pronoun Г«MayГҘГӯ has been
used by the Lord to show that none else
could expound the truth of His divine virtues,
glory and essential character as He Himself
would do; hence the wisdom taught by Him
above was exceedingly valuable. Even so
the use of the pronoun Г«TeГӯ is intended to
convey that the wisdom referred to above
has been imparted by the Lord for the spiritual
well-being of Arjuna considering him as
qualified to receive it. And the passive participle
Г«Г…khyГҘtamГӯ indicates that whatever the Lord
had got to say on the subject had already
been told; and that he had nothing more to
say.
Commencing His teaching from verse
11 of Chapter II, the Lord declared the vocation
of fighting at more than one place (II.18,37;
III.30; VIII.7; XI.34) as the duty of Arjuna
according 
to 
both 
SГҘвҲҶkhyayoga 
and

=== PAGE 771 ===

770
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
caution him; and with that end in view He
told him that God was the inspirer of all and
dwelt in the heart of all, and accordingly
asked him to betake himself to Him, When
Arjuna remained silent even on this, the Lord
wound up His teaching in the first half of the
present verse; and glorifying the teaching
already imparted, He admonished Arjuna to
ponder over the same and in conclusion
asked him to do as he liked (ГҝГ•пЈҝГ«ВҝUГҒвҖҡ ГғГ•ГҠ
вҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§). In other words, He exhorted Arjuna to
follow any of the several disciplines taught
by Him, viz., Karmayoga, JВӨГҘnayoga and
Bhaktiyoga etc., whichever appealed to him,
or to do whatever he thought fit.
Karmayoga, the disciplines of Knowledge
and Action, and exhorted him to take refuge
in Him. Then, after fully expounding in Chapter
XVIII the truth of SannyГҘsa (SГҘвҲҶkhya) and
TyГҘga (Yoga) in response to ArjunaГӯs enquiry,
He reiterated in verses 56 and 57 the glory of
Karmayoga with the element of Bhakti
preponderating in it and invited him to approach
Him for shelter. Nevertheless, since Arjuna
did not express his willingness to do so, the
Lord once more showed the unique reward
of obeying His commands to that effect and
also pointed out the great harm involved in
disobeying Him. When Arjuna made no answer
even then, the Lord deemed it necessary to
When Arjuna made no answer even on being thus asked to decide on his course after
pondering the entire range of the LordГӯs teaching, and when he got despondent as it were,
thinking himself to be unqualified and unable to determine his duty, the Lord, who is the inner
controller of all and knows the mind of all, took compassion on Arjuna of his own accord, and
with the intention of telling him the quintessence of the whole teaching of the GвҲӮtГҘ, said:
вҖҡп¬ӮВёВӘГҲsГ”Гғв—ҠВў Г·ГҚГҝвҖ” oГҺГЎГҠГҲ в—ҠпЈҝ В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠВў п¬ӮГёвҖ”вҖ“
ГҹCГ”UГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒвҖҡ в—ҠпЈҝ Е’ГҺвҖҰUГҒв—ҠГҒГғ ГғГғГҠпЈҝ п¬ӮЛҮГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ ГғпЈҝ ГҒвҖһUГғв—ҠЛңГ”H 64H
вҖҡп¬ӮВёВӘГҲsГ”Гғв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” the most esoteric of all; Г·ГҚГҝвҖ” again, once more; oГҺГЎГҠГҲ hear; в—ҠпЈҝ to Me; В¬вҒ„Uв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ”
supreme; п¬ӮГёвҖ” word; ГҹCГ”UвҖ” dear; вҖўГҒвҖҡ you are; в—ҠпЈҝ My; Е’ГҺвҖҰUв—ҠЛңГ” exceedingly; ГҹГҒГғ this; ГғГғвҖ” therefore;
п¬ӮЛҮГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ I shall give; ГғпЈҝ you; ГҒвҖһUГғв—ҠЛңГ” salutary (advice).
Hear again My supreme word, the most esoteric of all truths. You are extremely
dear to Me; therefore, I shall give you this salutary advice.
 (64)
All that the Lord has told Arjuna so far
is worth preserving as a secret; hence the
Lord has spoken of it time and again as
Г«supremely esotericГӯ and Г«the supreme secret.Гӯ
Of all those teachings, again, the words in
which He has revealed His own virtues,
glory, greatness, essential character and divine
power, that is to say, wherever He has declared
Himself as no other than the all-pervading,
all-supporting, all-powerful God, who is both
with and without attributes, and asked Arjuna
to practise His adoration and take shelter in
Him, are worth keeping from othersГӯ knowledge
more than anything else. That is why the
Lord has used the adjective Г«GuhyatamamГӯ
(most secret) in the opening verse of Chapter
IX and the word Г«RГҘjaguhyamГӯ (the sovereign
secret) in the very next; for, fully describing
His own virtues, glory, essential character,
mystery and divinity in that chapter, He has
clearly asked Arjuna to practise His worship
and place himself under His protection. Even
so, while introducing once more the topic of
self-surrender to Himself in Chapter X, the
Lord has similarly used the adjective Г«ParamamГӯ
with Г«VacaВЁГӯ in the very opening verse. In
the same way, by using the qualifications
Г«SarvaguhyatamamГӯ and Г«ParamamГӯ with
Г«VacaВЁГӯ the present verse, the Lord indicates
that He would deliver to Arjuna in the next

=== PAGE 772 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
771
two verses the most important and esoteric
part of His teaching.
The secret that the Lord seeks to confide
to Arjuna in the following two verses has
been communicated to him even before (IX.34;
XII.6,7; XVIII.56-57). Arjuna, however, failed
to take special note of it; that is why, sifting
that most valuable gospel from the entire
body of His teachings He was going to
repeat it once more and expected that Arjuna
would carefully listen to it and treasure it.
That is what is implied by the use of the
words Г«BhВөuyaВЁ вҖ№ГҰЖ’uГӯ.
In the preceding verse the Lord directed
Arjuna to use his independent judgment in
determining his duty, He did not keep to
Himself the responsibility in respect of the
same. This filled the mind of Arjuna with
dejection. He wondered why the Lord spoke
to him in that strain and began to doubt his
faith in the Lord, his devotion and attachment
to Him. Therefore, with a view to driving
away the despondency of Arjuna and in
order to cheer him up, the Lord assures him,
that he was exceptionally dear to Him, that
the tie of love obtaining between them was
indissoluble; hence he need not feel downcast.
This is what He seeks to impress upon him
through the words Г«IВ¶ВўaВЁ asi Me dГҰЕ’hamГӯ.
The indeclinable Г«TataВЁГӯ implies cause.
The Lord thereby shows that, Arjuna being
His most intimate friend, He would keep
nothing from Arjuna and would confide the
most esoteric truth to him in his own interest,
and that whatever He would tell Arjuna
would prove highly beneficial to him.
The Lord now unfolds the secret of all secrets that He promised in the preceding verse
to reveal.
в—ҠГЈв—ҠЕёГҠ Г·п¬Ӯ в—ҠjQВ§ГҠпЈҝ в—ҠlГҠВЎГӢ в—ҠГҠВў Еёв—ҠSвҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§вҖ“
в—ҠГҠв—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮГ’cГҝГҒвҖҡ вҖҡГ ГҝВў ГғпЈҝ В¬ЛқГҒГғВЎГҠЕёпЈҝ ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒвҖҡ в—ҠпЈҝH 65H
в—ҠГЈв—ҠЕёГҠ Г·п¬Ӯ give your mind to Me; в—ҠЕ’ЛңГ”Г·QВ§вҖ” (be) My devotee; в—ҠlГҠВЎГӢ (be) My worshipper;
в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” to Me; Еёв—ҠSвҲ‘ГҲВ§LВ§ bow; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” to Me; вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; вҲһcГҝГҒвҖҡ you will come; вҖҡГ Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” truly; ГғпЈҝ to you;
В¬ЛқГҒГғВЎГҠЕёпЈҝ I promise; ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҖ” beloved; вҖўГҒвҖҡ you are; в—ҠпЈҝ My.
Give your mind to Me, be devoted to Me, worship Me and bow to Me. Doing so, you
will come to Me alone, I truly promise you; for you are exceptionally dear to Me.
(65)
Knowing the Lord as all-powerful, all-
supporting, all-wise, all-pervading, the ruler
and inner controller of all, and a veritable
ocean of surpassing beauty, love, divinity
and other virtues, he who steadily fixes his
mind on Him with exclusive love and cannot
bear even a momentГӯs separation from Him
is said to have given his mind to Him. For a
detailed explanation of the term Г«ManmanГҘВЁГӯ
the reader is referred to the commentary on
the concluding verse of Chapter IX.
A devotee of the Lord recognizes Him
as his only supporter, master, guardian, supreme
goal and chief support, and places himself
wholly under the LordГӯs control. He does not
reserve the least freedom to himself and entirely
depends on the Lord. He remains ever
contented with every dispensation of the Lord,
obeys Him under all circumstances, and loves
Him with an undivided heart and with utmost
reverence. This is what the Lord expects
Arjuna to do when He asks Arjuna to be
devoted to Him.
A votary of the Lord offers worship to
His image with reverence, devotion and love,
by means of leaves and flowers as mentioned
in verse 26 of Chapter IX. He invokes the
LordГӯs presence with his heart and worships
the Lord mentally. He revers the LordГӯs
utterances, the scene of His sports, and His
images in everyway; and realizing the LordГӯs
presence everywhere or treating all living beings

=== PAGE 773 ===

772
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
verse of Chapter IX.
By adopting the course of discipline
indicated in the above paragraphs one is sure
to realize the almighty Lord, who is Truth,
Consciousness and Bliss solidified. What is
meant by His realization has also been pointed
out in the commentary on the concluding
verse of Chapter IX.
Arjuna was a beloved devotee and friend
of the Lord. Therefore, out of love and
kindly feelings towards him, the Lord was
anxious that Arjuna, and through him all
qualified souls, should repose unwavering
faith in the Lord. It is with this idea that He
uses the words Г¬Te satyam pratijГҘne (I truly
promise you).Г® That is to say, reposing firm
faith in the assurance of the Lord that one
who pursues the course of discipline suggested
above surely realizes Him, a man should
strive his level best to attain the qualifications
mentioned in the verse.
The words Г¬Me priyaВЁ asiГ® are intended
to justify the assurance given by the loving Lord
in the words Г¬Te satyam pratijГҘneГ®. What He
means to say is that it was His love for Arjuna
that compelled Him to give the above assurance
in order to strengthen his faith; otherwise there
was no need for Him to do so.*
Not only does the man who practises in
as His own manifestations he renders them
appropriate service and homage and treats them
with due honour and respect. All this is included
in His worship. The subject has been discussed
more fully in the commentary on verses 26 to
28 and 34 of Chapter IX.
The personal pronoun Г«MГҘmГӯ in this
verse stands for the integral Divinity or the
Supreme Person, who is all-powerful and
adorned with all virtues, who is the inner
controller and the chief support of all, who
has many aspects such as qualified and
unqualified, formless and endowed with form,
and so on. It is He who manifested Himself
in the form of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and is represented
here as delivering His gospel of the GвҲӮtГҘ to
Arjuna. It is He, again, who manifested Himself
as вҖәrвҲӮ RГҘma in the TretГҘyuga and set up the
ideal of virtue. And He is the same who
manifested Himself in the form of a man-lion
in the Satyayuga and rescued PrahlГҘda.
Prostration before any image, picture,
footprints or wooden sandals of the Lord or
before the scriptures depicting His virtues,
glory and truth, or bowing to all living beings
realizing His presence in all or regarding all
as His manifestations or living imagesГіthis
is what is meant by bowing to the Lord. The
idea has been elaborated in the concluding
* Who can glorify the high-souled Arjuna, for whose sake God Himself delivered with His own lips
the divine message of the GвҲӮtГҘ. In the Udyoga-Parva of the MahГҘbhГҘrata we read as follows:Гі
вҲһВ· ЕёГҠвҒ„UГҠГҝГЎГҠвҖ” вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠвҖ” В»В§ГҠГҖВӘГҲЕёp  ЕёвҒ„UвҖ”  Sв—ҠГҺГғвҖ” вҖ“ ЕёГҠвҒ„UГҠГҝГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ ЕёвҒ„UpГ’п¬Ӯ вҖҡГ»п¬Ӯв—ҠпЈҝвҲ‘ВўВ§ ГҒmЕ“ГҠ вҲ‘ГҺВ§Гғв—ҠЛңГ”H
  (49. 20)
Г¬вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a is the divine sage NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a Himself and Arjuna has been declared as Nara (the twin-born
brother of NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a). NГҘrГҘyaЖ’a and Nara are one life manifested in two forms.Г®
Our object here is to show how great was the love the Lord bore towards Arjuna. This itself will
indicate how dearly he was loved by Arjuna.
BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a was a close companion of Arjuna and often remained by his side even during
his excursions into the forest and his sports in water, at the royal court as well as during sacrificial
performances etc. They were on such intimate terms with each other that even in their domestic life one
came across scenes of free interchange of pure and unadulterated love between them. Returning from the
camp of the PГҘЖ’Е’avas, SaВӨjaya, King DhГҰtarГҘВ¶ВўraГӯs minister, gave the following account to his master:Гі
Г¬I have seen unique love between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and Arjuna. In order to have a talk with them I called
at their inner apartment in a most humble spirit ! I saw there the two noble souls seated on a most precious
seat, clad in rich constumes and adorned with costly jewels. In the lap of Arjuna rested the feet of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a,
while ArjunaГӯs own feet rested in the lap of DraupadвҲӮ (the common consort of the PГҘЖ’Е’avas) and SatyabhГҘmГҘ
(вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’aГӯs consort). Finding me there Arjuna pushed the gold stool from beneath his feet towards me and
beckoned to me take my seat on it. I touched it with reverence and squatted on the floor.Г®
BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a called on the PГҘЖ’Е’avas in the forest and in course of His conversation He spoke
to Arjuna thus:Гі

=== PAGE 774 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
773
a full measure all the four items mentioned
above attain God; but the practice of even one
of these can lead to God-realization. For the
Lord Himself declares in verse 14 of Chapter
VIII that He is easy of realization through mere
exclusive thought; verse 23 of Chapter VII
and verse 25 of Chapter IX state that he who
is solely devoted to the Lord eventually attains
Him; while verses 26 to 28 of Chapter IX
and verse 46 of the present chapter declare
Him as attainable through mere worship. Of
course, it is true that the specific practice of
anyone of the aforesaid times incidentally
involves the practice of other limbs too; and
the feeling of reverence and devotion is
involved in the practice of all these limbs.
в—Ҡв—ҠГ’п¬Ӯ Г п¬ӮВў 
Гғп¬ӮГ’п¬ӮГҠвҖһВўU ГҝпЈҝ 
в—ҠЕ’ГӢГҝГҠSГғп¬ӮГ’п¬Ӯ ГғпЈҝвҖ“ ГҝSГ п¬ӮГҠВў mпЈҝГҒCГ”U вҖҡ в—ҠГҠВў mпЈҝГҒCГ”U ГҝSГ п¬ӮГҠв—ҠЕёГҲ вҖҡ в—ҠГҠв—ҠЕёГҲH
(MahГҘ., Vana., XII.45)
Г¬Arjuna, you are Mine and I am yours. Those who are Mine are wholly and solely yours. In other
words, whatever is Mine belongs to you. He who is on inimical terms with you is My enemy; and whoever
is devoted to you is devoted to me.Г®
When BhвҲӮВ¶ma had mowed down the PГҘЖ’Е’ava army for nine days, YudhiВ¶Вўhira approached the Lord
at night and said to Him in great perturbation, Г¬вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, our encounter with BhвҲӮВ¶ma is just like the rushing
of moths into the burning flame for being devoured by it. Now tell me what to do.Г® To this BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a comfortingly said, Г¬Be not worried. Tell Me and I will dispose of BhвҲӮВ¶ma. Rest assured that Arjuna
will kill him.Г® Then, revealing the tie of love which bound Him to Arjuna, the Lord said:Гі
Гғп¬Ӯ Г·ЛқГҠГғГҠ в—Ҡв—Ҡ вҖҡПҖГҠ вҖҡГӘвҖҷГЈЕ“ГӢ ГҒвүҘГҠcГҝ вҲһп¬Ӯ Гё вҖ“ в—ҠГҠВўвҖҡГҠГЈГҝГҲГ вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г Гҝ Е’ГҠSГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ В»В§ГҠГҖВӘГҲЕёГҠГ•пЈҝВё в—ҠвҖһUГӢВ¬ГғпЈҝH
вҲһВ· ГёГҠГҒВ¬ ЕёвҒ„UвҲҡГҝГҠГүГҠЛқГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГ вҲ‘ГҺВ§ГғпЈҝ ВЎГӢГҒп¬ӮГғВў Г ГҝВЎпЈҝГғЛңГ”вҖ“ вҲһВ· 
ЕёвҖ” 
вҖҡв—ҠГҝSГғГҠГғ 
ГғГҠвҒ„UГҝпЈҝв—Ҡ 
В¬вҒ„USВ¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”H
(MahГҘ., BhвҲӮВ¶ma., 107.33-34)
Г¬O King ! your brother, Arjuna, is My friend, relation and disciple too. I can cut My own flesh and
part with it for the sake of Arjuna. And this tiger among men can as well lay down his life for My sake.
We have pledged our word, dear cousin, that we shall stand by each other till the end.Г®
This can furnish some clue to the tie of uncommon love that bound BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a to Arjuna.
KarЖ’a was in possession of an infallible weapon (a kind of lancet) which he had received from, Indra,
the lord of paradise. The latter had told him that the warrior at whom he hurled it would surely die. But
he could use the missile only once. KarЖ’a had kept the lancet in reserve for being used against Arjuna.
Duryodhana and others repeatedly urged him to use the missile against Arjuna and kill him outright. KarЖ’a
himself would feel inclined to do so. But as soon as he came face to face with Arjuna, BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a,
who occupied the charioteerГӯs box in the latterГӯs car, cast such a spell on KarЖ’a that he forgot to discharge
the missile. When GhaВўotkaca, BhвҲӮmaГӯs son from a demon wife, played havoc among the Kaurava army by
вҖҡп¬ӮВёЕ“в—ҠГҠВёГЈВ¬ГҒвҒ„UГ ГҝГ–Гҝ в—ҠГҠв—ҠпЈҝвҲ‘ВўВ§ вүҘГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠВў п¬ӮЛқВЎвҖ“
вҖўвҖһВўU Г п¬ӮГҠ вҖҡп¬ӮВёВ¬ГҠВ¬пЈҝГЁГҝГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҠГҒГҝcГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ в—ҠГҠ вүҘГҠГҲГёвҖ”H 66H
вҖҡп¬ӮВёЕ“в—ҠГҠВёЕёЛңГ” all duties; В¬ГҒвҒ„UГ ГҝГ–Гҝ resigning (to Me); в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me (the all-powerful and all-supporting
Lord); вҲһвҲ‘В§в—ҠЛңГ” only; вүҘГҠвҒ„UГЎГҠВў п¬ӮЛқВЎ take refuge in; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; Г п¬ӮГҠ you; вҖҡп¬ӮВёВ¬ГҠВ¬пЈҝГЁГҝвҖ” of all sins; в—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҠГҒГҝcГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ shall
absolve; в—ҠГҠ вүҘГҠГҲГёвҖ” worry not.
Resigning all your duties to Me, the all-powerful and all-supporting Lord, take
refuge in Me alone. I shall absolve you of all sins, worry not.                         (66)
The compound word Г«SarvadharmГҘnГӯ in
this verse denotes all those duties enjoined by
the вҖәГҘstras, which have been prescribed for a
particular man according to his grade in society,
stage in life, temperament and circumstances,
and which have been referred to in verse 6 of
Chapter XII as Г«SarvГҘЖ’i KarmГҘЖ’вҲӮГӯ and by the
term Г«SarvakarmГҘЖ’iГӯ in verse 57 of the present
chapter. Laying down all these duties in God
in the manner suggested in the commentary
on the verses mentioned above is what is meant
by the verb Г«ParityajyaГӯ. For, while discussing

=== PAGE 775 ===

774
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Г«ParityajyaГӯ be interpreted in the sense of
abandoning all duties.
Besides this, the Lord has commanded
Arjuna at more than one place (III.30; VIII.7;
XI.34) not to desist from fighting, which is a
sacred duty with the KВ¶atriyas, but to
participate in war resigning all duties to him.
the conception of Г«TyГҘgaГӯ in the course of this
chapter, the Lord has unequivocally declared
in verse 7 that it is not justifiable to abandon
oneГӯs allotted duties, so that giving them
up through ignorance is what has been
characterized as TГҘmasika TyГҘga. Therefore,
by no stretch of imagination can the word
his demoniac stratagems, Duryodhana and others were all unnerved. They all exclaimed with one voice,
Г¬First dispose of this wretch by hurling IndraГӯs missile, so that we may be spared. At this dead of night if
this demon finishes us all, of what avail would that missile be to us, which you have specially reserved
for Arjuna?Г® Therefore, KarЖ’a felt constrained to hurl  the missile at GhaВўotkaca, who died instantaneously.
His death cast a gloom over the entire PГҘЖ’Е’va family. BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, however, was immensely pleased.
As if maddened with joy, He clasped Arjuna to His bosom again and again. Later on He took SГҘtyaki into
His confidence and said, Г¬SГҘtyaki, on the battlefield it was I who kept KarЖ’a spell-bound. That is why he
could not discharge the missile against Arjuna so far. So long as the missile, which was capable of
despatching Arjuna, remained with KarЖ’a, I was in perpetual anxiety. Anxiety played so much on My nerves
that I could not get a wink of sleep at night, nor did I ever have a gleam of joy. Seeing that infallible weapon
used up today, I deem Arjuna to have escaped the jaws of death. Look here, My beloved parents, friends
and kinsmen like you and My own life are not dearer to Me than Arjuna. In the field of battle protection
of ArjunaГӯs life is more essential in My eyes than that of any other life. I would not barter away Arjuna
even for anything which is more valuable than the kingdom of the three worlds. Today I cannot contain
Myself for joy to see Arjuna reborn as it were.Г®
ГІГҠГ’вҲӮUГҠпЈҝГ„ГҝвҒ„UГҠГ–ГҝГҠЕ’ЛңГ” ГҝГҒГ вҲ‘В§ГҒ@Е’ЛңГ”  Г·п¬ӮпЈҝЕ’ГЈГҝГ вҖҡГҲЕ’ГҲвҲӮВёUГ·в—ҠЛңГ” вҖ“ ЕёпЈҝГ«ВҝпЈҝUГҝВў вҖҡГҠГ п¬ӮГғГҠвҖһВўU ГғГҒmЕёГҠ В¬ГҠГ•Z Е“ЕёTГҝв—ҠЛңГ”H
вҖўГғвҖ” В¬ЛқвҖһUВ·ВёвҖ” вҖҡГҲв—ҠвҖһUГҠЕёЛңГ” ГҝГҲГҝГҲЕ“ГҠЕёГҠl в—ҠпЈҝЛҳГ·п¬ӮГғЛңГ” вҖ“ в—ҠГҺГғВў 
В¬ЛқГ ГҝГҠВӘГғГҒв—Ҡп¬Ӯ 
Е’ГҺВ¶Г”UГҠ 
В¬ГҠГ•Z 
Е“ЕёTГҝв—ҠЛңГ”H
(MahГҘ., DroЖ’a., 182.44-45)
The friendship of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and Arjuna was so well-known that Duryodhana himself once said:Гі
вҖўГҠГ в—ҠГҠ ГҒвҖһU вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠвҖ” В¬ГҠГ•ВёSГҝ вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠSГҝГҠГ в—ҠГҠ Е“ЕёTГҝвҖ”вҖ“ ГҝЕ’ЛңГ” вҖҷЛқГҚГҝГҠЕ’ВЎВёГҲЕёвҖ” вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠВў вҖҡп¬ӮZ вҲ‘ГҲВ§ГҝГҠВёЕ’вҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝв—ҠЛңГ”H
вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ 
Е“ЕёTГҝSГҝГҠГ•пЈҝВё Sп¬ӮВӘВёвҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠГҒВ¬ 
Г ГҝВЎпЈҝГғЛңГ” вҖ“ ГғГ•Г’п¬Ӯ В¬ГҠГ•ВёвҖ” вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠГ•пЈҝВё В¬ЛқГҠГЎГҠГҠЕёГҒВ¬ В¬ГҒвҒ„UГ ГҝВЎпЈҝГғЛңГ”H
(MahГҘ., SabhГҘ., 52.31-33)
Г¬вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a is the soul of Arjuna and Arjuna, the soul of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a. вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a would do all that Arjuna
might ask Him to do; there is no doubt about it. вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a can forgo even the celestial world for the sake
of Arjuna; even so, Arjuna can give up his very life for вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’aГӯs sake.Г®
There are many more episodes illustrative of the ideal love between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and Arjuna. For them
the reader is referred to the relevant portions of the MahГҘbhГҘrata and вҖәrвҲӮmad BhГҘgavata.
It was due to this exceptional love of Arjuna that the Lord had to unfold to him the most hidden secret
of His integral being known by the name of PuruВ¶ottama or the Supreme Person, which is even more secret
than the all comparatively esoteric wisdom. And it was for this love that, even in the Supreme Abode of
the Lord, Arjuna obtained the most rare privilege of personal service to the Lord, which is coveted by the
greatest Vedantists and exponents of the Vedas. After his ascent to heaven the pious king YudhiВ¶Вўhira, who
had attained a super-celestial body, saw in the Supreme Abode of the Lord:Гі
Е’Е’вүҘГҠВё ГғГІГҠ 
ВӘГҠпЈҝГҒп¬ӮГЈЕ’Вў вҖҷЛқГҠrГҠГ”пЈҝГЎГҠ
п¬ӮВ¬ГҲВ·ГҠГҒГЈп¬ӮГғв—ҠЛңГ” вҖ“ Е’ГӢГҘГҝв—ҠГҠЕёВў 
Sп¬Ӯп¬ӮВ¬ГҲВ·ГҠ 
ГҒЕ’вҲҡГҝГ’вҒ„USГІГҠГ’LВ§В¬ГҒSГ•Гғв—ҠЛңГ”H
ГёвҲ‘ЛқВ§В¬ЛқГ·ГҺГҒГғГҒГ·ГүГҠГҠпЈҝвҒ„Г’UГҒЕ’ВёвҲҡГҝГ’вҖ” 
    В¬ГҲLВ§В·ГҒп¬ӮВӘЛқвҖһГ’UвҖ”вҖ“ В©UВ¬ГҠSГҝв—ҠГҠЕёВў 
п¬ӮГӢвҒ„пЈҝUГЎГҠ 
В»В§ГҠГҖВӘГҲЕёпЈҝЕё 
Sп¬Ӯп¬ӮГёВёвҖҡГҠH
(MahГҘ., Swarga., IV.2-4)
Г¬BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ Govinda is endowed there with His own Brahmic or purely spiritual Body, which is
all refulgence. His divine weapons as the Discus, and other formidable missiles are waiting upon Him in
their super-celestial human semblances ! The most glorious and heroic Arjuna is also attending upon Him.Г®
Such is the Г«supreme rewardГӯ of carefully hearing, grasping and assimilating the philosophy of the GвҲӮtГҘ. And
it is quite in the fitness of things that a man like Arjuna, who was not only self-controlled, most selfless,
talented and wise but also the supremely beloved friend, servant and disciple of the Lord, should obtain
the Г«supreme reward.Гӯ

=== PAGE 776 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
775
by taking refuge in the Lord. The idea has
been clearly brought out in the commentary
on verse 6 of Chapter XII, the concluding verse
of Chapter IX and verse 57 of this very chapter.
The word Г«PГҘpaГӯ forming part of the
compound word Г«SarvapГҘpebhyaВЁГӯ in this
verse stands for the bondage of action in the
shape of fruits of good and evil deeds, under
which this JвҲӮva or embodied soul has been
revolving from birth to birth through different
species of life; and the absolution from sins
referred to here consists in freeing one from
the above bondage. Therefore, the idea
underlying the freedom from sins promised
by the Lord is the same as has been conveyed
in verse 31 of Chapter III by the words
Г«KarmabhiВЁ mucyanteГӯ by the words
Г«MГҰtyusaвүҲsГҘrasГҘgarГҘt samuddhartГҘ bhavГҘmi,
in verse 7 of Chapter XII, and by the words
Г«MatprasГҘdГҘt sarvadurgГҘЖ’вҲӮ tariВ¶yasiГӯ in verse
58 of the present chapter.
The Lord winds up the teaching of the
GвҲӮtГҘ by comforting Arjuna in the words Г¬MГҘ
вҖәucaВЁГ® (worry not). Concluding with these
words the teaching which He commenced in
verse 11 of Chapter II with the words
Г«AвҖ№ocyГҘnГӯ (not worth grieving for), the Lord
exhorts Arjuna, who had already betaken
himself to Him, to surrender himself completely
and thereby be rid of all worries, and having
shed all grief and fear, abandon himself to
His care for ever. This total absence of sorrow
and realization of God form the principal
theme of the GвҲӮtГҘ.
And having carefully listened to the GвҲӮtГҘ,
Arjuna himself not only expresses his
willingness to do His bidding in verse 73 of
the present chapter, but actually participated
in the MahГҘbhГҘrata war and thus discharged
his 
sacred 
obligation. 
Г«SarvadharmГҘn
parityajyaГӯ should, therefore, be taken to mean
laying down all oneГӯs duties in the Lord, and
not actually giving them up. And the man who
has laid down his duties in the Lord, regards
everything as belonging to Him; and
completely renouncing the feeling of Г«IГӯ and
Г«mineГӯ, as well as attachment and desire in
respect of his mind, senses and body and with
regard to all actions performed by them as well
as to their fruit, continues to perform such duties
only for His sake and according to His behests
and prompting like a mere tool in His hands.
Having resigned all his duties to God in
the above manner, the devotee who has solely
taken refuge in the Lord regards Him as his
supreme goal, safest retreat, chief support,
dearest object of love, greatest wellwisher, most
intimate friend and nearest relative, and looks
upon Him as his supporter, lord and guardian.
He constantly thinks of Him at all times with
supreme reverence and exclusive love even
while sitting or standing, awake or asleep,
eating and drinking, walking and moving from
one place to another and carrying out His
behests in every way. He ever remains
contented with His dispensation and like the
celebrated devotee, PrahlГҘda, entirely depends
on Him and Him alone. All this is covered
Having thus concluded the teaching of the GвҲӮtГҘ, the Lord now seeks to glorify the teaching
and the study etc. of this gospel and with this end in view He first points out the marks of him
who is unqualified for the same and forbids Arjuna to impart the teaching to such a man.
ГҹЕ’Вў ГғпЈҝ ЕёГҠГғВ¬SвҲ‘В§ГҠГҝ ЕёГҠГ·QВ§ГҠГҝ вҲ‘В§Е’ГҠГёЕёвҖ“
Её ГёГҠвүҘГҠГҲГјГҠГҚВ·п¬ӮпЈҝ п¬ӮГҠГ«ГҝВў Её Гё в—ҠГҠВў ГҝГҠпЈҝЛҳГЁГҝвҖҡГҚГҝГҒГғH 67H
ГҹЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” this (secret gospel of the GвҲӮtГҘ); ГғпЈҝ by you; Её neither; вҖўГғВ¬SвҲ‘В§ГҠГҝ to a man who lacks
in austerity; Её nor; вҖўГ·QВ§ГҠГҝ to him wo is not devoted; вҲ‘В§Е’ГҠГёЕё never; Её Гё nor again; вҖўвүҘГҠГҲГјГҠГҚВ·п¬ӮпЈҝ
to him who is unwilling to hear; п¬ӮГҠГ«Гҝв—ҠЛңГ” should be imparted; Её never (should it be imparted);
Гё and; в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; ГҝвҖ” who (to him); вҖўГЁГҝвҖҡГҚГҝГҒГғ finds fault with.
This secret gospel of the GвҲӮtГҘ should never be imparted to a man who lacks in

=== PAGE 777 ===

776
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
austerity, nor to him who is wanting in devotion, nor even to him who is not willing
to hear; and in no case to him who finds fault with Me.
 (67)
who regards himself as everything. The most
esoteric gospel of the GвҲӮtГҘ should not be
delivered to such a man either; for being
incapable of grasping its secret he would be
unable to assimilate it.
Even if a man practises austerity in the
shape of performing his sacred duties, but
having no reverence and love for the teaching
of the GвҲӮtГҘ does not care to lend his ear to it,
this most esoteric gospel should not be delivered
to him. For a man of this type would get
disgusted with it, and would not be able to
appreciate it. Thereby he would only belittle
the teaching as well as the Lord.
In no case should this teaching be related
to a man who cavils at the Lord,Гіwho has
assumed a form with attributes for redeeming
the world,Гіwho paints His virtues as a vice
and vilifies Him. For, being jealous of the
LordГӯs virtues, glory and divinity, he would
treat the Lord with even greater contempt
and thereby aggravate his sin.
He who is free from all the four
disqualifications mentioned in this verse is
unquestionably fully qualified to receive this
gospel. Next to him, he who lacks penance
in the form of devotion to his duty, but is free
from the other three disqualifications is also
eligible for it. And he too who is neither
given to austerity nor fully devoted to the
Lord, but who is willing to hear the GвҲӮtГҘ, is
qualified to a certain extent. He, however,
who looks on the Lord with a carping eye or
vilifies Him is absolutely unqualified.
The demonstrative pronoun Г«IdamГӯ in this
verse covers the entire range of the LordГӯs
teachings imparted to Arjuna from verse 11 of
Chapter II to the preceding verse with a view
to expounding the truth of His own virtues,
glory, mystery and essential character. In order
to determine the eligibility for receiving this
gospel the Lord forbids Arjuna to repeat it to
those who labour under the four disqualifications
mentioned in this verse. Out of the four types
of unqualified persons referred to above the
Lord mentions first of all him who lacks austerity.
By shutting out such a man from the portals of
the GвҲӮtГҘ, the Lord seeks to impress upon Arjuna
that the gospel of the GвҲӮtГҘ is an extremely
profound secret, that Arjuna was His most
loving devotee and endowed with divine
virtues, hence He had confided it to him in his
own interest, recognizing him as qualified to
receive it. Therefore He warns Arjuna not to
repeat the GвҲӮtГҘ, replete as it is with an exposition
of His virtues, glory and reality, to a man who
is not given to austerity in the form of discharging
his own sacred obligations, who having
abandoned his duty has given himself over to
sinful ways out of greed for worldly pleasures
due to attachment for sensuous enjoyments.
For such a man would be incapable of
assimilating this teaching and would thereby
bring dishonour to the same as well as to the
Lord Himself.
The compound word Г«AbhaktГҘyaГӯ stands
for the unbeliever who has no faith in God,
much less love or reverence for Him, and
Having thus pointed out the marks of him who is unqualified to receive the gospel of
the GвҲӮtГҘ, the Lord now tells Arjuna in the following two verses the reward and value of
propagating it among His devotees.
Гҝ Гҹв—ҠВў В¬вҒ„в—ҠВў ВӘГҲsГ”Вў в—ҠjQпЈҝВ§cп¬ӮГҒГ·Е“ГҠSГҝГҒГғвҖ“
Г·ГҒQВўВ§ в—ҠГҒГҝ В¬вҒ„UГҠВў вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г п¬ӮГҠ в—ҠГҠв—ҠпЈҝп¬ӮГ’cГҝГ ГҝвҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝвҖ”H 68H
ГҝвҖ” (he) who; Гҹв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” this (gospel of the GвҲӮtГҘ); В¬вҒ„Uв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” ВӘГҲsГ”в—ҠЛңГ” most secret; в—ҠjQпЈҝВ§В·ГҲ among My
devotees; вҖўГҒГ·Е“ГҠSГҝГҒГғ will preach; Г·ГҒQВ§в—ҠЛңГ” love; в—ҠГҒГҝ to Me; В¬вҒ„UГҠв—ҠЛңГ” supreme; вҲ‘ГҺВ§Г п¬ӮГҠ having offered;
в—ҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” Me; вҲһп¬Ӯ alone; вҲһcГҝГҒГғ shall come to; вҖўвҖҡВўвүҘГҠГҝвҖ” without doubt.

=== PAGE 778 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
777
He who, offering the highest love to Me, preaches the most profound gospel of the
GвҲӮtГҘ among My devotees, shall come to Me alone; there is no doubt about it.
(68)
reverence for the Lord Himself or His
utterances, a devotee of God is overwhelmed
with love by the thought of His name, virtues,
sports, glory and essential character and
preaches the gospel of the GвҲӮtГҘ among His
devotees in a disinterested spirit for the sake
of His pleasure alone. That is to say, he gives
them lessons on the original text of the GвҲӮtГҘ,
explains the meaning of its verses, helps them
recite the text with correct intonation, brings
out and elucidates the ideas contained in it,
resolves the doubts of his audience and
inculcates the truth of the GвҲӮtГҘ upon their mind
and awakens in them a strong impulse to
translate into practice the teaching of the GвҲӮtГҘ.
All this is covered by preaching the gospel of
the  GвҲӮtГҘ among His devotees with supreme
devotion to Him.
A devotee of God, who propagates the
ideas of the Lord among those who are
qualified to receive them, in a disinterested
spirit and with the sole object of attaining
devotion to Him, doubtless reaches Him.
That is to say, the above is an unfailing
means to His realization; hence those qualified
devotees who seek to attain Him must
undertake the mission of preaching and
popularizing the gospel of the GвҲӮtГҘ.
The demonstrative adjective Г«ImamГӯ in
this verse refers to the entire gospel of the
GвҲӮtГҘ. The use of the adjectives Г«ParamamГӯ
and Г«GuhyamГӯ with reference to it is intended
to show that this teaching, inasmuch as it
secures freedom from the bondage of worldly
existence and leads one to realize God Himself,
is superb and esoteric.
Endowed with faith in God, His devotees
recognize Him as responsible for the  creation,
maintenance and destruction of the whole
universe, all-powerful and the universal Lord,
and love Him accordingly. They are eager to
hear of His virtues, glory, pastimes and reality,
and are delighted to hear the same. Such
devotees are referred to here by the term
Г«MadbhakteВ¶uГӯ. The use of this compound word
is intended to determine the eligibility for
receiving the gospel of the GвҲӮtГҘ. The idea is
that the devotee of God is automatically freed
from all the four disqualifications referred to
in the preceding verse. Therefore, a devotee
of the Lord is the only fit recipient of this gospel
and every person, to whatever grade in society
and to whatever caste he may belong, can be
a devotee of God (IX.32). Hence the caste,
creed and nationality etc., of a man are no
bar to his eligibility. Possessed of extreme
Её Гё ГғSв—ҠГҠГЈв—ҠЕёГҲcГҝпЈҝВ·ГҲ вҲ‘В§ГҒpГЈв—ҠпЈҝ ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҲ‘ГҺВ§Г»ГҠв—ҠвҖ”вҖ“
Г·ГҒп¬ӮГғГҠ Её Гё в—ҠпЈҝ ГғSв—ҠГҠЕ’ГЈГҝвҖ” ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝГғвҒ„UГҠпЈҝ Г·ГҲГҒп¬ӮH 69H
Её Гё there is not; ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” than he; в—ҠЕёГҲcГҝпЈҝВ·ГҲ among human beings; вҲ‘В§ГҒpГғЛңГ” anyone; в—ҠпЈҝ ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝвҲ‘ГҺВ§Г»ГҠв—ҠвҖ”
doing a more loving service to Me; Г·ГҒп¬ӮГғГҠ shall be; Её neither; Гё and; в—ҠпЈҝ Me; ГғSв—ҠГҠГғЛңГ” than he;
вҖўГЈГҝвҖ” (anyone) else; ГҒВ¬ЛқГҝГғвҒ„UвҖ” dearer to; Г·ГҲГҒп¬Ӯ in the entire world.
Among men there is none who does Me a more loving service than he; nor shall
anyone be dearer to Me in the entire world than he.                                (69)
The personal pronoun Г«TasmГҘtГӯ in this
verse refers to the pious and loving devotee
of God, who has deep knowledge of the GвҲӮtГҘ
and preaches its gospel among His devotees
as mentioned in the foregoing verses.
Dissemination of His ideas among His
devotees is dearer to the Lord than all other
duties that endear one to Him, such as the

=== PAGE 779 ===

778
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
mentioned above, does not refer to the present
alone, it is equally true of the future as well.
That is to say, it is hardly possible that
anyone would be dearer to Him even at a
future date. For when no other service is
dearer to the Lord than the one in which he
is engaged, how could anyone be more
beloved of Him through any other practice ?
Therefore, of all the practices helpful to His
realization, the mission of devoutly propagating
His ideas among His devotees is the best. It
is with this belief that the Lord expects His
devotees to proceed with this noble work.
This is what He seeks to convey in the latter
half of the verse.
performance of sacrifices and penance and
practice of charity, service, worship, Japa
(the repetition of sacred formulas) and
meditation etc.; nothing in this world is so
dear to the Lord as the mission referred to
above. Therefore, he who disseminates His
ideas among His devotees with reverence
and devotion is dearer to Him than anyone
else; none is dearer than he. Completely
neglecting his own interests, he does only
that which is dear to the Lord, hence he is
exceptionally dear to Him. This is what is
meant by the first half of this verse.
The proclamation of the Lord that no
one is dearer to Him than the devotee
In this way in the preceding two verses the Lord pointed out the reward and value  of
propagating among His devotees the gospel of the GвҲӮtГҘ in a reverent and devout spirit.
Everyone, however, is not equal to the task; scarce anyone is qualified for it. Hence He now
proceeds to glorify the study of the GвҲӮtГҘ.
вҖўГӨГҝпЈҝcГҝГғпЈҝ Гё Гҝ Гҹв—ҠВў Е“ГӘГҝZ вҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’в—ҠГҠп¬ӮГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ”вҖ“
ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҝГҙГҠпЈҝЕё ГғпЈҝЕёГҠвҖһUГҒв—ҠCГ”UвҖ” SГҝГҠГҒв—ҠГҒГғ в—ҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҒГғвҖ”H 70H
вҖўГӨГҝпЈҝcГҝГғпЈҝ will study; Гё as well; ГҝвҖ” whosoever; Гҹв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” this; Е“ГӘГҝВёв—ҠЛңГ” sacred; вҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” вҖўГҠп¬ӮГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” our
dialogue (in the form of the GвҲӮtГҘ); ГҙГҠГҠЕёГҝГҙГҠпЈҝЕё through, wisdom-sacrifice; ГғпЈҝЕё by him; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; ГҹCГ”UвҖ”
SГҝГҠв—ҠЛңГ” shall be worshipped; ГҹГҒГғ such (is); в—ҠпЈҝ My; в—ҠГҒГғвҖ” conviction.
Whosoever studies this sacred dialogue of ours in the form of the GвҲӮtГҘ, by him too
shall I be worshipped through YajВӨa of knowledge; such is My conviction.                 (70)
The demonstrative adjective Г«ImamГӯ along
with the words Г«Г…vayoВЁ saвүҲvГҘdamГӯ here
refers to the text of the GвҲӮtГҘ in the form of a
dialogue between Arjuna and BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a, which has been characterized in verse
68 above as Г«Paramam guhyamГӯ (the most
esoteric gospel). The use of the adjective
Г«DharmyamГӯ with reference to it is intended
to convey that the gospel in question has
been delivered by the divine Lord Himself;
hence whatever has been taught therein is
replete with virtue from beginning to end. It
contains nothing which offends against
righteousness or which is superfluous.
Therefore, it is the paramount duty of man to
follow the teachings embodied in it.
Receiving lessons on the holy GвҲӮtГҘ from
the devotees of God who are conversant
with its inner meaning, reciting it daily, going
through its translation in oneГӯs own language,
pondering over its meaning and striving to
grasp the same with the help of those who
are in the know of it,Гіpractice of all these is
included in the study of this scripture.
Going through the translation of the GвҲӮtГҘ
side by side with reciting the text, and daily
recitation of the GвҲӮtГҘ with an eye to its meaning
is much better than going through the text or
daily reciting it without following its meaning;
and it is still better to be overwhelmed with
love and get imbued with its spirit while going
through or reciting the text in an intelligent way.

=== PAGE 780 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
779
wisdom-sacrifice. The practice in the form of
this wisdom-sacrifice has been recognized as
far superior to other practices carried on with
the help of material substances (IV.33); for
all practices culminate in the knowledge of
the truth about God. And this consummation
is easily reached through the wisdom-sacrifice
referred to above, hence a seeker of beatitude
should whole-heartedly devote himself to study
of the GвҲӮtГҘ.
The latter half of this verse is intended
to reveal the value of studying the GвҲӮtГҘ in the
aforesaid manner. The idea is that a study of
this scripture enables one to acquaint oneself
correctly and fully with the truth about the
absolute and relative, as well as the manifest
and unmanifest, aspects of the Divinity.
Therefore, whoever studies the GвҲӮtГҘ with the
object of grasping the truth about the Lord
will be deemed to worship Him through
Having thus pointed out the value of a study of the holy GвҲӮtГҘ, the Lord now declares
the reward of hearing it in the case of those who are unable to study it in the above manner.
ГјГҠhГҠп¬ӮГҠЕёЕёвҖҡГҚГҝp oГҺГЎГҠГҲГҝГҠЕ’ГҒВ¬ ГҝГҠпЈҝ ЕёвҒ„UвҖ”вҖ“
вҖҡГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒВ¬ в—ҠГҲQВ§вҖ” вүҘГҠГҲГ·ГҠВ°ГҖвҖ№ГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠГЈВ¬ЛқГҠВ¬AГҲГҝГҠГ В¬ГҲГЎГҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ”UH 71H
ГјГҠhГҠп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” possessed of reverence; вҖўЕёвҖҡГҚГҝвҖ” free from cavilling; Гё and; oГҺГЎГҠГҲГҝГҠГғЛңГ” should hear
(the holy GвҲӮtГҘ); вҖўГҒВ¬ even; ГҝвҖ” ЕёвҒ„UвҖ” the man who; вҖҡвҖ” he; вҖўГҒВ¬ too; в—ҠГҲQВ§вҖ” absolved of (sins); вүҘГҠГҲГ·ГҠЕёЛңГ”
вҲӮUГҠпЈҝвҲ‘В§ГҠЕёЛңГ” the happy worlds; В¬ЛқГҠВ¬AГҲГҝГҠГғЛңГ” shall attain to; В¬ГҲГЎГҝвҲ‘В§в—ҠВёГЎГҠГҠв—ҠЛңГ” of the virtuous.
The man who listens to the holy GвҲӮtГҘ with reverence and in an uncarping spirit,Гі
liberated from sin, he too shall reach the happy worlds of the virtuous.           (71)
To say nothing of him who preaches
the gospel of the GвҲӮtГҘ among others as
mentioned in verse 68, or of him who studies
it himself as referred to in verse 70 above,
even he who is merely able to hear it with
faith is absolved of sin. Therefore, he who is
unable to preach or even study it himself
should make it a point at least to hear it.
The man who is thus given to hearing the
GвҲӮtГҘ is rid of all sins committed in successive
previous lives,Гіwhich bring about oneГӯs birth
among low-born creatures such as beasts and
birds etc., and throw one into the infernal
regions,Гіand obtains a residence in the higher
worlds from IndraГӯs heaven onward to the
supreme abode of God according to the degree
of his faith and devotion. This is what is meant
by the latter half of this verse.
The use of the word Г«NaraВЁГӯ is intended
to show that he who lacks the inclination
even to hear with reverence the holy GвҲӮtГҘ
hardly deserves to be called a human being;
for his human birth is proving fruitless.
Therefore, he is only a beast in human form.
Believing in the existence of God as
well as in His virtues and glory, and with a
firm conviction that the holy GвҲӮtГҘ is the word
of God Himself, and that whatever has been
said therein is absolute truth, and reposing
faith in the exponent of the GвҲӮtГҘ, the man
who hears the original text or its exposition
with love and eagerness is referred to here by
the word Г«вҖәraddhГҘvГҘnГӯ. And Г«AnasВөuyaВЁГӯ is
he who does not find fault with the Lord or
His utterance nor shows disrespect in any
form to the holy GвҲӮtГҘ while hearing it.
Having thus glorified the preaching, recitation and hearing of the holy GвҲӮtГҘ, the Lord
now enquires of Arjuna his reactions to the above, just in order to awaken him to his real
situation, although He knew everything Himself.
вҲ‘В§ГҒГ¬ГҠЕ’пЈҝГғГ«ВҝЛӣвҖ°UГғВў В¬ГҠГ•Вё Г п¬ӮГҝГ’вҲ‘В§ГҠВӘЛқпЈҝГЎГҠ ГёпЈҝГғвҖҡГҠвҖ“
вҲ‘В§ГҒГ¬ГҠЕ’ГҙГҠГҠЕёвҖҡГӘв—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUвҖ” В¬ЛқЕёcвүҲSГғпЈҝ Е“ЕёTГҝH 72H

=== PAGE 781 ===

780
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
вҲ‘В§ГҒГ¬ГҠГғЛңГ” whether; вҲһГғГғЛңГ” this (gospel of the GвҲӮtГҘ); ГјГҠГҲГғв—ҠЛңГ” has been heard; В¬ГҠГ•Вё O son of
PГҰthГҘ (KuntвҲӮ), Arjuna; Г п¬ӮГҝГҠ by you; вҲһвҲ‘В§ГҠВӘЛқпЈҝГЎГҠ ГёпЈҝГғвҖҡГҠ with one-pointed mind; вҲ‘В§ГҒГ¬ГҠГғЛңГ” whether;
вҖўГҙГҠГҠЕёвҖҡГӘв—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUвҖ” delusion born of ignorance; В¬ЛқЕёCГ”UвҖ” has disappeared; ГғпЈҝ your; Е“ЕёTГҝ O conquerer
of riches, Arjuna.
Have you, O Arjuna, heard this gospel of the GвҲӮtГҘ attentively? And has your
delusion born of ignorance been destroyed, O DhanaВӨjaya, conquerer of riches? (72)
he had preferred to live on alms abandoning
all his duties (II.5), how he had felt perturbed
at the thought of killing his own kinsmen
(I.45-47) and how he had been at a loss to
determine the course of his action (II.6-7),Гі
which had all been due to his mind being
warped by infatuation,Гіand was accordingly
anxious to know whether that infatuation had
left him. Should he have given an attentive
ear to His teaching, his mind must have been
cleared of the cloud of infatuation. And in
case it had not been dispelled, that clearly
showed absence of attentiveness on his part.
The above two questions of the Lord
are impregnated with the lesson that a man
should devote himself to the study and hearing
of the holy GвҲӮtГҘ with a careful and attentive
mind; and till he is completely disabused of
the delusion born of his ignorance he should
think that he has not correctly grasped the
teaching of the Lord, so that it is essential to
ponder it with reverence.
The demonstrative pronoun Г«EtatГӯ in this
verse covers the entire range of the most
esoteric divine teaching imparted by the Lord
from verse 11 of Chapter II to verse 66 of the
present chapter. It is in order to impress upon
Arjuna the importance of this teaching that
the Lord asks him the question embodied in
the first half of this verse. The idea is that the
above teaching of the Lord is something very
rare; He could not declare His divinity to
everybody or ask anyone and everyone to
seek refuge in Him. He, therefore, was naturally
anxious to know whether Arjuna had carefully
and attentively heard His teachings; for should
he have missed it, he would have certainly
committed an egregious blunder.
Now, if Arjuna had carefully heard the
teaching, it must have borne its fruit. He,
therefore, reminded Arjuna how he had
complained of his being puzzled about his
duty (II.7), how he had reckoned it a sin to
discharge his sacred obligation (I.36), how
Thus enquired by the Lord, Arjuna conveys his reactions to Him, expressing his gratitude.
вҖўВЎГҲВёЕё В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
ЕёCГ”UГҠпЈҝ в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUвҖ” Sв—ҠГҺГҒГғвҲӮВёUГ©Е“ГҠ Г п¬ӮГ В¬ЛқвҖҡГҠЕ’ГҠГЈв—ҠГҝГҠГ«ГҝГҲГғвҖ“
ГҒSГ•ГғГҠпЈҝЛҳГҒSв—Ҡ ВӘГғвҖҡГЈЕ’пЈҝвҖһUвҖ” вҲ‘В§ГҒвҒ„UcГҝпЈҝ п¬ӮГёЕёВў Гғп¬ӮH 73H
ЕёCГ”UвҖ” is dispelled; в—ҠГҠпЈҝвҖһUвҖ” (my) delusion; Sв—ҠГҺГҒГғвҖ” wisdom; вҲӮUГ©Е“ГҠ gained; Г п¬ӮГ В¬ЛқвҖҡГҠЕ’ГҠГғЛңГ” by Your
grace; в—ҠГҝГҠ by me; вҖўГ«ГҝГҲГғ O infallible Lord; ГҒSГ•ГғвҖ” вҖўГҒSв—Ҡ I stand; ВӘГғвҖҡГЈЕ’пЈҝвҖһUвҖ” freed from doubt;
вҲ‘В§ГҒвҒ„UcГҝпЈҝ will do; п¬ӮГёЕёв—ҠЛңГ” bidding; Гғп¬Ӯ Your.
Arjuna said: KГҰВ¶Ж’a, by Your grace my delusion has gone and I have gained
wisdom. I am free of all doubts. I will do Your bidding.
 (73)
Arjuna has now come to realize that вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a is the immutable Absolute, the supreme
Spirit and the almighty and immortal God.
This is what he seeks to convey by addressing
Him as Г«AcyutaГӯ (infallible Lord).
Arjuna gratefully answers the question
of the Lord, contained in the preceding verse,
in the words Г«NaВ¶ВўaВЁ MohaВЁГӯ. Arjuna thereby
acknowledges his immense obligation to the
Lord for the divine gospel so kindly delivered

=== PAGE 782 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
781
about the virtues, glory and divinity of the
Lord, and His absolute and relative as well as
the manifest and unmanifest aspects, and even
so about the nature of virtue and sin, and
about what he should do and what he should
abstain from, etc. In other words, all his doubts
had been resolved, and in consequence of it
the unsteadiness of his mind had completely
vanished. This is what Arjuna means by the
words Г¬SthitaВЁ asmi gatasandehaВЁГ®.
Lastly, Arjuna felt that by the LordГӯs
grace he had attained the object of his life,
and thus had no duty left for him. Therefore,
he was prepared to do as the Lord bade him
and would perform all his duties such as
fighting etc., in the interest of the world order
according to His directions by way of sport
as a mere instrument. This is the idea conveyed
by the words Г¬KariВ¶ye vacanam tavaГ®.
by Him, and assures the Lord that his
delusion,Гіwhich was due to his want of
correct knowledge about the LordГӯs virtues,
glory, divinity and essential character, and
which prevented him from carrying out the
LordГӯs behests (II.9) and  flustered him at the
thought of the impending destruction of his
kinsmen (I.28-47),Гіhad completely been
destroyed.
With the disappearance of delusion, born
of his ignorance, the light of divine wisdom
had dawned in his mind, the memory of the
virtues, glory, divinity and essential character
of the Lord had been fully awakened, and
His integral being had been revealed to him,
leaving nothing unknown to him. This is
what Arjuna seeks to impress on the Lord by
the words Г«SmГҰtiВЁ LabdhГҘГӯ.
Arjuna had now no doubt left in his mind
Having thus repeated the holy GвҲӮtГҘ in the form of a dialogue between BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a and Arjuna in response to the enquiry from DhГҰtarГҘВ¶Вўra, SaВӨjaya now reveals to his
master the glory of the GвҲӮtГҘ in the following two verses while concluding his message.
вҖҡTГҝ В©Uп¬ӮГҠГё
ГҹГ ГҝвҖһВўU п¬ӮГҠвҖҡГҲЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮSГҝ В¬ГҠГ•ВёSГҝ Гё в—ҠвҖһUГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ”вҖ“
вҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’ГҒв—Ҡв—Ҡв—ҠГјГҠГҠГ’В·в—ҠjГҲГғВў 
вҒ„UГҠпЈҝв—ҠвҖһUВ·ВёГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ”H 74H
ГҹГҒГғ thus; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; п¬ӮГҠвҖҡГҲЕ’пЈҝп¬ӮSГҝ of VГҘsudeva, вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a; В¬ГҠГ•ВёSГҝ Arjuna, son of PГҰthГҘ (KuntвҲӮ);
Гё and; в—ҠвҖһUГҠГ в—ҠЕёвҖ” of the high-souled; вҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” conversation; Гҹв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” this; вҖўГјГҠГҠГ’В·в—ҠЛңГ” heard; вҖўЕ’ЛңГ”Г·ГҲГғв—ҠЛңГ”
mysterious; вҒ„UГҠпЈҝв—ҠвҖһUВ·ВёГЎГҠв—ҠЛңГ” (and) thrilling (lit., making the hair stand on their ends).
SaВӨjaya said: Thus I heard the mysterious and thrilling conversation between вҖәrвҲӮ
KГҰВ¶Ж’a and the high-souled Arjuna, son of KuntвҲӮ.                                     (74)
The particle Г«ItiГӯ marks the conclusion
of the gospel of the GвҲӮtГҘ.
The use of the epithet Г«VГҘsudevaГӯ (lit.,
the all-pervading Spirit) for вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and of
the qualification Г«MahГҘtmГҘГӯ (high-souled or
noble-minded) with reference to Arjuna is
intended to glorify the GвҲӮtГҘ. The idea is that
this gospel has been preached by вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a,
who is no other than the all-pervading Divinity,
the indweller of all hearts, in response to the
enquiry from Arjuna, who is an incarnation
of the divine sage Nara; hence it is highly
valuable. No other sacred teaching can bear
comparison with it; for it is the quintessence
of all scriptures or sacred books.*
The dialogue between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and
* ВӘГӢГғГҠ вҖҡГҲВӘГӢГғГҠ вҲ‘В§ГғВёвҲҡГҝГҠ ГҒвҲ‘В§в—ҠГЈГҝГ’вҖ” вүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮSГғвҒ„Г’вҖ”вҖ“ ГҝГҠ Sп¬ӮГҝВў В¬kЕёГҠГ·SГҝ в—ҠГҲПҖВ¬kГҠГҒmГҒЕёвҖ”вҖҡГҺГғГҠH (MahГҘ., BhвҲӮВ¶ma, 43.1)
Г¬The GвҲӮtГҘ alone should be heard and chanted, studied and taught, as well as pondered and assimilated;
collections of other scriptures are of no avail. For the GвҲӮtГҘ has flowed from the lotus-like lips of no other
than BhagavГҘn ViВ¶Ж’u, who bears a lotus on His navel.Г®

=== PAGE 783 ===

782
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
Arjuna has been spoken of as mysterious
because it enables one to realize the integral
Divinity, possessed of wonderful and
transcendent virtues, glory and supernatural
powers. And even as a man hears and
understands it, he is filled with delight and
wonder, which make his hair stand on end.
Hence it has been called Г«RomaharВ¶aЖ’amГӯ.
SaВӨjaya feels proud that he has been able to
hear with his own ears such a wonderful dialogue.
вҲҡГҝГҠвҖҡВ¬ЛқвҖҡГҠЕ’ГҠГ«ВҝЛӣвҖ°UГғп¬ӮГҠЕёпЈҝГғeГҲsГ”в—ҠвҖһВўU 
В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘВў ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝEвҒ„UГҠГ вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠГ вҖҡГҠЛҮГҠГҠГ вҲ‘В§Г•ГҝГғвҖ” Sп¬ӮГҝв—ҠЛңГ”H 75H
вҲҡГҝГҠвҖҡВ¬ЛқвҖҡГҠЕ’ГҠГғЛңГ” (having been blessed with the divine vision) by the grace of вҖәrвҲӮ VyГҘsa;
ГјГҠГҲГғп¬ӮГҠЕёЛңГ” have heard; вҲһГғГғЛңГ” this; ВӘГҲsГ”в—ҠЛңГ” esoteric; вҖўвҖһUв—ҠЛңГ” I; В¬вҒ„Uв—ҠЛңГ” supremely; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘв—ҠЛңГ” Yoga or wisdom;
ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝEвҒ„UГҠГғЛңГ” from BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a; вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠГғЛңГ” the Lord of Yoga; вҖҡГҠЛҮГҠГҠГғЛңГ” in person; вҲ‘В§Г•ГҝГғвҖ”
imparting (it to Arjuna); Sп¬ӮГҝв—ҠЛңГ” Himself.
Having been blessed with the divine vision by the grace of вҖәrвҲӮ VyГҘsa, I heard in
person this supremely esoteric gospel from the Lord of Yoga, вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a Himself,
imparting it to Arjuna.
 (75)
The use of the compound word
Г«VyГҘsaprasГҘdГҘtГӯ is intended to express
SaВӨjayaГӯs gratitude towards MaharВ¶i VyГҘsa,
who had so kindly gifted him with the divine
vision, i.e., with the supernatural faculties of
seeing what is out of sight, hearing what is
out of hearing and grasping what is out of
oneГӯs mental grasp. It was due to that
supernatural gift that SaВӨjaya was enabled to
hear the divine gospel of the GвҲӮtГҘ, which he
was otherwise incapable of hearing.
The demonstrative pronoun Г«EtatГӯ stands
here for the holy GвҲӮtГҘ in the form of the
above dialogue between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and Arjuna.
The use of the adjective Г«ParamamГӯ with
reference to it is intended to bring out its
superb character; and Г«GuhyamГӯ points to its
esoteric nature, i.e., bangs its doors against
the unqualified. The third adjective Г«YogamГӯ
indicates that the gospel contains a detailed
exposition 
of 
Karmayoga, 
JВӨГҘnayoga,
DhyГҘnayoga, Bhaktiyoga and other practices
leading to God-realization; and the gospel
itself, i.e., even its devout recitation is an
independent means of realizing God and hence
deserves the title of Г«YogaГӯ.
Lastly, SaВӨjaya tells DhГҰtarГҘВ¶Вўra that the
GвҲӮtГҘ, which he had just repeated to the King,
had not been received by him through a third
agency but directly from the lotus-like lips of
the almighty Lord вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, the controller of
all Yogic powers.
Having thus revealed the value of hearing the most rare gospel of the GвҲӮtГҘ, SaВӨjaya,
while expressing his own reactions, glorifies the recollection of that gospel.
вҒ„UГҠВЎГЈвҖҡВўSв—ҠГҺГ Гҝ вҖҡВўSв—ҠГҺГ Гҝ вҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’ГҒв—Ҡв—Ҡв—ҠjГҲГғв—ҠЛңГ”вҖ“
вҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠп¬ӮГҠВЎВёГҲЕёГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” В¬ГҲГЎГҝВў NUcГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ Гё в—ҠГҲвҖһГҲUв—ҠГҲВёвҖһГҲUвҖ”H 76H
вҒ„UГҠВЎЕёЛңГ” O king; вҖҡВўSв—ҠГҺГ Гҝ вҖҡВўSв—ҠГҺГ Гҝ recollecting again and again; вҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’в—ҠЛңГ” conversation; Гҹв—Ҡв—ҠЛңГ” this;
вҖўjГҲГғв—ҠЛңГ” marvellous; вҲ‘пЈҝВ§вүҘГҠп¬ӮГҠВЎВёГҲЕёГҝГҠпЈҝвҖ” between BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and Arjuna; В¬ГҲГЎГҝв—ҠЛңГ” sacred; NUcГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ
I rejoice; Гё and; в—ҠГҲвҖһГҲUв—ҠГҲВёвҖһГҲUвҖ” again and yet again.
Remembering, over and over, that sacred and mystic conversation between
BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and Arjuna, O King ! I rejoice again and yet again.        (76)

=== PAGE 784 ===

* Chapter XVIII *
783
By giving his own reactions in this
verse SaВӨjaya glorifies the recollection of
the gospel of the GвҲӮtГҘ. SaВӨjaya means to
say that the gospel preached by the Lord
had captivated his heart so much that he had
lost his relish for anything else. He was
reminded of that teaching again and again,
and merged in the thought of it. He was
being transported with joy and overwhelmed
with love.
The holy GвҲӮtГҘ in the form of this mystic
conversation between BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a
and Arjuna purifies him who studies, teaches,
hears, ponders and discourses on it, and
does good to his soul in every way. Hence
it has been characterized as Г«PuЖ’yamГӯ (sacred).
And it reveals the marvellous virtues, glory,
divinity, truth, mystery and essential character
of the Lord; hence it has been spoken of as
Г«AdbhutamГӯ.
Having thus glorified the recollection of the GвҲӮtГҘ, SaВӨjaya while giving his further
reactions extols the recollection of the Cosmic Body of the Lord.
ГғГ¬ГҠ вҖҡВўSв—ҠГҺГ Гҝ вҖҡВўSв—ҠГҺГ Гҝ MВ§В¬в—ҠГ ГҝjГҲГғВў вҖһUвҒ„пЈҝUвҖ”вҖ“
ГҒп¬ӮSв—ҠГҝГҠпЈҝ в—ҠпЈҝ в—ҠвҖһUГҠГЈвҒ„UГҠВЎГЈNUcГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ Гё В¬ГҲЕёвҖ” В¬ГҲЕёвҖ”H 77H
ГғГғЛңГ” that;Гё and;  вҖҡВўSв—ҠГҺГ Гҝ вҖҡВўSв—ҠГҺГ Гҝ remembering again and again; MВ§В¬в—ҠЛңГ” form; вҖўГҒГ ГҠ вҖўjГҲГғв—ҠЛңГ” most
wonderful; вҖһUвҒ„пЈҝUвҖ” of вҖәrвҲӮ Hari; ГҒп¬ӮSв—ҠГҝвҖ” в—ҠпЈҝ (is) my wonder; в—ҠвҖһUГҠЕёЛңГ” great; вҒ„UГҠВЎЕёЛңГ” O king; NUcГҝГҠГҒв—Ҡ I rejoice;
Гё also; В¬ГҲЕёвҖ” В¬ГҲЕёвҖ” again and yet again.
Remembering also, again and again, that most wonderful form of вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, great
is my wonder and I rejoice over and over again.
(77)
By hearing, pondering and singing the
virtues, glory, exploits, divinity, greatness
and the sacred names of BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a,
and by perceiving and touching His Form a
man is rid of all sins. Association of any kind
with Him frees one from all sins, ignorance
and sorrows and the Lord robs the devotee
of his heart; hence He is termed as Г«HariГӯ.
The word Г«RВөupamГӯ qualified by the
adjectives Г«TatГӯ and Г«AtyadbhutamГӯ refers to
the most wonderful and divine Cosmic Body
of the Lord, which He had revealed before
Arjuna and the glory of whose vision has
been declared by the Lord Himself in verses
47 and 48 of Chapter XI.
The memory of that Cosmic Body of
the Lord did not fade from the mind of
SaВӨjaya, he was reminded of it again and
again and wondered how he was vouchsafed
a vision of that most rare and divine Form of
the Lord. He had no merit to his credit,
which could earn him that unique privilege.
The motiveless mercy of the Lord alone had
entitled him to that privilege. A mental survey
of the wonderful phenomena and events
forming part of that vision filled him with
wonder and awe at the marvellous Yogic
power of the Lord.
Thus giving his own reactions and glorifying the gospel of the GвҲӮtГҘ and the recollection
of the marvellous Form of the Lord, SaВӨjaya now concludes this chapter indicating the
certain prospect of the PГҘЖ’davaГӯs victory.
ГҝГІГҠ ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝEвҒ„UвҖ” вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠпЈҝ ГҝГІГҠ В¬ГҠГ•ГҠпЈҝВё Е“ЕёГҲЕ“ВёвҒ„UвҖ”вҖ“
ГғГІГҠ ГјГҠГӢГҢп¬ӮВЎГҝГҠпЈҝ Г·ГҚГҒГғЕ“ЛқГҲВёп¬ӮГҠ ЕёГӢГҒГғв—ҠВёГҒГғв—ҠВёв—ҠH 78H
ГҝГІГҠ where; ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘпЈҝEвҒ„UвҖ” the Lord of Yoga; вҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠвҖ” BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a; ГҝГІГҠ (and) where;

=== PAGE 785 ===

784
* Bhagavad-GвҲӮtВөa *
В¬ГҠГ•ВёвҖ” the son of PГҰthГҘ (KuntвҲӮ), Arjuna; Е“ЕёГҲЕ“ВёвҒ„UвҖ” the wielder of the GГҘЖ’Е’вҲӮva bow; ГғГІГҠ there;
ГјГҠГӢвҖ” glory; ГҒп¬ӮВЎГҝвҖ” victory; Г·ГҚГҒГғвҖ” prosperity; Е“ЛқГҲп¬ӮГҠ ЕёГӢГҒГғвҖ” (and) unfailing righteousness; в—ҠГҒГғвҖ” в—Ҡв—Ҡ
(such is) my conviction.
Wherever there is BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, the Lord of Yoga, and wherever there is
Arjuna, the wielder of the GГҘЖ’Е’вҲӮva bow, glory, victory, prosperity and unfailing
righteousness will surely be there: such is my conviction.                                         (78)
By using the epithet Г«YogeвҖ№varaВЁГӯ for
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and Г«DhanurdharaВЁГӯ for Arjuna,
SaВӨjaya impresses upon King DhГҰtarГҘВ¶tra the
glory of BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and Arjuna, and
indicates the sure prospect of the PГҘЖ’Е’avaГӯs
victory in order to awaken in the kingГӯs mind
an inclination to negotiate peace. In other words,
SaВӨjaya wanted to make it clear that BhagavГҘn
вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a was the Lord of all Yogic powers
and that He was capable of creating,
maintaining and destroying the whole universe
in a trice by dint of His Yogic power. There
could be no doubt about the victory of King
YudhiВ¶Вўhira, who had BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a,
the manifest Divinity, as his supporter.
Besides this, Arjuna too was an
incarnation of the divine sage Nara, a beloved
friend of the Lord, and a great hero, the
wielder of the famous GГҘЖ’Е’вҲӮva bow; he too
had girded his loins to see his brother victorious.
Hence there was none who could vie with
YudhiВ¶Вўhira at that moment. For where the
sun is, light must be there; even so, the very
presence of BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and Arjuna
ensures all glory, victory and righteousness.
And laurels go to him who has virtue on his
side. Therefore, the victory of the PГҘЖ’Е’avas
was guaranteed. The welfare of DhГҰtarГҘВ¶Вўra
lay in bringing round his sons to seek peace
with the PГҘЖ’Е’avas.
Лҷ ГғГ вҖҡГҒЕ’ГҒГғ ГјГҠГӢв—ҠjВӘп¬ӮeГӢГғГҠвҖҡГҚВ¬ГҒЕёВ·Г вҖҡГҲ вҖҷЛқrГҠГ”ГҒп¬ӮlГҠГҝГҠВў ГҝГҠпЈҝВӘвүҘГҠГҠSГІГҠпЈҝ ГјГҠГӢвҲ‘ГҺВ§cГЎГҠГҠВЎГҲВёЕёвҖҡВўп¬ӮГҠЕ’пЈҝ
в—ҠГҠпЈҝЛҮГҠвҖҡГӣГҝГҠвҖҡГҝГҠпЈҝВӘГҠпЈҝ ЕёГҠв—ҠГҠCГ”UГҠЕ’вүҘГҠГҠпЈҝЛҳГӨГҝГҠГҝвҖ”H 18H
Thus, in the UpaniВ¶ad sung by the Lord, the science of Brahma, the scripture
of Yoga, the dialogue between вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a and Arjuna, ends the eighteenth
chapter entitled Г¬The Yoga of Liberation through the path of
Knowledge and Self-surrender.Г®
The BhagavadgвҲӮtГҘ is the divine word of BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a, the supreme PuruВ¶ottama
or God Himself, who is adored by the whole animate and inanimate kingdom, is full of the
six divine properties, and is Bliss and Consciousness solidified. The scripture is a mine of
endless mysteries. It is by the grace of the supremely compassionate BhagavГҘn вҖәrвҲӮ KГҰВ¶Ж’a that
its inner meaning can be partially understood. He alone, who ponders the GвҲӮtГҘ with a heart
brimming over with supreme reverence and pure loving devotion, directly perceives the
grace of the Lord and can obtain a glimpse of the real character of the GвҲӮtГҘ. Therefore,
seekers of blessedness would do well to place before them the ideal of Arjuna, the prince
among devotees, and cultivating his divine virtues should hear, study and ruminate over the
GвҲӮtГҘ with faith and devotion; and they should whole-heartedly devote themselves to spiritual
practice according to their individual capacity in pursuance of the LordГӯs behests. Those who
proceed on the above lines are inspired with ever new thoughts and feelings of a supremely
blissful, unique and transcendent character. Attaining absolute purity of mind and enjoying
the exceptional grace of the Lord, they speedily realize Him.
U

=== PAGE 786 ===

PODS
SRIMADBHAGAVADGITA

TATTVAVIVECANI
(English Commentary)

SSDS

[GITA PRESS, GORAKHPUR [SINCE 192]