=== PAGE 1 ===

|

TNA

b

GR

WISH)

‘

US

=== PAGE 2 ===

THE LIBRARY
OF
THE UNIVERSITY
OF CALIFORNIA
LOS ANGELES

=== PAGE 3 ===

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2008 with funding from
Microsoft Corporation

http:/www.archive.org/details/englishtranslati03susr

=== PAGE 5 ===

AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION
THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA

Vol. Ill.

UTTARA-TANTRA

=== PAGE 7 ===

AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION
or

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA

WITH
A FULL AND COMPREHENSIVE INTRODUCTION, ADDITIONAL

TEXTS, DIFFERENT READINGS, NOTES, COMPARATIVE
VIEWS, INDEX, GLOSSARY AND PLATES

(IN THREE VOLUMES)

EDITED hy

KAVIRAJ KUNJA LAL BHISHAGRATNA,
M. R. A. S. (LoND.)

Vol. III.

ARA-TAN TRA

PUNLISHED BY

S. L. BHADURI, B. L.
10, KASHI GHOSE’S 1,ANE, CALCUTTA

1916

All Rights Reserved.

The Oriental 2ook-Supplying Agency, Poona.

=== PAGE 8 ===

PRINTED AT THE BHARAT MISIIR PRESS BY M. BHATTACHARYYA OF
Messrs. SANYAL & Co.,
25, ROY BAGAN STREET, CALCUTTA.

=== PAGE 10 ===

Kaviraj Kunja -Lall Bhishgraina, M.R.A.S. ( Lond.)

=== PAGE 11 ===

PREFACE.

oa

It was some years ago that we took upon our-
selves the rather ambitious task of bringing out
the Sushruta Samhita in English. And we may

mention that the appreciation the first instal-

ment of our undertaking met with at the hands of
scholars at home and abroad considerably encour-
aged us in completing this huge undertaking.

We desire to record here our deepest feelings
of gratitude towards His Highness the Maharaja
Sir Sawai Jai Singh Bahadoor, K. C. S. 1, of
Alwar (Rajputana), who has, by his princely
donation, enabled us to bring this highly import-
ant work toa completion. —[t is known through-
out India that the illustrious Ruler of Alwar
a great patron of letters and a lover of 4

yurvedic
Science, and many noble undertakings in our
country have depended largely upon his liberal

support. No words of mine can adequately ex-

press my admiration for the good he is dving to
our country,
Now that the whole work is before the public.

its worth and importance will be duly judged

Our translation does not claim to have any  liter-
ary excellence, as our sole aim has been to render
as faithfully as we could the original into one

of the European languages. The technical terms

occurring in the Sushruta Sambitt cannot be

=== PAGE 12 ===

il

accurately translated into English, as there are
ho corresponding words in that language which
would convey the exact meaning of the original.
We have therefore retained the Sanskrit terms,
and have in some cases put within brackets such
English words as may approximately render the
meaning of the original.

No apology is needed for placing before
the learned world of the West a scientific treatise
of ancient India. We may only mention that
the Hindu system of medicine is not a thing
of mere antiquarian interest. It is a living sys-
tem, and even to-day millions of people in India
are being treated according to this system. A
system which has stood the test of centuries, and
which still holds its own against rival systems of
the day, cannot be lightly brushed aside as wholly
unscientific. It has been said that a system
which recognises prayer as one of the means
of curing human ailments, can lay no claim to
any scientific character. All that we need say
in answer to this criticism is that humanity has
not yet risen above prayer in any country in the
world, and faith in the efficacy of prayer in curing
diseases is, instead of dying out, gaining ground
in the modern scientific world. Whatever that
may be, in actual practice, Hindu medical men,
like their brethren of Europe, rely chiefly upon
medicine and surgery, but occasionally prescribe
prayer also as an efficient form of remedy, While
recognising the influence of mind on body, and the

=== PAGE 13 ===

iii

efficacy of faith in certain
treat it as a special method

forms of disease, they
. falling more properly

within the province of priests.

A few words, howev

show what abiding interes

in such a work as the Sus
not wish to enter into an
prove that the different s
other countries, new or o|
than a mere stimulus fro:

er, seem necessary to
t there is for all time
hruta Samhita. We do
y historical criticism to
ystems of medicine in
d, have received more

m the Indian System,

and that many foreign discoveries may be traced

to the work we are now

presenting to the world.

‘The opinions of some modern men of science. who

cannot be accused of having any bias in favour
of our system, will demonstrate its abiding value.
Surgeon General Sir Pardey Lukis, M. D.,

I. M.S. Kk. C.S. 1., Director-General of Indian
Medical Service, was pleased to remark in the
course of his speech in the Imperial Legislative
Council :—" Many of the so-called discoveries of
recent years are merely re-discoveries of the facts
known centuries ago to the ancients (Indians).”
In noticing the first volume of this very work, the
3ritish Medical Journal observed in its issue of

vember, 1912: It is certain that in this an-
cient medical book there are traces of knowledge
which is comparatively recent in the West.”

We do not know what reception will be ac-
corded to this work by the public, but we may
fairly hope that now that the ancient Indian
Medical System and the Indigenous Drugs of

=== PAGE 14 ===

iv

this country are being investigated by scientific

experts under the direction of the Government
of India, this ancient system of Medicine and
Surgery will attract the attention of those who
hitherto neglected it as unworthy of notice.
The encouragement which we have received

hav

from the Governments of Bengal and Nepal and
from the States of Baroda and Mysore, has helped
us a great deal and we take this opportunity
of expressing our gratitude towards them. The
active help extended to us in the preparation
of this work by VWaidyaratna NKaviraj Jogindra
Nath Sen, Vidyabhusan, M. A., Kaviraj Madhav
Chandra Tarkatirtha, Kaviraj Jnanendranath Sen,
Kaviratna, B. A., Prof. Satyendranath Sen, Vidys-
vagis’a, M. A.. and Babu Sachindralal Bhaduri,
B. A., B. L., we also specially and thankfully
acknowledge. We offer our sincerest thanks also
to Dr. U. D. Banerjee, L. R. C. P., M.R.C. S.
Dr. Y. M. Bose, M. D. (Chicago), and Kaviraj
Surendranath Goswami, Vidyavinode, B. A.,
L. M. S. who have never failed to give us_ their
valuable suggestions whenever we have sought
their advice.

10, KASHI GHOSR’S LANE, i)
CaicuTta, KUNJA LAL BHISHAGRATNA,
May 25, 1916. J

=== PAGE 15 ===

CONTENTS.

(Urrar.

‘ANTRA.)

CHAPTER IL.

Diseases of the eyes, etc. ;—Discases of the eye and its append-
ages—Description of DrishtimMandalas and Sandhis—Description of
Patalas—Premonitory symptoms—Causes of cye-liseases—Classification—
of Vétaja—Pittaja—Kaphaja—Raktaja and Tri-doshaja_eye-

1-8

CHAP
Pathology of the diseases of the eye-joints :—Thcir nomencla-
ture—Number—Symptoms. —... “0 ss On

CHAPTER IIL.
Pathology of the diseases of the eye lid:

Specific symptoms of Utsangini—Kumbhika—Po

Causes and names:

Anjana—Klishta-vartma—Vartma-bandhaka, ete. ete. a 115,

CHAPTER IV.

Pathology of the diseases of the sclerotic coat
ymptoms of S'ukhirma—Lohitirma—S’uktiks

grathita, cles ete.

CHAPTER V.

Pathology of the diseases of the black part of the eye :—
anastukra Jitas p

Nuwber—Names—Symptoms—Prognosis—\

Stukra—Akshi

18-19

=== PAGE 16 ===

ii CONTENTS,

CHAPTER VI.

Pathology of the diseases affecting the eyes as a whole :—
Names and Causes—Symptoms of Vataja—Pittaja—Kaphaja and Raktaja
Abhishyanda—Causes of Adhimantha—Symptoms of Vdtaja—Pittaja—
Kaphaja—and Raktaja Adbimantha—Prognosis—Symptoms of Sa-s‘opha
and A-sfopha Akshi-péka—Symptoms of Hatddhimantha—Vata-pary4ya
—S'ushkakshi-péka—Anyato-véta— Amli-dhyushita — S’irot-pita—Sird-
harsha. on an oD on v1 2024

CHAPTER VII.

Pathology of the diseases of the Pupil :—Description of Drishti
—Symptoms—When first—second—third and fourth Patola attacked—
Blindness—Specific symptoms of VAtaja—Pittaja—Kaphaja and Sdnni-
pitika Timira—Pariml4yi—Different colours of the pupil in cases of
Linga-nds'a—Specific traits of Vétaja—Pittaja—Kaphaja—and Sénnipatika
Linga-nis'a—Traits of Vataja—Pittaja—and Kaphaja Vidagdha-Drishti—
Smoky  sight—Hrasva. EE SEIS po See of
traumatic Linga-nds'a. oe + “0 ws 25-31

CHAPTER VIII.

Classification and treatment of ocular affections :—Classi-
fication—Names of Chhedya—Lekhya—Bhedya—Vyddhya eye-diseases
—Names of eye-diseases where operation not to be risked—Names of

curable and incurable eye-diseases. 32-33

CHAPTER IX.
Treatment of Vataja Ophthalmia :—Tarpana—Puta-paka—
Fumigation —Snuff—Wash—Eye-drop—Collyrium—Treatment of Anyato-
vata—Vata-parydya—S'ushkakshi-pika, os 34-37

CHAPTER X.
Treatment of Pittaja Ophthalmia :—Tarpana measures—Wash
Snuff—Anjana—Rasa-kriyé—A's/chyotana—Treatment of | Stukti-paka
and Dhuma-dars’i. we o os as 3840

=== PAGE 17 ===

CONTENTS. iii

CHAPTER XI.

Treatment of Sleshmaja Ophthalmia :—Fomentation—Anjana
—Treatment of Balésa-grathita—Pishtaka—Praklinna-vartma, ... 41-46

CHAPTER NII.

Troatment of Raktaja Ophthalmia :—Venesection—Inhalation
—Eye-drop—Snuffs— Plaster— Vartis— Treatment of Stirotpéta— Siré-
harsha—Arjuna.—Scarifying— Anjana—Treatment of S‘ukra— Kshéra-
Anjana—Soothing applications—Treatment of Ajaka—Akshi-pika—Puyd-
Jasa—Praklinna-Vartma and Aklinna-Vartma, ai oe 4753

CHAPTER XIII.

Treatment of Lekhya-roga :—Mode of treatment by Scarification
—Satisfactory—defective and excessive scarification—Names of diseases

54-56

amenable to scarification,

CHAPTER XIV.
Treatment of eye-diseases which require Incision :—Treat-
ment of Visa-granthi—Lagana—Anjana—Krimi-granthi and Upandha.—

Application of Sneha and Sveda. oD oD 57-58

CHAPTER XV.

Treatment of eye-diseascs which require Excision :—Treat-
ment of Armans—Preliminary actions—Mode of operation—Medicinal
treatment—Treatment of Sird-j4la—Sirdija-pidakd—Parvanik 4. —Churna-
Anjana—Treatment of the inner part of the eye-lids. ws 59-63

CHAPTER XVI.

Treatment of diseases peculiar to eye-lashes and eye-lids :—
Surgical treatment of Pakshma-kopa—Preliminary actions—Mode of
operation— Cauterisation and other measures. i vs 6465

=== PAGE 18 ===

iv CONTENTS.

CHAPTER XVIL

Treatment of diseases of pupil and crystalline lens :—General
treatment of Pitta and S'leshma-Vidagdha-Drishti,—Pushp4njana—
Dravanjana—Gudikdnjana — Treatment of Day-blindness — Nocturnal
blindness—Application of | Vartis —Rasa-kriyénjana—Kshudranjana—
Treatment of a palliative type—Triphalé-Ghrita—Névana-errhines—Puta-
pika—Pratyanjana—Treatment of Pittaja—VAtaja—Kaphaja and Tri-
doshaja Kacha—Pumigation—Treatment of Parimlyi—Diet—Blood-
letting—Treatment of Timira—Prognosis—Surgical treatment of Kaphaja
easures—Symptoms and treatment of the disorders

Linga-nasa—lis after
resulting from an injudicious operation—Causes of relapse—Symptoms
produced by the defects of the S’aldk4—Description of the S'aléké—
Derangements due to defective operations—Their treatment—Eyessigit-
66—S3

invigorating Anjanas and Vartis. . aD

CHAPTER XVIIL

Preparations and medicinal measures for ocular affections
in general :—The Tarpana measures—Mode of application—Symptoms
of satisfactory excessive and defective Tarpana—Treatment of excessive
and defective Tarpana—Cases of ‘Tarpana—The Puta-paka measur
Emulsive—Scraping and Healing Puta-péka—Preparations of Snehana—
Lekhana and Ropana Pata-péka—Prohibition and Remedies for infringe-
ments—Symptomis of satisfactory —excessive—and defective applications of
Puta-paka—Mode of preparing Puta-paka—Mode of application—As‘chyo-
tana and Seka—their classes— Maximum time for Seka—Time for appli-
cation—S'iro-vasti—Lekhana—Ropana and Prasddana Anjana—Forms of
Anjana—Their size and dose—Materials of vessels and rod for the use of
Anjana—How to apply Anjana—Forbidden cases for the application of
Anjana—Symptoms of satisfactory—excessive and deficient use of

Lekhana Anjana—D'rasddana Anjana—Ropana Anjana—Recipe of several
principal Anjanas—Bhadrodaya-Anjana—Vartis—Pinddnjana. ... 84—101

CHAPTER NIX.

Treatment of hurt or injnry to the eye :—General Treatment—
Prognosis—Treatment of sunken eye—Symptoms and treatment of Kuku-
se 102 105

naka—Conclusio

=== PAGE 19 ===

CONTENTS. v

CHAPTER XN.

Causes and symptoms of Ear-disease ;—Classifications—Symp-
toms of Karna-s‘ula—Prandda—Vddhirya—K shveda—Karna-srava—Karna-
kandu—Karna-gutha—Karna-pratingha — Krimi-karna—Karna-vidradhi—
Karna-pika—Pati-karna. oo an ve 106-108

CHAPTER XXI.

Medical Treatment of Ear-disease :~ General Treatment—
Treatment of Vataja ear-disease—Karna-s'u!a—Prandda—and Vadhiryya.
—S'iro-vasti—Dipiké-Taila—Different kinds of Ear-drop=-General and
specific treatment of Pittaja car-ache and Kaphaja Karna.s‘ula—
Treatment of Deafnes
ava Krimi

-—General and Special Treatment of Puti-karna—

Karna-sr: arma — Karna-kshveda — Vidradhi, etc. ~ Karna-

kandu—Karna-paka. ve aS on ws 1OQ—117

CHAPTER NNIL.

Causes and symptoms of diseases of the nose :— Nomenclature
and Classification—Symptoms of | Apinasa—Puti-nasya—Niisi-paika—
Rakta-pitta—Puya-rakta— Kshavathu—Bhrams’athu — Dipti—Pratinéha—

Parisrdva—Pari-s’osha—Ars’'as—S’opka—Arvuda—ratis’yiiya 118120

CHAPTER XNIII.

Apinasa
rakta—Kshavatha—Bhrams’athu—Dipti—Nasdniha — Nasi-s
sfosha ete.

CHAPTER XXIV.

Symptoms and treatment of Catarrh :—Causes—Premonitory
symptoms--Specific symptoms of Vataja —Pittaja—Kaphaja—Tri-doshaja
Vrognosis— General treatment of Pratis'ys

types—Raktaja-pratis'ya

Regimen of diet and conduct—reatment of V'étaja—Vittaja—Kaphaja—
and Tridoshaja types... om os we 12}=130

=== PAGE 20 ===

vi CONTENTS.

CHAPTER XXV.

Symptoms of diseases of the head :—Classification—Symptoms
of Vataja—Pittaja— Kaphaja—Tri-doshaja—Kshayaja—Raktaja—Krimija
Stiro-roga—Symptoms of Suryvarta—Ananta-vata—Ardhiva-bhedaka—
and S‘amkhaka, a ED Bb as 131133

CHAPTER XXVI.

Treatment of diseases of the head:—Treatment of Vataja—
Pittaja—Raktaja S'viroroga—Food—Treatment of Kaphaja—Tri-doshaja
Kshayaja—Krimija—Ardhdva-bhedaka— Ananta-véta—and S'amkhaka, —
Conclusion... bo oo ao ws 134-140

Here ends the Saldkya-Tantra.

CHAPTER XXVII.

Specific features of nine malignant Grahas :—Different names
—General course of attack—Symptoms of attack by Skanda—Skandapa-
ra—S’akuni —Revati—

sn

mandiké—Naigamesha —Prognosis—Rules to be observed.

CHAPTER XXVIIL

Therapeutics of an attack by Skanda Graha
ment—Fumigation—Mantras ws 145146

seneral treat-

CHAPTER XNXIX.

Therapentics of an attack by Skandapasmdra :—General treat-
{—prinkling—Anointment— Utsddana—Fumigation—Religious pro-
ve 147-148

jation—Mant!

CHAPTER »

Treatment of an attack by Sakuni graha :—Sprinkling—Anoint-
ment—Pradeha—Fumigation—Religious propitiation—Mantras. 149150

=== PAGE 21 ===

CONTENTS. vii

CHAPTER XXXL.

Theraputics of an attack by Revati-graha
ment—Plaster—Religious propitiation— Mantras.

-—Sprinkling—Anoint-
151152

CHAPTER XXXII.

Treatment of an attack by Putana-graha :—Washing—Anoint-
ment—Fumigation—Religious propitiation—Mantras. we 153154

CHAPTER XXNXIII.

Treatment of Andha-putana-graha :—Sprinkling—Plaster—Fumi-
gation—Religious propitiation—Mantras. om a 155156

CHAPTER NXNIV.

Treatment of an attack by Sita-putand :—Sprinkling—Fumi-
gation—Anointment—Religious propitiation—Mantras. rn 157

CHAPTER XXXV.

Treatment of an attack by Mukha-mandika :—Spriokling—
Anointment—Fumigation—Religious propitiation—Mantras ... 158

CHAPTER XXXVI.

Treatment of an attack by Naigamesha
ment—Utsdana—Fumigation—Religious propitiation—Mantras. 159—160

prinkling—Anoint-

CHAPTER XNXVIL.

Origin of nine Grahas :—The nine presiding deities. ... 161-163

CHAPTER XXXVIIL

Symptoms and Therapeutics of the diseases of the female
organ of generation :—Causes.—Enumeration—Classification—Names
—Symptoms of Vataja—Pitt Kaphaja—and Tri-dosbaja types—
Medical treatment.—Internal and External treatment, vs 164-168

Here ends the Kaumara-bhritya-Tantra.

=== PAGE 22 ===

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER XXXIX.

Symptoms and Treatment of Fever :—Descriplion of Jwara—
Definition and classification—Pathology—Premonitory symptoms—Symp-
toms of Vétaja—Pittaja—Kaphaja and Tri-doshaja fever—Abhiny.sa-
fever—Hatanjas — Sannyésa—Dwandaja_fever—Vata-pitta-fever — Vata-
S'leshma-fever—Pitta-S'leshma fever—Pralepaka—Tritiyaka (tertian) and
Chaturthaka (quartan) fever—Vishama-fever—Seat and duration of Vishama-
jwara—Satataka—Anyedyushka—Tritiyaka—Chaturthaka —Action—Influ-
yu on Vishama fever—Agantuka fever duc to the effects of poison
neral treatment— Fast-

ence of
—Hay-fever—Gambhira fever and its prognosis—
ing—Probibition of fasting—Effect of fasting—Satisfactory and exces
fasting—Tepid water—Cold water—Peyé—Vavgu—Symptoms of Vakva
vara—Time for administering febrifage—Preliminary treatment
—Application of Vasti_ and S'iro-virechana—Administration of Ghrita—
Diet—Léja-tarpana—Mitk as a dict—Meat-diet—Prohibitions in fever—
Sams'amana decoctions for Vataja—Pittaja and Kaphaja fever—Treat-
ment of Kapha-Vata—Pitta-S'leshma—Viita-pitta fever and Tridoshaja
shama-jwara—Chrita in cases of Vishama fever—
kalydna-ghrita — Panch

ive

fever—Treatment of
Guduchyddi-ghrita — Kalasydi-ghrita — Mah
gavya ghrita— Triphald-ghrita—Pancha-sira—Medicated Tailas—Fumig
tions and Anjanas—Treatment of shivering and burning sensation—General
and specific treatment of the complications—A pplication of Vastis—Symp-
169—211

toms of the remission of fever.

CHAPTER XL.

Symptoms and treatment of Diarrhoea, ete :—Causes—latho-
logy—Dremonitory symptoms—Symptoms of Viitaja—Pittaja—Kaphaja
and Tri-doshaja types—Symptoms of S’okaja and Amaja Atisira—Symp-
toms of Ama and Pakva Atisira—Prognosis—Ueneral treatment—Twenty
different Recipes for Amétisira—Fasting—Six Yogas for Pittaja Atisdra—
Astringent remedies—Application of Ghrita—Putapéka-preparations—
Treatment of thirst—Use of milk—Asthpana and Anuvisana Vastis
—Pichchhii-Vasti—Diet — nd symptoms of Pakviitisira—Trcatment
and Symptoms of Pravahika—General Treatment—Application of Vastis
—Diet—Medical treatment—Yavagu—General principle of treatment—
Indications of cure—Static or dynamic causes of diseases and treatment—
Grahani—Premonitory symptoms of —Grahani—Symptoms—Specific
symptoms of Vétaja—Pittaja—Kaphaja and Tri-doshaja Grahani—Treat-
212-236

a:

ment and dict. ...

=== PAGE 23 ===

CONTENTS. ix

CHAPTER XLI.

Symptoms and Treatment of Phthisis :—Nomenclaturc—S’osha
—Kshaya—Réja-yakshu tivlogy and general symptoms—Specilic
symptoms of Vitaja—Pittaja and Kaphaja types—Prognosis—Other causes
of S’osha and their symptoms—Premonitory symptoms—Prognosis—Treat-
ment—Diet—Meat, etc. —Utsddana— Medicated Ghritas—Elidi-mantha—
Use of goat’s flesh, milk, etc.—Rules of conduct. vee 237-245

CHAPTER XLII.

Symptoms and Treatment of Gulma :—Detinition and Number—
Localisation and Nomenclaturc—Premonitory Symptoms—Specific Symp-
toms of Vétaja—Pittaja—Kaphaja and Tri-doshaja types—Symptoms of
Raktaja Gulma—General Treatment of Viitaja—Pittaja—Kaphaja—Tri-
doshaja and Raktaja types — Uttara-Vasti — Anuvasana — Chitraka-
ghrita — Hingvadi-ghrita — Dédhika-ghrita —Rasona-ghrita,—Ghritas in
Pitlaja—Raktaja and Kaphaja Guhna.—Intcrnal use of Kshara—Vris'chi-
ratishta—Blood-letting—Diet and Sveda,—Peyi—Khada-yusha—Fomenta-
tion—Medicated plugs—Supervening symptoms — Prohibited articles—
Causes and Symptoms of Sula—Symptoms of Vataja—Pittaja—Kaphaja
and Sdnnipdtika S’ula.—General treatment—Treatment of Vataja—
Pittaja—Kaphaja and Tri-doshaja S'ula.—Symptoms and treatment of
Pargva-S’ula.—Symptoms and treatment of Kukshi-S’ula.—Symptoms
and treatment of Hrich-chhula, —Symptoms of Vasti-S’wla—Mutra-S’ula
—Vit-S’ula and Annaja s‘ula.—Their treatment. ve 246264

CHAPTER XLII.

Symptoms and Treatment of Heart-disease :—WMticlogy and
Nomenclature—Number—specifie Symptoms of Viitaja—Pittaja—Kaphaja
and Krimija_ types—Supervening — Symptoms—Medical treatment of
Vataja—Pittaja—Kayhaja and Krimija types... 265-268

CHAPTER XLIV.

Symptoms and Treatment of Jaundice, etc. tiology and
Nomenclature—Premonitory Symptoms—Specific Symptoms of Vétaja—
Vittaja — Kapbaja and Tri-doshaja types — Symptoms of Kémaléi—
Kumbba-K dimalé—Lagharaka and Halimaka.—Supervening Symptoms

=== PAGE 24 ===

CONTENTS,

General treatinent ~Treatment of — Kéiali—Kumbba-k4malé—Ligha-
raka,—Articles of Diet—Treatment of Supervening Symptoms — Prog-
nosis. oo to c. a sss 269-276

CHAPTER XLV.

Symptoms and Treatment of Hemorrhage :—Cause and Patho-
logy—Prognosis—Premonitory Symptoms—Supervening Symptoms—Symp-
toms of incurable types—General principles of treatment.
Purgative—Fasting—Articles of fare—Diet—Lambatives—The best. six
Yogas—Asthdpana and Anuvésana—Treatment of down-coursing type—
Uttara-vasti. ... ke ee oe vee 277-284

imetic—

CHAPTER XLVI.

Symptoms and Treatment of Fainting fits :—Detinition—Classi-
fication—Premonitory symptoms—-Specific symptoms—Gencral treatment
Specific treatment.—Symptoms of Sannyasa—Treatment—Incurable
type—Diet. an on aD vs 285—288

CHAPTER XLVII.

Symptoms and Treatment of Alcoholism :—Propertics and
action of wine—Evil effects of drinking—Thrce stages of Alcoholic intosica-
tion—Cases where wine is probibited.—Specific symptoms of Pdndtyaya
symptoms of Vétaja—Pittaja— Kaphaja and Tri-doshaja types—
nada—Pandjirma—and Péna-vibhrama —Prognosis—

doshaja and Dvi-doshaja
-Paéna-vibhrama and

Symptoms of Par:
Treatment of Vataja—Pittaja—Kaphaja—Ti
types, —Panaka—Treatment of Para-mada—Panajima
fityaya—Treatment of Thirst—Remedics for Diha,—Symptoms and
treatment of Raktaja.-Diha.—Diiha due to  thirst—Accumulation of
blood—Due to Kshaya—Due to hurt of Manna,—Their Treatment—
Mode of drinking wine. ... ee ce vs 289—301

CHAPTER XLVIIIL.

Symptoms and Treatment of thirst :—Etiology—Classification—
Premonitory symptoms—Symptoms of Vataja—Pittaja—and Kaphaja
types-—Symptoms of Kshataja—Kshayaja—Amaja and Annaja thirst.—
Prognosis—General treatment—Speci fic treatment—Treatment of Kshataja
—Kshayaja and Amaja thirst.—General treatment. ws 302-308

=== PAGE 25 ===

CONTENTS. xt

CHAPTER XLIX.

Symptoms'and Treatment of Vomitin;
clature—Premonitory symptoms—Specifie symptoms of Vitaja—Pittaja—
Kaphaja—and Tri-doshaja types—Traumatie cases—Prognosis—General
treatment—Treatment of Viitaja—Kaphaja and Pittaja types. —Vomiting
due to pregnancy. —Treatment of traumatic and Krimija types.—General
treatment—Diet. ves ey vo 309313

Causes and Nomen-

CHAPTER L.

Symptoms and Treatment of Hic-cough :—Causes—Derivation
—Classification—Premonitory symptoms—Symptoms of Annajéd—Yamala
—Kshudrikéa—Gambhiri—and Mah4-hikkaé.—Prognosis—Their treatment
—Four liquid compounds—Meat as diet. a ve 314318

CHAPTER LI.

Symptoms and Treatment of Asthma :—Etiology—Classification
—Premonitory symptoms—Specific symptoms of Kshudra—Tamaka—
Pra-tamaka—Chhinna—Mahi—and_Urdhva-S’visa.—Prognosis—General
treatment, — Hinsrddi-ghrita — S'ringvadi-ghrita—Suvahddi-ghrita—Tali-
sfédi-ghrita — Meat as diet.—The five Lambatives—Utkiriké—Articles
pplication of Sneha and Dhuma — Purging and

319-325

recommended —
Vomiting.

CHAPTER LIL.

Symptoms and Treatment of Cough :—Causes and E
Classification—Premonitory symptoms.—Specific symptoms of Vataja—
Pittaja—Kshataja and Kshayaja types.—General Treatment—Inhalation
of Dhuma—Treatment of Vitaja — Pittaja — Kaphaja—Kshayaja and
Kshataja Késa.—Kalyana-gnda—Agastya-leha.... ss 326-337

iology—

CHAPTER LIL

Symptoms and Treatment of Hoarseness :—!tivlogy—Symptoms
of Vétaja — Pittaja — Kaphaja and Tri-doshaja types. — Symptoms of
Kshayaja and Medoja types —Prognosis—General Treatment—Treatment
of Vataja -- Pittaja — Kaphaja — Tridoshaja — Kshayaja and Medoja
types. on an 335-337

=== PAGE 26 ===

xii CONTENTS.

CHAPTER LIV.

Symptoms and Treatment of Worms :—Causes—Classification—
Namesand symptoms of Purishaja—Kaphaja—Raktaja worms.—Specific
causes—Genetal symptoms — Prognosis—Thcir Treatment. —Treatment of
Romada and Dantdéda worms—Diet. ... os wee 338-343

CHAPTER Lv.

Symptoms and Treatment of Udavartta :—Causes—Classifica-
tion—Symptoms of Vtaja—Purishaja—Mutraja Udavarta, Repression of
Yawning—Tears—Sneezing—Eructation— Vomiting — Seminal discharge
—Hunger—Thirst—Breath and Sleep.—Prognosis—Their General Treat-
ment—Their Specific treatment.—Treatment of Adhména.—Udavartta due
to errors of diet—Its treatment. - oy see 4435S

CHAPTER LVI.

Symptoms and Treatment of Visuchika :—Causes—Definirion
—Symptoms—Alasaka—Vilambika —Prognosis — General Treatment
—Kshérdgada—Kaly4na-lavana—Dict.—Causes and Symptoms of Andha
Treatment, ... om ap oD se 352356

CHAPTER LVIL

Symptoms and Treatment of Arochaka :—Etiology—Classifica-
tion—Symptoms of VAtaja—Pittaja— Kaphaja and Tri-doshaja types.
—Their Treatment — Four specific Lambatives — Regimen of diet —
Use of decoction — Arishta and Asava, — Treatment of Mdnasa
Arochaka. ap on a vs 357-360

CHAPTER LVIIL.

Symptoms and Treatment of suppression of rebuitize =Classifi
tion—Symptoms of Vita-kundaliki—V4
—Mutra-jathara—M utra-sanga—Mnutra-kshaya — Mutra-granthi — Mutra-
sarkaré—=-Ushna-véta and two kinds of Mutranka-shda,—General treatment
—Application of Uttara-Vasti. se 361368

=== PAGE 27 ===

CONTENTS. xiii

CHAPTER LIX.

Symptoms and Treatment of the defects of Urine :—Classi-
fication—Symptoms of Vitaja—Pittaja—Kaphaja and Sinnipitika types
Ulcer or injury in the Urethra—Mutré-ghéta due to Stone or Gravel—
General Treatment—Treatmet of Vataja—Pittaja—Kaphaja and Tri
doshaja types. —Treatment of Abbighstaja and Purishaja types. 369-372

Here ends the Kaya-chikitsd.

CHAPTER Lx.

Symptoms and Treatment of the diseases brought on through
Superhuman influences :—Action of Graha—Causes of influence by a
Graha—Indications of attack by Grahas—Deva-graha— Asura-graha—Gan-
dharva-graha—Yaksha-geaha—Pitri-graha— Bhujanga-graha — Réksbasa-
graha and Pis'4cha-graha.—Progonosis—Times of their Possession—Ex-
planation of Bhuta-vidya.—Gencral and religious treatment—Their specific

religions treatment—Medical treatment—Special treatment. ... 373-380

CHAPTER LXI.

Symptoms and Treatment of Apasmara :—Derivative signi-
ficance—Causes—Nomenclature—Premonitory Symptoms—Symptoms of
Vataja—Pittaja— Kaphaja and Sannipdtaja types. — Discussion on its
causes. — General treatment—Specific treatment — Siddhdrtha.ghrita—
Pancha-gavya-ghrita—General treatment—Preparation of special wine—
Venesection. ... on a on ass 381=386

CHAPTER LNII.

Symptoms and Treatment of Insanity :—Derivation—Classi-
fications of VAtaja—Pittaja—Kaphaja and Tri-doshaja types—Symptoms
of Sfokaja and Vishaja types—General treatment—Treatment by. fri
ing acts—Diet—Mah4-Kaly.ina-ghrita — Kalysna-ghrita — Pha
Vartis—Venesection, on oe

Here ends the Bhuta-Vidya-Tantra.

=== PAGE 28 ===

xiv CONTENTS.

CHAPTER LXIIIL.

Different Combinations of six different Rasas :—Taken two at
a time—Three at a time—Four at a time—Five at a time—Six ata time—
One at a time. wo . xo see 392-395

CHAPTER LXIV.

Rules of Health :—Indications of Health—Its importance—Regimen,
of diet and conduct in the rainy season—Rules for autumn—Hemanta—
Winter—Spring—Summer and for Privrit.—Different kinds of food—
When and how to be taken.—Ten proper times for administration of
Medicines—Their names—Definitions and Effects—Droper time for taking

food. a 396—405,

CHAPTER LXV.

The Technical terms used in the treatise :—Names of the
Technical terms—Necessity—Thcir definitions and examples. 406413

CHAPTER LXVI.

The different Modifications of the different Doshas :—
Number of different diseases. —Number of drugs,—Different_ combinations
of the three Doshas—Their number... bee wee 41G—416

End of the Contents of the Uttara-Tantra.

=== PAGE 31 ===

.
THE
SUSIIRUTA SAMHITA.
UITARA-TANTARAM.

(SUPPLEMENTARY PART OF TILE TREATE

CHAPTER I.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the discases, viz., of the eye, etc. (Aupadravi-
kam adhyayam). «.

Here commences that portion of the Susruta
Samhita which is known as the Uttara Tantra (the
supplementary part) to which references have been often

‘made in the preceding one hundred and twenty chapters,
as the fit place wherein to revert in detail to the topics
cursorily mentioned therein. ‘This part comprises
within it the specific descriptions of a large and a varied
number of diseases, viz., those which form the subject
matter of the Sdldkya-Tantra (Diseases of the cyc,
car, nose and throat) as narrated by the king of
Videha ; the «xtiology and symptomatology, etc. of
diseases peculiar to infants and women (Kaumdra-
bhritya), the pathology, ctc., of those diseases mentioned
in the six books of the Practice of Medicine par
excellence (Kaya-chikitsd) compiled by the holy sages of
old and diseases known as Upa (eg. Bhutopasarga

=== PAGE 32 ===

2 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA, (Chap. I.

—Demonology) as well as diseases of traumatic origin
are also included in this supplementary text*. Herein
are also mentioned the sixty-three combinations of the
six different Rasas (tasces) as well as the laws of health
and hygiene with their rationale (rules, interpretation

ifications of different

and reasonings) and the ci:
Doshas and organic principles of the body and various
accessorics and remedial agents required for their

successful treatment and cure. 2.

I shall now begin with the description of the num-
bers, the pathology and the curability or incurability
of those specific ailments of the body which are peculiar
to the region of the head out ofa myriad of other
distempers reserved for treatment in this portion of the
work (Uttara-tantra) which may be compared to the
unfathomable deep in respect of the vastness of its
depth and magnitude. 3.

Diseases of the eye and its append-
ages :—The cyc-ball (Nayana-Budbuda) is two
fingers (about an inch) in transverse diameter, about the
breadth of one's own thumb in depth (Sagittal diameter),
and two fingers and a half all round (in circumference).
The eye-ball is almost round in shape and resembles
the teat of a cow. It is made up of all the (five)
elements of which the universe is built up. The element
of the ‘soiid’ earth (Bhu) contributes to the formation
of its muscles, the element of ‘heat’ (Agni cr Tejas)

is in the blood (that courses in its veins and arteries),
‘the gaseous element’ (Vayu) contributes to'the formation
of the black part (Iris, ete.) in which the pupil is situated,
the fluid element (Jala) preponderates-in the -lucid

(1) The text has A’gantuka (traumatic ‘diseases). Gayadiisa explains

it to mean Apasméra, UnmAda, etc. (Hysteria, insanity, etc. ),

=== PAGE 33 ===

Chap. I. ] UTTARA-TANTARAM. 3

(white) part (Vitreous body) and the void (ethereal)

Space (Al
ducts or s

a) is there to form lachrymal or the other
cs (Asrumarga) through which the secretions
are discharged. 4. :

I shail now proceed to describe the Drishti (the cen-
tral part of Retina—Macula Lutea’) as set forth by
expert ophthalmic physicians. The black portion of the
eye (Krishna-mandaia—Choroid) forms one third part
of its whole extent whiic the Drishti, according to them,
occupies only one-seventh part of the Krishna-mandala.
The Mandalas or sub-divisions or circles of the eyc-bail,
the Sandhis or Joints (parts where these sub-divisions
meet with one another) and the Patal:

as (layers or coats)
of the eye are respectively five, six and six in
number. 5-6.

Mandala and Sandhi :—The Mandalas of
the eye are the following, viz, (1) the Pakshma-mandala
(the circle of the eye-lashes), (2) the Vartma-mandala (the
eyelid) (3) the Sycta-mandala (the Sclerotic and Cornea),
the Krishna-mandala (the choroid) and (4) the Drishti-
mandala (the pupil). These circles are so arranged that
the one preceding lics within the next in the list.* The
Sandhis (which serve as lines of demarcation of the
circles) already pointed out are six in number, the first
binding the eye-lashes (Paksha-mandala) with the eye-
lids (Vartma-mandala), the second the eyelids and the
Sclerotic coat (Sveta-mandala), the third binding the
latter with the Krishna-mandala (choroid), the fourth
situated between the latter and the Drishti-mandala,
the fifth lying in the interior corner (Kaninakas) and the
last (sixth) in the exterior (posterior) corner (Apdngas)
of the cye. 7-8.

* Evidently some line or lines are missing here as the line cannot

give a complete sense by itself. Ed.

=== PAGE 34 ===

4 THE SUSHRUTA SAMILITA, { Chap. I.

The Patalas :—Of the Patalas, two are in the
eyelid (Vartma-mandala) and four in the eye proper,
wherein occurs the dreadful disease known as the
Timira (loss of vision). Of these four the first or ante-
rior coat (Patala) supports the humour Jala and
light (Tejas), * the second coat or Patala (choroid) is
supported by muscles ; the third coat or Patala (Sccroim
and Cornea) consists of Medas (lit. fat) and there is the
fourth which is a fifth part of the whole and is known
as the Drishti. There are, however, divisions and sub-
divisions of these coats. 9.

The different parts of the eye-ball are held together
by the blood-vessels, the muscles, the Vitreous body
and the choroid+ Beyond the choroid, the cye-ball
is held (in the orbit) by a mass of Sleshma (viscid
substance—capsule of Tenon) supported by a number
of vessels. The deranged Doshas which pass upward to
the region of the eyes through the channels of the up-
coursing veins and nerves give rise to a good many
dreadful diseases in that region. 10.

Purva-rupa, etc. :—Cloudiness of vision,
slight inflammation, lachrymation, mucous accumulation,
heaviness, burning sensation, sucking pain (D. R-aching
pain) and redness in the eyes are indistinctly manifest
(in the incubatory stage) in such cases. In cases of an in-
flammation of the Vartmas (cyc-lids) the eye seems as if
studded with the bristles of worms (Suka) and attended
with pain (as if pricked into with thorns) and a_ sensible
impairment of the faculty of the eyes in detecting

* By “Jala” is meant here the serum (Rasa) in the skin, and by
“Tejas” the blood in the veins (Siré) carrying the (Tejas) known as the
Allochaka.

+D. R. vessels, muscles and aqueous humour (Medas) arc most
important for the maintenance of Krishna-mandala,

=== PAGE 35 ===

Chap. I. J UTTARA-TANTARAM. 5

colours and in closing and opening the ecye-lids frecly.
An intelligent physician will conclude from these symp-
toms that the eyes have been affected by the (deranged)
Doshas, with a due consideration whereof the remedies
should be (carefully) administered, otherwise the eye-
diseases might become too serious. The simpie maxim
or principle to be followed in the treatment of a disease
is simply to forego the primary pathological causes of
that disease. The special remedial measures that would
pacify the different Doshas, Vayu, etc. have been des-
criked in detail. 12-13.

Causes of Eye-disease :—The local
Doshas deranged and aggravated by such causes as

diving in water immediately after an exposure to the
heat and the glare of the sun, (constant) gazing at dis-
tant objects, sleep in the day time and keeping up
late hours in the night, fixed and steady gaze, excessive
weeping or over-indulgence in gricf, worry and fatigue,
a blow or a hurt, sexuai excesses, the partaking (in inor-
dinate quantities) of Sukta, Aranala (fermented rice-water),
acid grucl, Masha pulse, and Kulattha pulse, voluntary
repression of any cali of nature, exposure (of the eyes)
to smoke or dust, trickling down of the drops of sweat
(into the eyes), excessive or impeded vomiting, re-
pression of tears, constant contraction of the eycs to
adjust the sight to extremely small objects, etc., beget
disorders of the organs of vision. 14.
Classification of the Eye-diseases :
—Seventy-six different kinds of cyc-diseases have been
come across in practice ; of these ten are originated by
the deranged Vayu, ten by Pitta and thirteen by
Kapha. Sixteen are produced by vitiated blood, and
twenty-five by the concerted action of the deranged
Doshas (Tri-Doshaja), and lastly, two are produced by

=== PAGE 36 ===

6 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. (Chap. I.

external causes i.e, they are traumatic in their
origin. 15.

Prognosis of the Vataja Type :—Of the
diseases of the eyes which are due to the action of the
deranged Vayu, those known as Hatddhimantha, Nimi-
sha, Gambhii affecting the vision, and Vata-hata-
vartma (Vayu-afflicted Sclerotic coat) is said to be incur-
able. A temporary cure (YApya) is all that can be effected
in a case of Kacha (cataract) due to the action of the
deranged bodily Vayu ; while the affection of the eyes
known as the Anyato-Vata, Adhi-mantha (ophthalmia),

Sushkakshi-pAka, Abhishyanda and Maruta-Paryaya
are curable. 16.

Prognosis of the Pittaja Type :—Of
the diseases due to the deranged action of the Pitta
known as Hra: ‘a and Jala-

ive me sare the only
remedies in cases of Kacha, Parimlayi and Nila, while
Abhishynda, Adhi-mantha Amlddhyushita, Siktika,
Pitta-Vidagdha-Drishti, Pothaki and Lagana are cur-
able. 17.

Prognosis of Kaphaja Type :—Of the
diseases duc to the aggravation of Kapha, the one known
as the Srava-roga is incurable and (Kaphaja) Kacha
(cataract) admits of only palliative treatment, while a
cure may be be effected in the following cases, viz,
Abhishyanda (conjunctivitis), Adhi-mantha, Balasa-
Grathita, Sleshma-Vidagdha-Drishti, Pothaki, Lagana,
Krimi-granthi, Pariklinna-Vartma, Suklérma, Pishtaka,
Sleshmo-pandha. 18.

Prognosis of the Raktaja Type:—Of
the diseases of the eyes due to the vitiated condition
of the blood, those known as Raktasrava, Ajakajata,
Avalambita (pendent), Sonitargas and Sukra-roga should

rava should be deemed

incurable ;

=== PAGE 37 ===

Chap. I.) UTTARA-TANTARAM. 7

be regarded as incurable, and the type of sKacha (cata-
ract) due to the same cause admits of only palliative
measures, while the diseases known as Adhi-mantha,
Abhishyanda, Klishta ha and Sirotpata,
Anjana, Sirajala, Parvani, Avrana (non-ulcerated), Sukra-
roga, Sonitarma and Arjuna may be included within

tma, Sira-hars

the group of curables. 19.

Prognosis of the Tridoshaja Type,
etc. :—Of the eye-discases due to the concerted action
of the three aggravated Doshas, those known as Puya-
srava, Nakulandhya, AkshipAkatyaya and Alaji are
incurable and palliative measures are only possible in
cases of Kacha (cataract) or Pakshma-kopa ; while those
known as Vartmavabandha, Sirdja-pidaka, Prastar-
yarma, Adhi-mansirma, Snayvarma, U a

ngini, Puy
lasa, Arvuda, Syava- artma, Kardama-vartma, Arso-
vartma, Sukrargas, Sarkard-vartma, the two forms
of inflammation with or without local swelling known
as) Sasopha-paka and Asopha-paka, Bahala-vartma,
Kumbhika and Visa-vartma yeild to the curative
efficacy of appropriate remedial agents. Both the forms
of eye-disease due to the external causes* should be
considered as incurable. 20—21.

Their Localities :—Thus we have finished
enumerating the seventy-six types of eye-discases, of
which nine are confined to the Sandhis (binding
unions), twenty-one to the Vartma (cye-lids), eleven
to the Sukla-bhaga (the Vitreous body), four to the
Krishna bhaga (the region of the Choroid), seventeen
to the entire region (cye-ball) and twelve to the-:region
of the Drishti (pupil or the ‘crystalline lens, ete). The

*The one due to any external blow or hurt (Sa-nimitta) and the other
originating from the stulden sight of any celestial being of extreme brillj-
ancy (A-nimitta).

=== PAGE 38 ===

8 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. (Chap. I.

two cases due to the extraneous cause (are chiefly
located in the Drishti though affecting the whole of
the eye-ball and) are very painful and incurable. The
characteristic symptoms of all these will be hereafter
described in detail. 22—23.

‘Thus ends the first chapter of the Uttra-tantra in the Sus'ruta Samhitd
which deals with the disease:

i of the eye, ete.

=== PAGE 39 ===

CHAPTER LL.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the pathology of diseases which are peculiar to the
joints or binding membranes of the cye (Sandhl-
gata~Roga-Vijnaniya).

The names of those diseases :—Discases
peculiar to the joining (Sandhi) of the eye are nine in
number and are named Puydlasa, Upandha, (the four
kinds of) Srava (viz. Puya-srav srava, Rakta-
srava, Pitta-srdva), Parvani, Alaji and Krimi-granthi. 2.

Symptoms of Puydlasa and Upa~
ndha :—A suppurated swelling occurring at any of
these joining and exuding a sort of fetid and dense *
pus is called Puydlasa. A painless cyst (Granthi) of
considerable size occurring at the union of the pupil (with
the Krishna-mandala) and attended with an itching sensa-
tion and a little suppuration is called Upangha. 3. A.

Symptoms of Srdva :—The ( deranged )
Doshas + of the locality passing through the lachrymal
ducts into the binding tissues of the four different

Sandhis (joinings) set up a painless ¢ secretion (Srava)

a, Sleshma

from the localities characterised by the specific symp-

toms of the different Doshas involved. These are known
as Srdvas, which according to some, are also called

* According to Médhava’s reading, the swelling should be painful
(waiz:)- There is no mention whether the pus should be dense (ara) or
otherwise.

+ The term “Dosha” here means S'leshmé, Pitta, Rakta (blood)
and the concerted action of the above three Doshas. It should be noted
that Vayu is excluded from the list as it docs not produce any secretion,

$ Madhava does not mention this (painlessness) to be a symptom.

2

=== PAGE 40 ===

To THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. (Chap. I,

Netra-nadi and are classified into four different groups,
the different symptoms of which will be described
presently. A suppuration (D. R. swelling) in any of the
unions (Sandhi) of the eye marked by a discharge of pus
is called Puyd-srdva. This is due to the concerted action
of the Doshas (Kapha, Pitta and blood). The secretion of
slimy, white and thick muco-purulent discharges marked
by the absence of pain * is called Sleshmd-srdva. The
flow of thin, warm+ and blood-streaked copious discharge
due to a contaminated state of the local blood is called
Raktd-srdva. A warm, water-like and yellowish blue
(D. R. reddish yellow) discharge from the middle part
of the union (owing to the deranged condition of the
Pitta) is called Pittd-srdva. 3.

Symptoms of Parvani, etc. :—A small,
round and copper-coloured swelling occurring at the join-
ing of the Krishna-mandala and Sukla-mandala, duc to
the vitiated state of the local blood and attended with a
burning sensation and aching pain, is called Parvani.
A swelling possessed of the preceding features and
occurring at the very same joining is called Alaji (Kera-
titis) tA cyst or swelling (Granthi) characterised by an
itching sensation appearing on the joining of the eye-lids
and eye-lashes owing to the germination of parasites
(Krimi) in those localities, is called Krimi-granthi.
Parasites of different forms in such a case are found to
infest the regions where the inner lining of the Vartma-

* According to Madhava’s reading, the absence of pain is not a

necessary concomitant in this case.

+ According to Madhava’s reading thinness and warmness are not
essential.

+ The difference between a case of Parvani and that of Alaji is
that the swelling in a case of Parvani is smaller, and that in the Alaji is
larger.

=== PAGE 41 ===

Chap. I. } UTTARA-TANTARAM. 11

mandala (eyelid) is connected with the Sukla-mandala
(Sclerotic coat) of the eye and to invade and vitiate the
substance of the cye-ball. 4—5.

Thus ends the second chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus‘ruta

Samhita which deals with the pathology of the diseases peculiar to the
Sandhi (unions) of the eye.

=== PAGE 42 ===

CHAPTER HI.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the pathology of diseases peculiar to the region of the
eyelids (Vart magata- Roga-Vijndniya.. 1.

Causes and Names :—The Doshas of the
body jointly or severally expanding through the nerves
and_ veins, (Sira) of the eye-lids (Vartma) bringing about
an augmentation of the quantity of the blood and
the growth of the flesh in the localities (determina-
tion of blood toward formation of fleshy growth in
the affected parts) give rise to a host of local diseases
which are known as Utsangini, Kumbhika, Pothaki,
Vartma-Sarkara. Arso-vartma, Sushkargas, Anjana,
Bahala-vartma, Vartmavabandha, Klishta-vartma, Kar-
dama-vartma, Sydva-vartma, Praklinna-vartma, Pari-
Klinna-vartma, Vatdhata-vartma, Arvuda, Nimisha, Soni-
tarsas, Lagana, Visha-vartma and  Pakshma-kopa.
These twenty-one diseases are restricted to the eye-lids
(Vartma). 2.

The Specific symptoms of the dis-
eases of the eye~lids :—The names of these
have been enumerated ; now hear me describe their
specific symptoms. A (rolled up and indented) boil
or eruption (Pidaka) appearing along the lower eye-lid
on its exterior side with its mouth or head directed
inward is called Utsangini. A number of boils or
pustules (Pidaka) to the size of a Kumbhika seed ap-
pearing on the joint of the eye-lids and the eye-lashes
and becoming inflamed after being burst is called
Kumbhikd *. 3—4.

* This disease (Kumbhikd) is due to the concerted action of the
three Doshas.

=== PAGE 43 ===

( Chap. IIL. UTTARA-TANTARAM. 13

A number of red and heavy (hard) boils or pustules
(Pidaka) resembling red mustard seeds attended with
pain, itching and exudation is called Pothaki. A rough
and large pustule (Pidaka) surrounded by other very
small and thick erythematous pustules (covering the
entire length of the eyelid) is called Vartma-sarkard.
5—6.

Vegetations of small (D. R. soft) and rough papila
(Pidakas) on the eyelid resembling Erodruka seeds and
attended with very little pain are called Arsgo-vartma.
Long, rough, hard, and numbed papil«e (Amkura) on the
eyelid (2) are called Sushkdrsas. 7—S.

A small, soft, copper-coloured pustule (Pidaka)
appearing on the eyelid and attended with burning,
pricking sensation and a slight pain is called an Anjana.
Vegetations of pustules (Pidaka) of equal size (D. R—
attended with hardness) occurring all along the eye-lid
and resembling it (or each other) in colour are called
Bahala-vartma. 9-10.

Such swelling of the eyelid attended with an itching
sensation and a slight pain as impedes or interferes with
its being evenly opened is called Vartma-bandha. A
mild and copper-coloured inflammatory swelling of both
the eye-lids simultancously attended with a slight pain
and changing suddenly into redness (D. R.—suddenly
discharging blood therefrom) is called Klishta-
vartma. 11-12.

A case of Klishta-vartma in which the Pitta
has deranged and affected the blood and much dirty
matter (mucus) is discharged as a consequence is called
a case of Vartma-kardama. A dark brown colour of
the eye-lids both internally and externally marked by a

(2) According to Madhava, the papile in such cases occur in the
inner side of the cye-lid.

=== PAGE 44 ===

14 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Chap. 111.

swelling (D. R—pain) and attended with a discharge of
pus and with burning and itching sensations is called
Sydva-vartma. 13-14.

An external swelling of the eye-lid with a deposit of
mucous matter in its inner surface accompanied with a
little pain aswell as a discharge, itching and pricking
sensation, is called a Praklinna-Vartma. A sticking to-
gether of the eye-lids even in the absence of any suppura-
tion and in spite of the eyes being constantly washed
(with water) * is called Pariklinna-vartma. 15—16.

The drooping down (lit—inactivity) of the eye-lids,
whether attended with any pain or not, (so as to
obstruct the opening of the eye-lashes) where the eye-
lids seem to be out of joint is called Vatdhata-vartma.
A red and knotty swelling (Granthi) of an uneven size
or shape, growing hastily on the interior side of the
eyelid and attended with a little pain is called an Arvuda
or tumour. 17—18.

Constant wrinklings of the eye-lids owing to the
incarceration of the (deranged) Vayu within the nerves
or veins (Sir) controlling their wrinkings (closing and
opening) are known as Nimesha. Soft and fleshy
growths (Amkura) on the eyelid which reappear even
after being removed with a knife, and are attended with
pain, itching and burning sensation are called Sonitarsas
and should be ascribed to the vitiated condition of the
blood. 19-20.

A thick, slimy, hard and painless nodular swelling
(Granthi) on the eye-lid resembling a Kola fruit in size
and marked by an itching sensation and absence of sup-
puration is called Lagana +. An inflammatory swelling

* A different reading reads ‘whether washed or not.’ This, however,
not a good reading.
+ Certain editions read Nagana.

=== PAGE 45 ===

Chap. TI. J UTTARA-TANTARAM. 15

of the eyc-lid dotted with minute punctures like the pores
in the stem of a water-soaked lotus plant is called
Visa-vartma. 21-22.

An accumulation of the deranged Doshas about the
eyelashes makes them rough and sharp-pointed, which
give pain tothe cye and give relief when drawn off.
The disease is known as Pakshma-kopa in which the
eye cannot bear the least wind or heat or the glare
of fire. 23.

Thus ends the third chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta
Samhit4 which deals with the pathology of the diseases of the eye-lids.

=== PAGE 46 ===

CHAPTER IV.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the pathology of discascs of the Sclerotic coat
(white coat) of the cye (Suklagata-Roga-Vijndniya). I

Names :—The eleven different forms of diseases
which are peculiar to the Sclerotic coat (white) of the
eye, are Prastaryarma, Suklarma, Kshatajarma (Rakta-
rma), Adhimansarma, Snayvarma, Suktika, Arjuna,
Pishtaka, Sir ira-pidaka, and Balasa-grathita. 2,

Symptoms: thin and extended glandular
swelling (Granthi) coloured reddish blue and apearing
on the Sclerotic coat (Sukla) is called Prastdryarma.
A crop of soft and whitish growths slowly extending
over the entire length of the Sclerotic coat is called
Suklarma. The fleshy growth on the white coat of the
eye resembling a (red) lotus flower in colour is called
Lohitarma. The soft, extended, thick and dark-
brown and liver-coloured growth of flesh on the white
coat is called Adhi-mdnsérma. The rough, yellowish
(D. R. white) growth of flesh on the white coat, and
gaining (slowly) in size, is called Sndyvarma. 3-7.

The appearance of dark brown specks resembling
flesh in colour or of those having the colour of an
oyster-shell on the white coat (Sukla) of the eye is
called Suktikd. The appearance of a single dot or
speck on the Sclerotic coat (Sukla), coloured like a
(drop of the) hare’s blood, is called Arjuna. A raised
and circular dot or speck appearing on the white coat
and coloured white like pasted rice and (as transparent
as) water is called Pishtaka. Red and extensive
patches of hardened veins spreading over the white coat
and looking like a netsvork is called Sird-jdla. The

=== PAGE 47 ===

Chap. IV, UTTARA-TANTARAM. 17

crop of white pustular growths (Pidaka) on the Sclerotic
coat (Sukla), near the limit of the black coat (Lris) and
covered over with shreds of veins are called the Sird-
Pidakd. The disease in which a speck coloured like the
Indian bell-metal (Kamsya) and covered over with a
vein (Sir4) appears on the region of the Scleratic coat is
called the Baldsa*. 8-13.

Thus ends the fourth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta Sam-
hité which treats of the pathology of the diseases of the Sceloretic region
of the eye.

* The reading in Madhava’s Nidana is quite different here, and
Dallana seems to support that. It is defined as the disease in which a hard
speck appears like a drop of water on the white coat and looks like
bell-metal in colour.

=== PAGE 48 ===

CHAPTER Y.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the pathology of the diseases of the black part of
the eye—Choroid including the Iris (Krishna-gata-
Roga-Vijnduiya). 1.

The diseases which are found to invade the region
of the Choroid including the Iris (Krishna-mandala)
have been briefly said to be four in number. Their
names are Sa-vrana-Sukra, A-vrana-Sukra, Pakatyaya
and Ajaka. 2,

Symptoms :—A puncture-like dip in the region
of the (Krishna-mandala) with a sensation there as if
the part has been pricked with a needle and attended
with an excruciating pain and a hot exudation is called
Sa-vrana-Sukra. If the seat of this discase consider-
ably remote from the pupil—entire part of the Drishti
(Retina) be marked by the absence of pain and discharge
and be not deep-seated and if there be not double
spots, it offers very little chance of remedy. 3-4.

Symptoms and Prognosis of A-vra-
na-‘Sukra :—A whitish film appearing on the
region of the Choroid including the Iris (Krishna) like
a speck of transparent cloud in the sky, and attended
with lachrymation and slight pain due to the eye-disease
known as Abhishyanda (Ophthalmia—lit. secretion) is
called the A-vrana-Sukra. This is easily curable. A
case of Ayrana-Sukra (non-ulcerated film) which is
thickened, deep-seated and long-standing, may be cured
only with the greatest difficulty, while an long-standing
case of this disease, if it is mobile, covered with shreds
of ficsh, vein-ridden, stretching down to the second
layer of skin (in the eye) and obstructing the vision,

=== PAGE 49 ===

Chap. V.J UTTARA-TANTARAM, 19

severed in the middle and marked witha reddish tint
in the extremities, should be deemed as incurable.
Several authorities aver that the appearance of MJudga-
like specks or films on the region of the Iris, attended
with growths of pustules and hot lachrymations, should
be like-wise regarded as incurable. The fact of its (speck)
assuming the colour of the feather of a Téttira bird
is an additional indication of the incurable nature of
this disease. 5.

The appearance of a whitish milky film over the
black part of the eye slowly shrouding it entirly with its
mass and attended with acute pain is known as the
Akshi-Pakdtyaya. This is invariably found to result
from an attack of Akshi-kopa* and is due to the
concerted action of all the Doshas. A painful reddish
growth, like the head of a goat, found to shoot forth
from beneath the surface of the black part and attended
with reddish slimy secretion is called an Ajakd. 6-7.

Thus ends the fifth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus’ruta Sam-
hita which treats of the pathology of the diseases of the black part of the
eyes

“ According to Madhava’s reading in his Nidana, this

isease need
not necessarily result from an attack of Akshi-kopa, and there need not
be an acute pain, and it would be incurable.

=== PAGE 50 ===

CHAPTER VL

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the (symptoms and) pathology of the discases
affecting the eye asa whole (Sarva~gata~Roga~
Vijndniya). 1.

Names and causes :—The four types of
Abhishyandha (Ophthalmatis), the four types of Adhi-
mantha, the two forms of Akshi-paka (suppuration of
the eye) attended with or without swelling, these ten,
as well as Hatddhimantha, Anila-Parjaya, Suskakshi-
paka, Anyato-vdta, Amlddhyushita, Drishti, Sirot-
pata and Sird-Harsha are the names of the (seventeen
kinds of) diseases which affect the eye as a whole.
Nearly all these forms of eye-diseases may result from
the Abhishyanda (Ophthalmitis). Hence a wise physician
shall try speedily to remedy a case of Abhishyanda
)as soon as it is found out. 2.

c symptoms of Abhishya~
nda :—The symptoms which mark a case of Abhi-
shyanda duc to the action of the deranged Vayu are
pricking pain (in the eyes), numbness, horripilation and

irritation in the eyes, roughness and parchedness of the
organ, cold lachrymations and headache. A case of
Pittaja-Abhishyanda exhibits the following features,
viz. burning and inflammatory suppuration of the eyes,
longing for coldness (in the eyes), excessive hot lachry-
mations, cloudy vision and a yellowness of the eye. In
the Kaphaja type of the disease, the affected organ
longs for the contact of warm articles and is attended
with a heaviness, itching sensation, swelling, excessive
whiteness and a constant deposit and discharge of slimy
mucus. The special type of this disease which has

=== PAGE 51 ===

Chap. VI. ] UTTARA-TANTARAM. ar

its origin in the vitiated condition of the blood, « e., the
Raktaja type is marked by redness of the eyes, flow of
copper-coloured tears, as well as the symptoms of the
Pittaja type of the discase and the presence of deep red
stripes all along. 3-6.

Causes of Adhimantha :—All the (four)
forms of chronic Abhishyanda, if not properly attended
to and remedied at the outset, may run into as many
cases of Adhimantha which is attended (invariably)
with an excruciating pain in the eye, which seems as if
being torn out, the pain extending upward to and crush-
ing, as it were, the half the region of the head. The
characteristic symptoms of the Doshas involved in each
case are also seen to supervene. 7.

Symptoms of Vataja Adhimantha :—
Inthe Vataja type of Adhimantha the eye becomes
cloudy and seems as if being torn out and churned as
with an Arani (fire-producing wooden stick) attended
with an irritating, piercing and cutting pain, as well
as with a swelling of the local flesh, and a half of the
head (on the side of the affected eye) is afflicted with
a twisting and cracking sensation as well as with local
swelling, shivering and pain. 8.

Symptoms of Pittaja Adhimantha:
The symptoms which mark the Pittaja type of Adhi-
mantha are the blood-streaked eye attended with secre-
tion and a sensation thercin of being burnt with fire,
as weil as swelling, perspiration and suppuration in the
affected organs, yellowish vision, fainting fits and a

burning sensation in the head. The eyes in this case
become liver-coloured and seem as if ulcerated or rubbed
with an alkali. 9.

Symptoms of Kaphaja Adhimantha:
—In the Kaphaja type of Adhimantha the eye is

=== PAGE 52 ===

22 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Chap. VI.

swollen with a slight congestion (inflammation). Dis-
charges with a sensation of itching, coldness and heavi-
ness in the localities set in, and there is horripilation.
The eye becomes slimy with deposit of mucous matter.
The sight becomes cloudy, the nostrils are dilated, the
head aches and all objects seem to be full of dust. 10.
Symptoms of Raktaja Adhimantha:
—A pricking pain in and a blood-streaked secretion
from the affected organ which looks (bright red) like a
Bandhwjiva flower, are the symptoms which mark the
type of Raktaja Adhimantha (due to the vitiated blood).
The eye becomes painful and incapable of bearing the
sion seem as

least touch or contact, and the objects of vi:
if enveloped in flames. The extremities of the eye
become red and the whole origin of the cornea (black
coat of the eye) looks like an Arishta fruit submerged
in blood. 11.

The prognosis :—A course of injudicious diet,
conduct or medical treatment may usher in the blindness
of vision in seven days from an attack of the Kaphaja
type of Adhimantha (Ophthalmia) and in five days from
that of the blood-origined (Raktaja) type, in six days
in a case of the Vataja Adhimantha and instantaneously
within three days of the attack) in the Pittaja type of
(4. e, Adhimantha. 12.

Symptoms of Sa-Sopha and A-sopha
Akshi-pdka :—A case of Sa-sopha-Netra-pdka
exhibits the following symptoms, v/z., itching sensation,
deposit of mucous matter (in the eye), lachrymation and
a redness of the eye like the colour of a ripe Udumbara
fruit. There is a burning sensation in the eye-ball which
becomes copper-coloured, heavy, and attended with a
pricking pain and horripilation. The eye becomes
swollen and constantly sceretes either cold or hot slimy

=== PAGE 53 ===

Chap. VI. ] UTTARA-TANTARAM. 23
discharges, and ultimately suppurates. All these symp-
toms except swelling mark the (non-swollen) A-sypha-
Netra-pdka type of the disease. 13.

The deranged Vayu getting incarcerated in the optic
nerve (Sird) impairs the faculty of sight, and gives rise to
an incurable disease which is called Hatddhimantha
(blinding Ophthalmia). A shifting pain experienced
sometimes in the region of the eye-lashes* or of the
eye-brows and sometimes in the region of the eye,
owing to the coursing of the deranged and incarcerated
Vayu in those localities, is called Vata-Parydya. 14-15.

The disease in which the eye-lids become dry and
hard and remain always closed, the v

ion becomes
cloudy and hazy, and it becomes very painful to open
the eyelids, is called the S$ ishkakshi-paka.+ The
excessive pain in the eyes or in the eye-brows due to
the action of the deranged Vayu incarcerated in the
region of the head, the cars, the cheek-bones, the back
of the neck (Avatu), the Manydé (a particular nerve
on cither side of the neck), or in any other (adjacent)
place, is called the Anyato-vata. 16-17.

The swelling of the eye attended with a bluish red
tint all about, owing to the partakings of meals com-
posed of an unduly large proportion of acid articles, or
of such food as is followed by a digestionary acid re-
action, is called the Amlddhyushita-Drishti. The
disease in which the veins all over the eye become
copper-coloured and are frequently discoloured, whether
attended with pain or not, is called the Sirotpata. 18-19.

* Madhava in the Niddna does not mention the

ryeelashes.
+ Madhava in the Niddna reads “gagqqq” which means that a highly

burning sensation is produced in the affected eye, in place of “Faaijqa-—
a word which seems redundant.

=== PAGE 54 ===

24 THE SUSHRUTA SAMUITA. (Chap. VL

A case of Sirotpata, if not attended to and remedied
in time through ignorance, gives rise to transparent and
copper-coloured discharges in copious quantities from
the eyes and produce a complete blindness of v
This is known as the Sird-harsha. 20.

Thus ends the sixth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus‘ruta
Samhit4 which treats of the diseases affecting the eye as a whole.

=== PAGE 55 ===

CHAPTER VI.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the pathology of the diseases which are peculiar to
the Drishti (pupil) of the cye (Drishti-gata-
Roga-Vijndniya). 1.

Experts well-versed in the anatomy of the eye ayer
that the Drishti (pupil) of the eye is the quintessence of
the five material clements with that of the ctcrnai light
predominating therein—this principle of light neither
increasing nor decreasing in this case. It is naturally
accustomed to cold from the very nature of its tempera-
ment and is covered by the outer coating (Patala) of the
organ proper. It looks like a hole and is equal in
dimension to that of a Aastra secd or pulse*. The
pupil of the eye resembies in its action the phosphores-
cent flash of a glow-vorm or that of a minute particle
of fire (in not burning the things coming in contact with
it). Now we shall describe the pathology of the twelve
kinds of disease peculiar to the region of the Drishti
(pupil), as well as of the one which is known as Timira
(loss of vision) affecting the Patala (coating over the
pupil). 2.

All external objects appear dim and hazy to the
sight when the deranged Doshas of the locality passing
through the veins (Sir) of the cyc, get into and are
incarcerated within the first Patala (innermost coat) of
the pupil (Drishti). 3.

Symptoms—when- second Patala
attacked :—False images of gnats, flics, hairs, nets or
cob-webs, rings (circular patches), flags, car-rings appear

* According to Nimi, quoted in Madhava’s commentary by S‘tikantha,
the dimension of the Drishti is equal to only a half of that of a A/asura-
pulse,

4

=== PAGE 56 ===

26 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. (Chap. VIL.

to the sight, and the external objects seem to be enveloped
in mist or haze or as if laid under a sheet of water or as
viewed in rain and on cloudy days, and meteors of differ-
eem to be falling constantly in all directions
in the event of the deranged Doshas being similarly con-
fined in the second Patala (coat) of the Drishti. In
such cases the near appearance of an actually remote
object and the contrary (A/opia and Biopia) also should
be ascribed to some deficiency in the range of

ent colou

ision

(error of refraction in the crystalline lens) which in-
capacitates the patient from looking through the eye
and hence from threading a needle. 4.
Symptoms—when third Patala
attacked :—Objects situate high above are seen and
those placed below remain unobserved when the de-
ranged Dosha are infiltrated into the Third Patala (coat)
of the Drishti. The Doshas affecting the Drishti (crystal-
line lens), if highly enraged, impart their specific colours
to the objects of v

ion. Even large objects seem to be
covered with a picce of cloth. The images of objects and
persons with ears and eyes, etc., seem to be otherwise
Ze, bereft of those organs. The deranged Doshas
situated at and obstructing the lower, upper and lateral
parts of the Drishti (crystalline lens) respectively shut
out the view of near, distant and laterally-situate objects.
Adim and confused view of the external world is all
that can be had when the deranged Doshas spread over
and affect the whole of the Drishti (crystalline lens). A
thing appears to the sight as if cutlinto two (bifurcated)
when the deranged Doshas affect the middle part of the
lens, and as triply divided and severed when the Dos
are scattered in two parts ; while a multifarious image
of the same object is the result of the manifold distribu-
tions of movability of the Doshas over the Drishti. 5.

=== PAGE 57 ===

Chap. VII. ] UTTARA-TANTARAM. 27

Symptoms—when fourth Patala
attacked :—Loss of vision (Timira) results from the
fact of the deranged bodily Doshas being confined within
the fourth Patala (choroid) of the organ. When the vision
is completely obstructed by the aforesaid cause, it is
called a case of Linga-ndsa (blindness). Only a faint per-
ception of the images of the sun, the moon and the stars,

the heaven, a flash of lightning or any other such highly
brilliant objects is possible in a case of superficial (not
deep-seated) Linga-nd4sa. The Linga-ndsa (blindness) is

also called Nilika and Kacha. 6.

Specific traits of Timira :—All external
objects are viewed as cloudy, moving, crooked and red-
coloured in the Vataja type (of Timira), while in the
Pittaja type they appear to be invested with the different

colours of the spectrum or of the rain-bow, of the glow-
worm, of the flash of lightning, or of the feathers of the
pea-cock, or with a dark bluc tint bordering on black ;
while in a case of Kaphaja Timira, a thick white coat
like that of a pack of white clouds or a deep white
chowri (Chamara) scems to intervene in everything which
look white and oily and dull and appear hazy and cloudy
in a fine day, or as if laid under a sheet of water. In a case
of the Raktaja type of Timira, all objects appear red or

ssume a greyish, blackish
se of Sdnnipatika Timira,
the outer world looks vareigated and confused, appears
as doubled or trebled to the vision (of the patient), and
stars and planets, cither defective or supplied with addi-

enyoloped in gloom, and they
or variegated colour. Ina ca

tional limbs, seem to float about in the vision. 7-11.
Parimlayi :—The quarters of the heaven look
yellow and appear to the sight as if resplendent with
the light of the rising sun, and trees seem as if sparkling
with the tangles of fire-flics in a case of Parimldyi,

=== PAGE 58 ===

28 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. (Chap. VIL.

which should be ascribed to the action of the deranged
Pitta in concert with the vitiated blood. 12.

The different colours of the pupilin
cases of Linga-naSa :—Now we shall describe
the colours of the pupil in the six different types of
Linga-nasa. The pupil assumes a reddish (Aruna) colour
in the Vataja type of the disease ; looks blue or bluish
yellow in the Pittaja, white in the Kaphaja and blood-
red in the blood-origined one, while it assumes a varic-
gated hue in the Sdnnipdtika type of Linga-ndsa. A cir-
cular patch (Mandala) tinged with a shade of bluish or
bluish yellow colour and looking like fire or a piece of
thick grass, is formed on the pupil owing to the diseased
and agg cd condition of the blood (with pitta) in a
case of Parimldyi. In this case the patient is sometimes
permitted to catch faint glimpses of the external objects
owing to the spontancous and occasional filtering away
of the deranged Doshas obstructing the vision. 13-15.

Specific Traits of Linga-ndaSa :—The
circular patch (over the pupil) in a case of Vataja Linga-
naga is red-coloured, and is moving and rough to the
touch, while that ina case of Pittaja Linga-ndsa is bluish
or yellow or coloured like bell-metal. The circular patch
in a case of Kaphaja Linga-nasa is thick, oily and as
white as a conch-shell, a Aveda flower or the moon—
resembling a white drop of water on the moving lotus
leaf and moving away to and fro when the eye is rubbed.
The circular patch over the pupil in a case of Raktaja
(blood-origined) Linga-ndsa is red-coloured like a coral
or a (red) lotus-petal. A Sdnuipdtika type of the
disease is marked by a variegated colour of the Drishti
(pupil) and by the specific symptoms of the different
Doshas. 16.

The total number of diseases peculiar to the Drishti

=== PAGE 59 ===

Chap. VIL J UTTARA-TANTARAM. 29

is twelve. The six types of Linga-ndsa (Drishti) have
been described above. The six other forms of the
discase, peculiar to the Drishti (pupil) are named
as Pitta-vidagdha-Drishti, Sleshma—vidagdha-Drishti,
Dhama-darsin, Hrasva-Jatya, Nakulandhyata and Gam-
bhirika. 17.

The disease in which the region of the Drishti (pupil)
assumes a yellowish colour, and all external objects

appear ycllow to the sight owing to the presence of the
vitaited (and augmented) Pitta in the region of the
Drishti is called Pitta-Vidagdha-Drishti. It is due to
an accumulation of the deranged Dosha (Pitta) in
the third Patala (coat) of the eye, and the patient
cannot see anything in the day, but can see only in the
night. 18.

The external objects appear white to the sight when
it is affected by the accumulation of the deranged Kapha.
The deranged Dosha (Kapha), in this ca: simulta-
neously divided over all the three Patalas (coats) of the
e. In consequence of this the patient is attacked
with nocturnal blindness, being able to see only in
the daytime owing to the (melting and) decrease of the
deranged Kapha through the heat of the sun. This is
known as Sleshma-vidagdha-Drishti. 19.

The external objects appear dusky or smoke-coloured
when the sight is affected through gric
tracted) fever, over-straining or cx
cise, or injury to the head, ete. The affection of vision
thus engendered is called Dhuma-Drishti (smoky
sight). 20.

The discase in which small things can be viewed
only with the greatest difficulty (even) in the daytime,
but can be viewed (casily and clearly) in the night owing
to the subsidence of the deranged pitta through the

(high and pro-
ve physical exer-

=== PAGE 60 ===

30 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. { Chap. VII.

coldness of the atmosphere (and a general cooling of the
Earth’s surface)* is called Hrasva-jdtya}. 21.

The form of occular affection in which the colour
of Drishti (pupil) of a man affected by the Doshas resem-
bles (and is found to emit (luminous) flashes like) that
of a mungoose in consequence of which the external
objects appear multi-coloured in the day time,* is
called Nakuldrdhya. The form of occular affection
due to the action of the deranged Vayu, and in which the
Drishti (pupil) is contracted and deformed and sinks
into the socket, attended with an extreme pain in the
affected parts, is called Gambhirikd. 22-23.

Besides the above, there are two more forms of
Linga-uaga of traumatic origin, v/s., Sa-nimitta (of ascer-
tainable origin) and A-nimitta (without any manifest or

ascertainable cause). Under the first group may be

arranged those which are produced by such causes
an over-heated § condition of the head (brain, ctc.), and
marked by the specific symptoms of (blood-origined)
Abhishyanda, while the second comprises
which the loss of one’s
the witnessing of divine halo or effulgence emanating
from the ethereal person of a god, or a Gandharva (demi-
god),a holy saint, a celestial serpent, or such other

as

those in

ion is due to causes, such as

vii

"The latter part of the text here seems to be incongruous.
Madhava does not read the last line in his Niddna, nor does Dallana
include it in his commentary. Dallana, on the other hand, says that some
read this line, but holds, on the authorityof Vidcha, that the reading is
incongruous, in as much as “Hrasva-jétya” is said to cause one of the
four types of night-blindness.

+ Some read Hrasva-jédya in place of Hrasva-jatya.

+ This shows that a man affected with this form of disease cannot
see anything in the night.

§ The head is liable to be over-heated by the smelling of poison or
poisonous objects or any other strong-scented flower, etc.

=== PAGE 61 ===

Chap. VII] UTTARA-TANTARAM. 3

highly bright object. In this case the eye is not out-
wardly affected and the pupil (Drishti) looks as bright
and clear as a Vaiddrya gem, while in the former case

(of ascertainable origin) the eye is characterised by a
sunken or pierced or impaired aspect of the pupil. 24.
We have thus finished describing separately the
diagnostic traits of the sevent; forms of disease
which affect the organ of ion. We shall hereafter
separately deal with the nature of the medical treatment

to be pursued in cach case.

Thus ends the seventh chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus‘ruta
Samhité which treats of the pathology of the diseases peculiar to the
pupil of the eye.

=== PAGE 62 ===

CHAPTER VIL

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the classification of occular affection according to
the different modes of treatment (Netra-~Roga-~
Chikitsa-Vibhaga-Vijndniya). 1.

Classification :—We have already described
the names and symptoms of the seventy-six kinds of

eye disease. We shall now briefly and severally deal
with the nature of treatment to be pursued in them.
Of these seventy-six kinds eleven should be treated
with incision operations (Chhedya), nine with  scarifica-
tion (Lekhya), five with excision (Bhedya), fifteen with
venesection (Vyddhya) ; twelve cases should not be
operated upon and seven admit only of palliative
measures (Yapya), while fifteen should be given up by
an experienced physician (Ophthaimic surgeon) as in-
curable. The two kinds of eye-discase of traumatic
origin should be likewise held as incurable or admitting

only of palliative measures at the best. 2.
Names of the Chhedya and Lekhya
eye-diseases :—Discases which should be treated

with incision are Arso-vartina, Sushkarsas, Arvuda, Sira-

Pidaké, Sirajala, the five types of Arman*, and
Parvaniké (thus numbering eleven in all), Diseases in
which searification should be resorted to (numbering

seven in all) are Utsangini, Bahala-vartma, Kardama-

vartma, Syava-vartma, Vaddha-vartma, Klishta-vartma,

Pothaki, Kumbhikini, and Sarkaré-vartma. 3-4.
Names of Bhedya and Vyddhya eye-

diseases :—Optical diseases in which the affected

* See Chapter IV, para 2, Uttara-Tantara.

=== PAGE 63 ===

Chap. VIII. } UTTARA-TANTARAM. 33

localities should be treated with excisions, are Sleshmo-
panaha, Lagana, Vi

-vartma, Krimi-granthi and
Anjana—thus numbering five in all. The two kinds of
eye-discase beginning with Sira v7s., Sirotpita and Sira-
harsha, the two kinds of Akshi-paka attended or un-
attended with swelling, és. Sasothakshi-paka and
Asothakshi-paka, and Anyatovdta, Puydlasa, Vata-
viparyaya and the four types of Abhishyanda and the
four types of Adhimantha should be treated with
Venesection (Sird-vyadhana). 5-6.

Eye-diseases—not to be operated :—
Operations should not be resorted to in cases of Sushké-
kshi-paka, Kapha-Vidagdha-Drishti, Pitta-Vidagdha-
Drishti, Amladhyushita-Drishti, Sukra-roga, Agjuna,
Pishtaka, Aklinna-vartma, Dhuma-darsin, Suktikd, Prak-
linna-vartma and Valdsa—thus making twelve in all.
In the traumatic forms also of ceye-diseasc surgical
operations are not advised by experts. 7.

Names of Curable and incurable eye-
disease :—Palliative or temporary relief is ail
that can be offered in any of the six types of Kacha
described before, as well as in the affection known as
Pakshma-kopa, if the patient retains the faculty of
sight. Lour of the Vayw-origined, two of the Pittaja,

one of the Kaphaja, four of the blood-origined and four
of the types caused by the concerted action of the three
Doshas, as well as the two traumatic forms of optical
affections should be regarded as beyond all cure. 8-9.

Thus ends the eighth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta
Samhité which deals with the classification of eye.
the different modes of treatment,

es according to

=== PAGE 64 ===

CHAPTER IX.

Now we shall discourse on the remedial measures of
Abhishyanda (Ophthalmia) due to the action of the
deranged Vayu (Vatdbhishyanda-~Pratish-~
edha)* 1.

The patient should be treated with old and matured
clarified butter, both in a case of (VAataja) Abhishyanda
(Ophthalmia) and (Vataja) Adhimantha (Conjunctivites).
The diseased organ should be then duly* fomented
and local venesection resorted to. Then after having
effected full purging with the help of a Sneha-vasti
(oleaginous enema), such measures as Tarpana, Puta-
pika, fumigation, sprinklings (Aschyotana) +, snuffing
(Nasya), oily washings, Siro-vasti (errhines) or washing
the organ with Kanjika (Amla) or with any decoction
prepared with the drugs of the Vdyu-subduing group
or with that of the flesh of any aquatic (Jalaja) animal,
or of one frequenting the marshy places (Anupa), should
be resorted to. A compound consisting of clarified
butter, curd, fat and marrow should be applied luke-
warm to the affected organ, which should also be

* It should be noted that the part of the forehead adjoining the eye
and not the eye itself—should be fomented, since fomentation should not
be applied directly over the eye.

+ As'cnyoraNa (Evr-pRop)—Consists in dropping into the eye
with the two fingers, honey, A’sava, drug-decoction or any oleaginous sub-

stance. Its doses are cight drops for scarifying purposes, ten drops for
lubricating the part with any oleaginous substance (Snehana), twelve drops
for the healing of any local ulcer (Ropana). They should be dropped luke-
warm in winter and cold in summer into the eyes. In diseases of Vataja
origin they should be of a bitter taste ; oleaginous in diseases due to the
Pitta ; and bitter,—warm and parching in diseases due to Kapha.
—VaIDyAKA NIGHANTU as quoted in the Vaidyaka-S’abda-Sindhu. Cf
also Chapter XVIII, Uttara-Tantra.

=== PAGE 65 ===

Chap. IX.J UTTARA-TANTARAM. 35
covered with a compress or linen soaked with the preced-
ing lardacious compound. Milk, Vesavara, Salvana
Poultice, Porridges (Payasa), etc. should be used by a
physician in poulticing the affected organ. A portion of
clarified butter cooked with the decoction of Triphala,
or simply old and matured clarified butter, or milk duly
cooked with the drugs of the Vayu-subduing group, or
of the first group (viz., Viddri-Gandhddi Gana) should
be taken after the meal. 2. A.

The application of any lardacious substance other
than oil cooked with the admixture of the Vayu-sub-
duing drugs will prove beneficial for Tarpana purposes
in such cases. The use of medicated Sweha in the shape
of Putapdka, Dhuma (fumigation) and Nasya (snuffs) is
likewise recommended. Oil (duly) cooked with Sthird,
milk and the drugs of the Madhura group should be
employed as a snuff (in such cases). The milk of a
she-goat duly cooked with the admixture of the leaves,
roots or barks of Eranda plants, or with the roots of
Kantakdri, should be employed lukewarm in washing
(Sechana) the affected organ. A liquid compound con-
taining half milk and half water, and boiled together
with Saindhava, Vdld, Yashti-madhu and Pippali, should
be used in washing the eye as well as an Aschyotana
(eye-drop). A liquid compound consisting of the milk
of a she-goat diluted with the addition of water, boiled
with the admixture of //rivera, Chakra (Tagara), Man-
jishthd, and Udumbara-barks is considered to be the
best eye-drop in cases of there being any pain (Sula) in
the eye. 2. B.

A thin plaster compound of Vasthimmadhu, Rajant,
Pathyd and Devadéru, pasted together with the milk
of a she-goat should be used as an Anjana (collyrium) in
a case of acute Ophthalmia (Abhishyanda), and it proves

=== PAGE 66 ===

36 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Chap. IX.

very effective. Gairika-earth, Saindhava, Krishna,
(Pippali) and S’wxthi—the quantity of each subsequent
one being double of that of the one preceding it in the
order of enumeration, should be pasted together with
water, made into Gutikd (a large pill) and be likewise
applied (to the cye) in the manner of the application
of an Anjana. The use of Snaihika (lardacious) Anjana
(Collyrium) is beneficial in such cases. These will be
duly dealt with later on. 2.

Physicians should likewise adopt this method in
treating cases of Anyato-vata and Vata-paryaya.
Draughts of (medicated) clarified butter and of milk
before the meal, are highly efficacious. Clarified butter
duly cooked with (two parts of) Vrikshddani, Kapittha
and major Pancha-mula, (one part of) the expressed
juice (or decoction) of Karkata and (one part of) milk
should be taken in such cases*. In the alternative,
Ghrita duly cooked with (the decoction of) Pattura,
Agnika (Ajamodé) and Aytagala and with milk, or
clarified butter duly cooked with milk and (the decoc-
tion of) Mesha-s'ringi, or of Viratara should be simi-
larly taken. 3.

Treatment of Sushkakshi-pdka:
Saindhava, Devaddru and S'unthi and the expressed
juice of Mdétulunga, water, breast-milk and clarified
butter mixed together and duly prepared (in the manner
of Rasa- ‘4) should be prescribed as an Anjana in
cases of Sushkdkshi-pdka. The taking of clarified

* According to Dallana and Gayaddsa, this Ghrita should be pre-
pared without any Kalka. S'rikanta holds that the drugs Vridshaddni,
Kapittha and the Pancha-mula should be taken as Kalka and the Ghrita
prepared with three parts of milk, Stivadasa also seems io support this
view.

=== PAGE 67 ===

Chap. IX.} UTTARA-TANTARAM. 37

butter cooked with the drugs of the /7vaniya group and
the filling of the cavity of the eye with the same, as
well as snuffing with the Azz-ta‘la* are also efficacious
in such cases. Washes composed of cold milk with the
admixture of Saindhava salt or of milk cooked with
Rajani and Deva-ddru and mixed with (a little quantity
of) Saindhava are efficacious. Afahaushadha (Sunthi)
rubbed over a stone-slab with clarified butter and breast-
milk is also recommended as an Anjana (cyc-salve)}.
The Vasa (essence of the flesh) of aquatic animals or of
those which frequent swampy grounds, mixed with a
little quantity of powdered S’unthé and Santdhava salt
(and rubbed on stone-slab) should be applied to the
eyesas an Anjana (collyrium) in a case of Sushkakshi-
paka (Non-secreting type of conjunctivites). Let the
intelligent physician treat the sight-destroying Vataja
affections of the eye of what-soever kind in accordance
with the principle herein inculeated. 4-5.

Thus ends the ninth Chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus‘ruta
Samhita which deals with the medical treatment of Vataja Abhishyanda.

* According to Dallana, this Anu-taila is not the onc described in
Chapter V of the Chikitsita Sth4na ; but the one described in the S‘élékya-
Tantra.

+ This couplet may also be translated as follows :—Anjana (black-
antimony) rubbed over a stone-slab with clarified butter and breast-milk

is also recommended as a best remedy in stich cases.

=== PAGE 68 ===

CHAPTER X.

Now we shall discourse on the curative treatment of
Abhishyanda (Ophthalmia) duc to the action of deranged
Pitta (Pittd-bhishyanda~Pratishedha). 1.

General Treatment :—Blood-letting and
purgatives, cye-washes and plasters round the cycs,
medicinal snuffs and Anjana (collyrium), as well as the
remedial measures for Pittaja-Visarpa (Erysipclas)
should be employed in a case of Pittaja Abhishyanda
(Ophthalmia) and Pittaja Adhimantha (Conjunctivites). 2.

Clarified butter or goat's milk duly cooked with
Gundrd, S'dli (paddy), S’aivdla, S'aila-bheda, Ddru-
haridrd, Eld, Vtpala, two parts of Lodhra, Abhra (Mus-
taka), Padmaeaves, sugar, Durvd, Ikshu, Tdla, Vetasa,
Padmaka, Drdkshd, honey, (ted) Chandana, Vashti-
madhubreast-milk, Havidrd and Ananta-mula, should be
employed as a Tarpana measure* or as a wash or
snuff in the present casc. As an alternative, all the
preceding drugs or as many of them as would be avail-
able should be daily used in the manner of any of the
four forms of Nasyat. 3.

Anjanas :—All the Pitta-subduing measures,
may be employed in such cases. Application of medi-
cinal snuffs (as well as eye-drops, etc.) with Ashiva-
Sarpih (clarified butter churned from milk) at the
interval of three days, as well as that of Anjana (colly-
rium) with the expressed juice of Palés‘a or of S’allaki,
mixed with honey and sugar, should be likewise resorted

® See Chapter XVIII, ibid.
+ The four forms of Nasya are (1) Pratimarsha. (2) Avapida (3) Nasya
(snuff) and (4) Stiro-virechana.

=== PAGE 69 ===

Chap. X. ] UTTARA-TANTARAM. 39

to. The thick liquid extract (Rasa-Kriyd)* of Palind?
or Yashti-madhu mixed with honcy and sugar, should
be likewise employed. As an alternative, a com-
pound consisting of Afusta, Samudra-phena, Utpala,
Vidanga, Elé, Dhdtri and Vijaka and prepared in the
manner of Rasa-kriyA should be employed (as an
Anjana). 4.

Acompound of 7é/isa (D. R—Kasisa), E/é, Gairika,
Ustira and S'amkha (conch-shell) pasted with breast-
milk should be applied to the affected organ in the
manner of an Anjana (cyc-salve). As an alternative,
the powder or the Rasa-kriya of Didtaki and Syandana
(D. R.—Chandana) mixed with breast-milk should be
used as an Anjana. Gold-leaf rmbbed with breast-
milk, or the flowers of Avms’uka rubbed with honcy,
or of acompound of Rodhra, Drdkshd, sugar, Utpala,
Vacha and Vashti-madhu vubbed with breast-milk
should be used as an Anjana. Barks of Varnakat pasted
in cow's milk, or (red) Chandana wood, Udumbara and
Toya (Vala) pasted in the same, or Samudraphena
rubbed either in honey or breast-milk should be like-
wise applied to the eyes in the manner of an Anjana. 5.

ASchyotana :—Rodhra, Vashti-madhu, Drdkshé,
sugar and Ufpala should be soaked in breast-milk. It
should then be folded inside a picce of silk (Ashauma)
and employed as an Aschyotana (cye-drop). A compound
of Vashte-madhu and Rodhra rubbed in clarified butter
should be similarly used. A compound of Kés’mart
(Gamthari) Dhdtr?, Pathyd (Haritaki) and Zoya (Vala),

* Fou preparation of Rasa-kriyd sec Chapter NVI, ibid.
+ According to Dallana, ‘Varnaka’ Imeans ‘Kochanifa’. It may

also mean ‘Aarnita'ra’ which is not accepted either by Gay or by
Dallana, It may also mean ‘Chandana’ which is most probably the
meaning here.

=== PAGE 70 ===

40 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. { Chap. X.

aswell as that of Aatphala and Amdbu (Vala) should
be similarly* prepared and applied. 6.

All the above remedial measures with the exception
of blood-letting should be resorted to in a case of Amld-
dhyushita-Drishti and Sukti-pika. The medicated
Ghritas known as the Traiphala Ghrita or the Tilvaka
Ghrita* should be prescribed, or simply old and matured
clarified butter should be given in such cases. 7.

Ina case of Sukti-pdka an Anjana with cooling drugs
should be speedily employed in the event of the Doshas
being located in the lower part of the eye. Fine powder
of Vaidurya gem, Sphatika (crystal), Vidruma (coral)
and Muhtd (pearl), Samkha (conch-shell), silver and gold
mixed with sugar and honey and used as an anjana
would prove a speedy remedy in a case of Sukti-paka. 8.

Clarified butter should be administered in a case of
Dhuma-darsin and the procedure and the remedial mea-
sures laid down in connection with Rakta-pitta and
Pitta-origined Visarpa (Erysipelas) as well as the Pitta-
sub-duing remedies * should be likewise employed there-
in. 9.

Thus ends the tenth chapter in the Uttra-Tantra of the Sus'ruta Samhita
which deals with of the curative treatment of Pittabhishyanda,

* In the first two compounds, some take ‘Toya’ and ‘Ambu’ for
water. But Dallana having explained ‘Zoya’ as ‘Valaéa’ in a preceding
compound we adopt that meaning of the word here also.

} Traiphala-Ghrita is prepared by duly cooking clarified butter with
the Kalka and decoction of 7ripkala’. For Tilvaka-Ghritaisee chapter III.
Chikistsita-Sthéna.

+ By Pitta-subduing remedies Dallana means the remedial measures
laid down in connection with the treatment of Pitta-Vidagdha- Drishti.

=== PAGE 71 ===

CHAPTER XI.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the curative treatment of Abhishyanda due to the
deranged action of Sieshma (Sleshmabhishya-=
nda-Pratishedha). 1.

General Treatment :—An attack of Slesh-
maja Abhishyanda or Adhimantha during the stage of
acute aggravation should be treated by opening a local

vein® or by the employment of fomentation, Avapida-

a, Anjana, fumigation, washes, plaste:
non-fatty (Ruksha) eye-drops (Aschyotana) and Puta-
paka. The patient shou'd be made to fast on cach
fourth day and to take a potion of Tikta-Ghritat+ in the
morning, and his dict should consist of such articles as

urgles or

do not lead to the aggravation of the bodily Kapha. 2-3.

Tender twigs or leaves of A'utannata, Ashpotd,
Phanijjhaka, Vilva, Pattura, Pilu, Arka and Kapittha’
should be employed in (mildly) fomenting the affected
eye. A thin plaster composed of Malaka, S'unthi, Deva-
dadru and Kushtha, should be likewise applied to the
affected eye. 4.

Hingu, (Asafeetida), Triphald, Yashti-madhu, Sain-
dhava, Prapaundatka, Anjana (black Antimony), Tuétha
(Sulphate of copper), and copper pasted together with

The word ‘Atha’ (37) in the text. means says Dallana, that the

local vein should be opened as the best resource, when fomentation, ele.

would fail to effect a cure.
+ See Chikitsita-sthana, chapter IN.
$ In place of “Kiwtannata” and “Arba” both Vrinda and Chakrapéni

read “Surasa® and ©Arja”. S'rikantha the commentator of Vrinila how:
ever is of opinion that Arka should be better reading in place of that of
“Anja”.

6

=== PAGE 72 ===

42 THE SUSHRUTA SAMMITA, (Chap. XI.

water and made into a stick (Varti) should be applied as
an Anjana to the affected eye. As an alternative, sticks
(Varti) composed of Pathyd, Haridrd, Yashti-madhu and
Anjana should be similarly applied. Compounds made
of the equal parts of Pippali, Maricha, S'unthi, Haritaki,
Amalaki, Vibhitaka, Haridré and Vidanga-seeds, or of
Vélaka, Kushtha, Deva-déru, (burnt) conch-shell, Pdathd
(Akanidhi), Anala (Chitraka roots), Pippali, Maricha,
S'unthi and Manah-s'ildé (Realgar) and the flowers of
Jati, Karanja and S obhdnjana* pasted together with
water should be applied to the eye. The secdst of
Prakiryé (Karanja), or of S’igrw with the seeds and
flowers of the two kinds of Vrihati mixed with Rasdn-
jana, Chandana, Saindhava-sait, Manah-s'ild, Haritaki,
and garlic taken in equal parts and pasted together
with water should be made into sticks (Varti) and used
as an Anjana in all form

The following medicinal compounds should be pres-

of Kaphaja eye-diseases. 5.

cribed by experts as an Anjana (cye-salve) in a case of
Valdsa-Grathita after the system of the patient had
been properly cleansed by means of blood-letting. A
quantity of blue barley with the horns should be soaked
(for a week or two) in milk and dried (after the manner
of Bhavana saturation). It should then be burnt into
ashes. These ashes should then be mixed with an
equal part of burnt ashes of Azjaka, Ashphotaka,
Kapittha, Vilva, Nirgundi and /dti flowers and an alka-

* Dallana quotes the reading of “Panjika’éa’ra” (another commen-

tator of Sus‘ruta) according to whom J/urva’ and the flowers of /a’ti only
should be taken instead of the flowers of Jal, Karanja and S'obha'njana.
This reading seems to be the correct one inasmuch as this makes the
number of the drugs in the list twelve in all, as given by Dallana himself.

+ According to some commentators both the seeds and, flowers of
Prakirié and of Stigru should be taken.

=== PAGE 73 ===

Chap. XI.) UTTAKA-TANTRAM. 43

line solution should be duly prepared therewith. Saéx-
dhava, Tuttha (Sulphate of copper) and Rochand should
now be added to the above a'kaline solution and duly
boiled. The compound thus prepared should be appilicd
as an Anjana with an iron pipe (Nadi). This is’ pr
cribed in a case of Va'asa-Grathita. Alkaline prepara-

tions may be similariy prepared with (the flowers, ete.
of) Phanijjhaka ctc., and may be employed ina similar
manner. 6.

A (thin) plaster composed of S’uuthi, Pipfali, Musta,
Saindhava and white Maricha® pasted with the
expressed juice of J/dtu/unga and applied to the eye as
an Anjana, would bring about a speedy cure of the eye-
disease known as Pishtaka. 7.

Vrihati fruits shou'd be gathered whea ripe and a
pas’. compound of (the equal parts of) Pppali and
Sroténjana should be kept inside those scedless fruits for
seven nights. The (preserved) paste shou!d then be
taken out and applied to the eye asan Anjana. It
proves beneficial in a case of Pishtaka. Paste may
similarly be preserved inside a Mdrtdhu (brinjal), S'igru,
Indra-Vérunt, Patola, Kirdta-tikta and Amalaki and used
for the same. 8

Kasiga (Sulphate of iron), Samudra, Rasdujana
and buds of /d#-fiowers pasted together and rubbed in
honey, is advised to be prescribed as an Anjana ina
case of Praklinna-Vartma. 9.

A single application as an Anjana of the compound
composed of excellent Nddeya (Saindhava){ — salt,

* Dallana explains white aricha as S'igru sceds.
+ Samudra may cither mean Samudra-phena or Samudra salt, i.e.
‘lent on this point.

Karakacka salt. The commentators are
+ Dallana explains Nédeya as meaning Saindhava, but it generally
cans Srotanjana (black antimony).

=== PAGE 74 ===

44. THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. { Chap. NI.

white pipper* and Nepdla-jdta (Realgar-lit, that which
is produced in Nepala) taken in equal parts and_ pasted
together with the expressed juice of J/dtulanga, would
alleviate the itching scnsation (Kandu) in the eyes.
Similarly a compound of S’ringa-vera, Deva-ddru, Musta,
Saindhavé salt and buds of Jét flowers pasted together
with wine and used as an Anjana would prove effica-
cious in a case of swelling (Sopha) and itching sensa-
tion of the eyes. The above ceye-diseases should be
judiciously treated in accordance with the principles
laid down in the treatment of the cases of Abhi-shyanda
and Adhi-mantha. to.

Thus ends the eleventh chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'rata
Samhita which treats of the curative treatment of S'leshmabhishyanda.

* Dallana explains “‘S’veta-Maricha” as *S'igru-seeds”, but there is a

particular kind of Maricha which is white in colour and this is also
supported by some commentator.

=== PAGE 75 ===

CHAPTER XII.

Now we shall discourse on the curative treatment
of the type of Abhishyanda (Ophthalmia) which has
its origin in the vitiated condition of the blood
(Raktabhishyanda-Pratishedha). 1.

General Treatment :—A wise physician
shali pursue the same course of medical treatment in
those four diseases known as Adhimantha, Abhishyanda,
Sirotpata and Sird-harsha due to the vitiated condition
of the blood. Persons suffering from any of the afore-
said four compiaints should be first anointed and lubri-
cated with old and matured clarified butter technically
known as Aawabha Ghrita®, or with a copious quantity
of clarified butter. Venesection should then be resorted
to. The patient, having been made thus to bieed as much
as required, should be treated with clarified butter duly
ccoked with Siro-virechana drugs and mixed with sugar,

as an errhine for cleansing the head. Piasters, washes,
snuffs (Nas: inhalations (Dhuma) of medicated smokes,
schyotana), Abhyanjanat, Tarpana (sooth-

ing measures), Sneha-

eye-drops (

arma (cmulsive measures) and
Puta-paka should then be prescribed according to the
nature of the deranged Dosha involved in cach
case. 2-3.

A piaster (Pralepa) composed of NVilotpala, Cs'ira,
Dérwharidra, Kaliya, Vashti-inadhi, Musta, Lodhra and
Padma-Késhtha (taken in equal parts and) snixed with
Ghrita—duly washed, should be applied round the region

* See Chapter XLV, sutra-Sthéna,
+ Dallana explains “Abhyanjana” as collyrium, but he also says. that
some commentators take it in its usual sense of ancintment with clarified

butter washed hundred times in water, or such other Sncha.

=== PAGE 76 ===

46 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. (Chap, XII.

of the affected eye. Mild fomentations (Sveda), or
leeches should be applied to the region around the eye
in the event of there being intolerabie pain (due to any
defect in bleeding) in the affected organ. Large draughts
of clarified butter tend to alleviate the pain. Remedial
measures and agents mentioned in connection with
Pittabhishyande

Rain-water with powdered Aas‘eru and Yashti-madhu

should be as well employed. 6-7.

added thereto may be squeezed with benefit through a
piece of linen into the affected organ* as an Aschyotana.
Flowers of Pdtald, Arjuna, S'riparni, Dhdtaki, Dhétri,
Vilva, the two kinds of Vrihati,and of Vimbi-lota and
Manjishthé taken in equal parts and pasted together
with honey or expressed juice of sugar-cane and applicd
to the affected organ as an Anjana (Collyrium) is said
to bea curative in cases of Raktabhishyanda. 8-9.

A. similar compound consisting of Chandana,
Kumuda, Patra, Stilégatu, Kumkuma, powders of dead
iron and dead copper, Zuttha (Sulphate of copper), lead,
bell-metal, Rasdujana and the resinous exudation of a
Nimba tree taken in equal parts should be pasted with
honey and made into large Vartis (sticks). These are
always recommended to be applied to the affected eye
as an Anjana. 10.

Treatment of Sirotpata :—A compound
isting of honey and clarified butter and applied as
an Anjana should be regarded as a patent cure in cases
of Sirotpdta cyc-discase. A compound composed of
Saindhava (salt), Kds‘is'a (Sulphate of iron) and pasted
together with breast-milk should be similarly used. The

* Both Dallana and Stivadasa say that pure transparent water may be
used in preparing the compound ifrain-water is not available. Dallana
says further that the affected eye should also be washed with the liquid
compound thus prepared. Sfivaddsa, however, supports this latter view.

=== PAGE 77 ===

Chap. NU] UTTARA-TANTRAM, 47

application as an Anjana of S’amkha (ccnch-shell),
Manah-s'ilé, Tuttha, Déru-haridré, and Saindhava pasted
with honey, or of (white) Jaricha pasted with the juice
of SYérisha flowers, honey and wine, or of Svarna-Garika
pasted with honey would be attended with beneficial
results in cases of Sirotpdta. 11.

Sird-harsha:—A compound consisting of
Phénita( treacle boiled down to a sticky consistency)
and honey should be applied to the affected organ as
an Anjana in a case of Sird-harsha. Similar applications
of compounds composed of Rasdujana (Antimony) pasted
with honey, or of Saindhava and Kéds‘és‘a (Sulphate of
iron) pasted with honey, or of Vetrdila* and Saindhaza
pasted with Phduita and breast-milk wouid likewise
prove highly efficacious. 12.

Treatment of Arjuna :—.\'! the measures
and remedies for Pittébhishyanda should be employed
in cases of Arjuna cyc-discase. The expressed juice of
sugar-cane, honey, sugar, breastmilk, Ddsw-haridra,
Yashti-madhu and Saiindhava should be used in combi-
nation as a wash (Seka), or an Anjana. <lmla
(Kanjika, &c.) should also be used as an Aschyotana (eyc-
drop) in such ca:

The following drugs, 77s., sugar,
Yashti-madhu, Katvanga, Mastu, Ala, honey, Saindhava,
Vija-puraka, Kola and Dddimba of acid taste and other
acid fruits cither singly or in combination of two or
three should be judiciously used (as an Aschyotana
with a due consideration of the vitiated Dosha in cach
case). 13-14.

These two following compounds viz., of Sphatiha

* Dallana explains “Vetrdmla”

“Amla velasa”. Some, however,
divide it into two words 7s. “Vetra” and “Ainla” meaning thereby
sprouts of Vetra (canc) ant Amla-vecasa respectively.

=== PAGE 78 ===

48 THE SUSHRUTA SAMIITA, { Chap. NIL.

stal), Védruma (coral), S'amkha (conch-shell), and
Vashti-madhu, pasted with honey, as well as of S’amkha,
sugar, and Samudra-phena pasted with honcy, if used as
an Anjana would prove curative in a case of Arjuna eye-
disease. Satndhava and Kataka pasted with honey, or
Rasdjana pasted with honey, or Kds‘isa (Sulphate of
iron) pasted with honey, shouid constantly be applied
as an Anjana to the affected organ. 15.
Scarifying-Anjana :—All kinds of powder-
ed (dead) metals (Gold, Silver, Iron, Copper, ete.) and
metallic substances (Manal-s'ild, Gairika, etc.), (the five
officinal kinds of) salt, all kinds of gems (Vaédurya, coral
etc), the teeth (of cows, horses, etc.), the horns (of cows,
etc), the drugs of the sedative (Avasddana) * group,
pulverised shells of hen’s eggs, Las‘una (garlic), Trikatu,

Karanja sceds and E/d (cardamom) mixed together and
used as an Anjana, should be regarded as Scarifying
(Lekhya) in their action. 16.

Treatment of Sukra:—In a case of non-
ulcerated (A-vrana) Sukra (milky film or white fleshy
growth in the eye) a skilful physician shall (first)
adopt all the preceding measures prescribed in the

treatment of (Blood-origined) Abhishyanda,} beginning
with Rakta-vi
Puta-pika (and these failing, the Lekhydnjana—
collyrium fer scarifying) should be adopted. A case of
ulcerated (Sa-vrana) Sakra whether superficial or deep-
seated t or rough should be treated in the same

‘avana (Venescction) and ending with

manner. 17-18.

The group beginning with Kés'is’a—See Chapter NNNVI, Sutra-

Sthana, page 334, Vol. I.

+ See paras 3 and 4 of this Chapter.

$ “Superficial” (Uttana) is here used in the sense of “seated in the

first layer” andl

=== PAGE 79 ===

Chap. XIL J UTTARA-TANTR.

f. 49

In a case of Sakra the affected part should be
rubbed (scaritied) with a compound consisting of S‘irisha-
seeds, Murtha, Pippali and Saindhava pounded together,
or with Saizdhava a'one. A compound composed of
powdered copper, Manah-s'ild, Marichaand Saindhava
each preceding drug being taken ina quantity double
the one immediately succeeding it in the order of enu-
meration*, should be pounded together and made into a
thin paste. Applied as an Anjana to the seat of the
disease, it will cure a case of Sukra. As alternatives,
the two compounds composed of S’amkha, stones of
Kolas, Kataka, Drdksha, Vashti-inadhu, Mékshika (honey),
orof teeth (of cows, cte.), Sanudra-phena and S'irisha
flower anil honzy should be applied to the affected
locality inthe manner of applying an Anjana. The Kshd-
rdujana (alkaline collyrium) mentioned in connection
grathita,t may
as well bz profitab'y employed as an Anjana (eye-salve)
in the present disorder. Eye-salyes made of fried husk-

with the medical treatment of Vals:

less Vadyr pu'se, (burnt) Samkha and sugar mixed with
honey, or of the pith of Madhuka pasted with honey,
or of the inner pulps of the stones of Iibhitaka pasted
with honey should be constantly used as an Anjana, in
Sukra. A compound
shd, Vashti-
madhu, Kataka and honey may be used and soothing
application (Tarpana) antidotal to the deranged bodily
Vayu, should be resorted to in cases of Sukra, if the
second layer (Patala) of the cye is attended with pain
(Sula). 1g 26.

cases of the eye-disease known
consisting of conch-shell, oyster-shell, Dra.

* One part of Saindh iva, two parts of Alaricha, four of Manaks'ilt,
eight of S'amfha and sixtecn parts of copper should be taken in the pres
paration of the compound.

f See Chapter Ny para 6.

“

=== PAGE 80 ===

50 THE SUSHRUTA SAMUI TA. ( Chap. NIL

Young bamboo-sprouts, Arushhare, Tals (palm) and
Nérikela (cocoanut)* should be burnt to ashes and
alkaline water shou'd be duly pzepared therewith. The
burnt ashes of clephant’s bones should be soaked several
(seven) times with the above alkaline preparation in the
manner of Bhavana saturation. The application of this
preparation in the manner of an Anjana tends to
remove the discolouring nature (whiteness) of a case
of Sukra +f. 22.

Treatment of Ajaka :—The thin watery
matter accumulated in the eye in a case of Ajakd
should be drained by making a puncture on either side
(of the cornea ) with a needle after which the incidental
ulcer should be filled with powdered beef mixed with
clarified butter, Scarification shou'd be many times
made in the event of the ulcer becoming raised. 23.

Treatment of Akshi-pdka :—Applica-
tions of Sneha and of Syeda (fomentation) to the affected
locality should be made in cases of the two kinds of eye-
disease known as Sa-Sopha and A-sopha Akshi-pdka
(inflammation of the eye-lid whether attended with any
local swelling or otherwise). Vencsection should then be
resorted to. Eye-washes, eye-drops (Aschyotana), errhi-
nes (Nasya) and Puta-pdka measures should also be

employed. 24.

After having cleansed the systein of the patient both
internally and externally the following compounds
should be used as an Anjana (in cases of the two kinds

* The spathe (Jat4) of the palm tree and the shell of the cocoanut
fruit should be taken in preparing the compound —S’iva‘lasa.

+ The prepar.d powder of clephant’s bone should be mixed with
honey and rubbed over the affected part (S’ukra) with the tip of the finger
ye should then be washed with the in-

or witha Sfalakd (rod). Ti
fusion of 7riphald.—Dallana.

=== PAGE 81 ===

Chap. XII) UTTABRA-TANTRAM. St

of Akshi-paka). Serndhava and clariticd butter pasted
together in a copper vesse! with flesh or AZeévera or curd
n Anjana.
AAs an alternative, the rust of bell-metal pasted with

or with curd-cream  shou'd be used as

clarified butter, or Safndhava pasted with breast-milk,
or equal parts of the pith of JWathuka tree and Gairika

pasted with honey, or Savdthava and copper pasted

with breast-milk and clarified Lutter should be used as
Anjanas. The compounds of Dadiviba, Araveta, As’
manta, Kola, and Saindhava pas:ed with any acid juice*
should be applied to the affected organ in the manner
of a Rasa-kriyd measure for the cure of (the two kinds
of) Akshi-pika. 25-26.

Animal flesh and Saéndhavs salt soaked in clarified
butter and mixed with S’wz/h/ and breast-nilk should
be applied to the affected org:
Aschyotana or as an Anjana. .\ compound consisting
of Jat flower, Saindhava, S'unthi, Pippali and huskless
Vidanga pasted together with honey, may as well be

san in the manner of an

used as an with advantage in a case of
Akshi-paka. .
Treatment of Puydlasa :—Blood-letting

(after the application of Sncha and Sveda) and_ poultic-

ing (Upantha) of the affected lecality are efficacious
in the affecticn of the ey nown as Puydlasa. The
measures and remedies which prove curative in cases
of Aksk
cretion in this case by a_ physi
(cy
(Sulphate of iron), or Ads
and copper dust pasted together with honey, should be

paka should as well be employed with dis-
ian. An Anjana
salve) composed of Ardraka, Saindhava and Kas'tsa

sa Saindhava, cirdraka, ivon

applied to the affected eye in the manner of an Anjana
(in a case of Puydlasa). 29 30.

* Some add honcy in the list

=== PAGE 82 ===

A SAMEITA, (Chap. NUL

THE SUSHK

Treatment of Praklinna-vartma :—
The deranged Doshas of the system should be duly*
removed (corrected) and the patient should be duly
soothed in a case of Praklinna-vartma, after which
washes, eye-salves, eye-drops (Aschyotana), snuffs (Nasya)
and fumigation (Dhuma) should be resorted to according
to the Dosha involved in each case. A compound
composed of Musta, Haridrd, Vashti-madhu, Priyangn,
Siddhartha, Rodhra, Utpala-sdrivd + pasted together *
should be employed in the manner of an Aschyotana
measure. As an alternative, the compound consist-
ing of Rdsdujana and honey
Anjana. 31-32.

* The decoction of the leaves ‘and fruits of Arlaka
should be duly prepared (in the manner of Rasa-kriya)

should be used as an

and used as an Anjana. Rasa-kriyd preparations pre-
pared with (the expressed juice of) the roots of bamboo,
or Vartis prepared with the same by (condensing it by)
cooking it (again) in a copper vessel, should be used for
the above purpose. Rasa-kriyA preparations prepared
with 7riphald, flowers of Paldsa, or Khara-imanjari,

should be similarly applied to the affected organ. FE

salves made of powéered Adis’ va-it/a and cotton fibres
(Tantu) burnt together and pasted with the miik of a
she-goat and mixed with (white) March1 and powdered
copper should be used as a Pratianjana to the cye
(already weakened by the use of Anjana.) 33 34.

* Dallana says that the
cleansed with the application of Sneha, Venesection, purgative, errhines
and A’sthépana.

+ In place of ¢

deranged Doshas of the system should be

aaa aticaifa: som: read ‘aparfaaaifcarfa:, meaning
the term ‘Asita-sériv:
—Dallana.

in this case ‘Syima-laté’ b Others again mean

‘Rasdnjana’ by the term ‘Asi

$ Dallana recommends ‘rain water’ as the liquid for the preparation.

=== PAGE 83 ===

Chap. NII. J UTTARA-TANTRAM.

3

An eye-ssalve or an Anjana made of Samudra-phena,
Saindhava, conch-shell, Mudga and white Waricha mixed
together (in the shape of a powder) should be prescribed
in a case of Aklinna-vartma as it would promptly
alieviate the local itching. The foregoing measures

and remedies shou'd be likewise emp'oyed in a case
of Praklinna-vartma according tothe nature of the
deranged Doshas involved therein. An Anjana pre-
pared with the admixture of Kajjala and Tuthhaka
(Sulphate of copper) rubbed in clarified butter on the
surface of a copper
such cases). 35-36.

a

ssc!, would be similarly used (in

Thus ends the twelfth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta
Samhita which treats of the curative treatment of Raktabhishyanda.

=== PAGE 84 ===

CHAPTER NILL

Now we shall discourse on the curative treatment of

eye-discases in which Si cation should be resorted to
(Lekhya~-Roga-~Pratishedha). 1.
The general course of treatment to be adopted in the

nine kinds of eye diseases which are amenable to Scari-

fying (Lekhana) operations is as follows :—The patient
should be laid ina chamber not exposed to the sun
and the gales of wind, after having been treated with
proper emulsive measures (Sncha-karma)* and sub-
jected to a course of emetics and purgatives. The cye-
lid should be over-turned with the thumb and the index
fir
picce of linen soaked in lukewarm water and squeezed.

yer and should be very carefully fomented with a

The eyelid should be covered with a piece of linen and
over-turned with the thumb and the index finger at the

time to guard against its movement and enclosing. The
(part of the) eyelid to be scraped, should be wiped
with a linen and marked with a surgical instrument and
the scraping should be effeeted therein with a scraping
knife or any (rough) leaf according to the exigencies of
the case. After the subsidence of the bleeding, the
part should be fomented and then gently rubbed (Prati-
sdrana) with a medi
silé (Realgar), Ads'isa (Sulphate of iron), Trihat, Aiyjana
(black antimony), Saindhava salt and JJékshika finely
pounded together. After this the part should be washed

inal compound consisting of Aanah-

with Jukewarm water and lubricated with clarified

butter. The subsequent treatment thereof should he

* It should be noted that the patient should also be fomented (Sveda)

after being treated with the emulsive measures.

=== PAGE 85 ===

Chap. XIII. ] UTTARA-TANTRAM, 5

like that of an u'cer (Vrana).* Fomentations, Avapida,
etc, should also be employed after three days. Thus
Thave described to you the general measures to be
observed in scraping an affected locality in the eye. 2.

Satisfactory and deficient scari-
fication :—Stoppage of bleeding, subsidence of the
swelling and itching, a smooth level aspect of the part
like the surface of a finger nail are the features, which
mark a proper and satisfactory scarification. Red-
ness of the eyes, swelling and discharge of blood
from the operated locality, occurrence of Timira (blind-
ness or darkness of vision), non-amcliorations of the

disease under treatment, brownn
itching, horrip
matter) of the eye-lids and a consequent high inflamma-
tion of the eye if not attended to in time, are the symp-
toms which attend an incomplete and unsatisfactory

scarification, and this should be remedied by anointingt

s, heaviness, numb-

ness ation and coating (as if with foreign

and scarifying the affected part again. 3-4.
Excessive Scarification :—lixcessive dis-
charge and pain in the locality together with an
upturning of the cye-lids and spontancous uprooting of
the eye-lashes should be ascribed to excessive scraping.
Fomentation, application of Sncha and employment of

Vayu-subduing measures should be resorted to in such
cases. 5.

In the following discases of the eye, 77s. Vartma-
yabandha, Klishta-vartma, Bahala-vartma and Pothaki,

the affected part shou'd first be gently scraped and then

* For the first seven days the treatment should be like that of an
incidental ulcer (Sadyo-vrana) after which period, the case should be

Ircated, if necessary, a5 a case of Sfitira

t Dall:
‘@efaqear’ (anointing).

a says that some read ‘ea!

(lomenting) in place of

=== PAGE 86 ===

56 THE SUSIRUTA SAMIIITA, — [ Chap, XIIL

scarified. In Syava-vartma and Kardama-vartma, the
intelligent physician will gently scarify the affected
part neither dceply nor superficially. In cases of Ut-
sangini, Sarkaré and Kumbhikini, the seat of the discase
should be first cut (with a knife) and then carefully
scarified. An incision shou'd be followed by a scarifica-
tion in the case of small, very hard, supperated, copper-
coloured, Pidakds ((quiatles) occurring on (the inner
membrane of) the ey: Small and slightly swelling
Pidakds (pustules) occurring on the exterior surface
of the eyelid should be remedied with fomentations,
plasters and the general corrective remedies. 6.

Tantra in the Sus’rata

Thus ends the thirteenth chapter of the Uttai
Samhita which treats of the curative treatment of (eye-) diseases amenable

to scarification,

=== PAGE 87 ===

CHAPTER XIY.

Now we shall discourse on the curative treatment of
eye-diseases which require surgical incisions (Bhedya=
Roga-Pratishedha). 1.

Treatment of Visa-granthi :—In a case
of suppurating Vis1-granthi, it should be first fomented,
and its puncture-like holes should be completely incised
(so as to remove any swelling in the affected part). It
should then be dusted with Sacudhava, Kés'ts'a, Mégadhi,
Pushpénjana, Manah-s’ilé and Elé pounded together*.
Honey and clarified butter should then be applied (over
the dusted part), and it should be duly (loosely) bandaged
(for the complete union of the parts). 2.

Lagana :—An incision should be made into
the aflected part in a case of Lagana, and any of the
following drugs, 7s. Rochand, Vava-kshdra, Tuttha,
Pippali and honey should be applied to the incised
part; while in serious (lit—big) cases cauterization
with alkali or with fire will be the remedy. 3.

Anjana :—In a case of Anjana, the affected part
should be duly fomented and if it spontancously bursts
open, it should be well pressed and rubbed (Pratisdrana)

with a plaster-compound of -Wanah-s'ild, Hid, Tagara-
padukd and Saindhava, pasted together with honey.
If, however, the surgeon wants to open it, it should be
rubbed with honey and Rasdujana mixed together and

* Both Vrinda and Chakradatta read only the first two lines of the
text and hold that the incision should be dusted with Saindhava only,
‘Their commentators, however, accept the ceading there to be Sus’ruta’s.
‘They supply the next two lines of Sus'ruta, and notice the consequent
alteration in the sense.

8

=== PAGE 88 ===

58 THE SUSHRUTA SAMIII { Chap, XIV,

then coated with a warm collyrium made with the
lamp-black collected from a burning lamp flame. 4.

Krimi-granthi :—Ina case of Krimi-granthi,
the affected part should be duly fomented after it has
been incised and it should then be treated with the
Rasa-kriyé solution prepared with (the decoction of)
Triphaldé (with the addition of) Tuttha", Kd-sisa and
Saindhava. Ina case of Upandha (in the cye) due to
the action of the deranged Kapha, the affected part
should be opened and rubbed with powdered Pippalé and
Saindhava mixed with honey. It should then be scraped
with a Mandaldgra instrument. The surrounding parts
should also be gently seratched all around. 5.

In the foregoing five cases of incisable cye-discase,
until the setting in of suppuration therein, the affected
eye should first be treated with Sneha and then with
light fomentation with (the help of) tender leaves (as
a cover over the eye). In all the remedies to be adopted
in the treatment of these (incisable eye) diseases, the
application of a Sneha should be first adopted. In
cases, however, where suppuration had already set in,
the remedies for the healing up of the ulcer, should be
carefully adopted. 6.

Thus ends the fourteenth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra of the Sus‘ruta
Samhita which deals with the curative treatment of (ey

) diseases requiring
incisions.

* Both Vrinda and Chakrapdni read ‘4/ufya’ (cow’s urine) in place of

‘Tuttha’, Voth of them also recommend the addition of Rasdujana in
the compound.

=== PAGE 89 ===

CHAPTER XY,

Now we shall discourse on the curative treatment of
cye-diseases, which should be cured with excisions
(Chhedya-Roga-Pratishedha). 1.

Treatment of Armas :—The patient should
be first treated with a Sneha-predominating food
before being surgically operated upon ina case of Arman
marked by the manifest vegetation or polypus (on the
affected eye). The patient should then be made care-
fully to sit at ease and the affected eye should then
be irritated by casting powdered Satndhava-salt into
its cavity after which the cye-ball, without any loss of
time, should be duly fomented and rubbed with the hand.
The intelligent physician will then ask the patient to
look at his Apdnga (the interior corner of his own affeet-
ed eye) and the cyst or the polypus (thus turned up),
should be carefully secured with a hook (Vadisa) and
held with a Muchundi instrument or with a thread-
needle. It is dangerous to suddenly uplift the eye-lid
under the circumstances. The two eye-lids should be
firmly drawn asunder so as to guard against their being
anywise hurt during the operation. The  polypus,
thus made flabby and pendent with the means of the
three aforesaid accessories, should be fully got rid of
by scraping it with a sharp Mandalagra instrument.
The root of the polypus should be pushed asunder
from the Krishna-mandala (Sclerotic region) and the
Sukla-mandala (1
of the Kanina!

sion of the cornea), to the extremity:
(pupil) and then removed. The
Kaninaka (pupil) should be duly guarded so as not
to be hurt. A quarter layer of the flesh (of the polypus)
should be lefi back and then the operation won'd not

inany way hurt or injme the eye. An operation at

=== PAGE 90 ===

60 TIL SUSURUTA SAMIITA. { Chap. XV.

a point beyond the aforesaid limit of the Kaninaka
(might hurt the pupil and) would set up a hemorrhage
and beget a sinus (as well as ptin) in the locality.
The vegetation or polypus is sure to grow up again to
its former size if it is cut off insufficiently. 2.

A shreddy or netted Arman in the form of a mem-
branous growth (Jala) in the eye should be made pen-
deat by rubbing it (with Saézdhava-salt) and then cut
with a bent Vadisa instrument at the junction of the
Sukla-mandala (cornea) and the Vartma-mandala (con-
junctiva or eyc-+tid). The affected part should then be
rubbed with a compound consisting of VYava-kshdra,
Trikatu and Satndhava-salt (pounded together) and
then (duly) fomented and bandaged up by the skilful
physician. Lardaceous or oily (Sneha) application
should thereafter be prescribed with due regard to the
nature of the place*, the season, the time (day or
night) and the strengih of the patient, and the incidental
wound should be treated as an ulcer. The bandage
should be removed after three days and the affected part
should be (mildly) fomented with the application of
heated palms of the hands and treated with corrective
or purifying remedies. 3.

Milk duly cooked with Karanja seed, Amalaka and
Vashti-madhu and mixed with honey (when cold),
should be dropped twice a day (morning and evening)
into the affected eye in the event of there being any
pain in it. A cold plaster composed of Vashti-madhu,
polens of lotus (U¢pa/a) and Durva-grass pasted together
with milk and mixed with clarified butter is recom-
mended in such cases to be applied to the scalp. 4.

* In place of ‘gy—the particular part and nature of the country,

some real (3pq'—the par

cwlar Dasha involved in each case.

=== PAGE 91 ===

Chap. XV.) ULTARA-TANTRAM, or

Any residue of the Arman, left after the excision,
should be removed with the application of Lekhya*
(scraping) Anjana or eye-salve. An Arman (Cyst-like
papilla or protruberance) which is as white as curdled
milk (Dadhi), or which looks blood-red or blue or grey,
should be treated like a case of Sukrarman (Opacity of
the cornea or a flimy and fleshy growth in the eye). An
Arman which is very thick and looks like a piece of skin

and covered over with fibres of flesh and nerves +, as
well as one occurring on the Krishna-mandala (region
of the iris) should be excisioned. The eye asst nes its
former and natural colour and function, and becomes
free from pain and other complications by the proper
excision of an Arman. 5-8.

Treatment of Sird-Jdla and Sira-
pidaka :—In a case of Sird-Jdla, the hardened veins
(Sira) should be hung down with a hook (Vadisa) and
scraped with a Mandaldgra (round-topped) instrument.

Cysts or pimples (Pidakas) appearing on the diseased
veins in a case of the aforesaid Sira-Jéla and not prov-
ing amenable to the application of medicines, should
be excisioned as in a case of Arma with a Mandalagra
instrument. Pratisdrana (rubbing) as in a case of Arma
and Lekhana (scraping) with due regard to the nature
of the deranged Dosh

nyolved in each case, are also
recommendad in both the diseases (Sird-Jala and
Sjr4-Pidaka) under discussion. 9.

Treatment Of Parvanikd :—In a case of
Parvanika the place of junction t (of the lachrymal

* For Lekhya Anjana sce Chapter NIL, para 16 of this Uttara Tantra,
+ Some hefe read ‘faz? (veins) in place of ‘qa? |
“fThe function’ is the junction of the Krishna-mandala and the
Sukla-mandala of the cye.—Dallana.

=== PAGE 92 ===

62 PHBE SUSIKUTA SAMILUDA, [ Chap. XV.

sac and the cornea) should be duly fomented. A
quarter part only of the protuberance or growth should
be kept apart, while the remaining upper three quarters
should be secured with a hook and cut with a knife.
Half of the aforesaid quarter part should then be cut
away (very carefully), as lachryma! sinus (and conse-
quent lachrymation) would otherwise set in. The seat
of operation should be subsequently rubbed (Prati-
sdrana) with a compound of honey and Saindhava-salt.

rifying (Lekhana) powders should then be applied
to the affected part for the complete recovery of the
disease (any complaint still remaining), ro.
Churna-Anjana : —Powde!
(conch-shell), Samudra-phena, marine oystershell, or

of — Samkha

ruby, coral, As’mantaka, Vaidurya (Lapis lazuli), pearl,
iron, copper and Srofonjana (antimony) taken in equal
parts and mixed together, should be stuffed in a ram's
horn* and then lect the intelligent one apply this Churna-
anjana (powder) to the affected locality, morning and
evening everyday, as such applications are extremely

efficacious in all types of Armans, Pidakds, Sird-jéla,
Arsas, Sushkarsas and Arvuda, etc. in the eye. 11.
Treatment of inner part of the eye-
lids :—The mode of treatment in a case of any affec-
tion in the inner lining of the Vartma (eye-lid) is given
below. The affected part should be first fomented and
then the eye-lid should be over-turned (held at an angle),
and the diseased growth or swelling should be carefully
lifted up with a needle, when an experienced physician

should cut it at its root or base with the help of a sharp
Mandalagra instrument. After that the affected pari
should be rubbed with a pulverised compound consist-

Dallana explains UWeska-s'ringa’ as a kind ot Zugusté tree.

=== PAGE 93 ===

Chap. XV. ] UTTARA-TANTRAM. 63

ing of Saindhava, Kdsisa (Sulphate of iron) and Pippati.
The affected eye-lid should then be carefully cauterised
with a (red-hot) rod after a complete) cessation of the
bleeding. The residue of its root or base, if any, should
be scarified with a scarifying alkaline (caustic) prepara-
tion. Decoctions of strong emetic and purgative drugs*

should be (internally) administered for the climination
of the Doshas (from the Vrana—ulcer). The measures
and remedies mentioned in connection with Abhi-
anda (Ophthalmia) should also be prescribed with
gard to the nature of the bodily Doshas involved in
the case. The patient shall observe strict regimen ot
dict and conduct for a month after the surgical opera-

tion. 12.

Thus ends the fifteenth chapter in the Uttara-Tantra of the Sus'ruta
Samhita which treats of the remedies of eye-diseases requiring excisions or
surgical operation.

* Some commentators say that emetics and purgatives should be inter

nally administered, but Dallana and the Panjiké-kéra oppose this view.

=== PAGE 94 ===

CHAPTER XVI.

Now we shall discourse on the curative measures for
the remedy of dis s occurring on the eyelashes and
hence on the eyelid (Pakshma-kopa Prati-
shedha). 1.

Surgical Treatment:—In a case of
Pakshma-kopa which is an affection of the eyelid and
which has been described before as admitting only of
palliative treatment, the patient should be first treated
with a Sneha and made to take his

eat (in a proper
position). A cut in the shape and size of a barley corn
should be made in the eyelid horizontally parallel to
(the part of the eye-ball lying between) the Kaninaka
(pupil) and the Apanga (exterior corner of the eye)
leaving two parts below the eye-brow and one part
above the eye-lashes. The surgeon should then diligently
suture up the two edges of the incisions with (horse's)
hair. After the application of honcy and clarified butter
to the operated part, it should be treated in the manner
of an (incidental) ulcer. A picce of linen should be tied
round the forehead and the horse's hair sewing up the
operated part should be attached thereto. The stitching
hair should be carefully remoyed after the complete
adhesion* of the two edges of the incidental ulcer. 2.

Cauterisation :—In case of the failure of the
preceding measure, the eye-lid should be carefully exa-
mined and lifted up in an inverted posture and the
diseased cyst (Bali) should be very carefully cauterised
with fire or alkali, As an alternative, the Pakshma-

* According to Vagbhata, the stitching hair should be removed on the
fifth day.

=== PAGE 95 ===

Chap, NVI. J UTTARAY

NTRAM. 65

mala (eye-lashes) should be all removed and the affected
eyelid having been carefully secured with three hooks
(Vadisa) should be rubbed with pasted Haritaki and
Tuvaraka (Lodhra). The four aforesaid measures* as
well as purgatives, eye-drops (Aschyotana), medicinal
s, Collyrium,
Sneha and Rasa-kriyd, should be likewise held as
beneficialt in cases of Pakshma-kopa. 3-5.

snuffs, inhalations (fumigations), Plaste

Thus ends the sixteenth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus’ruta
Samhité which treats of the remedies of Pakshma-kopa.

* The four measures are (a) operation, (4) cauterisation with fire,
(c) cauterisation with alkali, and (@) application of medicinal drug:.

} It should be noted that this disease cannot be radically cured, but is
amenable only to palliative treatments (qr).

=== PAGE 96 ===

CHAPTER XVIL

Now we shall discourse on the curative treatment
of the diseases of the pupil and the Crystalline lens
(Drishti-gata-Roga-Pratishedha). 1.

Of the diseases included within the present group,
three are curable, three are incurable, while the remain-
ing six admit only of palliative treatment. The cura-
tive remedies of the discase known as Dhuma-darsi
(smoky or dusky vision) has been already described
(in connection with the medical treatment of Pittaja
Ophthalmia) *. All the remedies applicable in cases
of deranged Pitta and Kapha as well as application of
Nasya (snuff), Seka (sprinkling), Anjana (Collyrium),
A'‘lepa (plaster), Puta-paka and Tarpana (soothing
remedies with the exception of surgical operation should
be respectively administered in cases of Pitta-affected
(Pitta-vidagdha) and Kapha-affected (Sleshma-vidagdha)
vision. Traiphala-Ghrita should be prescribed in a case
of Pitta-vidagdha-Drishti and Traivrita-Ghrita in a
case of Sleshma-vidagdha-Drishti. Potions of old and
matured clarified butter as well as of Tailvaka-Ghrita
are ‘equally efficacious in both cases +. Collyriums
(Anjanas) should be prepared with Gairika, Saindhava,
Pippali, and the charred remains (Masi) of cow's tecth,
or with beef, Maricha, S'irisha-sceds and Manah-s'ild,
or with the stalk of a Kapitthi fruit together with
honey, or with Atmaguptd pasted with honey ; these four

* See Chapter X, 9, Uttara-Tantra,

+ Traiphala-Ghrita, Traivrita-Ghrita and  Tailvaka-Ghrité shéuld
be prepared with both the decoction and Kalka of Triphalé, Trivrita and
of Tilvaka respectively.

=== PAGE 97 ===

Chap. XVIL UTTARA-TANTRAM. 67

Anjanas may be used with advantage in both the types
under discussion. 2-3.

Pushpa’njana :—Powders of the flowers of
Kubjaka, Asoka, S'dla, Amra, Priyangu, Nalini and of
Vipala, as well as powdered Renuka, Pippali, Haritaki
and Amlaki mixed with honey and clarified butter,
should be kept inside a hollow bamboo and applicd
to the eye in the manner of a collyrium (Anjana) in
cases of Pittavidagdha and Sleshmé-vidagdha cye-
diseases. 4.

Dravanjana and Gudikdanjana :—As
an alternative, Renukd pasted with the expressed juice
of the flowers of Amra (mangoe) and Jambu (black-berry)
and mixed with honey and clarified butter, should be
used in both the above cases as an Anjana. Pollens of
Nalini (red lotus) and of Uépala (blue lotus) as well as
Gairika * pasted together with the Rasa (watery secre-
tions) of cow-dung + and made into large pills (Gudika)
may be profitably applied to the eye as an Anjana alike

in cases of day-blindness and night-blindness. This
Anjana is called the Gudikanjai 5.

Treatment of Day-blindness :—Rasdu-
jana, Rasa (Juice) %, honey, Talis‘a-patra and Svarna-

gairika should be pasted together with the Rasa of
cow-dung and applied (in the manner of an Anjana) in
cases of Pitta-affected vision 7e. day-blindness. S’éta

* Chakradatta does not read *Gairika’ in the list.
f In place of “ataaq” some real “apapRA” é
which may mean a cow or any animal, such as goat, sheep, ete,
—Juice) means the juice of
According to others, however, it means the juice of the leaves
Chakradatta, however, reads “gq” (clarified butter) in

+y the liver of a ay”

+ According to Dallana, §

A'malak:
of fiiti flo
place of “rq”,

=== PAGE 98 ===

68 THE

SUSHRUTA SAMIIITA. ( Chap. XVI.

(Rasanjana, or according to some Camphor), and

Sanvira should be soaked in Rasa (meat-j

nice) * and
then pasted together. It should then be soaked again
in the bile of a tortoise or of a Rohita fish and dried
and reduced to powder. The present compound is called
the Churna-anjana (powdered Collyrium) and may be
used beneficially for the pacification of Pitta (in cas
Pitta-vidagdha-Drishti). Ads'’mavi flowers, Vashti-
Déarvi, Rodhra and Rasdnjana, should be pounded
together and mixed with honey. Used as an Anjana it is
always efficacious in the affections of the eye. 6-8.
Treatment of nocturnal blindness:
—The application of a medicinal Varti (stick) composed
of Sanvirdujana, Saindhava, Pippali and Renukd pasted
together with the urine of a she-goat would prove
highly beneficial in cases of nocturnal blindness. Simi-
larly the application of a medicinal Varti (stick) com-
posed of Kaldnu-Sdrivd, Pippali, S'unthi, Vashti-madhu,
Télis'apatra, the two kinds of Haridrd, and Musta,
pasted with the Rasa of cow-dung + and dried
in the shade, proves beneficial in such cases. A/anah-
s‘ild, Haritaki, Trikatu, Bald, Kalanu-siriva and (S’amu-
dra-) Phena pasted together with the miik of a she-goat
and similarly prepared in the shape of a Varti is also

s of

recommended. 9-11.

Rasa-Kriya’njana :—The urine, bile and

dung of a cow * together with wine, should be boiled

(in the manner of Rasa-kriydnjana preparation) in the

* Rasa may also, from the context, mean the watery secretions of
cow-dung.

+ Dallana’s reading is evidently ‘ijagqza’ which he explains as
meaning the juice or serum of the liver of a goat, &c.

$ The text has “taqafm” | The term “jy” which literally means
cow, here stands for any female quadruped, such as a she-goat, ete.

=== PAGE 99 ===

Chap. XVIL ] UTTARA-TANTRAM. 69

expressed juice of D/dtri, or in the Rasa (serum) of the
liver of an animal (¢.g.a goat), or in the decoction of
Triphala. (tis called the Kshudrdnjana, and should
be applied to the affected organ in the manner of an
Anjana (collyrium). An Anjana consisting of cow's
urine, clarified butter, Sasedra-phena, Pippali, Katphala,
Saindhava and honey mixed together should be first
kept inside a hollow bamboo and subsequently applied
(in night-blindness) as @ collyrium. The Medas (fat)
‘and liver of a goat, together with a quantity of clarified
butter skimmed out of the milk of a she-goat, mixed
with Pippali and Saindhava should be boiled and cook-
ed with the (expressed) juice of Amataka (in the
manner of Rasa-kriyd preparations). It should then be
mixed with honey and kept in a closed vessel made
of Khadira (Catechu) wood. The use of this (com-
pound), known as the Kshudranjana, as an Anjana
(collyrium) would be attended with good results.
Harenn, Pippali-secds (without pericarps), E/d and the
liver (of a goat, ctc.) should be pasted with the Rasa of
cow-dung. Used as an Anjana, it would prove efficacious
of Kapha-affected vision (Sleshma-Vidagdha-
Drishti). 12-14.

The liver of a Godha (a kind of wild lizard) should be
partially opened and stuffed with Pippali and roasted
in fire (having been coated with clay ). The use of the
compound * for only once + as an Anjana (with honey’)

in a ca

* According to Dallana the Pippali so roasted should be used with
honey as an Anjana.

+ Voth Vrinda and Chakradatta read ‘aga in place of “azxq and the
commentators of both of them say that “the sentence means—the liver
should be taken internally and the Pippali should be used as an
Anjana. The commentator of Vrinda farther says that the practice is to
use both of them together ay an Anjana.

=== PAGE 100 ===

7o THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA, { Chap. XVII.

would be found to be highly beneficial in cases of

night-blindne Similarl

ngle application of an

Anjana made of a goat’s liver stuffed with Pippali *
and roasted in fire as in the preceding case would
specdily and certainly cure an attack of night-blindness.
Asan alternative, both the spleen and the liver (of a
goat or of a lizard) wouid be cut into pieces, mixed with
oii and clarified butter, and roasted on a spit. Used
internally or used as an Anjana with mustard oil, it

15-17.
pill composed of Nadija (Saindhava),

would speedily cure an attack of night-blindnes

An Anjana or
S'inbi (D. R—Samkha—conch-shell), Kataka, Anjana
(Rasnjana), Ianah-s'ild, the two kinds of Nis’d, pasted
together with the juice of the liver + (of a cow) and

mixed with red-sandal paste is recommended in a
case of day-blindness. 18.

Treatment of palliative types :—
Bleeding by opening the (local) veins should be resorted
to in the six kinds of ocular affections in which the
palliative treatment is all that is open to us. The
patient should be as well kept constantly purged with
draughts of matured ciarified butter duly cooked with
the admixture of suitable purgative drugs. In a Vataja

* Voth Végbhata and Dallana plainly say that the roasted Pippali
only should be used with honey as an Anjana in cases of night-blindness.
+ There is a confusion in the reading of this couplet. In place

of “amizé
other animal), Chakradatta reads “aaj qaiq?

ise. pasted with the juice of the liver (ofa cow or any

to say—the liver of
a cow (and of no other animal) should be taken. Vrinda, however,
reads and his commentator accepts the reading “sqaqj qziq? (the liver
ofan animal other than a cow).; but this reading is objectionable on the
ground of a faulty construction. “maga? i. e. pasted in the watery
secretions of cow-dung, is yet another variant noticed by both the
commentators of Vrinda and of Chakradatta.