=== PAGE 1 ===

Vedic Cosmography And Astronomy  
 
INTRODUCTION 
1: THE ASTRONOMICAL SIDDHÄNTAS 
A. The Solar System According to the Sürya–siddhänta 
B. The Opinion of Western Scholars 
C. The Vedic Calendar and Astrology 
D. The Starting Date of Kali–yuga 
E. The Distances and Sizes of the Planets 
F. The Size of the Universe 
2: VEDIC PHYSICS 
THE NATURE OF SPACE, TIME, AND MATTER 
A. Extending Our Physical World View 
B. The Position of Kåñëa 
C. Mystic Siddhis 
D. The Activities of Demigods, Yogés, and Åñis 
E. REGIONS OF THIS EARTH 
NOT PERCEIVABLE BY OUR SENSES 
3: VEDIC COSMOGRAPHY 
A. Bhü-maëòala, or Middle Earth 
B. The Earth of Our Experience 
C. Planets as Globes in Space 
D. The Orbit of the Sun 
4: THE VERTICAL DIMENSION 
A. The Terminology of 
Three and Fourteen Worlds 
B. The Seven Planets 
C. Higher-dimensional Travel 
in the Vertical Direction 
D. The Environs of the Earth 
E. Eclipses 
F. The Precession of the Equinoxes 
5: THE EMPIRICAL CASE 
FOR THE VEDIC WORLD SYSTEM 
A. Unidentified Flying Objects 
B. The Link with Traditional Lore 
C. The Events at Fatima 
6: MODERN ASTROPHYSICS 
AND THE VEDIC PERSPECTIVE 
A. The Principle of Relativity and Planetary Motion 
B. Gravitation 
C. Space Travel 
D. The Universal Globe and Beyond 
E. The Nature of Stars 
7: RED SHIFTS AND 
THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE 
A. Hubble’s Expanding Universe Model 
B. Anomalous Red Shifts:

=== PAGE 2 ===

2
The Observations of Halton Arp 
C. Hubble’s Constant and Tired Light 
D. Quasars 
E. Quantized Red Shifts 
8: QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 
Appendix 1: 
 VAÀÇÉDHARA ON BHÜ-MANDALA AND THE EARTH GLOBE 
Appendix 2: 
THE ROLE OF GREEK INFLUENCE IN INDIAN ASTRONOMY 
A. PINGREE’S THEORY REGARDING ÄRYABHAÖA 
B. THE MAIN ARGUMENT FOR PINGREE’S THEORY 
C. A PRELIMINARY CRITIQUE OF PINGREE’S ARGUMENT 
D. THE THEORY OF OBSERVATION 
E. INDIAN TRIGONOMETRY: 
A SPECULATIVE RECONSTRUCTION 
F. ANOTHER SPECULATIVE RECONSTRUCTION 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Richard L. Thompson 
Dedicated to 
His Divine Grace 
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda 
oà ajïäna-timirändhasya jïänäïjana-çaläkayä 
cakñur unmélitaà yena tasmai çré-gurave namaù 
The cover: An astronomical instrument seen in Benares, India, in 1772 by an 
Englishman named Robert Barker. Said to be about two hundred years old at the 
time, the structure included two quadrants that were used to measure the position 
of the sun. 
INTRODUCTION 
“Now our Ph.D.’s must collaborate and study the Fifth Canto to make a model for 
building the Vedic Planetarium. My final decision is that the universe is just like a 
tree, with root upwards. Just as a tree has branches and leaves, so the universe is 
also composed of planets which are fixed up in the tree like the leaves, flowers, 
fruits, etc.…So now all you Ph.D.’s must carefully study the details of the Fifth 
Canto and make a working model of the universe. If we can explain the passing 
seasons, eclipses, phases of the moon, passing of day and night, etc., then it will be 
very powerful propaganda” (letter from Çréla Prabhupäda to Svarüpa Dämodara 
däsa, April 27, 1976). 
In the year A.D. 1068 a group of workmen labored to erect an earthen mound 
about sixty feet high in the Anglo-Saxon village of Cambridge, northeast of 
London. On top of this mound they built a stone tower that dominated the small 
collection of thatched houses huddled alongside the river Cam. This tower served 
as a fortress to protect and consolidate this part of the kingdom, which William the 
Conqueror had won just two years before. 
At this time the Western, or European, civilization, which is so important in the 
world today, was just beginning to emerge from the debris of previous cultures and 
societies. Science as we know it today was unheard of, and the Christian Church 
was in the process of solidifying its position in the previously pagan territories of 
northern Europe. The writings of the ancient Greeks and other early civilizations

=== PAGE 3 ===

3
were largely lost, and would not be reintroduced into Europe from Arab sources 
for some three hundred years. Universities already existed in southern European 
countries; in Britain some two hundred years would pass before the founding of 
Oxford and then Cambridge. 
In A.D. 1000, about sixty years before the erection of the stone tower on the Cam, 
an Arab scholar named Alberuni completed a book on India (AL). Alberuni lived 
in the kingdom of Ghaznia, in the court of one King Mahmud—a Muslim king 
who specialized in raiding the northwestern territories of India, such as Sind and 
the Punjab. Alberuni was a well-known scholar of his time who read Plato in the 
original Greek and who had also studied Sanskrit. He was apparently employed by 
King Mahmud to study the Hindus, in much the same way that the United States 
government now employs scholars to study the Russians and the Communist 
Chinese. 
Alberuni’s access to source material in Sanskrit was limited. He had access to the 
body of Indian astronomical literature called jyotiña çästra, and he also had access 
to a number of Puräëas, such as the Matsya Puräëa and the Väyu Puräëa. He 
mentions the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, or Bhägavata Puräëa, but apparently he never 
saw a copy of it. 
In this body of literature, Alberuni was mainly interested in information relating to 
the Indian view of the universe and the observable material events taking place 
within it. Indeed, the most striking feature of Alberuni’s book is that nearly half of 
it is concerned with Indian astronomy and cosmology. 
One important division of the jyotiña çästra consists of works on mathematical 
astronomy known as astronomical siddhäntas. These include works of historical 
Indian astronomers, such as Äryabhaöa, Brahmagupta, and Viraha Mihira, some of 
whom were nearly Alberuni’s contemporaries. They also include ancient Sanskrit 
texts, such as the Sürya-siddhänta, that were said to have been originally 
disseminated by demigods and great åñis. These works treat the earth as a small 
globe floating in space and surrounded by the planets, which orbit around it. They 
are mainly concerned with the question of how to calculate the positions of the 
planets in the sky at any desired time. They contain elaborate rules for performing 
these calculations, as well as much numerical data concerning the distances, sizes, 
and rates of motion of the planets. However, they say very little about the nature of 
the planets, their origin, and the causes of their motion. 
The calculations described in the astronomical siddhäntas were well understood by 
Alberuni, and it seems that at that time there was considerable interest in Indian 
astronomy in the centers of Muslim civilization. He was also familiar with the 
Greek astronomical tradition, epitomized by Ptolemy. However, Alberuni found 
the cosmology presented in the Puräëas very hard to understand. His account of 
Puräëic cosmology closely follows the Fifth Canto of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and 
the Puräëas in general. When dealing with this material, Alberuni frequently 
expressed exasperation and complete incomprehension, much as many people do 
today, and he naturally took this as an opportunity to criticize Hindu dharma and 
assert the superiority of his own Muslim tradition. 
In this book we will discuss the cosmology presented in the Fifth Canto of the 
Çrémad-Bhägavatam and try to clarify its relationship with other prominent systems 
of cosmology, both ancient and modern. We have begun with this historical 
account to show that bewilderment with the cosmology of the Bhägavatam is not a

=== PAGE 4 ===

4
new phenomenon caused by the rise of modern science. The same bewilderment 
also affected Alberuni, even though in his society the earth was regarded as being 
fixed in the center of the universe. 
Many Indian astronomers of earlier centuries were also unable to understand Vedic 
cosmology, and they were led to openly reject parts of it, even though their own 
religious and social tradition was based on the Puräëas. For example, 
Bhäskaräcärya, the 11th-century author of the siddhäntic text Siddhänta-çiromaëi, 
could not reconcile the relatively small diameter of the earth, which he deduced 
from simple measurements, with the immense magnitude attributed to the earth by 
the Pauränikas, the followers of the Puräëas (SSB1, pp. 114–15). Likewise, the 
15th-century south Indian astronomer Parameçvara stated that the Puräëic account 
of the seven dvépas and oceans is something “given only for religious meditation,” 
and that the 84,000-yojana height of Mount Meru described in the Puräëas is “not 
acceptable to the astronomers” (GP, pp. 85, 87). 
Vaiñëavas of past centuries also discussed the relationship between the Fifth Canto 
of Çrémad-Bhägavatam and the jyotiña çästras. An example of this is found in the 
Bhägavatam commentary of Vaàçédhara, a Vaiñëava who lived in the 17th century 
A.D. In this commentary, Vaàçédhara discusses the apparent conflict between the 
small size of the earth, as described in the jyotiña çästras, and the large size of Bhü-
maëòala, as described in the Fifth Canto. His analysis of this apparent conflict is 
discussed in Appendix 1. 
There are evidently serious disagreements between the cosmological system of the 
Puräëas and the world models that human observers tend to arrive at using their 
reasoning powers and their ordinary senses. The cause of these difficulties is not 
simply the rise of modern Western science. They have existed in India since a time 
antedating the rise of modern Western culture, and to some they may seem to be 
based on an inherent contradiction within the Vedic tradition itself. 
The long-standing perplexity that has attended the subject of Vedic cosmology 
indicates that these disagreements are very deep and difficult to resolve. However, 
the thesis of this book is that the disagreements are not irreconcilable. The 
apparent contradictions can be resolved by developing a proper understanding of 
the nature of space, time, and matter, as described in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and 
a corresponding understanding of the Vedic approach to describing and thinking 
about reality. 
In Chapter 1 we begin our account of Vedic astronomy by discussing the 
astronomical siddhäntas. We give evidence indicating that these works form an 
integral part of the original Vedic tradition. To accept these works and reject 
Puräëic cosmology, as some Indian astronomers have done, is to start down the 
path of modern scientific materialism, which ultimately leads to the total rejection 
of the Vedic literature. But to reject the astronomical siddhäntas as anti-Vedic 
means to lose the Vedic tradition of rigorous mathematical astronomy. This plays 
into the hands of the modern Western scholars who wish to reject the Vedas and 
Puräëas as mythological, and who interpret the astronomical siddhäntas as 
products of Greek scientific genius that were borrowed and falsely dressed in 
Hindu garb by dishonest brähmaëas. (In Appendix 2 we address some of the 
arguments of these scholars and show that they are seriously flawed.) 
Our thesis is that the astronomical siddhäntas and the Puräëic cosmology can be 
understood as mutually compatible accounts of one multifaceted material reality.

=== PAGE 5 ===

5
Modern Western science is based on the idea that nature can be fully described by 
a single, rational world-model. However, the Çrémad-Bhägavatam points out that 
no person of this world is capable of fully describing the material universe “even in 
a lifetime as long as that of Brahmä” (SB 5.16.4). Thus the Vedic approach to the 
description of nature is based on the strategy of presenting many mutually 
compatible aspects of one humanly indescribable complete whole. 
The old story of the blind men and the elephant epitomizes this approach. Each 
blind man observed a genuine aspect of the elephant, and a seeing man could 
understand how all of these aspects fit together to form a coherent whole. Even a 
blind man, after carefully studying the reports coming from the seeing man and his 
fellow blind men, could begin to understand the nature of the whole elephant, 
although he could not directly sense it without obtaining a cure for his blindness. 
We suggest that in our attempts to understand the material universe, we are 
comparable to a blind man feeling a particular part of the elephant. 
According to this analogy, the astronomical siddhäntas present the cosmos as it 
appears to similar blind men of this earth, and literatures such as the Bhägavatam 
present the world view of beings with higher powers of vision. These include 
demigods, åñis, and ultimately the Supreme Lord, who alone can see the entire 
universe. These higher beings can directly see both the aspects of the universe 
presented in the Bhägavatam and the aspects presented in the astronomical 
siddhäntas. To these higher beings it is apparent how all of these aspects fit 
together consistently in a complete whole, even though we can begin to 
understand this only with great effort. 
We note that with the development of modern physics, scientists have at least 
temporarily been forced to abandon the goal of formulating one complete 
mathematical model of the atom. According to the standard interpretation of the 
quantum theory introduced by Niels Bohr, atomic phenomena must be understood 
from at least two complementary perspectives rather than as a single, intelligible 
whole. These perspectives—the wave picture and the particle picture—seem to 
contradict each other, and yet they are both valid descriptions of nature. They are 
facets of a coherent theory of the atom, but they cannot be combined within the 
framework of classical physics. To unite them and show their compatibility, one 
must go to a higher-dimensional level of mathematical abstraction, which is very 
difficult to comprehend. 
In developing an understanding of Vedic cosmology as a multifaceted description 
of reality, it will be necessary to free ourselves from the rigid framework of 
Cartesian and Euclidian three-dimensional geometry, which forms the basis of the 
modern scientific world view. We will attempt to do this in Chapter 2, where we 
will discuss space, physical laws, and processes of sense perception, as presented in 
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. In Chapters 3 and 4 we will give an account of Puräëic 
cosmology and show how the ideas developed in Chapter 2 can be applied to 
resolve apparent contradictions within the Vedic tradition and between the Vedic 
cosmology and the world of our ordinary sensory experience. Here a key idea is 
that the universe as described in Vedic literature is higher-dimensional: it cannot 
be fully represented within three-dimensional space. 
In our discussion of Vedic cosmology we will be forced to interpret the texts of the 
Çrémad-Bhägavatam and other Vedic literature. This is inevitable, since even a 
literal interpretation is based on underlying assumptions made by the reader—

=== PAGE 6 ===

6
assumptions that may differ from those of the author of the text, and that the 
reader may hold without being consciously aware of them. In making such 
interpretations we will try to adhere to the following rule given by Çréla 
Prabhupäda: “The original purpose of the text must be maintained. No obscure 
meaning should be screwed out of it, yet it should be presented in an interesting 
manner for the understanding of the audience. This is called realization” (SB 
1.4.1p). We also note that Çréla Prabhupäda advocated in SB 5.16.10p that we 
should accept the cosmological statements in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam as 
authoritative and simply try to appreciate them. We will therefore adopt the 
working assumption that even though these statements may seem very hard to 
comprehend, they nonetheless do present an understandable and realistic 
description of the universe. 
In Chapter 5 we address the question of whether or not there is any empirical 
evidence supporting the higher-dimensional picture of the universe that we derive 
from the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. It turns out that there is voluminous evidence along 
these lines, although practically none of it is accepted by the scientific community. 
In Chapter 6 we return to Vedic cosmology and discuss a number of controversial 
topics, including gravitation, the moon flight, the scale of cosmic distances, and 
the nature of stars. In Chapter 7 we survey the modern scientific evidence 
regarding the theory of the expanding universe. Here we not only find that this 
theory is flawed, but we also find evidence indicating that Newton’s laws of motion 
fail on the galactic level. Finally, in Chapter 8 we present brief answers to a 
number of common questions. 
The material presented in this book constitutes a preliminary study of Vedic 
cosmology and astronomy. To properly answer the many questions that arise, 
much further research will have to be done. This will include (1) careful study of 
cosmological material in a wide variety of Vedic literatures, (2) study of Vedic 
geographical material, (3) careful analysis of the theories of Western scholars 
about the history of Vedic astronomy, (4) study of ancient astronomical 
observations, (5) study of dating and the Vedic calendar, (6) study of empirical 
evidence relating to Vedic cosmology, and (7) the careful analysis of modern 
cosmology and astronomy. It is our hope that these studies will culminate in the 
development of a Vedic planetarium and museum that can effectively present 
Kåñëa consciousness in the context of Vedic cosmology. This, of course, was Çréla 
Prabhupäda’s plan for the planetarium in the Temple of Understanding in 
Çrédhäma Mäyäpura, and similar planetariums can be set up in cities around the 
world. 
In this book we will use the terms Vedic and Puräëic interchangeably. Although 
modern scholars reject this usage, it is justified by the verse itihäsa-puräëaà ca 
païcamo veda ucyate in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.4.20). According to this verse, the 
Puräëas and the histories, such as the Mahäbhärata, are known as the fifth Veda. 
References to Sanskrit and Bengali texts are of three forms: A reference such as SB 
5.22.14 means that the quotation is from the 14th verse of Chapter 22 of the Fifth 
Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. A reference such as SB 5.21.6p means the quotation 
is from Çréla Prabhupäda’s purport to verse 6 of Chapter 21 of the Fifth Canto. And 
a reference such as SB 5.21cs means the quotation is from the Chapter Summary of 
Chapter 21 of the Fifth Canto. AL or ML after references to the Caitanya-
caritämåta indicate Ädi-lélä or Madhya-lélä. For books not divided into verses and

=== PAGE 7 ===

7
purports, we cite the code identifying the book, followed by the page number (see 
the Bibliography). 
THE ASTRONOMICAL SIDDHÄNTAS 
1 
Since the cosmology of the astronomical siddhäntas is quite similar to traditional 
Western cosmology, we will begin our discussion of Vedic astronomy by briefly 
describing the contents of these works and their status in the Vaiñëava tradition. In 
a number of purports in the Caitanya-caritämåta, Çréla Prabhupäda refers to two of 
the principal works of this school of astronomy, the Sürya-siddhänta and the 
Siddhänta-çiromaëi. The most important of these references is the following: 
These calculations are given in the authentic astronomy book known as the Sürya-
siddhänta. This book was compiled by the great professor of astronomy and 
mathematics Bimal Prasäd Datta, later known as Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté 
Gosvämé, who was our merciful spiritual master. He was honored with the title 
Siddhänta Sarasvaté for writing the Sürya-siddhänta, and the title Gosvämi 
Mahäräja was added when he accepted sannyäsa, the renounced order of life [CC 
AL 3.8p]. 
Here the Sürya-siddhänta is clearly endorsed as an authentic astronomical treatise, 
and it is associated with Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura. The Sürya-
siddhänta is an ancient Sanskrit work that, according to the text itself, was spoken 
by a messenger from the sun-god, Sürya, to the famous asura Maya Dänava at the 
end of the last Satya-yuga. It was translated into Bengali by Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta 
Sarasvaté, who was expert in Vedic astronomy and astrology. 
Some insight into Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta’s connection with Vedic astronomy can be 
found in the bibliography of his writings. There it is stated, 
In 1897 he opened a “Tol” named “Saraswata Chatuspati” in Manicktola Street for 
teaching Hindu Astronomy nicely calculated independently of Greek and other 
European astronomical findings and calculations. 
During this time he used to edit two monthly magazines named “Jyotirvid” and 
“Brihaspati” (1896), and he published several authoritative treatises on Hindu 
Astronomy.… He was offered a chair in the Calcutta University by Sir Asutosh 
Mukherjee, which he refused [BS1, pp. 2–3]. 
These statements indicate that Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta took considerable interest in 
Vedic astronomy and astrology during the latter part of the nineteenth century, 
and they suggest that one of his motives for doing this was to establish that the 
Vedic astronomical tradition is independent of Greek and European influence. In 
addition to his Bengali translation of the Sürya-siddhänta, Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta 
Sarasvaté published the following works in his two magazines: 
(a) Bengali translation and explanation of Bhäskaräcärya’s Siddhänta-Shiromani 
Goladhyaya with Basanabhasya, (b) Bengali translation of 
Ravichandrasayanaspashta, Laghujatak, with annotation of Bhattotpala, (c) Bengali 
translation of Laghuparashariya, or Ududaya-Pradip, with Bhairava Datta’s 
annotation, (d) Whole of Bhauma-Siddhänta according to western calculation, (e) 
Whole of Ärya-Siddhänta by Äryabhaöa, (f) Paramadishwara’s Bhatta Dipika-Tika, 
Dinakaumudi, Chamatkara-Chintamoni, and Jyotish-Tatwa-Samhita [BS1, p. 26]. 
This list includes a translation of the Siddhänta-çiromaëi, by the 11th-century 
astronomer Bhäskaräcärya, and the Ärya-siddhänta, by the 6th-century astronomer 
Äryabhaöa. Bhaööotpala was a well-known astronomical commentator who lived in

=== PAGE 8 ===

8
the 10th century. The other items in this list also deal with astronomy and 
astrology, but we do not have more information regarding them. 
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté also published the Bhaktibhävana Païjikä and the 
Çré Navadvépa Païjikä (BS2, pp. 56,180). A païjikä is an almanac that includes 
dates for religious festivals and special days such as Ekädaçé. These dates are 
traditionally calculated using the rules given in the jyotiña çästras. 
During the time of his active preaching as head of the Gauòéya Math, Çréla 
Bhaktisiddhänta stopped publishing works dealing specifically with astronomy and 
astrology. However, as we will note later on, Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta cites both the 
Sürya-siddhänta and the Siddhänta-çiromaëi several times in his Anubhäñya 
commentary on the Caitanya-caritämåta. 
It is clear that in recent centuries the Sürya-siddhänta and similar works have 
played an important role in Indian culture. They have been regularly used for 
preparing calendars and for performing astrological calculations. In Section 1.c we 
cite evidence from the Bhägavatam suggesting that complex astrological and 
calendrical calculations were also regularly performed in Vedic times. We therefore 
suggest that similar or identical systems of astronomical calculation must have 
been known in this period. 
Here we should discuss a potential misunderstanding. We have stated that 
Vaiñëavas have traditionally made use of the astronomical siddhäntas and that both 
Çréla Prabhupäda and Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura have referred to 
them. At the same time, we have pointed out that the authors of the astronomical 
siddhäntas, such as Bhäskaräcärya, have been unable to accept some of the 
cosmological statements in the Puräëas. How could Vaiñëava äcäryas accept works 
which criticize the Puräëas? 
We suggest that the astronomical siddhäntas have a different status than 
transcendental literature such as the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. They are authentic in the 
sense that they belong to a genuine Vedic astronomical tradition, but they are 
nonetheless human works that may contain imperfections. Many of these works, 
such as the Siddhänta-çiromaëi, were composed in recent centuries and make use 
of empirical observations. Others, such as the Sürya-siddhänta, are attributed to 
demigods but were transmitted to us by persons who are not spiritually perfect. 
Thus the Sürya-siddhänta was recorded by Maya Dänava. Çréla Prabhupäda has said 
that Maya Dänava “is always materially happy because he is favored by Lord Çiva, 
but he cannot achieve spiritual happiness at any time” (SB 5.24cs). 
The astronomical siddhäntas constitute a practical division of Vedic science, and 
they have been used as such by Vaiñëavas throughout history. The thesis of this 
book is that these works are surviving remnants of an earlier astronomical science 
that was fully compatible with the cosmology of the Puräëas, and that was 
disseminated in human society by demigods and great sages. With the progress of 
Kali-yuga, this astronomical knowledge was largely lost. In recent centuries the 
knowledge that survived was reworked by various Indian astronomers and brought 
up to date by means of empirical observations. 
Although we do not know anything about the methods of calculation used before 
the Kali-yuga, they must have had at least the same scope and order of 
sophistication as the methods presented in the Sürya-siddhänta. Otherwise they 
could not have produced comparable results. In presently available Vedic 
literature, such computational methods are presented only in the astronomical

=== PAGE 9 ===

9
siddhäntas and other jyotiña çästras. The Itihäsas and Puräëas (including the 
Bhägavatam) do not contain rules for astronomical calculations, and the Vedäs 
contain only the Vedäìga-jyotiña, which is a jyotiña çästra but is very brief and 
rudimentary (VJ). 
The following is a brief summary of the topics covered by the Sürya-siddhänta: (1) 
computation of the mean and true positions of the planets in the sky, (2) 
determination of latitude and longitude and local celestial coordinates, (3) 
prediction of full and partial eclipses of the moon and sun, (4) prediction of 
conjunctions of planets with stars and other planets, (5) calculation of the rising 
and setting times of planets and stars, (6) calculation of the moon’s phases, (7) 
calculation of the dates of various astrologically significant planetary combinations 
(such as Vyatépäta), (8) a discussion of cosmography, (9) a discussion of 
astronomical instruments, and (10) a discussion of kinds of time. We will first 
discuss the computation of mean and true planetary positions, since it introduces 
the Sürya-siddhänta’s basic model of the planets and their motion in space. 
1.A. The Solar System 
According to the Sürya–siddhänta 
The Sürya-siddhänta treats the earth as a globe fixed in space, and it describes the 
seven traditional planets (the sun, the moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and 
Saturn) as moving in orbits around the earth. It also describes the orbit of the 
planet Rähu, but it makes no mention of Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto. The main 
function of the Sürya-siddhänta is to provide rules allowing us to calculate the 
positions of these planets at any given time. Given a particular date, expressed in 
days, hours, and minutes since the beginning of Kali-yuga, one can use these rules 
to compute the direction in the sky in which each of the seven planets will be 
found at that time. All of the other calculations described above are based on these 
fundamental rules. 
The basis for these rules of calculation is a quantitative model of how the planets 
move in space. This model is very similar to the modern Western model of the 
solar system. In fact, the only major difference between these two models is that 
the Sürya-siddhänta’s is geocentric, whereas the model of the solar system that 
forms the basis of modern astronomy is heliocentric. 
To determine the motion of a planet such as Venus using the modern heliocentric 
system, one must consider two motions: the motion of Venus around the sun and 
the motion of the earth around the sun. As a crude first approximation, we can 
take both of these motions to be circular. We can also imagine that the earth is 
stationary and that Venus is revolving around the sun, which in turn is revolving 
around the earth. The relative motions of the earth and Venus are the same, 
whether we adopt the heliocentric or geocentric point of view. 
In the Sürya-siddhänta the motion of Venus is also described, to a first 
approximation, by a combination of two motions, which we can call cycles 1 and 
2. The first motion is in a circle around the earth, and the second is in a circle 
around a point on the circumference of the first circle. This second circular motion 
is called an epicycle. 
It so happens that the period of revolution for cycle 1 is one earth year, and the 
period for cycle 2 is one Venusian year, or the time required for Venus to orbit the 
sun according to the heliocentric model. Also, the sun is located at the point on the 
circumference of cycle 1 which serves as the center of rotation for cycle 2. Thus we

=== PAGE 10 ===

10
can interpret the Sürya-siddhänta as saying that Venus is revolving around the sun, 
which in turn is revolving around the earth (see Figure 1). According to this 
interpretation, the only difference between the Sürya-siddhänta model and the 
modern heliocentric model is one of relative point of view. 
Table 1 
Planetary Years, Distances, and Diameters, 
According to Modern Western Astronomy 
 
Planet         Length of        Mean Distance      Mean Distance       Diameter 
 
                          Year             from Sun              from Earth 
                            
 Sun 
          — 
                 0.                     1.00 
           865,110 
 
Mercury      87.969 
             .39 
                    1.00 
           3,100  
Venus        224.701              .72 
                    1.00 
           7,560  
Earth        365.257             1.00 
                      0. 
           7,928  
Mars       686.980 
            1.52 
                   1.52 
           4,191  
Jupiter       4,332.587             5.20 
                    5.20 
           86,850  
Saturn       10,759.202           9.55 
                    9.55 
           72,000  
Uranus      30,685.206           19.2 
                    19.2 
           30,000  
Neptune   60,189.522            30.1                     30.1 
           28,000  
Pluto       90,465.38             39.5 
                    39.5 
              ? 
 
Years are equal to the number of earth days required for the planet to revolve once 
around the sun. Distances are given in astronomical units (AU), and 1 AU is equal 
to 92.9 million miles, the mean distance from the earth to the sun. Diameters are 
given in miles. (The years are taken from the standard astronomy text TSA, and the 
other figures are taken from EA.) 
In Tables 1 and 2 we list some modern Western data concerning the sun, the 
moon, and the planets, and in Table 3 we list some data on periods of planetary 
revolution taken from the Sürya-siddhänta. The periods for cycles 1 and 2 are 
given in revolutions per divya-yuga. One divya-yuga is 4,320,000 solar years, and a 
solar year is the time it takes the sun to make one complete circuit through the sky 
against the background of stars. This is the same as the time it takes the earth to 
complete one orbit of the sun according to the heliocentric model. 
TABLE 2 
Data pertaining to the Moon, 
According to Modern Western Astronomy 
 
 
 
 
  Siderial Period 
                 27.32166 days 
 
  Synodic Period 
                29.53059 days 
 
  Nodal Period  
                27.2122 days 
 
  Siderial Period of Nodes 
     -6,792.28 days 
 
  Mean Distance from Earth       238,000 miles = .002567 AU 
 
  Diameter 
                             2,160 miles 
 
 
 
 
The sidereal period is the time required for the moon to complete one orbit against 
the background of stars. The synodic period, or month, is the time from new moon 
to new moon. The nodal period is the time required for the moon to pass from

=== PAGE 11 ===

11
ascending node back to ascending node. The sidereal period of the nodes is the 
time for the ascending node to make one revolution with respect to the 
background of stars. (This is negative since the motion of the nodes is retrograde.) 
(EA) 
For Venus and Mercury, cycle 1 corresponds to the revolution of the earth around 
the sun, and cycle 2 corresponds to the revolution of the planet around the sun. 
The times for cycle 1 should therefore be one revolution per  solar year, and, 
indeed, they are listed as 4,320,000 revolutions per divya-yuga. 
The times for cycle 2 of Venus and Mercury should equal the modern heliocentric 
years of these planets. According to the Sürya-siddhänta, there are 1,577,917,828 
solar days per divya-yuga. (A solar day is the time from sunrise to  sunrise.) The 
cycle-2 times can be computed in solar days by dividing this number by the 
revolutions per divya-yuga in cycle 2. The cycle-2 times are listed as “SS [Sürya-
siddhänta] Period,” and they are indeed very close to the heliocentric years, which 
are listed as “W [Western] Period” in Table 3. 
For Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, cycle 1 corresponds to the revolution of the planet 
around the sun, and cycle 2 corresponds to the revolution of the earth around the 
sun. Thus we see that cycle 2 for these planets is one solar year (or 4,320,000 
revolutions per divya-yuga). The times for cycle 1 in solar days can also be 
computed by dividing the revolutions per divya-yuga of cycle 1 into 
1,577,917,828, and they are listed under “SS Period.” We can again see that they 
are very close to the corresponding heliocentric years. 
For the sun and moon, cycle 2 is not specified. But if we divide 1,577,917,828 by 
the numbers of revolutions per divya-yuga for cycle 1 of the sun and moon, we can 
calculate the number of solar days in the orbital periods of these planets. Table 3 
shows that these figures agree well with the modern values, especially in the case 
of the moon. (Of course, the orbital period of the sun is simply one solar year.) 
TABLE 3 
Planetary Periods According to the Sürya-siddhänta 
 
Planet         Cycle 1        Cycle 2     SS Period       W Period  
Moon       57,753,336 
* 
     27.322 
      27.32166  
Mercury    4,320,000      17,937,000     87.97   
      87.969 
 
Venus       4,320,000       7,022,376      224.7 
      224.701 
 
Sun 
      4,320,000           * 
     365.26 
      365.257 
 
Mars       2,296,832      4,320,000      687.0 
      686.980 
 
Jupiter       364,220 
     4,320,000      4,332.3 
      4,332.587  
Saturn      146,568 
      4,320,000     10,765.77       10,759.202 
 
Rähu      -232,238           * 
    -6,794.40       -6,792.280 
 
The figures for cycles 1 and 2 are in revolutions per divya-yuga. The “SS Period” is 
equal to 1,577,917,828, the number of solar days in a yuga cycle, divided by one of 
the two cycle figures (see the text). This should give the heliocentric period for 
Mercury, Venus, the earth (under sun) Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, and it shold give 
the geocentric period for the moon and Rähu. These periods can be compared with 
the years in Table 1 and the sidereal periods of the moon and its nodes in Table 2. 
These quantities have been reproduced from Tables 1 and 2 in the column labeled 
“W Period.”

=== PAGE 12 ===

12
In Table 3 a cycle-1 value is also listed for the planet Rähu. Rähu is not recognized 
by modern Western astronomers, but its position in space, as described in the 
Sürya-siddhänta, does correspond with a quantity that is measured by modern 
astronomers. This is the ascending node of the moon. 
From a geocentric perspective, the orbit of the sun defines one plane passing 
through the center of the earth, and the orbit of the moon defines another such 
plane. These two planes are slightly tilted with respect to each other, and thus they 
intersect on a line. The point where the moon crosses this line going from celestial 
south to celestial north is called the ascending node of the moon. According to the 
Sürya-siddhänta, the planet Rähu is located in the direction of the moon’s 
ascending node. 
From Table 3 we can see that the modern figure for the time of one revolution of 
the moon’s ascending node agrees quite well with the time for one revolution of 
Rähu. (These times have minus signs because Rähu orbits in a direction opposite 
to that of all the other planets.) 
TABLE 4 
Heliocentric Distances of Planets, According to the Sürya-siddhänta 
 
Planet           Cycle 1         Cycle 2     SS Distance        W Distance 
 
Mercury 
360 
       133 132         .368 
                .39  
Venus             360 
       262 260         .725 
                .72  
Mars             360 
       235 232         1.54 
              1.52  
Jupiter             360 
         70 72 
        5.07 
              5.20  
Saturn             360 
         39 40 
        9.11 
              9.55  
These are the distances of the planets from the sun. The mean heliocentric distance 
of Mercury and Venus in AU should be given by its mean cycle-2 circumference 
divided by its cycle-1 circumference. (The cycle-2 circumferences vary between the 
indicated limits, and we use their average values.) For the other planets the mean 
heliocentric distance should be the reciprocal of this (see the text). These figures 
are listed as “SS Distance,” and the corresponding modern Western heliocentric 
distances are listed under “W Distance.” 
If cycle 1 for Venus corresponds to the motion of the sun around the earth (or of 
the earth around the sun), and cycle 2 corresponds to the motion of Venus around 
the sun, then we should have the following equation: 
circumference of cycle 2  =  Venus-to-Sun distance 
circumference of cycle 1       Earth-to-Sun distance 
Here the ratio of distances equals the ratio of circumferences, since the 
circumference of a circle is 2 pi times its radius. The ratio of distances is equal to 
the distance from Venus to the sun in astronomical units (AU), or units of the 
earth-sun distance. The modern values for the distances of the planets from the 
sun are listed in Table 1. In Table 4, the ratios on the left of our equation are 
computed for Mercury and Venus, and we can see that they do agree well with the 
modern distance figures. For Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, cycles 1 and 2 are 
switched, and thus we are interested in comparing the heliocentric distances with 
the reciprocal of the ratio on the left of the equation. These quantities are listed in 
the table, and they also agree well with the modern values. Thus, we can conclude 
that the Sürya-siddhänta presents a picture of the relative motions and positions of

=== PAGE 13 ===

13
the planets Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn that agrees quite well 
with modern astronomy. 
1.B. The Opinion of Western Scholars 
This agreement between Vedic and Western astronomy will seem surprising to 
anyone who is familiar with the cosmology described in the Fifth Canto of the 
Çrémad-Bhägavatam and in the other Puräëas, the Mahäbhärata, and the Rämäyaëa. 
The astronomical siddhäntas seem to have much more in common with Western 
astronomy than they do with Puräëic cosmology, and they seem to be even more 
closely related with the astronomy of the Alexandrian Greeks. Indeed, in the 
opinion of modern Western scholars, the astronomical school of the siddhäntas 
was imported into India from Greek sources in the early centuries of the Christian 
era. Since the siddhäntas themselves do not acknowledge this, these scholars claim 
that Indian astronomers, acting out of chauvinism and religious sentiment, 
Hinduized their borrowed Greek knowledge and claimed it as their own. 
According to this idea, the cosmology of the Puräëas represents an earlier, 
indigenous phase in the development of Hindu thought, which is entirely 
mythological and unscientific. 
This, of course, is not the traditional Vaiñëava viewpoint. The traditional viewpoint 
is indicated by our observations regarding the astronomical studies of Çréla 
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, who founded a school for “teaching Hindu 
Astronomy nicely calculated independently of Greek and other European 
astronomical findings and calculations.” 
The Bhägavatam commentary of the Vaiñëava scholar Vaàçédhara also sheds light 
on the traditional understanding of the jyotiña çästras. His commentary appears in 
the book of Bhägavatam commentaries Çréla Prabhupäda used when writing his 
purports. In Appendix 1 we discuss in detail Vaàçédhara’s commentary on SB 
5.20.38. Here we note that Vaàçédhara declares the jyotiña çästra to be the “eye of 
the Vedas,” in accord with verse 1.4 of the Närada-saàhitä, which says, “The 
excellent science of astronomy comprising siddhänta, saàhitä, and horä as its 
three branches is the clear eye of the Vedas” (BJS, xxvi). 
Vaiñëava tradition indicates that the jyotiña çästra is indigenous to Vedic culture, 
and this is supported by the fact that the astronomical siddhäntas do not 
acknowledge foreign source material. The modern scholarly view that all 
important aspects of Indian astronomy were transmitted to India from Greek 
sources is therefore tantamount to an accusation of fraud. Although scholars of the 
present day do not generally declare this openly in their published writings, they 
do declare it by implication, and the accusation was explicitly made by the first 
British Indologists in the early nineteenth century. 
John Bentley was one of these early Indologists, and it has been said of his work 
that “he thoroughly misapprehended the character of the Hindu astronomical 
literature, thinking it to be in the main a mass of forgeries framed for the purpose 
of deceiving the world respecting the antiquity of the Hindu people” (HA, p. 3). 
Yet the modern scholarly opinion that the Bhägavatam was written after the ninth 
century A.D. is tantamount to accusing it of being a similar forgery. In fact, we 
would suggest that the scholarly assessment of Vedic astronomy is part of a general 
effort on the part of Western scholars to dismiss the Vedic literature as a fraud. 
A large book would be needed to properly evaluate all of the claims made by 
scholars concerning the origins of Indian astronomy. In Appendix 2 we indicate

=== PAGE 14 ===

14
the nature of many of these claims by analyzing three cases in detail. Our 
observation is that scholarly studies of Indian astronomy tend to be based on 
imaginary historical reconstructions that fill the void left by an almost total lack of 
solid historical evidence. 
Here we will simply make a few brief observations indicating an alternative to the 
current scholarly view. We suggest that the similarity between the Sürya-siddhänta 
and the astronomical system of Ptolemy is not due to a one-sided transfer of 
knowledge from Greece and Alexandrian Egypt to India. Due partly to the great 
social upheavals following the fall of the Roman Empire, our knowledge of ancient 
Greek history is extremely fragmentary. However, although history books do not 
generally acknowledge it, evidence does exist of extensive contact between India 
and ancient Greece. (For example, see PA, where it is suggested that Pythagoras 
was a student of Indian philosophy and that brähmaëas and yogés were active in 
the ancient Mediterranean world.) 
We therefore propose the following tentative scenario for the relations between 
ancient India and ancient Greece: SB 1.12.24p says that the Vedic king Yayäti was 
the ancestor of the Greeks, and SB 2.4.18p  says that the Greeks were once 
classified among the kñatriya kings of Bhärata but later gave up brahminical culture 
and became known as mlecchas. We therefore propose that the Greeks and the 
people of India once shared a common culture, which included knowledge of 
astronomy. Over the course of time, great cultural divergences developed, but 
many common cultural features remained as a result of shared ancestry and later 
communication. Due to the vicissitudes of the Kali-yuga, astronomical knowledge 
may have been lost several times in Greece over the last few thousand years and 
later regained through communication with India, discovery of old texts, and 
individual creativity. This brings us down to the late Roman period, in which 
Greece and India shared similar astronomical systems. The scenario ends with the 
fall of Rome, the burning of the famous library at Alexandria, and the general 
destruction of records of the ancient past. 
According to this scenario, much creative astronomical work was done by Greek 
astronomers such as Hipparchus and Ptolemy. However, the origin of many of 
their ideas is simply unknown, due to a lack of historical records. Many of these 
ideas may have come from indigenous Vedic astronomy, and many may also have 
been developed independently in India and the West. Thus we propose that 
genuine traditions of astronomy existed both in India and the eastern 
Mediterranean, and that charges of wholesale unacknowledged cultural borrowing 
are unwarranted. 
1.C. The Vedic Calendar and Astrology 
In this subsection we will present some evidence from Çréla Prabhupäda’s books 
suggesting that astronomical computations of the kind presented in the 
astronomical siddhäntas were used in Vedic times. As we have pointed out, many 
of the existing astronomical siddhäntas were written by recent Indian astronomers. 
But if the Vedic culture indeed dates back thousands of years, as the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam describes, then this evidence suggests that methods of astronomical 
calculation as sophisticated as those of the astronomical siddhäntas were also in 
use in India thousands of years ago. Consider the following passage from the 
Çrémad-Bhägavatam:

=== PAGE 15 ===

15
One should perform the çräddha ceremony on the Makara-saìkränti or on the 
Karkaöa-saìkränti. One should also perform this ceremony on the Meña-saìkränti 
day and the Tulä-saìkränti day, in the yoga named Vyatépäta, on that day in which 
three lunar tithis are conjoined, during an eclipse of either the moon or the sun, on 
the twelfth lunar day, and in the Çravaëa-nakñatra. One should perform this 
ceremony on the Akñaya-tåtéyä day, on the ninth lunar day of the bright fortnight 
of the month of Kärtika, on the four añöakäs in the winter season and cool season, 
on the seventh lunar day of the bright fortnight of the month of Mägha, during the 
conjunction of Mägha-nakñatra and the full-moon day, and on the days when the 
moon is completely full, or not quite completely full, when these days are 
conjoined with the nakñatras from which the names of certain months are derived. 
One should also perform the çräddha ceremony on the twelfth lunar day when it is 
in conjunction with any of the nakñatras named Anurädhä, Çravaëa, Uttara-
phalguné, Uttaräñädhä, or Uttara-bhädrapadä. Again, one should perform this 
ceremony when the eleventh lunar day is in conjunction with either Uttara-
phalguné, Uttaräñädhä, or Uttara-bhädrapadä. Finally, one should perform this 
ceremony on days conjoined with one’s own birth star [janma-nakñatra] or with 
Çravaëa-nakñatra [SB 7.14.20–23]. 
This passage indicates that to observe the çräddha ceremony properly one would 
need the services of an expert astronomer. The Sürya-siddhänta contains rules for 
performing astronomical calculations of the kind required here, and it is hard to 
see how these calculations could be performed without some computational 
system of equal complexity. For example, in the Sürya-siddhänta the Vyatépäta 
yoga is defined as the time when “the moon and sun are in different ayanas, the 
sum of their longitudes is equal to 6 signs (nearly) and their declinations are 
equal” (SS, p. 72). One could not even define such a combination of planetary 
positions without considerable astronomical sophistication. 
Similar references to detailed astronomical knowledge are scattered throughout the 
Bhägavatam. For example, the Vyatépäta yoga is also mentioned in SB 4.12.49–50. 
And KB p. 693 describes that in Kåñëa’s time, people from all over India once 
gathered at Kurukñetra on the occasion of a total solar eclipse that had been 
predicted by astronomical calculation. Also, SB 10.28.7p recounts how Nanda 
Mahäräja once bathed too early in the Yamunä River—and was thus arrested by an 
agent of Varuëa—because the lunar day of Ekädaçé ended at an unusually early 
hour on that occasion. We hardly ever think of astronomy in our modern day-to-
day lives, but it would seem that in Vedic times daily life was constantly regulated 
in accordance with astronomical considerations. 
The role of astrology in Vedic culture provides another line of evidence for the 
existence of highly developed systems of astronomical calculation in Vedic times. 
The astronomical siddhäntas have been traditionally used in India for astrological 
calculations, and astrology in its traditional form would be impossible without the 
aid of highly accurate systems of astronomical computation. Çréla Prabhupäda has 
indicated that astrology played an integral role in the karma-käëòa functions of 
Vedic society. A few references indicating the importance of astrology in Vedic 
society are SB 1.12.12p, 1.12.29p, 1.19.10p, 6.2.26p, 9.18.23p, 9.20.37p, and 
10.8.5, and also CC AL 13.89–90 and 17.104. 
These passages indicate that the traditions of the Vaiñëavas are closely tied in with 
the astronomical siddhäntas. Western scholars will claim that this close association

=== PAGE 16 ===

16
is a product of processes of “Hindu syncretism” that occurred well within the 
Christian era and were carried out by unscrupulous brähmaëas who 
misappropriated Greek astronomical science and also concocted scriptures such as 
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. However, if the Vaiñëava tradition is indeed genuine, then 
this association must be real, and must date back for many thousands of years. 
1.D. The Starting Date of Kali–yuga 
Imagine the following scene: It is midnight on the meridian of Ujjain in India on 
February 18, 3102 B.C. The seven planets, including the sun and moon, cannot be 
seen since they are all lined up in one direction on the other side of the earth. 
Directly overhead the dark planet Rähu hovers invisibly in the blackness of night. 
According to the jyotiña çästras, this alignment of the planets actually occurred on 
this date, which marks the beginning of the Kali-yuga. In fact, in the Sürya-
siddhänta, time is measured in days since the start of Kali-yuga, and it is assumed 
that the positions of the seven planets in their two cycles are all aligned with the 
star Zeta Piscium at day zero. This star, which is known as Revaté in Sanskrit, is 
used as the zero point for measuring celestial longitudes in the jyotiña çästras. The 
position of Rähu at day zero is also assumed to be 180 degrees from this star. 
Nearly identical assumptions are made in other astronomical siddhäntas. (In some 
systems, such as that of Äryabhaöa, it is assumed that Kali-yuga began at sunrise 
rather than at midnight. In others, a close alignment of the planets is a_sumed at 
this time, rather than an exact alignment.) 
In the Caitanya-caritämåta AL 3.9–10, the present date in this day of Brahmä is 
defined as follows: (1) The present Manu, Vaivasvata, is the seventh, (2) 27 divya-
yugas of his age have passed, and (3) we are in the Kali-yuga of the 28th divya-
yuga. The Sürya-siddhänta also contains this information, and its calculations of 
planetary positions require knowledge of the ahargana, or the exact number of 
elapsed days in Kali-yuga. The Indian astronomer Äryabhaöa wrote that he was 23 
years old when 3,600 years of Kali-yuga had passed (BJS, part 2, p. 55). Since 
Äryabhaöa is said to have been born in Çaka 398, or A.D. 476, this is in agreement 
with the standard ahargana used today for the calculations of the Sürya-siddhänta. 
For example, October 1, 1965, corresponds to day 1,850,569 in Kali-yuga. On the 
basis of this information one can calculate that the Kali-yuga began on February 
18, 3102 B.C., according to the Gregorian calendar. It is for this reason that 
Vaiñëavas maintain that the pastimes of Kåñëa with the Päëòavas in the battle of 
Kurukñetra took place about 5,000 years ago. 
Of course, it comes as no surprise that the standard view of Western scholars is 
that this date for the start of Kali-yuga is fictitious. Indeed, these scholars maintain 
that the battle of Kurukñetra itself is fictitious, and that the civilization described in 
the Vedic literature is simply a product of poetic imagination. It is therefore 
interesting to ask what modern astronomers have to say about the positions of the 
planets on February 18, 3102 B.C.

=== PAGE 17 ===

17
TABLE 5 
The Celestial Longitudes of the Planets 
at the Start of Kali-yuga 
 
 
Planet                Modern Mean                      Modern True  
                            Longitude                            Longitude  
 
 
Moon                      -6;04 
                              -1;14 
 
Sun 
                     -5;40 
                              -3;39 
 
Mercury 
         -38;09                               -19;07 
 
Venus                      27;34 
                              8;54 
 
Mars                     -17;25 
                             -6;59 
 
Jupiter                     11;06 
                             10;13 
 
Saturn                     -25;11 
                            -27;52 
 
Rähu                    -162;44                             -162;44 
 
This table shows the celestial longitudes of the planets relative to the star Zeta 
Piscium (Revaté in Sanskrit) at sunrise of February 18, 3102 B.C., the beginning of 
Kali-yuga. Each longitude is expressed as degrees; minutes. 
Table 5 lists the longitudes of the planets relative to the reference star Zeta Piscium 
at the beginning of Kali-yuga. The figures under “Modern True Longitude” 
represent the true positions of the planets at this time according to modern 
calculations. (These calculations were done with computer programs published by 
Duffett-Smith (DF).) We can see that, according to modern astronomy, an 
approximate alignment of the planets did occur at the beginning of Kali-yuga. Five 
of the planets were within 10Ö of the Vedic reference star, exceptions being 
Mercury, at –19Ö, and Saturn, at –27Ö. Rähu was also within 18Ö of the position 
opposite Zeta Piscium. 
The figures under “Modern Mean Longitude” represent the mean positions of the 
planets at the beginning of Kali-yuga. The mean position of a planet, according to 
modern astronomy, is the position the planet would have if it moved uniformly at 
its average rate of motion. Since the planets speed up and slow down, the true 
position is sometimes ahead of the mean position and sometimes behind it. Similar 
concepts of true and mean positions are found in the Sürya-siddhänta, and we note 
that while the Sürya-siddhänta assumes an exact mean alignment at the start of 
Kali-yuga, it assumes only an approximate true alignment. 
Planetary alignments such as the one in Table 5 are quite rare. To find out how 
rare they are, we carried out a computer search for alignments by computing the 
planetary positions at three-day intervals from the start of Kali-yuga to the present. 
We measured the closeness of an alignment by averaging the absolute values of the 
planetary longitudes relative to Zeta Piscium. (For Rähu, of course, we used the 
absolute value of the longitude relative to a point 180Ö from Zeta Piscium.) Our 
program divided the time from the start of Kali-yuga to the present into 
approximately 510 ten-year intervals. In this entire period we found only three ten-
year intervals in which an alignment occurred that was as close as the one 
occurring at the beginning of Kali-yuga. 
We would suggest that the dating of the start of Kali-yuga at 3102 B.C. is based on 
actual historical accounts, and that the tradition of an unusual alignment of the

=== PAGE 18 ===

18
planets at this time is also a matter of historical fact. The opinion of the modern 
scholars is that the epoch of Kali-yuga was concocted during the early medieval 
period. According to this hypothesis, Indian astronomers used borrowed Greek 
astronomy to determine that a near planetary alignment occurred in 3102 B.C. 
After performing the laborious calculations needed to discover this, they then 
invented the fictitious era of Kali-yuga and convinced the entire subcontinent of 
India that this era had been going on for some three thousand years. Subsequently, 
many different Puräëas were written in accordance with this chronology, and 
people all over India became convinced that these works, although unknown to 
their forefathers, were really thousands of years old. 
One might ask why anyone would even think of searching for astronomical 
alignments over a period of thousands of years into the past and then redefining 
the history of an entire civilization on the basis of a particular discovered 
alignment. It seems more plausible to suppose that the story of Kali-yuga is 
genuine, that the alignment occurring at its start is a matter of historical 
recollection, and that the Puräëas really were written prior to the beginning of this 
era. 
We should note that many historical records exist in India that make use of dates 
expressed as years since the beginning of Kali-yuga. In many cases, these dates are 
substantially less than 3102—that is, they represent times before the beginning of 
the Christian era. Interesting examples of such dates are given in the book Ädi 
Çaìkara (AS), edited by S. D. Kulkarni, in connection with the dating of 
Çaìkaräcärya. One will also find references to such dates in Age of Bhärata War 
(ABW), a series of papers on the date of the Mahäbhärata, edited by G. C. 
Agarwala. The existence of many such dates from different parts of India suggests 
that the Kali era, with its 3102 B.C. starting date, is real and not a concoction of 
post-Ptolemaic medieval astronomers. (Some references will give 3101 B.C. as the 
starting date of the Kali-yuga. One reason for this discrepancy is that in some cases 
a year 0 is counted between A.D. 1 and 1 B.C., and in other cases this is not done.) 
At this point the objection might be raised that the alignment determined by 
modern calculation for the beginning of Kali-yuga is approximate, whereas the 
astronomical siddhäntas generally assume an exact alignment. This seems to 
indicate a serious defect in the jyotiña çästras. 
In reply, we should note that although modern calculations are quite accurate for 
our own historical period, we know of no astronomical observations that can be 
used to check them prior to a few hundred years B.C. It is therefore possible that 
modern calculations are not entirely accurate at 3102 B.C. and that the planetary 
alignment at that date was nearly exact. Of course, if the alignment was as inexact 
as Table 5 indicates, then it would be necessary to suppose that a significant error 
was introduced into the jyotiña çästras, perhaps in fairly recent times. However, 
even this hypothesis is not consistent with the theory that 3102 B.C. was selected 
by Ptolemaic calculations, since these calculations also indicate that a very rough 
planetary alignment occurred at this date. 
Apart from this, we should note that the astronomical siddhäntas do not show 
perfect accuracy over long periods of time. This is indicated by the Sürya-siddhänta 
itself in the following statement, which a representative of the sun-god speaks to 
the asura Maya:

=== PAGE 19 ===

19
O Maya, hear attentively the excellent knowledge of the science of astronomy 
which the sun himself formerly taught to the great saints in each of the yugas. 
I teach you the same ancient science.… But the difference between the present and 
the ancient works is caused only by time, on account of the revolution of the yugas 
(SS, p. 2). 
According to the jyotiña çästras themselves, the astronomical information they 
contain was based on two sources: (1) revelation from demigods, and (2) human 
observation. The calculations in the astronomical siddhäntas are simple enough to 
be suitable for hand calculation, but as a result they tend to lose accuracy over 
time. The above statement by the sun’s representative indicates that these works 
were updated from time to time in order to keep them in agreement with celestial 
phenomena. 
We have made a computer study comparing the Sürya-siddhänta with modern 
astronomical calculations. This study suggests that the Sürya-siddhänta was 
probably updated some time around A.D. 1000, since its calculations agree most 
closely with modern calculations at that time. However, this does not mean that 
this is the date when the Sürya-siddhänta was first written. Rather, the parameters 
of planetary motion in the existing text may have been brought up to date at that 
time. Since the original text was as useful as ever once its parameters were 
updated, there was no need to change it, and thus it may date back to a very 
remote period. 
A detailed discussion concerning the date and origin of Äryabhaöa’s astronomical 
system is found in Appendix 2. There we observe that the parameters for this 
astronomical system were probably determined by observation during Äryabhaöa’s 
lifetime, in the late 5th and early 6th centuries A.D. Regarding his theoretical 
methods, Äryabhaöa wrote, “By the grace of Brahmä the precious sunken jewel of 
true knowledge has been brought up by me from the ocean of true and false 
knowledge by means of the boat of my own intellect” (VW, p. 213). This suggests 
that Äryabhaöa did not claim to have created anything new. Rather, he simply 
reclaimed old knowledge that had become confused in the course of time. 
In general, we would suggest that revelation of astronomical information by 
demigods was common in ancient times prior to the beginning of Kali-yuga. In the 
period of Kali-yuga, human observation has been largely used to keep astronomical 
systems up to date, and as a result, many parameters in existing works will tend to 
have a fairly recent origin. Since the Indian astronomical tradition was clearly very 
conservative and was mainly oriented towards fulfilling customary day-to-day 
needs, it is quite possible that the methods used in these works are extremely 
ancient. 
As a final point, we should consider the objection that Indian astronomers have 
not given detailed accounts of how they made observations or how they computed 
their astronomical parameters on the basis of these observations. This suggests to 
some that a tradition of sophisticated astronomical observation never existed in 
India. 
One answer to this objection is that there is abundant evidence for the existence of 
elaborate programs of astronomical observation in India in recent centuries. The 
cover of this book depicts an astronomical instrument seen in Benares in 1772 by 
an Englishman named Robert Barker; it was said to be about 200 years old at that 
time. About 20 feet high, this structure includes two quadrants, divided into

=== PAGE 20 ===

20
degrees, which were used to measure the position of the sun. It was part of an 
observatory including several other large stone and brass instruments designed for 
sighting the stars and planets (PR, pp. 31–33). 
Similar instruments were built in Agra and Delhi. The observatory at Delhi was 
built by Rajah Jayasingh in 1710 under the auspices of Mohammed Shah, and it 
can still be seen today. Although these observatories are quite recent, there is no 
reason to suppose that they first began to be built a few centuries ago. It is 
certainly possible that over a period of thousands of years such observatories were 
erected in India when needed. 
The reason we do not find elaborate accounts of observational methods in the 
jyotiña çästras is that these works were intended simply as brief guides for 
calculators, not as comprehensive textbooks. Textbooks were never written, since 
it was believed that knowledge should be disclosed only to qualified disciples. This 
is shown by the following statement in the Sürya-siddhänta: “O Maya, this science, 
secret even to the Gods, is not to be given to anybody but the well-examined pupil 
who has attended one whole year” (SS, p. 56). Similarly, after mention of a motor 
based on mercury that powers a revolving model of the universe, we find this 
statement: “The method of constructing the revolving instrument is to be kept a 
secret, as by diffusion here it will be known to all” (SS, p. 90). The story of the 
false disciple of Droëäcärya in the Mahäbhärata shows that this restrictive 
approach to the dissemination of knowledge was standard in Vedic culture. 
1.E. The Distances and Sizes of the Planets 
In Section 1.a we derived relative distances between the planets from the orbital 
data contained in the Sürya-siddhänta. These distances are expressed in units of 
the earth-sun distance, or AU. In this section we will consider absolute distances 
measured in miles or yojanas and point out an interesting feature of the Sürya-
siddhänta: it seems that figures for the diameters of the planets are encoded in a 
verse in the seventh chapter of this text. These diameters agree quite well with the 
planetary diameters determined by modern astronomy. This is remarkable, since it 
is hard to see how one could arrive at these diameters by observation without the 
aid of powerful modern telescopes. 
Absolute distances are given in the Sürya-siddhänta in yojanas—the same distance 
unit used throughout the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. To convert such a unit into Western 
units such as miles or kilometers, it is necessary to find some distances that we can 
measure today and that have also been measured in yojanas. Çréla Prabhupäda has 
used a figure of eight miles per yojana throughout his books, and this information 
is presumably based on the joint usage of miles and yojanas in India. 
Since some doubt has occasionally been expressed concerning the size of the 
yojana, here is some additional information concerning the definition of this unit 
of length. One standard definition of a yojana is as follows: one yojana equals four 
kroças, where a kroça is the maximum distance over which a healthy man can 
shout and be heard by someone with good hearing (AA). It is difficult to pin down 
this latter figure precisely, but it surely could not be much over two miles. Another 
definition is that a yojana equals 8,000 nå, or heights of a man. Using 8 miles per 
yojana and 5,280 feet per mile, we obtain 5.28 feet for the height of a man, which 
is not unreasonable. In Appendix 1 we give some other definitions of the yojana 
basedon the human body.

=== PAGE 21 ===

21
A more precise definition of a yojana can be obtained by making use of the figures 
for the diameter of the earth given by Indian astronomers. Äryabhaöa gives a figure 
of 1,050 yojanas for the diameter of the earth (AA). Using the current figure of 
7,928 miles for the diameter of the earth, we obtain 7,928/1,050 = 7.55 miles per 
yojana, which is close to 8. We also note that Alberuni (AL, p. 167) gives a figure 
of 8 miles per yojana, although it is not completely clear whether his mile is the 
same as ours. 
In the Siddhänta-çiromaëi of Bhäskaräcärya, the diameter of the earth is given as 
1,581 yojanas (SSB2, p. 83), and in the Sürya-siddhänta a diameter of 1,600 
yojanas is used (SS, p. 11). These numbers yield about 5 miles per yojana, which is 
too small to be consistent with either the 8 miles per yojana or the 8,000 nå per 
yojana standards. (At 5 miles per yojana we obtain 3.3 feet for the height of a man, 
which is clearly too short.) The Indian astronomer Parameçvara suggests that these 
works use another standard for the length of a yojana, and this is borne out by the 
fact that their distance figures are consistently 60% larger than those given by 
Äryabhaöa. Thus, it seems clear that a yojana has traditionally represented a 
distance of a few miles, with 5 and approximately 8 being two standard values used 
by astronomers. 
At this point it is worthwhile considering how early Indian astronomers obtained 
values for the diameter of the earth. The method described in their writings (GP, p. 
84) is similar to the one reportedly used by the ancient Greek astronomer 
Eratosthenes. If the earth is a sphere, then the vertical directions at two different 
points should differ in angle by an amount equal to 360 times the distance between 
the points divided by the circumference of the earth. This angle can be determined 
by measuring the tilt of the noon sunlight from vertical at one place, and 
simultaneously measuring the same tilt at the other place (assuming that the sun’s 
rays at the two places run parallel to one another). At a separation of, say, 500 
miles, the difference in tilt angles should be about 7 degrees, a value that can be 
easily measured and used to compute the earth’s circumference and diameter. 
The Sürya-siddhänta lists the diameter of the moon as 480 yojanas and the 
circumference of the moon’s orbit as 324,000 yojanas. If we convert these figures 
into miles by multiplying by the Sürya-siddhänta value of 5 miles per yojana, we 
obtain 2,400 and 1,620,000. According to modern Western figures, the diameter of 
the moon is 2,160 miles, and the circumference of the moon’s orbit is 2ë times the 
earth-to-moon distance of 238,000 miles, or 1,495,000 miles. Thus the Sürya-
siddhänta agrees closely with modern astronomy as to the size of the moon and its 
distance from the earth. 
TABLE 6 
The Diameters of the Planets, According to the Sürya-siddhänta 
 
Planet        Orbit 
Reduced        SS       Diameter     W Diameter      W/SS  
                                   Diameter    Yojanas    Miles 
          Miles  
Moon       324,000 
 480.00       480.00 
 2400.00       2,160.            .90 
 
Sun 
    4,331,500 486.21        6,500.00 32,500.0       865,110.         26.62 
 
Mercury  4,331,500  45.00         601.60 
 3,008.0        3,100.           1.03 
 
Venus     4,331,500 60.00         802.13 
 4,010.6        7,560.           1.89 
 
Earth          0    
  — 
      1,600.00   8,000.0       7,928.             .99 
 
Mars     8,146,909  30.00         754.34 
  3,771.7       4,191.           1.11

=== PAGE 22 ===

22
Jupiter    51,375,764  52.50       8,324.80  41,624.0      86,850.   
2.09 
 
Saturn    127,668,255  37.50       14,776.00  73,882.0      72,000.   
.97 
 
The first column lists the planetary orbital circumferences in yojanas (SS, p. 87). 
The second column lists the diameters of the planets in yojanas reduced to the 
orbit of the moon (SS, p, 59). The third column lists the corresponding actual 
diameters (in yojanas and miles). Except for the sun, moon, and earth (where 
figures are taken from SS, p. 41), these values are computed using the data in 
columns 1 and 2. The fourth column lists the current Western values for the 
planetary diameters, and the last column lists the ratios between the Western 
diameters and the diameters based on the Sürya-siddhänta. 
Table 6 lists some figures taken from the Sürya-siddhänta giving the 
circumferences of the orbits of the planets (with the earth as center), and the 
diameters of the discs of the planets themselves. The orbital circumferences of the 
planets other than the moon are much smaller than they should be according to 
modern astronomy. 
The diameter of the moon is also the only planetary diameter that seems, at first 
glance, to agree with modern data. Thus, the diameter given for the sun is 6,500 
yojanas, or 32,500 miles, whereas the modern figure for the diameter of the sun is 
865,110 miles. The diameter figures for Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn 
are given in yojanas for the size of the planetary disc when projected to the orbit of 
the moon (see Figure 2). These figures enable us to visualize how large the planets 
should appear in comparison with the full moon. On the average the figures are 
too large by a factor of ten, and they imply that we should easily be able to see the 
discs of the planets with the naked eye. Of course, without the aid of a telescope, 
we normally see these planets as starlike points. 
The discs of the planets Mercury through Saturn actually range from a few seconds 
of arc to about 1', and for comparison the disc of the full moon covers about 31.2' 
of arc. This means that a planetary diameter projected to the orbit of the moon 
should be no greater than 15.4 yojanas. From the standpoint of modern thought, it 
is not surprising that an ancient astronomical work like the Sürya-siddhänta 
should give inaccurate figures for the sizes of the planetary discs. In fact, it seems 
remarkable that ancient astronomers lacking telescopes could have seen that the 
planets other than the sun and moon actually have discs. 
If we look more closely at the data in Table 6, however, we can make a very 
striking discovery. Since the diameters of Mercury through Saturn are projected on 
the orbit of the moon, their real diameters should be given by the formula: 
 
projected  diameter  x  orbital circumference 
real diameter =      ——————————————————— 
 
moon’s orbital circumference 
If we compute the real diameters using this formula and the data in Table 6, we 
find that the answers agree very well with the modern figures for the diameters of 
the planets (see the last three columns of the table). Thus, the distance figures and 
the values for the projected (or apparent) diameters disagree with modern 
astronomy, but the actual diameters implied by these figures agree. This is very 
surprising indeed, considering that modern astronomers have traditionally 
computed the planetary diameters by using measured values of distances and 
apparent diameters.

=== PAGE 23 ===

23
We note that the diameters computed for Mercury, Mars, and Saturn using our 
formula are very close to the modern values, while the figures for Venus and 
Jupiter are off by almost exactly 1/2.  This is an error, but we suggest that it is not 
simply due to ignorance of the actual diameters of these two planets. Rather, the 
erroneous factor of 1/2 may have been introduced when a careless copyist mistook 
“radius” for “diameter” when copying an old text that was later used in compiling 
the present Sürya-siddhänta. 
This explanation is based on the otherwise excellent agreement that exists between 
the Sürya-siddhänta diameters and modern values, and on our hypothesis that 
existing jyotiña çästras such as the Sürya-siddhänta may be imperfectly preserved 
remnants of an older Vedic astronomical science. We suggest that  accurate 
knowledge of planetary diameters existed in Vedic times, but that this knowledge 
was garbled at some point after the advent of Kali-yuga. However, this knowledge 
is still present in an encoded form in the present text of the Sürya-siddhänta. 
The circumferences of the planetary orbits listed in Table 6 are based on the theory 
of the Sürya-siddhänta that all planets move through space with the same average 
speed. Using this theory, one can compute the average distances of the planets 
from their average apparent speeds, and this is how the circumferences listed in 
Table 6 were computed in the Sürya-siddhänta. The same theory concerning the 
motions of the planets can be found in other works of the siddhäntic school, but it 
is not mentioned in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. This theory disagrees with that of 
modern astronomers, who maintain that the planets move more slowly the further 
they are from the sun. 
We should emphasize that this theory applies only to the planets’ average speeds in 
circular motion around the earth. The actual speeds of the planets vary in the 
Sürya-siddhänta, and a rule is given for computing the change in apparent 
diameter of the planets as their distance from the earth changes. The motions of 
the planets are said to be caused by the pravaha wind and by the action of reins of 
wind pulled by demigods. 
Since the relative distances of the planets derived from the Sürya-siddhänta in 
Section 1.a are not consistent with the orbital circumferences listed in Table 6, it 
would seem that the Sürya-siddhänta contains material representing more than one 
theoretical viewpoint. This also makes sense if we suppose that the surviving 
jyotiña çästras may represent the incompletely understood remnants of a body of 
knowledge that was more complete in the ancient past. 
TABLE 7 
Modern Values for Planetary Distances and Diameters 
vs. Those of the Sürya-siddhänta 
Planet       Mean Distance           Apparent             Real 
                  from Earth                 Diameter            Diameter 
 
Moon         agrees 
                   agrees 
              agrees 
 
Sun 
      disagrees                   agrees 
             disagrees 
 
Mercury    disagrees                   disagrees              agrees 
Venus       disagrees                   disagrees              off by 1/2 
 
Earth           — 
                   —                          agrees 
 
Mars      disagrees                   disagrees             agrees  
Jupiter      disagrees                   disagrees            off by 1/2 
 
Saturn      disagrees                   disagrees            agrees

=== PAGE 24 ===

24
The entry “agrees” means that the Sürya-siddhänta value falls within about 10% of 
the modern value. The cases that are “off by 1/2” fall within less than 7% of the 
modern values after being doubled. 
Table 7 sums up our observations on the diameters and distances of the planets 
given in the Sürya-siddhänta. At present we have no explanation of how diameters 
agreeing so closely with modern values were found, even though estimates of 
distances and apparent diameters disagree. According to current astronomical 
thinking, the real diameters can be obtained only by making measurements using 
powerful telescopes and then combining these results with accurate knowledge of 
the planetary distances. However, other methods may have been available in Vedic 
times. 
We should note, by the way, that the numbers for planetary diameters can be 
found not only in our English translation of the Sürya-siddhänta (SS), but also in 
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura’s Bengali translation. This strongly 
indicates that these numbers belong to the original Sürya-siddhänta, and were not 
inserted as a hoax in recent times. 
We should also consider the possibility that the planetary diameters given in the 
Sürya-siddhänta were derived from Greek sources. It turns out that there is a 
medieval tradition regarding the distances and diameters of the planets that can be 
traced back to a book by Ptolemy entitled Planetary Hypotheses. In this book the 
apparent diameters of the planets are given as fractions of the sun’s apparent 
diameter. For the moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, these apparent 
diameters are stated by Ptolemy to be, respectively, 1m, nn, nn, nn, nn, and nn 
(SW, p. 167). Corresponding apparent diameters can be computed from the Sürya-
siddhänta data by taking the diameters of the planets reduced to the moon’s orbit 
and dividing by 486.21, the diameter of the sun reduced to the moon’s orbit. The 
values obtained, however, are quite different from Ptolemy’s apparent diameters. 
Ptolemy also computes actual diameters, expressed as multiples of the earth’s 
diameter, using his apparent diameters and his values for the average distances of 
the planets from the earth. We have converted his actual diameters into miles by 
multiplying them by 7,928 miles, our modern value for the diameter of the earth. 
The results for the moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn are 2,312, 
294, 2,246, 9,061, 34,553, and 34,090, respectively. (See SW, p. 170.) Apart from 
the figure for the moon, these diameters show no relationship with either the 
modern planetary diameters or the diameters obtained from the Sürya-s_ddhänta 
and listed in Table 6. 
The only feature that the Sürya-siddhänta and Ptolemy seem to share with regard 
to the diameters of the planets is that both give unrealistically large values for 
apparent diameters. If the planets actually had such large apparent diameters, they 
would appear to the naked eye as clearly visible discs rather than as stars. The 
ancient planetary diameters would therefore seem to be completely fictitious, were 
it not for the fact that in the case of the Sürya-siddhänta, they correspond to 
realistic, actual diameters as seen from unrealistically short distances. 
1.F. The Size of the Universe 
In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam a figure of 500 million yojanas is given for the diameter 
of the universe. On the basis of 8 miles per yojana, this comes to 4 billion miles, a 
distance that can accommodate the orbit of Saturn (according to modern distance 
figures), but that is smaller than the orbital diameters of Uranus, Neptune, and

=== PAGE 25 ===

25
Pluto. Since this figure for the diameter of the universe seems to be quite small, it 
is interesting to note the purport given by Çréla Prabhupäda to CC ML 21.84: 
[Text:] Kåñëa said, “Your particular universe extends four billion miles; therefore it 
is the smallest of all the universes. Consequently you have only four heads.” 
[Purport:] Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, one of the greatest astrologers 
of his time, gives information from Siddhänta-çiromaëi that this universe measures 
18,712,069,200,000,000 X 8 miles. This is the circumference of this universe. 
According to some, this is only half the circumference. 
In his Anubhäñya commentary on this verse of Caitanya-caritämåta, Çréla 
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté quotes from Sürya-siddhänta 12.90, “The circumference 
of the sphere of the Brahmändee in which the sun’s rays spread is 
18,712,080,864,000,000 yojanas” (SS, p. 87). Then he quotes Siddhänta-çiromaëi, 
Golädhyäya Bhuvana-koça: “Some astronomers have asserted the circumference of 
the circle of heaven to be 18,712,069,200,000,000 yojanas in length. Some say that 
this is the length of the zone binding the two hemispheres of the Brahmäëòa. Some 
Pauräëikas say that this is the length of the circumference of the Lokäloka Parvata 
[adåçya-dåçyaka-girim]Ó (SSB1, p. 126). 
Here the circumference of 18,712,069,200,000,000 yojanas corresponds to a 
diameter of 5,956,200,000,000,000 yojanas. This number is much larger than the 
500,000,000-yojana diameter given in the Bhägavatam, and we might ask how it 
relates to it. According to the Bhägavatam (5.20.37), 
By the supreme will of Kåñëa, the mountain known as Lokäloka has been installed 
as the outer border of the three worlds—Bhürloka, Bhuvarloka and Svarloka—to 
control the rays of the sun throughout the universe. All the luminaries, from the 
sun up to Dhruvaloka, distribute their rays throughout the three worlds, but only 
within the boundary formed by this mountain. 
This verse reconciles the statement that the 18-quadrillion-yojana circumference is 
the limit of distribution of the sun’s rays with the statement that it is the 
circumference of Lokäloka Mountain. We also note that in SB 5.20.38 the diameter 
of Lokäloka Mountain is stated to be half the diameter of the universe. This is 
consistent with the statement in Çréla Prabhupäda’s purport that “according to 
some, this is only half the circumference.” We are thus left with a picture of the 
universe in which the rays of the sun and other luminaries spread to a radial 
distance of 2,978,100,000,000,000 yojanas, and are there blocked in all directions 
by an enormous mountain. This mountain lies halfway between the sun and the 
beginning of the outer coverings of the universe. This means that the distance from 
the sun to the coverings of the universe is some 5,077 light-years, where a light-
year is the distance traveled in one year by a beam of light moving at 186,000 miles 
per second and we use the Sürya-siddhänta’s 5-mile yojanas. 
In Chapters 3 and 4 we will say more about the possible relation between this very 
large universal radius and the much smaller figure given in the Bhägavatam. At 
present we will consider what the jyotiña çästras have to say about the radius of the 
universe. It turns out that the Siddhänta-çiromaëi, the Sürya-siddhänta, and many 
other jyotiña çästras give a simple rule for computing this number. 
The Sürya-siddhänta gives the following rule: “Multiply the number of … 
revolutions of the moon in a kalpa by the moon’s orbit…: the product is equal to 
the orbit of heaven (or the circumference of the middle of the brahmäëòa): to this

=== PAGE 26 ===

26
orbit the sun’s rays reach” (SS, p. 86). If we perform this calculation, we find that 
the circumference of the brahmäëòa, or universe, is: 
57,753,336 X 1,000 X 324,000 = 18,712,080,864,000,000 yojanas 
In The Aryabhatiya of Aryabhata we find the statement that the circumference of 
the sky (äkäça-kakña) in yojanas is equal to 10 times the number of minutes of arc 
covered by the moon during one divya-yuga (AA, p. 13). This comes to: 
57,753,336 x 360 x 60 x 10 = 12,474,720,576,000 yojanas 
When interpreting this figure, we should keep in mind that Äryabhaöa used a 
yojana of about 7.55 miles rather than 5 miles. If we convert Äryabhaöa’s figure to 
5-mile yojanas, we obtain a universal circumference that is almost exactly one 
thousandth of the figure cited in Sürya-siddhänta and Siddhänta-çiromaëi. The 
reason for this is that Äryabhaöa used the number of revolutions of the moon in a 
divya-yuga rather than the number of revolutions in a kalpa. (There are 1,000 
divya-yugas per kalpa.) 
We mention Äryabhaöa’s calculation for the sake of completeness. There are a 
number of ways in which Äryabhaöa differs from other Indian astronomers (AA). 
For example, he is unique in making the four yugas equal in length, and he also 
suggests that the earth rotates daily on its axis. (All other Indian astronomers 
speak of the käla-cakra rotating around a fixed earth.) Our main point here is that 
very large figures for the size of the universe were commonly presented in the 
jyotiña çästras, and such figures have been accepted by Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta 
Sarasvaté Öhäkura and Çréla Prabhupäda. 
VEDIC PHYSICS 
THE NATURE OF SPACE, TIME, AND MATTER 
 “By Him even the great sages and demigods are placed into illusion, as one is 
bewildered by the illusory representations of water seen in fire, or land seen on 
water. Only because of Him do the material universes, temporarily manifested by 
the reactions of the three modes of nature, appear factual, although they are 
unreal.” (SB 1.1.1). 
Our ideas of the nature of space, time, and matter are essential ingredients in our 
understanding of the cosmos. When we look into the heavens, our direct sensory 
data consist of patterns of light. These patterns say nothing, in and of themselves, 
about the nature of the sources of this light. In order to say something about the 
cosmic manifestations that have produced the light, it is necessary to assume that 
the universe is made of some kind of stuff, or matter, that has certain 
characteristics and obeys certain laws. Given such assumptions, we can then ask 
ourselves what arrangement of this matter, acting in accordance with the laws, 
would produce the observed light patterns. If we are successful in putting together 
a consistent explanation of the observed data based on the assumed laws and 
properties, then we tend to suppose that we have correctly understood the 
structure of the universe. In our mind’s eye, our theoretical models take on an air 
of concrete reality, and it almost seems as though we were holding the universe in 
the palm of our hand. 
Throughout most of modern human history, people have been limited to the 
surface of the earth, and they have based their ideas of the nature of matter on 
observations that we can perform in this limited domain using our ordinary senses. 
Over the last two or three hundred years, Western scientists have used 
experimental observation and the analysis of experimental results to build up an

=== PAGE 27 ===

27
extensive body of knowledge—the science of modern physics—which gives a 
detailed picture of the properties of matter and the laws governing its behavior. 
The modern Western understanding of the nature and structure of the universe as 
a whole is based on interpreting observed celestial phenomena within the 
framework of modern physics. 
The thesis of this book is that the framework of modern physics is too limited to 
accommodate many phenomena that occur within this universe. In particular, this 
framework cannot accommodate many features of the universe that are described 
in the Vedic literature, and thus the Vedic accounts often seem absurd or 
mythological when viewed from the perspective of modern science. At the present 
time, certain assumptions of modern physics have been adopted by people in 
general as the very foundation of their world view. These assumptions are 
incompatible with the underlying assumptions of the Vedic world view, and thus 
they tend to block people from having free access to the Vedic literature. In this 
section we will try to alleviate this difficulty by discussing the nature of the 
material energy as described in the Vedic literature. Since this is a very deep and 
complex subject, we will be able to touch on only a few points that are relevant to 
the understanding of Vedic cosmology. 
2.A. Extending Our Physical World View 
Before making a truly radical departure from our familiar conceptions, we will 
begin by discussing some relatively moderate instances in which the Vedic 
literature refers to phenomena and theoretical ideas that do not fit into the current 
framework of scientific thought. These examples illustrate two main points: (1) 
Although many Vedic ideas contradict current scientific thinking, they also allow 
for the possibility that the contradictions can be alleviated by extending the 
conceptual scope of modern science. (2) Many ideas relevant to our physical 
world-picture are alluded to only briefly in works such as the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 
since these works were not intended to serve as textbooks of astronomy or physical 
science. Thus the conceptual advances needed to reconcile the Vedic world view 
with modern science may be difficult to make, since they require ideas that 
radically extend current theories but are not explicitly spelled out in available 
Vedic texts. 
Our first example is found in SB 3.26.34p. There we read that the ethereal element 
provides a substrate for the production of subtle forms by the mind, and that it is 
also involved in the circulation of vital air within the body. Çréla Prabhupäda 
indicates that “this verse is the potential basis of great scientific research work,” 
and indeed, it provides a clear idea of how the subtle mind may interact with the 
gross elements of the body and brain. 
In the theoretical structure of modern physics, however, there is at present no 
place for such a conception of the mind and the ethereal element (although some 
physicists have tentatively begun to entertain such ideas). As a consequence, 
scientists still generally adhere to the idea that it is impossible for the brain to 
interact with a distinct nonphysical mind. This in turn makes it impossible for 
them to give credence to many phenomena that imply the existence of such a 
mind, even though empirical evidence for these phenomena has existed for many 
years. These phenomena include the psychic events studied by the 
parapsychologists, out-of-body experiences, and the spontaneous remembrance of 
previous incarnations by small children.

=== PAGE 28 ===

28
It is not our purpose here to make a case for the reality of such phenomena. Our 
main point is that it is very difficult for people (including scientists) to seriously 
contemplate particular ideas about reality unless those ideas fit neatly into a 
familiar and accepted conceptual system. The current theories of physics have been 
worked out in great technical detail, and one who lives in the conceptual universe 
these theories provide may find that the Vedic idea of ether seems crude and 
unimpressive. Openness to the Vedic ideas may also be blocked by certain 
misconceptions, such as the idea that ether must be like the “luminiferous ether” 
rejected by Einstein. Yet the possibility nonetheless exists that physical theory can 
be extended by introducing a new conception of the ether that agrees with the 
Vedic conception and is consistent with experimental observations. And such an 
extended theory may provide explanations for many phenomena presently 
considered scientifically impossible. 
Texts such as the Çrémad-Bhägavatam were written for the purpose of clearly 
explaining certain spiritual ideas to people in general. However, they inevitably 
make reference to many other ideas that were familiar to people of the ancient 
Vedic culture but that may be very unfamiliar to people of modern Western 
background. One interesting example is the analogy given by Çréla Sanätana 
Gosvämé in which the transformation of a lowborn man into a brähmaëa is 
compared to the transformation of bell metal into gold by an alchemical process 
(SB 5.24.17p). 
The alchemical process itself is not described, and on the basis of modern science 
we might tend to regard such a transformation as impossible. Yet the dictionary 
defines bell metal as an alloy of copper and tin, and if we consult the periodic table 
of the elements, we find that the atomic numbers of copper and tin added together 
give the atomic number of gold. This suggests that there just might be something 
to this example, but if so, it clearly involves an extensive body of practical and 
theoretical knowledge that is completely unknown to us. For Sanätana Gosvämé, 
however, this transformation simply provided a familiar example to illustrate a 
point about the spiritual transformation of human beings. 
2.B. The Position of Kåñëa 
Thus far, we have discussed Vedic references to phenomena and theoretical entities 
that do not fit into the rigorously defined theories of modern physics but that can 
be readily inserted into our ordinary picture of the world around us. In this book, 
however, we will be dealing with many things that do not seem to be at all 
compatible with that picture. We suggest that to accommodate these things, it is 
necessary for us to re-examine our basic ideas concerning the nature of space. 
Modern physics and astronomy began with the idea that matter is made of tiny bits 
of substance, each of which has a location in three-dimensional space. According 
to this idea, which was strongly developed by Descartes and Newton, three-
dimensional space can be seen as an absolute, pre-existing container in which all 
material events take place. This idea is quite consistent with the picture of the 
world provided by our own senses, and it tends to provide an unquestioned 
background for all of our thinking. However, many cultures have maintained quite 
different ideas about the nature of space, and this is also true of the Vedic culture. 
To understand the Vedic conception of space, it is necessary to consider the 
position of Kåñëa as the absolute cause of all causes. Clearly we cannot regard the 
transcendental form of Kåñëa as being composed of tiny bits of substance situated

=== PAGE 29 ===

29
at different locations in three-dimensional space. Whether we regard the tiny bits 
as spiritual or material, such a form would certainly be limited and relative. The 
actual nature of Kåñëa’s form is indicated by the following verses from the Brahma-
saàhitä: 
I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, whose transcendental form is full of bliss, 
truth, and substantiality and is thus full of the most dazzling splendor. Each of the 
limbs of that transcendental figure possesses in itself the full-fledged functions of 
all the organs, and He eternally sees, maintains, and manifests the infinite 
universes, both spiritual and mundane [SBS 5.32]. 
He is an undifferentiated entity, as there is no distinction between the potency and 
the possessor thereof. In His work of creation of millions of worlds, His potency 
remains inseparable. All the universes exist in Him, and He is present in His 
fullness in every one of the atoms that are scattered throughout the universe, at 
one and the same time. Such is the primeval Lord whom I adore [SBS 5.35]. 
These verses indicate that the form of Kåñëa is made of many parts, but that  each 
part is identical to the whole. Also, all space is within the form of Kåñëa, but at the 
same time Kåñëa is fully present within every atom. One implication of this is that 
the entire universe, which is within Kåñëa, is fully present within every atom of the 
universe. Such a state of affairs cannot be visualized in three-dimensional terms, 
and indeed, it is not possible within three-dimensional space. The statement that 
reality is like this must simply be taken as an axiom describing the position of 
Kåñëa as the Supreme Absolute Truth. Thus, the Vedic concept of space begins 
with a statement of Kåñëa’s unified nature, rather than with the geometric axioms 
defining three-dimensional space. 
Here we will introduce an idea of higher-dimensional space that may help us 
understand the ideas about space implicit in the Vedic literature. The term higher-
dimensional is borrowed from modern mathematics; it does not appear directly in 
Vedic literature. It is part of an attempt to bridge the conceptual gap between 
modern thinking and the Vedic world view. Naturally, since the traditional 
followers of Vedic culture have not been confronted with such a gap, they have not 
been motivated to introduce ideas to bridge it. 
The most fundamental feature of the Vedic idea of space is that many more things 
can be brought close together in this space than the geometric rules of three-
dimensional space allow. In the course of this chapter we will give several 
examples from the Vedic literature illustrating this theme. Since the higher-
dimensional spaces of mathematics also permit more things to be brought together 
than the rules of three-dimensional space allow, we have chosen the term higher-
dimensional to refer to this feature of the Vedic view of reality. 
Although Kåñëa’s situation is very difficult for us to visualize, we can nonetheless 
understand from Vedic statements describing Kåñëa that space must be higher-
dimensional. Kåñëa’s situation is that He has full access to every location 
simultaneously. In ordinary, three-dimensional space we have access, through the 
operation of our senses of action and perception, to locations within a limited 
neighborhood, and we can change that neighborhood by moving from one place to 
another. Thus our situation can be viewed as a restricted form of Kåñëa’s situation. 
A higher-dimensional space corresponds to a situation in which access between 
locations is more restricted than it is for Kåñëa but less restricted than it is for 
beings experiencing three-dimensional space.

=== PAGE 30 ===

30
This concept of higher-dimensional space is closely tied together with the idea of 
varying levels of sensory development in sentient beings. Access between locations 
depends on the operation of senses of action and senses of perception, and thus it 
should be possible in principle to enlarge the space of one’s experience by 
increasing the scope of one’s sensory powers. 
These ideas about space and its relation to sense perception are implicit in the 
Vedic literature, and they can best be understood by giving some specific 
examples. The nature of Kåñëa’s absolute position is nicely illustrated by the 
following story of a visit by Lord Brahmä to Kåñëa in Dvärakä. In the story, Kåñëa 
first responds to Brahmä’s request to see Him by having His secretary ask, “Which 
Brahmä wishes to see Me?” Brahmä later begins his conversation with Kåñëa by 
asking why Kåñëa made this inquiry: 
 
“Why did you inquire which Brahmä had come see You? What is the purpose of 
such an inquiry? Is there any other Brahmä besides me within this universe?” 
Upon hearing this, Çré Kåñëa smiled and immediately meditated. Unlimited 
Brahmäs arrived instantly. These Brahmäs had different numbers of heads. Some 
had ten heads, some twenty, some a hundred, some a thousand, some ten 
thousand, some a hundred thousand, some ten million, and others a hundred 
million. No one can count the number of faces they had. 
There also arrived many Lord Çivas with various heads numbering one hundred 
thousand and ten million. Many Indras also arrived, and they had hundreds of 
thousands of eyes all over their bodies. 
When the four-headed Brahmä of this universe saw all these opulences of Kåñëa, 
he became very bewildered and considered himself a rabbit among many 
elephants. 
All the Brahmäs who came to see Kåñëa offered their respects at His lotus feet, and 
when they did this, their helmets touched His lotus feet. No one can estimate the 
inconceivable potency of Kåñëa. All the Brahmäs who were there were resting in 
the one body of Kåñëa. When all the helmets struck together at Kåñëa’s lotus feet, 
there was a tumultuous sound. It appeared that the helmets themselves were 
offering prayers unto Kåñëa’s lotus feet. 
With folded hands, all the Brahmäs and Çivas began to offer prayers unto Lord 
Kåñëa, saying, “O Lord, You have shown me a great favor. I have been able to see 
Your lotus feet.” 
Each of them then said, “It is my great fortune, Lord, that You have called me, 
thinking of me as Your servant. Now let me know what Your order is so that I may 
carry it on my heads.” 
Lord Kåñëa replied, “Since I wanted to see all of you together, I have called all of 
you here. All of you should be happy. Is there any fear of the demons?” 
They replied, “By Your mercy, we are victorious everywhere. Whatever burden 
there was upon the earth You have taken away by descending on that planet.” 
This is the proof of Dvärakä’s opulence: all the Brahmäs thought, “Kåñëa is now 
staying in my jurisdiction.” Thus the opulence of Dvärakä was perceived by each 
and every one of them. Although they were all assembled together, no one could 
see anyone but himself. 
Lord Kåñëa then bade farewell to all the Brahmäs there, and after offering their 
obeisances, they all returned to their respective homes [CC ML 21.65–80].

=== PAGE 31 ===

31
In this story it is significant that each of the Brahmäs remained within his own 
universe. This means that Kåñëa was simultaneously manifesting His Dvärakä 
pastimes in all of those universes. Each Brahmä except ours thought that he was 
alone with Kåñëa in Dvärakä within his own universe, but by Kåñëa’s grace our 
Brahmä could simultaneously see all the others. This illustrates that Kåñëa has 
access to all locations at once, and it also shows that, by Kåñëa’s grace, different 
living beings can be given different degrees of spatial access, either permanently or 
temporarily. 
Arjuna’s vision of Kåñëa’s universal form on the battlefield of Kurukñetra is another 
example of Kåñëa’s expanding the sensory powers of a living being and giving him 
access to regions of the universe previously unknown to him. Before revealing this 
form to Arjuna, Kåñëa said, 
O best of the Bhäratas, see here the different manifestations of Ädityas, Vasus, 
Rudras, Açviné-kumäras, and all the other demigods. Behold the many wonderful 
things that no one has ever seen or heard of before. 
O Arjuna, whatever you want to see, behold at once in this body of Mine! This 
universal form can show you whatever you now desire to see and whatever you 
may want to see in the future. Everything—moving and nonmoving—is here 
completely, in one place [Bg. 11.6–7]. 
Thus from one place Arjuna was able to see many different realms occupied by 
demigods and other kinds of living beings. To perceive such a vast variety of 
scenes simultaneously, Arjuna clearly had to transcend the limitations of three-
dimensional space, and it is significant that Kåñëa made this possible through the 
medium of His all-pervading universal form. The story of mother Yaçodä’s seeing 
the entire universe (including herself and Kåñëa) within Kåñëa’s mouth is another 
example showing that Kåñëa can reveal all locations through His all-encompassing 
form (see KB, pp. 83–84). 
It is interesting to note that the Brahmäs visiting Kåñëa had varying numbers of 
heads, ranging from four to hundreds of millions. It is rather difficult to 
understand how millions of heads could be arranged on one body in three-
dimensional space, and it is also difficult to see how millions of Brahmäs could all 
be seen simultaneously within one room. We suggest that these things are made 
possible by the fact that the underlying space is not three-dimensional. 
Similar observations could be made about the incident in which Bäëäsura used 
1,000 arms to work 500 bows and shoot 2,000 arrows at a time at Kåñëa. In this 
case we are dealing with a materially embodied being living on the earth. One 
might wonder how 500 material arms could be mounted on one shoulder without 
interfering with one another. And if this is possible, how could they aim 500 bows 
in the same direction at once? (Did the bows pass through each other?) We 
suggest that stories of this kind implicitly require higher-dimensional conceptions 
of space. 
We can sum up the idea of dimensionality of space by saying that the greater the 
degree of access between locations, the higher the dimensionality of the space. 
Since Kåñëa has simultaneous access to all locations, He perceives space at the 
highest level of dimensionality. Different living beings will perceive space at 
different levels of dimensionality, and thus they will have access to different sets of 
locations (or lokas).

=== PAGE 32 ===

32
It is interesting to note that the idea of higher-dimensional access between 
locations is a key feature of quantum mechanics. The quantum mechanical atom 
cannot be represented in three-dimensional space. In fact, to represent something 
as commonplace as an atom of carbon, quantum mechanics makes use of a kind of 
infinite-dimensional space called Hilbert space. The three-dimensional bonding of 
carbon and other atoms is made possible by the higher-dimensional interactions 
within the atoms. Thus, although the idea of higher-dimensional realms may seem 
to be an extreme departure from accepted scientific thinking, it is possible to 
interpret modern physics as laying the groundwork for such an idea. 
2.C. Mystic Siddhis 
The eight mystic siddhis directly illustrate that sentient beings can operate at 
different levels of sensory power by being endowed to varying degrees with Kåñëa’s 
primordial potencies. Çréla Prabhupäda gives the following description of some of 
the mystic siddhis: 
A mystic yogé can enter into the sun planet simply by using the rays of the 
sunshine. This perfection is called laghimä. Similarly, a yogé can touch the moon 
with his finger. Though the modern astronauts go to the moon with the help of 
spaceships, they undergo many difficulties, whereas a person with mystic 
perfection can extend his hand and touch the moon with his finger. This siddhi is 
called präpti, or acquisition. With this präpti-siddhi, not only can the perfect 
mystic yogé touch the moon planet, but he can extend his hand anywhere and take 
whatever he likes. He may be sitting thousands of miles away from a certain place, 
and if he likes he can take fruit from a garden there” [NOD, pp. 11–12]. 
The präpti-siddhi provides a perfect example of what we mean by the extension of 
access between locations. Consider the yogé on the earth who reaches out his hand 
to touch the moon. Does the yogé experience that his hand moves up through the 
atmosphere and crosses over thousands of miles of outer space, followed by a 
greatly elongated arm? This hardly seems plausible. We suggest that this siddhi 
actually allows the yogé to reach any desired location directly, and thus it requires 
higher-dimensional connections between remotely separated regions. The idea 
here is that Kåñëa always has direct access to all locations, and by His grace this 
power of direct access can be conferred to varying degrees on various living beings. 
The following verses in the Eleventh Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.15.10–13) 
show that the siddhis are indeed obtained by partial realization of Kåñëa’s inherent 
potencies: 
1. aëimä—becoming smaller than the smallest. “One who worships Me [Kåñëa] in 
My atomic form pervading all subtle elements [bhüta-sükñma and tan-mätra], 
fixing his mind on that alone, obtains the mystic perfection called aëimä.” 
2. mahimä—becoming greater than the greatest. “One who absorbs his mind in the 
particular form of the mahat-tattva and thus meditates upon Me as the Supreme 
Soul of the total material existence achieves the mystic perfection called mahimä.” 
3. laghimä—becoming lighter than the lightest. “I exist within everything, and I 
am therefore the essence of the atomic constituents of material elements. By 
attaching his mind to Me in this form, the yogé may achieve the perfection called 
laghimä, by which he realizes the subtle atomic substance of time.” 
4. präpti—acquisition. “Fixing his mind completely on Me within the element of 
false ego generated from the mode of goodness, the yogé obtains the power of

=== PAGE 33 ===

33
mystic acquisition, by which he becomes the proprietor of the senses of all living 
entities. He obtains such perfection because his mind is absorbed in Me.” 
Similar statements are made about the four other siddhis. According to the purport 
to SB 11.15.13, “Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura states that those who 
pursue such perfections without fixing the mind on the Supreme Lord acquire a 
gross and inferior reflection of each mystic potency.” 
 
2.D. The Activities of Demigods, Yogés, and Åñis 
In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam there are many references to the mystic powers of 
demigods, yogés, and åñis. These living beings are clearly endowed with more 
highly developed sensory powers than ordinary human beings, and they also are 
able to operate within a more extensive realm of activity than the space-time 
continuum of our ordinary experience. (Note that in accordance with Vedic usage, 
we are using the term “sensory” to refer both to senses of perception and to senses 
of action.) 
A typical inhabitant of the higher planets has a life span of 10,000 celestial years, 
where each day and each night equals six earthly months (SB 4.9.63p). However, 
many demigods live for a much longer period. Thus demigods such as Indra hold 
official positions in the universal administration for the span of one manvantara, or 
71 X 12,000 celestial years, and their total life span is much longer. 
The demigods have the power to assume any desired form (SB 8.15.32p) and to 
appear and disappear at will before ordinary human beings. Thus SB 9.21.15 says 
that demigods such as Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva appeared in human form before 
Mahäräja Rantideva, and SB 1.12.20p says that that Indra and Agni appeared before 
Mahäräja Çibi in the form of an eagle and a pigeon. There are also many passages in 
the Bhägavatam that describe how demigods possessing higher levels of karmic 
merit can appear and disappear at will before lesser demigods. For example, Indra’s 
guru, Båhaspati, made himself inaccessible to Indra after Indra offended him (SB 
6.7.16). 
Our thesis is that this ability to appear and disappear is not “just a matter of 
mystical power.” Rather, it demonstrates an important feature of the physical 
world in which we live. This world contains many manifestations that are not 
accessible to us with our ordinary senses, but that are accessible to more highly 
developed beings, such as the demigods. There is a hierarchy of dimensional levels 
within the universe, and beings on one particular level can operate within a larger 
continuum than beings on lower levels. The spiritual realm of Vaikuëöha and 
Goloka Våndävana is on a still higher level. Thus Brahmä, the topmost demigod 
within the material universe, became completely bewildered when Kåñëa revealed 
the spiritual world to him. 
In SB 1.16.3 it is said that during Mahäräja Parékñit’s horse sacrifices, even a 
common man could see demigods. It appears that in Vedic times demigods often 
visited the earth and engaged in various dealings with human beings. Generally, 
however, only qualified persons were able to see them. Even recently, after the 
birth of Lord Caitanya, to glorify the Lord demigods used to visit the home of 
Jagannätha Miçra while remaining invisible (CC AL 14.76–81). 
The Bhägavatam often alludes to the idea that by acquiring higher spiritual 
qualifications one can enhance one’s sensory powers and automatically experience 
phenomena within a broader realm of existence. (It is also emphasized, of course,

=== PAGE 34 ===

34
that such powers should not be exploited for sense gratification, since this would 
divert one from the actual goal of spiritual life.) One example of such powers is 
indicated by Närada Muni’s instructing Dhruva Mahäräja that by chanting a certain 
mantra—oà namo bhagavate väsudeväya—Dhruva would soon be able to see “the 
perfect human beings [khe-carän] flying in the sky” (SB 4.8.53). 
One method that was sometimes used to travel between the higher planets and the 
earth is mentioned in SB 3.8.5p, where we read that great sages can travel from 
Satyaloka to the earth via the Ganges River, which flows all over the universe. Çréla 
Prabhupäda points out that this form of travel is possible in any river by mystic 
power. It hardly seems plausible that this method of travel involves swimming up- 
or downstream over vast distances, and, of course, the connection between the 
earthly Ganges and its celestial counterpart is not visible to us. We suggest that 
this process of travel involves higher-dimensional connections between locations, 
and that the river serves as a kind of guiding beacon to direct such higher-
dimensional transport. In the case of the Ganges, the course of the river from 
higher planets down to the earth must also be higher-dimensional. 
In KB p. 534 there is a description of the mystic yoginé Citralekhä traveling in 
outer space from Çoëitapura to Dvärakä and taking the sleeping Aniruddha back to 
Çoëitapura. This is another example of a form of travel that seems to require 
higher-dimensional connections for its operation. 
The Vedic çästras mention many remarkable events that are said to have taken 
place on the earth in the remote past. Many of these events involve phenomena 
that we do not experience today, and one might ask why this should be so, if these 
events actually did occur at one time. One reason for this given in the Bhägavatam 
is that prior to the beginning of Kali-yuga, natural processes on the earth operated 
in a different mode than they do today (see SB 1.4.17p). The sensory powers of all 
living beings were on a higher average level than they are at present, and advanced 
beings such as demigods and great sages regularly visited the earth. Thus the 
earthly realm of ordinary human life was more intimately linked up with higher 
realms of material and spiritual reality than it has been since the start of the Kali-
yuga. 
This idea leads naturally to the following tentative scenario for the history of the 
last few thousand years: Once the Kali-yuga began, demigods and other higher 
beings greatly curtailed communications with people on the earth, and the general 
sensory level of human beings also declined. For some time, people continued to 
believe in stories about the earlier state of affairs on the earth due to the authority 
of tradition. However, due to the lack of feedback from higher sources and the 
natural cheating propensity of human beings, the traditions in various parts of the 
world gradually became more and more garbled, and people began to lose faith in 
them. Finally the present stage of civilization was reached, in which old traditions 
are widely viewed as useless mythology, and people seek knowledge entirely 
through the use of their current, limited senses. 
2.E. REGIONS OF THIS EARTH 
NOT PERCEIVABLE BY OUR SENSES 
We have been developing the idea that the three-dimensional continuum of our 
experience does not constitute the totality of spiritual or material reality. One 
feature of this idea is that there exist worlds, or realms of experience, that are 
located here on the earth but that cannot be perceived or visited by human beings

=== PAGE 35 ===

35
possessing ordinary sensory powers. Of course, the most striking example of this is 
Kåñëa’s transcendental dhäma of Våndävana. In CC AL 5.18p it is stated that 
although Kåñëa’s abode is unlimited and all-pervading, it is identical to the 
Våndävana of this earth. This implies that within the tract of land called Våndävana 
in India, there exists a completely real domain of spiritual existence that is not 
accessible to the senses of ordinary conditioned beings. This is another example of 
h_gher-dimensional connections, and it implies that two (or more) worlds of 
experience can co-exist in parallel, in the same location. 
The holy dhäma of Navadvépa is another example of this (and, of course, 
Navadvépa dhäma is also identical to Våndävana). Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura says 
in the Navadvépa Mahätmyä, “The dhäma of Navadvépa, within Gaura Maëòala 
and served by the Gaìgä, is situated in eternal splendor.… The form of Gaura 
Maëòala, eternally transcendental to the material world, is like the sun. The 
materialist’s eye is covered by the cloud of illusion, and because of this he sees only 
the secondary transformations of that spiritual energy, the dull, inert material 
world” (NM, p. 4). 
The transcendental realms of Navadvépa and Våndävana are purely spiritual, but 
there are also material examples illustrating the idea of parallel worlds co-existing 
in one place. For example, the Bhägavatam states that Maru and Deväpi, two 
ancient royal princes belonging to the Sürya and Soma dynasties, are still living in 
the Himalayas in a place called Kaläpa-gräma. By the power of mystic yoga they 
will prolong their lives until the beginning of the next Satya-yuga and then revive 
the lost Sürya and Soma dynasties by begetting children (SB 9.12.6, 9.22.17–18, 
and 12.2.37–38). 
If we go to the Himalayas, we will certainly not be able to perceive Maru and 
Deväpi using our ordinary senses, even though they are human beings possessing 
gross material bodies. It can also be argued that we will not be able to perceive the 
surroundings in which they live. A human being cannot live without interacting 
with his material surroundings. Even a yogé who is simply living on air requires an 
undisturbed sitting place. Could it be that the material accoutrements and sitting 
places of these two persons are directly visible and accessible to us, even though 
they themselves are invisible? We suggest that they are actually living in a setting 
that is entirely inaccessible to our senses, but that can be seen and entered by a 
person, such as an advanced yogé, whose senses can operate on an appropriate 
level. 
Here the objection may be raised that a co-existing invisible world cannot be on 
the same level of reality as our world because it must be “subtle,” transparent, or 
ghostlike in nature, whereas our own world is opaque and substantial. Our reply is 
that such a co-existing world is invisible to us not because it is made of transparent 
substance distributed within our own three-dimensional continuum, but rather 
because it lies in a higher dimension and is entirely outside our continuum. It can 
be in the “same place” as we are by virtue of higher-dimensional interconnection. 
A person with higher sensory powers is able to perceive this world not because he 
can discern some nearly transparent substance lying within his own three-
dimensional space, but because his senses are not restricted to three dimensions 
and have access to broader realms of material or spiritual reality. 
We should note that the basic elements—of earth, water, fire, air, and ether—are 
present in some form on all levels of reality, both spiritual and mundane. In SB

=== PAGE 36 ===

36
11.21.5 it is stated that these five elements constitute the bodies of all conditioned 
souls, from Lord Brahmä down to the nonmoving creatures. Also, CC AL 5.53 
states that “the earth, water, fire, air, and ether of Vaikuëöha are all spiritual. 
Material elements are not found there.” 
The five material elements (païca-bhüta) are described in the Bhagavad-gétä as 
separated energies of Kåñëa. Their counterparts in Vaikuëöha are evidently similar 
enough to them to warrant being called by the same names. However, the spiritual 
elements must belong to Kåñëa’s internal potency. It would therefore seem that the 
spiritual world and the material world are similar in the sense that both contain 
variegated forms composed of solid, liquid, and gaseous constituents. At the same 
time, they have distinct qualitative features, of which one of the most notable is the 
presence of the modes of passion and ignorance in the material world and their 
absence in the spiritual world. Material realms on various dimensional levels will 
also possess similar variegated forms, but the higher realms will be characterized 
by greater predominance of the mode of goodness over the modes of passion and 
ignorance. 
As a final point, we note that the history of the Mädhva-Gauòéya-sampradäya sheds 
some light on the higher-dimensional nature of reality. In SB 1.4.15p Çréla 
Prabhupäda points out that Vyäsadeva is residing in Çamyäpräsa in Badarikäçrama. 
Many people in India make a pilgrimage to Badarikäçrama every year, but it is not 
possible for an ordinary person to meet Vyäsadeva. However, it is said that 
Madhväcärya met Vyäsadeva there and took initiation from him. It was through 
this higher-dimensional link that the Mädhva-Gauòéya-sampradäya was passed 
down from Çréla Vyäsadeva to the recent line of äcäryas. 
3 VEDIC COSMOGRAPHY 
 
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: “My dear King, there is no limit to the expansion of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead’s material energy. This material world is a 
transformation of the material qualities…, yet no one could possibly explain it 
perfectly, even in a lifetime as long as that of Brahmä” (SB 5.16.4). 
In this chapter we will describe the structure of this universe, or brahmäëòa, as 
described in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Our aim is to show the relation be-tween the 
Vedic picture of the universe and the world of our experience. In doing this, we 
will draw information from the following sources: (1) The writings of Çréla 
Prabhupäda, including his translation, with commentary, of the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, (2) other writings in the Vedic tradition, including the Sürya-
siddhänta, and (3) modern Western science. 
Our strategy is to present the simplest possible world-picture that will harmonize 
(1) and (3), given the assumption that the Bhägavatam gives a direct and valid 
account of the universe. In doing this, we will try as far as possible to avoid 
introducing speculative hypotheses. (This is Newton’s principle of hypothesis non 
fingo.) This means that we will often have to make statements of the form “A 
corresponds to B,” without spelling out the exact nature of the correspondence. In 
some cases we will try to show the plausibility of the correspondence by offering a 
speculative explanation of how it might come about. However, all explanations of 
this kind should be regarded as tentative and subject to correction in the future.

=== PAGE 37 ===

37
3.A. Bhü-maëòala, or Middle Earth 
The Vedic literature describes the material cosmos as an unlimited ocean situated 
within a small part of the unlimited spiritual world. Within this ocean there are 
innumerable universes, or brahmäëòas, which can be compared to spherical 
bubbles of foam grouped in clusters. Each of these universal globes consists of a 
series of spherical coverings and an inner, inhabited portion. 
Within the inner region of the brahmäëòa, the most striking feature is Bhü-
maëòala, or the earthly planetary system. Bhü-maëòala is described in the Fifth 
Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam as a flat disc with a diameter of 500 million yojanas, 
or 4 billion miles (using 8 miles per yojana). The surface of this disc is marked 
with a series of ring-shaped oceans and islands surrounding a central island called 
Jambüdvépa. 
The total surface area of our familiar earth planet is some 197 million square miles, 
and, according to modern information, the total surface area of the sun is about 2.4 
million million square miles. In contrast, the total area of Bhü-maëòala comes to 
about 12.6 billion billion square miles. In SB 2.5.40p Çréla Prabhupäda refers to 
this as the area of the universe, and it seems that Bhü-maëòala is indeed one of the 
most significant and frequently mentioned features in the Vedic account of the 
universe. Its size is on the scale of the solar system as a whole, as conceived in 
modern Western astronomy. 
The Fifth Canto gives specific figures for the size, shape, and position of many of 
the geographic structures of Bhü-maëòala. The most striking characteristic of these 
structures is that although their description employs names for familiar features of 
earthly geography, such as mountains, oceans, and islands, they are all on the same 
cosmic scale as Bhü-maëòala itself. Thus the smallest mountains on Bhü-maëòala 
mentioned in the Bhägavatam are 2,000 yojanas, or 16,000 miles, high. Many 
mountains are 80,000 miles or even 672,000 miles high. In contrast, the diameter 
of the earth is about 8,000 miles, and Mount Everest, the highest known mountain, 
extends about 5.5 miles above sea level. References to such immense sizes are not 
limited to the Fifth Canto. For example, SB 4.6.32 gives a description of Lord Çiva 
meditating underneath a banyan tree 800 miles in height and 600 miles in breadth. 
In SB 8.2.1 we read that Trikuta Mountain, where the elephant Gajendra achieved 
liberation, is 80,000 miles in length and breadth. This mountain is situated in the 
ocean of milk, one of the geographical features of Bhü-maëòala. In SB 8.7.9 it is 
pointed out that when Kürma, the tortoise incarnation of Lord Viñëu, was 
supporting Mandara Mountain during the churning of the milk ocean, His back 
extended for 800,000 miles (lakña-yojana), “like a large island.” Finally, the Matsya 
avatära, Lord Viñëu’s fish incarnation, expanded from an initial small size to a final 
length of 8 million miles (SB 8.24.44). 
Modern scholars tend to reject dimensions such as these as ludicrous 
exaggerations made by poets who were completely devoid of scientific knowledge. 
However, even common men in primitive societies can tell that the earthly 
mountains of our experience have heights of thousands of feet rather than 
thousands of miles. The highly rational philosophical discussions in the 
Bhägavatam indicate that it was not written by some kind of mad fanatic who was 
devoid of common sense. We suggest, therefore, that the descriptions in the 
Bhägavatam of gigantic sizes refer to an actually existing world that is built on the 
scale of the solar system and that contains features built on a similar scale.

=== PAGE 38 ===

38
We will assume that this is the case, and later on we will consider what the relation 
might be between this world and the earth of our experience. For the present we 
will give a brief overview of the most significant features of Bhü-maëòala. We will 
do this with the aid of a series of computer-generated illustrations that portray the 
features of Bhü-maëòala as they would appear to an observer approaching Bhü-
maëòala from a great distance. 
In the first view (Fig. 3) we are looking down on the center of Bhü-maëòala at an 
angle of 45 degrees from a distance of some 600 million miles. We can discern five 
ring-shaped structures surrounding a central region that is too far away to see 
clearly. Going from the outside in, these are respectively the dvépas, or islands, 
named Puñkaradvépa, Çäkadvépa, Krauïcadvépa, Kuçadvépa, and Çälmalédvépa. 
Puñkaradvépa has inner and outer radii of 100.4 million and 151.6 million miles, 
and each successive ring, going inward, is half as wide as the one preceding it. To 
give an idea of the scale, the distance from the earth to the sun is currently 
accepted to be 93 million miles. 
The intervals between the dvépas are occupied by oceans, each of which has the 
same width as the dvépa that it surrounds. The oceans surrounding the five dvépas 
we have mentioned are said to be composed respectively of clear water, yogurt, 
milk, ghee, and liquor. Of course, these substances are celestial counterparts of the 
corresponding ordinary substances of our day-to-day experience. In Figure 4 we 
have moved in to a distance of about 150 million miles from the center of Bhü-
maëòala. Now Krauïcadvépa, Kuçadvépa, and Çälmalédvépa have expanded in 
apparent size, and the ring of Plakñadvépa has become visible within Çälmalédvépa. 
We can also begin to discern the central island of Jambüdvépa within Plakñadvépa. 
In Figure 5 we have moved in to a distance of 15 million miles, and in Figure 6, at 
a distance of some 3 million miles, we can obtain a detailed view of Jambüdvépa. 
Jambüdvépa is described as a disc-shaped island 100,000 yojanas, or 800,000 miles, 
in diameter. (For comparison, the currently accepted diameter of the sun is 
865,110 miles.) The most striking feature of Jambüdvépa is a central structure 
called Mount Meru, which is 84,000 yojanas high. This structure is generally 
referred to as a mountain, although it clearly has a unique form quite different 
from that of a typical mountain. The upper surface of Mount Meru is said to be 
occupied by Brahmapuré, the city of Lord Brahmä, and by cities belonging to eight 
other demigods. 
Jambüdvépa is divided into nine regions, or varñas, by a series of mountain ranges. 
In Figure 7 we see a more detailed view of the central region of Ilävåta-varña, which 
contains Mount Meru and is square in shape. To get some idea of the scale of this 
figure, we should note that the low mountain chain stretching from A to B in the 
figure is called Gandhamädana and reaches 16,000 miles in height. This is twice 
the diameter of the earth. 
Of the nine varñas of Jambüdvépa, eight are described as places of heavenly 
enjoyment. These are intended for persons who have returned to earth after using 
up their allotted time on the heavenly planets but who have some remaining pious 
credits entitling them to enjoy great material opulence. The inhabitants of these 
varñas are described as living for 10,000 years by earthly calculations, as having the 
bodily strength of 10,000 elephants, and as having a standard of pleasure like that 
of the human beings of Tretä-yuga (SB 5.17.12). These regions are also said to 
contain beautiful gardens that are visited by important leaders among the

=== PAGE 39 ===

39
demigods. The Bhägavatam refers to these eight varñas as bhauma-svarga, or the 
heavenly places on earth (SB 5.17.11), while Çréla Prabhupäda describes them as 
“the lower heavenly planets” and contrasts their inhabitants to those of “this earth” 
(SB 5.17.13p). 
The remaining varña of Jambüdvépa is called Bhärata-varña. It is described as the 
field of fruitive activities, in which human beings struggle with adverse conditions 
and elevate or degrade themselves by their actions. Bhärata-varña is the 
southernmost region of Jambüdvépa, and it is illustrated in Figures 8 and 9, in 
which we view Jambüdvépa from the southeast at a lower elevation. In shape, 
Bhärata-varña is a semicircular piece of land bounded on the south by the salt-
water ocean and on the north by the Himalayan Mountains. Bhärata-varña is the 
only part of Bhü-maëòala at all reminiscent of the earth, and it is frequently 
identified with either the earth or with India in Çréla Prabhupäda’s books. 
Yet the Himalayas bounding Bhärata-varña are described in the Fifth Canto as 
being 80,000 miles high, and Bhärata-varña itself runs some 72,000 miles (9,000 
yojanas) from north to south. This naturally leads us to ask, What is the 
relationship between the earth of our experience and Jambüdvépa and Bhärata-
varña, as described in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam? 
3.B. The Earth of Our Experience 
In this book we will take it for granted that the earth planet on which we live our 
daily lives can be practically thought of as a globe with a diameter of about 8,000 
miles. In the age of international travel by jet airplanes, it is easy for people in 
general to accumulate abundant evidence that confirms this. Commercial airlines 
fly regularly scheduled flights along a network of routes that completely covers the 
inhabited areas of the earth. A glance at an airline’s route map shows that each of 
these routes follows a great circle—the shortest path connecting two points on the 
surface of a sphere. (There are some exceptions, of course, due to political 
considerations.) One can experience changes in time zones of the kind that one 
would expect to find if the earth is a globe, and one can consider that if the airline 
authorities do not properly understand the size and shape of the earth, along with 
the location of various cities on it, then how is it possible for them to arrange 
regular flights from one city to another? 
There are many regions on the earth that have not been thoroughly explored. 
However, it would be difficult to argue that airplanes have not flown over most 
areas of the earth’s surface, including the Arctic and Antarctic regions. One can 
read popular articles describing life during the winter at an American base at the 
South Pole, and one can also read about artificial satellites with orbits ranging from 
equatorial to circumpolar. Thus human experience with remote, seldom-visited 
regions of the earth is also consistent with the idea that the earth is a sphere. 
Yet, even though the earth can be regarded as a globe from the viewpoint of our 
ordinary sensory experience, we have already argued that there is a sense in which 
the earth is definitely not a globe. The very idea of a sphere is based on three-
dimensional Euclidian geometry. Thus, if the three-dimensional continuum of our 
ordinary experience is simply a limited aspect of a higher-dimensional reality, it 
follows that the globe of the earth is also simply an aspect of that higher reality. To 
properly describe what that reality is, in and of itself, we must go beyond three-
dimensional constructs such as a sphere or a plane. A yogé who can reach directly 
to another continent by means of the präpti-siddhi is not experiencing the earth as

=== PAGE 40 ===

40
a sphere. Similarly, a person who is able to realize that Våndävana in India is 
nondifferent from the unlimited spiritual realm of Goloka cannot be thinking of 
the earth simply_as a small globe. The earth globe may be one aspect of the reality 
that he is experiencing, but he may choose to describe that reality by emphasizing 
other aspects that for him are more important. 
We propose that although the total reality of the world is very difficult, or even 
impossible, to fully describe in words, different aspects of it can be described in 
readily comprehensible language. These aspects correspond to different 
perspectives, which depend on the different situations and sensory capacities of 
different observers. Simple geometric imagery may be quite fitting for the 
description of the universe from many of these different individual perspectives, 
even though it is completely inadequate to describe the material world as a whole. 
In this book we propose that the cosmological system of the Bhägavatam is a 
simplified description of the universe as it appears from the viewpoint of 
demigods, åñis, and highly elevated human beings, who are the principal characters 
in this work. In contrast, our familiar conception of the earth globe is a valid 
account of our immediate environs as they appear from the viewpoint of persons 
with ordinary human senses. This can also be said of the world system of the 
astronomical siddhäntas, which we have proposed in Chapter 1 to be an integral 
and long-standing part of the Vedic culture. There the earth is also described as a 
small globe, and the astronomical discussions are limited to phenomena that 
people can observe with their gross senses. 
3.b.1. Bhärata-varña 
In an abstract form, the foregoing is our general idea about the nature of the 
relationship between Vedic cosmology and our modern world view. However, to 
make this idea more vivid and concrete, it is necessary to work it out in much 
greater detail. We will now proceed to do this, beginning with the question of how 
this earth relates to Bhü-maëòala as a whole. 
In SB 5.19.21p Çréla Prabhupäda refers to Bhärata-varña as India, and he points out 
that the demigods aspire to take birth there. In SB 2.7.10p this earth planet is 
identified with Bhärata-varña, and a similar reference is made in SB 1.12.20p. In SB 
3.18.19p Çréla Prabhupäda points out that the earth planet was once known as 
Ilävåta-varña, but when Mahäräja Parékñit ruled the earth it was called Bhärata-
varña. By the process of political fragmentation, Bhärata-varña gradually came to 
mean India alone. The idea that Bhärata-varña once referred to the entire earth is 
also indicated in SB 4.22.36p, where Çréla Prabhupäda suggests on the basis of 
Puräëic references that Brazil, rather than Ceylon, was Rävaëa’s kingdom. 
In SB 1.12.5 the earth ruled by Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira is referred to as Jambüdvépa, 
and in SB 4.12.16 the earth ruled by Dhruva Mahäräja is referred to as Bhü-
maëòala itself. Going further, SB 5.1.22 states that Mahäräja Priya-vrata ruled all 
the planets of the universe (akhila-dharä-maëòala), and Çréla Prabhupäda points 
out that it is difficult for us to understand just where Mahäräja Priyavrata was 
situated. 
In addition to his statements identifying our earth with Bhärata-varña, Çréla 
Prabhupäda also makes statements indicating that some regions of Bhü-maëòala 
are not part of this earth. We have already noted his reference to the other eight 
varñas of Jambüdvépa as “the lower heavenly planets.” In SB 4.18.20 one of these 
varñas, known as Kiàpuruña-varña, is spoken of as a planet whose inhabitants are

=== PAGE 41 ===

41
endowed with remarkable mystic powers. In SB 3.23.39p Çréla Prabhupäda 
describes Mount Meru as being a resort area for demigods that is “situated 
somewhere between the sun and the earth,” and in SB 3.2.8p he says that the moon 
was born from the milk ocean “in the upper planets.” In SB 5.1.8p he speaks of “a 
planet covered mostly by great mountains, one of which is Gandhamädana Hill.” 
This mountain marks one of the boundaries of Ilävåta-varña (SB 5.16.10). When 
commenting on the description of Ilävåta-varña in SB 5.16.10, he distinguishes 
between the mountains of this planet earth and the “greater mountainous areas of 
the universe.” Finally, in SB 8.2.14–19p he describes Triküöa Mountain, 
surrounded by the ocean of milk, as being on another planet. 
All of these statements can be reconciled if we adopt the idea that the earth of the 
Bhägavatam is the disc of Bhü-maëòala, but that only a small portion of this earth 
is accessible to the limited senses of modern-day human beings. In previous yugas 
larger regions of Bhü-maëòala were accessible, and people experienced a 
correspondingly larger earth. Thus in Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira’s time, at the end of 
the Dväpara-yuga, people had access to the entire region of Jambüdvépa, and 
people living in the Satya-yuga during the reign of Dhruva Mahäräja had access to 
the whole of Bhü-maëòala. In the Caitanya-caritämåta it is said that persons from 
the various dvépas of Bhü-maëòala visited the home of Lord Caitanya disguised as 
human beings. To these persons it is presumably still natural to think of the earth 
as Bhü-maëòala. 
3.b.2. The Projection of Bhü-maëòala on the Sky 
If Bhü-maëòala is a disc 4 billion miles in diameter, one natural question is, Where 
is this disc located? We have indicated that our own location on the earth 
corresponds to part of Bhärata-varña, which lies almost exactly in the center of 
Bhü-maëòala. In SB 1.1.4p we read that Lord Brahmä once envisioned the forest of 
Naimiñäraëya in India as the center of a great wheel that enclosed the universe. 
This suggests that this well-known site in India is located exactly in the center of 
the vast disc depicted in Figure 3. In any case, both India and the rest of the earth 
of our experience must lie close to this center. 
Let us consider a person somewhere on this earth. If he is standing in the center of 
a disc that extends for millions of miles into space, then from his perspective most 
of that disc will be very far away from him, and it will appear to be projected into a 
circular band running through the heavens. We can discuss this circular band 
more precisely by introducing the celestial sphere of the astronomers. 
In observational astronomy it is customary to visualize celestial objects such as 
stars and planets as lying on the surface of an enormous imaginary sphere centered 
on the earth. The system of earthly latitude and longitude is projected onto this 
sphere, and thus the sphere has celestial north and south poles corresponding to 
the north and south poles of the earth, and also a celestial equator corresponding 
to the earth’s equator (see Fig. 10). Any disc centered on the earth and extending 
millions of miles into space will intersect this sphere in a great circle tilted at some 
angle to the celestial equator. Our question thus becomes, What great circle on the 
celestial sphere corresponds to the disc of Bhü-maëòala? 
In Section 3.d we will discuss the daily and yearly motion of the sun. We will argue 
that the projected orbit of the sun on the celestial sphere provides a marker that 
will help us locate the projection of Bhü-maëòala. We will present two hypotheses 
regarding this projection: (1) The projection of Bhü-maëòala coincides with the

=== PAGE 42 ===

42
great circle known as the ecliptic. This circle marks the yearly path of the sun 
through the heavens, and it passes through the circular band of constellations 
known as the zodiac. (2) The projection of Bhü-maëòala corresponds to the 
celestial equator. Although we tend to favor hypothesis (1), we present both 
hypotheses, since some çästric support can be provided for each one. 
We will discuss these hypotheses in detail in Section 3.d, but for the moment we 
will consider some questions that naturally arise from them. First of all, it might 
seem that the Bhägavatam is presenting a simple model of the earth as a flat plane. 
According to this idea, the plane of Bhü-maëòala should be parallel to the surface 
of the earth, and therefore the projection of Bhü-maëòala on the sky should 
correspond to the circle of the horizon. One problem with this is that the 
Bhägavatam contains a number of verses indicating that the sun moves in a circular 
path on the surface of Bhü-maëòala (or very close to it) at a very large distance 
from Jambüdvépa (for example, see SB 5.20.30). If the celestial projection of Bhü-
maëòala corresponds to the horizon, then these verses imply that the sun must 
always remain close to the horizon, instead of rising in the east, going high in the 
sky, and setting in the west as we observe. In fact, the Indian astronomer 
Bhäskaräcärya seems to believe that the Puräëas do imply this, and he takes this as 
a reason for rejecting the Puräëic view (SSB1, p. 114). 
Actually, in the Arctic and Antarctic regions the sun does behave in this way at 
certain times of the year. However, since the earth of our experience is a globe, the 
inclination of the sun’s path in the sky changes as we go north and south, and over 
most of the earth’s inhabited regions this inclination is very steep. In Chapter 1 we 
have argued that the spherical nature of this earth planet was known in Vedic 
times, and this, of course, is incompatible with a flat-earth interpretation of Vedic 
cosmology. However, even if we disregard this point, we can hardly suppose that a 
hypothetical pre-scientific sage living by the side of the Ganges would not have 
noticed that the sun moves high overhead in the course of a day. We therefore 
propose that the Puräëas could not be identifying the plane of Bhü-maëòala with 
the horizon. 
At this point, the objection will be raised that when we look at the sky at night, we 
do not see anything unusual in the direction of either the zodiac or the celestial 
equator. Indeed, we see nothing but stars in all directions. If the surface of Bhü-
maëòala bisects the sky along one of these great circles, then we should see stars 
only on one side of the circle. On the other side we should see solid earth, as we do 
in the case of the horizon. Our answer to this objection is that since most of Bhü-
maëòala is not accessible to our senses, we cannot see it. 
This may initially seem to be a rather unsatisfactory answer, but it is consistent 
with all of the material that we have gathered from the Bhägavatam thus far. For 
example, the height of Mount Meru is nearly equal to the diameter of the sun 
(according to modern data), so if it is indeed located “somewhere between the sun 
and the earth,” then why can’t we see it? Also, if the plane of Bhü-maëòala exists at 
all, and acts as a barrier to our vision, then the sky must be bisected along some 
circle, with all visible stars lying on one side. Yet, if we go from the Northern to the 
Southern Hemisphere, it is possible to look at the night sky in all directions, and 
wherever we look, we simply see stars. This is true, for example, if we look 
towards the south celestial pole from New Zealand or South Africa (see Figs. 11 
and 12).

=== PAGE 43 ===

43
Another question that may be raised is, If you are saying that Bhü-maëòala is 
higher-dimensional and therefore invisible, why do you try to assign it a location 
in three-dimensional space at all? The answer is that a higher-dimensional 
structure can also have a three-dimensional location. To illustrate this idea, 
consider a person who is trying to find a particular office in Manhattan. By moving 
north-south and east-west through the grid of streets, he may arrive at the address 
of the office but be disappointed to find that he cannot see it. To actually reach the 
office he may have to move fifty stories in the vertical direction by taking an 
elevator. Thus, the office has a two-dimensional location, but to reach it, three-
dimensional travel is necessary. Likewise, to reach a given location in Bhü-
maëòala, both three-dimensional and higher-dimensional travel may be required. 
In summary, we propose that the Vedic cosmology corresponds to our observable 
world in the following way: The earth of our experience is a small globe 
surrounded by the starry heavens in all directions. Bhü-maëòala is a vast disc that 
extends for millions of miles into space but is not perceivable by our present 
senses. Its projection on the celestial sphere must be ascertained on the basis of the 
movement of the sun, and this projection does not correspond to the variable 
horizon of this earth. We suggest that this is not simply an artificial reconciliation 
of Vedic cosmology with modern astronomical views. Rather, we propose that this 
is how Vedic cosmology was understood in ancient times. 
3.b.3. A Historical Interlude 
In this subsection we will briefly consider some historical evidence suggesting that 
Vedic cosmology, or something very similar to it, may once have been widely 
accepted throughout the world. Some of this evidence supports the ideas we have 
just outlined on the nature and position of Bhü-maëòala. 
Societies throughout the world have traditionally passed down ancient legends and 
myths describing the nature and origin of the universe. In this seemingly chaotic 
array of diverse stories, two historians named Giorgio de Santillana and Hertha von 
Dechend thought they could see evidence for a common ancestral culture. 
According to them, this “archaic” culture antedated all the ancient civilizations we 
know of today, including those of Babylon, China, and India. They argued that this 
culture possessed a sophisticated scientific understanding of astronomy, but that it 
expressed this understanding in terms we today call mythological because we do 
not understand them. 
Here is what de Santillana and von Dechend have to say about how this archaic 
culture viewed the earth: 
(1) First, what was the “earth”? In the most general sense, the “earth” was the ideal 
plane laid through the ecliptic. The “dry earth,” in a more specific sense, was the 
ideal plane going through the celestial equator [HM, p. 58]. 
(2) The name of “true earth” (or of the “inhabited world”) did not in any way 
denote our physical geoid for the archaics. It applies to the band of the zodiac, two 
dozen degrees right and left of the ecliptic [HM, pp. 61–62]. 
(3) At the “top,” in the center high above the “dry” plane of the equator, was the 
Pole star. At the opposite top, or rather in the depth of the waters below, 
unobserved from our latitudes, was the southern pole, thought to be Canopus” 
[HM, p. 63]. 
The idea of the earth presented here runs parallel to the ideas we have discussed 
regarding Bhü-maëòala. According to the Bhägavatam, below the plane of Bhü-

=== PAGE 44 ===

44
maëòala are seven lower planetary systems and then the Garbhodaka Ocean, 
which fills one half of the universal globe. Here we see a similar conception of the 
earth as a plane projected against either the celestial equator or the band of the 
zodiac, with a region of water in the direction of the southern pole. 
Many bits and pieces of information can be collected from old myths and legends 
suggesting that a cosmology similar to that of the Bhägavatam was widely 
disseminated in ancient times. In many cases this information comes down to us in 
the form of what may be called fossilized stories, or stories that have lost their 
original meaning but have been preserved in a distorted, fragmentary form in 
various traditions. One interesting example of this is the following story taken 
from Norse mythology: At the time of the destruction of the cosmos (the Norse 
ragnarok), all-engulfing flames come out of Surt the Black. This Surt is said to be 
“the king of eternal bliss ‘at the southern end of the sky.’” It is also stated in the 
Norse myths that “there are many good abodes and many bad; best it is to be in 
Gimle with Surt” (HM, p. 157). 
Here one cannot help but think of Saìkarñaëa, or Ananta Çeña, who destroys the 
three worlds with fire at the time of annihilation, and who reclines on the 
Garbhodaka Ocean. If we project the location of Saìkarñaëa on the sky, it should 
be to the south, in the direction of the watery region mentioned in (3) above. 
Saìkarñaëa is known as tämasé, or “dark,” since He is in charge of annihilation, but 
He is also certainly the king of eternal bliss (SB 5.25.1). This passage from Norse 
mythology is therefore very curious, since standard historical accounts describe the 
ancient Scandinavians as polytheists who had no conception of one Supreme 
Godhead. 
Whatever the true significance of the story of Surt  may be, the ancient 
Scandinavians clearly had a concept of the earth that is very similar to Jambüdvépa 
as described in the Bhägavatam. They regarded the earth as a circular island 
surrounded by a world ocean. In the center of the island is an enormous mountain, 
crowned by Asgard, the home of the gods (see Fig. 13). Interestingly enough, the 
number of warriors of the gods stationed in Asgard is 432,000, a number that often 
appears in the Vedic literature (HM, p. 162). 
In his book Shamanism (SH), Mircea Eliade points out that the idea of three 
worlds with a universal axis marked by a cosmic mountain is extremely 
widespread. It is found in the ancient cultures of Egypt, India, China, Greece, and 
Mesopotamia, and it is also found in tribal societies throughout Asia, Africa, and 
the Americas. In central Asia, the names for the central mountain, such as Sumber, 
Sumur, or Sumer, are clearly related to the Sanskrit name Sumeru. The Greeks, of 
course, had their Mount Olympus; the Iranians had Haraberezaiti (Elbruz); the 
Germans had Himingbjorg; the Saxons had Irminsul, “the universal column that 
sustains everything” (SH, p. 261); and the Chinese had Mount Khun-Lun, where 
the dwellings of the immortals were situated (ND, pp. 566–67). Among the 
Babylonians, the ziggurat represented the cosmic mountain, and the central pillar 
of tribal dwellings in Asia and North America carried a similar symbolic meaning 
(SH, pp. 261–62). Needham, in his Science and Civilization in China, notes that 
“wheel maps,” depicting the earth as a circle surrounding a central mountain, were 
very common in the ancient world. He is uncertain as to whether these maps had 
ultimately an Indian or a Babylonian origin, but he notes that they seem to 
represent a tradition of great antiquity in both places (ND, pp. 588–90).

=== PAGE 45 ===

45
It may perhaps seem far-fetched to link the traditions of North American Indians 
with Vedic civilization, but even here we find some suggestive connections. For 
example, the Sioux Indians tell of a cycle of four ages. There is a buffalo that loses 
one leg during each age; at present we are in the last age—an age of degradation—
and the buffalo has one leg. In the Bhägavatam, of course, the same story is told 
about the bull named Dharma; at present we are in the last age (the Age of Kali), 
and Dharma is standing on one leg (EB, p. 9). 
In Figure 14 we give another example of what may be a remnant of the Vedic 
world view. This is a picture from the Maya Codex Tro-Cortesianus. Some people 
have interpreted it as a depiction of the churning of the milk ocean, as described in 
the Vedic literature. The picture is difficult to interpret, but it does seem to contain 
a tortoise, a central churn, and a serpent being pulled like a rope by what may be 
demigods and asuras. This picture illustrates both the attractive and the 
discouraging aspects of this kind of evidence. It seems highly suggestive, but its 
history is difficult, if not impossible, to trace out. We would suggest, however, that 
the presence of Vedic cosmological themes in many widely separated cultures 
throughout the world does provide evidence for the existence of a single culture in 
the remote past that widely disseminated these themes. 
3.b.4. The Principle of Correspondence 
Thus far we have developed the idea that the earth of our experience is a small 
globe and simultaneously a part of a region called Bhärata-varña in a larger, higher-
dimensional structure called Bhü-maëòala. We have proposed that the connection 
between the earth globe and Bhü-maëòala is higher-dimensional. Since this idea is 
very foreign to the Western way of thinking, we will devote this subsection to a 
discussion of further examples from the Bhägavatam indicating that this earth (and 
India in particular) is linked with a higher level of reality. To borrow a phrase from 
modern physics, we can speak of this idea of a higher-dimensional connection as 
the principle of corres-pondence linking our familiar earth globe with the domain 
described in the Vedic literature. 
There are many references in the Bhägavatam indicating that in previous ages 
many activities of demigods and great åñis were regularly carried out on this earth. 
These include the following: 
(1) Trita Muni, who became one of the seven sages in the Varuëaloka, came from 
the western countries of this earth (SB 1.9.7p). 
(2) Inhabitants of the Väyuloka (airy planets) were invited to expedite the cooking 
work at the sacrifice of Mahäräja Marutta. (Also, a golden mountain peak 
belonging Mahäräja Marutta is located somewhere in the Himalayas.) (SB 
1.12.33p) 
(3) Viçvävasu, the leader of the Gandharvas, fell from his vimäna (airplane) upon 
seeing Devahüti playing ball on her palace roof. This took place in India (SB 
3.22.17). 
(4) Atri Muni performed austerities in a valley of Åkña Mountain near the river 
Nirvindhya in India (SB 4.1.17). 
(5) The sacrifice in which Dakña offended Lord Çiva took place at the confluence of 
the Ganges and the Yamunä (SB 4.2.35). 
(6) Parvaté, the wife of Lord Çiva, took birth as the daughter of the Himalayas (SB 
4.7.58–59).

=== PAGE 46 ===

46
(7) Sväyambhuva Manu ruled from Brahmävarta, which is located in India where 
the river Sarasvaté flows toward the east (SB 4.19.1). 
(8) Indra became intoxicated on soma-rasa at Mahäräja Gaya’s sacrifice (SB 
5.15.12). 
These items all indicate that in the past this earth was the setting for many 
activities that lie beyond the range of our present senses. In the Bhägavatam 
(including both the Sanskrit texts and Çréla Prabhupäda’s purports) these activities 
are described from the viewpoint of persons whose sensory level is higher than that 
of ordinary people of today, and thus they are presented as normal, day-to-day 
affairs. In the Caitanya-caritämåta there is evidence indicating that similar activities 
are still taking place on the earth today. For example, CC ML 9.174–77 describes a 
meeting that took place between Lord Caitanya and Lord Çiva on the hill of Çri 
Çaila in south India. It is pointed out that Lord Çiva and Devé lived on that hill, 
along with Lord Brahmä and all the demigods. In this description, however, it is 
clear that this was not visible to the general human population. 
In KB p. 494 we read that the dowry of King Nagnajit’s daughter included 
90,000,000 horses and “a hundred times more slaves than horses.” Modern 
scholars use statements like this as an excuse to reject Vedic scripture as “Hindu 
mythology,” or utterly irresponsible fantasy. However, as we have already 
suggested, their interpretation is contradicted by the abundant evidence indicating 
the Vedic literature’s gravity and seriousness of purpose. We suggest that these 
very large numbers refer to activities taking place on a higher earthly domain, 
which was experienced by the people of those times (the late Dväpara-yuga). 
In many cultures around the world we find the idea that in an earlier age people 
had direct contact with higher realms and their inhabitants (SH). This direct 
contact is often thought to have been broken in the distant past by a fall, which 
consigned human beings to a life of struggle in a state of cosmic alienation. The fall 
of Adam and Eve in Judeo-Christian tradition is an example of this. The Vedic 
literature, however, can be thought of as being written from a pre-fall perspective. 
Although this literature describes the degradation of human society in the Age of 
Kali, it generally describes activities and events taking place in societies where 
communication with higher-dimensional realms was taken for granted. 
In SB 6.10.16p Çréla Prabhupäda comments that the battle between Indra and 
Våträsura took place not by the Narmadä River in India, as one might surmise from 
the text, but by its celestial counterpart. He points out that “the five sacred rivers 
in India—the Gaìgä, Yamunä, Narmadä, Käveré, and Kåñëä—are all celestial. Like 
the Ganges River, the Narmadä River also flows in the higher planetary systems.” 
For this to be possible, the connection between the celestial river and the earthly 
river that we can directly see must be higher-dimensional. 
Likewise, in SB 3.21.25p Çréla Prabhupäda points out that Brahmävarta, where 
Sväyambhuva Manu ruled, is said by some to be a place in India and by others to 
be a place in Brahmaloka. He says, “There are many places on the surface of this 
earth which are also known in the higher planetary systems; we have places on this 
planet like Våndävana, Dvärakä, and Mathurä, but they are also eternally situated 
in Kåñëaloka.” Thus, a place in India on this earth may correspond on a higher-
dimensional level to part of Brahmaloka.

=== PAGE 47 ===

47
In a number of places, Çréla Prabhupäda cites traditions identifying features of the 
earth with features of Bhü-maëòala and the higher planets in general. Some 
examples are: 
(1) “Bhauma-svarga [which corresponds to the eight varñas of Jambüdvépa other 
than Bhärata-varña] is sometimes accepted as the tract of land in Bhärata-varña 
known as Kashmir” (SB 5.17.11p). 
(2) It is said that Çivaloka is “supposed to be situated near the Himalaya 
Mountains” (SB 4.24.22p). 
(3) The Yakñas (who are associated with the demigod Kuvera) are identified as 
Himalayan hill tribes like the Tibetans (SB 4.10.5p).  
(4) The words ä-mänasa-acalät, meaning “up to Mänasa Mountain,” are translated 
as referring to the Arctic region (SB 4.16.14). 
(5) “Sapta-dvépa refers to the seven great islands or continents on the surface of the 
globe: (1) Asia, (2) Europe, (3) Africa, (4) North America, (5) South America, (6) 
Australia, and (7) Oceania” (SB 4.21.12p). Similar statements are made in SB 
3.21.2p and TLC, p. 80. 
We suggest that identifications of this kind either refer directly to higher-
dimensional associations between earthly and celestial locations, or else they refer 
to traditions that have arisen because of ancient experience of the earth as a higher 
realm. Thus, Lord Çiva is always associated with the Himalayas, and in the Vedic 
literature there are many stories about him that take place in a Himalayan setting. 
It is therefore natural to think of the Himalayas as the place of Lord Çiva, and he 
may indeed be especially accessible there to advanced yogés. Of course, we cannot 
simply regard Çivaloka or Sapta-dvépa as places in the three-dimensional earthly 
realm of our ordinary experience. 
The astronomical siddhäntas also contain passages identifying features of Bhü-
maëòala with parts of the earth globe. Thus the Sürya-siddhänta describes Mount 
Meru as a small mountain at the North Pole, and the Siddhänta-çiromaëi places the 
seven dvépas in the Southern Hemisphere. In his purports to CC AL 5.111 and CC 
ML 20.218, Çréla Prabhupäda cites the Siddhänta-çiromaëi’s description of the 
seven dvépas. Since Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura also cites this 
description in his Anubhäñya commentary on these verses of Caitanya-caritämåta, 
we will reproduce it here: 
Most learned astronomers have stated that Jambüdvépa embraces the whole 
northern hemisphere lying to the north of the salt sea; and that the other six dvépas 
and the seven seas … are all situated in the southern hemisphere. 
To the south of the equator lies the salt sea, and to the south of it the sea of 
milk,… where the omnipresent Väsudeva, to whose lotus feet Brahmä and all the 
gods bow in reverence, holds his favorite residence. 
Beyond the sea of milk lie in succession the seas of curds, clarified butter, sugar 
cane juice, and wine; and, last of all, that of sweet water, which surrounds 
Vadavänala. The Pätäla lokas, or infernal regions, form the concave strata of the 
earth [SSB1, p. 116]. 
We should note that these verses of Siddhänta-çiromaëi describe a correspondence 
between the earth globe and Bhü-maëòala that can be expressed in mathematical 
form. The points on the plane of Bhü-maëòala can be mapped onto the earth globe 
by a stereographic projection. This is a standard kind of map projection, in which 
countries on the curved surface of the earth are represented on a flat plane.

=== PAGE 48 ===

48
In this particular case, one can use a modified polar stereographic projection, 
which sends the North Pole of the earth to the center point on the plane and sends 
circles of latitude on the earth to ever-widening concentric circles on the plane. It 
is possible to set up such a projection so that 
(1) The path of the sun in Puñkaradvépa maps to the tropic of Capricorn (see 
Section 3.d). 
(2) The six dvépas surrounding Jambüdvépa map to bands along parallels of 
latitude in the Southern Hemisphere. 
(3) The equator cuts the salt ocean between Jambüdvépa and Plakñadvépa in half. 
Thus Jambüdvépa lies in the Northern Hemisphere. 
(4) The base of Mount Meru maps to the Arctic Circle. Thus Mount Meru 
corresponds to the “land of the midnight sun,” north of the Arctic Circle. 
This correspondence agrees with the description of the dvépas in the Siddhänta-
çiromaëi, and it agrees with the account given in the Sürya-siddhänta of the life of 
the demigods on Mount Meru. There it is stated that the demigods experience days 
and nights of six months each, and that their dawn and evening occur at the times 
of the vernal and autumnal equinoxes (SS, p. 81). This, of course, is the situation 
at the North Pole. 
The question is, What is the meaning of this mapping between Bhü-maëòala and 
the earth globe? It is not possible for us to take it as a literal description of the 
earth, since the continents in the Southern Hemisphere are not at all arranged in 
concentric rings. It may be that this mapping refers to actual higher-dimensional 
connections between parts of this earth and parts of Bhü-maëòala. This is 
suggested by the fact that Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté refers to it, and Çréla 
Prabhupäda, following in disciplic succession, does also. 
However, since the authors of the astronomical siddhäntas often expressed doubts 
about Puräëic cosmology, it seems likely that for them, at least, the mapping was 
simply an artificial attempt to force this cosmology into a three-dimensional 
framework and thereby make sense out of it. We therefore suggest that although 
historical Indian astronomers such as Bhäskaräcärya were carrying on a genuine 
Vedic tradition of astronomy, their understanding of Vedic cosmology was 
nonetheless imperfect. They did not understand the higher-dimensional nature of 
structures such as Bhü-maëòala, and they consequently focused their attention on 
those features of Vedic astronomy that can be readily understood in three-
dimensional terms. 
In recent centuries, many Vaiñëavas have also experienced perplexity in their 
efforts to understand the relationship between Bhü-maëòala and the earth globe of 
our direct experience. This is shown in Appendix 1, where we reproduce a 
discussion of this relationship by the Vaiñëava commentator Vaàçédhara. If the 
existing Vedic literature consists of materials dating to an era in which people had 
direct experience of higher-dimensional reality, then it is not surprising that many 
statements in it are bewildering from our gross sensory perspective. It is therefore 
reasonable to follow the example of the äcäryas and simply receive these 
statements with faith. If this is done, then further insight may come in due course 
of time. (In contrast, the approach of skeptical rejection is not likely to lead to 
further study and insight.) 
We will end this subsection by noting another correspondence principle involving 
Vedic cosmology—the principle of correspondence between microcosm (the body)

=== PAGE 49 ===

49
and macrocosm (the universe and the universal form). In SB 5.23cs there is the 
statement that “yogés worship the Çiçumära planetary system, which is technically 
known as the kuëòalini-cakra.” It appears that yogés in meditation would identify 
the central axis of the universe (which we will discuss in Chapter 4) with the series 
of cakras in the spinal column. By moving their life airs up the series of cakras, 
they would prepare their subtle bodies to travel up the axis of the universe to 
Brahmaloka. This basic idea appears in mystical traditions throughout the world, 
but it would take us too far afield to discuss it further here (again, see SH). 
 
3.C. Planets as Globes in Space 
In the pastime of Lord Varäha’s lifting the earth from the ocean, the earth is 
frequently depicted by artists as our familiar earth globe. However, the Sanskrit 
verses of Çrémad-Bhägavatam describing this pastime do not use any words 
denoting a sphere when referring to the earth, and the Viñëu Puräëa indicates that 
Lord Varäha lifted Bhü-maëòala as a whole. The relevant passage states that after 
lifting the earth from the waters, Lord Varäha divided it into seven great 
continents, as it was before, thus indicating that the earth that was lifted included 
the seven dvépas of Bhü-maëòala (VP, p. 65). The Vaiñëava commentator 
Vaàçédhara, in his commentary on SB 5.20.38, also points out that the earth lifted 
by Lord Varäha is Bhü-maëòala (see Appendix 1). 
In the Fifth Canto the earth is directly described as the vast disc of Bhü-maëòala. 
The word bhü-golam, or “earth-globe,” generally refers to the sphere of the 
universe, and the Bhägavatam seems to make no direct reference to the earth as a 
small globe. However, the astronomical siddhäntas do explicitly describe the earth 
as a small globe, and the following verse in the Fifth Canto can be interpreted as 
referring to the earth as a sphere: 
People living in countries at points diametrically opposite to where the sun is first 
seen rising will see the sun setting, and if a straight line were drawn from a point 
where the sun is at midday, the people in countries at the opposite end of the line 
would be experiencing midnight. Similarly, if people residing where the sun is 
setting were to go to countries diametrically opposite, they would not see the sun 
in the same condition [SB 5.21.8–9]. 
We have argued that the earth was understood to be a sphere in Vedic times, and 
that it was also understood to be part of Bhü-maëòala. It is therefore natural to ask 
whether or not the other parts of Bhü-maëòala also correspond to spheres in some 
sense. In fact, Çréla Prabhupäda frequently refers to the idea of planets as globes 
floating in space. Since this point is quite important, we shall quote a number of 
his statements at length: 
(1) “The earth floats in space among many millions of other planets, all of them 
bearing huge mountains and oceans. It floats because Kåñëa enters into it, as stated 
in Bhagavad-gétä (gäm äviçya), just as He enters the atom” (TQK, p. 122). 
(2) “Seated on His chariot with Arjuna, Kåñëa began to proceed north, crossing 
over many planetary systems. These are described in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam as 
Saptadvépa. Dvépa means ‘island.’ These planets are sometimes described in the 
Vedic literature as dvépas. The planet on which we are living is called Jambüdvépa. 
Outer space is taken as a great ocean of air, and within that great ocean of air there 
are many islands, which are the different planets. In each and every planet there 
are oceans also. In some of the planets the oceans are of salt water, and in some of

=== PAGE 50 ===

50
them there are oceans of milk. In others there are oceans of liquor, and in others 
there are oceans of ghee or oil” (KB, pp. 855–56). Similar remarks are made in KB 
p. 12. 
(3) “The planets are called dvépas. Outer space is like an ocean of air. Just as there 
are islands in the watery ocean, these planets in the ocean of space are called 
dvépas, or islands in outer space” (CC ML 20.218p). This purport begins with a 
quotation of the Sanskrit verses from Siddhänta-çiromaëi describing the seven 
dvépas of Bhü-maëòala, and thus Çréla Prabhupäda clearly does not limit the dvépas 
to the Southern Hemisphere. 
(4) “Sometimes the planets in outer space are called islands. We have experience of 
various types of islands in the ocean, and similarly the various planets, divided into 
fourteen lokas, are islands in the ocean of space. As Priyavrata drove his chariot 
behind the sun, he created seven different types of oceans and planetary systems, 
which altogether are known as Bhü-maëòala, or Bhüloka” (SB 5.1.31p). 
(5) “According to Vedic understanding, the entire universe is regarded as an ocean 
of space. In that ocean there are innumerable planets, and each planet is called a 
dvépa, or island” (SB 8.19.19p). 
(6) “Only under certain conditions do the planets float as weightless balls in the 
air, and as soon as these conditions are disturbed, the planets may fall down into 
the Garbhodaka Ocean, which covers half the universe. The other half is the 
spherical dome within which the innumerable planetary systems exist. The floating 
of the planets in the weightless air is due to the inner constitution of the globes” 
(SB 2.7.1p). 
(7) In SB 2.7.13p, 1.3.41p, and 3.15.2p it is indicated that the universe contains 
millions of planets, and that many are not visible to the naked eye. 
In these passages Çréla Prabhupäda refers to the seven dvépas of Bhü-maëòala as a 
planetary system consisting of many globes floating in space. He compares outer 
space to an ocean of air and interprets the word dvépa to mean an island hovering 
in that airy ocean. Since the Bhägavatam does not specifically refer to the dvépas as 
separated globes, this naturally gives rise to the question, Is the Bhägavatam giving 
a metaphorical description of the universe, and if so, then how far can we go in 
giving indirect interpretations to its statements? We note that passage (4) refers to 
a verse in which it is said that Mahäräja Priyavrata created the seven dvépas and 
oceans of Bhü-maëòala with the rims of his chariot wheels. We can easily see how 
a very large chariot could produce circular ruts that would become oceans and 
islands, but it is not so easy to see how it could produce systems of spherical 
planets. 
In answer to the above question, we suggest that the statements of the Bhägavatam 
can sometimes be given indirect interpretations, but this should be done very 
carefully in accordance with the overall meaning of the text and the tradition of 
paramparä. According to the Vedic literature, the universe is very difficult to 
understand, and a complete element-by-element description in the modern 
Western style is not possible. Any description can depict only a limited aspect of 
the total reality, and to do this the description must make use of familiar concepts 
and images. Thus to some extent any description of the universe must be indirect 
and metaphorical. 
Whenever we read a statement and arrive at some understanding of it, we are 
necessarily interpreting it in the context of many underlying assumptions, some of

=== PAGE 51 ===

51
which we may hold unconsciously. Thus, as we have already pointed out, a literal 
reading of a text is also an interpretation, and it may be an incorrect one. What 
then is the right way to understand a text? We suggest that this can be properly 
done only if one makes a sincere effort to enter into the spirit of the text as a whole 
and tries to realize the meaning intended by its author. Since the author is 
invariably writing in the context of some tradition, this also means immersing 
oneself in that tradition in an effort to assimilate its world view. 
Thus far we have been presenting a picture of Vedic cosmology based on the 
observation that the Vedic literature is using familiar three-dimensional imagery to 
describe an inherently non–three-dimensional material and spiritual reality. 
According to this interpretation, the simple image of the disc of Bhü-maëòala has 
been used to describe a higher-dimensional situation in which the earth can be 
seen in a variety of ways at different levels of sensory perception. The simple image 
of travel in outer space has likewise been used to describe modes of yogic travel 
that defy understanding in three-dimensional terms. 
If we proceed with this interpretation of the Vedic world view, then one way to 
understand the idea of the dvépas as islands in space is as follows: As the earth, 
which is part of Bhü-maëòala, appears to be a small globe to our ordinary senses, 
so various parts of Bhü-maëòala (and other regions of the universe) may also be 
experienced as globes floating in space by beings with certain levels of sensory 
development. On the basis of logic alone, we would offer this idea only as a 
tentative conjecture. However, since Çréla Prabhupäda is writing in accordance 
with the paramparä tradition, we suggest that this idea of Bhü-maëòala as a system 
of floating planetary globes must be in accord with the Vedic literature as a whole. 
It simply represents the appearance of Bhü-maëòala at one sensory level. 
3.D. The Orbit of the Sun 
“The universe is like a tree with the roots being upwards. The polestar which is 
situated within the Asking question star constellation is the root. The universe is 
pivoting around the pole star. That is one movement. The second movement is that 
the sun is revolving around the universe, as if it were going around the tree” (letter 
from Çréla Prabhupäda to Svarüpa Dämodara däsa, November 21, 1975). 
In this section we will discuss what the Bhägavatam has to say about the movement 
of the sun, and then we will use this information to develop the two hypotheses 
about the projection of Bhü-maëòala on the sky that we mentioned in Section 
3.b.2. As Çréla Prabhupäda indicates in the above quote, the sun moves with 
respect to the reference frame of this earth in two different ways. The most 
noticeable motion is the daily rotation of the sun from east to west around the 
earth, which produces the phenomena of day and night. The stars and planets also 
participate in this motion, and they all appear to revolve once per day around a 
fixed axis passing through the polestar. 
The second motion is the slow movement of the sun from west to east with respect 
to the stars. This movement takes place along the celestial great circle known as 
the ecliptic. To visualize this, consider that stars are present during the day, but we 
cannot see them due to the brilliant sunlight. If we could see them, we would see 
that on a particular day the sun is surrounded by certain stars. A day later, the sun 
will have shifted eastward relative to these stars by about one degree. Day by day 
the sun continues to shift until it completes one revolution around the ecliptic in

=== PAGE 52 ===

52
one year. In the course of this revolution it passes by the various star constellations 
of the zodiac, which are laid out along the ecliptic (see Figs. 10 and 15). 
The ecliptic is tilted at a 23.5 degrees angle to the celestial equator, which is 
perpendicular to the polar axis. Thus, as the sun moves along the ecliptic, it moves 
toward the celestial north pole (the polestar) for half the year, and it moves toward 
the celestial south pole for the other half. When it is north of the celestial equator, 
days are longer than nights in the Northern Hemisphere, and the opposite is true 
in the Southern Hemisphere. This situation is reversed when the sun is south of 
the celestial equator. 
 
3.d.1. The Ecliptic as the Projection of 
Bhü-maëòala on the Celestial Sphere 
Our first hypothesis is that the projection of Bhü-maëòala on the celestial sphere 
coincides closely with the ecliptic. The basic argument for this goes as follows: In 
the Fifth Canto we read that the sun orbits Mount Meru, moving above a ring-
shaped mountain in Bhü-maëòala called Mänasottara. This ring is centered on 
Mount Meru, and it has a circumference of 95,100,000 yojanas (SB 5.21.7). The 
radius of this ring is about 15,750,000 yojanas, and the height of the sun above 
Bhü-maëòala is 100,000 yojanas (SB 5.23.9p). (Here the Bhägavatam is using 3 as 
an approximation for pi.) This means that the distance from the sun to an observer 
on the earth is much greater (by a factor of 157.5) than the distance from the sun 
to the plane of Bhü-maëòala. 
Therefore, the part of Bhü-maëòala that lies directly underneath the sun at any 
given time must seem to be very close to the sun from the point of view of an 
observer on the earth. In other words, that part of Bhü-maëòala must project to a 
point on the celestial sphere that is very close to the location of the sun. We know 
where the sun is on the celestial sphere at any given time. So, if we can find out 
where the sun is in Bhü-maëòala at successive moments in time, then we can see 
where Bhü-maëòala falls on the celestial sphere. 
The following statements from the Bhägavatam indicate that the sun makes one 
circuit around Mänasottara Mountain per year, and that the sun is due north of 
Mount Meru when it moves farthest to the north on the celestial sphere. (This is 
called the summer solstice, and it occurs in June.) 
[1] Encircling Sumeru Hill on his chariot, the sun-god illuminates all the 
surrounding planetary systems. However, when the sun is on the northern side of 
the hill, the south receives less light, and when the sun is in the south, the north 
receives less [SB 5.1.30]. [Çréla Prabhupäda comments,] According to Jyotir Veda, 
the science of astronomy in the Vedic literature, the sun moves for six months on 
the northern side of Sumeru Hill and for six months on the southern side. We have 
practical experience on this planet that when there is summer in the north there is 
winter in the south and vice versa. 
[2] In the chariot of the sun-god, the sun travels on the top of the [Mänasottara] 
mountain in an orbit called Saàvatsara, encircling Mount Meru. The sun’s path on 
the northern side is called Uttaräyaëa, and its path on the southern side is called 
Dakñiëäyana. One side represents a day for the demigods, and the other represents 
their night [SB 5.20.30]. 
[3] Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King, as stated before, the learned say 
that the sun travels over all sides of Mänasottara Mountain in a circle whose length

=== PAGE 53 ===

53
is 95,100,000 yojanas [760,800,000 miles]. On Mänasottara Mountain, due east of 
Mount Sumeru, is a place known as Devadhäné, possessed by King Indra. Similarly, 
in the south is a place known as Saàyamané, possessed by Yamaräja, in the west is 
a place known as Nimlocané, possessed by Varuëa, and in the north is a place 
named Vibhävaré, possessed by the moon-god. Sunrise, midday, sunset, and 
midnight occur in all those places according to specific times, thus engaging all 
living entities in their various occupational duties and also making them cease 
such duties [SB 5.21.7]. 
Passages (1) and (2) indicate that the sun takes one year to make a complete 
circuit around Mänasottara Mountain. From passage (3) we see that on the plane 
of Bhü-maëòala, the directions north, south, east, and west are laid out in the same 
way as on a flat Mercator projection of the earth’s surface. In Jambüdvépa, Bhärata-
varña is to the south of Mount Meru, and Uttarakuru-varña is to the north. 
Saàyamané is much further to the south, on the ring-shaped dvépa of 
Puñkaradvépa, and Vibhävaré is located on this dvépa equally far to the north of 
Mount Meru. It would seem that the sun spends half the year in the part of its orbit 
lying to the north of Mount Meru, and half the year in the part lying to the south. 
This yearly circuit of the sun through Bhü-maëòala provides a simple explanation 
for the many statements in the  Bhägavatam indicating that the demigods’ day (24 
hours) lasts for one earthly year. 
The motion of the sun through Bhü-maëòala is described as follows in the 
Bhägavatam: 
The chariot of the sun-god has only one wheel, which is known as Saàvatsara. The 
twelve months are calculated to be its twelve spokes, the six seasons are the 
sections of its rim, and the three cätur-mäsya periods are its three-sectioned hub. 
One side of the axle carrying the wheel rests upon the summit of Mount Sumeru, 
and the other rests upon Mänasottara Mountain. Affixed to the outer end of the 
axle, the wheel continuously rotates on Mänasottara Mountain like the wheel of an 
oil-pressing machine [SB 5.21.13]. 
According to this description, we can imagine the sun moving in a circle around 
Bhü-maëòala in much the same way as a horse-drawn chariot moves around a race 
track. In discussing this verse, we should comment on the use of metaphor in the 
Bhägavatam. One example of metaphorical description is the story of the city of 
nine gates entered by King Puraïjana. There the different gates of the city 
symbolize different bodily senses. In the verse we have just quoted, the different 
parts of the wheel of the sun-god’s chariot similarly symbolize different divisions of 
the year. Thus one might take this verse as a metaphorical description of the 
movement of the sun during the year. As a general rule, since the purpose of 
metaphor is to increase understanding and not to obscure it, such indirect 
interpretation is justified only if the intended metaphorical meaning is 
transparently clear. One should not devise a metaphorical interpretation simply to 
replace a clear direct meaning. 
Whether the Saàvatsara wheel should be taken metaphorically or not, the verse 
clearly states that the sun is moving only a short distance above Bhü-maëòala. The 
comparison with an oil-pressing machine indicates that the chariot of the sun is 
always directly in contact with the upper surface of the ring-shaped Mänasottara 
Mountain. The identification of the wheel with the year is also consistent with the 
view that the sun takes one year to make a complete circuit of Bhü-maëòala.

=== PAGE 54 ===

54
When the path of the sun is projected onto the sky from our vantage point, it lies 
in the zodiac. According to SB 5.22.5, “Passing through twelve months on the 
wheel of time, the sun comes in touch with twelve different signs of the zodiac and 
assumes twelve different names according to those signs. The aggregate of those 
twelve months is called a saàvatsara, or an entire year.” If the circuit of the sun 
through Bhü-maëòala (called “Saàvatsara” in (2) above) takes one year, then the 
successive parts of Bhü-maëòala visited by the sun must correspond to the 
successive parts of the zodiac lying along the ecliptic. From this we conclude that 
when Bhü-maëòala is projected in the sky, it must lie on the ecliptic, with the 
northernmost part of Mänasottara Mountain corresponding to the summer solstice. 
This means that Bhü-maëòala remains stationary with respect to the stars, with the 
signs Gemini and Cancer (Mithuna and Karkaöa) in the direction of Vibhävaré to 
the north of Mount Meru, and the signs Capricorn and Sagittarius (Makara and 
Dhanur) in the direction of Saàyamané to the south of Mount Meru (see SB 
5.21cs). Since the stars rotate once per day around the polar axis, it must be that 
Bhü-maëòala also rotates once per day around this axis. This in turn implies that 
there is a relative rotation between Bhü-maëòala and the earth of our experience. It 
is not correct to assume naively that this earth and the rest of Bhü-maëòala form a 
single rigid plate. 
Now, this conclusion might be regarded as a drawback to the hypothesis that Bhü-
maëòala corresponds to the ecliptic. It could be argued that the “earth,” or Bhü, is 
motionless according to the Vedic literature. If Bhü-maëòala rotates daily with the 
stars and planets, then its system of directions—north, south, east, and west—also 
rotates and therefore does not correspond to our earthly system of directions. It 
could also be argued that in the statement that the sun spends half the year to the 
north of Mount Meru, “north” should be interpreted as meaning the north of the 
celestial sphere, and “Mount Meru” should be taken as the equator of this sphere. 
In response to these arguments, one can reply that if Bhü-maëòala is indeed a 
system of spherical planets floating in space, then why shouldn’t it rotate daily 
around the celestial pole along with the other stars and planets? We can see how 
the yearly circling of the sun through this system would produce a day of one year 
for the higher beings on each of these planets, if they do not rotate about their own 
axes. In any event, whether Bhü-maëòala rotates or not, its system of directions 
cannot correspond to the earthly system: The earthly north, south, east, and west 
point in different directions at different points on the spherical earth, while a set of 
directions on a plane have the same orientation at every point. (For example, at the 
North Pole every direction is south, but at Mount Meru the four directions are 
clearly defined.) 
3.d.2. The Celestial Equator as the Projection of 
Bhu-maëòala on the Celestial Sphere 
These objections to our first hypothesis suggest a second hypothesis about the 
projection of Bhü-maëòala. This is that the projection of Bhü-maëòala on the sky 
coincides with the celestial equator. This implies that the plane of Bhü-maëòala is 
parallel to the earth’s surface at the poles. At the North Pole, the sun is visible in 
the sky for half the year. It rises above the horizon at the time of the vernal 
equinox and spirals slowly up into the sky, making one turn per day. At the time of 
the summer solstice it reaches a high point of 23.5 degrees above the horizon, and 
then slowly spirals down, reaching the horizon again at the autumnal equinox.

=== PAGE 55 ===

55
According to this hypothesis, this is how the behavior of the sun would appear to a 
hypothetical observer standing on one of the dvépas of Bhü-maëòala. 
To back up this hypothesis, we first note the following verses, which seem to 
contradict the idea that the sun makes one circuit through Bhü-maëòala per year: 
When the sun travels from Devadhäné, the residence of Indra, to Saàyamané, the 
residence of Yamaräja, it travels 23,775,000 yojanas [190,200,000 miles] in fifteen 
ghaöikäs [six hours]. 
From the residence of Yamaräja the sun travels to Nimlocané, the residence of 
Varuëa, from there to Vibhävaré, the residence of the moon-god, and from there 
again to the residence of Indra. In a similar way, the moon, along with the other 
stars and planets, becomes visible in the celestial sphere and then sets and again 
becomes invisible. 
Thus the chariot of the sun-god, which is trayémaya, or worshiped by the words 
oà bhür bhuvaù svaù, travels through the four residences mentioned above at a 
speed of 3,400,800 yojanas [27,206,400 miles] in a muhürta” [SB 5.21.10–12]. 
Here we should note some technical details. First, 15 ghaöikäs equals one fourth of 
a day, and 23,775,000 yojanas is indeed one fourth of the 95,100,000-yojana 
circumference of Mount Mänasottara. The figure of 3,400,800 yojanas per muhürta 
is more difficult to interpret. Normally, there are 30 muhürtas in a day. However, 
SB 3.11.8 implies that standards of 24 or 28 muhürtas per day were also used. If we 
use 28, we see that 28 times 3,400,000 is 95,200,000. Also, in SB 5.21.19 the sun is 
said to move 2,000.5 yojanas per moment, or kñaëa. This is consistent with 
3,400,800 yojanas per muhürta if we use 1,700 moments per 20 muhürta. (SB 
3.11.7–8 indicates 2,250 kñaëas per muhürta.) 
All of these verses say that the sun makes one circuit through Bhü-maëòala in a 
day. If we take this to be the case, then on each day there will be a time when the 
sun is located above Vibhävaré, the residence of the moon-god on Mount 
Mänasottara. At this time on successive days, the sun will occupy a succession of 
different positions along the ecliptic. The ecliptic itself makes one rotation per 
sidereal day around the polar axis, and in one solar day it makes slightly more than 
one rotation. (A sidereal day is measured from star-rise to star-rise, and a solar day 
is measured from sunrise to sunrise.) If we argue, as before, that Vibhävaré must be 
close to the sun on the celestial sphere when the sun passes over it, then it follows 
that the projection of Vibhävaré on the celestial sphere must make one orbit per 
year through the ecliptic. 
Combining this motion with the motion of the ecliptic on successive days, and 
assuming that the sun rotates around Mänasottara Mountain once per solar day, we 
find that the position of Vibhävaré on successive days moves slowly up and down 
between the uppermost and lowermost limits of the ecliptic. By applying this 
reasoning to a number of other locations in Bhü-maëòala, we arrive at the 
following picture: Bhü-maëòala itself moves up and down parallel to the celestial 
equator in a cyclic motion taking one year to complete. 
This is a very strange motion, and it contradicts the assumption that the earth is 
located in the plane of Bhü-maëòala. Clearly something has to give here. One 
possibility is to relax the requirement that the sun is always close to Bhü-maëòala 
(relative to its distance from us). This allows us to place Bhü-maëòala in the plane 
of the celestial equator. We now suppose that the sun moves up and down with

=== PAGE 56 ===

56
respect to Bhü-maëòala in a yearly cycle while also circling Bhü-maëòala once per 
day. This gives the pattern of solar motion that is seen at the North Pole. 
This is our second hypothesis. Although it conforms with SB 5.21.10–12, it does 
have the drawback that it allows the sun to move quite far from the plane of Bhü-
maëòala. According to the Bhägavatam, the distance from Jambüdvépa to 
Mänasottara Mountain is 126 million miles. Thus at the summer solstice, when the 
sun is 23.5Ö above the celestial equator, our second hypothesis implies that the 
sun is about 54,786,000 miles above Bhü-maëòala. At the vernal and autumnal 
equinoxes it is in the plane of Bhü-maëòala, and at the winter solstice it is 
54,786,000 miles below this plane. This does not agree very well with the 
descriptions of the sun’s motion around Mount Meru on a chariot comparable to 
an oil-pressing machine. It also does not agree with the story of Mahäräja 
Priyavrata, who followed the sun in a chariot that moved over the plane of Bhü-
maëòala and created the seven oceans by making ruts with its wheels. 
The point can also be made that the daily clockwise (or east-to-west) motion of the 
sun is due to the dakñiëävarta wind, according to SB 5.21.8–9. In general, the 
movement of the planets around the polar axis is attributed to a wind (SB 5.23.3). 
If the daily motion of the sun is also due to this wind, then one can suggest that 
the sun’s yearly counter-clockwise motion could be due to the movement of the 
sun’s chariot through Bhü-maëòala. This interpretation supports our first 
hypothesis, and it is confirmed by the following remark by Çrédhara Svämé in his 
commentary on SB 5.21.8–9: 
Although leftward movement, facing the constellations, is their own motion 
[svagatya], the luminaries [sun, moon, etc.] move around Meru to the right daily, 
being blown by the pravaha wind, due to the power of the [käla] cakra. 
Here the svagatya, or “own motion,” of the sun must be its yearly motion around 
the ecliptic, since this movement is to the left (if one faces the constellations of the 
zodiac) and the daily motion due to the wind is to the right. Thus the sun’s chariot 
should be moving counter-clockwise around Mount Meru. (This assumes that the 
observer is, say, in northern India, where the constellations of the zodiac are to the 
south. In the southern hemisphere, south of the tropic of Capricorn, everything 
would be reversed, but the same conclusion about the movement of the sun would 
hold.) 
We suggest that further research will be necessary for us to give a final conclusion 
regarding the celestial orientation of Bhü-maëòala in Vedic cosmology. Here we 
tentatively propose that the Fifth Canto of the Bhägavatam is presenting a 
combined description of the two types of solar motion. Bhü-maëòala is being used 
as the underlying framework in each description, and thus a contradictory picture 
of its position seems to emerge. We note that a combined description of the two 
forms of solar motion is explicitly made in SB 5.21.8–9 and SB 5.22.1–2, and the 
idea of relative motion is introduced. These verses speak of the sun-god circling 
Mount Meru with the mountain on his left and on his right. Unfortunately, 
however, they do not specify which motion is actually taking place, relative to the 
plane of Bhü-maëòala. 
In spite of these ambiguities, it does appear that the intent of the Bhägavatam is to 
present Bhü-maëòala as an actually-existing, disc-shaped domain. We have 
suggested that its location in space must be related to the geocentric orbit of the 
sun. In Section 4.b we will also argue that its location can be related to the orbits of

=== PAGE 57 ===

57
the moon and other planets. This argument will provide further evidence in 
support of the hypothesis connecting Bhü-maëòala with the ecliptic. 
We would finally like to draw attention to the statement in SB 5.21.11 that “in a 
similar way, the moon, along with the other stars and planets, becomes visible in 
the celestial sphere and then sets and again becomes invisible.” This statement 
seems to be another indirect reference to the spherical shape of the earth planet: 
Since the luminaries are rotating once per day around this sphere, they seem to rise 
and set daily at any given place (between the Arctic and Antarctic circles). 
4 THE VERTICAL DIMENSION 
 
Thus far we have discussed the plane of Bhü-maëòala, and we have largely 
confined our attention to the two-dimensional region of space that this plane 
defines. In addition to this plane, which we can think of as horizontal, Vedic 
cosmology also has a vertical dimension. We naturally tend to define the direction 
“up” as meaning “away from the earth’s center,” and when we speak of the 
distance of an object from the earth, we mean its distance from this center. In 
Vedic cosmology, however, “up” means “toward celestial north, in a direction 
perpendicular to the plane of Bhü-maëòala,” and “down” means the opposite 
direction. The distance of an object from the earth in Vedic cosmology is the 
length of a perpendicular line from the object to this plane. As we shall see, this 
concept of distance is important for our understanding of the relative distances of 
the sun and the moon in Vedic cosmology. 
4.A. The Terminology of 
Three and Fourteen Worlds 
Along this vertical direction, the universe is divided into three and also fourteen 
subdivisions. The three subdivisions are called the three worlds: lower, middle, 
and upper. These worlds are often referred to by the names Bhüù, Bhuvaù, and 
Svaù, as well as the names Pätäla, Martya, and Svarga (SB 3.11.28p). However, 
these two sets of names are not synonymous. Svaù and Svarga both denote the 
realm of the demigods, which lies above Bhü-maëòala. Bhüù or Bhürloka refers to 
the earthly planetary system, including Bhü-maëòala and this earth (SB 4.20.35p), 
and Bhuvaù or Bhuvarloka refers to a planetary system lying between Bhüù and 
Svar (SB 2.5.40p). Apparently, human beings live in both the Bhüù and Bhuvaù 
systems (SB 1.9.45p). 
Going from lowest to highest, the fourteen subdivisions are Pätäla, Rasätala, 
Mahätala, Talätala, Sutala, Vitala, Atala, Bhürloka, Bhuvarloka, Svargaloka, 
Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka, and Satyaloka. The word Pätäla is sometimes used 
to refer collectively to the seven lower planetary systems from Pätäla up to Atala. 
These are all described as discs lying below Bhü-maëòala and parallel to it. The 
words Martya and Martyaloka also designate the Bhürloka system and refer to the 
fact that this system is a place of suffering and death. The six planetary systems 
from Bhuvarloka to Satyaloka are known as the higher planets. Çréla Prabhupäda 
also uses the terminology “upward” planetary systems for Bhürloka through 
Satyaloka, and “downward” planetary systems for Atala through Pätäla (SB 
2.1.26p). 
We have already noted that the three worlds—Pätäla, Martya, and Svarga—are also 
sometimes known as three kinds of Svargas, or heavenly regions (SB 5.17.11p). 
These three Svargas are explicitly defined as follows in the Çré Båhad-

=== PAGE 58 ===

58
bhägavatämåtam of Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé: “(1) Vila-svarga: Atal, Bital, Sutal, 
Talätal, Mahätal, Rasätal, and Pätal.… (2) Bhauma-svarga: Jambu, Plaksha, 
Shalmali, Kusha, Crouncha, Shaka, and Puskara.… (3) Divya-svarga: the world of 
the devatäs” (BB, p. 107). Here the three subdivisions Bila-svarga, Bhauma-svarga, 
and Divya-svarga correspond exactly to Pätälaloka, Martyaloka, and Svargaloka. 
4.B. The Seven Planets 
There are seven traditional planets in the sky that are readily visible to human 
beings. These are the sun, the moon, Venus, Mercury, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. 
Of these, Çréla Prabhupäda has specifically said that the moon belongs to 
Svargaloka, or “the third status of the upper planetary system,” and the same is 
presumably true of the others (SB 2.5.40p). The moon and the sun are given a 
distinctive position among the planets of Svargaloka in SB 3.11.29–30, where it is 
said that after the three worlds are annihilated at the end of Brahmä’s day, the sun 
and moon continue to exist. Çréla Prabhupäda has pointed out that although the 
different planetary systems are described as lying in successive layers, like 
phonograph records in a stack, actually the planets of different types are mixed 
together: 
Regarding your question of the planetary systems, the planets are arranged in each 
universe in layers like the petals of a lotus. But in each layer there is mixed both 
heavenly, hellish, and middle planets. On the outside layer there are these three 
kinds of planets, on the middle layer there are the three kinds of planets, and on 
the innermost layer there are found these three kinds of planets. Above these 
layers, in the center, is the Brahmaloka, where Lord Brahmä, the creator, is 
residing. So the earth planet and the moon planet are both in the same layer, but 
the earth is a middle planet and the moon is a heavenly planet” [letter to Rüpänuga 
däsa, December 20, 1968]. 
This letter indicates that the moon is a heavenly planet, but suggests that it can 
occupy the same level in the vertical direction as the earth. 
In the Bhägavatam there are many stories that take place in Svargaloka, but these 
are rarely (if ever) set specifically on one of the seven planets. However, these 
planets played an important role in Vedic society because their visible motions 
were understood to be indicators of the course of events on the earth, both on the 
level of individuals and on the level of society as a whole. This, of course, is the 
subject matter of astrology, and we have already pointed out (in Chapter 1) that 
since astrology was regarded as very important in Vedic society, astronomy, and 
specifically the study of the motions of the seven planets, was also regarded as very 
important. 
Although the Bhägavatam gives a fairly detailed account of the movements of the 
sun, it gives only a relatively brief description of the movements of the other 
planets. The only information given about the positions of the planets is a list of 
their heights above Bhü-maëòala. Their horizontal positions over the plane of Bhü-
maëòala are not mentioned. This list is given in Table 8. 
The two most striking features of this list of planetary distances are (1) that the 
moon is listed as being higher than the sun, and (2) that the distances for the 
planets other than the moon are all much smaller than the values given to them by 
modern astronomers (see Table 1). To many people, this would seem to indicate 
that the Bhägavatam is giving an extremely unrealistic account of the positions of 
the planets. However, this is not necessarily so.

=== PAGE 59 ===

59
The key point to consider here is that these distances are all heights of the planets 
above the plane of Bhü-maëòala. They are not distances along the line of sight 
from the earth to the planets. Let us therefore suppose that the distances of the 
planets from this earth along the plane of Bhü-maëòala might be much larger than 
the figures in Table 8. 
TABLE 8 
The Heights of the Planets Above Bhü-maëòala 
 
Planet                     Height above 
                              Bhü-maëòala 
 
Sun 
                     800,000  
Moon                     1,600,000 
 
Venus                     4,800,000 
 
Mercury 
        6,400,000 
 
Mars                     8,000,000 
 
Jupiter                     9,600,000 
 
Saturn                    11,200,000 
 
These figures, which are based on 8 miles per yojana, were obtained by using the 
planet-to-planet intervals from SB 5.22, plus the earth-to-sun distance given in SB 
5.23.9p. The planetary heights listed in the verse translations in Chapter 22 are 
800,000 miles higher than the figures in this table. 
This is true in the case of the sun, since the distance from Jambüdvépa to Mount 
Mänasottara is about 126,000,000 miles, using 8 miles per yojana. Using our 
smaller figure from Sürya-siddhänta of 5 miles per yojana, this distance comes to 
78,750,000 miles. Thus the modern figure of 93,000,000 miles for the distance 
from the earth globe to the sun is bracketed by the Bhägavatam figures obtained 
using our two standard values for the length of a yojana. 
If the planets do lie at great distances from us along the plane of Bhü-maëòala, 
then from our point of view the planets must always lie very close to the great 
circle on the celestial sphere corresponding to this plane. (We argued this for the 
sun in Section 3.d.) Now, is it true that the planets all tend to lie very close to 
some particular celestial great circle? The answer is yes. The orbits of all of the 
planets are observed to lie very close to the great circle, called the ecliptic, which is 
the geocentric orbit of the sun. 
TABLE 9 
The Maximum distances the Planets Move 
from the Plane of the Ecliptic 
 
Planet       Orbital             Orbital            Maximum distance 
                  Radius 
     Inclination         from the Ecliptic 
 
Sun 
     1.00 AU 
        0.000 
                     0. 
 
Moon    238,000 miles     5.150 
               21,364. 
 
Venus       .72 AU 
       3.400 
            3,971,000. 
 
Mercury    .39 AU 
       7.167 
            4,525,000. 
 
Mars      1.52 AU 
       1.850 
            4,564,000. 
 
Jupiter      5.20 AU 
        1.317 
           11,115,000. 
 
Saturn      9.55 AU 
        2.480 
           38,431,000.

=== PAGE 60 ===

60
Here modern Western data (EA) is used to compute the maximum distance in 
miles that each planet travels form the plane of the ecliptic in the course of its 
orbit. This is the average radius of the orbit times the sine of the inclination of the 
orbit to the ecliptic. Geocentric orbits were used for the sun and moon, and 
heliocentric orbits were used for the other planets. (1 AU = 93,000,000 miles.) 
In Table 9 there is a list of the maximum distances of the planets from the ecliptic, 
according to modern astronomical data. These distances agree only roughly with 
the heights in Table 8, but they give the same order for the relative distance of the 
planets, and some are of the same order of magnitude. (According to modern 
astronomy, Mercury should lie between Venus and Mars in this table because of 
the large inclination of its heliocentric orbit.) 
One possible interpretation of Tables 8 and 9 is as follows: In accordance with the 
first hypothesis discussed in Section 3.d, the projection of the plane of Bhü-
maëòala on the celestial sphere is the ecliptic. The Bhägavatam is giving a 
qualitative description of how far the planets move from the ecliptic in the course 
of their orbits. In this description, the moon is higher than the sun because the sun 
always remains on the ecliptic whereas the moon moves away from it. Likewise, 
Venus is higher than the moon because it moves still further from the ecliptic. 
One drawback of this interpretation is that the planets do not stay on one side of 
the ecliptic. In the course of their orbits they move equal distances on either side, 
following characteristic looping paths. This may seem to be in strong disagreement 
with the statements of the Bhägavatam, which simply specify fixed heights for the 
planets. However, we have seen that Çréla Prabhupäda has spoken of the disc of 
Bhü-maëòala as a system of globes floating in space, and we have also argued that 
this earth is a globe and was regarded as such in Vedic times. Furthermore, Çréla 
Prabhupäda has said that planets belonging to different layers in the vertical 
direction can mix together in one layer. This may also seem contrary to the 
Bhägavatam. 
We propose that such apparent contradictions can be reconciled by the idea that 
the Bhägavatam is using simple, three-dimensional imagery to describe a higher-
dimensional situation that is directly experienced and understood by demigods, 
åñis, and great yogés. In this case, we suggest that the image of perpendicular height 
above a plane provides a simple way to describe how the demigods view the actual, 
higher-dimensional situation: The height of a planet is an important higher-
dimensional feature of that planet; this feature is reflected in the planet’s visible 
motions away from the plane of the ecliptic and is described in simple terms in the 
Fifth Canto as height above the plane of Bhü-maëòala. 
TABLE 10 
The Days of the Week 
 
Planet  
               Day of the Week  
 
 
          SANSKRIT 
ENGLISH 
LATIN 
Sun 
         Äditya-bara 
Sunday 
Solis dies 
 
Moon          Soma-bara 
Monday 
Lunae dies 
 
Venus         Maìgala-bara 
Tuesday 
Martis dies 
 
Mercury      Budha-bara 
Wednesday 
Mercurii dies  
Mars       Båhaspati-bara 
Thursday 
Jovis dies 
 
Jupiter        Çukra-bara 
Friday            Veneris dies

=== PAGE 61 ===

61
Saturn       Çanaiçcara-bara Saturday 
Saturni dies 
 
The days of the week in Europe and India are named after the seven traditional 
planets. 
A final point concerning the seven planets is that the days of the week are named 
after these planets in both Europe and India. In Table 10 the names for the days of 
the week in English, Latin, and Sanskrit are given. These sets of names all refer to 
the seven planets in the order Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and 
Saturn. Although this is not the order of the planets as given in Table 8, it does 
derive from Vedic astronomy. 
In the Sürya-siddhänta the planets are listed as follows in order of distance from 
the earth globe: Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. This list 
differs from the one in Table 8 since it refers to distance from the earth globe 
rather than distance from the plane of Bhü-maëòala. According to the Sürya-
siddhänta, the successive months of 30 days are ruled cyclically by the planets in 
this order. (According to modern astronomy, the planets are sometimes aligned in 
the Sürya-siddhänta order of distance from the earth, with the exception that 
Mercury and Venus must be switched.) 
The successive days are ruled by the seven planets in such a way that the ruler of 
the first day of a month is always the same as the ruler of that month. If one places 
successive 7-day weeks next to successive 30-day months, one sees that if the first 
day of month 1 lines up with the first day of week 1, then the first day of month 2 
lines up with the 3rd day of a week. Likewise, the first day of month 3 lines up 
with the 5th day of a week, and so on. This means that the days must be named 
after the planets according to the pattern shown in Table 11. 
TABLE 11 
The Order of the Planetary Names 
of the Days of the Week 
 
Order in Week 
N 
Remainder of               Order from Earth 
                                                  (30N)/7 
         in the Sürya-siddhänta 
 
 
Sun 
                        1 
        2                                   Moon  
Moon                         2 
        4                                    Mercury 
 
Mars                         3 
        6                                   Venus  
Mercury 
            4 
        1                                   Sun 
 
Jupiter                         5 
        3                                    Mars  
Venus                         6 
        5                                    Jupiter  
Saturn                          7 
        7                                    Saturn  
The rule given in the Sürya-siddhänta is that the names of the 30-day months must 
match the names of their first days. The months are named cyclically in the order 
shown on the right, and the days must be named as shown on the left for the 
proper matching to occur. 
According to the dictionary, the English names for the days originated when the 
Latin names were translated into various Germanic dialects in about the third 
century A.D. Modern Western scholars trace the Latin names back to the Greeks, 
and as we might expect, they maintain that the Greeks originated these names. 
They also assert that Indian mathematical astronomy and astrology originated with 
the Greeks, and that the Sanskrit names for the days were translated from Greek at

=== PAGE 62 ===

62
the time when this body of knowledge was imported into India. However, the 
history of this development is not known, and one can also argue that the system 
for assigning planetary names to divisions of the calendar is indigenous to India. 
After all, it is one thing for the Romans, who started their empire within the Greek 
sphere of influence, to have borrowed this system from the Greeks, and it is 
another thing for the long-established and highly conservative civilization of India 
to have done so. 
4.b.1. Planetary Motion in the Bhägavatam 
In this subsection we will discuss the rates of orbital motion of the seven planets, 
as given in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. In SB 5.21.3, 5.22.7, and 5.22.12 it is 
mentioned that the sun travels at three speeds: fast, slow, and moderate. These 
occur when the sun is in the south, in the north, and at the equator, respectively. 
These periods also correspond to the northern winter, when days are shorter than 
nights, the northern summer, when the opposite is true, and the time of the vernal 
and autumnal equinoxes. (Note that the word equator refers to the equinoxes, or 
times when day and night are equal.) 
Some have interpreted these three Bhägavatam verses to mean that days are shorter 
in the winter because in this season the sun moves across the sky faster during the 
day and slower during the night. However, the text of the Bhägavatam does not say 
this, and at least two other interpretations are possible. The first of these assumes 
that the verses refer to the sun’s daily motion. SB 5.23.3 compares the motion of 
the planets and stars around the polestar to yoked bulls  walking around a central 
post threshing rice. Just as the bulls must walk faster the further they are from the 
post, so one can say that the sun’s daily motion is faster the farther it is from the 
polestar. One can represent this mathematically by mapping the celestial sphere to 
a plane that is tangent to the north celestial pole. 
The second interpretation assumes that the verses refer to the sun’s yearly motion 
against the starry background. This assumption is supported by SB 5.22.12, which 
says that Venus shares the three speeds of the sun. Although this verse could refer 
to the daily motion of Venus, it is a fact that since Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, 
and Saturn are not generally visible during the day, one seldom (if ever) sees 
references to their daily motion. Also the verses following SB 5.22.12 all refer to 
the motions of these planets relative to the stars. 
According to modern astronomy, it is in fact true that the sun moves faster along 
the ecliptic during the northern winter than it does during the northern summer. 
The heliocentric theory explains this as being due to the fact that the earth reaches 
perihelion, or its point of closest approach to the sun, just a few days after the 
winter solstice. At this time it is moving at its fastest rate in its orbit, and it is 
moving at its slowest rate exactly half a year later at aphelion. The Sürya-siddhänta 
also gives calculations for the varying speed of the sun during the course of a year. 
SB 5.21.4 states that the length of the day changes at a rate of one ghaöikä per 30-
day month during the period between the solstices. (A ghaöikä is 24 minutes.) If 
we take this to mean one ghaöikä in both the morning and the evening, then this 
rule is identical to a rule found in the Vedäìga-jyotiça, a short astronomical text 
said to be “one of the six aìgas [‘limbs’] of the Vedas” (VJ). 
Some critics have scorned this rule as a crude approximation, and others have 
claimed that it works best at the latitude of Babylon, and is therefore Babylonian in 
origin. We programmed a computer to calculate the annual variation in the length

=== PAGE 63 ===

63
of the day at various latitudes, using modern astronomy. We found that at the 
latitude of Delhi the Bhägavatam rule works quite nicely, as long as one is about 20 
days away from the solstices. The rule’s average error in the length of the day, over 
a full year period, is about 6.6 minutes at Delhi. In contrast, the average error at 
Babylon is about 9.1 minutes, and the rule doesn’t work well during any time of 
the year. One can argue that the rule is a practical approximation intended for use 
in northern India. Certainly it is simpler to apply than the modern calculations. 
In SB 5.22.9 it is stated that the moon passes through each constellation in an 
entire day. These particular constellations are called nakñatras, or lunar mansions; 
they are 27 in number, and are used to divide the ecliptic into 27 equal parts. In 
Section 6.e we discuss them in greater detail. In this verse the implication is that 
the moon completes one sidereal orbit (an orbit against the background of stars) in 
27 days. This is an approximation. For comparison, the modern figure is 27.321, 
and the Sürya-siddhänta gives 27.322. 
This verse also states that the waxing and waning of the moon respectively creates 
day and night for the demigods, and night and day for the pétas, or forefathers. 
Since some demigods have a day of 360 earth days, this verse presumably refers 
specifically to the demigods living on the moon. The simplest interpretation is that 
these demigods live on one side of the moon (the side facing us) and the pétas live 
on the other side. However, SB 5.26.5 places Pitåloka in the region between the 
Garbhodaka Ocean and the lower planetary systems. It would seem that some 
connection must exist between Pitåloka and the moon, but more research will be 
needed to determine exactly what it is. 
SB 5.22.8 also gives the orbital period of the moon, but it is hard to interpret. Here 
we will give a tentative interpretation that may need to be corrected in the future. 
The verse states that (1) the distance covered by the sun in one year is covered by 
the moon in two fortnights; (2) the distance covered by the sun in one month is 
covered by the moon in 2.25 days; and (3) the distance covered by the sun in a 
fortnight is covered by the moon in one day. From SB 5.22.9 we know that 
distance (3) must be 1/27 of a circle, or 13-1/3 degrees. This makes sense, since 
distance (2) must be 30 degrees, or 2.25 times 13-1/3. degrees. This is because the 
sun travels 360 degrees in a year and 30 degrees in 1/12 of a year. 
However, for (1) to be true, a fortnight must be 13.5 days, even though this period 
is normally 15 days. (The reason for this is that to go from the 13-1/3 degrees 
covered in one day to the 360 degrees covered in two fortnights, we must multiply 
by 27, or 2 x 13.5.) This conclusion is backed up by the fact that the sun should 
certainly travel more than 13-1/3 degrees in 15 days. 
If we accept the 13.5-day fortnight and divide 13-1/3 by 13.5, we find that the sun 
travels .9876 degrees per day. For comparison, the modern figure is .9856 degrees 
per day. These rates of motion correspond to solar years of 364.5 days and the 
modern value of 365.257 days. The point we would like to make here is that the 
Bhägavatam, with its 360-day year, may seem naive, but there is actually 
considerable sophistication behind its calculations. They are simply expressed in a 
way that seems unusual from the Western point of view. 
SB 5.22.14 states that Mars crosses each sign of the zodiac in three fortnights if it 
“does not travel in a crooked way.” This rate of motion is 30 degrees in 45 days, or 
2/3 degrees per day. The crooked motion of Mars may be its retrograde motion, but 
it is hard to specify just when this begins and ends, since the path of Mars begins

=== PAGE 64 ===

64
to curve before its motion actually reverses. Table 12 lists the percentage of time 
that Mars spends traveling at different speeds, calculated according to modern 
astronomy. From this table we can see that SB 5.22.14 is making a reasonable 
statement that must have been based on considerable knowledge of the movements 
of Mars. 
TABLE 12 
The Various Speeds of Mars 
Degrees/Day         Percentage 
 
below .000 
        10.3% 
 
.000 to .200         4.7% 
 
.200 to .400         7.1% 
 
.400 to .500         5.9% 
 
.500 to .550         4.5% 
 
.550 to .600         6.5% 
 
.600 to .650       11.3% 
 
.650 to .700       23.6% 
 
.700 to .750       26.1% 
 
above .750 
         .0% 
 
This table lists the percentage of time that Mars spends traveling at various speeds, 
calculated according to modern astronomy. The columns on the left indicate a 
number of speed intervals for the motion of Mars. (A speed below zero 
corresponds to retrograde motion.) The column on the right gives the percentage 
of time that Mars spends in these speed intervals. Mars spends most of its time at 
speeds approximating .667, which is given in the Bhägavatam. 
SB 5.22.15 states that Jupiter travels through one sign of the zodiac in one 
Parivatsara. The names Saàvatsara, Parivatsara, Iòävatsara, Anuvatsara, and 
Vatsara all refer to a year of 360 days (SB 5.22.7). This verse therefore indicates 
that Jupiter takes 4,320 days to complete one orbital revolution. The modern figure 
is 4,332.58 days, and differs by about .3 percent. Likewise, SB 5.22.16 states that 
Saturn makes one orbital revolution in 30 Anuvatsaras, which means that Saturn 
takes 10,800 days to complete one revolution. Here the modern figure is 10,759.2 
days and differs by about .38 percent. It is rather remarkable that the Bhägavatam 
can express orbital periods with such accuracy using simple expressions such as 
“one sign per Parivatsara.” 
4.C. Higher-dimensional Travel 
in the Vertical Direction 
One aspect of our interpretation of the planetary distances in Table 8 is that the 
vertical dimension in Vedic cosmology is more than just a third coordinate axis, as 
understood in ordinary geometry. It also involves a higher-dimensional aspect that 
goes beyond the range of our senses. We can obtain one indication of this by 
considering the highest destination that one can reach within this universe by 
traveling in this vertical direction. This is the planetary system called Satyaloka, 
which is the abode of Brahmä, the secondary creator of the universe. 
According to the Bhägavatam, Satyaloka is located near the top of the universal 
globe, in the direction of the north celestial pole. Since the earth is located near the 
center of this globe, this means that Satyaloka is about 2 billion miles from the 
earth. A spaceship traveling at 500 miles per hour (a moderate speed for a jet 
plane) could cover 2 billion miles in 457 years, and thus it would seem that it

=== PAGE 65 ===

65
might be feasible for human beings to reach Satyaloka using mechanical 
technology. 
Yet in SB 5.1.21p we read the remarkable statement that Satyaloka “is situated 
many millions and billions of years away.” Similarly, SB 1.9.29p states that “even 
attempting to reach the highest planet will take millions of years at a speed of 
millions of miles per hour.” And SB 2.2.23p completely rules out the possibility of 
going beyond Svargaloka or Janaloka by “mechanical or materialistic activities, 
either gross or subtle.” 
SB 5.1.21 describes the abode of Brahmä as being “indescribable by the endeavor of 
mundane mind or words.” In the terminology adopted in this book, this means 
that to describe Satyaloka adequately, we would have to make use of higher-
dimensional concepts that cannot be grasped by our present minds and senses. At 
the very least, this implies that our ordinary concepts of space and time might 
break down when applied to this region of the universe. 
An interesting indication of the form this breakdown might take is given in the 
following story from the Bhägavatam: 
Taking his own daughter, Revaté, Kakudmé went to Lord Brahmä in Brahmaloka, 
which is transcendental to the three modes of material nature, and inquired about 
a husband for her. When Kakudmé arrived there, Lord Brahmä was engaged in 
hearing musical performances by the Gandharvas and had not a moment to talk 
with him. Therefore Kakudmé waited, and at the end of the musical performances 
… [he] submitted his long-standing desire. 
After hearing his words, Lord Brahmä, who is most powerful, laughed loudly and 
said to Kakudmé, “O King, all those whom you may have decided within the core 
of your heart to accept as your son-in-law have passed away in the course of time. 
Twenty-seven catur-yugas have already passed. Those upon whom you may have 
decided are now gone, and so are their sons, grandsons, and other descendants. 
You cannot even hear about their names” [SB 9.3.29–32]. 
Here we see that when one visits Satyaloka, one experiences a transformation of 
time reminiscent of the time dilation of Einstein’s theory of relativity. King 
Kakudmé and his daughter were evidently advanced yogés who were able to travel 
to Satyaloka by nonmechanical means. Although for them the trip took only a 
short time, when they returned to the earth they found that millions of years had 
passed. We may then ask, Did the distance that they traveled seem like two billion 
miles to them? If so, then it might also be that from our perspective the distance 
was billions and billions of miles. Although this is merely a conjecture, it does 
indicate some of the things that are possible in a universe that is ultimately 
inconceivable by our mundane minds. (Note, by the way, that Revaté is the name 
of the star Zeta Piscium, which is used as the zero point for celestial longitudes in 
the jyotiña çästras.) 
Between the earth and Satyaloka there is a standard path traversed after death by 
transcendentalists and highly elevated persons. This is called the uttaräyaëa path, 
and it is mentioned in the Bhagavad-gétä (8.24). A more detailed description of the 
various stages of this path is given in the Vedänta-sütra commentary of Baladeva 
Vidyäbhüñaëa: 
(1) Archis, the Deva of light, (2) Dinam, the Deva of day, (3) Çuklapaksam, the 
Deva of the Bright-fortnight, (4) Uttaräyanam, the Deva of the northern progress of 
the sun, (5) Samvatsaram, the Deva of the year, (6) Devalokam, the world of the

=== PAGE 66 ===

66
Devas (the same as Väyuloka, according to some), (7) Väyu, the world of Väyu, (8) 
Ädityam, the world of the sun, (9) Chandram, the world of the moon, (10) Vidyut, 
the world of lightning, (11) Varuëam, the world of water, (12) Indram, the world 
of Indra, (13) Prajäpati, the world of Prajäpati, or of the four-faced Brahmä [VSB, 
p. 729]. 
Baladeva Vidyäbhüñaëa comments that in this list, the various items refer not to 
landmarks on the path, but to various demigods who make arrangements for the 
passage of the soul (see BG 8.24p also). This indicates that higher-dimensional 
travel along the “vertical dimension” of the universe involves more than a simple 
ballistic trajectory of the kind followed by a rocket. It also involves the action of a 
hierarchy of beings, all of whom are inaccessible to our ordinary senses. The 
motion towards the north celestial pole is simply the three-dimensional aspect of 
this higher travel. 
The descent of the Ganges River from the upper regions of the universe to the 
earth provides another interesting indication of the nature of travel along the 
vertical dimension in Vedic cosmology. According to the Bhägavatam, the Ganges 
consists of water from the Käraëa Ocean that entered the upper portion of the 
universe through a hole kicked in the universal covering by Lord Vämanadeva (SB 
5.17.1). This water takes a thousand yugas to reach the planet Dhruvaloka, or the 
polestar, which is situated approximately 30 million miles above the sun. (Here the 
term yuga indicates a divya-yuga of 4,320,000 years.) Since the sun is situated 
vertically in the center of the universe (SB 5.20.43), this means that the Ganges 
covers a distance of some two billion miles in 4,320,000,000 years. Since this is a 
very slow rate of progress even for a very sluggish river, this may be another 
example of the transformation of time, and possibly of space, which occurs in the 
higher regions of the universe. 
From Dhruvaloka the Ganges reaches the planets of the seven sages, and from 
there it is carried to the moon “through the spaceways of the demigods” in billions 
of celestial airplanes. From the moon it falls down (nipatati) to the top of Mount 
Meru, where it divides into four branches. Finally, one of these branches becomes 
the Ganges of India (SB 5.17.3–9). 
Since the moon is continuously moving in its orbit, it is hard to see how the top of 
Mount Meru could always be directly underneath it in an ordinary geometric 
sense. It therefore seems that the descent of the Ganges from the moon to Mount 
Meru must involve physical principles that are presently unknown. Of course, as 
we have already pointed out, the final appearance of the Ganges in India also 
requires such principles, since we certainly do not see its descent from a higher 
region of the universe. 
Thus our conclusion is that if we take the description of the descent of the Ganges 
seriously, then we must be prepared to view it in the context of principles that go 
beyond the framework of our familiar physical theories. We suggest that although 
these principles are not explicitly explained in the Bhägavatam and other Vedic 
texts in Western terms, they are nonetheless employed in these works in a 
consistent way. One example of this is Çréla Prabhupäda’s statement in Light of the 
Bhägavata that “one has to cross Mänasa Lake and then Sumeru Mountain, and 
only then can one trace out the orbit of the moon” (LB, p. 48). This statement is 
consistent with one idea that emerges from the story of the Ganges: In some higher

=== PAGE 67 ===

67
dimensional sense, the route from the earth to the moon passes through the region 
of Mount Meru in Jambüdvépa. 
In SB 5.23.5 the celestial Ganges is identified with the Milky Way, and in SB 2.2.24 
it is said that the Milky Way is a pathway that mystics follow through the heavens 
on their way to Satyaloka. It is interesting to note that similar ideas have 
traditionally been held in cultures around the world. Thus, both the Polynesians 
and various American Indian tribes maintained that the Milky Way is a pathway to 
heaven followed by the souls of the departed, and they also held that those souls 
who were not perfectly pure would eventually have to return to the earth (HM, p. 
243). 
The ancient Egyptians apparently regarded the Nile as an earthly continuation of 
the Milky Way (HM, p. 260), an idea they may have imported from an original 
homeland in India. (Çréla Prabhupäda indicates in SB 2.7.22p that according to the 
Mahäbhärata, the kings of ancient Egypt were driven there from India by 
Paraçuräma.) 
The Chinese also had the idea that the Milky Way is a celestial river that descends 
to the earth. Their account is as follows: “The celestial river divides into two 
branches near the North Pole and goes from there to the South Pole. One of its 
arms passes by the lunar mansion Nan-teou (lambda Sagittarii), and the other by 
the lunar mansion Toung-tsing (Gemini). The river is the celestial water, flowing 
across the heavens and falling under the earth” (HM, p. 260). 
4.D. The Environs of the Earth 
According to the Bhägavatam, the seven lower planetary systems have the same 
width and breadth as Bhü-maëòala, and they lie beneath Bhü-maëòala in 
successive strata separated by intervals of 80,000 miles (SB 5.24.7). Since the 
diameter of Bhü-maëòala is four billion miles, it follows that the complete system 
consisting of Bhü-maëòala and the seven lower worlds can be visualized as a 
relatively thin disc, comparable to a stack of eight circular sheets of paper. As with 
Bhü-maëòala, this means that the major part of the seven lower worlds lies many 
millions of miles away from us in what we regard as outer space. Also, the 
geometric projection of these lower worlds on the celestial sphere is nearly the 
same as the projection of Bhü-maëòala. 
Traditionally, people in cultures throughout the world have spoken of 
subterranean realms, and the lower planetary systems described in Vedic literature 
also have a subterranean aspect. Thus the Bhägavatam points out that the rays of 
the sun cannot reach the bila-svarga (SB 5.24.11), and in the Mahäbhärata there 
are accounts of people traveling to these regions by entering tunnels leading down 
into the earth. Also, the astronomical siddhäntas place the lower worlds in the 
“concave strata of the earth.” 
The Bhägavatam’s description of the dimensions of the lower worlds indeed 
suggests that these worlds constitute a subterranean stratum of Bhü-maëòala as a 
whole. According to this idea, this lower region does lie below our feet, and due to 
the vast extent of Bhü-maëòala, it also lies in outer space. Both of these locations, 
however, are simply three-dimensional projections (or aspects) of the actual, 
higher-dimensional position of the lower planetary systems. We could not reach 
Nägaloka, for example, by tunneling into the earth using ordinary three-
dimensional methods. But we could do so if our tunneling was accompanied by 
movement along a higher dimension.

=== PAGE 68 ===

68
Some 240,000 miles below the lowest of the seven lower worlds, Garbhodakaçäyé 
Viñëu lies on Ananta-çeña on the surface of the Garbhodaka Ocean (SB 5.25.1). As 
we have already noted, even Lord Brahmä was unable to see Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu 
when he tried to trace out the origin of the lotus from which he himself had taken 
birth. It is therefore to be expected that this scene must lie beyond the range of 
ordinary human sense perception. 
However, since the Garbhodaka Ocean is almost directly beneath the plane of Bhü-
maëòala, one can imagine that all points on the celestial sphere south of the 
projection of Bhü-maëòala should correspond to this ocean. This amounts to a 
simple, three-dimensional visualization of an essentially higher-dimensional 
situation. Our thesis in this book is that in the Vedic civilization, the relationship 
between higher-dimensional realms and the visible firmament was visualized in 
this way. (In Section 3.b.3 we have noted the existence of ancient traditions that 
are consistent with this idea.) 
According to the Bhägavatam, as we move up from the earth’s surface, we 
ultimately reach a point where clouds and wind are no longer found. This is the 
beginning of antarikña, or outer space. At an altitude of 800 miles above the base of 
antarikña are the abodes of the Räkñasas, Yakñas, and Piçäcas, and at a still higher 
altitude are the realms of the Siddhas, Cäraëas, and Vidyädharas (SB 5.24.4–6). For 
comparison, the highest clouds are about 50 miles up according to modern 
observations, and the American and Russian manned orbital flights range in 
altitude from about 100 to 900 miles above the earth (MSF, pp. 534–36). The 
various types of beings mentioned in these verses are known in Vedic literature for 
their great mystic powers, and they clearly operate on a level that is inaccessible to 
ordinary human senses. The Räkñasas, of course, are particularly known for their 
inimical nature and their ability to create various kinds of illusions. 
4.E. Eclipses 
If we go 80,000 miles above the region of the Siddhas, Cäraëas, and Vidyädharas, 
we come to the level of the planet called Rähu. Some 80,000 miles above Rähu we 
reach the level of the sun, which is said to lie between Bhürloka and Bhuvarloka in 
the middle of antarikña (SB 5.20.43, 5.24.1). We note that these measurements 
account for only part of the distance from Bhü-maëòala to the sun, since this is 
given as 100,000 yojanas (or 800,000 miles) in SB 5.23.9p. 
In the Vedic literature it is often mentioned that Rähu causes solar and lunar 
eclipses by passing in front of the sun or moon. To many people, this seems to 
blatantly contradict the modern explanation of eclipses, which holds that a solar 
eclipse is caused by the passage of the moon in front of the sun and a lunar eclipse 
is caused by the moon’s passage through the earth’s shadow. However, the actual 
situation is somewhat more complicated than this simple analysis assumes. 
The reason for this is that the Sürya-siddhänta presents an explanation of eclipses 
that agrees with the modern explanation but also brings Rähu into the picture. 
This work explicitly assumes that eclipses are caused by the passage of the moon in 
front of the sun or into the earth’s shadow. It describes calculations based on this 
model that make it possible to predict the occurrence of both lunar and solar 
eclipses and compute the degree to which the disc of the sun or moon will be 
obscured. At the same time, rules are also given for calculating the position of 
Rähu and another, similar planet named Ketu. It turns out that either Rähu or Ketu 
will always be lined up in the direction of any solar or lunar eclipse.

=== PAGE 69 ===

69
In Chapter 1 we have already described how the astronomical siddhäntas define 
the orbit of Rähu, and a similar definition is given for Ketu. The positions assigned 
to Rähu and Ketu correspond to the ascending and descending nodes of the 
moon—the points where the orbit of the moon (projected onto the celestial 
sphere) intersects the ecliptic, or the orbit of the sun. These nodal points rotate 
around the ecliptic from east to west, with a period of about 18.6 years. One of 
them must always point in the direction of an eclipse, since the moon can pass in 
front of the sun or into the earth’s shadow only if the sun, moon, and earth lie on a 
straight line. Thus, by placing Rähu and Ketu at the nodal points of the moon, the 
Sürya-siddhänta conforms both with the modern theory of eclipses and the Vedic 
explanation involving Rähu and Ketu. 
One objection that may be raised to the explanation given in the Sürya-siddhänta is 
that it contradicts the Vedic statement that the moon is higher than the sun. 
However, we have seen that this statement refers to the height of the moon above 
the plane of Bhü-maëòala, and not the distance along the line of sight from the 
earth globe to the moon. 
Another objection one might raise is that the explanation in the Sürya-siddhänta 
seems to be a cheap compromise between the Vedic account of eclipses (which 
many will regard as mythological) and the modern account (which many will 
regard as an import into India from the Greeks). It is true that Rähu and Ketu seem 
to play a rather superfluous role in the eclipse calculations given in the Sürya-
siddhänta. However, there are reasons for supposing that these planets do not 
appear in these calculations as a mere decoration. 
The principal reason for this is that the positions of Rähu and Ketu play an 
important role in astrology. This means that astrologers need some system of 
calculation that will tell them where Rähu and Ketu are at any given time. We have 
argued in Chapter 1 that astrology has traditionally played an important role in 
Vedic culture. From this it follows that some methods for calculating the positions 
of Rähu and Ketu have traditionally been required in Vedic society. Since we have 
no evidence that any other method of calculating these positions has ever been 
used, this can be taken as an indirect indication that the method used in the Sürya-
siddhänta has co-existed with the Vedic çästras for a very long time. 
Of course, by this argument we cannot conclude definitely that this particular 
method of calculation has always been used. But we can at least be sure that the 
Vedic society, with its emphasis on astrology and the astronomical timing of 
religious ceremonies, has always needed more than a mere qualitative story to 
account for eclipses and other astronomical phenomena. 
In the West there is also a long tradition ascribing solar and lunar eclipses to the 
action of some celestial beings of a demonic nature. There these beings have also 
been associated with the nodes of the moon, and they are known as the head and 
tail of the dragon. The story of this eclipse-dragon may help give us some 
indication of how little we really know about history. Figure 16 is a medieval 
Islamic picture showing an angel severing the head of the eclipse-dragon. (This is 
reminiscent of the story of the decapitation of Rähu by Lord Viñëu.) Figure 17 is a 
strikingly similar picture showing St. George, the patron saint of England, slaying a 
dragon. Unless this is a complete coincidence, it would seem that the story of the 
eclipse-dragon was somehow woven into the iconography of early Christianity 
without any indication of its significance being preserved. (St. George is said to

=== PAGE 70 ===

70
have been born in Asia Minor in about A.D. 300, but there is apparently no 
information indicating how he came to be connected with a dragon (BD, p. 539).) 
Unfortunately, our knowledge of the ancient history of this story is practically 
nonexistent. 
 
 
4.F. The Precession of the Equinoxes 
“Beings still greater than these have passed away—vast oceans have dried, 
mountains have been thrown down, the polar star displaced, the cords that bind 
the planets rent asunder, the whole earth deluged with flood—in such a world 
what relish can there be in fleeting enjoyments?” (Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura in 
VNB, p. 18) 
The precession of the equinoxes is another astronomical phenomenon that seems 
to involve a contradiction between the Vedic description of the universe and the 
picture built up in recent times on the basis of observation. According to Vedic 
literature, the stars and planets execute a continuous daily rotation around a fixed 
axis that extends from Mount Meru through the polestar. This motion is generally 
described in such a way as to indicate that the polar axis of rotation is rigidly fixed. 
Thus we read that “all the planets and all the hundreds and thousands of stars 
revolve around the polestar, the planet of Mahäräja Dhruva, in their respective 
orbits, some higher and some lower. Fastened by the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead to the machine of material nature according to the results of their fruitive 
acts, they are driven around the polestar by the wind and will continue to be so 
until the end of creation” (SB 5.23.2–3). 
In contrast, it is taught in modern astronomy that the polar axis of rotation is not 
fixed. It is supposed to rotate slowly about the axis of the ecliptic at a fixed angle of 
about 23.5 degrees. (The axis of the ecliptic is the line perpendicular to the plane 
of the ecliptic.) One complete revolution is said to take place in about 25,770 
years, and thus the amount of rotation occurring in one year is about 50.29" of arc. 
This slow shifting of the polar axis has two important consequences. One is that 
the position of the equinoxes will rotate slowly around the ecliptic at 50.29" per 
year. The equinoxes are the locations of the sun in its orbit at the times of the year 
when the day and night are of equal length. Since they correspond to the points of 
intersection between the ecliptic and the celestial equator, they will rotate at the 
same rate as the polar axis. 
The other consequence is that the center of daily rotation of the heavens will move 
slowly in a large circle centered on the axis of the ecliptic. As time passes, the 
center of rotation will sometimes lie on a particular star, which will then be known 
as the polestar. At other times no prominent star will lie at this center. At present 
the polestar is Polaris, and it is said that in about 12,000 years it will be the star 
called Vega. 
Although this appears to contradict the Vedic view, it turns out, as usual, that 
things are not as simple as they might seem at first. In the Sürya-siddhänta there is 
a rule for calculating something that seems quite similar to the precession of the 
equinoxes. According to this rule, the position of the sun at the time of the 
equinox will slowly shift back and forth over a total angle of 54 degrees. The time 
for one complete back-and-forth movement (covering 54 degrees twice) is given as

=== PAGE 71 ===

71
7,200 years, and thus the movement occurs at a rate of 54" of arc per year (SS, pp. 
29–30). A rule of this kind is said to describe trepidation of the equinoxes. 
This rule seems rather artificial. It assumes that the motion makes an abrupt about 
face at the endpoints of the 54-degree interval, and thus one suspects that it may 
be intended simply as a rough approximation. However, it does predict the 
observed motion of the equinoxes over the period of two thousand years or so for 
which we have records of observations. And similar rules are given in the jyotiña 
çästras that smoothly round off the motion at the endpoints of the interval of 
motion (BJS). 
Another consideration here is that in SB 5.21.4–5 the times of the equinoxes and 
solstices are given relative to the zodiac. These timings are the same as in the 
Western zodiac. Thus the equinoxes occur in the beginning of the signs Meña and 
Tula, which correspond to the Western Aries and Libra. The Western zodiac 
moves with the precession of the equinoxes, and thus the equinoxes always occur 
when the sun enters Aries and Libra. However, the zodiac of the jyotiña çästras has 
a fixed starting point at the star Zeta Piscium, and thus the position of the 
equinoxes in this zodiac should shift gradually with the passage of time. 
According to modern calculations, the last time the equinoxes occurred at the 
beginning of Meña and Tula was about A.D. 650, and the time before that was 
some 25,800 years previously. However, according to the trepidation theory of the 
Sürya-siddhänta, they would also have occurred at the beginning of Meña and Tula 
at the beginning of Kali-yuga. 
In the Siddhänta-çiromaëi we find the idea that the equinoxes precess through a 
complete circle. There it is stated that “the motion of the solstitial points spoken of 
by Muïjala and others is the same as the motion of the equinox: according to these 
authors its revolutions are 199,669 in a kalpa” (SSB1, p. 157). This comes to about 
one complete revolution in 21,636 years. 
Since Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté studied both the Siddhänta-çiromaëi and the 
Sürya-siddhänta, and cited them in his commentary on the Caitanya-caritämåta, it 
would seem that the Vaiñëava tradition must include some conception of the 
precession of the equinoxes. Unfortunately, we have very little information on this 
topic, and thus further research will be needed to clarify the exact nature of this 
conception. 
As a final point, we should note that according to the modern understanding of the 
precession of the equinoxes, the present polestar, Polaris, is now about 1 degree 
from the north celestial pole and will pass within 28' of it around the year 2100. 
One thousand years ago, Polaris was about 6.5 degrees away from the pole, and a 
thousand years before that it was about 12 degrees away. Since 6.5 degrees is about 
13 times the width of the full moon, it is hard to see how Polaris could have been 
regarded as the polestar prior to one thousand years ago. 
Due to a lack of suitable bright stars, it would appear that there was no prominent 
polestar from a few centuries ago back to about 1200 B.C. At about this time the 
pole passed between Beta Ursae Minorus and Kappa Draconis, and one could have 
said, roughly speaking, that there were two polestars. To find a prominent, single 
polestar, however, one would have to go back to about 2600 B.C., when Alpha 
Draconis was situated at the pole. 
We therefore ask, How can this be reconciled with the fact that the Bhägavatam 
strongly states the existence of a single polestar? One would think there must have

=== PAGE 72 ===

72
been a prominent polestar when the Bhägavatam was written. Western scholars 
maintain that the Bhägavatam was written about 1,000 years ago, at a time when 
there had been no notable polestar for thousands of years. Could there be some 
mistake in the scholarly dating of the Bhägavatam or in the modern reconstruction 
of the past history of the polestar, or both? Further research may shed more light 
on this issue. However, Çréla Prabhupäda has said, “Whether the Vedic calculations 
or the modern ones are better may remain a mystery for others, but as far as we are 
concerned, we accept the Vedic calculations to be correct” (SB 5.22.8p). 
5 THE EMPIRICAL CASE 
FOR THE VEDIC WORLD SYSTEM 
 
In Chapters 2 through 4 we have outlined an understanding of Fifth Canto 
cosmology based on the idea that higher-dimensional worlds exist in parallel with 
the three-dimensional continuum of our ordinary experience. Roughly speaking, 
by the “dimensionality” of space we mean the degree of access to other places that 
is possible at any given place for a conscious observer. This degree of access 
depends on the sensory arrangement of the observer, and thus we conceive of 
space as being relative to the consciousness of living beings. 
Kåñëa has full access to all locations at once, and thus for Kåñëa, space has the 
highest possible dimensionality. It is therefore possible for Kåñëa to appear in any 
location at will without having to travel, as we see in the story of Kåñëa’s 
appearance in the womb of Uttarä to save Mahäräja Parékñit. Another way of 
expressing this feature of Kåñëa is to say that He is all-pervading. 
For embodied beings in the material world, different levels of spatial access are 
possible, depending on their karmic status and corresponding sensory 
constitution. According to the Vedic literature, there are 400,000 species in this 
universe having humanlike form, and many of these have levels of sensory power 
superior to that of ordinary human beings of our modern civilization. These 
include, for example, the Kiàpuruñas, who are endowed with “mystic powers by 
which one can disappear immediately from another’s vision and appear again in a 
different form” (SB 4.18.20). 
These humanlike species all have their countries and dwelling places, even though 
these may not be visible or accessible to us. Indeed, our thesis is that many regions 
of the earth, or Bhü-maëòala, are not accessible to ordinary human senses. These 
regions are actually part of our immediate environment, but we can reach them 
only through higher-dimensional travel. 
5.A. Unidentified Flying Objects 
In this subsection we will discuss some modern empirical evidence suggesting that 
we are part of a larger world of humanlike beings that is largely inaccessible to our 
senses and that may involve higher-dimensional inhabited realms. Before we begin, 
we should emphasize that all empirical evidence is faulty, since it is subject to the 
four defects of sensory imperfection, mistakes, illusion, and the tendency to cheat. 
This is particularly true of empirical evidence regarding phenomena that cannot be 
readily controlled or subjected to systematic experimentation. It is even more true 
of the evidence we shall consider here, which may involve the independent actions 
of living beings possessing human or superhuman powers. Evidence of this kind 
will tend to be controversial no matter how strong it is, since it contradicts 
fundamental assumptions lying at the root of modern Western civilization.

=== PAGE 73 ===

73
Unfortunately, such evidence will also tend to be imperfect and fragmentary, since 
we are unable to control the phenomena involved and there is a natural tendency 
for people to suppress reports of these phenomena. 
Thus far in this book, we have presented arguments that are intended to show that 
Vedic cosmology might be true. These arguments can be divided into two 
categories: (1) explanations that clarify Vedic cosmological ideas and hopefully 
make them more plausible and understandable, and (2) refutations of objections to 
Vedic cosmology raised by modern scientific theories. (Chapters 6 and 7 and 
Appendix 2 contain additional material in this category.) Although these 
arguments may remove various objections to Vedic cosmology, they do not 
provide any direct empirical evidence indicating that Vedic cosmology is true. Of 
course, according to the paramparä system, Vedic cosmology should be accepted 
simply on the basis of çästric authority. However, the doubt may arise that if Vedic 
cosmology really is true, then it would seem strange if no empirical evidence could 
be adduced that directly supports it. 
We suggest that there is actually abundant evidence for the existence of realms of 
intelligent living beings operating almost entirely outside the range of our ordinary 
senses. This evidence is what we would expect to find if Vedic cosmology is true, 
and it is definitely not what we would expect to find on the basis of accepted 
scientific paradigms. It can therefore be interpreted as giving support for the Vedic 
world view, although it does not refer directly to the structure of Bhü-maëòala and 
other features of Vedic cosmography. 
This evidence falls into three broad categories: (1) folklore and traditional world 
views, (2) psychical phenomena, and (3) the evidence regarding unidentified 
flying objects, or UFOs. Each of these categories provides direct testimony 
indicating that interactions have occurred between human beings and other 
intelligent beings possessing paranormal or superhuman powers. In this chapter 
we will discuss category three, although, as we will see, these categories are 
interrelated and show considerable overlap. 
 
There is extensive documentation on the subject of UFOs, which is largely 
generated by three groups of people: empirical investigators, debunkers, and UFO 
cultists. One prominent characteristic of this field of study is that the evidence 
tends to generate strong emotions, both positive and negative, in the people 
involved. This makes objective discussion of the evidence difficult. Nonetheless, 
the UFO evidence can be potentially useful in helping people understand the 
overall validity of the Vedic world view, and therefore we will briefly consider it 
here. 
We will begin by considering two examples of sightings of unidentified flying 
objects. The first sighting took place during the evening of July 14, 1952. Second 
Officer William Nash was at the controls of a Pan American DC-4 flying at 8,000 
feet in the vicinity of Norfolk, Virginia, and Third Officer William Fortenberry was 
acting as copilot. It is described that the night was clear, with unlimited visibility, 
and the lights of Newport News could be seen out of the port window. 
Shortly after 8:00 P.M. (EST), both men spotted a reddish glow off in the distance, 
apparently east of Newport News. As the glow resolved itself into six bright points, 
it became obvious that the objects were approaching at a very high speed. Within 
seconds, the objects could be clearly recognized as reddish, glowing discs, as they

=== PAGE 74 ===

74
streaked under the airliner. Then, abruptly, the entire group flipped on edge, made 
a sharp-angled turn, and reversed direction. As this was happening, the procession 
of six discs was joined by two more identical objects coming from under the plane, 
and all eight blinked out, back on again, and then off for good, while heading 
westward north of Newport News [RS, p. 138]. 
Both Nash and his copilot had been military pilots, trained in observing and 
identifying aircraft. They maintained that the discs looked solid, with sharp, well-
defined edges. Based on their observations of the flight paths of the discs, they 
estimated that they had been traveling at least 12,000 miles per hour. 
A closer sighting of what seemed to be a strange flying machine was reported by 
several witnesses near Exeter, New Hampshire, during the early-morning hours of 
September 3, 1965 (RS, pp. 176–78). At 1:30 A.M. Police Officer Eugene Bertrand 
investigated a parked car and found a distraught woman who claimed that her car 
had been followed for some 12 miles by a spaceship with red lights. Bertrand 
rejected this story, but was soon summoned back to his police station to 
investigate a similar story by 18-year-old Norman Muscarello. The teenager had 
burst into the station at 2:24 A.M. “in a state of near shock.” He stated that while 
he was hitchhiking along route 150, a glowing object with pulsating red lights 
suddenly came floating across a nearby field in his direction. He said that the 
object was as big as a house and that it was completely silent as it moved toward 
him. After he dove for cover, the object backed away, and he flagged down a car, 
which took him to the police station. 
Bertrand and Muscarello returned to the scene, and at about 3 A.M. both saw the 
object rise silently from behind two seventy-foot-tall pine trees. As Bertrand later 
described it, it was a “large, dark, solid object as big as a house.… It seemed 
compressed, as if it were round or egg-shaped, with definitely no protrusions like 
wings, rudder, or stabilizer” (RS, p. 177). The object had a row of five blinding red 
lights that blinked cyclically, casting a blood-red glow over the field and a nearby 
farmhouse. As nearby horses kicked in their stalls and dogs howled, it floated 
about two hundred feet off the ground with a fluttering motion, like a falling leaf. 
This testimony was confirmed by officer David Hunt, who arrived on the scene in 
time to observe the object for five or six minutes as it departed in the direction of 
Hampton. The police also received a phone call from an excited man in Hampton, 
who reported seeing the object. 
Here we will briefly touch upon some of the interpretations that have been 
proposed for such sightings, but we will not try to resolve the many controversial 
issues they involve. Broadly speaking, these sightings have been interpreted as 
involving (1) illusions or hoaxes, (2) secret military vehicles, (3) alien spaceships 
from other planets, and (4) vehicles piloted by beings from higher-dimensional 
realms. Without going into great detail, we would evaluate these interpretations as 
follows. 
There are, of course, many instances in which sightings of strange phenomena turn 
out to be illusions or even deliberate frauds. However, there also seem to be many 
reports—such as the two we have summarized here—that are not amenable to this 
interpretation. If we dismiss either of these reports as the result of illusion or fraud, 
then it would seem that we must cast grave doubt on the reliability of human 
testimony in general. Let us therefore consider what consequences follow if we

=== PAGE 75 ===

75
give at least as much credence to human testimony as is customarily done in courts 
of law. 
The hypothesis of secret military vehicles may explain some sightings, but it seems 
doubtful that it can account for all of them. For example, if the flying discs seen by 
Nash and Fortenberry in 1952 were the product of human military technology, 
then one might ask why no technology of an even remotely similar nature had 
been used by any nation during World War II, only seven years before. Of course, 
it might be argued that technology had advanced by leaps and bounds in the post-
war period, as shown by the example of computers. But this does not seem to be 
true of aerospace technology. For example, in the 1980’s the space shuttle is being 
propelled into earth orbit by dangerous, unreliable solid-fuel booster rockets quite 
similar to the rockets used by the ancient Chinese, and atmospheric flight still 
depends on conventional propellers and jet engines. 
We should also point out that more is involved here than mere technology; many 
sightings seem to involve phenomena that are incomprehensible in terms of the 
known principles of physics. Secret military developments certainly take place, but 
we know of no example in which fundamental scientific advances were made that 
were unknown to civilian scientists. For example, the basic scientific principles 
underlying the atomic bomb were well known to European scientists prior to 
World War II, and the Manhattan Project was devoted to routine but expensive 
engineering developments. It is difficult to see how government scientists working 
under conditions of secrecy could make spectacular advances in fundamental 
physics that remain inconceivable to scientists in the world at large. 
The hypothesis of aliens from other planets also has its drawbacks, when presented 
in conventional form. Let us examine this hypothesis from the perspective of 
modern science. According to modern scientific thinking, the other planets of our 
solar system are devoid of life. Many scientists think that intelligent life may have 
developed on planets circling other stars, but they believe that this could happen 
only by a process of evolution similar to the process that has produced life on the 
earth. It is therefore important to note that prominent evolutionists have ruled out 
this possibility. These evolutionists point out that many random events are 
involved in the production of human beings, and the chance that something even 
remotely comparable to ourselves could evolve independently on another planet is 
essentially zero. 
The evolutionist George Gaylord Simpson has raised this question in the following 
form: “Even in planetary histories different from ours might not some quite 
different and yet comparably intelligent beings—humanoids in a broader sense—
have evolved?” (GS, p. 268) His answer is that the essential nonrepeatability of 
evolution makes this extremely unlikely. A similar conclusion was reached by the 
evolutionist Theodosius Dobzhansky (TD). 
In fact, we agree with the analysis of Simpson and Dobzhansky, and we would go 
further by noting that, according to their reasoning, the probability is nearly zero 
that evolutionary processes would produce humans on the earth. By a probability 
of nearly zero, we mean a probability of the form 1 out of 10 to the power N, 
where N is a number in the hundreds or thousands. If an event occurs on one 
planet with this probability, then the probability that it will occur independently 
on two planets out of a billion possible planets is about 1 out of 10 to the power 
2N-18. (Here we are assuming the existence of one billion planets suitable for life,

=== PAGE 76 ===

76
and the 18 is the log of one billion squared.) In short, it seems highly unlikely that 
the evolution of matter would produce builders of flying machines on the earth, 
and far less likely that it would do this independently on other planets. (For a 
detailed discussion of the low probabilities associated with the evolution of 
advanced life forms, see the book Mechanistic and Nonmechanistic Science (MN), 
by the author.) 
Of course, we can depart from the scientific hypothesis of extraterrestrial aliens by 
proposing, say, that one superintelligent being (i.e., Brahmä) may have created 
humanoids on other planets. However, we are still confronted by the fact that, 
according to modern astronomy, the nearest star is several light-years away, and 
most stars in this galaxy are hundreds or thousands of light-years away. Given the 
limitations imposed by the known laws of physics, a vehicle traveling between the 
nearest star and the earth would take several years at the very least to make the 
trip. 
Many thousands of sightings of unidentifiable flying vehicles have been reported in 
the period following World War II, and practically all have involved brief 
encounters followed by no significant developments. Since it is inconvenient to 
make many journeys, each of which lasts for years, these observations suggest that 
either (1) the aliens have established local residences or (2) they are able to travel 
faster than the speed of light. Our point at this stage in the argument is that in 
making necessary modifications of the scientific extraterrestrial-alien hypothesis, 
we have brought it closer, step by step, to the Vedic world view. According to 
Vedic cosmology, there are 400,000 created humanoid life-forms in the universe. 
Many are locally based (such as the Yakñas and Vidyädharas), and many are 
capable of unusual modes of travel (such as travel at the speed of the mind). 
Another aspect of the UFO phenomenon is what could be called its psychic 
component. UFO sightings are frequently accompanied by telepathic impressions 
that observers tend to interpret as communications transmitted by UFO occupants. 
Psychic healings are reported in connection with UFOs, and UFO encounters are 
often followed by the appearance of typical psychical phenomena. Here is one case 
that illustrates some of these features (JV, pp. 173–76): 
On November 1, 1968, a French medical doctor was awakened by calls from his 
14-month-old baby shortly before 4:00 A.M. On opening a window, he saw two 
hovering disc-shaped objects that were silvery-white on top and bright red 
beneath. After moving closer for some time, the two discs merged into a single 
disc, which directed a beam of white light at the doctor’s house. The disc then 
vanished with a sort of explosion, leaving a cloud that dissipated slowly. 
The doctor testified that he had received a serious leg injury while chopping wood 
three days before. After the departure of the mysterious object(s), the swelling and 
pain from this injury suddenly vanished, and during subsequent days he also 
noticed the disappearance of all the chronic after-effects of the injuries he had 
received in the Algerian war. 
During a two-year period following this incident, there was no recurrence of 
symptoms associated with either the war injuries or the leg wound. However, 
strange paranormal phenomena began to take place around the doctor and his 
family. According to the French scientist Jacques Vallee, “Coincidences of a 
telepathic nature are frequently reported, and the doctor has allegedly, on at least

=== PAGE 77 ===

77
one occasion, experienced levitation without being able to control it” (JV, p. 176). 
The doctor apparently did not experience such things prior to his UFO sighting. 
Psychical phenomena are a standard feature of human societies in all times and 
places, and they are referred to almost continuously in the Vedic literature. In 
modern human societies there seems to be an almost inverse relationship between 
the development of mechanical technology and the development of various psychic 
powers. However, in the Vedic literature we read of beings, such as the Dänavas of 
bila-svarga, who possess both advanced mechanical technology and mystic siddhis, 
and who are apparently able to combine the two. The UFO phenomenon seems to 
involve something similar, and this is another reason for thinking that this 
phenomenon can be better understood in terms of Vedic cosmology than in terms 
of standard theories involving high technology and interstellar evolution. 
In addition to sightings of UFOs from a distance, there are many reports of close 
encounters with UFO occupants. These beings are often reported to communicate 
directly by telepathic processes, and they are also said to be able to project 
illusions through some kind of hypnotic power. Here is a typical example of this 
kind of report (JV, pp. 191–92): 
On November 17, 1971, at 9:30 P.M., a Brazilian man named Paulo Gaetano was 
driving back from a business trip, accompanied by his friend  Elvio. Paulo 
informed his companion that the car was not pulling normally, but his companion 
reacted by saying that he was tired and wanted to sleep. The engine then stalled, 
and after pulling to the side of the road, Paulo saw some kind of craft about twelve 
feet away. Next, he later maintained, several small beings appeared, took him into 
the craft, and subjected him to some kind of medical examination, which included 
taking a blood sample from his arm. He could not recall how he and Elvio got back 
home. 
For his part, Elvio did not remember seeing a strange craft, but only an ordinary 
bus following the car at a normal distance. He saw the car pull off to the side of the 
road, and he remembered finding Paulo on the ground behind the parked car. But 
he did not remember seeing Paulo get out of the car, and did not know what had 
happened to him. He took Paulo by bus to the nearby town of Itaperuna, but he 
could not explain why they had abandoned the car. The police noticed the cut on 
Paulo’s arm and later found the car parked on the highway. 
Of course, there is a natural temptation to dismiss stories such as this as crazy 
nonsense. However, there are evidently many cases in which events of this kind are 
reported (including many that do not involve the questionable procedure of 
hypnotic regression). One possible explanation is that these stories involve 
delusions caused by some kind of mental disorder. However, there is psychiatric 
testimony indicating that common forms of nervous and mental disease do not 
involve delusions of seeing UFOs. For example, the psychiatrist Berthold Schwarz 
has stated, 
In thirteen years of private practice … I have never noted symptoms related to 
UFOs. A similar finding was confirmed on questioning Theodore A. Anderson, 
M.D., a senior psychiatrist, and Henry A. Davidson, M.D., then Medical Director of 
the Essex County Overbrook Hospital. Dr. Davidson recalled no patients with 
gross UFO symptoms out of three thousand in-patients, nor among all those 
presented to the staff while he was superintendent; nor of the thirty thousand 
patients who have been hospitalized since the turn of the century [ET, pp. 23–24].

=== PAGE 78 ===

78
It is possible that UFO close-encounter cases may involve the action of beings 
endowed with Vedic mystic siddhis. We do not wish to insist on this point, but we 
note that such a state of affairs would be consistent with Vedic cosmology. Çréla 
Prabhupäda describes the vaçitä siddhi as follows: 
By this perfection one can bring anyone under his control. This is a kind of 
hypnotism which is almost irresistible. Sometimes it is found that a yogé who may 
have attained a little perfection in this vaçitä mystic power comes out among the 
people and speaks all sorts of nonsense, controls their minds, exploits them, takes 
their money, and then goes away [NOD, p. 12]. 
The story of Paulo and Elvio clearly involves some kind of illusion (either of the 
bus or of the strange craft). We should also note that many people reporting close 
encounters with UFOs maintain that the UFO occupants overcame their will with 
some kind of telepathic power. 
The appearance of humanoid beings in UFO reports enables us to strengthen our 
remarks concerning the theory of evolution. The literature on UFOs is filled with 
reports of a wide variety of humanlike beings. These beings often exhibit 
recognizable emotions, and sometimes are said to communicate various 
philosophical teachings. If such beings actually exist, then it is very hard to see 
how they could have arisen by evolution, either on this planet or elsewhere. 
Paleoanthropology has no place for them on the earth, and the probability that 
beings so similar to ourselves would evolve independently on another planet is 
certainly infinitesimal. They fit consistently into the Vedic world view, but their 
existence is strongly incompatible with the theory of evolution. 
Our final topic in this section is the tendency of UFO phenomena to abruptly 
appear and disappear from the viewpoint of human observers and their electronic 
instruments. Here are two cases illustrating this. The first case involved Air Force 
observations of a UFO in the south-central U.S. on July 17, 1957, and was 
summarized in the journal Astronautics and Aeronautics, as follows: 
An Air Force RB-47, equipped with electronic countermeasures (ECM) gear and 
manned by six officers, was followed by an unidentified object for a distance of 
well over 700 mi. and for a time period of 1.5 hr., as it flew from Mississippi, 
through Louisiana and Texas and into Oklahoma. The object was, at various times, 
seen visually by the cockpit crew as an intensely luminous light, followed by 
ground-radar and detected on ECM monitoring gear aboard the RB-47. Of special 
interest in this case are several instances of simultaneous appearances and 
disappearances on all three of these physically distinct “channels,” and rapidity of 
maneuvers beyond the prior experience of the crew [AAA, p. 66]. 
One of the disappearances of the object occurred as the RB-47 was about to fly 
over it. The pilot remarked that it seemed to blink out visually and simultaneously 
disappear from the scope of ECM monitor #2 (an electronic surveillance device). 
At the same time it disappeared from radar scopes at ADC site Utah (a radar station 
on the ground). Moments later the object blinked on again visually, and 
simultaneously appeared on the ECM monitor and ground radar. 
Abrupt appearances and disappearances of this kind are reported in many UFO 
accounts (including the Nash and Fortenberry sighting, with which we began this 
section). Although one might propose that invisibility was being produced through 
techniques involving known physical laws, this behavior of UFOs has suggested to 
many observers that they are illusions or projections of some kind, rather than

=== PAGE 79 ===

79
physical objects. This is also suggested by the ability of these entities to accelerate 
abruptly to remarkable speeds without generating noticeable sonic booms. Of 
course, the hypothesis of illusion raises the question of how radar-reflecting 
illusions exhibiting intelligent behavior are generated. 
The idea of illusion is also suggested by our second case, which took place at 
Nouatre, Indre-et-Loire, France, on September 30, 1954. At about 4:30 P.M. 
Georges Gatey, the head of a team of construction workers, encountered a strange-
looking man standing in front of a large shining dome that floated about three feet 
above the ground. Our concern here is with the way in which these odd 
apparitions disappeared: 
Suddenly the strange man vanished, and I couldn’t explain how he did, since he 
did not disappear from my field of vision by walking away, but vanished like an 
image one erases suddenly. 
Then I heard a strong whistling sound, which drowned the noise of our excavators; 
the saucer rose by successive jerks, in a vertical direction, and then it too was 
erased in a sort of blue haze, as if by a miracle [VJ2, p. 68]. 
Mr. Gatey, a pragmatic war veteran, maintained he was not used to flights of fancy, 
and his story was corroborated by several of the construction workers. Although 
such stories seem bizarre, they are not uncommon, and they are consistent with 
the more prosaic long-distance sightings reported by pilots and military personnel. 
They are also consistent with the mystic powers attributed to the Kiàpuruñas and 
other intelligent beings described in the Vedic literature. 
5.B. The Link with Traditional Lore 
When the reports of UFOs are surveyed broadly, they are seen to resemble stories 
from traditional folklore that have been recounted in cultures all over the world 
since time immemorial. Jacques Vallee illustrates this point with the following 
story from ninth-century France: 
One day, among other instances, it chanced at Lyons that three men and a woman 
were seen descending from these aerial ships. The entire city gathered about them, 
crying out they were magicians and were sent by Grimaldus, Duke of Beneventum, 
Charlemagne’s enemy, to destroy the French harvests. In vain the four innocents 
sought to vindicate themselves by saying that they were their own country-folk, 
and had been carried away a short time since by miraculous men who had shown 
them unheard of marvels, and had desired to give them an account of what they 
had seen. The frenzied populace … were on the point of casting them into the fire, 
when the worthy Agobard, Bishop of Lyons,… having heard the accusations of the 
people and the defense of the accused, gravely pronounced that both one and the 
other were false [JV, p. 19]. 
The story refers to the “miraculous men” as sylphs, a class of beings thought by 
Paracelsus to inhabit the earth’s atmosphere and to have the power of appearing or 
disappearing at will before humans. 
In medieval folklore, such beings were thought to coexist with ordinary humans in 
this world and to inhabit invisible abodes, sometimes associated with lakes, 
mountains, or subterranean regions (EW). They were thought to interact with 
people in ways that were sometimes beneficial, sometimes sinister, and sometimes 
mischievous or trivial. Similar patterns of interaction are to be seen in the UFO 
literature.

=== PAGE 80 ===

80
According to the Vedic literature, interactions of this kind occur between humans 
and a variety of near-human beings, including Yakñas, Kiàpuruñas , Räkñasas, 
Vidyädharas, and Gandharvas. These beings occupy Bhü-maëòala, the lower 
planetary systems, and the upper system of Bhuvarloka. They are to be 
distinguished from the demigods and åñis of Svargaloka and the higher planetary 
systems ranging up to Brahmaloka. 
Such beings are frequently described in the Vedic literature as possessing aerial 
vehicles called vimänas. This is illustrated in the story of Çälva from Çrémad-
Bhägavatam. There it is described that a king named Çälva engaged in severe 
austerities to please Lord Çiva and thereby obtain an airplane that could be used to 
attack Kåñëa’s city of Dvärakä. Lord Çiva granted the benediction and arranged for 
the airplane to be manufactured by the demon Maya Dänava, an inhabitant of the 
lower planetary system of Talätala in bila-svarga. The airplane is described as 
follows: 
But still the airplane occupied by Çälva was very mysterious. It was so 
extraordinary that sometimes many airplanes would appear to be in the sky, and 
sometimes there were apparently none. Sometimes the plane was visible and 
sometimes not visible, and the warriors of the Yadu dynasty were puzzled about 
the whereabouts of the peculiar airplane. Sometimes they would see the airplane 
on the ground, sometimes flying in the sky, sometimes resting on the peak of a 
hill, and sometimes floating on the water. The wonderful airplane flew in the sky 
like a whirling firebrand—it was not steady even for a moment [KB, p. 649]. 
We can compare the appearance and disappearance of Çälva’s airplane with the 
“blinking on and off” of the UFO observed by the crew of the RB-47. The observers 
on the RB-47 also noted that their UFO sometimes generated two signals with 
different bearings on their electronic monitoring equipment. 
We have argued that the domain of Maya Dänava can be reached only by higher-
dimensional travel, and we suggest that even today, people of this earth may be 
interacting with beings originating from higher-dimensional regions of the 
universe. In Vedic times, people in general could directly see such phenomena as 
Çälva’s airplane. But they presumably had little direct access to Maya Dänava’s 
abode and could learn of the existence of such places only through hearing from 
higher authority. It can be suggested that we might be in a similar situation today. 
In the Bhägavatam it is described that the inhabitants of Maya Dänava’s abode have 
excellent material facilities, including cities with beautiful architecture and 
attractive gardens. There is no fear of the passage of time there because the 
distinction between day and night does not exist. The inhabitants are highly 
atheistic and materialistic. They are expert in various mystic powers and are free 
from disease and old age. However, they must all meet eventual death in 
accordance with the strict  arrangement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
(SB 5.24.10–14). 
The Vedic literature describes the universe as having a hierarchical organization, 
with a graded series of domains occupied by beings with different levels of 
consciousness. As we described in Section 4.a, these domains can be divided into 
the lower, middle, and upper worlds, whose inhabitants are characterized by the 
respective modes of ignorance, passion, and goodness. Beyond the material world 
lies the transcendental domain of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, which is 
characterized by pure goodness (viçuddha-sattva).

=== PAGE 81 ===

81
Given this hierarchical structure, one would expect interactions between humans 
and higher beings to be characterized by a variety of psychological modes, ranging 
from ignorance up to pure goodness. This seems to be the case, and it is interesting 
to note that cases of interaction on an apparently higher, sattvic level provide some 
of the best-attested evidence for the existence of higher beings and realms. 
5.C. The Events at Fatima 
An example of interaction with higher beings on a sattvic level is provided by the 
events that occurred in 1917 in Fatima, Portugal. These events centered on a series 
of revelations made to three children named Lucia, Francisco, and Jacinta by a 
divine personage whom they understood to be the Virgin Mary. The revelations 
occurred on the 13th of the month for six successive months in a natural 
amphitheater called the Cova da Iria, near the town of Fatima. Here we will not be 
concerned with the theological content of the revelations (which, as far as it goes, 
is compatible with the philosophy of Kåñëa consciousness), but will focus on the 
evidence they provide for the existence of higher-dimensional realms. 
The revelations were made in the presence of the three children and a large throng 
of onlookers, which increased greatly from month to month as news spread. The 
actual visions of the beautiful divine personage could be seen only by the three 
children, and so our knowledge of these visions is limited to their testimony. 
However, during the revelations there occurred related phenomena that were 
witnessed by large numbers of people. 
These phenomena included the appearance of a glowing, globe-shaped vehicle and 
the occurrence of a shower of rose petals that vanished upon touching the ground. 
One witness, Mgr. J. Quaresma, described the appearance of the globe on July 13, 
1917, as follows: 
To my surprise, I see clearly and distinctly a globe of light advancing from east to 
west, gliding slowly and majestically through the air.… Suddenly the globe with its 
extraordinary light vanished, but near us a little girl of about ten continues to cry 
joyfully, “I still see it! I still see it! Now it is going down!” [FJ, p. 46]. 
He reports that after the events, 
My friend, full of enthusiasm, went from group to group … asking people what 
they had seen. The persons asked came from the most varied social classes and all 
unanimously affirmed the reality of the phenomena which we ourselves had 
observed [FJ, p. 47]. 
During one of the revelations, the child Lucia had requested that a miracle be 
shown so that people who could not see the divine lady would believe in the reality 
of what was happening. She was told that this would occur on the 13th of October, 
and she immediately communicated this to others. 
On this date it is estimated that a crowd of some 70,000 people congregated in the 
vicinity of the Cova da Iria in anticipation of the predicted miracle. The day was 
overcast and rainy, and the crowd huddled under umbrellas in the midst of a sea of 
mud. Suddenly, the clouds parted, and an astonishing solar display began to 
unfold. We will describe this in the words of some of the witnesses. 
Dr. Formigao, a professor at the seminary at Santarem: 
As if like a bolt from the blue, the clouds were wrenched apart, and the sun at its 
zenith appeared in all its splendour. It began to revolve vertiginously on its axis, 
like the most magnificent firewheel that could be imagined, taking on all the 
colours of the rainbow and sending forth multi-coloured flashes of light, producing

=== PAGE 82 ===

82
the most astounding effect. This sublime and incomparable spectacle, which was 
repeated three distinct times, lasted for about ten minutes. The immense 
multitude, overcome by the evidence of such a tremendous prodigy, threw 
themselves on their knees [FJ, p. 63]. 
Dr. Joseph Garrett, Professor of Natural Sciences at Coimbra University: 
The sun’s disc did not remain immobile. This was not the sparkling of a heavenly 
body, for it spun round on itself in a mad whirl, when suddenly a clamour was 
heard from all the people. The sun, whirling, seemed to loosen itself from the 
firmament and advance threateningly upon the earth as if to crush us with its huge 
fiery weight. The sensation during those moments was terrible [FJ, p. 62]. 
Similar testimony was given by large numbers of people, both from the crowd at 
the Cova da Iria and from a surrounding area measuring about 20 by 30 miles. The 
presence of confirming witnesses over such a large area suggests that the 
phenomena cannot be explained as the result of crowd hysteria. The absence of 
reports from a wider area and the complete absence of reports from scientific 
observatories suggest that the phenomena were local to the region of Fatima. It 
would seem either that remarkable atmospheric phenomena were arranged by an 
intelligent agency at a time announced specifically in advance, or that coordinated 
hallucinations in thousands of people were similarly arranged at this time. By 
either interpretation, it is hard to fit these phenomena into the framework of 
modern science. They do, however, fit naturally into the multidimensional, 
hierarchical cosmos of the Vedic literature. 
At this point we should briefly summarize the conclusions of this chapter. The 
Vedic literature maintains that we live in a hierarchically structured universe 
occupied by 400,000 species of humanlike form and some 8,000,000 nonhuman 
species. These living beings inhabit a graded system of worlds such as Bhü-
maëòala, which possess variegated geographical features. The thesis of this book is 
that these worlds are literally real, even though they are almost entirely 
inaccessible to ordinary human senses. We have tried to relate this idea to modern 
mathematical thought by describing the universe as a multidimensional system. 
We can ask, If this description of the universe is correct, then is there anything 
that humans could expect to observe that would tend to corroborate it? First of all, 
we could not expect to readily see the demigods, for human beings generally do 
not have the karmic qualifications required for this. (See Section 6.c.1.) This 
means that we also cannot expect to gain access to the regions where the demigods 
are active, such as the slopes of Mount Meru, since this would surely entail being 
able to see the demigods themselves. 
We might expect to interact with beings lower than the demigods but slightly 
higher than ourselves in the cosmic hierarchy. However, since these beings are 
higher than ourselves, we could not expect to fully control these interactions. We 
might expect that they would have access to us but that we would not have access 
to them or their abodes. 
The beings between humans and demigods range from powerful types of ghosts to 
demonic entities such as Yakñas and Räkñasas, and to more attractive beings such 
as Vidyädharas, Cäraëas, Siddhas, and Gandharvas. Interactions with these various 
beings might take various forms, depending on their own interests and on our level 
of consciousness. These interactions are likely to involve mystic powers, since 
these beings are all well-endowed with such powers. They must involve higher-

=== PAGE 83 ===

83
dimensional transformations, because the abodes of these beings are invisible to 
our senses. They may also involve remarkable flying machines, since such 
machines are often ascribed to these beings in the Vedic literature. 
We propose that these ideas about what we might expect to see in the Vedic 
universe are consistent with the evidence provided by psychical phenomena, UFO 
reports, folklore, and reports of miracles. This broad body of evidence is consistent 
with the Vedic world picture. However, none of this evidence is compatible with 
modern science, and all of it is rejected by the scientific community. We suggest 
that the Vedic world view is broadly supported by empirical evidence, but this 
evidence can never be respectable until the Vedic world view itself is restored to a 
respectable status. 
VCA6: MODERN ASTROPHYSICS 
AND THE VEDIC PERSPECTIVE 
Thus far we have tried to show how Vedic cosmology relates to the overall picture 
of the universe that modern man has built up on the basis of ordinary sense 
perception. We have mainly dealt with fairly elementary features of this picture 
that have been part of human knowledge for centuries. In recent years, however, a 
highly sophisticated and complex science of astrophysics has grown up, which 
deals with many celestial phenomena in great technical detail. Many people will be 
inclined to argue that Vedic cosmology is no match for this new science, in which 
astronomy has joined forces with physics. They will say that it describes nature on 
a level of precision and detail that was never approached in ancient times, and it 
has established many new concepts that were undreamt-of by earlier thinkers. 
These dynamic developments stand in sharp contrast to the static Vedic world 
view and show that its many unverifiable ideas have simply been a hindrance to 
progress. 
One answer to this challenge is that to appreciate Vedic cosmology, one must 
understand its underlying purpose and the basic tenets on which it is based. These 
are quite different from the motives and assumptions lying behind modern science, 
and thus it is not surprising that they should lead to radically different scientific 
and cultural developments. We can evaluate the relative merit of the Vedic and 
modern approaches to nature only if we take these fundamental goals and 
assumptions into account. 
The picture of Vedic cosmology that emerges from this study is based on the 
fundamental principle that reality can be understood only partially and imperfectly 
through the endeavors of our limited mundane minds and senses. Thus Vedic 
descriptions of the universe have stressed the existence of higher realms of being, 
both material and spiritual. Since these realms could not be understood in detail by 
persons on the human level of consciousness, they were described only in general, 
qualitative terms. For those who wished to know of these realms more directly, 
processes of yoga were given, which enable a person to gradually elevate his 
consciousness to higher levels. Thus human endeavor was channeled in the 
direction of purification of the self and the development of our inner potential, 
rather than toward the exploitation of the material environment using our gross 
sensory equipment. 
Observable natural phenomena, such as the motions of the planets, were studied 
and mathematically analyzed in the ancient Vedic culture. However, the object of 
the analysis was not to give a final, comprehensive description of nature. Rather,

=== PAGE 84 ===

84
its purpose was to provide simple and practical methods of dealing with these 
phenomena in day-to-day life. The motions of the planets were studied for the 
purpose of making astrological forecasts and arranging for the proper timing of 
religious festivals and ceremonies. Thus observational and mathematical 
astronomy was used to fulfill needs related to higher aspects of reality that cannot 
be directly observed and measured. Since there was no question of creating a final, 
mathematically perfect theory of astronomy, no efforts were made toward this end, 
and mathematical models were kept as simple as possible, given the practical needs 
for which they were intended. 
According to the Vedic world view, the higher material and spiritual realms are by 
no means devoid of life. Rather, they are populated by a hierarchy of superhuman 
beings, and their original source is understood to be a supreme sentient being. 
Given this perspective, it is natural to think that knowledge about the most 
important aspects of reality can be obtained only by communicating with higher 
beings, and ultimately by coming in direct contact with the Supreme Lord. Thus 
the Vedic culture is dominated by the idea of receiving knowledge from a chain of 
authorities who are passing it down from a higher source. This applies not only to 
spiritual knowledge, but also to material arts, including mathematical astronomy. 
In contrast, modern science is based on the idea that nature can be fully 
understood using our present minds and senses. Its fundamental premise is that all 
aspects of reality can be mathematically described, and that all phenomena can be 
observed either directly or through their effects on other phenomena. This leads 
naturally to the idea that it is possible to create a final, complete mathematical 
theory of nature. If we examine the history of modern physics and astronomy, we 
see that these fields of study have been dominated by the drive to pry loose all the 
secrets of nature quickly and to create such an ultimate theory. 
We can therefore argue that many of the differences between Vedic and modern 
cosmology are due to this fundamental difference in approach. Vedic cosmology 
does not exhibit the same elaborate mathematical development as modern 
cosmology because the Vedic world view provided no motive for undertaking such 
a development. On the other hand, modern cosmology is strictly limited to a three- 
or four-dimensional continuum because modern man lacks the sensory faculties 
for observing higher-dimensional aspects of the universe, and because modern 
science places great emphasis on quickly arriving at a complete world model based 
on available observations. 
Modern cosmology may seem superior to its Vedic counterpart if we stick to the 
assumption that reality is limited to what ordinary human beings can perceive, 
using either their unaided senses or mechanical instruments. However, if the Vedic 
idea of higher realms of existence is even approximately correct, then it becomes 
clear that the modern scientific approach has caused us to focus our attention 
uselessly on relatively unimportant aspects of the universe. From this point of 
view, the technical sophistication of modern astrophysics appears more as an 
impediment to the attainment of knowledge than as an example of great scientific 
progress. 
To a person acquainted with modern scientific ideas, the obvious reply to this 
argument is that the complex technical methods of modern astrophysics have 
revealed many features of nature that contradict the Vedic literature, and thus the 
Vedic world view is no longer relevant. However, it is possible that a theoretical

=== PAGE 85 ===

85
description of nature could be developed that equals or surpasses modern 
astronomical science in technical sophistication but is also consistent with Vedic 
cosmology. Such a theory might take the form of a radically new conceptual 
framework that incorporates our current theoretical system as an approximation 
having a limited range of applicability. 
The point can be made that modern cosmology not only contradicts the Vedic 
literature but also has its own internal contradictions. These contradictions are 
quite severe, and we briefly discuss some of them in Chapter 7. They indicate that 
some radical change will have to be made in modern theories to bring them into 
line with astronomical observations. It is perhaps reasonable to suggest that such a 
revision should also take into account the empirical evidence for higher-
dimensional aspects of reality discussed in Chapter 5. Such a new theoretical 
system might well agree more closely with Vedic cosmology than the present 
system does. 
Radical extensions of our theoretical perspective have taken place repeatedly in the 
history of science. A striking example of this is provided by the revolution in the 
science of physics that occurred in the twenties and thirties of this century. At the 
end of the nineteenth century, physicists were almost universally convinced that 
classical physics provided a final and complete theory of nature. However, a few 
years later, classical physics was replaced by a new theory, called quantum 
mechanics, which is based on fundamentally different principles. 
The most interesting feature of this development is that classical physics turns out 
to be compatible with quantum mechanics in the domain of observation in which 
it was originally applied. The differences between the two theories become 
significant only in the new atomic domain opened up by the quantum theory. 
Likewise, our proposed new cosmology would agree with existing theories in its 
predictions of gross sensory observations, but it would open an entirely new world 
of higher-dimensional travel. 
6.A. The Principle of Relativity and Planetary Motion 
To construct such a new cosmology, there are a number of important topics that 
must be considered. One of these is the idea of relativity of motion. The watershed 
in the development of modern astronomy was crossed when Copernicus replaced 
the ancient geocentric model of the universe with a heliocentric model. Although 
the relative merit of the two models was initially debatable, the development of 
Newton’s laws of motion seemed to give overwhelming support for the heliocentric 
model. This can be argued as follows: If the stars and planets are rotating around 
the earth once per day, then they should be subjected to tremendous centrifugal 
forces that will have to be counterbalanced in some way. Isn’t it more reasonable to 
suppose that the earth, which is much smaller and more compact than the universe 
as a whole, is rotating on its axis? Likewise, isn’t it more reasonable to suppose 
that the small earth is orbiting around the massive sun than to suppose that the 
sun is orbiting around the earth? 
This objection can be partially answered by invoking the idea of relativity of 
motion. Consider two objects, A and B, that are approaching one another at a 
constant velocity. According to classical physics, there is no physical difference 
between saying that A is standing still and being approached by B and saying that B 
is standing still and being approached by A. Thus, as far as physics is concerned, 
no objection could be raised to either statement.

=== PAGE 86 ===

86
In classical physics this relativity of motion is not thought to apply to rotation. 
Imagine an axis running from the center of A through the center of B. Suppose that 
A is rotating with respect to B on this axis. According to classical physics, rotary 
motion generates centrifugal force, and thus the actual rate of rotation of A and B 
can be determined by measuring this force. Thus if A exhibits a certain amount of 
centrifugal force and B does not, the conclusion of classical physics must be that A 
is rotating and B is not. 
However, the physicist Ernst Mach once made the following argument: Suppose 
that A and B are the only objects in the universe, and suppose that they are of 
equal mass. Then why should it be that A shows measurable evidence of rotation 
and not B? After all, if we say that A is rotating, then what is it rotating with 
respect to? If B is the only other object in the universe, then A could only be 
rotating with respect to B. But it could equally well be said that B is rotating with 
respect to A. Thus Mach concluded that neither A nor B would exhibit centrifugal 
force if they were the only objects in the universe. He proposed that centrifugal 
force is generated in one object due to the rotation relative to it of another, much 
larger object. Thus, Mach maintained that if A is rotating with respect to the rest of 
the universe, then one could equally well say that the universe was rotating with 
respect to A and thereby generating centrifugal forces in A. Mach’s argument 
implies that there are no physical grounds for rejecting the statement that “A is 
standing still and the universe is rotating around it.” 
Here one might object that the rotation of the earth is directly indicated by the 
Foucault pendulum experiment and the evidence that the prevailing winds are 
affected by Coriolis forces. Also, the rotation of the earth around the sun is 
indicated by a number of minute but measurable effects, such as aberration of 
starlight and the parallax of some stars. 
It turns out, however, that Mach’s argument also disposes of these objections. For 
example, Mach would say that the rotation of the Foucault pendulum can be 
attributed to the rotation of the massive universe around the earth, just as well as 
to the rotation of the earth under the pendulum. 
If this idea of relativity of motion is granted, one can then argue that the geocentric 
or heliocentric viewpoints stand on the same footing physically, and we can choose 
one or the other, depending on what is convenient. In the case of the astronomical 
siddhäntas, we could argue that the geocentric viewpoint is simply the more 
practical of the two, since all computations must ultimately be expressed in 
geocentric terms. And if we intuitively prefer to think of large masses as stationary 
and small masses as moving, rather than the other way around, then we will prefer 
the heliocentric viewpoint. 
When we turn to the cosmology of the Bhägavatam, the situation becomes more 
complex. It is stated that the pravaha wind carries the celestial bodies around the 
polestar once per day. This can be seen from the viewpoint of relativity of motion 
in the following way: The pravaha wind is due to a kind of tenuous atmosphere 
that exists in the region of antarikña, or outer space. If we regard the earth as 
turning on its axis, then the stars are at rest in this stationary atmosphere. In 
contrast, if we regard this atmosphere as rotating along with the stars, then the 
stars are being carried by it, but they are still at rest in it. This brings to mind the 
analogy of the clouds and the wind that Çréla Prabhupäda uses to illustrate the

=== PAGE 87 ===

87
effects of mäyä: Just as the clouds seem to be at rest in the wind that carries them, 
so people carried by the influence of mäyä do not notice this influence. 
The situation of Bhü-maëòala can be analyzed as follows: As we pointed out in 
Chapter 3, if Bhü-maëòala is located in the plane of the ecliptic, then Bhü-maëòala 
must also rotate daily with the käla-cakra. The movement of the sun in Bhü-
maëòala consists of one leftward revolution around Mount Sumeru per year, and 
both Bhü-maëòala, the sun, and the other planets are carried in one rightward 
rotation per day by the pravaha wind. Here, from the perspective of relative 
motion, one can regard the earth as rotating and the stars, pravaha atmosphere, 
and Bhü-maëòala as stationary. The sun is then seen to rotate with respect to Bhü-
maëòala, being carried by its chariot. From the perspective that larger masses 
should be viewed as stationary, it is reasonable to regard the sun as moving and 
Bhü-maëòala as stationary, since Bhü-maëòala is much greater than the sun. 
If we then take the covering shells of the universe into account and consider that 
the pravaha wind is blowing with respect to these fixed coverings, we obtain the 
following picture: It makes sense to suppose that the pravaha wind and the various 
celestial bodies are moving with respect to the universal coverings, since the 
coverings are more massive than the celestial bodies. Likewise, in this picture it 
also makes sense to suppose that the sun is moving with respect to Bhü-maëòala. 
This, of course, is the  picture of celestial motion given in the Bhägavatam. 
As we mentioned in Chapter 3, the idea of relativity of motion is presented by 
Çukadeva Gosvämé in his description of the motion of the sun. Mahäräja Pariksit 
asked him, 
My dear lord, you have already affirmed the truth that the supremely powerful 
sun-god travels around Dhruvaloka with both Dhruvaloka and Mount Sumeru on 
his right. Yet at the same time the sun-god faces the signs of the zodiac and keeps 
Sumeru and Dhruvaloka on his left. How can we reasonably accept that the sun-
god proceeds with Sumeru and Dhruvaloka on both his left and right 
simultaneously? [SB 5.22.1] 
Here the leftward and rightward movements are the yearly and daily revolutions of 
the sun about the earth. Çukadeva Gosvämé replied to this question as follows: 
When a potter’s wheel is moving and small ants located on that big wheel are 
moving with it, one can see that their motion is different from that of the wheel 
because they appear sometimes on one part of the wheel and sometimes on 
another [SB 5.22.2]. 
Çukadeva Gosvämé explains that in this analogy the potter’s wheel corresponds to 
the käla-cakra, which carries the stars and signs of the zodiac with it. The ants 
correspond to the sun and other planets, which are moving leftward around the 
wheel while the wheel spins to the right. Thus the idea that motion can be seen 
differently from different relative perspectives is presented in the Bhägavatam. 
We have discussed these points in some detail to show that Vedic cosmology 
should not be rejected on the basis of naive arguments regarding the relative 
motion of the earth, the sun, and the universe as a whole. To fully relate Vedic 
cosmology to the laws of motion of modern physics, it will be necessary to 
understand the bearing that structures such as Bhü-maëòala and the coverings of 
the universe have on our understanding of the principle of relativity. Since these 
structures involve higher-dimensional travel and transformations of time such as 
that seen in the story of King Kakudmé and Revaté, we do not think that this will

=== PAGE 88 ===

88
be an easy task. But it may well be possible, and the resulting model will no doubt 
be even more surprising than the quantum theory was to the physicists of the early 
twentieth century. 
We should also note that Einstein’s theory of relativity is required in order to make 
sense of the heliocentric theory of the solar system. The history of this theory is 
that in the late 19th century, ether-drift experiments performed by physicists such 
as Michelson and Morley seemed to indicate that the earth is stationary relative to 
the ether. Since the ether was then conceived as a highly rigid medium, this 
seemed to indicate that the earth was stationary with respect to an absolute 
reference frame. Although many efforts were made to avoid this conclusion, this 
did not prove to be possible within the framework of classical physics. 
The dilemma was resolved only with the introduction of Einstein’s theory, which 
involved radical changes in physicists’ concepts of space and time, and which has 
many strikingly counter-intuitive consequences. These include the famous twin 
paradox, in which a space traveler returns to earth from a year’s journey at nearly 
the speed of light and discovers that many years have passed. It would take us too 
far afield to delve into these matters here, but we mention them as an indication 
that the issue of geocentric versus heliocentric cosmology is not as trivial as it 
might superficially seem to be. 
6.B. Gravitation 
The Newtonian theory of gravitation will play an important role in any attempt to 
harmonize modern physics and Vedic cosmology. This theory provides a uniform 
explanation of planetary motion that is tied conceptually to the heliocentric theory 
of the solar system. Quantitatively, it is highly accurate, and it has been confirmed 
by the experience people have gathered by launching artificial satellites and other 
vehicles into outer space. Since it provides an explanation for many details of 
planetary motion, many people will argue that it must be giving a correct account 
of the fundamental causes underlying planetary motion. 
However, even though this theory has been highly successful, it does have some 
shortcomings. These include the following: 
(1) To this day, Newtonian theory cannot account for the long-term behavior of 
the outer planets, namely Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto. One way to account for this 
is to posit the existence of an additional planet (or planets) that is influencing 
these planets. However, such a planet is thus far unknown. 
(2) The story is often told that the French astronomer Leverrier predicted the 
position of the then unknown planet Neptune by gravitational calculations based 
on the orbit of Uranus, and that Galle in Berlin pointed his telescope in the 
indicated direction and found the planet right where Leverrier said it would be. 
This created an international sensation at the time. In addition, John Adams of 
England independently made calculations giving nearly the same prediction as 
Leverrier. However, further analysis quietly showed that “the planet Neptune is 
not the planet to which geometrical analysis had directed the telescope, and that its 
discovery by Galle must be regarded as a happy accident” (PL, p. 125). The 
discovery of Pluto involves a similar story (DR). 
The erroneous stories of the discovery of Neptune and Pluto by gravitational 
calculation are still being repeated in various books and articles. This shows that 
the literature of modern astronomy is not fully reliable.

=== PAGE 89 ===

89
(3) In the 1870’s Leverrier argued that discrepancies in the orbit of Mercury could 
be explained by the existence of a planet between Mercury and the sun. Such a 
planet was, in fact, repeatedly observed. It was called Vulcan, and Leverrier 
calculated an orbit for it, based on observations. Now, however, it is believed that 
this planet never existed and that the reported observations of it were all illusory. 
If this is so, then the derivation of an orbit from spurious observations suggests 
that considerable fudging was involved in Leverrier’s calculations. On the other 
hand, if a planet-sized object did travel in Leverrier’s orbit, then what became of it? 
(CR1, pp. 46–71) 
(4) One of the most striking theoretical developments of 20th-century physics was 
Einstein’s general theory of relativity, which accounted for the anomaly in 
Mercury’s orbit. However, some have claimed that Newtonian theory can explain 
this if the sun’s shape is sufficiently oblate (CR1, p. 28). And others have pointed 
out that there is an anomaly in the orbit of Venus that cannot be accounted for if 
Einstein’s theory correctly accounts for the anomaly in Mercury’s orbit (CR1, pp. 
132–33). 
(5) During Nov. 11–12, 1940, over  200 observers cooperated in studying the 
transit of Mercury across the sun. The transit began 36 seconds late and lasted 18 
seconds less than it should have, according to gravitational calculations (CR2, p. 
27). Transits of Galilean satellites across Jupiter also have been repeatedly reported 
to occur minutes from their calculated times (CR2, p. 79). 
(6) Theories of planet formation based on Newtonian dynamics require that all 
planets should rotate on their axes in the same direction in which they rotate 
around the sun (i.e., counterclockwise as seen from the north celestial pole). 
Recent radar measurements have shown that Venus revolves on its axis in a 
clockwise direction and always keeps one side facing the earth at times when 
Venus is closest to the earth. This is hard to explain, since tidal influences of the 
earth on Venus should be very weak. We should also note that pre-radar 
measurements showed that Venus rotates in a counterclockwise direction with a 
period of either 23 hours or 225 days. Recent measurements have also shown that 
the atmosphere of Venus has a clockwise rotation period of 5 days (CR2, pp. 302–
4). 
(7) The rings of the planet Saturn have many puzzling features, including the 
presence of many annular gaps. These are strange enough to provoke the following 
assessment: 
At the very least, resonance theory cannot account for the thousands of gaps—
there are not nearly enough resonances. Indeed, some astronomers ask whether 
resonances can really explain any gaps. Sweeper moons might plow out some gaps, 
but the Voyager photographs do not reveal these postulated satellites. More 
ominously for celestial mechanics, the complex, dynamic nature of the rings seems 
beyond the power of Newtonian dynamics to explain and may require a whole new 
theoretical structure [CR2, p. 282]. 
(8) In May of 1976 the Laser Geodynamic Satellite was placed in an accurately 
determined orbit at an altitude of about 3,700 miles. The satellite was found to lose 
altitude at roughly ten times the rate attributable to aerodynamic drag and other 
known forces (CR2, p. 13).

=== PAGE 90 ===

90
(9) Small discrepancies in the orbital motion of the moon have led some 
investigators to propose that the gravitational constant G is slowly changing (CR1, 
pp. 260–64, 688). 
(10) A team of researchers in Greenland has recently reported evidence for a small, 
non-Newtonian component in the force of gravity, and similar results have been 
reported by other investigators. It is interesting to note that the Greenland team 
includes physicists dedicated to new quantum mechanical theories of gravitation 
that make non-Newtonian predictions (DS). 
The gravitational discrepancies in this list mostly involve small effects, but we 
include them to show that existing theories of gravitation are approximate 
descriptions of nature rather than exact accounts of how nature works. These 
examples also show how illusion and wishful thinking can play a role in making 
scientific theories seem more perfect than they actually are. 
The underlying causes of gravitation have been a topic of controversy in the 
science of physics for a very long time. Newton himself stressed that his theory was 
only a numerical description of observable effects, and he deliberately made no 
hypotheses about underlying causes. He spoke of gravitation as “action at a 
distance,” but the idea of a force acting mysteriously across empty space seemed 
abhorrent to Newton and other scientists, both in his day and the present. Thus 
the history of physics in the 18th and 19th centuries was marked by many attempts 
to explain gravitation through some kind of interaction of substances or particles 
moving through space. Unfortunately, all of these attempts were unsuccessful (RP, 
pp. 77–78). 
In recent years Einstein’s general theory of relativity has explained gravity as a 
bending of four-dimensional space-time. However, this theory has not been 
accepted as final by physicists, and attempts are now being made to formulate a 
quantum mechanical theory of gravitation. Since quantum mechanics is now 
accepted by physicists as the basis for understanding all atomic phenomena, such a 
theory is required to provide a consistent foundation for modern physics. Thus far, 
however, physicists have encountered insurmountable difficulties in their efforts to 
construct a quantum theory of gravitation, and the nature of gravity remains an 
open question. 
Çréla Prabhupäda has pointed out that, according to the Vedic understanding, 
planets float in outer space by the manipulation of air (SB 5.23.3p). He has rejected 
the idea of gravitation, calling it an imaginary law, but he has also said that the 
visible effects produced by the real causes of planetary motion can be called 
gravitation if one so desires. Since the issue of gravitation is so important, we 
should make a few observations about these statements. 
First, when the Vedic scriptures speak of the planets being carried by the wind, we 
might think they are naively assuming that our atmosphere extends all the way to 
the planets. However, we have seen in Section 4.d that outer space, or antarikña, is 
said in the Bhägavatam to begin a short distance above the earth at the upper limit 
of the clouds and ordinary winds. Thus the pravaha wind, which carries the 
planets, is of a different character than the winds of this earth. (The Siddhänta-
çiromaëi lists seven different types of winds, including ävaha, or atmosphere, and 
pravaha. See Appendix 1.) 
Second, we should note that the Vedic literature also states that the planetary 
systems are supported by the Ananta Çeña expansion of Lord Viñëu. This can be

=== PAGE 91 ===

91
reconciled with the statement that the planets float by manipulation of air if we 
suppose that the action of Ananta Çeña is the fundamental cause of planetary 
motion and that the manipulations of air are secondary, or represent the material 
consequences of the action of Ananta Çeña. Similarly, one could view the 
phenomena described by gravitational theories as being consequences of these 
subtle manipulations of air. 
Finally, there is the question of how a theory of gravitation should deal with the 
matter composing the invisible realms of the universe, including Bhü-maëòala. 
Here we confront our almost total lack of knowledge of the physics of higher-
dimensional material domains. 
 
6.C. Space Travel 
In recent years the public has received many reports of flights through outer space 
made by manned and unmanned vehicles launched from the United States and 
Russia. These include manned and unmanned orbital flights around the earth and 
journeys by robot vehicles to Venus, Mars, and other planets. And, of course, the 
most spectacular of these adventures in outer space were the Apollo flights to the 
moon. In this subsection we will discuss what Çréla Prabhupäda had to say about 
these flights. We will begin by discussing the Vedic idea of space travel. 
The Vedic literature contains many references to the idea of traveling from planet 
to planet through outer space. For some beings, such as great yogés and demigods, 
it is possible to travel from one part of the universe to another by the direct use of 
mystic siddhis. No machines are required, and the empowered being is able to 
transcend the constraints of ordinary space and time. However, as we mentioned in 
Chapter 5, machines are also used for interplanetary travel, and it would seem that 
many beings who are capable of traveling through space on their own also 
customarily make use of such machines. 
We can gather from various references that these machines, which are typically 
called vimänas, or airplanes, fall into a number of different categories, including 
literal space ships (ka-pota-väyu) and also mind ships (äkäça-patana) (SB 
4.12.27p). In SB 4.6.27p, vimänas run by mantric hymns are mentioned, and in CC 
AL 5.22p, it is stated that the airplanes in Satyaloka are controlled not by gross 
mechanical means (yantra) but by psychic action (mantra). The higher-
dimensional milieu of the upper planetary systems is the natural domain of flying 
machines of this type. It is interesting to note that Brahmä’s swan carrier is 
apparently a subtle mechanism of this kind, and not a sentient living entity (SB 
3.24.20p). Also, even though yogés are capable of traveling through space under 
their own power, we read that at the time of annihilation, the yogés living on 
Maharloka use airplanes to escape from the fire emanating from Ananta and fly to 
Satyaloka (SB 2.2.26). 
In SB 2.2.23p, Çréla Prabhupäda states that it is not possible to go beyond 
Svargaloka or Janaloka by either gross or subtle mechanical means. This suggests 
that in the heavenly planets below the level of Tapoloka and Satyaloka there are 
classes of subtle machines that are not capable of reaching these higher realms. 
There are many references to the vimänas of the demigods, which typically seem to 
be used as celestial pleasure craft. These vehicles, like the demigods themselves, 
must operate at a level beyond the limits of our ordinary, gross senses. However, 
the existence of still more powerful vehicles is indicated by the story of Kardama

=== PAGE 92 ===

92
Muni’s flying city (SB 3.33.15p), and also, of course, by the accounts of 
transcendental vimänas, such as the one that carried Dhruva Mahäräja to 
Vaikuëöha (SB 4.12.34p). 
Up to the time of Mahäräja Parékñit, vimänas of the demigods regularly visited the 
earth (SB 1.19.18p), and persons such as Çälva would occasionally acquire 
remarkable flying machines by performing penances to satisfy demigods. It would 
seem that during this period, even materialistically inclined people were well aware 
of the existence of higher beings, and thus instead of trying to develop their own 
technology, such people would naturally turn to the demigods to satisfy their 
material desires. However, with the advent of the Kali-yuga, the earth (or at least 
the portion of the earth known to us) was placed under celestial quarantine, and 
access to higher planets was largely cut off (SB 2.6.29p). 
It does seem, however, that flight to other planets is sometimes possible for human 
beings during the Kali-yuga. In SB 2.7.37 we read, “When the atheists, after being 
well versed in the Vedic scientific knowledge, annihilate inhabitants of different 
planets, flying unseen in the sky on well-built rockets prepared by the great 
scientist Maya, the Lord will bewilder their minds by dressing Himself attractively 
as Buddha and will preach on subreligious principles.” According to Çréla Jéva 
Gosvämé, this remarkable verse refers to a different Kali-yuga than the present one. 
We gather from the nature of the rockets and the name of their designer that in 
this age, atheistic people of this earth had mastered some techniques of higher-
dimensional travel and were able to challenge the authority of the demigods. 
6.c.1. The Moon Flight 
Çréla Prabhupäda has often said that the astronauts have never actually visited the 
moon. Since this is a very controversial topic, we will discuss his various 
statements on this issue at some length. As we will see, these statements mainly fall 
into two categories. These are (1) that the demigods will not allow human beings 
to enter higher planets because human beings are not qualified to do so, and (2) 
that the astronauts have not experienced the celestial opulences actually existing 
on the moon, and therefore they could not have gone there. 
In SB 1.5.18p Çréla Prabhupäda states, “Some are trying to reach the moon or other 
planets by some mechanical arrangement.… But it is not to happen. By the law of 
the Supreme, different places are meant for different grades of living beings 
according to the work they have performed.” He has said that the moon, Venus, 
and the sun are inaccessible to the “inexperienced scientists” because they are 
higher planets that can be attained only by works done in the mode of goodness 
(SB 2.8.14p). He has described the attempt of the scientists of this earth to reach 
the moon as being as demonic as the attack of Rähu (SB 5.24.3p), and has said that 
such travel will be barred by Indra, who has a standard policy of preventing 
unqualified people from reaching the heavenly planets (SB 8.11.5p). Thus the 
immigration policy of the demigods is one important reason Çréla Prabhupäda gives 
for why the astronauts could not have gone to the moon. 
Çréla Prabhupäda frequently uses the fact that the astronauts did not experience the 
celestial conditions on the moon as evidence that they did not go there. Thus he 
points out that the astronauts did not meet anyone on the moon, “what to speak of 
meeting the moon’s predominating deity” (SB 4.22.54p). In SB 6.4.6p and 8.5.34p 
he comments that since the moon-god is the presiding deity of vegetation, there 
must be vegetation on the moon, and yet the scientists say that it is a barren desert.

=== PAGE 93 ===

93
In SB 2.3.11p, 8.2.14p, and 8.22.32p, he cites the scientists’ lack of knowledge of 
the variety of life on other planets as evidence that the moon trip failed. And in SB 
10.3.27p he argues that those who reach the moon attain a life of 10,000 years, and 
thus the astronauts could not have gone. 
Çréla Prabhupäda makes several statements suggesting that higher-dimensional 
travel is needed to reach the moon. Thus in SB 1.9.45p he refers to the futility of 
trying to use mechanical spacecraft, and says that finer methods are needed. In SB 
3.32.3p he points out that “it is not possible to reach the moon by any material 
vehicle like a sputnik,” even though it hardly seems impossible to hurl a gross 
material object over a few thousand miles of space, or even several million. Finally, 
he indicates that to reach the orbit of the moon, it is first necessary to cross the 
Mänasa Lake and Sumeru Mountain (LB, p. 48). As we have already pointed out, 
no ordinary trajectory to the moon will pass by these particular landmarks. 
We therefore suggest that when Çréla Prabhupäda says that the astronauts did not 
go to the moon, he is referring to higher-dimensional travel to the celestial realm 
of the moon. From the Vedic point of view it is natural to interpret “travel to the 
moon” as travel in this sense. After all, if the moon is actually a celestial planet, 
then a journey to a place full of nothing but dust and rocks certainly couldn’t 
count as a trip to the moon. 
In an interview with a reporter in 1968 Çréla Prabhupäda stressed that the human 
body is not suited to live in the atmosphere of the moon. When asked whether 
spacesuits could make up for this deficiency, he said that if we could use scientific 
methods to change the nature of our bodies, then we might be able to visit the 
moon. But he regarded this possibility as very remote, and said that the spacesuits 
would not be sufficient. 
When the reporter asked whether the inhabitants of the moon would be visible or 
invisible, Çréla Prabhupäda said that they would be “almost invisible,” with subtle 
material bodies (CN, p. 179). This implies that the world of the demigods, 
including their dwellings, food, conveyances, and so on, would also be invisible to 
us. By definition, such a world is higher-dimensional: it is invisible to us but not to 
the beings living in it. To enter into it, we would indeed require more than a 
spacesuit: we would also need an “invisible” bodily form that could interact with 
the world of the lunar demigods. 
This leaves open the question of whether or not the astronauts traveled in three-
dimensional space to the moon that we directly perceive in the sky. We have 
pointed out that a higher-dimensional location can have a three-dimensional 
projection, just as a three-dimensional office address in New York City (given by 
avenue, street, and floor) has a two-dimensional projection (namely avenue and 
street). Thus the astronauts may have gone to the three-dimensional location of the 
moon without making the higher-dimensional journey needed to actually reach the 
kingdom of Candra. This would be comparable to visiting Våndävana on the earth 
without being able to perceive the spiritual world that is actually there. 
This is a definite possibility, although we do not know for certain whether it is 
true. A second possibility is that the astronauts may have been deluded by the 
demigods at some stage of their journey and may never have reached the gross 
moon planet. Thus, Çréla Prabhupäda has suggested that the astronauts may have 
been diverted to the planet Rähu (SB 4.29.69p). A third possibility, of course, is 
that the true story of the moon trip has been obscured by manmade illusions. Çréla

=== PAGE 94 ===

94
Prabhupäda has expressed doubt as to the honesty of the moon explorers, both in 
the Bhägavatam 5.17.4p and in private conversations. 
This brings us to the question of whether or not there was a moon hoax. 
Obviously, this is a very touchy question, and we have no definite evidence that 
settles it one way or another. Here we will simply give one piece of evidence 
suggesting that published reports of the moon landings may not have been fully 
honest. Figure 18 shows an official published picture of the Apollo lunar module 
on the surface of the moon (MSF, p. 397). The clearly visible footprints confirm 
the astronauts’ statements that the lunar surface was soft and dusty. The rocket 
engine of the lunar module can be seen beneath the craft, a few feet above the 
surface. 
As the lunar module descended to the surface of the moon, these rockets would 
have been firing continuously to break the vehicle’s downward motion and also 
support its weight. Under the lunar gravitational pull (which is 1/6 as strong as the 
earth’s gravity) the module would have weighed some 1,300 kg after expending 
most of its descent-stage propellant (MSF, p. 298). The question is, With the 
engine firing with enough power to support this much weight and break the 
module’s fall, why do we see no disturbance caused by the rocket exhaust in the 
soil beneath the engine? The engine was supposedly shut down when the vehicle 
was about 1.52 meters above the surface (MSF, p. 300). One would think that its 
exhaust would have left some recognizable streaks or markings on the soft lunar 
soil. Yet none can be seen in this picture or in other, similar ones. 
In summary, Çréla Prabhupäda rejected the idea that men had visited the moon on 
the grounds that these men were not qualified to enter a higher planet and that 
their descriptions of their journey indicated they had not done so. He also 
indicated that their gross mechanical methods were not suitable for entering a 
higher planet. Apart from these firm conclusions, Çréla Prabhupäda mentioned a 
few tentative possibilities as to what might have actually transpired on the moon 
flight, and he expressed general doubts as to the honesty of the people involved 
with space exploration. In this area there are many opportunities for cheating, and 
there is evidence suggesting that some cheating has taken place. However, to 
obtain conclusive proof of large-scale cheating would be very difficult, and possibly 
dangerous. 
6.D. The Universal Globe and Beyond 
According to the Bhägavatam, this universe consists of a spherical inner portion 
four billion miles in diameter, surrounded by a series of seven coverings. In this 
subsection we will describe the nature and dimensions of these coverings and 
compare this aspect of Vedic cosmology with the modern conception of the distant 
regions of the universe. 
Modern Western cosmologists have generally regarded the universe as having the 
same basic nature in all locations. One uniform geometrical framework is used to 
describe all space. Matter is regarded as existing in space, and it is assumed that the 
physical laws of our earthly laboratory experience govern the interactions between 
material elements in all parts of the universe. Thus the different conditions 
prevailing in different locations are attributed solely to the different arrangements 
of matter temporarily existing at those locations. 
Traditionally, the geometrical framework has been three-dimensional Euclidian 
geometry, and thus the universe has been assumed to extend uniformly to infinity

=== PAGE 95 ===

95
in all directions. In recent years, however, Einstein introduced four-dimensional 
non-Euclidian geometries, in which space can curve back on itself in a manner 
analogous to the curved surface of a sphere. This allowed people to formulate 
models of the universe in which the total volume of space is finite but there are no 
boundaries, and in which conditions are still essentially the same everywhere. 
In Vedic cosmology the material world is not assumed to be of the same nature in 
all places, and space is not postulated as an absolute background within which all 
phenomena take place. Rather, material space, or ether, is generated at a certain 
phase in the process of creation, and this takes place only in certain bounded 
domains, called brahmäëòas. Çréla Prabhupäda has spoken of these domains as 
universes and thus given a new meaning to this English word. 
As we have described in Chapter 2, the Vedic literature takes the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead to be the ultimate source of all manifestations, and it 
maintains that the universes are generated by the transformation of the Lord’s 
external energy. In the process of creation, the material elements are generated in 
the following order: mahat-tattva, false ego, mind, intelligence, sound, ether, 
touch, air, form, fire, taste, water, odor, and earth (SB 3.26.23–44). 
Here the term mahat-tattva refers to the manifest form of Kåñëa’s total material 
energy, which is produced from pradhäna, the unmanifest or undifferentiated form 
of that energy (SB 3.26.10 and 17–20). The mahat-tattva is the source of the false 
ego, a material energy that serves to cover the true self-awareness of the 
conditioned living beings. The false ego operates in three modes, called goodness, 
passion, and ignorance, and thereby generates mind, intelligence, and subtle 
sound. Here, sound (çabda-tanmätra) refers not to a vibration within gross matter 
but to a subtle energy that generates the gross material elements and vibrates 
within the element of false ego in ignorance. Ether, the first element produced 
from this energy, is the source of the subsequent elements in our list. 
When the Vedic ether is mentioned, the objection will often be raised that the idea 
of an ether was banished from physics by Einstein’s theory of relativity. This 
objection refers to the classical “luminiferous ether,” which was shown by the 
Michelson-Morley experiment to be stationary with respect to the earth (see 
Section 6.a). This conception of the ether was indeed rejected by Einstein, but he 
simply replaced it with another conception. In fact, Einstein said, “According to 
the general theory of relativity, space without ether is unthinkable; for in such 
space there would not only be no propagation of light, but also no possibility of 
existence for standards of space and time” (CH, pp. 53–54). 
 According to the Third Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, ether is the basic fabric of 
material space. Since air, fire, water, and earth are produced from ether, these gross 
material elements can be regarded as transformations of space. It is interesting to 
note that such ideas have been recently contemplated by modern physicists. For 
example, the theory of geometrodynamics created by the physicist John Wheeler is 
an attempt to define all matter in terms of perturbations in the fabric of space. 
Also, the scientists working on quantum mechanical versions of general relativity 
are all trying, in effect, to show how the fabric of space can be derived from some 
kind of wave motion (or quantum wave function). This can be compared with the 
Vedic idea that ether is generated from subtle sound. 
It is also interesting to note that in the Vedic process of creation, the sequential 
unfolding of the elements from ether involves an alternation of gross material

=== PAGE 96 ===

96
substances and modes of sense perception (tanmätras). Thus, according to the 
Vedic conception, the properties of matter are intimately tied together with the 
processes of sense perception occurring in conscious living entities. This aspect of 
matter is completely disregarded in modern physics, although there is some 
recognition by quantum theorists such as Eugene Wigner that a complete theory of 
matter must take into account the existence of a conscious observer (WG). 
Since our theme in this book is the structure of the universe, we will not discuss 
the process of creation of the elements in more detail. For us the key feature of this 
process is as follows: In the first step, “a part of the material nature, after being 
initiated by the Lord, is known as the mahat-tattva” (SB 2.2.28p). The generation 
of false ego occurs within a restricted part of the mahat-tattva. Within part of this 
region, subtle sound becomes manifest, and then ether becomes manifest within 
part of the region of subtle sound. In general, each successive element becomes 
manifest within a small portion of the region in which the preceding element is 
present. This is described by Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, who is cited by Çréla Prabhupäda 
in this connection in SB 2.2.28p. 
The result is that the material energy becomes filled with innumerable spherical 
regions of mahat-tattva and false ego. Each of these regions constitutes a particular 
universe, or brahmäëòa, and contains concentric spherical regions in which the 
successive material elements are manifest. Within the center of each of these 
systems of concentric globes is a hollow region containing the inhabited planetary 
systems of that universe. 
The part of the universe in which one element is manifest but the subsequent 
element is not is called the universal shell or covering corresponding to that 
element. Generally, it is said that the inner, hollow portion of the universe is 
covered by seven successive shells, each ten times as thick as the one within it (SB 
3.11.41). In different parts of the Bhägavatam Çréla Prabhupäda gives a number of 
partial lists of these different coverings. Since doubt is sometimes expressed as to 
what elements the various coverings consist of, we have collected together some of 
these lists in Table 13. 
TABLE 13 
The Coverings of the Universe 
 
 
(1) 
   (2)    (3)    (4)    (5)    (6)    (7)  
1 
 
 
 earth  
earth earth earth  
2 
water  
 water  water water water water  
3 
fire 
fire, 
                     effulgenc  fire    fire    fire   fire 
  fire 
 
4 
air 
 air 
   air 
   air 
 
  air 
   air 
 
5 
sky 
ether   ether    sky  
ether sky 
 
6 
ego, 
      noumenon 
 
ego 
 
mind material energy 
 
7    material nature 
       mahat-tattva 
ego 
false ego 
 
Here we compare seven different lists of the coverings of the universe given in the 
Bhägavatam. These are taken from: (1) SB 2.1.25p, (2) SB 2.2.28p, (3) SB 3.11.41p, 
(4) SB 3.26.52p, (5) SB 3.29.43p, (6) SB 3.32.9, and (7) SB 6.16.37p. (In two cases, 
air is listed before fire in one place and also listed in the standard order on the

=== PAGE 97 ===

97
same page. We have taken these to be typographical errors and assumed that the 
standard order is correct.) 
One question that is sometimes raised is, Does the first covering of the universe 
consist of earth or water? From this table we conclude that Çréla Prabhupäda was 
generally alluding only briefly to the coverings and not trying to give an exhaustive 
enumeration of them. We therefore suggest that the innermost layer of the 
universe must be of earth, since it is listed as earth four times. In the cases where 
water is listed as the first covering, it may be that the earth-covering is being 
amalgamated with the inner, earthly region of the universe. In general, it would 
seem that in some lists certain layers are amalgamated together, while in others 
they are subdivided. 
In SB 5.21.11p Çréla Prabhupäda indicates that the coverings of the universe make 
it impossible for us to see the suns of other universes. We note that this should be 
impossible even if the layers of earth, water, and air were perfectly transparent. The 
reason for this is that light as we experience it is a manifestation of the fire 
element, and thus where there is light there is fire (SB 3.26.38–40). Therefore, it 
should not be possible for light from the interior of a given universe to pass 
beyond that universe’s shell of fire. (There is light in the region beyond the 
universal coverings, but this is not material light, and it cannot be seen unless one 
has attained a certain level of spiritual advancement. Thus, the light of the all-
pervading brahmajyoti is all around us, but it cannot be seen with ordinary vision.) 
In the Båhad-bhägavätamåta the coverings are listed as being made of earth, water, 
light, air, ether, ego, and mahat-tattva (BB, pp. 134–35). There it is stated that 
variegated activities take place within each shell. Each shell is presided over by a 
demigoddess, beginning with the earth goddess, Bhümi, in the first shell and 
ending with Prakåti, the personified material energy, in the last. A yogé who is 
trying to attain liberation by leaving the material universe is presented with 
temptations within each shell, which he must overcome in order to continue his 
journey. 
In SB 3.11.41p it is stated that the earthly covering of the universe is ten times the 
thickness of the universe itself, or 40 billion miles. This is confirmed in other 
places in the Bhägavatam, including SB 3.29.43p. However, it is stated in SB 
2.2.28p that the first covering extends “eighty million miles.” This can be 
reconciled with the other statements about the first layer if it is a misprint and 
should read “eighty billion miles.” In that case the figure of 80 would refer to the 
total thickness of the first shell along a diameter of the universe, whereas 40 billion 
refers to its thickness along a radius. 
If we assume that the first shell has a radial thickness of forty billion miles, and 
that each successive shell is ten times as thick as the one preceding it, then the 
outer radius of the seventh shell comes to 44,444,442 billion miles. The inner 
region containing the planetary systems is therefore extremely small compared to 
the thickness of the outer coverings of the universe. According to CC AL 5.22p the 
universes are themselves innumerable, and they float in foamlike clusters within 
the unlimited Causal Ocean. Thus we can see that the idea of vast cosmic distances 
is present in the Vedic literature, and is not solely a product of recent cosmological 
thinking.

=== PAGE 98 ===

98
6.d.1. The Scale of Cosmic Distances 
At this point the objection may be raised that although the scale of the clustered 
universal globes may be very large, the inner globe of this particular universe is 
described as being far too small to accommodate everything we can observe in the 
sky. It is not  possible to fit even the solar system within a 2-billion-mile radius, 
what  to speak of stars and distant galaxies. Thus, if what we can see must indeed 
lie within the earthly, or even the fiery, shell of this universe, then the Vedic 
account is seriously contradicted by modern observations. 
In response to this objection we can offer the following tentative observations. In 
Section 4.c we observed that the rate of passage of time is much slower on 
Satyaloka than it is on the earth. We suggested that there might also be a 
comparable transformation of space in the region of Satyaloka. Thus, while a yogé 
traveling to Satyaloka may experience that he is crossing 2 billion miles, from our 
point of view he might be covering a much greater distance. We therefore suggest 
that when the Vedic literature speaks of a distance of 2 billion miles to the shell of 
the universe, it is referring to this distance as it would be perceived by the 
demigods, yogés, and åñis who can actually make this trip. 
In Chapter 1 we discussed a purport from Caitanya-caritämåta that is consistent 
with this idea. CC ML 21.84 states that the diameter of this universe is 4 billion 
miles. This yields a circumference of approximately 12.566 billion miles. Yet in the 
purport Çréla Prabhupäda cites information from Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté 
indicating that the circumference of the universe is 18,712,069,200,000,000 x 8, or 
149,696,553.6 billion miles. If we are to take this figure seriously, then we must 
accept that there exist different scales of distance that can be applied to the 
universe. In Chapter 1 we calculated on the basis of this figure (plus some 
considerations involving the length of the yojana) that the radius of the universe 
must be about 5,077 light-years. This would mean that the diameter of the fiery 
shell (marking the ultimate limit for the travel of material light) must be 4,442 X 
5,077, or some 22.5 million, light-years, a respectable distance even by modern 
cosmological standards. 
In SB 3.26.52p Çréla Prabhupäda states, “The space within the hollow of the 
universe cannot be measured by any human scientist or anyone else.” This also 
suggests that something unexpected must happen to space (as well as time) as one 
approaches the universal shell, for it hardly seems impossible to measure a 
distance of 2 billion miles in ordinary space. That such a transformation of space 
and time should occur is in agreement with the basic character of the universal 
coverings themselves. As one passes from covering to covering, the nature of the 
material manifestation is progressively transformed, until finally one emerges into 
a purely spiritual realm (SB 2.2.28p). Thus, it would not be surprising if 
transformations of the material energy and its laws of operation were to occur as 
one approached the first universal shell. 
6.E. The Nature of Stars 
In modern astronomy stars are regarded as suns that are so far away from us that 
they appear as the minute points of light we see at night. Some stars are regarded 
as being as large and bright as our sun, and some are regarded as being much 
brighter or much dimmer. Modern astronomers have worked out an elaborate 
theory of the inner workings of stars, and they claim to be able to explain in detail 
their origin, life history, and final demise.

=== PAGE 99 ===

99
In contrast, Çréla Prabhupäda has repeatedly compared the stars to reflecting 
planets or moons. His reasoning is presented in the purport to the verse in 
Bhagavad-gétä, where Kåñëa states, “Among the stars I am the moon” (BG 10.21). 
There Çréla Prabhupäda says, “It appears from this verse that the moon is one of 
the stars; therefore the stars that twinkle in the sky also reflect the light of the sun. 
The theory that there are many suns within the universe is not accepted by Vedic 
literature. The sun is one, and as by the reflection of the sun the moon illuminates, 
so also do the stars. Since the Bhagavad-gétä indicates herein that the moon is one 
of the stars, the twinkling stars are not suns but are similar to the moon.” 
In BG 15.12 it is directly said that the sun illuminates the entire universe, and Çréla 
Prabhupäda comments, “From this verse we can understand that the sun is 
illuminating the whole solar system. There are different universes and solar 
systems, and there are different suns, moons, and planets also, but in each universe 
there is only one sun.” A similar statement is made in BG 13.34, and Çréla 
Prabhupäda speaks of the unique position of the sun and the moonlike nature of 
the stars in SB 3.15.2p, 4.29.42p, and 5.16.1p, as well as in TQK,20  p. 102. 
It is clear that from the viewpoint of demigods and yogés, all the stars and planets 
of the universe lie within a fairly small neighborhood and can be reached by 
interplanetary travel. Thus, the stars in the Kåttikä constellation (corresponding to 
the Pleiades) are associated with the wives of the moon-god (SB 6.6.23), and the 
seven stars of the big dipper are associated with the seven sages. (We also read in 
SB 1.9.8p that Candramäsé, the wife of Båhaspati, was “one of the reputed stars.”) 
In SB 5.22.11 it is stated that 28 important stars headed by Abhijit are located 
200,000 yojanas above the moon. This distance seems short indeed, but we should 
consider that in this verse the word nakñatra, or star, has a special meaning. In 
Vedic astronomy there are 28 important constellations, headed by Abhijit. Of 
these, 27 lie along the ecliptic and are used to divide it into 27 equal units of 13-
1/3 degrees. These constellations are referred to as nakñatras, or lunar mansions. 
They are particularly connected with the motion of the moon, since the moon 
completes one orbit in about 27.3 days. In SB 5.22.5 the nakñatras are referred to in 
the following statement: “According to stellar calculations, a month equals two and 
one quarter constellations.” (Note that 2-1/4 times 13-1/3 degrees equals 30 
degrees.) 
The 28 nakñatras are mentioned in the description of the çiçumära-cakra in 
Chapter 23 of the Fifth Canto. The çiçumära-cakra is an imaginary form in the 
heavens that is made up of constellations and visualized as a gigantic animal. This 
form is worshiped by some yogés as a manifestation of the viräöa-rüpa, or the 
external form of Kåñëa. Table 14 lists the 28 nakñatras and the Western (Greek and 
Arabic) names for their principal stars, or yoga-täras. These identifications are 
from SS, p. 62. We have also indicated the different parts of the çiçumära-cakra 
that these nakñatras represent. These are taken from SB 5.23.7.

=== PAGE 100 ===

100
TABLE 14 
The Lunar Mansions 
 
Part of 
Çiçumära-cakra 
    Nakñatra 
            Western Star 
                                                                           Name 
 
    n 
                             Revaté 
             Zeta Piscium  
    n 
                             Açviné 
             Alpha Arietis  
    n 
                             Bharané 
                 Musca 
 
    n 
                             Kåttikä 
            Pi Tauri, Pleiades 
 
    n 
                             Rohiëé 
          Alpha Tauri, Aldebaran 
 
    n 
                           Mågaçérña               Lambda Orionis 
 
 right foot 
                   Ärdrä 
               Alpha Orionis 
 
   loins                           Punarvasu              Beta Geminorum 
 
   loins                              Puñya 
              Delta Cancri  
 left foot 
                 Äçleñä 
           Alpha 1 & 2 Cancri  
     s 
                            Maghä 
          Alpha Leonis, Regulus  
     s 
                        Pürva-phalguné 
     Delta Leonis 
 
     s 
                     Uttarä-phalguné 
    Beta Leonis  
     s 
                          Hasta 
         Gamma or Delta Corvi  
     s 
                           Citra 
           Alpha Virginis, Spica  
     s 
                            Sväti 
            Alpha Bootis, Arcturus 
 
     s 
                          Viçäkhä 
             Alpha or Xi Libra 
 
     s 
                         Anurädhä 
               Delta Scorpionis 
 
left shoulder               Jyeñöhä 
            Alpha Scorpionis, Antares 
 
left ear                            Müla 
                  Nu Scorpionis 
 
left eye              
Pürväñädhä 
                  Delta Sagitarii 
 
left nostril 
           Uttaräñädhä 
                  Tau Sagitarii 
 
right nostril              Abhijit 
                  Alpha Lyri 
 
right eye 
            Çravaëä 
                Alpha Aquilae 
 
right ear 
           Dhaniñöhä 
                Alpha Delphini 
 
right shoulder            Satabhiñä 
                 Lambda Aquarii  
    n 
                      Pürvabhädra                   Alpha Pegasi 
 
    n 
                      Uttarabhädra                  Alpha Andromedo 
 
The central comumn lists the 28 nakñatras, or lunar mansions. The column on the 
right lists the Western names for their principal stars. On the left are the parts of 
the body of the çiçumära-cakra represented by these stars. The n’s represent the 
right side and the course of the sun to the north; the s’s represent the left side and 
the course of the sun to the south. 
Apart from the 28 nakñatras, the only stars for which distances are given in the 
Bhägavatam are the planets of the seven sages, which are said to lie 1,100,000 
yojanas above Saturn, and the polestar, Dhruvaloka, which is said to be 1,300,000 
yojanas above these planets (SB 5.22.17 and 5.23.1). 
These distances, of course, are also very small (and as we have indicated in 
Chapter 5, they should be interpreted as heights perpendicular to the plane of Bhü-
maëòala). They conform to the idea that the stars in general are fairly close by, 
from the point of view of the demigods, that they are planets reflecting the light of 
the sun, and that the sun has the unique role of illuminating the entire universe.

=== PAGE 101 ===

101
This does not mean, however, that the distances to the stars as they appear to us 
will necessarily be this small. The distances may seem larger to us than they would 
to a demigod who was actually traversing them. As we have already indicated, the 
higher modes of travel used by the demigods may involve transformations of both 
space and time that make the distances shorter for them than they would be for a 
manmade machine traveling in the ordinary three-dimensional fashion. Thus, it 
might be that a spaceship launched from the earth toward the polestar would 
actually have to travel for many years at nearly the speed of light to get there. 
In SB 3.15.26p Çréla Prabhupäda makes an interesting remark: “By present 
standards, scientists calculate that if one could travel at the speed of light, it would 
take forty thousand years to reach the highest planet of this material world. But the 
yoga system can carry one without limitation or difficulty.” If the distances to the 
stars are really very short, one might ask why Çréla Prabhupäda would apparently 
give credence to this example of the modern idea of interstellar travel. It makes 
perfect sense to do so, however, if the distances as experienced by a three-
dimensional traveler are very large, whereas the distances experienced by a yogé are 
relatively small. 
At this point one might object that if the ordinary, three-dimensional distances to 
the stars are very large, then the inverse square law for the diminution of light 
intensity with distance implies that the stars must be shining very brightly. For the 
stars to appear as bright as they do to us, they must actually be shining as 
brilliantly as suns. Furthermore, the fact that the light of the stars has an emission 
spectrum shows that they are actively generating light and not just passively 
reflecting it. 
In response to this objection, two points should be made. The first is that it is not 
necessary to suppose that stars do not generate their own light. Çréla Prabhupäda 
compares the stars to moons, but he also gives an “educated guess” to the effect 
that there are mild and pleasing flames on the moon that generate illumination (SB 
5.20.13p). Thus the conclusion is that stars may be fiery and thus generate an 
emission spectrum, but they are not independent suns. Indeed, Çréla Prabhupäda 
has said, “The stars may have the same composition as the sun, but they are not 
suns” (letter to Svarüpa Dämodara däsa, Nov. 21, 1975).The second point is that 
the inverse square law for the propagation of light may not hold universally. If that 
is the case, then we cannot conclude that if a star is at a distance of many light-
years, it must therefore be as brilliant as the sun. In general, we propose that it 
cannot be taken for granted that the laws prevailing in remote parts of the universe 
are the same as the laws that hold here on the earth. The Vedic literatures describe 
phenomena on the higher planets that are quite different from the phenomena we 
experience on the earth, and they also indicate that the operation of the material 
energy on the earth was significantly different in earlier yugas (SB 1.4.17p). This 
suggests that laws governing the production and propagation of light might also be 
different in different parts of the universe. Of course, if the laws of physics are 
different in different parts of the universe, then it might also be that stars appear to 
be more distant than they actually are. It may even be that the very idea of distance 
as we know it breaks down in remote regions of the universe. Once we allow the 
laws of physics to vary, the possibilities are limitless.

=== PAGE 102 ===

102
In the next chapter we will show that in modern cosmology, there is abundant 
evidence indicating that the laws of physics may indeed change significantly as one 
travels from the earth to remote regions of the universe. 
VCA7: RED SHIFTS AND 
THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE 
In this chapter we enter into the domain of extra-galactic cosmology and discuss 
the big bang theory and the evidence for an expanding universe. We illustrate how 
scientists construct theoretical models that are mistaken for reality by millions of 
people who encounter them in authoritative textbooks and in popular 
presentations. We show, however, that even within the narrowly defined domain 
of astrophysics, new observations may arise that fundamentally challenge these 
models and reveal them to be mere systems of speculative ideas. In the example 
that we consider, this fundamental challenge shows the need for drastic revisions 
in the modern understanding of the universe as a whole—revisions that thus far 
have not been seriously considered in the scientific community. 
Let us begin with the theory of the big bang. Basically, this is the idea that in the 
beginning (or before the beginning, if you will), all matter in the universe was 
concentrated into an infinitely small volume at an infinitely high temperature and 
pressure. Then, according to the story, it exploded with tremendous force. From 
this explosion rushed a superheated, ionized gas, or plasma. This plasma expanded 
uniformly until it cooled sufficiently to form ordinary gas. Within this cooling 
cloud of expanding gas formed galaxies, and within the galaxies took birth 
generations of stars. In turn planets such as our own earth formed around the 
stars. 
But here’s a fact that few people realize: Even with the most powerful telescopes, it 
is not possible to actually see galaxies moving away from us. The images we see are 
static, and scientists would not expect them to show visible motion, even if 
observations could go on for centuries. 
So how do we really know the universe is expanding? All we have to go on is the 
light and other kinds of radiation that travel to us from across the reaches of 
interstellar space. Images formed from this radiation do not directly show universal 
expansion, but subtle features of the radiation have convinced scientists that this 
expansion is taking place. What scientists do is first assume that the earthly laws of 
physics apply without change throughout the universe. They then try to figure out 
how processes obeying these laws could produce the observed light. 
To understand how scientists have used this way of analyzing light to conclude 
that the universe is expanding, let us go back into the history of astronomy and 
astrophysics. Examining the heavens, astronomers long ago observed that in 
addition to individual stars and planets, there were many faintly glowing bodies in 
the sky. They called them nebulae, a Latin word meaning “clouds,” and later on, as 
their conceptions evolved, they called them galaxies. 
Larger than the full moon in the night sky, yet so dim that it is hardly visible to the 
unaided eye, is the nearby galaxy Andromeda. In the early part of this century, 
astronomers turned powerful new telescopes on this and other galaxies and found 
that they appeared to be vast islands of billions of stars. At further distances are 
found entire clusters of galaxies. 
Until the discovery of stars in Andromeda, it was generally thought that all celestial 
bodies were located within the boundaries of our local Milky Way galaxy. But with

=== PAGE 103 ===

103
this development and the discovery of other, more distant galaxies, all that was 
changed. The dimensions of the universe expanded beyond comprehension. 
Up until the early part of this century, scientists believed that the basic objects in 
the universe were static in relation to one another. Then in 1913 the American 
astronomer Vesto Melvin Slipher came to study the spectra of light coming from a 
dozen prominent nebulae and concluded that they were moving away from the 
earth at speeds of up two million miles per hour. 
How did Slipher reach this astonishing conclusion? For some time, astronomers 
had been using spectrographic analysis to determine the elements present in the 
stars. It was known that the spectrum of light associated with a particular element 
will show a characteristic pattern of lines that serves as a kind of signature for the 
element. 
Slipher noticed that in the spectra of galaxies he studied, the lines for certain 
elements were shifted toward the red part of the spectrum. This curious 
phenomenon is called a “red shift.” Slipher interpreted the red shift as a Doppler 
effect, indicating that the galaxies were moving away. This was the first major step 
toward the idea that the entire universe is expanding. (If the lines in the spectrum 
had been shifted toward the blue end of the spectrum, that would have indicated 
that the galaxies were moving toward the observer.) 
The Doppler effect is often explained by using the example of a train whistle, 
which seems to change pitch as the train goes by. This phenomenon was first 
scientifically studied in 1842 by Christian Johann Doppler, an Austrian physicist. 
He proposed that the intervals between the sound waves emitted from an object 
moving toward a listener are compressed, causing the sound to rise in pitch. 
Similarly, the intervals between sound waves reaching a listener from a source 
moving away are elongated, and thus the sound’s pitch is lower. It is reported that 
Doppler tested this idea by placing trumpet players on a flatcar drawn by a 
locomotive. Musicians with perfect pitch listened carefully as the trumpet players 
moved by them, and they confirmed Doppler’s analysis. 
Doppler predicted a similar effect for light waves. For light, an increase in 
wavelength corresponds to a shift toward the red end of the spectrum. Therefore 
the spectrum of an object moving away from an observer would tend to be shifted 
toward the red. Slipher chose to interpret his observations of galaxies in this way, 
as a Doppler effect. He noted a red shift and decided the galaxies must be moving 
away. 
Another step toward belief in an expanding universe took place in 1917, when 
Einstein published his theory of general relativity. Before Einstein, scientists had 
always assumed that space extended to infinity in all directions and that the 
geometry of space was Euclidean and three-dimensional. But Einstein proposed 
that space could have a different kind of geometry—four-dimensional curved 
space-time, in which space could curve back on itself. 
There are many forms that space could take, according to Einstein’s theory. One is 
a closed space without a boundary, like the surface of a sphere; another is a 
negatively curved space that extends to infinity in all directions. 
Einstein himself thought the universe should be static, and he adjusted his 
equations to insure this outcome. But almost immediately, Willem de Sitter, a 
Dutch astronomer, found solutions to Einstein’s equations that predicted a rapidly 
expanding universe. The geometry of space would change with time.

=== PAGE 104 ===

104
7.A. Hubble’s Expanding Universe Model 
De Sitter’s work caused a stir among astronomers around the world. One of them 
was Edwin Hubble. Hubble had been present when Slipher had announced his 
original findings about the motion of galaxies to a meeting of the American 
Astronomical Society in 1914. In 1928 Hubble set to work at the famous Mt. 
Wilson observatory in an effort to bring together De Sitter’s theory of an expanding 
universe and Slipher’s observations of receding galaxies. 
Hubble reasoned like this: In an expanding universe you would expect the galaxies 
to be moving apart from each other. And the further apart from each other they 
were, the faster they should be moving apart. This would mean that from any 
point, including the earth, an observer should see that all other galaxies are 
moving away and that, on the average, the further away a galaxy is, the faster this 
motion should be. 
Hubble set out to see if this were true and discovered that there seemed to be a 
proportional relationship between the distance of galaxies and the degree of their 
red shifts. Most galaxies, he observed, had red shifts, and the greater the distance, 
the greater the red shift. 
This raises a vexing question: How did Hubble know how far away any given 
galaxy was? That was a very difficult problem for Hubble, and it remains so even 
for today’s astronomers. After all, there are no measuring rods that can reach to the 
stars. But the basic idea is this: We can begin by using various methods to estimate 
the distances of nearby stars. Then, proceeding step by step, we can build a 
“cosmic distance ladder” that gives us estimates of the distances of a few galaxies. 
If we can find a way of guessing the intrinsic brightness of galaxies, we can then 
relate unknown galactic distances to known ones by making measurements of 
apparent galactic brightness. This is according to the inverse square law. 
Here we will not go into the details of the complex procedures used to establish 
this distance ladder. Suffice it to say that they involve many theoretical 
interpretations that are fraught with uncertainty and subject to revision, often in 
unexpected ways. This will emerge as we go along. 
Hubble, using his methods of approximating distance, established a proportional 
relationship, now known as Hubble’s law, between degree of red shift and distance 
for galaxies. He believed he had clearly shown that the galaxies most distant from 
us had the biggest red shifts and were thus receding from us most rapidly. This he 
took as ample evidence that the universe is expanding. 
 Eventually this idea became so solidly established that astronomers began to apply 
it in reverse: If distance is proportional to red shift, then one can measure the 
distance of galaxies simply by measuring their red shifts. 
But as we have noted, Hubble’s distance figures are not direct, accurate 
measurements of how far away galaxies are. Rather, they are derived indirectly 
from the apparent brightness of the galaxies. Thus the expanding universe model 
has two potential defects: First, the brightness and dimness of celestial bodies 
could quite possibly be caused by something other than how far away they are, and 
thus the distance figures derived from them could be flawed. And second, it is 
possible that the red shift might not be connected to velocity. 
In fact, a number of astronomers are convinced that some red shifts are not caused 
by a Doppler effect. And some even go so far as to question the very concept of an 
expanding universe.

=== PAGE 105 ===

105
7.B. Anomalous Red Shifts: 
The Observations of Halton Arp 
One astronomer who doubts the interpretation of all red shifts as Doppler effects is 
Halton Arp, who has served on the staff of the Hale Observatory at Mt. Palomar 
and is currently doing research at the Max Planck Institute near Munich, West 
Germany. At Palomar, Arp observed many examples of discordant red shifts that 
do not follow Hubble’s law. His analysis suggests to him that red shifts in general 
may be due to something other than a Doppler effect. 
Here we should ask why scientists generally interpret red shifts as being caused 
exclusively by the Doppler effect. It may be true that a Doppler effect produces a 
red shift, but how do we know that a red shift must be due to a Doppler effect? 
One of the main reasons for this conclusion is that, according to modern physics, 
the only phenomenon other than a Doppler effect that will produce a pronounced 
red shift is a powerful gravitational field. If light is going up against a gravitational 
field, it loses energy and undergoes a red shift. However, astronomers don’t find 
this explanation applicable for stars and galaxies, because the fields would have to 
be of incredible strength to produce the observed red shift. 
Arp argues that he has found objects with high red shifts in close proximity to ones 
with low red shifts (AR1-4, RC). According to the standard expanding-universe 
theory, an object with a small red shift should be relatively close to us, and an 
object with a large red shift should be far away. Thus, two objects that are 
relatively close to each other should have similar red shifts. 
But Arp gives the following example: The spiral galaxy NGC 7603 is connected to 
a companion galaxy by a luminous bridge, yet the companion galaxy has a red shift 
8,000 kilometers per second higher than that of the spiral galaxy. Judging by the 
disparity in their red shifts, the galaxies should be at vastly different distances—to 
be precise, the companion should be about 478 million light-years further away—
yet strangely, the two galaxies seem close enough to be physically connected. For 
comparison’s sake, our own galaxy, the Milky Way, is said to be just 2 million light 
years from its nearest neighbor, the galaxy Andromeda. 
Of course, there are some defenders of the standard view who strongly disagree 
with Arp’s interpretation. John N. Bahcall, of Princeton’s Institute of Advanced 
Studies, maintains there is no reason to suppose that the two galaxies are 
connected (RC). The objects are actually distant from each other and just appear to 
be closely associated. The so-called luminous bridge is there, but the more distant 
galaxy just happens to be lined up behind it from our point of view. 
To illustrate his criticism, Bahcall gives this specific rebuttal: He shows a 
photograph of a star within our own Milky Way galaxy apparently connected to a 
distant galaxy by what appears to be a luminous bridge. Are they connected? 
Bahcall points out that this is clearly impossible because the star is a bright 
foreground star in our own galaxy, while the distant galaxy is 44 million light-
years away. 
However, Arp responds by saying that Bahcall is just being frivolous. The galaxy he 
shows is not in any way unusual. The luminous bridge to the star is simply one of 
its normal spiral arms. But in the example Arp himself has chosen, the bridge is an 
unusual structure, not normally found in such galaxies. The likelihood that two 
galaxies of this type could be found in such a relationship is far less than the 
likelihood that a star in the Milky Way will be lined up with an ordinary galaxy.

=== PAGE 106 ===

106
Arp has found many other examples that seem to violate the traditional 
understanding of the red shift. Here is one of the most controversial of these 
discoveries: Near the spiral galaxy NGC 4319 is a quasar, Makarian 205, 
apparently connected to the galaxy by a luminous bridge. The galaxy has a red 
shift of 1,800 km per sec, giving it a distance of about 107 million light-years. The 
quasar has a red shift of 21,000 km per sec, which should mean that it is located 
1.24 billion light-years distant. But Arp suggests that they are definitely connected 
and that this shows that the standard interpretation of the red shift is wrong in this 
case. (We may note, by the way, that the very fact that astronomers express red 
shifts in terms of kilometers per second shows their commitment to the idea that 
the red shifts are Doppler effects.) 
Critics took their own photographs of NGC 4319 and claimed not to have found 
the connecting bridge shown in Arp’s picture. Others said the bridge was a 
“spurious photographic effect.” But recently, Jack M. Sulentic, of the University of 
Alabama, did extensive photometric studies of the two objects and concluded that 
the connecting bridge is real (SU). 
Another example of discordant red shifts noted by Arp is found in the highly 
unusual chain of galaxies called Vorontsov-Velyaminov 172, after its Russian 
discoverers. In this chain, the smaller, more compact member has a red shift twice 
as great as the others. 
In addition to pairs of galaxies with discordant red shifts, Arp points out 
something even stranger—it appears that quasars and galaxies can eject other 
quasars and galaxies. Here are some examples: The exploding galaxy NGC 520 has 
a fairly low red shift. Located along a straight line running to the southwest from 
the galaxy are 4 quasars of the faint type. Arp says that these faint quasars are the 
only ones in this region. Could it simply be an accident that they are arranged 
almost exactly on a straight line from the galaxy? Arp says the chances of this are 
extremely remote and suggests that the quasars were ejected from the exploding 
galaxy. 
Interestingly enough, the quasars have much larger red shifts than the galaxy that 
seems to be their parent. This is remarkable, since according to the standard theory 
of the red shift, the quasars should be much further away than the galaxy. Arp 
interprets this and other, similar examples by proposing that freshly ejected 
quasars are born with high red shifts, which gradually decrease as time passes. 
Some scientists question whether it is really possible for galaxies to eject other 
massive objects such as galaxies or quasars. In response, Arp points to a striking 
photograph of the giant galaxy M87 ejecting a jet of material. When we look at the 
galaxies of the elliptical type in the region around galaxy M87 (which is also 
elliptical), we find that they all fall on a line drawn in the direction of the jet of 
ejected material. This suggests to Arp that these galaxies have been ejected by M87. 
How is it that a galaxy can emit another galaxy? If a galaxy is an “island universe” 
consisting of a vast aggregate of stars and gas, how can it emit another galaxy, 
which is a similar aggregate of stars and gas? 
It has been argued that radioastronomy may provide a clue. In recent times, 
radioastronomers have agreed that vast radio-emission areas can be ejected from 
galaxies. These emission areas exist in pairs on either side of some galaxies. To 
explain this, astronomers have postulated gigantic spinning black holes in the 
centers of the galaxies that gobble up nearby stars and spit out material in both

=== PAGE 107 ===

107
directions along their axis of spin. However, if Arp’s analysis is correct, one has not 
only to explain the radiating emission regions, which may be composed of a thin 
gas, but also how entire galaxies or precursors of galaxies might come flying out. 
Regarding the red shifts of such ejected galaxies and quasars, Arp has found the 
following: The ejected objects, although in close proximity to the parent objects, 
have much higher red shifts. Arp maintains this can only mean that their red shifts 
are not due to the Doppler effect. That is, they do not measure the speed at which 
the object is receding. Rather, the red shift has something to do with the actual 
physical state of the object. 
But the present laws of physics provide no inkling of what this state might be. 
Since a galaxy is thought to be composed of many individual stars plus clouds of 
dust and gas, what qualities could it have that would result in a red shift not due to 
velocity or gravitation? This cannot be explained in terms of known physical 
principles. 
This seems to call for new physics. But that opens up a whole Pandora’s box, 
because modern cosmology is completely committed to the assumption that 
everything we see in the universe can be explained by the known laws of physics. 
If the physical laws are fundamentally changed, then all the models based on them 
are brought into question. 
Of course, Arp’s findings are very controversial, and many astronomers doubt that 
the associations between galaxies and quasars he speaks of could actually be real. 
But this is only one line of evidence suggesting that the standard interpretation of 
galactic red shifts might be in need of revision. 
7.C. Hubble’s Constant and Tired Light 
Another line of evidence involves Hubble’s constant, which is the very heart of the 
expanding universe model. As we have seen, according to the big bang model, the 
further away a galaxy is, the faster it should be going. According to Hubble’s law, 
the speed of recession should be equal to the distance multiplied by a number 
called Hubble’s constant. With this law, it becomes possible for astronomers to 
calculate the distance of galaxies simply from their red shifts. Find the red shift 
and divide by Hubble’s constant—and now you have the distance. 
The constant also gives astronomers the size of the universe. They can measure the 
red shift of the most distant celestial object and use the Hubble constant to 
determine its distance. The Hubble constant is therefore an extremely crucial 
number. For example, if you double the constant, you double the estimated size of 
the universe. Clearly, a precise value for Hubble’s constant is essential for 
determining the size of the universe with any accuracy. 
Over the years, however, different scientists have obtained many different values 
for Hubble’s constant. The constant is expressed in kilometers per second per 
megaparsec. (A megaparsec is a unit of cosmic distance equal to 3.3 million light-
years.) In 1929 the value of Hubble’s constant was 500. In 1931 it was 550. In 
1936 it was 520 or 526. In 1950 it was given as 260, down significantly. By 1956 it 
had dropped to 176 or 180. In 1958 it fell much further down, to 75, but in 1968 it 
bounced back up to 98. In 1972 it ranged from 50 all the way up to 130. Today, 
the Hubble constant is pegged at 55. All this change led one wry astronomer to say 
that perhaps the Hubble constant should better be called the Hubble variable.

=== PAGE 108 ===

108
Of course, these changes over the decades can be explained by arguing that that 
scientists have improved their methods and refined their calculations. But even so, 
something appears to be amiss. 
This brings us to the work of Jean Pierre Vigier, a French astrophysicist at the 
Institute Henri Poincare (VG1-5). Vigier points out that even today, different 
observers obtain different values for Hubble’s constant. Tammann and Sandage 
give 55 plus or minus 5. Abell and Eastmond arrive at 47, plus or minus 5. Then 
there is van den Bergh, who calculates a value between 93 and 111. Heidmann got 
100 for his figure. De Vaucouleurs came up with 100 plus or minus 10. 
If the universe is expanding according to some uniform law of proportionality, 
how is it that so many observers obtain so many greatly different values for the rate 
of expansion? 
Vigier notes that when astronomers take measurements in different directions, 
they find different rates of expansion. He then points out something even stranger: 
The sky can be divided into two sets of directions. The first is the set of directions 
in which many galaxies lie in front of more distant galaxies. The second is the set 
of directions in which there are distant galaxies without foreground galaxies. Call 
the first set “area A,” and the second set “area B.” 
Vigier found that if you restrict yourself to the distant galaxies in area A and 
calculate Hubble’s constant, you get one value, and in area B you get a significantly 
different one. This suggests that the rate of expansion varies depending on whether 
we measure galaxies with or without foreground galaxies. If the universe is 
expanding, what could these foreground galaxies possibly have to do with the rate 
of expansion? Vigier suggests that in fact the measured red shifts of the distant 
galaxies are not caused by the expansion of the universe at all. Rather, they are 
caused by something quite different—something called a tired-light mechanism. 
According to Vigier, as light moves through space it becomes red shifted simply 
from traveling a certain distance. This happens in accordance with physical laws, 
just like any other phenomenon. There is a law requiring that as light travels, it 
shifts toward the red. The effect is so small that it cannot be readily measured in 
laboratories on earth, but as light moves the vast distances between galaxies, the 
effect becomes apparent. 
This is called the tired-light hypothesis because the light loses energy as it moves 
through space. And the more tired it becomes, the redder it becomes. Red shift is 
therefore proportional to distance, not to the velocity of the object. Vigier pictures 
the universe as not expanding. All the galaxies are more or less stationary. The red 
shift is not a Doppler effect; it has nothing to do with the velocity of the light’s 
source. The red shift is caused by an inherent property of the light itself, namely 
that it becomes tired after traveling long distances. 
Most astronomers reject the idea of tired light. In the words of Joseph Silk, of the 
University of California at Berkeley, “Tired light cosmologies are unsatisfactory 
because they invoke a new law of physics” (SK). 
But Vigier presents his tired-light theory in a way that does not require radically 
new physics. He proposes that there is a kind of particle in intergalactic space that 
interacts with light in such a way as to steal energy from it. In the vicinity of 
massive objects, there are more of these particles than elsewhere. Using this idea, 
Vigier explains the different red shifts for the A and B regions in the following way: 
The light passing through foreground galaxies encounters more of these particles

=== PAGE 109 ===

109
and therefore loses more energy than light not passing through regions with 
foreground galaxies. Thus there is a greater red shift for the light going through 
regions with foreground galaxies, and this accounts for the different values found 
for the Hubble constant. 
Vigier also cites additional evidence for nonvelocity red shifts. For example, if the 
light from stars is measured when passing near the sun, it displays a higher red 
shift than when measured in a different area of the sky. Such measurements can be 
made only during total eclipses of the sun, when stars near the solar disc become 
visible in the darkness. 
In short, Vigier explains the red shift in terms of a nonexpanding universe in 
which light behaves somewhat differently than it is normally supposed to behave. 
Vigier claims that his model fits the astronomical data better than the standard 
expanding-universe model, which cannot explain the widely different values 
obtained for the Hubble constant. According to Vigier, nonvelocity red shifts may 
be a general feature of the universe. The universe could very well be static, and 
thus there would be no reason for the big bang theory. 
7.D. Quasars 
Doubt has also been cast on the expanding universe theory by the study of quasars, 
or quasi-stellar radio sources. Quasars look like stars but have very big red shifts, 
and thus they are considered the most distant objects in the universe, more distant 
than the most distant galaxies. We have already seen that Halton Arp believes some 
quasars are cosmologically close to us, even though they have high red shifts. Arp 
has also noted that many quasars tend to be located in the same vicinity of the sky 
as a large group of galaxies relatively close to our own. This suggests to him that 
the quasars may be associated in some fashion with these local galaxies and thus be 
at the same distance. 
This raises a question: If some quasars are actually close, and thus have large 
nonvelocity red shifts, why couldn’t that be true of quasars in general? In fact it has 
long been observed that there are severe difficulties with the idea that quasars are 
at their cosmological distances, that is, that they are at the distance obtained by 
applying the Hubble constant to their extremely large red shifts. 
The big problem is that quasars are very bright. If they are in fact extremely far 
away, that means that many quasars are putting out hundreds of times more 
energy than the brightest galaxies, which are composed of hundreds of billions of 
stars. If quasars were as big as galaxies, that might not be implausible. But it turns 
out that quasars can vary in their light intensity over periods as short as days. This 
observation suggests to astronomers that they are very small compared to galaxies. 
No one can understand how such a small object can generate so much energy, at 
least by presently known physical laws. 
One interesting approach to the interpretation of quasars has been proposed by Y. 
P. Varshni, a physicist at the University of Ottawa in Canada (VR1-3). He supports 
Arp’s contention that quasars have nonvelocity red shifts, citing as evidence certain 
patterns in the way these red shifts are distributed. 
Normally one would expect celestial objects like quasars to have a wide variety of 
red shifts with no discernible pattern. But Varshni finds that these red shifts tend 
to fall into well-defined groups. Each red-shift group is represented by quasars 
distributed widely across the sky, and very few quasars have red shifts that would 
place them outside the major groupings. A similar phenomenon was also noted by

=== PAGE 110 ===

110
the astronomer Geoffrey Burbidge, who observed that an unexpectedly large 
percentage of quasars have red shifts grouped closely around 1.95 (BR1). (The red 
shift of 1.95 is expressed in terms of shift in wavelength; it comes to about 238,160 
km per sec, or 79 percent of the speed of light.) 
This clustering of red shifts is a very difficult phenomenon to explain. Let us apply 
the standard cosmological interpretation to the distance of the quasars. All of the 
quasars with the same red shift should be at the same distance. Thus the quasars 
with a red shift of 1.95 should all lie close to a spherical shell with a radius 
corresponding to this red shift. The same should hold true of the other red shift 
groupings, each of which includes quasars in a wide variety of directions. This 
means that the quasars lie on a series of spherical shells centered on the earth. 
This conclusion is unacceptable to modern cosmological thinking because it places 
the earth in a special central position in the universe. There is only one center in 
an array of concentric shells. In effect, the earth must be at the center of the 
universe. 
The odds that this arrangement of shells could happen by chance are next to 
nothing, and Varshni argues that the conclusion that the earth really is at the 
center of concentric shells of quasars is not acceptable. Therefore the red shifts of 
the quasars must be due to something other than the Doppler effect, as described 
in the expanding-universe model. If they are not due to the Doppler effect, they do 
not represent distance, and if they do not represent distance, it is no longer 
necessary to suppose the quasars are arranged in shells. 
Varshni believes that quasars generate light in an unexpected way, a way that gives 
the appearance of Doppler-shifted light. According to Varshni, laser effects in the 
quasars give light inherently different characteristics that have nothing to do with 
velocity. Varshni believes scientists have mistaken the spectral lines in this type of 
light for Doppler-shifted spectral lines in ordinary ionized gas. So according to 
Varshni, the quasars are close by, and the idea that they are far away results from 
misinterpreting their laser-generated light as Doppler-shifted ordinary light. 
Varshni’s theory may or may not be true, but his observation that the spectral lines 
of quasars fall into definite groupings does call into question the standard theory of 
cosmic distances—at least for quasars. If the spectral lines are taken to be displaced 
by Doppler shifts and one applies the standard theory, one gets the unacceptable 
result that the earth is the center of the universe. If this were accepted, scientists 
would have to return to an idea they have consistently rejected since the time of 
Galileo and Copernicus. 
7.E. Quantized Red Shifts 
Yet Varshni’s observations represent only one of a number of strange patterns that 
emerge when modern astronomical data are closely examined. Another interesting 
pattern has been discerned by William G. Tifft, an astronomer at Steward 
Observatory, at the University of Arizona at Tucson (TF1-7). His conclusions have 
perhaps the most disturbing implications of all for the expanding-universe model. 
Tifft has observed that the red shifts associated with galaxies tend to be quantized. 
What this means is that red shifts tend not to be just any numbers but rather 
multiples of a certain basic unit of about 72 kilometers per second. In general, his 
studies show that red shifts of galaxies are grouped at 72 kps, 144 kps, 216 kps, 
288 kps, and so on.

=== PAGE 111 ===

111
Let us consider a pair of galaxies close to each other in space. According to 
Newtonian gravitational theory, these galaxies should be attracting each other 
gravitationally. Thus they should be orbiting around each other, falling together, 
or flying apart, and this relative motion should be revealed by a measurable red 
shift. 
Tifft examined the relative red shift of many pairs of galaxies. This value, according 
to standard theory, would represent not the speed at which the pair is receding 
from the earth but rather the speed at which one galaxy is moving in orbit around 
the other, measured along the line of sight from the earth. Simply put, the speed is 
calculated as follows: The observer measures the red shift of each galaxy in a pair 
of galaxies. For example, one galaxy may have a red shift of 7,500 kps, and the 
other may have one of 7,000 kps. This means that one galaxy is at that time 
moving relative to the other at a speed of 500 kps along the line of sight. But 
because this speed is due to orbital motion, it will vary according to the positions 
of the galaxies at different points in time. For example, when the galaxies are 
moving perpendicular to the line of sight, the relative motion will be zero, and they 
will have exactly the same red shift at that point. 
So if the two galaxies are in fact moving in orbit, the relative red shift will vary 
smoothly within a definite range of values. Of course, it is not possible to measure 
this variation for a single pair of galaxies. They would not display any visible 
motion or change of red shift within the lifetime of the observer. Therefore it is 
necessary to observe hundreds of pairs of galaxies and calculate their relative red 
shifts. If we did this, we would expect to find a nearly continuous spread of values, 
because we would be catching the galaxies at a variety of orbital positions relative 
to our line of sight. 
But Tifft has found this not to be the case. The red shifts are grouped in near 
multiples of a basic unit—72 kilometers per second. This indicates to Tifft that the 
measured red shift is a nonvelocity red shift and that the galaxies in each pair  are 
actually not orbiting each other. One might argue that perhaps the red shifts are 
caused by something other than the Doppler effect, but surely the galaxies must 
still be orbiting one another. But Tifft points out that even if something other than 
relative velocity is causing red shifts, orbital motion should still produce a smooth 
distribution of Doppler-effect red shifts in addition to this. But this is not what he 
finds. 
Tifft’s findings apply not only to galaxies moving in pairs, but to whole groups of 
galaxies. This poses two questions that modern physics cannot answer. The first is, 
How is it possible for galaxies to have a nonvelocity red shift? Tifft proposes that it 
is caused by the nature of the galaxies themselves. They produce light that is red 
shifted because of internal properties having to do with some as-yet unknown law 
of nature. The second question is, If the red shift is not due to motion, then what is 
the motion of the galaxies? If they are orbiting, then there should be a continuous 
range of Doppler shifts, whatever the internal properties of the galaxies might be. 
Could it be that they are not orbiting? Then, according to Newton’s or Einstein’s 
laws of gravity, they should be falling together or perhaps flying apart. They should 
still be moving relative to one another, but the indication is that they are not. 
Therefore, according to Tifft, new principles of gravitation are necessary. 
There is already evidence that might be interpreted as indicating that Newton’s 
laws may have to be revised, especially in relation to galaxies. For many years,

=== PAGE 112 ===

112
scientists have found great difficulty in accounting for the dynamics of galactic 
motion in terms of the law of gravity. For example, it may be seen that certain 
galaxies appear to be orbiting in a cluster, but the dynamics of mass and gravity 
suggest they should not be arranged in that way. Given their supposed velocities, 
they would have to be much more massive in order to orbit. But rather than 
sacrifice the laws of gravity, astronomers have posited the existence of great 
quantities of invisible dark matter to account for the missing mass. Some say 90% 
of the mass of the universe is missing. 
But another way to deal with this issue is to say that the laws of gravity need 
revision, and Tifft is suggesting this, based on his research. With new laws of 
gravity, the need to posit missing mass disappears. Is Tifft right or wrong? As of 
now, it isn’t possible to say. But his ideas do show how scientists, operating with 
the very limited data they have been able to acquire, are running into all kinds of 
contradictions in their attempt to comprehend the universe. 
Thus far we have discussed pairs and groups of galaxies. We have seen how their 
red shifts, representing movement relative to one another along an observer’s line 
of sight, should vary smoothly through a wide range of values. But Tifft has found 
that the red-shift values are quantized in multiples of a constant unit, and thus he 
concludes that they are not moving at all relative to one another. 
But what about the galaxies’ absolute movement along our line of sight? Is it 
possible that the galaxies are also standing still in relation to us—that they are not 
moving away, as the expanding-universe model tells us they should be? 
Tifft argues that they are not moving. If they are moving due to expansion of the 
universe, their red shifts should span a wide range, covering all possible 
intermediate values. But Tifft proposes that these red shifts are also quantized. 
Normal measurements do not show this, but Tifft points out that when the effect 
of solar motion is subtracted, the quantization of the red shifts becomes 
unmistakably clear. The red shifts do not vary smoothly but instead come in 
multiples of a constant number. 
Let’s take a closer look at this problem. If the red shifts are quantized, as Tifft says 
they are, then the sun, because of its motion, adds a Doppler effect to those 
quantized red shifts. What is added will depend on the angle of the distant galaxy’s 
motion relative to the sun’s motion. If the galaxy is moving perpendicular to the 
sun’s path, the sun’s movement will not add anything. At 0 degrees there would be 
a negative red shift (i.e., a blue shift), which would be subtracted. At 180 degrees 
one would add a positive red shift. At points in between, one gets other values. 
And by adding these values, one breaks up the quantized nature of the red shifts. 
To detect the quantization, one has to subtract the red shift due to the sun’s 
motion from the observed red-shift values. Tifft says he has done just that, and has 
found that galaxies have red shifts arranged in multiples of 72 kilometers per 
second. Thus he concludes that these are nonvelocity red shifts, and he posits a 
static universe. 
Summarizing his work, Tifft makes the following remarks in the Astrophysical 
Journal: 
The entire set of concepts [developed in these papers] is internally self-consistent 
and permits predictions which the conventional view does not even suggest. The 
predictions made have been verified in virtually all cases and offer alternatives to 
some very puzzling astrophysical problems: the mass discrepancy problem for

=== PAGE 113 ===

113
galaxies, and stellar rotational peculiarities, to name two major ones. Although not 
discussed specifically in these papers, the origin and evolution of galaxies by 
collapse are also untenable, as are most of the cosmological concepts based on the 
“expanding” universe. In view of all the implications which inevitably follow from 
the discrete red shift hypothesis, it is not surprising that the idea has met extreme 
resistance. Nevertheless, a set of intimately related significant correlations 
involving a massive amount of data exists. Showing that the discrete red shift 
concept is inconsistent with the “expanding universe” or even general relativity or 
quantum electrodynamics will not eliminate or explain the correlations! [TF5, p. 
390] 
As we can see from this statement, Tifft’s conclusions have not met with a 
favorable reception in the community of astronomers and astrophysicists. Indeed, 
they have been greeted largely with a barrier of icy silence. However, Halton Arp 
independently confirms some of Tifft’s findings, and this in turn lends greater 
weight to Arp’s own anomalous observations. 
One of Arp’s observations is that in groups of galaxies, one member is generally 
brighter and bigger. This galaxy tends to have a lower red shift than its smaller 
companion galaxies. Arp suggests the galaxies are all in the same region, at the 
same general distance from us; therefore the red shifts are not giving velocity 
effects and distances but indicate something else. 
Let us carefully consider the reasoning that leads Arp to this conclusion. One 
possibility is that the large, bright galaxy is nearby and just happens to be 
projected against a background of galaxies that are smaller and dimmer because of 
distance. These galaxies would have larger red shifts as a result of the expansion of 
the universe. 
However, Arp argues that this explanation overlooks the fact that the clusters of 
galaxies are well defined and that such well-defined clusters cover a small 
percentage of the sky. It is therefore unlikely that many such clusters should just 
happen to have a bright foreground galaxy projected in front of them. 
As we have already pointed out, Arp believes that galaxies can be ejected from a 
parent galaxy. What if the relative red shifts of the smaller galaxies are due to their 
being ejected from the larger parent galaxy in a direction pointing away from us? 
The problem here is that in this case we would expect some of the smaller galaxies 
to be ejected in our direction. These would exhibit relative blue shifts, contrary to 
Arp’s observations. 
But here is Arp’s clinching argument: Not only do these smaller galaxies have 
positive red shifts relative to their parent galaxies, but these red shifts are 
quantized, just the way Tifft indicates they should be in his studies. Arp finds 
peaks at 70, 140, and 210 kps; this agrees well with Tifft’s findings of quantization 
in multiples of 72 kps. As we have seen, this means that they are nonvelocity red 
shifts. And the fact that the quantization is in relation to the dominant galaxy in 
the group indicates there is some physical association. Why would the 
quantization be there if the association is simply coincidental? The fact that it is 
there indicates that the association is real. 
So here we have an example in which we see dim galaxies with high red shifts 
close to bright galaxies with lesser red shifts, although standard cosmological 
theory says they should be vastly further away. This raises questions not only

=== PAGE 114 ===

114
about the interpretation of red shifts, but also about the whole procedure of 
calculating distance according to brightness. 
One of Arp’s peaks for red-shift differences among groups of galaxies is in the 
range of 138–144 kilometers per second. This extremely narrow range is highly 
significant. If these groups are involved in orbital motion, we would expect to find 
them at different points in their orbits—some galaxies should be coming toward 
us, while others should be moving away from us. Thus we would expect a much 
greater spread in velocities than the 6 kps range found in this peak. 
As Arp puts it, “The really startling and difficult aspect of the quantization into 
very narrow peaks is the small latitude it allows for the true orbital or peculiar 
velocity” (AR2, p. 110). This suggests that the orbital velocities, if present, are very 
small, too small for the galaxies to be actually orbiting each other according to 
present physical laws and estimates for the masses of the galaxies. Tifft’s ideas 
about the need for new laws of gravity seem to be confirmed. 
Geoffrey Burbidge has summed up the evidence for anomalous red shifts by saying, 
I believe that however much many astronomers wish to disregard the evidence by 
insisting that the statistical arguments are not very good, or by taking the approach 
that absence of understanding is an argument against the existence of the effect, it 
is there and many basic ideas have to be revised. 
A revolution is upon us whether or not we like it [BR2, p. 103]. 
What we see from this evidence is that an established model of the universe, built 
up from years of painstaking scientific work, can be practically demolished by 
closer scrutiny of the observational data on which it is based. In the end we come 
back to the observation made by Çukadeva Gosvämé in the beginning of his 
description of the universe: 
My dear King, there is no limit to the expansion of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead’s material energy. This material world is a transformation of the material 
qualities,… yet no one could possibly explain it perfectly, even in a lifetime as long 
as that of Brahmä. No one in the material world is perfect, and an imperfect person 
could not describe this material universe accurately, even after continued 
speculation [SB 5.16.4]. 
VCA8: QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 
Here we give brief answers to a number of common questions about Vedic 
cosmology. We also indicate sections in the preceding chapters where more 
detailed answers are given. 
Q: The Vedic literature says the moon is higher than the sun. How can this be? 
A: In Chapter 22 of the Fifth Canto, the heights of the planets above the earth are 
given, and it is stated that the moon is 100,000 yojanas above the rays of the sun. 
In this chapter, the word “above” means “above the plane of Bhü-maëòala.” It does 
not refer to distance measured radially from the surface of the earth globe. In 
Section 4.b we show that if the plane of Bhü-maëòala corresponds to the plane of 
the ecliptic, then it indeed makes sense to say that the moon is higher than the sun 
relative to Bhü-maëòala. This does not mean that the moon is farther from the 
earth globe than the sun. 
For example, if point A is in a plane, B is 1,000 miles above the plane, and C is 
2,000 miles above the plane, we cannot necessarily conclude that C is further from 
A than B is.

=== PAGE 115 ===

115
Q: In SB 8.10.38p, Çréla Prabhupäda says, “The sun is supposed to be 93,000,000 
miles above the surface of the earth, and from the Çrémad-Bhägavatam we 
understand that the moon is 1,600,000 miles above the sun. Therefore the distance 
between the earth and the moon would be about 95,000,000 miles.” Doesn’t this 
plainly say that the moon is farther from the earth than the sun? 
A: In the summary at the end of Chapter 23 of the Fifth Canto Çréla Prabhupäda 
says, “The distance from the sun to the earth is 100,000 yojanas.” At 8 miles per 
yojana, this comes to 800,000 miles. We suggest that when Çréla Prabhupäda cites 
the modern Western earth-sun distance of 93,000,000 miles, he is simply making 
the point that if you put together the Bhägavatam and modern astronomy you get a 
contradictory picture. His conclusion is that one should simply accept the Vedic 
version, and he was not interested in personally delving into astronomical 
arguments in detail. 
Q: What is your justification for going into these arguments in detail? 
A: Çréla Prabhupäda ordered some of his disciples to do this for the sake of 
preaching. In a letter to Svarüpa Dämodara däsa dated April 27, 1976, Çréla 
Prabhupäda said, “Now our Ph.D.’s must collaborate and study the 5th Canto to 
make a model for building the Vedic Planetarium.… So now all you Ph.D.’s must 
carefully study the details of the 5th Canto and make a working model of the 
universe. If we can explain the passing seasons, eclipses, phases of the moon, 
passing of day and night, etc., then it will be very powerful propaganda.” In this 
regard, he specifically mentioned Svarüpa Dämodara däsa, Sadäpüta däsa, and 
Mädhava däsa in a letter to Dr. Wolf-Rottkay dated October 14, 1976. 
Q: If the distance from the earth to the sun is 800,000 miles, how can this be 
reconciled with modern astronomy? 
A: This distance is relative to the plane of Bhü-maëòala. The distance from the 
center of Jambüdvépa to the orbit of the sun around Mänasottara Mountain is 
15,750,000 yojanas according to the dimensions given in the Fifth Canto. This 
distance lies in the plane of Bhü-maëòala and comes to 126,000,000 miles at 8 
miles per yojana and 78,750,000 miles at 5 miles per yojana. Since values for the 
yojana ranging from 5 to 8 miles have been used in India, this distance is 
compatible with the modern earth-sun distance of 93,000,000 miles. 
Q: Using radar and lasers, scientists have recently obtained very accurate estimates 
of the earth-moon distance. This distance is about 238,000 miles. How do you 
reconcile this with Vedic calculations? 
A: According to the Sürya-siddhänta, the distance from the earth globe to the 
moon is about 258,000 miles (see Section 1.e). This is in reasonable agreement 
with the modern value. 
Q: If the moon is 258,000 miles from the earth globe, then how can it be 100,000 
yojanas above the sun? This seems hard to understand, even if the latter distance is 
relative to the plane of Bhü-maëòala. 
A: This question is answered in detail in Section 4.b, and the reader should 
specifically study Tables 8 and 9 in that section. Briefly, we propose the following: 
The heights of the planets from Bhü-maëòala correspond to the maximum heights 
of the planets from the plane of the ecliptic in the visible solar system. This 
correspondence is approximate because the Fifth Canto gives the viewpoint of the 
demigods, whereas in modern astronomy and the jyotiña çästra the viewpoint is 
that of ordinary humans.

=== PAGE 116 ===

116
In summary, we propose that the Fifth Canto description of the universe is broadly 
compatible with what we see. The differences are due to the difference in 
viewpoint between human beings and demigods. Thus, from the higher-
dimensional perspective of a demigod, Bhü-maëòala should be directly visible, and 
the relative positions of Bhü-maëòala, the sun, and the moon should appear as 
described in the Fifth Canto. 
Q: How are we to make sense of the enormous mountains described in the Fifth 
Canto? Some of them, including the Himalayas, are said to be 80,000 miles high. 
A: One might well doubt that even a scientifically uneducated person in ancient 
India would have thought that the Himalaya Mountains of our ordinary experience 
are 80,000 miles high. After all, such persons traditionally made pilgrimages to 
Badarikäçrama on foot. We suggest that the cosmic mountains of the Fifth Canto 
are higher-dimensional; they are real, but to see them it is necessary to develop the 
sensory powers of the demigods and great yogés. This is the traditional 
understanding, although words such as “higher-dimensional” are not used, and 
descriptions are made in a matter-of-fact way from the viewpoint of demigods and 
other great personalities (such as the Päëòavas). 
Çréla Prabhupäda has said that modern scientists are “hardly conversant with the 
planet on which we are now living” (SB 5.20.37p). If our ordinary three-
dimensional continuum is the total reality, then this statement would seem to be 
wrong. In Section 3.b.4, however, we give Vedic evidence showing that this three-
dimensional world links up with higher-dimensional realms. 
Q: If the Garbhodaka Ocean fills half the universe, where is it, and why don’t we 
see it? 
A: The Garbhodaka Ocean is beneath Bhü-maëòala. Thus its location corresponds 
to the region of the celestial sphere south of the great circle marked by Bhü-
maëòala. We have argued that this should be either the southern celestial 
hemisphere or the region to the south of the ecliptic (see Section 3.d). The 
Garbhodaka Ocean is also higher-dimensional. 
Q: Isn’t it true that there are fewer stars in the southern celestial hemisphere than 
in the northern celestial hemisphere? Isn’t this because we are looking down on 
Bhü-maëòala from the earth? 
A: A study of standard star charts shows that the number of stars visible in the 
southern celestial hemisphere is essentially the same as the number visible in the 
northern celestial hemisphere. (See Figures 11 and 12.) 
Q: What was Çréla Prabhupäda’s position on the moon flight? There seems to be 
some ambiguity in his statements about this topic. 
A: Çréla Prabhupäda offered a number of tentative explanations as to what might 
have actually transpired on the moon flight, but his main point was that the 
astronauts could not have visited Candraloka, since they did not reach the 
civilization of the demigods that exists there. To put the matter in another way, if 
the moon is really nothing more than a lifeless desert, as scientists maintain, then 
the Vedic literatures describing Candraloka must be wrong. This topic is discussed 
in Section 6.c.1. 
Q: What about the argument that the moon flights were faked by the U.S. 
government? A case for this is made in the book, We Never Went to the Moon, by 
Bill Kaysing.

=== PAGE 117 ===

117
A: Although this book makes some interesting points, its arguments are basically 
speculative and circumstantial. One of Kaysing’s main arguments is that Thomas 
Baron, a North American Aviation employee who wrote a report critical of the 
Apollo program, was murdered by government agents. Kaysing maintains that this 
was done as part of a government cover-up of the moon hoax. Unfortunately, if 
this is true, then it would be very dangerous to possess solid evidence proving such 
a cover-up. Another point made by Kaysing is that according to official reports, six 
Apollo flights to the moon were nearly flawless in execution. In contrast, the 
history of space flight before and after the Apollo program is filled with stories of 
failures and mechanical breakdowns. Kaysing argues that this is statistically 
unlikely, and cites this as evidence that the Apollo flights were faked. This 
argument is interesting, but certainly not conclusive. 
Q: What is the justification for bringing in works of Indian mathematical 
astronomy, such as the Sürya-siddhänta and Siddhänta-çiromaëi? 
A: Çréla Prabhupäda follows Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté by citing these works, 
which are called jyotiña çästra. He does so because Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté 
cited these works in his writings. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta gives direct quotations and 
says nothing indicating that the works are wrong in any way. Also, the jyotiña 
çästras are cited by other Vaiñëava commentators on the Bhägavatam. See Chapter 
1. 
Q: Çréla Prabhupäda refers to the earth as a globe, and Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta 
Sarasvaté Öhäkura made references to Sürya-siddhänta and other jyotiña çästras that 
describe the earth as a globe. But wasn’t this an innovation introduced by Çréla 
Bhaktisiddhänta in response to modern astronomy? 
A: This is not an innovation introduced by Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta. Earlier 
commentators on the Çrémad-Bhägavatam make reference to the jyotiña çästras, 
including the Sürya-siddhänta. One example is Vaàçédhara, who was living in A.D. 
1642, before the time that Western science made a large impact on India (see 
Appendix 1). 
Q: Does this mean that we have to accept the jyotiña çästras as absolute truth on 
the level of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam? 
A: No. The Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the spotless Puräëa, containing pure knowledge 
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The jyotiña çästras are handbooks for the 
execution of astronomical calculations. The Bhägavatam presents the world from a 
transcendental perspective, or at least gives the perspective of great personalities 
involved in Kåñëa’s pastimes. The jyotiña çästras deal with the motions of planets as 
seen by ordinary human beings. However, the jyotiña çästras do form a valid part of 
Vedic tradition, and their calculations are mentioned by Çréla Prabhupäda in 
various places. 
Q: Scholars say the calculations given in the jyotiña çästras were borrowed from the 
Greeks in the early centuries of the Christian era. How do we deal with this? 
A: Western scholars maintain that all the Vedic literature is relatively recent. 
However, their methods are speculative, and they are not free of ethnic and 
religious bias. In Appendix 2, we show the baseless nature of some of their 
arguments. 
Q: Some have said that the description of the universe in the Fifth Canto is 
allegorical and that Bhägavatam commentators have declared this. For example,

=== PAGE 118 ===

118
Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura has said that the descriptions of hell are allegorical. Why 
don’t you just accept the Fifth Canto as an allegory and leave it at that? 
A: It would indeed make things easier if we could simply accept the description of 
the universe in the Fifth Canto as an allegory. But in good conscience we cannot 
do so. Let us carefully consider the reasons for this. 
First of all, consider the statements of Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura about descriptions of 
hell in the Bhägavatam. In The Bhägavata he writes, “In some of the chapters we 
meet with descriptions of these hells and heavens, and accounts of curious tales, 
but we have been warned somewhere in the book not to accept them as real facts, 
but as inventions to overawe the wicked and improve the simple and ignorant. The 
Bhägavata certainly tells us of a state of reward and punishment in the future 
according to deeds in our present situation. All poetic inventions besides this 
spiritual fact have been described as statements borrowed from other works.” 
According to this passage, not only the hells but also the material heavens are 
dismissed as poetic inventions. But if the heavens are inventions, what can one say 
about their inhabitants, such as Indra? If Indra is also imaginary, then how are we 
to understand the story of the lifting of Govardhana Hill? This must also be 
imaginary, and we are led to an allegorical interpretation of Kåñëa’s pastimes. 
In The Bhägavata Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura is indeed introducing the Bhägavatam in 
this way. We would suggest that he is doing this in accordance with time and 
circumstances. He describes his readers in the following words: “When we were in 
college, reading the philosophical works of the West,… we had a real hatred 
towards the Bhägavata. That great work looked like a repository of wicked and 
stupid ideas scarcely adapted to the nineteenth century, and we hated to hear any 
arguments in its favor.” In order to sidestep the strong prejudices of readers 
trained by the British in Western thinking, Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura is presenting the 
Bhägavatam as allegorical, but we would suggest that this is not his final 
conclusion. 
Çréla Prabhupäda has explained that the Vedic literatures should be understood in 
terms of mukhya-våtti, or direct meaning, rather than gauëa-våtti, or indirect 
meaning. He has also said, “Sometimes, however, as a matter of necessity, Vedic 
literature is described in terms of the lakñaëä-våtti or gauëa-våtti, but one should 
not accept such explanations as permanent truths” (CC AL 7.110p). Bhaktivinoda 
Öhäkura was reviving Vaiñëavism at a time when it had almost completely 
disappeared because of internal deviations and Western propaganda, and he may 
have concluded that an allegorical presentation was necessary under those 
circumstances. 
In establishing the foundations of Vaiñëavism in the West, Çréla Prabhupäda 
stressed the importance of the direct interpretation of çästra. He writes, 
“Considering the different situation of different planets and also time and 
circumstances, there is nothing wonderful in the stories of the Puräëas, nor are 
they imaginary.… We should not, therefore, reject the stories and histories of the 
Puräëas as imaginary. The great åñis like Vyäsa had no business putting some 
imaginary stories in their literatures” (SB 1.3.41p). 
But could the description of the universe in the Fifth Canto be an allegory like the 
story of King Puraïjana? Çréla Prabhupäda makes many statements indicating that 
this not so. For example, he says that “we can understand that the sky and its 
various planets were studied long, long before Çrémad-Bhägavatam was

=== PAGE 119 ===

119
compiled.… The location of the various planetary systems was not unknown to the 
sages who flourished in the Vedic age” (SB 5.16.1p). He also says, “The 
measurements given herein, such as 10,000 yojanas or 100,000 yojanas, should be 
considered correct because they have been given by Çukadeva Gosvämé” (SB 
5.16.10p). 
In this book we have therefore tried to show that the Fifth Canto is giving a 
reasonable picture of the universe consistent with (1) transcendental Vedic 
philosophy, (2) the tradition of Vedic mathematical astronomy, and (3) our 
imperfect sense data. 
Q: To my knowledge, Çréla Prabhupäda never hinted at explanations of other 
dimensions; he always seemed to emphasize accepting it as it is written. If these 
ideas are right, why didn’t Çréla Prabhupäda save us a lot of trouble by bringing 
them out years ago? 
A: The Vedic literature does not explicitly refer to the concept of higher-
dimensional space, as far as I am aware. This idea is borrowed from modern 
mathematics. However, the Vedic literature does refer implicitly to higher-
dimensional space, and therefore it is justifiable to use this idea to clarify the Vedic 
description of the universe. 
For example, in the description of Lord Brahmä’s visit to Kåñëa in Dvärakä, it is 
stated that millions of Brahmäs from other universes came to visit Kåñëa. However, 
each Brahmä remained within his own jurisdiction, and apart from our Brahmä, 
each thought he was alone with Kåñëa. Thus Kåñëa was in many universes at once, 
and our Brahmä could also simultaneously see different Brahmäs visiting Kåñëa in 
all of these universes. This is impossible in three dimensions; it illustrates the 
implicit higher-dimensional nature of the Vedic conception of space (see Chapter 
2). 
Q: If we could visit the moon, would the inhabitants be visible to us or invisible? 
A: Çréla Prabhupäda has said “almost invisible” (see Section 6.c.1). 
Q: Couldn’t it be that denizens of higher planets are invisible to us simply because 
they have subtle bodies? Why bring in the idea of higher-dimensional worlds? 
A: The clothes, food, dwellings, airplanes, and other paraphernalia of the demigods 
must be just as invisible to us as the demigods themselves. (Imagine what it would 
be like to see a suit of clothes being worn by an invisible demigod!) In other 
words, the demigods live in a complete world that is invisible to us but perfectly 
visible to them. They can travel to our world since they are endowed with suitable 
mystic powers, and advanced yogés can travel to their world. However, humans 
with ordinary senses cannot perceive the demigods or their gardens and cities. This 
sums up what we mean by a higher-dimensional world. 
If we use the word “subtle,” we should realize that we are speaking of a complete 
subtle world that looks perfectly substantial to the persons living in it, just as our 
world looks substantial to us. The worlds of the demigods should be contrasted 
with the situation of a ghost, who is stranded in our own continuum in a subtle 
form, but is unable to enjoy it. 
Q: These higher-dimensional worlds may be normally inaccesible to us, but if they 
are actually real, shouldn’t there be some empirical evidence of them? Do we just 
have to accept this whole incredible story on blind faith?

=== PAGE 120 ===

120
A: There is abundant empirical evidence of higher-dimensional worlds, and such 
evidence has been well known in practically all human cultures since time 
immemorial. Our modern scientific culture is an exception in this regard. 
In Chapter 5 we briefly discuss some empirical evidence taken from non-Vedic 
sources. 
Q: But isn’t this empirical evidence imperfect? 
A: Empirical evidence is always imperfect. One may accept the version of çästra 
according to the descending process, or one can turn to the empirical process with 
all its imperfections. Of course, Çréla Prabhupäda advocated the descending 
process. 
Q: There are places in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam where it is said that the coverings of 
the universe begin with water. Since this is clear water, and the farther coverings 
are transparent, it should be possible for us to see the suns of other universes. 
Couldn’t these be the stars we see in the sky at night? 
A: In SB 5.21.11p, Çréla Prabhupäda says, “The Western theory that all luminaries 
in the sky are different suns is not confirmed in the Vedic literature. Nor can we 
assume that these luminaries are the suns of other universes, for each universe is 
covered by various layers of material elements, and therefore although the 
universes are clustered together, we cannot see from one universe to another. In 
other words, whatever we see is within this one universe.” 
In Section 6.d it is shown that the coverings of the universe are listed four times in 
the Bhägavatam as beginning with earth. We suggest that when Çréla Prabhupäda 
mentions water or fire first, he is giving a partial list of the coverings. 
Q: In SB 5.16.5, Jambüdvépa is described as having a length and breadth of one 
million yojanas, yet in SB 5.16.7, it is described as having a width that is the same 
as Sumeru’s height, namely 100,000 yojanas. This seems contradictory. In SB 
5.16.7, Sumeru’s width is stated to be 32,000 yojanas at its summit, and in SB 
5.16.28, the township of Brahmä has sides that extend for ten million yojanas. 
Does Brahmapuré hang way out over the edge of Sumeru? 
A: The correct diameter of Jambüdvépa is 100,000 yojanas, since this figure agrees 
with all the other dimensions mentioned in the Fifth Canto. Likewise, the width of 
Sumeru at its summit is 32,000 yojanas. We do not know the explanation for the 
other figures. 
Q: What can be said in general about such apparent contradictions in the 
Bhägavatam? Does it mean that we should not have faith in it as a source of 
absolute truth? 
A: Certainly it would not be justifiable to draw such conclusions from minor 
discrepancies. In many cases the discrepancy may have an explanation that we 
cannot guess because we have too little information. For example, in the Third 
Canto, two boar incarnations of Lord Viñëu are mentioned. In certain verses there 
appears to be some ambiguity in the description of these incarnations, and Çréla 
Prabhupäda cites Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté as saying that “the sage Maitreya 
amalgamated both the boar incarnations in different devastations and summarized 
them in his description to Vidura” (SB 3.13.31p). Without this information from 
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté, we might find it difficult to resolve the apparent 
contradictions in the story of Lord Varäha. 
We suggest that some of the apparent contradictions discussed in Section 3.d may 
have a similar explanation.

=== PAGE 121 ===

121
Q: SB 5.17.6 places Bhadräçva-varña  west of Mount Meru, and SB 5.17.7 says the 
same thing about Ketumäla-varña. How do you resolve this contradiction? 
A: If we look at the Sanskrit texts of these verses, we find that Bhadräçva and 
Ketumäla varñas are on opposite sides of Mount Meru. Careful inspection of SB 
5.16.10 shows that Bhadräçva-varña is to the east of Mount Meru, since its 
boundary mountain is Mount Gandhamädana. 
Q: SB 5.24.2 says that the moon is twice as big as the sun, and Rähu is three times 
as big. The purport says that Rähu is four times as big as the sun. How do you 
explain this? 
A: This is another case of an apparent contradiction. Since we have practically no 
information, we cannot make a definite statement. But it is possible that the large 
sizes of the moon and Rähu may have to do with the higher-dimensional aspects of 
these planets. 
The Sürya-siddhänta gives a diameter of 2,400 miles for the moon. This is close to 
the modern figure (see Section 1.e). 
Q: I have heard that all of the planets are in the stem of the lotus from which 
Brahmä took birth. How can that be? 
A: This is stated in SB 1.3.2p. Since the planetary systems are distributed 
throughout the universal globe, it must be that the stem encompasses everything 
within this globe. We should note that the standard pictures we see of Brahmä 
sitting on the lotus flower are three-dimensional representations of a scene that 
cannot be seen using our ordinary senses. Although the pictures show the lotus 
stem emerging from the navel of Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, Brahmä himself was 
unable to locate the origin of the stem. Thus, part of the scene was beyond the 
senses of Brahmä, and so it is certainly beyond the reach of our senses. We also 
note that the planetary systems were created by Brahmä from the lotus (SB 3.10.7–
8). This suggests that these systems were produced by transforming the substance 
of the lotus. 
Q: The Bhägavatam says that Rähu causes the eclipses of the sun and moon. How 
can this be reconciled with modern science? 
A: The jyotiña çästras, such as Sürya-siddhänta, give the same explanation of solar 
and lunar eclipses as modern science. These çästras also describe the orbit of Rähu 
(and Ketu) and point out that eclipses occur only when one of these two planets is 
aligned with either the sun and the moon or the earth’s shadow and the moon (see 
Section 4.e). Some will maintain that this account was devised centuries ago to 
reconcile Vedic çästras with Greek astronomy. But this is sheer speculation. 
Q: What can be said about the precession of the equinoxes and the consequent 
displacement of the polestar? 
A: The phenomenon of precession is described in the jyotiña çästras. We discuss 
this topic in Section 4.f. 
Q: The Bhägavatam says that the diameter of the universe is 4 billion miles. This is 
much too small to accommodate even the solar system, what to speak of the stars 
and galaxies. How can the Bhägavatam be correct? 
A: Çréla Prabhupäda, citing Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté, also gives a figure of 
18,712,069,200,000,000 yojanas for the circumference of the universe (or half the 
circumference) (CC ML 21.84p). He also says that “scientists calculate that if one 
could travel at the speed of light, it would take forty thousand years to reach the 
highest planet of this material world” (SB 3.15.26p).

=== PAGE 122 ===

122
We suggest that cosmic distances may appear different to observers endowed with 
different levels of consciousness. We also suggest that the laws governing distance 
and time may not be the same in outer regions of the universe as they are here on 
the earth (see Sections 1.f and 4.c). 
Q: Scientists in the twentieth century have amassed a huge amount of information 
about distant stars and galaxies. How can you lightly suggest that it may be 
seriously wrong? 
A: In Chapter 7 we discuss some of the latest findings of modern cosmology. There 
is abundant evidence in standard scientific journals to show that modern 
cosmological theories have serious defects. 
Q: The scientists say that spectroscopic studies show that the stars are 
incandescent bodies and not mere reflectors of light. They also say that the stars 
are typically as powerful or more powerful than the sun, and they have worked out 
in detail the thermonuclear reactions that sustain stellar radiation. How can this be 
reconciled with the Vedic version? 
A: This is discussed in Section 6.e. Briefly, we suggest that stars may well give off 
their own light. However, the Vedic literature indicates that they cannot be 
independent suns. The highly detailed scientific theories about stars may well be 
wrong in many respects. After all, these theories are based entirely on the 
interpretation of starlight. Their underlying logic is: This model seems to fit the 
data, and therefore it should be accepted and taught to students. Chapter 7 shows 
some of the pitfalls of this approach. 
Appendix 1 
VAÀÇÉDHARA ON BHÜ-MANDALA AND THE EARTH GLOBE 
In this appendix we will discuss a commentary on verse 5.20.38 of the Fifth Canto 
of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, written in the 17th century by Vaàçédhara. It is included in 
his Bhägavatam commentary, entitled Bhavärtha-dépikä-prakäça, which appears in 
the compilation of eleven Bhägavatam commentaries used by Çréla Prabhupäda 
when writing his purports. (Bhavärtha-dépikä is the title of Çrédhara Svämé’s 
commentary.) This commentary explicitly discusses the relationship between Bhü-
maëòala, as described in the Fifth Canto, and the small earth globe of our 
experience. 
We will summarize his commentary here, since it sheds some light on how Vedic 
cosmology and astronomy were regarded by Vaiñëavas in India before the 
widespread introduction of modern Western ideas. It shows that the cosmology of 
the Fifth Canto was controversial during the period of the 1600’s, when 
Vaàçédhara was active. It also shows that the astronomical literature known as 
jyotiña çästra was accepted as valid by Vaiñëavas, and it discusses the apparent 
contradiction that exists between the cosmology of the Fifth Canto and this system 
of astronomy. 
Vaàçédhara tries to resolve this contradiction, and we should state clearly here that 
we do not think that his analysis is entirely correct. However, our own 
understanding is certainly far from perfect. At the present time in history, when 
much ancient Vedic knowledge has been lost, it is difficult to reconstruct many 
important aspects of ancient astronomical science. Thus it is best for us to carefully 
consider the information that is available to us and see what insights may gradually 
emerge. 
We begin by quoting Çréla Prabhupäda’s translation of SB 5.20.38:

=== PAGE 123 ===

123
Learned scholars who are free from mistakes, illusions, and propensities to cheat 
have thus described the planetary systems and their particular symptoms, 
measurements, and locations. With great deliberation, they have established the 
truth that the distance between Sumeru and the mountain known as Lokäloka is 
one fourth of the diameter of the universe—or, in other words, 125,000,000 
yojanas [1 billion miles]. 
The first section of Vaàçédhara’s commentary on this verse is also stated in the 
commentary of Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, and Çréla Prabhupäda reproduces it 
in Sanskrit in his purport. This section begins by pointing out that the word bhü-
golasya in the verse means “of the egglike sphere connected with the earth.” This 
egglike sphere is the inner shell of the universe and has a diameter of 500 million 
yojanas. According to the Fifth Canto, the earth has the same diameter, and thus it 
should touch the universal shell on all sides. However, Vaàçédhara and Viçvanätha 
Cakravarté Öhäkura point out that the earth actually should be assigned a diameter 
of 496,600,000 yojanas. This figure is twice the sum of the following distances in 
lakhs (or 100,000s) of yojanas: (1) 157.5 from Mount Meru to Mänasottara 
Mountain, (2) 96 from there to the outer shore of the clear-water ocean, (3) 157.5 
for the width of the inhabited land, (4) 822 [or 4 x 157.5 + 2 x 96] for the width of 
the golden land bounded by Lokäloka Mountain, and (4) 1,250 for Aloka-varña, 
which lies beyond Lokäloka Mountain. 
As a result of this revised value for the diameter of the earth, there is a gap of 17 
lakhs of yojanas between the earth and the universal shell on all sides. The 
commentators point out that this gap makes it possible for the earth to move 
within the universal shell. This makes it meaningful for the earth to be supported 
by Ananta Çeña, and it also allows the earth to be immersed in the Garbhodaka 
Ocean in the Cäkñuña manvantara and be lifted by Lord Varäha. We can 
understand from this that the earth lifted by Lord Varäha is the complete 
Bhümaëòala of approximately 500 million yojanas in diameter and not the small 
earth globe of our experience (see also Chapter 3.c). 
In the next section of his commentary, Vaàçédhara confronts the apparent conflict 
between the size of the earth given in the Bhägavatam and the size given in the 
jyotiña çästra. From jyotiña çästra, he cites a value of 4,967 yojanas for the 
circumference of the earth globe. In fact, this figure is given in verse 3.52 of the 
Siddhänta-çiromaëi of Bhäskaräcärya, along with a value of 1,581 1/24 yojanas for 
the earth’s diameter (SSB1, p. 122). As we have pointed out in Chapter 1, this 
agrees closely with our present figure for the circumference of the earth, using 5 
miles per yojana. Vaàçédhara does not indicate that he thinks this figure is wrong. 
Rather, he accepts it without question and suggests various ways of reconciling it 
with Puräëic cosmology. These are as follows: 
(1) Çré Nélakaëöha, in his commentary on the Bhéñma-parva of the Mahäbhärata, 
gives a description of Jambüparvan as a square with its diagonals oriented north-
south and east-west. This square is also described as a lotus with a perimeter of 
18,600 yojanas and an inner diameter of 3,300 yojanas. Nélakaëöha argues that 
since one side of such a square is 4,650 yojanas in length, the size of Jambüparvan 
agrees in a crude “order of magnitude” fashion with the size of the earth globe 
given in the jyotiña çästra. In addition, since Bhäratavarña corresponds to the 
southern part of the Jambüparvan square and is bounded by the Himalaya 
Mountains on the north, it follows that Bhärata-varña must be triangular. This

=== PAGE 124 ===

124
agrees with ordinary experience, whereas the idea that Bhärata-varña is bow-shaped 
does not. (The idea that Bhärata-varña is bow-shaped follows from the Puräëic 
description of Bhärata-varña as the southern part of the disc of Jambüdvépa.) 
Here, a rough agreement is achieved between Jambüparvan and the earth globe of 
the jyotiña çästra, but at the same time a contradiction is introduced between this 
account of Jambüparvan and the Jambüdvépa of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. In 
Chapter 3 we argued that Jambüdvépa is inherently higher-dimensional and that it 
can be seen in different ways, depending on one’s level of consciousness. 
(2) Rather than introduce this idea, Vaàçédhara suggests that the apparent 
contradiction posed by the 500-million-yojana earth diameter in the Puräëas can 
be resolved by resorting to the principle of inexplicability (anirvacanéyaväda). 
According to this principle, “One should not try to establish by logic or argument 
those things that are beyond imagination.” 
(3) Then he suggests that whatever measure is mentioned in the Puräëas, one 
should take 1/20 of that, and thus in place of 500 million one should accept 25 
million yojanas as the measure of the earth. In place of one lakh, one should accept 
5,000 yojanas as the diameter of Jambüdvépa, and in place of 9,000, one should 
accept 450 yojanas as the measure of Bhärata-varña. We note that 9,000 yojanas is 
the width of Bhärata-varña from north to south, according to the Bhägavatam. 
(This distance is roughly 1,600 miles on a modern map.) 
(4) To justify these reductions in scale, Vaàçédhara observes that the yojana is 
defined on the basis of the human body. Thus a yojana is 32,000 hastas (or cubits), 
and a hasta is 24 finger-widths. Also, a hasta can be defined as one fifth the height 
of a man standing with his arms stretched up. As the bodies of infants, children, 
and adults vary greatly in size, so the yojana also varies, and in this way one can 
explain differences between various estimates of distance. 
After offering these arguments, Vaàçédhara sums up his position in the following 
words: 
Not indeed has the jyotiña çästra, or science of luminaries, started contravening the 
Puräëic statement that “Vyäsa is Näräyaëa himself.” Nor could Vyäsa also have 
proceeded in contravention of the science of luminaries, which is the very eye of 
Veda, as expressed in the statement “Astronomy is declared to be the eye [of the 
Veda].” Therefore, at different places, statements as to yojanas may be inferred to 
mean these various measures of finger, hand, etc. Moreover, it appears that 
Vyäsadeva himself speaks contrary to astronomy, as it were, in order to curb the 
tendency on the part of asuras toward the study of the çästras. But truly speaking, 
he is not doing so. Otherwise, it may be contemplated by the well-intentioned that 
there would be darkness [i.e., ignorance] as to Veda on the part of Vyäsa. This is 
the proper understanding. 
The statement that astronomy is the eye of the Veda may refer to verse 1.4 of the 
Närada-saàhitä: “The excellent science of astronomy comprising siddhänta, 
saàhitä, and horä as its three branches is the clear eye of the Vedas” (BJS, p. xxvi). 
“Siddhänta,” of course, refers to works such as the Sürya-siddhänta. 
Vaàçédhara is not satisfied with the explanations that he has given thus far. He 
goes on to give a sharper formulation of the basic problem: 
Well, then how can one explain the contradiction between the Bhägavata and the 
jyotiña çästra, or astronomical science? In the Bhägavata, Jambudvépa is said to 
measure 100,000 yojanas, whereas the astronomical science states the entire earth

=== PAGE 125 ===

125
to be measuring only 5,000 yojanas. The solution is given in the Goladarça. 
According to that text, some brief explanation is given below: 
The earth has two forms. One is the particular [viçeña] form of big measure, and 
the other is the smaller, spherical form given in the jyotiña çästra. In this regard 
Parékñit asked Çré Suka, the great yogin, and he replied [in SB 5.16.4]: “We shall 
explain the particular description of bhügola by name, form, measure, and 
characteristics.” In the jyotiña çästra the word bhügola refers to the earth as an egg 
of clay, and the word viçeña, or “particular,” refers to the round golden egg 
described in the Puräëas. 
Here a clear distinction is made between the earth of our experience, which is 
described in the jyotiña çästra as having a diameter of 5,000 yojanas, and another 
earth “of big measure,” described by Çukadeva Gosvämé. The figure of 5,000 
yojanas is a simple approximation of the 4,967-yojana diameter of the earth given 
in the Siddhänta-çiromaëi. The earth of big measure can be thought of as either the 
spherical inner shell of the universe or the disc-shaped Bhü-manòala. Both are 
made of the earth element, and both have a diameter of about 500 million yojanas. 
However, since Bhü-manòala contains the seven dvépas and oceans, it is clear that 
the big earth really should correspond to Bhü-maëòala. 
Vaàçédhara then cites a number of verses from the Bhägavatam to illustrate his 
point concerning the existence of two earths: 
It is stated in the Second Canto, the yoginéryäna [SB 2.2.28], “then reaching the 
particular, or viçeña, one becomes fearless.” It is also said in the Fifth Canto 
[5.20.35], “There is another land, made of gold, with a mirrorlike surface,” etc. 
Also, in the Third Canto [3.26.52] it is stated, “This universal egg is called 
particular or manifest [viçeña], with tenfold increasing coverings.” In the Fifth 
Canto [5.25.2]: “This great universe [kñiti-maëòalam, or earth-maëòala], situated 
on one of Lord Anantadeva’s thousands of hoods, appears just like a white mustard 
seed.” Thus, by the illustration of a mustard seed it is known to be spherical. It is 
also said in the Kardama-vihära [3.23.43], “After showing his wife the globe 
[golam] of the universe [bhuvaù] and its different arrangements, full of many 
wonders, the great yogé Kardama Muni returned to his own hermitage.” In the 
Tenth Canto [10.8.37] it is stated, “She [Yaçodä] saw within His mouth all moving 
and nonmoving entities, outer space, and all directions, along with mountains, 
islands, the surface of the earth [bhü-golam], the blowing wind, fire, the moon, 
and the stars.” By such proofs one should accept that there are two earths. 
Some of these verses illustrate the meaning of the term viçeña used by Çukadeva 
Gosvämé to describe the universe. Çréla Prabhupäda clarifies the meaning of viçeña 
by translating it in SB 3.26.52 as “the manifestation of material energy.” The 
reference to viçeña in SB 2.2.28 stresses the subtle aspects of this manifested 
energy, since it refers to the attainment of a subtle form by a yogé who has reached 
Satyaloka. 
Verses 5.25.2 and 3.23.43 refer to the globe of the universe, and 10.8.37 refers to 
mother Yaçodä’s seeing the earth globe within Krñëa’s mouth. Since Vamçidhara 
takes these texts to refer to the two earths, he is clearly thinking of the earth as 
having a spherical form. He does not seem to make a clear distinction between the 
disc-shaped Bhü-maëòala and the shell of the universe. 
The reference to verse 5.20.35 introduces the golden land that lies within the ring 
of Lokäloka Mountain in Bhü-manòala. This golden land is said to reflect light like

=== PAGE 126 ===

126
the surface of a mirror, so that any object that falls on it cannot be seen. This turns 
out to be the key to Vaàçédhara’s solution of the dilemma of the two earths. He 
continues, 
Well, this earth is the smaller one, so where is the other, bigger one? The answer 
is: The bigger one is indeed a form of reflection [pratibimba-rüpa] up above the 
orbit of the asterisms. Its measure, according to SB 5.21.19, is “the 95,100,000-
yojana circumference of the sun’s orbit around Bhü.” Thus, roughly speaking, it 
comes out to be the upper portion of the orbit of the asterisms. 
Here Vaàçédhara proposes that the small earth is the one we live on, whereas the 
big earth of the Puräëas is a form of reflection, or pratibimba-rüpa. The term 
bimba means “a mirror,” and pratibimba means “a reflection.” Bimba can also 
indicate the disc of the sun or moon, and pratibimba can thus indicate the sun or 
moon reflected from water. On a more abstract level, bimba means “an original 
object,” and pratibimba means “a counterfeit” or “an object with which the 
original is compared.” The term “asterism” (or nakñatra) means “star 
constellation,” and the orbit of asterisms is the orbit followed by the stars as they 
circle the earth. 
Vaàçédhara then explains the idea of the big earth as a reflection: 
Then how does the reflection appear, and how does it have this form? It is like 
this: On all sides of the earth of 5,000 yojanas’ circumference, separated at a 
distance of one yojana, there is the fire sphere [anala-golaù]. Thereby, above the 
orbit of asterisms that seems small in the distance, the golden land of pure form 
creates a screen of light. Therein, on all sides, is the great reflection. 
From a distant place a big thing looks small, and from another place a small thing 
looks big. Likewise, external objects of the universe such as the moon, look small, 
whereas the earth-globe, which is close by, looks big. 
The Sanskrit in this passage is difficult to translate. However, the general sense 
seems to be that the big earth is a reflection from the golden land mentioned in SB 
5.20.35. There, the golden land is described as being like a mirror, and one can 
imagine the earth being reflected from a vast, spherical mirror centered on the 
earth and situated beyond the orbit of the stars. One should note, however, that 
the Bhü-maëòala described in the Fifth Canto is inhabited, and it is therefore hard 
to see how it can be interpreted as a reflection. 
Vaàçédhara then discusses the fire-sphere, and also introduces a water-sphere. We 
have not seen any reference to these structures in the Bhägavatam or in the 
available jyotiña çästras. However, Vaàçédhara gives a reference to the water-
sphere from the Puliña-siddhänta (a work that unfortunately seems to be lost): 
What is the evidence for the existence of the fire sphere, or anala-gola? The 
evidence is that from the surface of the earth up to the limit of the orbits of the 
planets, there are eight divisions of winds, beginning with ävaha, and at the 
conjunction of the two [the earth and the winds], there is the water sphere, or jala-
golaù. It is mentioned in the Puliña-siddhänta that “the grasslike watersphere is at 
the conjunction of the earth-air [bhu-väta] and the udvaha wind, and by it the rays 
of the sun and other luminaries are seen to be separated and joined together. 
The Sürya-siddhänta [12.46] says, “Owing to closeness, the sun’s rays are 
vehement in summer [in the devas’ regions].” Here “closeness” and “farness” could 
not exist without the reflection of the fire sphere.

=== PAGE 127 ===

127
The water-sphere and the fire-sphere seem to serve as specific mechanisms for 
reflecting and refracting light. According to the Siddhänta-çiromaëi (SSB1, p. 127), 
the following seven winds are listed: ävaha (or atmosphere), pravaha, udvaha, 
samvaha, suvaha, parivaha, and parävaha. The atmosphere is 12 yojanas thick, and 
the pravaha wind envelops the fixed stars and planets, sweeping them westward at 
a uniform rate. This indicates that the water-sphere must be above the stars and 
planets, since it is connected with the udvaha wind. 
Vaàçédhara then argues that Çukadeva Gosvämé followed Puräëic tradition by 
describing the big earth and giving only brief hints of the small earth of 5,000 
yojanas: 
In accordance with the Puräëas, Çukadeva Gosvämé has spoken of the big measure 
of the earth, and only suggested the small measure; thus is the contradiction 
avoided by some. In the same way, although there is a contradiction involving the 
sphere of the sky, it is removed. 
As far as we can see, this seems to be a valid point. The Bhägavatam generally 
refers to Bhü-maëòala when it speaks of the earth. References to Bhü-gola, or the 
earth-globe, generally seem to refer to the globe of the universe, and there is no 
specific mention of an earth-globe 5,000 yojanas in circumference. However, there 
are some references to Bhü-gola, such as SB 10.8.37, quoted above, which may 
refer to this earth. Also, the idea of the earth as a sphere is strongly suggested by 
the description in SB 5.21.8–9 of how the sun rises at a point opposite to where it 
sets. 
However, it is hard to see why Çukadeva Gosvämé would elaborately describe a 
reflection, while only indirectly hinting at the real earth. We would suggest that 
“the big earth” corresponds to the reality directly perceived by persons on the level 
of consciousness of Çukadeva Gosvämé, while “the small earth” corresponds to the 
reality perceived at an ordinary level of human consciousness. The two earths are 
both aspects of one underlying reality, and the relation between them is higher-
dimensional: it cannot be understood in terms of the bending of light in ordinary, 
three-dimensional space. According to this idea, both earths are reflections, in an 
abstract sense, of the underlying reality. 
In the remainder of his commentary, Vaàçédhara uses the idea of reflection to 
interpret a number of verses in the Fifth Canto. First, he explains SB 5.21.2, where 
outer space, or antarikña, is compared to the empty space between two halves of a 
bean or a grain of wheat. In this analogy, the lower half of the bean corresponds to 
the hemisphere of the universe containing Bhü-maëòala and the Garbhodaka 
Ocean, and the upper half corresponds to the hemisphere containing the higher 
planetary systems. The space between the two halves of the bean corresponds to a 
thin, flat disc of space between the lower and upper hemispheres. This space, or 
antarikña, is bounded below by the plane of Bhü-maëòala and above by the parallel 
plane of Bhuvarloka. 
After explaining this verse, Vaàçédhara turns to SB 5.21.3: 
SB 5.21.3 states, “In the midst of the middle region [antarikña] is the most opulent 
sun.” This means that the water-sphere is the seeming middle of antarikña. Just as 
antarikña lacks a center, so also the water-sphere lacks a center (middle) due to its 
sphericity. Thus the sun, which goes there, is established with the form of a 
reflection [pratibimba-rüpena]. But the real sun disc [bimba-rüpena] is within 
125,000 yojanas of the center of the earth.

=== PAGE 128 ===

128
SB 5.21.3 states that the sun is in the midst of the disc-shaped region of antarikña, 
between the parallel planes of Bhü-maëdala and Bhuvarloka (see also SB 5.20.43). 
However, Vaàçédhara argues that space can have no middle, and goes on to say 
that the apparent presence of the sun in mid-space is an illusion due to reflection 
from the water-sphere. He then states that the real sun is within 125,000 yojanas of 
the earth globe. 
The Sanskrit here is terse and difficult to translate, but the import of Vaàçédhara’s 
statement seems to be as follows: The earth is a small globe, and the sun orbits it at 
a distance of no more than 125,000 yojanas. A process of reflection gives the 
impression that it is at a much greater distance. 
Çréla Prabhupäda indicates that the height of the sun above Bhü-maëòala is 
100,000 yojanas (SB 5.23.9p). However, one cannot conclude from this that the 
sun circles the center of the earth globe in an orbit with a radius of 100,000 
yojanas. The reason for this is that SB 5.21.7 states that the circumference of the 
sun’s orbit is 95,100,000 yojanas. Actually, Bhü-maëòala is a plane rather than a 
globe, and the Bhägavatam states that the sun moves in a large orbit parallel to this 
plane and very close to it. In Chapter 3 we argued that this plane corresponds to 
the ecliptic. 
Vaàçédhara goes on to suggest that SB 5.21.7 is not to be taken literally: 
SB 5.21.7 says [in paraphrase]: “The learned say the circumference of Manasottara 
Mountain is 95,100,000 yojanas.” The meaning is: mänasas means “the moon.” 
Uttaraù means “others beyond the moon, up to Saturn.” In accordance with jyotiña 
çästra, the measure of its orbit, combined with the part of Saturn, comes to 
126,800,000 yojanas. 
Here the circular Mänasottara Mountain defining the sun’s orbit is interpreted 
indirectly to refer to the moon, Saturn, and, by implication, the planets in between. 
In the jyotiña çästra the standard order of the planets is as follows: the moon, 
Mercury, Venus, the sun, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. (In Chapter 4 we have 
explained the relation between this and the order given in the Bhägavatam.) Also, 
in the Sürya-siddhänta the circumference of the orbit of Saturn is given as 
127,668,255 yojanas (SS, p. 87). 
Vaàçédhara then considers SB 5.20.43: 
According to SB 5.20.43, “The distance between the sun in the middle and the 
circumference of rhe universe [aëòagola, or “egg-sphere”] is 250 million yojanas.” 
The meaning is: “Of the sun” means “of the reflected sun.” “Eggsphere” means 
“the circumference of the golden egg.” The distance berween the two would be 250 
million yojanas. 
SB 5.20.43 also says, “The sun is situared [vertically] in the middle of the universe, 
in the area berween dyaus and bhümi [Bhuvarloka and Bhürloka, or heaven and 
earth], which is called antarikña, outer space.” The meaning of this is: Dyäv-
äbhümyoù refers to the orbit of the asterisms and the earth. Yad antaram means “in 
the middle of the egg (i.e., the golden egg). “The sun therein is rhe sun of the 
water-sphere reflection. Thus it should be understood. 
This verse states that the sun is situated vertically halfway between the top and 
bottom of the universal egg-sphere. It lies within the region of antarikña, between 
the planes of Bhürloka (or Bhü-maëòala) and Bhuvarloka. Vaàçédhara interprets 
the sun referred to in this verse to be a reflection of the actual sun. However, we 
have suggested that it can be understood as the real sun orbiting in the plane of the

=== PAGE 129 ===

129
ecliptic. In this connection, we should note that the radius of the sun’s orbit 
according to modern astronomy (interpreted geocentrically) is 93 million miles. 
For comparison, the 15,750,000-yojana radius of the sun’s orbit around 
Mänasottara Mountain is about 79 million miles using 5 miles per yojana, and 126 
million miles using 8 miles per yojana. 
In summary, the commentary of Vaàçédhara on SB 5.20.38 shows that the 
interpretation of the Fifth Canto was a topic of doubt and controversy among 
Vaiñëavas in the 17th century. The source of doubt lay in an apparent 
contradiction between the Puräëic cosmology represented by the Fifth Canto and 
the jyotiña çästra. The jyotiña çästra was regarded as the “eye of the Vedas,” and it 
seemed to correspond to observable reality. Yet its description of the earth seemed 
totally at variance with the “big earth” of 500 million yojanas described in the Fifth 
Canto. 
In this book we have argued that the contradiction between Puräëic cosmology 
and jyotiña çästra can be resolved, and that both are integral parts of an original 
Vedic tradition. This was also the basic point of Vaàçédhara’s argument. He 
concludes, 
Thereby it is undoubtedly indisputable that by meaningful justification as to truth, 
the sacred Bhägavata, being the statement of the supreme äpta [authority], is a 
means of proof, unrefuted, being in conformity with the conclusions of all 
sciences. 
It follows that in Vaàçédhara’s day, as today, an argument showing the 
irrefutability of the Bhägavatam needed to be made. We would suggest that the 
material knowledge of the ancient Vedic civilization has been in disarray for a long 
time, and this would also be true of Vedic spiritual knowledge, were it not for Lord 
Caitanya and the äcäryas following Him. However, this does not mean that we 
should denigrate the Vedic material knowledge as unrealistic and then similarly 
doubt the Vedic spiritual knowledge. A close examination of Vedic cosmology and 
astronomy suggests the presence of a deep and elaborate body of knowledge, even 
though today it is coming down to us in a fragmentary form. 
Appendix 2 
THE ROLE OF GREEK INFLUENCE IN INDIAN ASTRONOMY 
As we pointed out in Section l.b, Western scholars maintain that the mathematical 
astronomy of the siddhäntas was borrowed from Greek and Babylonian astronomy 
in the early centuries of the Christian era. In this appendix we will make a few 
observations suggesting that this hypothesis is not at all proven. We will not 
attempt an exhaustive treatment of the many arguments advanced by scholars, 
since this would require a large book. Rather, we will make a few points intended 
to show the quality of the scholars’ arguments and the nature of the historical 
evidence used by scholars to present their case. 
To begin, we should note that the history of ancient Western astronomy revolves 
around Claudius Ptolemy, an Alexandrian astronomer who lived in the second 
century A.D. Ptolemy is famous for writing a book on astronomy—the Syntaxis, or 
Almagest—that dominated Western astronomical thinking for over a thousand 
years. It turns out that, apart from Ptolemy’s Almagest, we have very little 
historical evidence regarding ancient Greek astronomy. Neugebauer describes the 
situation as follows in his three-volume work on ancient astronomy. Concerning 
his discussion of Greek astronomy before Ptolemy, he says,

=== PAGE 130 ===

130
With book IV [on pre-Prolemaic Greek astronomy] we entered an entirely new 
situation, where a later period had effaced all but vague and confused reports of its 
prehistory. This condition prevails right down to Ptolemy; without his historical 
remarks we would know almosr nothing about the astronomy of Hipparchus or 
Apollonius (NG, p. 781). 
Concerning the Roman-Byzantine period following Ptolemy, Neugebauer says, 
Over and over again attempts to see more clearly into the transmission of scientific 
knowledge within the Roman-Byzantine world and beyond its boundaries are made 
impossible by the absence of published texts.… It is obvious that at present any 
attempt at writing a historical narrative would be utterly unsatisfactory. The 
chances are slim that the future will be much better” (NG, p. 781). 
As a result, we can divide the history of ancient Western astronomy into three 
periods: (1) pre-Ptolemaic, (2) the time of Ptolemy himself, and (3) post-
Ptolemaic. Of these, we have substantial knowledge only of (2), as revealed by the 
Almagest. Due to our lack of solid evidence regarding period (1), we do not know 
the origins of Greek and Babylonian astronomy, and thus we cannot rule out the 
possibility that many astronomical ideas attributed to the Greeks may have come 
originally from India. And because of our ignorance of period (3), we have no solid 
basis for saying that these ideas were transmitted to India from Greek sources 
during the time of the decline and fall of the Roman Empire. 
Nonetheless, even though our knowledge of the history of ancient astronomy is 
extremely incomplete, there are scholars who believe that they can uncover 
important parts of this history by speculative reconstruction. One example of this 
is a paper entitled “The Recovery of Early Greek Astronomy from India,” by David 
Pingree (PG). In order to indicate the complexities and pitfalls of the speculative 
process, we will examine the key argument of this paper in detail. This will involve 
the use of a number of technical astronomical terms, but we will explain these as 
we go along. Our method will be to first present Pingree’s theory, and then give his 
reasons for accepting this theory as true. Then step by step we will show the 
fallacies in his reasoning and present an alternative theory that is in better 
agreement with the facts. 
A2.A. PINGREE’S THEORY REGARDING ÄRYABHAÖA 
Pingree maintains that in the late Roman period, the Indian astronomer Äryabhaöa 
used a Greek astronomical table based on Ptolemaic calculations to compute 
parameters for the mean motions of the planets. A planet moves at varying rates in 
its orbit, but one can define an artificial “average” planet that moves at a steady 
rate on both its primary cycle and its secondary cycle, if it has one. (Chapter 1 
points out that Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn have a secondary cycle, 
or epicycle.) The motion of this fictitious planet is called mean motion. To define 
it, two numbers are needed for each cycle: a position at a particular point in time 
and a rate of uniform motion. These numbers were the parameters needed by 
Äryabhaöa. 
Pingree proposes that Äryabhaöa chose noon of March 21, A.D. 499, as the date for 
his calculations. As Pingree reconstructs it, Äryabhaöa first used the parameters 
from an existing Indian astronomical text, the Brahmapakña, to compute for each 
planet the whole numbers of revolutions that had already elapsed from the 
beginning of Kali-yuga to this date.

=== PAGE 131 ===

131
The Brahmapakña calculations give not only the whole numbers of revolutions 
from the start of Kali-yuga, but also fractional parts representing the mean 
positions of the planets at the chosen date. According to Pingree, Äryabhaöa knew 
that these mean positions were wrong. He is convinced that Äryabhaöa was 
incapable of making his own observations of mean planetary positions. How then 
did Äryabhaöa know that these positions were wrong? Pingree explains that a 
Greek astronomical table had fallen into Äryabhaöa’s hands, and he had acquired 
instruction in its use from some person with Greek astronomical knowledge. On 
the basis of this foreign table, Äryabhaöa knew the errors in the mean positions 
computed by his Indian methods, and he desired to correct them in a way that 
would bring glory to himself and his native India. 
TABLE A2.1 
The Accuracy of Reconstructions of Äryabhaöa’s Parameters 
 
Planet           R 
  (1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
 
Saturn      146,564 
    0 
 0 
-12 
 4 
 0 
 
Jupiter      364,224 
    4 
 4 
-8 
 4 
 0 
 
Mars      2,296,824     0 
 0 
-8 
 4 
 0 
 
Venus      7,022,388     0 
-4 
-16 
 0 
 0 
 
Mercury   17,937,020   -8 
-12 
-24 
-20 
-8 
 
Sun 
      4,320,000    — 
 4 
1,192  0 
 0 
 
Moon       57,753,336    8 
 8 
-4 
-36 
 0 
 
Asc. Node  -232,226      0 
 0 
-10 
-88 
 0 
 
This table shows the accuracy of different schemes for reconstructing Äryabhaöa’s 
parameters, R, for revolutions per yuga cycle of the planets. The numbered 
columns give the differences between the reconstructed parameters and 
Äryabhaöa’s actual parameters. These columns are: (1) Pingree’s original results, 
(2) our reconstruction based on Ptolemy’s mean motions relative to his position 
for Zeta Piscium, (3) the same, using Ptolemy’s mean motions only, (4) a 
reconstruction obtained by rounding off the brahmapakña  periods, and (5) a 
reconstruction based on the hypothesis of observation. 
According to Pingree, Äryabhaöa simply looked up the required mean positions in 
the Greek table. Then he converted the table’s degrees, minutes, and seconds to 
fractions of a revolution, and added them to the whole revolutions obtained from 
the Brahmapakña. This gave the correct total mean motion of the planets from the 
start of Kali-yuga to the chosen date, assuming that the whole numbers of 
revolutions given by the Brahmapakña were right. 
Äryabhaöa’s chosen date was exactly 3,600 of his years after the start of Kali-yuga, 
and he wanted to express his rates of mean motion in Indian style as numbers of 
revolutions in a yuga cycle, which lasts 4,320,000 years. Since 4,320,000/3,600 is 
1,200, all Äryabhaöa had to do was multiply his total mean motion figures by 1,200 
and round them off to integers. (For technical reasons, Äryabhaöa wanted these 
integers to be of the form 4n for the seven main planets, and 4n + 2 for Rähu, the 
ascending node of the moon.) 
Pingree maintains that Äryabhaöa did this and then covered his tracks by 
neglecting to mention the Greek table in his astronomical writings. He also 
neglected to mention any of his other Greek source materials. In this way,

=== PAGE 132 ===

132
Äryabhaöa obtained undying fame as the author of an astronomical system of 
marvelous accuracy and sophistication. 
A2.B. THE MAIN ARGUMENT FOR PINGREE’S THEORY 
Now, how does Pingree know that this is what Äryabhaöa did some 1,400 years 
ago? His key argument is that if we use Ptolemaic calculations to reproduce 
Äryabhaöa’s supposed steps, then we obtain Äryabhaöa’s parameters for mean 
planetary motion almost exactly. Äryabhaöa’s parameters, listed under R in Table 
A2.1, are in the hundreds of thousands and millions. Column (1) of this table lists 
the differences between Äryabhaöa’s parameters and these parameters as 
reconstructed by Pingree. For example, for Jupiter, Äryabhaöa’s rate is 364,224 
revolutions per yuga cycle, and Pingree’s reconstruction is larger than this by 4. 
Since these differences are very small, it is hard to imagine how Äryabhaöa could 
have arrived at his parameters without following the scenario that Pingree 
proposes. This makes it seem that Pingree’s conclusion concerning Äryabhaöa is 
indisputable, and equally so his contention that nearly every aspect of Indian 
astronomy was imported from Greek sources without acknowledgement (PG, pp. 
114-15). 
An argument such as Pingree’s has a great impact on the academic world. It tends 
to be immediately convincing to scholars, and it becomes established as a 
foundation stone in an imposing school of thought that cannot be easily challenged 
by nonprofessionals. As a result, scholars in other fields (such as comparative 
religion and history) accept the conclusions of such a school as a matter of course, 
and modify their own views in accordance with it. 
A2.C. A PRELIMINARY CRITIQUE OF PINGREE’S ARGUMENT 
However, one can indeed find other ways by which Äryabhaöa could have arrived 
at his parameters. The Brahmapak–a parameters are expressed in revolutions per 
kalpa of 4,320,000,000 years, whereas Äryabhaöa wanted parameters in revolutions 
per yuga cycle of 4,320,000 years (see Table A2.3). What happens if we simply 
divide the Brahmapak–a parameters by 1,000 and then round them off to suitable 
integers of the form 4n or 4n + 2? Column (4) of Table A2.1 shows the differences 
between the parameters computed in this way and Äryabhaöa’s original parameters. 
We can see that for Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, and Venus the differences are not much 
greater than those produced by Pingree’s reconstruction. For these planets we 
come within 4 units of Äryabhaöa’s parameters, and for Mercury, the moon, and 
the ascending node we come within 20, 36, and 88 units, respectively. (Pingree 
neglected the parameter for the sun, but we also obtain this parameter precisely.) 
This illustrates that Pingree’s reconstruction at most accounts for the delicate fine 
tuning of Äryabhaöa’s parameters; most of the significant digits in these parameters 
come from the Brahmapakña parameters, which Äryabhaöa acknowledges as source 
material. 
As we shall see, this fine tuning can be accounted for in ways other than the one 
advocated by Pingree. To do this, it is first necessary to examine Pingree’s 
argument more closely. 
As the first step in reconstructing his calculations, we consulted Ptolemy’s 
Almagest (TM2) and wrote a computer program to calculate mean planetary 
positions according to Ptolemy’s system. In this system, mean motions are 
computed by linear equations, starting with initial conditions at Ptolemy’s epoch of 
noon on February 26, 747 B.C.—the first year of the reign of King Nabonassar of

=== PAGE 133 ===

133
Babylon. To clarify exactly what we are computing here, we will give some 
definitions of mean planetary positions in Indian, Ptolemaic, and modern 
astronomy. 
In Ptolemy’s system the planets Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn move in 
two cycles in a way similar to the motions of these planets in the system of the 
Sürya-siddhänta (see Chapter 1). For Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, the mean positions 
in Ptolemy’s system are angles measured counterclockwise on the first cycle 
relative to the point on the ecliptic representing the vernal equinox. In the Sürya-
siddhanta, the mean positions for theseplanets are the same,except that the 
reference point is the position of the star Zeta Piscium rather than the vernal 
equinox. The system of Äryabhaöa is essentially the same as that of the Sürya-
siddhanta. 
Ptolemy’s system defines the mean anomalies of Mercury and Venus to be the 
angles measured counterclockwise on the second cycle relative to their mean 
positions, which are both equal to the mean position of the sun. In the Sürya-
siddhanta the çéghras of Mercury and Venus are the corresponding angles, 
measured with respect to Zeta Piscium. For simplicity, we will redefine the 
Ptolemaic mean positions of Mercury and Venus to be their mean anomalies plus 
the position of the sun. This agrees with Pingree’s implicit usage, and provides 
natural quantities to compare with the çéghras of Mercury and Venus. We will also 
find it convenient to refer to these çéghras as the mean positions of Mercury and 
Venus according to the Indian system. 
In the SŸrya-siddhänta, the position of the ascending node of the moon, or Rähu, 
is defined relative to Zeta Piscium. Ptolemy’s system does not directly define the 
motion of the moon’s ascending node, but does define a related quantity called the 
mean motion of the moon in latitude. The position of the ascending node relative 
to the vernal equinox is 270º plus the difference between the moon’s mean 
position and this quantity. In this way we can define the Ptolemaic mean position 
for the ascending node. 
Using these definitions, we conclude that the mean positions of the planets in the 
Ptolemaic and Indian systems differ theoretically only in their choice of the 
reference point of zero longitude. In the two systems, this point is respectively the 
vernal equinox and the location of the star Zeta Piscium. 
In modern astronomy, the mean longitudes of the planets are defined in a way that 
is comparable with the mean positions as we have defined them for the Indian and 
Ptolemaic systems. There, one measures the counterclockwise angle between the 
vernal equinox and the planet’s heliocentric orbital position. The details can be 
found in texts on spherical astronomy such as SP. Here we would simply like to 
point out that the similarities between the Indian, Ptolemaic, and modern systems 
may arise as much from their describing the same planetary system as from 
cultural borrowing. 
To find the Ptolemaic mean positions at a particular date, one determines the 
number of days between this date and Ptolemy’s epoch and inserts this number 
into the equations for mean motion. For example, the traditional date for the 
beginning of Kali-yuga is February 18, 3102 B.C. Using Äryabhaöa’s assumption 
that Kali-yuga began at sunrise, there are 860,172.25 days from the beginning of 
Kali-yuga to Ptolemy’s epoch. (By convention, days begin at midnight, sunrise is

=== PAGE 134 ===

134
.25 of a day, and noon is .5 of a day.) This figure can be used to obtain the 
Ptolemaic mean planetary positions at the start of Kali-yuga. 
TABLE A2.2 
The Ptolemaic Mean Longitudes 
of the Planets at Noon on March 21, A.D. 499 
 
Planet           Ptolemy        Ptolemy minus          Pingree 
                                                Zeta Piscium 
 
 
Saturn              45;56                   49;19 
             48;40  
Jupiter              185;22 
       188;44 
            188;06 
Mars              4;24                    7;47 
              7;08  
Venus              351;17                  354;39 
             356;45 
 
Mercury 
178;32                   181;55 
               184  
Sun 
            357;16                  0;39 
                —  
Moon             279;46                  283;09 
             283;30 
 
Asc. Node 
 -10;55                 -7;32 
              -7;11  
The rightmost column lists the Ptolemaic mean longitudes of the planets at noon 
of March 21, A.D.499, as reported by Pingree in his Table 2. The leftmost column 
lists the Ptolemaic mean longitudes at this date, as computed by our program. The 
middle column lists the same figures minus the Ptolemaic position of Zeta Piscium 
at this date. 
We need a way of making sure that our Ptolemaic calculations are correct. Pingree 
provided a way of checking this by listing the Ptolemaic mean positions of Saturn, 
Jupiter, Mars, the sun, the moon, and Rähu at the Kali-yuga starting date. His 
figures agree precisely with ours, except in the case of Rähu, where there is a 6-
degree difference. This indicates that except for Rähu, our program for Ptolemaic 
calculations agrees with Pingree’s. 
The star Zeta Piscium is important in Indian astronomy, since it is used as the 
starting point for measuring celestial longitudes along the ecliptic. We therefore 
wrote a program to calculate the position of this star by Ptolemaic methods, and 
we wanted to check the accuracy of this program. 
This program is based on the following facts: According to Ptolemy’s star table, 
Zeta Piscium had a longitude of 23º of Pisces on July 20, A.D. 137. According to 
Ptolemy’s rule for the precession of the equinoxes, this longitude increases at one 
degree per century (of Egyptian 365-day years). 
Pingree gave the Ptolemaic position of the star Zeta Piscium at the beginning of 
Kali-yuga. Calculation with our program confirms Pingree’s statement that Zeta 
Piscium had a longitude of 320º37’ at the start of Kali-yuga. We should note that in 
the Ptolemaic system such longitudes are measured from the vernal equinox at 0º 
of Aries. (These are called tropical longitudes.) 
After we have checked our Ptolemaic calculations at the Kali-yuga starting date, 
the next step is to perform these calculations for noon of March 21, A.D. 499, the 
date of Äryabhaöa’s alleged calculations. There are 454,759 days from Ptolemy’s 
epoch to this date. If we compute the Ptolemaic mean positions for this date, a 
number of interesting points emerge. First of all, the Ptolemaic mean longitudes do 
not at all agree with Pingree’s figures, as given in his Table 2 (PG, p. 116). This can 
be seen by comparing the rightmost and leftmost columns of Table A2.2.

=== PAGE 135 ===

135
The middle column of Table A2.2 lists the differences between our computed 
Ptolemaic mean longitudes and our computed Ptolemaic position of Zeta Piscium 
in A.D. 499. For simplicity, we will call such differences “distances from Zeta 
Piscium.” If we compare these figures with Pingree’s reported mean longitudes in 
the rightmost column, we see that there is rough agreement. They differ from 
Pingree’s reported mean longitudes by 1.2º on the average (using a root-mean-
square average). This rough agreement suggests that Pingree is really listing 
distances from Zeta Piscium, not Ptolemaic mean longitudes. But even if this is 
what he intends, the agreement is still rough and should be contrasted with the 
precise agreement that we found for Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the sun, and the moon 
at the Kali-yuga starting date. 
TABLE A2.3 
A Hypothetical Reconstruction of 
Äryabhaöa’s Revolutions Per Yuga Cycle 
 
Planet     Revolu-               N        Ptolemy.         Est 1  
   Modern 
 Est2                     
                Tions                             -Zeta P.           of R         -Sun             of R 
                per kalpa . 
 
 
Saturn  146,567,298      122             49;19         146,564     48;39       146,564  
Jupiter  364,226,455      303            188;44         364,228     187;29    364,224  
Mars  2,296,828,522    1,914 
7;47 
        2,296,824   7; 11     2,296,824  
Venus  7,022,389,492    5,851 
354;39         7,022,384   356;26   7,022,388  
Mercury17,936,998,984  14,947 
181;55       17,937,008  183;28   17,937,01 
Sun 
4,320,000,000      3,600          0;39         4,320,004    0;00      4,320,000  
Moon 57,753,300,000    48,127 
283;09       57,753,344    280;     14 57,753,336 
Asc.     232,311,168       -193         -187;32        -232,226    -187;43   -232,226 
Node  
In this table we have reconstructed Äryabhaöa’s revolutions per yuga cycle (R), 
using revolutions per kalpa from the Brahmapakña and mean planetary positions 
according to both Ptolemy and modem calculation. The Ptolemaic mean positions 
are relative to the Ptolemaic position for Zeta Piscium, and the modern positions 
are relative to the modern position for the sun. The modern positions are 
computed for noon on March 21, A.D. 499, at Ujjain, and the Ptolemaic positions 
are computed for this date at Alexandria. The two columns of longitudes are 
followed by the revolutions per yuga cycle that result from them, using Pingree’s 
method. The numbers under N are the elapsed whole revolutions, according to the 
Brahmapakña, from the beginning of Kali-yuga to Äryabhaöa’s 499 date. 
In his Table 1, Pingree lists distances from Zeta Piscium under the heading 
“Distance from Zeta Piscium,” and mean longitudes under lambda, the Greek letter 
symbolizing these quantities (PG, p. 115). Yet in his Table 2, he lists quantities 
under lambda that are really distances from Zeta Piscium, and he refers to these 
quantities as mean longitudes. We have not been able to account for this 
discrepancy in nomenclature. 
We have also not been able to account for the discrepancies between the middle 
and rightmost columns of Table A2 2, for it would seem that calculations for 
454,759 days after Ptolemy’s epoch should be even more precise than calculations 
for 860,172.25 days before that epoch. (We note that Pingree’s Ptolemaic

=== PAGE 136 ===

136
calculations apparently have not been corrected for the time difference between 
Ptolemy’s city of Alexandria and Äryabhaöa’s city of Ujjain; this possible correction 
does not account for the discrepancy.) 
In column (3) of Table A2.1 we see the errors in reconstructing Äryabhaöa’s 
parameters using actual Ptolemaic mean longitudes for the selected A.D. 499 date, 
and not the Ptolemaic distances from Zeta Piscium used by Pingree. Clearly these 
errors rule out this reconstruction. In column (2) we see the errors that arise if we 
reconstruct Äryabhaöa’s parameters using our computed Ptolemaic distances from 
Zeta Piscium. These are the errors that Pingree’s theory actually entails if we 
assume that he means distance from Zeta Piscium when he says mean longitude. 
For Venus and Mercury the errors in Pingree’s reconstruction of Äryabhaöa’s 
parameters turn out to be worse than those reported by Pingree in his paper. 
(Compare columns 1 and 2 of Table A2.1.) This indicates errors on Pingree’s part, 
but it might be argued that it does not detract very badly from his hypothesis. We 
therefore ask, Is there some reasonable way of reconstructing Äryabhaöa’s 
parameters that produces smaller errors for all of the planets than Pingree’s 
method? The answer is yes. To explain this, we must turn to a discussion of the 
mean positions of the planets according to modern astronomy. 
A2.D. THE THEORY OF OBSERVATION 
We used standard computer programs published by Duffett-Smith (DF) to 
calculate the mean longitudes of the planets and the moon’s ascending node. We 
can also calculate the longitude of Zeta Piscium by looking up its position in the 
Astronomical Almanac and modifying this for a given date in accordance with the 
modern rate of 50.29 seconds per year for the precession of the equinoxes. 
Let us assume, for the sake of argument, that the mean longitudes computed 
according to modern astronomy are correct. Then the error in Äryabhaöa’s mean 
position for Jupiter on a given date must be equal to Äryabhaöa’s mean position 
minus the position of Jupiter relative to Zeta Piscium by modern calculation. In 
Figure A2. 1, these errors are plotted for the eight planets for dates ranging from 
10 B.C. to A.D. 1007. The vertical axis is located at noon of March 21, A.D. 499. 
We can see that for the seven planets Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, the sun, the 
moon, and the ascending node, the errors converge sharply to a value of about 1.5º 
at a date near A.D. 499. (Actually, the point of closest convergence is at roughly 
A.D. 540.) The planet Mercury, however, is an exception to this pattern. 
In Figure A2.2, similar error graphs are plotted. For these graphs we plot 
Äryabhaöa’s mean positions minus the corresponding differences between 
Ptolemy’s mean positions and Ptolemy’s longitude for Zeta Piscium. Here we also 
see a convergence at about A.D. 499. However, this convergence is much less 
sharply focused than the convergence in Figure A2. 1. It is good for Saturn, Mars, 
the sun, and the ascending node, but it is poor for the other planets in comparison 
with Figure A2. 1. 
Figure A2.1 Comparison between Äryabhaöa’s system and modern astronomy. The 
horizontal axis represents time in unirs of 40 years. The origin corresponds to 
noon of Mar. 21, A.D.499. The vertical axis represents the difference in degrees 
between modern mean planetary positions relative to Zeta Piscium and Äryabhaöa’s 
mean planetary positions. These differences are plotted for the seven planets and 
RŠhu (the ascending node of the moon). Note that for all planets except Mercury,

=== PAGE 137 ===

137
the differences between Äryabhaöa’s calcularions and modern calculations converge 
sharply at about A.D. 539. 
What is the explanation of these patterns? Pingree’s argument is that the 
convergence in Figure A2.2 is due to the fact that Äryabhaöa calculated his 
parameters so that his mean motions would agree with a Greek astronomical table 
at this date. But if this is so, we must ask, Why is the convergence in Figure A2.1, 
representing Äryabhaöa’s deviations from reality, so much sharper than the 
convergence in Figure A2.2, which represents his deviations from Ptolemy? 
We propose the following simple answer to this question: The convergence in 
Figure A2.1 is due to the fact that Äryabhaöa observed the planetary mean 
positions in the period between A.D. 499 and 540. The lesser convergence of plots 
in Figure A2.2 at this time is due to the partial agreement that exists between the 
Ptolemaic system and modern calculations. The convergence in A2.2 is not as 
sharp as that in A2.1 because there are errors in Ptolemaic mean positions relative 
to those computed by modern methods. 
Figure A2.2 A comparison berween Äryabhaöa’s system and Ptolemaic astronomy. 
The horizontal axis represents time in units of 40 years. The origin corresponds to 
noon on Mar. 21, A.D. 499. The vertical axis represents the difference in degrees 
between Ptolemy’s mean planetary positions relative to Zeta Piscium and 
Äryabhaöa’s mean planetary positions. These differences are plotted for the seven 
planets and Rähu (the ascending node of the moon). In this case there is a sharp 
convergence only for the sun, Mars, Saturn, and the ascending node. This figure 
should be compared with Figure A2. 1. 
This interpretation is borne out by a comparison of Ptolemaic and modern 
calculations. Figure A2.3 shows plots of the difference between Ptolemaic and 
modern calculations of mean positions relative to Zeta Piscium. We can see that 
Ptolemy’s errors for Saturn, Mars, the sun, and the ascending node are consistently 
small; the error for Jupiter is somewhat larger; and the errors for the other planets 
are much larger. In fact, the convergence in Figure A2.2 was strikingly good 
precisely for Saturn, Mars, the sun, and the ascending node. 
This confirms our interpretation that the partial convergence in A2.2 is simply a 
by-product of the greater convergence caused by Äryabhaöa’s observations—that 
we see in A2.1. By Pingree’s hypothesis, the scatter seen for Jupiter, Venus, and the 
moon in A2.2 just happens to be such that these planets converge along with the 
others in A2.1. This, however, seems unlikely. 
Figure A2.3 A comparison between Ptolemy’s system and modern astronomy. The 
horizontal axis represents time in units of 40 years. The origin corresponds to Jan. 
I, A.D. 161, a date in Ptolemy’s lifetime. The vertical axis represents the difference 
in degrees between modern mean planetary positions and Ptolemy’s mean 
planetary positions. Both the modern and the Ptolemaic mean longitudes are 
relative to Zeta Piscium (using modern and Ptolemaic calculations for Zeta 
Piscium, respectively). The differences are plotted for the seven planets and the 
ascending node of the moon. Ptolemy does fairly well for the sun, Mars, Saturn, 
Jupiter, and the ascending node, although he does make a systematic error for 
these planets. A much greater difference arises between Ptolemaic and modern 
calculations if they are both made relative to the vernal equinox. This suggests that 
Ptolemy’s observations were initially made relative to a fixed star, and then 
converted to the tropical Zodiac.

=== PAGE 138 ===

138
At this point the argument may be raised that the convergence of error graphs in 
Figure A2.1 does not take place at the origin, but is about 1.5º above it. One might 
ask whether this can be readily explained on the hypothesis that this convergence 
is due to Äryabhaöa’s observations. One answer, of course, is that Äryabhaöa may 
have made an error in observation that had an equal effect on all the planets. But 
we can go further and suggest the particular error that he may have made. 
To do this we must consider the sun, which Pingree did not mention in his 
reconstruction of Äryabhaöa’s parameters. According to Äryabhaöa’s system, the 
sun is required to have a longitude of zero after 3,600 years of Kali-yuga have 
elapsed. (This is due to the fact that 4,320,000 is evenly divisible by 3,600.) If 
Äryabhaöa found that the sun had a non-zero longitude, it would be natural for 
him to take this as an error and revise all his longitudes so that the longitude of the 
sun would come out to zero. Or, knowing that the sun should have a longitude of 
zero, he might have simply measured the longitudes of the other planets relative to 
the sun. This would automatically cause the errors in his observed longitudes to be 
roughly equal to the actual mean longitude of the sun at the time of his 
observations. 
Let us suppose that Äryabhaöa did this, and that he then computed his parameters 
using his observed longitudes rather than longitudes copied from a Greek table. 
This leads to a reconstruction of his parameters based on modern calculation of the 
differences between mean longitudes and the sun’s mean longitude. The longitudes 
and resulting parameters for this reconstruction are listed in the last two columns 
of Table A2.3, and the errors in this reconstruction are listed in column (5) of 
Table A2. 1. As we can see, these errors are zero, except for Mercury, where the 
error is equal to that in Pingree’s reported reconstruction (see columns (1) and 
(2)). Thus, the hypothesis of observation yields better results than the hypothesis 
of copying from Greek tables. 
A few final points will help to round out our discussion of Pingree’s theory. The 
first is that in Figure A2.3, we can see that the Ptolemaic error graphs for several 
planets converge at about A.D. 161. This makes sense, since Ptolemy is thought to 
have written his Almagest at about this date. However, the convergence point is 
about 1.25º above the time axis. It would appear that Ptolemy too may have made 
some systematic observational errors. 
Indeed, to properly evaluate Ptolemy’s errors, we should plot the differences 
between Ptolemaic longitudes and modern longitudes (without making these 
relative to a fixed star, such as Zeta Piscium). This is because both Ptolemaic and 
modern longitudes are relative to the vernal equinox. If this is done, all the error 
curves in Figure A2.3 acquire a decided positive slope, indicating a systematic 
error affecting all the planets equally. (Possibly, Ptolemy’s calculations were first 
worked out relative to a star, and then made relative to the vernal equinox using an 
erroneous value for the precession of the equinoxes.) 
The second point is that there is no actual evidence showing that Greek 
astronomical tables were being transmitted to India around A.D. 500. Indeed, 
Neugebauer’s discussion of the post-Ptolemaic period suggests that the quality of 
Western astronomy declined sharply after the time of Ptolemy. Thus he remarks 
that the astronomical material “extant from the later time of Roman Egypt is rather 
sad” (NG, p. 5). Of the second century work of Vettius Valens, he says, “The 
intervening less than 150 years succeeded not only in introducing several

=== PAGE 139 ===

139
numerical errors into the basic parameters but also in obscuring almost completely 
the meaning of the prescribed operations” (NG, p. 793). 
Persia is the natural link between India and the West, but of this country 
Neugebauer says: 
We know of Pahlavi translations of such first and second century astrological 
writings as Teucer and Vettius Valens and the presence of “Indian books” as well 
as of the “Roman megesti” around A.D. 250 under Shapur I. Under Khosro I É was 
revised, around A.D. 550, the famous Zij ash-Shah, which has been shown to be 
greatly dependent on Hindu sources (NG, p. 8). 
Here “Roman megesti” may refer to Ptolemy, but the phrase “Indian books” 
suggests that Indian astronomy existed at A.D. 250 and was being exported. 
Our final point is that, given the highly fragmentary nature of the surviving 
historical evidence, the process of speculative reconstruction is likely to create 
nothing more than illusions reflecting the opinions of the reconstructors. We 
therefore do not insist that our reconstruction of Äryabhaöa’s parameters is correct. 
We merely offer it as an alternative that is in better agreement with the available 
facts than Pingree’s reconstruction. 
A2.E. INDIAN TRIGONOMETRY: 
A SPECULATIVE RECONSTRUCTION 
In the remaining part of this appendix, we will give two more examples of the 
process of speculative reconstruction. These examples deal with the theoretical 
ideas and mathematical methods of Indian astronomy, which Western historians of 
science say were derived entirely from Greeks or Babylonians via Greek 
intermediaries. 
Our first example concerns the trigonometry used in texts of Indian mathematical 
astronomy. Our modern trigonometry is usually traced back to the Arabs (PF, p. 
260). However, in the Sürya-siddhänta, as well as in texts by Äryabhaöa and other 
Indian astronomers, sines and cosines are used, and a table of sines is given. A 
modern sine is defined geometrically using a unit circle, and the corresponding 
Indian sine is defined in the same way, using a circle with a radius of 3,438. This 
means that each sine is 3,438 times as large as its modern counterpart. It also 
means that if angles are expressed in minutes of arc, then the sine of a small angle 
is nearly equal to that angle. This useful feature is achieved in modern 
mathematics by measuring angles in radians, a technique first invented in England 
in 1783 (PF, p. 270). 
Another feature of the number 3,438 is that it represents a close approximation to 
pi. If the circumference of a circle is divided into 21,600’ (i.e., 360º times 60 
minutes/degree), then the circumference divided by 2pi is 3,437.746, or 3,438 to 
the nearest integer. Thus if one wishes to work with whole numbers, 3,438 is the 
best value for the radius of a circle of this circumference. 
Here is what some prominent historians of science have to say about the Indian 
sine tables: 
(1) Neugebauer: “The decisive step in proving that the Indian table of sines was 
derived from the Hipparchian table of chords was made by G. J. Toomer” (NG, p. 
299). 
(2) B. L. van der Waerden: “C. G. [sic] Toomer has shown that the chord table of 
Hipparchus was a table of chords in a circle of radius R=3,438. …Toomer is

=== PAGE 140 ===

140
justified in concluding that Äryabhaöa’s table of sines was derived from 
Hipparchus’ table of chords by halving the chords” (VW, p. 211). 
(3) D. Pingree: “This Indian sine-table is closely related to Hipparchus’ chord-table 
as reconstructed by Toomer, in which R also is 3,438” (PG, p. 114). 
These statements certainly convey the impression that the Indian sine table was 
directly obtained from a related trigonometrical table used by the Greek 
astronomer Hipparchus. However, what do we find if we actually examine the 
paper by G. J. Toomer that these authorities are citing? Let us briefly consider this. 
The first thing that we learn from this paper is that there are no surviving Greek 
documents containing Hipparchus’ chord table, even in a fragmentary form. 
Indeed, “there is no explicit evidence about the nature of Hipparchus’ chord table,” 
and no real proof that such a table ever existed (TM1, p. 6). It is important to note 
that only one work of Hipparchus’ has survived—a commentary on the stars—and 
this does not present his mathematical methods. As we have already noted, this is 
typical of the state of our knowledge of pre-Ptolemaic Greek astronomy. 
(The chord of an angle is defined as follows: Extend the sides of the angle until 
they intersect a circle of unit radius centered on the angle. The chord of the angle 
is defined to be the length of the chord of the circle connecting the two points of 
intersection. The chord of an angle is therefore twice the sine of half the angle.) 
Having admitted that he has no direct evidence regarding his hypothetical chord 
table, Toomer proceeds to construct the table from scratch. He does this using 
methods taken directly from works of Indian astronomy. Since in these works the 
sine of an angle is 3,438 times the corresponding modern sine, Toomer creates a 
chord table in which the chords are 3,438 times the corresponding modern chords. 
(These are computed using a modern sine table.) He also tabulates his chords at 
intervals of 7.5º or twice the interval of 3.75º typically used in Indian sine tables. 
To justify his construction, Toomer uses it to show how Hipparchus might have 
arrived at two numbers describing the moon’s orbit that are ascribed to him by 
Ptolemy. Since we do not actually know what computational methods Hipparchus 
used, Toomer takes it for granted that he used certain methods of Ptolemy. Using 
these methods, plus his hypothetical chord table, Toomer computes one of 
Hipparchus’ numbers, but gets it wrong. He then argues that Hipparchus must 
have made a particular mistake in the complex procedure. When he computes the 
number again on this basis, it still comes out wrong (3,082[2/3] over 246[1/3], 
rather than 3,122[1/2] over 247[2/3]). But Toomer concludes that it is close 
enough to “prove” that Hipparchus did use a chord table of the proposed type, and 
that he made the proposed mistake (TM1, p.12). The second number also comes 
out wrong (3,134 over 338 rather than 3,144 over 327[2/3]), but Toomer again 
regards it as close enough. 
By this reasoning Toomer maintains that “the nature of Hipparchus’ chord table is 
conclusively established” (TM1, p.16). Since the table has the structure of an 
Indian sine table, it follows that Indian trigonometry must have been derived from 
the Greeks. The idea that Greeks may have been influenced by Indian 
developments is never even suggested by modern Western historians of science. 
But in this case, of course, we have no evidence for influence either way, since the 
connection between Hipparchus’ two numbers and the Indian sine table is purely 
speculative.

=== PAGE 141 ===

141
Besides his interpretation of two numbers in the Almagest, Toomer offers only one 
other piece of evidence suggesting that the Greeks used a chord table with a radius 
of 3,438. This is a statement in Ptolemy’s Geography mentioning for two cases the 
ratio between the length of a parallel of latitude and the length of the equator. For 
Rhodes, at 36º north, this ratio is 93/115, and for Thule, at 63º, it is 52/115. 
Toomer claims that these figures must have been derived from Hipparchus’ 
hypothetical chord table, since in that table the diameter, expressed in degrees, 
rounds to 115. Also the chords corresponding to the two latitudes turn out to be 
93 and 52 when read from that table by linear interpolation and converted from 
minutes to degrees. According to Toomer, “The conclusion seems inevitable that 
he [Ptolemy] is here using, directly or indirectly, the old chord table of 
Hipparchus” (TM1, p. 25). 
Yet there are many ways in which Ptolemy might have arrived at these numbers. 
For example, he might have reasoned that it would be useful to use a degree of 
latitude as a unit of distance in geographical studies. (In fact, a degree of latitude 
was sometimes assumed by the ancient Greeks to have a length of 700 stades, or 
about 80 miles (NT, p.45).) In this case the diameter of the earth would be the 
circumference of 360 units, divided by pi. Using Archimedes’ rough estimate Of 
22/7 for pi, this diameter is 115 to the nearest unit. Using a compass, a ruler, and a 
protractor, it is easy to construct a circle of this diameter, marked with the parallels 
of latitude at 36º and 63º. Their lengths turn out to be 93 and 52 in round 
numbers. 
In fact, we performed this construction in about 10 minutes; it is much easier to 
obtain the ratios in this way than by using linear interpolation in a table of chords. 
Thus there is no need to suppose that a chord table, with or without a radius of 
3,438, was ever involved. 
A2.F. ANOTHER SPECULATIVE RECONSTRUCTION 
Since the chord table of Hipparchus has not survived (if it ever existed), it is 
remarkable that such slender evidence can be offered as the basis for “inevitable” 
conclusions about it. Yet, as we have seen, such speculative reconstructions are not 
unusual in the field of the history of science. Here we will give one more example. 
This is provided by the mathematician B. L. van der Waerden, who traces back 
Hipparchus’ trigonometry to the Greek mathematician Apollonius of Perge (VW, 
pp. 211–12). Van der Waerden’s reasoning goes as follows: 
(1) The Indian sine tablets accompanied by a complete theory of trigonometry, as 
shown by the writings of Äryabhaöa. This too must have come from the Greeks, 
but Hipparchus, in van der Waerden’s estimation, was not a good enough 
mathematician to have invented it. 
(2) This mathematician could not have been Archimedes, since he used 22/7 for pi. 
Therefore it must have been an able Greek mathematician living between the times 
of Archimedes and Hipparchus. 
(3) There was exactly one excellent mathematician living in this period, namely 
Apollonius of Perge. Now, Eutokios, in a commentary on Archimedes, says that 
Archimedes’ estimate of pi was intended for “the needs of daily life,” and that 
Apollonius had given more accurate estimates. 
(4) On this basis, “we are bound to conclude” that the value of pi used in Indian 
trigonometry is due to Apollonius (VW, p. 212).

=== PAGE 142 ===

142
(5) In fact, the Indian astronomer Bhäskaräcärya gives 3927/1250 (3.1416) as a 
good estimate of pi, and also gives [22/7] as an estimate “adopted to practice.” 
Since this statement is very similar to Eutokios’ statement about Archimedes and 
Apollonius, “we are bound to conclude that they go back to a common source, and 
hence that the estimate of pi is due to Apollonius” (VW, p. 212). 
One should note here that van der Waerden does not cite a reference giving 
Apollonius’ estimate for pi, and he also gives no reference that specifically 
attributes studies of trigonometry to Apollonius. Thus we do not know what 
Apollonius’ estimate of pi was, nor do we know whether he actually knew any 
trigonometry. Nor do we know whether Apollonius was the only able 
mathematician living between Hipparchus and Archimedes. And even if he was, we 
do not know who invented the basic theory of trigonometry, when this was done, 
or in what country that person lived. Van der Waerden’s argument is simply a 
chain of suppositions. 
We have discussed the arguments of Pingree, Toomer, and van der Waerden in 
detail to show the kind of foundations that underlie scholarly conclusions about 
the origins of Indian astronomy. The main characteristic of these foundations is 
that they are composed almost entirely of unsupported assumptions, biased 
interpretations, and imaginary reconstructions. It is unfortunate, however, that 
after many scholars have presented arguments of this type in learned treatises, the 
arguments accumulate to produce an imposing stratified deposit of apparently 
indisputable authority. In this way, supposedly solid facts are established by the 
fossilization of fanciful speculations whose original direction was determined by 
scholarly prejudice. Ultimately, these facts are presented in elementary texts and 
popular books, and accepted on faith by innocent people. 
The arguments of Toomer and van der Waerden are clearly very weak. But the 
objection might be raised that the division of the circle into 21,600’ in Indian 
trigonometry is itself evidence of Greek influence. In answer to this, we should 
first point out that according to modern scholars, the division of the circle into 
degrees, minutes, and seconds was borrowed by the Greeks from the Babylonians. 
We therefore ask, Did the Babylonians invent this division, or might they have 
borrowed it from some other source? 
In fact, there is evidence that the division of a circle into 360º is very old, and is 
related to the number of days in a year. In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam the number of 
days in a year is given repeatedly as 360 (see SB 3.11.10-12, for example). The 
same number is given in the Åg Veda, which is accepted even by Western scholars 
as dating back to 1000–1200 B.C. (HA, p. 8). For example, in the Åk-saàhitä, it is 
stated, 
Twelve spoke-boards, one wheel, three navels. Who understands these? In these 
there are 360 Sankus (rods) put in like pegs which do nor get loosened (BJS, p. 
18). 
This verse speaks of a year as having 360 days, and it can be compared with a 
similar statement in SB 5.21.13, in which the year is also described as a wheel. 
There are many statements in the Vedic literature comparing the year to a wheel or 
circle. 
The 360-day year was kept in alignment with the seasons by periodically inserting 
an intercalary month. This is described in Çréla Prabhupäda’s purport to SB 5.22.7.

=== PAGE 143 ===

143
The time accepted by scholars for the Åg Veda antedates the known period of 
Babylonian astronomy. According to Neugebauer, Babylonian astronomy dates 
back no further than about 600 B.C.: 
We know very little about the prehistory of this Babylonian astronomy. In the 
extant texts from the Hellenistic period almost all methods appear fully developed. 
On the other hand it is virtually certain that they did not exist at the end of the 
Assyrian period. Thus one must assume a rather rapid development during the 
fourth or fifth century B.C. (NG, pp. 3 4). 
We would suggest that the division of the circle into 360º was an ancient feature of 
Vedic civilization. In Egypt and Mesopotamia it may also date back to times when 
the civilizations of the Near East were part of a larger Vedic world system. As far as 
we are aware, this is neither demonstrated nor contradicted by known historical 
evidence. As the above statement by Neugebauer indicates, we have practically no 
historical evidence regarding the early history of astronomy in the Near East. 
If the division of the circle into degrees corresponds to the 360-day year, then its 
division into 12 signs of the zodiac, each with 30º, may correspond to the 12 Vedic 
months of 30 days. Likewise the Greek bathmoi, or 15-degree intervals, may 
correspond to the 15-day bright and dark fortnights of the moon. Going further, 
we note that among the many Indian time divisions there is the ghaöikä, which is 
one sixtieth of a day. Also, the pala is one sixtieth of a ghaöikä, and the vipala is 
one sixtieth of a pala. Next comes the prativipala, which is one sixtieth of a vipala 
(BJS, part 2, p. 13). Do these correspond to the divisions of a degree into minutes, 
seconds, and so on? We can only speculate about the ultimate origins of such 
divisions. 
As a final point, we should note that the assumption of the Western historians of 
science seems to be that no one in India could have exhibited mathematical or 
scientific inventiveness, and thus all Indian mathematical astronomy must have 
been due to Western creativity. However, the available historical evidence seems to 
contradict this. For example, the 14th-century Indian mathematician Mädhava 
gave the following approximation for pi: 
 
  2,827,433,388,233 
—————————  = 3.14159265359 
 
  900,000,000,000 
VCA: BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Mädhava showed great creativity in his mathematical work, and is credited with 
inventing the power series expansion for the arc-tangent function, which was 
separately discovered in Europe by James Gregory in 1671 (SA, p. 182). Since 
Mädhava lived in a traditional Indian cultural milieu, such mathematical creativity 
has presumably been available in India for thousands of years. 
I. BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
Works by His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda. These works 
are all published by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust in Los Angeles, California. 
BG: Bhagavad-gétä As It Is (1983) 
CC: Çré Caitanya-caritämrta (1974) 
CN: Conversations with Çréla Prabhupäda, vol. 1. (1988) 
KB: Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead (1-vol. edition, 1986) 
LB: Light of the Bhägawata (1984)

=== PAGE 144 ===

144
NOD: Nectar of Devotion (1982) 
SB: Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1987) 
TLC: Teachings of Lord Caitanya (1985) 
TQK: Teachings of Queen Kunté (1978) 
II. Other works. 
 
AA: Clark, Walter E., trans., The Aryabhatiya of Aryabhata (Chicago: Univ. of 
Chicago Press, 1930). 
AAA: “Air Force Observations of an Unidentified Object in the South-Central U.S., 
July 17, 1957,” Astronautics and Aeronautics, July 1971, pp. 66-70. 
ABW: Agarwala, G. C., ed., Age of Bhärata War (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidäsas, 
1979). 
AL: Sachau, Edward C., trans., Alberuni’s India (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, 
Trubner & Co., 1910). 
AR 1: Arp, H., “Observational Paradoxes in Extragalactic Astronomy,” Science, vol. 
174 (1971), pp. 1189–1200. 
AR2: Arp, H., and J. W. Sulentic, “Analysis of Groups of Galaxies with Accurate 
Redshifts,” Astrophysical Journal, vol. 291 (1971), pp. 88–111. 
AR3: Arp, H., “Distribution of Quasistellar Radio Sources on the Sky,” The 
Astronomical Journal, vol. 75 (1970), no. 1, pp. 1–12. 
AR4: Arp, H., “NGC-1199,” Astronomy, vol. 6 (1978), p.15. 
AS: Kulkarni, S. D., ea., Ädi Çaìkara (Bombay: Shri Bhagavan Vedavyasa Itihasa 
Samshodhana Mandira, 1987). 
BB: Çréla Sanätana Goswämé, Sri Brihat Bhägavatämritam (Madras: Sree Gaudiya 
Math, 1975). 
BD: Chambers, R., The Book of Days (Detroit: Gale Research Co., 1967). 
BJS: Dikshit, Sankar Balakrishna, English Translation of Bharatiya Jyotish Çästra 
(Calcutta: Gov. of India Press, 1969). 
BR1: Burbidge, G., “The Line-Locking Hypothesis …,” Physica Scripta, vol. 17 
(1978), pp. 237–41. 
BR2: Burbidge, G., “Evidence for Non-cosmological Redshifts,” International 
Astronomical Union Symposium No. 92: Objects of High Redshift, G. O. Abell, ed. 
(Boston: Reidel Co., 1980), pp. 99-105. 
BS1: Çrémad Bhakti Pradip Tirtha, Çréla Sarasvaté Thakur, 2nd ed. (Calcutta: 
Gaudiya Mission, 1978). 
BS2: Tridandisvami Bhaktikusum Sraman, Prabhupäda Çréla Sarasvaté Öhäkura 
(Sree Mayapur: Sri Chaitanya Math). 
CH: Cantor, G. N. and M. J. Hodge, eds., Conceptions of Ether, Studies in the 
History of Ether Theories: 1740-1900 (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1981). 
CR1: Corliss, W. R., Mysterious Universe (Glen Arm, Md.: The Sourcebook 
Project, 1979). 
CR2: Corliss, W. R., The Moon and the Planets (Glen Arm, Md.: The Sourcebook 
Project, 1985). 
DF: Duffett-Smith, P., Astronomy with Your Personal Computer (Cambridge: 
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1985). 
DR: Rawlins, D., “The Mysterious Case of the Planet Pluto,” Sky and Telescope 
(March 1968), pp. 160-62. 
DS: Waters, T., “Gravity Under Siege,” Discover (April 1989), pp. 18-20.

=== PAGE 145 ===

145
EA: Motz, L., and A. Duveen, Essentials of Astronomy (New York: Columbia Univ. 
Press, 1977). 
EB: Brown, J. E., ea., The Sacred Pipe (Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1971). 
ET: Andrews, G. C., Extra-Terrestrials Among Us (St. Paul, Minn.: Llewellyn Pub., 
1987). 
EW: Evans-Wentz, W. Y., The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries (New York: 
University Books, 1966). 
FJ: Johnston, F., Fatima (Rockford, Ill.: Tan Books, 1979). 
GP: Sarma, K.V., trans., The Goladépikä by Parameçvara (Madras: The Adyar 
Library and Research Centre, 1956). 
GS: Simpson, G. G., This View of Life (New York: Harcourt, Brace, and World, 
1964). 
HA: Kay, G. R., Hindu Astronomy (New Delhi: Cosmo Pub., 1981). 
HM: de Santillana, G. and H. von Dechend, Hamlet’s Mill (Boston: Gambit, 1969). 
JV: Vallee, J., Dimensions (Chicago: Contemporary Books, 1988). 
JV2: Vallee, J., Passport to Magonia (Chicago: Henry Regnery Co., 1969). 
MN: Thompson, R., Mechanistic and Nonmechanistic Science (Los Angeles: 
Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, 1981). 
MSF: Baker, D., The History of Manned Space Flight (New York: Crown, 1981). 
ND: Needham, J., Science and Civilization in Ancient China, vol. 3 (Cambridge: 
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1959). 
NG: Neugebauer, O., A History of Ancient Mathematical Astronomy (Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag, 1975). 
NM: Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura, Navadwip Mahatmya, trans. Banu däsa, ms. 
NT: Newton, R. R., The Crime of Claudius Ptolemy (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
Univ. Press, 1977). 
PA: Phillimore, J. S., Philostratus in Honour of Apollonius of Tyana (Oxford: 
Clarenden Press, 1912). 
PF: Playfair, J., trans., On the Trigonometry of the Brahmins (Royal Soc. of 
Edinburgh, 1798). 
PG: Pingree, D., “The Recovery of Early Greek Astronomy from India,” Journal for 
the History of Astronomy, vol. vii (1976), pp. 109–123. 
PL: Lowell, P., The Evolution of Worlds (New York: Macmillan, 1909). 
PN: Hartney, W. “The Pseudoplanetary Nodes of the Moon’s Orbit in Hindu and 
Islamic Iconographies,” Ars Islamica, vol. 5 (1938). 
PR: Procter, R., Old and New Astronomy (London: Longmans, Green, and Co., 
1892). 
RC: Field, G. B., H. Arp, J. N. Bahcall, The Redshift Controversy (Reading, Mass.: 
W. A. Benjamin, Inc., 1973). 
RP: Jaki, S., The Relevance of Physics (Chicago: The Univ. of Chicago Press, 1970). 
RS: Story, R., Sightings (New York: Quill, 1982). 
RS2: Story, R., Guardians of the Universe? (New York: St. Martins Press, 1980). 
SA: Sarasvaté Amma, T. A., Geometry in Ancient and Medieval India (Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidäsas, 1979). 
SBS: Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Goswämé Öhäkura, Çré Brahma-saàhitä (Los 
Angeles: Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, 1985). 
SH: Eliade, M., Shaminism (Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1964). 
SK: Silk, J., The Big Bang (San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1980).

=== PAGE 146 ===

146
SP: Green, R. M., Spherical Astronomy (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1985). 
SS: Sastrin, Bapu Deva, trans., Sürya-siddhänta (Calcutta: Baptist Mission Press, 
1860, reprinted in Bibliotheca Indica, New Series No. 1, Hindu Astronomy I). 
SSB1: Wilkinson, L., trans., Siddhänta-çiromaëi of Bhäskaräcärya, rev. by B.D. 
Sastrin (Calcutta: Baptist Mission Press, 1861, reprinted in Bibliotheca Indica, New 
Series No. 1, Hindu Astronomy I). 
SSB2: Arkasomayaji, D., trans., Siddhänta Siromani of Bhäskaräcärya (Kendriya 
Sanskrit Vidyapeetha, Tirupati Series No. 29, 1980). 
SU: Sulentic, J., “Confirmation of the Luminous Connection Between NGC 4319 
and Markarian 205,” Astrophysical Journal, vol. 265 (1983), pp. L49–L53. 
SW: Swerdlow, N. M., Ptolemy’s Theory of the Distances and Sizes of the Planets 
(Ann Arbor, Michigan: University Microfilms, Inc., 1969). 
TD: Dobzhansky, T., “Darwinian Evolution and the Problem of Extraterrestrial 
Life,” Perspect. Biol. Med., vol. 15 (1972), pp. 157–75. 
TF1: Tifft, W. G., “Periodicity in the Redshift Intervals for Double Galaxies,” 
Astrophysical Journal, vol. 236 (1980), pp. 70–74. 
TF2: Tifft, W. G., “Discrete States of Redshift and Galaxy Dynamics II…,” 
Astrophysical Journal, vol. 211 (1977), pp. 31-46. 
TF3: Tifft, W. G., and W. J. Cocke, “Global Redshift Quantization,” Astrophysical 
Journal, vol. 287 (1984), pp. 492–502. 
TF4: Tifft, W. G., “Absolute Solar Motion and the Discrete Redshift,” Astrophysical 
Journal, vol. 221 (1978), pp. 756–75. 
TF5: Tifft, W. G., “Discrete States of Redshift and Galaxy Dynamics III…,” 
Astrophysical Journal, vol. 211 (1977), pp. 377–91. 
TF6: Tifft, W. G., “Quantum Effects in the Redshift Intervals for Double Galaxies,” 
Astrophysical Journal, vol. 257 (1982), pp. 442–49. 
TF7: Cocke, W. J., and W. G. Tifft, “Redshift Quantization in Compact Groups of 
Galaxies,” Astrophysical Journal, vol. 268 (1983), pp. 56–59. 
TM1: Toomer, G. J., “The Chord Table of Hipparchus and the Early History of 
Greek Trigonometry,” Centaurus, vol. 18 (1973–74), pp. 6–28. 
TM2: Toomer, G. J., Ptolemy’s Almagest (London: Duckworth, 1984). 
TSA: Smart, W. M., Textbook on Spherical Astronomy (Cambridge: Cambridge 
Univ. Press, 1962). 
VG1: Vigier, J. “Cosmological Implications of Non-velocity Redshifts—A Tired 
Light Mechanism,” Cosmology, History, and Theology, W. Yourgrau, ed. (New 
York: Plenum Press, 1977), pp. 141–57. 
VG2: Jaakkola, T., M. Moles, J. P. Vigier, J. C. Pecker, and W. Yourgrau, 
“Cosmological Implications of Anomalous Redshifts…,” Foundations of Physics, 
vol. 5 (1975), no. 2, pp. 257–69. 
VG3: Kuhi, L., J. Pecker, and J. Vigier, “Anomalous Redshifts in Binary Stars,” 
Astronomy and Astrophysics, vol. 32 (1974), pp. 111–14. 
VG4: Merat, P., J. Pecker, and J. Vigier, “Possible Interpretation of an Anomalous 
Redshift…,” Astronomy and Astrophysics, vol. 30 (1974), pp.167–74. 
VJ: Shamasastry, R., Vedangajyautisha (Mysore: Asst. Supt., Govt. Branch Press, 
1936). 
VNB: Thakur Bhaktivinod and Siddhänta Saraswati, Vaishnavism and Nambhajan 
(Madras: Sri Gaudiya Math, 1968).

=== PAGE 147 ===

147
VP: Wilson, H. H., trans., The Vishnu Puräëa, vol. 1 (London: Trubner & Co., 
1864). 
VR1: Varshni, Y. P., “Alternative Explanation for the Spectral Lines Observed in 
Quasars,” Astrophysics and Space Science, vol. 37 (1975), L1–L6. 
VR2:Varshni, Y. P., “The Redshift Hypothesis for Quasars: Is the Earth the Center 
of the Universe?” Astrophysics and Space Science, vol. 43 (1976), pp. 3–8. 
VR3: Varshni, Y. P., “The Redshift Hypothesis for Quasars: Is the Earth the Center 
of the Universe? II.” Astrophysics and Space Science, vol. 51 (1977), pp. 121–24. 
VSB: Vasu, Rai Bahadur Srisa Chandra, trans., The Vedanta-sutras of Badarayana 
(New Delhi: Oriental Books Reprint Corp., 1979). 
VW: van der Waerden, B. L., Geometry and Algebra in Ancient Civilizations 
(Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1983). 
WG: Wigner, E., “Physics and the Explanation of Life,” Foundations of Physics, 
vol. 1 (1970), no. 1, pp. 35-45.