=== PAGE 1 ===

IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.8 No.8, August 2008 
 
 
 
 
170 
Manuscript received August 5, 2008.  
Manuscript revised August 20, 2008. 
Time-Frequency Analysis of Chanting Sanskrit Divine Sound “OM” 
Mantra 
Ajay Anil Gurjar and Siddharth A. Ladhake 
  
Sipna’s College of Engineering & Technology, Amravati University, Maharashtra, India 
 
Summary 
Our attentiveness and our concentration are pilfered from us by 
the proceedings take place around us in the world in recent times. 
Different challenges and impediments are faced by the people 
work in the software industries. It is tough to handle the stress 
some times. Therefore, to come out of the aforementioned 
troubles, Meditation is essential for all human beings. In the 
same way, for pschychological stress, Speech signal is uttered to 
be a considerable indicator.  In the direction of mediating human 
subject, ‘OM’ is a spiritual mantra, outstanding to fetch peace 
and calm. The entire psychological pressure and worldly 
thoughts are taken away by the chanting of OM mantra.  
Elimination of disruption and introduction of new dynamism in 
the body are given by the OM chanting. The consciousness could 
be promoted through the repetition of OM mantra. Furthermore 
this mantra transcends the restrictions of a mentality. To 
systematically understand the meditative chant, termed the divine 
sound ‘OM’, is the endeavor of this research work. With wavelet 
transforms, time-frequency analysis has been carried out for the 
divine sound OM. By this analysis we could conclude steadiness 
in the mind is achieved by chanting OM, hence proves the mind 
is calm and peace to the human subject. 
Keywords:  
Devine Sound, OM, Meditation, Speech signal, Time-Frequency 
Analysis, DWT, Haar, Daubechies 
1. Introduction 
Current advancement in technology and rising workload is 
often accompanied by stress.   As a result of a few physical 
factors in certain occupational actions, the psychosomatic 
complication termed psychological stress occurs. To 
incorporate spiritual welfare in step with our substance 
welfare, meditation provides as a way. Highly sensitive 
expressive experienced people are more probable to be 
satisfied and efficient in their life in recent days. It turns 
out that simultaneously they cannot give concentration and 
think 
discursively. 
Whether 
in 
the 
medical 
or 
technological or social spheres, to develop our excellence 
of life, human venture has sought all down the ages. 
Promoting the quality of our mind together with our 
material standard of living is essential to improve our 
quality of life. 
To deal with the increasing stress of modern standard of 
living, Humanity is progressively turning in the direction 
of different meditative practices. People have been 
heading for their gawk inwards in propose to attain peace 
of mind, since they are not capable to locate steadiness in 
the external world. Modern psychotherapists have begun 
to discover various therapeutic benefits of meditation 
practices.  Meditation induces the state of relaxation and 
the altered state of consciousness. They are particularly 
efficient in psychotherapy. However, for inculcating a 
more positive attitude in the direction of life at large, 
meditation is being utilized as a personal growth device 
over everything else recently.  
For psychological stress, Speech signal is uttered to be a 
considerable indicator. The speech signal expresses the 
information enclosed in the vocal word. As with several 
real-world signals, Speech signals are non-stationary. 
Hence the frequency contents changes diagonally the time; 
Fourier analysis is unconvincing [1]. Speech signal 
processing refers to the acquisition, manipulation, storage, 
transfer and output of human utterances by a computer. 
The main goals are the recognition, synthesis and 
compression of human speech [2]. Speech signals are 
including 
the 
features 
such 
as 
temper, 
physical 
characteristics and added pragmatic information. Most of 
these characteristics are audible as well. Concerning 25% 
of information enclosed in a clean speech signal refers the 
speaker. Through abstract psychological procedures 
speech production initiates the aspiration to communicate 
and the thought that is to be communicated.  
There are quantities of human verbal communications that 
are effectively non-linguistic, even if speech is an oral 
action which is greatly verbal. Tone of voice excellence, 
prosody, rhythm and pausing are the non-verbal 
characteristics. For a non-verbal signaling system, these 
phenomena stand which interweave with the verbal or 
linguistic system. In the midst of supplementary things, 
information about the physiological and psychological 
condition of the speaker is carried by the non-verbal 
content of the voice. Since, undoubtedly perceptible (non-
verbal) action typifies human beings; they are capable of 
identifying dissimilar states [3]. Our mind is entirely 
permitted to focus and give attention extra on sound by the 
repetition of Mantra i.e. chanting. The additional features 
that distract our energies for instance other thoughts, 
sensations and interruptions are too cleaned away by the 
repetition of mantra. As the mind clears away the mess of

=== PAGE 2 ===

IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.8 No.8, August 2008 
 
171
unnecessary internal discourse, our senses become more 
heightened and mind becomes sharper and perspective [4]. 
The theory in using mantras or chanting is that the body 
and mind begin to resonate with the frequency of the voice, 
helping to organize thoughts and consciousness. Reciting a 
mantra continuously "purifies the speech and 'protests the 
mind' by maintaining a constant spiritual connection; and 
of course it helps disperse mental chatter"[5]. If there is no 
religious preference then the sound vibration 'OM' is a 
universally recognized mantra .The sound of OM is also 
called Pranava, meaning that it sustains life and runs 
through Prana or breathes [6]. The OM is composed of 
three letters, A, U, and M. These symbolize the 
practitioner's impure body, speech, and mind Chanting 
OM (AUM) will bring us to a state of purity in body mind 
and soul [7]. The chanting of ‘OM’ mantra drives away all 
worldly thoughts and removes distraction and infuses new 
vigor in the body [6].  
Modern science has to reaffirm that OM mantra chanting 
allows our mind to focus and clear away unnecessary 
thoughts, sensations and distractions which divert our 
energies. In this paper, by utilizing signal processing 
techniques OM mantra chant signal is analyzed to endorse 
its effects on consciousness and steadiness of mind. The 
Time-Frequency analysis is performed on the OM chant 
signal using wavelet transforms. Our analysis results 
confirm that the chanting of OM mantra will improve our 
consciousness and give steadiness to mind by clearing all 
worldly thoughts. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the 
concepts and techniques utilized in the proposed work. 
The steadiness analysis of OM chant signal is discussed 
detailed in Section 3.The analysis results are given in 
Section 4. Section 5 concludes the paper. 
2. Concepts and Techniques Utilized in the 
Proposed Work 
This section gives a brief introduction of the concepts and 
techniques utilized in the proposed work. 
2.1 Mantra 
Mantra is intrinsically related to sound and sound is 
reverberating in everything in this universe [8]. A Mantra 
is a sound repeated over and over until it integrates into 
our consciousness - frees the mind from its constant doing, 
and elevates us to an altered state of awareness.  In this 
state, we can connect with our soul at its most profound 
level, achieving a state of universal consciousness [4]. 
Mantras have some features in common with spells, in that 
they are a translation of the human will or desire into a 
form of action. As symbols, sounds are seen to effect what 
they symbolize [9]. Mantra has been called the sound-body 
of God: It is God in the form of sound [8]. Mantra helps to 
quieten the mind. It works because it actively chases away 
our errant thoughts. Mantra helps to clear our mind and 
purify our inner being. This purification is essential to 
good meditation [12]. 
2.2 OM Mantra  
The basic mantra is OM or ‘Aum’, which in Hinduism is 
known as the ‘pranava mantra,’ the source of all mantras 
[10]. If there is no religious preference then the sound 
vibration 'OM' is a universally recognized mantra. It is the 
representation of the Supreme Being. The past, present and 
the future are all included in this one sound. Meditation on 
this sacred syllable is said to satisfy every need and leads 
to liberation [11]. The power of chanting the OM mantra is 
as follows: 
• 
The chanting of OM drives away all worldly 
thoughts and removes distraction and infuses new 
vigor in the body.  
• 
When we feel depressed, chanting OM fill us 
with new vigor and strength. The chanting of OM 
is a powerful tonic. When we chant OM, we feel 
we are the pure, all pervading light and 
consciousness.  
• 
Those who chant OM will have a powerful, sweet 
voice. Whenever we take a stroll, we can chant 
OM. The rhythmic pronunciation of OM makes 
the mind serene and pointed, and infuses the 
spiritual 
qualifications 
which 
ensure 
self-
realization.  
• 
Those who do meditation of OM daily will get 
tremendous power. They will have lustre in their 
eyes and faces. 
2.3 Time –Frequency Analysis 
Time-frequency analysis is a body of techniques for 
characterizing and manipulating signals whose component 
frequencies vary in time, such as transient signals [13]. 
Time-frequency analysis finds its roots in Fourier analysis, 
where a signal in time can be analyzed in the frequency 
domain as a sum of sines and cosines. For a non-stationary 
signal such as speech, the standard Fourier Transform is 
not useful for analyzing the signal. Information which is 
localized in time such as spikes and high frequency bursts 
cannot be easily detected from the Fourier Transform [14]. 
We have used wavelet transforms for time-frequency 
analysis in our approach.

=== PAGE 3 ===

IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.8 No.8, August 2008 
 
172 
2.4 Discrete Wavelet Transform 
The wavelet is a smooth and quickly vanishing oscillating 
function with good localization both in frequency and time. 
The Wavelet Transform (WT) is a technique for analyzing 
signals. It was developed as an alternative to the short time 
Fourier Transform (STFT) to overcome problems related 
to its frequency and time resolution properties. A discrete 
wavelet transform (DWT) is any wavelet transform for 
which the wavelets are discretely sampled. DWT provides 
high time resolution and low frequency resolution for high 
frequencies and high frequency resolution and low time 
resolution for low frequencies. In that respect it is similar 
to the human ear which exhibits similar time-frequency 
resolution characteristics. 
3. Steadiness Analysis Of OM Mantra 
Chanting 
This section details our analysis on the OM mantra 
chanting signal. Before some decades, Yogis and 
meditating professional affirmed that chanting mantra 
improves our concentration, gives peace and steadiness to 
our mind, reduces the mental stress and clears all worldly 
thoughts. Although, it’s required to verify importance of 
mantra chanting systematically, no schemes have 
demonstrated yet. In this proposed method, we have 
confirmed the significance of OM chanting. Time-
frequency analysis is performed on the OM mantra chant 
signal to analyze the steadiness. Unlike Fourier, wavelets 
can be used to analyze nonstationary, time-varying, or 
transient signals [15] [16]. This is an important aspect, 
since speech signals are considered to be non-stationary. 
We have utilized Discrete Wavelet Transforms (DWT) 
instead of Fourier transform for the Time-frequency 
analysis. We have exploited Haar and Daubechies 
wavelets for our analysis.  
3.1 Haar Wavelet 
Haar wavelet is one of the oldest and simplest wavelet. 
Therefore, any discussion of wavelets starts with the Haar 
wavelet. The Haar wavelet's mother wavelet function ψ(t) 
can be described as [15] 
 
and its scaling function φ(t) can be described as 
 
The Haar wavelet uses a rectangular window to sample the 
time series. The first pass over the time series uses a 
window width of two. The window width is doubled at 
each step until the window encompasses the entire time 
series. Each pass over the time series generates a new time 
series and a set of coefficients. The new time series is the 
average of the previous time series over the sampling 
window [21]. 
3.2 Daubechies Wavelet 
Daubechies wavelets are the most popular wavelets. They 
represent the foundations of wavelet signal processing and 
are used in numerous applications. Daubechies wavelets 
are a family of orthogonal wavelets defining a discrete 
wavelet transform and characterized by a maximal number 
of vanishing moments for some given support. The 
polynomial formed by the first N terms of the binomial 
expansion 
 
That is, the polynomial 
 
Where (a)k = T(a+k)/T(a),plays an important role in the 
construction of the compactly supported Daubechies 
wavelets. There is a close connection between the zeros of 
Pn(n) and the 2N filter coefficients h(n) of the Daubechies 
wavelet D2n.   
4. Analysis Results 
This section details the results of our analysis. The 
analysis results prove that the steadiness of mind is 
attained by chanting OM. To avoid disturbances due to 
ambient noise or other sources of sound, a professional 
recording was preferred. Therefore, a professional 
recording of the Divine Sound chanting OM was obtained 
and used for further scientific investigations. Hence the 
professionals may possibly not be affected by the stress, 
the need to analyze their speech signal is unnecessary. 
Though the professionals constantly practice OM chanting, 
the steadiness remains in their mind everlastingly. On the 
other hand, the normal people will not be having 
steadiness initially in their mind. Although they undergo 
“Om” chanting process, they have to perform it in an 
appropriate manner. Subsequent to the proper practicing, 
the mind of the stressed people reaches steadiness in a few 
days or weeks. On account of this, it’s very imperative to

=== PAGE 4 ===

IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.8 No.8, August 2008 
 
173
analyze the speech signal of a previously strained person. 
The constant analysis of a person’s speech signal would 
give us an enhanced outcome. 
During the OM chanting practice, our mind focuses on the 
repetition of OM chanting. Moreover, this practice helps 
us to reach steadiness. The frequency of the chant signal 
achieves steadiness following a continuous chanting. This 
specifies the attainment of the steadiness in the mind of an 
OM chanting person. This provides calm and peace to the 
stressed mind. The mental stress of a person gets reduced 
while 
the 
mind 
reaches 
steadiness. 
In 
addition, 
concentration also improves.  
Figure 1 represents the initial chanting of OM by a normal person.  
 
Fig. 1 Initial Chanting of single OM  
Figure 2 depicts the chanting of OM by normal person after some days of chanting. 
 
           
 
Fig. 2 Chanting of OM after some days     
Figure 3 and 4 portrays the analysis using the Haar and Daubechies wavelet transform respectively 
 
Fig.3 Haar Transform of OM chant signal

=== PAGE 5 ===

IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.8 No.8, August 2008 
 
174 
 
Fig. 4 Daubechies (D6) Transform of OM chant signal 
5. Conclusion 
Our attentiveness and our concentration are pilfered by the 
events around us. Different challenges and impediments 
have been faced by the humans due to their occupational 
activities. Meditation is essential for the human beings to 
come out of the above troubles. OM is a spiritual mantra, 
important to obtain peace and calm. The entire mental 
pressure has been taken away by chanting OM mantra. 
Consciousness has been improved by the repetition of OM 
mantra. In this work, we have confirmed the significance 
of OM chanting. The time-frequency analysis has been 
carried out using wavelet transforms for the divine sound 
OM. We have concluded that OM chanting affords 
steadiness in the mind scientifically. This provides calm 
and peace too to the stressed mind. The mental stress of a 
person gets reduced while the mind reaches steadiness. As 
a final point, we have confirmed scientifically the 
accomplishments of OM chanting in reducing the stress 
from the human mind. 
 
References 
[1] Aïcha Bouzid1, Noureddine Ellouze2,"EMD Analysis of 
Speech Signal in Voiced Mode", 1Institute of Electronic and 
Communication of Sfax, Sfax, Tunisie 2National School of 
Engineers of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisie. 
[2] "Speech signal processing" from http://en.Wikipedia.org 
/wiki/Speech_signal_pro cessing. 
[3] L.J.M. Rothkrantz, P.Wiggers, J.W.A. van Wees, R.J. van 
Vark, "Voice stress analysis", Text, Speech and Dialogues, 
ISBN 
3-540-23049-1, 
Lecture 
Notes 
in 
Artificial 
Intelligence 3206 pp. 449-456, Springer, Berlin-Heidelberg-
New York, September 2004. 
[4] "Mantra Meditation" from http://www.focalpointyoga.com 
/mantra_meditation.htm 
[5] Snelling, J. (1996), The Buddhist Handbook: A Complete 
Guide to Buddhist Teaching and Practice, 
[6] "The Meaning of Om" from http://www.omsakthi.org 
/worship/mantra.html 
[7] “The OM chant” from http://www.divinegold.com/meditation 
/meditationchants.htm 
[8] “Mantra Meditation” from http://www.meditationiseasy.Com/ 
mCorner/techniques /Mantra_meditation.htm. 
[9] "Mantra Its Meaning and Significance in Hindu Religious 
Rituals" from HinduWebsite http://www.hinduwebsite.com/ 
vedicsection/mantra.asp. 
[10] 
"Mantra" 
from 
http://www.haryana-online.com/culture 
/mantra.htm. 
[11] "Mantras' from http://www.spiritofangels.com/mantras.html 
[12] R Pettinger, Benefits Of Mantra for Meditation 
http://ezinearticles.com/?Benefits-Of-Mantra-For-
Meditation&id=453255 
[13] “Time-frequency analysis” from http://en.wikipedia.org 
/wiki/Time-frequency_anal ysis. 
[14] 
"Time-Frequency 
Analysis" 
from 
http://www.engmath 
.dal.ca/courses/engm6610 
/notes/node3.html. 
[15] G. Strang and T. Nguyen, “Wavelets and Filter Banks”, 
Wellesley-Cambridge Press, 1996. 
[16] J. S. Walker, “Wavelets and their Scientific Applications”, 
Chapman and Hall/CRC, 1999. 
 
 
 Ajay Anil Gurjar   received master’s 
degree in 2002 in Electronics Engg. from 
Sant Gadgebaba University Amravati, 
India. He has 13 years of teaching 
experience He is working as Assistant 
Professor in Department of Electronics 
& 
Telecommunication 
at 
Sipna’s 
College of Engineering & Technology, 
Amravati (India). His main research 
interests 
include 
Speech 
signal 
processing, Image processing, Wavelet 
transform and doing PhD in speech processing. He is a member 
of IETE & ISTE. He has published 5 papers in National & 
International Journal & Conferences on speech signal. He has 
awarded junior research fellowship from CSIR in 1995.

=== PAGE 6 ===

IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.8 No.8, August 2008 
 
175
Siddharth A. Ladhake received master’s 
degree in 1990 & PhD in 2004 in 
Electronics Engg from Sant Gadgebaba 
University Amravati, India. He has 25 
years of teaching experience. He is 
working as Principal at Sipna’s College of 
Engineering & Technology, Amravati 
(India). Previously he was holding a post 
of Professor from 1999 to 2005 at College 
of Engineering Badnera. His main research interests include 
Signal 
processing, 
Image 
processing, 
Code 
conversion, 
Multivalued logic etc. He is a fellow member of IETE & member 
of ISTE ,IE & IEEE. He has published 21 papers in National & 
International Journal & Conferences. 10 students are doing PhD 
under his guidance.