=== PAGE 1 ===

VAMANA PURANA

SANSKRIT TEXT AND ENGLISH TRANSLATION
WITH AN EXHAUSTIVE INTRODUCTION, NOTES AND INDEX OF VERSES

F- 99

=== PAGE 2 ===

Introduction

According to Manu- ‘‘Vedas are primary source of religion’ (Aa@fiact wy, verse
2.6), the Puranas, however, are the essence of the religion of Hindu society. Puranas are
also regarded as the chief source for the detailed explanation of the Vedas. They, therefore,
occupy a significant place in the ancient literature of India. The Puranas have obtained the
name of Paricalaksana because their contents generally embrace five topics namely (1)
Primary creation or cosmogony, (2) secondary creation, (3) genealogy of gods and
patriarchs, (4) reigns of the Manus, (5) history of the solar and lunar dynasties.

The definition does not however necessarily signify that the Puranas exclusively deal
with these topics only. On the contrary, every Purana dwells at length on one or more
particular subjects and in some, these five primary topics occupy a very subordinate
Position. Puranas are eighteen in numbers. The names of Mahapuranas at the last portion of
Stimadbhagavata has been given as under-

wre wat done o ve ae wes

ane arradaredt eEceateT

afast garded udhusd wart

anné ureet ahi a genusreafiafe fawen ( streerTad 12.7.232-6)

Vamana Purana is placed at serial number fourteen in the list of eighteen Puranas
mentioned in various scriptures. But it does not mean that it is of lesser importance than the
other Puranas. Although, it is smaller in size, yet it has all the constituents of the other
Puranas. Also its style of treatment of the subject matter is clearer and more analytical than

the style of other Puranas and Up-puranas. One of its special features is the amazing
variations in the famous ancient stories as related in other Puranas.

Its second special features is that inspite of being known as a Saiva Purana, nowhere the
importance of Visnu has in anyway been belittled as is the case with some other Puranas. In
Vamana Purana, both Siva and Visnu have been placed an almost equal footing. Again,
there is not a single sloka which humiliates Visnu. Some Saiva authors have gone even to
the extent of stating ‘‘A visit to a shine of Visnu is an insult to Siva.”’ In Vamana Purana,
on several occasions Siva has gone to Visnu for help and has praised him whole-heartedly.

The Story of Daksa yajiia and Sati -

Of all related in Vamana Purana which vary significantly from the stories as related in
other Puranas, the story of immolation of Sati attracts special attention. In Siva Purana,
Ramayana and other Purana scriptures, we are told that Sati had gone to the yajfia
performed by her father Daksa inspite of not being invited to the ceremony and when she
did not find the requisite share of offering for Siva, she cursed all those who had attended

=== PAGE 3 ===

iv

such a detestable function and immolated herself then and there. When Siva came to know
of this, he sent his attendant Virbhadra to avenge her death. Virbhadra reached the venue of
the yajfia and demolished the whole structure and put an end to the yajfia.

This story has been related in Vamana Purana in a different way. In this Purana it is
stated that on coming to know about the humiliation of Siva in the yajiia by Daksa, Sati
immolated herself. Relating the story in Chapter IV entitled ‘‘War between Hari and
Virbhadra’’, it is sated as under :

“The daughter of Gautama, Jaya had come to Mandracal to pay a visit to Sati. Seeing
her all alone, Sati asked her- Why her sister Vijaya Jayanti and Aparajita had not come
along?”’

Jaya replied, ‘“‘They have gone with father to the yajfia being performed by their
maternal grand-father Daksa. I am also going there. But I considered it worthwhile to visit
you first. Are you not going there? Is Lord Siva not going there? All Rsis along with their
consorts have gone there. All gods have also gone there. Has our maternal grandfather not
invited you?”’

Knowing such neglect and insult of her husband, and that too by her father, Satl was
greatly angered. She was furious and instantly fell on the ground. Immediately she breathed
her last at that very spot. Hearing the wailing cries of Jaya, Siva came there. On such tragic
death of Sati, Siva was very angry. Immediately, he collected a big gang of his disciples
and sent them to the venue of the yajfia being performed by king Daksa, under the
command of Virbhadra. He went there, fought with the soldiers of Daksa and destroyed the
yajiia.””

The Story of burning of Kamadeva -

Similarly, new elements have been incorporated in the story of burning of Kamadeva.
Traditionally, it is stated as under :

The demon Dvarkasura had vanquished all the Devatas. Later, the gods came to know
that none else but the son of Siva born of Parvati alone can kill Dvarkasura. They were
greatly worried as Siva was a celebate. So Indra persuaded Kamadeva to go and fill the
mind of Siva with amorous feelings and to prompt him to marry Parvati. When Kamadeva
played his tricks on Siva, he was awfully furious and by activating his third eye, Siva
reduced Kamadeva to ashes.

However, this incident has been related in Vamana Purana as under :

When Siva was destroying the yajiiasala' of King Daksa, Kamadeva shot his strong,
passionate and lustful arrows at Siva, he was greatly distressed and in a love-lom state of
mind he wailed for the company of Sati. When he could no longer tolerate his mental
torture, he handed over all the three kinds of arrows to Paficalika, the son of Kuber. When

1, The place where the sacrificial offerings are performed.

=== PAGE 4 ===

v

Cupid was about to attach Siva again, Siva was greatly upset and ran here and there in the
pine forest. There in the forest the wives of Rsis residing there became desirous and
lustfully ran after Siva. In that serious situation, the Rsis cursed Siva, “May you loose your
lifga.’’ When the linga of Siva fell apart, it stretched from heaven to the Netherlands.
Thereupon, both Brahma and Visnu came to that place. They tried to find out the terminal
ends of Siva’s organ but could not succeed. Thereupon, both of them prayed to Lord Siva
for mercy. Siva was pleased by their entreaties and said, “If all the gods honour and
worship this liiga of mine, I can accept this Linga again. Consequently Lord Visnu
prescribed the worship of Sivalinga for the four Varnas. For this, several new scriptures
were within advocating such practice and describing the great powers inherent in the
Sivalinga. The first scriptures was named Saivi, second Pasupata, third Kaladaman and the
fourth Kapalika.

Siva himself is a great energy centre. He was the son of Vasistha. His disciple
Bhardvaja was a great Pasupat. He considered ‘‘Gopayan Tapa’’ as of great merit. His
disciple Someswar was a king. Apastambha was equally great. Kameswar was his disciple.
Dhanada was also a great devotee whose disciple Aryodara was very powerful. He was a
Sudra by caste, but was a great ascetic. Thus, Lord Visnu made all the four Varnas and
persons of all Asramas great devotees of Siva.

After that when Lord Siva had been roaming about in Citravana, Kamadeva again
prepared himself for another attack on Lord Siva. This time Siva sternly and closely looked
at him from top to toe. Consequently, he was immediately burnt to ashes. It is stated in
other scriptures that after this, Kamadeva was declared as ‘Ananga’ or Formless and
exercised his sway on all living beings. However, it is stated that after being burnt,
Kamadeva got transformed into five plants namely (1) Drukam Prsta (2) Campaka (3)
Bakula (4) Patala (5) Jatipuspa. The arrows shot by Kamadeva at Siva were transformed
into trees of a thousand variety.

In reality, passion is a mental inclination which disturbs the mental poise of man from
time to time. Statements like ‘Being hit by its arrows’’ can be taken only as a metaphor.
The poetic allegory of spring season as an accomplice of Kamadeva as present in Vamana
Purana and ultimately the transformation of Kamadeva into famous fragrant flowers of this
country have become a beautiful literary composition. Concept of Kamadeva or Cupid is a
natural extension of the process of creation and emergence of man and this has been
presented in Indian Puranas and foreign mythologies in different ways.

Description of Geography of India -

Description of the Seven Islands (Sapta Dvipa) is considered as an essential component
of Pauranic literature. In ancient times, because of the difficulties of transportation, travel
through the length and breadth of the whole of India was considered as a great
accomplishment. However, the description of the then existing Saptadvipa as available in
the scriptures of those days is not true to facts today. It is only in some respects that the

=== PAGE 5 ===

vi

description of Jambidvipa agrees with the present position of Asia. Under such conditions,
the description of various regions of India and the mountains and rivers therein as given in
Vamana Purana is very significant. Although many of the names have since changed and
some may even be fictious, yet the information is greatly useful for the archaeologists.

Presenting a description about the mountains of India, it is stated in Vamana Purana,
“‘Mahendra, Malaya, Satya, Suktimana, Rksa, Viridhya and Pariyatra - these seven are
called Kulaparvatas.' In addition to these, there are other thousands of mountain ranges
including Kolahala, Vaibhraja, Mandara, Durdharacala, Vatadhuma, Vaidyuta, Mainaka,
Saras, Tunga, Prastha, Nagagiri and Govardhana. Also there are hundreds of other
mountains like Ujjvamanta, Puspagiri, Arbud, Raivata, Rsyamika, Sagomanta, Citrakita,
Krtasmar, Sri mountain, Kaukanaka etc.

While giving a description of rivers, it is stated that Sarasvati, Pasyaripa, K4lindi,
Hiranvati, Satadru, Candrika, Nila, Vitasta, Iravati, Kuha, Madhura, Hararavi, Usira,
Dhataki, Raks4, Gomati, Dhiitapapa, Bahuya, Drsadvati, Nihsvara, Gandaki, Citra, Kausiki,
Vadhusara, Sarayi, Salauhitya etc. are the rivers which come down from the Himalaya
mountains. Apart from these, there are other rivers originating from the mountains as
Parnasa, Nandini, Pavani, Mahi, Sara, Carmanvati, Lipa, Vidisa, Venumati, Citra,
Odhavati, Ramya etc.. Pariyasa, Sona river, Mehanadi, Narmada, Sursa, Kriya, Mandakini,
Dasa, Citrakitta, Daivika, Citrotpala, Tamasa, Kartoya, Pisacika, Pippalasrethi, Vipasa,
Vanjulati, Satsantaja, Suktiati, Cakrini, Tridiya, Vasu and other streams come down from
the Rksa mountains. Valguvahini, Siva, Payosni, Nirvindhya, Tapi, Sanisadhavati, Vena,
Chaitrani, Sintbahu, Kumudvati, Topa, Reva, Mahagauri, Durgandha etc. flow down from
Vindhyacala. Godavari, Bhimrathi, Krsna, Vaisya, Saridvati, Vigamadri, Supryopa, Kaveri,
Dugdhoda, Nalini etc. are big rivers which originate from Salya mountain. Kritmala,
Tabhraparni, Vanjula, Utpalavani, Suni, Sudama etc. come from Suktimana mountain. All
these rivers are very sacred, beneficent, mother of earth and wives of seas.”’

Later, there is a mention of the various regions of India and the names of races residing
in them. In the beginning, regions at far away frontiers are described. Kusidra, Kila
kundala, Pancdlaka, Kausika, Vrka, Saka, Barbar, Kaurava, Kalinga, Banga, Anga etc. are
the kingdoms. In these kingdoms live various races as Marmaka, Abhira of middle
countries, Sadhya Dhanaka, Brahmalika, Kaltopada, Aprafya, Sudra, Pallava, Sakhetaka,
Gandhara, Yavana, Sindhu, Saubir, Bhadraka, Satadrava, Lalithya, Paravata, Samisaka,
Kadhara, Kaikaiya, Dagana etc. these include people belonging to Ksatriya, Vaisya and
Sidra castes. Apart from these, there are Kamboja, Darada, Bardar, Aanga Lokika, Vena,
Tusara, Atriya, Bharadvaja, Prasthala, Daseraka, Lampaka, Ctdika, Alasa, Alibhadra which
are all reaces of Kirat people. Kirat races one those semi-civilised races which are found it
central India and Assam. After this is given a long list of kingdoms and kingships and
Democratic states which are located all over India. Out of these only a few can be identified

1. Mountains which are denoting various races.

=== PAGE 6 ===

vii

from their present names. Still, their comparison with descriptions given in other
contemporary books sheds sufficient light on the geographical and political conditions in
those ancient times.

Praises of Moral Conduct -

After describing the religions of all races and divisions, the supreme position has been
accorded to Moral conduct to which nobody can have any objection. Stating its importance,
it is emphasised, ‘‘If a person is not morally correct, all yajfias, charities, austerities etc.
performed by him are of no avail. An immoral person cannot have prosperity or peace
either in this world or the next world. Morality is a tree whose root is Dharma; whose
branches are wealth, whose fruits are fulfilment of desires and whose fruits are salvation. In
this context, the Rsis have prescribed the recitation of ‘‘Mangal Stotra’’ or ‘‘Beneficial
Hymns’”’ early morning which is very significant. That stotra refers to the sublime elements
in our vast universe, Indian religions and nation. Every person can draw great inspiration
from that stotra ‘‘Brahma, Visnu, MaheSa, other Devatds, Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury,
Jupiter, Venus, Saturn - these seven beneficient planets, Bhrgu, Vasistha, Kratu, Angira,
Pulastya, Pulaha, Gautama, Raidhya, Marici, Cyavana and Rbhu - all these Rsis may make
this morning of mine auspicious. Sanatkumara, Sanak Sanandana, Sanatana, Asuri, Pingala,
seven original musical notes, seven flavours, seven musical instruments - all these may
make this morning of mine blissful. This earth full of fragrance, this water full of flavours,
this air full of sensation, this fire full of energy, this ether full of sound waves - all these
five great elements may make my morning prosperous. The seven seas, seven mountains,
seven Rsis, seven Islands and seven regions may make this morning of mine propitious.””

If this stotra is deeply meditated upon, then all matter and energies of this universe get
fully invoked. If we recite it with devotion and comprehends its meaning, then certainly we
shall feel one with the Supreme Soul of our universe. Then we shall see none as our
opponent or enemy. Thus, there can be no better universal prayer. We can even say that this
stoira is an extension and expansion of whatever we pray for in the Supreme Gayatri
Mantra.

After that there is description of Indian religions. Then the Vamana Purana has offered
several prescriptions which are worth our attention even during this age. Actions like
aimless wandering, giving or donating to the undeserving, destruction of cattle wealth and
abduction of women etc. do not behove a good householder. Aimless wandering decidedly
is a blot on character; giving charity to an undeserving person is waste of wealth and
promotes evil in social life; killing of cattle is a sin whose evil consequences have to be
suffered in hell; abduction of women leads to degeneration of offsprings and possibility of
birth of illegitimate children.

The greatest of all sins - Ingratitude

Superstitious persons consider neglect or deviations from traditional commonsality and
prevalent customs and traditions as the greatest sin. In their opinion speaking ill of others,

=== PAGE 7 ===

viii

back-biting and ingratitude etc. are not vices. But Vamana Purana says, ‘‘In this world one
who is ungrateful, he is the most vicious person. There are modes of repentance and
purification for killing of a cow or killing of a brahmin, but those who are ungrateful to
their benefactors, for them there is no mode of repentance and purification. Such ungrateful
persons spite the obligations of their friends and relations. For them there is no escape.”’

In this context, a reference has come as to what are the famous products of different
regions of the world. This discourse is useful from the point of view of general knowledge.
Also it points to the fact that it is virtue or worth of an object or person which is valued in
this world. Just as Lord Krsna has stated in the tenth chapter of Gita that all supreme things
in this universe are manifestations of the splendour of God. Similarly it is stated in Vamana
Purana :

“Among gods, Lord Janardana is supreme; among mountains Sesadari is tallest; among
weapons, SudarSana is the most effective; among birds, Garuda is the foremost; among
snakes, Ananta Nag comes first; among natural planets, earth is the best; among rivers, the
Ganges is the most sacred; among aquatic plants, Padama is the most beautiful; among
pilgrimages, Kuruksetra comes first; among lakes, Manasarovar is the most sacred; among
forests, Naridanvana is the most famous; similarly among moral prescriptions, truthfulness
is the foremost. Among yajiias, ASvamedha yajfia is the topmost; among ascetics Rsi
Kumabhaja is the foremost; among scriptures the Vedas are the most holy; among Puranas,
Matsya Purana is the most popular; among moral codes, Manusmrti is the main code;
among days that Amavasya is the most sacred on which DarSa yajfia is performed; among
gods, it is Indra who is the head; among those who adorn energy, Sun is the supreme;
among satellites, moon is the supreme; among the cereals, Sali Rice is the best; among
bipeds, the Brahmin and among quadrupeds, lion and cow are the most gracious.

Among flowers, it is Jati flower; among cities, it is Kaficlpuram; among women, it is
Rambha; and among the four Asramas, Grhastha is the best. Among towns, it is Kusasthali;
among regions, is the central region; among fruits, it is mango; among tubers, it is Kanda;
and among diseases, constipation are more significant. Among white products, it is milk;
among clothes, it is cotton wear; among arts, it is mathematics; among sciences, it is magic;
among flavours, it is saltish; and among trees, it is Banyan tree which is held supreme.
Among chaste women, it is Parvati; among cows, it is Kapila; and among rivers, it is
Vaitarni which are more important. Just as these entities are supreme in their respective
categories, similarly, among the sinners, the ungrateful heads the list.

Undoubtedly, ungratefulness is a great infirmity and this indicates that the mental state
of such a person is very depraved. Whoever has done us even a small favour, to remain
grateful to him is our duty. It costs nothing. On the other hand, it encourages and inspires
the benevolent person for more such benevolents acts in future. On the other hand an
ungrateful person is so degraded that in return for the beneficial acts done to him, he does
not say even a few words of thanks in return. There are even such persons who will not
hesitate to blame, defame, damage or hit the interests of their benefactors. Thus they plug

=== PAGE 8 ===

ix

the sources of such social service which can benefit many deprived and needy persons.
Viewed in this light, ungratefulness is a great sin against individuals and society.

It is surprising to see that even animals express their gratitude towards those persons
who serve them or treat them well and are always prepared to serve their benefactors. On
the other hand there are human beings who are expected to discriminate between desirable
and undesirable, but they do not even say a few words of praise or do not return good for
good. In what category should we place such persons? Surely, they shall be called the most
degraded and shall deserve the most sever punishment at the hands of God who always
stands for justice.

Supreme Significance of Self-realisation -

Puranas contain all sorts of knowledge and discourses. On the one hand, they describe
the benefits of attaining heaven by going on pilgrimage, taking a dip in the holy rivers and
observing fast on Ekadasi and other auspicious days, on the other hand there are statements
which hold such rituals as of trivial importance and supreme importance has been given to
self-realisation alone. There is a Sloka in the scriptures which states, ‘‘Dip in a sacred river
and visiting pilgrimages is of great spiritual importance only to the people of low
intelligence. However, for the scholars the divine forces controlling the universe represent
the Supreme Soul. For the really learned persons, their souls alone is the manifestation of
the Lord.””

Like other Puranas, Vamana Purana is also full of such ideas as significance of
pilgrimages, worship of idols of gods, Sivalinga and sacred lakes etc. Attainment of merit
has been assured through these prescribed rituals. However, while analysing the true nature,
it is stated-

fa tat cacteitetat water
tana ferrmerta safer 231
(Vamana Purana, Chapter 43, Sloka 23)

“‘One whose mind has been concentrated in his Self does not stand in need of visiting
pilgrimages and Asramas.”’

While explaining the content, the author of the Purina says, ‘‘The Self is like a river
which passes through the pilgrimages of self-restraint. Truth is water in that river and it
includes good conduct and tranquillity. One who takes bath in such a river, he becomes
pure and attains great spiritual merit. From simple water alone Self does not get purified. It
is the foremost duty of a person to attain equanimity, through self-realisation. The saints
insist on knowing the Self. He is free from desires by knowing his Self. He alone is a
Brahmin who is in possession of the wealth of equanimity. He does not need any other
riches. Observance of moral conduct, sincere behaviour and gradual withdrawal from
worldly affairs are the duties of a Brahmins.”

=== PAGE 9 ===

x

It has always been stressed in the Puranas that alms should under all circumstances be
given to a Brahmin who is of high moral character and a true ascetic. But not much need to
be said about the moral conduct, sense of service, detachment, and the nature of day to day
life of the priests at the places of pilgrimage. Today, nobody is prepared to support them or
speak on their behalf. Everybody knows how they testify to the saying of Saint Tulsidasa
that, ‘‘They mortgage the Vedas and squeeze the religion.’” Vaman Purana says, ‘‘A true
Brahmin does not covet or crave for worldly riches. On the other hand he considers all
living beings like his own self and observes truthful behaviour in all matters. In ancient
times Brahmins were honoured by all and their status was even higher than the status of
gods. It was because of the fact that their entire devotion was towards the welfare of the
whole world and they were completely detached from worldly affairs. True Brahmins
considered it below their dignity to live on alms. Whenever they had to accept alms on.the
insistence of the kings, they used that wealth for the spread of knowledge, dissemination of
education and works of public utility. Today they are always busy in extracting the
maximum from the devotees through fair or foul means and at times even resorting to the
most degraded methods. Truly religious and artistic Brahmins should exent their most to
change the situation.

Inspiration for avoiding sinful acts -

One of the components of the Puranas is description of ‘Hell’. Other religions also
present a pre-picture of ‘‘Hell’’ inflicting punishment to the sinners. There is a mention of
‘hell’ in Christian scriptures and of ‘‘Dozakh’’ in Islamic scriptures. But to our knowledge
only these names have been mentioned and there is no detailed description of these
constructs. But there is a detailed description of twenty one categories of ‘Narakas’! in
Puranas. There is a very impressive and effective presentation of the types of torturing
punishments meted out to the sinners. There is no such thing in any other religion. This
presentation is almost similar in all the Puranas. However, the differences in styles of
presentation and the richness of language makes a lot of difference in the overall
effectiveness of presentation. Such presentation if various torturous punishments
corresponding to various sinful acts as given in Vamana Purana appears to be well
ingrained in the mind of the common man. It will be pertinent to give an extract of this
description.

“‘Those who reproach the saintly persons, those who create hurdles in virtuous acts,
those who discriminate against their friends, and colleagues, they go to hell. Those who
impelled by greed sell their daughters to successive bidders, they are cut to pieces by the
lords of hell. Those who torment others by their sarcastic remarks, they are pricked by the
carnivorous kinds by their sharp beaks. Those who beak bite against good person and speak
ill of them because of their selfish motives, their tongues are stretched out by the crows.
Those who indulge in mean behaviour towards their benefactors, they are thrown into

1. Hells.

=== PAGE 10 ===

xi

ditches full of excreta. Those who serve different qualities of food to different people
sitting in the same row and thus discriminate among equals, are tortured in hell. Those who
resort to violence against parents, siblings and other respected persons, they are tied with
hot chains and thrown in the most dreadful hell. Those who eat meat, molten iron is poured
into their mouth.

“Those who damage or destroy places of public utility like wells, tanks, lakes,
community halls etc., their skin is peeled off and they are thrown in hell to suffer
unbearable pain. Those who disfigure or defile places of public utility, their intestines are
drawn out by crows. Those who neglect their dependents and relations and are busy in self-
adornment and selfish pursuits, such persons are sent to a special category of hell where a
person leads the life of a dog. Those who eyes on the trusted property of other persons, they
are sent to a hell full of scorpions. Those who defile public sources of water are condemned
to a hell full of filth. Those who molest innocent girls and then force for abortion, they are
bitten by insects and ants. Those who misrepresent truth and give false evidence in a court
of law, they fall in hell for ten thousand years.’

These descriptions of hell are a clear warning to those persons who work against the
interests of other persons and the society and also for those persons who are
temperamentally inclined towards evil and take pleasure in harming others. It is of no use
to discuss about the location of such hells whether they are in this world or somewhere else
or whether they really exist or they are mythical creation of imagination. Only the idle
persons may indulge in such discussions. We shall only like to emphasise that evil actions,
bad behaviour and immoral conduct are sure to be adequately penalised in some form or the
other. One can easily find persons undergoing such sufferings in this world as have been
described above. Therefore, we must learn this lesson from such descriptions that we
should avoid evil actions and should be convinced that we shall have to suffer the
consequences of an actions good as well as evil. This is the law of nature. Retribution is
sure and certain. It is another matter that the fools or depraved minds may not accept this.
Thieves, robbers, scoundrels often hastily assert that no one can touch them. But we are
sure that such actions never lead to happiness. Similarly, those who try to amass wealth
through deception, fraud, corrupt practices, adulteration, bribes etc., ultimately land in
misery. They may shamelessly boast of their successes, but there is not the slightest doubt
that they will have to suffer the consequences of their sinful actions.

Communal Harmony -

As stated in the beginning, communal harmony is the most significant feature of this
Purana. This is known as Saiva Purana and there are many stories relating to Siva and Sati
whereas there is no mention of Rama and Krsna. However, along with Siva, Visnu has also
been greatly adorned for which the neutrality of the author must be praised. When
Kartikeya, the son of Siva was installed as the head of the army of Devatas, Parvati, the
mother of Kartikeya asked him to touch the feet of Visnu and seek his blessings. Skanda
only knew that Mahadeva is the only Lord of this Universe and hence where was the need

=== PAGE 11 ===

xii

to touch the feet of anyone else. He asked his mother, ‘‘who is this Visnu whom I must
honour in spite of my high status?’’ Then his mother replied—

act frag at teeafrer we vet:
AT: Wesenfeg Tay 7 BEAN Roll
(Vamana Purana, Chapter 58, Sloka 10)

“*T do not know much about him. However, your father had said that Lord Visnu is the
Supreme Lord while all of us are humans.”’ In a way, Brahma, Visnu and MaheSa have been
stated as three manifestations of the same power. Still since, Visnu is the sustainer of this
Universe, lord Siva has accorded to him a higher status. This must be accepted as greatness
of lord Siva.

Similarly, when the Raksasas Canda and Munda came to attack Parvati, the gods asked
her to wear her armour for the battle, Sati had said, ‘‘I do not see any need to wear the
armour to fight against these Danavas. I do not consider them of any significance.
“Hearing this, Lord Siva recited the Visnu Pafijar’’ to protect her. Describing the efficacy
of ‘Visnu Paiijar’, it is stated-

Wawona fas farmer: wary wareaterant fe tia:
were gag cleft wea ferdafa amar: nse
(Vamana Purana, Chapter 19, Sloka 44)

“‘Visnu Pajijar is really very efficacious and among the most important defences for
protection, It has been greatly praised. One who has the Lord seated in his heart, no one can
subdue him.””

When Lord Siva was accused of ‘‘Brahma Hatya’’ for destroying the fifth head of
Brahma and his skull got stuck with the palm of Siva, he went to Lord Visnu to get rid of
the same and implode him thus : ‘‘O Lord of all Gods, I offer my salutations to you. O rider
of Garuda, I pay my obeisance to you. O holder of Conch, Discus and Mace, I bow before
you in all humility you are infinite and absolute. You cannot be known through
argumentation. You are beyond knowledge and ignorance and you are the first cause of this
universe. O blissful supreme, you are the eternal Lord. Please accept my adoration. O Lord,
all this universe has been created by you. O Supreme Soul of this universe, you are the Lord
of all the worlds. O omnipotent, you are the sustainer of the entire universe. O omniscient,
you are the Rudra born of wrath. I am bound by the three attributes, while you are
omnipresent. Therefore, I salute you. O Lord of this Universe, all this universe belongs to
you. Water, ether, fire, air, intellect, mind etc. are all your manifestations. I bow to you.
You are the source of Dharma, Sacrifice, Tapa, Truth, Non-violence, Purity, Forgiveness,
Charity, Mercy, Wealth and Celibacy. The four Vedas are your manifestations. You have
the knowledge of the six Vedarigas, Upvedas etc. O imperishable, O holder of the Discus, I
adore you a hundred times. O incarnation in the form of Vamana and Matsya, I take you as
the supreme ocean of mercy. Please save me from this accusation of killing of a Brahmin.

=== PAGE 12 ===

xiii

Rule out this blemish struck to myself. I am burning because of this blame. O my Lord!
Please purify me. I beseech you again and again.””

When we compare this presentation with the presentation in Siva Purana, we find a
world of difference. In Siva Purana, when Sati did not find the offerings for Siva and saw
Visnu and Brahma present among the assembly of guests, she condemned them and said,
“O Visnu! Do you not know the nature of Siva? The scriptures declare him free of
attributes. O stupid, although you had keenfully enlightened in ancient time on the occasion
of Salva etc., yet you failed to be wiser and accepted your offerings even when you had
noted that there are no offerings for-Siva - your Lord. O Brahma! Earlier you had been
antagonistic to Siva because of your vanity and consequently, he had to demolish your fifth
head. Have you forgotten all that?’

Later when Virbhadra, the chief of the attendants of Lord Siva reached the venue of
yajfia along with Nara to destroy the same, he abused and scolded Visnu very greatly and
said, ‘“‘O Visnu! Over possessed by vanity, how have you violated your assurances towards
Siva given by you to Rsi Dadhici. Are you powerful enough to violate the promises given
by you to Siva? Who are you? Is there anyone else in the three worlds who can protect
you? Were you not aware what Sati had done? Had you not heard the commands of
Dadhici? Have you also come to this dawn yajfia of Daksa to receive the abominable
offerings. Accept this defiled offering from me. O Visnu! I shall pierce your heart with this
Trident of mine. I shall throw you on the ground and melt you down. I shall burn you to
ashes.”” At the end, Virbhadra said- ‘‘O immoral Visnu, O anti-Siva wretch! Are you
unaware of the pure eminence of Siva?’ This Visnu has been greatly humiliated in Siva
Purana and he himself is forced to accept his meanness. When Daksa fell at the feet of
Visnu and requested him to save the yajfia from destruction, he said, ‘‘O stupid Daksa, you
do not discriminate between good and evil actions. This Virbhadra is the chief of the
attendants of Siva and has come here to destroy us. Through sheer ignorance, I stayed here
against my assurances given by me to Lord Siva and I am suffering the consequences of the
same. O Daksa, it is beyond me to stop this destruction. By transgression of my oath, I have
also been condemned as anti-Siva. I am suffering because of your misdeeds. An anti-Siva
person cannot have solace even through the three ages. During this unfavourable time, such
destruction has occurred and our end is likely to come. We may travel to any part of this
world or even to Netherland, the weapons of Virbhadra shall overtake us. When Kala
Bhairava had cut the fifth head of Lord Brahma with his nails on the orders of Lord Siva,
we had not been able to do anything.

Similarly invectives in various forms are common in the Saiva and Visnu Puranas
which lead to many bitter conflicts between the two communities in ancient times. Now
those times are over. However, many followers of the two sects still consider themselves in
opposite camps and do not cooperate with each other in any religious or social work.
Sectarian scriptures creating hatred among its adherents for others have a very detrimental
effect which harms the society and the nation for hundreds of years. From this point of

=== PAGE 13 ===

xiv

view, we can appreciate the harmonising tendencies of Vamana Purana. In this Purana, we
find praises of Visnu as well as praises of Siva at several places. On the occasion of
sanctification of Sivalinga at Daruvana, Lord Brahma himself reached there along with all
the Rsis in the presence of Lord Siva and begging pardon for all his sins said, ‘‘O eternal,
well-pleasing, adorned with bow, Lord Siva, we offer our salutations to you. O Saviour,
Lord of whole Universe, all knowing, we always pay our respects to you. You are supreme
and the foremost among gods. You reside in our hearts and we always salute you. You are
grievously angry with the sinners - we adorn you O most powerful, you have the trident in
your hand. At the same time you are benevolent towards the world. All praise to you.”’

Similarly, it is stated at another place. ‘I do not know any other god except Siva having
the trident in his hand. You are the Lord of this world. Brahma and all other gods exist
under your patronage. Among all the gods, you are the only one doing or causing to be
done great acts. All gods enjoy within your pleasure.’’

It is clearly asserted in Vedas and other scriptures that in this universe, there is only one
divine force and people call him by different names according to their own understanding.
It is natural to have different names for God in different countries and in different
languages. However, on account of this difference names of God, it is an indication of
foolishness and not wisdom to quarrel among themselves or to curse or abuse the God of
other people. Thus adherents of different sects of Hindu religion should give up such
misconceptions.

Different versions of the same story -

We have several times explained this fact in the introduction to other Puranas that it is
futile to assert the truthfulness of these stories or to prove that these stories are historically
correct in all respects. The authors of Puranas have themselves termed them as ‘legends’
which means ‘stories’ or ‘tales’. They have created these religious stories to educate the
common people. they are based on the ancient folk lores. However when the illiterate or
those who have no literary background, read them they think that every word of these
scriptures is truthful and all the events mentioned therein are real.

We wish to inform such persons once again that had their presumption been correct, the
same story would not have been related differently in different Puranas. Even if we do not
take into account the differences in the nature and purpose of different Puranas, there would
not be two versions of a story in a Purana based on the same event. Even in Vamana
Purana, the incident of Siva roaming naked in Daruvana and cursing the Rsis has been
described differently at two places. Out of these, one appears in chapter six and the other in
chapter forty-three. We have already stated details of the incident as described in chapter
six. Hereunder, are given the details of the same event as given in chapter forty-three :-
“Once Siva along with Uma had been flying through the sky. At that time, Uma saw many
Rsis engaged in severe penances. She was moved by their plight and said to Lord Siva,
“These Rsis residing in this Daruvana have to undergo such severe penances just to get

=== PAGE 14 ===

xv

your blessings. Have pity on them. These skeleton-body Rsis have yet not been able to
attain salvation.’’ The Lord smiled and said, ‘‘You do not yet know fully the spiritual
aspect of the nature of true religion. All these people do not understand religion and have
not been able to control their passions. They have not been able to free themselves from
anger. They are all people of little intelligence.’’

Parvati got very curious to know more about all this. She said ‘‘Please prove whatever
you have said, ‘‘Siva left Parvati in the mid air and he went to Rsis down below. At that
time, Siva was young and beautiful but naked and decorated with flowers. With a bowl in
his hand, he went to the Asrama of Rsis for begging alms. The wives of those theistic Rsis
came to develop a fancy for Siva and said, ‘‘Let us come and see this beggar.” They got
some fruits and went near Siva. He very gladly accepted their offerings and said, ‘<All my
blessings for you. I am an ascetic. May I live in your Asrama.’’ Those ladies said, ‘“‘you are
such a beautiful ascetic. For what aims are you roaming about naked?” Siva said with a
smile, ‘‘I cannot reveal the secrets of my pursuits. But one who can know it by himself, he
should consider himself as a very fortunate person.’’ Those ladies said, ‘We shall do the
same.” So saying, they got infatuated by passion and embraced Siva. When the Rsis saw
all this, they got very angry. They picked up sticks and stones and began to hit at the linga
of Siva. From such an attack, the linga of Siva dropped and Siva disappeared from there.’’

After this, the Rsis were greatly frightened and they went to Brahma. He also rebuked
them for their involvement in passions and sensitivity to anger. Then all of them went in the
presence of Siva. Siva said- ‘‘your salvation lies in worshipping that very Linga.’’ Since
then, worship of the Sivalinga still in vogue.

This very story is related in Skanda Purana. But in that story, there is neither a mention
of running away of the frightened Kamadeva nor of the curiosity of Uma on the plight of
the meditating Rsis. In that story, it is stated that on his usual begging rounds, Siva had
incidentally reached Daruvana and there the wives of Rsis suddenly followed him. In
another Purana, it is stated that once there was a dispute between Brahma and Visnu as to
who is of greater importance. At that moment, the divine Sivalinga appeared before them
all of a sudden. It was decided that whoever could reach the end of that Sivalinga first shall
be considered as superior. Visnu moved downwards while Brahma travelled upwards. On
return, Brahma returned first and reported that he had reached the upper end of the Linga
and in support of his fraudulent claim presented the Pandarus Tree as a witness. It was
because of this vicious act that the fifth head of Brahma was cut off on the orders of Lord
Siva and Visnu was declared as superior.

When reader finds different versions of the same story in a Purana, which story should
be accept as the true story? In the above context, the first story is related to the incident
when Sati had immolated herself at the time of yajfia by her father Daksa and the second
story is related to the period when after thousands of years Sati had taken birth in the house
of Himacala and had married Siva consequent to her penances for thousands of years. In the
first story, Siva was roaming about in utter grief on account of the tragic death of Sati. In

=== PAGE 15 ===

xvi

the second story he had been moving about along with his consort on a pleasure trip and
apprising her of the wonderful mysteries of the world. In our opinion, it is irrelevant to seek
any historicity in any of these stories. These two different stories had perhaps been narrated
by two different religious preachers at different places and at different times in accordance
with their personal inclinations and for some reason both the versions got included in the
same Purana. The writers of these Puranas had no other aim in view except to import
religious orientation to the common man.

Such different versions of a story are common in other Puranas as well. Every story has
been narrated in different Puranas in such a way that their different versions do not
reconcile in any manner. Why only about Puranas, even the events on several occasions as
described in Valmiki Ramayana and Tulsi Ramayana are not the same.

If we study the Purana critically, the aim of their composition can very clearly be
comprehended. The present Puranas had not been written by one man and at one time.
Different preachers had been adding in their own new stories from time to time to the
already existing texts. This process had been continued by hundreds of preachers for
hundreds of years in accordance with their peculiar time and circumstances and also their
own inclinations. All these are religious stories and their content has been drawn from
either the ancient folk lores or from some performed anecdotes recorded in Vedic
scriptures. In addition to religious discourses, the writers have incorporated other material
relating to general knowledge, sciences, arts and crafts etc. Some parts of such material
could be still relevant and useful.

Character of Bali-Vamana -

This Purana has been named after the story of Raja Bali and Lord Vamana. But that
forms only a small part of it. In Rgveda and other Vedas, it has been stated that this whole
world is covered within three footsteps of Lord Visnu. While explaining this statement, a
brief description has been added in Brahmana scriptures. Thereafter, the writers of Puranas
through their poetic and literary contributions transformed the references in Brahmana
scriptures into an impressive story. In this Purana, the description of grandeur of king Bali,
the praise of his charities and the grand appearance of Lord Vamana, all these look like a
great literary composition to an ordinary reader. One important feature of the story of king
Bali is that inspite of being a demon king, he has been presented as a virtuous, well-
restrained and charitable person. It is said that when he ascended the throne as the king of
Svargaloka (heaven) after his victory over the gods, there was no vice or sinful act in his
kingdom and there appeared to be a period of Satyayuga or golden age. The Kaliyuga ran
away from the world and called on Brahma. He said to Brahma, ‘‘O Lord, king Bali had
destroyed my natural order. Whatever I am supposed to promote has been completely
negated by Bali and exactly the opposite is flourishing.’’

Brahm said, ‘‘Bali has not only dismaulted your natural order that he has uprooted the
natural order of the whole world. See, Indra, Marut, Varuna and others are sitting here.

=== PAGE 16 ===

xvii

Everything of theirs has been snatched away by Bali. Even the sun is loosing his glamour
on account of the sway of king Bali : ‘“Considering the spirituality, justice, truthfulness and
valour of Raja Bali, even the goddess Laksmi of the three worlds has approached him and
said, Previously, I was with Indra. But now you are the most powerful, so I have come to
you. O supreme among the Danavas, accept me’’ So saying, that Laksmi with the shine of a
moon got aligned with king Bali. Thereafter all natural, human, supernatural and divine
powers also moved on to Raja Bali.”’

Charities of king Bali have also been highly praised. When Lord Vamana was about to
ask for charity from king Bali, the whole world trembled and the effulgence of Danavas
appeared to wane. Thereupon king Bali asked Rsi Sukracarya, the guru of Danavas, reason
for such happenings. after meditating ovér the mysterious events, he said, ‘‘O king Bali,
Lord Vamana is soon coming to your yajiia to ask for charity. He will deprive you of
everything and give it over to Indra. Therefore, do not promise to give him anything. Only
say that I have nothing to give.”’

On hearing this, king Bali said, ‘‘O Learned Brahmin, when someone begs me for
charity, how can I say that I have nothing with me to give him and that too to one who is
the Lord of this Universe and destroyer of all our sins. What more can be desired in this life
then that Lord, who is invoked through so many fasts and austerities, himself comes before
me and asks for charity from me.’’ If that Supreme Lord whose blessings are sought
through various types of yajfias performed after acquiring such virtues as purity etc.
presents himself in person before me and says, ‘‘Give me something, I shall consider
myself as very fortunate. J] must have performed many virtuous deeds and undergone great
austerities in many previous lives that the Lord is coming to me to accepts the charity
donated by me. Nothing can be of greater significance that maturation of such virtuous
deeds.”’

“‘O my learned teacher, how can I say to my Lord who appears at my door that I have
nothing to give him in charity. I can sacrifice even my life but I can never say that I have
nothing to give. I feel if in the yajfia, Lord really comes himself and asks me to give
something, then I have achieved the purpose of this sacrificial oblations. What to speak of
other things. I can offer even my head to him in charity. Let the Lord say to me, ‘‘Give
something’’. What else more auspicious can there be? ‘‘I do not have anything to give.’’ I
have never said so to anyone. How can I say such unbecoming words to the eternal God
when he himself comes to my house. Even if a calamity befalls while giving alms, a
courageous person has to bear it. This is surely praiseworthy. There is no unhappy, poor or
diseased person within my kingdom. There is none who may not be having gold ornaments
or a house. All this is the result of the seeds of charity. Now if that seed of charity is to be
placed in the divine bowl of the Supreme Lord, what shall I not be attaining in this life.
This charity of mine shall be very very special and will please the gods as well. God
himself is coming here to oblige me by his presence, it shows that as a consequence of this
yajiia, he has showered his blessings on me.

=== PAGE 17 ===

xviii

Raja Bali was so impatient to give charity to god that he did not want any hindrance in
this act. But Guru Sukracdrya had been against this because he considered this as a
conspiracy of gods. Therefore, Raja Bali said to his Guru, ‘‘Sir, when Lord comes here to
accept charity, please do not say anything which may create obstacle in my offering of
charity to him. Either you not be present at that time or you keep completely quiet.’’ In
other Puranas, it has been said that Sukracarya opposed upto the end and to prevent Raja
Bali from agreeing to give charity and when Raja Bali was about to take water in his palms
to offer charity, Sukracdrya entered the pick of the pot to obstruct the flow of water from
the pot to his hands. Coming to know of this, Vamana inserted a blade inside the prick
which pierced through the eye of Sukracdrya and he became blind of his one eye for the rest
of his life. But this incident is nowhere mentioned in Vamana Purana. This is another
example of fanciful additions of events in the already existing stories by the writers of
subsequent editions of these scriptures.

When Vamana reached the venue of the yajfia and blessed Raja Bali, he offered his
entire treasures on his own to Lord Vamana. In the story of Raja Harigacandra, Visva Mitra
had to move very diplomatically to persuade Raja Harisacandra to offer his kingdom to him
as charity. But in this case, as soon as Lord Vamana reached, Raja Bali said to the Lord,
“O Lord, I offer to you everything that you desire from all my treasure including gold,
diamonds, elephants, bullocks, cows, clothes, ornaments, tuskers, land etc. etc.’” However,
Vamana asked for land measuring three footsteps. The king said, ‘‘Why are you asking
only for such a small piece of land?’” However, when the occasion for measuring of land
arose, Lord Vamana extended his size so much that the whole world was covered thereby.
The entire episode, as narrated in Vamana Purana indicates that it is a story which presents
the divine form of God through the story of Raja Bali and Lord Vamana. It is stated as
under :-

“*As soon as water flowed down from the hands of Raja Bali indicating his resolve to
give charity, Vamana transformed himself from the dwarf form into a gigantic form and
there appeared his divine form. Sun and moon were his two eye,s heaven was his head, both
his feet were the earth, the toes of his feet were the demons, the fingers of his hands were
the demons. The knees of Vamana Deva were the gods Visvedeva, his thighs were Sadhya
gods, his organs were yajiias, his ideas were the celestial ladies, his vision was planet
ASega, his hair were the rays of the sun, in all the pores of his skin were seated the Rsis, his
eight portion represented the tangential directions, his ears were the four straight directions,
his hearing power was Asvini Kumara, his nose was air, truth resided in his voice and
Sarasvati was seated there on his tongue. In his neck was mother goddess Aditi, Vasudeva,
resided in his back. In all his points were Maruta gods. Rudras were present in his chest.
Oceans were his patience. In his bosom were the Vedas. In his knees was the yajfia.””

This description is not of a physical human body but is of the vast universe. A similar
description of the cosmic form of God has been detailed by Lord Krsna in chapter XI of
Gita. It is more reasonable to accept it as a presentation from the knowledge point of view

=== PAGE 18 ===

xix

rather then a presentation of a physical form. Many of such stories in the Puranas have been
written for the benefit of the common man with a view to make them understand the basic
elements of cosmology and religion. This is the style of ancient compositions. During those
days, education was less popular and knowledge about sciences and arts was limited to
some persons of higher classes only. Common people used to gather knowledge about
tenets of religion by attending such gatherings where such stories were related. This
practice is prevalent even today to a great extent in all parts of the country and through such
gatherings, the uneducated sections of the society acquire knowledge about their religion
and are able to regulate and discipline their lives to some extent.

We also know that the religious preachers impelled by selfish motives considered
religious education of the masses as of secondary importance and concentrated more on
extracting as much money from the devotees as possible. Importance of fasting and
pilgrimage found a prominent place and in a great measure in the Puranas and people were
persuaded to give on such occasions as much money as they could.

Vamana Purana is comparatively small and it contains selfish and useless matter to a
lesser extent. We are confident that people will welcome this new series of the Puranas and
adopt the useful prescription of Hindu religion so as to make their lives purposeful.

aaa

=== PAGE 19 ===

CONTENTS

Chapter 1
Dialogue
Narada

Chapter 2

Story of the birth of Nara and
description of Destruction

Chapter 3

Dialogue between Hari and Hara
Chapter 4

War between Hari and Vérabhadra
Chapter 5

Description of Kala-form of Siva

Chapter 6
Episode of burning of Kama

Chapter 7

Description of battle of Prahlada
Chapter 8

Boon offering to Prahlada
Chapter 9

Description of battle of demons and
gods

Chapter 10

Victory of Andhaka

Chapter 11

Description of Puskara Dvipa
Chapter 12

Description of fruits of Karman

between Pulastya and

Chapter 13
Description of Bhuvana-kosa

Chapter 14
Description of Teachings of Religion

4

8

13

17

22

30

35

41

45

50

58

62

Chapter 15
Description of Charcter of Sukesi 73
Chapter 16

Description of Sleep of Gods &
Austerities on Dvitiya and Kalatami 77

Chapter 17

Description of the birth of Mahisdsura 82
Chapter 18

Description of Greatness of Goddess 87
Chapter 19

Description of the Greatness of
Goddess 92
Chapter 20

Killing of Mahisasura 96
Chapter 21

The story of the birth of Uma 101
Chapter 22

Glorification of Brahma-saras 106
Chapter 23

Description of Bali’s Coronation as
the King of demons 1
Chapter 24

Vicotry of Bali on gods 112
Chapter 25

Departure of Kasyapa and gods to

Ksirasagara 115
Chapter 26
Eulogy of Narayana by Kasyapa 116
Chapter 27
Grant of boon to Aditi by lord Visnu 117

=== PAGE 20 ===

Chapter 28
Grant of boon to Aditi by lord Visnu 120

Chapter 29
Condemning and Imparting of Curse
to Bali

Chapter 30

Eulogy of Vamana by Brahma
Chapter 31
Description of
Vamana and Bali

Chapter 32
Markandeya eulogises Sarasvati

Chapter 33

Praise of Sarasvati

Chapter 34

Account of the forests, rivers and
tirthas of Kuruksetra

Chapter 35

Account of various tirthas and forests 143

Chapter 36
Account of tirthas of Kuruksetra

Chapter 37
Account of the tirthas of Kuruksetra

Chapter 38

Praise of Siva by Mankanaka
Chapter 39

Praise of Ausanasa Tirtha

Chapter 40

Account of the Vasitha-apavaha-tirtha
in Kuruksetra

Chapter 41

Account of Kuruksetra-tirthas and
Praise of the Praci Sarasvati

Chapter 42

Description of Durga-tirtha and others 165

121

125

of
129

the characters

136

138

140

147

153

157

160

163

155

xxii

Chapter 43
Description of Creation and Religion 167
Chapter 44
Eulogy of Siva by Gods 174
Chapter 45
Description of Sthanu linga 177
Chapter 46
Description of various lingas 179
Chapter 47
The legend of the king Vena 183
Chapter 48
Boon-providing to Vena 196
Chapter 49

Formation of the Caturmukha-lingas
and Siva’s eulogy by Brahma

Chapter 50
Description of Prthidaka-tirtha

Chapter 51
Conversation
Batuka

Chapter 52
Prayer of Gods to Himalaya for

settlement of marriage of Uma with
Siva 208

198
202

between Uma and
203

Chapter 53

The marriage of Parvati and Siva 213

Chapter 54

Birth of Ganega 218

Chapter 55
The story of Sumbha-Nisumbha and
slaying of Canda and Munda 223

Chapter 56
Killing of Rakta-bija, Nisumbha and
Sumbha 230

=== PAGE 21 ===

Nav sfeTargTeat TA:

SATA TTL,

Chapter 1
Dialogue between Pulastya and Narada
araut EReT At Ba ATTA
Sa wreadi da wat wager
Jaya (Purana etc.) should be gone over
when first salute to Narayana, the best man

among all human beings, goddess Sarasvati
and Vyasa.

acieerennferer aerfegra at adh
reer Yes Bara RA TTT gH

Lord Visnu, the husband of the goddess of
wealth, who once disguised himself as a dwarf
(Vamana) under conceit and thus snatched the
three-kingdom (the heaven of deities) is
saluted.

yeni anfergt aq
ree: UfaES Yeoh ATTA 2

Once the very great scholar hermit Pulastya

was seated at his hermitage. The divine hermit

(Devarsi) Narada asked him the story related
to the Vamana Purana.

wet wTaaT Ter fawop wafer
ard ot ye aT Fa BU
O Brahmana! Please bring to notice the
query being raised by me to as how Lord
Visnu had held dwarf body irrespective of his
being so mighty?
aa a dunat year were Sere:
frevtiga argu & derek west
A doubt on the issue which intended
Prahlada, the best demon devotee to Lord
Visnu for fighting against deities, is looming
large in my mind.

eet & festa cere gfe wih
gees fren arat ayer araforitny 1

O the great Dvija! It is heard that Sati, the
most beautiful daughter of Prajapati Daksa,
was married to Lord Sankara.

famed ar ufrasa wart aera
ara fanart 78 fret were: g 1

Fe tater ether

wa 8 dered fore wdferd watsfa ton

Why did that beautiful Sati abandon her life
and was reborn as a daughter to the king
mountain Himalaya? And she again had
become wife of lord Mahadeva. I consider
you duly know the facts of that episode.
Hence, remove this doubt away from my
mind.

delat da area arrat da ar

gamit fafaerit @ fafraaea 3 fismcu

O the greatest saint! let me further know the
importance of holy places and the
magnificence of donations as well as the
procedure for observing the number of fasts
prevalent as contemplated in the scriptures.

Ware ANT Yer UPA: |

Ware aqat set ard aut Fer eu

The greatest orator and chief of hermits
Pulastya, in reply to the query so raised, began
to explain to Narada, the great ascetic.

Yes saver
Wei ant at arnfaftacmnfer:
waar fat Fen supa YA gol
Pulastya said- "O great sage! listen
attentively to Vamana Purana which I will

explain from bottom to top in an orderly
manner."

We trent tet ere wea
Bare Ter BT HerenreryUA eT gel

=== PAGE 22 ===

Vamana Purana

Long long ago, goddess Haimvati (Sati)
said to Mahesvara seated besides her on the
mountain Mandara on the five entrance of the
summer season.

ater: watt Serer a a ® ferert FET
am area AY Ferret are: 11 92H

O the Lord of gods! Summer has entered in
yet there is lack of a suitable house which
could enable us to face conveniently the
stormy wind and the scorching heat, the
companion of summer.

Wage WaT F VIET areTTTT

Freraisd Galt WarstwaT: YPN Vs

Having heard this very statement, lord
Sarikara replied- "O beloved with beautiful
teeth!" I am always homeless and a wanderer
to the forest."

SEYRET VZV FARBTATY ATTA
Frermererrrarnt gefor ar atu es
O Narada, Sati passed the whole summer

under the shade of trees with lord Sankara in
compliance and under adaptation to the habit
as explained by him.

Frere aya Fetaraftatsga:t

waren I MTGeARTEHSHAT TART 4 I

An excellent rainy season ensued just after
the summer was over. It was naturally
tempting to excessive attachment. All the
directions were sunk in dark due to the dense
grip of clouds in the sky and it resisted the
movement of common people.

4 Bl ean wrecarerqaieny
Sharer aver Bayt wat aor wan Rg
Afflicted by the presence of such a scenario

created by that rainy season, Sati, the daughter
of Daksa, requested Mahadeva courteously.

aqara
faenfa arat eearaaront
apie arent wea

eaiha atemerraty fara
aretiet Serra afer: Vol

O Maheésvara, the winds are blowing in full
swing, the clouds are thundering, the lightning
is sparking in the blue clusters of clouds and
the peacocks are cuckooing.

water are TPT TgAT

wet aetna AT Aaa
mata aaatagrenrat gar:

gourtir yar GareareRt: 11 Re HI

Torrents lapsed from the sky are falling on
the earth, heron and stork are racing to and fro
like the clouds and the trees like Kadamba,'
Sarja,? Arjuna’ and Ketaki* are dropping their
flowers down owing to the blowing of the
strong wind.

grata tere ae ¥ afte
anit gar wife aerona!
aera athirron: MART,
waar Wer Veit

As the recluse abandons the home
irrespective of its being full of prosperity, the
swans are leaving shelter of reservoirs
immediately having heard the dreadful sound
of clouds thundering.

srr genht at yet
arta avatar cafe gist
aersfereT: Yat BART
we fey wy Aa
FF agte water get
rahet BRTeTeUngagH 2 ol
seqaam: wedta Frm:
aren: yrengtigerereditent
Pater attra wafer carpio 2 en

1. Nauclea Cadamba (a tree with orange-coloured
fragrant blossoms)

2. Vatica Robusta,

Terminalia Arjuna

4. A kind of tree which is small but much branched
and it has very fragnant flowers.

y

=== PAGE 23 ===

Chapter 1

3

Fee eer age aT:

ter aeat ygeter tet:
weg facet: Were wT:

Wh: wudtes weracifan 22H

O Sambhi! look at the herd of deer running
to and fro happily and the skylark is sparkling
in amazement in these dark clouds. It appears
from the increased quantum of rain that the
warriors are walking on the trees so as to
escape themselves from getting wet.

The rivers are flowing suddenly with
galloping steps. O Candrasekhara! what scope
there is for surprise if the wife of a corrupt
man loses her chastity. The sky is covered by
the blue clouds, Sarja tree by flowers,
Kadamba with buds, bilva with fruits, rivers
with water and reservoirs with the lotus petals.

Bag WET g-RUS EA
aaret Gay ay F sein
ye Fea eae
‘after 8a went vive 31
O Sankara! In such a strange, intolerable
and dreadful phase of time, construct a house
properly on this great and best mountain so
that I could feel convenient and get rid of
worry.
ai Ra: gferemvite
geen sett arerating arty
a Aste fant gece
 wftantqaefes: frau ewii
watudit yatta: yy
autstt veer wet fret:
Rete wa aracreate-
fétrered qarit ests 241
Having heard those humble. words from
Sati, lord Sankara (having tree eyes) replied-
"O beloved! I have not sufficient wealth to

construct a house. See that I have a mere
tiger's hide on my body.

O nice lady! King Cobra (the king of
serpent) is my sacred thread. The two serpents
ie. Padma and Pingala are my ear-rings and
Kambala and Dhanafijaya serpents are my
armlets (Bajiibanda).

arredarand fe agut

WAR Ta TAL TMT
aAetsht terggerat:
soi’ wats Yates: 2G

The serpent Asvatara at right and Taksaka

at left wrist are my two bangles (Kangana).

The blue colour serpent (like Nilaiijana) is
around my waist.

Yeied sara
fa aera pga Ferit
sara aqaed sitrereaod sim
wahraemaer ware erage
ufiaafa aid creer BOTT 9
Pulastya said- "Having heard this hard but
true and impressive yet appearing false
statement from Mahadeva, Sati was caught in
the grip of fright. She bent her eyes on earth,
filled with anger and shame owing to the
trouble of a lack of residence and began to say
with a long expiration.

ae fe tata wgcarett afeate

angel feraren B yga aera VI

The goddess said- ‘‘O god of gods
(Devadeveéa)! how will this rainy season pass
by living painfully under the shade of a tree?
Hence, I pray you for the construction of a
house.””

vient sare
Brae: NIGER: Waa
wasgart a aa Frofreatar farrgn een

God Sarikara said- O goddess! you will
pass this rainy season by placing your body
above the clouds and this will rescue your
body from the torrents of heavy water drops.

=== PAGE 24 ===

Vamana Purana

Jad sara
at SCRIqaTaUS yaa
weg Tet We CATT
aaSHETAT TOT
sitqaeng heat fet fefan gon
Pulastya said- "Lord Mahadeva then
climbed upon the uprising cluster of clouds
with Sati, the daughter of Daksa. He seated
himself there calmly. Since then, he got
popularity with the name in heaven as
Jimitaketi.

fa stare gerermadans aetfert
WerSeaa: Hg

=== PAGE 25 ===

Vamana Purana

Chapter 2

Story of the birth of Nara and description of
Destruction

Were sata
wafers Ta: wean Eafe
ciearraentt Ta PTAA 8H

Pulastya said- "Thus, the rainy season was
passed by Mahadeva (trinetra) seated above
the clouds. Then there began the pleasant
Sarada (season), O sages!

Pt :
aaigt agi: aferern
wan: Bret Fern arrat
wefaarat Re HEMT:

(On commencement of Sarada) the blue
clouds abandoned the sky, the herons
abandoned the shelter of trees and the rivers
abandoned their banks. Lotus flowers started
releasing fragrance and the crows left the
shelter of their nests. The antelope stage
(Rurumrga) shed their horns and the reservoirs
got clean and pure water.

faaraarafar a aganht
arateat ot oat: YW:
seafe eerate ttepentt
eter BRNTTTAAAT BI

The lotus started blossoming, pure light
began to spread everywhere, the creepers bore
flowers, the cows became healthy and happy
(owing to abundant grass) and the gentlemen
got contentment.

AQ VN TF TT
wenger wa waifal
ani a fend fe fami ge: ad
Seer ART ITERATE TT: 1
The lotus in ponds, the stars in the sky, the
water in the reservoirs, the directions and the

heart of gentlemen as also the moonlight
became all clean and holy.

WH a: are Tansy

eaters vers Wet wart Gt

At this all-pleasing atmosphere, lord
Sankara came down from his seat above the

clouds and with Sati, he descended on the
great Mandara mountain.

at waryBsat fear: wafgrenact
Tom saphrarcer Fe Tareas gu

He then engrossed himself in coition with

Sati on a plane boulder at Mandaracala
mountain.

. aa cadet ents ita a Syren

ae: TaOPT APART BYTN t1

When the Sarada (the season) was over and
lord Kesgava (Visnu) awakened, Prajapati
Daksa commenced yajjia (the offering).

wave a afeaoardia gi

PHVA UAT TTN 6

He duly invited twelve Adityas and
Kasyapa etc., sages along with Indra etc.,
eminent gods and made them participants to
the yajiia so arranged.

TRA T fet ates vifaraTy

weST ash a we ger a alfereaq ei

aera tied a aE

aa Ufed TarghraigTa TAM oll

=== PAGE 26 ===

Chapter 2

SUPA Ararat: WeeIageifor

ARAYA TAT ACAST RATTAN 82

O Brahmins! he thus, invited Arundhati
with great resolute Vasistha, Anusiiya with
Atri, Dhrti with Kansika, Ahalya with
Gautama, Amaya with Bharadvaja and Candra
with Angira for participating in that yajiia.
Daksa, after due invitation, nominated to that
yajfia all hermits as members who were
meritorious, learned and conversant with the
Vedas and all their parts.

et a a age wdansheaar Fel
Farrar BATS RT ACTEM NTN BI

He invited Dharma with his wife Ahirnsa

and appointed him as gatekeeper to the
pavilion of that yajiia.

afeafirt a gerecranftory

Wy a aa Wea: ARAN Bw

wa aga aa fever ated yf

SAT a gacanies areas eG It

Daksa assigned Aristanemi to the work of

collecting the required fuel (Samidha) for
yajfia and appointed with due procedure,

Bhrgu for the work of processing hymn
(Mantra Sarhskara).

And Prajapati Daksa appointed Candra with
his wife Rohini as treasurer to that project.

wmnggtedia dtfeaier warafa::

aegt wet Yaa WS Tala ge 1

Prajapati invited all his son-in-laws,
daughters and their children (Dauhitras)
except Sati and Sankara in that yajiia.
ARG sara

feared citenafert creat wea:

Bay: Set afwatshe anetishe + Fafa: yon

Narada said- "Why did Daksa, the
Prajapati, not invited Mahesvara in spite of
being his senior, superior, principal, prime
(Adya) and treasurer?"

Yee sara
wae: Ist ats aneitsfe wrranfsesa:1
wmureitter faterereit edtor 3 Frafaan gen

Pulastya replied- "He considered him a
native of cremation ground (Kapali) in spite of
being his senior, superior, principal, prime and
treasurer. Hence, he did not invite him."
ang sarq

fand ante: yerafintercte: |
weureht erate: SO AT MRT Rea

The great god Narada said- "Why and
owing to which act, did lord Sankara, three

eyed and trident holder become Kapili (native
of cremation ground)?

Yeea sara
srysrafedt yar aartat gre
Sharafaqitg seroMseTAAAATH 3 0 I

Pulastya said- "Listen carefully to an
ancient story being now told by me and which
had been once told by lord Brahma, an
intangible god and as contemplated in
Adipurana."

qa anid ad sory rae
FEATS METATAN 2 RI
soreinfag srararafaatstay
Fromradare aay Beer 2H

In the very distant past, this entire universe
with its movable and immovable properties
was only an ocean. There were nowhere any
stars like the moon, the sun, all planets, wind
and fire-like illuminating substances. The state
of the then world was unknown, inaccessible
to imagination and without presence or
absence of anything. All mountains and trees
were in the belly of the ocean and the entire
universe was surrounded by darkness and in a
pathetic condition.

afare a wrenfast ateefear
TARA Bae Sara TATA SH

=== PAGE 27 ===

Vamana Purana

Lord Visnu sleeps for several thousand
years in that oceanic stage of universe and he
creates all worlds (lokas) under his Rajas
formation when that prolong night is over.

THE: Wyatt AeaaTFATTT:|

SBT TMT TAS GATSMA VV

His Rajas form was the creator of this
universe with its movable and immovable
properties; it was strange in look, having its
five mouths and it was fully conversant with
the Vedas and their parts.

wirretara: ayaa:
wera: af a serrett a ayia 2401
Similarly, one more Purusa (man) was bom
at that time. He was with Tamas property,
three-eyed, trident holder, leaper (kapardi) and
a garland of Rudraksa was around his neck.
at maT MITAKAT YaTHATY|
Farag Sat area serpent 26 0
The supreme soul (Paramatma) then

originated the fierce ego which gripped
Brahma and Sankara, both the gods.

aeerigat wa: Weare frarey

at wane Gore: St YBISA At aan oN

Sankara under the intoxication of ego said
to Brahma- "Who are you to come to this
place? Tell me who has created you?”

fraregisergenrt weqarart St war

weet Tas: BST TT aT AGETATTN VC

Brahma too replied with ego- "First tell me
who you are and who your parents are?"

serait yo aati germeai afer fra
uftaraiswarna safaris war 28 it
wararatia fe sramarercterre
arcraget att qefencrfenereatr 3 011
O Narada, loved by Kali! thus, a dispute
was arisen between lord Brahma and Sankara
in the distant past. You yourself were also

born there. You also moved to the sky (space)
above immediately after birth. An excellent

lyre was in your hands and a tremulous voice
played on your lips.
ad fafafia: siqaifen wert
meeraergat St wesarat we ereitu 3 gt
Lord Brahma (born from the lotus) then
defeated Sarikara (the administrator of loka).
He therefore put his head facing the ground
like a frightened moon.

waft citeudt 2a wef

warranted eh Vat Para 3 2

arg 3 waranty wing facitern

ferarar qaaredt crearratl war 3 311

The fifth mouth of Lord Brahma

subsequent to the defeat he had given to
Sankara, burning in excess fury, said- O three-
eyed and with Tamah property Purusa! I am
familiar to you. You are naked (Digambara),

Vrsarohi (bull rider) and destroyer of this
entire universe.

Sqm: Mt: Fal aed area
Fredgerrcatret cat erat: 11 3 stl

As a reaction to that very statement, lord
Sarikara opened his third fierce eye with the
intention to burn into ashes Lord Brahma. He
thus stared at his fifth mouth.

wafer wyatt
aanfin ware geshah
ad a th eran
et cen fagee o YN GH
Then there had arisen five mouths (heads)
to lord Sankara. One was of white, the other

red, golden, blue and yellow colour
respectively.

aeatfin episcramntt war:

tar aeayara are
TATA AA FLAT

wafer far Ay wereneitsfer gg

Having seen the automatic origin of the five
heads with sun splendour, the fifth head of

=== PAGE 28 ===

Chapter 2

7

Brahma said- "Bubbles naturally arise due to
force of stream in water but void from the
valour and meaningless?"

TFT AT AT MTT ARTA
warn ferfeod aret verarferqu 301
Having heard such harsh words, lord
Sankara cut that head of Brahma off by a hard
blow of nail.

ahead vigteaa wal HASTA
Waa A wether MeTATHTARTT | CH
The head so cut-off fell on the left palm of

Lord Safikara, It was stuck there and could not
be removed.

we BETA Terons AHO

BEY Fer starsat queett wigan

equnfintgrangatorerftneisera: |

agyat werguit enferranasta: iyo

Lord Brahma in a fantasy of anger then
created something phenomenal. It was the
origin of a wiseman (Purusa) duly equipped
with kavaca kundala (shield) and arrows. He
was an archer, long armed, mighty, avyaya
(robust), four-armed and a great bowman. His
aura was shining like the sun.

aw mes oa mM at Blea
TarITTEH: wifes at faratafe xs gn
He said- "O wicked Sankara! I will not kill
you if you leave this place at once. You are an
evildoer and who will make his hands dirty by
killing a sinner like you?
Sq: META FeO TeTeHT
AURA TTT Bal TaN BN
As a response to the statement, Rudra
ashamed left that place immediately for
Badrikasrama.
TATU weet fe fer
Treat aa quot ered Aah aA x3
a Weal BF QB ATANTaTe ZI
feet wees errarrerearenforantsta Aue e

So call Badrikasrama is situated at great
Himalaya where Nara-Narayana reside and
the greatest river Sarasvati flows there.
Having approached there and found Nara-
Narayana, lord Sankara said- "O lord! I am
Mahakapalika. Please give me alms."

samt nigng we aeanadiq
wed Spt Tea FE WATS GI
The son of Dharma (Narayana) replied- "O

Mahesvara! Give a blow with the trident to
my left arm.

ARO: sat faryert fatter:
Wed ARTIS ATSATATA ATA YG Ht

_ In compliance with these words, lord
Sankara hit hard on the left arm of Narayana
with the trident.

fayenfrerrarnifret art fatty:

Went TTA feet aTafrafegan viet!
facta uct at sare eater: |
afrerairagaggt gatar: ygtignt:i sci

Three streams emanated from the points
made by the trident at the arm of Narayana.
One = stream accessed upward = and
accompanied with the galaxy in the sky. The
other fell down to the earth and was
entertained by the great ascetic Atri. Being it
the ray of Safikara, it gave birth to Durvasa.

FART AIT weuTet a Ety cf]
weneay: WaMagRae Yar seit
The third stream was dropped on a dreadful
skull (Kapala) and a baby got its birth
therefrom. He immediately turned into a
young-chap of dark-complexion equipped
with a shield, bow and arrows.
vara: wearranfer-
Rien wale araetsat
se genes fererenta
eeafeatenctact aan 4 ot

As the clouds thunder during rainy season,
such was the dreadful voice of that young-

=== PAGE 29 ===

Vamana Purana

chap. He was saying- "Who is to be beheaded
by me like the fruit of Tala?"

a ygisaea ad ane

ai fe arrearage
Froast at guar

ener yeorTEATETAN 4 BN

Lord Sankara approached the man so born
from the arm of Sri Narayana and said- "O
Nara! Kill this man originated by Brahma,
harsh in tongue but glowing with the light ofa
hundred suns simultaneously."

eae: Wy M_UT

ate aqeanrrd wiry
sere ont aensarenfor

gare at: 8 aft ser 4 2

In compliance with the order so given, that
warrior picked-up his bow known as Adya
Ajagava and Tunira and decided to battle.

Wa: WYSt Qysi Aeracit
Tenet agra yd:
wat eiseter faces 3

The son originated by Brahma and the
Sarikara-purusa so originated from the arm of
Narayana thus, fought a fierce battle as long
as many thousand divine years lapsed. Sri
Sankara then approached lord Brahma and
said-

tr Rromgrenton wth
Tergarcftraes afsa-
wagi de feet aang sn

O Pitamaha! It is really surprising that
Nara, an excellent warrior has defeated your
purusa as a result of giving blows with his
great arrows spread at the time of the battle
around the ten directions.

Fen Tig set aay
Jere warrafarres yivt

waa: dese wadtat
Fa Tea: TRA TAT GG

Brahma said that Isa- "This undefeated
(Ajita) purusa has not been born here for
enduring defeat from others. If it is essential to
declare one defeated, your Nara is the man
who actually is defeated. The Purusa created
by me is the greater warrior.

seraget set Fra:
fade wi yer facta:
at reeda wat a fare
faara einrera fay gn
_ As a reaction to that statement, lord
Sankara threw the Purusa created by Brahma

in the sun's orbit and threw that Nara in the
body of Dharmaputra Nara.

ofa atarrrgant gerraradiany eretfert
sateafererat are fgeitettseara: 1 2

=== PAGE 30 ===

Vamana Purana

Chapter 3

Dialogue between Hari and Hara

Yeret Bara
Aa: BAT BR: HUTeT Treat Fer

Marrerrregeifsirans spear RU

Pulastya said- "O Brahmins! As the
dreadful skull (head) was stuck to the palm of
lord Sankara, he fell in the grip of anxiety and
gloom. It caused severe grief to him.

aa: ara at ArersTETTT
‘dean sit vere ear IH

Then Brahmahatya (sin of Brahmana's
murder) came near lord Sankara. She was of a
complexion like a cluster of Nilanjana; her
hair were of red colour; she was in creeping
gesture and dreadful.

ATAPTaT Bt GET UTES faeufering
atta ranean OX Sareea Tea 31
Having seen that dreadful figure, lord
Sarikara asked- "O dreadful lady! Tell me who

you are and for what purpose you have come
here?"

=== PAGE 31 ===

Chapter 3

eruferrmaara serra Yareom
weeenster dare at wites facie wi
That dreadful Brahmahaty4 replied- "O

Trilocana! Accept me. I am Brahmahatya
come to you."

Saya ae TereeN factor TY
Freerantort ex drenftaferrer 4 1
With these words, Brahmahatyad entered

into the body of Rudra who was already
suffering from anxiety.

Tererntinges val aeftarry

arresat capi TATU & It

Bearing so heavy a burden of Brahmahatya,
lord Sankara returned to Badrikasrama but he
did not see there the saints ie. Nara and
Narayana.

sagt tied ferargtarantard:)
STH TAT Sag IST YeRTesHAT 91

His pain was aggravated when he could not
find both the saints. In the vagary of sheer
agony and worry, he approached river
Yamuna but her water was dried up when he
got down for a bath.

aiferdl yenaferet fritter gaa:
AT SIGUA FA ATM CI
Having seen Yamuna with no water, he
went to Plaksaja (Sarasvatt) for bath but as he

could enter in its water, she vanished from
there.

matsqyeRTd AeaTCa yg a
Srrarvatraret Wear Sat BATA gt

He then visited Puskararanya,
Magadharanya and Saindhavaranya and took
a bath frequently to the extent desired by him.

wae Faftrarcodt eats aba:
ert ta a ar at were SAGETA Yon

He similarly, took a bath in Naimisaranya
and Dharmaranya also but could not be escape
from the tight grip of that fierce Brahmahatya.

afirg alg wassatg
quay farang eds!
wargat arrgatst wer
BraTa Thal aeteearstts ati eeu
In spite of his (Sankara) being a Yogi and a
number of pilgrimages he made, he took a dip
in the sacred rivers, visited a number of

hermitages and temples, yet he could not get-
tid-of the evil so stuck to him.

aa some Pifaoor: gt: FEET

aa Te capri eenurfoT ar gz

Aggrieved at the failure of all his efforts for
regrettable, lord Sankara ultimately visited
Kurujangala. He saw there lord Visnu (the
rider on eagle and a discus in his hand).

F EBT Yustanet ygacreere
grrgfergel yea Bt: BHATT 831
Having seen with his eyes Pundarikaksa

(Sri Narayana) with conch, discus and mace in
his hands, he began to pray him.

a sara
FH SAAT TRA TEST
VGA ayes TSE A gxI!

Sankara prayed- "O the king of gods! I
salute you. O rider on Garuda! Accept my
salute, O Vasudeva with conch, discus and
mace in your hands! I salute you."

sae frforrea smmaeata aera
arbres Patera AAtsey Tt VU

Salute to everlasting, beyond three
properties, inaccessible to imagination, the
creator. Salute to the former of knowledge and
ignorance, without any support and support to
all creatures.

wigs Tresy Teg war

ram Waa Aa STAT ATTN 2 I

Salute to god with Rajas, immortal and
Brahma in itself. O lord! You have created
this entire universe with both movable and
immovable properties.

=== PAGE 32 ===

10

Vamana Purana

wenfafiacitcam fampyd seern
MATIC AETATST SATE THISEY AU out
Salute to the resort of Sattva property, the
god of world, the formation as Visnu,
destroyer of sins, god of defending, most
chivalrous and Janardana.

mange org Be aera: |
qonfirgen Sayr acdoafeanisey” Fn ge

O image of Tama! I am originated from the
anger a particle of your entity. Salute to
omnipresent, god of gods and all meritorious.

ofa a sete semagarrs: |
arggfarantt: watt ci aatseg Tn eeu

Salute to the ruler of this universe existing
in the varied forms like the earth, water, ether,
fire, wind, wisdom, mind and the night.

eat agent: wemafeer viterarstery

aan ert car mrtiigeret eat 2 ot!

O god! You are religion (Dharma),
austerity, truth, non-violence, __ purity,

simplicity, forgiveness, generosity, kindness,
wealth and celibacy in yourself.

wa Ug agit dered Fat Aquet:1

saael wari washer at THIS AN

O god! You are the four Vedas with their
parts (angas), you are the physician (Vaidya)
and the best known to Vedas’ essence. You
are Upaveda (scriptures) and everything you
are. I salute you.

sat TRAST aEHTTAT
aaisey a area ai
ites warcnrefirent wat &

ARS Ut Byres UTTAR VI
Salute to Acyuta, Cakrapani, frequently.
Salute to fish-form Madhava. I consider you
to be kind to the world. O Kegava! Absolve
me from the bondage of evils.
Tay are farses
Tages aya

wehsfen aeiseereniereartt
Witte aettsfa vat ara a

Destroy the evils entered into my body as a
result of the murder of the Brahmana
committed by me. Owing to the act performed
deliberately, I have burnt and destroyed
myself in the fire of anxiety. You are holy and
hence bless me with the reward of purity. I
salute you frequently.

Yared Sart
Bel GMT: VISTO WETS
Ware wrararet sereearers feu 2st
Pulastya said- "At the prayer so submitted
by Lord Sankara, Lord Visnu suggested for
the repentance of Brahmana's murder in
following words-

efteara

TRA EM WH ard wer
weet yet yore irq e411

Hari said- "O Mahesvara! Listen to my
suggestion effacing the dire impact of the

murder of the Brahmana,; it is ear pleasing and
enhances the noble deeds."

atset uguset yous weymaaisora:|

wart sae Pret areryrettfet ferege: 2g 0

The holy Prayaga falling in the district of
Pranga wherein resides an imperishable
Purusa Yogasayi by name and has been bom
with my own ray.

eurrefaroreren fatratar afte
fage aie ada Yum ot
The renowned river Varana has emanated

from his right foot and it is holy as also
competent to absolve one from all evils.

wereen farttare srdifiera faq
Bt g afte cienget ayag:n ci

Another renowned river Asi has emanated
from his left foot. Both these rivers are
considered most holy in this universe.

=== PAGE 33 ===

Chapter 3

VW

aneat wet g at Serenata arent:

Setreanet ate adore 331

The territory lying between the above-said
rivers is the region of that Yogasayi. It is the
greatest in the three-worlds and is a holy place
that absolves one from all evils. No other holy
place analogous to it has existed in ether, earth
and the nether world.

a arqyistet wrt a ya T Tae

vonfer ATH quar Gam arora BT

meat fe sifetsdter wera waa HAN Ot

O god! There exists the renowned city of
Varanasi. It is so sacred that the people
indulging in worldly affairs too attain the
position as you yourself bear.

faerie wart

gfratatenggarm
Ufrard eat Frere
erence: Bie Bey E eT: 1 3 wl

The echo of Vedas recited by the great
Brahmins is mixed with the voice of luxury
enjoying people and thus the resultant
blending beholds all benevolent voices

altogether. The preceptors administer with
humour the voice so heard by them.

sary aifieg ageg
Weraerarefareht sgt

aat wet frerata aati
feaeaereraT TAT 3 2

The moon is confused at the movement of
terrestrial lily when it looks at the red smeared
feet of the women who stroll in the round
abouts,

Gaia wet gear
wat ag oritqagi
fearsfa yl verregqenfiy-
alfa quenferent: 113 au

The temples are built of so great a height
that the moon finds hurdle for its movement at

night and the flags on their tombs are so large
as their unfurling through the wind strokes
which makes the beams of sunlight in the day
vanish.

aR aeat wigan
weirarret: sfafattaags
areas atfafereTTER-
wigdarta a qorarrag 3 xi

The paintings on women in Varanasi when
they spread their reflection of face on the
walls studded with Candrakantamani fascinate
the bees to the extent that they forget to go to
the flowers.

ufemantt wafrag
ay data
. —
a ety vist yedtitergn 341
And, O Sambhi! Only in Varanasi and not
in any another place, the people indulging in
the enchanting activities and the women
gathered for swimming (Jalakridd) in the
ponds made in every home fight mutual
competition.

7 aa afreraeatir
ents vist Tea ASAT
A Sacra ATA WTR
wilt wet Gea fe Yara gg
Besides Pasa (dice used for gambling)
where the houses of others are free to act
voluntarily and where no person does any
forcible valour with the women except at the

appropriate time for courtship (such is
Varanasi).
Trpafanisrgiat errdet Wega
wea armel Yat aftort atari 30
There takes place Pagagranthi in controlling
the elephants, Danaccheda in their discharge

of intoxication and Mana and Mada at the
time of youth commenced in male elephants.

=== PAGE 34 ===

12

Vamana Purana

frrerater: wet weet aatfgrent AAT aT:
ARMMseeia ma qeegiifain 3c

O god! Only owls are found favouring the
night (evils/deficiencies) nobody else does so.
The people there are noble and if evils (not to
set in earth) are found there, only these exist
with the galaxy. Nowhere is misconduct found
there except in prose (breach of rhyme).

afagen facnfaad ysrraftenttr:1
erayfaaces wai ratte gt eH

O Sakara! The spotive women having
attraction of their bhiti' are found there
surrounded by bhujanigas” and their bodies are
decorated with the ornament Candra like you.
(The term Bhiti is for ‘ash’ and ‘wealth’,
Bhujanga for 'serpent’ and ‘debauchery’ and
Candra for 'moon' and an ornament is used
herein).

Sqerat Geet arora wer
aad wrateciit: TeaTTET Tai ¥ ont

O Suresana! In the great hermitage of
Varanasi endowed with such salient features,
god sun (Ravi) resides. He absolves the
creatures from all evils.

arrate walks Way aa Sera:

Wa Tea YS UTTAR ¥ RII

O the greatest god! You will be absolved
from all evils when you see Kegava my own

ray bom at the place known as
Dasasvamedha.

selena TEST
qreasret fercer wore
arama Srgeel aes at
aero referrer ¥ 21
The bull-rider (Vrsadhvaja) at the
suggestion so given by the rider of Garuda
(Visnu) travelled as fast as an eagle (Garuda)
to Varanasi for getting release of the evil after
duly saluting him.

1. Prosperity
2. Paramours..

Treat qyat are} yeitat
GBI a cite a cet
arent & diely faqeare:
7 Syd SEQUIN s3 1
He first went to Dasasvamedha, saw god
hola, bathed in all holy places and thus he
absolved himself from the evil in that holiest
city. He then walked to see lord KeSava.
faye yigt apr wftretauarcitq
TATTTTSM TACT aI TAT YY
He bowed before Kegava and said- "O
Hrsikesa! The evil of Brahmana's murder with
your grace has now been absolved.
34 aurei Zaye wat Vtgehe
werut Sf a a aaa agra watt
(Yet) O Kegava! This head is still stuck to

my palm and I am unable to understand the
reason behind it. You only can highlight it.

qos sart
WeRaaa: sear tyra arergaty
fae arat ey ara aerenft Awe
Pulastya said- Having heard Mahadeva,
KeSava replied- "O Rudra! I tell you the
reasons lying behind all this."
aiset wari feet ge: vatereta:1
wa didar: yoat eprardyfart: 1 win!
The divine pond with lotus flowers
blossomed in front of me is sacred and a very

holy place. It is worshipped by the gods and
the Gandharvas.

Wiferrat def ert wit war

Sree area auret afeteafen we 1

O Sambhu! Take a dip in this holiest pond.
This head shall abandon your palm just when
you take a dip in this pond.

aa: are aes a wait eq afeeafar

arene ate ae aerate et

With this event O Rudra! You will gain
popularity as Kapali and this place too shall be
popularly known as Kapalamocana.

=== PAGE 35 ===

Chapter 4

Fora sara

Wage: Bear yaa wea:

aurea wet Sahat BANG ot

Pulastya said- O sage! Mahesvara took a
bath with the procedures mentioned in the
Vedas in that pond when it was suggested by
Kesava.

aire def gear
Ufteqa FeraeTRATETT
are ayer area
wriviaet srerareTETA 4 Rt
As soon as dip was taken by lord Sankara
(the killer of Tripura demon), the head stuck
to his palm got separated and fell down. That
holiest place then became famous as
Kapalamocana by the grace of god.
‘sft tarragae yoreraradany eee ATT
ParasEAT aN

13

=== PAGE 36 ===

Chapter 4

Chapter 4
War between Hari and Virabhadra

Ferra Sara

Ue aut dad Fah ware:

ame aretrarat eater a Frafera: i gt

arenferarratfer weit ferrener worafer:|

aa ural gfegar eater at Fraferamien

Pulastya said- O Devarsi! Lord Sankara
became Kapali due to the above-said event.
This was the reason why, he was ignored by
Daksa Prajapati. In spite of Sati being
qualified with all respects and her being his
own daughter, she too was not invited as she
was the wife of Kapali.

Uaferant tat ae ere

FA TT MSL A ATT BHI

In the meantime, Jaya, the daughter of
Gautama went to the mountain Mandara

which had the five cave in order to see the
goddess Sati.

13

ararrai wet eer arteryaTE Bl
fend fase armssrardt arrafaratu wit
Sati saw only Jaya; therefore she enquired

of her as to why Vijaya, Jayanti and Aparajita
did not come with her.

Wl ten aat get Jara THT

aren fanaa: Wal wa ATATATET AT It

ast fear ats wat darerecaat

HE TATA FE Tat TA TATA GH

She replied- "They all were invited by the
maternal grand-father (Daksa) in a yajiia
arranged there. Hence, they have gone there
with father Gautama and mother Ahalya. I
have come to see curiously your zeal to visit
there.

fa a oa aa aM eat Tea:
arafaaista aed seretitacataratan on

Aren't you and Mahesvara going there? Has
your father not invited you? or shall you go
there?

Tag eI: Ta ATTRA!
THETA: VIPTIgS AURAL Ae: ATTN cH
All hermits, their wives and gods have gone

there too, O maternal aunt (Maus)! Saganka
too has gone there with his wife.

agéeg ety aetat 3 are:
Frater: ceat wel fer safe oi Frafeaati eu

All movable and inert organisms from the
fourteen lokas have been invited to function
there. Are you alone uninvited?

Jered sara
WARE: aT HITT Tait
TRAPS TET ATAAT: It Ro tl
Pulastya said- O Brahmins! These words
from Jaya appeared like a thunderbolt to Sati
and she became angry to the extent that the

common people are jeered and that stroke was
so hard that she fell down dead.

=== PAGE 37 ===

14

Vamana Purana

Set Bat Ge ET salereTrenah TEAM
Yadt aft Favat aati factend a eeu
Having seen that Sati met with casual
death, Jaya burst into tears and began wailing.

anakenafi great yeratinferetrert: |

amt: fetafetreqerar SaeareTGATTT: 1 83H
As the sound from the wailing was

piercing, it awakened lord Sankara from his

meditation. He came to Jaya and asked-

"What is it?"

ara qe tat cena area: |
wat wey eet yoengt aferat au gan

Lord Sankara saw there Sati lying on the
ground like a creeper cut off with a sharp
blow by an axe. Her body was as pale as a
dead one.

dat Frofat ar sat UTES VIET:

feat ofan yet Frente ora Bet est

Sarikara having seen this asked Jaya- "Why
has Sati fallen on ground like a cut-off
creeper?

UT Raa: Feat aT aaTTaTT

geet Wee cere aitrar: Ufa: aE yt

anfernfercieng a yranfahit: yt:

mrgerar fauserang Ga cei eg 11

Jaya replied- "O the ruler of three-worlds!
My maternal aunt (Sati) has fallen down dead
owing to sheer pain she felt when she heard
that all her sisters with their husbands, Indra
etc., gods and Adityas etc. have been invited
in the yajfia and gone there."

Gerad Jara

Teprasa oat Ue we: Brea aHh

Peel wana Fae: wearin von

Pulastya said- Lord Rudra became
excessively angry on hearing this fierce
statement from Jaya. Flames started coming
out of the body of Sankara so annoyed.

aa: Mee Maa FA

wom: feet Stat aeayeTAT: 1 ke

ah: ufigrererrrehereert

Ta: BAGEL THE SRST ATA eH

O sages ! The ganas having a mouth similar
to that of a lion appeared from the furs of
Sankara's body due to excessive fury.
Virabhadra was the principal gana among
them. He then went to the Himalaya from
Mandara mountain in the company of all his
ganas and Kanakhala from there where the
yajfia was commenced by Daksa.

aah moraraferat arergt water: |
fefer wategqeerat wet FeTAT WAN Rott

O sage! The mightiest Vérabhadra, the
foremost among the Ganas, then held a trident
and stood at the west north.

wer wreretet yer ydeferore: fea
ney freraycterel aerstergyt wert zk
O great sages! Jaya in the state of excessive
fury stood at the eastern-south with a mace in

her hand and Sankara with a trident in his
hand stood amid them.

mftact apr tat: wenger:
mae aarraat: faire fracaferrerqu 2 ei
Indra etc. gods, hermits, demi-gods (Yaksa)

and Gandharvas were caught in surprise when
they saw Virabhadra in disguise of a lion.

TRY TGTTS MTV faaTATy!
BUTT erat ereaRUTRA 2311
The gate-man Dharma then rushed towards
Virabhadra with bows and arrows serpent like.
wares wear vd ET TTT:
mts sere frye aerating 211
ane a fades tae artery
gel met yer eiaeagarUT: 11 24 It
The principal gana (Virabhadra) held a
trident analogous to fire in one hand, a bow in
another hand, an arrow in the third hand and a

mace in the fourth hand and rushed to Dharma
when he saw his sudden march.

=== PAGE 38 ===

Chapter 4

15

mages ger entaet wT
ARMAB AR YI APTI ETT: 1 2 I
GRAMMAR A: |
areantorret eqerat WTTTN 29H

Imperishable Dharmaraja confronted four
armed Virabhadra with enhancing his eight
arms equipped with varied weapons. He stood
boldly with the intention to finish Virabhadra
and held a sword, carma (shield), mace, spear,
axe, goad, bow and arrow in his hands.

TOartsht dHal Fy wet wary

aad aptoireitenraan waft dae zc

Virabhadra too started showering acute
arrows on Sanatana Dharma like the clouds

during the rainy season so that he could be
killed.

merited werart yreargett yt
‘oierrannferenrgt fengenferer Farg:11 23U1

O sages! Both of them with arrows and
bows soaked in blood and looked as red as the
flower of canker bloom (kirnsuka).

wat arrattorreat
fare: @ entertar wee
weqisyarn pir
B ates: wfaete BAT 3 ott
O king of sages! Dharmaraja had to move

back as he was conquered by Virabhadra and
thus, Virabhadra got way to enter into yajjia.

amare wad g dry WaT

BBl Y Bea Sar Sey: ATT HAN AN

O sage! The gods suddenly stood up with
weapons in their hands when they saw that
Virabhadra has entered into the pavilion for
offering.

aaaSEY HEMT HET AT YATHT: 1

Balen graynfarn warecaresta fen 3 2H

fad tas wens fearedert:!

Sa: FRSA YA: VTRTRETRAAT 3 3 11

Ten aerearaerg erlang feeqat:1
‘arrest storentherratysr: 1 3 v1
fefion Grant Isat at warTAT:
8 wdseagey Te atrergargan:n 34 it

Eight Vasus, predominant nine stars, Indra
etc., twelve Aditya, eleven Rudra, Visvedeva,
Sadhya-ganas, Siddha, Gandharva, Pannaga,
Yaksa, eunuch (Kinnaras), Ghosts (Bhita),
Birds, Cakradhara, renowned king
Dharmakirti of  Vaivasvata dynasty,
Bhojakirti, the chivalrous king of lunar
dynasty, demon, devil and all people present
there picked up weapons and rushed to kill the
dreadful Virabhadra.

ATA WaT STUTATITTY AUT: |
afagara ai wate pritent:13 gt
The gana Virabhadra with bow and arrows

attacked them and sppedily drove them by
throwing arrowheads.

a wreratnge witgra AAR
Tagish araeiGrae w fate aU 3011
They all shot arrows in showers at

Virabhadra. Virabhadra scattered all arrows
by the expert use of his weapons.

wt: wea wat EMIT WeTeEM
areagor FarErTaaTTATTTN 3 C1
The gods etc., ceased fighting as they all

were badly injured by the arrows and weapons
blown by the unique warrior Virabhadra.

wat face wordt ayet Gfegrt
Qt eat aa eel wer 3 st
Virabhadra then entered just at the centre of
that gigantic premise of yajfia. The hermits
engaged in offering were giving oblations to
the fire there.
wat neta qpr yirgaet TorT
sitter ett ufteasa Seq: preomegaA ¥ 01!
The hermits ceased their performance

immediately when they saw the lion-mouthed
gana and sheltered Acyuta.

=== PAGE 39 ===

16

Vamana Purana

ARiAyegET HetfererarTar
a Aeroafatieqerat Maat AAA gn

Acyuta stood up with a discus in his hands
and with words "don't be afraid" in the lips
when he saw those hermits badly frightened
and wailing.

Waa aa: TG PTR
Br SAAT STATA

He then started shooting arrows like the
flames powerful enough to penetrate the
external cover of body on Virabhadra by
giving a slight bend to his Samga bow.

a re arena sate aR: wT:
Friggfe saan aaferenges area: nw 3 nt

As the beggar returns with a despair in
mind from the atheist, the target hitting arrows
shot by Sri Hari fell down on the ground after
touching merely the « ody of Virabhadra.

ereieentersivercrarraraiest Syra:1
feareadiveg wearefaggar: esi

Kesava intended immediately for covering
Virabhadra by divine weapons when he saw
the futility of arrows in their mission.

APATSTYSAT MATTE: |
SATA Ye Tea PTTL st Ht

Those arrows from Vasudeva too were
destroyed by confronting with sila, mace and
arrows.

ger fawararenttr wet faera wera:
aR WATER UTA AEH I
Madhava threw his mace when he saw his
weapons destroyed by Virabhadra. However,
Virabhadra threw it on the earth with a blow
of his trident.

at wai famett apr onget wafarraft:)
wget U TMUIPSH TANT WTA viol
Wadi dregs deere george:

Paget B woes AeA MIETATN se 1
gael tet Er erat a Franke

avg fade aes wera: se
Musala and Langala were thrown on the
part of Halayudha but these weapons too were
thrown down by Virabhadra through his
mace. Garudadhvaja severely in furiated and
attacked with a discus Virabhadra when he
saw the failure of attack by mace including
Musala and plough.
marae werent
qeelt dea miareg!
Wet afeeasa Serre aah
war ag ditay: YTEIy ott
Virabhadra (Ganesvara) had however,
gobbled up that discus luminating with the
light of several hundred suns by leaving his
Sala aside. It was done in the same way as lord
Surendra had gobbled up the Madhu while
disguised as a fish.
a Frith orate
aarenfirets farrereta |
qafeeaer monte
aferer Sarge Faferta 4 ei
When the discus was gobbled up by
Gananayaka (Virabhadra) the dark and
beautiful eyes of Murari tumed red with
anger. He went to Virabhadra, lifted him up at
once, knocked him down on ground and
started thrashing him.

sagen fats qach

fad sinatra fares 21

Owing to the hard blows of arms and legs
of Hari, the discus came out from the mouth
of Virabhadra with blood when he was
knocked down with a thud.

amt Agrees aes Hera:

area wate areas qatar BG 31

Destroyer of demon Kaitabha, Hrsikesa

then picked up the discus and left Virabhadra
there.

=== PAGE 40 ===

Chapter 5

waa peg aeeagt wey
Wea FACMTATT aTASATAATATTN 4 11

Virabhadra when liberated. by Hrsikesa
went to Lord Sarikara and reported his defeat
through Vasudeva.

wat Sere GET were efor
Feared aor ant watt eA ARISTA GN
When imperishable Jatadhara Sankara saw
Virabhadra soaked with blood and breathing
like a serpent, he became angry.

a: MUNA Sats VAT
yatfed wer wart angen” Faferarny gu
In furiated Lord Sankara then restored

Virabhadra to the place first determined with
his weapons.

aroagrenfaya agatett ORT:
fate seer aaTE FETT 4 ott
Sankara, the trident holder, then passed
necessary orders to Virabhadra and
Bhadrakali and entered into the pavilion made
for offering. His eyes were turnéd red with
anger.
way tawat Het
fageraat faguerantttin
waren gt fergrfet aterent
warat ata watt fe aA NG cI
When Mahadeva, the killer of Tripura
demon, trident holder, destroyer entered into
the yajiia hosted by Daksa, all hermits were
severely frightened.
fa steneagait yorernadary ecetteat art
agafserra:us

ord

=== PAGE 41 ===

Chapter 5 17

Chapter 5
Description of Kala-form of Siva
Yered Saray
wert eftggr mrererencirerTy
TRUITT UTR HomTasmatee: FRA: 11 gu
Hari concealed him in Kubjamra and seated
him there and left his place at once when he

saw Jatadhara' whose eyes were reddened
with anger.

aachsel ee aT Aaya BA
AY Mat Aitader ar a ATA

O sage! Eight vasus were melted on
account of the temperature so created by the
presence of Hara. It originated the great river
Sita.

UREN TAT BRTATAT FAATAT: |
aarfeayiten ore SIT: AAATET PISTAN 31
And Vrsaketana, three-eyed eleven rudras

were frightened, rushed to lord Sankara and
merged with him.

faasfart a emer wedtsTereTERT:|
Tara YNSTe ere AEA wit

O great sage! Visvas, ASsvinikumaras,
Sadhyas, wind, fire and sun picked up
purodasa (oblation of offering) and ran away
eating the same.

aa: wa Bate agrestis

SUT TA ATT ATA RAA: 1

The moon with the galaxy abandoned the
night alone, ascended and stopped at their

respective places. They withheld their
movements.

BTU Ua ST: PTET
younger sear wore: dferet BN GA

O sage! Kasyapa etc., hermits started
chanting Satarudriya, took flowers in their
palms and stood up humbly.

1. The long tresses of hair twisted on the top of the
head. (Monier Williams Sanskrit-English Dict.)

=== PAGE 42 ===

18

Vamana Purana

orageRTefTa BET BK TeTHeEAT
weet Great Faut facrens gust
Having seen Rudra mightiest among Indra
etc., gods, the wife of Daksa began wailing
frequently in a pathetic condition.

aa: whenfirget ETO TeTETT
aemerteat wear farrier: 1c

In furiated lord Sankara killed numerous
gods merely by slapping them with his palm.

Trementeat fayermat ya

geisfrar wart Raven: werd WaT eH

O sage! Some of them were killed by kicks,
some other by blowing trident while a few
among them were killed by the fire emanating
eye of lord Sankara.

aa: Yer et chee fafrert yogTy
BUTE TATA WERT UBITAI Rott
The Pis4-sun rushed with both his arms
extended towards Mahesvara when he saw
lord Sankara killing the gods and demons
severely.
aaneet arerifries fetter:
argeat wfarorre aatclar PET RI
Lord Sankara caught both his arms by using
his single hand when he saw him advancing.

ana mpgs viyrisyAAsts fe
augieral Ferg: WAAR
Sambhu gave a blow so hard that the

fingers of both arms with sun started flowing
blood stream from all the four directions.

wat aia wea signed fearacy
orrarara aad feet yaferey gem ean
He then started rotating round the sun so

tapidly as the lion rotates the young stag
through his jaws.

sifirenttaia aratgadiste fe
spt graeme gererqaeriin gsi

O Narada! The muscular joints of both
arms were split and they fell short.

verregqraatgigyrd weet:
Aba Re TAS TTT BU NG A
When MaheSvara saw the sun soaked in
blood from all joints of his body, he left him
and went somewhere else.

arg yor faswagrnts facet
Wardae arnferga: Grebe 26 1

Pasa then began to laugh and exhibiting his
teeth he frequently challenged with the words-
"O Kapali! come! come to me for a duel.”

Ta: BENT Gan Se FAT
Uferissert ayrat: wnferen ereoitrTet Yo!

Sambhu gave a boxing on his jaw so hard
that Pisds teeth fell down on the earth.

eaeeTeTET Yar vitforenfiregAAA: |

ware afer Feat Aare SATA RCI

Thus, Piisd fell down on the ground
unconscious like a mountain hit hard by the
thunderbolt. His teeth were all scattered and
blood was oozing from mouth.

sritsfir tea yaut ufert afer
Janat eresonat Gaver 231
When Bhaga saw Piisa soaked in blood and

fallen on the ground, he stared Vrsabhadhvaja
with fierce eyes.

fate: FEE BY

Frorrerarea yfa areata: tt 2 ot

In furiated Sankara (killer of Tripura
demon) then slapped at the face of Bhaga
fiercely resulting which both his eyes fell
down on the ground.

at feaream: wa Greer WET

referer Besar eaTaTTAASyT STU 2 I

Adityas in the company of Marudganas and
fires then ran away to the ten directions under
the lead of Indra.

wirenag Raq wereren feta:
AHS AA: Te AY: MCA HAN VU

=== PAGE 43 ===

Chapter 5

O sage! On the departure of the gods,
Prahlada etc. demons bowed at the feet of
Maheésvara and stood before him with folded
hands.

wae UaeTE Y Ig Urea
aut ay attr wats Geqeq Vall
Sankara then started looking with fierce
eyes at that pavilion made for offering and all

gods including the demons so as to burn them
into ashes.

wat faferfeat ahr: worggggeram
weed Bt SBT Tat ATMA Vv

Some warriors present there were hidden
due to extreme of fear, some began to salute, a
few among them ran away and a certain
number of them were killed by lord Sankara.

aatsrrafertriag ag wader
FERIA TRNAS ETOH 2 4 1

Lord Mahesvara then saw three fires with
his three eyes. The fires so stared at him were
extinct within a second.

art wad agistt year feoragit:1
gale feracrernfecfinorratedtsratn 211

The yajfia too turned itself in a stage of
divine body when the fires were extinguished
and all rushed to the sky above with Daksina.
Its race was a race with anxiety.

Ragwatyeasrarsy sa

Be UYU Bea Her ASAT: Voll

EA ANAT Teva AA A:

aga HR Wa: rere a SAIN ICH

Mahesvara in the form of Kala (the death
god) put immediately Pasupata arrow on the
bow, gave tension to the string and chased
yajfia very fast. Lord Sankara with his half-
part (Ardharisa) was popularly known as
Jatadhara (Siva) in the premises of the yajfia
and by his other half-part in the sky is called
Kalariipa.

19

ang sara
arene assem: ehyphrrtat:!
ret a ered wae SaTTgTEfa 2a

Narada said- "You have addressed Sankara
as Kalaripa while moving in the sky. Explain

please, his complete feature and
characteristics.
Yost sara

wae fagrerer afeet arerefint:

Farad ghee sat cetera 3 ott

Pulastya said- "O great sage! I tell you of
the features completely of that Kalariipa and
murderer of Tripura demon, Sankara who
moved in the sky for all benevolence.

wart a sot afrerareraisge:|

Rea Ui: Gees afeat: arevsfior: 113 et

Asvini and Bharani constellation with
complete feature but a foot (pada) of Krttika
in zodiac Aries at the region of Mars is the
head of that Kalaripa Mahadeva.

aight Tera BET

ahrard qo ae after 3 IH

The territory of Venus comprising three
rays of Krttika constellation, complete Rohini

and two initial feet of Mrgasira constellation
ie. the zodiac Taurus in his mouth.

mdursisteaimmeaa: drenyg faery
faert quretrerer werent yfert 113 31
The territory of mercury comprising the rest
of two foot to Mrgasira, complete Ardra
constellation and three feet of Punarvasu i.e.

the zodiac Gemini is the two arms of the Sili
residing in the sky.

snfgaiva yet a anger wiget Tey
af: aheat arr wet wefeafeA: 3 xt

The territory of moon consisting of one foot
of Punarvasu, complete Pusya and Asles&
constellation i.e. the zodiac Cancer is the two
collateral parts of god Sankara who ruined the
yajfia.

=== PAGE 44 ===

20

frat arrdareprtiver Fath
qa fatderecd vfvitatn a4
O Brahmin! The territory of sun consisting
of complete Magha, complete Pura Phalguni
and one foot of uttara Phalguni i.e. the zodiac
Leo is called the heart of Lord Sankara.
arigmaa: wifi aera freaay
arya walategett aot fertts 13 gu
The second territory of Mercury consisting
of three feet of uttara Phalguni, complete
Hasta constellation and two feet of Citra
constellation i.e. the zodiac Virgo is the belly
(stomach) of lord Sankara.
Reraivfaered carta ay FIRING EOL
fattt Yara gen afrecTEAT 3011
The second territory of Venus consisting of
the remaining two feet of Citra, complete
Svati and three feet of Visakha i.e. the zodiac
Libra is called the navel of lord Mahadeva.
fammaterrgren ster tere Frere
feritet qiret ofertg arererefior: 13 cu
The second territory of Mars consisting of
Visakha one foot, Anuradha and Jyestha
complete i.e. the zodiac Scorpion is the penis
(linga) of that Kalaripa Mahadeva.
pt yaferctews Qarerdyg yi
POPC sea weiATN 3 eu
The territory of Jupiter consisting of the
complete Mila constellation and complete
Pirvasadha including one foot of uttarasadha
i.e. the zodiac Sagittarius is the couple thigh
of that Mahesvara.
SiMe eal Tac Het AN
afar wat apt AREA son
O hermit! The territory of Saturn consisting
of the remaining three feet of uttarasadha, the
complete constellation Sravana and two initial
feet of Dhanistha i.e. Capricorn is the two
pubics of that Paramesvara Mahesvara.

Vamana Purana

afer wrafirer steuanerenrry
at: wamnfeg qett ag a fagas en
The second territory of Saturn consisting of
first half of Dhanistha, complete Satabhis4 an
the three feet of Purvabhadrapada i.e. the
zodiac Aquarius are the two legs of that lord.

wevergrtté g srt tact ae
fetta taaet tre arongdtis ait

The second territory of Jupiter consisting of
one foot of Purvabhadrapada, complete
uttarabhadrapada and Revati i.e. the zodiac
Pisces are his two feet.

WH wel aera Frat

aa marathi
fagart aergtagm:

G teret arent ys

The three-eyed lord hit hard the yajiia in the
vagary of anger as Kala himself. Conceiving
no pain feeling, the arrow shot yajiia covered
its body with the galaxy of yajfia and settled in
the sky.

ANE Sarat

Tere: alee wera Bee St wT

Rai fags gfe cern ASAT: ws

Narada said- "O Brahmin! You have thus,
imparted knowledge on the twelve zodiacs.
Kindly, now continue with explaining their
characteristics according to their features
(physique).
YerRa art

aed da sears Tpit Oy ATT

BIG aa Maret aay TAT TNS 4H

Pulastya said- O Narada! I explain now the
features of the zodiacs. Please, listen
attentively. I tell you all about their
appearance, the orbits in which they move and
where they reside.

PaTMaarer aTeTeTRTEy
We: warafia snnfeeerney 1%

=== PAGE 45 ===

Chapter 5

The zodiac Aries has the feature of sheep. It
circulates its presence in sheep, goat, wealth,
cereals and gems etc.

Fayqaerisaagaral a wast:
Fret aeftt Geary UTai Ye Avon

It moves daily on the banks of reservoirs
covered by vegetation blossomed and

throughout the earth covered with new grown
Durvi (long lift plant).
ge: Tauren fe at ThRenfeg
weaearaghreg PATTY CI
The zodiac Taurus has the features of a bull

and it appears in the commune of cows. It
resides on the lands pertaining to the farmers.

aged: at wei grearerafiag:1

Srorarere fest trentefafergns 3

The zodiac Gemini has feature of a couple
(man and woman in joined form). It resides at
the cot and the seat. It holds a lyre and
musical instruments in its hands. It circulates
its rays on singers, dancers and craftsman.

fia: stenfafic faerrafreet g1

fags ara fared afgrgensseres: fare: 4 ott

This dual form (couplet) zodiac is called
Gemini. This zodiac prefers games (luxuries)
and resides at picnic spots (vihara bhimis).

wafé: Geiltor aa: weer: Watfete:|
Rerranitgiorafafermatita a 4 eu

The zodiac cancer is crab-like in feature
and lives in the water. It moves to the fields
full of water, the. river banks and solitary
places.

Faeeg veerwagtarceytig)
ARN ATMUECHY TERY Jey TUG

The zodiac Leo resides in mountains,
forests, inaccessible places, caves, hunting
places, trenches and the valleys.

Sitemeter AATRST aE
SRA VAAN TAT ACACTZ UNG Bt

21

The zodiac Virgo is with a lamp and Vrihi
in its hand and seated on a boat in appearance.
It resides in the genitals and nipples of the
woman.

geranfies yet dtearaurferenca:1

WRAY THY TA ATAU SH

O Narada! The zodiac Libra strolls in the
streets and markets, appears in masculine

feature with a balance in its hands, It resides
in cities, highways and buildings.
avariertat afirat atarareft:|
farireratarfecreronfeg afer: 114 4
The appearance of the zodiac Scorpion is
Scorpion-like. It walks through the pits and

termites. It resides in poison, cowdung, insects
and stones.

egg derart edz:
anfrgerafadtt: wret merenfagny § 1

The appearance of the zodiac Sagittarius is
horse-like in pubic region. It is glowing and is
an archer. It is known to horse riding, war-
craft, chivalrous and expert in operation with
weapons. It resides in elephants and chariots
etc.

pred wart aT gee AT:
maniset adterdt sat a wate you

O Brahmin! Appearance of the zodiac
Capricorn has a deer like mouth, bull like
shoulders and elephant-like eyes. This zodiac
swims in rivers and resides in the ocean.

frags yea: tarred sere:

WAM: GH: Wea vitfisenmagy cit

The zodiac Aquarius appears as a person
soaked in water with a pitcher on its shoulder.
It moves through casino and resides in bar
(liquor sipping place).

Areraenh arreiaifertat: |
wat yoaRyy Samreorargn 4 etl

The zodiac Pisces appears as two fishes
joined each other. It circulates through holy
places and the oceans, It resides in sacred

=== PAGE 46 ===

22 Vamana Purana

countries, temples and in the residences of
Brahmins.
warn niearegea Fereat aeTgy

FT HRAAMSSTHG RATATAT g ot!

O great hermit! thus, I have told you the
characteristics of Aries etc. zodiacs. Please,
don't disclose this mystery to anybody.

Wen & afr get

wer fa: WATT aa
arerrararcst fire aug gH

O Devarsi! I have completely explained the
complete episode on destruction of yajfia as
spread by three-eyed Mahadeva. I have thus
described this episode, most ancient, holiest,
capable of absolving sins and showering with
welfare as also enabling to perform noble
deeds.

fe sttermaget goreeretene eterferat ae
Wes yn

=== PAGE 47 ===

22

Vamana Purana

Chapter 6
Episode of burning of Kama
Yorrd sara
weal TEN aisat eat feoraPH
Raa res rah TeaTTTTTATT gi

Bt gen a Fal Tera waM
ararendt fret efterott aay: 2H
want tea seat ferent
aaa w aa: ahelt qerogferrat 3
wreretg warmer ae aaftaren

yore deat gar Tara faye wenn

Pulastya said- O hermit! The divine body
Dharma born from the heart of Brahma, had
reproduced Hari, Krsna, Nara and Narayana
sons by virtue of consummating with his wife
Daksayani. O divine sage! Hari and Krsna
engrossed themselves with exercise on Yoga.
Nara and Narayana, the greatest among all

ancient sages began austerity with
Parambrahma at the ever broad bank of the
sacred Ganges in Badrikasrama, a place
situated in the great Himdlaya.

FANTTOMAL A HTT

antec are TerL Vem: ah set Tat GH

O Brahmin! Indra (the king of gods)
became anxious when this entire universe
consisting of active and inert organisms felt

the heat (energy) on account of the penance
made by Nara and Narayana.

Ayer aa arenes yaa:
Toreeaa: Set: Heat HRPTTTN GIN
As Indra was aggrieved, he sent the most
beautiful divine prostitutes (Apsaras) so as to
entice them and impede their penance. Among
such prostitutes, Rambha was also sent.

ares Ygiagregeregy:|

wt agate ae OTTO

The sex-god (Kamadeva) with special
weapon in the form of mango buds too went
to that hermitage with his assistant spring
(season) with a mission to deviate their
penance.

wat mrerearcuf ar tarcerca ae:
aqalsmarns fafesitgeeresan ¢11

The spring, sex-god and all divine
prostitutes then began to spread sensuous
feelings everywhere in  Badrikasrama
arbitrarily.

aat aad doe feager seer:
Fron: aad Wy: viret eeaerqN gl

With the entrance of spring, the Palasa tree
having fire-like complexion started bearing
new buds and leaves and thus decorated the
land nearby that asrama.

fafert ar arag faerd Teather
SATA MA: THTTSRAPA Lot

O hermit! It appeared there as if the spring
lion would have come and killed the belly of

=== PAGE 48 ===

Chapter 6

23

autumn deer by blowing hard the nails of
Palaga flowers.

wer gareatt fifsta: <a Bera
aie Faaga: TAT: FFA LA

The spring started doing mockery through
the buds of Kunda flowers on the precipitation
(fog and dew caused during autumn)
considering as he has conquered.

anita foto yfiranis fatter
men ToyaTfoT arrenrcoTAT fen VIM
The forest having Amalatasa trees flowered

and appeared analogous to the Princes with
gold ornaments.

Rareg wer tat: fegat set Yat
ane eRTT AT YON Ta GATT 83 Ul
The Kadamba trees behind them seemed so

nice as the royal servants behind princes in a
cheerful mood.

Targa wife Yfeaat: AEATAT:|

FM THAT: MATS Yaa Fa VI

The forests having red Asoka suddenly
blossomed and looked gleaming as if the

soldiers of spring (king) are blood strained in
the war for him.

age: frat wr Tet a
Yoranitgen TEAST: FESTA Be tt

The herd of stags in the dense forest looked
so happy while moving on leaps here and
there as gentlemen are exhilarated on the
arrival of their friends in their home.

Taiifitarast TetHeY AeA:
SHAM FATA BST AGM TTI NE

The Vetasa trees with their new buds

1. As the flowers of Kunda are white, it seemed the
expression of victory by spring and irony blown
on the autumn. It is commonly known that spring
gets its tu when autumn is over, The author has
here beautifully used the personification figure of
speech by referring a joke of autumn through the
white colour budding of Kunda flowers. This joke
made is spring.

sprouted looked so nice at the banks of the
river as if they were saying with lofted fingers
whether there are any trees like us at all.

Taryaat tt tat fxyenfegen

engtaaren var faanfaarerA 91!

erate @ geacancrerit

RCSA HarenryifizaT ge 11

waster yar fergarrarga

Featfaerern fren agian Yat e811

afegencmn 4 aaa

MAC TEATS ATTA Bo

pRilaigqar yptrrafaferafa

aeraeratt: doer aerccafarran 2 at

O divine sage! A divine figure, youthful,
slim and all bright spring Laksmi having arms
of red Asoka, Palaga feet, hair of blue Asoka,
mouth of full blossomed lotus, eyes of blue
lotus, breasts of bilva fruits, teeth of full
blossomed Kunda flower, hands of buds, lips
of bandhujiva, nails of Sinduvara, voice of
cuckoo, clothes of ankola, ornaments of
peacocks, anklets of Sdrasas voice, Karadhani
of Pragvansa, motion of intoxicated swan,
garments (inner) of Putrajiva and furs of bees
appeared in that Badrikasrama.

aa ATAU @ET sre!

ater 8 fam: daterisagATPAAT zz

Narayana saw the sanctity of Agrama then
watched all direction and lastly, saw the sex-
god there.
ANE saraq

aIsteag! Tet aferaaitarm

@ cagt wrraret Sat areraTtserT: 1 2B

Narada asked- "O Brahmarsi! Who is that
sex-god (Ananga) so seen by Jagannatha
Narayana in Badrikasrama?"
Jered Sara

araut ada atset art Fre

BW Mgt Ma aA ITA: I eI

=== PAGE 49 ===

24

Vamana Purana

Pulastya replied- "That sex-god (Kandarpa)
is the son of Harsa. He is addressed as Kama.
As he was once burnt into ashes, he is
addressed as Ananga since then.

ang sara
fared armeatsat taeda siya!
RT BT BRAT ETSY 24 I

Narada asked- "Please, make me know why
and for what reason lord Mahadeva had burnt
the body of sex-god into ashes.

Feared sara

BET AGM TAA AT TTT!

fariga caragt of farerent fretrerts 2g

Pulastya replied- "O Brahmin! Lord
Sankara began to walk to and fro in the
indecisive state of mind subsequent to the
death of Sati and ruination of the yajfia
arranged by her father Daksa.

wat quent apt wad: gaye:
HURT AISA FHAATAATSATI V9 1
The sex-god with the flower weapon had

blown a weapon known as Unmada on
Sankara when he saw him bereaved of wife.

wat et: mone Sereary afsa:1
fare wart: are aif aN eI
Bearing the pain caused by that unmada

arrow, Sankara badly intoxicated began to
move in forests and reservoirs.

areal metas aise:

awd at sat aofag sa fern een

O divine sage! Like an elephant hit by an
arrow, lord Sankara began to recollect the
moments of acquaintance with Sati but could
not be satiated anyhow.

Wa: Ue ae: aferdtrafed PN
Frey yyy aa SET: FOTTAPTAT: 3 oN
O hermit! In the status of sheer anxiety,

Sankara fell down into Kalindi (Yamuna). The
temperature in his body was so high that with

his immersion, the water of that river boiled
and turned into dark colour.

Fer wate aaferen qarer Tt Tory
arerequadtat ar agrarefiaray: 113 gn
Since then Kalindi's water became as dark

as Ajijana and Bhmiga and that holy river
started flowing like the bunch of earth's hair.

wat aaly Quang ateg a aay al

yferg a vag arity aferitg a3

weg a Tay ary a Ay

frees ta yd oT weet: 3 3

MaheSvara then voluntarily strolled at a
number of holy rivers reservoirs, fountains,
enchanting river banks, ponds, lotus grown
forests, mountains, jungles and mountain
peaks but could not feel a sign of relief from
the anxiety.

arot rater Sah arot feet wgT:|

atat arate wat carat Waa a vt

O divine sage! sometimes he would sing,
on other moments weep and sometimes think

about the slim and beautiful Sati, the daughter
of Daksa.

eave ai weafete ator ereTae Rt
wary wae Tele at EBT Sa AAT BG
Now he would sleep, now he would dream

and on seeing Sati in dreams, he used to
blutter in these words-

Fagot fae fe ye ea aaa
wea waar fariedt extisher wee 3 gu

O cruel! Just stop O idiot! Why are you
leaving me alone? O beloved! O enchanting
Sati! I am burning myself in the sensual fire
due to your separation.

afa Get sepia ot ard HE Gefe
WaMUTTETETA HATS TAM 3 1911

O Sati! Are you really annoyed? O darling!
Don't be angry. I salute you with my head
bowing at your feet. You should gossip with
me.

=== PAGE 50 ===

Chapter 6

25

SEN eae Fret ey areas HA

anferqae a Bett farref arftreTean 3 ct

© beloved! I ceaselessly listen to you,
watch you, touch you, pray to you and
embrace you. Why are you not talking with
me?

farerat ot EBT HOT eT AT HAT

fata: ft aret Ay erafafrsorn 3 ent

O lady! Who is so cruel as not to express
sympathy on a wailing man? Specially, who.
will not melt when she watches her own
husband wailing. It is confirmed now that you
really are cruel at heart.

waahat saree ye wa agitate

waar feat 3 sed aeaed AT FAN Yo

O slim lady! You had earlier said that you
will not live without me but you would not
stand firm in your words, your statement was
untrue.

wale arrdad Uftert Yetta

FUR TPT AT: APTA ore FHT gn

O beautiful eyed lady! Come! Come to me.
I am immersed in the lust ocean. Hence,
embrace me. O darling! I depose that there is

no other option except that I cool down the
temperature.

set faery acres witqary Teo
sepa was Ges YA: AUR
When such a wailing dream was over, he
immediately stood up and started weeping
loudly in the forest.
4 if
ates aaret quart fel
faroae ert acer ferret
MATE F MOT FANS Z A
When the sex-god watched at a distance
that lord Sankara was weeping bitterly, he

took his bow soon and again shot a shaft
called Santapa at him.

PATA eat a fast
ya: a daa aya
— .
RHI Goped feared Susi
The Santapa arrow had made him more
anxious and passionate to sex. In excess of
appeal, he began to expirate from the mouth

resulting anxiety spread over the whole world
and the time thus passed.

dante yak nett ea
fageoranr at fat
adh get arrgitagat
fae: Uta west x4 HI
zeal menttrarergst
Uratferes ATT ATTA
wr fat eer ot
ued mae aeit gar
igen aarti aett aeer
ara Heeenfiratacnaistan we

The sex-god shot Vijrmbhana weapon on
Mahadeva resulting frequent yawning. At this
state of body he strolled here and there and
crossed the four directions. He thus reached in
the world of demi-gods where he saw
Pradhana Pajficdlika, the son of the king
Kubera. He accessed to him and said- "O
Nephew! You are extremely chivalrous. Do
today as I suggest to you."

Uranfere Jaret

ave Ui Sear Tene
yee salt fact:

SATA ATGATAT Bini
araisfaa & afageerre viet

Pajicdlika replied- "O master! I will execute
the assignment in spite of being tough to do
for the gods. O master of unique powers! O
Sambhu! please, order me. I am your loyal
servant."

=== PAGE 51 ===

26 Vamana Purana
oat sara aeai Fer Uyate Sara
caret Tarat ararftaanrat aad asdaa a ara
annie eypgfargisten galsa aretse garse afiy,
fagoroieregtfatira ad aarreat wafer y Un

ofa 7 rath vt ga ascn

Mahesvara said- "My body is feeling
aggravated sensuality on account of the
demise of Ambika (Sati) as she was only able
to satiate me. As I am hit hard by the
Vijrmbhana and Unmada shafts, patience,
coitus or pleasure has departed away from me
causing sheer anxiety.

fagent ya aa aa
Pe TET
art: qarenctag fe wat
Geet werd fe aa: were ve
"O son! Nobody other than you can hold
the acute shafts of Vijrmbhana, Santapa and

Unmiada shot by sex-god. Hence, hold these
within yourself.”

Yeres sara
saa TITER
aa: wdheare faery
ai sear aera
Feats Fe TAMING oft

Pulastya said- "That demi-god had held all
those shafts including Vijrmbhana and it
immediately cooled down lord Sankara.
Having been satisfied, he said-

R sara
TERA Yr Ysdafor

ferent wdifsnha
erat wat wit YATES

erent citer a arerATT 4 RH

Mahadeva said- O son! As you have held
such fierce shafts within yourself, I will
endow you with a boon worth bringing in
honour and obeisance for you in this whole
world.

An old man, a child, young chap or a
woman whosoever will either touch or
worship you in the month of Caitra (March)

shall immediately the intoxicated with
sensuality.
arate qatar waft wet
arent aerate area
aad eremerels fore

sata & atrgarg 3 qny an
O demi-god! They all will sing, dance, do
merriments and play with expertise on musical
instruments. They shall joke and laugh before
you still bound in intoxication (Yoga).
waa aren afaenfa yr:
uratferam: waa: yfirearr
WH MATRTERSY ATTA
afeera qramasfirresi 4 it
You will be honoured and addressed with
my name. You will attain popularity with the

name of Pajicdlikega. You shall receive the
highest honour and could give blessings with
my pleasure. Now depart to your destination.

weet faye Waa
aie Gerad walt
ISNA: BTN eet
ferrite efarorer: 114 4
afergyua faat fafret
eararcrefagerasat
aferrant wmraiferat
Ralshe fares fifteen y Gn

Under compliance with the words from
Mahesvara, that demi-god immediately went
to see all countries. The supreme holy state at
north to Kalafijara and south to the Himalaya

=== PAGE 52 ===

Chapter 6

was the country where he finally settled down
permanently. He became popular by the grace
of Rudra. Lord Sankara also went to Vindhya
mountain when he left that place.

anf nett meat cast UAT
BBr weaned Bat: MIgGTET NG tt

The sex-god reached there also and stared
at Sarikara. In order to defend him from his
encounter, lord Sankara started running from
there.

wat areet att wefirga et:
fae see aa aUete aah erAT 4 CH

The sex-god chased them and at the end of
such a race lord Mahadeva entered into a
dense forest known as Daruvana. The
household hermits used to live there with their
wives.

& ania aaa: ad get yet AeA
aaa wane F wfratTATT NY 8
Having seen lord Sankara there, the hermits

saluted him with sheer obeisance and the lord
asked for alms from them.

Tae wifey: wd wa Teta:
Tarssamnfar quanta afters ATTEN GoM
All hermits kept mum and did not respond

to Sankara. O Narada! lord Sankara then
began to stool in all hermitages.

a sfrg wer get enfant

wairnraal Srarat: WATTLE 8

a Beater a afr

wranigqarg afararg fad wag 2

Having seen Mahadeva enter into the
rama all, wives of Bhargava and Atreya
except most chaste Arundhati and Anusiya
(their mind having dedicated to their
husbands) became sensuous and ejaculated.

aa: alfirat: wat aarenfs weet:
aa went sararal wefergferatsaar: 11 § But

The enchanted, sensuous and passionate
women of agrama then followed lord
Mahadeva wherever he went.

27
TeRaIsssmntor went taht at yeaa:
appar wei aitwa ga FST gw

As the (she) elephants follow the

intoxicated male-elephant, the wives of
hermits began to run after lord Mahadeva and
contravened all the rules of the household.

arg serat apr arfarigeat BA
minfaargand fergiseradat gyfer g 41

O sage! Having seen such a phenomenon,
Bhargava and Angirasa hermits blew a curse
that his penis (liga) fall down on the earth.

Wa: woe tae fog yest ferred
STS arr Faget Prevett feet: 116 & 1
Mahadeva's penis then fell down on the

ground and it penetrated the earth where it so
fell. Mahesvara then vanished from there.

ware Ufa fergat fatter ager
Tanne fateny genes ettisfir Gon
The fallen penis then penetrated the land

and entered into the nether world. Its upper
portion had penetrated the cosmos. ;

aeararet yfaelt fire: ated am:
WATS: TS STMT TTPTAT: 1 & 611
The earth, mountains, rivers, trees and the

entire world with active and inert organisms
including the nether regions then shivered.

deerqarrgsr yciferdifrare:1
See Teed BE ats AMT ATTEN Sl
Having seen all the worlds so shivering,
lord Brahma went to see Ksirasagara.

wa Gor edteagt wforrer a afd:
sara &a yer: faraef gfizat fawn ott
He bowed in salute to Hrsikesga and said-
"O lord! O sovereign god! Why have all
worlds (lokas) so shivered?"
aatare efiderseorat fergt weft:
Unfrererer aTeTat HATE TET o Vit
Hari replied- "O Brahma! Some hermits
have cut-off by curse the penis of Siva and it

=== PAGE 53 ===

28

Vamana Purdga

is the burden of that penis which even earth is
unable to endure."

Tere gars ear Sa: fray:

Wa TROT VAM WANTS YA: FAM UH

Lord Brahmi inspired then frequently lord
Visnu to go and see there. He said- O lord of
gods! Let us go there immediately.

aa: frame Sat: Sayreay srereafet: 1

anTagengeyt a fag wearer TAIN 311

Lord Brahma and KeSava then reached the
place where that penis (liga) had fallen.

alsa Vfttig qEssea GT
Uratet wfeererer ferararatia ferz:nio wit
Having seen the unending length of that
penis, lord Visnu was surprised overwhelmly.
He rode on Garuda and entered into the nether
world.

ven gafaarsy sett wat:

Farcaeggen fafert: GATT NOG UI

Lord Brahma ascended and crossed all
layers of the uppermost worlds through his
lotus craft (Padma Vimana) yet failed to find

the edge of that penis. Hence, he returned with
sheer surprise.

faapieatsa warerae eter: |
aanfinatieard cisat 7 weg I

Lord Visnu also searched for the edge of
that penis in seven nether worlds yet he could
not find it and ultimately came back above
with surprise.

faq: faarresint eferg Gar I

parafegel year itt Fat wera: own

Having failed in their efforts, both of them
came to that penis and started praying.

‘eitwenongag:
was 8 Yet sy qe

Sigraret Be wre HAH PETC

Hari and Brahma prayed- "O Silapane! We
salute you. O  Vrsabhadhvaja! O

Jimitavahana! O Kavi! O Sarva! O
Trayambaka! O Sarikara! we salute you.

TRAT AUT Yanter gars!

PRATT BICHAT TASTAN 9 Vl

Salute to Mahesvara, = Mahesana,
Suvarnaksa, Vrsakapi, destroyer of Daksa's
yajfia, Kalaripa.

wares wre wet TT

TAR Waa AHS Ac ot

O supreme lord! You are the beginning,
middle and end of this universe. You are
Bhagavan (enriched with six luxuries) and
omnipresent. We salute you.

Gores Sara
a WRT Aare HI
wae Tas area AeA ATC VU
Pulastya said- The best orator Mahesvara
appeared in Daruvana when the prayer was
over and said-
wR sara
fared Saarret ufeyrant fragt
Ui Wat yeast areranfrafareq ¢ 2
Sankara said- "O couple gods! Why are you
praying to me here when I am tired badly,
passionate for sex and severely unwell?"

wad: Farquy: wlad fer aegis ET
Wayeat ya: sett Fa Waray c 311
The couple gods replied- "O Sarikara! Re-
entertain the penis collapsed on earth by the
hermits. This is the cause for our prayer."
RR sara
werdafa freeman ferg ger
memenfeeta Tae aT CS

Siva said- "O couple gods! I re-entertain the
penis once fallen only when the gods assure
its worship; nonetheless it will be impossible
for me.

aa: Sara waartanfieater Sayre:
Ten wad a sang fer arahaRETTN C4

=== PAGE 54 ===

Chapter 6

29

Lord KeSava replied- "May it be as stated."
Lord Brahma himself entertained that yellow
tint golden penis (liga).

Teaert wraiengaud gel

wrenfar dat qonht aritfafafemt anc qu

The lord then authorised four varnas for the
worship of Siva's liga (penis). The prime
scriptures of these varnas are popular with
numerous kinds of statements regarding the
worship of Siva linga.

one We uftearermarangad Wt

Witt areragi age a aurora cin

O hermit! The first sect of those Siva
devotees’ is Saiva, the second is Pasupata, the
third is Kalabadana and the fourth sect is
called Kapali.

fraanined wfadfaees fra: ya:
area fred ayer Moret sft BAC
Vasistha's son Sakti was a follower of the

Saiva sect; Gopayana was one of his famous
disciples.

TAT TTT A TETTRTTET: |

wee foreltsenygien eae: GATS eH

Bharadvaja, a great austere hermit was the
follower of Mahapasupata. The king of
Somakegvara Rsabha was his disciple.

ATR TATA TTT ATTNT: |

aren Foret aegarer ATT wAPPTT BTN Z ott

O hermit! Apastamba, an austere was an
Acarya of Kalabadana sect. Krathesvara, a
Vaisya, was his disciple.

Reradt @ areeret fore dttary

BURT SAT UA STAT YT ATA: g Bi

Dhanada was a follower of the Kapéli
(Mahavrati) sect. Karnodara, an austere man
from Sadra varna, was his disciple.

wa 8 aren PTs frat TTI

BM Y ages ata Me TANS TI

Having made a provision for lord Siva's
worship for the four varnas by allocating

ASramas, lord Brahma returmed to his divine
abode.

me walter raishs saeeTa TART

ford faarat wen wfterer gare eau

Lord Mahadeva too contracted in smaller
size that liiga on the departure of lord
Brahma. He established a small linga in
Citravana and again started moving all
around.

ferred oer yet weet FYTGT:!

arafeereanssat eat darafagyert: 11 es

The sex-god again appeared before him and

prepared for creating sensuous pain. A bow
made up of flowers was in his hand.

AAA EBT TEATAGYT BT:
erenretenarare Ferararerconfaren 8 4 1

Having seen that the sex-god again

appeared for more nuisance, Mahadeva stared
at him from head to feet with extreme anger.

aretfenateraan weit gfe

Wet Tal TAUCTAITA HAA F&I

O Brahmin! In spite of Kamadeva having a
strong and radiant aura, lord Siva's third eye
had burnt him into ashes from feet to the head.

weet ait eBIsat HAAG:
Sera ay: TS AMT WHAT G91!
The sex-god threw his bow away and it

split into five pieces when he saw his feet
burning in fire.

Terity fees ageTye WET

Baad: Graal Wer ec

The portion at which grip is made on the
bow was most radiant and fragrant and it
became a scanted campaka tree when so split.

Wear YATE zareteryaTy

aaard deere aepet AAT BANG

O hermit! The Nabhi-sthana became a tree
of Kesararanya Bakula when so broken. It was

decorated with a thunderbolt and was of a
beautiful shape.

=== PAGE 55 ===

30

ae aa yen enditfemierayiim
WHAT AT WaT TAT TEUfAfeNPAAATH go ot
Its koti studded with Indranila tuned into a
rose plant swarmed by the bees.
amrataft aan Ast war viferafineny
WAYCUISHaSAT PgR CUTITATAATH Ro Bil
The portion upside naha and at the grip was
studded with the Candrakanta gem converted

it into a white Juhi plant with five petaled
flowers.

a FEM aa: Seal: wr fagayfary

PATER echt Tara fafeer FAN Vo BW

O hermit! Upside grip and below two kotis
studded with Vidrumamani was converted
into a Malati plant.

qaikont venfor qaitfir a are!

aifegenht ta Taerattnfs a yo 311

Wate unto qaieét cafe ae:

weirs ganfar dye AEA: RoI

O Narada! Deva of the bow originated

several other beautiful and fragrant flowers.
Kamadeva had thrown down his arrows on
earth and all of them were converted into a
number of fruit giving trees.

garda ern carght fafaenf a

RUE ASAT BATT Ro 4H

With the pleasure of Sti Hara, there were
originated numerous types of fragrant and
tasty mangoes etc., fruits worth eating for the
gods.

Ud wen a BR: Ta way faq:

quent farfgraig @ Sem TTASEAT oR I

Thus, lord Siva went to the Himalaya for
observing penance subsequent to setting
Kamadeva into fire and maintaining balance
in the body.

wa Yu tat viT

BMY Sa: WI: WANT!
Ba: att aathg gra: gown

Vamana Purana

Thus, the supreme god Sambhu during the
distant past had burnt into ashes Kamadeva
with his bow and arrows, that great archer was
thereafter called Ananga and worshipped first
by other gods.

fa sitarragarat dane aarmeret ara

SEMTSIG I

=== PAGE 56 ===

Vamana Purana

Chapter 7
Description of battle of Prahlida
Gores sara
adtsag fergger gerarreait Af:
fagedd aa: wre aad se STAIN aI
Pulastya said- O Brahmin! The sovereign

Narayana then smilingly addressed Ananga-
"O Kandarpa! take your seat here."

regent art ferererarta:|

aerdiste werferat Serer HETETH Vt

The sex-god was stunned with surprise
when he saw Narayana unaffected by his

efforts and O hermit! spring also fell into the
trap of worry just then.

TAMA GET ARTA a

aatae WT array fe roan 3

Then lord greeted the divine nymphs and
said to the spring- "Come, spring and take a
seat here."

wat fees ware qeureary

aera weganigiqatatat fata si

God Narayana then smiled and took a
bunch of flowers, put it on his thigh and thus
originated a virgin whose parts of body were
golden.

aeaat waraut ger waiggeiy
sat Tas: feats ar rar ean 4

Kandarpa saw her and began to think- "Is
she my darling Rati?"

wea aad are Taferypfecreray
Prac eeraTeHAT TOT It

=== PAGE 57 ===

Chapter 7

31

She is having eyes, brows, cross eye-lids,
nose, upper and lower lips and appearance
analogous to Rati. She has an attractive face.

maa areafaret tat agit
Tse: Fat Gt aarnfers dedhion
Her pointed breasts with fleshy nipples are

fascinating and mutually compact like those of
gentlemen.

Wea ay aden aferrafayfiry
Set TT erent Teraferfargfier cu
This beautiful virgin has the same belly
slim, three lined, delicate and covered by furs
(ie. like Rati).
Morac a werent we

TRE PRAT Yea ACTH TTN FH

This line of furs ascending towards the
breast side from the pubic region appears as a
row of bees flying from the bank of a pond to
the lotus flowers.

wet wafafersiof sreren Targa)
aittenat 4g yatta weTAN Yon

Her broadened navel region covered by
Karadhani appeared as if the mountain

Mandara is covered by Vasuki serpent in
course of churning Ksirasagara.

mreetrerr ergy aT eH: |

fennfa ar qerdgt vafergeaatran yet

This fascinating beauty with white
complexion analogous to the pollen grown in

the lotus has ascended thighs like the stem of
a banana tree.

WPT JEyeS aT YA Tey aM
FRUIT UreTareT HAA ATAT 8

Both her knees, deep phallanges, beautiful
legs without furs and both feet as bright as
alaktaka are indeed fascinating.

Sit dferrerarrenntaredcireary
mrgiisat dare: feqara at BAM eat
O hermit! When Kamadeva himself was
fascinated and began to think so passionately

then it is of no use to say anything about the
feelings of other persons.

meaisyaeit ger dfercater area
faraerrttae User wa fat ys
Sree Beet Fattes anfarPrenera
‘eferafpermarenferetten greoTaT Tatu Bt
O Narada! Spring too pondered merely on
seeing her- "Is this the capital of Kamadeva
itself?" Or the radiance of the moon is
sheltered when night is over and on account of
the fear of heat generated from the sun beams.
yet faa sap
weit gffta exrrnftrr: ay wre: get
The spring stopped the nymphs and sat in
meditation like a sage in deep thoughts.

aa: @ faftrarcatarcuidiarert
Bel Ware set fea seat Yaa: got
sa wate areca meat
raat qeettara dtaai areara an Ret
O great hermit! When resolute Narayana
saw Kamadeva etc. caught in surprise, he
smiled and said- "O sex-god! O nymphs! O
spring! join this virgin generated from my
thigh, bring her to heaven and assign Indra as
a gift from my side.
Sqr: aes aaperdeh fea
AAA at WET WIAA TMT Le
They all shivered deep on these words,

brought Urvasi to heaven and handed over
that beautiful virgin to Indra.

arragetd avai enismai wergt

RATA AMTTTAS AERA: TEN Rol

O great hermit! Kama etc. reported the
master pertaining to the conduct of those sons
of Dharma (i.e. Nara and Narayana) before
Indra. He was greatly amazed at this entire
episode.

Tangy fe aft wafers som a

Warey aan wet feearerg wT aN 2a

=== PAGE 58 ===

32

Such a character (of Nara and Narayana)
attained supreme fame and it spread in the
nether world, earth and all the eight directions.

Tear fret ty fecorefert ya
afaftreretat Tat werel AT SAAN VR

O hermit! A danava named Prahlada was
enthroned long long ago when most fierce
Hiranyakasipu was killed.

aferorata ax SaareorgTe
Targa wart art fafrrram 2311

The kings, devotees to gods and Brahmins
on the earth, used to organise yajfia as per the
procedure prescribed in the scriptures during
the regime of that demon-king.

mraores wat end dtefarat a ada
Spey Uy eM: Ya: YT TAT Vwi

The Brahmins were engaged in penance,
religious affairs and visits to holy places, the
Vaisyas with animal husbandry and the
Sidras with service to the three varnas.

ange aa: ea = srt ectarifin
Meant eat Far FRAT FATT PTT I

© hermit! The four varnas thus kept
themselves busy with their respective
religious activities and heartily followed the
system of their aSramas. The gods as a result
were thus engrossed in their professions
respectively.

weg eat are atest Tere:
sam atet oe ef dargrefare 2g 1
Cyavana, one of great austere hermits in
Bhargava gotra (clan), one day went for
having a dip in Narmada at the holy place
Akulesvara.
Wa GBI Uelee al SQUAT
serio sore Art: Menretfea: 1 Rou
He first bowed "his head before Mahadeva
and then delighted himself in the river with his
bath. A serpent Kekaralohita caught that
hermit when he merely stepped into the river.

Vamana Purana

Taras a Wa WTA VET

aya yostrans Pfawsereret: 1 Be

That hermit so caught (gripped) by the
serpent summoned Hari in his mind and a
mere chanting of the name of Pundarikaksa,
that great serpent lost the power of poison.

aerernferdtgor wats Tartery
Fafemantey aeara Brat qeTTATT Re
That poisonless but fierce serpent then took

the hermit Cyavana into the nether region and
then freed him from his grip.

aera arty erat arta:

PAE ATM: WRT: AAT 3 0 Hl

Cyavana, the hermit began to live there
duly honoured by the serpent daughters
(Naga-kanyas) immediately when he was
freed by the serpent. He was surrounded by
those serpent virgins.

faccafectena erat weqT

aysaarh dard: wereiser caet aS tH

In course of moving about voluntarily he
entered one day into a vast city of the

Danavas. He was seen by Prahlada, a king,
getting due honour from the demons.

SyGN wena: Yat aH wera:
dyfadtefes gear wig tH
Prahlada, the most intelligent king, duly
honoured Cyavana, gave him a seat and asked

the reason for his visit when he was
comfortably seated there.

W Blane wera wend werHeTT
eagtarrats weer FE At ATS PATA 3 3A

He replied- O king! I had come today for a
bath in the holy-place of Akulisvara and with
a passion to see the lord.

Faaradtuister yaeanfen ae
Sara Tet Ura GBA WaTAHT 3 HI

As I was just alighting into the river, a
serpent suddenly gripped me, took me to the
nether world and here I could see you.

=== PAGE 59 ===

Chapter 7

33

Uae wl arent rere Feettat:|
Maver enteigni w aves areata: 13411
In response to the explanation of Cyavana,
the great orator Prahlada said-
Weele Jara
sorerattt fait yfsreat anf erat
Tardet a aft era STATEF AU 3 gH
Prahlada said- O lord! Kindly tell me how

many holy places are there on the earth, ether
and the nether world?"

wat sara
foes Afre dhrafeat a gene
wari agrarel Tarde fag: 301
Cyavana said- O chivalrous king! The most
popular holy places on earth, ether and nether
world are Naimisa, Puskara and Caktra tirtha
respectively.

Jere sare
gen wartaedt enna wer
Aft Egeriisyenrenade 3c

Pulastya said- O great hermit! Having heard
this, Prahlada tempted to visit Naimisa and
ordered the demons-

weetg sara
sfawed after: erg def fe Sf
FRAT: Yustrenad werarerTEgAT 3 Hl

Prahlada ordered- "Be ready, all of us will
go for a bath in the holy Naimisa and see there
Pundarikaksa putting Pitambara and who is
called Acyuta.

Yered Sara
sae aaa wee Serena:
appears fetqar TameNGN ¥o iI

Pulastya said- "All demons made
compliance to the order, became ready and
then came out from that nether world."

& ameter Star Sa Hela: |
AaTAATTAT Tt ager: 11% gM

Those mightiest Danavas took a bath in
Naimisaranya with pleasure.

aat fader: sterapreat & wa FI
arated yoat geet fanciigarqs 2

The demon king Prahlada then wished for
hunting and started strolling in the forest
adjacent to that place. He while strolling saw
Sarasvati river which had cool and pure water.

Wet Tera eget Vita

Reet MOTT ATTEN YU

He further saw, at a little distance, a huge
pipala tree having vast extended branches but
it was shot by arrows stuck there. Some
arrows were compact at their points (heads).

TARAS A ATA
aylsget ear as wet Seba: fare est

Prahlada became angry when he saw those
nagopavita arrows having excellent shape.

a tent matsquepemisret gh
agaarerat qreraATat yy I
He then saw two hermits engrossed deep in
penance. They had put the hide of a black stag
on the body and had long matted hair.

wats undated eget rere
wigan da sera a meget se 1

There were kept at their sides, Sariga and

Ajagava divine bows and two grand and
undepleting arrow-holders (tarakasa).

at qpiserat ser afivenferfer erra:1

Wa: Ware set agut gear vio

fa vest wired esi niferreT

wa aa: Fa HEM: Bear At waren wc

The demon king Prahlada deemed them
pomp and egoistic and said to them- why are
you both doing such ostentation? One side
you are immersed in penance and put matted
hair so long while you have kept these divine
weapons on the other.

aettare aa Set ar fara feta
areal aft a: paticivea Te fee

=== PAGE 60 ===

34

Nara then replied- "O demon king! Why are
you so worried about our possession? If
someone is competent to execute anything
particular, he would have naturally the
concerning equipment."

aatare feriteredt an wiferefentte
ate feat fers entaquanan 4 ott
Prahlada said- When I am here, the sole
founder of religion, what power should you
bath have?
ate wegareana strana wfatsien
7 airwoaqaay TARTU get & gH
Nara replied- "We possess supreme powers.
Nobody can dare to battle with us (Nara and
Narayana) in the battle-field.
eeatet: Ha: MtaTATETE A
aurea TATU TN BH
Prahlada them promised- "I will defeat

Nara and Narayana in battle by virtue of my
divine powers."

seagea set Tere
fader: wre act AFA
ferara ard syorenfergret
eet EAE ERT 4 BI
With this resolution, great Prahlada posted
his army at the frontier of that forest, gave
tension to his bow, tied the string on it and
thus made a challenging sound by pulling and
dropping the string.
raat aeearerra fe ara
WT aU qagheaarart
trea arated: yore
fade gerry: 14 su

Nara picked up his Ajagava bow and shot
several sharp arrows. These arrows were,
however, cut-off by the arrows having several
wings shot by Prahlada. All those arrows were
thus shattered into pieces.

foarte at: YaeArL
aorta TSN

Vamana Purana

He: TANT TETRA
yahs aranhafaeregarenrg 4 41

Having seen the unique power of Prahlada
and the arrows split by him, Nara gave a bend
to his bow again and shot a number of arrows.

TH TT at fefesteres
drentqqaga fede:
weg Toga we
we dere Fafgraregararq 4 GI

In a counter to the single arrow from Nara,
Prahlada shot two, three when two arrows
were shot by Nara and six arrows when five
arrows were shot by Nara.

a afiqgen frage tet

eg Be afin a te
We BA UTEL Aa WUATOT

faaafe erat: AAT Gott

O Brahmin! Prahlada shot eight arrows
when seven were shot by Nara and ten arrows
for nine arrows from him.

wre aeettfor gent eer:
ag agit amt dent:
TaSTISH STATS ATO,
yaagedt quai fe ary cit

Prahlada shot fifteen arrows when Nara
shot twelve arrows at him. Similarly, he shot
seventy-two arrows when Nara shot thirty six
arrows.

wat aa arorTatea-

Taree frat fee: GH
Bafa dreamer: yar

farede Arrears y eH

Three hundred arrows here shot by demon
king when Nara shot one hundred arrows. He
again shot one thousand arrows against six
hundred arrows from Nara’s side. Both of
them then shot numerous arrows in order to
defeat each other.

aa: Vafateaht quyt atari
Fal aga ast: TERA G oll

=== PAGE 61 ===

Chapter 8

Nara then covered the earth, ether and
directions through a pile of arrows blown.
Prahlada too on his part split them all by
shooting arrows having gold wings.

arg tan arrennftrr

art Frat g fearmerery
Fe eT TEATgE A

ate arreorrerargg en

Both these warriors then hit fierce weapons
and arrows at one another.

arg aaa arrerafirr

amt figrh g frarmeream
TAT PRT

ae arert fatageiting 2H

Prahlada then took a supreme weapon in
hand and put Brahmastra on his bow while
Nara (Purusottama) exercised Mahesvardstra.
Both these weapons collided with each other
and were destroyed simultaneously.

TEA Y WeHA were: wtTAEA:
Tet MYR ATA Wee TATA G 311
Having seen that Brahmastra failed in its
target, Prahlada was in furiated. He picked up
his mace and jumped down from his chariot.
mreranfar warard Set ATTA
BBs yer At AAA: TATE v

When Narayana saw Prahlada advancing
with his mace, he pulled back Nara and came
in front for coupling with his attack.

wat faite: ware: TATRA,
aeparot avat Feary
werd Guuitqarfaat
ATTTUE ATS STEHT & & 11
O Narada! Prahlada, the demon king with

his mace then rushed towards great chivalrous
Narayana who was with his Saniga bow.

TAMU YRS WeTaTS ATT
* PARIS: Ho

ee

35

=== PAGE 62 ===

Chapter 8

35

Chapter 8
Boon offering to Prahlada
qed sara
wigutornrard eprst area:
afar ret Aarget merasaq
Pulastya said- The demon king gave a
strong blow on the head of Sadhya (Narayana)
when he saw him marching forward.
afsrena nea cigar AR
Janarnacat afeadfadt gfan 2
O Narada! On account of the severe pain
caused by such a hard blow, tears like fire-rain

fell from the eyes of Narayana onto the
ground,

fet arraurenfa ar vet arenfian

SATA PIT TSHPYZ FATS: BH

O Brahmin! As the thunderbolt is split
when it is fallen on the mountain peak, the

mace blown on the head of Narayana was split
into several hundred pieces.

adt Frgra eetg: warera wi gat
arene anes Square WATER wit

The demon king then tured back
immediately, rode on his chariot and took out
an arrow from his tarakasa.

ane at ae meeneciger

wether arearar aed aaterrereR AeA: HG HI

He then in blind fury shot a number of
arrows having vulture wings at Narayana.

ARTI Way aToTar saa
fade ariiathifeite = arr gi

Narayana cut-off those half-moon shaped
arrows with his arrows and some other arrows
were also shot to hit at Prahlada.

aah areraot Seat et aTeTETUT it:
anfaatat rasaiet wiftaatirert: 1109
Then Narayana and Prahlada both exercised

a number of acute and direct hitting arrows on
each other.

=== PAGE 63 ===

36

Vamana Purana

watstat dfrarat Faraway

feqyuit tar qa ory fect a ag ach

O hermit! A crowd of gods desirous to see
this short-term, excellent and hurried battle
gathered in the sky.

Wa: QUOT Fy UsateErt WET:
qertrieet qyq: wert ¢ 1
Those gods then played the trumpets

making a loud noise and showered flowers on
both the warriors.

ad: Weary day Tey age
aaaat weal Reresitfrrs TT R011
These great warriors and archers then

fought a war throwing in surprise the crowd of
spectators in the sky who all were gods.

weRagEranssaret aTgat wea feta:

fever faferrater orqdat yritent:i gan

Both of them shot numerous arrows and
these covered the entire sky. All directions
and the angles of those directions were filled
with the stock of arrows so blown.

wat ARTO TATE ETAT
favre antitetent: werd wdergn ez
Wel deat: PSTN Sera
fate wad aeded a ATTN aH
O great hermit! Narayana exercised acute
arrows and hit hard at the sensitive spots of
Prahlada's body while Prahlada too hit at the

heart region, both arms and on the face of
Narayana.

watsendt dered: anes gfe

fardear ae ageracedam exit

Narayana then shot an acute half-moon
shaped arrow and cut-off the bow held by
Prahlada just from the portion where the fist is
made.

are safvedt UT ATT
attired orereregeen cent FfRATSSTTN Rh It

Prahlada threw immediately that bow and
replaced it with another. He then shot a
shower of arrows at Narayana.

Ana WRT andar
wanes @ agetor ferade yearerg: 1 eg

Narayana again split those arrows and cut-
off that bow too.
for fod aqeereerqaamee|
arent Fat wre Br fered eTTATN got
O hermit! Prahlada replaced one after
another bows but all were cut-off frequently
by Narayana with his extreme expertise in
archery.
dfirem ary sere fefrsat:|
utter arent ded adetrent Fem ee
Prahlada, when all bows were over, picked
up a fierce and formidable Parigha made up of
iron in large quantum.

ufeyena afte srrarara ara:
mreerarat a ferede ATT WeTAAT Re
He thus gave a circular move to Parigha

but, in the meantime, Narayana shot an arrow
and it was cut into parts.

for 7 URS starrer east:
Bat ory ate wfeate TERT Rott

When Parigha was cut-off, Prahlada gave a
circle to Mudgara and threw it at Narayana.

aartest aerate
fade tyre area: a fase aargian 2 ei
O hermit! The mighty Narayana shot ten

arrows and cut that Mudgara into ten pieces. It
thus fell on the ground.

UR feaa ore werner Stary

siege trae a a feeds nt 2 zit
Prahlada took Prasa and threw it at

Narayana when he saw that attack by

Mudgara has failed. Narayana cut it also with
his arrows.

=== PAGE 64 ===

Chapter 8

37

wre fox at dea: wrfmerere fare
at fede aera aT MEAT: 113 Bt
Prahlada on failure of attack by Prasa, took

Sakti and threw it immediately but it was also
cut into pieces by Narayana.

foay ay wey arasaaeaY:!

AALS Aa ATTA ATH 2%

O Narada! The demon king then took other
supreme bows (Mahadhanusa) and showered
arrows on Narayana when the stock of all
other weapons was finished and could do
nothing.

at areaott at terre Sere:
ARTAAAT FAS HCA 1 2 Ul
Then Jagadguru and supreme austere

Narayana made a blow with Naraca just at the
heart of the demon king.

a frre seredrgrartor
Froara waiteret aerate ATA EH

O Brahmin! That demon king fell down at
the middle portion of his chariot on account of
the severe blow at the heart region by Naraca
(a weapon). His charioteer then immediately
took him away.

a dat fetal siren fetta: 1
Bee aT yet ARITA: Bot
The demon king came back to

consciousness after many hours but he again
appeared at that place for another battle. A
strong bow this time was in his hand.

warn after wyatt ATT: |

Tree Seg StI: MT RATARHATET VCH

Having seen him re-appeared, Narayana
said- "O demon king! we will not fight in the

morning. Go back and perform Anhika-karma
as prescribed for the morning."

Tage fadiereg metrgrantom

ari Aftrarcod fara as Aatssfeeary 28H

Prahlada returned, visited Naimisdranya
and performed Anhika-karma there.

wel gente 3a a weret gagy yFT

wat ferred Be at Sent aftr 3 ot

O hermit! Prahlada kept his mind busy
throughout the night on a strategy to defeat
Narayana by duly recollecting the experiences
of the day.

Ua ARTAOTat Tetqert ARE!

feat adage x deat Fa a aTeTAAI 3 a

O Narada! Prahlada fought for several
thousand divine years with Narayana; still he
could not win him over.

ad atagart aft year
rarest erat area 3 2

When he could not win Narayana in spite of
the tremendous battle with him in which he
applied his all skill and expertise, he went to
lord Visnu and said-

farmed Saterer wet arr Vey
fag aise wert wat areot aan 33

O Mahadeva! Please tell me the reason why
I could not win victory over Narayana till
date?

Whaarat saret
Qiaiseh werengeeen were whet:
meat famed tage Zargtefin a si

Lord Visnu replied- "O Prahlada! the great
chivalrous son of Dharma is beyond your
powers and you cannot defeat him. Those
intelligent Sadhya Devas are invincible and
undefeatable even by all the gods.

were sara
aeret gaat Fa we area Ton
reared Tenferarrct TTL wrferwafe | & 1
Prahlada said- "O god! If those
Sadhyadevas are unconquerable, what will

then be of my promise? It will then prove a
mere fallacy.

Serta See set sitet age:
areca fereit aaftey arreryireorr 3 11

=== PAGE 65 ===

38

"O lord! How can a man like me live life
when spotted as false and resolute? O Visnu! I
will therefore, give-up my breathing before
you."

Jered sarey
seeaqeren aert fant aa:
fort: Srreaer wet JorTET HATTTTN 3 lt
Pulastya said- "With these words the demon
king Prahlada set his breathing in head, seated

himself there and started chanting the hymns
relating to everlasting Brahma."

wat draafe fee: dicaratsadtaa:1
ares Safe were aT BSA BAI
Lord Visnu then said to Prahlada- "Go there

again. Remember that you can only win them
with devotion and not by ensuing battle."

Were Sara
wen fart Sate Acierafe gaat
Wag rare ret feng TAs
Prahlada said- O god of gods! O great
resolute! I have won the three-world by virtue
of having your pleasure with me. What to say
about these sons of Dharma.

wan fit Sake Seireaatt Yara

fardise marorares yon: feaga nits xont

O unborm! If that resolute is undefeated by
any person in the three-world and I cannot
stand before him even after so backed by your
pleasure, tell me then, what should I do?
Waar saver

Wisé aragge ceri ferereren

ert yeratafang aasrat aanf tera: gn

Lord Visnu said- O great demon king!
Narayana is nobody else but 1 myself and
busy there on penance in order to establish
religion above all so that it could render place
to all. ‘

Terefgeafa set TATE eal
a es wacar TET TT TTT RI

Vamana Purana

Hence, O danavas! Do their worship if you
want to win them. You can defeat them by
your sheer devotion. Hence, serve those sons
of Dharma.

Jars sara
sep: Waarea eas TET
Sate TE: TANISHA BU
Pulastya said- O hermit, Prahlada pleased
with this, called Andhaka and ordered.

were sant
ders grata vftararrareas

Targafad wed mites et mE ssi

Prahlada said- "O Andhaka! Provide
maintenance to all daityas and danavas. O
chivalrous! I abandon and assign the state and
all stately affairs to you.

wage wag Tet Seva:
vereisfa reismeaque wefan yy i
In compliance with the order of Prahlada,
Andhaka (son of Hiranyaksa) took over the
liability of the state. Prahlada then went to
Badrikasrama.
Ber arent Be at a feferstae:
parefergel yet aay ait wats wet
He saluted with his head on their (Nara and
Narayana) feet at Badrikasrama.
AAAS TERIA ares ATTaTSETa: |
farrd soriisdte arafareat wergut x9
Narayana, the greatest genius and
imperishable said to him- "O great demon

king! Why have you shifted to salute instead
of defeating me in battle."

were Sart
wea Ag wa ys: HRT: Yeas hr:
4 fe arreottsaat: Haaren sas ci

Prahlada replied- "O lord! Who can
conquer you? Who is the man here greater
than you? You yourself are Janardana,
Narayana immortal and Pitambaradhari.

=== PAGE 66 ===

Chapter 8

i 2a: qusttenred faeq: maT
Tarra AEM: PIT: FRATT Se
You are Pundarikaksa and Visnu with the
Samga bow. You are imperishable,
Maheévara and immortal Purusottama.

wat dfimferata aah wtifior:1
ware Siteareat a saat cat et aTAET:II yo
Yogis do meditation, scholars worship,
celibates (sndtaka) do japa of your revered
name and yajfiikas perform yajfia.
vanegat witeryernanfined ez: 1
meni waferreata SETTING RU
You are Acyuta, Hrstkesa, Cakrap4ni,
Dharddhara, Mahamatsya, Hayagriva and the
greatest Kacchapa (Kirma).
favoaafy: serra gat:!
wfeagagrentttarat Fare GU

You are Sriman, killer of Hiranyaksa and
god pig (Stkara). You yourself are the killer
of my father god Nrsirhha.

ven fratsmcTegaT:
Renfertt fafa: wi:
wat pugisaeraqaret

sera are AAT 4 3H

You are Brahma, Mahadeva, Indra, Agni,
Yama, Varuna and you are wind. O sovereign
god! O administrator, O Garudadhvaja! You
are the cause of the sun, moon, the immovable
and movable.

wa yet wahferrenrgt Het Yea TEA: |
ae Se STR aaa Teak ATAU 4 WH

You are the earth, fire, sky and water. You
are present in this whole universe in several

thousand forms. O Madhava! Who will
conquer you?
were afe eta seas sgt

aren a wereaisfar Sg aeraTseTa G4 It

O Jagadguru! O Hysikesa! You can satisfy
yourself only on the devotion made. O

39
omniscient! O everlasting! you cannot be won
in any way and by anybody.
wraryarat

ufgetsfér & ter waar Yat

ARM ATM UE TAT a Tafa 14 Gt

Lord said- O great resolute! O Daitya! I am
pleased with your prayer. O Daitya! This
exclusive devotion has defeated me.

Wats yea der gus washer

quer # werent at qu afireafan yon

O Daitya! The defeated man is given
punishment but instead of receiving any
punishment from you, it is I who will bless
you. Ask for anything that you desire.

Were Sart

ara at ae Set F aguefan

wy Ue oe Ag PI aH ATI CI

anferes Trae aT TE FEAT: |

TUT TEASER WaT Ay Vi

Prahlada said- O Narayana! You are

competent to bless me with what I ask for.
Hence, O Jagannatha! May the evil committed
on my part through body, mind and speech in
course of fighting, all that may be absolved. I

pray and ask for it. Please, bless me with this
boon.

ARTA Sara
Te wag aerq oe a ang eee
faite wee at i cenit TaTgTNG on
Narayana said- O demon king! May it be as
you wish. May your evils so committed be

absolved. O demon! Ask for another thing. I
will render it also.

‘Were Sara
a ar waa & gf: at at fae arti
ar a Fret wafer waerTaT Gt
Prahlada said- O Visnu! Whatever
inspiration would get birth in my mind may
that all be shelter to you, for worship to god
and for meditation on you.

=== PAGE 67 ===

40

ARTA Sava
Ue afar ami aftreofa
a goiter ugranét werearaferarcaq § 211
Narayana said- O demon! It shall be as
desired. O chivalrous! Ask more whatever you

like. I shall bless all that without application
of my analysis.

Were sara
adie wer cred warrarereelersil

warrergarea fe wafrreg Wet WANG 31
Prahlada said- O Adhoksaja! I have got
everything with your grace. May my
popularity live long with your grace.
ATAU Saray
Tereant aneg Prerraatsera:|
srererrentte Herarerefareatai & v1
Narayana said- It shall be as asked. Besides
it, you shall be immortal, always youthful and
invulnerable with my grace.

Tree tere Seared fea:
ot aperel wreret wfererer srferearferns & & I

O lion to the demon dynasty! Go back to
your residence and always be busy with
religious deeds. You will not be betrayed by
the bondage of Karma (deed) since your mind
will be always with me.

WMATA UT PITT!
aanfraget dea qe eg § G11
Rule ceaselessly over the demon subjects.

O Daitya! Observe supreme religion as
prescribed for your race.

Jered Sara
sey ca Were Sanat
are tet TaTeTe Ute STG GO
Pulastya said- When these words on
blessing were over, Prahlada said to god- "O
Jagadguru! Tell me, how should I regain the
State, already abandoned?"

Vamana Purana

Ayers wean res et Frome
fedater tert erat Fe WANG cI
The lord of the universe (Visnu) said-

Return to your residence and be preceptor to
the Daityas and Danavas.

aRTaaage: Waar SeTTE 1
wforaeer fey get srr art Far g ett
Prahlada accepted this suggestion, bowed

before the lord and returned to his residence
thereafter.

qe: wafwaante eraeeat a

Frafacer Tears A wedhesee ATEIN9 01

O Narada! Andhaka and the Danavas
greeted Prahlada on his return, requested to

accept the throne again but he did not accept
that offer.

Tee after Target

za was eas
AACA

reat wer atrfearyeee: io en

The great demon king (Prahlada) thus
abounded the state, preached to the Danavas
the ethics, engrossed himself in unique
KeSava and attained purity of body through
Yoga.

YU ang eae

ARTaOr AST
wafsrante fare Tee

amet wt erat afsatgai 0 21

O Narada! long long ago Prahlada thus
defeated by Purusottama Narayana,
abandoned his state voluntarily and attained
supreme position by virtue of his mind
exclusively concentrated on lord Narayana.

pelt i iil nen

Prd

=== PAGE 68 ===

Chapter 9

Chapter 9
Description of battle of demons and gods
ANE Jara
Sad: set UR verearTaT FA
aafarfirar arransft taterd war

Narada asked- "O hermit! Why did
Prahlada incoronate the blind Andhaka in
spite of his being well conversant with rules of
everlasting Rajadharma?"

Yee sara
Teragrat qat fecwaishe stain
aettsfirfirar deta wares fast wan 20

Pulastya said- "He had regained eye-sight
even at the time when his father Hiranyaksa
was alive. As he was no more blind, Prahlada
was justified in assigning to him the throne.

ARG Jara

TRismasfatmey feared Yaa

enfef: we set TARA Tae AM

Narada asked again- O great resolute! Tell
me what was done by Andhaka after the
incoronation and what was his behaviour with
the gods?
Yared sare

TRashiafamt gers ferwmneretensae:|

arenssTea Bayi Yoranfti Freer su

mremaardt Utrera:

ATC FUGA SIMS HET AG

WF aren” tet Tea

We Filed rar wae aise G 1

Pulastya replied- Andhaka after the
incoronation, sat in penance for the pleasure
of three-eyed lord Mahadeva. He thus was
bestowed with powers by the undefeated
gods, siddha, hermits and serpents, unburnt by
fire and undrowned in water from lord
Mahadeva. He then held the rein of state
under the priestmanship of Sukracarya.

41

Wes YET SATA AT: |
SR Agar WaT ATTA 1
The demon Andhaka then developed war-

craft and strategy for conquering the gods. He
thus defeated all the kings on earth.

wafer etree Freiter a
a: ad Refereat srrargaaeta cit

After defeating kings, he appointed them as
assistants to handle state affairs; he climbed in
their company at the excellent peak of Meru
mountain.

vratste gedaan ayeier wera

wareerertacat ate sear fatter ¢ it

Indra too came out after assigning the
proper defence-related instructions _ for
Amaravati. He rode on Airavata elephant and
set out to see that peak with the divine army.

yma wart came waste: |
orem ated es Urge Pregafe:n gots
Other Lokapalas equipped with their
weapons rode on their respective carriages
(vans) and followed god Indra.

Radhaste a at yeboTgTentom

Ferrera aorarfrentetir:u gen

The divine army consisting of elephants,
horses, chariot etc. also set out speedily with
Indra, the king of gods.

amt greyfern: yous facie:

welset cat fed wenfirreat Tor:

eaferenerrensy eh ea arerTeTA RAT: 11 2M

At the front of the army there were twelve
Adityas, Trilocana (Rudraganas) at the back
and eight Vasus, Visvedeva, Sadhya,
ASvinikumara,  Marudganas, _demi-gods,
Vidyadhara etc. in the middle. All began to
march forward in their respective carriages
(vans).
ANE Jara

eae aay areTe a WaT:

Tereneentt nist wt algget FAN Va It

=== PAGE 69 ===

42

Vamana Purana

Narada said- O master in religion! Describe
the names of carriages (vahanas) on which
Rudra etc. had marched. I am curious to know
this topic in detail.

Yorea Sara
supe aafsenty wearaia area

SET AOTAA ChAT: 11 Vs
Pulastya said- O Narada! I explain all

vahanas in a series and precisely. Please,
listen to me carefully.

eaeeracierat weraat wera:

Feat warafe See aT BG

The ‘white coloured Gajapati (Airavata),
excellent in speed and power is the carriage

(vahana) of god Indra. It originated from the
palm of Rudra.

wreaeat itt qerauif waa:

hogar ame feet TET ATTN 2 11

O Narada! A buffalo called Paundraka,
most fierce, dark in colour, a racer as mind

itself, is the carriage of Dharmaraja. It
originated from the thigh of Rudra.

eaaulaciga: yarat weenie:

fargant feearnft: ated aTROTET AI Bot

The Sisumira called Jaladhi is the carriage
of Varuna. It was originated from the ear-wax

(soil) of Rudra. It has dark-complexion and
has divine speed.

da: maces: dered They
aaftaenraretyat ATE TACET GU R21

Narottama, having eyes like chariot wheels,
a gigantic body as the mountain, a fierce
figure is the carriage of Kubera. It originated
from the feet of Ambika.

Waray aT ATE AEN
Treaty verdtat qtr: ereoT:|
daft sheaf garoarsranht aN ee

O great hermit! The carriages of eleven
Rudras are white bulls. They originated from

the ray of Gandharvas, fierce serpents and
Saurabhi.

wa aaTeeeaed Aa
Beat rarer anferean AAATA Roll

O great hermit! Half a thousand (i.e. five
hundred) swans are the carriers of the moon's
chariot and the horses carry the chariots of
Adityas.

Hay Taal AAT AAT: |

ferret yornsat garest aenftt 2 gH

Elephants are the carriages of Vasus, men
are the carriages of demi-gods, serpents are

the carriages of eunuchs (Kinnaras) and
horses are the carriages of Asvinikumaras.

argtatsa rerredt SEE: |
Yearecey Haat werater vanes: zit

O Brahmin! Stags are the carriages of fierce
face Marudganas, parrots are the carriages of

poets (Bhrgus) and Gandharvas are
pedestrians.
See AAA Tat ARTAAT: |

we feigest gert quale: 23n

The great gods glowing with brilliance thus
marched forward for war with cheers on their
faces, properly equipped with weapons and
rode on their respective carriers.

ANE Jara

afer quatt areata erat BA

Sant areata aereapTefaN 211

Narada said- O hermit! You have described

the carriers of gods etc. Please, describe in the
same way the carriers used by the Daityas for
their riding.
Jord sara

US eae aretha fein

perfarentiy aaa Terenas ge Pan 24 11

Pulastya said- O great Brahmin! Listen to
the carriers used by the Danavas. I am going
to describe them in substance.

=== PAGE 70 ===

Chapter 9

43

arene wh feet Gea: TeaaTfsha
Porat: aearberrearaCaroTar TI 8G I

An immaterial (alankika) chariot of
Andhaka is operated by the dark-
complexioned horses. It has one thousand
spikes. (The wood is fixed between the centre
and the radius) and it is measured as twelve
hundred hands in size.

were wah feemercaufgaret:1
SOURMISEI: PTKATTA: YM RoM
The pink coloured beautiful and divine

chariot of Prahlada is driven by eight best
horses of moon tint.

fates a: GATE YEA
wera gy wh feat wa: arated 2c
The carriage of Virocana is an elephant and
Kumbhaja has a horse while the divine chariot
of Jambha is driven by golden coloured
horses.

vegeta yon gaia Fart:

at mae fare Fyter wee

The carriage of Sanku Karna is a horse, the
carriage of Hayagriva is an elephant, Maya
has a grand chariot and the carriage of
Dundubhi is a giant serpent.

rave frrtsyea: wgrinfire:

aegat =o afert mangacrenfiaiti 3 011

wea tardanhs sifigfagyeri

The carriage of Sambara is a Vimana and a
lion is the carriage of Ayahsafiku. Bala and
Vrtra, the mighty Danavas, were ready to
attack the divine army with mace and musala
but without any carriage.

wat THA: UaetishersiaanT: ng gt

Tren agit ata: fagaufs ar
sararetter fret yt Ya: Fae Teg BH
anart fngd wa a Yo

A fierce battle was then fought. O Narada!

The entire universe was covered with yellow
coloured dust. It was so thick that a father was

unable to recognise his son and a son his
father. O great resolute! Some soldiers began
to blow their weapons on their own people
and some others began to attack the opponents
on account of being tough to recognise.

anfirgat mere wataft wrer|TH 3 3 1
Te TTS oT are Mera
Taree aHa: verraateaorg 3st

The warrior on the chariot attacked another
chariot, the elephant with another warrior,
elephant and horse riders marched forward to
attack the soldiers who rode on horses. The
pedestrians began to attack pedestrian
soldiers. Thus, all these warriors began to
shower blows on each other in order to defeat
them.

Tee 9 sere feTTT: |
aay dpet aferqs targt FN ga
rade Fat Sh pret TORT:
vifortter wreat aterdeganferttu 3&0

O hermit! As a result of such fierce battle
between gods and demons, there flowed an
inaccessible river in which the water was of
blood whirls were made by broken chariots,
tortoise-like shells of dead elephants body and
fish heads were seen. It was swaying the
crowd of warriors and it had merged the dust
so raised initially when the battle was started.

TRgerergat weit grea
PenrreTra Terfareafetti 3 911
apatarcriaiot wareartrafert
TIRES VATATEATSATI 3 611
ATT WATUTTETHET
farreaghrdaitot gent wrgdstt:13 eu
aera: Gat: Yaa warTfat
AYE: FEIT: WA
Ar A Alea HATTA: 11% 0 1

There were a large stock of crocodiles ‘of
sharp edge Prasa (weapon), Graha of axes,
intestine algae, flags froth, Grdhra and Kanka

=== PAGE 71 ===

44

Vamana Purana

flamingo, Syena, Cakravaka, wild crow
Kalahamsa, jackal and sages Pisaca. It was
tough to cross by common people. The
chivalrous warriors who intended to gain
victory were immersed up to the knees. They
were crossing that river through the boats
made of broken chariots yet were busy in
blowing sharp weapons on each other.

amg a3 gaat
weed treintsen
wife aerer YaweT:
fargrerqureatinat ais eu
fragment wern-
Tate aie a serafen
ari faut a ferege
Tniaerarana safes BI
The monsters and demi-gods as also
Pisacas were very glad to see such a fierce
battle between the demons and gods in which
both were meeting to destruction while it was
dreadful to the cowards. The Pisaca and
monsters were sipping concentrated blood and
eating flesh with mirth. The carnivorous birds
were busy piercing the flesh in pieces and

they would reveal annoyance had any other
bird come and interfered with their work.

yata tearcvanfsereer
were ater yf Searats
vremcren Frade art
Fe Vat TAU YZ
The jackals were yelling, the warriors
injured and fallen down were crying in pain.
Some soldiers began to fall down wounded by
the blows from weapons and arms again and
gradually the entire battle-field was tumed
into a cremation ground.

aftafasar erat wat
Fuga yas
3 wt arg
Bas ferret FUCA:

The battle between the gods and demons
was fought so fiercely with the yelling of
jackals, that it appeared as if the warriors
skilled in war-craft betted their life with
weapon formed pasa had engaged themselves
in gambling.

ferret Wiserat

@ fad afraeain
TRS er

aafaareaate weaeRGAN SI

Andhaka, the son of Hiranyaksa marched
forward by riding on a chariot driven by one
thousand horses to fight against Indra, the
king of gods who rode on the intoxicated
Airavata elephant.

wareerd Tfeurterad

ae wihesqacranteiter: |
were FUTTTT
TH WAT AAA YG

The demon king Prahlada rode on a chariot
driven by eight horses, took weapons in hands
and faced aggressive Yama on a buffalo
boldly in the battle.

fatteranft west

TRA RAUTTGAS TATETT!
arg anaes a yiatisa

wat Rae G_e TPZ wot

O great hermit! Virocana advanced to fight
with Varuna in battle, Jambha marched to face
the mighty Kubera, Sambara marched to face
Vayu while Maya began to fight against fire-
god.

at Rattenpar Tera
ferent eqyrawa
TU GTRA TPT
we Boar Terao aA: YC

Hayagriva etc. other mighty Daitya and
Danavas began to fight against fire, sun, eight
vasus and urgesvara etc. gods,

=== PAGE 72 ===

Chapter 10

arf atafeatirenan
yaa aREPOTTEaT
anes 3 fasta fe gaausen
They faced each other with sharp
challenging statements, gave extra-tension to
their bows, shot a shower of arrows and began
to say- "Oh! Come! Come hurriedly. Why are
you so stopped?"
witg diechfirareera:
wafedtantet sein
were waa tat a
prea ASAT: I 0 It
Showering arrows and making attack with
acute weapons those people gave an extreme

flow to a fierce battle river whose flow was
analogous to that of Mandakini.

gigs dry 31
Wri ftresfargerat ait 4 gn
O Narada! The aggressive gods and
demons intended to cross the blood-stream

which was making healthy the Pisacas and
monsters and to win the three-worlds.

arate qaifor qegaant
waa Gem yrfagter:!
wae ACTA OTST
Bat Tet Ashe YT 4 Vl
(At that time) several musical instruments
were being played from both sides (i.e. gods
and demons), a crowd of hermits and siddhas
were observing that battle and the warriors
killed in war were being brought to heaven by
the nymphs.
ofa starrayat yerenedane targTyg aa
AAAISEATA UH
***

45

=== PAGE 73 ===

Chapter 10

45

Chapter 10
Victory of Andhaka

Fred Sarat
aa: Wa ae dent wae
AEA ARTA ATTA BU
Pulastya said- On having started the fear

aggravating battle for cowards, lord Indra
began to shoot arrows from his grand bow.

oreatste FEAT ATES AAT

yeaa faare prerafeorarra: i 8

Andhaka too reciprocated the attack on
Indra by shooting at him numerous arrows
having the shape of peacock wings.

mrad yao: wit: waar:

were eratrereryearahaii 311

Both of them injured each other by
shooting the arrows of bend nodes, wing
shaped and most acute.

Wa: HE: WTS: Hers wea ufo

fade deraore & cast wesw

arsrart & arate: yea: A ARE

ARTETA BOs TTS BATT

Aggrieved Indra then gave a circular
motion to thunderbolt and threw it at
Andhaka. Andhaka saw it and O Narada! he
also attacked with arrows, weapons and arms.
As the fire burns in ashes the trees, the
thunderbolt had burnt them all.

aalsfratrt ast egr aeraat az:

aareges ware afa aga & I

The mightiest Andhaka then jumped from
the chariot down without weapon in hand and
stood on ground when he saw thunderbolt
rapidly approaching him.

wantin we URaTARAT)

wer Fass Sierras AAAI ott

That thunderbolt first burnt into ashes the

charioteer, horse, flag and Kibara including
chariot and then accessed to Andhaka.

=== PAGE 74 ===

46

Vamana Purana

waned Sa yfratsseet TEN
UPSTATE ST ARTS: 11 CH
The mighty Andhaka blew his fist on
thunderbolt knocked it down and began to yell
with anger.

a wert deere area: araader
aad A ALF AAT DART AN ¢ tl
Indra shot a shower of arrows at him when

he saw him yelling in anger. He shattered
them all and then rushed to Satakratu (Indra).

SRI Ter He Tey ATT
BT I Tae feraTat WaT AN Roll
He slapped at the stomach of Airavata and

hit hard at his trunk by foot. He further gave a
sharp blow on his tusk and broke it down.

ae ae Uf MURATA

TARE Trae wartaat dT gH

And Andhaka then hurriedly hit at the side
of that elephant by his left fist. It was
intolerable and the giant elephant thus fell
down on the ground.

TRAIT HAY Vey: |
waftran aararere wferererrereraitg 82

Indra jumped from Airavata when it was
falling, took the thunderbolt in hand and
moved hurriedly to Amaravati.

WUE VSAM attach Wed

wearer ders: uray ferenfefir: 231

That demon-king used frequently his fist,
legs, hands and killed a considerable part of

the divine army when Indra showed his back
to the battle.

wat daeadt aug uftara fase
AUTATSIS SYST: YNTA VI

O great Brahmin! Yama then rushed toward
Prahlada to give a sharp blow with his danda
to which he was giving circular motion
rapidly.

marred auilitdad ware
ferocenforat: Grarearter STAN Bs it

When the chivalrous son of Hiranyakasipu
saw the son of Rabi (Yama) marching
forward, a shower of arrows flow from his
bow.

at arorgigagent qusaret area: |
wreafercenn wfeara aus eirenreAT TN Re It
Yamaraja destroyed that cluster of arrows
through his danda and threw them with full
might on Prahlada.
7B arquanrera enter faa:
Were SreM TERY TATA Rot
Having discharged from the hand of Yama,
that danda began luminating in flames like
Kalagni. It appeared as if the time for
destruction of three-world has come.
araearararart gus eBret: Yat:
wraraiat ga: He weretsa aes fen cit
The Daityas began crying when they saw

Kaladanda forwarding- "Alas! Prahlada is
now killed by Yamaraja."

aarenbermreod feromergatsea: |
Stare tr dy afer feae ats geen: gett

Having attracted to their cries, Andhaka
cooled them by saying- "Don't be afraid. What
is the existence of this meanest god till I am
living."

seaqeen aed Srna a
WME UV GUS FAT AeA ANN Vol

O Narada! He rushed with these words and

caught that danda with the left hand smilingly.

ATA Aal STMT ATS: |
Set @ WeMrs Bar wah Ara|:11 2 gi

Andhaka then gave it a circular motion and
cried in anger so loud as if clouds during rainy
season thundered.

werd Tart aE eusraReTtT fe
Aas SGEHITSATATT: 11 2 il

=== PAGE 75 ===

Chapter 10

47

When the commanders in Daitya and
Danavas' army saw Prahlada defended by
Andhaka, they cheered loud and tendered
gratitude for him.

wrred werens SET ATGTA FA

Brae gat Wear arrears 23

O hermit! When Yama, the son of Sirya
saw Andhaka has gripped the Mahadanda and
giving in circular motion; he immediately
vanished from there assuming it intolerable
and acute to bear.

orate here weratsta HET
RAAT AAT TAT MATT VSI
O great hermit! When Yama so vanished,

mighty Prahlada began to kill the divine army
all around,

wen: fryarcedt ager ashlerga

TAT SATA ARITA AG

dutdadeadt: aiefiabtinin

were Tea Yat: BUTT VEU

When Varuna riding on Sisumara (sansa)
had fastened the demons with Pasa and began
to give hard blows from his mace, Virocana
immediately appeared there to face him. He
gave hard blows with his tomaras, saktis,
arrows, mudgaras, kanapa and spears on
Varuna.

aret WeaTseaer Urahara Tee

afager aerery ugthent acti Von

Varuna rushed at him, hit him hard with his
mace, knocked him down and gripped his
elephant by Pasa (strings).

APTS UH AT SAR:

arent a ANAT HEY GE ATEN VCH

Virocana split in several pieces those pasas.
O Narada! He caught the loin of Varuna in a
hard grip.

Tat exit @ ggrai wfeata waisera:1

Wee SAAT Ue Tare SleTHATTN BVM

The elephant imperishable then blew its
teeth and knocked down Varuna on ground.
He then crushed him with his chariot under its
huge feet.

a meant dearer yang: faferigary
rarer arearara antit: arerarcet: 3 ott
Having seen Varuna so crushed, the moon

god rushed there and shot arrows on the
elephant.

eg: wenetiaen 3 eu

The elephant suffered severe pain but was
not afraid of crushing Varuna under its feet.
His feet were churning Varuna's body
barbarously.

BFE set IS
Waal re TS wath
weg aft ae: Tayi
TSR ACTET FHTARTATI 3 BU
Tenacity WHT Yes
eee aa quate
sere faara ferttert fe
apa G abregareq 3 an

O great hermit! Chivalrous Varuna gripped
tightly both feet of the elephant, lifted his
head and body by taking support from his
hands and feet, gripped the elephant's tail,
fastened Virocana with the serpent and threw
him along with the elephant, the chariot and
charioteer up into the sky.

fart weer fatty
aga yf ware

ag waasioeetafir
Ye Geeta areato gw

As Bhaskara once collapsed the city
consisting of multi-storeyed _ buildings,
apparatus, gates and palaces pertaining to

=== PAGE 76 ===

48

Sukesi, the elephant thrown by Varuna fell
with a heavy thud on the ground.

at Hele: WE: WITT:
anerafefast Pega
aa: TaREanAT fe
Rh g dehrragea 34

Varuna then rushed to slaughter other
Daityas with mace and Pasa in his hand.
Daityas began to cry in pain as loud as the
clouds thunder.

Bret Baise eects att
fatert aradart:t
were & Rae
THT ARTA 3G tl
"Oh! the chivalrous Virocana is being
thrashed by Varuna. O Prahlada! Come with

Jambha, Kujambha etc. and Andhaka and
ensure his defence.

BR AE IAAT:
equine ;
uray ageat rea Pref
BAT TEATS HEA: BON

Oh! the warrior Varuna was thrashing
Virocana by blows from mace after fastening
him in Pasa so barbarously as Indra
slaughtered the animal in horse sacrifice
(Asvamedha).

rasa yreg fafa: aaitfct

weer fefsarrea:|
araerteatia eet
BOT Weg Safert BATMAN 3 C1

Having heard the grievous call from
Daityas, Jambha etc. prominent Daityas
rushed so fast towards Varuna as the insects
tush to the flames.

arrrard were 2a:
mretfaqeged feracer ure
Tet AACUTA WaT
SRA ASAT ATT 3 8 It

Vamana Purana

When Varuna saw such a composite attack
from the Daityas, he left Virocana,
immediately spread Pasa in its full length,
gave a circular motion to mace and tured
towards Jambha etc. enemies.

west a urea we Freer
art aerrprifra

Wer Ft AAT Fat
FATA Act TF FEAT ¥ oll

He knocked down Jambha by fastening him
with Pasa, Tara demon by slapping, Vrtrasura
by kick, Kujambha and Bala demons by hard
hit through boxing.

Feafgar Saetor gear:

wormafay faqeeren:|
aalsea: weafedseytar-

FUE She HOTS ¥ UU

The daityas so knocked down by Varuna
dropped down their weapons and ran away
hither and thither. Andhaka then immediately
appeared there to face Varuna.

aaTeT TAA ST
UR agar aos YTIT
a wemnfaea Tet eye
fata ter: 8 WTA HI

Varuna tied that demon king in Pasa and
blew his mace on his body. The demon
snatched these weapons and threw them on
Varuna.

aad Water Urgt

Tat a aerator
fade arecrat Fart
watsarent Saaet AACN YH

Having seen Pasa and mace forwarding,
Varuna (Baksayani's son) immediately entered
into the sea. Andhaka then started killing the
Deva army.

wat GATT: GGes
eale Va: |

=== PAGE 77 ===

Chapter 10

49

mrarertaterant
wah werengeaatt: set

The. fire blazed by wind then started
burning the demon army into ashes. The
demon architect (Visvakarma) chivalrous
Maya then appeared before him.

waren We aT
wiles afg: wat BSH
PRAT He MATT BTS
PareT FTE TCTATSTN wu It
O great hermit! When the fire god saw
Maya forwarding with Sambara, he joined
with the wind god, hit hard by Sakti at the
throat of Sambara and gripped them forcibly.

Were a eprarearcay ferent
O fireat =aacgfereary
Wa: WaeTe a wreaisft
BUSTA TAHT WETTIG

As the shield of Maya was penetrated, his
injured body fell down on the ground on
account of the severe blow from Sakti.
Sambara's throat too began burning.

7 ent fefiatsirtsa
Yai tert era
Foenfirrat fatter ada
Tt: areft Feast vol

That demon began weeping so loudly as the
intoxicated elephant trumpets in pain when
attacked by a lion. This was due to burning
from fire so erupted.

a yearend a rary
dart: mafarage:1
am: fa farang at ye
fardt Wa: prea tt
Having heard that piteous cry, Andhaka

filled with anger said- "Aha! What is it? Who
has defeated Maya and Sambara in battle?

walsgacemer fete
MEER Ve FATT

Tag UN T WaT
garert arefag wrt se

The demon warriors then reported- "The
fire is burning him, Rescue him immediately.
Nobody other than you can prevent the fire in
the battle.

oe 8 teehintferg
fervrentrerrey wet
sera Arreafis gate
erates fre qafeny ot
O great hermit! As soon as the report was
over, Andhaka picked up Parigha and rushed

towards the fire ordering him to stop, stop
now.

sR qelsoreTeAT
‘Refarcatet fe tem
seed wat a fafaferte
TASH: WAHATTATEN & RL
Avyayatma fire immediately lifted that
daitya up and then dashed down forcibly
when it heard the challenge from Andhaka.
By then Andhaka accessed to the fire.
wanna gare fe
ager ag
arredist: aftqer weart
Pasa a rafeas MATa 4 UI
He gave a sharp blow on the head of fire
with a weapon. The fire so injured, then left
Sambara and rushed immediately towards
Andhaka.
aaraerd fteot eye:
aaTe yet aerserents fet
a mnfedtafefaseartot
sreTeng ara TOASTER: 114 31

Andhaka again hit hard with Parigha on the
head of fire. The fire god could not tolerate

=== PAGE 78 ===

50

such a sharp blow one after another; was
badly frightened and ran away from the battle-
field.

TASTRT ATTA,
Tara ATT
ARASH BA Wee
WTS PTATTOMASTT Ny 1
Andhaka, the most chivalrous demon, then
gave sharp blows from his arrows to the wind,
moon, sun, Sadhya, Rudra, Asvinikumaras,
Vasus and giant serpents. They all could not
stand there and departed from the battle-field.
adt fafa
ARTS TAY PAT ATATATTAT 4
Thus, Andhaka subjugated the entire armies
of Indra, Rudra, Yama, Soma etc., praised by
the danavas and then descended onto the
earth.
rae Aft ALATA
PN AY WA TU A
RBI CC HEC ILIEE
WATT UCT PATS & 1
He then subjugated all kings, imposed taxes
on them, enslaved the entire movable and

immovable world and lastly, entered into the
nether world and accessed to his Asmaka city.

va farenta verge
wrerdfererenfagea:|
werent: aftercoret
WATT THAT: 4 9

In order to render services to Andhaka, then
great king to Danava, Gandharvas including
nymphs, Vidyadharas and group of Siddhas
came down to the nether world and began
residing there.

fa starrrgaat yoreadany srerenferray ATT
BRAS: Rott

Vamana Purana

=== PAGE 79 ===

50

Vamana Purana

Chapter 11
Description of Puskara Dvipa
ANG Jara
waaam She Gag TTATT
wale yfar qaor wareeat fase en
Narada said- "You had explained the
collapsed city of Sukesi from sky to the earth

which was done by Sirya. Please, tell us when
and where that incident happened?

gavift a aaret agree:
ferme cnfetat qrarerenrereareentar FEU 2H

"Who was Sukesi? Who had given him that
city and why did Bhaskara clash it down on
the earth?

Foret sara

sqoparatedt yar aertat yy

ae gat wen yd wera WENA BN

Pulastya said- O innocent hermit! I am
going to tell this most ancient episode as I
heard it from lord Brahma. Please, listen to it
carefully.

anitfargrercatefeggensttter faega:1
We Yat Gods: Garren vi
There was a famous demon king called

Vidyutkesi. He was blessed with a meritorious
son Sukesi.

Wer YER: YeHrerranfe aq
WRT Tyee ATATTETN & U1
Lord Siva was pleased with him and
rendered him a mobile city in the sky and also
made him unconquerable and invulnerable by
the enemies.
a ante gtr at TERT ITT
YW Frama: arg wer eee Fert: g 0
He began to live happily abidingly religion
with demons on receipt of that mobile city in
the space.

W welfendstws WT SAAT: |
Tag Sq aaUTT snferATETAPTI 911

=== PAGE 80 ===

Chapter 11

51

Once he visited Magadharanya and saw
there asramas of hermits extremely devoted to
god.

edi cet apr wforaenfirarer a
weqare maitaratparerarerg: 1c

He did salute to them, seated there and said-

vpfresifa saa: derdisa efe faa:
aeeVadt 8 7 ded arrareeq eH
Sukesi said- "I am not passing any order but
went to make some enquiries on some points
still not clear to me. Please, give me an
appropriate explanation.

faftaada: wt cits fageg fester:

Bet Waa ey Sarat Yar yout

O gréat Dvijas! What is welfare
(benevolent) in this mortal and that immortal
world? How does a man deserve honour

among gentlemen and how can he attain to
pleasure?

Yeres sare
vet geniererert Frere weenie:
wrgfagye Seilseifirg cites wet a gen

Pulastya said- "Those great hermits first did
introspection and then replied on the enquiry
so made by Sukesi.”

waa Sy:
oat SATMTTST TAP TA
afeg Seat weg se UAT ATTA RV
The hermits said- "O demon king! O
warrior! We now say about the everlasting

and benevolent thing in this material and that
immaterial world. Please, listen to it.

St aot: We ae se a aUTeTaT
afer Ary WA YET WAT yy

O demon! Religion is the welfare for both
the material and metaphysical worlds. The
man resorted to religion deserves honour
among gentlemen and attains peace too.

ferent weget: farnrecorafena:|

wnfarer 3 deft arenegq agUTATAN es 11

Sukesi said- "What is the characteristic of
religion? What are the noble deeds and
conduct inherent therein, resorting to which
the gods etc., never feel the cruel touch of
sorrows. Kindly describe the same.

Ra Sq:

Rar weal end: ear agnfze: free:

erearraatard faye sft gft:u ett

The hermits said- "The supreme religion of
gods is to perform yajfia etc. deeds,
perseverance, to acquire knowledge on Vedas

and keep themselves engross in the worship of
lord Visnu.

dant aged weed gautena:!

Sart ferent eeafereeTEAT 8G Il

The religion of daityas is to acquire
physical stamina, jealousy, war craft,

knowledge on ethics and devotion to god
Siva.

fagrigfedt adf dmfataqaen

ret Taker atta SF TAT Yet

It is the religion of Siddhas that they do
practise Yoga study on the Vedas, science on
Brahma and a firm devotion to Visnu and
Siva.

sepe He Ferareag Aten

arearat fern aftenferat enh seat gen

The religion of Gandharva is to perform
worship, to acquire knowledge on dance and
music and undeviated devotion for goddess
Sarasvati.

faenenfiaraget farart dhe aft

fart eaise varai afata an ee

The religion of Vidyadharas is to acquire
unique learning, science, strong inspiration for
mind application and devotion for Bhavani.

=== PAGE 81 ===

52

mredfaenatecd afaattt ae fer

aiyred waferearat at: deyer: WM: Voll

The religion of eunuchs is to acquire
knowledge on Gandharva Vidya, strong
devotion to god sun and expertise in all crafts.

vertrntted armaretrgen

ada arreanited aise tga: BA elt

The religion of ancestors is to observe
celibacy, egolessness, strong attachment with
practice on Yoga and frequent touring world-
wide.

Ferd Wel Ua Wal A aw Tera!

Fram enlafererarat ent: wear 2211

O monster! The religion of hermits is to
observe celibacy, balance food-habits, Japa,
conscience and to acquire knowledge on
religion regularly.

arerh gered a ert aerate al

NOTA TAS HEATATATTA: It 2 3 1

fratzaed vitt a uiged aferegal

Vigt arent Feat aisd ara: BAU VU

The religion of human beings is to do
perseverance, celibacy, donation, yajfia,
generosity, attachment for hard labour,
kindness, non-violence, forgiveness, control

on senses, purity, benevolence and devotion
for Visnu, Sankara, Bhaskara and the goddess.

erfauet Aine aa: IgA
agarenyieard eatse yerenferfan 241

The religion of Guhyakas is to acquire
wealth in abundance, to enjoy, to do
perseverance, worship of god Sankara,
egotism and cowardice.

wanranferd Uren a org: |

arate aftaisd Tera: BAAN

The religion of monsters is to do
intercourse with other's wife, greed for other's

money, to do perseverance and worship of
god Siva.

Vamana Purana

afacermnsyt vicetacacrm
frgrenardt ert: wat enfETETAT Bot
The religion of Pisacas is to live without
discretion, in ignorance, impurity, falsehood
and temptation for flesh diet.

aret grevtdarearg emer tara
Teron afer: Yoo geste AMAT gS I

O monster! These are the twelve yonis.
Pitamaha Brahma has described their twelve
sacred and supreme position deserving
religions.

wafecerat & eat: YPaa BERETA: |

aa & aa aha aA 2A

Sukesi said- Again highlight the religion of
mankind out of the twelve everlasting and
immortal religions.
RIA HT:

squpea ayaa aafeg exoreratt

2 aaa wats at gag wTAUg ot

The hermits said- O monster! Listen to the
religions of men etc. residing in the seven
continents of this earth.

ahr wars vareratferea

aeitahe wet fe aiftaret BATT 3 aU

This earth extended as much as fifty crore
yojana has existed on the water as a boat on
the river.

meataht a fag gen ves
epfttenrenrcacye ANTATATA AAAI 3 VI
O gentleman! Lord Brahma has established

a hypotenuse shaped highest mountain (the
king of mountain) above it.

a ani Foy quai wat tangieery,
warn sheretantt qretatian TORT: 113 3
Lord Brahma then created the holy subject

thereupon and everywhere. Thus, the places
called islands were also created.

=== PAGE 82 ===

Chapter 11

wa ea ot Grrererggrahate gay
aevel Sarat aw avers erent 3x1

Jambidvipa at the middle of earth was then
created. Its expanse is said to be about one
lakh yojana.

wat wea: erat area faut: fer:
arearfis fagqor: wera arene: afer: 113 411

There is a gigantic ocean, just double the
measurement of the earth around the land so
created. There exists an island called Salmali
just double in expanse than this great ocean.

wafeayrates arent acraraf:
faq: wrenferettt fagutiser wera: 3&1
There is an ocean containing care-juice

outside that island. Its measurement is just
double that of Salmali.

Boe egos sera feo: se:

wale fequeta qerdtararatfta:11 3.00

The ocean containing liquor is double in
expanse than it and its double in measurement
is an island called KuSadvipa. The ocean

containing ghee is double in measurement
than it.

yrange fag: sires: aarsirater Frere
attsfar fagqor: stem: aR aferefra: 1g cH
O monster! Kraufica-dvipa is double in

measurement than Ghrtasagara and Dadhi
ocean is double than it.

Agata: wren: wrergenferert:|

faqu: fad aa seragt eft:

Ta faqon: ad weermaferT: 1330
Sakadvipa is just double than Dadhi-sagara.

Further, Ksirasagara is double than Sakadvipa
on which Sri Hari is existed.

mrarftniea: areal cay Aaft: yar:
Sent wares wer eTfrAfarTAT: 1 ¥ ont

O demon king! The expanse from
Jambidvipa to Ksirasagara is thus measured
to be about forty crore ninety lakh fire yojana.

53

wagner areraftafercd:|

RSMAS ATONE TTRTET TTT QU

earanisd aarra wetefe:1

PATUSHAST MHTAPGAATA 2

O monster! There fall then Puskara-dvipa
and an ocean of drinking water. Puskara-dvipa
is measured about four crore fifty two lakh
yojana. Then there falls a sea of the same
measurement. Its expanse about one lakh
yojana is filled by Andakataha from four
sides,

wa drafeert aa yore: yaa fare:
migwarreda ae super wa PreTATH 3
wanfeg aa ak & aah ware:
wrearay 7 teafta Green aera ¥ x

Thus, these seven continents are consisting
of separate religious and activities (deeds). O
monster! We here with describe them. Listen
to it carefully. O Brave, the Sandtana Purusa
who resides in the continents falling from
Plaksa to Saka has no provision of era (yuga).

edt Saentat erat fer sated:

Ber WTR Freer HATTA 4 I

O chivalrous! They enjoy like gods. Their
religion is called divine religion. It is said that

there takes place Pralaya (devastation) when a
Kalpa is over.

3 ort: Gerany at dee

terete ent pnt & ferries we tt

The people living in Puskara-dvipa having
a dreadful look, are resorted to the Paisacika

religion. They meet to destruction when a
Karma is over.

yatereara
feared genratt wat: wqaret:|
geet: vierfedt ae: antag vei

Sukesi said- Why have you described
Puskara-dvipa as dreadful, impure, gross and
meeting to destruction when a Karma is over?

=== PAGE 83 ===

54

mT Sg:
afenfireret gt aeat: aha ereoT:1
tharerentt Og: gett Grevasusen
The hermits said- "O monster! Raurava etc.

dreadful hells have existed in that island. This
is the reason why it looks dreadful.

fararetentt defor teeter aaert:1
ferarniin anfor at a ty RTT Ye

Sukesi said- O ascetics! How many are
those dreadful hells? How much is there
route? How do they look like?

maa Fg:
STS TARAS WaTOt Trarat eM
aeat tarda ten at Aalagfa: yon
The hermits said- O demon king! Listen to
the characteristics and expanse of all those

Raurava etc. hells. They are twenty one in
number.

2 wee Seen safengrfer:!
thet ae ee: sere: fata gn
The first hell is called Raurava. It is two
thousand yojana in expanse and there blazes
fire everywhere.
waa aftreretefeantien
farted faqqorererreritta eae 2H
The second hell called Maharaurava is just
double in measurement than it. Its land is
made up of burning copper. Fire is ignited
every time beneath the surface.

aaiste farqearerentiral Ata: Bt:
sreenfinacay aT Ugal fer: Wey Bn
Tamistra hell is just double in expanse than

it. Andhatamistra is double than T4mistra in
expanse. It is the fourth in the series.

ag arergata vara: ufeitaa
sofas wer WS Melt A AAG SI

Vamana Purana

The fifth in the series is the hell called
Kalacakra. Apratistha is the sixth and
Ghatiyantra is seventh in this series of hells.

afarrat aracgenter fraafe:1

Serra ued ERT 4 GI

The eighth hell called Asi-patra forest is
seventy two thousand yojana in expanse.

Fad aagest a set Hemeater:!
RUA: AAT HY GI
The ninth is Taptakumbha, Kitasdlamali;

the tenth, Karapatra eleventh = and
Svanabhojana is the twelfth hell in this series.

weet cteftoss aceafaeet em
St great aT aaISaM first
ANSBIARTA weaT aT SercUHt AMSA wil

There fall thereafter Sandarhga, Lohapinda,
Karambhasikataé, dreadful alkali river,
Krmibhojana and the eighteenth hell is called
Vaitarani river respectively.

emsey: yitforayenitrt:

aqrrrartt Faferaes asec:
‘agieott are went art
Sremretae AeeRT: BSAA 4 C1
Then there fall Sonitapayabhojana,
Ksuragradhara, Nisita, Cakraka and

SarnSosana hells. These are endless hells. O
Sukesi! Thus, description on these hells has
been made before you.
ofa start yormrredane Yenttraatt
TESTE RASTA: RU

=== PAGE 84 ===

54

Vamana Purana

Chapter 12
Description of fruits of Karman

gaterearet
anon awarded tester & aery)

Urged fatrar: wt algect AAI gH

Sukesi said- O Brahmins! Please, tell that
how the people fall and on account of what
kind of deeds they perform? I am curious to
listen to it all from you.

=== PAGE 85 ===

Chapter 12

a SY:
anton aa ae ait wrerencencl
eateries AeA SUES AN ZI

The hermits said- O  Salakatarhkata
(monster)! Listen to the deeds performed by
the people that lead them to fall in these hells.

Jadefeaiat Ae wat FM
& yuttfrernatarteretar afi 3n
Tehran & a wafer a
aghanar & @ ay & froaft fxn

The people doing continuous criticism of
the Veda, gods and Dvijatis, showing
dishonour to the practical exercise of the
essence contemplated in the Purana and
History, critics to their teachers, the people
putting hurdles on yajfia and the sinners who
resist the donor from falling into those hells.

qeenhiatedenfigeatearge:
aererrenaster gait Aetserdtfiier: 1 tt
SUH TA UT SEIT ASAT: |
UAT Were F feet aaferats ei

The mean people who create mutual
discrimination between friends, couple,
siblings, devotees, father and son, priest and
their clients as also who promise to first give
their daughters to a man but thereafter commit
breach of trust by solemnising their marriage
with other men are split into two parts by saw
(Karapatra) by the executives of Yama.

TeasreRreeier eT: |

TIRE: Beef: oN

The people putting others in pain, theft
scandal and usira (khasa), snatcher of wings

made fans (cavara) fall in Karambhasikata
hell.

Frafarisentt yet are Sasa tye
a fam: Goat youtengue: Giaasc

The fools invited to Sraddha for Pitr but eat
other places are split into two parts of their
bodies by the predator birds of large bodies
through their sharp beak.

55

waifor ag agai qeaniarterae
weattaht gear qusfersa afer: <u
The man who blows sharply on the heart of
gentlemen by his harsh words, several birds
with their sharp beaks sit on his body and
peck hard white piercing the flesh therefrom.

a: aft a hyet aeprerafa: |

aque frerrataset area: Rot

The man who behaves like an animal with
the gentlemen, his tongue is pierced by the

crows having beaks like a thunderbolt and
sharp nails.

fagagyent a asagi age:
wafer yafauas canted wetyar: 1 VM
The people showing disobedience to their
parents and teachers are drowned reverse (i.e.
legs up while head downside) in Apratistha
hell filled with urine, night-soil, pus etc.

Ranfafayay yA Tag

amay ase aefiatrngg 2

gergaqarata yard ae si

geltqeas arent qqerrat firfeferrat: 1 ea

The mean people who eat by keeping
hungry the gods, guests, other creatures,
slaves, beggars, child, parents and the fire get
gigantic mountain-like body but middle like a
narrow mouth, starve and receive only the
contaminated blood with pus as food to
survive.

Tangequfaeri fad visa a

fageitort Tarts aah F aa an est

O demon king! The people who distribute
food with partiality to the persons seated in a

row for a meal, fall into the hell called
Vidbhojana.

Uenardnereay Upeenfert AT:
arefarer gare 3 ara verter Bh II

The people who do not share their food
with a partner to any journey even while he is

=== PAGE 86 ===

Vamana Purana

56
desirous, fall into the hell called wUeaHATUMaMayTTATTSTL
Slesmabhojana.

arareorsa: wer spefeaeer aT: |
farera fe aeretat aaa Farah 2 11

O monster! The hands that touch a cow,
Brahmin and fire at the state when impurity
stuck to them, are forcibly thrown into the
hot-pitcher.

igure gan defeade arr!

Fat Fanat afer aafasat: 1 gon

The eyes that look at the sun, moon and
constellation in the state when the body is
anyway impure, are burnt by Yama's
executives by putting fire in them.

ferraratsa weet Saat sare frat eraT

wrrat yeat gare: Wee: wet FA ge

wale Frrdciiedtamentat:1

farera ea a eengafcarfer: een

The feet of those people are tied with the
burning (hot) iron bar and thrown into
Raurava hell, where they burn up to the
thighs, who have touched a friend's wife,
mother, elder brother, father, sister, daughter,
teacher and the old age people.

ured Heras gar yet St:

Ranrakysretat: Hert TAS TAT: Io

Those who eat sweet meat (payasa), Krgara
and meat voluntarily without purpose lying

there for offering it to gods, receive forcibly a
burning rod in their mouth in the hell.

yecatgoniat Sart a area:
Frastret ger deg urarrafiegeaargn 2 eH
at eiener: ater afgant: GA: yA
seaty Fraara echrorer ferent: 2 211

Hot iron nails are hammered frequently into
the ears of mean people who listen to wrong
things about their teacher, gods, Brahmins and
the Vedas. It is done by the executives of
Dharmaraja.

anitqreria vgarn feetaata an 23u
aa facruat wt Sea: fart yA
anti: qiteonfiz: qiteinfarat: nae

The skin of the body is decorticated by
using sharp knives in spite of cries made by
mean people who destroy Prapa, temple,
garden, Brahmin's home, convent, conference,
well, ‘pond and flower garden. All this is done
cruelly by Yama's servants.

Trareorsate a & fe Ref ara: |
Fat Teeereafir fatrgraha aera: 1 Ve Ht

The people who discharge urine and night-
soil at the presence of a cow, Brahmin, sun
and fire receive so severe a punishment that
the cows will enjoy the flesh of their intestine
by extracting it through the anus out.

ator weg ufteaafe wa:

aymacmteagerinteerr
ghia dat anit a aati roman equ

The man who eats alone leaving his poor
son, servant and wife including siblings who
starve from thrown into the hell called
Svabhojana.

wreornd & eaafet Fa aera:

vata aants & aerarg ferat:n Von

The people who lift up the protection cover
from the man sheltered and a guard who

watches over a prison are punished severely
and thrown into Yantra-pida hell.

aerate fe famdhanaanty wf:

a tert frevai 2 gieraste a viene

The sinners causing pain to Brahmins by
nuisance committed are ground on the
boulders and the fire sucks their bodies until
these turn into ashes.

sarerverfior: urat aeart Frrdefir
QAM: YSRATCATET: TT BATAAN SH

The people misappropriating the trust fund
are tied with hot iron bars, are left for starving

=== PAGE 87 ===

Chapter 12

57

and without water to drink. Then they are
thrown into VrScikaSana hell.

uddgfart: war: wearer 2
 afeaat germrenfergat a reac 3 oll
The sinners doing coition on auspicious

days and who do intercourse with others' wife
have to embrace Salmali with hot nails.

sorerrerma: area Seth feet:
Rarmercat Bar a Fyre fercat seq 3 vl
The dvijas and their teachers have to bear a
burden of boulders who do study from

preceptors but offer them a seat lower than
their own.

Wayerrgientir degen anfifin
Bere @ ferogy get gaya 3 a

The rudes discharging urine, phlegm and
night-soil on water are thrown in Vinmitra
hell filled with the stench night-soil and pus.

sarasota afr qf ara:
ween sarah 8 eairens anferet: 13 30
The fools who eat themselves the food
offered for guests on the occasion of sraddha

have to eat the flesh of each other after death
and on rebirth.

aeafaqeanit arenfiateadta a1

fafeygren: Tt Wert Tafagt Nw

Those persons are thrown down from the
peak of mountain who abandon the Vedas,
fire, teacher, wife, father and mother.

yaar & a aanfaeiraes hi
RVR Fea STAT: 1 3

The people who accept food offered on the
occasions of sraddha by the person married to
a widow, involved in coition with an
unmarried girl and by the children so born are
compelled to eat insects and ants.

eUSTeTETATETS HY where ateroTTA
ART AMAT WRAP Bes g

The priests and their clients receiving
Daksina from Candala and Antyajas have to

be born as heavy insects living in caves in
their re-birth.

yaniengrh yeradaratasitear:

faert gant 3 a Gr 3H

O monster! The sneaking and bribe
accepting rudes are thrown into the hell called
Vrkabhaksa.

wale & weet: YOM PETIT: |

wen Tyfirgahe Arettereremer B13 21
Waa fast 8 a thy faefeoreeM
‘Wrafaefaon & a Sefeseferoreem 3 et
qearareaytens Freeing:
Rearfarer & aX wets Fat: uso

The people committing loot of gold,
murderer of Brahmin, drunkard, cohabiting
with teacher's wife, snatcher of cow and the
land, torturers to women and children, vendor
of soma and Veda, diplomat, untidy, non-
abiding by routine and dvijas who submit
forged evidence have to dwell in the hell
called Maharaurava.

aprataeentir arama fer:
meee arfaaaay Ta: w aI
mada acted TG At: TET
wordt fe warat afte gent FNS eH
The above-said sinners have to live ten
thousand years in each hell known as
Tamistra, Andhatamistra,  Asipatravana,

Ghatiyantra and Taptakumbha one after
another in a systematic manner.

& Ba vee det thareretatfeat::

a ad wag: wher: Baer carer wan

The people ungrateful and condemned by
the public are thrown by turns in all dreadful
Raurava hells, about which I have already told
you.

BAN ATT Waal VATEAT

wen firtorafe stferafs:1
BNSSAIt wat Yaytt

Ben watt feranr ya: |

=== PAGE 88 ===

58

Vamana Purana

Hero wats eT
Ba YAY AST WETS
As Janardana in gods, the Himalaya in
mountains, Sudargana in weapons, Garuda in
birds, Anantanaga in serpents and earth in all
beings is supreme.
aq Wg Teg wet
qofqaay eer:
aay aaEgT a
daly ager yaw 4
As the Ganges in rivers, lotus in water born
flowers, Siva's devotee in daityas,
Kurujangala in regions and Prthiidaka in holy
place is supreme.
weg dated wat
wag quay fe eH ae
aay sarees fae:
art aor enifafafenargu se 1
As uttaramanasa in reservoirs, Nandana in
holy forests, abode of Brahma in lokas, Satya
property in religious deeds.
BSA: TeX: EAT
Wat an waytaat afta:
atest erat:
gfrcte aafeerragn sion
Asvamedha in yajfia, son in things worth
touching, Agastya in ascetics and the Veda in
Agama scriptures.
yet gouty ata ae
Teaiyafincate afeargi
Tq: Bi watt ada
faety ayit fagig araa:nsei
As Matsya Purana among the Puranas, code
laid down by Svayambhi among codes,
Manusmrti among smrtis, Amavasy4 among
tithi and donation made on Visuvas (rotation
of Aries and Libra) among other donations is
greatest.

ufeart a wats oh

way aH aerfeReT)
TAT TATA

aay arafeahag Tate

And as the sun in ascetics, moon in
constellations, ocean in reservoirs, you in
demon kings and Nagapaé in the pasas making
inactive is supreme.

arag yifaféuey fas
gee ther ger yrs:
yey ard ary aarsit
arty TUssaftUTt JET 4 ot
And as Sali in paddys, Brahmin in human
beings, cow in cattle, lion in wild animal, Jatt
in flowers, Kajficl in cities, Rambha in women
and household in 4sramas' is supreme.

grerci deat Ty
aay aay a wereeT:!
aefeetrat Were a WAT Gg
WAY He: Va Bart
aaferersitot grorereaeg
day ge vat wa
erulferd wraeat fe Sar IH
As KuSasthalf in Puris, Madhyadega in all
countries, mango in fruits, Asoka in buds and
Pathyé in all herbs is supreme. O monster! As
Kanda in roots, constipation in disease, milk

in white things and garments in cotton is
supreme.

wer FSM af
fearrget J wT
wreag yer wafe are
Tay Wet craut way gH
wey Met aferty wat
ateeeaa FT RATT: |
weregea Bat aes
BM ST Aaa AAT 4 SII

=== PAGE 89 ===

Chapter 13

Expertise in mathematics, Indrajala in
science, Kacamaci in vegetables, salt in
essences (rasas), tala in tall things, Pampa in
lotus reservoirs, bear in vanankasa, banyan in
trees and Mahadeva among scholars are
supreme. (And) O monster! As-

aor aati feracger fe
aasstri after atten
wer qarorate sterarut-
waa waafe g:3ey
iy tag Fremeter
aar aat Sarai WAT G GL

uniterat wales qe:

way Tray Frees
werrtrenteg Frepfaté

fade tara g quanti:
7 frephentt grey:

Wechd arprerdiseranfefir: 14 gu

Parvati in chaste women, Kapila in cows,
blue bull in bulls and Vaitarani is supreme
among all dreadful, difficult and intolerable
hells, the ungrateful is the most heinous sinner
among all other sinners. The sins like the
murder of a Brahmin and cow can be absolved
when the regrettal prescribed is observed but
the sin of destroying what is created by a
friend (gentleman) cannot be absolved even if
the regrettal observed for as many as several
crore years (viz. ungrateful man is deed the
most heinous miscreant and such crime is
uncompoundable).

fa starragent yerrradiane ariferarant are
BIETNSEATT HVA

59

=== PAGE 90 ===

Chapter 13

59

Chapter 13
Description of Bhuvana-kosa
gareara
wataefeat are yencatrafeata:
area wet ary eT: 1 gn

Sukesi said- O hermits! You have described
the gross painful location of Puskaradvipa.
Kindly, tell us now about Jambidvipa.

ad Sy:

Wages tear ae Fyre

wag gfereitol certian 2H

The hermits replied- "Listen to the details
about Jambiidvipa from us. That most
extended island is divided into nine parts and

it renders the man with emancipation and
heavenly abode."

we faorgat aaf aga: yddtsga:1

ydafarordt auf feces 311

O demon king- Ilavrta varsa has existed in
its middle, Bhadragva varsa at the east and
Hiranya varsa has existed at its north-east
direction.

sara efrat sheet efteferorafaren
Ufa Squares wer: VTA ¥

It is said that Kinnara varsa has existed at
its eastern-south, Bharata varsa at south and
Hari varsa at its southern-west direction.

sito Hildd: Hergqarmanga:|
yaguadt tat ad: faagee: BAG
Ketumala varsa has existed at the west,

Ramyaka varsa at western-north and Kuru

varsa covered by kalpavrksa at its north
direction,

quar ten Tage aul: aera!

serqarendarst at arta areTq & 1

a tafe Qureren aa equa 7 al

aati carafeet fate: Game wae: 911

fawedat 4 deafea Tree: |

aeerared af verght Free ct

O Salakatarhkata (monster)! These nine are

the holy and attractive varsa. Besides Bharata
varsa there is no fear of death and old age as
also yugavastha in all the eight vargas.
Success pouring with pleasure in abundance
and that too without efforts is achieved there.
There is no discrimination as best, medium

=== PAGE 91 ===

60

Vamana Purana

and mean (or uttama, madhyama and adham)
and reversion anyway. O monster! There are
nine isles in this Bharata varga. All these isles
are surrounded by oceans and mutually
inaccessible.

arrrafe: We sere WATT

Sse: HerSoreaTNT maT <1
amagia: werent Faget areoraat

aa y raat su: WPTTgA: I Roll
pares: viverra getse seo:

The names given to these nine isles are-
Indradvipa, Kaseruman, Tamravarna,
Gabhastiman, Nagadvipa, Kataha, Sirnhala
and Varuna. The ninth dvipa known as
Kumara is surrounded by the sea and extended
from south to north side.

we fererer ey VE TET: BTN ga

are afer ae Geena aT

O warrior! Kirata live at the east, Yavana at
the west, Andhra at south and Turuska people
live at the northern border of this Bharata
varsa.

mreon: eater ayer: BRANT: RTH
sergqeativand: aif: gear:

Rat dorareres Uf: anrifieftera e301
vantventonfae que unt ata at

In the interior of this island, there live the
Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras.
All of them are having purity through the
activities like yajiia, war, commerce etc. Their
behaviour, attainment of material and
metaphysical success and evil as also good
take place through these activities.

WER He: Ger: YfeargarTet: VI

frag uftare wart qereda:|

There are seven prominent mountains in
total in this varsa. These are- Mahendra,
Malaya, Sahya, Sutkiman, Rksa, Vindhya and
Pariyatra.'

1. This is the western portion of the modern
Vindhya Range, west of Bhopal, as appears from

ASL MAAR YT TATA HL RG I
frremttapfaon ven frgen: raat
There are other mountains several lakhs in

number in their codicil and these have
extended, high, attractive and beautiful peaks.

RTT SATAY WeTT TE TTRTAT  RE H

araet gear tara: wea

Geren arifatteren wreeiareret: 1 got
saat: afifigel tare

eG: Titaeap!S: FAST Re
siada: Braun: yergtseasta wat: 1

Here are Kolahala, Vaibhraja, Mandara,
Durdara, Vatarhdhama, Vaidyuta, Mainaka,
Sarasa, Turigaprastha, Nagagiri, Govardhana,
Ujjayana, Puspagiri, Arbuda, _ Raivata,
Rsyamika, Gomanta, Citrakita, Krtasmara,
Sriparvata, Konkana and several hundred
other mountains too.

‘Afafter seat weremeTTaT ATTEN Ret
a: Gere after at: were Fryer
Here are compact districts divided into
Aryas and Mlecchas. Listen carefully to the

names of the rivers whose water is used for
drinking purpose by them.

weeadt we arferdt a ferrari 3 ott
vragerenr stem fret He!

FAUT STAT SPAT eTTet TAT VU
aed qaarat a aga at aaa

farae woset feat atfgreat a aT 22H
wag aeitfeen ferent: ga:

These rivers emanating from the great
Himalaya are- Sarasvati, Paficariipa, K4lindi,
Hiranavati, Satradru, Candrika, Nila, Vitasta,
Aravati, Kuhi, Madhura, Hararavi, Usira,
Dhatuki, Rasa, Gomati, Dhitapapa, Bahuda,
Drsadvati, Niscira, Gandaki, Citra, Kausiki,
Vadhiisara, Saray and Lauhity4.

the rivers which rise in it. (Prof. H.H. Wilson,
Visnu Purana Chap. Il, verses 19-20)

=== PAGE 92 ===

Chapter 13

61

aeapfedefat gaet frgta ana

worter afett da weit a wet ae

wre ava oat fafee aopAatin ee

far Great war uftariaat: wyat:1

The rivers emanating from Pariyatra
mountain are- Vedasmrti, Vedasini, Vrtraghni,
Sindhu, Parnasa, Nandini, Pavani, Mahi, Para,
Carmanvati, Lipi, Vidisaé, Venimati, Ksipra
and Avanti.

vitor weret Sa Year fer BH

wrenfert ceront a ferreper fe fre

farteren & arran eaedter firgrtfereamn 2 11

wansem frorersivant fear agora

Te Yferrat ate fafear ay:11 Vo

Qa a TST aeyenfet

The rivers emanating from Rksa mountain
are- Mahanada, Sona, Narmada, Surasa, Krpa,
Mandakini, Dasarna, Citrakiita, Apavahika,
Citrotpala, Tamasa, Karamoda, Pisacika,
Pippalasroni, Vipasa, Vaiijulavati, Satsantaja,
Suktimati, Manjistha, Krttima, Vasu and
Balavahini.

Foren watt Fiferear anit afreeract 2211

aur aacut ver fering: Hast
aren Yar wert ghar arfyren wa ze
fereTTTEMyMA TI: WWI: YT: |

The rivers having pure water and emanating
from Vindhya mountain are- Siva, Payosni,
Nirvindhya, Tapi, Nisadhavati, Vena,
Vaitarani, Sinibahu, Kumudvati, Toya, Reva,
Mahagaurl, Durgandha and Vasila.

Teratt siteelt Geo Aver Utah g O11
fart grairn aren arafita a
geen alert Sa anftaar sere 3 eH
Wenfe wera: aenafahrtan:1

The mahanadis flowing down from the root
of Sahya Parvata are- Godavari, Bhimarathi,
Krsna, Vena, Sarasvati, Tungabhadra,
Suprayoga, Vahya, Kaveri, Dugdhoda, Nalini,
Reva, Varisend and Kalasvana.

BATT ATO ayer eererrartn 3 BN
wt da arn @ yharoraniert:

The rivers coming down from Suktiman
mountain are- Krtamala, Tamraparni, Vanjula,
Utpalavati, Suni and Sudama.

wal: JUST: AAT: TTA 3 BU
aera are: Bat: wat: ATT:

All these rivers are holy, competent to

absolve evils, mothers of this universe and
wives of the ocean.

ST: USAMA gre fF TarAN 3 v1

TTRTATACTM: WFLA TSTETAT

neryiaar Um: frata Sepa YAN AG

O monster! Apart from these prominent
rivers, there are several small rivers also. Out
of them some having water throughout the
year whole a few among them flow only
during the rainy season. The residents of north
and madhya countries drink the water of these
river without any reservation.

Ra: HUST: fepuseras
warraala wg afer
gem: vent advatates
eae ART ASTRA 3 & 1
lar Hereyttear Sei: VISTA: |
agra Serres ameter: AeTaaNT: 11 3.1
AAA YT: Weetaey WSSAT: |
apart aerate Ferqeteireegent: 113 ct
WAKA CCT UTA ATT TAT: |
TreteeceT Beha SPATE 3 8
afr: aft agen war ysqenht a
aration awa adtengenfera: 1 ¥ ol
Sora qares ager area!
ST: TATE: WATT SATA 1 RI
TERRE TASaTRTRT: Wel
THAR FRAT A STAY RM
arret: aetartiar qurat Toren

=== PAGE 93 ===

62

HAM: Hleneyoequrara: Pe HET: iw 311

HVS: MTs SATITATATA: |

The classes of people living in Madhyadesa
are- Matsya, Kusatta, Kuni, Kundala, Paiicala,

Kasi, Koala, Vrka, Sabara, Kaubira,
Bhilinga, Saka and Masaka, V<Ahlika,
Vatadhana, Ahira, Kalatoyaka, Aparanta,
Sidra, Pallava, Khetaka, Gandhara, Yavana,
Sindhu, Sauvira, Madraka, Satadrava,
Lalittha, Paravata, Misaka, Mathara,
Udakadhara, Kaikeya, Dasana, Ksatriya,
Prativaisya are the families of Vaisya and
Sadras; Kamboja, Darada, Barbara,
Angalaukika, Venda, Tusara, Bahudha,

Bahyatodara, Atreya, Bharadvaja, Prasthala,
Daseraka, Lampaka, Tavaka, Rama, Sidika,
Tangana, Aurasa, Alimadra are the castes of
Kiratas and the castes as- Tamasa,
Kramamarga, Suparsva, Pundraka, Kulata,
Kuhuka, Urna, Tinipada, Kukuté, Mandavya
and Malaviya are the residents of uttarapatha
(Uttara Khanda).

aglag Agar: erahiftafetitr:n wen
OT WagT AIGA Arar aera haa: |
galt: waster antag: 4
wreifrer: yous facerenaferat:1
TATA: MEAT STITT I

The districts at east are- Anga, Banga,
Mudgarava, Antargiri, Bahirgiri, Pravanga,

Bangeya, Mamsada, Baladantika,
Brahmottara, Pravijaya, — Bhargava,
Kesabarbara, Pragjyotisa, Sidra, Videha,

Tamralihtaka, Mala, Magadha and Gonanda.
qusts arena eter: qeaey waa
TAeRT BPCRTaAT FATTET ARTPTEAT: S19 11
Tere wnfefient: amferqta wae: |
anit: AeaAMT STA: Ma Ae it
yferar faeavtern dent gues: wel
Utter: efter orga ATETAT: We eI
After: Green Sra: SfeTET ACTETTAT: |
eafarorrer VTTETARAY PTETREREN 4 0 II

Va4mana Purana

O monster! The district in south are-
Pundra, Kerala, Cauda, Kulya, Jatusa,
Misikada, Kumarada, Mahagaka, Maharastra,
Mahisika, Kalinga, Abhira, Naistka, Aranya,
Sabara, Balindhya, Vindhyamauleya,
Vaidarbha, Dandaka, Paurika, Sarika,
Asmaka, Bhogavardhana, Vaisika, Kundala,

' Andhra, Udbhid and Nalakaraka.

walter arfterat guisseitene: Wel

yetreres fetter area ATT & 1
atenguint aera: grt:
RTT: FMM: TE AAT 4 BN
arettrer queer sree: Wel

sete UaraTaTett Fee ATTET ST 4 31
The residents of west districts are-

Sirparaka, Karivana, Durga, Talikata, Pullya,
Sasinila, Tapasa, Tamasa, Karaskara, Rami,

Nasikya, Antara, Narmada, Bharakaccha,
Maheya, Sarasvata, VAtsiya,  Surastra,
Avantya and Arbuda.

areuBlacteny Teacraiteat: Wel

serot ayronias aiter: fared: BENG XI

atwen: style Agu: Geert

gemgrrada ager Aad: Ey 4M

arpngitstas dager: |

gael fergerentead sau: aT 4 GI

O Sukesi! The districts located at lower
Vindhya are- Karta, Aikalavya, Mekala,
Utkala, Uttamarna, Dasara, _ Bhoja,
Kirhkavara, ToSala, Kosala, Traipura, Aillika,
Turusa, Tumbara, Vahana, Naisadha, Anipa,
Tundikera, Vitahotra and Avanti.

arareyreraeam: wdersferoreg a
FRET ETAT: HITE: MTN Gent
ganda Sua: YegaT:!
frvater froma arr: erfgreniiar:i yc

We shall now describe the names of
countries situated on the mountains. These
are- Nirahara, Harisamarga, Kupatha,
Tangana, Khaga, Kuthapravarana, Uma,

=== PAGE 94 ===

Chapter 14

Punya, Hithuka, Trigarta, Kirdta, Tomara and
Sigiradrika.
38 adhe fare: gfe
at gat Grete
wy aay a Srey
Patchy aed fey en
O monster! We have described in detail
about these countries falling under the
territory of Kumaradvipa. We shall now give

a true account of the religions prevalent in
these countries. Listen to it carefully.

a ; mn
ware PSeATT: ABN

63

=== PAGE 95 ===

Chapter 14

Chapter 14
Description of Teachings of Religion

Wa: Sy:

afea dered art antec: ya:
orang a ite a ter Tartan
augt Teas aaisat urdatite:

mrerorennte farfemt Mg TATE TAT 31

The hermits said- O demon king! The
religion consisting of ten parts (angas) i.e.
non-violence, truthfulness, asatya (afraid of
telling a lie), donation, forgiveness, control
over senses (dama), sama, generosity, purity
(sauca) and penance has been prescribed for
all people. A provision of four asramas has
been made for the Brahmanas.

fami wngaerst fears adler
arenas 1% gfe: squad: warmer 31
Sukesi said- O austere hermits! Describe in

detail the provision of four 4sramas for the
Brahmanas. My curiosity is increasing
manifold and I am still unsatiated.
aa Hq:

Pie: werserent yt aaa

aa atisea wet a ead Prema st

63

The hermit said- "The celibate should live
at the residence of the preceptor when thread
ceremony has been duly performed. His
religion prescribed there are being explained
by me now. Please, listen to it carefully.

rariisentagaar Fr faaned Tat

ae say AdATHG

We: aif dear: weniger

Berga: Waele Te AAT g

(This religion is) to do perseverance, serve
the fire (i.e. participate in offering), to bathe
daily, to go out for alms, to offer the food first
to the preceptor and then he should take when
allowed by him. Prepared always to act on
instructions given by the preceptor, to develop
love duly in the heart of the preceptor, to read
with mind in concentration when called by the
preceptor.

wh ot weciratshy erat qian

SMA at SAT BLS eat Aa: 19

TETRA ERAT

arrerend ast aged ewars ser CH

After completion of study in one, two or all

the Vedas under the guidance of the preceptor,
he should offer daksina (fee) for teaching.
Then, those desirous of household life should
enter into it or resort to voluntarily

Vanaprastha or reclusion with the permission
of that preceptor.

waa ar vie fast Parrarqarq

UTS aya afew acgat fag

watraiart seater aq

Or he should determine to live with the

preceptor throughout his life and observe
Naisthika Brahmacarya till he breathes his
last. (If so desired) he should live with the son
of the preceptor if he is dead or with any
disciple for the lack of his son.

Wa safe get a fet: AeemEN gon

THUY TTS TTT

oO Salakatanikata! He should live always in

=== PAGE 96 ===

64

Vamana Purana

celibacy and give up ego forever. The dvija
living under strict compliance of these rules,
conquers the death itself.

areaMNgneraT aaettereN Frere gai

anion et crear fagears faethe

Wea RAAT MATA FA: VIM

O monster! After being liberated from

there, one should solemnise marriage with a
virgin born in a gotra/clan other than his own.
The dvija observing courtesy should earn
wealth through functions executed by his own
industry and satiate duly with keen devotion
the Pitrs, gods and guests.

arated gontints Yaa:
watt stig fire sported reer A 9311
Sukesi said- O great resolute! You have
described etiquette which I have understood. I
want to listen now to its characteristics from
you. Please, describe those characteristics.

RTI Sy:
werent Faferera atsenfinretg
TaN TT aRTTETEH ES Frgreacit Bel
The hermit said- O monster! Listen to the

characteristics of etiquette/courtesy already
described by us.

WeeR wer anheraafiarery

A MRM ARTA TEA AI UI

The household should always observe
etiquette in his life. The man without courtesy
cannot see welfare in this material and
metaphysical world (after death).

agenauete Yara 7 yA
waft A: AACS ATA Waa RE I
The yajfia, donation and penance

made/observed by a man_ contravening
etiquette never become benevolent.

gerard fe yeat te WEA Fat
Bra Ae: HATA STAT FACT Rott

The man without etiquette does not feel
pleasure in the material and metaphysical
world. One should, therefore, always
endeavour towards observing etiquette.
Etiquette decays the evils adhered to the
personality.

TET TART FRAT: VETANTET TAT
soared w ate satsfrarssfau 92 tt
O monster! We, now talk about the features
of that etiquette. If you wish any good, then
listen to the etiquette with concentration.
amisea yet errea YG:
Wee a AM: HTT ANT: |
arat aerate: Gary
afaat Fa a goa ee
O Sukeéi! Its root is the religion, wealth is
one of its branches Kama is its flower and
emancipation is its fruit. The man who has
taken care of such and etiquette tree, always
enjoys pleasure (punya) in his life.
merged wri faqaregentaarnedty
wifes Agee ated agararcaufaerta:
He should first recollect the images of great

gods and hermits and chant the morning
prayer as propounded by lord Mahadeva.

fae age GRE ego ETAT
WT ASA PETA WTS ATALIN 2 RI
Sukesi said- What is the prayer propounded
by god Sankara worth chanting at dawn
capable to absolve all sins of the people.

RT Sy: Tat Tareas Yat Fifay
IAT Tye. USA A MATL: WHAT RU

The hermit said- O demon king! Listen to
morning pray propounded by Mahadeva. The
man is absolved from all evils by listening to
recollecting and reading it.

wen qufiergerart
wag: Bett gfirgat gaan

=== PAGE 97 ===

Chapter 14

ee Ys: Fe TAT
qeby ae ar Gwe RBH
May lord Brahma, Visnu, Sankara, Sirya,
Candrama, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and
Saturn bless me with a fine morning!

qyafee: agus
WR: gerea: yore: WTA:

taht uifayercatt ays
Beg ws Hr Qe Vv
May Bhrgu, Vasistha, Kratu, Angira,

Manu, Pulastya, Pulaha, Gautama, Raibhya,
Marici, Cyavana and Rbhu hermits bless me
with a fine morning.
PAGAN: WAG: WT:
Tarrisarghtaget a
AA aT: BA Tae
Reg aes a Gee 4H
May Sanatkumara, Sanaka, Sanandana,
Sanatana, Asuri, Pingala, seven voices and all
the seven nether worlds bless me with a fine
morning.
PAY WaT ATTEN:
werlageaert: Ga:
FM: WeRS WEA TT
aery a WH QT Ba
May the earth with smell, water with liquid,
wind with touch, fire with flame, ether with
word and Mahatatva bless me with a fine
morning.
WaT: WA HeMTCTT
aadat shrews we
qrea: ae ata citer
wea Vs HH GATT VN
May the seven seas, seven pioneer
mountains, seven hermits, seven supreme
islands and the earth etc. seven worlds (lokas)
render me with a fine morning.
UST STOTT aT

65

Baer TpT SAE YoATT
TAT Aet ATA ATTA BEI

One should read, recollect or listen to this
holiest moming prayer. O innocent! (when it
is done) the nightmare is decayed and one
obtains a fine morning.

aa: agere fafa

ed aan a faera year
sere waar

ares weleifate YAU VW

He should then give thought to religion and
wealth (essence) and go for defection with the
name of Hari on his lips after leaving the bed.

a Rertarenrafaart
a ert 4 ages a
gateterinitg 7S
at wet ter aera ATTN ON
Do not defecate on the route of the cow,
gods (temple), Brahmana and fire, highways

and roundabouts, in cowpen and facing east or
west direction.

amg viheniquretag

WR 7a wforaet ava
waived: ae ate wea

feig weet garrett 3 eu

He should then take soil for attaining purity
and smear the anus thrice, left palm seven
time, ten times on both palms and once on the
penis. (Then it should be washed with clean
water after due rubbing).

ATTCTRRTR YTHET

faera yitareromare:1
apie fe yaa wat

wren Barereferet ALOT 3 BH

O monster! An enlightened man should not
take clay from the bottom of a reservoir, mice
burrow residual from that used by others and
from the home side. It should be taken from
the termite.

=== PAGE 98 ===

66 Vamana Purana
TeyG: wraaistt faery Brahmana, beautiful white flower, fire, sandal,
wet af dhe: sun ball and pipala.
Taree ara hrentit- GR i

Yer fredt uftgse a fag a

The learned person first washes his feet
then sit facing north or east and washes the
mouth twice with water. He should then do
4camana with the water without froth.

aa: Wah fore: ator
dergurdta wat: ato
Sprigy titer a Sarees
Heat wa atoreyh UN 3x
He should then touch his senses and the
head. Thereafter, he should clean hair, teeth

and after a look at the mirror, then he should
observe sardhya.
weet fer searorenigs at
apa ae fageary
Wa o Feassenrt YAR
Bet afeeetet WETS GH
A man definitely achieves success on the
mission duly proposed when he goes out from
home after a complete or brief bath, obeisance

offered to Pitrs and gods with water and
things used in worship are duly touched.

gat eft afeatagrst

ag warat gee Yaoi
red caftrameranf

TAT HY STATO TERTRTI 3 & I
Sent year a via

wierd wearrchfareary|
were ST AAT

Tere arat Frorenfaert:11 gon

One should observe his respective dharma
(deed) after giving a touch with hand to dirva,
curd, ghee, a pitcher full of water, cow with a
calf, bull, gold, clay, cowdung, mark of
svastika, aksata (rice), 14ja, honey, virgin of a

ata 3 fe deg
Tanifafs ware
AIHA TT ARTETA 3
a fag are
area aera a1
fret wate a edit
Ug FT orerg atg Haq gen
One should not abandon the religion (law)
prevalent in the country, the family and gotra.
He should earn wealth even by practising the
professions that do not infringe upon his
religion. One should never deliver an untrue
statement, a sentence not permissible in
Agama scripture and in harsh ways.
darg asd Gai fet a
waty arg weracrg
Trae Tey aot
O chivalrous! One should not do
intercourse in the evening and at the day time.
Coition with other's wife in all yonis, on the

land without home, with a woman in her
menstruation cycle and in the water.

gaset Sar at gar MT UYATTOTY!
a areal eer gar areaferg:i wg
A household (grhastha) should not ge
anywhere without purpose, not give futile
donation, not slaughter and animal and should
not develop close contact with women.

BAUSeATAARTETATA TATA: |

Ber Uae: wrote ure Aree BA eH

Routine affairs are impeded on purposeless
movements, futile donation causes loss of
money and the man slaughtering an animal
without any strong and rational purpose is
stuck to evils that lead to the hell.

=== PAGE 99 ===

Chapter 14

67

daen airyeren aura wey)

Feet a waves Gaea er 3 it

The children have to bear insults inflicted
by society when their father develops illicit
relations with women; it increases fear of
having hybrid born and fear of humiliation
from the society too.

Wes Weng 7 arat gigeat:!

Wee Tarde UST FTA SI

An enlightened man should not be
entangled with other's money and wives as
other's money throws into hell and other's
wife becomes a cause for death.

Jeanie wai a Hata TERT

seaareght wagt drat a fash tt

One should not see other's wife naked, nor
talk to the smugglers and nor touch, converse

with or even see at menstrual state any
women.

Jaret wan Bes Aeal waa
FEN ATISTTGAT Ta TaghaTeAv AN wg II

One should not sit at the same seat with his
sister and other's wife. Similarly, he should
not sit at the same seat with his mother and
daughter too.

Te ta a ve aT yet aT

ferareaisti 3 aan uftrrmnfterti xin

One should not bathe and sleep naked. One
should not walk naked.

feraiar yrearerrarsraret-

ee Ta: Tafa
aelg AaRyUTTT
ait a frarg sag FATS cH

Give up broken seat and utensil even from a
distance. He should not do massage on tithis
like Pratipada, SasthT and Ekadasi, not shave
on Cathurthi, Navami and Caturdasi (Rikta)
tithis and not eat meat on Jaya (i.e. Trtiya,
Astami and Trayodasi) tithis.

quig atfreaftastiiar

agtg waft aerate
areas 3 Pays

att a gh tea a atest
wy aia watt

Beg walfor ata Hai

Should not do coitus on Parma (Paficami,
Dagami and Parnima) and should do all these
functions on Bhadra (Dvitiya, Saptami and
Dvadasi) tithis. Massage on Sunday and
Tuesday, shave on Friday, meat on Saturday
and coition with wife on Wednesday is
prohibited. The rest of days are good for all
other works.

farang BS sett + Act
ait fagmanafaterg aeiqy ott
yer wa arguarg ait
atftrrerafranierrg!

Massage on Citra, Hasta and Sravana
constellations, shave on Visakha and Abhijita
constellation, eating of flesh on Mila,
Mrgasiré and Bhadrapada constellation and
coition with wife on three uttaras (i.e.
uttaraphalguni, uttarasadha and uttarabhadra-
pada) should be avoided.

wea ael yet safer

wen wetheat Tat TET gl
aan 48s a afarompat

Ta weteiaft ster

O demon king! Slumbering with head
facing uttara and west is always prohibited
and meal should not be taken while facing
south and the west.

ferenfars anf 7S weferorqG BN
mea aaa aera
omit aes fe aay ga:

Pradaksina (circular walking in obeisance)
of temple, Caityataru (respectable trees),

=== PAGE 100 ===

68

Vamana Purana

roundabout, person more intelligent than him
and preceptor should be made.

araftar rama ot Fret
‘Frearcat ter verre 311
were TASTE
WaT a aT Pre
One should first sprinkle water on head
while bathing. Bath at night without any
strong reason and besides eclipse period,
death of any near and dear ones and entrance

of moon in constellation of birth should not be
taken.

Saat 1 Senfaepite afin y xu
arafir Aarercanfirat a
art faqeareriteten
O demon king! One should not touch an
anointed body, should not shake hair
immediately after a bath and the hands and

body should not be dried with a towel after
bath.

aayAAY YUMA
Gaeta wag Freaqy 4
seme aT ferret:
gitaen eterna

One should settle in a state where a just
king is ruling where tolerant, just and non-
envious people are loving and where peasants
and medicines are available in abundance.

varng det after a7
wepirerera aaa Frey G1
a Ag Saty ade ghegAry
Bel Fat eusEherRayK: |
ashe frederaargan:
aa friiga Femara yon
Wise people should give up a country
where the king inflicts rigorous punishment

but his position is weak, where the pubic
always celebrate the festivities, where people

are mutually envious and intend to conquer or
put down one another.

Raa: TY:
aa aed werarat wer vefeaett: 1
waist a agfes wafers aaqUy cit

The hermits said- O brave king! We will
describe the prohibited things as also the
things worth eating for the religion-abiding
people.

der ww rt Perk Croenl |

wee ater: vert feat: TTA AATI Y 8

The food cooked in oil, ghee etc. fatty
matters even if stale and kept for longer hours
and the rice and milk and milk products i.e.
curd, ghee etc. even if stale and kept for
longer hours are eatable.

wees: werent wear wer weerRETTh
aaftacererdtt stent aprratq g ot

The rabbit, porcupine, godha (goha),
Svavidha (particular animal), fish, tortoise and
pulses have been described by Manu as
eatables.

afore TEATS A
Veererart & goryetearafin § gn
qiaragnet a deat a array
SACRAATAATONTSAT fea FCAT g BU
Water purifies gems, pearls, coral, precious
stones, stones and wooden pots, the straws,
roots and medicines, the strpa-dhanya, hide of

deer, ready-made garments and all clothes
made up of tree bark.

weermaeis ferret wifey
annifaert aeront yf: warefergam § 311
The clothes bearing stains of oil or ghee etc.

are purified by hot water and by rubbing them
with a cake of sesamum oil while clothes
made of cotton are cleaned with ash.

aTTeeeygTT TarOTTEghahEIN

WF: Was ast Geta @ Berg vi