=== PAGE 1 ===

do AMETEM AT:
sirggurerrytasattry
argu,

uw

EN

Vayu Purana
(Part - I)

wienarare®
NST ATTSEATT:

Chapter 1

Summary of Contents
ARR eT At sa ATTA
at arent are oat Tags a
Having offered obeisance to Narayana, to
Nara as excellent among men, to Goddess
Sarasvati and Vyasa, thereafter, one may

proclaim victory or the Jaya, the original text of
Mahabharata may be expatiated upon?.

safe Wieregy: Haare Cae:
ARMS STAT Taare 2
Victory to Vyasa, the son of Parasara and
the gladdener of the heart of Satyavati, from
whose lotus-like mouth percolate the nectar in
the form of literature, which the world quaffs.
wee Sarid wrt garner
Tees WEA wdeT aT: VAT SN
I seek refuge in the God, the supreme one
(ISa), the perennial one, the eternal and undying
one or undecaying one, immutable great god of

the supreme soul, the Lord of the entire
Universe.

1. The etymological formation or derivation.
2. This is a benedictory verse which occurs at the
beginning of every Parvan of Mahabharata, which

is taken in Puranas too.

Fa casa adres

wy yanfaera wires a AeA

aan wea sared aT TTT: |

tard da mig wafers UGE GH

a Saad Malad WeRear

ofan yet 3 frarretiareqn @ 1

cagaleradt arrarea arated

aR wenn wae aon

ant fesrenntot farata otrearferory

QUOTES PRU TET CH

Ambitious of knowing (more about)

Puranas, legends (etc.), I seek refuge in Lord
Brahma, the creator of the world, the
omniscient, the unalloyed one, the master of the
past and future as also the present and a fine
leader. The unparalleled knowledge,
detachment, the overlordship and the idea of
spiritual good or duty— these four tetrad stands
accomplished simultaneously in him. He is the
Lord of the Universe. He who visually
perceived? these entities perennially, being
manifest or unmanifest, and they again dawn
upon him, the overlord for the sake of practical
employment of motivation. The ordainer of the
subjects, the cognizant of the realities of the

3. 4 SAW WA- Here in WAT an atmanepada
usage for Parasmaipada as un-Paninian is a poetic
licence.

=== PAGE 2 ===

Vayu-Purdina

people, the knower of the principles, who,
resorting to Yoga, who created all the creatures,
the mobile and the immobile ones, the unborn
lord, the creator of everything, the lord in the
form of consciousness and the cosmic witness
of the world.

waaaeseat wre wnfeA:|

aati uo afters afaare wert et

wae unfe aera argent (vat) a aah

afaerta Yat FOTIA Ul oll

Wot dvcentt gals Seafirey

andar: gegen gai

Obeisance with devotion to Brahma, Vayu,

Mahendra and also unto Vasistha, the greatest
among the sages, the great-souled one and also
unto that sage, Jatikarnya,! his (Vasistha’s)
great-grandson, highly-famed one, Vasistha, a
sage of great purity and Krsnadvaipayana. |
shall (now) narrate this Purana expounded by
Brahmi, being similar to Veda, adorned well or
equipped well with scriptures consisting of
section on Dharma (virtue), Artha (wealth) and
Nyaya (justice or right conduct).

oreatngait fart taeisqaateafan

weradtar efor af eyfirreain 92

aera: ST: ARTSaTTTTT: |

Fase ABUT: PRT era RAPT 19g UL

mig peas chia 7 eT

werent Cage: Qoera: Yaa: ev 1

Sears Garret Aree: |

When the king of a Royal class named

Asimakrsna, the chivalrous one, of unparalleled
radiance, the best among the kings, was ruling
over the Earth under righteous norm, there, the

sages having souls apprehensive, amenable to
the vow of veracity, honest or straight forward

1. Jatukarna (Karnya)- Name of an ancient teacher,
the great grand-son of Vasistha, name of Vyasa in
26th Dvapara.

ones, void of Rajas tendencies, quiet controlled
and having senses restrained, performed a long
tenured sacrifice in the holy land of Kuruksetra
on the sacred shore of the stream Drsadvati,
having shores sanctified as such. They were
initiated as per the scriptures and moving over
the ground of Naimisa forest.

ae aa werafg: Ua: ThaforarTT gk HI

aint ataiek sitqut agente:

anton sierra citess Fetereretor: 196 11

The highly intelligent and most excellent

reciter of Puranas i.e. Sita came there to see the
sages. He became famous in the world by name
of Lomaharsana (the thriller who made hair
stand on their ends), as he created horripilation
of the listeners by his sweet sayings or delighted
them by his excellent narration.

au.gararPercgcareret eft: |

foreat axa Deret fay cileay faga: 119011

He was the most intelligent disciple of the

sage Vedavyasa, the wise one, the quarry of
penance, the knower of Vedic lores and good-

conducted one and was well-known in the triad
of worlds.

Word aferaferraentatea:|
andt da fagen werrerateiinge
The entire Puranic lore admirably stood
steadied in him. His wisdom had become very
great through his reading of the Mahabharata.

gutterrienat: eer aferafatiar: 1
Gat: Bohra yorataeatt FTI ge 11
Wherein the tales stand imbedded to
Dharma (virtue), Artha (wealth), Kama (desire)
and Mokya (liberation) as also well-enjoined
with wise expressions and good discourses like
the herbs that lie covert within the soil.

Bara yea srafayrrary
Spray TS HeaTSPeT: 12 011
drearra tere wforora arpa

=== PAGE 3 ===

Chapter-1

He (Sita) who was accomplished in
observing customs, approached the highly
intellectual and the best among the sages,
through an appropriate way. Having approached
near him, he paid homage with folded hands.
He, the wise one, made acquiesced those sages
by prostration.

3 ante afar: site: Tae ATT: Ut
wet ae a Wet ot aerarenferafaty
Be Tat PTO PMT WATE VI

They even, the performers of constant
sacrifices, accompanied by associates, being of
mighty prowess or radiance, offered him the
psalms of Samaveda and adoration as per ritual.
Hence in them ensued the desire for hearing the
Purana.

pl aafafaaed fagie cimatu
afar qealt: aeayreafegree: 112 311
sigduiameea fat qandead

Having seen that scholar Lomaharsana,
highly trustworthy, in that session of sacrificial
performances, Grhapati (the householder) or
sacrificer, well-equipped with all the scriptures,
gauged the idea from their gestures and inspired
the Sata!

Taal Ue era hartrarserfaa: 12 vi
sfagrageoned cara: weayaferat: |
gee 3 aia ear Ss TOOT eT GH

O Sita, highly intellectual, the best knower

of the Vedas, Vyasa endowed with spiritual
power? has been propitiated for the sake of

I. Sata-~ This word signifies the offspring of a
Ksatriya by a Brahmin woman. This mixed caste
used to keep horses and drive cars or sellers of
flowers, garlands and gardeners. in ancient time. A
particular family of this caste however became
famous for its knowledge of Puranas and other
sacred writings. See, “The caste system of the
Hindus”, by Raja Sourindro Mohan Tagore.

The Vedas which is held in equal reverence with
Brahman by the Hindus for its spiritual knowledge
consisting in words.

3. The word in the text is Bhagavan which means one

n

interpolation of Itihasa and Purana (the
chronicle and the ancient lore of exegetic and
literary aspects); and milked his mind as such,
(to extort the exigency of the) narrative tale
referring to the Puranas (ancient lores).

Tat a afar yeot vfs etary
garistemegg taprafagrefan «it
Of all these wise ones, the chiefs amongst
the sages, there is an eagerness to hear the

Purana, O highly wise one! Therefore, you are
requested to narrate those legends to them.

ad GY wera aria: Warr:
eran yogdaanfer: 201

All these are great-souled ones, gathered
here being of many Gotras (family cadres).
They, the expounders of the Vedas, may listen
to their respective lineages through the Puranas.

mprthies eget pr
Ahrermitrenfies wrafe WEARS
In the long-tenured sacrificial session, you
may arrange the discourse unto the sages, who
along with their sons have assembled here.

Hence it is that you have been remembered by
us having a desire for getting initiated.

gfe date: Ya: eqara Ht freq
veut oT areeeat at Taree: 112 a1
This way having been inspired, Sita replied

in a nice tongue4, well-couched, endowed with
logical exposition and in this way Lomaharsana
propagate along.
Q sara

Wiseagqydas vatattinten:

WRT YO: ATTA: 113 01

Sita replied~ Having been inspired by you

who is possessed of Bhaga or spiritual power which
is of six sorts namely, dominion, might, glory
splendour wisdom and dispassion.

4, yry firey Here fit@{ should be the grammatical
usage. f RT genitive plural is out of place here.

=== PAGE 4 ===

Vayu-Purina

all, I stand sanctified and rendered beholden or
endowed with liability, (for the exposition) of
the Purana (by you all) who are knower of the
Purana (i.e. Ancient Lore) and amenable to the
vow of veracity or faithfulness.

aed Ue UAT USE: YTAT:
Saari a Tat eTfTAASTATN B01
aerat arcu ard gaat a HETETAT
sfreragentg fer a erenfafar:i3 au -

This is the official duty of the Sita, as well-
ordained by virtuous men of yore to preserve
the lineages of gods, sages and kings endowed
with exuberant radiance and the sustenance of
the lineages of the well-known great-souled
ones as illustrated in the Itihdsas and Puranas by
the expounders of Brahman or Vedic lore.

a fg Stuaiian: afrgre grat

deren fe yards aca were 113 31

gerarrage: vent aotagia:1

tan afer aa afar: Rh FEET BSH

Of the Sita’, the right in the Vedas is not

observable. In the sacrifice of Prthu, son of
Vena, getting in to vogue, of a great-souled one.
In Sutya2, there got procreated a Siita, one an
initial one, a disorderly progeny of an order of
society. By the oblation of Indra therein, the
clarified butter got congealed of Brhaspati.

qereaa ara aa: Wat aA
Woe Hae water a aqua yn
He offered oblations for lord Indra and then
was born Sita. And therein out of delinquency,
there got created expiation in activities.

forage aerating yttefa:t
FATATANT Sg ABUTS: 13 G1

1. Bhagavata Purana IV.23.23, 26 pp.233, 234 Op.cit
cff 4 above.

2. Sacrificial oblation: parturition; — Rajatbaran
Duttaray— A Forgotten Functionary of Ancient
India, Sanskrit Pustak Bhandar, Calcutta.

By the oblation material of the pupil, that
which got suffered as the overborne one, the
clarified butter of the teacher, by the circulation
of the upper and lower layer, took birth the one,
the disorderly breed one of the order of society.

Tel TARTANA: |
aa: yaar aeratgearat venta: 130901

And that which sprang from the Ksatra3,
(state functionary of a very high status), from a
breed lower than that of a Brahmana by the

earlier identity, from that it was famed as of
equal status.

Tem aa ya at: atositey
TRTaatt seat a fate ci
This duty of a Sita is of a mediocre norm as
one being subsidiary to the Ksatriya profession,
embodying the dealings of chariots, elephants,
steeds and his inferior duty is the practice of
medical treatment.

araeniné vet vafederanfefit: 1
meng F fergat yerorgheahrry Ng 8 1
Questioned by you, the expounders of
Brahman, that same duty of mine, why may I
not expose correctly that Purana which is highly
worshipped by the sages?
Fagot weet wT area HATE
amet @ fugit aye ats ot
The mind-born daughter of the manes,
Vasavi, took birth. Being cursed by her father,
she assumed the breed of a fish.
sruita gargs Fafa eT TAA:
Wai Sa Tera carat Aeafaat az eu

Like Arani stick in the (provenance) source
of fire, whose source of birth became

3. weet ark faoefas weed) acomaerd oat
arqettq ae: |
Jatikarna(nya) was the Purohita at the time of
Vyasa's birth. (Vayu Purana 98-93, text followed
here).

=== PAGE 5 ===

Chapter-1

5

(likewise). The mighty Yogin Vyasa, the best
among the construes of Vedas, took birth in that
(breed).

wel aaa Gray AH earara ae

RAT POTS PATA TN BI
mga frond wafer
wraaet a t Aq SUT WaT e 3
atta rrp wiqauaieary THI

I offer my reverence to that adorable one,
Vyasa, the creator, the primeval being, the one
protagonist of Bhrgu’s lore, the great lord Visnu
having form assumed of a mortal being, the one
having authoritative assumption and to whom
closely revealed itself the Vedas along with its
collections or ancillary lores. Having faith or
duty kept in front, he obtained birth here from
Jatikarnya.

fe wera Sarat aera US st
venryt Gita cites Tere

SegMa Swe ANTS: WATE I
qirenreyUrres ager wat FA:

Having churned the ocean of the Vedas with
the churning rod of the intellect, he produced
the Moon in the form of the Mahabharata,
whom having obtained where the veritable tree
in the form of Veda along with branches took
up generation, just as a tree proliferates into
many branches after reaching fertile soil and in
congenial season.

AAMT TIGA TUT TaATIA NSE
wagreadeeg yfrareraeaTa: |

quot trae agi waarmee!
es gfifis: ef Stier eerafin

Having learnt the Purana from him, the
expounder of Brahman, the omniscient one,
fully adept in all the Vedas, the adorable one,
having radiance refulgent, I shall dilate upon the
Purana as expounded by Vayu (Matarisvan),
which was questioned earlier by the sages, the

dwellers in the forest of Naimisa!, the great-
souled ones.

Heat: Wisermaqategda:uxcu
airman ergata:

The Ultimate source is Mahegvara, who is
four-armed, four-faced, Supreme, the
Unmanifest, the inconceivable, the inscrutable
and is the self-born God.

TERR BCU Tafa ATA 8
neatefarirt yar fate

It is sure that he produces the unmanifest
cause and whatever is everlasting in the form of
existent and non-existent, beginning with Mahat
(the great principle, the intellect) and ending
with Visesa.

aug fered de ayant any oll
aeenssatt afaTaaty a are
SATA ACE ATT THY YATASATS STAN
qafededt dea serisgat Wer

aisa fastarngiion drratoiergy 211

From him, an excellent Golden Egg was
born. The Cosmic Egg was enveloped by the
water; the waters by the fire; the fire by the
wind; the wind by the ether; the ether by the
Cosmic Ego; that Ego by the Cosmic Intellect
(Mahat) and that intellect was enveloped by the
Unmanifest (Avyakta). Therefore, herein, has
been given a description of all the gods and
sages.

admit wart a agutaisa wea
TTT Haat HUTA eT 311

The appearance of streams and hills is
belauded here and also the description of all the
Manvantaras and Kalpas!.

I. Nimkharavana or Nimsar at a short distance from
the Nimsar station of the Avadha and Rohilkhanda
railway and 20 miles from Sitapura and 45 miles to
the north west of Lucknow situated on the left bank
of Gomati. N.L. Dey, p. 135.

=== PAGE 6 ===

Vayu-Purdna

antt Teams gent a ated
aat attr geet warentraoirgny x1
The stories of the Brahmanas and Ksatriyas
and the birth of Brahmanas are defined. And
then the creativity of the Brahm (is defined) as
also the description of the creation of progeny is
explained.
FATA BS TRONS STATA: |
wert aeat Sa ST: WT FATIH
And herein the states of Brahma of indistinct
provenance are defined and also the year of the
Kalpas, as also the establishment of the
Universe.

wert a eter year TEM
aire: great austere 4 gt
The slumber of Hari (i.e. Visnu) herein and
the raising aloft -of the earth, as also the
establishment of the cities and the like as per
division into orders of society and stages of
life? (are described).
ant yecenat feat a fear
Rent wi da dat agaeTy on
The cutting of trees planted in houses and
those naturally grown (in the house) are
(discussed). A description of the Yojanas and
tracks with their detailed elaboration are given.
wat wrfaurt a waist quenitorm
seiedttat a area a weaitdrqy cit
There is the description of the division of
spots in heaven of the mortals of auspicious
activities and also the illustration of the trees

1. A day and night of Brahma, a period of
4,320,000,000, Solar-sydereal years or years of
mortals measuring the duration of the world and as
many, the intervals of its annihilation.

2. A religious order of which there are four kinds
referable to the different periods of life; Ist that of
the student or Brahmacdrin; 2nd that of the house-
holder or Grhastha; 3rd that of the anchorite or
Vanaprastha; 4th that of the Sarhnyasin.

and the medicinal herbs and the creepers (is
given).
garrfaitest meatat uftattar
Raargatat a & gat afattany en
How mortals attain the status of trees,
Hellish beings and insects is also explained.

Description of two paths of the gods and sages
have been given.

Saat Wt a Be at wa

wert MSR YR SATO BFAANG 1

ora a cent Serene fafa:

aaa ctor a oars Freres ei

Trt yea a dea: uftattiast

wean fadert sikh weer a aferesite 20

The origin and destruction of food etc. and

of the bodies is also mentioned. The foremost
among all the scriptures, the Purana was
remembered by Brahma. Then the Vedas came
forth out of his mouths, their auxiliary lores, the
codes of law3, the vows and the restraints or the
customs and the taboors are issued out. The
generation of animals or cattles and human
beings are illustrated. Then, the etymology was
enunciated and the processing of the aeon was
illustrated.

wa at: Wa: ser geod afaudan:1
was gfagatey wat ctearectaqe 311
Then nine creations were enunciated of
Brahma endowed with intellect and three others

(also) endowed with intellect. Then, he created
the worlds.

venisaaeay anidet aKa:
2 gay WEERT waeReT GA: Gag wn
From the limbs of Brahma, there ensued the
birth of Dharma and others (Artha, Kama and

3. The General body of law comprehending Acara
(ritual), Vyavahara (civil acts and rules) and
Prayascitta (expiation) is acclaimed the Dharma
Sastra.

=== PAGE 7 ===

Chapter-1

7

Moksa), which ones as twelve, are created in the
aeon of the progeny again and again.

worded sie wiveifier wera

aATATgAa TeUT STATA 4

ade yeaa: Maw Ad: THI

fragrant WRT AT 116 GU

aieha qaaranat ay citer: wfefgar:1

The duration of Kalpas and the period of

transition between ages is defined. The origin of
Adharma from Brahma on being covered by
Tamas and then the birth of Satrapa,! (is
described). Subsequently, Priyavrata and
Uttanapada (took birth) and Prasiti and Akati~
the innocent ones, in whom the worlds are
fixed.

Wa: marae Pepraas 1g on
WERTAAT Sarat HAT WAT ETT:|
The birth of a couple to Akiti by Prajapati

Ruci and then the birth of daughters of Daksa
through Prasiti.

Terai UTE ARTI WATT C1

ether ated wi: aise Galea:

meses FEMA ATTA TS YSERA: NG 8H

The procreation by great-souled Dharma

from Daksa’s daughters, subsequently Sraddha
and others (is being described). The creation of
Dharma is defined, being of Sattvaguna, having
a progression of bliss. And likewise the race of
Adharma (unrighteousness) from Hirsd
(violence) is illustrated, the evil-conducted one.

Tea Beat a ware: wei:
froma a gamit wey atid WA:twol

In Sati of Mahesvara, the creation of

1. Name of a daughter of Brahma (who is supposed to
be also his wife from whose incestuous connection
with her father is said to have sprung, Manu
Svayambhuva. (Skt. Eng. Dict., V.S. Apte, p.546.)
But some Puranas make her the wife not mother of
Manu, (Monier Williams p. 1050).

progeny is defined and diseaseless Brahma of
that norm was defined later on.

ant arrffa: we fart afrmenrefero
HAMA VF AST wa ais au
The receptacle of Yoga, enunciated the
Yoga to the sages desiring emancipation and

also the incarnation of Rudra of great affluence
likewise.

aefear mer atsfe dare: watt wer
TET Waa eA wef V1
The legends about the triad of Vedas and the
great dialogue or discussion are then mentioned,
wherein, by Brahma and Narayana, the
eulogium was expatiated upon.
rama a serge swrensera:|
wiguicisear BRET TRONS ET ARTA: 19311
atede aga aes tee:
Bara Ber BET ATTA: 19 11
Eulogised by them, the lord of gods, the
adorable Siva, felt satisfied. And there came
about the insurgence of Rudra in the frame of
Brahm, the great-souled one. The origin of the
name Rudra because the great-souled one
bewailed along and eight names starting with
Rudra, he got of the self-bomn one.
wer ay deatatng Aciest weTATA
Taegan a wareifreratary 94 11
And the way this triad of worlds of mobile
and immobile beings was pervaded by them, as
also the description of the creation of the
progeny by Bhrgu and the other sages (is
described).
afager a genta target
a: wera: aft: Tarerat aa atari gu
And there is the illustration of the lineage of
Vasistha, the Brahmana sage and the birth of

the progeny from the fire in Svaba (sacrificial
call or invocation) is illustrated.

=== PAGE 8 ===

Vayu-Purana

faq fareanrat Taare
faTaMAST sieht U WATT OCH
And the Svadha invocation unto the manes
of two classes, subsequent to that and he is
belauded under the context of the lineage of the
manes, from the great Lord.

Sa We: Ba aria a rar
wire BRT SATIN: Ne
wfeteey aver steht arrays
WETS HIATT FT STATING VN

The curse of Daksa and wise one Bhrgu and
others, for the sake of Sati, as also the counter-
curse of Rudra from Daksa of marvellous act
and the requital of the hostility is illustrated
between them by pointing out of faults. Under
the context of Manvantara (i.e. the period or age
of a Manu)!, the knowledge about Time is
described here.

WANA: SET HAM AT YAH
faa arnt ates aa fae: 0 11

The daughter of Prajapati Kardama, the one
who was endowed with auspicious marks and
the details about the sons of Priyavrata are
defined herein.

dat Frant gag ag a wR BRI

erga her TMAH ANS 8
Seat TAP TareaT ETAT: |

duet saga wari ao aac U1
That assignment in continents and countries
quite distinctly and subsequently, and the
description of the creation of Svayarhbhuva
Manu is given here*. The creation of Nabhi3

1. It comprises of about 7] Mahayugas which are held
equal to 12000 years of the gods or 4320000 human
years or 1/14" of a day of Brahma, each of these
periods, is presided over by its own special Manu.
(Skt. Eng. Dict., MW pp. 786-787).

2. Svayarnbhuva means sprung from the Self-Existent.
He is the grandson of Brahma and the first of the
seven Manus who governed the world. It was he

and the great-souled Rajas4, the enumeration of
the continents associated with the oceans and
also of the mountains are detailed here.

saint a agri a eee a wae:
a TATA OITA fear WATS 31
The description of Varsas (sub-continents),
rivers and their tributaries all around and the

thousand divisions of the seven chief
continents.

faenrscida weggtragga:|
warot arorretor ated wad: Wee I

The extension as well as areas, their size by
the measure of Yojanas of Jarmbi-dvipa and the
ocean, is enumerated along with the mountains.

ferarengerg frit Teta a
et: Sa: Ogaig ate atedat- ue 4
Himavan (Himalaya), Hemakiita, Nisadha,
Meru, Nila, Sveta and Smgavan- all these are
enumerated as the Varsaparvatas9.

POTATO TEHTATATAPAEATT: |
eer dau a a aa Ferfeasne gu

who produced the holy sages and the rest and was
not only the oldest but also the greatest of the
legislators.

3. A grandson of Priyavrata, son of Agnidhra and
father of Rsabha; Skt. Eng. Dict., MW p. 535.

4. Name ofa son of Vasistha.

5. In connection with Mount Meru, mention is made
of four Viskambha Parvatas or supporting ranges
viz. Mandara in the east, Gandhamadana in the
south, Vipula in the west and Supargva in the north,
which have respectively the following lakes on
them- Arunoda Manasa, Sitoda or Sitoda, and
Bhadra, (Vayu Purana chs. 35-36). Another eight
are sometimes mentioned as Maryada Parvatas or
boundary ranges e.g. Jathara and Devakita in the
east, and Nisadha and Paripatra in the west both
groups extending from Mount Nila to mount
Nisadha and also Kailasa and Himavat in the south
and Srigavat and Jarudhi in the north, both groups
extending from sea to sea. Sometimes the Mayavat
is mentioned as the range extending from Mount
Nila to mount Nisadha.

=== PAGE 9 ===

Chapter-1

Their internal dimensions, unextensive in
heights, are enumerated by measure of Yojanas
and those which are their denizens.

araraift aatfor aatft: vaerere

aeeierfatrenh aftaddeic oi
wrggiaredt gir: ays: Aafia:
aeererret aftreifenrettenar ateheic 611

The sub-continents such as Bharata along
with the rivers and the mountains as also having
been habitated or inhabited by the beings both
mobile as well as immobile. Jarnbidvipa and
other dvipas (islands or continents) are
surrounded by seven oceans and likewise the
earth endowed with the irrigatable areas or
waters and the Lokaloka are described.

mosearaicat cen: wrgrar a Ye
queasy Gey aU: waHM: HENS

These lokas and the earth of seven
continents as enveloped by the Cosmic Egg; the
terrestrial regions, Bhi etc. and the like are
enumerated along with the covering areas.

ad a acre Uitataeierer
merreafent a aaa BEA o 11
All that being of an important norm, has area
of a single measurement and is enumerated
along with the size and extension quite briefly.

gahagmaise ylromerangtad: |

warot SteARIT Vinee: 11g gH

REAM: WT: Yu Ue

Bet BA fea RATATAT NS 2

The extent of the Sun, the Moon and the

Earth in Yojanas with their present presiding
deities. The sacred assemblies of Mahendra and
others on the northern crest of the
Manasarovara and above that is spoken off, the

movement of the heavenly bodies like that of
the fire-brand is also described.

areata wari ufcaitea
areatehaasa teserat aT aA Ne aH

areca tear ser fagaree
aranen: fameiet atehs 3 ugiérqie xii
The definition of Nagavithi! and Ajavithi? is
enunciated here. Then is stated the Yojanas of
the two extremities, the two borders and the
zones of Lokaloka3. The extent of twilight and
of day endowed with Visuva,4 (equinoxes) is
mentioned. The lokapalas stationed above—
which ones are enumerated as (encompassing)
the four quarters.
faqut faarat a wart afratath
feat anfeat citeat Ta ARTETA 4H
The southern and northern paths of the
manes and the gods, of the householders and the
recluses are stated as based on the qualities of
Rajas and Sattva are described.

aielt a ud fauttinten ax ferfgar:
Galata aero saferat Fame gt
aiekt gearmatarnat a YATYAL
The region of Visnu5 wherein are stable the
Dharma, Artha etc., the revolutions of the Sun

1. Moon’s path through the asterism Svati (or Asvini,
Bharani and Krttika (MW p. 533).

2. Name of one of the three divisions of the southern
paths or one of the three paths in which sun, moon
and planets move comprehending the asterism Mala
Parvasadha and Uttaras4dha.

3. Name of a mythical belt or circle of mountains
surrounding the outer most of the seven seas and
dividing the visible world, from the region of
darkness (as the sun is within the wall of moutains,
they are light on one side and dark on the other).

4. The first point of Aries or Libra into which the sun
enters at the vernal or autumnal equinox, the
equinoctical point. fJasTA- the shadow of the
gnomon at noon. faIgafer4- the day of the equinox.
farya Tal- the equinoctical line. faya Wd the
sun’s equinoctical passage, V.S. Apte, pp. 524-525,
MW p. 998.

5. The station or footmark of Visnu : Zenith the sky :
the mark of Visnu’s foot warshipped at Gaya; The
Sun's passage into the zodical signs of Taurus, Leo,
Scorpio, Aquarius. (MW p. 999).

=== PAGE 10 ===

10

and the Moon and that of the planets and
luminaries owing to the power of Dhruva!, the
Pole Star, the good and evil of the subjects or
progeny is being belauded.

genn fata: dh: eraisdaMeaTTe oll
aitedt smarts were fafer ere

a Wistafadt Faufedhafatireaie cu
rrrcartifey arava: |

aut armas: steht A TARMTIIe ZHI

The chariot of the Sun prepared by Brahma
himself as per the exigency of the purpose. By
this chariot, the Sun-god himself moves in the
heaven. That chariot is occupied by the gods,
the Adityas, sages, Gandharvas, celestial
damsels, Yaksas, serpents and Raksasas.
Likewise, the chariot of the Moon which is
constituted of the essence of waters is
enumerated,

‘gfgartt a arrer aah wlanftats
Wala erat garga waitFTWNIg0 011

The waxing and waning of the Moon are
dilated upon as instrumented by the Sun. The
movement of the chariots of the Sun and others
starting from the Pole Star is described in
details.

waieke forges wer yes qa: fea
aRrentit Galfer saenitr 3: FE WN
fare aa acid tari qoeanftor

There is also the description of Sisumara
(tortoise-shaped Star) in whose rear stays
Dhruva or the Pole Star, stationed at the tail.
The structures of stellars along with planets in
entirety are enumerated, wherein the abodes of
gods of merited deeds, are situated.

grad a adgitien aa: g0 21
wiarrs ceetat aaa: aictiselet: 1
ufeororrdt ates wero GeraarATT yo 311

1, The unchangeable longitude of fixed stars, a
constant arc. (MW p, 521). The polar star as well.

Vayu-Purfina

The surplus heat, cold and rainfall in the
thousand rays of the sun and the dividing mode
of rays by their names, activity and purpose; the
movements and the tenure are narrated, the
constellations in light of the solar solstice (are
mentioned).

way assy faarerat wet: auSwrtteTAT
erraferenssy faare: yerafirt: 1g %i

Just as from the poison was acquired quickly
the azureness of the throat of Siva, (that very
way) there ensued quickly, grief for the trident-
wielding lord, having been gratified by Brahma.

Waa: Brfdog wife Sa wae
fergraaeat goat aefararoiget go Gt
Being adored by the gods, Visnu adores the
great lord Siva. The story emanating from the

phallus cult, the same one obviator of all the
sins (is also mentioned).
fararerTe ofuomisanayd:!
Yarra Tera mrerergTantiry go «11
There is the enumeration of the outcome of
the Pradhana (the Principal one) from
Visvariipa (the Cosmic form), which is quite
amazing and the greatness of Piruravas, the son
of Ila,
faut fare aot argerer a1
aa: Ualfin Sekt vedo da PAA gowi
An offering of oblations by means of nectar
of the manes of two types (is narrated). The
Parvans (auspicious occasions based on the
position of the moon) as also their junctures.
aioe a werat areata
Faq farearTont STATA ASLO Ct
And of those gone to the world of immortals
and the downward descent of those obtained as
such; the propitiation of the two types of manes
by means of Sraddhas comprises a great deed.

TEN wa a ated a a YT
Sargit uraeratgtattan: ana 20 81

=== PAGE 11 ===

Chapter-1

it

The duration and the number of Yugas and
Kyta Yuga is enumerated here. In the Tretayuga,
by virtue of the downgradation, the organisation
of animal husbandry, agricultural and
economical activities are also enumerated.

f iad ia wat
autem a derbi ego tt
The organisation of the enumeration of the
orders of society and stages of life as also the
establishment of the orders of society and stages
of life as per duty (systematisation).
aaa aa Warel aa Beha
matt agar and aetane: Grif
The introduction of performance of
sacrifices and the assimilation or discourse
between the sages, with Vasu and Vasu’s
falling into the nether-world is dilated upon.
went gdred o tarigage wT
Wear ATES PNA HAITI
The complicacy of the questions initiated by
Svayarnbhuva Manu; the praise of penance is
spoken of as also the condition of the Yugas in
entirety.

Bes aes dat wat
dafectgngernnt waronfl ait gees
aie Grarvalattorersarga:|
frerévi a fade: wigutag aitedtnieest

Of Dvapara and of Kali age, a description in
brief and the magnitudes of the girth, height and
longevity of gods, vertebrates, the men in every
age according to the efficacy and power of the
Yugas; the origin of the eminent persons and
their deeds, are dilated upon.

(WaT STROMA a watt Uttar
Sermon a aa: Fagor TN ek
Aer afgararat want a weit

Ura wfterat a SecerrenferreTAN 8eg It)

The characteristics of the narration of the

Vedic Mantras and the Brahmanas! (the
explanatory exegeties of the ritual of the Vedas)
and the gods or kings, the sages, Manu and the
manes have been enunciated. The narration of
the Vedic and non-Vedic Mantras are related;
the extent of the branches (of the Vedas); the
appellation of Vedavyasa and others.

TRA TE: HERA wy
Raarrgutot a wat: Fagor Teen
a ved faeries a are!
TTS TUT ST mga watfeaTg ge
The culmination of the Manvantaras and
resurgence after the culmination, then the
account of the Devas, the sages, Manus and the
Pitrs cannot be given in detail, hence they are
mentioned briefly. The enumeration of the
present Manvantara is proclaimed as such by
the human year.
TART Weare | MATT
Siar et aa TALS
The same description applies to all
Manvantaras and of those having gone by and

that have come, an enumeration is being given
by the present one.

FAT TTT TMA TTCRTOTA
SATAY WH FATASAT RF oN
And likewise of the Manvantaras, the period
of transition between two ages and the
definition of the past and future Manvantaras
are given with reference to the Svayurhbhuva
Manvantara.

Waa da rear a ata
werity tart wergat a ate att
The triad of Manvantaras and the knowledge
of their periodicity is being enumerated. In the
Manvantaras, the account of the Devas and the
Kings is enumerated.

1. Brahmana is called Dvija, because his second birth
is said to take place when lie puts on his sacrificial
thread

=== PAGE 12 ===

12

Vayu-Purana

area unfit dlfear: frarar gfeg: gam
ventas ara eae a area gz 211
The daughters’ sons of Daksa, the sons of
the beloved daughter, they were produced by
Brahma and others as well by the intelligent
Daksa, are enumerated.

mravatens ae waat Tectia:
Goer WaTATTGTOTTI 2 31

The Manus, viz. Savarni and others,
dwelling on the Meru, are being enumerated;
the description of the progeny of Dhruva, the
son of Uttanapada is given here.

We asta aan qaelenata
Watt wat da atyrrat w Fagor? v1
The act of milking of the Earth (as started)
by Prthu, son of Vena!, as also the specification

1. Son of Vena, Son of Anga. He was called the first
king from whom the earth received her name Prthvi.
The Visnu Purana relates that when Vena who was
wicked by nature and prohibited worship and
sacrifice was beaten to death by the pious sages and
when consequently robbery and anarchy pervailed
in the absence of a king, the munis rubbed the right
aim of the dead king to produce a son and it spring
the majestic Prthu glory like Agni. He was
immediately declared king and his subjects who had
suffered from famine, be sought the monarch for the
edible fruits and plants which the earth with held
from them. In anger Prthu took up his bow and to
compel her to yield the supply so much needed by
his subjects. She assumed the form of a cow and
began to flee chased by the king. But she at last
yielded and requested him to spare her life and at
the same time promised to restore all the needed
fruits and plants etc. “If a calf were given to her
through which she might be able to secrete milk.”
Prthu thereupon made Svayurhbhuva Manu, the
calf, milked the earth and received the milk into his
own hand from which proceeded all kinds of corn,
vegetables, fruits etc. for the maintenance of his
subjects. The example of Prthu was afterwards
followed by a variety of milkers gods, men, Rsis,
mountains, Nagas, Asuras who found out the proper
milkman and calf from their own number and
milked the earth of whatever they wanted. (Skt.

of the utensils and other vessels of milk and the
description of lineages.

genta: qatar gun tet ager

SMA Wea TATaTaT ATI 14H
ware sieht war arreaige daa:
eremrayred uegiot Tate EH

By Brahma and others, how this bearer of
the riches (i.e. the earth) was milked earlier; the
birth of Daksa, the intelligent Prajapati in
Marisa from the ten Pracetas, the partial
incarnation of Soma (Moon)- al] these are
enumerated. The overlordship of Mahendras
over the beings of the past, present and future.

Talent wfaeta anemdgiada:1
aaraaes a WA: ated Wafer Ugo

Manu and others will come out surrounded
by many anecdotes. The creative activity of
Vaivasvata Manu is being enumerated in detail
all round.

eae vedl ae arent fauraT
Tayaraqehnpardat wT Bee

In the great sacrifice of the Deva, bearing
the form of Varuna, the creation of Bhrgu and
others from the semen of Brahma is dilated
upon.

faigd wart ayaa wat: WAN
carer ate Tart mATeTEAASAT NB

After the description of the auspicious
creation of Caksusa Manu and that of Daksa in
Vaivasvata Manvantara by the way of
concentration, is narrated.

aie: fraetendt eargarreraerry
AUPE PTT STAY TROT: FAA RZ oll
Then Narada, son of Brahma, having
conversations clear to him, destroyed the sons
of Daksa of mighty valour, for the sake of his
own curse.

Eng, Dictionary by V.S. Apte p. 347).

=== PAGE 13 ===

Chapter-1

aa ealsgoraan difteenta feat:
aateke events ager etre: 1123 BU
Then Daksa created daughters in Virini
well-known as such and then the procreation of
spiritual good or duty of Kasyapa, the wise one,
is enumerated.

aa wei gang fasts saat a
Wad 8 yaad o fag o aiteianes 2
Thereafter, the unity, diversity and speciality

of Brahma, Visnu and Siva are being
enumerated.
Sea TAT MAT STAT aT: FaeTATI
TEMAS Weat fer Fawr WAT: 193 31
Owing to God-headship, how Devas were
cursed by the self-born Brahma, — the

achievement of Marut-hood of the Maruts and
the birth of Devas in Diti, then are narrated.

SHAY Heat MT TOT SATA: |
Raed PagaTEA(U) STARR TIS SATA: R3¥
And also are being enumerated the groups of
Maruts (the storm Devas) in sevenfold

dimensions. The god-headship by the words of
manes and their refuge by the Vayu is narrated.

dant enant @ Teretorerany

wayafigrarat aypi wferatrearT 23 4 1

SAT shied agiaTENT:!

aygeatrend a racehers: 193 & tl

arereaqahreen aay

The creation of Daityas, Danavas,

Gandharvas, serpents, Raksasas, all the Bhitas,
Pisacas, animals, birds, creepers and the
celestial damsels are enumerated, being many,
in details and also the birth of the elephant
Airavata created by the association of the ocean
and the birth of the son of Vainata (Garuda) and
his coronation (are also narrated).

Tt freer feTarAfT eget
BRITT YOR AAT TAA: |

13

WNT SAA: MT aa RTT S CH
The details of the descendants of Bhrgus as
well as of Angiras, Kasyapa, Pulastya, the
great-souled Atri and the sage Parasara and
where there is the spread of the progeny.

Pea a we: TTA
fra: er: waa arg cha: wiafeaT: 0
After that, the creation of the progeny of
Devas and Rsis (i.e. sages) is described. The

three virgins are dilated upon whereupon are
dependent the lokas or the terrestrial people.

fagdtfeatideh tarat war area
FARR ATG: THAT FASTA RY oN
The declamation of the grandsons of the
Pitrs is defined and the birth of Devas is
enumerated and the noble one, Lord, the
illustration of five great souls (is enumerated).

sore ferenainn onfgene at: WH
fagitrattd ahi getgrahadorqiex tu

The details of Jlé are spoken and after that
those of Aditya. The biography of Vikuksi, son
of Iksvaku has been illuminated and the
demolition of Dhundhu! (by Kuvalayapida) has
been detailed.

qeqaardaafesarearM: wathtat: |
Frardat faritgrat arasrg wonfafin es 2
Ending with Brhadbala, the Iksvaku and

others are narrated in brief and of the lords of
the earth, such as Nimi and others till Jahnu and
his group.

aie faent ay wareafe ques

agayreagest tera a fart: neva

mart aheeren apres aT

Tarra w Tred was SAU Yew

And is illustrated the detail which are even
of Yayati, the lord of the earth, the illustration

1, ote: RI ER Feat: fea: gare
sagaaaiera (Pauranika Kosa p. 250).

=== PAGE 14 ===

14

Vayu-Purana

of the Yadu lineage, as also of Haihaya and
later that of Krostr is given. The greatness of
Jyamagha! and the creation of his progeny is
illustrated.

Parga wader Gala went:
onftarcada faunfgentigiermi ess tt
faaaiisa dmferifiree sir:
genta: warent: ately WET eee I

The creation of progeny of Devavrdha (a
king son of Satvata and father of Babhru) and of
Arka as also of Vrsni, the great-souled one, the
lineage of Anamitra and the divine acclamation
of Visnu, the attainment of a precious jewel
from the Sun-god and the progeny creation of
Yudhajit is detailed, the one of great soul..

aide ura: srarrnganiiga:|

We Wr TERA aie a ART IRS
ae aft cheaters Waa:
anges caeat fais wage: 119% 6 11

The lineage of Devamidhusa of the glorious
Royal sage is enumerated and once again, birth
and conduct of the great-souled one is
enumerated, Even the wicked-souled attitude of
Karhsa and the birth in privation of Vasudeva in
Devaki,2 as Visnu (incarnate); the Prajapati.

faoiornt ate wareitcarai
Farge Agee feopr eta HAYS

Here VR MTT: MTA: TT BAT

1. Bhagavata Purana [X.23.35-39. One of the five sons
of Rucaka whom his brother exiled. Saibya was his
wife. She was a barren woman. In a battle victory,
he got a maiden whom he brought in a chariot.
Saibya’s fear did not allow him to reveal the truth.
He called his daughter-in-law. Visvedevas and
Pitaras blessed her with a son Vidarbha whose two
sons Kratha and Kesf started a lineage. (Pauranika
Kosa, Jina Mandala Ltd., Varanasi, p.188-189).

2. Vasudeva had two wives Devaki and Rohini.
Baladeva was transferred from the womb of the
former to that of the latter and therefore he was
called Sankarsana.

atatrearcerara feeat Ya AAT RY ON

And after Visnu’s (birth), the description of
the creation of progeny. In the dispute between
Devas and Asuras, a woman (Bhrgu’s wife,
Sukra’s mother) was slain by Visnu for the sake
of protectiing the life of Indra. He then obtained
the curse of Bhrgu. Bhrgu, however, raised aloft
the divine mother of Sukra.

RATATAT ST VAT BAMA: |
areata: HT MOAT: RG 2H
There were the twelve terrific wars between
Devas and Asuras that are being illustrated,
those connected with the man-lion3, the very
destroyers of life.

BPaUssees woah ATT FTA
EMTGa a HARTA: FAT NG VU

Propitiation of lord Siva was achieved by an
austere penance by wise Sukra‘. Being the one
greedy for the bestowal of a boon, he eulogised
Siva.

arent fares targriaatory

SET UE Te FGA TR TTA AG BI
Y ° = 0

Tey ay: NTT A AETY AUG SU

Later on was specified the activities of the
Devas and Asuras. While the great-souled one,
Sukra was engaged with Jayanti, the intelligent
Brhaspati, assuming the form of Sukra, deluded
the Asuras. So, Sukra of great radiance, cursed
them as such.

ah a feared faonisiantegrety
Waa: YRelfest Fart aarETT Ay GU

waggern vedanta Jo:
i lah

3. Man-lion incarnation of Visnu.

4. He was the priest of the Daityas and the presiding
priest of the sacrifice undertaken by Bali. Aditi had
twelve sons of whom Sukra was the eldest and
Visnu the youngest.

=== PAGE 15 ===

Chapter-1

15

aint as are aftgfaurera:|

The distinction of Visnu as also the
illustration of the birth of Visnu and the like, the
Vasu, the daughters son of Yadu who was born
in Devayani are described. Anu, Druhyu and
Puru, then happened to be the sons of Yayati,
the kings as such, herein the scions of that
great-souled one, the best among the virtuous
kings, are enumerated in full, being endowed
with radiance and riches of great norm.

aigeea a fart: erat rea: tigyon
anger 7 aiid yrafterged
alee Sgetees viertrefeh ge ey cH

And of Kusika, the Brahmana sage,
whatever is the resort of spiritual good or piety
or duty is narrated and also how Surabhi (the
divine cow) dispelled the curse of Brhaspati.
The enumeration of the lineage of Jahnu and the
illustration of the lineage of Santanu are also
narrated.

afererat TOT TATTLE TTA
SAMA BART Agata ey V1
siard aferay eittr dercacham

A succinct illustration of the kings to be, a
description of the seven Manus of the future and
a description of the dissolution at the end of
Kaliyuga of the last (Bhauma) Manvantara (are
given).

mura carat uftatehni gs ot
sean aearIT ufcarorfataota:

Also the description of the significance of
the terms Para and Pardrdha! is being done.
The judgement of the extent of Brahma or the
Universe in terms of Yojanas (is given).

afaen: wrap fereanearars Sea Paes TANG VU
fafea: wayarat atedke wire:
Three types of dissolutions of all living

1, The most remote one and the one on the opposite,
Skt. Eng. Dict., Monier Williams, p. 587.

beings, viz. Naimittika (occasional), Prakrtika
(natural) and Atyantika (ultimate) is being
illustrated.

srrgienienrar a: BeaereRAET NRG BI
fet Geni angen enter:

Pereerurg ies act oret fergtaa: 1196 31

The drought (lit. paucity of rain), caused by
the sun and the periodical destruction of
horrible norm from the Fire, of the cloud, of the
solitary ocean, of the wind, of the night of the
great-souled one (Brahma) and the calculation
of periods, especially the period of Brahma, are
described here.

ert a ceri darrquay
weet ars Frea: urea tears 9g v1
Then the description of the seven worlds
such as Bhi and others is given and are

enumerated the hells (or Narakas) of the sinister
ones, such as Raurava and the like.

vartanttery frac wrATT
aa Percent wa Parag 4
The description of the excellent spot of Siva,
established on above the Brahmaloka, where the
beings come to dissolution at the end of the
aeon is given.

wat da amt wturafafacta:|
gen: wire acteercaoirqn eg § it
BESAMA: Wek MOTTE a
afeseceeirer catenterrsrearti eg 9 11

Then the culmination of all creatures, the
entire destruction after the death of Brahma, the
eight-formed extent of the breath and its eight-
fold norm and its movement upwards and
downwards is enunciated owing to _ its
recumbence on piety and impiety.

wet wet a at AeaTafe Herat
SST ST BGT TRU TATAATI NG C1

In every Kalpa, the dissolution of the
Mahabhitas (the primary elements) and having

=== PAGE 16 ===

16

Vayu-Purana

counted upon the sufferings and the non-
etemity of Brahma (are described).

dhred da ati oftorafatrota:1

genre a rarer aerererreviry gg 311

ornrenh ufasa ued Telli afer

TATRA ATETSATATAT RG 0 Ut

TTT AUTEN PSA: 1

SPRST TIT: MeaT A AAT HAA Vo VI

The depravity of the enjoyments and

finalisation about their outcome; the difficulty
of attainment of emancipation and the
observability of harm in face of renunciation,
placement of the being in Brahman after
renouncing the manifest and the unmanifest and
its realisation through the knowledge of
diversity, the pure one then surrounds that.
Then gone beyond the triad of heats, the one
known as formless one and unactioned, the joy
of Brahman enunciated. He also has realized it,
he has no fear from anywhere (are stated here).

wee a ot: wat gentiserer aq
satel seftretger AUTaTOTTRTT: 1 89 ZI
The creation once again of another Brahma

is then like the earlier norm and so also the race
of sages, the obviator of all the sins.

sapaageM: yoredteafeta:!

aie Sorat wa PaetafafeaaT: 1120311
yawas wart fadiat wenfa a
wiguiat afawer yrasia Wa Tow!
dere feng a
TTS araferrerad BT fasts ngeyu
ae fiquit erat sreenft ae aA:

This way, a synopsis of the Purana has been
illustrated. Therein, the mobile existence are
being enumerated and all the deformities of
dissolution. The tendencies of the beings and
the fruits of the satisfactions; the appearance of
Vasistha and the birth of Sakti that very way.
The slaying of Sakti by (Kalmasapada), son of

Sudasa at the instigation of the sage Visvamitra
(are described). The birth of Parasara and how
the sage Vyasa took birth in the maiden of the
manes.

RT TM TT Ue aes aT VG I
TUeTees weet feanfiredt seri
The birth of Suka; how the intelligent

Parasara and his son (Vyasa) incurred the wrath
in Visvamitra.

afaaeyeanttatdanttatraraan govt

Paredtayen dtot: wares eter

aan faferr fan faanfaafedfiomigeci

That very way for a desire to kill
Visvamitra, the sacrificial fire got accumulated
by Vasistha and how that sacrifice was
shrewdly spoiled by divine means by lord
Skanda, seeking the welfare of the sage
Visvamitra and for the sake of progeny. For the
sake of progeny was observed a vow by
Skanda, the wise one and by providence, and by
the creator desirous of doing good to the
Brahmanic or scholar Visvamitra.

we 8g aged aget Writ:
am fare arareare: WaraaegA: 1g 8
ae fred: wipreaay yreartar: WA: Gat:

How the adorable Vyasa, all by his own
intellect, divided the single Veda of four
quarters, into four ones and how, further, his
disciples and — grand-disciples _—_ created
subsequently the divisions of the recessions.

watt: wequitde ae ye: TaeyaT ee ot!
Wea UQUERa Frat entareferar:
Set quater feet afgeferomige gi

By the way of six-fold desires, he was
questioned by Brahmi (lit. self-born one). Then
Brahma was asked by the sages, desirous of the
spiritual good, wistful for a sacred land, an
appellation, divine of abiding no ones, about the
practical application of the Vedas in sacrifices.
Brahma then answered for the sake of their
welfare, (gave them a wheel and told them).

=== PAGE 17 ===

Chapter-}

17

gm feared weg yaaa

arin ach adarmasat: ge

yeat aa Raa: sear ag

Trent otemer aa Sfafayiehes 311

Yaa: Bae Ware STAT AaT Mt

SHAT VATA PEPIN SN

This wheel has a good umbilical cavity, has

a divine form and name. It has truth for its
spokes; its movement is auspicious and it is
rare. Move in the rear, as controlled ones and
then strive for what is beneficent. You will then
attain what is wholesome for you. The place
where the rim of this wheel of law, wherein
fully gets shattered, that country deserves to be
reckoned as sacred. This way, the Lord spoke
then. Having said so to the sages, then Brahma
attained to invisibility once again (this is
mentioned).

agenfanen afarerata a
Shat da aio pret ARE ETc un

The cumulative source of the interior or
foetus of Ganga as also the adaptability of
Naimisa, the sages performed the long sacrifices
there in Naimisa (forest)!.

Wa Wield wa Tea Sa AT
meet Afar cea WaT TAR Gt
Fadiei mia grat great THAT
aenfate aergret TAA Re 81

On the Saradvat being dead, an elevation of
that was performed. Then the sages of the
Naimiséranya with utmost devotion, having
created this earth of limitless norm, brought
about a king and as per ritual and as per rules of
the scriptures, they adored here with
hospitalities.

1. One of the five principal places of pilgrimage (viz.
Visranti, Saukara, Naimisa, Prayaga and Puskara).
A most sacred place where all the Puranas are
narrated. It is situated in north India, at a short
distance from the Nimsar station of the Audha,

Std da Ganfet Tes faferaren
SMTA: HU: TAMAGTAUSTTM RE CH
The king who was thus gratified with the
ovation of a guest, was kidnapped by the cruel
Asura Rahu, who disappeared with him.

ayaged aft qads war get
 redafed Gear HoMTTTaTATTHN Le 8H
The way earlier they chased the king Aida

when kidnapped, having seen along with
Gandharva, abiding in the village Kalapa.

ira: YER Bat ae Tefsfa:
ae fered aed ay ay TATA RZ oN!
Appearance of that one again in the sacrifice
the way (it came about) through sages, having

seen all made of gold, the material of the great-
souled ones.

wer & After aS gegrarfisss
aan faaaureg te: dena #129 eu

Then of those abiding in Naimisaranya in
the sacrificial session of twelve years, as per the
activity of suppression, Aida was restated by
them.

wafer ervard teyt aeTyTA
arate aeeaATAS TUTAAU Ry VU
Having created Ayusa, the son of Aida
within the forest and having completed that

sacrificial session, the way he waits upon
Ayusa.

Tarad aaa orem fever:

sett Tet ar SAAT TAT RS BU

Then all this that happened as per the ritual

was dilated upon, O best among the Brahmanas.
The knowledge of worldly affairs of the sages is
indeed great, that has been explained.

FEO ATT ea PATO HITT
AMT THT PA GTEHTOTT LY

This Purana of high knowledge had formerly
been proclaimed by Brahma. The incarnation of

=== PAGE 18 ===

18

Vayu-Purdna

Rudra on account of the grace of the Brahmanas
is enumerated.

var Ugyuat ae: Wat wa srs
fograrer tae aieausraiia gee gi

That very way the applications of the
Pasupatas and the enumeration of the spots and
the blue-throatedness of the lord Siva, born of
the phallus-shaped image, have been glorified.

wert aa fama agar serene
ert Sere WA UTOMOTATAT RS & II

It is narrated to the Brahmanas by Vayu, the
expounder of Brahman or Veda. It is conducive
to wealth, fame and longevity and obviator of
all the sins.

aattt steut aren ercut a faye:
are fe mae Yui treat egiont

One should recite and listen to this Purana
and should consign it to memory in particular.
In such an order, this Purana is being expatiated
upon.

Garde vegas
TremTfcenPIA ATER UPATBRATA FATS CU
Even a great motif can be easily achieved, if
(this Purana) stated in a brief form. Therefore,
having taken something into account, I shall
dilate upon later on in details.
wenatad aarsdtta fafa
Raritt out ana area Hy 1ee gH
Whosoever, a sense controlled one, may
study by him, this preliminary section, would
have understood the whole of this Purana.
There seems to be no doubt in it.

at faeragt aeragrafrad fest:
qaqa deere w enfqaRTT: 120011
A Brahmana, who may understand the four
Vedas along with the Angas (as six) and
Upanisads, but if he does not understand
thoroughly this Purana, then he may be dubbed
as an unskilled one.

sfeeregroeat eyed
fatraragenea) wrt wefceafa go tt
By Itihasa and Purana, one may understand
the Veda. The Veda fears from one having a
smattering of learning or one having learnt very
little (thinking) that this one will strike him.
arrafarneneds arenas weayan
aed wre yeaa wat wraTEMAAANo Vt
Constantly reciting this chapter narrated by
Brahmi himself, one may get rid of the calamity
having obtained it and may attain to a state as
per cherished resolves,
ARTI A TUE a ART
freer at 8q waa: wPEAANT BN
This is called Purana because it breathes!
(exists) from earliest times. The etymology of
this one (i.e. Purana) who knows, he gets rid of
all the sins,

anran: wait feed ara wad
wenft at: BE: ABT Fat MATH
Narayana, having circumambiated this
Universe, moves on. Lord Siva is the creator of
that creator of the mobile stratum.
ore Hera Ope
He: wah YUN
a dare w wets wt
Pea FTAA OG

Hence, this succinct observation, you may
listen to, Mahesvara is the supreme lord in this
entire Purana. At every time, he creates the
creation and at the hour of dissolution, he
withdraw it into himself.

fa sitrergadt argsith sfrararesqarafiren am
WOTATSEATT RU

1. Gate - f& + athe - from root 37 to breathe, Vedic
variant of ffi clasical. A practical Vedic
dictionary by Dr. Surya Kanta, p.27. Oxford
University Press, Delhi 1981.

=== PAGE 19 ===

Chapter-2

neve fetter
Chapter 2

The narration of the twelve years of
sacrificial session
WAG: EEE ATT:
Ba Wa Mere HATTT aI
Then the sages, having penance for the
riches, replied to Stita again- “Where was the

sacrificial session got celebrated of those having
deeds marvellous?

feast da acer at a aad
SRT YUU eT aot AT: WAST HITH
How much then was the tenure? And how

was it celebrated? And how Vayu expounded
the Purana to them?

area feratare ot aleeet f% A:
fa ditfen: ya: weyaTEA YH Fag
You may narrate it in details. There is great

inquisitiveness in us.” Thus urged, Sita replied
in auspicious expressions.

sre aa a ater shat wage
mrad aecearet Fa aT AAETUY
Listen to as to where those wise sages
performed sacrificial session, the excellent one
and the tenure upto which it was held and the
way it came about.
fagernon fayd fe ua ferga: ym
aa fe dR od weet UitaerG
Where the creators of the Universe, desirous
of creating the Universe, to begin with, where

they celebrated the sacrificial session, the sacred
one, to the extent of a thousand of years.

amt entra gen Tenssacary
sere aa walled gifted aa afeerig i
WYSH WIAA HET!

Wherein the Tapas was the householder or
the lord of the sacrifice; god Brahma became
himself the priest designated as Brahma (of the

19

Yajiia), and the status of spouse was designated
to Ila (the consort of the performer of sacrifice).
The wise Mrtyu (god of death) of great
brilliance performed the Samitra! rite (of killing
the sacrificial animal) in that sacrifice of those
great souls.

fager SRR aa dee vitaTETNON
gant clam aa Afgan
anton a4 faend Sint ghgireqic i
The sages performed the sacrifice for a
thousand years where the rim of the revolving
Dharma-cakra, got shattered. By that act, this
place became well-known as Naimisa, adored
by the sages.
aa OT ae quar fagercoraferat
Diet gee aa aa: Sratswegaen
Where there is Gomati, the sacred one,
waited upon by Siddhas? and Caranas. Rohini

gave birth there and from her took birth Budha
by Soma.
wae: aa eT eT:
SUA: YA AA MAFAAATT: Ro Ut
Where Sakti, the eldest son of the noble-
souled Vasistha, took birth and where the

hundred sons of sublime radiance of Arundhati
were born.

meuremral zarada west wT
aa at aanafganfirateaeat: 11 gail

Kalmasapada, the lord of men, wherein was
cursed by Sakti and where ensued the hostility
of Visvamitra and Vasistha.

I. Fire meant for roasting a sacrificial animal or
sacrificing or immolating or killing animals at a
sacrifice or tying up cattle or a sacrificial vessel or
relating to the official who cuts up the animal for
sacrifice or fire for cooking the sacrificial flesh or
the place for the above fire or any place of
immolation or shambles. (MW p. 1065. wa;
masculine WHA: | (neuter) WFR!

2. A Siddha is a Semi-divine being supposed to be of
great purity and holiness and characterised by eight
supernatural faculties.

=== PAGE 20 ===

26

Vayu-Purana

ayaa waregirdas Tg:
wat afew afore eran 82
Where sage Paragara was born in Adrsyanti,
and on whose having taken birth, the
defamation of Vasistha came about.
aa a Stat as Aft geariens
Site St aa Afttrarera: BAT: ue3n
There, they, the expounders of the Vedas
sacrificed in the session in the Naimisa.
Wherein at Naimisa, they sacrificed there, were
termed as Naimiseyas.

areata AAT gle sara
qerafe fare wyreta seers

That sacrificial session there happened to be
of twelve years duration, of the wise ones, when
Pururavas, the valiant one was ruling over the
earth,

ARAMA HATE: |
aie 4a tart cterfefa fe a: gTAAG
We have heard that Purdravas enjoyed the
eighteen islands of the ocean, he was never
satisfied out of avidity for hoarding precious
stones.

sayit wat a a Qagiamontea
ARE UT A AGATA S ATT NRE
Urvasi loved him as inspired by Devahiti
and the king performed that sacrifice with
company of this celestial damsel.

aferatadt wa After: waft
amet Qya TET Tara HATA OU
aged wae ae fecod wera
On that one being the lord of men, the
Naimiseyas took up the sacrificial session. The
highly-radiant foetus which Ganga conceived
from the Fire-god, was placed on the mountain
which was transformed into gold.

fared aa TATE TETTATTUNRC
ferment cae Sat creigtararer

qeeaferenrerat Tura LS
Us: Fecal WS Ff Bei Wai ae
Then the sacrificial square was created as

made of gold, the sacrificial hall of the great-
souled sages, having illimitable radiance by god
Visvakarma, Brhaspati himself, for promoting
the welfare of the world. Once Puriiravas, the
son of Ila, reached at that place, during his
course of hunting.

a apr ceqerd aaaré feroraANR ott

an eafearerarang wea

Having seen that of great marvel, the
sacrificial altar made of gold, his specific

knowledge marooned by greed and he desired
to grab it.

AfattarenTene TMA? UH

fagentt tpat: areata

at Faget Tat Gra Sere

Then the sages of Naimisa cursed (lit. cried

over) that king manifoldly; they got extremely
infuriated and inspired by fate, killed him
towards the culmination of the night with
adamantised Kusa grass.

arasstey: @ Ua ae
stare acer Wa ap gfanean
Pounded down by the adamantine Kusas,
that king gave up his mortal body. Then the
sages anointed his son, born of Urvasi, as king
on the earth,
ares warns firrt a weer
a ay ada werenigited waters
This king (Ayu), the great-souled one, was
the father of Nahusa. He happened to be the
lord of the earth, disposed to religion and
behaved well with them.

aaa aaa aT
arafaen a ta adt gafaat ATG
Ta ag aera

aye wa aaat aqerd WETTING

=== PAGE 21 ===

Chapter-2

21

feet fogerorat yer feergonfira

The age and health of that best of men was
of highest order. Then having mollified the
king, the sages, the best ones of those knowing
Brahman, commenced the sacrificial session as
per ordainment of the welfare of piety. Then
that sacrificial session of those great-souled
sages became as wonderful as that of the
creators of the world which they undertook
earlier, with a desire to create the world.

dard: freredateahacciifad: 291
was ghige qd:

That sacrificial session was attended by
Vaikhanasas, the  fiiendly = Balakhilyas,
Maricikas and other sages having radiance of
the sun and fire.

fagearer: fasteraterendt: 112211
wreg YAS aaa aM
It was served by Pitrs, Devas, Apsarasas,
Siddhas, Gandharvas, Nagas and Caranas. It
was equipped with very auspicious materials,
the way the court-hall of Indra, by means of all
these.

Riswanedartag rave aft 12 <1
ards wannfa meratéenfatin
They worshipped the Devas through hymns,
sacrificial chants and Grahas, They worshipped
the Pitrs by the rites reservable for them. They
adored the Gandharvas and others as per castes
or their status and ritual.

srafig headend: aaATae13 0
ay: arn weal aggareatrror:
Desirous of adoring thereafter, even in other
rites also, the Gandharvas sang Saman hymns
and the nymphs danced.

marge are ferrercaat BArq 3 eu
Taerrafeata gs Wey
The sages spoke out the auspicious tongue,
having syllables of variegated components. And

the scholars of the true signification of Mantras,
mutually dilated upon.

farusrerernses freq: wftarfeat:113 211
are fagia: wierdarerataen:t
Some disputants overcame their adversaries
by fallacious argumentation. The sages therein,
being scholars, were skilled in the Samkhya and
Nyéaya! schools of philosophy.

a aa oftd fafatgeeserceran:13 au

ao get de a a AAS AT:

wrafart gfte ar a aa wasTaANs wi

Brahmaraksasas did not take to there any

abominable deeds; nor were there the sacrifice-
demolishing Daityas; nor the Asuras who
deprecate the sacrifice. There was no obligation
for expiation or imprecation.

ramet inaratfafereriteagiod:|
wea aR wat grapes TROT: 13 4 II
By power, intellect and action, their
applications, the activity or ritual was adhered
to. This way, the intelligent sages performed the
twelve-year’s sacrificial session.

arn wet ahr Siesta!
ufet gormarrarrqaetaorqus & tt

Bhrgu and other prudent sages performed
the Jyotistoma sacrifices separately. They paid
ten thousand (coins) as gift to all those returning
priests.

mae wed arta werhereg
negara wafaied feat: 1301

1. It is the dialectic philosophy of Gautama dealing
with the metaphysics of Logic. The text of
Gautama’s Nydya Sitras is a collection of Satras in
five books or lectures, each divided into two daily
lessons and these again are sub-divided into
sections. Nyaya as well as the Samkhya concur with
other schools of psychology in promising beatitude
and moksa, deliverance from the evil for the reward
of a thorough knowledge of the principles which
they teach.

=== PAGE 22 ===

22

Vayu-Purdna

Having completed the sacrifice, they all
inquired the great soul Vayu, the mighty
overlord, what I have been asked by you, O
Brahmanas.

wonfena dened a a arate:
fret: eactgat Za: wdueeerqragin ¢ 11

Inspired as such for the sake of the
description of various lineages, the lord replied
to them. Lord (Vayu) himself is a disciple of
self-born (Brahma), having perceptible vision, a
controlled one.

afornfaiirentitett: afar
fecetrantetindt, aetcirenrfaratt 113 811

He is endowed with the eight Siddhis or

superhuman powers like Anima and others!. He

supports all the worlds with their distinct
characteristics of the breed of the vertebrate.

Beeefee ITA TATE:
fame Fraen wer afer: ANAT TOT: 11
The one virtuous among the men, who dips
or floats perennially the Saptaskandha (seven
regions) and the like as arranged, and within
whose domain, determined as such, stand
stationary, the seven groups of seven.

aqeterarnt yartt gees wera: |
Berea earns yor gu
He, the highly powerful one, making the

battalions or structures of the members
(Vythas) of three kinds of living beings,

1, ifr atest Sa ater een gem

wii: wren afd aehrsa: 11
STARHTRT 8.2.38,

(i) Anima or the power of becoming as small as an
atom; (2) Mahimd or the power of increasing size to
any shape; (3) Laghima or the power of assuming
extreme lightness at will; (4) Garima or the power
of making one’s self heavy; (5) Prapti or the power
of obtaining everything at will; (6) Prakamya or
irresistible will; (7) /sitva or supremacy; (8) Vasitva
or the power of subjugating all.

2. The group of forty nine Maruts,

supports embodied beings through the radiance
(Tejas or fire).

Wore gra: Tae aot a aati:
aaron: yréteont Has a TAIT 211
The five activities such Prana, Apana,
Vyana etc. by the tendencies of the senses,

being inspired as such which ones, take to
sustenance.

rea: were:
aarapieaitntserdt arat THA 31
It has been enunciated by the skilled ones
that his source of origin is ether, endowed with

twofold qualities— sound and touch, and he is
the root of fire.

attra srrarargenfatraneten: |
Sra: ASAT: PORTRAITS ¥
And there, the presiding deity, the adorable
Vayu is highly active, well-known as ‘Vatarani’
and is skilled in the scripture of words i.e.
grammar.

AIT YeRura walapingreataa
JRO: YT: YUOTTAA ATS 4 I
Being a expert in Puranas, he could delight
all the sages, having a happy mind, by speech
well-nuanced, endowed with the contents of the
Purana.

fa sttrergant agate wagranfteraabrava ar
faassen

wR

=== PAGE 23 ===

22

Vayu-Purana

ustey Teitattseareat:
Chapter 3
The narration of the creation of
Prajapati
Wa sara
reared gereantiag igre
weaQacadd anfercitadentagea 7H:

=== PAGE 24 ===

Chapter-3

Sata remarked~ Obeisance be to Mahesvara,
the one having deeds of excellent heroism,
having the radiance of intellect, illuminated by
the valiant (lit. Bulls) among the gods, having
illumination of a thousand suns and fires and
obeisance to the one, having creativity of the
dissolution of the triad of worlds.

sich Bi 6 am ,
a wife was ay wrenteenit agar

(Obeisance) be to the Prajapatis, having
been bowed down unto by the lokas and
likewise unto self-born god Brahma, Rudra and
the like Mahesvaras, unto Bhrgu, Marici,
Paramesthin (the Almighty god), Manu and
even to Kasyapa, the one having the duty of
(controlling) the Rajas and Tamas (by spirit of
Sattva).

fa farereenfa a aq)
worea weal Gers a Ara aN
ade Y(a?) metetegtt
wanfagaears frrcnrtereatait
Ria URITOTa ANS Ut
(aig watafaerratemi)
waa ait eigen)
BAT: YT ATTA
Unto Vasistha, Daksa, Atri, Pulastya,
Kardama, Ruci, Vivasvat, Kratu, (to) the
patriarch sage Angiras, Pulaha, Cukrodhana and
having the ordainment of a task enjoined by the
increase of progeny, twenty-one in number and
even to the ancient ones, the other eternal sages,
who are accompanied by their attendants.
Likewise, stationed on mass, all the Manus and

all others stationed as such, glamorous on the
courage, the sages headed by Brhaspati and

23

USanas and the anchorites of virtuous conduct,
endowed with compassion. (I bow to all these
sages).
wore aed aaferrrntertt
wera: Petra
gears terarq ug 1
Having bowed down, I shall describe the
excellent creation of Prajapati, the obviator of
the sins of the Iron Age. adorned by Suresa (i.e.
Indra) and groups of Devrsis (godly sages). It is
auspicious, unparalleled, non-arrogant and dear
to the sages.
warnitarafe dreaonfetat
faygarafgerieasrary
daat garfienfrenfiret
marenferegrerireatirer 9 1
This Purana comprises the account of the
Prajapatis of radiance of excellent norm, of
radiance of body, the sages of pure intellect,
pure speech and bearing austerities. It describes

glory of prowess manifested profusely of the
time of the day of Brahma.

ag eat a mgeTTERT
wet ToOTTARrermeatferaTy
waren aera
fagreaerate wa sreftuirqic 1
It is spread or dilated upon in the Vedas and
Smrtis and illustrated (therein) as well and
expatiated upon, the best one, of others
pertained by Wind-god. It is highly elator of the
mind, owing to the regulation of construction of
compounds as per statements, even when by
wrong pronunciation.

wea a ag year wae:
wrenfrant eearcenritar a
; -
Fer wert seperate 11

=== PAGE 25 ===

24

Vayu-Purana

Herein is described the foremost tendency,
the principal one of unmanifest nature which is
created by lord Siva and that which is
remembered as the cause of unmeasurable
norm, the Brahman, the chief one, the source of
Prakrti (the primordial creation).

SIRT Ter Arena ay:

at Wana a
Wa aa; carer

waaay Pret get fatago ti
mated gator ye

agen crea fraraea

The individual unit is a synthesis of the soul,
the cave, the birth source and likewise the eye,
the body and that very way, it is immortal and
undecaying. The semen (Sukra) embraces the
Sattva, penance and is very brilliance. That
indistinct, the perennial, second Purusa is

pervaded by Brahma, the grandfather of the
worlds.

TARTS fiero ar fTATERET
daagmiaatrentectas dartashae
TPIT YRS TSE HHT WAITET
Owing to creativity, owing to the
predominance of Rajas in abundance, bound by
the cosmic time and of the tenure of
observances, by the mental intention of
Mahesvara, Prakrti gives birth to the eight
causes for increasing the generation and to the
predetermined changes in the personal soul.

aptedtaratt dteat anes

A . .
fagraftafaegarm
amet aquia afc
aemrat am defer feafaqiey it
ached went afafeates-
Teemt arated waft:

The enumeration of the Devas, Asuras,
mountains, trees and oceans, of the Gandharvas,
Yaksas, Uragas and Manusas, Manus, the
creator of the progeny, sages, manes and
Brahmanas, Pisacas, Yaksas, Uragas and
Raksasas, the stars, the planets, the Sun, the
seven stars (Saptarsis), evil spirits or fiends or
goblins or night stalkers, the months, seasons,
years, days and the nights, the directions, the
time, by their communion, of the Yugas (aeons)
and Ayanas,! even of the medicinal herbs and
of the creepers, the water denizens, Apsarasas,
animals, lightning, rivers, clouds, the sky-roving
(vertebrates and birds) is given here. In fact
whatever is subtle, whatever is on the earth, as
well as in the atmosphere, whatever is mobile or
immobile, whatever has motion and division of
progony since to Brahma (is mentioned in this
Purana).

wife aa: wart ashe
arena armas wee aa: 116 11
semtat aediftat a
tae wel a at SATA
aaa Ta: TERT,
after waa FT Velt

The metres, the Vedas, along with the
hymns, the formulas of the Rk, Yajus, Saman,
the Soma juice and the Yajiia. Whatever is

made use of and whatever happened to be the
cherished end, fit for livelihood of these, has

1, The sun’s passage, north and south of the equator.
Hence the period of duration of this passage, half
year, the time from one solstice to another.

=== PAGE 26 ===

Chapter-3

25

been mentioned by the lord of subjects. Before
Manu, son of Vivasvan, the birth and flowering
or flourishment of those was narrated.
aunfiré q .
cleat cere
arated araftafit age

The birth of those pious ones, who are
bowed to by all the worlds, that same was
replenished as mainly comprising of Indra,
godly sages, Manus and well-known men, who
have filled in (propagated) and decorated the
three worlds.

Tae WTS RAT

eared UTE Tyas
ara: fret at Frearqaer

CATT TEA TARTS

By the curse of Rudra, there happened to be
the rebirth of Daksa in this world of mortals or
an abode on the earth by the law of birth or Siva
of Daksa as well as the obtainment of a counter-
curse (are mentioned).

i utara
aig dyfafanert a
afirrmha a dnafeg-
don gmfecaty AraA2 oll

The changes of Manvantaras, (their) birth or
creation in the Yugas and resurrection, the
sagedom of those of primeval age of the sages,
as well as growth just as in Yugas and the like
and likewise here is described.

a arty seata der,

ares asa HAN Frag:
Hera TST Ya HET

arerea areas FEAT HTN

Those Vyasas who proclaimed the Vedas in
Dvapara, they herein, have been serially

illustrated. The counting of the aeons, the
counting of the universe, and the counting of
the days of Brahma (are mentioned).
aatert enifrentaat an
3 arenes sitar
Breau arate aT MATITTN VII

The extent of four-fold living beings, viz.
the oviparous, those born from eggs, birds etc.,
those born by germination, trees etc., those born
by warm vapour, insects and those sprung from
the fostering the cause of conjugal felicity and
those pious ones, abiding in the celestial regions
and of those who have gone over to the spots of
torture (hell). Their extent is given by logical
fallacies, even an authentication as such.

areata: wrpherensy ast
Afafrens wfrertag:1
ary es fate 7a
Sher a Carenfa: WT TURIN

The three types of dissolution, viz. absolute,
of Prakyti (primordial nature) and the one
pertaining to a cause and even a source of
dissolution or secondary creation, the bondage
and the release or emancipation and having
specified wherein the movement of the
Universe stands defined as such.

speaey u arity
aa feateat @ ya: wafer:
TOTAL ATTA,
TTT aap: |
fast safer: ayetet a
BNA TeUATATATATN 1

In the causes, having the stability of
primordial creation, whichever is the stationing
as well as the mobility, have been expounded to
the sages through arguments and on the
authority of the sacred scriptures, O

=== PAGE 27 ===

26

Brahmanas! Whatever has been expounded by
the sages, the same as per verbation exposition,
you many listen to, being expounded as such.

‘sfa strergent argatts wimarere ferent ae
Tara seaa: 13

aK

Vayu-Purdna

=== PAGE 28 ===

26

NST gas:
Chapter 4

The description of the section on
creation
RR aa: gar afraroeenfar: |
WTS Aa: ws Yes vate gH
The sages, having heard as such, being the
residents of Naimisaranya, then all those having
eyes impatient as such, replied to Sita (as
under).
ward ayer cmrerrcara heart
were wet Get Serer caf
“You are, verily, skilled in the knowledge of
the lineages, as you have inherited it directly
from Vyasa. Therefore, you may describe the
location of this world in entirety.
are Tara 2 & chen afegqa
ant yaftels a fafast at woran3n
Whatever may be the respective lineages of
any one or which ones, those very, we are eager
to know or ascertain and also the different
creation of the ancient sages, as also the
primeval creation of Prajapati”.

arapeahtypedterean cirredur: |
faettunssqyeatt a TTA BAAS

Repeatedly questioned by them, the great-
souled one, Lomaharsana, the best among men,
narrated in details and in serial order.

wrqetor sart
Yat Sat sat feet yrent oewonfyrig

Vayu-Purdna

weaarat wet feat weet afer

Lomaharsana spoke- You asked for this
divine narrative, the cohesive one or synthetic
one, the one obviator of sins, which is being
narrated by me. It is of marvel provoking, full
of variety of topics of many imports and in
accordance to the Vedas.

sant arafaed syoprrerseastenrgr: 1
sree fama aferaey fasta: 1& 11
fa: udg garem dite a
Serra 8 yeongqatearane nt

Whosoever may retain it perennially or may
listen to it in totem and may even make it as
listened to by the Brahmanas and to recluses in
particular, and to self-restraint in entirety, the
pure one, during festive occasions or important
Junar days at the places of pilgrimage and in the
shrines, he obtains longer life regularly by a
recitation of this Purana.

rad yetut Sear Eerie wstAA
faeatraad tut aergred weATANC 1
Having assumed one’s own lineage, one
becomes enfamed in the world of immortals.
The stretching of limbs or escalation of the parts
of those one, gets on as per expression and it
was heard (by me).
ot aged wget aringiaaay HU
ait feratifat aaat qorenftor
Being eulogised, the eulogism of all may be
listened to (lit. you may listen to). The
exaltation of all virtuous persons, endowed with
steady fame is the blessed one, the fame
ensuring one, the foe-demolishing one,
salubrious for heavenly pleasure and the
enlarger form of life span.

wigs often det werrafit gon

Creation (of the universe, its) dissolution
and re-creation, the lineage line, Manvantaras

=== PAGE 29 ===

Chapter-4

and the description of the genealogical tables,
(combined as such) make the Purana as having
five pre-requisites.

aeraistt fea: wea: yest faa: giant

ae ff + deaf zt
vata: woreda feafreafita ae
(The history of) the Kalpa which is purer

than any other Kalpas and is absolutely purer
than other pure ones, J shall dilate upon Purana,
that was narrated by Vayu, replete with

knowledge, the insurgence, dissolution, as well
as the establishment and creation likewise.
ira wer: Ure: sereeqUrery:|
SHUASTTSS STS Wa TUB
The first section called Prakriyd (pada) or of
preamble forms, the component part of the
subject matter fit to be narrated, the preface
(Upodghata), the subject matter (Anusanga) and
the conclusion part as well.
eed SERAATYEL TATION!
TG fe Tawa: waraTafeat FATS
areata fret aaa
This Purana is fit for acquiring the virtue,
the fame and longevity of age. It is also obviator
of all sins. Thus, the four sections are briefly

referred to by me. I shall expatiate upon these in
details as per serial order.

we ferrari YeretaTrt TUG Ut

arama serrata fafgrere we

TE cHreaAATS AHA HAYA NE I

read fated wdact are

Tawa wet Yerated FAA VMI

aragrarea sents renter

AGA Ay Met AEATAHAN EH

Having made obeisance to the self-born god

Brahma, Hiranyagarbha (having primordial egg,
born of golden egg), who is the lord, the first

and the last Purusa, the unbom one, the
foremost one, the super-most one, the one

27

having self for the progeny or subjects and the
administrator of the universe, I shall dilate upon
the creation of the beings of highest order,
beginning with the principle of Mahat to the
end of Visesa (the gross body), having many
forms and characteristics with the five
dimensions and six as the white ones (i.e. the
truths or gunas. It is occupied by Purusa. The
unmanifest principal cause is of the nature of
Sat (existent) and Asat (non-existent) and it is
infinite.

wart welt da auigeratectat:|
TRTaUTa A wrereaetferatsterg es 1
The knowers of the reality call it Pradhana
and Prakrti. It is reft of smell, colour, taste,
sound and touch.
Sera Weqyet Ut Tel FATA II
It is unbom one, stable, undecaying,
everlasting and stationed in its own Self. It is

the provenance abode of the universe, the great
being, the supreme Brahman, the primeval one.

fare aayrmernaatee

SATE TA HAOT WHATETTT IN 1

It is unmanifest and is indeed the extension

of all elements. This unmanifest cause became
the framework of all the beings. It is not having
beginning and no end. It is unborn, subtle and
endowed with three qualities, the supreme
mortar fit for circumambiation.

aatmenfaget sent wredat
TRISSHRT alas STATA? ZU
Urea wey AferyOTaTe TATA

waar yerrea damier 41230
TUM WEPAIgayS BI

PANU Teal Bisa SST AUTAU I
RAY WET WIA WeTPTETT)

TH Ugigs faye wareTaO ANI

In the beginning, Brahman revolved as
ungaugeable and inconsistent. By the soul of

=== PAGE 30 ===

28

Vayu-Purana

self of that was all this circumambiated as
endowed with darkness at the time of
equilibrium of Gunas. But at the time of
creation, Tamas (gloom) reached a subsidiary
state. Being consumed at the existence of the
property of the substance, that great one or
principle of Mahat got created, since it was
presided over by the individual soul. When it
was enveloped by the subtle and unmanifest
principle of Mahat, Sattva becomes ascendant,
which lights only Sattva. The mind should be
calculated as the Mahat because the mind is its
cause.

faguraqea: daynfefeag 7:1
gatdtat q wart crema ara: 112 § 11
wet wie Get ttm: freer

It is born of the subtle mind, verily, stood
occupied by the Ksetrajiia (the knower of the
locality or a plough man). The forms of piety or
spiritual good constitute the causes of the real
essence of the universe. The principle of Mahat
creates a creation actuated by the desire for
creating.

Tet werafeden yafe: wahrtet: 12011
yan fata: wafa: dfafegt dread aa:

The wise persons say it in following terms—
Manas, Mahat, Mati, Brahman, Bhith, Buddhi,
Khyati, Isvara, Prajiia, Citi, Smrti, Samvid and
Vipura.

Uqa wey Tereteract feng: ect
ADanes fagagri 34 wa Tew

Whereby the almighty recognises all the
fruit of actions of the human beings, that
multiply in a subtle way, is termed as Manas.

TART ETRE VATATOTA 12 8
Pretshe qoaisa wea aa: GA:

It is called Mahat because it is born first of
all the principles and was remembered greater
in proportions than other remaining principles
and attributes.

faafa art aga fermi waste ag ol
Gedniprerarans uret aft: Baya:

It bears the honour and even agrees a
subdivision and even recognised it by the
relativity of the enjoyment of Purusa, therefore,
it is inculcated as Mati (understanding) .

Ferg eUATET Aaa ASTHMA BU
meregeat warsen a7 Freer

It is termed as Brahman by way of
etymology, because of on account of its
greatness or vastness, dual activity of
development of the beings and it lifts them up
from their recumbence of cosmic waters.

SYR AHA SHASTA 113 VM
wauaia Fanta aftr crea
Since if fills all the bodies by conferring
benefits and makes them endowed with
predetermined elements, on that account it is
called Bhi.

get Yours adarenteenfearq 311
aenreaerae aa a Stee heeaa
It is called Buddhi because of Purusa or soul
that understands all the ideas beneficial or

unbeneficial and whereby something is made to
be understand.

waa: wean Teredade AA 3 Ul
area afer waa aya:

The popularity and the counter enjoyment
whereby gets rescinded therefrom and because
the enjoyment is based on knowledge, it is
called Khydti.

ara aqqutats fir arenfefertargt: 113 4 1
Weed ved: dat Safahatieiraa

Owing to the stability of the knowledge of
enjoyment, the popularity becomes evident. It is
popularised by different names and the like,
manifoldly. Hence, Khydti has been the epithet
of Mahat.

=== PAGE 31 ===

Chapter-4

29

eran fasrnfa wera 34 BT: 113 Gt
Te Tela WaT AAT Sea
It is called Jsvara, the high-souled one,
because it knows everything visually. From that
sprang up the organs of perception and it is
termed as Prajrid.

ana a warttr mqetwenfs A311
ferttfa wera rre Sarat faery
It is called Citi because it collects the forms,
knowledge etc. and the fruits of sacrificial rites
for enjoyment.
adarareadtaht der ararrarafing cu
Ba Bacar Aaa wafer!
pee a fered A Tee eH
Tenfgeteda dfafeatiita
The present, the past and the future, all those
activities whereby it remembers, by that it is
called Smyti, Whereby it gains the entire
knowledge, it is called Mahdtmya (the act of

importance). On account of the derivation from
root Vid or Wind, it is called Samvid.

faad Wu water wd ates faaison
meneefafete treat Wert gfeaat:
It subsists in all and everything subsists in it.

Hence this Mahat is called Sarivid by the great-
intelligent ones.
Weary Wafheays wraseTarahs: 1s eH
wart fayterenfayt wreay a:

That receptacle of knowledge, (the
omniscient), the supreme lord, acknowledged
that knowledge arises from knowledge. Mahat
is called Vipura by the learned persons because
the Dvandvas (mutually clashing pairs) are
covered by it.

Baers Arararragd A ATTY I
Feared BA TE yaaa Ta!

Being an absolute controller of all worlds, it
is called Isvara and because of its vastness, it is

called Brahman. It is called Bhava as one
having an existence,

Sadana 8H: BAIS 3 I
aegag yey Fe TAMTET Sea
Trenferancqdamadyfttt areaaiy vi

Because of the specific knowledge of
“ksetra”, the corporeal body and “kyetrajiia”,
the soul and owing to its oneness, he is called
Ka (Prajapati). It is Purusa because it lies in the
body. It is called Svayambhi because it is not
procreated and because of its existence before
all.

vara: weer
mare wrarattd TaraferAg sy
By these synonym words, the primary
Tattva (Mahat) is quitely described by the
knowers of truth and those who think over on
virtuous thoughts.
erate faget dream: fargeram
dartiserraray wer afret BALIYE 1
The great one (Mahar) being inspired with a
view to or desire to creating, originates the
creation. The determination and perseverance,
of this one stands remembered as the attitude
twain.

ania a wurftr cearaeaa:!
Frqureg @ faga: GATTEATTA ISI
The spiritual good (Dharma) and other
principles constitute the instruments of the
objects of the realising of the world. It has
three-fold attributes in the form of Sattva, Rajas
and Tamas.

frog gemTesRTTRTAS AAI
eM Ussga: Wit afehageng Wisc

From that Mahat, the triad of gunas, having
gone predominant, there grew up Egoism. The
creation of Ego and the like, transformed as
such and covered up by Mahat.

=== PAGE 32 ===

30

Vayu-Purdna

eter TaN Ta TTT
qaremanky yanfeerrerg ase
Thereafter, when that (cosmic) Ego,
accelerated by tamas-guna, got predominated,
there sprang up the creation of the subtle and
primary elements, born of the Ego distinguished
by tamas.
ated fagatn: weqar wast g
STERTR OL TENTH PETMATUTANY 0 I
Transmigrating the cosmic Ego (Bhitadi),
he created the subtle element sound. From that

the Akasa (Ether) was born, characterized by
the subtle element sound.

arate WRN g aenfesnssquA:|
Wrage aeveATeT VAVHAT TAST SUG
The cosmic Ego enveloped again the sound,
the subtle element. Ether characterised by the
subtle element sound, created the subtle element
touch.

aparaad ag: Bea eae wa:
TR WRT Y SIRT AUTTUN BN

The Wind gets on as powerful. That verily,
is known as the one having quality of touch.
Akasa, endowed with subtle element sound,
enveloped the subtle element of touch.

arganta fagaton wort west a1
TART STAT RTRTTOTTEAT 3 1

The Vayu (the wind) even getting
transformed, created the subtle element of form.
From Vayu, sprung up light, that verily, is
known of the quality of colour.

water ga art aa aATgUTG
wifeantt fagatot Trani Test B14 wil

The subtle element touch, of wind, was
covered by the colour above. And transforming
the light, he created the the subtle element of
Rasa (taste).

aerate adt gra: werent Canfetren: |
TOR TT STAT BITTON 4 U1

Thereafter by heat got generated the waters,
having form of Rasa, Water embodied with the
subtle element of taste is enveloped by the
subtle element of colour.

att Tanergeeat terest wast
EMA TI TAT TN OT: BPAY GH

The waters transforming the subtle element
of taste, created the subtle element of smell.
Aggregation gets on by that and its quality is
known as smell.

Tene ¢ aah Tet waguirA
aferafereg aaret Ba AATAAT BAT: IG 9

That water constituent of subtle element of
taste covered up with the subtle element of
smell. In that and that one, the subtle element
got absorbed by that and was known the subtle
element.

wfavmarcararefagrardd: Fya:!
AUMTANS ATCA: YAN C1
Owing to the unspecific elementation, they
are known as Avisesas. They are realised

unspecific elements again owing to the
uncalmed, terrific and insensate.

gamaanise fag WweRd
Seam ER HATA RET AAPRTERTAN 3
aanfte: a wh Gina
This creativity of the subtle elements based
on beings, deserves to be realised by mutual
temperament. From the transforming egoism,
produced by Sattva guna and from the good
nature, the Vaikdrika (modified) creation
however, continues quite instantaneously.
qatar wa va atiarvafnng ot
meeritganion wqdar senitar een
ware Ware at Aanften: BAT: 1g eH
The senses of intelligence are five and five
are the organs of action. The organs are called

as accomplishing ones (of tasks). These organs
are Vaikdrika ten Devas. The eleventh one

=== PAGE 33 ===

Chapter-4

31

therein is the mind. (Thus) the Vaikdrika gods
are eleven (in number).

ota ragant fran atten aa vain
vreardtamancad gfgrnht aeaa§ V1

The ear, the skin, the two eyes, the tongue,
the nose, as the fifth one, are said the cognitive
organs for the sake of acquisition of sound and
the like.

wal UgEreya Beit are wag)
fatten ore: fret arert a ad ang 311
The two feet, the anus, upastha (the organs
of generation of the letter), the hands and the
speech as the tenth one are the organs of action.
Their acts are movement, exhaustion,
enjoyment, manual work and speech.
areargt PEA a wagers af
fagurgy vat arg: regermnieratsraTE ¥II
Ether equipped with the subtle element of
sound, perforates the subtle element of touch.

Therefore, wind became of two attributes as
endowed with the touch of the sound.

wt aa faye: vecertqorgen

PRONG waa: A EATEN & It

When the two gunas of Sabda (sound) and

Sparga (touch) enter into the colour, fire
becomes endowed with three qualities, viz.
sound, touch and colour.

a ea THA TATA
Mee TUT IAT Ferrera TerfecrenT: 1G

Endowed with Sabda, Sparsa and Ripa, that
same enters into the subtle element of taste.
Therefore, the waters having four-fold qualities,
should be recognised as characterised by taste.

a rreepiedy Treey wafer
age TeV safest Teal frATT NG 911
RTT BF: ITY FAA
wire Seer yates fagaTeAT FT BPATIIG C11

The subtle element of smell obtain ingress
into those having Sabda, Sparsa and Riipa.

Then (water) endowed with the subtle element
of smell created the earth. Therefore, the earth
having five fold qualities, is observable as such
in the prominent beings. They all are
remembered as Visesa because they are
tranquil, fiery and insensate.

TeNMarEgart WAH
wiafead wd crereteeTgaLg 811

They support each other because they
perforate one another. They are inside of the
earth which entirely surrounded solidly by
Lokaloka.

fara sfeeren Pancaed + Byat:1
Tot yer yee ea oN
Rat Weed ees aATag UT SAT
The Visasas are observable by the sense
organs and are known as limited. The later
substance attain the qualities of the former ones.

Whatever characteristics is retained for a certain
term is called guna (quality) for that period.

saenT Yerba STAT TUTTINe gt
vrrerta afgeneut arate dara
Someone obtains the smell from that pure
wind due to their ignorance, but it should be
recognised that this (smell) quality is only in
earth, because they (the particles of earth) take
resort to Vayu.

(Ut Ge Terstat ATA: YETTR IN 211
AMPA: SYTAALTT AKAM: |

a Bae Ae PATA BHAA) 119311
Feufatgaares serra

Teeny fagrarat susqrreaha Mies

These seven elements are greatly powerful
but manifolded. They could not become capable
of creating the progenies without having united
in a communion. They all having combined, the
great-souled ones, by the support of one another
and presided over by Purusa and owing to the
amenability of the Avyakta, beginning with

=== PAGE 34 ===

32

Vayu-Purdna

Mahat and ending with Visesa come together,
and procreate the Cosmic Egg.

fagtisusnnaqaergad F Aq 1
That same one procreated at that time like a
bubble of water and assumed the form of an
Egg from the specific ones and finally became a
water of vast expanse.
fencartecot fica —

wrpases fgg wea TerdfeA: 19G

aa Witt wm: @ a yea sem)!

sifgeat a yar Tas AAaIAN99 11

Then that instrument of activity of Brahma
stood established that very way. In the natural
Egg, having got up alive, the one conversant of
the region of locality, Ksetrajiia became one as
known by the name of Brahma or primordial
being. That same one of corporeal form, the
primeval one is called the Purusa. He is the
primeval creator of all beings.

fewanl: astserongieagha:|
at a afta a aagt gardiia:iiec tt

He existed himself as the four-faced
Hiranyagarbha in the beginning of the universe.
The one having golden foetus to begin with
herein obtained generation as one having four
faces, in creation and secondary creation, the
knower of locality, the primordial being. In the
primary and the secondary creation, the
Ksetrajiia is named as Brahma.

ett: We Gerd Wea att aI
Tay a WRdereEnaag VI

Along with the sense-organs, they are
created and they leave them at the time of
resolution. Living beings take to the physical
forms again during the transitional periods,
distinguished by non-aggregation.

fauna” at teenaied arate:
hile WyRS SATA WdAT: 112 ott

The gold-marked, that is Meru mountain is
the foetus of that great-souled one. The oceans
are the embryonic water and the mountains are
the bones and the decrepitude and the like.

aferaud fat otter senfarg aa a1
aagtT a yfereht WAR: Ge AAP Ie et

In that Egg, these seven worlds and the
seven continental earth, along with the seven
seas, as such became coalesced.

wad: Gaeta waiter eee:
arretafead citar erafevatid arrqiic Bu

All these worlds along with thousands of
very great mountains and rivers do persist and
within these, this entire universe persists.

wafer waar at We ATEN
chareité @ airafreans aferrnftric 3
The Moon and the Sun along with the
planets, with the grahas (the portents and
comets) and with Vayu, the Lokaloka mountain
and whatever exists all that stands, included into
the cosmic Egg.

ataderyating arenisus wargay
AN AMO Fes AHA aa Fat 112 wit
The cosmic Egg is covered from outside by
waters of tenfold extent. Water in tenfold extent
this way, stand covered by fire from outside.

iat aya aed aRAIsaTg
argdyrypatta arent TaAISSAT NS KU

The fire in tenfold extent stands covered up
by wind from outside. And wind in tenfold
extent stands enveloped by the ether from
outside.

want gi ag: G a ynfensseT
aenfedgen unit stert gat AENG & Ut
The wind is circumambiated by the sky and
the sky is enveloped by the cosmic Ego. The
cosmic Ego as well stand enveloped as such
being vast, by an unspecific entity.

=== PAGE 35 ===

Chapter-5

33

waraties waht: mEAgTT
Wranssge Utama wera: erate
By these seven coverages, the (primordial)
Egg stands enveloped by Prakrti. And having
enveloped mutually, all these cight Prakrtis
established.

sentenret feat a Tea: WATT
We Wee erat WTTTNE
At the time of dissolution or flood
inundation (lit. pomingant of waters) having
stayed as such, all these swallow each other.
And this way having taken birth mutually, they
stabilise themselves mutually.

arermranraa faces faanftg
aerh dagfes gen sag Teac 81

By the idea of support and supportable one
and a transformation among the transforming
ones, the unspecific one is called Ksetra and
Brahm (the cognisant) is called Ksetrajfia.

sete wae: wt: damfaferg a1
wafagd smmitengun afseeme ott

Thus, the creation of Praksti is presided over
by Ksetrajfia. It existed as in earlier times
without intellect. It appeared just as the
lightning got into being.

warranties oH al Ae Trad:
TATA: THAT MATA

This origin of the primordial Egg,
whosoever knows in fact, he becomes a long-
lived one, a fame-endowed one, a blessed one
and one endowed with progeny.

frofrermistt a: yaar wae THA
aunts ge a serarcpaqie BN

A man cherishing emancipation, a pure-
souled one, attains to a (stable) situation. By
listening to this Purana, he may attain perennial
bliss and beneficence.

gia sttrergerat arsine wirarne yfomencoreet are
agaiseara: us

=== PAGE 36 ===

Chapter-5 33
UST USANSETT
Chapter 5
The narration of the formation of a day
of ISvara

drag sare
afgebeg werd wer arerett fist:
UarATAAL HTATS UTA gH
Lomaharsana spoke- O Brahmana! The
period of time ca)culated by me for the creation

should be known as one day of the supreme
Lord.

Tareaaadt Far WT SET:
BES F AT UPB: west werRAAN Ht
The night of the Paramesvara should be also
understood of this extent in entirety. The day

comprises of that which is his creation and that
which is the universal deluge is called his night.

aes fart wer a ulate arom
SER: WiRae cert ferererag
It is held that he (Brahma) has only the day

and no night, But this assertion is made for the
sake of beneficence of the world.

(aT: Seat weer ewe YP: wel

EAHA ATI: ASIST

sania venga wa a)!

art sian afar aTeT waN

wefeata & at wets etre:

Beet Wea Tare Feerara 116 11

The progenies or subjects and the overlords
of the subjects, the sages along with the
ascetics, the sages such as Sanatkumara and
others along with those who have attained state
of Brahman, the sense-organs and the sense
objects and the five great elements, the subtle
elements (such as sabda, sparSa, riipa, rasa and
gandha), the group of senses and the intellect
along with the mind, all these stay upto the day

=== PAGE 37 ===

34

Viyu-Purana

of the Parameévara, the wise one. They dissolve
or get dissolved at the end of the day and at the
end of the night, there is creation of the world.

varrtafad oe frat wfrtet
met ayorakaset merpEaTgMh en

In case, the Sattva quality stays in its own
self and the formation getting rescinded and the
concomitance getting established, both
Pradhana and Purusa become similar.

TARA AAA Aart
satfert weet a at een a wee
Turan eet Fat aad glee
The Tamas and Sattva— these two qualities
stay in a state of equilibrium, herein in the
excellence, as well as creation, they (exist)
mutually as such. Within the similarity of gunas
is inherent the coalescement and their
dissimilitude is termed the creation.

frag ar aan det yd Tafa at ferrqie
wet wate area a Taser Ferm

Just as oil remaining inherent in the sesame
seeds or ghee in milk or clarified butter, so does
the quality Rajas stay unmanifest in Sattva and
Tamas.

BUR tart Feat We Me FAM go I!
weqe waa wut: wprdva:

Having waited upon the whole night in
them, the great one, the Paramesvara, the
creation of Prakrti begins anew at the opening
of the day.

areas SA TT ATT Ra
wart yeu da wfeyerog wea:

Having entered the cosmic Egg, the great
lord created exasperation by his Yoga of the
highest order, in Pradhana and Purusa.

wera THT I MAAN
wr wads wa cheat war ser
From Pradhina, the one being agitated,
Rajas was created, Rajas became instrumental

therein even as water became the source of the
action in the seeds.

TUATHA EET VAMABAT: NS
yuna: aarainarerat sat fat

Having attained to the dissimilarity of the
gunas, the occupants get regeneration. From the
gunas being agitated, there got created three
Devas.

sift: Tot Yen: Wales: Mfrs
TH ge wt ait: ae faa
TH: WaTGTaN Fa VR orafeAT 4 1

Those embodies gods, the souls abiding in
all beings, have taken highly secretive asylum.
Brahma as Rajas, Agni as Tamas and Visnu as
Sattva got created. Brahm as the illuminator of
Rajas, got established as a creator.

a wenrgransforg areas arate:
aramenrerant fereaitaretst orafiort: 119 11
Fire, the propagator of Tamas got
established in the form of Kala. Visnu, the

propagator or progenitor of Sattva, remains
unresponsive.

Wet Ua wat cet Us Wa FA JOT:
Ue Ua FA AST UA Ua TASHA VON
These, verily, are the three worlds and these
verily, are the three gunas. These, verily, are the
three Vedas and these, verily, are the three
Agnis (fires).
Wea Ba WANATTA: |
Wea aed IAT UTTAR I
All these are mutually dependent and

mutually co-ordinating and do exist mutually
and do support one another.

siraiee at eaten:
any feet 4 Sot a raat TETAS
They perform mutually uncoupling and
mutually subsisting and even for a second, they
do not disunite nor even get apart from one
another.

=== PAGE 38 ===

Chapter-5

35

Sav fe wa Sch fang wea: We:

Fa y Waifs: Walae wade

WE Tart Ha: veh TT AMON

Ivara is the supreme god and Visnu is the

supermost than Mahat. Brahma is the excellent
one of the Rajas and moves here for creation.
The Purusa is to be reckoned as great and
Prakrti is Pard (great).

afatsatsat fe neato
wade Barat: AAT
aquadha wera
farfiam: 2 feed frararqne en
He (Brahma) functions on being established
by Mahesvara and being urged all round. Mahat
and other (creations of Prakrti) long stationed in

their respective objects due to attachment,
function thereafter.

wart qordeenratteare rerdh

Saeateareys THERA V1

wen Stara fayt quactayag:

WeanMisenara: Say TeaAsAT: 118311

Owing to the disparity of gunas at the hour

of creation, the Pradhana prevails. From
Pradhana, which is of the nature of Sat and
Asat, presided over by Isvara, the pair Brahma
and Buddhi took birth simultaneously and from
them, the knower of locality called Brahma,
being one as the Tamas and the unmanifest one.

(afag: artarneest wactaa
tan wet dae: UATTAU SU

Well-groomed by the instruments of action,
Brahma became in the forefront, the wise one
being leading by radiance, gets illumined quite
in a dormant norm.

aa wit som: arod crafe:)!
sondage Tahar a aisFaa un ee

That one, verily, the foremost one, got
established in the face of reasoning. He stands

endowed by the knowledge having no obstacles
and by supremacy.

atta ates deer waka:
Peace Ae ATTAIN G1

He is equipped with an unobstructive sense
of duty and by a sense of self-abnegation. The
unobstrusive knowledge of that forms the
definition of self-abnegation.

tide gfaatat sasha:
FORA ATA WAT a APERBATIR tt

Spiraea uarcg eae:

The awakening caused by Dharma (duty or
spiritual good) and supremacy is unimpeded.
The intellect of Brahma identifying himself
with that lord, is affected by Dharma and
Aisvarya (supremacy). Whatever he wishes
mentally, is created out of the unmanifest
naturally, due to its being controlled, due to
absence of attributes and due to his being the
lord of Devas.

ACY TES reves SAIS HANS
aeaqet yeaferasaem: wya:

In the capacity of Brahma, he became the
four-faced one; in the capacity of Kala, he
became the destroyer; and in the capacity of
Purusa (Visnu), he is the thousand-headed lord.
These are the three states of the self-born God.

OS THRE FES HTT TARTANA
afer eae a yoreha: wrayer:

In the capacity of Brahm, he is the creator
who possesses Sattva and Rajas predominantly;
as destroyer (of the universe), Rajas and Tamas
predominantly; and as Purusa (Visnu), Sattva
exclusively. Thus is the state or course of
attributes of the self-born Lord.

Prargaht gerd atest UeeaPAg oN
yee qediafaretisae: yaaa:

In the framework of Brahma, he creates the
worlds and in the form of Kala, he also destroys

=== PAGE 39 ===

36

Vayu-Purana

the worlds; in the capacity of Purusa, he
remains indifferent. These three are the state of
Prajapati.
Wen Serenata: sare AATS SAT: 13 UH
Yous gustan we aera:

Brahma is one as having the glare of the
interior of lotus and (he is) Kala, being of the
glare of collyrium. Purusa is lotus-eyed one and
is the form of the supreme soul.

ater: witofir ati fants aa
arafifrararmgh: weitere

The overlord of the Yoga creates the bodies
and even deforms them. Out of his sportiveness,
he makes different forms, actions, names and
functions in those different bodies.

fren age ete renter seaa3 B11
aqui wfewrnareagale: watt: |
That which exists in the world threefold, on
that account, he is called as Triguna. Owing to
fourfold subdivision, he is so called Caturvyitha
(having four kinds of appearance).

ware aera weafea(he) ferret wfeirg wit
a(ayeareal Bad arereTeTeTeT Freee
He is called Atman because what it acquires,

what it borrows and what actually exits (4sti) as
per the object matter, that is his constant being.

safe: eberererreer ere erence 113 4 U1
eafiremea aed fay: waver
Rsi is so called because he moves all around
with his physical existence in very beginning
and he is the lord due to his personal ownership
over everything. He is Visnu on account of
circumambiation.

ATARTTTATATATA TTR YATE
wea ¢ spuerearaiafa Ba:
ade: wefagraeTrd: Wa AAT ZO
He is called Bhagavan owing to the suavity
of future (bhaga) in him and he is Raga (lord of

passion) due to his command on Raga. The best
one (Para) is known owing to the idea of
excellence and owing to the protection “Om” is
so remembered. “Sarvajfia” or omniscient is so
called because of all knowing. He is Sarva
because everything originates from him.

FOUTS BATA ATA: BT: |
fren ferns arnt Aettert terterng cu
As he is the abode of men, he is known as

Narayana. Having divided his self into three, he
acts on the three worlds.

aan waa da dha o fang aq
amt fewant: 3 mgdnaga:na eu
He creates, engulfs and observes even
through the three activities. In the beginning
Hiranyagarbha or primordial egg appeared
being four-faced one.

aUferareadis s facets Ara TaTee SIA: |
Ufa Gere: Rat: WaTafNd: BAO
Owing to primeval element, he is called
Adideva (first god) and owing to not having
taken birth, he is knows as Aja as such. Since he
protects all the subjects, on that account,
Prajapati stands etymologised.
Bag a Were HetaeM: Ba!
AMAT TATA LAATTATT 11S QU
Among the Devas (gods), the greater one is
called Mahddeva, Owing to all supremacy of
the worlds and owing to inexorability, he is
called [svara,

geared Tat TEM YATRA TAA
(Gaa: Aafagraiey: aera TAs VU
Owing to being great or big, he is known as
Brahma and owing to his eternal existence, he
is called Bhuta. He is called Ksetrajfia because
he knows the unmanifest cosmic nature. He is
Vibhu because he is present in all beings.

TEAS a TT ET FAT
Trenfencareqerarreaenyee H BIA:) US BU

=== PAGE 40 ===

Chapter-6

37

He is called Purusa because he lies in the
subtle body. He is called Svayambhi because he
is not created by anyone and also he exists
before the creation.

seragend we: wfafaarresiara
RAGT: AMUR TATU RATATAT
Yajiia is so called because a sacrifice is
offered to him. Kavi is so called on account of
perceiving what has happened in the past.
Kramana, the dynamic one, is so called because
of mobility and owing to surrounding the
coverable.

sifeerda: aftercenits Rare yas

favors maisyfgrrrents WT ISG

wenfgand: a yots fafa

The one called Aditya, Kapila (the tawny

one), Agraja (born in advance) and Agni. His
womb was gold.and he was bor of golden
womb, so he is called Hiranyagarbha in this
Purana.

wate Freer arett aatasreg ae
a wea: uftiengaie ata .

The time which had elapsed since the
manifestation of self-born Brahma, it is not
possible to count that even in hundreds of years.

Serengrey WEN aT: Wave
Wasa AMIS TATAT UTA
The counting of Kalpas of Brahma that have
passed is remembered as Para. That much of
time still remains for him. At the end of that, the
secondary creation is to take place.
aife aifemeentn arnienit at tuseu
eri wert aa: Weg A
eet aaa cea ates t Fatt gu
ve: Bina aetiss aT faa)
Crores and crores of Kalpas have already
passed and the other remnants of the aeons are
yet to pass, O Brahmanas, you may recognize

this Kalpa as named Vardha Kalpa. The first
one in these aeons now exists as such.

aferrariyareng Wa: WAGeMIy on

ade adams afar 3a a ya

ites yer wah waster WeTAT:Iy gu

In that Kalpa Svayarnbhi etc. Manus may be

fourteen as such. This includes those of the past,
present and the future. By those, this earth in
entirety exists as are endowed with seven
continents.

wot qrage & uftareat atat:1
senfiretier de at yop freA BH
That should be protected entirely as such the
thousand Yugas, by the leaders of men and by

the subjects or progenies by means of penance.
Now you may hear in details.

Tate dat Walvtarrater a1

afaenti afaeter wea: sett tet By AN

atta a ment aeenht Teraa:t

SREY Tees wh: wera FeSTTATING wit

Through one Manvantara, all the future

Manvantaras, and through one Kalpa, all the
past and future Kalpas (are described). The
future Kalpas along with the futurities and
dynasties. should be inferred by the intelligent
one (on the basis of) the past Kalpas.

fe TeTgUny argues mere gfemenot aTe
Weta: ny nt

eK

=== PAGE 41 ===

Chapter-6 37

NST BRISA: It
Chapter 6

The description of the Boar
Incarnation

amt wat wanaapset yfrdtaeh
ARTA RTARTA

On the destruction of ihe surface of the earth
in fire, the water got regenerated of fire. Then

=== PAGE 42 ===

38

Vayu-Purana

everything merged within it (water), along with
the mobile and the immobile beings.

wand car afer wraradt fare

Fel A ATA GEN AEA: TEANGA

Beavial yeat senemiiseti:

Bel ATAU: A BEANT feret TANT

That time in the vast ccean, nothing come to

be known as such. Then that adorable Brahma,
named Narayana, the thousand-eyed one, the
thousand-footed one, the thousand-crested one,
the Purusa, the golden coloured, having senses
controlled, slept over the water.

aetarganr yet creyder wi:
BB Dees yes Tat we
By the influence of Sattva, he woke up.
Having seen the world as void, they alter this
verse, pertaining to Narayana.
amt ang & aaa gerat at YA
eg HA UW AAA ANAT: SAAT
The water are called Nara, the physical form
as such, this way do we hear the name of

waters. He who sleeps on waters, from that the
word “Narayana” gets proclaimed.

ged greeeen Agt areaTeT a1
wea weed wert Tle tt
Equal to the thousand of Yugas, the
nocturnal hour, having waited upon that, he, at
the end of the night, creates the Brahma-hood
under exigency of the creation.
Fen { Beet aaa wey
agarradyat wragat wt
ante ag eat aeufeg gar ym
aat reren wren feed wonfeTaqNC 11
Then in the water, having understood as the
earth, having submerged by estimation,
absolutely alert as such, (taking recourse)
towards the emergence out of the earth, he
assumed another body in the beginnings of the
Kalpas earlier. Then the great-souled one,

contemplated (the assumption) of a divine form
by mind.
afererassigat aft apr ay AAA
fa J wt cera Setar mT
Having seen the entire earth inundated by
water on all sides, he thought~ “What great
form should I assume to bring the earth out?”

aomiery Bat ane BITE!
aaa wayat aR hfe gon
Lovely one in watery sports, he remembered
the form of a Boar, irrepressible for all beings,
endowed with the nature of speech and was
designated as Dharma.

ardhrfretat yraterrafega
Hreatendianst treats een
It had ten Yojanas in outstretch or
expansion, a hundred Yojanas in height. It is a
compeer to the blue cloud, having growling like
the rumbling of thunder-clouds.
faamntut at dtenterefioy
Fergqa famrenryrer Tere A ATT 8 UI
It had a frame like that of a huge mountain,
Its terrific jaws were white and sharp. The eyes
were bearing gleam of the fire and lightening
and its radiance was like that of the Sun.
tramanat feefarrntrary
rT e YR ATT YATTON gS tt
woarena faye arene aft:
yRroqarorata afaerer TATE RY
Having shoulders longer, roundish and
plump, having movement of the swoop of a
lion, having waist region elevated and flatulent,
well-composed and auspicious-marked one and
having assumed the primordial form of a Boar,
the stupendous one, Hari (Visnu), entered the
nether-lands for the sake of uplifting the earth.

a aque: aaa
afeafagt eter gersinifcal) merrat:1ig4 ut

=== PAGE 43 ===

Chapter-6

39

That one, being one as having feet for the
Vedas, the jaws as the sacrificial poles (Ydpas),
the chest as the sacrifices, the mouth as stack or
pile, tongue as fire, shags as KuSa grass, crest as
Brahmi, highly austere resolved one.

HEPAVERT SarsyfeTATT: |
BRAT: (A:) GaGUS: AAA AEN
Bearing vision as day and night, having
omaments as Vedas and Angas (auxiliary
lores), nose as clarified butter, the mouth tip as
the sacrificial ladle and the sound of the Saman
hymns was his roaring grunt.
weemina: starenifecerifat:
wafrrat ae: ugergterafa: i yon
The illustrious one, endowed with truth and
spiritual good was established in virtuous
valour. He was having chariot for expiation. He
was a hideous one, having huge form with the
knees of an animal.

saree: wrist wetafa: |
SEAT HATTA THAOTA RS A

The one having entrails as Udgaty— the priest
who chants the hymns of Samaveda, the one
having Jinga (genital organ) as Homa
(oblation), the semen or seed for sthana (the
spot of sacrifice), the one having mighty
medicinal herbs, the Vedi or fire altar as the
inner soul, the chants as buttocks, the clarified
butter as the sprk (firing as penal) and Soma
juice as blood.

aera vferiat gernenteerrar
wregrenreat eferarararctantere rat: 1198 1

Vedas were his shoulders. He had the
oblation as smell. The Havya (god’s oblation)
and Kavya (oblations for the Pitrs) constituted
his speed. Prdgvamsa (the room for the
sacrificer) was his body. He was brilliant and
had undergone different initiations.

afroreaet Shit wera fay:
suratizefer: wariferayer:112 011

His heart was the sacrificial gift. He was an
all-pervading Yogin in the form of a great
Yajfia. He was glorious with the sacrificial rites
of Upakarman. Pravargya! were the riches and
omaments.

arrearifeaed yeaareret:|
wraructtaerat & aforeg seltfeega: 2 Vu
His routes of movements were the different
Chandas. The secret Upanisads were his seat.
He was associated with his consort Chaya. He
was raised like a jewelled peak.

aT AAT J ara: were:
ate: dorfgargat a arpa: tu
Having assumed the form of a sacrificial
Boar, that overpowering lord, entered the water.
The lord of the subjects resorting to (lit.
consuming or eating) the earth was enveloped
by waters.
SOTA AENISSY sree 7 fay
argae agg areata Taree gH
Having come closer, he quickly spilled those
waters of the ocean while resorting to them
specifically. He diverted the water of the ocean
in the oceans and those of the streams in the
streams.
Tae Ut THATS TAT
wacitafemrata spanseyaarere MAN
The mighty Lord for the sake of the benefit
of the worlds, lifted the Earth with his jaws,
which had sunk into the netherlands and gone
over to the nether regions.

aa: IAS yfeet yferctert: 1
ware yd were area eee g4
Then keeping the Earth in his hands, he
brought to its original spot. The bearer of the

Earth at first mentally supported the earth and
then released it.

1. Sacrifice at which fresh milk is poured into a heated
vessel, thus giving rise to fumes.

=== PAGE 44 ===

40

Vayu-Purdna

wea aciees vet afta fem
aftararer deer a wet afer rere gu

Over that flood of waters, the Earth stood
like a huge boat and owing to the agility of the
body, the earth does not attain to turmoil.

adage fife Sat seat: wT
ferent: SPM HHBPRSTIRRT: ON

Then out of lurement for the stability of the
universe, having brought out the earth, the
lotus-eyed god, made up his mind for the
division of the parts of the land.

feat ¢ wigs yee ashe
wrerat aearang det dadenieie ci
Serf faye oder fet weet:

Having rendered the land even, he created
the hills on it. Formerly when the creation was
burnt by the Sarhvartaka fire, all the mountains,
being consumed by that fire, lay shattered and
scattered all over the earth.

drarania aferargasstg HeaT:12 811
Paftren a UAISSTRAA TATECTS TAT
weataeaedet: waft: da: BWANZoN

Owing to cold in that ocean of cosmic
waters, the waters were shrank down by the
wind. Wherever the (waters) got impregnated,
therein an immobile one came out. Owing to the
motionless after, being (thus) sprinkled, they
were known as Acalas. Since they were
endowed with knots and joints, they were
known as Parvatas.

firetsathieiareaaarer firetrerar:1

array fasittty crarafiififteenna en

feoaal fart arog 7: A:

wagateat yet wedtat aaa Vu

They were called Giris on account of having

been engulped from within and owing to getting
heaped up, they came to be known as
Siloccayas ie, stony-mounds. Then the worlds,
the oceans and the hills, getting scattered at the

end of a Kalpa, Visvakarma (the divine
architect) creates them again and again, in the
beginnings of the Kalpas. He created the earth
including the ocean, seven continents and
mountains.

Tagg’ cay: Asa weet
Srarracaface a saree Tet 113 31
Then he created four lokas such as Bhi and
others. Having created the worlds, then he
started the creation of progenies.

gen eehphrenrgyfataer: wa:
want gfe aga weufey ae FTUa vi
Brahm, the self-born one, the adorable one,
desirous of creating different progenies, created

the creation in the same form, as they had at the
beginning of the Kalpa.
wenfrearaa: wt wer a gfguden
wearranentet & wrgefrer area: 113 4 11
When he was meditating upon the creation,
quite intelligently, quite in line with the

meditation, there erupted up the creation full of
dark.

attitat wertteenfiret aren) referer: |

anferer waraeier wget Went: 113
Nescience (Avidyd) with five knots, viz.
darkness, delusion, great-delusion, gloominess

and the blinding gloominess, became appeared
of the great-souled one.

wae uissfiat: wit earra: Aisha:

aden da Ao: HVAT 11

aferawegs Yost Fg va a

wert: dau sahenh aeons age

TEAR Uae TT ASAT: eaatfeta st

While he meditated, the creation became

established in five ways. This creation
enveloped all over within gloom, like a lamp
got covered up with a pot. It was illumined from

outside and inside, pure one and senseless, from
which the intellect and sense organs got covered

=== PAGE 45 ===

Chapter-6

4a

up. It consisted of vegetation and since
vegetation is declared to be primary, it was
called primary creation.

gern qeng gan qe wareangen
RT: Wise aat =ats eA
wenfreararan feclerstdiseradans oi
Having seen the main creation having come
to steady state, Brahma was unhappy and he
went into contemplation. When he
contemplated thus the Tiryaksrotas (the animal
world) came into being.
wenfeterata frirataetat: AT
aaragrant Ws BHAGAT: THAT eM
seeenfgoenta & areas:
Since this creation proceeded obliquely, it
became well-known as Tiryaksrotas. Owing to
abundance of Tamas, all those became abundant

in ignorance. They took to crooked direction.
They were self-swayed and devoted to self.

freierateng opr. a fate feria 2
(siege sreaTT StarferefgMTAET: |
Tema egafeen Fae ASTRAY 31
at a anerener dat piftafaer: Bat:

The supreme being saw the vertebrate
generation, the second creation, the egoistic
ones, the self-priding ones, twenty-eight typed
one, eleven-organed-normed, the nine-moded
one, and of the eight stars and the like, amongst
them were known as having capacity of power.

SRULNETTRS Wa sre af: FAs s
menkriarada feet: 8 seat

They were all illuminated from inside but
they all had a covering from outside. Since their

activity was oblique, they were called
Tiryaksrotas.
(ferteretrter apr a faire feria: irs 4 ut

afamrenmetagt ger wd were
wenfteradt Fret aaa: wradAts e 1

Having seen the vertebrate generation as the
second world, the Tiryaksrotas, the supreme
one, having observed everything of it of the
same type of nature, that way having taken
provenance, on his meditating that way all over,
there gathered forth the Sattvika element.

saarngieng @ adie? arate:
wenguatte 9 setetarerd: Basen
This third creation became known as
Urdhvasrotas, as such remained hung up in the
aerial space. Since life proceeded upwards, it
was known as Urdhvasrotas.

& Gawftage afer dat:

wear afer Sete: BATS
a areal Fa: Yo Sra:
saataregiae & 3 whey wats

They abounding in bliss and happiness from
within and outside, became illuminated from
within and outside and became sprung from an
elevated source. By that the wind and the like
may be construed as ones having souls
generated as established entities. The
Urdhvasrotas, being third one (in order of
creations), that creation was known as such.

waaay by Bag aw Aer wy:
MferasaagEn wats Pts AAATIY oN
wast wired wars TTT:

When the divine creation of Urdhvasrotas
was created or even gods of that norm having
got created, that overlord Brahma became
satisfied. Then to some one else, he recognised
as such. He, the overbearing one, the supreme
being, created a different creation, that would
be of Sddhakas or aspirants after spiritual
power.

STOTT RTE PRTTATETATG BH
wedya ureameateatt: Yar
meteatrerada( 2) aatsateratet TARY Vt

When he was meditating again and since he
was of truthful conception, the Arvdksrotas

=== PAGE 46 ===

42

Vayu-Puraga

beings created out of the unmanifest (Avyakta)
which were proficient for the task of creation.
Because the stream of life proceeded
downwards, they are called Arvaksrotas.

3 Menage EAT ATE: |
FEAT BART AT HIT SATATT: Wy BH
And they were abounding in light and
abundant in Sattva, Rajas and Tamas attributes

and therefore they are grief stricken to the
extreme and repeatedly engaged in activities.

wenre afer AGEN: TET a
AUTH SEAT a SAAR TAT: 114 11
Endowed with light from within and
without, the mortal beings were as
accomplished for the task of creation. Through
the characteristics of Taraka etc., they got
established as eightfold.
fagrart aera madagattor: |
gare dora: art wales: walifaa yy
They were mortals having souls
accomplished, having dispositions comparable
to Gandharvas. This way, the creation of
radiation, called the Arvaksrotas of Tejas
(light), has been narrated.
watisqye: Wiagal w safe)
far wasn a guar fag ada any gi
The fifth one called the Anugraha Sarga
(name of the eighth or fifth creation) stabilised
as fourfold through Viparyaya (Contrariety),
Sakti (Power or Energy), Tusti (Satiety) and
Siddhi (accomplishment).
fag ada a asd aaha aaa:
aarti wari ws: wh: a TERING
The created beings know factually the past

and the present objects. The sixth creation is
said to be that of the beings Bhitas and others.

(@ vafeor: ad daar: Yas
Grerremrerytrensy Har arte A) ott
fardtor ynferrecn a safer)

They all being householders and engaged in
partitions, likewise the consumers as also
uncivilized, deserving to be called as Bhutas
(the verifies, spirits, ghosts etc.). Bhutddi is
characterized by contrariety and disability.

want wea: eit Faget were’ B14 3
wana fete aret: w sea
The first creation is of Mahat. It is known as
Mahatsarga. The second is the creation of
Tanmdatras and is called the creation of the
Bhitas.

aanfmeqdierd wa USaea: TWA on
seu wig: wt: aT gaye:
Termiaghg yer & wag: ByaT:Ng gt
The third creation is that of Vikaras (the
products of Prakti) and is perceptible by the
senses. Thus, the Prakrta creation got created by
intellectual perseverance. The main creation
being the fourth one, the chief ones, surely are
the immobile beings.
faders a: wife: we
aateheteat aet tengo ayANG UI
The creation of Tiryaksrotas consisting of
animals is the fifth one. The sixth creation of
Urdhvasrotas being the creation of the superior
types, was known as Devasarga or the creation
of the gods.

(osatearat Wh: wan: aT Ay
aes: Wi: MRT WG BU
Likewise, the creation of the Arvdksrotas,
the seventh one is of the mortal beings. The

eighth one is the Anugraha Sarga, which is
identified by Sattva and Tamas.

wSa aga: Wat: wea Fa: TAT:
went agate atid aan: yA g vu
These five are the modified (Vaikyta)
creations. The Prakrta creations are the three
defined as such. The ninth creation named as
Kaumara is both Prakyta and Vaikrta.

=== PAGE 47 ===

Chapter-6

43

MARY FI: Ut: Ha gfe yeeAT: 1

afayd wad went seo” MEQ

faced wt acters Frater

ugaisafera: isa wayey Beery: 1g & tl

fardtor yan a gem fase wa ai

The three Prakrta creations have been

created with the ken of intelligence. The six
creations of Brahma get into movement by
intellectual ken. The detailed Anugraha creation
being enunciated, you may lear. In all the
Bhitas, that stands emerged as fourfold by
contrariety, by power, by satiety and by
accomplishment likewise.

wrery favatafertaiag wfaaiig ot
fagarant agar gfedag gre:

Among the immobile beings, there is
Viparydsa (opposition or loss of consciousness)
and in the vertebrates breed, there is power. The
man have soul for accomplishment. The satiety
among the gods is in entirety.

saa weela dems qa ByaT 1g C11
At: WT WRT EA: TAT:

These are the Prdkrta and Vaikrta creations
known as nine in number. The creations of a
mutual substratum, the divisions are known as
many.

oR Gast & gel UAT: WANG 8H
are a are fagra @ wa)
fags figura dada wetter: 119 011

At the beginning, Brahma created the mind-
born sons, similar to himself. They were three
viz. Sanandana, Sanaka and the scholar
Sanatana. Being greatly powerful, they
abandoned (the world) due to their certain
knowledge of Vivarta (the unreal appearance of
the world).

agewta arraraufecgreaists 31
areata warent wierd maT: GA: io a

Owing to multiplicity, they were spiritually

awakened. They were abandoned. Having not
created a creation of the subjects, they became
indifferent from secondary creations.

aa ag aniidg Teraruesis a

UMA GAGTE YA: RATT: 119 I

ATTRA ATT RATATAT AAT

Then on their having gone lost, Brahma

created once again other mind-born sons, the
accomplishing ones and the ones identified
themselves with their position and abided till
the final dissolution of the world. You may
know them by their names.

amatsfa: yfret argeafiat ferrari 3
wal fea: asia aaverrarent
Sedat WaISSeATAT WARY gaeeaMTWo 6
They are water, fire, earth, air, ether,
quarters, heaven, the divisional glomming,
atmospheres, the oceans, the rivers, the
mountains, the forests, the vegetations, the
herbal plants, souls and the souls of the trees
and creepers i.e. the life force of the herbal
plants, the trees and creepers.
wat: anet: wonda ygal: dfereaet:1
SETA ATT SATERT TAT UIN9 4 11
wmifrnta: wad wrarera F BAT: 9g
Units of time, Lavas, Kasthas, Kalas,
Muhiirtas, Sandhis (junctions of day and night),
night, day, fortnights, months, Ayanas, years
and Yugas. These are the positions with which
they identify themselves.
SATE STRUT: ATTA
were: after: year
avait wea a yet:
ee amt maa: UAT: N99
From his mouth, the Brahmanas were
produced and from the chest region of that very
one, were produced the Ksatriyas in the front

portion. Vaisyas Were produced from his thighs
and from the feet, Sidras were produced. All

=== PAGE 48 ===

44

Vayu-Purana

the varnas as orders of society were created
from the body.
ARM: WISeTHTeUSHT ATT
ASSAY YATE ATH Fal: TTI
Narayana, the supreme one, is beyond the
unspecific one and the primordial Egg. He is

born of the unmanifest. Brahma is born of the
Cosmic Egg. The worlds are created by himself.

We a; fra: We: Wararag fread
SPRISSAT WAT YTOT Mah V1
This Pada has been dilated upon succinctly
and not in details. This Purana has been
narrated briefly by this first Pada.

fa merge argues wfrarene gfowenet are
WBA NG I

ee

=== PAGE 49 ===

44

Vayu-Purana

UST AAAS
Chapter 7

The enumeration of Pratisandhi period
of transition between two Ages
Wi sara
Bere wera: wa: wines: waatfetet:)
IM F MESA: HIPAA: VATA
The Sita spoke— This way, the first section
has been dilated upon as one having motive for
the preamble. Having listened to it became
jubilant at heart, the son of Kasyapa, the
primeval sage.
date ad suet UR eT
wa: wyfa meae wits weet Agu
Having made understand by words, he asked
Sita for the subsequent narration. “From here

onwards, O knower of Kalpas, you dilate upon
us the period of transition between two Ages.

wai ere adarer aera
merarent wed wiraferdrerat: |

URefeghireare a(at M)eAHTeNSAAAN
About the period of transition between past
and the present Kalpa and the interval between
the two aeons, we are eager to know since you
are highly skilled as one not infatuated.”

cimettt sara
oa aisé vaenfir wfrdtier wea:
endirer sere ada aerate
Lomaharsana spoke— Here unto you, I shall
dilate upon the period of transition between the

two Kalpas, the past as well as the running one
as also their selection.

Tartan aetg ay af a yaa:

ward ade wed ae: Biv: YANG

sreTReTn a: HET: Waist: Gara:

Tet ORS OT HTT Tea Frater, W

O Sages of sacred vows, the Manvantaras

(the periods of Manu) that exist in the aeons and
which one this exists aeon, named Vardaha, the
auspicious one, the earlier one gone by, as such
the ancient one, you may know the interim
period between that Kalpa and the present one.

weared Udenret wie a at at
SA: Wait edt SHTRCTATA: FAH
The earlier aeon having been beaten back

and the transition therein, the other aeon ensues
from Janaloka, time and again.

wafaraiadieg heuer: wT

wafesert frat: wat: aeard wayretenic tt

Tenencoy aerer wfrefatrrem

This happens when period of transition ends

and ihe Kalpas are cut off or separated from
each other. At the end of a Kalpa, all the
activities get cut off from all sides. Hence it is
called the period of transition between one
Kalpa and another.

TT CTE fer a WT 8
WON: Wade WRG: Tel

=== PAGE 50 ===

Chapter-7

45

Ser & wiearls ydeneat: Waa goN
The transition between the periods named as
Manvantaras and Yuga, too get cut off. This
tradition continue as such along with the
Manvantara Yugas. By the objective of the
specific activity, those earlier aeons have been
defined briefly.

Rat wedacrt yateeng a: ws
areiceneadt sata F wae TUTE Aga

Of these aeons beyond the half, the earlier
and which assumes the later form, the aeon
passed as such, becomes one as the subsequent
one by the second half.

at afaen & aererealfegquina:!
WOR: Binreaet Heiss ada FET U
The other Kalpas which follow in the future
are so tied with their later half. The Kalpa that is
current, O Brahmanas, is the first among them.
uferyd: weed g faite: wt seat
ren PreencrenTeTT MAMTA: TAT 83 1
In it the first (half) is called Parva and the
later half is called Para. This is the period of

sustenance (of the world). The period after it is
called the dissolution of the world.

wereaeay a: ya wecisdta: War:
UP MEar Het Wat: TTR
aftty aed wer aferarearer Waren
aftract aar ar arercenfrearg Ane
FAATEATY TRETTT B
sranferenfeitere: HeTEy WHAT RE I

From this aeon, ‘the aeon which passed the
earliest one, was Sandtana (the ancient one). At
the end of one. thousand sets of four Yugas
along with the Manavantaras, when the Kalpa
came to an end, then the time of consumption
(lit. buming) having arrived, in that Kalpa, the
gods, who were moving about in aerial cars, the
planets, the comets and the stellars and moon
and sun that happened to be as the

constellations, these categories, endowed with
virtuous souls, numbered twenty-eight crores.

want waftaggdrg 3 wm
Ain afegararenieat feraferetam git

In one Manvantara and in fourteen (their
numbers) are equal. Thus, their total number (in
all Manvantaras) was three hundred and ninety-
two crores.

Sergent: WANT: AEA TAT: WAT
auifrart tart aeisdtt J Asweiecn
weaning set & tar daar: wyAT:1

In the past Kalpa, the number of gods who
were moving about in aerial cars, were known
as seven hundred and eight thousand in number.
In one individual aeon, the aeronautic gods
came to be recognised as such.

aw warterdagéyg 4 fefangen
Seng feria yeah wae

Faragaa 3 w aqyATe Tot

autafifitenes fara g 2 qT:

Tradity & aretaciies feta a

Ba: Satara: Unt wet earery wT

grahong 3 ae wed arena? 2

In all the fourteen Manvantaras, there had

been Devas, the manes, the sages and Manus in
the heaven. Their followers, the sons of Manus
and the respectable gods, during that period,
worshipped by the followers of all castes and
stages of life and in the Manvantaras, those who
are the célestial beings or heaven-dwellers,
abide in the Devaloka, they all along with their
assistants stand on equal footing at the time of
final dissolution.

aaRsayefararegEa TaN: |

Aeirerrenfet Sar seer: 12 3

Then owing to inevitability, the gods, the

residents of the triad of world, proud of that
place, have understood the revolution or
suppression (Parydya) of their own, which
necessarily occurs in due course.

=== PAGE 51 ===

46

feaftrenet dat yur arae VETS
eaerarenferent Sar ALATA TTA VIL

Wirgeafaarer wera WIE TEA:
Wecitenrea dierent Seat TATA G UL

The span of stay having gone completed,
and the final or last interval having become
closer, the gods, residents of that Kalpa, at the
time of the arrival of the dissolution, they, by
that impatience and grief, having deserted the
places out of emotion, agitated as such, fixed up
their mind for the Maharloka! .

& gem saverd wef Gh: wees
fagfgagen: ad arrdt fafgerfem: 1261
Abounding in purity, having attained to the
mental accomplishment, they all become
justified with bodies of Maharloka.
wm: weuenfafa: aed werrenferg 4:1

rent: eqfacefpcerearbaratsts: 111911
They established the connection with those
Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and other
devotees of that Kalpa.
Tea FF Hevites Bateagdm
aaa Sete Sta AAT AAT CI
Having their minds fixed on Maharloka,
they all, the fourteen groups of the divine
beings, made up a mind for the world of the
Janas too.

fayfgagen ad wei fate:
a: aeuenfata: aed merrenfereg 4:21
Having abundance of purity or racial

sanctity, all those stood in mental
accomplishment along with the denizens of the
aeons who have attained Maharloka,

Saga Saissgea Tet AAT

aa aoarey ferent aed meBha 8 FA:N3 oN)

1, The fourth of the seventh worlds which rise one
above the other, supposed to be the abode of those
saints who survive the destruction of the world
being between Svarloka and Janaloka.

Vayu-Puraga

Having ten times taken recourse to, they
attained the worlds called Svar and Tapas.
Thereafter, staying for ten Kalpas, they proceed
again to the world called Satya.

Ga aa (o) at aah

wa Sagat F Beef WTETTTN gH
mnt welt & srocratet wf
By this combination of an order, the
residents of the Kalpa move along. This way
having passed the thousands of the Yugas of the
Devas, they attain the region of Brahma, the
state of final emancipation.

snfeaed feat FS arin | aA BN
vata cerorgea wtur fereeor a
Aside from overlordship, they become equal

to Brahma by prosperity, glory, appearance and
objects (of enjoyment).

wa 8 walaaracaysitftrger: WaT BH
ors VENT: WT YET TION Tel
There they stand as such endowed with
affection by concomitance. Having obtained the
bliss of Brahma, they become liberated along
with Brahma.

sapenfernsta wep % LATTES
ATTA TARTAR TAATETATETT: |
By an inevitable objective regarding to
Prakrti, they remain bound in their separateness
produced at that time.
ward afaud fe sen waft Sra ng 4
arora Bat g ver art waa
Just as in a wakeful stage, knowledge occurs
with intellectual efforts from its forms, similarly
knowledge which arises in them at that time,
begins to function.

werent g Hari aai firafergeror 7) 113 G11
a: ard wig aratfin aon a

When the differences of those who have

different minute observations are restrained and

=== PAGE 52 ===

Chapter-7

a7

withdrawn, along with them get repulsed the
activities as well as the instruments (sense
organs).
AARP AGT TeleireAhaAAMTNG ot
farpenftreantot ea afar fasarg

B Gear: Fag: YSIS cH
wedt arurdt: Taree Safer: |
Owing to the observation of diversity of

those residing in the Brahmaloka, abiding by
their own jurisdictions, having personal rights
forfeited, they having equal characteristics, the
accomplished ones are of pure souls and free
from falsehood. In their nature, they are beyond
the sense-organs and are well-established in
their souls.

werafaran wreart wee PAR eH
Yeaere(ea) 7 water a wade

Prakrti thus discloses itself to them all
round, but it can not able to function without
activation by Purusa.

wate YA: Bt Fat aT AUT FALIwoll
BAR weRA Fat Gat waefFary
sramrafitont seragaartn ATOM) ANY BU
ama: Weert prararafeanfiza

When the creation starts again, those, the
seers of truth, who are restrained and those who
have attained path of liberation wherefrom one
does not return to this world, there is no birth
again for them like the blazing flames of fire
which has been extinguished.

AARAG TAS FHM BH

a: wre & ectearaar assaTfeat SAT:

afoereae faster aerate qoratis 30

Then on their having gone upwards, the

great ones, from the triad of worlds, along with
them who have not acquired Janaloka from
Maharloka, those survived from their stay in
Maharloka, they maintain their body for a
Kalpa.

qrraten: frgreat Agate:
uyra: Waule wT: PATTI
There are groups of Gandharvas and others
ending with Pigacas, Brahmanas and other
human beings, the animals, the birds, the
insensate ones and the crawling ones.

faery ay acaret yfrdtacrenfagi

aed ay wit whee reais yu

BETA sat Ghat wraa vias

The denizens of the surface of the land,

staying that way at that time, a thousands of the
rays of the sun that stood shining. Those ones
having assumed the form of seven rays getting
combined and each ray becomes as a Sun.

PUOTRBAATRT Aecien eSATA GU
ya yen erga Gees waftatsiven

In due order, rising up, they burnt the three
worlds, mobile and immobile beings, rivers and
all mountains. The former ones got drought
desiccated and were smoke-screened by those
suns.

nar & faa: wa den: qeeigatins
BRU MaT: Ws qHtaaterang Svc
Then they all helpless as such were
consumed by the solar rays. The mobile and the

immobile ones, all assumed the form having
souls as endowed with Dharma and Adharma.

Sere S TAT: TUTTI

an wat wrap: YAATGaAMIS VU

AAR QUT FRAT FY FT:

fagfaagen: ad ard fafegenferat: 14 011

At the end of the sinful age, they go away

with their bodies burnt. But they are not freed
from bodies worn due to their auspicious or
sinful activities. Then they were combined with
the people of Janaloka who were equal in their
form. Abounding in purity, they attained mental
supremacy.

=== PAGE 53 ===

48

Vayu-Purina

ster Trt ar TeUTISARATATT:|
Ri: wh waste seit wrretwaT:( 2) 114 git
Having lived for a night there of the Brahma
of undefined provenance, once again they are
bor as the mind-born sons of Brahmi, at the
beginning of the creation (of the world),

TaMaegay wy Acirerenfag

frag a otag 8g aeg Bafa iy UH

gen fart wenferarat fergiohearerag a

agate tees arm: datas wife: 31

wanted fe afereremeai:|

When the denizens of the triad of worlds,

turned thus from activisation in Janaloka and
the three worlds having been consumed by the
seven suns, when the earth having got
inundated by rain, when the buildings have got
collapsed, the oceans as well’as the clouds as
also the terrestrial waters assume the form of
one ocean. These waters are known as ‘Salila’.

amarafies Th Bary Alert TRIG wii
doremt frat qfraciaren ver a an
The one flood followed the other. When that

enormous flood of water covered up the entire
earth, then it assumed the form of Arnava (sea).

aenfat Serats sere ATT Safa ATG
waa: SAGs aat aren fase
And that shine forth all around and even do
not shine forth shining as such in the ubiquitous
flames or lights. And having inundated all over,
the water of those become apparent.

ReBTATe Teeaal yest PATTING GN
engerifer feat tarererra: ByAT:
The root VZan means ‘to cover’, to

‘expand’. That water then cover up the entire
earth all over, so, they are known as Janus.

arfiera int ¢ Fro: fafa: Aye
Tels saat + yee FAT

That the particle ‘Aram’ has meaning as
quickness, has been enunciated by the wise

ones. In the vast ocean, the water do not attain
to a speedy flow. Therefore, they are called
‘Nards’.

arepragard die seriseny ci

erat adarrat aeneaterener

ae Biel aferaBs a yferatretiy gu

MPAA TERME Precis WaT: |

Wrenfated Ge Ten A YET: Wy: oN

fourm tieer gad agfireaten

Jn that end of the thousand Yugas on the day

established as such of Brahma, when during the
night everything is covered up with waters by
their form, when the earth destroyed by the fire
disappears in water, when in the lightless gloom
having breeze ceased all around and there is no
ray of light, Brahma became supreme as an
existent human being, by whom was occupied
this one, who is eager to create a division of the
universe.

wenta car afer wre E eH

wal a wate ger Rea: TEAM!

aeaviat gaat werauit wether: 1g 2H

In that one ocean, having mobile and

immobile gone oblivious, he becomes god
Brahma who happens to be one with thousand
eyes and thousand feet, a Purusa of thousand
heads of golden complexion and who is beyond
the range of senses.

Fen ANTOTERY Gara Alster at
Teka yt carder aie 30
Brahma entitled Narayana then slept within
water. Having seen the world as a void, he
woke up out of height of Sattva guna.
ga clereccas vers arent win
SITY AAAS STAT ATT BTN Wi
age aft wanssea Ba ATTY BA:
This way, they quote as an example here a

verse referring to Narayana. The waters are
called Nara. We have thus heard that the name

=== PAGE 54 ===

Chapter-7

49

of waters is Tanus. Because he stays there with
waters upto the level of the navel, he is known
as Narayana.
Beayial Gar: BETA,
weed: WEAYR
Teaag: I: aTafe-
ead a: gent freee G11
He is thousand-crested one, nice-minded
one, a thousand-footed one, a thousand-eyed
one, a thousand-faced one, a _ thousand
consuming one, a thousand-armed one, and in
the Veda, he is called the first primeval creator,
the Purusa.
aifgrrani qerra wat
Wat wy: wert FATA
fart: geet wert
BUSA A TA: WTAE GI
He is the sun-coloured one. He is the
guardian of the universe. He is the sole supreme
one, the first over-powerer of the mighty. He is

the golden-wombed Purusa and the great-souled
one, who is beyond darkness.
amet THAT TaN FAIS TAS: |
SHOURA TUM: SHTeAT YAS TATU 6
At the inception of the Kalpa, excelled by
the Rajas, having became Brahmi, he created
the progenies. At the end of the acon, excelled
by Tamas, he engulped them again having
become Kala or Yama.
a 8 arora aeatigmisuia aay
fren ferry wisseart Feet AAG gt
He, verily, known as Narayana excelling in
the Sattva Guna, sleeping in the ocean, having
divided himself in three parts, assumed form in
the triad of worlds.

gaa waa da det 7 fafing aM
Tees cet as AB TATRA 0H
aggre ada: afererga

FEN ARTIURERY SIMEATRTOA TATTIN

He creates, devours and observes the three
forms. When the world, mobile as well as
immobile devastated, all around at the end of
the four thousand years enveloped by water,
Brahma named Narayana sleeps in the ocean
having no light or of darkness.

ugfaer: son Tee Tera Tat weroien
wyata a aecitangd caret Weta: eB

The great sages see from Maharloka, the
Kala, after absorbing the four types of creation,

is sleeping in the great ocean during the night of
Brahma.

aA an aa set afer:

wat ferertaretieratiret: We 3
Bhrgu and others sages just as seven (in
number), in this aeon (existed) as such, then by

them, revolving round as such, the great one,
the secondary one became engirt as such.

Teateuat erat ar(atyarrs frre:
Wangan werereraeta:) est
From the root VRs, ‘to go’, the word ‘Ryi? is

etymologised. The classification becomes
apparent from the very beginning, on that
account, they are called Ryis. By the prowess of
amenability to a sage, the word added as
‘Mahan’ gives the term Maharsis.

uegeitenfeage: art: ART Tas
WaT: GH arenes Teta 94 tt
Stationed in the Maharloka was seen the
sleeping Kala by them. And Satya and the like,
those were the seven great sages in the past
Kalpa.

Gi mrealy wily wattary Wea:
FSaTRT GA YH Sret META NU
This way during these nights of Brahma,
having gone by a thousand fold, the other great
sages observed the sleeping time as such.

moreaisadl ¢ age weredeagew
ROTATE SF TaN TERT Fre 9911

=== PAGE 55 ===

50

At the beginning of the Kalpa, Brahma
created manifoldly the fourteen organisation.
On that account that period stands etymologised
as the Kalpa.

a ae way Henley FA: TA:
SAMAR ABARAT Haas ATG ¢ tt
He is the creater of all living beings at the
beginning of each Kalpa again and again. The
great lord, is manifest as well as unmanifest, of
him is this entire universe.
gan winded: difia: aera:
iret wre AYA ATiI'9 8A
afer yw Bey wey TAT TAM
Bimt 8 waeenfis eat FrateT¢ ott
This way, this has been dilated upon the
transition period between the two Kalpas unto
you. The primary situation that happened to be,
in the midst of the two ages, the present as well
as the past, that same reckoned as such
succinctly in every Kalpa. Now, I shall explain
the present Kalpa, that same you may
understand.

sft margeny agate widen are
AARISATA NON

aK

Vayu-Purana

=== PAGE 56 ===

50

Ware sTeMsera:
Chapter 8
The establishment of the Earth— Its
description
WW sara
ged greeeet Ae aeTTUT HI
wae ered Teret eeRTUTAN aH

Sita spoke- Having waited upon the
nocturnal hour equal to a thousand Yugas, at the
end of the night, he initiates the state of Brahma
for the purpose of creation.

Vayu-Purana

Fen y afer aferarger wat wT
Orr Te ASAD WATE
Brahma then in water having assumed the
shape of Vayu, moving along, in the dark of
that type having got obviated, being mobile as
well as immobile.

Tet WAGE wea: yferetact
area yay wg gWM3n

The water having collectively enveloped all
around on the surface of the earth by a non-
division among the beings, on their being well-
organised all around.

Frereantie Gretta: wqeenret aAawTT:
FRSSHIT UTTSa sear: TTS
Like a fire fly at night during the rainy

season then likewise moving in the sky, being
seen by the earth itself or self one.

wieerar quart gy achoorser wy:
arg aferet afta wanlat we
Looking for the mean to an establishment,

the supreme being then, in that water, having
realised the earth having plunged as such.
srg Hgal reatat FAI
wena wy da wheenieg BATE
By estimation gone alert about the
extrication of the earth, he got transformed into

another frame remembered as such in the earlier
aeons.

ag wt are Hest: wifey:
afta: tanfeaaf ateae ware:
He, the supreme being, having assumed the
form of a Boar, entered into the water. Prajapati

(the lord of the created beings) observed
admirably the earth as enveloped by waters.

segetatnorang sree © fare
aay way ae erratic

Having uplift out the earth from the waters,
he stabilised those waters, those belonging to

=== PAGE 57 ===

Chapter-8

the ocean in ocean and those of rivers in the
rivers,

wife a faerer yfrett ais ferthat
were aaa y aal Maa
And those of the earth on the earth, having
poured, he picked up the hills. The earlier
creation getting calcimined, thereafter, by this
fire of destruction or submarine fire.

deaf weftarey dar gfe weet
dratania aferarisstg WEA g011

By that fire got consumed all the mountains
on the earth owing to cold in that sole single
ocean, the waters were channelised by wind.

Freeh Ga GalSSHRAA AAISTPS HE
eae: Wat: Tae: TAT Re
Wherever they got stuck, there and there
above, a mountain was created. Owing to the
immobility trickled out as such, the static ones
and by knot entanglements, the Parvatas (came
out).
firedisfahivtareraares firetreara:1
aay at Tyee feaferractoreny: eet
wre warafrean a fear: |
They are called ‘giris’ because they were
swallowed by waters and they are called
‘Siloccaya’ because they are collected. Then
having extricated out of water, the supreme

being have placed the earth on its own place,
created the sub-divisions again.

Ba Wa YF alter se ety WAAL
farnit cites frontier
Sy ag anifin aenfioreta aie
Seven each were the Varsas (sub-continents)
in all the seven Dvipas (continents). Having
enplained the unplained ones, he raised the hills

with stone slabs. In those continents, the Vargas
were forty likewise.

mat: vdala aati rahe:
tel aPfereret TATA ATTN

51

That very numbered mountains were there
collected or stuffed as such within the Varsas
introduced as such at the beginning of the
creation naturally and not otherwise.

a BU: Aye ST YF AUSeTy
aPaeT: HATA TTT WTETTAN RG UI
Seven continents and seven oceans mutually

established, having a circle, were introduced by
nature having enclosed as such collectively.

qureigg? ctaierstent we: we
wd g Fae gen arin wae igen
Brahma created earlier (in beginning of
Kalpa) the four lokas headed by the name Bhi

along with the moon and the sun as also planets
surrounded by all sides.

are Ue gan a GEENA: FA
arash: yfaat araeaftat fect aemigeu
Brahma created the presiding deities or
occupants (sthdnins) of this aeon (Kalpa); then
water, fire, earth, aerial passage and the celestial
abode.
eat fam: aggia aa: wats wher
aiteeiat sens seaareart garetreergu ee tt
The heaven, the quarter, the oceans, the
rivers and all the mountains, the medicinal

plants or herbs and likewise the very soul and
extent of trees and the creepers.

war: arene: aera yet dire

aeitraig areig srerreagnft ano

The minuter divisions of time, Lavas,

Kasthas! Kalas, Muhirtas, the Sandhis (the
junction of day and night), the nights and days;
fortnights and months, Ayana,? the years and
the Yugas (aeons).

1. Practical Vedic Dictionary, Dr Surya Kant, p. 248.

2. The Sun’s passages, north and south of the equator
and hence the period of duration of this passage,
half year, the time from one solstice to another.

=== PAGE 58 ===

52

Vayu-Purana

wriimtade wet a wR WEI
I: U BETS greet faa wn
He created distinctly the abodes and its
presiding deities or occupants therein. After
that, he created the soul for those abodes. He
established the serial order of the Yugas.

wi Far wat w afer da wat gL
OTMS Sat FAQ VAT PSPS VU
These are Krta, Treta, Dvapara and the Kali.

At the beginning of the Kalpa in the first Krta
Yuga, he created the progenies.

MURATA wear Get Ydere Wa aT:
aferdiatart g wet cereteisfam 311
Earlier that had been declaimed by me
before you, the progenies of the earlier times,
those very got consumed by fire in the aeon that
attained devastation.
SMTATATRT ee Seis ATTA
wedaca) ya: wt ator at gaa feurwit
Those that did not attain to the world of
penance resorted to the Janaloka. They trudge
on to the creation and assume form for the sake
of insemination.

dhe fears A: wher ao
Aret: GEMM dare vafat Euzqu
For the purpose of insemination, stationed
there for the sake of regeneration, then those
being created, remain as such for the sake of
progeny.
auidaramerontag a: area(fayat: Bat:
Rare fraecla sere THEA & 1
Here the Gods, the Manes, the Sages and the
Manus were considered as the accomplishers of
Dharma (spiritual good), Artha (material gains),
Kama (lust) and Moksa (emancipation).
WA ATE Get: TTA fr
Pet ware & fragrant vara fez

Then they equipped with austerity replenish
the spots and they become the ones having souls

accomplished as the mind-bom ones of Brahma.
a aga aon 3 fed wars
aradurn g¢ & daha gt FM
Those who have attained heaven through

subversive rites, are revolving here and take
birth in every Age.

watnegtin wala waite:
Prater Srreetrenran a TSATA 8

By the remittance of the fruit of action, they
became popular being of that soul structure;
they take birth from the land of the Janaloka
owing to the bondage of the suspicious nature
of action.

Se: ero ta Argel aint | as
&: eolfingg Sera sera: GeTa13 ott
The quint essence of the action should be
taken as the cause of these actions. The worlds

get generation from the Janaloka by these
actions, good or bad.
Zera & witafor ars ag
SST DT SIE TTT ai
They acquire many-formed frames in
(different) births and take birth mutually as
immobile ones such as headed by Devas or
divine beings.
Sat a a anifin merge: wfrdfet
areata sieved QIN: WA: GA3
Of those whose acts came upon before the
creation, those very assume form being created
time and again.
feared WR ania aT
emf: Woe ATT TANG BU
In the killer-and the non-killer, the emollie:::
and the cruel, the righteous and the unrighteous,
the true and the false or in the moral order or

immoral order, construed as such, they assume
forms, on that account that suits or appeals that.

atanrentag eran art a
ARITA Ser Mra: WTAE wi

=== PAGE 59 ===

Chapter-8

53

During the aeons gone by the names of
forms which existed, those very in the time not
come, normally came up as such.

wag aMrSartin ata wfetfat
WA: FAR HEN HT ATT 113 4

On that account, the forms and names or
form of the names, these very assumed a norm.
Time and again during aeons, they take birth by
name and form.

wa: Bt waeel fagateuong 41
SAT RT TATRA RT. TATA CT PTTETATNS & 1
Then in the creation stalemated as such, of
the Brahma desirous of creating those
progenies, verily, of that one meditating upon
the existence as such.

fagart wee J Asay WErTN
SARS QUE TET: TATA URI
“Then he created thousand of couples from
the mouth. Those as such take birth excellent in

spirits and noble-minded with the quality of
Sattva predominant.

wearer fags wast st

Bae Taretine: Yleroeery fer: 113 611

Uy Weatay Fayed: WA:

Tae faer SeTpiteTTEG FAAS

A thousand, a different one from the bosom

of the couples, he created. All those survived or
increased with Rajas quality as such, strong as
well as weak. He created again a thousand
different one, of the pairs from the thigh.
Increased by Rajas and Tamas, disposed to
endeavours, they became known as such.

Waa aeenay fig wast 2
sfgmrerran aa Faster MUTANS oN

By the two feet, different one of couples, he
created. Increased by gloom, all those glareless
and deficient in radiance.

wat 4 garrora wealerar wor:
arian wesarfaer Ceara Tay: 1s BI

Then certainly getting exhilarated, those
ones encoupled as such, the sentient beings got
created, mutually attained to proximity and
resort or proximious resort, endeavoured for
copulation.

aa: mole wets aepeafreet
Tra(fa) a(n Teenie Afar

Since then in this aeon, the creation of
couples stands defined. In every month that was
the day after menstrual discharge, favourable to
conception of the women.

weal + YEG: Sfaaafa dys:
agass weet fiypprta F aay gn
Then they did not conceive, even when

copulated. They brought forth pairs of children
once at the end of life.

wear: qlee serert yaftar:!
Wa: wate aeasheahgarat f& Pease si
They gave birth to crooked offspring, when
they had desire for death. Since then in this

aeon, the birth of the couples (became
processed).
ee J Aa Ael Waat SIa THA
vreatfafera: Yq: Mer TAHA SG Ut
And having had a thought about those
progenies for once only, there gets on the object
of sound and the like, each of which was of five
characteristics in the pure form.

sea adh ya srergieal wera:
marca den afte uftd arqs en
This way the mind-born creation of Prajapati
happened to be in earlier days. In the lineage of

that one got created by whom, this universe
became replenished thereby.

afte: wags Fat wdarafn
Aer TeTgyiaT Bt aah Arvo
The rivers, the lakes and the oceans, they
wait upon and even the mountains. Then they

do not take to the working of highly cold and
hot norms in the age.

=== PAGE 60 ===

54

Vayu-Purina

qeatanadt amt arent aretha 21
a: wer: errenftuat aeret fafegerfert: it
They bring the food born of the fluids in the
earth. Those progenies taking to the sensual
activities attain to the mental satisfaction.

emfenif 3 arareat Pfagter: wae aT:
raTg: YS ws avai afta Tee
The spiritual good and evil did not exist in

them and those progenies attained to equality,
age, bliss and form in that holy age.

ented 4 aRarat weal | HA TT
Ba Srafteanta BR J FI TAY ont
The spiritual good and evil did not exist in
those at the advent of the aeon in Krta age. By

their own individual right, they took birth in the
golden age.

wart 3 weenitn auto feereraT
are AQT wy: Hei By MATY gH

Four thousand of the Varsas remained by
divine counting. The primeval golden age, they
enunciate as one of four hundred of Sandhyas
i.e, twilights i.e. morning as well as evenings.

Wa: Wear’ wag wirareafin
a arat sirenisfea 3 ad af a aA IIG 2H
Then on those progenies in thousand fold,
even getting popularised, neither a repulsion nor
a resurrection becomes possible.

wedtakrafaan arena a:
fargiteat: Geaagen Weare APSATTT: 1% B11
Resorting to the mountains and oceans and
having repose without the housing abodes,
shorn of sorrow and spirit, abounding solely
blissful (were) those progenies.

m3 frarrantual fet yferaran:)
uyra: wroea 7 AaISSHATETT NG YI

Those ones, taking to wilful movements,
perennially happy-minded, the animals and
birds and not then happened to be the crawling
ones.

Ahan area § ering:
a peracryed a assdagaad A AUG uN
Neither the plants (Udbhijas) or botanical
germinations, abiding in the hades, sprung by
unvirtuous norm, neither the roots and bulbous
fruits or exulent roots nor seasonal germinations
and the like,

aaargG: Bret Arak Quite
Tafretaa: areraat Waa Waa g At
sfaaha ufreat & arfivertar cetera)
aerated arat fats: ar terrfertiy en

The time affording bliss of all cherished
ends, neither height of heat nor cold, the
cherished ends suited to the minds of those
everywhere all around as such rise up on the
earth, meditated upon by them, spirited up by
sentiments. Their success affording force and
colouring that one obviating the maladies
(existed as such).

orcad: writter were: ferent:
arat faqugrencrssrert Fagan: waTI4 611

By the physical form not fit to be endowed
with sacraments, those progenies of youths
stable, of those emerge out of mental cravings
the progenies in couples as well.

wi ar a wt a fret de a: aT
ael Gerace erat qe: HS sry eu

Simultaneously, their birth and form
(emerge) and they all die simultaneously. Then

likewise truth, want of avidity, forbearance,
satiety, bliss and self-restraint (come about).

fafagtang at: wat worg: viteretfae:
aafgrds Fe WAT STAT TINE oft
They had no distinguishing marks in their
forms and features, longevity, conduct and

activity. Their actions were spontaneous and
voluntary, without the intercession of intellect.

angi: aay aon: yaarTay:)
ANAT FT ASISSUA GATING Qu

=== PAGE 61 ===

Chapter-8

55

In the age of virtuosity or the golden age, the
non-alignment of good and sin, the
establishment of the orders of society and stages
of life, were not there nor even the intermixture
of castes.

afrareaae adaha wT
GRRE: Wal settaTapsAT 1g
A version antipathy, endowed with these,
they all behave unto each other; having equality
of form and age, all those were devoid of
depravity and elevation or inferiority and
superiority.
Faren wear srt HI FN
FRRIMEBAAA WSTATA WSTaCT: 1G 31
Mostly blissful and free of grief, they all
take birth in the golden age, perennially happy-
minded, high-spirited and force-endowed.

areata arearent Firat frrenfie
warm fawerearat fatterot wertang x11

The gain and loss were not in them; nor
alliance and antipathy; nor likes and dislikes.
By mind, the objects of those prevail as such
having no lust.

a fevate fe asaisd agate de fe
ear ut gagh Farah AAAI 4
Neither they desire to obtain antipathy nor
do they take to gracefulness. The meditation is
supreme in Krta-yuga and in Treta, it is called
knowledge.
wa Bey aig) art aafergT aT
aed Gat WHT at | RTA 1
In Dvapara, the sacrifice assumes prevalence
and in Kali Yuga, charity becomes suitable.
Golden age being virtuosity, Treta as the hazy
horizon and Dvapara endowed with haze and
gloom.

ait amg fad BrgHagT gl
ale: Ga Qi aa ter Heat Fatamg 1

In the Kali Age, gloom is cognizable under
force of the conduct of the age. In the golden

age, the time is this one. You may know its
enumeration.

arent gq aeenfor auto Acad yr
dat we fen waraet a aerATg ci
wel wat ayanssyt a SyfaarT:|

The four thousand divine years constitute
Krta age. In the portion of the period at the
expiration of the age, in the divine eight
hundred years, the people had no longevity and
suffered no hardships or pain.

aa: Bagy aerate fe wT angen
weratgst vata grenieg ade:

Then in that age of accomplishment, the
period of extirpation between the two ages
passes off, only one fourth of the entire
Yugadharma (characterising in Kyta age)
remains,

Perarreniierearararet TA liso ll
wanarafee g dement ger qi
Ue aa g Fae fafeeetde aati a

And when the culmination of the period of
extirpation is over at the end of Age, the
Dharma of the period of the junction remains
but one fourth. Thus, when Krta age passes off

entirely, then all Siddhis of this age too
vanishes.

meat & feet gerat weer:
fatarar gt afereararaat FAT VI
In that accomplishment of mental activity
gone down to a persevering norm, a different

culmination comes to the fore in that application
of physical effort in the Treta Yuga.
wamiet ar were g arte & wetter:
oat amar) feat att Gerri 3
At the culmination of the creation, eight
types of mental Siddhis were got initiated by

me. Those eight phases by the serial order
decline gradually and are lost.

=== PAGE 62 ===

56

wordt anet gar fafadafea at Hat
Taaty wag agdafarg: iio v1
autism: aafeerea: yt:

In the beginning of the Kalpa (the aeon) in
the age of Krta, this attainment is only mental.
In all the Manvantaras, in accordance with
division of four Yugas, the accomplished
activisation is initiated by the adherence to the
maintenance of order of society and stages of
life.

POM FATT UT eT Aya: 1194 11
ardenigra aa ateireraTeRTy
Beha Grae aa: qaaeTAa: 1 0
By the exertion, education and agricultural
activity, endowed with periodical
fructifications, all those phases of fructification

periods get culminated in three phases by
mutual conjunctions.

Ba: BATT He Y ays THT!
Fara Fray Hatyrgfeaaa: sie
afore sagt y afeserg wonfeae
eT MAGMA: MPS AETV C I
worgafa wer fafg: areata ae
wreat fag sapranran fafgratane eit

O best among the sages! When the part of
Krta age goes to a culmination, then in the Treta
age, a portion of Krta remains. When that
activised phase of Krta having culminated, in
the beginning of Kalpa at the beginning of the
Treta age, the attainment of remaining
progenies become defunct by the time-honoured
factors and not otherwise. The accomplishment
gets bedoomed and then another Siddhi
assumed that form.

ami Beret wierd aeat Bareat g ah
te: wager: wat greA< O11

The paucity of irrigative sources having
gone removed, then by the medium of rainfall,
by the clouds thundering ones or endowed with
lightning, there ensued the creation of rain.

Vayu-Puraina

wate ae pat wae yaaa
wIgtreteaar aret garreq Yee 1¢ gt
Only by a single effort by that rain, the
surface of the earth having got association, there
took insurgence the trees of those ones
overgrown in the habitats.

wdrgninng atat det: wera
adata fe PaeraagTgS wT BI
The enjoyment of all those then gets

assumption and by those in the Treta Yuga, the
progenies take their norm.

Wa: Sle Tea aaa fereefary
UTTAR STARA OTRAS HATS 31

Then by a greater span of time, by the
process of inversion of those, the emotions of
lust and greed assumed regeneration suddenly.

areata arcut sifsart aerstegy
Aa aa T Maer Yaa Fle i

That which comes about in case of women,
the menstrual activity at the time of life
enforcement, that does not happen to be by the
force of conjugal felicity once again.

aret Gr: wat J WTA wa Tania
wate aie adat flat Fame 4

Of those that again come about the
menstrual activity every month and then by that
very process that may happen by physical
union.

ATet ARTE MRT EATT
SenTA MTree fetta NS & I

Of those by the appreciation of time, a union
may come about every month. At an untimely
occasion, the menstrual courses coming about,
the creation of foetus came about.

faudan aret g a4 are safer
worpate at: We Gard Yeah

By the inversion of those, by that over-
bearing time, all the trees stationed in abodes
get demolished.

=== PAGE 63 ===

Chapter-8

57

wgaygenai w gard yedfern:|
aeaftr a EE WHAM ANC 21

Of those appeared again those trees
stationed in abodes. The costumes get created,
along with the fruits and omaments.

afearatt at fats center 11

Then those having got demolished, agitated
and having senses dazed, those meditating upon
the existent as such, meditate upon thai success
or attainment.

aaa waa arate
surfaces werehet yes yet AQUg ol

Invigorating honey without the bees,
possessing sweet taste, scent and colour, exuded
in them in every leafcup.

aa mt adahd a Oe FATT
eequrern fergar war & farsa: 1g eit

By that, they maintained themselves at the
beginning of the Treté Yuga. Invigorated and
ennourished by that achievement, the progenies
become free from disease (lit. fever).

WF: area Wretargarg a:
gaharatyget Hy ar wf serge BH
At the passage of time, they were again
encumbered by greed. They forcibly took

possession of trees and extracted from them the
nectar (of flowers) and honey.

arat waroentor qatar a1
ABT HEAT Url aerger: sAfereraferqe 311
Due to this misdemeanor committed by the

people, the wish-granting trees perished at
certain places along with honey.

mearrareatyrerat RearenrerayTaT
Wada aet aret earnghaanhs Tie wu
In that very surviving situation, by the force
of the period of extirpation between the two

ages, there got created then of those the twins or
couples grown up as such.

sivaranttattcarren g:fisa yer
weet: Gera epraconft ag ait

By the cold, winds and sun shinning of
terrible norm, highly anguished being afflicted
by these pairs of opposites, they brought about
the coverages or sheltering abodes.

weal amie Fens fe aft
we frarmenet afeaaerr yerqie gn
Warding off this pair of opposites of heat
and cold, they took refuge in the buildings

earlier, having been such as moving harmlessly
and wanton-willed.

aurired aenitfe Petey:
Teray fre wag adg geet!
As per suitability and happiness, they lived
in homes, in deserts, in inaccessible waste-

lands, in low-lying regions, on mountains and
near the streams.
Terata a gain rant rade
qarint aareant wag faatg aie ci
They take refuge in the forts or intractable
regions of the arid soils, the never ceasing

waters as per combination and desires in even
and uneven spots.

area Free AA) ag vititworarory
Wa: TMT Gert a gti ween
Those habitats were started in order to
ensure security against heat and cold. Then he
created the Khetas (small villages) and (bigger)
towns.

amiga garmt wardpafor a
ATATaTaTa PRAT STIATTAT ENO ON

And the villages or hamlets as _ per
divisibility and likewise the female apartments
or towns of the interior areas, their extensions or
extents and dimensions and the intervals or
spaces between the establishments or harems.

UPR Tat (fireat frearssariseqets|
Tisai waronht war wafer ARTI Ro git

=== PAGE 64 ===

58 Vayu-Purana
They . created as per _ intellectual | Dandas, therein a Gavytiti is understood as

understanding’ having measured repeatedly, | such>.

with personal fingers, the measurements at eq:aeattin dort aftean

calculated by minds.

aergemeteateettengeryfy

ae agerTafer mem: BAT a:1Ro BH

SBTgR: wefan care: wre Sea

AA: VAR HEMT MeV 20 31

The areas as per measurement of fingers

which are called Pradesa, Hasta, Kisku and
Dhanusa as such. A ten-fingered (Avigulas)
joints measure area was defined by the name of
Pradesa. The distance from Pradesa to eight
fingers is called Pradesa. The Tala (a measure
of height) is known by the ring finger and
Gokarna is assumed (a span from the tip of the
thumb to the ring finger) as such.

ahea facia aemge sea
in eer eacofereTAa: 110 ¥ 1
The area between little (finger) and thumb is
called Vitasti| which is of twelve Angulas
(finger-breadths) and Ratni (the distance of the
elbow to the end of the closed fist) having the
Angula joints by counting as twenty one.

agfanfatida ger: erage gy
fang: wat farforg faerenftregery( 7) 11

By twenty-four, a Hasta may be so as such
equal to Angulas and Kisku is known as of two
Ratnis being of forty-two Angulas.

age eqduet afrargtia ai
agraeal & aa vegeta go G11
Four Hastas or two Nalikas? make one
Dhanu or Danda and two thousand Dhanus or

1. A particular measure of length defined either as a
long span between the extended thumb and the little
finger or as the distance between the wrist and the
tip of the fingers and said to be equal to 12 Arigulas
or about 9 inches.

2. V.S. Apte & MW. Skt. Eng. Dict., taken Heat as
fest! But the context here is the measurement of
distance or length.

GH ahaa afayredt: BAUR wil
Eight thousand Dhanus making a Yojana
thereby defined as such. By this Yojana, a site is
so fixed.
aqui gator creer afer gi
ag art of cea aearerd fafirtiigo cit
There are four types of Durgas (forts), in
which the three occur automatically, the fourth

one is the artificial Durga. I shall now talk of
the structure of that.

PeieranMea Tata
aech tafe Haga Tigo et
Huge palaces, lofty ramparts and fort-walls
(Catakas)* are built around. There is a
Svastikadvara (principal-gate) and a women's
apartment (Kumdripura) likewise.
aatihtenan fran yrta a
eet wt ay Het FATEH AIST FAT ROM
The main gate is closer to the water channels
having been dug up as such, having
measurement of eight or ten Hastas which is

being deemed as the best ones. Others opine
that nine or eight Hastas is the best one.

Geri Tt wa a aT:
fafaerat a gator weleteerererr ee ett

The boundary of the peasants or small towns
(Khetas)>, the cities and the villages and of the

3. Dhanurdanda comprises of four hastas or a pair of
Nalikas (Dhanur or Danda = 4 aratnis or hasta,
Brhat Sathita XXIV.9 as per Dr. Ajay Mitra
Sastry). Two Dhanub-sahasras, the Gavyuti
becomes tenable. (India as seen in the Brhat
Sarihita of Varahamihira. p. 343.

4, AITETGM] - TTF means a through bird as per
dictionary and lexicon. But here the context
demands some term of architecture. The meaning
being obscure, an equivalent not found.

5. Ge: Woe fae: - Abhidhana Cintamani 1V.38, p.

=== PAGE 65 ===

Chapter-8

59

three types of Durgas, is defined by the waters
and the hilly spots.
fafeeri a guint faensreamta a1
Shani a feenerrparmedaraT gz
The enclosure and the length of three types

of the forts and the enclosure of Yojanas! being
longer to the extent of half of the eight parts.

werekiarand wygaract YT
foaaut fat q art pedir e esi
A town amenable to east and north having
extent of half or one-fourth of the maximum
length is the best one. It should be established in
the shape of a fan segments, the breezy spot
having situation.
qi a4 a dtd a amt 3 wren
ugrania faaet werd & yt Tegel
Globular, truncated and longer one, a city is
not recommendable. The square one or
quadrangular, straight one and situated in a
quarter may be a commendable city.

gant ¥ eArEgAT TT
wa Tet wyEha BettepofratsrerTg gy tt
The city of eight hundred and twenty four
Hastas dimensions at the opening with central
portion as smaller but polished one, they do
recommend as unavoidable.

ae finepraraet mgtet Fagan
arreTed ferent Ge ard at STB g 8g 1
Eight hundred Kiykus (or cubits) in extent,

they call a prominent establishment. On the
outskirts of the city, a Khera (the stretch of a
half town) and the village flanked as such.

wR We Geremisdaery

fear wer dn saci aMIZ ego

2. The stretch of half a term is Khera.

1, A Yojana is a measure of distance equal to 4 Krogas
or eight to nine miles. (Skt. Eng. Dict., p. 169. V.S.
Apte)

From the Nagara at a Yojana is Kheta and
from the Kheta, the Grama? is at a distance of
half Yojana. The furthest limit is at a distance of
two Krosas and the limit or border of the Ksetra
is at a distance of four Dhanusas.

farragia faetuit fet ung a: get:
fagragutaant: dterarit avta qiegett
Having the extent of dimensions as twenty
Dhanusas, the area of the quarters was created
by them. The area of Grama was also of twenty
Dhanusas and the area of the boundary is just
ten (Dhanusas) in extent.
erife am ferettel; stterersaa: aya:
FATT: YHAT URL
Ten Dhanusas wider is the illustrious
Rdjapatha (main-road) known as such having
no hurdles or obstacles of men, horses, chariots
and elephants having movement of easy
acceptability.
ajfa da orenht wrareag #: gat:
ovata Frere TeAAT: 1183 oH
Of four Dhanusas, the branching lanes were
created by them. The residential lanes and the

intermediary passages and the twofold forming
a pair of the intervening lanes.

mergers UTE
aferaratecantng wrretgr: ufeem: TEA 12 eu
The Ghantapatha3 of four quarters and the

interior of a house having three quarters, the
Vrttimarga‘ of half a stepping and PragvarsaS

2. A measure of length equal to 4 hastas 3: Wt
wor on dark waa 3 wa ade eK
GRE! Yajfiavalkya Smrti 1.167 p, 264; 4: et
veo Or eRe: | ae aft Aeon
PRE Manusmrti VII.237.

3. TAR THAT aT: | according to Kautilya
quoted by V.S. Apte.

4. The enclosure route comprising of sacrificial
chamber or any enclosure room.

5. A room in which the family and friends of the
person performing sacrifice assemble, (MW p. 704).

=== PAGE 66 ===

60

Vayu-Purana

known as a Padika, a simple stepping stone or a
support beam.

weet Teas WET AAA: |

aay ay erg Fep afi augezu

The Avaskara (the sweepings), the water-

courses all around to a single spot, such spots
having been created and the houses were
created subsequently.

aan % yaarerd garg yout:
wen wag arcenfarafareay YA: FA 823A
Just as earlier trees standing in houses
remained, they were thought of for being
planted once again having deliberated.

gala tat: wnat tae WTA:
oa wed Teter ue feet: FUR e wl
The trees vanished away and those branches

did not move away. Therefore, the other ones
risen aloft this way, went aslant as such earlier.

Ras Fee AAT TAT: |
WM FANG A: VASAT A: PAT:
They observed carefully how the branches
had gone. They constructed the apartments in

accordance with the growth-of the branches.
Hence they had been called Sa/as (apartments).
wa feat: wena: mena yerfor at
wea 8 BM: We: Wrest Wa AY ATI
This way became eminent from the
branches, the apartments as well as the abodes.

On that account, those apartment became
popular to the ideology of residential norms.

waltefa wreng wa: wercafet at:
emegerin wrens wrarewia ita: ugVoul

The mind gets pleased in them and they
please the mind as such. On that account, the
houses, the apartments or enclosures and the
palaces obtained nomenclature.

wen setradreararatorahaA
aby ner uel Hevaay 4 qageen

Having created their conjugal copulation or
having rendered them, having been exposed to
conjugal copulation, they devised their
agricultural mainstay, the wish-granting trees
having vanished along with the vernal glory.

fanreerrqeiren & waregemeenteren:
aa: Migavtt arat fategerargt Tree!

Agitated owing to grief, those very
progenies, being thirsty and hungry, their
regenerations got revived once again in the
Treta Yuga.

arathenfrersaren gfarcarat fe ara:
aat geyearie aft Frente queso

Accomplishing the agricultural activity of
the different norm, the tendency of those
became such by lust of those, the waters of rains
that percolated by stepping norms.

eM devarate: wrens Fem: Bye:
wa Fe: wang feats afresri eg eu
By rains emerged the currents or springs, the

dig wells or moats or oblong ponds or ditches
and the low lying streams or rivers or canals.

a ueereant iter aircat; yfertret
Bat tay HATTERAS 3 21

And on the distant side, watery stocks
accumulated on the land routes by the contact of
the water and the earth and the plants took
provenance.

qoaereng sveran: wate
ARAPSGAT WATTAGE V3 31
Fourteen types of plants grew up endowed
with the flowers, bulbous roots and fruits in the
villages and forests without ploughing or
burning.

mqgrnea gar qeusy ait
wieutagy Sarat arafardteerst qua wit

The trees and underwoods or bushes grew
up bearing fruits and flowers of seasonal

=== PAGE 67 ===

Chapter-8

61

growth. And in the Treta age, there grew the
growth of plants in agricultural produce.

ates ad weet sen
Ae: Trea Te eater TST 83 4
way wnferisda SargTag gl

By the plants in the Treté Yuga, there grew
the progenies of which ones; then again grew
up the lust and the impassioned outlook, by the
inevitable objective, under the exigency of the
Treta Yuga.

aan: wehygat aaaarfor werATIS & 11
warSimiga vee J aaa

Then again, they forcibly occupied the
streams, fields, the mountains, trees, clusters
and medicinal plants.

fagrareg & ye caer: sree FAI
FEN UAT aT Sera ArTfeEl

The accomplished-souled ones, which I have
described in Prakrta-sarga, these were born as
human beings according to Brahma’s plan.

wrens yferonte enfant ¢fareran eg cil

Wa: ada Barat SAR GA:

are: after Ayer: YaT ASAT 3 BH

They were tranquil, powerful, endowed with

activity and distressed. Then given to
acceleration, they took birth in the Treta Yuga
once again, the Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, the
Vaisyas, the Stidras and the vindictive ones or
treasonable ones.

cafam: yang afer garg:
SAT ae AY Beaeiien ASMA: evo
They were recognised among the castes of
yore by professional (segregation), sophisticated
as well as nefarious. Herein for them, those who
became dominating, disposed to veracity and
non-criminals.

atacten faereart Perahat or ay a
wferyaha greta Sera eoRTT ey aU

Having avidity gone, having souls restrained
or controlled, who happened to be living
therein, those of lesser intelligence, who
entertained maritaties and activated unto them.

aet anit ada aeadlarremg 2
Ufteratea(y) aehet PeaaTseTTTA: ey VI
And acted on behalf of those and owed
inferiority to them, took to service acts unto
them being of lesser attainments.

Te fasfiasy waag Wey
aa etter Fat at atta feat Taga
This way mutually opposed or connected or
having refuge sought as such, the medicinal
plants owing to that defeat, assumed a tricky
appearance.

waar fearon & yfeeat fanart aem
AT TATA FST AY YM

Gone defunct, having assumed a visual form
like sand by the handfuls, by the force of the
Yuga, the earth expanded of the habitats as well
as arid one.

wet Tara gota yet waar at yA:
TART TABTY FATA: WATTSTU RWG UL
They get fruit from the flowers and then
flowers from the leaves. Then, on then having
gone defunct, the progenies became agitated.

weaye wy rq: genfasr: arate
greinfaterara arat FATT TNS
Overwhelmed by hunger, they went to
Svayarhbhii Prajapati (the self-born creator), at
the beginning of the Treté Yuga, being desirous
of obtaining means of subsistence.
gen eeephrarsarean aTet wtf
ah weaargha ays feat aiewen
Having understood their impulse of mind,
Svayarhbhi Brahma, the adorable, having
thought over the suitable, by a perception,
revealed by physical verification.

=== PAGE 68 ===

62

Wet: Yfser situed Hear MAGE: |
Hea Get YRS Y gle viucifnevci
Having understood the plants as consumed
by the earth, he milked once again the earth
making Sumeru as the calf.
gard tihaer a ater yfercttacn
saigt aft dtonfa arava at: ese
Seed: WHT: AAMAS A:
reas wanda thee storaferet yon
Having been milked this cow then by him,
the seeds were produced on the surface of the
earth. Those seeds then (fructified) into plants
and fruits of wild and parochial norm. These
plants, then having culmination in the ripening
of fruits, assumed seven by seventeen varieties—
the rice grain, the barley grains, the wheat and
_ the atomic sesamum seeds.

frreirat Garey career Waa) Aa:
WaT Fa WAT Freer: ARAUAT RY RI
Priyangus!, Udaras, Karusas with peas, the

Masas, the Mudgas (legumens), Mastiras and
Nispavas along with Kulatthakas?.

MSrTUTR MARA: ETAT
Beat Sweat YAMATO STAT: PATA NG VA
Adakyas} and the chick-peas (Canakas)

were known as seventeen species. This way of
these plants, the rural species were enunciated.

aieat afrera arearoaargésn
lea: Waar wear Me srovafereT: N64 BH
The herbal plants meant for the sacrificial
purposes also being unwild and wild, were of

1, Panic seeds- Name of a creeper said to put forth
flowers or blossom at the touch of women fir]
arin yEfaH also Malatimadhava, Ill. 9, p.69,
MR. Kale.

2. 7A a we: ae fea: aa fre: gerd
BRAGA: | SSP TAIT) Nighantusesa V1.392-
393 pp. 212-213. (L.D. serial No. 18).

3, aTeeM qat-fravg Wy (p. 213)

Vayu-Puradna

fourteen varieties; the rice grains along with
barleys and Masa beans, the Godhuma or wheat
corns, the atomic awns and the sesamum seeds.

freer ae ant y Geren
varrrenreay Farrer siete: TATA SU

weferat ayeraretar wcheater 2
AON: THAT Be STAY ASTI NG 4H

These have seventh as Priyangu and the
eighth one as Kulatthika (a kind of grain or
corn), Syamakas (a variety of rice grains),
Nivaras’ (the rice growing wild or without
cultivation), Jartilas (the sylvan sesamums),
Gavedhukas (a special food of the sages),
Kuruvindas> (the wild grass eaten by hogs),
Venuyava (bamboo seed) and Markataka (a
kind of grain, the unwild one and wild one),
these plants are known as fourteen.

Sera: TET Sea at FATTTET YI
TARR STA AAT TITRE

These ones were the preliminary products of
the Treté Yuga, the plants shom of fruits and
uncultivated ones, wild and unwild ones.

sat YMCA ae aeRO: |

Wet: wes Vigo Tes waa 7) uy on
veal gen gy ten aft we weyers
RTTTETEM & aitreat Re Feey cn

The trees, the bushes or underwoods or
shrubs, the creepers, the winding plants, the
spreading creepers or plants growing after being
out obtaining growth with roots and fruits being
of the species of grass. And affluently grown by
flowers, the earth becomes milked. And the
seeds that were (born) by the self-born one
earlier, fructifying with the seasonal flowers,
these very plants grew up here again.

ae Weer aioe a witeha a: YA
aa: & aet Greet arafart wae TNNa SH

4. tareg aie: vars! TA - Abhidhana
Cintamani 1V.242
5. Bef AeA FRA Ibid, [V.259.

=== PAGE 69 ===

Chapter-8

63

When the plants grew up with the stretched
out fingers or to the extent of stretched out
fingers, they did not obtain growth again. Then
for the purpose of agricultural cultivation, he
devised plans as such.

gan eeepirare fats g a
a: Mya: BTA HART RE O11
Brahma, the self-born, the adorable, having
seen the success of those born of action, from
that time, created the plants ripening by
cultivation,

dfagrt 9 aratat aacarat eeyari
water: PTAA BATTEN: UTETTAI RG V1
The agriculture having got fructified, then

the self-born one, established the jurisdictions,
the way these were initiated mutually.

& @ ofdarcerramrataareran:|
Saat FAA: WTA aA eg 2A

Those who were masters had (to follow)
prescribed conventions and established them as
Ksatriyas for the protection of others.

sufagha’ & ard arasit fafareeni

Bet el Ba Ye Fara TAIT ANG 3
Those who stood closer or worshipped to
them all, as many ensured intrepidity and those
who were bearers of truth the way it came
about, (they were) called as Brahmanas.
& aeismarereaat der at afer:
SST arpa GT Yleat wrTA AAT: 1 8G YI
And the others who were powerless, for
whom the profession pertaining to slaughter
(got ensured) established like Yamarajas i.e.
butchers or —_land-cultivators —_ (applying
implements), they take to the act of liquidation
on the earth being free of indolence.

ayaraa g amg: atarrghreaerar
vires ans ofteatg & TAT eg 4

1, safasfa here is an ungrammatical
Parasmaipada Atmanepada - SRA

usage

fresraiserdiaias ygiaracity a1
Rat aanifor eater ger | SAeETATT: 12g
To them, they may call as Vaisyas, the
cultivators of land, as organisers of means of
subsistence or livelihood. And those taking to
remorse or grief and relenting those ones who
got engaged in service, shorn of radiance or
mental and physical powers, to them, he defined
as the Sidras. Their activities and duties, Lord
Brahm, the supreme being, enjoined as such.

afedt argerat gy agawes way:
A: WaT’ AT rere ATTATERAT 2g 911
In the natural establishment of the four
orders of society, all around, those progenies

once again out of infatuation adhered to those
dicta of morality.

auletaiedt arent WTI

wen are qaear | arawT ST HRs CI

afrarot act aus gguntremnigg

anmrart da gate a where 2g 811

meMri fayeat autvtaraens stag

Uguet afin afi da fag etigeoit

Unadhering to the duties of the castes, they

got involved in intricacies. Having realised that
matter in the real norm, the Supreme being,
Brahma, ordained for the Ksatriyas, physical
strength, the army personnel and warfare. The
performance of sacrifices, teaching and the third
one as alms begging for Brahmanas, the
Supreme being ordained as such as their
avocations and for the Vaisyas, he ordained
animal husbandry or cattle rearing, trade and
agriculture.

freon oft da yr aeeery:1

arora 7 anifin geRratagt FA: yo WH

The Supreme being ordained for the Sidras,

the subsistence by arts and crafts and service for
hire. The duties allotted to Brahmanas,
Ksatriyas (Ksatras) and Vaisyas (Visas) were
normally so.

=== PAGE 70 ===

64

Vayu-Purdina

TERA eH BAA gy Ay a
araisite oat grat Peale UTETTTI 9 RH
The common duties for all these (three), he
ordained as sacrifice performing, studying, gift-
offering and allotting the tasks meant for
livelihood for mutual exchange.

tartg writ det fagusqarry:!
WT TEU Hyd WI HRaTaATAN 293 11
By accomplishment, the Supreme being,
allotted for them the status within the spaces of
their populace. For Brahmanas, endowed with
activity, the status of Prajapati! was enjoined?.
Tris afar wearer
Sport Wed WIR Tae qUSeATT gow
The status of Indra was allotted to the
Ksatriyas not fleeing in battles. The region of
Maruts is assigned to Vaisyas who subsist
themselves as per their duties.
Tred ypndat wftrartor freA
TERA aust TATA FATTO 4 I
To the Sidra castes who abide by their duty
of rendering service, the region of Gandharvas
is assigned. These are the regions for different
castes who observe their prescribed rites.

aa: fertg aofg wrerara assert
Weeh gernfied arrest atraenTi e§

Then the orders of society having been
established, he established the stages of life— the

1. A kind of sacrifice performed before appointing a
daughter to raise issue to her father failing male
heirs or procreative energy or power. (Skt. Eng.
Dict., V.S. Apte, p.375).

2. A form of marriage in which a father gives his
daughter to the bridegroom without receiving any
present from him or a kind of past or penance
lasting 12 days, food being taken during the first
three- once in the morning, during the next three,
once in the evening and in the next three only if
given as alms and a plenary fast being observed in
the remaining three days.

house holder, the act of celibacy, the retreat to
the forests, along with the act of alms-begging.

srrmigg Vara: |

auleanifor & Sferanfite a Haan govt

ae: anita gcareraner:|

TaN TRATES STATA ATA URS 11

The Supreme lord organised these four

stages of life primarily. Those who do not
practise the duties assigned to their caste, they
say, incurred the loss of the (fruit of) holy rites
even if they maintained the activities of the
Asramas. Brahma established these Asramas by
name.

PMS AEA TAM TATTATTT
weariht a dai & amiss Frais gu goet
Then, for the sake of their implementation of
the actions, Brahma enjoined their field of

actions, their movements, restraints and
punctualities.

urgavaters: ye yewenssemt: Bt
rao a wfaet ara age ot

The one comprising of four orders of society
as the preliminary one is Grhastha, as the initial
stage of life. This stage is the very basis and
support of the other three stages of life.

wore weeantt ates Frater 31
SNOAASATSS PANT SRATATAAAT: WTS 2
see 3 yeerer wareTgaaTE:

I shall dilate upon it as per due order along
with restraints and jurisdictions. The following
are briefly the religious duties of the
householder~ Marriage, maintenance of the
sacred fire, entertainment of guests,
performance of sacrifices and Srdddha-karma
(the sacrificial oblations to the manes).

audt a traett da weasgeht wet HaSV
Teyqant det feed geranfior:t
direnients wetarreracitaenqn gs 311

The one having wand-wielded, zone girdle

=== PAGE 71 ===

Chapter-8

65

worn, sleeping on the ground (i.e. downwards)
and matted locks wearing one, the service of the
teacher, the alms begging for the obtainment of
education— these are the duties of a celibate.
The rags, the leaves, the deer hides, the corn,
bulbous roots and fruits may be possessions.

a det ames srroreanfeary
area denned vies aes vu
A bath in both the twilights (moming and
evening), the sacrificial offerings as such is the
ordainment for those abiding in the forests—
having flails-wielded close at hand, alms
begging, no act of thievery and purification.

sua saaaT TAT YAY TSA
SAT TRY Tel T STAT BAUS GI

Non-delinquency, paucity of professional
avocations or physical exertion, compassion
unto people and forbearance, ire-evasion,
service of the elders and teachers and veracity is
the tenth one.

SRTeRTOTERT Wa TH: reat: Taya!
fretdaa vara watrsenft ange gn
This code of conduct of ten characteristics
has been enunciated by the self-born god. For

the mendicant or recluse, these are five vows
and five likewise, the auxiliary vows.

aranyfaasa: vid arferent a
wena warraArafa ec oll

The purity of conduct, modesty and the
tendency of unequalled deeds or achievements
(apratikarman) and uprightness or honesty, a
reasonable outlook or correct philosophy or
love of wisdom)- this way are the five auxiliary
vows or ways of action.

et anenarannt waren
ht wfedtefadfagin: vtec afin aefan
Attentiveness and concentration of mind, of

the sense objects or senses, four or seven alms
begging, observing quietude or quietness, pure

closeness of thoughts, specific emancipation
and renunciation— these duties (they) speak.

wa 8 aa GH SUT TENT AAT
weata aa: anferafitea euyferean es eit

All these stages of life have been enunciated
by Brahma himself for beneficence, veracity,

honesty, austerity, forbearance, _ mental
concentration and sacrifice preceded by
restraint.

Aa: aime weer sania Frees 2

a feeaft WgueT ATaSTT TITTY ofl

The Vedas along with their (six) arigas, the
sacrifices, vows, the precepts or voluntary or
self-imposed religious = observances _— or
obligatory avocations which are defined as
such- these do not get accomplished on the
appearance of depletion of ideas in case of one
given to depravity.

afe: calfin alii wfseata were
arMtangyet Hats ie Tee eH

Of a person depraved by internal emotions
even when taking to heroic actions, the external
activities even do not get achieved any time.

adanft at cereagiurtacen
8 eae ARTS WaT ATTN

The one who may even bestow all by a
polluted inner conscience, by that, he may
become a sharer of spiritual good, since
ideology here constitutes the real norm.

ua tan: after eee TATE
Fat wranyftreg dferarat wees BH

This way, the Devas along with manes, the
sages as well as Manus, ordain the status of
those in that when come to a stationary state.

wenifragartn sitormetiray

et F Fat TRG aes Fear ee vil
andint g arent opi ae fedterar
Wee Feat =asat get: aTTATNAS a

=== PAGE 72 ===

66

Vayu-Purdna

There are eighty-eight thousand sages living
in perpetual celibacy or abstaining from sexual
intercourse and it is their region that is assigned
to those who live with their teachers. The
sphere of the seven sages is the abode of
heaven-dwellers. The region of Prajapati is for
the householders and the region of Brahma is
for those who have renounced all worldly ties or
sarinyasins, as apt within the Vedic knowledge.

aftanngd wrt Aart 7 ferent
waranatinont aft & caerh araeorat: 1198 &

Of the Yogins, the status is of immortal
norm, of the ones having variety of thoughts but
of those having varied mental anguishes, such a
status never gets enjoined. These are the regions
for the people of different stages of life who
abide by their allotted duties.

Tran W wart gaart fatter:
FAUT ATA MT THAT Baggett
The four paths ie. modes of activity,
enjoining devotion unto the gods, have been
enunciated by Brahmé, the one taking to the
systematisation of the world in the primeval
Manvantara! on the earth.

wert gaara Fat grt xa: ea:
aie fagarartt egeT BITTEATN Ae C1
The paths are meant for the devotion to the
Gods and their gate is cailed the Sun and
likewise for the devotion of the Manes, the door
is called the Moon.

ud anism & wf qa Aen
UIST A STATA aT aUMTSEAATEAT 118 SH

This way, the allocation of the orders of
society and the stages of life having been done,
when the progenies bearing souls of the orders
of society endowed with the stages of life do
not get resurrected.

1. The period or age of Manu comprising of about 71
Mahayugas = 12000 years of the gods 4320000
human years or 1/14th of a day of Brahma, MW pp.
786-87.

AAS UAT: AisavaTHeS FAAS:
We: Ted Ferslatant J Ro oll

Then in the Treta’s middle, there ensued the
progenies born of the minds, from out of
personal bodies quite similar ones to the self.

aferexargtt caret wet we ae BI
AAS AAA WAT: BE TAHA o BI
Then that Treté Yuga, the first one having
reached its middle, in due order, then he started

creating even other progenies, the mind-born
ones,
aa: Treaster: wet: WsaTEaay:
eabarmiennnt aratesa afer: 112 0 2
The Supreme being created then the
progenies affluent in Sattva and Rajas,
accomplishing the ends of spiritual good,
material gains, lust and emancipation or final
beatitude as also of economics, animal
husbandry and agriculture.

Roney fieredbe awa ere
agen ator after faferat: wats BM
The Gods and the Manes, the Sages and
Manus likewise as suited to the age and as per
bond of duty, by whom, those progenies were
created as picked up.
sofed aat afearaey tachya:
afteedt wat: Wat ARATE’ ATR 0 wil
Then the duty of provocation of the self-
born having come to the fore, the progenies in
entirety of various norms, the mind-born ones
permeated all over.

Vater ar men get saci aenfaraT: 1
ametsdta oF ARATE” WaT SPN VOUN

The persons who have been mentioned to
you by me, as having resorted to Janaloka
became Devas and other subjects here, when
the previous Kalpa passed away.

AAR TH: Wat: dyeeiguiea:
Tarte BAB wat WAT: 0 G1

=== PAGE 73 ===

Chapter-9

On his meditating upon them, all those came
to the fore for a specific generation, in order of
the Manvantaras, considered as ones, being in
the first one as the youngest one.

raga aatdite arfeat:1
BUMP MEMT: SUE: Wel FAT: URoVll

By popularity and by serial orders, they
were construed by all those ends of healthy and
unhealthy norms, the progenies.

aeRO STEM Wa

Rargrfagea wearer: 120611

gern fenailerted eta eae: |

arid wari o anrerat & farting eu

By the residual fruit of that activity, there

were born by the breeds of gods, demons and
manes- the birds, the beasts, the reptiles, the
trees, the vermins of the hades by those and
those ends, appeared forth. And in the motive of

subservience or dependence of the progenies, he
created from his self.

fe stirrer argues aguerafearrenart
ATTA TSM Ne It

ae

67

=== PAGE 74 ===

Chapter-9

67

UT ASUS
Chapter 9
Narration of the creation of Gods and
others
Wa sar

wishes SR ACA) AT:
weotragea: areed: UT: TEN
dag aad TS sta
ad targefigparrd @ age
faggenianiva eer aAaET
ARATE TAY AAT AA ATTNNZ 11
wafer: wt waetiseSATTa |
wiser Seay SR Gat

The Sita spoke- Then on his meditating
upon, there were born the mind-born progenies
and by those born of their bodies by the
activities along with resources, there ensued the
Kyetrajras (individual souls) from the limbs of
that wise one. Then desirous of procreating the
group of four living entities, Devas, Asuras,
Manes and the human beings, he applied
himself in the water. Then as the self-born god
Brahma engaged himself in meditation on
creation, exertion appeared on the part of the
creator. Then from the thigh of that one, the
demons as sons grew up.

ag: WU: aa eres gT!
BOT TE: YAR at aw SAT (at) BAG

The breath being a synonym of word ‘asuh’
by the scholars, the birth from that was
calculated of the Asuras or Demons. By which

body were created ‘surah’ or gods, that body he
abandoned as such.

asafagn aye(aat TARATEA
Ht ahagen sera Tear I

That frame was abandoned by him and a
night appeared instantaneously whereby that
one, dark abounding one, became night
assuming the form of a lady.

AQAA Tal WaT: |
el Athy tareaeaaTamient
The progenies of the self-born lord were
enveloped by gloom at night. Having seen the
gods, the lord of gods assumed a different
frame.

1, sfegI- Abandoned, rejected, cast or thrown off,
neglected, Skt. Eng. Dict., V.S. Apte, p.33. Stafag:
YA: - A son that is abandoned by the father and
mother or by both and adopted by a strangers one;
of the twelve kinds of sons among Hindus,
Yajfiavalkya Smrti (1.132. SBI Jed seq Asferst
wad Fa: ager at wat a aT yy
uftqerad arses: 8 TAT |

=== PAGE 75 ===

68

Vayu-Purina

ser Wage wat Ase
areal Garena fireardieni: faretie i
Abounding in life but unspecified to that
one, he united himself with it. There too that
one getting united, a well-being of the Jord then
became apparent.

wat Wa Bye Certeres Saat:
aiiser dterat araTeast Fat: WaatfereT 11g 1
Then from his shining mouth got generated
the gods or deities shining forth or gambling as
such. By him were born the Devas reputed as
such,
engfedift a: sien: aterat w ferarera
weal wat g fecrrat wit Ba Fagot
Which one in the game of the creator, in
heaven or light was declared as such, in that
very brilliant frame, the gods were produced by
him.
RargEaisa saree
SPST A ATR Ga SRATAATTAN Ra
Having created the gods, the Lord of the
gods assumed a different frame. Abandoned as

such by him, that body instantaneously got
regenerated from the hand.
wees: Steral Fae: VATA
arauraltrant taeriisat SseTTTA gM
From that, the diurnal activity assumed one
and he became as such. The god collectively

united upon him. Then Devas assumed a
different form having only the Sattvic attribute.

PUGS TATA MEAT WY:
Feat CoV THATS FHL YS UI
Recognising those sons as fathers, the lord
then mediated upon them and created the father-
like Manes from his two sides, between the
juncture of day and night.

wed fied tat: gard 34 ag aq
Wa Berg fares a A SAH) eAUesit

Hence, Pitrs are Devas and their fatherhood
is due to that. He abandoned the body after
creating the manes.

wusuferg TYR) A: EAA) TTT
Taree tari afrat asge ATK
That frame abandoned by him, then assumed
the (frame of) twilight immediately. From that,
the day of the gods became as such and the
night, the one of the Asuras i.e, the demons
became as such.

wane g & tot ar ag: ot ated
ASMATAU: TS TA TATETATII NG Ht

In between the two, the frame that was of a
father, that one being greater, from that, the
gods, the demons, all of them, the sages, the
Manus likewise got created.

B FMryUTrs Tau Meat ATA!
adisai a aden ay So wT VON!

From the mind of that one were born the
sons of mental proclivities. Then having seen
his own progenies, he again gave up his body.

wieeafararat y aver As yaTy:
THM: AST AAT ATATATATL RS

That body then taken leave off, became
moonlight in no time. At the generation of the
moonlight, the progenies became highly
jubilant.

TARR AARTET AAT (AN) GARE TST:
(Set GF: werent zat a arr (at) gauge
From mind of that one, then the mind-born

progenies took birth. And having seen the
progenies even, he take leave of that body.

asuiag! AeA ST WERT
TRA RART GEE SAAT TAI TATU

That body then taken leave off, became
moonlight in no time. At the generation of the
moonlight, the progenies became highly
jubilant.

=== PAGE 76 ===

Chapter-9

69

BATRA oaafagl TERT
Wah Taret Ba den Siren T FAR VU
This way by that great, these bodies were
taken leave off. Instantaneously then, the day
and night and the twilight along with moonlight
took birth.

Sai Hea TISePT TRAM TT
aararaicrenr Ufa: ar S Tenferenray 2
The moonlight, the twilight and the diurnal
glow automatically endowed with life, the night

endowed with gloom, became one as endowed
with three watches.

wenar feenrat EET: VET: FUTY a
memat fear at afore F fea 31
From that, the gods of the divine frame,
overjoyed as such, were born from the mouth,

whereby the birth took place during day time
and hence they became stronger during the day.

WAT FEMUR SEATETHSTY |
money obser gaan fafa Fa Mes
By the body, the lord during the night,
created the demons from the thigh. From the life
forces, the ones taking birth at night, became
intolerable at night.

wre afer Faragt: Fel

faut aarti a antag 42411

Tamny way ff wate fer

wien teret der aarahnfaanh 4112 e101

Of the Devas likely to be, along with the

Asuras in the earlier Manvantaras passed, as
well as not yet come, of the fathers as well as
men, shall become the causes, the four in
number, engleamed by moonlight, night, day
and twilight.

cubrrerrdtse(et) fa wrgreatsa THifefir: 1
snfedteat Fafa: Gansse warafs: uo

In whom shine forth then the waters, the
word ‘bha’ stands etymologised by those

seeking inspiration from the mind. Having been
accosted during the circumambiating light,
Prajapati spoke again.

Asma er y taeraarar|
fares ars garets are Frgarga: 12
Having seen these waters, he then created
Devas, Danavas and Manavas, the Pitrs and
other intellectuals (learned men, wise men or
sages).
TRH Ay Great TSIEN: |
aft Wrerwrat tara eM
Having flayed that body in entirety, then the
Supreme lord created another one. The one
being a corporeal doll or a bracket female figure
or a perceptible image endowed with Rajas!
and Tamas (i.e. materialistic tendencies and
morbid proclivities) that became associated as
such.

aren gufarenisat gaa GA:
FA UO: QUA ATTY YRAT: 113 ot
Obsessed by hunger, then in the dark, he
once again created another one. Created by him,

these having selves comprising of hunger, got
ready to procure waters.

araraana want seas ag a

Tea Tra eites satereaTaY rere: 113 eH

Asgakropsmifa sat eet: TT

Fa aoelon aa Yee: HHT 3 BH

“We are preserving these waters”, this way

talking, those Raksasas (demons) in that light of
reminiscence or having light brought to mind,
having souls irate and being night-rovers, talked

like that. “We shall make the waters recede”,
getting pleased, they talked this way mutually.

1. The second of the three gunas or constituent
qualities apart from the Sattva, Tamas, supposed to
be the cause of great activity among creatures being
predominant among men, the other 2 Sattva and
Tamas predominating among Devas and Demons,
(Skt. Eng. Dict. V.S. Apte, p. 462).

=== PAGE 77 ===

70

Vayu-Purdna

By him then, by activity, the sacrifices along
with the Guhyakas of cruel acts (were created).

TART Trey ents angie faureaal
awe fafrenge arait dPraeat3 311

The root Vraksa is considered to have the
sense of protection. The root Vksi is used in the
sense of destroying.

arggT wires aay syitdet 7) ttt
vitronyetfager aed matstiet F wR WHI

Having seen them with displeasure, the hair
of that wise one withered. But due to cold and
heat, they grew up once again over to that
master.

Ser aie oan TeredarrataT:

TATA: CAT AAT SAAT TT: BFA 3 &
As if the snakes released off from my head,
on that account, left off as such, the wicked-
souled ones released as such were called as
snakes that way.

warareamta auidarrafaar: |
at yfseat freer: qatesrarer:n3 &

Owing to having wings or falling down—
they were Pannagas and creeping ones or
crawling ones as Sarpas. They had their abodes
below in the earth under the sun and the moon.

wer Meret atswratrntgeren:
SCORE RIC CMCC. COCOE
The highly furious self-born as born out of
his wrath, that same entered into those beings of
poisonous nature~ serpents who were born
along with them.

AUGgaT aa: HTS) far
ata efits soar: faferereat:gcu

Having created the snakes out of wrath from
the irate sovl, he created by the ferret hue those
ones or he created the wrath-souled ones by the
brown colour. These became onvs as flesh-
eaters,

SATA BAT YT: fren: feferererTT
Gara TATA TAT SRT TATA RU

Owing to impish tendencies, they were
called Bhutas (vampires) and Pisdcas, the
carrion-eaters (lit, owing to eating of raw
flesh). Even as he was singing words, the
Gandharvas were given birth to.

eeniite agé wart uftcea
frat ait Ing tar F Batson

The root Vdhay means ‘to drink’. Since they
were born from drinking the (musical) words,
they were known as Gandharvas.

aReaTY weg saa w wy:
Wa: arama aaifa aarats MA's vi
On these eight Devayonis getting generated,
that Supreme lord, quite voluntarily, created
those vertebrates from the food.

Brecentt weife aaaiste qatar
Weare g tat & gates

From the covering ones, those Vedas or
metrical portion and from food, those
vertebrates and from the void, the god created
the clusters of birds.

Tadisaaraia cares aais gad

Taawerggen wakat a fares

aaat IRI ICICI Oi RE

sprrvancider meareder ATTY ¥ 1

From the mouth, the creator created the

goats and from the chest, the sheep and kine.
Then from the stomach and from the two flanks
and feet the horses, along with the elephants,
the Sarabhas (octapuses), the oxen or bisons,

and the antelopes, the dromedaries or camels,
the mules and those of different breeds.

ae: werent Trees aR
Ud ware: Up AGaIsA Wyss yn

The medicinal herbs, the bulbous roots and
fruits were born from the shags. This way

=== PAGE 78 ===

Chapter-9

nN

having created the animals or cattle and
medicinal herbs, the Supreme lord organised the
sacrifice.

meng J Hered Fa Fen
Tihs: Jeot Bat watsaraeretiw ett
Then on that account, in the beginning of the
aeon at the opening of the Treta Yuga, the kine,

the goats, the man, the ram, the horse, the mule,
and the donkey (were born).

Wramarageigacater Frater
yarval fagtt geht at: wars ven
To these, they called as the parochial cattle
and now you learn about the wild ones, the

beasts, the bipeds, the elephant, the monkey and
the birds as the fifth one.

Fea: Ula: YO: VAI WITT: |
ured aeut de fgets wars tt
afaent a agri ft weer
oeifa tg at int uses sass
qermied a esos PTET
arnt Set SIAN VBA FAM ot
awanfeat a vegan
werfargraeratoreravararorya Ty Qi
aE TAUTTATET TST

The rodents and the cattle were created and
the seventh one the creeping ones. From his
front mouth, he created the metre Gayatri,
Varuna, Trivrt, Soma and Rathantara and the
Agnistoma among the Yajiias!. From the right
or southern mouth, he created the metres such
as Traistubha metre (name of a Saman arising

1, Agnistoma- Praise of Agni- A protracted ceremony
performed by one, who desires to go to heaven, the
performer is a Brahmin who maintain the sacred
fire, the offering is the Soma, the deity are Indra etc.
and the number of priests required is sixteen; the
ceremonies continue for five days. It is the chief
modification of Jyotistoma, a Practical Vedic
Dictionary, Dr. Surya Kanta, p. 6.

from a Re in Tristubh metre) and the fifteenth
stoma (a song of praise), the Brhatsdman and
Uktha (a saying, song, praise) verses. From the
rear or western face, he created the Samani,
Jagati metre and a fifteenth stoma, the Vairipya
and Atiratra?, From his northern mouth, he
created twenty-first (stoma hymn), the
Atharvan, the Aptoryaman (an amplification of
Atiratra sacrifice), Anustubh along with Vairaja
metres.

fagasyimis tersedfiny wu

aaifa a waatssdt were ear:

semraenht went maT SRT BU

The lightnings, the thunderbolt, the clouds

and red rainbow and the like and he, the
adorable supreme being, created the birds to
begin with in the aeon. And higher and lower or
bigger and smaller beings grew out from his
limbs.

eur warent yack fe werae:1
ae aged yd targeeprr iy si

Of Prajipati creating the creation of the
progeny of Brahm, having created the group of
four to begin with, the gods, the demons, the
manes and their progenies.

aa: gate yer wreaaiin erafin a

aan ETE TATRA TOT 4 Ut

afeanaife aaa

wort a are ce ates TAT G1

Then, he created the beings, both mobile and

immobile, the Yaksas, the Pisdcas and
Gandharvas and likewise the bevies of the
Apsarasas (nymphs), the Naras, Kinnaras, the
Raksasas, the birds, the cattle, beasts and the

reptiles, the unexpendible and the expendible,
the stationary and non-stationary.

ai Sans eeatfin wreeguat witfet
arte WERT PRT: WA: FENy on

2. An optional part of Jyotistoma; A sacrifice
performed overnight (Rgveda VI1.103.7).

=== PAGE 79 ===

2

Vayu-Purana

And whatever were their activities assumed
as such in the creation to begin with, those very
get into implementation being created as such
again and again.

feanfes ugg sttenigarya
afer: WUERA Te TAY C11
Carnivorous or noxious or hurtful or beasts
of prey and non-injuring ones, gentle and cruel,
the spiritually good and bad, the true and false,
calculated by him as such, they do conform to
that. Therefore, that same appeals him as such.

mengeg armrafirary fey!
fahetht a qari ante Sra BU
Varied norms among the mighty beings and
among the images having objectiveness of
senses, the dissociation of beings, the creator
brought about creation of his own.

Rueyearart y Wy: at aT ATA:
daftrant fam: xanrd defeat: 1g ofl
Some say that it is human effort and others
say it is the karma, while still others such as
fatalist Brahmanas, call it the destiny that
decides the nature of beings.
heat anf td w wergfrcanret:|
ade t yorarernferes a ratfelg:1g gH
The human and the divine act (fructifies) by
the instinct of the tendency of an outcome or

fruit. In fact either of the two alone does not
suffice. They are inseparable from each other.

Wea) wth TT at sz a aI
SANTA: WATT AAAAMA NG VU

Neither one is superior to the other. Neither
one alone nor the two separately or collectively.
The balanced out-looked ones, firm in spiritual
good or spirited norm, define objects as
dependent on activity.

aM Bee Yat HAT oT TIAA!
Regret wansset Pa w WBA AN

Name and form of the beings and the
manipulation of deeds that Mahesvara created is
just from the word Veda or from the words of
the Vedas.

sedan amare wer aay yea:
Wee Wat ater aaft Bg wit
The names of the sages and which ones
constitute the philosophies (Drstayah) or
outlooks or observations or wise sayings of
those born at the culmination of night (ie.
sinister deeds), those very, he observes as such.

aamiggirgi arareafir yay
ayant an atare aar are MAEM 4
Just as in season, the marks of a season are
of many forms with the lapse of time, those
very are seen the ideas at the start of the aeons.

wafaerg BErY TeNTISSRRAAAT
wade aqgerdt Fafgrriare mrraTTg & tt
This way the activities having been created
by the creator of provenance, unspecified at the
end of the night (i.e. the obviation of sin), are
seen as manifest having taken recourse to the
mental accomplishment.

ua yet Gert aati erat a
ASIST A: WaT: WET a SAaaT FAT Ug ott
This way stood created the beings, mobile as

well as immobile, then the progenies created as
such of the wise one, did not assume a growth.

FORA AERTS BAT
Ty yoret yore mgTifaTa aes cit
wife canfa a afes da aa

a WATOT BAT TOT Pare aT 11g @

Then he created different sons born of
mind— Bhrgu, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and
Angiras, Marici, Daksa, Atri and Vasistha, the
mind-born ones, the nine Brahmas (the creators)

or Vedic sages or seers. This way these ones
have been determined as such in the Purana.

=== PAGE 80 ===

Chapter-9

aut generat 4 wear gerenfeary
Wasa sEM By TTA N90 11
Of all these being the Veda-souled ones,
expatiating upon the Vedic lore or expounders
of the Vedic lore, Brahma, the creator, then,
created Rudra born of the soul of wrath.

vast da ef a arnt ia
a8 Gast & Gel UAAMTAR: FANG Rl
The mental resolve and the duty or activity
of the earlier ones, the primeval one- Brahma
(creator) created in the beginning as also he
created the mind-born ones, similar to himself.

wre werk faghd a Gar
wren a fay ars a ASTIN I
7a cieag Gard Fda: SAAT:
Bea AMAT Sta FAT: 1119 311
aed Fray cagayErona!
fever rare afetadiio vit

They were— Sanandana, Sanaka, the scholar
Sanatana and also Sanatkumara, the
omnipresent or omniscient. They are eternal,
independent, unattached to worldly life and
hence they do not procreate. All these being
ones as having knowledge acquired, having
passions and rivalry controlled. When they
remained dispassionate this way, Hiranyagarbha
(the Brahma born from the golden egg or Visnu
or the soul invested by subtle body or
Saksmasarira or one having golden foetus)!, the

1. Golden Foetus- Name of Brahma as born from a
golden egg, formed out of the sea deposited in the
waters when they were produced on the first
creation of the self existent, according to Manusmrti

“17-9.

Ssaradieaaa: qaisorm: TAT: |
whyrisir: a wa wage dsfirera
wtugg: fafae: vai amy wa aaaid ag
drag, were weaker aera
way we Tei: | This seed became a
golden egg resplendent as the Sun; in which the self
existent Brahman was born as Brahmi, the creator

73

adorable, the supreme being or almighty god or
most exalted (Prajapati) thought over.

we Taya: Yeasheaait:|
EAT SICA: 194 1
From the wrath of that one was born a
Purusa bearing gleam of the sun having the
frame of half male and half female in radiance
like fire.
waesed steers
fanissmrafagaen Barerdadiie§ tt
“Everything has become full of lustre and
equal to the sun in splendour. Divide yourself’—

this way having spoken, he became invisible
there and then.

Wayea fee Ya: Yer Yea: WRI
7B Seay ae ST ATATTAAT: Hoot
Having said so, split up in two parts, a male
separated and a female separated, he, the
Supreme lord generated eleven times the
personal half.
ahera WER: Wa Ua AEIAT
saraT ageitarearafiger feafeot:19¢ 11
aeagurngitie wermerratsa
feed ferer cteret wear fear agit
By him the great-souled ones were spoken—
“Having taken into consideration the
multiplication of the mobile ones i.e. world
seeking inspiration for well being, for the sake
of escalation of the populace, make efforts
unindolent, having confided in the world or in
all for the establishment and welfare of the
populace.”

Waray wegeggy Wad:
Terregaureta ea AEA FegAT: eo
This way addressed, they wailed about and
fled along all around and on account of

who is therefore regarded as a manifestation of the
self existent.

=== PAGE 81 ===

4

Vayu-Purapa

bewailing and fleeing, they became well-known
as Rudras.

ae anafad ad Acted waraTy

Bara cles Tac: NS eI

By them were circumambiated this entire

triad of worlds along with the sensate and
insensate creatures. Of those ones, there were
no successors in the world as subservient to the
entire populace.

Serrgdaen farnretey wetaT: |
a OT OT Tera vienreadaetié 2

Having force of ten thousand Nagas
(serpents) of innumerable norm, the Gana
overlords became highly valiant. And there,
which one was the greatly affluent one, was the
half-female framed one of Satikara.

SORT a Te Ged Gt eachsinfStene
cored efarot ae: YH art aes FATA 311

I declared before you earlier, the lady sprung

from the mouth of the self-existent one, the half

of the body, the right-sided one was of that one
and the left-side being white and black.

arent fareate dear Sat eae

at g Stem feet get Wee He a a AEST

“You may divide yourself (into two)”, this

way was talked to by the self-existed one, the
Devi or the goddesses. O Brahmanas! She,
however, talked that way, became subdivided
into two parts being white and black.

wen arnt agents oped yarfear: |

Tare Fae Terie Ber cea: ATT S GA
soot deat a aM Ves Ween

oa Saat wat Heautt sat AMAT kt
anf: war wera cies Teer feat
ferarnssatar: yereehMTaATANC 11

I shall relate her names. You may listen with
due attention- Svaha, Svadha, Mahavidyd,
Medha, Laksmi, Sarasvati, Aparna, Ekaparna
and likewise Patala, Uma, Haimavati, Sasthi,

Kalyani, Khyati, Prajiia, Mahabhaga, and Gauri.
These are well-known in the world, the
universal form of the noble one, owing to the
adoption of different physical frames.

wy daureren aaraaqeay:|
wepfatterar tat ent ast werfertic cn
arenifateraran tact seria
grartfaearty goat ara B yuiic gti
Therefore, listen succinctly of that forms, as
per earlier narration— Prakrti, Niyata, Raudri,
Durga, Bhadra, Pramathini,  Kalaratri,
Mahamaya, Revati and Bhitanayika. During the
transition of the Dvapara age, you may listen to
the names of the Goddess as (narrated) by me.
viet atfret erat aodt cprearertt acti
wordt arect Fat ara FanfeFEMIg ott
afgeion yeent wergeratcon
Tea Tear qaetnareTag Bn
amrafaet agua wren fagenfert
arene) Soret aren wferafetig BH
Gautami, Kausiki, Arya, Candi, Katyayani,
Sati, Kumari, Yadavi, Devi, Varada, Krsna,
Pingala, Bahirdhvaja, Siladhara,
Paramabrahmacarini (highly observant of
celibacy), M&hendri, Indrabhagini, Vrsakanya,
Ekavasasi, Aparajita, Bahubhuja, Pragalbha,
Simhavahini, Ekanarisa, Daityahani, Maya,
Mahisamardini,
atte faxahtern ferren verifier
earmmfaerafir satan sare 311
agearearetatentrt Seat ATA TAT:
& vote aeretat fae 7 wae vil
Amogha, Vindhyanilaya, Vikranta,
Gananayika. The names of the goddess (stand
enumerated) as per serial order. Of Bhadrakali!,

1. Name of one of the Matrs attending on Skanda,
Name of a village on the right bank of Gaiga.
ugar AH Hen wise a1 ats ae
sreged aftet azafict and gift agerehft fare

=== PAGE 82 ===

Chapter-9

the goddess, the names proclaimed by you as
such in real norm, those men who recite as
such, they do not come to the fore and are not
embarrassed.

area ort aIsft gt atsfa esti at

Tarai wgaiia wet aisha weisfa amg an

sagpeizeiteat eres faged:1

aifinafa a watg(ag) ten ara aaa

In the forest as well as in alone or solitary

path, in a town or in a house, these ones may be
taken recourse to as protection. In water or on a
land route, from the tigers and thieves at the
spot of goblins in particular and in teeth of
afflictions (mortal agonies), all of these names
of the goddesses may be pronounced.

aiamegta WAG: wen
arafeat aerat waa WaT go
By the Pitanamatrs! having assumed the
role of malignant planets or omens for the
children, one may use an amulate with these
names for protection of the children.

wertelt Her FY wa sitar waste
arent traeentn teateahact aq 1

The two lineages of Mahadevi as Prajiia and
Sti are declaimed as such. By these two,
thousands of goddesses are assumed as such by
whom the entire universe stands
circumambiated.

esa J ah yaya
dart da Hemel aigtsormathra nee

She created the profession, an embodiment
of Dharma or spiritual good and afforder of

gordi 41 Bhagavata Purdina X.2.11, p. 880.

J. Patana~ name of a female demon said to cause a
particular disease in children and to have offered
her poisoned breasts to the infant Krsna who seized
and sucked away her life; regarded also as one of
the matrs attending upon Skanda and also a Yogini
or a kind of disease in a child ascribed to the
demoness Patana.

75

bliss. And at the beginning of the aeon, from an
unspecified source of creation, they created the
determination.

ura efeata faa get: Yas
woTareaaeat wapat a ATR O11
Of Brahma, a son named Ruci, the mind-
born one, deserves to be recognised as such.

And from the breath, he created Daksa and from
the two eyes Maricin (i.e. the Sun).
RY way fe: wie:
feraisiiecd det streets Ugo gu
Bhrgu, the sage, was born from the heart,
having birth from the water or Varuna. From

the head, he created Angiras and from the ears
Atri.

Gert a waterIgeITET Fore A:
wares afed y atarifaht mA BU
From the Udana?, he created Pulastya and
from the Vyana3 (the life wind getting diffused
through the whole body) the Pulaha. He created
Vasistha as born from Samana and from Apana,
he created Kratu.

afr 3y Fey Ftectfern
BAT TR: VAT: MOT BIEN HATIRo FN
He created Nilalohita and Bhadra in the
form of conceit (Abhimdna). This way the sons
of Brahma as born from the one born of life
force, stand recounted as twelve.
Bele AAT: Yat aga TROT: YA:
sareng 3 yr waa Taanfet uo vi
This way these should be recognised as the
mind-born sons of Brahma and Bhrgu and the

others, who were non-expounders of Brahman
or Vedas.

2. One of the five vital airs or life winds which rises
up from the throat and enters the head, the other
forms being 3, 319, HH and 2A.

3. One of the five vital airs that which circulates or is
diffused through the body, personified as a son of
Udana and father of Apana.

=== PAGE 83 ===

16

Vayu-Purdna

yet: Toure ate: wresrataa:|
Was verbs We BROT SWAT Rou
By those ancient householders, the pristine
attitude of life was brought into being. These
twelve create progeny along with Rudra.

ay: Pg wangedtaah
Yaterat ga tear: waaraf gst go gi
Rbhu and Sanatkuméara— these two lived on
perpetual celibacy (keeping abstained from
sexual intercourse). Born earlier before others,
these two were the ancestors of all.
aay wey Hee geet eieraereah
Aas argu cits Aa: afer assferitn gow
On the lapse of the first ancient aeon, both
the accomplishers of the world, shone forth in
the world and stood having rendered contracted
or preserved their semen or radiance.
migel arremtorentrens serrata
wered a art a adtat websTatig0 ci
These two, having self induced to Yoga,
having super-imposed self in the self, so that
they may adhere to the cherished end of
progeny as well as lust, being endowed with
great virility.
adirmeae gar sft area
TTR AAMT SAAT Zo BH
Sanat continues to have the same form and
features as at the time of his birth. So he is
called Kumara. Hence his name is mentioned as
Sanatkumara.
ai wag & ayn fgea FaqunFaa:
faaterd: Wael wahirceiaaT: ggoNl
Of them, those twelve lineages, the divine
ones, endowed with the qualities of gods,
endowed with activity, equipped with
progenies, were adorned by the great sages.

sae aug earae Taya
wearfefersreardt fara: WHT: TTT

This way sprung from the senses, with a
view to create the people, from the self-bom
one, culminating in ‘Mahat and the like,
specific as such, a modification or modality
came about of the creation automatically.

aanerciiar werarrafisa:|

waits wae vader aTga: 1122211

Yi fafaerant: stticraderem

aferaereserth gam eet weg 83 11

Decked by the planets and constellations, the

gleam of the light of the moon and the sun,
surrounded or covered by the stream, the ocean
and the mountains and by the towns of different
varieties and by the Janapadas (inhabited
countries) exultant as such— in that unspecific
grove of Brahma!, Brahma spends the night.

FORA AMAA ATTA: |

afgrmerradta STEHT: RRS

Tener fag: wate

qalentqyeney Gag ARAT RGU

anita: Bayer gat: TAT:

Wert Va TeraereT TET BIVRg UT

This eternal tree of Brahma is born of the

seed of Avyakta. It grows up through his
blessings. Intellect constitutes its branches and
the sense-organs its sprout. It is having good
flowers in the form of Dharma (spiritual good)
and Adharma (evil or vice), having the fruition
of fruits in the form of bliss and woes. It is the
source of subsistence or livelihood or
maintenance for all the beings. The root of that
tree of Brahma is Brahman.

1. May be the country of Barma (Myanmar)- a
country in the Eastern India as per Ramayana IV
(Kiskindhakanda 40.22) and Kavyamimarhsa of
Rajasekhara mentioned along with Anga, Vafga,
Sumha and Pundra Janapadas, 38 Wa WH wT Feet
fata ay Ye FRM: TAIT: | LL.3-4. and
also “Geographical Encyclopaedia of Ancient and
Medieval India.” - Dr. K.D. Bajpai, page 75, part I.

=== PAGE 84 ===

Chapter-10

7

werk art ay Pet waRETAT
seaasyIS: Wl TAIT: WAY Tell
The unmanifest cause of the creation is
eternal and endowed with the form of Sat and
Asat. This is the creation of grace of Brahma
(Anugraha-sarga), which is the natural alone or
primary creation of Brahma.

qorang wean agar gfagdan:|
Fare reat TAU TATATT 8 RC UI

Six creations headed by Mukhya are
secondary (Vaikrta). They exist in the triad of
times who identifies with them.

at: WTS wareUr A aa: TAT:
feed quoi wast aerat vefagat
WaT a ge Af art: Taher geet

The creations of the mutual norm then, were
deemed as the source in them, the two divine
well-winged ones or beautified-leaved ones,
endowed with two combinations, two branches
and two cloths and coral plants or young shoots.
The one who knows the tree and no one else of
his own self therefrom.

ajar zea fers: wata
G ated wag a

fam: att aut ara aa:
ise AAA AAT 1122 011

Whose crest or elevation the scholars belaud
as the heaven the sky as the navel, and moon
and the sun as two eyes, the quarters as the ears,
and the two feet as the ground, that one having
soul as uncognizable, is the procreator of all the
beings.

SAGA STEIOT: TAT
age: afar: yaar
apreiirhe wea a yet:
we ant TAT: GTA 122 8H
From the mouth of which one, the

Brahmanas got procreated and from whose
chest, the Ksatriyas in the forepart and the

Vaigyas from the thigh and Siidras from the two
feet. All the orders of society (therefore) were
procreated from his limbs.

TRA: WaserATeUSTATA ATA
Hosa Ysa Is citer: Fahey VN
Mahesvara, the supreme lord, is beyond the
unmanifest. The cosmic Egg has procreation
from the unmanifest. From the Egg then was
born Brahma by whom the worlds were created
as such.

aft simergent argsins tarfegizerott art
FaAISEATA UGH

**K

=== PAGE 85 ===

Chapter-10

7

UST SPATS:
Chapter 10
The description of Manvantaral

Wa sara
TERY erag Te vita
Bel A A Maat WaT: Seah SGATAN
mnmargat gen wanrgta g:faas
aa: o feet afegreiferrmtrig i

The Sita spoke- This way, the people
having been existent by Brahma, the creator of
the world, when those progenies fail to get
carried on by some reason, then Brahmi, solely
enveloped by Tamas and aggrieved as such,
created intelligence which leads to a definite
decision.

1. Faraenmeaged ef gm ate safe
traanftgreaa | Manusmrti 1.79, p. 23. The period
or age of a Manu; this period according to
Manusmrti 1.79 comprised 4,320,000 human years
or 1/14th day of Brahma. The fourteen Manvantaras
making up one whole day. Each of those fourteen
periods is supposed to be presided over by its own
Manu. Six such periods have already passed away,
we are at present being in the seventh and seven
more are yet to come. (Skt. Eng. Dict., V.S. Apte, p.
424. MW pp. 784-785).

=== PAGE 86 ===

3

Vayu-Purdga

sassmht arereirataat frente
aed wofres ada a eta 13 1
Then in his own self, he saw the Tamas
element, the restraining one. Subduing Rajas
and Sattva, it was reigning as per spiritual good.
wad 84 ge wes Oh Cae:
TAY AAA TTS 1
Tormented by that grief, the Lord of the
universe felt grieved. He dispelled Tamas and
Rajas (the cause of great activity in creatures)
overpowered that gloom (Tamas).
am: sfigt & feet a erated
HTPTTOTIS TR FEAT PTAA ATATU U1
Then that dusk became dispelled and a
couple from these were born. And from the
assumption of criminal tendency, violence
erupted up and as such born of grief.

wafer fag corn
aay wraTeeasaarATNg 1
Then on that couple having taken birth,
having soul for the feet, then the god was
overjoyed and resorted to such a norm.
wat of 8 ae Gen TAT) equ
feasetiea at terefagedisaaqiie tt
Then that Brahma took leave of that
personal frame being of no glamorous gleam.
He dissected that body into two. By half, the
male being assumed form.
oe aT A TT WTST STAT
wert yaertt ah aad quence
By the half the female! being, by name of
Satariipa got created. Then the supreme being
created the earth (supporter of the creatures) and
then he created the desires also.

mr fed yfadt da afer are fate
FAM: WM ay: Yalfeanraca frwhae nt

1. Male half of Brahma as man and half as Satarapa.

That one took refuge in the heaven as well
as in the earth by the greatness of Brahma and
that body, the pristine one, stays having
enveloped the sky.

ar waategaa ANT PRATT SATA
or Rat Fad awa AT: UTABSTTAN OM
That woman by name Satardpa was created
from the half, that female one. She performed
severe penance for million years of highly
impracticable norm.

watt drat yet weaved
a4 ware: ye eat ayeeatigen
Then she obtained the male being, the

husband of refulgent fame. That one, verily, the
primeval being, the male being, is called Manu.

aaaaatgt want
OAT Y Yeu: Vell prereset aT gz
wat a Tae Ure ETAT Tere

wer: aT: BT Heat TAT y

Seventy-one sets of four Yugas, contitute
what is known his Manvantara (reign of Manu).
Having obtained the wife Sataripa, not born of
any womb, the husband (the man) sported with
her. Hance that sexual urge is called as Rati.
The first copulation that one got initiated was at
the inception of the Kalpa.

ferramgsgen aisaayeay fee
a UMRrRATY SAY WY: BASH
Brabm then created Viraj, the first progeny.
That Virat became the man (Purusa) and in the
form of the king, he became known as Vairaja
Manv?.

a ae: ware: oat Geet Ags
SATACT RATATAT STATA RG A

2. In Rgveda X 90.5 - he is represented as born from
Purusa and Purusa from him. In the Atharvaveda,
VIII 10.24.5 X1.8.32, Viraj is spoken of as a female
and regarded as a cow, being elsewhere however
identified with Prana.

=== PAGE 87 ===

Chapter-10

79

fragdrartaet Gat yraat ath
at Bu caret area ara: wanes: 119g
That was the creation of progeny called as

Vairaja and in that creation, the Purusa was
Manu. And from the Purusa of Viraj, the heroic
one, Satarapa gave birth two sons, the best of
the sons, named Priyavrata and Uttanapada and
two daughters of great felicity from whom these
progenies got procreated.

Rat aren wanssala: wefeda &
wariga: waft J cara STESTARY: get!
Two auspicious daughters were named

Akiti and Prasiiti. Svayarhbhi, the supreme
overlord, offered Prasiiti to Daksa in marriage.

wot carey faga: dared wGREAa
wa: Mamas atrepfel MeTTTEAAN gS 1
Daksa should be known as Prana and Manu
is called Saikalpa. Manu gave Akiti to Ruci
Prajapati.
ape free sa WTSI eA: YT
aay efron da arat Haye: R911
In Akiti, the auspicious couple was born

from Ruci, the mind-born one. Yajfia and
Daksina, the twin born ones, took birth as such.

aged elerorat yar grey SAR
aU sft MAMA Sar: TAT ASATN 011
In Daksina of Yajfia, twelve sons were born

known as Yamas, the Devas in the
Svayambhuva Manvantara.
RS WaT ae TET aT:
anfaele eres Tort gt wer: TAT a
Being the sons of Yajfia, one of the twins
(Yama), on account of that they have been
known as Yamas. Ajitas and Stkas are the two
ganas of Brahma known as such.
ann: yd after aa: tat fect:
Paria gaa J wapat SAATAT: 2 VI

The Yamas were earlier made
circumambiated because it was the name of a
divine denizen. In the procreativity of the
daughter of Svayarnbhuva (there got
procreated) the lokamatrs (the mothers of the
world).

wat Hea farearRaTTTy |
wales EMIT: Bal: HATTA: BH
In her the lord Daksa produced twenty four

daughters. All those were of mighty affluence
or fortune and ones as having eyes lotus like.

area a: Wal: Gabe ATA:
wala geenfea: wat fears ATR
All these were wives of Yogins and
Yogamatrs. All were expositors of Brahman

(the universal knowledge) and universal
mothers.

gal cettiegie: yfsten fear ae
agfarisrag: wife: fafa: atfterdreyitey
The first thirteen were as Sraddha, Laksmi,
Dhrti, Tusti, Pusti, Medha, Kriya, Buddhi,
Lajja, Vapus, Santi, Siddhi and Kirti, the
thirteenth.
used wfsere erat qerraait: wy:
grant dane fatenta cyan gi
Lord Dharma took the daughters of Daksa
for the purpose of his spouses. They functioned
as door-ways for creation ordained by
Svayarnbhuva Brahma.

ama: forer acter Wenray Ye: |

wera: eae cafe: cafe: sift: erat FETI2@

dafearrgar a Set Tater Tae aM

ART: HITE FATT ETA SH

Besides them, the remaining younger ones

were the eleven daughters, endowed with lovely
eyes. They were~ Khyati, Sati, Sarnbhati, Smrti,
Priti, Ksama, Sannati, Anasiiya, Orja, Svaha
and Svadha. Other sages then espoused them.

=== PAGE 88 ===

80 Vayu-Purana
wat Tavera sity: Yee: Yl qaata: Grenft smmmes argu
yereets frdfawer faeits rea ae ui waar feta: gat aerate aah: ANI

They were~ Rudra, Bhrgu, Marici, Angiras,
Pulaha, Kratu, Pulastya, Atri, Vasistha, Pitrs
and Agni.

adi ware rRNA YTS TAM
wired a tafe Tyra etg 01

For beneficence, he bestowed Sati unto
Bhava (i.e. Siva), and Khyati unto Bhrgu. To
Marici, he offered Sarhbhiti and Smrti unto
Angiras.

wie Sa Yoreara ara f yorera aI
sare Safe ara arta TETSAANG QU

Unto Pulastya he bestowed Priti and unto
Pulaha Ksama, unto Kratu Sannati and unto
Atri Anasiya.

oat edt afeera caret 4 aaa ech
wast da fagearg arama aeaa( 2) 113 21

Unto Vasistha he offered Urja and unto
Agni Svaha. Unto the Pitrs, he offered Svadha. I
shall mention the progenies born to them.

Tad weem: wat: Targfoat: Feet:
Tatty Way Mae BH

All these wise ones, the affluent ones, stood
well-organised in all the Manvantaras till such
time a flood came about.

aa are fag a caf ceitga: eas
grag fram: yaequan: date Sema x11

Sraddha created Kama (Desire) and Darpa
(Arrogance) was known as the son of Laksmf.
Of Dhrti, the son was Niyama (Restraint) and of
Tusti, Santosa (Contentment) called as such.

Wea om: Geant tenga: aTeTAT
fRATANY Aa: WaT AUS: AAA Wa ANGI
Of Pusti the son was Labha (Gain) and the
son of Medha was Sruta (Learning), Of Kriya,

Naya (Justice), Danda (Punishment) and
Samaya (Law) were declared as sons.

Of Buddhi, the son was Bodha (Knowledge)
as also Apramada (Absence of errors), the both
being so as such. Of Lajja the son was Vinaya
(Discipline) and Vyavasaya (Exertion) was the
son of Vapus.

aa: wigs qe fagetrraa
ae: ae: Yeanie sea GAA: 113 01

Ksema (Welfare) was the son of Santi,
Sukha (Pleasure) of Siddhi, the son who took
birth of Kirti was Yasas (Fame). These are the
sons of Dharma.

arrea et: Yat & feat wai era
sae S aah: ant eke aitfaa gc
Harsa (Pleasure) was the son of Kama, born

in Devi Rati. This way this creation amenable to
bliss of Dharma stands well proclaimed.

oat fem want frpftergrgyh
fapergraig wa ATH Wa SSH
From Adharma (Unrighteousness) or Hirhsa
(Evil Violence) took birth Nikrti (Deception)
and Anrta (Untruth) as well. From Nikrti and
Anrta (deception and untruth), Bhaya
(consternation) and Naraka! were born.

1. Hell or Internal regions (corresponding to the realm
of Pluto; there are said to be 21 different parts of
such regions where different kinds of tortures are
inflicted upon the sinners); name of a demon king
of Pragjyotisa. According to another account, he
carried off Aditi’s ear-rings and Krsna at the
instance of the gods, killed him in a single combat
and recovered the jewels. According to another
account, Naraka assumed the form of a elephant and
carried off the daughter of Visvakarma and
outraged her. He also seized the daughters of
Gandharvas, gods, men and nymphs themselves and
collected were than 6000 damsels in his harem.
There it is related more transferred by Krsna to his
own harem after he had slain Naraka. The demon
was born of earth and hence called Brahman.
(V.S.Apte. p. 281).

=== PAGE 89 ===

Chapter-10

81

urn a aeat writ festa:
TART A AAT Fer TarTETTUNT o 1
The twins Maya (Deceit) and Vedana
(Agony) were bom to them. Bhaya begot of
Maya, Mrtyu (Death), the wrester of life.
aerrarcanfa g7a ase tear
geteaifinta vita: aeisgar a sR a
From Raurava, Vedand gave birth to
Dubkha (Grief). From Mrtyu were born Vyadhi
(Disease), Jvara (Decrepitude), Soka (Sorrow),
Krodha (Wrath) and Asuya (Spite).
SGM: Bar Ba wa Tenia:
aut sratsfer gat ot wef wert: ByaTs se
All these, pre-requisites of unrighteousness
or evil, are known as such as having grief
entailed as such. Of these no spouse or son

stands enunciated. All these are known as
undefunct.

sae ane: wat ag etre:
yet: Gate enfeer geo Aeretfet: 1s 3 11
This way stands (enunciated) the Tamasa
creation bom as such, the restrainer of
righteousness. ‘You may create progenies’, this
way was erranded Nilalohita (i.e. Siva) by
Brahma.
asfrena adi oat Flt aera
aiftenra & GARRATS SU
He having meditated upon his spouse Sati,
created his own self-born ones, neither the ones
excelling himself nor inferior ones to himself,
but being the mind-born ones equal to himself.

wee fe aearogapfrarTAy
qradassen: wd euaaege: ea
A thousand among the thousands having
costumes for the elephant or antelope hides,
quite similar to his own self, all of those were as

such in point of radiance or valour or
intelligence, strength and knowledge.

fRARifapi wavelet

erarerercenetir Sfieties HUTS NE

They were Pirgalas (tawny-coloured),
equipped with quivers, Kapardins (matted-
haired) and  Vilohitas  (dark-red), the
costumeless ones, the white-haired ones, those
having killing eyes and the Kapdlins (bearing
skulls in their hands).

agenfaaniat fasravie wftur:1
Tart afta aftoes aero

Of many forms, formless ones, universal-
formed ones, the guised-formed ones, the
charioteers, the armoured ones and the
bucklered ones (ie. those having shields
wielded) and those furnished with fenders or
protecting planks,

reams frearsitaraferrg
wrriiaiecurafatigifeetreartins 211

Those having a hundred and thousand arms,
the divine ones, the terrestrial ones and those of
the ethereal regions or atmospheric space.
Those having foreheads, eight jaws, those
having double tongues lolling as such i.e. the
flying snakes and triple-eyed ones.

aaraafrereiva serait
Uguientrenraigy Frits: 8

The vegetarians, the flesh-eaters, the
cannibals or man-eaters, the ghee-drinkers and
Soma-quaffers, the ram-eaters or ram-keepers,
the gigantic-bodied ones, the dark-necked ones,
the peacocks or gallinules.

auraprenig aft gration:
aninrreda gfirda fafeariy ott

Those equipped with quivers leathern gloves
(talatrdnas or talatras or talavdranas), the
archers, the armoured-ones or arm keepers, the
squatters or ambushers or staying quiet ones,
the runners, the yawners ones or the stretching
ones and the crouching ones.

=== PAGE 90 ===

82

Vayu-Puradna

senfiaise wait agit saree
sara aeasa SrA TANG 81

The teaching ones, the mutters, the yoking
ones or associating ones and the meditating
ones, the burning ones, the showering ones, the
Juminaries or shining ones and the fuming ones
or smoke screeing ones.

Fen gamida sfasrquestry
Aeriaragererccaterer ear 2
The grown up ones or the old ones, the best
among the intellegents, those thoroughly
proficient in Vedas or very learned persons,
(Brahmisthan) and those having auspicious
looks, those having blue necks, the thousand-
eyed ones and all those that were night rovers.
SqRaa A ARATE: |
Bat FAS US TATA: NG BI
Those unscannable to all the beings, those
given to mighty mental concentration or given
to conjugal ties or Vaisnavas or Saivas or
meditators and those of great splendour, the
bewailing ones and those getting emollient and
applying ones in thousands.

AAT ATAERET UTA
Ter Geansgaiearan areata: wT 4 wit
He created the fresh form of best of gods.
Having seen these, Brahma spoke out to these
and created such progenies.
BEST TSSHPRGEA WaT FereareTM
ST: st SG ACT SF WTA AAT NG GH
“By you are to be created progenies equal in
norm to that of yours and not excelling you.
You may create others; may it be all well to
you. The progenies have gone defunct (as such).

asst fé anifer yor Fenferarearem
wammisadted are Depenaa: 114 §
Wat: Beaty ay) feriisé et ger we:
Ua a a war ger feaur Aereitfeat: 114 on

The progenies shorn of death shall not take
to tasks”. Having said so, Siva spoke out- “I
shall not create the progenies endowed with
death. May it be all well to you. I stay here, you
may create progenies. These that have been
created by me are ugly ones Nilalohitas.

agar west F atertonh fara:
UR Sear wafereat xT ATT ETAT 1G Ct
A thousand of thousands determined as

similar to self, these will become Devas, known
as Rudras of great prowess.

yfrearnattat a eaaren wfegqet:!
rege MTeAS AAAT NY SU
On the earth as well as on the atmospheric
(space) known as Rudras or known by the name
Rudra, traditionally known as Satarudra, there
will happen to be the Yajriiyas.
aU afeata ws sagt: Tel
wrartty 3 tar afaerdte TAAT1G ot
a: Bfrae wraRte (en gTaTaTa
Along with the Devas, all will become
sharers of the sacrifices, till the final period of
dissolution. In all Manvantaras, the Devas
which will take birth as born of wanton will
with them, being given to perform sacrifices,
they will continue here owing to non-
destruction of the Yugas.”

WAG ETT TEM MRTea tra eu

wegara vat int wero: waaay:

Wa Fag as F eT S cae iG IU

This way spoken then Brahma by the wise

Mahadeva. Getting over-joyed, the Lord of
progenies replied to Bhima— “May it be so. May
it be all well for you! The way it has been told
to you, O supreme overlord!”

Feo VATA Var Tamale
et wyfe Say aT MTA SF Hee Bit
When so assented by Brahma, everything
happened accordingly. From that time onwards,
the lord of gods did not create the progenies.

=== PAGE 91 ===

Chapter-10

83

setter: far: wnyataangraerey
weeds ferisaifa at: wargftfa aya
The trunk stood shorn of any physical
copulation till such time a turmoil or dissolution
came to the fore. Since he spoke out- ‘I am
stationary”, he is called as “Sthanu”.
at aerated aa: wet ar gfe:
eayrar eer eaeETI AAT G & 1
ara aft avin Feet feat vient
waltartivas hart: Feng § 1
Knowledge, supremacy,
austerity, truth, forbearance, fortitude,
creativity, self-awakening and stability- these
ten qualities remain steady in Sarikara, in all the
gods, the sages accompanied by demons.

aft a pivakinren aay:

aeafa tarratgaerst U TET

are oo piraateiereaanh Wah: 116 911

The god that excels by radiance is so termed

as Mahadeva. He excels Devas by his glorious
prosperity; Asuras by virtue of strength; the
sages by his knowledge; and all the beings by
his mental concentration all around.

renunciation,

RU HY:
ant wag wet a ad ent wengy
URS TRT ATT Tet aT AT TG Cd
The Sages replied— Mental concentration or
meditation, austerity and truth and dharma
(piety), O great sage! You may expound before
us being the source of knowledge of their
supreme being.
an a a attr af seat & fist:
ared sighreafs art meat wing gn
And by which very act or spiritual deed, the
Brahmanas may attain to a stable situation or

mobility, that all, { am eager to listen about the
Mahesvara Yoga, O Master!

argearet

ue at: gat gy Sku Aye:
arggerd aan sikh aAeRRTETT: 119011
Vayu spoke-- Five duties in the Puranas have
been enunciated by Rudra, the act of the
worship of Siva, the way it has been declared
by the Rudras of acts untainted.

aittgfz: mehigaat da wae:
nefadaiieta & art fagerera: ie gn
aagayitts fagenensteetan
Tavares agra oat: wiifsar: ew

By Adityas, by Vasus, by Sadhyas and by
the two Asvins (the divine Vedic physicians),
all over by Maruts, by Bhrgus and whichever
are these other abodes of gods, by Yama and
Sukra and others and likewise by those ending
with the time of the Manes, by those and others,
these duties were adhered to.

@ @ saitorantor: yrerattrion:)
sored YrTon: Perens SATA 3 Ut
They, verily, the groups of sages, having
actions or duties come to a cease, clear ones like

the autumnal aerial route, propitiated at the
twilight, the self within the self.

Tetrated get Teut F frac:
fara age wat faethe a BaaqINo vit
Engaged in the cherished benefits of the
teachers or elders and the well-wishes of the

teachers or elders, having taken leave of the
human birth, they move like Devas.

wea Sweet: War Tat: PATA: |
ARTA (OT) TAATATAATAT UNG &

By MaheSvara who is termed as one having
five-moded duties of pristine norm, by the
application of activity, you may know the five
eternal Dharmas as being addressed to.

STOTT RAR CAT WATTS. TOT
ert da atisferrg gat: waitfeat 119 11

=== PAGE 92 ===

84

Vayu-Purana

These are- Prdndydma (the restraint of
breath), Dhyana (i.e. mental concentration or
meditation), Pratydhdra (restraint of organs or
withdrawal of senses from external objects),
Dharand (steady abstraction of the mind) and
Smarana (memory or reminiscence). In this
combination are deemed as the five modes of
activities.

Fat senfasrtror marot arcot em
sent war ard ser SMT sTfAATTUO Ht

In the specific serial order of these, the

definition as well as the reason, I shall enunciate

as well as the true norm or reality, the way by
Rudra, it has been enunciated.

wore WTOreMS Say Sea
Bounty fafa: wheat wet metre ci
The suspension of breath activity

(Prandyama) is so called because of the
restraint or control of breath or even all round
extension or stretching of inhalation as well as
exhalation. That too, is termed as threefold—
slow, medium and high.

wort & ater @ woreda:
MONET | UAT S HSM BAT: Ws
The very restraint of the breaths which so
exists, is called Pranayama as such. The extent
of the restraint of breath is of the norm of
twelve mdtras!.
Wet MAMA SLUT BMT IAT:
Teams faaeUragfaeierentaa: 112 011
The slower one is one as having twelve
matras and likewise Udghdtas (breathing
through the nostrils as a religious exercise), are
also known as twelve. The medium Pranayama
is of two Udghatas and twenty-four matras.

Sareea Wat: WEfaTgeAa
qarafaarart SAT BAA: TA 12 et

1. One matra = time required to pronounce a short
vowel.

The best one is Uttama Prdndydma having
three strokes and thirty-six mdtras. It is a
generator of sweat, tremor, grief, and known
thereby, the excellent one.

seafarers ste wren PeTOTT
worot ware cer a Frac 2

This way has been declared the definition of
restraint or stretching of breath as threefold. Its
extent and specific mark, you may understand.

faet at gat aise wats at yt aA
Wea: Vea By: ATTA BA

A lion or an elephant or any other wild beast
(mrgo) in the forest on being ensnared and
served, attains to tranquillity.

(rem aU sued: wee
ana: Fay Varad we wn

And likewise, the breath is difficult of being
suppressed or restrained for all those who have
souls unaccomplished. Being put into practice
by Yoga (i.e. mental concentration or
meditation), that same may attain to actability.

a aa fe aan fae: Sart ans gder1

RATA Ta UTS

Ufterra tat we ayes enferrash

Ufera wate aan Sirah wre 12 & I

Just as a lion or an elephant becomes

powerless and tamed by disciplining and lapse
of time, similarly by placing the mind with the
Manda (slow) type of Pranayama, it comes
under control. Similarly the wind (life-breath)
lives by being placed under mind-god.

ayed fe an anrhee aerate:
ael rarer: OT aaa aa erase on
The way Vayu (wind-god) assumes

subservience through Yoga in application, then
voluntarily the breath leads wherever it desires.

aon feat wat aisfa ayerarcataga)
antares wernt wins: reac cut

=== PAGE 93 ===

Chapter-11

85

Just as a lion or an elephant even stays
owing to ensnarement, for the intrepidity of
men, it strides towards the wild beasts.

amr uffraard aad feria:
Ufvaramm: deg: AY fated zeae eH

Just as well-acquainted, the Vayu or breath,
having face turned all around, being meditated

upon and restrained, may obviate all
malignancy or sin.
woe gees oaths Framer a

aa dha: woyata arawela ATTA oN
Of a Brahmana or a scholar endowed with
the restraint of breath and having soul
restrained, all the deformities get obviated and
he becomes stable in spirit.

auife aft wert gett Framer 2
waa Tet WOT ARTA 1g gt

The austerities that stand performed and
whichever are the vows and regulations and the
fruit of all the sacrifices that may be, the
restraint of breath, assumes a similar norm to
that one.

aferg a: peer wife wate aaega
SAAT A WOT AT ATTN VI
Pranayama is equal to the penance and
observance of the holy rite of drinking a drop of
water from the tip of Kuga grass once in a
month and continuing it for a hundred years.

wroreracearereaconfiaes feaferer
WATT ARAPAHO NS 3 1
One may burn down the defects by
Prandyama and by determinations, the sin, By
the restraint of organs, the sense objects and by
meditation, the qualities of supremacy.

TaN: Vel aA oar Taq
adurefagegren wt genferrestinie vit

Therefore, always given to mental
application, the Yogin (the meditator) may be
adherent to Pranayama. Having soul obviated

of all sins or absolved of all sins, he attains to
eternal Brahman or beatitude.

fa sitrergent args ungaaat warerafeauht are
SPTISEATA: ROM

eK

=== PAGE 94 ===

Chapter-11 85

Warberegitseara: it
Chapter 11

The observation of the purposes meant
for pacification of Pranayama

argqeara

wea Wert feaansraaenfe at

seared war WETTER TAT TU

werprecentar sereeaate Fea:

STAT HEAT: wot RST TAATUR I

Vayu spoke- For a single great day or both

day and night, for half a month or fortnight or a
month, for an Ayana, (sun’s passage north and
south of the equator), period of duration of this
passage, half year or time from one solstice to
another, for years or Yugas or aeons, for
thousands of Mahayugas, the sages given to
austerities, the great-souled ones, wait upon
Prana with a divine gaze.

aa set yeeenft wore
wet Ba Fagor aensse way: 3
After this, I shall dilate upon the purpose
behind the restraint or suspension of breath or

its stretching out as also the fruit specifically,
the way spoke out, the adorable supreme being.

wake aeart woranrer fates a
wife: synbadiias wares ages

The purposes are four of Pranayama. These
you may understand, viz., tranquillity, passivity,
composure enlightenment and the fourth one
happiness.

A fuerat 3 fart —
erin ater sera u efearG

=== PAGE 95 ===

86

Viyu-Purana

Actions whether terrible in form or
auspicious in nature, if performed by oneself,
do bear fruits here and hereafter in due course.

fagarggert wfratertat:1
aunt fe aararott urarat yrs 1

But the quelling of evils and sins committed
by parents, cousins or other relatives or a
mixture of both is defined as tranquillity or
peace.

aenrereart fe warrefe dar)
sera famata sentra eat
The restraint of sins even such as ones
having soul for greed and pride for the purpose
of peace here and hereafter accords the
definition of austerity.
Wiamecraat gong fart waq
aint a wiegrt aafarrararqic
Of the sun, moon, the planets and stars, the
domain may be similar as also of the sages of
repute having affluence for knowledge and
scientific understanding.
antarmmnart a at ain a
Fee aaa aia Af: KAT TAA
Of the gone bye and impending ones or
those not yet arrived and of the present, of the
visual-perceptioned one and of the enlightened
one, they attain to equality and their brilliance
or light or radiance may be called austerity.

shraniteraiy wa: wat a area
wereafa taret ware sft BTA 1011
The senses, the sense objects, the mind and
the five breaths whereby that pleases, that
obtains the definition of Prasdda or pleasure or
satisfaction or classification.

sae ad: vem: sorearesgfaer:
(Afraemett HA: VA ATTAIN: 1A
This way, the primary Prdndyama being of
four kinds should be known as having fruit

quite at hand and born of the happiness of the
spontaneous hour.
Se: Sea Weenie WTO PeTOTA
aed o oar aed Geet ArT Tea
After this, I shall dilate upon the
characteristics of Prandydma, its posture as per
factual representation and the practice of Yoga
precisely.
giant went great wR AH AI
aret wafers apart vermatert Far193 11
To begin with, one should pronounce the
‘Om’ syllable and having bowed to the sun and

the moon, he should assume the Svastika
posture and also the half posture Padma.
Tgtengedn: Yreistt a
aa ger wat des BOTgMnes
The one having knees parallel (Samajanuh)
and the one having one knee in process and
even raised aloft and even well-composed,

having assumed a firm postured pose, paralleled
as such, having encrouched the two feet.

Ugquretsaagey Ri fast ae:
Ufstat qaut ore aat we BAEK
Having face covered up and eyes
concentrated and having supported the chest in
front, having covered up the scrotums with the
heels as also the penis.

fafagaritaten: fret atat ate a
thea afeert i fererracinaq eg 1

Having head raised up a bit, as also the head
and the neck, having well observed the tip of
the nose of one’s own and not looking towards
any other direction.

TH: WOR TH TH: GRA Wed!

aa: Graft year art geranfed: gen
sieavitearies wa: wat WOTeA

Frye ara) wae AARC 1

Having covered up the famoguna or the

=== PAGE 96 ===

Chapter-11

87

malignant tendencies by rajoguna, the material
gains by rajas enveloped by sattva or spirit,
then having assumed a posture in sattva, attuned
for Yoga, well-concentrated, the senses and the
sense objects, the mind accompanied by five
breaths, having controlled in a group, one may
take to Pratyahdra (withdrawing in himself
these together).

ag weretearmraniseria wa:

TAUSSHTARS A: TRTATATTATAATI RS U1

The one that may abstain from lusts like a

tortoise encrouching or shrinking its limbs from
all sides, that very way, the one having personal
lust or happiness (dormant) within,
concentrating in one spot, just realises the self
in the self.

fire wat J Ware Yar:

RUST WATTTTHATN 0

Having replenished the body, however, from

within and without, (quite) pure as such, by the
application of the navel upto the throat, one
may take to the abstinence.

aoa” fagat Fra wa a
AMT BATA HroTaTay feta ei
The winking and unwinking may be
recognised as simply consistent for a Kala and
the Pranayama shall be held for twelve mdtras.

eroregrenrarat art & amore
aan & arr tard wferaarane 211
Dhdrand consists of twelve Prandydmas
and a Yoga is of two Dhdranas, and likewise
endowed with a Yoga, one attains prosperity
(self-shining in his own splendour).
Aart ware dem waasan
MOT ara fame Freee 12 311
aed Ser: woah Pe HTT
He observes the Supreme-self being
illumined by personal radiance, having mind
restrained by Prdndyama. All the discrepancies

of such a Brahmana get alleviated and one
becomes well-composed in spirit.

Wa & Framer: MOTATTUTAT: eI
Facer farcar war yfrartiey Ber yA:
armen fe werafietargereteag ne 4 1

This way having food regulated (lit.
controlled), the sage (observing silence),
engaged in Pranayama, shall conquer Yogic
stages and ascend higher and higher. The great
ground (i.e. stage), if not subdued (overcome),
may generate many defects.

faadafa datg a teefrat aa:
Te Yen ate ale sone
afta wae sat are rear:

It creates or augments inordinate
attachments and delusion. One may not ride on
an unvanquished one. Just as water is taken by
applying force through a pump, so also the
Yogin should drink in the wind with effort but
conquering exhaustion.

anata ged da aus wef UUSsAMOM
art g aa 3a gartaisa why
feoferged ueferer arco WaT BATS HI

The wind should be retained with effort or
measures, in navel, in heart, in throat, in the
chest and in the face, in the nasal crevice, in the
eye, in between the brows, and in the head and
after sometime in a different aspect, the steady
abstraction of mind or holding the breath
suspended becomes Dhdrand.

MOTTA: A ALATA
were arco a ereetter MeAtAaATIIg BH

By the all-round restraint of Prdna and
Apana, the Prdndydma becomes defined as
such. It is the steadying of mind that is called
Dharana.

Frafaferannt gy weeny fa:
weet aaa g fag: eareTeTOTN3 ott

=== PAGE 97 ===

88

Vayu-Purana

The withdrawal from the sense objects is
termed as Pratyahara'. On accumulation of all
these, accomplishment of Yoga or Siddhi takes
place.

wares arrest art & fag
eargm: Wet aKa PARAS aU

Of the Yoga born of that, the meditation
forms the pre-requisite of accomplishment.
Endowed with meditation invariably, one may
realise the self like the moon and sun.

wraengant J av g a fae
aerate evi g a faerang gu

On non-acquisition of spirit, a perception
does not get apparent and even no observation
of the concomitance of improper time and
space.

ANA ay ars fr yarraeret Femi
SYSMA PAM ST SOTA aGEes 311
aut aA ashe deactiietaa

SAU TT Halt A ASSATA: CTE XI

A Yogin should not practice concentration
near fire, in the forest, over a heap of dry
leaves, in a place infested with low creatures, in
a cremation ground, in a dilapidated cowshed,
at the cross-roads, in a resonant spot and one

full of flight, in a sanctuary and near a well or a
river, since these are place of disturbance.

qenfeeretansstal Ta SAHA:
gale wet a ari ara: Banyan
Now should he do so when overwhelmed
with hunger, displeasure or excitement. A
Yogin is one who is perennially given to
meditation with full concentration.

wrefarica sae yates a
we Ser: wept writ fererenrTaT: 113. 11

Having determined these inclemencies, he
who takes to delinquency, the defections of that

1. Abstraction, Werereearrearong ferratey: aarefa:

Abhidhana Cintamani 1.83.

one get aggravated in the body as creators of
deformities.

Word afin a qed urferresie

aed epfacires oer Treva B39)

Dullness (regarded as one of the

subordinates feelings), deafness and dumbness—
these are attained by him. And likewise,
blindness, loss of memory, decrepitude and
disease.

W ae: squared sat yaks a
TRIGA YSr APT qaerafea uy ci
These deformities become aggravated in the
caste of that one who is aligned with ignorance.
Therefore, a Yogin may get aligned with pure
knowledge having got into mental
concentration.

at: Wel da 7 Srararganeatey
dat fafearat aeanfit arerott a aaTEAATNE 811
Undelinquent invariably one may not attain
to deformities. I shall dilate upon the treatment
of those deformities quite in due order.

aon eat & ater: wore fer: |
fereat aanyTgent Yara AATETATI¥ 0 11
The way those deformities arise out of
Pranayama, they may get eradicated, if the
patient drinks thick, sticky gruel (while it is)
very hot.
Tr aaa) aed werraf
qeyraduianttd Hatteras en
By this active mechanism, the gout and

tumour get assuaged. As a remedy to fistula and
the like, the (following) treatment may be taken.

qeen af wari at aged adt aq
argafr vat firear ages mains 21
Having partaken of curd or Yavagii (the rice
gruel) the gout or rheumatism may go upwards.
And having exploded the gout joints, it may
employ it in the domain of gout.

=== PAGE 98 ===

Chapter-11

89

wensft 4 feria: eargrit yer aaa
areal a ae Teaereda Vets 31
Even if no improvement may come out, one
may practise Dhdrand in mind (lit. head).
Taking recourse to, the body of that human
being shall retain the Sattva alone.

Ysyerateirans UrepalfarfentraTy

aaaRa(O) MaETET ATTY I

Bai fafecat adie er daa Gan

Tet wad fafageniaa aaais yt

In the event of fistula deformity, this one

may be implemented. In the event of the tremor
of the whole body of the Yogin before taking to
the act of meditation, this cure may be betaken
by which he may be comfortable, Having
supported some tangle in mind, he may keep
patience as such.

RU TI HVS T AAT
wisaurt at atta aferet sterareeis & 11

In case of chest deformity, one may bear the
vital breath in the chest region and near the
throat. In case of skin eruption, talk delirium, in
deafness in both ears and the like, (the
following procedure should be followed).

fagrent gadeg ara: Siegler AAAs
wet Sfaaent aa: Haat FIs
In the region of the tongue tormented by
thirst, he may apply the oily substance (roasted)
on fire with the help of threads. Concentrating
on its fruit, a Yogin becomes happy.

aa SS Tata aeradarkaany
aferaferaian afergar fateeras en
In thisis, leprosy and white leprosy, one may
take to very nutritive medicine. In whichever

area of material gains he may be, he may take
recourse to, in that very one.

drier faucet sé qalfatatary
agate Wa AAA (US ASAT eH

afer aitet wfaerer ae aIBa asa
sraviterer OT Sat at: Weare ot
Of a Brahmana, in case a hurdle is born in
mental concentration, this treatment should be
arranged. His crest should be struck with a
bamboo-spike or the wedge shall be placed on
his head and beaten with a wooden stick. In this
manner, when he will struck by terror, the
consciousness shall get revived.
we oT Gear Sea ATA
wierenet aa: Ga arent WET ATARI QU
Or, of one having consciousness lost, the
support may be given by two hands. Having
revived his consciousness, the support may be
assumed on the crest.

forrest o ypia aa: doad Gat
aera eas Ta Geafer Bafa 2

One may partake of food, staple one (lit.
greasy one) and little in quantity. Then alone
one may become happy. By an unmortal spirit,
when one understands Yoga (mental
concentration), he becomes agile or spry.

feat o yet da agai a ona
MOTTA Aes SAAT aH MATING Bu

(Then), one may support the aerial route,
terrestrial route, the atmospheric space, the fire
and all that getting burnt by Prdndydma, all
may become controlled.

oente wfagieg aaet wit

aa: Tena a a(t TAG vI
wroraratferar ant aca ferent ast
porratared J aeatageaatiny 4 1

Moreover, one may take to the physical
structure and may then take to the norm of
extraction. Then having propped up with Yoga
on the crest of the supporting one by the fire of
Pranayama scorched as such, all that may attain
to oblivion.

=== PAGE 99 ===

90

Vayu-Puraga

wel SET: Tet ee Fea J AAA
fared | et Wire fergreat oT Hy GH
Having kept in mind, the virility, austerity,
truth, a person may assume support. And having
drunk the fruit of poison or essence or extract of
water, one may get relieved of pain or anguish.

waa: Gt peat grat wate aaa
wig Gen Taga wen Pals Fae yW0U
Wea wert a ge: aria arfaq
Tes BUSTY Y arent yet aeATIY

All around, having rendered the ground
accompanied by the trees or mountains, one
may think in mind and likewise having kept in
mind, all the oceans and the gods and by a
thousand of ewers equipped as such, the one
understanding Yoga should talk ablution. And
in water to the brimming of throat or neck, he
may assume the Dhdrand on the head.

wireaatfemniae areata
viviischuagess: fidgeting raise

When afflicted by the back-current of
poison, he shall perform Dhdrand over all the
parts of his body. He may drink in the clay from
the ant-hill with the leafy cups of sunflower
plant.

fafefraafatiela fagat araftia:
SIRE WaT ATED SEATING ot

This mode of treatement is well-known as

established in Yoga, expounded as such

succinctly by the reasoning, established by
mental concentration.

gat cant fate fare aerate
arate aeetternfgart weitraug @
weraghraires + aM aeEANG 211

You may understand me while expounding
this definition to a Vipra (Brahmana). If it is
expounded out of delusion to an undeserving
person, the instruction proves fruitless. On that
account, the tendency of Yoga is not to be

expounded by any means (to an undeserving
person).
ard austria
aun Gea a
Tre: YA yayiraet
arrga: yerot writs 3
Strength, freedom from ailments, absence of
greed, the lustrous complexion, happy accent
and suavity, the auspicious flavour, the small
quantity of urine and feces~ these are primary
signs or inclination of progress in Yoga in the
body.
ara yet da sacri afe wean
geass fag da faenitatequfearie wit
If he sees himself and the earth blazing and
one entering the other, he may understand that
the time of accomplishment of Yoga has
approached.

af stranger args argued
ATH CHTSRTISEATA: RU

RE

=== PAGE 100 ===

90

Vayu-Purdga

UST BRISA:
Chapter 12
The assessment of Yoga sickness

Wi sat
om sed yeenft suet war wa
wigtata & ater quart Sfeas en

After this, I shall talk of the sicknesses, the
way they crop up and the defections or
deformities that creep in case of a man having
realized the realities.

ugenfatrerarmranad sed fea:
froma da serge arfaqei

The one conversant with Yoga but afflicted
by evil spirit, may be enamoured of women,
season and long for human enjoyments and the
fruits of charity or bounty.

=== PAGE 356 ===

Chapter-50 
313 
TI3qsf rITO<l<3rUm^l% TO ^1 
irtarof fasrpsrf w *tktt§{ w^rar: n ?o o h 
n^wm<icjr*imfagfd ^ ifo.-i 
3T^TTT cutiU^m^l^Irl xlll ^|| 
When the sun sets in the city of Yama, it is 
midnight in Amaravatl. Then the sun is in 
midday in Vibha, the city of Soma. In the 
Amaravatl of Mahendra, when the sun gets 
aloft, it is midnight in Samyamana and the sun 
sets in the city of Varuna. 
IT xiffr 
wnunft ^nf&T wr ifo:ii 
That same sun gets into action quickly and 
circumambiates like a firebrand, revolving 
along the planets and stars or constellations in 
the sky, 
T£t ^ 1% c^UT^f TPSfTI 
XR: XRMl^u 
This way, the sun moves in the four 
continents ending with the southern comer. It 
rises and sets alternately time and again. 
xra% WCR7% 5 if $ IT:I 
rPRfcfc <t filer w it TfN^mi *o-*n 
The sun warms up the two abodes each of 
gods in the forenoon and in the afternoon. With 
its rays alone it heats one of them during 
midday. 
STrT: XR IT T^ffril ^omi 
Risen along, the sun blazes with its rays of 
increasing heat till midday. Thereafter, it sets 
with its rays of decreasing heat. 
3WrTW«TT f| 
i||c|dTTWTl>Tft dlST^B H TTT^RTt:mo^|| 
The eastern and western direction is 
determined by its rise and set. Till such time it 
shines in the front, its heat is felt behind and on 
the sides also. 
TT V^A 
m yuTrvmraild tRtw: it t^ii 
Wherein the sun is observable while taking 
its rise, it is called the sunrise by the people 
thereof; while where it attains to its doom, 
therein it is declared the sunset in regard to the 
people there. 
U^NI*TtA fodfcJilHlebTd ^TRl 
rill 
%XRT IWTt ^TWlrTT ITiff T ^^11 ^o<ill 
In the north of all is Meru and in the south is 
Lokaloka1. Due to the far distance of the sun 
from the earth and being covered up by the 
horizon of the earth, its rays are shrunk back. 
On that account, it becomes invisible at night. 
ii^rsTTKiori »nich<w tji 
TEyRTRT !HWJH ^TRTITRRl^IJTII ?o || 
The appearance of grahas (planets or 
comets), stars and the sun as well as their rising 
and setting deserves to be recognised or 
calculated by the extent of their elevation. 
rl TT^Ttl 
tstrj faifroii 
irwrat fctif'j^r^^iiTxnumujwm n 
Fire and water are white-shadowed ones and 
the earth is dark-shadowed one. Owing to the 
great distance of sun, it appears to be without 
rays at the time of rising. Since it is without 
rays, it has the red lustre and the absence of heat 
is due to its redness. 
£ft§msgfrsicr: *Rrf m m ft 
TIT; n?i <T #3RRT IT ^ftll WH 
1. Name of a mythical mountain that encircles the 
earth and is situated beyond the sea of fresh water 
which surrounds last of the seven continents. 
Beyond Lokaloka, there is complete darkness and to 
this side of it, is light; it thus divides the visible 
world from the region of darkness i.e. the visible 
and invisible world.

=== PAGE 357 ===

314 
Vayu-Puraga 
And wherever the sun is visible as stationed 
on the line of horizon, it is seen a thousand 
Yojanas above. 
TDTT f| 4ft TTfcr 3TCH TFESfo ST-Rcf^l 
TTsft dwi^idicbiv^n w ii 
On sun getting into the setting horizon, the 
solar gleam partially enters fires. On that 
account, fire shines more brilliantly at night, 
even from afar. 
^iwmi^miPivmi 
TTCHTT gf|pT f5w: TI <TOT f^TII W II 
When the sun rises again, the brilliance of 
fire enters the sun. This together with the 
brilliance left in the sun at the time of sunset, 
makes it all the more brilliant. So the sun blazes 
during the day. 
3raJT^ *T rRTtHlt *T rr 
y<woHM^ii<nzji^ f^cninvi^ii wii 
Fit to be illumined and not likewise, the sun 
and the fire radiant as such, owing to mutual 
coalescement, nourish people in days and 
nights. 
mt ^ <iBki^vi^ ccnr:ii 
rH^wiyi w&m\ RciKi^ydivHHii mu 
In the northern and southern halves of the 
earth, when the sun rises, night enters waters. 
Then the waters become copper-hued during 
day owing to the entry of night. 
3TRT ip: ^ jrfo?pnT:i 
'flcRHTTT y^Wldll mII 
On sun getting into the setting horizon, the 
day enters the waters. Therefore during night, 
water appears white and bright as a result of the 
entry of day. 
w-mr-t (m) 
fe?lr£R:» ^V9|| 
By this order of unification, in the southern 
and northern halves of the earth, day and night 
enter waters at the time of sunset and sunrise. 
^4ycfeiyrrfeij HTwr 
ttPt: T^pyii mu 
The day is named after the shining of the sun 
or solar gleam and night is called that being 
dark-endowed one. On that account, the night is 
provisioned due to this and the day is so called 
as having the incorporation of sun ensued. 
jjiwvra f uf^^i "31^ wf?m m it 
When the sun passes by the middle of 
Puskara1 (sky), it traverses one-thirtieth of the 
diameter of the earth in a Muhurta (forty-eight 
minutes). 
ilWHmi^W Wit ftefarn 
yof vHff^prni^vTTr tit w o ii 
■Hg<5llu<j|s|et)lPi HI 
Tifdihi ftfrzr h Mfann u 
In regard to the advancement in Yojanas, 
you may know that the distance traversed is 
three million one hundred and fifty thousand in 
full. This is the distance traversed by the sun in 
one Muhurta. 
TfHH HfHHITR Uft cRlst H ^fapipi 
^ gngHT^or Hll W ? II 
^ cjnsrst nf^mi 
UTHsillHT ^ 3 II 
tmt vi^wifni tiFTiiwsr w wi 
3THRTHTHTHfTH TffH^TT fosffaHII ??*|l 
With this movement of the sun, it reaches 
the southern-most limit in the month of Magha 
and moves about there. That you may know as 
such. The circumambiating orbit of the sun 
1. The clouds causing death and famine; or a night of 
new moon falling on Monday, Tuesday or Saturday 
or an inauspicious Yoga; an illumined combination 
of a lunation, with an unlucky day of a lunar 
mansion or the regent of Puskaradvlpa.

=== PAGE 358 ===

Chapter-50 
315 
during a day and a night is nine crores and 
fortyfive hundred thousand Yojanas. 
df^uiifefr^dlSRrr fyWRfll ddT Tfd:l 
And revolved back from the south, that sun 
when stays in Vi?uva!, it rises up at the 
northern end of the ocean of milk. 
wt (yfcraiPm? dta^dfsratadi 
iddf: eEteTCJ fd*dWr i^oT^JTftl fTT T?dTII 
mt vH«^Tuimv^«fiifyyiT 5^:1 
sraut yi-dti yrot ^ctii 
3dTRTrfd<f2JTRII ^VSII 
You may understand the distance in 
Yojanas, of the zone traversed during the transit 
in the equinox. It is three crores and eighty-one 
hundred thousand Yojanas. When the sun, 
while moving in the north, is in the constellation 
Sravana (lunar mansion containing 3 stars), it 
traverses the northern region of the sixth 
continent called Sakadvipa. 
rf eJTOT 5PP! RU^dRR dl 
yldRunflrwsyidr chl(d\«*i d w fs^:ii mu 
3?#fdf%dr% rVhtrt d)hr dl 
3TgR^WId dd yldRRfKTeblR dll ^ II 
And in the northern quarter, the extent of the 
orbit as such, counted along or calculated in 
Yojanas, is one crore eight million and 
fiftyeight Yojanas, O Brahmanas! 
q|J|4)«4d<| cfteft d d%°TTI 
Rdf ddTSSR7^ II 
wifd-i^ryl«y<iii^(4:ii ^ o n 
The northern orbit is called Nagavlthi2 being 
the northern Vlthi3 and the southern orbit is 
]. The first point of Aries and Libra into which the sun 
enters at the vernal or autumnal equinox, the 
equinoctial point. 
2. Moon’s path through the asterism Svati or Asvini, 
Bharani and Krttika, 
3. Vlthis are the courses of the sun in the sky. 
called Ajavlthl. When the sun rises in the 
constellations Mula, Purvasadha and 
Uttarasadha, it is called Ajavlthl4. And when 
the sun rises during the rise of the three stars 
after Abhijit, it is called Nagavlthi. 
<*l8RU'di ddd dfd^: Rd:l 
ljd^d^lfUfTr|9)fy?frTl{ TTcn^ll ^ *11 
yiifw?nfychiai^ dt^:i 
chiayiwt ^diiiMidmTdi(dfad^ii ^ ? 11 
The distance between two Kasthas5 
(quarters), I shall talk of that in Yojanas. This 
distance is thirty lakh one hundred and three 
thousand three hundred and thirtythree Yojanas. 
d%RTTdTl 
^ d d^rrfd imm vnr^jfmrmn ^ ? it 
Now I shall talk of the distance between the 
southern cardinal points and meridians in 
Yojanas. You may learn that. 
R^PRft dRRT fqddRtd)TPdfd:l 
^lu-yfdftThlJJ ddtodT q^jqid(d:ii^'*j|| 
dttsRTl: dfiyyigd dW^Rddi: RJJdRI 
3T«RR d tpffd RU^RPPdTTdUtll ^ R II 
'O -o * 
WRT ^d Tfdd d RdTddTRI 
RRddTRt t?Id ^ujR^nVRlsiefeRTH^II ^ d II 
dTd dlfd dTd^d fdWId^tl 
dRTUT WSHWId dRqndfddWdll ^\9|| 
The external and internal distances between 
the two quarters and meridians are seventy lakh 
and one hundred and seventyfive Yojanas. 
During the northern transit of the sun, it goes 
4. Ajavlthl is one of the three divisions of the Southern 
path in the sky in which the sun, the moon and the 
planets move comprehending the constellations, 
Mula, Purvasadha and Uttarasadha. 
5. Course of waters or quarters and pieces of wood 
placed to mark the limit of race or the path of the 
wind and cloud in the atmosphere or a measure of 
time = 1/30 kala or sixteenth part of the disc of the 
Moon.

=== PAGE 359 ===

316 
Vayu-Purana 
round the internal zones and during the southern 
transit, the sun goes round the external zones. 
This is the precise order. In the north, there are 
one hundred and eighty zones. In the south also 
the sun traverses to that very extent. Now you 
know the distance of the zone in Yojanas. 
Tirf | qtvSTHnt wttfiftii ^6II 
% ^.ii ^ ^ ii 
The magnitude of this zone is twentyone 
thousand two hundred and twentyone Yojanas. 
And that verily, is the measurement of Mandala 
or zone in Yojanas. 
femt fa&RT f fefatl 
31^1? rTCrt WlPr ^ ^TUScR^jWII || 
The diameter of the zone is laid obliquely. 
Everyday the sun circumbiateS within those 
orbits in due order. 
frazil ^ 
Like the circulation of the wheel of a potter, 
the sun also moves quickly during its southern 
transit. 
dwidichyi <dfir rr wfiri 
On that account, it circumambiates the 
extensive earth within a shorter span. Within 
twelve Muhurtas, it traverses quickly from the 
south to the north. 
A , r _ , ,n _^L „ 
1 tm:\ 
g^n^rtftrr v&^\\ 
The sun passes through thirteen and a half 
constellations of stars during the day. During 
the night in eighteen Muhurtas it passes through 
as many of stars. 
Like the centre of the wheel of a potter 
revolves tardily, that very way in the course of 
the northern transit, the sun moves slowly. 
^VyrisSt$H i^ntnt "cRtT Tfar: i 
■dwr(iefut cRI#T SjfdUrdi PMktffall ^qil 
The sun passes through thirteen and a half 
stars. On that account, it covers less extent of 
the earth in longer time. 
HrfcllfM rTCrT M-dfdjfitl:ll ^$11 
In the later part of the northern transit, a day 
has the duration of eighteen Muhurtas. Then 
also the sun proceeds very slowly. 
WdTlrfwfq tsaiWTt tf%:l 
HTtiflyrdylyTTii ^^11 
The sun passes through thirteen and a half 
stars during half the time. During night, it 
passes through as many stars in the course of 
eighteen Muhurtas. 
rfiTt T^rTT HTCTT ^ t WTI 
yftdug ^ wnsfr '^nrfrr t trtth ^dii 
Just as a ball of clay stationed on the middle 
of the wheel rotates along very tardily, Dhruva1 
(Pole star) revolves in the same manner. 
3^: qugtfifa TT:ll 
They declare that day and night together 
constitute thirty Muhurtas. The Pole Star 
revolves between the two quarters along the 
circles. 
wr cr^i 
o 
fcPRMT % fcMhfri^cl o I) 
Like the nave of the wheel of a potter 
remains or revolves there, similarly the Pole 
Star whirls there only without changing its 
place. That very way deserves to be understood. 
1. The Pole Star or the distance of a planet from the 
beginning of the sidereal zodiac, polar longitude.

=== PAGE 360 ===

Chapter-50 
317 
%T TO 4 fjfrsr T^r #5TT zf $ vfw:ll ^ ^ 
Therefore the rotation of the sun in a circle 
between the two quarters is slow during day and 
fast during night. 
3tR ^ fer<rf$cn TF^T 7Tf?T: T^TI 
nit* * 3^tK #5TT t 7TffT:ll ^ ? II 
Within the northern solstice of the Moon, 
the movement is remembered as tardy. And 
likewise again during night the movement of 
the sun becomes hasty. 
c?%at W rfa f^T #5T Mtatfl 
hfcK ^5*4 TO> % M<JI rjlfu rMT ■H^rtlll 5Jh3II 
And within the southern solstice, the 
movement of the sun during day becomes hasty 
and during night tardy one as calculated 
thoroughly. 
'Jlldfayftui faswwgifa jjl 
m farti wf wr farm *11 
This way by a proper movement, dividing 
the days and the nights, the sun traverses the 
path by its even and uneven movements. 
cileblH^ fWT it rT H)cbirrHTSIgf5?WI 
3FTwrm ^m%T3^r p 
^t**m*$nfat* n ^ mi 
In the four quarters over the Lokaloka 
mountain (i.e. half light and half dark) on which 
are stationed the guardians of the worlds, 
Agastya (the star Canopus) traverses with great 
velocity. He divides days and nights by diverse 
movements. 
TTWEtmi HI4IHI4'44 4trR4l 
tfich’HrlKchi 
To the south of Nagavithi and north of 
Lokaloka and outside the path of Vaisvanara1, 
he is the protector of the worlds. 
1. A particular division of the Moon’s path comprising 
both Bhadrapada and Revatl. 
tjb ^T^nrr Trrft 
TTT^Nrr: yyd-Wldrmi4IHict,HI Tr^rT:ll ^V9II 
There is ample sunlight at the sides, behind 
and all round Lokaloka as there is on its top and 
front. 
4frRRt ^nf&r nfadi fJrft: i 
uehivraiMehivisr w&t: qf<m^H;ii 
The height of this mountain is ten thousand 
Yojanas. The lofty mountain is partly 
illuminated and partly unilluminated. It is 
circular all round. 
usrroWh wi 
arcreri seETgRl ^a?rrg^i ct fa: n ^ s> n 
The constellation, the moon, the sun, the 
comets or planets along with the groups of stars, 
illuminate the interior of the Lokaloka 
mountain. 
MdlctLta HlcbW fTO^Tte^fcT: WTl 
tf'ta.lcftcfi PaKTT * fd<l^cbW^cb4TII ^o|| 
This much is the loka (i.e. the light’s 
horizon) and beyond this is the paucity of light. 
The Lokaloka is single but Niralokas (darker 
sides) are numerous. 
HlehlrTldJ jT Wt dffllgMI 
W Tlf^: TtpTT fyMfggifq ^gcRTII ^ ? 
Because the sun in its circular movement 
unites the Lokaloka, the wise call the inter¬ 
space between Usa and Vyu$ti by the name 
Sandhya. Usa is remembered as night and 
Vyusti is remembered as day. 
f| WTRHT I 
iMmldtoVVi VTN'Riyt pirrop 
jrrfrdT 4Tut wn ^ * n 
At the time of twilight, a curse was cast on 
the wicked demons who were devouring the sun 
that they would have imperishability of bodies 
but they would be made to die everyday.

=== PAGE 361 ===

318 
Vayu-Purana 
srarrftT f^n 
TTWrTt fTlrMR: ^JfwfcT Tuf^ll ^ ? II 
Three crores of demons who are well-known 
as Mandehas (also name of the Sudras in 
Kus'advipa) ingratiate before the rising 
thousand-rayed sun every day. The wicked- 
souled ones harass and desire to devour the 
blazing sun. 
3W rTCt W ^mTtr^TWTI 
rTrTt flgJl c(31?J sll^Ull^fo :II 
TTKlfo WT^ITRl: zpmfa TfRFWII ^*11 
STfgjRURtfrfi TTO?qT ^TfecWI 
^ ^tt gifwn^mi 
Thereafter a terrific battle ensued between 
them and the sun. Then Brahma, Devas and 
Brahmanas of excellent norms, who were 
performing Sandhya sprinkled the holy water 
sanctified by Omkara and Gayatrl. By that, the 
Daityas were burnt by the water that had 
became adamantine. 
(31 fqTTT^ ■HM-dl^l^l'Jllgfd: I 
All around the sacrificial place where 
Brahmanas are offering oblations, the thousand- 
rayed Bhaskara (Sun), shines forth with its 
light. 
rRT* *^lsjfa>4<l*H:l 
PWTfaT ^TiBTII ^\S|| 
Then again the highly refulgent sun having 
prowess and brilliance of high norm, rises up a 
hundred thousand Yojanas. 
AT: WRITpt: hfpcT[fPT:l 
firTlf: B’ufrftlpT-.ll ^<£11 
Then moves along the adorable one, 
surrounded by Brahmanas and by the 
Balakhilyas, the sages accomplished in motives 
along with Marlci. 
Writer w xfa 
TiTBT WfigtHRmi 
'■^feWTT TT5J^ft TTOTII ^ <> II 
Fifteen Nimesas (winking time of the eye) 
constitute one Kdsthd (a measure of time =1/30 
Kald, thirty Kasthas make one Kald (Kdsthd 
being 1/30 of a Kald, Kald therefore is equal to 
30 Kasthas); a Muhurta may be of thirty Kalds 
and thirty Muhurtas make a full day consisting 
of a night and a day. 
TTOT T^iTTII II 
There is increase and decrease in the length 
of day by a few parts. But whether it is 
increased or decreased, the duration of twilight 
remains constant i.e. one Muhurta. 
^TiTtr^Rnssf^r fdM|dWid t h 
TnrBRR: TP: TT/T PT WT:ll w 
The three Muhurtas (i.e. 90 Kalds) from the 
time when the sun rises from the horizon 
constitute the Pratastana (early morning) period 
which is one-fifth part of day. 
TPM 1(31 ITWTTTJTrTfd M Pd WT^'A 
dp-Midi'inra wftii ?^ii 
From the hour of Pratastana i.e. dawn 
appearance, the extent of three Muhurtas 
constitutes the Sahgava (forenoon). The extent 
of three Muhurtas after Sahgava is called 
Madhyahna (midday). 
TPM I l< '-HI (JU | ff?T PfcT:l 
T£T T3T TfTTW TWIcaSTcTTST TSTTRTII ^^|| 
3Ttm| THH: PTTTF1 TOJTl 
Tfctft TfrffejT TTg ^TII ?WII 
The period of three Muhurtas from midday 
is called Aparahna (afternoon). The period of 
three Muhurtas from afternoon is called 
Sdycihna. There are only three sacred Muhurtas 
out of a day of fifteen Muhurtas\

=== PAGE 362 ===

Chapter-50 
319 
During the position of the sun in the 
equinox, day and the night, each consists of 
fifteen Muhurtas. 
^cT ^ 
Tift ■OlW ^?:ll ^11 
During the transit of the sun to the north and 
south, the duration of day increases and 
decreases accordingly. The day engulps the 
night and night engulps the day. 
fctfcjcj df&Hioyrll 
3#TTt cRH12N W ■HMV^rlll ^V9|| 
In the middle of autumn and spring, Visuva 
(equinox) is realised as appearing. The Moon 
adheres to its seven Kalds during the night and 
the day, 
^ ^ ir wraRRi^:ii 
cn%55R*ll ^>£11 
Then of fifteen days, one Paksa (fortnight) 
is termed as such. And of two fortnights may be 
a month and an interval of two months 
constitute a Rtu (season). Of three seasons, one 
Ayana (solstice) may be called and a Varga or 
year comprises of two solstices (Ayanas). 
SflcT: efTOTOT etfr W 
cMiqif&VM: WT HNIVl)lrl^l^<*ln ^ || 
The unit of time created by fifteen Nimesas 
is Kasthd. Thirty Kasthas make a Kala. It 
consists of one hundred and sixty Matras. 
Vld^dddf^yi^MlPdyid^xHN 
r^ra’MIcHqTcfVI^Nrqt ^ ^cTII \c O II 
The unit of time Kala or Cala is thus 
defined. It consists of ninety-nine, thirty, thirty- 
six, sixty-two or twenty-three Matras. 
tWiRyirH^ifai yidi^l ^ fogfr: i 
wft xnft qcrfw \c ’ii 
Forty thousand and eight hundred and 
seventy Matras make the unit of time called 
Vidyuti. To be precise, it is ninety. 
ir# -dlta <*KUW|| ? || 
In Vaidhasarhyuga they say that there are 
only four hundred Matras in a Vidyuti. This is 
known as Cardrhsa. The cause is Nalika. 
'^clrWRJ'q: ^<JnRlfe|ebR'Md:l 
ftgqr: ¥j«hww fnfaqfiwtafrii ^311 
Sarhvatsara and the like five units of time 
have four alternative calculations. The fixation 
of Yuga is decisively done on this basis in all 
the units of time. 
wrr Tfe^Rrl 
tURTt ^KWMi MfUi$d:ll*6*ll 
Sarhvatsara is the first year; the second one 
is Parivatsara\ Idvatsara being the third one; 
fourth one is Anuvatsara\ the fifth is Vatsara. 
Thus the various units of time are termed. 
Rryi w ^rof <t i^Rmi 
C\ O O "N 
'^awBi^viRsivi^ ■mww wiiumi 
Twenty hundreds of Parvans completes a 
Yuga of Ravi i.e. Sun. These eighteen plus 
thirty Yugas constitute one Udaya (rise) of the 
Sun. 
diddf^Vld: W 3TqqiRr f I 
M^PdVl^d qfstrfw *TTCc&T:ll^ll 
Thirty Rtus of the sun make ten Ayanas. 
Three thousand five hundred Ayanas make sixty 
months of the sun. 
f%?cr v $t trnisr ^rr^r: i 
Rroistctii 
Thirty days and night make one solar month. 
Sixty-one days and nights constitute a single 
Danu. 
^ W Tjnzifira; 'O^tTl 
TTR dfcdd^ldlW TOM cTII \CC II 
s3 ' *

=== PAGE 363 ===

320 
Vayu-Purana 
One hundred and eighty-three days 
constitute the time of one transit of the sun over 
the world. 
<T TTTER Ml 
MTUT faWIrTlI II 
The four types of calculation viz. Saura 
(solar), Saumya (lunar), Ndksatra (stellar) and 
Savana (sacrificial) should be clearly 
understood. 
STtfw cR*T f ^ O || 
Situated to the north of Sveta is the 
mountain named Sriigavan. The three peaks of 
that one are sky scraping ones. 
tsjrft f^grfri 
fwrrr fawwfa ^ 
By those very ones, the mountain stands 
reputed as Sriigavan i.e. possessed of peaks. 
The single path leading to it, its expansion or 
length (vistara) as well as the width 
(■viskambha) have been already mentioned. 
w t ■q^r: ^ ww ^feniwri 
^rot TjjRt ^ *9^ <t Wilichy^nrii ^ ? n 
To the east of that one is the peak made of 
gold and the southern peak, verily, is the silvery 
one, having lustre of a marble. 
Tjcj f^T:ii^^n 
And a northern peak fully overladen by 
gems, is the most excellent one. This way by 
three peaks, the mountain is (named) Sriigavan. 
iWf&McTd il(dM^I 
Tift cSTtfa fdftlTm*: 11^*11 
Within the interval of autumn and spring, 
the sun proceeds with medium velocity, neither 
fast nor slow. It reaches that peak of the 
mountain which is near the equinoctical line. 
The day shorn of dusk, renders night of equal 
dimensions. 
fT*TT f^TTM fMRET H^HSTl 
^wfcHwi jmsswfo 
All around, the divine steeds stand yoked to 
the huge chariot and appear as if smeared by the 
red-lotus gleamed rays. 
llfctf 3TFt Tlf^rT rTracTtll ^ * II 
At the end of Mesa and Tula zodiacal transit 
of the sun, days and nights contain fifteen 
Muhurtas beginning with sunrise. 
cFfteERT Trf: TMWFFTr WTI 
faviusiMi cTsrr tmsjTsrm fHvn**:ii mu 
When the sun have existence in the first 
quarter of the Krttika constellation, the moon is 
considered as existent in the fourth quarter of 
Vis'akha constellation. 
faVUtsllili ^dlitcfiq i 
^ ferr%n^f%^Tf?RftT fwtrn h n 
In Visakha, when the sun exists in the third 
quarter, then the moon may be deemed as 
having existed on the top of Krttika. 
fayel-d ftill^c|lj|§4^:l 
fihTcr felWii TTl^T FTS^TII ^ II 
Then the equinoctial point may be 
recognised, this way do the great sages declaim. 
Equinox shall be known through the position of 
the sun and the time through that of the moon. 
TThT TTf^SfcT dfgp^WI 
fegcR^ftru 
gi^ruterr fcivltiui yyildd t^iii^oii 
When night and day are of equal extent, then 
it is equinox or equinoctial point. During 
equinox transit, oblations to the manes and 
charities to the Brahmanas should be made. 
Brahmanas are the mouths of Devas. 
W <*HI<*l8W£<UT:l 
hiU1 Wit TMT ^JT 3UJNIWI ^11 
Irwldidfl mi yMqfdwyiiiRo^n

=== PAGE 364 ===

Chapter-50 
321 
The night of short duration and intercalary 
month occur in view of the differenes due to 
Kalas, Kasthas and Muhurtas. The full moon is 
of two types: Raka and Anumati.1 The new 
moon too is of two types- Sinivall and Kuhu. 
FTTcTII 
wwtssr $5: 
W: c^TOT WTcTII ? o II 
Tapa and Tapasya, Madhu and Madhava, 
Su/cra and Suci, are the summer solstice; Nabha, 
Nabhasyo, /yw, Sahorja, Saha and Sahasya are 
the northern or winter solstice. 
■HciHKiWt ^T: mgnrr: ^tti 
iwii |rarr ^rtct: ^hthro^u 
These months make a year (Samvatsara), 
The five years are the sons of Brahma. From 
that deserve the Rtus or seasons to be 
recognised as the intermediary records. 
fop^rii^o^u 
On that account, the Amavasya (New Moon 
Day) is known as the leader of Parvans. And on 
that account may be reckoned the Vi$uva (the 
equinoctial point) invariably beneficial to the 
manes and gods. 
Tier i 
dfMIrHJd WCR\ t fofoFTfoi WH ? o mi 
This way having understood, a man should 
1. Sinivall- Moon on the first day on which it is 
visible, Rgveda II.32.6, Gungu- a synonym of 
Kuhu, the day of conjunction when the moon rises 
invisible. It would be seen if these phases of moon 
were identifiable with IndranT or VarunanI or with 
both. (H.H. Wilson on Rgveda II.32.8, p.78). 
Sinivall- The day preceding that of the new moon 
or that day on which the moon rises with a scarcely 
visible crescent ^ TTT 
fAi)on<H14lAitareya Brahmana and TR 
Rh1c(h1 
not feel scepticism regarding rites dealing with 
manes and gods. Hence equinox is remembered 
as all-pervasive by the people. 
STHtgTRT: TFpt t dfo 3czfo 
HtoH: fWTW tffolc-lUfeW lTSqcT:ll?o^ 
The Loka (world) should be known to exist 
as far as light extends and the end of the world 
is also known as Loka. The Lokapdlas or 
quarter guardians stay there in between the 
Lokaloka mountain. 
Tpmr xtt ^TT3T: sfor: 
fouiTtfHfl ^MM'ddg ^:IRoV9|| 
Those great-souled ones stay till the final 
dissolution of the world. They are Vairaja of 
good brilliant splendour, Kardama of good and 
merciful disposition, Parjanya of golden hair 
and Ketuman of static determination. 
rHIcfculHI: R«ldl # tdWlPlleb ■cldf5VlH.il ^ 0 £ 
Having no duality or dual policy, void of 
fear and pride, void of deceptive contrivances 
and perversities- these Lokapalas are stationed 
in the four quarters in Lokaloka. 
fq^noT: it h ttstt ^wrqsn^i%: n ? o n 
The path which is to the north of Agastya, 
south of Ajavlthl and on the exterior of the 
Vaisvanara path is called Pitrydna. 
JTSPRTt I 
Hlchw TfdH^ii: fq^iut qRrf^irrT:ii?^oii 
Stationed on the route of Pitrydna are the 
sages blessed with progeny who perform 
Agnihotras and who perpetuate the lineage of 
the world. 
anfVM dtfrcl^rll 
TTTTWR rTl^mT^qt W: TT II9 UH 
Being desirous of the welfare of all the 
worlds, they bless the activities of living beings

=== PAGE 365 ===

322 
Vayu-Purana 
and start the activites of Rtviks. Theirs is the 
southern path. 
O 'O 
WcqT 3M TTqfafor: VII ? ?? II 
In every Yuga, they re-establish Dharma that 
has gone astray by their progeny, by penance, 
by legacies or traditions and learning. 
-q^qi ftsrtelfqn 
C\ 
TJ^TT^rnTRRrT fdg^rdT^jclri ^ 31 dj I ^ ^ II 
The earlier ones on their death are reborn in 
the houses of the later ones. This series of births 
and deaths makes them live upto the hour of 
final dissolution of the universe. 
3?EI¥fifdfl3WTftl TffaT ^feliTI 
wf fmr 
srfsftu ? vsn 
There are eighty thousand householder- 
sages resorting to the path south of the sun. 
They stay there as long as the moon and the 
stars exist, Those fit for reckoning among the 
active ones, they went down to the cemeteries. 
€TI 
^IgqM'f^-ll V %4tqi|iR STII 9 ^ II 
<WT ^RTfgq^TW VI 
crt#: ftngr: WTRTft ft ^rf^TTii 
grot imfe? ^rflrtii ? ^ n 
By the worldly behaviour initiated by the 
start of the goneby task, by the disposition of 
crest and apathy and also by the assumption of 
physical union and likewise by the activity of 
the body, by the adjustment of the object in 
hand, by these very instruments, the Siddhas 
attained to the cemeteries. Having impulse for 
the progeny, the sages took birth in the 
Dvapara. 
3tR: vfm: w v ^:ii 9 ^11 
To the north of Nagavlthi and south of the 
Saptarsis (Great Bear) is Devayana (the vehicle 
of the gods), the northern path of the sun. 
vz rr cnftre; iwn ?rgf«nrw:i 
rT It: II II 
Therein resides Siddhas who are celibates of 
accomplished chaste conduct. They are 
unsullied and have conquered death. 
^q-WRM&UI: ITTOrTWraMII ^ %% II 
Even these Urdhvaretas sages (those living 
in chastity) are eighty thousand in number. 
They have resorted to the northern path of the 
sun and stay there till the final dissolution. 
(ct TOfTjT RlebVJ f g^nHI 
V FcjcI'oShi^II 
gfggT <OT^tJTTiS^l^q^qr^ll ? ? o II 
Those ones out of contextual assimilation of 
Loka i.e. the light and owing to the evasion of 
coition, by the observations of desire and 
enmity as also owing to the evasion of the 
undertakings of the past, (there ensued) the 
ennourishment by concomitance of Kama, 
owing to observation of Sabda i.e. the sound, 
sense and the like. 
fr^: VJTOt: f| Slftftl 
%TT3q?ni ? ? W 
This way by their pure reasons, they have 
attained immortality. Deathlessness is 
predicated of those who survive till final 
dissolution. 
This is the period of life till the three worlds 
last, for sages who do not return to the path of 
Samsara. By the murder of a Brahmana and the 
horse-sacrifice, the one having taken to the 
perpetration of sin or acceptance of merit

=== PAGE 366 ===

Chapter-51 
323 
(becomes tangible as such). Those taking to the 
extreme sense of celibacy become extinct, at the 
end of the annihilation of all living beings. 
TjrTfsrojr^ f% pW 'Mrwwi 
Wl 1 iOmU rtfSBOTT: % 3^TI 
^^jrf^tgTd 33 ft cftch'^BEM 
To the north and above the world of sages, 
where Dhruva is said to present, is the divine 
shining region of Visnu. No one is affected by 
sorrow or pain after reaching that region. It is 
the greatest region of Vi§nu where Dharma, 
Dhruva and other meditators of the world stay. 
ff?r wmfTjrnrr aftfirerenfl 
u*nsfilssztT3:imoit 
•k -k *

=== PAGE 367 ===

Chapter-51 
323 
SRgJ cTlft ^ Wmil 3 II 
The Sages enquired- “How do these 
luminaries revolve along or rotate as such in the 
sky in a circular motion? Why they do not 
collide with one another? And who makes them 
rotate along? Or do they revolve of their own 
accord?” 
fqq^ mm 
This we want to understand, O excellent 
one! Narrate it to us. This is such as one 
perplexing the human beings. We have a desire 
to hear about this. 
113$cbqrfn $ sssTO: 11 
Chapter 51 
The description of the movement of 
stars or light 
■jgjfT 
fq^pf smstmn^rrtrftir § i 
^fgKnfuT Xf ^crtftrr M cJ^|UH*qqn ^|| 
Suta spoke- While narrating the creation of 
the Svayambhuva Manvantara, the events of 
past and future have been illustrated. Now we 
shall talk of them in due order. 
fidget I <T im^tffqgtSuTni 
U^TUTT qr^TtlRII 
Having heard this, the sages questioned 
Lomaharsana regarding the movement of Sun, 
Moon and the planets all around. 
o 
fofroq^q Tratftrr xj\\ 
JRT:llMI 
Suta spoke- You may understand me as 
talking of this wonderful thing which though 
very clear and visible, deludes people. 
YiYpm sraiw:i 
It is Dhruva, son of Uttanapada, who is 
established or stationed at the tail-end of what 
appears like the Gangetic porpoise with tails 
towards the four quarters in the sky. He has 
become the pivotal peg in the sky. 
qr % PWif n|: TTSI 
Wrmqwfqr q^ranftrr ^ ^r^dji^n 
It revolves itself and along makes to revolve 
the moon and the sun along with the planets. To 
this one rotating along, follow in, the stars like a 
wheel or circle. 
STcTPl TPTOT rircft TPft TThTTr: TTTqi 
trt q^nf&r uf: W» c n 
cHgjfq rTlfq ^1 
M ^tq£r ^TcTIgJ chlHTdlTW^c) till || 
3TOlli^fr rTSTt^TTcTT ^TOTtr^l 
srairffcf sra^rn^oii

=== PAGE 368 ===

324 
Vayu-Purana 
With the epicentre of the Pole Star (Dhruva), 
the sun, the moon, the fixed and moving stars 
and the planets are bound to Dhruva in the form 
of groups of winds. It is because of Dhruva that 
their communion, dislocations, seasonal 
movements, rising and setting, likewise the 
portentious phenomena, the solstices, southern 
and northern i.e. summer and winter transits, the 
equinoxes and colours begin to function. 
^ snrf fgtf TTf4: xtQ f^T OTI 
The rain, the heat, the snow, the night, the 
twilight, diurnal glow, and the good and evil of 
the progenies all emanate from Dhruva (Polar 
star). 
The sun having covered all those occupied 
by Dhruva, sustain itself as such. Hence his rays 
are illuminated. The sun is the deadly fire. 
^r:ii 
By the order of revolutions or rotations, O 
Brahmanas, the sun illuminates the quarters by 
his rays. The sun by the networks of his beams, 
equipped with breeze all around, sucks water 
from the entire universe, O best among the 
Brahmanas! 
?*ll 
o o 
The water sipped by the sun gets transferred 
to the Moon from the fire of the sun. By the 
Nadis (tubular veins), full of wind, the activity 
of sustaining the worlds begins. 
imr cmjfavi^r f^rf^T ^ ■gfeii ^ n 
That which percolates down from the moon, 
the sun receives at its tips. The clouds by the 
impact of breeze release waters on the ground. 
i^cTqfrt^ujcl Held rT 
qi?m(3)^cb'Wrfw rl^cf ^ II 
And this way the water is splashed above 
and percolates down once again. There is no 
destruction of water effected as such. That same 
water assumes various shapes. 
wrunsf ^TRt tttsNt fg^fqftfdii 
3TTOT tnw o5Tn<t Ir^TcRt Wntjnfll y\a|| 
For the sustenance of the worlds (lit. human 
beings), such a magical feat stands manipulated 
by Visva (i.e. Brahma). By this very magical 
feat, stands circumambiated the triad of worlds 
equipped with mobile and immobile beings. 
f^Tt Hl«*^d: jLi^i^i: jrarqfr:i 
The sun is the lord of the universe, the 
creator of the lokas, the thousand-rayed one, the 
lord of the progenies, the sustainer of the 
universe in entirety and is the master, Vi$nu, the 
maker of the day himself. 
^IWt 3rrTrM<S^drTSSq JR&^|| || 
The water of the universe in entirety 
percolates down from the moon in the sky. The 
universe is, therefore, supported by the moon. 
This is a true fact proclaimed as such. 
Wfeoi fatfcirT mi^Td ^ra#l 
yndiuiidl# wmnyou 
From the sun, the heat gets generated and 
from the moon, frigidity gets into being. These 
two have power for heat and cold conjoined as 
such and they sustain the universe. 
yfcrremT ^ ti^t qfer fwrt^Ti 
The holy Ganga having waters limpid or 
transparent, has the moon for support. And the 
great streams have movements in front of the 
son of the moon, O excellent Brahmanas.

=== PAGE 369 ===

Chapter-51 
325 
uchdymjy OTTt fRi^nsr ^t-.i 
fWcTOT 3T 3TTOt pMIM-dt* ^T: II ? ^ II 
In the bodies of all the beings, water is 
present. When the bodies of the mobile and 
immobile beings burn, the water becomes 
vapour and rises on all sides. 
rR xjrsnftr srrskr Tsimrsnwral TffR) 
3TT& rf3Tt f| ^rl^T Wl^T ^ ^ || 
By that the clouds arise and they are 
receptacles of water. The brilliance of the solar 
light takes up the water from the living beings 
by the rays as such. 
WRPJ:l 
tjfwf %re*:ii 
WAim % ^RT: ^Fmf^T:n 
From the ocean by the impact of breeze, the 
rays take the water. The revolving sun imparts 
water to the clouds by means of his white rays 
in the proper seasons. 
3RTWT: WRSTPTt W Tig^f^TT:l 
graft©- TfFRTrf: ii ? mi 
The waters drips from the clouds while 
stationed in the sky and having been inflamed 
by breeze. For the benefit of all beings, the 
clouds scatter showers when they are blown by 
the winds in all directions. 
ci#r 
grara 3g grftwfigtTii ^ ^ II 
Then clouds shower forth rain for six 
months for the prosperity of all the beings. They 
produce the rumbling sound of thunder arising 
from the wind and brilliant lightning bom of 
fire. 
t yyqfcr ■udMiM^’g gragr fg^:ii^ii 
The root Imih means ‘to exude’ or ‘to 
sprinkle’. Since the clouds exude water, they 
are called Megha. And from which the waters 
do not fall down, they are called Abhra. 
TTEIHT ^dbdjFdf^lf^SII SlftWll 
fasTTSRT: WMUsyidl^Ni g$9Tft- ^ftranjl^ll 
Thus the generation of clouds is in three 
ways. Their source of origin are three. The 
types of clouds are- Agneyas, Brahmajas and 
Paksajas. Thus the three types of clouds have 
been narrated. I shall mention their mode of 
origin. 
OT^rremkr: HKbi^Ni riwsraRk^i 
^ftd^Tqidl % otfc|fkdl:ll?^ll 
The Agneyas are called as those that are 
bom from waters of ocean. Therefore, their 
promulgation (remains practicable). Cold, 
cloudy and breezy- these qualities are inherent 
in them. 
gftg© crnWTST qrlWd^RlfiRU 
«rraT fggrftr Tufor git 3 o it 
They assumes the movements of bisons or 
buffaloes, boars and inebriate tuskers in their 
rut. They sport and roam about very near the 
earth. 
These clouds are entitled as Jlmutas having 
life-force generated from these. They have no 
streaks of lightning and hang down due to water 
content in them. 
tot srt wrarraT ^mror:i 
WtTRia gi 
These silent clouds are of huge stature. They 
follow the trail of Avaha1 submissively. They 
rain forth only to the extent of a Krosa or even 
upto the half of a Krosa. 
\. Name of one of the seven winds or bands of air that 
which is aspirated to the Bhuvarloka or atmospheric 
region between the Bhuvarloka and Svarloka.

=== PAGE 370 ===

326 
Vayu-Purana 
xjcfomPttiisra sHtfcr ^ vfet 
o 
^rllchlchi^lRui: || ^ ^ |( 
They rain forth on the tops and slopes of the 
mountains and revel along. They pierce the 
wombs of the flocks of the white cranes. They 
make them conceive. 
fa^ujlVdl: VHfiwi:ll3,#ll 
The types of clouds called Brahmajas 
sprung from the breath of Brahma. They are 
endowed with the lightening streak and rumble 
forth being lovers of sounds. They thunder too. 
?rat yn^an^T 
^RTRT ^ mi 
By the reverberation of the noise of those 
ones, the earth gets a thrill. Like a queen 
consecrated by a king earth attains youth once 
again. Being the cause of the birth of the living 
beings, the earth endears itself to the clouds. 
wjffim Shaft sfarcs wrar:i 
fgrfcr gig ifeinst <r Tunimr: n ^ ^ n 
Jlmutas are those clouds from which ones 
ensues the regeneration of the life or living 
being. These clouds resort to the second layer of 
wind called Pravaha. 
tjcT trmwM wyferifaifKircjfti 
'<jfg^4w«iT for stttwrt: jRhHfdi:ii 
WKicrfm wr % hm 
These clouds shower forth from a distance 
of a Yojana, half a Yojana or one-fourth of a 
Yojana from the earth. They rain in continuous 
torrents. Puskardvartakas (an epithet of a class 
of clouds said to cause death or famine) are the 
clouds that get generated from the peaks of 
mountains. 
yrafar % xj&iHi h^ntumi 
Tnf^RT fyraftr^srmi^dii 
By Sakra (i.e. Indra) were chopped off the 
wings of the mountains of great radiance, for 
the sake of beings grown and exposed to lust, 
whose well-being he cherished. 
hWT TW cT W 5j*dWUUWKl:l 
chlfUl^ 
These clouds are named Puskaras. They are 
stupendous ones having effluences of waters. 
On that account they came to be called as 
Puskardvartakas (revolving Puskaras). 
<*<rMbd<^: WIT: TradWftrilW:il'So il 
They are myriad-formed ones and highly 
horrible ones. They are the generators of the 
rain at the end of the aeon and organisers of the 
fire of Sarhvartaka. 
fTTRfa (frftiCTTcf 
a^cMMNfcwMc uglddfqn 
anf Tit T^TT&raT: 
The third type of clouds mentioned before 
shower at the end of the Yugas. They stand 
enunciated having myriad forms, replenishing 
the surface of the ground. They resort to the 
wind called Paravaha and conclude a Kalpa 
(i.e. aeon). 
rTWRJSnpT 
dl^leflu^cbmHW T$ W: Hdi)R'dl:ll'#^ll 
Of the Cosmic Egg-shell of Prakrta, all the 
clouds are reputed to have been bom of. 
Brahma, the four faced one, the self-bom one, 
was also bom of the same Cosmic Egg. 
dmmujKM am T^NwfaylNd:i 
rfal ^STf TTforonlter f^"r3TT:ll*3ll 
It is the smoke that makes them complete in 
form without any difference. Among them the 
best one is Parjanya and there are four quarter 
tuskers.

=== PAGE 371 ===

Chapter-51 
327 
1T5TRT Xf irerni ^rfrifir: 
fro igsr^rr t^ii^ii 
Elephants, mountains, clouds along with the 
serpents, belong to one and the same family, 
though they are severally manifested, since 
water is known as the sole source of their 
origin. 
Parjanya and the quarter tuskers take birth 
in the winter season. Bom of chilliness, they 
rain forth the showers of frost for the over¬ 
growth of all the corns or crops. 
qfr# qrrc itai 
firoff wrapi^raT<5i?Ffhjn^ii 
f^ii^Hi wit fam wW Iwmrii'k^ii 
The best wind Parivaha is their support. It is 
that lordly wind which sustains the Gariga that 
wades through the sky. It is sacred, divine 
nectar-like river, flooded over with water, 
stationed in the heaven and flowing with three 
branches. 
The quarter elephants spray all round drops 
of water from the Gahga by means of their huge 
trunks. That release of showers in the form of 
sprays, is known as hoarfrost (Nlhara). 
RrfNrfofr tw ff?r Tp:i 
#n§rTTPI ^ ^Tutll 
Wf qm ^TTT^nrT qqt dil t TgrWirjSill 
In the south of Meru, the mountain that 
exists is known as Hemakuta. There is a city 
called Pundra to the south of this mountain and 
to the north of Himalaya. 
dRqfoqfrfd ^ ydUltTiq^srPi 
fwVRT ^^rfnRH.11^^11 
ffy-jiid cTri: thti 
rfcT: q^JTSiqTRTf^ogifll q o || 
The rain that sprung out of this frost, falls on 
this mountain. The wind Avaha blowing from 
Himavat brings drops of mist and sprinkles 
them over the great mountain, irrigating or 
saturating as such the huge mountain. The 
remnant of the shower crosses Himalaya and 
comes here thereafter in order to make the 
western region flourish. 
Stsrar(seiT5s)Tzn*R ste 
TP* W^Tt WT q *11 
The two types of clouds that make the 
regions flourish have been enunciated as such. 
The sun, verily, is deemed as the creator or 
generator of the rains. 
SJ^OTC^fgcIT trfwiWT ffg: Scf#l 
g%tJTTS5%fScTt ’SW ^T:liq?ll 
The sun is surrounded by the polar star, from 
the two the rain gets into being and Vayu, 
likewise, surrounded by polar star, restrains 
forth rains once again. 
c(H^W pf<%fSd^ll q ^ II 
In the entire circle of sidereals having got 
out of the solar planet, at the end of the turn of a 
day the wind enters the sun surrounded by the 
polar star. 
3RP. q4w*ll«l factor I 
Cs 
q^KUl f=TCTf*RTIiq*ll 
Therefore, now you learn the descriptions of 
the chariot of the sun. It is having one wheel 
with five spokes and three naves. 
■qwPT^UTT jj l#ll 
dtjyrTqh^rasfr>Ti q<y*UchdRHiii 
qiwi Tfot: ttcf5%iiqqn 
The adorable lord Sun goes ahead on his 
golden-wheeled chariot of great refulgent, that

=== PAGE 372 ===

328 
Vayu-Purana 
has knotty joints, six-fold rim and one felly. It 
destroys the darkness on the road. 
ftffrdCranTrf: TgrfT! 
%DTt5W m'l'qWI'cJIVT^^WIIa: im $ I) 
This is known as such having length and 
width of ten thousand Yojanas. Owing to the 
extent of the poles or shafts of the carriage or 
side beam (its radius) is twice as the central 
part. 
TT STRUTT gfgt jTI 
3TSf: gn^TT f^STT grfi: 
That chariot has been created by Brahma 
under exigency of a specific motive. It is 
unhinged golden one, beautiful one and yoked 
with steeds of excellent gaits. 
VcT: 
c^: TT^?R5 TT:II 
fomt ^f?r mrffcr wi g ferrar-.ii^ii 
It is the Vedic metres which assumed the 
forms of horses. It is stationed in the orb of 
Sukra or Venus. That verily is similar to the 
pre-requisites of the chariot of Varuna. By that 
one refulgent one crawls along the Sun in the 
sky. 
TTdrWWlcWl: chfidniPf II 
These, verily therefore, are the individual 
components (lit. limbs) of the chariot of the Sun 
composed by the compartments of the 
Samvatsara, distributed as per sequence. 
^rfa: TJ^RR: TT t T^:l 
am: T^RTT:ii ^ o n 
The day is the navel of the Sun. A single- 
wheeled chariot is known that one. The spokes 
are the five seasons of that one and the rim of 
that is the sixth season. 
gfctf ilfiww ?TmT eRrTT: ^TT:II^^II 
gm gjTST: wht 
xrrrn Hdi: T^rti:ii ^ ^ 11 
The inner part of a chariot is known as the 
year, the two ayanas are the two shafts. The 
Muhurtas are the Bandhuras (fastening ropes) 
and Kalas are pins of the yoke. The Kdsthds 
constitute its nose and Ksanas are recognized as 
the shafts. The Nimesas are the axle-trees or 
bottoms of the carriage, and the Lavas (equal to 
one Ksana) are the Isas (frames consisting of 
two short and two longer beams). 
ttMwt enrfom em sd: mrferT:i 
S3 <s 
^ srakrormfr T^ffn ^ 3 11 
The night is the wooden fence or fender 
provided to a chariot as a defence against 
collision and Dharrna is the lofty rising banner. 
The two linch pins or the pins fastening the 
yoke to the poles (yugaksakoti) of this one are 
known as the Artha and Kama. 
WWTI'^KifTT crro^t fOT1 
TTTOift fag-GET SRgoSrrftTT clWTU II 
^cr <jfwi'c^cf h wmri 
3# xtsg fro 3 mfeuwi 
The seven steed formed Vedic meters carry 
along the yoke from the left. (Such as) Gayatrl, 
Tristubh, Anu§tubh, Jagatl, Parikti, Brhatl and 
Usnik the seventh one on the pole of the art, the 
wheel stands tied, and on the polar star the pole 
of the cart wheel stands superimposed. 
TTfgsKt ’Sra^T: ¥*# fpr:i 
3T§T: ^fer rr^trr |%fT<T:ii^ii 
The pole of the cart revolves having wheel 
accompanied and having pole of the cart 
accompanied revolves the polar star. And the 
pole of the cart accompanied by the wheel 
revolves round having been stuttered out by the 
polar star. 
(iciqvSewirPw mm § 1 
cmt ■yfTT^l rnmrr Tsmu^ii

=== PAGE 373 ===

Chapter-52 
329 
This way under the exigency of a purpose, 
the Juxta-position of that chariot stands 
requisitioned. Likewise by the proportionate 
conjunction, the solar chariot stands well 
accomplished. 
By that one, the Sun (tarani), revolves 
speedily in the sky connected with the tip of the 
yoked poles of the cart. There are two bridles 
like rays of the chariot (of the Sun). 
sjrot twt feirok 
WWWfw TSTFT cj II 5 II 
The bridle normed beams revolve along the 
polar star, being of the two yokes of specific 
wheel. They may be the orbits of the revolving 
chariot moving in the sky. 
fT^JT JT'Jfdd If %I^RTT5gcRTI|V9o|| 
They are the two tips of the cart poles of that 
yoked one to the right of the chariot, gathered 
by the polar star, verily, like the white ropes of 
the two wheeled one. 
sra T?m w rira^fi 
53 sD 
^Mi^chiii cii'drtT pvs^u 
These two bridle like rays follow in trail of 
the revolving polar star. The two tips of the 
yoke poles those ones, the whirlwind ripples or 
rotations of the chariot. 
O > 
gMWW T?qt rft WdHdTUIdiJinvay II 
Just as a rope tugged on to a nail, revolves 
along all over the directions, the two bridle 
normed rays grow truncated in the form of a 
circle in the Uttarayana. 
c$rT xte pwt Wrnfr Wl 
l^tJT 5 TWl ^ Tfop 19 3II 
They rose along in the Daksinayana 
(southern solstice) and make the orbits move. 
Gathered along by the polar star the two bridle 
normed rays carry along the Sun. 
W^T TETtS‘«TOT 'SRTf Wrdlfd WI|V9*|I 
Cs s3 
When occupied by the polar star, the two 
when get on to dragging all along then that sun 
revolves inside and makes the orbits revolve 
along. 
3T?flfd'MU^H?Td cf.ia^b'TOtSTTI 
§T^TIT Tp6gTrFm2lt TfThWt TO TTII va ^ n 
wlcf WTflW: ^ ^ Wcdlfd Wl 
Tijy'Td TT WTO WeTlft W wfwil^ll 
The sun thus moves along within two 
Kasthas (i.e. quarters) by one hundred and 
eighty orbits. When the rays are being released 
by the polar star, once again, the exterior the 
sun revolves along the orbits and 
circumumbiating the orbits with velocity, it 
trudges along. 
^rrfh^nfr 
•h * *

=== PAGE 374 ===

Chapter-52 
329 
II3W 1%WT?TOTF?:II 
Chapter 52 
The observations on the deities waiting 
upon the chariot of the Sun 
r:ii 
Suta spoke- That chariot is occupied by 
gods, Adityas and R§is likewise, Gandharvas, 
Apsaras (nymphs), Gramanis (or Yaksas), 
Sarpas (nagas), and Raksasas. 
TT^ cRTfo t ^ TTTTrT ;PtUT fll 
3t7T* 'We&Ulfrsr <TTcT*fh 
O v3

=== PAGE 375 ===

330 
Vayu-Pura^a 
trj# -rrRTcrt g#ii 3 n 
CT8JT ^ g%g5WTTI 
3TTCTOTV c###cT TTTf#ll * II 
wnsj#f# w err# 'mr^nmi 
These abide, verily, over the Sun every two 
months or for a period of two months each. 
They are Dhata (Brahma), Aryama, (sages) 
Pulastya, Pulaha and Prajapati, the Seipents 
(Nagas) Vasuki, Samkirnara, Vasuki, 
Samkirnara (a serpent demon) and those two, 
Tumburu and Narada, the two Gandharvas, the 
best among the musicians, the Apsarasas, 
Kratusthall, PunjikasthalT, Gramanls or Yaksas 
Rathakrcchra, and likewise, Urja. Raksasas and 
Yatudhanas, Heti and Praheti- these reside in 
the Sun during the months of Madhu and 
Madhava (i.e. Caitra and Vaisakha). (These are 
the months in the season Vasant (the Spring). 
cTTTT# ### in# cRTU12J FI 
##fMrf*TB?J p# tot tt? n 
TTF^TT ^ 7R#f ^ Ff:l 
T# cTO# i ^ WI: ^ftl^yV.lldll 
During the months of the spring or vernal 
season and the two of the summer season, the 
following reside in the Sun- Mitra and Varuna, 
the sage Atri and Vasistha, Taksaka and 
Rambha (Apsarasas), Menaka and Sahajanya; 
(Gandharvas) Haha and Hahu; Gramanls 
(Yaksas) Rathasvana and Rathacitra; and 
Yatudhanas (Demons) Pauruseya and Dhava 
(Vadha in Bd. P.). These abide along the Sun in 
the two months of Suci and Sukra (the months 
of Jyestha and Asadha. 
cTrT: Tjsf UHW^I #THT:I 
feWS 3T%TT fH# *TII II 
fejrawrrn tt fii n 
wrnmmr ^mfrn 
T# gr# tttt#:ii ^ii 
Then on the sun again, however, abide the 
other deities. They are- Indra and Vivasvan, 
Angiras and Bhrgu, two Nagas- Elapama, 
Sarikhapala; (Gandharvas) Visvavasu and 
Ugrasena, Pratah and Arunah; Apsarasas- 
Pramloca and Nimloca; the Yatudhana 
Vyaghra; and the Naga Sveta. These all reside 
in the Nabhas and Nabhasya (i.e. Sravana and 
Bhadrapada). 
wg# p: ^rgr srof# gf#^n:i 
W TT 'qrgFTT: t##T:II WII 
fsiWFg tt: (pi 
1TRT fepTSJ STt3R:l 
#T(FT)ftrsr #TRT#CT#2J #11 ?*ll 
3TFTT cfffisr #T# WSTRTf# T#Tl 
gt tfTTT%r f##tT:ii *mi 
During the autumn, the refulgent sages and 
gods or sage-normed deities abide in Sun during 
the months of Isa and Urja (i.e. Asvina and 
Karttika) Parjanya and Pu§an; (sages) 
Bharadvaja and Gautama; Gandharvas 
VisVavasu and Surabhi; two Apsarasas of 
auspicious characteristics Visvaci and GhrtacI; 
the famous Serpents Airavata, and Dhananjaya; 
the leaders of armies and Gramanls Senajit and 
Susena; and the two Yatudhanas Apa and Vata. 
fuf## g # ITT# cT f#T#l 
at# to ?## ispr Fll ^ II 
pfSJ UFnRT: T# <*>#<!<* wyii 
its# pr#n ^an 
^ri 
FT#srrfr#i% #TRh#roTter #n \c 11 
#r ttf# v r^i#n h ii

=== PAGE 376 ===

Chapter-52 
331 
During the two winter months (the season of 
snow and frost and cold), the two months of 
Saha and Sahasya (i.e. Margaslrsa and Pausa), 
the following subsist upon the Sun- Amsa and 
Bhaga the two; and Kasyapa and Rtu the two; 
Senanls and Gramanls; Tarksya and Aristanemi; 
the two fierce Yatudhanas, Vidyut and Sphurja; 
and the Nagas Mahapadma and Karkotaka; the 
two Gandharvas Citrasena and Urnayu; and 
UrvasI and Vipracitti; likewise the two noble 
Apsarasas, Tirksya and Aristanemi, SenanI and 
Gramani the two; Vidyut Sphurja and the two 
terrific ones are exemplified as Yatudhanas. 
cftT: VlfvKifl&Tft WratffaflPd tl 
rTH ^ o || 
w qpft grtg^nwrf^Tti 
TRraf sprrpr ^ 
*d|gMWfih=t>c| iIWUift rilcfcfdWhl ? ? II 
ST^TOTWT ^ wftrl2J ^ T^:\ 
c^T ^ Wt cT <TII 9^11 
During the two months of late winter, the 
following reside in the Sun for two months- 
(gods) Tvasta, Visnu; (the sages) Jamadagni 
and Visvamitra; the two Serpents Kambala and 
Asvatara, the sons of Kadra1; the two 
Gandharvas Dhrtarastra and Suryavarcas2; the 
two Apsarasas Tilottama and beautiful Rambha; 
the world famous Gramanls; Rtajit and Satyajit; 
and the Raksasas Brahmopeta and Yajnopeta. 
wnfwrf^Rr #T TTXTTT W¥:l 
[£|iP^d ^3T 3WTII?>ni 
The twelve groups of seven are the presiding 
deities of them with their place of residence. 
These make the Sun inflated by their radiance. 
Their radiance is excellent. 
TRTctfcT Tf^TI 
By the distinguished hymns of prayer, the 
sages adore the Sun. Gandharvas and Apsarasas 
attend upon him with dance and music. 
mi ^ ?tii 
sri^Rsi^i wii 3^11 
Gramanls, Yaksas and Bhutas, organise a 
terrific gathering. The snakes carry the sun and 
the Yatudhanas follow him. Worshipping the 
Sun from the time of rising, the sages 
Balakhilyas3 lead him to the mountain of 
Sunset. 
Vni '^ranrnr: i 
gyndpi ±ivii«M mm wra^ii^ii 
*tcit qqrtrcft fagsj mm\ 
t e|*RTl^ gt # PIPT %T5f^ll?<ill 
The way that sun shines forth for them, well- 
accomplished by radiance and in accordance 
with the powers, penance, Yogic power, 
truthfulness, righteousness and strength of these 
deities, in the same way, these abide herein for 
two months each over the Sun. 
wrTTOT^t 
mum fOT 
Trt qqfqr cpjfo ^TTfqr cTTf^T xTI 
^ETRTO^T <£lRdl:ll 3 o ll 
The sages, the gods, the Gandharvas, and the 
groups of Pannag as or snakes and bevies of 
nymphs, the Gramanls and likewise the Yaksas 
and Yatudhanas manifoldly. These gleam forth 
and rain forth, shine forth, emit out breeze and 
generate or procreate, herein proclaimed as such 
drive away (lit. refute) the inauspicious acts of 
the Bhutas. 
1. A species of Nagas born from Tarksya (Kasyapa) 
and Kadru having many hoods. 
2. Suryavarcas- A Yaksaraja who in a rebirth was 
bom from the womb of Kamakantakata as the son 
of Ghatotkaca, son of Bhima. 
3. A clan of divine personages of a size of a thumb 
and produced from the creator’s body and said to 
precede the Sun’s chariot (their number being 64 
thousand.

=== PAGE 377 ===

332 
Vayu-Purana 
H wm\ cgqt^r 3 ^11 
Of the men of sinister souls, they scare away 
the sin, monger they do prowl fully. 
foirftscrfwT gjTW c)rd^:i 
^ wfa f^nyTT:ti^u 
Stationed in a divine aerial car (vimana), 
moving at will with a velocity of the wind, they 
revolve along with the Sun, with the following 
of day long rotation. 
cniw <tori2j ^ ra:i 
■Jiftraftr f swift ■fl^u^iss'M^yrdii3311 
Raining forth and getting heated and making 
the progenies jubilated, they protect the beings 
here till the time of the end of Manvantara. 
^MlfamfdHmdcWR TT^FdTq- eh 
•o 
3TdtcTRFTrfRt # cT ^11 3*11 
This position of the deities (who identify 
themselves with it) exists in all the Manvantaras 
of the past and of future, by which ones they 
exist now as such. 
Tier cTflftr t ^Tdfd^THI 
W M-cItHM rfll ^mi 
'' s3 -O "O ' ' 
This way, the Saptakas (i.e. the seven groups 
of deities) abide over the Sun, in the four 
direction during the fourteen Manvantaras. 
ifotr %ir xr crafa ^ m&hm') 
trtf fpt ^ enf xi f?R %tt *ni 
3TRR Jl^^ddVrTdjR^THfyM- 
^riPjdsr ^fjrrsr 3^11 
In summer, winter and rains releasing heat, 
snow and rain during day and night with time 
moves along in line with seasons. He (thus) 
propitiates Devas, Pitrs and human beings. 
sftimfa ^trtjcR 
^rnt w^r fsmfarorn 
•0^3 
f fjf 
<T <^wiL|^r fgw: 3*911 
The Sun pleases the gods by the means of 
nectar and by means of the ray (Susumna), the 
Sun develops the Moon in the bright half (of the 
moon) day by day and it is complete (full of the 
full moon days). Devas imbibe its nectar during 
the dark half. 
<T fteKRTSrfW 
Tf^rfw STRRII 
T-SraTtR dfrdcK: (MorPrl 
After being sucked thus, the moon has only 
two digits left at the end of the dark fortnight 
and percolating down by rays, the manes 
consume the nectar by Svadha, the manes, the 
gods and the Saumyas drink that very way the 
oblation of kind of the deceased. 
dlf*TW 
Tfe: ^^rllRT:l 
cf^jTsfcf^ 
^ vmnttzfcrii ? <? 11 
By the sun, the rays or kine, consolidated as 
such and by waters well-distilled by rain and by 
well-grown medicinal herbs, the mortals satiate 
their hunger by food and slake (the thirst) by 
waters. 
TTTTUTT 
3T^r mra 
fdd wsr d^r.-iivoi 
By nectar becomes the satiety for half a 
month of the gods and of the manes; for half of 
a month by Svadha (call) by food constantly 
sustain (themselves), the mortals, and the sun 
bears all that by the beams. 
T2T ff fTcTTffT TfRTfo:l 
m: tr- 
f^T^T VI-’arHfcidl ^RTSTTRIIV ^11

=== PAGE 378 ===

Chapter-52 
333 
The Sun moves ahead by the horses in the 
form of rays consumes waters by the rays. At 
the hour of their release, he discharges them. 
Thus the Sun sustains the mobile and immobile 
beings perpetually. 
The Sun by the green horses is carried 
along, consumes (lit. drinks) waters by the rays 
thousand fold. While being carried by green 
horses, he (Sun) showers it again. 
This way, the Sun moves ahead quickly in 
his celestial globe by means of his single¬ 
wheeled chariot dragged by those unimpaired 
good steeds. 
3T^RldI#TTsRf TT^adlT <T <9^1 
W^wgrrsr wRt: 
During the diurnal and nocturnal glow, he 
traverses over the world of seven continents and 
oceans by means of his single-wheeled chariot 
dragged by the seven horses. 
dRf: 
cRTWh 11 ^ mi 
The voluntary metres that have assumed the 
form of horses are yoked to the chariot near the 
wheel. They are endowed with want on willed- 
form. They are yoked but once. They have the 
unlimited speed of the mind. They* are 
undecaying, green and tawny, acompained with 
the expounders of the Vedas, revolve eighty 
hundred zones within a year. 
w&l TT5E^lfUT 
They are yoked in the beginning of the 
Kalpa. They travel continuously till the final 
dissolution. They traverse the external and the 
internal zones day by day and surrounded by 
Velakhilya, they revolve along d^y and night. 
yR^-cRiiRrri^: *r#f£r:i 
RctoRt:ii *6 ii 
The great sages eulogise him by the famous 
hymns of the praise. He is served with songs 
and dances by the Gandharvas and the series of 
Apsarasas. The lord of the heaven, the sun, 
traverses along by the winged-horses. 
£1^41 T^TT ^cTr^ll^ll 
The Moon that very way revolves along the 
sidereal subsisting upon the avenues. The 
waving and waxing of this one’s rays, likewise, 
is declaimed as such, at par with these of the 
Sun. 
fg^ET; tst: I 
T2T: W: WTfa:ll 
Rrfrisjjfrfcfi: im o u 
The chariot of Moon deserves to be 
recognised as stationed on the both flanks of the 
triad of wheels. The chariot along with the 
horses and the charioteer has sprung out of the 
midst of waters. The chariot endowed with three 
wheels containing hundred spokes and excellent 
white horses have been yoked thereto. 
TTfTSM ^11 
They are ten in number, which are slim and 
divine. They are unimpeded and speedy like 
mind. They are yoked but once (in the 
beginning of the Kalpa) and they trekking till 
the dissolution of the aeon. 
■RpRrt ^ ti

=== PAGE 379 ===

334 
Vayu-Purana 
Gathered on to that chariot, white serpent 
acts as the rain in that chariot. The steeds drive 
along being of one colour. They carry the 
conch-coloured Moon. 
ms frtRisN tptWi i 
wjt cnM^iu4ivd tot aM 
-imRr: TTcf c^?t tot:i 
tj% rF&m ^ f^TO$Rn^im*n 
Yayu, Trimanas, Vr§a, Rajlvala, Haya, 
Varna, Turanya, Harhsa, Vyomin and Mrga- 
this way all these by these names, are the ten 
horses of the Moon. These carry along the god 
Moon at the culmination of the day. 
■hIp^ tot: fisiTtii 
m$i ijiwra: wf^wTiTTimmi 
Surrounded by Gods and Pitrs, the gentle 
Soma (Moon) goes ahead. At the inception of 
the bright fortnight of Moon (Soma), when the 
Sun stays in the foreground, the interior of the 
city of the Moon is filled duly everyday. 
Pfa 8T^t #qiTMITOf?r 
TTfa TOdTTli W *TOIR:im$ll 
3TTOTOTOFT *TFT 'PFTOI:t?PTRTI 
^RTOTWTOT ^TTOTT t TOTT: 11^911 
The Sun develops the Moon drunk by Devas 
in the declining fortnight. The Moon is drunk 
for fifteen days and the Sun replenishes one part 
everyday. Nourished by Su§umna, the white 
digits flourish. 
dWT^prfrt t 3TTWTTOfcr *TI 
■yJcjlifui xiTOTTSsiiifydr TRtim^n 
They decline and decrease in the dark 
fortnight and develop and nourish in the bright 
fortnight respectively. Thus the body of the 
Moon is developed fully by the vigour of the 
Sun. 
TTcPTPZnfaTT: TTTR: f^PTPTII H II 
Developing gradually in the bright half day 
by day, the Moon attains completion on the full 
moon day. 
mi 1#^# TOMMkMehW *TII 
fqsRWTO 
Beginning with the second day in the dark 
half and ending with the fourteenth day, the 
gods drink the water-formed one, the Madhu 
(honey or wine), the nectar of the Moon, 
pleasant one and ambrosial as such. 
3PJ?t TOHTOTI 
-TT^nsfarp Tfter qlafa^ijro^ii $ ?n 
P^TT5T fqgfosj 
#toj 'MiPTOfadidHi xni 
Wtm TOPTRT: hTTORT: cFTO: sTTRTOII ^ II 
By the radiance of the Sun, the nectar is 
collected and prepared in the course of a 
fortnight. For one night, all the gods, manes and 
great sages attend the Soma (i.e. Moon) at the 
inception of the dark fortnight facing the Sun, 
and waves along the end of the western horizon 
and the digits being consumed in due order. 
(592J firrot Wl 
irafwrororrg' ^ ^ factor =hi $ ? n 
Three and thirty making thirty three 
likewise, thirty three thousand gods quaff the 
Moon as such. 
MlduR'W ^ credit) 1 
dwirfi'eur wiwrrof^T ttt:ii^ 
This way the digits being consumed as such, 
decline gradually in the dark half and become 
refilled in the bright half. 
fcjd*u-RTid few f^rrathi 
TO5ftT 3Bfic|IWi TOTrRT:ll 
ftrarsrm^g^r smFrori ftwsrorii^Mi 
This way on the lapse of the days, the gods, 
excellent among the divinities, drink the Moon

=== PAGE 380 ===

Chapter-52 
335 
for half a month until the new-moon day and go 
away. On the new-moon day, Pitrs resort to the 
Moon. 
WT cMkt&l 
3nrrr% n 
When the fifteenth part of the digit is left 
over in the afternoon, that part is used by the 
groups of manes. 
ficrf^r fgcbci chici f?iyi n-w c[ 
deCRTctr^Mi TTOf^T: ^craTtpHTII 
rfr v&u I wfcr 
The digits of that one which survived as 
such or residual as such is consumed by Pitrs 
during the period of two Kal&s. From the lunar 
rays, the nectar of Svadha emerges out on the 
new-moon night. They drink the nectar and 
remain content for a month. They attain 
immortality. 
tW «rf|'Ere$cr 3#MTrrre^ rn 
% iitaCT: fcrc: 
Saumyas, Barhisads, Agnisvattas and 
Kavyas- all these all are Pitrs (manes) as such. 
FtdcFRI4d t ^JT: % fg^: PfctT: I 
■tfiww wn to t^it:ii 
3lfrMPfn(TTT)i^g ^ fs^mil^ll 
The Samvatsaras verily, are the Kavyas or 
manes, of five-yeared durations known as such 
by the Brahmanas. Saumyas should be known 
as seasons, Barhisads are remembered as 
months and Agnisvattas are Artavas (fertility 
period). All these are the creations of Pitrs, O 
Brahmanas. 
fqgfa: ul’MMMHI WclWT eJRTT H tl 
rTRT WT: ^:IIV9o || 
^xr^rr^r ^tP^r: ppfrii^n 
When the digit is being drunk by manes on 
the fifteenth night (Amavasya), the last digit is. 
left and it is refilled. The increase and decrease 
of the Moon are on the sixteenth day i.e. at the 
beginning of each next half. 
TTej 
This way, the waxing and waving of the 
Moon are caused by the Sun. I shall now talk of 
the increase and decrease of the stars and 
planets and also of the chariot of Rahu. 
frFf 
The chariot of the son of Soma (Mercury or 
Budha) is full of water and fire, a brilliant one, 
yoked with eight tawny horses that can move as 
fast as the wind. 
wtm: l^otfT # -q^Ri 
W3TT 
It is equipped with Varutha1 and Anukarsa 
(the axle tree or bottom of the carriage). The 
charioteer is divine and great. It is accompanied 
by a quiver and banner, a flag as such and being 
a peer to the cloud. 
Tjfcfi FTd i q uffq [tTO 
froisr idrdgn? ^rt: rni 
The chariot of Bhargava (Venus), the 
illustrious one, is brilliant, similar to the Sun 
yoked with excellent steeds bom of the earth 
and having various colours. They are tawny, 
brown, blue, yellow, ruddy-hued, black-hued, 
green chequered-hued and short-statured. All 
the ten are highly fortunate. They are unleaned 
ones and have the speed of the wind. 
3TW3: cbisR: 
1. A sort of wooden fence or fender, with which a 
chariot is provided as a defence against collision.

=== PAGE 381 ===

336 
Vayu-Puraija 
v3 
The chariot of Mars is glorious and golden. 
It is yoked with eight red, unimpeded horses. 
They are bom of fire and they can move all 
over. The Kumara (Mars) traverses the signs of 
zodiac in straight, curved and circular lines. 
pto: wto jrcrff?riH94ii 
ftofa wfrllVS^II 
Then the scholarly one, the preceptor of 
gods, Brhaspati (Jupiter) of the family of 
Aiigiras, moves ahead in his golden chariot 
yoked with eight divine red steeds having 
velocity of wind. In a constellation this planet 
stays for a year; then he traverses quickly. 
rfiT: yidtoVto:! 
cEimifcRT ttctw Wp ^nf?T t ?1^: lid OII 
And likewise Saturn even rides in a chariot, 
made of black iron, (yoked) with horses white 
(in colour) and sprung out of the firmament, 
moving along quietly or gradually. 
It cPimt (W ITfj^rRT 
Of Svarbhanu (Rahil) that very way, the 
horses are dark-coloured, eight (in number), 
speedy like the mind, yoked on to the chariot 
consisting of gloom, drive along accordingly. 
tobtopr TTg: tow toi 
SnfifrJjirft ■HIMTW TR: 1% d^ll 
Leaving Aditya1 (the Sun), Rahu goes over 
to the Moon (Soma) during lunar Parvan (the 
Full-Moon day). From Soma (i.e. Moon), 
(Rahu) attains to Aditya once again during 
New-Moon day. 
1. A son of Aditi, god, divinity in general. Name of 
twelve divinities (Suns) taken collectively, then 
twelve Suns are supposed to shine only at the 
destruction of the Universe or Name of Visnu in the 
5lh Dwarf incarnation. 
3TST 3TWT# toPT:! 
wHiHpwcfciyii: -?iwn nwwnidp 
The chariot of Ketu has eight horses yoked 
to it. They have the velocity of wind, being of 
the hue of the smoke of Palala (straw or husk). 
They are strong and tawny like the donkeys. 
W irsmt t w to ish wi 
These horses of the planets have been 
illustrated by me along with their chariots. All 
of them are fastened to Dhruva by gaseous rays. 
TtrT ^ yiujuHRd star h 
These, verily, rotate along as per their 
conjunctions by invisible windy whirls tugged 
onto by the breezy beams. 
trfwta tan 
for w wto w:iid$n 
The Moon, Sun and the planets ligatured by 
that move along in the sky. And to Dhruva 
revolving along, follow the constellations of 
stars. 
mn whw tata utoti 
dWry^ui otor h\6 3\\ 
Just as in the water of a stream, a canoe or 
boat is carried along with water, that very way 
these abodes of gods are wafted along by the 
gaseous rays. On that account, all the groups of 
Devas are seen by everyone in the sky. 
yrartU&cT WTTTRT Wltat dTd^Ud:l 
nwi pfdy4iwi ■gtat ■yitod wwiiddii 
As many are the stars that many are the 
breeze gusts or gaseous rays. All those are 
ligatured by the Pole Star (Dhruva). They whirl 
Dhruva and whirl by themselves. 
totot W3& wm 
ctstt srta toidifti cndd«5ifd tor.-iid^n

=== PAGE 382 ===

Chapter-52 
337 
Just as the circular machine (Cakram) or oil- 
crushers whirl and make the wheel to revolve, 
that veiy way revolve along the astronomical 
elements fixed to Dhruva harnessed by wind all 
around. 
3^kH*c)g]|Pd rTJ 
sratwt Tp-.n^oii 
Like a fire-brand circle, they move along 
propelled by the circulations of breeze. Because 
the wind bears the luminary bodies, it is called 
Pravaha. 
■Qcj ^6^54 TPSrT W.l 
rnnwr spr f^flrii 
XTTTT ^gT cT fEHmil ?ll 
This way, ligatured by Dhruva or Polar Star, 
the constellation of stars traverses the 
firmament. The huge porpoise-like appearance 
in the sky made up of the stars is Dhruva. If it is 
seen in the night, the sin committed during the 
day is quelled. 
1^11 ^ II 
Having seen that at night, they (people) 
becomes emancipated. As many are the stars in 
the sky, for those many years they live along 
and even more. 
?nw: fviipmsTn 
OTRMKWWiyr ^TfTCt ii 3II 
This permanent Gangetic porpoise deserves 
to be known as per divisibility. Uttanapada (the 
Pole Star, Dhruva) deserves to be known as the 
northern (upper) jaw-bone. 
f^TT srnf I 
jfc 'dHWi: wf(sEn) srf^RT ^k^ii^ 
The Yajna or sacrifice is to be known as the 
lower jaw and Dharma is recumbent on the 
crest. In heart, Narayana deserves to be tackled 
and the two Asvins (the divine physicians) stay 
in its forelegs. 
f?n?T: ^cirwiww fwrs^r ^reri«rr:ii<?mi 
Varuna and Aryaman are the two hinder 
thighs. Samvatsara is its penis and Mitra resorts 
to its anus. 
nftfa: f^:i 
rfTW: Rl^TMfd TjrJg'ilMII <? <= || 
In its tail are- Agni (fire), Mahendra, Manci, 
Kasyapa and Dhruva. The four stars and 
Sisumara (Gangetic porpoise) do not get 
extinct. 
^ ysfNdifflHT f^foii ^11 
The stars, Moon, Sun, planets along with the 
constellation of stars stay in the sky facing 
upwards. They are in the form of a wheel. 
^uniyfedi: fewer s^nmri 
^ f^n ^ c 11 
Presided over by Dhruva, all of them move 
about in a clockwise direction unto Dhruva, the 
excellent one and the utmost one. Dhruva acts 
as the supporting pillar in the sky. 
ipTfRebWHi W cJTSmft f?: ^T:i 
PJrTTTcF Tier <gHc£|T3r <? II 
Among Dhruva, Agni and Kasyapa, Dhruva 
is well-known as the excellent Pole Star. This 
one as the solitary one, revolves on the crest of 
the mountain Meru. 
With its face downwards, it attracts the 
group of luminaries. It illuminates Mem and 
rotates in a clockwise manner. 
mm? 11 
k k k

=== PAGE 383 ===

338 
Vayu-Purana 
iiaw f^wmrss2mr:ii 
Chapter 53 
The definition of the Lightning Fires 
■qrff^T <T fTO: JTO 'tivwipydl:l 
11MW SRrerefT ?t ^CT^Wril ?|| 
Samsapayana spoke- Having heard this, the 
sages once again, overwhelmed by suspicion, 
asked Lomaharsana again for its clarification. 
35^: 
mm fewri 
m ^j^rfuT TV: gsi cjtfarii ^ n 
The Sages spoke- Sir, you have mentioned 
the famous abodes of Devas. How possibly may 
be the abodes of gods be there and how possibly 
the astronomical elements? You may dilate 
upon. 
5 cRT ^cf: } II 
You may dilate upon precisely all this, the 
determinant element of the stars. Having heard 
the words of those ones, Suta with full 
concentration said. 
In this aspect, what has been dilated upon by 
the wise-ones having intellect endowed with 
knowledge, that same shall I dilate upon before 
you- the origin of the Moon, the Sun and how 
the Sun and the Moon are the abodes of gods. 
3m: Vt 
WlTg^TTI 
fdoyct ^faeh?M|^H|U£t|^: rTIIMI 
After this, I shall talk of the origin of three 
fires- the Divya (celestial), the Bhautika 
(elemental) and the Parthiva (terrestrial). 
c^l^fl <T T^RTF ^ 5*^luil5oyTh^l-HH: I 
(3Toai^rrfii^ mrn^mu^ii 
When the great night came on Brahma, bom 
of the Unmanifest, the universe became 
undefined and enveloped by nocturnal darkness. 
d^|c|^|^M^|f§fg: Tnsfnfb^dl 
^SJTSS^t r^t R rej3:)l|\9ll 
Only four elements survived there. That 
which blazed at first is called terrestrial fire. 
The fire that blazes in the Sun is known as Suci 
(celestial). 
WP5 vzvsv R^fimi 
3TT3T: 3P7T iTOfenrr5R^:ll 
rRRTSR: 
I shall now mention the characteristics of the 
fire named Vaidyiita (atmospheric) fire. Three 
fires- Vaidyuta, Jathara (gastric) and Saura 
(solar) are the fires dormant within waters. On 
that account, consuming water, the Sun shines 
forth in the sky with his rays. 
%cR ^Mlf^gl cfl# vfe: y?IIU|fal 
HH'tfHi V 3Tf^: VTU^fd TTra^:ll^ll 
The fire from lightning that bums trees can 
not be extinguished by the arboreous waters. 
And even the fire, dormant within the abdomens 
of men, does not get extinguished by waters. 
3l(fo|pjRTT: ^tsfR: WVV\ 5TT3T: T%V:I 
WRT ^TO%II || 
The fire existing in the abdomen is full of 
rays. It is great fire and becomes known as 
Gastric fire. The diffused light of the Sun free 
from heat is white and gleams forth as such. 
wr % fret vtfv fcirati 
The gleam of the solar orbit by a quarter gets 
on to* a setting in the Sun and enters into fire at 
night and on that account shines from a 
distance.

=== PAGE 384 ===

Chapter-53 
339 
3IRT W JT: ^4^'UJNEIH^lfayidl 
TTI^T WWII UII 
Into the Sun rising along, the heat of the fire 
permeates again. With a quarter of the heat, the 
terrestrial fire blazes forth. 
jra>w flsftsug *r $r itarati 
vKWijy^Viiciiuti^ f^cdftviHU ^ n 
The light and heat of the solar and fiery 
norms develop by day and night, owing to this 
mutual commingling. 
3# xfa dWI<fwgr ^TOTl 
r^t-.ll 
dwwrai w-re# f^mfira^Riwii ran 
In the northern half of the earth or the 
southern hemisphere, when the Sun rises, the 
night enters the water. On that account, water 
assumes crimson-hue during the day, because of 
the entry of the night. 
3Rrf 31# t£T: 3?# sfoWPT: I 
^ ^vif^d *mi 
Then the Sun taking to setting, the day 
enters the water. So during the night, the water 
sparkles due to the entry of the day. 
IT# *wfa(ur) Wist 
fe?Bre:ll ^ II 
By this combination of serial order, in the 
southern and northern hemisphere, at the time 
of sunrise and sunset, the day and the night 
enter the waters. 
Wtfr cT# f#5P# 
C\ 
% fefcmsTrt f^scT: ^fctftfd pp-.n ^ 
And that which blazes in the Sun consuming 
the waters by the rays is the celestial fire 
commingled with the terrestrial one. 
werricl: ITtsfrrg tpr: fw#*r: ^%:i 
3TR^t rfg TT*RftT: II \C II 
grwisrcr 
«r m ^raf fpmm:ii 
Thousand-rayed one, that celestial fire is 
globular shaped like a jar. With its thousand 
rays, it acquires the water of the rivers, oceans, 
desert lands, both mobile, i.e. flowing and 
static. The Sun of golden hue has a thousand 
rays that showers forth rain, cold and heat. 
cTRTT ^RTt^IrTT 
cj^ngt ^£cHT HdHiW^lll 
Tmr ^fgvr^Ti 
Four hundred nodes of those rays having 
variegated forms shower rain. Vandanas, 
Vandyas, Rtanas, Nutanas and Amrtas are the 
names of rays that generate rain. 
fpraw cm^s^iT T?w%yrdT: 
^rr -fezngj ii ^ w 
Apart from these, there are three hundred 
rays that generate chilliness or cold. These are 
called- Drs'yas, Medhyas, Vahyas and Hradinls. 
€1^I^T TTOT: Traf: 
fg^pwni ? mi 
ijjlcMTWI TOW: TOf%?lWT srfar#T:i 
to %# wifroj M^fv-<£wwr:ii3Mi 
By name all rays are called Candras. All 
these rays are yellow-coloured. The rays that 
produce hot energy are- Suklas, Kakubhs, Gavs 
and Visvabhrts. All of those are white and three 
hundred as such. With these the Sun sustains 
human beings, manes and Devas alike. 
wrar w #r#i 
fc 
He gratifies human beings through 
medicinal herbs; the manes by means of 
Svadha; and Devas by means of nectar. 
cn# ^Icf #tf xT 3T 3JW# ftfa: I 
gufesn ?rrfe xt xzffi: tow?#ii r mi 
During the spring as well as in the summer 
season, he blazes with the three hundred rays.

=== PAGE 385 ===

340 
Vayu-Puraga 
During rains and autumn, he generates rain by 
four (hundred rays). 
atmta sr?r 9% ^ ftnpftrn 
^ n 
During early and late winter, he generates 
mist and fog by means of three (hundred rays). 
He creates efficacy in medicinal herbs. By 
means of Svadha, he propitiates manes, By 
means of nectar of three varieties he bestows 
immortality. 
~Qcr TfVTO'^ rF^TTt #5?Tsfal9q^l 
This way, a thousand rays of the solar orb is 
an accomplisher of the objectives of the men or 
the Universe. They differ according to the 
season by generating water, cold and heat. 
(^ra^rmRT ifim 
sS^RFOPlgl: ^&Eta3T:il?6ll 
This way, the bright and sparkling solar 
zone is described, the very stability and source 
of generation of sidereals, planets and lunar 
orbs. The sidereals, the Moon and the planets 
should be recognised as the offsprings of Sun. 
^rfmrfo: irgTMt f^9ra»T:i 
^GTT: II ^ ^ II 
Soma or Moon is the lord of stars and Sun is 
the Lord of Grahas or planets. The remaining 
five Grahas are to be considered as lordly ones 
having forms as they please. 
TfrT:l 
?miTJTt TTfif^r ^PKPgo^RRt ftcftacTII ^ o || 
The fire is proclaimed as Aditya (Sun) and 
Udaka or water is known as Moon, The instinct 
of the remaining ones being dilated upon, you 
may learn adequately. 
3f:i 
-^ri^tj'i fsn|:ii3 \\\ 
Skanda is the army-in-chief of the Devas 
and is said to be the origin of Arigaraka (Mars). 
Those who have perfect knowledge know that 
N arayana is the origin of Lord Budha. 
Mffgll fggjtBt ?T%T:ll3 ? II 
Lord Rudra, the son of Vaivasvat, in 
corporeal form of Dharma in the world, being 
the Lord by himself, is the origin of the great 
planet Saturn, the slowest of all the planets. He 
is the most excellent among Brahmanas. 
twt Hilld9Tril fafttwril ^11 
The two great radiant planets are Brhasati 
(Jupiter) and Sukra (Venus), the preceptors of 
Devas and Asuras respectively. They are the 
sons of Prajapati. Daitya and Mahendra, the two 
were established in the supremacy of these two. 
3Tlf5[r9^mfeet TT?TO:I 
tl*ll4fiqRyqu V<*!l 
The entire Universe, all the three worlds 
including Gods, Demons and human beings, 
have their roots in the Sun. There is no doubt in 
it. 
firHi 9%5t: Tn#frf5v=prii 3 mi 
O Best of the twice-boms! the gleam of all 
the radiant of Rudra, Indra, Upendra and the 
moon, the denizens of heaven, the radiance 
verily which is one as belonging to all the 
worlds. 
Trafon -rr trm^mi 
rfcT: cT3T #cf TTcfcftll ^11 
That is the soul of all, the Lord of entire 
universe, and the root of the supreme god. From 
that all get generation and gets coalesced 
therein. 
miciroieft % '^Ycftr-i rnif^Tifa :^rr rtti 
T%:» ?\9II

=== PAGE 386 ===

Chapter-53 
341 
0 Br&hmanas, the existence and non¬ 
existence of the worlds emanated out of Sun to 
begin with. The Universe is required to be 
known as a planet and the Sun is the most 
excellent and refulgent auspicious planet. 
»lrSFd ftHR WtTrT fT: tp.'l 
spun uftf fr?TT: f1cwyi:ii 
urtt: wcmulcr rni ^ d n 
Where attain to extinction and get 
regenerated time and again, all the moments, 
Muhurtas, days, nights, fortnight, months, 
seasons, years, sets of five years and Yugas. 
cftt efilcTWsST T fsrarfi 
vsren^ct t fTrerr i ^rr Hif^cb^q:113s* n 
Then without the Sun the counting of time 
does not become tenable and without time, 
neither Nigama, nor Dik$a, nor the serial order 
of days becomes tenable. 
3mT:I 
«jwT: ^Tirtfotl 
And even the non-division of the seasons 
and from where, the (generation) of flowers, 
bulbous roots and fruits could be there; 
wherefrom the accomplishment of the com. 
How can there be medicinal herbs of good 
quality? 
3WTcfr otra^HPJTT ^ctHT f^T % til 
The paucity of attitudes and of the gods in 
the heaven and here, without the radiation of the 
Universe the Sun is a veritable enemy like 
smuggler or thief. 
Tf TJcI 3T<?TTcUT tWNfa:l 
O excellent Brahmanas, that same is the 
Kala, the Agni, twelve-souled Prajapati. He 
warms up the triad of worlds including mobile 
and immobile beings. 
V ^ TftTW Tff^T; HW: 
3rPi mifaiwy 
That same is a quarry of the splendour. He is 
the entire world and benefactor of all the world. 
Resorting to the uppermost path of Vayu, he 
heats up all around by means of his splendour 
on flank, overhead and in the nethers. 
itaTSlBT: W WIT 
The thousand of rays of the sun that has 
been exemplified by me earlier. Of these, the 
excellent ones are the seven rays. They are the 
causes of the planets. 
w^t gfr^isr fosrenrf ri4hji 
f^gw. TtTfi 
spafoif: hp^Fit inn wnr 
Su?umna, Harikesa and likewise 
VisvakarmS and another one being VisvasravS 
and other than that is Samyadvasu; ArvSgvasu 
then another one by me here has been 
illustrated. 
-nfCT: 
“Su§umna” the ray of the Sun making to 
wax the Moon having movement circuitous and 
upwards that one becomes known as 
“Su§umnah”. 
gfnE?T: MOWigJT 
ctf^nir fgwtf <t iMtshifr ^11*^11 
The ray Harikesa is declared as the 
provenance source of the stars. It spreads 
forward. In the south Visvakarma ray deifelops 
Budha (i.e. Mercury). 
WSggrntTfYn: ITT 311*4 II 
The Visvasravas which one is in the rear on 
west, that is considered as the birth source of 
Sukra (Venus) by the scholars. The ray 
Samyadvasu is the cause of Lohita (Mars).

=== PAGE 387 ===

342 
Vayu-Puraga 
#iraff^5 fefwki 
•?i%t )f®nftr {f^urra^ ^reir**? ii 
The sixth one the solar ray Arvagvasu is the 
source of provenance of Brhaspati (Jupiter). 
The ray Svarat develops Sanaiscara (Saturn). 
fsf^TT: TTqft fw ^ 5^RTII 
* dw^sdr tptii h o ji 
This way by the influence of Sun, the 
planets, comets and stellars, grow along well- 
known as such and also the entire Universe, the 
mobile one. The Naksatra-hood (i.e. the term 
Nak$atra) is called due to (fact that) they do not 
decline. 
ShluildlPl 3- 
ttoi im 
The jurisdiction of these verily, become 
incumbent by the rays. The Sun attained to the 
state of a planet affords their fields of 
circulations. 
Wifldl 
cTRTOT dTW ffaT: yjZrRcnv&f rTTT^T:liq?II 
Tdrakas (constellation) are so called because 
of they have crossed (the ocean) by the virtuous 
conduct and at the end of the happy planning 
owing to refuge of the planets. These are 
Tdrakas because they enable others to cross and 
owing to whiteness or brightness. 
f^otTRt TTlfifoRt ^ Tt#5T:l 
3n^lfarM*tli^WW( TT^FTIt q 3II 
The sun is famous by name of Aditya 
because this removes darkness of night of 
celestial as well as the terrestrial. It is the 
mighty one, the (quarry) of dusks and lights. 
TprfFr tj «ndTd f^rrami 
W rldlri*) tlldnl W: II h 'it II 
The root su impels for the purpose of 
flashiag across of the root, this, verily, becomes 
intelligible. Owing to impulsion of lights and 
waters, that one becomes known as Savita. 
^ ^ f^crrcq^imMi 
Manifoldly auspicious one is this Moon this 
way, the root is determined as such. It is 
understood in light of pleasing as per 
recognition of this root, brightness, immortality 
or nectarine motive and coolness. 
^im^u 
IHflWncb' truiH ?lf?R: TffflTI 
tRrKffrtrii ^TcFT tTUlH 'WIWW (TII^II 
WRi^THTfr i 
:im£ii 
In light of the Sun and the Moon having orb 
lovely, radiant as gone into the sky, being 
endowed with refulgent gleam, bright one, 
globular and being a peer to an ewer, the 
auspicious one, the lunar orb, there endowed 
with dense water stands remembered as that of 
the Moon. Endowed with dense brilliance, 
brighter orb of the Sun as such the gods obtain 
ingress into and all these spots having 
recumbence on Rk§as (lunar mansions or sings 
of the zodiacs) the sun and the planets in all the 
Manvantaras. 
fllfr ^cPJ^TTRPEf ctcPW^ srafo rTI 
TTtt %T: WR ITlW&cr WII H II 
These very are the abodes of gods. Their 
names assume form, that very way sun is the 
habitat normed spot of the solar gleam pleasant 
one. And that very way, the Moon (has the spot 
of lunar beams). 
f*T?T: WR ^1391(1^: MdmciMj 
cWTISIFt ?I%R:ll $ o || 
Sukra (i.e. Venus) being refulgent owing to 
sixteen rays has a station suited to the planet

=== PAGE 388 ===

Chapter-53 
343 
Venus or related to the planet Venus of the 
astronomical cabin, Brhaspati is powerful 
(Brhad) and Mars is ruddy-hued and the glow 
moving station likewise occupies the (planet) 
Saturn. 
farzptt; HfajT: T%Z:\\Mil 
Owing to the conjunction of the rays of 
Aditya or Sun the luminaries stand enunciated 
and to the extent of pine thousand Yojanas, the 
diameter of the circle of the Sun (Savita). 
fWUWW fa'WKJ WH rT WOTrT:l 
v3 
^f^TRTfWTT: 7lf?R: Hp: II MII 
Triple normed is the breadth of that one and 
the circumference is in light of the 
measurement. Twice as the breadth of the Sun, 
is the breadth of the Moon, known as such. 
TTff^cl^raf ftfhcTT M N 
Similar in extent of the two having assumed 
the form of Svarbhanu (i.e. Rahu), creeps in at 
the bottom. Having extricated the terrestrial 
shadow, it stands created as having shape of a 
circle. 
wj'rtfj iirtitruoHi 
OTfeWTStt fops Wfa TJ^gllMH 
tilttW ^T: rT T^gl 
Ut-Hlrtrl: MU 
The mighty station of Svarbhanu stands 
allocated out of darkness. During full moon 
days he comes out of the Sun and goes to the 
Moon. From the Moon he (Svarbhanu) 
approaches the Sun and again the Moon during 
eclipses. He escalates through the light of the 
heaven and on that account is termed as 
“Svarbhanil”. 
wwi mzyft wit wtasr 
%5Ri?nwntiRT:ii^^n 
The sixteenth digit of the Moon, is created 
as Bhargava (Sukra, the planet Venus) owing to 
diameter, circumference and owing to the extent 
of Yojanas or assimilation and measurement. 
f^it ^ ^«fd:l 
Brhaspati (Jupiter) is three-fourths of the 
planet Venus in size. Kuja (Mars) and Saura are 
three-fourths of Jupiter. Budha (Mercury) is 
three-fourths of each of them in width and girth. 
dlTR^Mlfrr cfW-Tlg znft 
^FT feiWTPJTJSrTRpni ^ CII 
Those which ones here are in corporeal 
form, the stars and sidereal or planets to be sure, 
equal in stature of the Mercury in point of 
breadth and circumference. 
(far) fesn^rfor 
TRH^r^tnftrr fprft 5 thwh.ii * \ 11 
Vldlft TJU rlccilU ^tfur t ^ ^ri 
fit 
TJ Jet girl IIV3 o || 
A knower of the facts should understand that 
the stars are normally having conjunction with 
the Moon. The stars and constellations differ 
from one another by five hundred, four 
hundred, three hundred and two hundred 
Yojanas as well. The spheres of the stars are 
lesser than the earlier ones. There is no star 
smaller than the ones with one and a half 
Yojanas. 
3nfrgF5W^t w % £nrfifa:i 
Tfttrsffnsr T-nsgr ^it 
The three planets Saturn, Mars and Jupiter, 
crawling along to a distance. They go slowly 
and their movements are crooked as well. 
rlsqtaHWT TWJ: Tprc^T R?T!I3T:l 
wfc^?fcPTT:ll^ll 
Below these, there are four other mighty 
planets Surya, Soma, Budha and Bhargava, the 
fast moving ones.

=== PAGE 389 ===

344 
Vayu-Puraija 
WfWWT: 
There are crores of constellations and as 
many Rk§as or zodiacal signs. The way (orbit) 
of the stars is. well arranged through the 
regulations of the vithls (the particular division 
of planetary spheres comprising of 3 asterisms). 
^ gfojtssi wfa: WTtnfw:ilV9'i< 
O 
In the order of his transit, the movement of 
the Sun is either above or below. When the 
Moon is in the northern sphere during Parvans, 
Svarbhanu occupy their own abodes. 
^raTfbT xi Trafftr ^nfar 
ijprilkuft 'yfrdrcmu^ii^ii 
And all the planets get ingress into the 
planets. All these abodes of the asterisms stands 
ordained for those having souls of merited 
norms. 
qiirgl 
In the beginning of the Kalpa, the abodes are 
created by the self-bom one. These spots stand 
as such till the dissolution of all living beings. 
3W‘-«ug ^eTdWtHifi ti 
wift 3 3^: 3^:11 v»«n 
In all the Manvantaras, there are the shrikes 
of gods. These deifibi identify themselves with 
these aho.deg and resM fhejievagaimandagam, 
wii & c n 
The abodes of those who have gone have 
vanished. The abodes of the future Deyas and 
Asuras will be created along with- them. The 
present groups of Devas stay in those abodes. 
foetidhQ: 3^: ^cftdcl5'^IIV9<? II 
In this Manvantara, the planets are 
recognised as of aerial cars. The Sun is bom of 
Aditi in the Vaivasvata Manvantara and it is 
named Vivasvat. 
IdafiwwtfjsKsj m-. Tp:i 
dd'Ht c° ll 
Tvi$imat, the son of Dharma, the lord Moon 
is recognised as Vasu. Sukra the god, is to be 
recognised as Bhargava, the sacrificing priest of 
the demons. 
f?%5TT: I 
fRTfTSfa fwfajsKjJ || c *|| 
The highly radiant Deva Brhaspati, son of 
Angiras, is the preceptor of the gods. Buddha is 
charming and is known as the son of Tvi$i. 
^rratni: Tpng <7T:ii<i^ii 
Agni took birth alternatively as the youthful 
one, the king of Lohita (Mars). The daughters of 
Dak$a resort to the stars and constellations. 
Rrffapjsft 35racntrrrsff::i 
Svarbhanu (Rahu) the son of Simhika, the 
demon was a tormentor of beings. Thus the 
deities identifying themselves with the Moon, 
the Sun, planets and stars have been recounted. 
And these station have been declared as 
such with staying ones the gods. The abode of 
the thousand-rayed Sun is full of fire and bright 
one. 
TTpri#fw: WiPni rfi 
3TM tl%pt 
The abode of the thousand-rayed Moon is 
full of water and sparkling white. The abode of 
the fiye-rayed handsome planet Buddha is of 
dark-coloured.

=== PAGE 390 ===

Chapter-53 
345 
-^Tt ff #f|cTWTRTWTII 6$ II 
Of Sukra (Venus) the spot watery one, the 
abode endowed with sixteen rays. The abode of 
the nine-rayed Mars is full of water and red in 
colour. 
3%T(rn5S)T2T <^rc||fa I 
fwr 3ixwiiid\3ii 
The abode of the twelve-rayed Brhaspati 
(Jupiter) is great one and green in colour. It is 
full of water. The abode of the eight-rayed 
Budha is the watery one and dark in colour. 
wfrrtww 
C\ ^ 
fc$<*IWKchi: :\\C6\\ 
The abode of Svarbhanu is Tamasa 
(engloomed one), a receptacle of torment for 
living beings. The all constellations are to be 
recognised as watery ones and single-rayed 
ones. 
3IBTO: wrafrdfai 
wBrrforgrr ^it: ^ftP5tfT:iid^n 
They are the abodes of men of reverent 
fame. They are highly bright in colour. They are 
in the form of solid water and created in the 
beginning of the Kalpa in accordance with the 
Vedas. 
<mt ^Hi4UA<MMi(w?r: 11 ^ o n 
^T: 
? vnyuw^fd «rn <? 
Owing to height, the Sun is seen quickly by 
the manifested rays. The Sun stationed in the 
Nagavlthl, the path of southern transit, is 
covered by the streak of the Earth during bright 
full moon nights and dark half of every month, 
and does not become visible as per time proper 
and gets along quickly. 
flwigtuwtwh ijpirarwtftvn^:i 
wf qr hii <? ? n 
Hence, the Moon stationed in nothem path 
during the 15lh day of the dark half of every 
month, the maker of the night i.e. moon, is 
visible in the southern planetary route and is not 
visible under regular norm. 
qnrt^n ^ ^ II 
By the conjunction of the movement of the 
planets, the Sun and the Moon both rise and set 
at the same time during the equinox. 
SrTTTf H oU-rHIRM^c^l 
IS* 
In the northern pathways, they rise and set at 
different times. During the new moon and full 
moon days they both follow the circle of stars 
or planets. 
When the Sun is stationed in the winter 
solstice (Dak^ipayana), then it revolves below 
all those planets. 
fBRcftaf -qtRvt fvHT HHT TWfl 
wSfmi n 
Having created a broad orbit, the Moon 
moves above that one i.e. Sun. The entire 
constellation of stars moves above the Moon. 
q^3TT f?+uf?T:l 
'^qrluii ^ wRt p- ss# 
Above the sidereal stands Budha of Mercury 
and above Budha stands Jupiter (Brhaspati); 
Saturn is above Jupiter; and above that the Ursa 
Major (the circle of seven stars). Dhruva (Polar 
Star) is above the Seven Sages. 
fgirtl* *WRT HI 
O >0 ^ S3 \3 
dum^i^rnfui 
The intermediate space between the stars 
and the planets are above two hundred thousand 
Yojanas as per serial order.

=== PAGE 391 ===

346 
Vayu-Purana 
irg® rKqffl 5 fsfa Tteran 
faqt$5 fHTfo J[r3fcf fwnSFTcTII <?<?n 
The planets, the Sun and the Moon, in the 
sky by the celestial light perennially get 
conjoined in the stars and rotate along in due 
order. 
^f5E^gerfWHT:| 
WJPlft xT ^ xT Mgqfcl 'yrc3r5»:ii qo o n 
The Sun, stars and the planets may be either 
below or above or in the middle. During 
conjunction and disjunction, they take care of 
the subjects. 
TrrprdwT -g^r xt wprrtrii 
t q^:ll *|| 
Mutually intertwined these ones become 
conjuncted mutually. Their conjunction 
deserves to be recognised by a non¬ 
intermixture, by the wise ones. 
eT: yfsrati xfl 
■gfaqigc'sfaT xT q^TFfT ^11t>o ^ II 
srafan xr ^ xt Tte cnjfcr ti 
^ TPjf^IrTT: n 30911 
I have described thus, to you the position of 
the luminaries on the earth and also the position 
of the continents, oceans, mountains, sub¬ 
continents and streams. These self-same planets 
formerly originated from the stars. 
qq: Tpf i :£n^trs^ri 
feOTTCj neluii WRT q?: ll 
Son of Aditi, Vivasvan, the Sun (Surya), 
verily, in the Caksusa Manvantara was born 
under the constellation Visakhas, the first 
among all the planets. 
Tl*|rcrai: f^ehig ftviiau:ll ?ohii 
Tvi§iman, however, the son of Dharma, 
Moon-god Visvavasu likewise, the cool-rayed 
one sprang up during Krttikas, the maker of the 
night. 
m: ip>: 
rlKIJI^Itil!' 
H*tfed:ll ^o^|| 
Following on the Sun, Sukra (Venus), the 
son of Bhrgu, is sixteen-rayed one, which is the 
best among constellations and planets. He was 
bom under the constellation Tisya (Pusya). 
W|% TnjcTO: W&Q xT ^1^:11 *o\9|| 
The planet, the son of Arigiras, the twelve- 
beamed one, Brhaspati (Jupiter), the preceptor 
of the Universe, bom during all the Phalgunis 
(the full-moon days of the month of Phalguna). 
3tiyi<sirw^ to '•Hydra ?f?r srf?r:ii n 
The nine-beamed one, the Lohitanga (the 
planet Mars), the planet son of Prajapati sprang 
up during Purvasadha and Uttara§adha 
collectively. This is the traditional belief. 
\cRfobf TTTT: 
Wta wjdjyl n# xi^jiM'^ii ii 
The seven-rayed one, the son of the Sun, the 
Saturn was bom under the constalletion of 
Revatl and also the planets (Rahu and Ketu), the 
crushers of Moon and the Sun, are bom under 
the constalletion of Revatl. 
PrT rilingISlct qtgSJT I 
*nf% %nrat ^t:ii 
sftfrr cRdrtt jt?st%5) ii % ?o it 
These stars and planets Bhargava (Sukra) 
and others are deserve to be understood, 
because they attain to futility of merits during 
suppression of sidereal during birth and then 
because of that fault, they touch (each other) in 
divisions of planets. 
Wc}i|j*lU|mdmMircHlf<ry 3xZFT| 
dKiirgiTTT tprg %rRT xta gwrn 33311 
Of these planets or constellations in entirety, 
the parent source is called Aditya. Among the 
steller planets, Sukra is the first. Among the 
comets, (Ketu) is the first one.

=== PAGE 392 ===

Chapter-53 
347 
fef: f ftWfRRt ydRVWI 
^raroit stMt vni^Hw'r wn 
The Pole Star is the pike or nail of the 
planets divided within the four quarters. Among 
the stars, Sravistha is the most excellent and 
Uttarayana is the best among the Ayanas. 
crafat Mr WFTTtnsr: MtW: ^:i 
ftrftrc xnftr wrt vm t*? wii ^ n 
Of the five varsas, the first one is called 
Samvatsara, of seasons Sis'ira (late winter) is the 
first and of months Magha is the first. 
TjpJTT Mfat sftqrTOTI 
pTuMmHW&gTft ychlRdH.n ***» 
Of the fortnights, the bright fortnight and of 
the tithis the first day of the lunar fortnight are 
excellents. Likewise, in the division of days and 
nights, the day stands declared as excellent. 
gfafat a&rcssl^af ^crar:i 
3pfenfa fdtraifd: tmni m 
Of the Muhurtas, the first one is the 
excellent. It has Rudra for its deity. Among the 
units of time, Nimesa (the time taken in the 
winking of the eyes) is the excellent. So is the 
opinion of those experts in Time. 
PMffopor €j*dHjRcfd?ni n 
Beginning with Sravistha and ending with 
Sravana, there shall be Yuga of five year’s span. 
By the specific rotation of the Sun, it revolves 
like a wheel. 
ftetrarc: Ms wri 
ddfayHi pqt TnaPftcP:ii^\9ii 
On that account, the Sun is remembered as 
Kala (Time). Know him as “Isvara”, the 
activiser of the four types of living beings and 
their destroyer as well. 
faftfifatH Wll 
This way, therefore, stands the fundamental 
positioning of the planets, as a decisive feature 
of the affairs of the world. It is created by the 
Lord for a regular working of the Universe or 
people. 
sraPreft ^f$rw otti 
It is brought about by Sravana and truncated 
by the Dhruva (Pole Star). It spreads all over in 
comers, the round-orbed one. This is the correct 
position of that. 
ffp? wracrr wrrH%:i 
mm: ^ ^rtf^n^:ii 
MjP uryr'w mRuii41s'?to^t:ii ^oii 
By wisdom, by the adorable one, at the 
inception of the aeon, it was declared. He is the 
supporter and the Abhimanin (the identifier) 
with all. He is the soul of the luminary bodies. 
He is the very facsimile of the Universe; this, 
verily, is the marvellous outcome of the vital 
most. 
^cr ?TcRi totsP tnsnrRzft 
TiffFTct syiRrai irrcrapii w *11 
It is not practicable to enumerate as per 
factual representation by some one among men, 
observed by the physical eyes, the insurgence 
and oblivion of the planets. 
trP ftp mmi ftrcfpii w ? n 
By scriptural knowledge, by estimation and 
by perceptibility and reasonability, having 
examined admirably and by devotion, a scholar 
should entertain sufficient faith in it. 
t|# ip PPiMPii w 3 it 
Perception (lit. eye), theoretical treatises, 
water, the documentation and mathematical 
calculations- these five are the means for 
ascertaining the true positions of the luminaries, 
O excellent-intellected ones! 
im ? n

=== PAGE 393 ===

348 
Vayu-Puraga 
II3T2T ■■q^nvlVsqFT:ll 
Chapter 54 
. Glory of NUakantha 
W^OillUll eftfw*SI<r» RSTl^ll 
^Rsillfl R: ^RWTfrT W'JtSTT;II ?ll 
The Sages spoke- O you rich is penance! In 
which land and at what time has this holy and 
excellent incident happened in regard to persons 
progressing in Brahman? Narrate this exactly in 
the manner it happened. 
eng^T 
cf»zmM fg^gi: ^ » 
%KTT cKUd'W ^R:l 
?if^dsicii:ii 3 ii 
Suta replied- O excellent Brahmanas! I shall 
narrate as has been heard by me earlier from 
Vayu, the very breadth of the Universe, at the 
sacrifice of a thousand-yeared span. How the 
throat of the god of gods, the trident-wielding 
one, Siva attained blueness, that same shall I 
dilate upon. You may listen to, O of holy rites! 
Wfa •gftrTT ^T:l 
^ru 
it? T«l^r^5 *imi 
In the north of the Sailaraja (i.e. the king of 
mountains) Himalaya, there are lakes, streams 
and ponds, the auspicious or sacred gardens, 
places of pilgrimage and shrines of gods, on 
lofty hill-peaks and in orchards of the caves or 
caves and orchards. 
t=r>T?FT hsirwi) ipt: yrfwdm 
^ stsnfgfSr: a ^ ii 
Devotees of gods, high-souled ones, the 
sages having vows applauded, belaud 
Mahadeva there in different spots as per ritual. 
artert | W %^ll ^ II 
By means of Rk, Saman and Yajus Mantras, 
by song, dance and adorations, by obeisance’s 
with Oihkara (Om) recitation, they adore Siva 
perennially. 
TPfrt ^ nsyankt f^TcFTl 
frsirTlVqR: ftsfo rft oRSH^II 
m femfrrej TtM^tssraf^raTtinaii 
The circle of planets having set in and sun 
having gone ubiquitous in the centre, the gods 
having souls restrained, all adhere to that 
narrative. Those adherent to vows were 
disposed well in the survival of life. 
'4fcrebo<jKi frrara ^nif?r:i 
'MifcMIrMIHl TJTO: ^(R<dsidi:ll 
Td^'^lRuT.lldll 
“Obeisance be to NUakantha (i.e. Ssiva)!” 
This way declaimed the perennially wafting one 
i.e. Vayu (Wind-god). Having heard that, the 
sages having vows applauded, having souls 
ascertained, well-known as Balakhilyas, 
recognised the moving ones along with the Sun. 
t II II 
Eighty thousand of the sages given to 
continence, having diet confined to wind, leaves 
and water, enquired Vayu. 
•IHchU^fd ^TT 
TTfl^ir UfaSIUli W Wip CRT:H II 
The Sages spoke- “NUakantha” (the blue- 
throated one), the way it has been pronounced 
by you, O Excellent Vayu! This one is fit to be 
kept a secret for the sacred ones, O you Best 
one among the merit-earning ones! 
dlcddf ehodVh : II ^11

=== PAGE 394 ===

Chapter-54 
349 
We are desirous of hearing (properly) that, 
by your grace, O Vayu! (Prabhanjana!) On what 
account has come about the azureness of the 
throat of the Lord of Ambika (Siva)? 
qwftjri: <c|ilf<dl:ll ^ll 
We are eager to listen to it adequately from 
your mouth particularly. Since the words 
expressed by you continue to impress forth and 
are full of meanings. 
cmft cirfJcrfsr: toIi 
3ra3crn ^ n 
When the breath goes to its place of 
articulation, then the activity of speech begins. 
Knowledge at the outset and desire afterwards 
gets activated from you, O Vayu! 
csftr fasRftn} f Tftrr cjuiy^rPt: i 
m grat ftcwA «tpRnsf <pfaT: u y* \i 
When you become actionless, the functions 
of sound cease. Where speech has ceased, the 
combinations of structures becomes difficult of 
processing. 
rT^rfd ftsfer TRftcr: TOfqfHi 
^nftrtiTU ^ u 
There even these happens to be your suvaity 
as you are all pervading, O Vayu! No other god 
is all pervading barring aside you, O Wind-god! 
TTfT t ^PTMTdhW ^cTtsf^rTI 
^7 dMwPd ctw ■q^nwfrarnrii ^ it 
The world of beings of yours is perceptible 
from all sides, O Vayu! You may recognise the 
lord of speeches (Vacapasti), as the supreme 
one, a guider of the mind. 
qjfg frufafaptn 
fPTT ddWMPpfali ^iPfdlrhdUill 
WgcIM cU<4HfcMft*<£>'d:ll ^11 
Speak one! whereto sort is the deformity of 
the form of throat, region? Having heard the 
words of the sages of pious souls, the highly 
radiant Vayu, who was offered obeisance by the 
world, replied to them. 
grr fiwt fern -d<rduuiddn.:i 
erfWT ^ «wk TTFHTt ^ TP3rFQ^:|| ^|| 
Vayu spoke- Earlier in the Golden Age, 
happened to be a Brahmana engaged in offering 
interpretations of the Vedas. He was Vasi$tha 
by name, the one having soul of disposition or 
dutiful norm, a mind-bom one of Prajapati. 
mss gnfto Itotwhi 
wn^T^nTTii ^ n 
He questioned Karttikeya, whose excellent 
vehicle was the peacock, the very bewitcher or 
fascinate or (lit. thief) of the collyrium of the 
eyes of Mahi$asura’s spouses (i.e. made them 
widows by killing Mahi$asura). 
^ o || 
ctRta: ^etriJl cblfS^jd h^icnrtHlI ^ ?ll 
Who is a leader of army, the great-souled 
one, having sound of the rumble of clouds. He 
assumed the form of a boy to delight the mind 
of Uma. He is wrester of the life of Kraunca and 
a rejoicer in the heart of Parvatl. Vasistha by 
devotion asked Karttikeya of great prowess. 
ciftis 3crrer 
3rfwfcr ?ru qqu 
Vasistha spoke- Obeisance be to you, O son 
of Hara! O you offspring of Uma! Obeisance be 
to you. Obeisance be to you, O offspring of 
Agni! O offspring of Ganga, Obeisance be to 
you. 
W ^>f%^FjTORTl

=== PAGE 395 ===

350 
VSyu-Puraija 
Obeisance be to you. O you bom from the 
reed (forest), Obeisance be to you, O son of 
Kpttikas! Obeisance be to you, the twelve-eyed 
one and Obeisance be to you, O six-faced one! 
tier wit ■Rfrcft trow fvifecn^H.11^^11 
Obeisance be to you, O you (wielder) of a 
£akti (i.e. Missile) in hand and to you one 
having (emblem) of the flag as a divine bell. 
This way having panegyrised, he questioned 
Mahasena, the one having peacock as vehicle. 
dfewf Trgdra cru^ ^ mi 
This one is visible as fit to be chosen, 
auspicious as such, having gleam like that of the 
shining collyrium, on the neck of Lord Siva, 
which is lustrous as the Kunda flower or the 
Moon. How did it happen? ' 
tJTT^TWf ^RTT3 TCI^I 
sot TtfvrafrRT hforr wnfsHtati 
This you may expand forth before one 
questioning as such being confident, devoted 
and restrained, the story endowed with 
auspiciousness, sacred and obviator of sins. For 
the sake of my well-being, 0 highly fortunate 
one! It behoves you to expatiate quite 
completely. 
cfieFi TOW I 
wtott: ^roft®FmcFr:ii?v9ii 
O O Cv 
Having listened to the sentence of that one, 
Vasistha, the great-souled one, replied the 
highly radiant one, the destroyer of the army of 
the enemy of gods (i.e. demons). 
cr^tt m mt mi 
OTtoR^rfsr^r trar wwt spniii ^ c n 
Listen, O greatest among the Orators! I am 
repeating what has been heard by me formerly 
as I sat on the lap of Uma. 
m4rui TT? W >T£TrUR:l 
^ rcrfsrois? i^nqprii 
This is the conversation of Sarva (i.e. Siva) 
with Parvatl, the highly-souled one. That same 
shall I dilate upon for the sake of your 
beneficence, 0 great sage! 
TRT qT-TOldfafakkll 
(rRjUTTf^ry^!?! 3 o (I 
f^r ARmidf^r^n 
i^n 
On the fascinating peak of Kailasa, 
variegated owing to many minerals, bearing 
semblance of the fresh Sun, having sheen of the 
norm of burnished gold, having stairs of marble 
and adamant or diamond, having stone slabs, 
having variegated surface counterpane made of 
gold and lovely one, variegated owing to many- 
typed mineral ores. It was over-grown with 
many trees and creepers and was decorated by 
the Cakravaka birds. 
It was abounding in the loud humming of 
the bees, tumultuous owing to the water falls 
and the interior of the caves, was resounded 
with the sounds of inebriated Kraunca birds and 
peacocks. 
3TO<)haRi<*)<jf 
jfram^^rdT-TT cfr^CT?frfi[^ii 3 3 it 
It was scattered all over by or crowded by 
the bevies of nymphs and decorated by the 
Kinnaras and Jlvarhjlvaka birds. It was 
beautified by Jati creepers. 
feswKcn^fii 
It was sweetened with the warbling of the 
cuckoos, waited upon by Siddhas and Caranas, 
rich in sound of celestial cow Saurabheyl. The

=== PAGE 396 ===

Chapter-54 
351 
place beneath was resonant with the rumbling 
sound of clouds. 
It was having caves deserted by the 
elephants, disgusted by the terror of Vinayaka 
(i.e. Ganesa). This was regaling to the minds by 
sense of ears by the instrumental music and 
lutes. 
^OSRt foTflcp*ll II 
The slopes were undulated by the hammocks 
or swings waited upon by the bevies of women. 
It was resonant with the tollings of bells of the 
swings pendulous with buntings. 
dii^Kdf^xfroini ^ufap&ii ^vsii 
There was clamour of the exercises of the 
sounds of sports in a wholesome temple, owing 
to musical instruments played upon (lit, 
vociferous) by the mouths accompanied by the 
explosions of the offerings. 
cW4^(dch^dMfo:ldgfy(Hi<1<A: i 
oyiy &i i44dcii faiptswrii 3 11 
:l 
i7teflftg;e»>ufgr 11*^11 
M l<4^ l : 1 
11^11 
Somewhere the attendants of Siva were 
laughing boisterously. Their faces were hideous 
and terrible and filled with marvellous normed 
smell of the bodies. They sported about here 
and there in the steps leading to the place 
embedded with gems, crystal and diamonds. 
The lord of Bhutas (i.e. Siva), a great Yogin, 
surrounded by his attendants whose faces 
resembled those of tigers, lions, elephants, 
horses, fierce cats and foxes. Some were among 
those having many eyes, bigger eyes, one eye 
and no eye, many heads, huge heads, one head 
and no head, many feet, huge feet, one foot and 
no foot, kine like ears, huge ears, one ear, no 
ear, having sport shanks, longer lips, palm tree 
like shanks or Tala Janghas and others, pigmies 
and tall-statured, lean ones, flatulent ones, 
longer-bellied ones and bloated-bellied ones, 
having cat’s faces and terror provoking ones, 
r^ogMwmruiwMfMd 
feliB |Wt TRtriri 
click} frrftTFiPpftll'tf'tfll 
The daughter of the Lord of mountains 
spoke thus to the Lord, the destroyer of the 
body of Cupid, seated at ease on a mind 
fascinating gold made stone platform adorned 
by gems and stones and pearls of pure quality. 
dor cfrik W^^Tf^tiw^ll^HII 
Devi spoke- O adorable one, a master of the 
past and future! O bull-emblemed one, O 
Mahadeva! There is something resembling a 
dark cloud shining on your throat. 
■^TRpITJT ^Tlfd^Tij HV<rfl3Hd4}ilMHJ 
fefaf cfaiH %% c&D& ^ivrfdrywii^n 
It is neither very prominent nor highly 
refulgent. It resembles the heap of blue 
collyrium, O destroyer of the body of Cupid! 0 
lord, what is this that shines on your throat? 
cst If: cfnrtrr sr wfe 4lHcfc( 
mwi'ij ff? effort % THl^V9ll 
What is the reason, what is the source and 
what is this azureness on your neck, O God?

=== PAGE 397 ===

352 
Vayu-Puraga 
This all you may expound to me duly. I have 
great curiosity. 
graft 'ddW^T: wftcJfT: 
«R8TT ^raJT:ll'*6i| 
Having listened to the word of that Parvatl, 
&iva, the consort of Parvatl, told the tale 
endowed with auspicious norm. 
wroiftsijft qft sftftft 
3pr ^rgfefcT dfatfera cBr^TFT^ismTTi 1 ^ 11 
Formerly when the ocean of milk was being 
churned for extracting the nectar by the gods 
and demons, emerged out the venom bearing 
shine of the black fire. 
ft <[g3T tyumtss tJTFlftl 
fift TTfTrcft u?iwr5fftra»^imon 
O good looking faced one, having seen the 
congregations of gods and the demons, they 
became pale-faced and dejected. They went 
closer to Brahma. 
^gT wiufi4miwTan^ qgrafft:i 
fftrusf ftt h^wkii ftftn 
Having seen the group of gods terrified, 
Brahma of mighty radiance spoke out- “O 
blessed ones, why are you frightened? Why are 
you dejected in mind? 
3THTOigwbgRf srarri 
ftR Wi ft ¥TWTT:llk?ll 
O Excellent ones among the gods! The 
eight-normed supremacy or god headship has 
been expounded by me. By whom you have 
your supremacy deprived? 
<7? 7tft ft fftrpT3grr:l 
Cs 
TRTRFf q 3TT?TT ftf ft k ^ tl 
You are all the supreme commanders of the 
triad of worlds having your maladies gone. In 
the creation of the' progenies, there is no one 
who may override my errand. 
fakl'-BilPm: -qftnft ^^RrnfiR:l 
STKflrft xTTUmft Tf srfftftft rT fe?T:ll 
TTSTT: *4fftuftrq w 
All you travel by aerial cars and all you 
move at will. In the supernatural self and 
supreme being’s status and in the status of a 
sublime fortune, invariably, you are capable of 
guiding the subjects by the fructification of 
action. 
crffthqv? qftrft^r tftt: fftfrfftfn 
f% ftjq iP: eEtft qWThdkil 
HcTcgft wwm y^qioai^igiikkii 
Then on what account (you) are disgusted 
like antelopes pestered by the lions? What is 
your grief? By whom is torment (coming war) 
to you? And from where the danger has cropped 
up? You narrate all this precisely and 
immediately”. 
fp5JT 313ft Wft ft W.l 
3*pft ^^cfRgrnik^ii 
Then having listened to the words of that 
Brahma, the great-souled one, the lords of gods, 
Daityas and Danavas spoke out along with the 
sages. 
qiftreft 3 thrift:! 
TTtfifcT fftq ftrt 
When the ocean getting churned by the gods 
and demons, the great-souled ones, there 
emerged out venom of virulent norm bearing 
semblance of bees and snakes and also bearing 
likeness of the blue clouds and having gleam of 
the norm of the fire of dissolution. 
l(H!cWibHTr^fti'4 ywtft TPRT?r:iik<iii 
It has come up like the death of the 
dissolution (Kala) or dark Death, having 
radiance of the Sun of the end of the aeon, 
bearing shine of the Sun dissolving the triad of 
worlds spurting forth all around. 
fftftjftfftgrnftq ^THiTcwqfftran 
fqftnft rTfrnhfff: cft: f^oft 11 k ^ 11

=== PAGE 398 ===

Chapter-54 
353 
Janardana Vi$nu who was fair and reddish in 
complexion has been burnt by the poison that 
rises with lustre of black fire. He was rendered 
dark-complexioned. 
^TtcTT: TEf "?nTJT W: 11^on 
Having seen that whitish red-hued 
Janardana, rendered dark-complexioned one, all 
of us got frightened. We seek refuge under you. 
'’P'UlHTf'tlUli rT W ft|HTO?:l 
U3k)M|| HlchR'l HldehlUWIII^II 
Having listened to the words of the gods and 
demons, highly radiant Pltamaha Brahma 
replied, out of desire for the beneficence of the 
worlds. 
^TETT: WIST tnfl«HT:l 
ffiTc^r Tnpti TTezm^r * ? n 
foj (fcMMHUfeii chld^fd f^ET^I 
uX^dMI^UI fEL tjRT$T:II^H 
“0 you Devas, sages and saints, all of you 
listen. The poison, resembling black fire, that 
rose up when the great ocean was being 
churned is known as Kalakuta. Even as it rose 
up, (Visnu) was rendered black. 
HER fdbUI^ infer TRf ^ TJTgfEIT:l 
R i ET vichild.ll ^>5 u 
Neither I, nor Visnu nor other virile Devas 
are capable of bearing the virulence of that one, 
barring aside Sankara”, 
SrfeEcH TRmVlfa: WEtfRETtfR5T:l 
ETcf: TTETT®ft sip ^=hRldIH^: 11 ^ mi 
Having spoken this way, having gleam like 
that of the pericarp (lit. hollow or centre) of the 
lotus, having birth source of lotus, and one bom 
without a foetus or womb, then started 
propitiating Brahma, the grandfather of the 
Universe. 
re: fiRic&swra cra^wr t rehi^ii 
Obeisance be to Virupak$a, O you having 
eyes more than one! Obeisance be to one 
(engripping) Pinaka (bow) and thunderbolt in 
the hands. 
4tJ^dl«HJ4lt!lli| ERIRT ERE RE:l 
Cn 
RE: rTFTOFI fjra^ll^taii 
Obeisance be to the master of the triad of 
worlds and obeisance be to the Lord of the 
Bhutas; obeisance be to the destroyer of the 
enemy of gods i.e. demons), the ascetic, the 
three-eyed one. 
^ ^ RE:l 
E'lOSTE EtETE ^ditmi-4 $ RE: II ^ 6II 
Obeisance to you who are Brahma, Rudra 
and Vi§nu. Bow to you (the deity of) Sarhkhya 
and Yoga and (to you) who are the aggregate of 
Bhutas. 
M-Hyi^-UVII'M ^ RE: I 
wr e ^trt ^ete ^ re:ii * u 
Obeisance to the destroyer of the body of 
Cupid, the dark-complexioned one or the dark 
Yama; obeisance to Rudra and Suresa (Indra), 
the god of gods. 
EiEf^ ERIHIAI ^TERTE EETfd4l 
f?lEIE ETRTE EHEoll 
(Obeisance to you; with matted hair, the 
terrific one, the skull-festooned one, the ugly- 
faced one, multiformed yet single-formed one, 
Siva, the bestower of boons. 
fdUOdlil ERTTE ETRTrTT ErEf RE: I 
E^gTE ^)E ^EgFE EtRTE ^T1|A9$(l 
Unto the destroyer of Tripura fit to be 
eulogised as such, the Lord of Mothers, an 
obeisance be as such; as also to him who is 
Buddha (i.e. intelligent), Suddha (pure), Mtikta 
(liberated) and Kevala (absolute one). 
RE: R'EIEIE fvHdfu^l 
HlEEEfEE& E E£1E EbUIIE EI|\9^1I 
Obeisance be to one who has lotus in hand,

=== PAGE 399 ===

354 
V5yu-Puraija 
the one having abode for quarters and the 
crested one, and the one organiser of the victory 
of the Universe. Bow to Candra and Varuna. 
(Obeisance) be to the Primeval one, the 
terrific one, the scholar of many eyes or visions; 
unto Rajas, Sattva and Tamas of unidentifiable 
provenance. 
(Obeisance*) be to the perennial one, the one 
having form unperennial and obeisance be to 
one being (both) perennial as well as 
unperennial and obeisance be to one quite 
apparent and one not apparent and the one both 
apparent and inapparent. 
fck'UW #cnfsFr3FET t ^T:l 
■T-HKli|U||<y ^Iivami 
Obeisance be to one fit to be cogitated upon 
and one not fit to be cogitated upon and one 
both fit to be cogitated upon and not cogitated 
upon, and to one who is the obviator of the 
afflictions of the devotees. (Obeisance) be to 
Nara-narayana. 
?Tclk rT| 
Obeisance be to one dear of Uma, Sarva and 
one who has the emblem of the wheel of Nandi 
or having vehicle for Nandi. Obeisance to you 
who are fortnight, month and half a month and 
(also) unto Samvatsara (a year). 
Mugw gr^faFTi 
f^’cfRTTO 
Obeisance be unto the many-formed one, the 
shaven-headed one, the wand-wielding one and 
also unto Varuthin (the cruised-one or one 
furnished with a fender or protecting flank); 
obeisance be to the cranium-wielding one, 
quarter abiding one and the tufted one. 
3fr^:W*T^ra- TOTOM WII 
o ' o 
Unto the pennon-wielding one, the chariot 
owing one, to the self-controlled one and the 
celibate one, unto Rk, Yajus and Saman, Purusa 
and Isvara and also unto you, 0 God! O 
adorable one! Obeisance be as such by this way 
and by primeval deeds. 
yfuiMrd cRF^II^II 
Mahadeva replied- This way I had been 
belauded by the gods who bowed to me, O 
handsome-faced lady! 
<j srftj ire ^Pfcri 
q % ^ ii c o n 
“Having realised my devotion, the god of 
gods having hair region drenched in the water 
of the Gariga, still remains subtle. Owing to the 
surpassing Yogic power, he is inconceivable. 
He remains invisible like the moon that has 
been hidden.” 
TTcj SFIcRTT ijcf 9RJPHT 'HUdxJuill 
This way, I had been adored by Brahma, the 
creator of the Universe, with varied eulogiums 
sprung from the Vedas and Vedarigas (i.e. cited 
from Vedas and auxiliary branches of 
knowledge). 
p^i 
mTs? ^ ii 
Then I became pleased with Brahma, the 
great-souled one, and then in subtle words, I 
spoke to Brahma. 
^ tPTT ^ ^pTcfll C ^ II

=== PAGE 400 ===

Chapter-54 
355 
“0 God! The Lord of the past and the future, 
0 Lord of the Universe! O master of the mobile 
beings! What is to be done by me, O Brahma! 
Speak out that fit to be done.” 
Won cftTt sfijIT 
o ^ o o “ 
Cv C\ 
Having listened to (my) talk, the lotus-eyed 
Brahma spoke out- uO lord of the Causes! 0 
Lord of past, future and present, may this be 
listened. 
'WcMu^iyi c mi 
Tn§^rt f^T W'cffififaflqSI*riTI 
MWlf^rdcMyMU 6 % (I 
feint'd I 
3^ ¥gfelci dfwfefi 'dF.rrdRHU'fflTlIi^ll 
t ^gT $J Tit #TT: 
dfrMdW TTfTJcr HtcFRt fp^RTU 
wgifn $ *rai&? m: w.iiddii 
O lotus-eyed one, when the ocean was being 
churned by Devas and Asuras, the terrible 
venom, sprung up in front, spurting along all 
over, bearing semblance of the light of the Sun 
dissolving the Universe, having radiance like 
that of the Sun of the end of the aeon. It sprung 
up as if in the form of Kala mrtyu (the death 
emblem of Yamaraja), having gleam like that of 
the fire of the time of dissolution, the virulent 
one, (the venom) appeared forth as such, similar 
in colour to the blue cloud and similar to a 
cloud, we all became terrified as such, having 
hearts agitated. That you may drink, O 
Mahadeva, out of desire for the beneficence of 
worlds! You alone even are its enjoyer and you 
alone are its sole master. 
T&l q feRtl 
Barring aside you O Mahadeva! The venom 
does not become tenable or bearable nor any 
one is capable of doing so, and (this venom) is 
belauded in the triad of worlds.” 
TJcf Wcf: sffJM: TTO%T:l 
areftrfte frgTcRi tfYqfi grmn<s<?u 
This way having heard the words of 
Brahma, the Supreme overlord, 0 comely-faced 
one! I concurred and said- “Allright”. 
cratet wtrir^r 
wravTof fOTt R BRcrfufftii o h 
Then I started drinking that venom that 
resembled death. On my taking to that venom, 
virulent one, causing fear to the gods, O lady of 
excellent complexion, my throat immediately 
turned black. 
rt Wr4 CFTU& WyhftciHiiHI 
cf^ '■ll'UMH fwRII ^11 
awto RfRtai $n?rr 
tsttott ni cw&biYh ipprii n 
Having seen the poison that had the gleam 
of the petal of a blue lotus and that had 
appeared like the Lord of Serpents, Taksaka, 
clinging to my throat and putting out its 
tongues, Brahma of great radiance, the 
grandsire of the Universe, then said- “You look 
glamorous, O Mahadeva, with this neck, O 
nicely-vowed one! 
rfrfWW cFET: STC3T W 
^TCTETRi xl cfimil 3II 
spr ^ far YwgiOdWd'i ^t^t^ii ^ ^ n 
O daughter of the excellent mountain, on 
listening his words, even as the Devas and 
Daityas were watching along with Yaksas, 
Gandharvas, Bhutas, Pisacas, Nagas and 
Raksasas, O sweet-faced lady, the terrible 
poison was contained in the throat. Hence I 
became famous as Nllakantha (Blue-throated).

=== PAGE 401 ===

356 
Vayu-PurSga 
ftoto: 
dfei W toiMMfe 
p^ratrr 
fgT TT f^WmFjTTFTII^kll 
Then, O daughter of the Lord of Mountains, 
having seen that Kalakuta, the venom of 
virulent radiance, being introduced over my 
neck, the congregation of gods and demons 
attained to utmost marvel. 
p3T ^Mld^mftfel II 
Then, the groups of gods in entirety, along 
with all the Daityas, Uragas or Nagas and 
Rak§asas (i.e. demons) spoke out having hands 
folded, O you having gait like that of an 
inebriate female elephant! 
3TfT cf?T 
tostoto ton 
3fi?t 
tl^MdlWir^dyffediVIII <^11 
“O what a prowess and virility of yours! 0 
what a power of Yoga or mental concentration 
of yours! O what a supremacy of yours! O god 
of gods! O you having locks dishevelled 
flooded with Ganga water! 
tor tJcptotocTI 
tod fKiftegr 
to^ flft: todt todlt ^ CII 
You alone are Visnu, you are the four-faced 
god (BrahmaX You are Mrtyu (Yama), the 
bestower ol boons you are. You are Surya as 
also the maicer of night, i.e. Moon. You alone 
are the Barth and also water. 
to* to fto^toei 
<d*fd srt todf todi 
tod^ssf^tod 
Spgf prawldll <t<? II 
You, verily, are Yajna and you alone are 
Niyama (rites and observances). You verily, are 
the past and you alone are the future. You alone 
are the primeval being and you alone are the 
dissolution or death. You alone are Puru$a, the 
prominent one and the subtle one. 
ccfircT TTT: 
^ tod ii'tww 
cltdiLd cfcdf d hlkllll o || 
You, verily, are the farthest limit of the 
subtle one and you are the fire and you, verily, 
are the wind. You, verily, are the creator of the 
world in entirety, mobile as well as immobile 
and a protector or rescuer in the dissolution.” 
ddr irto: 
JPJfT to Slftod Rstfl 
TirfT tortofjtoV 
tjgtot togto toll 
This way having said the words, the Lords 
of the gods or excellent gods having grasped 
Soma or Moon and having prostrated with crest, 
the noble souls, proceeded along the Meru in 
their aerial chariots. 
ftoto pi Twjimzm wtl 
tod>0&fd dto fewd tojfdpHJ' ? II 
This way, this utmost secret, more sacred 
than the sacredest, the elevated one, “the story 
of Nilakantha” has been proclaimed and well- 
acclaimed in the Universe. 
to topr to crat trmwtodi 
drto fetor gsdPTii 
dto to t fdp* V 3 ii 
This story has been spoken by the self-bom 
deity himself. It is a sacred story, the very 
obviator of sins. He who upholds this story as 
recounted by Brahma, 1 shall talk of the fruits, 
absolute and great, accrued by him because of 
it.

=== PAGE 402 ===

Chapter-54 
357 
f^PT TTR cRTTT? W3R PTfH rRJTI 
TO WZ H ^TtfOT rTrSrfW^TII II 
0 comely maid, having gone over to his 
body, that venom from mobile and immobile 
things becomes antidoted immediately. 
TTTOft iftt f:^T ^TTOf^l 
eTrHWHt Tf# TOTRt PTfaiHTO xTll^omi 
It quells inauspiciousness and drags away 
the evil dream. The person attains the affection 
of ladies as also the leadership in royal 
assembly. 
pranraftffl ^ qftdfru xti 
HrUW: sfrmri w ftraTta?:ii *0511 
He acquires victory in disputes and heroic 
spirit in war. He attains welfare on expedition 
and he has perpetual riches in his house. 
crei cHHqi 
4)d<*u6) 
At the dissolution of his body, I shall talk of 
his goal, 0 comely-faced one! He becomes 
Nllakantha, green-moustached and moon- 
crested. 
fwrc: 
He attains three eyes; he holds the trident in 
his hand and has bull as his vehicle. He holds 
the Pinaka (bow or trident). He becomes one 
having power like that of Nandi, the illustrious 
one. 
H hfdWUt Slftrfra W3WTU 
dKIHMI fdBAtmd'HHcimi ^ II 
O C\ C\ > 
He roams about all over quickly within all 
the worlds at my errand, the movement of that 
one is not truncated in the sky like that of the 
wind. Having become equal to me in power, he 
stays alortg till the final dissolution of the 
worlds. 
SRfiT cRlftl if g sjngfcr HRefT:! 
HPT T[fH SIcf^lPM f? HTT%> HTH rill II 
0 lovely maiden! I shall now mention the 
goal both here and hereafter of those persons 
who are my devotees and who hear this story. 
WhtT %c(PTGTtfH arfsrar prat uwtHi 
Frat Hmt ^TsIMclI^l^ii ^11 
A Brahmana acquires mastery over Vedas; a 
K$atriya wins the earth; a Vaisya obtains the 
profit; and a Sudra attains bliss. 
rarfstHT fTOH f^TH ^SRTHI 
HTdH PH HiraT TTHlfHHIl 
Hi rj HmH HT? PTII WII 
The diseased one is given immunity from 
disease; a bondaged one is relieved of the 
bondage. A pregnant woman obtains a son; and 
a virgin gets a virtuous husband. Everyone 
regains everything he loses in this world as in 
the other. 
HHt TOprra yuiKf-HW ^HhHTil 
dHbH Trafn frotffsiTfirat Hsamu w$\\ 
Having listened to this divine tale of the 
Almighty, one obtains the same fruit as is 
obtained when one hundred thousand cows are 
duly gifted away. 
pt3 err ^ grrasf m 
W OTTOH fHHi TT wf?T|| ^*11 
If one verse or half of it, or even quarter of a 
verse or even half of it, he who sustains 
perennially in memory, he goes to the 
Rudraloka. 
(^fH^TTTHH fHfTTRPfH 
Mdl •yfljH HPira^Tltll 
W xJ ^RTTR^H) II II 
This Itihasa (the happening happened as 
such) i.e. the history or chronicle, 0 daughter of 
the Lord of the Mountains! O lotus-eyed one!

=== PAGE 403 ===

358 
Vayu-Purana 
That has been narrated by me before you, is 
equipped with the sacred fruit and the like that 
has been narrated (lit. sung) by me, 0 clever¬ 
faced one! 
eWIlfoui 
ftirer 'vtfyra'aqftim 
Having narrated this pious story, endowed 
with sacred fruit to the spouse (Devi), the Lord 
with the moon embellishing his crest, the one 
dear to Guha, went along with Uma to the cave 
(named) Ki$kindha (mountain)1 seated on his 
bull. 
W3R:i 
3Wt?q ^ 
fg^rniT:ll 
After narrating this story of great length 
quelling sins, lord Vayu went away. After 
studying everything, the excellent Brahmanas 
went to the auspicious path of Aditya (Sun). 
ffir sftnfryiPJt 
xj|KHTT^lt5SzmT: 11 q >S 11 
* * * 
T A cave situated over the mountain Kailasa or the 
name of a mountain in the South of India, 
containing a cave, the residence of the monkey 
prince Vail who was slain by Rama; the territory 
said to be in the northern part of Mysore, near the 
sources of the river PampS. A Hill as well as a 
country rounds it in the south-eastern division. It 
comprising the hills of Kupal, Mudgal and Raichur. 
There still exists a small hamlet in the Dharwad 
district on the south bank of the Turigabhadra near 
Anegundl, three miles from Vijayangar which is 
called Kiskindha as well as Anagundl.

=== PAGE 404 ===

358 
Vayu-Purana 
n sm Trmwvftss?jm:ii 
Chapter 55 
The description of the sight of the 
phallus-shaped image created by 
Brahma and Visjiu 
jjuieb4imiclgr g?: i 
The Sages spoke- By the effects of merits 
and deeds who becomes excelling one among 
those orators? We are eager to hear properly in 
details of the merits of supremacy or god 
headship. 
TTTrRTI 
Mgl^cTW MlglcUj fcmd rf H^lrMR:ll'?U 
Suta spoke- Here also they exemplify or 
illustrate the ancient chronicle about the 
greatness of Mahadeva and the supremacy of 
the great-souled one. 
Pc? faWRl mzw^l 
orfFT TfTdlW jlHlcKIlIyMPd: TTTII 3 II 
Earlier this was narrated by Visnu when he 
had conquered the three worlds after binding 
Bali. The highly radiant deity became the 
overlord of the triad of worlds earlier. 
TRST rT W5 V Tralhtfll 
ararssTrnj: inj sg Spsrr: pitrcr: ii * ii 
The Daityas having gone perished and the 
Lord of SacI gone jubilant, arrived then with a 
view to seeing the master, all the gods along 
with Vasava, i.e. Indra. 
fogRPRUT TmTJH: I 
T§TT TRj^c+H Wi W:IIMI 
TFTT TIT: ?T tpjfoT:| 
3ifilW Wdftl TP ?ftTII^II

=== PAGE 405 ===

Chapter-55 
359 
Where abides the one (Visnu) having soul 
and form of universal norm, near the Milk 
ocean. After approaching him, all the Siddhas, 
Brahmar§is, Yaksas, Gandharvas, bevies of 
nymphs, Nagas, Devar$is, all the rivers and 
mountains eulogised him, the Puru$a, Hari. 
^ wri 
tcTdlWIdlrg STO si<vfieKW*19^11 
^^stf^ggr t ^rani\9ii 
“You are the bearer as well as the creator of 
the lokas, O my Lord! By the grace of yours, 
the triad of worlds attain imperishable welfare. 
All the demons have been vanquished and by 
you, Ball has been ensnared”. 
TjcrgTK: 
grgqirl fftTT II C li 
This way addressed by Devas, as also by 
Siddhas and great sages, Vi§nu, Puru§ottama 
(the best of men), replied to the Gods. 
flwrfSrarenfa e&Rut m^vrar-.i 
C\ N3 
WT W^rlRT 37RT: '<3>FeT^iT: tf*F:ll^ll 
“May it be listened to, 1 shall dilate upon the 
reasons, as to who is the creator of all beings, 
the Kala (i.e. Time), the creator of time, the 
overlord, O Best among Gods! 
SlipUTT W? ^1T *TTWI 
And by whom along with Brahma, the 
worlds have been created by his Maya power. 
At the beginning, the accomplishment came 
along. 
utt dmfa rTTctr^ dHTcfy Tnf^ trsni 
TSTOIU H&S? VrfifdWdlll %%\\ 
Earlier, when the triad of worlds were in the 
unidentifiable gloom and when the living beings 
had been retained within my abdomen, I lay 
myself down. 
wwfldf srarcsr wttrti 
vi^x)dih<TOfftn: Tif^rr fo^s'wrfTni ^ n 
Having assumed the form of a thousand¬ 
headed one, thousand-eyed one and thousand¬ 
footed one, holding the conch, discus and mace 
in the hands, I reclined over pellucid water. 
VTd^4«#a»19t ^TOTII ^ II 
During that very interval, from a distance I 
saw a highly refulgent person, bearing 
semblance of a centum of suns burning with its 
own radiance. 
M6luVi 
^ ehHusgtct^ri^ll 
fqilMWTfiraui WTSTTf pStrTO:ll ^11 
The person, endowed with great Yogic 
power, had four faces and was of golden 
complexion. He wore a deer-skin and was 
embellished with a water-pot (Kamandalu). 
Within the twinkling of an eye, that excellent 
man came closer to me. 
cf?Tt Tf^Tf<S'qp''P^t:i 
c&^r frTt err ^ *r f^rrn ^ 11 
Then spoke to me Brahma, being offered 
obeisance to by the entire Universe- “O lord, 
who are you? Whence have you come? Why do 
you stay here? Tell me. 
3?e? 
PymVRW sT?PJITSgUelM rTRII ^ II 
I am the creator of the worlds, a self-bom 
one, having faces in all directions”. Thus 
addressed by Brahma, I spoke to him. 
3T? rT cHfaiTIT ^ WT: WT:I 
TJcf WWruipGTt qTTTTJf^fmJTTTTll 
HtHT f^tTWi ttqiFT ^gTSUljgffgcITII $V9|| 
“I am the creator of the worlds, the restrainer 
or destroyer time and again”. While we two 
were conversing with each other like this with a 
desire to overpower each other, a well- 
established flame stood up from the northern 
side.

=== PAGE 406 ===

360 
Vayu-Purana

=== PAGE 407 ===

Chapter-55 
361 
having highly horrible voice, hideous-framed 
one, the (bulged out) jawed one, the indistinct 
one, the one having a huge end. We offered 
obeisance unto that Lord. 
o o ' 
rfrti 
ft Wrf 
% T3^3mc5f%ll ? ?ll 
“Obeisance be to you, O Indra of the world! 
O God! Obeisance be to you, O King! O you 
having a vast culmination! Obeisance be to you, 
O perennial one! O you having an accomplished 
provenance source! Obeisance be to you, O 
stabiliser of the Universe! 
RT W 3T^Tf bTR WTI 
You are the supreme overlord, the highest 
Brahman, the indestructible one, the highest 
region. You are the best of all and Vamadeva', 
Rudra, Skanda, Siva and Prabhu. 
■Wr?I9iR) TOR: BWnX: 3 3 ii 
You are Yajna, Vasatkara, Omkara and the 
greatest goal. You are Svahakara and 
Namaskara. You are the purifier of all the 
avocations. 
TOTR5RT9 btTOS fdWTOITI 
vTT3R9 STOIFte RTOT:II3'*II 
You alone are Svadhakara. You are the 
Mantra for repetition. You are the sacred rites, 
observances, the Vedas, the worlds and all the 
Devas. 
3T1WW ^RTFTt 1IWOTI 
TRsntrt ^3Ttwt bwrn 3 mi 
You are the very sound of the Akas'a, the 
indestructible provenance of the beings, the 
scent of the earth and fluid of waters. You are 
Mahesvara, the form of radiance. 
TOTS' ITOT gRg^TO(RRT)TOTTI 
?TR x! TTfirfr WII3 s II 
You are the impact of vayu, O Lord of 
Gods! You have the body likewise of the Moon. 
You are the perfect knowledge in Budha. O 
Lord of Gods, you are the seed in the Prakrti. 
cbclf TT^TrTRT ch(Hl I 
rsr aRdfy fjrftr rahi^n 
You are the creator of all beings, Kala, 
Mrtyu, Yama, the destroyer. You support and 
create the three worlds, O Lord! 
■>^RT (TO) ^ 
xf c|ch|U[ Wtll^ll 
You illumine the object of senses by your 
frontal face and by the southern face you 
annihilate the worlds, O Lord! 
Tt%Tpir tt 3cbpit dburH ^rrrfq- h 
3rf^iT f toto ir n 
By the back (western) face, you exhibit your 
Varuna-hood and by the face subsequent one 
(or northern one), you exhibit your Soma-hood 
(i.e. Moon-hood). 
TUfir cTfOT ^ HlcbKi bTOTTOT: I 
3Trf^iT gror w trwi%Wnroii 
tott fg^rPiTT rftt^jttutw rnrrsRT: i 
dMRsl<rdl bfTTOTTOUfTORJ '^RTT:U>5 
r^rT: % ^trt ftbdsidr:i 
You shine forth in various forms, O God! 
You are the eternal souce of the worlds quite 
indestructible as such. Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, 
Maruts, the two sons of AsvinI, Sadhyas, 
Vidyadharas, Nagas, Caranas, the noble-souled 
Valakhilyas and all those persons accomplished 
and those others who perform vows regularly, 
are also bom of you, O Lord of Devas. 
3RT wm 1MW 
chl^ldifsiT cTOTT ^lftd4b: TOTTI 
1. Vamadeva- another form of Siva. This too had four 
sons. This form appeared in the Rakta Kalpa.

=== PAGE 408 ===

362 
Vayu-Pura^a 
jjfy: f^TT xfa 3FMT '^TTT^TftH 
r^rT: TOdT Irterr xt|| ^ ^ I) 
Uma, Slta, Sinlvall, Kuhu, Gayatri, LaksmI, 
Klrti, Dhrti, Medha, Lajja, K§anti, Vapus, 
Svadha, Tusti, Pusti, Kriya and the goddess of 
speech, Sarasvatl, and likewise Sandhya and 
Ratri, are all born of you, O Lord of Gods! 
ft 
^*^5 ^ 
Rifts^ ft 
O you having the lustre of ten thousand 
suns, Obeisance be to you. Bow to you, O you 
lining within the range of thousands of moons. 
Hail to you, O Lord assuming the form of a 
mountain. Obeisance to you, O reservoir of all 
good qualities. 
n3 CS 
Obeisance be to the one bearing a spear with 
sharp edge and obeisance be to the one applying 
ashes to the skin. O Rudra, obeisance to you 
having the Pinaka in your hand and bearing a 
discus and an arrow. 
ft 
^nrrrer ft 
^nfts-sr ft ft? fftnHraTrrft 
ft ftg teWdT^ll'^ll 
Obeisance be to you, O you having body 
smeared with ashes. Obeisance be to you, O 
you who destroyed the body of Cupid. 
Obeisance be to you, O you wearing golden 
costumes! Obeisance be to you, O you, having 
arms of gold. 
Rifts-KT ft ffrnwr 
ft ftw ftr'Hrcrm 
ft 
ft ftcT %^T:ll^^ll 
Obeisance be to you, O god having a frame 
of gold! Obeisance be to you, O God having 
golden navel! Obeisance be to you, O God 
having wonderful form with thousand eyes! 
Obeisance be to you having a golden semen. 
Obeisance be to you, O Siva. 
^pftsig ft ftcj fgiWjrtf 
ft ftef %rwrfti 
ft fts- fftnHrah 
ft ft=r iftTTn^Tfftftiixii! 
Obeisance be to you, O God having golden 
complexion! Obeisance be you, O God 
Hiranyagarbha (having primordial Egg) or 
having a golden-womb. Obeisance be to you, 0 
God having golden rags! Obeisance be to you, 
0 God, the bestower of gold! 
Rjfts-sr ft ftcr fftrawrfftfft 
Rftfs^r ft ftci f%Tctrarcnf%ft i 
ft fter %mra?ftft 
Obeisance be to you, O God having golden 
chaplets! Obeisance be to you, O God having 
golden drum. Obeisance be to you, O God 
having a golden path! Obeisance be to you, O 
God roaring terrifically! 
^fts-sr ft <ftr=rftnft7T 
o 
ft WK ftlrWM I 
ft 
Rjfts’sr ft -r^re-rfiraii h o u 
Obeisance be to you, O God having the 
velocity of a terrific race. Obeisance be to you, 
O Sankara! O Nllakantha! Obeisance be to you, 
O God having divine thousand arms! Obeisance 
be to you fond of dance and playing on 
instruments. 
Tjci wwrg czraft ^ n*m(d:i

=== PAGE 409 ===

Chapter-55 
363 
On being eulogised thus, the lord, the great 
Yogin of great intellect, became manifest. He 
had the radiance like that of a thousand of solar 
orbs. 
srftrarow ¥St n^8R:i 
8|cHcfilid^ilUI WTR fdTWTmi m || 
t^ifa^dwTdl dHTWrr*Tfad:l 
wmi^<ri^:im^ii 
Mahadeva Mahes'vara then jubilant as such, 
became worthy of being addressed. He seemed 
to be engulping the sky forcibly with his 
thousands and crores of faces, though he had 
only one neck and a single mass of hair. He was 
decorated by many ornaments, having body 
variegated by many gems, many unguents and 
chaplets. 
1 cEbl POT1^ I 
: cPTvTT «Ufcqij|e|lim*|| 
He held Pinaka bow or trident in his hand. 
The Lord wielding a spear was seated on a bull. 
He was a bearer of a staff, dark antelope hide, a 
skull wearing one, the one having an ugly face. 
Trot p*. y^MMfydimmi 
Wearing a sacred thread of snakes, he 
offered protection to the gods. He was the one 
bearing semblance of the sound of cloud and the 
proclamation of the noise of a kettle drum. A 
laughter was then ejaculated by him and 
reverberated the entire atmosphere. 
cPT TTcP tip P -JTtrrr Hp*R:l 
rRMra UpqFTt 3TtrTtSF 
By that mighty noise, we felt terrified, O 
great-souled ones! Then spoke out the great 
Yogin- “1 am pleased, O excellent Devas! 
Updi rT MftlRIdi SRI TRt V UPdld I 
swr tri xjcf TmrRTim^n 
sO C\ "O Cn 
You two may observe this great Maya and 
release up terror and all the fears. Both of you 
are bom out of my limbs. You are ancient and 
former beings. 
m ^ ^raft snffer ^fwi?:i 
=mrt ^ (qwjRcq fdyfau 
jfaiW fpf: 
This Brahma, the grandfather of the worlds, 
is my right arm and then left arm of mine is 
Visnu who perennially stays with me in 
warfares. I am very happy with you. I offer 
boons to you as per your desire.” 
dd: fT:l 
ftp- prspru m ii 
Then both of us were jubilated in the mind. 
We prostrated at his feet again. Then we, the 
great-souled and sinless ones, spoke out once 
again. 
^ 3ltfd: TtddTdT pT cTC£J Tfl 
■*rfd7&3d dt ftp difa ^ f*J£RII ^ o || 
“In case you are pleased and if boons are to 
be bestowed on us, O Lord of Devas, let there 
be eternal devotion in us for you.” 
WTRcTFET 
W*\\:I 
i^dMchril ^ ^11 
The god replied- “It may be so, O fortunate 
ones. You two may create progenies”. Having 
said this way, the adorable one, just became out 
of sight there. 
TJcfiftr TRTPT d: 5WTOW dtfrR:l 
eft 3J2 *JdMtdl df fdT?ll II 
This way by me has been dilated upon the 
power of that great Yogin. All this has been 
created by him. We are only nominal causes. 
IJdfe^yiMIdlJcilTb fyicRif^ddl 
rt iiviiOr 115311 
This is the specific form of one known as 
Siva. It is the inscrutable one and unmanifest

=== PAGE 410 ===

364 
Vayu-Purana 
one, uncalculable, invisible one and only 
intellected-eyed ones can perceive it. 
Wcbii 3i^3g|i 
We two offer obeisance to that one, the 
supreme overlord of the gods, by whose grace 
persons with intellectual vision can perceive 
subtle and incomprehensible things. 
TTfT^cf qpnRtog T#SR h 
^ii ^ mi 
O Mahadeva! Obeisance be to you. O 
Mahesvara! Obeisance be to you. 0 you best 
among the gods and demons! 0 swan of the 
mind, obeisance be to you! 
^RT WET 
TTrfT: TjT\: TcT 
•wwbr mgRT: y'mm Wr^ni $ $ n 
Suta spoke- Having heard this, all the gods 
went away to their own abodes after offering 
obeisance to Sankara, the great-souled one. 
^ iwizi hfw:i 
3JTOT2I rTflrt WPTFTCRg fe^Urtll^ll 
Whosoever may read out this hymn of the 
god, the great-souled one, he may achieve all 
the cherished ends and finds emancipation from 
all sins, 
LidrHcl w fewpn smfewMn 
TJrT?: TRTT FI&R ^TrTR 11 ^ II 
All this in respect to the ancient Brahman 
was perennially dilated upon by Visnu, the 
powerful one, only by the grace of Mahadeva. 
The power of Mahesvara in every respect has 
been thus explained by me. 
^ ^-M^rqoul c^rm 
ii ^ mi 
* * *

=== PAGE 411 ===

364 
Vayu-Purana 
wm ^M®raite6qFT:li 
Chapter 56 
The observation on the conjunction of 
Moon and Sun with planet Mars 
^j|i<TjRWidTwi 'cnf% ^:i 
^5: jWdT: gsj ^33^11 ^ii 
Samsapayana spoke- O Suta, how the king 
Pururavas, son of Ila, used to go to heaven 
during the new moon day in every month? And 
how did he gratify the manes? 
rm SNi^lfq wm WWTFRI 
rT TJ^tR: || ^ || 
Suta replied- I shall talk of the effect or 
power of that one, 0 Samsapayana, along with 
conjunction of Aida (the planet Mars) with Sun 
(Aditya) and also of Moon, the great-souled 
one. 
ftRpt cnJot rRTTI 
choMi^gT5STrH>RHi ftrrprt ^ x n 
Tjcfftra Wrftrr ^ ^n^nru h ii 
The waxing and waning of the Moon, 
consisting of the essence of waters, during the 
bright and the dark fortnights, the decision 
about the fortnight dedicated to manes, the 
acquisition of nectar from Moon and likewise 
the Tarpana offering to the manes, and the 
observation of manes who extracted the Soma 
juice from the Kavya fire (i.e. fire having food 
oblation offered to the ancestors), and how 
Pururavas, the son of Ila, gratified the manes. 
All these I shall dilate upon as also the Parvans 
as per serial order.

=== PAGE 412 ===

Chapter-56 
365 
5 wiMdii 
smraiw frETHcT $ II 
When the Sun and the Moon, the two 
combined with the sidereal abide in one orbit in 
a single night, it shall be known as Amavasya 
(the New Moon). 
^ Sf f<cUcfii^?TI*^l 
3l«TTe|^mMNI^i *4l'dTq^Rtrn'M#U 
3TfeTU rTc^T ^ gJT^T: 3T%f?T (W)ll^ll 
He obtains conjunction then with a view to 
locating the Sun and the Moon, the maternal 
and paternal grand-fathers, on every Amavasya. 
Having offered obeisance then thereon, having 
the expectation of proper time, he wails along. 
i^T: TOr^T:ii 
fWcf: ll 6II 
And for the sake of the manes, he used to 
extract exudation from the delighted Soma 
(Moon). Pururavas, the son of Iia, the wise one, 
in every month as per perseverance, gets closer 
to the one in heaven and worships Moon 
accompanied with manes. 
%lcT ffRR <J % 3$ § fensf ^:l 
fanlclMblUliJ^ f^4)c|iHlilPW'*:ll<?ll 
S3 
cs^t rte yr:i 
yt^fdii^oii 
Manes and the Moon partake of the Kavya 
offerings for two lavas (Lava = 60th part of 
twinkling of the eye). Worshipping Simvall1 
during the time of its appearance, Pururvas 
understood the duration of the new moon called 
Kuhu2 and adored Kuhu too. Binding his time, 
he used to see the Moon in conjunction with the 
Sun. 
1. When Amavasya merged with the 14th tithi of the 
dark half, it is SinTvalT. 
2. When Amavasya merged with the 1st tithi of the 
bright half, it is Kuhu. 
frT: h 
fmydqT<^:ii wi 
How could the lightning from the Moon 
create nectar for the gratification of the month? 
It is by the nectarine sprays of lightning for 
fifteen days (of the bright half). 
5fWR irats^jfa:l 
TOT: ^l^TrlT Tf^T xTHni^ll 
^tR Mui farfa-n ^t:i 
^IT#T t ftrf^ll 
Then in the dark fortnight having drunk, 
being milked likewise, by the rays flowing 
down instantaneously by that lunar honey 
(nectar), for the sake of pouring out by the one 
offered by the mode of activity of the manes, 
the king, the lord of the kings, by the nectar of 
the lunar succulence, gratified the manes. 
Rtu (season) that has been spoken of as 
Agni, is deemed as Samvatsara. The Rtus 
(seasons) sprang out of that and from the Rtus 
are bom Artavas (smaller division of time such 
as fortnight). 
3TT&3T usfrrarw: foflTt n«^ct:i 
m: ftain'gr rwt sc^gr^wTec u ^ n 
Artavas are the fortnights known as such 
and manes are the sons of the year. Rtus are 
grandfathers. The months and Rtus verily, are 
the sons of the year. 
sfadRltifd ^ ^cfT: WT^T 9^PIT: ^TT:I 
'fftRRTT ^JT: WT;|| 
Gods are the great-grandfathers. The five 
years are spanned sons of Brahma. Saumyas are 
to be taken as spmng from Soma and Kavyas 
are known as the sons of Kavi. 
3^: TJpTT ^T: UlUmwaill 
Tpr. cRisn^zrf^r ftf3n?nr:ii

=== PAGE 413 ===

366 
Vayu-Puraga 
Invoked as such, the gods became 
remembered bom of Soma and drinkers of 
Soma. The Kavyas are known as the drinkers of 
clarified butter and are the species of the manes 
who become gratified thus. 
g>TcqT ^ IWITI 
TJIWT % *T WrefR fcT^II II 
Tj^ngnfti 3T(ir)fi4bcjr-dii 
Kavyas, Barhi?ads and Agni?vattas are 
known as three classes of Pitrs. Rtus who are 
the householders and the sacrifices, they are 
definitely Barhisadas. Even Agni§vattas are also 
householders and performers of sacrifices. The 
Kavyas are to known as Astakapatis. You may 
understand now about five years. 
EW Tidbut) fffrT: 
trlrr ^^155^:11^011 
Of these, Agni is Samvatsara and SGrya is 
Parivatsara. Soma is called Idvatsara and Vayu 
is spoken of as Anuvatsara. 
^ yGicMebm 
f^cilchloylgr ^ T*pTTMI ? S>ll 
Rudra, verily, is their Vatsara. The five 
years of the nature of Yugas are known as 
Lekhas, Usmapds and Divakirtyas. 
tnftr tnftr wit 
These drink the nectar on the 15lh day of the 
dark fortnight (Amavasya) of every month. As 
long as he lived, Pururavas gratified them with 
that nectar. 
■irw Intacta ETfir fwwpn 
d| ftipt WimpTHmil ^ II 
Since the nectar percolates down of the 
Soma every month, you may understand that it 
is the nectar for Pitrs (manes), the drinkers of 
Soma juice. 
TTfRI WIT *T $cT £ | 
fjron^T WIT 3wTT: jRWrTII ^*11 
ftlW^n^TT^W^Wlf^TI^S^TT: I 
TTte^T xl TTRT Wafa ^UT^II ^Hll 
This way, the nectar is called Amrta, 
Saumya, Sudha as well as Madhu. The thirty- 
three Devas known as Chandajas drink the 
fifteen watery Kalas of the Moon gradually in 
the dark half. Having drunk the nectar for a 
month till fourteenth day, they depart. 
??WT TfWTRW 
WT^iTT^it fei%:iR^ii 
This way being drunk by Devas, the maker 
of the night (i.e. Moon), remains with only the 
fifteenth part left on the Amavasya day. 
WwrznfWT i* 3TfiTcirWT WITPTXTI 
ftraf^r f|^ ^TcT ftTdTTf) ^I^IRvail 
When the Moon develops by the Susumna 
ray of the Sun, then Manes (Pitaras) drink the 
nectar for two Kalas in Amavasya as per serial 
order. 
3||iyfwPJTT ^W^RTEII ^dll 
When the Soma is completely consumed 
after being drunk, the Sun develops it by his 
Susumna ray for Pitrs, the drinkers of Soma. 
SiHrai tt 4T)nuiwiiy-ydH:i 
WMMW WT 
gfcrfcr rTT; fOTT; <rq\\ 
When the digits of the Moon are consumed 
fully, the Sun develops it gradually by his 
Susumna ray by one fraction everyday. When 
the digits dwindle it becomes dark and when 
they develop it becomes white. 
•qcf ^rsN*I wtifor W^TWSStznfWTT TR:l 
iflcfalW t ^T«FT: WGWr^:ii 
<5<*H<|;w|4i):ii3o||

=== PAGE 414 ===

Chapter-56 
367 
This way by the energy of the Sun, the 
frame of Candra (Moon) gets waxed. On the 
full moon day the Moon is complete in disc and 
white in colour. This way becomes the 
accomplishment (decrease and increase) of the 
Moon in the dark as well as bright fortnights. 
fcr^wfa: Tjjd OTl 
37RT: wf Tra7^ddffel:ii^ii 
This way, the Soma with Pitrs is 
remembered as Idvatsara. He is surrounded by 
fifteen rays shedding the nectar Sudha. 
3TtT: tratfcn dferi- wreran 
dfeife ddT ddWteg^TJefrfedddll ^ ^ 
crerrs^Mi'MM^fui § f^:i 
w® ^113311 
Now, I shall talk of the Parvans and 
likewise the conjunctions of the Parvans. Like 
the knots of the sugarcane-stem and bamboo in 
their joints, in the same way the bright and dark 
halves have Parvans. Their knots and joints 
differ in respect of the full moon day and the 
new moon day. 
a^irraNd iraffbT 51 
3rnsn*jR%qT dfniftfr'Mr! d<fesn?ii 3*11 
'O ' 
The third tithi and other tithis are the 
Parvans of the fortnight. On account of which 
the rite of smouldering of fires is done during 
the conjunctions of the Parvans of eclipses. 
(lRriflSTTT $ 357rT dr^ril 
fef sfer wst: eirfrTt ^rrsir<if^*:ii^mi 
At the eventide, by the following norm, that 
time is called as one having two lavas (twelve 
parts of the twinkling). And twelve parts of the 
twinkling verily, constitutes the time proper of 
the Raka (full moon night), of a subsequent day. 
Wdr^prfddfcfe ^fufaifu«fi:ii^ii 
If there is the overlapping of Pratipad of 
dark fortnight in the evening, that time belongs 
to the full moon. 
cddhld fed fe WTSt? d ddldUi 
C\ v3 ^3 
ddRTTrf^ fe <NNf? ?rf?R: ddTTTTII^H 
When the Sun is stationed in Vyatipata (a 
great portentous calamity) at a deviation of half 
meridian line at a distance of a Yuga, the 
meridian of the Moon is risen duly by the 
distance of a Yuga. 
oitcfldTri TT^rt IKWLRI 
IT fefe- ^ spdhJId f II ? 4 II 
This is because the Sun and the Moon 
glance each other after the elapse of the full 
moon day, and at that time their minutes of 
declination are the same. 
dddT ^fe fetft WIT d fefdl 
^ ^ W? f^dleblH: eJddTTrfer Ml^ll 3 <? II 
Calculation proceeds on the basis of the time 
and direction of the Sun. That is the time 
prescribed for the rite to be performed 
immediately. 
wfcfr: dufer d TTfsfeSid dftfei 
Cv tv ' sa 
dWldWdh9d1>l fddfr wil 
dwr^ddfddk dfdTxn wit T^dTii^oii 
When the Moon is full after a complete 
period of a half-month but the Purnima is the 
junction of the night (i.e. when it rises one digit 
less than the full), it is then looked after by 
Pitaras along with Devas. Hence, the first 
Purnima named Anumati becomes illustrated. 
■<3Rl^cf dlddf II **11 
The Moon shines in absolution on the full 
moon night. Sages call it Raka because the 
Moon delights then. 
3THT d ddT d^fddTdPTtl 
ife Tifewir dd: ^jdTiixy 11 
When the Moon and the Sun dwell together 
in a lunar mansion or in the sign of the zodiac, 
on a single fifteenth night after the full moon, 
then it is called Amavasya.

=== PAGE 415 ===

368 
Vayu-Purana 
^TrSTJTW tffafarPWT ftvn«*T:l 
oq^qi^ %T Roff >HVHHII 
t^leb^cpnik W tlurtrAT-fl H RfifaTII'^ll 
V s3 C\ -O C\ T 
Then on the foil moon day, the Moon 
becomes apparent on the western horizon. The 
Moon and the Sun are foil in the afternoon ans 
see each other in the Vyatlpata. (That verily) 
becomes Purnima (the full moon day). 
flwwenwi TRiwfi 
rft 35SEtll'«*» 
When the period of Amavasya is over, the 
Sun and the Moon coming together exist 
mutually, it is called Darsa. 
jfr # Heiw^wi-wi 
■ga^rt fjpre 3 skirtst * ^RT:ii 
^FRTTir^MI 
There is a short time of two Lavas- the time 
taken to utter the two syllables ku-hu, in the 
Amavasya, during the conjunctions of the 
Parvans. In Amavasya when the Moon 
becomes invisible, it becomes conjunctioned 
with the Sun from the midday to the midnight. 
f<«WI&T Tnzref W <T ^r^TT:l 
Mth RRTTrRtrCT^tll 
$ ^THt *rwrcr nBml Pp^fa:ii'^ii 
Having came closer to the Sun within half 
the night or nocturnal half by the diurnal half, 
the Moon gets released from the Sun quickly in 
the morning. And the conjunction remains for 
two Kalds when the Sun appears forth in the 
midday. 
?r^TT: 
WJW II *4II 
The Moon gets released from the solar orb 
on the Pratipad day of the bright half. The time 
of getting released from the solar disc is the best 
suitable time for Ahuti of Darsa and Vasatkriya. 
The time of Amavasya of the Parvan shall be 
known as Rtumukha (first day of the season). 
f^T qeJ'NJJiidl'Wi w h 
rTOTlfl^T ^micd'Wi 
cf ^TWKMiyifUj 1^fg$pl:ll'tf^ll 
During the day in a festival or eclipse 
occasion on the 15th day of the dark fortnight 
(Amavasya) the Moon remains emaciated. 
Therefore, the sun is engripped on the 15th day 
of the dark fortnight by the evil planets in the 
firmament. 
cb'HHIMfa ^ rTRTT dfill^NtelAl 
foatat chmoii 
In accordance with the digits of the moon, 
the names of the Tithis ha*e been declared by 
the honoured and sensible scholars. 
^^rTTWRTRT 
fasmm cfter ^ ?n 
The Moon and Sun both have a mutual 
concordance of visibility on that day. (It) i.e. 
Moon issues out and separates itself in due 
order from the solar orb. 
fgRTcRT fr^TRj 'JTlWt 
cR[T rT -dN<r*dlll k ^ II 
For the duration of two Lavas, during the 
course of the day and the night, the Moon 
touches the Sun. That then is the auspicious 
time for offering oblations as well as the 
Vasatkriya. 
*T: cCTFT: Rfrfe%T:l 
<R3JTcTOf|Rn TOWM RtRTTII ^ ^ II 
The Amavasya, the duration of as much time 
as is required for the cuckoo to utter Ku-hu is 
remembered as Ku-hu (the new Moon 
beginning right from the dawn). 
f^cirHIRMIUH ftr?TMT:i 
smrnrrai fewicfe ftrctenRit ^Rmm^ii

=== PAGE 416 ===

Chapter-56 
369 
When the Moon is emaciated yet has the 
remnant of a measurement of Sinivall and the 
Amavasya enters the Sun, it becomes known as 
Sinlvdll. 
(3*3^: mrai: ftwUuH) fprari 
TJTTrat Istf4: d>Rd: ep^mai II 
The duration of Anumati accompanied by 
Rate, and Sinlvdll accompanied by Kuhu 
likewise is the time of 2 Lavas, Kuhu having 
extent of the Kuhu (of a cuckoo). This way of 
the Parvan conjunction, the time is of the 2 
Lavas. 
bcJuT: Mcjehurug dc^TT cf d dddfdTdTl 
Tj^4c^dim^ ^im^u 
The time of conjunction or duration of the 
festival (Parvan) is equal in both. Vasatkriya in 
the Vyatipata of the Sun and the Moon is 
forbidden. The two types of full moon have 
already been explained. 
MeJetilvi) (s*il3eb:l 
dilH: TPpfrftvra': T5rf:imt9ii 
The auspicious time on the Pratipad and 
Purnima is for the duration of two Matras. The 
auspicious time in Kuhu and Sinivall is also the 
same. 
gichffHtjug^ ^rtrr MeiebiH: d*nwsr:i 
When the Moon is in the orb of Fire and 
Sun, that auspicious time of conjunction (.Parva 
Kala) is of the duration of one Kala. It is so in 
the bright fortnight of the night during the 
conjunction of the days of new and full moon 
{Parvan). 
•HMukugd: 3hthr)i 
^W<*IUlWrl Itm: d dfifaTn k % II 
Thus the full-orbed Moon, the glorious one, 
gets eclipsed when it is bright half during the 
conjunctions of Parvans of night. As the Moon 
is replenished in the fifteenth day, it is Purnima. 
dwwwr: qr% d dtetfhi 
rTWr^Tm^T 3Tdfd dgTfld: II 5 o II 
In fifteen nights the Moon develops fully by 
putting on fifteen Kalas, adding one everyday. 
There is no sixteenth Kala in the Moon. On that 
account, it becomes emaciated completely on 
the fifteenth day after the full moon. 
^ farfr ^t: #troT: *il*kn4ni:i 
3u4qi >id4l c(dT ^ilqq^d dNI ^ ^11 
This way, these manes, gods and drinkers of 
Soma are the waxers of Moon, Artavas and Rtus 
(seasons). Hence Devas worship them. 
31d: dl 
did d dtd xf dfd $(l«S,*q %ll ^ RII 
After this, I shall talk of the manes who 
partake of the obsequial offerings during a 
month. I shall mention their goal, their inherent 
spirit and the procedure of the Srdddha. 
d TJcfFTT did: TTcRT fd?TTd TJd<ldffl:l 
dwsft 3ddftra§[dTii * ^ II 
The departure of the dead and their return is 
not practicable for being calculated by even 
penance of well-known norm. Then how can it 
be perceived through the physical eye? 
^l^qlPtd-ldlfddi) Hl(d>diT: TfrJT:l 
^efT: ifftznsj dddTd: Tli $4)Pmi:11 11 
The manes who are deemed as 
Sraddhadevas are known as Laukika (wordly) 
Pitrs. Devas, Saumyas and Yajvans are all not 
sprung from the wombs. 
ftdl: di ^dTdnd}Tdddddl 
w: fbdrira' dwis^ djdT:ii^ 
All these Pitrs are Devas. Devas make them 
recognised. There are human Pitrs different 
from the others deemed as Laukika Pitrs. 
ftdT fildmg^cT d&d dfadldf:l 
% d dldd dtddFd^ ^ dJdT:ll^ll

=== PAGE 417 ===

370 
Vayu-Purana 
The father, grand-father and likewise the 
great- grand-father (are the human Pitrs). The 
sacrificial hosts and those who become 
equipped with Soma are known as Soma- 
sacri ficers. 
% sr«rrc: rt ^ *pr:i 
prat 
Those who are known as Yajvans (sacrificial 
hosts) are Barhisads. They are engaged in holy 
rites and they get gratified till the time of 
recreation of the body. 
stfHMMI: ^RTF#lf itftRt ^T3WftR:l 
if msTzrerwfDT sraiwT: n % c n 
W ^BT ^tJTTl 
g|gl-c(4ui cTTOT tl'Jlttl xT ctll ^ 9, II 
«n§^rr few y wui 
^ p>T ^^n^nrRTHll\9o|| 
The offerers of sacrificial oblations and 
presiding over them are known as Agnisvattas. 
Those who adhere to their duties in virtue of 
their stages in life, those wrho closely follow the 
traditions, those who do not get aggrieved 
owing to an act endowed with faith or devotion; 
those who are engaged in the sacred rites till 
death, after being endowed with celibacy, 
penance, sacrifice, progeny, faith, learning and 
charity in a seven fold manner, are also called 
Agnisvattas. 
fq^r: wf ipqii: «twi4ck:l 
After reaching heaven, they all rejoice along 
with Devas, Pitrs and the Suksmaka (the subtle¬ 
bodied) drinkers of Soma. They worship 
Pitmans. 
Wctfri Wfo ftngT fclTcRTPTI 
^fT drfHMgr <37^:11^11 
Only the holy activity-endowed ones and 
those equipped with progeny are praised. 
Oblations and food-offerings are given to them 
by their kinsmen and persons born of their 
families. 
TRWT; ftrTTt TTlftT ^IIV&^II 
The partakers of the monthly Sr&ddha, the 
Somalaukikas become satisfied thus. They are 
human Pitrs and partake of monthly Sraddhas. 
% xTRT ^ehlufi: -cfa-1^%1 
ptrtTR: fapT STO^TI 
^cbqb^cl yifafa <qiddl^lHM|J|dl:IIV9mi 
Different from those who are strangers, they 
get commingled as such in their actions and 
rebirths in wombs. Degraded down from their 
duties of the stages of life and devoid of Svadha 
and Svaha, these wicked persons with their 
bodies pierced assumes the form of ghosts 
within the abode of Yama. They expiate 
regarding their own actions that attained them to 
the state of tortures. 
(Jtaiprstd^iar femfe faenra: i 
^qwrqf^risr drafiT:ll^ll 
They are long-lived, highly dried, 
colourless, naked, overwhelmed by hunger and 
thirst, wandering along hither and thither. 
cmftgTct -dHmd:I 
xl chlc^|ilMIWrRdrI:ll^^ll 
Thirsty of water, they roam hither and 
thither near streams, lakes, oblong tanks and 
wells. They covet foodstuffs left by others. 
They tremble and move about here and there. 
Rjm mmitrisj ywiyidd ti 
wtTHT ^ruuyi xt ywtyidiy ifc triiv9<ju 
■O O O 
cbtaicdHthNi y arfttqyyq crsrri 
vO 
fVTHRi^u) 3cf WTORT: II 
They move from one place of torture to 
another. They are thrown in different hells like 
SalmalT, VaitaranI, Kumbhlpaka,

=== PAGE 418 ===

Chapter-56 
371 
Karambhavaluka, Asipatravana and 
Silasampesana (stone-grinding-normed hell) as 
a result of their own deeds. 
^rroat? ftorei <t ti 
It is here that they have their miserable 
hellish abodes devoid of joys of heaven. 
Offering three Pindas to those who passed to the 
other world by uttering their names and Gotras, 
they offer Pindas anticlockwise on the ground 
strewn over with Kusa grass. Thus they 
propitiate the Pitrs abiding in their places after 
death. 
3TCTOT iJIddIWW ^JFT 'gfe TIWI 
mm torn 6?ii 
tof fd^dlfdN ;3Tlfdfl 
^R^TTT <TT§ dlfer? 
dR-MWR-MWdlgK to <dlMfdB(dlld^ll 
Those who do not go to the abode of torture 
are bom in any of the five types of living beings 
according to their past activities. Whatever may 
be the birth taken by them, whether of animals 
or of immobile beings as a result of the 
offerings of food by the kinsmen in the course 
of Sraddha. 
to -yi-upid m ftorr toitol,1 
At the auspicious time the offering of food 
in Sraddha shall be made to deserving persons. 
Then alone it reaches the place where the 
departed kinsman stays. 
^JSTT % Udym tot fcT^d WTRI 
dsn to 'dfdyi'-ri me. intot fton t mi 
Just as among kine lost as such, a calf 
locates its mother-cow, that very way in an 
obsequial rite the sacred chant of the cherished 
ones is made to acquire the manes. 
^ Sirg ^<&Tdri $T *F^rT:l 
torer xiv^cin 
wi%: tot ^ fp c s. ii 
This way an obsequial rite offered with 
faith, by sacred chant, becomes accomplished. 
Then spoke out Sanatkumara, who had 
observed the gaze of the departed souls by his 
divine vision, about how food offered in 
obsequial rite could reach the manes. 
^ ^pr:i 
Yl'4'ftll 6^\\ 
These Pitrs are known as Bahvlkas, 
Usmapas and Divaklrtyas. For them, the dark 
fortnight becomes a day and the bright fortnight 
is a night meant for sleep. 
ftot to to© ftogT h 
dfdito to; § tototo: ^dT:ii<s<sn 
This way, these manes are gods and gods are 
manes. Rtus and Artavas stand enunciated as 
Pitrs mutually. 
<T ftot to: TOT: ftot h 
tor toft ^r*ftnni ^ n 
o o o 
And these godly manes and men-nonned 
manes are gratified by Sraddha rites offered 
with faith. 
to* fto to: ftto tototori 
% W<iul fd£jdl tTrT: II 9, o f| 
This way have been illustrated the manes. 
The greatness of Pitrs, drinkers of Soma, is 
understood as the definite logic or entirety in 
Puranas. 
xto* ^ wm:i 
wgrrw wraiftfr: ftot to ntoni p 
totontot: ftort wrto sti 
C\ t 
TFTTcTT:II II 
The co-ordination of Pururavas with the 
Sun, Manes and the Moon, his attainment of the 
nectar and the performance of Tarpana rite for

=== PAGE 419 ===

372 
Vayu-Purana 
the gratification of the manes, the time of the 
full moon and the new moon, as also the status 
of the manes has been illustrated before you 
succinctly. This is the eternal Sarga (Creation). 
w TjfTWTRf 9, ? II 
The Universal form of all of a single 
aspected norm stands enunciated. It is not 
practicable for description, but fit for belief by 
one cherishing beneficence. 
f^wttJTTSs^rqosrr *r wsc i% crofan^ii^ii 
•o C\ CV ^ *\ 
This creation of Svayambhuva Manu has 
indeed been illustrated by me in detail and in 
serial sequence. What more may I dilate upon 
now? 
?f?r alUfpytrol yr^yirk jtpt 
* * *

=== PAGE 420 ===

372 
Vayu-Purana 
urn wwr#ss5rm:ii 
Chapter 57 
The illustration of Time fractions such 
as Nimesa 
rig^Cftr) 
frrpf cTr^r rr *ii 
The Sages spoke- In the Svayambhuva 
Manvantara earlier, the nature and reality of 
four Yugas that happened, I am eager to hear 
the same in details. 
^crscrrcr 
Tjfenfew^r wn ym<i£dHi 
cm f^raWn ? ii 
Suta spoke- In the context of the description 
of the earth and the like, I have already said 
about the four Yugas. Now I shall dilate upon in 
detail. You may know it. 
wi^? Trwrrcr iwrret^ TnJ?T:i 
wi ^ WT3 ^ wnf rl^cT ^11 3 II 
MdMchK^TR^Rj 3T^T% W^rT:IUll 
Having calculated and enumerated 
everything, I shall narrate in full the six aspects 
viz. : Yuga, Yugabheda (difference in Yugas), 
Yugadharma (the particular characteristics of 
each Yuga), Yugasandhi (the junction of 
Yugas), Yugamsa (the parts of Yugas) and 
Yugasandhana (the joints of Yugas). 
tIRU:l 
v3 
3TWIR ^TT% rTd^HII ^11 
By means of valid working knowledge, the 
human year stands illustrated. Having reckoned 
on the basis of that year, I shall talk of the four 
Yugas. 
ftftHchlpf: W chrTTyifa M£<W;| 
ftitoeblWpi % r^llrriw^n: TRTll^u 
The time taken to utter a short syllable is 
equal to a Nime§a. Nimesa, Ka§tha, Kala and 
Muhurta are the units of time. 
c&TST 
cRigl Titn^g^n^TT: I 
wrfwrai TM§ufi tt^iiuii 
A Ka$tha is comprised of fifteen Nime$as. 
Thirty Ka$thas may make one Kala. Thirty 
Kalas make one Muhurta. Thirty Muhurtas 
make one full day and night. 
3#TT% MHi^-f^l 
qqif: irfr: ^c^rdn c n 
The sun divides the days and nights, 
mundane ones and celestial ones. The day is 
intended for activity and perseverance and night 
for a slumber.

=== PAGE 421 ===

Clrapter-57 
373 
fq^T TTSTguft 'RTO: srf^WT^Tt: ^T:l 
sQcxri: 'WHN Vi^ll ^ II 
A (human) month constitutes the day and 
night of the Pitrs. Its division is thus. The dark 
fortnight is the day for them and the bright 
fortnight is the night meant for sleep. 
T^\rxi TTJW W: ft^Tf TJTW V T?rT:l 
37ftT ■qi'MHI tfp ^i^ifacfiifq h\ 
fel: WtTRl vwm II 
Thirty are the human months that make one 
month of the Pitrs. On the basis of the human 
calculation, three hundred and sixty months 
constitute a year of the Pitrs. 
■tTHNffta Trfrr current toi 
fq?pit ^tfen cprrfar wtraRtf ufa h\ 
mu: ^ n wi 
The measurement of hundred years of 
human beings is said to be equal to three years 
of the Pitrs. The four months added along are 
calculated for the Pitrs. 
TTFR 3T5JT *Tt mU: T>pT:l 
m: II w II 
By the Laukika (wordly) measurement, a 
human year is one divine day and one divine 
night of the Devas. This stands determined in 
the Sastra. 
f^r Trarpft cpf jrf^rTTOrat: 5^:1 
^W#T^l<yR TTf5F; WI^UIliJH^ll 33 II 
The divine day and night together make a 
varsa (human year). A further sub-division is 
that the Uttarayana period (northern transit of 
the sun) is the day and the Daksinayana period 
(southern transit of the sun) is the night (of 
Devas). 
% ct mwu\ hwiicI rrat: j=r:i 
Ufa cJttff&T f^ztf ifa f^fsr: ^T:ll ^ 
Thirty human years or thirty of the days and 
nights of the gods make one month of Devas. 
Tjwj v -fa fufa ffauuwwmi h 
2RT ^ rTSTTS^ltn fdUr: TtpT:ll ^11 
You may know that one hundred human 
years make three divine months and ten divine 
days. Thus is the divine reckoning for division 
of time. 
#fbT dtJ^WRlcI gf|g(^)qffaT ^Tl 
■WdcWtl "MIH^ui Wcb)n$d:ll ^11 
Three hundred and sixty years that happen 
to be as per human calculation stands 
remembered as a divine Samvatsara (year). 
TtfhT g^Tf^TfuT TTTHMUI JRTUfiT: I 
fl^lgllft § lT?t: ^TOfetTT:ll ^911 
Three thousand and thirty years that happen 
to be as per human calculation stands 
remembered as one year of the Saptar§is (Seven 
Sages). 
m tt^ifui enfant MT-pnfui 31 
mufa mffam mm: jfa-.u uu 
Nine thousand and ninety human years 
stands remembered as one Kraunca Samvatsara. 
^nf&r ettfanf mjHtufui 51 
^nffa mmm 1 ft f wmuw 
safari fear tu fcfa: T^tii^ll 
Thirty-six thousand human years deserve to 
be known as one hundred divine years. This 
verily, is the calculation of the divine unit of 
time. 
ifam ftddroigefafuii TTppnfoT *n 
ufgm Hfafal mgffiffa ^ WTCTII 
f^r f Jnj: wnfsrfa 3RT:ii3°ii 
Three hundred and sixty thousand years 
reckoned on the basis of human time units 
constitute a thousand divine years. This is well 
proclaimed by persons well versed in 
calculation. 
ffarn twmsfamj 
ym<fa dhfitstuydi^dMii^^11

=== PAGE 422 ===

374 
Vayu-Purana 
This way, by the sages has been sung the 
divine enumeration. By the divine measure 
alone, the counting or enumeration of the Yugas 
and their duration have been formulated by 
them. 
xfoarift %:i 
ddteldl MtacTII 
W ? ? 11 
In Bharatavar^a, the poets or intellectuals 
enumerate the Yugas or aeons as four. The first 
one is the Krtayuga, then follow Treta, Dvapara 
and Kali. These Yugas or aeons (the creator) 
created as such. 
tfwwfg: ^TpnfoT ^foTT 5 <pr *pnpi 
did-t^di im W3W ^ n 
The Krtayuga they called as one of four 
thousand years. The Sandhya or twilight consist 
of as many hundred years and the Sandhyamsa 
(part of junction with the next Yuga) is of the 
same norm. 
^TTTCT ST WTCT t %l 
ij^rcrraR ^nftrr wrft wm'su 
In Sandhyas and Sandhy&rhsas of the other 
Yugas, there is gradual reduction of thousand 
and hundred years. 
d^n^d wzn wmiyigr mufm: n ^ mi 
Treta is declaimed as one of three thousand 
years. Its Sandhya and Sandhyamsa consist of 
three hundred years. 
irot | 3 wrnpWtfw:i 
dPTifM ftwr Tm wzm: ^sraT tht:ir^ii 
Those seeking inspiration from the mind, 
declare Dvapara as of two thousand years. Its 
Sandhya consist of two hundred years and the 
Sandhyamsa is equal to Sandhya. 
dWI^lcbVIdl TP2IT WZli'VT: 
Those seeking inspiration from mind, call 
Kali as of a thousand years. Its Sandhya consist 
of one hundred years and the Sandhyamsa is 
equal to Sandhya. 
tjw ^tusmi MfwJffildii 
-giw ^ c n 
This enumeration of Yugas comprising of 
twelve thousands years stands illustrated. Krta, 
Treta, Dvapara and Kali- constitute the group 
of four Yugas. 
m TTcFHTT: W TTR^Ul MTO:I 
flcT^T tPlfolT drtlHIUId: II ? <? II 
In this world the calculation of years is 
based on human level. I shall now talk of the 
duration of Krta Yuga as per measure of years. 
rRgift?Ir?(pnfnT cbirtebW^IW 311 3 o II 
The duration is ten lakh, four hundred and 
forty thousand years. As for Kali Yuga, it is 
one-fourth of the above. 
Tier tlwlvichldw Rf¥>Md:l 
TJerg^: f^RT wzit¥i%: 
This way, the specific duration of time of the 
four Yugas without the Sandhy&s and 
Sandhyamsa is declared. 
fkgtidnn&ifotxGi 3 rnft ^1 
rj?arifT¥R^f&r ft^dift *r wrarrn 
f%fd2J wwftrr TT ^iviyd^ll ? ? II 
The duration of the four Yugas is forty lakh, 
three hundred and twenty thousand human 
years including the Sandhyas and Sandhyamsas. 
■pej rid^lKsai 3 fflfydif ^lc*>fPdfd:i 
^dddir^Thl TTT TRfRR3^ll 3 3 H 
This way seventy-one sets of Caturyugas 
consisting of Krta, Treta etc., constitute a 
Manvantara. 
IFcRTTW WIT 3 «wU)m ftcTtarTI 
fsIVhebliaKd J|eblf3dl:ll^^ll 
fTildl^tfsiitiTft rfl 
v3 n3

=== PAGE 423 ===

Chapter-57 
375 
WSlfaT ^T#5^T TTfefe f?RTII } q II 
M-d<r<w TtT^tn wnfef^rfflr: 
efiJvTrra-*mf yeh)Rd:ii?^n 
You may understand the counting of 
Manvantara by the advancement of human 
years. It will be thirty crores, sixty lakhs, seven 
hundred and twenty thousand human years 
(306720000 years). The number of years 
constituting a Manvantara has been calculated 
by Brahmanas, the experts in calculating time. 
Thus the duration of a Manvantara and that of 
Yugas has been stated. 
3OTT tir<3>d 
^dicrfyrg ^nfir srn 3^11 
Equipped with four thousand years, the first 
one is the Krta Yuga. I shall talk of the 
remaining Yugas, viz. Treta, Dvapara along 
with Kali. 
dhMcM^dwl ftsiT ctf T T?T3RR)| 
3RFRT WU ifRTJ 
rTll^dll 
Earlier, while engrossed in describing the 
lineage of the sages, the two Yugas have been 
illustrated to you as they had come in due order. 
It is not possible to describe separately the two 
connected Topics coming in the same context 
simultaneously. 
sfa Thfif xt snf x[ sr^rtm ^ 3^11 
Therein at the advent of the Treta Yuga, 
Manu and the Seven Sages popularised the 
religion dictated by the Vedic lore and the 
Codes of Law, directed by Brahma. 
^qrf^nit $fl<T srf UidiWlSfcRIUoll 
The seven sages expatiated on the Vedic 
sacred rites such as Marriage, Agnihotra and the 
like on the basis of Rk, Yajur and Saman. 
iHURFld snf RRR? 
Svayambhuva Manu dictated upon the way 
of conduct and the duties of the different orders 
of society and the stages of life based on Sirqrti 
injunctions. 
srsraifoi fltRTT ^ $1 
TRTsN 3Tltr ^TPfTU3 fl 
3iqQs,M4«h snr^u 
rl H-fli'WKchislRq^W: I 
3Tlfd^ § ^HT R^frTT^T ^ *3^11**11 
The Seven Sages and Manu were endowed 
with truth and Brahmacarya (celibacy), with 
§ruti (i.e. Vedic lore) and penance, with 
austerities of vigorous norm in line with the 
conduct of the sages. Hence in the beginning of 
Treta Yuga, the Mantras manifested themselves 
to them without their undergoing physical or 
mental effort. In the first Kalpa those Mantras 
along with Taraka (Oriikara) and others had 
already appeared before the Devas voluntarily. 
3nrrn?t rew f^TnwrRit aafonj 
3TTO=qjfT ^ e|*% 
rT TRIT t fTCTPi flfdRWRMftydkllkqil 
At the defunction of the accomplishment 
(Siddhis), the revival of these (others) took 
place. The mantras that existed in thousands at 
the culmination of Kalpas (aeons), manifested 
themselves in their intellect once again. 
'srafo Tmrrftr 
RVltdiw ^ RTW: WRf 
The Rk, Yajus, Saman and the Atharvan 
Vedic mantras were popularised by the Seven 
Sages. And Manu sang the Smarta Dharma 
(rites in accordance with the Smrtis). 
^cITcfl TTf%7TT %2[T: 
At the advent of Treta, the Sariihitas of 
Vedas were one undivided and unified whole as

=== PAGE 424 ===

376 
Vayu-Puraiia 
per exclusive treatises on Dharma and on 
account of the shortage of life, they became 
classified in Dvapara age. 
1TOPJ1 xf tl 
The divine sages and Devas without birth or 
death were regenerated by penance by the Self- 
bom deity in the Kali and Dvapara ages. 
wrf: apti 
faffed ?PTRraf mmmii * ^ n 
Along with Dharma, progeny and auxiliary 
sections, they conducted in different Yugas. The 
exposition of Vedas became interpreted 
variantly in light of the similarity of meanings 
as per the age. 
3TRWTOW: 3T3R2T 
Arambhayajnas for Ksatriyas, Haviryajnas 
for Vaisyas, Paricarayajnas for Sudras and 
Japayajnas for the excellent Brahmanas (were 
declared). 
fsb-MieW: Wldn: TPJJgr: ?ll 
Overjoyed were the orders of society in 
Treta, protected righteously. They became 
active progressed and blissful likewise. 
$tf3RT: ^f5RTTfer?T:l 
^ngerffo: ^T: nfWTujg'amm^ii 
To the Brahmanas, followed Ksatriyas and 
the Visas or Vaisyas followed the Ksatriyas. 
The Sudras became followers of Vaisyas. 
People cooperated and collaborated with one 
another. 
■^TOT: 3tfr^PRtaT 
TFTOT cfRIlTi^ w^uim 
eRtfosT: Slfeyfaim^n 
Their tendencies were good-intentioned and 
the duties involved as per the orders of society 
and stages of life were also auspicious, in 
thought, mind, words and actions. Thus in the 
Treta Yuga, the initiation of tasks becomes 
uneffacable. 
^TCJRWT # hm t ‘fl^pTimXII 
The age, intellect, strength or power, the 
form, freedom from ailments and disposition of 
duty or religious activity- all these were a 
common place fallacy in the Tretayuga. 
tfaT sfipT 
5^r: rfT ^irTRmhr 
Brahma had ordained the establishment of 
the orders of society and stages of life. The 
subjects or progenies out of infatuation did not 
adhere to the duties of jurisdiction. 
TTPTTf^rm tr cm 3pn*sn?:i 
O \3 s3 
tr: 
<T ?RRe»MRn: w=r 
They argued and quarrelled with one 
another. Owing to mutual discard, they once 
again followed Prajapati Manu. Manu, the son 
of Brahma, realized the state of affairs. He, the 
creator, the Man, begot of Satarupa two sons 
Priyavrata and Uttanapada. These two were the 
first kings. 
cR: TT3TR Wm '<VI^Rui:l 
jMlHI II 
Since then happened to take birth a line of 
kings, the staff-holding ones. Since they 
delighted the subjects, kings were called 
“Raj an ah” 
raw % ^d'MVIeKII TR^TT sqfwi 
gmrwidrahi fat ynr# fa^mm^ii 
gnrfqt sffarrw farot <fag>(fcir:i 
«f^dia fat w h\ ^ o u 
The men who happened to be such as having 
sins or crimes inherent within, being of 
invincible disposition, in order to check and

=== PAGE 425 ===

Chapter-57 
377 
control those men and in order to establish 
righteousness on the earth, the divisions of 
castes have been laid down in Treta Yuga. The 
compilations of Vedic texts, both Mantras and 
Brahmanas have been made by the sages. 
■q^r: jrafefe <wt fe <t tfe:i 
fet fewTTT#:ii^ii 
This way institution of sacrifice got initiated 
likewise, by the gods. Those were named 
Yagas, Suklas and Japas, all fully equipped with 
the requisites. 
The sacrifices then came into propagation, in 
the Svayambhuva Manvantara by Devas, under 
the leadership of Indra of mighty prowess, the 
enjoyer of the Universe. 
fe srcfet fe few m sfei 
fen snSsr ffe fectn ^ ^ 11 
Truth, Japa (muttering of sacred chants), 
austerity, charity, were deemed as the Dharma 
of jurisdiction in Treta. The practice of holy 
rites and rituals retarded and the jurisdiction of 
veracity became in vogue. 
jrafer rfrT: 7RT 3IT4|lfel MjiWtfT.i 
C\ O 
TFjfer sr^fefeTi^n 
Then take birth the valiant ones, endowed 
with age and hefty power, being of great 
fortune, having dicta of law enjoined, the 
sacrifices and the expounders of Brahman or 
Vedic lore. 
wraFRWTSJ feffetl 
fferrarr ^iwcti Mrim^-nifetii^Mi 
They were having eyes dilated like lotuses, 
having broad chests and well-knit structures, 
having the extremities of lions, highly spirited, 
having gaits likewise of intoxicated elephants. 
TRTSRfefe feW ^crffel 
fertt^uifew -qiily11 ^11 
Being the wielders of huge arcs or bows, 
they were the paramount sovereigns in Treta 
endowed with all the auspicious marks, having 
the surroundings of the pippal trees or Indian 
Fig tree. 
few w ifef wtf cfer few -rfei 
ferferfer wx tft fe 3 fer.-n 
RFeSWhfet fet fefe03H:ll^ll 
The two arms are known as Nyagrodhas (the 
Fig trees) and Vyama (extended arms) is termed 
as Nyagrodha. He whose height extends as 
much as a Vyama, he whose girth and height 
are equal, should be known as a Nyagrodha- 
parimandala. 
fe fe ferferr ffengr iffttroti 
UWlfelWRlft feW iWWfemil $ 6II 
The wheel or quoit, the chariot, the gem, the 
spouse, the treasure, the horse and the elephant 
likewise, are the seven highly esteemed gems of 
all the paramount sovereigns. 
fe wr fei: wfe snfe tr^urqi 
feffesr feft qfeftr: fe)ffe:ii$<?ii 
The quoit or wheel, the gem, the poniard, 
the bow, the jewel, the fifth one, the flag and 
the treasure, these seven are the inanimate 
jewels of the sovereigns of the worlds. 
qfe fefefe feW TSTfvE€I Tr:l 
cKmift ferR: fefefe:ii^oii 
The spouse, the chaplain, the army-in-chief, 
the chariot-maker, the minister, the horse and 
the elephant cub or camel cub are deemed as 
seven jewels full of life. 
wfefo femft ferfer twrfti 
rRffe fefef Tfet r|*c|felHJ|V9^ll 
These gems, the divine ones, stand well- 
accomplished for the great-souled ones. These 
fourteen are fit to be assigned to the paramount 
sovereigns.

=== PAGE 426 ===

378 
Vayu-Puraija 
fabUlHVM mTCFtT JjfilcZjf rragf^T: I 
IM-dth atdl'dRHRm ill la 3 II 
O <3 O 
The paramount sovereigns on the Earth take 
birth by the partial incarnation of Visnu in all 
the Manvantaras gone by as well as likely to 
come. 
Offrosnft sfifararft mrfr mi 
kmifeOT mimm risRcififr: 1119311 
In the gone by ones, those likely to be, and 
whichever are the present ones in Yugas such as 
Treta and the like, take birth the paramount 
sovereign. 
m mimifT mn sjtf: aFren^ii 
These precious gems are conducive to the 
welfare of all emperors (in all Yugas). These 
four are very wonderful viz. strength, piety, 
happiness and wealth (among the emperors). 
TITCFd t WTI 
awf snfer ddw immm iim minami 
Materials gains, spiritual good, lust, repute 
and triumph attained by kings without any 
conflict are on a par with one another. 
3TO?T3rST mi 
3T5PT rTTOT dPTTdfw^tT mil 
am hwi instil 
By Aisvarya (i.e. supremacy or autocracy) 
and Anima1 and the like and by the power of 
material resources or the power of treasury and 
army likewise, by food and by austere resolves 
or penance or austerity, they humiliate the sages 
and also the gods, demons and men by power 
and penance or perseverance. 
ch^ifeidf cwrstTJif mrcs^m yirr&ftii 
diy«'d)ycj-dl8l: «kmdSrt^frWT:ll^\9ll 
1. The superhuman power of becoming as small as an 
atom, one of the 8 powers or Siddhis of Siva. 
They take birth by marks of physical 
spurting as also by non-manual eligibilities or 
superhuman tendencies. They have pate-wrinkle 
carved out on the hair and the tongue not 
defacing the face. They have crimson-hued lips, 
their hair stand facing up and they have the 
Srfvatsa scar (on the chest). 
^T%rfT: I 
Tjm mills <jii 
They are having arms hanging down to the 
knees, having palms bearing networks, having 
auspicious marks of bulls, having structure of 
the norm of Fig trees, lion-shouldered, of nice 
virility, having gaits of lordly tuskers and they 
are huge-jawed ones. 
They have feet soles marked by quoit and 
fish and palms marked by conch and lotus. 
They live upto eighty-five thousand years as 
kings without signs of old age. 
3TOfpr wli 
mgt m wth trspfa mu c on 
Their movements are free from attachments 
or partialities at the four places, viz. in the 
firmament, in the ocean, in the nether regions 
and on the mountains. 
mi ^nrnr snJ ammi 
The sacrifice, charity, penance, veracity or 
honesty duty stands declared in Treta Yuga. 
During this age, Dharma functions in 
accordance with the division of the castes and 
stages of life. 
m ^4)Pi: 
isgsT: w: Wr ijtptt: 
In order to establish the jurisdictional 
limitations, Danda-niti (administration of 
Justice) gets into vogue sturdy and robust. The

=== PAGE 427 ===

Chapter-57 
379 
progenies or subjects in entirety are free from 
ailments and having minds engloated (lit. 
fullsome). 
ej^«^|(u| rT^T ^f=cl TRTTOT: II 6 ? II 
Only a single unified Veda with four sub¬ 
divisions became popular in the Tretayuga. The 
descendants of Manu (Manavas) subsist upon 
that for three thousand years. 
wtfbrcrerafotf fgrot 3friroT wi 
S3 S3 
Well engirt by sons and grandsons, they die 
in due order. This is characteristic feature of 
Tretayuga. Now you may understand Treta- 
Sandhya. 
s3 s3 
worn t wro 
s3 s3 
The disposition of the Tretayuga becomes 
existent within the quarter of the Sandhya and 
in Sandhya, the disposition becomes apparent 
by a quarter of the Yuga, 
O S3 
intuit 
Sams'apayana spoke- How possibly in the 
Tretayuga’s beginning, there ensued the 
propagation of sacrificial performance and 
earlier Svayambhuva Manvantara? Please let 
me know (lit. illustrate before me). 
sRiffrot qmw to! 
TOnrorat afrmit srcr ^tii 
i t W.il^ll 
TOTTTOiSJ wjcQ 3rafS?r:i 
SjTOT MIWTII6 611 
Along with the Krtayuga, the Sandhya 
(twilights) having gone oblivious and the 
incursion of one named Kala having ensued, 
and the Tretayuga having arrived, they-again 
made the classification and arrangement of the 
castes and stages of life. Having gathered those 
equipments, how sacrifice became in vogue? 
Having heard this replied Suta- O 
Samsapayana, now listen to this. 
armmf w toto 
Tifaferrat TOrkt to 6 \ ii 
i&im tif&rmi 
szr zznpto cf%ii o it 
rTsrr TO' m^ro^Ti 
TTf%rf: Tit: ?u 
Just as in the beginning of the Tretayuga, 
there was the prevalence of the Yajna, the 
medicinal herbs or plants having taken birth and 
the rain showers having got ensued. People set 
about building houses, hermitages and cities. 
Then Indra the enjoyer of the universe, arranged 
the division of castes and stages of life and 
compiled the Mantras into Samhitas. He 
employed the mantras then here in the 
undertakings of the world and the yonder world. 
Thus, the enjoyer of the Universe, Indra, too 
organised a sacrifice (Yajna) or accompanied by 
all the gods equipped with all the (associate) 
materials. 
SWRJ^ TOT5PTpJlfo:l 
WTflT:ll 11I 
Then Asvamedha becomes in vogue. Thus 
the sages arrived there and began to perform 
sacrifices with the holy sacrificial beasts. 
Having offered them as oblations, all of them 
gathered together. 
snfem jgfog tr# TO^fftri 
#% ^cwmiTOsj vwvii to 
O Np "S • ' 
mR*i% hot «ri 
^ TfSOT cWT q^Plum ^11^*11 
3TTffr| W ^OT TO^ *W§ll mi

=== PAGE 428 ===

380 
Vayu-Purana 
^efT § %l 
?n^3i% ^T: -»qcjR?r <? ^ ti 
The officiating priests (Rtviks) gone 
engrossed in business (lit. ceremonies), the 
sacrificial performance having gone continual, 
when the Vedic mantras were recited, with 
articulated melodies, when the virile Adhvaryus 
moved about hurriedly and quickly, when the 
holy sacrificial beasts were being killed, when 
the clarified butter getting offered as oblation in 
the fires, by the divine priests of the gods and 
the great-souled gods, having been summoned, 
being the sharers of the sacrifices, the sages 
began to worship the Devas that constitute the 
soul as senses, the sharers of the sacrifice 
likewise, those very ones, to them the gods 
make an object of sacrifice who happen to be in 
the end of the aeons. 
zmfct: iw yjfejar % tr^r:i 
UMAR’S. qftsq' d^RtRlWcHI % V91| 
The Adhvaryus who were great sages got 
ready at the time of Praisa to slay the animals. 
Having seen those innocent animals' herds 
standing as such, these great sages inquired of 
Indra as to what sort of the ritual of the sacrifice 
that was? 
'STcfT^r 
trfqo5R%RTII 
fpTT R fasirrii o n 
If you want to perform the sacrifice, do it as 
per instructions of the Vedas. You may worship 
by means of the Yajna, wherein no violence 
comes to the fore, O foremost among the gods! 
in* graf vdd'dRtfSd: 5TFII ^ll 
The lowest limit of time is the triad of years 
by the residents, the newly non-branching ones. 
0 Indra! This, verily, is the righteous deed of 
highest order that has been laid down formerly 
by self-bom god Brahma. 
T?cf fera'gPKw 
^llcRdfd l>%6qfir^xZ^ll^o^ii 
This way, the enjoyer of the Universe, Indra, 
was asked by the sages, the realisers of truth- 
‘Say with what mobile and immobile objects, 
sacrifice shall be performed?’ 
rf feST ^:l 
ira cllcHjRl^UI cRPTII 3 II 
The great sages, however aggrieved as such, 
endowed with reality, having combined with 
Indra parried question to the lord Vasu, 
cWclT^t R.ratfoWi rl^l 
rtcf ^ fftrPTII ^ )l 
This is a great unrighteous act owing to your 
desire for an act of violence. This slaughter of 
animals is not desired one as such in your 
sacrifice, O you best among the gods! 
ara-qf snfaKM Tnr^r: 
qm smf frsrcfrq r fprc srf <? <? 11 
The unrighteous act for the destruction of 
righteous norm has been commenced by you 
with the animals. This is no sacred deed. It is an 
unsacred act. Violence is not termed a sacred 
deed. 
qfw crst (jywqi qsrRrfy^i 
3rfFniT^ w %fcr 1 Wtll ^o^|| 
The sages spoke- O highly intelligent King! 
O son of Uttanpada! How possibly has been 
perceived by you the sacrificial ritual? You may 
illustrate us and obviate our doubts. 
W dd'ktomftMIlS eRdWRWI 
wil 
-cnfe:ii i|oMI 
Then having listened to the question of 
those, the king remembered the Vedic texts and

=== PAGE 429 ===

Chapter-57 
381 
without pondering over the strong or weak 
points, he dilated upon the real import of the 
Yajna i.e. sacrifice the way it deserved to be 
performed as guided (as per nuancement), the 
king spoke out. 
fprrwirat ?fq ^ $ ii 
The sacrifice deserves to be performed with 
animals fit to be immolated with fruits and 
flowers (lit. seeds). Violence is the nature of 
Yajna. This way displays before me. 
^f^dlM^I R^fa:l 
cfttfoT qWT q4<Jv^'WK<*lfcfa:ll 
'ddllUIUtUM^l Wti cTWFtff ^RTf^ni 'a || 
Just as here, the mantras of the Samhitas 
were (composed by) the sages endowed with 
longer span of austerities, endowed as such with 
the specific marks of violence and by practical 
experiments such as those of Taraka, what I 
have said now is based on that authority. Hence 
it behoves you to forgive me. 
qfq wi qr^q n<raicKiift (for) q %n:i 
qqT mfcn q*Tt 1FOTT RTS^jq qq;ll 
T?q fdraTTVT ^ ^TfilrMMWqtaRr:ll^o<' II 
O Brahmanas! In case those very ones are an 
authority, the statements in Mantras, then alone 
the Yajna may be adhered to, otherwise those 
statements will become false”? Thus those sages 
of Yogic communion were rendered unable to 
reply (silenced by him). 
3T32J WR c[gT rRST qi'ildt Rqi 
ftyqiqiqt ^rr qwqrfqt?r Tsiqqrmi n 
Having observed the world underneath, they 
told- “For that purpose be quiet. Though a king, 
you have uttered a falsehood. So enter the 
nether world”. 
Hfatyi TOTcFPTi 
q^’fell T^rmFraftS^ra^ll ^o|| 
This way having been said, the king entered 
the nether regions and having become Vasu 
moving overhead or attempting to clear doubts 
in Dharma, he became as rover of the Hades. 
^ dleHJd R^Rc^l 
entfoTT Wif^-HI TTRT WWT35R?T:ll ^^11 
By that talk of the sages, he became a 
denizen of nether regions. The remover of the 
apprehension of the Dharmas or laws, the king 
Vasu then arrived as such. 
qpqq ciMji&H qpqrfq wr:i 
q^^l^<MMMlfd:ll5!^ll 
On that account, even by a very learned one, 
the apprehension does not deserve to be 
revealed of Dharma. The way of Dharma is 
very subtle. It has many loopholes and is 
inscrutable. 
wm ftwsrK snJ: qraw didfodj 
*?wgq# r^ii s>s>? it 
Therefore, by anyone the Dharma does not 
deserve to be dilated upon in definite terms. 
Excepting Svayambhuva Manu, none of Devas 
and Sages can pronounce a judgement on 
Dharma. 
qwrq snfer uro q?f§fq:i 
qqffa: qq;ll ^*11 
Therefore, violence has not been dictated as 
the opening channel of Dharma, by the great 
sages. Thousands and crores of sages went to 
the heaven by their own actions. 
Piq qR W qT yy'KlPd R#q:i 
(qqj Red RKd cTTteFTT:II 
Tjq q^qr fq^qq-. W'Wiq. yfafedTill 
Therefore, the great sages do not appreciate 
neither charity, nor sacrifice. By making gifts of 
even insignificant articles such as the root fruit, 
the vegetable or potherb and a water vessel or 
water gourd, they became established in the 
world of heavens. 
qrfr qqqqT qq-.) i

=== PAGE 430 ===

382 
Vayu-Puraga 
9^1^ twt $mT«gfa:ii 
tHIrHW spfo q^d^TKKHH %\^\\ 
Non-treachery, lack of greed, restraint, 
compassion unto beings, penance, celibacy, 
truth, tenderness, forbearance and fortitude 
(then) are the basis of the Ancient law or code 
of conduct, difficult of obtainment. 
^ <cTHIMlfd WTOT TO:ll ^V9|| 
The sacrifice consists of Dharma and 
Mantras. Austerity is of the nature of 
observance of fast. One attains gods by Yajna 
i.e. sacrifice and Vairagya (detachment) through 
penance. 
siigiuy wm 
efecFS Tjim TTcRT: ^T:ll ^6II 
Brahmanhood by the renunciation of the 
fruits of Karman and assimilation (in the 
supreme Atman), is obtained through 
detachment. From knowledge, one attains 
perfect isolation or exclusiveness. These are the 
five goals of life. 
Tier fir^; ii 
safari ^ewMi ei ^ wmcrs^ii ii 
This way, there was a dispute of great norm 
in the initiation of the sacrifice of sages and 
gods in the first Svayambhuva Manvantara. 
nn^f HI 
cTTTl^cHimi^ t WnTTT:ll ^o|| 
Then, those sages, having seen the 
marvellous procedure (of sacrifice) by strength 
and disregarded the words of Vasu, returned to 
the place, whence they had come. 
TOT T^cTT 
9TO % TOtfegT ^TT: 11 
' s3 O 
WI foTOsN ^ Ml^ TT^ ^Tll 
srafcraff: it^t #raTTOrr ^tn:ii 
The gods performed the Yajna and attained 
the fruits, when the sages had gone away. The 
kings belonging to Brahmana and K§atriya are 
heard of as accomplished in penance. They are : 
Priyavrata, Uttanapada, Dhruva, Medhatithi, 
Vasu, Sumedhas, Virajas, Sankhapat, Rajas, 
Praclnbarhis, Parjanya, Havirdhana and other 
kings. 
TJct ^TRf tT fao&l HHT:l 
m^wtcii ifcri cftf4: yfafediu 3 u 
These and many other kings accomplished 
as such, attained Siddhis and went to heaven. 
These were great sagely kings of mighty spirit 
whose fame stands perennial. 
(dfqifeiyit^ i^i-dn: toM-.i 
TTTOT WTTfgaftci TO) II ^*11 
Hence by all means, in regard to everything, 
penance surpasses Yajna. Brahma created this 
entire universe earlier by austerity only. 
TO: jrgfa ^ oTO&Tii^mi 
Therefore, Yajna does not become extinct as 
such. It is known as the root of tapas or 
austerity. In this manner, Yajna was set in 
vogue in the Svayambhuva Manvantara. Since 
then, this Yajiia remained prevalent as Yugas 
rolled on. 
sfrcrsTjrwt toito to 
Tramn#3S!mr:im^ii 
* * *

=== PAGE 431 ===

382 
Vayu-Puraga 
ll3WTEWT3TteSJTFT:ll 
Chapter 58 
Description of the four Yugas 
RJRT 3^ i-ci 
sjw TO^rrfn ^r:i 
m ^rnr 'mi sfrroifitii *u

=== PAGE 432 ===

Chapter-58 
383 
Suta Spoke- After this, I shall dilate upon 
the traits of the Dvapara Yuga once again. On 
the expiry of the Treta Yuga, Dvapara gets into 
being. 
UvTHt ^ 5 ^Tl 
tjfrfrt dfwwd: TIT ^MUl?-qfd|| ^ II 
At the inception of the Dvapara Yuga, the 
accomplishment of Siddhis by the people is as it 
was in Treta Yuga. But as the Yuga advances, 
the Siddhis disappear. 
rRT: rTHFlf fTtft TR;I 
II ^ n 
Wrt csraftm er fdf-fu^:i 
^TTE3tT Wf Spit ^ ^BTlsaThTS^TtTII 
^#TT T^TTII'811 
Then gets into being again the following 
vices in the people at the advent of Dvapara- 
covetousness, lack of fortitude, trading 
mentality, trade conflicts, uncertainty of the 
factual representations, the disintegration of the 
castes (or orders of society), an allocation of the 
jurisdictional avocations, beggary, destruction 
of sacrificial plants and animals, criminal 
proceedings, pride or hauteur, intolerance and 
weakness. A prevalence of all these endowed 
with the qualities of Rajas and Tamas i.e. 
obscurity and gloom became well-known in 
Dvapara. 
antr # r amfsf^r «fii 
3JPT oqicM) MUI^frl 37^ ^11 h II 
-O C\ O' 
In the primeval Krta age, Dharma is neutral; 
in Treta Yuga, it is sought and attained. In 
Dvapara, it becomes agitated and intensely 
affected and in Kali, it perishes. 
cpjfat firofeiTT: Trafc# TWT5S3PT:l 
t#ii $ ii 
In Kali Age, the order of the castes gets 
destroyed. The discipline of the different stages 
of life is destroyed. Doubts (due to variance) in 
Srutis and Smrtis begin to rise. 
wfcm ■§ firsfHt s^uimii\9ii 
Owing to the difference between Srutis and 
Smrtis, no decision is arrived at. Due to 
indecision, the factual representation of Law 
(Dharma) becomes obsolete. And there ensues a 
difference of opinion among men in matter of 
factual representation of the Law. 
f^TOT rf| 
3T4 swf ira ftgprf 'TiFtriiciMii c n 
By them mutually disintegrated, owing to 
the variation in the outlooks, no definite 
decision as to what is Dharma and what is not, 
can be arrived at. 
gjROTRT 3T <^r^^r<urwiWJpf$P7TTI 
ir rrat t %nrr ^ttii % n 
Owing to the depletion of the causes and 
also owing to the instability of a means, in the 
difference of opinion of those ones, there may 
ensue the delirium in the viewpoints. 
fRt f^tri 
fy^jrrn it 
Then by those divided in outlook, a variety 
of scriptures became composed. A single 
unified Veda is divided into four here in Treta 
Age. 
fn% rTI 
cTTotii&jgyf 5 inrnf^fii uii 
Owing to the obscurity of the duration of life 
in the Dvapara Yuga, the Veda is divided into 
four by Vedavyasa in Dvapara ages. 
Sifogt: 
By the scions of sages then, the Vedas are 
subdivided owing to the variability of the 
viewpoints by the composition of the Mantras 
(i.e. Vedic Texts) and Brahmanas (their 
explanatory exegetic), by alterations on accents,

=== PAGE 433 ===

384 
Vayu-Purana 
syllable etc. and by the gradation of vowels 
consonants. 
■gfXr 
The compendious collections of RJt, Yajur 
and Samans become compiled by the learned 
sages. Somewhere owing to the general and 
special (known as Vedic Vikrtis), changes 
occurred according to variation of outlook. 
3t^r <T yfpraW: r*il 
Brahmana (the explanatory exegetical 
treatises of the Vedas), Kalpasutras (the 
Auxiliary Vedas or scientific aphoristic 
literature), Mantra-Pravacanas (different 
scriptural texts) and others such ones came into 
existence. Some were rejected by authoritative 
persons while others were retained. 
fffScPrrTSRT fen: I 
In Dvaparas, the twice-born ones began to 
disregard the rules of conduct and stages of life. 
Formerly, there was a single Yajurveda; later it 
was divided into two (Sukla and Krsna 
Yajurveda). 
3TI«c|4cR3 ^irTRU ^ II 
By the normal and perverted interpretations, 
this group of scriptures has been created. By the 
proposals of the activities of the initiating 
priests, that was rendered endowed with 
contrarieties manifoldly. 
f^^SPzr^RTT:l 
ssnfH ^ii 
And likewise by the undecaying 
conceptions, the psalms of the Atharvan, Rk 
and Saman have been confused in Dvapara, by 
those having philosophy of varied norm. 
Xt Xt: sXtsj 
ft: girffn %c n 
Their variation and typical exegetics by 
optional imagination and the preservative 
expansions prevent in Dvapara and get defunct 
in the Kali Age. 
Xt fXXisN ft-l 
gqfgXot X Xter cEing<T£5iT:ii ^ ii 
Their contrarieties once again get 
resurrection in Dvapara itself, as calamities such 
as draughts, premature deaths, disease or 
epidemics and turmoils. 
^tX tr-.i 
fXc^nX Xt ^ o n 
By anguishes bom of speech, mind and 
action, despondency and indifference to worldly 
life sets in, and as a result of which they begin 
to ponder over the idea of renunciation from 
grief. 
fariHuiitaf XrX X^XtoXXi 
XnX 
From thoughtfulness renunciation and from 
renunciation, the observation or finding of faults 
are seen. And from the observation of faults, 
there is the possibility of spiritual knowledge in 
Dvapara Age. 
Xi sr iTTfqRt Xurtr wXrXXn 
cs o 
In Dvapara Age, rival (scriptures and sects) 
crop up against the scriptures which were 
honoured formerly in the first Svayambhuva 
Manvantara. 
3TfRT XlfX^ ^1 
a^viiferiX^isr ? 3 n 
There are speculations and alterations in 
Ayurveda, Jyotisa and the ancillaries of the 
Vedas; there are doubts and variations in Artha 
Sastra and the exposition of the science of logic. 
iXXrfXX* XaXnRWT 
There are diversities and variations in the

=== PAGE 434 ===

Chapter-58 
385 
Smrti texts. Different sects and branches (of 
theology and philosophy) came into vogue. In 
Dvapara Yuga, difference of opinion starts 
among men. 
TTTOT cfctJiiH 
chi^c^^rM<^idUI ? mi 
Survival is possible only by mind, action 
and speech. It becomes practicable in Dvapara 
of all the beings foreboded by the physical 
strain. 
srcrrtnt y<3><w«rTii^n 
srorj TRt wvmi 
rfilcr rrm^ll 
Cupidity, impatience, the activities of the 
merchants, wars, the uncertainty in regard to 
philosophical principles, the composition of 
Vedas and the intermixture of castes or 
confusion of the legal implication, passion, 
greed and murder, the violation of the orders of 
society and stages of life and lust and animosity 
likewise in Dvapara became in vogue. 
irof gtfa# | ^otft1 
fnit 
giu*w 51 
tit ■R ^ H 
The traits of Dvapara age are evident in the 
Sandhya period but a little. They become 
establish as devoid of merits in Dvapara and 
that very way by a quarter of the Sandhya 
period, only a part of that persists. 
PT5 ^ cjrf *TT falZlW <T ftcTlERTI 
<t yfayfa: ^ irT: 11 ^o u 
In the year of Dvapara or the var$a of 
Dvapara, the situation that prevailed of Tisya 
i.e. Kali age having strife, that you may know as 
such. 
Violence, spite and untruth, deceit or 
cheating, murders of the ascetics, these are the 
dispositions of the Kali age, which people 
inherit. 
•q^ srf: enfej uftsfofdl 
TFRETT cPfalT WTT cjffif fast# Wf? mil 3? II 
The entire Dharma deteriorates, affected by 
the traits of the Yuga. It is doubtful whether the 
livelihood (of the people) can be achieved even 
by putting up mental strain, physical exertion or 
prayers. 
Mir^t tttt: h 
i ^TTRt ^ 
In Kali age, the contagious epidemic 
prevailed constantly, hunger and fears 
(predominated). The terrific awe of drought 
(paucity of rains) is there and the vision is 
blurred and rendered perverse. 
T STCM SjTf ^Tfi 
In the world of Kali age, no authenticity of 
the Law Codes survived in every period of 
existence. Some foetus developed (lit. some 
child developed in the embryo) and became 
defunct and even some other one in prime of 
youth lest his life. In Kali Age, the progenies 
became defunct in old age as well as in middle 
state of youth. 
3^d9ic(T$j t y^r-.ii^Mi 
In Kali age, people are unrighteous, 
unmindful of the rules of conduct, fierce in 
anger and deficient in power and splendour. 
They are the false speaking ones. 
famuli 3,lie'll: TT3TRT WTII ^ ^ II 
They are badly cherished, badly tutored, 
bad-conducted ones and study misleading

=== PAGE 435 ===

386 
Vayu-Pur§Qa 
religious scriptures. There are faults in the 
performance of holy rites of Brahmanas. 
fpTT ttrit cranrr xt 
strrt w Rtw 
There erupts awe for the subjects or 
posterities, violence, deceit and likewise spite, 
wrath, heart burning, intolerance and untruth in 
the Kali Age. Living beings become rampant 
and passion and greed (prevail) all over. 
prmt t wti 
R %3TRW: II 
sfiHlrIJI ^6 II 
Exasperation of highest order gets into being 
having attained to the Kali age. Neither Vedas 
are studied nor the Brahmana perform 
sacrifices. Men attain to grief including 
Ksatriyas and Brahmanas or Ksatriyas along 
with the Brahmanas. 
psn grprr: pi 
PRTt? gi# : ii 3 ii 
Sudras (low-born) and degraded persons 
have contact with Brahmanas (high-born) in 
sharing beds, seats and food in Kali age. 
TFJfTR: ?P!#IST: 
pl^ctJi: 'JIRTffra' TP p ilci^rlll *o II 
The Kings are mostly of the Sudra caste, the 
organisers of the heretical sects. The abortion 
dealers among the progenies become abundant 
and progeny gets on that very way. 
O \3 
yrm 5n?nrnxiRT: ^ranmar 
Ayuh (Age), intellect, strength or virility, 
beauty and lineage become truncated or short 
lived. The Sudras take the role of Brahmanas 
and Brahmanas assume the role of Sudras. 
f^jjtwrr^TTgr infer: i 
pn$r R^p^t pr% ifeffeii*:?ii 
The thieves take to the profession of kings 
and the kings assume the role of thieves and at 
the arrival of the end of this aeon, servants are 
bereft of love, friendship and loyalty (to their 
masters). 
fwtt uaiftqiW:| 
Women being of unvirtuous demeanour, free 
from vows or sacraments, fond of wine and 
meat, shall assume the role of swindlers at the 
arrival of the end of the aeon. 
pp fenffe fefefefer pii^ ii 
The ferocity or rapacity of wild beasts, the 
paucity of kine, and the exhaustion of Suave 
beings, one may know (for certain) in the Kali 
age. 
At that time, the excessively fruitful and 
very subtle Dharma becomes difficult of 
acquisition. Having root for charity or begging, 
owing to the laxity of four orders of society and 
stages of life, Dharma gets shaken. 
Then, the Earth, the goddess may become 
such as having fruits mitigated being of a vast 
expunge, and the Sudras shall take of penance 
at the arrival of the end of the aeon. 
pr fenferr araf sfe m RrfP:i 
%cTTCfT cISIIOT TJchp(plfT«ran*V9|| 
A Code of Law practised for a single day in 
(Kali) is equal to that practised for a month in 
Dvapara and a year in Treta Yuga. 
3Ttfapfr Rlfel:! 
RferfRT W^IM<HIUTUII*6II 
The kings never protect the subjects. They 
appropriate their shares in oblations. The kings 
at the end of the Yugas or within the Yugas 
shall happen to be as prone to personal 
safeguard.

=== PAGE 436 ===

Chapter-58 
387 
srapfamsf fg?T: 
w?T %rarTOT:imu 
The kings do not belong to the Ksatriya 
caste, and Vaisyas subsist upon the Sudras. The 
excellent Brahmanas shall be welcomers of the 
Sudras at the end of the aeon. 
sifatzffrr ^?ri 
cfcjT tjiw fn^t:imoii 
And there shall happen wicked recluses 
innumerable in the Kali age. When the god 
(Indra) will rain in an unusual manner, then 
there will happen the dissolution of the 
Universe. 
Osps : II 
eiteroT: trpt1! ^ ^0 
All the commercial tangles shall happen to 
be in this inferior age. The Sudras, the Yatins 
(the ascetics), the penance practisers, the poors, 
the miserables, helpless persons and those 
having lust for the others’ wives or adulterers, 
having paths deranged, shall happen to be in the 
Kali Yuga. In abundant norm, by frauds and 
fraudulent measurements, the articles of trade 
shall be sold by men. 
cipOcE Lr4tiRsiidiih^ii 
The misconducted behaviour by the heretical 
sects, covered all over by futility normed ones, 
scant in males and abundant in females, will be 
there on the arrival of the end of the aeon. 
*<c<i<**i)s»|l4<Jl ■HM^«h:llH^II 
Abundantly begging one, the populace shall 
happen to be in a concordant norm. They are 
the carrion-eating one, scurrile-tongued, 
dishonest and jealous normed. 
^ fR yfacffdl *T sfait cfc&t ^byfrii 
3T7T^f ^ yfflrT rTCFIRI'W R^PJT^II k * II 
And the populace not offering return help 
for the (wing) done, will be disabled as such. 
They shall indulge non-apprehensively in the 
activities causing downfall. That shall be the 
specific characteristic of the (Kali) Age. 
-uvi^r crwm ?rjt ^ ufyuifai 
C\ O Cn 
wnft py thP *nmmi 
•S? -O 
The earth shall be void of good men. It will 
be desolate. And in the countries and towns, 
there will be groups and cliques. 
wrm 
TTTWT^JlwiTCrR: W^r^-raviw^l-.im^ll 
Short in water and fruits, the earth shall 
become scanty. The guardians shall become 
non-guardians and the misruling ones shall 
prevail upon. 
Srfo: fHMRi 
efcWIrllRI ^TSrqfr^TT^Rf5RTT: 
Stealers of others’ gems and draggers or 
abductors of others’ wives, having selves of 
wanton wills, the wicked-souled ones, owing to 
unrighteousness, the ones fond of tenacity or 
violence (shall abound) as such. 
y^rRT T&ft Hfh’^VirW ^fRcb7:l 
O O -O C\ 
(y^r*w fn^im<ju 
The men having consciousness or alertness 
vanished, having crests with curls dishevelled, 
having ages less than sixteen years, shall take 
birth at the end of the aeon. 
W h ^ it 
O nP 1 * 
Having teeth white, senses won over, 
shaven-headed ones, wearing scarlet robes, the 
Sudras shall act the undertakings of Religious 
merits on the arrival of the end of the aeon. 
TTPTcftTT srRwfcr rWT %nRTO#TT: I 
tfUiyUTy gTtfrr ifpk tj-t *ni $ o n

=== PAGE 437 ===

388 
Vayu-Purana 
There will be thieves stealing foodcrops and 
garments. There will be looters robbing other 
robbers and abductors of murderers. 
ftfWfrH VrTl 
yESfauqfa VR-TRII $ ^11 
The world having gone relinquished by 
knowledge as also gone void of professional 
segregation, the worms, rats and snakes shall 
drag away the human beings. 
fefcj ^TTI 
chifvichi: vRrafwfti ^n^vvtaqii $ q n 
Abundant supply of provisions or corns1 or 
food, well-beings, good health or freedom from 
ailments, shall assume paucity. The owls shall 
predominate the areas (lit. countries) tormented 
by hunger and fear. 
^RsTCTfcpgrfHT W W 
cbfa*ji»sfT35IT:ii^|| 
Of those overwhelmed by grieves, the age 
may get prolonged to the extent of a hundred 
yeairs. In Kali Yuga, the Vedas will be seen in 
some places and not seen in some places. 
cWT VyTT: %5PFTT «nWfe:l 
fiftarewr 'aircifwfflr 5115*11 
cmikrnmt v wir tnw§T: vfTvfoFr:ii$qn 
<rar 3r t wph j 
The sacrifices shall assume defunction only 
obsessed by unrighteousness. The scarlet-robed 
ones (Buddhists), the naked mendicants (Jainas) 
and likewise the Kapalikas2 or Saiva 
mendicants, the sellers of the Vedas, the sellers 
of the holy places or fordable spots, as also 
others who are the heretical sects offering 
1. V.S. Apte, p. 607. 
2. The followers of a certain Saiva sect, characterised 
by carrying skulls of men in the form of garlands 
and eating and drinking from them. 
opposition to the dicta of orders of society and 
stages of life, will be bom. That very way at the 
inception of the Kali Age, the Vedas shall not 
be studied and Sudras shall be the expounders 
of spiritual good or Law and political thought. 
*F3R) qpgft&T TF3TR: 
gky f^rr sect vrwq.li 
wroftr ?raT 5T3tt:ih-v9h 
The kings of Sudras breed shall not take to 
the celebration of Asvamedhas (horse- 
sacrifices). Having taken to the brutal murders 
of women and kine and also of mutual 
massacres, the subjects may liquidate each 
other. 
f ThVmh 
TTHTT mTfd 
Owing to the propagation of miseries, the 
people will be short-lived. The demolition of 
the countries and diseased framedness, 
infatuation, fatigue or hatred, and the idea of 
bliss overpowered by the Tamoguna i.e. 
depravity, remain popularised in the Kali Age. 
wr g#t to vftvvii 
t w ^orrq)ll 5 » 
Among the progenies or subjects, the 
abortion or destruction of embryos shall prevail 
along and on that account, in that Age, power or 
strength or virility and form or beauty becomes 
scent-normed, having taken to strife. The 
highest life expectation of men afflicted by 
misery will be a hundred years. 
g#wrsfwiT:l 
T3T V*TT: ^ctcTT £l'4lH%dl:ll V3o || 
The Vedas in entirety are seen or not seen in 
the Kali Age and the Yajnas or sacrificial 
performances go defunct obscured by 
unrighteousness. 
crh gum fsfig vivifa hrcit:i 
W SR? ilftKfftf MRl %RWU:im?||

=== PAGE 438 ===

Chapter-58 
389 
Then within a short span of time, the men 
will attain Siddhi. The fortunate ones, the twice- 
born ones, shall take to piety at the end of the 
aeon. 
snf % i=rwR^Fy«hi:i 
^rrai euf&tfi fpft ^mt 
Those reft of spite who take to the 
performance of religious rites as per enjoinment 
of Vedas and Dharmasastras for a year in Treta, 
it is equal to that for a month in Dvapara Age. 
An intelligent man performing these in Kali 
Age according to his capacity, shall attain the 
same fruit in a day. 
<r Rrata in 
^ ii \a ^ ii 
This is the provision in the Kali Age. You 
may know from me the part of the junction 
(Sandhyamsa). In every age, the 
accomplishments become defunct and dwindle 
by three-fourths. 
On an account of the personal disposition of 
the Yuga, the Sandhyas stay by a quarter and on 
account of the personal disposition of the 
Sandhyas, they stay in their parts by a quarter. 
■qrc? iST^f <T ^llft&l 
fot IRTPfTi ftSRtfe?T:ll^mi 
This way, when the period of junction 
(Sandhyamsa) approaches as pertaining to the 
end of the aeon, a king, the chastiser of the 
wicked people, will be bom after the death of 
Bhrgus. 
tthut t g^pqrcrr ^trt ufafa^ri! 
qWdW <T TTtfTR Wrg%S«ftl|V9$ll 
He will be of the lineage nonn of Moon, or 
by the nomenclature of moon, and termed as 
Pramiti. By the partial incarnation of Madhava, 
he was bom earlier in the Svayambhuva 
Manvantara. 
TTOT: TT Wl: 
3TTxra^ TT t 
For a full span of twenty years, he wandered 
over the earth. He led an army equipped with 
horses, chariots and elephants. 
Caught hold of by Vipras (Brahmanas or 
scholars), hundred fold or thousand fold, he 
then surrounded by them, kills Mlecchas in 
thousands. 
TTORt dd: IIII 
He went everywhere. After killing those 
sprung from the Sudra breed, he then killed in 
absolution1 all the heretical sects. 
die# snf&ET t ST dWdfeRd ^l%:l 
% aTdlfj4)RH:ll<io|| 
And those who were not religious by any 
means, he killed them in absolution. He killed 
those bom of mixed castes as well as those who 
depended on them. 
ari 
dsrr c 
dJ# diRwidw wi 
yRj 
^vhlchH^r cbausl at snaWtll^ll 
He killed the Northerners, of the Central 
provinces, the Mountaineers, likewise the 
Eastern ones and western ones, the dwellers of 
Vindhya and Aparanta i.e. of Kankana 
countries. And likewise he killed the 
Southerners, the Dravidas, along with those of 
Simhala country, Gandharas, Paradas, Pahlavas, 
Yavanas, Tusaras, Barbaras, Clnas, Sulikas, 
Daradas, Khasas, Larhpakas, Ketas and the 
Kiratas, the tribal ones. 
1. In verse 80, pada 4. is printed as

=== PAGE 439 ===

390 
Vayu-Purana 
STfRi: ■y<%iRr tram ^r§srTmiu-*ii 
Setting his wheel (of religious victory) in 
motion, the mighty one, the liquidator of the 
Mlecchas, the powerful one, unrepressible for 
all the beings, roamed about on the earth. 
■qracTW ftTW ft 
He was born by the partial incarnation of 
Madhava i.e. Visnu, the god. He became known 
as Pramiti, the prowessed one, specifically by 
those having knowledge of the law of 
primogeniture. 
Tft^Txr ft y-sufl: trft gftwr ot:i 
c\ o o 
■gFftftssgftft eft 3ranft fft?ifft w:ii c 3 ii 
ftftftvrai g ^ e&ftoiTi 
tlTWftfuftl ^mTSScbfwdR tfll <S^|| 
He was of the lineage of the lunar race in the 
primeval Kali Yuga. When he was thirty-two 
(he started his victorious march). For twenty 
years, he continued to slay men and other living 
beings in thousands. He rendered the earth reft 
of virility in entirety or as one having virility 
survived by a mutual cause and sudden wrath. 
WfftelT ^>4'HI4ITdVIWMyir4chNJ 
f%T TJM: 
That one having tackled the Vr§alas, 
normally those one as irreligious beings, 
attained to solidarity along with the associates 
in the middle of Ganga and Yamuna. 
<ftt sftft ftwsr 3Twr wtftftfti 
o 
•irwia ii c u 
rft Wiw shift Wrt H fmftftl 
fftRTT^qraftrgrcr swifts ^ o 
ft ftftftgrcfl f^?T:i 
OTftftft THIClft hCWRII ^ ^11 
When he thus passed away along with his 
ministers and faithful soldiers, after extirpating 
all the kings along with Mlecchas in entirety all 
over in thousands, when the period of the part 
of Sandhya arrived at the end of the Yuga, and 
when only a few of the progenies survived only 
to a little extent here and there, the unchecked 
people became active in the world in groups. 
They kill each other and disintegrate mutually. 
3TTFS&; wifftfti 
wrorr: ftrRt: W: 
The apprehension of anarchy having come 
to the fore, as per exigency of the Yuga, all the 
subjects, then became distraught by mutual 
terrors. 
snfcT® ftftlRnWksll cfTTPJfTfar rTI 
fwwtT: ^3:%rTT:ll^ 
Thoroughly disturbed and ennuied, having 
abandoned spouses and abodes, taking recourse 
to the security of their lives, void of 
complaisance, they became highly aggrieved. 
ft? Sift Tift tRWPWI 
fftfaftl fall'll ftftgr ftrmtTT:il<^ll 
When the Law based on the Vedas and 
Smrtis became oblivious, people killed one 
another devoid of the bounds of decency, 
affection, friendship or shame. 
ft? siftfRi pcichr: vrchi: i 
ft<3T efTTtgj pfer 
Their span of life dwindled to twenty-five 
years. They became short-sized. They 
abandoned their wives and sons, having senses 
dazed by anguish. 
%3TT ^^|f 
Distracted by draughts and scanty rain, they 
were forced to abandon cultivation. Being 
utterly miserable, they took leave of their own 
Janapadas and lived in the frontier.

=== PAGE 440 ===

Chapter-58 
391 
C-v 
^§:fi=RTT:ii-^ii 
They began to resort to streams, oceans, 
marshes and the mountains. They subsisted 
upon honey, meat, bulbous roots and fruits and 
passed their time quite miserably. 
dHdtenfddgn fttcraT RwRudi: i 
T: TO ^R£lifedT:ii<?<iii 
Wearing cloaks of wrapper and antelope 
hides, reft of straps and spouses, fallen astray 
from the domain of orders of society and stages 
of life, they attuned to horrible intermixture of 
breeds. 
T^TT diTOWdyiidl 31<r»WI: FflTWTI 
^TiHjTRj^snfgiT u 
Gone over to such an extent of misery where 
progenies survived to a scanty norm, they were 
overwhelmed by hunger, disease, old age, and 
attained to grief and disgust. 
faciWJi 5 r^Kun-di 
muiMwm mte: 
?oo|| 
From disgust gets generated thoughtfulness 
and from thoughtfulness comes off the state of 
equanimity. From equanimity comes off 
wakefulness * and from wakefulness comes off 
adherence to law or duty. 
rn^WTOETCT <3#rfWT^ t TOPTI 
MT rTTOT 3 TfRcfiftii ^|| 
When those subjects surviving at the end of 
Kali Age are thus enlightened, in a single day 
and night the Yuga is transformed. 
cTTOt TOT f Ml 
^ cWMd: <£dWdll ? || 
After inducing the infatuation of heart, the 
activity or Krta Age sets in due to the seventh 
one from them (?) under force of impending 
objectives. 
1. is an error for I 
JJfrt <T MdWR-mdd: fifTOt <T tl 
MraT: trihmtii 3 n 
When Krtayuga begins to function again, the 
few subjects surviving from Kaliyuga become 
the subjects of Krtayuga. 
its ^ fegj: ^fiT RroRd 
■H<l W ci|c<Rjydl:ll ^|| 
Those Siddhas who stand move about and 
are clearly seen. The Seven Sages also continue 
to remain established there. 
sRRprdVI: if -^dT 
djfdT^: ^ ^ ^ RfRJylmw<;i5Sig^|| || 
Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras 
who remained well-known for the purpose of 
procreation, all those assume a non-distinction 
from those who are bom of Kali. 
ctaT w<r$m srtf ^i 
o 
: vfa: widf fgHTT W ^rli^o^n 
The Seven Sages ordain them and the others 
too in the two types of Dhanna prescribed by 
Srutis and Smrtis as well as in the conduct 
pertaining to the castes and stages of life. 
fdMeRd t W. #1 
«ftrT: fidldt f srtf: <MUif5d(fvtrl: 11 ^o\s|| 
Then in the Krta (Yuga), (all the progenies 
or subjects) take to the act of virtuosity. The 
duty or law based on Vedas and Dharmasastras 
enjoined by the seven sages is one of those 
hailing from the Krta (Yuga). 
rTTO qferosnsf fdy^lSS'fdS^PfTrfl 
M*d*d<lfacbi^ fdsRd ^11 c II 
Among them for the sake of establishment 
of Dharma, the Sages remain in authority over 
the whole of Manvantara and stay on (live) to 
the end of the Yuga. 
w dic!yd% pife? dxr ^rfn 
MRT wi ^ <T WT:ll ^o<*|| 
craT <*UdMWi ?T cbidT^felS Wf:l

=== PAGE 441 ===

392 
Vayu-Puraga 
■qcf MiWH.ii 
^oMc)T^ciiaTc)^-c|<R^:ll ^O II 
Just as fresh regenerations take place from 
the roots of grasses that are burnt during the 
summer in the forest-fire, in the similar manner, 
the new Yuga grows out of the old Yuga. This 
way from Yuga to Yuga, these ensures the 
development in a mutual combination and 
continues the continuity till the dissolution of 
the Manvantara. 
■gJfoctaift ^rfoT p 
Bliss, beauty, force or strength, form, the 
spiritual good, material gains and also lust, all 
these abide or get assuaged during Yugas, the 
triad or such as per said order of the Yugas. 
wit 
The accomplishments of the Law of Yugas 
become defunct during the parts of the 
conjunctions. This way, O Brahmanas, the 
Pratisandhi (the period of transition between 
Yugas) has been narrated to you. 
(utt) J^farnddd ywRMi 
3TtrT> TI%J cTTefift T^iTTI 
^rst^rat 'w-ww^idji ^*11 
By means of this alone should all the sets of 
four Yugas be known. When the set of four 
Yugas repeats a thousand times, it is the day of 
god Brahma. His night is also of the same 
duration. Herein the rectitude and the insensate 
norm of the beings continues till the end of the 
aeon. 
jj WRT r^TCTT TJJW 
TTitf tJf^TTRT OUT) <T WTT 
MfrfHI <T ■R^RTTR^II mil 
This much verily, has been known as the 
definition of all the Yugas. Seventy-one cycles 
of the sets of four Yugas occurring successively 
constitute a Manvantara. 
wft WSpRTI 
W *TT% 'Rcffa W3FWII W II 
In a single set of four Yugas, everything 
happens as per traditional hearing. In the other 
sets of four Yugas also the same thing happens 
in the same order. 
^ W ^ <TI 
s9 
M^PdVRMRfMdl T WfT RlfenWII ^\9II 
In every sarga or creation, the variations or 
differences that occur are confined to twenty- 
five, neither less nor more. 
W chrWl: 1TW wfo W^mTT:l 
5 Fr^niHii mu 
Likewise along with the Kalpa, Yugas 
become of the similar pre-requisites. This 
verily, is the definition of all the Manvantaras. 
W WHT uRe^nlft 
Ruy^difd fiwmi 
W R ^fdyfd did'Hlcfi: 
^RTIddlW qRcT^'iTH: 11 ^<?|| 
So also the transitions of the Yugas occur 
naturally. They are eternal as well. But the 
living beings that undergo modifications in the 
form of dissolution and re-creation cannot be 
permanent. 
JTtrE WRT $ WR?T:I 
3ld1dHdlclMi % ^?o|| 
This way has been illustrated the 
characteristics of Yugas in brief, of those gone 
by and those not yet come, during the 
Manvantaras. 
3MRrlg Tgw gjFTf fWRrTTI 
TOlf 3^cTRFIrtfe?ll ^ ^11 
In case of those not yet dawned, a 
deliberation deserves to be done, by the experts 
in the Manvantaras gone by and those not yet 
dawned.

=== PAGE 442 ===

Chapter-59 
ownaif^r ferRte* gjRt cfiefo cte %ii w ? 
In the Manvantaras whether of the past or of 
the future, know that the Manvantaras shall be 
explained by the present one; one Kalpa is 
explained by explaining another, 
•o 
irgfgsiT % xj trrt^srt: u ^ ? 11 
By the name and framework of this one, do 
become endowed with honour or pride, the gods 
of eight types that exist being the Lords of 
Manvantaras. 
*Rc£gfcr ^ <piT: 
P-t gtJifenrnnt w spt ^tn ^*11 
The sages and Manus are all equal in matter 
of purposes. This wray the distribution of the 
orders of society and stages of life stands 
(tenable) in every Age. 
mt ferf ^ ^ 5nj: i 
fprft ypirugiiii^qii 
As per disposition of the Yugas, the Lord 
makes a provision, perennially, for the 
distribution of the orders of society and the 
stages of life, the Ages for the accomplishment 
of the functions, in the respective Ages. 
r^WUHSSjq^rf ri fpafiT cj$ mu 
The sequential norm has been expatiated 
upon. Now you learn about the creation of the 
world. In details as per descending order, I shall 
talk of the situation within the Yugas. 
HwiyWisiU&rm: ii q iii 
* * *

=== PAGE 443 ===

: II 
Chapter 59 
The observation on the ideologies of the 
Divine Human Beings 
'UI'W '3TRr% H'JlI'WI ^ ftafttlWI 
smrft ^rtTf^fru 
xi wf^rrat ^rra^r 41fawii 
Suta spoke- The progenies that take birth in 
the Yugas, you may locate them (list, 
understand those). I shall mention in which 
Yugas demons, serpents, cattles, birds, Pisacas, 
Yaksas and Raksasas are bom and how long 
they live. 
*j$rn$rau?mT:i 
^11 ^ II 
Pisacas, Asuras, Gandharvas, Yaksas, 
Raksasas and Pannagas (the Nagas), live to the 
span of a Yuga without death and murder. 
tRGjTOTt g vri^tnff wrat: 
'9ft55RT wrifa ^T:ll^ll 
The span of life of human beings, animals, 
birds and immobile beings varies everywhere in 
accordance with the traits of the Yuga. 
^rt ^gr: 
W cFJrfr 
The instability stands observed in the Kali 
Age, of the beings as well as of the vegetation. 
The maximum life expectation of human beings 
in this Yuga is a hundred years.

=== PAGE 444 ===

394 
Vayu-Purana 
In Kali age, the extent of the gods and 
demons is one hundred and fifty-eight Angulas. 
In human beings, the height is gradually 
reduced by seven times seven Angulas from that 
of Devas and Asuras. It is remembered that by 
the personal extent of Angulas upto the extent 
of head down to the feet, this way this is the 
elevation of the human norm which becomes 
subtract of further at the end of the aeon. 
^RjpnrcRR huhtr: rjht htmuii 
In all the Yuga’s spans or tenures of the 
gone byes and the advancing ones, the man has 
the height of eight spans (Talas i.e. Vitasti1) 
measuring with his own fingers. 
httrhht rrR h hcthtri R:i 
r rhihii ^ n 
He who is nine Talas in height from foot to 
head with arms extending upto the knees when 
they are close together, is adored even by 
Devas. 
RiR R)|| || 
Of cows, horses, tuskers, buffaloes and 
immobile beings, their height varies as follows 
in every Yuga. 
: RnR ch 
SlfRTgRd VujqrfR: ^frtTTt RJH;|| ^11 
The hump of bull has an elevation of 76 
Angulas i.e, 57 inches, and that of an elephant is 
full hundred and eight Angulas known as such. 
WRTH ?HTHt R Hr&T: RTfeHT T^H: It WII 
The height of horses is fifty Angulas and 
that of trees is a thousand Angelas less by forty 
Angulas (i.e. nine hundred sixty). 
fercn 
1. The distance between the tips of the little finger and 
the thumb when both are extended. 
^RT Ht^^TRTII ^ II 
The structure of the physique of a human 
being is of that norm and the one having marks 
of the same type is discernible (even) of gods 
by an examination of the factual points. 
a«8?JISfci¥l*I^Th R c(HMI 
-qm araguftu 
By intelligence endowed with extraordinary 
faculty, the physique of gods stands determined. 
And non-extraordinary one from that of the 
gods, is determined the body of human beings. 
i uftsKRfi ^rrar % Rowi-tr:! 
RRTT q%RT RH RtlcRIUli RcfRHlI ^ II 
Thus the life of gods and human beings has 
been explained. Now you may understand the 
(physiology) of animals, birds and the immobile 
beings accordingly. 
HIRT |3RT -qffErtSJgr ?Rr: RsRJTT HR: I 
ShfcR: yQKtTfw* RcRr:ll ^ll 
The kine, the goats, the buffaloes, the 
horses, the elephants, the birds and the serpents, 
are all having utility for this sacrificial 
performance all over. 
RHH) H^TT HR H HH:l 
RR?raRRlrnrc<| ^htr ^TORfc:ii 
In the abodes of gods, they take rebirth once 
again having the same form. They, of 
auspicious forms, are such as can be enjoyed by 
the Devas as they pleased. 
HR Trcmfl: wioMfRi 
jyRsi-h ^RR^ii 
By the forms and adaptability of the 
measurements of those, having static or 
dynamic forms, the charming ones and realisers 
of the actual ideologies, they become blissful. 
3R: RigRra^nfir rh: rRrpIh ri 
rRR WR: RsHWHt t RHRRTII 
RBp? gRMTJHTH cR RR: R3RHII II

=== PAGE 445 ===

Chapter-59 
395 
Now, I shall expose the Sistas (the 
sophisticated people) constituting Sat-s and 
Sadhus (saints). The word 'sat ’ indicates 
Brahman. Those who posses it, are called 
santas due to their similarity with Brahman. 
^ c^kui 
R SjSlftT R fctdlcMH^ cl II ^ o || 
Those who are neither infuriated nor elated 
in regard to the tenfold object of senses and 
eight types of causes of bondage, are called 
Jitatmans (who are self-controlled). 
TrmRPf w sr% risn Ififs&jj gi 
In laws of normal sorties and likewise in 
those of specific connotations or implications, 
those including Brahmanas, Ksatriyas and 
Vaisyas- they are declared as the twice-born 
ones. 
•O O 
spfer TT 3=5JRtll ^ ? 11 
The understanding of the laws enunciated in 
Vedic texts and the trespasses on codes of Law 
by the different castes in their different stages of 
life and leading to salvation is called Real 
Dharma. 
feral *it: TnsHirHif§J^i€rr<f RTlff^:i 
feWJTT TJpSI: ■^TTprq^ll ^11 
A Brahmacarin acting in co-ordination with 
his preceptor is an ascetic because he amasses 
learning. A householder is an ascetic because he 
accomplishes holy rites. 
TIRRFTWr5TU% TTTy^MB : Tfrt: I 
ydMidl WRT?tii 
By the medium of austerity in the forest, a 
saint is called Vaikhanasa. And the persevering 
one is defined as Yati, the controlled one, the 
saintly being, becomes so by the medium of 
Yoga i.e. mental concentration. 
Tj^rorwifaTT WRi^rm: TpT:i 
tjswt ^ ir mi 
Thus, the religious student, the house¬ 
holder, the forest-dwelling hermit and the 
recluse- all these are called Sadhus because 
they perform the As'rama Dharmas (duties of 
their stage of life). 
fa^tmii^ll 
Neither gods nor manes, neither sages nor 
human beings do speculate upon being of 
philosophy of varied norms- “This is Dharma”, 
“This is not”. 
trtofr yKi&fl f^nrR^ri 
qnfonffefd T#IRV9|| 
The Law (Dharma) and Illegal activity 
(these two) have been enunciated here. A 
righteous and an unrighteous act are known as 
Dharma and Adharma respectively. 
(WTOTT Mc&$d:i 
^ #ezrii ?6ii 
Dharana (i.e. a conviction), and Dhrti (a 
bearing or forbearance or fortitude), this way by 
the signification of the root (Vd/zr), the word 
Dharma becomes derived. If Dharma does not 
sustain or if it is not conducive to greatness it is 
Adharma. 
3^yHIM<*) spf 3TTraffolf^q%)| 
<pgT -gmlgmsN ^i<«i«*i:ii 
Herein, Dharma is that which is an 
instrument of attainment of the cherished 
resolve being etymologised (lit. instructed or 
ordained) by the Acaryas. Old persons, free 
from greed or non-greedy ones, self-contained, 
honest (free from deceit), non-cheaters, properly 
disciplined and straightforward ones, to such 
(person) they call as Acaryas (Preceptors). 
Jk|4pw-W 414-MKMK WRIrrfRI 
A preceptor practises those principles 
himself; he establishes a code of good conduct;

=== PAGE 446 ===

396 
Vayu-Purana 
he (even) gathers together the meanings of 
scriptures and consolidates the material gains by 
restraints and legal legacies. 
C\ -o *\ 
Having made to be assimilated by the 
hereditary traditional knowledge (inherited) 
from the ancestors, the Srauta or Vedic lore, the 
Seven Sages expounded the hymns of Rgveda, 
the formulas of Yajurveda, the psalms of 
Samaveda and the auxiliary lores of Vedas. 
rfWrWI^: T*T?Tt SHT? II 3 ^ II 
Having recapitulate the way of action of the 
Manvantara gone bye, (the intellectual) once 
again sung forth on that account the Smarta 
Dharma (the dictum of the law codes). It refers 
to different castes and stages of life. 
'ST THT fgfelt fyiyMH I 
ymyKifeiy ?f?r fyiywH: 3311 
The twofold Law here is termed as 
“Sistacara” i.e. the circumabiative 
circumspective way of life of the sophisticated 
elite. The word Sista gets derived from the word 
Sesa (the remainder or segregated one), 
whereby the (word) Sistacara becomes 
enunciated as the conduct of life for those who 
remain (i.e. survived the Manvantara). 
trrRxj % Iwt ?? 
TR: wMNj Rr<*^dH*T7U||dl| 
srofcf ^ ^ xjsjrszt Tra#n it 
The righteous persons who survive after a 
Manvantara are Manu and the Seven Sages. 
Owing to the purpose of propagation of the 
lineages and for the purpose of spiritual good, 
they survived as such. As per propriety of the 
derivation, they became popular as the Sistas. 
% f^nzT % wn 5mj<iRdi:i 
h ryrjjwRdl wft: TPSFra ^rtii 9 mi 
And Manu and others who happened to be 
the exceptionally talented ones, have been 
illustrated earlier. That which has been practised 
regularly in every Yuga by those Sistas (shall be 
known as Sistacara). 
^ xr: tr;i 
S3 O S3 
ir4dd^r5Ei fviyiTjrc ir?nw:ii^ii 
The study of Tray! (the triad of Vedas), 
Varta (Economics, Agriculture and Animal 
husbandry), Danda-nlti (administration of 
justice and government), Ijya (sacrificial ritual), 
the duties of the orders of society and 
jurisdiction of the stages of life, are adhered to 
perennially by the Sistas or law givers such as 
Manu and the likewise. That Sistacara is 
eternal. 
c^FT TtcU ftrtTHnTFjFft S^TTI 
3T# diRr ^Rsnfor fviyran^j 
Charity, truth, penance, lack of greed, 
education, sacrifice, impregnation and 
compassion- these eight are characteristic 
Sistdcaras. 
%ET TR: ■HidtJ'Oa- ^1 
M^-dlM ^5 fyrywKWd: ^r:ii^^n 
Since the Sistas (survivors), Manu and the 
Seven Sages, practise this in all the 
Manvantaras, it is declaimed as Sistacara. 
f^feT: ^c|U||r0\d: S^UcTl 
STR: WHf guifepqRTeB:li 
That which is heard (i.e. refers to Srutis) 
shall be known as Srauta (Dharma); that which 
is remembered (i.e. refers to Smrtis) is called 
Smarta (Dharma). Srauta comprises of having 
sou! for sacrificial performances and Smarta has 
soul for the orders of society and stages of life. 
In every aspect, shall I declare the dicta of law 
as such herein.

=== PAGE 447 ===

Chapter-59 
397 
^gT THTdRsf Tt: YST ^ R 
W SI'HWIgRR ^drWrUcH^Uimi'Uo II 
After realising and on being asked about it 
(if) a person does not conceal facts and states 
them in proper sequence (as they occurred), it is 
the characteristic (sign of) Satya (truthfulness). 
uratf ft* rui?K^ci xu 
^ftHrTlft RR Mt d^WId^ll^ll 
Celibacy, muttering of chants, quietude and 
abstinence from food and sense objects or 
continence- these are the roots of penance, 
well-sustained and difficult of procurement. 
rajrct mri 
wfcm tfqwnt €7 Tiftft w Rsftiu?ii 
The sacrificial animals, mundane articles or 
riches, greasy substances, the RJc, Saman and 
Yajur Mantras, the priests officiating at the 
sacrifices (the four chief Rtviks) and the 
sacrificial gifts- the collection of all these 
constitutes Yajiia. 
RT ^1 
RRT RRift ftg: <$rFTT RRT T^RTII^II 
The vision that all living beings are one’s 
own self, looking towards friends and enemies 
without any partiality, is called Dayd (sympathy 
or mercy). 
craft RTss^hivrai r ftft rii 
RTfRtRftfo: ^1^111**11 
One who does not strike back or counter¬ 
rebuke when struck or rebuked, such a restraint 
in thought, speech, action and forgiveness is 
called endurance. 
Refraining from taking other man’s 
belongings not being guarded by the master, or 
deserted, is termed here as non-covetousness. 
%RWRRTRm U^RIdtrcfi'RTRRI 
ddftst 3R R^ftfll II 
The abstinence from coition, complete 
sexual detachment, neither brooding nor 
imagining about it, is called celibacy 
(Brahmacarya). 
OTrtrrsf cjt trrft rt h 
R fftRT I ?TR^RR RtS^II^II 
For the sake of self or for the sake of others, 
(if) the senses assume an existence and do not 
act in fallacious way, this verily, is the sign of 
quiescence or restraint. 
<yiicM^> ft fftft cfinft cngR^ftri 
R BfiftrT Jfftw: R fftncRT fftmftfll *6II 
O \3 
He who does not get infuriated when 
thwarted in the ten-fold sensual object and in 
the eight causes of worldly bondage is 
considered a conqueror. 
RsrftgRR sft RnftrftFft ^ rri 
Whichever is the material of utmost liking 
and that one has come closer by logical 
sequence, that same deserves to be gifted to a 
merited one. This verily, constitutes the 
definition of Dana or charity or munificence. 
RTR ftftftftft^ft%%RKIRRI 
RR ftcj ftRg wftftgftn 
ftftrrw RRran h o n 
Cs S3 S3 OO 
The endowment or charity is triple-moded 
one- the lowest one, the highest one and the 
medium ordered one. That which leads to 
liberation (from worldly ocean) is of the highest 
type; that which is given for the achievement of 
one’s selfish ends is the lowest; and that which 
is given to all beings out of pity or their proper 
sharing with the kins is the medium ordered 
one. 
ftrftft «ift gftftRiRiRJ: i 
sft: iimii 
That which is enjoined by the Vedas and 
Dharmasastras, that which adheres to the law of

=== PAGE 448 ===

398 
Vayu-Puraija 
the orders of society and stages of life, that 
which is not antagonistic to the people of the 
sophisticated demeanour (Sistas) and that which 
arises from contact with the saintly and the 
good, is Dharma. 
Non-antipathy, i.e. sympathy unto those 
unagreeable and well coming of the agreeable, 
the aversion from alacrity, hot temper and grief 
is called detachment. 
TRTTTT: cb4ui) 
cb^igiVictHi ^ FJFT 
Renunciation, the allocation of business 
performed or intended to be performed, 
abandonment of what is good and what is not 
good, is called Tyaga. 
The specific understanding of non-alertness 
in alertness, in this insensate norm having 
transformations and specifications, having 
beginning in the unspecified, is called Jhana or 
knowledge. 
Of the individual pre-requisites of moral 
Code or Law, this definition stands confirmed 
by sages having knowledge of the reality of 
moral codes, in the earlier Svayambhuva 
Manvantara. 
m eft cidfyujTfq Mifew ^:i 
ScAruquta ff | 
Here I shall bring to initiation the procedure 
of the Manvantara and the manner among the 
people of one caste with the members of the 
other castes and among themselves. In every 
Manvantara, the Vedic tradition assumes a 
different norm. 
3nwfwrawfa ^ ^ ii 
mr victim fill 
The hymns of Rk, Yajus and Saman remain 
the same in respect of the deities as before. In 
spite of the dissolution of elements, 
Satarudriya, the course of sacrificial offerings 
as well as various praise become in vogue as in 
earlier times. 
fjwwU €rii 
rim<su 
The Stotras are of four types- Dravya-stotra 
(prayer for sacrificial material); Gunastotra or 
the eulogium of merits; Karma-stotra (eulogy 
of proper rites), and the fourth is the eulogy of 
Abhijanas (lineage). 
Tf^r wn srgfcr h 
T?cT WjTOHT rT Wqfa-3gfcRITII II 
In all the Manvantaras, Brahma initiates the 
four types of Stotras in regard to Devas even as 
they come into being. This very way the origin 
of the merits of the Mantras or Vedic hymn is of 
four-fold norm. 
3W3WTT TTTCTT ^ycP^cFl 
jpfan cTjqdTMii ^rrn^smTii ^ o n 
fm: 
^RdtMl^ill^^ryOl^cblSI TJ^TTH ^ 
^mt ^ n 
As the seers perform austere penance of 
terrific norm, the formulas of different Vedas, 
Atharva, Rk, Yajur and Saman, appear before 
them differently in the same manner as in the 
previous Manvantaras. The Mantras took 
provenance herein- the Mantras bom of satiety, 
out of fright, out of grief, out of happiness and 
out of grief, being five fold in norm. Now I 
shall dilate upon the austerity entirely in light of

=== PAGE 449 ===

Chapter-59 
399 
the visual perception and voluntary exulerations 
and the Rsitva (the state of being a Rsi) of sages 
along with their characteristics. 
^nfir infer ot $311 
Among the gone bye and those not yet 
come, the sages are said to be of five types. 
Hence I shall recount the origin of the sages and 
of Arsa. 
jjururtit 
<r ^Rmfnfe fetfeni^ii 
frr rT^fe llfilfSrWII ^ k II 
When the Gunas became in balance, there 
was the destruction of everything. There were 
no Gods anywhere. As if due to their 
assimilation (atidesa) that (Pradhana) 
unintelligently functions for the sake of Cetana 
(the conscious one). Thereby it preside over by 
Cetana (the conscious principle) without its 
mindfulness. 
^rMTMgVf TpOTOTOTII ^ ^ II 
Both of them function like the fish and the 
water. The Tattva (Pradhana) presided over by 
consciousness (the conscious Purusa) becomes 
in vogue endowed with Gunas. 
chK^Ircnrl^l ^ rTRT W<^\ 
STII^II 
By virtue of the source, the undertaking 
becomes tenable. The object functions due to 
the subject. The Artha (meaning) functions due 
to its meaningfulness (state of possessing 
meaning). 
cKlfe OTwfe cKT^lTrfTcST: I 
-rfe&fe rTlT sjrET: fent tmr3^:n^<iii 
By the time fit to be adhered to, there ensue 
the differences or variations or schisms or 
dissentions. They become explicitly manifest in 
due course as Mahat and other principles. 
grnf n 
Tlfie Cosmic Egoism is evolved from Mahat 
and from Ego, the (Subtle) elements. The 
different elements are evolved due to mutual 
interaction. The cause immediately transforms 
(itself) into action. 
cTSFT ffefT: ^T: cfifeT||\9o|| 
The way a meteor or a fire-brand, falling 
down, spreads its sparks all round 
simultaneously, so also the conscious Principle 
(Ksetrajna) that transforms itself due to the 
action of Time manifests himself. 
lata: WOT W<$¥±k\l 
cW facj-rtl ^|ci)Tt>lc^slalrl ^ rnc^OT:IIV9^|| 
Just as in dark a glow-worm becomes visible 
quite suddenly, that very way Mahat is evolved 
out of the unmanifest and shines like a glow¬ 
worm. 
ot WRfefer -gferr 
rffe fdgl^n^HHiqU fw:ii\3?n 
The Principle of Consciouness stays at the 
entrance to the great chamber where the 
embodied principle Mahat stays, 
rTOTT; fe 
rife ufwd) 
ffr:II^H 
The stupendous one, Mahat is beyond the 
gloom and becomes congnizable owing to its 
specific marks or extraordinary stature. The 
Sruti says, “The conscious Principle, the 
knower, stays there itself at the end of 
darkness”. 
cffigffefeRW 'OTTffel 
?TR fefefej ildy'AIOTI WII 
As it (Mahat) was transforming, Buddhi 
(Intellect) manifested itself in four ways viz. 
Jhcina (perfect knowledge), Vairagya

=== PAGE 450 ===

400 
Vayu-Purana 
(detachment), Ais'varya (supremacy) and 
Dharma (piety or legal code). 
-MHdlcfitfH rTPI ti 
These verily, are such as having 
accomplishments ensured and having the nice 
appearances of that one. It is called Siddhi 
(Evolute) as it is effected through the 
transformation of embodied Mahat. 
3T? '^Icf rT 
to: ^rRTrprg^iiva^ii 
He (Purusa) stays in the body (Pur) and 
possesses the knowledge of the body. He is 
called Puru$a as he dwells in the Pur (body), 
and is called Ksetrajha due to his knowledge of 
the body. 
^T: | 
*rc*n§33TS3 ^ f dwiglyirMch: tt tn 
ttfrrRT SfrEToqWT^WTlI'a^ll 
Ksetrajha, the one having knowledge of the 
locality or a husbands man is so called because 
of his understanding of the nature of the body 
(ksetra). The adorable one (Lord) is called Mati. 
Since he abides with Buddhi (Intellect), he is of 
the nature of knowledge (.Bodha). For the 
accomplishment (of task of the world?) this 
non-intelligent entity, both manifest and 
unmainfest, is pervaded (by the Intelligent 
Principle). 
Tier ftffrr: 
8T#t sTfarrs^r 11 
This way the conscious principle dissociates 
itself from the objects of sense-organs. It is this 
very principle that cognizes the objects as 
worthy of being enjoyed. 
snrT: TTHT 
o -o 
The root ^rs means ‘to go’. It refers to the 
Vedas, truthfulness and penance. He who is 
devoted to these three and attains Brahman is 
called 'Rsi\ 
Tt ft VFl:\\6o\\ 
A Parama-rsi is a kind of Rsi who attains 
the knowledge of the great unmanifest principle 
and abstains from worldly attachment 
simultaneously. 
HTWr ^j^tTTTTRT^r ^rTT ^rTTII 
#TT: TTRTTT srilUT: TTHT:II <* ?ll 
The name Rsi has been derived from the root 
Vrv meaning ‘to go’. The derivation becomes 
logical from onomatopoeia. Since the mental 
sons of Brahma are self-born, they are Isvaras 
(endowed with spiritual power). 
W1S TTI^PTfTTRT: TTT:I 
(WTS^H % jftTT TTcRTT II 
Whereby the one is not struck down by 
measurements, for him the word Mahan (great) 
gets derived as the primeval one. Those who 
attain the Great Principle by means of attributes 
are called Maharsis. They become well-known 
as the ones maintaining balance of minds.1 
jftr&T w#:) 
fyrruTt htcttt hi 
3TP&TT rPTgto rOcRefT rf ^cfarTT 
Those sages are the gods, the auspicious 
ones, the mind-bom ones and the ones uterine 
as such. Having taken leave of egoism or pride 
as also ignorance or morbid tendency, they have 
attained to the state of Rsis. 
FTWTtT WTRT t 
jTftPpTT 
On that account those who have a real 
insight and knowledge of the Bhutadi (Cosmic 
Ego) are called Rsis (Sages). The sons of Rsis 
(Sages) who are bom of womb through sexual 
intercourse are called Rsikas. 
1. In Vayu Purana verse 82, the root rs is 
Parasmaepada i.e. I

=== PAGE 451 ===

Chapter-59 
401 
VMiisifiii h yirm: i 
■yidthwa'^ ^ WIT: WI^RTnumi 
Those (spiritually) powerful ones realize the 
Tanmatras (subtle elements) and Satya (the 
truth). The Seven Sages, the lofty ones, 
therefore, are the anticipators of truth or 
existence. 
safari r( wwf ri fgftar i 
sprf^fr ^ wsz:\\ 
qfi^icTii c ^ u 
The sons of the R§is deserve to be 
recognised as Rsiputras. Because that have 
attained Vedic learning and the mastery of the 
principles in the real sense of interpretative 
norm, they are called Srutarsis. They are keen 
observers of the true wisdom. 
aioiltUIrm MfjlcMI TllgeBUIrHI rf&cT Wl 
^TrUT rl WRWJ^II 
They are of five classes. Their names are- 
Avyaktatma, Mahatma, Aharhkdratma, Bhutdma 
and Indriyatma, They practise five kinds of 
learnings. Listen to the five classes of sages by 
their names. 
3lfflT: 3hT:I 
iqc&fr WTR^Slw ft ^TII 
Sf^iuft MIWI 1RT T^rTT: WHll8RT:lld<ill 
Bhrgu, Marlci, Atri, Ahgiras, Pulaha, Kratu, 
Manu, Dak§a, Vasistha and Pulastya- are the 
ten powerful lords, self-bom as the mental sons 
of Brahma. As they are bom of the sage and are 
hence (spiritually great), they are called 
Maharsis. Know the names of the sages who 
were the sons of these great sages {Maharsis). 
3TToqt ch^^VRIWTTI 
<*$M\ felon: SRT:l 
3fer jgfet *rar:ii<?*n 
Kavya, Brhaspati, Kasyapa, Usanas, 
Utathya, Vamadeva, Ayojya, Ausija, Kardama, 
Visravas, Sakti, Balakhilya and Dhara- this 
way stand illustrated these sages (R$is), those 
who attained to sagehood by their knowledge. 
^rTlft *111 % ? II 
Tirster aHi^cuafllwwiu 
^fM^dHlsN ? ii 
cmmr: wfaw mFnmwmu 
ctffcr: yi$m£cr tfstt 
yj-ddift ^n^ftRTT TnaTrii 
You may learn about the sons of Rsis, 
Rsikas, bom of wombs. Vatsara, Nagnahu, 
Bharadvaja, Brhaduttha, Saradvan, Agastya, 
Ausija, Dlrghatamas, Brhaduktha, Saradvata, 
Vajasravas, Suvitta, Suvak, Vesaparayana, 
Dadhica, Sankhaman and king Vaisravana- this 
way stand illustrated these Rsikas. They 
attained to the non-defilement of truth. 
fsnrr sgftrajsN ft *rrft ft 
T$t ^ mi 
Isvaras, Rsikas and other seers are the 
compeers of Mantras. They are thoroughly 
eulogised ones and you may know these as 
well. 
spj: cRosi: yft'diw zptit 
aftswr irCTgj 41d?oa: 
ftai: 
lJ<*)dfftyiR<ftd WIT WraTf^T:lt<?t9l| 
Bhrgu, Kavya, Pracetas, Dadhica, Atmavan, 
Aurva, Jamadagni, Vida, Sarasvata, Advi$ena, 
Arupa, Vltahavya, Sumedhasa, Vainya, Prthu, 
Divodasa, PasVasya, Grtsaman and Nabha- 
these twenty less by one i.e. nineteen sages 
were the expounders of the Vedic Lore.

=== PAGE 452 ===

402 
Vayu-Purana 
tWT^p^raT ^rfe: ^ni ^ ^ ii 
VFcfirRI52f JriSffirr 3Tfeferfef gi 
>3 S3 
nzRVS: wr-WMRii <?<? n 
OT^fessn^mfej wft cifinVci 
■p^gt wfeN«r u ^o o n 
'ffTgRWT cJRT^Srai 3#TI 
snm^j ^nra^crefer ^rn ?o *11 
sffert f^cRIgJ 
cF^feS jwfeftlrtJJcfT 3I%T^ ^TT:ll 
^ V^rJ: ^ chlVOTIW ferfeTII ?o ? II 
Arigiras, Vedhasa, Bharadvaja, Baskali, 
Amrta, Gargya, Seni, Samhrti, Purukutsa, 
Mandhata, Ambarlsa, Yuvanasva, Paurukutsa, 
Trasadasyu, Sadasyuman, Aharya, Ajamldha, 
R§abha, Bali, Prsadasva, Virupa, Kanva, 
Mudgala, Utathya, Bharadvaja, Vajasravas, 
Ayatya, Suvitti, Vamadeva, Augaja, 
Brhaduktha, Dlrghatapas and Kakslvan- these 
thirty-three are known as the excellent 
descendants of Ahgiras. These all are the 
expounder of mantras. Now understand the 
descendants of Kasyapa. 
eSWl^r cfr&TTt feff<Tt T«T ^ ^| 
^ sr^rarfe: n ^ n 
Kasyapa, Vatsara, Vibhrama, Raibhya, Asita 
and Devala, these six are the Brahmavadins (the 
expounders of Brahman). 
3Tfefer#er ppw fap::i 
ci?ijdchl -gfq#qt^MT Mciifdly^r ^:ii 
fern Tf^.R‘1 11^0xii 
Atri, Arcisana, Syamavan, Nisthura, the 
intelligent sage Valgutaka and Purvatithi- these 
verily, are called Atris, the composers of 
mantras, the great sages. 
crfmsfc ?rfesr ^ wi:i 
w foraw. Sjfen: WW?JTI 
S3 v3 
tj% fen wstefenfenii^o^ii 
Vasistha, Sakti, Parasara, the fourth one 
Indrapramati, the fifth one Bharadvasu, the 
sixth one Maitra-varuna, Kundina (the seventh 
one)- these seven sages, the scholars or 
Brahmanas are the denizens of Brahmak§etra. 
ifnm ftfer jni 
wir ferm#mfern 
Brahmak§etra, the great pilgrimage was built 
by Brahma earlierJ Pitamaha Brahma abide in 
highly sacred Kuruk$etra. 
^ cu^cltiill <J. H 
i urwrfi jfei n cst) crfefeni 
?f?T f%RTOrtt ^gcfFTII || 
The groups of Devas and the sages 
assembled there. Brahma remarked that where 
is Vayu Devata? On this, sages told that Vayu 
Devata was not seen (by them). This way those 
being absorbed in thoughts, they observed him 
in a form of atom. 
(3TOTra^nfbT fen; WTfarrwii u 
A town was seen there which was by name 
of Vayu of excellent norm. Eighteen thousand 
twice-boms were then inhabited therein. 
vi^iw^juiiwpi wifeii nRrir^Rii 
nwqiTi rraV ^“r Tffirfwr Mgifet^:n 
1. ^ 1 
^ cKrlfol ^8-1% cf Blfcl^ 11 
^ wfet t^TT: W: I 
TP^clfoHWt tFTTTT?r TT#Trl I 
9^^ WII 
Mahabharata, Vana Parva 83.4-6, p. 507. Vayu 
Purana 97.5, p. 481. 
TT: Y<^cfR.II 
The field where the great battle was fought. Modem 
Panipat is now pointed out as the proper place.

=== PAGE 453 ===

Chapter-59 
403 
The Sudras twice in number were stationed 
by Vayu there. To them then addressed the god 
Vayu, highly dignified one. 
HvTTRT Tsyifrimgyi 
You the adherents to my devotion may attain 
to popularity in name. O twice-born ones, you 
may take upon individually as emissary twain. 
sracrt f xfoBifa %rir(Tj%)«fiiii^ici f|i 
C: 11 mu 
Of you, shall happen to be the eleven 
Gotras. The hour of marriages stands 
commended having the honour of ablution at 
the squares. 
T^TT: TTT: | 
asr TTR T TJ^cT farfit: ^W:ll W 
There on that occasion the highly powerful 
men with opened sword, should be appointed to 
protect that place. By the means of that nobody 
can able to see this auspicious bath-ceremony. 
TTfeRITW ^ST rWT Tfzm 
Naivedya should be offered to the ladies 
bom of same family or Gotra, quite distinctly. 
Four fortunate women will be required 
honourably there to take the preparation of 
Kunda. 
TJc^tr *?^rt gdsior: f^Ri 
This way the conduct of the lineages of you 
people has been dilated upon to some extent. By 
taking the bath, this oblong tank is the obviator 
of the fever of the Universe. 
O mortal experts, there is no other’s right to 
bath in this tank. And having located six places 
of my name, a person become sanctified. 
flrM 
<RT t Wlfen fefT WfT 9^31^-1111 w» 
That place of pilgrimage is well-known 
where Hanuman got resuscitated. Therein, 
verily, stand allocated the Brahmanas by Vayu 
skilled in the Vedas. 
W. Tratf MfcWHIl mil 
By the errand of the god triad, for the 
preservation1 of law or morality wherein Rudra 
remained steady in all directions in corporeal 
form. 
etlSlRrq$J q[W rT^TI 
TT&f: JTjTfa: TRT1WTII U 0II 
The overlord of god Vadaditya was then 
established by Vayu. That sun is the bestower 
of desires, bestower of all, the master mind and 
Is'a, the prowessed one. 
rtlimn 
He is equipped with thousand hands or rays 
decorated by all the weapons, united with 
RatnadevI, the illustrious one, triad-propped 
one, the one triad-endowed or equipped with 
the triad of Vedas. 
Cs -O 
: TJTtT l 
There were established four Kundas: 
Suryakunda, Brahmakunda, Rudrakunda and 
Harikunda. 
Iwtw in 
^frgg- GtjpjiRii rMT it u 3 11 
Nine forms of Durga stood there for the 
safeguard of the region. Among them, two are 
for Hari, three for Rudra and four for Brahma. 
cirf tremri 
3Trairr fgfejT: tnw 3raFRT:ii ^*11 
1. Here is an error for R l

=== PAGE 454 ===

404 
Vayu-Pura^a 
During the nuptial vows and tonsure rituals 
in the marriage, a tax unto them is offered. The 
modes of conducts of the Vadavas i.e. 
Brahmanas stand enjoined with effort. 
fahuu: sTHpW: T*JcfT:l 
And to that extent are the double-fold Sudras 
as many are these, the Brahmanas and Kusa 
shaped twice-boms to begin with, stayed in 
corporeal form. 
^rra?Rift sm ^n 
By the excellent theoretical formulas 
engroomed by the technical treatises of these 
expert in technical treatises, oblong tanks, wells 
and the temples or shrines of gods were 
created.1 
q<fyriHTsft «qprr cfTOwr wnri 
TRldMl ^ ^TT^raT%Ttll ^\sll 
Dharmasalas (Charitable Institutions) or 
Courts of Justice or religious asylums in great 
number in an airy spot of a great town, (were 
created) made of gems, gold and Gariga, the 
nectar streaming one or the ambrosial stream. 
qm n*mrdebdrf¥R)i 
$rd^wi 
In the Kali Age, Drsadvatl by name, a great 
obviator of sins, (existed as such). And by 
Vayu, this mandate, an obviator of sins has been 
ordained. 
TpRR cFT rfST TCIT I 
TJrTrWR W ifrrfi xT *RlfR:lt ^ ^ II 
Sunandana forest is there fascinating as 
such, waited upon by the kings and sages or the 
sage kings or king sages. This spot has been 
illustrated by me in brief unto all. 
1. Here is a Vedic archaism for Neutre 
plural as an ici^nPl scMMP-ticii i 
Rgveda X.5.15, p. 443. 
f^0s)wi?j H f^rr m&n wfwi?j ^i 
m ^ mfwi w n ^ o ii 
The Brahmanas that were rehabilitated by 
Vayu being of compeerless norm, O Devesl! 
The comparison deserves to be offered of the 
Brahmana as well2. 
(WRTSJTSiTSfa ^TcPTlOT <^Md: I 
diWW WT3TT tRlsll?HJl<*H«I:ll ^ ^11 
Sudyumna is the eighth one and the ninth 
one is Brhaspati. The tenth one being 
Bharadvaja, all these are the composers of the 
Vedic Hymns and therein exegetics (i.e. 
Brahmanas the explanatory dissertations). 
TJ% xte % cRrlfTt felfe^cfilfiTIT:)l 
rT^Jt ^%T%Tmil « * II 
These verily, are the composers, the 
destroyer? of the unrighteousness. The 
definition of Brahman stands enunciated, of all 
the Sasvins (the branches of the Veda). 
tertt snaWfa^Rd t^:i 
The word Hetu (reason of inference) 
becomes derived from root 'Ihi (meaning to 
destroy). That which destroys what is argued 
by the opponent’ is called Hetu. Or it may be 
from V/ii (meaning to go). That which enables 
one to the acquisition of the meaning’ is Hetu. 
asn ^iiifticHii«Jwiciyi^iH.i 
dim'giwiiif y^lmdi^Jrl crt:ii ?^ii 
That very way one may talk of the 
etymology or derivation of words being the 
deliberation on the meaning of the sentences. 
Preceptors say that Ninda or censure means the 
statements that are censured owing to their 
faults or discrepancies. 
wsmi^mi 
2. Verses from 106 to 130 seems to be additional 
verses appended in the text afterwards.

=== PAGE 455 ===

Chapter-60 
405 
Owing to (preposition or upasarga) Pra 
prefixed to 'Isams the root, (the word) 
Prasamsd becomes derived, owing to the sense 
of guna-vatta i.e. merited one as such. ‘This is 
this’, and ‘This is not this’- this sort of doubt or 
sceptical fallacy is called Sathsaya. 
‘This alone should be put into practice’, this 
way this makes the word Vidhi i.e, a way of 
action. And owing to the expression of another 
one by understanding the composition of a 
different one is known as such. 
rr 'flrn^(Ug ywsgq: tr shitii 
(TT fa*l-dc||fob3l^<rcb>qw ^FRTII ^^11 
He who stands declared as such to the 
tra) ¥grnrrseRir ii mu 
The utility of the mantras or Vedic hymns is 
in the prescribed rites through injunctions. The 
word ‘Mantra’ is derived from the root Vmantr 
(meaning to whisper) and the word Brdhmana 
gets derived from the act of preservation of 
Brahman i.e. Vedic Lore. 
The experts in aphoristic lore enunciated 
that as Sutra, which is succinct-expressioned, 
short-syllabled, unsuspicious or having no 
incertitude, endowed with essence and one 
facing the circumambiatory outlook, having no 
deprecation and faultless. 
extreme point that is called Purdkalpa i.e. 
owing to the expressibility of the earlier gone 
bye assumes the derivation of Purdkalpa i.e. the 
predestined norm. 
The events of ancient times cannot be 
decided by Mantras (Vedic texts), Brahmanas 
(the exegetical treatises), Kalpas (The auxiliary 
lores) and Nigamas (pure exegetical 
etymologies), howsoever genuine and detailed. 
What is said indecisively is called a make- 
believe. 
^ crar rft $3 srcfo ^i 
c(w 'dTfdtRy wu u 
Just as this, so also is that; this is also so, 
this very way, this is the direction, the tenth one 
of a Brahmana (i.e. the exegetical treatise). 
fsrffS <g&:i 
d^Irlbf^fT oUHoyiS^TTd fg^:ll^o|| 
This way stands illustrated the early 
definition of a Brahmana by the scholars. 
Afterwards on its Vrtti (commentary) was 
composed by Brahmanas.

=== PAGE 456 ===

Chapter-60 
405 
ii t#tnrtssTOii 
Chapter 60 
The dilation on the division of Vedas 
W ?prT : n^rrq;i 
e&ST 3RT HTWTWt ff? UIT^II *11 
The Sages spoke- Having heard his words, 
the sages spoke to Suta in an effortless manner. 
How possibly did the Vedas became revealed, 
you may expose it before us, O highly- 
intellected one? 
3ThT 3 XRT: 
WT cTgfdH) WtTTlI * II 
Suta spoke- In Dvapara of early yore and in 
the Svayambhuva Manvantara, Brahma spoke 
this to Manu- that I shall dilate upon, O greatly - 
intellected one!

=== PAGE 457 ===

406 
VSyu-Puraija 
rM fg^nrRT: | 
^tTT ^I^UI ^ ^cT WOT(II ^ II 
“When a Yuga passes away, Brahmanas 
become deficient in energy and vigour. All of 
them become enveloped by the defects of new 
Yuga, O dear one! 
■yyy'MM ^?iTciF#£ ft ^fi 
irafw fKnft^imi 
Under the exigency of the Yuga (aeon) 
getting demolished, it (the previous glory) looks 
as remaining (only) in a scant norm surviving 
only in a part of ten thousands from the Krta 
Yuga. 
rta yuiyyfdi 
Physical valour or virility, radiance, strength 
and eloquence- all these become defunct. 
Therefore, Vedas and their interpretative lores 
deserve to be preserved lest there ensue no less 
of the knowledge or education. 
^ 'Hiymjynci ^fauifai 
# ^ ^nyiw: ^ ntnyiiidii ^ ii 
On Veda becoming defunct, the sacrifice 
shall go defunct. On the defunction of sacrifice, 
Gods perish, and subsequently the defunction of 
all or everything. 
3TF2Ft ^cfcigsqT?: 
Tp&npr: f^rt ^ ^ch'w^ii^ii 
The original Vedas consisted of four Padas 
and a hundred thousand hymns. It has increased 
ten times. The entire Yajna yields all desires”. 
ITenTTbW^cFcn TH‘.I 
xijTsif osr^rarg-.imi 
On being addressed thus, “All right”, this 
way said Manu engaged in the well-being of the 
world. Being a Supreme Lord, he divided the 
Vedas into four subdivisions. 
9^PJTT cTERTtTRT rfichMI %TcKPZRTn 
rift? Wlcfi Ic^HlTII II 
At the instance of Brahma and out of desire 
for the well-being of the people, O dear one! 
(He divided the Veda). It is by the present 
classification of the Vedas that you have to 
imagine the Vedas. 
g^nfir SERTfaRT STehW^I 
^ rlf^cjisicl tgrPTT:|| ^o|| 
I shall talk to you (the classification of the 
Vedas) in accordance with the present 
Manvantara. By the process of perception, you 
may know the imperceptible one, O best among 
the Suave! 
srfwqrr s*fr Muiyrcf: trtrro:i 
|tmR ffa Tstrnrt f^urUyr: jra&fcu wi 
In this Yuga was created Vy&sa (the 
arranger of the Vedas), the son of Parasara, the 
utmost austerity (incarnate), (known as) 
Dvaipayana, who is glorified as a part of Vi$nu, 
the vanquisher of the enemies, 
sTgmT ^Tf%rT: ^rsfFl^d cSHjT Tra^l 
m fyMR? spn? ^mft w ii 
Inspired by god Brahma, he started the work 
of classifying the Veda in this (Yuga). He 
caught hold of four disciples for (preservation 
and continuity of) the Vedas. 
zj iTtRT Tf efoiun^d *n 
O <o 
rjgsf 3 Wtf HlM^UI^II ^ II 
(They were) JaiminI, Sumantu, 
Vaisampayana, Paila (the fourth one) among 
them, and the fifth one as Lomaharsana. 
mcR&cmt €rii 
He caught hold of Paila, the twice-born one, 
and made him the discourser of Rgveda and 
Vaisampayana, the dilator of Yajurveda. 
He followed up Jaimini as the reciter of the 
Samaveda and likewise Sumantu he (followed

=== PAGE 458 ===

Chapter-60 
407 
up), being the excellent redactor of the 
Atharvaveda. 
eTRR TTWm %l 
Rt RRgi%T: U^:ii^n 
And for the expounding of Itih&sa and 
PurSnas quite judicially, he, the adorable god, 
the supreme being, caught hold of me. 
q*meh'<?qqdu ^ail 
One alone was Yajurveda, which he 
subdivided into four parts. There were four 
sacrificial priests. Through them he organised 
the sacrifice. 
3llte|4ci rfl 
icJjlN rnxyy|cj|«r:ii 
p y, n 
By the formulas of Yajurveda, he created the 
work of the priest Adhvaryu and through the 
hymns of Rgveda, he created the work of Hotr 
or Hota; that of Udgatr, he created by 
Samaveda and that of Brahma by Atharvan 
chants. He established Brahma in the Yajha by 
means of the Atharvana (Veda). 
tRT: TT WBRPlp 
Then having checked out FJk hymns, he 
composed the Rgveda. He ordained the duties 
of Hotr, the performer of a sacrifice and the 
benefactor of the world. 
wrfa: rim^< q ddi^iTTtrci^ddi 
^«S«b^U*|«hlW^II * O || 
By the psalms of Saman, he created 
Samaveda and made the functions of Udgatr. 
By means of Atharvaveda, he established rites 
fox kings. 
sn^T^srMwn^ikrf^r: f*ranffa:i 
^ utiuuiiifdviKd:ii ? ^ii 
By Akhyanas (anecdotes), by Upakhyanas 
(shorter anecdotes and legends) and by Gathas 
(the parochial recitations), he, an expert in the 
subject, created the Paurariika episodical 
treatises. 
iiii 
Whatever remained, he included in the 
Yajurveda and organised it with sacrifice. It is 
the definite conclusion of scriptures that 
Yajurveda is that which enables one to perform 
sacrifice. 
* rl4)4dcff4^ jfeRdN^Hi^:ll 
IWfareR fHJrT f ^T:ll ? ^ II 
With the collaboration of Rtviks, the masters 
of Vedas, he gathered the scattered Yajur 
Mantras duly and by means of it, the 
As'vamedha sacrifice is performed. It is utilised 
in it. 
5PTt ijfterr oqWr^ETT RR:I 
ftlfW fybqiWMddldTR: II ^ * II 
Having collected the Rk hymns, Paila 
divided them into two parts. And having 
divided them in the righteous Age, he 
transferred them over to his two pupils, the 
supreme beings. 
fgafat fllteMKJ qi 
W; ^tf%rTT firqr qpqif^#3TWR:ii 
The one he (offered) to Indrapramati and the 
other was given to Baskala. Having composed 
four redactions, Baskall (the son of Baskala), 
the excellent Brahmana, taught his disciples 
who were engaged in service, being of 
auspicious norms. 
qfeq <r wit qrmt ftqtarqfRqTCTHJ 
Wi pfaT 5 qT^qqWWTII II 
The first compilation was taught to Bodha, 
the second one to Agnimathara, the third one to 
Parasara and the last to Yajnavalkya.

=== PAGE 459 ===

408 
Vayu-Puraga 
aiBqrtra^mnt fii&u^d ^ifeq^ii^vaii 
The excellent Brahmana Indrapramati taught 
one of the compilations (Samhitas) to 
Markandeya, the reputed one, the illustrious 
one. 
wwm: mvf&i TpRsrmzfwsr:n?6ii 
(Markandeya), the excellent Brahmana of 
great fame, taught his eldest son Satyasravas 
and Satyasravas passed it on to Satyahita. 
■fltsftr wmt fiS yrcsTrtraf§'jj:i 
wrfm TRfBTR ^sisnfrrcraoi^ii 9 <? u 
That master, the supreme being, taught again 
his truthful son SatyasrI (by name) who was the 
great-souled one and amenable to the duty of 
virtuosity. 
3TOP f?TOT t 5IW 
ficfifafifiT ffiSiU: VH^UMHUCII^oll 
Of that one (SatyasrI) happened to be three 
highly radiant disciples, having true glory, the 
scholars engaged in earning the truthful norm. 
¥ir«w: jranFRtat iwnidpit tstrh:i 
«HtehfHSr ^TTgT3T VIKsllSlel^chl: II3 *11 
Sakalya was the first among them. Another 
one was Rathantara. The third was Bharadvaja, 
son of Baskala. All the three were the 
expounders of the branches of that Veda. 
¥llcb<rtft ?!Hl{jebHfif^d:l 
The Brahmana Devamitra or Sakalya, being 
proud of monopoly of knowledge, attained to 
doom in the Yajna (sacrifice) of Janaka. 
VIIpn ^TET 
fcHI¥W*WcH MfH^Mf3d:l 
gw wj? fii ? 3 ii 
Samsapayana spoke- How did that sage, 
having pride caused by knowledge, perish? 
How erupted up a controversy in the horse- 
sacrifice of Janaka? 
fefitf fiR ^rwfrr <an 
jg#nT jj ^cl: d^TfiS'UtfeJl^ll^ll 
And with whom a controversy arose and 
how possibly? All this you may explain in 
details, the way known to you in entirety. 
Having listened to the word of the sages, he 
spoke out in a reply. 
<r ^hhAhwhih:! 
3g#nt <r w^ifuT W5rr5i^‘ni^chvi:ii 
<M»MdchWW f^ra:ll3mi 
Suta spoke- At the horse sacrifice of Janaka, 
there gathered a large assemblage. Thousands 
of sages assembled there manifoldly from 
various places, desirous of witnessing the 
sacrifice of the sage king Janaka. 
atMidi^igunr^i fa;?iwTSfiym<*dd:i 
e&t W^T: %E’- ^ ^ fi^TII 
ffifSKfi RfifiT fife fifii fifiTfofi:ll35H 
Having seen the Brahmanas arrived there, a 
desire to know more about them arose in him. 
“Who, verily, is the greatest Brahmana among 
these? How shall I decide it?'’ Having made up 
a certainty in mind, the overlord of men created 
an intelligent thought. 
fieri «g«im4i4i wfafijch fifiti 
lllfiMHlfa ^TJFffer RfitfiT? fiTlfiPT:ll 
WiUt %TfiT StBfilffiT: II II 
Having gathered a thousand of cows and 
more than a thousand of gold pieces, gems, 
slaves and villages, the Lord of men spoke to 
the sages and the subordinates- “0 excellent 
and blessed ones, I bow to you all with my 
head. 
f^fTT 3Tf oT; ^cTI 
d^Mdld f| l^aifad fejil-dW:ll34ll

=== PAGE 460 ===

Chapter-60 
409

=== PAGE 461 ===

410 
Vayu-Puraga 
Sakalya, quite amicably then, the creator of the 
whole debate. 
yu^ dldlWHdi m\ ^f?r: im O n 
“O Sakalya! Speak out what deserves to be 
spoken, why do you stay meditating upon? You 
seem to be bloated owing to pride of false 
prestige like a pair of bellows inflated by wind”. 
TJcT 
^TrT ct WT M ?ll 
This way demoralised by Yajnavalkya, 
Sakalya, having eyes and face aglowed owing 
to wrath, spoke out in harsh words to 
Yajnavalkya in presence of all the sages. 
fensR wt ht? f^drnm?ii 
“Ignoring us as well as these excellent sages 
like blades of grass, you wish to seize the entire 
wealth for learning all by yourself? 
TT ^Wr-cKJ: TTM^Uldl 
srfglERT cRT Mg felTTT^c^RTTIIk^ll 
This way retorted to by Sakalya, 
Yajnavalkya spoke out- “You may realise that 
the potency of those who are supremos in Vedic 
Lore, is their learning and their philosophy of 
the interpretation of the lores. • 
cbinsnifa cnh^im^i 
chinniHERi fan: 
Kama (desire) is connected with Artha 
(wealth) and by that we desire for wealth. 
Brahmanas consider that asking question freely 
out of desire is the wealth of Brahmanas. Hence 
we ask questions as we please. 
■qmlratS'W SR Ml 
UdT^ren eMWW yricERT: BCTSiy^d:ll 
This is the wager or stake of the sage king 
Janaka and on that account by me has been 
taken away this wealth.” Having heard this 
expression of that one, Sakalya gone rash in 
wrath, spoke to Yajnavalkya, the words 
entailing the questions regarding Kama. 
fgT^Rf :i 
m: q $ 11 
“You now reply to the questions parried by 
me before you regarding Kama”. Then ensued a 
great debate between the two, learned in 
Brahman. 
Sakalya put forth in advance a thousand 
questions. Yajnavalkya then replied to all those 
in the presence of all the sages. 
TTTcfKM ftctn 
traifcr <«r 
WJ' wts^r 
When Sakalya was made questionless, 
Yajnavalkya then spoke to him- “O Sakalya! 
You too answer a single question of mine 
pertaining to Kama. The stake for this debate is 
a curse. If you are unable to answer you will 
die”. 
WTfgd 5TR STTPHTI 
WT ^cdMcliqiiidil q II 
Then was parried1 a question by 
Yajnavalkya, the intelligent one. Sakalya then 
having not understood, attained to death 
immediately. 
Tier TT 
cTT^ST TpgRRftrmt SRI^RTTTII 
^mnTt TqfqfiT: TTIsf ^ar 1%ll ^ o II 
Sakalya died being afflicted by inability to 
answer that question. Thus, such a debate 
ensued among those lusty for wealth, the sages 
along with their sub-ordinates and between 
Yajnavalkya. 
1. Here 3^ is a error for wrf^Tf: I

=== PAGE 462 ===

Chapter-60 
411 
WSTFT:l 
bijrwr i ^ ^tai mvh-mr M^nifd:it ^ 
-yi^dwiT sr ijir ^r?Tt ^nss?ir:i 
wm k tj? ^8T: f?M: g?Ttn u 
Having commented upon (all) the questions 
put forward by all the sages in hundreds and 
thousands, Yajnavalkya, who had deep 
penetration into the essence of those questions 
took the entire wealth. He spread his fame 
everywhere and proceeded homewards, quite 
well-disposed and surrounded by pupils, being a 
controlled man. 
^efforc<T Vira^yt TffTrR fg^TWRil 
xRctt m gfigTrRf^TR-.u^^u 
Devamitra Sakalya was the great-souled 
excellent Brahmana. He was intelligent among 
those who know the implications of grammar 
and he composed five recensions or 
compilations. 
flfesiT 3TOcRT5 Mc^lW 'MMcbWVITI 
WfaSJ Tm TO: WT:ll^ll 
His pupils happened to be five™ Mudgala, 
Golaka, Khallya, Matsya and Saisireya, the fifth 
one. 
TTtcnrf yfedlRdW: VlldiMoUyldCI 
Sakapurna Rathltara dilated upon three 
compilations. The excellent Brahmana 
composed Nirukta (Etymology) subsequently, 
the fourth one. 
f^TOTCT iRatK: km 
cfegrct ^ sREBT fg^TT: II5 5II 
He had four disciples- Ketava, Dalaki, 
Dharmasarman and Devasarman, all being 
Brahmanas bearing vows. 
Vlleh^t W TJrT dfdHIW cWRm 
m f%RTT W STO 7RFR 5r?RTT5f^HII ^3II 
When Sakalya died, those present there 
incurred the sin of Brahmana-slaughter. They 
approached Brahma, worried by this sin. 
dl»jil<cti 9511 Stfar: ^1 
rR W?T m 'm- TRT yuivdfdii^dil 
Having understood them by heart, Brahma 
sent them to Pavana Pura1, (saying)- “All of 
you go there, all your sins shall get obviated 
immediately. 
^IdVI m MI-dldMd I^VlUdtll 
fn| dRutyn $ % || 
After bowing before Dvadasarka (the twelve 
suns), the deity Valuka2, the eleven Rudras and 
Vayu-Putra (Hanuman) in particular and having 
bathed in four Kundas or reservoirs or holy 
pools, you will shake off (lit. swim across) the 
(sin) of a Brahmana’s murder”. 
■gf vnyd'U ’em mi wtpr:i 
Cs ^ O 
chd IcCtTl^R <£> cl Hj IV9 o 11 
All of them having become hasty, reached 
that town. (By them) an ablution was performed 
as per rituals and a sight of the gods was 
observed. 
MNfc|ft4ThT 
O C\ ~s 
Having offered obeisance to Utt ares vara, out 
of grace of the Brahmanas (Vadavas), all of 
them became free from sins and proceeded 
towards the solar orb or solar region. 
m irgfr rTcftaf tjTR TRRRT^RTT I 
^rsfr: trt ^ cTBRT ftRfa wiiva^n 
no -o o 
Since then, that holy spot became known as 
the obviator of sins. The holy city of Vayu was 
created by the Wind-god earlier. 
1. 'jt may be HcA ^ | 
2. Balukesvara, the Malabara Hills near Bombay 
where Parasurama established a linga called 
Valukesvara Mahadeva, Skandha Purana, Sahitya 
Khanda, Pt. Ch. 1, N.L. Dey, p. 21.

=== PAGE 463 ===

412 
gift TTfKJct ?3TTI^feTT:ll 
(ft5* ftfftl fttf oTTfTr dglftfadl II V» ^ II 
The one bom from the womb of AnjanI, 
Hanuman, the son of Wind-god, the great god 
of truthful exploits, when he took birth, O 
Mahadeva! This place of pilgrimage was 
created by Vayu (god), the son of god Brahma. 
3Hlf 4ldl^ % UglurRT ft^ftdltl 
VtiPtyltf g*% ^Tt g?I^IIV9*ll 
Here whichever Sudras took birth as 
ordained by the Brahmanas or as nomenclatured 
as Brahmanas, for the sake of subsistence as 
well as for Brahmayajna, among them a high 
flown tax became promulgated. 
3tftr fftiRT girt fftnuil ^TTTR ra^TI 
TrtsrT graft <3idHl gr -m<im) u+><i<ruu:ii 
gigrfftg 
By this became in vogue the great 
government of the Brahmanas. Whether a cow- 
killer or a destroyer of the gratefulness, a wine- 
drinker or a defiler of the teacher’s bed, when 
bows to Vadaditya, he gets immunity from all 
the sins. 
?f?r 3forgT*pmrt cuumI-A 
* -k -k

=== PAGE 464 ===

412 
Vayu-Pura9a 
n^chMrad^5sm^r:ii 
Chapter 61 
Lineage of Prajapati 
^k^ni wife: wfewrri 
latwr 
wtafr ftfe sr wfe d rife mi ? II 
The sages spoke- Bharadvaja, Yajnavalkya, 
Galaki, Salaki, intelligent Satavalaka, the 
excellent Brahmana Naigama, Ba$kali (son of 
Ba§kala) and Bharadvaja- all these dilated upon 
three Sarhhitas and Rathltara then expounded 
Nirukta, the fourth one. 
sIW^mraf^JIT M^lrHi4l ^JTTfecTT:l 
MdHiiRgr 
rt hwt 4if¥idsrar:ii 3 u 
Three happened to be his pupils, great- 
souled ones endowed with merits. Among those 
first was illustrious Nandayanlya, second was 
intelligent Pannagari and third was Aryava- all 
those having vows belauded. 
feTCFTT RlfejlT: ^if^rll^iMMK^TT: I 
few: T%TT if: fefe:imi 
They were having passions extradited, 
highly radiant, gone beyond the knowledge of 
the Sarhhitas. All those are called Bahvrcas by 
whom the Sarhhitas were brought into being. 
SfetHT: Trffe WhT ^ITtlimi 
The Sage having the spiritual lineage of 
Vaisampayana composed the Yajurveda, by 
whom eighty-six Samhitas of the sacred 
Yajurveda Mantras were expounded. 
yfe ms ^rgf# felRT:l 
dg?flfrlgr TWlfu TTffeqt ffecWT:ll^ll 
He passed these on to his disciples and they 
assimilated these as per ritualistic norm. The 
Sage Yajnavalkya of great penance alone was 
left out. He also composed eighty-six alternative 
Sarhhitas. 
Tlcfarfe fe ^ fen ife: fefeff: l 
ffe fesr ?r feRT ^•iivsii 
Of all those verily, the divisions were 
organised as threefold. The three-fold divisions

=== PAGE 465 ===

Chapter-61 
413 
became illustrated in nine auspicious divisions 
or schools. 
s^ssrr totoi#? ^«iPciy I: i 
YyiMKlPH><telH'l tor*, wtot ?ii c II 
The three main schools are Udlcyas (those 
of the northern), Madhyadesas (those of the 
middle countries) and Pracyas (those of the 
eastern countries). Syamayani became the chief 
of the northern school. 
TRPT: Tp:l 
snRfanfg;: TnTORt \ n 
Aruni was declared as the chief among the 
institutions of the Madhyadesas. Alarhbi was 
the first among the easterners which are known 
as Trayodas'ya and others. 
$<44 Tj<chl: yi-riii: ^TOnrof^Tt fgf3TT: I 
WWI: ^<TO ^ i%WcftsfcRII n 
This way, these twice-boms are called 
Carakas, the expounders of the Samhitas. 
Having listened to their words, the sages who 
were desirous of hearing, spoke to Suta. 
x|<<*Im4cI: 4r cFTTW rTr^rT: I 
i% tow ^ucbcej ^ 
|?p>: TO? TOT TO xUohlclH^yiil ^11 
“By what reason, the Adhvaryus were called 
Carakas in the real sense and what was it that 
they performed? For what reason they were 
termed as Carakas?” Thus addressed, Suta 
spoke out the way their norm of Carakas came 
into being? 
TFT 4c*|tJ 
zf fofacisiT^uwfini:i 
TOrojs <t^t toto fruinrf 5 w 11 
Suta spoke- O excellent Brahmanas! There 
the sages had to perform a rite. Having attained 
to the peak of Meru, by them then, a 
contemplation was made as such. 
¥ ^ tototot 3trofeimn 
“O excellent twice-born ones, he who does 
not come here within seven nights, he would 
have to perform an expiatory rite for killing of 
Brahmana. This is proclaimed as our stipulated 
condition.” 
TOTTOt TOW: TO^ $?TRnRerf^TT:| 
iwg: UkUi4ui to TOfa: pitSTOTO^i ^11 
Then all groups of the sages along with their 
attendants, except Vaisampayana, went away, 
within seven nights where an agreement stood 
signed. 
SWTHt <J TOTOR TO:I 
fYTORST WP TO ^TTOTOtSWRTII II 
On direction of Brahmanas, he 
(Vais'ampayana) had to perform the expiatory 
rite for Brahmana's slaughter. Then gathering 
together his pupils, Vais'ampayana said. 
Snrastf TOTOTO t TJr# f^rarnTT:! 
TOf TO PPM TOT: II ^11 
“O excellent Brahmanas! On behalf of 
myself, you all should perform expiatory rite for 
Brahmahatya. All of you come and speak this 
beneficial words to me.” 
3TOFET 
ST^fTct rlftUJlfa f4lTTO TOTOTfWtl 
tot Ui^mRibuifM totot tor TOTfroT-.ii yaw 
Yajnavalkya spoke- I myself shall perform 
it along. Let these sages remain alone. I shall 
raise up my strength as purified by my own 
penance.” 
ticfHTh’Wd: 
3TOTO TOTOTOSsfa TO^ TOTOkw TOll II 
This way having been spoken, irate as such, 
he spoke to Yajnavalkya saying that whatever 
had been studied by him, he could return to me. 
TTOTOH: TO ^hlftll TOTOft 3R4t TOTOM

=== PAGE 466 ===

414 
Vayu-Puraga 
Having been said so, he (Yajnavalkya), 
having excellent knowledge of Brahman, 
vomited the embodied forms of Yajur-Mantras 
smeared with blood and returned to his 
preceptor. 
cRT: W S-UWMI^Iil ^TTTm^TT:l 
^ O || 
O Brahmanas! Then he meditated and 
adored the Sun. What was vomited rose up in 
the sky and stood near the solar Brahman. 
Tnft ^ t 
31Wirq- TTT^uil iJl^cIc'cHllil sfa^ii ? ^|| 
Then the pleased Sun handed over Yajur- 
Mantras which had gone up to the solar disc. 
The Sun-god gave them to the intelligent 
Brahmarati Yajnavalkya who had assumed the 
form of a horse. 
9ll*]U|| ^| 
cTrR^ ^Rr^^TII ^11 
The formulas of Yajurveda that are being 
studied by Brahmanas were handed over to 
Yajnavalkya having the frame of a horse and 
therefrom, they became Vajinas or horses. 
HlfrqT <T ^TWn^fW: ^CRTT: I 
And by whom the expiatory rite for the 
slaughter of Brahmana was performed, they 
became known as Carakas. The pupils of 
Vaisampayana, all those were known as 
Carakas. 
htcst: jftw gTfSrrwrf^irTi 
fyiuti# c*)Ud^4iviifHH:ii^^n 
wnrt fgf^ijsjTw 3^r: i 
vuwiuigr gir^qsr w wr#ftftn 
3tTs4f ^ rraT tpilf #nJTt WTTRTUI:II ?mi 
These are therefore, this way called Carakas 
and now know the Vajins, the disciples of 
Yajnavalkya. They were- Kanva, Vaidheya, 
Salin, Madhyandina, Sapeyl, Vidigdha, Apya, 
Uddala, Tamrayana, Vatsya, Galava, Sai§ir!, 
Atavl, ParnI, Vlranl and Saparayana. 
^R: JTtrTir ^ORT:l 
VM^cKlfeh -Qmi ^ fc|cB^Mcbl:ll ^^11 
These fifteen are known as Vajins. A 
hundred added by one in entirety were the 
composers of formulas of Yajurveda. 
wqsqrwiTRT WRW 
'HH’-dSlfh I) 
o o o o o 
■HcfiWiui w wiRziiTrac5nj:ii ?\9ii 
Jaimini taught his son Sumantu, Sumantu 
taught his son Sutavan and Sutavan taught his 
son Sukarman. 
TT wtfsTZrsr ^T%TT:l 
^tcii^ra wot wrf ^4=f^:ii?<sn 
Having studied with courage a thousand 
Samhitas, Sukarman expounded them to his 
thousand disciples having the brilliance of the 
Sun. 
WRTRPR ?R3kT:I 
f^q^TTOTRTII ^ II 
Satakratu (Indra) killed those studying 
(Vedas) during prohibited days and then took to 
expiation for the sake of his disciples. 
¥5 ^ cUM^I ^ JT:l 
snfeft W ^ o n 
Having seen him irate, Sakra conferred a 
boon on him again- “You will have two 
disciples of great prowess and brilliance of 
fire”. 
TJcfr ^ tT^rnFft ■*TT ftSTWTII 3 ^11 
They will be highly intellected ones and 
shall study all the thousand Samhitas. They will 
be the two gods, greatly fortunate ones. Be not 
irate, O excellent Brahmana!

=== PAGE 467 ===

Chapter-61 
415 
^fmFwrrnt et^tTwhi 
TTRT^m %T ^gT rrt^RTT^lcTII 3^11 
This way having spoken to the illustrious 
Sukarman, the reputed one and having seen the 
twice-born gone unirate, Vasava (Indra) became 
out of sight. 
ftnnnw: <*1fvir4) 
O excellent Brahmanas, the wise Pau?yanjin 
was his first disciple and the king Hiranyanabha 
of Kausilya race was his second disciple. 
3TETTW(T J : 1 
rf fyiWT: ^fT:ll 
Pau$yanjin taught five hundred Sarhhitas. 
The pupils of Pausyanjin named 
Udicyasamanyas were well-known in the 
northern quarters. 
7Tr#T xl 4l4ctl^l 
fpztf yi'^Wimil: II ^ Ml 
The chivalrous Kausilya (redacted) five 
hundred Samhitas. The pupils of Hiranyanabha 
were known as Pracya Samagas i.e. the eastern 
Saman (psalms) singers. 
vTlcl>T$ft eRjft^cT Hl^f^TWyil 
Lokaksi, Kuthumi, Kusltl and Langali were 
Pausyahjin’s four disciples. Having brought 
them to mind, you may locate their groupings. 
{luiiARfq: 
-^raift (fdSRii 
fl4>fdMd: WWTW 
vftal^UKp 
Ranayanlya, son of Sahitandi, the fine 
scholar Mulacarin, Kaitiputra and Satyaputra- 
know these to be different groupings of 
Lokaksin. 
Etw w sfhw) Tvimw.i 
wiMrsr fafeh: ^griT: n ^ <i. n 
Three sons of Kuthumi were Aurasa, 
Rasapasara and the brilliant Bhagavitti. These 
three were known as Kauthumas. 
TMTEFTta: WT^fsr?n#ll^ll 
The two sages Sauridyu and Srngiputra were 
expert in performing vows. Ranayaniya and 
Saumitri were the two, skilled in Samaveda. 
4rara sjffgtr ngidMni 
fs#fTOT:n*oii 
Srngiputra of austere penance expatiated 
upon three Samhitas to Caila, Praclnayoga and 
Surala, the excellent Brahmanas. 
Rtcfra ^T%TT: W. cT TH1^l4fd cfiWr:l 
^ "SO 
3ti4fwui4viits4i 
MlTdtqglqqdgr Rd^PvT:l 
<T MKIVl4w ^TPT:II 
differ: TOds 3?raT3r ? n 
Parasarya, disciple of Kuthumi, expatiated 
upon six Samhitas. Asurayana, Vaisakhya, 
Vedavrddha, Parayana, Praclnayogaputra and 
Patanjali, the wise one, are known as the six 
disciples of Parasarya, the disciple of Kuthumi. 
Langali and Salihotra dilated upon six Sarhhitas 
each. 
STTeTfe: ^TWrpTSJ 
ctiO^gj cm?c*?N nifjrii: *ym:ll 
f^JT: i%tt JratfiidT: 11*311 
Bhaluki, Kamahani, Jaimini, Lomagayini, 
Kandu and Kihala- these six are known as 
Langalas. These were the pupils of Langali and 
they composed or polished these Sarhhitas. 
Hr?) <fK#rar ^Mrr^:i 
^cETTeer ^dRSyiHifedi ^r:ii 
Hiranyanabha, who was the son of a king (or 
a prince), who had disciples and who was the 
best among the Dvipadas. he created twenty-

=== PAGE 468 ===

416 
Vayu-Purana 
four Samhitas. You may know and understand 
the names of those disciples whom he taught. 
ms vww 
YS^T: mRy>&kJ tth *ri 
11^5,11 
wftHwfcntafir sFrita: sifegr *ri 
•CR1TO «n#TT sKRIHg ^OTRirtfOII 
Rada, Mahavlrya, Pancama, Vahana, 
Talaka, Pandaka, Kalika, Rajika, Gautama, 
Ajavasta, Somaraja, Prstaghna, Parikr$ta, 
Ulukhalaka, Yavlyasa, Vaisala, Angullya, 
Kausika, Salimanjarl, Satya, Kapiya, Kanika 
and the righteous Parasara- all these were the 
singers of psalms of Samaveda. 
qpwnl $J M # H JUlMll 
«f|dRi fcr^c^iiuiii 
Of all those singing the psalms of 
Samaveda, the greatest ones were reputed as 
two, Pausyanji and Krti- the redactors of the 
Samhitas. 
srerafuT fgsiT Y«arr 
Having split up Atharvan in two parts, 
Sumantu offered that entire Veda to Kabandha 
(i.e. preceptor or a teacher), 0 Brahmanas. That 
may be understood completely. 
%n WTO 
Kabandha further split it into two and 
offered one to Pathya and the second to 
Vedasparsa. He (Vedasparsa) then split it up 
into four. 
■m^r Riui-hkw^ci 
?fte>rcrfdgr 
Moda Brahmabala, Pippalada, Sauskayani, 
the knower of the law and the fourth one known 
as Tapana- were the four pupils of Vedasparsa 
who were firm in holy rites. 
Tjqsr ffld[4 WRT 
Know the excellent threefold division (i.e. 
disciples and sons) of Pathya. They were Jajali, 
Kumudadi and the third Saunaka. 
%r Yk^t y 
ftYtat ■Rfpt im ^ ii 
Saunaka, however, having split it up into 
two, offered one to Babhru and the second 
Samhita (the wise-one offered) to the disciple 
named Saindhavayana. 
■fora) fwT ^ W m:\ 
fj?r tfRrdidi fer^di:! 
rc?T: y«^t ^iuiYfr^dm:iiHMi 
Saindhava (offered) it to Munjakesa. The 
Samhita was further divided into two. 
Naksatrakalpa, Vaitana, (the third) 
Samhitavidhi, the fourth Angiras-kalpa and the 
fifth Santikalpa- these were the five alternative 
Samhitas of Atharvaveda. O excellent sages, the 
Purana too was expounded by me after dividing 
it into six. 
m<gF3Ttefacrafg- crf^t ftrsr^sj h: n 
PH fphHT m 
Rtfafw: Y^W: 5^ f|imv9ll 
Atreya, Sumatl, the wise one, Kasyapa, 
Akrtavrana, Bharadvaja, Agnivareas, Vasistha, 
Mitrayu, Savarni, Somadatti, Susarman and 
Samsapayana- these are my disciples, firm in 
religious austerities, in Puranic lore, O 
Brahmana! By the three of them were created 
three Samhitas once again.

=== PAGE 469 ===

Chapter-61 
417 
cRIWT: ^TfpTcHrtf Tnrafot: WW:i 
'Hifirchi xs w^it ^rr t^^tiii^ii 
K5syapa, Savarni and Samsapayana were 
the composers of the Samhitas. There is a fourth 
Samhita named Samika. It is the original 
Samhita. 
^lyrnsn vm mi 
All of them have four Padas (hemistiches), 
all being ones having similar interpretations. 
They were distinguished by separate readings 
like the recensions of the Vedas. Excepting 
Samsapayan's Samhita, each contains four 
thousand verses. 
nMta fnw: w:i 
^rdf^yn^^i^i 11 $ o 11 
The original ones then came from 
Lomahar§ana and then come the Samhitas of 
Kasyapa. The third Samhitas are of Savarni. All 
these can be easily understood by the scholars 
skilled in the interpretation of the Yajurvedic 
formulas. 
Willful Jferjmal MdVIdTfn cT&cf rill 5, ^11 
The Samhitas of Samsapayana are 
embellished by the topics of exhortation. There 
are eight thousand six hundred verses (in it). 
TJrTT: e^lfclW^ll 
greffecMT: wifrn: HcblRJdl:ii*9ll 
There are additional fifteen and ten along 
with ten (Rks?) known as Valakhilyas, 
Sahapraisas along with Savarnas. 
3T# TTPT W^Wlfui UWrft rf 
3h(ir-y«fi Tr?m i^rrafar tttw: ii 5 311 
There are eight thousand fourteen psalms or 
Saman Mantras (in the Samaveda) including 
Aranyaka along with Homa. Samagas (Sama- 
singers) sing them. 
wtftr wz sm&t 
wi tfi^iuiHi ^ w <3m\ oycb^^ii^^ii 
There are twelve thousand Chandas 
(Mantras) of Adhvaryava Veda including 
Yajurvedic formulas and Brahmanas as 
compiled by Vyasa. 
«U|U|Hm|<fc cfSTTI 
37rr: trt ^sTRt f ^ ff?r f^muT^ii 5 mi 
It includes the Grdmya, Aranyaka and the 
Mantrakarana. Therefore, beyond this is the 
Purva (Pras'asti) of the anecdotes. This is a 
specific norm. 
murRiHf W5T 5T diTdlfdtlNd: PJ^Tl 
rMT *iR*toiuii Rsihi^m%hiPi ^tii 
^ df%Oj-nuii 5,^11 
Parochial, sylvan and endowed with political 
thought constitutes the plethora of Rk, 
Brahmana and Yajus. There are additional 
compilations (Khila) and supplementary ones 
(Upakhila) of Haridravlya as also the 
Paraksudras of Taittirlyas. 
\ eiM^^ebl 
^TUT: HfTWTRTt f 5^31^11 ^^|| 
In the Vajasaneyi Samhita, the Rk verses are 
a hundred less than two thousand. The 
Brahmana portion contains four times that 
number. 
3T# WSlfOT WTft 5TTET- 
TTRJ:l 
bcidmi<Ji sr 
TT^rfer ■Hify'H'UMc^raii 5,411 
Eight thousand eight hundred eighty plus a 
quarter becomes the extent of the Yajurveda 
formulas and Rks more along with Sukriya 
(Samans belonging to Pravargya) and Khila 
(additional) Mantras (according to) 
Yajnavalkya. 
rISJT WOt -tffW ^1 
^T:ll

=== PAGE 470 ===

418 
Vayu-Puriuja 
TJrTT^filcE rtMTT cbR fae(^ict|| ^ ^ II 
Likewise listen to the extent of the Samhita 
of Carana-Vidyas (sections of Vedic school of 
Atharva). They contain six thousand twenty-six 
Rks. Yajur Mantras, it is said, are some what 
more than this. 
WSrftJT c^T WRIT cT5TtxRT: I 
jplt ^TII^o II 
iwrard:i 
^Hlet^yfaidK^TxipgfcJeh ^(|||V9^|| 
There are eleven thousand twenty Rks (in 
Yajus). There are ten thousand three hundred 
and eighty Rks and a thousand Mantras in the 
Samhita of Bhrgu. The number of Rks in 
Atharvaveda is more (than this). 
w TTpnfur tarf%*r:i 
feRTll^n 
TTTFK dMIHUUtTch ip:| 
^riio? it 
Of Atharva Vedic hymns, five thousand is a 
certified calculation and another nine hundred 
and eight Rks are added by some sages. This is 
mentioned by Aiigiras who includes the 
Aranyaka portion. This way the counting stands 
popularised and that very way the difference of 
recensions. 
cFktNJcT VTRsl'Ri ^ WTJRTsm zll 
^tlt^TOcTT: THTT: '^fTT: II '3>T II 
The composers of Rks are the cause of the 
variations in recensions. In all the Manvantaras, 
the recensional differences are the same. 
yMNriti TtJrTT:l 
aifocOTeii^ciRi uJlflifil: p: ^tiitami 
The Prajapatya Sruti (Vedic text created by 
Prajapati) is perennial. These variations are due 
to the non-eternal nature of Devas. Creation of 
Mantras takes place again and again1 (in every 
Manvantara). 
1. The writers on Puranas believed that Devas are not 
n^Riiuri feici mm i 
g^r: instil 
A determination of the nomenclature of the 
Devas is being assumed in each Manvantara. 
During Dvapara, the variations of Srutis became 
in vogue. 
Tier rRT ' 
WT WSrm^TlWT fTfTT:ll'3\9ll 
This way, after establishing the Vedas and 
having disseminated the same to his pupils, the 
holy lord, the excellent sage Vyasa went to the 
forest for performing penance. These different 
recensions have been made by his disciples and 
their disciples. 
^lSRarrfr mImwi 
wit zt f^are^nsRi^vmts4ii 
S3 O ' 
Arigas (the six auxiliary lores), Vedas (four 
in number), Mlmamsa,2 Nyaya-vistara (logic), 
Dharma-sastra and Puranas- these lores are 
fourteen in number. 
3TW^t epffi cT jBT:I 
srfjUKst <T fw^ST#5T p^ll 
Ayurveda (Science of Medicine), 
Dhanurveda (Science of Archery), Gandharva- 
Veda (Science of Music) and Arthasastra 
(Science of Economics), the fourth one, make 
the total number of lores as eighteen. 
eternal but Mantras are so and they manifest 
themselves again and again in the new world order, 
after the new creation of the world. 
2. One of the six systems of Indian philosophy, which 
is divided into two systems- Purva-Mlmarhsa or 
Karma Mlmamsa of Jaimini and Uttara Mlmamsa or 
Brahma Mlmamsa founded by Badarayana; but the 
two systems have very little in common with them, 
the first concerning itself chiefly with the secret 
interpretation of the ritual of the Veda and the latter 
dealing with the nature of Brahman or the Supreme 
Spirit. The first part is popularly known as 
MTmarhsa and the latter as Vedanta

=== PAGE 471 ===

Chapter-61 
419 
^ rfwr f{:\ 
TDpfa: 5gf^IfK!WEr:ll 
9k(uy^Kt4t ^fvm^Midoii 
The Brahmar$is desire to be recognised as 
the earliest ones, followed by Devar$is and then 
Rajarjis. Thus the chief functionaries of the 
R$is are three. It is through sages of well- 
disciplined observances, that R$is were bom. 
«KWiJg <m ^Jei^sfaji 
w^rff tti^ sr^raT%:ii 
?r?TM rR ^Ttlld^ll 
Among the descendants of five Gotras viz. 
Kasyapa, Vasi?tha, Bhrgu, Angiras and Atri, 
take birth the Brahmavadins. They can move 
towards Brahma and on that account, they are 
called Brahmar$is. 
snferw Tprerer ^ktIsj rn 
mwvr ww ott II611I 
Devarsis (Celestial Sages) are the sons of 
Dharma, Pulastya, Kratu, Pulaha, Pratyusa, 
Prabhasa and Kas'yapa. 
I TiHRIiltlll'fdTlI 4^ II 
You may know the sons of Devarsis by their 
names. Devarsis and Dharmaputras both were 
Nara and Narayana. 
flIHRg^Tt: rfl 
TR^Rra^T: TfcT:il<s*n 
Balakhilya is the son of Kratu and Kardama 
is the son of Pulaha. Kubera is the son of 
Pulastya and the son of Pratyusa is Acala. 
JSdRWhl T^cTmidmi 
Parvata and Narada happened to be the two 
sons of Kasyapa. They approach the Devas or 
Gods and hence on that score are called as 
Devar§is. 
ciyi*) 4^ ^ ^ ^TfT; | 
Kings bom in the race of Manu and in the 
dynasty of Aila (PurQravas), viz. Ailas, 
Aik§vakas (descendants of Ik$vaku) and 
Nabhagas deserve be known as Rdjarsis (Royal 
Sages). 
TIJHT mt: II <SV911 
Owing to their act of pleasing the progenies 
and delighting the subjects, they are called as 
Rajar$is. Those having stability in Brahmaloka 
became known as Brahmar$is. 
cteiHUvIdaHS' trtr a^r: ^pr:i 
TDpfcri TtrTT: II 6 6II 
Those having stay in Devaloka, deserve to 
be called as Devar§is, the auspicious ones and 
those stationed in Indraloka, are known as 
Rajarsis in entirety. 
STTfeTTrSTT ^ tTTOT WJ|| 
ITcf sTfpk: 3TJrTjT f^T TR&TKT ifrll 6 <? II 
By nobility of birth and penance, and by the 
pronunciation of Mantras, the celestial Sages 
(Devar§is) and Rajarsis are proclaimed as 
Brahmar$is. 
rrarn^oii 
I shall illustrate now the characteristics of 
Devarsis and others endowed with the 
knowledge of past, present and future and they 
always speak the truth. 
TcPd $ <T r % xT t 1 
yfWi ir % 3Rt(xiTt)%n^ii <^n 
They are well awakened as such and 
interconnected as they happened to (their) self. 
By austerity, they became popular, even while 
in the womb, the darkness of ignorance has 
been dispelled by them. 
n^oyi#ui) % ^ %sraWrw 
^11 <? ? II

=== PAGE 472 ===

420 
Vayu-Purai?a 
They are the subsisters by the Mantras and 
they are omnipresent by supremacy. This way, 
those sages were associated by the Devas, 
Brahmanas and the Kings. 
TpamgrrotaFTT % w: i 
wfasNt W&T: TgrTT:ll ^ ^ 11 
Those who study and practise these ideas are 
recognised as R§is. These seven by seven merits 
were remembered as Saptar?is or the seven 
sages. 
fofonfr fsrcr 
cpgr: ^11^*11 
They are long-lived ones, the composers of 
Mantras, Supreme beings, having divine eyes, 
intellectuals, perceptible avocations, the 
propagators of the lineages (these are seven 
merits of them). 
MAehltifwi ftcS VII^HI 
tjrMdgffcf TP ST^t: 
They are perennially engaged in six-fold 
rites, are englamoured ones, the house-holders, 
used to act in consonance with the similar ones 
by unforeseen instruments of actions. 
They used to subsist by non-parochial 
sentiments or fluids created personally, the 
family owners endowed with prosperity, the 
denizens of external and internal spots. 
firnf^r ^R: ^R:l 
C -o -O nI> 
ciufern«*H4gtH ferd wt g tn «^n 
At the very outset of the Yugas known as 
Krta and the like, time and again, they are 
induced to the establishment of the orders of 
society and stages of life. 
TTP^T 5RTWn|f ^R: TTOtfafegi 
O O O 
kwf ctdlCH ft: 3^:11^ II 
At the advent of the opening of Tretayuga 
once again here, the seven sages relegate over 
to the creation of orders of society and stages of 
life all over. In the lineage of those, the mighty 
persons take birth again and again. 
ftRT fortff ^eT f%| 
31Il?flf?WWTfnT tftrKTft ^ II 
Like a son taking birth of a father and when 
a son turns into a father, in the same way, 
having gathered without any breakage, they 
(sages) subsist along till the dissolution of the 
aeon. Eighty eight thousands are declared as 
such of the householders. 
3TtfajTT ^%UTT % § ftddiui wfocTT:l 
t $ Jl'dl^dd: Tprmi o || 
Those who resort to the Pitryana to the south 
of Aryaman, the Sun take wives unto 
themselves and perform Agnihotra. They are 
known as the cause of progeny. 
(Tgfrfcrei ^ wfat: vMViwwiy^Pt h 
3HWTII ^11 
Householders are innumerable. They resort 
to the cemeteries. Eighty-eight thousand of 
them are stationed in Uttarayana (northern 
path). 
% STPRl fijp? TOT WFti ^sf^W:l 
t|-d9H^lU|chdU'l 'jfPEfT f| fn$%ll ^ II 
Those sages living in perpetual celibacy, 
who are being heard as having attained heaven, 
take birth on the dissolution of the aeon as the 
composers of Mantras and Brahmapas. 
ildUldtfiTHRf) )R:l 
cH^IRi WlfeURt HHIVIItel^'d: ^Tll 
fern ^f3d<ui im wj:n ^ ii 
Thus, they take birth in Dvapara Ages time 
and again. They are the composers of Kalpa- 
texts, propounders of commentaries of many 
Sastras at the dissolution of the Yuga. At the

=== PAGE 473 ===

Chapter-61 
421 
inception of Tretas, the expatiation on those 
commentaries is being done by them. 
gqr: t 
In the future in Dvapara again, 
(Asvatthaman), the son of Drona, will be 
Dvaipayana Vedavyasa of mighty penance. 
■Mfafeufci ^Trmwrnfq 51 
ttw rr^ngnm w Hnwjcwrn 
In future shall happen to be the compositions 
of different recensions of the Vedas. By virtue 
of his great penance, he will attain 
indestructible Brahman. 
HW ejrf ira gvfolT % cKTT ^T:l 
sra-mtj% % €nc£Ri:ii 
By penance, Karma was acquired and by 
action then, fame was assumed. By fame, truth 
was fit to be acquired and by truth was acquired 
the eternal Brahman. 
?oV9|| 
From the eternal Amrta (nectar), 
(immortality) is attained and from immortality, 
essence of every object is attained. This eternal 
one-syllabled (Om) is Brahman, quite 
established in personal soul. Due to its greatness 
or (inconceivable) vastness, it is called 
Brahman. 
yuididfew «rat ■mfo: 
Cv CS«0 c v 
Wm: .HIUTSildiui 9^^:11^611 
Again it remains in the form of Pranava and 
is known as Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svah. Obeisance to 
the Brahman of the form of Rk, Yajus, Saman 
and Atharvan. 
*TCcT: yuwVwfi d-Hd*KU|^d*ll 
■q^T: trrtT -pr qnr:ii ^ n 
That is known as the cause of the dissolution 
and resurgence of the Universe. Obeisance to 
that excellent Brahman, the utmost esoteric 
secret beyond Mahat. 
It is unfathomable, having no destructibility, 
the abode of delusion of the Universe. By the 
lumination and temperament, it is the cause of 
the realization of human aims. 
fqgT *1%: FBT^TTrtFT:! 
TTfiiTW ?TP8RTtTII 
It is the firm resolve of those having 
knowledge of Samkhya. It is afforder of the 
alliance of self, which is the unmanifest, 
immortal, eternal Brahman and the cause of 
Prakrti. 
WMqirWlfay- ^ TT^I 
STf^fFTWT cTgdWd^ll 
TRqunit ^nr: 119^11 
It is called Pradhana, the source of the soul 
and the esoteric spirit. It is indivisible, the Sukra 
(essence), imperishable and multiformed. An 
obeisance be quite perennially to Parama- 
Brahman. 
^cf jq: ferr qrfRi Tj^n^crf^ni 
TTf^cT ^ -^di^dqii 11 
SltaoET ^ SRt gisfa 
^ITdoq- ^ETTST TSfS^T €TII 
sta ^rmoET cnssr fg*rTim*ii 
There is no any religious act in the Krta 
Yuga. How can there be an unprescribed rite? 
In this world whatever is once done or whatever 
is committed or omitted, whatever has been 
heard or should be heard, whether good or bad, 
what should be known, pondered over, touched 
or enjoyed, seen heard or realized- (all these are 
created by Brahman). 
#RT ?TR fit 
^r| #ram 
^rtssrataii ^ ^ n

=== PAGE 474 ===

422 
Vayu-Puraga 
Whatever has been shown by Him 
(Brahman) is the (only) knowledge of Devarsis. 
Who can scrutinize that which He has pointed 
out? It is the lord alone who has declared all 
things to all. 
^ ^ famferqi IW11 
One gets identified with whatever is done by 
him. What is done by one, is previously 
conceived by another (i.e. by Brahman). 
<T fchf-ei^H cwfaqj 
rldjid ^ cb^UII 3Tfrnn1% ^\\ ^^11 
When (even) an effort of speech is made by 
anyone anywhere, that is done by Him 
(Brahman) only. The act (merely) appears to be 
done by the doer. 
fd4j|y)'MMIW^c)|<jycbRumj| WCII 
Passionlessness, over-attachment, 
knowledge, ignorance, pleasure, displeasure, 
Dharma and Adharma (good and evil), 
happiness, sorrow, death, immortality, the state 
of being above, below or at the sides- all these 
are due to the unseen (Adrsta, destiny). 
wwitssr ip: 
wfo &nf*=rg gq:ii^n 
STWrr d&l*Ag JT: TfT:l 
4d^fmS^ diw4cRc)r)^ll W ° II 
In every Treta Ages, Svayambhuva (Manu), 
the eldest son of Brahma, the Supreme God, is 
the only knower of all lores, which he classifies 
in the Dvapara Age. In the Vaivasvata 
Manvantara, it is Brahma who teaches that lore 
at the outset. 
shci4hhi wn wr?rm tr-. tr:i 
O O O O 
TTftcTT # *TRmFTT: V^WT^tl^^ll 
The sages compose and propagate Samhitas, 
being bom frequently in the revolving cycles of 
the Yugas. 
mT3=r ^%rr ft: ^t:ii ^ii 
Eighty thousand of the Srutarsis stand 
known as such and these Samhitas get repetition 
again and again. 
TJT: tot oCTRW t: TFT: tr-.II^ 
\j s5 *0 O s3 * 1 
Resorted to the southern route and attained 
to the cemeteries, in every age, those recensions 
are rearranged again and again. 
frrr Trilfew: totc 'ffcnm? tr: trt:ii 
?fT: ww irgRff? fn^n^n ^*11 
In all the Dvaparas, the Samhitas have been 
composed by Srutarsis. In their lineage, 
recensions grow time and again. Those very 
recensions, their redactors happen to be here 
owing the sustenance or dissolution of the aeon. 
TTcfircT W oildldHHI^ftd^l 
^^•#5 yiKsnyuwdifd in ^mi 
This very way deserve to be recognised that 
the composition of all different branches in the 
past and future Manvantaras takes place in a 
similar way. 
SftflcTCT STdlcTlfd RlSIdq ^1 
^fdbillfui W TJTft ^4u4^SMI*Mi||l ^ ^ II 
(The composition of the branches of Veda) 
of the past (Manvantaras) have elapsed, those of 
the present (Manvantara) exist, and those of the 
future (Manvantara) will be described in the 
future. 
Term xjtsrsnri 
Uc^T ^dlto(UT) 
^V9|| 
By the earlier one, the posterior one 
deserves to be recognised and by the present 
one, both deserve to be recognised. The 
determination of the Manavantara becomes 
apparent on this basis.

=== PAGE 475 ===

Chapter-61 
423 
Tier ^cjisr fwr wit w %i 
T&: wrssf wfcr ri t: him <sn 
Thus Gods, Manes, Rsis and Manus, who 
proceed upwards along with the Mantras, they 
get to the repeated norm once again along with 
them. 
SHcltWTTT: ^ 5^:1 
Vg^'Fl TTJTT^ WTT («T)W WII W <? II 
l [cm rtc^l IT ill 
rTcT^ ^tara^T TORT lYiqcigTqil ^ O II 
From Janaloka, the gods in entirety are 
generated at the appropriate time again and 
again for ten Kalpas. Then they are linked with 
inevitable destiny. Thereafter, they perceive that 
birth to be full of defects and associated with 
diseases. 
ftel# rT^TT ^frl^mmc^Yfaldl 
rrsf ^WTT% TO fe^TII ^ ?ll 
Becomes rescinded the tendency of those 
one till the time of detection of faults. This way, 
the rebirths of Devas continue for ten Celestial 
Yugas before they stop. 
TJcj ?OTI% TOTtrTTft TtfW:ll 
froi updtli t Trrnf^r wh ^ ? n 
From Janaloka, they attain to regainment in 
the Tapaloka and from there they do not return. 
This way, the Deva Yugas stand passed by 
thousand-fold, and finally (they) attain to 
defunction in the Brahmaloka along with the 
sages. 
q ■YTWTR^OT TOT nfTOTTRI 
SRlfTOTOI IJIfW 3TWIHreg R%:ll??3 
It is not possible to talk of this details as per 
descending order owing to iron-primeval 
capacity of time and unaccountability as such. 
n-cw<iuiidldift 'Sift gTO: TO nil 
nrsf TOfbfasr 
gn#r yfa^gwi tort ^ faciYmji ^ii 
The Manvantaras of the previous Kalpas that 
have gone before along with Manes, Sages, 
Gods and the group of Seven Sages with time, 
of the Yugas revoked as such having been 
resurrected. 
tjYt wftYr(ur) groTORTOfar tti 
TOTrfq oudTdiPi totoyttssct «igavT:ii ^mi 
By this calculation of serial order, the 
Manvantaras of the Kalpas passed by along 
with the progenies in hundreds and thousands. 
TORTTR* WTT: -RflTRr W WT:I 
'dddRigdlUTt €T TO: fq^fhTOTg‘11^^11 
q wnTR^for gnr gtJroyfai 
PcRd'fW fTO 11 HI WTHI g- II 
PTOTO WIT 5 TO TO fqWfll ^V9|| 
At the end of the Manvantara, the 
dissolution and at the end or culmination of the 
dissolution, the regeneration of Gods, Sages, 
Pitrs and Manus cannot be described in detail 
and in due order even in hundreds of years. The 
details of the creation and dissolution cannot be 
stated. Now you may understand the duration of 
a Manvantara, by a human counting. 
Ywri^ui'i n WTOtffg-?iR$:i 
fTOTg^Rf YWi: WTO: whit ft$:ii 
wgfgHMTsnnfq Pradift w wtoti 
frofgsr wwifti groYn uifychifediii ^ <> ii 
TORTTHI WMI TOYrT ychlfHrTTI 
•o 
dtnYftg fiTOT Jig^n«g"*rR to: ii y* o n 
By those skilled in the purpose of 
calculating the duration of a Manvantara, it is 
thirty crores sixty-seven million twenty 
thousand years excluding the period of transit. 
This counting of a Manvantara has been 
declared by the human standards (i.e. according 
to human years). Now by the Divya Vatsara 
(celestial years), I shall talk of the interval of 
Manvantara.

=== PAGE 476 ===

424 
Vayu-Purana 
wszm T*rerei 
f^nyiTrarcreift ^^nu^(ira>ifH p rsqii 
Eight hundred fifty-two thousand years is 
the duration of a Manvantara according to the 
celestial calculation. 
^cJcfrppTt ire Wire 3TWcTWre:l 
Fourteen-fold of this is the period of floods 
all around (the period of final dissolution). A 
thousand sets of four Yugas constitute a day of 
Brahma, understood as such. 
C\ 
unrew: fjreT ^^m^.-ii 
Thereafter, all the beings will be burnt by 
the solar beams. Keeping Brahma at the head 
and accompanied by Devas, Sages and 
Danavas, they will enter lord Mahesvara, the 
most excellent among Devas. 
*T WT ■Hcf'Mdlfa ire: tR;i 
C\ O O 
f^rejrert ^ ^in w'tsn 
He is the creator of all the beings at the 
inception of each Kalpa or aeon, time and again. 
This way stands reckoned the time of the 
existence of Manu along with gods and sages. 
dretail *rr 
**mi 
Of all the Manvantaras, you may know the 
interim period of transition1, O Innocent ones! 
(The period) what is called Yuga has been 
already recounted to you by me before. 
TRWrmmt srara *pic*rrt:ii ii 
Combined as Krta (golden), Treta and the 
like group of Yugas, being of four-fold norm, 
1. V.S. Apte, p. 360. 
have been illustrated. When it revolves into 
seventeen cycles, it is the period of a 
Manvantara. This has been spoke out by the 
adorable overlord or the supreme being. 
T3=r TRjwwi w s&nita reareri 
3refrrerrreTRT $ crcfrrere c&ffcwn 
Thus, the characteristics of the Manvantaras 
of the past and the future are explained through 
the present Manvantara. 
i?4re TThf *RT: -tdld'ftd'W ft 
ctw ^crrerPT p ^6 n 
And this way has been illustrated the 
creation of Svayambhuva Manu and now I shall 
talk of the period of transition which links it 
with the following Manvantara. 
tfcrr 'resrr 
W ftp’ll 
The Manvantaras of the future shall also 
pass as in the earlier period along with Gods 
and Sages through the inevitability of destiny. 
Cv so 
wfctSJ ^c(T& fR'TRMTl 
7T ftdul dll£J«fcl4r1«lll?h o II 
Earlier in this Manvantara, those who were 
the overlords of the triad of worlds, the 
Saptarsis, Gods, Manes and Manus, are known 
as Sadhakas throughout the duration of this 
Manvantara. 
^mnfcbRT: tffre <gds=n wupr:i 
Tfprfanre ^ Trem ?fa? ufap ^ 
Having realized the expiry of their tenure 
and the fall from authority, they eagerly turn to 
go to Maharloka. 
rfftt rffw^UH cTT:l 
TPTtlf felfdcSlH cT <J*T Will ^ 3 II 
Cs sO c sO *s * 
Then in that Manvantara, the gods of 
dissipated norm were eulogised and at the 
culmination of the time of existence, they abide 
by the Krta Yuga.

=== PAGE 477 ===

Chapter-61 
425 
33T?T3 
ifcrTT: ftrirltW ^RTt *TII ^ 3 II 
Shall take birth the future ones, all such time 
the overlords of Manvantaras, Gods, Manes, 
Sages and Manus and the like. 
*TSRli f3l 
Wlrf f«t tlj ef#|fvi^ # TR^II ^*11 
In every Manvantara it is the surviving 
subjects at the end of Kaliyugas who constitute 
the earlier subjects of the Krta Yugas. 
My i cbrfW t 
*4-d-cKi^M anf^f^TTFJ m ^mi 
Like the continuity of Krta Yuga is 
remembered as preceded by Kali Yuga by 
learned men, so also the beginning of 
Manvantaras is preceded by the end of (the 
previous) Manvantara. 
#Tf 'bcf TTfrT ^tTPt 33:1 
g# fKlf^nsr ^ rRJII ^ $ II 
yidtjtrt ebltfl^lHjf % 1wn:l 
TP3RJT 33t8pT 33fa iwT:ll ^V3II 
On the truncation of the earlier Manvantara 
and at the inception of the later one, those who 
survive in the beginning of the Krta Yuga, viz. 
the Seven Sages and Manu, remain biding their 
time, stationed in penance. 
3i33qsf u 31%: l 
For the purpose of stability or provision of 
the Manvantaras and for the sake of progeny all 
over, they do continue actively at the ensuement 
of the release of rains. 
5% %% *n 
ttstto ^ %3T3r cwfci^fcidn ^<? 
The couples get regeneration and the 
medicinal herbs or plants begin to grow. The 
progenies build abodes and begin to live at 
different places. 
cjrafat 3 3ffrirat 3% 
Phh^ ^ 3i ^rramftrii ^ o ii 
Varta (Agriculture, Economics and Animal 
Husbandry) ensue and the Righteous conduct 
sponsored by sages begin to function. The 
world goes joyless when the mobile and 
immobile beings die. 
TgfaeRk ^ <Mc|% *aifiJchl:U 
3^3) 3^ 33141*1 
The paucity of villages and towns because 
of the non-employment takes place. The order 
of society and stages of life gets disturbed. At 
that time, the Saptar$is, Manu and those 
virtuous persons who survive the previous 
Manvantara exert themselves for procreation. 
TFsnsf cTWT cPT: tnuggr^i 
3373% 3% 3%: n ^ ? ii 
%mr: Pm^iuii %t mywyii 
3% 33T: ftyirensr 3% ^m^TT: II ^ 3 11 
Even on their taking to austere penance 
difficult to be performed for the Devas, Asuras, 
Pitrganas, Munis, Sarpas, Bhutas, Pisacas, 
Gandharvas, Yaksas and Raksasas, they take 
rebirth1 all over at the death of earlier persons. 
dd*rt^T ?T ^ 1?(gT: 
333% 33^3 3% ?ll 
JfR^ 3 efinffcrr -qqw 3% 3T?n ^3*11 
Then among those survived, the 
sophisticated ones talk of the etiquettes of 
suavity. Saptar§is and Manu, at the inception of 
the Manvantara, commence their holy rites, 
along with the gods and the human beings. 
TRT33T3T STFta 33:1 
o -o 
3^ <3133dW t f^JrT 3 3%: II ^mi 
ww TTcerrs^csr 3 33: i 
1. is an error for W as a metrical 
exigency.

=== PAGE 478 ===

426 
Vayu-Puraiia 
fq^oit Tmn # ^Hifasriwi otth^ii 
At the inception of a Manvantara as in the 
opening of the Treta Yuga, when gods and men 
(exist) and subsequently incline towards the 
stability of the Dharma all over, they absolve 
themselves from the indebtedness to Sages by 
observing celibacy, to Pitrs by procreation and 
to the Gods by performance of sacrifices. 
w enS^lRil # dulled fwi:l 
5rsff gr?rf <ju^4Hd yiif^uifejniwy'ii 
Wlk T^t; || ^ || 
For a hundred thousand years, existing in the 
practice of virtue pertaining to the orders of 
society and after establishing Tray! (the triad of 
Vedas), Varta (economics, agriculture and 
animal husbandry) for livelihood, Dandaniti 
(the policy of law and order), having established 
the Laws pertaining to orders of society and 
stages of life and the hermitages for virtuous 
state of life, they desire to attain heaven. 
C\ ' O \3 S3 
# #1 ^ fwi srrftrr '$rH?l: II ^ II 
After they have set out for heaven, these 
very gods at the outset stood firm in absolution 
in law or piety. 
tofr to# #?r:i 
Wf^T wfeRTWTII ^ II 
At the end of Manvantara, having 
abandoned the spots all over along with the 
Mantras1, they move upwards to the Maharloka 
having no maladies at all. 
#RfkB^n^rTwra^ii ?^oii 
Having deformities revoked, those ones 
stationed within the mental state, attentive as 
such, the restrained ones, stay along till the 
insurgence of a dissolution. 
1. JI^Pd - Here is written printed as 
TI Verse 169, pada 3. 
rTTOfa 35R7% ##l 
# '#?T:ll 
C\ s3 \3 O 
#3# #T % wfalftR:ll ^^11 
rR# ?TTOT ^JtFT ■WRPJTTOjfk tl 
n3 C\ 
^ ^mfkHT:ll ^11 
Then on all those having gone bye, when all 
the abodes of gods become desolate within the 
triad of words all around, other gods who had 
been the denizens of heaven, endowed with 
penance, well-equipped with austerity, 
truthfulness, celibacy and learning, occupy 
those places. 
ywfuii TRtlk #Rt fq#r: ^i 
##Trf#T ^ TOfro^rnroii ^311 
Of Saptarsis and Manu, and of gods along 
with the manes, the deaths here of the earlier 
ones by a beginning of the future ones. 
# traktjfar fkfro?T5#krnii 
^l<^Wd<HkdcWII ^V9^|| 
Their final resolution takes place at the end 
of the Manvantaras. They proceed endlessly in 
the same order in all the Manvantaras, till the 
destruction having ensued. 
3i'didMmdwi ?r w# wii ^mi 
Thus the definition of Pratisandhana (i.e. 
period of transition between two ages)2 of the 
past and future Manvantaras have been 
proclaimed by Svayambhuva Manu. 
M^#bddldd 'dkrouTt rt mm\ 
O s3 *v 
njffRTI| II 
In the Manvantaras gone bye, the means of 
the coming ones, are snapped completely 
through the final dissolution. 
2. V.S. Apte, p. 360.

=== PAGE 479 ===

Chapter-61 
427 
TO 
TJchRPTTp W ^raf^cT ^11 ^9V9|| 
After the decline of all Manvantaras, these 
attain Maharloka1 and from Maharloka they 
attain Jana, Tapah and Satya Lokas. 
cT^tRiTi ^ 
?T Hrd^dll 
■Wc^l dc;l jT dlfa 
JfTO fefcR JlfrHT'folvRl ^\9<MI 
tT^TTMt t)Rc(folft 
■q^T WQ <T TKTtSWrtll 
\3 O 
RtttRcT HKiyuifrd ^rn n 
Then by a vision of the coming ones and by 
the confidence of the one having been seen 
manifoldly, stationed in Satya Loka, but when 
aberrations set in at the time of the end of 
Manvantara, they leave off Satya Loka. They 
enter the body of Lord Narayana of vast 
insensible size with devotion. 
TT^RThli' HfTc^ta 
Rroif^g farfsrwrramii 
$iut Tff %f?r 
^^4n«n yR^qN:ii^oii 
In all the transformations of the Manvantaras 
of long-tenured existence, the world of living 
beings2 does not remain even for a single 
moment. Owing to the nature of destiny, this 
world undergoes changes by way of decrease or 
increase. 
yqlrM^i M^'ii m^hihu 
1. The fourth of the seven worlds rising one above the 
other from the earth being between Svar and Janas. 
2. is a misprint for plural erratic for 
singular. 
Thus the narrative of the Manus, of divine 
vision, having souls of spiritual .goodness, who 
are virtuosity adored by the sages, who are the 
subsequent ones, has been recounted partly in 
expansion and partly in brief This is the 
composition of Vayu, which can be obtained by 
those with divine valour. 
'O 
HiR^lTn^r ^ii 
fflnRr ^cycFuRckfmRni \c ? n 
All the changes refer to the Sage-kings, 
Celestial Sages, Brahmanas, Devas, Serpents, 
alligned by Indra, the lord of Devas, the Seven 
Sages, the Manes and the Lords of the subjects. 
^KciyiiRwadVi 
ctfRsiiid^iRiimPcWMi 
TO 
II U'SH 
It is highly meritorious to eulogise the lords 
having radiance of noble birth and generous 
lineages, impulsed by exquisite intellects, 
endowed with popularity, splendour and fame. 
v3 ^ > 
WZl 
§:MCiviiRi: ^nrraWru 
This salubrious for heaven is highly 
sanctified and this one beneficial for sons, is a 
high-pronged secret. It should be recited during 
great Parvan days. It is acquiescence of bad 
dreams and is great eligibility for longevity. 
n^gf^qgjraRi 
tmiRf 
RrRj ^ n 
This Purana contains the narratives of 
Manus, Devarsis and Prajes'as (the Lords of

=== PAGE 480 ===

428 
Vayu-Purana

=== PAGE 481 ===

428 
Vayu-Purana 
II3T2T %q%rt?r5S2im:ll 
Chapter 62 
The observation on the recreation of 
the Manvantaras headed by 
Svayambhuva 
viiympw 
3PT H*ccn<|uii ^ dr^rl: I 
^cKrrai ^ § xt tiww). xrrr:ii 
Samsapayana spoke- I am eager to know in 
serial order the factual representation of the 
Manvantaras as also of the Divinities in 
entirety, pertaining to different Manvantaras. 
JRRTCTfOT ^dtaRPRTlft ?l 
fsrat t ^rateRtn ^ n 
Suta replied- The Manvantaras that have 
gone bye and those likely to ensue, you may 
understand as I narrate them succinctly or in 
details. 
WWI *R: TTcf T&: ^trfaw4TI 
O O Cs O 
rT8TT 
The first Manu was Svayambhuva and then 
there was Svarocisa Manu. Thereafter the 
Manus were- Auttama, Tamasa, Raivata and 
Caksusa. These six Manus have already passed 
away. I shall now talk of eight Manus that are 
yet to come. 
JJMuri: 'jftcSt terewi 
fimi 
Five Savamas, Raucya, Bhautya and 
Vaivasvata, I shall talk of these to begin with in 
precedence of Vaivasvata Manu. 
W: w 
TPaRlt W rTtrfi 3TRT 'WV-Wycy f|| ^ || 
The five Manus that have passed away, to 
them you understand as Manavas. By me has 
been already described the Manvantara of 
Svayambhuva Manu which has already passed. 
37rr 3®# jraazrrfir trT: wmfdnw 
Wirnf tWR:ii^n 
After this, 1 shall talk of Manu Svaroci§a 
(name of the second Manu)1, the second one, 
the great-souled one and the creation of progeny 
in brief (in that Manvantara). 
3TR(4 
! 
MKHdlSJ f^gRTt f Tyxifr T^fll^ll 
In the Svarocisa Manvantara, there were the 
gods called Tusitas2 (a class of sub-ordinate 
deities said to be 12 or 36 in number) and the 
learned Paravatas3, the scholars (being a class 
of deities under Manu Svarocisa). Only these 
two were remembered as the groups of Devas. 
1. V.S. Apte, p. 633. The names of the 14 Manus in 
order are : V V ^<]p44, 3. 4^41, *. 
dtnA tsRf,, C. VllcriV, 
^o. u. qfoigf&i, u. 
KHwfSi, ^M^oRnoifSr, v*. '^loipSn a 
symbolical expression for number fourteen, V.S. 
Apte, pp. 423-424. 
2. V.S. Apte, p. 237. 
3. MW, p.620.

=== PAGE 482 ===

Chapter-62 
429 
dfMdmi ^cTT: W: 
<3 v5 O 
twisr sT<?ft rft ^rpfhi 
^ cT^T T^cThlldll 
They were bom of Tusita as the sons of 
Kratu, the Svarocisa (Manu). The Paravatas and 
the remaining ones- these two Garias consist of 
twelve each. All these Devas together are 
known as Chandajas and they are twenty-four 
in number. 
dwpft Trtnr 
WH%T fftmST RSldcd:ll II 
3d<*yift ^idi^4^wisnftr cfofarRi 
amt dlTd r^hii n 
3FSI2J dfddT: i|iTe|^fSdT:l 
^ fcdQdKd ddT55'^mt||fiTd:ll ^11 
The sons of Kratu were- Dhaivasyasa, 
Vamanya, Gopa, Devayata, lord Aja, the 
adorable god Durona of mighty power, Apa, the 
mighty-armed one, highly chivalrous Mahaujas, 
Vlryavan, Cikitvan, Nibhrta, and Amsa. They 
were then the imbibers of Soma. Aja was the 
twelfth among them well-known as Tusitas. 
This way, these sons of Kratu then happened to 
be as drinkers of Soma. 
ferm dgr ^(^igif^T:ii 
3Tf^TFmfmFrr fdcrrd-di ^ri 
STjfoft ^ 'RitHTPiT -ddtw wradrrll ^11 
ffdT d xmdJRTr: TJJddl: I 
The Paravatas of great exploit were- Lord 
Pracetas, Visvadeva, well-known Samahja, 
Ajihma, the suppresser of enemies, Arimardana, 
Ajihmana and Mahlyana endowed with 
learning, the two Ajopas, greatly fortunate ones, 
Yaviya, the highly powerful one, Hota and 
Yajva. This way, these deities happened to be in 
the intermediary period of Svarocisa 
Manvantara. 
Trmq ud ddr 
^Mirn^Wdl WWrtdiJ c^t^fdfd:ll II 
These Hotas, the twenty four gods, then 
happened to be Soma drinkers. Their Indra 
(ruler) was Vaidha was world-famous. 
37df dfwp^d TdTR: W^dtT TJcf dl 
ddT ^HITT WTTSf^RddTII ^ II 
cfdlfdTlitdT fedTfddTI 
MfHitW d dTdHd RrT TgdT:) II ^11 
Urja, the son of Vasistha, Stambha the son 
of Kasyapa, Drona the son of Bhargava, R$abha 
the son of Angiras, Dattatri the son of 
Paulastya, Niscala the son of Atreya, and 
Dhavan the son of Paulaha- these are well- 
known as Saptar$is (Seven Sages). 
^T: chf^t)Cl^fcT firTRTt Tfo: I 
RcgNf ^TRT# dd RJdT: II u II 
RRf: wftfdd^ ddT d^IdJTT: ^dT:l 
RTIRt dfrwddT f|dtd ^dcpdTRlI \\II 
Caitra, Kavimta, Krtanta, Vibhrta, Ravi, 
Brhat, Guha, Nava and Subha- these are known 
as nine sons of Svarocisa Manu, also known as 
Vamsakaras (establishers of their race), 
enumerated in this Purana. Such is the second 
Manvantara. 
wJdi fcfircgr dpddi 
RH R^RRR^I ddt Tf5lT:ll^o|| 
CV 
Saptar$is, Manu, Devas and Pitaras- this 
group of four constitute the root of a 
Manvantara. All the progenies are subsidiary to 
them. 
dRTTUTt ^ddT: ddT: ftjdft ^fdd:l 
Of Rsis, sons are Devatas and Pitaras are the 
sons of Devas and Rsis being the sons of Devas. 
This verily, forms the facet of scriptures. 
*Rt: fopi^N' TP<Tf§Wr fold'd:I 
TRRRcRTt ^frR WRT5T <T f^TTTcTII ^ t II

=== PAGE 483 ===

430 
Vayu-Purana 
Of Manu, Ksatriyas and Vaisyas were bom 
and from Saptarsis, the Dvijatis (Brahmanas) 
were bom. This way, the Manvantara has been 
described succinctly and not in details. 
fWTTT di 
o * o 
q ^TcRd fcTW-RdTd 
WSfPTifOTrd TRTRt ^ fdfll ^ ? II 
By Svayambhuva Manvantara, the detail 
description is to be understood of Svarocisa 
Manvantara. It is not possible to dilate upon the 
description of that one even in hundreds of 
years, owing to superfluity subjects of 
progenies in every lineage. 
TTTT: I 
w ^cFiun: ^Tbrww^ifM ftcftadii 
The third among the Manvantaras is the 
Manvantara of Auttama. Five Devaganas will 
be illustrated by me, I shall talk of these. You 
may know these. 
rnmfw ^ ^ d^rafifo:) 
f^raT: qw w n 
The Devas are Sudhamanas1, Vasavartins, 
Pratardanas, Sivas and Satyas. Each of these 
Ganas consists of twelve Devas. 
qw tgfd^ cnqr: $pt: $rnrr ^jfd:i 
fdTwfer mi dgariicr ?R7tii 
qrqf^r: ^rqrr: wiqiq^ ^ mi 
Satya, Dhrti, Dama, Danta, Ksama, Ksama, 
Dhrti, Suci, Isa, Urjjas, Jyestha and the twelfth 
one Vapu§man- by these names were (known 
as) twelve Sudhamans. 
qjpjsjrft fawn 
few fowif d dqqdqfr fvrr^ic ii q mi 
fep® ^f^qr4?raqfqtrr:i 
Sahasradhara, Visvatman, Samitara, 
Brhadvasu, Visvadha, Visvakarma, 
Manasvanta, Virad, Yasas, Jyotis, Vibhavya 
1. A Devagana of Raivata Manvantara, p. 526. 
Pauranika Kosa. 
and Klrtiman- these are twelve Vamsakarin 
Devas. 
fc*d*et4t:ll ^\9ll 
'3 S3 
f^OTd: WIT d SIWTT d#Tdq':l 
' \S sS Cs 
ifRcrigid Trq^qT:iR<iii 
Anyatia, Radhita, Lord Vasu, Dhi$na, 
Vivasvasu, Dinakratu, Sudharma, Dhrtavarma, 
Yasasvina and Ketuman- these are construed as 
Pramardanas.^ 
iqrqdtrs%?T ^d w^q^rwii 
^rt ddw q <> u 
dd disdfdsNr qrfddqRdqdwn 
# if^TT df^idT iid?nw:ii3°ii 
Hamsa, Svara, Ahiha, Pratardana, 
Yasaskara, Sudana, Vasudana, Sumanjasa, 
Visa, Yattuvahyati, Suvitta and Sunaya- these, 
deserve to be known as Sivas. They are the 
twelve different gods worthy of partaking their 
share in sacrifice. 
TrfcRqmft qrmfq fqdidd trarortn 
fdddfddWqfrfsN' fd^: dll 3 ?ll 
qcipi^fimd ddfdT pHjtvT:l 
drodsj qr^rasr dii ? q u 
The names of Satya category of Devas are- 
Dikpati, Vakpati, Visva, Sambhu, Svamrdlka, 
Adhipa, Varcodhas, Muhyasarvasa, Vasava, 
Sadasva, Ksenia and Ananda. Understand these 
names as agreed (by sages of yore). 
tot # d%dr ZR&mru:i 
^rtldl ^ddT ddf:ll 3 3II 
These Satyas are twelve other Devas who 
are sacrifice-worthy. This way, these Devatas 
were there in the Auttama Manvantara. 
^iq^grrafadt d^i^dqddi 113*11 
2. Pratardanagana- a group of twelve gods of the 
Manvantara of Uttama Manu. (Pauranika Kosa, p. 
330).

=== PAGE 484 ===

Chapter-62 
431 
feqtaSJ Tpfepj ^fer: I 
sftrmFT tRT: 'q^IrtR:ll 
1?^ ^MUldlO^dlii 
Aja, Parasu, Divya, Divyausadhi, Naya, the 
unparelled Devanuja, Mahotsaha, Ausija, 
Vinlta, Suketu, Sumitra, Subala and Suci- these 
thirteen were the noble-souled sons of the Manu 
Auttama. These ones were the progenitors of 
Ksattras and made them flourish. Such is the 
third Manvantara. 
sfcrot tiftwnrr: wrtfg^JT 31 
The activity of creation etc. in the course of 
Auttama Manvantara has been explained 
through that of Svarocisa Manvantara. Now 
listen and understand the creation etc. in the 
Tamasa Manvantara in detail and in the proper 
order. 
TRFTt:I 
(ggrr: Tc[wn: -gfagr wni^n 
In the fourth Manvantara of the Manu 
Tamasa, Satyas, Svariipas, Sudhis and Haris 
were the four Ganas (groups). 
wrwr^l ^TnW1MW4RI> *Ht:l 
s3 s3 S3 
The sons of the son of Pulastya (manifested 
themselves) in the Manvantara of the Manu 
Tamasa. Each group of these gods consisted of 
twenty-five (gods). 
^qi'Tli Wi gfg gqg: gfggRrii 
y'rMsnTnrg #§ngrwi2NsTTWTii 
^g?rr:u ^ ^ 11 
A centum of senses (Indriyas) and Tamas 
(Darkness), the eighth one, which the foremost 
sages who value truth as life, enunciate, are 
recognised as the Devas in that Manvantara of 
Manu. 
rftt g jrg^cfHi fylfot: sgrwqi 
^g djfUU)43TT wht:ii^oii 
And the master of those gods was Sivirindra, 
or Sivi as Indra, the prowessed one. O excellent 
ones, understand the seven sages of that period. 
^fg cbi^M: -gg^g gi 
iftt# d-Ridgi ifenfgB Tig gi 
Harsa, the son of Kavya; Prthu, the son of 
Kasyapa; Agni, the son of Atri; Jyotirdhaman, 
the son of Bhargava; Vanapltha, the son of 
Paulaha; Gotra, the son of Vasistha; and Caitra, 
the son of Paulastya were the (seven) sages that 
happened to be in the Tamasa Manvantara. 
ddUcr^gT TTrfcm: 
wfrst 3stHrT:ii 
-Eriggsr tow ggt: wt.-ii^ii 
•o ' 
Janughanda, Santi, Nara, Khyati, Bhaya, 
Priyabhrtya, Avaksi, Pr$thalodha, Drdhodyata, 
Rta and Rtabandhu were the sons of Tamasa 
Manu. 
TIfft gg Tjyfo tRtsjTfTWi^sgti 
quTng ^dRl fqgtagii's'su 
'O v3 ' 
Then within the fifth Manvantara of Manu 
Carisnava, the ganas became well-proclaimed 
of the gods. You may understand them. 
c CS s3 s3 
gfooTftg ^tot: w gftwr Tr3nq%:ii 
gg£?r g quii^ui g gregg.-n^mi 
s3 s3 
Amrtatma, Bhutarajas, Vikunthas along with 
Sumedhasas were the auspicious sons of 
Carisnu alias Vasistha, the Prajapati. Fourteen 
and four (i.e. eighteen) were their shining 
Ganas. 
gifgqr<:^cir^gTii * 11 
s3 
yfU-uvT^ g gTcgr 
srirngT: TinT: 11% 
Svapna, Vipra, Agnibhasa, Pratyetistha,

=== PAGE 485 ===

432 
Vayu-Purapa 
Amrta, Sumati, Vavirava, Vacinoda, Srava, 
PravirasI, Vada and Prasa- these were the 
fourteen Amrtabhas remembered as the Gods in 
the Carisnava Manvantara. 
•o 
TTcfr fTOT ^ rTII *<£ II 
^ttt fsiwr: 
■o -o 
^tt% qrtnfq ottotort ^ n 
Mati, Sumati, Rta, Satya, Avrti, Vivrti, 
Mada, Vinaya, Jeta, Jisnu, Sahas, Dyutiman and 
Sravasa- these are the names of Abhutarajas 
Ganas as (they) know. 
^T?Tt 
tot fi# ^flfr pswi 
chlft’dPW tol3T t WIRd ItoTOu U, o I! 
Vr§a, Bhetta, Jaya, Bhlma, Suci, Danta, 
Yasa, Dama, Natha, Vidvan, Ajeya, Krsa, 
Gaura and Dhruva are remembered as 
Vikunthas. You may know the Sumedhas. 
•^TofttsrT^snsr qfaitsns *r: Rjd-.u 
xr <*iftdRd RireRTum^ii 
O s? 
Medha, Medhatithi, Satyamedha, 
Prsnimedha, Alpamedha, Bhuyomedha and 
others, the lord Dlptimedha, Yasomedha, 
Sthiramedha, S arvamedha, Asvamedha, 
Pratimedha, Medhavan and Medhaharta are 
remembered as Sumedhas. 
qTlHT^Jl Wdiqi xT 
r^.uiiBMi^wi ^rnfcrti 
SE&iTpr enfRg: q^fcr: qWgwanii 
WTT Wr^IIH'SII 
Vibhu of well-known prowess and 
enormous vitality was their Indra. Vedabahu, 
son of Paulastya; the sage called Yaju, the son 
of Kasyapa; Hiranyaroma, son of Arigiras; 
VedasrI, son of Bhargava; Urdhvabahu, the son 
of Vasi$tha; Parjanya, son of Paulaha; and 
Satyanetra, son of Atri- these were then the 
(seven) sages in the Manvantara of Raivata 
Manu. 
<|<osid:ll 
vfmmzr tor^ w uyii 
Mahapuranasambhavya, Pratyahgaparaha, 
Suci, Balabandhu, Niramitra, Ketubhrhga and 
Drdhavrata were the sons of Carisnava. Such is 
the fifth Manvantara. 
wdfeqfrrosNr diror Itorwti 
fWsfrTORJT # xfigRt q t- II 
Svarocisa, Auttama, Tamasa and Raivatas- 
these four belong to the lineage of Priyavrata. 
TOxRT qqk ^ciT % 
3trar: jpgfrr vmm ygmf t.-ii 
TOgroiT dbsnsr w d^rnw: ^ptitimvan 
Then in the sixth exchange or upheaval of 
the Caksu§a Manvantara, the gods are 
remembered as consisting of five Ganas- 
Adyas, Prasutas, Bhavyas, the heaven-dwelling 
Prthukas and the Lekhas of great dignity. 
fag'll: in* item tn^Tmfir:i 
3^: W TOR 3JRUiJW WTO: II 
\3 
TOST rfqt ^afR|i)'«h«l RJdTrimill 
This creation of heaven-dwellers is 
illustrated by the names of their mothers. The 
Ganas of those Devas are the great-grandsons of 
Aranya, the Prajapati, the son of Atri. Each of 
these groups is remembered as comprising of 
eight Devas. 
yRiqi frfdfer iwd:i 
srtar tot fTOT xt arraT # 
Antariksa, Vasu, Haya, Atithi, Priyavrata, 
Srota, Manta and Sumanta- these are known as 
Adyas.

=== PAGE 486 ===

Chapter-62 
433 
■gtRisr ^?nsr W: ^«^rdw:ii 
: srrar: uRc^feitn^oii 
Svenabhadra, Pasya, Pathyanetra of great 
fame, Sumanas, Suvetas, Revata, Supracetas 
and Dyuti of great prowess are known as 
Prasutyas. 
few: f^ragtcf Tntupfr rfer 
■pffr: ipRsN' fencitesfafej sr: u 
wn # ^rTT ^T: feNltlll $ ^11 
Vijaya, Sujaya, Mana, Udyana, Sumati, 
Supari, Vijnata and Arthapati- these gods are 
remembered as Bhavyas. Now you know about 
the Prthukas. 
3d%g: yncHH> dHygw&r *n 
viid><: ■Mbu^tujsr fepr few^rani 
WWFT: 
Ajista, the Lord Sakyana, Vanaprstha, 
Sankara, Satyadhrsnu, Visnu, Vijaya and the 
highly fortunate Ajita are the heaven-dwelling 
Prthukas. 
iWiwii jra^nfir pwt if Rrafen 
■qfew: sramtjj warw Ttfi?r?n:ii^^ii 
^TcTT 'd)'4dHI 
afet ^wldsN #0T: *wR<£)fei: 11^*11 
I shall now talk of Lekhas. Understand as I 
talk of them. Manojava, Praghasa, Pracetas, the 
highly reputed one, Vata, Dhruvaksiti, Adbhuta, 
the valiant one, Avana and Brhaspati are the 
Lekhas, declaimed as such. 
TRfeft u^icTi 4 w m i 
3?RTf wfeN ?fenT%Trp:ii^mi 
wrr gn^wq^tcT gRrst 
srfem fercw-. Tiferr: mIhotii 
two^r w ct xn^fenRii^u 
Manojava of great virility and prowess 
happened to be their Indra. Unnata, son of 
Bhargava; Havisman, the son of Arigiras; 
Sudhaman, the son of Kasyapa; Virajas, son of 
Vasistha; Atimana, son of Paulastya; Sahi§nu, 
the son of Paulaha; and Madhura, the 
descendant of Atri- these were the seven sages 
in the Cak$u§a Manvantara. 
3T5: <rewid$fd:l 
^Pdwj<td<idar % qcrii^u 
arfewjsr mgmu tnt: ^r-.i 
^TT It^ ^ rRr^TTXTII ^ <i II 
Oru, Puru, Satadyumna, Tapasvin, Satyavak, 
Krti, Agni§tut, Atiratra and Sudyumna- these 
nine and Abhimanyu, the tenth one; these were 
the ten sons of Caksu§a Manu bom of 
Nadvaleya. Such is the sixth Manvantara. 
wndtdbd W:i 
w gifet ^ wr ferr:n^<?n 
The creation of that great-souled one is 
illustrated by me through Vaivasvata 
Manvantara in detail and in a proper order, 0 
Brahmanas! 
xn^rw g wtt: 
d-w radii) rfe fft ^ o u 
The sages spoke- The successors and heirs 
of Caksu$a Manu took birth in the lineage of 
Kasyapa. Kindly enumerate to us all those 
others who were bom in his family. 
dWRTdm ^RT: ydNdldll^ll 
Suta replied- You may know succinctly, the 
Nisarga (or creation) of Kasyapa. In his lineage 
took birth Prthu, son of Vena, the valiant one. 
jrant tiTiliHli) ^T: MI^)d41W«lll 
irH'-im'd rtw wife ^Rmfeii1^ ii 
Other overlords and Daksa, son of Pracetas, 
too were bom (in that lineage). Prajapati Atri 
adopted Uttanapada as his son.

=== PAGE 487 ===

434 
Vayu-Purana 
f wts^rt ttstt 
WI ^3T5^: MHJT S%|| ^ ^ 
ti^uqynss^rer niroi ■ciii^nw ?i 
*1$ n^d^lfM tl f§'5TT:ll'3'tf II 
Of this Daksa, the Prajapati, the son 
happened to be a king. By Svayambhuva Manu, 
he was offered to Atri in light of a purpose or 
reason at the advent of the sixth Manvantara. 
Having reached the future Manvantara Caksusa, 
I shall now dilate upon it in an introductory 
norm, O Brahmanas! 
<^dl 
snfer sn%r tot fepnii 11 
TOraT riifyarifui grot ^thti 
snfer ^ e^TT t ht ^Rifwnn^ n 
W eblffcki W 3TTOTOT TO Ml 
ircftcRt HTO xtsIT: 3t^H^TT:ii\9V9ii 
o 
From Uttanapada, LaksmI, the spouse of 
Dharma, a very clever lady, truth-speaking, 
pure-smiled one, amalgamator of wealth, the 
knower of Dharma or Law, well-known as 
Sunrta, produced a son named Dhruva, the 
auspicious one. Uttanapada also begot of her 
Kirtiman, Ayasman and Vasu and also two 
daughters of sparkling smiles, well-known as 
Manasvim and Svara. Their sons have been 
already mentioned. 
fcfr cltks^lfiu f^oyift tH^dldl 
TOT Puigic yrsfafrord 
Dhrava, the valiant one, performed penance 
taking to abstinence from food and physical 
enjoyments for ten thousand of divine years, 
declaiming absolute fame. 
dTOHI d TO iffa: ^ITOTOT H:l 
V3 O O 
STTrtTR «HTTOikTc5n^TO^T:ll\9^ II 
In the first Treta Yuga, he (Dhruva), the 
grandson of Svayambhuva Manu, sustained 
himself by means of Yoga (i.e. mental 
concentration), in his desire to earn great repute. 
TO^ ¥?n ^ ^llTOI HTOTOTOTHI 
OTHcRTOTO Tp^TOHlVcRlfTORtcPTII 6 o II 
Unto him, the delighted Brahma, offered an 
excellent spot among luminaries. It is pleasing 
and lasting till the final dissolution. It is shorn 
of rising and setting. 
'dWlfrPTMH^ H T#tTR fl 
VHlcCTUJVHI TOftl^ll 
On seeing his prosperity of highest order and 
fame, Usanas, the preceptor of Daityas and 
Asuras, sang the following verse. 
cTTOt SpTTRt grPTI 
Iwt: Hrofc: pen fro11 
1% Iro TmiTOfflbgT: ¥ fd'd^Rf:IU^II 
“O what a marvellous prowess of the 
penance of this one! O what a learning and what 
an invocatory holy rite that the Saptarsis have 
kept Dhruva above themselves! The heaven 
clung on Dhruva. He is the Isvara, the lord of 
Heavens”. 
yciidtfg H ^ qfrt: to' TOT% TO^T 
•O C\ OO c 
H3i sraiw ^ TOt W TO fTO:lU?ll 
And from Dhruva, Bhumi generated the two 
kings (sons) Pusti and Bhavya. To his own 
shadow, Pu$ti invoked the supreme- “May you 
assume the form of a woman”! 
TOnfaMTftf TOT HU: ^ HTSTOrTdll 
fd<TOiFW-ctflTO I^MWTtnHfeTTIId'iill 
At his truthful utterance, the shadow of 
divine body instantaneously assumed the form 
of a woman. Owing to divine physical framing, 
she became adorned by divine ornaments. 
yixftmiMf fact; ^ h ejror ^froiumi 
Pusti begot of his Chaya five sinless sons, 
viz. Praclnagarbha, Vrsaka, Vrka, Vrkala and 
Dhrti. 
TOTt yidMh'4w HTOf HTO fTOI 
hir^rItot MdftKi to ^rorfriu^ii

=== PAGE 488 ===

Chapter-62 
435 
The wife Suvarca of Pracinagarbha 
produced a king (son) by name Udaradhi, who 
was Indra in an earlier birth. 
He used to take food only once at the end of 
a thousand of Samvatsaras. This way, the 
supreme one attained to Indra-hood which 
lasted a Manvantara. 
3^RST: FJTT Retail MJ 
frg # TOTft fit fc^iii^iu^ii 
Bhadra bore to Udaradhi, the son (named) 
Divamjaya. Varangl produced from Divamjaya 
the son Ripu, the conqueror of foes. 
fHtrrarT FicRtaTOi 
TOFT TO) It 6 II 
From Ripu bore Brhati, Caksusa of 
ubiquitous refulgence, of that one, the son, 
Manu, the scholar, the organiser of Brahma and 
Ksattra. 
cti^uqj tor i 
TOTMTOlHRiqiMTUq^ TOIcTO: II OII 
Cak§usa begot Manu of Puskarint, a 
descendant of Varuna and the daughter of the 
noble-souled Prajapati Aranya. 
rn^d tot frosror -qd 
to crow tot ^TRT: WT:II 
ch-yiiii ^ tT^mrrr 
The one named Caksusa Manu, the well- 
known one, the propagator of Dharma and 
Artha, begot ten auspicious sons of Nadvala, the 
daughter of Prajapati Vairaja, 0 highly- 
fortunate one! 
TO: TO: yidgTOWHW) FTTOcTTeRKfo: l 
o -o 
arfTq^frorag- FTipsjrfH ^ toii 
arfaropj totot q&roii tot: ftto:ii<?to 
Uru, Puru, Satadyumna, Tapasvin, Satyavak, 
Kavi, Agnistut, Atriratra and Sudyumna- these 
nine ones and Abhimanyu, the tenth one, were 
the sons of Manu and Nadvala. 
SrFtFTOTOJTOW^ft TOTOTOI 
3Tf fTOFT F^T# f^ra^ll ^ || 
Agneyi bore to Uru six sons of great valour. 
(They were)- Anga, Sumanas, Svati, Kratu, 
Angiras and Siva. 
STj^rFfTtaTSTOT e( eH*)«h oTOTTOI 
3TTOT^nT efTOR W: fTORTOlR*ll 
Sunltha bore to Anga a single child Vena. 
Owing to the misconduct of Vena, a mighty 
turmoil erupted up. 
^TOR TTHTTf t#rT FTRRR1 TOTfP: II 
TOJt TOT TT^TdTt R: nfichlf&l: II ^ mi 
For the sake of progeny, the sages churned 
down his right arm. When the hand of Vena 
was pressed, there took birth a great king for the 
protection of the earth, who became known as 
Prthu. 
FT SRft ehcitJi -JiidFrta^l X'J'drdRieU 
IfSNr: FT^FTfaR W sror-ht: n $ n 
He was a Dhanvl (bow-wielding one) and a 
Kavacl (an armoured one). He became such as 
if smouldering with radiance. Prthu, son of 
Vena (Vainya) rescued the entire Universe, 
being foremost of Ksatriyas. 
TMURifaftRiHims*;: ft TOrsnfro:i 
C\ N$ 
tor Fronsfarroft ftroff ^rdTOrerriR^ii 
Of those consecrated for the Rajasuya1 
(sacrifice), he was the first king (lit. guardian of 
the Earth). For the sake of his eulogium, took 
birth the skilled ones, Suta and Magadha. 
1, A great sacrifice performed by a Universal monarch 
in which the tributary princes also took part at the 
time of the coronation as a mark of his undisputed 
sovereignty. 3RT of ^fcT 7TUTZ 
(Satapatha Brahmana, V.S. Apte, p. 467).

=== PAGE 489 ===

436 
Vayu-Puraga 
ifh^Twr wnfq sftqqn 
JMHi glricbiMHi ^5fe(»i*iui: TTftll^ill 
f^M4£cT q^4wHHlul:l 
writer M^rlwym <? 11 
By that wise great king, the earth in the form 
of a cow was milked for grains, crops, for those 
desiring sustenance of the progenies along with 
Gods, group of Sages, Pitrs (manes), Danavas, 
Gandharvas, the bevies of nymphs, all the 
merited-persons, mountains and creepers 
likewise. 
% <1$ § gfTTHr gfsiTTI 
cHWr^wydii ?oon 
Being milked in different receptacles, the 
Earth, provided milk of cherished resolves and 
by that he supported his subjects. 
fsTSTtUT TJSTfjfcr ckld^lW 
mr wirfm <piT ?fq crcjsrrrn ?o 
wn qT% -qsn 3TFI 
wn *Hi-yeC<mBfa4soT grrn 
'iraiWI *T ^IT f^RT ^q tq q n 
The Sages spoke- O highly-intellected one! 
You may dilate upon in details regarding the 
birth of Prthu and how the Earth was milked 
formerly by that great-souled along with Devas, 
Nagas, Brahmarsis, Yaksas, Gandharvas and 
Apsarasas. In which individual ways, (the earth) 
was milked individually? 
rTsrr $ n 
You may dilate upon before us while we 
keep on querying, the special fonns of vessels, 
the milker, the milk and the different calves. 
ufrm &rm mfm&m vftm: toi 
■o 
^cf deflef ch^Tti4^ T:ll ^o^ll 
And for what purpose, the hand of Vena was 
churned earlier by the enraged great sages, that 
all you may dilate upon before us. 
W 33TcT 
gujRuziifa <=ft f^rr: qiwri 
r^th:ii5>omi 
Suta spoke- I shall explain, O Brahmanas, 
the birth of Prthu, son of Vena. Having sole 
concentrated, you may hear, 0 excellent 
Brahmanas! 
q^r4qifa ttptrt diivibyiAjit^rim 
c|uj4#tpr ’HIsRld ^TcRII 5= || 
Neither to a polluted one, nor to a sinister 
one, nor to a non-pupil, nor to one as 
unfavourable one, I shall narrate this sacred 
(thought) and nor even to one who has vow not 
adhered to. 
s3 v3 ' S 
3Ttrfc ^o^|| 
This event is salubrious to heaven, fame, 
afforder of longevity of life and sacred as such 
unanimously recognised by the Vedas, the 
secret exposed by the sages. 
snci*R*c4: Wcpti 
q TT ¥l)4njhdl<2>rlHjl 
4tctt cm^iBwq: 3W:ii^o^n 
He who is not malicious shall hear it. The 
man who having listened to this birth of Prthu, 
son of Vena and having offered obeisance to the 
Brahmanas, shall not grieve over the actable 
and inactable. This king was a guardian of Law 
or spiritual good, and happened to be one as a 
peer to Atri, 
3Tf3RTWPTR# ffft- qFT JMIdfdrl 
wr 'sr^tqr qpsrtf siifiSeb*d«iiii ^ n 
A Prajapati named Ariga1 was bom in the 
lineage of Atri whose son happened to be Vena, 
who was not absolutely religious one. 
1. Bhagavata Purana IV. 13.17-18, p. 213. 
'^Ruq[

=== PAGE 490 ===

Chapter-62 
437 
qrqt ^fffrraT t ^terror wmvfo:i 
ebWTc*MWM:ll^o|| 
The Prajapati was bom of Sunitha, the 
daughter of Mrtyu. Vena was the son of the 
daughter of Kala. Owing to the fault of his 
Matamaha (maternal grandfather), Vena was 
(cruel). 
spf TJBrT: fra&TI 
wr www smfoi -q qr$rq:ii w\\ 
He having turned his back on Dharma, out 
of lust rolled along or swaggered in greed. That 
king established institutions devoid of Dharma. 
^iiwuijfd*Kr iraif iwrts wti 
3ttw tt ttj: gq qfnj ^rr:n 
Having violated the Vedas and Sastras, he 
became engrossed in impiety. During his reign 
period, the subjects became such as having no 
adherence to Vasat (Vedic study) and endowed 
with non-concentration of self-study and nor 
even the gods or deities quaffed Soma during 
the Yajnas. 
31TOtc5t%T faRT^t ^^11 
“Neither a sacrifice should be performed, 
nor an oblation is to be offered to fire”. This 
was the vow of Prajapati, a cruel one, when his 
min was imminent. 
qfq wt feirasit qfq ^W^fcril W*ll 
“I deserve to be offered a sacrifice and 
deserve to be honoured in the sacrificial 
performance in entirety (undertaken) by the 
Brahmanas. In me, the Yajha deserves to be 
assimilated and in me oblations deserve to be 
offered.” 
■g^rT5^2T-qj wtmp 
XHfe pKHl^piqjl hUiI^R: 
Tii qftf^nrwPRmTii w n 
When he crossed the limits of decency, 
when he took up an improper stand, Marlci and 
other sages addressed him in entirety. 
■qT5«nf «biMUd ^ ertf: WTrR:ii 
q jngqtsfq 3wtrfwrwre:ii wii 
“We shall talk of the initiation for many 
hundred of Sarhvatsaras, O Vena! Be not 
adherent to unrighteousness. This is not the 
eternal Dharma. You have taken birth in the 
family of the God of death as a Prajapati. There 
is no doubt in it. 
MlirdiJWl M ^ SfiWTHI 
mm cn%: wn 
It has been promised by you earlier- ‘I will 
safeguard (the interests) of the subjects’”. 
Thereafter, he addressed those Brahmar§is, who 
had talked like that. 
•*T W f 
w snfcq $ wn uc 11 
wt qfqi 
O \3 
H^TrPT^RH qj W rTWT:ll ^^11 
Then, the wicked-minded but eloquent Vena 
laughingly said- “Who else is the creator of 
Dharma? Whose words are needed by me? By 
virility or power, education, austerity and truth, 
who, verily, bears comparison with me on the 
Earth? You all know me as a formidable high- 
souled one and none is superior to me. 
WoT: ■*icSc4i«bHi arafat q fq$mq:i 
$x*Ke>ii q#T qTH 
■gqq 3T qT qiq qqqf ferTTUTTii ^ o n 
I am the genesis of all the people and 
especially of laws or moral limitations. If I wish 
I can bum whole of the land and shall inundate 
it with water. I can generate or even I can 
swallow it together. There deserves no thought 
to be provoked in this regard.”

=== PAGE 491 ===

438 
Vayu-Purana 
q ?TcRFT ^Ftrr%rT:l 
SFfPj ^nrt tei: ^^t:ii ^ 
When Vena, who was utterly deluded by 
stubbornness and sense of false prestige, could 
not be dissuaded, the great sages became 
furious. 
fojW MgltiTg ftafRT 
MtS^T'dlH^ % *<M^jyicftlPwi;limil 
Having restrained that one of mighty arms, 
flaring forth as he was like fire, then they 
churned down his left hand, highly irate as such. 
# ftafafcTti 
^WlsIcWui PTiP: <jhtUl£llft %5TTt II ?? 3 II 
From his hand being twisted and churned as 
such, there took birth, as stipulated earlier, a 
highly diminutive person, quite dark- 
complexioned one, O Brahmanas! 
■*r #T: wfasN' I 
HTTP? fogc* ^gT PlMl^ril^clPcbH 1^*11 
That one terrified as such having hands 
folded, stood their having senses dazed as such. 
Having seen him confused and perturbed, they 
(sages) asked him to sit down, 
mu 
The creator of the Nisada lineage, he 
happened to be of great heroism. He even 
created the Dhlvaras (the fishermen or sailors) 
sprung up of the sins of Vena. 
% xf^X ^TcRT: W:l 
sratSb-d'dyifa wm te^rranmii 
And all those others, who had abodes in 
Vindhya, Tumburas, Tuvaras and Khasas, 
having zest for impiety, took birth from the sins 
of Vena. 
3Hunfqc) 4H<wti-qq^dU-y<4:u ^\9|| 
Then the Maharsis or great sages having got 
roused again, churned the right hand of Vena 
out of exasperation, as if it were Aranfi. 
ebiddlftisfir ilWwild: ^5W:ll 
443 MM I 
^411 
Out of the radiance emanated owing to the 
outstretch of the hand, Prthu was bom. Since he 
was bom of the big (Prthu) hand (palm) he was 
called Prthu. He was dazzling with the radiance 
of his body like the refulgent fire in corporal 
form. 
SHdUlMHIel SFfffT ^IWTI 
Having wielded the bow named Ajagava, 
the mighty missile, he took up the arrows of 
mighty radiance for the sake of protection. 
rrfwgnfcgr <*pnft wsift *r%:i 
trt: ii S3 o n 
On the insurgence of that one, all the beings 
became exhilarated all over. On the birth of the 
great king, Vena proceeded to Tridiva i.e. 
heaven.2 
m^R 7Rf$: *r tail 
O s3 
4PT: TT MbMotjiy: -q?rrRt dWfRTli 
Due to the birth of that virtuous son 
endowed with wisdom, he (Vena) was (elevated 
as) a Rdjarsi. The tiger among men (Prthu) then 
protected him from the hell named Punn. 
w ^%:i 
WBt rT TJc|)MdR«All ^ ? II 
All the rivers and oceans, having carried 
gems and jewels, came there. They consecrated 
the son of Vena as the king. With a great royal 
kingdom, he became an Emperor of great 
splendour. 
1. A piece of wood used to kindle sacred fire by 
attrition. 
2. V.S.Apte, p.241.

=== PAGE 492 ===

Chapter-62 
439 
f: ■Hsmfi 
^wnfui 'STFrrf^T w 3T%:ii ^ 3 n 
tT^TT ww ^^11 ^*11 
Pitamaha (Brahma), the adorable one, along 
with Ahgirsa and Gods, combined with the 
beings, both mobile and immobile all around, 
then consecrated Vainya (i.e. son of Vena), as 
lord of men, i.e. the King, the great lord of lords 
of mighty radiance through a kingdom of kings. 
T[t:i 
3TTf^TT5Tt UgK'M: ^ ^ || 
The primeval being, the great Prthu, son of 
Vena, the prowessed one, was consecrated as 
the great king, by gods and sons of Arigiras. 
y^n^HT%TT:i 
tmt TT3tf?r qTWT ^ ^ n 
The people who had been antagonised by his 
father were won over by him. Owing to his 
favourable devotion, he got the name Raja. 
xir^T •W}p;«:ri^qi'WcT:l 
^tswctii 
When he rushed against the ocean, the 
waters became stagnant and the mountains 
crumbled before him. He never experienced the 
breakage of his banner. 
3T^gWTT Tjfacft faWHI 
flcJoSWgsn TTTcf: 5^ TZ3T *Tgll ?? £II 
The land yielded food-grains without being 
cultivated. By mere thinking, all edible foods 
were achieved. The cow became yielders of all 
desires. Honey was obtained in every leaf-cup. 
Tjrrfwra cRTH ^ # ’tfcrrtn? ^ri 
w: wit wra: wrn%:ii 
C\ o o 
crfvtlg tiw# ^ wtssr itftst: n 
During that very juncture, at the auspicious 
sacrifice of Pitamaha, the highly intelligent Suta 
took birth of Suti\ on a day called Sautya2 (a 
day devoted to Soma pressing), one of great 
intellect. In that very great sacrifice, there took 
birth the intelligent Magadha (i.e. the king of 
Magadha or a Bard). 
(WHIM § Wlrf ^TTnt cte^c&l 
The singers of psalms of Samaveda singing 
along within the Vaisvadeva Srugbhanda3 and 
during the music of Samaveda, (he) took birth 
and on that account, he is called Magadha or a 
Bard. 
id^rr 
rPT: RTTf oqF5fRTrTll o II 
The Havis (clarified butter) of Indra got 
suffused with the Havis of Brhaspati. The 
offering was made to Indra by the Devas and 
therefrom, was born Suta. 
-qrfrhTriWtit 
^ d'^U?%dMII ^ ?ll 
Therein, got provenance Pramada 
(delinquency) and expiation through the actions. 
The Havya offering of the preceptor which was 
mingled with that meant for the disciple, was 
over-powered by the disciple’s Havis. Because 
of this (mingling) activity of the lower and the 
upper, a mixed caste came into being. 
A Suta (charioteer) is begot of a Brahmana 
lady by a Ksatriya who belongs to an inferior 
caste. Owing to affinity, he was called as one 
having duties of the latter (Ksatriya) one. 
1. V.S. Apte, p. 608. Rtfd: - Extraction of same juice 
parturition. 
2. MW, p.1252. 
3. The vessel having wooden ladle for affairs clarified 
butter into fire. (V.S. Apte, p. 630.)

=== PAGE 493 ===

440 
Vayu-Purana 
ismw ^rfr^t *r ^#311 
This duty is the middle type of Dharma of a 
Suta, viz. that of Ksatriyas. Looking after 
chariots, elephants and horses (are his three 
duties). Medical treatment is his lowliest of 
duties. 
era rftnfrfr ^rf4fa:i 
=rr w 'wra^r 
For eulogising Prthu, those two (Suta and 
Magadha) were summoned there by the gods 
and sages. All the sages said to them- “May this 
king be worshipped. This work suits you two 
and this is the receptacle of eulogium”. 
srrar tfuwra: ^cb4fa:ii 
Then the two, Suta and Magadha spoke out 
to all the sages- “We two shall gratify the gods 
and sages by our actions. 
^ t feir ? hsit 
itorw frafert Ti?i%jrf^4r fs^rr: n n 
Neither we know the performances, nor the 
characteristics and nor the reputation of this 
king (Prthu). Wherefore, can we eulogise this 
king of radiant norm, O Brahmanas!” 
O O C\ 
^Repfarr fra* ^ciicRafactf^y:ii 
c^TRT WI|tteWffad:ll 
By the sages, the two were deputed as- “Let 
him be praised by his future activities. Engaged 
in charity and duties, perennially truth-speaking, 
having senses controlled, endowed with 
intelligence, he is munificent and is undefeated 
in warfares.” 
wfk cprffuT fracJpjspjTfa TTg|cTH:i 
^RTRTn^:n 
The exploits that conducted Prthu of great 
strength, those were ligatured with good 
conduct by Sutas and Magadhas, taking to 
Panegyrics. 
3R<^r wra 
■ *ni 
Thereafter at the end of the eulogium, the 
highly-pleased lord of the subjects, delivered a 
land of Anupa to Suta and Magadha to 
Magadha. 
t tjMNIH'I: ^f3Rt ^rWPnl:l 
SdlWVI ^fRFTSraf^Trll^oll 
Since that time, the protectors of Earth are 
panegyrised by the Sutas and Magadhas and are 
alerted or awakened by blessings of Sutas and 
Magadhas with benedictory songs. 
t <|gr DRtralai: TT3TT '*v4^tk:i 
^ 'srafefa ^Riiira-.n ^ 
Having seen him (King Prthu), the subjects 
were highly pleased. The great sages addressed 
the subjects- “May this Vainya (i.e. son of 
Vena) be your Lord of men, an endower of 
means of subsistence to you”. 
crat ira -q?WTTr 3raT: 
!Tt5f%r: 3RnfiTST WdlfiTdklchilli ^ II 
Then the subjects rushed towards Vainya 
(Prthu), the highly fortunate one, saying- “You 
may provide us the means of subsistence at this 
instance of the great sages”. Then he raced 
forward to by the subjects out of desire for 
doing good to the subjects. 
spfjften ermtsr gror^li 
414^(1 »I*cm4||| ^H^ll 
Having wielded the bow and engripping the 
arrows, the mighty one tortured the Earth. 
Frightened by his torturing, the Earth ran away 
having assumed the (form) of a cow. 
rri TJf&TTTcTRI ^fawyicldl 
^WJIrraTII 
niJ(d1 chl4ch)sld5JiRtJ|H|| ^||

=== PAGE 494 ===

Chapter-62 
441 
To her running along, Prthu followed having 
wielded the bow. Then she (Earth) out of terror 
of Vainya, ran to Brahmaloka and the like 
worlds (but finally) saw Vainya, face to face, 
bearing a bow strung up as such. 
cRrTI^Wr fH|T cTf^%fq: q^TII^II 
Finding a great-souled one, highly 
concentrated in mind, irrepressible for gods 
even, having been Acyuta i.e. invincible one, 
endowed with great Yogic power, having 
radiance refulgent by the blazing arrows and 
shafts, she, with hands folded, the goddess 
(Earth), adorable by the triad of worlds 
perennially, took refuge in Vainya, the saviour 
as such. 
w ctei qrepf qfrq^qfqi 
352T snrfefT 3T3TT TT5PTOT f^TTII ^^11 
She addressed Vainya- “You do not realise 
the sin of the crime of the murder of a woman. 
How will you be able to support the subjects 
without me, 0 King! 
qfa vT^T: fwT TRPWcj SJT^cT ^TTTrTI 
q^cl q 3RTT: TTlfeWTII^dll 
In me the people have sustenance, 0 King! 
By me alone is propped up this Universe. O 
Excellent King! Without me, the people may 
get bedoomed. 
q qjqffq t ?qj smijv? 
TT3THT qqt TRII ^ II 
In case you aspire for doing good to the 
subjects, it hardly suits you to kill me, O 
protector of the Earth! You may listen to my 
talk. 
Tft q TTilRT WET ^11 ^ ° H 
All undertakings become accomplished if 
they are begun with proper means. O King! You 
will not become capable of protecting the 
subjects after having killed me. 
srenjffT qfgKrrfq srfs gqtr i 
fan: 
q^ snf q ^ *11 
I shall assume the form of food. Therefore, 
give up your anger, O highly-radiant one! Even 
females among the vertebrates, they call as not 
fit to be killed. Considering this, O protector of 
the Earth! It behoves you not to take leave of 
righteousness”. 
qq cTgfqST crra=d TT5TT q%HHI:I 
j&tsi fojW qqfrqT ^q || 
This way having listened to talk of 
prevariative norm, the king, the noble-minded 
one, having restrained the wrath, spoke to the 
Earth as under. 
IJcHWIiilk qt ^JldldHl cfT m\ 
qqi qixrt qqq dwiFw tMchujl ^ 3 
“If any one destroys a single life or many, 
whether his own or another one’s and for the 
sake of the one, he attains enough sin. 
dfi-M-W fq^T tqqqt qpf: qgqi 
dRq-dd qrfqr wre; dlMdid<*Mii wxn 
There ensue no sin or an auxiliary sin if one 
man is killed and when many attain happiness, 
0 auspicious lady. 
qtsi qqifqfqrT qfipqifq qqjsfti 
qfd; qqq qra diRsifq duf^dMii ^mi 
In case you pay no heed to my words 
entailing the well-being of the Universe, I shall 
kill you for the sake of progenies or subjects, O 
Earth! 
%<qTU qm q^qqqtm^q#qi 
3TTrqTq 5T3TT:II ^^11 
If you go adverse to my command, I shall 
presently kill you with a single arrow. After 
proclaiming myself, I shall prop up the subjects.

=== PAGE 495 ===

442 
Vayu-Purana 
tu rst ggqrqrera gri 
wr fei Tra^r frftr q wg;ii ^<$n 
O you excellent among the law abiders, 
having acknowledged my word, resuscitate the 
progenies perennially. You are capable for it, 
there is no doubt herein. 
^ ir w TJ=m?T 
for# <gf <r sraM mrfi yk^yPlii n 
You may attain to the status of a daughter 
unto me, this way (recognising it) as a great 
boon. O terrific viewed lady, I control you, 
therefore, for the sake of righteousness, 
implemented as such”. 
MrSfclW rTcTt Wt t#l 
s3 O 
■Qcifo^ TRfesnwfir q n ^ n 
This way having been addressed, Mahi i.e. 
Earth, the Sati (the chaste one), reported to 
Vainya in reply- “O King! I shall act this very 
way. There is no doubt in it. 
dcHHIl 
W ^ ^5 fofa "RT ccf cfTII 
mj ^ §nt 
You may hand over a calf to me, whereby I 
may get milked or whereby I may become 
dripping with milk being one as having a calf. O 
you excellent one among the law abiding ones, 
make me flat-surfaced and level everywhere so 
that I can spread everywhere the flowing milk”. 
rRT fyWMHlft ^#T:I 
«q«tal rfo ferforr:ll ^|| 
Then, Vena got removed the stone networks 
from everywhere by his bow-string. Then, the 
mountains developed all over. 
Wi^PWH: wuft f^wftrr rru 
During the past Manvantaras, the Earth 
became unevened. And by natural sequence, 
there came into being uneven and even tracts. 
jrfgwT: wurt ctt umiuii feirni ^9311 
During the primeval creations, there existed 
no division of towns and villages, as the Earth 
was uneven and rugged. 
q fo$TT ? frftrf gfbi9W:i 
dfa^cMrrw Tmcrni ^*11 
Neither crops, nor the protection of kine; 
neither agriculture, nor the market lanes 
(existed), in the Caksusa Manvantara earlier. 
Such a thing did happen in the Vaivasvata 
Manvantara. These were the regenerations of 
such a norm. 
^ WZ 3T3TPRTT ^ ftcRlfo TT^TII ^kll 
Wherever there happened to be the levelled 
land amply, therein the progenies took birth and 
lived there perennially. 
WT:II ^11 
The edibility of fruits and bulbous roots 
became in vogue for progenies all over quite in 
a hardship. This way, we do hear the reign of 
the son of Vena by tradition and all these 
became the regeneration of others in this world. 
TT^cTT ^TTSfq M-TgTWlM^ h 
Jf cfctf <T 
ciw:ii 
On the extinction of the medicinal herbs, 
Lord Prthu created a calf of Caksusa Manu, and 
with great difficulty, milked out the Earth (in 
the form of a cow) with his own hand and 
produced plants. 
flWlfd jpiTft (t) W cRfon 
TRj ^ ^ wrn 
rHlvlH WT ^ PF3fT; TRc^TII ^9611

=== PAGE 496 ===

Chapter-62 
443 
By that Vainya, the Earth was milked and 
crops were (sown and grown), having made 
Caksusa Manu, the calf and the bare ground the 
vessel. The progenies continued to subsist 
themselves with that food. 
cJTsft cR^KTI 
qqT: RRlT qifa ^pqf?T:ll 
By the sages, the Earth was adored and 
again milked as such. The calf of those became 
then Soma and Brhaspati became the milkman. 
MBWUiVj -c4J<ifU J|RJ5q$ft I 
§ftTRT#tRT ^TPSRnTll U o || 
The vessel became then the Vedic metres 
such as Gayatrl and the like all over and milk 
then for those became Tapa (penance) and 
Brahman, the perennial one. 
RT: TjTcqT ^crmfh 
3T^t TRIM 
T^q qfc% q $-£MTmT:ll \6 ^ll 
Then again, (the Earth was) worshipped by 
Devaganas led by Purandara. Having engripped 
the golden vessel, Amrta (Nectar) was churned 
out by them. On that alone, the Gods headed by 
Indra, subsisted upon. 
iqtf crt u#i 
TRT q II ^11 
By the Nagas, the Earth was eulogised and 
milked. Poison was the milk, Vasuki, the son of 
Kadru, was the milkman, on behalf of those 
great splendourful serpents. 
RFTFTt t TT%:l 
^cr d^ii^iii tRMrar t#c^on:ii 
d<l^l<l^<WK(W^y^ cRT$raT:ll 
0 excellent Dvijas, the fierce, stupendous- 
figured ones, the guardians of the foetus or 
embryo and excessively aggressive ones among 
the Nagas and Sarpas sustain themselves with 
that alone. That is their food and sustenance. 
Their conduct, refuge and virility were in line 
with that. 
srmft ccwy^PMAi tt?ti 
qrq ^(crar q^: guqq^cTenri 
In the Amapdtre (unbaked jar) with 
sacrifices, the Earth was milked, by the sacred 
or merited men. Vaisravana (Kubera) was 
deputed as calf and became oblivious. 
^TT q fq?rr trf&igTW TT:l 
^TTcR^r R'glcUil q?TT TT ^l«W:ll 
^ q&RTR Rfqf^qirl ?|| \6 \ II 
The milkman then became Jatunabha1, the 
father of Manivara. That son of a Yaksa was 
highly-prowessed one and highly-radiant one. 
He had full self-control. The great sage 
remarked that they sustained themselves with 
that milk. 
W&sr fbT’Tbls' ggsmi 
aiinicrw imi q clRitn#cf^Tcfi:ii w\\ 
By the Raksasas and Pisacas, the Earth was 
milked once again. The milkman of those then 
was Kubera, the one endowed with the 
knowledge of Brahman. 
W: TiRTcft gcTdR arfr qfir^q qi 
SRrqfq q ii 
cR q^RT^ iq%:ii 
The Raksasa Sumal! was the calf. He was 
full of strength. Blood was the milk yielded. 
The Raksasas milked the milk in a cranium 
bowl, having become oblivious. By that milk, 
all the Raksasas sustain themselves. 
TT3R WTRTq 1TO Riftl 
Tqqrjct q fMcpmm^WS^qT cRTTl 
qqt qqrtsqq^Rt qTTTtCq) TRRTII \CC 
Having engripped the river vase, the Earth is 
adored by the manes. Of manes, the milk was 
Svadhamrta and the milkman was Aryaman. 
Yama assumed the form of a calf for them and 
their gratification lasted for one month. 
1. Pauranika Kosa, p. 180.

=== PAGE 497 ===

444 
Vayu-Purana 
tram% qqfreiT TRi^wFiur:! 
i%T5RSt ^11 u % II 
In the lotus (leaves) cup, the Earth was 
milked again by Gandharvas and the bevies of 
nymphs. They made Citraratha1 the calf and the 
sacred gandhas (scents) was the yield. 
3^ T*: 
WrTRtsftct# ^rqf^m:n ^oii 
Of those, Visvavasu happened to be the 
milkman, who was the son of a sage, a sacred 
one, a highly-chivalrous king of Gandharvas, a 
great-souled one, a peer to the sun. 
cJWTTI 
rl^sfrftcfacft WII ^ ?ll 
Having been milked the goddess Earth once 
again, she was adored by the mountains. There 
(existed) the medicinal herbs in corporeal form 
and variety of gems. 
3 VtMTTcnsswq- 3iftfgtT:ii^ii 
The calf of those ones happened to be 
Himavan and Meru, the great mountain, became 
the milkman. The mountain itself was the 
receptacle and with that, the mountain was 
stabilised. 
Wti WTTTI 
^ (^?rtT^amii ^ 3 n 
The Earth-goddess was eulogised and 
milked again by the trees and creepers. Having 
taken up the Palasa cup as vessel, the milk 
became such as having growth and truncation 
i.e. endowed with percolation. 
gc*TT 
^rwtMtii ^xii 
The mountain in full bloom was Kamadhuk 
(the milkman of desires). Plaksa tree was the 
calf. The Earth became Dogdhrl (cow-yielding 
milk or the yielder of all desires), the one 
supporting all the beings. 
■fcrr w gTTuft rr wwti 
HtcfiRT cf: SpHTII 
ruixR'W cHioh^r nf^T yrTAd rfii ^mi 
Such is the Earth, the bearer, the support, the 
creator. She was milked for the beneficence of 
the worlds by Prthu. This has been heard by us. 
She is the very mainstay of the world consisting 
of mobile and immobile beings and the source 
of their origin. 
* * * 
1. A type of Satta milked by Gandharvas from the cow 
formed earth, Matsya Purana VII. 14; X.24; XVI.26. 
Pauranika Kosa, p. 144.

=== PAGE 498 ===

444 
Vayu-Purana 
\\m f^Mfa^MtSSqTEr:II 
Chapter 63 
The description of the fame of Prthu 
wscrrer 
C\ 
3THftfipr TR^RTT tjft^rTTI 
=r§ srn^r ^rwtigsiT ttztfu y\ 
Suta spoke- It is heard that the Earth 
extended to the oceans as its limit. Since it 
holds riches, it becomes known as Vasudha. 
•o <N 
crcrrs^wTTTw: stact: n ^ n 
^T5#rtT^RTT TlfTfrm 
rRt: II 3 II 
Earlier, she was inundated by the marrow of 
Madhu and Kaitabha. She became Medinlone 
as having comers or extremities for oceans. And 
then owing to the association of Prthu, son of 
Vainya, the wise one, she became known as 
such by name PrthivL 
tlfeTT 3tf5MThT xl xf cTtprri 
T1W W^raWf^Rtll

=== PAGE 499 ===

Chapter-63 
445 
Tjid^xi^MrchiTiii T%?rr cR srnmTimi 
The Earth stretched forth and got segregated 
and became handsome being endowed with the 
storehouses of granary or granary of corns and 
having rows of the treasure troves of towns 
(rendered) by the King Prthu. It was thronged 
by the group of four orders of society who were 
guarded by that wise one. 
TJeT Trorat TRTSS#t=5: IT ^TITtR:! 
TT3qgr 'RRirroT IT%:limi 
C\ C\ 
Of such an influence was that king Vainya, 
the excellent ruler (lit. protector of the people). 
He was fit to be offered obeisance and adorable 
by the congregation of beings. 
TRTR^li^T^Whi 
tfgfcr qqgbigf IRTTR:II^II 
Prthu alone, being the primeval source of 
Brahman or Vedic lore, is fit to be offered an 
obeisance by the Brahmanas of great dignity 
expert in Vedangas. 
TTFTOT^: 
snf^TRT 4iJWbi4: wrarRiivan 
By the kings of great fortunes, aspiring for 
great refute, the primeval king Prthu is fit for 
offering obeisance, the prowessed one. 
4$lfa xT IT^RT TjfSn 
t ^1: ^ 'I 
The primeval creator of men verily, is fit to 
be bowed unto, alone as such, even by the 
warriors in a battlefield seeking victory in 
battle. 
tr Rfo c^mfo^T ^ ^rt i 
IT ^4) If# chlfd^Rjl % II 
The warrior who marches into the 
battlefield, having offered refute to the king 
Prthu, he returns safely from the terrible battle 
and attains glorious fame. 
4?4lf4 xT TFff4%^f1wiTTf^:l 
TJfTcf qirw4f q^Vll:ll^oll 
The sage king Prthu alone, a bestower of 
subsistence being of great refute, deserves to be 
offered obeisance by the Vaisyas, strictly 
adhering to the duties of Vaisyas. 
# cFFTfertw cfarrc: ajhifer xn 
wftTT xT Mdlrtilp Hctfutfd WiTR^II ^11 
These different calves and milkmen, milk 
and the vessels, all have been illustrated by me 
in a proper order. 
^PJTT mri W HiglriUll 
Earlier by Brahma, the great-souled one, 
was milked the Earth. Having made Vayu the 
calf, the surface of the Earth as vessel, the seed 
(as milk) was yielded. 
rRT: cf^T ^T:| 
fKcfT <psiTS5M^U| c( *^ll ^ II 
Then in the Svayambhuva Manvantara 
earlier, the Earth was milked by Agnldhra (the 
priest who enkindles fire or prepares the fire)1 
after making Svayambhuva Manu the calf. 
waf^TT cpiT r# s^rti 
*R WTlfcPT ^rTT WTTft t Wll ^11 
During the Svarocisa Manvantara earlier, the 
Earth was milked by the wise Caitra, after 
making Svarocisa Manu the calf. The yield 
consisted of plants and foodgrains. 
STtirspfoifa §*sjt m 
RT clrFT TT^TTRTTfq- 4tRTTII ^ II 
In the Auttama Manvantara, the Earth was 
milked by the excellent Devabhuja, having 
made calf as Manu Uttama. All the crops were 
the yield. 
tRSJ ■cpat TTFRTRTRn: RTt:l 
5^4 WRIT cfrTT f «IR«R^ril ^ II 
Again in the fifth Manvantara of Tamasa 
1. A Practical Vedic Dictionary by Dr. Surya Kanta, p. 
5, Oxford University Press, 1981. MW, p. 6.

=== PAGE 500 ===

446 
Vayu-Purana 
Manu, the Earth was milked by Balabandhu 
after making Tamasa Manu the calf. 
rjiRwicrm wr* ^rr^rt utt:i 
<pir junto uru srftn ^>n 
And on the arrival of the Manvantara of 
Manu Carisnava, the Earth was milked by 
Purana after making Carisnava Manu the calf. 
^ tourt ju: i 
cpsrr ufr junto uui f*ur w \c ii 
Then on the approach of the Caksusa 
Manvantara, the Earth was milked by Purana, 
having made calf as Caksusa. 
w ^ c&tftt rmw w n 
When the Caksusa Manvantara elapsed and 
Vaivasvata Manvantara arrived, the Earth was 
again milked by Vainya, the way it has been 
illustrated by me earlier. 
jit jseft onu£to=RRj ui 
imt ^uii^oii 
Fonnerly in the previous Manvantaras, the 
Earth was milked by the Devas and others, by 
human beings as well as by the Bhutas (goblins) 
and the like. 
(TT^ iufj fg^JT ^ittoHFRtfefl 
*l<W*M*S| J2TTUT fnjU TT3TT: II ^ ^11 
This way deserves to be understood the 
Devas in the past and present Manvantaras. 
Now you hear about the progenies of Prthu. 
gsrrur j=ft 
fTTTsrfngto ^fejf^RTgTTi^rsn^ii 9^11 
Of Prthu, the two sons were bom as 
Antardhi and Palin. SikhandinI from 
Antardhana gave birth to Havirdhana1 (and 
Marica)2. 
1. Ibid., p. 4. 
2. Ibid., p. 493. 
yrato^ffti ^5B uf fjwt 9Rn%4tii r 3 11 
Dhisana, the daughter of Agni, bore to 
Havirdhana six sons, viz. Praclnabarhis, Sukra, 
Gaya, Krsna, Vraja and Ajina. 
aitoSgtonMtf: jfeiii*cMtelftil 
iiraknTT: jryirwun d^iriiwtocigiu'liii'tfii 
The adorable Praclnabarhis was a great 
Prajapati. By learning, penance and prowess, he 
was a sole autocrat on the earth. The tips of his 
Kusa grasses pointed to the east by frequent use 
in sacrifices. Hence he is called Praclnabarhis. 
J JRtoR: IT % TTJ:I 
ijgdWMfl: uR ■Hcruiki 3T3ntrffr:ii?mi 
TTOTlfsaRT HUpT ^1 OTCTRcffftT:) 
That lord duly married Savarna, the daughter 
of the ocean, far beyond the extensive darkness. 
From the Prajapati the daughter of the ocean, 
Savarna, bore the ten sons of Praclnabarhis. 
IRf STUdlH UjifelU WTT; I 
cR?T cuS^Wlfui UJ£UfH^YIill:ll^ll 
All of them are named Pracetas. They were 
masters of the science of archery. Adhering to 
duties of similar norm, they performed austere 
penance for ten thousand years. They remained 
reclining over the waters of the ocean. 
UWUf jMt TreRT:^ q^l :l 
it JFsiT$ni:ii^ii 
While the Pracetas were performing penance 
on the Earth, there ensued the extinction of 
progenies, being unguarded and trees not cared 
properly. 
TrUT?d UtT U^T:! 
ur?raRTTutr uij ft i 
dMu^wifui q- %^fgt 3Rrr:iR<iii 
Then that Manvantara of Caksusa having got 
dissolved, there started an annihilating squall

=== PAGE 501 ===

Chapter-63 
447 
blowing and the sky became overcast by trees 
and for ten thousand years, the progenies failed 
to get into activity. 
TT#«rt cnpf?q rr n 
Having realised that by the power of 
austerity, all the Pracetas became active and 
having gone furious, started emitting out breeze 
and fire from the mouths. 
Vayu uprooted those trees and dried them 
up. The terrific fire calcined them and this way 
came about the extermination of trees. 
^m|C4l9l^dRWI #tT: 
Then having realised the clearing off of the 
trees and survival of some of the remaining 
trees, king Soma approached these Pracetas and 
spoke to them. 
<SgT sraterc *ra 
r5T3T?T TT3TPT: ^ ^n4t-|clf^:ll ^|| 
“Give up all the wrath after considering the 
benefits conferred for the continuance of the 
worlds, 0 Kings! O sons of Praclnabarhis! 
TcWctt w ^iwft crc^rctn^ii 
The trees shall overgrow on the land. The 
fire and breeze may get extinct. This jewel of a 
girl of fair complexion is the daughter of the 
trees. 
SlfeET ^TRcTT ffaT WT ^tfafifafifaTI 
itniw ^rm faftfifani 
eft ifar 
Knowing the future by me, she has been 
rendered enflourished by me with my rays. 
Marisa, known by this name, she has been 
created by the trees themselves. May she be 
your spouse, gone gravid by Soma (plant). 
3TWTqdl?Rd qm 51^#: 113 mi 
By a half of the radiance of yours or virility 
of yours and by half of the virility of mine, in 
her shall take birth the scholar Daksa named 
Prajapati. 
3Tf7qqTS^H^MI 5RTT: ^ ^ II 
He, of fiery splendour, shall again develop 
the subjects and protect the Earth almost burnt 
by the fire comprising mostly of your virility. 
d^RIW^R WFRf:l 
f snfnr -enformu^u 
Then, at the word of Soma, those Pracetas 
having restrained their ire, accepted righteously 
Marisa as their wife from the trees (their 
daughter). 
*TTfWdi rTTOt t tTTOT 
'sr^nwr mfwwi ^Fifa-.ii^ h 
In Marisa, then they bore embryo mentally 
and from it were born ten Pracetas and Daksa, 
the Prajapati. 
^ ■RIKftTT: ■yRwivR dt4cTRI 
^ %=MII 3 H 
Daksa, highly-virile one, took birth by the 
partial incarnation of Soma. Being endowed 
with virility, Daksa created progeny mentally 
and subsequently by means of physical union. 
■srETCTS 1 
f^RT fFTW t|gTR^3l?T f%RT:ll^otl 
Having generated by mind- the immobile 
and mobile beings, the bipeds and quadrupeds, 
Daksa created females thereafter. 
^35T: U^VTfafa^ll'i^ll 
He offered ten of his daughters to Dharma, 
thirteen to Kasyapa and the twenty-seven 
enshrined within the gaze of Kala, (he offered) 
to Indu or Soma.

=== PAGE 502 ===

448 
Vayu-Purana 
TT^Jt ^ "cFre^sfTg^fij^l 
1cn^wsr | cMtii 
wmi fj^n^nrar ^srst fqwteRiu^ii 
Having offered these daughters unto those, 
thereafter he gave four other daughters to 
Aristanemi1, two to Bahuputra, two to Arigiras 
and one daughter was given to Krs'asva. Now 
you may learn about their progeny. 
3RR wquwij WTT: w w 
■CRtf^rPRTfr WW JF3TTOhll*3ll 
The sixth Manvantara of Manu Caksusa 
becomes here truncated giving place to the 
seventh Manvantara of the Prajapati Vaivasvata 
Manu. 
rTRT WIT TTcTT FFJT 
In them (the daughters of Daksa) Gods 
(Devas), Khagas (birds), cows, the Nagas, 
Daityas, Danavas, Gandharvas and Apsarasas, 
took birth as also other breeds. 
RT: TTffr ^sfqqRRTT %WM:l 
Since within this world, sprung out of the 
physical union of progenies by determination, 
perception and impact, the creation of earlier 
ones becomes declared. 
^nqi cjReiRi R ^foTt r ^ ^p:i 
wm: RfsR: Rf c^ppi xx trt?*r:ii^ii 
The sages spoke- “Of Devas, Danavas, 
Devarsis and the great-souled Daksa- their 
auspicious generation has been declared earlier 
by you. 
1. Pauranika Kosa, p. 30. One among the Prajapatis 
headed by Kasyapa unto whom four daughters of 
Daksa were given in marriage, the father of 16 
children. (Vayu Purana ch. 63.42). 
crfSR RTR) 
cfiST xX qqpfir TRT?n7T:l!*V9l| 
From the Prana of Prajapati, the birth of 
Daksa has been declared by you and how the 
highly austerity performing one, attained to the 
state of the son of Pracetas? 
TR q; squirt RfaflffqTI 
qr 3j$qrri thtt: n ii 
0 Suta, it behoves you to clarify this doubt 
of ours. He was the daughter’s son of Soma, 
then how did he attained to the status of his 
father-in-law”? 
"FcT d<TlF 
3Rl%sr fqfm fq^T qk WTT: i 
Cs 
jpnitor q R^rfqr fatficwjg- ^ qqr:ii'*<?n 
Suta spoke- The procreation and dissolution 
perennially among the beings is desired as such, 
0 excellent Suaves! The sages and also those 
man who are equipped with learning are not 
deluded in this matter. 
gif 'qcjqRT fgRT: I 
qq^R fqqjSZRT q^ -gufRU H o II 
In every age, Daksa and others are bom, 0 
Brahmanas! They undergo subsequent death 
too. An intelligent one is not confused in this 
matter. 
qq Rq^rrsRrjiRra^ riwth h W 
O excellent Brahmanas, there never existed 
seniority or juniority of these 'ones earlier. 
Austerity alone became superior and prowess 
was the basis thereof. 
TRnqrcn^qnM: q^RT^ JRkrrim^ii 
Whosoever understood this creation of the 
mobile and the immobile beings in Caksusa 
Manvantara, he attains dignity in the heavenly 
world.

=== PAGE 503 ===

Chapter-64 
449 
TE^Jwrf % ^RfT iM^<lrMcfcl:l| 
-wi4^^Tai: ^n^n^Rn ^n^nrim^n 
This creation of Caksusa (Manu) has been 
dilated upon quite succinctly. This way, 
therefore, six creations have passed in the form 
of Manvantaras. Headed by Svayambhuva 
Manvantara and ending with Caksu§a 
Manvantara, they have been narrated briefly in 
proper sequence. 
TJ% 13trRT t fg^rTOT:l 
These creations have been talked of as per 
my intelligence, O excellent scholars! By the 
creation of Vaivasvata Manvantara, their details 
deserve to be known. 
3H*rff TifdRTbl^J Ticf TBlI I 
TTOW'R sr4rf: ^rqWt3^cT:)l 
o 
■qrrftcrWRfra;:ii^ii 
All the creations of Vivasvan are 
innumerable and non-different (from other 
Manvantaras) in the matter of states of health, 
duration of life and from the point of view of 
Dharma, Kama and Artha (spiritual good, lust 
and material gains). Whosoever studies this 
without malice, he attains these attributes. 
gcjwvJi ^nfir WcPR ^1^:1 
Now I shall talk about the creation of the 
present Vaivasvata Manu, the high-souled one. 
While I talk of the creation from Vyasa and 
others, you may listen to me or understand. 
"cjTyMTrh HlU 
•k k k

=== PAGE 504 ===

Chapter-64 
449 
Chapter 64 
The description of the creation of 
Vaivasvata 
U^lfe m^eKcldW FI 
nftft wifer.ii yi 
Suta spoke- In the seventh cycle called 
Vaivasvata Manvantara, the gods and the great 
sages were bom of Kasyapa, son of Marlci. 
stiffen carafe ^rrsctT fey tra^iun:i 
'frifesf^^fa ir# feHIUH: T^RTT:ll ? II 
Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Sadhyas, 
Visvedevas, Maruts, Bhrgus, Ahgirasas- these 
are known as eight Devaganas (groups of 
Devas). 
STlffen T^fe fefelT: chVWr^l:! 
wnsr cirfe fesf snmryfe w:ii 3 n 
Adityas, Mamts and Rudras deserve to be 
considered as the sons of Kasyapa. Sadhyas, 
Vasus and Visvedevas, these three groups are 
the sons of Dharma. 
yfeljT yfefe felt feffeffey: ^rT:l 
fefeffey % m<dl: ^TT:ii 
■qrTsIfe tT yffeqfe HFtT: et>!tflfelldvimi 
Of Bhrgu is the Lord Bhargava, and Arigira 
was the son of Arigiras. In this Vaivasvata 
Manvantara, those Devas were bom of 
Chandajas (bom according to their own will). 
TKJ yfeg tnffet fefer: feM: ^T:l 
ferfet yferfenfe#yen M^ranumii 
The current auspicious (Tejasvi) creation 
should be known as that of the descendants of 
Marlci. The present one is one among them, by 
name Indra as of great prowess. 
swIcTHHidi y cfe^t ir y mm\ 
fef nyyfesrai fa^iWHH$nJTT:ii $ ii

=== PAGE 505 ===

450 
Vayu-Purana 
The gone by and the coming ones (or those 
not come) and the present ones, all those 
Manvantaras they deserve to be understood as 
of similar pre-requisites. 
H3W rt ^ <*dmuiii:ii 
Tlf: didVIcftg yycF?ldJ|UM p^ll 
The masters of past, future and present, 
thousand-eyed ones, Purandaras, bountiful, 
wearers of crowns with crests, the adamant 
wielders, by all these a sacrifice was performed 
with hundreds of divine intelligences quite 
distinctly by a merit centrum as such. 
dHlcKI tqrft fhcllfd ^1 
sra’r#: diirouftn d n 
CN 
In the three worlds, they establish 
themselves after excelling all the living beings 
(weak or mobile), for varied reasons such as 
Dharma etc. 
^3RIT cTTOT cW8TcTtRT^:l 
w % '5wfciHird:ii 
CN 
hdr4t4 tr fqratsRTii n 
By radiance, penance, intelligence, strength, 
education and physical power or energy, the 
masters of past, future and present, the way they 
are the supreme commanders- all this, 1 shall 
explain to you. You may listen while I narrate. 
'qfcJ&M dc^d fgyt: I 
Ttpr f^r ^idriMi TrrsFnrn t>o n 
The gone by, the coming forth and coming 
into being or existent one, that same is 
remembered by the scholars (Brahmanas) here 
as- Bhiirloka or the earth, Bhuvarloka or the 
atmosphere, and Bhavya or the heaven. I shall 
talk of their resources. 
syiAjdi Mddifipn wunsir fenfwm 
By Brahma, desired of a son, absorbed in 
meditation, it was declared in advance- “BhuK\ 
this way it was spoken to begin with and then 
this Bhurloka took shape. 
^drdl^d^l^ ^fehl5'UH^dd:ll 
3(4)5^ WRt ^dcdipjld: HTT:II ^11 
The root “Bhu” is remembered in the sense 
of Satta (existence) as also Loka Darsana 
(visibility to the people). Since it existed and 
was visible it became Bhurloka. Therefore, this 
primeval universe, remained remembered by the 
scholars as “Bhuh” on account of the idea of 
existence. 
fgdRj )TT:I 
When this (universe) had taken shape, the 
second word, “Bhavat” was declared again by 
Brahma. That which is about to take shape in 
the immediate future time is indicated by the 
word “Bhavat”. 
qcRTrT ^ctdlchl 
pw^ifedidt Ht«R -ssiku ysu 
The word “Bhuvarloka” is analysed by the 
etymologists (knowers of Nirukta) as derived 
from bhavana. Therefore, the firmament is 
declared as the second loka i.e. Bhuvarloka. 
§ pnidi pRi wan i 
ctnicT ^rwr^arr ^ n 
On the provenance of the Bhuvarloka, the 
third word “Bhavya” was declared by Brahma 
and then the Bhavya-loka took shape. 
SRFIcT TO TJ^ f4*TTOI%l 
HT^ dWd*d ^rT^II ^ II 
The word Bhavya is used in the sense of 
what has not yet come about (i.e. the future). 
Therefore, this future world (loka) by 
nomenclature, is known as “Divam” (Heaven). 
'•wRrpi «nc4t HlebW<(l5^3RTI 
tpi simf stts* gnd- l^noq^ii ?3ii

=== PAGE 506 ===

Chapter-64 
451 
“Svah”, another third word, was uttered and 
the “Bhavyaloka” (future world) took shape. 
The root Bhavya is used in the sense of coming 
time. 
UM 
The earth this way is known as “BhuK\ the 
antariksa or intermediary space (firmament) is 
declared as “Bhuvah” and the heaven is 
remembered as “Bhavya”. This very forms the 
set of three worlds in a nutshell. 
cSflfcTTOSTcRI 
^TTST Tg?T:ll ^11 
By the exclamations endowed with 
Trailokya i.e. triad of worlds, the three Vyahrtis 
(i.e. mantras Bhiih, Bhuvah, Svah) originated. 
The root ^Nath by the root experts, was 
recognised in the sense of rearing or guarding or 
protection. 
■y WK'iTtW HTcJTW qoJTW TOWi 
HlcfijRITq' TMlfcl' TWfer TpT:IRo|| 
Because they are the Lord Protectors of the 
Bhuta, Bhavya and Bhavat worlds, they are the 
Nathas (Protectors) of the three worlds. These 
masters came to be known as “Indras” by the 
scholars. 
TrSTRfRTT W7RTCT&? ?TI 
CN ' n3 
The chief-existent Devendras as well as 
those lordly gods who are their subordinates in 
the Manvantaras, become partakers of shares in 
the sacrifices. 
fayiNBTKITcf7:l 
Yaksas, Gandharvas, Raksasas, Pisacas, 
Uragas and Danavas are all proclaimed as (the 
products of) the glory of Devendras. 
TMT TRR: fwt f? h 
3f3TT: Tfcrf STTfot^ ^TRTTT: II ? ^ II 
Devendras are the elder Gurus (preceptors), 
Nathas, the kings and the parents. Likewise, 
those excellent ones protect all these subjects 
according to the law. 
TTfrfi c$^iu|j TPTTW:I 
Wtf ^ f^RTT: II ^*11 
This way, these characteristics of the 
Devendras (Lordly gods) have been illustrated 
succinctly. I shall now talk of the Saptar§is 
(seven sages) who are existing at present in the 
heaven. 
Tnfe: ofrtfyicsr gbqTfegTftrat W:l 
ifpfctt wrarrn ? mi 
They are- (i) Visvamitra of great penance, 
the intelligent son of Gadhi who was born of the 
family of Kusika, (ii) Jamadagni, the heroic son 
of Uru and the scion of the family of Bhrgu, 
aftoErt Tfcrat fg^nrgjsrm €nffe:ir^n 
(iii) the son of Brhasp^ti- Bharadvaja, the 
great ascetic, (iv) Saradvan, the learned and 
virtuous son of Utathya, belonging to the family 
of Gautama, 
WT:I 
^3 
n3 ill ^vau 
(v) Brahmakosa, the fifth one, also known as 
lord Atri and son of Svayambhuva Brahma, (vi) 
the sixth one, Vasuman, the son of Vasistha and 
well-known in the world, 
cFSR: 51^ TTTfS*mT:l 
and (vii) Vatsara, the son of Kasyapa. All 
these seven are recognised as great sages. These 
Saptarsis Siddhas exist in the existing 
Manvantara. 
qmmt fg: w 
ifcz&m qrn sftg ^tii ^ 11 
ipwg eKpmm: 1

=== PAGE 507 ===

^ W: Tebrt^f:il 
^tfSrn t trm ^nt xld^wi 3 o n 
Iksvaku, Nabhaga, Dhr§ta, Saryati, 
Narisyanta, all famous by name, Udvista, 
Karu§a, Pr^adhra and Vasuman- these are the 
nine glorified sons declared as such of 
Vaivasvata Manu. The seventh Manvantara has 
been explained by me. 
frSnj ^ w ferfa: gfc %TT:i 
This way the second “Pada” or section has 
been illustrated by me in detail and in a proper 
order. 0 Brahmanas! What else shall I talk of? 
it ^ v ii