=== PAGE 1 ===

ATT

Vayu Purana
(Part - II)

usta Taeee asa:
weraferctergenttry

Chapter 65
The observation on the birth of Bhrgu
and others
HT HY:
gear urd fata g oat ges dtm
areregaet umes wd F Mya gH
The Sages spoke— Having heard the second

pada by Sita, the wise one, Sarnsapayana
queried regarding the third pada (section).

We: HRUSfEasaaGaAgU RAAT

Tita faeraend aritant waite

WayMSTagA: TEVA 21

The second pada has been narrated by you

along with its sequel. You may now dilate upon
in details, the third pada along with its
preamble. This way having been addressed,
Sita began to speak with his inner soul highly
delighted.

Wi saa
aah gett a aitart aera
wre Bgeatfgmt at & Frater 311

Sata spoke- I shall dilate upon the third
pada in details along with its necessary

introduction. Therefore, O Brahmanas, You
please listen and understand it completely.
THiceearend Bint WEE: |
faettonssqyeat @ Frat saya fatnsn
O scholars! Now you hear about in details

and in descending order, the creative activity of
the present Vaivasvata Manu of the noble soul.

agdiaanen tem: yi gi

we tamigda safetireisd: wen tt

fagrerctades waingrdtetem

mgt: waft uff: wat: Weng

Wrarfed feTeTT ATR adg TAT

aed dead wt area fat

The period is already calculated as being of

seventy one sets of four Yugas. I shall talk of
the Vaivasvata Sarga (creation) headed by
Manu and ending with the future events, having
offered obeisance to Vivasvan (the Sun-god). It
comprises Devaganas, Sages, Danavas, Manes,
Gandharvas and Yaksas, Raksasas, Bhataganas,
Human beings, Animals, birds along with the
immobile creatures.

ard tartisditn: at: wees 1
Parhyeasat yor Menssey weds:
STARS HT SaaS TAH Ct

The seven great sages who had passed away
in the first Svayarhbhuva Manvantara earlier,

=== PAGE 2 ===

Vayu-Purana

and who were the creators and initiators then,
they are reborn in the Vaivasvata Manvantara
after the lapse of Caksusa Manvantara.

ware a ato a yrardtat wetsrarq
MUTATE Hagaray HETATAN <1
Owing to the curse of MaheSvara, the noble

souls, Daksa as also the sages such as Bhrgu
and others manifested themselves.

Ya: WHA T SIA: TT AAT
we afore Tata weyatl YoU
The Saptarsis were born again as the seven
mind-born sons of Brahma. They were adopted
as sons by Svayarnbhii himself.

A: afta: at gene aerATAN geH
By those the propagators of the progenies,
taking birth as such as great-souled ones, the
creation was again revived as per earlier norm
and in a proper order.
aut waft ae faggarrentoray
PASTA ETATSTTA TT 11 V2
Of those having deeds and learnings of pure
norm, I shall talk of their generations by brevity

in the light of conformity and in the proper
order.

Aarraaycssa FETA:
Wr: B Yfta: Gat weerrafose ugg
This world of mobile and immobile beings,

embellished with planets and stars is filled with
beings born of their families.

Uren sae Wt dyeaiswad

weed dyrenfaer: ga dearer

Tene Ufone: dfprearar nee

Having heard this way, the sages entertained

an apprehension. Overwhelmed by the doubt,
the sages of pure holy rites honoured Sita and
asked him for the sake of clarification of their
doubts.

aa Hd:

at wena: Wager: Wa AAT:

aed aafearela vat frre SAT

waists: ga: Traore: WAT BQH

The sages spoke- How earlier the seven

Saptarsis were born as seven mental sons? How
were they adopted as sons? O excellent one!
Please explain this to us. Then the highly-
splendid Sita, well-versed in Puranas began the
auspicious narration.

Ut sara
at uetig: fergt 4 a rareyasat
Watt Gare Gaara fret 2g tt
Sita replied— How the great Saptarsis who
has been great Siddhas in the Svayarhbhuva

Manvantara, failed to attain the fruit of penance
in the Vaivasvata Manvantara, I shall narrate.

cenfrgmarcifag! Barared aat AT:
SUA ST Cis THAME A Vout

By the curse of Bhava (i.e. Siva), they did
not attain the fruit of the penance. Once they
gathered together in the Jana Loka.

By: Wa adisatet saci weatta:1
HIS TEM arent ferra seat Ve

All the sages then spoke out or talked

mutually in that world of the populace and

talked alone in the grand sacrifice of Varuna,
the greatly fortunate ones.

ad ad wae TAT:
focrmernat: ae aa: Seat safereafen Vet
“All we shall take birth in the transitional
period of Caksusa Manvantara as the progenies
of Pitamaha (Brahma). Then it will be
conducive to welfare.”
varhyasat war: aad a was GI
af A grad @ sreiteafeat wat: Zot
Cursed — during the Svayarhbhuva
Manvantara by Bhava (i.e. Siva), for a truthful

=== PAGE 3 ===

Chapter-65

purpose, they took birth once again having gone
to the heaven from the world of the populace
(Jana Loka).

Rarer wed aa aTeUH fare
gent yer: YR ys wera
maa ait oe fetafafa a: ge eH
“In the mighty sacrifice of the Deva,
Brahma assumed the form of Varuna and with a
desire for progeny, he had consigned the semen

into the holy fire. It was then that the sages had
their second birth.” This is heard by us.

gaia wife: Yor: Ue: Teh
afista afer aret 3 get: Gat Vl
Bhrgu, Angiras, Marici, Pulastya, Pulaha,
Kratu, Atri and also Vasistha— these eight were
the sons of Brahma.
menses fer aa Sar: we MATA:
ARIS w aalfor ames TATU 23H
In his grand elaborate sacrifice, all the gods
came along and al! the components (ancillaries)

of the sacrifice and Vasatkara had assumed
corporeal forms.
ufdafa a arnt asf a age:
aeaegMaHA Tema fengaa: i Bw
The Séman mantras, thousands of Yajur
mantras and the Rgveda embellished with Pada

and Krama (Pathas), assumed form. therein
decorated by the senses of syllables.

aydes Giew sienaqtirte:|
faa aa HA MATAUTTAATA 24 Ut

And Yajurveda rich in vrttas (established
tules or usages or laws), brilliant with Ornkara
(Om) as its mouth was present here along with
Suktas, Brahmanas and Mantras related to the
objects of the sacrifice.

Maes Grea: TAA: WI
faarecanfafix: and treed: aydtswe 2&1

I. V.S. Apte, p. 529, TH!

And Samaveda also rich in Vedic metres
headed by al] the musical songs to be sung at
the outset was also present there along with
Gandharvas, Visvavasu and others.

Tadean at: Henfafatiad:1
weafgraatiay fggritefertssraqn ze
Brahmaveda (Atharvaveda) equipped by the
terrific Krtya rites? was present there. But due

to Pratyangirasas, it appeared to have a single
head with two bodies.

meronft ta wie PERROTT: |
srr arent Frremrerafin 2211
The characteristic topics, accents,
panegyrics, etymologies, the vowel gradation,
resting places, Vasatkara, Nigraha

(suppression) and Pragraha (restraint and
control), all these were present there.

dren diftatten Set fem: wher damn

SaRAY UT AMT WAT Ua TUS

amg: Waa wae Seer aaa FS!

fiat: SUS TeuTT ABTA gon

The brilliantly shining goddess Earth, the

quarters, the intermediate quarters, the Lords of
directions, the celestial virgins, the wives of
Devas, the mothers and Ayu- all these were
present there in embodied form in front of the
Lord (Brahma), who was himself performing
the sacrifice assuming the corporeal form of
Varuna.

wrayer at apt ta: waaaqyfan
wertatenyeren feerarea 3 Myra: 113 tH

Having seen those ladies, the semen virile of
Svayaribhii fell on the ground. It took place on
account of the dispensation of the inevitable in
the case of Brahmarsis. There is no doubt about
it,

en Yea qrai a qa wipe a
TRTAR(S aa Wears frame: 3 2H

2. V.S. Apte, p. 160.

=== PAGE 4 ===

Vayu-Purana

Having done this way, Pitamaha then took it
up by means of Sruks and Sruvd (sacrificial
spoons and ladles) and performed the Homa as
if it were clarified butter, reciting the mantras
duly.

Aa: BSAA AT WaTaAa: |
WAAR UH ceay TATA
TART HreaceaT eS AMT Arh AAT TAIN 3 BU

Then that Prajapati began the creation of
living beings. Due to the splendour that was
beside, the fiery things were born; the Gunas—
Sattva and Rajas were not pervaded by the
Guna Tamas.

agora fret arengt cafe Ferm
ara Tay SRT | wU

From the Saguna brilliance, perennially in
the sky developed the Tamas (gloom) and from
Tamas and the Tejas (brilliance), all the living
beings took birth.

Uer aera Set Yar ST:
ARTMCAAMTATS TAY FATT TUF

When the sons bom of Karman (action)
were created, Brahma took up his semen virile
in the cooking vessel of clarified butter and
offered the oblation.

US Fa afeng wig weta:)
Sap SYST Yet: Tea S ween se
The semen virile having been offered as
oblation, the Maharsis (the great sages)
appeared forth themselves, embodied with
brilliance and having the attributes of new born
infants.
Bi ae apega sateen Fga: afar:
facial opt caret fire fafasgamy
qyeatatt gare wees & FY 01
Once the semen virile having been offered
as oblation into the fire, from the flame, issued

out Kavi (i.e. Venus). Having seen him coming
out splitting up the flame, Hiranyagarbha

(Brahma) said— “You are Bhrgu.” This way he
spoke out, whereby from that Bhrgu (became
apparent).

wercaeeateyt BET Teo
mae yar dies cat wait:
farsa qadat wa gat waTAAR CH
Having seen Brahma that way, appeared as
such Mahadeva and remarked- “I am desirous
of a son and J am initiated. He is born to me, O
lord. Hence may lord Bhrgu be my son.”

waa way wea: Kayan
Ware HCUAATE WRIA IATA

ARUN PTAA U Fo YN Se
“All right”, this way permitted by
Svayarnbhi, Mahadeva adopted Bhrgu as his
son. All the descendants of Bhrgu are called
Varunas. He became a holy lord sage.

fgita g aa: Yanga:
apitaigisai dteatht wats hati ¥ on

A second ladleful of semen virile fell on the
burning coals. Aigiras was born of it with his
limbs firmly united on fire (burning charcoals).
From this, he is known as Angiras.

aula wea at opr afeterormacia
VWhergpataré fedtaise warfeafen we
Having seen the generation of Angiras, Agni
spoke to Brahma-~ “I am verily the bearer of the

semen virile of you. Hence may this second son
be mine.”

wanfeaft aiswpat geo Hea:
Tereiantt srat sft A: ATTN S I

“May it be so”, this way then agreed to by
Brahma. Hence, we have heard that all the
descendants of Angiras are known as
“Agneyas”.

rape Fi: YR EU caanfom
Bl wares vege sft gf ean

The semen virile, when was consigned to the
holy fire for six more times by Brahma, the

=== PAGE 5 ===

Chapter-65

5

creator of the universe, the six Brahmas (sons of
Brahma) were born. This is what is our hearing.

wife: serena wife: wafer
sat afeaegat SR aR SAGs Yt
Marici was the first one therein, born up out
of rays. In that Kratu (sacrifice), then a son got

birth and on that account (became known) as
Kratu. ,

ae att senteronea: & ate
ata Pfgenin: gers BBS I
“I am the third”, this is the meaning on that
account he is called as Atri. The fourth son was

born with sharp pointed hairs. Hence he became
well known as Pulastya.

Spend: ATQUTERATY Yee: BIA:
AMAA TATA 1 It
“Born out of larger curls’, on that account

another son is known as Pulaha. He who was
born out of the Vasu was called Vasuman.

afas sft wag: shat geranfefirs
SAT TAIT: FAT: ATT: WORTH wig
“Vasistha”, this way is declared as such by
the reality knowing Brahmavadins (expounders
of Vedas). This way, these six great sages are
the mind born sons of Brahma.

aired Ceara eat afta: WaT: |
waa Bela VST TAIT: GAT WS
They are the propagators of the universe. By
them, were developed these subjects or
progenies. Hence Brahma’s sons are mentioned
as Prajapatis.
amt farat ara uta wetefa:
seater seferron: Bes eteAy aT Use
Others called Pitrs were created by these

very great sages. The seven groups of sages are
well known in the world,

unten antag wa warieratsmt
deren: there anfneta feet:

SRT OT: teat: FeUTE eiTeRFeRTAT: 114 o
They are- Maricas, Bhargavas, Angirasas,
Paulastyas, Paulahas, Vasisthas and Atreyas.
These groups of Pitrs are well-known in the
world.

Wl aaradena Gta F YU:
ayes wenrerey Satferoraay Fegan 4 eu
These three Ganas have been briefly
mentioned before: They are Apurvas (Rare),

Prakagsas (Brilliant) and — Jyotismantas
(Illuminated ones).

Fat Tet at Fat wfeerencT: |
ATL TAT TARA STORATAP ATEN 2

Their king is the lord Yama and they have
their sins obviated by their observances. Now
listen with utmost care to the other Prajapatis.

wen: Syaa: Wa feat: YRATEM
agya: qaresy freee terran it & 3 Ul
Kardama, Kasyapa, Sesa, _Vikranta,

Susravas, Bahuputra, Kumara, Vivasvan, along
with Sucigravas,

weaaisheatidgea waratt:|
Seas ASAT AeA WIT 4 VII

Pracetasa, Aristanemi, Bahula and many
others are Prajesvaras many in number.

ayitern areafaca: dye: Wada:
wattaat: aera: ares ASIAN 4
Kusoccayas and Valakhilyas took birth as
great sages having the speed of the mind, and

could circumambiate the universe. They
happened to be Emperors.

wet ererttfeat weathers: |
Sara GPO ATTAIN 1G GH

The groups of sages called Vaikhanasas,

born of the sacred ashes, adhering to penance
and Vedic studies, are honoured by Brahmanas.

ativarera dreraratert wretirat
faguarercrah fanen Sarat: 401

=== PAGE 6 ===

Vayu-Purana

Sprung from the ears of his, the two
handsome ASvins, pure ones, born of the eyes
and are known as Aksarajas.

SET: WAT Uae: siraNTETT RT
UAT TURN A RM KAUAI SH
The greatest ones as the lords of progenies,

were born of his vessels. The sages were born
of the hair pores in the skin and the sweat dirt.

aroun fe Ga ater Frater: werdera:1
ara 3 erat: fiat) Safar eee
Of his tears and cry were born the terrible
months, Nirydsas, the junctions of fortnights,
years, days and nights and the terrible light of
manes.
ae dia ict Te 7
amtatifa fag quer Uya: THAT G ON
Raudra, they say is the Lohita (blood) and
Lohita is known as Kanaka (gold). That verily

is to be known as Maitra also, and smoke is
remembered as animals.

ashi a earerassfeet: WARAT:|
RUA: Tera Safa feeraTTAT: 1G gil
The rays! that were of that one, are Rudras

and Adityas. The brilliant divine human beings
were born of the burning coal and the flame.

sfearret Breer Te TATRA: |
Fa A TERA SATS § Vl

Brahma, the primordial being in the world,
became the one born of Brahman. To him, the
bestower of all the desires, requesting a virgin,
the sages spoke like this

gen quer fragt: dmciafan
Ba 9 aafaerha wat: Wat: eT G 3H

Brahm, the eldest one of the gods, becomes
gladdened by the Devas and these Prajesvaras
(the Lords of progenies) shall generate all the
progenies.

1. V.S. Apte, p. 52. Sif: Ray of light flame, light.

wa warat waa: ad ante qatar:
aererafentecearacagicm: farang xn
All are the Lords of progenies, and also all
are the penance performers or ascetics. These
rites will uphold these worlds with his grace.
we Vadarra aa ait faa
Ray aefaata: we confer & Gt
They have developed the couples who are
enhancers of your radiance. Among the gods,

there are scholars of Vedas and all the sage
kings are also such.

aera: ad warafeyutreat:|
arr Fal Ged a aT WH Afan gat
All are engaged in the Vedas, having born
out of the merits of Prajapatis. The unending
Brahman is the Truth, and the penance of
highest order.

wd fe aata a ada waa: wit
Fal u genta cela ATTN Il

O Prabhu! All of us are your own children,
the Brahman, the Brahmanas and all the worlds
including the mobile and the immobile beings.

mifeamfea: arat tary aefate: wel
aurarie fears asus SMTA 21
Beginning with Marici, the gods
accompanied by sages said— “Having thought

over for the progenies, we sought for your
blessings.”

aferag werrn fay safer: Tel
WARM ALAA: RA ERTETATATATAT: 1G BH
In this Yajfia, the greatly fortunate gods
along with the sages, are born as such from the
lineage, thoroughly honoured all over as per
space and time.
ag aa eto wea: wa:
anata emtaicn: wT: neon
By that very appearance, they may not
established these subjects. They may be

=== PAGE 7 ===

Chapter-65

stabilised from the beginning till the end of the
Yugas.

Wissdicttae: witrafraa

Ue ten fatter wer yer a eT

waa are: FART TERT: 9 BU

Then exclaimed the preceptor of the

universe, not contemplating upon any further
thought- “O gods, it was after having
determined like this that the subjects had been
created by me. There is no doubt in it. These
great sages have been born in your race.”

wat gt: atte cig vs wera:
faettonssqyeat S were ATTA: 19 BH
Among them, | shall dilate upon of Bhrgu’s

lineage, the high-souled one, the primeval
Prajapati, in detail and in proper sequence.

ca ptrenfatt sesh
fecoaceferat: aaa fect ary ufegatu
yeieante ueint giz arafititne a1

The two spouses of Bhrgu were unrivalled,
excellent ones, of noble descent and auspicious.
One was the Hiranyakasipu’s daughter, famous
by the name ‘Divya’ and other was named
Paulomi, the fair-complexioned daughter of
Puloman,

qieataten aret defeat am
ZaRRMarard ys aAfargd WET st
Divya gave birth from Bhrgu to Kavya, the
excellent one among the Vedic scholars, the

preceptor of gods and demons, well-known as
Sukra, the son of Kavi.

yee Gad: Hye: aareatishe aA:
faa weet aan arora apr
re stat wars fast AAR: GAO G
That Sukra was also known as Usanas and
was remembered as Kavya by name. The
spouse of Sukra was the mind-born daughter of
the manes, the Soma-drinkers and was very
reputed one. She gave birth to four sons.

Seo AH BH: TATA Teta:
Weal 7 Ua: WaT: YHA AAMT VR
Equipped with Brdhma-teja (the ineffectual
splendour of a Vedic scholar), he was born as
the most excellent knowers of Brahman. In her
verily, four sons of Sukra took birth.

TABI eat weet yest a ATV

3 TeISSPeTAERTT TRACT: WHAT:
They were— Tvasta, Varitrin, Sanda and
Amarka. They resembled the sun and equivalent
to Brahma in their prowess.

Tem: verter fagreres geafire:
ae: gat Ba steer: eats: Wc
Rafjana, Prthurasmi and the scholarly
Brhadgiras were the excellent sons of Varitrin.
They were devoted to Brahman and became the
priests of gods.

werner wrens
Fret & od quagt aqnadiqe <i

With a view to demolish the lawful domain
of sacrifices, they approached Manu. They
planned as such and having seen the law getting
violated, Indra spoke to Manu.

uta g ant wai wrofaents ara
TS I Ta TETATETAAAN ¢ ol

“I would rather have the sacrifice performed
through you than through these.” Having
listened to these words of Indra, they got out of
that spot.

fray afters ntact a ararg
mao Utafacan | Aa: AISTHA ATTN ce

On those having gone out of sight, Indra
then having got rid of the malignant planets,

released spouse Cetana, and subsequently
followed her.
ad safanena amare aL

TAISSTARPAGET SUR: wEz(wa) FU
gem tates dat & afar aac 2

=== PAGE 8 ===

Vayu-Purana

On seeing the Yatis (the restrained recluses)
persevering for the annihilation of Indra, he
struck at them while they slept in the altar of the
lord of Devas on the southern quarter or right
side.

aati Y MANTUA AT MIeTGS: Tel
viaifor rodents wafroaretera: ic 31

While they were being devoured by

Salavrkas (ie. dogs, jackals or hyenas), their

heads tumbled down simultaneously and
became dates fruit.

wd aefam: yat sau Feat: TT
aera faa a yet gfeatswaq cv)
Thus, the sons of Varitrin were killed by

Indra earlier. Devayani became the daughter of
Sukra with his wife Yajani.

fafa farang ap: yistater
apierranqerat atrerth AEra ET: 1
fersnenty fercnat aa: Tyas 4H
The three-headed Visvariipa happened to be
the great son of Tvasta, born of Yasodhara,
daughter of Virocana, the highly-famed one.

Visvakarman is remembered as the younger
twin-brother of Vigvaripa.

sping yrat tar HART wlegnsserstT:|
deat agya walarenans seaTATy: 1c &
Of Bhrgu, the Bhrgu Devas took birth as

twelve sons. Lord Kavya begot of Devi those
sons.

qert werd serra
wy: Toe gat a spat cayuer a1)
weagrenia gevisfiatt: yan cen

They were- Bhuvana, Bhavana, Anya,
Anyayata, Kratu, Sravas, Mardhan, Vyajana,
Vyasrusa, Prasava, Aja, and the twelfth one
Adhipati.

Bear ya Ser: BEAT BEM ATE: |
udienraga afed afer fayque ci

These Bhrgu gods are remembered as twelve
sacrificial Devas. Paulomi gave birth to a lordly
son having full self-control and engrossed as
Brahman.

anfaa: diset wife wi: tor acto
ATE: Bisa UAT WaT
MATAR TRATES VU

In the eighth month, because he was
diseased, he was forcibly taken out of the womb
by a treacherous act, and so his name became
Cyavana. He became’conscious due to Pracetas.
From the anger of Cyavana revived by Pracetas,
Cyavana alias Pracetasa burned the man-eaters.

SAAT Yat gt Yaa s arta:
wears adit o argut apa ott
Cyavana produced two sons with Sukanya

named~ Atmavana and Dadhica. Those two
became well honoured by the saints.

Ate: Wat cetera
eat veit mean arrerarret ATgeTN @ tH
Sarasvata was born of Sarasvati and

Dadhica. Ruci, the blessed daughter of Nahusa,
became the wife of Atmavana.

we Gahafess se fie Were:
aitdenssditguteng drenfiraqyra: i <2

And from the thighs of that one, the greatly
famed sage Ura or Aurva took birth, having
opened apart the thighs of his mother. Rcika
was the son of Aurva. He was having radiance
like that of a blazing fire.

wmefaaias Ararat sre
aphey cremate dgdorrerarereit <3

Of Retka with Satyavati, Jamadagni took
birth when the sacrificial offerings pertaining to
Rudra and Visnu by Bhrgu were interchanged.

SUATEOTERAT Se TATA
oper THEM’ WRIT
aeETare Te Yas freA gv

=== PAGE 9 ===

Chapter-65

As the caru (sacrificial offerings) pertaining
to Vaisnava fire was consumed, Renuka bore to
Jamadagni, the son Rama of unmeasured
splendour. He was an incarnation of Sakra in
valour and had the traits both of a Brahmana
and a Ksatriya.

aidenssaigayt saefagtrey
at Qragertin antarn wea e 4H

Aurva had a hundred sons headed by

Jamadagni, and those Bhargavas (descendants

of Bhrgu) had thousands of sons due to mutual
alliance,

REY & sen geat artat: Bar:
aat faatsfatoes wg: wa: ayia I
Wao aT Ba wa Fa AAA: ee
Among the intermediary sages, there are
many other descendants of Bhrgu. They are
divided into seven Gotras, viz. Vatsa, Visva,
ASvisena, Panda, Pathya and Saunaka. These
seven clans are also remembered as Bhargavas.

STOTT sey: yer sea:
FASS BYAT ARET: TATA:

Reena Genfeagest wetsra:1 eet

Now you listen about the lineage of Angiras,
the intelligent son of Agni, in whose lineage
took birth the Bharadvajas along with
Gautamas. The gods chief among the Angiras
are Tvisimants (endowed with brilliance) and
highly prowessed ones.

gen va wih arett a wa aT
Wan a amt aan feat arateaador:
seesiete: Ure ceafe eater ect
Atharvan, Angiras had three spouses, viz.
Surap4 the daughter of Marica, Svarat the
daughter of Kardama and Pathya the daughter
of Manu. I shall now talk of their progeny.

sedong earerag stat: Beiteaet:1
BAT USAT AST ATA AAPAATAATN ee

Of Atharvan with his various wives, took

9

birth the collaterals (Dayadas), the propagators
of the lineage. They took birth blessed by
austere penance of that purified soul.

geet: TSIM MAT: Y_I WT

sere aed a TATA TAM Yo 01!

feu: yg wart dada wa:1

fafereey Te TET PARIITETAATT: I Ro Vt

Brhaspati was born of Suripa and Gautama

was born of Svarat. Pathya produced Avandhya,
Vamadeva, Utathya and Usija. Dhisnu was also
(born) of Pathya and Sarhvarta was the mind-
born son of Atharvan. Vicitta, Ayasya and
Saradvan were the sons of Utathya.

fort chin gegatt armza:1
fat: Ya: YAM AW TEA go VM
Dirghatamas was the son of Usija and
Brhaduttha was the son of Vamadeva. Dhisnu’s
son was Sudhanvan and Rsabha was the son of
Sudhanvan.

wer: BEAT Far UA  ufeqar:1
gemaaicart faa: AAT! go BU

The Rathakaras (charioteers) are
remembered as Gods as well as Rsis. Of

Brhaspati, Bharadvaja of very great fame and
well-known was born.

afgray dadt tanfgra: ya
geeridtara Sat BETA: Bat Row
The sons of Sarhvarta, mind-born son of
Anigiras, are known as Devas. You may listen to
them. These Angiras Gods are regarded as
junior to Brhaspati.
aieanfara: yar: Gearai fast
atemiqggéat af: somata a
slams aaa Hg: Ae FT SM ou N
The couterine sons of Angiras took birth in
Surtipa. They are ten— Audarya, Ayu, Danu,
Daksa, Darbha, Prana, Havisman, Havisnu,
Kratu and Satya.

=== PAGE 10 ===

10

Viayu-Purana

Seer sae ameaeifaa:
UTTER: Wteplerenr MI RTTATHTAT: 1 o & It

aren fampgges eftat araereran
TOT Want WERT sat: FETA 209
Wl wigea: war fagar ay ws aI
Rey & are sedis: BAT Roc
Ayasya, Utathya, Vamadeva, Usija,
Bharadvajas, Sarnkrtikas, Gargya, Kanva,
Rathitaras, Mudgalas, Visnuvrddhas, Haritas,
Vayus, Bhaksas of Bharadvajas, Arsabhas and
Kirnbhayas-— these fifteen are to be remembered
as belonging to the Paksa (lineage) of Angiras.
And those sages who are the extraneous ones
(belonging to the families outside) are
remembered among other sages.
Tried uftaenta aerqarrEa
TRAN Tey ATTA Ro Vl
I shall now talk of the lineage of Marici
having excellent men as its scions and in whose
race took birth the world consisting of mobile
and immobile beings.

Titferreget aftertaste
Wa: waquida: waagefareta: u

eae weraat wraT sTferat wy got
Marici looked for waters and then meditate
out of lust for progeny. The lord mentally
conceived thus- “The son bom of a
praiseworthy woman, equipped with all merits
and having good tastes is adored”.

SgHs aa: Pat sa: WAST:

arg wforfgarearries: BISTATINT: 1 eat
efimarensheat: sarafe:1

Wa wits Wala aah agit casi eee

Invoked as such, then all the waters were
called. The master dwelt in their company. The
lord procreated an unequalled son named
Aristanemi who was a Prajapati and who was of
well-controlled mind. Vadhauvesa begot the son
Marica, having the splendour of the Sun.

wearafe dat art gareif afer fara:
ae adtaeentin at: AiswferMiseTaTU g 23 Ut
Meditating upon the speech of the Suave,
cherishing for sons, he stayed under water for a
period of seven thousand years and thereby that
son became Apratima (unequalled).
amen: Bagagrat BT Te: WAI
Waaity Way TAUTISHA TAA Vee
Kasyapa was the knower of the sun, hence
he was equivalent to Brahma. In all

Manvantaras, he takes birth by the partial
incarnation of Brahma.

auftiratige ceo epfter: wat:

aftara er age cape warfare gk tt

It is said that for the sake of his daughters,

the subjects were angered by Daksa. Then he
drank Kasya. The’ word Kasya means liquor or
wine.

aararen fe fasten aes: Hypa TAA
aye Wel oye fad: PAUATY HVAT VEN
Hascekasas (sense of humour) deserve to be
enunciated as Brahma’s Kasya. Kasya is
remembered as wine by the scholars and
Kasyapa is derived from the drinking of Kasya.

eetifet AT agra are BTRTEAAL
enfingra: Sita: APATAT AsTATN VI
He used cruel speech. Cursed by Daksa, he

became furious and thereby became Kasyapa as
such.

Weare HPT TAIT VATA

THA: HYAGTS HAT: HATTA

wais gerenfea: waten wearer eget

On being requested by Kasyapa and urged

by Brahma Paramesthin, Daksa gave his
daughters to Kasyapa. All those maidens were
Brahmavadins and all those were the mothers of
the universe.

geagheat gy gud at ae areumy
MYAPTAATYS: YSRTATATTTTN

=== PAGE 11 ===

Chapter-65

i

eruragaurreda weaard: mA Vee
He who knows this sacred creation of sages
by Varuna, becomes long-lived one, pious one,
the chaste one, and he attains to utmost bliss.
By hearing this and retaining this in memory he
becomes immune from all sins.

TIGA: wa wat Teton

fated weet uB ad were ZI

frat: duatisd wildacaaer si 22011

Then spoke out again all the sages to

Romaharsana- “When the sixth creation of the
subjects of Caksusa Manu had been dissolved,
the creation of Vaivasvata Manu started, how
did it take place?”

WW sara

WaT: eft afew: cat cer: waayan
wast zal gens afanta garfor an
sofmasat wraarsararey FI g2 at

Sita replied~ “You may create the
progenies”, this way commanded by
Svayarnbhii lord himself, Daksa then created
the beings~ mobile and immobile ones, on the
arrival of Vaivasvata Manvantara.

aa: Ng ang wo: we gfe:
gusala sfasa: EaETM 22 2

Then Daksa started creating progenies of
four types, viz. Jardyujas (viviparous), Andajas
(oviparous), Udbhijjas (germinating ones) and
Svedajas (those generated by warm vapours or
sweat).

ae atagentin aan att eT:
eonferdt arrarcteforeratfeasiea: 0 223 1

Having performed austere penance for ten
thousands years, he became endowed with the
powers of Yoga (mental concentration),
specifically by Anima (the super-human powers
of becoming as small as an atom and one of the
8 powers or siddhis of Siva) and others.

arart sara agate ar
Taal eee
STATA PASTA ATTA 22 VII
adamant gfedt afrafa genfar a
arate yah fargayfafaen: wars 224 tt

The illustrious one, divided himself into
human beings, serpents (Nagas), Demons
(Raksasas), Devas, Asuras along with
Gandharvas. All of them were endowed with
divine strength and wealth of beauty and
radiance. They were lords equal to himself. He
was desirous of creating other mental norm of
progenies of various kinds.

maar yea
TAT TTR ITTETATI 2R KI
The Rsis, Devas along with Gandharvas,
human beings, serpents, Raksasa’s, Yaksas,
Bhitas, goblins, birds, animals and the beasts
were created by him.
FaISS AAMT BRT A aT aT: aT:
UAT ATA TEA HTATH QR Nt
When the progenies created by mind did not
grow and multiply along specifically, he was

rebuked as such by the adorable and wise lord
Mahadeva.

ape a are fargafefaen: wer:
afaert arerecacit SORT ATTA RCH
And by an idea of physical union (sexual
intercourse), he became desirous of creating the
different subjects. He bore to himself as spouse
Asikni, the daughter of Prajapati Virana.
Gat Great Geet Tar eiteenfeainy
wer gaftg Ue STEEN 2231
She was endowed with great austerity, and
by whom was supported the entire Universe
consisting of the mobile and immobile beings.

sargarecdiat yeitent wre fa
eaetgedt aratafacstt draft wert 93 ott

=== PAGE 12 ===

12

Vayu-Purana

aunt rad aa: otto enfin
saifinty aster: yodtsyaat wy: 23 gH
Here are quoted these two verses about

Daksa, the son of Pracetas— “When Daksa
married Asikni, the great daughter of Virani, he
created a million mobile wells along with those
identifying with them. Releasing them into
streams and hills, the powerful Daksa pursued
them.

a ger fata: sike wfaereate & ser:
wees fatten | SATE WATT RB TH
Having seen him, the sages said- “He will
establish the first and second set of the
progenies of Daksa Prajapati here.”
wasTexMee Hat Age g A:
afar afte aa car: wretraisaequ 23 311
That very way after creating a million wells,

Daksa Pracetasa married Asikni, daughter of
Virani.

am Grae © afwarafiritsrm
afaerat SATA Bat: MTT: TYLM LB VI
Then Daksa Pracetasa begot a thousand sons

of unmeasured splendour from Asikni, the
daughter of Virani.

aig ae ver: a faadfagan
afd: fradarel aet get: Gan
Aga et AA PITTA SHAS TAA 83 4
And having seen those greatly radiant cnes,
desirous of ennourishing forth the progenies,
Devarsi Narada, the son of Brahma, fond of
dialogues, spoke out evil words to them
resulting in himself being cursed.
a: a a vread fan: eyerreta air:
SAMOA ATA TAIRA ATU 23.
The Brahmana (Narada) is sometimes called
son of Kasyapa. Because of his mean act, the
Brahmana sage was afraid of the curse of

Daksa.

a: BPATAT ET UAT STATE
URE: BPATS CATMTTATTA: I R391
Paramesthin was born as Kasyapa’s son.
And again owing to the fear of the curse of
Daksa, he was born as his mental son.

aera ayareny igi aaiswadi
a fe vhagerat are: WeafeA e3 cl
His second birth was as the mental son of

Kasyapa. He was born earlier as Narada of
Paramesthin.
Wa carer Yara weer ofa fae:
frend safgrar: we farmer + Hera: 93 8
Earlier Daksa’s sons known as Haryasvas

were annihilated for the purpose of censure.
There is no doubt about it.

TET eet: BRT are SF wy:
wats yeep aaa: wae ev oll
Lord Daksa became infuriated and attempted

to destroy him. Placing the Brahmarsis ahead,
Daksa was implored by Paramesthin.
adtsfirdfad oh earegq weafeat
wat ae Wel aa Wat weafeefarn ex gu
Then Daksa stipulated the conditions with

Paramesthin~ “Let Narada be born of my
daughter as your son”.

wat eet: Yat wreferat & wee
TST ART FH a: ORT sarees ewe
Then Daksa offered his dear daughter to

Paramesthin. From that one, Narada took birth.
The sage became calm and ceased to be afraid.

aguged fares sieeateet: GA:
apace IG ad raiaheaq ews
Having heard this, those Brahmanas having
curiosity provoked once again, inquired of Siita,
the best one among the orators, a displayer of
the real sense of the real expressions.

=== PAGE 13 ===

Chapter-65

13

aaa Sy:
aed fernfget: Yat ARS WET
WeaTUfer gare SAT: TEAST Aww
The sages enquired- How were the sons of
Prajapati, the sons of Pracetasa destroyed by the
noble-souled Narada’?
a red oer aren fagrerdre YT
Ware yt aed Aut aaron gw tt
He (Siita) having listened to the truthful

expressions born of true curiosity, spoke out
these sweet words endowed with all the merits.

aaa wean fererifaaa: wes)
FaNMA Welstat ARTETA Bl PVE
The sons of Daksa, Haryasvas, desirous of
developing the progenies, highly valiant ones,
came there and Narada spoke to them.
afer aa ga a a ware yaerq
orgenada et wear J WaT: 1 Roll
“Childish ones, O verily”, all of you are not
being aware of the surface of the world. What is
inside, above and below, you do not know.
How will you create the progenies?
fe wai g ten: agent aa a
afarte apet sro fe ¢ Bez
aed asta agats (ais) fa aa arg gaa
What is the extent of the Earth? What are the
things deserve to be created? And without
having known, the one fit to be created, what

will you create as such, lesser or greater?
Therein a shortcoming is discernible.

8 caer yea wae: wat fer
ard ¢ WAM Tard J WTA evel
And those having heard the speech of
Narada, went away to various directions, and
having approached the aerial zone, they came
down to a disparagement.

arenfa 3 frac soit argfifira: |
Ue aqua wey eet F TEMA Quo

Wandering here and there and mixed up
with the winds, they have not returned till date.
Thus those great sages are roaming after
reaching the aerial zone.

Ay WY AVY ee: wate: Wa:
fever Yara ARTETA! 4 8
On his own sons having got perished, Daksa
Pracetasa, once again begot a thousand sons of
Virini.
wat faceifaea: yacrat: Gg a
ways seer ofa AEA BI RG RH
These sons known as Sabalasvas' became
desirous of increasing the progenies once again.
And again they were made to listen to the words
spoken by Narada as spoken earlier.

wager wert wa ST Wet:

amie wa gerne weTgfe: 1
meu weet eter ate ATT TPT HG BA
Having heard those
Kumaras (Princes) of great radiance spoke to
each other- “The great sage had spoken

correctly, And the track of our brothers deserves
to be followed here. There is no doubt in it.

WT WAT PT YS SATS HST:

asf aa arto ware: wade

genta a Prada AaB SATS STAT 4 vi

Having understood the extent of the Earth,

we shall be able to create subjects quite easily.”
And they too proceeded in all the quarters in the
same maaner and even till date, have not
returned like the streams not returning after
falling into the oceans.

aa: wale & wraT UIgeaaTt Ta:
wera agate wer aa wars FeraTAATH RG GH
Ever since then, a brother engaged in quest
of a lost elder brother, gets himself lost. That,
therefore, need not to be done deliberately.

words, all those

1. Having horses of diverse colours.

=== PAGE 14 ===

14

Vayu-Purana

Og wacway aa: Gatswatey:|
aed aTregifet tare Tae aN RGGI
When the Sabalasvas were perished, lord
Daksa, the supreme being became infuriated
and cursed Narada- “Be ruined and endure the
pain of residing in the abode of foetus (womb)”.

wen tate aby weTeTY ye feet
ufgassyaeat aftwarta feat: gyn
Then even on those noble-souled sons
getting perished, Daksa begot of Vairini sixty
daughters of great repose.
areal wire Uae aT: wy)
at: dong wratetart wedas neyo
Those daughters were accepted as wives by
Lord Kagyapa, Dharma, Soma (the Moon god),
and likewise other great sages.’
at fagis ana greet at ae waa:
SPST ATA: WATT TATA 4 8
He who knows this specific progeny of
Daksa in entirety and in reality, becomes long-
lived, reputed, blessed and endowed with
progeny.
upafpattseara:ttg 4 tt

wR

=== PAGE 15 ===

14 Vayu-Purana
in detail of the Devas, Danavas and Daityas in
the Vaivasvata Manvantara.

Wi Sart
athe crageata Frect ¢ Frater
sree agate eran aaa it 3
daem a ygat a ae feat wa aI
entacatt ayer aa eet: weer eM 3
Sita replied— I shall now talk of the creation
of Dharma. Listen and understand. You may
know that Arundhati, Vasu, Yami, Larhba,
Bhanu, Marutvati, Sarhkalpa, Muhirta, Sadhya
and Visva, these ten daughters were offered to
Dharma as wives by Daksa Pracetasa.
aren yar’ og weargem at
TET AT TATRA TATA
Sereda: UTA XI
Sadhya bore to Dharma twelve sons called
Sadhyas. The greatly fortunate ones were born
according to their wish and were partakers of
shares in the sacrifices. Those who are
conversant with Devas, know them to be greater
than other Gods.
wet & yaRgEr sat ear: were
wa apes Tye Watts 4 Ul
From the mouth of Brahma, got birth Jayas
out of the desire for progeny. All of them
Tee weufeaatseara: it having born in the form of mantras came to be
‘ . known as such in the Manvantaras.
Chapter 66 .
; nap ; avis thoes geerer WaT
The amaie-onsinnd lineage of faieha fafirfer arent: aiita ang
fagrat da feat wat ager A eyAT:
ed Si: artes aat f saat wan aot

Rani eran a gamit da wag:
sata faentite gfe aaeaasatu eu
The sages spoke— You may talk of the birth
1. One who is possessed of Bhaga or spiritual power

which is of six sorts, namely, dominion, might,
glory, splendour, wisdom and dispassion.

Darga, Paurnamasa, Brhad, Rathantara, Citti,
Vicitti, Akiti, Kati, Vijiata, Vijiiata, Manas and
Yajiia~ these names of those Jayas are well-
known.

were F Sa: Ga: Taree Fate: 1
warifat 3 gir: weary Tuc

=== PAGE 16 ===

Chapter-66

5

By the curse of Brahma, they were born
again in the Svayarhbhuva Manvantara as Jatas.
They were born again in the Svarocisa
Manvantara as Tusités and Satyas in the
Auttama Manvantara.

area eat ara agar tara
eT MAT ATT GT HAT TT SH

In the Tamasa Manvantara, they were born
as Haris and Vaikunthas in the Raivata
Manvantara. They were reborn as Sadhyas as
per their will in the Caksusa Manvantara.

eigen wera: area FT BETA: |
Ud EA ATER FAT: Gol
The highly fortunate sons of Dharma, the

twelve deathless Sadhyas, had been formerly
born in the Caksusa Manvantara.

Tanifeatsatsettar Far I a wea:
qfaar are Asay erase eH

In the Caksusa Manvantara, the gods of
great radiance who happened to be in the
Svarocisa Manvantara, they mutually called
themselves as Tusitas and spoke to one another.

fafahes ter afertar 3 gfmsgey
gaat weMad Treaster a1
Tat ofaereeda: seat safereafarn 22 tl

When the duration of Svarocisa Manvantara
remained but little, the Tusitas spoke out
mutually- “We shall enter into the blessed
Sadhyas shall born in the Manvantara. Then our
beneficence shall come about as such.”

Way 7 8 ad arent FAT:
TeMagIa yA THAT ATTA: 1 83
This way having spoken, all those in the

Manvantara of Caksusa Manu, took birth as the
twelve sons of Dharma, son of Svayarhbhii.

AARON aa sae WAS fe
fauttedt aenssdivar wet afta at
Tanifaasat ware at qi Ten ge

Nara and Narayana then took birth once
again there. Vipascit who was Indra and
likewise Satya who was Hari happened to be
those two Tusités gods in the Svarocisa
Manvaniara earlier.

gfe y Meares area ae
THIS TRM, woes AT aR aA 4 1
fafreat vada gat ARTO
waaisa fagga areat greg ART eg II

When Tusitaés became Sadhyas, these names
are announced~ Manas, Anumanta, Prana, Nara,
the valiant Yana, Citti, Haya, Naya, Harhsa,
Narayana, Prabhava and Vibhu. They were born
as the twelve Sadhyas.

waniyasat ud aa: tarifas ya
ARTES qaarat Frater gon
In the Svayarhbhuva Manvantara earlier, and
later in the Svarocisa Manvantara, these names

happened to be those of the Tusitas. Those you
may know.

WUONSUMRMEM: FHA SIA Us Ti
ay: att wer ror: eayif afegtrerETH ec 11

The names were- Prana, Apana, Udana,
Samana, Vyana, Caksus, Srotra, Prana, Sparsa,
Buddhi and Manas.

WOTUATgeMea AA SAT Us A
arena ys x gfearat cyenft gu ett
Formerly only these name of the Tusitas
were remembered— Prana, Apana, Udana,
Samana and Vyana.
aah aa: Wat: GRA AAT: BAT:
att gas dy amaaretts Fett
weeer wares TaaISwt waatfefa: 1 2 0 I
Of Vasu, the sons were Vasus and they are
remembered as the younger brothers of
Sadhyas. The eight glorified Vasus are— Dhara,

Dhruva, Soma, Apa, Anala, Anila, Pratyisa and
Prabhasa.

=== PAGE 17 ===

16

Vayu-Purdna

are Wat giao greerae ETAT
gery ve are aarett SHreeTeRTEAT: 1 8 RII
Of Dhara, the sons were Dravina and
Hutahavyavaha; likewise of Dhruva, the son
was Bhava by name, who in the name of Kala
became the impeller of the worlds.

area marcel gear weather: 1
Digvat at agerat fay cay fain eeu
Soma’s sons were adorable Varcd and
Budha who is known as a planet. Of Rohini,

these two were born well-known in the triad of
worlds.

mifiatrenda waersre: Ga:
amr WAY AaOST: WA: WRT AT 23 IN
Dhara, Urmi and Kalila— these were the

three sons of Candramas (Moon-god). Apa’s
sons were Vaitandya, Sama and Santa.

a: TAU FA We Te:
afaya: Facey PRT SITET
wer vray fares Saas yes eI
Skanda and Sanatkumara were born of the
fourth part of Tejas (fire). Of Agni, the son
Kumara was born in the Sara grove (a kind of
reed), Sakha, Visakha and Naigameya were his
younger brothers.
afrerer fren srat wea: Yat wa:
afamanfista dt yararerer a 241
Of Anila (Wind-god), the spouse was Siva.
Her sons happened to be Manojava and
Avijiiatagati.
wees fag: ya aftr g tact:
Bt yah Garant erererat witferot 2
Of Pratyiisa, the son was Rsi Devala by
name. Devala had two sons Ksamavan and
Manisi.

geen wit ave garantie
amfeg areca frag Ron

Brhaspati’s sister was a celibate and an

excellent female accomplished in Yoga.
Detached to the wordly affairs, she roamed in
the entire world.

ware g at erat TEATS ZI

faaenal gaara ara: farfeamsrafa: R20
She became the spouse of Prabhisa, the

eighth of the Vasus and had a son named

Visvakarma was the Prajapati of all Silpis
(architects).

a at wafrert fragt a aife:1
quot a weet wat area TAN
He was the architect of all the arts and crafts

and carpenter of the gods. He makes and causes
others to make ornaments:

aaat a faa tact wos a:
aguaiaitata wer ferent ferert:1 3 ol
Of all the gods, he creates the Vimanas (the

aerial cars). The human beings subsist upon his
architectural structures and mechanical arts.

faa(aytarg fear afet a feega:1

HYST: HA: WT: BATT: STAT GP TETATU 3 RU

Rearmaiga tenes & eet

erigat: tyat ae ferret TART YATIN| VW

The ten well known Visvedevas were born

of Visva. Kratu, Daksa, Sravas, Satya, Kala,
Kama, Dhuni, Kuruvan, Prabhavan and
Rocamana were the ten as such. They are all
known as the ten son of Dharma. They were the
auspicious sons born of Visva.

Tea I Wed aay AST: BAT:
Ugaias qgatat att crear ree 3 311

From Marutvati was born Marutvants. The
Bhanu groups were remembered as the sons of
Bhanu and the Muhiirtas were born of Muhirta.
Lamba gave birth to Ghosa.

decal J dat fagrdiaes wa a
aT Seat eT Were AAAT: 3
From Sarnkalpa was born the learned

=== PAGE 18 ===

Chapter-66

Sarhkalpa. The Nagavithis consisting of three
paths were born of Jami.
yadifardt warerat Sra)
We at: aaTeraT fags wT 34H
Arundhati gave birth to all objects on the
Earth. Thus the intellected and eternal creation
of Dharma has been narrated.

Ugalctar fren ufatir: ae yaa!
aaa: teas gadt & rated $e 11
I shall now talk to you about the names. of
Muhartas and Tithis along with their presiding
lords. O men of holy rites! Try to understand
me while J talk of them.

weroafenrmay aerafor SaraT: |
Uget: aeaarr sercafacern 3001
I shall mention the divisions of days and
nights, the constellations quite briefly, all the

Muhirtas and all the planets appearing during
days and nights.
aera F veiatiren aM
Teifafagtn aay eg fireaa: 361
Kalas accounting to six hundred are
mentioned during days and nights. The

manifestation of Rtus is based on the special
movement of the Sun.

ait aefaedat fatateata udg
sfagrag arery asa: @ Frgerra: 380
The scholars of Vedas calculate Tithis as the
basis of festivals. They employ different
occasions for the purpose of charitable gifts on
behalf of the manes.
da: aden dy: ftuesarea wa a
aretisa ducaey areal TET R ERT: 1 ¥ ot
Raudra, Sarva, Maitra, Pindya,
Apya, Vaisvadeva, Brahma and Madhyahna~
these are the divisions by name in a day.

mee tae Patera
areuey aarseeait armeanty fefara: ty ait

Vasava,

7

UW forages Rerenfafafiian
vignaranfagtinr aferon: waa gn
Prajapatya, Aindra, Indra, Nirrti, Varuna,

Aryamna and Bhaga~ these Muhirtas of the day
are caused by the Sun by the shadow proper of
a Sanku (a sine of an altitude). They are to be
known in accordance with their magnitude by
means of the gnomons.

omreaistedeas yar fe queen:

armaantt faze: woreda B39 n

qrerdrercans staat agereiisa Sara:

aifaaise wa BT aoa Wass

Aja! (the sign Aries), Ahir-Budhnya, Pisa,

Yamadevata, Agneya, Prajapatya, Brahma,
Saumya, Aditya, Barhaspatya, Vaisnava,
Savitra, Tvasta and Vayavya are the collection
of Muhirtas.

wautaggal: w: ware ae Us a

perigee Fan afore: wearer

STRSTR Feat Aaa: ATH

These are the fifteen Muhirtas in order of

one night. The developments of the movement
and rising of the moon is to be known as Nalika
or the Pada of its rise. These are the divisions of
time remembered as Muhirtas. Their presiding
Devatas are also mentioned.

adaennt Aaa writ fateh a
atau anf freee ¥ § 11

Of all the grahas or planets, there are three
positions ordained as such— southern, northem
and the middle ones. One may know them as
per descending order.

aM arena wey wT
dart efor Fieefig aarti wot

The place Jaradgava is the middle, the place
Airavata is the northern one and Vaisvanara has

1. These are all astronomical terms required to be
identified by comparison with the terminology of
Brhat Sarnhita and other works.

=== PAGE 19 ===

18

Vayu-Purana

been indicated as the southern one as per factual
presentation.

ait aire aren anretfatet sat

yesyerryaay atfatrat wat
frag drt Sar sat art Sema yen

The constellations~ Asvini, Kyttika and
Yamya are known as Nagavithi (Moon’s path
through the asterism Svati or Asvini, Bharini
and Krttika)!. The constellations Pusya, Aslesa
and Punarvasu become known as Airavati Vithi.
These three Vithis are enunciated as the
northern path.

Yat Grey w oer darhit aa
Beas Ta Tani AeteitafireeraT yeu

The constellations Parvaphalguni,
Uttaraphalguni and Magha are well known as
Aryami vithi. The constellations Hasta, Citra
and Svati are declared as Govithi.

Wer farmasseen aif aera aya
wang araftrat wert ant saa 4 ol
The constellations Jyesthd, Visaékha and
Anuradha are known as Jaradgavi Vithi. These
three Vithis verily, constitute the middle path.

yet assure & att snrdieatingferm
set a afaer a nif wraferreen & en
Mala, Pirvasadha, Uttarasadha- these three
constellations are decalred as Ajavithi. And the
constellations  Sravana, Dhanistha and
Satabhisak are the Gargi Vithi.

dart wane tadt da atta
ayer Sherey feerer writ & eferatt gay 2

The constellations Pirva Bhadrapada, Uttara
Bhadrapadi and Revati are known as

1. If the moon be glossy, thick, of even horns,
extensive high in the sky, moving north in the Naga
avenue, (viz. Bharant, Krttika and Svati) aspected
by benefices and accompanied by malefic, he would
confer great joy and happiness on humanity (Brhat
Samhita, English Translation pp. 399-400, M.R.K.
Bhatta edition).

Vaisvanari (Vithi). These three Vithis are
remembered by the wise ones to be in the
southern path.

wafagry a: aan aa: Sara a ech
wal araresren Bitar se atta:
ARTA TT STAT AAA TAT & 3H

Twenty seven maidens (constellations) that
Daksa bestowed on Soma (Moon-god) are
glorified as Naksatras or planets well known in
the science of astronomy. Their progenies are
refulgent ones having indefinite splendour.

arg arte eM: we PAT: |
SGM TENT: Tate AHATAT NG SM
Of those the surviving ones, Kasyapa

married fourteen blessed daughters, all being
the mothers of the Universe.

agifaa aia: carerat Fate y 41
They were— Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kala, Arista,
Surasé, Surabhi, Vinata, Tamra, Krodhavasa,
Ira, Kadru and Muni. O Dharmajfia, you may
listen and understand their progenies.

afnrasatsatat & ge Were:
Aquat Ary A ATT aYGETATAS ATTN 4 GI

The twelve Vaikuntha gods who were
prominent in the Carisnava Manvantara that has
passed, became Sadhyas, in the Caksusa
Manvantara.

wifmisat wider z
arafaat alge F WACISSE: TATA Got

On the arrival of the present Vaivasvata
Manvantara, they were propitiated as such by
Aditi. They having gathered together spoke out
mutually.

uaa wemmrafeta dara a
aeraasat Ulerarmeehs ATTY CH
TreaTa: Yaaraneta: Stat safereafer

aga TEAM Afewaen 4 8

=== PAGE 20 ===

Chapter-66

19

“Having entered into this blessed Aditi
alone, in the Vaivasvata Manvantara by means
of our Yogic splendour, we shall become her
sons. Then only we shall have our beneficence
done. Those born from Aditi shall be
remembered as Adityas”.

Wage 7 8 ad awe wa:
ERT BraMTss fara AT ATEAPTITTA: I § oI
Having said so, all of them were born as the

twelve Adityas from Kasyapa, the son of
Marici, in the Caksusa Manvantara.

wing fay wae Gata fel
Aaraasat BierATTTATT TT g gt
Satakratu (Indra) and Visnu took birth once

again in the present Vaivasvata Manvantara as
Nara and Narayana.

Aaraf fe Fart Fertafreet
aon wher vias fengearerranget

wares ferrites erer a ETT ING UH
Birth and death are mentioned to happen
even to those Devas. Just as:the Sun rises and
sets in this world, similarly there is
manifestation and dissolution to the noble
souls~ Prajapati, Visnu and Bhava or Siva.
Deyatas wera: weeren
ares FO I TET HART ATG BH
These gods were born because they are
attached to the great Vedic tradition as well as
worldly objects like sound and the eightfold
super-human powers like Animd (minuteness).
sey feud TH: HARM: SUT TTT
Tey HT Sat: Tay aT & ws
The attachment to sensual objects became
known as the cause of regeneration. Because of
the curse of Brahma, the Jayas were born in the
Svayarhbhuva Manvantara as Jitas.

wanifad 4 gitar: aetart yA:
aa eat Sar sreenfeors J 4
Agora Bear safe: BINT FAR GI

In the Svarocisa Manvantara, they were bom
as Tusitas and Satyas again in the Uttama
Manvantara. In Tamasa Manvantara, Devas
were born as Haris, Vaikunthas in the Carisnava
Manvantara, Sadhyas in the Caksusa
Manvantara and Adityas in the current
Manvantara.

arnsdat a faaar aeutisst sree
SH faeargr @ wiht ey: wag gH
TARA aat PPE S TT: |

SAA TEMS: BPATT YA: TAT: Go
Dhata, Aryama, Mitra, Varuna, Améa,
Bhaga, Indra, Vivasvan, Pisan, Parjanya, the
tenth one, Tvasta and Visnu, the last but not the
least, are remembered as the twelve Adityas, the
sons of Kasyapa.

gun ayaugararen fast
RISATRA TTT HEAT AAT Ct
Surabhi from Kasyapa gave birth to eleven
Rudras. By the grace of Mahadeva and by her
penance, she became recognised as Sati.
ages cer at fait waeeaern
oprmefedenpdced sat Fam 811
Taraahig wife
ATRT Ba ASAT QR AAAI 9 0 Ht
The eleven Rudras were— Angaraka, Sarpa,
Nirrti, Sadasaspati or Brhaspati, Ajaikapada,
Ahirbudhnya, Urdhvaketu, Ivara,
Bhuvanesvara, Mrtyu and Kapala who was
famous. Surabhi by that great penance, gave
birth to (all) these gods, the eleven Rudras, the
overlords of the triads of worlds.

wat geared gett % aera
Digot aa eget APE a afer en
Then Surabhi gave birth to two daughters—
Rohini having the lustre of Rudra Gandhari, the
reputed one.

=== PAGE 21 ===

20 Vayu-Purana
Digval wR See ieafaa:1 afteatustarmmrarie eer
FOU Saale FT AA BGA TAT aggre faguarret faa: eat:

RAS BGA J FO TAIT VW
Of Rohini were born four daughters, well-
known in the Universe. They were~ Suripa,
Harhsakila, Bhadra and Kamadugha.
Kamadugha and Surip gave birth to two sons.
eaaten Tarea ARTA SATA
fagang werarn warat afer: Gat: 1119311
Harhsakila gave birth to Nrpa (king) and

sages and Bhadra gave birth to famous and
blessed Gandharvas, the sons of Vajin (horse).

FAA AAT: GATS WAT: |
Set: Bon: Fagg aregT Vita:
al Faroe TAA SAT N91

The horses Uccaigravas were born then; they
roamed about in the sky with the speed of mind.
They were of different colours, white, red,
tawny, deer-coloured, green, grey and also of
the lustre of Rudra. These ones were of
Gandharva wombs. They were the vehicles of
the Devas.

wat aa Geng amiss:

gat cat sit ward: Hos AftrecMT: Nou
erat ware afar: |
BRAGA aA at WaT AiG |

Again was born of Surabhi, the illustrious
one Candrabhasuprabha. He was glorious and
had the great lustre like that of the moon. He
had a garland on and was lustrous with a big
lump. He was born of the storehouse of nectar.
With the permission of Surabhi, he was given to
Mahesvara as his banner.

Bea aayargar Eafe: watfeiaT:
eager: WM: Gea fay a TATA V9

This way, these sons of Kasyapa, Rudras

and Adityas have been glorified. Sadhyas,

Visvedevas and Vasus are remembered as the
sons of Dharma.

wea: Ser wea Tella: 9. 1

Of the spouses of Aristanemi, progenies
were sixteen and the sons of learned Bahuputra
became known as Vidyuts. The excellent Rks
honoured by Brahmarsis are bom of
Pratyangirasa.

pyre I katkkawecon: BAT: |

W Peart wee ERE fee
ad taro famrerattagy aT:
waaraft tart Frtetrafreertn ¢ ott

The sons of Krsasva, the celestial sage,
became known as Devapraharanas. These ones
at the culmination of thousands of Yugas take
birth once again. O Brahmanas, all the thirty-
three groups of Devas are Chandajas'. Of these
gods, the restraint and birth is being dilated
upon.

war yer citehs ferqearerrargan
Wi tafrarana daaha BA TAs
Just as the sun rises and sets in this world, so
also these groups of Devas get birth in every
Yuga (age).
Ua Sy:
weary aaa fee eaferarera a
anftreren wares afte fegar:ie 20
The sages remarked~ How were Sadhyas,
Vasus, Visvedevas, Rudras and Adityas famous
by the nobility of their birth and well-known by
their actions and powers?

waiTadey fawoiter weet a Wena:
oat qigfreort as qenfeferert ¢ 311
ag aaremafa ay aferatatee: |
wrarat wera aftarag ay auc wil
Of Prajapati, Visnu and Siva (Bhava), the

1. Born from Vedic chandas or mantras.

=== PAGE 22 ===

Chapter-66

21

great souled one, we want to know as to who
excels whom among them? Who originates
from whom? Who is established in whom? Who
among them is superior, the middling and
inferior one?

veya aeat yor Ay a1

atifienttenen wareur a at wer

unagte a: ad oe fe Ser sere Ct

Who is the most greatest among them? And

among them, who is most important one by
merits of actions, nobility of birth and by
capacity? These you may tell us the way you
understand in a serial order.

We sara
oa a aifeaisenat ay ae
aemefempagront syopet Fy fered: 11

Sita replied— In this context I shall talk (or
describe) unto you the difference or distinctness
that is remembered among them. Listen to what
I am going to say as to difference among
Brahma, Visnu and Rudra.

Tae ah da Uifaat Ga a: BAT:
We: SYS: WRT Set Srey Tat AT co
The bodies of Svayambha Lord spoken of as

such (exist) from time to time are proclaimed as
Rajasa, Tamasa and Sattvika.
Tra ag ta yreet festa:
qurafegagrargieearyasaera: il é 2 1
The variation among these bodies is not
possible to illustrate, O Brahmanas! owing to
their dependence upon the increase of merits
and the two-fold bondage due to Anugraha
(favouring) and Nigraha (controlling).
yaft a Fight a qurgtefte faa:
TOIT Wai aat ahaa ¢ 3
O Brahmanas, according to my ability, I
shall recount Pravrtti (activity), Nivrtti
(desistance from activity) and the increase of

the Gunas (merits) of the bodies. Listen and
understand it.

welt ¢ Use Fat areme at BAT
taracet wredt aa ant arat Fate gon
Brahmi is the Rajasi among them and the
one named Kala is Tamasi among them and

Sattviki and Paurusi among them you may
know as such.

Tal ¥ Hed wat weet waa: eT
Tat daniaen ¢ asqyeta afearaitn
UST OT AGA Srey ATTA TAA WATS
First among them, the Rajasa body creates
all the subjects; the Sattvika one staying in the
ocean, blesses; and the Tamasa one swallows

the subjects and overthrows them at the proper
time.

THT Fo Safa Tet Ayas Ten
TROTeN Aer eT atfaat fafraang 2
When god Brahma manifests himself with
the resurgence of Rajas guna, the Sattvika body
named Purusa vanishes.

Fel Hater AAA TRARY FI
FAST TH aat A Tat fafradang au
When it develops the form of Kala owing to
the development of Tamoguna, the Rajasi form
designated as Brahma disappears.

Seay Yea Aer waft A Wys1
SAS A Aer A At wercifer Anew
Owing to the excess of Sattva, the lord
becomes Purusa, the body named Kala ceases to
exist.
mana fad we am a at a
dered adores anigaeha!e 84

In due order, the form, nomenclature and
activity of the Lord in favouring and controlling
those prevailing in the triad of worlds,
disappear.

Fal Tate TaN a Aal UTA
Fal a Yea Ta A da TERR Auge

When Brahma manifests himself the

=== PAGE 23 ===

22

Vayu-Purana

difference is declared as such. When the lord is
Brahm, Purusa does not exist.

Ua a Ye walt Tel A Fae Aen
tar warmata fe Fat A JER Wg

And when Purusa gets into being, Brahma
does not get into being and when he exists as
the consuming one then even he does not
become a Purusa.

Tal ART HAYA FEM T TAT TAN
ag a wate gen a da Ye Auge
When Bhadra may come into being again,
Brahma does not get into being. And when
Brahma does not exist, then the Purusa also
fails to exist.
ufirfdeme anifatearcafes gem
aaemepraagnagt: PATE IS BA
FAT PUAN ASAT
Ward oped a ThatahayTAN go oll
Just as a gem assumes various colours due to
its purity, and as a result of the contact with
other objects, the colours and sizes being in
accordance with those.objects, so also the self-
born assumes shapes and sizes due to the
merits. In its singleness and separateness this is
the example cited.

Wat yet wen te: yaerearafewa

Bua quia FAT YUTAMI Atl Ro kil
sata fier da fren yfifearerr
Wal gensaipedta Gauss I FAH 2 VI

Just as the cloud having assumed a single
form, gets established in distinctness as per
colour, so also the self-born Lord though single
one assumes different forms due to Gunas and
assumes one, two or three forms. The single
entity has the three forms of Brahma, the
creator, annihilator and Purusa.

Tarde: anferarereng weya:
Brat a Chait da aareardt w F FAN go 3

_ These three bodies are remembered as those
of the single Svayarhbhuva. Brahmi, Paurust
and Antakarl— these are the three bodies.

aa Ot Uae Aer ay: BT a waren
Ur are | TSS WotR | AT
aber treat at gy aqaeadt Bat own

Herein what is known as His Rajasi body is
verily the creator of subjects. What is called the
Tamasi form is verily the destroyer of progeny.
And Sattvika form called Paurusa is deemed as
the endower of grace.

THEN FEMtisge wifa: Hypatiswad

ard arte | AVANTE R041
From the Rajasi incarnation of Brahma,

Marici and Kasyapa were born. From the

Tamasi form that causes dissolution was born
Bhava.

aiken Uhedt ar ar aeaigit fame
eres or: Brererrag Tae ya | Fo Gt

The Sattviki or Paurusi form is called Visnu.
These three bodies of the self-born are thus
remembered in the three worlds.

ARM fe areitsaat aif ast
Fae WaT: YET faweayTE a
SoMSMS TATA VMSTTAT FAH Row!

The supreme being Kala, assumes states for
different functions such as creating progenies in
the state of Brahma, supporting them in the
status of Visnu and devouring in the guise of

Rudra, the subjects who had been blessed by the
Vaisnava form.

Ue: eye: afar atta wi:
BAA ATE Ha: HET FAT C1

The Self-bor one, Kala, performs three
activities through the three bodies. It creates,
supports and annihilates the subjects.

sam: arnftrrerang waya:|
warmer a Uist a Aunt a A: BAT Yok

=== PAGE 24 ===

Chapter-66

23

This way have been declared the three forms
of the self-born lord. They are— Prajapatya
(belonging to Prajapati), Raudra (belonging to
Rudra) and Vaisnava (belonging to Visnu).

Wat AY: BMT ae here FTAA
eterna: quarcencratettin: 1
after merergta fafireraref STF: RR UL

Only one body is declared in the Vedas,
Dharmasastras and in the ancient schools of
Sarnkhya and Yoga by the intelligent sages who
could see both analytically and synthetically,
the knowers of the influence of nobility, the
observers of Reality.

Tard u ward oo arg fin: wanfeael
ge eft fet gard firwayiat:n geen
In the matter of unity and diversity there
happens to be the progenies of different
opinions. The diverse opinioned ones say—
“This is great and this not so.”
vero aut dfaesfrang: werafery
Sfakod wes wgfey wesc
afer WAHT TAT TEMAERTAM BRAM
Some declared Brahma as the cause of the
Universe as Prajapati, some opined as Siva and
some declared Visnu as the supreme one. Out of
ignorance and with the mind vitiated by
passion, attachment etc. they think like this.
aed anet o ayt ot aratoeraer waa:
wt I ya Bar AAs FaAT | Ves
Considering the reality, time, space, cause
and effects quite factually, these deities are
declared as working for diverse purposes.

wa Freft aaet walta wo frefi
Wa sey wala werafan
ah at aft ged amgderanfer geet

He who censures one among them censures
all. He who eulogises one, eulogises all of them.
They declare him as Brahmavadin (propounder
of Brahman) who understands one Purusa.

wag wel arat teary faa
aT werent agaacior craft eeu it

The attitude of non-censure must always be
adopted towards the deities by one who knows
the Reality. It is not feasible to understand god
(Ivara), established with supremacy or
affluence.

Waren & fren aeer aatgafs a: wT:

WAST a Faro | feaereeTATE GAT eRe

He fascinates ‘the subjects or progenies
having become threefold even when he is

having single soul as such, and people think
over the difference among these three Beings.

feared: Wierd: Geet wUferaTa:
oe unftd Sf ata firaafeta:u gen
Out of deluded mind with diverse points of
view and curiously testing their forms, they

say— “This is absolute or tangible and this is
not”.

agaritaraa: fipraiye aa

Ware QU Trea BRC HI

TUeriranirg aghatga:)

Here THT AY TAT AAT TATU VATU

These deities permeate even Y4Atudhdnas,

Pisacas and human beings. The self-born stays
unified and separate deluding the subjects by
means of the bodies solely consisting of the

Gunas. He who worships one among them,
worships all the three.

werearaa at tert aaa:
TATA ST HEIL
Ward a aged at Bg at aTGMEfAu RIO
These three deities remain non-different.
Therefore where is separateness or unity?
Where is their number? Whence do they come

and go? Who is capable of construing unity and
diversity among them?

TUS TT TAA seat A aT:
TUTTE TESS: A THAN? AM

=== PAGE 25 ===

24

Vayu-Purana

Since in view of their being united with the
Gunas they create, sustain and annihilate the
subjects in the three units of time, the Supreme
being is said to be one.

TM o cae
aa ates ag wreath FRAT: ee

Brahmanas call that one lord, Rudra,
Brahma, Indra, Lokapalas, the Rsis (sages),
Danus (the Demons), and Narayana, in diverse
ways.

wegen ayat a agai da sore
Wear FT aed wore YA: YA RSI

The body that is Prajapatya and that is
Vaisnava, recur again and again in all the
Manvantaras and Kalpas.

dag aft asset fartferquen

ASAT ANA Fea YT T eA A

area areata arrite Prete ees

The Ksetrajiia even having ploughed', may

divide or distribute this way out of grace and by
radiance, fame, intellect, education and force,
do take birth equal in norm to Him. You may
know those also.

TRE gauisye wiifa: HyaTiswaa

AUT TGA STATE BH FETAL

afar Yeats ae faeeTAT 224

By Rajasi incarnation of Brahma, Marici and

Kasyapa were bom. And by Tamasi, an
incarnation Kalatma Rudra is declared as such.
By Sattvika incarnation of Purusa, Visnu was
then born in the sacrifice.

fag arey wea Tae yT:|
HICH Yea TAPE GR: WET HTN RAEI

The bodies born of parts of Brahma occur in
all the three units of time. And having became
Kala again, that Rudra revokes the progenies.

1 Obscure or wrong usage.

Tore Ya aeurt warieaiearat:|
en dadanieet ctenettar wat FEN VOI
And at the end of the acon, seven-rayed
Divakara (Sun) assumes the form of
Samvartakaditya (the Sun of dissolution)
burning along the three worlds.

fan: mIsy Tera arecarda: |
TE TTT AAG SUN 2
Visnu endows the subjects or progenies with
the grace by the contrarieties of name and form.
In the different situations he is the cause of the
origin of different things.

aeatigenr J aT Mea TaN: Wrest ays

weg fag W xe Tayasatn

argat ura Sat seta: were fens eee

Illustrated with the Paurusa form of Brahma

which had a predominance of Sattva guna, the
god took birth here in the first Svayarnbhuva
Manvantara as the mental son of Akati.

aa: A: Wa Ba: re Tareas

gfaarat agerat wiraeaiaa: Ten 23 ot

Then on the approach of the Svarocisa
Manvantara, again that god was born of Tusita
along with the Tusitas of Devas and passed
away along with them.?

att ait da gfiang fag: 3 4
aprafdfrecrat ayretf eft: ga: 93 en

And in the Auttama Manvantara also, he
was known as Tusita. By Vasavartis was bom
VaSavartin Hari again.

FARIA: We: HE TATA:
Tae anit wet Gata fen
wratat aftr: and eftta ayer fen 23 20

He was born of Satya, as Satya, along with

the excellent gods Satyas. At the arrival of the

2. V.S. Apte, p. 237. @ffai:! A class of subordinate
deities said to be 12 or 36 in number.

=== PAGE 26 ===

Chapter-66

25

Tamasa Manvantara, Hari himself was born of
Bharya along with the Haris.

witondsat aft eftda: yA a:

faquarerast 5 NTA: Fell
HVS: T YAMA: MATT MASA 23 3
auf argam: Gea: wel: We We
WY ARTA: BRA: yrea SaraAS AT V3 v IL
In the Manvantara of Carisnava!, Lord Hari
was again born of Vaikuntha along with the
Abhitarajasas. And on the arrival of the
Caksusa Manvantara, lord Vaikuntha was born
as Narayana, Dharma and Sadhya along with
the Sadhya group of gods. He, however,
became Narayana Sadhya in the Vaivasvata
Manvantara.
uitteravantgafeat days B
fat: eiftniccienrfarer fermpeem 23 4 11
wermrentesra eevee Wy:
PATRAS ST: TT AAT
wepttentiag ant: aeferar: HAT R83 GN
From Aditi and Kasyapa, the son of Marici,
Visnu took birth, having won over all the
worlds by means of three big steps and handed
them over to Indra and the gods. This way,
these seven bodies of the lord have appeared in
the seven past Manvantaras whereby the
progenies got protected.
wenfgefad ad ante aaa
Tener & Taya faoyfagratat: wey e311
Because at the time of his birth, all the
worlds were permeated by Vamana (the dwarf

1, afeeq - son of Dhenuka from Kirttiman as per Vayu
Purana 28.17.
aa aiferaanfe Sqar areca
ae ytd arequrantexat a1
Also Vayu Purana 100.22.
aay ust fy ara: gala ta a1 raves A:
a: sfaeara Aatagqi Also Vayu Purana 67.40.
Pauranika kosa p.169.

form of lord Visnu), on that account he became
known as Visnu, derived from the root Wis
meaning ‘to enter, to permeate.’

sedqgeS aT WaT: |
Vand a yaad a fated a antftrq eacu
This way, the unity, diversity and the

importance of Brahma and the great-souled
Vamana, stands enunciated here.

Raarnfagige sted ang Saat:
Wet ART Fea FA FT aA TU
were wera at a TUTTTNTTN 23. Fu

The Devatas get generated of the part of
other deities. They are then born equal to them
in radiance, intelligence, learning and strength
by their grace.

Tafayfred singitiata an
aacararreanes fawuirestisererarn gy ol

And whatever spirited being exists endowed
with prosperity, glory and strength, that same is
born of a part of the radiance of Visnu.

aud wadst dfateasta wat!
atsat gaits aaa ge a

Some men say that the lord alone is born
partially. Others talk of this that the deities gets
birth by mutual incarnation.

Ua faaearaRa EBT ara gata gi
wena fase det wastes FI
TRTSTIERAT AAMT TATA VS RU

And this way disputing those ones with one
another, they say after seeing them. For, there is
no difference between Manas and Cetas, hence
they are blessed. They become Ksetrajfias.

Wa wy & ager varia:

A TATE SRM Ma: YAR A Vv 3M
FEIT Tea STAT Zl
Warity Wag aT: TET:

antdt wagerarttraxite were ev vil

=== PAGE 27 ===

26

Vayu-Puraina

By the power of might and good intention
(Prabhu Sakti)! and the diversity of brilliance of
Lord, the subjects are born consisting of mobile
and the immobile beings in all the Manvantaras.
And at the inception of the Sarga, they stay here
out of eulogium.

wre wre F Hera BR: eek WaT:
SRT Wea SATA Bw I
At the end of every aeon, Rudra annihilates

the progenies. Isvaras do take birth infatuating
others by their Yogamaya.

Renter were eat wen:
Tee Grge T frat ewe

They are moving along owing to their
supremacy and the non-supreme ones are
deluded. Therefore there is nothing proper or
improper in things where faults spread.

qarenfedt gat neren yarn:
qareafed: preareaat Faq: MEAP exo!
The wicked ones spread scandal about the
living beings; those who are favourable to
living beings are middling; those who disregard

living beings are competent. There are three
Vedas for the eloquent ones.

utter at a dena era + fantar
qoqeyarared wareredta vitfenenre
ugh: areittfirterred 4 ferefan even
Because it is listened firmly, because it is
listened before, because it is rumour and

because it is the worldly one, for these four
reasons, one fails to attain the actual reality.

yanaat ret: arene aft
aaraararens Fura whem 7) eset
Earlier they assorted and were used in

different sense, and even after the lapse of time,
it becomes not tenable owing to antipathy.

1. See KAS. 1.V1.2.33, p. 166. KAS.I, p. 370. R.P.
Kangle ed., University of Bombay.
2, AVIA the magical power of Yoga.

aert Fore A TUTRRY AY a1
ation wget cat orfttenean a at wer
Set: art argh: UF TaTeAAU eG 0 tt

He who is a solid among solids, he who is
the merited-one, he who is a doer of great deeds
and he who is great due to pedigree, becomes
reputed for these four causes by those who
know the tradition.

SMRSET GTA Raat: SPTTETET:
sat carers veireat atat wen 84 gH
The incompetent and the irate one realises
the gods only partially. They recite these two
verses in this connection towards the Lord of
Yoga.
are: SRM weet aT AEE:
qateirract wre day ae: Tease gy BH
wrentguaisse addr
deter WH: Talagiast youFran 3 31
The Yogesvara makes duplicates of himself
and others in thousands by the power of his
Yoga. He moves about among them. He attains
to the objects taking to austere penance. He
revokes them all again, like the sun
withdrawing his brilliance and attributes
(gunas).

fa strange agi yore ayettamarenit
are weafparntsema: 1 & Gi

aaRK

=== PAGE 28 ===

26

Vayu-Purana

WaT Ta EAATSEATa:
Chapter 67
The description of the progenies of
Kasyapa
Waa Sq:
rage aes Afirtrarerafeaa:
WRT: AS TA VIHA VN

The sages spoke— Having listened to his
words, the sages and the ascetics of the Naimisa

=== PAGE 29 ===

Chapter-67

(forest) questioned the excellent one as per
sequence.

wakes eet tar oat waits

SafempErnes entero’ wetsTa:
uaargfe a: wa farearerarrettorn 21

How did the gods headed by Indra and
Visnu and Adityas of mighty radiance took
birth in the seven Manvantaras? O
Romaharsana! You may dilate upon this in
details.

Tamnetal Gat feat geararfefias
sara seat Het sar yet welsh 3

This way questioned by the Bramavadins,
then the modest Sita, the best among the
orators, replied the way he had been questioned
by the great sages.

Wa sara
vet S yERgEr wen Fat: wea
Ba WAR ByAT WaT aw wt

Sita spoke— From the mouth of Brahma, the
gods were generated with a desire for progeny
in the Manvantaras. All those were considered
as the bodies of the Mantras.

asi Uhinreg geded WAT

Age: METeT TeATHLATS TG

fafa gfafaer ore: afta a

atte wat fa: anitfedta waa

fagnfadte fagret wat & a grew g 1

2a Wergaws ase wa

a Ql aadtqgan sar Fara wit

anifagadamfasarmatet a

Wagan gf gen aardeitaai cu

The twelve Manus, the twelve sons of

Brahma were— Darga, Paurnamasa, Brhad,
Rathantara, Akita the first, Akiti, Vitti, Suvitti,
Akati, Kati, Adhista, Adhiti, Vijiati and
Vijfiata. These are the cumulative names of
years. Seeing them Brahma said, ‘O Jayas,

27

procreate the Devas and perform the Agnihotra
Yaga after marriage.’ This way having spoken,
Brahm there became out of sight.

Tae ATT Tere WBA:
dae 7 aalfn cere quent
wMearatiet at eB y aig
aafaagt FF SET AAT weTTN gol
Then they did not welcome that word of
Paramesthin (Brahma). They found out faults
even in those who abide by mental, verbal and
physical activities of a truthful nature. They saw

the fruits of actions endowed with extreme
annihilation.
qyert: wafa a fers fraswaq
oad creed facet cree fea: een
They hated progeny and procreation. They
were alert but free from egoism. They aspired

for permanence. They were detached from
worldly objects.

ad at a ard a fget 3 3 afer

ret aera Sat: fare iss fra get

Having taken leave off of material gain,

spiritual good and lust, they verily, became
established and having resorted to manliness
and intelligence, and having truncated radiance,
they stood along.

at a waft Frat Te YaNT zl
Taare Ta PrecareryTAail 23 Ul

And having understood the motive of those,
Brahma became irate. Brahma addressed those
gods who had courage lost as such.

werdfite gat & weraprsfer arta
weed ane Deparaes aT evi
“For the sake of progeny, you are here and I
have created you for the same and not

otherwise. I have already told you to procreate
and be victorious.

TeTSTRTTG WH ATTA IAT: |
Quorn: a ser dale ara ek tt

=== PAGE 30 ===

28

Vayu-Purana

Whereby having disregarded the words of
mine, you have resorted to renunciation. You
hate your own birth.

(atu a Fat Tat Bye freregra
THT WAAR AAA) 11 EU

Hence you do not appreciate the necessity of
progeny. Out of desire for immortality, you
have abandoned all rites. On that account, you
all having disregarded me, will be born seven
times.”

& We Te Sat Tae S waTaAA
ares werea aewarcHd fevin gon

On being cursed by Brahma thus, those
Devas, the Jayas, began to propitiate him. “O
Mahadeva! O Great Lord! Forgive us for what
has been done by us out of ignorance”.

wires ays Ten ATA yA:
wie WeasaqRe: wi: Tanraftreréfarn ee
Having prostrated with ingratiation, Brahma
spoke to them again— “In the world, unallowed
by me, who becomes capable of assuming
independence?
Ten Uford ad eee WA
wrote sent yet or ate atsyTAT eet
By me has been pervaded all. How possibly

voluntarily, without me, shall living beings
attain anything good or evil?

wile aafta feted Wearted crafty
SST TAT caret at ui wires ferret 2.0
In this world, whatever is existent and non-
existent, has been pervaded by me with intellect
and soul. Who in the world may cheat me?
Want afat ser aearetat feenftar
wen ferenfict area acre fester tra 2 aH
Whatever has been contemplated, decided or
considered by the living beings, is known to me
entirely.
en fare wd SRT
SPM TAT Ge DyPSTATN 2 Vl

By me only, stands established all that is
mobile as well as immobile in the Universe. By
the reality endowed with expectation, how
possibly could I dare to truncate all?

mere fagdt 4 anifie are
Be anivaae Bt FY warfemteman 231

Since I stand exposed for the sake of

creation and not otherwise, who will be free

from my will without beginning the
performance of holy rites.”

utara aat tartare awaTa:|
Hea TAS gargs HATTA VI
Then having conversed with the gods, the
Jayas, who accepted his punishment and who
were dejected, Prajapati spoke to them once
again in consolation.

Teraahas Gae a: Fa: TT
Tene faut aa Bay A: Fa
afacsa: qateat Far wag STIATAN 24

“Since after open declaration to me,
renunciation was ordained by you earlier and
since excessive effort, though futile, had been
put in by you, O Devas, you future births shall
result in ultimate happiness.

aera a an afecatt GT:
weanty Uys: wey ws wf AGM
aaraarag Green tariganieg

ASAT TAO TA Pera Tita: TAA Von

O excellent gods! By the voluntary will-
power, your birth shall take place in the six
Manvantaras beginning with Svayarhbhuva and
ending with Vaivasvata. O Suras, all of you will
be moving ahead, deluded as such”. Having

known them, Brahma therein recited this
primeval verse.

wait faat ged waft orgie a

ay da g or a Uta g Fea

a fe oH faen yer aes 2 CI
“Those who perform holy actions such as

=== PAGE 31 ===

Chapter-67

29

the study of the triad of Vedas, maintenance of
celibacy, procreation and obsequial rite,
performance of Sraddhas, Yajiia (sacrifice) and
Dana (charity), that very one having become
free from sin shall always be eulogised by
others”.

a Ud yellnyeen J warararaata
SaaS ASH ARTA TASEATI 3 8

Then he having recited this verse, spoke to
the Devas, Jayas again. “On the elapsing of the
Vaivasvata Manvantara, you may come here
near me.

wat ga wer and fag sree wear
Wage J Are Aare 3 011

Then you all along with me may attain to an
accomplishment of perennial norm”. Having
addressed them like this, Brahma became out of
sight there and then.

wat Sefer sat Dear:

wean arforarelsy gear areca: 11 3 8
Then on the supreme being having

disappeared, those Devas endowed with the

power of Yoga and having no fear from

anywhere became as such, endowed with

Anima and other supernatural powers.

AAG F ARTARIS ASEM Be: |
SAT She MUTSTTAT Sree tera: 113 BA
Thereafter their bodies turned into twelve
lakes. They came to be proclaimed by the name
Jaya and they resembled the oceans.
Wa: ayes aferet a aR GT:
aise Gt Yat safe BTeRTITAT: 1 3B
Then, in that Sarga of Svayarnbhuva, those
Suras (gods) were born as the sons Ruci and
Ajita. They were twelve in number and were
known as Ajitas.

fafa grade aot aRseraeem
MOIST: Yaar wa wgwoTaT AT: 1
Set UA: Ba asta BEM BAAN 3 vl

Vidhi, Munaya, Ksema, Nanda, Avyaya,
Prana, Apana, Sudhama, Kratu, Sakti and
Vyavasthita— these were the mind-born sons
known as Ajitas.

Qa ae gt: ae awl BAT
wardgasatt yd aa: Tarte F113 4 1
gfe ae 2 reaoen ahren: YT:
We gira Far sad aT TA
grat aaa: YA: Yat: eater 3 Gu
SR FF Gat wearat SHR YT:

Wa: GEM: BAT Far SAT UTA TAM Bou

And they in the Yajia (sacrifice) along with
the gods were remembered as Yajfiabhajas (the
partakers of the fruits of Yajfias) in the
Svayarnbhuva Manvantara earlier, and then
again in the Svarocisa Manvantara, they were
known by the names- Tusitas and Pranas. They
were the Suras and partakers of Yajfias. Again
these Tusitas were born as the auspicious sons
of Uttama and Satya in the Uttama Manvantara.
Then they were declared as Satyas in the
Uttama Manvantara.

SMEAR TH ATT

@Y We: Wea: Ga aT gC

gat 3 ama: yar aft greta GI

BAT aT F Bar BHUTSTRAATS AAT 3 8

They happened to be the enjoyers of

sacrifices in the third Manvantara of Dvapara.
Those twelve Devas, the Satyas, were born as
the sons of Tamas and Harya on the arrival of
the Tamasa Manvantara. They were known by
the name Haris and were enjoyers of Yajfia.

aae BAT Sar: wT ae
faqrort ane & aia TT
Aquat AF Aa: VST AAI So I
Those Devas, the Haris, were born as the
sons of Vaikuntha and Carisnu on the arrival of
the Carisnava Manvantara. In the fifth

Manvantara those gods were known by the
name Vaikunthas.

=== PAGE 32 ===

30

Vayu-Purana

amet a Gadat aquest: wet aN
reared Bae Yar BAT rte git
Then again those Devas, the Vaikunthas
were born as the twelve sons of Dharma and
Sadhya in the Caksusa Manvantara.

wae A UA: ArT: Patter eras
sofeat wat: wt qacearrer guyz

ame FPS wes Saas FI

BT Teas feeat MTA TUTTA: NY BU
aR gremssfera adarisat YA:

Fal AT AAA WAT ww
Ae: CaS TAT SRT ETSMTENT: |
WATE HATA STITT TNTI YH
At the end of the Caksusa Manvantara and at
the beginning of the first Treta Yuga in the
Vaivasvata Manvantara, these Sadhyas were
once again born as the twelve Adityas, by
means of their parts as the sons of Aditi and
Kagyapa, the son of Marici. Thus those who
were originally Jayas were born as Sadhyas in
the Svayarnbhuva Manvantara as a result of the
curse of Brahma. Again they were born in the
Caksusa Manvantara and were born as Adityas
in the present Vaivasvata Manvantara.
a gat waeyle Sarat Saye!
WSS: TEM Fe: Wears A Tea we
He who with devotion study this story of the
sevenfold birth of Devas, he does not attain to
any obstacle or sin.

See Ya: Wea HAT AAT: |
Uftarat wea are fa ya: sights vont
This way, the seven births of Jayas with

seven pre-requisites have been narrated by me.
What more do you desire to hear from me?
Na Sq:

ean erat @ weraforera4ry

whypfigrani wei verde

safa feet da fererreeeras Ansel
The sages spoke- Of Daityas, Danavas,
Gandharvas, Raksasas, Sarpas, Bhitas, Pisacas,
animals, birds and plants, their birth and
defunction, you may narrate in details.

Tawa Ee Sara TATA
fea: yaa oat apenfeft a: gee
This way addressed, Sita replied to those

excellent sages that it has been heard by us that
of Diti two sons took birth from Kasyapa.
ayaressenit at a waa: wast wah
Pease aT PATS STAT 4 01
faorafngain sod ahereary
fern walfghrge aasstitreadafan
facuerenferrererrcen da Bt A APTI BH
Those two sons are remembered as the
eldest of all the sons of Kasyapa. Kasyapa
performed a horse-sacrifice. During that
sacrifice, in the course of performance of
Atiratra yajfia, on the day of Sutya, the son of
Kasyapa came out of the womb of Diti and
seated himself on the big seat of the Rtvik in the
midst of the assembly-hall. The word Kasgipu
means ‘a mat’. The seat of the chief Rrvik
(offerer) in a sacrifice is a golden mat. By that
action, he became known as Hiranyakasipu.

ead SW:
fewreiniata wa da werent:
werd da dere faeatagté a: wi

The sages spoke~ O My Lord! You may
narrate in detail before us the name, origin and
prowess of Hiranyakasipu Daitya, the great
souled one.

at sara
areas F yeRt YM
sefafacacnfieer trercteagttfind: 14 3

Sita replied— Earlier the holy Asvamedha of
Kasyapa was performed at the sacred Puskara.

=== PAGE 33 ===

Chapter-67

31

It was englamoured by Rsis, Devatas and
Gandharvas.

aeita fate srermret wenfafen
SRARVATA SAI J VS Sg vii

According to the excellent injunctions in
sacred scriptures and for the purpose of
discourses etc., there were five golden seats
organised there.

Raga aera ad: erate a
eats ararcetat ATTRA 4 4

Three of them were sanctified by means of
Kuéa grass. The fourth had a bundle of Kuga
grass and a plank over it. The four seats were
meant for the chief Rtviks.

ye assed ag age wafer
faved wen feed feerrercontegr 4 Gt
The fifth was an auspicious, divine and

golden seat that happened to be therein for the
Hotr. It was spread over by a divine cloth.

amtdett fefedta weit ayUrEM
am ad weet mien sada ont
The pregnant Diti, then attained to the status

of Patni (a wife). For ten thousand years, the
foetus of hers continued.

aq ma fag mgd sequen

TEga ay vee fer

Frag @ waiss aaiseta: wes TUG Cit

STEIgAraaraee: TAG TAT

a apr yrrerea areedey afer 4 ei

The boy in the womb came out of the

abdomen of his mother and improvised the
golden seat that happened to be for the Hotr.
Seated thereon, he spoke out or narrated the
four Vedas and the fifth one, Akhyanas
(Puranas) like Kasyapa. Having seen him, the
sages have him that name.

feweafagerenration a faga:
fewaniisqrena fafear Tet aya

Tet: at Se Set fawfers: uftre: tg ott
Hiranyakasipu on that account became well
known. Hiranyaksa was his younger brother and
Sirnhika was his younger sister. She was the
mother queen of Rahu and the spouse of
Vipracitti.!
favaafoadeert we aa
yet atageront Prrert we: fer: & an
Hiranyakasipu, the Daitya, took to austere
penances for a hundred thousands of years
abstaining from food and standing topsy-turvy.
a yal Sea eed ger att gi
vain fete: waar va TH
anmtenfatter adgacrnfera 1g
To that Daitya, Brahma conferred a boon
pleased as such. Conquering all Devas and
attaining deathlessness from all living beings, O
leading Brahmanas! By his Yogic power he
attained the lordship of all.

erage tar: wat wag aI
mrecdaeaaaa & deat at: 3h
“Danavas, Asuras and Devas may be of the
same stock and attain the greatness of Marut
gods. May this boon be granted.”

WaRMsa TEM F Tat seat afer
wel Te aufgerearrcedeaa
farvrefagees: yetteiia: Wate vi

This way having been talked to him, Brahma
bestowed unto him as per desire and conferred
the divine boons. Then he verily became out of
sight. Hiranyakasipu daitya was eulogised by
verses of earlier days.

umn fawrafingat armrsti Frat
aed ved fest tar amerputefefirsng yn
“The king Hiranyakasipu resorts to
whichever direction, unto that very quarter the
gods offered obeisance along with great sages.”

1. Pauranika Kosa, p. 520.

=== PAGE 34 ===

32

Vayu-Purana

Tarra Sas farwaaiergfsers

wesstiattae: o faapie: yo fern

ery Be Faftharagear ET: BAT &

O Brahmanas! The Lord of Daityas,

Hiranyakasipu was of such enormous power. In
ancient times, Visnu, in the form of Narasirnha
(Man-Lion) killed him with his claws.
Therefore, the claws are remembered pure.

faromerga: ve ferret: Great:
se: Verda areata ag ou
Tern fart yrdarerea
fecomarger ae Saehe GeMUT: ng CH
Hiranyaksa had five heroic sons of mighty
prowess. They were~ Utkura, Sakuni,
Kalanabha, the valiant Mahanabha and

Bhitasantapana. These sons of Hiranyaksa were
even inaccessible to the gods.

Rai grey wire area: AMT: Bas
rd aT eeTTfoT FreATeATTERTATIN g eH
Sons and grandsons of those were known as

Vadeya Gana. A hundred, thousand of those,
were killed in Tarakamaya' (battle).

facaaiet: Gaara WeaeT:|
yele: Vasraeggiena a
ages eda gayafadat on

The sons of Hiranyakasipu were four of
mighty force. Prahlada was the eldest one
among them and Anuhlada followed him.
Sarhhrada and Hrada were the younger ones.
You now know the sons of Hrada.

ort Frgae cer geyat aay:
wares feat fgeararguinw gn

Hrada and Nisunda happened to be the two
sons of Hrada. Sunda and Upasunda were the

1. A battle of Devas and Asuras of Krtayugas. The
abudction of Tara wife of Brhaspati by Soma form
the basis of the battle, Sukra sided with Soma and
Siva and Indra six with Brhaspati, Pauranika Kosa,
p. 157.

two heroic sons of Nisunda.
weeny wertat weg searfea:
Wea: GAYAY ASHTTTTAA V1

Brahmaghna, Mahavirya and Mika became
the successors of Hrada. Marica, the son of
Sunda, was born of Tadaka.

aisan feat asa weer aera
went fatrecenta fart werent 3

Tadaka was killed by the valiant Raghava
(Rama) and Mika was killed by Savyasact
(Arjuna) in Kirata (i.e. when Siva assumed the
form of a hunter to test Arjuna).

Jaa eM Ba TTT faa: KITT
fia: Slang tai 2 uftrenifenfeargy
waem taart & rea: Terafeam os

Their descendants purified themselves by
means of might penance. They were the
residents of Manivarta and reached the number
of thirty million. Not fit to be killed by gods,
they were killed by Arjuna (Savyasaci).

argegat arg: fadtaret wa a
Bal F MAATEaY TON Bee: FANG It
The sons of Anuhlada were Vayu and
Sinivali. Their descendants were hundred
thousand who constituted the group of demons
called Halahala.

faterrg were: wy TeMsseHT: BAT:

Tag area wet aeact va a

why seta Gar: WeTEEAa: Ng

Virocana, the son of Prahlada, had five sons

who were well known as Gavesthi, Kalanemi,
Jarnbha, Baskala and Sarhbhu (the youngest
one). They are well known as the sons of
Prahlada. ~

aamart sen tat Gaga

qed Fyne fear ara: oot

2. Name of a place having scions of the youngest son
of Hiranyakasipu, killed by Arjuna.

=== PAGE 35 ===

Chapter-67

33

wafer: YM Ba were TagyhA:
(FON Seer USS UA TATA: W196 1
As per seniority and invincibility, I shall

illustrate their sons. Sumbha, Nigumbha and
Visvaksena- these were the greatly prowessed
sons of Gavesthi. Jarhbha’s sons were Sata,
Dundubhi, Daksa and Khanda. Those four were
Jarnbha’s sons.

fates ya gang: aereitga:!
Wea Ya Ia HreAGaSTTIN V1
Virodha, Manu, Vrksayu and Kugalimukha—

these were the sons of Baskala. Now you hear
about the sons of Kalanemi.

varenfteda tartare
mega St WIRY AA WAT on

Brahmajit, Ksatrajit, Devantaka and
Narantaka— these were the sons of Kalanemi.
Now you know about the sons of Sarhbhu.

ager Brace a wae WINE:
Taree tiniss git: gat: wentfar: nc en
Dhanuka, Hyasiloma, Nabala, Gomukha,
Gavaksa and Gomén are the sons of Sarhbhu
well named as such.
fates Wag afeita: waTTATA))
Be: Yad FH WA: WS Wa Ae VI
Virocana’s son Bali was the valiant one. Of
Bali, a hundred sons were born. All of them
were kings.
aut waa fawn: Grea:
weaagelaey aot xfaoreaa: 1
qornit meee: piercer 31
Among them, the most important ones were
four. They were highly heroic and valiant. The
thousand-handed eldest son Bana was rich and

honoured by all. The others were—
Kumbhandbha, Gardabhaksa, Kusi and others.

Vert WRT da A FY Ae: |
ae: Yas Was wrayiise TEATS YI

Sakuni and Patan were the two daughters
of Bali. Of Bali, the sons and grandsons in
hundreds and thousands happened to be.

aferat arafereadt tit fermenter: 1
ara Ve SieTTTETAN 6 4 1

They constituted a group of demons well-
known by name Baligana. They were heroic
and manly. Bana whose mind was like that of
Indra, had his capital city Lauhitya.

fefafaasgar & atearara aya
A BPA: MATT ATT TTT TAT © & It
Diti, having sons demolished, gratified
Kasyapa. Well-propitiated by her, the delighted
Kasyapa asked her to choose a boon admirably.
SIO ETAT A aT at Aas
ay wet at werent aay:
fefrexchia orga artterereraii cit
She chose the boon. The holy lord granted
her the desired boon. The son of Marici, of
fierce splendour, asked her, “What do you
cherish?”
arte ayer ge watt wefereet
eagastta smraafedterst Utne cu
vrei ys chiara
ae mesfvent aimenguefanc eit
To the consort Kasyapa, son of Marici, she
said with hands folded in reverence- “O
adorable lord, my sons have been killed by your
sons born of Aditi. I am longing for a son who
could be a killer of Sakra by long standing

penance’s. I shall take to austerity. Therefore, it
behoves you to impregnate me.”

TRE Beat Uta: HPTTET
weqara renter fefe wrag:faaran got

Having heard that words of her, Kasyapa,
the highly radiant son of Marici, replied to Diti
who was highly aggrieved.

wa wag ak a Unie ater
srafeeatt aeyst PHREATATEAII g RI

=== PAGE 36 ===

34

Vayu-Purana

“May it be so. Welfare unto you. May you
become chaste. O you having riches for
austerity, you shall give birth to a good son, a
killer of Sakra in battlefield.

yal ated cepfedte afaeafan
a faeteaverna a safaeafan ¢ en

For a full span of a hundred years, in case
you will remain chaste, a son dignified in the
three worlds will take birth of you.”

WAQaa WERARAT THATS: |
araferga Payert Se srTaTgAa: 1g 311
Having said so, the highly radiant one, the
supreme being, cohabited with her and having

hugged her, the adorable sage proceeded to the
triad of worlds.

ma waft ar Sat fafa: were
Het SATA ATTY YaTRUTTN ev
The consort having left, that maiden Diti,
highly exultant, went to the forest Kusala and
took to austere penance.
area 7 ade ufteat war g1
AeA: YAS: WAT TUOTATAT <4 tt
While she was performing penance, the
thousand-eyed Indra, the foremost among the
gods, served her by means of his rich attributes.
af aftengt are wet yet aaa a
waqaaraa Teanstefe fre 1
The thousand-eyed lord then offered fire,
fuel-wood, Kua, fruits and bulbous roots and
anything else that was (suitable) to her.
mates aaa
wom: way citeay fafa utara gn
Taare PRaTEa FefereTAT 89 1
By the shampooing of limbs and by
assuaging her weariness, Sakra (Indra) served

her on all occasions. This way propitiated, Diti
then addressed Sakra.

fefarwarer
sia asé Gee ae aaifor yaa

safer ag F wee RAAT TANS CU
Diti spoke- “I am pleased with you, O
excellent one among Suras! O dear son, only
ten more years remain; welfare unto you; you
will then see your brother.
wafer THe weaIsé aget BAT
Seieatesd ya weanfa we aa anes
Having obtained that type of son, the one
desirous of victory, I shall fulfil my desire for
conquest. Along with him, O son! J shall obtain
the victory of the triad of worlds.”

wayarat fafa: ye met wet feareath
Fagaisugat Sat Gat: Frat FTE go ofl
This way having addressed Sakra, and when
the sun reached the mid-noon, the maiden was
over-powered by slumber. She crouched down
keeping her head on her knees.

apr anata ya: wearing
TEER HEAT FETA FT WUrE AM Ro el
Having seen her as _ having attained
defilement and having her hair spread over her
feet, Sakra laughed and rejoiced on getting that
opportune moment.

wen: wet fag fees gia:
sfava unfit ger mifirgy wésraq
aafirreerten a X epferet weTTRTT: 11 Ro Bl

Then Purandara (Indra) entered her exposed
body. Having entered and having seen a
formidable embryo of mighty virility, Indra of
great fame pierced the important enemy in
seven parts with his thunderbolt.

frrerarrerar Taf Astor grractom
wie Tent id Soa: GA: A
ar Tebfels fm gH: YATATIAI 20 BU

The foetus then being pierced with
thunderbolt by Sataparvana (Indra), the bearer

=== PAGE 37 ===

Chapter-67

35

of thunderbolt, shrieked along dolefully or
plaintively and terrific as such quavering
repeatedly. “Bewail not this way” then accosted
Sakra (Indra) to that foetus once again.

domi aan gent Vas WoT TA:
afer favegerat fefatqera yo wn
With his thunderbolt, Indra cut off the foetus

into seven pieces and split each of the pieces
into seven pieces again. Then Diti woke up.

7 etal a exer see fefartactay

frorniensht mgéaricard

wafedaafedt eft watseaaa You I

“Tt is not to be aborted out, not to be aborted

out”— this way did Diti remark. With due
deference to the words of his mother, Indra
jumped out of her belly. Armed with his

thunderbolt, Indra spoke to Diti with palms
joined in reverence.

agradta gansta weariagion

TST CERT WHRTATTATET

fararnitd 8 ager eqréfan yo

Unchaste as such you slept in a defiled state

since the hair were spread over your feet, O
Devi.! Then having found an opportunity, 1
pierced the foetus that would have been the
slayer of Sakra in battle. It behoves you to
forgive me.”

afer farmer wif fafa: weag:farm
Aeete al STE TT ATTA Zoot
That foetus having became fruitless, Diti

became highly aggricved and_ ingratiated
politely before the thousand-eyed one.

Tameise ate & farneiiga:|
areas fet Sater eA ARTA FoI

“Tt is not your fault, if the foetus of mine had
been rendered incapable as a result of my fault,

1. Wedron: for wearfayin: a misprint, verse

106, pada 2

O Lord of Gods, O son of a sage of mighty
prowess!

yetae a atest Fa wai a yr sits
fart y cag ftrennty Sat meter B aE go eu
There is no crime in killing an enemy. On
that account, I do not curse you, O Indra! | am
eager to do good to you. You may do good to
my embryo.
wag aT yar wea wrath & fefen
ARMA ATT TA YET:
Trecehfet FTAT TOT AT ATI ROM
May there be seven abodes of my sons in the
heaven. May my seven sons abide within the
aerial-trunks (Vataskandhas)’. May they be
renowned as the seven Maruts, the seven sets of
seven.
Yfroat werent farted areath
At gitah fageargqal staat wen eee
May on the Earth be the first Skandha
(region), the second one on the Sun. On the
Moon, the third deserves to be recognised and
the fourth should be known in the groups of
luminaries.

aay Wada wy: waftnvse
ge F Merah SHAT: TT Be LN
On the planets is the fifth one and the sixth
on the Ursa Major (sphere of the Saptarsis). The
seventh one on the Polar star (Dhruva) and
Vataskandha is the ultimate one.

APA fasta Be He WASSATT:
AERTS TTY AA YAS  Vk3 I
May my sons promenade among them on

different occasions. May they move through
these Vataskandhas.

‘fret werreeer arena a Sew:
ET TA GATT TAT HE TTT aw

2. Pathways of wind.

=== PAGE 38 ===

36

Vayu-Puraga

The first Skandha extends from the Earth
upto the clouds and it is called Avaha. May the
first set of my sons move therin.

fafteantt teva orqaioaeg 4:1
arene faired g fittaarcat morn gay
The second one extends from the clouds
upto the Sun. It is called Pravaha. May the
second set of my sons walk in the second
Vataskandha. °
gales gy aa: Sragaet aq A aA
Serene Yt rgemtearcat THT: RE I
Above the Sun (Sirya) and extending upto
the Soma (i.e. the Moon), is the Vataskandha
remembered as Udvaha. Let the third set of my
sons walk through the third Vataskandha.

(aged wahaagd: garg a1
agat wa gator woreg atat feasitn gon
And above Soma and extending upto the
stars is the fourth Vataskandha which is called
Suvaha. O Vibhu! May the fourth set of my
sons walk therein.

waa wateareeaeg 4:1
wad waa: WA: TAT AAT ATT: RRS
The fifth Skandha called Vivaha is above the
stellar region and extending up to the planets. O
dear boy, may the fifth set (of my sons) walk
through the fifth Skandha.
wed wergfeng wet ata weed:
aay Wa Vag aa aS ag An geen
Above the planets and extending up to the
Seven Sages (Great Bear) is the sixth Skandha
which is called Pardhata. May my sons who are
in the sixth set move about within the sixth
gana.

aeniaratetgareareanregy 4:1
anert: facet fg F Yatsu eon
Above the Saptarsis and extending up to
Dhruva is the seventh Vataskandha which is
called Parivaha. May my sons stay therein.

Waa MRA HTT HTT WAIST: |
TaN BATE SF rere Teeth 2 aM

May my sons move about all these from
time to time. There let these be known by the
name Maruts.”

aaeaat gy ATTA BTaTgat wePRg:
ape Hutte weal J yererye 22 UM

Then the mother and the son named them
Maruts through the actions performed by them.
They separately named the seven Maruts of
each set.

Teamifteansstear: wetfereeasat:
Ferctrsetther Met fers OTA TT ETAT 82 3 11
Sattvajyotis, Aditya, Satyajyotis,
Tiryagjyotis, Sajyotis, Jyotisman and another
one constitute the first set.

wee Tor: reat fated & Frater
mafaraatsreda Gar: Sats kgs
weafaatstaftas eftfirecasa:
aro Ue farted acted B Frater een

The first one is proclaimed as Gana. The
second one you may know from me. The
second set consists of Rtajit, Satyajit, Susena,
Senajit, Satyamitra, Abhimitra and Harimitra.
Listen and understand the third set now.

aa: Get gat eat feeratser faereas1
aria ghda gn dtmeda a

antag: anferasberargeer Wo: BPA REM
dqeda wasmgagea weg

MT Utaela PUM Ta AUT Voll
geaa ged seneured Sa:1
aftaratigared wfegerer & AUT Rec
(mefaceradta war Sat fagitswe: 1
aaplanggramrernssat writers:

Sear aT: TARSTAT: WAT AAA TOT LIS

The following constitute the other sets— Rta,
Satya, Dhruva, Dharté, Vidharta, Vidharaya,

=== PAGE 39 ===

Chapter-68

37

Dhvanta, Dhuni, Ugra, Bhima, Abhiyu,
Saksipa. This is known as Ahvayagana, Idrk,
Anyadrk, Yadrk, Pratikrt, Samiti, Sarhrarhbha,
Tdrk, Purusa, Anyadrksa, Cetasa, Samita,
Asamitadrksa, Pratidrksa, Maruti, Drasarata and
others. Deva, Disa, Yajus, Anudrk, Sama,
MaAnusi, Visas— these seven as seven-fold Ganas
are famous in all the worlds.

Wt ARIAS AAA: aT:
weerrarer avat feat Sut da fen gon
These forty-nine are the different Maruts
with their own separate names. They have been
enumerated by Diti and Indra.

gear at g as fefaftayara z1
arrest aed Ta Ga YAS
farreg wag 8 Ba: Ge WAS SHATEN 3 Ul
On hearing their names, Diti spoke to Indra~
“May my sons take recourse to Vataskandha, O
Sunny! May my sons promenade along with the
Devas. May it be all well for you.”

ARIAT Frat AeA: FaT:1
sara wrafentrar wretagy AAT 83 2H
Having heard her words of that norm, the
thousand-eyed Purandara, spoke out having

hands folded (saying) O Mother! “May it be
so.
waters & afeeas + aera:
Raye WENA: HUNT Fae
Ra: weg afer AMAT RTS STITT: HRB BI
No doubt all this will happen the way it has
been spoken by you. These great-souled sons
shall incarnate as gods and will be honoured by
the gods. Similarly, your sons will become

partakers of the fruits of sacrifices along with
Devas.”

Wee Fed Sat: Ta VATAT:|
fagaemma: we fefrgarerafeaa:n 93 xu

On that account, all those Maruts should be
known as Devas (shining ones), younger

brothers of Indra and the immortal ones. All of
them, the sons of Diti were ascetics and gods.

wa at feared srear arergat atte
amagftafed wet pratstt fated Tan gaan
This way having taken upon a
determination, the mother and the son of ascetic

nature proceeded to the heaven exultantly.
Sakra too went to the heaven.

Treat fe ye ser supa: wea at
aaferanrcttit aergas TargAN 23 Gt
Whosoever reads or listens to the auspicious

birth of Maruts shall attain long life and never
meets with the fear of drought.

ofa strange apis stung areritamareit
FU MEA ATS: 11 191

eke

=== PAGE 40 ===

Chapter-68

37

USTATEaAB TAS EAT: I
Chapter 68
The description of Danu’s lineage

a sara

om sel veeanfts eqgatiaatearc
AETTAY SRT ATA TTT: Bt
Sita said~ Hereafter, [ shall talk of the sons
of Danu. You may know them. The sons of
Danu happened to be the well known ones in
the lineage of great demons.
fanfafararret ort ater: |
ae ceraela qari 3
They were headed by Vipracitti.’ These a
hundred (in counting) were of mighty prowess.

All of them had performed good penances and
had been endowed with boons.

1. Pauranika Kosa, p. 467-468. A great demon having
produced Rahu from Sirnhika. Born from Danu, a
son of Kasyapa, having Atapi and Vatapi as sons.

=== PAGE 41 ===

38

Vayu-Puraga

PRT: WRT: ART Arar &
Teac sREsart PIMA FAT: i
aidan vatarerast Fated 30
They were truthful, highly valiant ones,
cruel, of magical feats, highly powerful, non-
sacrificing ones and non-Brahmanical demons. I
shall enumerate them all in accordance with
their importance. Listen and understand.

faget vegenig wen veghrr:t

veal veaat wafed-hirerau wu

SATSIST serene ATTA MT

mofeaadta termratsfgeraa i 4 i

fears gags yas: Year

satafgatreda aot qeferda:n gil

Ware: YET ART TEA: |

dart: year a watotser wane: Won

waatgdunal a quay FeTyT:1

grey wes ag Ser afr cH

genta Frese solani wate:

afaeinn gags Wes THB TANI

WaT Ta T PAA WeET:1

wits qual gaitay darn go

args fama: quatsa wergt:)

anit fecorada prearges Prat: gen

wa: vera gakrgragah

SAU Yaa Yaoi Tisenfean ge
. The chief sons of Danu were— Dvimiardha,
Sankuvarna, Sanku, Nirdmaya, Sankukarna,
Mahavisva, Gavesthin, Dundubhi, Ajamukha,

adorable Sila, Vamanasa, Marici, Raksaka,
Mahagargya, Angiravrta, Viksobhya, Suketu,

Suvirya, Suhrada, Indrajit, Visvajit,
Suravimardana, Ekacakra, Suvaha, the powerful
Taraka, VaiSvanara, Puloman,  Pravina,

Mahdsiras, Svarbhanu, Vrsaparvan, the mighty
demon Mundaka, Dhrtarastra, Siirya, Candra,
Indra, Tapina, Siksma, Nicandra, Umanabha,

Mahagiri, Asiloman, Sukesa, Sada, Balaka,
Adaga, Gaganamirdha, Kurhbhanabha,
Mahodara, Pramodaha, Kupatha, the valiant
Hayagriva, the mighty demons Viripaksa,
Supatha, Aja and Hiranmaya, Satamayu,
Sarhbara, Sarabha and Salabha. The Sun and
Moon were the lords of Asuras formerly but
now they are the lord of Suras.

aft gar eatdst wert: wftaifiar:1
Farmer yaularetarearn 30
This way the sons in the lineage of Danu, as

the principal ones have been illustrated. Their
sons and grandsons are of indefinite counting.

sed aU: Met saat arta A

wanigg oat det wqUat: yas

Bf g dengue at: yang 3 was gen

This way have been illustrated Danavas

(sons of Danu) and Daityas (the sons of Diti)
who are (among them). Svarbhinu is
remembered as Daitya (son of Diti) and
Anubhanu is the son of Danu. And these trailing
along in lineages are those who are the sons of
Danu.

Tara aaMISe: weraataTata

Sete F The: vies ATS RGA

mrefeer Teter areaga ata

We Hgeeraheg A: GAT AT GAT 2 tL

Ekaksa, Rsabha, Arista, Pralamba, Naraka,

Indrabadhana, Kesi, Meru, Samba, Dhenuka,
Gavesthi, Gavaksa and the heroic Talaketu-
these were the sons of Danu but followed
human rites and activities. So I remember.

eeeradad ater ita:
fafeerarmetrcan fasfafrgartcatn got
In the clash of Daityas and Danavas, the
following sons of Vipracitti born of Sirmhika,
became terrible and valorous.
‘Shearer sf wang weTgT:|
VATS AAA: PTR TT Ct

=== PAGE 42 ===

Chapter-68

39

agin: yfada arate faatge:
BRT: SATAY eT AAT
They are renowned as Sairnhikeyas (the sons
of Sirnhika). They are the fourteen formidable
Asuras, viz. Satagiala, Balavan, Nyasa, Samba,
Anuloma, Suci, Vatapi, Sitarnsuka, Hara,
Kalpa, Kalanabha, Bhauma and Naraka.
Ugeing tat} agudnada:1
see fafeergar Sache SeraUt: uot
Rahu is the eldest among them who is the

thrasher of Sun and Moon. Thus these are the
sons of Sirnhika invincible even to Devas.

areunfisrt: UT: we Telewa A

Sen aeentor Aes WOT: BPA: VM
All of them were of terrific or atrocious

lineage, the cruel ones and hostile unto the

Brahmanas. There are other ten thousand
Asuras constituting the Sairnhikeya group.

fredt armen antaor aeiteran
aubrey WT SM Yeieisa yet Yat 2

By the powerful son of Jamadagni of
Bhargava race, they were killed. Of Svarbhanu,
the daughter was Prabha and of Puloman, the
daughter was Saci.

srerdireanta wiftet artedain
getter arfetent da SoATTT FAUT 3

_ Upadanavi was the daughter of Maya,
Sarmistha was the daughter of Varsaparvani.
Puloma and Kalika were both the daughters of
Vaisvanara.
WHET ART: YAY aT reg:
Ye waa wifter gerTquarat 2x1
Nahusa was the son of Prabha and Jayanta

was the son of SacI. Puru was born of Sarmistha
and Dusyanta was born of Upadanavi.

Sarega Sa yeirrenters sh
se ate g a we otters afer ea

The two daughters Puloma and Kalika of
Vaigvanara, both became the spouses of Marica.

ana ragenttr ufbeiraggan:|
agdn cass faroagranfearn 26 1
Sixty thousand leading Danavas were the
sons born of them. There were fourteen
thousand other Asuras residents of Hiranyapura.

Weir: arena eat: YA: |
weet aari & Feat: Pert Vol
The Paulomas and Kalakeyas were the
demons (Danavas) of great power. They were
not capable to be killed by the Devas and they
were killed by Savyasaci i.e. Arjuna.
wares arat & gat: wes aAreTAT:|
raat Gefidla guar afer 2c
aiferat awenuigy ea weet ae
dant amar a at wa watt 2
All the sons that were born of Maya were
heroic and prowessed ones. They were—
Mayavi, Dundubhi, Vrsa, Mahisa, Balika and
Vajrakarna. A daughter Mandodari was also

born to him. This verily, the creation of Daityas
and Danavas stands illustrated.

CAGE: YATE] WaT: UH AeA: |
areedformit a fares ferrari 3 ott
The sons of Danayusa are remembered as

five of great power. They were- Ariru, Bali,
Janma, Viraksa and Visa.
TRU: AT PATA WETGT:|
Fred: Hacwesy Sagaeafretn 3 VU
Ariru’s son was a cruel great Asura named

Dhundhu. It is reported that he was killed by
Kuvalasva at the instance of Uttarika.

adi: Wt nerdhif arate
afrernant a a aut: yarem 3 an

The two sons of Bali were great heroes,
unparalleled in splendour. They were Kumbhila
and Cakravarma who was Karna in his earlier
birth.

=== PAGE 43 ===

40

Vayu-Purana

farerenfa yat gt ares aes ah

fare merge: saree:

SUBS ARE VA TART VeET TAT 3 31

Of Viraksa were two sons, Kamaka and

Varavisa. And of Varavisa, happened to be four
sons of atrocious deeds, destroyers of Sraddhas
and sacrifices, the killers of Brahmanas and
animals.

war SATAY gaeMAT Frater
aR SeATEUTEga ST EAA: 3 vA

The valiant sons of Dandyusa have been
enumerated, Now understand the sons of Vrtra
who were born of the terrible breath of Vrtra
while engaged in battle with Indra.

AN ART WIA TART: YACTAT: |
prt aft eerie ARAFAT: SPAT |G
They were Raksasas of mighty prowess and
were the rulers mentally famous. They were a

hundred thousand in number and are known as
the followers of Mahendra.

wa gefae: dhe enfter: garda:
waar: we Prevafer genie: 03 «1
All were knowers of Brahman, gentle,
righteous and of minute-observationed frames.

All were immanent in the subjects. All were
quite religious ones.

dani erent owt we wala:
WARAAQART  WATAL 3 1

Thus the creation of Daityas and Danavas

has been illustrated. Pravahi produced sons at
the sacrifice. They were excellent singers.

wea: wramaa aca defiant
pada gerard gangsta wegen
wala wag yest ae

gaa terrerat fag: aftatiar: 3 ei

Sattvan, Sattvatmaka, Kalapa, Viryavan,
Krtavirya, Brahmacarin, the seventh one
Supandu, Pana, Taranya and the tenth one
Sucandra. These verily, deserve to be reckoned

as Devagandharvas the bards of gods, well
known as such.

gfe teergatt argans semaTe ayrdamaeTth
AATEUABAATSEATA NG Ct

eK

=== PAGE 44 ===

40

Vayu-Purana

NST FARST ANS EAT:
Chapter 69
Dynasties descending from Kasyapa
Qe sara
Tralee: guar wie: aftatfta:
fares HUQ aRAM et
gaug: yin a qantas a1
Brrerguraccer forte fa Sraeererem 2
aaah afeferr: whee ager:
afer: Wasaga aneda ater:
Bad tarsal we: uftatftars 30
Sita remarked— The sacred Gandharvas and
Apsarsas are glorified as the children of Muni,
viz. Citrasena, Ugrasena, Umayu, Anagha,
Dhrtarastra, Puloman, Stiryavarcas, Yugapat,
Trnapat, Kali, Diti, Citraratha, the thirteenth
Bhramisiras, the fourteenth Parjanya, the
fifteenth Kali and the sixteenth Narada. These
divine Gandharvas are famed as descendants of
Muni.
ghar: YT:
SRT area a freST YeAAT vA
Tara dat MT eit aut aISsarergan
ante yereat ce fagqgurt fare yt
afgan caro da Fat TAT WANA
gaa a gargs yfoter gatas § 1
qosttan Gren aT Yea YA aa
Sm Wet da Ys SACI T Anon
ep sare a cifras era
Teaterce gat wear: after: cn

=== PAGE 45 ===

Chapter-69

41

There are their thirty-four younger sisters,
the auspicious Apsarsas, viz. Antara, Daravatya,
Priyamukhya, Surottama, Misrakesi, Casi,
Vamini, Alarhbusa, Marici, Putrika, Vidyud,
Varna, Tilottama, Adrika, Laksana, Devi,
Rarnbhé, Manorama, Suvara, Subahu, Pirnita,
Supratisthita, Pundarika, Sugandha, Sudanta,
Surasé, Haima, Saradvati, Suvrtta, Kamala,
Subhuja and Harhsapada. These were the
worldy Apsarsas. These Gandharvas and
Apsarsas are well known as Mauneyas
(descendants of Muni).

weratot staat wer ar: uftetfcter::
(amet ann watat atetaranta F sq eu
The daughters of Gandharvas had been

illustrated by me. You may listen to the names
of all those being related by me.

aM eT aTat MTT TETATA
faeradt areqet gPSt T aTAT) I got
Suyasa was the first one of them. Gandharvi,

they call as the second one. Then are Vidyavati,
Carumukhi and Sumukhi of beautiful face.

TAY TaMIGAT AETACTTAAAT: |
waa: Yar TATA ATA A TTT Le
Therein the sons of Suyasa were of great
strength and prowess. Yaksas were the sons of

Pracetas. You may listen to their names from
me.

aah efter after: aEERTT
Terret J AAMT WT Wa SATAN LV
Karbala, Harikesa, Kapila, Kaficana and
Meghamili are declared as such constituting the
group of Yaksas.

Gaye sienteretscaca: BAM:
arat ara & erage % Frater 93
The four daughters of Suyasa are known as
Apsarsas. You may know from me their names,
as I recount them.

weet MAST AAT TART

eng a fayren a weenie qa ex
Loheyi happened to be the eldest; Bharata
was the next. Then were Krsangi and Visala
who were unparalleled in beauty.

anaismt aarronerat: oftaitfetan:1
seafeen fargrert fart WeTETAT gy II
From them other four groups of Yaksas

were declared as such. They were procreated by
Visala, the prowessed one and great-souled one.

aia seats Gegaes fase:
fagrerrear aero yet sia TOT Rg NL
Loheya, Bharateya, well-known Krsangeya
and Visaleya were the groups of Yaksas famous
in the Purana.

sergtattiaactat:|
Saremitcaten cient crafaat at: got

And by these terrific Asuras (demons),
having highly forceful prowess, the worlds have
been occupied, O excellent ones among the

knowers of Loka and Aloka.
Tatas ate fear WeTAT
SeUTfeAT Hera TTT AT TERT 1 Re
The Gandharvas called Valeyas were
procreated by the noble-souled Vikranta. They
were great valiant Gandharva Nayakas
(leaders).

farttarhirat wera: |
Bei arf aaeftt aerrereTTeT: 88 tt
They were endowed with generosity and
prowess. They were highly valiant and heroic.
Their names I shall talk of as per descending
order of priority.

fraget nerdhiffarant wa a
forage: amerisa aan
frat sfereta arat arn saat (A TN

They were— Citrangada, Citravarma of great
prowess, the greatly fortunate Citraketu and the
greatly heroic Somadatta. There were three

=== PAGE 46 ===

42

Vayu-Purana

daughters also. You may listen to their names as
being talked of by me.

WaT wae ATT HAC TATA
wer argue are wore at
The first was Agnika; Karhbala following

her; Then was Vasumati. All of them had
unparalleled splendour.

ana: We Hart TON seanfamfeer
aa eei(on) fara Tagder: eV
Three other important groups of the chief

Gandharvas were begotten of them by Kumara.
They were heroic ones and invincible in war.

aren: anaes wa aA yA:
whifefateotatig cits aT 23H
They were Agneyas, Karhbaleyas and sons
of Vasumati. This world of mobile and
immobile beings is pervaded by these various
groups.
faarerag aa fara were
Sema HEMT BOAT AT: NFS
They were equipped with education and
were procreated by the noble-souled Vikranta.
They were highly fortunate ones, the lords of
beauty, knowledge and wealth.
aargdvictatar wrath wera)
amas tetris goed Ty freer 241
You may hear the names of those noble-

souled Gandharvas of highly ferocious valour
from me while I am illustrating them.

fear after: gen APETERRT
wraeega & mgt wredla wereret: 3G Il

They were—  Hiranyaroman, Kapila,
Suloman, Magadha, Candraketu, Ganga and the
greatly valiant Goda.

Tefaeragraat fart afar
seramfate mot & ary a Yet Ven

These were the first among the groups who
were ascetics, valorous and pure enough owing

to deep understanding of the Vedic lores. There
were two daughters also of beautiful eyes.

frat a qeala aerate went

seanfee feererar ferereacortreat: Bett

vreena farted Wee AUT:

Utoateafind cites fererercrrat eatin ul 2 eu

They were Siva and Sumanas. The groups

Saiveya, the valorous and Saumanasa as well
were begotten of them by the great-souled
Visravas. They practised learning. This world is
pervaded by these three groups of Vidyadharas.

waste aren sear
tie Tuga faeracferafwardit 3 ott
From these were born many hundreds of
ganas promenading within the interior of the
sky, born in the world from the activities of the
Vidyadharas.
seen aa fear Were
senfeet waar: feracrentaraterm 3 en
Asvamukhyas (horse-faced) were procreated
by the same valiant and the great-souled

Vikranta. They were created with horse-faces.
You may know them as Kinnaras.

Wage: atferet weal WeTeet:|

gauleite: qatar were attarqn 3 2

sererenfere mor: ferent wer

garat faghafdetel: uftatedan 331

Samudra, Sena, Kalinda, Mahanetra,

Mahabala, Suvarnaghosa, Sugriva, the heroic
Mahaghosa and the others were the leading
ones of the noble-souled Kinnaras with the
faces of the horses. They are being glorified
extensively by the scholars.

war wget fear Tere
Berea ACP: fee: TATA: 1 Bw
That very way, Naramukhas (human-faced)
Kinnaras too were procreated by the noble-
souled Vikranta, O Sarhgapayana.

=== PAGE 47 ===

Chapter-69

43

Btu: gio afters dary

PHAN T ASGAHATGAT 3 4 Ut

faga fagana ageeney feat)

Beas ferarer: SeT Ses Gare: BRETT: gg

Harisena, Susena, the valiant Véarisena,

Rudradatta, Indradatta, Candradruma,
Mahadruma, Bindu and Bindusdra were the
Kinnaras of the lunar race. Thus these excellent
and auspicious Kinnaras have become well-
known in the world.

Feeiarreartast Esra:
‘AS wogerae frat weTETATTN Zot
O Brahmanas! In this world exist the

hundreds of clans of these noble-souled
Kinnaras, highly skilled in dance and music.

war aalogn cigar STEEN
CO CCR COMIC CLOUE LAT

They are Yaksas, Yaksopasanta, Lauheyas
endowed with beauty, the brilliant daughter
Suravinda, who were honoured by the Siddhas.

sures raged wT: 1
Ueto Yaa Fat aN BH sya en
The groups of Bhiitas had been procreated
by the terrible Upayaketana. Of the beings, their
names you may hear from me.
ar qeralgiar srreryrenfaaweAT: |
Bar: areata gre faegre:
seanfelé wot AfinitE: BAN Ko
The groups of Bhitas (Bhiitaganas) deserve
to be recognised as those who haunt from

within and without etc. (avesakas, nivesakas).
They are declared as being visible in the world.

faga 3@ cies feat yas:
2 gee cetera
SATTTATERTST FATT A APTI ei

Those that are the excellent ones among

Bhitas that move about in the sky deserves to
be recognised as Bhiitandyakas i.e. the leaders

of goblins or Siva (Bhitanayaka = Bhitapati) in
the world. There is no doubt that they move
about in the sky up to the tops of trees.

eat derreal: wreor aise WaT
FatreanPret fara agar e eH
Thus almost all Devas and Gandharvas have

been illustrated by me. The reputed ones are
engaged in waiting upon the Devas.

ARTA ATs fart yenterurgs

ford w dat agqaet wea san

vet a were a Trey

sayatenssfarresin Taft: TEU svi

sary: wal Tenia:

free: adeinen Fygon trae x4

Waited upon, accompanied by Gandharvas,

clever musicians and experts in music and
dance, the Devas stay in all the worlds. They
worship Narayana who is lotus-eyed, free from
Rajas Guna and the foremost of gods,
Hiranyagarbha (god Brahma) who is four-faced
and self-born, great lord Sankara who is Isana
and the lord of Universe. Again they worship
Adityas headed by Indra and to Rudras along
with Vasus.

Sat Ve: Bisa yeni a get ge:

vagal firauka act arferefererati ¥& 11

WER Tet at feeueay: wa:

sree fear fate: yoaeeTT:1 vion

gyasel ween after aah:

SEMAaTaa ATA

ren Gar anaheise aaa se

Varistha!, the highly fortunate one, gave

birth to eight (sons) who were adored by gods.

Harhsa was the eldest and the youngest was
another. The middle ones were Haha and Huhu.

1. Eight daughters of Kasyapa and Varitha— Pauranika
Kosa, pp. 12, 20, 23, 30, 31.393, 528 (Vayu Purana
69.48).

=== PAGE 48 ===

44

Vayu-Purana

The fourth was Dhisana and then Vasiruci was
born. The sixth one among them was Tumburu
and thereafter Visvavasu. These divine artists
have been illustrated as of sacred
characteristics. Arista gave birth to eight
daughters (named)- Anavadya, Anavasa,
Anuvata, Madana, Priya, Aripa, Subhaga and
Bhasi.

wladt Ga a PA’ yA su
wsaeiern fran dharedisearat amuse

Manovati and Sukesé were the two
daughters of Tumburu. The following ten
celestial and divine Apsarsas are called
Paficaciidas i.e. five-crested ones.

Tran wes a Ufo gfsrereem
gaan garat a ferret yeteiteafin
weteaaeIMsPaT aa UN y ott
They are~ Menaka, Sahajanya, Parnini,
Puijikasthala, Ghrtasthala, Ghrtaci, Visvaci,
Parvaci, the one well-known as Pramloca and
Anumlocanti likewise.

srfeerrene St ATAU Tt
BU: Balraangt sayeenr|aght BAT & Bt

From the thigh of Narayana having no
provenance and death, there took birth Urvasi
remembered as the eleventh, having faultless
limbs in entirety.

trea tren we geruit wads:
wats gerne werdnay a: BAT 4 2

Menakaé was the daughter of Mena,
delightfully engrossed in meditating upon
Brahman. All of them were Brahmavadins, well
known as Mahayogins.

Ton aearat GMa: yoo & agéw
SAM: MTT TOT IT AEM Y 3

The ganas (groups) of Apsarsas are well-

known as fourteen. Among these fourteen

groups, Ahitas is the first and Sobhayantis is
the fourteenth,

FeO AAT: SM: TARA TY: Ya:
arrereafterean Sateen & ¥ 1
Ahitas are the mind-born daughters of
Brahma and Sobhayantis are Manu’s daughters.
Vegavantis are the daughters of Arista and
Agnisarnbhavas are the daughters of Urja.
(gama whe ea: Qa:
Wee ATT FATA BS: YT GU
Born from the rays of the Sun, nicely
illuminating are the Ayusmatyas. They deserve

to be known as Kuravas or Kurus, the
auspicious ones.

UReaT: YT AM RATATAT ET:)!

afta wyMeTA aya ATA: ATG GH

Born from Yajiia are named Subhas,” the

fires common to the character of Hymns of
Rgveda. The groups born of water i.e. produced
from Amrta (nectar) are remembered by the
name Amrtas.

STRAT at ATT yf way a
fagnay wat at gett: eens Sat 401
Born of Vayu are known as Sudas, those
born of the Earth are known as Bhavas, The
groups named Rucas are born of Vidyut and the
daughters of Mrtyu are Bhairavas.
vies ares ton: wreTgayT
aatts: gent eafagaaftarny cu
The group Sobhayantis have the attributes of
Kama (Cupid). Thus the ganas have been
spoken of as fourteen. They are formed with
exquisitely superb beauty by the groups of
Suras including Indra and Upendra.

rem wera fect ard fae

TeOnfagusra tart waren
ATA TAT STAT STHLAAAT 4 <i
The divine lady Tilottama is of auspicious
features and extremely blessed. From the fire
altar of Brahm, the celestial damsel Prabhavati,

=== PAGE 49 ===

Chapter-69

45

richly endowed with beauty and youth and well-
known in the Universe, was born.

adaeraqea ugdeaer dea:
are Aearit AT YATE HATTAT & ott
The divine damsel Vedavati by name, highly
beautiful one, born out of the bottom surface of
the altar of Caturvaktra (ic. the four-faced
Brahma).

wen wae seat Beater
men Tar Saat Yow g Vi

And likewise the daughter of Yama (Surya),
endowed with puberty and beauty, named
Hema! has the lustre similar to excellent gold
and possessed youth and beauty.

sat aguled aa waTT: |
RaaATTa UT ST TAT TTT FG VM
This way existed the groups of nymphs
radiant in many thousands, the wives of Devatas
and Rsis and their mothers as well.

Prrrranigy waters: FAT:

daar g area arate afett fern

aravarerad Beterrear fereehan & 3

All the Apsarasas are equally fragrant with

the complexion of Campa. In communion with
the consort, they are inebriated without
imbibing wine. From the touch of those
damsels, their pleasure increases.

(wae ane Ye te: Tat TTA:
adaera det aeda arguing wil
In Parvata and Narada the semen of

Prajapati got split up. Parvata took birth
therefrom as also Narada.

maddie da qitnseenit Ban

1. Pauranika Koga, p. 553. A nymph of Indra having
Svayarn Prabha as fixed whom Maya abducted.
Indra killed him and offered all abodes in to
Rksabila her (Hema).

2. Michelia Champacea.

Raeet (2) weer aferarcawddty ng 4

Of the two, the younger one, the third
(progeny) was known as Arundhati. The birth
of Sirya came out of Devarukhya and from
them of Narada and Parvata.

fararang Yat graeur WEEE Zl
welagry Wane ada A: ATG KU

Of Vinata, the two sons were Varuna and
Garuda who had thirty-six sisters. They are the
younger ones remembered as such.

Treat waif atocfees vier: 1
wearer waitin fay afenha an gon

Gayatri and the other Vedic metres, the birds
pertaining to Suparna i.e. Garuda, and also the
Havyavaha (bearers or vehicles of sacrificial

oblations) established in all the quarters (pertain
to Vinata).

agai & UTA!
aprafgrcat Fut Gero ware
age arena wrerereg Frater & oti

Kandi gave birth to a thousand of Nagas
(serpents) both mobile and immobile. They
were having many heads, the sky rovers, the
great-souled ones. They have many names and
learn the chief of them.

Fai MEETS Weary feareret: |
Tavita Heer AeA STEMI 8H
tuaanenet aracraargat

dee vga wales 9 ot!
werent were qreTgacTeat

HAN: YET GAT SSAA 8 2
fereitgat efinga: arctta: ynfefiusa:1
fargura: QoS teal ATTATTIUTEAATIN 9 211
aftremathesy gare easT:|

wale: walfeaey Treratse wafer: 19 3
aga: GRIT a Afinfetaraa: |
SRSA TAT AAT: GTA Fata wi

=== PAGE 50 ===

46

Vayu-Purana

Among them, the chief Nagas are— Sega,
Vasuki, Taksaka, Karnira, Jarnbha, Aiijana,
Vamana, Airavata, Mahapadma, Karhbala,
ASvatara, Ailapatra, Sankha, Karkotaka,
Dhanaiijaya, Mahakarna, Mahanila, Dhrtarastra,
Balahaka, Kumara, Puspadanta, Sumukha,
Durmukha, Silimukha, Dadhimukha, Kallya,
Salipindaka, Bindupada, Pundarika, Naga,
Apirana, Kapila, Ambarisa, Dhrtapada,
Kacchapa, Prahlada, Padmacitra, Gandharva,
Manasvika, Nahusa, Khararoma and Mani and
many others like them. The’ sons of Kandi or
Kadru have been illustrated by me. You may
know of Khasi now.

vam feat gat at faget yeareait
Se vErterat yea ATTATI 4 I
Khasa produced two sons well-known as

man-eaters. The eldest was in the latter number
and the men in the east!

fachied ferent a yd aissrergaa

agit ugeré faaett fearaferieg it

walgeeet Tey TAT HET

weit weraot qacayt TTToN

wea deve o sede were

watag weet a wered chateaus

Toe farfract a werd werGEH

weifeet Gre Ost feat Ars fertrorTi ee

At first, Khasa gave birth to a very terrible

son of the following description. He was
excessively red in colour and devoid of ears. He
was four-footed, four-armed, two-crested and
two-gaited one. He had hair all over the limbs, a
fat-framed one, had an elevated nose and a
bloated belly. He had plump crest, huge ears
and the hair of the style of Muija grass. The
lips were like those of an elephant. He had
longer thighs, horse like formidable jaws, red
tongue, matted locks of hair and shaggy eyes.
The face was huge and the nose long. He was a

1. The second line of this verse seems obscure.

Guhyaka. The ears were variegated in colour.
He was extremely delighted and had a great
face. To such an extremely terrible son, Khasa
gave birth.
mane fata g Ge da oa
fayind a frog a Breet Hoe cot
Khasa gave birth to his younger brother, a
second son, having crest triad, feet triad, hands
triad and having dark eyes.
waar eftamny frremdert gon
Bae Yay A WeAres ASTaATAI ¢ gut
The hair raised up or erect, the moustache
was green in colour and his body was as firm as
a rock. He had a pigmy body, good looking
arms, a formidable or stupendous figure, highly
strong.

aranigttaret a cred wera
wypionedy u fahrg vreepeciarc UH
His mouth was open up to the ears. He was a
longer-browed one, a flat-nosed one, flat-lipped

one, flat-jawed one, two-tongued one, and had
ears of the norm of spikes.

fugetagerat afeet faget wet

verenf were afee ayer

afadt chfenitd ar ate weaeaiic 311

His eyes were red and tawny-coloured. His

complexion was tawny. He had matted hair,
huge ears and broad chest. He was devoid of
hips and the belly was slender. She gave birth to
the younger brother who had claws and whose
neck was red.

Wa: wean g faget aw war:
sairranabar wiargaferdtn
wetstafagargt wat waywATTI Cc v1

Instantaneously after the birth, the two
developed or grew as per dimensions. Their
bodies were fit for sensual enjoyments and they
were fully mature. With their bodies thus
developed, they embellished their mother.

=== PAGE 51 ===

Chapter-69

47

sarang a: AAT Urat Aisvereia
wrens ware gees fet: 4
The elder one of the two was a cruel one. He
dragged his mother on all sides and spoke out-
“O Mother! I stand tormented by hunger. Come
along for the purpose of eating.”

aera Sratd g afea:1
apdieaisege 4 wai at GIT
mga ofa aret at TAA Cg
The younger brother, then, interdicted the
elder one and spoke to him repeatedly— “Guard

this mother Khaga, our mother”. Seizing him
with both the arms, he released his mother.

Ware are J migucert: fin
& opr fagerant avai serra coi
During this very time, there father (sage
Kasyapa) appeared there. Having seen them in
hideous form, he said— “Both of you stay here”.

at g a fiat opt aeanit aura
Agta Gans wevdat TAHT Sct

And those two strong ones having seen their
sire, began to lisp, clinging to the lap of their
mother, by means of their Maya.

aorgdighrutatranangmaatal
warned area adarssvat cata ¢ eu)

Then the sage spoke out to the spouse—
“You may reveal at the outset, how these two
misbehaved.

Tage sad ga: fieraft are
AMV AAA TAVITA: SoM

A son adopts the traits of his maternal uncle

and a daughter resorts to the parental ancestors.

A son adopts the same conduct of life as that of
his mother.

ment q waqufirergut weet gam
rath viterereor ae vite: YA:
fafirarg sor: water wanfragrs ag

Of what colour may be the earth, of that
same Varna (or colour) shall be the water to be
sure. By the defects of the conduct of mothers
and that very way by the merits of the conducts,
all the progenies become distinct as such
likewise under the exigency of repute.

aersirenfefireararatetaetiaenn

“Trenton fafa weneherenfert

aivitentetda watrarcrenterttn e 2

Among all wives, Aditi became attuned to
religious duty or good conduct because of her
inherent strength. She is endowed with piety,
good conduct, enlightenment and strength,

Taviten aansfter wrargitet eq: AT
farat g Greet Aererafativatn eat
Arista is interested in music. Danu is

remembered as fond of magic and illusiveness.
The descent lady Vinata loves aerial movement.

mates vies qe: aacigeM
IATA TT cg: HATHA TCTAT ex
By the conduct endowed with austerity,
Surabhi became adorned as such. Kadri is of a

furious temperament and unpleasant conduct
due to anger.

wargarn: vite & augrecerory
a a Sfa ment ategiten TaTsfat ney
The conduct of Danayusa is pre-requisite of
both enmity and blessing. And O Devi! The
fortunate one! You have been considered as
Krodhasila (of furious temperament) by me.

seat wayitenfa Trae
att andl Gan wart sere
aarrcdta Firat enfeaaiacs a eat

Owing to the observation of conduct of
other men or owing to their actions, the children
adopt or change their character naturally. They
are different in their activities, intelligence,
features, strength and forbearance. Changes
occur due to the force of the objects conceived.

=== PAGE 52 ===

48

Vayu-Purana

Traramigaaran: rar:
Urge aTaATS Grear Tura faa: gon
The forms of the whole Universe are by the
instinct of Rajoguna, Sattvaguna and
Tamoguna. Your sons have followed their
maternal uncle in their character and activities.”
SMAgRAT Wraaaaaat AAW
Yararge aren af was Araesaa:( 7) ecu
This way having said Bhagavan (the
adorable) unto Khasa, the unparalleled one, he
summoned the sons and made them fearless by
means of gently words.

ANAT a cha TATTETAW Ae TIT
Weal ae Ware at aat yaa
aa erendattts araayit wane ne eu

Then Khasa spoke out what had been done
by them to her. As the mother narrated their
activities severally, the sage who saw the truth
gave them names according to the meaning of
the roots.

Te gag ad GIS Ba TA:
WAIQMA TATE TARTAN Ro o lt

The root yaksa is derived from “Khadana”

and “Krsana” i.e. eating and dragging. Since he ,

said Yaksaye i.e. I will eat, be will be a Yaksa.

we gee aga: Tere a favre
saad wang we wat we
ASS TATARSTAN AAT TATSSTTA: It Rok
The root raksa means “to protect”. Since he
said “Guard my mother Khasa”, on that account
your second son will be known by the name
“Raksasa”.
a aa afgerggr faara g aah: fie
wen antares a geet UGH TAH Ro Bt
agut aftr epr fafena: aftyra a
Aa: wnfewrerat waTafAT TTA Qo 3A
The Prajapati then having seen them of that
type, having understood them as the sire of

those two, and likewise having understood the
forth coming sense pertaining to the mother of
the two, having seen those two as hungry
astonished as such, and having looked for,
enjoined the food for the two as the blood and
fat.

fae at agfardt opr at art aatdah
qaatgerterygit wate g wae gown
The father having seen those two as hungry

conferred this boon on the two- “Only at night
can your hands feel the touch of anything.

amenfaent a fearaciotiri
We da aciaiet anaareet garq yout
You will move about and take your food
during the night. By day, you will be enjoying
sleep. You will be powerful during the night
and will be sleeping during the day time.
Tat tard da varie
SIRT HVAT: Yat IAAT 20 G 1
You may guard the mother and follow the
righteousness as such.” This way having spoken
to the two sons, Kasyapa became out of sight.
ma feat at ait fants ereuit
fauedtior acai farmed wrftrfzerati goo it
weraett wgrerct werent gureat
Hae a eyat aaTaATATAUT 20.61
The sire having gone, those two heroes
instinctively cruel by instinct, began to behave
and do what was exactly opposed, became
eaters of whatever (available) beings and
harassing living beings. They were highly
powerful and highly spirited, having stupendous
figures and invincible. They possessed the
illusive maya power. Sometimes they would be
visible and immediately they would vanish.

at arreafion dnt fagfagt wera:
wageteant: wecarqurafii go ett

These two assume forms voluntarily or at
will. They attain hideous form instinctively.

=== PAGE 53 ===

Chapter-69

49

Both of them became powerful by means of
their diet in accordance with the forms.

Zarquyisa wraith

fargretiar ayers warPaferor: WEN RRO Il

carinfa ferardt adaeit Freeh

BAM J at Ga gal gray aA geen

They used to move about at night

everywhere and for their food they were
desirous of seizing Devas, Asuras, Sages,
Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Pisdcas, human beings,
Pannagas (nagas), birds and beasts. They were
given the boons by Indra of not killing.

mar’ a Halter Fryer werner
Mer A Vea RATTAN BU BVM
Once that younger Yaksa, was wandering

alone at midnight, desirous of getting some
food. Hearing a sound, he followed it.

arrange firgret gt aquvt a argut
fagenqehiarit geet J Yereuin gaan

He came across two Pigsacas~ Janu and
Canda, both of them being crimson-chested,
erect, curled ones, roundish-eyed ones and
highly atrocious.

aygeniaeeent yeurdl were
ararat afedt at g avert fraferariam evn

Their diet consisted of blood, flesh and fat.
They were man-eaters and highly powerful.
They were accompanied by their two maidens
with a desire to do what pleased them.

% ae arraitual agra wa Wa
srentitest at aarat afemgain 924 1

Though the two maidens were splendid in
appearance, their behaviour was like that of
their father. They were wandering for the sake
of food in the company of their daughters.

ASUPaTA Aa ATTA Teva!
BEAT Aaa F SAT Aer TTT LRG
Twat wise were:

farnquy: wat qarrmad ga geo
There they saw a demon, a self-assumptive-
formed one and highly powerful. As they met
one another accidentally, they wanted to seize
the other and save themselves. The father told
the daughters- “Seize this young fellow alive
who is throbbing at every step and being him
here quickly”.
Stamm faye fergrd we vat
aa: Waheed at WyEGeTaN
Yelear gaara fagaafan eget
Having caught this one alive, shuddering at
every pace and having crawled on collectively,
the two maidens caught hold of him. Having
caught by both the hands, he was taken to the
assembly of their father by the daughters.
angi at ald & faye Tareq
yeaat aisha Het a A a WAAVTAT RVI!
To the demon caught by the hands of the
two, the two Pisacas inquired as to who you are
and whose son you are? And he replied them
everything.
wer aenifinfergne eat ait aren
sare GUS TAT werTaMAt YAU Voit
at gat atom wee aa Fea an ze
His antecedents were known. After knowing
him as the foremost of Raksasas, Aja and
Khanda, the two Pisacas who were satisfied
with his activity, offered him those two
maidens, their daughters.

eres farang Gert Faarez:|
St; usa At at aapareaaAT IAT RU
By the Paigaca mode of nuptial with the fine

toothed one, the Raksasa married those girls.
Aja and Khanda then recounted their wealth.

ga Geet aa aU eT Weiien
TARA Set AVS TST 22 3 Ml

“This Brahmadhana named is my daughter,
devoid of hair and has Brahmanas along with

=== PAGE 54 ===

50

Vayu-Puraga

their wealth as her staple diet”. This way did
Khanda declare.

=a aT aa aa wale
FAAS TATA TATU AIA
“And this Jantudhana named as such, is my
lovely daughter beautiful in all limbs. All the
animals are her diet and wealth”. This way did
Aja declare. Thus both of them narrated the
wealth.

aaigtagt AT a aT SEAT MT
THUTSENT UT HAM TET F AMR
The daughter Jantudhana had another name
Sarvaigakesi', The maiden devoid of hair and
tip of the ears happened to be Brahmadhana.
Fert vem Tact da aa
a fagreett & fae & waar
wat: sonferrt a gadt & Frater 22 au
That one gave birth to a boy Brahmadhana
and a girl Tattvala*. This way the two daughters

of Pisacas gave birth to two twins. Listen and
understand even as I narrate their progeny.

Forges (7) dete aaa

faephide arg amit emda an ez!

Bags TATA Ba AGIA EIT

wiengan aa ae ta gat a zen

Heti, Praheti, Ugra, Pauruseya, Vadha,

Visphirji, Vata, Apa, Vyaghra, Sarpa— these
were Raksasas, the ten sons of Yatudhana. They
were the followers of the Sun and they whirl
along with him.

Raye cegpeigtelea area
uieaaig guret a wegeraTTI
wegata: siterazetrr arate: 92 eH
The son of Heti was Lanku and of Lanku
were two sons- Malyavan and Sumali. Now

1. One having hair on every limb.
2. FE WEA a dere a (HRT) for FTE an
error, verse 125, pada 2.

you hear about the sons of Praheti. Praheti’s son
was the illustrious and well-known Puloman.

aagat giant face yr
faye Gee SAAT ATT TATA

The two sons of Vadha were wicked-
conducted ones, Vighna and Samana and son of
Vidyut also ill-conducted one, a Raksasa named
Rumana.

eapigar fares aa dt werTara:
SIAgaT FAITE STIG STH: 11 23 01
And Nikurhbha was the son of Sphirji who
was ruthless Brahmaraksasa. Vata’s son was
Viraga and Apa’s son was Jarnbuka.
aga Fast Sat farerare:1
SAT ST TTT: AT: WS | TATA 3 UM
Vyaghra’s son was Nirananda, the creator of
hurdles for all beings. Thus all those highly

attacking and cruel Raksasas have been
enumerated.

alfa agar seerrfaatet

aa: fir ght: Sat ger wrdse AMT 23 I

Taraen: afer: oat TEATS ST

AAT TERT VT: YATRUT: NB BU

Yatudhanas have been mentioned. Now

know about the sons of Brahmadhana. Yajfia,
Pita, Dhuni, Ksema, Brahma, Papa, Yajiiaha,
Svakotaka, Kali and Sarpa were the ten sons of
Brahmadhana. The sisters of Brahmaraksasas
were quite treacherous as such.

Traut werfareisarn edatverttorn
UaUaY Tet: yfseat TATA: 3
They were— Raktakarna, Mahajihva, Aksaya
and Upaharini. Brahmaraksasas were born of
their families on the earth,

VAONTRATAT WAY FATA: |
Sea TAT: HRT BareMty FraterT 23 4 tl

On the Slesmataka (Cardya Myxia) trees,
they have their abodes normally. This way these

=== PAGE 55 ===

Chapter-69

51

Raksasas have been enumerated. Now know
about Yaksas.
a screed Tet: ret am
at foregirrarer Tet WME TURN
aunt ahi da wen dad wT aq
WER wen aferacatiis: wera een
Yaksa cherished desire for the Apsarasas
(nymph) Paficasthila (stout in five limbs) or
Kratusthali. Yearning for her and desirous of
securing her, he wandered in parks of Nandana,
Vaibhraja, Surabhi and Caitraratha. In the park
of Nandana, he saw her seated along with
nymphs.
ator fered aa wen cera fer
afta: er wt acto Fa fn eae
He did not get to any resource of her
acquisition despite his pondering, because he
was tarnished by his own form, he was
tarnished by his own corrupt acts.

Wifasra anit wenger Wat:

ae AT TST ETAT 23 Ul
He thought, “All living beings are afraid and
disgusted with me who am noxious and hurtful.
Then how possibly shall I get this maiden of
beautiful limbs?”

aBrard aa: Bisa vitgeardt orate
pel wi agetacke | Tea
aa: Biscarat We at STE HTEICTAN evo
Having thought of a plan, he hastened to put
it into action. Having created the form of
Vasuruci Gandharva, the Guhyaka (Yaksa) then
caught hold of that Kratusthali from the midst
of other Apsarsas.
geen agefe fa sratarezraa
Maa: Baar Ue SaaS TATA: 1 gw a
Having recognised that one as Vasuruci, she
followed him with emotional attachment. Even
as he was being observed by the group of
Apsarsas, he was embraced by her.

wa Gfagan: wet ota: Ysera
uftondrapckhe: wet get sacra ev 2
Thereafter having senses well accomplished,
a son of full-fledged sense-organs and height
was born to him instantaneously. The new-borm
was brilliant in his own glory.
Tensetata aise frat AtssaeTET
Fara Ste a Sia: fret ft oeqara Bn evant
“T am a king, I am Nabhi”, he spoke like this
to his father. The sire spoke to him, “O Sunny!
Since you are born, there is no fear for you”.
TRISPa wor feqafeor saa
are a aferetior Tae WATE gw wl
Since the son was quite suited to the mother
in form and father in valour, Yaksa was

overjoyed and due to that exultation regained
his original form.

eau witaerd Get WeTTTAT: |
fraaron: wetter Haat tte: wafers awe tt
The great Yaksa and Raksasas regain their
original disposition while dying, when asleep,
infuriated or terrorised and when overjoyed.
MSTA MA: A Tea
We res Yao ayat arate ewe
Then that Guhyaka smilingly spoke to the
Apsarasas~ “May you go to my house along
with your son, O beautiful-waisted one! O
comely dame!”
Sel Wea Fa GET ea SUA
fagren: seater: ReTTEARATIT: tl Pvt
On seeing him who regained his original
form suddenly after saying this, all the nymphs
were furious, perplexed and frightened and they
fled.
Texter Uret araafann
Taratercat wet at airat waa evel

Kratusthali followed the Apsarsas who were
fleeing. But the son consoled her with his

=== PAGE 56 ===

52

Vayu-Purana

speech. He took- her to the middle of
Gandharvas and Apsarsas and returned.

at a apr ageahe aareatat TT:
Tat et wef sree I AgeTiTTN exe
And having seen that generation of Yaksa,

the bevy of Apsarsas spoke out to Kratusthali-
“You are the generator of Yaksas”.

SET BS YA aay wat: AAT

mateifeot At Tera aa SA

aftafwarat aarti =atta: wea: Fras gy ont

Then, along with his son, Yaksa proceeded

to his own abode named Nyagrodharohinah
(established on the holy fig tree) where
Guhyakas used to sleep. Therefore the
Nyagrodha tree is always a favourite place of
residence to the Yaksas.

wal TANT Yeart fray:

ages cera agmafratt Far

sey a agai Tet afoTaT ay By eH

Fa AT ato a WeRGeTTTAA

wat: Ueat attra gq areas BAN Ay

The Yaksa named Rajatanabha was the

grandfather of Guhyakas. He married Bhadra,
the excellent daughter of the Daitya Anuhrada.
She gave birth to two sons— Manivara of good
self-control and Manibhadra, the one having
prowess like that of Indra. The spouses of these

two brothers were sisters, the two auspicious
daughters of Kratusthali.

are quart da wat gacrit @ an
faa aforagry garquasrtt Wea e431

Their names were Punyajani and Devajani.
To Manibhadra, Punyajani gave birth to the
following sons of auspicious disposition.

feat gts a gest at wT
wath Uferch cea wfored TH TAT RG eI
walgai wg a fagei sireta a

Aa HC FT Vel TT FATH ky 4H

taget gus a waht a aetsraT
wfemeagrrit a fie tifergagritn gy gu
They were— Siddhartha, Siryateja, Sumanta,
Nandana, Kanyaka, Yavika, Manidatta, Vasu,
Sarvanubhita, Sankha, Pingaksa, Bhiru,
Mandarasobhi, Padma, Candraprabha,
Meghapirna, Subhadra, Pradyota, Mahaujas,
Dyutiman, Ketuman, Mitra, Mauli and
Sudargana.
went fagfagda gat: qoeset: YU:
wR afore ae quae:
Rat Goes Water Aa: WHAT: FAT: Ryo
Thus there are twenty-four auspicious
Punyajanas born to Manibhadra. They all were
of sacred characteristics. Their sons and
grandsons were the auspicious Yaksas and
Punyajanas.
feat tart yarafreesTa
wos eral aioreafgait CYA

Fa a faget ta yooh HATA eG SH
waaul Ga w ual atet ach FET
wad aud da alas ae SAT Ron
TRAM aug a Yat fart airy
qutard fecoenet Gad aeqaTea 1 2g vi
Devajanani bore to Manivara the following
sons— Pirnabhadra, Hemaratha, Maniman,
Nandivardhana, Kustumburu, Pigangabha,
Sthilakarma, Mahajaya, Sveta, _‘Vipula,
Puspavanta, Bhayavaha, Padmavarna, Sunetra,
Yaksa, Bala, Baka, Kumuda, Ksemaka,
Vardhamana, Dama, Padmanabha, Varanga,
Suvira, Vijaya, Krti, Pirnamasa, Hiranyaksa,
Surdpa, and others.
wat aftrarede war a een: BAT: |
gen frame aftam: freagat: i 2g 80
Rat Gawr Wawey Mays ASAT Vg BM
These sons of Manivara are remembered as
Yaksas and Guhyakas. Some are handsome and

=== PAGE 57 ===

Chapter-69

53

some are ugly. They are garland wearing ones
and good looking ones. They had hundreds and
thousands of sons and grandsons.

EMAAR YaT TATA: ATRAHTTT: 1

Ret aor WEARS qoaMTPAaAATH 2g wt

Of Khasga, there were other sons who
became demons (Raksasas) of self-willed
physical transformations. Listen to and

understand the important ones among them as
they are being narrated.

crenfa: get sia: gureit ayta aI
feraghctat ferafoargt wrath efter 96.40
aah: Yad ga: after: weras:)
wis: Wega comes Fryar: 11 96 GH
fafgnr: wadps ques TaN:
magma eteey feet: u eg .ou
They were- Lalavi, Kuthana, Bhima,
Sumali, Madhu, Visphirjita, Vidyujjihva,
Matanga, Dhimrita, Candrarka, Sukara,
Budhna, Kapiloman, Prahasaka, _Kroda,
Parasunabha, Cakraksa, Nisacara, Trisiras,
Satadarhstra, the Raksasa Tundakesa, the Yaksa
Akarnpana, Durmukha and Silimukha.
gad verdad fear Torafaar:1
Pact YF Hey TAT AAEAATE RG CI
These great Raksasas were heroic. In the
form of groups, they move about in all the

worlds. They have the ability to move on equal
footing with the Devas.

Be SRM Slane: TOA TITHTAT!
arate a: werent Fa area AUT 8g <
She (Khasa) had seven other daughters.
Hear about them, their progeny and the groups
formed by them as per serial order.
area seer Fan Fae after frre
Sit a weraen ater: Wat A: BATH
Alarhba, Utkaca, Krsn, Niryta, Kapila, Siva
and the greatly fortunate Kesini were the seven
sisters who were known as such.

areat cenftares eat yaguer:t
sahot cererTon ga Fafa: YT oA
From them, the consumers of the flesh of
men, killers, highly proud for warfare, ferocious
and auspicious groups of demons were born.

TAA ToT: AX SeReA TOTEM
AAT TAMIA TAT DAA TOT: 11 LO
The group of Alarnbeya was cruel as also

the group Utkaceya. The groups of excellent
Raksasas were the Karsneyas and Saiveyas.
wae Saat are area ZI
senfea: Warat TOprTAtAT FN ost
The group of Raksasas called Nairrta
comprised the progeny created by leading
Ganesvara who was the follower of Tryarhbaka.

verter aera sett aerceraT: |
faarm: vithioat aa Face:
Aarafrafetea ATT Garett faT 11 Yow

These ferocious Yaksas and Raksasas were
procreated by the powerful and heroic
GaneSvaras who were equipped with valour.
These Devaraksasas, the Nairrtas had the well-
known Virdpaka as their leader.

Tat WONT SAAMI WET
WAT REA viet WTA: ATTN Vou
Among those great souled ones, the

pernicious ones, many hundreds mostly follow
Sankara, the lord of the Universe.

Sens BA Tera TETAAT

SeMnfee Meet ASTACTATAAT: 11 YOK UH
anfaetar meratat sett Seacerat:|
went Baar HM WE BAT: Yvon
SMTA AAT STOTT AAATATAT: |
drtighegia tern: ERAT: Vet
arena afer far: Beets fe

Fem sft WareTaT sata UrefaHAT: oe

By the great-souled Daitya king Kurhbha,

=== PAGE 58 ===

54

Vayu-Purdna

the Kapileyas, the Daityaraksasas of great
power, huge body and exploit were procreated.
The Yaksa Kathpana begot of Kesini, very
powerful Yaksas and Raksasas. And Nila, the
daughter of Kesini gave birth to many Raksasas
of petty mentality from Alarhbeya Surasika.
They are called Nailas. They were invincible
and were terrific in their exploits.

aha vfadt geet aa a Facile:

ageteda wher tat ag A WaT Ve onl

Endowed with divine and worldly power,

they roam about on the entire earth. Since they
are enormous, the detail of their creations is
impossible to narrate.

meareafa a stern fare are wereh
Seer Cantata AAT HAT Re RU
The same Nila had a daughter, the demoness
(Raksasi) named Vikacd. She was naturally
devoid of hair and possessing mediocre strength
and exploit.

wen aft fetus a wT
sane: GU (?) art: Ty areaqyayr

The same Vikaca gave birth to many terrible
Asuras by the contact of the ugly Nairrta. Now
listen to them in due order.

Sprauctage Wert Weta: |

erat ttwcle ata wrreat: an ee an
Srreney firgrrenay argeat: sreTeRT: TU
afimaraat Sa Wet: Youtawar:n ex

Having deformity of terrific or hideous jaws,
huge ears and bloated bellies, they are-
Harakas, Bhisakas, Kramakas, Vainakas,
Pisacas, Vahakas and Prasakas. These are
Bhiimi-raksasas (earthly demons). They possess
manly exploit though slow-witted.

AGES ATT BHI: |
sepa FA as VAT: Wa weqn
They assume multifarious forms and roam
about unseen by others. Those whose strength

and energy are excellent and extraordinary are
known as Khecaras!.

PATA UssaTet eM: Tact aa B
Udeatatint cites wragiise MEAT RS KI
Those who are diminutive ones, they move

in the sky to a small extent. This world is
pervaded by these in hundreds and thousands.
cafirmerach: Baca: exrera:1
APSARA ATES: MARTA RS OM

By all the Bhamiraksasas and
Ksudraraksasas (petty Raksasas) of diverse
forms and shapes, the different countries all
round are infested.

marae Bet TaTATR:
agt fawn Sat fe ferera ayer gcc
Briefly have been illustrated the eight

mothers of the Raksasas. Hence there are eight
well-known clans of these Raksasas.

sigan Fort: tfresiaeatiegant: (2)1
aeaRTa ETAT HeeteafereneAT: Re Ft

Some of them, being the source of
accomplishment of sacrifices, constitute the
Bhadraka group. They are enumerated in
hundreds and thousands, roving in the world of
mortals.

UAT AIGA AAT ATTRA: |
STRAT ATG Cites HET SATA V8 ott
There are several terrible Bhitas having the
same traits as their mother Pitand. They harass

children in the human world like the evil
planets, causing dejectedness.

EITTS ATTA ATE: |
ae y fag STAT EGTA: gg all
The Skandagrahas and the like groups, the
Apakas, the Trasakas and the like- all these
deserve to be recognised as Kaumaras, ill-
disposed towards children like evil planets.

1. The word Khecara refers to one who moves in the
sky.

=== PAGE 59 ===

Chapter-69

55

erarefagrent mira waa a
year & a citeaferareraar: 11 22 2H
Reem ueleirenferenttorg
wd moarate athe yee ee an
There are hundreds of the groups of these
evil Raksasas like the deceitful types of
Skandagrahas and Bhitas named Pitanas, lakhs
and lakhs of them roaming about in the human
world annoying the people.
Ba: GUAT AT ae FH she TTA:
aan tale aa GuaAT Ti 29 vil
There are Yaksas known as Punyajanas,

there are Guhyakas, and still others called
Devajanas.

Wear a aaa Fa Tea:
tenet Terat & a feats & aya: 28 &
All of them are included in the category of
Guhyakas. Then there are Raksasas known as
Agastyas, Paulastyas and Visvamitras.
Bano Tara a Werenreras a1
Bat UAT WENT: HAT were eee
The illustrious king Kubera, the overlord of
Alaka, is the ruler of all these Yaksas and
Raksasas that are Paulastyas and Agastyas.
aan eB arte gon wt
Taragragn fig: afedtst:n egiont
Yaksas drink flesh blood and swallow flash
of men by merely looking at them. Raksasas do
so by entering inside the body and Pisacas just
by all-round suppressions.

warUURTa: wa tad:

ERT Gera Sa: STTEHATT: 1 Vee tl
aafinren faa: wdc: |
gareataftatt tear axer afqener A ee eit

There some beings of the following
characteristics. They are endowed with all the
auspicious marks and of similar fields with the
Devas. They are refulgent and stronger ones.

They are Isvaras of self-willed frameworks.
They are not fit for conversation, are valiant
ones, offered homage by the entire world, the
subtle ones, the florid ones, fit for sacrifices and
as such bestowers of boons.

lant great weT: wae: BAT:
fafa: urea teat Bag AT: waTaT Root
All these have the same characteristics as of
Devas and are remembered as Asuras.

Gandharvas are inferior to Devas by three-
fourths of their prowess.

Terhafeta: wedi a aya:
weregeat cement fagat: WeRTETAT:
toda aan: frerenferqat Gan go tH
All Guhyakas are inferior to Gandharvas by
three-fourths. All Raksasas deserve to be
recognised as similar in strength to Yaksas.

Pigacas are three times Jess inferior in their
glory and prosperity than Yaksas.

wa SI agW wae a)

aigdor Gaga FT AT AATTHRA Ro VM

caged dat sharers wey

wreaten: fagrermartat Fara: Zo BN

This way by wealth, by form, by age, by

strength, by duty, by supremacy, by intellect, by
penance, by education and by valour, the four
Devayonis, starting with Gandharvas and

lasting with Pisacas are consecutively three-
fourths inferior to Devas and Asuras.

ai sara
SA: TY AG Ss WAT: HTARTCTEAT: 1
maa Sater TY BES MAT:
Ot rat: YRS SHAT Fata Ro v1
Sita spoke~ Therefore it may be all well for
you, now hear the progeny of the family of
Krodha. Krodha gave birth to twelve daughters.

They happened to be the wives of Pulaha. You
may know them by name.

=== PAGE 60 ===

56

Vayu-Purana

wh a ger a eftag saath
ya a afte der fren frat ata a
Fat te ea da Ua Ae faa: Vou H
They were— Mrgi, Mrgamanda, Haribhadra,
Iravati, Bhita, Kapisa, Darhstra, Nisa, Tirya,
Sveta, Svar and Surasa, this way well-known
as such.
Wang efton: Yat: MEM: PeETAT
aga: wet Fa wa: Jae AUR
Of Mrgi, the sons were different types of
deer, viz. Harinas, Nyarikas, Ruras and Prsatas
as well as such other animals as hares and
Sarabhas.
TTT WEST Tea Aa
HigitpaTE GETTER 2 ott
The king of beasts was the son of
Mrgamanda as well as such other animals as
Gavayas (blue cows), buffaloes, camels, boars,
rhinoceros and Gauramukhas (a kind of black
monkey with white face).

Bey Ra: YT Wengerera:!

anu: faruda om: faqearee

saanredisaashy street Fatt Roe

Of Hari were sons Haris (lions), bears,

tigers, hyenas, different varieties of monkeys,
Kinnaras, Vyaghras, Kirnpurusas and many
other animals. Now know about the sons of
Travati.

enuseuret & aria g sitet:
Beat afoypea WATT 20 B11
Bhauvana (Visvakarman) gathered two egg-
like skulls of Sirya. Having engripped them
with his hands, he sang the Rathantara hymn.

ST WENA Ae Wa TaISHATI
a worsted art wg lean oM
Being generated by Saman hymn,
instantaneously an elephant appeared. He
presented that elephant to Iravati as her son.

Sua: Yat TerTeTeTad: FAA:

RATATAT: AAAI

Qurareagdg: strrrradt mA: VU

Being thus the son of Iravati, the elephant

was called Airavata. Being the vehicle of
Devaraja (Indra), the foremost one, that became
the elephant Lord. It had the radiance of white
cloud. The glorious elephant Airavata had four
tusks.

aaa aura ea:
ager fe var attreres fae: ezH
Since it is born of water, has a single root,
six tusks and the lustre of gold, only this
elephant has the strength of being a vehicle. It is
of the Bhadra variety of the elephants.

We Vaseade yritaisa arr:
wada ugaiseg ited arerqeratu 2 231

The sons of that elephant were~ Afijana,
Supratika, Vamana and Padma. His mate was
Abhramu.

ferrets ae (q) t: AASTTAAISSYTY
PT a ws a MAT GT: WARN evi

Sveta gave birth to four swift-footed sons

who became the elephants of the quarters. They

belonged to the varieties such as Bhadra, Mrga,
Manda and Samkima.

datniswert ag sare wet Fl
aa a: Uoitarg efter: w Maia yea Ml
And even belonging to Sarkirna variety,
Ajijana happened to be the vehicle of Yama.
Supratika belonging to Bhadra variety is the
vehicle of the Lord of Waters i.e. Varuna.

walt weg at a feat dears a1
WM: Pare At TRA Sar: HW Wa Ve,
Padma of white-complexion, belonging to
Manda variety is the vehicle of Ailavila
(Kubera). (Vamana) that happened to be the
dark-coloured elephant, belonging to the Mrga
variety, is the vehicle of the Fire-god (Agni).

=== PAGE 61 ===

Chapter-69

57

wale a: walt weit A aeat wT:
STATA TATE GARE YaT: 1g You

He has eight sons, viz. Padma, Uttara, two
Gajas, Varuna, Gana, Upalepana and Mesa.

TEMA era TT TAN
dearer: fagt aelat weagaT:1

TARA APTAATAAT HATH 2 RCH
Endowed with lofty spirit, they (elephants)
take birth in that lineage having white hair and
nails, crimson-hued and physical-franied ones. I
shall now talk of the inebriate tusker Matangaja
and other types of elephants in due order.

afte: quite QUAM Wen:
ait area Gat aat fra 2 Ve
The elephant Pundarika was grey-coloured

and Rathantara had a flowery colour. Their sons
were Supratistha and Pramardana.
Yet: Wet: eTeeraT 2 Year
afer: wiaadla yarcarepferet WaT:11 220
There are other types of elephants known as
Akulika elephants which are spear-shaped,
stout, with raised heads, having white hair and
nails, strong and energetic.

WoeRit Tea weet SATETATT
arauit a aga: aeenfeeafora: 1 2 2 el
Puspadanta, Brhatsaman, Saddanta,

Dantapuspavan and Tamravarna were his sons
and companion elephants.
aaa Ure Set ra TEa A:
FAT: YavABIST AATTSTAAPAT: RV
Do get birth in the lineage of this one-
elephants of beautiful appearance, having

protruding lips, dark-coloured, fierce and
capable of enduring diverse kinds of ordeal.

Sea SSAA: ATA FAST ATTA: |
arat darger qer Ateraccerait Gat 22 BU

Vamadeva was as dark as collyrium.
Vamana was born from Saman. His spouse was

Angada and the two sons were Nilavan and
Laksana.
TUSETEAAT SATA: |
atdar: Get dat sera fagAT TATA VSI
These tuskers were fierce. Their necks and
heads were awesome. Their chests were broad

and they were swift-footed. If they are bound by
men, the elephants born become deformed.

Gaited eto a Bey TTI
TET WEN Ta yefarhergATT: Ie BG
There happens to be no elephant comparable
to Supratika in form and beauty. He had three
sons, viz. Prahari, Sarhpati and Prthu.

upat dhieeadter: gfareaferten:
TRA USI AM TET TABATA VE I
The animals having longer palates and lips,
equitably well-formed heads and stomachs, take

birth as gentle ones, in his lineage of
Matangajas.
SRE A i aa Ue act

wa wre aaante vreTgeA: Gat 2 WON
From Ajfijana, Ajijana was born and from
Saman, Afijandvati was born. The mother of
these two is reputed to be the daughter of
Ayurajas.
Taferrafrca: feresitgrdfen: |
Gaver: Gamat: waren ufeeger:
WAT: Taraaga Taree TAT 2 PEI
In his lineage were born elephants having
highly symmetrical crests resembling bland
clouds, good looking ones, good-physiqued
ones, having appearance or gleam of lotuses and
globular ones all round, bloated ones, having
faces yellow and longer ones.

ag wane: UA: fager Hye:
fageren: gat cer TeTeahfinferita 2 Ve 0

From Candramas and Saman were born
Pingala and Kumudadyuti. From Pingala, two
sons were Mahapadma and Urmimilin.

=== PAGE 62 ===

58

Vayu-Purana

aaTeeiMerrggarertawy
ara fravarnPats wer SeiRATTN 23 ON
The bestowers of boons, Candas (terrific
ones) having strength spread as such, (bloated)-
bellied ones, fond of elephant fights, such
(elephants) you may know were born in the
lineage of that one.
Wea Fe Taf Hg: YT:
parts fergera valent: wagteer: 23 en
In the course of wars between Devas and
Asuras, Suras used them for the purpose of
victory. Having achieved victory, those

elephants were let off by them and they went to
different directions as mentioned before.

Warraa arenataiereg ees
agra ciamera Gears & FEIN 32

The gods offered the well-trained elephants
born in these lineages to Lomapada, the king of
Anga and Saktakara (the author of a Sikta
work).

fart farenat a eeraEh Tow
SLUT Sait STAAL ASAT 1 23 3

Since it has two tusks it is called Dvirada;
the word Hastin is derived from hasta (hand);
from the word kara the word Karin is derived;
Varanat (since it protects) it is called Varana.
Since it has dantas it is called Dantin. It is
called Gaja because it trumpets.

Bat: Haeivararh afar:
Wear arf tragt feat great forage
art: aTarcenfalet Paar eae

Kufijara got derived owing to the act of
roving in groves and Naga got derived owing to
butting against the Nagas trees or mountains.
Since it is born of Matanga, it is called
Matanga. Dvipa is (derived) as it continues to
drink with two (tusks). Samaja (meaning an
elephant) (is derived) from its having taken
birth from Saman hymn. This is the serial order
of etymologisation.

wat franaefaft (%) ard wf

area A F A sar TeyEAAT

wet i NIZAM

The convergeness of their tongues and their

down stooping is born of the curse of Agni. The
fact that they are unaware of their strength and
the existence of deep-rooted testicles, both these
are due to the curses of Svayarnbhii and Suras.

daerareat: firgrearereeran: |
SAY Bat eSATA TAT: FB U
Elephants of varied inherent spirits are born
of girls of Deva, Danava, Gandharva, Pisaca,
Uraga and Raksasa tribes through their union
with the elephants of the quarters (Diri-ndgas).
daft wafte arated vem
Ueatat feat Aart Tet faery: 230
The story of Sarhbhiti (birth), Prabhiti
(power) and the etymology of names of
elephants whose king is Vibhavasu, should be
known.

aalfgrenren: ysTy WEAR
PEARY WaT J ACU IS
The forest in the east bound by the rivers
Kausiki and Ganga and the sea belongs to
Ajijana and the family of elephants of which he
is the founder.

Sw we faeaes agra afevt aT aI
TATASRHENA: UTAH TET 23 VU
North of Vindhya, south of Ganga and in
between the land of Karusa and the source of
Ganga is the forest of Supratika.
amu Maes wT
TTA Fh BAAN BVO

To the west of Utkala and extending upto
the land of Vedi is the forest of Vamana known
as such. He is the sole Atman.

am g cifgemnfaat: warts g
auedagt stnaqudata ai 2% et

=== PAGE 63 ===

Chapter-69

59

To the west of Lauhitya extending
westwards upto the sea is the forest of Yama, in
line with the mountain as such.

afafaaa aria wenger
wergyig dale area BY
Bhiti gave birth to Bhiitas who are the
attendants of lord Rudra. They were flatulent,
lean, longish, dwarfish, the pigmies and the
equal-statured ones.
ean Tae RTa SAT
Taenferenig orafanrerefafisari 2s 3
They were long-eared ones, hanging-lipped
ones, lolling-tongued ones, longer-teated ones
and bloated-bellied ones; single-formed ones,
ugly-formed ones, projected-hipped ones and
hanging-legged ones.

marae ioreanes: |
POIs Atetier Aetier citfeareurq 21
They were denizens of lakes, oceans,
mountains, rivers and shores. They were dark-
complexioned ones, the white-complexioned
ones, the azure-hued ones, white ones, red ones
and crimson-hued ones.

AES Maa TTAATOTEL
areaprre eager 1S 4 UL

Some were ferret-hued ones, the dappled-
hued ones, the dusky-hued ones, the tawny-
hued ones, atrocious like Raksasas and Kadriis.
Some had dishevelled hair like the Muiija grass.
Some had hair standing up. Some were serpents
as the sacred thread.

ferquenfaremergerEratery
ageiaitaviiviss waitatagiiear 2% 11
Some having eyes bulged out, hideous-eyed

ones, small eyed-ones, single-eyed ones, many-
crested ones, ugly-crested ones, one-crested
ones and some were crestless ones.

ausig faeida favre

wag wfenida Hearsay voll

They were fierce and hideous. Some had no
hair. Some had plenty of it. Some were blind.
Some had matted hair. Some were yellow.
Some were dwarfish.

atarenmierdigierratar:|
Uaailareranitopegrcnantenfitearyn 2% ci

They were denizens or servers of lakes,
oceans, mountains and rivers. Some were one-
eared ones, some were huge-eared ones, some
were spiked-eared ones and some had no ears.

spn afi sai '
Re seeaT EA ATAKTATTU 2 wR Ut

Some had fangs. Some had claws, Some had

no teeth. Some had two tongues. Some had a

single hand. Some had two hands. Some had
three hands. Some had no hand,
vamratgurais fmreraguecart
TRA TFAETAAT-YATEAPACTAATL 2 & 0 I
Some were one-footed ones, some were
two-footed ones, some were three-footed ones
and some were many-footed ones. Some were
great Yogins. Some were highly dignified.
Some were very strong. Some were of good
penance.
TEIN TATaATATTSTTT: |
ahorgtigs Beaier ferarequarsranfeg:n 24 tH
Promenading everywhere and having no
obstruction, some were having knowledge of
Brahman and some were of wanton forms,
terrific ones, cruel ones, fit for sacrifices,
beneficent ones, sacred and had
unanimous talks.

PUCKETT HU AEA
wares Garais ferdtaier aenfertn 24 RN
Some had the Kuga grass in their hands.
Some had huge tongues, long ears and large
faces. Some ate with their hands, some with
their mouths and some with their heads. Some
wore skulls.

ones

=== PAGE 64 ===

60

Vayu-Purana

afeadt qarenfageenieen
Srareardter sigs FATE AEN 34 3
They were bow-wielding ones, the
bludgeon-wielding ones, sword-bearing ones
and trident-wielding ones. They were refulgent
faced-ones, radiant-eyed ones, variegated-
wreathed ones and varied-normed unguents
bearing ones.
araratafnais AgRIrGETaT
Titer rinraitdtantearne
ACgS Ree Pe 24 SN
Some ate cooked food; some raw flesh.
Some had many forms. Some had handsome
appearance. Some roamed about at night or
dusk. Some were terrible. Some were gentle,
roaming about during the day. Some were night
prowlers, who were very terrible to look at;
some were terrible night-wanderers.

Wel wwe Se BS BATT:
Sat sraissfea gat ar wet & aera 244
All of them had their minds devoted to lord
Bhava (Siva), the greatest god. Neither of them
had spouses nor sons. They were all celibates
with sublimated sexuality.

wd af aeentn serena
We WS HRT eT: WaT: weatfdaT: 24
These Bhiitas numbered a hundred thousand
were great Atmayogins. They were all great-
souled ones and were known as the sons of
Bhiati.
after aa Hered HevsaRt YA:
fags fegrart auf afi au
aaftrentrrraret ad a faferargAt: 1 24 Von
Kapisa gave birth to Kismandi
Kiismandi again gave birth to the couples of
Pisacas who were tawny-coloured. Because
they were brownish, they were called Pisacas
and all of them were eaters of meat or flesh.

and

gant degen adores: |
ATTRA TRATETTETAAL 4 CU

Sixteen other twins are there and their
lineages are existing now. By name, I shall
declare them, the man-eaters and their lineages.

wretch da aa cay TMT

Wer ton da Tet TeTEAMN Wee
aumragy att a aude geht:
THAT THT THEA 2 oN

arey arral a pUvey Hultean
unforarar wnforarat aig: ange AAT ye gu
fques fqust a Fryun Fryuretem
sereraa da Weare: TaheeT TAT
Weaet faye wor: wR SST 26 TH

They are—- Chagala and Chagali, Vakra and
Vakramukhi, Siici and Sicimukha,
Kurhbhapatra and Kuribhi, Vajradaristra and
Dundubhi, Upacara and Upacara, Ulikhala and
Uldkhali, Anarka and Anarké, Kukhanda and
Kukhandika, Panipatra and Panipatri, Parnsu
and Parhsumati, Vitunda and Vitundi, Nipuna
and Nipuna, Chalada and Ucchesana, Praskanda

and Skandika. These ganas as sixteen clans of
the Pisacas have been narrated.

seal saa: Yr: tarereT
fanrargtitansta BRUT: MAT: RE BH
snigateant eras Fatisat:!
uforeras Aquat sorte FryoMeraT 2g vt
wigasama: Serta we

seat ahaa” Hees waters VE GU

The sixteen families of Kismandas are—

Ajamukhas, Bakamukhas, Parins, Skandins,
Visadas, Angarikas, Kumbhapitras,
Prakundakas, Upacarolikhalikas, Anarkas,

Kukhandikas, Panipatras, Naitundas, Umasas,
Nipunas and Siicimukhocchesanadas. This way
these are noble ones known as the (lineages) of
the Kiismandas.

=== PAGE 65 ===

Chapter-69

61

fargrearet gy fagrer: gaat sfe TAR
dard fagarant yaaa
aaetat fogrertt carota Frater 2&1
Pigacas they deserve to be known as such,
accompanied by the collaterals who were born
this way, odious ones, having conduct of ugly
norms, having sons and grandsons of unending
norms. Hence, understand the characteristics of
Pisacas.
waigca gare éfgut afterea
frist: Gores fegrana SaP|T: 2G oI
The Pisacas are shaggy all over the limbs.
Their eyes are round. They have claws and

fangs. Their limbs are crooked. They are man-
eaters and their faces are turned down.
Be PUMTUTRaA TATA: |
qonfoser: freee freer: darter:
The Pisacas called Kismandikas are
shagless and bristlesless. Skins and _ hides
constitute their garments. They always eat
gingelly seeds and flesh.
RIFE SHAT
WaT aafterans cam: aArRaftaT n 2g BH
Some Pigacas have curved limbs, hands and
feet. They attains to crooked-disposition and
deserve to be known as Vakrapisacas. They are
crooked-gaited ones and wanton-framed ones.

ATRTRUSATT BATA: |
Fagan: firgraret fererar: Frasrat: 1129011
Some Pigacas have hung stomachs and some
are snorted-nosed ones.! Some are  short-
statured ones, some are small-crested ones and
small-armed ones. These are called Nitundaka
Pigacas. They are sesame eaters and are fond of
pleasing hearings.

arated araren: ert:
PUTA SATATATEAT TAT: 11 219 BU

1. QPSALM: is a misprint for G°SA: in verse 270.

Some are dwarfed-structured _ ones,
vociferous, having movements of jumping
norm. They are Anarkamarka types of Pigacas.
They are fond of eating and living on trees.

BATRA SEGMT TATA: |
Yate vigage: firgrenr: vig an eee
Some are erect-armed and erect-shagged
ones, having projected abodes on tall trees.
They release dust from their limbs being
Parhsava Pisacas.
erie: Weal: yaya: |
STENT: PMTETET PARTATATAT RTA F193 Ut
The Upaviras Pisacas are very considerate
about their veins. Their bodies are dry. They
have plenty of moustache. They wear bark
garments. Cremation ground is their abode.

fageren vettier Stent WRT
Beqeeierat fara qaftogan:u owt

The Ulikhala types of Pisacas have stable
motionless eyes and long tongues with which
they lick their lips. Their heads are as large as
those of elephants and camels. They move
about severally or jointly.

fag: HOUTA SETA RAT
Reng Tag: fist qergeracht Su Vout

The Pisaécas known as Kumbhapatras are
those, who eat the unobserved foods. They are
small and yellow-complexioned with hairy
bodies. They move about visibly and invisibly.

args fagrite fyored fagrerar:1
eROTRTALATRTT TTT ATTA: B19 G UL

The Pisdcas called Nipunas enter and infest
those persons who go alone. Their faces extends
upto their ears. They have thick noses and
brows hung along.

Were: wen: frre: WoT A
SRUIGraRTTOT eae: feaftewa:n
mrerera firgrar & afraryeafer: i Qe

The Pisacas called Baladas (devourers of

=== PAGE 66 ===

62

Vayu-Purana

children) are those, who have refuge in vacant
apartments, are short-statured ones and resort to
the maternity chambers. They attack people
with their hands and feet. Their eyes are turned
towards the earth.

Yoanforargey Beara aTATA:|
fafgrener: figraret wear Bray: R92
The Pisitadas Pisdcas have hands and feet on
the backside. They are shorter ones and have
speed like that of the wind. They are meat-
eaters and drinkers of blood.

Wem sree figrerat waiter: 2081

The Pisacas called Skandins are naked and
have no fixed abode. They are circular in shape
with long hair. There are other types of Pisdcas
being the eaters of leaved-food. Thus sixteen
castes of Pisicas have been well narrated.

Téfanfamarg darguasyarr

RT Te Ak We THTATATSPTATT: It

arr waTeat arrET AN? ot

On seeing these types of Pisacas, niggardly

ones and in a dejected condition among his
progeny, Brahma out of compassion granted
them the boons of vanishing and assuming
forms as they pleased.

wat: data Waar wT

Tern aft seh YETTA A Be aH
faarenfa a aft eqerantfiean a
aeepiraferent dentate an Ve TN
Teenie Pepeeraaitt a1
eRwagernsa Frinrdaateen 26 31
waht aaisa Pai aeagarreTary

fagren fatter 4 wreag Fae ew

He permitted them to move about at the time
of the two junctions (viz. dawn and dusk). I
shall mention their abodes and way of

maintaining themselves. The houses that are
broken and are vacant having scanty populace
(lit. men) are their abodes. And which ones are
destroyed as such, where there is misconduct of
people, which are not cleaned and scrubbed
properly or not painted well. They live in the
highways, adjoining lanes, the orchards and the
squares, the gates and the watch-towers, the
exit-doors and the dikes, the roads, the streams
and the places of pilgrimage or fordable spots,
the holy sanctuaries or trees, monasteries and
huge highways. Pisacas occupy all such spots.

weriter sare & onsite fateat: gt:
ater: tenftent: Aref efeasATeRTM 36 4 Il
ayierant afar

Wits aghreartanseds

arena frat arg firgrarent Saat: 2S GI

The irreligious persons, those who violate
the discipline of castes and stages of life and
artisans and masons constitute the livelihood of
these Pisdcas as ordained by Suras. These
Pigacas will be the presiding deities where holy
rites are performed by means of money earned
by unjustifiable means such as breach of trust
and theft of nectar-like articles,

agnidierden frerguigaad:1

qigifiggertetcmastet: 1 8c

gona da araife qu: qareer

ud gar: qaraetat & uses

froma gen aisferafedet ec

By honey, meat, cooked-rice mixed with

curds, sesame powder, sura (wine) and dsava
(spirituous liquor), incense, turmeric and
KrSaras (balls of sesame and grain), oil, rice
mixed with jaggery, fragrant grass, dark
costumes and flowers are the means of
oblations for Pigacas. At the junctions of

Parvans, these things must be offered to
Pisacas. Brahm, the lord, ordained thus.

aayaiterani fife yornfory
op aaraarenmnrasia afr eee

=== PAGE 67 ===

Chapter-69

63

He made the trident-bearing Girisa, the lord
of all the beings and Pisacas. The lady Darhstra
produced as sons Vyaghras (tigers) and Sirnhas
(lions).

feftes Garena oreaenssfaigr:
marrenta area werent rate
wea gfert: way arat aT TN Veo

The leopards, the serpentine or elephants

like, the flesh eaters are also her sons. Now you

know absolutely about the progeny of Rsa. She
had five daughters. Listen to their names.

ar wat dat gar uftgar wa a

STAT | faye Arar SF OPT WAT Fe AU
Mina, Mata, Vrtta, Parivrtté and Anuvrtta
deserve to be known as her daughters. Whose
progenies they were, you may listen to.
aeaeM eT: Wshaferea eat: |
seanfate Ton at farwitel seat 28 2
Sharks and crocodiles with a thousand teeth,
the types of fish known as Pathina, Timi and

Rohita and other extensive groups are called
Maina groups.

mewgider der wasqeeer sft
Premier fergarcian aT SATSTAT: 11 23 BU
Grahas (alligators) of four types deserve to
be recognised. Anuijyesthakas, —_Niskas,
Sigumiaras etc. were progenies of Mina.
aa aifearafer tanh aereanftorg
FMT rgiercererfor Sprarera aaT 1 VAI
Vrtta procreated manifoldly the deformities

of Kiarmas (tortoises) and other aquatic beings
of many norms as well as varieties of conches.

Tage foarfar sya sasreaat
tiart faarafir wget wa aU ee4t
Anuvrtta_ procreated the manifold

deformities of frogs
deformities of black
Sarbiikas (snails),! etc.

(Mandikas), the
antelopes, as also

1. V.S. Apte, p. 548.

an fataarafar arena a
wen pgfeenrafor uftgar Sma 38g I
And Parivrtté procreated the varieties of
oyster-shells (Suktis), cowries and likewise the
conch-shells.

airgeaartiin aetefatemnt a
gee fe eee: we TET: Waffen eon

The varieties of Kalakita (virulent venom)
and the water leeches were also produced by
her. This way the lineage of Rs consisting of
five branches has been recognised.

fretiigaarengdge (7) ayia
Paaafaerafor an Meat waft BAe
The vertebrates and the like in great number
hailed from a vast lineage. The moisture-born
ones are a part of them.
wahatragttent sreqereat fest:
TIEN: CHAR SYA ATT FATA VSAM
O Brahmanas! These insects are born of the
bodies of Svastipika. The producers are human
beings. The insects known as USanas are born
of dirt and sweat of men. So also the other
insects and groups of ants moving about in
rows.

(wan fora det a yer: HeaeeT: BAT:
wafeentararat yfareat dat 313001
And likewise on crest and Caila (cloth) the
lice get generated as the moisture-born ones.

And those who get birth on the earth heated by
the fire, the moon and the sun’s heat.

goes: War: Hae)
araferttforenon: Blea TATA: 11 3 o
The creatures born of moisture, were known
as (as progenies) of Trmamegha Prasikté, many
groups of ants and worms of feet enclosed as
such,

vigraefaarafir aterararcenfar a
seanigaget: Bam: UFar WOT: zo VW

=== PAGE 68 ===

64

Formed out of conches and stones, having
the conduct of nails (prickling tendencies), this
way and the like many moisture-born terrestrial
beings happened to be.

wn enigma feet wa a
Jar WANA SET TARTAN 3 0 311
Likewise from waters heated by heat (of the
Sun) and from waters and rain showers, and
many from the bodies of beasts, these creatures
get birth.
Wire: froren gereen fafregirar:|
atefear area wernt agherent: 13 o¥l
The following small creatures are born both
of water and of sweat— shrimps, ants, rodents,
Tittiras and Putrikas, blue and variegated
Alakas, small bees or white ants shags and
many normed breadth as such.

weet: BewEla wed aetafean
RIMAIA (ABM: HTM ATTTSAT: 1 3 0 &
Aquatic and moisture-born do get birth from
these creatures. The worms are bom in Kasa

(grass) and water, reed born ones, having many
feet.

fagen trend feo: ftatfier:1
seanfate wel Tet: EA: BANGIN
Sinthalas (i.e. quilled-ones), Romalas
(Hairy) and Picchalas (Slimy) are three kinds of
such insects. These and the like are the aquatic
and moisture-born ones.
afta meget SEY HATE
farsa: wera Geta: gow
Some creatures are born of clarified butter,
black gram and green gram. From Bilva

(Mammals), Jarnbi, Mango and Arecanut do
take birth some creatures.

Waa wera agers a
en werent Pisa vata fen gocu

Creatures are born of the dry hollows of
trees and also of green gram, jack fruits and rice

Vayu-Purdna

grains when exposed for a long time.
aenaisfa a are a fe tafe wen
aRRgUMfart fanfeerata an 308

From other things also preserved for a long
time, creatures are born. Germs and worms are
born of horses and other animals and even from
poison too.

age Flee quate a wren
were Bra fam: BB PIT TOTTI 3 Roll

From the cow-dung stored for many days,

emerge out the worms or insects, O Brahmanas!

White ants and other creatures are born of
wood.

UT gut Sra Fert Ateraferert: |
Te Yeates: ote: werefat Tg Veu
A variety of blue flies are born of trees in

due course. The creatures Putrikds (white ants)
are born of drying and withering things.

aaifetent vifteaa aut ara Gey
aay HT Sheen: YETTA 3 ez

From Satikas, hundred-normed = Kalika
Sarpas (the black snakes) get birth all over.
Scorpions and moisture-born creatures are
produced from dry cow-dung.

Cinat fe afgteag area seta: wa
meaieaay fafaen srosgelt Farge: 3 gg

From kine and buffaloes (or from bulls and
male buffaloes or bisons) get birth many worms
and beings such as fish, are born of eggs.

alftene rere war TEMA a
aenseant a Garnfin areiteRTART STAN 3 BS

Different species of leeches are born of eggs
such as Caivirakas and Gojas and many other
subtle creatures too.

aiiapeed: Gem yearend UI
AAAS He GSMA SETI ATET HB Ra UI

From pigeons and ospreys and the like, the
tiny ones Yikas (lice) get birth. That vary way

=== PAGE 69 ===

Chapter-69

65

one declared the fabulous animals like
octopuses (Sarabhas)!and the crabs (Kulirakas).

fararon ferarafor area aTaasTy)|
wrt gy aarafergfeawramendin 3 86 1

Various species of flies etc. take birth of
eggs. These are laid generally on the leavings of
food, water and sloughs.

ayer farearator sero wa
ova: were GPa: GATT 3 ROU
The different types of mosquitoes and black
bees are also born of eggs. The creatures known

as nits (Putrikas and Putrabhdsakas) are
produced from grass.

Ufrsereen ret: Wrest: viata:
wdahfearatit attieat vata fen a ret

The insects Manicchedas and Vydlas are
said to be born from foetus with no enveloping
membrane (potajas). Those having
transformations from Sataveri do get generation
from the Karisas (cow-dung cakes).

Vanfgrdead tr: detest TAM
Baraafedt VT Wer: BIAS 8H
This way and the like born from sweat in a
succinct norm has been enunciated by me. It is
to be remembered that these are born of their
actions in earlier births.
aes Faia Bra BAT STAT:
yang ater: dfachfadhafrer: aya: 0
Likewise there are other beings of Nairrta
Sattvas (born of Nirrti). They were known as a
result of change occasioned by disease
(Upasargajah)*, purified some as sprung from
the uterus and some known as bom of
procreation.

wrote: wa a fager quafas:!
fag athe gar: aaferzartafinet: 1 3 een

1. See SBI V.S. Apte, p. 67.
2. VS. Apte, p. 114.

Normally all Devas deserve to be (called) as
Autpattikas. Some of the gods are the
production of uterus and only some gods are
born without cause.

qererag aes frat aan ata a1
US PATTY OT SATAN VW
Tulalagha and Kola are the sons and Siva is
the daughter of Sarama>. They became known
as the ganas headed by Sarama.

vary vaca afar afore
Hott qureuela Yoo AYA: 3 V3 At

Kadrukas are Syama (dark-hued), Sabala (of
variegated-hued), Arjuna (white-coloured),
Harita (green-coloured), Krsna (black-hued),
Dhimraruna (smoke-coloured), — Tailalabus
(cotton-hued and gourd-hued).

grasa fas g wits reg

autor merat Tet ArT anit arate:

THAT FAT AUT: SANTA 3 YI

Surasi produced a hundred serpents with

nectar in their heads. Of Sarpas (snakes), the
king is Taksaka and of snakes is Vasuki. Thus
this group belonging to the family of
Krodhavasa is mostly of Tamasa quality.

Yeeens somentenrararetaraet
agrancafafererearer ara FasTART 3 BU

From the self-born of Pulaha, you may know
about the progeny (lit. creation) of Tamra.
Many well known daughters took birth from
Tamra.

Set areit cen wat geet Yat TM
aeons arat gat g dilaatt wetacit

aunt a wer a Maat Vere BE

They are— Syeni, Bhasi, Krauiici, Dhrtarastri
and Suki. Syeni was the spouse of Aruna who
gave birth to two excellent birds of great
strength and prowess. They were Sampati and
Jatayu.

3. @aypit - a Divine Bitch or a canine-normed lady.

=== PAGE 70 ===

66

Vayu-Purdga

duiremaga ante waa a
wage & Yat: arenperaftis: 1 3 Vo
SampAti produced a son and a daughter. Of
Jatayi, the sons were- crows, vultures and
Asvakarnins.

carat wrectaenfa aret saat ae yea
SAUTE a ag a aRaUeNA set (PEA) II

The spouses of Garutman were— Bhasi,
Kraufici, Suki, Dhrtarastri and Bhadra. Their
progenies are being enumerated.

yal Teed: Gargya ve uftgar
fat GyS da act ys TEATS Ve
fae p i ard ,

Wat Gay WAT TSSHT AAT 3 BOM

a g i) i U

yadtaferratea dat & ciyrfererts 33 en

Suki produced six well-known sons from
Garutman, viz. the sweet-faced Trigira, Bala,
Prstha of great valour, Trigankhanetra,
Sumukha of good form and the powerful
Surasa. The sons and grandsons of these
ruthless descendants of Garuda, the great-souled
serpent-eaters, were numbered fourteen

thousand. By procreation of sons and grandsons
their family became extensive.

arent aft Sent Carats) a aed BART
mrenfertiatact tape Twas 3 eH
afore a ves Ueaferat Fem

woleret Yeah TVPG AMSAT TN 3 8 3
ani ugigat tra a ude
weugargaaddtiad: Tanah: 33 yi
Stasrenf carenf mredetteraht:
STANGA: TYAT ANN Seles: BTHHA PET:
And the Jands where they spread

themselves, I shall dilate upon them in a serial
order. They are— Salmalidvipa! in entirety, the

1. African Archipelago pp. 29-30. Gepafarl: XV.2,

mountain Devakita, the lordly mountains
Manimén of thousand peaks, Parnamila,
Sukesa, Satasriga, Kauraja, Paficasikhara and
Hemakita. All these mountains were occupied
by the noble-souled descendants of Garuda.
They were brightened with ruby stones and they
produced gusts of violent winds. Bhasas (the
bird vulture), Uliikas (owls), crows and cocks
were the sons of Bhast.

TER: Heresies atten orafateT:)

ait ates SARAMTTar

Peacocks, Kalavirikas (sparrows), Kapotas

(doves), Lavas (quails) and Tittiris (partridges)
also were born of Bhasi. Kraufici created
Vardhinasa birds (black birds with red legs,
head and eyes). Syeni created Kuraras
(ospreys), Sdrasas (cranes) and Bakas.

seamreRts ashes wearer Fa Ue:

gaust a ees Hees ATH 3 Bn

aamarenigy fargreraistarcenthaerd

Uae fees GaUtAATN 3 BCU

She gave birth to other birds of prey also

like these. The beautiful lady Dhrtardstri created
Harhsas and Kalaharhsas, Cakravdkas and other
types of aquatic birds too. These were the birds
given birth to and their sons and grandsons were
infinite.

TESS SAAT: MrT STAT: TORT WaT:
BU Wa BMT SA: HUACTAAT 3 BH
The offsprings of Garuda have been
enumerated. Listen to the progeny of Ira. Ira
produced three daughters with lotus like eyes.
erential garot areat wa wat
aa dere aeeht a area Aft AM Aug rot
They were Lata, Valli and Virudha. They
are the mothers of all types of plants, trees and
creepers.

1987 edited by Dr. Mandana Mishra and Sampath
Narayana Ac&rya, Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan,
New Delhi.

=== PAGE 71 ===

Chapter-69

67

tet arenies ayergeaaar
erguernctsatectat & corsa 3 ¥ el
Lata produced Vanaspatis having
flowered plants grown over the shoals. She
herself gave birth to Vrksas or trees with
flowers and fruits.

Ba eet J Yes AFATGUTTT:|
Sea cane AMET WATE 3 ¥ VI
Valli creates Gulmas (bushes), grasses and
bamboos etc. of the same species. Virudha gave
birth to Virudhds (creepers) spreading all round.
The description of the race is concluded here.

Ut PATTY SST: MYATT: |
at Garey Wer afte utd TU awa
Thus the progenies of Kasyapa, static and
dynamic ones have been enumerated. Their
sons and grandsons are those by whom the
Universe gets replenished.

ofa Bilayer aiftdsaaat wan
uritatisd sarent: wares wentfta:
a et erat arate aetera feat: 3 wv

This way has been enunciated the
component of the sole single aspect of the
creation. This is the progeny creation of Marica
illustrated succinctly. O Brahmanas or Scholars!
It hardly become possible to illustrate it even in
hundreds of years.

anfefchigiten q aergiten fafa: eam
waviter | Yeantargiten Sy: BAT Isai

Aditi was of righteous, pious temperament.
Diti is remembered as strong-minded. Surabhi
was inclined towards the performance of
penance. Danu was of a deceitful nature.

(afer wagien 4 wrereretentert
ahagien cafeersa aagiten wy BAT)

Sage Gandhasila, was normally disposed to
mental concentration or studies, Gitasila, Arista
and Krodhasil4 became known as Khasa.

no-

weit aT ag: alee afro
N gasquesiton g carquartt Ta 3g
Kadri was of ruthless mind. Krauficl was
disposed towards learning. Ira had the receptive
capacity. Danayu was interested in taking food.

aresiten g farat ara & urgrenferth
ave Sean vera Tae: 3 wot

Vinaté was capable of bearing burdens.
Tamra was habituated to use nooses and strings.
These are the natures and temperaments of the
mothers of the worlds.

eta: yiterat Gage AAT AAU: |
TteaMiga atarntang aac

In duty, disposition, intellect, forbearance
and in power, they had the traits of qualities
Rajas, Sattva and Tamas. Hence they were both
righteous and unrighteous.

AGI AT: HVAT SAAT: NST: |

SaeTqu Tal BaTTATTT:

faye: upasta Wm: warater: 3x8

As peers to mothers were born the bossom-

born progeny of Kasyapa. They were— Devas,
Asuras, Gandharvas, Yaksas, Raksasas,
Pannagas, Pisacas, Pasus (animals), deer, birds
and the plants or vegetations.

Tera Ge wea
TARRY WAY TATIETY ATTA: BK oN

Because these were born of the daughters of
Daksa who were human beings, hence human
beings are the most excellent in all the
Manvantaras.

guidermiennt agar: weeny a
AAST ATT SF THT FTA SG

Human beings are the aspirants of Dharma
(spiritual good), Artha (material gains), Kama
(lust) and Moksa (renunciation). Therefore,
Suras and Asuras are bor as Adhah-srotas
(downward flow).

=== PAGE 72 ===

68

Vayu-Purdna

art arifagad aig WA:
sata aya: WeerTeTAaATAN 3 4 21
They take birth for the purpose of exigent
tasks, in human form again and again. This way
stands illustrated the origin of the lineage of the
ascetics (Tapasvins).

qooragan a weratearcat wT
aarer:fagreart qauiferafarorgn 3 4 311
arent fafert da sitet a wet
pfasteragmt gant sernes an

Wat areorat & sthrat Joe: 34 Sl
ageaa aay sienfergarae:!
srroaa aad ETAT 3 4 4 I

This meritorious story of Gods, Demons,
Gandharvas, Apsarasas, Yaksas, Raksasas,
Pisacas, Suparnas (i.e. Garudas), Uragas,
vertebrates or birds, Vyalas (pythons), the
crested ones (peacocks), medicinal herbs all
over, worms, insects, flying rodents, those that
are water-offsprings, Pasus (animals) and the
glorious Brahmanas, is conducive to longevity
and wealth. It is meritorious and beneficial. It is
fit to be heard of and engripped by one who is
devoid of malice and jealousy.

Ba g det Fate a: woaieni greet
aunt fe ata yeni fri ai ta a
vet ATH
To this lineage by dictum, who may go
through, in the consembly of the great-souled
Brahmanas and Vaidyas, he may attain to the
great benefit of progeny in amplitude, glory,

wealth and an ultimate emancipation after
death.

fa staergemt arginisqagUe ayattamaranf ae
FaafpeasEaTa: 1g 8

eK

=== PAGE 73 ===

68

Vayu-Purana

Nate Weaaarat seas:
Chapter 70

The description of the sovereignty of
Soma and others

Wa art
Te wag wey wyas weer
sfafearg walg wrewrg arg aN gt
ofafrenfiraety (2) dat yer: werafe:1
Aa: AT Tea STATTHAN B

Sita spoke- Thus when all mobile and
immobile creations had been created and
established by the noble-souled Kasyapa, he the
chief Prajapati, crowned (the chiefs of them) as
their Lords and began to assign them their
respective domains in due order.

fear creat a seraroti we: Fel
aaMi wat da ars WRswTAqN 31

In the kingdom of birds and creepers, of
planets along with grahas (comets), of sidereals
along with planets, of Yajfias i.e. sacrifices and
austerities, of Brahmanas, Ksatriyas and
Vaisyas, he consecrated Soma (the Moon).

geafa g fadat aarafgrat vf
oad da aed TSAI v1

Brhaspati was crowned as the lord of all the
descendants of Angiras by him. He made Kavya
as the ruler over the realm of Bhrgus.

anferarat yatta agar wraaq
Waa sat aA Tea ATAATTA GH

He crowned Visnu as the lord of Adityas;
Fire-god the lord of Vasus; Daksa the lord of
Prajapatis; and Vasava (i.e. Indra) the lord of
Maruts (gods).

earre Tar ward feferery
ARTaU F AAT SAU FEAT & 1

Of Daityas, the king he appointed was

Prahlada, the son of Diti. Narayana (he

=== PAGE 74 ===

Chapter-70

69

appointed) as overlord of Sadhyas and the bull-
bannered lord Siva, the king of Rudras.

fasfata o Ua emaramanssfesra

ai y seu WA Te daraat vf

qa Tae w wart area ant

He ordained Vipracitti as the king of

Danavas, of waters (he ordained) Varuna (as
king). He ordained Vaisravana (Kubera) as the
overlord! of Yaksas, Rakgsasas and terrestrial-
terrained ones as also of wealth.

aad fqn a a ad ose
wayatiorent faite genni ct
To Vaivasvata Yama, he consecrated to the
kingdom of the manes. And to Salapani (the
trident-bearer), GiriSa (the one sleeping on the
mountain) i.e. Siva, he consecrated as the
overlord of all the beings and goblins (Pisacas).
deri feneasi a ada ary
qTRralurafaata wa ferret aan en
Of mountains (he made) the overlord
Himavan (Himalaya) and Sagara (ocean) as the
(overlord) of streams. Then of Gandharvas, he
made the overlord Citraratha.

FATA Ua aa
WTA yet Mat a AGUTETAN gol
He made Uccaihgravas as the overlord of
A§vas (horses); he made Sardiila (tiger) as the
sovereign lord of deer and cows, and Govrsa

(the Bull) as the overlord of the four-footed
ones.

unos wae WHS Wadi ATA
TRI Ured dea yaar feoTA gent
And of all the birds or vertebrates, he
consecrated Garuda (as the overlord), the
excellent one of the flying ones. He made
Maruta the overload of scents and unembodied
beings.

1. fq may be UAE a misprint in verse 7, pada 2.

Vera U ay aera AT
edat efor oe arrears arafarqu ent
Of sound, sky and power, he made Vayu the
overlord, the foremost among the powerful
ones. Of all the reptiles, he made Sesa as the
overlord and of all the serpents, he made Vasuki
as the overlord.
aitguon wate armai aa waren
aerint aaa a Bet afer au
Srferarraarnt wstarefataeearLt 83 Ut
Taksaka was made the overlord of all the
creeping or crawling ones, serpents and reptiles,
Of ocean and rivers, of clouds and the
showering ones and of the distinct ones of the
Adityas, he consecrated the overlord as
Parjanya.
watathront a armed ada a
RAMS WAATaara ata an evn
vert @ faverot yeaiat a vdory
HOTA TATA
afineara aren aa Pact ATTN RGN
And likewise, he made Kamadeva as the
overlord of all the bevies of nymphs. He made
Sarhvatsara as the lord of Rtus (seasons),
months and groups of seasons, fortnights,
Vipaksas (the day of transition from one half of
a lunar month to another), Muhartas*, Parvans,
Kalas‘, Kasthas®, and Pramanas®, the movement
of the  solstices, Ganita (mathematical
calculations) and Yogas (astronomical divisions
of time or combinations of Stars).

2. MW, p. 973.

3. One of 48 minutes or 2 ghatis, Brhat Samhita Pt. 1,
p. 8 by M.R.K. Bhatta, MLBD, Delhi 1995, reprint
edition.

4. 10 Kala = | Nadika

5. 10 Kastha = Kala, Ibid.

6. Magnitudes, V.S. Apte, p. 366 or a measure in
general: length; breadth.

=== PAGE 75 ===

70

Vayu-Purana

warnfad wa: year fafin fey
Wd ATT Gat TH BSAA v6
Prajapati, verily, in the eastern quarter, the
terrestrial terrain, consecrated the well-known
son of Rajas, Sudhaman as the overlord.

vérreat (arai) fefin wen Tare: GRAAL
Sqr verar Tart Ase gon
In the western quarter, he crowned the great-

souled Ketuman, the unerring son of Rajas, the
king.

agerorafiatet aa secant ayy

afta yladt wat wag war

meme for ubeaTETAN Rou

To Vaivasvata Manu, he created as the
overlord of men.' The entire earth consisting of
seven continents along with the towns therein,
is being ruled righteously by them in their
respective areas.

wargasat yd genom asfrifem:1
JT sashes war X aafer Suge

In the Svayarnbhuva Manvantara (aeon),
they had been crowned by Brahma formerly.
Only those who become Manu are consecrated
as kings.

warttadiag wer dag wien:
wanes fared We WAT YA)
SAAT: WS WaT HARA oll

In the Manvantaras that have passed, these
kings had ruled and passed away. Then on the
arrival of another Manvantara, others become

consecrated. All the kings, past and future, are
proclaimed as Lords of Manvantaras.

Tags fifa ytd:
Sega fata get TT waTTATTU e tH

By these excellent men, Prthu was

I. Verse 18, pada 1, ATeTIeIAT has ATTA as

the correction. Misprint in the printed text.

consecrated in the Rajasiiya? (sacrifice). As
ordained by the Vedas, he was created king, the
prowessed one.

UA Yatey ATAU
WAta wet: wet aferat:n ee
wyatt Waa Pat Tor aT:
Wat tiratt wet weenie 23

The Lord of progenies or subjects, Kasyapa,
procreated these sons, for the purpose of the
continuity of the progeny. Thereafter, desirous
of his own lineage, he performed a severe
penance. He contemplated- “May sons, the
founders of the lineage, be born to me”.

ARI VETTART HPATRT TETAAT1
gantisst Yat varareuat weteratu Bvt

Of that great-souled Kasyapa while taking to
meditation, the incarnations of Brahma, the two
sons afterward assumed appearance, the greatly
prowessed ones.

arananfaada argat seranfeth
Seared ae ey HARTA RI

They were Vatsara and Asita,> both being

Brahmavadins. From Vatsara were born
Nidhruva and Raibhya of great reputes.

tera ben fata Agee fete
AT FRAT Ya: AATTA 2G Il

Raibhyas should be known as the
descendants of Raibhya. Now you learn about

2. Rajashya- A great sacrifice performed by a
Universal monarch (in which tributary Princes also
took part) at the time of by coronation as a mark of
his undisputed sovereignty. V.S. Apte, p. 467. MW,
p. 874.

3. Paurdnika Kosa, p. 40. Vayu Purana 7.25-27, on
Nidhruva, son of Vatsara, who was married in
Ekaparna, daughter of Himavan— a Brahmavidi as
Mantradrasta. He was father of Devula, the manasa-
putra of Ekaparnd and Vatsara.

Name of a son of Kasyapa. MW, p. 916.
Asita, MW, p. 120 a descendant of Kasyapa named
Devula Asita Devula.

=== PAGE 76 ===

Chapter-70

”

those of Nidhruva. Cyavana begot Sumedhas of
Sukanya.

“fgeet goa ust ore a Husa
afaratauntat gfe: arr 291
Nidhruva’s wife was the mother of
Kundapayins. Of Asita and Ekaparna, took birth
Brahmistha.
wufagcart aa: year Fact: YaST:
Fagen: pfteet taara: way APTN CH
Having listened to the words of Sandilya,
Devala became of great fame. Nidhruvas,
Sandilyas and Raibhyas, all these three, formed
the Kasyapa Gotra later.

arya far fac wenfeaat:1
Ugg wafteara wetearey wa: 1
sears ae BNL HTaAT ye
The Devas such as Vara (Indra) etc. are the
progenies of Devala. These subjects function in
Dvapara Yuga that occurs after eleven cycles of
the sets of four Yugas that have passed.

Tee a feaRreRa Wat aa: fae
WARTS STAT UTag AT FAT: 3 oN
And of Manasa, Risyanta was the son and

his son was Dama. Manasa being his heir and
successor was well known as Trnabindu.

TaTAS Tas Tita days zs
wel aan fafefaen wtonsfinsaaqn
Wee F Tafa sat WeTeTEAT 3 eH
In the beginning of the third Treta Yuga, he
became the king. His daughter Idivila was
unrivalled in her beauty. To Pulastya, that sage
king offered his girl.
afafifstecrat g fara: waved
er Wee Terrence: 1 3 BH
The sage Visravas was born of Idivila. His
four wives became the propagators of the
lineage of Pulastya.

Teegechacararseal feta

erat TaNAY @ aren & Faafo 3 3H
Brhaspati, the preceptor of the Devas, had a
famous daughter named Devavarnini. He
(Visravas) married that daughter.

Yotenet U areata ya uTewad: Fea
Sordi wifes: erat ara | OA WaT av
He married Puspotkata and Vaka, the two
daughters of Malyavan as well as Kaikasi, the
daughter of Malina. Now you hear about their
progenies.

Se daa wea yea taaftth
fear fatten gentile gaa an
TAR FT BVT STAT sey ANB 4H

Devavarnini gave birth to his eldest son
Vaisravana, endowed with divine mode of
living and having form of a Rsi (4rsa), a well-
known one being demoniacal as such and
equipped with Asura (Demoniacal) strength.

frag Grereart weit wey

apde afta veqrnnriactertn 3 &
Brag wag a fixe yfaviicor
aaderraad Gag AAATAT ZU

Wefaet at apt faaracet vem

fant qgasadtaa qHatisatate Tarn 3 ct

Having seen such a son having three feet,
highly stupendous figure, flatulent crest, a hefty
physique, eight-jaws, white beards, spike like
ears, ruddy-hue, short arms, excellent arms,
tawny-hue, highly hideous looking, conversant
with the knowledge of transformation or
hypnotism, and highly alert owing to the
affluence of understanding, having a form of

omnipresent norm, the father himself said—
“This is Kubera”.

qrarai feafergreaise writ seer
gat: SMaTATaT FA a BisfyAN yeu
The word ‘Ku’ is used to indicate contempt.
The body is mentioned by the word Bera.

Hence he is called Kubera because his body
was deformed.

=== PAGE 77 ===

2

Vayu-Purdna

meaigradisued wevanesat ga
WeTEaTU AT ATT wie faa yo It
Since he was the progeny of Visravas and he
appeared like Visravas, he will be known in the
world by the name Vaisravana.

eat Feisoafeyt TAT
Tau aera a at yori wm
fariouretqui sara eraegATA & Bit
From Rddhi, Kubera produced the well-
known son Nalakiibara. Kaikasi produced three

sons Ravana, Kumbhakarna and Vibhisana and
a daughter Sirpanakha.
vena eyeita: faget cama:
agentes wera wera: ny
Ravana had pike-like ears and ten necks. He
was tawny-complexioned, ruddy-haired, four-

footed, twenty-armed, stupendous-figured and
highly valiant one.

arassatal ast cfenita va a
TT Be Fa BIT T IT TUB
By breed or birth, he was collyrium-normed,

jawed-one, ruddy-necked, Rajasena like and
was endowed with great form and strength.

wmahaqery wedta wat:
Framterent: at WaOTATAORT Awe
He was true-intellected one, strong-bodied
one, surrounded by demons, instinctively
horrible and crue! and owing to his roaring, he
became (known) as Ravana.

faurafageanitea tat wa
ages (fir) watsa watee FTAA Sy

In the earlier birth, he happened to be king
Hiranyakasipu. That Raksasa king ruled for
thirteen cycles of four Yugas.

a: Ua aedt aalormrena: dere fests
frgaianfes denfatqearean % & ti

His span of life as reckoned by Brahmanas,
experts in counting, extended to five crores and

sixty-one lakhs of years.
wig waaeentin aut ¢ A Wau:
Raa a a Heat HATTA wot
For sixty lakhs of years, that Ravana created
a wakefulness of terrific norm among Devas
and Sages.
argh ugha WaoraTa: era)
We arent wrer wer: ereitfarargs ct
In the twenty-fourth Tretéyuga, owing to the
cessation of merits of his penance, he (Ravana)
met Rama, the son of Dagaratha, and attained to
doom along with his clan.
Tea: Wet Teg: STMT
qaencen: Tae GaN EEiiaat awe
Mahodara, Prahasta, Mahaparhsu and Khara

were the sons of Puspotkaté and Kumbhinasi
was her daughter.

fate quota fags were:
wa Caterer Sa arena: WAaT: BAT Yo
Trisiras, Diana, the Raksasa Vidyujjihva
and the daughter Asalika are known as the
progenies of Vaka.

eae aren: here Tere ae
arouse: wae SAAT STATING RH

This way, these cruel-actioned ones, are ten
Raksasa descendants of Pulastya lineage. All of
their followers were atrocious and difficult of
being approached by the Devas.

wa cera yatta:

wart a weet Wterecar Fa TATA BU
BUTTS TATOT ATO TeTATAT
Agere wearer y 301
aardetaet tat vere: Weahige:

Bat SF aT TTT UG BA

All of them had boons obtained and were
endowed with sons and grandsons. Aidavila
(Kubera) whose left side was yellowish in
colour and who was the descendant of Pulastya

=== PAGE 78 ===

Chapter-70

73

was the king of all these— all the Yaksas, all the
Raksasas belonging to the family of Pulastya,
the cruel Brahmaraksasas of Agastyas and
Vaisvamitras, disposed to study of Vedas, the
adherents to the performance of austerities and
holy rites. Then, there were the other Raksasas
called Yajiiamukhas.

aga gaat aaa fear:
Promecnoredat ara: alate: BAT ING KU
Yatudhanas, Brahmadhanas and Vartas are
the three groups of Raksasas, These are
Divacaras (i.e. day-rovers as such). There are
four groups of Nisdcaras (the night-roving
ones) as such remembered by the poets.
dierent tala arr: aatferearere
BAT: Wa Fat A HAA TATA: BHAT GA
Thus there are seven classes of Raksasas
(including the above three and the following
four groups)— Paulastyas, Nairrtas, Agastyas
and Kausikas.

aai et weenie care cafe
guen: fagenta wera WET 4 ot

Their natural features, | shall talk off. They
had circular eyes. They were yellowish in
colour. They were stupendous-figured ones and
bloated-bellied ones.

ween: Yanan SAT wa a
orelanitarensr qaqa yean: 114 ci

They were eight-jawed ones, pike-eared
ones, and erect-haired ones. Some were having
mouths wide and extending upto the ears. Some
had smoke-coloured upright hair and some had
Muiija grass like hair.

weriiat: Faas BeaHeT WagaT:|
AUTEN AA RTST TTT TATA: 114 3

Some had stout heads shedding white lustre.
Some were short-statured. Some were long-
armed ones. Some had copper-hued faces.
Some were long-tongued and long-lipped ones.
Some had long eyebrows and stout noses.

Feret sifecitar rattan fertioor:1
rere ferret ag fafisenn: 1 § ot
Some were blue-limbed ones, ruddy-necked
ones, hideous-eyed ones and _terrific-voiced
ones. Some were ugly-framed ones. They went
in groups.
wes TATA rere get:
areunfesrn: saat: reer: feretwenftiar: 11g eu
They were flatulent’ and projected-nosed
ones, stone-normed bodied ones and strong

ones. They had terrible kinsmen and generally
they were cruel, indulging in painful activities.

apusegeniier eratentear:|
fafa Un TATGATT: 1G VU

They were having crest jewels, chaplets or
garlands, armlets and ear-peduncles. They were
wearers of turbans and diadem, variegated-
constumed ones and  omamented-ones,
variegated wreathed-ones and unguented ones.

aaa: fafgrereer yeatees & Bat:
seraguaad werart gt: AAT
F UMRaet Fe Tat rae fe TANG BU

Some were cooked-food eaters and some
were meat-eaters. Some were known’ as man-
eaters. These attributes of Raksasas, common
among them, stands illustrated by the scholars.
The full extent of their strength is not known
because it is effected by Maya.

Yeeea YM: Yat: eS Saree eer:
gat: frye: aula sere aferrereT gh
anu: feat wafagearemm

Asa da UPAR AERA Hg GH

Pulaha’s sons were- the deer, all the fanged
beasts of prey, Bhiittas, Pisdcas, serpents, bees,
Hastins (elephants), Vanaras (monkeys),
Kinnaras, Mayiras (peacocks), Kimhpurusas and
all those others that moved all around, gone
subservient to Maya, wrath and the like.

=== PAGE 79 ===

74

Vayu-Purana

ara: ageferega saa
a wer ya: Oat at aot: Sfarer ot frre g
Childless Kratu became known in the
Vaivasvata Manvantara. He had neither a son

nor a grandson. He remained with fully
controlled splendour.

sade weeanit gitar wera:
We We Gaal avlasseafiaa:n gon
I shall now talk of the lineage of Atri, the

third Prajapati. His beautiful ten wives as such
were quite faithful ladies.

WW Yara & aurea Ea:
AAT VAT A Nal A Vetel Aetal AAT G Cl
aa Get wT Aaa A A Mae BAT

WM UATE Wes TART A A STNG SI
Bhadragva begot of Ghrtaci the Apsarasas,
ten daughters. They were~ Bhadra, Sadra,
Madra, Salada, Malada, Vela, Khala, these
seven and the remaining (three) were known as
Gocapala, Manarasa and Ratnakita, the tenth.

maa yg Tal AAT WaT: |
agrat saarere Std Bt agar 0 1
wautge et aa uaa feat we
maf cies farren Fa vafdatie gu

The creator of the lineage of Atri was
famous by the name of Prabhakara. He was
their husband, He begot of Bhadra, the well-
known son Soma (the Moon). When the sun
was struck by Svarbhanu (Rahu) and was
falling down towards the earth from the sky, the
whole world got enveloped in darkness by dusk.
At that time, it was he (the sage Atri) who
spread light everywhere whereby he got the
name Prabhakara.

afta asfeata ite: a vafae fearat:r
Tenders 7 ward feat we eM

“May it be all well of yours”, this was
spoken while sun was falling down and at the
instance of the great sage, (the sun) did not fall
on the earth.

anfaaarht tanfin aera WETTT: |
aratrrda yids wafia: (2) gn
Atri who was the performer of great penance
founded excellent Gotras. Among sacrifices, the
one called Atrighana is created as such by
Gods.

WA TRPRATARA TAP
Qe area Tee ATT TfETATAT: 119 ¥
From them he produced ten unnamed sons
similar in stamp to him. All the ten were
purified by austere penance.

aT Sf GT VAT STTCAT:|
aai faerraget fast grass n
They were the sages famous by the name
‘Svastyareyas.’ They were masters of Vedas.
Among them, two were of well-known repute
and Brahmisthas of great radiance.

SHAARS SBT gararereal TGA:
adr ga wearer Terenfettn
SaTTETA yeites Uhafirar: YAW 9g
Dattatreya was the eldest of the two and
Durvasas was his younger brother. The
youngest daughter was Abala who was
Brahmavadin (an expounder of Brahman). In
this connection, the Ancient Lore experts
(Pauranikas) quote this verse.
a: UF Wea PIRATATTACTEA
aad ag fait: Yeo: Weata wel
Those who are conversant with Puranas say
that Atri’s son Dattatreya has the body of
Visnu. The noble-souled one is free from sins
and tranquil in mind.

Wea Tarad simran: waa afar

Fay Teresa ToT TST:

Us Jot { a: Wa: war wala cI
There were born in the lineage of that one,

the four ones well-known on the earth. They

were- Syamas, Mudgalas, Balarakas and

=== PAGE 80 ===

Chapter-70 5

Gavisthiras', These four as the aspects of BIT WRT HUTA HT

human beings were well-known as_ highly a 5 BR 7

radiant ones. a a x) ears
Kali from Paragara produced

apamranesda wads wert wa
aR o aRaTEMfaaad WTA: 9 8 I
From Kasyapa Narada, Parvata and
Arundhati (were born). And from Arundhati
that were born, you may know.

ana afaerarent TTT
SARA TERA BAMATY ARE: 1 <0 ll
Narada offered Arundhati to Vasistha.

Owing to the curse of Daksa, the brilliant
Narada was compelled to be celibate.

qu targt afer area
SRI Ba ces ST WH Ot: TEU
afaperrer saree & WaT: et

Earlier in the war of the gods and demons,
star-spangled one as such, the whole world was
bedoomed by drought (Andvrsti) and Sakra was
aggrieved along with Suras. The intelligent
Vasistha sustained all the subjects by means of
his penance.

arated yornertteeigy were)
ares SHrerarare sravere tea FI ¢ 2H

Supplying the food, medicine, bulbous roots
and fruits, as also the medicinal herbs, he
resuscitated them out of pity, with the medical
treatment.

orearat afamed wifnqrreaefest:|
AI HAAS WTP 7 11 6 3
O Brahmanas, Vasistha produced in

Arundhati Sakti. Adrsyanti bore Paragara to
Sakti on the seashore.

1. THaeat — Paurdnika Koéa, p. 156. An Atreya sage, a
Mantrakrt and Gotrakara.
Fes - THAT verse 78, Paurdnika Kosa, p.
348.
Age - An Atreyavarnga, verse 78, Pauranika Kosa,
p. 426.

Krsnadvipayana, the holy (lord). And from
Dvaipayana, Suka, the one endowed with
merits, took birth at the Arani’.

seer a Weal wk gaa:
qferer wa: sq: Gott es TSS 4
an atin ta aererat sega

et TeereT Vet araTSST ANS GH
And take birth from Pivart of Suka, six
children. They were— Bhirisravas, Prabhu,
Sarhbhu, Krsna and Gaura (the five sons) and a
daughter Kirtimati by name. She was a
Yogamata of an austere vow. She was the
mother of Brahmadatta and the wife of
Sattvaguha.
aT; HOTT TTT FETT oT: AAfeTeAT: |
aan gratia aterla were:
URTETOTABY Va: SAT HATA ¢ 11
Svetas, Krsnas, Gauras, Syamas (azure-
hued), Dhimras (smoke-screened), Samilikas
(those having shapes of roots), Usmapas (the
drinkers of heat) and Darakas (the tearing ones)
were the eight groups of Nilas and Parasaras.
These eight of Parasaras, the great souled ones
were known as the Paksas (the partisans).
ad wed Froteeaftranferrare
afager aftsreat yareat waren
goiter cared saat SAAC CI
After this, you may know the progeny of
Indrapratima. There was born Kusiti of
Kapifijali-Ghrtaci of Vasistha, well known as
Indrapratima.

yet: Gear: He: YETTA:
SAY: GATT TAY STATA A

2. The sacrificial twig with which fire is produced by
attrition.

=== PAGE 81 ===

76

Vayu-Purana

Of the daughter of Prthu was born his son
who became known as Vasu, Upamanyu was
his son whose descendants were these
Upamanyus.

fierexorista pfogat & ufeqat:1
vantaradart afer are feat: i
Wi wen fast wat Taras Ugo

Of Mitravarunas, the descendants are
considered well known as Kundins of one
spiritual lineage. Others are well-known as
Vasisthas. These are the eleven Gotras of
Vasisthas.

sea TANT: Yat AAT we fase:
OR: YAeTIAT at ae: whafwaT: ng a

This way, these sons of Brahma, the

Manasas (mind-born ones) are well known.

They were greatly fortunate brothers and their
spiritual lineages have been established.

dietermedaratitronigner!
at yay wer wags wea
deaten vet wat ateta waftafirs ie 2H

They support the three worlds crowded by

groups of Devas and Sages. There sons and

grandsons are thousands and hundreds in

counting. By them the entire Earth is pervaded

as with the rays of the Sun.

fa strange args satgrerare sefteqaAtts
ATG AePATATSEATAT: 19 0 It

eK

=== PAGE 82 ===

76

Vayu-Purana

Nae AAAS EAT:
Chapter 71
The Procedure of Sraddha for Pitrs
Wrage aererer Grea fafeaTary:1
Bat uftomeg: area fea gH

Having heard this narration of Sita, the
knower of Atman, the Brahmanas, subsequently
asked him as follows.

ae fattagen wart serait g am
arettererraont gehen Serene 2 tt
Sarnsapayana spoke- How did the second
time was born Bhavani who was Sati earlier?
She was Daksayani at first. How did she
become Uma?
Tart figararat ararara Frere
& da fara Aer tar g aaa
The king of mountains begot her of Mena,
the daughter of Pitrs. Who were these Pitrs
(manes), whose Manast (the mind-born
daughter) was Mena?

taeda det det a ant gam

Teun aan dea aa MT PHATATN YI

Tet da aftaer vatat wer wa

yada wanes sod ae WaT GI

(Who are the Pitrs) whose grandson was

Mainéka and whose grand-daughters were
Uma, Ekapama, Ekapatala and Ganga, the
excellent among all rivers and the ancestral
domain of all? As enunciated by me earlier, you
may know that all (again).

& UG fara abet aa a aT
aigirants ag 3 ores a oi fate n
Whose these Pitrs or manes are and where
do they abide again? I am eager to hear these.
May it be all well with you. I also want to know
the absolute rite of obsequial performances
(Sraddha).
as & oye: Sat eet a fureeq a
fare: eT: I VAT: fee: No
The sons of whom were they called and
whose fathers they happened to be? How did
Pitrs or fathers take birth? Whose sons were
they and what souled-ones they were?

wait g frets & tararafe tat:
wet & ages Ft aga

=== PAGE 83 ===

Chapter-71

77

wareeerenta: arg stone & fa en
Are there other Pitaras who are deities unto
the gods in heaven? This way, do I desire to
learn about the excellent generation of the Pitrs
and how the Sraddha performed by us as per
injunctions gratifies Pitrs or manes.

aed 4 qed aa fe ari a
wait fe By ada fat aH J Hen

What is considered as the reason for their
invisibility. What type of Pitaras reside in
heaven and what types reside in hell?

afirderea frat fager fart vem
fag: frend Ser fry fewsy AAAI Roll
aaa srgifa taf eet teak & fo

weet Pen Set ATH: Het GAH Ve
Which Sraddhas (obsequial rites) deserve to
be offered to Pitrs? And how do these Sraddhas
reach Pitrs- the Sraddhas that are offered
uttering the names of father, father’s father and
great grand-grandfather against the three rice-
balls (Pindas)? And how do they (Pitrs) became
capable to offer the suit, stationed in hell?

& ae feat ae art at A:
ar aft faeait aarti fe a: ger eet

Who then are the Pitaras here? And whom
do we offer sacrificial rites? The gods even
offer sacrificial rites to the Pitrs. This has been
heard by us.

Unfeeate & stg faattor aga
waar & agaraprefan e311

O you highly learned one! We wish to know
this all in detail. The specific etymological
meaning, you deserve to explain before us.

watt | aa: grat qareradaeary
ATTA TITGS UOTE AT AA ev
Having listened to the words of the sages,
Sita, a conceiver of the real sense (of the
words), dilated upon in accordance with the
questions and the desire in the minds of the
sages.

WW sara
oe at autfirentt aang aera
Wey Sree eet Saga gg
Sita spoke- Here shall I dilate upon
(regarding Sraddhas) as per intelligence and as

per scriptural evidence. In every Manvantara,
Pitaras do take birth as the sons of Devas.

aaaarnt Set: PET ATG FI
a: ard Gusdter: fart Asaty au
abe wind 3 J ars aearfey Fare eg
In the past and the future Manvantaras, they
are respectively the eldest and the youngest as
per serial order. I shall precisely recount the
Pitaras who have gone in the earlier

Manvantaras along with the gods and who exist
at present.

arg Sei Tye arg wea
Sarge Fen aaertats Sf Gas
TART Targa Tenet: gout
A Sraddha rite of the human beings is what
is offered with devotion. Brahma created gods
who were not desiring to offer sacrifices as

such. Desirous of a result, having created
themselves they took birth once again.

& Wea FeO Yet AEeAT fer
7 fafafgaia vat cet DARA Von
They were cursed by Brahma in this
manner- “Having lost consciousness, you will

all become devoid of sense.” They did not know
anything. This way the people became deluded.

a ye: wo: wa area eH faa
APS Mart res aTy: Ve

They again prostrated as such supplicated!
before Pitamaha i.e. Brahma. For the grace
endowment of people, once again the Lord
spoke out.

1, 3: Wom: wa arate a faaTaey - has aTaPT as
an example of Parasmaipada usage for Atmenepada
in verse 19.

=== PAGE 84 ===

78

Vayu-Purana

wets aed a cafirat fe a: aa:
Yararafigesad wat aTTATERM 2 0 tt
“Perform an expiation for the transgression

which has been committed. Consult your sons
and then you will attain enlightenment.”

adet targaiga srafverafrgara: 1
BRT Meee erfererear feat Fier: 2 gu
Then desirous of taking recourse to

expiation, Devas controlled themselves duly
and asked their own sons mutually.

Tere Frama: werergeA
wratarnft cat area ata Guz
They (sons) being self-controlled ones,
conversant with real Dharma, explained to them
the various modes of expiations— by speech,
mind and actions.

a Vargas crenin featea:1
wa & feetisench 3 ae wirattfere:
otart a ares a aT a: METAR BBM

Pleased as such, they, the denizens of divine
regions having consciousness regained, spoke to
the sons— “You are our fathers, (by whom) we
have been awakened. What boon should be
granted- virtue, knowledge or love?”

remsdtiqran 4 aarater:1
TATA FORA FT TSA 2X
Then to them spoke out Brahma- “You
verily, are truth-speaking ones. Therefore, what

has been told by you, shall be so and not
otherwise.

se a faatiseratife 4 ara war:

farted afeeata teaiisa deat at 24H

This is what is uttered by you- your own

sons have been mentioned by you as your Pitrs.
They will be your Pitrs. Let this boon be given
to them.”

Sta Seat Yat eT: WeAABA:|
Yat: fageanrag: gard feat: TA Bg It

By that very words of Brahma, Paramesthin,
the sons (Pitrs) became fathers (of Devas) and
real fathers (Devas) became sons.

Tend fir: gar: faged ag aE
ud oe fiqeargas free
MIEN Ysen frprfaggan yon

Hence it is declared that the sons (of Devas)
are Pitrs and the status of Pitr-hood is
proclaimed about them. This way having
remembered fathers as the sons and the sons as
fathers, once again spoke out Brahma to the
fathers for the development of their own selves.

a after fiend frat aiferatteath
Tare amauta wet wafer TET ATC

“If any one will perform Sraddha (obsequial
tite) without worshipping Pitrs, Raksasas’ and
Danavas shall obtain the fruit of that.

grannies fret: dare
mea Sefer FreagTstt 8 8

Propitiated and developed by you all by
means of Sraddhas, the Pitaras shall increase
invariably the indestructible Soma.

mraventaa: drt cterrarataeatin
pret wadaed apa AgATN 3 ot

Strengthened and developed by means of
Sraddha, Soma shall develop the people and the
entire world, along with forests and mountains
inhabited all over by mobile and immobile
beings.

orga years & after ara:
wer: Ufe wanda areafa feet: Tang gu

Desirous of virility, whosoever (men) shall
perform the Sraddhas, the Pitaras offer virility
and progeny always unto them.

org eq: vereaha APowsraTaa: |
aaa ain fat: witaTTETN
Ferareratrerta aged Ft KATRIN

Those (Pitrs) to whom they (the performers
of Sraddha) offer three balls of rice (Pindas)

=== PAGE 85 ===

Chapter-71

79

mentioning their names and Gotra up to great-
grandfather, they (Pitrs) who are present
(everywhere), strengthen and develop their
progeny by that offering of Sraddha.”

Tana Fat Vs GeO AAT
Wada fag are 77:33 01
This way has been declared by Brahmi, the
Paramesthin, earlier. It is by their grace that—
Dana (charity), Adhyayana (study) and Tapas
(penance) fructify.
YW: frat at a dea
gee feat Sar Fares fer: Ya
saat Ba Saws fees ange
These fathers are the disseminators of
knowledge unto you, there is no doubt in it.
This way, these fathers are gods and gods are
the fathers. Devas and Pitrs are reciprocally
Pitrs.
Cramer: sar yer fafearny:|
Wey Aa Ya: Yel THATS AT 34 1
Having heard these words of Sita,

possessing _ self-knowledge, the sages
questioned once again to Sita.

ead Sy:
frat 4 fagron: eferare a 7:1
ada Samer Sarat MeN 3G
The Sages spoke— How many are the groups
of these Pitrs and in what time these ganas
(groups) happened to be the Deva Pravaras (The

permanent gods), the Soma augmentors of the
Devas?

QW sara

Wraise ent fagertageT
vig: Ure aed fit & geeaferqu gon
Sate spoke—I shall talk of the most excellent
creation of Pitaras. What Sathyu enquired
earlier to his father Brhaspati, this is the same
question.

qeahygae adaraaen
WF: afer wet umes farenFaa ng ci
As Brhaspati, an expert in the import of all
the leamings, was sitting closer, the son Sarhyu
endowed with discipline, put this question.

& Ue feat am feet: HT TAT
BRAT: seh at faged MTT: Ug a

“Who are these Pitrs? What are their names?
How these ones were born and how did they
attain to the status of Pitaras?

warred fart we aasgerd Feat:
fray wat ate sregyal WEATTHs oN

On what account, the Pitaras are worshipped
at the outset in every sacrifice? All the holy

activities of noble souls begin with the
performance of Sraddhas.

are aratht Sanh fa a od wera
ay award org alg a aalg ans

Unto whom these obsequial rites are to be
offered? What is the great fruit of such
offering? In which of the holy places and sacred
rivers does the Sraddha performance yield ever-
lasting benefit?

Sy 8 wdarctfa org seat fasta
aay are wears fart: arqedauy 2H

What are those holy centres in which the
excellent Brahmanas perform obsequial rite to
obtain all benefits? What is the proper time for
Sraddha? What is the procedure to be followed?

wafeanta wafer carta
aTenguayedar aa dleret Wary 3

I do desire to understand all these in details
as per proper sequence, O adorable one.”

gefatee wart ost weraft:1
SAE STIS we WeAfaat AT ww
Brhaspati, quite suitably questioned as such,
being of great intellect, being the excellent one

among those knowing questions, replied in a
sequential order to all the questions.

=== PAGE 86 ===

80 Vayu-Purana
Femhreana qaventa amit creraeis eer:
wafrent & aa att a vita BrrenfayT AGE TROT ATAFTTI & V1

farts cared weit mE Sy
Brhaspati spoke- O dear one! | shall dilate
upon whatever you question me modestly and
as per judicious ardour, the deep-rooted
questions of an excellent order.
attoattat yferct aernfin fer
qahraaat da casérerata avg
a aYGea aa Tara oT
Wea Bat TA MIM WOH AT Yell
At the time when there exist no heaven or
sky, no intermediary space, no earth, no stars,
no sidereals and likewise no quarters, no sun, no
moon, and likewise no day and no night, O
dear, the whole Universe was enveloped by
gloom. Brahma alone there then took to a
penance of highest order difficult to be
performed by others.

yiganadiqga: fart sear
wads gent waMfaet STN

Sarnyu then spoke to his father once again
who was the most excellent among the knowers
of Brahman, who always performed holy
ablutions in the form of rites and who was the
most excellent of all knowers of perfect
knowledge.

aitgyt Way TETTRAT META:
Wael Fete Feels TUS Sil
“What sort of austerity did Prajapati, the
Lord of all beings performed?” This way
questioned, Brhaspati, the highly radiant one,
spoke to him.
weet awat gta
ATS TARTS HTTATEAATN § o Nt
Of all the austerities, Yukti (Yoga) austerity

is the foremost. Meditating on it, the lord then
created all the lokas by means of that Yoga.

The knowledges of the past and future, the
entire lokas and Vedas in entirety were created
after practising Yoga by Brahma, by means of
his Yogic concentration.

Stan: Bieter ar oa faghea arent:
& auret ofa wan samt fafa Faas 4 UH

The lokas, the heaven are named Samtdnikas
where exist the brilliant deities of the Devas
well-known as Vairdjas.

ane are ge: Wate set wy:
Raga TE Ai Gera MATTAN 4 BN
By mental concentration and penance
equipped as such, quite earlier the lord Brahma
then created the gods having taken to the
application of Yoga of pristine order.
anfegar sft wae mereaT: wee:
WARTIME: THM SATAY SU
They are well known as Adidevas. They are
highly spirited and of great radiance. They are
granter of all desires and worthy of being
adored by Devas, Danavas and Manavas
(human beings).

Rat wer TaTENAT Toca AT: |
aaa TTR GTN GG

Of those are well-proclaimed the seven
groups, adored in the triad of worlds. Three of
them are Amurtis (non-corporeal form) and four
are of corporeal form.

serra ada orergta
RATER UR: MTT TI Gl

The three groups which have corporeal form
are stationed above. The four Suksmamiirtis
(having subtle forms) are stationed beneath
them.

wat Fareed ghia cage
we adfe 3 wfereea: whereas

=== PAGE 87 ===

Chapter-71

81

gia dgem cert twa: Tnyon
Thereafter, the gods, and thereafter this earth
and this tradition of populace in this world do
occur as such and from there ensued the
provenance of Parjanya. By them there occurs
the rainfall and by rainfall the generation of
men again.

sara & wend oat a arta:
SIRS ficperencceart GATTI oH

Since they develop and strengthen the moon
and the food-grains and make them flourish by
means of Yogic power, they called them the
Pitrs of the lokas, the most excellent ones in the
world.

Twat: Tare: Wana: |
aetesarter Fafarer: yiterarfetat: 114 @ 01

Having agility of mind, the consumers of
Svadhd, having equipment for all the lusts,
devoid of greed, infatuation and fear, they are
determined as such having immunity from grief.

Wa ant vias wreat rargavar
fee: Yuan wert ferment ray go
These having taken leave of mental
concentration, attained to good-looking lokas.
They become divine ones, sacred ones, great-
souled ones and sinless ones thereby.
aat Praeara at Teena:
siren Grate Wet tara 1g gil
Then at the end of a thousand of Yugas, they
do take birth as Brahmavadins. Having received
the Yogic power once again, they attain
emancipation in a bodiless state.

SRT UT TETaPTaAA aT
ayaRgeha TH aftfergeta ag 2

Having given up the apparent and the
inapparent, and by the force of Mahayoga, they
perish in the sky like a meteor, as also like a
lambent streak of lightning.

sages Seas weraeTaey

Frreatareaat ae afta: art weg 31

Having taken leave of all the bodies as
(requisites) or physical assets by the force of
Mahayoga, they attain to namelessness like
streams sinking within the ocean.

fran yerefeaht gata Frag:
aire feet arreefat: ng it
Engaged everyday in holy rites and the
worship of preceptors, Pitrs develop their Yogic
power and satisfy all.

org Stat: Ga: ate feat arene: -
rerrate aris sciet a4 strafing 41

Propitiated in Sraddha again, the Pitaras
(manes) nourish Soma (Moon) making use of
their Yogic power Yoga whereby the three
worlds become revived.

werregr gi Sanh athe aed: wan
faqui fe aet art arrears: wena § G11
Therefore, the obsequial rites (Sraddhas)
deserve to be offered invariably with effort unto
the Yogins. The strength of Pitrs (manes) is
Yoga wherefrom emanates Soma.

wear faurd ieteraerra
wag ainfaaita: wales Tay gH
To thousands of Brahmanas or as many as
come along, one may feed. A single knower of
Yoga gratified as such, becomes fit for all. That
you may hear.
TAT WEA TAA VA Tt
aerareior Taye TAA Wea TATA G Cl
What is taken in by a thousand invited
Kalpitas (ordinary Brahmanas), or by a hundred
Sndtakas (graduated Brahmanas), or by one
Yogacarya (master of Yoga) guards one against
mighty fears.

Yeu TEA ATA
aerniasenr shit sar fafrewang <i

By a thousand of householders, by a
hundred of forest rovers, and by a thousand of

=== PAGE 88 ===

82

Vayu-Purana

celibates (Brahmacarins), a solitary Yogin

retains distinction.
aufeaeat at facnat ar daitorereetsfa at
ARE arti ee arrears waTafT: 901)

An atheist or one having invidious acts, a
person of mixed caste or even a thief, cannot
have redemption from anything else, except by
offering a charity unto those who have Yogic
power. This way spoke Prajapati.

fara gaht qapta ada:
wat asa ar dat entrt siafeeafen gn

The Pitrs or Pitaras of that one get satisfied
like the husbandmen (farmers) or agriculturists
by a timely rainfall, even if his son or grandson
feeds a Yogic meditator.

set enti dietegerntiai
TeeSE yeerahe sTAGI0 2

In the event of non-availability of meditating
mendicants, one should feed two celibates. And
in the event of non-availability of that one also,
one may feed a householder not much
engrossed in worldly affairs.

afeameenares arquar: yet WaT:
arent werent TAMA 0 3

He who stand on one leg, an air-subsister

one for a hundred years, he is the Dhyanayogi

of the highest order. This is the ordainment of
Brahma.

fot fe faretor ata yarcitfirarg
aera ferrari Te HATALCT: 119 ¥ 11

The Siddhas do promenade on this Earth in
the guise of Vipras (Brahmanas). On that
account, one should welcome an in-coming
guest with palms joined in reverence.

Wteareiaas ay aera a
saf arrertat ar ater: wan
AaRSt AS aT THOT TITAN GI

One may adore him with the materials of
worship and feet-washing waters. He should
offer him place of residence and food. To the

land having ends as oceans, the gods
Yogesvaras perennially promenade along by
assuming many forms, guarding the progenies
by way of duty.
weeds eM fame at:
verift weet wet Sat wa agi
Therefore, every man should offer charity

unto a Brahmana guest. I shall talk of those
charities and their fruits.

PATA THAT
Wuetaaean aaa anol

Refuge in a Yogin is far better than
thousands of horse-sacrifices, hundreds of
Rajasitya sacrifices and thousands of
Pundarikas sacrifices.

Se US TOT: Ses: feRoTaerTary
werea aera Raat ws MT: WaMVcn
The first of those seven groups of Pitrs or
Pitaras of mighty prowess, has been recounted.
This group exists always with the conception of
Time.

on wef seeenft walPagrorga:|
date dat da areata UAT <I
Henceforth, I shall talk of all the Pitrs and
Ganas once again as also the static norm of the

continuity of progenies and also their
conception as per serial order.
gfe strergnt ariké siigrne arenfrarcsit
ATTA ATSEATS: 1119 QU
kee

=== PAGE 89 ===

82

Vayu-Purana

user faereaferaatserra: 1
Chapter 72
The observation on the groups of Pitrs
aa sara
ae teraat Ser: eat Fagor: war:
wean yfdreaey TTRTOTATAT:
aut cienferrt g aitfaet Felten en

=== PAGE 90 ===

Chapter-72

83

Sita spoke— Seven superior most Ganas or
groups of Pitrs endowed with intellect or
wisdom were known as such in the Svarga
(Heaven). Four of them are in corporeal form
and three of those in non-corporeal norm. You
may learn as I shall recount their creative
activity in the world.

aa gieancetat dfenda & aya:
enighterraat 3 ta: TOT TOT Rt
Those that were their daughters and those
that were the daughter’s sons, those that bear
Dharmic bodies and forms, and whose three
ganas are of highest order, (I shall describe
them).

arent cierto dat aed eared:
iter fararat aren aa faeha rT 3 1
The names as well as the generation of all
those, I shall talk of in brief. The disembodied
groups of Pitrs, the sons of Prajapati, abide in
the shining worlds named Virajasa.
ania: fagron: yard 4 yaaa:
farsrenr fast: Ser deen gfe Faget:
we a yam: aedt aueari waitfdasu xi
The non-corporeal normed groups of Pitrs
(manes), were the sons verily of Prajapati. The
excellent Brahmanas of Virajasa were well-

known as Vairajas. This verily, the first group
of Vairajas is declared as such.

tai g are aan Tar aH arfe
Ueht fenad: Yet wea Bar FAT
Their fair-complexioned mind-born daughter
is by name Mend, the wife of the great

mountain Himavan. From her, the son Mainaka
was born.

aa: aatafier: ata!
Waa: WAL: YOR: BATTS SHASTA G Ml
Born as a bearer of all the medicinal herbs,
having self as endowed with all the gems and
the mountains, the great one happened to be his
son Kraufica.

fra: aang Farat samara vere!
auntienant a qetartermreemuio tt

The king of mountains procreated three
daughters of Mena, viz. Apama, Ekaparna and
the third Ekapatala.

anf & wrt | sifacheat TISAI
aetna q ween
wad atagentin gat Gaara ct

Two of them had abodes, but Apama
performed penance for a hundred thousands
years difficult of being performed even by
Devas (gods) and Danavas (demons), without
an abode. Ekaparna had a Nyagrodha tree as her
abode and Ekapatala had trumpet flower tree as
her abode.

orertienndfa weanaulf ware
Weerta da facereeurecm 8

The diet of Ekaparna was a single leaf and
Ekapatala diet was a single trumpet flower.
Wor wot wee & ote & wearmg:1
Wert aa roan at ata HATTA Qo
On the completion of two thousands years,
the two took food once. One of them (Aparna)

remained without taking food. To her, the
mother replied.

Freaait gata mat Sea gaat

Hr water Tat Sat rar garcenfeoitn eeu

Safa ar wean fag cieag faye

wafer aver Aare Freee antor BTU gz I

The distressed mother out of affection,

aggrieved her with the words~ “O daughter! Do
not”. Since she was addressed by her mother in
this manner, the blessed gentle lady performing
the difficult penance became famous as “Uma”.
“All right”, this way by name that got
etymologised by signification being the
auspicious one.

Tag feats waRereatet WT
Uarat ae eet araqufinifeeafan 93 1

=== PAGE 91 ===

84

Vayu-Puraga

This world having three virgins shall
continue perennially. Feeling proud by the
penance of these ones, the earth shall sustain
itself.

wa: gikren: Baiferat arracnfam:1
Banat: GaeMe: wakes feacateat:u ge

All those three endowed with the power of
Yoga, sustain their bodies by means of their
penance. All those Devis or Goddesses of
highly mighty fortunes possessed steady youth.

vals gaat: waidatetaa:
amr arei after a Set a arate gait

All of them were expounders of Brahman
and all having continence observed (i.e.
freedom from sexual intercourse). Uma was the

greatest of all those, being the seniormost and
the excellent girl of the fairest complexion.

werahractitar wera
STUART: Yat RAH RE tt
Endowed with the strength of great Yoga,
she presented herself to Mahadeva (as his
spouse). Her adopted son was UsSanas, the son
of Bhrgu.

afaaetennalt ¢ ueit arat qeaem
eat fenaer wet atrrarata ean
act BPA A Y ates AG Faq gw

Of Asita, Ekaparna happened to be the wife.
She was chaste one and strong-vowed one. She
was given to that Yogacarya, the wise one, by
the Himavan. She gave birth to the menta! son
Devala who was a great Brahmistha (engrossed
in meditation on Brahman).

ar darat puriton yatat Aenareem
WS pater Sriworgufera ec
And the third one that happened to be of

these Kumaris, the Ekapatala, she presented
herself to Jaigisavya, the son of Satasilaka,

wente gfetadt wat garecthsin
saa Ft WENT: Hea fara: YAU gst

His sons Sankha and Likhita are
remembered as the two sons not born of the
womb. This way, these ones, the greatly
fortunate ones, were the daughters of Himavan,
the auspicious ones.

eq UT Y WaT Tau faite
araanifarratrearyercarea 2 0 tl

Rudrani (Uma) was the best among them.
She attained distinction by her merits. The

mutual devotion of Uma and Sankara (was
ideal).

ved Taretaieat pig: feat Gren

anat dgaeneraetrgavireort

wet: Bemrgrftaegur Hera SeeTATET NR

Having realised the union of those two clung

on as such, the killer of Vrtra (i.e. Indra),
became apprehensive. Havyavahana (Fire-god)
was sent near them by Indra who was afraid of

the birth of a child from them engaged in sexual
intercourse.

ort tafaet a carat BATE
Waa We Ua we Ft Stet fared aan Va
“OQ Fire-god! Create hindrance in the
physical union of these two. Since you are such

as having reach everywhere (lit. all the spots),
there can not be any blame on you.”

erkerpt gaan afer a ar FT
saree TEREST YR yet fraser eau

When he was told thus, Fire-god acted in the
same way. Having left the body of Uma, the
semen virile was released on the ground (by
Siva).

wat ofan en weishia: wig
3 creat afg dergremn fir asi

Then by the irate Devi (i.e. Uma) was cursed
Agni, O Sarhsapayana! Owing to wrath, she
spoke bitter words to Fire-god thus.

warrafagarat tafaet gag
prares adet worante suf 240

=== PAGE 92 ===

Chapter-72

85

“O Fire! On what account on my having
remained unsatiated, you have created an
obstacle in the physical union, a deed not
required to be done as such. On that account
you stand (disdained) as a wicked-minded one.

aed fat wi Oy Ys FETT
anf et oreedater F eUsAOT 2G II

Since the terrific semen virile of great
radiance of Rudra has not been retained in my
womb, you should hold the foetus yourself.
This verily, constitutes an imprecative
punishment.”

7B Megs ser BAVA:
agerirorant area & fest: Rot

That Fire-god having foetus developed
within by Rudrani out of wrath of a curse,

retained that foetus, for good many years, O
Brahmanas.

a TaITAssE gaat Biegay
graraftaet % avbrrcurearongtt 3 61
He having gone over to Ganga, spoke out-
“O great river, may this be heard. Excessive
distress is caused to me by the retention of the
foetus.

Rigarifint mind arr ert
Horaerel Wel a weeta afarafan 2 et

O stream! For the sake of my interest and
welfare, you may bear this foetus. Due to my
grace, this trouble of yours shall go mitigated”.

WAKA Fal A F Uae erat
orf area Fear TATATU 3 ot
“All right”, this way having spoken, then

that great stream became very pleased and bore
that foetus by a radiating radiance.

asta Graton vent feerarr wert
let WHE FATS TMATTUTATT 3 att

That great stream even getting aggrieved,
owing to trouble, for an ample amount of time

engaged herself in bearing that foetus.

aan afer me gait fener: YA

yd eraui are fet gferrorer

wat argued Cermaftrarrern 3

By that one, that foetus was sustained in the

auspicious middle portion of Himavan. There is
an auspicious forest of reeds having a
variegated tree of florescence. And there, she
released her foetus, as a fire-smouldering one.

CARATS STATS HOTT: |
SAA APTAERTST ETAT: MATTE 3 3
Rudragni, the son of Gariga, took birth there,
having a ruddy radiance, a peer to sun, highly
refulgent and endowed with strength or energy
of hundreds of suns.

afererat werent Eat aTeataa
faurrartrenyt watafafafteargarn 3 xi
When the son of Jahnavi (ie. Ganga) of
great fortune was born, then the sky was
covered with aerial vehicles being, as if by
birds.

Raggy Agua AAT:
Wye: yo a Ga: fegaronn ay
The divine trumpets sounded forth sweet
notes and the sky-roving Siddhas and Caranas
showered forth rain of flowers.

. aperdqeny waves a 8

ent faenent: fag: faamda way aan
The chief Gandharvas, Yaksas,
Vidyadharas, Siddhas and all the Kinnaras, sang
forth everywhere.
TEMES Te Waa: |
TATA VTA
TATAUT BATA SRASATRAAT: 11 39
Thousands of Mahanagas (great serpents)
and the birds of exquisite norm, waited upon the
greatly fortunate one or great-souled one,
Agneya, the son of Sankara. By his influence
were killed Daityas, Danavas and Raksasas.

=== PAGE 93 ===

86

Vayu-Purana

ae Tafturaiirreaanadaa:|
oftavaranfager ast aera ci
Even at the very outset, the son of Agni was
observed by the wives of Satparsis, barring
aside Arundhati who had come there for their
ablutions.

aif: @ arehiaet Ug: afega: wy:
feared cantata agin sen
By all those, the master Raudra, a veritable
peer to the rising sun, was surrounded as such,

holding affection as real mothers, being of
highly individual norm, the Matrs (mothers).

rcrckeaite fegyateatga:1
TOS AGATA MT ETAT: Yo tt

Simultaneously with a view to see all those
goddesses, out of affection for them, the son of
Jahnavi (Ganga), the illustrious one of great
radiance, created six faces.

SPRATT:
OF Fea CATT Fatt v Ul
The illustrious one, having eyes like the
lotus petals, a peer to the young sun, by whom

having taken birth the turbulence of lokas, was
created by his lustre.

aa aaa Heat Farnrafewra:|

wahen araToEeeare: WATTS NS VU
The groups of Danavas who could not brook
Devas, had a purge (Skandita) when the great
deity was born. On that account, that prowessed
one became known as Skanda.

afaariing wend afta: a yea:
aaifeicae St CUTAN QTTSA: Nl 311

Because the pristine one, the killer of
Asuras, had been nourished by the Krttikas, he
became famous as Kartikeya.

Fee sevaterarenpeMeay
qenrfgtrin aa wankexcarat vst

On the yawing forth of that enemy of Deity,
his Sakti* (spear) called Aparajita came out of

his mouth, blazing with flames of fire.
ated da arc faa wafer
restate OBt fe wfarut fe wagatn syn
Ta: Hageda waa Ya aT
WI TA ARAM Tera WET

a: Tacha Sat at Sear PATE

For the sake of sport of Skanda, by Visnu,
the powerful one, were generated two birds the
Prabhadrakas (a peacock and a cock) from
Garuda. A Pataka (banner) was given by Vayu
(Wind-god). A great Vina (lute) was offered by
Sarasvati of great intonation. Aja (goat) was
offered by the Svayarhbhuva and a Mesa (ram)
was presented by Sarhbhu.

arenferecor farmr fire ates Frontech

ARH UTgTat Agelat Frurfran won
wareeaikeefiaga: wy:
tres cenftehafirn: wearvar yc

O Brahmanas! When the Kraujicagiri was
felled down in his sport out of his illusive
power, when Taraka, the excellent Asura, was
also thoroughly torn asunder, the lordly son of
Agni, the enemy of Daityas, the prowessed one,
was crowned as army-in-chief by the blessed
gods such as Upendra accompanied by Indra.

qatarahreatd Weat TATA!
Ra: THE: PASAT: WY S RH

The army-in-chief of the army of gods is
also known as Naranayaka (the leader of men).
The chastiser of the enemies of gods, Skanda,
became the Lord of the entire world, the
Lording one.

waatfafadidaecanr semithin
urghafataenties feared 4 ott

By all the Pramathas and varied gods,
likewise by Bhiita-ganas and by good many
Matrs and by the groups of Vinayakas (helped
as such) (he became the army-in-chief).

ofa strergaat aries Sargqeahreert ae
faaafreratseara: 9 2

=== PAGE 94 ===

Chapter-73

87

usr frecafratiseara:

Chapter 73

The description of the Loka Acchoda
and an observation on the manes
consumed by Fire

(qeenfreara)
ater: Brae are artes Fo Gat:
fat fefa ata taraenaata ane
Brhaspati spoke~ The lokas named
Somapadas wherein were there the sons of
Marici, the manes abide in heaven and to them
the gods recognise.

aftrann eft wrat: wa warfare:
Wet A aM orester are FEAT RHI
Consigned to fire all of them the way they
became known as of highly radiant form.
Therein mind-born daughter is known as
Acchoda.

aearé a9 aiget wat sen: wafer
aieararen aah fanrififad fafa au
From where rose up the beautiful lake

named Acchoda resorted to by the nymph
Adrika equipped with aerial cars in the heaven.

animes fray a y faferm
Wiss 3:64 aya aratttinsn
Amazed as such, she saw the manes

formless ones and was made anguished by this,
the Varavarni (the beautiful woman).

mt opt fiat ad agarrafierm
srrag itt Garrard: ya aaa GH
Having seen the Pitrs, she wooed the one
gone within the intermediary space, the one
belonging to the Vasus, the one known as
Anavasu, the reputed son of Ayo.

Waa cafreatr wa: arTenfToM
UAAETAT AAT AT UW AMTTET TUT B) NEN

That one by that morbid movement of mind,

acting wanton as such, cherishing a husband,
then became downgraded from Yoga and
collapsed.

ar aupaigarnfa wait a feagem
aunt FeayTeT aPATAH ott

And she saw the aerial cars as small as a
mote while falling down. Then she slipped
down from the heaven. She saw the fallen
manes in them.

Teearafiennrsarifiaans 5 fear
areaftegareny weit arrenfergrets it ¢ 1

They were extremely minute and
unforsaken. They were like sparks of fire
existing on sparks of fire. “Rescue me”, this
way she clamoured out, while falling down
head long.

recht TT YF AT AeifigensfetwatsHaq
Wa: Meee & firfemdan firm en
By them, she was asked not to get afraid.

This way spoken, she became stable. Then by
an ingratiating talk, she gratified the manes.

age fer: eat obvaf after

gbaat wadttior wate a yfafert go

Spoke out those manes (Pitrs) to the girl

who had gone down from supremacy owing to
transgression— “Having supremacy brought
down owing to personal fault, you have fallen
down, O pure-smiled one!

a: fea a anifin waite dat
aa aentwet erqarite Saat: 11 eau

The Devatds (gods) achieve the fruits of
their actions by means of the same bodies with
which they perform those actions.

aa: woth anti
tard Fea GU

wemrenrest (Y) wet (fa)
Wr WTS ETT AMI

Instantaneously acts do fructified in the case
of Devas. In case of human beings, they fructify

=== PAGE 95 ===

88

Vayu-Purana

after death. Hence you will attain the status of
the child of Amavasau after death and will
attain the fruit”.

seen & fet: Grea y wafers
SAAT WATE WHR AFH BB
By such a talk (of her Pitrs), she once again
gratified Pitrs. After meditating, they offered
grace on her out of compassion.

vaginas opr wage: TA:!

ar: far: at Tada waren ext

serrer Yeat ¢ gael WEI:

aa Ya franieciarga: wreeate warfafan

Having foreseen what is surely destined to

happen, the Devas, the Soma-drinking Pitrs
spoke to the girl “You will become the
daughter of the noble-souled king Amavasu
who is born on the earth in the existent state of
a human being and thereafter attain these
personal worlds of yours.

worag afeat a gmt neertiam
aeta Tat glee arfgerrat erareratn 96

In the twenty-eighth Dvapara Yuga, you will
happen to be the one born in the breed of a fish.
You will be the daughter of this very king
Améavasu and Adrika.

We Farad Sfacafa
a aets fanfigget 4 after eon
You will generate the collateral of the sage

ParaSara. That Brahmana sage shall dissect the
single Veda into four parts.

nerfrer Yat st viet: aif
fafeadtd enti catatarefarafan gent
faangé U Ta teeerponFay
WE Wated Waetfearrarcenfan 9¢

You alone will give birth to two sons who
will maximise the glory of Mahabhisa'

1. Pauranika Kosa, p. 408. Mahabhisa— Santanu's
name of a previous birth. Santanu being one of the

Santanu- the two sons, namely, Vicitravirya,
the knower of Dharma, and Citrangada, the king
endowed with merits, force and radiance.
Having given birth to these sons, you will attain
to your lokas (worlds).

aaftramfeat a wrod sma afer
weda Ue Gen siarat afawafan on
Owing to transgression of the Pitrs, you will
acquire a birth of abominable order. You will
become the daughter of the very same king and
Adrika.
aa Gea ae Sftmicctararcata
UatRal Y aaa Hat wera | AM aH
Having become a maiden, you will again
attain to these lokas.” This way having been
spoken, she was bom as Satyavati, the daughter
ofa fisherman.
arigenrat gar Heat Yar Sra ATTA: |
SAGAR TETTGTETA 2 2
In the confluence of Ganga and Yamunéa,

she was born of the fish Adrika. She was born
as the daughter of Amavasu in Adrika fish.

wet TaN fe HT eT Ua ae wea fe
fara ama & eter fafa tras & wou eau

Infact, she was the daughter of that king, the
semen virile of the king. These lokas are named
Virajas and in the heaven shine forth those
ganas.

afrarn: wares fradt react:
ASSO TANT TATRA: NBS
areifagreny saata mente:

Ul GAT: SARA: YOST ATTA 24 I

There the Pitrs became well known as
Agnisvattas of refulgent radiance. Covetous of

excellent fruits, groups of Danavas, Yaksas,
Raksasas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Bhitas,

sons of (Devapi Santanu and Bahlika) as per Vayu
Purana 9.237.

=== PAGE 96 ===

Chapter-73

89

Sarpas and Pisacas worship them. These ones
are declared as sons of Pulaha Prajapati.

Fa UA TOM: Meer engi: YT:
Uaat wa Bea Trak are feat 2g 11
These three are the ganas declared as such,
as bearers of frame of piety, the auspicious

ones. Of these, the mind-born daughter is well
known as Pivari.

aitrt arract a arrarat ate a
fear grat wer atenfaret Tea FN ROU

Yogini, Yogapatni and likewise Yogamata—
she was reputed this way. In the twenty-eighth
Dvapara, she will exist as such.

WU: YT AT TTT:
straint weratt arrerenfestrra: 1 32
He will born in the lineage of Paragara, the
one named Suka, of austere penance, the
illustrious one, the Yogin, the Mahayogin and
Yoga will spread from him, O excellent
Brahmanas.

carererval dye fae ga wera:
ao reat figerarat ahraratafegarn 2 ei
He will took birth of Vyasa, from the Arani
like the smokeless fire. In the mind-born
daughter of the Pitrs, he will beget the
following well-known Yogacaryas.
por te wey vy ae afega a aL
wen atta da ath ArraTTTAN 3 ot
Krsna, Gaura, Prabhu, Sarnbhu and
Bhirisruta. He will beget a daughter Kirtimati,
the Yogini and Yogamata.
Fea Set Ufa aySeT gl
Wager ented Gara a3 gH
Tertrrana eraratet afar
sufgrafencottd eaqaateranfead: 11 8 2H
She will be the mother of Brahmadatta and

the queen of Anuha. Having produced these
pious-souled sons, having attained to Yoga,

having austerity of great Yoga (mental
concentration) (assumed), he will attain that
great goal from which there is no return. Like
the rays of the sun, he will attain the status of no
rebirth.

demi fafnhat afaeats wergfi:t
arate: frat ectufterrg 23301
Fa WA TOAST aeaTes=al Fratera
araeanta fete yftatt were: 113 vil

The great sage will become omnipresent and
liberated. These three Pitrs of non-corporeal
form have the framework of piety. And four
others you may understand, whom I shall
illustrate, O excellent Brahmanas! O corporeal-
normed ones! O highly radiant ones!

SAAT TTY HST GA: HA: Ya:

fart actieag satferifag aT | KI
They are Kavyas, sons of Agni, Kavi born
of Svadha. These Pitrs stationed in the

Devalokas are refulgent with light, being
radiant as such.

wdarmaqay faarerraga
Wat at wan ciate fea faegamn gen
They are affluent with all desirable objects
and the Brahmanas revere them. Their mind-

born daughter was famous by name Gau, well-
known in heaven.

eet aaa Yow afedt fran
Werfayred fereerat spoT aitftaeet: 113 9 tt
Kumara bestowed an army on her. She
became the queen, dear one of Sukra. Thirty
one happened to be the well-known Pitrs, who
heightened the glory of Bhrgus.
wofarahe car: wage fafa gan:
Wi wigta: Gar: area: we fafatiar:n acu
Their lokas were well-known as
Maricigarbhas (having rays within) which
envelop thé heavens. Those sons of Angiras
grew along with the Sadhyas.

=== PAGE 97 ===

90

Vayu-Purana

SUgeT: Yared g feat arene fafa
areatrenrmnige: wraata wort: 13 en

Summoned along and remembered Upahitas
as such, they verily, were the Pitrs, radiant ones
in heaven. Looking up to them, the Pitr groups
of Ksatriyas, those cherishing fruits, revere
them.

Waa Wa SAM agile as Fagan
elt ar ferred: Get a feat

The mind-born daughter of these is well-
known by name Yasoda. She was the wife of

Visvamahan and the daughter-in-law of
ViSvasarmin.
wath at Gear WET:

Bea aH Te site mre FestehAAA ny en
The gentle lady was the mother of the
saintly king Khatvanga, the great-souled one, in
whose Yajfia (sacrifice) was strained forth the
eulogium ditty by the divine great sages.
Sea Ta EBT wfaserer ETA:
aan fect & wate qafgars nw en
And having observed the birth of Agni (in
the sacrifice) of Sandilya, the great-souled one,
was seen Dilipa, the Yajamana (a host under
whose auspices the sacrifice is performed),
quite concentrated as such.

aad wert & eattafeitsm:)
sree are frat: HEAT HATTA 1B
He was of truthful rites, the great-souled

one. The Pitrs named Ajyapas of Kardama, the
Prajapati, were vanquishers of the heaven.

TAMA TRG STA:
dime ata arty faeries
He was born of Pulaha and took birth once
again of him. Moving about in the sky, they are
stationed in these worlds that go about as they
please.

warayeon: arg areata wentea:
waat wet aT facet aT fea wy Mt

The groups of Vaisyas who are desirous of
fruits, revere these in an obsequial rite
(Sraddha). There mental daughter is Viraja by
name, well-known as such.

mares Ureat weit UT AgTET gl
Beret ara feat afar wT se
The chaste woman was the wife of Nahusa

and the mother of Yayati. The Pitrs named
Sukalas are the Pitrs of Vasistha, the Prajapati.

fauanha ga: YRRAPTaaal
TTT aM & Slat det aa a fefauwon
They are the sons of Hiranyagarbha, the

Sidras, and they are stationed in the worlds
named Manasas.

wet uA aan wer afat am
er orerate erent afro yc
Their mental daughter is Narmada, the most
excellent one among rivers. Flowing along in

Daksinapatha (southern domain), she sanctifies
living beings.
wort waeRae Garant:
WRIT UTTAR YB
She was the mother of Trasadasyu and the

spouse of Purukutsa. Manu became the lord of
Manvantara by adopting these (Pitrs).

Wana seat waa wae:
faqurengqgein waar fer oN

At the inception of the Manvantara, he takes
to obsequial rites all over as per descending
order of Pitrs, O Brahmanas of excellent norm.

wanes ator org Ba | EAM
waar Ta: TAT aT Tara QU

Therefore, the obsequial rite deserves to be
performed with devotion with one’s own
Dharma unto all, by silver basins or even by
those filled with silver.

ad at Gera aa stunts & fa
ATAMSSaT Feat TASHA TUG VW

=== PAGE 98 ===

Chapter-73

on

Senet ath a spate TeNqETG
faaionfa 3 seen fers: storafa TUG 3
Having kept the Svadha in front, he gratifies
the Pitrs. By the propitiation of Soma, Agni and
Vaivasvata and by the performance of Homa in
the sacrificial fire during the northern transit (of
the sun), one shall attain the fruit of an
Asvamedha sacrifice. Pitrs gratify him who
propitiates Pitrs with devotion.
fret: yfeerret were aT WA:
Us wai a ert a reheat era y wh
The Pitrs bestow those who are desirous of
progeny and desirous of virility. They ennourish

the progeny and offer heaven. There is no doubt
in it.

Racnratafe wat fuged fafererh

Raana: faut fe wore BATTING GH

As compared to the Deva-karya (rites of

gods), the Pitr-karya (the obsequial rite) attains
distinction. It is ordained that the propitiation of
Pitrs must be given priority over that of deities.

a fe arrefa: Ger faqoratt Tara:
aren fg wines Grad areERTT Gc
The Yogagati (the subtle activity of mental
concentration) or the gratification of Pitrs is not
visible through the physical eye. Only by means
of a well-known penance are they to be seen.

gra fara citer gig a
Aer sears ster T aaa ATTN ent
This way Pitrs, their worlds, their daughters,
their grandsons, their sacrificial hosts and those
who revere them have been recounted.

eat wie see: |
Wa: oa Genel Fat: Haha TAT ol
(Out of the seven classes of Pitrs) four are in
corporeal forms and three are in non-corporeal

forms. Devas honour them and offer Sraddhas
to them devoutly with efforts.

TET: WAT: WS AARANATATAT: |

fad a fanaa yfgasn: sf (or) een
qm: Sareea fatraarya
WATE STATE fearateaterdta Ung BN
tray weala vere fedtaa:
afapahrny mua: wd Wa ae aH
aan ar: UTiT fava Tara: Tet
farpragrerad Prater wenfir: 1 § 61

All the Devas accompanied by Indra
concentrate their minds on them. They join their
palms in reverence and worship them with full
devotion. Visvedevas, Sikatas, — PrSnijas,
Srigins, Krsnas, Svetas and Ajas worship them
duly. Desirous of benefits, the subjects
Divakirtyas, Lekhas, Maruts,
Brahma and other heaven-dwellers, Atri, Bhrgu,
Angiras and all other sages, Yaksas, Nagas,

Vatarasanas,

Suparnas (Garudas), Kinnaras along with
Raksasas, invariably adored the  Pitrs,
cherishing fruits.

Wada WEA: oT eR UAT:

PabarTaea et wagise BEATE GM
These great-souled ones, if duly adored and
honoured in Sraddha, grant all desires hundred-
fold or thousand-fold.

feet Actes Sea FM
thal arated sero fa farareet: 11 & 1
These Pitamahas (Pitrs) do grant Moksa,
(liberation), Yogic Power and Aisvarya
(prosperity) after one has abandoned the three
worlds of normal existence involving old age
and death.

matarermdard went Saat: 1
greet Trem wereaha frame: 11g ott
Pitamahas, the deities of subtle bodies, grant

the means for emancipation, supremacy,
complete renunciation and infiniteness.

tard fafedt arrterd ferrgea
aitgatgt ter: cretfersiromerdtit § ¢ tt

=== PAGE 99 ===

92

Vayu-Purana

Supremacy of Yoga is Aisvarya; and
Aisvarya is the excellent wealth. Without the
supremacy of Yoga and Aisvarya, how possibly
liberation becomes tenable?

amanda er THY wferait aa
afte: wderatot drarrt: Garda G VI
Just as for a wingless bird, the flight within
the sky (is not) practicable, that very way the
(Moksa) is impossible. It is super most among
all the Dharmas (religions or duties) and pristine
as such.

fanart agent garaacat mt:
weaaatagis washes frat: Neott
The Pitamahas grant thousands of aerial cars

stand associated with the groups of Apsarasas;
well-known as the accomplishers of all desires.

yan Ufe: wien Teaaa aI
Fagot fe were wreTy ARIAT 9 gH

The strength of intellect, memory, brain,
kingdom and health can be attained only by the
grace of the noble-souled Pitrs.

Teradata afarngantt a
aifeventa venta weeoha frarrat:i9 80
Pitamahas do offer crores of gems, pearls,
turquoise or Japis lazuli, costumes and
thousands of horses and elephants.

gaateorgen qartatatea a1

fafgotorerai wargerncntt Tl

Sher fart wereahet wgerort Frat: 1119 3 11

Pitamahas always bestow on subjects with

love, chariots equipped with swans and
peacocks, studded ‘with pearls and turquoises,
decorated with tinkling bells and provided with
perpetual flowers and fruits.

fe sftreryaret argues SutgTATy attegeaed aT

Farereaferetttseara: 1119 3 1

weR

=== PAGE 100 ===

92

Vayu-Purana

UST eg eae: UI
Chapter 74

The naming of the receptacles of Pitrs
and the demarcation of the abode of
Pitrs

aeeafrwaret
aut wad art faquit we
Tat Tras at feqatt uEAA BU -
Brhaspati spoke- the vessels of Pitrs should
be made of gold, silver or copper as per

(Dharma-sastra). Silver and silver-coated vessel
is deemed to be befitting Pitrs.
Tare an asia ag ate a
arremerd tard fq area
FUGA SAT AYATATTTA 2
The sight or gifting away of silver is
considered to be highly conducive gift for the
Pitrs. It is beneficial for the attainment of
infinite and everlasting heaven. By this
bestowal to Pitrs, the virtuous sons redeem as
such.
an fe tan ger vasfeafaght: ym
rarrerafifirena aferad wearer 3
O dear one, it was in silver vessel that
Svadha was formerly milked by Pitrs seeking to
get Svadha. O dear one, if that is gifted, it yields
everlasting benefit.
ponte wife att arate an
waite gach facerafgarearq wt
The close propinquity of the black antelope
hide or elephant hide, its sight as well as its
offering is conducive to the destruction of
demons. It increases Brahmanical splendour and
enables Pitrs to cross (hell).
arent Ted and aie qaafeten:1
ae a wettest freudt art wa aan

Vessels made of gold, silver or copper,

=== PAGE 350 ===

322 
Vayu-Purana 
Manvantara. The future Devas are said to 
consist of five groups. 
?ftcTT TtfgrTT^cT (^T: WTOWTI 
WW W T*pTT:il6\3ll 
The Devas such as Haritas, Rohitas, 
Sumanas, Sukarmans and Suparas- these are 
known as five Devaganas i.e. righteous- 
actioned ones, 
WUTr RPTOT #TT TT^r TW:I 
3T^3TT f^gRI2J ^WT: 1166 II 
riot dm ^t: ^t:ii6^ii 
They are the mind-bom sons of Brahma. 
Each of these groups consists of ten Devas. 
Aruntija1, Havi, the wise Sahasrasan, 
Parvatanucara, Apos, Amsu, Manojava, Urja, 
Svaha, Svadha and Tara- these ten are known 
as Haritas. 
f TR£f iril^ o 11 
t 3# TTf^HT: ^cTT:l 
^ ^H5raf^Bt^%T:ii<?^ii 
faCjj. RcJRtTJTT I 
^ferRt ^ n 
fopgj 5fR#f fq^rf: <SRT TJ<J Wl 
Vrf ^MOTT ^rfT?tWl fqcjtelTTil^ll 
Tapas, Jani, Bhrti, Vaca, Bandhru, Rajas, 
Raja, Svamapada, Vyusti and Vidhi- these ten 
constitute the Rohita group. And the thirty-three 
Devas who have been glorified (before), viz. 
Usita and others are to be known as Sumanas. 
Now you may know the Sukarmans. They are- 
Suparva, Vr$abha, Prsta, Krsi, Dyumna, 
Vipascita, Vikrama, Krama, Nibhrta and Kanta. 
These Devas are Sukarmans. Now you may 
know their sons. 
1. One of the ten gods of Haritagana,. Vayu Purana 
100.88. 
cwlficTwyi f^rgt ff?RT^fo:i 
^ ciyiirwym^u 
They are- Varsodita, Jista2, Varcasvl, 
Dyutiman, Havi, Subha, Haviskrta, Prapti, 
Vyaprtha and Vasama. 
Suparas, Managanas etc.- these Devas were 
well-declared (before). Of them, Indra deserves 
to be recognised as Rtadhama3 of great fame. 
TTlsfa: WROTTI 
cRtS'STOR: hlHTrh: iRUfatl 
The Seven Sages are- Krti the son of 
Vasistha, Sutapas of Atri’s family, Tapomurti of 
the Angiras race, Tapas vin of Kasyapa Gotra, 
Taposayana of Paulastya race, Taporati4 of 
Pulaha Gotra and the seventh one among them 
deserves to be recognised as Tapomati of Bhrgu 
family. 
■q% TRpfa: fegr 3RT JHNfesqfri 
^rfh^Ti 
foRTf: TRTElfer 513$* TRt: ^tTT:l)<?<?ll 
These Saptarsis are well-accomplished in the 
Savamika Manvantara. Devavan, Upadeva, 
Devasrestha, Viduratha, Mitravan, Mitrabindu, 
Mitrasena, Amitraha, Mitrabahu and Sutacas- 
these were the sons of twelfth Manu. 
TT Wr% RoR /^RR TR:l 
O \3 
TJcf TrOTT: MJrbT \c\m\ H o U 
2. Pauranika Kosa, p. 187, Vayu Purana 100.94, Jista. 
3. Pauranika Kosa, p. 70, Rtadhaman. Rtasavarna 
Manu (Indra of the Yuga of 12!h Manu), Vayu 
Purana 100.95. 
4. Taporati Pauranika Kosa, p. 193. Paulaha, fourth 
Savarni Manu’s contemporary sage.

=== PAGE 351 ===

Chapter-100 
323 
In the thirteenth transformation of the aeon, 
which deserve to be Raucya Manvantara, three 
groups of Devas are mentioned by the 
Svayambhuva (i.e. Brahma). 
wwt -RFraT: Wtft % Ri 
WCTTW: wrftJT: ^ =T2T:ll^o ^ii 
v3 O O * 
All those noble souls are mind-bom sons of 
Brahma. They are- Sutramans, Sudharmans and 
Sukarmans, the three. 
faSViRi W: ^TTFFrr Rfew: i 
These Ganas have been illustrated as the 
future Somapayins i.e. Soma drinkers. The 
deities are thirty-three in number along with the 
performers of Yajnas. 
They include the Ajya, Prsadajya and 
Grahasrestha groups of Devas. You may know 
that the thirty-three Devas are quite distinct as 
such. 
yywTUT: srqMjrw 3TFHjm ^pt mm\ 
O \3 ■N 
yfcKMIlfyWRJ ^ll^oXII 
The Sutramans are the present Prayajyas and 
Ajyapas. The Anuyajyas and those who partake 
Prsadajya (eaters of ghee mixed with coagulated 
milk) are Sukarmans. 
swam wtHt c^t: n«£lHfn:i 
The Upayajyas are Sudharmans. This way, 
the Devas are declared as such. Divaspati of 
great prowess shall become their Indra. 
WI^TfW^TRT WT:l 
3Tf^N ^:in?o^|| 
fHa5RTCRITSS%3t cR^pr^Uu^oVan 
faf^Rt HHrasr Rg-.n^o^u 
fr^TF^T -CRT: J3T fRT* 3 
The sons of Ruci deserve to be recognised as 
the grandsons of Pulaha. The Seven Sages in 
the thirteenth Manvantara will be- Dhrtiman of 
Angiras family, Pathyavan of Paulastya race, 
Jattvadarsin of Paulaha family, Nirutsaka of 
Bhargava race, Nisprakampa of Atreya lineage, 
Nirmoha of Kasyapa Gotra and Svarupa of 
Vasistha lineage. Citrasena, Vicitra, Tapas, 
Dharmadhrta, Bhava, Anekak§attra, Baddha, 
Surasa, Nirbhaya and Prtha- these were the 
sons of Raucya Manu in the thirteenth 
Manvantara. 
H xraf^ RRwnsRrr trT:i 
r!drTmi TTurr* trar rmru if h %jfdbufwi 
In the fourteenth change of aeon of Manu 
Bhuta, the five groups of Devatas or Gods have 
been spoken of and these they will come about. 
^TTTTgJ cRftHTSJ tffojT RRTTTR2TTI 
c(THT3^T2j w eic(j|crn: ^ijrmiimii 
Caksusas, Kanisthas, Pavitras, Bhajaras and 
Vacavrddhas- these five Ganas of Devas stand 
well-known. 
3iw(wgT)fir iRt: 
c^dinifa wtnH chPgimR n 
*rr%n: w HrjcT:ii wn 
Know that the seven different parts are those 
named Caksusas. They understand Brhad and 
other Samans as the Kanisthas. The seven lokas 
are Paritras and the Bhajiras are the 
Saptasindhavas (seven oceans or rivers). 
TTTt: *cuq^cH<i c(| 
You may know the sages to be Vacavrddhas 
of Manu Svayambhuva. All the Indras of the 
Manvantaras deserve to be known as of similar 
pre-requisites. 
ctersr wm i 
^rrRr rHrHt fprf&r wn

=== PAGE 352 ===

324 
Vayu-Purana 
ehi*v*u 
Those Indras excel all the mobile and the 
immobile living beings in the three worlds by 
means of their radiance, austerity, intellect, 
strength, learning and heroism. 
^dwsnf^Tl ist Tmm 
spqarrf^T: ^i^RTt %?T: Trarf^TTSii^mi 
The Indras are Bhutapavadms, Hrstas, 
Madhyasthas (neutral-normed ones or impartial 
ones), Bhutavadins and Bhutanuvadins. The 
three Vedas are competent in respect to 
Pravadins. 
3wms *T:l 
STPfcTt flfaraijpj ^fiRTffTTOMTII 
3Tt3R^ TRt: TgcTT:||^|| 
Agnidhra', Kasyapa, Paulastya, Magadha, 
Bhargava, Agnibahu1 2, Suci, Angirasa, Ojasvin 
and Subala- these happened to be the sons of 
Bhautya Manu. 
TReft iftft Mil 
TJcfit wi TRWRTlIWII 
All these four Savama Manus are the sons of 
Brahma. One Savarna Manu is called the son of 
Vaivasvata. 
ffeft tft <T TRh 
rM*<4 c|TSsfifTAl cT 1tTof; cb^M<K1 M<5rl11 II 
Raucya and Bhautya, these two Manus 
belong to Paulaha and Bhargava family 
respectively. While there is an overlordship of 
Bhautya, the Kalpa becomes complete. 
xt TT% TTcTT 
TTfW^tot %T 3HtfT||^ || 
Suta spoke- When all the Manvantaras 
come to a close in entirety, many Yugas pass on 
1. Agnidhra- one of ten sons of Svayambhu Manu, a 
king of Jambudvlpa, Paur&iika Kosa, p. 12. 
2. Pauranika Kosa, p. 11. 
and when everything is truncated, it is called 
Samhdra or dissolution. 
T*c}T 3RT rT^Tl 
MWWWT ffTTW 
^tZT^ t: 
oMdrcil 
TTcP% ^tuT W^TII^II 
Then at the culmination of the Manvantara, 
the seven Devas of the Bhargava lineage, the 
powerful sovereign rulers having enjoyed the 
world triad for a period of seventeen Yugakhya 
(cycles of four Yugas), accompanied by Manes 
and Manus as also the Saptarsis, the Yajvanas 
(performers of Yajnas) and even the devotees of 
these ones, shall proceed to the Maharloka 
having deserted the world triad. When they 
proceed upwards (i.e. to heaven) and when the 
Manvantara truncates, all the three worlds shall 
happen to be without any support. 
rTW: w-iifa yRiifa wipHi TTTft t ftsrr:i 
swrfaf PciqTbiP bTTi^yu^ynii^r^n 
Then the abodes of the abiding ones shall 
become desolate, 0 Brahmanas! They shall slip 
down having been rendered flaccid by stars, 
constellations and planets. 
cld'klM Odjdlrftl cd ICK^I 
f^TTUT?xT W U3T 
^T% T*c|TCt i TT#jTS:II^MI 
Thereafter, when the overlords of the world 
triad accompanied by eight Indras pass away, 
the fourteen groups of Devas beginning with 
Jita and others and ending with Caksusas, the 
Devas who were very mighty and full of 
radiance in all the Manvantaras, (shall) go to the 
Maharloka wherein they will become the aeon 
dwellers. 
s3 Cs O* -v 
dc|IAi ^ TTM rt^TII^^II

=== PAGE 353 ===

Chapter-100 
325 
tJ^frdh qRrMvHl W# t xJ^?TI 
Then when the time of Sarikalana (lit. 
collision or dissolution) arrives, those fourteen 
groups of Devas will take leave of Maharloka 
and shall proceed to Janaloka in corporeal form 
(i.e. preserving their physical bodies) 
accompanied by their followers. 
TT^- yfcl I 
C\ ' v3 -O * 
?T#T HlebWI^N WTf^l 
O- O V S3 C\ N3 
^5 ^ )tht «h(rMdiRnr^ii 
TTTWIT WT 
This way, when the Devas have gone from 
Maharloka to Janaloka, when Bhutadi (Cosmic 
Ego) and other (prime causes of the universe) 
remain and (even) immobiles have come to an 
end, when the abodes of the worlds beginning 
with Bhuh and ending with Mahah have 
become void, when the Devas . have gone 
upward and become united with the residents of 
Kalpa, then having harnessed then those, later 
on, Brahma re-establishes Devas, Sages (Rsis), 
Pitrs (Manes) and Danavas as also the great 
creation by a perception at the dissolution of the 
Yuga or aeon. 
I# gJWUHinjUbM 3RT:ll^ll 
The people recognising Ahoratra i.e. day 
and night tenure, understands that the day of 
Brahma consists of a thousand cycles of four 
Yugas and similarly the night too consists of a 
thousand cycles of four Yugas. 
^fafricb: Tnefcfaehl ^«IISWlfcl#S#T:l 
The dissolution of all living beings is three¬ 
fold- Naimittika (periodical), Prakrtika 
(pertaining to Prakrti) and Atyantika (the 
ultimate one). 
it# ^fniricbww jtwt:i 
TTfd*rn § ^RTRT ST^rT: II ^ ^ II 
The Naimittaka dissolution is the burning 
(of the Universe) at the end of the Kalpa and 
complete withdrawal by god Brahma. The 
natural dissolution of senses of living beings 
into Prakrti is called Prakrtika type of 
dissolution.. 
dcT: -QWV TTRIjpT ^c|T^#5*lc|lftR:ii^'#il 
tR;i 
O o 
WT: TT^TrT cT^TI I ^ m l 
The dissolution due to dawning of spiritual 
learning is called Atyantika type of dissolution 
since it causes the non-provenance of the 
sources. After dissolving all the Devas abiding 
in the world triad at the end of his day and when 
he feels the urge to sleep, Lord Brahma brings 
about the annihilation of the subjects and 
dissolves all the creation. 
M'dl: TT# TT II 
Then at the culmination of a thousand cycles 
of Caturyugas and at the arrival of the 
dissolution of the Yuga, Prajapati begins to 
make the subjects absorb in him. 
W ^ra^RTfflrRT^T FT VlrMlftebl'l 
rTSTT ■sn^JFTTTTTTfw WTTfq 
flRfaiaf SHfe# TTferoife ^1 
Cv 
Then sets in paucity of rains or drought for a 
period of hundred years. And those living 
beings on the surface of the Earth, (still left) 
being deficient in strength become dissolved 
and are merged into the Earth. The Sun then 
rises up with seven rays constituting his chariot. 
Tmferfa:l 
www #zpnrm§ wfa:nmii 
Having rays of unbearable norm, the

=== PAGE 354 ===

326 
Vayu-Purana 
adorable Sun begins to consume water through 
his rays. Those seven rays will be green in 
colour and of dazzling lustre. 
WT TJc[ dH TEt: i 
sfa gng «R M 11 
Circumambiating the cloud or becoming 
dense gradually, (the seven rays) spread forth 
and the terrestrial wood, the wealth and light 
gleams forth with water. 
THTcTtsirr f| gSERfl 
qi^g^rr ijRfgigciii^ii 
On that account, the water is said to be the 
cause of the shining of the Sun. With drought, 
the sun neither gets torrid-normed nor get 
bedoomed-beamed. 
dTejg^IT qRRwRd Tfe:l 
Nor by drought they become accumulated. 
By water, sun gets engleamed. On that account, 
consuming water, the sun is made to gleam 
forth in the sky. 
ct W ftsRSJWTt WtfcrRTI 
TRlf: W W-rddll ^11 
His seven rays suck up water from the 
Maharnava (the great ocean). Rendered radiant 
by that food, the single Sun proliferates into 
seven Suryas (Suns). 
Hereof wm: w 
xjg#cfifipt Tig RiRsH'W^m^'xii 
Then those seven rays having assumed the 
form of seven Suns, bum the four quarters and 
the four worlds in entirety like fires. 
mcrafcr g grfw <&>$ grasr TfN^:i 
v3 O 
The fiery rays reach the upper and lower 
(regions of the worlds). Seven Suns and the 
blazing fire of the dissolution gleam forth 
fiercely. 
% giRun g 
And these beams in many thousands, being 
calcined by water, having encompassed the 
aerial route (lit. sky), stay on, rendering burnt 
the earth. 
dd^NI ScTT^T ctgTOHI OTRTI 
uiRriautai igggt fcTFr^i wrugii^gn 
Being burnt by their blazing heat, the Earth 
having terrestrial terrains, mountains, streams 
and oceans becomes free from humidity. 
cfanfif: gggriw ^M-dd:i 
g fd^gg 
The lower regions, the upper regions and the 
vertical spots are enblocked by the solar beams 
of various colours spreading everywhere. 
Tj^ni wrtti 
ijg^Mygidigirg^itf Traill WII 
The solar fires developed as such and 
suffused within each other appear to be a 
solitary unit with a single flame. 
y4HHyunyi g gtsfR&gi <t 
gdnWddi Tig ^WII^oll 
That fire becomes a circumambiating fire 
(forebading) the dissolution of this universe. 
With its brilliance, it bums all the four worlds. 
tRT: mm 
Rrf$rr Rr^un gRr: c&iRjwtt 
Then gets dissolved all that is static and 
mobile. The Earth becomes treeless, strawless 
and appears like the back of a tortoise shell. 
m wtfad wm 
gcRig gof 
The entire world exposed to a state of an 
epidemic norm gleams forth as if like a frying 
pan1. The sky gets smouldered having been 
circumambiated by the rays as such. 
I. V.S. Apte, p. 47, AmbarTsa.

=== PAGE 355 ===

Chapter-100 
327 
hicii^ 'mfr ^tciiIh 'R^fiFirTT^r 
driwifn 'Mfa^MMillPd WII^II 
All the living beings in the nether worlds 
and in the great ocean get dissolved and attain 
to the state of oneness with the Earth. 
m Ulctcb^ *T:II^'SII 
The continents (DvTpas), the mountains, the 
sub-continents and the great oceans- all these 
will be reduced to ashes by that Pavaka (the 
cosmic fire), the soul of everything. 
fwb: ^ralwrf^Tt 33FRI)^H 
The smouldered fire consumes water from 
everywhere, the oceans, the streams and the 
nether worlds. Resorting to land it blazes up. 
m: tfcnfo: upmi 
HlcbR^trl ^TT STlT: Ac|<tertSqrT:ll^ II 
Then, Samvartaka (submarine fire or the fire 
of dissolution or destructive squall), having 
overpowered, being of a horrid norm, 
smouldered as such, consumes or encompasses 
the worlds on all sides. 
cIW: WldHimlWdl 
cTRf MldHMHIHlchJiyid^dJI^^II 
Then having perforated the ground, it dries 
up Rasatala. After burning up the nether worlds, 
it bums down Nagaloka (the world of serpents). 
3TEiwjfsraf cpszrr fenri 
'ilddTdi J^lfui 3TO?TRl<|^Tft rTII^II 
Having burnt the land from below, from 
overhead, it bums the sky spreading through 
thousands, lakhs and Arbadas (trillions) of 
Yojanas. 
^fdafe^lWW affST: <T| 
RiviNiw ■^TO^rrn^TRii 
Many flames rose aloft from that 
Samvartaka fire. Blazing fiercely the 
Samvartaka fire consumes Gandharvas, Pisacas, 
the great serpents and Raksasas. Everything is 
burned to a huge globular mass (of ashes). 
Wdidi zj -q^TSrri 
Cl<l o 11 
Bhurloka, Bhuvarloka, Svarloka and 
Maharloka- all these four worlds are burned by 
that terrific Kalagni. 
=i||%t| ^ 'Rf-ditt fdiJ^WlPddll 
\3 0 s3 Cv 
c^rH 'JlufcK ?T^:i 
3Rrm^r wi ycfiwfn^ii 
Then all the lokas are enveloped with fire on 
all sides horizontally as well as in elevation and 
the entire universe is slowly permeated with 
brilliance and shines forth like a steel ball1. 
fifiT OTcH<h:I 
Tfasfct %T differ ^chl: 
Thereafter, the terrible Samvartaka clouds 
begin to rise in the sky. They bear the shapes of 
the tusker herds and are adorned with lightning 
streaks. 
Some are azure-hued like the blue lotus. 
Some are of the semblance of white lilies, some 
similar in norm to turquoise gems and others 
like the sapphire stones. 
*ETT: efcfa^fclcdhri: tr5TteTCT:||^*|| 
And others white like the conch shell and 
the kuncici flowers. Some having resemblance of 
Jati (nutmeg or Jasmine flowers) and collyrium 
sticks, some are smoke-coloured. Some of the 
clouds are pallid-hued. 
cHf^iwgTJifrn ht^RthPwtwti 
«f)filfimiOTn5T^r: 11 ^ m 1 
1. V.S. Apte, p. 188. a ball globe.

=== PAGE 356 ===

328 
Vayu-Purana 
Some clouds have the gleam of the colour of 
a donkey, some having ruddy glow of the 
lacquer dye. Others being of the hue of red 
arsenic and some other clouds of cadaverous 
norm (lit. pigeon-coloured). 
Some are of the colour of Indagopas 
(cochineal insects) and some of the clouds soar 
high in the sky, some of the shape of land of a 
town and some bearing semblance of elephant 
herd. 
*m:)i 
n^ll 
Some clouds are similar to mountains and 
some clouds are like rocky regions. Some have 
the shapes of kundas (basins) and some of the 
shape of fish flakes. 
■tfR'WTT yV«Rfddffcd: I 
Some are myriad-normed and horrid- 
formed, some rumbling like terrific tumult. 
They fill the entire firmament at that time (of 
dissolution). 
WKJ ^TTT Tlf^TT 
WT itfrnrlTTTOTTfR ^ITOcTI I ^ 11 
Then these clouds terrific in rumblings and 
solar-orbed, organise themselves in seven 
groups and extinguish the fire. 
qrret gtf fsrfqr ^ M^ycidj 
Then those clouds release rain like a mighty 
inundation and destroy the terrible and ominous 
fire. 
Tfcrtsr WSrSIsf ctTfrfa: ^ SFTrTI 
And by waters vastly poured down or rained 
down, the universe gets inundated. The 
brilliance of the burning fire is suppressed by 
the waters and the fire enters into water. 
^rr wqr: tnwicfT:i 
THI^rTd 'SFlrWcf 
On fire having got extinguished within a 
centum of years, the clouds bom of the fire 
inundate the entire universe with huge 
quantities of water showers. 
yrmfo: wrtW gteurcr ^imi 
■o v3 
ysft arfe: Mil 
Being guided by the self-born deity 
(Brahma), they fill the universe with their 
showers. Others overpower the alluvial shoals 
with huge quantities of water. The entire Earth 
with its continents and mountains is covered all 
over by water. 
rRZT ^g3TT ^ flrRcf f| llRufu^dMI 
ferr: #1^:11^9*11 
The entire quantity of water showered by the 
clouds enters the ocean, 0 Brahmanas! There it 
is consumed by Sun’s rays. 
3Tif^r#<qRr: RrgRn 
qq: xrrrf?r qj# 
Consumed by the solar beam, the water gets 
on to the clouds and drops down again on the 
Earth whereby the oceans are replenished. 
qnpj: #t #t:i 
'l|4dlW faq^rlfall^N 
Then the oceans overstep their tidings all 
round. And the mountains get torn asunder and 
the land gets sunk or submerged in waters. 
mww iqfc crer. mdd:ii^9V9u 
Then suddenly blows forth the squall of 
terrific soul in the atmospheric region that 
encompasses those clouds over the sky vault all 
round. 
dR^cblU^ srft qg WIcK'd^l 
qu? % fq.-Tte: 3RFT 33Rtll*i9<SH

=== PAGE 357 ===

Cbapter-100 
329 
In that single stretch of water (.Arnava) or 
ocean of horrid norm, all the mobile and the 
immobile beings get perished. When a thousand 
cycles of four Yugas pass away, it is named a 
complete Kalpa. 
WT:I 
m tr C^TII 
^ driWrl ^ferRII^II 
Then by water the world having got 
surrounded or covered, the experts declared that 
as a single ocean (Ekarnava). All separate 
entities are lost sight of. Neither the surface of 
the land, nor the atmosphere, neither the wind in 
the ocean nor the firmament is visible distinctly. 
TTPKT 3TFTT 
The terrestrial and alluvial-shoaled ones, the 
waters snow flaked all around, spreading along, 
move along, and attain to the state of one unit 
named as water (all round). 
3TFIflFlfaeS rT^T dcUfad HJTRI 
5T5CTSI ST d^THHJI^II 
When only water is seen moving to and fro, 
it is termed Salila. When it stands covering the 
whole Earth, that water is called Arnava (an 
ocean). 
sfmrfo kwwi 
Tr^Rsnw 
The word Bha becomes etymologised as 
Vyapti (pervasion) and Dlpti (splendour). Since 
water gleam forth and pervades all the ashes all 
around, it is called Ambah. 
qra *r sngf 3tt 3^1 
rf^TssiTT t ^ #grr#r m qrT:ii^^n 
In point of myriad norm and great velocity, 
the root >Ur is derived. In that single ocean, 
these waters are not quick. Hence they are 
called Naras. 
<ttcrt imu 
s3 *S 
cl^T <T ^oSTTtTRT 3T3TTW: II ^^11 
Then at the end of thousand sets of four 
Yugas, one day of Brahma passes off. During 
that tenure, the entire universe becomes one 
ocean only. And all the activities of Prajapati 
get revived. 
qr srafa <jr?s 
WsraTf: ot: v^mfd- 
When in that single ocean, the mobile and 
immobile beings perish, then that Brahma 
assumes form as thousand-eyed one, thousand¬ 
footed one, thousand-crested one, pleasant- 
minded one, thousand-footed one, thousand¬ 
eyed one, thousand-faced one, thousand- 
tongued one, thousand-armed one having the 
lustre of the Sun. He is etymologised as the 
primeval Prajapati and the Puru§a in the path of 
Trayl (three Vedas). 
■gcRRi TTtarr 
3R<f IJefi: OTWTMZI 
cv 1 o *\ 
TO?t 
TERUrr t cHTO: Wdldll^ll 
He is Adityavarna (i.e. solar-complexioned 
one), the guardian of the Universe, the 
extraordinary one, the single one, the primeval 
one, Turds dt (Indra), Hiranyagarbha, the 
stupendous Purusa and goes beyond the gloom 
of yonder norm. 
rld4'KT$W<) 'O'fo: I 
ffMm<5(«bf?Ti W Tift W W:ll^£ll 
At the culmination of the Yuga tetrad when 
everything around is inundated by water, the 
lord becomes desirous of sleep and creates a 
lightless night of his own.

=== PAGE 358 ===

330 
Vayu-Purana 
^Tf%T fft W. 
\3 v 
tr^RT <T TRIrBR W B#T:ll^ll 
When Brahma sleeps a long1 with the four 
types of creation withdrawn in the Anda 
(Cosmic. Egg), the Seven Great Sages see that 
great-souled Kala (god of Death). 
tiRHtefc fecU'-dBRBT 
HJ«en# BgTrBM: ^ 
Bll^oll 
Rolling along in the world by penance, 
having obtained divine vision, they are Bhrgu 
and others, the great-souled ones having pre¬ 
requisites dilated upon earlier. 
BrflNcftBkf RTcfiT^ % ft 
WWt ^ $T wfft TTftgll^ll 
With their divine vision only they observe 
the seven worlds- Satya and others. They 
visualize Brahma during the great nights of 
Brahma. 
Wfa: HMVBftl B<?TchM Wlftm 
o -o 
cKRTHT T^JrTlI^ ^ II 
The Seven Sages observe that sleeping Kala 
in their own nights. Since he stays beyond all 
Kalpas, he is declared to be the first 
Parame$thin. 
WT B^BtfRi iR: TR:I 
Cs ' O \3 "O 
tTcmi'^Tflicgf -Ju^TrP^ig swracUi^n 
In the beginning of every Kalpa, he becomes 
the creator of all living beings time and again. 
After withdrawing all creations within himself, 
Prajapati (recreates them again). 
3T2CTSRft '*#*11: Bd#J 
rR:^T =# T# dBRUlftSl #11^X11 
The greatly radiant one, the creator of 
everything withdraws everything into himself 
and thereafter lives within the single vast sheet 
of ocean during that entire night in dark. 
1. %ct is an error for i metrical exigency. 
RTT Tift# RR yfd4<4: SRUPft: I 
fR: fB^raT # wfcl RT.II^BII 
Then on the arrival of the end of night, 
Prajapati wakes up. He is induced (in his mind) 
with the desire for creation once again. 
# RRtft ft# 3<4?Tlft y^NdTl 
rrfBTcFfftft ^ R#II^H 
<|kk>T: BvdTdf dftn4 ^oR?T: T?cT:l 
At the time of the Naimittika dissolution, 
when Prajapati grows calm, in the course of 
withdrawal effected all the living beings get 
separated from their bodies. Then all beings 
become burnt by the solar beams in entirety and 
even Devarsis (gods and sages) and the noble- 
souled Manus (are affected by it in that water of 
flood). 
TRra^ft wnft fa^WR’ITft B%:l 
efiRCTcT=nRRTft SRitcfTSSSraftr 
In that collision at the inception of the 
Kalpa, Gandharvas, other loka beings ending 
with Pisacas who have been unheated as such, 
take recourse to Janaloka (the world beyond 
Maharloka, the heaven of deified mortals). 
ft^rrftftft Btcflft BRefonfal RRlftl 
?TRrft spsnft f=mi<TTft r%:ii 
# cTRIRTIlft RdcBMcft 'SRfTII^ RII 
The living beings of the lower strata of 
animals and those that have fallen into Naraka 
(hell)- all those get burnt up and get absolved 
from sins. Till such time the universe gets 
inundated or dissolved, they abide in Janaloka. 
opyrai <T RRCT <T 
RT# ft TRBnft B%d(ft ^WBRooll 
When the night of Brahma whose source of 
origin is the Unmanifest, dawns again, then 
ones again take provenance, the creatures in 
entirety all around.

=== PAGE 359 ===

Chapter-100 
331 
jpnrt iqqgt e^: jrt: ^ra^rf^JT: I 
fegRT feRtcqf^re^lRo^ll 
Rsis, Manus, Devas and all the four types of 
progenies (are alike in this respect). Those 
Siddhas too die and their birth is being 
enunciated. 
ciiii 'jRTfn■Ti^V'd ‘MtihiIh?} ri11^o^h 
The way within the solar world, the rising 
and setting become well-known, that very way, 
birth and death (nircdha) of beings here stands 
observed. 
WI 3SZFTI 
'm Tl^fftT 'ffcTTft 
waRT^tfq WrciifH ^ <3k*t w w:i 
risn 5n^ran%i 
y^ir^K rr rr ■'rftrafcr g^rfbr ^riRomi 
The rebirth after the dissolution of all living 
beings is termed as Sariisara. The way all the 
beings take birth during rains, in the same 
manner the immobile beings are bom in every 
Kalpa or aeon. Similarly, as in successive 
seasons the different forms of the characteristics 
of the season appear in the same succession as 
before, in the same manner the creation of the 
mobile as well as immobile beings (appear) 
before Brahma’s nights and the Pratydhara 
(dissolution). 
snpm ■w4,wmTfq ngwVr ^^nri r o 511 
^flJT ^cJ^dNi tr: xrt: I 
Cs V3 S3 
oiM)|oih£) ^FT?TIRo\3|| 
All the living beings exist and re-enter the 
creator of subjects, Prajapati, the creator of 
progenies. Brahma of great Yogic power, who 
is the creator of all beings at the inception of 
Kalpa and the like time and again, who is both 
perceptible and imperceptible is Mahadeva and 
the entire universe is his. 
IJgT WT WcTT 
3TnTt % TTPfur 
cTOT lITtS^TT- 
*^3 0^11 
It is he by whom the waters are created to 
begin with, the waters that proceed the surface 
of this land along the path taken earlier. That 
very way towards the waters of different norm, 
they trudge along as such. 
rltcT fa'c^URT:! 
^RTWlfe^gT- 
^4viTd^M9SRf^TIRo^|| 
Just as mortal beings revolve along 
variously (assuming different forms in this 
world) because of their auspicious and 
inauspicious acts, so they roll on above and 
below owing to the (gravitational force) of Sun, 
as transfer from one body to another is 
inevitable. 
^ ^TftT c^ch flnci: tTjT^TT 
spfoftr $ whRTSj 
rT^lftrmsJnf^ITW 
srafcr Ttr^T:11 'R 11 
Whosoever even Gods and Men, and even 
others, the Lords of progenies and those that are 
the Siddhas gone over to the heaven, these ones 
understand as such out of exigency of repute 
and the lawful ones, once again by recreation 
become spirited ones. 
•q^RTCTfriT W fg5n:ll 
w 5Fsnfr*pfar w ^srtc$tir wi 
After this, I shall dilate upon the Kala of 
existing inundation or dissolution of all living 
beings, O Brahmanas! I have already explained 
all the Manvantaras along with Prajanisarga (the 
creation of progenies) and the fourteen Manus.

=== PAGE 360 ===

332 
Vayu-Purana 
3TWT: t cR^r359%ir^ii 
All the Manvantaras consist of a thousand 
cycles of four Yugas. When two thousand 
cycles of four Yugas are completed, a Kalpa is 
called Nihsesa or in absolution. 
cWT WIT ftcrtatfl 
f| e^r jJIR3 3II 
This deserves to be recognised as one day of 
Brahma. You may learn its enumeration. 
Nimesa is the time taken to utter a short 
syllable. It is equal to a Matra. 
tfRNlfyftii-tfRd c&im T>?cTT:l 
rn: STUTTCT ^ ^T:lR ^ll 
Fifteen such Manusaksinimesa i.e. the 
winking of the eye of a man is called one 
Kastha. One Lava is of 5 Ksanas and twenty 
Kashas constitute three Lavas. 
3HW: Trrfiichi'W T^FT:I 
hcjiR4vi^*hi ^T:iR^mi 
Prastha comprises of seven Udakas and 
Sadhikas form a Lava known as such. Thirty 
Lavas constitute one Kala and one Muhurta is 
of thirty Kalas. 
3(£TTT4 ehIHMi 3 ymift 42IR ^ II 
Thirty such Muhurtas constitute one day and 
one night or nine hundred Kalas make one day 
and one night. 
ftw wm cwaiwifwvH: ^htir^ii 
And these very ones by counting deserve to 
be recognised the way ensues the motion of Sun 
and Moon- Fifteen Nimesas make one Kastha 
and thirty Kasthas form one Kala. 
RiyicchHi gffcT ^ymFT: csht 
5 'hQici:ii’R ^dii 
Thirty Kalas make one Muhurta and 
according to some, Kala is a tenth part of a 
Muhurta. Forty Kalas are termed (by others) as 
one Muhurta. 
■gfffe Rcnsrrfr vnfm#: ychfcqdui 
drwi^rwrw^) rnftr wrrm Tyr??iii? u 
HKI^cT wr fasfcKti 
RTfR^r 132:11^011 
Muhurtas and Lavas are thus calculated by 
the experts in Pramanas (measures). Then by 
the space of waters even (the time is measured). 
Thirteen Palas of water make a Prastha 
according to the calculation current in 
Magadha. Four Prasthas of water constitute one 
Nalikaghata. 
<^d<^FT: i 
rJ TJfdf t f§R#lc&T:IR^II 
The bottom plate of the device is four 
Angulas (cubits) square and there are four holes 
in it, each of the size of a golden mas a pulse. 
Two Nalikaghatas of water flow through those 
holes in the period of a Muhurta. It is the same 
both in the day and in the night. 
*44fdklVlfc|U| u3^dN ftr3yT:l 
3rfiie& xr^r cbHHi yfgyiudiR^^n 
By the specific motion of the Sun, in all the 
seasons perennially, the maximum number of 
Kalas is six hundred and five. 
W&R $T tTTTR W: T??T:IR^II 
This deserves to be known as one human 
day. The Naksatra (planetary one) day contains 
ten more. By the Savana months, a human year 
is calculated. 
A human year is equal to one divine day and 
one divine night and this is the determination of 
the experts in Sastras. By this day, the months, 
seasons, Ayanas and years should be 
enumerated.

=== PAGE 361 ===

Chapter-100 
333 
cR?T ^1 ^JT 
cfTFTRT WmTUTT^Trr 
Then this knowledge having been 
materialised, the nomenclature that becomes 
(evident) that may be observed. Since Kala 
constitutes the basic unit, time becomes 
etymologised as Kala. 
ffelT Cfit€t TT ^TT ^RTTI 
•?TcTRt ^ WSTTfoT ^?T fejPuidlPl rill 
ri WHTfcn d^ciwiPf tctPt 31139*11 
And the day that have been enunciated by 
Brahma becomes known as Kotl. It is 
constituted by hundred lakh two hundred and 
ninety thousand divine years. 
ydrsj^i <j wit fgwi trui^rt^i 
WRW5R TrwnR^ii 
Having heard this, however, the sages 
(attained) to highly amazing marvel. They 
requested Suta thereafter to make their 
knowledge (more) clearer numerically. 
tt tow wtoi 
S3 S3 *N 
The Sages spoke- On the basis of human 
calculation, we desire to hear, briefly, about the 
magnitude of the period of dissolution 
consisting of small words and syllables. 
fet felf TW:I 
^IMlP^rl^bm^ellTil WrBTgMR^Il 
Having listened to (their dissertation), lord 
Vayu, engaged in the well-being of the lokas, 
having eyes of divine norm, the adorable 
supreme overlord (Prabhu), spoke out. 
Tict ft to! cstfe) few nlPbetii 
?irat wire wir ^s<jttow: si^ir 3 ° 
“The days and nights of Brahma have 
already been declared. Now I shall dilate upon 
at their duration based on worldly (human) 
calculation. 
chlilwiPl T^lPt ^dtpur -tTRTOfaT TTI 
v3 
TOJT ^fel: WTOTT: feral fft:ii 
W TTTRWTTTprT TOT: I 
BsTWlPui TJ^ WT: TOT^I TTIR^II 
TOTOJTfenT -Misilld: WTt WTITOTOTOtg:| 
O Brahmanas! According to human 
calculation, four hundred and thirty-two Kotis 
(crores) eighty lakhs nine hundred and eighty 
thousand (4,32,89,80,000) human years 
constitute the period of dissolution. 
W fe ^IR3 3II 
Wife cfafe TOTO: ^fegrrffeT:i 
C\ O 
IlfefeTTSSTO# vfet ^ W=TTiTf^lR3*ll 
Seven suns then rise up. All the four types of 
creations become merged in the great elements 
of the worlds. The loka or world is inundated by 
water and all the mobile and the immobile 
beings come to a cease. 
feTOf% ri Tt?TT ThV'lld IMIMdll 
fefetgt TOfe <t mmss^n 
fwifaffe irarofe fe^riR^mi 
Having done a complete dissolution, 
Prajapati becomes calm. Then the gloom 
spreads everywhere and everything is 
surrounded by nocturnal dusk because 
everything is burnt down. The sole single ocean 
(that remains) is then occupied by Isvara. 
TOTOichlifer ^Tt TOddlTfeW: fet:l 
TTfeg Trirrorraw fefrfr wnw: T?rq;i r 
That deserves to be known as Ekarnava or 
one ocean. Its duration is same as that of the 
day of the lord. The period of night is as long as 
everything is submerged in water. When that 
recedes, it is remembered as day. 
tottut irfferPri 
STTOdTikHcH 3TWPTOT. TJJTT: JWt:IR3l9ll 
Day and night, that very way, in due order 
do exchange an inception. This existing 
dissolution verily, stands known as of days and 
nights.

=== PAGE 362 ===

334 
Vayu-Purana 
IrTtefr Ufa JlfdhPd ira#T xf\ 
v3 
In the world triad, all the beings whether 
mobiles or immobiles that exist, they get 
coalesced. On that account, the existing 
dissolution gets into being. 
m SRT: y^TRT <T rTFTT^T: JFSfNfa:! 
Prajapati is called Bhuta since he exists at 
the very outset before all the progenies and 
creations. Everything inundates in that. On that 
account, the final dissolution becomes known as 
Ab h u tasarhplava. 
^TP£FT 
3TcftrTT d^MRlVVSI d^HFTdT: TRT:II 
3Txm%aT^dTM^^o|| 
The word Abhiitasamplava is also used in 
the sense of perennial immortality and 
deathlessness. The gone by, the existing ones 
and likewise the future progenies are calculated 
by the divine counting well-recognised as such 
multiplied by another half. 
TTOsf f|pt infif y^lRdM I 
lidMlfoyfacfcMW 3RTTtRT:ll 
tWRt sr^rnT: 
The ultimate age of Brahma stands 
illustrated as twice Parardha. This much is the 
time of existence of Prajapati having no birth. 
At the end of the existence of Brahma, 
Paramesthin, there is the Pratisarga (secondary 
creation). 
The way, the light of the lamp becomes 
extinguished by the velocity of the wind, that 
very way, by Pratisarga or recreation, Brahma 
becomes calm and quiet. 
The principles beginning with Mahat 
become withdrawn in the great Isvara; Mahat 
gets coalesced into Avyakta i.e. the 
imperceptible and then may ensue the equality 
of all Gunas. 
^ TrqT^TRTT WT :| 
W^T WUsMIdl Wt: f% cidillfM cT:l 
WAlfarU yujVI&ISizmt8UW:ll 
This way stands illustrated by me the 
existing dissolution (Abhiitasamplava) in brief. 
This withdrawal by complete merging in water 
is a Naimittika reabsorption in relation to 
Brahma. Now what more may I repeat? He who 
may sustain it perennially or may listen to in 
entirety, owing to enumeration or listening, he 
may attain utmost success.” 
felt $T^cTI 
CUTS^cr) 
A Brahmana gains learning and a Ksatriya 
may grow victorious. The Vaisya may gain 
wealth and a Sudra may become happy. 
didsiWii u-d-dtPwnlfdcWH 
ViddnteJidtii^ooii 
•k -k -k

=== PAGE 363 ===

334 
Vayu-Purana

=== PAGE 364 ===

Chapter-101 
335 
Vayu spoke- Those Brahmanas having 
extraordinary-normed demeanourers, having the 
remnants of materials offered- as oblations, the 
minute-observationed ones, and who maintain 
special piety, become the residents of 
Maharloka along with Devas. The fourteen 
Manus who have been illustrated as the 
propagators of fame, and who are gone by ones, 
existing ones and those that have not yet come, 
are bom here again and again accompanied by 
the Sages, Devatas, Gandharvas and Raksasas. 
TT: TTT:l 
■O ^ O 
^t: ^r=r: 
lift A’m'dldi wferr:i 
They do get provenance into the 
jurisdictions of the Manvantaras time and again. 
Devas, Saptar§is, Manus and Pitrs pass away 
gradually and take refuge in Maharloka1 along 
with the righteous Brahmanas, K§atriyas, 
Vaisyas and Suras or Gods. 
cwfcimuii enfe 
O 
They are (also) accompanied by those, who 
observe reality or truth, who are endowed with 
faith or devotion, who are prideless ones, who 
are well-established in the duties of orders of 
society and stages of life and who resides within 
the domain of Codes of Law (Smrtis). 
Afterwards when the period of a Manvantara 
expires, they have their activities re-allocated. 
s3 
tK THcriT^WlT fait I 
yfd'<dfa rT cb<fan^: ^rofsrfg?TT:ll^ll 
The Sages spoke- Of what nature is that 
world which has been spoken of as Maharloka 
1. Fourth of his seven worlds rising one above the 
other from the Earth being between Svar and Janas, 
V.S. ^pte, p. 429. Mw, p. 794. Mahar + loka. 
by you, O powerful Matarisvan (Wind-god)? 
Within the Pratiloka (every world) many 
(meritorious souls) will be presiding. 
-tirade) % rTtcfiT cf?RT % fatl 
TJtRT: rg; % 5R5J WrMXTIKH 
How many are those worlds and how they 
do get burnt, O Prabhu? All this you may 
narrate before us with love or pleasure. You 
alone know this precisely. 
(Jcjy-rfjWd) 
TTTcrra W ctleR rrfafa I 19 11 
This way having been spoken by those sages 
having disciplined souls, Vayu, the knower of 
factional representations, uttered sweet words as 
per veracious norm. 
cUOTcjra 
o 
*nr#ci <paHifa ^fuTd'rf^r TT#f^T:i 
Vayu replied- Fourteen spots (abodes) have 
been illustrated by the great sages having name 
as lokas and wherein stay the human beings 
(Manavas, the scions of Manu). 
TP7T <T TPdf cfl 
wgm: W cTWT: efcdlfw?Sll^ll 
They call seven among them as Krtas and 
the other seven as Akrtas. The seven lokas, 
enumerated as Bhuh etc. are the Krtas. 
3JcgmfH <T -*txfa Hlcfcdlfd § ^tlft ^1 
Wilder: TTT^f faf^RlTII^II 
The seven Akrtas are the Prdkrta ones 
(created by Prakrti). The Krtas are the spots 
created along with their Sthdnins (persons 
identifying themselves with them). 
feft ywfitf ^ fas -R?: Ppmi 
WRI%i ^TiT ^dWIufablft rTII^II 
The Earth, the ethereal space, the divine 
heaven and what is known as Mahah- these 
four spots are known as Arnavakas.

=== PAGE 365 ===

336 
Vayu-Purana 
lfnf%chifq ^fwsw \m$ i1^11 
These abodes are equipped with extreme- 
normed dwellings. Those that are not equipped 
will be mentioned (afterwards). Those that may 
be Naimittikas, stay till the final dissolution. 
IRWm V WHWdlfa mf&T jjl 
^cbirdchlfH 'WtcJiIh 
Jana, and Satya- these three abodes 
are the Aikantikas (the isolated ones). The 
beings stay in these owing to non-restraint. 
czrajift 3 w 
fearer vm: T>J?T:ll^ll 
I shall now talk of the seven Vyakta 
(manifest) abodes. Bhurloka is the first among 
them and the second one is known as Bhuvah. 
t *Tf>: ^T:l 
3FFRJ WIT) Hleh'WM: fasn^Rtll^ll 
Svah is the third one that deserves to be 
recognised and Mahah is known as the fourth 
one. Jana is the fifth loka and Tapah is 
considered as the sixth one. 
WTT rTfcRt ftTHld^d: tRtri 
Satya is the seventh loka. Beyond that, there 
is Niraloka (darkness). “Bhuh”, this way having 
been illustrated earlier (by Brahma), thereafter it 
became Bhurloka. 
(fgjfafr <gcf ^tT> 3t^rf^t 
Spfoj Wftdlrd-di ?ll^ll 
The second time when he said “BhuvaK\ 
thereafter became the atmospheric region. The 
third time when he said “Svah”, heaven 
appeared. 
WT c^lchMcfirMild) 
rrat ^r: ^nrii^oii 
By these three nomenclatures, he created the 
Brahmaloka. Hence Bhuh is remembered as 
Parthiva Loka or terrestrial world and 
atmospheric region is remembered as Bhuvah. 
$ f^cT filddJdUl TirPETI 
^dWlIyklrlJMlPdWd) 'SJrTOfa: ^11 
Svarloka then is the heaven. This is rendered 
certain in the Puranas. Of Bhutas, the Adhipati 
(lord) is Agni and therefore he became known 
as Bhutapati. 
duwjeiwld:! 
Vayu is the Adhipati of Bhuvah, on that 
account, Vayu is Bhuvaspati. Of Bhavya, Surya 
(Sun) is the Adhipati. On that account, Surya is 
Divaspati. 
^fdodl^ci »f@HleH'Wd'l5«ra^l 
IdPfcj-dllycbKIUlj t $RI:IR3II 
“Mahah”, this way spoken of, then 
Maharloka came into being. The abode of the 
Devas who retire from their offices is there. 
t ^HT:i 
■o 
dTOT WTOW 3T5lRt dFRP5R:ll?'tfll 
O 
Jana is the fifth loka. People taking birth 
there are called Janas. Since the subjects of 
Svayambhuva Manu and others were bom 
there, Janaloka becomes etymologised thus. 
dT*dT: f| M<WlcdUebl^-dl:l 
d^T dtPS yfdBfd ddT dd:ll^kll 
And those subjects of Svayambhuva Manu 
and the like, who have already been illustrated, 
set out for Tapoloka when all the worlds are 
consumed by the fire at the end of the Kalpa. 
W%: ^T^KISTI m 
O 
dTOT 
■wWTlfd cTTrii’R^n 
Rbhu, Sanatkumara and other 
Urdhvaretasas1 (living in perpetual celibacy) 
having selves perpetuated by penance, stay in 
that world. That is why that world is called 
Tapoloka. 
1. V.S. Apte,p. 119.

=== PAGE 366 ===

Chapter-101 
337 
Wtfw TT T*JcT:l 
I'SIHIdiWd: MOTT: TET W TOTO:ll?\9ll 
The word Satya refers to Brahma. It is 
remembered as one having simple existence as 
(the sole prop). Brahmaloka then is Satya and it 
is the shining seventh world. 
irerafarcst w TOi$rerT:i 
W^dftyilW TOTT3J TO TOJ$:II 
WdUejiRw: to? TOr ftcnfan:ii^<sii 
Gandharvas, Apsarsas, Yaksas, Guhyakas 
accompanied by Raksasas, along with all the 
Devas are the residents of Svarloka. All Bhutas, 
Pisacas and Nagas are residents of the Earth 
along with men. 
to TOTfrwrr to' 
TOcTOsT %II 
grror tow frorroni 
tocTO; toi1tot:ii3oii 
Although Maruts, Matarisvans (gods and 
winds), Rudras, Devas and likewise the two 
AsVins have no fixed abode and they roam 
about in the atmosphere, they have their main 
abode in Bhuvarloka, Adityas, Rbhus, 
VisVedevas, Sadhyas, Pitrs and likewise the 
sages of Ahgiras Gotra resort to Bhuvarloka 
also. 
TJH clmftchl ^giTOTO?fTOTlTO: I 
TTtrfiT 9l^|ci||^|^'Mgi:||^ ^|| 
All these Devas move about in aerial 
chariots and reside in the constellations and 
planets also. This way all the (worlds) bom of 
the utterances (Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svah) of Brahma 
have been illustrated in due order. 
tfVcbi : I 
ottort grot: TpnTOt 
Bhurloka is the primary loka declared as 
existing within Mahat. These (lokas) get 
inception by Tanmatras. They are mutually 
pure. 
% otlrftdl TO fTOT:l 
Trf&TO TOrorfTO:ii 
f^rf top?t: toft ?^rsm5RTOgT:ii^^ii 
Sukradyas and Caksusantas- these 
beginning with Sukra and ending with Cak$u§a 
(Manu) who resorted to Bhu (Earth) earlier, 
reside in Maharloka till the end of Kalpa. This 
way, these lokas of Brahma have been 
illustrated. 
TOTOTOPT TO2TOTO g TgrfT:l 
rfRT^FTOT 
groqT ^ttoit TOgTOr5%tr:i 
TORT WT: TO TO t: TOl 
ftfTOTT frTOTTTO TO cT ^TOT:II^^II 
The seven Suns bum with their rays those 
worlds beginning with Bhurloka and ending 
with Maharloka. Marlci, Kasyapa, Dak§a, 
Svayarhbhuva, Ahgiras, Bhrgu, Pulastya, 
Pulaha, Kratu and others are the overlords of 
progenies or subjects and they exist there along 
with them. They are spiritless and free from 
egoism. They are Urdhvaretasas (perpetual 
celibates). 
jpr: TOTOTTTOTT TOtTOT:l 
TORTTTWt TOft •HHUl^i TO: TOT1:ii 
TO^TRt TOgt TOTO^?Tcl:ll^'3|| 
Rbhu, Sanatkumara and others are ascetics 
of great detachment. These fourteen worlds are 
the sources of the resurrection of all the 
Manvantaras including those of the Savamas. 
TOr toto tot ?t tttoto totsstTOti 
cfth fTOfcd toto (?) 
Practising Yoga, Tapa (penance) and Satya 
(truthfulness) and having resolved within self, 
they return to the sixth Loka (i.e. Tapoloka) 
then at the end of the day. 
TOFTO TOTOT cTOt ^miMllfauilHI 
v3 v vj *V 
TOTTOmt ^Mdlyidr^nJT:ll^<?ll

=== PAGE 367 ===

338 
Vayu-Pura9a 
Satya is the seventh Loka from where there 
is no return. It stands illustrated as Brahmaloka 
as one of pre-requisites of unassailablemorm. 
gii'iymRuiuiin -qcfo;: 
WSRTt ^iP^K-dR^T TgrnTll^oll 
By the thorough measurement of Paryasa 
(rotation), Bhurloka is known as Samitih (an 
association)1. The Antariksa, the space between 
the Earth and the Sun is remembered as 
Bhuvah. 
^F%5reTt TfvSt wnfctleft fer: ■^cT:l 
The space between the Sun and Dhruva (the 
Pole Star) is Svargaloka or Divaloka. The area 
between Dhruva and Janaloka is called 
Maharloka. 
fegnm: w HictTOj fer ^ufir fegs:i 
'Mdi^diRM: ^f T*n?qgn:innil 
The Saptalokas (seven worlds) are well- 
known. Now I shall talk of the accomplishments 
of those worlds. All the beings of Bhurloka are 
the food-eaters and are endowed with chyles. 
^ -*cpf ^ ¥1 h 
gni fefa cj^ ^rmferr: 11*311 
fgfen itr# ?rat WFT^nuTi 
In Bhuvarloka and in Svargaloka, all the 
residents are Soma-drinkers and clarified butter 
imbibers. Those who stay in the fourth Loka, 
Maharloka, they deserves to be recognised as 
possessing mental Siddhis of five features. All 
their cherished ends are instantaneously 
realised. 
TJ% ^fe i -gf: l|JU|JM| 
All the past, present and future Devas 
mutually worship by means of sacrificial 
performances. 
1. V.S. Apte, p. 588. 
«yMM^tRacii 3¥Ttt: fefe ^T:i 
fewT ?TrT:( ?) 11*^ II 
The middles ones adore the past ones and 
the present ones adore the middle ones by 
sacrifice. When the groups of Devas pass off, 
all their contacts and relations cease. 
fdfa^dlfacfeHlurr 3 ¥R¥TI 
rmt w TTnrsft ^it ^gr fafig<TTTOii*^ii 
Of those having jurisdiction rescinded as 
such, the accomplishment of- these is the 
intellectual one (Manasi). Their- series of 
Siddhis (accomplishments) is pure and deserves 
to be known as Manasi (mental). 
3rET ETtengr 
wiRh fen to dfefn sr:ii^<su 
c\ 
The four lokas situated lower than Janaloka 
have been illustrated succinctly by me to you, O 
scholars! I shall recount them again. 
o 
tjcTOI: *dR^MK<y:il*^ii 
n wftot g^rnfr 
3T3TT: hRibto ydifesssrnfo rT)imo u 
Vayu spoke- Marlci, Kasyapa, Dak$a, 
Vasistha, Arigiras, Bhrgu, Pulastya, Pulaha, 
Kratu and others are generated at the outset as 
the mind-bom sons of Brahma, ihen having 
established their subjects or progenies, they do 
resort to Janaloka. 
cfiTrtf fe ^1 
fWT Tfefe ?fe jnrof^r ¥gT *ht:i 
ymidy) w: M^nlebR(cjiRn:im^ii 
sRfeisssrafo cfl 
When the worlds beginning with Bhuh and 
ending with Mahar are pervaded by the flames 
of Samvartaka fire at the end of the Kalpa,

=== PAGE 368 ===

Chapter-101 
339 
when the black fire blaze and bum, groups of 
Devas headed by Yama and others residing in 
Maharloka resort to Janaloka. All of them of 
subtle bodies do become stationed therein. 
O O Cv 
Of these, they, being of similar capacities 
and bearers of similar frameworks in Janaloka, 
retire till such time the world gets inundated. 
oprat jj T3RTT t gpJTtSe^|T^fa:l 
stirrer ^ctbhMviPw^immi 
When the night of Brahma, the one having 
Unmanifest source of origin, converts into 
dawn, they get generated like earlier norm in a 
serial order. 
*rftenrpRfT wra>T:i 
All those aspirants beginning with 
Svayambhuva and ending with Marlci do take 
rebirth on the defunction of their predecessors. 
tnw: chi%iac rnm-.\ 
^ ^ r* irfsRr tr%UTWTim^ii 
Then, the Yama groups of Devas take 
rebirth in due order, the eldest first and the 
younger afterwards. 
T^cTT % ’Hkl TT^rl^l: TJjJrii: I 
oqcftHT: fflTT: PvigT^yi Tftliq<ill 
In the lineage of Devas, Devatas, verily, are 
known as seven Sambhutas (generations). 
These are bom with the Kalpa. Among them, 
the three Sistas (still) survive. 
t W. Ttf ^7 %tl^MpTR4d|t(l 
STTfaRtesfetT xj ctHIrdUiJIfsqifd^d ^11^ oil 
Ri WSJT: TRTRRTRrTI 
dJIUill-d HIcfPR^iq <f33RTTjj|$ ^11 
Those gods obtaining recurrence upto ten 
times in a serial order all around, manifest the 
evanescence of all living beings. Then those all 
Ganas, in entirety, having seen the apparent 
nature in ideologies and by force of the 
inevitable future, attain mental equilibrium. 
Having tendencies gone accomplished, all of 
them, healthy and nice minded ones, take leave 
off Janaloka with a calm mind and then attain 
the Vair&jaloka. 
gjT^T I 
chtiHlr^e) SP^T^T^irf|^5^ri|^^|| 
$*ld4?IHdd^ t WTRINtd-rddl 
The ascetics endowed with perpetual norm 
and penance and owing to their palliation of 
Dharma for a long time, get generated in the 
lineages of meritorious persons. They do fulfil 
the duties of their respective positions, whether 
they attain Devahood, Sagehood or human 
form. 
tTcT ^cFTtJTT: Ttf tl 
T?T fdB^MkddHII^II 
This way, all the Devaganas resort to the 
Vairaja Loka after ten repetitions of births and 
there they resort for ten Kalpas. 
wf ^ dd: ^ iwn eliMcii ttt: i 
Cs Cv O 
tffilHl-* XTcJqc^MUl rTII^MI 
v C\ C\ o 
Then on the completion of every Kalpa in 
the Vairajaka (Loka), they return to 
Brahmaloka in line with the earlier order. 
lidfRRiglH)^ 5 trT3f% THI 
trrsr gj^sn^j^Rii^^ii 
In this Brahmaloka, when a Kalpa of 
Vairajaka passes away, they once again gain a 
position that lasts for a Kalpa in Vairajaloka. 
Trcj McridM^UI y-^dWldd ^1 
ira oddlrlu cTTRTT mR<*fc-M^II 
Tqrra% c^Ail

=== PAGE 369 ===

340 
Vayu-Purana 
This way in line with the earlier serial order, 
they frequently go to Vairajaloka as a result of 
their penance upto ten times and get back to 
Brahmaloka. 
Having head that sentence of the sages, 
Suta, the knower of the real import of the 
material gains of the world, well-versed in the 
Puranas, replied in following terms accordingly. 
TJcj ^wrr% ajcfrcflft I 
ftsR slglcdU <T *TcTRT*lfifa: WN^II 
This way, thousands of Devayugas have 
passed. Along with the sages, they attain death 
in Brahmaloka. 
w 3cm 
qr ^TWIRq^OT cTcR 
3T^rri^WTw=I ehi<n*t| 3TO®TRT^T : 11 
Tjcjip? q 
Suta spoke- It is not possible to illustrate in 
details this account as per serial order. Owing to 
non-primeval norm of Kala or Time, it is 
impossible to count everything completely. This 
way, the apprehensions have been released by 
me as per suitable norm. 
cT§WT qt?raTferTT:l 
WTT|: MJlUIji Hnrrf^WT WTrf^TT||V9o|| 
Having heard that import of the expression, 
the sages were over-whelmed with 
apprehension. They then spoke to Suta, the one 
having expert knowledge of Puranas, the pupil 
of Vyasa and the greatly-intellect one. 
yrMifd ydigm q-rWrcnij 
fagfqr V&t ff| ^rwqil^ll 
The Sages replied- About the Aharas (food- 
takings or enjoyment source) of these beings in 
Vairaja Loka (relating to Brahman)1, their 
exploit, the way they stay there and their 
support- all these you may dilate upon as per 
veracity. 
^fr: wnfum w ira^n 
1. V.S.Apte, p.535. 
Wf 3c(irJ 
jfTW^T ^ Tri h 
Rtgfcr ^ 3RT:iiv93h 
Suta said- Then they all, being of extreme 
purity-normed attitudes, attain that world and 
stay there for ten periods of final dissolution. 
Tfi f^RTT U^<Rl:l 
Cv 
All of them are of diminutive frames. They 
are scholars, being the corporeal norms of 
riches or density, having dissolution of the 
existing norm. 
UHofcMKisai: ymyfifai:i 
■O s3 ^ 
wfir d Pm fa chi hxjt wRr TirmfetHii^ii 
s5 
Sanatkumara and other Siddhas having 
lawful activity of mental concentration, spoke 
out on their providential repute on their 
transformation arrived as such. 
WddiFf tRsnfcr wwii 
-si cT^rs^^rter Itrt: 
ycidk^Ti: smt ^rfgwf?riiv9i9ii 
The inclination for deserting the spot or 
abode occurs instantaneously in mind. Then all 
of them, having chaste intellects, talked to each 
other and the Vairajas (those related to 
Brahman)- “O greatly fortunate ones, having 
taken recourse to Pranava, we shall proceed to 
Brahmaloka. Then our beneficence will be the 
outcome”. 
TJcrgeRcfT cl^T -gf oJTc^|fiH:| 
filed I cl^rSSFTR •5TTrafiJoT:lP3</II 
Having spoken this way, all of them 
persevering within the control of Brahman, 
having applied their own self, do exist as 
Yogadharmins.

=== PAGE 370 ===

Chapter-101 
341 
3#8T UHHUkI 7TRTT dinf&ll Wl 
'0gl«bl*Wc|&d 
They get coalesced the way do become 
extinguished the lights of the lamps and adhere 
to the Brahman wherefrom a return is rarely 
achieved. 
?TptIT: JJP2J 3i^flr'djq ^ dell: lid o 11 
Having attained to that loka full of 
meditation, they attain to joy through Brahman 
and the state of immortality. 
W:i 
If*: W^TTTt Ipr hfrf|rT:lld?ll 
Six times higher up beyond the Vairaja loka, 
Brahmaloka is popularised as where Brahma 
was the chaplain. 
W Tfi uuMFuini ^s^gfnrreMTi 
3nq^ srgroT: jnmipd 'd^prii^ii 
All those having souls for Pranava are 
endowed with purity, enlightenment and 
penance. Having acquired the joy of Brahman, 
they do strive for immorality. 
anflraoT ftRT sifonst ngW:iid?n 
They do not get humiliated by mutually 
clashing duals. They are devoid of three 
emotions. The possess overlordship equal to 
Brahma and they become highly radiant. 
rT {rgnlfchcbl: ^ T# 3TTW 
They are endowed with Prabhava 
(superiority), Vijaya (victory), Aisvarya 
(supremacy), Sthiti (stability), Vairagya 
(renunciation) and Darsana (vision) on par with 
Brahma. 
Hwtt w yfa+wi 
rrcms^t fjgjraw *Rifwi:n 
<sm& ^ % 3TOT3[f?fa:lldmi 
Along with Brahma and (other) gods, at the 
end of the penance, having selves given to 
activity, having states awakened and seeking 
inspiration from minds and within the 
imperceptible, they coalesce as observers of a 
moment or festivity when Pratisancara (a 
counter resurrection) is imminent. 
W33 WdH^iTOrlll4 5ll 
Thus the godly sages partake of the Sattra 
(the sacrificial session in the form of) Brahman. 
The Brahmasattra is eternal, immortal, 
resplendent and ever-existent. 
They are Punarmarga gadis (those that do 
not take to the path of resurrection), 
Urdhvaretasas, the purity activated by the 
adherence to action is discernible in Vedantas 
(i.e. Upanisads) (the concluding portions of the 
Vedas). 
m sraT: w 
o o 
% W: lid dll 
There, the practising ones, concentrated as 
such, wait upon the ultimate limit. Having given 
up the sinister-normed body, they proceeded on 
for immortality. 
efldTFTT fadshWl : I 
7TRTT: KfuT%dlrMldl fa?t^l:lld<? II 
rtmwfMt snrfcnpiT: TtpT:ii<?oii 
Having pennons exercised, having wrath 
restrained, uninfatuated, truth taking ones, 
tranquil ones, having souls given abstract 
contemplation or profound religious 
meditation,1 complaisant and having senses 
controlled, detached ones, pure ones, are known 
1. V.S. Apte, p. 354, Pranihita.

=== PAGE 371 ===

342 
Vayu-Purana 
as Brahmasdyujyas i.e. those adhering to the co¬ 
operation or co-ordination of Brahman. Those 
who are endowed with lustlessness, those who 
were staid ones, having sins obviated by 
austerities, the undestroyed lokas became 
known as of unmeasurable comforts for them. 
TTTtf Suffer 
■m m a wfcr 
This is the divine Brahmapada, the excellent 
one, refulgent in the firmament. After attaining 
it along with Brahma, Devas cease to be 
worried and sorrowful (i.e. attain Moksa). 
WF* 3*1: 
i^T^gr in; 
fqrn^ wmi^n 
The Sages spoke- Whence is this Parardha 
(infinite or infinity)? What is called Para 
(supreme spirit or culminating point or final 
beatitude)1? This we want to understand, that 
you may talk to us, O excellent man! 
c\ 
x) tRTST rT qR+ioni VT&r W 
Xie&^T u 
Suta spoke- You may hear from me the 
definition of Parardha and the enumeration of 
Para. One, ten, hundred and thousand are the 
(chief) counting numbers. 
TTg) WffpT 3 fogtT 
Ten times thousand deserves to be known as 
Ayala. One hundred thousand is called Niyuta 
by intelligent men. 
crerr 
3T<fe d^ldi^ 3T53T eh|fd$>|d %:!!<? M! 
Likewise an Arbuda (one hundred million)2 
and Kofi (crore) can be calculated. An Arbuda 
1. V.S. Apte, p. 315. 
2. V.S. Apte, p. 55. 
is of ten crores and an Abja (one thousand 
millions)3 is of hundred Kofis. 
rT f3§:ii^u 
Those seeking inspiration from mind call a 
thousand crores as Kharva4 (a larger number : 
10,000,000,000). Ten times a Kharva make a 
Nikharva5 (a billion). 
ttpt 3 ^iuii ^r:ii 
Wg, 13JTf: wnfMf ^1:11^^11 
A hundred thousand crores (Kofis) is called 
Sahku6 and a thousand times thousand crores 
multiplied by ten as such, they, the persons 
conversant with calculations, call as Samudra1 
(Jaladhi). 
Ten thousand times a thousand Kofis is 
called Madhya. A hundred thousand times a 
thousand Kofis is termed Anta. 
chYdchYd^ifui ^f?r gfefoi 
ftyit 
A thousand crores multiplied by a crore is 
called Parardha. Learned men call twice a 
Parardha, a Para (great). 
wng: W ^RM-iicjnTi 
fofnmct tTWlfSTOW cTcf;llo || 
^ TlrT: 
TIRf ^ rr XRT xTll^o?|| 
Wjt ^cT LHI^XTMi 7TcT:l 
IJcPTfi^rnft WMlPf quMlfeffl^o ^ II 
3. V.S. Apte, p. 37. 
4. V.S. Apte, p. 175. 
5. V.S.Apte, p. 286, a Billion. 
6. V.S. Apte, p. 545, Ten Billions. 
7. MW, p. 1166. V.S. Apte, p. 589. Samudra- a 
number 4.

=== PAGE 372 ===

Chapter-101 
343 
A hundred is Paridrdha as recognised by the 
great sages. A thousand is Paripadmaka. 
Thereafter the other numbers (each successive 
number is ten times the previous number) are as 
follows- Ayuta, Niyuta, Prayuta, Arbuda, 
Nyurbuda, Svarbuda, Kharva, Nikharva, Sanku, 
Padma, Samudra, Madhyama, Parardha and 
Para. This way, these eighteen are the figures in 
counting. 
TTdHlfd 
jrfHFT 'CRTsf 
These are the terms enumerated by the great 
sages. A Parardha from the beginning of 
creation constitutes a Kalpa of Brahma. 
qr in* xro^sr wira: wrar ■crttii^n 
The surviving period is also of the same 
extent, at the end of which there is a Pratisarga. 
Thus, Para and Parardha have been counted by 
me by enumeration. 
WRfPT TJT cfcf WTFT: Tit rPT: I 
W tttT sitf: W felT W g%:ii^c>mi 
Tit WT Tit ?TR Wl 
WTFUidKdi 'ffcT sr^nTTS^ fearTlI 5= || 
Whereby this one is of the highest virility or 
prowess, highest age, highest-nomied penance, 
highest power, highest law or duty, highest 
education and utmost fortitude, Parabrahma, 
Pararii Jhanam (highest Brahma and highest 
knowledge), utmost supremacy or overlordship. 
Beyond that is the superior Bhuta and nothing 
remains beyond Brahma. 
qt twt #q tit: cTrT: qr:i 
qn it qn^rTTi19ova11 
He is stationed in the highest position, so he 
is beyond (greatest of) all objects. The greatest 
Brahma has been reckoned by me and half of 
that is Parardha. 
UTRT rflfq 'dferajqj 
The countable yet ever uncountable is the 
trinity. The countable is seen by counting of 
numbers and all numbers up to Parardha can be 
specifically calculated. 
3iqqrq ftrTT>rc%q (?) 
On the visibility of Rasi, the counting 
becomes apparent. Then the definition of 
uncountable is sand particles that means 
infinite. These are the five per-requisites. 
^iMx(dB^UrH4 WT^^fdll^oll 
By the divine-visioned gods or kings, this 
counting can be achieved because of their 
purity. Owing to his stability in the knowledge, 
Brahma locates everything. 
W rf ^rq^lWMRcH:l 
-<2 -O 
Having heard this, all the ascetics of the 
Naimisaranya had their eyes brimful with tears. 
Out of joy, their voice was choked up. 
q ^ rr 
9I^ihI«b^ WRiraqnsnqrc: Trotnwii 
q|*HiJ)qT wiRt qrrqq qtaw wi 
o 
sbiviw ^ qiiMiui ^t^fwrfq <1^:11^311 
(Then) all those Brahmavadins (the 
expounders of Vedas) questioned Vayu- “0 
adorable one, we wish to hear precisely how far 
is Brahmaloka in so many Yojanas. 0 Supreme 
overlord! We are eager to hear about the extent 
of Yojana and a Krosa in factual 
representation.” 
rfqt TTpR 3R3TT qRT%T 
B^TcI Hfi qsnqjqqil^'iSII 
Having heard that talk of those, Vayu 
(Matarisvan), the disciplined one in talking, 
uttered pleasant words as per perception and 
serial order.

=== PAGE 373 ===

344 
Vayu-Puraija 
srnreyw 
o 
Jra^nftr ^ fsrarf^TrPqri 
3T^r?RT^RPTFTr t foqToEFtll^ II 
Vayu spoke- Here I shall dilate upon this 
much. You may hear what I am eager to dilate 
upon. From the imperceptible, the perceptible- 
portioned one, becomes highly prominent as 
such, 
#cT TT?rTi WHT ^cTlf^: 35q^| 
^wmifaeb wmp>:iimn 
There are ten parts of Mahat. The gross part 
is called Bhutadi (Cosmic Ego). The magnitude 
of Paramanu (an atom) is little more than the 
tenth part of Bhutadi. 
snerranrt ? 33pm 
^riRnt ^ wrm mii^ii 
An atom is the minuter one that can not be 
seen by the (naked) eye. That which is 
absolutely indivisible, that is termed as 
Paramanu (an infinitesimal particle).1 
wt dciimuiHi wmj wn 
When the rays of Sun enter through the 
window, the dust particle that becomes visible 
as the minutest one, is termed Paramanu. It is 
the first one among the units of measurements. 
They call that as an atom or an infinitesimal 
particle. 
3TEFTT wp wrrm I 
d'H'lUj: HHIIsMIdWdJ'iK'd 
When there may get into being the 
accumulation or aggregation of eight Parmanus 
(atoms), it is called Trasarenu (an atom or mole 
or an atom of dust which is seen moving in a 
sun beam) or Padmarajas (pollen-dust of a 
lotus). 
The accumulation of Trasarenus becomes 
known as Ratharenu2 (chariot dust). And eight 
Ratharenus in aggregation is known as 
Balagt'cr* by the wise ones. 
foSTT WMT I 
fW ^ 
Eight Balagras make a Liksa4 and eight 
Liksas make a Yuka (a louse). An octagon of 
Yukds makes a Yava (a grain of barley) and they 
call Angula (the distance between the joints in a 
finger) as made of Yavas octagon. 
Twelve Ahgulas make a Vitasti and 
twentyone Afigulai-joints make a Ratni (a 
cubit- the distance between the elbow and the 
closed fist). 
^ITcJTfT fdVlfd^cl Hllc^dlfa m 
Twenty-four Ahgidas form one Hasta (a 
measure of length about 18 inches, the distance 
between the elbow and the tip of the middle 
finger).5 Kisku deserves to be recognised as of 
two Ratnis or forty-two Afigulas. 
^cr qjTIjpfttfW: I 
Md<JIoMjdIsqIvafafcJM SFpT: TlJcPTII^'SII 
Ninety-six Ahgulas, those seeking 
inspiration from mind may call as Dhanus6. 
2. The dust whirled up by a chariot as a partic. cubic 
measure = 8 Trasa Renus. Mw, p. 865 (Ratha 
Renu). 
3. V.S. Apte, p. 387. has extreme strength or force, 
and head of an anny. MW, p. 723. 
4. Yajnavalkya Smrti p. 362, padas 3-4 has - 
f^TSJT cj dlR-u^kM rrfn d 11 a very minute 
measure of weight said to be equal to four or eight 
Trasarenus. V.S. Apte, p. 480, Manusmrti VIII. 133. 
.5. V.S. Apte, p. 637. 
6. A measure of length - 4 hastas, V.S.Apte,p. 267. 
1. V.S.Apte,p. 317.

=== PAGE 374 ===

Chapter-101 
345 
This Dhanus is a unit for the purpose of 
measuring Gavyuti1. 
sbjufwyid wnft# srcniimn 
Dhanus, Danda, Yuga and Nall- all these 
are equal-normed by Ahgulas. Those knowing 
counting do talk that three hundred Dhanus 
units make a Nalva. 
sip# I 'loyrfdMinjy^i 
31# SR-.W^lfrl #R $r ftsfrftll^ll 
It is taught that two thousand Dhanus units 
make one Gavyuti and eight thousand Dhanusas 
make one Yojana. 
T# SOTT # #R <T W#l 
ft# rOTII^II 
By this Dhanus, the measurement of the 
distance of a Yojana become completely 
illustrated. It deserves to be known that a 
thousand of these Dhanus make the distance of 
a Sakra-Krosa. 
#TCHt <T Wild 
Of Yojanas, the counting has been done by 
the experts in calculations. By this advance 
Yojana measurement, you may hear of the 
distance of Brahmaloka. 
?TcTT# ft'dlcR:! 
ftyilebClimH 
Divakara (Sun) is a hundred thousand 
Yojanas above the surface of the Earth. 
Nisakara (Moon) is a thousand Yojanas above 
the solar orb. 
# ww 5 #rht ft?ncbTrai 
q^TTUp c^rwyijfwdlchl# 11^ oil 
A full hundred thousand Yojanas above the 
Moon, the entire stellar zone shines. 
1. A measure of length nearly equal to two miles or 
one Krosa or a measure of distance equal to two 
Krosas, V.S. Apte, p. 185. 
Tfip? THOdldt Rjld ^T:l 
A hundred thousand stands counted the 
height of Meru. The distance between planets 
above the stellar zone is twice this (height) and 
they are one above the other. 
'diui^iori ^r:i 
Below all the stars and planets moves Budha 
(Mercury). Above that moves Sukra (Venus) 
and above that is the Lohita i.e. planet Mars. 
# fptftsr# trull# 
wftftugH ^uppyRyidJ^lVWl 
W^ntnt ?Td!<# ft'*TT#ll^'tfll 
#5# cTRTtft f#T ft# 
ft## #) ftftn^mi 
Above that is Brhaspati (Jupiter) and above 
that Sanaiscara (Saturn) moves on. A hundred 
thousand Yojanas above Saturn shines the entire 
circle of Seven Sages (Ursa Major). A hundred 
thousands Yojanas above the Seven Sages 
shines Dhruva (Pole Star), son of Uttanapada. 
He is the main pivot of all stars in the heaven. 
He has the compact divine Vimana (aerial car) 
made of stars. 
ours# 
M-cFrAg #Rlf#IT ftft #ft#II^H 
^hit cT Rftvsfftnsrr Traftti 
#mt ###T fftft#: 3T i pw:M^'3M 
The elevation of the world triad has been 
illustrated by me in Yojanas. In the course of 
the Manvantaras, worldly Yajhas are performed 
for Devas by the people of different castes and 
stages of life. These Yajnas alone are called as 
the measure of sustenance and stability of 
Devas. 
cb<*|c||i#:ll

=== PAGE 375 ===

346 
Vayu-Puraiia 
((JchyM^dl W WRII^II 
This world triad has been illustrated. Beyond 
this, you may know. The Maharloka is above 
the Pole Star (Dhruvaloka) wherein those 
denizens staying till the end of the Kalpa reside. 
It is one crore Yojanas from Dhrava. This is the 
determination done (by the learned men). 
| gfeit w ^dUifSiR^ ehc-Mcnftw:)! 
m it sr^PJT: w wraJT: *g<n:ii^ii 
From Maharloka, Janaloka is two crores 
Yojanas wherein do abide the Kalpavasins and 
wherein those sons of Brahma, headed by 
Dak§a are called as the Sadhakas or 
accomplishes. 
TgrHTI 
It is remembered that Tapoloka is four 
crores Yojanas above Janaloka. Therein, the 
gods called Vairajas, stay. They are divested of 
the burning of all beings. 
slglcfacb: ^3xzfall^ll 
Six crores Yojanas from Tapoloka is 
Satyaloka. It is called Brahmaloka of those who 
are devoid of death and desire. 
vzm ■ror pit ^ 
HebchMdilT^dHi MsHVlfaiJdlfH jTII^II 
From there, one does not get collapsed. It is 
remembered that the space above B?*ahmaloka 
is a crore and fifty Niyuta (1.5 crores Yojanas). 
l * l WdlS 44 ^TgRTt^jTrQT; 
chldrU-M fapTT 
^IrSRTgJTTT: 
The upper part then of Anda (Cosmic Egg) 
is called as beyond the range of Brahmaloka. 
The lower part extends to four crore sixty lakh 
five hundred thousand Yojanas. This is the half- 
digited escalation and the difference of the 
movement of this one, is deemed as different 
one. Dhruvaloka and its top stands illustrated by 
me as per hearing, mentioning the distance in 
Yojanas. 
or^nft’ WTRT WHcbr^mj 
wfar uKcfc^ui: infant m gfafar.-u^mi 
Now I shall talk of the jurisdiction 
arrangement for those living beings who 
deserve falling into hells due to their cruel 
actions. 
(w^psit Trafatssr fanfaER:ii^^u 
^ ^fa^sr wvwwfr fafam-.i 
3Tsr:faRT: wgfa rOn^ii 
cm nsni 
3rffa^rfat n 
cm c^uui^sr 
The following are various types of hells— 
Raurava, Rodha, Sukara, Tala, Taptakumbha, 
Mahajvala, Sabala, Vimocana, Krmi, 
Krmibhaksa, Laldbhaksa, Visamsana, 
Adhahsiras, Puyavaha, Rudhirandha, 
Vaitarana, Krsna, Asipatravana, Agnijvala, 
Mahdghora, Samdamsa, Svabhojana, Tamas, 
Krsnasutra, Loha, Asija, Apratistha, Vlcyasva 
and others. 
rTTW TOJT: -gi wm fam fwi: l 
% gbcfedewfal: TlrRTtf ^f^ll^oii 
All these hells are dark and gloomy 
established in the domain of Yama. Those 
having done deeds of sinister norm fall into 
these severally. 
c\ 
■fli tferrsn: y«lf%T:i 
vzmft § ferr wfavi-Hfan 
Beneath the Earth, all these Raurava and the 
like hells have been illustrated. The false- 
witness giving one, the false-income earning

=== PAGE 376 ===

Chapter-101 
347 
one, a person of ruthless grasp, an untrue 
statement maker and a false speaking person 
falls into the hell Raurava. 
Tf£t ^ ^[h^TcTi ^Tl 
A cow-slaughtering one, an aborter of 
embryo and an incendriator of a town falls into 
Rodha hell. A Brahmana killer, a drink-addict 
and a gold smuggler fall into the hell Sukara. 
cTT^ ^T3TT 
The killer of a Ksatriya, of a Vaisya in 
miserable circumstances or of a Brahmana as 
well as a defiler of the bed of an elder or a 
preceptor falls into the hell Tala. 
WWIl4) m\ TF3W3ST *T:l 
dwtt srraraftnrTRfT 
He who cohabits with his own sister, he who 
may be a Royal soldier (murderer) falls into the 
hell Taptakumbha, A horse grocer or horse 
seller and likewise a prison-guard fall into the 
hell Taptaloha. 
W W srai hffAtddl 
A seller of a chaste women, a forsaker of a 
devotee and one who cohabits with his daughter 
or daughter-in-law falls into the hell Mahajvala. 
cnss^wi^dPd *m^ii 
STWTTtft ^ ^ 9f^rTl 
f^Tlt WTT Trafc(T $11^011 
A seller of the Vedas, he who spoils the 
Vedas, those who dishonour the teachers or 
elders and even those who belabour with 
wounding words, a man cohabiting with one not 
cohabitable- all these go to the hell named 
Sabala. A thief and he, who transgresses the 
limitations falls into the hell Vimoha. 
^ 
OdtflillUlfasUil TT^nit diUlMdch:!! 
tr jrcraRtii^dii 
He who takes to a wicked intention falls into 
the hell Kitaloha. A antagoniser of the Devas 
and Brahmanas, a non-adorer of elders or 
teachers and he who distorts or disfigures the 
gems, he attains to Krmibhaksya. 
grwnff WPT) I 
pr# trt:ii ^<*11 
He who eats food keeping Brahmanl (his 
wife), friends and daughter (starving) falls into 
the foul-smelling hell Lalabhaksa. 
chiuscbrll eftWK'UiJ 
31K|l)bc(nq<|dl IT f^Vl^ll^oll 
A reed grower, a potter, a stealer of gold 
coins or an ornament for the neck or an 
abductor of a Candala, a physician and he who 
is an incendriator in the gardens falls in 
Visamsana (hell). 
d^dldM'dMch:| 
tjsj qfr 
IW^II 
He who may be an espouse of an unchaste 
woman, he who officiates as a priest in the 
sacrifice on behalf of an ineligible person and 
he who subsists by planets falls into the hell 
Adhomukha. 
t TTTCT r\ Fn^TT TRT T*T fcUrUHl 
t^cjuicTrf^ fetfupyH 
7T: <***diPi ^snf?r MNUi^chiisr rTRi 
He who sells milk, wine, meat, lac, scented 
fluid or juice, sesamum and similar things falls 
into the terrific hell Puyavaha. He who ensnares 
cocks, as also cats and hogs, as also birds, the 
antelopes and goats, that one even go into this 
very hell. 
yi.ilfd^T Rlfl^cEPOTn ^ 7T:l 
<f|tMifdchl for: Yir^ratwEraitii^'kii

=== PAGE 377 ===

348 
Vayu-Purana 
3FTR^t 
wtT -qnm^sr ?mt ^ vi^jyidcb:ii^Mi 
fgwi nf^idldi jpr^n dste rTi 
gcJchRg- wr ^ m wiPM^yid<*:ii 
■^lnT% Md-rtJr) lJcWlg*W)fb|UI:ll^ 5 II 
A Brahmana who is a keeper of goats and 
sheep (i.e. a shepherd), a buffalo-keeper, one 
dealing with discuses and flags or carriage 
dealer or a potter’s wheel dealer, a flag dealer, a 
theatre-keeper or a dancer or a stage manager or 
a drama or a stage actor, a painter or a 
gladiator1 (Rarigopajivi) or a wrestler, a fowler 
or a bird catcher, a rustic chaplain, he who 
burns other men’s houses, a poison giver, a 
Kundasi (an adulterine or a pander, a pimp or 
one depending for livelihood on a bastard 
(Kunda)2, a seller of Soma plant, a drunkard, a 
meat-eater, an animal killer, an immolator or a 
Candala3 or a dissector of buffaloes and others, 
a deer hunter or a venison seeker, a Parvakara 
or Parvakar!4, a Sue! (a needle worker or a 
tailor) and one who is treacherous to an ally or 
friend- all these sinners fall into the hell 
Rudhirandha. This way have declared the 
scholars. 
^Mpe^ebM^ckyi iWT h 
TffifcT TOT 11^1911 
He who feeds variantly that (group) seated 
in the same row falls in the terrific hell 
Vidbhuja. There is no doubt in it. 
■pTcTT^ ^TT rCTT 
TR# Tf Milled II ^£11 
1. SlftRffef;, I Eng. Skt. Diet., V.S. Apte, 
p. 183. 
2. A son born in adultery; a son of a women by a man 
other then her husband while the husband is alive, 
V.S. Apte, p. 152, Yajhavalkya Smrti 1.222. 
3. V.S. Apte, p. 522. MW, p. 990. 
4. A Brahmana who from motives of gain performs on 
common days ceremonies which ought to be 
performed as periodical occasions. 
A person who is a false speaker, who is an 
abusive-tongued one, an inauspicious one- 
these sinners fall into a terrific hell named 
Mutrakfrna (urine-infected one). 
WTSTfa^RTTTt cfarnff qrr: i 
w gfkif^cbisj %ii 
TjJMim: n^9on 
Those beings who are killers of crocodiles 
and bees fall into the hell Vaitarnl. Mentally 
deranged, persons having broken hearts, 
persons devoid of purity and conduct or chastity 
of conduct, wrath betakers and af'forders of 
grief, those having been duped by cheats, ropes 
or jugglers (Kuhakas)5 fell into the hell 
Asipatravana. Persons killing Urabhras (rams) 
or hunting deer, are cut, mutilated, dragged and 
pulled in a terrible manner in that hell. 
34pH\rc||<i| MdPd ^I 
Those who are ostracised from the orders of 
society or drunkards6 within the orders of 
society, they fall into Agnijvala hell. They are 
eaten by steel-beaked crows of dark and diverse 
colours. 
^l^dWIHlMlc^ ^ tRETI 
yp; wh siPinl si$),cu!<*J|:11 ^ 11 
Owing to the defunction of sacrificial vows 
by discharging of semen even in dreams, one 
may fall into Sandamsa (hell). 
^{yyiPMdi ^ rj y^MiPidisr h 
^ ^ ^nf^r <T «#3^ll^^ll 
Those who are taught or commanded by 
their sons, all those definitely go to the hell 
Svabhojana (having feeding by dogs). 
5. V.S. Apte, p. 156. Kuhaka, Juggler, Rogers, Cheats. 
6. V.S. Apte, p. 361 eater, drunk.

=== PAGE 378 ===

Chapter-101 
349 
<*nWfirr % ?r gRcffcr ^ ftwnft^:(TiT)ii 
•O s3 
And those who perpetrate actions violating 
the laws of stages of life and orders of society 
on being roused to wrath and joy go to the hell 
(Niraya). 
*TK <JWJIIrHI ftot tT?RI 
vfldlrHl ch^i^'KIItim: PJcT:ll^^ll 
The hot-centred great hell Raurava is white 
from outside and terrific. The extremely terrible 
Tapah is beneath it. It is cool-centred. 
i^nir^Moid 
TOil: MRcb^RdT:il^\9^ll 
You may hear and understand these being 
described in serial order. Beneath the Earth, 
there are seven hells illustrated as such. 
■foci: OTMWfJi Ticf xTil^ii 
The scions of unrighteousness or the 
generators of unrighteousness are 
Andhatamisraka and others. Raurava being the 
first of them and then there is Maharaurava. 
3TWTST: TfTCiHj: 
^TRT: ehiH^: 
Beneath this is another hell which is both 
cold and scorching. This third hell is Kalasutra 
which is known as Mahahavividhi too. 
W*T 'PpT:i 
The fourth hell is Apratistha and fifth one is 
known as Avici. Lohaprstha being sixth one and 
Avidheya is the seventh. 
ylwi^Ud: jtItfi: yiwi=hl ^r: Tp:i 
r:ll^o i 
On being hideous one, Raurava becomes 
well-known as highly terrible. Although it 
contains water, it is remembered as one that 
scorches. Beneath it is the hell Tapah, most 
terrible, cold and very inferior. 
Tnif Ihc^h: 3Ttrf>: 
Biting serpents are said to be in the highly 
terrible Kalasutra. In Apratistha, there is no 
standing. There is a highly terrific whirling in it. 
Strtft WMMUdM ^T:l 
rWir^Treuii Ht?: grtfuri ^iiuii-cd ^r:ii^?ll 
Avici is called highly terrific owing to 
suppression within or compression within 
through mechanical contrivances. More terrific 
than that is Loha owing to the demolition of all 
deeds. 
Though the beings in the hell are without 
bodies, the pain, bondage, death and disjunction 
that they undergo in the Avidheya hell have no 
remedial means or qualities. 
33^ Wll PuiHIchlV’d ^ TCFIT: I 
Having mountains overhead, all these 
terrible hells are devoid of light. The uprise of 
grief among them is as per reasoning of 
unrighteousness. 
These two lokas on the top are devoid of any 
light whatsoever. Although they are similar to 
other lokas, the uprise of grief among them can 
be of terrific norm by means of fiery piles. They 
take up bodies capable of experiencing these 
sufferings as a result of their previous actions. 
The intensity of suffering is common to all 
these worlds.

=== PAGE 379 ===

350 
Vayu-Purana

=== PAGE 380 ===

Chapter-101 
351 
All the sky roving ones i.e. birds deserve to 
be reckoned as forming a thousandth part of the 
number of aquatic living beings. 
^T: WleifcM t qgrTl 
traT rflfibebiy ^3^1:11^0^11 
All the animals or beasts, the quadrupeds, 
deserve to be reckoned as constituting a 
thousandth part of the number of birds. 
^omt mi 
The bipeds (human beings) in this world 
should be recognised as constituting a 
thousandth part of all the quadrupeds. 
u: <r fg^t yr:i 
yiFScfcPRta WTT fg?RT: TTforTT: ^TMRo^ll 
Dharmikas i.e. righteous men should be 
known to constitute a thousandth part of the 
entire number of bipeds. 
■stfRt snfiJ&Bjr mu 
«TFTt yiftfebiuii q^rn 
^TPtr tTt%tTnsrra^ f|ll? O'*II 
Of the righteous men, only a thousandth part 
attains to heaven. Of those righteous men who 
go to heaven only a thousandth part becomes 
eligible (depending on their deeds) for final 
emancipation (.Moksa). 
ufdrTT: hTWlWr %l I 
dmrr iirt yiidiuii yud<#d ftiRomi 
Persons assuming from in heaven are equal 
to those who are staying in the abodes of 
torture. The degrade ones, the sinistered deeds 
ones, the wicked-souled ones- all these fall into 
the dark Raurava hell after death and attain to 
cold and hot. 
^<dld>dchl^d<£U iJlddlWR*Wlrn:l 
srorer ffrreftTt ylu^irUcb-.n^o^ii 
The torments attain to the spots of torture of 
bitter norms. Their bodies become benumbed. 
Raurava deserve to be known as having soul for 
fiery and terrific-tasted ones. 
rfiTT 'ERlR^gTlft #dlrHI W WJ:\ 
Tjgrfcrr: trt: wr 3T rttui? o\9 
The Tapa hell is having soul for clouds and 
for frigidity and constant penance. Good and 
pious men attaining to heaven are very rare. 
TRPTT (?) ^><Aui 
tpirt gTTfjft xt TTR^ll^odII 
This way stands reckoned by counting the 
enumeration (of hells) by the self-bom Brahma 
himself. This counting stands enumerated, the 
one of Brahma and the one of human beings. 
TT^f ^HWM: TTrtf ^TcTt ‘JTIoht 
3rST t^TT WfcfcT H)d>HW-d>U| g|| 
The Sages spoke- Mahah, Jana, Tapah, 
Satya, Bhuta, Bhavya and Bhava- all these 
lokas have been illustrated by you. Now you 
may dilate upon in details about their difference 
and about the distance between them. 
rfot HjfER fHT j^Uliqi^d^lMI 
IT ch^ghfcUvS dvdhdM ?IR^o|| 
Having listened to that expression of those 
sages, the Urdhvaretasas (perennially continent 
ones), Vayu, having the motive in reality 
understood that and spoke these words. 
cuqWcT 
WrtllgAur mPR W x( «ll 
Vayu spoke- The learned men see that 
manifest through a logical deliberation; the 
Yogins see it directly by means of Yogic power 
and those who habitually perform holy rites 
observe it through Pratyahara (withdrawal of 
physical senses), meditation and penance.

=== PAGE 381 ===

352 
Vayu-Puraija 
mg: 4M<$MKidi: 
eqt)dVl>cKI f^TSTT: ‘S^TT WW:!!? ^11 
Rbhu and Sanatkumara and the like, grown 
up ones, having preintellects, having grief 
shaken off, the Virajas (having no gloomy ideas 
or perplexed senses), being in such a state, are 
the veritable Brahma, O excellent ones. 
dwfisrryHt «ii 
W ^ Tnf^rezr rT? <*^nil 
The indestructible ones, endowed with 
pleasure, adhering to Brahman, Yogins and the 
sages Valakhilya and others- all these have 
observed the residence of the eternal lord from 
close quarters. That abode cannot be conceived 
or argued about. It makes righteous men 
contented. I too have observed it by remaining 
close at hand. 
ir-ftftungi 
?IR rPT: 
*TI 
3<biWlfH rffwfdBPd 
Isvara, owing to the idea of minuter atom, is 
fit to be cognisable for those seeking inspiration 
from mind, knowledge, renunciation, penance, 
truth, forbearance, fortitude, perceptibility or 
anticipatory power, self association and 
stabilisation as such. Through these ten 
attributes, they stay along in that Sankara. 
f^JTr^ Trf:l 
■o S3 N S3 N 
^ vmt wi^wtrf^rir ys 11 
Owing to the idea of supremacy, the Fire of 
mental concentration (Yogagni), engaged in the 
gracefulness of Brahma- that one having 
assumed the framework of loka, attains to 
association. 
fcRcsmgg 
dWW -SFqra WR Mraiw TRgiR^ll 
The abode of that eternal lord is Aksara (the 
certain one), fixed and undisturbed by worldly 
chaos. It is the eighth (loka) which is conceived 
by Maya (magical power) and the greatest of 
all. 
wtot tfFft ijcrr i 
^ngw^R^nrrot % gfafttiR ^ ii 
Through Maya, the eightfold Prakrti and its 
creations are created by him. He is lord 
Mahesvara who is the master of Maya. The 
dissolution of Dev as is also done there (in his 
abode). 
fcrat ir 
mtesrej ftgrfT 
gHlchT^^IHIchl t ^chlrJ^IR^oll 
In details and in serial order, you may know 
from me, while I speak. The distance between 
Bhurloka and Brahmaloka is illustrated as one 
hundred and thirteen million five hundred 
thousand Yojanas. 
wryifagarft rn 
awf wiydiu^ g 'wji^cbFrt t^ir^ii 
One crore Yojanas and fifty Niyutas] is 
known as the space of Brahmanda above 
Brahmaloka. 
rr&fri: srarnrej *ic*rt <rt: 
(ftotIT IPTftwmT: M<WJpilSRTT:ll^ll 
This, the upgoing movement, is known as 
having an ending in mobility perennial and 
unrecountable adhering to mutual qualities. 
WTT: 
MefccTd : 
Minuter ones, having qualities for 
procreation, known as Prakrtis exist there, 
whose attribute is to create the Ksetrejna known 
as Brahma. 
SHdlia TTt STPT CRTT1UI ntWtlR ^^11 
-O *s 
1. V.S, Apte, p. 290.

=== PAGE 382 ===

Chapter-101 
353 
yi^cir^il'tiM: ftsrf?®gFzgiTf: iiq ? mi 
The one endowed with Prakrti, the minuter 
one, the supporting one, the eternal one, the 
unprocreative-normed one, the abode of highest 
order, the great atom, Aksaya (indestructible), 
Anuhya (not fit to be borne or thought over), 
Amurti (frame), frame-endowed one, the 
expositioned-normed one, the obscurity-normed 
one, the stationing as well as Anugraha 
(gracefulness) or condignment- all these exist 
in them. 
wrnj$|qsR:i 
^TrETT TJy TTWl *t: 
Vidhi (Brahma) is not comparable to others. 
The great Isvara is like Paramanu. He is 
endowed with radiance and he is the exposer of 
austerity in advance. 
wit wImuPUhj 
^TPT%TTJg5ra^rracTII^?V9l| 
The golden egg that was evolved at the 
outset as Aupasargika (a relevant adjunct) was 
of great norm and globular from all sides. It 
became a twain of Isvaras. 
yrfq TTT ^ qRraanfwa5TII??<SII 
From Isvara is the gemiination of seed. 
Ksetrajna (individual soul) is desired as a seed. 
Yoni, they known as Prakrti and that is 
Narayana personified. 
^RTif: TTTWT^T 
Vibhu (Brahma) for the sake of creation of 
the loka, is the very mainstay of the lokas. A 
happy creation with physical frame constitutes 
(the activity) of the bearer of the lokas, the 
great-souled one. 
MTWI<^4ld>W 3tU^|<c)Uy 5T^W:l 
rpinte qt f^T WR ^ iRTWriR^oll 
Beyond Brahmaloka and beneath the upper 
crust of the Cosmic Egg- in between these two 
is the divine spot, his abode which is made up 
of the mind. 
That is the abode of the embodied Isvara, the 
highly-radiant one. The city named Siva is 
(also) there which is the refuge is of those afraid 
of birth. 
TTfwnt w w? #jhht f^-rTMui: i 
3TWRT* TT 
It is full one hundred thousand Yojanas in 
extent, 0 excellent Brahmanas! Within, it is as 
extensive as the sphere of Earth. 
Vll-ddil*^ TT^TTT ycfcMUir^cJ^III^ 3 II 
It is illuminated by a mighty golden rampart 
of solar radiance. It has brilliance of the mid¬ 
day Sun suppressing the lumination of all 
others. 
SltsRTfif: 4THU1i4ThldlM^'MfMrl:l 
It has four golden gates1 ornamented by 
pearl wreaths. It is refulgent like gold being 
engirted handsomely. 
TTEEtTSSc&r?! yt TW f^cq- yUilldHlfddMI 
(q m rtM q ^tt 
That city in sky is the lovely one, divine one, 
resounded by bells and the likes. There does not 
prevail upon death, no heat, no decrepitude and 
no fatigue becomes prevalent. 
q^h y?raTi ^nm1dM^(d(?)i 
u#nuii wi wf •dl'jHTqi f^Tt 
No other city deserves to be compared to 
this city. It extends to a hundred thousand 
1. dl<=Ff: for verse 234, padas, 
p. 548.

=== PAGE 383 ===

354 
Vayu-Purana 
Yojanas to the ten quarters. 
W2I 
#felT <*Hcbw4)ll^\9ll 
That city is pervaded by the lustre of the 
bull-bannered lord and so it stands (firm). By 
the idea of mind, that land stands established as 
made of gold. 
gq fERWT ^rfofijePTI 
VIK^Hcbiyilfq WT^ffwtl^ 
3r£|)dlsSw>lft g$g ^1 
uUqi>U| WTHT TTftRTSTri^T ^1 
O 
gg f^oyiin’ TRJlfq tTII^^oII 
By sand of jewels, that city shines forth 
abundantly. In the gardens and parks therein, 
there are divine lotuses having light of the 
autumnal Moon, which are similar to the rising 
Sun, which are half white and half ruddy-hued 
and which are golden ones. Their stalks have 
the lustre of emerald gem and their size equal to 
the extent of the wheels of chariots. They are 
unparalleled-scented ones. 
dml-yifa gift gi 
^ebMH'RHlfUF 
O s3 
U^difn 
qq: w qiqifq wlggii^^ii 
Bearing semblance of the Bhniga-patra or 
bees and sprouts that are golden ones, half dark 
and half red, having softer interstices, the 
lotuses cover up the whole place and seem to be 
so many umbrellas. There are seven great rivers 
there. You may know their names. 
CRT cfTTlf cKdfufqh 
gw *r TWTdfwgrt^ii^^^ ii 
Vara, Varenya, Varada, Varaha, 
VaravarninI, Varama and Varabhadra- these are 
the fascinating rivers of excellent form. 
ST 
gfoi^wwrra#ET ^fTSTT:ii^*n 
The excellent rivers are suffused with petals 
of lotuses and lilies, having framework of 
whirlpools and foam water known as Manidala. 
q g dfrwi ^ qren: fudqwyn 
q {cj^cRTSMildW f^flyiW g^Tgiiq^mi 
Neither Brahmarsis nor Devas, nor Asuras 
nor Manes nor others knew that immeasurable 
city of the Isa (lord). 
o 
qygqft? upR: q* d<qFpjirqq:iR'>^ii 
All those great-souled ones, concentrated in 
mediation, nicely united or engaged, having 
senses well-control, take to observation that city 
of the bull-bannered one. 
d^wfuclrl^ll 
TWTT?: ^TO:l 
In the centre of that excellent city of lord, 
there is a mansion of unparalleled radiance, a 
great one or a lofty one similar to Meru, a 
divine one surrounded by Bhadrasrl (sandal 
tree), a thousand-footed one, a golden one and 
the auspicious one. That is decorated all over by 
the gems of unparalleled nonn. 
4lWW:l 
cFHwrmsjg 11 ^ ^ ^ n 
TnqrtejTlq 
^rg :U’R ^ o II 
It is crystalline, lunar-normed with turquoise 
gems having radiance like that of Soma (Moon), 
even bearing semblance of the light of fresh 
Sun, golden ones, having refulgence like that of 
Agni, even silvery-normed ones, shining forth 
by sapphire-normed ones, auspicious ones, 
stronger ones, adamantine- this way were those 
nicely carved-out ones.

=== PAGE 384 ===

Chapter-101 
355 
rchHtluim«?|ctl^: Wn^lcfcKilhJtrhlR^’RlI 
Having waters of many varieties, shining 
ones, equipped or scented as such (Adhivasita), 
decorated by buntings, having shine of the light 
of Moon, having tinkling of the bells of gold or 
iron, having a perennial festal melee, its 
refulgence is heightened by the residential 
abodes of Kinnaras, shining in the shape of 
clouds of twilight. 
The way the mountain Lord Meru shines 
with golden peaks, in the same manner the 
mansion shines with shining water currents all 
round abounding in golden flowers. 
WTI 
Tict 
The whole city shines with golden flags and 
banners. Prasada~rdja (the lordly mansion) 
shines forth with its storeys. 
wiki T?TkT 
^ ifar wrrRRnrfkrrT: 1 
ftrJTT inrirwiraT: ih^hjuiispsjt:)ii 
'ffncRT q?kMR 5rfkk^If[%fT:IRk\9ll 
In this abode of Tryambaka (i.e, Siva), there 
is a statue of Vasanta. LaksmI, Sri, Kirti, Sobha 
and Sarasvatl- these female deities united as 
such, endowed with form and scent, perennial 
and innumerable, depending on their mutual 
qualities, ornament among all the gems, the 
breeding spot of transformation and grace, 
dividing themselves into hundred crores, the 
highly fortunate ones, the adorable ones, the 
great-souled ones, are present there in physical 
bodies, free from lassitude. 
wrat w^rsfRir: 
ferr f^T: ^kr: 
They have thousandfold other maid-servants 
behind them, assuming superimposed forms, 
endowed with glory, all being lotus-eyed ones. 
TTtffSTT: TTkk qidch)Mft:lnmi| 
By highly fascinating emotions or ideas, 
endowed with grace, they sport along and gloat 
along with the Ganas, bearing gleam of 
mountains and resembling fire. 
cJinfnchl^N TOM 
'O 
11 ^ o 11 
bikrcfrT f*cr<T3TT f^TT fWmfdchM 
Some are hunch-backed; some are dwarfish; 
some are having beautiful bodies; some are 
wanton-normed ones; a few are slender like the 
red variety of sugarcane; some are hideous and 
terrible with flat faces; some are hanging- 
bellied ones; some are short-armed ones; some 
are without eyes; some are small-footed; a few 
have the faces of the lord of beasts. 
r^cqiyi-Hiwin 
Some others have faces and bellies like 
those of tusker; others are elephant-faced; a few 
are lion-faced and tiger-faced; some have red 
eyes; some beauties have huge breasts and 
charming eyes. 
3RT12J ^TRraWT: 
Some having curls shorter and curly ones; 
some are beautiful ones having lovely eyes and 
some others of wanton forms; some are 
superimposing ones. They wear different 
costumes. 
r:ii^xn

=== PAGE 385 ===

356 
Vayu-Puraija 
They are worthy of the abode of the lord. 
They move about everywhere within the palace. 
The ten-armed lord Mahes'vara sports therein. 
^tt g got: gr# i 
He lives along with Nandin and the great- 
souled Ganas of universal forms and likewise 
with Rudra-ganas having similar liberal¬ 
mindedness and prowess. 
mcteblrlJ'j|^eblV!l4l4ciylr*dH^: I 
They bear semblance of Pavakatmaja (an 
epithet of Kartikeya)1, having faces hideous, 
having curved jaws of sacrificial posts norm. He 
is being offered obeisance to by those staying in 
the Vimanas (aerial chariots) and being adored 
by those engaged as such. 
■yeScUuui wtt f^wntJTtrfrr ferwi 
•0x3x3 *S 
R^'3II 
He wears all-seasoned floral garland on his 
chest and inhales their fragrance. Pie is azure- 
hued one like the dark lotus. His eyes are 
elongated and boldly ruddy-glowed ones. 
4Ue|KWHJR^II 
He is slightly terrific with hanging lips. He 
is equipped with group of sharp jaws. His lofty 
eyes are turned upwards. He is difficult of being 
visioned. He is lovely and nicely-costumed one. 
cRpn^T wf TTSErs^ fw^lR^II 
TTF3T tfetf tW ^mrafTfflTniTl 
■q^V4TcfRralq cRRTqfdht -iTTHII 
faRd i r is o 11 
He is absolutely unscathed in battles, a 
destroyer of the enemies of gods, having 
incorporated arms within arm. On his left side is 
stationed the shining weapon Pattisa (a spear 
with a sharp edge). In strength, he is highly 
extraordinary-normed force. He has ten- 
coloured bow, variegated one, shining 
admirably and the twanging sound of which is 
very terrible. 
fgWMWTtg 
Cx x3 ' xfl ' V 
sHisrdr^uw gw wi gRw foWiR^ii 
His trident have the gleam of lightning. It is 
unfailing one and destroyer of enemies. It is 
endowed with the excellent splendour and it 
blazes brilliantly. 
«rg: YTtrrcfyM: wt Ml 
gw mw ^?Rg n 
m fgiRmn 
The sword of the excellent one among the 
forceful ones shines forth extremely therein like 
the fire flame in a sacrificial altar. It is similar to 
a cool-rayed Moon that shines with its 
engleamed body and radiance of Deves'a. 
iw: Wcrr^rg tt^ri 
'sfgr: tt: eb^^:iRV9^ 
In front of Deva (lord) is the great golden 
stupendous Kamandalu (water-pot). It shines 
forth illustriously and is well-equipped with 
water. 
3^Ulrica 
-q^rr f^nf^mTii 
fefiTT rii)cb4iqdTIRV9^|| 
qrn 
felcfT tJi^hRihII 
Having inserted sword in limbs, the one 
wearing white clothes, shining with a pearl gem 
or pearl (wreath), huge-normed one, chest 
perforating one, four-armed one, highly 
fortunate one, the first female doorkeeper is 
Vijaya that stands there well-known in the 
universe. That Devi is the foremost female 
usher like Sri, unparalleled, a different one, 
1. V.S. Apte, p. 334, Mic(c^|rH^ - |

=== PAGE 386 ===

Chapter-101 
357 
shining forth, stationed as such with folded 
hands unto Deva. 
treiT: ^gljnWRTT: 
cTT: TSFerfMh ebl^*»MfrlBPd 
Following her, there are other ladies. They 
are endowed with the bevy of nymphs. These 
ones with new consorts1, wait upon or adore 
Sankara. 
w tri«I^4i:irv9V9u 
The Ganas or attendants of the breed of 
Gandharvas, endowed with all the distinctive 
marks and invigorated by the musical 
instruments, do (eulogise) by musical notes the 
lord of Devas. 
3?«ivRTr h^hwi: vitrappier:i 
T^m-tgr dlufrHiw ii 
Highly lofty or tall, robust-chested one, 
having complexion like that of autumnal cloud, 
the lord of bulls, shines forth getting exultant in 
his house. 
WictR: UTTSHnfhddrfcjMi 
' -O "S 
:ll?V9^u 
Then there is Skanda, his son, the highly 
chivalrous one, wearing ruddy costumes, the 
illustrious one and having eyes like the 
excellent lotuses. He stays there with his 
followers. 
cTPI FTT# faviHsIST ^Tira^J 
oyirdowm: w.ir^oii 
He has four followers, viz. Sakha, Visakha, 
Naigameya2 and Astavan (these are 
incarnations of Skanda)3. They are devoid of 
vicious indulgence, uncruel ones and engaged 
in protection of progenies or subjects. 
2. Ibid., p. 283 and 39. An Anucara as well as a 3rd 
brother of fCumara. 
3. Ibid. 
%: TTTsf FT TljrfW: fviRsle||$H:i 
Along with them shines forth the deity with 
Sikhivahana (having peacock for his vehicle, 
i.e. Skanda). He has great prowess. There, the 
lord having faces all round sports with big 
serpents as his toys. 
% fCT fcray^lUli chlfHHJ ^TftFT: I 
% tT W5RFTT f%5IT ^11 
Those kings who are bestowers of gold unto 
leading scholars, those Brahmanas who had 
their own abodes and are Brahmavadins, those 
who perform austerities in secret or esoteric 
self-study and those who maintain themselves 
by gleaning- all these are the counters of that 
Devesa, well-honoured as such. 
H^iiu^chifn sicfifo rjq: tr:i 
ftrat ^ Viratair^ii 
Many Manvantaras staged a come back time 
and again. Now listen to the excellent future 
marvel of Bhava, the lord of Devas. 
cyiyiv^ciHJiiw^ ehrtHi'MreRfwqf:! 
Tigers are his followers. They are golden- 
coloured and forceful ones. They are created by 
the lord himself and they move about as they 
please. 
T 
They are like Death unto god of Death. They 
subdue the pride of Yama. Who, verily, will 
describe the innumerable superhuman faculties 
and excellences (of the Lord)? 
3Trf: ^l^dgrTOHJ 
^dumnobuii^ ipgpT <rf%«rtawiR<iV9ii 
After this, I shall illustrate again the 
excellent and wonderful activities of Bhava

=== PAGE 387 ===

358 
Vayu-Purana 
(Siva), pursued sympathetically for the sake of 
blessing of all the beings. You may know that. 
$|<<§^e|UlhT 
xismfuimiuii 4r 
C'v "S 
hriktsh iwrt w m feriwHii^ *n 
■^sujm^dmy (?) wJcranpT fi^yrdi 
m 'flcHftlWHf gpM^pj ^^1:11 
C\ v3 
3PFT: mmmj 
Having manifestations or gleam like the 
Mandara mountain, in strength of indubitable 
physical powers, having colours of pearl 
necklace, Kunda flower and the Moon, having 
reverberation like the rumbling cloud lightning, 
the bearers of the crest jewels, having costumes 
of cloud colour, having adament marked by 
Srlvatsa (Visnu), having hands occupied by 
cubit-nonned tridents- these are the attributes 
possessed by those who are a thousand living 
beings created through Maya and fettered to 
eight pillars in that abode of the three-eyed lord. 
They have the excellent features of the lords of 
the quarters. To the excellent shining columns 
of that illustrious mansion, they are severally 
tied by means of fiery fetters. Thus they live 
there very happily. Then having honoured the 
word of Vayu, the highly amazed sages, the 
denizens of Naimisa forest, the great ascetics,, 
replied. 
^ci^cJhttrt tttw wri 
c\ 
^ ^ ^ cT ^TTrfF: fctvMlrUcbi:!! 
“O adorable one! O you life breath of all 
beings! 0 omnipresent Lord! Who are those 
great beings in the forms of lions? Where are 
they bom and of what forms are they? 
f^lTT: ^RTTTT wfa^JMII 
What is their guilt for which those lions 
have been severally bound by means of 
Vaisvanara (fiery) fetters by the lord of all 
living beings?” 
flgxH cu<jc(lc*<4 f I 
Having heard that talk of those ones, Vayu 
spoke the sentence- “Those thousand lions are 
the embodied forms of the Furies of the lord 
and created by the noble-souled Isvara after 
straying away from his own body. They are 
given the wrath-embodied forms of lions. 
xT xT^TI I ? ^ ^ II 
^ ^ ef^R=!r Jf 3S?r:ll? <?U!I 
After offering peace to all living beings, 
they had been fettered formerly by means of the 
fiery bonds. The Kratu (sacrifice) of Daksa was 
completely demolished sportfully by a single 
lion that had been released from bondage at the 
behest of IsVara after knowing that the wrath of 
the goddess has been incurred (by him). 
W P<tfc(°qi ^[cblcft 
3TirtR: ^^5^:11 WII 
At that time, the great goddess emanated out 
as Mahakall of Mahesvarl (goddess Uma), the 
one bearing witness to her personal actions, 
along with all beings or Bhutas. 
TT TJ^T : I 
^TT tF^SrtTF^tlR^^II 
That fury is the holy lord Vlrabhadra who 
permanently resides in Rudra’s abode. He is of 
incomprehensible form and is the eradicator of 
the grief of Devi.

=== PAGE 388 ===

Chapter-101 
359 
yfa4yiw4^ui'| TTqr cf: •qfe^T:ll^oo|| 
Thus, the abode, the excellent one among all 
the secret abodes, the habitat of Indra, of no 
comparison, has been illustrated by me to you. 
31tf: Trt Hc^lfij % rT3T JlfdcllRR:l) 
v*t trTcn:^ o 311 
s3 Cs "O ' 
MdldiNg^N ^Tl 
^Tpcidvii^ii^o?n 
TMcTT T^RTT vltrldfla^iudM 
After this, I shall talk of the other residents 
and objects of that fascinating excellent capital. 
It is situated in the atmospheric regions. There 
are other chief mansions, variegated with many 
gems, abounding in buntings, affluent in all 
cherished ends, englamoured by forests and 
groves, silvery ones and huge ones, golden 
ones, peers to the clouds of twilight and bearing 
semblance of Kailasa. 
ft: ^dWHfllRui:i 
In those excellent palaces, the followers of 
Bhava, the nicely-vowed ones, rejoice enjoying 
various means of pleasures liked by them such 
as sweet melody etc. 
Ifrattrf^TrTT: 3M12J ^pT:l 
There is an unceasing recital of anecdotes of 
auspicious norm along with the chanting sounds 
of Vedas. The notes of music, vocal and 
instrumental, with eulogiums are heard all 
around. 
TTcTOTflft Cf£?t 
United or well-knit, the (subjects) there are 
incomparable having good many resorts or 
sheltering spots likewise. This way and the like 
do exist of these ones on the crest or roof of the 
mansion (Prasada). 
Wercif: ^T:i 
SRWi^fl ^f?T: 
Cs ' 
Each of them is a thousand-plinthed 
mansion made of gold and an auspicious one. It 
is embellished with uncomparable jewels and 
gems decorated all over as such. 
dMy4n%Tfa 1130 6\\ 
They are beautified with crystals like the 
Moon and having gleam of the norm of 
turquoise gems as also of the norm of rising sun 
and by golden gems having gleam of fire. 
STMT 
cii<FW3: u4V<uivii3o^ii 
Having heard this, the sages of the 
Naimisaranya expressed loudly (their wonder). 
The ascetics, having apprehensions created, 
uttered these words to the Wind-god. 
% cT ?rar TfpfRRt ^ 1 
3mr?IW. TTMcBPTtf^ I 
^Mluii ster stmt ?oii 
The Sages spoke- Who are the great-souled 
ones there, the followers or devotees of Bhava 
(i.e. Siva)? Indeed they are thoroughly fit to be 
counterpoised, rejoicing as such in that 
excellent town. Having heard the words of 
sages, Vayu replied again. 
srarri ^cn=g 
^rRfrrr fRrr: vfcfowr fTcHHR:ii? ?? 
(nsznfnj^ aucMumi 
fddf-fT: n^rHi^r: tAmt Rrncrccmr:ii 
TOM: y^dHIMcillilKI 3RI<*HI:l) 
Cs s3 ' 
cfituiT TTTOT cOMT f^^RRRMRTII?^ll 
3RM*RM TOW % T^WTII^II

=== PAGE 389 ===

360 
Vayu-Puraija 
'tmz ^ih-humii^^ii 
Vayu spoke- May this be listened, O Sages! 
The people who are docile (lit. endowed with 
modesty), highly exalted, well-controlled, 
equipped with heroism and lustre, having food 
of mediocre norm or those taking food in the 
midst of gathering, Matras or of measured out 
looks, revelling in self, controlled in senses, 
having dualities won over, highly courageous, 
pleasant-tempered ones, having spite wiped off, 
steady within the emotional candour, beings 
free from bargaining and unperturbed by action, 
mind and speech, having pure inner self or 
conscience, having minds devoted for no one 
else than lord and whosoever take refuge in 
Mahesvara- by them is obtained the luminous 
light of Rudra, the perennial status of 
indestructible norm and they obtain the 
semblance of the framework of Bhava of 
highest order. 
All of them are fire-faced and universal- 
formed ones. They are Kapardine (Saivites 
having matted hair), blue-throated ones, white¬ 
necked ones, sharp-jawed ones and three-eyed 
ones. 
^iwyiRuci 
WtTTfnfeR: 113^11 
The crescent Moon forms their coronet. 
They are wearers of matted locks of hair. They 
all being ten-armed and heroic ones, the 
scentful ones like the interior of a lotus. 
fiHichmuii): TFTSf ^RFTt^arrFrT:ll^^ll 
Bearing semblance of the rising Sun, all of 
them are yellow-costumed ones, bow or trident- 
wielders and having vehicles as white bulls. 
O 
^T#T: «cte[fyfa:ii3 ?3ii 
They are endowed with Sri (glory); they are 
Kundalins (snake-coiled ones or wearers of ear¬ 
rings), adorned by pearl necklaces, excelling in 
radiance even more than gods, omniscient and 
all observing ones. 
faiTHT slfOTSSrlTR ^Tn^fy^rTT: I 
Being such as free from decrepitude and 
death, having divided selves in many forms, 
they sport along with myriad-normed emotions, 
having obtained highly unattainable shares. 
iwrtitii^^oii 
They are of wanton movements, Siddhas 
and well-awakened by other Siddhas. Thus the 
attendants of the eleven Rudras of great souls 
are crores and crores. 
TjfiT: TT? -q^TrRRt T%SR:I 
Ml4dlfsw:ll3^1l 
Along with them, the great-souled lord of 
Devas i.e. Mahes'vara, the beloved lover of 
Parvatl, rejoices there fully sympathetic with his 
devotees. 
dWi^viHyv-miPm Pm: 
Between those Rudras and that great-souled 
Bhava (i.e. Siva), 1 do not observe any 
difference. I am telling this truth to all of you. 
m.Hl cRSTT rfrT: 11 ^ 9^11 
tlldil^ TTP2I %cfT^drlMHI 
^11 
Matarisvan (i.e. Vayu) spoke this sacred one 
(the anecdote) heard from IsVara. Then those 
sages, all of them having radiance like that of 
the maker of the day (i.e. Sun), having heard 
this excellent and sacred story of Tryambaka 
(i.e. Siva), attained to exquisite gratitude and to

=== PAGE 390 ===

Chapter-101 
361 
utmost glee. They honoured Vayu, the greatly 
forceful one, and spoke to him. 
o 
^nfktu RtfWFT 3TWTC& rT ^JT 
I^TWTrnt WPTOT 
cfw wr wot ^ 
ift tor ^ tnrr T3TtnrtR:ii??^n 
The Sages spoke- 0 Samlrana (Vayu)! O 
Greatly-fortunate one! O Supreme one! the 
excellent and sacred eighth abode Aupasargika 
(prepositional one) of Isvara and its extent has 
been illustrated precisely to us by you. It is 
redolent with the excellent scent of the 
Supreme-souled one. 
tii^iri4 
■^T R 11^ ^ 11 
The greatness of Mahadeva is even 
uncognizable by the gods. Due to the greatness 
belonging to himself, the lord of unmeasured 
splendour has thousand Gan as. 
W ^Uplift IHebUnvftcf rll 
Wt r#: wr m WSSUfdMVIirHMllI 
stm it feM 
There is a lack of infatuation among his 
devotees that is effected by himself in order to 
bless them. In the abode of the lord of Devas, 
the grandeur that assumes a cosmic form shines 
very well. It is unparalleled and is attended by 
Brahml and Laksmi themselves. It shines like 
the Moon that pervades the sky with the 
moonlight. 
■Rflc^T pMMT ^RTT jT WWI 
dc1T4 cleWKyaftfcld'HJI3 3 o 11 
Of Rudras, the great-souled ones, the 
veritable peers to Mahadeva, all that by this 
absolution, spring out from your mouth as such. 
snrterr (?) istr ^T:i 
wi i 3 3 n 11 
Without having been quaffed, of what use 
are our excellent vows? Nothing remains as 
uncognizable to us. O excellent one among 
Devas! O Prana (life-breath)! You deserve to 
answer our question precisely. 
it iscrara tor f% wr 
C\ C\ ^ V 
^ drficZi d^UJlpM pcTT:ll3 3?M 
Suta spoke- That adorable one, however, 
spoke out- “What more may I conduct for you? 
What is to be dilated upon by me. That I shall 
dilate upon, O nicely-vowed ones!” 
3TTf^TT ^rrT§HT: i%r t dfolddRi:I 
cRJRTT ^WTTT otnviT^grdiurHd:ll^^^ll 
3t^ctw% tift n4yiur^TT 
fonraw qcRstit yyivJcRii^'sii 
T3rT ^ t ccTOT 3TtrKT: fPi*°iJiyJ|Ul: ITfl 
% faP&wrrvn irmfr^T wn$ 
The Sages spoke- In the existing dissolution 
of hideous norm at the time of the annihilation 
of all beings, what will be the state of the 
Adityas who stand by as attendants (near the 
lord), the lions who had been the outcome of the 
lord’s furious outburst, the Vaisvanara groups 
of Bhutas, the tigers and other followers about 
whom you have mentioned earlier along with 
the groups of lions and tigers. You may tell us 
as per factual norm. And what will be state of 
those others, that had their accomplishments 
achieved? Then, Vayu (MatarisVa) talked of (in 
the following manner). 
wm dSJTI 13 3^11 
cT5T TT^TrTR^r cPTTTT IP: ^TcfT: I 
C\ O o v o 
trz® sprfasj ^rrr.-ii^^v9ii

=== PAGE 391 ===

362 
Vayu-Purana 
cftpg chRiH^urqmrjyg nfrawti 
■Rfr: % ^312^1^1:11^?ill 
This is the exquisite fact, I shall narrate it 
before you. Please hear. Those who have gone 
there before, the sons of Brahma, viz. Sanaka, 
Sananda and Sanatana, the third one, Vodhu (an 
ancient sage whom water was offered at the 
time of tarpana), Kapila, Asuri of great refute, 
Sage Pancasikha and others have known the 
existence of Isvara, the unmanifest source of 
origin. 
rTcT: eZjfaiSRt cfc<rMH'l ^ TlrTl 
JTFTCT yr^fWlll^^ll 
vr jjmr v&srfn 
fl^dlPr ?TFra^T ^rRTTI 
^dHPRcbURIIIl^ll 
Then when time elapses and at the exchange 
of aeons, when even the great Bhutas (elements) 
are destroyed and the dissolution comes to the 
fore, then many crores of Rudras (meditate on) 
Mahesvara with delight, adhere to eight types of 
truth, desist from enjoying melody and other 
objects of happiness, enter all the living beings 
with a radiance endowed with alertness or 
knowledge, desert the status of acquiescent or 
of the aerial route, take leave of the status of 
undisturbed situation of the beings out of 
compassion or out of compassion for the beings. 
*nn<*rrc: n"<Hiuj 
The great-souled ones attain to Mahesvara 
of the subtle nature of Paramanu (atom) there. 
They ferry across the river of births and deaths 
of great eddies and whirlpools of terrific nature. 
pcrtui (?) m si<fiiuii)ci 
^oEfT t iFri%rU: W ^TT ^oq-; i|R<*lRdl:ll3*3 
Then they create (see) the omniscient 
Brahman of the supreme norm. They are 
accompanied by those seven Devls (goddesses) 
who have been illustrated (before). 
4OTT^^ci|ci||yi^c|M4|ir^-:l:ll?^'«ll 
3TT^IT33Prft dKldki^l^lT^cliWOTl 
And that which is the thousand of lions as 
also of Adityas, Vais'vanara group of Bhutas, 
the tigers and his followers (Rudraganas)- 
having incorporated all these within self and 
having counted the Upadravas, he (lord 
Sankara), draws these seven lokas in entirety 
and the five Mahabhutas. 
feuiHI Tff -SfrE: gjf# *Tl 
Mr ^r: iwrafe ^ wfeii^^ m 
Associated by Vi§nu, he creates and 
recreates (the worlds). That Rudra is of the 
nature of Sama(veda) and likewise of 
Yajur(veda). 
TT inf 3TRT: 
ijc&r % ^FraT^rrat iri%i: 11? *vs 11 
He is warped and woofed both within and 
without, decisively. He is the sole single lord 
and leader, the one having no beginning or end, 
O Brahmanas! 
cicTCT 3PFT: RdlchfWJmT: 1 
^ WTOTWWfhsnfrr rT2rr33rqft|l3'tf<£|| 
c*tfuTT TRPT giw fg^RRTnrtRTI 
3PRPH# 3PT£Rt Tfi&TPT11 $ * ^ 11 
Then all those sages, having radiance like 
that of the Sun, consecrated the sacred fire in 
their own hermitage. They thereafter devoted 
themselves to the worship of Mahes'vara by 
action, mind and speech with a self of pure 
intention and having assumed a form of mind of 
none else’ norm. 
PRTTT: ^^dq4!tRT:l 
TTTCT 
Engaged in vow, abstinence from food, 
endowed with compassion for all beings, the 
Yoga of divine unparalleled norm was acquired 
by them having scepticism obviated.

=== PAGE 392 ===

Chapter-102 
363 
jput mimi wii ^toti 
'^IHleR* ?TTW q^|c4|iWJI3^|| 
Having adhered to with utmost devotion and 
radiance endowed with knowledge, by them 
was obtained Rudra Salokya perennial status, 
indestructible as such. 
fim: ^Tsfcr ci^Tt wfswiM<:ii 
«rf%rcnf^TrT3gT:l 
smsrosr *r. 
^llUiqrii Tf WR cfT ^TT^iwril^H^II 
He who study this eulogium talked of by 
Vayu, equipped with penance, whether a 
Brahmana or a Ksatriya or a Vaisya, engaged in 
his own duties, obtains Rudra Salokya. He will 
be a devoted one, having maladies gone. An 
undrunkard Sudra, who verily, becomes a 
devotee of Siva, having senses controlled, stays 
quietly during the existing dissolution, having 
pre-requisites unimpaired. He attains to the 
status of Ganapati (leadership of Ganas) or even 
a spot of all cherished ends. 
Wit wh W$ WK&S TTT^I 
Rc^TT I 
flcrra crc:ii3kmi 
A drunkard (Sudra) enjoys along with the 
groups of beings who are drunkards. That one 
being adored on the surface of the Earth, will be 
a bestower of boons unto the mortals. This way, 
the adorable Vayu spoke the dilation. 
?o^|| 
* * *

=== PAGE 393 ===

Chapter-102 
363 
U3M ^&<^lddMVlW:ll 
Chapter 102 
The description of Dissolution1 
tRTIfR 
W^T: Ryfdchlrl 3 STtit rffjLM-RTdl WTlI^II 
Suta spoke- I shall now talk of Pratyahara 
(dissolution of the world) at the end of Para 
(one full day and night) of Svayambhuva, when 
the age of Brahma comes to a close, 0 master! 
gpSrrssznrtT fsydtfw: i 
aJ^TfRBract oEtrR rT ^T?T:IRII 
During the process of dissolution, the lord 
swallows the unmanifest ones entirely and 
clearly in exactly the same manner as he does 
the subtle ones. 
ft cb?UMmd<S 
3hfWf?T TTfraft fFJR# f II 
3RT ftPRT ili TRfWI 
31% =F#ran rT%(^hJt wr 33^11*11 
This activity of re-absorption of creations 
begins even as the Kalpas have not fully 
expired. This highly terrific period arrives at the 
closing period of the tenure of the office of the 
Manu called Druma towards the end of 
Kaliyuga then. The entire creation merges and it 
is called dissolution. 
Wmk rfdT 
HcSflgft rf?T m 11 
When inundation (Sampraksala = 
Sarhpraksalana) comes into being and 
dissolution period arrives, there is a 
consumption of all elements gross and subtle. 
MSdl^chU-W faylUR’Pd TET^n 
ulrWrftnsii 
1. V.S. Apte, p. 360, Pratisargah.

=== PAGE 394 ===

364 
Vayu-Purana 
All evolutes beginning with Mahat and 
ending with Vise§a become annihilated. This 
culmination and Pratisamcara (re-absorption of 
the world back into Prakrti) happen quite 
naturally. 
=1 fcf 
STlrPTSIT rldl ffM: cfcHJrlll 
Trfg& TRfrRTTW did refill dTT ^Tll\9ll 
The waters absorbs the primary or primeval 
merit or quality of perfume of the (element) 
earth. Then earth devoid of smell aspires for 
dissolution. When thus the quality of smell of 
the earth is dissolved, the earth assumes a 
water-logged form. 
3TTOW 3TCET t H?5TWTI:I 
The water then evaporates away, endowed 
with speed and terrific explosion. And having 
inundated the entire universe, it flows along 
awaiting destruction. 
srrcqftd TRJTt W ^ulfdd HlUc! TW 1 
>3 O 
Of waters, the prime quality (taste) gets 
coalesced in fiery element and that water gets 
evaporated owing to the dissolution of fluid of 
that much quantity. 
eftmr TTfflTtfr ^iifdqcj jrpgcRpi 
rT gfovt ^3T: 
Having liquids evaporated by fire or heat, 
they attain to the framework of luminaries. On 
water having been consumed, light becomes 
observable all around. 
T) 05JTPT 3TTcf^ fl^TI 
The fire element circumambiating all 
around, saturates that water and the universe in 
entirety becomes illumined by lights or rays. 
Wlit 
WJ\ WT ITcfTlTIdjMli 
-O "S 
TTcfol?! cT3J tTT^II^ II 
When luminaries spread all over, horizontal, 
upwards and downwards, Vayu (the wind 
element) swallows up Rupa (colour or form), 
the luminous quality of the fire element. The 
entire fire elements get coalesced in the cosmic 
air, like the light of lamp in the great wind. 
When the subtle and primary quality is 
dissolved, the element of fire becomes bereft of 
form and colour. Tejas then subsides which gets 
squandered by Vayu (breeze). 
rftjl xX c^i(Vl 
' s3 Cs 
drflRT WTTWT WraWR:ll^ll 
v3 Cs s3 
When the entire world goes lightless, the 
element of Tejas having merged in Vayu, then 
the element of wind resorts to its source of 
origin. 
gm fNta=air glggtfg W g?n 
gigtrft wn uwt g crtii^ii 
Overhead, below and horizontally, it quakes 
repeatedly the ten quarters. Then Akasa (ether) 
consumes the quality of Vayu, viz. Sparsa 
(touch). 
rR[T gif: f fdggRlfrnTI 
The squall gets subside and the sky gets on 
stationary as uncovered one i.e. open as such, 
formless, touchless or impactless, scentless but 
not incorporeal form. 
rr^fwnw 
Reverberating all by noises, the mighty one 
that shines forth, the circular hole, the sky is 
such as having its per-requisites as sound. 
TT8Tram?t ftsfoi 
it g ¥i®afui gw ggif^wl fTrii^u

=== PAGE 395 ===

Chapter-102 
365 
The sound-normed sky (Akasa) stays having 
enveloped or shrouded all. Then Bhutadi (the 
Cosmic Ego) absorbs the quality of sound 
belonging to it. 
3TftwMic*i«f Tpr:n^n 
Then the Bhutas and the sense-organs get 
merged simultaneously in Bhutadi. Bhutadi is 
of the form of Cosmic Ego. It is said to be of 
the quality of Tamas. 
ft# it# srrfa ttf# 
M^RIrMI f f#*T: #5# cSTcTTTragjtlR o || 
The principle Mahat characterised by the 
Cosmic intellect engulps even the mighty one 
(Bhutadi). The Mahat principle deserves to be 
recognised as of the form of Samkalpa 
(conception) and Adhyavasaya (determination). 
fapr tjct wi 
q#T<3r#: V1^'WiTI|Wfc|fyviehT:ll?^11 
Philosophers who illustrate over factual 
representations call it by Intellect, Mind, Lihga 
(the Symbol), Mahat (Great) and Aksara (the 
Imperishable). 
yurwiui r##l 
^TrtT# ft# # e&T# rileh<*l#ll^?ll 
When the Bhutas or beings becomes 
coalesced, the equality of merits endowed with 
Tamoguna and the cause being the instrument 
of the Lokas, have a stay within self. 
ft## rRTT W\ SR^Sclftsi# ^1 
ai-TMo-n-T rd,cny m mfa i 
SIHIdMlidc*)W*J IT# ^T ftr#IR'tfll 
The creation becomes re-absorbed in nature; 
neither the beginning nor the end of anything is 
perceived; nothing is visioned. Owing to non- 
descriptiveness, non-intelligibleness, ignorance 
of even the learned ones, owing to existent and 
non-existentness, the acquisition then becomes 
not tenable. 
ft# cFTRTTt dft## ^RTTT^##IRMI 
Owing to the estimation of the feasibility of 
acquisition of emotions having thought over, 
this is being spoken. And this cause having 
stayed as such, perennial one, endowed with 
existent and non-existent, the uninstructed 
tendency, the self-realising one by a cause, this 
way the dissolution of seven Prakrtis occur to 
be sure. 
JlciTIlft rT^T # TTTWm 
#^tT# #t#ll^ll 
Then in dissolution as well as in creation, 
they enter within themselves, whereby all this 
enveloped as such, the Cosmic Egg gets 
coalesced in waters. 
wsiwgsRt Trcr^rmi 
^ScT #fdMi ## J rtfTII?dll 
The seven continents endowed with seven 
oceans, the seven worlds along with seven 
mountains are enveloped by the covering of 
water. This water covering becomes dissolved 
in Jyotis (fire element). 
ms5cr<uimdirvi tt# § tkti 
msrcr<uwi<*i¥i ^r# f mii^ii 
The coverage that is luminous one, is 
engulped by the wind element. And the 
coverage of wind element is engulped by the 
sky element. 
3)i<*,|<>||cRXJT *T^ET Wlf## J HcTI 
it# WTftr tti# #g?r^tiT:ii^oii 
The element of Cosmic Ego engulps the sky 
element. Mahat, the great per-requisite of 
intellect absorbs Bhutadi (Cosmic Ego). 
TTfRT 1T#SH# Tprarcj tW: WTI

=== PAGE 396 ===

366 
Vayu-Purana 
The Unmanifest absorbs the principle of 
Mahat. Thereafter the Gunas attain equilibrium. 
This annihilation and extension of creation is 
pursued through the unmanifest Prakrti 
stationed in Brahman. 
WfTT^l4c6'fUlf: TTftngT SnfoTCiJ tll^ll 
It creates and engulps the deformities at the 
restraint of the creation. The Siddhas of well- 
accomplished intellects have all instruments in 
the activity of annihilation. 
W SdWiqj 
vwngft fan*, ^nrfr; 3^:113311 
Having attained to velocity in the activity of 
becoming faster in these spots, owing to 
restraint, in dissolution do become disjoined the 
K§etrajnas by senses again. 
w,4Prt5^^i'w4l:ii^'!iii 
They enunciate the Unmanifest by the term 
K$etra and Brahman is known as K$etrajna. 
Their union is having no beginning but is 
caused by similarity and dissimilarity of 
characteristics. 
Tjrcj fsprd wrgroT:! 
fgfnr: 
This way, in relation to all these creations, 
K§etrajnas deserves to be recognised, O 
Brahmanas. Owing to knowledge of K$etras 
quite distinct as such, a knower of Brahman 
should be known. 
fErtrcnfoarcra: v TJjrnii 
$n»rr§ fmmgrag^n^ii 
The jurisdiction and non-jurisdiction of 
Ksetra and Ksetrajna is well-known as such. 
Brahma deserves to be known as jurisdiction 
and the non-jurisdiction is called Ksetra. 
JsNnfiifeT are Traarn 
viflqort yrfffi ggsu Tgw:ii^v9ii 
The K§etra is occupied by K§etrajna and so 
is said to be for his sake. Owing to the 
amplitude of bodies, the embodied soul is 
known as manifold. 
sqlfa&SET ajgfePT:i 
Unarrayed and unintermixed, these souls 
stays as luminaries. On account of which, in 
everybody, there is the attainment of weal and 
woe. Therefore, the multiplicity of men, 
deserves to be known by the experts. 
#=T WTT:l 
When the withdrawal of those different 
beings sets in, that is brought about naturally 
after the lapse of a great deal of time. 
farf?rcPT: wi^:i 
At that time the passion for sustenance of 
the worlds of the Svayambhuva (Brahma) 
recedes, along with all the denizens of 
Brahmaloka. 
fefTfrl rf^T TFT 
rldfclH3lfV-)i fot rlfr^fTFTII^^11 
Then the attachment gets resurrected in the 
personal state of the denizens of those residing 
at that time and they begin to see defects therein 
of their contemporaries. 
y-nTuuiruardyuirFFii 
'MM^'cciqr-ntg rrat 
Then gets into being a destroyer of self¬ 
exposition in case of myriad-normed existence 
of the consumer and the consumed one in those, 
making manifest that idea or emotion. 
^OTPTtrfT: Tpf 3 II 
By their distinct knowledge, they have been 
(termed) Ksetrajiias. Then the residents of

=== PAGE 397 ===

Chapter-102 
367 
Brahmaloka (see the multiplicity of individuals 
but) they are beyond the cause of Prakrti. 
Ru^-n: iHi •■ctfRp&rTq-nRiym^^ii 
Therein verily, the dwell in the Atman alone. 
They are quiescent and endowed with vision. 
They are pure, free from blemish and in 
conscious or unconscious stage. 
^ llRftcriuil: 3l 
(HjJuiWlRnilrMM: H$cA|*i 6i|fa*Hl^irsmi 
It is proclaimed that they attain complete 
absolution there itself and they do not return to 
world since they are devoid of Gunas and the 
sense of identity with the body. 
3TP|kT: TEsrtrorar:i 
far?* ch<unR) swrii^ii 
^rer wi# 3r=nqt 3ruT: 
rrenreftmt in -^rtt frafaft fgarmi^vsn 
This way has been dilated upon the natural 
recreation of Svayambhuva. In this final 
curbing and restraint, the senses of all the 
beings differ. This way this restraint along with 
the instrument of all facts, the restraint of 
factual representations, is known as Avartaka 
(excitement of mind from the influence of 
senses), O Brahmanas! 
TRT 33TTcT 
C\ 
?tr cMi 
pfrm3r fg§:ilr fanftihrtf6ii 
xT rT^T ?#RT II 
ira^rr 3=r cTc*t3 w trrd yfanfai 
Suta spoke- Dharma and Adharma, 
austerity, perfect knowledge or learning, the 
auspicious, truth, falsehood, the upward flight 
and downward descent, weal and woe, favour 
and disfavour or agreability or non-agreability 
or agreement and disagreement- all these are 
mere attributes of one who has attained 
salvation. Whatever is good and bad, auspicious 
and inauspicious is considered as the nature of 
Gunas of the wise who are devoid of attachment 
to sense organs- all merits and demerits that are 
deposited in the nature of embodied beings are 
stabilised in Prakrti which is the source of 
origin. 
3RRT MN^u4 <T ^fdfydUJ 
3^ lP ^THrorq-ift 3RT=T:ll 
The merits and demerits of living beings 
become patent established in Prakrti. They are 
declared to lie unmanifested. The same merits 
and demerits of the beings make unite this body 
in case of variation of body. 
Srqfepft rT Pit 
ejRrft: ^3: «hi-u^ 3RTfa:ii^u 
Dharma and Adharma (virtue and sin) of 
beings are recumbent on the instinct of simple 
merits. They become accumulated in the form 
of the body along with the senses (Karana) of 
beings. 
WcfrRT: TTeffaRt 
s3 
tTHTT:I 
■o 
Jliwf =T W* 3=1 
^rrdft: rnm^n 
■o o 
The merits involving those libertines well¬ 
conscious as such go coalesced and during 
creation and recreation in the world, the beings 
get united as well as disunited with senses and 
move on. 
TTsrcrt tfurtfr 3=r 3=r i 
wra: wrifsifgcnfwiik'sii 
The Vrttis (proclivities) are threefold- 
Rdjasi, Tamasl and Sattvik. These tendencies 
having simple merits do prevail on being 
activised by Purusa. 
c^cUrHcb TDT: I

=== PAGE 398 ===

368 
Vayu-Purana 
Sattva of the divine nature is conducive to 
attain the upper region (heaven) and Tamas is of 
the nature of lower region (hell). The prevailer 
of the two, in the centre is Rajas which revolves 
about repeatedly in this world. 
^idmurFTcKi: i 
UcS^dHi ^Mdlim^ll 
^(d^lMr£|4TTWr STH^RT f| tTR^rl 
T37TTCT dd-yRd'+d: T^TT: ’PJ?TT:imV9 
This way, within all the beings, these three 
types of emotional attributes are the original 
causes of the nature of Gunas in all the worlds 
of the beings. That is not to be taken up by the 
one well-conversant as such. The undertakings 
ensuring ignorance are commenced or 
undertaken by men. These three activities, 
auspicious as such, are known as having soul 
for sin. 
3JdTcl4yfalrHte8T fqfeq cfSOTT rTrf.'im <£. II 
Owing to envelopment by Tamas (gloom), a 
being fails to understand the factual facts. 
Owing to the observation of unreal norms, a 
massacre (bondage) is created in three ways. 
rT 5RCR ^JT t^rfwrf xfl 
(i) Prakrta Bandha (a natural bondage), (ii) 
Vaikarika Bandha (bondage of its evolutes) and 
(iii) Daksina Bandha (a technical term in the 
Sdmkhya System for the third bondage)- with 
these three types of bondages, a creature turns 
round and round here (in world). 
^ sRT: TTtrGT WR^T: I 
3lfqR% ^ ^ o li 
zm wfafa ST jjiHUgift ^|qfw:l 
WR Mdiiitii Rm4iiidii^ ^1 
This way has been illustrated the three types 
of bondages of the very instrument of 
ignorance. The following are the common 
defects (due to them)- Seeing permanence in 
what is transcient; observation of happiness in 
what actually is the cause of grief; recognition 
of personalness in what does not belong to one; 
and the appearance of purity in what is impure. 
Those who have these mental defects have the 
defects of knowledge through misapprehension. 
^3*TR -Hy^igdHi 
3i?1M rPTOt TTFT T5T: II 
The absolvement to passion and detachment 
or antipathy stands illustrated as knowledge. 
Ignorance is the root of engloomment and the 
fruit of action twain is Rajas or obscurities. The 
body then is the offspring of actions and thus 
there ensues mighty grief. 
^rsrr ricr 
ipfocfiTl' cfnfari *rTOct <T 'STll^ll 
The sins born of ears or hearing, born of 
eyes or vision, as also (sprung) out of skin, 
tongue and nose are the causes of the rebirth 
and misery. 
«nH: qnfuT: te^:I 
A man with a craving is said to be a Bala (an 
ignorant person). As a result of his actions, the 
individual soul goes round and round there only 
like the bull yoked to the oil-pressing machine. 
Therefore, it is being sermonised that gross 
ignorance is the cause of all grief. To that, one 
having considered as the sole enemy, may 
persevere for knowledge. 
By understanding alone, all is given up and 
by abnegation of all, the intellect becomes 
detached. By renunciation, one gets sanctified 
and the vindicated one gets rid of spirit.

=== PAGE 399 ===

Chapter-102 
369 
3??r ^ra^nftr trt ^diT^iftumi 
3Tfaq|W ^ ^:ll^'3ll 
After this, I shall talk of Raga (passion) that 
overwhelms living beings. By means of this 
attachment, all living beings become indulgent 
in worldly pleasures in spite of themselves. 
FTO2J ^'<ayWUI rTOTII^dll 
The uncherished attachment is the very woe 
inspiring by the torment of love. By the 
acquisition of grief, there ensues torment and 
the reminiscence of comfort. 
TFT: TFJcnT cfnTOT T*RPTI 
TSncfTT% % TTFR irrfsFfrffT^II 
TTFTT^TR jT ^ II 
This way, it is the attachment to worldly 
pleasures that is declared as the cause of births. 
In all the physical worlds beginning with 
Brahma and culminating with the immobile 
beings, this attachment alone is the cause of 
birth and that is the result of ignorance. 
Therefore, one should evade the glory caused 
by ignorance. 
TJFh TTT5lf 1 JFT7TJT f?I2TW{ rf&cf tj| 
cnnfeFTi%Tteft u: 
TJF FFff % farfirf?FfaM TT ctiFUFTI 
^ 3TRUT TT ftWT%ll\9^ll 
If one does not accept the words of sages as 
evidence or authority; if one has no regard for 
good manners as practised by virtuous and 
respectable men; if one is antipathetic towards 
orders of society and stages of life; and if one is 
opposed or hostile to the activity of decorous 
behaviour- this way of action is senseless and a 
cause of vertebrates breed. And gone within the 
breed of vertebrates, the instrument is being 
etymologised. 
fgfgsn -snrHT wft xj 
UTTOt f#CT TTfenrFF TJ%:ll^TH 
o 
And remaining in the vertebrates breed of 
six varieties, there are various kinds of 
torments. In the matter of cause and objective, 
there is hurdle all around. 
sftgRf f FrFcf itfdUldlfMeb T^rFTI 
FFTTTt ^f^cTT^Tt I |V9 ^ 11 
And all that lordless is deemed as hurdle- 
normed. This way, this is the gloomy tendency 
(Tamasa proclivities) of beings and the like of 
four types. 
TF^FTT^R f%Jrt WT TTr^^dldl 
diclHi rf dSJT dtc) ^ TTt^c!^TTTTII'3'^|| 
The heart has sole prop for spirit (Sattva) if 
the Sattvic traits are evinced. Tattvas can be 
comprehended only after viewing them in 
accordance with reality. 
?TWT4^4l3^ll'3mi 
And the plurality of Sattva Guna and 
Ksetrajnas constitutes the observation of the 
factual object (perfect knowledge). It is said that 
Yoga originates from perfect knowledge, 
tti 
<T FtST f^T FES^II^II 
Of one bound by that one, there is bondage 
and a release is there when immune from that. 
When the worldly existence recedes, the 
emancipated one gets immunity even from the 
sex assignment. 
ir^RT: w<^3Tcrfdgdl 
Void of kingship, the insensate one, abides 
in his own self and abiding in personal self, he 
is marked by diversity and multiplicity. 
TT rnft 3Ttr#r t TF^f^T:ll\a<SII 
This way, this per-requisite has been 
illustrated in brief of knowledge and Moksa

=== PAGE 400 ===

370 
Vayu-Purana 
(liberation). And the Moksa even is known as 
three-moded by the realisers of reality. 
TJcf f^rfrrf TFTR^nRT I 
The first one is the abnegation is by 
knowledge and the second one owing to the 
defonction of passion whereby the liberated 
soul attains Kaivalya] and owing to Kaivalya, 
Niranjana2 (freedom from falsehood). 
rRTT ^RTT 
^icRTTtJmn^oii 
Owing to freedom from falsehood, one 
becomes Suddha (sanctified). In this state of 
liberation there is no guide or leader. Owing to 
the destruction of lust, the third cause of Moksa 
has been illustrated. 
wfni supifa ^TTwnii 
wi 
The Nimitta (liberated soul) do not 
experience misery caused by the obstacle to the 
worldly objects of desired melody etc. These 
eight are the forms, caused by Prakrti in serial 
order, that adhere to the Ksetrajnas. They are 
called Gunas and Matras. After this, I shall talk 
Vairagya (detachment), arising from the sight of 
faults. 
^ nm ^cr Rm w^nni 
^TSTT dlMd^Hrdlld^ll 
One should practice non-hatred and absence 
of attachment to the five pre-requisites (objects 
of sensual enjoyment) of both divine and human 
nature, after seeing the flaws therein. 
IrRPP RpW) 'Shrill 6 *11 
1. V.S. Apte, p. 164. Beatitude or perfect isolation or 
exclusiveness. 
2. V.S. Apte, p. 290. 
A devastation deserves to be done of 
torment, love and grief. This way having 
resorted to Vairagya, the embodied one may 
become free from egoism. 
fsr^g ^rWcitt ■im,^(?)n<imi 
He should realise in his mind that (the 
worldly existence) is ephemeral, inauspicious 
and conducive to grief. Then with Sattvic traits, 
he should perform pure activities. 
dW: TTOTUIcjn^ % 
3£RT jrarfttn: %crwspftfcr:l 
■?r TRt^rtnfs^r cfiid'sii 
Maturely astringent as such, he observes all 
the causative flaws and then at the time of 
departure (death), the heat in the body becomes 
virulent due to conditioning causes e.g. Dosas. 
JTTtrrotRTft #R(f% 
VF4IBI4.rqdl d dd: 11 £ £ 11 
O O 
Due to chilliness, the virulently excited 
Vayu pierces the centres of vital airs, cuts off 
vulnerable parts of the body and rises up. 
Tt ^cbldHT yWWMMdfWd:l 
O. 
?TFT ^ dP^TII^II 
It is the breath stationed in the abodes of 
vital airs of all living beings. By contraction, the 
knowledge goes obscured and the actions are 
enshrouded. 
■*T ^Sd'cqfijgR: dntfrr: jn^:i 
3tEifyiui^T?l<3 irfeyicu^ ddtu^oii 
The individual soul being bereaved of the 
supporting body, is induced by its own actions 
committed before. It then dislodges the Pranas 
from the eight limbs. 
fR (ipt) ttt ^ ^rarri 
dci Ttrohi: qR^ ^ 
The body getting released, that one may

=== PAGE 401 ===

Chapter-102 
371 
become then breathless. This way deserted by 
breath, a dead one becomes known, 
oTEj; Wirt 4)*WHfarlWd:l 
T33R rT# ^ ^TT ^rTT R feUcfl I % ? 11 
The way in this world, when someone holds 
the glow-worm in his hand and goes about here 
and there, he too is visible in light. He who kills 
it, though a carrier ceases to be a carrier. 
oznwrt 
^Te^rir fMt fkfcnk 
By the alleviation of greed, being the third 
one, the definition of Moksa becomes 
illustrated. It is the observation of defects in five 
distinctive objects of sensual pleasure such as 
sound and others. 
cUt^cfeRUi ^TrBnfrfcri WF& ^11^ II 
Immunity from animosity, 11011-attachment, 
the devastation from love and torment- these 
are the causes of Vairdgya and of the coalescent 
of Prakrtis. 
'R^TRTt ^ 
SToERHIUT^ f^TT 'ffcTRTT: Se§cRfaT:II^MI 
Eight Prakrtis, spoken off earlier, deserve to 
be known as per serial order, beginning with 
Avyakta (imperceptible) and ending with Bhutas 
(Elements). These are called the dissolution of 
the Prakrtis. 
guformoTi skruptu^h 
Those who are endowed with the etiquettes 
of stages of life and orders of society and those 
civilized beings who are the non-antagonisers of 
the scriptures are called Sistas. The law of 
orders of society and stages of life is the 
instrument in the attainment of Devasthanas 
(i.e. heaven). 
ygnffifi wrtPt ^=rr[T:i 
t^fafoTOTsr % gjnTit 
Starting with Brahma and ending with 
Pisacas, the eight-spotted are the gods. The 
Siddhis conducive to Aisvarya (supremacy), 
Anima (minuteness) etc. are the causes eight in 
number. 
fafarTMiratartl ft ¥Kin<rU*ntl 
srskmft wnfcrr moprfq 
Those who stay in those abodes do not 
experience the grief due to the obstacle to the 
achievement of such desired objects as sweet 
melody etc. These are the eight Prakrta forms as 
per serial order. 
yum'NIWchlfo $TI 
q rlfflTimil 
They come into contact with the Ksetrajnas. 
They are of the nature of the (three) Gunas and 
(five) Tanmatras. At the time of rainy season, 
owing to dereliction, they fail to see clouds with 
their eyes. 
fegr fz&R ;at^Ti 
The Siddhas, however observe the Jlva 
(individual soul) of such a state by a divine 
vision. The Jlva assumes all kinds of bodies 
such as those of dogs etc. 
sucRtsfa -qsrnsimi 
■faf gjRtit w 11 ^ o \ 11 
sq^TToSI# Tmnn\5-4 t wi <T efcrFTVI:ll^o9 
Thus, he moves horizontally, upwards and 
downwards, running along as per serial order. 
He is called by these various synonymic 
names- Jlva (individual soul), Prana (vital air), 
Linga (the symbol) and Karana (cause). He is 
the proof in both specific and inspecific 
(worlds) having form of the same norm 
absolutely. 
ijcj ^ikntai ?tht| teMjf^ii^n

=== PAGE 402 ===

372 
Vayu-Purana 
After realising categories ending with 
Avyakta and what is presided over by the 
Ksetrajha, he assumes purity and gets immunity 
owing to knowledge. 
qg ^cT TMT cfiSTCT 
g&g qftfWrfff '§fof%'ll?o*|| 
This way the principle that was demolished, 
ensues out on the observance of the reality of 
the factual points. The cherished end, by 
suitability, gets thoroughly driven out on the 
body gone as defunct emancipated pertinently. 
fogft cjRTii grfq aToror^fqnwyjii 
The senses of the one, having knowledge 
imperceptible, become dazed. He is 
emancipated by the body of merits, by the Prana 
and the like all around. 
*ftta: ffdfrerRj^TTdrqhr: 11 <= 11 
It does not assume another body. Just as 
sprout never comes out when seed is burnt, in 
the same manner, the Jivika (the living being) 
comes out from the entire universe, having the 
mind of the semen framework. 
Due to Jnana (knowledge), he becomes 
enlightened and purified of the four conditions. 
To the Prakrti, they call as truth and the Vikdra 
(deformity) is called the untruth. 
The suave norm of that one is called 
immoral odour and the suavity is called truth. 
Satya (Brahman) is without name and form. On 
that account, Ksetrajha is called as such 
possessing name and form. 
Owing to the recognition of Ksetra (the 
body), he is called Ksetrajha. Ksetrajha is 
known as auspicious because of the perception 
of Ksetra. 
^g gtar wii^°n 
Ksetrajha becomes remembered (thus) 
whereby is recognised by the experts of that. 
Ksetra is seen to be without intelligence but 
Ksetrajha is the cognisant one invariably. 
^uu<cfi<oiiT^ci ri 
Owing to its getting demolished and 
activating, on account of safeguarding against 
injury (lit. wound), on account of enjoybility 
and objectivity, those knowing the Ksetra 
recognise it so. 
fcichKd^trt Ril^ll 
All categories starting with Mahat and 
ending with Visesa assume deformity and they 
are characterised by Vikdra (change). Hence, 
they are endowed with non-evanescence and 
evanescence. 
ta if tat rT gRg| fT:l 
rTWl^f 
From that very Vikdra whereby it becomes 
evanescent and on that account, the evanescent 
becomes known. 
O *S 
From the hells of the world that rescues the 
man and owing to rescue from the grief, the 
Ksetra is so called. 
30drc)lfc£ star: RjcTrlimn 
Owing to the idea of weal, woe and 
infatuation the Bhojya or enjoyable one is so 
called and owing to insensate norm, the object 
is called Dharmavibhu.

=== PAGE 403 ===

Chapter-102 
373 
qr gfar) ^ fgaRronp tt h^ti 
Tfr xll^xhM^UIrctW^ci ^ll^ll 
It is called Aksara because it neither gets 
diminished nor gets percolated. Evolutes spread 
from it. It is not diminished. 
Since it lies in Pur, on that account, it is 
called Purusa. Since it is Purapratyayika (i.e. 
the knower of the Body), it is called Puru$a. 
tpr cfsi d^r^i^i 
By the experts that Purusa is understood the 
pure one, Nirahjana, glamoured one (free from 
falsehood) and void of knowledge and 
ignorance. 
3Tfer qiwlfa ^5^ cfT cJTgf TTrKt TRT: f^rT: I 
He is other than what can be called existent, 
non-existent, bound, liberated, mobile, stable. 
As he is devoid of any cause, he cannot be 
specified. 
%^n?T TT ^Tt t fjyrrl|r*lMdVW:l 
SilcHHr^chR) TFfTTqR (?) %^nT 11 
'WTdarfilMHM'Rj f%RRT?r PTpitll^oll 
Owing to purity, he cannot be indicated 
specifically and owing to his blissfulness, he is 
of equal vision. And owing to personal 
etymologisation, he becomes absolute in 
reasoning. It can be imagined or inferred. Those 
who perceive thus are not deluded. 
T3gT ?TRn9f g^RlrUcCTJ 
rT^T ^11?? ^11 
When one sees the knower, the one having 
self observer of the tranquillising objects fit to 
be directed in visible and invisible norms, then 
the exemplification of that becomes cogent. 
Tic) fa?iidi: M: ^nf^t ftwfri 
^ grnrJt ^ cug*Ji<l sftfrrai TTgriivq ? 11 
This way having known that great Being, the 
perfect knower attains restraint in quietude, in 
the action and its cause and in the material 
world’s knowledge and the like. 
’HMyrhl fcl^rhl <TT ^Tcldl TJcRST 
IdjiTdi q ^sr ^?r ^jeF^g qr%r:ii^^ii 
Conjoined or disjoined of the living one or 
the dead one, the realiser may not come to 
vision in distinctness here all around. 
dTTTrTTW chKOIkMI fqTT^fal 
gjRUr ■JRHIr^^llfdyfdTI^^II 
The causal soul controls that individual soul 
by means of his own self. He abides in the 
Prakrti, in its cause and his own self. 
srftcT diwifa ctt <?t ifT:i 
TT^T? <5T TJgJcRg- =fT ?) ^Tll^mi 
He exists or does not exist. He is he or 
different one. He is here or hereafter. He is 
unified one or the distinguished one, He is 
Ksetrajha or Purusa. 
bdcMctMT fa-fir^ cTT cfT! 
gjrrf TTOTZradt 'STtW cfT 'dl^TT'd cfTII 
He is equipped with self or having no self. 
He is sensate or insensate. He is even the doer, 
or even undoer. He is the enjoyer one or fit to 
be enjoyed. 
3T^TE2t dddlTsMHKHI^I^I^dfdll^gll 
Having realised Ksetrajha which do not get 
back, there is no further return to world. It is 
called the unspeakable because it cannot be 
described as such and on account of non- 
engulpment in the uncausable norm. 
qrrfqf^n^r WTW TTTOT wn^n 
It is non-thinkable owing to non-anxious- 
normed movements and owing to non¬ 
availability all around. After attaining that 
principle along with the mind, he (the soul) 
does not become attached.

=== PAGE 404 ===

374 
Vayu-Purana 
Rnfw ^ sfoft frc^i 
oytid^isr^:# v wRcnrrniRi^ii 
^Rlf^ mwr^IxiJMI-c^t ^ foUrTl 
v» 
TJcfr -H^K^WkI oMThMrhl cTcT: fTtll^ll 
When the Ksetrajna is Nirguna (free from 
Gunas), when it is pure, quiescent, unsullied, 
exhausted, immune from weal and woe, 
restrained one having come to appeasement, 
devoid of ego, then there is neither Vacyatva 
(talkable) nor Avacyatva (untalkable). These 
two, the Samhara (dissolution) and Vistara 
(escalation) are perceptible and imperceptible. 
■g^rT xta w: tnfef^n 
^ Jratfrn^oii 
Pumsa creates and dissolves and the 
dissolved one attains to defunction occupied by 
Ksetrajna, all that gets resurrected once again. 
^irr faiyd*fiyl:ii 
3HiRw* ^TT Tp:ii^u 
By the one started from the station of that 
one, along with intelligence, the union effected 
by Dharmya (lawful) and Vaidharmya 
(unlawful) becomes assumed in form. That 
union having no beginning is known as 
Mahapurusajna. 
o 
^ f|d^r (?) dd4^m^clll 
Till such time the tenure of Sarga (creation) 
and Pratisarga (Samhara) persists, Prakrti 
keeps Purusa restrained and stays. To begin 
with, it functions with intelligence continued for 
the sake of righteous object of men. 
%%H<*lRdT xTI 
3fTOR^TT ^rnc^fwil 
This activity accompanied by Sarga 
(creation) and Pratisarga (recreation), the chief- 
normed activity of supremacy, becomes 
effected by Pradhana and Tsvara. Having no 
beginning and no end, Prakrti approaches the 
Universe even while terrifying it with the 
feeling of identification. 
Thus the third creation of Prakrti 
characterised by Hetu (cause) has been 
illustrated. One who strictly adheres to it 
becomes liberated as mentioned by sages. 
srfdyjfi crfejfaST: Chlfidl Ml 
^ ^T: f% 
Thus the three-typed Pratisarga has been 
illustrated by me before you in details and in 
line with sequence. What more may I do for 
you? 
* * *

=== PAGE 405 ===

374 
Vayu-Purana 
II3W ^fa^VIddoVlRCII 
Chapter 103 
The description of Creation 
3R *TcRTT Miichlf^TOI 
tRFft tR^T: wf ^ll^ll 
t^TRt •<R^H'r «r ^uniter tr%crmTii^ii 
The Sages spoke- By you, a mighty legend 
has been dilated upon of progenies or subjects 
along with Manus and of gods along with sages, 
of Manes, Gandharvas, Bhutas, Pisacas, Uragas 
(Nagas), Raksasas, Daityas, Danavas, Yaksas 
and vertebrates or birds. 
chttTfCir 
fgfensr gwprmi tjihtjm^-hmmii^ii 
Their highly marvellous exploits, excellent 
births of highest order and lawful legal

=== PAGE 406 ===

Chapter-103 
375 
determination have been narrated in varied- 
normed anecdotes. 
rirch'^^llHH^Hlch <*T^cTT f*HT| 
V3 Cn "N 
Being dilated upon us by you by an 
affectionate talk, O son of Suta, it renders bliss 
to our ears and minds for ever till the end of the 
existing generation. 
IJcWHISZT % W ^ I 
TW: ^rf^rw: Wt R: 
<3 O 
This way having extolled that Suta, they all, 
the great sages, having honoured him, the 
session celebrating ones, once again questioned 
about the commencement of the Sarga 
(creation). 
<$21 ^RT MSIW JT: MMrWcll 
eRfa JlUWIUf FRmil^ll 
-O O O 
sttimr 
SWlft wbm: Tlfft ^dlMlIVSIl 
“O Suta! O highly wise one! How does 
Sarga (creation) get into being? How the 
creation begins again, when the bonds have 
dissolved, when all the Gunas have attained the 
state of equilibrium, when everything is 
enveloped in darkness, when the groups of 
Vikaras (created beings) have become inactive 
and stationed in the unmanifest Atman and 
when all the Ksetrajnas have attained Sayujya 
(identity) with Brahman? This you may dilate 
upon us who ask you.” 
TTcJfrfiW: 
•oo o "V 
This way having been addressed, then the 
Suta Lomaharsana started explaining or 
discoursing once again all that assumption as 
such. 
3T? eft c^filbillfft m\ MMrWftl 
MeSelry f WFTtT ft«ft*RTII,?ll 
“I shall repeat before you the way the 
creation shall come about. That deserves to be 
understood as of earlier norm. That same you 
understand from me. 
^ d'iTRXt'd rT ^ ^TkT: I 
trwrgraft fftcpftft ottfzt ftot 
Having been seen and fit to be estimated, the 
same logical point, I shall talk to you with 
argumentation. On that account, the words 
make a retreat having not approached along 
with mind. 
fetftl: FUTFTfft fftcjrfftll^ll 
Like the imperceptible or unmanifest is 
invisible and incomprehensible, (the objects of 
creation too) are invisible and difficult of 
acquisition. When the evolutes become 
dissolved, they are seen nowhere. The Gunas 
attain equilibrium and the created things recede. 
TRTR MWIUll ^ TTOuftifF fft^fTI 
srftftpff Svftftft 3ToqtTft yiffTRI F^TII^M 
Pradhana stands on a similar footing with 
Purusas. Dharma and Adharma go defunct in 
the imperceptibility of breathing ones. 
FTcIHNIcUchl spft 7TTJRF% Tlfftfed:! 
o 
Flft cmfa fdsfdll^ll 
Dharma is Sattvamdtrdtmaka (having soul 
for mere spirit) established in the spirit of Guna 
and Adharma having soul for Tamas stays in the 
Tamoguna. 
Fsft&Rf WRm 
These two Gunas are devoid of divisioning 
when they are established in the equilibrium. In 
all the functions of Pradhana (the principal one), 
the activities will be backed by the intellect. 
^qft rTFmJTRI 
■QcT rlRftTqi-H FTWII^M

=== PAGE 407 ===

376 
Vayu-Purana 
With ignorance, the Ksetrajna shall abide by 
those Gunas. This way, by pride, the Pura 
(physical body) will be attained. 
When it deserves to adhere both, the Ksetra 
and the Ksetrajna, the two, begin to interact 
mutually. They attain to unification in the 
relationship of Bhojya (that which has to be 
enjoyed) and Bhoktr (the enjoyer). 
dW«$T01Me4M> TTTRt WlIrMchMI 
*N 
^TT^rfgfr rfSET -t^TET 
The only refuge for them is imperceptible. 
Having stayed in similitude, those having soul 
for Gunas, become occupied by Ksetrajna and 
then they attain to dissimilitude as such. 
rTcF: 
fsrant 
Then the two Ksetra and Ksetrajna attains to 
the state of perceptibility. Sattva presided over 
by Ksetrajna will produce evolutes. 
'xJdf^VMJUKrqebi^i 
TrarFPRT jwr 
Beginning with Mahal and ending in Vis'esa, 
the twenty-four principles of the nature of 
Gunas adhere to the Ksetrajna, Pradhana and 
Purusa. 
Tianr: 4t5st ■qf^n gr:i 
In Brahmanda (Cosmic Egg), first one shall 
happen to be the Isvara. Siva will be the lord of 
all the beings (Bhutas), of the entire knowable 
universe. 
far: rwpti 
3Tlfa^: TraHWITJfglAI Tra^lR^II 
The overlord of all the emancipated ones, he 
is Brahma, the one made of Brahman, the great 
one, the primeval lord. For the grace of 
Pradhana, his manifestation is being illustrated 
as such. 
^FrrarV Ttjcfh 
Ksetra and Ksetrajna are self-bom having no 
beginning. They are bom as the minuter ones. 
They are known endowed with the union of no 
beginning and are aware of the entire Ksetras. 
srafipsfe TJrft wafft W cffr cT^TI 
-O C\ S3 O 
They are endowed with the idea of 
ignorance like Masakas (mosquitoes, gnats; a 
water leather bag)1 and the two Varas or whisks 
for keeping away mosquito (the mosquito nets 
met to evade or ward off mosquitoes). They are 
stationed beginninglessly and inconceivably 
like water and fish. 
nq; TPf TOPltl 
C\ Cs %3 
The creatioji flmctions again as it had 
functioned before. The ignorant Prakrti adheres 
to the state of Rajas, Sattva and Tamas. 
y^fdch'lH T^WTSfqhvT- 
ferytNcTt ^P*ddi xX qrfcr 
huiiciyA yfdfittSduti’.ii^mi 
At the time of commencement, the Ksetrajna 
human beings adhere to Rajas and the like and 
having attained importance, they attain to 
specification and sense-realisation. Then the 
Gunas reach their end. 
smfiR: uBifiwywi 
ocm fentfoT: 
God Brahma is of truthful conception. While 
he was meditating on the Sat, the Gunas Rajas, 
Sattva and Tamas though mutually dissimilar 
became manifest as caused by the Sat (the 
existent). 
3TT2Rt WIc*5RT ^d^ll-W Tl%:l 
1. V.S. Apte, p. 428, This verse is obscure.

=== PAGE 408 ===

Chapter-103 
377 
Ksetratajjnas (knowers of Ksetra) are ever 
produced both at the beginning and at the end. 
The Atmans who identify themselves, having 
means for accomplished acts achieved, do get 
birth. 
TRcfT WRT Wl 
All spirited ones assume form from the 
Unmanifest at the outset itself, which creates 
Suvahas, Sadhikas (spiritual aspirants) as well 
as non-Sadhikas. 
WFTO ^ IRwi: W:l 
S3 
Chl^fui ilfdMoW-q 3?qiR) TR: TH:IR^|| 
Crawling along, all those along with the 
context of their places adhere to acts and take 
birth time and again. 
srrcqRft OcrT) ? qi^Ri 
^rn^oii 
Dharma (law) and Adharma (unlawful 
norm) are soul-formed Gunas. They mutually 
give rise to each other through boons and grace. 
Tti wm: qtfct fafermi 
o 
dWWrlW T^rTlI^II 
All are similar ones at the beginning of the 
creation. For the sake of preservation, they take 
to modifications. The Gunas race towards him. 
On that account, that suits him. 
IJUTT^ qrft 3llcRyy: 
rfRfq MfdMgl^ ^HTRRT: TT: qT:ll^ll 
The Gunas move to all those in the vision of 
the earlier ones and do adhere to as such and 
adhere to all those while being generated time 
and again. 
d^lfcldl: TftRRT dWWdW Traqil^^ll 
The violent and non-violent, cruel and 
compassionate, Dharma and Adharma, covered 
and uncovered, fostered by that one, assume 
form, on that account that appeals that one. 
fqqqtw qqRt q^: 
Myriad norm among great beings, in images 
for the sake of senses, the separation of the 
beings- all these take place through Gunas. 
^q qt qqr TsTlrT: qq; qrf: quwd:l 
HHJTtsq TTg^qqil^kll 
This way by me has been illustrated the 
resurrection of creation succinctly. Now in 
brief, I shall talk of the creation of Brahma. 
aTcXJ-dlTr^lJ-U I Id W ifvIrdlr^qdlr^MI 
qqrcqwrarr <r qtqrf q t#sr:: 113^11 
From the unmanifest cause which is eternal 
one and of the nature of Sat and Asat (existence 
and non-existence) takes birth Mahesvara 
through Pradhana and Purusa. 
Tf qq: wfe wzfc sl^Qld:l 
TT MdHlchM^MHdUlIrMchldll^^ll 
With the appellation 4Brahma’, he becomes 
the evolver. He creates the lokas (worlds) again 
or people endowed with the merit of pride. 
STfc&RTg M£d*dWlc^dlH xUSSTWA 
qqqrqqq^r qqRT^qifR *TII 
•o C\ 
Egoism is bom of Mahat (the cosmic 
intellect) and the Bhutas or beings from the self. 
Bhutas and sense organs get into being 
simultaneously from the Atman. The different 
living beings are bom from Bhutas. This way 
the creation assumes form. 
fqqqrrqqq^tqt WI3qt qqmqqi 
qqf&T qqr q^ q$c||^qq|iidiHN3 ll 
The components of the breadth of these ones 
(assumes form) as per intelligence or 
understanding and learning and stands 
illustrated before you as per earlier narration. 
That very way may it be resolved upon.” 
HlcbVlPd Tifefq q sqq qil

=== PAGE 409 ===

378 
Vayu-Puraija 
dfW^S^JSj W3T ^ST: 
WT c^eh^M'il: yiMclPdll'Soll 
Having heard the story of the creation, 
stability and oblivision of the worlds, the sages, 
the inhabitants of Naimisa(ranya) at that time, 
having performed Avabhrtha (purification bath 
at the end of a principal sacrifice) in the Satra 
(sacrificial sessions) purified as such, attain to 
sacred loka. 
r5cF=FT ^iqTffoqfcprafq 
TTfr^rarn^ ?n 
The way, you all, as per ritual, offer 
sacrifices to the gods and perform Avabhrtha 
and thus become sanctified. At the culmination 
of life be contented, abandon bodies, attain the 
sacred world and activate yourself as per 
decorum. 
i^r Ir 'Afatan t fgT i r^n 
^^T^TFTRTT: ^ f ^01:11*^11 
All the residents of Naimi§a(ranya), having 
seen and created verily, all being of sacrificial 
session, proceeded to heaven after having bath, 
Avabhrtha (purificatory bath). 
cRT: Wf WI: W 
0 Brahmana, in the same manner, even you 
will proceed to heaven at the end of your life 
after the performance of various kinds of 
sacrifices like those excellent Brahmanas. 
_____ 
JlljKyT W: TTT^: 
:l 
Preamble is the first part (of this Purana), 
being the introduction of the plot and Anusanga 
is the introduction as well as the conclusion or 
denouncement. 
TjrniT 
33^ ^JIcd^rryi^WHTch^rl TET:M*mi 
This way, this Purana, well-recognised by 
the world, was dilated upon by the adorable, the 
incarnated one, Vayu himself, engaged in the 
beneficence of the world or people. 
ssrarora qfq^rr #wi:i 
^nn^n 
yujfrcj^T Tfsrral q' 
He narrated it to the sages after going to 
their sacrificial session in the Naimisa forest, O 
excellent sages! Owing to the grace of those 
ones, the story of the origin and dissolution of 
the living beings has been learnt without any 
doubt. After hearing and understanding this 
principal creation and likewise the supreme 
administrative norm, the wise one does not 
attain to infatuation. 
Wtf W8&: W: I 
The Brahmana scholar who listens to or 
narrates or teaches this ancient chronicle 
(Itihasa) rejoices in the worlds of Indra for 
perennial years. Having attained Sayujya 
(identity) with Brahman along with Brahma, he 
gets emancipated. 
cmt c&lftqrii c&fq y^nrqi Gemini 
wPifa^THT ^T^rimoii 
Popularising the repute of those Prajapatis, 
the reputed noble-souled ones as they are the 
overlords of the land, he attains the status of 
Brahman. 
This Purana spoken by Krsna Dvaipayana, 
the expounder of Brahman (Vedas) is the 
blessed one, the fame-affording one, the sacred 
one, and well-regarded by the Vedas.

=== PAGE 410 ===

Chapter-103 
379 
■q^VR^nuTt xf c&Itt W^UIMI 
^afdi^n^iuT'i xi ^^urd^iHii 
IT -d^Wd tuq-; W zt U^IMilldim^ll 
He who gives publicity to the repute of the 
Lords of Manvantaras, the Devas and Sages 
having radiance and wealth of abundance gets 
rid of all sins and may attain to great merit. 
flr^fa&RTdi trafcrr xr^fon 
ydmcqi srpTOm 
A scholar who always narrates this on every 
festival occasions, shakes off his sins, conquers 
heaven and achieves strength to gain the 
Brahmanhood. 
He who may make it heard on an obsequial 
rite (Sraddha) to the Brahmanas, the Pad a 
(quarter of a verse or hemstitch) of that finally 
passes on to Pitps which is an accomplisher of 
all desires and an indestructible one. 
rTWRJTT JTTOt 4^1 
^ Tdrtrnh ygyjriimmi 
On account of which to begin with, this 
endless Purana is dilated upon and he who may 
know the etymology of this is given immunity 
from all the sins. 
T$cf fsnr cnifa % twzit: 
s3 O 
ffdfprfiw wan eruk (^) gfirmme, 
wfor TIWTlfaT ^?T:l 
diddblfe-trsbnfai effort fgfe trt^ni 
1^: Ttf tTt^iimaii 
Those people of the three prime orders of 
society who listen to this Itihasa (chronicle) and 
make up mind for a lawful activity, they rejoice 
in heaven for as many thousands of crores of 
years as are the hair-pores all around in their 
bodies. Having assumed the absorption with 
Brahman, they abide along with the gods. 
ycSmugi w ufor ^ qyife wi 
WT VII*df*U TTRlftlFrimill 
This sacred text of the ancient Purana, the 
obviator of all sins, pure and fame endowing, 
was offered by Brahma to Matarisvan (Vayu). 
rPFmwfarTOT 3TPTT TTWIrenfa 
From him, it was acquired by Us'anas and 
from him, it was acquired by Brhaspati. 
Thereafter Brhaspati spoke out it unto Savitr. 
Tjrg% trr? t 3^: i 
eifviBiq TTfsft WTWRT iTII^oii 
Savitr passed it on to Mrtyu (Yama) and 
Mrtyu passed it on to Indra thereafter. Indra also 
passed it on to Vasistha who on his own part, 
passed it on to Sarasvata. 
^3[R11^ S>ll 
Sarasvata passed it on to Tridhaman1 and 
Tridhaman passed it on to Saradvata. Saradvata 
passed it on to Trivi§ta who on his own part, 
passed it on to Antariksa. 
erffnt rTRrfTSTt 4 ^Tsfr 3WSUTHT ^1 
pRZTRJnfr snt3T^ TT ^ 
Antariksa passed it on to Var§in and he even 
unto Trayyaruna2. Trayyaruna passed it on to 
Dhanahjaya and he gave it to Krtahjaya. 
^TTgi'^ry TTtsTqsri 
uVdUTO ^FiT: Tftsft ftifcU TRlII^II 
From Krtahjaya to Trnanjaya and he even 
passed it on to Bharadvaja. Bharadvaja passed it 
on to Gautama who handed it over to 
Niryantara. 
1. Pauranika Kosa, p. 207, Vyasa of Treta Dvapara, 
vide Vayu Purana 103.61. 
2. Pauranika Kosa, p. 210, son of Trivista, an lksvaku 
who heard Vayu Purana from Varsin, Vayu Purana 
103.62.

=== PAGE 411 ===

380 
Vayu-Purana 
fa&Hwr rim mzfmmu wi 
^ TStU^fTRT ^ ^ 
Niryantara1 passed it on to Vajasravas2. He 
passed it on to Somasusma3 who gave it to 
Trnabindu4. 
^TRT TTtgra ?TtP*I 
'HlWV^lfa mfast: 
Trnabindu passed it on to Daksa and Daksa 
talked it off to Sakti. From Sakti, Parasara even 
staying in embryo, heard it. 
MU?iUsrsng^wm^IxfTqq: vm:\ 
From Parasara, Jatukarna and from him lord 
Dvaipayana. From Dvaipayana, this was dilated 
upon unto me, O excellent Brahmanas! 
TTOT ^ I 
mm wrf^wrn Tw^cmi^ii 
Sarhsapayana spoke- By me then, it was 
passed again on to my son of extraordinary 
intellect. This way, the speech was spoken to by 
the guru (Brhaspati) and Brahma and the like. 
dtt^lAlfsr TRcf: *t4rftfa:i 
gRT WV 
Preceptors are fit to be offered obeisance 
with efforts by those seeking inspiration from 
mind. This tale is blessed one, repute endowing 
one, age prolonging one, sacred one and 
accomplisher of all the objectives. 
■qrqsr n^nfr: 
^rifcr mm? ^diTc|rfr<riVdii^^ii 
wt seteri 
mfem ^IfToq Pfe(fiR^TRTOII\9o|| 
1. Pauranika Kosa, p. 276. 
2. tbid.,p. 460. 
3. Ibid., p. 203. 
4. Ibid., p. 203. 
It is the obviator of sins and it deserves to be 
listened to by a legal implication by the 
Brahmanas. This sacred story should neither be 
mentioned to an impure person; nor a person of 
criminal intention and nor to one who has not 
put in at least a year’s disciplined student life; 
nor even to a scholar having no faith; nor to one 
having no son by any means; nor to one who 
never pays obeisance and who is inimical. 
3Toq^l c( 
crft CRF5T ERRTof rT 3T 
f^VT: yiuimgsj 
yreft ^TsrRrfT^ 
i^fw tn^T <TTW TtWTRI 
Traffic mfa 
fasnsr 3T|#t ^ zrer g^JTii^n 
<T dc(^c| 'jrlHlf*H 
WT Vldfed ^1 
O 
m ynnrr ^ 
ttertt 
With great mental purity, I offer obeisance 
to Brahma, the first Mahesvara whose source of 
origin, they say, is Unmanifest, whose body is 
the Manifest. Kala that has gone in, whose 
mouth is Vahni (fire), whose eyes are the Sun 
and the Moon, whose ears are the quarters, 
whose nose, they say, is Vayu, whose words are 
Vedas, whose body is Antariksa, whose feet are 
Sariraksiti (earth), whose pores are the stars, 
whose limbs are auxiliary lores and whose 
Vidyas (learnings) are the tail. Fie is the lord of 
Devas and the creator of men. He is well- 
established in all the worlds. He is Mahesvara, 
the bestower of boons and foremost of all. 
ff?r sfafTOTPJt :3Wf:rttk etr 
* * *

=== PAGE 412 ===

Chapter-104 
381 
urn : 11 
Chapter 104 
The removal of the apprehension of 
Vyasa 
m ^ mi 
3TgT^r punft ^fd^i-wifH xirmi 
<^rWvr:iRii 
The Sages headed by Saunaka and others 
spoke- 0 Suta! O Charioteer! O Greatly 
fortunate one! Owing to the grace of Vyasa, you 
have narrated eighteen Puranas entirely along 
with the connected anecdotes in the manner of 
Upah'ama (beginning) and Upasamhara 
(conclusion). 
rldciyrafW z( TTFrW 
drMMIch Slfoq- ^ aftR M^cTlfecfiqil^ II 
You have clearly narrated Matsya Purana 
containing fourteen thousand verses; the 
Bhavi$ya Purana containing an equal number of 
verses with five hundred more. 
csfsnr 
Markandeya of great beauty has been dilated 
upon as of nine thousand verses and 
Brahmavaivarta has been dilated upon as of 
eighteen thousand verses. 
WtrfT zl 
m rdounyi^w^HgnTimii 
The Brahmanda (Purana) having a counting 
of twelve thousand and one hundred verses and 
the divine Bhagavata consisting of eighteen 
thousand verses (have been narrated). 
fl^wiftl d^ldlTh TJTWT Tj^HTWTI 
ai^dy^Ychyfcr ww grtRri^nrii^n 
Ten thousands verses have been dilated 
upon of the Purana named Brahma and 
composed of (ten thousand a myriad) verses 
(Slokas) is the Purana known as Vamana. 
^pTqrnv9ii 
The Adipurana containing ten thousand and 
six hundred verses and the Anila (Vayu Purana) 
containing twenty-three thousand verses (have 
been narrated). 
^Td^<TfVftTII6 II 
Naradiya (Purana) is exemplified as of 
twenty-three thousand verses and the Vainateya 
i.e. Garuda (Purana) consists of ninteen 
thousand verses. 
W^^M^i?TriiVrf; TIM 
H cjnf MFR TMT^TTII^II 
The highly laborative Padma (Purana) 
contains fifty-five thousand verses and 
seventeen thousand normed is talked of as the 
Kurma (Purana), the fascinating one. 
The most marvellous Saukara (i.e. Varaha 
Purana) consists of twenty-four thousand verses 
and eighteen thousand normed is talked of as 
the Skanda (Purana) of great dilation. 
TTcPTST3#TTnft JJTlunft xTI 
This way have been dilated upon eighteen 
Puranas of formidable size. In these Puranas, 
great many holy rites have been well-laid down 
by you. 
TlfWlt zf foTFTmt TSTfTfaT sfiJMlRuTTOI 
oM^HI U^juii 
Rdgins (worldly beings, lit. impassioned 
ones), Viragos (those having no passions), Yatis 
(recluses), Brahmacarins (celibates), Grhasthas 
(house-holders), sylvan-dwellers (forest 
anchorites) and specifically women and Sudras 
have been explained by you.

=== PAGE 413 ===

382 
Vayu-Purana 
TF^IHT *JT tTFRaT ^11^ II 
Similarly the rites and duties of Brahmanas, 
K§atriyas, Vaisyas and the intermixed castes 
have been recounted. Gariga and other great 
rivers have been described by you. Yajnas, 
Vratas and Tapas (sacrifices, vows and 
penances) have been explained in those 
Puranas. 
3^<*fay<HiPl -q-RlSJ TRl 
^fyyi: lip ^Hicidi^yiii^ii 
Many-normed charities, along with Yamas 
and Niyamas (restraints and precepts), 
Yogadharmas of varied norm, Samkhya and 
Bhagavata (pertaining to the holy devotee of the 
lord) have been explained in them. 
srfWTFft ^RTJFff tTFPtf^Rt^3TT;l 
Bhaktimarga (path of devotion), 
Jnanamarga (path of knowledge) and Vairdgya 
(detachment) have been explained. The 
procedures for the various ways of worship with 
water and wind by those whose minds have 
been purified by holy rites, have been 
mentioned. 
WfS fter <Wq xf 
Brahma, Saiva, Vaisnava, Saura, Sakta and 
likewise Arahata- these six systems of 
philosophy have been dilated upon well- 
restrained or enjoined by their individual traits. 
TT^recT fofei wnm fqpfTOTTI 
This much and the other redundant material, 
all that has been illustrated in Puranas. Beyond 
this whatever is there or deserving to be 
understood is the excellent one. 
^ oErrcfr cn i 
3R ^T: TftTifnMt *RT:ii^li 
Could it be that Vyasa or you, holy sir, are 
hiding anything? Please remove our doubts in 
this respect because you are a complete Purana 
expert. 
m scnsr 
C\ 
3JTJT g^nfiT 3TIHTO 
stffpfrzraT f^RRTwr sra^u^ii 
Suta replied- Listen, O Saunaka! I shall 
dilate upon this question of difficult import, 
highly confidential and divine one and unfit for 
being dilated upon, (they) call it. 
WTfTt SIRT: ^rcfT qhifcrrc£|' gjgIRI 
flRPTOHT #rTf%IRo|| 
Vyasa, son of Parasara, having composed 
the ancient chronicle anecdote (Pauranikl- 
hatha) created out of all the Vedas (sciences), 
thought over in mind. 
-yuikMctrri snft wn 
Tffwrrnf crgfgsiT %c;ifefty?r:iR^ii 
The duties of the orders of society and 
stages of life have been aptly dilated upon by 
me and the passages of emancipation of varied 
norm have been dilated upon in co-ordination 
with to the Vedas (Sciences). 
fqr^T: '^fqonn 
o o 
The distinction between Jlva (soul), Isvara 
(god) and Brahman (divine knowledge) has 
been spoken off by me during the judgement of 
an aphorism. The utmost Brahman has been 
established as per deliberation upon the 
propriety of Sruti i.e. the Vedic lore. 
WT W tRTTTrm trt ^1 
The utmost Brahman (the supersonic 
knowledge is indestructible and the supreme 
soul. It is the highest step for the sake of which 
Brahmacarya (celibacy) and the like, the vow of 
recluses and forest anchorites (persists).

=== PAGE 414 ===

Chapter-104 
383 
3TTcRf% l^rai?TT STRHlt xf TJSjfrgsmT | 
3trr vmiteigi «nwriR'c;ii 
setr ■ymlyVriiPi fwh tt?i 
STgTflft ^ xf rRf^T ^^ItlRHIl 
Highly-intellected ones adhere to Dharana 
(concentration) of distinct norms. Leading sages 
perform- Asana (posture), Pranarodha 
(restraint of breath), Pratyahara (restraining 
back), Dharana (concentration), Dhyana 
(mental concentration or meditation), Samadhi 
(trance, ecstasy), Yam a (restraint) and Niyama 
(observance). These are the eight components 
known as Astanga Yoga for the sake of which 
the excellent ones among the sages move about. 
OfllJoifiraT chf^Hlf^dl:ll?^l! 
Those who strictly adhere to the injunctions 
of the Vedas (Sciences), perform holy rites only 
for the sake of Brahman. They are lustless and 
void of morbidity. 
$%isRTr:iR\9ii 
For the understanding of which one, with a 
view to scaring away the sinful action of the 
self, the pure-vowed ones take to the abodes of 
places of pilgrimage such as Gariga and the like. 
rT^rgr Wt 
flcjjw WUT eficISj 11 11 
O CS C\ "s' 
That Brahman is the greatest and highly pure 
one, having no beginning and no end and free 
from disease, perennially ubiquitous and static, 
stationed on a peak and void of deceit. 
It bears gleam of the working of all senses 
and divested of the instinctive senses, 
unimpaired in directions and time, perennially 
of a minuter noma and indestructible. 
b||<lM frf%Tt rT ] | ^ o 11 
I fu ct^cj dl d flj 
The whole Visva (universe) is super¬ 
imposed on it like the serpent on a piece of rope 
and hence appears so. Brahman is devoid of 
aberrations. If properly thought over, foam, 
ripple, bubble and wave will be found not 
distinct at all from water. That very way is 
Brahman thought over as such, not distinct from 
Visva. 
g#cT ^TTClcxj Wlfa fqw 3FT:l 
sriiTTJSc&tefr ? xtii3?ii 
“Entire Brahman is not the idea of myriad 
norm”, this way do dilate upon the Nigamas 
(scriptures). It is from Brahman that the crores 
of Brahmandas (Cosmic Eggs) assume from as 
such. 
WM 
3T tRT fWTII33ll 
The defunction and uprise of the moving 
ones depend upon the Unmesa (opening) and 
Nimesa (closing) of Brahman. And the great 
Sakti (the divine goddess of power) is stationed 
with the support of Brahman. 
■SI^nqTwFT^lfH ^ftl)53Tlr[ 3R?T ftll}*II 
The universe is in it and it originates from 
Brahman. It is Brahman itself. It is due to the 
ignorance of Brahman that the universe 
flourishes and by which one having been 
understood, the universe persists to dominate. 
STORT 'STwrt g:Ti swfwfd fH^MrTOI 
The universe is described as unreal, 
insentient, cause of misery7 and insubstantial. 
The retrograde of it is an embodiment of joy of 
the existent one.

=== PAGE 415 ===

384 
Vayu-Purana 
^rrafw fgwrsd wcr ^rt rjtrti 
TR^Il^ll 
On Jlva (soul) being alert or wakeful, it is 
named Vis'va; that is known as Taijasa 
(refulgent) in a dream and in the desire to sleep, 
it is named as Prajna (intelligent one). This 
stands known in all the situations. 
smnnrt srErcrzrfri 
ttleWyi TTFT rTRT STM H|tTI4-M STfSgtll^ll 
It is the eye of the eyed ones, an ear of the 
eared ones, the skin of the skinned ones, the 
tongue of the tongued ones and the breadth as 
such of the vital airs, that they understand. 
ffipfrr rT STOTT: %STWIT ElWiHJ 
n<wSd:ii3dli 
The human beings become incapable of 
knowing precisely and attaining it by means of 
intelligence, worldly knowledge, life forces and 
by the power of activity for ever. 
T53TTerf|tfft cTTft ^frPTT Ml 
3R#gf*rd «nfrr <?ii 
Just as in a rope the snake, in an arid soil (or 
desert) the water and azureness in the sky 
(gleams forth), in the same way, the non¬ 
existent universe looks glamorous wherein 
created by ignorance. 
UZrafevT T?wr M^lchTVIl fofflUHl 
Like a Ghata (a trap of elephants meant or 
assembled for martial purpose)1 truncates as 
such, this one, the vast sky or the great Akasa 
gets truncated. Jlva is the restricted form of the 
all-pervading soul, restricted through the karya. 
WRIT fvj^chlfjUMT rdP^MUIVllHdll 
9TPTU3 fcldddH ^ftJTftTHTferf5cRTII^^II 
The whole Brahmanda is an unprecedented 
or unrivalled superb painting drawn on 
1. V.S. Apte,p. 197. 
Brahman as if on a wall by the Maya of 
wonderful activities possessing diverse Gunas. 
That indestructible Brahman is conclusively 
arrived at by the doctrines of Vedas and 
Vedantas. Brahman is beyond those who rush 
after it. It is beyond the words of those who try 
to explain it. 
3T$R1?T TT foftHRII cFTTST TTT W 1#:! 
^ ^STT^ftT 11*311 
Beyond the indestructible, there is nothing. 
That is the limit and that is the extreme state. 
This way is being explained in Vedas, when 
(they are) closely pondered over. 
felTRTl 
^mTrnmmqi 
fTTfeftwfeffer %uw*<qR-i?RT rrii^mi 
fcmzrm fezr rT^TT^RTfn^irk^n 
TTtpRT I* 611 
tsnrrraf^ fi# ttwtcrmr^i 
s3 s3 O < 1 
chdMrlUfchlVlIchMiri'JlIdMdi^imoll 
fV'rfTsl'lTRrad^chfMchchlH^HI^I 
ftrlsnsf <icm)cr siicmwftdwd:im^ii 
TTyifdHKUfach ^raiw^r W TTRTI 
^dcIH^d 3II 
I have heard this from the Vedas with whose 
help he became cognisable. Also that Lord 
Krsna is that supreme Purusa. He is abiding in

=== PAGE 416 ===

Chapter-104 
385 
the form of Atman in that imperishable soul. 
Stationed by the personal form, he is an 
embodiment of joy and a frame of the 
permeation of exquisite joy. He is having zest 
for sportive grace, the one gone within the bevy 
of cowherds, women and embellished with a 
crown decorated with peacock plumes and 
studded with shining gems. He is equipped with 
ear-rings gleaming like the flush of flashing 
lightning, moving in vicinity of the ears, 
fascinating with the wagtail in the form of eye. 
To that one lewd for the graceful sport of bevy 
of beloved roving in every garden, the one 
wearing yellow garment, the divine one, 
decorated by the plaster of or unguent of sandal. 
He fascinates the cowherdesses with the notes 
of his flute sprinkled with the nectar oozing out 
his lips. He is the Cidananda (i.e. the joy of the 
subtle elements), the very crusher of the pride or 
inebriation of Cupid. He is brimful with the 
crorec of arts of Kama (Cupid) and transparent 
like the crores of lunar beams. Bees and deer 
surround him. Round his neck with three lines, 
a diamond necklace shines with beads 
interspersed. To control cows from straying 
away, he runs about here and there on the high 
banks of Yamuna in the grove of Tamala trees, 
fascinating owing to Kadamba, Campaka, 
Asoka and Parijata (spices plants) or coral trees. 
That forest is reverberous owing to the 
warblings of cuckoos, (talks) of parrots, 
pigeon’s gharghara sound and cooings of 
peacocks. He is fond of sporting with Radha. 
TJcj f%F*TT% faftt 
c^OTt ({loiRTlfrl WIIMII 
This way in the Brahman of a subtle 
element, Nirguna and void of distinction, 
named Goloka, Kr§na shines along. This has 
been heard by me. 
TOTSft cjfo IRTTRMFd: ^:iiysu 
Beyond He, there is nothing discernible in 
Nigamas or Agamas (etymologies). Still the 
Vedas say that he is beyond and greater than 
Aksara. 
A denizen of Goloka, the adorable one, is 
deemed as beyond the one having no 
percolation. Who is this always spoken by the 
Vedas as beyond even that? 
How the specific meanings quoted by the 
Vedas should be understood or even the 
interpretation of Vedas deserves to be 
understood from beyond the jurisdiction of the 
indeclinable? 
fayu-ynmi Hit 
Endowed with scepticism in the 
interpretation of the Vedas, Vyasa, the son of 
Satyavatl, racked his brain for longer time but 
could not arrive at a specific realistic norm. 
HH14JUI: JflHr ¥FT:imcil 
Suta spoke- Even deliberating upon, the 
sage then could not come to a conclusive 
disposition on Veda. The Veda is Narayana in 
corporeal form wherein become mesmerised 
even the poets. 
rt^Tsfb wt 
Still he underwent great distress of the heart. 
Then he once again thought over as to whom he 
could go and what could he do? 
I do not see anybody in this world who is an 
omniscient one having knowledge of all

=== PAGE 417 ===

386 
Vayu-Purana 
philosophic lores. After not knowing anyone in 
the world who could clear his doubts. 
mt: rmr wt cPT:i 
Having gone over to the cave of Meru, he 
performed a great penance, wherein the waters 
of light or electricity flashing was golden- 
normed. 
^ trrq cf,RTRnfw^<«n^ ? n 
There was a vast highly gorgeous forest 
there. Although there was blinding darkness 
within, the rocks shed a golden brilliance 
everywhere. 
MRHlyu^ttfugd:l 
^irf^hf?TdnH^ddWRMi^fir: 
TF?t: 
hRTciT|hiih^n 
The forest was rendered vociferous by birds 
warbling within groves of creepers and trees of 
myriad norm. It was void of fatigue, torment, 
wrath, fear of thirst and hunger. It was equipped 
with reservoirs of many norms, decorated by 
many-typed lotus stalks and birds hovering over 
the shores, inlaid with golden stone slabs, 
regaled by lotus breezes an all sides and 
occupied by auspicious normed thoughts and 
divested of rapacious wild beasts. It was 
englamoured by birds fond of divine creepers 
and sequestered as such with inebriate cuckoos, 
hilarious pleasing parrots and pigeons. 
eCTSRt f^n MO^iwTTIIh'SH 
The pollen dust particles rose up and 
rendered all the quarters fragrant. Therein even 
was a divine cavern, highly beautiful as such. 
<rt terdr^m fofrfoat fadiTM: i 
WITT tcH?JfTTTR^TTRRT 
Having entered that cave, having food 
abstained, having heart overpowered and 
having a seat won over, the sage having 
absolute concentration assumed, remembered 
all the four Vedas. 
T^TT 'JHIIH VRql %l 
TnfTTWRTt ^iaffJUSrTTTi^dr:ll^^ll 
A triad of hundred years (lit. Autumns) 
passed by while he remembered and the four 
Vedas of pleasing philosophy got revealed to 
him. 
^hTdTHJTHIVH^ ^ilwyiRui:! 
cimqi?TwAd:i 
3TTTr(W)JAI-dc|'J|)»J |\3^ 11 
TTftrf%: cbFd^ar tTl^Tr 4fTH<^telvell:l 
^fid^iyrb^Ki yrralcn ^rnw: 11193 n 
Their eyes were like the lotus petals blown 
as such and they were bearers of matted locks 
and diadem, having lotus like hands occupied 
by handfuls of Kusa grass, having shoulders 
adorned by antelope hides, having faces made 
of sixteen Svaras intervened by Pranava (Om), 
kavarga (letters starting with ka), cavarga and 
the like being the source of syllables, having 
hands of five limbs, having feet skilled 
pavarga, comprising of pa and having left order 
writing started from tavarga (ta> tha, da, dha, 
na), having ending syllables dictated by 
ravarga assumed as such. The letter Na 
constituted their navels. The letter Ka 
constituted their backs. The letter Ma 
constituted their stomach. The letters Ya, Ra, La 
and Va constituted their hair. Agniblja (the

=== PAGE 418 ===

Chapter-104 
387 
seed-like hymn of Agni) shone in their right 
shoulders. The Dhara (hymn of the earth) was 
their neck and the Bhrta shone on their 
shoulders. 
Their joints consisted of the semi-vowel 
letters. They were throbbing with Vaikharl 
speech. He view Mathura (city) marked in their 
lotus-like hearts. 
fbfocKT: % TFTI 
That is the very emanation spot of Lord 
Hari? the adorable one. The city of KasT was 
seen by him in the middle of their eyebrows. 
The city of Maya (Haridvara) was stationed in a 
mystical plexus at the posterior part of the body. 
csr^srr 6K«t>i*tei MFi stuft ?rarmv3^ n 
He saw the city of KancI in the region of 
their linga (generative organ); the city of Avanti 
in the navel region; the city of Dvaraka 
stationed on the throat spot and the city of 
Prayaga in the region of vital breath. 
TT^rsftr TCTI 
■RKT 
On their left and right flowed the two rivers 
Gariga and Yamuna. In the centre flowed the 
river Sarasvati in corporeal form and Gaya- 
ksetra was on the facial region. 
The excellent holy centre of Prabhasa was in 
the centre of the neck and the chin. The 
hermitage of Badari (Badrayasrama) was seen 
in their Brahmarandhra (cerebral aperture). 
The holy seats of Paundravardhana and 
Nepala were seen in the eyes twain. The seat 
named Purnagiri came to sight on the forehead. 
rT WTNfe <*1^1 Mid «hfdft*ldHJ 
cMT ^R^el^RTIIdoU 
The holy Mathurapltha (the seat of Mathura) 
was seen in the neck. The seat of KancI was 
stationed in his hips. And the seat of Jalandhara 
was seen on the breast spot. 
«PTMte cB'O^'Vl sratelt HirUcfelM^.1 
Bhrgupltha was the ear lobes and Ayodhya 
was on the naval cavity. In the Brahmarandhra 
was stationed the Brahmya and the holy centre 
Saiva was stationed in the parting of hair. 
The holy centre Sakta was situated on the tip 
of the tongue. Vaisnava-tlrtha was in the lotus 
of the heart. Saura (the holy place of Sun) was 
stationed in the region of the eyes and all 
Bauddha centres were stationed in the shadows. 
■*ffarqf&T ehud^vi 
cfcfed^ yfHfjU TTSITSS^IId^ll 
SautramanI was the neck spot and 
Pasubandha was in the chest. Vajapeya sacrifice 
was in the waist region and Agnihotra likewise 
on the face. 
3T^r 
TrST^il OTTSSS^IId^ll 
Asvamedha was in the waist region and 
Naramedha on the stomach. Rajasuya was 
stationed in the crest region and Avasathya in 
the lower lip. 
l^HId JTTotefafidSjt:lldmi 
yyd-^MMir^dldl 
HtM WdifofoMM^chKchRJ 16 $ 11

=== PAGE 419 ===

388 
Vayu-Purana 
He saw Daksinagni on the upper lip and 
Garhapatya (fire) within the mouth. The Havya 
was in the two ears and varied Mantras were 
stationed in hairpores like servants waiting upon 
a lordly monarch. He visioned the Vedas 
severally revered and honoured by the Puranas 
suffused with Nyayas, Samhitas and Tantra 
texts. He saw the Vedas who blessed the people 
through holy rites, perfect knowledge and 
modes of worship. 
■gft: c^ott ?tri 
On seeing them, the sage Krsna 
(Dvaipayana) became highly amazed. They 
were having divine brilliance of Brahman; they 
were blazing like Sun of undecaying norm and 
also like the smouldering fire of intense 
inflammation. They had the appearance of 
crores of Moons. 
cfcRj; US'HlcyW d;u^HlfaHT 
\cc\\ 
Having offered obeisance and prostrated 
himself, he (the sage) got up quickly like a staff, 
while saying repeatedly- “I stands 
accomplished in ends, I stands accomplished in 
ends, I stands accomplished in ends. 
3TSJ ^ WR 3TST fW RR:I 
3TST ^ : 11C ^ 11 
Today my birth stands successful and today 
my mind stands successful, today my age stands 
successful because you have come within the 
range of my sight. 
sFrtfesi fern i 
Whatever there is whether worldly or non- 
worldly, whatever is worth knowing whether 
past, present or future is not unknown to you. 
R cTFWI 
TlfiT^TT^II^ ^11 
You all are not such ones as the mere 
instructors of the path of action. Even if you 
show the path of action, it is only to restrict the 
haphazard actions of those who are passionate. 
mfJBWift sr^ cjt Mtofri 
Tf ?Tr3gfoRTfa$Rfhl^ll 
Your words of injunction and prohibition 
regarding the status of Brahman and the 
unreality of the universe are not based on 
attachment which is unreal. They are binding as 
the injunctions and prohibitions. 
3wt 
^crtrKT: WCT PRdl:ll^^ll 
Therefore the objects such as heaven etc. 
mentioned by yourselves have been censured by 
you, saying that they are of a perishable nature, 
while the truth is being explained by you, the 
benefactors of the worlds. 
•net ^ 
By the distinctness of the officials as per 
sermonisation of Jnana (i.e. knowledge) 
guarded as such stands the entire universe by 
those having self-named images as Sabda 
Brahman. 
spfat Torf: ^rr^J^rRTnri i m i 
Therefore, I am eager to query in case you 
are quite of a gracious norm. With regard to 
those whose minds are filled with desires only, 
the fruit ordained for their rites is heaven. 
rr 3nfar:i 
Of men having intellects dedicated to Isa 
(the Lord) as also of the action undertaken, the 
purity of heart and likewise the learning and 
emancipation is subsequent to that.

=== PAGE 420 ===

Chapter-104 
389 
Emancipation is Brahman, this way do 
expound some which verily, constitute the joy 
of the truth-normed subtle element. All get 
culminated when it is realized whatever is done 
or left undone. 
fa?rchl¥l 
It is non-attached, the subtle element in the 
sky of knowledge, the nature of wisdom 
unobscured by Maya, lustless, immobile, pure 
and is known as meritorious ubiquitous 
element. 
WSWH mUdcfaiW II 
When the products become defunct, the 
Brahman does not get lost, the way the Sun 
retains its illumination by light while the whole 
universe becomes plunged in blinding gloom. 
^ (?) I 
¥T Wt tffth?lfft^^ll?oo|| 
Like that of a steel, a gem being the 
emancipator, when by the light that one having 
attained to the existence, yawns forth as such, 
that very way of the soul, the knowledge 
becomes the emancipator. 
feyi'chUOT rrpzjftl 
By the form of Jlvesvara and the like, and 
also by the shape of universal norm, on the 
defunction of that one, even the Kutastha is the 
single entity. 
fftnffft flrTitcr 1 #[:| 
HSJTSfo EE clftft ffftll^ll 
By you, this way having been decoded, that 
verily, is that very way, there is no doubt in it. 
Even then, there is inquisitiveness in me, solely 
in my heart. 
snrrsfcr ETE fch^^rl ET E ETI 
rrgcT^ EgroiET 11^0311 
Even then, is there anything more realistic 
than this or not? O greatly fortunate one, please 
expound as you are the realiser of realises. 
EisjJcftEieTftft? EJgtft ft cgrn^dTI 
Eft fHRTEEft SJTft UciWdlgdHJI 
^TTET ttilsctlri itrydRunl :M^o11 
■o c\o * 
That which constitutes the front of Sravas 
(hymn or wealth)1 constitutes the 
accomplishment of the end of my birth. To 
Vyasa, the son of Satyavatl, the innocent one, 
talking like this, “Well done, well done”- this 
way having eulogised, the Vedas spoke out the 
words.” 
ftc(T 
wx mx EfTW fabuiikm yiflftuiwi 
Vedas spoke- “Well-done, well-done,” O 
greatly-learned one! You are Visnu, the soul of 
the embodied ones. Though unborn, you obtain 
birth and you cherish for the grace of people. 
3RE5T ft E EEft 
E1EET ftoPT ebdird'^Hh^lll^o^ll 
Otherwise why should you be fettered by the 
worldly actions? It does not affect you. You are 
untouched for ever by the divine Maya Dev! by 
the secrecy of your learning. 
3EFqcEEE tr^TSTT EEET 
TTnftfefft?T% H ftcJOTI 
3T8fTT W ETE I ^ o <£ 11 
You bear forth a form voluntarily and 
voluntarily do you take it back (lit. conceal as 
such). The object well-determined by us has 
been well-displayed by you in Puranas, Itihasas 
and Sutras (the ancient legends, chronicles and 
aphoristic lores). The imperishable Brahman is 
supreme, the cause of all causes. 
1. V.S. Apte,p. 565,

=== PAGE 421 ===

390 
Vayu-Purana 
cTW55?tRt5UJ|rM^llc|r|i|l WI-^T TRI^TI 
v3 *S. 
TflcJSJ fw tRlt % cT(TII?o<?|| 
3FWcT d^^-Hlfo'Jl'irl Hlefcfdtfi f^PIl 
?IW: VKIdlft d<lrMebl:il^o|| 
Like the smell of a flower or its taste, it is 
the Atman of the Atman. You may realise it to 
be ultimate form. This has been experienced by 
us when the dissolution pertaining to Prakrti 
took place. It is beyond the Aksara 
(indestruction) and it is the supreme Rasa 
(fluid) that exists. It is beyond all words of 
expression. Since we are of the forms of words, 
we are incapable to express it precisely. 
eft TTtnpnft crrofr^ 
k k k

=== PAGE 422 ===

390 
Vayu-Purana 
Narada spoke- O Sanatkumara! You may 
talk to me about the tlrtha (place of pilgrimage 
or fordable spot), a fordable spot of excellent 
norm, a redeemer of all beings such as those 
studying and hearing ones. 
Chapter 105 
The importance of Gaya 
ch^cutJ 
o 
3T?T $8$ Ucia^rfM 
Vayu spoke- After this, I shall dilate upon 
the importance of Gaya, the excellent one, 
having listened to which, one gets emancipated 
of all the sins. There is no doubt in it. 
Suta spoke- Accompanied by Sanaka and 
others, the greatly fortunate ones, the godly 
sage Narada questioned Sanatkumara, having 
offered obeisance as per ritualistic norm. 
Terra 
ir ?rft 
s3 Cs "s 
<TTTcR ^NdMI TOTII^ II 
WIR 3® 
•o 
^PTpimi 
Sanatkumara spoke- I shall talk of the 
tlrthavara punya (the excellent sacred place of 
pilgrimage) which saves all by means of 
(performance of) a Sraddha (an obsequial rite) 
and other holy rites. You may hear about the 
Gaya tlrtha (the Gaya place of pilgrimage), 
being the excellent one among all the tlrthas in 
the whole of the country. 
Gayasura (the demon Gaya) performed 
penance there when solicited by Brahma for a 
sacrifice. On the crest of that one (Gaya) 
Dharma hurled a stone slab, when he offered 
(his body). 
ere gwsgrewi 'feasjift Wi 
WHS, II 
Therein Brahma performed a Yaga 
(sacrifice) and stood there the wielder of mace 
(Gadadhara) in order to keep the demon Gaya 
steady and immovable day and night. Assuming 
the form of the (river) Phalgu and other sacred 
places, Visnu stayed there along with excellent 
Brahmanas, Devas such as Brahma. 
4rcfchH> w ermt 
v V 
Having concluded the sacrifice, Brahma 
bestowed abodes etc. unto the Brahmanas. In 
the beginning of the Sveta Varahakalpa, he had 
performed the sacrifice at Gaya.

=== PAGE 423 ===

Chapter-105 
391 
TRTRTRT W Tgmn ^ 
fhclG 11\6 11 
The holy centre became known by the name 
Gaya after the demon Gaya. It is liked by 
Brahma. Afraid of the fear of hells, the manes 
desire sons. 
w nmfa W: tt h wicfT srfaarffri 
pirn w sgr rMduimoH^ sp^tii 
vsvmft Wt w to f% * torn 
‘To Gaya shall go which son, he shall 
become our protector.’ Having seen the sons 
reached Gaya, there may be a festivity of the 
fathers. ‘Even by touching its waters with his 
feet, what is it that he cannot offer to us?’ 
■q^cqT oT^cf: xm 
^JTST^T <?T 11 ? o 11 
W 7T^5t^RTT: fcRUW-T gfauT: I 
3T WTlft fanfopill^ll 
Many sons deserve the performance of 
sacrifices and if one son goes to Gaya and may 
sacrifice with Asvamedha or may release the 
blue bull or offers food, they (Pitrs) will realise 
the benefit of (their) having such a son. If the 
son abides there for three fortnights, his family 
get sanctified upto seventh lineage. If that is not 
possible, he may stay there for fifteen days, for 
seven nights or three nights. 
TTPT W STTW fcH¥<yfdl 
fait Smss fq^TTrlRtsfq f^feril^ll 
A sin committed within a mighty Kalpa 
(aeon) gets obviated after reaching Gaya. One 
may offer the rice balls (Pindas) and the like to 
the manes. He can offer the Pindas to himself, 
but without including gingelly seeds in that 
case. 
The murder of a Brahmana, liquor drinking, 
theft and the coition with the wife of an elder or 
a teacher- these all constitute sins bom of the 
limbs of that one and they all become obviated 
by an obsequial rite at Gaya. 
ilvtl'MI MTcmfcWg ^TIWTII^II 
One’s own son or another’s son, whenever 
and thereafter by whichever name may offer a 
Pinda, obsequial oblation or libation on the land 
of Gaya, that may bring forth Brahman of 
perennial norm. 
^TTftr cb^faoW tpnqt 
Having pronounced the name and fame or 
title, the offering of libation is required as such 
whereby and by which one and for when 
offered, he attains to the excellent 
emancipation. 
SHpTR TTPpt TRTTt WII 
<3HT: fFft ^1% rlHfisiTII^II 
Emancipation is of four types- (i) which is 
achieved through the knowledge of Brahman, 
(ii) which is achieved by the performance of 
obsequial rite at Gaya, (iii) which is achieved 
by death in a Gogrha (cowshed) and (iv) which 
is achieved by having an abode in Kuruksetra. 
sT^TFPT f% 37Rf feui 
WT W I ^ I1 
What is to be achieved by Brahmajnana and 
what is an abode in Kuruksetra and what use is 
a death in Gogrha, if a son goes to (Gaya). 
Trarot ^cSehi^M font dair^i^UT: i 
srfsnrrer 
? rs^oij <g^wd1i 
^ t^rt [muscm^ii^ii 
A skilled one may offer rice balls at Gaya at 
all times. It should not be discarded in an 
intercalary lunar month1, or on one’s birthday 
]. V.S. Apte,p. 14. arfWRTI

=== PAGE 424 ===

392 
Vayu-Purana 
or when Jupiter and Venus are set, or when 
Jupiter is stationed in Sirhha (the sign Leo of the 
zodiac)1 and during the eclipse of the Sun or the 
Moon, the obsequial rites of the dead ones 
should be performed. 
<T WTH $Tcfe% ^ fel%l 
W tcflPTfe xlll 
WJI 
When one arrives at this great tirtha, no 
defect of injury crops up and in case one is 
wounded, he becomes eligible to take up the 
activity of the performance of obsequial rite 
afterwards. He becomes an enjoyer of 
Brahmaloka after a single journey to Gaya and 
by a single offer of rice balls which is otherwise 
extremely difficult to achieve. Herein there is 
no provision. 
As a result of delinquency or remissness, if 
one dies in this Ksetra (region) of Brahma and 
others, he attains emancipation. By the 
knowledge of Brahman, the way emancipation 
is gained, there is no doubt in it. 
ehlehdlfc^dHi rf fe&TT dKUliq xH 
For the redemption of manes who died due 
to Kikata (wormbites etc.), an expert deserves 
to be perform (the obsequial rite) by all means. 
To the Brahmanas, one may adore by Havya 
and Kavya oblations or clarified butter or 
offerings guided by the Vedas. The oblation of 
food reaches to the deceased ancestors. By 
these, all the gods along with the manes get 
gratified. 
1. V.S. Apte, p. 602. 
iiww fesm 
1%?TTrft fcK^T 
Shaven head and abstinence from food in all 
the tlrthas, viz. Visala (Ujjayim) Viraja (Jajpura 
in Cuttack district of Orissa) and Gaya barring 
aside Kuruksetra, is a well-ordained tradition. 
fqfRr: ^ wftii^ii 
A recluse need not offer Pinda (rice balls) 
after going to Gaya. Having placed his staff at 
Visnu-pada2 (the step of Visnu), he gets 
emancipated along with Pitrs (manes). 
? cfogt fefe? 81% qrni WHsfel 
3RT: felt rUcft^l feat safer 'W^:ii 
O S3 
A staff-bearer incurs no sin or acquires no 
merit even by real norm. Therefore, having 
given up all activities, he meditates upon Vi$nu 
as an emotional being. 
11 ^ 611 
One may renounce all acts but may not 
abandon the Vedas alone and may take to head¬ 
shaving outside the limits of the holy centre in 
the east and also in west or south-north. 
fe ferr dgulfaiHj 
MSshty wn&r 
The area of the holy place Gaya is two and a 
half krosas (1 krosa = 5 km.), as declared by 
Brahma. Five krosas is the area of Gayaksetra3 
and one krosa is the measurement of 
Gayas'lras4. 
fife* ferfe% fef fef tl 
srngeprt i i 3 o 11 
In the midst of those are all the tlrthas that 
do exist in the triad of worlds. An obsequial rite 
2. Caranadri or ChumTra being Visnupada giri (hill) at 
Gaya, As SIGOAAMI, p. 107, Dr. D.C. Sircar. 
3. As SIGOAAMI, p. 285, Dr. D.C. Sircar. 
4. Ibid.

=== PAGE 425 ===

Chapter-105 
393 
performer who happen to be in Gayak§etra, he 
get freed from the indebtedness of the manes. 
TTIR Jlfall 
iWTt V t[^ TJ^ll? ^11 
And he who offers Sraddha at (Gayasiras), 
may get redeem a hundred of his lineages. By 
one moved from the house as per destination as 
Gaya, he attains to the rundle of riding as to 
Svarga (heaven) for the manes at every pace. 
^ TTESRTt W(l 
At every step taken (by the son) in his 
journey towards Gaya, the fruit of Asvamedha 
is accomplished by him, there is no doubt in it. 
Mra^Hlfil xJW ^TripT cTTI 
LhHMHI^-Mmt fMU^LUcMMJ 1^ ^ 11 
With Payasa (rice-milk porridge), Caru (an 
oblation of rice, barley and pulse boiled for 
presentation to gods and manes)1, oat-meal or 
barley-meal, ground-flour (Pistaka) with rice 
grains and fruits and bulbous roots and the like, 
the offering of a Pinda in Gaya is done. 
<JSTT cfT WTT55J ^ril^^ll 
With emulsion of sesamum, sugar (khanda) 
and traceable or molasses (guda) suffused with 
ghee or with curd alone or with Urja (sap)2 3 and 
honey (the Pinda is to be offered). 
fttniTcR TT^RT Tsmt 
eraser 
Pinyaka3 (oil-cake, incense, saffron, 
Asafetida), ghee-saturated sugar (khanda) is 
quite indestructible for the manes. Or worship is 
performed and any seasonal fruit is offered as 
1. V.S. Apte, p. 204. 
2. V.S. Apte, p. 119. 
3. V.S. Apte, p.336. 
food or Havi§ya food is also offered as 
mentioned by the sages. 
TjcJJrT: flcScHdft TTTcTfo f|l 
^kT:ii^^ii 
On one side are all the articles of offering 
such as clothes and things sweetened with 
honey. On the other side is the sacred water 
from the holy centre Phalgu brought after 
meditating on the lotus-like feet of Gadadhara 
(Vr$nu). 
ftnigreR fttrg^R 
ftrfsr:H3'3ll 
The procedure of the Sraddhas at Gaya is 
this- First Pindlasana*\ Pinda-dana is done, 
then Avanejana rite is performed (in which 
water is ritualistically sprinkled on the Darbha 
grass); charity is then done and finally 
Annasamkalpa5. 
1^rcn^:ii^<iii 
Neither invocation to deities; nor the 
quarter-binding; nor even the fault created by 
vision is there during the performance of a 
Sraddha. An obsequial rite deserves to be 
performed at a tlrtha with due sympathy. 
3T^raTSS^Tf%rTT: fwt ^R*nj 'Sffal 
^ crater d-wi<icii^ q- f|u^u 
In other places, the Pitrs if and when 
invoked at the proper time, go there. But they 
always stay in the holy centre. Therefore, the 
invocation fails as such. 
strt rrsTT 4m ftrrot%q;ii 
By a man performing obsequial rite at a 
tlrtha, cherishing a fruit, all the rites deserve to 
4. A seat assumed for offering of rice balls in an 
obsequial offering. 
5. Ritualistic verbal utterance of one’s intention of 
offering food.

=== PAGE 426 ===

394 
Vayu-Purana 
be performed having taken leave of kama, 
krodha and lobha (lust, wrath and greed). 
A single-mealed one, a celibate sleeping on 
the bare ground, truth-speaking, pure one, 
engaged in the beneficence of all beings- that 
one attains the fruit of a tlrtha. 
trum?: *T fetat *TT %j^rchmchKch: II 
The staid one, chasing the tirthas, may take 
leave of heretical tendency to begin with. A 
Pasanda or a heretic may he be called who is a 
wanton-willed one. 
sfe: cfctf ejv^fcr 
yf^rvif^T M^iugq nr <si^m<i^uu:tr^^ u 
The way the knowers of Brahman take to the 
Vedya (the acts fit to be known) or Vedic ritual 
with full-concentration of mind, similarly the 
self-possessed persons performing the holy rites 
in the tirthas enter Brahman named Paresa (the 
supreme lord). 
FUSS'S) IrTToft THT tcTteqffedTI 
(wcmtmf fernt ttkoito in 
tirt) fir^iricCc^^eg^ri 1x 11 
The VaitarnI named stream, well-known in 
the world triad, descends in Gaya-ksetra for the 
redemption of the manes. One who takes bath in 
the Vaitaranl and bestows away cows redeems 
his twentyone lineages. 
<^rycRf^Hir^yv^o44choi4ir<His^r?Tu 
fcp^ffdVfT: Traf: fefa: ^ ^RTTtllxmi 
After going to Aksayavata (the eternal holy 
fig tree), the devotee should gratify the 
Brahmanas there. To the Brahmanas trained in 
Brahman, he may adore with Havya and Kavya. 
If they are gratified, all the Devas along with 
the manes (also) will be gratified. 
Wt ? ft doWlHt ^ q- fqutl 
wfezf crrmi^ u 
In Gaya, there is no spot where a tlrtha do 
not exists. Proximons to all tirthas, the Gaya- 
tlrtha then is the excellent one. 
ifft m felt Zr&m qtl 
WIT <3^d s^^ET: WII 
ftf Wm fMU^qidH^II^^II 
When the Sun stoods in the Zodiacs of Mina 
(12th sign of the zodiac Picas), Mesa (the sign of 
the zodiac Aries), Kanyd (the sixth sign of the 
zodiac Virgo), Dhanus and Kumbha, if one 
could offer Pinda at Gaya, then it is a rare 
achievement that cannot be had anywhere else 
in the three worlds. 
jp'faf fe 'HIdid WSTTIg 
Similarly when a Sraddha is performed at 
Gaya when the Sun is in the Zodiac Makara and 
also at the times of the eclipses of the Sun and 
the Moon, it is a very rare opportunity, 
inaccessible in the three worlds. 
wm wti dT:l 
^ d^cKl tPETT cR§ 
By offering of a Pinda in Gaya, the fruit that 
a man obtains, that same is not fit to be 
described by me even in hundreds of crores of 
aeons. 
W W *

=== PAGE 427 ===

394 
Vayu-Purana 
IIrn M^ly<*>VlddMlsarW:ii 
Chapter 106 
The description of the Importance of 
Gaya 
H 
WtTT: cJSj fcCTTrM^:l

=== PAGE 428 ===

Chapter-106 
395 
HWtf 33T eft 3ST ^feTTII^II 
Narada spoke- How did Gayasura take 
birth? What was his power and what personality 
did he posses? By him, how was penance 
performed and how did his body acquire 
sanctification? 
sr^TT 
TRTT: Wtrfi: foWHTIRII 
Sanatkumara replied- Brahma, the grandsire 
of the Brahmaloka, was bom of the navel lotus 
of Vi$nu. He created progenies at the instance 
of Vi§nu to begin with. 
OT'^Vlcr ^r 
By the demoniacal norm, he created Asuras 
and by the emotional disposition of mind, he 
created the Devas of Suave intentions. 
%jRTCT mti ^ w rTW^T: *p:imi 
Gaya was an Asura of highly formidable 
heroism. His height is remembered to be one 
hundred and twenty-five Yojanas. 
^tT: urg^^TH'l ^rgts^fr ^mef: 1 
His girth was sixty Yojanas. He is known as 
the most excellent Vai?nava (a progeny of 
Visnu). On the excellent Kolahala mountain 
(the Brahmayom hill in Gaya), he performed an 
austerity of austere norm. 
f^re^rRT f^rrrs^racTi 
cMnwifiKn ^arr: wt trtt:h^t( 
For good many thousand years, he became 
insensate, being breathless one. Tormented by 
that penance, the gods attained to great 
exasperation. 
tfKIHlcfi TMT %c|T: fWIWTl 
WgTT^ WT 
The gods went to Brahmaloka and spoke to 
Pitamaha (Brahma)- “Safeguard us from the 
demon Gaya, O Lord!” Brahma then replied to 
the Devas. 
cjcrc srpursr trtt: fiOTi 
“We shall go to lord Sankara.” And the 
Devas headed by Brahma went to Siva. Having 
gone over to Kailasa, they spoke out- “Rescue 
us, O god, from the mighty demon!” 
trw #tti 
#TT®flr ^ ^ fgiTRzrf^ll 
Sin few q?gT 3T^f:ii<?n 
To Brahma and others, replied Sambhu- 
“We shall seek refuge in Hari, in the 
Ksirasagara (milk ocean), O lord of all Devas! 
He shall offer security (lit. benefices) to us.” 
Brahma, Mahesvara and other Devas bowed to 
Visnu and became satisfied or overjoyed. 
dncj * 
^bqrrr vf wrt wfauaMi 
The Devas spoke- Om! Obeisance to Visnu, 
the overlord, the one overpowering all the 
shining ones, the victorious one and the 
devourer of demons and others. 
erfilHJT% IRRM ^nrt qrr:ii^u 
The bearer of all, the one going beyond all 
Yogins, the augmentor one, the one being an 
intermediary agency, obeisance be to the 
gleaming one, obeisance be as such. 
o 
Sanatkumara spoke- This way adored, 
Vasudeva offered appearance to the Devas and 
(said)- “What for have you come, O gods!” 
This way questioned by Visnu, they replied.

=== PAGE 429 ===

396 
Vayu-Puraga 
“Protect us from the fear of demon Gaya”, 
they spoke1 to Hari. Then Hari spoke- “May 
Brahma and other gods go near that demon, I 
shall follow thereafter.” 
sfeypsfr <rrerWi =rt 
Kesava, mounted on a Garuda, started with a 
view to offer a boon to Gayasura. All those 
excellent ones proceeded having occupied their 
individual vehicles. 
314^41gift d^ci r3<lll 
WRMi: Tii ert wgru^n 
Vasudeva and others spoke to him- “For 
what purpose, this penance is being performed 
by you, O Gayasura? We have all arrived here 
folly satisfied. You may ask for a boon.” 
^ <TgT: "W 
4^cd^Tfd'«Tr 
tvieiiemn^i 
^Pn^jrftr tR^rtii^ii 
afqfrsr wr vt-.i 
o 
?r(^r)f?nrf^^r: ^fer: w Tnrtii^ii 
Gayasura spoke- In case you are pleased 
with me, 0 Gods, Brahma, Visnu and 
MahesVara, may I be ever holier than these- 
than all the gods and Brahmanas; than all the 
Yajnas, tlrthas and Silocaya (mountains); than 
all the sages; than even the unchanging Siva; 
than all the Mantras; than all the lords of Devas; 
than all the Yogins; than all the renouncers; 
than all the performers of holy rites; than all the 
religious ones; than all the sacred Yatis. 
TjfoRng rt IfcnjeRtJT 
1. 31 is an error for 3Tg^ in verse 13 or 
31-sHMR: i 
^gT ST ^gT ^ frfTdt 
“May you be sacred”. This way having 
spoken to that demon, the gods went away to 
heaven. Having seen and touched the demon, all 
went to the capital of Hari. 
3TRT ^RTT 
^TTsf g^lrileh | ^ o 11 
The world triad became void and the whole 
city of Yama became void. Yama, then along 
with Indra and others went to Brahmaloka. 
ggTtTPgfe) ^5TT W4TTf3#fcTT:l 
c5rit ^rsiiranfr ^ fwrgip ^11 
The gods, obscured by Gayasura, spoke to 
Brahma- “By you has been given the authority. 
You may accept back that, O Pitamaha!” 
5TpT5'#yl"Tidr iforeamt 
rl<#ITUy: fTpTI 
ell^cf) g^Tfot 4T 3II 
Brahma then spoke to the Devas- “We shall 
go to Vi$nu, the imperishable one”. And 
Brahma and others spoke to Vi§nu- “Since the 
Asura (demon) has been conferred a boon by 
you, all the people have been proceeding to 
Svarga (heaven) by a mere sight of him. The 
world triad have become void.” Addressed thus 
by Devas, Vasudeva spoke these words to 
Brahma. 
“Go and request the Asura thus, ‘Give your 
body for the purpose of a sacrifice’.” Urged by 
Visnu, Brahma went there accompanied by 
Devas and saw the great Asura. 
)|Aimm5i41^i srenuj ^i 
fafaewrarri: 
Having seen Brahma along with other gods, 
Gayasura got up, adored them as per decorum 
endowed with devotion and spoke out.

=== PAGE 430 ===

Chapter-106 
397 
35JTET 
STH Tf Wm 3RI 3HT *T rTtf.l 
«<(l«ldl5fri(5ls}$l TT=f 3IM tTOTS'SI ehl^ll 
Gayasura spoke- “Today my birth has 
gained its fruit. Today my penance has gone 
fruitful, as Brahma has come to me as a guest. 
All stands achieved by me today. 
ild^MFldf chlcUOll^ll^ll 
0 Yogin! O Yogangavit (i.e. conversant 
with the ancillaries of Yoga)! O Master of the 
entire world! 0 Sire! O Preceptor! I do 
accomplish the work of yours for which you 
have come.” 
w wri 
^nsf qr f tt rnfir yfeif&T iprtaiRdii 
Brahma replied- All the tlrthas (places of 
pilgrimage) seen by me while on the prowl, are 
not as pure as your body, for the purpose of 
sacrifice. 
r^TT Ufaafci TIM fgtnjTOT^T: I 
3R: trf^ ^ II 
By you in frame, purity has been achieved 
by the grace of Vi§nu. Therefore, 0 Asura, you 
offer to me your pure frame for the purpose of a 
sacrifice. 
^ Tnsaft FiRTTI 
fq^?T: cpTsif if c& m cfiftfa %^II3 oil 
Gayasura replied— I stands blessed, O gods 
of gods (Devadeves'a) that by you, (my) body is 
being solicited as such. In case you offer a 
sacrifice over my body, the manes in my family 
shall be contented. 
dfcRd cp:l 
o 
By you alone has been created this body (of 
mine) and by you only, it has been rendered 
sacred or sanctified. For the benefit of all, may 
the sacrifice comes to an existence. 
frfrficlT ^dchc^l W*TT:I 
Having said so, the demon Gaya, collapsed 
on the ground during the Svetakalpa. He 
adhered to the south-western quarter on the 
Kolahala mountain. 
frdcfrcd TTrStR^rtfl' WffGI 
tr^r <*ihi^H' fhfrn^^ii 
Having turned the head in the north and 
having directed the feet in the south, Brahma, 
having requisites gathered, created the mind- 
bom sages. 
aiPH^uin^d ^i 
<§gfsr wi 3^113*11 
tTRT^Tt eUM WljJcy ^<^^11^mi 
Sfct Tg^TTct ■pit gRftfg rll 
^ nsrarf ^ *ni^n 
cFTriinr-i ri 
whirral tfm m\ ggf?rawH;i 
^nfgnt ^ ^iw?ii3<iii 
wcrffRpfapRj tRWtri 
They were- Agnisarman, Amrta, Saunaka, 
Janjali, Mrdu, Kumuthi, Vedakaundilya, Harlta, 
Kasyapa, Krpa, Garga, Kausika, Vasistha, the 
sage Bhargava, the indestructible one, Vrddha, 
Parasara, Kanva, Mandavya, Srutikevala, Sveta, 
Sutala, Damana, Suhotra, Kahka, LaukaksI of 
huge mighty arms, Jaiglsavya, the Brahmana 
Dadhipancamukha1, Rsabha2, Karka3, 
1. Pauranika Kosa, p. 215, One of the Rtviks of the 
Yajna performed by Brahma on the body of 
Gayasura in Gaya. 
2. Ibid., pp. 71,88. 
3. Ibid., pp. 71,88.

=== PAGE 431 ===

398 
Vayu-Puraga 
Katyayana, Gobhila, the sage of great fierce 
rites, Supalaka, Gautama, Vedasirovrata, 
Jatamalin, Avyagra, the terrible Catuhasa, 
Atreya, Angiras, Aupamanyu of great holy rites, 
Gokarna, Guhavasa, Sikhandin and Umavrata. 
TJWTW2J f^RT^T tftgrfiMFlg: I 
MReb^lch^gJMi ■TOTWRto&ll'iSoll 
o 
After creating these and other lordly 
Brahmanas, Vedha (Brahma), the grandfather of 
the worlds, took to a sacrifice on the body of 
Gayasura. 
gr^qwscnfoft wrs<gg:ii'«*ii 
^ ^ g^T: TrfdfydT:i 
xi f^WT 3%JTT ^11*911 
Agnis'arma1 without wasting his penance, 
created these five fires from his mouth- 
Dak$inagni, Garhapatya, Ahavanlya, 
Tapovyaya and two Avasathya. 0 Devarsi! the 
Yajnas are established on these and for the 
honour of the Yajna, he offered daksina to the 
Brahmanas. 
gW hU|)jjfrj fl 
g?r^T wwta WTwjt^n 
Having offered the complete oblation 
(Purnahuti) and taken the bath of Avabhrtha, 
Brahma caused the sacrificial pole to be brought 
along with the gods and fixed it. 
gwn: mg: # mgwmfari ^wti 
gRrd&ifyw gw 
That auspicious post was fixed in the 
Brahmasaras which is the most excellent of all 
lakes. Embarrassed and surprised, Brahma 
moved off and spoke to Dharmaraja. 
wtt tj? rig ftiw ggTgWRwrggi 
tmg fmfg rTt mv wssggnixMi 
“In your house, there is a slab of stone. 
1. Ibid., pp. 11-12. 
Without promenading, bring it here at my 
behest and fix it on the head of the Daitya ” 
fVRHRI 
iYFTTqt wfxmi 5 
Having listened to it, Yama supported the 
stone slab on the head of the demon to keep him 
steady. The stone slab having been placed, that 
demon moved off having stone slab 
accompanied. 
^[R^sg fgsw: fagri 
^gr: ggiMiwSicggw g ^ few.-iugii 
Then he addressed the gods headed by 
Rudra- “O gods, you may stay unmoved on the 
stone slab”. They said- “As you please” and 
stayed along. 
^gi: rRTTSft gifWTtSfT: I 
gw^g osngjRt fgw gg: sfuifeiyiRRuji 
ggrg mumi gw gw giss^g g gmrirtf iii 
The Devas pressed the slab with their feet 
and noted that the demon even then moved off. 
Then Brahma, perturbed as such, proceeded to 
Vi$nu who was reclining over the milk ocean. 
Having gone prostrated and bowed down, he 
honoured that Supreme Lord. 
gwgrg 
g^iusw tr) gig ggrfg gggf trfgrjj 
gfg gif^ggi wn 
Brahma spoke- 0 Lord of the Primordial 
Egg! O Lord! I bow down to the lord of the 
mobiles, the goal of persons possessing glory, 
the granter of worldly pleasures and salvation. 
t TT OTMII 
ffT: cfcTII^ o f| 
Vi§vaksena spoke to Visnu- “O Lord! To 
you belauds Padmaja (the lotus-bom one i.e. 
Brahma). Hari spoke- “You may bring that 
one”. And having been urged by Visnu, he 
brought him. To Aja (Brahma) spoke Hari- “On

=== PAGE 432 ===

Chapter-106 
399 
what account you have come to me”, you may 
speak that.” 
<$cTt 3FT y^TEn^r WgT:l 
Brahma replied- O God of gods, when the 
sacrifice was performed, Gayasura moved even 
when a stone slab of the framework of the Gods 
was placed on his head. 
f%PTTsf f? Wt TnqcniH?ll 
Even when the gods headed by Rudra and 
others were stationed (over it) there, the demon 
quaked. Now be pleased to make it steady, O 
Madhava! 
Sgruit 3rR gllcfcttj ^TTtTrf: I 
ftgrrcsf unit 
Having listened to the words of Brahma, the 
adorable Hari pulled out a idol from his person 
and gave it unto Brahma to stop the restless 
quaking of the demon. 
3?Rta Tjfir wrcfa f^rrat wit^ti 
Having brought the idol with him, Brahma 
adjusted it on the stone slab. Even then, the 
(demon) was seen as mobile, so he invoked the 
lord again. 
3TFTHI fguiT: gjtTREt: fvRrirai 
Mug(i<*rdnmdii 
r^iriwi % 
csimmi 
Having come from the milk ocean, Vi§nu 
himself, became stationed over the stone slab, 
with the name of Janardana and also by the 
appellation of Pundarlka. The primordial mace- 
wielder himself stood there to steady the slab, 
for stabilising (the demon). 
fadP#S2T c£3H: 
$rpT few: wd |cHi4i*:i 
For stabilising (the demon Gaya), Brahma 
divided himself into five, viz. Prapitamaha 
(Great-grandfather), Pitamaha (Grandfather), 
Phalgvlsa (Master of Phalgu), Kedara and 
Kanakesvara. Brahma in the form of an 
elephant-normed Vinayaka (i.e. Ganes'a) stood 
there. Gayaditya, Uttararka and Daksinarka- 
these were the three manifestations of Sun. 
tfldlfelFFt Tfrff rt 
^Tnfoft fawnei fuwdlimdii 
Lak§ml stood there in the name of Slta, 
Gaurl in the name of Marigala and Sarasvatl 
stationed herself in three forms, viz. Gayatri, 
Savtirl and Sandhya. 
f^T w tyrant: i 
(irrwt %srcnra;:ii 
Wifd>fa:ii^H 
Indra, Brhaspati, Pusan, the eight highly 
strong Vasus, Vis'vedevas, the two AsVinI 
Devas, Maruts, the leader of the universe 
accompanied by Devas, Uragas and Gandharvas 
stood there along with their respective Saktis 
(powers). 
otswt TT^rr Enrft! 'dHirtry 
fw ?fwr WWTc(Tf?TT?m:ll^o|| 
Since the Daitya was brought to stagnation 
by the primordial club and Hari stood there, on 
that account, he became famous as Adi- 
Gadadhara. 
TORjTt ^ir^P'4 ^fwr ^rpri 
Wisf ifnit ^ ?i(1wh4 wii 
Gayasura spoke to the gods- “What for have 
I been duped as such”? For the purpose of 
Yajna, I have offered my pure body unto 
Brahma. Would not have I been steady at the 
sheer instance of Visnu?

=== PAGE 433 ===

400 
Vayu-Puraija 
utferuiutf ttfit tfrm mn 
usr?^arr: jrcrerr: tr^tii^ii 
Why have I been tortured by Suras and Hari 
with his Gada (mace)? And if I stand tortured, 
then may all gods grow jubilant perennially.” 
■*ret 
Gad&dhara and others were pleased and they 
all spoke out simultaneously to GaySsura- “You 
may ask for a boon. We are happy”. Then 
replied GaySsura to Devas. 
mctRaiHKJi 1^5 g?llgwjq|^RT:ii 
if OTT $5PTCT tll5*l| 
“As long as the earth lasts, as long as the 
mountains, the Moon, the Sun and the star 
remains, may Brahma, Vi$nu and Mahesvara 
stay on this stone slab along with all other gods. 
Let the holy centre be named after me. 
*rarfyR:i 
rPT«zr «4MPi 
May five krosas be the Gayak$etra and one 
krosa in extent be Gayasiras. In the centre of 
that, may all the tirthas offer beneficence to 
men. 
WMlfcrCfoi 3pcfT fqoi^RTrd^ntira^l 
Having taken to the gratification by bath and 
by the offering of pinda and the like, one may 
obtain the fruit and becomes a Mahatma and 
may redeem a thousand members of his lineage. 
oTThT<^T^*si)U| %rf ^Tl 
TT^raT: <rllc»ilc^M*<lr«c(iyHivi4i^||^V9|| 
By imperceptible and perceptible form, you 
all stay here perennially and may Gadadhara of 
your own form, be the obviator of all sins in the 
world. 
91KS Triw* ifut W5 h 
sr^n%) mu *r ^Primii^ii 
May those on whose behalf the Sradclha has 
been performed and Pindas offered, go to 
Brahmaloka. May the sins such as the murder of 
a Brahmana and the like of those who report to 
this holy centre come to a cease. 
TJfTRRTTfu ^oJRTf^T:ll 
WUT-5 ^UTt f%rt ^TTMI^ ^ II 
May all holy centres such as Naimi$a, 
Pu?kara, Gariga, Prayaga and Avimuktika1 and 
other tirthas (places of pilgrimage) come along 
from heaven, land and atmospheric space and 
offer beneficence unto all men, O Devas. 
ef^eFrUI WTUTT UUt|'+4bt>Tsfcr i^rTTI 
grfu w: n 
What use is prolixity, 0 Gods! Unless one 
of you Devas stand (on this stone slab), I too 
will not be steady. This is the condition. Let it 
be strictly observed.” 
wpu: yi^^njcn<u; ip;i 
U3llf&i ^ 
Having heard the talk of Gayasura, the 
Devas headed by Vi?nu replied- “What has 
been said by you, all that shall happen to be 
undoubtedly. 
UTKtfcT UTUt ufa^l 
? it 
Having adored our feet, you will go to the 
highest state.” After receiving the boon from 
Devas, he became overjoyed and remained 
steady. 
fWchf c^T^T:) 
umisr uiruwRui^?Tt' w totii 
^ f^3TRIuhw^UcIFTII^?ll 
uitosr mfwmifdchiw^i 
rnhaxil 
1. A name of Varanasi, Pauranika Kos'a, p. 35.

=== PAGE 434 ===

Chapter-106 
401 
■qpiclt f^TTW^TTtftr *TI 
^elU^fe <y^H?llf<M4dlHI|\3mi 
i '<*ra«|^ feMT shii^cmi ^tst-.ii^ii 
When the Devas were stationed as such, Aja 
offered unto Brahmanas1 fifty-five villages and 
the holy centre of Gaya extending to five 
kros'as. Having created divine buildings 
equipped with all the paraphernalia, he offered 
Kfimadhenu (wish-yielding divine cow), 
Kalpavrksa and Parijata and other trees. A 
great river of milk, many streams of ghee, 
exudations of honey, streams of honey, lakes 
rich in curds etc., a lake of gold, many hills of 
cooked food etc. were given. Brahma created 
different items of food and fruits and gave them 
all to the Brahmanas. While giving these things, 
Aja said- “0 leading Brahmanas, do not beg of 
others”. 
0gicHi<* TOit srif^wrPTi 
SnfaFT xj Hmit KRlfdcfiHJ 
MT WT 5fi^U|iWloVlVlN ?IH9dll 
Having given away all these things and 
having bowed to Adigadadhara, Brahma went 
to Brahmaloka. The Brahmanas of Gaya 
officiated as priests of Dharma in his sacrifice at 
Dharmaranya and later begged him. Owing to 
covetousness, they accepted monetary and other 
gifts at the sacrifice of Dharma. Brahma came 
there and cursed the Brahmanas. 
cfedei'dl wr fto Racial fin 
dWIfJUlfae&t TO qRlbilPr (8T) ^%TT:||\3<? 
TOroi wigiR^i tot inmuin4dii 
TOTTOt dlRcIgT yajdiy TOT TJ^T:ll<io|| 
“When everything had been offered by me, 
even then you wished for more, O Brahmanas. 
t. V.S. Apte, p. 7, Name of unborn- Visnu, Siva or 
Brahma. 
Therefore, you will always be under debts. The 
river shall flow with water only. The hills of 
foodstuffs will turn into those of rocks. All the 
rivers shall be flooded with water and your 
abodes will be of mud. 
cf^UTT q<rHl*MMfd8dlHJ 
^ W $6iuil % ^11 
The trees of Kamadhenu and Kalpavrksa 
will come back to my region.” This way cursed 
by Brahma, all those Brahmanas humbly spoke 
to the Unborn deity. 
tftewri TO? qt 
“0 lord, everything that was gifted by you 
has become infutile due to your curse. May you 
be kind enough to assign something for our 
livelihood”. 
TOpTT 'sllflUIKfll MldNci <i|lRdd:l 
ifRrrwtfg^iT «rRfui«ui<i^ii 
Having heard these words, the Brahma 
sympathetically spoke to the Brahmanas- “As 
long as the Moon and the Sun shine, you will be 
maintaining your livelihood by means of tirthas. 
^Ttapnr: gw tort % snf^rt i 
totrT trt ^rt: wimto 
Those meritorious persons who perform 
Sraddhas in Gaya will attain Brahmaloka. I will 
also always be considered adored by those who 
adore you.” 
3Tra=rRT sr^ur 
qnfaejpnrafr g UT fgw fwnidMI 
The Jathara or abdomen of Daitya is 
circumambiated by the righteous mountain 
Viraja. Near Nabhikupa (the umbilical cavity), 
the goddess Viraja stays as such. 
m fau^iR-cb ^c^nr 
tot ^fro^ftii 
rfsT fillip I fc^rWifl c^HI-d^Tcf TO: 114^ II

=== PAGE 435 ===

One who offers pinda (rice-ball oblation) 
and the like therein may redeem his 3x7=21 
lineages. By Mahendragiri, the feet of that one 
(demon) were rendered nicely steady. The man 
offering pinda there (on the mountain 
Mahendra) redeem his seven lineages.

=== PAGE 436 ===

402 
Vayu-Purana 
II3T8T WTfe^TcTcrRts^T: 11 
Chapter 107 
The description of Gay§ continued 
eRSj W&m WRT:l 
v3 v3 
1% WT f% Hl$lc«i ctW 1% •tTU ^TII^II 
Narada said- How did Sila (slab) took birth 
when Gayasura was attacked? What is its form 
and what is its importance? You may dilate 
upon and tell its name. 
Scire 
o 
faWHT ET SSUSt <N<JsMlUKlU|lll?ll 
Sanatkumara replied- There happened to be 
a person Dharma of great physical valour, the 
one gone beyond the range of all the sciences. 
Visvarupa was his the spouse who was highly 
faithful to her husband. 
wi c&2tt snfcrn wh 
ouiiiy<*111311 
In that one from Dharma was born a 
daughter named Dharmavrata i.e. one having 
vow for piety and fidelity endowed with beauty 
and youth like LaksmI, being excellent in 
merits. 
cTW 3 cl W 
\3 S3 
SUlf erfsMWIW TTPfcRIlYII 
\3 \3 O *S 
Whatever merits exist in the three worlds, 
they were present in her. Dharma searched for 
an appropriate bridegroom for Dharmavrata in 
all the three worlds. 
srt M srafssr ck^^i 
rHT: 3T5 cRlsf S$H1<KEIT cR ^TfllMI 
s3 
But he did not obtain a suitable match. 
Dharma, then for a suitable match, told her- 
“You may perform a penance for the sake of a 
suitable match”. She said, “So be it”, and 
proceeded to the forest. 
3PTT *TT ^ ST mil 
JTTII^II 
That maiden performed a very severe 
penance which was difficult to be performed by 
anyone. Subsisting only on the wind, she spent 
ten thousand Yugas in that Sveta Kalpa. 
^TRTT: ipTt tmfeqk $m:\ 
mfcgfsret mcrf ^ ire 11 
Of Brahma, the mind-born son is well- 
known as Marlci. Roaming along on the whole 
earth, he saw that gem of a maiden. 
wjkwnraT Ercfa ftserm 
nfrflrrsr ^ trssiren 
Endowed with beauty and youth and 
established in austere penance, to her 
questioned Marici then- “Who are you and to 
whom you belong? You may speak. 
^UII^H Tri ^5 
fcHsUMl 1: 11 ^ II 
O timid one! O you of a handsome vow! By 
this beauty of yours, you are entrancing me. I 
am the son of Brahma, well-known as Marici. I 
have gone beyond the (knowledge) of the 
Vedas.” 
■crffENiER r trimri 
3T? snJsRTT Rm mkm dUlPcISTII^oll 
Having heard the words of Marici, the 
maiden replied to that sage- “I am by name

=== PAGE 437 ===

Chapter-107 
403 
Dharmavrata, the daughter of Dharma. I am 
endowed with austerity. 
yfdsldiyf WT cHT: I 
I am observing this austere penance for the 
wooing of a good husband, O excellent 
scholar!” Then Marlci spoke out with affection 
to Dharmavrata, 
MptgMI 
”0 auspicious-vowed one! You will become 
one as having vow for a husband on a mere 
sight of mine. I am roaming day and night on 
the earth, only with a desire to meet with a 
chaste lady. 
#3; 1 <S^TT Wf ? % 3R:ll^ll 
In case, you are born as one having faith in a 
husband, then I adhere to you and you adhere to 
me as a suitable match. In the world, there is no 
other maiden of you stamp and there is no 
suitable match for you like me. 
snfect snfaqt dWTci -ra i(smu 
SpferTT TfT? ST$ WZW ^pRTII^II 
O Dharmavrata! On that account, you may 
become a lawful wife of mine now.” 
Dharmavrata thereupon said to the sage- “You 
may ask for it from Dharma (my father), O sage 
of good rites.” 
<* -o v 
Having heard that, he went to Dharma and 
Dharma saw the sage. Having seen the suitable 
match, being a heap of radiance, he worshipped 
or welcomed him with seat and material of 
worship. 
■stcfh gsff ^gT rt chichi crth 
w SfRjt rr rtf M3 ^tiifdll^ll 
“What for you have come”, this way 
questioned, Marlci replied to Dharma- 
“Roaming over the whole earth for a maiden, 
your daughter, the excellent one, has been seen 
by me. You may bestow that daughter (Kanya) 
of yours unto me. It will be (all) welfare of 
yours.” 
srerfpMi unvid snf: <nri 
spirit ■HMIdfa ^<3iwi ^fTEmil^ll 
Having adored him with material of worship 
and the like, Dharma spoke to him in the 
affirmative. Having summoned Dharmavrata, 
he offered her to Marlci. 
STpITO ^Tl 
He offered him (the Brahmana) wealth, 
ornaments (lit. gems) and bestowed a boon unto 
him. He fulfilled the promise made. The 
Brahmana took her to his own hermitage 
accompanied by Agnihotra (sacred fire). 
Tg •rPtwtt tttsJ mn f^ui: firar 
xn%n rr -m mwrT -m ^nr-.ii^ii 
The sage sported in her company like Visnu 
revelled with Sr! or Sarhbhu revelled with 
Parvati and the way Aja (Brahma) revelled with 
Sarasvatl. 
TTfrf^T: th'H>WTsf SR TTc^r WH<T:IRo|| 
Marlci begot of her a hundred sons who 
were veritable peers to Vi§nu. Once Manci, for 
the sake of fruits and flowers, went to the forest 
and returned. 
SfFrT: ebcjlfclfri qRlqdl^fd MPdqmmj 
^11 
Fatigued as such, he spoke to his spouse, the 
faithful one- “After taking your meals, massage 
my feet, even I lie down on the couch”. 
snfgRTT d^Stcn W MT:l

=== PAGE 438 ===

404 
Vayu-Purana 
Dharmavrata said- “All right”. Having said 
so, as that sage lay down on his bed, she took to 
the shampooing of his feet by means of ghee 
with eagerness. 
snpM 5T^IR3II 
On the sage taking to a nap, Brahma came to 
that spot. And having seen Brahma, she was 
placed in a dilemma- “Shall I continue to 
massage the feet of my husband or honour the 
Jagadguru (the preceptor of the world).” This 
way agitated, she stood up to honour him, as he 
was the teacher of her husband. 
auimaifcicfi ^tctt 
f 7TW*ri 
She offered the material of worship and 
washed his feet with water. Then she adored 
him and Aja or Brahma took rest on a bed, well- 
spread or well-furnished as such. 
HdfwSRft UffRyl Wd^d:l 
ytfsidwiJV^ for: ^5: Wi dT^u^n 
In the meantime, the husband rose up from 
his bed. Not observing Dharmavrata, the 
Brahmana became infuriated and cursed her. 
mot dd: f^TcdT 
“Having deserted the shampooing of my 
feet, you have violated my command and you 
have gone elsewhere. On account of that crime, 
you may assume the form of a stone slab.” 
epfsRT w •RTlfe w TTT Wl 
wr% WT r5|MR<£r TJ5:IR<SII 
By the husband cursed as such, Dharmavrata 
in full wrath spoke to Marfci- “While you were 
sleeping, Brahma, your sire and your teacher, 
arrived here. 
dSWtOTdf % eKtfei WTTT: MR TtdTI 
w g d^ diT§ ■girii’R ^ ii 
By you deserves to be done the adoration of 
your teacher. O sage, strictly adhering to pious 
activities (of a wife), I carried out your duty. 
dd: TddT dWhsilM ^ 
Therefore, I am faultless. Still I have been 
cursed by you. On that account, I also shower a 
curse on you. 0 my lord, you will obtain a curse 
from Mahadeva, there is no doubt in it.” 
cdTdjR d dfd Ml^SdTdTdRf^l 
drdT ?TdR sfigTTttPTfR MdTdd rpKR:ll^ ^11 
ttIpm fwT dd: 
dsn wt tpftfas' dd^ir ^ii 
Having seen her husband agitated, she too 
became distressed and went to Prajapati. 
Having bowed to Brahma, as he was lying 
down, she kindled the fire Garhapatya with fuel 
and stood in its middle. There she performed a 
penance of an austere noma. Similarly Marlci 
who too had been cursed, performed an 
austerity of terrible norm. 
dfdgdTOTCdW dSITI 
WdT ddRd 7RHT fdTd 113 311 
By the penance of the Pativrata 
(Dharmavrata) and that of Marici, Indra and 
others Devas became afflicted and went to 
(seek) refuge in Hari. 
aftrrwyi ^:i 
dfdgdTdlSr T$T ^Tldll^XII 
Afflicted because of the penance, they spoke 
out to Hari who was sleeping in the milk ocean- 
“0 Hari! O Kes'ava! Rescue the world triad 
from the chaste lady and the sage.” 
cm: sptT fabujy4$M"l 
*TMnMT:ll 
3^sWsRT srfRW ^?raT:ii^mi

=== PAGE 439 ===

Chapter-107 
405 
Having listened to the words of Indra and 
others, Visnu went up to Dharmavrata. During 
that very time, the adorable Aja (i.e. Brahma) 
also woke up and the Devas accompanied by 
Kesava, spoke to Dharmavrata who was 
established in the centre of the fire. 
TfdsfHi 
cSRTT c£ft 
“O chaste lady, who has the capacity to 
perform penance in the centre of the fire? By 
you, the excellent one, that has been done. It is 
awe inspiring for the entire universe. 
3R cfT?T ^TtfWTI 
era: 
O Dharmajna! Choose your cherished desire 
as boon from us”. Having heard the words of 
Visnu and others, Dharmavrata spoke to the 
Devas. 
o 
(^Tt ^ gHTWjTII^N 
“ I am incapable of reverting back the curse 
of my husband even with all my prowess. Let 
the curse proclaimed by Marici unto me vanish 
off.” 
enfcucra: x&n *p:i 
spfarr snfgfr TTrctro wif5aTTii3<?ii 
Having heard the words of Dharmavrata, the 
Devas, once again spoke to her- “O daughter of 
Dharma, 0 one of pious rites! This curse has 
been given to you by a great sage. 
ftncEjf yi^prf i 
This curse given to you is not capable of 
being reverted by Devas and Brahmanas. 
Therefore, you seek some other boon whereby 
may be the steadiness of Dharma 
(righteousness). 
(It should be as per) the (Dharma) ordained 
by the Vedas in the three worlds, O nice-vowed 
one!” Having heard the words of Devas, 
Dharmavrata spoke to the Devas. 
«r$f: yiNMiMfad q tyrant ERTSW:I 
W ert wf&m iiicif^yMdTmHiii'k?ii 
“O immortal gods, if you are not capable to 
redeem me from the curse of my husband, you 
may confer a boon of such a type of an 
extraordinary norm. 
% ^rf^nfir stfto? qrgqt ^tti 
Whereby I may become a stone slab, which 
will be the most auspicious and the holiest in 
the whole of the Primordial Egg. I shall be more 
sacred than rivers, lakes, fordable spots or holy 
places, Devas and others. 
tnicR) ^TMawirw<*Riftii 
qrfq fqg*| dl^ijur ^ni'S*ll 
I shall be holier than the sages, ascetics, the 
principal gods and others. Let all phallus¬ 
shaped images of perceptible and imperceptible 
norm in the triad of worlds, stay in my abode, in 
the form of a holy spot perennially. 
Let all the holy places in entirety and the 
planets of principal norm, the Devas and the 
sages stand by (on me). 
fVIRTfekR ■RTrcTT I 
srng; ^11*511 
TRTsrft ^d)af w4HlylTWMLiMi 
■qfq^fEqgint w cf^qt ^TT^ScT: ^ll>{\9ll 
In the tlrthas, having stone slab established, 
having bathed, having offered gratification and 
having performed the Sraddha along with pinda 
(offering of oblation), one goes to region of 
Brahma and Gadadhara (Visnu). Drs'yatlrtha

=== PAGE 440 ===

406 
Vayu-Purana 
(Gaya) is the excellent one among all the 
tirthas. A performance of Sraddha herein leads 
to the emancipation of all the manes. 
msfir cfisfr 
fyiHRi ct 
Viviparous (Jarayujas)1, oviparous 
(Andajas)2, those generated by warm vapour or 
sweat3 and those bom by germination- all of 
them having given up body on this stone slab 
may attain to the form of Visnu. 
wsfin # 3?rr: iTort srafr f|i 
cm it}ut ^ di^uwftrcigirs^ii 
The way, on adoring Hari, all the sacrifices 
become accomplished, in the similar manner, 
the Sraddha (obsequial rite), gratification 
(Tarpana) and bath become imperishable. 
w ^ fFrrf^PTi 
3Tf%r^xmftr % fegr: f^rf^rrsfr ehmon 
In the body of Devas who mutter down my 
lore and the like, without any delay, they may 
become accomplished being the accomplished 
ones (Siddhas). 
ftcpit <§a«i3«mrriHi rt.-i 
«ngrf^rr fcituiHra; R^p^imstu 
By performing obsequial rite and the like at 
a holy place, the thousand members of the Pitrs 
(manes) accompanied by self, redeem and they 
carry on to the world of Visnu by all means. 
Tfiinsi ^t-.i 
mtpi iTRWT: ^^RT:il 
gun f^Krr xrimgn 
O leading Devas, as many are the streams of 
excellent norm headed by Gariga; the eddies 
headed by oceans and the lakes headed by 
Manasa, they may persist for the emancipation 
of the men taking to obsequial rites. 
1. Eng. Skt. Diet., V.S. Apte, p. 488. 
2. Ibid, p, 326. 
3. V.S. Apte, Skt. Eng. Diet, p. 633. 
VHUut cwkl^l ^T:l 
s3 'O 
Tj^t (yujjfeiyim 
May Devatas come in corporeal from and 
may not go anywhere, the Devas. Visnu is 
single but he alone is glorified as having three 
physical forms Let me be eulogised by the wise 
ones. 
rTfcrfe^mt m ^t:i 
Let the sages and all the groups of 
Gandharvas stand on the stone slab along with 
all the Devas and all the holy centres. 
'<!TdfrfHfe sr^mri rTra%g t iwi 
*nr rmPd ^rimmi 
3T§RT <T ^fqrRTftT *TII 
f^HIdiSd^UI -crf^T fflBcT ^rim^ii 
The time upto which exists the Primordial 
Egg (Brahmanda), till that time may continue 
the Sila (stone slab). And whosoever mutter 
chants and perform penance on my physical 
body in the form of stone slab, he shall also be 
permitted to perform Homa in the fire. May it 
be eternal and the let the Sraddha be eternal. Let 
the Japas, Homas and the penances, all be 
eternal. Let the stone slab in the form of a hill or 
mountain may persist for long.” 
MfrlsIdlcM: SpJT ^T: TTlf: MfrlsMIHI 
Having heard the talk of the chaste lady, the 
Devas replied to Pativrata- “Whatever has been 
sought by you, all that shall assume from 
undoubtedly. 
rT^r m<i(d'^ui wwr# ^fenr-.ii 
On the head of Gayasura when you will 
continue to stay, then in the form of a footprint,

=== PAGE 441 ===

Chapter-108 
407 
we too shall stay there steadily.” Having 
conferred a boon on Sila this way, the gods 
became out of sight thereon. 
ff?r 
l:ll^o^9ii 
* * *

=== PAGE 442 ===

Chapter-108 
407 
I 11 
Chapter 108 
The description of Gaya (continued) 
WR5PJR 3WT 
S3 
oR^r trr?irCT ^pjt qrc<? i 
wit 'mfct ^cn?j ui^kwi ■gfwrai:ii^ii 
Sanatkumara spoke- I shall now talk of the 
importance of Sila (slab of rock), listen O 
Narada. It is an endower of emancipation. 
Devas and the excellent sages sing of the 
importance of the slab. 
f?WT iWT ijfwit TfTT ■^■(eWTSldmcRll 
fclfcblHaj ^HldM % PTT% felTPTIR II 
That Sila established as the earth is god¬ 
framed and highly sacred. The excellent 
Silatlrtha is well-known in the three worlds. 
WIT: OWvk^Hle&T: Tri W:l 
^ ?PTT Wlft ITfRTII^II 
On touching it, all the people in the worlds 
went to Haripura (Vaikuntha). When the triad of 
worlds became isolated, the city of Yama also 
became empty. 
w $ i u nr^tjfrHj 
arfsrant Jj^iuiiy ftnFT?imi 
Yama, along with Indra and others, went to 
Brahma and spoke to him about this wonderful 
event- “0 Pitamaha, take back this staff of 
office as well as the assignment offered to me as 
Yama.” 
Wfir TTcTf WI SIKWT TmT I 
sRjTlWf srfiTWI TTt ■HMyiWdjmil 
Brahma then spoke to Yama- “You may 
sustain that at your home”. Spoken by Brahma, 
Dharmaraja sustained that slab in his home. 
wtsferi p? ^ hrfw viwhiR<*mj 
TJ^felT hhW f?TPTT ;3TTrf?T fepTTII^II 
Yama assumed his own duty being such as 
command or restraint of the sinister ones. Such 
type of Sila of huge norm became well-known 
in the Universe. 
wn wt wr fdbui4«ii ^4t 
HITuI ^ W *cH*ftui)||V9|| 
The slab having the forms and features of 
Devas is on a par with Brahma, Visnu, lord 
Mahes'vara and Meru, in the whole of the 
Primordial Egg. 
^T:l 
3PT: ufajuM'l: iwTt 4^1^:11^11 
Since it was held on the head of Gayasura, 
owing to its heaviness, the happy conjunction of 
the two Pavitras (sacred ones) is an endower of 
emancipation for the manes. 
^SWTtS^ftTTI 
wn^TTPra^jT fawMi4)H$i4)feHiii,?ii 
In the conjunction of the two sacred ones, 
Aja (Brahma) perfumed Hayamedha (i.e. 
Asvamedha). Having seen Visnu and others 
who came there for enjoying their due shares, 
(the slab requested). 
tafeiWiw <t Pm^i 
^rdThdl f^TPTrat 4 5^T fw^TW: f4jtTT:ll^o 
“All of you may take upon the vow of 
standing on the slab for the emancipation of the 
manes.” “May it be so”, having said this way, 
the gods headed by Visnu, stayed on the Sila 
(slab). 
f^MTWPJT Pctf ^ Mi^ui 4^TT: I 
MdWdwWbJT fee: ^4nf^mTii^n

=== PAGE 443 ===

408 
Vayu-Purana 
In accordance to their earlier vow, Devas 
stayed on the Sila in embodied and unembodied 
forms either through their idols of stone or 
footprints. 
nmm uIwt fyiRTi 
dWIW ftcpt #gwra;<:ll^ll 
On the surface of the shaven head of the 
Daitya, the way that Sila stood, on that account, 
that became (known as) Mundaprsthadri. It is an 
endower of Brahmaloka to the manes. 
3TR5Tf^T: fyrrtNK: Wl^HlRnn ^TT:I 
The Silapada (foot of the Sila) is covered by 
Prabhasa mountain. Engleamed by the Sun, it 
became known as Prabhasa. 
TWTO faf^d:l 
f?T(5ftr WTW: MchHdd:ii^n 
Having pierced Prabhasa verily, the thumb 
of this Sila (stone slab) emerged out. And risen 
out of the thumb, the Isa even became known as 
Prabhasesa. 
ryiHi^ton u: tot rt Mim t^t) i 
n<u4dMisidwwi tidSfFMT^ ottmi^ii 
A part of the thumb of the Sila is known as 
Pretasila. Owing to the offering of rice balls 
(Pindas) to the dead on this rock, the dead man 
becomes free from the state of a Preta (goblin). 
wjt\ <MMC£?k:| 
TT^Tt ^TT W 'Wldl ilMcM rfrf: II 
A devotee may take ablution at the 
confluence of Mahanad! and Prabhasa 
mountain. Rama bathed there along with Devi 
(queen Slta) and on that account, Ramatirtha 
became known. 
UTf&TteT HfRgJT 7TOT TOTOTt OTI 
ttprM hh! otcstt fm 
Rama, requested here by MahanadI- “O 
Rama! You may take your bath herein.” Since 
then, it became Ramatirtha, well-known in the 
triad of worlds. 
SPTRTTW Tm Ml 
flrTP# feoTOT OTTjT <mdMfa^Hld)IUH 
“Let all those evil sins committed by me in 
my hundred and odd former births, may attain 
to defunction, by a bath in Ramatirtha ” 
'n^uifrr ot: ttrctt snrg gpfa otrct:i 
<mdWf fqu^d^d fsmjjtriigi yiiiAi^n 
Tisrrfd^T Iwr TTOT: OTtdOTT %HdHTJI:ll^ II 
Reciting this mantra, whosoever bath, 
perform Sraddha (obsequial rite) and offers 
pinda in Ramatirtha, he goes to Visnuloka. “All 
right”, having said so, stand Rama, the elder 
brother of Bharata, along with Slta. 
TPT 7TOT Ugldlg) %ctHHWti9><l 
r3T OTOT MldehMIRoll 
If a devotee repeats this hymn- “0 Rama! 0 
Rama of lofty arms! O you a creator of 
intrepidity for Devas! I offer obeisance unto 
you, the lord of Devas. May my sin gets 
obviated”. 
M^UII^q OT: tM ^rRiWcRTI 
il<uoiiTi*4i fqMTtil: Rujm *nj:IR ^11 
If the devotee takes his bath repeating this 
Mantra and perform the Sraddha along with the 
offering of Pindas, his manes get emancipated 
from the state of a ghost and attain the state of 
Pitrhood. 
OTPwrfa wTftrt Rafter oti 
PUT RT?FT *T m'lcUcKhl-ych^lR^II 
If a devotee repeats this hymn- “You are the 
waters, 0 Devesa! You are the lord of 
luminaries. Obviate my sin, spring out of mind, 
speech, action and body, O God!” 
*NKRH %cf 5T3PTI 
rt rT TW HrT:IR?ll 
Having offered obeisance to Prabhasesa 
(lord of Prabhasa), one may go to Siva, the 
radiant one. And having offered obeisance to 
Sambhu, one may take to the offering unto 
Yama or adoration of Yama.

=== PAGE 444 ===

Chapter-108 
409 
TFT FF FT* #FTFI?F W: fel 
^?FT TFT TTTFFF m FIIT-tfll 
TFT TT^T FT^TOt TT FFtFFTfqFFBm: I 
TTRTTRTSS^Fr W fFTF FUFTF^FTII 
(FFfTF -q^ FF ^TF TT^TR^:lRmi 
When Rama had gone to the forest, Bharata 
came to this mountain and performed the 
offerings of Pinda etc. to the manes. The lord 
(Bharata) installed the idols of Rama, Slta, 
Lak§mana and the sages. In the sacred 
hermitage of Bharata, the foot-print of Matahga 
is seen by all men. It' is always surrounded by 
highly meritorious men. 
TsnfqF #t#tf ^fttfitf fasynmi) 
# ^TF^r TIFfTFTTFrr fFFFIIT^II 
It is established as the entire wealth of 
spiritual good or law or piety owing to the 
exemplification of the universe. At the 
hermitage of Matahga, a Sraddha performed 
gets redeemed all the manes. 
mM FT: TFTTFT TFT TTfat TFT# Til 
TFP8R WFFTF F FIFTt FF:IIT^II 
A man who takes bath in Ramatlrtha and 
adores Slta and bows down to Rames'vara does 
not assume a corporeal form. 
r^HHT FFF FF: TFTTFTTFT F*tF FI 
#TT3tF TTSTt# F F#fF FF: T*Jcf:ll? <£ II 
The posterior of this Sila again stands 
circumumbiated by a Naga (a tree or a 
mountain). Advised by Yamaraja (saying)- “Do 
not go”, this way stands known as Naga. 
FFFT c#T TFTFJTfF TFTrTT^Fra1tTT#IIT ^ II 
“Yamaraja and Dharmaraja of static motives 
have been established unto there. I offer 
oblations for the purpose of emancipation of the 
manes. 
ti ?FFT?1F# #TTFFF#T^cfh 
FFFt crirT TFTFT^n#|TT#ll^o|| 
Two dogs of black and variegated or 
dappled-hued colour are bom in the family of 
Vaivasvata (i.e. of Yama). I offer oblation Bali 
unto them so that they may become non-violent. 
^ldlT>U|c||i|ci|<y|U|^ryTiRydl:l 
FTFTTT FFT fttr? FFTSfFrFT11 3 *11 
May the crows stationed in east, west, north¬ 
west-south and south-west accept the balls of 
rice offered by me. 
rviHidl Ffernr I# TsnfFF: ^U^n4d:i 
fdfaTlf^JFTFFU^ T#SJTT:ll?TII 
On the right hand of the Sila stand 
established the Kundaparvata. Timiraditya, 
Isana and Bharga- these are the Mahesvaras. 
Ff|# FTi# T^I^FTT: fqfFt^r:l 
(FTFT9FFTTTTTSI FT#tcf5#jTT:ll3 3 N 
Vahni, two Varunas, four Rudras, the 
endowers of emancipation to the manes- all 
these are adorable in the hermitage of Bharata. 
FT^alMMN'GTT FTFcT f#f*T: TT?I 
FF FTFTFTSS9# FT: 11 
TFTF: «TFSTf#i FjF#<FT#rsfF F #F#II3*II 
Along with manes, one gets emancipated of 
all major sins and auxiliary sins therein. 0 
Devarsi! In the hermitage of Bharata, the man 
may take to oblation and Sraddha. That fruit is 
not lost even after a Kalpa. 
FFIFT FT$IF StFg FF^tFcFITfF FI 
TT^TTFFFFTft F^F FTFTS#ll^mi 
In Gaya, the Sraddha performed, is 
imperishable. Still they say that the Japas, 
Homas and penances and anything offered in 
the hermitage of Bharata, are of infinite nature. 
F#FTF#mT FFFTt TfF#F:l 
^gT: T*TgT: M^dlWI: ft<pt FfTB^T (If) FTT:ll 
In the four Yugas, there are four idols of Sun 
in the forms. On being seen, touched and 
adored, all those bestow emancipation on 
manes.

=== PAGE 445 ===

410 
Vayu-Puraiia 
Cgf%>clfaR dKchIMT fgfiT: TR: I 
y^KlulddidMi Hldlddl TT^gfhl 
<TTTc& W fcTHt ^fgmfTT^T11 ? <311 
Muktivamana and Taraka are two excellent- 
normed deities. These deities are the boats for 
those who are tormented within the ocean of 
universe. Brahman is Taraka (that which 
enables one to cross the ocean of worldly 
existence) of all the dead and living beings. 
RfoPT 3T ST: 
He who sees Trivikrama and Brahma, the 
excellent man, becomes pious and attains 
utmost state along with the manes. 
f?Mli|-| dWMkHsft- HSTT5«51RT^ Wt:I 
TSTTforT: ftJTR ^113^11 
At the left foot of the Sila, there is a giri 
(hill) Abhyudyantaka well-established there. An 
offerer of oblations there, carries his manes to 
Brahmapura. 
}rntmu<yiTT$ WWT ft: Wl 
^TT^t f| drM ^ felrTmi^o || 
Brahma proceeded to the outprecincts of 
Naimi$aranya along with gods. That tlrtha is 
called Mukhyatirtha and the gods are stationed 
at its feet. 
f=r*r TT^cf UpHTHHI 
In those three padas and tlrthas, O excellent 
Sage, whatever was the inauspicious act, that 
same becomes defunct, O Narada. 
dsiruNcH wr Tffer wiW:i 
s3 
m mm: cRncrr %sn: ^fr:ii 
That Naimisa forest is waited upon by the 
sacred men such as Vyasa, Suka, Paila, Kanva, 
Vedhas, Siva and Hari. 
rPrt -jvkurauT mm wi&ici 
cfm^ fvidl'MI^d W ^(TlWcfiT frTfT:ll'«3ll 
By their mere sight, a man gets rid of all 
sins. On the right-hand side of the Sila is 
likewise the Udyantaka1 mountain. 
TT fl^MMl TT^THTTTI 
tT? fIJT W TnPT:ll'tf'SII 
That mountain was established (here) by 
Agastya, the great souled one. Thereupon, 
Brahma and Hara (Siva) offered austere 
penance there. 
mrrmm % m c&ut 
tt^ pm truth 
cPlt mm ^rTll^mi 
Therein is the nice Kunda of Agastya 
difficult of obtainment in the triad of world and 
therein the eight sages accomplished as such, 
having offered austerity, attained to Siva. In the 
Kunda, having bowed down to the eight sages, 
one may carry the manes to Brahmapura. 
siwnrra ^-iRmRihhii 
fVIHTOT crm^sfq- wfqcTt Wttr ^T:li 
cnRilehl frrfT:II 
0 Devarsi! On the Sila of UdrayadrI 
(Udayagiri), on the left-hand side was 
established the lordly auspicious mountain 
Vaditrakagiri, by Agastya, the great-souled one. 
It is always resounding by the divine vocal 
songs having instrumental music. 
Rtsitsitt wsKmui Tnft:i 
TT^rrsinffT %rPr Rom Pi tt? tt^ii^ii 
Therein, groups of Gardharvas, Vidyadharas 
by name and bevies of nymphs sing divine 
songs, even today. 
WT£T TPTtei tT ^]F3Tt TTf^TtTTtT: I 
xr^cTt hi<«?sii4) ttjM 
iftrT^FT y^RPlI'k 6II 
I. Pauranika Kosa, p. 60, At Gaya on the left side of 
Sila established by Agastya, Vayu Purana 108.39, 
43,44.

=== PAGE 446 ===

Chapter-108 
411 
Therein, Mohana, Sunltha, Sailuja, 
Mohanottama, Parvata, Narada, DhyanI, 
SahgitI, Puspadantaka, Haha, Huhu and others 
perform musical (concerts). 
(m fzm®t m 
TTraf^T TOW 
Likewise Citraratha by name, surrounded by 
all the Gandharvas, do sing sweet songs on the 
mountain at the time of great festivities. 
3TrT: Tff tjcpTf ftbWM 
snferw ift wnfsnw^imon 
Therefore, that mountain is being waited 
upon by gods even today perennially, O 
Dharmajas! This is the abode of the Lord of 
lords i.e. Hara, having ashes besmeared all over 
the body. 
W&n TT%Tt ^5: ^ iftrFTrfs^l 
^tt: fwnt ttw ^rirnTii^ 
Accompanied by Parvatl, Rudra on the 
mountain, resounded by music, rejoices having 
been adored. He is fit to be meditated upon 
since he is the utmost goal of the manes. 
TFTRJT VOuAlT % ^T^TSTT: | 
In Gaya, the Supreme-souled one, Gopati 
(lord of cows) or Gadadhara (exists) and the 
Vai§navl Maya gets reduced likewise by the 
worship of Rudra, O sage! 
^nrr 'trwhfii 
snfrFstt srwi: 
On the right-hand side of the Sila is located 
the Giri Bhasmakuta. Along with Dharmaraja, 
therein stays Agastya along with his spouse. 
3TWTCT ^ l?IHtafPT:i 
cfr ^ ^ i^nrim^n 
Hiyripj risrr wif ftnpj wfi irf^nri) 
One who baths there near the spot of 
Agastya and offers pindas, he goes to 
Brahmaloka. It was from Brahma that he 
secured the excellent boon of greatness in the 
world, Lopamudra as spouse and the highest 
goal (emancipation) to his forefathers. There 
having seen Agastyesvara, one gets rid of the 
(sin) of killing a Brahmana. 
3TWT ^ ^ I 
On seeing Agastya accompanied by his 
spouse, one leads the manes to Brahmapura. By 
Dandin, a penance was performed on Sifadri, 
the southern mountain. 
TlfcrdR?:l 
c^forTT 
^ftr^rrat qr: Tim waJ 
^ font ir^nTTgg:im<iii 
The Banyan tree VatesVara is stood there as 
the great grandfather. In front of that one is 
RukminI Kunda and to the west is Kapila 
stream. Kapilesa (a Siva temple) is on the banks 
of the river. On the new moon day, one should 
take bath in Kapila, worship Kapilesa, perform 
a Sraddha and offer charity. By this, (his) manes 
may attain emancipation. 
srfasrnr PiRcRi<m'disi^ch'i<qi 
0T5T flIWd Wit WfcMI 
There is a current of fire coming out from 
that excellent mountain. Therein is Sarasvata 
Kunda, created by SarasvatL 
JTO:I 
rT3 w ^-dJOTi 
qrtll^oU 
Lord Sukra stayed there along with his sons 
Sanda, Amarka and others. O excellent sage, a 
man who performs Sraddha and offers pinda 
etc. in the various spots at the feet of the 
eminent sages, enables the manes to cross (the 
worldly ocean).

=== PAGE 447 ===

412 
Vayu-Purana 
Isiwun fnfo§tT:)i 
^pjwrT T^T:ll^^ll 
On the left-hand side of the Sila there stands 
the hill Grdhrakuta. The great sages assuming 
the form of cranes performed penance there and 
became Siddhas. 
3KTt PlfifoEfrgWg 3SP8TC: fW:l 
3gT ^ ^.*11^11 
Therefore, the hill became (known) as 
Grdhrakhta i.e. this crane’s hill. The deity 
Grdhresvara is stationed there. Having seen and 
bowed before Grdhresvara, a man may proceed 
to the region of Siva. 
rlS' 1J?I' W Dude;: 
rf3T sra*|lfr ^?TII^^II 
Therein is a cave1 of Grdhra. A person 
offering pindas on Grdhrakuta and in the cave, 
becomes the sharer of Sivaloka. One who bows 
down before the Banyan tree on Grdhrakuta, he 
attains all his desires and goes to heaven. 
stupid 'mtpqt^ fyrci ^gr 
Having seen 3iva, one attains the 
redemption from debt, redemption from sins 
and goes unto Siva. Therein exists Sulaksetra. 
An offerer of Pindas there, may carry manes to 
heaven. 
StTftMIvtr 
cRr Enrfa fen£*r: ttstcii 
<T 3gT fifiTWJ* 
By Adipala mountain is occupied the 
interior of the Sila (Silodara). Therein stays in 
the form of an elephant, Vighnesa, the obviator 
of obstacles. Having seen that, one gets 
emancipation from obstacles and one may carry 
the manes to Brahmapura. 
1. for Vayu Purana, p. 590, verse 
63, pada I. 
wwll fcpJ33: 
On the slope of Mundaprstha, there 
happened to be a Devadaru forest. Having 
visited the mountains Mundaprstha and 
Aravindadri, one may get the sin obviated. The 
offerer of Pindas in the umbilical region of 
Gaya called Su$umna leads his manes to 
heaven. 
fircwn *w\\ 3 ^nfor: y^d:i 
qfaSET niilwfr ^^1^1^:115,^11 
On the left foot of Sila is established the 
mountain Pretaparvata by Dharmaraja. For the 
sinners, the hill named Pretasila (exists) as such. 
^ ryivfPdl: 
trT: f^THBTT: WhfsfaolvJ: d(ct^dlH,H^dll 
The mountain was kicked off to a great 
distance. Pretakuta was freed from sins and 
attained sanctity by its impact with Sila. 
faqpg rT ^ fWT:l 
rfsf <OTllf3(cfi 3peTT II 
Pretakunda exists therein. The gods are 
stationed at its foot. Performing Sraddha etc. in 
the Kunda, one shall emancipate manes from 
the state of goblins. 
Yawns' cr?crt f^ratfroT ^ hi 
91l^lf<«hlRlhi T<TTT fqgf^rpru 
^cTT yMBch^UT <*til^U|chKcbT:llV9 0|| 
There are many of the ghosts existing 
separately and causing hurdles to Sraddha 
performing men who are performing Sraddha at 
a tlrtha for the emancipation of manes. The 
Pretas (ghosts) assume the form of archers and 
engulp the hands (of the pilgrims). 
rTT ^gT MIMlMmd4i:)ll^ll 
There is a rock on Mundaprstha where

=== PAGE 448 ===

Chapter-108 
413 
Mahadeva stays. Having seen that, the universe 
gets redeemed of major and auxiliary sins. 
Trcifinftr wr v 
y4RMd)sf?TOTcR cRRII^II 
Gayasiras is sacred and immuned from all 
sins. It is devoid of Pretas and the like, from 
where is incurred a highly sacred boon. 
'W WfT WT TFxPjt 
XJXRt R# WIT tR: tRT||\9^|| 
o 'vS o o 
In the Klkata land, Gaya is the holiest 
centre. The Rajagrha forest is also holy. The 
sacred hermitage of Cyavana and sacred stream 
Punahpuna are also there. 
#nTcP:l 
3T7 OT%T R#TII^II 
There are other holy spots such as 
Vaikuntha, Lohadanda, Grdhrakuta and Sonaka. 
By performing a Sraddha here, one may carry 
all manes to Brahmapura. 
ft gftifegi rT#5e&#ri 
rm MKlI^Tt T«JrT:IIV9MI 
In the form of a Krauhca (heron), a sage 
performed penance on the ridge of 
Mundapr§tha. Marked by the feet of the heron, 
it came to be known as Krauncapada. 
TR# R5T HilcWJI R3eR ^T^l 
cfcichfviHiiii ir grafts ^ui4)^:ii\s^ii 
One who takes bath in the water reservoir 
there, shall carry the entire family to heaven. An 
offering unto crows on the rock Kakasila, is 
conducive to redemption from indebtedness. 
rtt# ft nmyii #m#ui:i 
#1# RTR MI ra:fRf% RTT R#I|\9\9II 
On the peak of Mundaprstha, two sages- 
Lomasa and Lomaharsana performed a mighty 
penance and thereby attained highest 
accomplishment. 
3TTfrTTRT uft%JI RfTR#l 
Wield I #cPTt xl^RPII OTWdil|\3<SII 
fRRJ#TT ^ W^RT rj TrfTSTTI 
Slfagl TTgRT RtrggjffWRII^II 
Rfitrnrnf rtjrt f^nr f#rrwr:i 
TO?W?1(?) 3H«hlg-!4lll<So|| 
^fyichl 9T^t #st fieiwiy^nj|^4)i 
^yj|c|Ui|T rl4c|d1 | ^ yfd>dlfi#ll<^ll 
By Lomas'a was summoned many excellent 
streams viz. MahanadI, Saravatl, Vetravatl, 
Candrabhaga, Sarasvatl, Kaverl, Sindhu, Ira1, 
the excellent stream Candana2, VasisthI, 
Sarayu, Gariga, Yamuna, GandakI, Indira3, 
Mahavaitarani by name, Niksara that originates 
from heaven, Alakananda, the northern river 
called Kanaka, KausikT, Brahmada- all these 
rivers are the obviator of sins of all. The two 
rivers viz. Krsnavena and Carmavatl are the 
endowers of emancipation. 
Rift# #R#RT RTfRTRI 
W#T RJ#T RpR^-clll 
cTTTT Tf: IRI^T f#^: ? 
These excellent ones among all streams 
were summoned by Lomaharsana out of 
temerity. By the impact of his penance (as also), 
Narmada also was invoked by him, 0 excellent 
sage! He who takes bath in any of these rivers 
and offers pindas leads his Pitrs to heaven. 
sr^ratfR wftiwiy ftpf#src| rir^:i 
si w # *ra# ftnr# ylfd^cHJiRiid^ii 
Having entered the Brahmayoni, a man who 
may take exit, he attains to great Brahman 
having been released from the intricacy of 
breeds. 
fR^TTRTT Mi4iftui|'| rrtr; RT;| 
## fR3TWR^RIRII 
W STfSR Scf W1C * 11 
1. Pauranika Kosa, p.55, vide Vayu Purana 108.79. 
2. Ibid., p. 163, vide Vayu Purana 108.79 and 45.97. 
3. Ibid., p. 50 vide Vayu Purana 108.79.

=== PAGE 449 ===

414 
Vayu-Puraija 
A man who bathes in Niksara and Puskanni 
(holy ponds) and take to the performance of 
Sraddha and the like on the divine 
Krauncapada1 as a matter of rite for day triad, 
he carries his manes, even if they were guilty of 
five major sins, to Brahmapura. 
snwRfstzisraTs^n' f^fsRTii 
iftcRT cjiwfiTST ^ ft fawjtfWll: I Id m I 
Janardana stays in Bhasmakuta. He who 
offers pindas in his hands whether for himself 
or for others- if it is for one’s own self, it must 
be without gingelly seeds with the sacred thread 
in the Savya (hanging from the left shoulder) 
position; and if for those who are alive, it must 
be suffused with curds. All those (thus) become 
as gone to Visnuloka. 
ftpJSt H'Ul <;tiwci jjrft 'jHkJhI 
41^V*I WT # WTTII^II 
(Mantra) “The Pinda that has been given by 
me in your hand, may please be given by you to 
that person for whom I have given it to thee, O 
Janardana. This Pinda is for the dead one, 0 
Prabhu!” 
Mft MIT WRIT Mdl^ll^ll 
(Mantra) “This Pinda stands offered by me 
in your hand, O Janardana! When I reach the 
end of my life, it deserves to be offered to me at 
Gayasiras. 
TOfi mw i%MT^cri 
Term rT MW fqgsfWniCdll 
O Janardana! Obeisance be to you, 
obeisance be to you, O endower of 
emancipation to the manes! Obeisance be to 
you, obeisance be to you, O you having 
assumed the form of manes.” 
TTOTOt fqfWJT mm MfMT#M:l 
1. Pauranika Kosa, p. 138 in Gaya. 
In Gaya, Janardana assumed the form of 
Pitrs himself. Having seen that Pundarlkak§a 
(lotus-eyed lord), one becomes immune from 
debt triad. 
MW wftoar 
^MtofTRT MW M ftTOTt MT^ Wl^oll 
“Obeisance be to you, O lotus-eyed one! 0 
you immuner from debt triad! O you consort of 
Laksml! Obeisance be to you. May you be the 
emancipator of manes.” 
cTPTSnj WTTrM MR^T MRT^MMI 
fqg^T: W«PMW^nMt;5T?^M:3ril^^ll 
Having nicely kneeled down, Bhlma bowed 
down to Janardana. Having offered Sraddha 
along with Pindas, he became the sharer of 
Brahmaloka along with his brothers. He became 
a religious one and redeemed a hundred 
forefathers in his family. 
fVIHP-li oUThloUTtilVMMl fW:l 
On the Sila, the lord of Lak$mi stays in an 
ostensible form both specific-normed and 
unspecific-normed, along with gods. Hence the 
Sila became endowed with Devas or gods. 
k k k

=== PAGE 450 ===

Vayu-Puraija 
i 
I 
( 
i 
II3T2T qcTTfe^Tc^SSETR:ll 
Chapter 109 
Description of importance of Gaya 
hkc; 3cTTET 
cqrR^wrur fswssf^i«n::i 
cgtbWMui oqgnoJJWrtRT fw:ll^ll 
Narada spoke- How the primeval 
Gadadhara stayed in a manifest form? How did 
he stay both as manifest and unmanifest?

=== PAGE 451 ===

Chapter-109 
415 
3KT 7RT WW R2JT I 
^IcdM 
How did the Gada (mace) originate and how 
did he come to be known as Adigadadhara? 
How the spot Gadalola happened to be an 
eliminator of all sins? 
HcTTST 
■nftt -rwifti urateaisaart ^:\ 
yi®dt sRjnft Hi^icwyrcUifw' gRWT i1 $ 11 
Sanatkumara spoke- There was a demon 
named Gada whose body was very adamant and 
robust. Requested as such, he was offered the 
bones of his body difficult to be taken leave of, 
by Brahma. 
sT^TTtItT -d^S^grTT d^Ti 
HcftST <*pft: WT iRJR^imi 
Urged by Brahma, Visvakarma created a 
Gada (mace) of marvellous norm. He converted 
the bone of the demon in the lathe that could 
crush even Vajra (thunderbolt) and kept it in the 
heaven itself. 
m Tr^rTT TRl ^f%RTI 
left T^ft Wdl^umimil 
After a good amount of time, in the 
Svayambhuva Manvantara, the demon Heti, the 
son of Brahma, performed a penance of austere 
norm. 
fftarattassnoft w giw^ra?fi 
Wii^u 
For a hundred thousand divine years, he 
subsisted upon wind, having face lifted up and 
arms raised aloft (standing) on one toe thumb. 
jJfFcR efft cRSRRII^II 
He stood along, unperturbed, subsisting 
upon seared leaves and breeze. Brahma and 
others were pleased by him. He asked for boons 
from them, the bestowers of boons. 
cliffy sr 
“I should become very mighty. I cannot be 
killed by Devas, Daityas, or human beings with 
any kind of weapons. I should not be killed by 
the discus and the like weapons of Krsna, Isvara 
(Siva) and others”. 
^fdnchft^fd,4Idi sr?RTi^T:H^ii 
“May it be so”, having said so, they 
vanished away. Heti1 vanquished the Devas and 
assumed the form of Indra. Brahma, Hara (Siva) 
and other gods became terrified (of him). 
# ft Trmt jTJTJcffjftrd 
{dftfyRTl: ^<1:11 ^ o 11 
They sought refuge in Hari. They told him- 
“Kill Heti”. Hari then spoke to them- “This 
Heti cannot be killed by gods or demons, 0 
Suras! 
R cRTI 
^fffjRft flfft ftcfT TfciT dt c^rll^ll 
You may give me a mighty missile by which 
I may kill that Heti”. This way accosted, then 
the Devas gave that gada (mace) to Hari. 
^STR eft TRTOTff ftlfrdVl TRTSR: I 
TF^TT |fdMT^d£T ftft: 
He held that gada to begin with and 
(thereby) by gods was named as Gadadhara. 
Having killed Heti with his gada, he proceeded 
to heaven along with the gods. 
felftt RWfTRRlfftfRT£n::l|^|| 
Having taken the gada and having propped 
up the Sila of Gayasura, the way he stood as 
having objective unmoved, on that account he 
became known as Adigadadhara. 
1. Pauranika Kosa, p. 553.

=== PAGE 452 ===

416 
Vayu-Puraija 
^PrF SHARPER: 11 
T^itf ynspife: wwr qm tj^t:ii^ii 
3IRTT PiRt^lHl 
W&- : 11 ^m I 
M*?l)eti: -MRIHlGhl cRjtTcii ^3?U3<fi:l 
sdteyrSteafRras: wrM qgvcto^n\%\\\ 
cffe&T RT Hgwfll 
<Wlml($<«M)ui SJrfi 3Trf^T^RR:ll^ll 
Adigadadhara is manifest in the form of 
Silas (rocky slabs and mountains). Through 
Mundapr$tha mountain, Prabhasa named 
mountain, Udyanta, Gltanada, Bhasmakuta, the 
great mountain Grdhrakuta, Pretakuta, Adipala 
and Aravindaka, Paiicaloka, Saptaloka, 
Vaikuntha, Lohadandaka, Krauncapada, 
Ak$ayavata, Phalgutirtha, Madhusrava, 
Dadhikulya, Madhukulya, the great rivers 
Devika and VaitaranI etc., Adigadadhara 
becomes apparent. 
fonTt: 
wnw Mt ^ mRpfcftiiKn 
Wiqnt ?^FTWR RTl 
The following are manifest-cum- 
unmanifest- Vi§nu’s pada (footprint), 
Rudrapada, the Brahma’s pada, the excellent 
one of Kasyapa which is a divine pada wherein 
two hands have issued out, the padas of 
Pancagnis (five fires), the excellent padas of 
Indra and Agastya, the padas of Ravi and 
Kartikeya, Kraunca and Matariga. 
yciifui bijifiicAiThicMHi iw:i 
All are the chief lingas (phallus-shaped 
images) and in all of them is stationed the 
primeval Gadadhara, the illustrious Gadadhara, 
in both manifest and unmanifest forms. 
imm #=r wfawi W2TT frcWii 
wfe^jTrTTrar ^njira^sftr 
^dRTTi|«l WP?J RRTctfS'ffi' M41yd<l:l 
■wraqMsr Rt^t: cru^vii RHij-ich:i 
Rraftg'ityi: cRt€h?Tt nff^T: Rrtiu?:i 
H^rlT RT MUsRcbii? :3tR:IR'*SII 
|f?r€ tt^twR^ht Return 
The primeval Gadadhara is stationed as- 
Gayatri, Savitrl, Sandhya, Sarasvatl, Gayaditya, 
Uttararka, Daksinarka, Naimisa, Svetarka, 
Gananatha, the eight Vasus, the lordly sages, 
the eleven Rudras, the other seven sages, 
Somanatha, Siddhesa, Kapardisa, Vinayaka, 
Narayana, MahalaksmI, Brahma, 
Sripuru$ottama, Markandeyesa, Kotlsa, 
Arigiresa, Pitamaha, Janardana, Marigala, the 
excellent Pundarikaksa etc. (these are the 
various shrines and deities in Gaya). When the 
demon Heti was killed, Vi§nu went back to his 
city. 
sfipn w cjnfR) 
%sn e$ur ft^T:ii^u 
When the demon was rendered senseless by 
Brahma with Rudra and others, Vedhas (the 
creator), gone redeemed by joy, gratified the 
primeval Gadadhara. 
7Tc(TSR 5ygJ|d<*IHeh^M 
TT^FTrT faRrPJUi Wf?RRI 
^Flrf 
hUllRtci 3R^TeT RRlft[|Rt9l| 
Brahma spoke- I bow to Gadadhara from 
whom Times blemishes have receded, who is 
stationed in Gaya, whose merits are well- 
recognised, who is gone beyond the merits, who 
enters into a grotto, who has gone into the 
abode of excellent mountain Gaura1 (a golden 
1. Pauranika Kosa, p. 159, Vayu Purana 47.23.25.

=== PAGE 453 ===

Chapter-109 
417 
mountain in the north having Haratala tree), 
who is adored by Ganas and who is a bestower 
of boons. 
srr.fsni 
cTOTfiilrriWTII^dll 
To one who bestows prosperity on the day, 
who bestows prosperity on the hosts of Devas, 
who bestows royal glory even to Bhava, whose 
glory torments Daityas, who bestows glory in 
Kali age, whose glory suppresses the impurities 
of the Kali age and who bestows affluence on 
those who seek refuge, to that Gadadhara, I 
offer obeisance, the one having Sri adhered to. 
cblMIc^Tct I 
I bow unto him who is stronger than the 
strongest, well-belauded owing to density of 
development, marvellous in Kama, highly 
strong one, gone over to the highly stronger 
tradition, gone over to richness, who can be 
approached (even) by highly stronger sinners, 
who has his own abode and whose spiritual 
lineage and eulogy is great. 
<*<U|chHlfad£id 
To one who is incorporeal, who has no sense 
organ, who has no birth, who is decorated on 
altar of the Sun, I offer obeisance to that 
supreme Gadadhara, Isvara, the excellent one 
who is eternal and who is devoid of sound and 
face. 
gqlfini nfcwifacifcid hr 
fdfafVKfw ^ I 
fadlctjcb ch^ldebKUIlfrl^i 
Wrt ^nrrfxr ^113 ^ii 
To one gone beyond the mind, void of 
intellect, the excellent one, constantly one as not 
being twained, belauded by the wise, who is 
worshipped by learned men in the Vedantas, 
who is Cidatmaka (pure consciousness) and 
who is beyond the causes present in Kali, I bow 
unto that Gadadhara. 
■o 
eft cfxrft^ ^ cR Wf rPT^ratrTI I ^ 11 
Sanatkumara spoke- Along with Brahma, 
this way was adored the primeval Gadadhara by 
Devas. Then he spoke out- “You may choose a 
boon” and Brahma asked for the boon. 
fyiHiqi f^RTl 
WWTlS5f tcRfT Wf ^ 
“On a Sila which is god-framed one, we 
may not stay without you. We shall stay here 
along with you perennially when you have 
assumed a manifest form.” 
IfclURT f9RTT 'ST?! I 
hi chi *11 wm 
“May it be so”, this way said Gadadhara and 
stationed there along with Sri (Lak$ml) for the 
safeguard of the people and emancipation of the 
mobile beings. The perceptible form 
Pundarlkaksa i.e. lotus eyed one, is well-known 
as Janardana. 
^TT TrfdTTf^TdT WIcHll 
■4tctPrhl ‘HT ^rf5fb£ri% rMT HR: II 
\3 O 
clRIWH) ^IdtlThr 
The image that is unassessable by gods, 
being of primeval norm and pristine one, 
perceptible as such in the Svetakalpa, shall 
become that very way again. It will become

=== PAGE 454 ===

418 
Vayu-Purana 
imperceptible in the Varahakalpa although it 
attained to perceptibility earlier. 
WRtfTRT TlWhi Ml T^TOTRT 
With a view to redeem the worlds and for 
the protection of the Devas, he will be clearly 
manifest in Gayasiras. There is no doubt in it. 
^ 3g?rf% w ^HI^KIIOTITI 
4nwPd' 131911 
Those who visit lord Adigadadhara and pray 
to him with devotion, will become immune 
from the diseases of leprosy etc. and will 
proceed to the abode of Hari. 
% w sresn rfcrmf^KWTH)i 
SIHWPl SR rTll^dll 
And those who regularly visit lord 
Adigadadhara with devotion, they shall obtain 
wealth, crops (lit. com), age or longevity of life 
and health. 
TTHf gT^Tht cWTII 
sicRerr g^r: w ^T:ii3<?u 
S3 ■O -O 
With faith and devotion whosoever offers 
obeisance unto Adigadadhara, he achieves 
spouses, sons, grandsons and the like, the 
merits, fame and comforts. Such men enjoy the 
kingdom of Brahmapura. They will enjoy the 
fruits of the collection of their merits. 
4hWN' W<;Rd:l 
By an offering of perfume, one will be rich 
in scent, by offering of flowers, one attains 
conjugal felicity and by the offering of sweet 
incense, one attains acquisition of kingdom and 
illumination through lamps. 
$114^0311^ W fgwt ^1% t ftTcFTH^ ^|| 
By an offering of a flag, he becomes free 
from sins; by undertaking pilgrimage, he shall 
be the enjoyer of Brahmaloka. He, who is a 
perfonner of Sraddha and an offerer of 
libations, leads his manes to Visnu(loka). 
snggT % wi^unssf^TsnTTi 
OsitEiftT g fwqj? TnsrarRii 
fTrcrtsftr yryt 'dyiyissf^i<iy<di iv ? 11 
With devotion whosoever offers homage to 
the Adigadadhara with eulogium (stotra) and 
adores him, he leads his manes to Madhava. 
And Siva even, by great pleasure, gratified 
Adigadadhara. 
f^T 331W 
3)^3fH-^Tr gt ffogygrfy^qf?:) 
tf^rWrf^roT 1*311 
Siva said- I bow to Adigadadhara who 
though is in an imperceptible form, becomes 
manifest in the form of Mundaprstha and the 
like and the holy centre Phalgutirtha etc. 
cirfhloq'^t^yi q^ui 
To one who is stationed in perceptible and 
imperceptible forms in the forms of Padas and 
the phallus-shaped images of the faces, 1 bow to 
that Adigadadhara. 
3lodjrh<c\*il 1 
wyt ^ 
To one who is of unmanifest nature in the 
form of Janardana and who is bom naturally on 
Mundaprstha, I bow down to that same 
Adigadadhara. 
fyiHrui ^cRcfquyj fw ginfyfa: ^:i 
yfag tt^t^ii^ii 
To one who is stationed in the Sila of divine 
features, who is adored and honoured by Devas 
along with Suras headed by Brahma, I bow 
down to that Gadadhara. 
t g SgT fief: y^T wfelT WET ^1 
srr^refr tfTc&rfw wy i [wz lyry i i^vsn

=== PAGE 455 ===

Chapter-110 
419 
And having seen or touched or adored which 
one, one attains Brahmaloka, I offer my 
obeisance in the form of Sraddha to that 
Adigadhadhara. 
ggrrt % cftwti 
I bow down to the primeval Gadadhark who 
is the sole cause of Mahat etc. that is manifest 
and who is of the unmanifest form. 
o 
I'S'?!! 
To one who is devoid of body, senses, mind, 
intellect, life breath, pride and who is free from 
wakeful and dreaming states, I bow down to 
that primeval Gadadhara. 
^JTRR*iJoqgt{j 
O 
And to one who is free from the eternal and 
the non-eternal (states), who is truth, joy and of 
an unexpendable norm, the fourth light of the 
self, I bow to that Adigadadhara. 
attains material gains and a lewd one attains 
lusts and the one cherishing emancipation 
attains emancipation. 
CRZIT g FTOrt Tpr 
TTjTT fqMtdhlHlfrt 
Even a barren woman may obtain a son, 
gone beyond the Vedas and Vedarigas (ancillary 
lores). A king attains victory and even a Sudra 
attains happiness. 
tfwt grfgtt TR? WIT: hpw<£) :ii<aMI 
One cherishing sons gets sons after adoring 
the primeval Gadadhara. By adoration of Hari, 
everything that is desired by the mind is 
obtained. 
fir si M^ipui crmrrrai jRnnifitui rut 
Tdliy <*V IddMl^sarra': 11 ^ o 9,11 
* * * 
Tig ^TclT MrfyH UTrfT aiK'l<|!0T:l 
fWt ^g: f?Rigi g 
Sanatkumara spoke- This way eulogised by 
Mahesa, Adigadadhara became gratified. That 
lord stood himself on that Sila (slab) along with 
Devas headed by Brahma and others. 
Tdcifg g^rtg mr iim?n 
Those who eulogise and adore Lord 
Adigadadhara eulogise who is stationed on 
Mundaprstha mountain, shall attain 
Brahmaloka. 
snM HrqgT&Tfrsgfal gT^rnggiTTi 
cfcmMdiMyi^hni gtsrraf TTt^wiMdidimf n 
The one eager for spiritual good obtains 
spiritual good, the one eager for material gains

=== PAGE 456 ===

Chapter-110 
419 
IIm <*VlfeVMd^SS*IR:ll 
Chapter 110 
The importance of visit to Gaya 
''UHfchMK 
*\u\m\ mrs tmRkpti 
fefcfefa: mseb<pii' urnn %j?r ipTii^ii 
Sanatkumara spoke- O Narada, I shall talk 
of journey or visit to Gaya. You may listen to it 
as it is one offering emancipation. It is the 
expiation for all the Sraddha performers and is 
sung by Brahma of yore. 
to ms fenro:i 
fgSTRT ebltfSl^fcj VIMM^UIUII^ll 
In case one is ready to go to Gaya, he should 
duly perform Sraddha as per rituals after 
assuming the form of a Karpati1 (a pilgrim or a 
person maintaining himself by carrying water 
1. V.S. Apte, p. 145.

=== PAGE 457 ===

420 
Vayu-Puraija 
from rivers). He should circumambulate the 
village. 
rRTT JTRRR « 
Then he should go to another village and 
partake of the remainder of the Sraddha. 
Thereafter, he should go on foot everyday and 
he must avoid accepting monetary gifts. 
tf^TgTTnfrT: *?pt few: ^rfei 
3^c*>h£wt^ u: Tf 
He who abstains from accepting monetary 
gifts, who is satisfied, who is controlled and 
chaste and who is free from egoism, enjoys the 
fruit of the tirtha (holy spot’s journey). 
fel rT TTT^r TRSfe wioti 
fen to cEtf% ^T: cTtfern^iiHii 
He whose hands, feet and mind are well- 
restrained and who possesses education, 
perseverance and fame, achieves the fruit of the 
pilrimage to a tirtha. 
wwr wsfer 
m fe wira fe£t 
At the entrance of Gaya, towards the east, 
there is a great stream Phalgu. Having collected 
water there, one should have a bath at an 
unturbid spot. 
«rns cpcrr wferi 
Having gratified the Devas and the like and 
having performed Sraddha as per systematic 
way, one should recite the Vedic passage 
belonging to one’s own branch without the 
material of worship and invocation. 
sfesit; ^Tfefen fefct fcpferi 
WW: THIrWt n 
Having become purified on the very next 
day, he should with all purity go to 
Pretaparvata1. The intelligent pilgrim should 
1. Pauranaika Kosa, p. 343. In Gaya, vide Vayu 
Purina 110.8. 
thereafter take bath in Brahmakunda2 and 
perform Tarpana of Devas and others. 
He should perform the Sraddha for those 
who are Sapindas (having the similar Pindas i.e. 
near kinsmen) on the Pretaparvata. The wise 
pilgrim should face the southern direction and 
wear the sacred thread as Prdclndvltv*. 
wjsjfetswwr: fet mi 
arfecriTTT fem: fe^TT:ii^on 
fefe: feft ^ ^ 3TRTT: 
fe fMu^y^iqrsiSuHidisfe iraifermi 
h gfenwR w&ife ?nwrcm^ii 
‘The fire carrying the libation or oblations 
offered to the deceased ancestors, Soma, Yama, 
Aryama (Sun), Agnisvattas, the Barhisads and 
the drinkers of Soma (seated on Kusa grass) 
may come along, the highly fortunate ones. By 
you here have been safeguarded my manes. 
Those kindred relations born in the family are to 
be offered the ball of rice. For the purpose of 
offering libation balls for them, I have come to 
this Gaya. May all those attain to gratification 
of perennial norm by this obsequial rite 
(Sraddha).” 
3TWU|)ck^l rf qiTf yiQHAIW JRIr^T: I 
I ^11 
Having sipped water (Acamana) and recited 
Pancariga4, the pilgrim should perform 
2. Ibid., p. 350, vide Vayu Purana 110.8 & 83.20. 
3 . The wearing of sacred thread from the right 
shoulder across the chest and passed under the left 
arm. 
4. Pancariga Pranama ^TT^^Tl ^ RfK'Hl 
T?TTt V.S. Apte, p. 308 fcf ^ of 
Kiratarjuniya 11.12 does not suit here. 
■cb4ufchK«frM: f^fRRTyfd^R: 
'^iRwfeRfd 1 WP7I: ^HidWI:

=== PAGE 458 ===

Chapter-110 
421 
Pranayama with effort, for the purpose of 
attainment of Brahmaloka reft of Punaravrtti 
(transmigration). 
xi ^rr m towi 
And after performing the obsequial rite as 
per rituals in due order, he, should invoke and 
adore the manes with the mantras. Then he 
should offer rive balls. 
cT$ 3fafal'HKl xX WHT cJTI 
^44^ tfwr wio^g- Wnr11 ^ 11 
^TT: fqp?%l 
At the tirtha (holy spot) on the Pretasila etc., 
the place must first be cleaned with 
Pancagavya1 separately while their mantras are 
being recited. Then the deities should be adored 
with offerings of Caru soaked in ghee. So long 
as the gingelly seeds are taken by the pilgrim in 
the holy rites of the Pitrs, Asuras run away from 
the place of holy rites like a deer gone terrified 
by a lion. 
During the Astakas1, Vrddhi days and on the 
day of the demise, the obsequial rite of mother 
should be performed separately at Gaya. On 
other occasions, the Sraddha should be 
performed along with that of her husband. 
fsr^TFTt 
MW, pp. 577-578 has five modes of devotion, 43 
silent prayer, oblation, libations bathing idols and 
feeding Brahman as. 
1. cT«TT 7TFTC ^ ^ - five products of 
the cow taken collectively- milk, curds, clarified 
butter or ghee, urine and cowdung, V.S. Apte, p. 
308. 
2. The eighth day of the three months on which the 
Pitrs are to be propitiated. 
ww ^urmyi: 
fw^rt TWIWM ^#rPTra^Tll^dll 
During the Vrddhisraddha:> (an offering 
made to the manes on prosperous occasions 
such as the birth of a son), the Sraddha of the 
mother should be performed first. But at Gaya 
that of the father should be performed first. The 
obsequial rite starts with the offerings of Padya 
and the systematic laying of the Kusa grass with 
the tips pointing to the south to the father etc. 
The remaining activities of the Sraddha is to be 
performed as ordained by Grhya(sutras). 
sir nfiiusRf Srar ^unrm<r:i 
<*VIWIWl4 ferfiRT fa<^c(eCT||^|| 
The pilgrim may perform Sraddha of the 
Sapindas from the right (southern) side having 
spread Kusa grass once and having offered 
sesame with water. 
■Jj#c3TS3jrf?RT fepyjw 3FTcT:l 
yfam^ui 
The water libation is offered with the sacred 
water of the Pitrs holding it in the hollow of 
one’s palm. He may then offer the unfinished 
pindas with a fistful of powdered fried grain. 
The other relatives should be invoked then in 
the Kusa grass by means of water with gingelly 
seeds. 
ftcR: 
May all those Devas, sages, manes and 
human beings, mothers and maternal 
grandfathers and others beginning with Brahma 
and ending with a blade of grass, be propitiated 
by the water libation. 
3. V.S. Apte, p. 530.

=== PAGE 459 ===

422 
Vayu-Purana 
For crores of the lineages of those ones, 
abiding in seven continents upto the 
Brahmaloka and Bhuvanaloka, may this be the 
sesame water (as libation). 
fan fijcflu^hr yfw-n:i 
TTTrfT ftqp# q&J 
Mldl^wf^Tdl xJ «HldlM^ebKd:l 
riqi f^rrgT qqT qqf fr^'Ujyyfdjjcii^ii^^ii 
Father (Pita), grandfather, likewise great¬ 
grandfather, mother, grandmother, likewise 
great-grandmother, maternal grandfather, his 
father and his grandfather and the like- for all 
of them, a Pinda has been offered by me. May 
that continue for an indefinite time. 
VHfrTdSTOFJi cfT d^l<)NirvAll 
d^dHtd J ltd I ft! ^rdlfd TPTO^cTIRmi 
Eight-normed in measurement and of the 
extent of a wet myrobalan or of the extent of a 
Sami petal, a pinda, one may offer at Gayasiras 
and may redeem seven Gotras and a hundred 
Kulas (lineages). 
fudM^d: wnqfar qfqqrr ^dw«m 
W 4faT: ^fddTMR^II 
The seven Gotras have been enumerated as- 
of the father, of the mother, of one’s own wife, 
of a sister, of a daughter and likewise of the 
father’s sisters and mother’s sisters. 
xjdfdyifafdvia' %i 
wni^n 
s3 
The hundred and one Kulas are as follows- 
father and his twenty-four ancestors, mother 
and her twenty ancestors, wife and her sixteen 
ancestors, twelve ancestors of sister’s husband, 
eleven ancestors of the son-in-law, seven 
ancestors of the husband of the sister of one’s 
father and eight ancestors of the husband of 
mother’s sister. 
q f^rat q g(M 
q dii^ugq 
Neither invocation nor the blockade of 
quarters, nor the fault ensuing from vision or 
unrighteousness, deserve to be incurred during 
the Sraddha performance at a tirtha by the 
skilled ones. 
ftugi-Hd fq&gqiq gq: 
q%TJTT rJIsHjebrM fqf£T:IR^II 
Pindasana, Pindadana, (the seat of libation, 
the offering of libation) and again the ritualistic 
sprinkling with the Kusa grass, Daksina and 
Annasamkalpa- this may be the ritual sequence 
in Tirtha Srciddhas. 
3Wo$<rl grlT % xj Jlld^ui q fqu^l 
31131 dl-Hd^yg fdHtc(4:ll^oll 
(Mantra) “In my own lineages who have 
died and of which ones does not exist the 
redemption (gati), I shall invoke all those, on 
the Kusa platform by sesame waters. 
qirfTq^f if q qfq^T q fellTTl 
3TT3T#P2) W 
In the family of matamaha (maternal 
grandfather), whose movement does not 
become possible, I shall invoke all those on the 
surface of the Kusa with sesame water. 
cRTcpfoqr % xj Jifaifai q fggfri 
And in my family of kindreds (bandhu- 
varga) who do not exist and whose movement 
or redemption does not become possible, I shall 
invoke all those on the surface of the Darbha 
(Kusa) with sesame waters.” 
^44: sqrqqRl 
This way the pilgrim should meditate on the 
Darbhas, repeat these mantras with the offering 
of water libations along with gingelly seeds, 
invoke and adore the manes and offer the 
Pindas as per serial order.

=== PAGE 460 ===

Chapter-110 
423 
TJ?TT % XT R fallrtl 
ft ffot ^IWf^ll^^H 
“In our family, for those who died and 
whose redemption does not exist, for the 
emancipation of those, I offer this libation ball 
(Pinda). 
nidm^ q sr •nfdffqi q Mti 
fq fttrt 
In the family of my maternal-grandfather, 
those who died and whose redemption do not 
became possible, I offer this libation ball 
(pinda) for their redemption. 
O 
fq fintt 511 
I offer this libation ball {pinda) for the 
upliftment of those persons belonging to the 
family of our kinsmen who are dead and who 
have no other means of emancipation. 
SNIcK-rh % q q$ TPftfgcTT:l 
^rm^qtJirak fq fcrni 
Those who had their teeth ungrow and those 
who became tortured within the foetus, for their 
redemption, I offer this libation ball {pinda). 
faarcfHddl i q fcq: ftftit «luigqil3<SII 
Those who were fire burnt and others who 
got burnt by fire and those struck by lightening 
or by thieves, for them I offer this libation ball. 
'dTciaxii 'tjcTT ^ q Ui^ciiiy^digr 
^jfffsrafsfq 
Those who got killed in forest conflagration 
or who were killed by a lion or tiger, the jawed 
ones or by homed ones, unto them I offer this 
libation ball {pinda). 
ancqmrfqqr q % <*«r: fans ^im^uxon 
Those who died by implement on the stake 
and those who were killed by poison and 
weapons and those who committed suicide, 
unto them I offer this libation ball (pinda). 
^ ^rw gw grTT: I 
Those who in the forest route or in the 
forest, were killed by thirst or hunger, by 
Bhutas (ghosts) Pretas (goblins) and Pisacas 
(vampires), unto them I offer this libation ball 
(pinda). 
in&t rfi*rdifa& 0&) cKTrrqa xj $ ttcTt.-i 
?q ftmt rrarcq^q^ir^ ^ u 
Those who have fallen into the hells called 
Raurava, Andhatamisra and Kalasutra, for the 
redemption of them, I offer this pinda (libation 
ball). 
% qqi: i 
s3 S3 
fq ftrni I"* 311 
I offer this libation ball (pinda) for the 
salvation of those persons who have fallen into 
the terrible hells of Asipatravana or 
Kumbhlpaka. 
itovTtejJ q % qqr:l 
Those who were exposed to many tortures, 
who went to the Pretaloka (the world of ogres), 
for their redemption, I offer this libation ball. 
: ^ qfaT qqfi^fiV.l 
fq fqut ^nq^qil'kmi 
And those who were taken to the abodes of 
many torture by the Yama’s attendants, for their 
redemption I offer this libation ball (pinda). 
qn$q qqqfq qiqqrq q % fqjqr:i 
s3 s5 s3 
dmM^TQTrak ^q ftni ^^ro^qn^ii 
For those who stayed in any of the hells or 
abodes of torture, for their redemption I offer 
this libation ball (pinda). 
q^qrfqqqr $ q 
f: ftftri iretail

=== PAGE 461 ===

424 
Vayu-Purana 
Those who attained to the breeds of animals 
and who became snakes, reptiles, birds and 
insects or those who imbibed the breed of 
plants, for them I offer this libation ball (pinda). 
1TR5T fcfcr #T #T: fmg ft 
I offer this libation ball for those persons 
who are transmigrating into the thousands of 
other lives as a result of their own actions and to 
whom the human birth as become a rarity. 
ft# cf|jycfid(y:i 
3tw$ht ^ ^ <rm: iw 
For those who are stationed in heaven, 
atmosphere and land, the manes and kindreds 
and the like, who died as unpurified, I offer this 
libation ball {pinda). 
% jfcfadld*# ftctfr Wl 
^ gfowraraj foo^i^ ^rimon 
Those manes of mine who stay as Preta- 
framed, all those may attain to gratification by 
offering of libation all over. 
^rcrcfT cir ^r^t: i 
rfot fo# w 
Those who may or may not have been my 
kinsmen in this birth but who were my kinsmen 
in the other births, unto them, the pinda is 
offered by me as the indestructible, while they 
stayed as such. 
fog# gdi % w ing# v % grn:i 
^ xTRT WRraT grTT:im^ll 
% tt c# rrafoosT: ^ygR'foctf^dii 
fo^T^foTRT % rT snrSRTT: ? II 
foWT 3TTW% 5TRTWT: ^ *WI 
fou^t W 
Those who died in the family of my father 
and those who died in the family of my mother, 
those others who were the kindreds or elders or 
teachers or fathers and fathers-in-law, those in 
my family who had neither sons nor wives and 
hence had been deprived of Pinda offerings, 
those who had been defaulters in the holy rites, 
those who were bom blind, those who had been 
lame, those who had ugly forms, those who had 
been prematurely bom, known ones and 
unknown ones in my family- to all those the 
libation ball has been offered by me. May it be 
indestructible in reaching unto them. 
3TT g#T fog^VMIrlT 
gnFWdi 
m h 11 
ftdifor forw, g§TT 
ggr wggtgr #1wtt.-i 
% w wnsr 
#r: wit foug’qg ggifant^ii 
Those who are bom in the family of my 
father ever since the days of god Brahma; those 
who are born in the family of my mother; those 
who had been my servants in both these 
families; those attendants and dependants, 
friends, animals, pupils, trees, birds seen or 
unseen ones, those who had rendered help unto 
me; and those who united with me in different 
births- to all of them, I offer this libation ball 
with Svadha. 
Tlrtej ^foTfRT *11 
With these mantras, the pilgrim should offer 
the libation balls to the feminine gender too, 
beginning with mother. In that case, he should 
incorporate necessary alterations in the 
substantives and adjectives as per the feminine 
gender. 
WTfo TTRTfo ## fou^Wdqj 
mt, fot>i #d>difoiHn^ii 
Whether in one’s own Gotra or in the other 
man’s Gotra, the offering of libation balls, the

=== PAGE 462 ===

Chapter-111 
425 
performance of Sraddhas and the water 
gratification is futile if done separately. 
Having thrown gingelly seeds in a libation 
vessel and having filled that with auspicious 
water, he should perform the Parisicya rite 
thrice for all the Pipdas as per systematisation. 
He should then conclude the rite having bowed 
down. 
W W ■HUl'HlSJ iwnt ^rfTll^oll 
Having performed the rites for the manes 
and having sipped water, one may make to hear 
the witnessing gods. The Devas, Brahma, Isana 
and other likewise may become witness for me. 
By me having reached Gaya, redemption of 
manes has been done. 
3rm#r5fFr whi 
I have come to Gaya for the undertaking 
unto manes, O Deva! O Gadadhara! You are a 
witness thereof, O adorable one! I stand 
absolved of the threefold debts”. 
WlfrMUiSrt ^1 
j)d^d*IIW rT 
0 Narada! On all the spots, there may be the 
offering of libation balls like this. Having 
started from Preta mountain, one may take to 
libation offering in all the tlrthas in due order. 
zm ^%UTTffR#T rfll^ll 
Then one may throw oat meals suffused 
with water over Preta mountain by left hand as 
well as by the right one faced as such, O 
Devarsi. 
(Mantra) “Whosoever, my manes, stay as 
Pretas on the Pretaparvata, they all may get 
gratified with oat meals suffused with gingelly 
seeds. 
wn qfewraFj Trefcrmsmi 
May all the mobile and immobile beings 
beginning with Brahma and ending with a blade 
of grass be propitiated by means of the libation 
offered by me.” 
SlrlWkel fafrET: TS: ^1 
>ld« rPPI Mi5ir«4lr^(ri -T IfT^II^ S* II 
His manes shall be released from Pretahood, 
O Narada! The state of a Preta will never recur 
in his lineage because of his greatness. 
^TRT Sldfvitfl TsSTrTT TOlfanfa WTl 
By name has been illustrated Pretasila at 
Gayasiras for emancipation. Adigadadhara is 
stationed (there) in the form of the holy centre, 
Mantra etc.

=== PAGE 463 ===

Chapter-111 
425 
Chapter 111 
The Gaya Mahatmya in Uttaramanasa 
tirtha' 
w fafa: i 
' O 
1. A place, sacred one in Gaya, GDOAAMI, p. 214, 
also the Garigaloka near Nandiksetra at the foot of 
Haramukha peak. In Kasmlra Rajatararigin! Kosa, 
Uttara Manasa, a sacred lake spring out of 
Pundarika and Payoda lakes, the source of MrgyS 
and Mrga Kanta streams, Vayu Purana 111.4, 
Pauranika Kosa, p. 58.

=== PAGE 464 ===

426 
Vayu-Puraija 
Sanatkumara said- To begin with, I shall 
mention the procedure for holy rites in the five 
tlrthas in the Uttaramanasa. Having performed 
Acamana rite with hands (holding) Kusa grass, 
the pilgrim should sprinkle water over his head. 
RRl^ ?nfcrt <$c<3T %qfatfi|UgcfiHII3ll 
Then he should go to the Uttaramanasa and 
may take a holy bath with the chanting of 
following Mantra- “In Uttaramanasa lake, I am 
taking a bath with a view to have personal 
sanctification and for the sake of 
accomplishment of the success of the solar 
world and the like and for the emancipation of 
the manes”. Having performed gratification of 
the Devas, he should perform Sraddha with 
pindas (libation balls) offerings. 
W f| TRt fET HWJfrrtTRFrRI 
^4 ^4c4«h II 
Manasa is the lake here and from that one is 
Uttaramanasa. Having bowed to and offered 
obeisance to Surya (Sun), one may carry manes 
to the Suryaloka. 
(Mantra) “Obeisance be to the lord and 
sustainer (Sun) who assumes the forms of the 
Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, 
Rahu and Ketu ” 
m RRT %T WlfftoT *[RcT:ll$ II 
From Uttaramanasa, the pilgrim should 
proceed towards Southern Manasa, duly 
observing the rite of silence. This is called 
Udlcltlrtha. An Udfcltlrtha (northern pilgrimage 
place) is an afforder of emancipation. Having 
bathed here, a man goes to heaven along with 
his own body. 
fm fepmi 
RR: MfdadldJ l\911 
In the centre is the tlrtha Kanakhala, well- 
known in the three worlds. One taking bath 
there, shines like gold. The man attains sanctity. 
^•prr RRr xNr MdiiM^dMiiiii 
In the right part of that one is the tlrtha 
Daksinamanasa. And in Daksinamanasa, a 
tlrtha triad stand illustrated. 
Riven fggilq 
fRIcdTcfilid,4ft 
^^ifdMIMhjiJIddl'yi f^gr^ll^oll 
Having bathed in them with a proper order, 
one may perform Sraddha quite in a distinct 
norm (staying) in the Daksinamanasa. “I bathe 
here for personal purity, for the accomplishment 
of success in the Suryaloka, for the 
emancipation of the manes and for the sake of 
freedom from the torture of the killing of a 
Brahmana and the like. 
cfiTTOTf Rti d^Rlftl 
Rf RJTSxlft^l xf fl4ftch d€rfdJ<RII^II 
C\ Os t N ' 1 
0 Divakara (Sun)! I bathe here in 
Daksinamanasa. Having bowed down and 
adored the Sun, one may carry manes to the 
Suryaloka. 
Wlfk RT fRJsf fq^roit WH'Oira w 
II 
I bow down to the Sun-god for the purpose 
of satiety and for redemption of the manes and 
for the sake of sons, grandsons, wealth, 
prosperity, the elongation of age and health”. 
^frwi^4diyi-d4wmii 
csmt ftw sn^T: ^ni^ii

=== PAGE 465 ===

Chapter-111 
427 
(After this) one may go to the Phalgutlrtha. 
From that holy centre which is excellent among 
all the tlrthas, emancipation gets on to the 
performers of Sraddha of the manes, 
gw mf^TT fw: -CRr^Tcht 
§rf rR r^3f: II 
Being requested by Brahma formerly, Visnu 
became Phalguka earlier. When its dust 
particles were consecrated in the Daksinagni, it 
came to be known as Phalgutlrthaka. 
gift -eraTfui o 
rTlft I 
All the tlrthas in the Universe come over 
there to Phalgutlrtha with a view to take bath 
there along with Suras. 
tt^t 
f| *cRsftxnr 
Gariga is padodaka (originating from the 
feet) of Vi$nu and Phalgu is the Adigadadhara 
himself. He assumes the form of a liquid 
himself On that account, it is called 
Gangadhika (i.e. more sacred than Gariga). 
3TgW^*TTllli TTp? g: WMWtHI 
He who performs a thousand of thousands of 
AsVamedhas does not attain that fruit which one 
attains after reaching Phalgutlrtha. 
^TT: RF3T cPfot 
Having bathed at Phalgutlrtha, one may take 
to the Sraddha meant for gratification and one 
may bow to Pitamaha (Brahma). He should then 
offer pindas in the manner that has been 
prescribed in his own Sutra. 
qq: fyrcna ^cTRT JJW4I #1 
'Uglbrtldiq ?m%ll^ll 
“Obeisance to lord Siva, Isa, the (great) 
Purusa, to Aghoravamadeva and to Sanhbhu 
born instantaneously”. 
OTrRR cTTRTRrat 
After taking bath in Phalgutlrtha'and visiting 
lord Gad&dhara, the pilgrim shall redeem his 
own soul, the ten earlier ones and the ten 
subsequent generations. 
3Tf ^ cii^ki qq: ticffluiiq 
Having bowed to the god Gadadhara, one 
may adore him with this chant- “Om, obeisance 
be to Vasudeva and obeisance be to Sankarsana 
(Balarama), to Pradyumna, to Aniruddha as also 
to Sridhara, the consort of Sri (Vi$nu)”. 
g^Jvlich HdfrMdHl 
3Pjt: ^TR 
At Pancatlrtha1, having performed an 
ablution, a man may lead his manes to the 
Brahmaloka. One who does not bathe the 
Gadadhara by means of Pahcamrta nor 
embellishes it with flowers and garments, his 
Sraddha becomes futile. 
TTr^WfTTC: tKRTrM 
From the Nagakuta2 mountain to 
Grdhrakuta, from there to Yupa and from there 
upto Uttaramanasa- this becomes known (lit. 
spoken) as Gayasiras and that is called 
Phalgutlrtha (too). 
wrsf| farfir: ^trEt fsirft g^ri 
yPTTCRi spft 
niMI^^RHIcEirm^Alct f| RTTcfll^XII 
1. One of the five tirthasthanas at Gaya named Uttara 
Manasa, Daksina manasa, Kanakhala, Phalgu tirtha 
and Gadadharadeva mandira, vide Vayu Purana 
111.21, Pauranika Kosa, p. 284. 
2. Nagakuta- At Gaya is fully within Phalgu tirtha and 
Gayasiras. A bath herein is indestructible, Vayu 
Purana 111.23, Pauranika Kos'a, p. 237.

=== PAGE 466 ===

428 
Vayu-Purana 
On the first day, the performance of the rites 
has been declared. On the second day, the 
pilgrim should go to the Dharmaranya. At this 
place, Dharma performed a sacrifice. By a visit 
to this place, the attainment of Brahmaloka 
comes off, O Narada! 
nayciiart rnSnt 
He who having bathed in Matangavapi 
(Matarigasrama in Gaya)1, takes to Tarpana and 
Sraddha (gratification and obsequial rite) and 
bows down to Matangesa, (he attains 
Brahmaloka). He may chant the following 
sacred Mantra. 
wot TRJ H’lebMIc'Ug' '*Trf?(ltJT:l 
“Gods may bear evidence and the quarter- 
guardians may be the witnesses of the fact that I 
had come to this Matangavapi and the 
redemption of the manes has been effected by 
me . 
Vcf ft Vgffi W ejjft writ ! 
snf srfrgf Rt^iRV9ii 
This way, at the well called Brahmatlrtha, 
one may get a Sraddha performed. In the midst 
of that Kupa (well) and Yupa (sacrificial post), 
one gets redeemed all the manes. After bowing 
down to Dharma and Dharmesvara, one may 
bow down to the tree of Mahabodhi. 
sf^fcumfvicjrrMqi 
cEcfai flTPJTO ^11^6\\ 
“Obeisance be to you, the Asvattha (the holy 
fig tree) lord, having soul for Brahma, Visnu 
and Siva. The Bodhi tree is the (tree of 
enlightenment) for the performers and the 
redeemer of the manes. 
TITsT# TTrTT: I 
1. Pauranika Kosa, p. 391 vide Vayu Purana 111.25. 
May our kinsmen, of our lineage or of our 
mother’s family who attained to miserable 
condition, may attain to the state of heaven of 
perennial norm by your sight and touch. 
^^idW^imMir^Thls^ qgiu^u^oii 
The debt triad have been repaid by me after 
coming to Gaya, O lord of the trees! By your 
grace, I am freed from the great sinister wretch 
and the ocean of worldly existence.” 
tRftrr 
On the third day, the pilgrim should duly 
take bath in Brahmasaras and perform Sraddha 
with the offering of libation balls repeating the 
chants as per ritual, O son! 
TP cFTtfa 
“I bathe in this tirtha for the freedom from 
the debt triad”. Then in the midst of Kupa and 
Yupa, (by performing Sraddha), one may lead 
manes to the Brahmaloka. 
trnt 
This Yupa was raised by Brahma after 
performing a Yaga (sacrifice). Having offered 
this Sraddha at Brahmasaras, one gets redeemed 
all the manes. 
Having circumambulated the Yupa, one 
gains the fruit of Vajapeya sacrifice. Having 
bowed to Brahma, he may lead his manes to 
Brahmaloka. 
TfttsTf ^rmwRTif^ftniri 
'JTrSRT ^ fqgtITT g m&m TtT:ll^mi 
“Obeisance be to Brahma, the birthless one, 
the one having form of the birth of the Universe 
and the like. Obeisance be to the redeemer of 
the devotees and the manes.”

=== PAGE 467 ===

Chapter-111 
429

=== PAGE 468 ===

430 
Vayu-Purana 
of Gayasura, the Sraddha performed here is an 
indestructible one. 
3Trat «tThMrtilrmi fecT:ll 
fywjeiif<iid^ui i^FT gfa»?|d^ii*^ii 
The region below the mountain 
Mundapr$tha too constitutes PhalgutTrtha. The 
primeval lord Gadadhara is stationed here in 
both visual as well as unvisual forms. The foot¬ 
prints of Vi$nu is divine and destructive of sins 
at its very sight. 
tjdfcaJIMc- f^oq- 
This Visnupada is divine, endless, 
auspicious and imperishable. By touching and 
worshipping it, sins are dispelled. Whatever is 
given unto the manes becomes of inexhaustible 
benefit. 
■HftugcB ^rTOT^nTFRTI 
ftwqoqq411*4II 
By performing the Sraddha along with the 
Pinda offerings, one leads a thousand members 
of one’s family to the divine foot of Visnu 
which is auspicious and infinite. 
srng 4perr ^tt:i 
WS5AHT f?lcN< rWl ^:II*<?N 
SlfjIHlch <^yid 
By performing Sraddha at Rudrapada1, a 
man takes a hundred members of his lineage 
along with the self to Sivapura. Similarly a 
pilgrim performing the Sraddha etc. at the foot 
of Brahmapada leads hundred members of his 
family to Brahmaloka. 
^uiip^ik; srngt ftPTWjr qipTI 
1. Raudrapada Mahabhurata Vanaparva 82.100, p. 
506, Pt. I Gita Press, Gorakhpura 1956 edition. 
ddiP^Tii 
(for vPfcl) 1 
3TT^ ctMMilCFrf cWcTim ^11 
At Dakjinagni-pada, a Sraddha performer 
may lead the manes to the Brahmapura and at 
Garhapatya-pada, a Sraddha performer may 
gain the fruit of Vajapeya sacrifice. 
Having performed Sraddha at Ahavaniya, 
one gains the fruit of a horse-sacrifice. Having 
performed Sraddha at Sabhya-pada, one may 
gain the fruit of Jyotistoma. 
OTarwra? ^iri 
Having performed Sraddha at Avasthya- 
pada2, one may lead the manes to Brahmapura 
and having performed a Sraddha at Sakrapada, 
one may lead the manes to Indraloka. 
: «T^lr 14*11 
At the feet of Agastya, a Sraddha may lead 
one to lead the manes to Brahmapura. On 
Kraunca and Matanga padas, a Sraddha 
performer may lead the manes to Brahmaloka. 
dilfrM44ll44ll 
At Suryapada, he who perfomis Sraddha 
leads even the perpetrators of five great sins to 
Arkapura. At Kartikeya-pada, a Sraddha 
performer may lead manes to Sivaloka. 
4M(*uid>iu|c^Pj4d w4^fdJddll4 5ll 
He who performs Sraddha at the foot of 
Ganesa leads the Pitrs to Rudraloka. One who 
performs Tarpana rites in the holy spot 
Gajakarna leads his Pitrs to the resplendent 
heaven. 
2. The unusual words are covered by bonding thread 
and hence exact words are not legible.

=== PAGE 469 ===

Chapter-111 
431 
^ ^ srngt fi(dcW3< 
^=kt chiv^rt fanEDTt § tj^ii 
M «nfr %E cT? Jlcblfddflll^ll 
A Sraddha performer at the feet of other 
deities leads the manes to Brahmapura. Among 
all the footprints, those of Kasyapa, Visnu, 
Rudra and the pada of Brahma are illustrated as 
the most excellent of all. 
3HTKT g m4 rr i 
qrc^im^n 
At the beginning and at the end, an 
alternative one stands remembered. O Narada, it 
is conducive to the welfare of the performer of 
the Sraddha. 
^ f^r qRSrat gft: Wi 
sn^g 5if ftnwnimsn 
At the divine feet of Kasyapa, sage 
Bharadvaja performed Sraddha formerly. He 
became leading to offer libation balls unto the 
manes. 
^leRHcfewft rm ^ frfcfh 
m ■gft: ^twn^T:ii^oii 
Two hands, one white and the other black, 
then issued out breaking asunder the foot. On 
seeing the two hands, the sage entertained a 
doubt. 
cRT: WHItR TTRTt W^5 ^ HgPjft:ll 
chgquyq f^T ^pFT c*T cfTTlI 
fWr W HkMHlfa fwt cJctll^ll 
To his mother Santa questioned that great 
sage- “O Mother, is the pinda to be offered to 
the white hand or to the black hand, at the 
divine foot-print of Kasyapa? You know my 
father, (so) you speak out.” 
VIMYdW 
3TTTSF3T TT?W efeWira 
VTTTgraW: foot <$0J||i| gtSRT:l|^|| 
Santa spoke- “O (illustrious one!) O 
Bharadvaja! O highly wise one! Offer the 
libation ball unto krsna (the black one).” Then 
Bharadvaja attempted to give the Pinda to the 
black one. 
f? Trtfhnff: I 
^aJTT35l4t^T'M ftugchHIl^ II 
Then invisible as such, the white one spoke 
out- “You are my son bom from the uterus.” 
The black one spoke out- “It is my ksetra 
(progeny), hence you may offer libation balls to 
me.” 
rnTgRTw. ^ii 
Then the Svairini (wanton woman) said that 
the pindas are to be given both to Ksetrin (the 
husband) and the Bijin (the procreator). 
Bharadvaja then offered pinda to Kasyapa on 
his (obsequial) spot. By an aerial chariot yoked 
by a swan, both of them went to Brahmaloka. 
tptT srng ftu^Hiiii ?fm?r:i 
fttTT ^RST: ebiHMicttll^mi 
Rama attempted to offer the libation balls at 
the sacrifice at the Rudrapada. His father 
Dasaratha came there from heaven stretching 
his hand. 
Hl^lfrMUg clft THTt ^ cTcT:l 
TT4 ctfRSltSSefall^ll 
Rama did not offer the libation ball unto the 
hand. Then he placed the libation ball at 
Rudrapada. To Rama, frightened on violation of 
the edicts of scriptures, Dasaratha spoke. 
rTTfcTtet ^HI<*Hc||Mi|IM| 
^ ^ STt^ll^ll 
“O son! I have been redeemed by you. I 
shall attain Rudraloka. By an offering of 
libation ball unto the hand, my movement to 
heaven would have came about.

=== PAGE 470 ===

432 
Vayu-Purana 
fa g jm fat WlfaRU ft^rF5T3TT:l 
fawjHl* afawifaii^ii 
^rfan^: nfa ^faafeifafa: wi 
sp^cfaTS'^fl' <Vk^ fa il;ii 11 ^ ^11 
And you having reigned over the kingdom 
for a longer span, having protected the 
Brahmanas and subjects, having performed 
sacrifices with gifts, will go to Visnuloka along 
with all the people of Ayodhya as also along 
with insects and worms.” Having said so, this 
Das'aratha went to Rudraloka. 
#atr 3TTf*T ftfa 
$it% foatewt ^ r^ug^uu'aou 
RT5#|U3 fat rfiT:ll^ll 
At Visnupada, the excellent one, Bhisma 
invoked his father and performed the Sraddha. 
When he became ready to offer libation balls to 
the Pitrs, then emerged out two hands at 
Gayasiras of Santanu (his father). Bhisma did 
not offer the libation balls into the hands and 
offered them at the foot-print of Vi§nu. 
3TT? TSfcjS: H^IHI 
Then Santanu spoke satirised- “In the 
interpretation of Sastras, you are adamantine. 
May you have the vision extending to the three 
times. At the end, may Visnu be your goal. 
eMfay'l *T fafat rj cnUR^II 
<5<^n wsrezf ffapifagr wrcfa^n^ii 
As per discretion death may come about to 
you”. Having said this way, he attained 
emancipation. By adoring Kanakesa, Kedara, 
Narasimha and Vamana in the northern path, 
one may get redeemed all the manes. 
V: fqu§R|t|T HURT § Mfall 
Hfaifal faef '^nfal 4)^lHIH^:ll\9'iSII 
If Pindas are offered at Gayasiras invoking 
their name, persons (who are thus invoked, if) 
they are stationed in a hell, proceed to heaven 
and attain emancipation. 
Hfal ■qu-^yifc: f?ri$RT:l 
wfar fbrTT: 
All over, the mountain Mundapr§tha has 
been clearly marked by these footprints. All the 
manes go to Brahmaloka free from diseases. 
efarcjTfar wnf d<fen 
P^lfaRTT urnrfaf RST ffaTrJfall 
TehHFriufa faTRT RtpidHUl-dHRII^ H 
The head of the demon Heti was split into 
two and the mace {gada) was washed in this 
tlrtha. Therefore, this tlrtha is conducive to 
liberation. It is well-known as Gadalola. It is 
the most excellent of all excellent tlrthas. 
7T^TP^TT^RT^:l 
HR gJTtfa fa^fafa$fa 1^^911 
At Gadalola Mahatlrtha, owing to the 
cleansing of gada of Hari, “I bathe for the sake 
of accomplishment so that I may attain to the 
status of an indestructible norm.” 
SIRS STIIV94II 
On the fifth day, the pilgrim shall take his 
bath in the holy centre Gadalola and perform 
the Sraddha along with the offerings of libation 
balls. He will (thereby) carry the manes and 
himself to Brahmaloka. 
fafaNtffarr: Traf: ftgfa: w faRrmi^ii 
The pilgrim shall adore the Brahmanas 
incarnated as Brahma, He should propitiate 
them by means of Havyas1 and Kavyas2. If they 
1. V.S. Apte, p. 637, oblation offered to gods. 
2. V.S. Apte, p. 140, oblation of food offered to the 
deceased ancestors.

=== PAGE 471 ===

Chapter-112 
433 
are satisfied, all the deities along with the manes 
are satisfied. 
^ : i 
<T Wd^HJIioll 
A Sraddha performed at Aksayavata (a 
Banyan tree in Prayaga and Gaya)1 with cooked 
food will lead the pilgrim and his manes to the 
Brahmaloka of indestructible norm. 
ci *vci v r-_\ . Ar. l . r~~ N r* 
In vicinity of that Banyan tree, if a single 
Brahmana is fed with vegetables or even with 
water, it is as fruitful as feeding a crore (of 
Brahmanas), 
A gift of sixteen types deserves to be 
bestowed unto a chaplain at the Gaya tirtha. He 
should be duly honoured and should be offered 
clothes, scents etc. in the company of one’s 
sons. 
Near the ocean, in front of the Banyan tree, 
whosoever sleeps with the slumber of Yoga 
(mental concentration), assuming the 
framework of a child, to that one reclining by 
Yoga, an obeisance may be (offered). 
xf! 
Unto one having weapons made of Banyan 
tree, the one obviator of all sins and to one 
gifter of indestructible Brahman, obeisance be 
to that Aksayavata. 
<J^fr WffTT HTcST ?TWT^m:ll 
xT cT% 
In the Kali age, people are the followers of 
Mahesvara. On that account, Gadadhara has 
assumed the form of a phallus. I bow down to 
that Prapitamaha. 
srfafnrrnrr srnprt3> 
* * * 
1. Pauranika Kosa, p. 8.

=== PAGE 472 ===

II3W 
:ll 
Chapter 112 
The description of the Yajna (sacrifice) 
of the king Gaya 
O 
^ Tf^r TT3TT 
^ ^SJRTgjgRt WIT 3ST? ^ W^ll^ll 
Sanatkumara spoke- The king Gaya, 
performed a sacrifice (Yajna) abounding in food 
and gifts, wherein the counting of the heaps of 
riches or materials is very difficult of being 
recounted. 
%3FOT cTT WT HOT OT>n V fefo TTTOTT:I 
tot ii 
Like the sand particles in the universe and 
like the stars in the heaven, that very way by the 
gems and gold and the like, the gifts became 
uncountable. 
^ grfrsjfcT hotti 
y^'M-rPvi flsrrtfOT ^jf%rn:ii^n 
Formerly no one has done like this and no 
one will be doing like this in future. The 
Brahmanas who were well-honoured and 
adored in the different lands, praised it like this. 
wi fspneire^pEpT cit fftirT snfcRi 
3t$otot3J % grrimi 
mnJTT % f?HT: TOT SOTH sTOTT^OT:! 
WTTTfTT WRI WOT gT^nfft OT9TIIM! 
Visnu and others who were gratified spoke

=== PAGE 473 ===

434 
Vayu-Purana 
to Gaya- “You may ask for a boon .” And Gaya 
then requested them- “May those Brahmanas 
who were cursed earlier by Brahma, become 
sanctified. Let them be honoured in the 
sacrifices. May this city be known as Gayapurl 
after my name and let it be as well-known as the 
city of god Brahma.” 
RRRRT RT ^fcfT RTT:I 
rr?i r^rhirri Rt R*ftn$n 
“May it be so”, this way having conferred 
the boon, the gods became out of sight 
thereafter. And Gaya, having enjoyed the 
objects of enjoyments, went to the excellent 
Vi$nuloka. 
rr rrt^rI ^ ^fejyiw rnf^g3n:iiv3ii 
In the city called Visala1, there was a king 
named Visala, issueless or sonless. He spoke to 
the Brahmanas- “How can I beget sons etc.?” 
Then to Visala, spoke the Brahmanas. 
rrpr hr Rtf 
fayne-nsfa rrt^ 
“By the offering of the pindas at Gaya, all 
shall happen as per your (desires) (lit. of 
yours).” Visala offered pindas at Gayasiras and 
begot sons. 
3HRTSSRIT?T fRR TtK RRRRRRtoi 
% RR ^5 fRR: Rtcf fqVlHch^ll^ II 
Having seen three person in the sky white, 
red and dark-complexioned, he spoke out- 
“Who are you all?” One of them, the white one, 
spoke to Visala. 
1. Name of a tirtha according to Puranas : Pauranika 
Kosa, p. 470 : Name of Sarasvat! preferred in the 
country Gaya of King Gaya. Ibid according to 
MahabhSrata Salya Parva, 38.20-21, p. 226. 
srFTrff Wrii cR 'HRU 
wrm fee g 
^fwfcU: -Part III GPE, 1957. 
fRRRf RRR 
RR RRT ftRTT Trfit R^I?T RTR^RRtll^o II 
“I, the white one, am your father who have 
come here from Indraloka. O son, my father is 
this red one. He had killed a Brahmana, a 
sinister wretch. 
SIR fading: c£BJT HiRRt RR yifddkl 
STrMrRT^ Wl RR^ cc|fRV)d<Rd:ll^ll 
This black one is your grandsire by whom 
many sages had been killed. They had fallen 
into the hell called Avici. They two got 
emancipated by your offering ofpinda. 
fRRR fMrimgl^R R^R RfRcTTRffRI 
jftoiRlfafa RRlR IRRT ^RRfTRRII^II 
O destroyer of enemies, you offered the 
water libation saying, “I shall propitiate my 
fathers, grandfathers and likewise the great 
grandfathers”. 
rtrRr rrri 
5%: ^RT IRRT RR RRTR: WlRRRRII 
RR rI: ft^Rlt R RtfcZJT RfewRTlI^II 
As a result thereof and in view of your 
above statement, we have come here 
simultaneously, O excellent man! O son, an 
emancipation has been effected by you. We 
shall go to the excellent heaven. This way the 
emancipation of highest order of the manes 
must be effected by all sons. 
xj ll^rq f%TT ^TUT^J 'gefo'MI 
Having reigned for good many times and 
having enjoyed the enjoyment difficult of 
obtainment and having performed sacrifices 
endowed with alms or gifts, you may go to 
Visnupura thereafter. 
■Qcj" HcejchI IKrfT f^cf ^Trf: I 
^TOR: R? RfrnRTRT^gTf^R rrmi^ii 
This way having a boon acquired, the king 
having reigned, went to the heaven. The

=== PAGE 474 ===

Chapter-112 
435 
Pretaraja (goblins lord) along with Pretas 
(goblins) attained heaven, thanks to 
Gayasraddha. 
Tlcf: ct>Fc^<siq)cU 
tnr qrn=rr ^ii^ii 
^ £R -RTTI 
^TTc^T WSTT^SSRt ^>11^11 
Some Preta (goblin) for the sake of 
emancipation, spoke to a Vanij (merchant)- 
“Please offer pinda in my name at Gayasiras for 
the sake of my release from the state of ghost. 
You accept all my riches. Having taken all that 
money, you incur the expenditure of Sraddha at 
Gaya. 
SR^rW W?T f«i t cj-dciH^qj 
'WWlfa iWRJFi qu^qiisMIdcIR^II^II 
I have given you five-sixteenth part of my 
wealth. I have mentioned my name (etc.) in the 
proper manner ” 
W SldTraW 
^Tsf wfM^UlWdt c^ll^ll 
Having gone to Gaya along with kinsmen, 
the man offered pindas to Pretaraja at 
Gayasiras. It was only after that, that he offered 
the pindas to his own manes. 
Tic* ^TOTST 8T? f^GOTT OwillRoll 
Preta got released from the state of Preta 
and the merchant came back to his house. Thus 
is the holy centre of Gaya, of Sambhu, Visnu 
and Ravi. 
OTlftHISSJ JlPJdldli 
tmxn: W. WI STW: 
o 
qftusgj e§?rqii^ii 
The pilgrim should observe fast then at 
Gayatri tlrtha1 stationed near the river 
Mahanadl. Having bathed in front of Gayatri, 
one may take to the morning worship as such. 
Having offered Sraddha along with pinda, one 
carries his lineage to the state of Brahmanhood. 
^TTcerc TRTferr: wr rt: i 
TTszn^ f^rn 
Fmu^cJh cR: ^frj^i'i 
After taking bath in the Samudita tlrtha in 
front of Savitr! and performing Sandhya at the 
midday junction, the pilgrim leads hundred 
members of his lineage to heaven. The offering 
of pinda then may be taken out of desire for the 
redemption of the manes. 
SMlwWrfldl^ ■RlrcTr ^yrfarfyi 
www Trrar| 
^^dloHbyiHlMI-MThfU^yj^dJR ? II 
After taking sacred bath in the holy water 
called At Praclsarasvati tlrtha1 as per ritual and 
performing Sandhya at eventide, one may lead 
manes to Visnuloka. A performer of Sandhya 
triad becomes free from the sin of negligence of 
performing Sandhyas in many births. 
fcWHRMi W W1PI 
One becomes liberated by performing 
Sandhya on three occasions in the holy centre 
Lelihana, in Visala tlrtha, at the ds'rama 
(hermitage) of Bharata and in Mundaprstha 
mountain bearing mark of foot and near 
Gadadhara. 
(f$T HTSS^HIjfRli filHchUlqyy *T| 
WOT fcnig^l ^11? Ml 
(A person who takes holy ablution and 
offers pindas) at tlrtha in Akasagariga and in 
those called Girikarnamukhas, leads hundred 
members of his lineage to Brahmaloka. 
1. Pauranika Kosa, p. 152, a tlrtha in Gaya wherein 
“Trisandhya” offering is very important. 
2. Pauranika Kosa, p. 340, a tlrtha in Gaya where 
having bathed and offered Sandhya, worshipper 
goes to Visnuloka.

=== PAGE 475 ===

436 
Vayu-Purana 
$cRUT wf JRlfrVf^l 
■RTcTt qTgt ^d(Uili 
He who takes bath in the divine river 
VaitaranI leads his manes to heaven. A person 
who takes bath and who gifts away kine in 
VaitaranI, redeems his 3 x 7 = 21 lineages. 
^ -^frET ^rUUili jj ^TT?I 
This way, timely speaking and timely 
speaking, once again that in VaitaranI, O 
Narada! Twenty one lineages, they talk of, 
(which) one may redeem, there is no doubt in it. 
qT W IwTt qiq t#cRlfqfqT| 
Wddlorf fqfOlt dUOTW 
That which is named as VaitaranI, the 
stream well-known in the world triad, that one 
descended down in this Gayaksetra for 
redeeming the manes. 
d1«rtIwAq *ri 
a^rcft ^rur w qft# wti qi:iR 11 
By a fasting for three nights and by an 
alliance with the tirthas, without having gifted 
gold and kine, a man takes birth as a penury 
stricken one. 
^ddbc^l qf^TT xt qfR^I 
(VHidi: wrt qq qq qq^qrii^oii 
3TOT TlTg^nqr qr:i 
A man who takes ablutions in Ghrtakulya, 
Madhukulya1, Devika, MahanadI and in the 
celebrated place of meeting of Sila, declared as 
Madhusrava, attains the benefit of ten thousand 
horse-sacrifices. 
^qqr qster qn 
ejjqnqt wq^r (qwiH)* q^fqqqii} 
Having offered a Sraddha with libation balls 
along with the offering of pindas, the man 
1. A stream near Visnupada in Gaya vide Vayu Purana 
112.30, p. 608, Pauranika K.osa, p. 395. 
redeems a hundred generations of his lineage 
and leads them to Visnuloka. 
x4iH'<Wdqii 
e&rfoftzf qqqqiut fqq^: II 
One who offers pindas in Dasasvamedha, 
Hamsatlrtha, Amarakantaka2, Kotitlrtha and 
Rukmakunda leads his manes to heaven. 
trrcw qgqjqqt q$q qi 
efftMai qr: qqTqarr q q: 113 311 
qqfePT SRT^IT q<qi<q:l 
Mi^u^vi^Vivii qqq wfqr^qK<*:ii^^n 
By taking bath in VaitaranI, Ghrtakulya, 
Madhukulya and Kotitlrtha and visiting 
Kotlsvara, the pilgrim becomes a rich 
Brahmana, well-versed in all the Vedas for a 
crore of births. Bowing to Markandeyesa and 
Kotlsa, he shall become the redeemer of his 
manes. 
wrarfenqq^ qr&qr qg ?raR:i 
TgF^T qlwi ^ gqHiqqd WII^MI 
Formerly, in the forest called Rukmaparijata, 
Sankara sported secretly along with Parvatl for 
ten thousand Yugas. 
qfH%r: tqqrgHTTsf qTfenqqq qq:i 
ggr ?pqr qg^q- qqwir^3f^Enqq>:ii^^ii 
Marlci went to this Parijata forest for 
gathering fruits and flowers. Having seen, he 
was cursed by Mahesa (Siva) whereby a 
destroyer of comforts. 
2. Vide verse 32, Vayu Purana 112.32, Amarakantaka 
also called Amrakuta Arigirah, observed a ladder of 
heaven here after Agnihotra. It is a well-known 
field of Jalesvara of Narmada having Rudrakoti hill 
all around. It is more important than Kuruksetra. 
Here golden Kus'a emanate at the bank of Narmada. 
Towards Kalihga therein is a lake or tank here, 
Jvalasara, Pauranika Kosa, p. 26. GDOAAMI N.L. 
ey, p. 4. It is also a part of Mikul (Mekala) hill in 
Gondwana in the territory of N&gapura in which 
Naramda and Sona have their sources.

=== PAGE 476 ===

Chapter-112 
437 
5:# fWTI 
p: ITt^TcT 4 TwfnTte y^-dMUil^'Oll 
“You may become aggrieved.” This way 
frightened by that one, Marlci eulogised Siva. 
Pleased as such, Siva (Sambhu) spoke to 
Marfci- “You may ask for a boon of highest 
order”. 
'^fr+rw fvwiifi: wfr wtTii^^ii 
“There may be freedom from or immunity 
;om the curse of yours”, Marlci spoke to 
Sankara. “May your immunity or emancipation 
come about at Gaya”, this way spoken by Siva, 
he went to Gaya. 
dTOT dlbURji R fet: ^PJrTrTt R<T:II^II 
Stationed on the Sila, he performed penance 
that was difficult of performance by anyone. 
Marlci, cursed by Isvara, attained to dark 
complexion or form of Krsna earlier. And by 
austere penance there, that Brahmana attained 
to whiteness. 
xrftfcf ^ eft pT % pg;i 
fcpr«i wfa ^ irrapii^oii 
Hari spoke to Marlci then- “O son! Ask for 
a boon.” Marlci spoke to Madhava- “On your 
getting pleased, what can become difficult of 
attainment? 
W T^lcRtl 
^ fp trt;n'tj 
“I stand immune from the curse of Hara 
(Siva). May this Sila be sacred and may it be an 
emancipator of the manes”. “May it be so”*- 
having said so, he (Hari) went to heaven. 
fpfavHT wrftuTt WW W: ^rfe-.i 
m p ftpsrg ^rr4^€riVrp:ll^^ll 
Having gone over to the PuskarinI (lotus 
lake) of the denizens of heaven, a man becomes 
pure. Whatever is offered to the manes here 
becomes perennial. 
WTWt fp fcTJHMui TTR^-.I 
flpfWcR W 
He who takes bath there, goes to heaven 
along with his own body. He gets rid of 
sinfulness like a snake getting rid of its slough. 
That lotus grove, thus the sacred one, is adhered 
to by the merit-endowed ones or merit-doing 
ones. 
TTTUffVlRT 4 ^5rT^Rt R^rTI 
ifirftrrer aw % ^ ^11**11 
A white stone slab (Sila) exits there 
whereupon a Sraddha may become free from 
decay. O sage! Yudhisthira went over to that 
one for performing a Sraddha. 
W5WT f?THTOT W xWJR 
At that time, he was spoken by Pandu- 
“Hand over the libation ball (pinda) unto me.” 
Avoiding the hand, he placed the libation ball 
on the rock. 
fTTRrat fau3df4-{ Pit oyw^:i 
cIT c^t TTHT <p 1^^11^6,11 
3Te&nzgj cT Wlf W ^ 5TT6TT f| tRWiin^ll 
By the offering of libation balls (pinda) on 
the Sila (rock), the son of Vyasa (Pandu), 
became pleased or overjoyed. He conferred a 
boon on his own son- “May you rule over the 
kingdom on the surface of the earth, void of 
criminals absolutely. You are my saviour, O 
son! 
qlfSRTPT ^Wr-?R6hWT^4 TOII^dll 
You may proceed to heaven along with your 
body surrounded by brothers. Sanctified by a 
mere sight, you may lead to heaven those 
stationed in naraka (hell).”

=== PAGE 477 ===

438 
Vayu-Puraija 
'$^cktn wg: ■jtrtt 
^dg-PI 91# 5l#i ^rf^fTII^^II 
This way having spoken, Pandu attained the 
perennial and undecaying region. A Sraddha at 
the spot of Matariga may lead manes to the 
Brahmaloka. 
rffi w f^nrimon 
Having churned the fire within the interior 
of a Sami (tree) in the company of Visnu and 
others, Vidhi (Brahma) secured the Tlrtha for 
the sake of a Yajiia. It is well-known in the 
world triad. 
fosPJTT 
rl <p}ot fqt^l ^RfjSiqqidim VII 
That tlrtha named Makha1 is an emancipator 
of manes. Having bathed and having done 
gratification, an offerer of pindas (libation balls) 
may attain to emancipation. 
ftRFScpf 
He may lead the manes to heaven after 
bowing to Angaraka (Mars) and Is'vara (Siva) at 
the confluence. By the offering of libation balls 
at Gaya, one may gain the fruit of Asvamedha. 
WTcfict WRTSj rl tTHTlf^TRI 
ntraqiPTr w^rh: # ■Rmra^rim^ii 
After bowing to Bhasmanatha at 
Bhasmakuta, one may redeem the manes. 
Having sins obviated, one may become 
emancipated and may bathe at the confluence. 
gfg crfwt qfawT:i 
gfgqt fgfwgcfiqim^n 
The sacrifice named Asvamedha was 
performed by Vasistha, the excellent sage. From 
sacrifice issued out Sambhu who said- UA boon 
you may choose, O Vasistha”! 
1. Pauranika Kosa, p. 396. Makra tTrtha. 
■5n%% q eifamsft flier qgrsftr ^ ^rfei 
clWc4 eJH d^rdcKell fwr:)|IVA 
To him, spoke Vasistha- “O Siva! If you are 
pleased with me, then it deserves you to stay 
here, O Devesa!” “May it be so”, having said 
so, Siva stood there. 
fWgt ^eh'K'U^ rll 
pnr^T q^Tssr wmx sr^Hich q^fagqim^n 
An offerer of libation balls at 
Dhenukaranya2 at Kamadhenupadas3, after 
taking bath, bowing down and adoring them, 
leads the manes to Brahmaloka. 
cFTtfrm W4Tflfr g«3'IWflTd:l 
mm su&rfa* mm «r^Timv9ii 
By taking ablution and performing Sraddha 
etc. at Kardamala, holy centre in Gayanabhi, 
near the Mundaprstha mountain, one gets 
absolved of all the debts of his manes. 
qfrirat: W^Ti 
mx mx fwr i^r f^f^rr:im<iii 
One should worship (the deities) Phalgu, 
Candl, Smasanaksf, Marigala and others. At 
Gaya, by a release of a bull calf, one redeems 
twentyone generations of his family. The gods 
and the sages who have conquered their senses 
are stationed here and there (in Gaya). 
3TTST T5TER sq lysWcgfPJgTf^l-Td: I 
35HPTT ?lcn^c5l sl^JcdT^ q^fpTRim^ll 
Mediating upon primeval Gadadhara by the 
offering of pindas and the like, one redeems 
hundred generations of his lineage and leads the 
manes to Brahmaloka. 
wraf mm w mm:i 
mxr vmxRm qfogrfw.-ii^oii 
Gayagaya, Gayaditya, Gayatrl, Gadadhara, 
2. Pauranika Kosa, p. 255. At Gaya. 
3. Ibid., p. 100.

=== PAGE 478 ===

Chapter-112 
439 
Gaya and the demon Gaya- these six Gayas are 
the bestowers of emancipation. 
to ^T; T^rBrRT ^R:l 
^ R to Wn ^Tf^nTII^ ^11 
This description of Gaya, the sacred one, 
whichever man may read out perennially and 
which may hear about it with favour, he attains 
to supreme state. 
qici^l *1*IK£4H ftto: WJ^T:I 
wto <tfs ?tfs ift 
A merited man may even make to study the 
anecdote of Gaya unto Brahmanas. When the 
Gaya Sraddha is performed by one, the merit 
then becomes earned definitely. 
TraroT t#ttr ^ atom: Rmtoi 
to TFar^R mrsu^ii 
Concentrated as such, who may practise the 
greatness of Gaya, by that one stands performed 
Rajasuya and Asvamedha sacrifices. 
fttor totoft mtoto 
rTRT Tf? ftiRT r^ft: TTORW 11 ^ 11 
He who writes this book or adores this book 
or causes others to write it, the Goddess of 
fortune, LaksmI, will stay delightedly in his 
house. 
jot f?rsf?r jwccti 
*Nitotoftd m hw ^ toriif,mi 
This anecdote is sacred and if this book 
exists in a house, there is no fear of a snake, 
fire, thief and the like there. 
to#* <r tom w wwtii^n 
At the time of Sraddha, he who reads out 
this excellent Gaya mahatmya, it will be 
considered by his manes on a par with Gaya- 
Sraddha even if it is against strict injunctions in 
the Sastras. 
to toft tcto* to fsift rm ti 
to tow to m tort u 
O Sage, if anyone knows, listens or reads 
this Gayakhyana (the anecdote of Gaya), all the 
sacred places of the world triad are visited by 
him. 
Rmjpnft jftjfcTTO 
wtt to "siTsar ftor 
■O 
TPTftRTC 6\\ 
Suta spoke- Sanatkumara, having narrated 
the sacred anecdote with favour unto the 
excellent sage, went to his own hermitage 
which was endowed with sacred forests or 
groves, after doing farewell to his music 
preceptor (i.e. Narada). 
wnpRi 
fia^rr : 11 n R * i 
* -k -k 
Thus ends Volume II of Vayu-Mahapurana