=== PAGE 1 ===

THE VISNU-PURANAM
BOOK I
WATT:

CHAPTER 1
Wwe SEATT: 1

Cagereron, wert wit derer we:,
WIRTH)
ao TA WTA aTgeATA
find & qusttenat aret fester
wees eae TeET TIT I
OM ! glory to Vasudeva'— Victory be to
you, Pundarikaksa, adoration be’ to you,
Visvabhavana; glory be to you, Hrsikega,
Mahapurusa, and Parvaja’.
Wea Fe TAR: JA
uifergty-Ratt-are-aera: 1
WA-GaMS- TTA TTS T:
a aiseg feuplfa-yfet-githe: nt 201
May that Visnu, who is the existent,
imperishable, Brahma, who is Ivara, who is
spirit;* who with the three qualities’ is the
cause of creation, preservation, and
destruction; who is the parent of nature,
intellect, and the other ingredients of the
universe’; be to us the bestrew of
understanding, wealth and final emancipation.
wore feral fertet wenety wforacr
We woes aera yor Arar gH
fereregeror AecerAATTTAY
eigmenfenest afesararerr X11
wnt yhat aaqaifeatrry
Aaa: atoms wftraentirarer a 411
Having adored Visnu’, the lord of all, and
paid reverence to Brahma and the rest®; having
also saluted the spiritual preceptor, I will
narrate a Purana equal in sanctity to the Vedas,
Maitreya,’ having saluted him reverentially,

thus addressed Paragara, the excellent sage, the
grandson of Vasistha, who was versed in
traditional history and the Puranas; who was
acquainted with the Vedas and the branches of
science dependent upon them; and skilled in
law and philosophy; and who had performed
the morning rites of devotion.

Wa sara

wail fe aqreerratanfiaet We
entgrentar Galton Sargtht aerATTN «II
OTE YRAS ART ATTA
mere wdereg wag ashy fafea:i 01
Aisefirenth anit: stg carat ger TT
aya year sat werart sfaeafen c1

wrag og ger aaa

ciate ger aa crates aa a8

aamonft ynht Fars wTaT

AAR UAT TPIT TT Ya oll

Wide tert wat gfe

Maitreya said— Master! I have been
instructed by you in the whole of the Vedas,
and in the institutes of law and of sacred
science; through your favour, other men, even
though they be my foes, cannot accuse me of
having been remiss in the acquirement of
knowledge. I am now desirous, oh you who
are profound in piety! to hear from you, how
this world was, and how in future it will be?
What is its substance, oh Brahman, and
whence proceeded animate and inanimate
things? Into what has it been resolved, and
into what will its dissolution again occur?
How were the elements manifested? Whence
proceeded the gods and other beings? What
are the situation and extent of the oceans and
the mountains, the earth, the sun, and the
planets?

=== PAGE 2 ===

2 THE VISNU-PURANAM
Rardat wen dey AY Werf a gat Afarenta wed act waHA APA:
merry arifaacuia upniaaernry arprererraata rN ATTHT: TN BV
HUTT SUS YEIMAET FT LI vantneniorrderarcet wea: |
tafdnttarrs aft are aptater wer mle are aT Aa TaN BH
ASMSTMUTETT BUTTS SATAN V3 aret Prematdeteterranteiir:1

enigs gretoretat aan ase

Raftresrag wed tact afer es

Berl Waewant Heer wT ATA

Raretariat ASTATTATTAN Re

What are the families of the gods and
others, the Manus, the period, called
Manvantaras, those termed Kalpas, and their
sub-divisions, and the four ages: the events
that happen at the close of a Kalpa, and the
terminations of the several ages'': the
histories, oh great Muni of the gods, the sages,
and kings; and how the Vedas were divided
into branches (or schools), after they had been
arranged by Vyasa; the duties of the
Brahmanas, and the other tribes, as well as of
those who pass through the different orders of
life ? All these things 1 wish to hear from
you, grandson of Vasistha. Incline your
thoughts benevolently towards me, that I may,
through your favour, be informed of all I
desire to know.
WII Sarr

ag 39 nis onftiste goa

faq: frat & stray afast agare gu 2g

feonfiamgent teen afarat wat

Serene: Bre Area ATATGeT I go

aaisé Terat wt fare BAT

retereer preterethey Wa Freee: ke

aa: Wefteronttg ag wet: Fae:

Trae werent afer wferartg: 1 ¢e

ear ae Wea a!

Tere aE fget farfeet TAM Rou

qerras wale wet Wraat Hea:

SAM A GH: BT TA: STITH FAN 2 WW

wea & ferred arareret fe ATA Iw

Parasara replied— Well inquired, pious
Maitreya, You recall to my recollection that
which was of old narrated by my father's
father, Vasistha, I had heard that my father had
been devoured by a Raksasa employed by
Visvamitra: violent anger seized me, and I
commenced a sacrifice for the destruction of
the Raksasas: hundreds of them were reduced
to ashes by the rite, when, as they- were about
to be entirely extirpated, my grandfather Vasis
tha thus spoke to me: Enough, my child; let
your wrath be appeased : the Raksasas are not
culpable: your father's death was the work of
destiny. Anger is the passion of fools; it
becomes not a wise man. By whom. It may be
asked, is any one killed? Every man reaps the
consequences of his own acts. Anger, my son,
is the destruction of all that man obtains by
arduous exertions, of fame, and of devout
austerities; and prevents the attainment of
heaven or of emancipation. The chief sages
always shun wrath: be not you, my child,
subject to its influence. Let no more of these
unoffending spirits of darkness be consumed.
Mercy is the might of the righteous’?

Ue mat Aareaytat wee

SHA ETA Tt MURATA Ft

Wa: Wa: GT Tay afaBt yfrae:

TOMA AT YA YOR TAIT: YAN EM
faeraet ened: qarerafere:1

agar weit Aa Yor: VON

a weft aarearg yen aTAT

TA TATEMT aL PTT ereeaf 2 eH
wat war: HUT at: Fa

A THAT SETA HSTATAN VV

=== PAGE 3 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 1

3

qourdigaaat wary ace ufacatan
Ramus TaTag AT ATTN 3 ot
yaw a faga w advan Aft:
Teraraearern ta ace faa 8 gt
Aer wa wre afaat afsrarte:
Wore ages & weir afereafarn 3 ait

Being thus admonished by my venerable
grandsire, I immediately desisted from the rite,
in obedience to his injunctions, and Vasistha,
the most excellent of sages, was connect with
me. Then arrived Pulastya, the son of
Brahma," who’ was received by my
grandfather with the customary marks of
respect. The illustrious brother of Pulaha said
to me: Since, in the violence of animosity. you
have listened to the words of your progenitor,
and have exercised clemency, therefore you
shall become learned in every science: since
you have forborne, even though incensed, to
destroy my posterity, I will bestow upon you
another boon, and you shall become the author
of a summary of the Puranas; you shall know
the true nature of the deities, as it really is;
and, whether engaged in religious rites, or
abstaining from their performance,'* your
understanding, through my favour, shall be
perfect, and exempt from doubts. Then my
grandsire Vasistha added: Whatever has been
said to you by Pulastya, shall assuredly come
to pass.

fa ya fees yore @ iT
ages aq Olt art rereTfaet WANE BH
sé aerate F Ade uitgER
Yuoreieat aerR at Prater aaraerq 3 sit
fat: Tar TEE WY Aaa UY
feafe-danarcisat soitser et gut
ster sitfereryyeret wermigt weretseara: 1 Qu
Now truly all that was told me formerly by
Vasistha, and by the wise Pulastya, has been
brought to my recollection by your questions,

and I will relate to you the whole, even all you
have asked. Listen to the complete

compendium of the Puranas, according to its
tenor. The world was produced from Visnu : it
exists in him: he is the cause of its continuance
and cessation: he is the world.'®

wie

NOTES
1. ait FH aTazarT An address of this kind, to
one or other Hindu divinity, usually introduces
Sanskrit compositions, especially those considered
sacred. The first term of this mantra or brief prayer.
Om or Ornkara, is well known as a combination of
letters invested by Hindu mysticism with peculiar
sanctity, In the Vedas it is said to comprchend all
the gods; and in the Puranas it is directed to be
prefixed to all such formulae as that of the text.
Thus in the Uttara Khanda of the Padma Purana:
'The syllable Om, the mysterious name, or Brahma,
is the leader of all prayers: let it therefore, O
lovely-faced, (Siva addresses Durga. .) be employed
in the beginning of all prayers:’ aig: wrel wer
amt waa aia Fam yw QU
eee a the same authority, one of the
mystical imports of the term is the collective
enunciation of Visnu expressed by A, of Sri his
bride intimated by u, and of their joint worshipper
designated by M. A whole chapter of the Vayu
Purana is devoted to this term. A text of the Vedas
is there cited: ahfiereat wet ‘Om. the
monosyllable Brahmé;' the latter meaning either the
Supreme Being or the Vedas collectively, of which
this monosyllable is the type. It is also said to
typify the three spheres of the world, the three holy
fires, the three steps of Visnu etc.3iftrera at Jererat
crest: | fasta Frequent meditation
upon it, and repetition of it, ensure release from
worldly existence, Sagar we st
set TE a en Waa
eaaaen: | atact Prfet wert fia wetter: See
also Manu, II. 76. Vasudeva, a name of Visnu or
Krsna, is according to its grammatical etymology, a
patronymic derivative implying son of Vasudeva.
The Vaisnava Puranas, however, devise other
explanations: see the next chapter, and again, b. VI.
5. .
2. In this stanza occurs a series of the
appellations of Visnu: I. Pundarikaksa, having eyes
like a lotus, or heart-pervading; or Pundarika is
explained supreme glory, and Aksa imperishable:

=== PAGE 4 ===

4

THE VISNU-PURANAM

the first is the most usual etymon, 2. ViSvabhavana,
the creator of the universe, or the cause of the
existence of all things. 3. Hrshikega, lord of the
senses. 4. Mahapurusa, great or supreme spirit;
purusa meaning that which abides or is quiescent in
body (puri sete). 5. Purvaja, produced or appearing
before creation; the Orphic ‘npm@toy ovos'. In the
fifth book, c. 18, Visnu is described by five
appellations, which are considered analogous to
these; or, I, Bhdtatma, one with created things, or
Pundarikaksa; 2. Pradhandtma, one with crude
nature, or Vigvabhavana : 3. Indriyatma, one with
the senses, or Hrshikesa : 4. Paramatma, supreme
spirit, or Mahapurusa : and Atmi, soul; living soul,
animating nature and existing before it, or Parvaja.

3. Brahma, in the neuter form, is abstract
supreme spirit: and Ivara is the Deity in his active
nature, he who is able to do or leave undone, or to
do any thing in any other manner than that in which
it is done: eiradaen ad wae: |

4. Puman which is the same with Purusa,
incorporated spirit. By this and the two preceding
terms also the commentator understands the text to
signify that Visnu is any form of spiritual being that
is acknowledged by different philosophical
systems, or that he is the Brahma of the Vedanta,
the Isvara of the Patafijala, and the Purusa of the
Sarhkhya school.

5. The three qualities, to which we shall have
further occasion to advert, are Satya (ar),
goodness or purity, knowledge, quiescence; Rajas,
foulness, passion, activity; and Tamas, darkness,
ignorance, inertia.

6. Pradhanabuddhyadisih. This predicate of the
Deity distinguishes most of the Puranas from
several of the philosophical systems, which
maintain, as did the earliest Grecian systems of
cosmogony, the eternal and independent existence
of the first principle of things, as nature, matter, or
chaos. Accordingly, the commentator notices the
objection. Pradhina being without beginning, it is
said how can Visnu be its parent? To which he
replies, that this is not so, for in a period of worldly
destruction (Pralaya), when the Creator desists
from creating, nothing is generated by virtue of any
other energy or parent. Or, if this be not
satisfactory, then the text may be understood to
imply that intellect (Buddhi) etc, are formed

through the materiality of crude nature, or
Pradhdna.

7. Visnu is commonly derived in the Puranas
from the root Vis, to enter, entering into, or
pervading the universe, agreeably to the text of the
Vedas, gel \ "Having created that
(world), he then afterwards enters into it; being, as
our comment observes, undistinguished by place,
time, or property; Saran oTaSerTar!
According to the Matsya Purana the name alludes
to his entering into the mundane egg: according to
the Padma Purana, to his entering into or com-
bining with Prakrti, as Purusa or spirit: 8 Ga Wary
fae spramnfaaa 1 In the Moksa Dharma of the
Mahabharata, s. 165, the word is derived from the
root vi. signifying motion, pervasion, production,
radiance; or, irregularly, from krama, to go with the
particle vi, implying, variously, prefixed.

8. Brahma and the rest is said to apply to the
series of teachers through whom this Purana was
transmitted from its first reputed author Brahma, to
its actual narrator, the sage ParaSara. See also b, VI.
c. 8,

9, The Guru, or spiritual preceptor, is said to be
Kapila or Sdrasvata: the latter is included in the
series of teachers of the Purana, Pardsara must be
considered also as a disciple of Kapila, as a teacher
of the Sarnkhya philosophy.

10. Maitreya is the disciple of Parasara, who
relates the Visnu Purana to him; he is also one of
the chief interlocutors in the Bhagavata, and is
introduced in the Mahabharata (Vana Parva, s. 10.)
as a great Rsi, or sage, who denounces
Duryodhana's death. In the Bhagavata be is also
termed Kausharavi, or the son of Kusharava.

11. One copy reads Yuga dharma, the duties
peculiar to the four 14 ages, or their characteristic
properties, instead of Yuganta.

12. Sacrifice of Parasara. The story of Parasara's
birth is narrated in detail in the Mahabharata (Adi
Parva, s. 176). King Kalmasapada meeting with
Sakti, the son of Vasistha, in a narrow path in a
thicket, desired him to stand out of his way. The
sage refused : on which the Raja beat him with his
whip, and Sakti cursed him to become a Raksasa, a
man-devouring spirit. The Raja in this
transformation killed and ate its author, or Sakti,
together with all the other sons of Vasistha, Sakti

=== PAGE 5 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 1

5

left his wife Adrisyanti pregnant, and she gave birth.
to Paragara, who was brought up by his
grandfather. When he grew up, and was informed
of his father's death, he instituted a sacrifice for the
destruction of all the Raksasas, but was dissuaded
from its completion by Vasistha and other sages or
Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, and Kratu. The Mahabharata
adds, that; when he desisted from the rite, he
scattered the remaining sacrificial fire upon the
northern face of the Himalaya mountain, where it
still blazes forth at the phases of the moon,
consuming Raksasas, forests, and mountains. The
legend alludes possibly to some trans-Himalayan
volcano. The transformation of Kalmasapada is
ascribed in other places to a different cause; but he
is every where regarded as the devourer of Sakti or
Saktri, as the name also occurs. The story is told in
the Linga Purana (Purvarddha, s. 64) in the same
manner, with the addition, conformably to the
Saiva tendency of that work, that Parasara begins
his sacrifice by propitiating Mahadeva Vasistha's
dissuasion, and Pulastya's appearance, are given in
the very words of our text; and the story concludes,
‘thus through the favour of Pulastya and of the wise
Vasistha, Parasara composed the Vaisnava (Visnu)
Purana, containing ten thousand stanzas, and being
the third of the Purana compilations
(Puranasamhita). The Bhagavata (b. III. s. 8) also
alludes, though obscurely, to this legend. In
recapitulating the succession of the narrators of part
of the Bhagavata, Maitreya states that this first
Purana was communicated to him by his Guru
Purasara, as he had been desired by Pulastya: Ward
ae F Sages) AA: WI:) YAR WTAE!) ie.
according to the commentator, agreeably to the
boon given by Pulastya to Paragara, saying, 'You
shall be a narrator of Puranas; Wore] feet) The
Mahabharata makes no mention of the
communication of this faculty to Parasara by
Pulastya; and as the Bhagavata could not derive this
particular from that source, it here most probably
refers unavowedly, as the Linga does avowedly, to
the Visnu Purana.

13. Pulastya, as will be presently seen, is one of
the Rsis. who were the mind-born sons of Brahmi.
Pulaha. who is here also named, is another.
Pulastya is considered. as the ancestor of the Raks
asas, as he is the father of Visravas, the father of

Ravana and his brethren, Uttara Ramayana,
Mahabharata, Vana Parva. s. 272. Padma Purana
Linga Purana s. 63.

14. Purana sarihita kartté bhavan bhavisyati.
You shall be a maker of the Samhita or
compendium of the Puranas or of the Visnu Purana,
considered as.a summary or compendium of
Pauranic traditions, in either sense it is
incompatible with the general attribution of all the
Puranas to Vy4sa.

1S. Whether performing the usual ceremonies of
the Brahmanas. or leading a life of devotion and
penace. which supersedes the necessity of rites and
sacrifices.

16, These are, in fact. the brief replies to
Maitreya's six questions (p. 3). or. How was the
world created? By Visnu how will it be? At the
periods of dissolution it will be in Visnu. Whence
proceeded animate and inanimate things? From
Visnu. Of what is the substance of the world? Vis
nu. Into what has it been. and will it agnir be.
resolved? Visnu. He is therefore both the
instrumental and material cause of the universe.
"The answer to the "whence" replies to the query as
to the instrumental cause: "He is the world” replies
to the inquiry as to the material cause:' a7
ware ARI wre a RATEANTEIT!
‘And by this explanation of the agency of the
materiality, etc. of Visnu. as regards the universe,
(it follows that) all will be produced from, and all
will repose in him:, aaa faa: agen

waa zrenifa: We
have here precisely the TO nav of the Orphic
doctrines, and we might fancy that Brucker was
translating a passage from a-Purina when he
describes them in these words: "Continuisse Jovem
(lege Visnum) sive summum deum in se omnia.
omnibus ortum ex se dedisse, omnia ex se genuisse.
et ex sua produxisse essentia. Spiritum esse
universi qui omnia regit vivificat estque; ex quibus
necessario sequitur omnia in eum reditura." Hist.
Philos. I. 388. Jamblichus and Proclus also testify
that the Pythagorean doctrines of the origin of the
material world from the Deity, and its identity with

* him, were much the same.—Cudworth. 1. c. p. 348.

kkk

=== PAGE 6 ===

THE VISNU-PURANAM

CHAPTER 2
faitatserra:
(faupegit:, ofeafra 2)

WI Sarg
afearnra Yer fear wae
weeRNTRUTET fereorer Ta FATAN gt
ait foal wea ETE TI
argeara ana wifererranftam 31
VERE BATRA TA:
serene fear yfmeran 311
wiftafafaarenat sense STE:
eng arene ferret wT SH

Paragara said, Glory to the unchangeable,
holy, eternal, supreme Visnu, of one universal
nature, the mighty over all : to him who is
Hiranygarbha. Hari, and Sankara,’ the creator,
the preserver, and destroycr of the world: to
Vasudeva, the libcrator of his worshippers: to
him, whose essence is both single and
manifold; who is both subtile and corporeal,
indiscretc and discrete: to Visnu, the cause of
final emancipation.” Glory to the supreme Vis
nu, the cause of the creation, existence, and
end of this world; who is the root of the world,
and who consists of the world.?

+f rater 1
warer weld PeTTTTI GH
areerrerataie warda:1
atarkerster onftegiae: Fer gt
faraj afoot fererenr fact wit wer my
WOT, STATA STATS TATLIN 9 1
arent aor yet aarehyfrerat:
ye: Ware wrarroralfa: firearm: ct
aah eRe yy lene!
areata Taft wel ATCT A

Having glorified him who is the support of

all things; who is the smallest of the small;*
who is in all created things; the unchanged,

imperishable* Purusottama;* who is one with
true wisdom, as truly known;’ eternal and
incorrupt; and who is known through false
appearances by the nature of visible objects:*
having bowed to Visnu, the destroyer, and lord
of creation and preservation; the ruler of the
world; unborn, imperishable, undecaying: I
will relate to you that which was originally
imparted by the great rather of all (Brahma), in
answer to the questions of Daksa and other
venerable sages, and repeated by them to
Purukutsa, a king who reigned on the banks of
the Narmada. It was next related by him to
Sarasvata, and by Sarasvata to me.”

WE: WaT Tea: Tea: |

Ruauifariegfagennfeatsta:n Rott

araferremat uftorafgsrati:

afar: waad agi a: wareitfs Here Vet

wart ares Teas S aA:

aa: a argeat fafa: oftwemn een

TRS Te FremoneraTorETy

Varad a Ber Farrar Fier ga

wee Wada STARA

TN Yeretr arerstor a FTA It

Wer Feu we Yer: wert fin

Same Mary BT STAT TTA BGI

wea Tee fe AAI

yah gra: ys aig: wet VaR GH

MEAT ST RTA MATATTET: 1

eunfor Feaftrernireaftreareaeaa: 1! Yon

ark fampewnenh er: set Ua a

wied areata Vet wer Fema ect

Who can describe him who is not to be
apprehended by the senses: who is the best of
all things; the supreme soul, self-existent: who
is devoid of all the distinguishing
characteristics of complexion, caste, or the
like; and is exempt from birth, vicissitude,
death, or decay: who is always, and alone:
who exists every where, and in whom all

=== PAGE 7 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 2

7

things here exist; and who is thence named
Vasudeva!’? He is Brahma,'' supreme, lord,
eternal, unborn, imperishable, undecaying; of
one essence; ever pure as free from defects.
He, that Brahma, was all things;
comprehending in his own nature the
indiscreet and discrcte, He then existed in the
forms of Purusa and of Kala. Purusa (spirit) is
the first form of the supreme; next proceeded
two other forms, the discrete and indiscrete;
and Kala (time) was the last. These four—
Pradhana (primary or crude matter), Purusa
(spirit), Vyakta (visible substance), and Kala
(time)—the wise consider to be the pure and
supreme condition of Visnu.!?These four
forms, in their due proportions, are the causes
of the production of the phenomena of
creation, preservation, and destruction. Visnu
being thus discrete and indiscrete substance,
spirit, and time, sports like a playful boy, as
you shall learn by listening to his frolics.”®

worth Bt ae ae WaTTEPTTA: |

Bterd wenfer: want Fred Weare ge

oeret AraeTTt ga

wreceaptferdtt ag, wunfafircaferan 2 ot

faqqo aan frenferrareray

dart adtardtg ant & wereareqn 2 eu

Aearefadt feefaran rerenfer:

vata & atard varanfrarearit 2 2

That chief principle (Pradhana), which is
the indiscrete cause, is called by the sages also
Prakrti (nature): it is subtile, uniform, and
comprehends what is and what is not (or both
causes and effects); is durable, self-sustained,
illimitable, undecaying, and stable; devoid of
sound or touch, and possessing neither colour
nor form; endowed with the three qualities (in
equilibrium); the mother of the world; without
beginning; and that into which all that is
produced is resolved.’* By that principle all
things were invested in the period subsequent
to the last dissolution of the universe, and
prior to creation'’. For Brahmanas learned in

the Vedas, and teaching truly their doctrines,
explain such passages as the following as
intending the production of the chief principle
(Pradhana).

RrenfeqeeTyTMAN
MENTE Gel TAT RTATAT NB 3
feat: ae wat fe Asay
wt vert yeas farm
aaa isan ga fag
WORT UY AG fa STAT BVI
wart dient armies J A!
TA MATa RISAAT WATT 4M
srrfestrary are arise fas ferent
ARTA TATRA TATA TTA: NB I
gored aeafery yg fe crate
SITTERS ae ota ake
metered afawieae afta gon
MARAT TET UAT STAT: |
wat: way: Tale TT VI
wert qersntt vfayerctesar ef:1
atvrarare wont were Serer 2g
aan afateesto wet: attare SER
were strange aera wee: 13 ot
7 Ue atrat wer ater yeah:
a agrafeeremat werreste a fRaft:113 el
faeries gereufatiream
aa RUT Fer fay: WTA 3 BH
"There was neither day nor night, nor sky
nor earth, nor darkness nor light, nor any other
things, save only One, unapprehensible by
intellect, or That which is Brahma and Puman
(spirit) and Pradhana (matter)"'’. The two
forms which are other than the essence of
unmodified Visnu, are Pradhana (matter) and
Purusa (spirit); and his other form, by which
those two are connected or separated, is called

=== PAGE 8 ===

8

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Kala (time)'’. When discrete substance is
aggregated in crude nature, as in a foregone
dissolution, that dissolution is termed
elemental (Prakrta). The deity as Time is
without beginning, and his. end is not known;
and from him the revolutions of creation,
continuance, and dissolution unintermittingly
succeeds: (or when, in the latter season, the
equilibrium of the qualities (Pradhana) exists,
and spirit (Puman) is detached from matter,
then the form of Vignu which is Time abide?"*.
Then the supreme Brahma, the supreme soul,
the substance of the world, the lord of all
creatures, the universal soul, the supreme
tuler, Hari, of his own will having entered into
matter and spirit, agitated the mutable and
immutable principles, the season of creation
being arrived, in the same manner as fragrance
affects the mind from its proximity merely,
and not from any immediate operation upon
mind itself: so the Supreme influenced the
elements of creation’’, Purusottama is both the
agitator and the thing to be agitated; being
present in the essence of matter, both when it
is contracted and expanded”. Visnu, supreme
over the supreme, is of the nature of discrete
forms in the atomic productions, Brahma and
the rest (gods, men. etc.)

qoranany arerend saanatearyA
quererargia: waters fasttra 3 311
Then from that equilibrium of the qualities

(Pradhana) presided over by soul”, proceeds
the unequal development of those qualities
(constituting the principle Mahat or Intellect)
at the time of creation”.

RIAA Herat Ae, HTT

whoa wereta areas FRET ART!

waaay UG wera SeifrargeT 3 vt

aarftertres yea are:

fafaehsemegrt) WeMATeATAT 34 11

qatar gq: @ fryorarrery

OM RAT WET AAT A TANGA! 3 Gl

yaa fagator: sreqrnfies aa:

TA VARTA PETETUT

Wend aararet yee: T AATGTTAI BI

arene fagatar: ayia wast 31

THATS AFR UGE UT ag SH

arent weeny waar WaT

The Chief principle then invests that Great
principle, Intellect, and it becomes three fold,
as affected by the quality of goodness,
foulness, or darkness, and invested by the
Chief principle (matter) as seed is by its skin.
From the Great principle (Mahat) Intellect.
threefold Egotism, (Ahankara)", denominated
Vaikdrika. 'pure;' Taijasa, ‘passionate;, and
Bhutadi- rudimental.” is produced; the origin
of the (subtile) elements and of the organs of
sense; invested, in consequence of its three
qualities, by Intellect, as Intellect is by the
Chief principle. Elementary Egotism then
becoming productive, as the rudiment of
round, produced from it Ether, of which sound
is the characteristic, investing it with its
rudiment of sound. Ether becoming
productive, engendered the rudiment of touch;
whence originated strong wind. the property of
which is touch; and Ether, with the rudiment
of sound, enveloped the rudiment of touch.

aat argfdqaton Beart wast Bel

wife sehen UTEa

erlrargy & arg euaTs WAU Y oll

Sifeanftt fagneatat tarart wast g1

aerate aatserifa carerafor aft Ty ei

Temratfor aretifa eat GATT!

fagatonfs aresifer wert afer yz

Mend Hae Te TET TAM YUH TI

aftreafarg ara Fa TAT TAT YB

amratwafersrentar sifersvaretct fe #1

MRT ate eee a seTfers TTT ww

YeTETseMERRIT J AUTATL

teraritfgaroargéan dente Seri

Waray tat Yat danften: Byars

=== PAGE 9 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 2

wag cepifeen fren stems a TTA N
wrerdarrancad afgamht 2 fea
agra at wel arg 8 Ade wEtvon
fanifrenngha: at tag ea

Then wind becoming productive, produced
the rudiment of form (colour); whence light
(or fire) proceeded, of which, form (colour) is
the attribute; and the rudiment of touch
enveloped the wind with the rudiment of
colour. Light becoming productive, produced
the rudiment of taste; whence proceed all
juices in which flavour resides; and the
rudiment of colour invested the juices with the
rudiment of taste. The waters becoming
productive, engendered the rudiment of smell;
whence an aggregate (earth) originates, of
which smell is the property”. In each several
element resides its peculiar rudiment; thence
the property of tanmatrata”> (type or rudiment)
is ascribed to these elements. Rudimental
elements are not endowed with qualities, and
therefore they are neither soothing, nor
terrific, nor stupefying”. This is the elemental
creation, proceeding from the principle of
egotism affected by the property of darkness.
The organs of sense are said to be the
passionate produces of the same principle,
affected by foulness; and the ten divinities”
proceed from egotism affected by the principle
or goodness; as does Mind, which is the
eleventh. The organs of sense are ten: of the
ten, five are the skin. eye, nose, tongue, and
car; the object of which, combined with
Intellect, is the apprehension of sound and the
rest: the organs of excretion and procreation,
the hands, the feet, and the voice, form the
other five; of which excretion, generation,
manipulation, motion, and speaking, are the
several acts,

SreTgraTgaatife aferet yrs TaMN YS |
vrenfehinfiitert! aamrgritat:t

Vira eee Yares fargrareta F BAT Ue
ardtal: yeryareatet dela frm

AMETAT MAT: ALATA FETT: 14 oH
Then, ether, air, light, water, and earth,
severally united with the properties of sound
and the rest, existed as distinguishable
according to their qualities, as soothing,
terrific, or stupefying; but possessing various
energies, and being unconnected, they could
not, without combination, create living beings,
not having blended with each other.
Werder wea:
WeenTeTey TTA TA: 1

Fenfatsaara yerarqTeor at

Wecren fagraran wosyrarcara TV
renin fagary aerggearmy
yeeisug wergea! ger ageaerery
ig TERT fat: TTA y BI
TTR A SrA HALT: |

feugait wate safer: xt

Having combined, therefore, with one
another, they assumed, through their mutual
association, the character of one mass of entire
unity; and from the direction of spirit, with the
acquiescence of the indiscrete Principle”,
Intellect and the rest, to the gross elements
inclusive, formed an egg”, which gradually
expended like a bubble of water. This vase
egg, O sage, compounded of the elements, and
resting on the waters, was the excellent natural
abode of Visnu in the from of Brahma; and
there Visnu, the lord of the universe, whose
essence is inscrutable, assumed a perceptible
form, and even he himsclf abided in it in the
character of Brahma.*°

Teeatyy Fea seg wet:
wifes WARET TTL GASTTTEN YG
aainagarg aetficiaage:!
aferavtswag fam! wearqeanga: iy & It
anftagutronensherdt qafeat af:1

ad amqehed yonfetigan aaron
werigat were: wa: alec AEF
ufirreartieg waft: apt,

=== PAGE 10 ===

10

THE VISNU-PURANAM

aifcnernerereaatat arereettan 4 601

Its womb, vast as the mountain Mcru, was
composed of the mountains; and the mighty
oceans were the waters that filled its cavity. In
that egg, O Brahman, were the continents and
seas and mountains, the planets and divisions
of the universe, the gods, the demons, and
mankind. And this egg was externally invested
by seven natural envelopes, or by water, air,
fire, ether, and Ahankara the origin of the
elements, each tenfold the extent of that which
it invested; next came the. principle of intelli-
gence; and finally, the whole was surrounded
by the indiscrcte Principle: resembling thus
the cocoa-nut, filled ulteriorly with pulp, and
exteriorly covered by husk and rind.

WH Winn wa wae faded eft:

TEN yearer Sera ferget waren gn
Wes Maggy aad aeafrarrn
ATL Wray ATTA: 1G oN
waa a Sey BRAT SATA:
Rrnfaeryah seaafiniteorng gu

@ vate yen srerutdtg
TS MTAY Va A TTT IG U1
Wass WH: Ble wot weramyg G3

Affecting then the quality of activity, Hari,
the lord of all, himself becoming Brahma,
engaged in the creation of the universe. Visnu
with the quality of goodness, and of
immeasurable power, preserves created things
through successive ages, until the close of the
period termed a Kalpa; when the same mighty
deity, Janardhana.*! invested with the quality
of darkness, assumes the awful from of Rudra,
and swallows up the universe. Having thus
devoured all things, and converted the world
into one vast ocean, the Supreme reposes upon
his mighty serpent couch amidst the deep: he
awakes after a season, and again, as Brahma,
becomes the author of creation.

attra rereeniorenfarar
w dat aft wart wa WATT GY

am yale wet fawy: wears ft a
srdigad art deal a ward TYNE GN
pirate Aat area A
watsart:atat Yeast fe TAT G GI
Bua aya fauent aatsera:)
anita wdisa yTqTEAAT G91
BUa GA: Ua Want

ae Uefa @ Wea a

famyafadt aret awa: 211

fe sitfaenget wernist fadhatseara:

Thus the one only god, Janarddana, takes
the designation of Brahma, Visnu, and Siva,
accordingly as he creates, preserves, or
destroys.” Visnu as creator, creates himself;
as preserver, preserves himself; as destroyer,
destroys himself at the end of all things. This
world of earth, air, fire. water, ether, the
senses, and the mind; all that is termed spirit,
that also is the lord of all elements, the univer-
sal from, and impreishable: hence he is the
cause of creation, preservation, and
destruction; and the subject of the vicissitudes
inherent in elementary nature. He is the
object and author of creation: he preserves,
destroys, and is preserved. He, Visnu, as
Brahma, and as all other beings, is infinite
form: he is the supreme, the giver of all good,
the fountain of all happiness.”*

wee

NOTES

1. The three hypostases of Visnu. Hiranyagarbba
is a name of Brahma; he who was born from the
golden egg. Hari is Visnu, and Sankara Siva. The
Visnu who is the subject of our text is the supreme
being in all these three divinities or hypostases, in
his different characters of creator, preserver and
destroyer. Thus in the Markandeya: ‘Accordingly.
as the primal all-pervading spirit is distinguished by
attributes in creation and the rest. so he obtains the
denomination of Brahma, Visnu, and Siva. In the
capacity of Brahma he creates the worlds; in that of
Rudra be destroys them; in that of Visnu he is

=== PAGE 11 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 2

i

quiescent. These are the three Avasthas (lit.
hypostases) of the self-born. Brahma is the quality
of activity : Rudra that of darkness; Visnu, the lord
of the world, is goodness: so. therefore, the three
gods are the three qualities They are ever combined
with. and dependent upon one another, and they are
never for an instant separate; they never quit each
other."

ae area: att antag Weta |

wen a darrenta wenfaenferenerai

Fea Gad Sar Baca HET

faopasti terinferaisaen: eaeya: 1

Tat BEN TAT BST fare: Tes SETA: |

AT Ta TH SAT Us Us FH TOT: it

seiratepn a sirens

aro fear erat raha we

The notion is one common to all antiquity,
although less philosophically conceived, or perhaps
less distinctly expressed, in the passages which
have come down to us. The tpets a'pikas vrooT
Aoeis of Plato are said by Cudworth (I. 111), upon
the authority of Plotinus, to be an ancient doctrine,
maratd Soea and he also observes, “Orpheus,
Pythagoras, and Plato have all of them asserted a
trinity of divine hypostases, and as they
unquestionably derived much of their doctrine from
the Egyptians, it may reasonably be suspected that
the Egyptians did the like before them." As
however the Grecian accounts, and those of the
Egyptians, are much more perplexed and
unsatisfactory than those of the Hindus, it is most
probable that we find amongst them the doctrine in
its most original as well as most methodical and
significant from.

2. This address to Visnu pursues the notion that
he. as the supreme being, is one. whilst he is all: he
is Avikara, not subject to change; Sadaikariipa, one
invariable nature: he is the liberator (tara), or he
who bears mortals across the ocean of existence: he
is both single and manifold (ekanekaripa): and he
is the indiscrete (avyakta) cause of the world, as
well as the discrete (vyakta) effect: or the invisible
cause, and visible creation.

3. Jaganmaya, made up. or consisting
substantially (74). of the world. Maya in an affix
denoting 'made' or consiting of,’ as Kastha maya.,
made of wood.' The world is therefore not regarded

by the Pauraniks as an emanation or an illusion, but
as consubstantial with its first cause.

4. Aniyansari anniyasam ‘the most atomic of the
atomic;' alluding to the atomic theory of the Nyaya
or logical school.

5. Or Acyuta; a common name of Visnu, from a,
privative, and chyuta. fallen; according to our
comment, ‘he who does not perish with created
things.' The Mahabharata interprets it in one place
to mean. ‘he who is not distinct from final
emancipation;‘and in another to signify, ‘exempt
from decay, (sé: ). A commentator on the Kasi-
knanda of the Skanda Purana explains it. -be who
never declines (or varies) from his own proper
nature;' MATA |

6. This is another commen title of Visnu,
implying supreme, best (Uttama), spirit (Purusa), or
male. or sacrificc, or. according to the Mahabh.
Moksa Dharma, whatever sense Purusa may bear:

qed aa geld aq afeia

TAIRA Feu Say ad TAIT: it

7. Paramarthatas, by or through the real object,
or sense; through actual truth.’

8. Bhranti darfanatas ‘false appearances,’ in
opposition to actual truth.,By the nature of visible
objects, (3f=REM) : Artha is explained by drigya
‘visible,; swaripena by 'the nature of: that is, visible
objects are not what they seem to be. independent
existences; they are essentially one with their
original source: and knowledge of their true nature
or relation to Vignu, is knowledge of Visnu himself.
This is not the doctrine of May4, or the influence of
illusion, which alone, according to Vedanta
idcalism, constitutes belief in the existence of
matter: a doctrine foreign to most of the Puranas
and first introduced amongst them apparently by
the Bhagavata.

9. A different and more detailed account of the
transmission of the Vignu Purana is given in the last
book. c. 8.

10. The ordinary derivation of Vasudeva has
been noticed above (p. I): here it is derived from
Vas, 'to dwell,’ from Visnu's abiding in all things,
and all in him: wai Waa The
Mahabharata explains Vasu in the same manner,
and Deva to signify radiant, shining :

wed creat arrafe wahyay serfs ag: |

wei ea Stn fata: arqardt tafe argza: 1

=== PAGE 12 ===

12

THE VISNU-PURANAM

He causes all things to dwell in him. and he
abides in all: whence he is named Vasu: being
resplendent as the sun, he is called Deva: and he
who is both these, is denominated Vasudeva., See
also b. VI. c. 5.

11, The commentator argues that Vasudeva must
be the Brahma, or supreme being, of the Vedas,
because the same circumstances are predicated of
both, as eternity, omnipresence, omnipotence, etc.;
but he does not adduce any scriptual text with the
name Vasudeva.

12. Time is not usually enumerated in the
Puranas as an element of the first cause, but the
Padma Purana and the Bhagavata agree with the
Visnu in including it. It appears to have been
regarded at an earlier date as an independent cause:
the commentator on the Moksa Dharma cites a
passage from the Vedas, which he understands to
allude to the different theories of the cause of
creation; #Ta: wana Frafrigarn oft aif: gee:
Time, inherent nature, consequence of acts, self-
will, elementary atoms, matter, and spirit, asserted
severally by the Astrologers, the Buddhists, the.
Mimansakas. the Jains, the Logicians, the
Sarhkhyas. and the Vedantis. Kpovo& was also one
of the first generated agents in creation, according
to the Orphic theogony.

13. The creation of the world is very commonly
considered to be the Lila (them), sport or
amusement, of the Supreme Being.

14. The attributes of Pradhdna. the chief
(principle or element). here specified, conform
generally to those ascribed to it by the Sarnkhya
philosophy (Sarnkhya Karika, p. 16, etc,), although
come of them are incompatible with its origin from
a first cause. In the Sarhkhya this incongruity does
not occur; for there Pradhana. is independent, and
coordinate with primary spirit. The Puranas give
rise to the inconsistency by a lax use of both
philosophical and pantheistical expressions. The
most incongruous epithets in our text are however
explained away in the comment. Thus nitya (fi),
‘eternal’ is said to mean ‘uniform, not liable to
increase or diminution: frei BeRed qeafeeris
Sandasaditmaka (Hear), — ‘comprehending
what is and what is not.' means ‘having the power
of both cause and affect, (areferomfae) as
preceding from Visnu, and as giving origin to
material things. Anadi, ‘without beginning,’ means

‘without birth’ (379i), not being engendered by
any created things but proceeding immediately
from the first cause. The mother, or literally ’ the
womb of the world (stretfi), means ‘the passive
agent in creation,’ operated on or influenced by the
active will of the Creator. The first part of the
passage in the text is a favourite one with several of
the Puranas, but they modify it and apply it after
their own fashion. In the Visnu the original is,

OTS BNO Ay A UTA: |

Pro welt: gam fred wears

rendered as above. The Vayu, Brahmanda. and
Karma Puranas have

FeTS BNO} TUPAC AATF |

werd wpfada aengeraraan: |

The indiscrete cause, which is uniform, and both
cause and effect, and whom those who are
acquainted with first principles call Pradhana and
Prakrti— is the uncognizable Brahma, who was
before all: afagri weet wradd! But the application
of two synonyms of Prakrti to Brahma seems
unnecessary at least. The Brahma Purana corrects
the reading apparently: the first line is as before :
second is, WUM Yes aay fais faite The
passage is placed absolutely; There was an
indiscrete cause eternal, and cause and effect,
which was both matter and spirit (Pradhana and
Purusa), from which this world was made. Instead
of $431 ‘such’ or 'this,' some copies read 2%: ‘from
which Isvara or god (the active deity or Brahma)
made the world., The Hari Vara has the same
reading, except in the last term, which it makes $a
that is. according to the commentator, 'the world,
which is ISvara. was made. The same authority
explains this indiscrete cause, avyakta karana, to
denote Brahma, "the creator; ¢ 4 fafs went Ber
welprt an identification very unusual, if not
inaccurate, and possibly founded on
misapprehension of what is stated by the Bhavisya
Purana: aad sroeae Fred wares atshre: a yea
AS wafa stefai wt a amare ¥fail ‘That male or
spirit which is endowed with that which is the
indiscrete cause. etc, is known in the world as
Brahma: he being in the egg, ac.' The passage is
precisely the same in Manu, I. 11; except that we
have ‘vigista, instead of ‘visistha:' the latter is a
questionable reading, and is probably wrong: the
sense of the former is.'detached;' and the whole

=== PAGE 13 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 2

13

means very consistently, ‘embodied spirit detached
from the indiscrete cause of the world is known as
Brahma., The Padma Purana inserts the first er
line, etc., but has Feafat wet aprife fafiaass
"Which creates undoubtedly Mahat and the other
qualities:, assigning the first epithets, therefore, as
the Visnu does to Prakrti only. The Linga also
refers the expression to Prakrti alone, but makes it a
secondary cause: Sore Vaud Trevad Bre ward
weft da aagerafedat:) ‘An indiscrete cause,
which those acquainted with first principles call
Pradhana and Prakrti proceeded from that Isvara
(Siva), This passage is one of very many instances
in which expressions are common to several
Puranas that seem to be borrowed from one
another, or from some common source older than
any of them, especially in this instance, as the same
text occurs in Manu.

15. The expression of the text is rather obscure;
‘All was pervaded (or comprehended) by that chief
principle before (recreation), after the (last)
destruction’ 7 wdtarte emi a weary! The
ellipses are filled up by the commentator. This, he
adds, is to be regarded as the state of things at a
Maha Pralaya, or total dissolution, leaving,
therefore, crude matter, nature, or chaos, as a
coexistent clement with the Supreme. This, which
is conformable to the philosophical doctrine, is not
however that of thc Puranas in general, nor that of
our text, which states (b. VI. c. 4), that at a Prakrta,
or elementary dissolution. Pradhana itself merges
into the deity. Neither is it apparently the doctrine
of the Vedas, although their language is somewhat
equivocal.

16. The metre here is one common to the Vedas,
Tristubh, but in other respects the language is not
characteristic of those compositions. The purport of
the passage is rendered somewhat doubtful by its
close, and by the explanation of. commentator. The
former is, Ch woe wea yateerta: ‘One
Pradhanika Brahma Spirit: that, was. The
commentator explains Pradhanika. Pradhana eva.
the same word as Pradhana; but it is a derivative
word, which may be used attributively. implying
“having, or conjoined with. Pradhana., The
commentator. however, interprets it as the
substantive; for he adds, There was Pradhana and
Brahma and Spirit; this traid was at the period of

dissolution; wear wea yaiafs sata were ore
He evidently, however, understands their conjoint
existence as one only; for he continues, ‘So,
according to the Vedas, then there was neithcr the
non-existent {invisible cause, or matter) nor the
existent (visible effect, or creation): 4
afertaerdaraeraaerit meaning that there was only
One Being, in whom matter and its modifications
were all comprehended.

17. Or it might be rendered. ‘Those two other
forms (which proceed) from his supreme nature;
fret: <aeurera: that is, from the nature of Visnu,
when he is Nirupadhi, or without adventitious
attributes: Frewafetet: sae! ‘other’ (31); the
commentator states they are other or separate from
Visnu only through Maya, illusion,’ but here
implying ‘falsc notion; the elements of creation
being in essence one with Visnu, though in
existence detachcd and different.

18. Pradhana, when unmodificd, is, according to
the Sankhyas and Pauraniks, nothing more than the
three qualities in equilibrio, or 15 goodness,
foulness, and darkness neutralising each other;
(Sarhkhya Karika, p. 52.) so in the Matsya Purana:
ae wenda wraqeed, arenafeafitad weft:
uftaiftia! This state is synonymous with the non-
evolution of material products, or with dissolution;
implying however, scparate existence, and detached
from spirit. This being the case, it is asked what
should sustain matter and spirit whilst separate, or
renew their combination so as to renovate creation
? It is aswered, Time, which is when everything
else is not; and which, at the end of a certain
interval, unites Matter, Pradhdna, and Purusa. and
produces creation. Conceptions of this kind are
evidently comprised in the Orphic triad, or the
ancient notion of the co-operation of three such
principles in creation, as Phanes or Eros, which is
the Hindu spirit or Purusa; Chaos, matter or
Piadhana : and Chronos. or Kala time.

19. Pradhana is styled Vyaya ‘that which may be
expended;' or Parinamin ‘which may be modified:,
and Purusa is called Avyaya 'inconsumable;' or
aparinamin. ‘immutable.’ The expressions fava
having entered into,’ and sara ‘agitated,’ recall
the mode in which divine intelligence, mens, vovc,
was conceived by the ancients to operate upon
matter:

=== PAGE 14 ===

14

THE VISNU-PURANAM

GPPNV 12... GPOVTLOV KOOLOV ANAVTA
sees KATA GOOVEA Sonat :
cas in a more familiar passage:

Spiritus intus alit totamque infusa per artus

Mens agitat molem et magno se corpore miscet:
or perhaps it more closely approximates to the
Phoenician cosmogony. io which a spirit mixing
with its own principles gives rise to creation.
Brucker, I. 240, As presently explained, the mixture
is not mechanical; it is an influence or effect
exerted upon intermediate agents, which produce
effect,; as perfumes do not delight the mind by
actual contact, but by the impression they make
upon the sense of smelling, which communicates it
to the mind. The entrance of the supreme Visnu
into spirit as well as matter is less intelligible than
the view elsewhere taken of it, as the infusion of
spirit, identified with the Supreme, into Prakrti or
matter alone. Thus in the Pradma Purana:

aise ween: Yeu: Was a eee: |
Bua wrentaay yaaa

‘He who is called the male (spirit) of Prakrti, is
here named Acyuta; and that same divine Visnu
entered into Prakrti.’ So the Brhat Naradiya: wedt
aera Yesrst TIE The lord of the world, who
is called Purusa, producing agitation in Prakrti.’
From the notion of influence or agitation produced
on matter through or with spirit, the abuse of
personification led to actual or vicarious admixture.
Thus the Bhagavata, identifying Maya with Prakrti,
has,

regen F Fraser POREATAR ATT: |
yer deter dear

"Through the operation of time. the Mighty One,
who is present to the pure. implanted a seed in
Maya endowed with qualities, as Purusa, which is
one with himself.’ B. III. s. 5. And the Bhavisya:
‘Some learned men say that the Supreme Being,
desirous to create beings, creates in the
commencement of the Kalpa a body of soul (or an
incorporcal substance): which soul created by him
enters into Prakrti: and Prakrti being thereby
agitated, creates many material elements:' 3-3 3
Tera yack wifier 1 Asean WEA BeTS TAT
wai gear verardt fagafiaen: wor a ge: YReRG
ward faera 31 werd atfind da go fren ae

But these may be regarded as notions of a later
date. In the Mahabharata the first cause is declared
to be ‘Intellectual,’ who creates by his mind or will:
amet we yaisft fagd do mefifi; senfeert
zamenrisAME | ‘The first (Being) is called
Ménasa (intellectual). and is so celebrated by great
sages: he is God, without beginning or end.
indivisible, immortal, undecaying.' And again:
wateret fafa ara aqdisgay! The Intellectual
created many kinds of creatures by his mind.'

20. Contraction, Sankoca (##4:), is explained
by Samya (Si), sameness or equilibrium of the
three qualities, or inert Pradhana: and Expansion,
Vikasa _ (fare), is the destruction of this
equipoise, by previous agitation and consequent
development of material products.

21. The term here is Ksetrajfia. ‘embodied spirit’
or that which knows the Ksetra or 'body” implying
the combination of spirit with form or matter, for
the purpose of creating.

22. The first product of Pradhana sensible to
divine, though not to mere human organs, is, both
according to the Sarhkhya and Pauranic doctrines,
the principle called Mahat, literally ‘the Great.’
explained in other places, as in our text. "the
production of the manifestation of the qualities:'
Tpreisrraryfa: | or, as in the Vayu, Werarecrar
Wer, Mga ys 1 We have in the same Purana, as well
as in the Brahmanda and Linga, a number of
synonyms for this term. as, 71 Fer fester fs:
wafrtar: | wat fafa: aafa: dfafegt drera gh: They
are also explained, though not very distinctly, to the
following purport: Manas is that which considers
the consequences of acts to all creatures, and
provides for their happiness. Mahat, the Great
principle, is so termed from being the first of the
created principles, and from its extension being
greater than that of the rest. Mati is that which
discriminates and distinguishes objects preparatory
to their fruition by Soul. Brahma implies that which
effeets the development and augmentation of
created things. Pur is that by which the coneurrence
of nature occupies and fills all bodies. Buddhi is
that which communicates to soul the knowledge of
good and evil. Khyati is the means of individual
fruition. or the faculty of discriminating objects by
appropriate designations, and the like. ISvara is that
which knows all things as if they were present.
Prajiia is that by which the properties of things arc

=== PAGE 15 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 2

15

known. Citi is that by which the consequences of
acts and species of knowledge are selected for the
use of soul. Smriti is the faculty of recognising all
things, past, present, or to come. Samvit is that in
which all things are found or known, and which is
found or known in all things: and Vipura is that
which is free from the effects of contrarieties, as of
knowledge and ignorance, and the like. Mahat is
also called Isvara, from, its exercising supremacy
over all things; Bhava, from its elementary
existence : Eka. or ‘the one’, from its singleness;
Purusa, from its abiding within the body; and from
its being ungenerated it is called Swayambhu.,”
Now in this nomenclature we have chiefly two sets
of words; one, as Manas, Buddhi, Mati, signifying
mind, intelligence, knowledge, wisdom, design .
and the other, as Brahm, ISvara, etc., denoting an
active creator and ruler of the universe: as the Vayu
adds. Wet @f& fapea “emma: firgerat 1 'Mahat,
impelled by the desire to create, causes various
creation:, and the Mahabharata has er, Gaatéan
‘Mahat created Aharhkara.' The Puranas generally
employ the same expression, attributing to Mahat
or Intelligence the act of creating. Mahat is
therefore the divine mind in creative operation, the
vovgodiaxoopov TE xat navTov aiTog of
Anaxagoras, ‘an ordering and disposing mind.
which was the cause of all things., The word itself
suggests some relationship to the Phoenician Mot,
which, like Mahat. was the first product of the
mixture of spirit and matter, and the first rudiment
of creation: “Ex connexione autem ejus spiritus
prodit mot. hine seminium omnis creature et
omniuin rerum creatio.” Brucker, I. 240. Mot. it is
true, appears to be a purely material substance,
whilst Mahat is an incorporeal substance; but they
agree in their place in the cosmogony, and are
something alike in name. How far also the
Phoenician system has been accurately described, is
matter of uncertainty, See Sarhkhya Karika. p. 83.
23. The scnse of Ahatikara cannot be very well
rendered by any European term. It means the
principle of individual existence, that which
appropriates perceptions, and on which depend the
notions, I think. 1 feel. I am. It might be expressed
by the proposition of Descartes reversed: “Sum
ergo cogito, sentio.” etc. The equivalent emyloyed
by Colebrooke, egotism, has the advantage of an
analogous etymology, Ahankara being derived

from Aham (37@), I; as in the Hari Varnéa: ae fret
weary Wor: een wa! ‘He (Brahma), oh Bharata,
said, I will create creatures,’ Sec also Samkhya
Karika, p. 91. These three varities of Ahankara are
also described in the Sarmkhya Karika, p. 92.
Vaikarika. that which is productive, is the same as
the Satvika, or that which is combined with the
property of goodness. Taijasa Ahaikara is that
which is endowed with Tejas, ‘heat, or 'cnergy,' in
consequence of its having the property of Rajas,
‘passion’ or ‘activity;' and the third kind. Bhiitadi. or
‘elementary,’ is the Tamasa. or has the property of
darkness. From the first kind proceed the sense;
from the last, the rudimental unconscious elements
: both kinds, which are equally of themselves inert,
being rendered productive by the cooperation of the
second, the energetic or active modification of
Ahankara. which is therefore said to be the origin
of both the senscs and the elements.

24. The successive series of rudiments and
elements, and their respectively engendering the
rudimcuts and elements next in the order, occur in
most of the Puranas, in ncarly the same words. The
Brhannaradiya Purana observes, ae

al ‘They (the elements) in
successive order acquire the property of causality
one to the other.’ The order is also the same; or
other 4kasa), wind or air (vayu). fire or light (tejas),
water and earth : except in one passage of the
Mahabharata (Moksa Dharma, c. 9). where it is
ether, water, fire, air. earth, The order of
Empedocles was ether, fire, earth, water, air.
Cudworth, 1. 97. The investment (avarana) of each
element by its own rudiment, and of each rudiment
by its preceding gross and rudimental elements, is
also met with in most of the chief Puranas. as the
Vayu, Padma. Linga, and Bhagavata; and traces of
it are found amongst the ancient cosmogonists : for
Anaximander supposed, that 'when the world was
made. a certain sphere or flame of fire, separated
from matter (the Infinite), encompassed the air,
which invested the earth as the bark does a trce:'
Kara ty evry tovée tov Koo}tov anoKptynvat.
Kal tiva ék tovtov gAoyos aBoipav mepi~
vyvol TH mept THY ynv aEpt, as Tadévdpw
gAotsv Euseb. Pr. 1. 15. Some of the Puranas. as
the Matsya, Vayu. Linga. Bhagavata. and
Markandeya, add a description of a participation of
properties amongst the elements, which is rather

=== PAGE 16 ===

16

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Vedanta than Sarhkhya. According to this notion,
the elements add to their characteristic properties
those of the elements which precede them. Akasa
has the single property of sound: air has those of
touch and sound: fire has colour, touch, and sound;
water has taste, colour. touch, and sound: and earth
has smell and the rest. thus having five properties:
or, as the Liga Purana describes the series, 3TT%
wea aq aentamiie: ferg at a:
weerimistad! eh daar weceriqrgyt
fog wish: a weerierar wees wart
Safer aereaCin art ferereg cafera: | wees
Se was renee Te ea yf: ea
WER

25. Tanmatra, ‘rudiment, or ‘type,’ from Tad
‘that.’ for Tasmin ‘in that’ gross element, and mdtra
‘subtile or rudimental form’ (aTaTgei *4)1 The
rudiments are also the. characteristic properties of
the elements: as the Bhagavata; 44 ATaT To: weet
fery aeBGETA: | ‘The rudiment of it (ether) is also its
quality, sound; as a common designation may
denote both a person who sees an object which is to
be seen:' that is. according to the commentator,
suppose a person behind a wall called aloud, “An
elephant! an elephant!" the term would equally
indicate an elephant was visible, and that somebody
saw it, Bhag. IL. 5.

26. The properties here alluded to arc not those
of goodness etc. but other properties assigned to
perceptible objects by the Sarhkhya doctrines, or
Santi. 'placidity’; Ghorata, ‘terror; and Moha,
‘dulness' or 'stupefaction.' v. Karika. v. 38. p. 112.

27. The Bhagavata. which gives a similar
statement of the origin of the elements, senses, and
divinities, specifies the last to be Dis (space), air,
the sun, Pracetas, the Asvins, fire, Indra, Upendra.
Mitra, and Ka or Prajapati, presiding over the
senses, according to the comment, or severally over
the ear, skin, eye, tongue, nose, speech, hands, feet,
and excretory and generative organs, Bhag. Il. 5.
3h.

28. Avyaktanugrahena. The expression is
something equivocal, as Avyakta may here apply
either to the First Cause or to matter. In either case
the notion is the same, and the aggregation of the
clements is the effect of the presidence of spirit,
without any active interference of the indiscrete
principle The Avyakta is passive in the evolution
and combination of Mahat and the rest. Pradhana

is, no doubt, intended. but its identification with the
Supreme is also implied. The term Anugraha may
also refer to a classification of the order of creation,
whicli will be again adverted to,

29. It is impossible not to refer this notion to the
same origin as the widely diffused opinion of
antiquity, of the first manifestation of the world in
the form of an cgg. “It seems to have been a
favourite symbol, and very ancient, and we find it
adopted among many nations.’ Bryant, III. 165.
Traces of it occur amongst the Syrians. Persians’
and Egyptains; and besides the Orphic egg amongst
the Greeks, and that described by Aristophanes,
Téxtev part of the ceremony in the mp@tictov
vunveniov we n pekavorntepos Dov, part of the
ceremony in the Dionysiaca and other mysteries
consisted of the consecration of an egg; by which
according to Porphyry, was signified the world:
Eppnvever S€ 16 @dv tov KOapoVv, Whether this
egg typified the ark. as Bryant and Faber suppose,
is not material to the proof of the antiquity and
wide diffusion of the belief that the world in the
beginning existed in such a figure. A similar
account of the first aggregation of the elements in
the form of an egg is given in all the Puranas, with
the usual epithet Haima or Hiranya, 'golden.' as it
occurs in Manu, I. 9.

30. Here is another analogy to the doctrines of
antiquity relating to the mundane egg: and as the
first visible male being, who, as we shall hereafter
see, united in himself the nature of either sex.
abode in the egg. and issued from it; so "this first-
born of the world, whom they represented under
two shapes and characters, and who sprung from
the mundane egg, was the person from whom the
niortals and immortals were derived. He was the
same as Dionusus, whom they styled. i
fra ware stared pores Tent a fears

31. Janarddana is derived from Jana, 'men,' and
Arddana. ‘worship; the ‘object of adoration to
mankind’.

32 This is the invariable doctrine of the Puranas.
diversificd only according to the individual divinity
to whom they ascribe identity with Paramdtman or
Paramesvara, In our text this is Vishhu: in the Saiva
Puranas, as in the Linga. it is Siva: in the Brahma-
vaivartta it is Krsna. The identification of one of the
hypostases with the common source of the triad
was an incongruity not unknown to other

=== PAGE 17 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 3

theogonies; for Cneph, amongst the Egyptians,
appears on the one hand to have been identified
with the Supreme Being, the indivisible unity,
whilst on the other he is confounded with both
Emeph and Ptha, the second and third persons of
the triad of hypostages. Cudworth, 1.4.18,

33. 'The world that is termed spirit;' Fare WG!
explained by the commentator, yevawta! ‘which
indeed bears the appellation spirit, conformably to
the text of the Vedas. 484 Ua¢ Ha! this universe is
indeed spirit.' This is rather Vedanta than Sarbkhya,
and appears to deny the existence of matter: and so
it does as an independent existence; for the origin
and end of infinite substance is the Deity or
universal spirit: but it does not therefore imply the
non-existence of the world as real substance.

34. Visnu is both Bhutesa, "lord of the elements.’
or of created things, and Visvaripa ‘universal
substance:, he is therefore, as one with sensible
things, subject to his own control.

35. Varenya, ‘most excellent;, being the same,
according to the commentator, with supreme
felicity: TARBIETT|

ese.

17

=== PAGE 18 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 3

CHAPTER 3
aaratseaa:

(wan: winrar: wafer,
Tengen),
aia vara

Prpreamterea YgearareeT: |
aa unifeended seruitsequrrerai git
Maitreya.- How can creative agency be

attributed to that Brahma, who is without
qualities, illimitable, pure, and free from
imperfection?
TUR Sart

WRT: MAMTA ATER: |

ASA TRUTH AAA AAMT IH

waft waat fe! uretarer aera

afaate wat wit weary area Bt

AMOS TAT TEN SeenvTATAS 1

17

Parasara said—The essential properties of
existent things are objects of observation, of
which no foreknowledge is attainable; and
creation, and hundreds of properties, belong to
Brahmi, as inseparable parts of his essence, as
heat, oh chief of sages, is inherent in fire.!
Hear then how the deity Narayana, in the
person of Brahma, the great parent of the
world, created all existent things.

sera: Shea faery fer watrarer: wit
Far rea ant agate ByprT
Were Tea Tere
arrest faut sarah Tarra

aa wet Fate ufo eH
aang wet aToTErTeT A
FAP TATA 9

Brahm is said to be born: - a familiar
phrase, to signify his manifestation; and, as the
peculiar measure of his presence a hundred of
his years is said to constitute his life: that
period is also called Param, and the half of it,
Pararddham.’ I have already declared to you,
oh sinless Brahman, that Time is a form of
Visnu: hear now how it is applied to measure
the duration of Brahma, and of all other
sentient beings, as well as of those which are
unconscious, as the mountains, oceans, and the
like,

aaat Uaeerearen Fae yer
aaafererenen ang fryritetteat fairs cu
mantener yetnigg ay

arererarfon aah Ara: WRATH 8

a: weft af Zoey eferuirat

art efarot ofagarmaat fern gon
fectctineeng garters

aay gemfiratgant Frater tee
went afar 3 ah aerfey gare
froma wearin gireng: wafae: gH
warat: Wa: Bea Yat ceanferaa
weiner aq geal Grearragy fe Bu gan

=== PAGE 19 ===

warrant: are year

gure: a g fara: qerrenfeciqe: newt

i Fat ee afeda ugg

wread aq Beas Tet fears WI gu

wenn feare wer! was wee

wae afters tat aarergd syn 9g i

Oh best of sages! fifteen twinklings of the
eye make a KAstha; thirty Kasthas, one Kala;
and thirty Kalas, one Mubirtta’. Thirty
Muhirttas constitute a day and night of
mortals: thirty such days make a month,
divided into two half-months: six months form
an Ayana (the period of the sun's progress
north or south of the ecliptic): and two Ayanas
compose a year. The southern Ayana is a night
and the northern a day, of the gods, Twelve
thousand divine years, each composed of
(three hundred and sixty) such days, constitute
the period of the four Yugas, or ages. They are
thus distributed: the Krta age has four
thousand divine years; the Treta three
thousand; the Dvapara two thousand; and the
Kali age one thousand: so those acquainted
with antiquity have declared. The period that
precedes a Yuga is called a Sandy, and it is of
as many hundred years as there are thousands
in the Yuga: and the period that follows a
Yuga, termed the Sandydmsa, is of similar
duration. The interval between the Sandya and
the Sandy4msa is the Yuga, denominated Krta,
Tretd, etc. The Krta, Treté, Dvapara, and Kali
constitute a great age, or aggregate of four
ages: a thousand such aggregates are a day of
Brahma, and fourteen Manus reign within that
term. Hear the division of time which they
measure’.

wena: Ya: WaT Aye TT:
mane fe gerd dig a aq etl
agepiat waren entrar geareaft: |
werat wt: Be: QUST AAAI RC
wat werreentin eer sere TT
Brae caren wears a eet

THE VISNU-PURANAM

frmteng wyut: dene: wera fem
aaafrerarantt Fragen war 2011
faurfter aeentin arctisemtird fern

wratcer Hers wrghdratiaa 3 eu

aceon Be aareit arene: BT

‘are A fafereet are cee wfeST Ne UH

wer fe cent wet cited splenigar

Seven Rsis, certain (secondary) divinities,
Indra, Manu, and the kings his sons, are
created and perish at one period’; and the
interval, called a Manvantara, is equal to
seventy-one times the number of years
contained in the four Yugas, with some
additional years: this is the duration of the
Manu, the (attendant) divinities, and the rest,
which is equal to 852,000 divine years, or to
306,720,000 years of mortals, independent of
the additional period,. Fourteen times this
period constitutes a Brahma day, that is, a day
of Brahma; the term (Brahma) being the
derivative form. At the end of this day a
dissolution of the universe occurs, when all the
three worlds, earth, and the regions of space,
are consumed with fire.

et went ararat Teetten Prana: 1 2311
emote Fete Gea ATTETUTTENS 1
attfirerearrra: Bet Ferm ea: 1 Vw
sereiniigatrerriseraea:|
warn fe at Ut AeA BHAT TA AGH
erg vet atte ated a aT
we fe ee satu weer eH
Ware oTtrY TS Te
meartsyeTHeT: wrt seafeea Von
faders wedges artarrer & feat
areg sft metist wer: after: n ec
far stfamygent wens gira: areas:
The dwellers of Maharloka (the region
inhabited by the saints who survive the world),
distressed by the heat, repair then to Janaloka

(the region of holy men after their decease).
When the three worlds are but one mighty

=== PAGE 20 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 3

19

ocean, Brahma, who is one with Narayana,
satiate with the demolition of the universe,
sleeps upon his serpent-bed-contemplated, the
lotus born, by the ascetic inhabitants of the
Janaloka-for a night of equal duration with his
day; at the close of which he creates anew. Of
such days and nights is a year of Brahma
composed; and a hundred such years constitute
his whole life.' One Pararddha*, or half his
existence. has expircd, terminating with the
Maha Kalpa’ called Padma. The Kalpa (or day
of Brahma) termed Varaha is the Rest of the
second period of Brahma's existence.

NOTES

1. Agency depends upon the Raja guna, the
quality of foulness or passion, which is an
imperfection. Perfect being is void of all qualities,
and is therefore inert.

Omnis enim per se divom natura necesse est

Immortali aevo summa cum pace fruatur :

but if inert for ever, creation could not occur.
The objection is rather evaded than answered. The
ascribing to Brahma of innumerable and
unappreciable properties is supported by the
commentator with vague and scarcely applicable
texts of the Vedas. ‘In him there is neither
instrument nor effect : his like, his superior, is
nowhere seen :, 7 7a wef soi a fad 4
acamarafiea Fadi ‘That supreme soul is the
subjugator of all. the ruler of all. the sovereign of
all : 8 arraren wae aah ache wea: Beenerafe: | In
various places of the Vedas also it is said that his
power is supreme, and that wisdom. power, and
action are his essential properties : TT a
gad caateet arracsea 1 The origin of creation is
also imputed in the Vedas to the rise of will or
desire in the Supreme: Ms#rad 4g Vi Tarra! 'He
wished I may become manifold. I may create
creatures.’ The Bhagavata expresses the same
doctrine : 'The Supreme Being was before all things
alone, the soul and lord of spiritual substance : in
consequence of his own will he is secondarily
defined, as if of various minds: warm
STAT! fay: | sTeRSRERTaAL ATTRA: This
will however, in the mysticism of the Bhagavata, is
personified as Maya : @ a wat dee: wie:
meena Brat ar Here ae PAY Fa ‘She (that

desire) was the energy of the Supreme, who was
contemplating (the uncreated world); and by her.
whose name is Maya, the Lord made the universe.’
This, which was at first a mere poetical
personification of the divine will. came, in such
works, as the Bhagavata, to denote a female
divinity, co-equal and co-eternal with the First
Cause. It may be doubted if the Vedas authorize
such a mystification, and no very decided vestige of
it occurs in the Visnu Purana,

2. This term is also applied to a different and still
more protracted period. See b. VI. c. 3.

3. The last proportion is rather obscurely
expressed : TR] faf:1 'Thirty of them
(Kalas) are the rule for the Muhirtta.' The
commentator says it means that thirty Kalas make a
Ghatika (or Ghari), and two Ghatikas a Muhirtta,
but his explanation is gratuitous, and is at variance
with more explicit passages elsewhere, as in the
Matsya fie senda weryed:| : Muhrtta is thirty
Kalas. Im these divisions of the twenty-four hours
the Karma, Markandeya, Matsya, Vayu and Linga
Puranas exactly agree with our authority, In Manu.
1, 64, we have the same computation, with a
difference in the first article, eighteen Nimesas
being one Kastha. The Bhavisya Purana follow
Manu in that respect, and agrees in the rest with the
Padma, which has,

15 Nimesas = 1 Kasthd 30 Kasthas = 1 Kala

30 Kalas =1Ksana 12 Ksanas = | Muhiirtta

30 Muhirttas = 1 day and night.

In the Mahabharata, Moksa Dharma, it is said
that thirty Kalis and one-tenth, or, according to the
commentator, thirty Kalis and three Kasthas make a
Muhirtta. A still greater variety, however, occurs in
the Bhagavata and in the Brahma Vaivartta Purana

These have,

2 Paramanus ==1Anu 3 Anus =! Trasarenu

3 Trasarenus == 1 Truti 100 Trutis == 1 Vedha
3Vedhas = 1 Lava 3Lavas =1 Nimesa
3Nimesas =1Ksana 5 Ksanas =] Kastha

15 Kasth’s = 1 Laghu 15 Laghus = 1 Narika
2Narikas = = 1 Muhdrtta 6 or 7 Narikas = 1 Yama. Or

watch of the day or night
Allusions to this or either of the proceeding
computations, or to any other, have not been found
in either of the other Puranas: yet the work of
Gopila Bhatta, from which Colebrooke states he
derived his information on the subject of Indian

=== PAGE 21 ===

20

THE VISNU-PURANAM

weights and measures (A. R. 5. 105); the Sarnkhya
Parimana, cities the Varaha Purana for a peculiar
computation. and quotes another from the Bhavis
ya, different from that which occurs in the first
chapter of that work, to which we have referred.
The principle of the calculation adopted by the
astronomical works is different: it is, 6 respirations
(Prana)=l Vikala; 60 Vikalas==| Danda; 60
Dandas=l sydereal day. The Nimesa. which is the
base of one of the Pauranik modes, is a twinkle of
the eye of a man at rest; whilst the Paramanu which
is the origin of the other, and apparently more
modern system, considcring the works in which it
occurs, is the time taken by a Paramanu. or mote in
the sun-beam, to pass through a crevice in a shutter.
Some indications of this calculation being in
common currency, occur in the Hindustani terms
Renu (Trasarenu) and Lamhu (Laghu) in Indian
horometry (A.R.5.81); whilst the more ordinary.
system seems derived from the astruaomical works,
being 60 Tilas=l Vipala; 60 Vipalas=1 Pala; 60
Palas=1 Danda or Ghari. Ibid.

4. These calculations of time are found in most
of the Puranas, with some addition, occasionally, of
no importance, as that of the year of the seven Rsis,
3030 mortal years, and the year of Dhruva, 9090
such years, in the Linga Purana in all essential
points the computations accord, and the scheme,
extravagant as it may appear, seems to admit of
easy explanation. We have, in the first place, a
computation of the years of the gods in the four

ages, or,

KrtaYuga +. 4000

Sandya

Sandyansa ...

Treté Yuga

Sandya

Sandyansa 300
3600

Dvapara Yuga 2000

Sandya 200

Sandyansa 200
2800

Kali Yuga 1000

Sandya 100

Sandyansa 100
1200
12000

If these divine years are converted into years of
mortals, by multiplying them by 360. a year of men
being a day of the gods, we obtain the years of
which the Yugas of mortals are respectively said to
consist:

4800x360 1,728,000
3600x360 = 1.296,000
2400x360 = 864,000
1200x360 432,000

4,320,000 a Mahadyuga.
So that these periods resolve themselves into
very simple elements: the notion of four ages in a
deteriorating series expressed by descending
arithmetical progression, as 4, 3, 2,1; the
conversion of units into thousands; and the
mythological fiction, that these were divine years,
each composed of 360 years of men. It does not
secm necessary to refer the invention to any
astronomical computations, or to any attempt to
represent actual chronology.
5, The details of these, as occurring in each
Manvantara, are given in the third book. c. | and 2.
6. aqdari dena after aeaafi:! One and
seventy enumerations of the four ages, with a
surplus,' A similar rcading occurs in several other
Puranas, but none of them state of what the surplus
or addition consists; but it is, infact, the number of
years required to reconcile two computations of the
Kalpa. The most simple, and probably the original
calculation of a Kalpa. is its being 1000 great ages,
or ages of the gods: Weg eared Sart ATS!
teri qari y aed vitterm wet ened cat
ufseean Bhavisya Purina Then 4,320,000 years,
or a divine age, x 1000=4,320,000,000 years, or a
day or night of Brahma. But a day of Brahma is
also seventy-one times a great age multiplied by
fourteen: 4,320,000x71x14=4,294,080,000; or less
than the preceding by 25,920,000; and it is to make
up for this deficiency that a certain number of years
must be added to the computation by Manvantaras.
According to the Strya Siddhanta, as cited by
Davis (A. R. 2. 231), this addition consists of a

=== PAGE 22 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 4

21

Sandhi to each Manvantara, equal to the Satya age,
or 1,728,000 years;.and one similar Sandhi at the
commencement of the Kalpa:

thus — 4,320,000x71=306,720,000+1,728,000=
308,448,000 x 14=4318,272,000+1,728,000
4320,000,000. The Pauraniks, however, omit the
Sandhi of the Kalpa, and add the whole
compensation to the Manvantaras. The amount of
this in whole numbers is 1,851,428 in each
Manvantara. or
4,320,000x7 1=306,720,000+ 1,85 1,428==
308,571,428 x 14 = 4319,999,992: leaving a very
small inferiority to the result of the calculation of a
Kalpa by a thousand great ages. To provide for this
deficiency, indeed, very minute sub-divisions are
admitted into the calculation; and the commentator
on our text says, that the additional years, if of
gods, are 5142 years. 10 months, 8 days, 4 watches,
2 Muhirttas, 8 Kalis, 17 Kasthas, 2 Nimesas, and
1/7th; if of mortals, 1,851,428 years, 6 months, 24
days. 12 Naris. 12 Kalas, 25 Kasthas, and 10 Nimes
as. It will be observed, that in the Kalpa we have
the regular descending series 4, 3. 2, with cyphers
multiplied ad libitum.

7. The Brahma Vaivartta says 108 years, but this
is unusual. Brahma's life is but a Nimesa of Krsna,
according to that work; a Nimesa of Siva.
according to the Saiva Purina.

8. In the last book the Pararddha occurs as a very
different measure of time, but it is employed here
in its ordinary acceptation.

9. In theory the Kalpas are infinite; as the Bhavis
ya: Teen Seri 2 Tea ares
‘Excellent sages, thousands of millions of Kalpas
have passed, and as many are to come.’ In the Linga
Purana, and others of the Saiva division, above
thirty Kalpas are named, and some account given of
several but they are evidently  sectarial
embellishments. The only Kalpas usually specified
are those which follow in the text : the one which
was the last, or the Padma. and the present or
Varaha. The first is also commonly called the
Brahma; but the Bhagavata distinguishes the
Brahm, considering it to be the first of Brahma's
life. whilst the Padma was the last of the first
Pararddha. The term Mahi, or great Kalpa applied
to the Padma is attached to it only in a general
sense; or. according to the commentator. because it
comprises, as a minor Kalpa, that in which Brahma
was born from a lotus. Properly, a great Kalpa is
not a day, but a life of Brahma; as in the Brahma

Vaivartta: sama ae: arefafeftatia: | asset

wauiga: Hya:1| Chronologers compute a
Kalpa by the life of Brahma. Minor Kalpas, as
Samvartta and the rest, are numerous.’ Minor
Kalpas here denote every period of destruction, or
those in which the Samvartta wind, or other
destructive agents, operate. Several other
computations of tune are found in different
Puranas, but it will be sufficient to notice one
which occurs in the Hari Varhga. as it is peculiar,
and because it is not quite correctly given in M.
Langlois’ translation It is the calculation of the
Manava time. or time of a Manu.

10. divine years | =a day and night of a Manu.
10 Manava days = his fortnight,
10 Manava form. = his month.
12 Manava months = his season.
6 Manava seasons = his year.

Accordingly the commentator says 72000 divine
years make up his year. The French translation has,
“dix annees des dieux font un jour de Manu; dix
jours des dieux font un pakcha de Manu," etc, The
error lies in the expression "jours des dieux” and is
evidently a mere inadvertence : for if ten years
make a day, ten days can scarcely make a fortnight.

RK

=== PAGE 23 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 4

21

CHAPTER 4
aguiseara:
Carat wtavirg)
a3a sarr
Ben ATTUTSRS at eat wary TM

want achat cares weTyAN gH

Maitreya said—Tell me. mighty sage.
How, in the commencement of the (present)
Kalpa, Narayana, who is named Brahma,
created all existent things.’

Way Fart
WAT: WAS MTA TA ATT S:|
werafeafadat ser at Fremrrn au
PardSara replied~ In what manner the

divine Brahma, who is one with Narayana,
created progeny, and is thence named the lord

=== PAGE 24 ===

22

THE VISNU-PURANAM

of progeny (Prajapati). the lord god. you shall
hear.

aniiraearerart Fremgatfert: 1y:1

Praia Ten Yt citer 311

ana: wisferar: wWearaft @ My:

vereett wTarrie: WATT: SI

BH drerercea vette areata

wereeafiat Sa wert: weATETTTN GI

At the close of the past (or Padma) Kalpa.
the divine Brahma endowed with the quality of
goodness, awoke from his night of sleep, and
beheld the universe void. He, the supreme
Narayana, the incomprehensible, the sovereign
of creatures, invested with the form of
Brahma, the god without beginning, the
creator of all things; of whom. with respect to
his name Narayana, the god who has the form
of Brahma, the imperishable origin of the
world, this verse is repeated.

amit are fet aheat sat a aT:
are wer at: We Ba AAT: AAG I
arava: w mgt area seeesTOry Wy:
START Agent ayant: WATaAT: WN
say Tae aenfey sat FT
aRrenifeant Teg ANTE ATTA:

"The waters are called Nara, because they
were the offspring of Nara (the supreme
spirit); and as in them his first (Ayana)
progress (in the character of Brahma) took
place, he is thence named Narayana the whose
place of moving was the waters)."? He, the
lord, concluding that within the waters lay the
earth, and being desirous to raise it up, created
another form for that purpose; and as in
preceding Kalpas he had assumed the shape of
a fish or a tortoise, so in this he took the figure
of a boar.

aqard wage: feat

fea: Ferrer water were sarah: 1 et
srcirama: fag: wrareefinga:|

wferergr eT ATATETTAY TTT: 11 0 1

Having adopted a form composed of the
sacrifices of the Vedas’, for the preservation of
the whole earth, the eternal, supreme, and
universal soul, the great progenitor of created
beings, eulogized by Sanaka and the other
saints who dwell in the sphere of holy men
(Janaloka); he, the supporter of spiritual and
material being, plunged into the ocean.

Fetes a der Set rarer

JOT OTT Hy AHA IATA 8M

The goddess Earth, beholding him thus
descending to the subterrene regions, bowed in
devout adoration, and thus glorified the god:

yfuegara

Wa ey PAA Pg

Tryarrened wt raeisé yeryferam eit

watseqga yed wrraré ST

rere er eae areas ART: 83

FAT TUNA PRATT THIS A

METAR She A ATI ge

Prthvi (Earth) said— Hail to you, who are
all creatures; to you, the holder of the mace
and shell: elevate me now from this place, as
you have upraised me in days of old. From
you have I proceeded; of you do I consist; as
do the skies, and all other existing things. Hail
to you, spirit of the supreme spirit, to you, soul
of soul; to you. who are discrete and indiscreet

matter; who are one with the elements and
with time.

4 ant adyart ore ot ferrerad
anifag weit gafampeRTerRTTR Bh
afta Tact waa

Be rata tifa ferret wetfefi- gg
wadt ay wt aed a Set erT
sanity agi date fedtena: 1 gon
Tae WE Tel AAT Bhs AUT: |
ATQeaHATTEA at hat AaaTERAFA ge
ad feafaerer areal Aeare separate:

=== PAGE 25 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 4

23

aaa a aq Uftadet aguafiact aan een

You are the creator of all things, their
preserver, and their destroyer, in the forms, oh
lord, of Brahma. Visnu, and Rudra, at the
seasons of creation, duration, and dissolution.
When you have devoured all things, you
reposes on the ocean that sweeps over the
world, meditated upon, oh Govinda, by the
wise. No one knows your true nature, and the
gods adore you only in the forms it has
pleased you to assume. They who are desirous
of final liberation, worship you as the supreme
Brahma; and who that adores not Vasudeva,
shall obtain emancipation? Whatever may be
apprehended by the mind. whatever may be
perceived by the senses, whatever may be
discerned by the intellect, all is but a form of
you.

TESS SMT ART ATU

mreetfate crasrafieas att fe ATTN RON

Wena Ta WeTTATSTA

Sat SaTea We SaATS WHT 2 aM

WITTY EMT HS BATISTA

Fe Aye TULSA TTTTRTATAT: I VI

wa dared wag ei aagent et

atest were FaraTvafaet TTT 231

Tahpingras afst year

wath aa Aakh wart wat

aad wt tered yah get Aa TA Ve

I am of you, upheld by you; you are my
creator, and to you I fly for refuge: hence, in
this universe, Madhavi (the bride of Madhava
or Visnu) is my designation. Triumph to the
essence of all wisdom, to the unchangeable,
the imperishable: triumph to the eternal; to the
indiscreet, to the essence of discrete things: to
him who is both cause and effect; who is the
universe; the sinless lord of sacrifice; ‘triumph.
You are sacrifice; you are the oblation; you are
the mystic Okara; you an the sacrificial fires;
you are the Vedas, and their dependent
science,; you are, Hari, the object of all
worship.' The sun, the stars, the planets, the

whole world; all that is formless, or that has
form; all that is visible, or invisible; all, Purus
ottama, that I have said, or left unsaid; all this,
Supreme, you are. Hail to you, again and
again! hail! all hail!
WIG ary

Ua eq yiroa yferdtaz:1

errata: starz aret ufteroq 24 11

Wa: Wafers at waégat

ARATE: BHCTTCA: |

wafer aret garrett WEN ZG II
fase a4 qeanrenet

ARTA TACHA
segreverare fe ary Mere

PRTATACTAL FAT 2911
sented aycrerfereret

THE, FAM: |
arabian: wet: Tat

Fog a & Frnt aaa 2c
Shermer TETRA

terres wat farerahi
fagradt Sand yritt

Taree Brat Ys 2H

wie of 2 Raahe afr
ren ATT
SUT ACAI 3 0 11

Parasara said—The auspicious supporter of
the world, being thus hymned by the earth,
emitted a low murmuring sound, like the
chanting of the Sama Veda; and the mighty
boar, whose eyes were like the lotus, and
whose body, vast as the Nila mountain, was of
the dark colour of the lotus leaves, ‘uplifted
upon his ample tusks the earth from the lowest
regions. As he reared up his head, the waters
shed from his brow purified the great sages,
Sanandana and others, residing in the sphere
of the saints. Through the indentations made
by his hoofs, the waters rushed into the lower

a

=== PAGE 26 ===

24

THE VISNU-PURANAM

worlds with a thundering noise. Before his
breath, the pious denizens of Janaloka were
scattered, and the Munis sought for shelter
amongst the bristles upon the scriptural body-
of the boar, trembling as he rose up,
supporting the earth, and dripping with
moisture. Then the great sages, Sanandana and
the rest, residing continually in the sphere of
saints, were inspired with delight, and bowing
lowly they praised the stern-eyed upholder of
the earth.
wea weg Aya
wat verphaenfe wage
wafer areftatiegiar-
Paha TA TAS A TTI 2
Uy Aare ude aay amir set
earaiiraista ayeetior eat: wet aagHteaa 32
facies waet were Waleed gered force
BHATT werent Brot wreTs Edife Fan
qysermaaitong wrdgrearnfiacrarera
Weanisanisfa a Garaaery way Wea BYU
vaemarayd verrenfefiatrsrart ferrgi
fore faa: wtarisfa sete aisha wea
aprafaarenpratad qauset ae fawreaa 7
famed: ware fart wilfariteatiatougrn 3 & 11
manger
aett aq ag Taal
are ae:
feara fare fast va TN BON
weadeatcat aratshet Hert: Ta:

aaa fee Sa Saree 3 CH

The Yogis said~ Triumph, lord of lords
supreme; KeSava, sovereign of the earth, the
wielder of the mace, the shell, the discus, and
the sword: cause of production, destruction,
and existence. You are, oh god : there is no
other supreme condition, but you. You. lord,
are the person of sacrifice: for your feet are the
Vedas; your tusks are the stake to which the
victim is bound; in your teeth are the

offerings; your mouth is the altar; your tongue
is the fire; and the hairs of your body are the
sacrificial grass. Thine eyes, oh omnipotent
are day and night; your head is the seat of all,
the place of Brahma; your mane is all the
hymns of the Vedas; your nostrils are all
oblations: oh you, whose snout is the ladle of
oblation; whose deep voice is the chanting of
the Sama Veda; whose body is the hall of
sacrifice, whose joints are the different
ceremonies; and whose ears have the
properties of both voluntary and obligatory
riles;” do you who arc eternal, who are in size
a mountain, be propitious. We acknowledge
you, who has traversed the world, oh universal
form, to be the beginning, the continuance,
and the destruction of all things: you are the
supreme god. Have pity on us, oh lord of
conscious and unconscious beings. The orb of
the earth is seen seated on the tip of your
tusks, as if you had been sporting amid a lake
where the lotus floats, and had borne away the
leaves covered with soil. The space between
heaven and earth is occupied by your body, oh
you of unequalled glory, resplendent with the
power of pervading the universe, oh lord, for
the benefit of all. You are the aim of all: there
is none othcr than you, sovereign of the world:
this is your might, by which all things, fixed or
movable, are pervaded.

AAAS FPA TRA TTAT
iat water sergaratr:11 3.31
areeunfadt setagea:!
ooberett Uyedt MET AAA ¥ ott
aq are: yorreeisfact oy
ares wagatar wags TATU ye
wate wdeatery ware aranfary
sedate vat Saree ¥ ei

This form, which is now beheld, is your
form, as one essentially with wisdom. Those
who have not practised devotion, conceive
erroneously of the nature of the world. The
ignorant, who do not perceive that this

=== PAGE 27 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 4

universe is of the nature of wisdom, and Judge
of it as an object of perception only, are lost in
the ocean of spiritual ignorance. But they who
know true wisdom, and whose minds are pure,
behold this whole world as one with divine
knowledge, as one with you, oh god. Be
favorable, oh universal spirit: raise up this
earth, for the habitation of created beings.
Inscrutable deity, whose eyes are like lotuses,
give us felicity.

wranisfe anay ties via

aRSt Waray vi At Serene +31

wingiiadt sranquantioit

WaT THAIS Vi at Teer yw

Oh lord, you are endowed with the quality
of goodness : raise up, Govinda, this earth, for
the general good. Grant us happiness, oh lotus-
eyed. May this, your activity in creation, be
beneficial to the earth. Salutation to you. Grant
us happiness, oh lotus-eyed.
WAI Fart

wa deqaartisa ware Etat:

serene faxfat fare =reraiay vero x4

weatat ayaa vent afta firm

ferrarara Seer a wet aft Mera wE I

aa: fafa wnt Gear yfseat ister Aefroy

aan faurt ararenfe: Tat xt

are wigefaery wary yfadtaet

aris wardur waattreaifira: ix ou

Parasara said— The supreme being thus
eulogised, upholding the earth, raised it
quickly, and placed it on the summit of the
ocean, where it floats like a mighty vessel, and
from its expansive surface does not sink
beneath the waters. Then, having levelled the
earth, the great eternal deity divided it into
portions, by mountains: he who never wills in
vain, created, by his irresistible power, those
mountains gain upon the earth which had been
consumed at the destruction of the world.

gfaant aa: grat wast aera

25

qaraiggy citar ydaq wracTAT ye

geeonl Faenisd Treat ga:!

want Ufe wratrqdaaat eft: yo!

Pirmoatandd year wasn

ween CATT aT ST STMT: 2

faftannt yarark arr fafa

stad avai de way TATRA VM

far sitferargeret weraigt aguifeara:1

Having then divided the earth into seven
great portions cr continents, as it was before,
he constructed in like manner the four (lower)
spheres, earth, sky, heaven, and the spherc of
the sages (Maharloka). Thus Hari, the four-
faced god, invested with the quality of
activity, and taking the form of Brahma,
accomplished the creation: but he (Brahma) is
only the instrumental cause of things to be
created; the things that are capable of being
created arise from nature as a common
material cause: with the exception of one
instrumental cause alone, therc is no need of
any other cause, for (imperceptible) substance
becomes perceptible substance according to
the powers with which it is originally imbued."

RK

NOTES

1. This creation is of the secondary order, or
Pratisarga; water, and even the earth, being in
existence, and consequently having been preceded
by the creation of Mahat and the elements. It is also
a different Pratisarga from that described by Manu.
in which Svayambhu first creates the waters, then
the egg : one of the simplest forms, and perhaps
therefore one of the earliest in which the tradition
occurs.

2. This is the well known verse of Manu. I. 8,
rendered by Jones. “The waters are called Nara.
because they were the production of Nara. or ‘the
spirit’ of God; and since they were his first Ayana.
or place of motion, he thence is named Narayana,
or ‘moving on the waters.” Now although there can
be little doubt that this tradition is in substance the
same as that of Genesis, the language of the
translation is perhaps more scriptural than is quite

=== PAGE 28 ===

26

THE VISNU-FURANAM

warranted. The waters, it is said in the text of
Manu, were the progeny of Nara. which Kullika
Bhatta explains Paramatma, the supreme soul; that
is, they were the first productions of God in
creation. Ayana. instead of ‘Place of motion,’ is
explained by Agraya, ‘place of abiding.’ Narayana
means, therefore, he whose place of abiding was
the deep. The verse occurs in several of the
Puranas, in general in nearly the same words. and
almost always as a quotation, as in our text: #4
drerecaa vei! The Linga, Vayu. and Markandeya
Puranas, citing the same. have a somewhat different
reading; or. 37 ARI -@ aya Fern aT ATH) Ey WA
aaa a ARTA: yas! ‘Apa (is the same (as)
Nara. or bodies (Tanava); such, we have heard
(from the Vedas), is the meaning of Apa. He who
sleeps in them. is thence called Narayana, The
ordinary sense of Tanu is either ‘minute’ or ‘body.’
nor does it occur amongst the synonyms of water in
the Nirukta of the Vedas. It may perhaps be
intended to say. that Nara or Apa has the meaning
of ‘bodily forms, in which spirit is enshrined, and of
which the waters, with Visnu resting upon them are
a type; for there is much mysticism in the Puranas
in which the passage thus occurs. Even in them.
however, it is introduced in the usual manner, by
describing the world as water alone, and Visnu
reposing upon the deep : wamt§ war wer... Foi
aRrTeRg! Tart afer Tem! Vayu Purina The
Bhagavata has evidently attempted to explain the
ancient text: yeasvs fatter get ow Paras
araseaRetiseairgr: yeh) aretaretiq,
eager weenie! Fa ARP AT war: WRIA: |
‘When the embodied god in the beginning divided
the mundane egg, and issued form. then, requiring
an abiding place, he created the waters: the pure
created the pure. In them. his own created be abode
for a thousand years, and thence received the name
of Narayana : the waters being the product of the
embodied deity :' i. e. they were the product of
Nara or Visnu, as the first male or Virat. and were
therefore termed Nara : and from there being his
Ayana or Sthna, his ‘abiding place’ comes his
epithet of Narayana.

3. The Varaha form was thosen, says the Vayu
Purana because it is an animal delighting to sport in
water, but it is described in many Puranas, as it is in
the Visnu, as, a type of the ritual of the Vedas, as
we shall have further occasion to remark. The

elevation of the earth from beneath the ocean in this
form, was, therefore, probably at first an allegorical
representation of the extrication of the world from a
deluge of iniquity by the rites of religion.
Geologists may perhaps suspect, in the original and
unmystified tradition, an allusion to a geological
fact, or the existence of lacustrine mammalia in the
early periods of the earth.

4. Yajiiapati, ‘the bestower of the beneficial
results of sacrifices.,

5. Yajfiapurusa, "the male or soul of sacrifice;'
explained by Yajfiamirtti, ‘the form or
personification of sacrifice :' or Yajfiaradhya, ‘he
who is to be propitiated by it.’

6. Varaha Avatara, The description of the figure
of the boar is much more particularly detailed in
other Puranas. As in the Vayu: “The boar was ten
Yojanas in breadth, a thousand Yojanas high; of the
colour of a dark cloud; and his roar was like
thunder; his bulk was vast as a mountain; his tusks
were white, sharp, and fearful; fire flashed from his
eyes like lightning, and he was radiant as the sun;
his shoulders were round, fat and large; he strode
along like a powerful lion; his haunches were fat,
his loins were slender, and his body was smooth
and beautiful.” The Matsya Purana describes the
Viriha in the same words, with one or two
unimportant varieties. The Bhagavata indulges in
that amplification which marks its more recent
composition, and describes the Vardha as issuing
from the nostrils of Brahma. at first of the size of
the thumb, or an inch long, and presently increasing
to the stature of an elephant. That work also
subjoins a legend of the death of the demon
Hiranyaksa, who in a preceding existence was one
of Visnu's doorkeepers, at his palace in Vaikuntha.
Having refused admission to a party of Munis, they
cursed him, and he was in consequence born as one
of the sons of Diti. When the earth, oppressed by
the weight of the mountains, sunk down into the
waters, Visnu was beheld in the subterrene regions,
or Rasatala. by Hira-nyaksa in the act of carrying it
off. The demon claimed the earth, and defied Visnu
to combat; and a conflict took place, in which
Hiranyaksa was slain. This legend has not been met
with in any other Purana, and certainly does not
occur in the chief of them, any more than in our
text In the Moksa Dharma of the Mahabharata, c.
35, Visnu destroys the demons in the form of the

=== PAGE 29 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 5

Varaha, but no particular individual is specified,
nor does the elevation of the earth depend upon
their discomfiture. The Kalika Upapurana has an
absurd legend of a conflict between Siva as a
Sarabha. a fabulous animal, and Visnu as the
Varaha, in which the latter suffers himself and his
offspring begotten upon earth to be slain.

7. This, which is nothing more than the
development of the notion that the Varaha
incarnation typifies the ritual of the Vedas, is
repeated in most of the Purdnas in the same or
nearly the same words.

8. This seems equivalent to the ancient notion of
a plastic nature: “All parts of matter, by reason of a
certain life in them, being supposed able to form
themselves artificially and methodically to the
greatest advantage of their present respective
capabilities.” This, which Cudworth (c. Ill) calls
hylozoism, is not incompatible with an active
creator: “not that he should, avtovpyav anavta,
set his own hand to every work, which, as ‘Aristotle
says, would be, unbecoming God; but, as in the
case of Brahma and other subordinate agents, that
they should occasion the various developments of
crude nature to take place, by supplying that will.
of which nature itself is incapable. Action being
once instituted by an instrumental medium, or by
the will of an intellectual agent, it is continued by
powers or a vitality inherent in nature or the matter
of creation itself. The efficiency of such
subordinate causes was advocated by Plato,
Aristotle, and others; and the opinion of Zeno. as
stated by Laertius, might be taken for a translation
of some such passage as that in our text : “Eat Se
govats eC avtn& Kocpevn Kata anepuatkavt
AoyovE, anotToAOVWa TE KM ave~ovaa ta s&
avtnd ev apopevors Epo8vorg, Kat toravta
Spaaa ap oWv aex16n Nature is a habit moved
from itself, according to seminal principles;
perfecting and containing those several things
which in determinate times are produced from it,
and acting agreeably to that from which it was
secreted.’ Intell, system, I. 328. So the
commentator illustrates our text by observing that
the cause of the budding of rice is in its own seeds,
and its development is from itself, though its
growth takes place only at a determinate season , in

consequence of the instrumental agency of the rain.
RK

=== PAGE 30 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 5 27

CHAPTER 5
USnsera:

atest View)
3a sart

war was eaistt affagerary

ager feted, qeirrafecitea:n gn

aq wearers aaa wale

amet Weary TEM ATTRA AT I

Maitreya said— Now unfold to me, O
Brahman, how this deity created the gods,
sages, progenitors, demons, men, animals,
trees, and the rest, that abide on earth, in
heaven, or in the waters: how Brahma at
creation made the world with the qualities, the
characteristics, and the forms of things! is
called the first creation.

WHR Jaret

We areas quer geanfea:
war was Malset Faraafiaery WYN AN
Parasara said- I will explain to you,
Maitreya, listen attentively, how this deity, the
lord of all, created the gods and other beings.

‘ofs faxrarere mene ae YT

agfayde: wt: wgyrerierr: ist

aah whet Tertheentiret wera: |

aafaan: teraefar wget HET GH

taarafima: wit erat wit aera

afgedtswenrger dgarert ATT: 1G 1

Whilst he (Brahma) formerly, in the
beginning of the Kalpas, was medicating on
creation, there appeared a creation beginning
with ignorance, and consisting of darkness.
From that great being appeared fivefold
ignorance, consisting of obscurity, illusion,
extreme illusion, gloom, utter darkness,’ The
creation of the creator thus plunged in

abstraction, was the fivefold (immovable)
world, without intellect or reflection, void of

=== PAGE 31 ===

28

THE VISNU-PURANAM

perception or sensation, incapable of feeling,
and destitute of motion,*

Wen an aaah Gerke

a qsaedé what Fe

wenfieanra: wifertqetanzenrta

area fate sqa: a frigate: Bac

wares fererarert: wrat Wafer:

serenfeusta sat TAN eH

HEGHM SSTAMT Sela yrEaaaT: |

SAUTER WS STAT TTT Rott

Since immovable things were first created,

this is called the first creation. Brahma,
beholding that it was defective, designed
another; and whilst he thus meditated, the
animal creation was manifested, to the
products of which the term Tiryaksrotas is
applied, from their nutriment following a
winding course’, These were called beasts,
etc., and their characteristic was the quality of
darkness, they being destitute of knowledge,
uncontrolled in their conduct, and mistaking
error for wisdom; being formed of egotism
and self-esteem, labouring under the twenty-
eight kinds of imperfection’, manifesting
inward sensations, and associating with each
other (according to their kinds).

TORT TAT ATTA SAAS AAT

aehatagdtaeg uaarectratan een

a Geitfragen aferaraarga:

were aferaa Seda AT: BAT VU

querediag tantg a at)

afery witsorery stators seroreTETn 83

adisat U aa eet Tres TTT

HOTT AL MT PeTaTieawATN Vet

TUNAEATATRTRT MAMMA RTT: |

sage erearenraetay BtTey REAAN Ch i

Tengatg wea aisaigqearreang *

3 wenrgragerreetticea Tats feraeT: RGM

TEM F gage yates aie:

weary aferaay Hye: Brerenter Fn gon

Beholding this creation also imperfect,
Brahma again medicated, and a third creation
appeared, abounding with the quality of
goodness, termed Urdhvasrotas.“The beings
thus produced in the Urdhvasrotas creation
were endowed with pleasure and enjoyment,
unencumbered internally or externally, and
luminous within and without. This, termed the
creation of immortals, was the third
perfomance of Brahma, who, although well
pleased with it, still found it incompetent to
fulfil his end. Continuing therefore his
medications, there sprang, in consequence of
his infallible purpose, the creation termed
Arvaksrotas’, from indiscrete nature. The
products of this are termed Arvaksrotasas,
from the downward current (of their
nutriment). They abound with the light of
knowledge, but the qualities of darkness and
of foulness predominate. Hence they are
afflicted by evil, and are repeatedly impelled
to action. They have knowledge both
externally and internally, and are. the
instruments (of accomplishing the object of
creation. the liberation of soul). These
creatures were mankind.

sere afer: ant: wer yma

wert wet: BT Para BeNOR Tu Re

waa faites qreohg w aya

aanftaendieng wt Ufa: BA: ee

see wipe: wh: HPA shay:

qorntaghy yor 4 wat: BA zon

freaigatang a: trainer: @ seat

wetetaraa: wet Saenteg w ByT 2 aN

I have thus explained to you, excellent
Muni, six® creations. The first creation was
that of Mahat or Intellect, which is also called
the creation of Brahma’. The second was that
of the rudimental principles (Tanméatras),
thence termed the elemental creation (Bhita
sarga). The third was the modified form of
egotism, termed the organic creation, or
creation of the senses (Aindriyaka). These

=== PAGE 32 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 5

29

three were the Prakrta creations, the
developments of indiscrete nature, preceded
by the indiscrete principle'’. The fourth or
fundamental creation (of perceptible things)
was that of inanimate bodies. The fifth. the
Tairyag yonya creation, was that of animals.
The sixth was the Orddhasrotas creation, of
that of the divinities.

adisateaters: wh: aa: ay AAT

SMIST IE: WH: ATTA AN Vl

wat agar: ant: weg Fa: Bar:

watt dqala aterdt aaa: By ISN

The creation of the Arvaksrotas beings was
the seventh, and was that of man. There is an
eighth creation, termed Anugraha, which
possesses both the qualities of goodness and
darkness.'! Of these creations, five are
sccondary, and thrce are primary'?, But there
is a ninth, the Kaumara creation, which is both
primary and secondary",

gat a wren wa wat: WaT:

argent dgaa ard yeaa:

earl srrdieres fener aightresfan 2x1

These arc the nine creations of the great
progenitor of all, and both as primary and
secondary, are the radical causes of the world,
proceeding from the sovereign creator. What
clse dost you desire to hear ?

aia sara
dey aa: wif garetat Bt cra
faenragighrantas rat gFratran 2411

Maitreya said— You have briefly related to
me. Muni, the creation of the gods and other
beings: I am desirous, chief of sages, to hear
from you a more ample account of their
creation,

WIR sara
aifintifera: yet: Giererpyeny a1
warner wre ert SATATAT: AEM
RATT: BEY WaT TeiIGAST:|
gam: ada: ote BR UTE ATH VON

at Gargeaq 3 aIguta aga
Forggrniataht SaTAATTAAN 26
SeTTRTAT TAT SAAT, WATT: |
fargatetarany yore aft AANA VH
sera watarg aerapnferat ATA

TY aren aaa Hag feet 3 ot
faagrtem: siftrs wt: YT!
Rae: AYR yaa geo fea 3 ei
BRAT TY AeA Tramrenyg ferry

aat fe afertt wareager Baar feat 3 BH
Pramas AAS AS ATA
fagerrararres feeroarer ATU 3 31
sree faq ET aeeTAAY wy:

B eeguswad wear ferret ast

Parasara said— Created beings, although
they are destroyed (in their individual forms)
at the periods of dissolution, yet being affected
by the good or evil acts of former existence,
they are never cxemptcd from their
consequences; and when Brahma creates the
world anew, they are the progeny of his will,
in the fourfold condition of gods, men,
animals, or inanimate things. Brahma then,
being desirous of creating the four orders of
beings, termed gods, demons, progenitors, and
men, collected his mind into itself.'* Whilst
thus concentrated, the quality of darkness
pervaded his body; and thence the demons (the
Asuras) were first born, issuing from his thigh.
Brahma then abandoned that form which was
composed of the rudiment of darkness, and
which, being deserted by him, became night.
Continuing to create. but assuming a different
shapc, he experienced pleasure; and thence
from his mouth proceeded the gods, endowed
with the quality of goodness. The form
abandoned by him, became day, in which the
good quality predominates; ard hence by day
the gods are most powerful, and by night the
demons. He next adopted another person, in
which the rudiment of goodness also
prevailed; and thinking of himself, as the

=== PAGE 33 ===

30

father of the world, the progenitors (the Pitrs)
were born from his side. The body, when he
abandoned it, became the Sandya (or evening
twilight), the interval between day and night.

Tiararrat aye a Ay at:

cataratener are ager FesraATAT 3 at

ATTY A AAT a HET: STURT: |

wate Teer af reper afi 3

Brahma then assumed another person,

pervaded by the quality of foulness; and from
this, men, in whom foulness (or passion)
predominates, were produced. Quickly
abandoning that body, it became morning
twilight, or the dawn.

wieana afer agen: fret

Bra wearers Temes taht A300

wait warett wean arardanhs & wits

seoreg wehatir Fryuiernfor gna c

At the appearance of this light of day, men
feel most vigour; while the progenitors are
most powerful in the evening season. In this
manner, Maitreya, Jyotsna (dawn), Ratri
(night), Ahar (day), and Sandhya (evening),
are the four bodies of Brahma invested by the
three Qualities’.

irene asa aye APT

TA: YR TAO HT Ta SITET TAR SI

FATT ST Vs TA MATRA: |

FART: VAG TATA HANARTAT: MANY 0

Be at aay ereT TTA FH

SY: GET Bae HT aaa HATA Bit

Next from Brahma, in a form composed of
the quality of foulness, was produced hunger,
of whom anger was born: and the god put forth
in darkness beings emaciate with hunger, of
hidcous aspects, and with long beards. Thosc
beings hastened to the deity. Such of them as
exclaimed, Oh preserve us! were thence called
Raksasas"*: others, who cried out, Let us eat,
were denominated from that expression Yaks
as!”,

THE VISNU-PURANAM

afrrre ary apt Sem: sitet dea:

errs fereat qa: wanted afert: 68H

ating aswey wat sree: BAT:

Wa: Beal Seeger fare xy

atts apfagrien yard faferargrat:1

Sera Ui ARTA TeraaTeT FATT wv

frarit aay ard werahas & fie

Beholding them so disgusting, the hairs of
Brahma were shrivelled up, and first falling
from his head, were again renewed upon it:
from their falling they became serpents, called
Sarpa from their creeping, and Ahi because
they had deserted the head." The creator of
the world, being incensed, then ereated fierce
beings, who were denominated goblins,
Bhitas, malignant fiends and eaters of flesh.
The Gandharvas were next born. imbibing
melody drinking of the goddess of speech,
they were born, and thence their appellation”

Went GET TAL eM TAHA WG UL

Wa: eras aaife aaisaaa

HAN AUTH YSIS: W TEAR SE tt

Vaya Tey wate a weraft:|

PT, SAAT PA WAAL, ATM ¥i9

spread et TTA:

areer: weraferst Traretes wR sc

The divine Brahma, influenced by their
material energies, having ereated these beings,
made others of his own will. Birds he formed
from his vital vigour; sheep from his breast,
goats from his mouth; kine from his belly and
sides; and horses, elephants, Sarabhas,
Gavayas, deer, camels, mules, antelopes, and
other animals, trom his feet: whilst from the
hairs of his body sprang herbs, roots, and
fruits.

FaEpTPS gen seven fers

Ber wired: WER] gas a Aaratn vei
Ther: You Tar aM SIT: TT:

Tar ar WIL MEMOS Frat My ott

=== PAGE 34 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 5

31

amat fagt gait arn: varie:

Sea: UTE: AST: THT] TTT 4 RH

O foremost or the Bramanas! Brahma
having created, in the commencement of the
Kalpa various plants, employed them in
sacrifices, in the beginning of the Treta age.
Animals were distinguished into two classes,
domestic (village) and wild (forest): the first
class contained the cow, goat, the hog, the
sheep, the horse, the ass, the mule: the latter,
all beasts of prey, and many animals with
cloven hoofs, the elephant, and the monkey.
The fifth order were the birds; the sixth,
aquatic animals; and the seventh, reptiles and
insects”’,

Tred u aaa fageeitt WaT

afer @ aari Preby wa ETL 4

fa Sei ai —

Fel AM weet a afar FATT 31

arnt weno: aHERT TET

aeuntid a UTE, FETT sil

wafarrmatornitatarora a

ayes o Ay FATT] STNG Gt

From his eastern mouth Brahma then
created the Gayatri metre, the Rgveda. the
collection of hymns termed Trivrt, the
Rathantara portion of the Samaveda, and the
Agnistoma sacrifice: from his southern mouth
he created the Yajurveda, the Tristubh metre.
the collection of hymns called Panchadga, the
Brhat Sama, and the portion of the Sama-veda
termed Uktha: from his western mouth he
created the Sama-veda, the Jayati metre, the
collection of hymns termed Saptadaga, the
portion of the Sama called Vairipa, and the
Atiratra sacrifice: and from his northern mouth
he created the Ekavirnga collection of hymns,
the Atharva-veda. the Aptoryama rite, the
Anustubh metre, and the Vairaja portion of the
Sama-veda”',

serena sent meerTeT SRT
Rargelieyy Wer yeaa waaay

aa: Ya: Waal @ aera frase:

aan fener weaketaracat TTT 4 oil

aafaaraifa aa: wero

werd a ord Sa afed MORAY 11

aq weet tet gen wrrarnfaag feng:

at & aft anion reg Goat wheres y eH

arta 3 werd GRIT: YA: WA:

feantsa ygRt cmtenigarg

eat: MOERa TET Tel PT TANG ol

In this manner all creatures, great or small,
proceeded ffom his limbs. The great
progenitor of the world having termed the
gods, demons, and Pitrs, created, in the
commencement of the Kalpa, the Yaksas,
Pisachas (goblins), Gandharvas and the troops
of Apsarasas the nymphs of heaven, Naras
(centaurs, or beings with the limbs of horses
and human bodies) and Kinnaras beings with
the heads of horses), Raksasas, birds, beasts,
dcer, serpents, and all things permanent or
transitory, movable or immovable. This did
the divine Brahmi, the first creator and lord of
all: and these things being created, discharged
the same functions as they had fulfilled in a
previous creation, whether malignant or
benign, gentle or cruel, good or evil, true or
false; and accordingly as they are actuated by
such propensities will be their conduct.

shang gag witty a a wy:

arared fatter ante ra, KATA G

ara & ya Haat w WET)

ayers varet targat wat: Wg VM

adtont arent wer degen ay

zen Frirarent waarafa aise & 3

aetgg feat wrarenfor veka

Sead aft area var sar BAe Gv

witdfaai gfe aead a oF: WF:

forgarmfageiset graeme: & 4 1
fa stagger wenigt waiiseara:

=== PAGE 35 ===

32

And the creator displayed infinite variety in
the objects of sense, in the properties of living
things, and in the forms of bodies: he
determined in the beginning, by the authority
of the Vedas, the names and forms and
functions of all creatures, and of the gods; and
the names and appropriate offices of the Rsis,
as they also are read in Vedas. In like manner
as the produces of the seasons designate in
periodical revolution the return of the same
season, so do the same circumstances indicate
the recurrence of the same Yuga, or age; and
thus, in the beginning of cach Kalpa, does
Brahma repeatedly create the world,
possessing the power that is derived from the
will to create, and assisted by the natural and
essential faculty of the object to be created.

EK

NOTES

1. The terms here employcd are for qualities.
Gunas; which, as we have alrcady noticed, are
those of goodness, foulness, and darkness. The
characteristics, or Swabhavas, are the inherent
properties of the qualities, by which they act, as,
soothing, terrific, or stupefying: and the forms.
Swuripas. are the distinctions of biped, quadruped,
brute, bird, fish, and the like.

2. Or Tamas. Moha, Mahamoha, Tamisra.
Andhatamisra; they are the five kinds of
obstruction, viparyyaya, of soul's liberation,
according to the Sarhkhya : they are explained to
be, 1. The belief of material substance being the
same with spirit; 2. Notion of property or
possession, and consequent attachment to objects,
as children and the like, as being one's own; 3.
Addiction to the enjoyments of sense; 4. Impatience
or wrath; and 5. Fear of privation or death, They
are called in the Patafijala philosophy, the five
afilixations, Klesa, but are similarly explained by
Avidya, ‘ignorance;’ Asmitd, 'selfishness,, literally

‘l-am-ness : ‘Raga, ‘love;' Dwesha, hatred :’ and
Abhinivesa, (aififaa:), ‘dread of temporal
suffering.’ Samkhya Karika, p. 148—150. This

creation by Brahma in the Varaha Kalpa begins in
the same way, and in the same words, in most of
the Puranas. The Bhagavata reverses the order of

THE VISNU-PURANAM

these five products, and gives them, Andhatamisra,
Tamisra, Mahamoha, Moha, and Tamas; a variation
obviously more immethodical than the usual
reading of the text, and adopted, no doubt, merely
for the sake of giving the passage an air of
originality.

3. This is not to be confounded with elementary
creation, although the description would very well
apply to that of crude nature, or Pradhana : but, as
will be seen presently, we have here to do with
final productions, or the forms in which the
previously created elements and faculties are more
or less perfectly aggregated. The first class of these
forms is here said to be immovable things; that is,
the mineral and vegetable kingdoms; for the solid
earth, with its mountains and rivers and seas, was
already prepared for their reception. The ‘fivefold’
immovable creation is indeed, according to the
comment, restricted to vegetables, five orders of
which are enumerated, or, 1. trees : 2. shrubs; 3
climbing plants: 4, creepers : and 5. grasses.

4, Tiryak. ‘crooked;' and Srotas, 'a canal.’

5. Twenty-eight kinds of Badhas (a), which
in the Sarhkhya system mean disabilities, as defects
of the senses, blindness, deafness, etc.; and defects
of intellect, discontent, ignorance, and the like. S.
Karika, p. 148, 151. In place of Badha, however,
the more usual reading, as in the Bhagavata,
Varaha. and Markandeya Puranas, is Vidha (f44),
‘kind,’ sort., as srafamfgererst: | implying twenty-
eight sorts of animals. These are thus specified in
the Bhagavata. III. 10 : Six kinds have single hoofs,
nine have double or cloven hoofs, and thirteen have
five claws or nails instead of hoofs. The first are the
horse, the mule, the ass, the yak, the sarabha, and
the gaura, or white deer. The second are the cow,
the goat, the buffalo, the hog, the gayal, the black
deer, the antelope, the camel, and the sheep. The
last are the dog, shacal, wolf, tiger, cat, hare,
porcupine, lion, monkey, elephant, tortoise, lizard,
and alligator.

6. Urddha. ‘above,’ and Srotas as before; their
nourishment being derived from the exterior, not
from the interior of the body : according to the
commentator: Séq9R @egieta ata sees Wet eT
U1 as a text of the Vedas has it; ‘Through satiety
derived from even beholding ambrosia; *sryaaeTea
Th

7. Arvak. ‘downwards,’ and Srotas. ‘canal’

=== PAGE 36 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 5

33

8. This reckoning is not very easily reconciled
with the creations described, for. as presently
enumerated, the stages of creation are seven. The
commentator, however, considers the Urddhasrotas
creation, or that of the superhuman beings, to be the
same with that of the Indriyas, or senses over which
they preside; by which the number is reduced to
six.

9. This creation being the work of the supreme
spirit, wet Tare ay Sys: GH fara Fae: | according
to the commentator : or it might have been
understood to mean, that Brahma was then created,
being, as we have seen, identified with Mahat,
‘active intelligence.’ or the operating will of the
Supreme. See Ch. II, Nofe 23.

10. The text is, wt: Aya afeyeds: | which is, as
rendered in the text, ‘creation preceded by, or
beginning with Buddhi. intelligence., The rules of
euphony would however admit of a mute negative
being inserted, or A*ysafeqeds:1 ‘preceded by
ignorance.’ that is by the chief principle, crude
nature or Pradhana. which is one with ignorance :
but this seems to depend on notions of a later date.
and more partial adoption, than those generally
prevailing in our authority; and the first reading
therefore has been preferred, It is also to be
observed, that the first unintellectual creation was
that of immovable objects (as in p. 30-31), the
original of which is, aafaqete: at: migraine:
and all ambiguity of construction is avoided. The
reading is also established by the text of the Linga
Purana, which enumerates the diffcrent series of
creation in the words of the Visnu, except in this
passage, which is there transposed, with a-slight
variation of the reading. Instead of 9 Hea: Wt
fase TATE GB: it is WTA Fea: A: TEST afm: |
“The first creation was that of Mahat : Intellect
being the first in manifestation.’ The reading of tae
Vayu Purana is still more tautological. but confirms
that here preferred : eit Hea: ant fast Awa 1
See also n. 12.

11. The Anugraha creation, of which no notice
has been found in the Mahabharata seems to have
bcen borrowed from the Sarnkhya philosophy. It is
more particularly described in the Padma,
Markandeya, Linga and Matsya Puranas : as,
wats: Fh @ wgel orafeea:) fare
fasar qn ata au 'The fith is the Anugraha
creation, which is subdivided into four kinds; by

obstruction, disability, perfect-ness. and
acquiescence. This is the Pratyaya sarga. or
intellectual creation. of the Sarhkhyas (S. Karika. v.
46. p. 146); the creation of which we have a notion,
or to which we give assent (Anugraha), in
contradistinction to organic creation, or that
existence of which we have sensible perception. In
its specific subdivisions it is the notion of certain
inseparable properties in the four different ordcrs of
beings : obstruction or stolidity in inanimate things;
inability or imperfection in animals : perfectibility
in man : and acquiescence or tranquil enjoyment in
gods. So aho the Vayu Purana : @Taty

fremont age Geeay
eM: |

12. Or Vaikrta, derived mediately from the first
principle, through its Vikrtis, productions or
developements;' and Prakrta, derived more
immediately from the chief principle itself. Mahat
and the two forms of Ahatikara, or the rudimental
elements and the senses, constitute the latter class:
inanimate beings, etc. compose the former : or the
latter are considered as the work of Brahma, whilst
the three first are evolved from Pradhana. So the
Vayu : Mpeg wa: wh: Beret afogeta: | ateyel
vate we wot: we 4) ‘The three creations
beginning with intelligence are elemental; but the
six creations which proceed from the series of
which Intellect is the first are the works of Brahma.'

13, We must have recourse here also to other
Puranas, for the elucidation of this term. The
Kaumiara creation is the creation of Rudra or
Nilalohita, a form of Siva. by Brahma, which is
subsequently described in our text, and of certain
other mind-born sons of Brahma, of whose birth the
Visnu Purana gives no further account : they are
elsewhere termed Sanat-kumara, Sananda. Sanaka,
and Sanatana, with sometimes a fifth, Rbhu, added.
These, declining to create progeny, remained, as
the name of the first implies, ever boys, kumaras;
that is, ever pure and innocent: whence their
creation is called the Kaumara. Thus the Vayu : 381
aes 3 Fe AMSRIGR: TaN) TR Beh fast a
TARA SAHARA BF a cies g Bees Pte wa)
And the Linga has, 4ae: Gel Ut FAK @ eer
Ferd erga aarEie yalfea: | Bring ever as he
was born, he is here called a youth; and hencc his
name is well known as Sanatkumiara.' This
authority makes Sanatkumara and Rbhu the two

=== PAGE 37 ===

34

THE VISNU-PURANAM

first born of all : 4: GampARa gaaqeftadh
Yatert.cderaft yeist) whilst the text of the Hari
Varga limits the primogeniture to Sanat-kumara :
wea a fay, gaat whi In another place,
however, it enumerates apparently six. or the above
four with Sana and either Rbhu or another
Santana; for the passage is-corrupt. The French
translation scribes a share in creation to
Sanatkumira : 'Les sept Prajapatis, Raudra, Scanda,
et Sanatkaumala, se mirent a produire les etres
repandant partout l'inepuisable energic de dieu.’
The original is, Wa AAPA 1 Won Bes MTA! HR:
wpa wa: Sey faa! Sariksipya is not
‘repandant.' but ‘restraining . and Tis¢hatah being in
the dual number, relates of course to only two of
the serics. The correct rendering is. These seven
(Prajapatis) created progency. and so did Rudra;
but Skanda and Sanatkuméra. restraining their
powcr, abstained (from creation)’ So the
commentator : Warmed dra fry yeagetata
fagd:! These sages, however, live as long as
Brabma, and they are only ercated by him in the
first Kalpa, although their generation is very
commonly, but inconsistently, introduced in the
Varaha or Padma Kalpas. This creation, says the
text, is both primary (Prakrta) and secondary
(Vaikrta). It is the latter, according to the
commentator, as regards the origin of these saints
from Brahm : it is the former as affects Rudra.
who, though proceeding from Brahma, in a certain
form was in essence equally an immediate
production of the first principle. These notions, the
birth of Rudra and the saints, seem to have been
borrowed from the Saivas, and to have been
awkwardly engrafied upon the Vaisnava system.
Sanatkumara and his brethren are always described
in the Saiva Puranas as Yogis : as the Karma, after
enumerating them, adds, Wa aifrt fam:
fA: | These five, oh Brahmanas, were Yogis,
who acquired entire exemption from passion :' and
the Hari Varnsa, although rather Vaisnava than
Saiva, observes, that the Yogis celebrate these six,
along with Kapila, in Yoga works: wet afc Wa
wsaia afr: aan arwsay aha fe fierss:1 The
idea seems to have been amplified also in the Saiva
works; for the Linga Purana describes the repeated
birth of Siva. or Vamadeva. as a Kumara, or boy,
trom Brahma, in each Kalpa, who again becomes
four. Thus in the twenty-ninth Kalpa Swetalohita is

the Kumara, and he becomes Sananda, Nandana.
Visvananda. Upananda; all of a white complexion:
in the thirtieth the Kumara becomes Virajas,
Vivahu. Visoka, Visvabhavana; all of a red colour :
in the thirty-first he becomes four youths of a
yellow colour : and in the thirty-second the four
Kumaras were black. All these are no doubt,
comparatively recent additions to the original
notion of the birth of Rudra and the Kuméras; itself
obviously a sectarial innovation opon the primitive
doctrine of the birth of the Prajapatis. or will-born
sons of Brahma.

14. These reiterated, and not always very
congruous accounts of the creation are explained by
the Puranas as referring to different Kalpas, or
renovations of the world, and therefore involving
no incompatibility. A better reason for their
appearance is the probability that they have been
borrowed from different original authorities. The
account that follows is evidently modified by the
Yogi Saivas. by its gencral mysticism, and by the
expressions with which it begins: de targr-

age frqgentetah rarer
‘Collecting his mind into itself, 7 Tet)
according to the comment, is the performance of
the Yoga (Yiyuje). The term Ambhinsi, lit.
‘waters.’ for the four orders of beings, gods.
demons, men, and Pitrs. is also a peculiar, and
probably mystic term. The, commentator says it
occurs in the Vedas as a synonym of gods, etc.:
wa were tar ayen: fretsga sf aa:! The
Vayu Purana derives it from ‘to shine.’ because the
different orders of beings shine or flourish severally
by moonlight, night, day, and twilight: ete.
TRATTASTATAT | etc.

15. This account is given in several other
Puranas : in the Karma with more simplicity; in the
Padma. Linga, and Vayu with more detail. The
Bhagavata, as usual, amplifies still more copiously,
and mixes up much absurdity with the account.
Thus the person of Sandhya, ‘evening twilight.’ is
thus described: “She appeared with eyes rolling
with passion, whilst her lotus-like feet sounded
with tinkling ornaments: a muslin vest depended
from her waist, secured by a golden zone: her
breasts were protuberant, and close together; her
nose was elegant: her tongue beautiful; her face
was bright with smiles, and she modestly concealed
it with the skirts of her robe; whilst the dark curls

=== PAGE 38 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 6

35

clustered round her brow.” The Asuras address her,
and win her to become their bride. To the four
forms of our text, the same work adds, Tandri,
‘sloth,’ Jrmbhika, ‘yawning;’ Nidra, ‘sleep;’
Unmada, insanity; Antarddhana. ‘disappearance;'
Pratibimba, ‘reflexion;' which become the property
of Pisachas, Kinnaras, Bhitas, Gandharvas,
Vidyadharas, Sadhyas, Pitrs, and Manus. The
notions of night, day, twilight, and moonlight being
derived from Brahma, seem to have originated with
the Vedas. Thus the commentator on the Bhagavata
observes, WISta TAR TeGTET UT aftreraeks Aa: 1
‘That which was his body and was left, was
darkness: this is the Sruti.' All the authorities place
night before day, and the Asuras or Titans before
the gods, in the order of appearance; as did Hesiod
and other ancient theogonists

16. From Raksa, 'to preserve.’

17. From Yaksa, 'to eat,’

18. From Srip, srpo, ‘to creep,’ and from HA, 'to
abandon.'

19. Gam dhayantah, “drinking speech.”

20 This and the preceding enumeration of the
origin of vegetables and animals occurs in several
Puranas, precisely in the same words. The Linga
adds a specification of the Aranya, or wild animals,
which are said to be the buffalo, gayal, bear.
monkey, sarabha, wolf, and lion,

21. This specification of the parts of the Vedas
that proceed from Brahma occurs, in the same
words, in the Vayu, Liga, Kirma, Padma. and
Markandeya Puranas. The Bhagavata offers some
important varieties: “From his eastern and other
mouths he created the Rik. Yajush. Sama, and
Atharvan vedas; the Sastra or ‘the unuttered
incantation;' Ijya ‘oblation:' Stuti and Stoma-prayers
and hymns; and Prayascitta, ‘explation' or ‘sacred
philosophy’ (Brahma). also the Vedas of medicine,
arms, music, and mechanics; and the Itihasas and
Puranas, which are a fifth Veda: also the portions of
the Vedas called Sorasi, Uktha, Purisi. Agnistut,
Aptoryama. Atiratra, Vajapeya, Gosava; the four
parts of virtue, purity, liberality, piety, and truth:
the orders of life. and their institutes and different
religious rites and professions; and the sciences of
logic, ethics, and polity. The mystic words and
monosyllable proceeded from his heart; the metre
Usnis from the hairs of his body; Gayatri from his
skin: Tristubh from his flesh; Anustubh from his

tendons; Jagati from his bones; Pankti from his
marrow: Brhati from his breath. The consonants
were his life: the vowels his body: the sibilants his
senses: the semi-vowels his vigour". This
mysticism, although perhaps expanded and
amplified by the Pauraniks, appears to originate
with the Vedas: as in the text, S48 Far! ‘The
metre was of the tendons,’ The different portions of
the Vedas specified in the text are yet, for the most
part, uninvestigated.
24K

=== PAGE 39 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 6 35
———eSeSSSSSSSSeSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSESNS

CHAPTER 6
wBrseara:

caqdvdafy: , agdoherfrers)

aaa vara

sarang ae waa TY AT:

wert ferent gfe wen TATE FAT gt

aM a quae TaUTieT HATE

aa fat ead aot fends agerATAN WN

Maitreya said— You have briefly noticed,

illustrious sage, the creation termed
Arvaksrotas;-or that of mankind : now explain
to me more fully how Brahma accomplished
it; how he created the four different castes;
what duties he assigned to the Brahmanas and
the rest!.

WR Farr
wenfventar: ye fergatternit ser
snared fade wali FEN WaT BH
aera Traiger & TeaisTa
THAT AAT eed TAR ATTA 1S
TRAM: WaT Te a feo
Ta WITET: Walengqavaiag asi yi
‘wren: axfsrar ayer: yas fester
WAST: TAT FIAT TARA

Paragara replied- Formerly, oh best of
Brahmanas, when the truth-meditating Brahma
was desirous of creating the world, there
sprang from his mouth beings especially

=== PAGE 40 ===

36

THE VISNU-PURANAM

endowed with the quality of goodness; others
from his breast, pervaded by the quality of
foulness; others from his thighs, in whom
foulness and darkness prevailed; and others
from his feet, in whom the quality of darkness
predominated. These were, in succession,
beings of the several castes, Brahmanas, Ks
atriyas, Vaisyas, and Sadras, produced from
the mouth, the breast, the thighs, and the feet
of Brahma’,

ahead watag Ten wa a1

argued WeMrT AaeRATTATTTN 1

agrrenfaat tat gegerifor a wen:

MTA TR AAT: BEMOTSATT NC

front ate werner:

faqarrante: wha: wartnfafir nen

rartvenit ager wrgatar aT WN

aanfireferdt wart ag aa Agar fas gon

WATEM Teo YEungawderaferth

PARASTAATATAAUTT APTATAN 8A

aereararaheat: adarenferafsren:1

Uartaum: Yar: walyerPraienn en

Ws a wat wate yasa- dfs wh

We Tet woyater fawared Fr aqET ea

We: Sareea Ase a Big: sla 1

FAI TATATITAS OSI

sentdirenyl mirigy

wRarg arg Ale Tengen eH

aa: wt Rem fafegerat anda Ber

TieerareareM: fergaiset wafer a0 gen

arg atoreatrary aegart a wae

walhinrag:areten wafer aa: wars gon

These he created for the performance of

sacrifices, the four castes being the fit
instruments of their celebration. By sacrifices,
oh you who know the truth, the gods are
nourished; and by the rain which they bestow,

mankind are supported*: and thus sacrifices,
the source of happiness, are performed by

pious men, attached to their duties, attentive to
prescribed obligations, and walking in the
paths of virtue. Men acquire (by them)
heavenly fruition, or final felicity: they go,
after death, to whatever sphere they aspire to,
as the consequence of their human nature. The
beings who were created by Brahma, of these
four castes, were at first endowed with
righteousness and perfect faith; they abode
wherever they pleased, unchecked by any
impediment; their hearts were free from guile,
they were pure, made tree from soil by
observance of sacred institutes. In their
sanctified minds Hari dwelt; and they were
filled with perfect wisdom, by which they
contemplated the glory of Visnu.’ After a
while (after the Treta age had continued for
some period), that portion of Hari which has
been described as one with Kala (time) infused
into created beings sin, as yet feeble though
formidable, or passion and the like: the
impediment of soul's liberation, the seed of
iniquity, sprung from darkness and desire. The
innate perfectness of human nature was then
no more evolved: the eight kinds of perfection,
Rasollaga and the rest, were impaired;> and
these being enfeebled, and sin gaining
strength, mortals were afflicted with pain,
arising from susceptibility to contrast, as heat
and cold, and the like.

att guifin aapatet were

part a cen ot yt adeeigenqn ecu
Jen a warat ag wp: Fare
pitereranfeererat severe merge ge
wettearefing rat Biter: ATA:
anitord marpeeafata a ariarqn 3 al
Seas aaa Tet srorafetet: 1
Praga Garey BGT: eT: 2 VN
ANAT RT TET Frere: AeA: |
MSR MOT: AAS: TAT
They therefore constructed places of

refuge, protected by trees, by mountains, or by
water; surrounded them by a ditch or a wall,

=== PAGE 41 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 6

37

and formed villages and cities; and in them
erected appropriate dwellings, as defences
against the sun and the cold.‘Having thus
provided security against the weather, men
next began to employ themselves in manual
labour, as a means of livelihood, (and
cultivated) the seventeen kinds of useful
grain—rice, barley, wheat, millet, sesamum,
panic, and various sorts of Icntils, beans, and
pease.”
awit A el

sraett afrala arearerenesgdyn 2311

Stes: Waar arar ear atoTafereT:)

Seer MrT STRAT FAT: WU

varmrenrecas Tare Se: WET:

war Supren: MATTE cher BU AGN

ARATE; BAT Aer siren Agee

aaiferoreret aereeaT BPRTAN FGM

UIEy We aa wat Ht TTT

wereafae: wrrerat aay feraraetu Von

aeISATEM BMA BRAT

srartet got framers wnireq yen

O sage! These are the kinds cultivated for
domestic use: but there are fourteen kinds
which may be offered in sacrifice; they are,
rice, barley, Masa, wheat, millet, and
sesamum; Priyangu is the seventh, and
kulattha, pulse, the eighth: the others are,
Syamaka, a sort of panic; Nivara, uncultivated
rice; Jarttila, wild sesamum; Gavedhuka
(coix); Markata, wild panic; and (a plant
called) the seed or barley of the Bamboo
(Venu-yava). These, cultivated or wild, are the
fourteen grains that were produced for
purposes of offering in sacrifice; and sacrifice
(the cause of rain) is their origin also: they
again, with sacrifice, are the great cause of the
perpetuation of the human race, as those
understand who can discriminate cause and
effect. Thence sacrifices were offered daily;
the performance of which, oh best of Munis, is
of essential service to mankind, and expiates

the offences of those by whom they are
observed.

Iarg Hrenetiset wafergeraa

Aaya UPA FT VG APTA Ve

dearet 5 Frame = aA

weed fraarret aperteraaf tor: 3 ott

safrmniegheshrenttut aefrear:1

BUT gee aA: sleergra: 11-3 eH

Those, however, in whose hearts the dross
of sin derived from Time (K4la) was still more
developed, assented not to sacrifices, but
reviled both them and all that resulted from
them, the gods, and the followers of the Vedas.
Those abusers of the Vedas, of evil disposition
and conduct, and seceders from the path of
enjoined duties, were plunged in wickedness.8

fran ary aratat war: yer sara:

Tatat TATA TAT ITTOTTN 3 FU

AUTON TART oie am

citnier adantiat weary eatgaierrgn 330

woraed great Bt wrt aarzary

writs afro agrrahrahrmn au

‘ayant ured wrt wanngatan

caped ypardtat aftratqaherrq 34 0

The means of subsistence having been
provided for the beings he had created-
Brahm prescribed laws suited to their station
and facultigs, the duties of the several castes
and orders, and the regions of those of the
different castes who were observant of their
duties. The heaven of the Pitrs is the region of
devout Brahmanas. The sphere of Indra, of Ks
atriyas who fly not from the field. The region
of the winds is assigned to the Vaisyas who
are diligent in their occupations and
submissive. Sidras are elevated to the sphere
of the Gandharvas.

aeniracentn piergeterary

tad Fei Tener ata yeenfear a gu
aritorg Uy wat pt Me atterary
wraraed Yee =f Tens Zin

=== PAGE 42 ===

38

THE VISNU-PURANAM

fem we afewtt: wet ve
ita: wer erent afi fe a
at ay Wed art ag Wea Tac
reat Tea Pratt yeataat Wet:
refs French wreemarcfereenn: 13 <1
aiftrerrennfira weratat
afeurat at arerganatferT yo
fafrqamt deer aqoararrenfeorr
Raa Tare Traian Tx it
St faye weigh aBiseara:)

Those Brahmanas who lead religious lives
go to the world of the eighty-eight thousand
saints: and that of the seven Rsis is the seat of
pious anchorets and hermits. The world of
ancestors is that of respectable householders:
and the region of Brahma is the asylum of
religious mendicants.'? The imperishable
region of the Yogis is the highest seat of Vis
nu, where they perpetually meditate upon the
supreme being, with minds intent on him
alone: the sphere where they reside, the gods
themselves cannot behold. The sun, the moon,
the planets, shall repeatedly be, and cease to
be, but those who internally repeat the mystic
adoration of the divinity, shall never know
decay. For those who neglect their duties, who
revile the Vedas, and obstruct religious rites,
the places assigned after death are the terrific
regions of darkness, of deep gloom, of fear,
and of great terror; the fearful hell of sharp
swords, the hell of scourges and of a waveless
sea.!?

ee
NOTES

1. The creation of mankind here described is
rather out of its place, as it precedes the birth of the
Prajapatis or their progenitors: but this want of
method is common to the Puranas, and is evidence
of their being compilations from various sources.

2. This original of the four castes is given in
Manu. and in most of the Puranas. We shall see;
however, that the distinctions are subsequently
ascribed to voluntary election, to accident, or to
positive institutions.

3. According to Manu, oblations ascend to and
nourish the sun; whence the rain falls upon earth,
and causes the growth of corn: burnt-offerings are
therefore the final causes of the support of
mankind,

4. This description of a pure race of beings is not
of general occurrence in the Puranas. It seems here
to be abridged from a much more detailed account
in the Brahmanda, Vayu. and Markandeya Puranas.
In those works Brahma is said to create, in the
beginning of the Kalpa, a thousand pairs of each of
the four classes of mankind, who enjoy perfect
happiness during the Krta age, and only gradually
become subject to infirmitics as the Tretd or second
age advances.

5. These eight perfections, or Siddhis, are not the
supernatural faculties obtained by the performance
of the Yoga, They are described, the commentator
says. in the Skanda and other works: and from them
he extracts their description: 1. Rasollasa, the
spontaneous or prompt evolution of the juices of
the body, independently of nutriment from without:
2. Tripti, mental satisfaction, or freedom from
sensual desire: 3. Sdmya, sameness of degree: 4.
Tulyata, similarity of life, form, and feature: 5.
Visoka, exemption alike from infirmity or grief: 6.
Consummation of penance and meditation, by
attainment of true knowledge: 7. The power of
going every where at will: 8. The faculty of
reposing at any time or in any place. These
attributes are alluded to though obscurely, in the
Vayu. and are partly specified in the Markandeya
Purana.

6. In the other three Puranas, in which this
legend has been found. the different kinds of
inhabited places are specified and introduced by a
series of Iand measures. Thus the Markandeya
states, that 10 Paramanus==I Parastiksma; 10
Parasiksmas=I Trasarenu; 10 Trasarenus=I particle
of dull, or Mahirajas; 10 Mahirajasas = 1 Balagra,
hair's point;'10 Balagras=I Likhya; 10 Likhhyas=I
Yaka; 10 Yakas= I heart of barley (Yavodara); 10
Yavodaras=I grain of barley of middle size: 10
barley grains=I finger, or inch; 6 fingers=a Pada, or
foot (the breadth of it); 2 Padas=1 Vitasti, or span;
2 spans =I Hasta, or cubit: 4 Hastas=a Dhanu, a
Danda, or staff, or 2 Narikas; 2000 Dhanus= a
Gavyati; 4 Gavyatis-a Yojana. The measurement of

=== PAGE 43 ===

BOOK 1, CHAP. 7

39

the Brahmanda is less detailed. A span from the
thumb to the first finger is a Pradega; to the middle
finger, a Nila; to the third finger, a Gokama; and to
the little finger, a Vitasti, which is equal to twelve
Angulas, or fingers, understanding thereby,
according to the Vayu, a joint of the finger
( hyert=af1) ; according to other authorities, it is the
breadth of the thumb at the tip. (A. R. 5. 104.) The
Vayu, giving similar measurements upon the
authority of Manu (4taff waren), although such a
statement does not occur in the Manu Sarhhita,
adds. that 21 fingers= 1 Ratni; 24 finger=l Hasta, or
cubit; 2 Ratnis==] Kishku; 4 Hastas=1Dhanu; 2000
Dhanus= | Gavyiti; and 8000 Dhanus= 1 Yojana.
Durgas, or strongholds, are of four kinds; three of
which are natural. from their situation in
mountains, amidst water, or in other inaccessible
spots; the fourth is the artificial defences of a
village (Grama) a hamlet (Khetaka), or a city (Pura
or Nagara). which are severally half the size of the
next in the series. The best kind of city is one which
is about a mile long by half a mile broad, built in
the form of a parallelogram, facing the north-east,
and surrounded by a high wall and ditch. A hamlet
should be a Yojana distant from a city: a village
half a Yojana from a hamlet. The roads leading to
the cardinal points from a city should be twenty
Dhanus (above 100 feet) broad: a village road
should be the same: a boundary road ten Dhanus: a
royal or principal road or street should be ten
Dhanus (above fifty feet) broad: a cross or branch
road should be four Dhanus. Lanes and paths
amongst the houses are two Dhanus in breadth:
footpaths four cubits: the entrance of a house three
cubits: the private entrances and paths about the
mansion of still narrower dimensions. Such were
the measurements adopted by the first builders of
cities, according to the Puranas specified.

7. These are enumerated in the text, as well as io
the Vayu and Markandeya Purana, and are, Udara.
a sort of grain with long stalks (perhaps a holcus);
Kodrava (Paspalum kora): Cinaka, - a sort of panic
(P. miliaceum); Masa. Kidney bean (Phaseolus
radiatus); Mudga (Phaseolus mungo); Masiira,
lentil (Ervum hirsutum); Nispava, a sort of pulse:
Kulattha (Dolichos biflorus). Arhaki (Cytisus
Cajan); Canaka. chick pea (Cicer arietinum); and
Sana (Crotolaria).

8. This allusion to the sects hostile to the Vedas,
Buddhists or Jains, does not occur in the parallel
passages of the Vayu and Markandeya Puranas.

9. The Vayu goes farther than this, and states
that castes were now first divided according to their
occupations : having, indeed, previously stated that
there was no such distinction in the Krta age:
aoleraraeng 3 aa wat:! Brahma now
appointed those who were robust and violent to be
Ksatriyas, to protect the rest; those who were purc
and pious be made Brahmanas: those who were of
less power, but industrious, and addicted to
cultivate the ground, he made Vaisyas; whilst the
feeble and poor of spirit were constituted Sadras:
and he assigned them their several occupations, to
prevent that interference with one another which
had occurred as long as they recognised duties
peculiar to castes: af (Fat:) SawerT
Acad]

10. These worlds, some of which will be more
particularly described in a different section. are the
seven Lokas or spheres above the earth:].
Prajapatya or Pitri loka: 2, Indra loka or Swarga: 3.
Marutloka or Divaloka, heaven: 4. Gandharva loka,
the region of celestial spirits; also called
Maharloka- 5. Janaloka, or the sphere of saints;
some copies read eighteen thousand; others, as in
the text, which is also the leading of the Padma
Purana: 6. Tapaloka, the world of the seven sages:
and, Brahmaloka or Satyaloka, the world of infinite
wisdom and truth. The eighth, or high world of
Visnu. fet: et 41 is a sactarial addition, which in
the Bhagavata is called Vaikuntha. And in the
Brahma Vaivartta, Goloka; both apparently, and
most certainly the last, modern inventions.

11. The divisions of Naraka, or hell, here named,
are again more particularly enumerated, b. 11. c. 6.

RE

=== PAGE 44 ===

BOOK 1, CHAP. 7

39

CHAPTER 7
wantsena:

ai i sd aiE:,

WU sata
mals freqrarerer SAR arte: WaT:
meptirayera: area: rect: wwii eit

=== PAGE 45 ===

40

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Sag: arent TET eT:

3 wed areata 8 rar wrpeifeat: at

Rare: wreerey Fyvafaws Fra: 1

waren yori ererfor earereafT eT 3 tt

Ware a: Mat: Wal a oxerget eta:

FAI AA YAR AEA TAT XH

Wy yeoreed gers mqaigtTd vam

wife cami a afas da aT GH

ea TaN See YATTY Fart Tat:

Parasara said— From Brahma, continuing
to meditate, were born mind-engendered
progeny, with forms and faculties derived
from his corporeal nature; embodied spirits,
produced from the person of ‘that all-wise
deity. All these beings, from the gods to
inanimate things, appeared as I have related to
you,' being the abode of the three qualities:
but as they did not multiply themselves.
Brahma created other mind-born sons, like
himself; namely, Bhrgu, Pulastya, Pulaha,
Kratu, Angiras, Marici, Daksa, Atri and
Vasistha: these are the nine Brahmas (or
Brahmarshis) celebrated in the Puranas.”

wreredt 3 a ye yor g aera gt
WF cterasa frtan: warg 31

ad & armagen ata fart: 91
ered Prtady citeget weet:

TRONS TTA TSA: It 6 Il
Tet RIT WPAN fray
FeMiisyR Aer wed Aetarafact Fs
wpeigetey TH Meter, Hertha
ATARI BHT TEATS: 11 Fol
sariatay: meusts herrea
farorrerratargecat a Tenaga AA: VAI
marisa fear fered gamed aereatq
fate qed a aye Sa TA RAM
arate wrat yet: Gited aT A TY:
fate ager 2a: eamtefad: fats gat

Sanandana and the other sons of Brahma
were previously created by him, but they were
without desire or passion, inspired with holy
wisdom, estranged from the universe, and
undesirous of progeny. This when Brahma
perceived, he was filled with wrath capable of
consuming the three words, the flame of which
invested, like a garland, heaven, earth, and
hell. Then from his forehead, darkened with
angry frowns, sprang Rudra’, radiant as the
noon-tide sun, fierce, and of vast bulk, and of
a figure which was half male, half female.
Separate yourself, Brahma said to him; and
having so spoken, disappeared. Obedient to
which command, Rudra became twofold,
disjoining his male and female natures, His
male being he again divided into eleven
persons, of whom some were agreeable, some
hideous, some fierce, some mild; and he
multiplied his female nature manifold, of
complexions black or white.4

ad gereranygd yd tarry wy:

STS Baar WaT He fas ew

wet a ai AT wafer
arene aya: uote Sy fags gu
Tere Yeag Sat PTET SISTA
fragaharraret weararenfered rere 96 tt
SUES Tle Bute

wat wait care werepher Ger GaN Votl
warafa: a sere: wate: afro:

Yat ae WeTTT ereret Fay AA Ret
aye afeorarg yar Bray BAT

aet Bfet BATEATAT Sat: TATTTS TAT VA

Then Brahma’ created himself the Manu
Svayambhuva, born of and identical with, his
original self, for the protection of created
beings; and the female portion of himself he
constituted Sataripa whom austerity purified
from the sin (of forbidden nuptials), and
whom the divine Manu Svayambhuva took to
wife. From these two were born two sons,
Priyavrata and Uttanapada®, and two
daughters, named Prasiti and Akati, graced

=== PAGE 46 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 7

41

with loveliness and exalted merit’. Prasiti he
gave to Daksa, after giving Akiti-to the
patriatch Ruci®, who espoused her. Akati bore
to Ruci twins, Yajfia and Daksina’, who
afterwards became husband and wife, and had
twelve sons, the deities called Yamas'”, in the
Manvantara of Svayambhuva.

wat a wen eaerrat faerie

wat aarenrary wag AAT BF sy Rott

sal creasferegis: yfstiar fara vem

afgctam ag: mir fate: atfreratayu 2 eu

uead wfaamre af crareoit: myst

ang: fren aaraes Waa YSN IBN

onfa: wer wey: Tae: fe: are TET

afaferrrgar & sat eaten aET TAMU Ut

ayia wifes an tarfier yh:

Gere: Yoda wysearceAT Bw

afrdtagt afer fierer waren

GARTEN TYR: HA PAA BP TATA V4 tt

The patriarch Daksa had by Prasiti twenty-
four daughters'': hear from me their names:
Sraddha (faith), Laksmi (prosperity), Dhrti
(steadiness), Tusti (resignation), Pusti
(thriving), Medha (intelligence). Kriya (action,
devotion), Buddhi (intellect), Lajja (modesty),
Vapu (body), Santi (expiation), Siddhi
(perfection), Kirtti (fame): these thirteen
daughters of Daksa. Dharma (righteousness)
took to wife. The other eleven bright-eyed and
younger daughters of the patriarch were,
Khyati (celebrity), Sati (truth), Sambhuti
(fitness). Smrti (memory). Prti (affection). Ks
ama (patience), Sannati (humility). Anasdya
(charity). Urjja (energy), with Svaha
(offering), and Svadha (oblation). These
maidens were respectively wedded to the
Munis— Bhrgu, Bhava, Marici. Angiras,
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Atri, and Vasistha; to
Firc (Vahni), and to the Pitrs (progenitors)”.

aa ard wen at Frat aferererary
ete Ter eects yer eK It

Ret ga fear aug za farata or

ate gigeen cen fart ayer Vet

wraard wast & at nreqaau

WG fafecier: aifarery entgra: ecu

wren Tar Ye et chitargam

The progeny of Dharma by the daughters
of Daksa were as follows: by Sraddha lie had
Kama (desire); by Laksmi, Darpa (pride); by
Dhrti, Niyama (precept); by Tusti, Santosa
(content); by Pusti, Lobha (cupidity); by
Medha, Sruta (sacred tradition); by Kriya,
Danda, Naya and Vinaya (correction,
polity, and prudence); by Buddhi, Bodha
(understanding); by Lajja, Vinaya (good
behaviour); by Vapu, Vyavasaya
(perseverance). Santi gave birth to Ksema
(prosperity); Siddhi to Sukha (enjoyment); and
Kirti to Yasas (reputation"). These were the
sons of Dharma; one of whom, K&ma, had
Harsa (joy) by his wife Nandi (delight).

feat arat aerater eat ae MATA

wer ao Prosfreaneat wed aaa TU Beit

wat a deat da faeaaeterat: 1

waitse Fara yes qaraeror 3 ott

Fen wgrane ge wasa Tan

yetreatftrerergtrengeoreatear HART 3 BU

BcGhae wat Ba wes aerate:

Sat araifer gat ar a wa eee 3 ttt

Carter a enfin fae frre:

Freamcraeged weriiser wenfat Sug zu

wat wiferfer qrarenes WT:

weet Hera Preratter aa BU

waat wagers yor ater at

weamnifiren: yore Preaftafranfior:n 340

The wife of Adharma”* (vice) was Hithsa
(violence), on whom he begot a son Anrta
(falsehood), and a _ daughter Nikrti
(immorality): they intermarried, and had two
sons, Bhaya (fear) and Naraka (Hell); and
twins to them, two daughters, Maya (deceit)

=== PAGE 47 ===

42

THE VISNU-PURANAM

and Vedana (torture), who became their wives.
The son of Bhaya and Maya was the destroyer
of living creatures, or Mrtyu (death); and
Duhkha (pain) was the offspring of Naraka
and Vedana, The children of Mrtyu were
Vyadhi (disease), Jara (decay), Soka (sorrow).
Trsna (greediness). and Krodha (wrath). These
are all called the inflictors, of misery, and are
characterised as the progency of Vice
(Adharma). They are all without wives,
without posterity, without the faculty to
procreate; they are the terrific forms of Visnu,
and perpetually operate as causes of the
destruction of this world. On the contrary,
Daksa and the other Rsis, the elders of
mankind, tend perpetually to influence its
renovation : whilst the Manus and their sons,
the heroes endowed with mighty power, and
treading in the path of truth, as constantly
contribute to its preservation.

tia sara
at Fen Rufader, Frerectenatasi
Premera tat f ered a AAT EH
Maitreya said—Tell me, Brahman, what is
the essential nature of these revolutions,
perpetual preservation, perpetual creation, and
perpetual destruction.
UUs sara

wiftafaterrea wary HET: |
aerate fear atteroreary, fry: Fol
fife: wrpfaaentaratarat fast
free adyarat weratse agiae: 13 ci
wen afafraaa weadd wT: UA:

went wey dar wens weit STATI 3 FH
Frrerahars Sat Aer: wea

fea: wea arert at farrett fearfrerq voi
wae: wrecat Yar Oe: wre BET
Safe mar weer UR TeTATEGI ¥ gil
qaragiet wa anes yfrerm

Fara: ats wg Sten: qerorelfererertt 11x 2

PardSara said— Madhusidana, whose
essence is incomprehensible, in the forms of
these (partriarchs and Manus), is the author of
the uninterrupted vicissitudes of creation,
preservation, and destruction. The dissolution
of all things is of four kinds; Naimittika.
‘occasional;' Prakrtika, 'elemental;' Atyantika.
‘absolute;' Nitya, ‘perpetual’’. The first, also
termed the Brahma dissolution, occurs when
the sovereign of the world reclines in sleep. In
the second, the mundane egg resolves into the
primary element, from whence it was derived.
Absolute non-existence of the world is the
absorption of the sage, through knowledge,
into supreme spirit. Perpetual destruction is
the constant disappearance, day and night, of
all that are born. The productions of Pratmi
form the creation that is termed the elemental
(Prakrta). That which ensues after a (minor)
dissolution is called ephemeral creation: and
the daily generation of living things is termed
by those who are versed in the Puranas,
constant creation.

wa wderitg wary YaATAT:

dhea: Ber faopeafateairtaarq 6 311

Pehahifearem wena: weeieg!

doer: oftertt Ahesefiet wan weit
quran gag Ter wierd AeA

aistrant ward We TAT FAS I

oft stfeeqgeet weigh wartseara:!

In this manner the mighty Visnu, whose
essence is the elements, abides in all bodies,
and brings about production, existence, and
dissolution. The faculties of Visnu to create, to
preserve, and to destroy, operate successively,
Maitreya, in alt corporeal beings and at all
seasons; and he who frees himself from the
influence of these three faculties, which are
essentially composed of the three qualities
(goodness, foulness, and darkness), goes to the
supreme sphere, from whence he never again
returns.

2 ak a ae

=== PAGE 48 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 7

43

NOTES

1. It is not clear which of the previous narratives
is here referred to, but it seems most probable that
the account in Ch. V. is intended.

2. Considerable variety prevails in this list of
Prajapatis,  Brahma-putras. Brahmanas, or
Brahmarshis; but the variations are of the nature of
additions made to an apparently original
enumeration of but seven, whose names generally
recur. Thus in the Mahabharata,’ Moksa Dharma,
we have in one place, Marici. Atri, Angiras.
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu. and Vasistha, ¥€™: Wa a
Wl Fe: Taa7a: | 'the seven highminded sons of
the self-born Brahma,’ In another place of the
same, however, we have Daksa substituted for
Vasistha: FORT YAR AAA <aeWAP|!
Tifemaiye Yea Ye FA! ‘Brahma then created
mind-begotten sons, of whom Daksa was the
seventh, with Marici,' etc. These seven sons of
Brahmi are also identified with the seven Rsis: as
in the Vayu; SRA AA AST: | GAT
sfernga mata wraeya: | although, with palpable
inconsistency, eight are immediately enumerated,
or, Bhrgu, Marici. Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha.
Kratu, and Vasistha. The Uttara Khanda of the
Padma Purana substitutes Kardama for Vasistha.
The Bhagavata includes Daksa, enumerating nine.
The Maisya agrees with Manu in adding Narada to
the list of our text. The Ktirma Purana adds Dharma
and Sankalpa. The Liiga. Brahmanda, and Vayu
Purana also add them, and extend the list to
Adharma and Ruci. The Hari VarnSa in one place
inserts Gautama, and in another Manu. Altogether
therefore we have seventeen, instead of seven. But
the accounts given of the origin of several of these,
show that they were not originally included
amongst the Manasa putras, or sons of Brahma's
mind; for even Daksa, who finds a place in all the
lists except one of those given in the Mahabharata,
is uniformly said to have sprung from Brahma's
thumb: and the same patriarch, as well as Dharma,
is included in some accounts. as in the Bhagavata
and Matsya Purana, amongst a different series of
Brahmia's progeny, or virtues and vices: or, Daksa
(dexterity). Dharma (virtue). Kama (desire).
Krodha (passion). Lobha (covetousness). Moha
(infatuation), Mada (insanity), Pramoda (pleasure),
Mrtyu (death). and Angaja (lust). These are
severally derived from different parts of Brahma's

body: and the Bhagavata adding Kardama (soil or
sin) to this enumeration, makes him spring from
Brahma's shadow. The simple statement, that the
first Prajapatis sprang from the mind or will of
Brahmi, has not contented the depraved taste of the
mystics, and in some of the Puranas, as the
Bhagavata. Linga, and Vayu, they also are derived
from the body of their progenitor : or, Bhrgu from
his skin, Marici from his mind. Atri from his eyes,
Angiras from his mouth. Pulastya from his ear;
Pulaha from his navel. Kratu from his hand,
Vasistha from his breath, Daksa from his thumb,
and Narada from his hip. They do not exactly
agree, however, in the places whence these beings
proceed; as for instance, according to the Linga,
Marici springs from Brahma's eyes. not Atri, who
there proceeds, instead of Pulastya, from his ears.
The Vayu has also another account of their origin,
and states them to have sprung from the fires of a
sacrifice offered by Brahma; an allegorical mode of
expressing, their probable origin, considering them
to be in some degree real persons, from the
Brahmanical ritual, of which they were the first
institutors and observers. The Vayu Purana also
states, that besides the seven primitive Rsis, thie
Prajapatis are numerous, and specifies Kardama.
KaSyapa, Sesha, Vikranta. Susravas,: Bahuputra,
Kumara, Vivasvat. Sucisravas. Prachetasa (Daks
a), Aristanemi, Babula. These and many others
were Prajapatis: <aaHeas=~asht agag Waa: | In the
beginning of the Mahabharata (A P.) we have again
a different origin, and first Daksa, the son of
Pracetasas, it is said. had seven sons, after whom
the twenty-one Prajapatis were born, or appeared.
According to the commenfator. seven sons of Daks
a were the allegorical persona Krodha, Tamas,
Dama, Vikrta, Angiras. Kardama, and Agva; and
the twenty-one Prajapatis, the seven usually
specified Marichi and the rest, and the fourteen
Manus. This looks like a blending of the earlier and
later notions.

3. Besides this general notice of the origin of
Rudra and his separate forms, we have in the next
chapter an entirely different set of beings so
denominated; and the eleven alluded to in the text
are also more particularly enumerated in a
subsequent chapter. The origin of Rudra, as one of
the agents in creation, is described in most of the
Puranas, The Mahabharata, indeed, refers his origin

=== PAGE 49 ===

44

THE VISNU-PURANAM

to Visnu, representing him as the personification of
his anger, whilst Brahma is that of his kindness:
ae: wa cerersa at tae A wen wat at faquaet
Tear! daefrerat giderarstn The
Karma Purana makes him proceed from Brahma's
mouth, whilst engaged in meditating on creation.
The Varaha Purana makes this appearance of Rudra
the consequence of a promise made by Siva to
Brahma, that he would become his son. In the
parallel passages in other Puranas the progeny of
the Rudra created by Brahma is not confined to the
eleven, but comprehends infinite numbers of beings
in person and equipments like their parent; until
Brahma, alarmed at their fierceness, numbers, and
immortality, desires his son Rudra, or, as the
Matsya calls him, Vamadeva. to form creatures of a
different and mortal nature. Rudra refusing to do
this, desists; whence his name Sthanu. from Stha.
‘to stay,” Liga. Vayu Purana etc.

4. According to the Vayu, the female became
first twofold, or one half white, and the other black;
and each of these, again, becomes manifold, being
the various energies, or Saktis, of Mahadeva, as
Stated by the Karma, after the words
fava: | which are those of our text: a & fayaat fan
faga: wat yfai The Linga and Vayu specify
many of their names. Those of the white,
complexion, or mild nature, include Laksmi,
Saraswati, Gauri, Umi, etc. Those of the dark huc,
and  fierce-disposition, Durga, Kali, Chandi,
Maharatri, and others.

5. Brahma, after detaching from himself the
property of anger, in the form of Rudra, converted
himself into two persons, the first male, or the
Manu Svayambhuva, and the first woman, or
Satariipa: so in the Vedas; Ua ae 4 Wat AAT 'So
himself was indeed (his) son.' The commencement
of production through sexual agency is here
described with sufficient distinctness, but the
subject has been rendered obscure by a more
complicated succession of agents, and especially by
the introduction of a person of a mythic or mystical
character. Viraj. The notion is thus expressed in
Manu: "Having divided his own substance, the
mighty power Brahma became half male and half
female; and from that female he produced Viraj.
Know me to be that person whom the male Viraj
produced by himself." I. 32. 33. We have therefore
a series of Brahma, Viraj, and Manu, instead of

Brahma and Manu only: also the generation of
progeny by Brahmé, begotten on Satardpa. instead
of her being, as in our text. the wife of Manu. The
idea seems to have originated with the Vedas, as
Kullaka Bhatta quotes a text: wh fasrearm Then (or
thence) Virdt was born.’ The procreation of
progeny by Brahma, however, is at variance with
the whole system, which almost invariably refers
his creation to the operation of his will: and the
expression in Manu, en # fama ‘he created
Viraj in her,’ does not necessarily imply sexual
intercourse. Viraj also creates, not begets, Manu.
And in neither instance does the name of Satartipa
occur. The commentator on Manu, however,
understands the expression asrijat to imply the
procreation of Viraj : 443 wim) and the same
interpretation is given by the Matsya Purana, in
which the incestuous passion of Brahma for
Satardipa, his daughter in one sense, his sister in
another, is described; and by her he begets Viraj,
who there is called, not the progenitor of Manu, but
Manu himself. a4: Sea Feat eM: TA Say:
wareya efi waa: @ frofeft a: yt) This therefore
agrees with our text, as far as it makes Manu the
son of Brahma, though not us to the nature of the
connexion. The reading of the Agni and Padma
Purana is that of the Visnu; and the Bhagavata
agrees with it in one place, stating distinctly that the
male half of Brahma was Manu, the other half,
Sataripa: 4 Wa YR WS: PeYE: Tae, Gi
arisreien weeaes Aer: | Bhagav. Ill. 12. 35:
and although the production of Viraj is elsewhere
described, it is neither as the son of Brahma, nor the
father of Manu. The original and simple idea,
therefore, appears to be, the ideality of Manu with
the male half of Brahma, and his being thence
regarded as his son. The Kitrma Purana gives the
same account as Manu, and in thc same words. The
Linga Purana and Vayu Purana describe the origin
of Viraj and Sataripa from Brahma; and they
intimate the union of Satartpa with Purusa or Viraj.
the male portion of Brahmé, in the first instance;
and in the second, with Manu, who is termed
Vairaja. or the son of Viraj: Seq 4: Fe: | The
Brahma Purina the words of which are repeated in
the Hari VarhSa, introduces a new element of
perplexity in a new name, that of Apava. According

to the commentator, this is a name of the Prajapati
Vasistha: arya: afaeraa: wart! As, however,

=== PAGE 50 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 7

45

he performs the office of Brahma, he should be
regarded as that divinity: but this is not exactly the
case, although it has been so rendered by the
Franch translator. Apava becomes twofold, and in
the capacity of his male half begets offspring by the
female. Again, it is said Visnu created Viraj. and
Viraj created the male, which is Vairaja or Manu;
who was thus the second interval (Antaram), or
stage, in creation. That is, according to the
commentator, the first stage was the creation of
Apava, or Vasistha, or Viraj, by Visnu, through the
agency of Hiranyagarbha or Brahma; and the next
was that of the creation of Manu by Virdj. Satarapa
appears as first the bride of Apava, and then as the
wife of Manu, This account therefore, although
obscurely expressed, appears to be essentially the
same with that of Manu; and we have Brahma,
Viraj, Manu, instead of Brahma and Manu. It seems
probable that this difference, and the part assigned
to Viraj, has originated in some measure from
confounding Brahma with the male half of his
individuality, and considering as two beings that
which was but one. If the Puruaha or Viraj be
distinct from Brahma, what becomes of Brahma ?
The entire whole and its two halves cannot co-exist.
although some of the Pauraniks and the author of
Manu seem to have imagined its possibility, by
making Viraj the son of Brahma. The perplexity,
however, is still more ascribable to the
personification of that which was only an allegory.
The division of Brahma into two halves designates,
as is very evident from the passage in theVedas
given by Colebrooke, (As. R. VIII. 425.) the
distinction of corporeal substance into two sexes :
Viraj being all male animals, Sataripa all female
animals. So the commentator on the Hari Varhsa
explains the former to denote the horse, the bull,
etc.; and the latter. the mare, the cow, and the like.
In the Bhagavata the term Viraj implies, Body,
collectively, as the commentator observes; Wafer
wafer WaT ala wa fat
yatereraredis: Yar! ‘As the sub illuminates his
own inner sphere, as well as the exterior regions, so
soul, shining in body (Viraja), irradiates all without
and within.” fare @@ verry wars werrafa! All
therefore that the birth of Viraj was intended to
express, was the creation of living body, of
creatures of both sexes: and as in consequence man
was produced, he might be said to the son of Viraj,

or bodily existence. Again Sataripa, the bride of
Brahma, or of Viraj, or of Manu, is nothing more
than beings of varied of manifold forms, from Sata,
‘a hundred’ and ®4, ‘form;’ explained by the
annotator on the Hari Vamsa by Anantardpa
(SAS) ‘of infinite,” and Vividharpa
(fafaeemt), ‘ of diversified shape;’ being, as he
stares the same as Maya, ‘illusion,’ or the power of
multiform metamorphosis: ed) The
Matsya Purana has a little allegory of its own, on
the subject of Brahma's intercourse with Sataripa;
for it explains the former to mean, the Vedas, and
the latter the Savitri, or holy place, which is their
chief text; and in their cohabitation there no evil:
Seah: Saat wen ae weft) wea Bae: =A
afar TAF fast: 1

6. The Brahma Purana has a different order, and
makes Vira the Son of the first pair, who has
Uttanapada, etc. by Kamya. The commeotator on
the Hari Varhsa quotes the Vayu for a confirmation
of this account: but the passage there is. ar
yer wren ear sartaefieadt ‘Satarapa bore to
the male Vairaja (Manu) two Viras,' i. e. heroes or
heroic sons, Uttanpada and Priyavrata, It looks as if
the compiler of the Brahma Purana had made some
very unaccountable blunder, and invented upon it a
new couple, Vira and Kamya. : no such person as
the former occurs in any other Purana, nor does
Kamya, as his wife.

7. The Bhagavata adds a third daughter,
Devahiti: for the purpose apparently of
introducing a long legend of the Rsi Kardama,
to whom she is married, and of their son
Kapila : a legend not met with any where else.

8. Ruci is reckoned amongst the Prajapatis by the
Linga and Vayu Puranas.

9, These descendants of Svayambhuva are all
evidently allegorical : thus Yajiia is ‘sacrifice,’ and
Daksina, 'donation’ to Brahmanas.

10. The Bhagvata (b. IV. c. 1) says the Tushitas.
but they are the divinities of the second, not of the
first Manvantara, as appears also in another part of
the same, where the Yamas are likewise referred to
the Svayambbuva Manvantara.

11. These twenty-four daughters are of much
less universal occurrence in the Puranas than the
more extensive series of fifty or sixty, which is
subscquently described, and which appears to be
the more ancient legend.

=== PAGE 51 ===

46

THE VISNU-PURANAM

12. The twenty-four daughters of Daksa are
similarly named and disposed of in most of the
Puranas which notice them. The Bhagavata, having
introduced a third daughter of Svayambhuva, has a
rather different enumeration, in order to assign
some of them, the wives of the Prajapatis, to
Kardama and Devahiti. Daksa had therefore, it is
there said (b. IV. c. I), sixteen daughters, thirteen of
whom were married to Dharma. named Sraddha,
Maitri (friendship), Daya (clemency), Santi Tusti.
Pusti, Kriya, Unnati (elevation), Buddhi, Medha,
Titiks4 (patience), Hri (modesty), Martti (form):
and three, Sati. Svaha, and Svadha, married, as in
our text. Some of the daughters of Devahiiti repeat
these appellations, but that is of slight
consideration. They are Kali (a moment), married
to Marichi: Anasiya to Atri; Sraddha to Angiras;
Havirbhu (oblation-born) to Pulastya; Gati
(movement) to Pulaha : Kriya to Kratu; Khyati to
Bhrgu : Arundhati to Vasistha; and Santi to
Atharvan In all these instances the persons are
manifestly allegorical, being personincations of
intelligences and virtues and religious rites, and
being therefore appropriately wedded to the
probable authors of the Hindu code of religion and
morals, or to the equally allegorical representation
of that codec, Dharma, moral and religious duty.

13. The same remark applies here. The Puranas
that give these details generally concur with our
text, but the Bhagavata specifies the progeny of
Dharma in a somewhat differcnt manner; or,
following the order observed in the list of Diarma's
wives, their children are, Rita (truth), Prasada
(favour), Abhaya (fearlessness), Sukha, Muda
(pleasure), Smaya (wonder). Yoga (devotion),
Darpa, Artha (meaning), Smriti (memory),
Kshema, Prasraya (affection), and the two saints
Nara and Narayana, the sons of Dharma by Martti.
We have occasional varicties of nomenclature in
other authorities; as, instcad of Sruta, Sima: Korma
Purana. instcad of Dandanaya, Samaya; and instead
of Bodha, Apramada; Liga Purana: and Siddha in
place of Sukha: Kirma Purana.

14, The text rather abruptly introduces Adharma
and his family. He is said by the commentator to be
the son of Brahma, and the Liga Purana
enumeratcs him among the Prajapatis, as well as
Dharma. According to the Bhagavata, he is the
husband of Mrsha (falsehood), and the father of

Dambha (hypoerisy) and Maya (deceit), who were
adopted by Nirritti. The scries of their descendants
is also somewhat varied from our text; being in
each descent, however, twins which intermarry, or
Lobha (covetousness) and Nikrti, who produce
Krodha (wrath) and Himsa: their children are, Kali
(wickedness) and Durukti (evil speech): their
progeny are, Mrtyu and Bhi (fear); whose offspring
are, Niraya (hell) and Yatand (torment).

15, The three first of these are more particularly
described in the last book: the last. the Nitya, or
constant, is differently described by Vans Kennedy
(Ancient and Hindu Mythology, p. 224. note). "In
the 71h chapter.” he observes, “of the Visnu Purana
four kinds of Pralaya are described. The Naimittika
takes place when Brahma slumbers: the Prakrtika
when this universe returns to its original nature:
Atyantika proceeds from divine knowledge: and
Nitya is the extinction of life. like the extinction of
a lamp. in sleep at night.” For this Tast
characteristic, however, our text furnishes no
warrant; nor can it be explained to signify, that the
Nitya Pralaya means no more than “a man's falling
into a sound sleep at night.” All the copies
consulted on the present occasion concur in
reading, fra: waa wast ah faaret fea as
rendered above. The commentator supplies the
illustration, @ysareTaq) ‘like the flame of a lamp;'
but he also writes, samt fearfasi a faart: 3 fra:
‘That which is the destruction of all that are born,
night and day, is the Nitya, or constant’ Again, in a
verse presently following we have the Nitya Sarga,
‘constant or perpetual creation,’ as opposed to
constant dissolution yarmafed Fa sre WPT
‘fra: ei: q ste: Geoneiferrert: | ‘That in which, oh
excellent sages, beings are daily born, is termed
constant creation, by those learned in the Puranas’.
The commentator explains this, weTafeafewaret fre:
at gad: 1 "The constant flow or succession of the
creation of ourselves and other creatures is the
Nitya or constant creation: this is the meaning of
the text.’ It is obvious, therefore, that the alternation
intended is that of life and death, not of waking and
sleep.

kK

=== PAGE 52 ===

BOOK I, CHAP, 8

47

CHAPTER 8

ae sera 7
(wergeafrae)

WU sara

afoeerra: wat rerored wer

aed waeenfis at Free: ogo gH

Parasara—have described to you, oh great
Muni, the creation of Brahma, in which the
quality of darkness prevailed. I will now
explain to you the creation of Rudra.’

SUSTaTAea Yar WATT: |

wiguadig was Gard Aerettfeau V1

wala Get asa aa fire

fa Dette ft gen wed Megara BAH

am @aifa & asa wegara werafiry

ward Fa aenfa ar Tefdaraa vn

In the beginning of the Kalpa. as Brahma
purposed to create a son, who should be like
himself, a youth of a purple complexion?
appeared, crying with a low cry, and running
about.> Brahma, when he beheld him thus
afflicted, said to him, "Why do you weep ?"
"Give me a name,' replied the boy. "Rudra be

your name.” rejoined the great father of all
creatures :' "be composed; desist from tears."

Taye: YA: Aisa aaKE we at
aatseantt eat wet aa arnt & wy:
warn Samer weit: yaar Sf wy GN
aa ad atari wen ayaa faa

sthapi ered sara a frarag 116 11

a aaradnht et Tee a:
wat set wet afgatgquergrta a
Qiferat arent: Sr FAATETAA: HATTNG

But, thus addressed, the boy still wept
seven-times, and Brahma therefore gave to
him seven other denominations; and to these
eight persons regions and wives and posterity
belong. The cight manifestations, then, are

named Rudra, Bhava, Sarva. Isana. Pasupati.
Bhima, Ugra. and Mahadeva, which were
given to them by their great progenitor. He
also assigned to them their respective stations.
the sun. water, ether, air, fire, earth, the
ministrant Brahman, and the moon; for these
are their several forms.‘

gaden adater geet area fea

waret fagrevet dear Trevi a we C1

quid eae eareainf: el

Wea: Bye we aarenhs F syUp

aat gfargdat semrgfed sere

yaar yaar cigars Ta:

ere: Giisa GAN aR A Yat ot

The wives of the sun and the other

manifestations, termed Rudra and the rest
were respectively, Suvercala, Uma, Vikest,
Siva, Svaha, Disa, Diksa and Rohini. Now
hear an account of their progeny, by whose
successive generations this world has been
peopled. Their sons, then, were severally,
Sanaigocara (Saturn), Sukra (Venus), the fiery-
bodied Mars, Manojava (Hanuman), Skanda.
Swarga, Santina, and Budha (Mercury).

Tamra saisat ait sreatafersan

SAAT ARNT AT WaT KS AHTATIN RA

feragign anna fier

Soa Yaar WATT Aa VAM

tat angie yt: entree

frag tate vet areToTet aT eB

It was the Rudra of this description that
married Sati, who abandoned her corporeal
existence in consequence of the displeasure of
Daksga.° She afterwards was the daughter of
Himavan (the snowy mountains) by Mena; and
in that character, as the only Uma, the mighty
Bhava again married her.° The divinities Dhati
and Vidhata were born to Bhrgu by Khyati, as
was a daughter, Sri. the wife of Narayana, the
god of gods.”

=== PAGE 53 ===

48

THE VISNU-PURANAM

aa zara

aired oft: aera seaspa
ph: wreat aqeerare ae TaN ew
Maitrcya—It is commonly said that the

goddess Sri was born from the sea of milk,
when it was churned for ambrosia; how then
can you say that she was the daughter of
Bhrgu by Khyati ?
WI Farag

Fret at srrarat faut: sieve

er wera feroperdeet fester eu tt

wat faayite aot Hater wat aft:

Set faut gfgdatsdt aqfrar ferrqu een

aur faanite wfe: sinffinieatt eft:

Bait rary weairgfetia wearin gout

pan sivrtary art agiset efron gy am

orearg ferret Sat yeteryit SATE RS

Parasara said— Sri, the bride of Visnu, the

mother of the world, is eternal, imperishable;
in like manner as he is all-pervading, so also is
she, oh best of Brahmanas, omnipresent. Visnu
is meaning; she is speech. Hari is polity
(Nyaya); she is prudence (Niti). Visnu is
understanding; she is intellect. He is
rightcousncss; she is devotion. He is the
creator; she is creation. Sri is the earth; Hari
the support of it. The deity is concent; the
eternal Laksmi is resignation. He is desire; Sri
if wish. He is sacrifice; she is sacrificial
donation (Daksina). The goddcss is the
invocation which attends the  oblation;
Janarddana is the oblaiion.

Ustteren Wt weet: wreteit wepyaA:

fafactetrfta gem sitrary gy: 83

ARM sTaR a: HAETETAT

Talat Santis aTAeaT FATA ol

vga wrasse fester

Bie era: Geter arereratn 8

fawq: fag: wan wer yreagieen

ait: ait: waterent feryrerenrgtisfaferertn 2 ait

wang: ster: aafa: siterctarrarferth
gitetaitcirens arg: wat eft: ean

Laksmi is the chamber where the females
are present (at a religious ceremony);
Madhustidana the apartment of the males of
the family. Laksmi is the altar, Hari the stake
(to which the victim is bound). Sri is the fuel;
Hari the holy grass (Kusa). He is the
personified Sama-veda; the goddess, lotus-
throned, is the tone of its chanting. Laksmi is
the prayer of oblation (Svaha),; Vasudeva, the
lord of the world, is the sacrincial fire. Sauri
(Visnu) is Sankara (Siva); and Sri is the bride
of Siva (Gauri). Kesava, oh Maitreya, is the
sun; and his radiance is the lotuses eated
goddess. Visnu is the tribe of progenitors
(Pitrgana); Padma is their bride (Svadha), the
eternal bestower of nutriment. Sri is the
heavens; Visnu, who is one with all things, is
wide extended space. The lord of Sri is the
moon; she is his unfading light. She is called
the moving principle of the world; he, the
wind which bloweth every wherc.

wetafes Werceten sinter

meptrersufiegian Sarg weer BMI
TRA: MATS TAT aE
mafg: ot: sted ta: carats aT BG

Govinda is the occan; Laksmi its shore.
Laksmi is the consort of Indra (Indrani);
Madhustidana is Devendra. The holder of the
discus (Visnu) is Yama (the regent of
Tartarus); the lotus-throned goddess is his
dusky spouse (Dhimorna). Sti is wealth;
Sridhara (Visnu) is himself the god of riches
(Kuvera).

ait ceathtgrarn Sgrat aan: Tae
sidaten fairs Fatarafeefesn equ

Bawah verter: vfmcteatfestrern

arer weiaaeiset ygaisat wer | AUN
aieet cat: wettisdt wa: waat aft
manger sore sifeegad fran ent
farmed sitfgerdh Saararraet:

=== PAGE 54 ===

BOOK J, CHAP. 8

aay aise: UsaATETATH 28

O illustrious Brahman, Laksm! is Gauri;
and KeSava is the deity of ocean (Varuna). Sri
is the host of heaven (Devasena); the deity of
war. her lord. is Hari. The wielder of the mace
is resistance; the power to oppose is Sri Laks
mi is the Kastha and the Kala; Hari the Nimes
a and the Muhirtta. Laksmi is the light: and
Hari, who is all, and lord of all, the lamp. She,
the mother of the world, is the creeping vine;
and Visnu the tree round which she clings. She
is the night; the god who is armed with the
mace and discus is the day. He, the bestower
of blessings. is the bridegroom, the lotus-
throned goddess is the bride.

Feet varsiidrerdatt:|
CART YOST: WATE HACTCTAT 3 oN
gon aathireant eit ara: we:
tet @ ete eeattifere wa a3 2
faaniraginer datieqea
Zafrolergerdt gars aay eft:
atnea ceatties arraifaert wea UH
ofa stfereggere wets areriseara: 1
The god is one with all male— the goddess

one with all female, rivers. The lotus-eyed
deity is the standard; the goddess seated on a

lotus the banner. Laksmi is  cupidity;
Narayana, the master of the world, is
covetousness, Oh you who know what

rigteousners is, Govinda is love; and Laksmi,
his gentle spouse, is pleasure. But why thus
diffusely cnumerate their presence?—it is
enough to-say, in a word. that of gods,
animals, and men. Hari is all that is called
male; Laksmi is all that is termed female:

there is nothing else than they.
CR

NOTES

1. The creation of Rudra has been already
adverted to. and that seems to be the primitive form
of the legend. We have here another account,
grounded apparently upon Saiva or Yoga
mysticism.

49

2. The appearance of Rudra as a Kumara, 'a
boy,’ is described as of repeated occurrence in the
Linga and Vayu Puranas, as already noticed (Ch. V.
Note 12); and these Kumaras are of different
complexions in different Kalpas. In the Vaisnava
Puranas, however, we have only one original form,
to which the name of Nilalohita, the blue and red or
purple complexioned is assigned. In the Karma this
youth comes from Brahma's mouth: in the Vayu,
from his forehead,

3. This is the Pauranic etymology:te7e aTeTa
%%:1 or rud, ‘to weep.’ and dru. 'to run.’ The
grammarians derive the name from rud. 'to weep’,
with ra affix.

4. The Vayu details the application of each name
severally These eight Rudras are therefore but one,
under as many appellations, and in as many types.
The Padma. Markandeya, Karma, Linga.. and Vayu
agree with our text in the nomenclature of the
Rudras. and their types, their wives, and progeny.
The types are those which are enumerated in the
Nandi, or opening benedictory verse, of Sakuntala;
and the passage of the Visnu Purana was found by
Chezy on the envelope of his copy. He has justly
corrected Jones's version of the term ®t 'the
sacrifice is performed with solemnity;’ as the word
means. 'Brahmana officiant <i @Tem:) ‘the
Brahman who is qualified by intiation (Diksa) to
conduct the rite.” These are considered as the
bodies, or visible forms, of those modifications of
Rudra which are variously named, and which,
being praised in them, severally abstain from
harming them: a] Waa Fa: wa Ta feafet 4
‘fa afd: 1 Vayu Purana The Bhagavata. III. 12. has a
different scheme, as usual; but it confounds the
notion of the eleven Rudras, to whom the text
subsequently adverts. with that of the eight here
specified. These eleven it terms Manyu, Manu,
Mahinasa, Mahan, Siva. Rtadhvaja. Ugraretas.
Bhava, Kala, Vamadeva, and Dhrtavrata: their
wives are. Dhi. Dhrti. Rasaloma, Niyut. Sarpi, 14,
Ambika, Iravati, Svadh4. Diks4, Rudrant: and their
places are the heart, senses, breath, ether, air, fire.
water, earth, sun. moon, and tapas. or ascetic
devotion, The same allegory or mystification
characterises both accounts.

5. See the story of Daksa’s sacrifice at the end of
the chapter.

=== PAGE 55 ===

50

THE VISNU-PURANAM

6. The story of Uma's birth and marriage occurs
in the Siva Purana and in the Kasi Khanda of the
Skanda Purana: it is noticed briefly, and with some
variation trom the Puranas, in the Ramayana, first
book: it is also given in detail io the Kumara
Sambhava of Kalidasa.

7. The family of Bhrgu is more particularly
described in the tenth chapter: it is here mentioned
merely to introduce the story of the birth of the
goddess of prosperity, Sri.

Bid

SACRIFICE OF DAKSA!
(From the Vayu Purana)

“There was formerly a peak of Meru, named
Savitra, abounding with gems, radiant as the sun.
and celebrated throughout the three worlds, of
immensc extent, and difficult of access, and an
object of universal veneration. Upon that glorious
eminence, rich with mineral treasures, as upon a
splendid couch, the deity Siva reclined,
accompanied by the daughter of the sovereign of
mountains, and attended by the mighty Adityas, the
powerful Vasus, and by the heavenly physicians,
the sons of Asvini; by Kuvera, surrounded by his
train of Guhyakas, the lord of the Yaksas, who
dwells on Kailasa. There also was the great Muni
Usanas: there, were Rsis of the first order, with
Sanatkuméra at their head; divine Rsis. preceded by
Angiras; Visvavasu, with his bands of heavenly
choristers; the sages Narada and Parvata, and
innumerable troops of celestial nymphs. The breeze
blew upon the mountain, bland, pure, and fragrant;
and the trees were decorated with flowers, that
blossomed in every season. The Vidyadharas and
Siddhas, affluent in devotion, waited upon
Mahadeva. the lord of living creatures, and many
other beings, of various forms, did him homage.
Raksasas of terrific semblance, and Pisaches of
great strength, of different shapes and features,
armed with various weapons, and blazing like fire.
were delighted to be present, as the followers of the
god. There stood the royal Nandi, high in the
favour of his lord, armed with a fiery trident,
shining with inherent lustre; and there the best of
rivers. Ganga. the assemblage of all holy waters,
stood adoring the mighty deity. Thus worshipped
by all the most excellent of sages and of gods,
abode the omnipotent and all-glorious Mahadeva.

"In former times, Daksa commenced a holy
sacrifice on the side of Himavan, at the sacred spot
Gangadvara, frequented by the Rsia. The gods,
desirous of assisting at this solemn rite, came, with
Indra at their head, to Mahadeva. and intimated
their purpose; and having received his permission,
departed in their splendid chariots to Gangadvara.
as tradition reports, They found Daksa, the best of
the devour, surrounded by the singers and nymphs
of heaven, and by numerous sages, beneath the
shade of clustering trees and climbing plants; and
all of them, whether dwellers on earth, in air, or in
the regions above the skies, approached the
patriarch with outward gestures of respect. The
Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Maruts, all entitled to
pareake of the oblations, together with Jisnu, were
present. The four classes of Pitrs, Ushmapas.
Somapas, Ajyapts, and Dhumapias, or those who
feed upon the name, the acid juice, the butter, or the
smoke of offerings, the Asvins and the progenitors,
came along with Brahma. Creaturcs of every class,
born from the womb, the egg, from vapour, or
vegetation, came upon their invocation; as did all
the gods, with their brides, who in their resplendent
vehicles blazed like so many fires. Beholding them
thus assembled, the sage Dadhicha was filled with
indignation, and observed, 'The man who worships
what ought not to be worshipped, or pays not
reverence where veneration is due, is gultcy, most
assuredly, of heinous sin.' Then addressing Daksa,
he said to him, 'Why do you not offer homage to
the god who is the lord of life (Pasubhartri)?' Daksa
spoke; 'I have already many Rudras present, armed
with tridents, wearing braided hair, and existing in
eleven forms: 1 recognise no other Mahadeva.‘
Dadhicha spoke; ‘The invocation that is not
addressed to ISa, is, for all, but a solitary (and
imperfect) summons. Inasmuch as | behold no
other divinity who is superior to Sankara, this
sacrifice of Daksa will not be completed.' Daksa
spoke; “I offer, in a golden cup, this entire oblation,
which has been consecrated by many prayers, as an
offering ever due to the unequalled Visnu, the
sovereign lord of all.”*

“In the meanwhile, the virtuous daughter of the
mountain king, observing the departure of the
divinities, addressed her lord. the god of living
beings, and said—Uma spoke— 'Whither, oh lord,
have the gods, preceded by Indra, this day

=== PAGE 56 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 8

51

departed? Tell me truly, oh you who know alt truth,
for a great doubt perplexes me.' Mahesvara spoke;
"Illustrious goddess, the excellenc patriarch Daksa
celebrates the sacrifice of a horse, and thither the
gods repair.’ Devi spoke; 'Why then, most mighty
god, dos you also not proceed to this solemnity? by
what hindrance is your progress thither impeded?’
Mahesvara spoke; ‘This is the contrivance, mighty
queen, of all the gods. that in all sacrifices no
portion should be assigned to me. In consequence
of an arrangement formerly devised, the gods allow
me, of right, no participation of sacrificial
offerings.’ Devi spoke; ‘The lord god lives in all
bodily forms, and his might is eminent through his
superior faculties; he is unsurpassable, he is
unapproachable, in splendour and glory and power.
That such as he should be excluded from his share
of oblations, fills me with deep sorrow, and a
trembling, oh sinless, seizes upon my frame. Shall
J now practise bounty, restraint, or penance, so that
my lord, who is inconceivable, may obtain a share,
a half or a third portion, of the sacrifice’?!

“Then the mighty and incomprehensible deity,
being pleased, said to his bride, thus agitated; and
speaking; 'Slender-waisted queen of the gods. you
know not the purport of what you say; but I know
it, oh you with large eyes, for the holy declare all
things by meditation. By your perplexity this day
are all the gods. with Mahendra and all the three
worlds, utterly confounded. In my sacrifice, those
who worship me. repeat my praise?, and chant the
Rathantara song of the Sama veda; my priests
worship me in the sacrifice of true wisdom, where
no officiating Brahman is needed; and in this they
offer me my portion.’ Devi spoke; ‘The lord is the
root of all, and assuredly, in every assemblage of
the female world, praises or hides himself at will.’
Mahadeva spoke; ‘Queen of the gods, I praise not
myself: approach, and behold whom I shall create
for the purpose of claiming my share of the rite.”

“Having thus spoken to his beloved spouse, the
mighty MaheSvara created from his mouth a being
like the fire of fate; a divine being, with a thousand
heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet; wielding a
thousand clubs, a thousand shafts; holding the shell,
the discus, the mace, and bearing a blazing bow and
battle-axe; fierce and terrific, shining with dreadful
splendour, and decorated with the crescent moon;
clothed in a tiger's skin, dripping with blood;

having a capacious stomach, and a vast mouth,
armed with formidable tusks: his ears were erect,
his lips were pendulous, his tongue was lightning;
his hand brandished the thunderbolt; flames
screamed form his hair; a necklace of pearls wound
round his neck; a garland of flame descended on his
breast: radiant with lustre, he looked like the final
fire that consumes the world. Four tremendous
tusks .projected from a mouth which extended from
ear to ear ; he was of vast bulk, vase strength,
mighty male and lord, the destroyer of the universe,
and like a large fig-tree in circumference; shining
like a hundred moons at once; fierce as the fire of
love; having four heads, sharp white teeth, and of
mighty fierceness, vigour, activity, and courage;
glowing with the blaze of a thousand fiery suns at
the end of the world; like a thousand undimmed
moons; in bulk like Himadri; Kailasa, or Meru, or
Mandara, with all its gleaming herbs; bright as the
sun of destruction at the end of ages; of irrcsistible
prowess, and beautiful aspect; irascible, with
lowering eyes, and a countenance burning like fire;
clothed in the hide of the elephant and lion, and girt
round with snakes; wearing a turban on his head, a
moon on his brow; sometimes savage, sometimes
mild; having a chaplet of many flowers on his head,
anointed with various unguents, and adorned with
diffcrent ornaments and many sores of jewels;
wearing a garland of heavenly Karnikara flowcrs,
and rolling his eyes with rage. Sometimes he
danced; sometimes he laughed aloud; sometimes he
stood wrapt in meditation; sometimes he trampled
upon the earth; sometimes he sang; sometimes he
wept repeatedly; and he was endowed with the
facuities of wisdom, dispassion, power, penance,
cruch, endurance, fortitude, dominion, and self-
knowledge.

“This being, then, knelt down upon the ground,
and raising his hands respectfully to his head, said
to Mahadeva, ‘Sovereign of the gods, command
what it is that I must do for you,’ To which
Maheswara replied, 'Spoil the sacrifice of Daksa.'
Then the mighty Virabhadra, having heard the
pleasure of his lord, bowed down his head to the
feet of Prajapati; and starting like a lion loosed
from bonds, despoiled the sacrifice of Daksa,
knowing that he had been Created by the
displeasure of Devi. She too in her wrath, as the
fearful goddess Rudrakali, accompanied him, with

=== PAGE 57 ===

52

THE VISNU-PURANAM

all her train, to witness his deeds. Virabhadra the
fierce, abiding in the region of ghosts, is the
minister of the anger of Devi. And he then created,
from the pores of his skin, powerful demigods, the
mighty attendants upon Rudra. of equal valour and
strength, who started by hundreds and thousands
into existence. Then a loud and confused clamour
ailed all the expanse of ether, and inspired the
denizens of heaven with dread. The mountains
tottered, and earth shook, the winds roared, and the
depths of the sea were disturbed; the fires lost their
radiance, and the sun grew pale; the planets of the
firmament shone not, neither did the stars give
light; the Rshis ceased their hymns, and gods and
demons were mute; and thick darkness eclipsed the
chariots of the skies.*

“Then from the gloom emerged tearful and
numerous forms, shouting the cry of battle; who
instantly broke or overturned the sacrificial
columns, trampled upon the altars, and danced
amidst the oblations. Running wildly hither and
thither, with the speed of wind, they tossed about
the implements and vessels of sacrifice, which
looked like stars precipitated from the heavens. The
piles of food and beverage for the gods, which had
bcen heaped up like mountains; the rivers of milk;
the banks of curds and butter; the sands of honey
and butter-milk and sugar; the mounds of
condiments and spices of every flavour; the
undulating knolls of flesh and other viands; the
celestial liquors, pastes, and confections, which had
been prepared; these the spirits of wrath devoured
or defiled or scattered abroad. Then talling upon the
host of the gods, these vase and resistess Rudras
beat or terrified them, mocked and insulted the
nymphs and goddesses, and quickly put an end to
the rite, although defended by all the gods; being
the ministers of Rudra's wrath, and similar to
himself. ‘Some then made a hideous clamour,
whilst ochers fearfully shouccd, when Yajiia was
decapitated. For the divine Yajiia. the lord of
sacrifice. then began to fly up to heaven, in the
shape of a decr; and Virabhadra, of immeasurable
spirit, apprehending his power, cut off his vast
head, after he had mounted into the sky.7 Daksa the
patriarch, his sacrifice being destroyed, overcome
with terror, and utterly broken in spirit, fell then
upon the ground, where his head was spurned by
the feet of the cruel Virabhadra.* The thirty scores

of sacred divinities were all presently bound, with a
band of fire, by their lion-like foe; and they all then
addressed him, crying, 'Oh Rudra, have mercy upon
your servants: oh lord, dismiss thine anger.’ Thus
spoke Brahmé and the other gods, and the patriarch
Daksa: and raising their hands, they said, ‘Declare,
mighty being, who you are.’ Virabhadra said, 'I am
not a god, nor an Aditya; nor am I come hither for
enjoyment, nor curious to behold the chiefs of the
divinities: know that I am come to destroy the
sacrifice of Daksa, and that I am called Virabhadra.
the issue of the wrath of Rudra. Bhadrakali also,
who has sprung from the anger of Devi, is sent here
by the god of gods to destroy this rite. Take refuge,
king of kings, with him who is the lord of Uma; for
better is the anger of Rudra than the blessings of
other gods.’

"Having heard the words of Virabhadra, the
righteous Daksa propitiated the mighty god, the
holder of the trident, MaheSvara, The hearth of
sacrifice, deserced by the Brahmanas, had been
consumed; Yajfia had been metamorphosed to an
antelope; the fires of Rudra's wrath had been
kindled; the attendants, wounded by the tridents of
the servants of the god, were groaning with pain;
the pieces of the uprooted sacrificial posts were
acattered here and there; and the fragments of the
meat-offerings were carried off by flights of hungry
vultures, and herds of howling jackals. Suppressing
his vital airs, and taking up a posture of meditation,
the many-sighted victor of his foes, Daksa fixed his
eyes every where upon his thoughts. Then the god
of gods appeared from the altar, resplendent as a
thousand suns, and smiled upon him, and said.
‘Daksa, your sacrifice has been destroyed through
sacred knowledge: I am weil pleased with you:’ and
then he smiled again, and said, ‘What shall I do for
you: declare, together with the preceptor of the
gods."

"Then Daksa, frightened, alarmed, and agitated,
his eyes suffused with tears, raised his hands
revcrentially to his brow, and said, ‘If lord, you are
pleased; if I have found favour in your sight; if I
am to be the object of your benevolence; if you will
confer upon me a boon, this is the blessing 1 solicit,
that all these provisions for the solemn sacrifice,
which have been collected with much trouble and
during a long time, and which have now been
eaten, drunk, devoured, burnt, broken, scattered

=== PAGE 58 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 8

53

abroad, may not have been prepared in vain.’ 'So
let it be,’ replied Hara, the subduer of ludra. And
thereupon Daksa knelt down upon the earth, and
praised gracefully the author of righteousness, the
three-eyed god Mahadeva, repeating the eight
thousand, names of the deity whose emblem is a
bull.’
NOTES

1. The sacrifice of Daksa is a legend of some
interest, from its historical and archaeological
relations. It is obviously intendcd to intimate a
struggle between the worshippers of Siva and of
Visnu, in which at first the latter, but finally the
former, acquired the ascendancy. It is also a
favourite subject of Hindu sclupture, at least with
the Hindus of the Saiva division, and makes a
conspicuous figure both at Elephanta and Ellora, A
representation of the dispersion and multilation of
the gods and sages by Virabhadra. at the former, is
published in the Archeologia, VII. 326. where it is
described as the Judgement of Solomon! a figure of
Virabhadra is given by Niebuhr, vol. II. tab. 10:
and the entire group in the Bombay Transactions,
vol.1. p. 220. It is described, p. 229; but Erskine
has not verified the subject, although in cannot
admit of doubt The groupe described. p. 224,
probably represents the introductory details given
in our text. Of the Ellora sculptures, a striking one
occurs in what Sir C. Malet calls the Doomar Leyna
cave, where is "Veer Budder. with eight hands. In
one is suspended the slain Rajah Dutz,” A. R. VI,
396. And there is also a representation of 'Ehr
Budr,' in one of the colonadcs of Kailasa;'being, in
fact, the same figure as that at Elephanta. Bombay
Tr. Ill, 287. The legend of Daksa therefore was
popular when those cavern temples were excavated.
The story is told in much more detail in several
other Puranas, and with some variations, which will
be noticed: but the above has been selected as a
specimen of the style.of the Vayu Purana. and as
being a narration which, from its inartifical,
obscure, tautological, and — uncircumstantial
construction, is probably of an ancient date. The
same legend, in the same words, is given in the
Brahma Purana

2. Or this may be understood to imply, that the
original story is in the Vedas; the term being, as
usual in such a reference, #fa fa: | Gangadvara. the
place where the Ganges descends to the plains—or
Haridvar. as it is more usually termed—is usually

specified as the scene of action. The Liga is more
precise, calling it Kanakbala, which is the village
still called Kankhal, near Haridvar (Megha Dutft, p.
59). It rather inaccurately, however, describes this
as upon Harhsa peak;, a point of the Himalaya:
eae feraferati
3. The Karma Purana gives also this discussion
between Dadhicha and Daksa, and their dialogue
contains some curious matter. Daksa, for instance,
states that no portion of a sacrifice is ever allotted
to Siva, and no prayers are directed to be addressed
to him, or to his bride: wetsta fe ary 4 4M:
afteteaa: | a reat areten arg siaceafa Fe7t! Dadhicha
apparently evades the objection, and claims a share
for Rudra, consisting of the triad of gods, as one
with the sun, who is undoubtedly hymned by the
several ministering priests of the Vedas: ® Wad
Feary wma: | Te faaentet vg Atal
Daksa replies, that the twelve Adityas receive
special oblations : that they are all the suns; and
that he knows of no other. The Munis, who
overbear the dispute, concur in his sentiments: 4 @
St Beet eat ef ert feet
eas WITS Y ATA: Tae Vgera:1 arehreagay cat
‘eq Bre: || These notions seem to have been
exchanged for others in the days of the Padma
Purana and Bhagavata. as they place Daksa's
neglect of Siva to the latter's filthy practices, his
going naked, smearing himself with ashes, carrying
a skull, and behaving as if he were drunk or crazed:
alluding, no doubt, to the practices of Saiva
mendicants, who seem to have abounded in the
days of Sankaracharya, and since, there is no
discussion in the Bhagavata. but Rudra is described
as present at a former assembly, when his father-in-
law censured him before the guests, and in conse-
quence he departed in a age. His follower Nandi
curses the company, and Bhrgu retorts in language
descriptive of the Vamdacharis, or left hand
worshippers of Siva. “May all those” he says, “who
adopt the worship of Bhava (Siva), all those who
follow the practices of his worshippers, become
heretics, and oppugners of holy doctrines; may they
neglect the observances of purification; may they
be of infirm intellects. wearing clotted hair. and
ornamenting themselves with ashes and bones: and
may they enter the Saiva initiation, in which
spirituous liquor is the libation."

=== PAGE 59 ===

54

THE VISNU-PURANAM

4. This simple account of Sati's share in the
transaction is considerably modified in other
accounts. In the Ktirma, the quarrel begins with
Daksa the patriarch’s being, as he thinks, treated by
his son-in-law with less respect than is his due.
Upon his daughter Sati subsequently visiting him,
he abuses her husband, and turns her out of his
house.

She in spite destroys herself: Sareea Siva.
hearing of this. comes to Daksa, and curses him to
be born as a Ksatriya, the son of the Pracetasas, and
to beget a son on his own daughter: eat Gara
FSA TAAeMeAAE It is in this subsequent birth that
the sacrifice occurs. The Lifiga and Matsya allude
to the dispute between Daksa and Sati. and to the
latter's puting an end to herself by Yoga:

cd IA:The Padma.
Bhagavata, and Skanda in the Kasi Khanda, relate
the dispute between father and daughter in a like
manner, and in more detail. The first refers the
death of Sati. however, to a prior period; and that
and the Bhagavata both ascribe it to Yoga: wt Wa:
yeraret wrfeenffrt The Kasi Khanda, with an
improvement indicative of a later age, makes Satfi
throw herself into the fire prepared for the
solemnity.

5. The description of Virabhadra and his
followers is given in other Puranas in the same
strain, but with less detail.

6. Their exploits, aod those of Virabhadra, are
more particularly specified elsewhere, especially in
the Liga. Kiirma, and Bhagavta Puranas. Indra is
knocked down and trampled on; Yama has his staff
broken; Sarasvati and the Matrs have their noses
cut off; Mitra or Bhaga has his eyes pulled out;
Pusha has his teeth knocked down his throat;
Candra is pummelled : Vahni's hands are cut off;
Bhrgu loses his beard; the Brahmanas are pelted
with stones : the Prajapatis are beaten . and the
gods and demigods are run through with swords or
stuck with arrows.

7. This is also mentioned in the Liniga and in the
Hari Varisa: and the latter thus accounts for the
origin of the constellation Migosiras, Yajiia, with
the head of a dear. being elevated to the planetary
region. by Brahma.

8. As he prays to Siva presently, it could not well
be meant here that Daksa was decapitated, although
that is the story in other places. The Linga and

Bhagavata both state that Virabhadra cut off Daks
a's head, and threw it into the fire. After the fray
therefore when Siva restored the dead to life, and
the mutilated to their limbs. Daksa's head was not
forthcoming : it was therefore replaced by the head
of a goat, or, according to the Kasi Khanda, that of
aram. No notice is taken in our text of the conflict
elsewhere described between Virabhadra and Vis
nu. In Ihc Linga, the latter is beheaded, and his
head is blown by the wind into the fire. The Karma.
though a Saiva Purana, is less irreverent towards
Visnu, and after describing a contest in which both
parties occasionally prevail, makes Brabma
interpose, and separate the combatants. The Kasi
Khanda of the Skanda Purana describes Visnu as
defeated, and at the mercy of Virabhadra. who is
prohibited by a voice from heaven from destroying
his antagonist : whilst in the Hari Varnga, Visnu
compels Siva to fly, after taking him by the throat
and nearly strangling him. The blackness of Siva's
neck arose from this throttling, and not, as
elsewhere described, from his drinking the poison
ptoduced at the churning of the ocean.

whee

=== PAGE 60 ===

54

THE VISNU-PURANAM

CHAPTER 9
waaiseara:

(34 wf gatea: wre:, arent: wt zara
THY VYTRTY SHI AMG ha)
WOR sara
ves Ty Wa aq Weisel aT
sirerrareg wer wrereagrare rea: QI
Parasara said—-But with respect to the
question you have asked me. Maitreya,

relating to the history of Sri, hear from me the
tale as it was told to me by Marici.

aRrartnfaet we wet afar
ates get wet renfcog 3 11
Saaa] farat BET whet aa
ai aret aerttet ferereraey aa

=== PAGE 61 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 9

55

anfean a wag uret faeneragAN

aah wet feremonalt erat sforarT a4 1
ATT Yfet SaTyARRATTRI

wen a fast dae oftewre AfeiEn
a cast WaRTaT Tae
deirenfeaft Fa we 2a: yearn

Durvasas, a portion of Sankara (Siva)', was
wandering over the earth; when he beheld, in
the hands of a nymph of air’, a garland of
flowers culled from the trees of heaven, the
fragrant. odour of which spread throughout the
forest, and enraptured all who dwelt beneath
its shade. The sage. who was then possessed
by religious frenzy’; when he beheld that
garland, demanded it of the graceful and full-
eyed nymph, who, bowing to him
reverentially, immediately presented it to him.
He, as one frantic, placed the choplet upon his
brow, and thus decorated resumed his path;
when he bcheld Indra, the husband of Sact. the
tuler of the three worlds, approach, seated on
his infuriated elephant Airadvata, and attended
by the gods.

amen: @: force: aanprreTEry
srerarerearaTe Feaat TAP NC
Tera aitreangeh

arent Tet Sorafyrat area wae
rarectfterdts et wages ATCT:
aturere faate at ast Tuite go!

The frenzied sage, taking from his head the
garland of flowers, amidst which the bees
collected ambrosia, threw it to the king of the
gods, who caught it. and suspended it on the
brow of Airavata, where it shone like the river
Jahnavi, glittering on the dark summit of the
mountain Kaildsa. The elephant, whose eyes
were dim with inebriety, and attracted by the
smell, took hold of the garland with his trunk,
and case it on the earth.

Teapate array Gate BATT:
Ae tam f padagara agen

torina germafareranste ara

fret are oat aed Tet aaa ean

Ware sft Are A wftrorage: Ae

Balegecranters 7 ent fercer gam gant

We Setftent Wrett wea ay Aa

Seteasiea ye ferrergrarefan exit

vi weasel: aget Et yee wary fists

SASe ATE AAT TART FATT NG 1

TeMT erat Tee FRAT Tre Tete

TEM WABeRRIs Felted B wafereafen eg 1

ae BATT wera STATA

at oa aroferdor arenerraTan gon

That chief of sages, Durvasas, was highly
incensed at this disrespectful treatment of his
gilt, and thus angrily addressed the sovereign
of the immortals: “Inflated with the intoxica-
tion of power, Vasava, vile of spirit, you are
an idiot not to respect the garland I presented
to you, which was the dwelling of Fortune
(Sri), You have not acknowledged it as a
largess'; you have not bowed yourself before
me; you have not placed the wreath upon your
head, with your countenance expanding with
delight. Now, tool, for that you have not
infinitely prized the gailand that I gave you,
your sovereignty over the three worlds shall be
subverted. You confoundest me, Sakra, with
other Brahmanas. and hence I have suffered
disrespect from your arrogance: but in like
manner as you have cast the garland I gave
you down on the ground, so shall your
dominion over the universe be whelmed in
ruin. You have offended one whose wrath is
dreaded by all created things, king of the gods.
even me, by thine excessive pride.”

WH sar
Teg aronaragadted ware: |
WATCATATA Hel FART TTA RC
FAA: AF Aer aforaTATGT ATA
wegara weeny gale yfraAA: 1 83

=== PAGE 62 ===

56

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Parasara said— Descending hastily from his
elephant, Mahandra endeavoured to appease
the sinless Durvasds: but to the excuses and
prostrations of the thousand-eyed, the Muni
answered.

gatar sara
We PUGECa AF Ai wae aT
SUT ya: wR GeatraTafs AM Zot
aihanfefired adernfeat yer
sanfrarcaded gatranae ary 2 at
afamredarent: wit gdfxead:1
wed meatsfe Aa aTTETATATATAI 2 VI

wewermcres yaclplect PET
Friar aafergat we at a wat ETN 23H
até entire agar farqeat erat
fasrrnfiat ya: aterarferarq 2x1
Durvésé said— “I am not of a
compassionate heart, nor is forgiveness

congenial to my nature. Other Munis may
relent; but know me, Sakra, to be Durvasas.
You have in vain been rendered insolent by
Gautama and others; for know me, Indra, to be
Durvdsas, whose nature is a stranger to
remorse. You have been flattered by Vasistha
and other tender-hearted saints, whose loud
praises have made you so arrogant, that you
have insulted me. But who is there in, the
universe that can behold my countenance, dark
with frowns, and surrounded by my blazing
hair, and not tremble ? What need of words? I
will not forgive, whatever semblance of
humility you may assume.”

WIE Sart
seqeen weet fast tacsitshe at yA:
wreehrat TA WATT 8 I
aa: wofe Fst aerk yea
Braniteuered daftoieteretreer 2 1
AM: WERT T TAT ATTA: |
Fe ariigatlg waePa Tat FA RII
Faeerar waren cian ciherg weather:

actstt fe ayget afteret fesnTAT RCH

aa: rd wat cet: wed Gest a

fasten Ha: are fae Ba JOT: SA VeN

aeritaterrasr gear qf

gta: wrerer aerate farataa 13 oN

wareremficigtnr: sft: Fart

Parasara said— Having thus spoken, the
Brahman went his way; and the king of the
gods, remounting his elephant, returned to his
capital Amaravati. Thence forward, Maitreya,
the three worlds and Sakra lost their vigour,
and all vegetable products, plants, and herbs
were withered and died; sacrifices were no
longer offered; devout exercises no longer
practised; men were no more addicted to
charity or; any moral or religious obligation,
all beings became devoid of steadiness ; all
the faculties of sense were obsttucted by
cupidity; and men's desires were excited by
frivolous objects. Where there is energy, there
is prosperity; and upon prosperity energy
depends. How can those abandoned by
prosperity be possessed of energy; and without
energy, where is excellence ? Without
excellence there can be no vigour nor heroism
amongst men : he who has neither courage nor
strength, will be spurned by all: and he who is
universally created with disgrace, must suffer
abasement of his intellectual faculties.

Tarren ates Feet TaAAAAU 3 VU

dary wa aciteint apetaerrat:1

sinnfingar site dear: arate: 3 Vu

fran fae eee TTY

fafanfacen eeifcgren: yreat ay: 3 31

foareg THETA ATAT NTA: |

ware alae Baden wre Ta: YAN Fv

The three regions being thus wholly
divested of prosperity, and deprived of energy,
the Danavas and sons of Diti, the enemies of
the gods, who were incapable of steadiness,
and agitated by ambition, put torch their
strength against the gods. They engaged in war

=== PAGE 63 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 9

57

with the feeble and unfortunate divinities; and
Indra and the rest, being overcome in fight,
fled for refuge to Brahma, preceded by the god
of flame (Hutasana). When the great father of
the universe had heard all that had come to
pass, he said to the deities,

watara

eats rot aT

serfattatrarermed BetbaT TH 3&1

warafaata faaprrarraratay

wea: areot aA TAT: 113 & 1

wore fay wa: seh faereafer

Brahma said- “Repair for protection to the
god of high and low, the tamer of the demons,
the causeless cause of creation, preservaction,
and destruction; the progenitor of the
progenitors; the immortal, unconquerable Vis
nu; the cause of matter and spirit, of his
unengendered products; the remover of the
grief of all who humble themselves before
him: he will give you aid."

aa ML wah wen aiteafaaTTE:|
aftecirat att ata aft ati gen
aman fret: wed: ana: fare:
Jara anftafterfe: werecaf eft g cn

Having thus spoken to the deities. Brahma
proceeded along with them to the northern
shore of the sea of milk; and with reverential
words thus prayed to the supreme Hari;

valart
aaa ad adererrTeTaT
RATTATATAT TANT 3 FHI
areUrmatararagraroTU TTA
arent afte aq qadtat witerarq ¥ ot
wa wd Ua: Wage UGTA
waar a a: weorafy a: wey el
Wt: WEE FRA, TUTE RTH!
aifafataas sisal yimeg yes iy ei
BMA A GRIT BAS Wg TOT:

aye: ways: Yarra: weteguy3 i

Brahma said— "We glorify him who is all
things, the lord supreme over all, unborn,
imperishable; the protector of the mighty ones
of creation; the unperceived, indivisible
Narayana, the smallest of the smallest, the
largest of the largest of the elements; in whom
are all things, from whom are all things; who
was before existence; the god who is all
beings, who is the end of ultimate objects, who
is beyond final spirit, and is one with supreme
soul; who is contemplated as the cause of final
liberation by sages anxious to be free; in
whom are not the qualities of goodness,
foulness, or darkness, that belong to
undeveloped nature. May that purest of all
pure spirits this day be propitious to us.

aon-enrer- Frmenigerergaer That

we whet Yas weteg oat eftsuewn

shat weet fe a: YasqTana:

wateg a faeyeren a: waar YG

May that Hari be propitious to us, whose
inherent might is not an object of the
progressive chain of moments or of days, that
make up time. May he who is called the
supreme god, who is not in need of assistance,
Hari, the soul of all embodied substance, be
favourable unto us.

a: SUS ares SONY are

artenta a a: arf matey a At eftven

attarka a: arf wartentt a: ear

TBI AeA WOT: BT ATI SION

May that Hari, who is both cause and
effect; who is the cause of cause, the effect of
effect; he who is the effect of successive
effect: who is the effect of the effect of the
effect himself; the product of the effect of the
effect of the effect, or elemental substance; to
him I bow.’

BUT HOTT TAT ALOT

meat Vf wat MOAT: BT TVAITTN YS I

ahaert tens Bert era

ard enhaed f word: BT Ut VEN Ye

=== PAGE 64 ===

58

THE VISNU-PURANAM

The cause of the cause; the cause of the
cause of the cause; the cause of them all; to
him I bow. To him who is the enjoyer and
thing to be enjoyed; the creator and thing to be
created; who is the agent and the cffect; to that
supreme being I bow.

faqd tert fremmerorry
sornnfaant aq Afgan: wed TENG of
a Bet TO Ged aa favorita

werd Wer fae: Morar: TaTHeTTNY ei

The infinite nature of Visnu is pure,
intelligent, perpetual, unborn, undecayable,
inexhaustible, inscrutable, immutable; it is
neither gross nor subtile, nor capable of being
defined: to that ever holy nature of Visnu I
bow.

mengargainigt fergfated fern

Ue TARAS A MOTTA TAT & VI
aa dat Taal A ae TT ETI
arate weitere aise: wed TENG aH
ag aft: wate: YoauaaTasey

uyater wore fered afgeat wet TERN vt

wnat wes taer garfernferarfeer:|
NATE afeT: Tet aA GH
wae aya ad walsrregM

write faroit srenrat aor ar gfortran 4 Gn

To him whose faculty to create the universe
abides in but a part of but the ten-millionth
part of him; to him who is one with the
inexhaustible supreme spirit, I bow: and to the
glorious nature of the supreme Visnu, which
nor gods, nor sages, nor I, nor Sankara
apprehend; that nature which the Yogis, after
incessant effort, effacing both moral merit and
demerit, behold to be contemplated in the
mystical monosyllable Om: the supreme glory
of Visnu, who is the first of all; of whom, one
only god, the triple energy is the same with
Brahma, Visnu, and Siva: oh lord of all, great
soul of all, asylum of all, undecayable, have
pity upon your servants; oh Visnu, he manifest
to us.”

sqaiftanrncd weniferegrert:!

wordy: waefa aa Ft gfettere yon

Bart WAL Te STAT OA TAA

WaT: BT TAMA Ta We MATA 4 CA

Paragara continued-The gods, having heard
this prayer uttered by Brahma, bowed down,
and cried, “Be favourable to us; be present to
our sight: we bow down to that glorious nature
which the mighty Brahma does not know; that
which is your nature, oh imperishable, in
whom the universe abides.”

Set saa Sarat Teor

sgeata: ad: Feeatagera: 14 eu

art aayireat a: wars at:

4AM: BT SPREE: SETTAfaP AUTH Gold

rer yaar Sry faeTTETT

Wale wort we weet She ae § en

Then the gods having ended, Brhaspati and

the divine Rsis thus prayed: “We bow down to
the being entitled to adoration; who is the first
object of sacrifice; who was before the first of
things; the creator of the creator of the world;
the undefinable: oh lord of all that has been or
is to be; imperishable type of sacrifice; have
pity upon your worshippers; appear to them.
prostrate before you.

Ws en ward we ether:

alte: at ger wraenise Benita ng Bn

aft aaaadt wi da weRT:|

ren feet wen Far SergarrentbaT 1g

MOTO Aver Sera TTT STAT: |

PRUE ATAATAT: PHA SAAPTOTT: HG

Here is Brahma; here is Trilocana (the
three-eyed Siva), with the Rudras; Pusan (the
sun), with the Adityas; and Fire. with all the
mighty luminaries: here are the sons of Asvini
(the two ASvini Kumaras). the Vasus and all
the winds, the Sadhyas, the Visvedevas, and
Indra the king of the gods: all of whom bow
lowly before you : all the tribes of the

=== PAGE 65 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 9

59

immortals, vanquished by the demon host,
have fled to you for succour.”

WA Farq

WT TINY Magus!

Saar aah Fat Are wea g GI

a apr war targa

anychareterrt Sorat uferegferrg & 1

wore worat: yet datrafeafeeeror: |

FRA: Qusttened frarreqerra: 11 g i911

Parasara continued-Thus prayed to, the

supreme deity, the mighty holder of the conch
and discus, showed himself to them: and
beholding the lord of gods, bearing a shell, a
discus, and a mace, the assemblage of
primeval form, and radiant with embodied
light. Pitamaha and the other deities, their eyes
moistened with rapture, first paid him homage
and then thus addressed him :

zat wy:

aay aaisfaghned wt gen et fires

Sawai: vad aan: afer SAE Sil

aaal wet: eat fas Favor wary

asa warndt Fa weitd Saar: 1g et

Waa AAT At: TAMA TAT!

wa age SUERTE: WATAAT: 1119 011

andes valeieaanact 31

wares veut ferent rea Seafafeia: 119 tt

Gods said— “Repeated salutation to you,
who are indefinable: you are Brahma; you are
the wonder of the Pinaka bow (Siva); you are
Indra; you are fire, air, the god of waters, the
sun, the king of death (Yama), the Vasus, the
Maruts (the winds), the Sadhyas, and
Visvadevas. This assembly of divinities, that
now has come before you, you are; for, the
creator of the world, you are every where. You
are the sacrifice, the prayer of oblation, the
mystic syllable Om, the sovereign of all
creatures: you are all that is to be known, or to
be unknown: oh universal soul, the whole

world consists of you. We, discomfited by the
Daityas, have fled to you, oh Visnu, for
refuge.

ad waite watered 7:1

TART ART TAPAS TATTTA © V1

TAA ROT ATTA

wa WEE WAAAY MOAT HHT 71119311

Barat Aer Waa ATTA FEMI

Spirit of all, have compassion upon us;

defend us with your mighty power. There will
be affliction, desire, trouble, and grief, until
your protection is obtained : but you are the
remover of all sins. Do you then, oh pure of
spirit, show favour unto us who have fled to
you: oh lord of all, protect us with your great
power, in union with the goddess who is your
strength®,”

WE Sart
wa Beary wordt:
weagisiratrenre w faeraqios i

Hari, the creator of the universe, being thus
prayed to by the prostrate divinities, smiled,
and thus spoke:

sieprargart

awa waat Jar: aherrqadey

aerad aq fact wafxeried YANG I

anita afget Set: afta warcieett:1

wart Wat Heat Aa Het J arafer o'sit

wearanngd Fat: wera Werafeei

Visnu said— "With renovated energy, oh
gods, I will restore your strength. Do you act
as I enjoin. Let all the gods, associated with
the Asuras, cast all sorts of medicinal herbs
into the sea of milk; and then taking the
mountain Mandara for the churning-Kick, the
serpent Vasuki for the rope, churn the ocean
together for ambrosia; depending upon my aid.

angdy ata arereraafoTi 9 ¢

STEER Bet area afar

HOTA FT TATE Aq AAS TTT 8

=== PAGE 66 ===

60

THE VISNU-PURANAM

ARIAT afett yar weet

wn are afventir wer frenfafee:

a wrereangd tat: act serena oft

To secure the assistance of Daityas, you
must be at peace with them, and engage to
give them an equal portion of the fruit of your
associated toil; promising them, that by
drinking the Amrta that shall be produced
from the agitated ocean, they shall become
mighty an immortal. I will take care that the
enemies of the gods shall not partake of the
percious draught; that they shall share in the
labour alone.”

WIPE Tart

sya tates wd Wa wa: YA:

PIAA: FAT AMAASTASHATN < Rl

aetedit: warita ta-ataerat:|

farcer feroferrafar prequrrcitrafinn ¢ 211

Being thus inscrucced by the god of gods,

the divinities entered into alliance with the
demons, and they jointly undertook the
acquirement of the beverage of immortality.
They collected various kinds of medicinal
herbs, and cast them into the sea of milk, the
waters of which were radiant as the thin and
shining clouds of autumn.

War wet gran 3a Hear a arghaq

vat afagureen Ata ATATFATN ¢ 3H

fagen: wie: wa aa: yes aa: Get:

RO aryeser: yee Fafa cw

2 tee HOT are-aterreaaearg: |

freentisga: wa aqgefiaganc qu

Waa Wah are-argaretacnga:

Yromest aifgerar renter: GANS RM

attend amar Kabat waa eft:

TREE wHaISTETAN ¢ 811

They then took the mountain Mandara for
the staff; the serpent Vasuki for the cord; and
commenced to churn the ocean for the Amrta.
The assembled gods were stationed by Krsna

at the tail of the serpent; the Daityas and
Danavas at its head and neck. Scorched by the
flames emitted from his inflated hood. the
demons were shorn of their glory; whilst the
clouds driven towards his tail by the breath of
his mouth, refreshed the gods with revivifying
showers. In the midst of the milky sea, Hari
himself, in the form of a tortoise, served as a
pivot for the mountain, as it was whirled
around.

toes tant wel wT:

aad wifi dermeisato ac cl

sratardar, vet geqetor Sys:

aura Ate ae ewe agi 2 ei

aera aera aarenfarary et:

arr tore tary segferary fay: gol

The holder of the mace and discus was
present in other forms amongst the gods and
demons, and assisted to drag the monarch of
the serpent race: and in another vast body he
sat upon the summit of the mountain. With
one portion or his energy, unseen by gods or
demons, he sustained the serpent king; and
with another, infused vigour into the gods.

werent areafery aftrredt Sareraa: |

eaatamay wa get: qegfara g gu

wryef ad tar array wer

onfirrerasta aya feat: 11 211

fatafafa facari fafa fercaat aa!

aye arent Set ereforreEAT eB

From the ocean, thus churned by the gods
and Danavas, first uprose the cow Surabhi. the
fountain of milk and curds, worshipped by the
divinities, and beheld by them and their
associates with minds disturbed, and eyes
glistening with delight. Then. as the holy
Siddhas in the sky wondered what this could
be, appeared the goddess Varuni (the deity of
wine), her eyes rolling with intoxication.

Hae ATTEN aitlere AA BATA
TR United yg, SaaS gv

=== PAGE 67 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 9

61

wettarchpuitereraemeacat 701: |

afte’: aaerat Ara Targa et

Next from the whirlpool of the deep,
sprang the celescial Parijata tree, the delight of
the nymphs of heaven, perfuming the world
with its blossoms. The troop of Apsarasas, the
nymphs of heaven, were then produced, of
surprising loveliness, endowed with beauty
and with taste.

aa: ptaigerasy’ wt Wea:

sryger fart arm: afttrarer afer < GU

wat eerafida: Janae: Gay

fauq arose yong ayfera eon

Wd: eMeHRA Bes Sta-araT:|

aygifan: we tq gfe: wenecn

The cool-rayed moon next rose, and was
seized by Mahadeva: and then poison was
engendered from the sea, of which the snake
gods (Nagas) took possession. Dhanvantari,
robed in white, and bearing in his hand the cup
of Amrta, next came forth: beholding which,
the sons of Diti and of Danu, as well as the
Munis. were filled with satisfaction and
delight.

aa: apna faanfenret farm

site warereng her yarTZST ee

at ygader gen: sige veda:

femreaqyareran warat: Feat ATs Root

Paria Ter ATATTOT: |

TTT: WARN: FUATTTAATU Ro BU

fern tauren faret we

vara Bat acta 90 2

Then, seated on a full-blown lotus, and
holding a water-lily in her hand, the goddess
Sri, radiant with beauty, rose from the waves.
The great sages, enraptured, hymned her with
the song dedicated to her praise’. Visvavasu
and other heavenly quiristers sang, and
Ghrtaci and other celestial nymphs danced
before her, Ganga and other holy streams
attended for her ablutions; and the elephants of

the skies, taking up their pure waters in vases
of gold, poured them over the goddess, the
queen of the universal world.

airtel wugg Tet wre

eet faquorarg: feerant wert a go 8tl

FeTTRATARERT FAT TOTAL

Upaat WagaMt Tal aT: Wet BM Yow

Taraehfenm ar eftoer wae

met ie asar wet Frferarram gout

Set wed wegen aap:

Brat Seta Tent fawfarageATAT: 1 ROK MI

The sea of milk in person presented her
with in wreath of never-fading flowers; and
the artist of tnc gods (Visvakarma) decorated
her person with heavenly ornaments. Thus
bathed. attired, and adorned, the goddess, in
the view of the celestials, cast herself upon the
breast of Hari; and there reclining, turned her
eyes upon the deities, who were inspired with
rapture by her gaze. Not so the Daityas, who,
with Vipracitti at their head, were filled with
indignation, as Visnu turned away from them,
and they were abandoned by the goddess of
prosperity (Laksmi).

Tat TgeeT Tait fra

anuSe Weldtat saree Aq fasTETAI gow

ara ciafiat ay fare: eirarafeaa: |

arena tava: weet fergsn go cit

WA: WY: YON: PRN Ta

SeRTqatifeare sare ANA: 1 Ro VU

Wasua w aferaderagern

aernrt fegit Sat aratret x faerer A geo

Wer Sat Yer Yet: QVHTENTT

wforoes sarge srreraa fafeeraA Veal

The powerful and indignant Daityas then
forcibly seized the Amrta-cup. that was in the
hand of Dhanvantari; but Visnu. assumin’. a
female form, fascinated and deluded them: and
recovering the Amrta from them, delivered it
to the gods, Sakra and the other deities quaffed
the ambrosia. The incensed demons, grasping

=== PAGE 68 ===

62

THE VISNU-PURANAM

their weapons, fell upon them; but the gods,
into whom the ambrosial draught had infused
new vigour, defeated and put their host to
flight, and they fled through the regions of
space, and plunged into the subterraneous
realms of Patal. The gods thereat greacly
rejoiced, did homage to the holder of the
discus and mace, and resumed their reign in
heaven.

Wa: Waa: Wea: weet waar aah

Satie a aaranf weary rar ¢ez

anata wratsitamadifafawrag: |

eet a aaa war ALATA Re3 I

The sun shone with renovatcd splendour,
and again discharged his appointed task; and
the celestial luminaries again circled, oh best
of Munis, in their respective orbits. Fire once
more blazed aloft, beautiful in splendour; and
the minds of all beings were animated by
devotion.

acieag fren ye aya yiraa

vena FETS: YA: AAAI ge

fagrerna: we: wore fafed GA:

Sarre feat eat qurarenett FAN ARAM

The three worlds again were rendered
happy by prosperity; and Indra, the chief of
the gods, was restored to power. Seated upon
his throne, and once more in heaven,
exercising sovereignty over the gods, Sakra
thus eulogized the goddess who bears a lotus
in her hand:

¥4 sara
Te wey serinreareerary
Brergfargrerelt favottcar- werent rary 826 11
a fated ger ere wer ei cieamrahn
wear Ufa: wer afer sregr Aa geo!
aafaen werferen eta a yh
arafaen @ afer a fargfemcrafrin eee
areifgat wat arat cusdtftreata a
araniieingieertatta yr 228
war ST Targa Afar da ay:

Bae Raga Affe TENFA: Ry ot

waar Sf uftcaeh Tenet YT!

farpmrerra eer WATT gz eM

ant: arent ee arene

HST Freed ATATUTTOIMN 82 V1

wihrataeiafivra: Fay!

fa wagefeqertt Yeutot + yeHTAN LIAN

Indra said- “I bow down to Sri. the mother
of all beings, seated on her lotus throne, with
eyes like full-blown lotuses, reclining on the
breast of Visnu. You are Siddhi (superhuman
power): you are Swadha and Svaha: you are
ambrosia (Sudha). the purifier of the universe:
you are evening, night, and dawn: you are
power, faith, intellect: you are the goddess of
letters (Sarasvati). You, beautiful goddess, are
knowledge of devotion, great knowledge,
mystic knowledge, and spiritual knowledge;
which confers eternal liberation. You are the
science of reasoning, the three Vedas, the arts
and sciences:'° you are moral and political
science. The world is peopled by you with
pleasing or displeasing forms. Who else than
you, oh goddess, is seated on that person of the
god of gods, the wielder of the mace, which is
made up of sacrifice, and contemplated by
holy ascetics? Abandoned, by you, the three
worlds were on the brink of ruin; but they have
been reanimated by you. From your propitious
gaze. oh mighty goddess, men obtain wives,
children, dwellings, friends, harvests, wealth.
Health and strength, power, victory, happiness,
are easy of attainment to those upon whom
you smilest.

wa nar weyerat Saat eft: fram

vada fea rer STEAM ATTN AVI
Ta: Bret aa WS Ar WE aT UieewTeA

Tr wat Bey wT: Tera EG H
TAR geal a wey aT faery
PRAT Try Serer fereuTtler: ETE RPE I
TRH aeptanal ae sitenfefinfat:

werd FAT: Te: TT F ATTA LI

=== PAGE 69 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 9

63

raaracitfee: a: viterefach fat: |
pees ert Yor Frfor sift ecu

W yore: W Yui ea: w Heit: w afer
WMG a a feat ae aa atferasn eee
walt aquemrentat pte: Wee TUT: |
Wega wrae wet  faaqaceitn 23 011
a8 aulfag went gory fra Sera:

wate Sfer verter arenteetelt: BETTI 93 gil

You are the mother of all beings, as the god
of gods. Hari, is their, father; and this world,
whether animate or inanimate, is pervaded by
you and Visnu. Oh you who purify all things,
forsake not our treasures, our granaries, our
dwellings, our dependants, our persons, our
wives: abandon not our children, our friends,
our lineage, our jewels, oh you who abide on
the bosom of the god of gods. They whom you
desert are forsaken-by truth, by purity, and
goodness, by every amiable and excellent
quality; whilst the base and worthless upon
whom you look favourably become
immediately endowed with all excellent
qualifications, with families, and with power.
He on whom your countenance is turned is
honourable, amiable, prosperous. wise, and of
exalted birth; a hero of irresistible prowess:
but all his merits and his advantages are
converted into worthlessness from whom,
beloved of Visnu, mother of the world, you
averted your face. The tongues of Brahma are
unequal to celcbrate your excellence. Be
propitious to me, oh goddess, lotus-eyed, and
never forsake me more.”

WR sart

Te att: Tage Wer we Sat WATT

syoaat waearat waar FT 2 2

Paragara continucd— Being thus praised, the
gratified Sri, abiding in all creatures, and
heard by all beings, replicd to the god of a
hundred rites (Satakratu);

atteara
uftqarfer tae whoa te

at quira afeagt avers FATTATI 93 31

Sti said- “I am pleased, monarch of the
gods, by thine adoration. Demand from me
what you desire: I have comc to fulfil your
wishes.”

Sy Sara

ara af % tf aural afe arene

Sretvert a rarer eae Asay at: WEN RI wU

ato aes ai wreraferara

a aa a Ultra fetaisey at aA eg 4

Indra replied— “If. Goddess, you will grant
my prayers; if it ] am worthy of your bounty ';
be this my first request, that the three worlds
may never again be deprived of your prescnce.
My second supplication, daughter of ocean, is,
that you will not forsake him who shall
celebrate your praises in the words I have
addressed to you.” “I will not abandon,”

siteara

Seitet fers + derenfe area

Beit OT WaT wet SAATTEAGTAT 23 & Il

aay Ul Aa wie: AOI Wa:

vi erate a rene afer wregqatn e301

The goddess answered, “the three worlds

again : this your first boon is granted; for Jam
gratified by your praises: and further, I will
never turn my face away from that mortal who
morning and evening shall repeat the hymn
with which you have addressed me.
WU Jara -

wa at aa tat asa 4 YT

Bare sitter wiarcertatfiramn 3 ct

Ph: Tarai ayaa at: yee: yA:

Ra-AAAIAA WYATT 23 VI

a aan aan Fatal sare:

aA HURT TAT sHrTMTETAATT Bx o

FS Teg EM safety wat ees!

Get y wet crete aeuit FeTT AN Be RI

Teaasway aet BeaUt Fora

=== PAGE 70 ===

64

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Paragara proceeded— Thus, Maitreya, in
former times the goddess Sri conferred these
boons upon the king of the gods. being pleased
by his adorations; but her first birth was as the
daughter of Bhrgu by Khyéati: it was at a
subsequent period that she was produced from
the sea, at the churning of the ocean by the
demons and the gods. to obtain ambrosia.” For
in like manner as the lord of the world, the god
of gods. Janardana, descends amongst
mankind (in various shapes), so does his
coadjutrix Sri. Thus when Hari was born as a
dwarf, the son of Aditi. Laksmi appeared from
a lotus (as Padma or Kamala); when he was
born as Rama. of the race of Bhrgu (or
Parasurama). she was Dharani; when he was
Raghava (Ramacandra), she was Sita; and
when he was Krsna, she became Rukmini.

ara oraatg feratitar weer gee
tard Gade WA oA

famaigerpeat & atetararrey A 3x3
BATATYAAT MAT BT USAT:

fort 3 Perea fererer We ara, FATT Bev
weat dg dae ay sitet gh

STAN: BAST FT AAT HST PG

In the other descents of Visnu, she is his
associate. If he takes a celestial form. she
appears as divine; if a mortal, she becomes a
mortal too. transforming her own person
agreeably to whatever character it pleases Vis
nu to put on. Whosoever hears this account of
the birth of Laksmi, whosoever reads it. shall
never lose the goddess Fortune from his
dwelling for three generations; and misfortune,
the fountain of strife, shall never enter into
those houses in which the hymns to Sri are
repeated.

Un & ala eR aa a uftefa
aftredt sitar orat ve yg Ben ewe
fa aacfayerariiteg:
fitatraqataa fe meat:
angfentire veat 3tt
data a ag warfare yin

fe sttfereyerat weigh AarAtseaTa:|

Thus, Brahman, have I narrated to you. in
answer to your question, how Laksmi.
formerly the daughter of Bhrgu, sprang from
the sea of milk; find misfortune shall never
visit those amongst mankind who daily recite
the praises of Laksmi uttered by Indra. which
are the origin and cause of all prosperity.

aK

NOTES

1. Durvasas was the son of Atri by Anasiya, and
was an incarnation of a portion of Siva.

2. A Vidyadhari. These beings, male and female,
are spirits of an inferior order, tenanting the middle
regions of the atmosphere. According to the Vayu,
the garland was given to the nymph by Devi.

3. He observed the Vrata, or vow of intanily;
FATA! equivalent to the ecstasies of some
religious fanatics. ‘In this state.’ says the com-
mentator. ‘even Saints are devils :' frit fe watera:
Frere ga ait

4. They became Nih-satwa; and Satwa is
explained throughout by Dhairyya, steadness,
‘fortitude.

5. The first effect of primary cause is nature, or
Prakrti : the effect of the effect, or of Prakrti, is
Mahat : effect in the third degree is Aharikara: in
the fourth, or the effect of the effect (Ahamkara) of
the the effect (Mahat) of the effect (Prakfti), is
elementary substance, or Bhita. Visnu is each and
all. So in the succeeding ascending scale, Brahma is
the cause of mortal life : the cause of Brahmi is the
egg, or aggregate elementary matter : its cause is,
therefore, elementary matter; the cause of which is
subtile or rudimental matter, which originates from
Aharnkara. and so on. Visnu is also each and all of
these.

6. With your Sakti. or the goddess Sri or Laksmi.

7. Or with the Sukta, or hymn of the Vedas.
commencing. “Hiranyu varnam." etc.

8. The churning of the ocean does not occur in
several of the Puranas, and is but cursorily alluded
to in the Siva, Liga, and Kirma Puranas. The
Vayu and Padma have much the same narrative as
that of our text; and so have the Agni and
Bhagavata, except that they refer only briefly to the
anger of Durvasas, without narrating the

=== PAGE 71 ===

BOOK 1, CHAP. 9

65

circumstances; indicating their being posterior,
therefore, to the original tale. The part. however,
assigned to Durvasas appears to be an
embellishment added to the original, for no
mention of him occurs in the Matsya Purana nor
even in the Hari Varhsa, neither does it occur in
what may be considered the oldest extant versions
of the story, those of the Ramayana and
Mahabharata : both these ascribe the occurrence to
the desire of the gods and Daityas to become
immortal. The Matsya assigns a similar motive to
the gods, instigated by observing that the Daityas
slain by them in battle were restored to life by
Sukra with the Sanjivini, or herb of immortality,
which he bad discovered. The account in the Hari
Vamsa is brief and obscure, and is explained by the
commentator as an allegory, in which the chuming
of the ocean typifics ascetic penance, and the
ambrosia is final liberation : but this is mere
mystification. The legend of the Ramayana is
translated, vol. |. p. 410. of the Serampore edition :
and that of the Mahabharata by Wilkins, in the
notes to his translation of the Bhagavata Gita. See
also the original text. Cat ed. p. 40. It has been
presented 'to general readers in a more attractive
form by my friend H. M. Paiker. in his Draught of
Immortality, printed with other poems, Lond. 1827.
The Matsya Purana has many of the stanzas of the
Mahabharata interspersed with others. There is
some variety in the order and number of articles
produced from the ocean. As I have observed
elsewhere (Hindu Theatre, 1. 59. Load. ed.), the
popular enumeration is fourteen, but the Ramayana
specifies but nine; the Mahabharata. nine; the
Bhagavata. ten; the Padma. nine; the Vayu. twelve;
the Matsya. perhaps, gives the whole number.
Those in which most agrec, are, I. the Halahala or
Kalakita poison, swallowed by Siva : 2. Varunt or
Sura, the goddess of wine, who being taken by the
gods, and rejected by the Daityas, the former were
termed Suras, and the latter Asuras: 3. the horse
Ucchaigravas. taken by Indra : 4. Kaustubha, the
jewel worn by Visnu : 5. the moon : 6.
Dhanvantari, with the Amrta in his Kamandalu. or
vase, and these two articles are in the Vayu consi-
dered as distinct products : 7. the goddess Padma
or-Sri : 8. the Apsarasas, or nymphs of heaven : 9.
Surabhi, or the cow of plenty : 10. the Parijata tree,
or tree of heaven : 11. Airavata, the elephant taken

by Indra. The Matsya adds, 12. the umbrella taken
by Varuna : 13. the earrings taken by Indra, and
given to Aditi : and apparently another horse, the
white horse of the sun : or the number may be
completed by counting the Amrta separately from
Dhanvantari. The number is made up in the popular
lists by adding the bow and the conch of Visnu; but
there does not seem to be any good authority for
this, and the addition is a sectarial one : so is that of
the Tulasi tree, plant sacred to Krsna, which is one
of the twelve specified by the Vayu Purina The
Uttara Khanda of the Padma Purana has a peculiar
enumeration, or. Poison; Jyestha or Alaksmi, the
goddess of misfortune, the elder born to fortune :
the goddess of wine; Nidra, or sloth; the Apsarasas;
the elephant of Indra; Laksmi; the moon; and the
Tulasi plant The reference to Mohini, the female
form assumed by Visnu, is very brief in our text .
and no notice is taken of the story told in the
Mahabharata and some of the Puranas, of the
Daitya Rahu's insinuating himself amongst the
gods, and obtaining a portion of the Amrta : being
beheaded for this by Visnu, the head became
immortal, in consequence of the Amrta having
reached the throat, and was transferred as a
constellation to the skies : and as the sun and moon
detected his presence amongst the gods, Rahu
pursues them with implacable hatred, and his
efforts to seize them are the causes of eclipses;
Rahu typifying the ascending and descending
nodes. This seems to be the simplest and oldest
form of the legend. The equal immortality of the
body, under the name Ketu, and his being the cause
of meteorical phenomena, seems to have been an
after-thought. In the Padma and Bhagavata, Rahu
and Ketu are the sons of Simhika. the wife of the
Danava Vipracitti.

9. The four Vidyas. or branches of knowledge,
are said to bc, Yajfiavidya, knowledge or
performance of religious rites; Mahavidya, great
knowledge, the worship of the female principle, or
Tantrika worship; Guhyavidya, knowledge of
mantras, mystical prayers, and incantation . and
Atma vidya, knowledge of soul. tue wisdom

10. Or Vartta, explained to mean the Silpa Sastra,
mechanics, sculpture, and arehitecture : Ayurveda,
medicine, etc.

ll. The cause of this, however, is left
unexplained. The Padma P. inserts a legend to

=== PAGE 72 ===

66 THE VISNU-PURANAM

account for the temporary separation of Laksmi
from Visnu, which appears to be peculiar to that
work Bhrgu was lord of Laksmipur. a city on the
Narmada. given him by Brahma. His daughter Laks
mi instigated her husband to request its being
conceded to her. which offending Bhrgu. he cursed
Visnu to be born upon eartt ten times, to be
separated from his wife, and to have no children.
The legend is an insipid modern embellishment.
dedek

=== PAGE 73 ===

66

THE VISNU-PURANAM

CHAPTER 10
‘epratsearea:
Cayaatatat yx: eA)
a3a sara
waft & rer ad wegpishea were
ayaa wate ait Y aerat GA gn

Maitreya said— You have narrated to me.
great Muni, all that I asked of you: now

resume the account of the creation
subsequently to Bhrgu.
WIN Sart

3a: wareat ayer cetfaneiee:

wer eget warreat sat at yA UBM

arafafrahala 8: at weer:

eng free aret aatatat garqet 311

wrnla yeaa whose yey: 1

aah Sefere at wrorente yet STU S I

wore Airey Yat Wsaigy AatswaT

att atett werent farearé rea aa 1

Pardsara continued— Laksmi. the bride of
Visnu, was the daughter of Bhrgu by Khyati.
They had also two sons. Dhatri and Vidhatti,
who married the two daughters of the
illustrious Meru. Ayati and Niryati : and had
by them each a son, named Prana and
Mrkanda. The son of the latter was
Markandeya. from whom Vedasiras was born.'
The son of Prana was named Dyutimat. and
his son was Rajavat; after whom, the race of
Bhrgu became infinitely multiplied.

welt wih: weyfa: theta

fern: wade er Yat water GI

aereSne yar afeese wafEa

Sambhiti, the wife of Marici. gave birth to
Paurnamasa, whose sons were Virajas and
Sarvaga. I shall hereafter notice his other
descendants, when I give a more particular

account of the race of Marici.

Taftenfgra: eit wae: aTEATEAMT Ott
farterct geste war arate
aya Wary yaracAATTN ci

ang gatada quite attr

Seat yoreamreatat atferergdiswag ¢
yaoraa aise: Ba: TTBS
wenaratais BUT YAATTT Roll
Baar | Ygs area yore wea: |
cater waftteat arefiararrgaan gen
wipalft aeenitr aig trary
SPBIAMATN TAATRTA TAT C2
salara afaeea waradt 4 Yar:
Wirnateatargs TAASTATEMM! 8311
WaT: Ys gaa wa wAasTeT:|
Userafetirart geurercatswT: ge
TENT BATT Yates Hoyerdtera fest
Waa waars yfaanht sen But
dary waasl wenfterr ws
wateruareg ag: uftatfean: 1 21
wort agate fiat gaara aq

The wife of Afigiras, Smriti, bore daughters
named Sinivali, Kuhu, Raka. and Anumati
(phases of the moon ). Anasiya, the wife of
Atri, was the mother of three sinless sons,
Soma (the moon), Durvasas, and the ascetic
Dattatreya’. Pulastya had, by Priti, a son called
in a former birth, or in the Svayambhuva
Manvantara, Dattoli, who is now known as the
sage Agastya’. Ksama, the wife of the.
pattiarch Pulaha, was the mother of three sons;.
Karmasa, Arvarivat. and Sahignu®. The wife of

=== PAGE 74 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 10

67

Kratu, Sannati, brought forth the sixty
thousand Balakhilyas, pigmy sages, no bigger
than a joint of the thumb, chaste, pious,

resplendent as the rays of the sun’. Vasistha
had seven sons by his wife Urjja, Rajas, Gatra,
Urdhvabahu. Savana, Anagha, Sutapas, and
4 8
Sukra. the seven pure sages . The Agni named
Abhimani. who is the eldest born of Brahma,
had, by Svaha, three sons or surpassing
brilliancy, Pavaka, Pavamana, and Suci, who
drinks up water: they had forty-five sons, who,
with the original son of Brahma and his three
descendants, constitute the forty-nine fires’.

fart eOM YET cara F wat Tan gon

aftrena afedatsrra: ara 2

Wa: TIT YA FA Wai SenfToit gern get

ao Teatet Ahr argy fen

FAA Ba: ABPaA POT VV

Sele eeTarATAT Sera AAT: |

TRAM, TAATATATT T STAT 2 ot

pler Feaygert weigh eenitseaa:1

The progenitors (Pitrs), who as I have
mentioned, were created by Brahma, were the
Agnisvattas and Barhisads; the former being
devoid of, and the latter possessed of, fires'”.
By them. Svadha had two daughters, Mena
and Dharani, who were both acquainted with
theological truth, and both addicted to
religious meditation; both accomplished in
perfect wisdom, and adorned with all
estimable qualities''. Thus has been explained
the progeny of the daughters of Daksa . He
who with faith recapitulates the account, shall

never want offspring.
sek

NOTES

1. The commentator interprets the text at Jafert
WA to refer to Prana: wera deft Ati ‘Vedasiras
was born the son of Prana.’ So the Bhagavata has
arvseq wongefent HPA: 1 The Linga, the Vayu. and
Markandeya. however, confirm our reading of the
text. making Vedasiras the son of Markandeya.
Prana, or, as read in the two former, Pandu. was
married to Pundarika, and had by her Dyutimat,

whose sons were Srijavana and Asruta or
Asrutavrana. Mrkanda (also read Mrkandu) married
Maoaswini, and had Markaandeya. whose son, by
Murddhanya, was Vedasiras : he married Pivari,
and had many children, who constituted the family,
or Brahmanical tribe, of Bhargavas, sons of Bhrgu,
The most celebrated of these was Usanas, the
preceptor of the Daityas. who, according to the
Bhagavata, was the son of Vedasiras; but the Vayu
makes him the son of Bhrgu by Paulomi, and born
at a different period.

2. Alluding especially to Kasyapa, the son of
Marichi. of whose posterity a full detail is
subsequently given. The Bhagavata adds a
daughter, Devakulya : and the Vayu and Linga,
four daughters, Tusti, Pusti, Twisa, and Apaciti The
latter inserts the grandsons of Paurnamasa. Virajas,
married to Gauri, has Sudhdman, a Lokapila, or
rular of the east quarter; and Parvasa (quasi
Sarvaga) has, by Parvasi. Yajiiavama and Kasyata,
who were both founders of Gotras, or families. The
names of all these occur in different forms in
different MSS.

3. The Bhagavata adds, that in the Swarocisa
Manvantara the sages Uttathya and Vrhaspati were
also sons of Angiras; and the Vayu, etc, specify
Agni and Kirttimat as the sons of the patriarch in
the first Manvantara. Agni, married to Sadwati, has
Parjanya, married to Marichi; and their son is
Hirauyaroman, a Lokapala. Kirttimat has, by
Dhenuka, two sons, Carisnu and Dhrtimat.

4, The Bhagavata gives an account of Atri'a
penance, by which the three gods. Brahma, Visnu,
and Siva, were propitiated, and became, in portions
of themselves, severally his sons, Soma, Datta. and
Durvasas. The Vayu has a totally different series, or
five sons. Satyanetra. Havya, Apomurtti, Sani, and
Soma; and one daughter, Sruti, who became the
wife of Kardama.

5. The text would seem to imply that he was
called Agastya in a former Manvantara, but the
commentator explains it as above. The Bhagavata
calls the wife of Pulastya. Havirbhi, whose sons
were the Muni Agastya, called in a former birth
Dahragni or Jatharagni. and Viaravas. The latter
bad by Ilavila, the deity of wealth, Kuvera; and by
Kesini, the Raksusas Ravana, Kumbhakarna. and
Vibhisana. The Vayu specifies three sons of
Pulastya, Dattoli, Vedabahu, and Vinita; and one
daughter, Sadwati, married (see note 3) to Agni.

=== PAGE 75 ===

68

THE VISNU-PURANAM

6. The Bhatgavata reads Karmasrestha. Variyas.
and Sahisnu. The Vayu and Linga have Kardama
and Ambarisa in place of the two first, and add
Vanakapivat and a daughter. Pivari. married to
Vedasiras (see note I). Kardama married Sruti (note
4), and had by her Sankhapida, one of the
Lokapalas, and a daughter. Kamy&, married to
Priyavrata (note 6. Ch. VII.). Vana-kapivat, also
read Dhana-k. and Ghana-k., had a son, Sahisnu.
married to Yasodhara. and they were the parents of
Kamadeva.

7. The different authorities agree in this place.
The Vayu adds two daughters, Punya and Sumati,
married to Yajfiavama (sce note 2).

8. The Bhagavata has an entirely different set of
names, or Citraketu. Surocis, Virajas, Mitra.
Ulwana, Vasubhridyana. and Dyumat. It also
specifics Saktri and others, as the issue of a
different marriage. The Vayu and Linga have the
same sons as in our text, reading Putra and Hasta in
place of Gatra : they add a daughter. Pundarika,
mattied to Pandu (see note I). The eldest son,
according to the Vayu. espoused a daughter of
Markandeya, and had by her the Lokapila of the
west. Kelumat. The seven sons of Vasistha are
termed in the text the seven Rsis. appearing in that
character in the third Manvantara.

9. The eldest son of Brahma, according to the
commentator, upon the authority of the Vedas:

: ¥a:1 The Vayu Purana
enters into a very long detail of the names and
places of the whole forty-nine fires. According to
that. also. Pavaka is electric or Vaidyuta fire;
Pavamana is that produced by friction, or
Nirmathya; and Suci is solar. Saura, fire. Pavamana
was the parent of Kavya-vahana, the fire of the
Pitrs; Suci of Havyavahana. the fire of the gods;
and Pavamana of Sahasraksu. the fire of the Asuras.
The Bhagavata explains these different fires to be
so many appellations of fire employed in the
invocations with which different oblations to fire
are offered in the ritual of the Vedas : dart @aifir
camizatateh: | ara ee aa Prearismrag a1
explained by the commentator, af&& #Fift aa Ai
amfinitgana gat fea frat wa a afta a
citer: |

10. According to the commentator, this
distinction is derived from the Vedas. The first
class, or Agnisvattas. consists of those house-
holders who, when alive, did not maintain their

domestic fires, nor offer burnt-sacrifices: the
second, of those who kept up the household flame,
and presented oblations with fire. Manu calls these
Agnidagdhas and the reverse, which Jones renders,
‘consumable by fire,’ etc. Kullika Bhatta gives no
explanation of them. The Bhagavata adds other
classes of Pitrs; or, the Ajyapas, ‘drinkers of ghee;”
and 'Somapas. ‘drinkers of the acid juice.’ The
commentator, explaining the meaning of the terms
Sagnayas and Anagnyas, has,

ara: aefem Ka: | which might be understood
to signify, that the Pitrs who are ‘without fire, are
those to whom oblations are not offered; and those
‘with fire, arc they to whom oblations are presented.

ll. The Vayu carries this genealogy forward.
Dharani was married to Meru, and had by him
Mandara and three daughters. Niyati, Ayati, and
Vela: the two first ».ere married to Dhitri and
Vidhatri (p, 69). Vela was the wife of Samudra, by
whom she had Samudri, married to Pracinavarhis,
and the mother of the ten Pracetasas, the fathers of
Daksa, as subsequently narrated. Mena was matried
to Himavat, and was the mother of Maindka, and of
Gang§. and of Parvati or Uma.

12. No notice is here taken of Sati, married to
Bhava, as is intimated in Ch. VIII, when describing
the Rudras. Of these genealogies the fullest and
apparently the oldest account is given in the Vayu
Purana : as far as that of our text extends, the two
nearly agree, allowing for differences of appellation
originating in inaccurate transcription, the names
frequently varying in different copies of the same
work, leaving it doubful which reading should be
preferred. The Bhagavata. as observed above (Ch.
VII, n. 12), has created some further perplexity by
substituting. as the wives of the patriarchs, the
daughters of Kardama for those of Daksa. Of the
general statement it may be observed, that although
in some respects allegorical, as in the names of the
wives of the Rsis (Ch. VII.); and in others
astronomical, as in the denominations of the
daughters of Angiras (Ch. X.). yet it seems
probable that it is not altogether fabulous, but that
the persons in some instances had a real existence,
the genealogies originating in imperfectly
preserved traditions of the families of the first
teachers of the Hindu religion, and of the descent of
individuals who took an active share in its
propagation.

ek

=== PAGE 76 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 11

69

CHAPTER 11
Wenreyseaa:
(qavaneny)
WIN Jara

fread wit: area Gl

at gat querctalf eight afarit wan gn

TATA YRATAT: YA:

anttorarnyg, wert faqTerTaerra 1 3H

eifeata a aerated fan

w aafeattfertrereat TREATS Ga: YALA

Tarafereng figuiccntirry

gered gaara aatg wen

weret quieren: Gea ATA

MORATT YAARAAT SUT 4 1

Paraiara continued—I mentioned to you,
that the Manu Svayam-bhuva had two heroic
and pious sons, Priyavrata and Uttanapada. Of
these two, the latter had a son whom he dearly
loved. Uttama, by his favourite wife Suruci.
By his queen, named Suniti. to whom he was
less attached, he also had a son, called
Dhruva', Observing his brother Uttama on the
lap of his father, as he was seated upon his
throne, Dhruva was desirous of ascending to
the same place; but as Suruci was present, the
Raja did not gratify the desire of his son,
respectfully wishing to be taken on his father's
knee,
aaa sara

waster ar aagntentyay

fag: yt wened Yefaaterraatqn & 11
fran fer gat at wera water:
SRA STAT WATT 9
satrraasrerafercrants frareara

wet qaeanene fag aa WaT gasucn
Ug Tae Taya)

ard ata yer feat fered aT a1
saitremisd wgaeta fer gen
Bierrerh srr fas aT ATTA Go!

Maitreya said— Beholding the child of her
rival thus anxious to be placed on his father's
lap, and her own son already seated there,
Suruci thus addressed the boy: “Why, child, do
you vainly indulge in such presumptuous
hopes? You are born from a different mother,
and are no son of mine, that you should aspire
inconsiderately to a station fit for the excellent
Uttama alone. It is true you are the son of the
Raja, but I have not given you birth. This regal
throne, the seat of the king of kings, is suited
to my son only; why should you aspire to its
occupation ? Why idly cherish such lofty
ambition, as if you were my son ? Do you
forget that you are but the offspring of
Suniti?”"

WU SareT ;
segee fiat arerereg cat argent
orm afte arghrarer fat aPeeN get
a apr aiud atrorepftarercy
Bitrate HraaquraT 82H
are Hi: BURGe Se wai Afieraie
mscrmtmnfe frre wat aesTTEAAAN g3 1

Paraiara continued— The boy, having heard
the speech of his step-mother, quitted his
father, and repaired in a passion to the
apartment of his own mother’; who, beholding
him vexed, took him upon her lap, and, gently
smiling, asked him what was the cause of his
anger, who had displeased him, and if any one,
forgetting the respect due to his father, had
behaved ill to him.

Sep: Veet AT SETA TET

gota: wre yuremmeearat fara gs
fararetter afer aay yt ga
soreearteron Sar Batata Bh 1

Dhruva, in reply, repeated to her all that the
arrogant Suruci had said to him in the presence
of the king. Deeply distressed by the narrative
of the boy, the humble Suniti, her eyes
dimmed with tears, sighed, and said,

=== PAGE 77 ===

70

THE VISNU-PURANAM

wifaearr

yee: weed Tara sfa YAH

fe quactat aoa IAAT Bg I

atarena ator: at aq wae YT

aq aisuey wrertfa ag aarpd MAT got

Tae dares ATT ATA:

Ry Quah Tea wera YAH BCU

arg: Yus: YReat Goreye:

sartta shart aren ufger arerataatit 8811

Qua: YAATA: |

TH ARAM GI: ACATTTAY Gal HAT oI

wanfa g:@ a weary area Ya

we aad a ata er Gate BFA aM

af at gana Yeean aaa Aa

Ae goaray aot FE TAHT VU

Britet wer ante ta: wafers eA:

Fret aora: veo: WTAE WETT VBA

Suniti said— “Suruci has rightly spoken;
thine, child, is an unhappy fate: those who are
born to fortune are not liable to the insults of
their rivals. Yet be not afflicted, my child, for
who shall effact what you have formerly done,
or shall assign to you what you have left
undone? The regal throne, the umbrella of
royalty, horses and elephants, are his whose
virtues have deserved them: remember this.
my son, and be consoled. That the king
favours Suruci is the reward of her merits in a
former existence. The name of wife alone
belongs to such as I. who have not equal merit.
Her son is the progeny of accumulated piety,
and is born as Uttama: mine has been born as
Dhruva, of inferior moral worth. Therefore,
my son. it is not proper for you to grieve; a
wise man will be contented with that degree
which appertains to him: but if you continue to
feel hurt at the words of Suruci. endeavour to
augment due religious merit which bestows all
good; be amiable, be pious, be friendly. be
assiduous in benevolence to all living
creatures; for prosperity descends upon

modest worth as water Rows towards low
ground.”
ga sara
ana aq wafirg wre wees eet
ang gaeren fire gaa wa frail een
‘aisé ven aftenta wer aah
Tart MIRA paTOT STATA AAAI RG I
gefadtaan aera anitsfer Ae
wared Uye Rswr et Gai PaaTN Va
Sar: HA we at wT gRTAT

a carerarcig fier at ware ATU I

arene ware watom

sear weg wa aa wT fat AAU ICI

Dhruva answered: “Mother, the words that
you have addressed to me for my consolation
find no place in a heart tnat contumely has
broken. I will exert myself to obtain such
elevated rank, that it shall be revered by the
whole world. Though I be not born of Suruci,
the beloved of the king, you shall behold my
glory, who am your son. Let Uttama my
brother, her child, possess the throne given to
him by my father; I wish for no other honours
than such as my own actions shall acquire,
such as even my father has not enjoyed.”

WHR sara

Fehon qerngiagaen ant ga:

Wee Freaey aera arated aaNet

a taut Wieaa Ge yarrary ga:

ponferinntay fast wari erar 3 ot

a Tere waly wore

WATT: TATA AATTH AN 8 RU

Paraiara continued~ Having thus spoken,

Dhruva went forth from his mother's dwelling:
he quitted the city, and entered an adjoining
thicket, where he beheld seven Munis sitting
upon hides of the black antelope, which they
had taken from off their persons, and spread
over the holy kuga grass. Saluting them

=== PAGE 78 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 11

7

reverentially, and bowing humbly before
them, the prince said,
qa sara

Saree ai Frater aA:

wt Bates Faery gears wera 3 20

Dhruva said~ "Behold in me, venerable
men, the son of Uttanapada, born of Suniti.
Dissatisfied with the world, I appear before
you”.
maa Sy:

UTAH were TM

Frefcenreut feafaag a arent farang 30

a fad war: fase free aft: farm

a dapfaannig wa upenfit areran asi

wet 3 8 enfrenfirereeat

fide: fer Faint 3 aeaat afe farang qu

The Rsis replied: “The son of a king, and
but four or five years of age, there can be no
reason, child, why you should be dissatisfied
with life; you cannot be in want of any thing
whilst the king your father reigns; we cannot
imagine that you suffer the pain of separation
from the object of your affections; nor do we
observe in your person any sign of disease.
What is the cause of your discontent? Tell us,
if it is known to yourself.”
WH Tart

a: SMA YR UAT!
aera oa: WYATT WATTS gM
oat at ot Sst arerenfr Beer
RUST Mg Eas KAaTATTTTFAN B19
st st afracrare frdere a erga
and coated aa: aeaat ate Te gcn
wa ert qarenti: areranfiagy
ageaat Ferra ererenfiraUeTT 3 <1

ParaSara said:— Dhruva then repeated to the
Rsis what Suruci had spoken to him; and when
they had heard his story, they said to one
another, “How surprising is the vehemence of
the Ksatriya nature, that resentment is

cheruhed even by a child, and he cannot efface
from his. mind the harsh speeches of a step-
mother. Son of a Ksatriya, tell us, if it be.
agreeable to you, what you have proposed,
through dissatisfaction with the world, to
accomplish. If you wish our aid in what you
have to do, declare it freely, for we perceive
that you are desirous to speak.”

qa sara

arenetneiteantiy + te fesreaear:

rRUtairanta yh AR Aq FAN vot

UR feat wee AAT wey Be

RS Me: WTA BP ATAT NY

Dhruva said—- “Excellent sages, I wish not
for riches, neither do I want dominion : I
aspire to such a station as no one before me
has attained. Tell me what 1 must do to effect
this object, how I may reach an elevation
superior to all other dignities.” The Rsis sever-
ally thus replied—
wifereara

STURN: WT TUT

a fe ware Sg TereTaregAqN sz

Marici said: “The best of stations is not
within the reach of men who fail to propitiate

Govinda. Do you, prince, worship the
undecaying (Acyuta).”
afreart

We WOT Yea BET BRT SATA: |

Fe RECO CR CUCCLORELL

Atri said:- “He with whom the first of
spirits, Janarddana, is pleased, obtains
imperishable dignity. I declare unto you the
truth.”
aig sara

Wet: WANA: |

mores Tiers wrt aeheaa se

Angiras said:— "If you desire an exalted
station, worship that Govinda in whom,
immutable and undecaying, all that is. exists.”

=== PAGE 79 ===

72

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Jered saret
We wel Ui are aiset ger FAT ITA

mareret eft anf afemreatagearT % 4 It

Pulastya said: “He who adores the divine
Hari. the supreme soul, supreme glory, who is
the supreme Brahmi, obtains what is difficult
of attainment, eternal liberation.” “When that
Janarddana,”

ayeary
at aggedt aa ary a: wer: Yar
aferege aaured far aafea set x I

Kratu observed~ “who in sacrifices is the
soul of sacrifice, and who in abstract
contemplation is supreme spirit, is pleased,
there is nothing man may not acquire.”

Jere Sarat
tears: ut wart wares sereafir
wry aeafe faway ATTA Yaa viol

Pulaha said:— “Indra, having worshipped
the lord of the world, obtained the dignity of

king of the celestials. Do you adore, pious
youth, that Visnu, the lord of sacrifice.”

afag sart
wretaTae faut wat aq wfeesta

Feleaentt wart fag aetratrert wo tt
Vasistha exclaimed “Anything, child, that

the mind covets. may be obtained by
propitiating Visnu, even though it be the
station that is the most excellent in the three
worlds.”
ga vara

aren: afaet Fat waka: goerer th

war ae Ufa sare AGATA Y eI

Sear arent eT we ware WETATA:|

WACATS sey ATT 4 ol

TRA wer faroereatt:

wTEGE TY AMT TEA AI 4 CH

mrenatafaenfant wars werd At:1

afta Srragifea aa: qe Faery 2
waters TA TATA

ree aparece, wet AT: Unf 4 BIL
feoaniqemarrenrmetaan

SH AA ATRRATT YRS 4 wt
WAMATT Ta Het TaTTAYAaT AY:
PaaS YT TET FEY SATEAU GG H
adh aenfiretirany aafig Setreagetrey
vem anf tiferd aredag, Wet ATTN G GU
‘ster stage weraigt wareyiseara:|

Dhruva replied to them: “You have told
me, humbly bending before you, what deity is
to be propitiated: now inform me what prayer
is to be medicated by me, that will offer him
gratification. May the great Rsis. looking upon
me with favour, instruct me how I am to
propitiate the god.” The Rsis answered:
“Prince, you deserve to hear how the adoration
of Visnu has been performed by those who
have been devoted to his service. The mind
must first be made to forsake all external
immpressions, and a man must then fix it
steadily on that being in whom the world is.
By him whose thoughts are thus concentrated
on one only object, and wholly filled by it,
whose spirit is firmly under concrol; the
prayer that we shall repeat to you is to be
inaudibly recited: ‘Om! glory to Vasudeva,
whose essence is divine wisdom; whose form
is inscrutable, or is manifest as Brahma, Vis

nu, and Siva? This prayer, which was formerly
uttered by your grandsire, the Manu
Svayambhuva, and propitiated by which, Vis
nu conferred upon him the prosperity be
desired, and which was unequalled in the three
worlds, is to be recited by you. Do you
constantly repeat this prayer, for the
gratification of Govinda.”
tek
NOTES
1. The Matsya, Brahma. and Vayu Puranas speak
of but one wife of Uttanapada. and call her Sunnita
: they say also that she had four sons. Apaspati (or

=== PAGE 80 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 12

Vasu). Ayushmanta. Kirttimat, and Dhruva. The
Bhatgaveta, Padma, and Naradiya have the same
account as that of the text.

2. The instructions of the Rsis amount to the
performance of the Yoga. External impressions are
first to be obviated by particular positions, modes
of breathing, etc, : the mind must them be fixed on
the object of meditation; this is Dharana: next
comes the meditation, or Dhyana; and then the
Japa. or inaudible repetition of a Mantra, or short
prayer : as in the text. The subject of the Yoga is
more fully detailed in a subsequent book.

KEKE

73

=== PAGE 81 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 12

CHAPTER-12

‘Blevitseara:

(qeaet aeM:)

WER Sart

Fagen aaghior dia zat: Was)
‘Fata arg Tee wforoer a ATTEN gH
papratrareant wararrenat fest
Tepeat Fergus TAT TAATANSAN VI
We agar aerated aa:
aat ngat are Garaas Weta Bu
wear a craUt wat HEYA TETAS
vgen wet are yet ae dart Set
aad tata unfe efttera:
adaragt afary arte wear Ak
woferpenihtietitfeeryg, aa
arrerarsraeerst Fart feraperersra & 0
STATA TAT WTA BEE:
waaay fam welorerrats wad i911

The prince, having received these
instructions, respectfully saluted the sages, and
departed from the forest, fully confiding in the
accomplishment of his purposes. He repaired
to the holy place, on the banks of the Yamuné,
called Madhu or Madhuvana. the grove of
Madhu, after the demon of that name, who
formerly abided there, Satrughna (the younger

73

brother of Rama) having stain the Raksas
Lavana, the son of Madhu, founded a city on
the spot, which was named Mathura. At this
holy shrine, the purifier from all sin, which
enjoyed the presence of the sanctifying god of
gods, Dhruva performed penance, as enjoined
by Marici and the sages: he contemplated Vis
nu, the sovereign of all the gods, seated in
himself. Whilst his mind was wholly absorbed
in meditation, the mighty Hari. identical with
all beings and with all natures, (took
possession of his heart).

Treated we feo Bey athe

Fyre ae areal yeni ¢ 11

armurafeae afer sarees Beit

faites sare fatter et

rerger wnitea wate agai fea:

wer at ager fax aeret HE Tat: gol!

Fed Aer: TART WaT Te ay:

aairent: alti ot areqderg geil

Visnu being thus present in his mind, the
earth, the supporter of elemental life, could not
sustain the weight of the ascetic. As he stood
upon his left foot, one hemisphere bent
beneath him; and when he stood upon his
right, the other half of the earth sank down.
When be touched the earth with his toes, it
shook with all its mountains, and the rivers
and the seas were troubled, and the gods
partook of the universal agitation.

ana are wat Sar Aa weg:

SAU Ue Va OTE Wa! TI
geaver fated wd: Teer we
BT ATTATTOAT:, AATF: 11 3M
Bitiate sare wnat aegea: fer
Yate weut aerate Ararat TAN AI
Wrarentrarta prerrerrersord|
Frdestt war eral gird waa GH
Sartat feat + eae far
manana ace arr afer 26 11

=== PAGE 82 ===

14

The celestials called Yamas, being
excessively alarmed, then took counsel with
Indra how they should interrupt the devout
exercises of Dhruva; and the divine beings
termed Kusm4ndas. in company with their
king, commenced anxious efforts to distract
his meditations. One, assuming the semblance
of his mother Suniti, stood weeping before
him, and calling in tender accents, “My son,
my son, desist from destroying they strength
by this fearful penance. I have gained you, my
son, after much anxioux hope: you can not
have the cruelty to quit me, helpless, alone,
and unprotected, on account of the unkindness
of my rival. You are my only refuge; I have no
hope but you.

waa wy Ugatia: aa dag erat aT:
Rraciat wa: aerprend weraferarg Yo
ale: BSE F AERISTTTA U1

WA: TMT AEA THAT TT et
SARSATGM Teta ACTA FA
afecrererfered crater fas ATgreTeraT TH 11 8311
Waite: wet aif aaiserenfrarerry
agentes Ut We Praraferaeta:n 3 ol
afterift eter Wear AAT: |
RATATAT MUTA ST UYATETAT 2 RI

What have you, a child but five years old,
to do with rigorous penance? Desist from
such fearful practices, that yield no beneficial
fruit. First comes the season of youthful
pastime; and when that is over, it is the time
for study: then succeeds the period of worldly
enjoyment: and lastly, that of austere devotion.
This is your season of pastime, my child. Have
you engaged in these practices to put an end to
your existence? Your chief duty is love for
me: duties are according to time of life. Lose
not thyself in bewildering error: desist from
such unrighteous actions. If not, if you will not
desist from these austerities, I will terminate
my life before you.”

Wat sara

THE VISNU-PURANAM

wnfearrn fawt werate F wArN VM
wer ace Barat wears aT
i ahh Wh nea

Fat Aeraatatey TAGE A YT

wayaiaerentin erred Prema: B41

frraws way Ag: waretHaeya: |

Sara eT reread APART BET: AEH

But Dhruva, being wholly intent on seeing
Visnu, beheld not his mother weeping in his
presence, and calling upon him; and the
illusion, crying out, “Fly, fly, my child, the
hideous spirits of ill are crowding into this
dreadful forest with uplifted weapons,”
quickly disappeared. Then advanced frightful
Raksasas, wielding terrible arms, and with
countenances emitting fiery flame; and
nocturnal fiends thronged around the prince,
uttering fearful noises, and whirling and
tossing their threatening weapons. Hundreds
of jackals, from whose mouths gushed flame1
as they devoured their prey, were bowling
alcud, to appal the boy, wholly engrossed by
meditation.

wat waa feat ferry

meat ETAT a FET: 1 ol

adt arifaery ery PaereAeR AAT: |

AAT TGA AGe GHHAT: | REI

wife af 8 wer: frararageah a

Tifererernferren agate ATA 3a

Waraat: Bard Fernand

quar viretrreargat AA SSA 3 oN

The goblins called out, "Kill him, kill him;
cut him to pieces; eat him, eat him;” and
monsters, with the faces of lions and camels
and crocodiles, roared and yelled with horrible
cries, to territy the prince. But all these
uncouth spectres, appalling cries, and
threatening weapons, made no impression
upon his 'senses, whose mind was completely

=== PAGE 83 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 12

15

intent on Govinda. The son of the monarch of
the earth, engrossed by one only idea, beheld
uninterruptedly Visnu seated in his soul, and
saw no other object.

aa: Waly ararg facierg WA: gu:

Said wey ayer RAT: 113 a

a ater sorenttreenehert fe

rea MCU AAT AT APTA 11 BV

All their delusive stratagems being thus
foiled, the gods were more perplexed than
ever. Alarmed at their discomfiture, and
afflicted by the devotions of the boy, they
assembled and repaired for succour to Hari the
origin of the world, who is, without beginning
or end; and thus addressed him:
zat ay:

a 8a orare Te ea

Gee ATT TATRA as PT TAT 331

fet fet erat: MME yet we

ward aren a wareghagnePrergn 3 xi

strarrafiarer cafiet sere

stareat prot ararenreret Prana 3 411

a fara: fas a pened fea gedaan

faaaaratami aftrera: ve 3 FNS eH

TRA WAIT TEATTRIFRL

saTEaTa TTA: UTA 3911

Celestials said:~ “God of gods, sovereign
of the world, god supreme. and infinite spirit,
distressed by the austerities of Dhruva, we
have come to you for protection. As the moon
increases in his orb day by day, so this youth
advances incessantly towards superhuman
power by his devotions. Terrified by the
ascetic practices of the son of Uttaénapada, we
have come to you for succour. Do you allay
the fervour of his meditations. We know not to
what station he aspires: to the throne of Indra,
the regency of the solar or lunar sphere, or to
the sovereignty of riches or of the deep. Have
compassion on us, lord; remove this affliction
from our breasts; diverse the son of
Uttanapdda from persevering in his penance.”

wrayer

dae a a Yale Aangquetear

weae at ant t athafaet ag cu

are Sar werent Tare ferns: |

Frartarad atet ATTA AAI 3 811

Visnu replied to the gods.: “The lad
desireth neither the rank of Indra, nor the solar
orb, nor the sovereignty of wealth or of the
Ocean: all that be solicits, I will grant. Return
therefore, deities, to your mansions as ye list,
and be no more alarmed: I will put an end to
the penance of the boy, whose mind is
immersed in deep contemplation.”

WO Sara

pagar dagea wore faye:

wag: waft front preeeggerrar: ¥ ot

marta water areas aif:

wear gerard agerageres it x gn

The gods, beings thus pacificd by the
supreme, saluted him respectfully and retired,
and, preceded by Indra, returned to their
habitations: but Hari. who is all things,
assuming a shape with four arms proceeded to
Dhruva, being pleased with his identity of
nature, and thus addressed him:

BATTS og F aerate:

ATAISEAGMA St AT YaTU¥

arerdfrtat 3 ute fat werent

Yelss wards aq guitar at TTT ¥ BN

Visnu said- “Son of Uttanapada, be
prosperous. Contented with your. devotions, I,
the giver of boons, am present. Demand what
boon you desire. In that you have wholly
disregarded external objects, and fixed your
thoughts on me, I am well pleased with you.
Ask, therefore, a suitable reward.”

WIE ara
ea ag Wled Tee SARA ATT: |

=== PAGE 84 ===

76

Siena age array aft Fuss

A EMMIS MEER LL |

fetes waretet se fercet we 4 I

tfsag: ager wears To TA:

Wag Fagael BH WAT gasivg il

fe safe quia aia Heft:

epee wa yur save

The boy, hearing these words of the god of
gods, opened his eyes, and beholding that Hari
whom he had before seen in his meditations
actually in his presence, bearing in his hands
the shell, the discus, the mace, the bow, and
scimetar, and crowned with a diadem, he
bowed his head down to earth; the hair stood
erect on his brow, and his heart was depressed
with awe. He reflected how best he should
offer thanks to the god of gods; what he could
say in his adoration; what words were capable
of expressing his praise: and being
overwhelmed with perplexity, he had recourse
for consolation to the deity.
ga sara

sore afe 8 ate are we Ta

wig aceftentt arid were Anse

wemdcecedatad area tafe

a mai aang Ga wig enti Teen

waferant Bag waa Baa

wig wad edt oa Wai wee ANG on

Dhruva exclaimed—“If the lord is contented

with my devotions, let this be my reward, that
I may know how to praise him as I wish. How
can I, a child, pronounce his praises, whose
abode is unknown to Brahma and to others
learned in the Vedas? My heart is overflowing
with devotion to you: oh lord, grant me the

faculty worthily to lay mine adorations act
your feet.”

Tae FATT
Pigara thfereet were aarstery
saree fired sera: 4 en

THE VISNU-PURANAM

HY TAAATART RIOT AU AST: |

wea worat YT TAMARA AN & B11

Whilst lowly bowing, with his hands
uplifted to his forehead, Govinda, the lord of
the world, touched the son of Uttanapada with
the tip of his conch-shell, and immediately the
royal youth, with a countenance sparkling with
delight, praised respectfully the impcrishable
protector of living beings.
qa sara

aftrnistet arg: @ wt gfgta al

senfeaterpiacter we ats het ATG BU

Ya: Weishaceah wera Wet: FAL

hn wee are oars TOMAR Gi

SETS ARTA WTS PPT: |

ASAT VATA YR TA: TENG GH

ot TET: TT

weet PITOt Ys TAT UAT G GI

qerarg qeurara ag Tere

weet aaa alery afrferenfaarTaqN 4 911

Dhruva exclaimed-— “I venerate him, whose
forms are earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind,
intellect, the first element (Ahankara),
primeval nature, and the pure, subtile, all-
pervading soul, that surpasses nature.
Salutation to that spirit that is void of
qualities; that is supreme over all the elements
and all the objects of sense, over intellect, over
nature and spirit. I have taken refuge with that
pure form of thine, oh supreme, which is one
with Brahma, which is spirit, which transcends
all the world. Salutation to that form which,
pervading and supporting all, is designated
Brahman, unchangeable, and contemplated by
religious sages.

eayiat Yer Wea: WEA!

adeard Fa: Cayley Be ty GN ct

aati aa 4 wet yearn aq War

wat fare ate, Ware, TTT ET: | GS

araftard tisag frig thes S qa:

=== PAGE 85 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 12 7
wart faafag ord cant qerafererttig ott Aare reayay ater: AGP AT: 1G 91
agunftugrantt wfre aq faeces oem anfe waa: get AAT aA
val aa: Wega: Vaart TYEE g gt men fe weet area reaQuare aT SPAT G CI
You are the male with a thousand heads, a Wat fared Aad ARUaT Eyal

thousand eyes, a thousand feet, who traversest
the universe, and passest ten inches beyond its
contact.’ Whatever has been, or is to be, that,
Purusottama, you are. From you sprang Virat.
Swarat, Samrat, and Adhipurusa . The lower,
and uppcr, and middle parts of the earth are
not independent of you: from you is all this
universc, all that has been, and that shall be:
and all this world is in you, assuming dus
universal form . From you is sacrifice derived,
and all oblations, and curds, and ghee, and
animals of either class (domestic or wild).

wah aise aM Poe BAR

eae SRT Hts aaa G Tt

TARA: UPR RAISA Stara TAT: |

TRU TROT TAT: ATAATAATI & 311

ayaretares: Yarera Vera aR: |

sau: Gals Fret: sirarergu WTRTAI G XI

wratt & yficanat warefererea

aufiret wert eter farce: aera g «II

fem: stad fafa: wat wae: weyfear

From you the Rg-Veda. the Sama. the
metres of the Vedas, and the Yajur-Veda are
born. Horses. and cows having teeth in one
jaw only*, proceed form you; and from you
come goats, sheep, deer. Brabmans sprang
from your mouth; warriors from your arms;
Vaisyas from your thighs; and Sidras from
your fect. From thine eyes come the sun; from
thine ears, the wind; and from your mind, the
moon: the vital airs from your central vein;
and fire from your mouth: the sky from your
navel; and heaven from your head: the regions
from thine ears; the earth from your feet. All
this world was derived from you.

sate: Greet sar ast crater g Gu

dat faanfaci diet aa af

Stet afer area wrt waa &
Beatrand fier cafe At qurafaa
aA YATAT FAA: ol
MMAR Ye ATP |

SRM RAaATe, AME TANS TAT Vi
fareisaach: pera wary

watery wayredt wd: AdAUTRI 2
ad area of au: walerisy” 7
wateratsfa weet weyafeaat asi 311

As the wide-spreading Nyagrodha (Indian
fig) tree is compressed in a small seed®, so, at
the time of dissolution, the whole universe is
comprehended in you as its germ. As the
Nyagrodha germinates from the sced and
becomes first a shoot, and then rises into
loftiness, so the created world proceeds from
you, and expands into magnitude. As the bark
and leaves of the Plantain tree are to be seen in
its stem, so you are the seem of the universe,
and all things are visible in you. The faculties
of the intellect, that are the cause of pleasure
and of pain, abide in you as one with all
existence; but the sources of pleasure and of
pain, singly or blended, do not exist in you
who are exempt from all qualities’. Salutation
to you, the subtile rudiment, which, being
singlc, becomes manifold. Salutation to you.
soul of existent things, identical with the great
elements. You, imperishable, are beheld in
spiritual knowledge as perceptible objects, as
nature, as spirit, as the world, as Brahma, as
Manu, by internal contemplation. But you are
in all, the element of all; you are all, assuming
every form; all is from you. and you are from
thyself. I salute you, universal soul: glory be to
you. You are one with all things: oh lord of all,
you are present in all things.

=== PAGE 86 ===

78

aorta aa: fa ae afte ee fear

watery wey waar RA 0X11

Teh wary Sf way

WF waa ae Wat: TAA FT!

aes ae wet Ae eBIshs TTA YI

What can I say to you? you know all that
is in the heart, oh soul of all, sovereign lord of
all creatures, origin of all things. You, who are
all beings, knowcst the desires of all creatures.
The desire that I cherished has been gratified,

lord, by you: my devotions have been crowned
with success, in that I have seen you.”

sierraryara

mae wei wd Ae EBIss AT gal

west fe farmet Taya: F ATA I

at aw Tend St seni ATA:

ad wae Yai wis gerd Taw

Visnu said to Dhruva: “The object of your

devotions has in truth been attained, in that
you have seen me; for the sight of me, young
prince, is never unproductive. Ask therefore of
me what boon you desire; for men in whose
sight I appear obtain all their wishes.”
qa sara

ame Baya ade vary ee

feorgnt Ta Tanti eT BATAAN 8c 11

vente pa fae safes ara

rede gfariet weerTAgATTN 9 gil

fe at waders: wea waft gery

wmaarenet YS Acted waa ¢ ott

Fae Tees aera wae

ofa watearerat aaah agers: ic a

AY Ba: ReahegMAATT

went wat wart wasreTeTeASeTTTN ¢ 2H

To this, Dhruva answered : “Lord god of
all creatures, who abidest in the hearts of 2!1,
how should the wish that | chrish be unknown
to you ? I well confess unto you the hope that
my presumptuous heart has entertained; a hope

THE VISNU-PURANAM

that it would be difficult to gratify, but that
nothing is difficult when you, creator of the
world, are pleased. Through your favour, Indra
reigns over the three worlds. The sister-queen
of my mother has said to me, loudly and
arrogantly, ‘The royal throne is not for one
who is not born of me;’ and I now solicit of the
support of the universe an exalted station,
superior to all others, and one that shall endure
for ever.”

stterrargart

UL aT watered wa Hr St TAT

waaré atta: Gara ares 2 311

raurdtatent: yt wererrafa: wan

arenes Yara Prreratgarereh 2%

wer Tea ft TyTN

aerisfacnitedt aphttaterrcnrett: 1 ¢ 4 11

TRY Tes aTBfegracireageTT

wae Tayaisefat ater at Fat c Gl

aat aenfirerfaca stat & TTTAATI

TAA WE TTiisfa ga seta cou

arnt We at UA Sel SITET AI

wereat are Aa uftaifare ci

TIARA yftarrarciteataettearara|

wafer are fang canted TaANC eH

Visnu said to him: “The station that you
aske you shall obtain; for I was satisfied with
you of old in a prior existence. You wast
formerly a Brahman, whose thoughts were
ever devoted to me, ever dutiful to your
parents, and observant of your duties. In
course of time a prince became your friend,
who was in the period of youth, indulged in all
sensual pleasures, and was of handsome
appearance and elegant form. Beholding, in
consequence of associating with him, his
affluence, you formed the desire that you
might be subsequendy born as the son of a
king; and, according to your wish, you
obtained a princely birth in the illustrious
mansion of Utténapada. But that which would
have been thought a great boon by others, birth
in the race of Svayambhuva, you have not so

=== PAGE 87 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 12

719

considered, and therefore have propitiated me.
The man who worships me obtains speedy
liberation from life. What is heaven to one
whose mind is fixed on me ?

Seirearefies wart aa: |

aferatt 7 Weel WaTAEIE AAP Gall @ ott

yaa, aren wer sheng Saya TEMA!

frarcderrarctat weestort ter garg ¢ gt

aattorestarnt & gy dente: ya:

waerguht wart wa at WaT gang VU

ara weg afaret yA:

faaha wat cat war at Herefeafan <3

wilfaete & ren aerenfatratem

fart arcet year ara aeiet Praceafern est

Qa wl aa: Wa: Tes Tare:

shite Fors weg god afeeafin ean

A station shall be assigned to you. 'Dhruva,
above the three worlds*; one in which you
shall sustain the stars and the planets; a station
above those of the sun, the moon. Mars, the
son of Soma (Mercury), Venus. the son of
Strya (Saturn), and all the other
constellations; above the regions of the seven
Rsis, and the divinities who traverse the
atmosphcre”. Some celestial beings endure for
four ages; some for the reign of a Manu: to
you shall he granted the duration of a Kalpa.
Your mother Sumati, in the orb of a bright
star, shall abide near you for a similar term;
and all those who, with minds attentive, shall
glorify you at dawn or at eventide, shall
acquire exceeding religious merit.
WII Sara

ual yd sora 2atarsarearT

at wTer gat: RARER HARTA GH

vente args wien Frier a

Rargquorararel: yetearatert ait wit

Bese ATA delagises Wa: KT

att Wa: Heat ged wade: feratne cu

gam wrt at yin a

orang Ufeart &: wreat auifag yfan eeu

Feleaeraat ort ot art ferrafen

a we a Heat at Hlafaat gag oot
adaq ahiafaed geeaitent fefen

a wdaafaafen cates wat 0 eH
marnist 1 arena fefer at afe at gyfer

adacarurtget alerts Hafan go
pha sttaeygey meaty aregiisera:

Thus the sage Dhruva, having received a
boon from Janarddana, the lord of gods, and
lord of the world, resides in an exalted station.
Beholding his glory, Usanas, the preceptor of
the gods and demons, repeated these verses:
“Wonderful is the efficacy of this penance,
marvellous is its reward, that the seven Rsis
should” be preceded by Dhruva. This too is the
pious Suniti, his parent, who is called
Sonrta'’." Who can celebrate her greatness,
who. having given birth to Dhruva, has
become the asylum of the three worlds,
enjoying to all future time an elevated station,
a station eminent above all? He who shall
worthily describe the ascent into the sky of
Dhruva, for ever shall be freed from all sin,
and enjoy the heaven of Indra. Whatever be
his dignity, whether upon earth or in heaven he
shall never fall from it, but shall long enjoy
life. possessed of every blessing".

NOTES

1, A marginal note by a Bengali Pandit asserts it
to be a fact, then when a jackal carries a piece of
meat in his mouth, it shows in the dark as if it was
on fire.

2. The commentator understands this passage to
imply merely that the supreme pervades both
substance and space, being infinitely vast, and
without limit. "Having a thousand heads’ etc.
denotes only infinite extension ; and the 'ten inches
beyond the contact of the universe’ expresses
merely non-restriction by its boundaries.

rea atsand: aac wens eyEearT
weftsers Freaitstrary fer ef

3. Explained severally the Brahmanda, or
material universe; Brahma. the creator : Manu. the
tuler of the period; and supreme or presiding spirit

=== PAGE 88 ===

80

THE VISNU-PURANAM

4. So the inscription upon the temple of Sais :
Eyo ap mav to yeyov&, Kal KOI OV, KOI
eoopevov. So the Orphic verse, thed by Eusebius,
beginning Ev de Sena0& Baoideov w wo tad_e
mMavta KvAEITaL, K, t. A. One regal body in which
all things are comprehended (viz, Virat). fire. and
water, and earth, and air, and night, and day. and
Intelligence (viz. Mahat) the first generator, and
divine love; for all these does Jupiter include in his
expansive form.' It proceeds also, precisely in the
Pauranic strain, to describe the members of this
universal form : the heaven in his head, the stars his
hair, the sun and moon his eyes, etc.

5. A piece of natural history quite correct as
applied to the front teeth which in the genus ox
occur in the lower jaw only.

6. This is also conformable to the doctrine, that
the rudiments of plants exist in their cotyledons.

7. In life. or living beings, perception depends
not. according to Hindu metaphysics, upon the
external senses, but the impressions made upon
them are communicated to the mental organ or
sense, and by the mind to the
understanding—Samvid (#f4% ) in the text—by
which they are distinguished as pleasurable,
painful, or mixed. But pleasure depends upon the
quality of goodness, pain on that of darkness, and
their mixture on that of foulness, inherent in the
understanding. properties. belonging to Jiveswara.
or god. as one with life, or to embodied spirit. but
not as Parameswara. or supreme spirit.

8. The station or sphere is that of the north pole.
or of the polar star. In the former case, the star is
considered to be Suniti, the mother of Dhruva. The
legend, although as it is related in our text it differs
in its circumstances from the story told by Ovid of
Callisto and her son Arcas, whom Jove

Imposuit Caelo vicinaque sidera fecit,

sugggests some suspicion of an original identity.
In ncither of the authorities' have we, perhaps, the
primitive fable. It is evident from the quotation that
presently follows in the text, of a stanza by Usanas,
that the Purana has not the oldest version of the
legend; and Ovid's representation of it is after a
fashion of his own: all that has been retained of the
original is the conformity of the chracters and of
the main Incident, the translation of a mother and
her son to the heavens as constellations, in which
the polc-star is the most conspicuous luminary.

9. The Vaimanika devas. the deities who travel
in Viménas. ‘heavenly car,’ or rather 'moving
spheres.’

10. The text says merely @ifata gga! the
commentator says. ‘perhaps formerly so called;
Yer atl We have already remarked that some
Puranas so denominate her.

1-1 The legend of Dhruva is narrated in the
Bhagavata, Padma (Swarga Khanda), Agni. and
Naradiya, much to the same purport, and partly in
the same words, ‘as our text. The Brahma and its
double the Hari Varga, the Matsya. and Vayu
merely allude to Dhruva's having been transferred
by Brahmi to the skies, in reward of his austerities.
The story of his religious penance, and adoration of
Visnu, seems to be an embellishment interpolated
by the Vaisnava Puranas. Dhruva being adopted as
a Saint by their sect. The allusion to Sarta in our
text concurs with the form of the story as it appears
elsewhere, to indicate the priority of the more
simple legend.

REEK

=== PAGE 89 ===

THE VISNU-PURANAM

CHAPTER 13
wareyisena:
(Aage-WaWITATT!)
WH Sara
qatar was woareyoharad
Feat Fea TH YAS TAT Rt
fog fryer fast gat gartorery
feared seat aed TaN IH
snieed Geafvat aravat meget ATH
MATA ATATOT RT STATA: 11 3
Tahared ae Agerat wesTa:
ware Wat ae STAT WATT
BS: YS: Mrerea array Hla:
afapiistrraas qqeata & 7a
afr eet agerat wel:
STA YAR FST WENT G1
BRM Haast 4 Suramar

=== PAGE 90 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 13

81

age TeT HALT TT!
Soren Toit aay Mays wETGA C1
Quek ara agtaret a: yy: uftanhra:)
Ua gem wet ye wort ference git

Paragara continued— The sons of Dhruva,
by his wife Sambhu, were Bhavya and Slisti.
Succhaya, the wife of the latter, was the
mother of five virtuous sons, Ripu, Ripnnjaya,
Vipra, Vrkala, and Vrkatejas. The son of Ripu,
by Vrhati. was the illustrious Caksusa, who
begot the Manu Caksusa on Puskarini, of the
family of Varuna, the daughter of the
venerable patriarch Anaranya. The Manu had,
by his wife Navala, the daughter of the
patriarch Vairaja. ten noble sons, Uru. Puru.
Satadyumna, Tapasvi, Satyavak, Kavi. Agnist
oma, Atiracra, Sudyumna, and Abhimanyu.
'You wife of Uru, Agneyi, bore six excellent
sons, Anga, Sumanas, Swati, Kratu. Angiras,
and Siva. Anga had, by his wife Sunitha, only
one son, named Vena, whose right arm was
rubbed by-the Rsis, for the purpose of pro-
ducing from it progeny. From the arm of
Vena, thus rubbed, sprang a celebrated
monarch, named Prthu, by whom, in olden
time, the earth was milked for the advantage
of mankind’.

fa vara
fame afar: wiftretore weafefir:|
aa ae arta: a WyPTATA: I Rol
Maitreya—Best of Munis, tell me why was
the right hand of Vena rubbed by the holy

sages, in consequence of which the heroic
Pythu was produced.

Way art
Bitar ae a ara Gaal: wenitseaT
SPR AAT A SAT Tea Tai STATA gM
a MraEa aT Ba BRN: YATE:
franiga aa ge Ua oTeTAAI gzI
safinfireat wer TE w Sor: UTAH: |
Waa H aet Yitreat yfaatafa ean

A apes 4 Gites 7 arted Gere

siren sere aera we Aaraee: ys gw

arena: ya aaa oritaferT

By: aMHet Wag Aha MUA TAT: ea

Parasara said— Sunitha was originally the
daughter of Mrtyu, by whom she was given to
Anga to wife. She bore him Vena, who
inherited the evil propensities of his matcrnal
grandfather. When he was inaugurated by the
Rsis monarch of the earth, he caused it to be
every where proclaimed, that no worship
should be performed, no oblations offered, no
gifts bestowed upon the Brahmanas. “I, the
king,” said he, " am the lord of sacrifice; for
who but I am entitled to the oblations.” The Rs
is, respectfully approaching the sovereign,
addressed him in melodious accents, and said,
ea Sy:

attr ge ag aaa wit

TRatéiranra wars fed TE eg

Shion Bae wdagat efeq

yeifeeara ag & aeaieret afereafen yon

aA aayeN eft: watford qa

stenfintad: TAM Tata wereAfeTH Re

aaa Aa Te wae eft:

tat wattaarante earfet JT PATTI Ve

Rsis replied- “Gracious prince, we salute
you; hear what we have to reprcsent. For the
preservation of your kingdom and your life,
and for the benefit of all your subjects, permit
us to worship Hari, the lord of all sacrifice, the
god of gods, with solemn and protracted rites’;
a portion of the fruit of which will revert to
you’. Visnu, the god of oblations, being
propitiated with sacrifice by us, will grant you,
oh king, all your desires. Those princes have
alf their wishes gratified, in whose realms
Hari, the lord of sacrifice, is adored with
sacrificial rites.”

aur vara
Ta: aatswafeens sas fet Berea TAIT: |

=== PAGE 91 ===

82

THE VISNU-PURANAM

anise eftfefet wart aise aT FAI Voll

wen wera: wegheR area east

BATT TOUT ear yet yfeahrereaT: 11g NN

Wurst aa tar: waft:

Trae wratcen: Waa FI

RAT Taree sera, aerat aT

aired 4 aired 1 ape ay fess 231

adgeaant ef gar ett wt Aa:

ATeTeTerT Ta rere ce FEST: BU

Vena said~ "Who” is superior to me? who

besides me is entitled to worship? who is this
Hari, whom you style the lord of sacrifice?
Brahma, Janarddana, Sambhu, Indra, Vayu,
Yama, Ravi (the sun), Hutabhuk (fire),
Varuna, Dhaté, Pasha (thc sun), Bhami
(earth), the lord of night (the moon); all these,
and whatever other gods there be who listen to
our vows; all these are present in the persent
of a king: the essence of a sovereign is all that
is divine. Conscious of this. I have issued my
commands, and look due you obey them. You
are not to sacrifice, not to offer oblations, not
to give alms. As the first duty of women is
obedience to their lords, so observance of my
orders is incumbent, holy men, on you.”

ea SY:

aga wera Ur eat arg dary)

dant uftoriist aarafact aT B41

Rsis replied- “Give command, great king”
that piety may suffer no decrease. All this
world," is but a transmutation of oblations;

and if devotion be suppressed, the world is at
an end.

WU Sara
fa fagrermatsfa w aur: weafefir:!
Ber Satfel AGRT Wee: MTR: YA: FAC EI
ParaSara said : “But Vena was entreated in
vain; and although this request was repeated

by the sages, he refused to give tlie order they
suggested,

ag gra: wa arora:

Raat Fae TT SATS Trae! Voit

W aaget tarnfahret mE
fatremenrent a a areat yer: aft Re
Fara waytet: gaye TH
Frrgttet yd erafirenferm 29

Then those pious Munis were filled with
wrath, and cricd out to each Other, “Let this
wicked wretch be slain. The impious man who
has reviled the god of sacrifice who is without
beginning or end, is not fit to reign over the
earth,” And they fell upon the king, and beat
him with blades of holy grass, consecrated by
prayer, and slew him, who had first been
destroyed by his impiety towards god,

waar Great: Yoh aqy: waar feo
fatafets oredt wage We TAT 3 oN
TETAS SRG SATA

UB y cereal veerareangt:n 3 a
Raryatoterrat ahrot yer:

rer qead oy: weferarerfeorgn 3 21
aa: Waar toad ye YT:
TRS Yas ASAT S BM
Ter wy Tat: Yet: fact
SUNT: A eTATS HAG AG: It BS
fa aint ary aly fawry we Ua:
Fria ager Fara Biswaq 341
areTeTTaT eT faeayterranhat:|

Frarer gfryget Urrenntrerero: 11 3 & 1

aa Brtor ag Ud repre ee Ua:
Frere cat STAT AUTRE: 11 3
adiser efatot get wereperer F fast:

FUT et MANY VYAVT: WATTATHN BCH

Samm: @ age waneiaita sary

Afterwards the Munis beheld a great dust
arise, and they said to the people who were
nigh, "What is this? and the people answered

and said, “Now that the kingdom is without a
king, the dishonest men have begun to seize

=== PAGE 92 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 13

83

the property of their neighbours. The great
dust that you behold, excellent Munis, is
raised by troops of clustering robbers,
hastening to fall upon their prey.” The sages,
hearing this, consulted, and together rubbed
the thigh of the king, who had left no
offspring, to produce a son. From the thigh,
thus nibbled, came forth a being of the
complexion of a charred stake, with flattened
features (like a Negro), and of dwarfish
statute. “What am | to do?” cried he eagerly to
the Munis, "Sit down" (Nishida), said they;
and thence his name was Nishada. His
descendants, the inhabitants of the Vindhya
mountain, great Muni. are still called Nis
hadas. and are characterized by the exterior
tokens of depravity’, By this means the
wickedness of Vena was expelled; those
Nisadas being born of his sins, and carrying
them away. The Brahmanas then proceeded to
rub the right arm of the king, from which
friction was engendered the illustrious son of
Vena, named Pythu, resplendent in person, as
it the blazing deity of Fire had been
manifested.

SMTA ATT GT TUT eT TYING

wag feear wa: HaTe Td ZI

afery art ¢ yar aoreetht wae: xo

agar a ara Auitshe fated aah

GaN een ATA: TBA YASIR BN
a Uae Fee Tres WaT:

areata unfittenet watoctatrat etn s 2H
firemen ora Raut: el
eoenafin & yen sorent a aetna
earrel wel doerpafiay wae

ee Y aero web apt wea fearae sew
faoirtet vy arat uftdrt wt aah
faoyfag at ak wat amahrArU SGI
warmetedt wer warafareseha

There then fell from the sky the primitive

bow (of Mahadeva) named Ajagava. and
celestial arrows, and panoply from heaven. At

the birth of Prthu all living creatures rejoiced;
and Vena, delivered by his being born from
the hell named Put, ascended to the realms
above. The seas and rivers, bringing Jewels
from their depths, and water to perform the
ablutions of his installation, appeared. The
great parent of all, Brahma, with the gods and
the descendants of Angiras (the fires), and
with all things animate or inanimate,
assembled and performed the ceremony of
consecrating the son of Vena. Beholding in his
tight hand the (mark of the) discus of Visnu,
Brahmi recognised a portion of that divinity in
Prthu, and was much pleased; for the mark of
Visnu's discus is visible in the hand of one
who is born to be a universal emperor’, one
whose power is invincible even by the gods.

FEAT THR YYAVA: WATATTN YG II
‘aisfaftrat verter fatrratanfad:

fier wefrarerer sara eA: 1 ven
SPUN ATT AMT TTT
SRT TT VARMA: IY 6
ude eguht eager arta

armor yf farce ferrets ei
aderngel Wa: Yee yes Ag

wer ore aH TaTAS YANG ot
Be: Wear ayers: deisel Terafa:1
aferda wera ay wigitse ATT: HG BN
Stat der gratengut gramme

Raarte galt: yysoa: waTANY 2N1
aituaqed at ut ater arermy
AARATTAGaM WAT FATA B11
ater Saree AY a TTA ET ETT: |

Tor Fare WR a are sort aT:
Wid farereres ardent 4 st

The mighty Prthu, the son of Vena, being
thus invested with universal dominion by
those who were skilled in the rite, soon
removed the grievances of the people whom
his father had oppressed, and from winning

=== PAGE 93 ===

84

THE VISNU-PURANAM

their affections he derived the tide of Raja or
king’. The waters became solid, when he
traversed the ocean: the mountains opened him
a path; his banner passed unbroken (through
the-forests): the earth needed not cultivation;
and at a thought food was prepared: all kine
were like the cow of plenty: honey was stored
in every Bower, At the sacrifice of the birth of
Prthu, which was performed by Brahma, the
intelligent Sita therald or bard) was produced,
in the juice of the monoplant, on the very
birth-day’: at that great sacrifice also was
produced the accomplished Magadha: and the
holy sages said to these two persons, "Praise
ye the king Prthu, the illustrious son of Vena;
for this is your especial function, and here is a
fit subject for your praise.” But they
respectfully replied to the Brahmanas. “We
know not the acts of the new-born king of the
earth; his merits are not understood by us; his
fame is not spread abroad: inform us upon
what subject we may dilate in his praise.”

NT Sy:
afearae a at amadt wera:
Ton afaen & arer tet WA FTG aH
“Praise the king.” said the Rsis, “for the
acts this heroic monarch will perform; praise
him for the virtues he will display.”

WIR saret
aa: & yafereite agar wot ah
Ret: yeaa SOTA FUT AAG GT
WRT Bee TAT Urol fear
aad aftenty ware wafed:n yon
afent asta fates afeert1
veg auifeariiaiags aft FING CI
aa tt aang: wid yatdorer sta:
aferd: anifir: weg gent grartati § e11

Parasara said~ The king, hearing these
words, was much pleased, and reflectec that
persons acquire commendation by virtuous
actions, and that consequently his virtuous

conduct would be the theme of the eulogium
which the bards were about to pronounce:
whatever merits, then, they should panegyrize
in their encomium, he determined that he
would endeavour to acquire; and if they should
point out what faults; ought to be avoided, he
would try to shun them. He therefore listened
attentively, as the sweet-voieed encomiasts
celebrated the future virtues of Prthu, the
enlightened son of Vena.

Tea eaves WTA aT:

Sry Aa: araryftet fan Ge G ott
enigar gees cararq freee: |
ARTA AeA TATA: AF AAAT: | G 8
aa: wat a fat a creat feat Ta:

The king is a speaker of truth, bounteous,
an observer of His promises; he is wise,
benevolent, patient, valiant, and a terror to the
wicked; he knows his duties; he acknowledges
services; he is compassionate and kind-
spoken; he respects the venerable; he performs
sacrifices; he reverences the Brahmans; he
cherishes the good; and in administering
justice is indifferent to friend or foe.

gather yore waar APRA TNE BH
wan efe aaR a anion Gaara

aa: & Vaeiorer: were Tyna GBH
sant fafetegntefayfetntt: |

dwar: peatrergarey: genfea:11g vil
aiteeity worerg afery ret ETT

PART AT: TRTAATTTUTA & 4 HI

The virtues thus celebrated by the Sita and
the Magadha were cherished in the
remembrance of the Raja, and practised by
him when occasion arose. Protecting this
earth, the monarch performed many great
sacrificial ceremonies, accompanied by liberal
donations. His subjects soon approached him,
suffering from the famine by which they were
afflicted, as all the edible plants had perished
during the season of anarchy. In reply to his
question of the cause of their coming, they

=== PAGE 94 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 13

85

told him, that in the interval in which the earth
was without a king all vegerable products had
been withheld, and that consequently the
people had perished.

wa Bq:
ars Tes afta Tacit!
metre: ere aft WoT: Tat: WATT GIN
wath afte arar warerett Frafire:|
fe a: gerdarat wart sitesteet:11 € 1011
They said— “O king, you are the bestower
of subsistence to us; you are appointed, by the
creator, the protector of the people: grant us

vegetables, the support of the lives of your
subjects, who are perishing with hunger.”

TAK Jay

weitse qufaformerarsta ay:

writs feeary git: Vsaevag THAT G CHI

wat vate after siren g T_T

Hr cieary Tercera, aararaTAI § <1

aa aa oat Sat er cer yea

aa aa oO aod camber Voll

aeret We YA VS VTA

weUaTOT TeTTefearoraTAOT 9 BI

On hearing this, Prthu took up his divine
bow Ajagava, and his celestial arrows, and in
great wrath marched forth to assail the Earth.
Earth, assuming the figure of a cow, fled
hastily from him, and traversed, through fear
of the king, the regions of Brahma and the
heavenly spheres; but wherever went the
supporter of living things, there she beheld
Vainya with uplifted weapons: at last,
trembling with terror, and anxious to escape
his arrows, the Earth addressed Prthu, the hero
of resistless prowess.

yreqarear
aha werent fer te a uaa
a ot equesd vende yar 21

The Earth said— “Know you not, king of
men,” the sin of killing a female, that you thus
perseveringly seek to slay me."

Wear

wafer an Fert mifte geanfifin

agai waft at wet quand aa: gt!

Prythu replied: "When the happiness of
many is sccured by the destruction of one

malignant being, the death of that being is an
act of virtue."

warrgranna afe at a erate

SEN: |: Wt F Fas vfaeafino wn

The Earth said “But, if in order to promote
the welfare of your subjects, you put an end to
me, whence, best of monarchs, will your
people derive their support"

yyeara
a en age ahora
MATA MTT WAT: 1119 4 1

“Disobedient to my rule,” rejoined Prthu,
“{t I destroy you, I will support my people by
the efficacy of my own devotions.”

TWIN SaTT
aa: Wor ager at yA: wre Mnf
wearers weet arte ATATATATII 9G Li

yfacqara
saat: WATE; aes Ferg: |
wang sangurd & aq greet atest oi
erat war sito tere Tete: |
adhata werent at: eftcaftontiet: ect
Te weafemats we edyat at
4 aed wees et atte Fa aT RHI
wars ae waa as alte WaT:
ated dtongt dix ada are ¢ ot

Then the Earth overcome with
apprehension, and trembling in every limb,

=== PAGE 95 ===

86

THE VISNU-PURANAM

respectfully saluted the king, and thus spoke:
“All undertakings are successful, if suitable
means of effecting them are employed. I will
impart to you means of success, which you can
make use of if you please. All vegetable
produces are old, and destroyed by me; but at
your command I will restore them, as
developed from my milk. Do you therefore,
for the benefit of mankind, most virtuous of
princes, give me that calf, by which I may be
able to secrete milk. Make also all places
level, so that I may cause my milk, the seed of
all vegetation, to flow every where around.’

WIP JarT

WA FORA HATTA: |
aqealem tar ducer: set faafsran:n 2 an
a fe qaferet 3 faat ofrdtaen

wrt: Goat at areaT aT TaMTETTN ¢ Be
a wreanfa a aint + ated afirer:

auarqyfa ta wheter WAC Bl

wa aa we te PTT: |

aa aa rat fe Fart watered csi

STE: Ween TATATTaT Aa

weg ug Wishe wrwreiteetg Seq

a aeafre at J Ay Maya Ty:

@ unt yaiaet gate yet yysucen

Prthu accordingly uprooted the mountains,
by hundreds and thousands, for myriads of
leagues, and they were thenceforth piled upon
one another. Before his time there were no
defined boundarics of villages or towns, upon
the irregular surface of the earth; there was no
cultivation, no pasture, no agriculture, no
highway for merchants: all these things (or all
civilization) originated in the reign of Prthu.
Where the ground was made level, the king
induced his subjects to take up their abode.
Before his time, also, the fruits and roots
which constituted the food of the people were
procured with great difficulty, all vegetables
having been destroyed; and he therefore,
having made Swayambhuva Manu the calf

milked the Earth, and received the milk into
his own hand, for the benefit of mankind.
werent waifr mart ferereren
SATA weet arbatsenfir Fear: coll
WOE a yydeang yeas firm
amg yadhiarmannfarenttatn ce
wees Ran afederehfiretaha:
Tradectda: fighrareireanic eu
A A MqUETs Aa AE ST YT TTI
araarafersiens tat aeitrasraq gol
Thence proceeded all kinds of corn and
vegetables upon which people subsist now and
perpetually. By granting life to the Earth.
Prthu was as her father, and she thence derived
the patronymic appellation Prthivi (the
daughter of Prthu). Then the gods. the sages,
the demons, the Raksasas, the Gandharbhas,
Yaksus, Pitris, serpents, mountains, and trees,
took a milking vessel suited to their kind. and
milked the earth of appropriate milk, and the
milker and the calf were both peculiar to their
own species”.
oar art faarit a enftoit wife vem
water ara: wat fermperereteraTi g UI
wa ware: 8 Wg: Wat dora drary
Wa Felafa: Yah TSAR 8 Ul
ase 3H ava wa: ahaa ATI
3 wer goad fafa meters waTaa sa
geeactagnt Fort seat dager
yar wre wath Bad FUT XII
‘sf sitfereqgeret weratgt adteyitseara:t
This Earth, the mother, the nurse, the
receptacle, and nourisher of all existent things,
was produced from the sole of the foot of
Visnu. And thus was born the mighty Prthu.
the heroic son of Vena, who was the lord of
the earth, and who, from conciliating the
affections of the people, was the first ruler to
whom the title of Raja was ascribed. Whoever

shall recite this story of the birth of Prthu. the
son of Vena, shall never suffer any retribution

=== PAGE 96 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 13

87

for the evil he may have committed: and such
is the virtue of the tale of Prthu's birth , that
those who hear it repeated shall be relieved
from affliction"®.

NOTES

1. The descent of Prthu from Dhruva is similarly
traced in the Matsya Purana, but with some variety
of nomenclature : thus the wife of Dhruva is named
Dhanyé; and ‘the eldest son of the Manu, Taru. The
Vayu introduces another generation, making the
eldest son of Slisti, or as there termed Pusti. father
of Udaradhi; and the latter the father of Ripu, the
father of Caksusa, the father of the Manu. The
Bhagavata has an almost entirely different set of
names, having converted the family of Dhruva into
personifications of divisions of time and of day and
night The account there given is, Dhruva mad. by
his wife Bhrami (revolving), the daughter of
Sisumara (the sphere), Kalpa and Vatsara. The
latter married Suvithi. and had six sons. Pushparna,
Tigmaketu, Isha, Urjja, Vasu and Jaya. The first
married Prabha and Doaha. and had by the former,
Pratah (dawn), Madhyadina (noon), and Saya
(evening); and by the latter, Pradosha, NisItha, and
Vyusta. or the beginning, middle, and end of night.
The last has, by Puskarini. Caksusa. mar, ried to
Akuti. and the father of Chaksusha Manu. He has
twelve sons Puru, Kritsna, Rita, Dyumna, Satyavat,
Dhrita, Vrata. Agnistoma Atiratra, Pradyumna.
Sivi, and Ulmuka. The last is the farther of six sons,
named as in our text, except the last. who is called
Gaya. The eldest, Anga, is the father of Vena. the
father of Prthu. These additions are evidently the
creatures of the author's imagination. The Brahma
Purana and Hari Vamsa have the same genealogy
as the Visnu, reading, as do the Matsya and Vayu,
Pushkarini or Varani. the daughter of Virana,
instead of Varuna. They, as well as copies of the
text, present several other varieties of
nomenclature. The Padma Purana (Bhiimi Khanda)
says Anga was of the family of Atri, in allusion
perhaps to the circumstance mentioned in the
Brahma Purana of Unioapida's adoption by that
Rsi.

2, With the Dirgbasaira, ‘long sacrifice;' a
ceremony lasting a thousand years.

3. That is, the land will be fertile in proportion as
the gods are propitiated, and the king will benefit
accordingly, as a sixth part of the merit and of the
produce will be his. So the commentator explains
the word ‘portion: si; WEY aT: |

4. The Matsya says there were born outcast or
barbarous races, Mlecchas (T@erA4:) as black as
collyrium. The Bhagavata describes an individual
of dwarfish stature, with short arms and legs, of a
complexion as black as a crow, with projecting
chin, broad flat nose, red eyes, and tawny hair;
whose descendants were mountaineers and
foresters : fiftsrrriraa: | The Padma (Bhu. Kb.) has
a similar description, adding to the dwarfish stature
and black complexion, a wide mouth, large ears,
and a protuberant belly. It also particularizes his
posterity as Nishadas, Kiratas, Bhillas. Bahanakas,
Bhramaras, Pulindas, and other barbarians, or
Mlecchas, living in woods and on mountains. These
passages intend, and do not much exaggerate, the
uncouth apperance of the Goands, Koles, Bhils, and
other uocivilized tribes, scattered along the forests
and mountains of central India, from Behar to
Kandesh, and who are not improbably the
predecessors of the present occupants of the
cultivated portions of the country. They are always
very black, ill-shapen, and dwarfish, and have
countenances of a very African character.

5, A Cakravarttl, or, according to the text. one in
whom the Cakra, the discus of Visnu, abides
(varttate); such a figure being delineated by the
lines of the hand. The grammatical etymology is,
‘he who abides in, or rules over, an extensive
territory called a Cakra.'

6. From raga (%P"1),'passion' or ‘affection;' but the
more obvious etymology is raj (1 ), to shine’ or
“be splendid.

7. The birth of Prthu is to be considered as the
sacrifice, of which Brahmé, the creator, was the
performer, but in other places, as in the Padma, it is
considered that an actual sacrificial rite was
celebrated, at which the first encomiasts were
produced. The Bhigavata does not account for their
appearance.

8. ‘Having willed or determined the Manu
Swayambhuva to be the calf; daca ai g 7d
YAP! So the Padma Purana ; act vem: welerdt!
aq maraeyd Yad ofr yA: YA: | The Bhagavata has
‘acd Heat 44! Having made the Manu the calf.’ By

=== PAGE 97 ===

88 THE VISNU-PU!

the 'calf,' or Manu in that character, is typified, the
commentator observes, the promoter of the
multiplication of progeny : SARATTATS: |

9. The Matsya, Brahma, Bhagavata, and Padma
enter into a greater detail of this milking, specifying
typically the calf, the milker, the milk, and the
vessel. Thus, according to the Matsya, the Rsis
milked the earth through Vrhaspati; their calf was
Soma; the Vedas were the vessel; and the milk was
devotion. When the gods milked the earth, the
milker was Mitra (the sun); Indra was the calf:
superhuman power was the produce. The gods had
a gold, the Pitrs a silver vessel : and for the latter,
the milker was Antaka (death); Yama was the calf;
the milk was Swadha, or oblation. The Naga, or
snake-gods, had a gourd for their pail; their calf
was Taksaka; Dhritarastra (the serpent) was their
milker; and their milk was poison. For the Asuras,
Maya was the milk; Virocana, the son of Prahlada,
was the calf; the milker was Dwimurddha; and the
vessel was of iron. The Yaksus made Vaisravana
their calf; their vessel was of unbaked earth, the
milk was the power of disappearing. The Raksasas
and others employed Raupyanabha as the milker :
their calf was Sumali: and their milk was blood.
Citraratha was the calf, Vasuruci the milker, of the
Gandharvas and nymphs, who milked fragrant
odours into a cup of lotus leaves. On behalf of the
mountains, Meru was the milker; Himavat the calf;
the pail was of crystal : and the milk was of herbs
and gems. The trees extracted sap in a vessel of the
Palisa, the Sal being the milker, and the Plaksa the
calf. The descriptions that occur in the Bhagavata,
Padma, and Brahma Puranas are occasionally
slightly varied, but they are for the most part in the
same words as that of the Matsya. These mys-
tifications are all probably —_ subsequent
modifications of the original simple allegory, which
typified the earth as a cow, who yielded to every
class of beings the milk they desired, or the object
of their wishes.

10. Another reading is ¢tactary waft ‘It
counteracts evil dreams.’ The legend of Pythu is
briefly given in the Mahabharata. Raja Dharma,
and occurs.in most of the Puranas, but in greatest
detail in our text, in the Bhagavata, and especially
in the Padma, Bhumi Khanda. s. 29, 30. All the
versions, however, are essentially the same.

=== PAGE 98 ===

88

THE VISNU-PURANAM

CHAPTER 14

ageviiseara:
(serrat 7:)

Wat: Wat werd agmisaearfert

feraftet erates Sram gn

virgin wert faroEAaT, Far

mretrafed ype mt Got went BH

sretrafestrary werent ware:

ehatrrereragt a4 dafegar wT: 11 311

wri: yet yeaa WA

wreitrarfgetrearry ware fet WETaCT: 11

aagrrarat J saat waa:

TERA: TY Maat WATT

wate BET ae wribateT: 1

ad weal ae aqdes Ue G11

AMAT TOTS TATA ARTA: |

aprentagentar MARAE TAT: 11 911

Prthu had two valiant sons, Antarddhi and
Pali. The son of An-tarddhana.' by his wife
Sikhandini, was  Havirdhana,to whom
Dhishana, a princess of the race of Agni, bore
six sons, Prachinaverhis, Sukra. Gaya, Krsna,
Vraja. and Ajina’. The first of these was a
mighty prince and patriarch, by whom
mankind was multiplied after the death of
Havirdhana. He was called Prachinaverhis
from his placing upon the earth the sacred
grass, pointing to the east’. At the termination
of a rigid penance he married Savarna, the
daughter of the ocean, who had been
previously betrothed to him, and who had by
the king ten sons, who were all styled
Pracetasas, and were skilled in military
science: they all observed the same duties,
practised religious austerities, and remained
immersed in the bed of the sea for ten
thousand years.

Wa gaa
wed & rerarrenreneryy

=== PAGE 99 ===

BOOK I, CHAP. 14

89

MATA: ARTO AATSTSAGAST AT 6

Maitreya said—You can inform me, great
sage, why the magnanimous Pracetasas
engaged in penance in the waters of the sea.
WI Jaret

fier seine: shat ware afar

warafageet ABARAT ATTN eH
mritraferara

van tagar Safes eae Yat:

wart: dagtraret war aie AAA AAU got

ware trad gat: warrgfagaaisar:

reed rete SF: ATT AT MATT BAN

Parasara said—The sons of Pracinaverhis
were originally informed by their father, who
had been appointed as a patriarch, and whose
mind was intent on multiplying mankind, that
he had been respectfully enjoined by Brahma,
the god of gods, to labour to this end, and that
he had promised obedience : “now therefore,”
continued he. “do you, my sons, to oblige me,
diligently promote the increase of the people,
for the orders of the father of all creatures are
entitled to respect.”

wae afeay: Fe set FORT: |

warqarat gt ya: uneg: feat TA gan
wae Hy:

aa wet wengat wnat: anton aa

ware, we A: At caTSATgMEfan 8311

The sons of the king, having heard their
father's words, replied, "So be it;” but they
then inquired of him, as he could best explain
it, by what means they might accomplish the
augmentation of mankind.

wife wae ed: fart wera as ex
Teng wenfaqad way eft
arrears afe Fafgavitoran 94 1

anladss arg Terenferasat Wen
Sree wT SATS: TRRTTT: 1 UGH
aferratit wf aamreret werafa:!
aaReangd gig: mart at afercafen gon

He said to them: "Whoever worships
Visnu, the bestower of good, attains
undoubtedly the object of his desires: there is
no other mode. What Further can I tell you ?
Adore therefore Govinda, who is Hari. the lord
of all beings, in order to effect the increase of
the human race, if you wish to succeed. The
eternal Purusottama is to be propitiated by him
who wishes for virtue, wealth, enjoyment or
liberation. Adore him, the imperishable, by
whom. when propitiated, the world was first
created, and mankind will assuredly be
multiplied.”

WH Sarr

sear fiat gat weet ae

wer: walftraferet area: Targa ge It
aretagentit eaten areadtt

art yas ade ee 1

waa 4 fam Satrerrrrat afr

Weyt ee: wrary wiigher were 2011

ParaSara said- Thus instructed by their
father, the ten Pracetasas plunged into the
depths of the ocean, and with minds wholly
devoted to Narayana, the sovereign of the
universe, who is beyond all worlds, were
engrossed by religious -austerity for ten
thousand years: remaining there, they with
fixed thoughts praised Hari, who. when
propitiated, confers on those who praise him
all that they desire.

Wa sara
we weet fae: aggre dha:
PEt yrs od ayefan zen

Maitreya said—The excellent praises that
the Pracetasas addressed to Visnu, whilst they
stood in the deep, you, oh best of Munis, are
qualified to repeat to me.

=== PAGE 100 ===

90

TER sara
sqgy a3a tiferd aon yd wera:
PRTerr eT: Mya TAT: VT

Parasara said— Hear, Maitreya, the hymn
which the Pracetasas, as they stood in the
waters of the sea, sang of old to Govinda, their
nature being identified with him :

wee Sq:
at: GH Udaeat witer aa ya
are AAT ST: TH TN VB
Sareea
ATT WATT ATT ARH
TNS: We ETT aT Fg
WRT TUT TS ATCA TAN VGH
qeaisgfet 2a: fagfins gare:
iene: Wee Tet ST TA RGM

erat Bhat drareat eanfieataay 7:
erigitarsrat ater qatert FA: Von
afore at feat oreaagret: 1

wreetfeeionet cardt et gree FAR S

aah eegt oat att aq aeefeary

ae Arena erer TATA STATA AS

a ye watant weayH HANH TM

Fagor rere fares uTTETATTH 3 011

uperaftadt 28 aadet qetsFremy

STRATA, A AAATEAY AA VI

STRAPON AAT I: WereDAT

TTA YSRTE ATP TA 3 VN

wreigaenter a: Bat ITA

Pracetasas said~ "We bow to him whose

glory is the perpetual theme of every speech;
him first, him last; the supreme lord of the
boundless world; who is primeval light: who is
without his like; indivisible and infinite; the
origin of all existent things, moveable or
stationary. To that supreme being who is one
with time, whose first forms, though he be
without form, are day and evening and night,
be adoration. Glory to him, the life of all

THE VISNU-PURANAM

living things, who is the same with the moon,
the receptacle of ambrosia, drunk daily by the
gods and progenitors: to him who is one with
the sun, the cause of heat and cold and rain,
who dissipates the gloom, and illuminates the
sky with his radiance: to him who is one with
earth, all-pervading, and the asylum of smell
and other objects of sense, supporting, the
whole world by its solidity. We adore that
form of the deity Hari which is water, the
womb of the world, the seed of all living
beings. Glory to the mouth of the gods, the
eater of the Havya; to the eater of the Kavya,
the mouth of the progenitors; to Visnu, who is
identical with fire; to him who is one with air,
the origin of ether, existing as the five vital
airs in the body, causing constant vital action;
to him who is identical with the atmosphere,
pure, illimitable, shapeless, separating all
creatures.

wed prefers TH: Hora Ses 3 BH
renter Ferrerry FreaferreareerTeRT: |
TR APTS AT: GAT ATTA ax

eatery onert a: wereshh

See: UAT TRA fea AAR GM

aftrrrt weet feat wend BRT

wane sere an: wefrafern 360

Be: Woeat wre qoreanra sy:

aarerefiat Sat Fat: BT PRATT 3 tt

eM: BH ee eT ae ferent: Wet TENA CH

Glory to Krsna, who is Brahma in the form
of sesible objects, who is ever the direction of
the faculties of sense. We offer salutadon to '
that supreme Hari who is one with the senses,
both subtle and substantial, the recipient of all
impressions, the root of all knowledge: to the
universal soul, who, as internal intellect,
delivers the impressions, received by the
senses to soul: to him who has the properties
of Prakrti; in whom, without end, rest all
things; from whom all things proceed; and
who is that into which all things resolve. We