Introduction to system of medicine 
The Indian System of Medicine is the culmination of Indian thought of medicine 
which represents a way of healthy living valued with a long and unique cultural 
history. It also amalgamates the best of influences that came in from contact with 
other civilizations be it Greece (resulting in Unani Medicine), Germany 
(Homeopathy) or Our sages (which gave us the science of Ayurveda, Siddha as also 
Yoga & Naturopathy). An indigenous system is a natural form of medicine outside 
the stream of Western or allopathic medicine practiced by majority of doctors all 
over the world today. These systems are Ayurveda, siddha, Unani, yoga and 
homeopathy (AYUSH). 
Medicinal plants based traditional systems of medicines are playing important role 
in providing health care to large section of population, especially in developing 
countries.  Indian Systems of Medicine are among the well-known global traditional 
systems of medicine. 
 India has the unique distinction of having six recognized systems of medicine in 
this category. They are: 
               1.Ayurveda 
               2. siddha 
               3. Unani 
               4. yoga  
               5. homeopathy 
               6.Naturopathy 
AYURVEDA 
Ayurveda is the dominant herbal tradition in India. It still enjoys the faith of a large 
number of people of our country though it is perhaps, the oldest system of healing 
in the world. 
 Ayurveda is a classical system of healthcare originating from the Vedas 
documented around 5000 years ago. Around 1000 B.C. the knowledge of Ayurveda 
was first comprehensively documented in the compendia called Charak Samhita 


and Sushruta Samhita. As per the fundamental basis of Ayurveda, all objects and 
living bodies are composed of five basic elements, called the Pancha Mahabhootas, 
namely:  Prithvi (earth), Jal (water), Agni (fire), Vayu (air) and Akash(ether). 
Definition 
 The term “Ayurveda” is derived from two Sanskrit words, Ayur and Veda. Ayur 
means life and Veda means knowledge or science. Therefore, Ayurveda means 
science of life or way of life. 
 Principle 
 The principle of Ayurveda is based on the concept of five basic elements and 
tridoshas. According to Ayurveda, the whole universe made up of five basic 
elements (Panchamahabuthas) 
 The whole universe includes the material world, plant kingdom and all other living 
beings. In other words, these five elements together form the basis of all matter. 
The five elements are – Akasha (ether), Vayu (air), Agni (fire), Jala (water), Prithvi 
(earth) 
There is a balanced condensation of these elements in different proportions to suit 
the needs and requirements of different structures and functions of the body 
matrix and its parts. The growth and development of body matrix depends on its 
nutrition i.e. on food. The food, in turn, is composed of above elements. 
 The health or sickness depends on the presence or absence of a balanced state of 
the total body matrix including the balance between its different constituents. The 
properties, location and manifestations of these elements are as follows 
1.Ether: is nonresistance, it is located in the body cavities like mouth, thorax, 
abdomen, lung cavity, digestive tract.  
2.Air: is related to movements, vibrations and oscillations. They manifest 
movement of muscles, pulsation of heart, expansion and contraction of lungs, 
functioning of digestive and nervous systems. 
3.Fire: concerned to radiation, it manifests digestion, metabolism, temperature, 
vision and intelligence  


4.Water: is related to force and cohesion. Located in cytoplasm, blood, salivary 
glands, gastric juice. 
5.Earth: is concerned to resistance and solidarity. They manifest skin, nails, hairs 
and bones. These elements manifest in the functioning of our scenes. They are also 
closely related to our ability to perceive and interact with environment. 
TRIDOSHAS 
 The five elements combine to form “Tri Doshas” i.e. Vata, Pitta, and Kappha. They 
are the “Basic Forces’’ and also known as the “Pillars of Life”  
                  Vata (Air principle) the elements ether and air 
                 Pitta (Fire principle) the elements fire and water 
                 Kapha (Water principle) the elements earth and water 
According to the Ayurveda, sickness is due to the imbalance of any one or more of 
the three doshas. 
 E.g. Aggravation of Pitta leads to indigestion, skin diseases and liver problems. 
  Diagnosis  
 In Ayurveda diagnosis is always done of the patient as whole. Diagnosis is carried 
out to find out which dosha is aggravated. For his purpose, Ayurveda diagnosis is 
done by questioning and by undertaking 8 investigation including nadi(Pulse), 
tongue, skin, physical features, stool, urine etc. are examined.  
Treatment:  
 Treatment includes preventive and curative measures. Preventive measures 
include personal hygiene, regular daily routine, appropriate social behavior. The 
curative measures include three major measures including aushadhi i.e. drugs, 
Anna i.e. diets and vihar i.e. exercise and general mode of life. 
 The curative treatment consists of Aushadhi (drugs), Ahara (diet) and Vihara (life 
style).  Ayurveda largely uses plants as raw materials for the manufacture of drugs, 
though materials of animal and marine origin, metals and minerals are also used.   


      Ayurveda medicines are generally safe and have little or no known adverse side-
effects, if manufactured properly and consumed judiciously following necessary 
DOs and DON’Ts. 
 Ayurveda is proven to be effective in the treatment of chronic, metabolic and life 
style diseases for which satisfactory solutions are not available in conventional 
medicine. Over the years, Kshar Sutra and Panchakarma therapies of Ayurveda 
have become very popular among the public. 
  Panchakarma is a unique therapeutic procedure for the radical elimination of 
disease-causing factors and to maintain the equilibrium of humors. 
 Panchakarma include 5 detoxification processes, used to treat diseases, according 
to Ayurveda.  
➢ Vamana (Medicated emesis), 
➢ Virechana (Medicated purgation),  
➢ Basti (Medicated enema), 
➢ Nasya (medication through the route of nose), 
➢ Raktamokshana (Bloodletting) 
 The Panchakarma therapy minimizes the chances of recurrence of the diseases and 
promotes positive health by rejuvenating body tissues and bio-purification. 
 Kshar Sutra is a para-surgical intervention using an alkaline thread for 
cauterization, which is scientifically validated to be effective in the treatment of 
fistula-in-ano and such surgical conditions as require excision of overgrown soft 
tissue like polyps, warts, non-healing chronic ulcers, sinuses and papillae. 
The importance of treatment is to restore the balance and harmony of doshas with 
proper diet and drugs. Selection of the drugs Based upon 
    1. Rasa (Taste), 
    2. Virya(Potency) 
    3. Vipaka (Taste after digestion) 
 
 


✓ RASA  
Rasa indicates the composition, properties and probable action of the drugs. There 
are six tastes. Each taste has one or more mahabuthas(elements) and each taste 
has its own influence on doshas.  
             E.g.      Sweet (earth and water), influences on doshas– Kapha increases, vata 
and pitta deceases and promote antibiotic activities 
                         Sour - (Water and fire) – Pitta increases –stimulates enzymes.  
                         Saline- (Fire and earth)- Pitta increases.  
                         Bitter - (Air and fire) – Pitta increases 
                         Pungent- (Air and ether)- Kapha and pitta decreases           
                        Astringent- (Air and earth)- Pitta decreases and vatta increases 
✓ VIRYA 
 On the basis of Virya, the drugs are classified into hot and cold drugs. 
 Hot (Ushna) drugs – Aggravates pitta and pacifies vata and kapha, garlic, drumstick 
 Cold (Sita) drugs – Aggravates kapha and vatta and pacifies pitta, Jeera, amla 
✓ Vipaka 
 Food and medicine undergoes various changes during digestion (metabolism). The 
taste after digestion is known as vipaka. The three tastes described under vipaka, 
sweet, sour and pungent. 
Sweet – Aggravates kapha and alleviates pitta and vatha Sour – Aggravates pitha 
and alleviates kapha and vatha Pungent – Aggravates vatha and alleviates kapha 
 
 
 
 
 


HOMEOPATHY SYSTEM OF MEDICINE 
 Homeopathy is relatively a recent system of medicine. The word “Homeopathy” 
is derived from two Greek words Homois meaning similar and pathos meaning 
suffering. 
Homeopathy simply means treating diseases with remedies, prescribed in minute 
doses, which are capable of producing symptoms similar to the disease when they 
taken by the healthy people. It is based on the natural law of healing. “Similia 
Similibus Curantur” which means “Likes are cured by likes” 
ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT HOMEOPATHY  
Homeopathy = homois (similar) + pathos (suffering). Homeopathy is a specialized 
method of drug therapy curing a natural disease by administration of drugs. 
Homeopathy began in the late 1700s, developed by a German doctor named 
Samuel Hahnemann. 
 Homoeopathy is a system of medical treatment introduced by Dr. Christian 
Friedrich Samual Hahnemann, a German physician. He had spread a long and useful 
life of 88 years during which he benefited the suffering humanity immense by 
introducing this new system of medicine. 
DIFINATION & MEANING 
 Homoeopathy is a system of treatment (branch of medical science) works on the 
principle of ‘‘Similia similibus curenter’ ’Means like cures like, further explanation 
is that patient & medicine symptoms are similar, it also called LAW OF SIMILA 
ABOUT THE FOUNDER DR. HAHNEMANN 
The Founder of homoeopathy was born on10thApril, 1755 at Meissen in Saxony of 
Germany. He was basically a M.D Medicine allopathic doctor who turned in to 
Homoeopath. He Died on 2ndjuly 1843. 
 
 
 
 


FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF HOMOEOPATHY 
 1. Law of Similia 
 2. Law of Simplex 
 3. Law of Minimum 
 4. Doctrine of Drug proving 
 5. Theory of Chronic disease 
 6. Theory of Vital force 
 7. Doctrine of Drug-dynamization 
Principle 
 The cause of the disease itself can be its treatment i.e. Law of similar. This is the 
basic principle of homeopathy. According to Hahnemann, diseases are congenital 
and caused by gene mutations. Toxic or poisonous substances are called Miasms 
are responsible for gene mutation 
 Miasms are of three types- Psora, Psychosis, Syphilis These exist in a suppressed 
or sleeping state in a person. As long as they are in that state, the person does not 
suffer from diseases due to resistance power. 
 If any one of them stimulated, then the person loses his resistance power and 
suffers from diseases related to it. Therefore, Homeopathy is called a Genetic 
medicine 
Discovery of drugs  
The drugs are discovered by testing on humans but not on animals. A drug is 
administered on healthy person to induce any one of the miasms and the 
symptoms of the drugs are discovered 
Treatment 
 The treatment is based on the concept of proving and prover. Prover – The healthy 
person. Proving – The symptoms (Physical, mental, emotional changes) that are 
caused by the various potencies of medicines in prover. 


 For the treatment, the symptoms of the drug are compared with the symptoms of 
the patient. In other words, the selection of the drug depends upon the symptoms 
of the drug and patient condition. 
Remedies used in homeopathy are derived from naturally occurring substances 
such as plant extract and minerals. Extremely low concentrations are prepared in 
specific way. Homeopathy has definite and effective treatment for chronic diseases 
such as diabetes, arthritis, bronchial asthma, immunological disorder, behavior 
disorder and mental disorder. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Unani 
The Unani System of Medicine has a long and impressive record in India. It was 
introduced in India by the Arabs and Persians sometime around the eleventh 
century.  Today, India is one of the leading countries in so for as the practice of 
Unani medicine is concerned. It has the largest number of Unani educational, 
research and health care institutions.  
 Unani name is derived from the word 'Ionian' which originated in Greece. Unani 
medicine, like any other form of medical science strives to find the best possible 
ways by which a person can lead a healthy life with the least or zero sickness.    
Origin & Development of Unani System 
 Unani system originated in Greece. Hakim Ajmal Khan IS UNANI physician but also 
one of the foremost freedom fighters in the country. He established an Ayurvedic 
and antino Tibbia College and Hindustani Davakhana – a pharmaceutical company 
–for Ayurvedic and Unani medicine in Delhi. 
 Today the Unani system of medicine with hospitals and educational and research 
institutions, forms an integral part of the national health care delivery system.  
 Unani Medicine as a healing system was founded by Hakim Ibn Sina. It was 
introduced in India around 10th century with the spread of Islamic civilization. Now 
Unani-pathy has become a part of Indian system of Medicine and India is one of 
the leading countries so far as its practice is concerned. 
 
 Principles & Concepts 
 According to the basic principles of Unani the body is made up of the four basic 
elements i. earth, air, water, fire which have different temperaments i.e. cold, hot, 
wet, dry. After mixing and interaction of four elements a new compound having 
new temperament existence. i.e Hot wet, hot dry, cold wet, and cold and dry. 
 The body has the simple and compound organs which got their nourishment (The 
substances necessary for growth, health, and good condition) through four 
humours i.e. Blood, phlegm, yellow bile and black bile. 


The humour (put into a good mood) is also assigned temperament as blood is hot 
and wet, Phlegm is cold and hot, Yellow bile is hot and dry and Black bile is cold and 
dry. 
 Phlegm is cold and hot (Thick, sticky, stringy mucus secreted by the mucous 
membrane of the respiratory tract, as during a cold or other respiratory infection). 
Yellow bile is hot and dry (A yellow, or greenish, viscid fluid, usually alkaline in 
reaction, secreted by the liver. It passes into the intestines, where it aids in the 
digestive) 
Black bile is cold and dry (a humor that was once believed to be secreted by the 
kidneys or spleen and to cause sadness) 
 Unani medicine believes in promotion of health, prevention of diseases and cure.  
Health of human is based on the six essentials 
- Atmospheric air 
- Physical activity and rest 
- Drinks and foods 
- Sleep and wakefulness 
- Excretion and retention 
- Mental activity and rest 
The human body is considered to be made up of the following seven components 
are:  
 i. Elements (Arkan) 
 ii. Temperament (Mizaj) 
 iii. Humors (Akhlat) 
 iv. Organs (Aaza) 
 v. Spirits (Arwah) 
 vi. Faculties (Quwa) 
 vii. Functions (Afaal) 


 
Elements (Arkan) 
 The human body contains four elements. (earth, air, water, fire). Each of the four 
elements has its own temperament as follows:  
Element Temperament Air Hot and Moist, Earth Cold and Dry, Fire Hot and Dry, 
Water Cold and Moist 
Temperament (Mizaj) 
 In the Unani system, the temperament of the individual is very important as it is 
considered to be unique. The individual’s temperament is believed to be the result 
of the interaction of these four elements. 
Humors (Akhlat) 
 Humours are those moist and fluid parts of the body which are produced after 
transformation and metabolism of the aliments; they serve the function of 
nutrition, growth and repair; and produce energy, for the preservation of individual 
and his species. 
 The humors are responsible for maintaining moisture of different organs of the 
body and also provide nutrition to the body. 
Organs (Aaza) 
 These are the various organs of the human body. The health or disease of each 
individual organ affects the state of health of the whole body. 
Spirits (Arwah) 
 Ruh (Spirit) is a gaseous substance, obtained from the inspired air, it helps in all 
the metabolic activities of the body. It is the source of vitality for all the organs of 
the body. These are considered to be the life force and are, therefore, important in 
the diagnosis and treatment of disease. 
 These are the carriers of different powers, which make the whole body system and 
its parts functional. 
 


Faculties (Quwa) 
 These are of three kinds: 
    1.Natural power (Quwa Tabiyah) 
 Natural power is the power of metabolism and reproduction. Liver is the seat of 
this power and the process is carried on in every tissue of the body. Metabolism is 
concerned with the processes of nutrition and growth of human 
 Nutrition comes from the food and is carried to all parts of the body, while growth 
power is responsible for the construction and growth of human organism. 
 Psychic power refers to nervous and psychic power. It is located inside the brain 
and is responsible for perceptive and motive power. Perceptive power conveys 
impressions or sensation and motive power brings about movements as a response 
to sensation. 
      2.Vital power (Quwa Haywaniyah) 
 Vital power is responsible for maintaining life and enables all the organs to accept 
the effect of psychic power. This power is located in the heart. It Keeps life running 
in the tissues. 
     3Functions (Afaal) 
 This component refers to the movements and functions of all the organs of the 
body. In case of a healthy body the various organs are not only in proper shape but 
are also performing their respective functions. This makes it necessary to have full 
knowledge of the functions of the human body in full detail 
Diagnosis:  
The diagnosis of a disease is done by feeling pulse, observation of urine, stool color 
of skin and gait etc. 
 The Diagnostic process in Unani system is dependent on observation and physical 
examination. Diagnosis involves investigating the causes of disease thoroughly and 
in detail. For this, the physicians depend mainly on pulse reading and examination 
of urine and stool. 
 The ten conditions of pulse observed during the diagnosis are:  


                  i. Quantity 
                 ii. Force 
                iii. Duration of movement 
                iv. Condition of the vessel wall 
                v. Volume 
                vi. Duration of the rest period 
                vii. Palpitation of the pulse 
                viii. Equality and inequality 
                 ix. Balance of the pulse 
                 x. Rhythm 
 Physical examination Is carried out by the diagnosis of urinogenital disorders, 
pathogenesis of blood and other humors, metabolic disorders and liver diseases. 
The following observations of urine are made: Colour, Consistency, Clearness and 
turbidity, Odour Foam or froth, Precipitates, Quantity 
 The examination of stool, its colour, quantity, consistency and the presence of 
foreign body help very much in the diagnosis of various diseases. Besides the means 
of pulse reading and physical examination of urine and stool, other conventional 
means such as inspection, palpitation, percussion and occultation are also used for 
diagnosis purposes. 
Strength of Unani: Unani system of Medicine has very remarkable strength in the 
following disorders: Skin disorders, Digestive disorders, Mental disorders, Sexual 
disorders, Gynecological disorders, Neurological disorders 
Treatment:  
The treatment comprises of three components namely preventive and curative it 
seeks the restoration of the body as whole to its original state. Treatment is carried 
out in the four form i.e. regimental therapy, pharmaco therapy dieto therapy and 
surgery. 


 Regimental Therapy –It includes venesection, diaphoresis, diuresis, Turkish bath, 
massage, cauterization, exercise and leeching. These are the drugless therapies and 
are found to be effective in treating diabetes, high blood pressure, obesity, arthritis 
and migraine etc. 
Dietotherapy –It deals with certain ailments by administration of specific diets or 
by regulating the quantity and quality of food. 
 Pharmacotherapy – It deals with the use of naturally occurring drugs mostly herbal 
drugs of animal and mineral origin.  The drugs are used singly or in the form of 
infusion, powder and syrup Unani system of medicine specializes on rheumatic 
arthritis, jaundice, filariasis, eczema, sinusitis and bronchial asthma. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


NATUROPATHY 
 Naturopathy is not only a system of treatment but also a way of life. It is often 
referred to as a drugless therapy. Special attention a is being given to eating habits 
using only natural, mostly uncooked food (fruits and vegetables, adoption of 
purificatory practices, use of hydrotherapy, cold-packs, mud-packs, bath massage 
and variety of methods to tone up the system, increasing energy level aimed at 
producing a state of good health and happiness. 
Naturopathy is holistic system and it helps promote physical mental /emotional, 
social and spiritual health by self-regulation of life activities on normal and natural 
basis. It requires real effort, will power and proper discipline to follow naturopathy 
way of life. 
 
Naturopathy  
 Naturopathy advocates living in harmony with constructive principles of Nature on 
the physical, mental, moral and spiritual planes.  Naturopathy promotes healing by 
stimulating the body’s inherent power to regain health with the help of five 
elements of nature – Earth, Water, Air, Fire and Ether.  Naturopathy advocates 
‘Better Health without Medicines’.  It is reported to be effective in chronic, allergic 
autoimmune and stress related disorders. 
Naturopathy The theory and practice of Naturopathy are based on a holistic view 
point with particular attention to o simple eating and living habits, o fasting, o 
hydrotherapy-body packs, baths o mud packs, massages, o Under Water Exercises, 
o Air therapy o Magnet Therapy, Chromo-therapy, o Acupuncture, Acupressure etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Homoeopathy 
 The Physicians from the time of Hippocrates (around 400 B.C.) have observed that 
certain substances could produce symptoms of a disease in healthy people similar 
to those of people suffering from the disease. • Dr. Christian Friedrich Samuel 
Hahnemann, a German physician, scientifically examined this phenomenon and 
codified the fundamental principles of Homoeopathy. • Homoeopathy was brought 
into India around 1810 A.D. by European missionaries and received official 
recognition in 1948 by the Parliament. 
First principle of Homoeopathy ‘Similia Similibus Curentur’- a medicine which could 
induce a set of symptoms in healthy human beings would be capable of curing a 
similar set of symptoms in human beings actually suffering from the disease. • 
Second principle of ‘Single Medicine’- Single medicine should be administered at a 
time to a particular patient during the treatment. • Third principle of ‘Minimum 
Dose’ - bare minimum dose of a drug which would induce a curative action without 
any adverse effect should be administered. 
Homoeopathy is based on the assumption that the causation of a disease mainly 
depends upon the susceptibility or proneness of an individual to the incidence of 
the particular disease in addition to the action of external agents like bacteria, 
viruses, etc.  Homoeopathic medicines are prepared mainly from natural 
substances such as plant products, minerals and from animal sources. 
Homoeopathy has its own areas of strength in therapeutics and it is particularly 
useful in treatment for allergies, autoimmune disorders and viral infections. 
Many surgical, gynecological and obstetrical and pediatric conditions and ailments 
affecting the eyes, nose, ear, teeth, skin, sexual organs etc. are amenable to 
homoeopathic treatment. Behavioral disorders, neurological problems and 
metabolic diseases can also be successfully treated by Homoeopathy.   
 
