History of Ayurveda
… a heritage of healing
The Origins – 
The word ‘veda’ means knowledge.The evolution of the Indian art of healing and living a 
healthy life comes from the four Vedas namely : Rig veda , Sama veda , Yajur veda and 
Atharva veda .Ayurveda attained a state of reverence and is classified as one of the Upa-
Vedas - a subsection - attached to the Atharva Veda. The Atharva Veda contains not only the 
magic spells and the occult sciences but also the Ayurveda that deals with the diseases, 
injuries, fertility, sanity and health. 
Ayurveda incorporates all forms of lifestyle in therapy. Thus yoga, aroma, meditation, gems, 
amulets, herbs, diet, astrology, color and surgery etc. are used in a comprehensive manner in 
treating patients. Treating important and sensitive spots on the body called Marmas is 
described in Ayurveda . Massages, exercises and yoga are recommended.
History
The knowledge we have now is by three surviving texts of Charaka, Sushruta and Vaghbata. 
Charaka (1st century A.D.) wrote Charaka Samhita (samhita- meaning collection of verses 
written in Sanskrit). Sushruta (4th century A.D.) wrote his Samhita i.e Sushruta Samhita. 
Vaghbata (5th century A.D.) compiled the third set of major texts called Ashtanga Hridaya and 
Ashtanga Sangraha. Charaka’s School of Physicians and Sushruta’s School of Surgeons 
became the basis of Ayurveda and helped organize and systematically classify into branches 
of medicine and surgery.
Sixteen major supplements (Nighantus) were written in the ensuing years – Dhanvantari 
Bahavaprakasha, Raja and Shaligrama to name a few – that helped refine the practice of 
Ayurveda. New drugs were added and ineffective ones were discarded. Expansion of 
application, identification of new illnesses and finding substitute treatments seemed to have 
been an evolving process. Close to 2000 plants that were used in healing diseases and 
abating symptoms were identified in these supplements.
Dridhabala in the 4th century revised the Charaka Samhita. The texts of Sushruta Samhita 
were revised and supplemented by Nagarjuna in the 6th century. 
There developed eight branches/divisions of Ayurveda:
1.                   Kaya-chikitsa (Internal Medicine)


2.                   Shalakya Tantra (surgery and treatment of head and neck,  Ophthalmology and ear, 
nose, throat)
3.                   Shalya Tantra (Surgery)
4.                   Agada Tantra (Toxicology)
5.                   Bhuta Vidya (Psychiatry)
6.                   Kaumara bhritya (Pediatrics)
7.                   Rasayana (science of rejuvenation or anti-ageing)
8.                   Vajikarana (the science of fertility and aphrodisiac)
Many modern medications were derived from plants alluded to in Ayurveda texts. The oft-cited 
example is that of Rauwolfia serpentina that was used to treat headache, anxiety and 
snakebite. Its derivative is used in treating blood pressure today.
Two areas of contribution of Indian physicians were in treating snakebite and prevention of 
small pox. Detailed account of steps to be followed after a poisonous snake bite including 
application of tourniquet and lancing the site by connecting the two fang marks and sucking 
the poison out is described. A decoction of the medicinal plant Rauwolfia serpentina is next 
applied to the wound.
A form of vaccination for small pox was commonly practiced in India long before the West 
discovered the method. A small dose of pus from the pustule of small pox lesion was 
inoculated to develop resistance.     
Charaka Samhita
Charaka was said to have been in the court of the Kushana king, Kanishka during the 1st 
century A. D. Some authors date him as far back as the 6th century B.C. during Buddha 
period. The sacred trust between physician and patient was held in high esteem by Charaka 
and patient confidentiality, similar to the Hippocratic Oath, was deemed the proper conduct for 
a practicing physician. Charaka also told us that the word Ayurveda was derived from Ayus, 
meaning life and Veda meaning knowledge. Nevertheless, according to Charaka the word 
Ayus denotes more than just life. Ayus denotes a combination of the body, sense organs, 
mind and soul. The principles of treatment in Charaka’s teachings took a holistic approach 
that treated not just the symptoms of the disease but the body, mind and soul as single entity.
Compiled by Charaka in the form of discussions and symposiums held by many scholars, 
Charaka Samhita is the most ancient and authoritative text that has survived. Written in 
Sanskrit in verse form, it has 8400 metrical verses. The Samhita deals mainly with the 
diagnosis and treatment of disease process through internal and external application of 
medicine. Called Kaya-chikitsa (internal medicine), it aims at treating both the body and the 
spirit and to strike a balance between the two. Following diagnosis, a series of methods to 
purify both the body and spirit with purgation and detoxification, bloodletting and emesis as 


well as enema (known as Pancha-karma) are utilized. The emphasis seems to be to tackle 
diseases in the early phase or in a preventative manner before the first symptoms appear.
Ayurvedic diagnosis and treatment is traditionally divided into eight branches (sthanas) based 
on the approach of a physician towards a disease process. Charaka described them thus: 
1. Sutra-sthana - generalprinciples
2. Nidana-sthana - pathology
3. Vimana-sthan- diagnostics
4. Sharira-sthana - physiology and anatomy   
5. Indriya-sthana - prognosis 
6. Chikitsa-sthana - therapeutics 
7. Kalpa-sthana - pharmaceutics 
8. Siddhi-sthana - successful treatment.
Detailed accounts of various methods of diagnosis, study of various stages of symptoms and 
the comprehensive management and treatment of debilitating diseases like diabetes mellitus, 
tuberculosis, asthma and arthritic conditions are to be found in the Charaka Samhita. There is 
even a detailed account of fetal development in the mother’s womb, which can rival 
descriptions of modern medical textbooks. 
Charaka also wrote details about building a hospital. A good hospital should be located in a 
breezy spot free of smoke and objectionable smells and noises. Even the equipment needed 
including the brooms and brushes are detailed. The personnel should be clean and well 
behaved. Details about the rooms, cooking area and the privies are given. Conversation, 
recitations and entertainment of the patient were encouraged and said to aid in healing the 
ailing patient.
SushrutaSamhita
Sushruta was a surgeon in the Gupta courts in the 4th century A.D. Though Indian classics is 
full of accounts of healing through transplantation of head and limbs as well as eye balls, 
Sushruta Samhita is the first authentic text to describe methodology of plastic surgery, 
cosmetic and prosthetic surgery, Cesarean section and setting of compound fractures. 
Sushruta had in his possession an armamentarium of 125 surgical instruments made of 
stone, metal and wood. Forceps, scalpels, trocars, catheters, syringes, saws, needles and 
scissors were all available to the surgeon. Rhinoplasty (plastic surgery of the nose) was first 
presented to the world medical community by Sushruta in his Samhita, where a detailed 
method of transposition of a forehead flap to reconstruct a severed nose is given. Severed 
noses were common form of punishment. Torn ear lobes also were common due to heavy 
jewelry worn on ear lobes. Sushruta described a method of repair of the torn ear lobes. Fitting 
of prosthetics for severed limbs were also commonly performed feats.


Sushruta wrote, “Only the union of medicine and surgery constitutes the complete doctor. The 
doctor who lacks knowledge of one of these branches is like a bird with only one wing.” While 
Charaka concentrated on the kaya-chikitsa (internal medicine). Sushruta’s work mainly 
expounded on the Shalya Tantra (surgery).   
The Samhita contains mostly poetry verses but also has some details in prose. 72 different 
ophthalmic diseases and their treatment are mentioned in great detail. Pterygium, glaucoma 
and treatment of conjunctivitis were well known to Sushruta. Removal of cataract by a method 
called couching, wherein the opaque lens is pushed to a side to improve vision was practiced 
routinely. Techniques of suturing and many varieties of bandaging, puncturing and probing, 
drainage and extraction are detailed in the manuscript.
Ashtanga Hridaya
Vaghbata in the 5th century compiled two sets of texts called Ashtanga Sangraha and 
Ashtanga Hridaya. It details the Kaya-chikitsa of Charaka Samhita and the various surgical 
procedures of Sushruta Samhita. The emphasis seems to be more on the physiological rather 
than the spiritual aspects of the disease processes. Ashtanga   Sangraha is written in prose 
whereas the Ashtanga Hridaya is in poetry for recitation of the Verses.
The Ancient ayurvedic Physician  
Originally only Brahmins ( a certain caste ) were practicing physicians. Later people from 
other castes became well versed in the art of healing and a term Vaidya came to be applied to 
the practitioners. Merely by their art and knowledge, the physicians gained high social status 
regardless of their caste of birth. The court physician was of political importance and sat on 
the right side of the throne, an important symbolic place. Though the physician, patient, the 
nurse and the medicine were all important in curing a disease, the physician was thought to 
be the most important.
The codes of conduct for physicians and medical students were laid down by the texts. The 
poor and downtrodden were to be treated free of charge. Others were charged according to 
their ability to pay.
The physician was expected to behave in an exemplary manner, conforming to the highest 
ideals of professional and personal life. His dress, manner and speech were expected to be 
beyond reproach. Medical education was arduous, consisting of many years of sacrifice 
learning the art of healing. Visiting the sick, collecting herbs and preparation of drugs, 
memorizing the Vedic texts of Ayurveda, performing procedures on dead animals, melons, 
and leather bottles and bladders were part of the training. These exercises helped refine both 
theoretical and practical training of the student. When finally the student is deemed ready to 
practice on his own, he was certified by the ruler.


 
Recent History 
Before Ayurveda began its recent renewal in the West, it went through a period of decline in 
India when Western medical education became dominant during the era of British rule. 
Ayurveda became a second-class option used primarily by traditional spiritual practitioners 
and the poor. After India gained its independence in 1947, Ayurveda gained ground and new 
schools began to be established. Today more than five hundred Ayurvedic companies and 
hospitals have opened in the last ten years, and several hundred schools have been 
established. Although Ayurveda remains a secondary system of health care in India, the trend 
toward complementary care is emerging, and Western and Ayurvedic physicians often work 
side by side. 
Interest in Ayurveda in the West began in the mid 1970's as Ayurvedic teachers from India 
began visiting the United States and Europe. By sharing their knowledge they have inspired a 
vast movement toward body-mind-spirit medicine. Today Ayurvedic colleges are opening 
throughout Europe, Australia, and the United States. 
OUR COSMIC BEGINNING
TRIGUNA
Three primordial forces, or principles (GUNAS) namely Sattva, Rajas & Tamas, interweaving 
to create the five elements - space, air, fire, water and earth – birth the entire creation. 
The principle of stillness, tamas, replenishes the universe and its beings and is the main 
principle of support within the physical universe. The principle of self-organizing activity, rajas, 
gives motility and co-ordination to the universe and human life. The Principal of harmonic and 
cosmic intelligence, sattva, maintains universal and individual stasis and awareness. These 
three cosmic principles, called gunas, operating through the five elements they have created, 
directly interface with human existence.
On the physical plane, tamas works closely with the physical functions of the body, 
summarized as bodily humors called doshas, tissues and wastes. Tamas is said to exercise 
the greatest influence on the body’s water aspect, or Kapha dosha(humour)* human and 
gives the body its ability to cogitate and to endure long periods of gestation. 
Rajas influences the psychic plane of existence and works closely with the psychological 
functions of the body. On the physical level, rajas is said to exercise the most influence on the 
body’s air aspect, Vata Dosha (humour)*. It gives us our power to transform what is being 
perceived externally into thoughts, concepts, visions, and  dreams. 


Referred to as the universe’s cosmic intelligence, the third principle sattva, permeates each 
and every minute cell of our being. It functions through our existential states of awareness, 
although it also influences the physical organism to some extent. Within the physical body, 
sattva is said to exercise the most influence on its fire aspect, Pitta dosha (humour)*. Closely 
linked to the universal subtle fire, tejas, the sattva principle maintains the cosmic memory of 
the entire creation- the collective memory of every human- each individual’s memory 
accumulated from the beginning of time through each rebirth until the present time i.e– our 
personal wisdom.
*all the above mentioned doshas will be explained in detail in the coming chapter( tridosh)The 
Panchamahabhutas 
As mentioned earlier the three primordial forces ( sattva , rajas & tamas ) interweave to create 
the five elements( panchmahabhutas) which birth the entire creation.
 According to Ayurveda everything in life is composed of the Panchamahabhutas – Akash 
(Space), Vayu (Air), Jal (Water), Agni (Fire) and Prithvi (Earth). Omnipresent, they are 
mixed in an infinite variety of relative proportions such that each form of matter is distinctly 
unique. Constantly changing and interacting with each other, they create a situation of 
dynamic flux that keeps the world going.
This is a small example: Within a simple, single living cell for example the earth element 
predominates by giving structure to the cell. The water element is present in the cytoplasm or 
the liquid within the cell membrane. The fire element regulates the metabolic processes 
regulating the cell. While the air element predominates the gases therein. The space 
occupied by the cell denoting the last of the elements. 
In the case of a complex, multi-cellular organism as a human being for instance, akash 
(space) corresponds to spaces within the body (mouth, nostrils, abdomen etc.); vayu (air) 
denotes the movement (essentially muscular); agni (fire) controls the functioning of enzymes 
(intelligence, digestive system, metabolism); jal (water) is in all body fluids (as plasma, saliva, 
digestive juices); and prithvi (earth) manifests itself in the solid structure of the body (bones, 
teeth, flesh, hair et al). 
The Panchmahabhutas therefore serve as the foundation of all diagnosis treatment 
modalities in Ayurveda and has served as a most valuable theory for physicians to detect and 
treat illness of the body and mind successfully. For example if a person has more of the fire 
element in the body he may suffer from more acid secretion          (gastric/ digestive), which if 
causing harm in the form of hyperacidity etc., can be controlled by giving him food which 
contains more of jala (water) mahabhuta in it like sugarcane juice etc.
Table – 1
Panch 
Mahabhutas 
Sense 
Organs 
Sensory 
Faculty 
Properties 
Actions 


Space 
Ears 
Hearing 
*Creates natural space 
in the body
Produces softness, lightness 
and porosity 
 
 
 
* No distinct taste 
 
Air 
Skin 
Touch 
*Light, clear and dry.
Creates dryness, lightness and 
wasting
 
 
 
*Governs breathing, 
movement of eyelids, 
joints, and other motor 
functions. 
 
 
 
 
*slightly bitter taste 
 
Fire 
Eyes 
Sight 
*Rough & bright 
Helps in digestion,  improves 
eye sight 
 
 
 
*Controls temperature 
and luster of body 
colour. 
 
 
 
 
*Pungent taste 
 
Earth 
Nose 
Smell 
*Heavy, immobile, 
compact & rough.
*Increases firmness & strength 
of the body
 
 
 
*Controls organs as 
teeth, nails, flesh, skin, 
tendons & muscles.
*Acts as a nutrient,  and 
purgative 
 
 
 
*Sweet taste. 
 
Water 
Tongue 
Taste 
*Cold, heavy fluid
*Imparts glossiness.
 
 
 
*Slimy, fat and sweat 
by nature
*Enhances fluid content & 
purgative
 
 
 
*Sweet & astringent, 
sour & saline taste. 
*Acts as nutrient,  purgative. 
Language of the Doshas)
The  Physical, psychic and cosmic language of the body is created from the circadian rhythm 
of the universe set in motion some billions of years ago when the five great elements were 
born. Space, air, fire, water and earth, the first material for life, are the basis of the Vedic 
sciences. In Ayurveda human physiology and anatomy is rooted in bodily humors (doshas) 
tissues (dhatus) and wastes (malas). These three principles support all of life and are more 
than the physical substance of our anatomy. 
Doshas are three in number called Tridoshas (tri meaning three and doshas being the basic 
physical energies/humors) . They are the primary and essential factors of the human body 
that govern our entire physical structure and function. Derived from the Panchmahabhutas 
(five elements), each dosha – which like the elements cannot be detected with our senses 
but their qualities can be. They are the combination of any two of the five bhutas (five 
elements) with the predominance of one. Called Vata, Pitta and Kapha in Sanskrit, these 
three are responsible for all the physiological and psychological processes within the body 
and mind – dynamic forces that determine growth and decay. Every physical characteristic, 
mental capacity and the emotional tendency of a human being can therefore be explained in 
terms of the tridoshas.


When existing in the body of all living organisms, the five elements congregate in a certain 
pattern and are known in Sanskrit as doshas, the literal meaning of which is, “that which is 
quick to go out of balance.” Doshas imply that the human system maintains a delicate 
balance, its dynamic elemental composition always being on the verge of disorder.
The doshas are a classic example of energy and matter in dynamic accord. All matter born 
from energy remains intricately woven within its core nature of energy. In a state of balance or 
equilibrium, doshas are considered an energy force in that we cannot visibly detect them as 
they move through and support bodily function.
For example most of the physical phenomena ascribed to the nervous system by modern 
physiology for example, can be identified with Vata. Just as the entire chemical process 
operating in the human body can be attributed to Pitta, including enzymes, hormones and the 
complete nutritional system. And the activities of the skeletal and the anabolic system, 
actually the entire physical volume of an organism, can be considered as Kapha.
In a state of imbalance or disequilibrium the doshas become visible as excessive mucus, bile, 
flatus, and physical matter. When these early signs of disorder are ignored, imbalances can 
quickly become full-blown diseases. 
In this unique system of explaining health, air and space—both ethereal elements – form one 
of the three doshas called Vata. Here air exercises its power of mobility only when space is 
available.
The elements fire and water form a second dosha called Pitta. Here the bodily water protects 
the heat of the body from burning through. An example of bodily fire is the acid in our 
stomachs, which, if leaked from the stomach, is capable of burning the organism with the 
force of a raging fire. Water is the buffering force that contains the body’s fires.
The elements water and earth combine to form the third dosha called Kapha. Because of 
their mutual density, water gives earth its fluidity. Without water, earth would become 
stagnated and inert. Thus, the Kapha dosha enables a certain fluidity in the body without 
depriving it of its solid support. Thus the three doshas co-exist in all living organisms. 
It is important to realize that these three are forces and not substances. Kapha is not mucus; 
it is the force that causes mucus to arise. Similarly pitta is not bile; but that which causes bile 
to be produced. And they are called doshas – literally meaning `faults’ or `out of whack’- as 
they indicate the fault lines along which the system can become imbalanced. 
It is equally important to understand that the three doshas within any person keep changing 
constantly due to their doshic qualities (explained in the next chapter), the specific lifestyle 
and environment of the person, time and the season. Remember that these three are not 
separate energies but different aspects of the same energy, present together in an infinite 


variety of combination .The degree to which each dosha exists within a person determines the 
individual’s constitution, commonly referred to as body type (prakriti , which will be mentioned 
in the forthcoming pages). 
Each dosha thus shares a quality with another (although there remain slight differences in the 
nature of shared quality). Also, each has an inherent ability to regulate and balance itself, 
which comes from the opposite qualities that arise from the doshas constituent (basic) 
elements. 
When the doshas are in balance i.e. in a state of equilibrium, we remain healthy. As 
Charaka, the great ayurvedic sage, explained: "Vata, pitta and kapha maintain the integrity 
of the living human organism in their normal state and combine so as to make the man a 
complete being with his indriyas (sense organs) possessed of strength, good complexion 
and assured of longevity."
It is only when that there is imbalance within these three doshas that disease is caused. And 
since it is the strongest dosha in the constitution that usually has the greatest tendency to 
increase, one is most susceptible to illnesses associated with an increase of the same.
THE THREE DOSHAS & THEIR BASIC QUALITIES
Table-2
Vata
Pitta
Kapha
(Air and Space) 
(Fire and Water) 
(Water and Earth) 
Light 
Light 
Heavy 
Cold 
Hot 
Cold 
Dry 
Oily 
Oily 
Rough 
Sharp 
Slow 
Subtle 
Liquid 
Slimy 
Mobile 
Sour 
Dense 
Clear 
Pungent 
Soft 
Dispersing 
 
 
Erratic 
 
 
Astringent 
 
 
Eash dosha also has a primary function in the body. Vata is the moving force, Pitta is the force 
of assimilation, and Kapha is the force of stability. 
Vata, the most dominant of the doshas, governs bodily movement, the nervous system, and 
the life force. Without Vata’s mobility in the body, Pitta and Kapha would be rendered lame. 
Pitta governs enzymatic and hormonal activities, and is responsible for digestion, 


pigmentation, body temperature, hunger, thirst, and sight. Further, Pitta acts as a balancing 
force for Vata and Kapha. 
Kapha governs the body’s structure and stability. It Imbricates joints, provides moisture to the 
skin, heals wounds, and regulates Vata and Pitta. Vata, Pitta, and Kapha pervade the entire 
body, but their primary domains are in the lower, middle, and upper body, respectively. Kapha 
rules the (UPPER) head, neck, thorax, chest, and upper portion of the stomach, fat tissues, 
and the joints. Pitta pervades the (MIDDLE) chest, umbilical area, stomach, small intestines, 
sweat and lymph glands, and the blood. Vata dominates the (LOWER) body, pelvic region, 
colon, bladder, urinary tract, thighs, legs, arms, bones, and nervous system. 
Apart form its main site; each dosha has four secondary sites located in different areas of the 
body. Thus each dosha then has five sites considered to be its centres of operation, which 
include the various outreach systems because of which the entire body functions. The doshas 
interact continuously with the external elements to replenish their energy within the body. 
Each of the three doshas’ five sites has a specific responsibility towards the maintenance of 
the organism. 
PHYSIO- PSYCHOLOGICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL NATURE OF THE DOSHAS
Five Airs of Vata
The five sites or centres of operation and systemic outreach through which Vata casts its 
influence on the entire organism are called the five airs of Vata, namely: prana, udana, 
samana, apana and vyana
Air of Respiration: Prana
Prana means ‘life’ is the first air of the universe and of the body. Although located in the body 
between the diaphragm and throat, it not only pervades the region of the heart and chest, but 
also up into the face and brain. Prana aids in the chewing and swallowing of food and 
provides immediate nourishment to all vital tissues of the body. The system is constantly 
being rejuvenated through the natural rhythm of the breath’s inhalation, exhalation, and timely 
retention. The activity of the colon is attuned to the respiration’s rhythm; the main function of 
prana is extracting ‘prana’ i.e life from the digested food and diffusing it into all of the tissues 
in the body. When the colon is disturbed and unable to fulfil its natural ability to extract and 
diffuse prana, this unused prana becomes waste. 
Prana facilitates all movement in and out of the body. It moves in the region of the heart, 
causing it to beat. It carries food through the oesophagus into the stomach. Prana sustains 
the heart, arteries, veins, senses, and our wisdom faculty, (buddhi). When prana cannot 
function properly our very life force is threatened. Respiratory ailments such as bronchitis and 
asthma result. Heart ailments and the impulse to vomit are also related to prana’s imbalance. 


Air of the Throat: Udana 
Udana, the second air of Vata, which means “rising air,” flows upward from the umbilicus 
through the lung and into the throat and nose. Known as the air of ejection, it provides us with 
our vocal powers and clarity of sense perceptions. It also preserves our body’s natural forces, 
such as its strength of will and capacity for effort. 
Udana has the supreme task of keeping track of the number of breaths we expend. 
An equally supreme task is udana’s capacity to preserve memory, both experiential 
(memories gathered within a present lifetime) and cognitive (cumulative memories carried into 
all lives from the beginning of creation through all time). Impairment of udana can result in 
loss of memory, impaired speech, giddiness or heaviness in the head, deep-seated fears, and 
a shortened life span). 
Air of the Stomach: Samana 
Samana, the third air of Vata, is located between the diaphragm and navel. It aids the 
movement of food through the stomach and small intestines, fans the fires of digestion by 
stimulating the production of gastric juices and digestive enzymes and helps in the 
assimilation of nutrients extracted from our food. Samana is the moving force that transports 
these nutrients to the various tissue elements and discharges wastes into the colon. When 
the samana air is disturbed, it can cause mucus accumulation in the stomach called ‘ama’, 
indigestion, poor assimilation, and diarrhoea. 
Air of the Colon: Apana 
The fourth air of Vata, apana, is located in the colon and the organs of the pelvic region. Also 
known as the air of elimination, apana’s primary function is to relieve the body of feces, urine, 
flatus, semen, and menstrual waste. Its down ward pressure maintains position of the foetus 
and the flow of its eventual birth. Apana is the most dominant of the five airs, situated as it is 
in Vata’s primary location. Apana maintains the delayed nutrition of prana in the organism. 
When apana is impaired, diseases of the bladder, anus, testicles, uterus, menstrual problems 
and obstinate urinary diseases, including diabetes, prevail. 
Air of Circulation: Vyana 
Vyana is the fifth and final air of the Vata and is located in the heart. It diffuses the energy 
derived from food and breath throughout the entire organism including the skin. Circulatory in 
nature, Vyana functions in the body’s circulation channels, such as the blood vessels, to 
transport nutritive juices and blood throughout the body. Vyana also carries sweat from the 
glands to the skin and is the force behind bodily expressions such as yawning and blinking. 
When vyana malfunctions, there is dryness of the skin and other body extremities, poor 
circulation, and diseases such as fever. 
Table -3


Doshas 
Site 
Normal function 
Prana 
Heart & Head, between 
diaphragm and throat
Breathing and swallowing of food, life & 
thinking, heart rhythm
Udana 
From umbilicus to lung, throat 
and nose 
Speech,
 
voice,
 
colour,
 
strength, 
immunity,energy, memory,capacity for effort
Samana 
Between diaphragm and navel 
(stomach and intestines)
Helps action of digestive enzymes, 
assimilation of end products of food and 
separation into their various tissue elements & 
waste products.
Apana 
Colon & organs of pelvis 
Elimination of stool, urine,   flatus, semen, 
fetus and menstrual blood. 
Vyana 
Heart 
Diffusion of energy from food and breath in 
the whole body, helps in the functioning of 
circulating channels as blood vessels. 
Five Fires of Pitta 
Pitta, formed from the elements of fire and water, also is said to reside in five sites. These 
sites are the centers of operation and systemic outreach through which the Pitta dosha 
influences the entire organism; they are: pachaka, ranjaka, sadhaka, alochaka and bhrajaka. 
Fire of the Stomach: Pachaka 
Pachaka is referred to in Ayurveda as the first fire of the body. It exists in the small intestine, 
duodenum, gall bladder, liver, and pancreas, and supports the remaining four fires, to be 
discussed below. Pachaka’s main action is to dissolve and digest  the food we eat. It also 
regulates body temperature. Once digestion has taken place, pachaka separates the food’s 
nutritive elements from its waste elements. An imbalance in this first fire, pachaka, causes 
indigestion as well as a revulsion for food. 
Fire of the Blood : Ranjaka 
True to its name, ranjaka, the second fire of Pitta, controls the formation and preservation of 
blood. Located in the liver, spleen, and stomach, ranjaka provides the blood with its colour 
and oxygen. When ranjaka is impaired, bile compounds may appear in the blood and 
diseases such as anaemia and jaundice may follow.
Fire of the Heart: Sadhaka 


The finest of the fires, sadhaka, the third fire, is central to the activity of Pitta. It reigns, along 
with prana, in the heart. With udana, it governs memory and the retention and wellness of all 
mental functioning. When sadhaka is impaired, there may be psychic disturbances, mental 
disorientation, extreme emotional states, and craving for extreme foods, drugs, and so on. 
Fire of the Eyes: Alochaka
Alochaka, the fourth fire of Pitta, exists in the pupils of the eyes. It  gives the eyes their lustre 
and diffuses light and its spectrum of colours throughout the body, When the fourth fire is 
vitiated, there is impairment of vision and yellowness may appear in the eyes. 
Fire of the Skin : Bhrajaka
The fifth fire, bhrajaka, is located in the skin, given the skin its lustre and gleam. Bhrajaka 
protects the body from extreme atmospheric conditions and facilitates the assimilation of light, 
wind, water, and oil through the skin. When this fire is disturbed, skin diseases such as 
psoriasis, eczema, and leukoderma may result.
Table -5
Doshas 
Site 
Normal function 
Ailments caused by its 
vitiation
Pachaka 
Stomach
 
&
 
small 
intestines,gall 
bladder,liver,pancreas, 
Digesting and dissolving of 
food,regulating
 
body 
temperature,separation
 
of 
nutritive
 
elements
 
from 
wastes 
Indigestion, Anorexia
Ranjaka 
Liver, spleen and stomach 
Blood
 
formation
 
and 
preservation  
Anemia,
 
Jaundice 
Hepatitis 
Sadhaka 
Heart 
Memory and other mental 
functions. 
Psychic disturbances, 
Cardiac
 
diseases, 
mental
 
disorientation 
and extreme emotional 
states  
Alochaka 
Eyes 
Vision, lusture of eyes 
Impairment of vision, 
yellowness of eyes 
Bhrajaka 
Skin 
Colour and glaze of the skin 
Leucoderma, Other skin 
diseases eg psoriasis, 
eczema 


Pitta Dosha Imbalance
All the above mentioned functions of pitta and its various subtypes are executed when they 
are in their balanced state. Due to various reasons *pitta gets imbalanced and causes the 
following results. If pitta dosha is in excess it results in:
Table -6
Ambition
Hate
Anger
Jealously
Envy
Judgemental or critical tendencies
Fear of Failure
Lack of discernment
Sarcastic speech and actions
Pride
Skepticism
Burning sensations
Excessive thirst 
Craving for cold
Loss of sleep
Fever 
Frustration
 
Decreased Pitta results in:
Indigestion
Loss of luster in the skin
Abnormal loss of body heat
Irregular bowel movements.
Five Waters of Kapha 
Kapha, formed from the elements water and earth, also manifests in five doshic sites, through 
these centres of operation and systemic outreach it influences the entire organism. The five 
waters of Kapha are: kledaka,  avalambaka, bodhaka, tarpaka and slesaka.
 
Water of the Stomach: Kledaka
The first water of Kapha, kledaka, originates in the stomach. It is the cause of mucus 
formation in the body. Most important of the waters, kledaka’s moist foamy liquid aids 
digestion, liquefies foods, and nourishes the remaining waters of Kapha. When the first water 
is aggravated, the digestion process becomes impaired, heaviness of the abdomen prevails, 
and nausea may also occur.
Water of the Heart : Avalambaka
The second water of Kapha, avalambaka, resides in the chest and heart. It provides a plasmic 
( fluid ) tissue covering to the heart, thus insulating it from heart & acting as a shockabsorber. 
Avalambaka also provides the limbs with their energy. When this water is disturbed, laziness 
and lethargy ensure. Heart originating diseases such as rheumatic fever and pains in the 
pericardium(tissue around the heart) may also occur.


Water of the Tongue: Bodhaka 
Bhodhaka, the third water of Kapha, is the one which joins the five waters of body’s river. It 
sends water to the tongue and palate and gives the perception of taste. It registers each of 
the six tastes in nature and sends the appropriate impulses to the receiving tissue long before 
the food is ingested. Bodhaka water also liquefies the food.
When this water is disturbed, crimes against the body’s natural instincts are committed, due 
to the impairment of taste. This creates Ama, the foul undigested remnants of food which 
stick in the tissues and promote diseases such as obesity, bulimia, and anorexia. Generally, a 
thick white coating on the tongue indicates the presence of ama in the body.
Water of Head: Tarpaka
Tarpaka, Kapha’s fourth water, flows in the brain and spinal cord. It soothes the sense organs 
and, as a result lubricates and protects the nervous system. When this water is out of 
balance, the sense organs become impaired. Loss of memory and dullness of sensory 
perceptions are the natural result. 
Water of the Joints: Shlessaka 
The fifth water of Kapha, slesaka, is located in the joints. It lubricates the joints and gives 
them their solidity. Slesaka’s unctuous gel protects the joints from heat, and gives ease and 
flexibility of movement. When this water is impaired, the joints may become swollen, painful, 
and dysfunctional.
Table 7
Doshas 
Site 
Normal function 
Ailments caused by its 
vitiation
Kledaka 
Stomach 
Moistens food, which helps 
in digestion, formation of 
mucus in body. 
Impairment of digestion, 
heaviness in abdomen , 
nausea 
Avalambaka 
Chest & Heart 
Energy in limbs , controls 
temperature of the heart
Laziness, Rheumatic heart 
disease
Bodhaka 
Tongue, 
palate  
Perception of taste. 
Impairment
 
of 
digestion,bulimia,anorexia, 
obesity
Tarpaka 
Brain,spinal 
cord 
Nourishment of the sense 
organs, lubrication and 
protection
 
of
 
nervous 
system.
Loss
 
of
 
memory, 
Impairment of function of 
sense organs 


Shlesshaka 
Joints 
Lubrication
 
of 
joints,protection of joints 
from heat  
Pain in joints, Impairment 
of function of joints. 
 
Kapha Dosha Imbalance
                  All the above mentioned functions of kapha  and its various subtypes are executed 
when they are in their balanced state. Due to various reasons *kapha gets imbalanced and 
causes the following results. If kapha dosha is in excess it results in:
Table 8
Boredom
Lack of interest
Carelessness
Secretions from the mouth
Lack of compassion
Lethargy
Greed
Excessive sleep
Feeling lack of support or love
Improper digestive function
Obsessive behavior
Obesity
Unkindness
Nausea
And decrease Kapha gives way to:
Thirst
Cramps
Giddiness
 
Body aches
 
Dryness of mouth
 
* The various reasons for the aggravation of vata, pitta, & kapha are mentioned below in the 
(do’s & don’t’s chart ), factors increasing vata, pitta & kapha & food charts.
Agni
Being the biological fire that governs metabolism, agni encompasses all the 
changes in the body and mind from the dense to the more subtle. Such changes 
include the digestion and absorption of food, cellular transformations, 
assimilation of sensory perceptions and mental and emotional experiences. Agni 
therefore covers all the  sequences of chemical interactions and changes in the body and 
mind. Digestive abilities are directly proportional to the strength of agni.


Agni and pitta are closely connected. While both are hot and light, agni is subtle and dry, 
while pitta is gross & liquid .The heat energy to help digestion contained by pitta is agni. 
Pitta is therefore the container and agni the content. Agni is acidic in nature and stimulates 
digestion. It is subtly related to the movement of vata. In every tissue and cell agni is present 
and is necessary for maintaining the nutrition and auto-immune mechanism which is 
performed by destroying micro-organisms, foreign bacteria and toxins in the stomach and the 
intestines. 
A balanced agni therefore is vital for health. The strength of the body to resist disease and 
also its physical strength are directly related to its heat energy determining the metabolic 
processes of the body. Disturbances to Agni are usually the chief causes of disease leading 
to ama in the body. 
As per Ayurveda there are thirteen types of Agni( 12 dhatwa{tissue}agnis given below, & 1 
jatharagni) in the body and mind according to the conversion and the transformation made. 
The most important of them is the Jatharagni, the gastric fire, responsible for digesting the 
food eaten (can be correlated to hydrochloric acid in the stomach and the digestive enzymes 
and juices secreted into the stomach, duodenum and the small intestines). If digestive agni is 
low and the its capacity is impaired, one may experience pain, discomfort, feeling of 
heaviness or gases gurgling, constipation or loose stools.
*In such  conditions one should practice the sansarjana kram given in the ‘diet’ part of the 
course below,  preventing the accumulation & production of ama( explained in the seed of 
disease, below) & thus diseases.
Dhatus: Bodily Tissues
PHYSIOLOGICAL ANATOMY
Ayurveda has identified seven constituent tissues whereby the body both lives and dies. 
These tissues are called dhatus. Like doshas, dhatus are formed from the five elements – 
space, air, fire, water, and earth. The Sapta (seven) Dhatu (tissues) elements form the pillars 
of the body that form the means of nourishment and growth while providing support to the 
body as well as the mind.
With the help of the digestive fire, the dhatus form the body’s protective biological system. In 
other words, they nourish and defend the internal immune system. If one dhatu is defective, 
each successive dhatu is affected, thereby triggering a chain reaction of impairment 
throughout the entire tissue system.
The concentric formation of dhatus occurs through the ingestion of food substances. Infinitely 
well expressed by Charaka, the use of naturally healthy foods is essential to the quality of 


nutrients responsible for sustaining the dhatus: “The availability and consumption of a 
wholesome diet are essential to promote the healthy growth of a person; likewise, indulgence 
in unwholesome foods promotes diseases.” Equally relevant is the recognition that mental 
unrest or a negative outlook contaminates even the most wholesome foods once these have 
been ingested. 
Through an enormously sophisticated process of chemical reactions (main digestive fire 
called jatharagni)*, spurred by both the energy in the food and the energy vibrations of bodily 
tissues and mental thoughts, the nutrient called ahara rasa is produced. 
The main digestive fire lies in the umbilicus region called jatharagni(macroscopic- can be 
seen as hydrochloric acid,pancreatic juice etc ). Every dhatu has its own digestive fire called 
dhatwa-agni (microscpic-on the tissue and cellular level, cannot be seen), which is a subtle 
part of the jatharagni and is totally dependent on the jatharagni. So if the jatharagni of a 
person is strong and well working all the dhatwagnis will be working properly and the all the 
tissue formation (each cell) will be of superior quality and vice the versa.
The nutrient, once absorbed into the digestive tract, is synthesized by the rasa- dhatu 
digestive fire i.e rasadhatwa-agni to form the first of seven tissues, rasa dhatu. This tissue, a 
milky, sticky, cold chyle resembling the quanlities of Kapha, is the body’s plasma tissue and 
derives its existence from the water element. The proper conversion of the primary nutrient, 
ahara rasa, into plasma is dependent upon the quality of the foods, the state of mind, health 
of bodily prana (prana vayu), the main digestive fire i.e JATHARAGNI and the tissues 
digestive fire (rasadhatwa-agni). In wholesome conditions, these factors contribute to the 
production of plentiful rasa. In unhealthy conditions, they contribute more to the production of 
wastes in the form of mucus i.e ‘ama’, rather than to the production of healthy plasma.
Each of the six subsequent dhatus is fed by the previous dhatu.  Once rasa tissue is formed, 
The nutrients are refined through a  process by raktadhatwa-agni and transported to form 
blood tissue, rakta dhatu. Again, if the nutrients quality is defective, the production of bodily 
waste in form of bile is produced at expense of healthy blood tissue. The main universal 
element comprising blood is fire. Rakta (blood) Dhatu – Regarded as the basic of life, it not 
only nourishes the body tissues, but provides physical strength and colour to the body. 
Not surprisingly, then, once the hemoglobin of the blood is nourished, the nutrients are further 
refined by mamsadhatwa-agni , to provide the fuel necessary to produce muscle tissue, 
mamsa dhatu. Masma Dhatu – The muscle tissues  main function is to provide physical 
strength and support for the meda dhatu.  Muscle tissue’s dominant element is earth, the 
most matter-like element of the five elements from which the dhatus derive their form. The 
body’s muscle tissue shares earth’s nature of matter. Next in the dhatu nourishment is the fat 
tissue from medadhatwa-agni, called medas dhatu which is pervaded by water element. It’s 
main function is lubricating the entire body system.


The bone and cartilage tissue, (asthi dhatu) from the asthidhatwa-agni which is pervaded by 
the elements air and space is next in the dhatu nourishment lineage. Ashti Dhatu – 
Comprising of bone tissues, including cartilages, its main function is to give support to the 
majja dhatu and provide support to the masma dhatu.
The continuously refined nutrients are then transported and converted by majjadhatwa-agni 
to the tissue comprising the body’s red and white bone marrow, majja dhatu. Majja Dhatu – 
Denoting the yellow and red bone marrow tissue, its main function is to fill up the ashti and 
give fullness to  the body.
Finally, the refined nutrient remaining after all these dhatus have been fed replenishes the 
sperm and ovum tissues, shukra and artava respectively by their shukradhatwa-agni. This last 
dhatu, once formed, is fed by the subtle essences of the nutrients refined through the 
synthesis of all the previous dhatus. It is the subtle pervasive essence remaining in the body 
before it becomes the material for procreation. If this dhatu is contaminated or not properly 
formed, due to pollution of the nutrients, the new life formed from the union of sperm and 
ovum is usually adversely affected in some way or other.
Since the dhatus support and derive energy from each other, affecting one can influence 
others. For instance, interference in the manufacture of the plasma affects the quality of the 
blood, which in turn affects the muscle. As mentioned earlier each tissue type has its own 
agni (digestive fire- dhatwa-agni) which determines metabolic changes in the tissues and 
forms by-products*, which are either used in the body or excreted. Menstural periods for 
example are a by-product of rasa. The tissues are also governed by the three doshas, and 
any imbalance in them also causes imbalances in dhatus.
                         
*  see the chart below (table no 9)
Oja: The Glow of Health 
Oja is the cumulative essence remaining after the cycle of dhatu nutrition is complete. Our 
physical, mental, and spiritual strength is totally dependent on oja. Our personal aura, the 
strength and glow we are meant to exude, is produced from an abundance of oja. This is our 
best safeguard against mental and physical disease. As oja thrives, so does the body’s 
natural immunity. Mental clarity and cognitive memories  flourish. If, on the other hand, the 
body has insufficient rasa, the tissues become dry and contaminated, resulting in the 
depletion of oja. Decreased oja also fosters an increase in the ama, or wastes, produced by 
the body thus hampering the physical and mental capacity of an individual.  
Dhatus: Bodily Tissues
PHYSIOLOGICAL ANATOMY


Ayurveda has identified seven constituent tissues whereby the body both lives and dies. 
These tissues are called dhatus. Like doshas, dhatus are formed from the five elements – 
space, air, fire, water, and earth. The Sapta (seven) Dhatu (tissues) elements form the pillars 
of the body that form the means of nourishment and growth while providing support to the 
body as well as the mind.
With the help of the digestive fire, the dhatus form the body’s protective biological system. In 
other words, they nourish and defend the internal immune system. If one dhatu is defective, 
each successive dhatu is affected, thereby triggering a chain reaction of impairment 
throughout the entire tissue system.
The concentric formation of dhatus occurs through the ingestion of food substances. Infinitely 
well expressed by Charaka, the use of naturally healthy foods is essential to the quality of 
nutrients responsible for sustaining the dhatus: “The availability and consumption of a 
wholesome diet are essential to promote the healthy growth of a person; likewise, indulgence 
in unwholesome foods promotes diseases.” Equally relevant is the recognition that mental 
unrest or a negative outlook contaminates even the most wholesome foods once these have 
been ingested. 
Through an enormously sophisticated process of chemical reactions (main digestive fire 
called jatharagni)*, spurred by both the energy in the food and the energy vibrations of bodily 
tissues and mental thoughts, the nutrient called ahara rasa is produced. 
The main digestive fire lies in the umbilicus region called jatharagni(macroscopic- can be 
seen as hydrochloric acid,pancreatic juice etc ). Every dhatu has its own digestive fire called 
dhatwa-agni (microscpic-on the tissue and cellular level, cannot be seen), which is a subtle 
part of the jatharagni and is totally dependent on the jatharagni. So if the jatharagni of a 
person is strong and well working all the dhatwagnis will be working properly and the all the 
tissue formation (each cell) will be of superior quality and vice the versa.
The nutrient, once absorbed into the digestive tract, is synthesized by the rasa- dhatu 
digestive fire i.e rasadhatwa-agni to form the first of seven tissues, rasa dhatu. This tissue, a 
milky, sticky, cold chyle resembling the quanlities of Kapha, is the body’s plasma tissue and 
derives its existence from the water element. The proper conversion of the primary nutrient, 
ahara rasa, into plasma is dependent upon the quality of the foods, the state of mind, health 
of bodily prana (prana vayu), the main digestive fire i.e JATHARAGNI and the tissues 
digestive fire (rasadhatwa-agni). In wholesome conditions, these factors contribute to the 
production of plentiful rasa. In unhealthy conditions, they contribute more to the production of 
wastes in the form of mucus i.e ‘ama’, rather than to the production of healthy plasma.
Each of the six subsequent dhatus is fed by the previous dhatu.  Once rasa tissue is formed, 
The nutrients are refined through a  process by raktadhatwa-agni and transported to form 
blood tissue, rakta dhatu. Again, if the nutrients quality is defective, the production of bodily 


waste in form of bile is produced at expense of healthy blood tissue. The main universal 
element comprising blood is fire. Rakta (blood) Dhatu – Regarded as the basic of life, it not 
only nourishes the body tissues, but provides physical strength and colour to the body. 
Not surprisingly, then, once the hemoglobin of the blood is nourished, the nutrients are further 
refined by mamsadhatwa-agni , to provide the fuel necessary to produce muscle tissue, 
mamsa dhatu. Masma Dhatu – The muscle tissues  main function is to provide physical 
strength and support for the meda dhatu.  Muscle tissue’s dominant element is earth, the 
most matter-like element of the five elements from which the dhatus derive their form. The 
body’s muscle tissue shares earth’s nature of matter. Next in the dhatu nourishment is the fat 
tissue from medadhatwa-agni, called medas dhatu which is pervaded by water element. It’s 
main function is lubricating the entire body system.
The bone and cartilage tissue, (asthi dhatu) from the asthidhatwa-agni which is pervaded by 
the elements air and space is next in the dhatu nourishment lineage. Ashti Dhatu – 
Comprising of bone tissues, including cartilages, its main function is to give support to the 
majja dhatu and provide support to the masma dhatu.
The continuously refined nutrients are then transported and converted by majjadhatwa-agni 
to the tissue comprising the body’s red and white bone marrow, majja dhatu. Majja Dhatu – 
Denoting the yellow and red bone marrow tissue, its main function is to fill up the ashti and 
give fullness to  the body.
Finally, the refined nutrient remaining after all these dhatus have been fed replenishes the 
sperm and ovum tissues, shukra and artava respectively by their shukradhatwa-agni. This last 
dhatu, once formed, is fed by the subtle essences of the nutrients refined through the 
synthesis of all the previous dhatus. It is the subtle pervasive essence remaining in the body 
before it becomes the material for procreation. If this dhatu is contaminated or not properly 
formed, due to pollution of the nutrients, the new life formed from the union of sperm and 
ovum is usually adversely affected in some way or other.
Since the dhatus support and derive energy from each other, affecting one can influence 
others. For instance, interference in the manufacture of the plasma affects the quality of the 
blood, which in turn affects the muscle. As mentioned earlier each tissue type has its own 
agni (digestive fire- dhatwa-agni) which determines metabolic changes in the tissues and 
forms by-products*, which are either used in the body or excreted. Menstural periods for 
example are a by-product of rasa. The tissues are also governed by the three doshas, and 
any imbalance in them also causes imbalances in dhatus.
                         
*  see the chart below (table no 9)
Oja: The Glow of Health 


Oja is the cumulative essence remaining after the cycle of dhatu nutrition is complete. Our 
physical, mental, and spiritual strength is totally dependent on oja. Our personal aura, the 
strength and glow we are meant to exude, is produced from an abundance of oja. This is our 
best safeguard against mental and physical disease. As oja thrives, so does the body’s 
natural immunity. Mental clarity and cognitive memories  flourish. If, on the other hand, the 
body has insufficient rasa, the tissues become dry and contaminated, resulting in the 
depletion of oja. Decreased oja also fosters an increase in the ama, or wastes, produced by 
the body thus hampering the physical and mental capacity of an individual.  
The Dhatus, Upadhatus, and Malas 
At the end of the dhatu feeding chain, a secondary group of tissues is created, called the upadhatu. These 
tissues do not provoke a chain reaction with subsequent upadhatus, as is seen in the dhatus. Also, each 
primary dhatu, after having been fed, produces its own bodily waste called malas. The primary dhatus, along 
with their upadhatus, malas, and physical and emotional functions, are presented in the following chart. 
Table 9
THE PRIMARY DHATUS, THEIR UPADHATUS, MALAS.
PHYSICAL AND EMOTIONAL FUNCTIONS
DHATU
UPADHATU
MALA
PHYSICAL
EMOTIONAL
 
 
 
FUNCTION
FUNCTION
 
 
 
 
 
Ingested 
 
Feces 
Production of 
Joy 
Foods 
 
urine 
Nutrient
 
 
 
 
Substance
 
Rasa (plasma 
tissue) 
Breast milk, 
Mucus 
Nourishment 
Exhilaration
 
menstrual 
secretion
 
 
 
Rasa (blood tissue) 
Blood vessels, 
tendons 
Bile 
Stimulation 
Invigoration 
Mamsa (muscle 
tissue) 
Muscles, skin 
Ear wax,  naval 
lint 
Buffering the
Nurturing 
 
 
 
body 
 
Medas (fat tissue) 
Omentum* 
Sweat 
Lubrication 
Love 
Asthi (bone and 
cartilage tissue) 
Teeth
Body hair, 
beard, nails
Supporting the 
body 
Courage 
Majja (bone marrow 
tissue) 
Head hair 
Tears 
filling of the 
Fullness 
 
 
 
bones
 
Shukra & Artava 
(reproductive 
tissue) 
----
----
Procreation 
Life 
* A fold of peritoneum from another organ that supports an organ.


MALAS: BODILY WASTE 
Malas are the various waste products of the dhatus produced during the normal metabolic 
process. The three primary malas being Purisa (faeces), Mutra (urine) and Sweda (sweat). 
Ayurveda clearly states that only a balanced condition of doshas, dhatus and malas is 
arogya (good health or disease free condition) and their imbalance is the cause of ill health or 
disease. 
Purisa is the waste left back after nutrients of digested food have been absorbed in the small 
intestine.  The consistency of the faeces depending  on the main digestive fire i.e jatharagni 
and apana vayu( refer to the 5th type of vata).This system is known as Purishvahastrotas.
The tridoshas must be in balance to ensure normal evacuation. Pitta and kapha help 
digestion and vata governs the mobility throughout the process. Any imbalance between 
these can lead to various symptoms of abdominal heaviness or pain, flatulence, constipation 
or diarrhea. It may also give rise to diseases as rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, low-back 
pain, asthma, bronchitis as well as stomach ulcers and irritable bowels. 
Mutra is derived during the course of digestion within the human body. The first stage of urine 
formation begins in the large intestine where fluids are absorbed into the system. The entire 
urinary system i.e Mootravaha strotas-kidneys, uterus, bladder and urethra, take part in the 
formation and elimination of urine, regulating the fluid balance in our body and also 
maintaining blood pressure. Any imbalance of increased or decreased urine may result in 
disorders as kidney stones urinary infections, cystitis, abdominal pain and bladder disorders. 
Sweda (sweat) is the third primary mala, and it occurs as a waste product during the 
synthesis of meda dhatu (fatty tissue). Eliminated through skin pores, it controls body 
temperature. The channels responsible for bringing the sweat to skin surface are known as 
sweda vaha srotas. It is essential that normal formation and flow of sweat takes place as 
otherwise it may lead to skin infections, itching/burning sensation over the body, loss of fluid 
balance and reduced body temperature.
The three principal malas are urine, feaces, and sweat. These waste products, like the 
doshas and dhatus, are composed of the five elements. Secondary malas include the 
intestines fatty excretions, earwax, hair (body, head, and beard), nails, tears, and menstrual 
discharge. 
The normal flow of the malas is obstructed whenever the Doshas are increased or decreased 
beyond their natural state. Pancha karma, the five-fold Ayurvedic cleansing therapy, is 
designed to assist the body in the elimination of  The Malas.


Balanced Doshas (humors), healthy Agni (digestive fire), a good state of tissues(dhatus) 
and their proper metabolic end- products(mala) lead to a balanced state of the senses, mind 
and spirit, all of which lead to sound health.
AMA: THE SEED OF DISEASE 
When the body’s digestive fire is not adequate, foods remain undigested and unabsorbed in 
the intestinal tract, and ama is the result. Foul-odour and sticky, ama clogs the intestines and 
other channels of the body, including its blood vessels. Ama prevents the colon in its attempt 
to carry out its primary functions like extracting the vital force, or prana, from the digested 
foods. Ama undergoes a multitude of chemical changes, gradually creating toxins, which are 
released into the bloodstream. As mentioned earlier if the main digestive fire vitiates, so do 
the seven other fires (dhatwagni) on the cellular (tissue) level, thus creating ama in the 
tissues. Excess dosha and toxins (from ama) form a sinister team as they travel through 
different channels (as mentioned in the next topic) with great rapidity to a weakened (disease 
prone/vulnerable) part of the body. Through its toxicity, ama elicits a negative immune 
reaction in the body’s tissues until, finally, disease manifests in these organs. 
All internal diseases begin with ama’s presence in the body, and all externally created 
diseases eventually produce ama. In addition to obstructing the body’s channels, ama causes 
a deterioration in our strength and energy levels. It reduces rasa, inducing lethargy and 
fatigue. Equally crippling to the system is mental ama, gathered through misperception and 
disturbed emotions. Greed, selfishness, possessiveness, stubbornness, anger, and excessive 
desires become mental pollutants, are also ama. 
An early sign of ama in the body is a sticky coating on the tongue. In Kapha types*, the 
coating is usually thick, sweetish, and whitish in colour. Pitta types* tend to have a slimy, 
sourish, yellowish coating and Vata types* have a dryish, bitter, grayish coating. When these 
early symptoms occur, fasting may readily alleviate ama and/or the pancha karma therapies 
administered according to the body type and in the appropriate season. 
* Described in the chapter on body types (prakruti)
Role of Taste 
It is as important to realize that every food's unique combination of attributes will influence its 
taste and the action it causes in the body. With every taste having a different action – as 
detailed below. Astanga Hrdayam clearly describes the characteristics of each of the six 
tastes and problems that might be experienced from its habitual over-consumption. Most 
foods being a combination of two or more of these tastes e.g. coffee is bitter and pungent.
Sour 
Comprised of the elements earth & fire, it increases pitta and kapha and is good for heart 
and digestion. Stimulates agni, moves inactive Vata energy down the pelvic cavity, sets the 
teeth on edge and increases salivation. Excess use may cause looseness and flabbiness, 


loss of strength, giddiness, itching, irritation, a whitish yellow pallor, swelling, thirsts and fever, 
and diseases arising from excess pitta and kapha.
Sweet
Related to earth & water, it increases pitta and vata, producing greater strength in the tissues 
and value to the aged, wounded, emaciated and children. Universally liked, it often adheres to 
the inside of the mouth, giving a feeling of pleasure, contentment and comfort. Good for the 
complexion, hair, senses and oja, it also increases breast milk and helps unite broke parts like 
bones. By its virtue it prolongs life and helps life activities. In excess however it may cause 
diseases arising from fat and excess kapha e.g. obesity, skin infections, unconsciousness, 
diabetes, enlargement of neck glands or malignant tumors etc.
Salt 
The water & fire in salty taste increases pitta and kapha. It clears obstruction of channels and 
pores and increases the digestive activity and salivation. Also responsible for lubrication and 
sweating, it penetrates the tissues. An excess of it may cause baldness and graying of the 
hair, wrinkles, thirst, skin diseases, blood disorders and loss of body strength.
Pungent 
Fire & air in pungent increases vata and pitta and mitigates kapha. Increases hunger, is 
digestive, causes irritation, brings secretion from the eyes, nose & mouth, and gives a burning 
sensation to the mouth. It dilates the channels and breaks up the hard masses. But an excess 
use of it may cause thirst, depletion of reproductive tissue and strength, fainting, contracture, 
tremors, pain in the waist and back, and other disorders related to excess of pitta and kapha.
Bitter 
Air & space being its elements, it increases  pitta and kapha. Drying up moisture from fat, 
muscles, faces and urine. It cleans the mouth and destroys the perception of taste. It is said 
to cure anorexia, worms, bacteria, parasites, thirst, skin diseases, loss of consciousness, 
fever, nausea, burning sensation. But in excess, it increases vata, causing diseases of vata 
origin and depletion of tissues.
Astringent 
Air & earth increases vata and controls increased pitta and kapha. It cleans the blood and 
causes healing of ulcers. Like bitter, it too dries up moisture from fat. It absorbs water, causing 
constipation and hindering digestion of undigested food. Its excess use causes stasis of food 


without digestion, flatulence, pain in the cardiac region, emaciation, loss of virility, obstruction 
of channels and constipation.
BALANCING SEASONAL TASTES AND BODY TYPE TASTES 
The apparent contradictions between the tastes and qualities beneficial to each body type, 
and the tastes and qualities suggested by the cyclical nature of the seasons are to be 
understood in the following way: The tastes which are generally good for each body type may 
become heightened or prevalent in the body and external environment due to seasonal 
influences. For example, of the six tastes, the pungent flavour naturally predominates during 
the summer; although considered a generally good all-year taste for Kapha types, it needs to 
be used in the summer season with discretion. This is because in summer the pungent taste 
prevails out of the six tastes.(According to the seasonal accumulation of the doshas, in 
summers there is decrease of kapha and the pungent taste also causes decrease in kapha 
and increase of vata which may lead to vata/kapha disorders) 
Similarly, the salty taste which predominates during autumn, although considered a generally 
excellent all-year taste for Vata types, needs to be reduced during the autumn season, even 
by Vata types(According to the seasonal accumulation of the doshas in autumn there is 
alleviation of pitta, the salty taste also causes alleviation of pitta  which may lead to pitta 
disorders).
In the early winter, the sweet taste predominates, and although generally an excellent all-year 
taste for Pitta types, needs to be reduced during the early winter, even by Pitta types. 
(According to the seasonal accumulation of the doshas in winter there is increase in kapha 
and sweet taste also causes increase of kapha which may lead to kapha disorders)
Table 16
TASTES OF THE SEASONS
Northerly Phase (Winter Solstice to Summer Solstice)
Season
Dry Tastes
Element Composition 
Dosha
Late Winter
Bitter 
Air and space
Vata 
Spring 
Astringent
Air and earth
Vata & Kapha
Summer
Pungent
Air and fire
Vata & Pitta
Note: the dry tastes are created by the progressive northward movement of the sun
Southerly Phase (Summer Solstice to Winter Solstice)
Season
Dry Tastes
Element Composition 
Dosha
Rainy Season (early fall)
Sour
Earth and fire
Pitta and Kapha
Autumn
Salty
Water and fire
Pitta
Early Winter
Sweet
Water and earth
Kapha
Note: the moist tastes are created by the progressive southward movement of the sun
 
Beneficial Tastes According to Doshas
Vata
: 
sweet, sour, salty
Pitta
:
Sweet, bitter, astringent
Kapha: pungent, bitter, astringent


Table 17
SEASONAL TASTE ADJUSTMENTS
 
VATA
PITTA
KAPHA
LATE WINTER
Major: sour, salty, 
unctuous 
Major: sweet, 
sour*, salty,* warm, 
unctuous
Major: sour,* 
astringent, pungent, 
warm, moderate 
unctuous
Minor: sweet
Minor: bitter, 
astringent, cool, 
light
Minor: bitter, salty, 
dry
SPRING
Major: sweet, salty, 
warm, moderate 
unctuous, alkaline
Major: sweet, bitter 
pungent*, warm
Major: pungent, 
moderate astringent, 
alkaline, ward, dry
Minor: sour, pungent
Minor: astringent, 
cool, alkaline
Minor: bitter, salty
SUMMER
Major: sweet, sour, 
warm, moderate 
unctuous
Major: sweet, bitter, 
cool, moderate 
unctuous
Major: bitter, 
astringent, moderate 
sweet, warm, dry
Minor: bitter, salty, 
cool, light
Minor: astringent, 
light
Minor: pungent, cool
RAINY SEASON 
(early fall)
Major: sweet, 
moderate bitter,* salty, 
moderate unctuous, 
warm
Major: bitter, 
astringent, 
moderate salty, 
moderate sweet, 
warm, moderate 
unctuous
Major: bitter, 
astringent, pungent, 
warm, light
Temperate Climates 
Minor: sour
Minor: pungent, 
cool
Minor: salty, sour, dry
 
 
Major: sweet, bitter, 
salty,* warm, 
moderate unctuous
 
Tropical and 
Semitropical
Major: sweet, salty, 
moderate unctuous, 
warm
Minor: astringent, 
pungent
Major: moderate 
salty,* pungent, bitter, 
warm, moderate 
unctuous.
Climates
Minor: bitter, pungent
 
Minor: astringent, dry


AUTUMN
Major: sweet, sour, 
warm, light
Major: sweet, bitter, 
astringent, cool, 
light
Minor: salty, 
astringent
Minor: pungent
Major: bitter, 
astringent, moderate 
sweet, warm, light
EARLY WINTER
Major: salty, bitter,* 
moderate sour, warm 
unctuous
Major: bitter, 
astringent, 
moderate pungent,* 
warm, moderate 
unctuous
Major: pungent, 
astringent, bitter, 
warm, moderate 
unctuous
Minor: pungent, sweet
Minor: sweet
Minor : salty
*Vata types: If strong tendency to Vata disorders, use bitter as  minor tastes and increase 
the use of sweet and salty tastes during the seasons indicated.
*Pitta types: If strong tendency to Pitta disorders, use sour, pungent and salty as minor 
tastes and increase the use of bitter, astringent and sweet tastes during the seasons 
indicated.
*Kapha types : If strong tendency to Kapha disorders, use sweet,sour and salty as minor 
tastes and increase the use of pungent, bitter and astringent tastes during the seasons 
indicated.
[ vata, pitta & kapha disorders can be seen in the charts mentioning increase in the 
respective doshas in DOSHIC IMBALANCES ]
Table 18
SEASONAL DO’S AND DON’TS
Climates 
DO
DON’T
Late Winter
Sour, salty, moderate sweet, 
unctuous, substantial quantity of 
food 
Excess sweet, pungent, bitter, dry, 
cold, raw foods
SPRING 
Pungent, astringent, moderate 
sweet, moderate salty, warm, 
moderate quantity of food 
Sour, excess sweet, bitter, too 
many fluids, cold 
Summer
Sweet, bitter, astringent, cool, 
moderate unctuous, 
sufficient fluid 
Salty, sour, pungent, hot, 
insufficiency of fluids 
Rainy Season (early 
fall) Temperate 
Sweet, moderate sour, moderate 
salty, warmfood, 
Pungent, bitter, astringent,  light, 
cold food.    excess unctuous 
Troplcal and 
Semitropical Climates 
Sour, salty, unctuous, moderate 
sweet, moderate unctuous, warm 
Pungent, bitter, astringent, excess 
sweet, cold, dry 


Autumn
Sweet, bitter, astringent, cool, light, 
non-oily 
Sour, salty, pungent, hot, oily, 
excess food, heavy foods
Early Winter
Salty, bitter, astringent, moderate 
sour, warm, moderate unctuous, 
Moderate quantity 
Sweet, excess sour, excess cold, 
dry, excess food, raw foods
The “Seasonal Don’ts” may be used occasionally as a minor taste. See previous chart. 
Important Rules And Regulations Related to DIET : 
CONCEPT OF DIET IN AYURVEDA : 
1)
Defination : 
Diet is that – what we eat.
It includes everything we eat or drink. 
Diet is the cause of the very existence, Energy , Colour & ‘Oja’ (immunity/Ultimate purified 
form of all the Sharir Dhatus i.e Body tissues) of every living being on this earth. 
2)         ‘Diet’ is the cause of the birth, maintenance, & destruction of all forms of life on this 
earth. 
From ‘Diet’ only we acquire following things – constant growth, unhampered growth , Energy , 
Wellbeing – Health, Colour, Proper functioning of the Indriyas (Sense Organs). 
Improper dietis the major cause of  all illness according to Ayurveda.
From all above statements one can say that’ In short everything depends 
on diet. 
 
AYURVEDIC CONCEPT OF FORM OF DIET 
According to Ayurveda Body is said to be made up of Panch Mahabhutas (Pentads) & hence 
the food also needs to be Panchbhautic (Made up of Panch (five) Mahabhutas) then only food 
can get digested & be utilized for the growth of Panchamahabhutas (the basic constituents of 
body) which in turn results in growth of body. 
The diet should be made up of all the six tastes i.e. Sweet, Sour, Salty, Hot, Bitter, Astringent. 
It has also been stated that according to the properties diet again can be of  2 types i.e. 
Heavy to digest , & Easy or light to digest . 
Ideal Diet 
The ideal diet should have following properties:- 
1)                   It should increase the strength of body.
2)                   It should be tasty/it should be such that it should be liked by the one, who is 
taking it. 
3)                   It should give energy instantaneously / immediately after taking it. 
4)                    It should have the capacity to withhold the body & give its strength & 
energy to carry on its regular functions. 
5)                   It should satisfy the one taking it . 
6)                   It should be hot, unctuous ,not dry when taken. 


7)                   Should be taken in proper quantity. 
8)                   It should not be incompatible .(mentioned in uneasy combinations below) 
The food (Diet) with all above properties is said to be ldeal diet. 
The Diet which is of all the properties explained above can only do the functions prescribed to 
it. 
3)         FUNCTIONS OF DIET (food) 
1)                   Instantly satisfying.
2)                   Gives strength/energy.
3)                   Maintains the body & maintains the functions of the body . 
4)                   Increases longevity. 
5)                   Increases the Digestive fire , Vitality , Recollecting Power , & Oja . 
4)         TYPES OF DIET
There are four types of diet
i)                    That which can be drunk 
ii)                   That which can be licked 
iii)                 Easily chewable e.g. Rice etc. 
iv)                  Hard food substances which need to be chewed e.g. Sugarcane,                  meat. 
Some have given 6 types in addition to the four stated above : 
v)                   which should be sucked e.g. Mango. 
vi)                  Which needs mastication by teeth, these include very hard food materials e.g. 
various nuts. 
Some have stated 8 types / forms of food / Diet. In addition to the above 6. 
vii)                Those which can only be eaten after being grinded into powder, various pastes etc. 
viii)                Food substances like Suger candy etc. 
 
5)                   According to Nature – Diet has been classified into 2 types Heavy Diet & Light diet. 
Rain water, Raktashali (Red rice), Sathe Sali (Old rice), Mudga, Eina (black deer) &  lava 
(kind of bird und in airid regions) are light / laghu. 
Milk, sugarcane, fresh Rice, Udad( black gram) & meat of the animals from Anoop Desh – 
land with abundant water & plantation (Marshy lands, equatorial Rain forests) are considered 
to be Guru (Heavy)
 
6)         Seven Concept of Diet
The following points are important in the making the Diet complete – (promoting health) or 
improper- (giving Rise to various diseases). 
1)               Basic nature / properties of the food 


2)               Combination of 2 or more food material changes the qualities / properties of 
food material. 
3)              Due to boiling, roasting etc. there is change in the properties of the food. 
4)               Quantity of food we take. 
5)               Region has 2 meanings – the  region where the food is being taken & 
Secondly region means the area the food is been produced affects the 
properties of food material. 
6)               The time when one takes the food. 
7)               The order in which one takes the food. 
 
7)         TIME OF TAKING DIET 
Proper excretion of urine & Stools, Doshas go to the there respective sthanas i.e sites, 
strotasas are clean and free from blockage & indriyas i.e. sense organs are sharp and 
attentive, one feels lightness of body , Belching with proper smell to it. With proper excretion 
of ‘Apaan vayu’ , Heart becomes Nirdosha i.e. we feel like eating & drinking. 
When all the above signs are present then only one should eat; as this is the proper time for 
taking the diet. 
It is said that when the Doshas go to their own respective places  & the Strotaras (channels) 
become clean then only one should take Food. 
QUANTITY OF FOOD TO BE TAKEN
It is decided according to digestive capacity of Agni. If Agni is weak then one should take food 
only once or should take food in less quantity. 
Food taken once i.e. at one time which gets digested completely & properly , is said to be 
Matra/Quantity of food to be taken. 
Considering four parts of the Stomach, one should take food such that 2 parts of the Stomach 
get filled by the food taken, one part to be filled by water or other liquid matter & one part 
should be kept free for the ‘Vayu’ / Gas to move .
One should take diet in proper quantity. The quantity of diet to be taken depends on the 
digestion capacity of the person which varies from person to person & so does the Matra. 
20) The amount of food, which without disturbing the equilibrium of dhatus & doshas of the 
body gets digested as well as metabolized in proper time is to be regarded as the proper 
quantity. 
The proper quantity of food does depend upon the nature of food articles. If the food article is 
heavy only three fourth or half of the stomach capacity is to be filled up. Even in the case of 
light food articles excessive intake is not conducive to the maintenance of the power of 
digestion & metabolism. 


IMPORTANCE OF FOOD TAKEN IN PROPER QUANTITY
Taken in Appropriate quantity, food certainly helps the individual in bringing about strength, 
complexion happiness & longevity without disturbing the equilibrium of dhatus & doshas of the 
body. 
Indicated Food :- 
One should regularly ( can take everyday) take Shastika (a kind of rice harvested in sixty 
days), Sali (oryza sativum), yellow gram , food cooked in Rock Salt, Amalaka (emblica 
officinalis), Rain Water, Ghee, Meat of animals dwelling in arid climate & Honey. 
Contradicted Food : 
One should not regularly take heavy articles such as dried meat, dry vegetables, lotus 
rhizomes & lotus stalk. One should never take meat of a diseased animal. Moreover, one 
should not regularly take boiled buttermilk, inspissiated milk with pork, beef, meat of buffalo 
with fish curd, & barley.
ORDER IN WHICH ONE SHOULD TAKE THE DIET
First, one should eat food of sweet taste for the purpose of Vata Pitta pacification. Sweet taste 
is helpful for pacification of vata dosha present in the digestive tract or intestines. 
Then one should take sour & salty substances for they do the function of increasing the 
digestive juices. Lastly one should take food of bitter and pungent taste for the purpose of 
pacification of ‘Kapha’ .
One should take fruits like pomegranate first in the diet. Then one should take liquid material 
& then lastly semisolid & solid food. 
EIGHT FACTORS DETERMINING THE UTILITY FOOD.
The Eight factors which determine the utility or otherwise of various types of food are.
1)         nature of food articles
2)         method of their processing
3)         combination
4)         Quantity
5)         Habitat
6)         Time
7)         Rules governing intake of food.
8)         Wholesomeness to individual who takes it.
21)     RULES FOR TAKING FOOD
Healthy individuals as well as patients should observe the following:
While having food articles which are most wholesome by nature; one should eat only that 
food in proper quantity which is hot, unctuous & not contradictory in potency & that too after 
the digestion of the previous meal, food should be taken in proper place with all the 
accessories, without talking & laughing with concentration of mind & paying due regard to 
oneself , not too fast or too slowly. 


Important Rules And Regulations Related to Diet  
1)       Eat to live but don’t live to eat. 
2)       Eat food which is beneficial.
3)       Eat food in a moderate quantity. 
4)       Don’t eat food, properties of which are not known to you.  
5)       Don’t eat food in a hurry or when you are in a disturbed state of mind, full of tensions, 
strains, and emotional outbreaks. Regain peace of mind and then enjoy food with happy and 
hearty mood. 
6)       Wash your hands, feet and mouth, using clean utensils in a clean place which is well 
lighted and well-ventilated. 
7)       Fill half quantity of stomach with food, one fourth quantity with water and liquid 
substances and keep the remaining one fourth for air. 
8)       A person who takes only one full meal a day is called Yogee (or Yoga – practitioner). He 
takes light breakfast in the morning and the healthy and happy life. 
9)       A person who takes two full meals in a day is called ‘Bhogi” i.e. a lusty and greedy 
person who lives mostly to eat and suffers from illness and or ill health from time to time. 
10)  A person who takes full meals more than two times is called Rogee or a sick person. He 
a gluttonous person and lives only to eat. He is always sick and away from health. 
11) Don’t do yogic exercises immediately after taking food. It is safe to do them three hours 
after taking food. It is better therefore to do Yogic exercise  early morning or in the evening 
when the stomach is empty. 
12) Don’t take food immediately after doing yogic exercises, but one hour after doing them. 
13) Don’t go to bed immediately after taking supper wait for  a minimum of  one hour after it. 
14) According to Ayurveda well balanced diet consists of food stuffs having six tastes namely 
Sweet, Sour, Salty, Pungent, Bitter and Astringent. 
Diet and Mind : 
Yogic and Ayurvedic aspects. Modern Dietetic consideration is only related to body. But it is a 
uniqueness of Yogashastra and Ayurveda which shows intimate relationship between diet and 
mind. Both the sciences assert with proofs that diet affects mentality of a human being. Satva 
(virtue), Raja (Aggressive desire) and Tama (Ignorant sloth) are the basic qualities of mind. 
Satvaguna is always strengthening, invigorating and vitalising. Satvaguna expresses 
essence, understanding, purity, clarity, compassion and love. Rajoguna implies movement, 
aggressiveness and extroversion and it operates on a sensual level. Tamoguna manifests 
ignorance, inertia, heaviness and dullness. 
Satvaguna is a positive virtue and it strengthens and stabilizes mind. Rajoguna and 
Tamoguna are negative attributes which destabilise and weaken the mind. Yet all the three 
attributes are required of course in a balanced state and having a strong control of satvaguna 
are necessary for normal functioning of the mind. 


As the final goal of yoga practitioner is elevation and uplifting of mental faculties to attain 
eternal bliss or moksha he/she should do everything to go on increasing his satvaguna 
through proper diet and good behaviour. Yoga becomes the destroyer of all woes and sorrows 
and can be accomplished only by him who is regulated and moderate in diet and recreation, 
regulated in speech and actions, and regulated in thinking and sleeping too.
The Taste Process
The first subjective experience of a substance on the tongue is taste (rasa). A short time later, 
one feels heating or cooling energy (virya). Finally the substances have an action on urine, 
fasces and sweat (vipak). For instance, for hot chilli peppers, one immediately experiences 
its pungent taste (rasa) and heating energy (virya) , observing a burning sensation in the 
faces and urine (vipaka) . 
Virya – Heating or Cooling Energy
When any medicinal herb or food substance is put in the mouth, the first experience is its 
taste. Later, and in some cases immediately, you feel its heating or cooling energy, either in 
the mouth or stomach. This change is all due to its action or potent energy called Virya.
By experience, one can form general rules about what a taste "feels like" in the body. For 
example, the sweet taste has a cooling energy, due to its heaviness. This action provokes 
kapha and is pleasing to pitta and vata. But there are occasional exceptions to this rule. 
Honey  is  sweet but have heating energy. This unexpected effect is termed Prabhav. In this 
same way, sour taste is usually heating expect in the instance of lime, which is cooling.
Vipak – Post-Digestive Effect
The final post-digestive effect of the taste on the body, mind and consciousness is called 
Vipak. While sweet and salty taste have a sweet vipak, sour taste has a sour vipak, but that 
of pungent, bitter and astringent tastes are all pungent. Knowledge of the energy and post-
digestive effect of food or medicinal herbs makes understanding of its action on bodily system 
easy. This knowledge being essential for both healing and cooking.
Prabhav – Specific Unexplained Action
When two substances of similar taste, energy and post-digestive effect show entirely different 
action, it is called prabhav. There is no logical explanation for this.  All gem stones, crystals 
and mantras aid healing due to their prabhav.
Prabhav is therefore the specific, dynamic, hidden action of the awareness present in the 
substance.


Diet Planning 
Choice of Food
In planning the diet it is necessary to know which food to have or avoid based on ones 
personal doshic constitution or imbalance. For easy reference therefore some of the 
acceptable and avoidable items for each doshic type has been listed below:
Table 19
Fruits
Vata
Pitta
Kapha
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
apples
Avocades
apples(sour)
apples(sweet)
bananas
apples
dates
grapes
berries(sour)
berries(sweet)
dates
berries
figs (dry)
lemons
cranberries
coconuts
grapes
cranber
ries
pomegranate
bananas
strawberries
dates
water melons
pomegr
anates
raisin
sweet oranges
banana
figs
sweetners
dried 
fruits
pears 
Plum
lemon
avocados
melons
strawbe
rries in 
small 
amount
s 
 
figs (fresh)
peaches 
sweet melons
mango
 
 
mango 
 
plums
coconut 
 
 
 
 
pomegranates 
 
 
Dairy
Vata
Pitta
Kapha
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
cheese
dairy
yogurt
fresh ghee
milk
just a 
little 
dairy
cow’s milk
Fresh, whole
sour cream 
fresh whole un-
homogenized 
milk 
clarified butter 
cheese 
goat 
milk 
and 
ghee in 
modera
tion 


powdered
un-homogenized 
milk
 
 
 
 
yogurt
Ghee
 
  
 
  
 
little butter
 
 
 
 
 
white meat 
(chicken, fish or 
turkey – baked or 
broiled)
 
 
 
 
 
chicken broth
 
 
 
 
Grains
 
Vata
Pitta
Kapha
 
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
 
Barley
white or brown 
basmati rice
Corn
white or brown 
basmati rice, 
wheat
Bread(with 
yeast)
barley 
buckwh
eat 
cousou
s millet
 
corn
wheat
millet
barley
oat(cooked)
muesli
 
cereals
Oats
oat(dry)
oat bran
wheat
oats
 
granola
quinoa 
quinoa
oats
white rice
oat 
bran
 
millet
 
polenta 
wheat or wheat 
bran
cane 
small 
amount 
of 
wheat
 
tapioca 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meat
 
Vata
Pitta
Kapha
 
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
 


turkey
white meat 
(chicken, fish and 
turkey - baked or 
broiled)
meat
rabbit
chicken broth 
chicken
pork
 
ducks
lamb
 
eggs
 
 
pork
 
 
salmon
 
 
sardines
baked or broiled 
chicken, turkey or 
white fish in 
moderate 
amounts 
beef
fresh 
water 
fish
 
buffalo
shrimp
 
chicken
rabbit
 
duck
venison 
 
small 
amount 
of white 
meat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vegetables
 
Vata
Pitta
Kapha
 
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
 
Cabbage(
raw)
beets
Beet
asparagus
Cucumber
asparag
us
 
Cauliflow
er(raw)
cauliflower(cooke
d)
greens
broccoli
Olives
beets
 
Peas
Leeks
Carrots
cabbage
Potato
bitter
 
Potatoes
carrots
Garlic
cucumber
Pumpkin
melons 
Spinach
asparagus
Green Chillies
cooked onions
Spaghetti
broccoli 
Eggplant
cilantro
Onion
sweet
Squash
beet 
greens
 
Mushroo
m
fennel and a little 
bit of garlic
Peppers
potatoes
Tomato(raw) 
cabbag
e
 
Raddish(r
aw)
green beans
Prickly pear
sprouts
 
garlic
 
Spinach
greens chillies
Radishes
squash and a 
small amount of 
okra and 
cauliflower 
 
fennel
 
Tomatoes
(raw) 
Okra
Spinach
 
 
carrot
 
 
parsnips
Turnips
 
 
horsera
dish
 
 
pumpkins
 
 
 
leafy 
greens
 
 
radishes( 
preferably 
cooked) 
 
 
 
leeks
 
 
 
 
 
 
lettuce
 
 
 
 
 
 
okra
 


 
 
 
 
 
cooked 
onions
 
 
 
 
 
 
spinach 
 
 
 
 
 
sprouts 
 
 
 
 
 
squash 
 
 
 
 
 
turnip 
and a 
small 
amount 
of 
artichok
e, 
burdock 
root 
and 
brussel
s 
sprouts 
 
 
 
Spices
 
Vata
Pitta
Kapha
 
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
 


Carawas  
 
Ajwan
Ajwan
Black pepper
Almond extract
Anise
cardamom
Aruise
Asafoctida
coriander
Basil
Basil
seeds
Bay leaf
Bay leaf
cinnamon
Black pepper
Garlic
cilantro
All spices are 
good.
Ginger
fennel seeds
cilantro, cummin, 
corriander and 
fennel seeds, 
turmeric and 
asafoetida(hing) 
Mace
fresh basil
 
Pippai
dill
 
Mustard
turmeric and a 
small amount of 
cumin and fresh 
ginger 
 
Seeds    
 
 
 
 
Salt   
chillies, 
ginger, 
cinnam
on, 
clove, 
fenugre
ek and 
bay 
leaves
 
Ajawan 
Arvise
 
Asafoeti
da
 
Bay leaf 
Carawa
y
 
Cinnam
on
 
Dill
 
Mace
 
Nutmeg 
Saffron  
 
 
Nuts
 
Vata
Pitta
Kapha
 
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
 


None
small amount of 
almonds
Almonds
pecans and 
sesame seeds 
Cashew
 
Peanuts
 
Pinenuts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sunflower seeds 
and almonds in 
moderate amount 
Almonds
small 
amount 
of 
almond
s ,
 
Black Walnuts
charole 
 
Brazil nuts
 
 
Filberts
 
 
Hazelnuts
 
 
Peanuts
 
 
Pine nuts
 
 
Walnuts
 
 
Uneasy Combinations for all body types
The next important factor requiring attention in the planning of diet is the incompatibility of certain 
combinations of food that disturb the normal functioning of gastric fire and interfere with the equilibrium of 
the three doshas, thereby creating toxins (ama) – the root cause of all ailments. A list of the same is 
indicated below :
Table 20
Milk with
fish, meat, curd, sour fruits, bread containing yeast, cherries, yogurt
Melons with
grains, starch, fried foods, dairy products
Starches with
eggs, tea, dairy, bananas, dates, most fruits
Honey with
when mixed with an equal amount of clarified butter, boiled or cooked 
honey
Radishes with
milk, bananas, raisins
Nightshades with
potato, yogurt, milk, melon, cucumber, tomato, eggplant
Yogurt with
milk, sour fruits, melons, hot drinks, meat, fish, mangos, starch, cheese
Eggs with
milk, meat, yogurt, melons, cheese, fish, bananas
Fruit with
with any other food
Corn with
dates, raisins, bananas
Lemon with
yogurt, milk, cucumbers, tomatoes
THE THIRTEEN CHANNELS OF CIRCULATION 
The body contains numerous channels through which the dhatus, doshas and malas 
circulate, known as strotas in Ayurveda, these consist of both gross channels, such as the 
intestinal tract, lymphatic system, arteries, veins, and the genitor-urinary tracts, as well as the 


more subtle channels, such as the capillaries.( mentioned earlier in ‘malas’ as 
mootravahastrotas etc)
In Ayurveda, a complex system of diagnosis is employed to trace the root cause of disease. 
The diagnosis of all diseases is based on which of the individual doshas are compromised 
and which channels are obstructed. An excess of any one dosha can create a spill-over effect 
in the body. Thus, a disease originating from one vitiated dosha is able to travel through the 
channels to the site of another dosha. Dosha excesses can also create blockages in the 
channels, thereby obstructing their normal flow. 
Men have thirteen groups of channels, and women have fifteen. Of the thirteen common 
groups of bodily channels, the first three are the channels through which the air (or breath), 
food, and water travel; these are governed by Vata, Pitta, Kapha, respectively.
Air Channels-   pranavahastrotas
The body’s air channels originate in the heart and the alimentary tract and conduct pranic 
force and vitality through the respiration and circulation systems. These channels become 
impaired by the suppression of natural bodily urges, by ingesting dry or stale food, and by 
excessive physical exertion. Symptoms expressed by vitiated air channels are shallow and 
restricted breathing, fear, anxiety, and nervous tension.
Food Channels-   annavahastrotas
Food channels originate in the stomach and carry food through the digestive system. 
Untimely or indiscriminate eating, unhealthy foods, and low digestive fire cause vitiation of 
these channels. The symptoms of afflicted food channels are loss of appetite, indigestion, 
vomiting, anorexia, greed, and possessiveness. 
Water Channels-   udakavahastrotas
Water channels originate in the palate and pancreas, and regulate the body’s fluid. 
Obstruction of these passages is caused by excessive exposure to heat, excessive use of 
alcohol or other addictive substances, and ingesting very dry foods. The symptoms of vitiation 
are excessive thirst, dryness of lips, throat, tongue and palate, as well as selfishness and 
dullness.
The following seven groups of channels service each of the body’s seven dhatus. Like the 
dhatus, the nature of these channels range from the most gross (megascopic) to the most 
subtle (Microscopic cellular level)
Rasa (Plasma) Channels- rasavahastrotas
Plasma channels begin in the heart and its several blood vessels and transport chyle and 
plasma to the rasa (plasma) dhatu (all over the body). Obstruction of these passages is 
caused by stress, grief, and excessively cold and heavy foods. The symptoms of vitiations are 
anorexia, drowsiness, nausea, fainting and anaemia, impotency, stress and grief. 


Rakta (Blood) Channels- raktavahastrotas 
Blood channels originate in the liver and spleen and transport blood to the rakta dhatu (all 
over the body). This group of channels is often referred to as the circulatory system. Vitiation 
of this system is caused by hot and oily foods, excessive exposure to the sun or fire, and 
exposure to radioactivity. The symptoms of vitiation are skin diseases and rashes, abscesses, 
excessive bleeding and inflammation of the genital organs and anus. The emotional 
symptoms are anger, dullness, and aggressiveness. 
Mamsa (Muscular) Channels - mamsavahastrotas
Muscular channels, which originate in the ligaments, tendons, and skin, supply nutrients to 
the muscle dhatu (all over the body). Impairment of these channels is due to regular intake of 
heavy, greasy foods, excessive sleep, sleeping after meals, and sedentary lifestyle. The 
symptoms of vitiation are usually benign tumors produced by the muscular system, tonsillitis, 
a swollen uvula, hemorrhoids, and swelling of the thyroid glands and adenoids. The emotional 
symptoms are lack of mental clarity and nervous tension. 
Meda (Fat) Channels - medavahastrotas
Fat channels, commonly known as the adipose system, originate in the kidneys and the 
omentum. They supply fat tissue ingredients to the Meda dhatus (all over the body). Vitiation 
of this system is due to suppression of digestive activities, and excess of fatty foods, alcohol, 
and other addictive substances. The symptoms of affliction are generally diabetes, urinary 
disorders, and possessiveness. 
Asthi (Bone and Cartilage) Channels - asthivahastrotas
Bone and cartilage channels, commonly known as the skeletal system, begin in the hipbone 
and supply nutritive ingredients to the asthi (bone and cartilage) dhatus (all over the body). 
Affliction of these channels is generally caused by excessive activity, friction of the bones, and 
excessive intake of food which is e dry, cold or stale. Some symptoms of vitiation are dry, 
flaky nails and decaying teeth, painful joints, dry and thinning hair, and feelings of deprivation 
and fear. 
Majja (Bone Marrow) Channels - majjavahastrotas
The bone marrow channels, commonly referred to as the central nervous system, supply the 
marrow and nerve tissue nutrients to the Majja (bone marrow) dhatus (all over the body). In 
Ayurveda, the marrow is not only the matter found in the bone encasement (called white and 
red marrow), but is also found in the brain and spinal cord. Impairment of the bones and joints 
is generally caused by consumption of uneasy combination foods, such as the use of animal 
foods with milk, or hot and cold substances taken together, trauma and injury, which, in turn, 


affect the bone marrow. The symptoms of vitiation are fainting, dizziness, loss of memory, 
blackouts, and compound abscesses.
Shukra (Ovum and Sperm) Channels - shukravahastrotas
The ovum and sperm channels are subtler than the nine preceding channel groups. 
Originating in the testes and ovaries, these channels are ordinarily referred to as the 
reproductive system. They transport the semen, ovum, and ojas essence to the male and 
female tissues. Affliction of these passages is normally the result of unwholesome activities 
such as excessive or suppressed sex, unnatural sex, sex at improper times like during 
menstruation and pregnancy, drug addictions, and abortions. The symptoms of vitiation are 
impotency, infertility, and defective pregnancy. The emotional symptoms are sexual perverted 
indulgences, selfishness, and aggression.
The remaining groups of channels common to both the male and female are the body’s three 
elimination systems.
Urinary Channels - mootravahastrotas
The urinary channels being in the kidneys and bladder eject urine from the body. Impairment 
of these passages is caused by the suppression of urination. The symptoms of vitiation are 
generally excessive, scanty, or frequent urination, as well as fears, anxieties, and 
nervousness.
Excretory Channels - purishvahastrotas
The excretory channels ordinarily referred to as the excretory system, originate in the colon 
and rectum. They evacuate feces from the body. Vitiation of these channels is caused by 
weak digestive fire, eating before the previous meal is digested, suppression of defecation, 
and ingesting food of opposite quality. The symptoms of affliction are usually diarrhea, 
constipation, or excessively hard stools. The emotional symptoms are execessive attachment, 
dullness, and fear. 
Sweat Channels - swedavahastrotas
The last of the excretory channels, commonly known as the sebaceous system, originate in 
the fat tissue and hair follicles, and expel sweat from the body. Affliction of these channels is 
caused by excessive activity, heat, spicy foods, acidic foods, excessive alcohol, other 
addictive substances, grief, fear and anger. The symptoms of vitiation are excess perspiration 
or no perspiration, rough and dry skin, burning sensation of the skin, aggressiveness, or 
dullness.
Female Channels


Two additional channels exist within the female body: the menstrual channel, which expels 
blood, secretions and tissue debris from the uterus, and the breast milk channel, which 
carries milk to the nourishing mother’s breast. These two channels are both part of the 
plasma channel, which supply the plasma dhatus (rasa dhatu). 
When the channels are blocked, their corresponding doshas/dhatus/mala and updhatus 
become vitiated. (as mentioned before air, food and water channels are governed by vata, 
pitta and kapha respectively, also refer to the chart of primary dhatu, updhatu and mala) The 
cleansing therapies of pancha karma restore order to the system by clearing away to 
obstacles so that the doshas can flow as they should.
Ayurvedic Body Types
PRAKRITI
The Ayurvedic texts provided specific guidelines to help us identify our constitutional nature. 
These guidelines enable us to live wisely on the earth while safeguarding our health. From 
the three doshas, Vata, Pitta, and Kapha, seven body types were originally identified. Our 
body type, which is determined at birth is our constitutional nature, our prakriti. This prakriti is 
derived from the particular combinations and permutations of the five elements in the sperm 
and ovum that exist during conception (ref to the chart below). Once birth has made its 
elemental imprint, we cannot alter it without adversely affecting our balance of well-being. 
The human constitution, or prakriti, is comprised of all three doshas. This means that every 
individual has within himself the dynamic forces of Vata, Pitta, and Kapha. The difference 
between individuals is the degree to which the three doshas interact with one another within 
each body type. Only our physio-psychological aspects change, influenced as they are by 
social, environmental, and cultural factors operating in our lives, and as well as by our 
personal choices. 
The Seven Original Body Types 
Originally, Ayurveda defined seven body types. These were Vata, Pitta, Kapha, Sama, Vata-
Kapha, Vata-Pitta, and Pitta-Kapha. The first three types occur in their pure from very rarely, 
so seldom is it that anyone is primarily influenced by one dosha alone. Even more infrequent 
is the Sama dosha (all three doshas in balance).  More common are the combination body 
types, referred to as dual prakriti, i.e. Vata-Kapha, Vata-Pitta, and Pitta-Kapha. In more recent 
times, these three dual types have been expanded to include six dual types. By reversing the 
two doshas within each dual type and considering it a separate type, i.e. Kapha-Vata, Pitta-
Vata, Kapha-Pitta. A person who has both Vata and Pitta dominant may, therefore, be either a 
Vata-Pitta or Pitta-Vata type, depending on which of the two doshas is more dominant. 
Because the body types are the basis, from which all Ayurvedic diagnosis begins, they are 
explained here in some detail. This explanation is also intended to help you better understand 
your own personal constitution.
Elemental Source of Body Types


Rare Body Types
1)
Vata
air/space
2)
Pitta
fire/water
3)
Kapha
water/earth
4)
Sama
balance of all three doshas
*NOTE- The relation between dosha & their elements refer to the chapter on TRIGUNA, table 
no.1, & table no.2
Dual Body Types (original classification)
1)
Vata/Pitta
air/space main; fire/water subordinate
2)
Vata/Kapha
air/space main; water/earth subordinate
3)
Pitta/Kapha
fire/water main; water/earth subordinate
Additional Dual Body Types (recognized by contemporary practitioners)
1)
Pitta/Vata
fire/water main; air/space subordinate
2)
Kapha/Vata
water/earth main; air/space subordinate
3)
Kapha/Pitta
water/earth main; fire/water subordinate
Body Type Qualities
VATA (like wind)
Kapha (like water)
Pitta (like fire)
dry
oily 
hot
cold
cool
oily
light
heavy
light
mobile
stable
intense
erratic
dense
fluid
rough
smooth
smelly
bitter
sweet
sour
astringent
sour
pungent
pungent
salty
salty
Table 10
Characteristics of body types 


For a better understanding of your Ayurvedic constitution and to cross-check the results of the 
test, listed below are the principal physical and psychological characteristics of persons with 
the predominant single dosha constitution.
 
VATA - Physically such people are very tall or very short, non- muscular, with thin and bony 
limbs and have a quick gait with short fast steps. Skin is generally thin, darkish and cool. The 
hair is thin, dark, coarse and either kinky or curly. The face is usually long and angular, often 
with an underdeveloped chin. The neck is thin and scrawny. Nose is small and narrow. May 
be long, crooked or asymmetrical also. Eyes tend to be small, narrow or sunken, dark brown 
or grey in colour, with dull lustre. The mouth being small, with thin, narrow or tight lips. Teeth 
are irregular, protruding, or broken, set in receding gums. And while the voice is weak, low or 
cracked, speech is fast with interruptions. 
Creativity ~ Enthusiasm ~ Freedom ~ Generosity ~ Joy ~ Vitality
Vata people have restless minds and weak memories. They avoid confrontation. Have active 
and sensitive natures and express themselves through sport and creative pursuits. Likely to 
be artistic and creative with a good imagination, they will sometimes overindulge in pleasures. 
And are sexually the very active. Fearful, worrisome and anxious they are into questioning, 
theorising and over-analysis. Often dissatisfied with and unable to sustain friendships, they 
spend money quickly, often on trifles. With light, interrupted sleep of 5-7 hours a day.
 
PITTA - A moderately well developed physique with muscular limbs and a purposeful, stable 
gait of medium speed. With a loud, strong voice and precise, convincing speech. The skin is 
fair, soft, lustrous, warm, and tends to burn easily in the sun – has freckles, many moles, and 
a tendency to rashes. And the bodies are hot and sweaty. Characterised by fine and soft, 
either fair or reddish/ light brown hair that tends to grey soon. Face is heart-shaped, often with 
a pointed chin. While the neck is proportionate and of average size. A neat, pointed, and 
average sized nose matches the average sized eyes that are either light blue, light grey or 
hazel in colour, with an intense lustre which gets red in summer or after bathing. The mouth 
being medium, with average lips and medium-sized, yellowish teeth. 
Ambition ~ Concentration ~ Confidence ~ Courage ~ Enthusiasm for knowledge ~ 
Happiness ~ Intelligence 


Pittas have an intellectual and precise disposition due to a very alert, focussed mind. Sharp 
and knife-like in anger, they are irritable, jealous and aggressive by nature. Discriminating and 
judgemental, they are articulate, learned and proud. With a developed sense of responsibility, 
they can take decisions and organise affairs well. Argumentative, but with a sense of humour, 
their selectively excellent memory makes them fast learners. Moderately passionate in their 
sexual pursuits, they spend moderately, usually on luxuries.
 
KAPHA - A thick, broad, well-developed frame and large, long limbs go well with a pleasant, 
deep and resonant voice with low, slow, rhythmic speech. The skin is usually thick, oily, pale 
or white and cold. Plentiful, thick, wavy, lustrous and generally brown/black hair is set on a 
large, rounded and full face. The neck is solid, with a near tree-trunk quality. A large, rounded 
nose and large, attractive, blue or light brown / black  color of eyes are found ,in a mouth that 
is large with big, full lips. Teeth too are big and white and set in strong gums. 
Caring ~ Centeredness ~ Compassion ~ Contentment ~ Faith ~ Fulfillment ~ 
Groundedness ~ Patience ~ Sense of being nourished ~ Stability ~ Support ~ 
Tenderness 
Kapha predominated people are calm, steady, considerate - stable, patient personalities they 
are slow to anger. Not easily provoked, once angry they do not calm down easily. They are 
honourable, true to their word and avoid lies. Loyal, forgiving and understanding, they can be 
lethargic, even lazy, if not driven by others. Learning may be slow but memory will be strong. 
Excellent in logical analysis, they take time before reaching conclusions. Long hours of deep 
sleep and a strong, enduring sex drive come naturally. While they do save money, it does get 
spent on food. And there can at times be an element of dullness, given that a kapha mind is 
usually too content to seek fresh mental stimulation
Nurturing Requirements
VATA: Nurtured by the elements fire, water, and earth
moist
sweet
heavy
salty
smooth
sour
hot
PITTA: Nurtured by the elements water, air, space, and earth
cool
sweet       
         
bitter
aromatic
        
astringent


calming
KAPHA: 
Nurtured by the elements fire, air, and space
dry
pungent
warm
bitter
light
astringent
Table 11
Do's and Don'ts
REMEDIES
VATA
PITTA
KAPHA
Food 
Warm, well cooked 
food. Sweet, sour 
and salty tastes
Warm to cool rather 
than steaming hot. 
Sweet, bitter and 
astringent tastes.
Decreased quantities of warm 
food.Pungent, bitter and 
astringent taste. Healthy Kapha 
types should observe fast one 
day per week. 
Oil Massage
With calming and 
warming oils such as 
Mahanarayan Oil etc.
With cooling oils such 
as chandanbala 
Laxadi oil etc.
With stimulating oils such as 
sahacharadi oil etc.
Exercise 
Moderate exercise 
such as yoga, 
walking and light 
weights
Moderate exercise 
which may include 
jogging, swimming, 
Yoga, cycling and 
weight lifting
Regular and vigorous.
Herbal Dietary 
supplements
Ashwagandha, 
shatavari, haritaki, 
Guggul, Trikatu ,Vata 
tea, Calming Tea.
Haritaki, Bhumiamla, 
Chyavanprash, 
surakta, sitopladi 
churan,pitta Tea.
Guggul, sitopladi churan, trikatu, 
chyavanprash, Kapha Tea.
Factors that increase vata
Exposure to cold , lack of routine in your life, eating too much dry, frozen or leftover food, or 
food with bitter, pungent or astringents taste.
Fasting, too much traveling, too much or inappropriate exercise, suppressing natural urges, 
abdominal surgery.
Not oiling the skin. 


Factors that increase pitta 
Exposure to heat, eating too much red meat, salt, spicy or sour foods. Indigestion and 
irregularity of meals. Exercising at midday, Drugs especially antibiotics.
Too much intellectual work/thinking. Alcohol, Fatigue. Anger, Hate ,fear. 
Factors that increase kapha
Exposure to cold , eating too much sweet ,meat ,fats, cheese, milk, ice cream, yogurt, fried 
food, excessive use of salt. Excessive intake of water , taking naps after meals. Doing nothing 
.Sedative and tranquilizers. Doubts, greed, and possessiveness.  
Determining Your Ayurvedic Body Type
Generally, everyone possesses characteristics from all three categories of body type, 
although one or two will usually predominate. Approach the chart below honestly. Remember 
that your evaluation will be coloured by the qualities of your present lifestyle. Six week after 
making the necessary changes in your diet and daily activities and doing the cleansing  as 
given in the forthcoming pages, re’-do the Body Type chart. The latter response will be more 
in keeping with your true constitutional nature.
Directions : Move horizontally across each of the sections set out in the chart below and circle 
the attributes that you feel most accurately reflect you. Choose at least one from each 
section. Ask a spouse, parent, or friend to assist you with the Emotional Characteristics 
portion of the assessment so that your choices will be as objective as possible. Men are 
advised to seek the assistance of a women – a spouse, a friend, or mother – for both the 
Physical Characteristics and Emotional Characteristics section of the chart. Then, moving 
down each of the three columns, count how many characteristics you circled for each body 
type. Which ever column yields the highest score indicated your Ayurvedic body type. For 
example, if your scores are 15 for Vata, 12 for Pitta and 5 for Kapha, then your Ayurvedic 
body type is Vata/Pitta.
Table 12
BODY TYPE CHART: PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
Dosha
VATA
PITTA
KAPHA
Body Frame
Thin, irregular, very 
short or very tall
Medium, proportionate, 
toned
Heavy, board, evenly 
proportioned
Weight
Hard to gain, easy to 
lose
Easy to gain, Easy to lose
Easy to gain, Hard to 
loose


Skin
Cold, dark or dusky
Warm and reddish, 
sunburns easily
Cool, fair or oily, tans 
easily
Hair
Dry, frizzy, thin, dark
thin, fine, reddish, 
premature, balding or 
graying
Oily, wavy, thick, 
lusturous.
Eyes
Brown, gray or 
unusual color, 
small,nervous eyes
Green, hazel, light brown, 
peircing eyes
Black, blue, dark 
brown, big, sensual 
eyes
Nails
Dry, grayish, 
rough,brittle
Clear, well formed,soft, 
pink 
Square, white, even
Appetite
Irregular
Intense
Consistent
Evacuation
Constipated, irregular, 
small quantity
Loose, regular, large 
quantity,soft
 regular, moderate 
quantity
Sweat
Scanty
Profuse
Moderate
Stamina
Poor, exertive
Moderate, driven
Excellent
Sleep
Poor, variable 
Moderate, light
Long, deep
Activity
High,restless
moderate
Low, moves slow
Sensitivities
Cold, dryness, wind
Heat, sunlight, fire
Cold, damp
Immune 
function
Low, variable
Moderate, sensitive to 
heat
High
Disease 
tendancy
Pain
Fever, inflammation
Congestion, oedema
Table 13
BODY TYPE CHART: EMOTIONAL CHARACTERISTICS
Mental 
characters 
Vata
Pitta
Kapha


Temperament
Fearful,
 
indecisive, 
nervous, perceptive
Angry,
 
intelligent, 
arrogant, successful
 
calm, stable, 
stubborn
Memory
Learns quickly
Learns quickly
Learns slowly
Forgets quickly,quick but 
absentminded
Forgets slowly, sharp & 
clear
Forgets slowly, 
slow but study
Speech
Erratic, talkative,fast
Decisive, 
articulate,sharp
Slow, cautious, 
melodious
Faith
Variable, erratic
Strong, determined
Steady, slow to 
change
Dreams
Flying, fearful, erratic, 
frequent
Fiery,
 
violent, 
intense,moderate
Watery, sensual, 
infrequent ,long 
sequences
Sexuality
Cold, variable
Hot, intense
Warm, enduring
Positive emotions
adaptability
courage
 Love
Negative 
emotions
Fear
anger
Attachment
Superior qualities are allotted to the Kapha body type as far as physical and emotional 
characteristics are concerned. But when body types concerned with more than one dosha is 
concerned, the ‘sama’ type where all the doshas are in equal quantity is the best of all body 
types which is very rare to find.
Dinacharya
In order to keep the tridoshas in a state of healthy equilibrium , digestion & metabolism (agni) 
in proper order, Ayurveda prescribes for each individual a specific daily routine ( dina – day & 
acharya – behavior). The various stages to this daily routine as per  prakriti(constitution), that 
will enable you to make the most out of your life are :
Arising
Since our biological clocks are attuned to the rising and setting of the sun, it is obviously 
better to awake an hour before sunrise in perfect synchronization to the natural clock i.e 
between five & six in the morning. An ideal time to let the body cells soak in the strength of a 
tempered sun to be charged for the day. It increases the life span of an individual and helps 
maintain the equilibrium of doshas in once body. Drinking a glass of Luke-warm water helps 
flush out all toxins accumulated overnight in the body.


Natural Urges
The last portion of the night being ruled by vata – involved in the process of elimination – the 
time before dawn is  best  to eliminate the body's physical waste . Proper elimination also 
helps remove the kapha that naturally accumulates overnight. Defecation once or twice daily 
is the best. Examine your eliminations each morning and if you notice any disturbance 
indicating poor digestion, go on a fast. It will allow the body rest to correct the system before 
disease sets in. 
Never suppress the natural physical urges as elimination, hunger, thirst, sleep, sneezing, 
yawning, burping, crying, vomiting, flatus and ejaculation, for it will lead to discomfort and 
even disease.
ORAL HYGIENE
Oral gargles
Specific oil gargling according to one’s constitution is beneficial for the strength of jaws, depth 
of voice, glow on the face and perfect taste sensation. One who does these gargles never 
gets dryness of throat, cracking of lips, his teeth will be free from cavities and be deep-rooted, 
he won’t suffer from toothache and can chew the hardest of things.
HEAD OIL
One who applies ayurvedic herbal head oil (according to one’s body constitution) on his head 
does not suffer from headache, baldness, hair graying. Strength of his head and forehead is 
specially enhanced, his hair becomes black long and deep-rooted, his sense organs work 
properly, the skin of his face  brightens, applying this head oil produces sound sleep and 
happiness. This oil should be applied lukewarm, at night before going to bed. The best results 
for lustrous & thick hair is when the oil is washed with an ayurvedic herbal shampoo.
OILING OF EARS
Ear diseases due to vitiated vata like lock jaw, difficulty in hearing, tinnitus(whistling sound in 
the ears),accumulation of wax  and deafness( also appear during old age) are prevented if 
ear oil called bilwatailam is used regularly (twice in a month )i.e dropped into the ear. It also 
helps keep the ears clean of wax and other external impurities.
Massage


Necessary for every person, a regular self-massage (before a bath) with herbal oils is 
necessary at least twice a week but needs to be supplemented with professional attention 
(ayurvedic oil massage) occasionally. It makes the skin supple; controls vata by reducing its 
cold, dry, light, rough & erratic qualities, enhances blood circulation, encourages quicker 
removal of metabolic wastes and relaxes the body. The one who practices oil massage 
regularly, his body, even if subjected to injuries or strenuous work is not much injured. He 
remains strong and charming. The ayurvedic oil massage done with proper oil according to 
ones constitution regularly is highly rejuvenating. Follow the normal direction of hair growth, 
massage the scalp and head at least twice weekly and just the soles of your feet if short of 
time
Exercise
Either passive like massage or active like aerobics or both as in yoga postures; regular 
exercise increases the body's stamina and resistance to disease by facilitating the immune 
system, clearing all channels, promoting circulation & waste disposal, and destroying fat. 
Done regularly, it can reduce anxiety . Depending on age & body type, kaphas can go for 
heavy exercises, pittas should do it in moderation (aerobics) and vatas should perform yoga 
and not aerobics. Never exert more than half your capacity. Avoid any kind of exercise during 
illness, just after a meal and without rhythmic breathing. Swimming, brisk walking and jogging 
are excellent options.
Cleanliness - 
EFFECTS OF HAVING A BATH
Bathing is purifying, increases libido and is life-giving. In today’s fast life we use soaps which 
are made of chemicals , these make our skin dry and are harmful in the long run especially to 
children. Done after the herbal oil massage with a proper ‘herbal body scrub’ it removes 
fatigue, sweating and dirt. It brings about strength in the body and is an aid par excellence for 
the enhancement of oja.
Thorough washing of the limbs, face, mouth, eyes & nose purifies the bodies sense organs. 
Best done with a bath in clean water, it should accompany brushing of the teeth (should be 
repeated after every meal), scraping off a toxicated coating of ama from the tongue, 
occasional gargling of salt water with a pinch of turmeric to keep gums, mouth & throat 
healthy. Proper cleaning of the nose and the ears and washing the eyes should be done. 
Keep your hair trimmed, nails filed and wear clean clothes. Ayurveda encourages to use 
perfumes in moderation and feel good.
TIME FOR USE OF COLLYRIUM- rasanjana


One should regularly apply the collyrium made of antimony called ‘rasanjana’, once in every 
five or eight nights as it causes lacrymation of the eyes. 0f all the mahabhutas fire (tejas) 
dominates the eyes, so they are especially susceptible to kapha (which leads to cataract, 
blurring of vision). Therefore collyrium, which alleviates kapha, is good for keeping clearity of 
vision.
The rasanjana must not be applied to the eyes during the day time, as the eyes weakened by 
the drainage will be adversely affected in  sunlight . Thus collyrium should be applied at night. 
Charaka says ‘ As different types of tarnished gold are spotlessly cleaned by means of oil, 
cloth & brush, so also with the use of rasanjana the eyes of human being become spotlessly 
bright like the moon in the clear sky.’
USE OF NASAL DROPS
One should inhale specially prepared oil for nasal drops during all seasons called ‘anu taila’. 
Two drops of this oil should be applied in both the nostrils, after hot water bath or before going 
to bed with a cotton swab or ear bud. 
One who practices this nasal drop therapy called nasyam in proper given time and according 
to the prescribed method his eyes, nose and ears are not effected easily by any disease or by 
any external infection. It prevents hair graying (hair on the head, beard, eyebrows, and 
eyelashes) and hair fall rather they grow luxuriously. Diseases such as headache, facial 
paralysis, lock jaw, rhinitis etc are treated. Being nourished by inhalation of anu taila his veins, 
joints, ligaments and tendons of the head and neck gain greater strength. Their is glow on his 
face, voice becomes sweet, established & stertorous. All his sense organs become clear & 
there is considerable strength in them. Even though a person might be growing older but the 
age is not reflected on his face.
By massaging oil on the feet roughness, lethargy, dryness, fatigue and numbness are 
instantaneously cured. Tenderness, strength and steadiness of feet are effected, eye sight 
becomes clear and vitiated vata is relieved . prevention from sciatica , cracking of feet, 
constriction of vessels and ligaments of feet is ensured if oil massage is done on the feet.
Meditation
Ideal for disciplining the mind and removing stress & strain, it is best done after a quick bath 
to cleanse yourself. Critical in satisfying the mind's hunger, when done well it is so nourishing 
that even the body can survive on less. Control of desire, or mental hunger, is the key to 
longevity. Anything can be meditation so long it is sincere and heartfelt.  


Clothing 
In shielding from extreme temperatures, it tends to reflect the temperament of the wearer in a 
society showing growing preponderance of the same. Should always be light & airy( unless it 
is very cold), and made of natural fibers as cotton, wool, linen or silk.  Since energy is brought 
into the body through the crown of the head and exits from the soles of the feet – extracting 
abnormal heat from the system – the polluted energy usually collects in the footwear. So 
avoid wearing other's footwear, try not to take shoes into the house and walk barefoot 
whenever possible. And wooden sandals are healthier than animal skin or rubber shoes.
*all the above mentioned products i.e oils/ shampoo etc ( according to one’s constitution) can 
be ordered on our website . 
Sound sleep is the key to good health
ANCIENT ayurvedic texts while dealing with right and ideal lifestyle  have discussed three 
pillars of life. They are ahara (diet), nidra (sleep) and brahmacharya (observance of sexual 
discipline). Out of these three, the concept of proper sleep finds mention in the work of every 
author. 
The time spent on sleep is likely to vary according to the age and other situations. On an 
average, it is believed that a man passes one-third of his life asleep. An infant sleeps 20 
hours daily, whereas, on an average, adults require seven or nine hours and an old person 
five or seven hours of sleep in 24 hours. The requirement for sleep also varies individually. 
There are persons who are “short-sleepers” but do not show any sign of illness attributed to 
less sleep .
Physiology of Sleep: 
When the mind including sensory and motor organs is exhausted and they dissociate 
themselves from their objects, then the individual sleeps. 
Effect of Sleep:
Happiness, misery, nourishment, emaciation, strength, weakness, virility, sterility, knowledge, 
ignorance, life and death – all these occur depending on proper or improper sleep. 
According to  Sushruta, a good sleep enjoyed at proper time and for proper period, tends to 
improve the growth, strength, vigor and complexion of the body. It increases the sense of 
well-being by freshening the body and mind and also restores the natural equilibrium among 
different body tissues. So much so that the scope and importance of good sleep has been 
equated with the soundness of health enjoyed by a person. There is no physiological system 
in the body which doesn’t get the salutary effect of sound and soothing sleep. 


Untimely and excessive sleep takes away both happiness and longevity. The same sleep, if 
properly enjoyed brings happiness and longevity in human beings as real knowledge brings 
about spiritual power in a yogi.
Indication of day sleep:
Sleeping during the day time in all season is prescribed for those who are exhausted by 
singing, study, alcoholic drinks, sexual acts, elimination therapy, carrying heavy weight, 
walking long distance; those suffering from phthisis, wasting diseases like tuberculosis, thirst, 
diarrhoea, colic pain, dyspnoea, hiccup, insanity, those who are too old, too young, weak and 
emaciate; those injured by fall and assault, those exhausted by journey by a vehicle,  anger, 
grief and fear, and those who are accustomed to day sleep i.e they are working in night. By 
this the equilibrium of dhatus and strength are maintained and kapha nourishes the organs 
and ensures longevity.
In summer season nights become shorter and vata gets aggravated in the body due to the 
absorption of fluid (adana kala). Therefore, during this season, sleep during the daytime is 
prescribed for all. 
Contra-indications of day sleep: 
Sleeping during the daytime in the seasons other than summer is not advisible as it causes 
vitiation of kapha and pitta. Persons with excessive fat, those who are addicted to taking 
unctuous substances, those with kapha constitution, those suffering from diseases due to the 
vitiation of kapha and those suffering from artificial poisoning should never sleep during day 
time. If one violates the prescription regarding sleep during the day time, he would subject 
himself to halimaka (type of jaundice), headache, timidness, heaviness of the body, malaise, 
loss of digestive power, hridaya-alepa ( a feeling as if phlegm adhered to the heart), oedema, 
anorexia, nausea ,sinusistis, rhinitis, hemicrania, urticaria, eruption, abscess, prutitus, 
drowsiness, coughing, diseases of the throat, impairment of the memory and intelligence, 
obstruction of the circulating channels of the body, fever, weakness of sensory and motor 
organs and enhancement of the toxic effects of artificial poisons. So one should keep in view 
the merits and demerits of sleep in various seasons and situations so that it may bring 
happiness to him. 
Dreams:
After hours of working( physical or mental) our mind & body need rest , so that they are once 
again charged. But when we are dreaming during sleep our mind is still working , it  is’nt 
taking rest. That is why people who dream often are not feeling fresh( mind is not recharged) 
even after long hours of sleep , or they want to sleep more in the daytime. The quality of sleep 
is hampered due to dreams which in turn hampers our thinking/working process & thus quality 
of life in the long run.


Effect of night awakening:
Awakening during night causes roughness in the body; sleep during daytime causes 
unctuousness and dosing in sitting posture does neither cause roughness nor unctuousness. 
Methods and measures to induce a good sleep :
If for some reason or other, one is subjected to sleeplessness, he can instantaneously be 
cured by ayurvedic herbal massage, unction, hot herbal bath, intake of soup of domestic 
marshy and aquatic animals, Sali rice with curd, milk, herbal unctuous substance and herbal 
alcohol, psychic pleasure, smell of scents and hearing sounds of one’s own Ayurveda 
believes that usually it is the vitiated “vata” which disturbs the natural body physiology and 
results in various types of sleep disturbances. Adverse physical situations such as like painful 
conditions, cramps,  an urge to urinate frequently etc can interfere with sound sleep. Social 
situations like an irregular routine, noise, excessive use of caffeine and alcohol and eating a 
very heavy meal close to bedtime may also ruffle the sleep pattern. In most cases, however, 
the core problem is emotional which includes anxiety, stress and depression. 
There are a number of ways which can help a person to fall asleep more easily. The most 
important of these is to establish a bed time “ritual” composed of a daily timetable and proper 
sleeping environment. Short-term sleep disturbances can be overcome by adopting taste, 
samvahana (rubbing the body by hand), application of smoothening ointment to the eyes, 
head massage, comfortable bed, home and proper time. 
simple measures like cutting back on coffee and tea, especially in the late evening hours, and 
avoiding alcohol, which may help sleep onset but causes early morning wakefulness. 
Taking a light and timely dinner, avoiding late night TV programmes and following an exercise 
schedule reduce stress and help bring sound sleep. 
Ayurveda offers many herbs and other classic medicines and herbal therapies( 
SHIRODHARA ) for good sleep and most of these are safe and devoid of any hangover or 
addiction. For mild-to-moderate cases of insomnia, taking twice a day two gm powder of 
ashwagandha, amla, brahmi and shankhpushpi (all crushed in equal parts) is quite helpful. 
Aswagandharishta, Sarsvatarishta, and Brahmi Vati are good classic medicines. Another herb 
called sarpgandha is famous for its somnolent effect, but  all of the above mentioned herbs 
should be used only under expert supervision. 
Except for the cases of senile insomnia and sleeplessness associated with other chronic 
ailments, long-term use of sleep-inducing medicines should always be avoided. 
Causes of Insomnia:


Elimination of dosas in excess from the body through purgation and emesis, fear, anxiety, 
anger, smoking, excessive physical exercise, excess blood letting / loss, fasting and 
uncomfortable bed are causes for insomnia. 
The above mentioned factors along with overwork, stress, old age, diseases, specially these 
due to the vitiation of vatta like colic pain, etc. are known to cause sleeplessness even in 
normal individuals. Some are insomniac even by nature.
Bramhacharya:
It refers to the state of life when any living being refrains from excessive sensuality. This state 
does not mean a complete sexual abstinence but to indulge in sex in such a way, so as not to 
have any adverse effect on health. 
Ayurveda insists on refraining oneself form sexual activities during academic years 
(masturbation) and is defined as Bramhacharya ashram. Ayurveda advocates sexual 
intercourse after marriage in the form of gruhastha ashram but here also excessive 
indulgence is prohibited as it leads to loss of physical strength, memory, lack of vitality, 
increases irritability (because of  loss of oja ,which is produced after considerable amount of 
sperm is stored in the body) and disturbs the normal physiological functions of the body by 
causing a dis-equilibrium of the three doshas. Ayurveda looks upon sex not merely as fun but 
as the means of procreation. 
Ayurveda believes in the principle where excess in any walk of life be it food, sleep or sex 
causes harm to the body. All of this emphasize on the regulated functioning of the three triads 
i.e food, sleep & sex 
THE SIX SEASONS
PART ONE
Northern and Southern Movements of the Sun
The seasons are defined according to the two directions in which the sun appears to be 
moving. As the earth makes its annual voyage around the sun, we also experience six distinct 
phases called the seasons. The northern and southern movements of the sun are created 
mainly by the earth’s relationship to the sun and the moon. The northward movement of the 
sun, known as adanakala in Sanskrit, begins with the winter and ends before the beginning of 
summer. The southern movements start at the summer solstice and ends at the winter 
solstice and is known as visargakala.
During the northerly phase i.e adana kala, the sun’s energy is at its strongest and sucks 
moisture from the earth, leaving it dry. Also the wind conjugates with the sun, adding to the 
harsh nature pervading the three seasons in this phase. During this half of the year the body 
tends to be weakened by the sun absorbing its moisture and humidity.
THE THREE SEASONS IN THE NORTHERLY PHASE OF THE SUN
The three seasons in the northerly phase of the sun are late winter, spring, and summer. 
From late winter, in mid-January, the absorbing effects of the sun and wind increase 


progressively until their culmination in mid-June, when the sun’s southward movement across 
the earth commences. 
Due to the sun’s harshness during the northernly phase, three of the six tastes bitter, 
astringent and pungent-are dramatically enhanced. These three tastes share a constricting 
and absorbent nature which, when used in the form of food, further weaken the physical 
organism. 
THE THREE SEASONS IN THE SOUTHERLY PHASE OF THE SUN
The southerly phase i.e visagra in Sanskrit, influenced more by the moon, provides a period 
of cooling relief to the earth. The sun’s energy begins to wane and more moisture is released 
into the atmosphere. During these remaining three seasons of the year, the body tends to 
gain strength and vitality.
Contrary to the northerly phase, the sun’s southward movement begins a period that gives 
strength for earth’s inhabitants and vegetation.  During this period, the sun and wind are also 
restrained by the clouds and rains, triggering a period of cooling release, which begins 
towards the end of summer. The stupendous powers of the sun begin to slacken as a result of 
the course of the earth’s movement, cloud formation, and the presence of wind and rain.
During the southerly phase, the natures of the three remaining tastes, sweet, sour, and salty 
are greatly enhanced. As a result, they contribute to bulk and vigour when used in the body. 
The three seasons created by the southward movement of the sun are the rainy season or 
early fall, autumn and early winters from mid June until towards the beginning of summer, the 
heat of the sun slackens progressively until its weakest culmination in mid November. The 
end of the southerly phase and the beginning of the northerly phase marks the important 
junction of the changing seasons.
Daily and Seasonal Cycles
THE SEVEN DAILY CYCLES 
The earth is a mobile force, which circles the sun, just as the moon circles the earth. The daily 
and seasonal cycles are created by the earth’s dynamic relationship to both the sun and 
moon.  
Table 14
7 DAILY CYCLES OF THE DOSHAS
 
VATA
PITTA
KAPHA
DAWN
Dominant
Neutral
Accumulating
MORNING
Lessening
Accumulating
Dominant
MID-DAY
Neutral
Dominant
Lessening


AFTERNOON
Accumulating
Lessening
Neutral
DUSK
Dominant
Neutral
Accumulating
EARLY MORNING
Lessening
Accumulating
Dominant
MIDNIGHT
Neutral
Dominant
Lessening
VATA:
Dominant 2:00am-6:00 am & 2:00pm-6.00 pm
PITTA: Dominant 10:00am –2:00 pm & 10.00pm-2.00 am
KAPHA:
Dominant 6:00 am– 10:00 am & 6.00pm-10.00 pm
Each day we experience six phases of expansion and contraction, all of which are controlled 
by the sun. At dawn, when the sun is about to rise, the dry, cold, mobile aspects of Vata, 
gathered through the night, are prevalent. At daybreak, the cool and heavy energy of Kapha 
begins to flow out of the body as we rise from rest. At midday, when the sun is at its peak and 
saps the body with its heat, Pitta prevails. In the early afternoon, as the sun’s energy begins 
to wane, the dry, cold energy of Vata once more dominates. At sunset, when the sun has 
descended on the horizon, Kapha begins to pour back into the body to induce the body to 
rest. Finally, at midnight, when the sun is farthest away from the earth, Pitta once more 
prevails
THE SEASONS OF NATURAL ACCUMULATION, AGGRAVATION AND ALLEVIATION
Given that the term prakriti denotes both body constitution and nature, it is only expected that 
with the changing seasons of nature there will be corresponding effects on the 
panchmahabhutas and thereby the doshas of the constitution( of the human body ). Cold, 
dry weather for instance enhances vata, hot humid climate increases pitta, while cold, wet 
weather aggravates kapha. 
To avoid such continued aggravation leading to imbalance of the doshas, Ayurveda 
prescribes a seasonal routine to preserve the doshic balance as the seasons change. For 
each season therefore, there is a unique diet (ahar), a distinct mode of living (vihara) and 
routine living (karya). These keep your doshas in a state of equilibrium and help you cope 
with the stresses and strains of changing seasons.
Table 15
 
Accumulation
Aggravation
Alleviation
VATA
Summer
Rainy season ,early fall, 
Late winter
Autumn


PITTA
Rainy season
Autumn 
Early winter
KAPHA
Early winter
Spring 
Summer
 
RITUCHARYA
Dietetics and Regimen for winter: 
During winter, the digestive power of human beings possessing good health (strength) is 
enhanced due to the restraint caused upon it by the cold wind, so much so that it is capable of 
digesting any foodstuff irrespective of its heaviness and quantity. When it does not get proper 
fuel, the digestive fire affects the nutritive fluids, resulting in the vitiation of vatta having cold 
quality. Therefore, during the winter one should take unctuous, sour, salty and sweet juices of 
the meat of the aquatic and marshy animals, which are fatty. One should also eat the meat of 
burrow-dwelling animals that eat by snatching. Thereafter, one should drink herbal wine and 
have honey.
If a person habitually takes preparation of cow’s milk, cane juice, fat, oil, new rice and hot 
water during the winter his span of life is never decreased.
In winter one should resort to ayurvedic herbal massages, unction, application of oil on the 
head, fomentation, and one should reside in an underground residence or an inner heated 
apartment.
In the winter one should see that the conveyance, bedding and seat are well covered 
specially by heavy wrappers, silken cloth ropes and blankets. One should wear heavy and 
warm clothes and should besmear his body with heavy aguru (Aquilaria agallocha Roxb, kind 
of herb). One should embrace a healthy women with her well developed plumpy breasts, and 
with her body besmeared with aguru (Aquilaria agallocha Linn), lie down on the bed 
intoxicated with strong passion and may indulge in excessive sexual intercourse during the 
winter. One should avoid food and drinks, which are liable to vitiate vata; one should not 
expose him to cold wave. Under feeding should be avoided. 
Dietetics and Regimen for spring: 
During the spring, the accumulated kapha is liquefied by the heat of the sun and as such 
disturbs the power of digestion and causes many diseases. So, one should administer 
therapies like emesis, etc. and should avoid heavy, unctuous, sour and sweet diets. One 
should not sleep during day time. At the advent of spring one should habitually resort to 
exercise, unction, oral gargles and collyrium. The excretory orifices should be regularly 
washed with lukewarm water. One should besmear his body with chandana (Santalum album 


Linn.) and aguru (Aquilaria agalocha Roxb.) and take food consisting of barley and wheat, 
meat of sarabha rabbit, antelope, common quail and grey partridge. One should drink herbal 
wines made of barley. One should also enjoy the company of women and blossoms of the 
garden. 
Dietetics and Regimen for summer : 
During the summer, the sun evaporates the moisture of the earth by its rays. In that season, 
the intake of sweet, cold liquid and unctuous diets and drinks is prescribed. One who takes 
cold mantha (a type of herbal drink) along with sugar as well as the meat of the animals or 
birds of aired climate, ghee and milk along with Sali rice (Oryza satiunm Linn) during this 
season does not suffer from any diseases. One should either drink alcohol in little quantity or 
should avoid it, and even if one drinks he should drink it along with plenty of water. One 
should further avoid taking diets, which are salty, sour, pungent or hot. Physical exercise is 
also to be given up during this season. During the day time one should sleep in an air cooled 
apartment. During the night, after having besmeared the body with sandal wood paste, one 
should sleep on the open airy roof (under the cooler or air-conditioning) of the house, which is 
cooled by the rays of the moon. One should keep him aloof of sexual intercourse (restrict as 
much as possible) and should enjoy gardens, cold water and flowers during this season. 
Dietetics Regimen for rainy season : 
The body, which is weakened during the period of dehydration, with its digestive system, is 
also weakened. It is further weakened due to the vitiation of vata and other dosas during the 
rains. The power to digestion in the period is also affected due to the gas coming out of the 
earth, rainfall, increase of acidity in water. So it is advisable to be moderate as regard to diet 
and regimen during the rainy season. 
One should abstain from taking diluted drinks in excess, day sleep, frost, water, (excessive) 
exercise, moving in sun, and too much indulgence in sexual intercourse. One should 
generally use honey in their diet and drinks. 
If these days are cooler due to heavy rains accompanied by the storms, one should take food 
that is a littlle sour, salty and unctuous; this serves as an effective antidote to the vitiation of 
vata during the rainy season. 
In order to maintain normal power of digestion one should take old barley, wheat and Sali rice 
(Oryza sativum Linn.) along with the meat of arid animals and vegetable soup. More over, one 
should drink the madhvika or arista (herbal type of liquor), pure rainwater or water – boiled 
and cooled, mixed with little honey. It is advisable to apply herbal body scrubs, ayurvedic 
massages, take bath and wear fragrant garlands during the season. One should wear light 
and clean apparel and should reside in a house devoid of humidity. 


Dietetics and Regimen for autumn: 
The body parts adopted for rains and cold is suddenly exposed to the heat of the sun with the 
beginning of autumn so the pitta accumulated during the rains gets generally vitiated. In this 
season, sweet, light cold and bitter foods and drinks, which have potentialities to alleviate 
pitta, are to be taken in proper quantity when there is good appetite. Furthermore, the meat 
common quail, Grey Partridge, antelope, sheep, wapiti, rabbit, rice, barley and wheat are 
prescribed during this season. Intake of ghee prepared with bitter medicines, purgation, and 
bloodletting are also prescribed for this season. One should avoid taking sunbath, fat, oil, and 
meat of aquatic and marshy animals, alkaline salt preparations and curd in food. One should 
not sleep during day time and should not expose himself to frost and wind. The water which is 
exposed to the heat of the sun during the day time and to the cooling rays of the moon during, 
is also purified by time and is detoxicated by star canopus (agagastya) is known as 
“hamsodaka”, which is spotlessly clear and is as beneficial as nectar for the purpose of 
bathing, drinking and swimming. Use of garlands made of autumnal flowers and clean apparel 
and also the rays of moon in the evening are exceedingly beneficial in this season. 
Seasons and Strength
Note: S = Southern phase; N = Northerly phase
S
Early winter, hemanta
November to January; maximum strength (peak period)
N
Late winter, sisira
January  to March; maximum strength (wane period)
N
Spring, vasanta
March to May ; moderate strength (wane period)
N
Summer, grisma
May  to July ; minimum strength (wane period)
S 
Rainy season (early fall), varsa
July  to September  minimum strength (peak period)
S
Autumn, sarada
September  to November ; moderate strength (peak period)
A Woman’s Season
There is an additional season for women which happens once every month during 
menstruation. The beginning period of the full moon is the natural cycle for ovulation. 
Receiving the essence of the moon at this time, a woman’s sexual impulses heighten and her 
vitality is once more replenished. Then, during the time of the new moon she experiences the 
natural cycle of menstruation. Menstruation is caused by the sun absorbing energies from the 
earth, which in turn draws the menstrual waste from the body. When the cycle has not been 
tampered with by use of contraceptive pills and other birth control devices, harmful foods and 


activities, and disruptive sexual activities, the natural ebb and flow of a woman’s monthly 
cycle remains in harmony .
Regimen to be observed by women in their Menses:
During the period of menstruation, activities need to be reduced to the essential so that the 
body experiences the least degree of interference.  Quick warm showers, or sponging(wiping 
down the body), is the appropriate means of bodily cleaning during menstruation. She should 
avoid crying nor take a head bath. A woman should refrain from all sexual foreplay & 
intercourse. Day sleep and collyrium during the first four days of her periods should be 
avoided.  Considered a very fragile period for a woman, this time is to be used to rest and to 
allow the body to empty it self before it is renewed. She should also not indulge in loud and 
excessive laughter and talk, nor should she hear loud noises. Food should be easy to digest, 
not too heavy, not too unctuous, nor too dry or cold. She should avoid fatiguing work. All the 
above things during menses may lead to the vitiation of doshas, which may especially lead to 
gynaecological problems.  One may observe these rules in order to eventually restore your 
natural cycle.
During ovulation, Pitta is most dominant, while Vata dominates the period of menstruation and 
Kapha the period following menstruation. 
Seasonal Cleansing Therapies for Each Dosha 
VATA: SEASONS OF AGGRAVATION
Rainy: Season (Early Fail)
During the rainy season, the earth releases more gases into the atmosphere, which tends to 
aggravate Vata. Further aggravation is created by the dampness of the rainy season and the 
higher acidity in the water at that time. The rainy period comes at a time when the body, 
having endured the long and harsh time of the northerly phase. Even through the rainy 
season marks the beginning of the southerly phase, a period of strengthening, the body is still 
to vulnerable to resist the onslaught of the rains. 
Vata is the dosha that leaps out of bounds very quickly and is thus afflicted somewhat 
consistently throughout the year. However, it requires special help at the end of the period of 
major aggravation, which begins in the summer and runs into and throughout the rainy 
season. Thus Vata’s first annual cleansing period comes between the early and late phases of 
the rainy season. 
Although Vata’s main season of alleviation is the rainy season (early fall), the next 
appropriate cleansing period occurs at the end of autumn.
NOTE: In temperate climates, where there is no definitive rainy season, the vitiation 
of Vata still occurs at this time due to the northerly movement of the sun; therefore, 
the same seasonal recommendations apply. 


Late winter 
Late winter is the next season in which Vata is generally alleviated. The extreme coldness of 
winter increases the already cold nature of Vata, and the body requires the greatest amounts 
of physical warmth and nourishing foods. When not amply protected or fed, the body begins 
to eat its own tissues, and Vata becomes aggravated as a result. Nourishing, warm foods with 
sour, sweet, and salty tastes are recommended to balance Vata during this time of year. 
Ayurvedic massages, warm atmosphere and clothing are all deemed vital so that Vata may 
remain balanced throughout this season. 
NOTE: Although there are some cooling influences in tropical and semi-tropical climates at 
this time of year, the late winter cleansing programs recommended do not apply. 
Summer 
Vata may become mildly disturbed during the summer, due to the reduction of Kapha in the 
body caused by the heat of the sun.  
Vata may be nurtured at this time by sweet and nourishing food, decreased sexual activity.
Autumn 
The end of autumn is generally considered to be the time when all three doshas can be 
relieved of their excesses. Therefore, if Vata’s condition was not alleviated during the rainy 
season, it may be removed through the elimination therapies at the end of the autumn 
season.  
Ayurveda presents a vast and illuminating group of healing therapies. Although many of its 
practices have become virtually extinct, we are fortunate to have a practicing knowledge of 
the Panchakarma and its supporting therapies. Pancha karma therapies include those 
treatments that cleanse and eliminate the aggravated doshas and rejuvenate the body. This 
helps the tissues and doshas to regain their equanimity, which leads to sound health.
The therapies and the proper time to apply them are described below. These therapies may 
be used by all body types, according to how the doshas are behaving.
Vata Seasonal Cleansing Therapies 
Vasti Therapy: The Ayurvedic use of herbal decoction enemas, as well as medicated herbal 
oil enemas, to clear the excess dosha from the large intestines. 
Enema decoction are derived from herbs (permutation and combination of more than 100 
herb ) such as castor, dashamula, gotu kola, and liquorice etc. The medicated herbal oil 
enema is usually administered as a separate procedure. These enemas re-direct the apana 
vata to its normal downward flow and soothe Vata disturbances in the body. 
Pinda Sweda: The Ayurvedic use of fomentation therapy to thoroughly invigorate the body.
This therapy stimulates the vital tissues and organs, while alleviating body pain. Swedan 
(fomentation) therapy also removes fear from the mind. 


Abhyanga: The application of the Ayurveda system of massage, using herbal medicated oils, 
sesame oil, sandalwood oil, and so on. 
Abhyanga is a vital Ayurvedic practice used to restore equanimity to the body’s muscular 
system.  This massage also promotes both peace of mind and strength of limbs and is highly 
rejuvenating.
Shirovasti : The Ayurvedic practice of pouring medicated oil on the head and allowing it to 
remain for a period of time. 
This therapy promotes mental clarity, stimulates memory power, removes stress, arrests 
hairfall and hairgreying and completely revitalizes the body. 
Shirobhayanga: The Ayurvedic application of medicated oils to the head. Various Ayurvedic 
herbs (permitaion and combination of more than 250 herb ) such as 
bremhi,avala,shankpushpi etc are boiled in sesame oil in preparation for shirobhyanga. The 
head is then amply massaged with the oil, giving life and balance to the sense organs and 
rejuvenating the entire body. 
PITTA : SEASONS OF AGGRAVATION 
Autumn 
Accumulated Pitta from the rainy season becomes aggravated during the autumn season, a 
time when the digestive fire is already tremendously affected by the long and dry period of the 
previous northerly phase. Pitta is further afflicted by the extreme conditions of the rainy 
season that precedes autumn. As the sun begins to brighten the sky, providing the heat 
necessary to evaporate the moisture of the rainy season just passsed, it affects the 
vulnerable Pitta, causing vitiation of both the digestion and blood systems . At this time, the 
liquid that Pitta has accumulated during the rainy season dampens the digestive fire, resulting 
in a loss of appetite. 
In order for Pitta to retrieve its normal and excellent digestion, the Ayurvedic purgative therapy 
of virechana is recommended (See below). The best time of the autumn season for any form 
of cleansing therapy is at its   tail end , i.e. the latter part of the season when the dosha is in 
its most fluent form. 
Note - In tropical and semi-tropical climates, the best time is at the end of autumn. 
Rainy Season 
There are many Ayurvedic healing therapies that may be observed during both the rainy 
season and throughout the autumn period. These include massages, using aromatic and 
cooling oils such as coconut oil combined with sandalwood essential oil; daily body brushing 
with herbal body scrubs ; altering one’s activities to those that are milder and more 
harmonious, especially during the initial stages of doshic vulnerability; aroma therapy using 
herbal oils (permutation and combination of more than 100 herbs ) like mint, liquorice 
(yashtimadhu), sandalwood, jasmine, or vetiver (usheer), to calm the mind and stomach.
 


Pitta Seasonal Cleansing Therapies 
Virechana Therapy: The use of Ayurvedic purgatives (permutation and combination of more 
than 500 herbs) to clear the lower pathways of the body. 
This therapy helps to purify the blood and to cleanse the stomach, sweat glands, small 
intestines, colon, kidneys, liver, and spleen. Substances such as psyllium husk(isabgol), 
castor oil, cow’s milk with ghee, trivrrita and triphala are used to induce purgation. 
Rakta Mokshana: Although this form of therapy, commonly referred to as 
bloodletting, is seldom used in India today, and is illegal in the United States and Europe, 
when performed correctly it is an effective form of therapy to extract toxins from the blood. 
Generally, toxins that accumulated under the skin and around the marma points (the energy 
junctions of the body’s meridians) are eliminated through the process of blood-letting. 
Because Pitta manifests in the waste products of blood, many skin ailments, such as rash, 
eczema, and acne, are caused by toxins circulating in the blood system. The drawing of a 
small amount of blood from the vein relieves the blood tension created by these toxins. 
Internal use of certain bitter herbs (permutation and combination of more than 100 herbs ) 
such as neem, manjishta, sariva, guduchi and turmeric etc, may also be used to purify the 
blood. 
Shirodhara: The use of a decoction, such as medicated ghee and buttermilk, sugarcane 
juice, and herbal oils on the forehead, to relieve  burning sensations or pain in the head and 
body.
In the traditional Ayurvedic application, the person lies down on a wide, seasoned, wooden 
log. A vessel called dhara chatti, which resembles a wide top funnel, or a dhara patra, a pot 
with a hole in bottom, is used, through which the medicated  herbal oil is dripped rhythmically 
onto the centre of the forehead where the third eye is located. Shirodhara is a beautiful 
therapy which stimulate our subconscious mind  and lulls the entire bodily organism into a 
state of calmness. This therapy is used to balance all three doshas, employing medicated oils 
and substances best suited to the different doshas and various ailments.
Kapha : seasons of aggravation
Spring
Although Kapha enjoys the strongest stamina of the three doshas, it experiences its fragility in 
the springtime. After the long, cold, and inert periods of early and late winter, Kapha begins to 
soften so that most of the semi-frozen wastes accumulated during the previous seasons 
liquify.
Kapha’s imbalances are expressed through the feeling of lethargy, cold,  sore throat, lung 
congestion, cold body extremities, and so on. Winter changes to spring, almost at the very 
height of the northernly phase of the sun, when strength and vigor tend to become depleted 
by the sun’s harshness. The softening out of liquid waste in the body retards both the 
digestive fire and the body’s metabolism, which is why Kapha’s potential listlessness and 
lethargy increase. The gap before the full bloom of the spring season is the best time of the 


year for the kapha dosha to be thoroughly cleansed by means of both the elimination 
therapies and rejuvenative therapies. These processes relieve the excess dosha when it is in 
its most fluid form and not yet rooted in the body in the form of disease. Kapha then has 
plenty of time to mobilize during the remaining season and does not cause obstruction in the 
channels.
Rainy Season 
Kapha experience similar difficulties during the rainy season (early fall), a time when the 
spring seasonal process is reversed. The end of the summer heat and the ensuing decline in 
strength is braced up by the damp and humid cold of the rainy season. During this period, 
replenishing therapies used to maintain Kapha’s balance include: seasonally appropriate 
foods; Ayurvedic massage with medicated oil; inhalation therapies using aromas such as 
eucalyptus and aromatic smoke
Kapha Seasonal Cleansing Therapies 
Vamana Therapy: Vamana, also known as emesis therapy, is an ancient therapeutic method 
for eliminating Kapha’s accumulation through the oral pathway.  
Vamana releases congestion from the lungs and provides immediate relief for asthmatic and 
bronchial attacks. Vamana is used for serious Kapha disorders and in skin diseases, 
diabetes, chronic disorders of the lungs and stomach, sinusitis and tonsillitis. 
Oil massage and fomentation applied to the chest on the evening before the emesis therapy 
is the preliminary steps taken to induce the state most conducive to this therapy. 
Nasya:It is the nasal application of medication in both powder and liquid form. The powdered 
medication is inserted into the nose through a tube and the liquid medication is applied with a 
dropper. The nose is the gateway to the cerebral, sensory, and motor functions of the body. 
Disorders associated with the movement of prana are usually corrected by nasya therapy. 
Excess kapha stored in the throat, nose, sinus, and head are also removed from the body as 
a result of nasya. Herbal powders, such as brahmi, shatavari etc as well as substances such 
as milk, ghee, medicated oils, ginger and garlic etc are used, depending on the dosha and the 
nature of the disorder. 
Relationship Between the Doshas and the seasons
The doshas are to the body what the seasons are to the earth. Both the doshas and the 
seasons are created from the five elements. The elemental aspects of the seasons are in the 
form of space, wind, sun, moon, rain, and the earth. Here, we must understand the interplay 
between the doshas and the seasonal influences within the primacy of the five elements. The 
doshas are not simply the dynamic energy within the body; rather they are influenced 
primarily by seasonal variations. Knowledge of the seasons is related to the balancing of the 


doshas. Therefore, a thorough understanding of the function of the doshas within the body 
necessitates an understanding of the variations within each season, the junction between 
seasons, and the annual rotation of the six seasons. 
In many cases, the designated seasonal tastes and qualities appear to be contradictory. For 
this reason, charts are provided to assist you in coordinating your body type with its seasonal 
tastes and qualities. (See below)
Role of Taste 
It is as important to realize that every food's unique combination of attributes will influence its 
taste and the action it causes in the body. With every taste having a different action – as 
detailed below. Astanga Hrdayam clearly describes the characteristics of each of the six 
tastes and problems that might be experienced from its habitual over-consumption. Most 
foods being a combination of two or more of these tastes e.g. coffee is bitter and pungent.
Sour 
Comprised of the elements earth & fire, it increases pitta and kapha and is good for heart 
and digestion. Stimulates agni, moves inactive Vata energy down the pelvic cavity, sets the 
teeth on edge and increases salivation. Excess use may cause looseness and flabbiness, 
loss of strength, giddiness, itching, irritation, a whitish yellow pallor, swelling, thirsts and fever, 
and diseases arising from excess pitta and kapha.
Sweet
Related to earth & water, it increases pitta and vata, producing greater strength in the tissues 
and value to the aged, wounded, emaciated and children. Universally liked, it often adheres to 
the inside of the mouth, giving a feeling of pleasure, contentment and comfort. Good for the 
complexion, hair, senses and oja, it also increases breast milk and helps unite broke parts like 
bones. By its virtue it prolongs life and helps life activities. In excess however it may cause 
diseases arising from fat and excess kapha e.g. obesity, skin infections, unconsciousness, 
diabetes, enlargement of neck glands or malignant tumors etc.
Salt 
The water & fire in salty taste increases pitta and kapha. It clears obstruction of channels and 
pores and increases the digestive activity and salivation. Also responsible for lubrication and 
sweating, it penetrates the tissues. An excess of it may cause baldness and graying of the 
hair, wrinkles, thirst, skin diseases, blood disorders and loss of body strength.
Pungent 
Fire & air in pungent increases vata and pitta and mitigates kapha. Increases hunger, is 
digestive, causes irritation, brings secretion from the eyes, nose & mouth, and gives a burning 


sensation to the mouth. It dilates the channels and breaks up the hard masses. But an excess 
use of it may cause thirst, depletion of reproductive tissue and strength, fainting, contracture, 
tremors, pain in the waist and back, and other disorders related to excess of pitta and kapha.
Bitter 
Air & space being its elements, it increases  pitta and kapha. Drying up moisture from fat, 
muscles, faces and urine. It cleans the mouth and destroys the perception of taste. It is said 
to cure anorexia, worms, bacteria, parasites, thirst, skin diseases, loss of consciousness, 
fever, nausea, burning sensation. But in excess, it increases vata, causing diseases of vata 
origin and depletion of tissues.
Astringent 
Air & earth increases vata and controls increased pitta and kapha. It cleans the blood and 
causes healing of ulcers. Like bitter, it too dries up moisture from fat. It absorbs water, causing 
constipation and hindering digestion of undigested food. Its excess use causes stasis of food 
without digestion, flatulence, pain in the cardiac region, emaciation, loss of virility, obstruction 
of channels and constipation.
BALANCING SEASONAL TASTES AND BODY TYPE TASTES 
The apparent contradictions between the tastes and qualities beneficial to each body type, 
and the tastes and qualities suggested by the cyclical nature of the seasons are to be 
understood in the following way: The tastes which are generally good for each body type may 
become heightened or prevalent in the body and external environment due to seasonal 
influences. For example, of the six tastes, the pungent flavour naturally predominates during 
the summer; although considered a generally good all-year taste for Kapha types, it needs to 
be used in the summer season with discretion. This is because in summer the pungent taste 
prevails out of the six tastes.(According to the seasonal accumulation of the doshas, in 
summers there is decrease of kapha and the pungent taste also causes decrease in kapha 
and increase of vata which may lead to vata/kapha disorders) 
Similarly, the salty taste which predominates during autumn, although considered a generally 
excellent all-year taste for Vata types, needs to be reduced during the autumn season, even 
by Vata types(According to the seasonal accumulation of the doshas in autumn there is 
alleviation of pitta, the salty taste also causes alleviation of pitta  which may lead to pitta 
disorders).
In the early winter, the sweet taste predominates, and although generally an excellent all-year 
taste for Pitta types, needs to be reduced during the early winter, even by Pitta types. 
(According to the seasonal accumulation of the doshas in winter there is increase in kapha 
and sweet taste also causes increase of kapha which may lead to kapha disorders)


Table 16
TASTES OF THE SEASONS
Northerly Phase (Winter Solstice to Summer Solstice)
Season
Dry Tastes
Element Composition 
Dosha
Late Winter
Bitter 
Air and space
Vata 
Spring 
Astringent
Air and earth
Vata & Kapha
Summer
Pungent
Air and fire
Vata & Pitta
Note: the dry tastes are created by the progressive northward movement of the sun
Southerly Phase (Summer Solstice to Winter Solstice)
Season
Dry Tastes
Element Composition 
Dosha
Rainy Season (early fall)
Sour
Earth and fire
Pitta and Kapha
Autumn
Salty
Water and fire
Pitta
Early Winter
Sweet
Water and earth
Kapha
Note: the moist tastes are created by the progressive southward movement of the sun
 
Beneficial Tastes According to Doshas
Vata
: 
sweet, sour, salty
Pitta
:
Sweet, bitter, astringent
Kapha: pungent, bitter, astringent
Table 17
SEASONAL TASTE ADJUSTMENTS
 
VATA
PITTA
KAPHA
LATE WINTER
Major: sour, salty, 
unctuous 
Major: sweet, 
sour*, salty,* warm, 
unctuous
Major: sour,* 
astringent, pungent, 
warm, moderate 
unctuous
Minor: sweet
Minor: bitter, 
astringent, cool, 
light
Minor: bitter, salty, 
dry
SPRING
Major: sweet, salty, 
warm, moderate 
unctuous, alkaline
Major: sweet, bitter 
pungent*, warm
Major: pungent, 
moderate astringent, 
alkaline, ward, dry
Minor: sour, pungent
Minor: astringent, 
cool, alkaline
Minor: bitter, salty
SUMMER
Major: sweet, sour, 
warm, moderate 
unctuous
Major: sweet, bitter, 
cool, moderate 
unctuous
Major: bitter, 
astringent, moderate 
sweet, warm, dry
Minor: bitter, salty, 
cool, light
Minor: astringent, 
light
Minor: pungent, cool


RAINY SEASON 
(early fall)
Major: sweet, 
moderate bitter,* salty, 
moderate unctuous, 
warm
Major: bitter, 
astringent, 
moderate salty, 
moderate sweet, 
warm, moderate 
unctuous
Major: bitter, 
astringent, pungent, 
warm, light
Temperate Climates 
Minor: sour
Minor: pungent, 
cool
Minor: salty, sour, dry
 
 
Major: sweet, bitter, 
salty,* warm, 
moderate unctuous
 
Tropical and 
Semitropical
Major: sweet, salty, 
moderate unctuous, 
warm
Minor: astringent, 
pungent
Major: moderate 
salty,* pungent, bitter, 
warm, moderate 
unctuous.
Climates
Minor: bitter, pungent
 
Minor: astringent, dry
AUTUMN
Major: sweet, sour, 
warm, light
Major: sweet, bitter, 
astringent, cool, 
light
Minor: salty, 
astringent
Minor: pungent
Major: bitter, 
astringent, moderate 
sweet, warm, light
EARLY WINTER
Major: salty, bitter,* 
moderate sour, warm 
unctuous
Major: bitter, 
astringent, 
moderate pungent,* 
warm, moderate 
unctuous
Major: pungent, 
astringent, bitter, 
warm, moderate 
unctuous
Minor: pungent, sweet
Minor: sweet
Minor : salty
*Vata types: If strong tendency to Vata disorders, use bitter as  minor tastes and increase 
the use of sweet and salty tastes during the seasons indicated.
*Pitta types: If strong tendency to Pitta disorders, use sour, pungent and salty as minor 
tastes and increase the use of bitter, astringent and sweet tastes during the seasons 
indicated.
*Kapha types : If strong tendency to Kapha disorders, use sweet,sour and salty as minor 
tastes and increase the use of pungent, bitter and astringent tastes during the seasons 
indicated.
[ vata, pitta & kapha disorders can be seen in the charts mentioning increase in the 
respective doshas in DOSHIC IMBALANCES ]


Table 18
SEASONAL DO’S AND DON’TS
Climates 
DO
DON’T
Late Winter
Sour, salty, moderate sweet, 
unctuous, substantial quantity of 
food 
Excess sweet, pungent, bitter, dry, 
cold, raw foods
SPRING 
Pungent, astringent, moderate 
sweet, moderate salty, warm, 
moderate quantity of food 
Sour, excess sweet, bitter, too 
many fluids, cold 
Summer
Sweet, bitter, astringent, cool, 
moderate unctuous, 
sufficient fluid 
Salty, sour, pungent, hot, 
insufficiency of fluids 
Rainy Season (early 
fall) Temperate 
Sweet, moderate sour, moderate 
salty, warmfood, 
Pungent, bitter, astringent,  light, 
cold food.    excess unctuous 
Troplcal and 
Semitropical Climates 
Sour, salty, unctuous, moderate 
sweet, moderate unctuous, warm 
Pungent, bitter, astringent, excess 
sweet, cold, dry 
Autumn
Sweet, bitter, astringent, cool, light, 
non-oily 
Sour, salty, pungent, hot, oily, 
excess food, heavy foods
Early Winter
Salty, bitter, astringent, moderate 
sour, warm, moderate unctuous, 
Moderate quantity 
Sweet, excess sour, excess cold, 
dry, excess food, raw foods
The “Seasonal Don’ts” may be used occasionally as a minor taste. See previous chart. 
Important Rules And Regulations Related to DIET : 
CONCEPT OF DIET IN AYURVEDA : 
1)
Defination : 
Diet is that – what we eat.
It includes everything we eat or drink. 
Diet is the cause of the very existence, Energy , Colour & ‘Oja’ (immunity/Ultimate purified 
form of all the Sharir Dhatus i.e Body tissues) of every living being on this earth. 
2)         ‘Diet’ is the cause of the birth, maintenance, & destruction of all forms of life on this 
earth. 
From ‘Diet’ only we acquire following things – constant growth, unhampered growth , Energy , 
Wellbeing – Health, Colour, Proper functioning of the Indriyas (Sense Organs). 
Improper dietis the major cause of  all illness according to Ayurveda.
From all above statements one can say that’ In short everything depends 
on diet. 
 
AYURVEDIC CONCEPT OF FORM OF DIET 


According to Ayurveda Body is said to be made up of Panch Mahabhutas (Pentads) & hence 
the food also needs to be Panchbhautic (Made up of Panch (five) Mahabhutas) then only food 
can get digested & be utilized for the growth of Panchamahabhutas (the basic constituents of 
body) which in turn results in growth of body. 
The diet should be made up of all the six tastes i.e. Sweet, Sour, Salty, Hot, Bitter, Astringent. 
It has also been stated that according to the properties diet again can be of  2 types i.e. 
Heavy to digest , & Easy or light to digest . 
Ideal Diet 
The ideal diet should have following properties:- 
1)                   It should increase the strength of body.
2)                   It should be tasty/it should be such that it should be liked by the one, who is 
taking it. 
3)                   It should give energy instantaneously / immediately after taking it. 
4)                    It should have the capacity to withhold the body & give its strength & 
energy to carry on its regular functions. 
5)                   It should satisfy the one taking it . 
6)                   It should be hot, unctuous ,not dry when taken. 
7)                   Should be taken in proper quantity. 
8)                   It should not be incompatible .(mentioned in uneasy combinations below) 
The food (Diet) with all above properties is said to be ldeal diet. 
The Diet which is of all the properties explained above can only do the functions prescribed to 
it. 
3)         FUNCTIONS OF DIET (food) 
1)                   Instantly satisfying.
2)                   Gives strength/energy.
3)                   Maintains the body & maintains the functions of the body . 
4)                   Increases longevity. 
5)                   Increases the Digestive fire , Vitality , Recollecting Power , & Oja . 
4)         TYPES OF DIET
There are four types of diet
i)                    That which can be drunk 
ii)                   That which can be licked 
iii)                 Easily chewable e.g. Rice etc. 
iv)                  Hard food substances which need to be chewed e.g. Sugarcane,                  meat. 
Some have given 6 types in addition to the four stated above : 
v)                   which should be sucked e.g. Mango. 


vi)                  Which needs mastication by teeth, these include very hard food materials e.g. 
various nuts. 
Some have stated 8 types / forms of food / Diet. In addition to the above 6. 
vii)                Those which can only be eaten after being grinded into powder, various pastes etc. 
viii)                Food substances like Suger candy etc. 
 
5)                   According to Nature – Diet has been classified into 2 types Heavy Diet & Light diet. 
Rain water, Raktashali (Red rice), Sathe Sali (Old rice), Mudga, Eina (black deer) &  lava 
(kind of bird und in airid regions) are light / laghu. 
Milk, sugarcane, fresh Rice, Udad( black gram) & meat of the animals from Anoop Desh – 
land with abundant water & plantation (Marshy lands, equatorial Rain forests) are considered 
to be Guru (Heavy)
 
6)         Seven Concept of Diet
The following points are important in the making the Diet complete – (promoting health) or 
improper- (giving Rise to various diseases). 
1)               Basic nature / properties of the food 
2)               Combination of 2 or more food material changes the qualities / properties of 
food material. 
3)              Due to boiling, roasting etc. there is change in the properties of the food. 
4)               Quantity of food we take. 
5)               Region has 2 meanings – the  region where the food is being taken & 
Secondly region means the area the food is been produced affects the 
properties of food material. 
6)               The time when one takes the food. 
7)               The order in which one takes the food. 
 
7)         TIME OF TAKING DIET 
Proper excretion of urine & Stools, Doshas go to the there respective sthanas i.e sites, 
strotasas are clean and free from blockage & indriyas i.e. sense organs are sharp and 
attentive, one feels lightness of body , Belching with proper smell to it. With proper excretion 
of ‘Apaan vayu’ , Heart becomes Nirdosha i.e. we feel like eating & drinking. 
When all the above signs are present then only one should eat; as this is the proper time for 
taking the diet. 
It is said that when the Doshas go to their own respective places  & the Strotaras (channels) 
become clean then only one should take Food. 
QUANTITY OF FOOD TO BE TAKEN


It is decided according to digestive capacity of Agni. If Agni is weak then one should take food 
only once or should take food in less quantity. 
Food taken once i.e. at one time which gets digested completely & properly , is said to be 
Matra/Quantity of food to be taken. 
Considering four parts of the Stomach, one should take food such that 2 parts of the Stomach 
get filled by the food taken, one part to be filled by water or other liquid matter & one part 
should be kept free for the ‘Vayu’ / Gas to move .
One should take diet in proper quantity. The quantity of diet to be taken depends on the 
digestion capacity of the person which varies from person to person & so does the Matra. 
20) The amount of food, which without disturbing the equilibrium of dhatus & doshas of the 
body gets digested as well as metabolized in proper time is to be regarded as the proper 
quantity. 
The proper quantity of food does depend upon the nature of food articles. If the food article is 
heavy only three fourth or half of the stomach capacity is to be filled up. Even in the case of 
light food articles excessive intake is not conducive to the maintenance of the power of 
digestion & metabolism. 
IMPORTANCE OF FOOD TAKEN IN PROPER QUANTITY
Taken in Appropriate quantity, food certainly helps the individual in bringing about strength, 
complexion happiness & longevity without disturbing the equilibrium of dhatus & doshas of the 
body. 
Indicated Food :- 
One should regularly ( can take everyday) take Shastika (a kind of rice harvested in sixty 
days), Sali (oryza sativum), yellow gram , food cooked in Rock Salt, Amalaka (emblica 
officinalis), Rain Water, Ghee, Meat of animals dwelling in arid climate & Honey. 
Contradicted Food : 
One should not regularly take heavy articles such as dried meat, dry vegetables, lotus 
rhizomes & lotus stalk. One should never take meat of a diseased animal. Moreover, one 
should not regularly take boiled buttermilk, inspissiated milk with pork, beef, meat of buffalo 
with fish curd, & barley.
ORDER IN WHICH ONE SHOULD TAKE THE DIET
First, one should eat food of sweet taste for the purpose of Vata Pitta pacification. Sweet taste 
is helpful for pacification of vata dosha present in the digestive tract or intestines. 
Then one should take sour & salty substances for they do the function of increasing the 
digestive juices. Lastly one should take food of bitter and pungent taste for the purpose of 
pacification of ‘Kapha’ .
One should take fruits like pomegranate first in the diet. Then one should take liquid material 
& then lastly semisolid & solid food. 
EIGHT FACTORS DETERMINING THE UTILITY FOOD.


The Eight factors which determine the utility or otherwise of various types of food are.
1)         nature of food articles
2)         method of their processing
3)         combination
4)         Quantity
5)         Habitat
6)         Time
7)         Rules governing intake of food.
8)         Wholesomeness to individual who takes it.
21)     RULES FOR TAKING FOOD
Healthy individuals as well as patients should observe the following:
While having food articles which are most wholesome by nature; one should eat only that 
food in proper quantity which is hot, unctuous & not contradictory in potency & that too after 
the digestion of the previous meal, food should be taken in proper place with all the 
accessories, without talking & laughing with concentration of mind & paying due regard to 
oneself , not too fast or too slowly. 
Important Rules And Regulations Related to Diet  
1)       Eat to live but don’t live to eat. 
2)       Eat food which is beneficial.
3)       Eat food in a moderate quantity. 
4)       Don’t eat food, properties of which are not known to you.  
5)       Don’t eat food in a hurry or when you are in a disturbed state of mind, full of tensions, 
strains, and emotional outbreaks. Regain peace of mind and then enjoy food with happy and 
hearty mood. 
6)       Wash your hands, feet and mouth, using clean utensils in a clean place which is well 
lighted and well-ventilated. 
7)       Fill half quantity of stomach with food, one fourth quantity with water and liquid 
substances and keep the remaining one fourth for air. 
8)       A person who takes only one full meal a day is called Yogee (or Yoga – practitioner). He 
takes light breakfast in the morning and the healthy and happy life. 
9)       A person who takes two full meals in a day is called ‘Bhogi” i.e. a lusty and greedy 
person who lives mostly to eat and suffers from illness and or ill health from time to time. 
10)  A person who takes full meals more than two times is called Rogee or a sick person. He 
a gluttonous person and lives only to eat. He is always sick and away from health. 
11) Don’t do yogic exercises immediately after taking food. It is safe to do them three hours 
after taking food. It is better therefore to do Yogic exercise  early morning or in the evening 
when the stomach is empty. 
12) Don’t take food immediately after doing yogic exercises, but one hour after doing them. 


13) Don’t go to bed immediately after taking supper wait for  a minimum of  one hour after it. 
14) According to Ayurveda well balanced diet consists of food stuffs having six tastes namely 
Sweet, Sour, Salty, Pungent, Bitter and Astringent. 
Diet and Mind : 
Yogic and Ayurvedic aspects. Modern Dietetic consideration is only related to body. But it is a 
uniqueness of Yogashastra and Ayurveda which shows intimate relationship between diet and 
mind. Both the sciences assert with proofs that diet affects mentality of a human being. Satva 
(virtue), Raja (Aggressive desire) and Tama (Ignorant sloth) are the basic qualities of mind. 
Satvaguna is always strengthening, invigorating and vitalising. Satvaguna expresses 
essence, understanding, purity, clarity, compassion and love. Rajoguna implies movement, 
aggressiveness and extroversion and it operates on a sensual level. Tamoguna manifests 
ignorance, inertia, heaviness and dullness. 
Satvaguna is a positive virtue and it strengthens and stabilizes mind. Rajoguna and 
Tamoguna are negative attributes which destabilise and weaken the mind. Yet all the three 
attributes are required of course in a balanced state and having a strong control of satvaguna 
are necessary for normal functioning of the mind. 
As the final goal of yoga practitioner is elevation and uplifting of mental faculties to attain 
eternal bliss or moksha he/she should do everything to go on increasing his satvaguna 
through proper diet and good behaviour. Yoga becomes the destroyer of all woes and sorrows 
and can be accomplished only by him who is regulated and moderate in diet and recreation, 
regulated in speech and actions, and regulated in thinking and sleeping too.
The Taste Process
The first subjective experience of a substance on the tongue is taste (rasa). A short time later, 
one feels heating or cooling energy (virya). Finally the substances have an action on urine, 
fasces and sweat (vipak). For instance, for hot chilli peppers, one immediately experiences 
its pungent taste (rasa) and heating energy (virya) , observing a burning sensation in the 
faces and urine (vipaka) . 
Virya – Heating or Cooling Energy
When any medicinal herb or food substance is put in the mouth, the first experience is its 
taste. Later, and in some cases immediately, you feel its heating or cooling energy, either in 
the mouth or stomach. This change is all due to its action or potent energy called Virya.
By experience, one can form general rules about what a taste "feels like" in the body. For 
example, the sweet taste has a cooling energy, due to its heaviness. This action provokes 
kapha and is pleasing to pitta and vata. But there are occasional exceptions to this rule. 
Honey  is  sweet but have heating energy. This unexpected effect is termed Prabhav. In this 
same way, sour taste is usually heating expect in the instance of lime, which is cooling.


Vipak – Post-Digestive Effect
The final post-digestive effect of the taste on the body, mind and consciousness is called 
Vipak. While sweet and salty taste have a sweet vipak, sour taste has a sour vipak, but that 
of pungent, bitter and astringent tastes are all pungent. Knowledge of the energy and post-
digestive effect of food or medicinal herbs makes understanding of its action on bodily system 
easy. This knowledge being essential for both healing and cooking.
Prabhav – Specific Unexplained Action
When two substances of similar taste, energy and post-digestive effect show entirely different 
action, it is called prabhav. There is no logical explanation for this.  All gem stones, crystals 
and mantras aid healing due to their prabhav.
Prabhav is therefore the specific, dynamic, hidden action of the awareness present in the 
substance.
Diet Planning 
Choice of Food
In planning the diet it is necessary to know which food to have or avoid based on ones 
personal doshic constitution or imbalance. For easy reference therefore some of the 
acceptable and avoidable items for each doshic type has been listed below:
Table 19
Fruits
Vata
Pitta
Kapha
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
apples
Avocades
apples(sour)
apples(sweet)
bananas
apples
dates
grapes
berries(sour)
berries(sweet)
dates
berries
figs (dry)
lemons
cranberries
coconuts
grapes
cranber
ries
pomegranate
bananas
strawberries
dates
water melons
pomegr
anates
raisin
sweet oranges
banana
figs
sweetners
dried 
fruits
pears 
Plum
lemon
avocados
melons
strawbe
rries in 
small 
amount
s 
 
figs (fresh)
peaches 
sweet melons
mango
 


 
mango 
 
plums
coconut 
 
 
 
 
pomegranates 
 
 
Dairy
Vata
Pitta
Kapha
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
cheese
dairy
yogurt
fresh ghee
milk
just a 
little 
dairy
cow’s milk
Fresh, whole
sour cream 
fresh whole un-
homogenized 
milk 
clarified butter 
cheese 
goat 
milk 
and 
ghee in 
modera
tion 
powdered
un-homogenized 
milk
 
 
 
 
yogurt
Ghee
 
  
 
  
 
little butter
 
 
 
 
 
white meat 
(chicken, fish or 
turkey – baked or 
broiled)
 
 
 
 
 
chicken broth
 
 
 
 
Grains
 
Vata
Pitta
Kapha
 
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
 
Barley
white or brown 
basmati rice
Corn
white or brown 
basmati rice, 
wheat
Bread(with 
yeast)
barley 
buckwh
eat 
cousou
s millet
 
corn
wheat
millet
barley
oat(cooked)
muesli
 
cereals
Oats
oat(dry)
oat bran
wheat
oats
 
granola
quinoa 
quinoa
oats
white rice
oat 
bran
 
millet
 
polenta 
wheat or wheat 
bran
cane 
small 
amount 
of 
wheat
 


tapioca 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meat
 
Vata
Pitta
Kapha
 
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
 
turkey
white meat 
(chicken, fish and 
turkey - baked or 
broiled)
meat
rabbit
chicken broth 
chicken
pork
 
ducks
lamb
 
eggs
 
 
pork
 
 
salmon
 
 
sardines
baked or broiled 
chicken, turkey or 
white fish in 
moderate 
amounts 
beef
fresh 
water 
fish
 
buffalo
shrimp
 
chicken
rabbit
 
duck
venison 
 
small 
amount 
of white 
meat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vegetables
 
Vata
Pitta
Kapha
 
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
 
Cabbage(
raw)
beets
Beet
asparagus
Cucumber
asparag
us
 
Cauliflow
er(raw)
cauliflower(cooke
d)
greens
broccoli
Olives
beets
 
Peas
Leeks
Carrots
cabbage
Potato
bitter
 
Potatoes
carrots
Garlic
cucumber
Pumpkin
melons 
Spinach
asparagus
Green Chillies
cooked onions
Spaghetti
broccoli 
Eggplant
cilantro
Onion
sweet
Squash
beet 
greens
 
Mushroo
m
fennel and a little 
bit of garlic
Peppers
potatoes
Tomato(raw) 
cabbag
e
 
Raddish(r
aw)
green beans
Prickly pear
sprouts
 
garlic
 
Spinach
greens chillies
Radishes
squash and a 
small amount of 
okra and 
cauliflower 
 
fennel
 


Tomatoes
(raw) 
Okra
Spinach
 
 
carrot
 
 
parsnips
Turnips
 
 
horsera
dish
 
 
pumpkins
 
 
 
leafy 
greens
 
 
radishes( 
preferably 
cooked) 
 
 
 
leeks
 
 
 
 
 
 
lettuce
 
 
 
 
 
 
okra
 
 
 
 
 
 
cooked 
onions
 
 
 
 
 
 
spinach 
 
 
 
 
 
sprouts 
 
 
 
 
 
squash 
 
 
 
 
 
turnip 
and a 
small 
amount 
of 
artichok
e, 
burdock 
root 
and 
brussel
s 
sprouts 
 
 
 
Spices
 
Vata
Pitta
Kapha
 
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
 


Carawas  
 
Ajwan
Ajwan
Black pepper
Almond extract
Anise
cardamom
Aruise
Asafoctida
coriander
Basil
Basil
seeds
Bay leaf
Bay leaf
cinnamon
Black pepper
Garlic
cilantro
All spices are 
good.
Ginger
fennel seeds
cilantro, cummin, 
corriander and 
fennel seeds, 
turmeric and 
asafoetida(hing) 
Mace
fresh basil
 
Pippai
dill
 
Mustard
turmeric and a 
small amount of 
cumin and fresh 
ginger 
 
Seeds    
 
 
 
 
Salt   
chillies, 
ginger, 
cinnam
on, 
clove, 
fenugre
ek and 
bay 
leaves
 
Ajawan 
Arvise
 
Asafoeti
da
 
Bay leaf 
Carawa
y
 
Cinnam
on
 
Dill
 
Mace
 
Nutmeg 
Saffron  
 
 
Nuts
 
Vata
Pitta
Kapha
 
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
 


None
small amount of 
almonds
Almonds
pecans and 
sesame seeds 
Cashew
 
Peanuts
 
Pinenuts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sunflower seeds 
and almonds in 
moderate amount 
Almonds
small 
amount 
of 
almond
s ,
 
Black Walnuts
charole 
 
Brazil nuts
 
 
Filberts
 
 
Hazelnuts
 
 
Peanuts
 
 
Pine nuts
 
 
Walnuts
 
 
Uneasy Combinations for all body types
The next important factor requiring attention in the planning of diet is the incompatibility of 
certain combinations of food that disturb the normal functioning of gastric fire and interfere 
with the equilibrium of the three doshas, thereby creating toxins (ama) – the root cause of all 
ailments. A list of the same is indicated below :
Table 20
Milk with
fish, meat, curd, sour fruits, bread containing yeast, cherries, yogurt
Melons with
grains, starch, fried foods, dairy products
Starches with
eggs, tea, dairy, bananas, dates, most fruits
Honey with
when mixed with an equal amount of clarified butter, boiled or cooked 
honey
Radishes with
milk, bananas, raisins
Nightshades with
potato, yogurt, milk, melon, cucumber, tomato, eggplant
Yogurt with
milk, sour fruits, melons, hot drinks, meat, fish, mangos, starch, cheese
Eggs with
milk, meat, yogurt, melons, cheese, fish, bananas
Fruit with
with any other food
Corn with
dates, raisins, bananas
Lemon with
yogurt, milk, cucumbers, tomatoes
Water in Ayurveda :
Different synonyms for water are used by the brilliant scholars of Ayurveda representing either 
the properties of the water or importance of the water in human life. Jeevanam is a synonym 
for water which means life. Life could not exist on this planet without water. For an Ayurveda 


physician water is not only an essential nutrient but is one among the five basic elements 
essential for the creation of this universe. It is Jalamahabhoot i.e water element.
According to charaka liquid, unctuous, cold, soft, sticky & sweet taste are the attributes of the 
substances predominanted by water. Moistening, unctuous, binding, oozing, softening and 
exhilarating are the effects of  watery edible substances on the human body.
Taste is also an attribute of jalamhabhoot. According to caraka water is the basis of taste. 
Water is basically tasteless but as soon as it falls from the sky gets endowed with the 
properties of the five elements, or comes in contact with other substances & taste appears in 
water.
Classification of Water: 
Charaka while describing the various types of water mentioned that, entire water is only one 
which falls down as rain from the sky, that while falling or having fallen down depend on place 
and time. He further says that water while falling down from sky & coming in contact with the 
moon the air & the sun which follows time, gets impregnated with the properties of cold, hot, 
unctuous, non unctuous etc. & so on, as  it rests on the ground. 
Soil & The Water : 
According to Charaka the pure rain water has by nature six qualities namely cold, pure, 
wholesome, palatable, clean & light. But when water falls on earth its properties change 
according to the soil on which it has fallen. In white soil it becomes astringent, in pale it 
becomes bitter, in brown alkaline, in usara i.e red saline, in hilly area pungent, & in black soil it 
becomes sweet. The water from rain, hailstone and snow is tasteless.
The Season & The Water : 
According to charaka- 
(1) The fresh rain water of the rainy season is heavy, cases blockage to the channels & 
sweet. That of autumn is thin, light, and which does not block the channels in the body.
 (2) In early winter water is unctuous, aphrodisiac, strength promoting & heavy. 
(3) In later winter it is light and alleviates kapha & vata.
 (4) The water of spring season is astringent, sweet & rough. 
(5) In summer it is non blocking for channels. 
The River & The Water :    
Charakacharya has described the properties of water from different rivers. It’s a a huge 
ecological observation. It shows the wisdom & the extent of eco-friendly nature of oriental 
thinking.
The river originating from Himalayas , constantly used by the sages   having water that is 
obstructed, agitated & beaten is wholesome & virtuous, says Charaka. (According to modern 
science the water agitated & beaten by the big stones in the bed of the river contains more 


oxygen). Those originating from Himalaya, carrying stones & sand have clean water which is 
like nectar. This rivers flowing towards west have clean water & are wholesome while those 
joining the eastern sea are mostly mild flowing & do not have clean water.
Good Water
The water which falls from the sky is called as Aindrya Jala. It is the principal drinking water. 
Best water is slightly astringent, sweet, thin, non slimy, light, non rough & does not block the 
channels of the body says Charaka. 
Jala Mahaboot & Human Body :
While describing the predominance of Mahabhootaas in human body in   Charak samhita 
Charakacharya cleared stated that, “ the liquid, mobile, dull, unctuous, soft & slimy, plasma, 
blood, fat, kapha, pitta, urine, sweat etc. along with the taste & gustatory sense are 
predominantly made up to Jala Mahabhoot. These are the watery ingredients of the body. 
Udakavaha Srotas :
Strotas are defined as transporting passages of dhatus undergoing transformation.  
For udakavaha srotas, the orign is palate & pancreas. The symptoms of their affliction are 
dryness of tongue, palate, lips, throat, pancreas & excessive thirst. The signs mentioned 
above are the early signs of dehydration irrespective of the cause. It is clear from the 
description mentioned above that the udakavaha strotas is ment for maintaining the water 
balance of the body.
                   


*Rules for water intake:
Water should not be taken before food as it diminishes the digestive fire in the stomach & 
hampers digestion.
Water with food( advised in cases of regular stones in the excretory system) causes weight 
gain & postpones digestion.
Water after food hampers digestion & aggravates kapha, because of which one feels drowsy.
Cold water taken in normal & cold climates causes constipation, irritable bowel syndrome,& 
weight gain. It should always be taken in hot temperatures.
Hot / lukewarm water is good for digestion, alleviates vata & kapha & is fat – cutting. Thus 
should be used in obesity. This should be avoided in hot temperatures, pitta diseases & 
persons of pitta constitution.
An ideal time for drinking  water after meals is at least half an hour after you have had food .
Drinking a glass of luke-warm water helps flush out all toxins accumulated overnight in the 
body, is helpful in constipation & relieves one of gases.
*lukewarm water should be avoided by pitta body types in summers, or if a person is suffering 
from gastric acidity.
Dehydration :
Thirst is an urge to drink water. Water is so vital for all our body processes that thirst compels 
us to drink long before we get dehydrated i.e. dangerously low level of water in the body. 
Charakacharya, in his topic dealing with urge specifically mentioned that the urge of thirst 
should not be held. Suppression of thirst gives rise to dryness of throat & mouth, deafness, 
fatigue, depression & cardiac pain. For which cold & gratifying drinks are recommended. It 
becomes easy to control the complications when thirst itself is alleviated. Hence one should 
overcome thirst before it leads to other disorders.
Excessive thirst due to loss of fluid dries up the patient & kills him instantly. Hence one should 
take rain water mixed with honey. The ground water which is astringent in post digestive fate, 
thin, light, cold, fragrant, of good taste & non blocking of channels should be considered as 
rain water.
Water In Disease :
Charaka recommends naturally cold water in different conditions of thirst, burning sensation, 
fainting, giddiness, exhaustion, poisoning & bleeding disorders naturally  . In hiccups , 
difficulty in breathing, acute fever, coryza, after intake of ghee, disease of chest & throat, 
kapha & vata disorders, unctuosness in the body & just after evacuation, hot water is 
wholesome. 
Intake of too much water is not wholesome in case of aneamia ,  Ascitis, coryza,  Diabetes, 
Tumor, poor digestion, diarrhea & spleen enlargement. However, if the desire is intolarable 


one  should drink water added with sugar & honey or some other suitable & favourite 
preparation. 
Water In Fever : 
In condition of thirst, hot water should be given in  fever. Thirst caused by wine & pitta( 
excessive heat ), cold water boiled in small quantity is advisable. Both the above types of 
water are appetisers, digestive, antipyretic, channel cleansing, strength promoting, producing 
relish  & are wholesome. 
Water boiled with musta, parapatak, usira, chandana, udichya & Sunthi( names of herbs)  self 
cooled, should be administered to alleviate thirst & fever. 
Water In  Benign Tumor
The patients of bening tumor should use water boiled with laghu panchamool( group of herbs) 
.
Water in Diabetes
A person suffering from Diabetes should drink water processed with the drug of salasardai 
group (group of herbs) or kusa or honey water / triphala water /  juice of triphala which helps 
in controlling the sugar & keeping the body free from post- diabetic complications.
Water In Anaemia & Jaundice
For those suffering from Anaemia water boiled with herbs of laghupanchamula & for those 
suffering from Jaundice, the grape juice & the juice of amalaki is recommended.
Water in Panchakarma : 
In virechana karma, (Purgation) after taking purgative drugs if there is constipation & the 
impurities are discharged in little quantity & with delay, the patient should drink hot water. By 
this tympanitis, thirst, vomiting & constipation are pacified.
In charaka it is stated that “hot water digests the undigested unctuos substances, breaks 
kapha & carminates mind. Hence hot water should be given in emesis, purgation in herbal 
water & oil enema for pacification of vata & kapha.
Water Preparation :
Water prepared with different substances are mentioned in Charak samhita. To avoid the 
repetition these water preparations are discussed here in short.
1) Shadangapaneeya ( water with six herbs ) in obesity


Water boiled with musta, parapatak, ushir, chandan, udichya & sunti is called as 
Shadangapaneeya. Shadangapaneeya is indicated in all types of fever & bening tumour.It is 
fat cutting & very useful in obesity.
2)
Trinapanchamool water.
This is indicated in excessive thirst. The water boiled with Trinapanchamool & mixed with 
sugar candy is called as Trunapanchamool Jala.
3)
Water in excessive thirst
In excessive thirst the water boiled with tender leaves of matrulunga, vetas, roots of kush, 
kasha & madhuyashti is advised. This water is then filtered & allowed to cool for the use.
Water prepared with Laghu panchamool, Bruhat Panchamool, Dashamool are also some 
other examples of the water prepared useful in different disease conditions. 
Cow Milk & Buffalo Milk – An Ayurvedic View Point :
Charak samhita is the oldest one in all Ayurvedic tests. In the  Charak Samhita the properties 
& the usage of cow & buffalo milk are described . The description is based on the 
panchamahabhautic theory.  
Cow Milk
Buffalo Milk
Properties – Best among the 
Properties – Enhances 
Rejuvenator tonics .
Sleep & decreases excessive
appetite. 
In the description from Charak Samhita the properties of cow’s milk & buffalo’s milk are 
compared. So the buffalo’s milk is colder, more unctuous, heavier than the cow milk.  
It means though the Gunas (properties) are same in both the milk but their percentage & 
proportion with each other varies in the two types. This difference in the proportion of 
Mahabhuta influences the properties of the milk. More of Pruthvi & Jala Mahabhuta are the 
causative factors of ‘Kapha dosha’ and hence buffalo’s milk increase the ‘kapha dosha’ in the 
body. Because of this increase in kapha dosha it enhances the sleep & controls excessive 
appetite. On the other hand because of the proportionate composition of gunas & the balance 
of Panchamahadhutas the cow milk is described as the best  rejuvenator & also it delights the 
mind. 
Charakacharya stated that, because the properties of cow’s milk & ‘Oja’ are the same, the 
cow’s milk is the best among the rejuvinater tonics. 
GENERAL RULES TO BE PRESCRIBED FOR EVERY INDIVIDUAL:
When a person comes for ayurvedic counselling, you may directly prescribe him the general 
rules which are to be followed by every person.
These  constitute of the following:


1 Dincharya i.e regime to be followed everyday,
2 Rutucharya i.e regime to be followed in that particular season,
3 Uneasy combinations which are to be avoided by all.
4  Make the individual aware of the concept of an ideal diet & functions of food. He should 
be informed about the time , quantity & order in which the food should be taken.(all this 
information is given above in importance of diet)
5 Rules of water intake as given above( in water according to ayurveda)should be prescribed 
to all individuals.
4 The food articles (diet) to be taken & avoided on daily basis should be prescribed from 
table no. 19 i.e choice of food according to vata/ pitta / kapha , which will be most beneficial 
for the individual. 
5  Food articles prescribed out of the table no.19 should be taken from table no.21 keeping 
in mind that they don’t aggravate the individuals  Doshas with respect to his body constitution 
& season in which he is dwelling.( refer NOTE 21 at the end of food charts)
6 The regime for woman’s cycle (periods) is also common and hence should be prescribed 
to all woman.
7 In the regime of Rutucharya and Dinacharya the prescribed hair oil, massage oil etc ,should 
be different according to the body constitution. 
Apart from common prescriptions, here are some principal guidelines with examples about 
how to prescribe seasonal routines &  diet to all healthy individuals according to their 
personal body constitution & the season they are dwelling in.
 DETERMINING THE BODY TYPE OF AN INDIVIDUAL:
Table 12 & 13 which give information about physical characters and emotional characters 
about each body type. One should tick the particular characters he has for each of the Dosha 
and count them. The maximum number of characters in a particular dosha gives his major 
body type, and the second is his minor body type i.e if one finds maximum characters of Vata 
Dosha and lesser of Pitta Dosha and the least of Kapha Dosha, his body type is predominant 
in Vata and less dominant in Pitta. He has a dual body type i.e. Vata Pitta.( you can match it 
with table no.10 and see which of the photograph type does the individual resemble).
After diagnosing the constitution of the individual, if he is predominant in kapha dosha, table 
11 will give him the Do’s and don’t’s of each dosha. In Kapha Dosha and even in diseases 
related to Kapha dosha(increase in kapha dosha- table no 8, table no.7- ailments caused by 
the impairment of five types of kaphas), one must be prescribed to take less quantity of food 
which is warm and take food having pungent, bitter and astringent taste. He should be 
advised to observe fast, once a week. He should do oil massage with stimulating oils like 
sahacharadi oil etc. He should do regular and vigorous exercise & have kapha tea. Herbal 
dietary supplements  as mentioned earlier like Guggul, Sitopaladi Churna, Trikatu, 


Chavanprash should be prescribed strictly under medical guidance. Likewise, for pitta & 
vata body types.
If a person is dwelling in the rainy season (early fall) it is but natural that even the seasonal 
aggravations of Vata Dosha will be there. This is given in table 15. The tastes of seasons and 
seasonal taste adjustment are given in table no 16 & 17. A person having Vata dosha 
predominant should be prescribed & strictly told to follow the regime of early rainy season 
(given in, regime in rainy season). The tastes given for this season are Major- Sweet, 
moderate salty, moderate unctuous, warm. Minor –Pungent, astringent etc given in the same 
table. He should be prescribed with the season do’s & dont’s given for rainy season in table 
18.The food articles (diet) to be taken on daily basis should be prescribed from table no. 19 
i.e choice of food according to vata, which will be most beneficial for the individual. ( on the 
same guidelines prescribe routines for pitta body types dwelling in autumn & kapha body 
types dwelling in spring)…..always remember that before aggravation there is accumulation 
of the specific Dosha with respect to the season( refer table no.15).So if the 16 & 17 no 
charts are followed in the accumulation period i.e 25 days prior to the aggravating season , 
there would be minimum aggravation of the Doshas & thus the ailments( refer table no 3,4, 
5,6,7 & 8) related to it … In this way Ayurveda can be the best preventive natural 
medication.
If an individual’s body type is Pitta-Kapha and he his dwelling in the early rainy season, where 
there is aggravation of Vata Dosha. He should be prescribed with the general rules given in 
regime for rainy season , as both the Doshas forming his body type are not dominant in this 
season( table no.15).The prescription should include seasonal taste adjustments & seasonal 
do’s & don’ts for pitta( table 17 & 18). The food articles (diet) to be taken on daily basis should 
be prescribed from table no. 19 i.e choice of food according to pitta , which will be most 
beneficial for the individual. Food articles prescribed out of the table no.19 should be taken 
from table no.21 keeping in mind that they don’t aggravate pitta & kapha(refer note 21 at the 
end of food charts). He should follow the Dincharya and avoid the uneasy combinations given 
for all body types in table 20. These combinations should be avoided by every individual as 
mentioned earlier. 
