AYU SAMVAD
Ayurveda 
for 
COVID 19
My Health 
My Responsibility


Ayurveda for COVID 19
My Health 
My Responsibility
About the  Lecture [PowerPoint Presentation]
The Power point Presentation you can download 
Ÿ
from www.aiia.gov.in  and  www.ayush.gov.in
The Power point presentation is a brief gist and the 
Ÿ
lecture material maybe referred to keep the uniformity 
in lectures
The Power point presentation maybe translated into 
Ÿ
regional language as per the need
These lectures do not contradict to the National COVID 
Ÿ
guidelines framed time to time by the Government
These lectures do not intend to comment on other 
Ÿ
Medical systems 
The medicines mentioned maybe taken under 
Ÿ
supervision of authentic Ayurveda Vaidya
Each Ayurveda graduate are expected to conduct 
Ÿ
minimum 05 public lectures on the provided theme 
and report back to their respective authorities and get 
the feed back of the community
A      L E C T U R E


1
Chief Patron:
Shri Shripad Yasso Naik
Hon’ble Union Minister of State ( I/C)
Ministry of AYUSH, Govt. of India
Patron:
Padmashree Vaidya Rajesh Kotecha
Secretary, 
Ministry of AYUSH
Co- Patrons:
Shri Pramod Kumar Pathak,
Additional Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH
Shri P N Ranjit Kumar,
Joint Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH
Shri Roshan Jaggi
Joint Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH
Advisory Panel:
Dr. Manoj Nesari, Advisor (Ayurveda)
Ministry of AYUSH
Dr. D.C. Katoch, Advisor (Ayurveda) 
 
Ministry of AYUSH 
Chief Editor:
Prof. Tanuja Manoj Nesari,
Ministry of AYUSH 
 
 
 
Director, All India Institute of 
Ayurveda
Nodal Oícer & Executive Editor:
Dr. Umesh Tagade,
Joint Director, 
All India Institute of Ayurveda
Associate Editors: 
Prof. Medha Kulkarni, AIIA
Dr. Meera K. Bhojani, AIIA


All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA), New Delhi is conceived as an apex 
Ayurveda institute under the Ministry of AYUSH with a vision to be an 
out-standing centre of excellence for Ayurveda Education, Research and 
Healthcare. The First Ever All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA), set up 
along the lines of AIIMS, was dedicated to the Nation by the Honorable 
Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi on 2nd Ayurveda Day on 17th 
October, 2017 at New Delhi. Set up as an apex institute under the Ministry 
of AYUSH, AIIA is bringing synergy between the traditional wisdom of 
Ayurveda and modern diagnostic tools and technology.  AIIA has also 
been awarded with NABH Accreditation, therefore becoming the ϐirst 
Ayurveda Hospital in Public Sector to be conferred with NABH 
accreditation in July, 2017, indicating the quality patient services it is 
rendering.
AIIA is playing an exemplary role in providing Holistic care through 
individualized Ayurveda Medicine, diet, Yoga and Relaxation techniques 
to COVID 19 patients across India.
As envisioned by the Ministry of AYUSH, in pursuance to the 5th 
Ayurveda Day 2020 theme "Ayurveda for Covid-19 Pandemic”, a 
campaign in the form of lecture series “AYU SAMVAD“ is organized from 
26.01.2021 to 30.04.2021 pan India to make people  aware about 
Ayurveda & COVID 19 pandemic. The objective of this campaign is to 
educate the community in an authentic way and make them feel 
responsible for their own health. “My Health My Responsibility”
Introduction:
2


On 11 March 2020, WHO declared Novel Corona-virus Disease 
(COVID19) outbreak as a pandemic and reiterated the call for countries 
to take immediate actions and scale up response to treat, detect and 
reduce transmission to save people's lives. 
There's a lot of information & misinformation out there about 
coronavirus (COVID-19) and role of Ayurveda in this pandemic. Myths 
related to various infections have been prevalent from time to time, and 
it takes a long battle to de-mystify the existing myths by providing a 
realistic evidence-based approach. These myths can be very dangerous, 
as these can lead to over- complacency and lead to a reduction in actually 
needed practices, or can lead to other health hazards. Most importantly, 
it is necessary to get the information from reputable sources
 In view of the above, the AYUSH Ministry has envisioned to conduct a 
public campaign AYU SAMVAD (Public Awareness Campaign) 
“AYURVEDA FOR COVID PANDEMIC”. to enable equip the health 
workers & general public with the right information and to enable them 
cascade the same to the communities they are serving.
The main objective of the campaign is to create awareness through 
Lecture series to make common people aware of the   theme “Ayurveda   
for   Covid-19   Pandemic". This campaign will assist to ensure the 
uniformity of information delivered to approximately 01 crore target 
audience across India through 05 Lakh lectures. This campaign will be 
immensely beneϐicial in understanding the importance of Ayurveda & in 
the ϐight against Covid-19 and will speciϐically focus on the Role of 
Preventive, Promotive, Curative and Restorative Ayurveda Management 
of  Covid-19.
3


Ayurveda is unique in its approach as a healing science, rather than 
merely a medical science. It is rightly considered as science of life and it 
gives due importance to all the aspects of treatment. The word Ayurved is 
comprised of Ayu + Ved. Ayu denotes the healthy and happy life where as 
Ved is derived from vid dhatu which means the knowledge. Hence 
Ayurveda should be considered in true sense as Knowledge system about 
healthy and happy life.  
Moreover, it emphasizes on knowledge system, which includes 
physician, infrastructure, supporting staﬀ and legislation. The COVID 19 
pandemic is also a role model to prove the signiϐicance of considering all 
the aspects of the Chikitsa Chatushpada; wherein the whole knowledge 
system viz. physician, medication, para-medicals and the patient – 
everyone had their participatory role, hence 
proving the worth of the whole knowledge 
system depicted in Ayurveda.
In covid pandemic situation not only 
physical health was aﬀected but 
psychological, social as well spiritual 
health were also aﬀected.   
The motto is to make a move from 
Illness to Wellness and Wellness to 
Happiness. It is not sufϐicient to just 
Ayurveda: 
Knowledge System of Healthy and Happy Life 
4
Refer SLIDE 3 from the shared PowerPoint Presentation


cure the disease or in other words the Wellness is not just merely one 
does not suﬀer from any ailment and is able to do the regular work. 
Medicine typically treats injuries, disabilities, and symptoms, to bring 
the individual to a "neutral point" where there is no longer any visible 
illness. However, the Wellness Paradigm requires moving the state of 
wellbeing further along the continuum towards optimal emotional and 
mental states that is towards happiness. This is the state of achieving 
your higher self. The concept assumes that wellbeing is a dynamic rather 
than a static process. 
Ayu to Deeraghayu, 
Deeraghayu to Sukhayu 
and 
Sukhayu to Hitayu.
Ayurveda therefore proposes 
the paradigm shift from 
5


The concepts and practices of Ayurveda are deeply rooted in our 
community viz the kitchen remedies, making use of spices, rituals and 
traditions observed in India at various seasons and places. This is the 
nerve of our traditions. However, it is not merely a Folklore or Home 
Remedies Science, as it is scientiϐic and provides an insight to our beliefs 
as truth. For instance, observing the rituals of eating Sesame seeds and 
jiggery on Makar Sankranti falling in the winter season will enhance the 
robustness of health and closely matches with the Ritucharya described 
for this season in Ayurveda literatures. Similarly, lighting a common ϐire 
as ritual of Holi, falling in Vasant Ritu is a reϐlection of Public Swedana to 
be advised in this season to mitigate the Kapha prakopa as is depicted in 
Ayurveda. Thus, as explained through customs, traditions or rituals or as 
a part of kitchen herbs, Ayurveda is tightly woven in Indian community, 
which makes it all the more acceptable to meet the health and wellness 
for all. Ayurveda is the binding science which advocates scientiϐic 
parameters to give insight to those belief system of Indian community. In  
present covid situation also use of Kitchen remedies like Haldi, Ardrak, 
Tulasi, Marich, Jeera in the form of Ayushkwath or Haldi milk helped to 
prevent the disease by modulating the immunity. Thus, what is needed is 
to touch the roots and transform the lives of the people.
Ayurveda:
Rooted in Community & Public Health
Refer SLIDE 4 from the shared PowerPoint Presentation
AYURVEDA
6


Aims of Ayurveda: 
Ayurveda has two basic aims: First, to preserve the health of healthy 
people and to help them attain the four principle aims of life (virtue, 
purpose or wealth, pleasure, and release or liberation from cycle of 
rebirth); second, to treat illness and disease. The disease COVID has 
provided an opportunity to prove Ayurveda – its strength in both of 
these ϐields viz. prophylaxis & prevention through Immuno 
modulators (Rasayana) and in treating the mild to moderate cases 
through the stand alone Ayurveda treatment in signiϐicant number of 
cases through the Advisory protocol notiϐied by Ministry of AYUSH – 
Gargling, Anu Taila Nasya,  AYUSH kwath, Samshamani Vati, 
Chyawanprash etc. Moreover, an integrated approach imbibing the 
rules of diet, sleep, and healthy life style regimen (true meaning of 
brahmacharya) is incorporated for achieving both the aims along with 
keeping in mind the individualization of the patient as a unique being 
and providing a tailor made treatment for every individual based on 
his/her Prakriti (Constitution). 
7
Personalized 
Holistic 
Approach
Maintenance 
of Health
Management 
of Diseases
Refer SLIDE 5 from 
the shared PowerPoint Presentation


Strengths of Ayurveda:
Ayurveda science has certain salient characteristic features which makes 
it unique. First of all, it is Time tested. It has the legacy of thousands of 
years well documented in form of texts and practiced till today. As it has 
its roots in the community and as it is our genetic knowledge, it becomes 
Cost eﬀective. Many of the remedies mentioned are readily available in 
the Kitchen and known to a common man. Since, these remedies are part 
and parcel of our routine life in form of spices, herbs, vegetables etc., it 
Quality, Safety & Efϐicacy assured. Further, this system has separate 
governing body, Ministry of AYUSH to ensure the optimal development 
and propagation of AYUSH systems of health care, regulating the rules 
pertaining to the Quality, Safety & Efϐicacy of the drugs and procedures. 
Ayurveda has Rasayana herbs like Amla, Guduchi, Shatavari, 
Ashwagnadha etc. which are known to the common public and can be 
easily grown in the kitchen garden. These drugs bring about the immune 
modulation, Restoration and Rejuvenation of the body tissues.  For the 
treatment of various ailments, we have vast choices of treatment based 
on the condition of the patient, condition and stages of diseases, 
environment, time and place; in terms of Shamana (Palliation), Shodhana 
(Bio puriϐication), Nidana Parivarjana (Avoiding the causes), Antah 
Parimarjana, Bahir Parimarjana, Shastra Pranidhana and so on. In the 
vast ϐlora and fauna in the biodiversity of India, thousands of drugs are 
available to choose for treatment. More than 10,000 herbal & Herbo-
mineral formulations are documented in the texts for the purpose. The 
Panchakarma in an unique modality of treatment wherein the toxin are 
removed from the natural oriϐices through Emesis (Vamana), Purgation 
(Virechana), Enema (Basti),  Nasal Errhines(Nasya) or Blood letting 
(RaktaMokshana). These modalities of detoxiϐication is applicable in 
various pathological conditions as well as for the maintenance of health 
in terms of seasonal Panchakarma. Apart from the treatment modalities, 
8
Refer SLIDE 6 & 7 from 
the shared PowerPoint Presentation


a Holistic integrated approach is imbibed incorporating the guidelines to 
Ahara, Vihara & Achara. Ayurveda also makes a synergy with Yoga system 
and brings about Mental & Spiritual healing. 
Ayurveda science tends to consider the individual as a whole: a soul 
/mind/senses /body thinking and interacting with its environment. It is 
thus a matter of adjusting a treatment according to the individual 
characteristics of each patient. The approach of P5 medicine as 
Predictive, Preventive, Promotive, Personalized & Participatory is well 
incorporated in Ayurveda principles and not merely curative alone.
Personalised: everyone is unique, we are interested in the 
personal proϔile of the individual (genetic, environmental, etc.).
Preventive: health education aims to reduce the risk of disease 
(primary prevention), promote early detection (secondary 
prevention) and improve the quality of life of the sick (tertiary 
prevention). “Wellness” is at the centre of these diﬀerent processes.
Promotive: The immune modulators in form of Rasayana drugs 
like Amalaki, Ashwagandha, Shatavari etc. the health status is 
enhanced to its optimum in the desired way.
Predictive: by establishing a personalised mapping of the risk 
factors and protective elements of a person's health, the risk of 
developing a disease can be assessed and the most appropriate drug 
and other treatments proposed.
9


Participatory: patients are the actors of their own health and 
care. They are now considered “expert patients”, with theoretical 
knowledge and subjective knowledge derived from experience of 
their disorders. Further, during COVID it is once again proved that 
'health is an individual responsibility” by following the proper 
prophylaxis, diet and regimen.
Further, it also imparts the Universal approach of looking to the 
individual being as a reϐlection of the universe, through “Loka Purusha 
Samya Siddhanta” which says that whatever is present outside is present 
inside. There exists a harmony and synergy between the macrocosm & 
microcosm. 
The comprehensive deϐinition of health as mentioned in Ayurveda is a 
state of balance – physically, mentally & emotionally. Health is 
uninterrupted physical, mental, spiritual happiness and fulϐillment; a 
true balance of organs/systems, psyche and spirit, and balanced and 
creative relationships with fellow creatures and nature as a whole, 
family, friends, work, climate, ideals and customs. This holistic 
perspective is one of Ayurveda's basic principles. Swastha also means 
being established in one's self. Generally, we talk about mental health 
and physical health, but one of Ayurveda's basic principles emphasizes 
from the beginning that we should be established in our self. Ayurveda 
together with its sister science, yoga, which includes the practice of 
meditation, helps you to stay physically ϐit and spiritually on point at all 
times in order to lead a holistically healthy life. Ayurveda views physical 
health as balance and Wellness as living the dynamic expression of your 
own nature and body type to its full potential.
Implementation of this holistic approach in COVID situation helped the 
community to restrict the spread and also improved the immunity so as 
to keep the disease in mild to moderate grade in most of the population.
10


Kaaya 
Chikitsa
Baala 
Chikitsa
Graha 
Chikitsa
Urdhvaanga 
Chikitsa
 Shalya 
Chikitsa
 Damstra 
Chikitsa
Jara 
Chikitsa
Vrushan 
Chikitsa
Ayurveda
Knowledge System:
Ayurveda knowledge is systematically categorized into eight specialties, 
which looks after the diﬀerent needs of diﬀerent conditions, pathologies, 
body systems and treatment procedures. Basically there were two main 
branches viz. Kaya Chikitsa (Internal medicine) and Shalya Tantra 
(Surgery). This was later further divided into 08 specialties called as 
Ashtang Ayurveda. Today, there are 14 specialties existing in Ayurveda. 
Hence, specialized treatment is provided based on the need of the disease 
and the diseased. However, in spite of having these specialties, Ayurveda 
does not keep an analytical approach. The approach is synthesized 
through the concept of Triskandha viz. Hetu, Linga and Aushadha. In 
other words, the basics remains common for all the 08 branches, in the 
interest of patient. 
Amongst 8 branches Jara / Vrushan is the unique branch which speaks 
about rejuvenation and immune-modulation. During COVID 19 through 
this unique wisdom of  immune-modulatory measures Ayurveda could 
serve the entire humanity.
11
Refer SLIDE 8 from 
the shared PowerPoint Presentation


Epidemics or outbreak is a sudden spread of the disease within a short 
time to a large number of people in a given population.
In Ayurveda, a concept similar to the epidemic is narrated by Acharya 
Charaka under a broad heading 'Janapadodhwamsa'. The word 
'Janapadodhwamsa'comprises of two words Janapada(large population) 
&Udhvamsa (destruction) which means the diseases aﬀecting & causing 
damage of a large number of people; similar to pandemic.
Factors which are common to the community like air (Vayu), water 
(Jala), habitat (Desha) and seasons (Kala) are responsible for 
'Janapadodhwamsa'. These factors prove to be true even today in 
perspective of diﬀerent Pandemic situations like COVID. COVID 
19, according to Ayurveda is caused by vitiated Vayu 
(droplets) and vitiated Desha. Thus, Herbal Fumigation 
(Hawan) with ghee and Vayu shuddhikara drugs was 
advocated and was found useful.
Similarly, Sushruta has given the concept of 
Aupasargika Roga for the communicable diseases 
and diﬀerent modes of transmission are also well 
explained. Avoiding these factors of transmission is 
nothing but the modiϐied practical version of COVID 
prevention viz. social distancing, avoid gathering, 
frequent hygiene, sanitization, wearing mask etc.
Epidemics in Ayurveda:
ŉसƟाƲाłसंˮशा¹pɻ˙ासात ्सहभोजनात ्|
सहशʲासनाɁाnप वȒमा˃ानलुेपनात ्||
Aupasargika Roga (Sushruta samhita)
12
Refer SLIDE 9 from 
the shared PowerPoint Presentation


Anukta Vyadhis in Ayurveda:
The question arises whether such newly discovered diseases like 
COVID 19, Dengue, Zika virus, chikungunya etc. mentioned in 
Ayurveda texts or they are new to the Ayurveda fraternity? Ayurveda 
has clearly speciϐied that there may be innumerable number of 
Vyadhis possible out of permutations and combinations of Tridoshas, 
Sapta Dhatus and Malas. The guidelines for diagnosis of the disease in 
terms of NidanaPanchaka viz. etiology, prodromal symptoms, 
symptomatology, pathogenesis, prognosis etc are explained in detail 
and based on these, one can infer the etio-pathogenesis of any disease 
which are newly discovered.
COVID 19 may also be explored on the same guidelines. COVID 19 is 
considered to be caused due to vitiation of Vata  along with kapha in 
initial phase and with pitta in the later stage, making it a Sannipatika 
Vyadhi. Rasa ,Rakta and Mamsa are main Dushya  however in some 
cases Oja is also depleted
Thus, the concept of including the new diseases in the compendium 
and understanding them through basic concepts is not a newer thing 
to Ayurveda.
nवकारनामाकुशलो nन जŔीया̡  कदाचन|
nन ह सव¹nवकाराणा ंनामतोऽ˪ ņवुा ˫nतः||
Acharya Charaka
13
Refer SLIDE 10 from 
the shared PowerPoint Presentation


Chikitsa is a process of management which 
involves multi factorial issues and persons. 
In Ayurveda, however the success of 
Chikitsa depends mainly upon four factors 
which are known as Chikitsa Chatushpada. 
These Chatushpada includes Bhishag, 
Upastha, Rogi and Dravya.
Health management system in Ayurveda. 
Sucessful management depends on 
availability and best qualities of for 
segments  i.e. 
Ÿ Vaidya (physician)
Ÿ Parichayak (para medical and supporting staﬀ)
Ÿ Ayushdha (Medicines) And  
Rogi (well aware and convinced  patIent )
In Covid 19 Awareness  and eduction of  preventive  like donning 
,dofϐing, hand sanitization  and manegement  of Covid 19 to all the 
segments of  Chatushpada is important.  Similarly, availability and 
feasibility of required medicines and infrastructure like green zones, 
orange zones and red zones etc is  important.
Fourfold
Health Management 
through Knowledge system:
14
Refer SLIDE 11 from 
the shared PowerPoint Presentation


Establishing four pillars for management of highly infectious 
communicable diseases through Ayurveda was important in successful 
treatment of COVID 19.
This is thus a team work and each pillar of the team has its role to play 
including the patient. COVID 19 is again a role model to prove this 
concept of knowledge system; wherein one had to train the 
paramedicals, medicals and the patient too for certain technicalities of 
the disease and its prevention and treatment, at the same time being 
equipped with medicines, instruments and other requirements.
Ayurveda has mentioned the 4 qualities of each of the four pillars. 
Amongst the 4 qualities of physician and para medical staﬀ “Anukampaa” 
has been mentioned which means having sympathy and human touch. 
Especially in the pandemic conditions like COVID, this model of Care 
with Compassion has been a successful one. Also, the qualities of patient 
are mentioned as “Gyapak” (knowledgeable and informed). Thus, in the 
conditions like COVID 19, it has come out to be the important verse “My 
Health is my own responsibility”
15


COVID 19:
COVID-19 is a new virus which has spread quickly to many countries 
around the world. Knowing the facts about COVID-19 symptoms, how 
the virus spreads and what you can do to stop it will help protect you 
and your community. As ever, when the word “pandemic” began 
appearing in headlines, people became fearful — and with fear came 
misinformation and rumours. There is a lot of misinformation about 
COVID-19 in the public and on social media. Hence, it becomes 
necessary to provide primary information to the public on the 
incubation period, signs & symptoms, when to call a doctor, how to 
diﬀerentiate the symptoms from common ϔlu etc and ask them not to 
panic even if found positive for COVID. Moreover, it's important to 
check that the information has come from a reliable source such as 
the World Health Organization or your government health authority.
16
Refer SLIDE 12 from the shared PowerPoint Presentation
Corona viruses (CoV) are a large 
family of viruses that cause illness 
ranging from the common cold to 
more severe diseases


COVID 19 – Management Principles:
The ϐirst and foremost step maybe the prevention. For preventing the 
Ÿ
virus to enter in to the body, along with the general measures of wearing 
a mask, hand hygiene, sanitization etc., Ayurveda prophylactic measures 
like Pratimarsha Nasya with Anu Taila; which will act as barrier to stop 
the entry of the virus, hot water gargling & drinking; warm water 
soothes the throat and acts as a protective shield. 
In the second step, if the virus enters the body and starts showing the 
Ÿ
earlier symptoms or if one has history of exposure or contact, than it 
becomes necessary to stop its replication inside the body. For this, the 
Katu Tikta dravyas or spices included in the AYUSH kwath, 
SamshamaniVati, Tab AYUSH-64 will be useful. These medications are 
useful for the prophylaxis as well as prevention of the virus to progress 
further from mild to moderate to severe stages. 
In the third step of management, if the virus has settled in the body and 
Ÿ
started showing conϐirmed symptoms, it becomes important to reduce 
the damage it causes to the tissues through the restorative treatment of 
Ayurveda viz. Chyawanprasha, Brahma Rasayana, Agastya Rasayana etc. 
These Rasayana formulations will help making the tissue robust and 
improve the host immunity.
Refer SLIDE 13 & 14 from the shared PowerPoint Presentation
Preventing the virus entering to our cells
Stopping its replication if it gets inside the cells
Reducing the damage that occurs to our tissues
The management principles of COVID-19 can be strategically planned 
based on the Ayurveda principles. 


Prophylactic Measures:
Follow physical distancing, respiratory 
Ÿ
and hand hygiene, wear mask 
Gargle with warm water added with a 
Ÿ
pinch of turmeric and salt. Water boiled 
with Triphala (dried fruits of Emblica 
o ϐ i c i n a l i s , T e r m i n a l i a 
chebula,Terminalia bellerica) or 
Yashtimadhu (Glycyrrhiza glabra) also 
can be used for gargling. 
Nasal instillation/application of 
Ÿ
medicated oil (Anu taila or Shadbindu 
Taila) or plain oil (Sesame or Coconut) or 
nasal application of cow's ghee 
(Goghrita) once or twice in a day, 
especially before going out and after 
coming back to home. 
Ayurveda and Yoga can certainly play a pivotal role to augment 
preventive measures provided in the guidelines by Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare (MoHFW). The current understanding of COVID-19 
indicates that good immune status is vital to prevention and to safeguard 
from disease progression. 
General and Physical measures as mentioned in National Clinical 
Management Protocol by Ministry of AYUSH
Refer SLIDE 14 & 16 from the shared PowerPoint Presentation


Steam inhalation with Ajwain (Trachy-
Ÿ
spermum ammi) or Pudina (Mentha 
spicata) or Eucalyptus oil once a day
Use warm water or boiled with herbs like 
Ÿ
ginger (Zingiber oϐicinale) or coriander 
(Coriandrum sativum) or basil (Ocimum 
sanctum / Ocimum basilicum), or cumin 
(Cuminum cyminum) seeds etc., for 
drinking purpose. 
Drink Golden Milk (Half tea spoon Haldi 
Ÿ
(Curcuma longa) powder in 150 ml hot 
milk) once at night. Avoid in case of 
indigestion. 
Drink Ayush Kadha or Kwath (hot infusion 
Ÿ
or decoction) once a day
Fresh, warm, balanced diet 
Ÿ
Adequate sleep of 6 to 8 hrs. 
Ÿ
Moderate physical exercises 
Ÿ
Follow Yoga Protocol for Primary 
Ÿ
Prevention of COVID-19 and Protocol for 
Post COVID-19 care (including care for 
COVID-19 patients)
19


Yoga practices 
for Mental wellbeing during COVID 19:
Yoga and Ayurveda have joined hands complementing each other. 
Ayurveda is the physical form of Yoga and Yoga is the spiritual form of 
Ayurveda. A standard protocol is designed along with its Standard 
Operating Procedures with the objectives to improve respiratory and 
cardiac efϐiciency, to reduce stress and anxiety and to enhance immunity. 
This Standard protocol includes the sukshma vyayama which includes 
joint movements, Sitting postures, lying down postures in Supine 
position and prone position followed by relaxation postures, pranayama 
and meditiation.
Refer SLIDE 15 from 
the shared PowerPoint Presentation
20


General Measures for COVID 19:
Drink Warm water:
Warm water (Ushnodaka) is speciϔically advised by Ayurveda 
in the conditions of Jwara and it acts as Amapachaka. It is also 
a part of Langhana. Ushnodaka is speciϔically mentioned in 
Janapadodhwamsaniya Adhyaya, which itself proves its 
indication for the pandemic conditions like COVID 19. Hot 
water drinking also relieves spasm and checks the entry of 
virus through its portal. Moreover, warm water is an easily 
available and simple modality which anyone can adopt.
Spices:
Kitchen is considered as the primary pharmacy and 
most of the times, the ϔirst aid for mild to moderate 
ailments are readily available in Indian kitchen. The 
data on COVID 19 from 163 countries including total 
cases, total deaths, and total recovered were 
analyzed. It was observed that there is a clear 
interrelated prevalence between the total number of 
COVID-19 cases per million population tested and 
the gram of spice supply per capita per day. Nations 
with lower consumptions of spices per capita 
showed greater number of COVID-19 cases per 
million population. This is not surprising as herbs 
and spices are well-known to boost immunity. Thus, 
the Ahara yogi varga and the Haritaka Varga 
mentioned in the Samhita has signiϔicant role as 
immune modulators.
Chyawanprash:
Chyawanprash – a polyherbal formulation containing Amla as the main ingredient is 
considered as an important practical version of Vatatapika Rasayana. The Ayusanjivani 
Refer SLIDE 17 to 25 from the shared PowerPoint Presentation
21


App developed by Ministry of AYUSH had come out with a 
survey data that more than 80% of the population in India 
have been consuming Amla in one or the other way during the 
COVID period. Amla has proved to be eﬀective immune 
booster, immune modulator, rich in vitamin C and eﬀective in 
strengthening the tissues. Apart from Amla, Chyawanprash 
also has many other drugs acting on Respiratory system, 
Cardio vascular system and Digestive system.
AYUSH Kwath:
For prevention of the disease progression to symptomatic and 
severed form and to improve recovery rate, AYUSH Kwath has 
been included in the National protocol Advisory of COVID 19. 
Based on the Prakriti of the patient and the environmental 
conditions, the herbs included in the AYUSH Kwatha can be 
added or omitted. The proportion of Shunthi and Kali Mirch 
should be 1/4th of the other ingredients. Moreover, for the 
persons of Pitta Prakriti and those suﬀering from acidity, acid 
peptic diseases, piles, mouth ulcers etc. Amla / Yashtimadhu 
may also be added. It can also be ϔlavoured with lemon and 
jaggery. It may also be boiled with milk or prepared as Tea. 
This has proved to be very eﬀective if the Prayog Vigyan is 
done properly.
Golden Milk:
Ayurveda describes “Kshira Ghrita Abhyasa” i.e routine 
intake of ghee and milk (preferably cow's milk & ghee) as 
best among the Rejuvenators. Turmeric is having the proven 
eﬀect as anti-microbial, anti-oxidative immune booster and 
particularly useful for the diseases of Respiratory tract. It 
helps in the co-morbid conditions like Diabetes Mellitus for 
which also it is a drug of choice. Thus, Golden milk / 
Turmeric milk is advised for the prophylaxis as well as 
treatment of COVID 19.  Half Tea spoon of Haldi powder in 
150 ml of hot milk once or twice can be advised. 
22


Nasya:
Instilling the drops of sesame oil or coconut oil or mustard oil 
or cow's ghee in the dosage of 2-3 drops in each nostril will stop 
the virus from entering into the further respiratory system. 
This will act as a bio mask and strengthen the mucous 
membrane of the nose as a ϔirst line of defence. Further, 
Pratimarsha Nasya is part of Dincharya mentioned in 
Ayurveda, wherein Anu Taila Nasya is advised and ϔlexibility is 
provided for instilling Nasya at any of the eight Kaala 
mentioned in Charaka Samhita for Pratimarsha Nasya. It can 
be advised atleast while going out and after coming back home. 
Moreover, the other ingredients in the formulation of Anu Taila 
are beneϔicial for making the sensory organs strong, as loss of 
sensation of smell and taste are also involved in the 
manifestations of COVID 19. So, Nasya will be beneϔicial for 
these symptoms as well.
Steam Inhalation:
Steam inhalation is a simple measure which can be practised 
anywhere even at the small village level and at every ordinary 
home in India. Steam inhalation has proven eﬀect as relieving 
the spasm, broncho dilators, checking the entry of virus and 
preventing the cytokine storm. Fresh Pudina (Mint) leaves or 
Ajwain (Caraway seeds) can be used along with water for 
steam inhalation once in a day. It should be especially done 
during dry cough / sore throat. 
Samshamani Vati:
Guduchi (Giloy) is a wonder herb. It is especially mentioned 
under the Rogadhikara of Jwara. Moreover, it also is a drug of 
choice for Rejuvenation. Thus, its daily usage is beneϔicial as 
immune modulator and prevents the occurrence of 
communicable diseases. It can be prescribed as two tablets 
twice daily with lukewarm water.
23


Diet:
Diet and lifestyle management are the important integration in Ayurveda 
management. The guidelines of Ahara as mentioned in Ayurveda are detail in terms of 
12 Ahara Varga, Ashta Ahara Vidhi Vishesha Ayatanani, Ahara Vidhi Vidhana and 
Viruddha Ahara. This comprehensive description of Ahara includes what to eat, when to 
eat, where to eat, how to eat, how much to eat etc. Amongst those the foremost thing is to 
advice what to eat. The diet should be balanced not only in terms of its calorie value or in 
terms of carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, vitamins etc., but from Ayurveda point of view, 
the balance should be in terms of Shad Rasas, Panchabhautika Ahara, Chaturvidh 
Ahara (four forms of Ahara) etc. Regarding the time to eat, the food chronobiology of 
nature's clock has to be followed. i.e the Ahara consumption should be in presence of the 
Sun, as the solar energy representing Pitta component in the body, is responsible for 
digestion. Regarding the quantity of food, the patients maybe adviced to consume the 
amount of solids 50% of the capacity, liquids 25% of the capacity and 25% of the space 
to be kept empty for circulation of Doshas. Further, the heavy to digest Ahara should be 
consumed less than the satiety and light things also upto the satiety only. In general, the 
Ahara quantity should be only that much which does not cause trouble or hamper the 
routine physical activities after its consumption.
In regards to COVID 19, frequent warm liquids treated with medicinal herbs (preferably 
Shunthi, Dalchini, Trikatu) should be used as a regular drink to maintain hydration. 
Freshly prepared Laghusupachya ahara (easily digestible, light diet) should be 
consumed. The other guidelines of time for consumption and quantity will be same as 
mentioned above.
Refer SLIDE 26 from 
the shared PowerPoint Presentation
24


Longevity: A way of life including Healthy Habits:
Regarding the modiϔications in life style, the practical equation for longevity maybe 
adopted. Classifying the day into 3 parts (8 hours each), the work life balance can be 
achieved. 8 hours can be conveniently utilized for the personal, family and social time; 
which should include the practices in the daily routine like exercise, massage, yoga 
meditation and diet nutrition. Seasonal panchakarma should be part of the Seasonal 
regimen followed by consumption of Rejuvenating herbs. 8 hours to be dedicated for 
adequate and timely peaceful sleep and rest. And the remaining 8 hours can be spared 
for the professional work, ofϔice etc. This way the life style guidance in a practical way 
maybe designed as keeping healthy is one's own responsibility. 
 
 
 
“My Health my Responsibility”
Diet guidelines in 
COVID Management
Ÿ
Chew a piece of ginger with a pinch of 
rock salt 15 to 20 minutes before food 
to improve appetite. 
Ÿ
Light to digest food preparations 
like:- 
Ÿ
Soups of mung dal or lentil. 
Ÿ
Soups of vegetables, Meat soup. 
Ÿ
Khichadi of rice and mung dal. 
Ÿ
Phulka with cows ghee. 
Ÿ
Vegetables like gheya, turai, bhindi, 
sitaphal etc. 
Ÿ
Use spices like jeera, black pepper, 
garlic, coriander, ginger , Ajwayan.
Ÿ
If appetite and digestion improves 
start with normal diet & Quantity of 
food as per appetite. 
Lifestyle modiïcations in 
COVID management
Ÿ
Wake up early in the morning around 
5 - 5.30 am 
Ÿ
Ushahpana: Drink warm 100ml to 
640 ml water stored in copper vessel. 
Ÿ
Defecation and Urination. 
Ÿ
 cleansing face and oral cavity 
Ÿ
Brushing teeth with astringent tooth 
paste or powder, tongue cleaning. 
Ÿ
Frequent Gargling with warm water 
added with salt and haldi 
Ÿ
 Further washing face with warm 
water. 
Ÿ
 2 drops of Anutail in each nostril. 
Ÿ
Oil application daily at least on head, 
ear and foot feet (sole), preferably 
whole body once a week. 
Ÿ
Light  physical exercise 
Refer SLIDE 29 from 
the shared PowerPoint Presentation
Refer SLIDES 27 & 28 from the shared PowerPoint Presentation
25


FAQs
Frequently 
Asked 
Questions
Are there any traditional medicines or therapies that can prevent or 
cure COVID-19?
There are some traditional medicine remedies from Ayush systems 
which provide relief and alleviate some of the symptoms of COVID-19. 
Ayush systems follow a holistic approach towards disease management 
and maintaining health of a healthy person. It provides detailed advocacy 
and interventions for disease prevention. There are various 
interventions in Ayush systems which are presently being used in 
prophylactic approaches as well as in the management of COVID 19, and 
are providing good results. Further these are seen to be beneϐicial in 
symptomatic management in COVID 19. 
The ongoing AYUSH-CSIR COLLABORATIVE STUDIES (a joint initiative 
among the Ministry of AYUSH, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and 
Ministry of Science & Technology, with technical assistance from ICMR) 
includes four clinical studies on use of AYUSH medicines for COVID 19, 
both in a prophylactic role and as an addon intervention to conventional 
treatment. The Ministry has also initiated 68 studies at 112 locations 
undertaken through National institutes, Research Councils, Universities, 
State Governments and other collaborating hospitals (which includes 
AYUSH-CSIR studies also).  
Refer SLIDE 30 from the shared PowerPoint Presentation
26


However, it is underlined that the interventions and measures proposed 
in the Clinical management protocol are not for cure, but for the 
management of asymptomatic and mild cases of COVID 19 and for 
prophylactic care. One should not get a false feeling of safety from 
adopting these measures. It is also underlined that for prevention of 
COVID 19, the mainstay approach remains adherence to the general 
guidelines as released by Government, including maintaining 
appropriate physical distance, wearing a mask, maintaining hand-
hygiene and avoiding unnecessary crowding at any place, and these 
should be followed strictly.  
Who has prepared the National Clinical Management Protocol based 
on Ayurveda and Yoga for management of Covid-19? 
The Ministry of AYUSH has set up an Interdisciplinary Committee for 
Integration of Ayurveda and Yoga Interventions in the 'National Clinical 
Management Protocol: COVID-19'. The said Committee is chaired by Dr V 
M Katoch, former Director General ICMR and includes a group of experts. 
 The Committee, after a thorough consultative process, formulated its 
Report & Recommendations (which is available at http://ayush.gov.in) 
based on acceptable experimental and clinical published data indicating 
potential beneϐits and safety at the same time and trends from ongoing 
studies in COVID-19. The report was presented before the National Task 
Force on COVID 19 and the Joint Monitoring Group, both constituted by 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
 On consideration of this report, the National Task Force on Covid 19 
management suggested preparing a National Clinical Management 
Protocol based on Ayurveda and Yoga for management of Covid-19 for 
inclusion as a dedicated chapter in National Protocol for Management of 
COVID 19. 
27


 The Ministry of AYUSH referred these recommendations to the 
Chairman of its National Task Force (i.e., the UGC Vice Chairman) with a 
request to vet the recommendations by initiating consensus from 
experts from the concerned premier institutions. These institutions 
included the All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA), Delhi, Institute of 
Training and Research in Ayurveda (ITRA), Jamnagar, National Institute 
of Ayurveda (NIA), Jaipur, Central Council for Research in Ayurveda 
(CCRAS), Central Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy (CCRYN) 
Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga (MDNIY) and other National 
Research Organizations. Finally, the National Clinical Management 
Protocol based on Ayurveda & Yoga for management of Covid-19 was 
prepared with cumulative inputs from all the above mentioned exercises 
and after due consideration by the best experts of all the concerned 
disciplines.  
 The report and recommendations have detailed scientiϐic rationale with 
references of clinical studies, safety studies and in-silico studies based on 
which repurposing of the interventions for COVID 19 is proposed. This 
report is available in public domain at https://www.ayush.gov.in/. The 
said National Ayush protocol has been prepared in line with the protocol 
and rationale used by protocol of the conventional system of medicine. 
Is there any scientiïc rationale behind selection of drugs ïguring in 
the Protocol? 
These drugs were selected after due consideration of relevant factors 
like published scientiϐic evidence, literary research supported by 
scientiϐic relevance, the rationale in support of repurposing of these 
medicines in COVID 19 and the outcomes and trends of completed and 
ongoing studies taken up by the Ministry of AYUSH across India. 
28


What is immunity in Ayurveda? 
In Ayurveda, immunity is referred to as vyadhikshamatva.  Ayurveda has 
a comprehensive approach of immunity encompassing two-fold 
management, respectively of health and disease. Vyadhikshamatva is the 
resistance of the body to ϐight a disease by either of the following two 
ways:  a. Vyadhi-Bala-Virodhitvam – The resisting power of the body to 
restrain or withstand the strength or severity or progression of a disease, 
or b. Vyadhi-Utpada-Pratibandhakatvam – The resisting power of the 
body to prevent the manifestation of a disease.  
Signiϐicantly, various modiϐiable factors have been enlisted in Ayurveda 
that inϐluence the host defense responses (Bala/Vyadhikshamatva). 
These factors include a healthy diet (Pathyaahara), condition of 
biological humors (dosha) and the state of physical and mental health 
(Sareera). The previous Covid 19 related advisories issued by the 
Ministry of AYUSH are based on this host defense mechanism or 
salutogenesis and also on various empirical evidences available from 
peer reviewed and indexed publications.  
Are the recommended medicines safe? 
The herbs selected are some of the most commonly used and prescribed 
ones in India. There has been a substantial number of clinical studies on 
each of these without any Serious Adverse Event (SAE) and these are also 
being prescribed in about 25000 Govt. Ayurveda PHCs and by a large 
number of Ayurveda practitioners in routine clinical practices for a vast 
range of clinical conditions and as health tonics (Rasayana). The 
scientiϐic information available in public domain was also screened to 
substantiate their safety in preclinical and clinical studies. Furthermore, 
the trends coming out of the research studies in COVID 19 as standalone 
and add-on interventions of these Ayush medicines were found to be 
29


absolutely safe and no herb-drug interaction was noted in these studies 
on a large number of participants.  
Is taking Ayush Kwath regularly injurious to liver? 
Ayush kwath is made up of a few common herbs which are used as 
kitchen spices viz. Dalchini, Lavang, Shunthi and Tulasi. These are 
regularly used by the majority of Indian households on a regular basis 
and are absolutely safe. There is no known study or report on it having 
any Adverse eﬀect. These herbs are ushna virya (hot in potency) and may 
be used with added munnaka or mishri as per need or a person and taste.  
The ingredients of Ayush kwath are very good antioxidants. Antiviral and 
immuno modulatory properties of the ingredient like Tulasi are well 
documented in research studies.  
Are the medicines prescribed in the protocol immune-boosting?
Ayurveda system of healthcare takes holistic approach towards disease 
management and preservation of health in which salutogenesis 
(maintaining optimum health and immune status) is a major aspect. The 
medicines selected in the Protocol have immuno modulatory eﬀect i.e. 
they tend to stregthen the immunity of a person in a natural way. In 
present times when altered lifestyles, diet and stress are a common, 
maintaining a natural immune system is challenging, and this renders a 
person prone to infections and diseases. The immuno modulatory 
interventions of Ayurveda which are included under the broad term 
'Rasayana' are very helpful in preserving optimum health of a person. 
They also help in preventing disease and in controlling disease 
progression. This should not be confused with hyper immune status or 
aberrant activity of the immune system.
30


 Eﬀective management to address COVID 19 infection is still evolving and 
attempts are being made to integrate traditional interventions along 
with standard of care. Ayurveda and Yoga can certainly play a pivotal role 
to augment preventive measures provided in the guidelines by Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW). The current understanding of 
COVID-19 indicates that good immune status is vital to prevention and to 
safeguard from disease progression. Following three aspects are 
considered while preparing this “National Clinical Management Protocol 
based on Ayurveda and Yoga for management of Covid-19”: 
Ÿ Knowledge from Ayurveda classics and 
experience from clinical practices 
Ÿ Empirical evidences and Biological plausibility 
Ÿ Emerging trends of ongoing clinical studies 
This consensus document is developed by expert committees from AII 
India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA), Delhi, Institute of Post Graduate 
Training and Research in Ayurved (IPGTRA), Jamnagar, and National 
Institute of Ayurveda (NIA), Jaipur , Central Council for Research in 
Ayurveda (CCRAS), Central Council for Research in Yoga and 
Naturopathy (CCRYN), other national research organizations. This 
protocol is for management of mild COVID-19. Moderate to Severe 
COVID-19 individuals may have informed choice of treatment options. 
All severe cases will be referred. This protocol and its annexure are 
approved by the Chairman, Interdisciplinary Committee for inclusion of 
Ayurveda and Yoga in the management of mild COVID-19 and approved 
by the empowered committee of the Interdisciplinary AYUSH Research 
and Development Taskforce on COVID-19, both constituted by the 
Ministry of AYUSH.
National Clinical Management 
Protocol of Covid-19:
Refer SLIDE 31 from 
the shared PowerPoint Presentation
31


The protocol was also validated and than notiϐied to the public domain 
and was included in the national protocol. At present, the Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare has also included the Post-COVID management 
protocol of Ayurveda in the National Protocol which is as under:
Ayush Kwath (150 ml; 1 cup) daily, Samshamani vati twice a day 500 mg 
(1 gm per day) or Giloy powder 1 -3 grams with luke warm water for 15 
days, Ashwagandha 500 mg twice a day (1 gm per day) or Ashwagandha 
powder 1-3 grams twice daily for 15 days and Amla fruit one daily/Amla 
powder 1-3 grams once daily.
Ÿ Mulethi powder (in case of dry 
cough) 1- 3 gram with luke warm 
water twice daily
Ÿ Warm Milk with ½ teaspoonful 
Haldi in (morning/evening)
Ÿ Gargling with turmeric and salt
Ÿ Chyawanprash 1 teaspoonful (5 
mg) once daily in morning (as per 
directions from Vaidya)
It is also suggested by the Ministry of 
AYUSH that the use of Chyawanprash 
in the morning (1 teaspoonful) with 
luke warm water/milk is highly 
recommended (under the direction of 
Registered Ayurveda physician) as in 
the clinical practice Chyawanprash is 
believed to be eﬀective in post-
recovery period.
32


Ready Reckoner at a glance for 
Holistic Management in different stages of COVID:
Based on the evidences and experience at COVID Health Centre, AIIA,  a 
Spread sheet is laid in the Shared PowerPoint Presentation. Ayurveda can 
showcase its strength in the asymptomatic, mild and moderate cases and 
plan the interventions but as of now in the severe cases, the cases needs 
to be referred to the higher centres of conventional medicine but again in 
the post COVID management, the restorative Rasayana drugs like 
Guduchi, Gokshura and Amalaki maybe useful.
In the Spread sheet, some other drugs like Tab. AYUSH 64, Vasa-Guduchi 
Kwath, Guduchyadi Kwath, Nagaradi Kwath etc have also proven to yield 
good results.
https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/PostCOVID13092020.pdf, Annexure I
33
The post COVID sysmptoms ranges from simple complaints to major 
complalints involving the heart, lungs, brain and nervous system, 
musculo-skeletal system and mental health. Ayurveda management has 
been included in the national protocol by Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare in the notiϐication dated 13th September, 2020.
Post COVID Complications & Management:
Refer SLIDE 32 from 
the shared PowerPoint Presentation
Refer SLIDES 33 & 34 from 
the shared PowerPoint Presentation


FAQs
Frequently 
Asked 
Questions
What is the importance of Rasayana  in 
strengthening the host defense? 
 “Rasayana” in Ayurveda is a comprehensive term which refers to a group 
of herbs, formulations and therapies for enhancing body resistance by 
attaining optimal level of Rasadi Dhatu. This is attained through speciϐic 
medicinal herbs, formulations and some speciϐic codes of conduct. 
Rasayana promotes strength, vitality, longevity, memory, intelligence, 
perseverance of youthfulness and the maintenance of optimum strength 
of the body and senses. There is a substantial body of scientiϐic 
information on the said herbs and their phytoconstituents in public 
domain regarding the various activities viz; immunomodulation, 
antioxidant activities, neurodegenerative disorders, rejuvenators and 
nutritional supplements.
Are the recommended medicines safe? 
 The herbs selected are some of the most commonly used and prescribed 
ones in India. There has been a substantial number of clinical studies on 
each of these without any Serious Adverse Event (SAE) and these are also 
being prescribed in about 25000 Govt. Ayurveda PHCs and by a large 
number of Ayurveda practitioners in routine clinical practices for a vast 
Refer SLIDE 35 from the shared PowerPoint Presentation
34


range of clinical conditions and as health tonics (Rasayana). The 
scientiϐic information available in public domain was also screened to 
substantiate their safety in preclinical and clinical studies. Furthermore, 
the trends coming out of the research studies in COVID 19 as standalone 
and add-on interventions of these Ayush medicines were found to be 
absolutely safe and no herb-drug interaction was noted in these studies 
on a large number of participants.
Is there any research work done in AYUSH for COVID 19? 
 The Ministry of AYUSH has set up an Interdisciplinary Ayush R & D task 
force to formulate and plan research studies (clinical, preclinical, 
observational etc) for COVID-19. The inputs from the Taskforce which 
had prepared generic protocols (available in public domain at 
http://ayush.gov.in) led to many studies being initiated by Research 
Councils & National Institutes under ministry of AYUSH, Universities, 
State Governments and Covid hospitals. The above-mentioned agencies 
initiated various studies across the country in collaboration and 
consultation with reputed scientiϐic organizations like Council of 
Scientiϐic and Industrial Research (CSIR), Indian Council of Medical 
Research (ICMR), Public Health Foundation of India (PHFI), Department 
of Science and Technology (DST), Department of Biotechnology (DBT), 
including clinical, observational, in-silico and preclinical studies. The 
total number of such studies initiated by the Ministry presently stands at 
68, spread over 112 locations, and being undertaken by premier 
institutions like National institutes, Research Councils, Universities, 
State Governments and other collaborating hospitals (this includes the 
AYUSH-CSIR studies also). Many of these are completed and data 
analysis has been undertaken, whereas the others are in the ϐinal stage of 
completion.
35


How has the Ministry ensured the quality of the Research work? 
 To ensure the scientiϐic robustness of the interventions, the Ministry has 
constituted an Interdisciplinary Ayush Research and Development 
Task Force(  https://icssr.org/sites/
default/ϔiles/Notiϔication%20on%20task%20force002.pdf ) 
on 2nd  April 2020 chaired by Prof. Bhushan Patwardhan (Vice 
Chairman, University Grants Commission) and comprising of senior 
scientists and experts from reputed institutions of Ayurveda and 
conventional system of medicine like ICMR, AIIMS, Amrita school of 
Ayurveda, AVP Research Foundation, CSIR, All India Institute of Ayurveda 
(AIIA) and AYUSH Research Councils. The Committee called for research 
proposals and inputs from all stakeholders across India. This was 
followed by a series of consultative processes and thorough examination 
of inputs. The Committee then proposed certain interventions for 
research studies and also prepared comprehensive research protocols 
for undertaking research studies on COVID 19 through AYUSH 
interventions. In this sequence, the Ministry of AYUSH in  a joint initiative 
with Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and Ministry of Science & 
Technology took up four clinical studies on AYUSH medicines for COVID 
19 used as prophylactic and as add-on intervention. These came to be 
called the AYUSHCSIR collaborative studies, and were taken up under 
technical assistance from ICMR. These studies are currently in progress 
with a robust clinical protocol that was prepared by AYUSH Task Force 
with substantial contributions from eminent rheumatologist, clinician 
and researcher Dr Arvind Chopra, Center for Rheumatic Diseases (CRD) 
Pune.  
 The Ministry also monitored all the studies being undertaken by 
National institutes and Research Councils and other collaborating 
hospitals and institutes through a Project Monitoring Unit. 
36


 A Central Ethics Committee was also constituted with members from 
reputed institutes like AIIMS and all studies are put before the committee 
thereafter to ensure safety and robustness of the studies at each study 
site. All inputs and suggestions by ethical committees are properly 
addressed before initiation of the study.  
 To ensure Data Safety and safety of participants and proper conduct of 
studies, Data Safety and Monitoring Board (DSMB) was also constituted 
which was chaired by Dr Nandini Kumar, Former Deputy Director 
General Sr. Grade (ICMR) and Vice President, Forum for Ethics Review 
Committees in India.
What is the basis of recommending Guduchi in the protocol? 
 Guduchi is one of the most commonly used herbs in Ayurveda. It has 
been studied and found eﬀective in viral fevers, as anti-inϐlammatory, 
antipyretic and immuno-modulatory interventions. There are three in-
silico studies, which show its high binding efϐicacy against SARS-CoV-2 
targets involved in attachment and replication of the virus, as compared 
to Favipiravir, Lopinavir/Ritonavir and Remdesivir. About 7 studies are 
also being done under the Ministry of AYUSH on Guduchi as Prophylactic 
care on about 1.33 Lakh population and with very good results in 
preventing COVID 19 and in management of asymptomatic COVID 19 
without any side eﬀect. Further detailed rationale of its inclusion has 
been provided in the Interdisciplinary Committee for integration of 
Ayurveda and Yoga Interventions in the 'National Clinical Management 
Protocol: COVID-19' which is made available in public domain on the 
Ministry of AYUSH website.
37


What is the basis of recommending Ashwagandha in the protocol? 
 Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) (WS) is one of the most extensively 
experimented Ayurveda medicinal plants and has been used in Ayurveda 
practice since centuries. Ashwagandha has been selected owing to its 
properties like immune-modulatory, anti stress and antiviral efϐicacy. In-
silico studies have shown its high binding afϐinity to ACE2–RBD interface 
which may stop SARS COV 2 entry into cells.  The WS root extract has 
shown positive results against protracted social isolation induced stress 
and anxiety which makes it a good medicine for prophylactic use. 
Further, the medicine also has very good pulmonary protective function 
and hence is beneϐicial in post Covid care. There are substantial number 
of studies on Ashwagandha published in reputed peer reviewed journals 
to establish its efϐicacy, safety and protective action.
Has any large-scale study been undertaken in 
AYUSH for prophylactic care? 
 Prophylactic care is a major part of the AYUSH protocol, and in order to 
substantiate and understand its role in the management of Covid 19, 
several studies on a large cohort are being undertaken by the Ministry 
through Research Councils and National Institutes across India. Notable 
ones are prophylactic care through AYUSH interventions in about 20000 
sample size by each Research Council and National Institute covering a 
large area through their peripheral institutes across India wherein 
AYUSH interventions are studied. Further, All India Institute of Ayurveda, 
Delhi has carried a promising study over a big cohort of 80000 Delhi 
police personnel for two months starting in May and are following up the 
cohort since then. The studies have shown very promising trends in 
reducing incidence of COVID 19 and Inϐluenza like symptoms among 
participants to a signiϐicant level and also in improving Quality of Life.  
38


Rasayana: Way to enhance immunity:
Easily available Rasyana drugs can be advocated like Guduchi, 
Ashwagandha, Haridra, Amalaki, Shatavari, Draksha. These drugs will 
take care of the prophylaxis management as well as the overall health 
during the COVID and post COVID management.
CHC Ward services, AIIA: “WE STAND FOR - CARE WITH COMPASSION”
AIIA has made eﬀorts to give exemplary services for the management of 
mild to moderate COVID cases at CHC war, AIIA; wherein an integrated 
approach of Ayurveda management, Yoga, Diet, Meditation is applied. This 
centre is a perfect blend of traditional knowledge and contemporary 
technologies. All the beds has the facility of Oxygen supply, Emergency 
medical ofϔicer is available, Ambulance equipped with all Cardio-
pulmonary resuscitation facility is in place. The health workers are given 
the training of Cardio-pulmonary resuscitation, Donning dofϔing and all 
precautions of COVID intervention etc. All the patients are made to follow 
the Yoga meditation protocol, which is also practiced by the Corona health 
workers Team as well. This centre is trying to be a role model in the country 
to extend the same healing practices for all the other diseases. What 
diﬀerence it makes in its healing touch is “CARE WITH COMPASSION”
Refer SLIDE 36 from the shared PowerPoint Presentation
Refer SLIDE 37 from the shared PowerPoint Presentation
39


Design: Kamleshwar Singh  9810316649   Kamsingh.online@gmail.com
40
All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA), conceived as an apex 
Ayurveda institute under Ministry of AYUSH with a vision to 
be an outstanding center of excellence for Ayurveda 
Education, Research and Healthcare. It is a perfect blend of 
Ancient wisdom and Modern technology, attracting global 
attention and expected to boost medical tourism in India 
showcasing strengths of Ayurveda.
NABH Accredited Tertiary Care Hospital and
Post Graduate Teaching and Training Institute in Ayurveda
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA


All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA) has been entrusted with the 
task of training the trainers, to guide and enlighten the vision 
regarding the role of Ayurveda during this Covid-19 pandemic. 
This online Training of Trainers (TOT) Programme had been 
organized from 18.01.2021 to 21.01.2021 for all State Directors, 
Principals of Ayurveda Colleges, Medical Ofϔicers and other stake 
holders. The training material will be uploaded on the web portal 
of Ministry of AYUSH, and other important institutions of 
Ayurveda like AIIA, CCIM, CCRAS, RAV &amp; State AYUSH 
Directors web portal for reference and will guide to organize 
Lectures across India, in regional languages to give wider 
publicity of the theme “Ayurveda for Covid-19 Pandemic” amongst 
government ofϔices, Non- Government sector employees, Schools, 
Colleges, Panchayati Raj Institutions, Gram Sabhas, Industries, 
various Housing societies, Women's self-help group, various 
NGOs, Senior Citizens Group, Asha workers and Health staﬀ, etc. 
for wider dissemination.
This campaign will be immensely beneϔicial in understanding the 
importance of Ayurveda in the ϔight against Covid-19 with the 
salient aspects of Ayurveda for Immunity boosting, in Pre-Covid, 
during COVID and in Post Covid management, essential role of 
Diet and Yoga and other guidelines and will speciϔically focus on 
the Role of Preventive, Promotive, Curative and Restorative 
Ayurveda Management of Covid-19. This campaign will assist to 
ensure the uniformity of information delivered to about 01 crore 
target audience across India through 5 Lakh lectures.
Core of AYU-SAMVAD:


ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA
An autonomous Institute
under
Ministry of AYUSH,
Government of India, New Delhi
We hope that this largest public campaign AYU SAMVAD (Public 
Awareness Campaign) “AYURVEDA FOR COVID PANDEMIC” will 
enable equip the health workers & general public with the right 
information and to enable them cascade the same to the 
communities they are serving.
Ayurveda for COVID 19
