Rollins College 
Rollins College 
Rollins Scholarship Online 
Rollins Scholarship Online 
Master of Liberal Studies Theses 
Spring 2020 
Ancient Wisdom and Future Medicine: A Defense of the Science 
Ancient Wisdom and Future Medicine: A Defense of the Science 
of Ayurveda 
of Ayurveda 
Michael Eatmon 
meatmon@rollins.edu 
Follow this and additional works at: https://scholarship.rollins.edu/mls 
 Part of the Alternative and Complementary Medicine Commons, Philosophy of Science Commons, 
and the South and Southeast Asian Languages and Societies Commons 
Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Eatmon, Michael, "Ancient Wisdom and Future Medicine: A Defense of the Science of Ayurveda" (2020). 
Master of Liberal Studies Theses. 91. 
https://scholarship.rollins.edu/mls/91 
This Open Access is brought to you for free and open access by Rollins Scholarship Online. It has been accepted 
for inclusion in Master of Liberal Studies Theses by an authorized administrator of Rollins Scholarship Online. For 
more information, please contact rwalton@rollins.edu. 


 
  
  
   
Ancient Wisdom and Future Medicine: 
A Defense of the Science of Ayurveda  
  
  
A Project Submitted in Partial Fulfillment 
of the Requirements for the Degree of  
Master of Liberal Studies  
  
by  
Michael Eatmon  
April 2020 
  
  
  
  
  
Mentor:  Dr. Thomas Moore  
Reader: Dr. Jayashree Shivamoggi  
  
Rollins College        
Hamilton Holt School  
Master of Liberal Studies Program   
Winter Park, Florida 
 


2 
 
 
Heart disease, stroke, obesity, and diabetes are chasing modern humans to the 
grave. A month rarely passes without alarming news of the population’s declining health. 
Ancient hunter–gatherers suffered from lifestyle diseases, too, but rarely. This started to 
change when our ancestors left plains and forests for farms and cities. Rates of these and 
other so-called diseases of civilization began to rise.1 Many modern people, especially 
those in the West, have come to see these diseases as part of life. 
Too many see these conditions as normal. They do not recognize the connection 
between lifestyle choices and poor health. They eat a lot of salty, sugary, highly 
processed foods. They get no regular exercise, and they do little to relieve stress. They 
smoke or drink more than they should. Sooner than their socio-economic status predicts, 
they succumb to a lifestyle disease.2 
 
When they do, most in the West turn to modern medicine for solutions. The 
decline in their health took years, but they hope to find a quick fix, even if not an 
inexpensive or painless one. Their conventional family physician prescribes pills and 
procedures to ease their symptoms. The physician often fails to investigate their 
condition’s potential causes, though. Physicians often fail to explore what roles diet, 
 
1. S. Boyd Eaton, Melvin Konner, and Marjorie Shostak, “Stone Agers in the Fast 
Lane: Chronic Degenerative Diseases in Evolutionary Perspective,” The American 
Journal of Medicine 84, no. 4 (1988): 739–49, doi.org/10.1016/0002-9343(88)90113-1. 
 
2. Andrea S. Wiley and John S. Allen, Medical Anthropology: A Biocultural 
Approach (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2017), 120. 


3 
exercise, and state of mind play in illness.3 This treat-the-symptoms approach is common 
in the West. It also tends to minimize or ignore underlying causes of disease. Some 
Westerners have concluded that modern medicine offers only band-aids, not cures. 
 
What is more, some wonder whether healthcare professionals have incentives not 
to heal. They wonder whether physicians knowingly prescribe ineffective or unnecessary 
pharmaceuticals or surgeries.4 The treatment of acute illnesses and long-term diseases 
generates staggering revenues. In 2018, Americans spent about $3.65 trillion on 
healthcare, the most spent in the developed world.5 Big pharma, medical supply 
companies, insurance companies, hospitals, and physicians benefitted. Patients, however, 
did not benefit so much from the boon. In the same year, the US ranked twenty-seventh 
in the world for overall health.6 
 
3. Jennifer Sinclair, Beverley Lawson, and Fred Burge, “Which Patients Receive 
Advice on Diet and Exercise? Do Certain Characteristics Affect Whether They Receive 
Such Advice?” Canadian Family Physician • Le Médecin de Famille Canadien 54 
(2008): 406. 
 
4. David Epstein and ProPublica, “An Epidemic of Unnecessary Treatment,” The 
Atlantic, March 20, 2017, https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2017/02/when-
evidence-says-no-but-doctors-say-yes/517368/. 
 
5. Erik Sherman, “U.S. Health Care Costs Skyrocketed to $3.65 Trillion in 2018,” 
Fortune, February 21, 2019, https://fortune.com/2019/02/21/us-health-care-costs-2/. 
 
6. Aria Bendix, “The US Was Once a Leader for Healthcare and Education - Now 
It Ranks 27th in the World,” Business Insider, September 27, 2018, 
https://www.businessinsider.com/us-ranks-27th-for-healthcare-and-education-2018-9. 


4 
 
Some Westerners decide to look elsewhere for solutions to their chronic health 
problems. They turn to complementary or alternative approaches to conventional Western 
medicine.7 Some people abandon conventional medicine altogether. They turn to 
alternatives, instead, such as chiropractic, homeopathy, and energy healing. Others who 
are dissatisfied with their conventional healthcare aim only to supplement it. They may 
give the latest trend in diet, exercise, or supplements a go. They may consult an herbalist 
and schedule regular sessions with a massage therapist. They remain under the care of a 
conventional physician, as well. 
 
Some Westerners seeking unconventional solutions to chronic healthcare 
problems look to the East. Many of them explore traditional systems of medicine 
originating in China or India. A growing number look to Ayurveda as a complement, or 
even an alternative, to Western medicine.8 Ayurveda is one of India’s traditional systems 
of medicine.9 Its history stretches back millennia, into the mists of Vedic antiquity. 
 
7. “Complementary, Alternative, or Integrative Health: What’s in a Name?” 
National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health, April 2, 2019, 
https://nccih.nih.gov/health/integrative-health. 
 
8. V. Sajeev Kumar, “Europe Fast Embracing Ayurveda alongside Modern 
Medicine,” The Hindu BusinessLine, January 12, 2018, 
https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/news/variety/europe-fast-embracing-ayurveda-
alongside-modern-medicine/article9481575.ece. 
 
9. Ayurveda is not India’s only traditional system of medicine (TSM). Unani and 
Siddha are, too, though neither plays so prominent a role. Further information is available 
at the website for India’s Ministry of AYUSH: http://ayush.gov.in. AYUSH stands for 
Ayurveda, Yoga (and Naturopathy), Unani, Siddha, and Homoeopathy. 


5 
Though ancient, many view it as viable modern medicine. Generations of Indians have 
depended on its practitioners for advice, diagnosis, and treatment. Millions turn to 
Ayurveda, but what are they turning to? Are they relying on a bona fide medical science 
or on a patent medical pseudoscience? 
 
The answer to that question must take four key prior questions into consideration. 
One, what criteria distinguish a genuine science from a pseudoscience? Two, how 
compatible with genuine science are Ayurveda’s history and philosophy? Three, how 
compatible with genuine science are Ayurveda’s methods, results, and research? Four, do 
significant, even determinative, differences exist among ancient, traditional, and modern 
“Ayurvedas”? Once these questions are answered, Ayurveda’s scientific status will 
become clearer. “Clearer” does not mean settled. The East and West have different 
understandings of important terms in the discussion. Indian approaches to metaphysics, 
epistemology, and methods differ from those in the West. A brief paper cannot work 
through all such differences. 
Still, answers to these three key questions will caution the critic. Answers will 
show that Ayurveda’s modern expression ought not to be dismissed. It is neither outdated 
nor irrational. Evidence will support the claim that Ayurveda is maturing in, and because 
of, the modern age. The modern expression of Ayurveda is a genuine science with a 
promising future. Ancient and traditional approaches to Ayurveda may not be defensible 
as modern sciences. This thesis of this paper, though, assumes Ayurveda’s modern 
expression. Thus, the Ayurveda being defended is one that values modern, Western 


6 
education. It values modern Western medicine, even while pointing out some of its 
shortcomings. This paper does not defend every Ayurvedic folk healer throughout the 
world. 
 
THE PROBLEM OF DEFINING SCIENCE10 
 
 
The claim that Ayurveda is a genuine science may stand or fall on the definition 
of science.11 People use the term regularly enough. Defining it should be straightforward. 
In the early 1960s, many Americans thought the same thing about the term obscenity. In 
1964, the Supreme Court handed down its ruling in the Jacobellis v. Ohio case. The case 
involved the questionable obscenity of Louis Malle’s film The Lovers. In question was 
whether the film constituted hard-core pornography. The Court found that it did not meet 
the criteria. 
Justice Potter Stewart was among the decision’s majority opinion. He was 
reluctant to define hard-core pornography. Still, he denied that Malle’s work crossed the 
 
10. Massimo Pigliucci and Maarten Boudry, ed., Philosophy of Pseudoscience: 
Reconsidering the Demarcation Problem (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013). 
This section is especially indebted to Pigliucci, Mahner, and Hansson for many general 
insights into the demarcation problem. Helpful, too, is Sven Ove Hansson, “Science and 
Pseudo-Science,” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, April 11, 2017, 
https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/pseudo-science/. 
 
11. This paper italicizes terms when discussing their definition or etymology. 
 


7 
line. Famously, he said of what he demurred from defining, “I know it when I see it.”12 
Stewart might not have been able to define the sort of obscenity in question. He claimed 
to be able to recognize it when in front of him, though. 
 
As Stewart felt about obscenity, many Americans feel about science. They believe 
they intuit what science is and can recognize it when they see it. Recent surveys reveal 
otherwise.13 They reveal deep illiteracies about both the facts of nature and the methods 
of science. Advertising claims about “evidence-backed” or “scientifically proven” 
products add to the confusion. Op-ed columns and political statements from non-
scientists do, too.14 
Many non-scientists play fast and loose with the terms science and scientific. 
Professional scientists use the terms with frequency and ease, of course. Still, some might 
feel at a loss if asked to define them.15 Intuiting the meaning of a crucial term may have 
sufficed in the Jacobellis case. Intuiting the meaning of science will not do as a sorting 
 
12. “Jacobellis v. Ohio,” Legal Information Institute, accessed March 16, 2020, 
https://www.law.cornell.edu/supremecourt/text/378/184. 
 
13. Henry I. Miller, “Scientifically Illiterate America,” Hoover Institution, 
November 29, 2017, https://www.hoover.org/research/scientifically-illiterate-america. 
 
14. Lawrence M. Krauss, “Trump’s Anti-Science Campaign,” The New Yorker, 
June 19, 2017, https://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/trumps-anti-science-
campaign. 
 
15. Miller, “Scientifically Illiterate America.” 


8 
criterion for the purpose at hand. Evaluating whether Ayurveda is a genuine medical 
science requires conceptual boundaries. 
 
A logical place to look for an answer is a dictionary, and there are many to choose 
from. One could compare and synthesize the entries for science in the most reputable of 
them. One could also select a leading reputable dictionary and then weigh its helpfulness. 
For the present illustration, this approach will prove sufficiently effective and more 
efficient. One such leading reputable dictionary is the New Oxford American Dictionary, 
3d edition. It defines the term in this way. Science is “the intellectual and practical 
activity encompassing the systematic study of the structure and behavior of the physical 
and natural world through observation and experiment.”16 
This seems to settle the issue until one considers a dictionary’s limitations. Chief 
among them, a dictionary’s definitions are descriptive, not prescriptive. That is, 
dictionaries do not provide authoritative and unchanging meanings of words. Rather, they 
provide dynamic descriptions of how terms are commonly used. Dictionaries show how 
speakers use terms in different contexts. As terms’ uses change over time, a dictionary’s 
entries change to reflect their evolution. 
 
Clarifying a term’s meaning in a particular context, though, is a different matter. 
A term can mean one thing in one setting and something else in another. This is true 
 
16. Angus Stevenson and Christine A. Lindeberg, The New Oxford American 
Dictionary: Third Edition (New York: Oxford University Press, 2010). Abbreviated as 
NOAD in subsequent footnotes. 


9 
about the term science, and it is true about all the words the dictionary uses to define 
science. Clarifying a term’s meaning requires input from linguistics, psychology, and 
philosophy. Scrutinizing what the dictionary says about science answers some questions 
but prompts others. 
What sort of “intellectual … activity” is science? Empirical and rational only or 
intuitive and imaginative, as well? Must science always and everywhere be a “practical” 
activity? Can a field’s foundation not be observational but the rest of it only theoretical? 
Science studies “the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world.” Does that 
imply that the only world that exists is one that is physical and natural? If science studies 
the “structure” of the world, does that mean that science reveals what is? Alternatively, 
does science merely create effective models to account for observational data? How can 
someone know which? Is science itself competent to say? The definition speaks of 
observation and experimentation as science’s instrumental means. Are these reliable 
means of learning about the natural world? Are they the only two? How does someone 
know? One cannot intuit the semantic scope of science, nor can a dictionary settle the 
issue. 
 
The problem of defining science proves even more complicated. To determine its 
semantic boundaries, one must know the contours of related concepts. Where do the 


10 
boundaries of pseudoscience and nonscience begin and end?17 Could the definitions of 
pseudoscience and nonscience clarify what science is? Could one best define science in 
the negative, as the anti-pseudoscience and anti-nonscience? Or must one begin with the 
question of what science is to see how the others differ from it?18 
 
Philosophers refer to this science-definitional conundrum as the demarcation 
problem. Philosopher of science Karl Popper (1902–94) was first to call attention to it. 
Many intractable issues surround discussions of demarcation. The preceding several 
paragraphs raise only a few. Doing the problem justice requires a book, and many 
scholars have taken up the challenge. One helpful contribution is Philosophy of 
Pseudoscience: Reconsidering the Demarcation Problem.19 An introduction to the topic, 
such as this paper provides, can only scratch the surface. 
 
Popper’s basic question addresses a fundamental concern in the philosophy of 
science. Do criteria exist that can differentiate science from both pseudoscience and 
nonscience? How can one distinguish scientific claims from claims that merely purport to 
be? How can one distinguish scientific claims from those that do not purport to be 
 
17. The contours of protoscience are worth exploring, too, but not for the same 
reason. Protoscience differs from genuine science mostly by degree, not by kind. 
 
18. This approach has prima facie plausibility. The terms pseudoscience and 
nonscience are back-formations of the term science. Science, that is, has lexical and 
semantic priority. 
 
19. Massimo Pigliucci and Maarten Boudry, ed., Philosophy of Pseudoscience: 
Reconsidering the Demarcation Problem (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013). 


11 
scientific at all? Einstein’s relativity and Freud’s psychoanalysis make claims about the 
world. Wordsworth’s poetry does, too. 
Into which category—science, pseudoscience, or nonscience—does each belong? 
What sorting criteria does one use to decide? Solving the demarcation problem would 
permit the objective answering of these questions. It is important to note where 
demarcation focuses its efforts, though. Pondering what distinguishes poetic claims from 
scientific claims can prove fascinating. Such an investigation explores the boundary 
between science and nonscience. More relevant to the demarcation problem is what 
differentiates science from pseudoscience. 
 
Popper argued that the distinguishing characteristic of scientific claims is their 
falsifiability. A scientific claim, that is, has the potential to be proven incorrect. A 
genuine science makes hypotheses or predictions that evidence can, in theory, refute. 
Claims that cannot be disproven—claims that are non-falsifiable—are not scientific. 
They are either nonscientific or pseudoscientific. Popper’s falsificationism contrasts with 
the verificationist view of demarcation. According to verificationism, science makes 
claims that empirical evidence can, in theory, prove.20 Following David Hume’s insights, 
 
20. Jacqueline McLaughlin, “A Gentle Reminder That a Hypothesis Is Never 
Proven Correct, nor Is a Theory Ever Proven to Be True,” Books & Resources: NSTA 
WebNews Digest, August 14, 2006, 
https://www.nsta.org/publications/news/story.aspx?id=52402. Popper and others refuted 
verificationism long ago. Science cannot prove hypotheses, theories, etc.; it can only 
support them. Verificationism’s view of science has persisted, though, among scientists 
and nonscientists alike. 
 


12 
though, Popper denied that this was possible. Verificationism’s proofs rest on logical 
induction, which has fatal inferential flaws. 
Among them, induction attempts to justify universal claims with particular 
observations.21 One may observe many instances of phenomenon P, all with 
characteristic C. It does not follow, however, that C holds for all possible instances of P. 
Further, one cannot know in fact whether C holds for every instance of P without 
observing each P. Without omniscience, this verification is impossible. A simple 
illustration from history will underscore the problem with inductive inference. 
Medieval Europeans had seen swans for centuries, and all were white. Their use 
of induction led them to conclude that all swans are white. Problem was, their 
observations—like all observations—were limited to particular instances. Limited 
observations of a phenomenon cannot entail universal statements about that 
phenomenon.22 Centuries later, Europeans discovered black swans in Australia. As the 
 
21. Stephen Phillips, “Epistemology in Classical Indian Philosophy,” Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, February 13, 2019, 
https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/epistemology-india/. The ancient Indian Cārvāka 
materialist school recognized induction’s weaknesses, too. Induction rests on an inference 
from perceptual experience to the unexperienced. Making generalized claims about the 
unexperienced is unwarranted because it lacks empirical evidence. Striking about 
Cārvāka’s insights is that they predate Hume’s by more than 2,000 years. 
 
22. Under one condition, limited observations can entail universal statements. The 
condition is that the limited observations happen to include all instances of P. In this case, 
induction’s problem becomes less one of logic, more one of epistemology. Observers 
cannot know whether they have observed all instances of a phenomenon. 


13 
illustration shows, verification fails as science’s demarcation criterion. It relies on an 
unreliable logical foundation. 
 
Popper’s criterion of falsifiability rests on a different logic, the hypothetico-
deductive method. Falsifiability’s logic moves from a hypothetical premise to a 
(hypothetically) certain conclusion. If X is a sufficient cause of Y, then whenever X is 
present, Y will be, too. What can we conclude, then, if data from many experiments often 
show X but no Y? First, we conclude that the data disprove the hypothesis. X is not a 
sufficient cause of Y. 
The second conclusion we draw is a key feature of the falsifiability doctrine. 
According to Popper, a disproven hypothesis does not reveal a failure of science. It shows 
that a proper science is at work. However counterintuitive, the disproving of a hypothesis 
demonstrates the essence of science. Science makes testable claims that specific 
empirical evidence, if found, can refute. This, Popper claimed, is the criterion that 
separates genuine science from all pretenders. 
 
Many philosophers and scientists find both verificationism and falsificationism 
inadequate lines of demarcation. They agree with Popper’s criticism of verificationism, 
while not embracing his solution. Some, such as science historian Michael Shermer, 
challenge falsificationism’s starting point. They agree that generating and testing 
hypotheses fits well with some scientific disciplines. They deny that this method fits well 


14 
with all scientific endeavors.23 Shermer points to string theory and the extraterrestrial 
hypothesis as examples.24 (Some challenge whether these examples are themselves 
scientific.) A simple, noncontroversial illustration can convey Shermer’s concern equally 
well. 
A biochemist combines compounds to see what effect the result has on cancer 
cells. Such an approach need not begin with, or ever produce, a clear if–then hypothesis. 
Instead, the researcher might pose a series of open-ended questions of scientific 
exploration. “I wonder what will happen when I … ?” The results of such 
experimentation may be only observation, analysis, and recommendations. It may show 
the researcher whether a line of cancer research is worth the pursuit. This sort of 
scientific exploration need not end in the support or refutation of a claim, though. The 
requirement that genuine science makes falsifiable claims is too narrow a constraint. 
Others see a different problem with viewing falsifiability as science’s defining 
characteristic. It allows patent pseudosciences to be classified as scientific. Astrology, 
phrenology, and homeopathy are prime examples. All make falsifiable claims, claims that 
 
23. Ashutosh Jogalekar, “Falsification and Its Discontents,” Scientific American 
Blog Network, January 24, 2014, https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/the-curious-
wavefunction/falsification-and-its-discontents/. 
 
24. Michael Shermer, “What Is Pseudoscience?” Scientific American, September 
1, 2011, https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/what-is-pseudoscience/. 
 


15 
empirical evidence can, in theory, refute. According to Popper’s model, we may view 
them as genuine scientific endeavors. 
The problem with classifying them as such is that all make claims that have been 
proven false.25 Evidence has disproven both particular hypotheses of these 
pseudosciences and their theoretical foundations. Of course, even mainstream biology, 
chemistry, and physics make claims that prove false. While true, pseudoscience and 
genuine science respond to falsification in different ways. A genuine science abandons a 
failed hypothesis because refuted by empirical evidence. A pseudoscience, by contrast, 
often modifies the hypothesis to accommodate confounding evidence. An excellent 
example is genuine science’s challenge to homeopathic preparations. 
Homeopathy adds a purported medicinal agent to water.26 The mixture is then 
“activated” by diluting it thousands of times. Chemists have pointed out a significant 
problem with these dilutions. None of the original medicinal agent survives the process. 
Skirting the apparent falsification, homeopathy modifies its claim. A homeopathic 
 
25. Tania Lombrozo, “What Is Pseudoscience?” NPR, May 8, 2017, 
https://www.npr.org/sections/13.7/2017/05/08/527354190/what-is-pseudoscience. 
 
26. Homeopathy (from Gk. for “like/similar + sickness/disorder”) owes its name 
to how it treats sickness. Conventional medicine identifies a pathogenic cause of sickness 
and then counteracts its effects. If harmful bacteria are the cause of illness, then it 
prescribes an antibiotic. By contrast, homeopathy does not treat sickness with 
countermeasures. Instead, it treats a pathogen or sickness with an agent that causes 
similar symptoms. Homeopathic theory claims that like cures like—pathogen defeats 
pathogen, as it were. Though not a defense of homeopathy, biomedical vaccinations work 
on the same principle. 


16 
preparation’s mechanism of action is not in the medicinal agent. It is in the dilution 
water, which retains the “memory” of the medicinal agent no longer in it. One should not 
consider it any more scientific than the refuted claim it replaces. Contra Popper, 
falsifiability is too broad a criterion to distinguish science from pseudoscience. 
 
As demarcation candidates, verificationism and falsificationism focus on 
science’s relationship to claims. One says that science proves them; the other, that 
science disproves them. Some philosophers see essential definitions as better approaches 
to the demarcation problem. They frame the discussion as a more fundamental question: 
what is science? Once science is defined, it can be distinguished from what merely 
purports to be. 
This approach is not the effortless consulting and comparing of reputable 
dictionaries’ entries. It does not attempt to ascertain the most common uses of the term 
science, either. Instead, the essential-definition approach is self-consciously prescriptive, 
not descriptive. It makes lists of characteristics that render a field, claim, or community 
scientific. The characteristics tend to focus on empirical methods and epistemic warrant. 
On the lists appear qualities like “observation-based,” “replicable,” “evidence-directed,” 
“probabilistic,” and “cause-seeking.” Essential definitions sound promising, but they tend 
to have significant shortcomings. 
 
The first is that some essential definitions exclude fields most recognize as 
scientific. If hypotheses need to be lab-testable and their results reproducible, what about 
cosmology? How does one conduct and replicate experiments that show how the universe 


17 
came to be? How does one replicate the conditions of the primal universe, of its first few 
seconds? Physical conditions were vastly different then from what they have been since. 
Physical processes operated by (or, at least, within) a different set of rules. What about 
the claims of string theory or the multiverse hypothesis? 
An essential definition can broaden to suit more hypothetical/theoretical fields, of 
course. Such adjustments can prove problematic, though. They can lead to a second 
potential defect of essential definitions. Some could legitimate fields, claims, and 
communities that most scientists view as pseudoscientific. Certain definitional lists would 
qualify cryptozoology, ufology, and panspermia as genuine sciences. 
 
The third defect of essential definitions is the most problematic. No authoritative 
science-definitional list exists. It exists neither among scientists nor among philosophers 
of science. Different experts view different characteristics as necessary to the essence of 
science. Some require that scientific claims be peer-reviewed, and some do not. A simple 
illustration can show how this common feature of modern science can be arguable. 
Does any philosopher or scientist question whether Isaac Newton was a 
scientist?27 Was his work peer-reviewed, though? Did a contemporaneous community of 
scholars critique all his work? Did teams of fellow astronomer–physicists recreate his 
experiments, rework his math? If not, can his work be considered scientific? Can he be 
 
27. Newton considered himself not a scientist, but a natural philosopher. This 
point is irrelevant, though, for the current discussion—whether genuine science requires 
peer review. 


18 
considered a scientist? Some of Newton’s contemporaries interacted with his ideas. The 
interaction hardly constituted a scholarly scrutinizing by a global community of peers. 
Still, who argues that Newton was not doing science? 
 
Some thinkers see as essential to science one or more qualities that others dismiss. 
Others disagree over whether certain characteristics are jointly sufficient to define 
science. One philosopher claims that her list of characteristics is sufficient to define it. 
Another philosopher strikes two qualities from her list and adds three more of his own. 
Proposed essential definitions sometimes overlap, but no unified, incontestable 
description has arisen. This definitional ambiguity leads to further disagreements when 
assessing a claim’s scientific standing. 
Whose definition should the scientific community use when evaluating a 
controverted field? Evolutionary psychology, for example, aligns with some, but not all, 
essential-definitional lists. Is it a science, and on what grounds does one say so? Whose 
essential-definitional list is the standard by which its claims are judged? Essential 
definitions address some of the weaknesses of other approaches to demarcation. They 
create their own complex problems, however. 
 
Falsification, verification, and essential definitions fail as solutions to the 
demarcation problem.28 No framing of these approaches garners the consensus of all 
 
28. Thomas Nickles, “History and Future,” in Philosophy of Pseudoscience: 
Reconsidering the Demarcation Problem, ed. Massimo Pigliucci and Maarten Boudry 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013), 1928–2353 (Kindle edition). 
 


19 
philosophers and scientists. Philosopher Massimo Pigliucci underscores how much of a 
conundrum demarcation is. “The boundaries separating science, nonscience, and 
pseudoscience are much fuzzier and more permeable than Popper (or, for that matter, 
most scientists) would have us believe.”29 Science’s boundaries are more like a chain-link 
fence than a concrete wall. Wherever the fence is placed and however tight its mesh, one 
can count on two outcomes. Something desirable will be excluded, and something 
unexpected will get through. What is more, the demarcating fence is susceptible to being 
moved. Where today’s thinkers place it, tomorrow’s thinkers may upend. 
Some maintain that the boundary problem is even worse than the fence image 
suggests. Philosopher Larry Laudan concludes that the entire demarcation project may be 
futile. He finds the question “both uninteresting and, judging by its checkered past, 
intractable . . . . We ought to drop terms like ‘pseudo-science’ and ‘unscientific’ from our 
vocabulary; they are just hollow phrases which do only emotive work for us.”30 Some 
uses of the terms unscientific and pseudoscientific may be shallow and subjective. Some 
demarcation solutions may be little more than self-serving turf protection, too. 
 
29. Massimo Pigliucci, Nonsense on Stilts: How to Tell Science from Bunk 
(Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2010), quoted in Michael Shermer, “What Is 
Pseudoscience?” Scientific American, September 1, 2011, 
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/what-is-pseudoscience/. 
 
30. L. Laudan, “The Demise of the Demarcation Problem,” in Physics, 
Philosophy and Psychoanalysis: Essays in Honor of Adolf Grünbaum (Vol. 76 of Boston 
Studies in the Philosophy of Science), ed. R. S. Cohen and L. Laudan. (Boston: D. 
Reidel, 1983), 125. 
 


20 
Shermer agrees. “The boundary problem between science and pseudoscience, in 
fact, is notoriously fraught with definitional disagreements because the categories are too 
broad and fuzzy on the edges, and the term ‘pseudoscience’ is subject to adjectival abuse 
against any claim one happens to dislike for any reason.”31 Some use the term more as 
(subjective) pejorative than as (objective) classification. Labeling something 
“unscientific” or “pseudoscientific” may reveal much about someone’s biases. It may 
reveal little about what makes science, science. Laudan and Shermer make sound, 
cautionary points. 
 
Still, their observations do not make the demarcation effort impossible. Ask 
educated people whether physics and astrology are sciences. They may not label one as 
science and the other as pseudoscience. Nor, likely, will they say anything about 
boundary criteria. Nonetheless, they will recognize physics as scientific and astrology as 
something else. They will intuit one or more key differences, even if unable to identify 
them with precision. 
The critic may protest that this illustration uses extreme examples. Anyone can 
distinguish an obvious science from an obvious pseudoscience. The demarcation 
problem, the critic maintains, lies nearer the boundary between the categories. This is a 
valid concern, but it concedes the point that demarcation is possible. People can 
distinguish a genuine science from a field that only purports to be. This does not imply 
 
31. Shermer, “What Is Pseudoscience?” 


21 
that they always sort correctly, nor that they use a sound method for sorting. Nor does it 
imply that people’s categories are not sometimes fuzzy around the edges. People do have 
the ability, though, to differentiate a sham or a superstition from a science. 
 
Attempting to distinguish science from pseudoscience is not always pointless, 
either. Sometimes, it helps people stay out of harm’s way. An increasing number of 
claims purport to be evidence-based, lab-tested, or research-confirmed. Touting a claim 
to be scientific, even if unsubstantiated, gives it an air of credibility. In some areas, a 
person’s belief in a pseudoscientific claim has little practical effect. What harm is done 
when someone attributes her stress relief to vibrating crystals? What does it matter that a 
couple of Himalayan hikers claim to have seen a yeti? 
In other areas, such as healthcare, believing in a sham science can have dire 
consequences. Relying on aromatherapy to cure cancer or homeopathy to cure Ebola 
could prove fatal. This is why investigating Ayurveda’s scientific standing is important. 
How does one do that, though, if common demarcation solutions have been ruled out? 
What approach can garner enough agreement to be an effective boundary criterion? 
 
One robust and helpful approach to demarcation is to think of science as a cluster 
concept. A cluster concept is an idea best described by means of connected attributes. 
These attributes are not like essential definitions’ necessary and sufficient characteristics, 
though. With a cluster concept, no attribute is always necessary to describe it. There may 
be rare situations in which common attribute Z, for example, does not apply. Nor is any 
combination of attributes always sufficient to describe a cluster concept. Under some 


22 
conditions, attributes A, B, and C will be enough to identify the concept in question. 
Under other conditions, attributes B, C, and D will suffice. 
Cluster concepts differ from essential definitions in another important way. 
Cluster concepts do not allow for either–or evaluation. Taking a definitional approach, a 
field or claim either is or is not scientific. The field or claim either meets the definitional 
threshold, or it does not. Cluster concepts, in contrast, are not semantic binaries. Rather, 
these terms’ descriptions represent a range of qualitative possibilities. Evaluating a term 
as a cluster concept yields semantic probabilities, not certainties. The more concept X 
descriptors we can attribute to an undetermined Y, the more likely Y is to be an instance 
of X. 
 
As illustration, someone would like to know what a family is. She wants to know 
what demarcates a genuine family from a non-family or a family falsely so called. The 
dictionary tells us that a family is “a group of people related to one another by blood or 
marriage.”32 This captures a common use of the term, but it says at the same time too 
much and too little. The definition allows, in principle, for an unlimited number of family 
connections. If Q and R are distant family members and R and S are, too, then Q and S 
are themselves distant family members. What is more, this applies to all combinations of 
Q’s, R’s, and S’s relatives, present and past. With so many “family” relationships, the 
term loses its distinctness and usefulness. The dictionary’s definition says too little, as 
 
32. Stevenson and Lindeberg, ed., NOAD. 


23 
well. Where do adoptive families fit, for example? Adopted children have no biological 
or marital connection to their adopting parents. 
The dictionary cannot serve as a comprehensive, authoritative demarcator of 
family. An essential definition would fare no better. Both approaches run into the same 
sort of problems as when attempting to define science. A better way to understand the 
term family is to view it as a cluster concept. The term appears in different contexts, and 
each context can change its meaning. Still, each use of the term shares important 
conceptual attributes with all other uses of it. The more familial attributes a group of 
people shares, the more likely it is to be a family. 
 
The cluster-concept method can help distinguish genuine sciences from 
pseudosciences. Approaching the problem this way aims to describe science, not define 
it. It also aims to say that an undetermined claim or field X either is likely or is not likely 
to be scientific. Science philosopher Martin Mahner takes this approach. To assess the 
scientific standing of some claim, field, or community, he asks a series of questions. The 
questions arise from a modern Western understanding of science. A few address 
psychological or sociological concerns. Most focus on epistemic justification or empirical 
methods. Most, that is, address the justification for a belief and how the belief was 
arrived at. Mahner’s questions are illustrative rather than comprehensive, indicative 
rather than determinative. Still, how a claim, field, or community answers them shows 
how likely it is to belong to science’s family. 
 


24 
Do they form a research community, or are they just a loose collection of 
individuals doing their own thing?33 Is there an extensive mutual exchange 
of information, or is there just an authority figure passing on his doctrines 
to his followers? Is the given group of people free to research and publish 
whatever they want, or are they censored by the reigning ideology of the 
society they live in . . . ?34 Does the domain of study consist of concrete 
objects, or does it contain fuzzy “energies” or “vibrations,” if not ghosts or 
other spiritual entities?35 What are the philosophical background 
assumptions of the given field?36 Does its ontology presuppose a natural, 
causal, and lawful world only, or does it also admit supernatural entities or 
events?37 . . . Does it accept the canons of valid and rational reasoning? Do 
the principles of noncircularity and noncontradiction matter? Does it admit 
fallibilism or endorse dogmatism? Occam’s razor or unfettered 
speculation? How important are testability and criticism? How important 
is evidential support?38 Can the reliability of its methods or techniques be 
independently tested? Do the theories have genuine explanatory or 
 
33. History provides many examples of pioneer scientists who tended to work 
alone. They worked alone because they were opening a new field of scientific discovery. 
A research community in that field did not yet exist. Examples include the early modern 
astronomers Copernicus, Brahe, and Kepler. 
 
34. This does not address the scientific standing of the community in question per 
se. The Nazis censored research that did not conform to their ideology. This does not 
entail that suppressed researchers were not conducting genuine science. 
 
35. More precisely, this question asks whether the claim in consideration posits 
metaphysical causality. Genuine science may investigate whether evidence substantiates 
the existence of ghosts. 
 
36. This question should be taken to mean current, not historical, philosophical 
assumptions. Many modern sciences were born in historical contexts that made 
unscientific/pre-scientific assumptions. 
 
37. The real question here is not whether a community in question believes in a 
god. The question is whether that community attributes physical causality to a 
metaphysical entity. 
 
38. This is an important question, of course. A more important question may be 
“What counts as evidence to justify, or support, a claim?” 
 


25 
predictive power, or both? Are the theories fruitful?39 Are the data 
reproducible? Are there mechanisms of error elimination? Are its claims 
compatible with well-established knowledge, in particular law statements? 
Does the field borrow knowledge and methods from adjacent fields? Does 
it in turn inform and enrich neighboring fields, or is it isolated? Do the 
problems tackled in the field spring naturally from research or theory 
construction, or are the problems pulled out of a hat? Is the corpus of 
knowledge of the given field up to date and well confirmed, or is it 
obsolete, if not anachronistic? Is it growing or stagnating?40 
 
 
How Mahner words his questions points them toward his view of the “right” 
answers.41 That is, his questions’ substance and phrasing reveal how he understands 
science. Still, he does not suggest that all genuine sciences answer each question in the 
way he hints they should. Answers may differ here and there in details, but they will have 
much in common at their core. None of Mahner’s questions is overwhelmingly more 
important than the others, either. Nor are all the implied right answers, taken together, 
sufficient to define science. The more a field looks like the family of implied right 
answers, though, the likelier it is to be science. Genuine sciences will share many family 
resemblances that pseudosciences lack. 
 
39. Here Mahner asks whether the field’s theories give birth to further research. 
 
40. Martin Mahner, “Science and Pseudoscience: How to Demarcate after the 
(Alleged) Demise of the Demarcation Problem,” in Philosophy of Pseudoscience, ed. 
Massimo Pigliucci and Maarten Boudry (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013), 
752–77 (Kindle edition). 
 
41. One might point out that Mahner’s implied “right” answers beg the question at 
hand. “Right” answers assume a definition of science, which the cluster sets out to 
establish. 


26 
 
Mahner’s family-resemblance questions can help us consider the claims of 
Ayurveda. The answers it gives, taken individually or as a whole, may not determine 
whether it is scientific. Cluster concepts are not essential definitions, and they offer only 
probabilities, not certainties. Still, how Ayurveda answers will provide a strong indication 
of its scientific standing. Ayurveda is a broad and deep topic. Its history, philosophy, 
diagnostics, therapeutics, research, and sociology are complex. Examining any aspect of 
Ayurveda could produce its own book. 
The discussion below is limited. It will focus on Ayurveda’s philosophical 
framework, clinical practice, and research methods. This focus cannot provide a full-
orbed view of Ayurveda. It can, though, provide sufficient evidence to argue that 
Ayurveda is a member of science’s family. 
 
FOUNDATIONS: HISTORICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, THEORETICAL42 
 
 
Ayurveda is Sanskrit for “knowledge of life.”43 For centuries, millions have 
viewed it as a heaven-sent system of healing arts. Systematized Ayurveda may date only 
 
42. For this section, I borrowed from many sources. Payyappallimana and 
Venkatasubramanian were of special help. 
 
43. Jivananda Vidyasagara Bhattacharya, Shabda-Sagara, or a Comprehensive 
Sanskrit-English Lexicon Chiefly Based on Prof. Horace Hayman Wilsons Sanskrit-
English Dictionary, version: scan (Calcutta: Ashu Bodha Bhattacharya and Nitya Bodha 
Bhattacharya, 1900), https://www.sanskrit-lexicon.uni-
 


27 
to the first few centuries CE. Its roots, though, stretch much further back. Tradition says 
that the god Brahmā revealed this knowledge of life to ancient sages.44 They in turn 
preserved these insights in the Vedas. The Vedas are collections of sacred Hindu texts 
written approximately 1500–500 BCE. 
In the centuries that followed, a class of healers called vaidyas emerged.45 These 
were the first of those later called Ayurvedic practitioners or Ayurvedic physicians. Early 
systematized Ayurveda (c. 500 BCE–c. 500 CE) did not develop in a worldview vacuum. 
Growing in influence at the same time was Sāṅkhya, one of six “orthodox” (āstika) 
schools of Hindu philosophy.46 Sāṅkhya may have shaped Ayurveda’s philosophical 
 
koeln.de/scans/SHSScan/2020/web/webtc/servepdf.php?page=097-a. Ayurveda is a 
compound formed from ayus, “life,” and vēda, “knowledge.” Many Sanskrit terms will 
appear in the discussion that follows. Unless otherwise indicated, translations will come 
from the Shabda-Sagara. Sanskrit, one of India’s most ancient languages, is the language 
of classical Ayurveda. Many key Ayurvedic terms are still considered foreign—i.e., not 
part of standard English. This paper will italicize foreign terms only when introducing or 
translating them. 
 
44. Yogini S. Jaiswal and Leonard L. Williams, “A Glimpse of Ayurveda – The 
Forgotten History and Principles of Indian Traditional Medicine,” Journal of Traditional 
and Complementary Medicine 7 no. 1 (2017): 50–53, doi:10.1016/j.jtcme.2016.02.002. 
 
45. Vaidya is Sanskrit for “physician.” Sanskrit and English inflect their 
vocabularies differently. For ease of use, though, this paper inflects Sanskrit as though 
English. The plural of vaidya will appear as vaidyas. 
 
46. Cārvāka, one of Indian philosophy’s “unorthodox” (nāstika) schools, did not 
view inference (from the perceived to the unperceived) as a valid means of knowledge. 
 


28 
foundation more than any other school.47 A comprehensive system of thought, its 
doctrines address metaphysics, ethics, and epistemology. Most relevant to Ayurveda are 
the school’s views on the natures of knowledge and reality. 
Important to note first is how Sāṅkhya’s rationalist epistemology influenced 
Ayurveda. Indologist–philosopher Ferenc Ruzsa summarizes the school’s doctrine. 
“Sāṅkhya recognizes only three valid sources of information: perception, inference and 
reliable tradition. The ordering is important: we use inference only when perception is 
impossible, and only if both are silent do we accept tradition.”48 Traditional authorities, 
such as the Vedas, can be trusted as a source of knowledge. The principal sources of 
knowledge, though, are experience and reason. 
Early vaidyas incorporated Sāṅkhya’s epistemology into their medical practice. It 
provided an empirical framework for their diagnostics and therapeutics. They observed 
and compared the signs and symptoms of health and disease. They made inferences about 
the causes of each. Then, they designed systems of disease-prevention, diagnosis, and 
treatment based on those conclusions. Ayurveda researcher Christian Kessler, MD, et al. 
emphasize the value of the vaidyas’ early scientific methods. “(Proto)scientific concepts 
 
47. Some argue that Nyāya exercised a greater influence on Ayurveda. Exploring 
the argument would take the present discussion far afield. What is most relevant about 
the present discussion is Ayurveda’s metaphysics and epistemology. On these points, the 
Nyāya and Sāṅkhya schools are in sufficient agreement. 
 
48. Ferenc Ruzsa, “Sankhya,” Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, accessed 
March 17, 2020, https://www.iep.utm.edu/sankhya/. 
 


29 
have had a firm place in mainstream Ayurvedic medicine ever since around the beginning 
of the common era . . . and are centered around designated disciplines of logic and 
methodology.”49 The vaidyas often turned to the Vedas for inspiration, insight, and 
instruction. They turned first to sensory information, logical implication, and material 
causality. 
Vaidyas studied what the Vedas have to say about healthy bodies and healthy 
living. They also observed and made inferences about the health of humans and other 
animals. How do creatures remain strong and sickness-free? How do they treat 
themselves when ill? Apparent cures observed by a vaidya might become subjects of 
rudimentary, small-scale experiments.50 
One can imagine an illustrative scenario. A monkey eats a rotten egg and gets 
sick. In response, she gathers a handful of leaves from a tree she never uses for food. She 
seems to know (expects, at least) that the particular tree’s leaves will have a healing 
effect. She swallows the leaves, nurses her belly, and vomits on occasion. Within a few 
hours, the monkey appears normal again. The vaidya wonders whether the leaves will 
 
49. C. Kessler et al., “Ayurveda: Between Religion, Spirituality, and 
Medicine,” Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine 2013 (2013): 1–
11, https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/952432. 
 
50. Experimentation may seem a surprising feature of early-CE Indian 
civilization. It was a logical result, though, of prevailing schools of philosophy. Several 
schools placed the highest epistemic value on direct perception of phenomena. In these 
schools, comparisons, inferences, and authorities played secondary roles at best. If 
perception is paramount, then experiments are efficient ways to expand its reach. 
 


30 
have the same effect on humans. He administers some to a villager made sick by eating 
rotten food and observes what happens.51 If the treatment works, he makes a mental note 
of his findings as a future prescription for the ailment.52 
He considers other animal cures and folk remedies, too, and seeks to validate 
them. He shares his findings with students and other healers. Other vaidyas share their 
observations and inferences, as well. The oral tradition that emerges spreads knowledge 
about health and disease. This collective wisdom becomes a sort of diagnostic and 
therapeutic manual for vaidyas. How can people remain healthy? What are various ways 
they can get sick, and how should a vaidya treat them? The knowledge and methods of 
these early healers becomes the foundation of Ayurveda.53 
 
During the first millennium BCE, two vaidyas stand out: Suśruta (c. 600) and 
Charaka (c. 250).54 Like other early vaidyas, they studied the Vedas. They observed how 
 
51. The pronoun “he” is used for the ancient vaidya only for historical purposes. 
 
52. The vaidya concluded that what worked in one instance will work in others. 
The use of this type of reasoning was a point of contention among early Indian 
philosophies. Critics, such as the Cārvāka school, pointed out a problem with induction. 
It draws conclusions based not on sensory input, but on something not perceived. The 
vaidya observed a cure in one villager's instance. He then drew a conclusion about others 
whom he had not yet observed. 
 
53. “Journey of Ayurveda,” YouTube, accessed March 17, 2020, 15 min. mark, 
https://youtu.be/1y5VhRDM6QU. 
 
54. Estimates for Suśruta’s and Charaka’s lifespans vary widely. What 
complicates matters is that works attributed to one or both may be synthetic. They may 
owe to an original author, disciples’ modifications, and later redactions. This paragraph 
 


31 
humans and other animals maintain health. They attempted to validate apparent cures for 
various ailments. They studied other vaidyas’ work, too, seeking to confirm their 
findings.55 Unlike earlier healers, they aimed to codify and comment on all that was 
known about health. Suśruta focused on surgery; Charaka, on the causes, symptoms, and 
cures of disease. They compiled their knowledge into compendia known as the Suśruta 
Saṃhitā and the Charaka Saṃhitā.56 Many regard these as the bibles of Ayurveda and 
their authors as the fathers of Indian medicine. Between them, the texts outline eight 
medical specialties. They are internal medicine, otorhinolaryngology, pediatrics, 
psychiatry, rejuvenation, surgery, toxicology, and virilification.57 
The Suśruta Saṃhitā, Charaka Saṃhitā, and other early Ayurvedic texts have 
much to say about human health and sickness. They also have much to say about human 
nature itself. Ayurveda’s perspective on the subject owes much to Sāṅkhya’s 
metaphysical dualism. Sāṅkhya views human beings as part prakriti, part puruṣa. Puruṣa 
 
eliminates timeline and authorship ambiguity for simplicity’s sake. Admittedly, historical 
accuracy may suffer. 
 
55. In most instances, other vaidyas’ experiences were captured only in oral 
tradition/accounts. 
 
56. A saṃhitā is a collection of post-Vedic texts. 
 
57. Gopi Warrier, Ayurveda: The Right Way to Live (London: Carlton, 2002), 11. 
Virilification is the “use of aphrodisiacs and fertility-boosting agents to improve sexual 
function and generative issues.” 
 


32 
can be understood as “person,” “soul,” “consciousness,” or “self.”58 It is the immaterial 
principle that infuses humans with personality and uniqueness. Prakriti, by contrast, is 
the set of physical constituents that make up a human being. Prakriti is the sum total of a 
person’s material existence. 
Anything about a person that may be seen, heard, touched, tasted, or smelled is a 
product of prakriti. So are the mental faculties that allow humans to interpret such 
sensory information. Perception and reason, that is, also arise from prakriti, not puruṣa. 
Puruṣa “is pure consciousness: it enjoys and witnesses Prakṛti’s activities, but does not 
cause them.”59 Most striking about Sāṅkhya’s metaphysical dualism is the profound 
inactivity of puruṣa. Ruzsa emphasizes the point: 
 
It is a notable feature of Sāṅkhya that its dualism is somewhat unbalanced: 
if we dropped puruṣa from the picture, we would still have a fairly complete 
picture of the world, as Prakṛti is not inert, mechanical matter but is a living, 
creative principle that has all the resources to produce from itself the human mind 
and intellect. Sāṅkhya thus looks like a full materialist account of the world, with 
the passive, unchanging principle of consciousness added almost as an 
afterthought.60 
 
 
58. The literal Sanskrit meaning of puruṣa (sometimes transliterated purusha) is 
“man.” In Sāṅkhya philosophy, though, as Ruzsa explains, “it often is used for the wider 
concept of person.” 
 
59. Ruzsa, “Sankhya.” 
 
60. Ruzsa, “Sankhya.” 
 


33 
It is this “unbalanced” dualism that shaped Ayurveda’s understanding of human nature. 
Vaidyas saw the causes of human health and sickness as material and sensate. They 
viewed the proper treatment of illness to be material and sensate, as well. A modern 
physician may point out that they knew little about the actual causes of sickness. Early 
Indian healers knew nothing about bacteria, viruses, parasites, and prions. Still, vaidyas 
embraced the idea that material causes account for material effects. 
They sought to explain human health and sickness in terms of the only material 
agents they knew. To an ancient vaidya, these material agents were earth, water, fire, air, 
and space.61 Ayurveda refers to them as the pancamahabhutas, the five fundamental, or 
“great,” elements. All natural things—that is, all things with a prakriti, a material 
nature—are made of them. Human beings are puruṣa–prakriti composites. The puruṣa, 
having no material existence, is not a product of the five elements. It is a preternatural 
entity. Only the prakriti is deemed to arise from the natural elements. 
In humans, the pancamahabhutas combine to form the doshas. A dosha is one of 
three basic bodily humors: vata, pitta, and kapha.62 The original meaning of the Sanskrit 
dosha had scant connection to a bodily humor. Pre-Ayurvedic use of the term often 
 
61. These “classical elements” appear in early Western metaphysics, as well. 
 
62. Most today pronounce the ph in “kapha” as /f/. In ancient Sanskrit, it would 
have sounded like a breathier, more plosive /p/. Early Western medicine had a similar 
belief in basic bodily humors. Hippocrates referred to them as blood, yellow bile, phlegm 
and black bile. 
 


34 
pointed, instead, to a fault, defect, or blemish.63 Early vaidyas began to use the term to 
refer to “fault lines” in the body’s health.64 In this early sense, the doshas were where a 
defect in human health—a disease—could occur. When vata, pitta, and kapha are in 
balance, humans remain healthy. When diet, activity, emotional state, or environment 
becomes unbalanced, however, people become sick.65 
Doshas regulate all systems of body and mind, from gross-motor movement to 
imagination.66 Like the pancamahabhutas, the doshas are understood to be material 
entities. They are not new material entities, but arrangements of the five basic elements. 
Vata dosha blends air and space, and classical Ayurveda links it to bodily movement. 
Vata regulates locomotion, as well as respiration and blood circulation. Pitta is the fire 
dosha, and it is linked to metabolism and the digestive and endocrine systems. Kapha 
dosha blends the elements of earth and water, and Ayurveda links it to chest, torso, and 
back. Kapha regulates growth and strength. 
 
63. Shabda-Sagara, “doṣa.” 
 
64. Robert Svoboda in Doctor from India, directed by Jeremy Frindel (New York: 
Kino Lorber, 2018), https://www.kanopy.com/product/doctor-india. 
 
65. Marc Lallanilla, “Ayurveda: Facts About Ayurvedic Medicine,” LiveScience, 
January 7, 2015, http://www.livescience.com/42153-ayurveda.html. 
 
66. Many Ayurvedic practitioners would protest this sentence’s Cartesian mind–
body dualism. They would argue that body and mind are not the human being’s bipartite 
constituents. Nature and consciousness are. Under the head nature fall all aspects of 
human psychology and anatomy/physiology. 
 


35 
Ayurveda sees the doshas as more than human beings’ material causes, though. 
The doshas’ permutations and combinations also constitute psycho-physical human types. 
Pitta is not only the fire-dosha, for example. It is also represents a particular anatomical, 
physiological, and psychological makeup.67 When a vaidya says that a person has a pitta 
constitution, it means that pitta dosha predominates. Doshic types may be single-dosha or 
dual-dosha dominant. Someone’s doshic type, then, may be vata only, pitta only, kapha 
only, vata–pitta, pitta–kapha, or vata–kapha.68 Everyone fits into one of these six general 
doshic categories. 
Sorting people by doshic type has analogs in the West. Westerners often sort 
people using physical and psychological criteria. For example, an exercise physiologist 
might classify clients according to body type. She might see clients as ectomorphic, 
mesomorphic, or endomorphic. The mesomorphs will have “a compact and muscular 
body build.”69 She will use the term mesomorph as shorthand for a set of anatomical 
features. 
 
67. Unnikrishnan Payyappallimana and Padma Venkatasubramanian, “Exploring 
Ayurvedic Knowledge on Food and Health for Providing Innovative Solutions to 
Contemporary Healthcare,” Frontiers in Public Health 4, no. 57 (2016), 
doi:10.3389/fpubh.2016.00057. Some Ayurveda researchers link doshic types to discrete 
phenotypes. See Periyasamy Govindaraj et al., “Genome-Wide Analysis Correlates 
Ayurveda Prakriti,” Nature News 5, 5786 (2015): 1–12, doi:10.1038/srep15786. 
 
68. Ayurveda outlines doshic subcategories, as well, but their discussion is not 
relevant here. 
 
69. Stevenson and Lindeberg, ed., NOAD. 
 


36 
Psychologists often sort people, too, but according to personality type. They view 
people as either more introverted or more extroverted. Some are concerned more about 
their own thoughts and feelings. Others are concerned more about external things or 
objective considerations. Both terms, introvert and extrovert, represent a complex of 
psycho-emotional and psycho-social characteristics. Combining body–mind 
classifications, some people are introverted mesomorphs. Body and personality typing are 
convenient ways to convey information about someone.70 
The six doshic types play a similar role in Ayurveda. They summarize common 
features of categories of human beings. All human beings share many characteristics. 
Those of the same doshic type share even more. Still, no two human beings ever have 
identical physical and psychological constitutions. No two bodies, no two minds work 
exactly alike, not even in twins. Each human being has his or her own unique prakriti, 
and that prakriti determines his or her doshic type. Even within the same doshic type, 
though, people’s psycho-physical makeups vary. Among vata–kaphas, for example, some 
are more vata dominant, some more kapha. 
When people live compatibly with their doshic type, they remain healthy longer. 
Their psycho-physical constitution is in equilibrium. People rarely live in harmony with 
their doshas, though. They eat what they ought not to and do not sleep as they should. 
They get too much physical activity or too little, and they deal with stress poorly. They 
 
70. They are convenient. They are not always so precise as a physician or scientist 
might like. 


37 
live in geographies or climates unsuited to their constitutions. Those with pitta dosha, for 
example, should reduce or avoid hot and spicy foods.71 Most people on the planet, 
however, know nothing of their doshic type. Ignorant of Ayurveda’s advice, many pittas 
routinely eat hot and spicy meals. Soon, many develop acid reflux and other digestive 
difficulties. The added heat in their diet—thermal and chemical—cause a pitta imbalance. 
When people live incompatibly with their doshic type, they are more likely to 
become ill. Various factors, some controllable and some not, affect the balance of 
individuals’ doshas. A change in one’s doshic balance results in a change in one’s 
physical or mental well-being. Ayurveda calls a person’s present state of health, whatever 
it is, his or her vikriti.72 The wider the gap between one’s prakriti and one’s vikriti, the 
more likely illness will be. 
 
Ayurveda sees human health as a balance in the doshas, illness as an imbalance.73 
Too much pitta can lead to inflammation. Too much kapha can express itself as sinus 
congestion or edema. Like Western medicine, Ayurveda treats these conditions in an 
effort to restore full health. Unlike much Western medicine, though, Ayurveda focuses on 
maintaining health, not curing disease. This may be part of what makes Ayurveda 
 
71. Vasant Lad, “Ayurveda: A Brief Introduction and Guide,” The Ayurvedic 
Institute, accessed March 17, 2020, https://www.ayurveda.com/pdf/intro_ayurveda.pdf. 
 
72. Ayurvedic literature sometimes transliterates this word vikriti, sometimes 
vikruti. 
 
73. Jaiswal and Williams, “A Glimpse of Ayurveda.” 
 


38 
attractive to many Westerners. Why pay the cost of treatment, they wonder, if one can 
prevent many illnesses in the first place? Vaidyas may prescribe tulsi tea as an anti-
diabetic.74 Their counsel to the patient, though, will focus on changes to diet and activity. 
Keeping people healthy is more important to Ayurveda than prescribing medicine. 
 
PHILOSOPHICAL & THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS: OBJECTIONS 
 
 
For some critics, Ayurveda’s religious foundation disqualifies it as a science. The 
concern seems to be that its worldview is incompatible with modern thinking. To many 
modern thinkers, all things that exist are reducible to the natural and physical. A god that 
transcends nature cannot exist because the supernatural cannot exist.75 Even if such a god 
did exist, that god could have no causative effect on the natural world. Ayurveda’s 
mythic foundation and religious ties to Hinduism seem insuperable obstacles. One can 
excuse ancient vaidyas who attributed Ayurvedic healing to the gods. The problem is that 
many of today’s practitioners do, too. 
 
74. Lesley Braun and Marc Cohen, Herbs & Natural Supplements: An Evidence-
Based Guide, vol. 2 (Sydney: Churchill Livingstone, 2015), 997. “Tulsi has been found to 
have effective anti-diabetic activity in human trials.” 
 
75. This statement begs the question. Its premise assumes what its conclusion 
asserts. 
 


39 
 
This line of objection is an unfair disqualification. Many modern sciences were 
born in a mythic, pre-enlightened past. One should not dismiss them for how their 
embryonic versions understood the world. Who discounts astronomy, for example, 
because its intellectual ancestors were religious astrologers? Who disregards chemistry 
because its pioneers practiced alchemy? Hippocrates and Galen believed that four fluids 
control the body. Should one dismiss modern medicine on account of their humoral 
theory? Ancient physicians and natural philosophers accounted for the world as best they 
could.76 They could explain reality only with the concepts and information available to 
them. This is no less true for ancient Ayurvedic physicians. 
 
Other critics are concerned that Ayurvedic practitioners attribute natural 
phenomena to metaphysical entities. This concern sounds religious, but it is more 
philosophical or methodological. Before addressing the objection, it is necessary to 
qualify the term Ayurvedic practitioner. This paper addresses beliefs and practices of 
ancient healers and present-day vaidyas. Its discussions of history and philosophy are 
helpful and important for understanding Ayurveda. The thesis, though, defends 
Ayurveda’s modern expression. The vaidyas being defended are modern practitioners 
with modern Western educations. 
 
76. Lawrence Principe, Scientific Revolution (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2011). Principe traces the development of science from myth (pre-science) to 
protoscience to modern science. 


40 
This qualification does not detract from the critic’s contention, however. Some 
practitioners today do indeed see metaphysical causes behind natural effects.77 This 
objection is insufficient to disqualify Ayurveda as a genuine science, though. Stating the 
concern more precisely will help explain why. Some modern practitioners see 
metaphysical causes behind the natural causes of natural effects. They believe that there 
is a God or a nonphysical “energy” at work in the universe.78 They believe that this 
metaphysical entity interacts with the physical world. Some believe that this entity 
interacts with the physical world in a sustaining way. Others believe that the entity 
interacted with the world only to bring it into existence. 
Many of today’s Ayurvedic practitioners hold such views. Still, modern vaidyas 
practice medicine within a natural effect–natural cause framework. In this way, some 
modern Ayurvedic physicians are like some Western scientists. Many a biomedical 
physician believes that God performs medical miracles. In one poll of 1,100 US 
physicians, nearly three out of four do.79 One ought not to dismiss modern medicine 
because of these doctors’ metaphysical beliefs. Regardless of those beliefs, they approach 
 
77. Vasant Lad may be an example. 
 
78. Some view the metaphysical as plural: gods, for example, or “energies.” 
 
79. Shoba Sreenivasan and Linda E. Weinberger, “Do You Believe in Miracles?” 
Psychology Today, December 15, 2017, 
https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/emotional-nourishment/201712/do-you-
believe-in-miracles. 
 


41 
medicine as methodological naturalists.80 The same can be said of the Ayurvedic 
practitioners this paper defends. Some twenty-first-century vaidyas believe that Vishnu 
enlightens their minds and guides their hands.81 Some believe that Ganesha removes 
obstacles to good health.82 Even so, these vaidyas research, diagnose, advise, and treat as 
if the gods did not exist. 
 
Another line of objection to Ayurveda focuses on the pancamahabhutas, doshas, 
and prakriti. Some critics are concerned that they seem to have immaterial natures. 
Granted, modern scientists may believe God to be working behind natural causes. May a 
genuine scientist interpret an immaterial “substance” as a natural cause, though? If the 
pancamahabhutas are immaterial, how can they account for humans’ physical existence? 
If the doshas are immaterial, how can they be biological mechanisms of action? If the 
prakriti is immaterial, how can it produce human beings? Ayurveda cannot be a genuine 
science if its core concepts have no physical existence. 
 
80. David Papineau, “Naturalism,” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 
September 15, 2015, https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/naturalism/. 
 
81. Vishnu is “a god, originally a minor Vedic god, now regarded by his 
worshipers as the supreme deity and savior, by others as the preserver of the cosmos in a 
triad with Brahma and Shiva. Vishnu is considered by Hindus to have had nine earthly 
incarnations or avatars, including Rama, Krishna, and the historical Buddha; the tenth 
avatar will herald the end of the world” (NOAD). 
 
82. Ganesh/-a is “an elephant-headed deity, son of Shiva and Parvati. Worshiped 
as the remover of obstacles and patron of learning, he is usually depicted colored red, 
with a potbelly and one broken tusk, riding a rat” (NOAD). 
 


42 
Other critics grant that the pancamahabhutas’, doshas’, and prakriti’s natures are 
material. These critics challenge their identities. Ayurveda teaches that every natural 
thing is made of earth, water, fire, air, and space. How can a genuine science cling to 
these five “elements” as the building blocks of the world? These two objections to the 
pancamahabhutas, doshas, and prakriti are formidable. Clarifying how Ayurveda sees 
their natures and identities requires a careful response. That response needs to consider 
three different Ayurvedic mindsets: ancient, traditional, and modern.83 
 
Ancient vaidyas are those of the premodern world. They recognized no separation 
between the metaphysical and the physical. Their worldview saw gods and mortals 
playing on the same cosmic stage. They saw their minds as receptacles of divine 
revelation and reflectors of its truth. Their scriptures were sources of knowledge and 
arbiters of experience. Ancient vaidyas were children of their time. Their Ayurveda 
cannot determine the scientific standing of today’s Ayurveda. The same cannot be said 
for the beliefs and practices of traditional and modern vaidyas. 
 
Traditional vaidyas are practitioners of the modern era who ignore modern 
Western education. Traditional vaidyas downplay or deny the insights of modern medical 
science. Their training derives from the tenets and practices of ancient Ayurveda. Most 
traditional vaidyas study under traditional gurus, who themselves learned from traditional 
gurus. Traditional vaidyas overlook or look askance at biomedical principles, diagnostics, 
 
83. Nishal Ramnunan. Personal interview. 8 Dec. 2018. Thanks to Ramnunan for 
outlining this delineation. 


43 
and therapeutics. They have little regard for methodological naturalism and modern 
clinical methods. A Western analog is the zoologist who denies and resists evolutionary 
theory. The resistance stems not so much from scientific considerations as from ante-
scientific commitments. Those prior commitments may be philosophical, religious, 
societal, or even political. 
Traditional vaidyas view the pancamahabhutas, doshas, and prakriti as the 
ancients did. Defending their Ayurvedic practice as a genuine science would prove an 
exceptional challenge. Traditional vaidyas are by no means rare in the global Ayurvedic 
community. Writing for the WHO in 2011, P. N. V. Kurup estimated their number at 
300,000 worldwide.84 Still, their non-modern views do not represent most Ayurvedic 
schools and hospitals today.85 
 
The third Ayurvedic mindset the critic of Ayurveda must consider is the modern. 
Modern practitioners represent a minority, but a growing and influential one. Given their 
 
84. P. N. V. Kurup, “Ayurveda,” in Traditional Medicine in Asia, ed. Ranjit Roy 
Chaudhury and Uton Muchtar (New Delhi: World Health Organization, 1990), 3. 
 
85. “Courses in Ayurveda,” Ministry of AYUSH | Courses in Ayurveda, accessed 
April 5, 2020, http://ayush.gov.in/courses-ayurveda. According to Nishal Ramnunan, 
however, India’s current prime minister wishes to see this change. A defender of Hindu 
nationalism, Narendra Modi advocates Ayurveda’s returning to its Vedic roots. His 
concern seems to have little to do with medicine, more to do with casting off Western 
thought. 
 


44 
roles in colleges and hospitals, they are poised to shape Ayurveda’s future.86 Modern 
Ayurvedic practitioners and teachers embrace modern Western education. They view 
Ayurveda as a complement, not an alternative, to biomedicine. Still, typical modern 
vaidyas receive premedical educations in anatomy, physiology, and pharmacology.87 
They learn the scientific method, and they learn to value it in the practice of medicine. 
Modern vaidyas recognize the importance of methodological naturalism and the modern 
worldview. 
When they describe the doshas, for example, they characterize them in biological 
terms. Modern Ayurvedic literature characterizes vata, pitta, and kapha as confluences of 
bodily systems. Alex Hankey of the Institute of Ayurveda Integrative Medicine, 
Bangalore, provides an example: 
 
In an age where validity of concepts is judged by their scientific relevance, 
establishing the scientific validity of Tridosha is a program of significance. It 
requires translating concept and practical application into the idiom of modern 
biology and medicine. Four different complementary approaches have been 
proposed to do so: factor analysis of human physiology; systems analysis of 
organism function; correlation of Dosha and genomic variations - Ayugenomics; 
and correlation of Dosha and cellular function.88 
 
86. Bhushan Patwardhan, “Bridging Ayurveda with Evidence-Based Scientific 
Approaches in Medicine,” EPMA Journal 5, no. 19 (2014), doi.org/10.1186/1878-5085-
5-19. 
 
87. Kurup, “Ayurveda,” 14. 
 
88. Alex Hankey, “Establishing the Scientific Validity of Tridosha: Part 1: 
Doshas, Subdoshas and Dosha Prakritis,” Ancient Science of Life 29, no. 3 (2010): 6, 
 


45 
 
The doshas comprise complex interactions among biological, chemical, and mechanical 
systems. Physical things, such as food, medicine, exercise, and weather, impact the 
doshas.89 The right medicine for the right person at the right time brings bodily balance 
and health. The wrong food or medicine can have the opposite effect. Modern vaidyas 
make these causal connections based on the doshas’ physical nature. 
 
Modern Ayurveda sees an individual’s prakriti in a similar physical way. The 
prakriti is a person’s unique combination of doshas. The prakriti is understood to have a 
biological basis because the doshas do. US-based researchers Yogini Jaiswal and Leonard 
Williams describe scientific studies of Ayurvedic principles. Their integration of 
Ayurvedic and biomedical terms is typical in modern Ayurvedic literature. (The topics of 
their discussion will be taken up in the next section.) Their uses of prakriti and dosha 
lack precision. The concepts’ biological nature is apparent, though. 
 
Rotti et al, have published several studies correlating the concept of prakriti in 
Ayurveda to present-day science. A report indicating the correlation of dominant 
prakriti with the Body Mass Index (BMI) and place of birth in individuals was 
 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3336287/pdf/ASL-29-6.pdf. For further 
information on the “Ayugenomic” approach, see Bhushan Patwardhan and Gerard 
Bodeker, “Ayurvedic Genomics: Establishing a Genetic Basis for Mind–Body 
Typologies,” The Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine 14, no. 5 (2008): 
571–76, doi.org/10.1089/acm.2007.0515. 
 
89. Kurup, “Ayurveda,” 6. 
 


46 
published.90 Studies involving subjects of various prakriti types viz. Vata, Pitta 
and Kapha, were carried out to identify molecular differences that affect 
susceptibility and responses of individuals to various environmental or disease 
conditions. A classification method for human population, with respect to DNA 
methylation signatures is reported based upon traditional Ayurveda concept of 
prakriti.91 In a study involving genome-wide SNP (single nucleotide 
polymorphism) in 262 male individuals from three different prakritis, it was found 
that PGM1 gene is associated with energy production. PGM1 was found to be 
more homogeneous in Pitta prakriti, than the Kapha and Vata prakriti.92, 93 
 
The authors discuss doshic types alongside BMIs, molecular characteristics, and DNA 
methylation. They mention a correlation between pitta dosha and the homogeneity of the 
PGM1 gene. The article does not address the prakriti’s or the doshas’ natures per se. Still, 
the authors’ language assumes that the doshas are complexes of biochemical systems. 
The doshas are neither metaphysical entities nor literal earth, water, and the rest. The 
authors’ approach to Ayurveda frames ancient medical ideas within modern scientific 
understandings. Later sections on methods show how this approach affects clinical 
practice and research. 
 
90. Harish Rotti et al., “Determinants of Prakriti, the Human Constitution Types 
of Indian Traditional Medicine and Its Correlation with Contemporary Science,” Journal 
of Ayurveda and Integrative Medicine 5 no. 3 (2014): 167–75, 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4204287/pdf/JAIM-5-167.pdf. 
 
91. Harish Rotti et al., “DNA Methylation Analysis of Phenotype Specific 
Stratified Indian Population,” Journal of Translational Medicine 13 no. 151 (2015): 1–
12, doi:10.1186/s12967-015-0506-0. 
 
92. Periyasamy Govindaraj et al., “Genome-Wide Analysis Correlates Ayurveda 
Prakriti,” Nature News 5, 5786 (2015): 1–12, doi:10.1038/srep15786. 
 
93. Jaiswal and Williams, “A Glimpse of Ayurveda,” 52. 


47 
Some Ayurvedic practitioners today hold metaphysical views like those of their 
ancestors. They understand prakriti, puruṣa, pancamahabhuta, and dosha much as Suśruta 
and Charaka did. Others have more modern perspectives. To assess Ayurveda fairly, one 
needs to consider the views of both sorts of practitioner. Various sections below will 
highlight important developments in Ayurvedic understanding. Some of these discussions 
use five-elemental language, but only because Ayurveda does. “Earth,” “water,” “fire,” 
“air,” and “space” appear in contemporary discussions of the pancamahabhutas. The 
classical elements are implicit in every mention of the doshas and the prakriti, as well. 
What is meant in each instance depends upon the “Ayurvedist” using the terms.94 
The use of ancient terms by today’s Ayurvedists represents a hermeneutical spectrum. 
Some speak of the five elements and their doshic combinations as literal earth, water, etc. 
An increasing number of Ayurvedists use the elemental terms more like metaphors. Talk 
of air does not mean “the invisible gaseous substance surrounding the earth.”95 Instead, 
air points to some biology-based principle or process associated with vata dosha. This 
literal-to-figurative hermeneutical divergence represents a key development in Ayurvedic 
 
94. “Ayurvedist” is shorthand for Ayurvedic theorist, educator, practitioner, or 
researcher. 
 
95. Stevenson and Lindeberg, ed., NOAD. 
 


48 
thought.96 Its relevance to the question of Ayurveda’s scientific standing may be 
apparent. 
Of course, using language that points to a biological process is not the same as 
defining the process. To a modern Ayurvedist, pitta is not, of course, made of what 
consumes wood in a fireplace. Rather, it signifies a complex of biological, chemical, and 
physical mechanisms. This statement is vague and easy to make. It is more challenging to 
translate the concept of pitta into biomedical terms. Some Ayurvedists, such as 
Jayakrishna Nayak, have called special attention to the problem.97 They want to see 
greater dialogue between Indian Ayurveda and Western biomedicine. For that to happen, 
these Ayurvedists realize, both sides must agree upon terminology. 
 
The descriptions above characterize Ayurvedists delineated as modern. Without a 
couple of caveats, though, the response would be incomplete. The first concerns the 
confusing language used by some modern Ayurvedists. Ayurveda instructor Justin 
Robertshaw provides a clear example of the problem. He refers to the doshas as 
 
96. “Figurative” here means “representing a physical substance (or system) that is 
not literal earth, water, etc.” “Figurative” does not mean metaphysical. Some Western 
Ayurvedists refer to the pancamahabhutas and doshas as “energies.” This notion is a 
novelty in Ayurveda’s history. It will be addressed below. 
 
97. Jayakrishna Nayak, “Ayurveda Research: Ontological Challenges,” Journal of 
Ayurveda and Integrative Medicine 3, no. 1 (January 2012): 17–20, 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3326789/pdf/JAIM-3-17.pdf. 
 


49 
“energies.”98 By logical implication, then, the pancamahabhutas are energies. After all, 
the doshas are mere combinations of those five fundamental elements. 
Some critics view an Ayurvedist’s use of the term energy as a telltale sign of a 
medical pseudoscience. If doshic “energies” are real but nonphysical, however, then they 
must be metaphysical. If metaphysical, then they cannot be the basis of a genuine medical 
science. A conceptual framework that incorporates metaphysical entities betrays 
methodological naturalism. Other critics view such a use of the term energy as indicative 
of shoddy scientific thought. If Ayurveda says “energy” when it means a complex of 
biological systems, then it is doing bad science.99 Alternatively, does “energy” refer to 
electricity, magnetism, or the like? If so, then Ayurveda posits a sort of scientific magic 
in its theoretical foundation. These concerns are understandable, but they prove less 
substantial than they first seem. 
 
Calling the doshas “energies” need not indicate either bad science or 
pseudoscience. It may indicate, instead, a failure to find more precise, less misleading 
language. Indeed, Robertshaw elsewhere defines a doshic type as a person’s “biological 
constitution.”100 Ayurveda conceives of the doshas (and underlying pancamahabhutas) as 
 
98. “Q&A with Ayurvedic Lifestyle Mentor, Justin Robertshaw,” Mala Love, 
January 24, 2017, https://www.lovemalalove.com/questions-answer-with-justin/. 
 
99. Of course, charging Ayurveda with doing bad science entails that it is doing 
science. 
 
100. “Q&A with Ayurvedic Lifestyle Mentor.” 


50 
material. It views them as comprised of, influencing, and being influenced by biological 
processes. The doshas are neither electromagnetic energies nor esoteric metaphysical 
entities. 
Modern Ayurvedic literature explores the doshas’ biological basis. It seeks to 
isolate the doshas’ mechanism of action. Are the doshas rooted in people’s genes? That 
is, do the doshic types represent six common genetic variations among humans? Are they 
rooted, more proximally, in six principal species-wide metabolic variants? Questions 
such as these will be taken up in the next section. What modern Ayurvedic literature 
makes clear about the doshas is this. Whatever they are in precise scientific terms, they 
are neither immaterial nor electromagnetic. 
 
The second caveat about modern Ayurvedists concerns the “mystical outliers.” 
Vasant Lad and Deepak Chopra are notable examples. These contemporary Ayurvedists 
incorporate into their views metaphysical, paranormal, or otherwise unscientific ideas. A 
scene from the documentary film The Doctor from India demonstrates the problem.101 
The film spotlights the work of Vasant Lad, a vaidya trained in Pune, India. In the late 
1970s, he was one of the first to bring Ayurveda to the West. The illustrative scene’s 
context is Lad’s seeing of patients in his Pune clinic. To diagnose and treat, a vaidya must 
 
101. Doctor from India, directed by Jeremy Frindel (New York: Kino Lorber, 
2018), https://www.kanopy.com/product/doctor-india. 
 


51 
first determine a patient’s prakriti and vikriti. One traditional means of doing this is by 
examining the patient’s pulses (more on this in the next section). 
In the scene, Lad examines a man who has come to him for treatment. By 
checking the man’s pulses, Lad claims to know his mother’s present health condition. In 
another scene, Lad talks about feeling nature’s “vibrations” while sitting under a tree. 
Popular Ayurveda teacher and yoga guru David Frawley explains Lad’s abilities.102 No 
ordinary Ayurvedic physician, Vasant Lad is a physician, a yogi, and a psychic.103 The 
film presents remote diagnosis and “vibrational” perception as normal for Lad. Such 
purported abilities are not claimed by the typical modern vaidya, however. Neither Lad 
nor Chopra is representative of the modern Ayurveda this paper defends. 
 
METHODS: DIAGNOSIS & TREATMENT 
 
 
When one evaluates the methods used by a field of practice or research, what is 
one aiming to assess? One is aiming to determine how the field views the epistemic 
warrant for its claims. On what grounds, that is, do its practitioners and researchers 
believe its claims to be sound? When one asks about Ayurveda’s methods, one asks 
questions such as the following. Are its diagnostic and therapeutic methods recognizable 
 
102. David Frawley is one of Deepak Chopra’s longtime teachers. Information 
about Frawley is available at https://www.vedanet.com. 
 
103. David Frawley in Doctor from India. 


52 
as scientific? What is the role of empirical evidence? What is the role of logical 
reasoning? What is the role of critical review? We can explore Ayurveda’s answers by 
considering two groups, practitioners and researchers. 
 
A visit to an Ayurvedic practitioner (AP) is like a visit to many a modern 
physician.104 The practitioner takes the patient’s medical history. She notes the patient’s 
age, sex, place of birth, current address, and illness history. She notes what medications 
the patient has taken and what surgeries he has undergone. She notes diseases and 
conditions common in the patient’s family, too. The practitioner makes clinical 
observations, as well. She observes the patient’s gait and demeanor. She attempts to 
discern his mental and emotional states. She examines hair, skin, teeth, eyes, tongue, 
urine, stool, pulse, and respiration.105 She asks about diet, rest, voiding, sex, work, and 
exercise. 
 
Then, she makes a diagnosis based on prakriti assessment and symptom 
presentation. What she prescribes as a treatment may vary by patient because no two 
 
104. Kurup, “Ayurveda,” 7. 
 
105. An AP takes note both of the cardiac pulse and of the doshic pulses. The 
question of the doshic pulses’ clinical, or sensory, content is intriguing. What exactly is 
an AP assessing when checking doshic pulses? The question is intriguing, but it also lies 
outside the scope of this paper. Whatever is being evaluated, the vaidya assumes it to be 
biological in nature. The vaidya also uses the doshic pulses to help determine prakriti and 
vikriti. Also interesting is the high concurrence rate of prakriti determination by 
experienced vaidyas. For further information on this last point, see Harish Rotti et al., 
“Determinants of Prakriti.” 
 


53 
patients are ever the same. Indeed, diagnosis and treatment may vary with the same 
patient on different occasions. According to Ayurveda, one’s prakriti adapts to one’s age, 
the time of day, and the season of the year.106 Two hypothetical patients’ symptoms lead 
the AP to diagnose arthritis of the knee. For the inactive, pitta-dominant patient, she 
might advise short walks in the cool of the day. The kapha-dominant patient, though, 
might receive a turmeric decoction as an anti-inflammatory. 
Ayurveda does not assume that the same treatment will work for everyone. This 
stands in stark contrast to the standardized approach of much Western medicine. 
Ayurveda researcher Shailaja Chandra describes Ayurvedic diagnostics and therapeutics 
this way. “Each individual is believed to have a special and unique constitution and the 
choice of therapeutic treatment is individualistic and holistic. Diagnosis is done in a 
patient specific manner and treatment is custom-made.”107 Some people will respond well 
to a certain treatment. Others will be unaffected by it or may even be harmed. Vaidyas 
need to know what can cause human illness, but they need to know their patients, as well. 
Biomedical protocols tend to look for and treat disease. Ayurveda aims to treat persons. 
 
106. Warrier, Ayurveda, 23. 
 
107. Shailaja Chandra, “Ayurvedic Research, Wellness and Consumer Rights,” 
Journal of Ayurveda and Integrative Medicine 7 no. 1 (2016): 7, 
doi:10.1016/j.jaim.2016.05.002. 
 


54 
 
Remarkably, the Vedas and Samhitas describe many modern medical conditions, 
including arthritis.108 Modern APs do not rely on ancient texts to justify their treatment 
protocols, though. They turn first to Ayurveda’s history of clinical presentations and 
treatment results. They know that APs have used X to treat Y for centuries and with 
effective result. They understand this history to serve as a diagnostic–therapeutic 
baseline, though. What worked for many people a century ago may not work for many 
today. Diets, psychological stresses, and the environment change over the years. Those 
changes affect an individual’s prakriti. They also affect the collective prakritis of a 
people. 
 
To diagnose and treat, modern APs rely on observation, logic, and Ayurveda’s 
history. They base diagnoses on sensory data and abductive logic. A patient presents with 
a handful of symptoms. The vaidya evaluates the patient’s history, lifestyle, prakriti, and 
vikriti. The AP renders a diagnosis that makes best sense of the information available. 
 
108. Ayurveda has long treated inflammatory and arthritic conditions. For 
information about treatment history and current research, see the following. Kumar P. R. 
Krishna, “The Efficacy of Ayurvedic Treatment for Rheumatoid Arthritis: Cross-
Sectional Experiential Profile of a Longitudinal Study,” International Journal of 
Ayurveda Research 2, no. 1 (2011): 8–13, 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3157120/. See also Ali Mobasheri, 
“Intersection of Inflammation and Herbal Medicine in the Treatment of 
Osteoarthritis,” Current Rheumatology Reports 14 (2012): 604–16, doi:10.1007/s11926-
012-0288-9. See too Subramani Parasuraman, Gan Siaw Thing, and Sokkalingam 
Arumugam Dhanaraj, “Polyherbal Formulation: Concept of Ayurveda,” Pharmacognosy 
Reviews 8, no. 16 (2014): 73–80, doi:10.4103/0973-7847.134229. Helpful also is Ramar 
Perumal Samy, Peter Natesan Pushparaj, and Ponnampalam Gopalakrishnakone, “A 
Compilation of Bioactive Compounds from Ayurveda,” Bioinformation 3, no. 3 (2008): 
100–10, doi:10.6026/97320630003100. 


55 
Then, the AP determines a course of treatment based on (probabilistic) induction. The 
vaidya prescribes curatives that have a long, successful track record. If panchakarma has 
worked for so many with a similar prakriti in the past,109 it is likely to work again today. 
 
One Ayurvedic remedy that has received much recent attention is turmeric. Not 
only a cooking spice, the orange powder has played a prominent role in Ayurveda for 
centuries.110 Vaidyas often prescribe turmeric-rich polyherbal decoctions to reduce 
inflammation.111 Inflammation can be “a localized physical condition in which part of the 
body becomes reddened, swollen, hot, and often painful, especially as a reaction to injury 
or infection.”112 Inflammation can also cause chronic disease, such as rheumatoid arthritis 
 
109. L. A. Conboy, I. Edshteyn, and H. Garivaltis, “Ayurveda and Panchakarma: 
Measuring the Effects of a Holistic Health Intervention,” The Scientific World Journal 9 
(2009): 272–80, doi:10.1100/tsw.2009.35. “Panchakarma is one of the prominent 
Ayurvedic tools used to restore balance to the body,” Conboy and team explain. 
“Through the use of herbalized oils, body treatments (including oil massage), steam 
therapy, herbal paste therapy, nasal therapy, vomiting therapies, enema therapy, and 
purgation therapies, Panchakarma is designed to allow the body to rid itself of wastes that 
have accumulated and lodged in the body, creating blockages in the intelligent flow of 
the various systems, including the circulatory, nervous, and digestive systems. Once this 
cleansing process is complete, the body can resume its natural functioning without 
interference” (“Ayurveda and Panchakarma,” 274). 
 
110. Samy, Pushparaj, and Gopalakrishnakone, “Bioactive Compounds.” 
 
111. Parasuraman, Thing, and Dhanaraj, “Polyherbal Formulation.” Vaidyas 
sometimes prescribe a single-herbal remedy for a particular condition. Often, they 
prescribe a polyherbal formulation. “This key traditional therapeutic herbal strategy 
exploits the combining of several medicinal herbs to achieve extra therapeutic 
effectiveness,” explain Parasuraman, Thing, and Dhanaraj. 
 
112.  Stevenson and Lindeberg, ed., NOAD. 
 


56 
or inflammatory bowel disease. One group of turmeric’s key phytochemicals, the 
curcuminoids, have piqued biomedical interest. 
Some laboratory research appears to support the Ayurvedic remedy’s claim. 
Musculoskeletal researcher Ali Mobasheri and team provide an example of supporting 
evidence. He and his team were investigating herbal medicines as potential treatments for 
osteoarthritis. They conducted in-vitro research into curcumin’s biological action. 
Mobasheri concluded that “results indicate that curcumin is a safe and promising herbal 
medicine for treatment of OA [osteoarthritis]. However, its efficacy and bioavailability 
must be studied in greater detail in-vivo.”113 Mobasheri recognizes the need for more 
research into curcumin’s potential in humans. Still, he finds promise in the principal 
phytochemical of a key Ayurvedic remedy. 
Another example of supporting laboratory evidence comes from a team of oral-
medical researchers. Syeda A. Ara and his team reviewed studies of curcumin, turmeric’s 
key curcuminoid. They were investigating its use for treating oral submucous fibrosis 
(OSMF). The researchers did not find the evidence they sought. “There is a lacunae [sic] 
for scientiﬁc review of curcumin for … OSMF,” they write.114 They did, however, find 
support for curcumin’s anti-inflammatory usefulness. “By modulating the activation of 
 
113. Mobasheri, “Inflammation and Herbal Medicine,” 608. 
 
114. Syeda Arshiya Ara et al., “Research on Curcumin: A Meta-Analysis of 
Potentially Malignant Disorders,” Journal of Cancer Research and Therapeutics 12, 
no. 1 (2016): 175–81, doi:10.4103/0973-1482.171370. 
 


57 
various transcription factors,” the team explains, “curcumin regulates the expression of 
inﬂammatory enzymes.”115 Though recent and still scant, research is starting to show how 
turmeric’s curcumin works. 
 
Many practitioners in complementary and integrative medicine tout turmeric’s 
curcumin as an anti-inflammatory. Many on the Internet tout it as an anti-bacterial, anti-
fungal, and anti-viral, as well. More extreme voices claim that it cures cancer, 
Alzheimer’s disease, and baldness. Some researchers find no evidence for any such 
curcumin claims. Medicinal chemist Kathryn M. Nelson and her team counter them in the 
strongest terms. 
 
The likely false activity of curcumin in vitro and in vivo has resulted in >120 
clinical trials of curcuminoids against several diseases. No doubleblinded, placebo 
controlled clinical trial of curcumin has been successful. This manuscript reviews 
the essential medicinal chemistry of curcumin and provides evidence that 
curcumin is an unstable, reactive, nonbioavailable compound and, therefore, a 
highly improbable lead.116 
 
 
Nelson and her team dismiss curcumin claims as nearly groundless. Curcumin is 
“a highly improbable lead.”117 If so, then Ayurveda’s claims about turmeric’s 
 
115. Ara et al., “Research on Curcumin.” 
 
116. Nelson et al., “The Essential Medicinal Chemistry of Curcumin,” Journal of 
Medicinal Chemistry 60, no. 5 (2017): 1620, doi:10.1021/acs.jmedchem.6b00975. 
 
117. Nelson et al., “Chemistry of Curcumin,” 1620. 
 


58 
effectiveness would appear to be baseless. This may seem a clear implication, but 
Nelson’s team stops short of drawing that conclusion. Researchers admit they “do not 
rule out the possibility that an extract of crude turmeric might have beneficial effects on 
human health.”118 The researchers’ study describes the lack of supporting evidence for 
curcumin claims. It does not rule out the potential effectiveness of turmeric itself. Nelson 
and her team may have intended only to refute claims about turmeric’s key 
curcuminoid.119 To be clear, Ayurveda has had much success with turmeric as an anti-
inflammatory. It has never attempted to isolate and prescribe the chemical constituent 
curcumin. 
 
Turmeric is one plant-based Ayurvedic treatment among thousands. Laboratory 
research has begun investigating the biochemical basis of claims made for it. Research 
has begun to investigate claims for other Ayurvedic medicinals, also. PubMed searches 
for “ashwagandha,” “tulsi,” and “bacopa monnieri,” for example, bear this out.120 One 
early Western investigation involved the Ayurvedic herb sarpagandha, or Indian 
 
118. Nelson et al., “Chemistry of Curcumin,” 1631. 
 
119. Bhushan Patwardhan, “Ayurvedic Drugs in Case: Claims, Evidence, 
Regulations and Ethics,” Journal of Ayurveda and Integrative Medicine 7, no. 3 (2016): 
135–37, doi:10.1016/j.jaim.2016.08.005. Patwardhan has a similar concern about how 
Ayurvedic medicines are advertised in India. He criticizes the “blatant cheating through 
misleading commercial advertisements claiming cure for many incurable diseases (135).” 
 
120. PubMed is a service of the U.S. National Library of Medicine’s National 
Center for Biotechnology Information. It is available at https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/. 
 


59 
snakeroot. Ayurveda has used the herb to treat fever and insanity. Western researchers 
isolated the herb’s chemical mechanism of action. From the isolated chemical, the 
reverse-engineered pharmaceutical reserpine was produced. Reserpine is now used to 
treat hypertension and schizophrenia.121 Conventional medicine has only recently started 
paying attention to Ayurveda’s herbal medicines. This fact is not tantamount to there 
being no strong evidence for Ayurveda’s claims. It is only a recognition of biomedicine’s 
longstanding lack of interest. 
 
Sometimes, critics deny the effectiveness of Ayurvedic remedies. Sometimes, 
they issue stern warnings about those remedies’ potential harm. An example is the 
warning about the toxicity of certain Ayurvedic preparations. Most Ayurvedic medicines 
are herbal blends solely. Some, though, are prepared as rasa shastra. Rasa shastra 
preparations combine herbs with metals, minerals, or gems. Most often, the metals used 
 
121. Bhushan Patwardhan and Raghunath Anant Mashelkar, “Traditional 
Medicine-Inspired Approaches to Drug Discovery: Can Ayurveda Show the Way 
Forward?” Drug Discovery Today 14, no. 15-16 (2009): 804–11, 
doi:10.1016/j.drudis.2009.05.009. See also R. D. Lele, “Beyond Reverse Pharmacology: 
Mechanism-Based Screening of Ayurvedic Drugs,” Journal of Ayurveda and Integrative 
Medicine 1, no. 4 (2010): 257–65, 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3117317/. Reverse pharmacology is one 
new avenue of investigation that shows promise. Researchers have begun to study 
successful Ayurvedic medicines’ mechanism of action. The hope is that this may lead to 
new drugs and treatment protocols. Turmeric has been mentioned as a classic Ayurvedic 
treatment for inflammation. Another is frankincense, the aromatic gum resin. One 
research team at the University of Tübingen (in 2011) found it as effective as cortisone, 
but safer. The researchers hypothesized that its mechanism of action owed to its 
Boswellian acids. See The Secret World of Wellness: Ancient India, directed by Peter 
Bardehle (Langbein & Skalnik Media, 2007), https://youtu.be/1QYhh5bmQcE. 
 


60 
are lead, mercury, and arsenic.122 Some traditional vaidyas claim that rasa shastra 
enhances herbal medicinals’ therapeutic effect.123 
 
Western medicine disagrees. Notable are the concerns and conclusions of two 
studies, one in 2004 and one in 2008, led by Robert B. Saper. Both studies set out to 
“determine the prevalence and concentration of heavy metals in Ayurvedic HMPs [herbal 
medicine products].”124 The 2004 study looked at HMPs sold in the Boston area; the 
2008 study, at HMPs sold on the Internet. Both studies’ conclusions were similar. “One-
fifth of … Ayurvedic medicines purchased … contain detectable125/potentially harmful 
levels of126 lead, mercury, or arsenic.” In 2012, the CDC issued a related report about six 
cases of lead poisoning in New York City.127 Six pregnant women had ingested toxic 
 
122. Technically, arsenic is a metalloid. 
 
123. Parasuraman, Thing, and Dhanaraj, “Polyherbal Formulation.” 
 
124. Robert B. Saper et al., “Heavy Metal Content of Ayurvedic Herbal Medicine 
Products,” JAMA 292, no. 23 (2004): 2868–73, doi:10.1001/jama.292.23.2868. 
 
125. Robert B. Saper et al., “Lead, Mercury, and Arsenic in US- and Indian-
Manufactured Ayurvedic Medicines Sold via the Internet,” JAMA 300, no. 8 (2008): 
915–23, doi:10.1001/jama.300.8.915. 
 
126. Saper et al., “Heavy Metal Content.” 
 
127. “Lead Poisoning in Pregnant Women Who Used Ayurvedic Medications 
from India — New York City, 2011–2012,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 61, 
no. 33 (August 24, 2012): 641–46, 
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6133a1.htm. 
 


61 
levels of the metal in rasa shastra medicines. Such findings have caused many physicians 
and officials grave unease about Ayurvedic preparations. 
 
Ayurveda’s responses to concerns about heavy-metal toxicity appear to be 
mixed.128 It appears that the responses tend to fall along the traditional–modern divide. 
Some modern Ayurvedists raise the same alarm as Western physicians and health 
officials. Others see the issue from a more traditional Ayurvedic perspective. Traditional 
Ayurvedists have concerns about some rasa shastra preparations, too. Their complaints 
are not about the use of metals in Ayurvedic medicinals per se. They point out that some 
medicines are designed to include metallic ingredients. Instead, they question why the 
metals remained toxic after the rasa shastra process. Some of these Ayurvedists attribute 
residual heavy-metal toxicity to improper production.129 Others attribute it to 
environmental contamination of botanical (or other) ingredients. 
Rasa shastra medicines should be safe and effective, traditional Ayurvedists 
maintain.130 They must be prepared correctly and administered properly, though.131 Rasa 
 
128. An interesting question is whether AYUSH—and, thus, the Indian 
government—approves the use of rasa shastra preparations. 
 
129. Parasuraman, Thing, and Dhanaraj, “Polyherbal Formulation.” 
 
130. Ayurveda: Art of Being, YouTube, accessed March 18, 2020, 
https://youtu.be/VgJJlceH-vA. At the 34-min. and 55-min. marks, Brahmanand Swamigal 
explains the shodhana process and provides a demonstration. 
 
131. Janmejaya Samal, “Can the Recent Public Notice by the Ministry of 
Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy Be Helpful in 
 


62 
shastra preparations undergo a blending process called shodhana. This process involves 
blending, heating, cooling, and pulverizing. Shodhana, according to classical Ayurveda, 
purifies, potentiates, and detoxifies ingredients. Ancient vaidyas discovered curious 
chemistries when combining various botanicals with certain metals. According to 
classical texts and Ayurvedic custom, the metals activate the botanicals. The botanicals, 
in turn, buffer the metals, rendering them no longer harmful. 
 
Traditional Ayurvedists are not clear about how rasa shastra preparations enhance 
therapeutic effect. In what way do metals augment beneficial phytochemical activity? 
Nor are traditional Ayurvedists clear about shodhana’s mechanism of action. How 
exactly do chemicals in some plants detoxify chemicals in some metals? If some plants 
can detoxify some metals, why do the plants not render the metals altogether inert? A 
typical Western critic might counter that shodhana cannot detoxify heavy metals. The 
suggestion that it can is (pseudoscientific) alchemy by another name. The criticism is 
understandable. 
Still, the traditional Ayurvedist’s claims about shodhana have a prima facie 
plausibility. Neurologist Bala Manyam explains. “Ayurvedic drugs have been taken for 
thousands of years, mostly in India, and if the lead in [these medicines] was poisonous, 
 
Combating the Irrational Use of Herbal Drugs?” Journal of Family Medicine and 
Primary Care 5, no. 3 (2016): 732–33, doi:10.4103/2249-4863.197286. 
 


63 
we should have an epidemic of lead poisoning. But we never had anything like that.”132 
Millions of Indians have taken rasa shastra medicines for millennia. If they are essentially 
poisonous, then India should have experienced a metal-toxicity epidemic. India has not; 
therefore, rasa shastra medicines are not essentially poisonous. 
Manyam makes a valid modus-tollens argument, though it is sound only if its 
premises are true. His argument is sound, that is, only if no metal-toxicity epidemic has 
ever existed in India. Manyam’s premise has prima facie plausibility. It is possible that 
India has suffered many an epidemic of heavy-metal poisoning. One wonders, though, 
where the evidence of such epidemics is. Surely, there should be plenty after millennia of 
rasa shastra use, but this does not appear to be the case. Critics may dismiss Manyam’s 
view, but they will need to answer his implied question. Why do only a relative few 
develop heavy-metal poisoning from rasa shastra medicines? The answer may be that 
shodhana is not alchemy, but a chemistry not yet understood. 
The clinical practice of today’s APs is like that of Western physicians.133 Vaidyas 
diagnose patients based on self-reports and presenting symptoms. They weigh their 
 
132. Bala Manyam, qtd. in Lallanilla, “Ayurveda.” 
 
133. Kishor Patwardhan et al., “The Ayurveda Education in India: How Well Are 
the Graduates Exposed to Basic Clinical Skills?” Evidence-Based Complementary and 
Alternative Medicine (2011): 1–6, doi:10.1093/ecam/nep113. According to Patwardhan et 
al., the AP described here is unlike some graduates of Ayurveda programs. They lack 
basic knowledge and skills, both in biomedicine and in Ayurveda. Their lack of 
preparation risks both Ayurveda’s integrity and patients’ health. 
 


64 
knowledge of how a patient’s body should function against how it is functioning. They 
assess observed and reported empirical evidence and draw a diagnostic conclusion. They 
prescribe a remedy that has a well-demonstrated therapeutic effect. Unlike some Western 
physicians, though, APs advise patients on how not to be patients. They counsel them on 
lifestyle choices that will help balance their psycho-physical constitutions. The vaidya’s 
aim, says Ayurveda, is not so much to treat disease as it is to heal persons.134 
 
METHODS: RESEARCH & REVIEW 
 
 
Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled studies (RCTs) are the gold 
standard in biomedicine.135 RCTs test drugs, validate therapies, and provide parameters 
for future, more targeted testing. In a basic RCT format, a cohort of test subjects is sorted 
at random into two groups. Everyone in Group 1 receives the target treatment; everyone 
in Group 2, a placebo. Researchers do not know which group receives what, nor do test 
participants. A successful RCT is one that shows significant therapeutic benefit to those 
in Group 1. Those in the target group, that is, need to have benefitted more than those in 
 
134. Ramnunan. 
 
135. Eduardo Hariton and Joseph J. Locascio, “Randomised Controlled Trials - 
The Gold Standard for Effectiveness Research,” BJOG: An International Journal of 
Obstetrics & Gynaecology 125, no. 13 (2018): 1716, doi:10.1111/1471-0528.15199. 
 


65 
the placebo group. RCTs standardize medical testing to reduce both experimental error 
and researcher/participant bias. 
Randomized control trials present challenges for Ayurveda’s holistic, prakriti-
tailored treatment approach.136 They are also contrary to a core Ayurvedic principle. 
Ayurveda tailors its treatment protocols to the individual’s psycho-physical constitution. 
Ayurvedic practitioners and academics alike see this as a system strength.137 Rarely does 
any symptom, condition, or disease present in every person the same way. Rarely does 
any drug or surgery have identical effects on all who receive them. Ayurveda recognizes 
the medical significance of individuals’ anatomical, physical, and psychological 
differences. 
Western physicians do, too, but biomedical testing methods often belie that 
recognition. The RCT’s methods are standardized, but its human test subjects are not. 
Even those who defend the RCT as biomedicine’s gold standard admit this deficiency. 
Eduardo Hariton and Joseph J. Locascio are examples. In an article defending the RCT, 
they call attention to three of its “drawbacks.”138 They are costly and are often not 
 
136. Holistic is used in a technical sense. Holistic systems of medicine are 
“characterized by the treatment of the whole person, taking into account mental and 
social factors, rather than just the symptoms of a disease” (NOAD). 
 
137. Chandra, “Ayurvedic Research.” 
 
138. Hariton and Locascio, “Randomised Controlled Trials.” 
 


66 
followed up. RCTs also have “problems with generalisabilty.”139 The authors clarify this 
point, writing that those “that volunteer to participate might not be representative of the 
population being studied.”140 Test members may not be the sort of subject the trial 
intends to study. This is problematic, because an RCT purposes to study the effects of X 
on population Y. 
The drawbacks Hariton and Locascio mention are not the RCT’s only 
complications. Another is that researchers cannot count on the consistency of cohorts 
across RCTs. This is true even when the cohorts are representative of the studied 
population. An RCT’s success depends upon predictable responses in a target population. 
Different cohorts for different RCT phases, though, may be more homogeneous or less 
so. Their basic demographics, medical histories, and treatment responsiveness will not be 
identical. This sort of variability introduces a confounding element not easily 
compensated for. RCTs may speak of “populations” and “cohorts,” but all groups are 
made up of individual persons. What is true of a whole will not always be true of its 
parts. 
 
Still, many Ayurvedists see value in substantiating Ayurvedic claims using 
modern methods. Many appreciate the rhetorical persuasiveness that biomedical 
validation would provide. If modern methods can show Ayurveda’s effectiveness, then its 
 
139. Hariton and Locascio, “Randomised Controlled Trials.” 
 
140. Hariton and Locascio, “Randomised Controlled Trials.” 


67 
influence will grow. Conventional medicine will begin to take its diagnostics, 
therapeutics, and research seriously. It will have a greater impact on global healthcare by 
supplementing conventional options. RCTs present an exceptional challenge for 
Ayurveda, though. They presuppose and require standardization; Ayurveda, 
individualization. This does not imply that RCTs are of no potential benefit to Ayurveda. 
Nor does it imply that Ayurvedist researchers cannot devise a satisfactory 
alternative. Former Indian-national public health minister Shailaja Chandra has suggested 
two alternatives.141 The first focuses on numerous careful case studies. Invite volunteer 
patients at allopathic hospitals to receive Ayurvedic treatment at government expense.142 
Patients would be sufferers of common conditions, such as arthritis, hypertension, and 
IBS. APs could treat them as they saw fit, and biomedical researchers could review 
results. They would assess relevant health parameters from before, during, and after 
treatment. Reviewers would use whatever diagnostic and laboratory tools needed to 
render an evaluation. 
 
141. Chandra, “Ayurvedic Research.” 
 
142. In India, conventional Western medicine is often referred to as “allopathic” 
medicine. The term derives from one of biomedicine’s foundational principles. Treat 
illness with its cause’s opposite (from Greek allos, “other”). Chandra recommends that 
these RCT alternatives be conducted at government expense. This recommendation owes 
to at least three considerations. One, the government has an interest in validating what is 
in its people’s best medical interest. Two, research studies are expensive; government 
funding removes the financial burden. Three, patients are not likely to volunteer for a 
study at their own expense. 
 


68 
Chandra’s second suggestion of RCT alternative focuses on reviews of clinical 
cases. She estimates that key Ayurvedic hospitals hold tens of thousands of patient 
records. Certain medical conditions presenting and treated could be targeted for 
retrospective analysis. Studies could target those treated for the amelioration of 
tuberculosis, for example. Relevant pre- and post-treatment data could be gathered and 
input into analytical software. The software could show which treatments appeared to 
provide significant improvement.143 Treatment data would prove valuable for use in 
reverse pharmacology, as well. Chandra’s suggestions of RCT alternatives may not 
satisfy all Western researchers. Still, they demonstrate the possibility of using modern 
methods to validate Ayurveda. As important, they show that objective validation need not 
violate core Ayurvedic principles. 
 
Advocates are eager to test Ayurveda because they believe in its benefits. They 
want to share its insights with wider audiences, too, popular and medical-scientific. 
Distinguished Ayurvedist educator Ram Harsh Singh sees great promise in recent 
research efforts. “The demand for new scientific evidence for the efficacy, safety, and 
quality of [Ayurvedic] medications is gaining momentum. Such a demand has motivated 
a large number of investigators to launch ambitious research and development activities. 
 
143. “Significant improvement” does not imply “better than conventional 
approaches.” This phrase means only that patients were medically better off (relative to 
the target condition) upon discharge. 


69 
This is definitely a welcome development.”144 Singh mentions efforts to validate 
Ayurvedic medicines. Ayurveda’s remedies are not limited to its pharmacopeia, though. 
Substantiating Ayurveda’s broader claims will need to include treatments such as 
panchakarma. 
One important component of biomedical validation is critical review. Ayurvedic 
research needs expert scrutiny from those within the system and outside it. Practitioners 
need to share their studies with other trained APs. They need to dialogue with 
conventional physicians and biochemical scientists, as well. One common (some say 
crucial) means of critical examination is the peer-reviewed journal. Rigorous, reputable 
journals allow researchers and practitioners to share their hypotheses and findings. They 
also invite the careful analysis, and disagreement, of other experts. Many Ayurvedists 
have only begun to see the value of such constructive-critical communities. 
When Ayurvedists do publish robust articles, they tend to appear in Ayurvedic 
journals.145 These articles rarely enter into conversation with those outside the Ayurvedic 
community. Ayurveda educator Kishor Patwardhan and his team value the rigors of peer-
reviewed journals. They also observe that Ayurvedic journals have not yet reached their 
academic-scientific potential. This is due in part to a deficit in Ayurvedic education. 
 
144. Ramharsh Singh, “Exploring Larger Evidence-Base for Contemporary 
Ayurveda,” International Journal of Ayurveda Research 1, no. 2 (2010): 65, 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2924985/. 
 
145. Within India, this means that they tend to appear in AYUSH-related journals. 
 


70 
Future APs need training in anatomy and physiology, diagnostics and therapeutics. They 
also need “frequent training programs on research methodology and scientific writing 
skills.”146 To be successful in a peer-reviewed community, researchers’ methods must be 
sound. Their writing must be skillful. Until these are the norm in Ayurveda, its critical 
review will not be as fruitful or respected as it desires. 
 
Some seek to disqualify modern Ayurveda as a science on methodological 
grounds. It is difficult to see the strength of that case, though. Modern Ayurvedic 
methods display the characteristics of many a scientific community. It bases its 
diagnostics and therapeutics on empirical evidence and sound reasoning.147 It uses logical 
tools common to modern sciences: induction, abduction, and hypothetico-deduction. It 
values the testing of hypotheses and the validating of results by modern means. 
Granted, Ayurveda does not fit well within the testing confines of biomedicine’s 
RCTs. Its peer review is largely internal, too. It lacks the rigorous scrutiny of medical-
scientific outsiders. These concerns are valid, but they do not warrant the dismissal of 
Ayurveda as a genuine science. Ayurveda’s deficits in biomedical validation and review 
do not stem from resistance. They stem from an old-world science attempting to align 
itself with the modern world. Ayurveda considers itself a genuine science and a 
 
146. Kishor Patwardhan et al., “Peer Reviewed Journals of Ayurveda - An 
Appraisal,” Journal of Research and Education in Indian Medicine 20, no. 3-4 (2014): 
148, doi:10.5455/jreim.82-1434000477. 
 
147. Singh, “Exploring Larger Evidence-Base,” 66. 


71 
biomedical complement. As a community, it looks for ways to demonstrate the rationale 
for its beliefs. Modern Ayurveda invites the efforts of both the verificationist and the 
falsificationist. Their attempts to disprove Ayurveda show the Ayurvedic community 
what needs scientific reinforcement. These behaviors would be unusual for a 
pseudoscience. 
 
RESEARCH CAVEATS & CONCESSIONS 
 
 
Researching Ayurveda for this paper was like tiptoeing around the ocean. Then 
falling in. The topic is vast, stretching beyond where newcomers’ eyes can see. 
Ayurveda’s contours cover history, religion, philosophy, language, society, economics, 
and … medicine. Each one of these areas is in turn its own deep sea. Beneath the surface 
of Ayurvedic philosophy bubble ancient Hindu schools of thought. Beneath the simplicity 
of Ayurvedic terms swirl millennia of Sanskrit scholarship. Beneath the clear waters of 
anti-inflammatories churn the opacities of Ayurgenomics. Ayurveda is a worthy topic for 
a beachcomber’s research. The researcher should be warned, however, that its depths are 
deceiving from the shore. 
 
Deceiving views of one’s topic are not uncommon in research. Deceiving views 
are unintentional, but they are no less distorted. Often, these distorted views owe to 
various cognitive biases. Cognitive biases are unintentional, usually unexpected 
malfunctions in our thinking. FUTON—“full text on the Net”— is one. Unfunded 


72 
researchers do not wish to pay to read this journal article when that one is free. Another 
common distortion is the “not invented here” bias. This clouded view of research affects 
the sources a researcher uses. A source may have an aversion to an idea merely because it 
came from a different community. A third common distortion is the confirmation bias. 
Research aims to be as objective as possible. Sometimes, though, researchers read 
research in the way they want it to be read. Cognitive biases are avoidable, but rarely 
entirely so. Doubtless, I have fallen prey at times to all three, so I ask the reader’s 
understanding. The distortions were unintentional. 
 
The decision to omit a discussion of the placebo effect was not. Some critics 
maintain that Ayurveda is an ineffectual medical pseudoscience. It does no one any good. 
Other critics recognize that Ayurveda has worked for millions of people. These critics do 
not attribute its success to science, however. They attribute any therapeutic benefit from 
Ayurveda to the placebo effect. The turmeric worked, they would insist, because the 
patient believed it would. Western medicine has long disparaged the placebo effect, 
which is puzzling. If biomedicine’s aim is to heal patients, then it should applaud and 
marvel at it.148 What is not to like about an inert X that brings people relief from their 
suffering? An interesting topic, the placebo effect is tangential to this paper’s 
 
148. Dominik Wujastyk, “Medical Error and Medical Truth: The Placebo Effect 
and Room for Choice in Ayurveda,” Health, Culture and Society 1, no. 1 (2011): 221–31, 
doi:10.5195/hcs.2011.14. Wujastyk points out the therapeutic—and, thus, medical—
value of the placebo effect. “The fact is, patients get well for many reasons, only some of 
them connected with the therapies administered by doctors” (224). 


73 
investigation. The question being considered is not whether Ayurveda works for people 
and if so, how. The question is whether Ayurveda is a genuine science. 
 
The evaluation that follows this section will provide an answer to that 
question. The answer can be only provisional, though. This paper’s exploration of 
Ayurveda has been a mere introduction. That is, the conclusion this paper reaches reflects 
the limited scope of its research. Important questions for future exploration include at 
least these two. First, what are the doshas? What is their biological basis? What accounts 
for some studies’ abilities to predict doshic types? Second, what protocol can be 
developed to validate APs’ diagnostics and therapeutics? If a given therapeutic success 
does not owe to the placebo effect, what accounts for it? What is the successful 
treatment’s mechanism of action? Ayurveda is an ocean. Exploring its breadth and depth 
will take teams of researchers years. This researcher hopes only to have made a partial 
map of its seas. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
This paper has sought to defend the claim that Ayurveda is neither superstition 
nor sham. More than a traditional system of medicine, it is a genuine medical science. 
Some critics will remain unconvinced. They will argue that a strong enough case has not 
been made. The claim has not been scientifically proven with irrefutable empirical 
evidence. These critics, though, may need a reminder of where the discussion began. 


74 
Distinguishing science from pseudoscience is an elusive endeavor. The effort has taxed 
some of the best minds in philosophy and science. Various thinkers have offered 
solutions that other thinkers have rejected. One of the rejected solutions is the critic’s 
verificationism. 
Martin Mahner provides the demarcation disagreement a reasonable compromise. 
He has suggested that science be thought of as a cluster concept of connected attributes. 
The more of them a given claim, field, or community possesses, the more likely it is to be 
scientific. The attributes he suggests can be inferred from his list of foundational 
questions. Most of Mahner’s questions target epistemic warrant and empirical methods. It 
seems unlikely that philosophers or scientists would object to any of them. It seems as 
unlikely that any would object to his questions’ implied answers. His questions are 
repeated here for convenience. 
 
Do they form a research community, or are they just a loose collection of 
individuals doing their own thing? Is there an extensive mutual exchange 
of information, or is there just an authority figure passing on his doctrines 
to his followers? Is the given group of people free to research and publish 
whatever they want, or are they censored by the reigning ideology of the 
society they live in . . . ? Does the domain of study consist of concrete 
objects, or does it contain fuzzy “energies” or “vibrations,” if not ghosts or 
other spiritual entities? What are the philosophical background 
assumptions of the given field? Does its ontology presuppose a natural, 
causal, and lawful world only, or does it also admit supernatural entities or 
events? . . . Does it accept the canons of valid and rational reasoning? Do 
the principles of noncircularity and noncontradiction matter? Does it admit 
fallibilism or endorse dogmatism? Occam’s razor or unfettered 
speculation? How important are testability and criticism? How important 
is evidential support? Can the reliability of its methods or techniques be 


75 
independently tested? Do the theories have genuine explanatory or 
predictive power, or both? Are the theories fruitful? Are the data 
reproducible? Are there mechanisms of error elimination? Are its claims 
compatible with well-established knowledge, in particular law statements? 
Does the field borrow knowledge and methods from adjacent fields? Does 
it in turn inform and enrich neighboring fields, or is it isolated? Do the 
problems tackled in the field spring naturally from research or theory 
construction, or are the problems pulled out of a hat? Is the corpus of 
knowledge of the given field up to date and well confirmed, or is it 
obsolete, if not anachronistic? Is it growing or stagnating?149 
 
The questions are repeated here for the critics’ review and reflection, as well. 
Mahner pointed each one toward the answer most genuine sciences would provide. He 
also pointed them, unintentionally, toward how modern Ayurveda aims to answer them. 
Modern Ayurvedists value and require empirical evidence in support of medical claims. 
They embrace and employ the hypothesis testing of the scientific method. They 
understand the need to validate medical claims through experimentation and critical 
review. They seek to benefit and be benefited by rigorous interaction with conventional 
biomedicine. Their use of reason’s different modes of logic mirrors Western approaches. 
Modern Ayurveda provides the “right” answer for most of Mahner’s questions. A couple 
will take more time, though. As Ayurveda matures, it needs to grow in the areas of peer 
review and experimental validation. This growth will come as Ayurveda and biomedicine 
deepen their dialogue. 
 
149. Mahner, “Science and Pseudoscience,” 752–77 (Kindle edition). 


76 
The cluster-concept approach to describing science cannot provide demarcation 
certainty. It cannot define what always and everywhere constitutes a genuine science. It 
can, though, provide an indication of whether a given field is likely to be a member of 
science’s family. The curious might ask how many family characteristics a genuine 
science needs. This is a good question, but a debatable one. Its details are best left to 
philosophers and historians of science. For present purposes, it is safe to say that a 
genuine science should possess most of the family’s features. 
Current literature shows that modern Ayurveda meets that criterion. Ayurveda’s 
modern expression shows a reasonable number of family-resemblance characteristics. 
This researcher finds that its chief deficits lie only in the two areas mentioned above. 
These areas, modern Ayurvedists see both as needs and as opportunities for growth. 
Ayurveda may not possess all the same modern scientific characteristics as biomedicine. 
It does not answer all of Mahner’s questions in exactly the same way as conventional 
medicine. Still, Ayurveda answers enough of them the “right” way. The platypus does not 
give birth to live young; still, it is a mammal. 
Born in the mists of antiquity, Ayurveda is an ancient healing art. Long before 
Hippocrates said, “First, do no harm,” it was promoting health and happiness. More than 
a medical tradition, though, Ayurveda is a genuine medical science. It is a viable, and 
justifiable, complement to modern Western medicine. It is coming of age in the modern 
world. Ayurveda values the well-being of individuals, not merely the treating of their 
diseases. It seeks to keep them healthy, to keep their psycho-physical constitutions in 


77 
balance. To millions around the world, Ayurveda is a respected system of medical 
practice. It has become part of their and their families’ health and wellness. To an 
increasing number, even in the modern West, Ayurveda is becoming a science of life. 


78 
Bibliography 
 
 
Ara, Syeda Arshiya, Jayashree A. Mudda, Ashok Lingappa, and Purushottam Rao. 
“Research on Curcumin: A Meta-Analysis of Potentially Malignant 
Disorders.” Journal of Cancer Research and Therapeutics 12, no. 1 (2016): 175–
81. doi:10.4103/0973-1482.171370. 
 
Ayurveda: Art of Being. YouTube. Accessed March 18, 2020. https://youtu.be/VgJJlceH-
vA. 
 
Bardehle, Peter, dir. The Secret World of Wellness: Ancient India. Langbein & Skalnik 
Media, 2007. https://youtu.be/S6RJaZ_Drmw (part 1), 
https://youtu.be/Ys2CfFQyclE (part 2), https://youtu.be/c3s3rqfCXgk (part 3), 
https://youtu.be/1QYhh5bmQcE (part 4). 
 
Bendix, Aria. “The US Was Once a Leader for Healthcare and Education - Now It Ranks 
27th in the World.” Business Insider, September 27, 2018. 
https://www.businessinsider.com/us-ranks-27th-for-healthcare-and-education-
2018-9. 
 


79 
Bhattacharya, Jivananda Vidyasagara. Shabda-Sagara, or a Comprehensive Sanskrit-
English Lexicon Chiefly Based on Prof. Horace Hayman Wilsons Sanskrit-
English Dictionary (version: scan). Calcutta: Ashu Bodha Bhattacharya and 
Nitya Bodha Bhattacharya, 1900. https://www.sanskrit-lexicon.uni-
koeln.de/scans/SHSScan/2020/web/index.php. 
 
Braun, Lesley, and Marc Cohen. Herbs & Natural Supplements: An Evidence-Based 
Guide, vol. 2. Sydney: Churchill Livingstone, 2015. 
 
Chandra, Shailaja. “Ayurvedic Research, Wellness and Consumer Rights.” Journal of 
Ayurveda and Integrative Medicine 7 no. 1 (2016): 6–10. 
doi:10.1016/j.jaim.2016.05.002. 
 
Chaudhury, Ranjit Roy, and Uton Muchtar Rafei, ed. Traditional Medicine in Asia. New 
Delhi: World Health Organization (1990). 
 
Cohen, R. S., and L. Laudan, ed. Physics, Philosophy, and Psychoanalysis: Essays in 
Honor of Adolf Grünbaum. Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel, 1983. 
 
“Complementary, Alternative, or Integrative Health: What’s in a Name?” National Center 
for Complementary and Integrative Health. April 2, 2019. 


80 
https://nccih.nih.gov/health/integrative-health. 
 
Conboy, L. A., I. Edshteyn, and H. Garivaltis. “Ayurveda and Panchakarma: Measuring 
the Effects of a Holistic Health Intervention.” The Scientific World Journal 9 
(2009): 272–80. doi:10.1100/tsw.2009.35. 
 
“Courses in Ayurveda.” Ministry of AYUSH | Courses in Ayurveda. Accessed April 5, 
2020. http://ayush.gov.in/courses-ayurveda. 
 
Eaton, S. Boyd, Melvin Konner, and Marjorie Shostak. “Stone Agers in the Fast Lane: 
Chronic Degenerative Diseases in Evolutionary Perspective.” The American 
Journal of Medicine 84, no. 4 (1988): 739–49. doi.org/10.1016/0002-
9343(88)90113-1. 
 
Epstein, David, and ProPublica. “An Epidemic of Unnecessary Treatment.” The Atlantic, 
March 20, 2017. https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2017/02/when-
evidence-says-no-but-doctors-say-yes/517368/. 
 
Frindel, Jeremy, dir. Doctor from India. New York: Kino Lorber, 2018. 
https://www.kanopy.com/product/doctor-india. 
 


81 
Govindaraj, Periyasamy, Sheikh Nizamuddin, Anugula Sharath, Vuskamalla Jyothi, 
Harish Rotti, Ritu Raval, Jayakrishna Nayak, et al. “Genome-Wide Analysis 
Correlates Ayurveda Prakriti.” Nature News 5, 5786 (2015): 1–12. 
doi:10.1038/srep15786. 
 
Hankey, Alex. “Establishing the Scientific Validity of Tridosha: Part 1: Doshas, 
Subdoshas and Dosha Prakritis.” Ancient Science of Life 29, no. 3 (2010): 6–18. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3336287/pdf/ASL-29-6.pdf. 
 
Hansson, Sven Ove. “Science and Pseudo-Science.” Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy. April 11, 2017. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/pseudo-science/. 
 
Hariton, Eduardo, and Joseph J. Locascio. “Randomised Controlled Trials - The Gold 
Standard for Effectiveness Research.” BJOG: An International Journal of 
Obstetrics & Gynaecology 125, no. 13 (2018): 1716. doi:10.1111/1471-
0528.15199. 
 
“Jacobellis v. Ohio.” Legal Information Institute. Accessed March 16, 2020. 
https://www.law.cornell.edu/supremecourt/text/378/184. 
 
Jaiswal, Yogini S., and Leonard L. Williams. “A Glimpse of Ayurveda – The Forgotten 


82 
History and Principles of Indian Traditional Medicine.” Journal of Traditional 
and Complementary Medicine 7 no. 1 (2017): 50–53. 
doi:10.1016/j.jtcme.2016.02.002. 
 
Jogalekar, Ashutosh. “Falsification and Its Discontents.” Scientific American Blog 
Network. January 24, 2014. https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/the-curious-
wavefunction/falsification-and-its-discontents/. 
 
“Journey of Ayurveda.” YouTube. Accessed March 17, 2020. 
https://youtu.be/1y5VhRDM6QU. 
 
Kessler, C., M. Wischnewsky, A. Michalsen, C. Eisenmann, and J. Melzer. “Ayurveda: 
Between Religion, Spirituality, and Medicine.” Evidence-Based Complementary 
and Alternative Medicine 2013 (2013): 1–11. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/952432. 
 
Krauss, Lawrence M. “Trump’s Anti-Science Campaign.” The New Yorker (June 19, 
2017). https://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/trumps-anti-science-
campaign. 
 
Krishna, Kumar P. R. “The Efficacy of Ayurvedic Treatment for Rheumatoid Arthritis: 


83 
Cross-Sectional Experiential Profile of a Longitudinal Study.” International 
Journal of Ayurveda Research 2, no. 1 (2011): 8–13. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3157120/. 
 
Kumar, V. Sajeev. “Europe Fast Embracing Ayurveda alongside Modern Medicine.” The 
Hindu BusinessLine, January 12, 2018. 
https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/news/variety/europe-fast-embracing-
ayurveda-alongside-modern-medicine/article9481575.ece. 
 
Kurup, P. N. V. “Ayurveda.” In Traditional Medicine in Asia, edited by Ranjit Roy 
Chaudhury and Uton Muchtar, 3–16. New Delhi: World Health Organization, 
1990. 
 
Lad, Vasant. “Ayurveda: A Brief Introduction and Guide.” The Ayurvedic Institute 
(Accessed March 17, 2020). https://www.ayurveda.com/pdf/intro_ayurveda.pdf. 
 
Lallanilla, Marc. “Ayurveda: Facts About Ayurvedic Medicine.” LiveScience (January 7, 
2015). http://www.livescience.com/42153-ayurveda.html. 
 
Laudan, L. “The Demise of the Demarcation Problem.” In Physics, Philosophy and 
Psychoanalysis: Essays in Honor of Adolf Grünbaum (Vol. 76 of Boston Studies 


84 
in the Philosophy of Science): 111–27. Edited by R. S. Cohen and L. Laudan. 
Boston: D. Reidel, 1983. 
 
“Lead Poisoning in Pregnant Women Who Used Ayurvedic Medications from India — 
New York City, 2011–2012.” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 61, no. 33 
(August 24, 2012): 641–46. 
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6133a1.htm. 
 
Lele, R. D. “Beyond Reverse Pharmacology: Mechanism-Based Screening of Ayurvedic 
Drugs.” Journal of Ayurveda and Integrative Medicine 1, no. 4 (2010): 257–65. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3117317/. 
 
Lombrozo, Tania. “What Is Pseudoscience?” NPR. May 8, 2017. 
https://www.npr.org/sections/13.7/2017/05/08/527354190/what-is-
pseudoscience. 
 
Mahner, Martin. “Science and Pseudoscience: How to Demarcate after the (Alleged) 
Demise of the Demarcation Problem.” In Philosophy of Pseudoscience, edited by 
Massimo Pigliucci and Maarten Boudry, 565–885 (Kindle edition). Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2013. 
 


85 
McLaughlin, Jacqueline. “A Gentle Reminder That a Hypothesis Is Never Proven 
Correct, nor Is a Theory Ever Proven to Be True.” Books & Resources: NSTA 
WebNews Digest, August 14, 2006. 
https://www.nsta.org/publications/news/story.aspx?id=52402. 
 
Miller, Henry I. “Scientifically Illiterate America.” Hoover Institution (November 29, 
2017). https://www.hoover.org/research/scientifically-illiterate-america. 
 
Mobasheri, Ali. “Intersection of Inflammation and Herbal Medicine in the Treatment of 
Osteoarthritis.” Current Rheumatology Reports 14 (2012): 604–16. 
doi:10.1007/s11926-012-0288-9. 
 
Nayak, Jayakrishna. “Ayurveda Research: Ontological Challenges.” Journal of Ayurveda 
and Integrative Medicine 3, no. 1 (January 2012): 17–20. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3326789/pdf/JAIM-3-17.pdf. 
 
Nelson, Kathryn M., Jayme L. Dahlin, Jonathan Bisson, James Graham, Guido F. Pauli, 
and Michael A. Walters. “The Essential Medicinal Chemistry of 
Curcumin.” Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 60, no. 5 (2017): 1620–37. 
doi:10.1021/acs.jmedchem.6b00975. 
 


86 
Nickles, Thomas. “History and Future.” In Philosophy of Pseudoscience: Reconsidering 
the Demarcation Problem, edited by Massimo Pigliucci and Maarten Boudry, 
1928–2353 (Kindle edition). Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013. 
 
Papineau, David. “Naturalism.” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (September 15, 
2015). https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/naturalism/. 
 
Parasuraman, Subramani, Gan Siaw Thing, and Sokkalingam Arumugam Dhanaraj. 
“Polyherbal Formulation: Concept of Ayurveda.” Pharmacognosy Reviews 8, 
no. 16 (2014): 73–80. doi:10.4103/0973-7847.134229. 
 
Patwardhan, Bhushan. “Ayurvedic Drugs in Case: Claims, Evidence, Regulations and 
Ethics.” Journal of Ayurveda and Integrative Medicine 7, no. 3 (2016): 135–37. 
doi:10.1016/j.jaim.2016.08.005. 
 
Patwardhan, Bhushan. “Bridging Ayurveda with Evidence-Based Scientific Approaches 
in Medicine.” EPMA Journal 5, no. 19 (2014). doi.org/10.1186/1878-5085-5-19. 
 
Patwardhan, Bhushan, and Gerard Bodeker. “Ayurvedic Genomics: Establishing a 
Genetic Basis for Mind–Body Typologies.” The Journal of Alternative and 
Complementary Medicine 14, no. 5 (2008): 571–76. 


87 
doi.org/10.1089/acm.2007.0515. 
 
Patwardhan, Bhushan, and Raghunath Anant Mashelkar. “Traditional Medicine-Inspired 
Approaches to Drug Discovery: Can Ayurveda Show the Way Forward?” Drug 
Discovery Today 14, no. 15-16 (2009): 804–11. 
doi:10.1016/j.drudis.2009.05.009. 
 
Patwardhan, Kishor, R. Galib, Pratap Thakur, and Suresh Kumar. “Peer Reviewed 
Journals of Ayurveda - An Appraisal.” Journal of Research and Education in 
Indian Medicine 20, no. 3-4 (2014): 141–52. doi:10.5455/jreim.82-1434000477. 
 
Patwardhan, Kishor, Sangeeta Gehlot, Girish Singh, and H. C. S. Rathore. “The 
Ayurveda Education in India: How Well Are the Graduates Exposed to Basic 
Clinical Skills?” Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine 
(2011): 1–6. doi:10.1093/ecam/nep113. 
 
Payyappallimana, Unnikrishnan, and Padma Venkatasubramanian. “Exploring Ayurvedic 
Knowledge on Food and Health for Providing Innovative Solutions to 
Contemporary Healthcare.” Frontiers in Public Health 4, no. 57 (2016). 
doi:10.3389/fpubh.2016.00057. 
 


88 
Prasher, Bhavana, Sapna Negi, Shilpi Aggarwal, Amit K. Mandal, Tav P. Sethi, Shailaja 
R. Deshmukh, Sudha G. Purohit, et al. “Whole Genome Expression and 
Biochemical Correlates of Extreme Constitutional Types Defined in 
Ayurveda.” Journal of Translational Medicine 6, no. 48 (2008). 
doi:10.1186/1479-5876-6-48. 
 
Phillips, Stephen. “Epistemology in Classical Indian Philosophy.” Stanford Encyclopedia 
of Philosophy. February 13, 2019. 
https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/epistemology-india/. 
 
Pigliucci, Massimo. Nonsense on Stilts: How to Tell Science from Bunk. Chicago: The 
University of Chicago Press, 2010. 
 
Pigliucci, Massimo, and Maarten Boudry, ed. Philosophy of Pseudoscience: 
Reconsidering the Demarcation Problem. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2013. 
 
Principe, Lawrence. Scientific Revolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011. 
 
“Q&A with Ayurvedic Lifestyle Mentor, Justin Robertshaw.” Mala Love (January 24, 
2017). https://www.lovemalalove.com/questions-answer-with-justin/. 


89 
 
Ramnunan, Nishal. Personal interview. 8 Dec. 2018. 
 
Rotti, Harish, Ritu Raval, Suchitra Anchan, Ravishankara Bellampalli, Sameer Bhale, 
Ramachandra Bharadwaj, Balakrishna K. Bhat, et al. “Determinants of Prakriti, 
the Human Constitution Types of Indian Traditional Medicine and Its Correlation 
with Contemporary Science.” Journal of Ayurveda and Integrative Medicine 5 
no. 3 (2014): 167–75. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4204287/pdf/JAIM-5-167.pdf. 
 
Rotti, Harish, Sandeep Mallya, Shama Prasada Kabekkodu, Sanjiban Chakrabarty, 
Sameer Bhale, Ramachandra Bharadwaj, Balakrishna K. Bhat, et al. “DNA 
Methylation Analysis of Phenotype Specific Stratified Indian Population.” 
Journal of Translational Medicine 13 no. 151 (2015): 1–12. doi:10.1186/s12967-
015-0506-0. 
 
Ruzsa, Ferenc. “Sankhya.” Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Accessed March 17, 
2020. https://www.iep.utm.edu/sankhya/. 
 
Samal, Janmejaya. “Can the Recent Public Notice by the Ministry of Ayurveda, Yoga 
and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy Be Helpful in Combating the 


90 
Irrational Use of Herbal Drugs?” Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care 
5, no. 3 (2016): 732–33. doi:10.4103/2249-4863.197286. 
 
Samy, Ramar Perumal, Peter Natesan Pushparaj, and Ponnampalam Gopalakrishnakone. 
“A Compilation of Bioactive Compounds from Ayurveda.” Bioinformation 3, 
no. 3 (2008): 100–10. doi:10.6026/97320630003100. 
 
Saper, Robert B., Stefanos N. Kales, Janet Paquin, Michael J. Burns, David M. 
Eisenberg, Roger B. Davis, and Russell S. Phillips. “Heavy Metal Content of 
Ayurvedic Herbal Medicine Products.” JAMA 292, no. 23 (2004): 2868–73. 
doi:10.1001/jama.292.23.2868. 
 
Saper, Robert B., Russell S. Phillips, Anusha Sehgal, Nadia Khouri, Roger B. Davis, 
Janet Paquin, Venkatesh Thuppil, and Stefanos N. Kales. “Lead, Mercury, and 
Arsenic in US- and Indian-Manufactured Ayurvedic Medicines Sold via the 
Internet.” JAMA 300, no. 8 (2008): 915–23. doi:10.1001/jama.300.8.915. 
 
Sherman, Erik. “U.S. Health Care Costs Skyrocketed to $3.65 Trillion in 2018.” Fortune, 
February 21, 2019. https://fortune.com/2019/02/21/us-health-care-costs-2/. 
 
Shermer, Michael. “What Is Pseudoscience?” Scientific American, September 1, 2011. 


91 
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/what-is-pseudoscience/. 
 
Sinclair, Jennifer, Beverley Lawson, and Fred Burge. “Which Patients Receive Advice on 
Diet and Exercise? Do Certain Characteristics Affect Whether They Receive 
Such Advice?” Canadian Family Physician • Le Médecin de Famille Canadien 
54 (2008): 404–12. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2278358/pdf/0540404.pdf. 
 
Singh, Ramharsh. “Exploring Larger Evidence-Base for Contemporary 
Ayurveda.” International Journal of Ayurveda Research 1, no. 2 (2010): 65–66. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2924985/. 
 
Sreenivasan, Shoba, and Linda E. Weinberger. “Do You Believe in Miracles?” 
Psychology Today (December 15, 2017). 
https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/emotional-nourishment/201712/do-
you-believe-in-miracles. 
 
Stevenson, Angus, and Christine A. Lindeberg. The New Oxford American Dictionary: 
Third Edition. New York: Oxford University Press, 2010. 
 
Warrier, Gopi. Ayurveda: The Right Way to Live. London: Carlton, 2002. 


92 
 
Wiley, Andrea S., and John S. Allen. Medical Anthropology: A Biocultural Approach. 
New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2017. 
 
Wujastyk, Dominik. “Medical Error and Medical Truth: The Placebo Effect and Room 
for Choice in Ayurveda.” Health, Culture and Society 1, no. 1 (2011): 221–31. 
doi:10.5195/hcs.2011.14. 
