

Translated by Dr. A. G. Krishna Warrier 
Published by The Theosophical Publishing House, Chennai 


Om! May He protect us both together; may He nourish us both together; 
May we work conjointly with great energy, 

May our study be vigorous and effective; 

May we not mutually dispute (or may we not hate any). 

Om! Let there be Peace in me! 

Let there be Peace in my environment! 

Let there be Peace in the forces that act on me! 


The body is fivefold in nature (the five elements), existing in the five, depending 
on the six (tastes of food), connected with the six qualities (kama etc.,), seven 
Dhatus, three impurities, three Yonis (of excretion) and four kinds of food. 


Why say 'Fivefold in nature?’ The five elements Earth, Water, Fire, Wind and 
Ether. In this body, whatever is hard is of Earth, liquid is water, warm is fire, 
whatever moves about is air and space-enclosed is ether. The function of the 
Earth is to support; water is to consolidate (digestion etc.). Fire is to see, wind is 
for moving, Ether is to give space (for vital functions). 


The eyes are used in seeing form, ears for sound, tongue for taste, the skin and 
nose for touch and smell respectively; genital for pleasure, Apana is for 
evacuation (of bowels). The person cognises through the intellect wills with the 
mind and speaks with the tongue. 


The six-fold support is the six tastes (of food): sweet, acid, salty, pungent, bitter 
and astringent. 


1-7. Sadja, Risabha, Gandhara, Panchama, Madhyama, Dhaivata, Nisadha - 
these are the seven agreeable and disagreeable sounds. White, Red, Black 
smoke-coloured, Yellow, Tawny and Pale-White - these are the colours of the 
seven Dhatus (primary Humours). Why? For Devadatta (any person) there 
springs up in his mind desire for enjoyment of objects. From relish of food blood 
is born, from it is flesh, thence fat, bones, marrow, semen; by the combination of 
semen and blood the foetus is born. 


Vital warmth springs up in the womb and the belly. In the seat of the warmth 
bile, Prana flows - at the proper season ordained by the creator. 


Vedanta Spiritual Library | www.celextel.org Page 288 of 921 Upanishads 


8. The embryo lying (in the womb) for (a day) and night is a confused mass; 
after seven days it becomes a bubble; after a fortnight, a mass and in a month, it 
hardens. In two months develops the region of the head; in three months, the 
feet; in the fourth, belly and hip; in the fifth, the backbone; in the sixth, nose, 
eyes and ears; in the seventh the embryo quickens with life and in the eighth 
month, it becomes complete. 


9. By the dominance of the father's semen, the child becomes male; the 
mother's - female. When equal, a eunuch. If, at the time of impregnation, the 
parents are agitated, the child will be blind, crippled and hunch-backed or 
stunted in growth. If the couples have vital-air-trouble, the semen enters in two 
parts resulting in twins. 


10. In the eighth month, in conjunction with the five vital airs the Jiva gets the 
capacity to know its past affairs (of past births), conceives of the imperishable 
Atman as Om, through perfect knowledge and meditation. Having known Om he 
sees in the body the eight Prakritis derived from it the five elements, mind, 
intellect and ego and the sixteen changes [See Prasnopanishad]. 


11. The body becomes complete in the ninth month and remembers the past 
birth. Actions done and not done flash to him and he recognises the good and 
bad nature of Karma. 


12-17. '| have seen thousands of wombs, eaten several kinds of food and 
sucked many breasts; born and dead often, | am immersed in grief but see no 
remedy. If | can get out of this, | will resort to Sankhya-Yoga which destroys 
misery and yields liberation; or | resort to Maheshvara who destroys misery. Or | 
resort to Narayana, who destroys misery. If | did good and bad deeds for the 
sake of my dependants, | shall myself be burnt for the deeds - the others who 
enjoyed the fruits go away (unaffected). 


18. The person being squeezed as it were by a machine is touched by all- 
pervading air and forgets previous births and deeds. 


19. Why is the body so called? It has three fires: the Kosthagni ripens all that is 
eaten; the Darsanagni helps one see colour etc., the Jnanagni is the mind which 
helps perform good and bad deeds. 


20. The Daksinagni is in the heart; Garhapatya in the belly and Ahavaniya in the 
mouth; the intellect is the performer's consort, contentment is Diksha, sense 
organs are the utensils, head is the jar, hair is the sacred grass, the mouth the 
interior of the altar etc. 


Vedanta Spiritual Library | www.celextel.org Page 289 of 921 Upanishads 


21. The heart measures 8 Palas, tongue 12, bile is one Prastha, phlegm one 
Adhaka. Sukla is one Kudupa, fat two Prasthas, Urine and mala two Prasthas 
each, depending on what is taken in daily. 


The scripture of liberation expounded by Paippalada ends. 


Om! May He protect us both together; may He nourish us both together; 
May we work conjointly with great energy, 

May our study be vigorous and effective; 

May we not mutually dispute (or may we not hate any). 

Om! Let there be Peace in me! 

Let there be Peace in my environment! 

Let there be Peace in the forces that act on me! 


Here ends the Garbhopanishad belonging to the Krishna-Yajur-Veda. 


Vedanta Spiritual Library | www.celextel.org Page 290 of 921 Upanishads 

