=== PAGE 1 ===

गर्भ उपनिषद् 
Garbha Upanishad 
 
Translation and notes by Subhash Kak (सुभाष काक) 
 
॥ गर्भोपनिषद् ॥ 
 
ॐ सह नाववतु । सह नौ भुनƠु । 
सहवीयɍ करवावहै । तेजǔःव नावधीतमःतु । 
मा ǒवǑƮषावहै ॥ 
 
ॐ शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः ॥ 
 
Om! May we be protected; may we be nourished; may we act together with 
energy; may our study be vigorous and effective; may we not mutually dispute. 
Om! śāntiå, śāntiå, śāntiå. 
 
ॐ पञ्चात्मकं पÑचसु वतर्मानं षड्रसं षड्गुणयोगयुक्तम् । 
तत्सप्तधातु त्रिमलं द्वियोनि चतुर्वर्धाहारमयं शरीरं ॥ 
 
The body is fivefold in nature (the five elements), existing in the five, depending 
on the six supports (tastes of food), connected with the six qualities, [consisting 
of] seven dhātus (tissues), three impurities, having two yonis (sexes), and 
[nourished by] four kinds of food. 
 
 
भवित पञ्चात्मकिमित कःमात् पृथिवीयापःतेजोवायुराकाशिमित  
अǔःमÛपञ्चात्मके शरȣरे ।  
का पृिथवी का आपः Ǒकं तेजः को वायुः Ǒकमाकाशम् । 
तऽ य×कǑठनं सा पृिथवी यÙिवं ता आपो यदंणंु 
तƣेजो य×सÑचरित स वायुः य×सुǒषरं तदाकाशिम×युÍयते ॥ 
 
How is it pancātmakam (five-fold)? Because of the five: earth, water, fire, air and 
ether. In this five-fold body, what is earth, what is water, what is fire, what is air, 
and what is ether? It is said that what is hard is earth, what is fluid is water, what 
is warm is fire, what moves is air, and what is space is ether.  
 
तऽ पृिथवी धारणे आपः संपादनकरणे तेजः प्रकाशने 
 
1

=== PAGE 2 ===

वायुगर्मने आकाशमवकाशूदाने । 
पृथक् ौोऽे शÞदोपलÞधौ ×वक् ःपशȶ च¢ुषी Ǿपे ǔजƾा रसने 
नािसकाऽऽयाणे उपःथƱानÛदनेऽपानमु×सगȶ बुद्ध्या 
बुद्ध्या मनसा संकल्पयित वाचा वदित । 
 
There the earth is to support, water is to consolidate, fire is for light, air is for 
movement, and ether is to provide space. Separately, ears are to receive words, 
the skin for touch, eyes to see form, tongue for taste, and nose for smell. The 
genitalia are for pleasure and apāna for evacuation. One cognizes with the 
intellect (buddhi), envisions with the mind (manas), and speaks with words (vāk). 
 
 
षड्रसम् कःमात् मधुराàललवणितƠकटकषायरसाǔÛवÛदतेु । 
षÔजषर्भगाÛधारमÚयमपÑचमधैवतिनषादाƱेित ।  
इƴािनƴशÞदसं£ाः ूǔणधानƧशǒवधा भवǔÛत ॥ १ ॥ 
 
How is the six-fold support? It is said to be the six tastes [of food]: sweet, acid, 
salty, pungent, bitter, and astringent. And ¬adja, Å¬abha, gāndhāra, pancama, 
madhyama, dhaivata, ni¬āda, together with agreeable and disagreeable sounds 
and prayer, make ten categories.  
 
शुक्लः रक्तः कृंणो कृष्णः पीतः कपिलः पाण्डुरः इित । 
सप्तधातुिमित कःमात् यदा देवदत्तस्य िåयातद्ǒवषया  जायते ॥  
परःपरं सात्त्विकगुण×वात् �ड्विधः रसो 
रसाच्छोǔणतं शोणितात् मांसं मांसात् मेदः मेदसः 
स्नायु स्नायुनोऽस्थीनि च मज्जाश्च मज्जा शुक्रम् शुक्रम् 
शुक्रशोणितसंयोगादावतीर्य गर्भ ǿतद् åयोनिः नयति । 
 
It has white, red, black, smoky gray, yellow, tawny and pale as the colours. What 
are the seven dhātus (tissues) when Devadatta (any person) desires enjoyment of 
objects? From the proper combination of qualities, six types of taste (rasa) 
emerge. From relish of food, blood is created, from it flesh, thence fat, bones, 
marrow, semen. By the combination of semen and blood the embryo (garbha) is 
born, and its growth is regulated by the heart (mother’s heartbeat as well as the 
embryo’s). 
 
ǿदयेऽÛतराǔÊनः अǔÊनःथाने ǒपƣं ǒपƣःथाने 
वायुः वायुःथाने ǿदयं ूाजाप×या×बमात् ॥ २ ॥ 
 
2

=== PAGE 3 ===

[The seven dhātus] are in the heart where there’s inner fire; at the place of the fire 
is pitta (bile); at the pitta-organs is movement (vāyu); and at the vāyu-place is the 
heart, all growing in order according to the law (Prajāpati).  
  
ऋतुकाले संूयोगादेकराऽोǒषतं किललं भवित 
सƯराऽोǒषतं बुƪदंु भवित अधर्मासाßयÛतरेण ǒपÖडो 
भवित मासाßयÛतरेण कǑठनो भवित मासƮयेन िशरः 
संपƭते मासऽयेण पादूवेशो भवित । 
 
When ready, on the joining [of the male and female], [the embryo] after [a day] 
and night is in a mixed (semi-fluid) state; after seven days it becomes a bubble; 
after a fortnight, a solid mass, and in a month, it hardens. In two months, it 
develops the head; in three months, the feet grow.  
 
अथ चतुथȶ मासे जठरकǑटूदेशो भवित । 
पÑचमे मासे पृƵवंशो भवित । 
षƵे मासे मुखनािसकाǔ¢ौोऽाǔण भवǔÛत । 
 
In the fourth month, belly and hip are formed; in the fifth month, the backbone is 
formed; in the sixth month, nose, eyes and ears are formed.  
 
सƯमे मासे जीवेन संयुƠो भवित । 
अƴमे मासे सवर्संपूणȾ भवित । 
In the seventh month, [the embryo] comes to have the jīva (conscious self), and in 
the eighth month, it becomes complete in every sense. 
 
ǒपतू रेतोऽितǐरƠात् पुǽषो भवित । 
मातुः रेतोऽितǐरƠाǔ×Ƹयो भवÛ×युभयोबȸजतुãय×वाÛनपुंसको भवित । 
 
If the father’s seed is more potent, it becomes male; if the mother’s seed is 
stronger, it becomes female. If the seeds are equal, it becomes an intersexual 
(napu÷saka, neither male, nor female).  
 
åयाकुिलतमनसोऽÛधाः खÑजाः कुÞजा वामना भवǔÛत । 
अÛयोÛयवायुपǐरपीǑडतशुबƮैÚयाǔÙƮधा 
तनुः ःयाƣतो युÊमाः ूजायते ॥  
If [at the time of impregnation] the parents are agitated, the child will be blind, 
crippled, hunch-backed or stunted. If the vital air moves around, the seed enters in 
two parts, resulting in twins. 
 
3

=== PAGE 4 ===

पञ्चात्मकः समथर्ः 
पञ्चात्मकतेजसेƨरसƱ सàयÊ£ानात् Úयानात् 
अ¢रमोÌकारं िचÛतयित । 
तदेतदेका¢रं £ा×वाऽƴौ ू
कृतयः षोडश ǒवकाराः शरȣरे तःयैवे देǑहनाम् । 
 
Enabled by the five-fold self, the intelligence of the five elements emerges, and he 
meditates on the imperishable syllable Om. With the knowledge of the syllable, 
he understands the eight natures [five sense organs, the mind, intellect and ego] 
and their sixteen modifications belong to the self residing in the body.  
 
अथ माऽाऽिशतपीतनाडȣसूऽगतेन ूाण आÜयायते । 
अथ नवमे मािस सवर्ल¢णसंपूणȾ भवित पूवर्जातीः ःमरित 
कृताकृतं च कमर् ǒवभाित शुभाशुभं च कमर् ǒवÛदित ॥ ३ ॥ 
 
Whatever is consumed or drunk by the mother passes through the nerves and 
vessels to the child, becoming the source of his satisfaction. During the ninth 
month, all outer signs attain completeness. And he is reminded of his previous 
birth, and recounts the good and bad deeds committed. 
 
 
नानायोिनसहॐाǔण ǺंÒवा चैव ततो मया । 
आहारा ǒवǒवधा भुƠाः पीताƱ ǒवǒवधाः ःतनाः ॥ 
जातःयैव मृतःयैव जÛम चैव पुनः पुनः । 
अहो दःखोदधौु मÊनः न पँयािम ूितǑबयाम् ॥ 
यÛमया पǐरजनःयाथȶ कृतं कमर् शुभाशुभम् । 
एकाकȧ तेन दƻािम गताःते फलभोिगनः ॥ 
 
 
He thinks: I have seen thousands of wombs, eaten several kinds of food and 
sucked many breasts. Born and dead again and again, I am immersed in grief but 
see no remedy. Thinking of my good and bad deeds, I am suffering alone, 
although the bodies that enjoyed the fruits are gone. 
 
यतद् योÛयां ूमुÑचािम सांÉयं योगं समाौये । 
अशुभ¢यकतार्रं फलमुǒƠूदायकम् ॥ 
यतद् योÛयां ूमुÑचािम तं ूपƭे महेƳरम् । 
 
4

=== PAGE 5 ===

अशुभ¢यकतार्रं फलमुǒƠूदायकम् ॥ 
 
When I get out of this womb, I will take refuge in Sā¡khya-Yoga, which destroys 
misery and yields liberation; when I get out of this womb, I will take refuge in 
Maheśvara, who destroys misery and grants liberation.  
 
यतद् योÛयां ूमुÑचािम तं ूपƭे 
भगवÛतं नारायणं देवम् । 
अशुभ¢यकतार्रं फलमुǒƠूदायकम् । 
यतद् योÛयां ूमुÑचािम Úयाये ॄƺ सनातनम् ॥ 
 
When I get out of this womb, I will take refuge in Nārāyaªa, who destroys misery 
and grants liberation. When I get out of this womb, I will meditate on the eternal 
Brahman. 
 
अथ जÛतुः Ƹीयोिनशतं योिनƮाǐर 
संूाƯो यÛऽेणापीÔयमानो महता दःखेनु जातमाऽःतु 
वैंणवेन वायुना संःपृँयते तदा न ःमरित जÛममरणं 
न च कमर् शुभाशुभम् ॥ ४ ॥ 
 
 
When he reaches the birth canal and comes out of it with great difficulty, he is 
touched by an all-pervading movement [Māyā] that causes him to forget previous 
births and the good and the bad deeds performed therein.  
 
शरȣरिमित कःमात् 
सा¢ादÊनयो ƻऽ िौयÛते £ानाǔÊनदर्शर्नाǔÊनः कोƵाǔÊनǐरित । 
तऽ कोƵाǔÊननार्मािशतपीतलेƻचोंयं पचतीित । 
दशर्नाÊनी Ǿपादȣनां दशर्नं करोित । 
£ानाǔÊनः शुभाशुभं च कमर् ǒवÛदित । 
 
Why the body is called śarīram. It has three fires – namely, jñānāgni, darśanāgni 
and ko¬−hāgni. Of these, ko¬−hāgni is that fire which enables the digestion of all 
that is eaten; darśanāgni is the fire that gives the power of seeing forms; jñānāgni 
is that fire of knowledge which enables one to distinguish between good and bad 
actions. 
 
तऽ ऽीǔण ःथानािन भवǔÛत  
ǿदये दǔ¢णाǔÊनǽदरे गाहर्प×यं 
 
5

=== PAGE 6 ===

मुखमाहवनीयमा×मा यजमानो  
मनो ॄƺा लोभादयः पशवो धृितदȹ¢ा सÛतोषƱ 
बुƨȣǔÛियाǔण य£पाऽाǔण कमȶǔÛियाǔण हवींǒष िशरः 
कपालं केशा दभार् मुखमÛतवȶतद्ः चतुंकपालं 
िशरः षोडश पाƳर्दÛतोƵपटलािन । 
 
They have three places. At the heart is the dak¬iªāgni, in the belly is the 
gārhapatya, in the mouth is the āhavanīya. Ātman is the yajamāna (sacrificer); 
the  mind is the Brahmā (the doer); greed and so on [anger, jealousy] are animals 
[of sacrifice]; mental strength is the vow; contentment and the organs of intellect 
are the instruments of the yajña (sacrifice); the action organs are the sacrificial 
objects (comparable to the havis or the rice); the head or the skull is the utensil; 
the hair thereon is the darbha (the dried grass used in homa); the mouth is the 
inner altar, the head are the four cups, and the two rows of teeth are the sixteen 
cups (kapāla) [of the sacrifice]. 
 
 
सƯोƣरं ममर्शतं साशीितकं सǔÛधशतं सनवकं ःनायुशतं 
सƯ िशरासतािन पÑच मज्जाशतािन अःथीिन च ह 
वै ऽीǔण शतािन षǒƴƱाधर्चतॐो रोमाǔण कोÒयो 
ǿदयं पलाÛयƴौ Ʈादश पलािन ǔजƾा ǒपƣूःथं 
कफःयाढकं शुÈलं कुडवं मेदः ूःथौ Ʈाविनयतं 
मूऽपुरȣषमाहारपǐरमाणात् ॥ ५॥  
 
[The human body] consists of 107 marmas (weak or sensitive spots), 180 sutures 
or junction points, 109 snāyu (sinews), 700 channels, 500 majjā (muscle), 360 
bones, and forty five million hairs. The heart weighs 8 palas and the tongue 
weights 12 palas. It has one prastha of pitta (bile), one ā©haka of kapha, one 
ku©ava of śukra, and two prasthas of fat.  The measure of the urinary or solid 
excretions is dependent on the intake. [1 pala = 45.5 grammes; 1 prastham = 728 
grammes; 1 ā©hakam = 2,912 grammes; 1 ku©avam = 182 grammes] 
 
पैÜपलादं मो¢शाƸं 
पǐरसमाƯं पैÜपलादं मो¢शाƸं पǐरसमाƯिमित ॥ 
 
This Mok¬a ˜āstra was enunciated by the sage Pippalāda. This Mok¬a ˜āstra was 
enunciated by the sage Pippalāda.  
 
ॐ इित गर्भपिनष×समाƯा ॥ 
 
 
6

=== PAGE 7 ===

Notes 
 
 
1. Pippalāda and his date 
 
The first question concerns the date of the Garbha Upani¬ad. Since it is ascribed 
to Pippalāda, we need to determine this sage’s place in the Vedic tradition, 
although it is believed that the text may not be as old as the sage. Pippalāda is also 
the instructing sage of the Praśna Upani¬ad and the author of the Atharvaveda 
śākhā named after him (Paippalāda śākhā). As a principal arranger of the 
Atharvaveda, he should be assigned to at least the middle of the second 
millennium BCE, if the ›gveda is to be taken to be no later than 2000 BCE, as is 
suggested by hydrological evidence related to the drying up of the Sarasvatī river 
around this time, and the fact that the ›gveda celebrates this river as the great 
river of its time, flowing from the mountains to the sea. 
 
According to the Purāªas, Pippalāda was the disciple of the ›¬i Vedasparśa, and 
he instructed Yudhi¬−hira in the significance of the A¡gāravrata, which is based 
on a dialogue between ˜ukra and Virocana.  
 
The physiological knowledge in the Garbha Upani¬ad is consistent with that 
found in the oldest Upani¬ads. Like the other texts, it speaks of recursion, but it 
doesn’t list as many channels (veins and nerves) as the other texts do. This 
indicates that this Upani¬ad may be older than what has been assumed. 
 
Pippalāda answers six questions in the Praśna Upani¬ad, a number that is 
reminiscent of the six darśanas. The six questions touch upon six different 
aspects of reality: forms (nyāya), basis of life (mīmā÷sā), origins (sā÷khya), 
devas within (yoga), next world (vedānta), and modifications (vaiśe¬ika). This is 
not an argument for the lateness of the Praśna Upani¬ad, but rather for the remote 
antiquity of six bases to reality, which mirroring the six directions. 
 
 
2. Recursion 
 
Recursion, the mirroring of the cosmos at several levels, including at the level of 
the body, is one of the central ideas of the Upani¬ads. It is clearly stated, for 
example, in the Chāndogya Up. 8.1.1 and 3, where we are told that within the 
heart is this small place with the heaven, earth, sun, moon, and stars where the 
lights of the universe shine. 
 
अथ यतद्दमǔःमÛॄƺपुरे दहरं पुÖडरȣकं वेँम 
दहरोऽǔःमÛनÛतराकाशःतǔःमÛयदÛतःतदÛवेƴåयं 
तƮाव ǒवǔज£ािसतåयिमित ॥ ८. १. १ ॥ 
 
 
7

=== PAGE 8 ===

यावाÛवा अयमाकाशःतावानेषोऽÛतǿर्दय आकाश 
उभे अǔःमÛƭावापृिथवी अÛतरेव समाǑहते 
उभावǔÊनƱ वायुƱ सूयार्चÛिमसावुभौ 
ǒवƭुÛन¢ऽाǔण यÍचाःयेहाǔःत यÍच नाǔःत सवɍ 
तदǔःमÛसमाǑहतिमित ॥ छाÛदोÊयोपिनषद् ८. १. ३ ॥ 
 
There is in this city of Brahman (the body) the mansion in the shape of a 
lotus and in it the small inner ākāśa (sky). What lies there that should be 
sought, which one should seek to understand?’ 
 
As large indeed as is this ākāśa, so large is that ākāśa in the heart. Within it 
are contained both heaven and earth, both fire and air, both sun and moon, 
lightning and stars; whatever there is of him (Self) in this world and whatever 
is not, all that is contained within it. (Chandogya Up. 8.1.1 and 8.1.3) 
 
This recursion is also expressed across time, and it leads to a variety of paradoxes 
that, the Vedas tell us, cannot be explained away by language. It is described most 
clearly in the last (fifth) section of the Garbha Upani¬ad in which the body itself is 
seen as the ground of the sacrifice. 
 
Speaking of recursion, one must also mention “hiraªyagarbha,” the golden womb 
out of which, the Veda tells us, the universe emerged. In an abstract sense, 
creation at the cosmic level is to be understood in a sense similar to that at the 
individual level.  
 
3. Physiology and consciousness 
 
Now we consider the most interesting assertion that the body consists of 107 
marmas (weak spots), 180 sutures or junction points, 109 snāyu (sinews), 700 
veins, 500 majjā (muscle), 360 bones, and forty five million hairs. 
 
The numbers 180 and 360 are obviously astronomical and related to the number 
of days in the civil year. Their occurrence is the assertion of the mirroring of the 
cosmos in the body. 
 
The numbers 107 and 109 are also, but less obviously, astronomically related. I 
have shown elsewhere (see the references below) that the Vedic Å¬is characterized 
the universe by the measure of 108, for it represents the distance to the sun and 
the moon from the earth, in multiples of their respective diameters. If the body 
mirrors the universe, it will have 108 parts, with 107 vulnerable joints (marmas), 
and 109 lashes to hold them together (snāyu). 
 
Other Upani¬ads (e.g. Aitareya 3.3) speak of four kinds of life: born alive, born 
from egg, born from moisture (insects), and born from germ (plants). 
 
 
8

=== PAGE 9 ===

बीजानीतराǔण चेतराǔण चाÖडजािन च जाǽजािन च ःवेदजािन चोǒƫÏजािन चाƳा गावः पुǽषा 
हǔःतनो यǔ×कÑचेदं ूाǔण जÌगमं च पतǒऽ च यÍच ःथावरं सवɍ त×ू£ानेऽं ू£ाने ूितǒƵतं ू
£ानेऽो लोकः ू£ा ूितƵा ू£ानं ॄƺ ॥ ऐतरेय उपनिषद् ३.॥ 
 
[These all] are born of eggs, of wombs, of moisture, and of sprouts, namely 
horses, cattle, men, elephants, and all creatures that there are that move or fly 
and those that do not move. All these are guided by consciousness and 
supported by consciousness; the basis is consciousness. Consciousness is 
Brahman. (Aitareya Up. 3.3) 
 
Consciousness is not taken to exist only in the human, but in all life. 
 
4. Channels in the body (nerves) 
 
The count of 700 channels does not go to the usual details that are to be found in 
other Upani¬ads. Thus Pippalāda instructs ¸ślavāyana in Praśna Upani¬ad 3.6: 
 
अऽैतदेकशतं नाडȣनं तासां शतं 
शतमेकैकःया ƮासƯितƮार्सƯितः ू
ितशाखानाडȣसहॐाǔण 
भवÛ×यासु åयानƱरित ॥ ूưोपिनषत् ३.६ ॥ 
 
Here there are one hundred and one channels; 
each of these has one hundred more;  
each further has seventy-two thousand branching channels, 
through which the vyāna (breath) courses. (Praśna Upani¬ad 3.6) 
 
This means that the total number of channels (veins, nerves) equals: 
 
 
101 + 101×100 + 101×100×72,000 = 727,210,201. 
 
Of these, the most significant channel is the su¬umnā. 
 
BÅhadāraªyaka Upani¬ad 2.1.19 speaks of how the Self returns to the body along 
the 72,000 hitā channels, which branch off from the heart to all parts of the body. 
This together with a further description of these nerves of four colours is 
described well in the Kau¬ītaki Brāhmaªa Upani¬ad: 
Ǒहता नाम ǿदयःय नाÔयो ǿदया×पुरȣततमिभूतÛवǔÛत यथा सहॐधा केशो ǒवपाǑटतःतावदÖåयः 
ǒपÌगलःयाǔणàना ितƵǔÛ त।  शुÈलःय कृंणःय पीतःय लोǑहतःयेित तासु तदा भवित। यदा सुƯः 
ःवÜनं न कंचन पँय×यथाǔःमÛूाण एवैकधा भवित तथैनं वाÈसवȷनार्मिभः सहाÜयेित मनः 
सवȷÚयार्तैः सहाÜयेित च¢ुः सवȷ Ǿपैः सहाÜयेित ौोऽं सवȷः शÞदैः सहाÜयेित मनः सवȷÚयार्तैः सहाÜयेित 
स यदा ूितबुÚयते यथाÊनेÏवर्लतो ǒवःफुिलÌगा ǒवूितƵेरÛनेवमेवैतःमादा×मनः ूाणा यथायतनं 
 
9

=== PAGE 10 ===

ǒवूितƵÛते ूाणेßयो देवा देवेßयो लोकाःतƭथा ¢ुरः ¢ुरÚयाने Ǒहतः ःयाǑƮƳंभरो वा ǒवƳंभरकुलाय 
एवमेवैष ूा£ आ×मेदं शरȣरमनुूǒवƴ आ लोमßय आ नखेßयः  ॥  ४. १९. ॥ 
तमेतमा×मानमेतमा×मनोऽÛववःयित यथा ौेǒƵनं ःवाःतƭथा ौेƵैः ःवैभुर्ÌƠे यथा वा ौेǒƵनं 
ःवा भुÑजÛत एवमेवैष ूा£ आ×मैतैरा×मिभभुर्ÌƠे यथा ौेƵी ःवैरेवं वैतमा×मानमेत 
आ×मनोऽÛववःयǔÛत यथा ौेǒƵनं ःवाः स यावƨ वा इÛि एतमा×मानं न ǒवज£ौ तावदेनमसुरा 
अिभबभूवुः स यदा ǒवज£ावथ ह×वासुराǔÛवǔज×य सवȶषां भूतानां ौैंÓयं ःवाराÏयमािधप×यं 
पयȶित तथो एवैवं ǒवƮाÛसवȶषां भूतानां ौैंÓयं ःवाराÏयमािधप×यं पयȶित य एवं वेद य एवं वेद 
॥    कौषीतǑकॄाƺणोपिनषत् ४. २० ॥  
The nerves of the heart named hitā extend from the heart of the person 
towards the surrounding body. Fine as a hair divided a thousand-fold, they 
stand full of thin essence of various colours, white, black, yellow, and red. In 
these one remains when sleeping and sees no dream, becoming one with the 
prāªa alone. Then speech with all names goes to it, the eye with all forms 
goes to it, the ear with all sounds goes to it, and the mind with all thoughts 
goes to it. And when he awakes, then as from a blazing fire sparks proceed in 
all directions, thus from that self the prāªas proceed, each towards its place, 
from the prāªas the gods (the senses), from the gods the worlds. And as a 
razor might be placed in a razor-case, or as fire in the fire-place, even so this 
conscious self enters the body to the very hairs and nails.  
On that self depend other selves, as the men follow the chief, or as his own 
people are of service to the chief, even so these other selves are of service to 
that self. So long Indra did not understand this self, the Asuras defeated him. 
When he understood this, striking down and conquering the Asuras, he 
attained pre-eminence among all gods and all beings, sovereignty and 
supremacy. And thus also he who knows this obtains pre-eminence among all 
beings, sovereignty, supremacy -  he who knows this, yes, he who knows 
this. (Kau¬ītaki Brāhmaªa Upani¬ad 4.19-20) 
 
5. Causal chain and birth 
 
In Section 4, the Upani¬ad speaks of how the newborn forgets the causal chain at 
the moment of birth. This echoes the Bhagavad Gītā: 
 
इÍछाƮेषसमु×थेन ƮÛƮमोहेन भारत । 
सवर्भूतािन संमोहं सगȶ याǔÛत परÛतप ॥ भगवƥȣता ७- २७॥ 
 
By the rising together of desire and envy by the confusion of duality, all 
beings, when born, fall into the state of forgetting. (Bhagavad Gītā 7.27) 
 
 
10

=== PAGE 11 ===

By doing this, it is able to fit the individual’s embodiment in the womb that is 
consistent with the idea of rebirth. 
 
6. General views 
 
Like other sages of the Upani¬ads, Pippalāda is systematic and rational. The 
physical basis of life, and the sequence following the development of the embryo, 
is clearly defined. He describes the basis of life mystically in categories that go, in 
sequence, from 2 to 7. In the body emerge 8 natures and in it arise 16 
modifications that are similar to the tattvas of Sā¡khya. In Praśna Upani¬ad 6.4, 
these are listed by Pippalāda.  
 
The embryo is taken to have become jīva (conscious self) in the seventh month, 
and in the eighth month, it becomes complete in every sense. This gives the time 
the fetus becomes a person, with attendant legal rights. It is not explained how the 
jīva comes to be attached to the body.  
 
Although other passages indicate that the jīva resides in the heart’s recess, it also 
suffuses the entire body; furthermore, its identity with the Puru¬a means that, 
mysteriously, it is the one with the entire universe. The distinction also implies 
the existence of the subtle body (li¡gam). In the Sarvasāra Upani¬ad 7, the subtle 
body is defined as created out of the mind and other subtle elements that reside in 
the knot of the heart. The consciousness within this subtle body is called the 
“knower of the field” (k¬etrajña). 
 
The body is an instrument of the heart, but for it to be able to do what it can, the 
k¬etrajña must be free: this is mok¬a or mukti.  
 
7. Mass ratios 
 
The conversion ratios in the last section of the Upani¬ad are from Paul Deussen’s 
book The Philosophy of the Upanishads (Dover, 1966, page 285). 
 
References 
 
S. Kak, The Astronomical Code of the ›gveda. Munshiram Manoharlal, New 
Delhi, 2000. 
 
S. Kak, The axis and the perimeter of the Hindu temple. Mankind Quarterly, vol. 
46, 2006. 
  
© Subhash Kak, सुभाष काक, 2006 
 
11