THE 

AGNI-PURA N A 


PARTI 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE LIMITED • DELHI 



First Edition: Delhi ^ 1954 
Reprint: Delhi , 1998 


Also available at: 

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 

41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 1 10 007 
8 Mahal ax mi Chamber, Warden Road, Mumbai 400 026 
120 Royapeuah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004 
San as Plaza, Subhash Nagar, Pune 411 002 
16 St. Marks Road, Bangalore 560 001 
8 Camac Street, Calcutta 700 01 7 
Ashok Rajpaih, Patna 800 004 
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 


PRINTED IN INDIA 


BY JAINENDRA PRAKASJJ JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS, 
A-45 NARAINA INDUSTRIAL AREA, PHASE I, NEW DELHI 1 10 028 
AND PUBLISHED BY NARHNDRA PRAKASH IAIN FOR 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED, 
BUNGALOW ROAD, 'DELHI 1 10 007 



CONTENTS 

PART I 


CHAPTERS 

1. Introductory I 

2. Manifestation of Visnu as Fish 3 

3. Manifestation of Visnu as Tortoise 5 

4. - Manifestation of Visnu as Boar 7 

5. Manifestation of Vi§nu as Rama 9 

6. Manifestation of Vi?nu as Rama 1 1 

7. Manifestation of Visnu as Rama 15 

8. Manifestation of Visnu as Rama 17 

9. Manifestation of Visnu as Rama 19 

10. Manifestation of Visnu as Rama 21 

11. Manifestation of Vi$nu as Rama 24 

12. Manifestation of Vi?nu as Krsna 25 

13. Origin of Kauravas and Pandavas 31 

14. Story of the Mahabharata 34 

15. Ascendance of Papd&vas to heaven 36 

16. Manifestation of Visnu as Buddha and Kalki 38 

1 7. Creation 39 

18. Genealogy of Svayambhuva Manu 41 

19. Secondary Creation : the progeny of Kasyapa 45 

20. Primary Creation 48 

21. Method of worshipping Vi?nu and other gods 50 

22. Bath prior to a religious rite 53 

23. Mode of performing worship 54 

24. Mode of constructing the sacrificial pit and the 

oblations unto fire 56 

25. Mode of worshipping Vasudeva, Sankarsana 

Pradyumna and Aniruddha 62 

26. Positions of fingers in Worship 66 

27. Initiation rite 67 

28. Mode of anointment for the preceptor 74 



Contents 

29. Mode of Worshipping Hari in Sarvatobhadra 75 

30. Mode of worshipping gods in lotus figures 79 

31. Mode of cleansing oneself and others 82 

32. Purificatory rites 85 

33. Investiture of the sacred thread for the deity and the 

installation of the deity 87 

34. Mode of performing oblation 92 

35. Mode of consecration of an image 96 

36. Mode of performing the investiture of sacred thread 98 

37. Mode of investiture of sacred thread for all gods 100 

38. Benefits of constructing temples 101 

39. Preparations of ground for constructing temples 106 

40. Mode of making the respectful offering to the god 107 

41. Mode of performing Consecration 110 

42. Construction of a temple 113 

43. Installation of deities in temples 116 

44. Characteristics of the image of Vasudeva 118 

45. Characteristics of pedestals and details relating to 

images 123 

46. Characteristics of different Salagrama stones 124 

47. Mode of worshipping Salagrama 126 

48. Adoration of twentyfour forms of Visnu 127 

49. Characteristics of forms of Fish etc of Visnu 129 

50. Characteristics of an image of the goddess 132 

51. Characteristics of images of Sun and other 

planets 1 36 

52. Characteristics of images of different forms 

of goddesses 1 38 

53. Characteristics of Linga (parabolic repre- 
sentation of Siva) 139 

54. The dimensions of different varieties of Linga 141 

55. Characteristics of the pedestal 146 

56. Five divisions of installation 147 

57. Consecration of pitchers 149 

58. Consecration of the idol 152 

59. Preliminary consecration of an image 155 

60. Mode of installation of image of Vasudeva 161 

61. Consecration of the door of the temple and the 

erection of banner 164 



Contents 


62. Mode of installation of image of Goddess Laksmi 169 

63. Mode of installation of other gods and Goddesses, the 

SudarSana disc and the writing of books and their 
installations 171 

64. Mode of consecration of tanks and ponds 173 

65. Building pavilions in front of temples 178 

66. Mode of consecration of other god.* 180 

67. Renovation of decayed images 184 

68. Mode of taking out a procession and celebration 

of festivals after fixing the new image 184 

69. Mode of conducting the bathing festival 186 

70. Mode of planting trees 188 

71. Mode of Worshipping Gancsa 186 

72. Mode of bathing and daily worship 190 

73. Mode of worshipping Sun 195 

74. Mode of worshipping Siva 197 

75. Mode of installation of fire 205 

76. Mode of Worshipping Canute (attendant of Siva) 211 

77. Mode of Worshipping Kapila 212 

78. Mode of investiture of the sacred thread for the deity 215 

79. Investiture of the Sacred thread 221 

80. Mode of investiture with the fibres of Damanaka 225 

81. Mode of spiritual initiation 226 

82. Mode of performing purificatory initiation 235 

83. Mode of spiritual Initiation that removes one’s bondage 238 

84. Mode of Initiation for Emancipation 243 

85. Mode of purifying the Beatific principle of establish- 
ment 248 

86. Mode of purification of Scriptural knowledge 252 

87. Mode of purification of the principle of peace 254 

88. Mode of initiation for attaining liberation 257 

89. Initiation of principles 262 

90. Anointing the disciple after worshipping Siva 263 

91. Mantras for worshipping gods 265 



Contents 


92. Mode of installing the image of Siva 266 

93. Mode of worshipping the presiding deity of a 

ground 272 

94. Mode of placing the stone slabs 276 

95. Mode of installation of Lihga 278 

96. Mode of initial consecration of an image 283 

97. Mode of installation of lord Siva 294 

98. Mode of installation of the image of goddess Gaurl 302 

99. Mode of installation of the image of sun-god 303 

100. Rites of Consecration of doors of a temple 304 



CHAPTER ONE 


Introductory 

1. I bow to (goddesses) Sri (Lak$mi), Sarasvatl, Gaurl 
(Parvatl) and gods Ganesa, Skanda, I £ vara (Siva), Brahma, 
Vahni, Indra and other celestials and Vasudeva (Krsna). 

2. Saunaka and other sages (staying at the sacred forest) 
of Naimisa, conducting a sacrifice devoted to Hari (Vi$nu), 
welcomed Suta (the reciter of ancient lores) on his arrival there 
after a pilgrimage. 

The sages said : 

3. O Suta ! You are adored by us. Tell us the quintessence 
of all things, by knowing which alone one gets omniscience. 

Suta said : 

4. The illustrious Visnu (who is) the Supreme Being (and) 
the Creator, is the quintessence. By know ng that ‘I a m Brahman* % 
one gets omniscience. 

5. Two Brahmans are to be known, the Sabdabrahman (the 
Vedas) and Parabrahman (the Supreme Spirit). The Atharvant 
Sruti (Muntfakopanifad) refers to this as the two (kinds of) knowl- 
edge to be learnt. 

6. Myself, (sage) Suka (son of sage Vyasa), (sage) Paila. 
(disciple of sage Vy&sa) and others bowed Vyasa having resort- 
ed to the hermitage at (holy) Badarikajrama. He imparted, 
to us the quintessence (of all things). 

Vy&sa said : 

7. O suta, listen in the company of Suka and others what 
Vasi$tha has said to me about the excellent quintessence of the 
Brahman^ when he was requested by the sages. 

Vasiffhasaid : 

8. O Vy&sa, Listen, in entirety, to the two (kinds of) loKwt- 



2 Agni Purdna 

edge, which (god) Agni narrated to me in the company of the 
sages and the celestials. 

9. The excellent Purdna (known as) the Agneya (or Agni) 
and the two (kinds of) knowledge, Pard (the superior) and 
Apard (the inferior) signifying respectively the knowledge about 
the Brahman and the knowledge about the Rgveda and so on, which 
satisfies all the celestials (will be narrated to you). 

10. The Purdna spoken by Agni and designated as the Agneya 
by Brahma and which gives bhukti (enjoyment) and mukti (re- 
lease from mundane existence) for those who read it or hear it 
(will be narrated to you). 

1 1 . Being requested by the sages (I will also describe) (god) 
Visnu in the form of the destructive Fire at the end of the world 
(who is) the effulgent Brahman (and) the most Supreme Being 
(who is) worshipped by means of knowledge and action (reli- 
gious rites and so on). 

Vasiffha said : 

12. O Brahman (Agni), point out to me the masterly way 
of crossing the ocean of mundane existence, by knowing the 
quintessence of which knowledge one becomes omniscient. 

Agni said : 

13. Visnu is the destructive Fire at the end of the world (in 
the form of)Rudra (Siva). I shall tell you the essence of knowl- 
edge (in the form of) this Purdna , which represents all learning 
and is the cause of all things. 

14. (Lord) Visnu, who assumes the form of a fish, a tortoise 
(and other beings), is the cause of the primary creation, the 
secondary creation, the genealogy of the sages, the cycles of 
Manu-periods and the genealogy of the kings. 

15-17. O Twice-born ! (Lord) Visnu (is the cause of) the 
two kinds of knowledge Pard (the superior) and Apard (the in- 
ferior). Here the Apard is represented by the Rgveda, Tajurveda , 
Sdmaveda, Atharvaveda , the six supplementary texts, (namely) — 
£ikfd (phonetics), Kalpa (rules governing rituals), Vydkarana 
(grammar), Nirukta (etymological science), (thescience dealing 
with) the movement of the luminary bodies, Chandovidhdna 
(metrics), Mimdrhsd (investigation of the interpretation of the 
ritual of the Vedas), DharmaSdstra (law -books), Purdnas (18 in 



1 * 18 — 2.6 


3 


number), Nydya (logical philosophical system), Vaidya (medical 
science), Gdndharva (science of music), and Arthaidstra (polity). 
The Pard-Vidyd (superior knowledge) is that through which the 
Brahman is known. 

18. I shall narrate to you (that Purdna) which was told to 
me by Vi?nu and the celestials by Brahm& and which deals with 
that invisible, incomprehensible, not having a cause for itself 
and eternal (form of Vi?nu) which is the cause of the forms such 
as the fish and others. 


CHAPTER TWO 
Manifestation of Vifnu as Fish 


Vasiffha said : 

1. O Brahma ! Describe unto me the manifestations of 
Vi?nu, such as the Fish etc., which are the cause of creation. Also 
narrate to me the Agni Purdna as heard from Visnu in the days of 
yore. 

Agni said : 

2. O Vasi?tha ! I shall describe to you the manifestation 
of Hari as a Fish. Listen. The manifestations are for the 
destruction of the wicked and for the protection of the pious. 

3 . At the end of the past kalpa (of 432 million years ) , there 
was a periodical dissolution. Brahma was its instrumental cause. 
O sage ! the earth and the people were submerged under the ris* 
ing water. 

4-5. Vaivasvata Manu was practising penance for gaining 
objects of enjoyment and for release from mundane existence. 

Once when he was offering waters of libation in the (river) 
Kftamal&, a small fish came in the waters in his folded palms. 
As he desired to throw it into the waters, it said “O excellent 
man 1 do not throw me away. 

6. Now I have fear from the crocodiles (and others). 99 
Having heard this (Vaivasvata Manu) put it into a vessel. When 



4 Agni Pur&Qa 

it had grown there in size, it requested him, “Get me a bigger 
vessel”. 

7. Having heard these words, the king put the fis*h in a 
bigger vessel. Growing there again in size it requested the* 
king, “O Manu ! Get me a bigger place”. 

8. When it was put into a tank, it soon grew in size as big 
as it (the tank) and said, “Get me to a bigger place”. Then. 
(Manu) put it into the ocean. 

9. In a moment, it grew in size extending to a lakh of yojanar 
(on cyojana 8 or 9 miles). Seeing that wonderful fish, Mann 
got surprised and said : 

10. “Who are you, but Visnu ? O Narayana (Visnu) I 
salute you. Why do you stupefy me with your illusory power, O 
Janardana (Visnu)”. 

1 1 . Having heard the words of Manu, the Fish replied Manu 
who had been engaged in the protection (of the world), “I have 
manifested for the protection of this universe and for the destruo 
tion of the wicked.” 

12-13. On the seventh day, the ocean would flood the earth. 
Having put the seeds (of creation) etc. in the boat that would 
approach you, you would spend the night (of 1 000 mortal years ) 
of Brahma on it being encircled by the seven sages. (You) bind 
this boat to my horn with the big serpent.”. 

14. Saying thus, the fish disappeared. Manu, who was 
waiting for the appointed hour, boarded the boat as the ocean 
commenced to swell. 

15. The fish now appeared with a single golden horn of one 
million yojanas in length. He tied the boat to its horn. 

16-17. After having praised it with adoration, he heard from 
the fish the Purdna known as the Matsya which is capable of des- 
troying the sins. Ke£ava (Vi?nu) killed the demon Hayagriva,* 
the destroyer of the Vedas of Brahman and thus protected the 
vedic mantras . And when the Vardhakalpa (one of the periods 
of time) set in, Hari (Vijnu) assumed the form of a tortoise. 


1 . Hayagrlva was die name of a powerful demon, who carried away the 
Vidas during Deluge. He was lulled by Vifltu manifesting** a fish and the 
Ptato were rescued. BhOg. P. VIIL xxiv. 8 mid 57 />. Mtx m.p. 742. 



3.1-9 


5 


CHAPTER THREE 
Manifestation of Vi§nu as a Tortoise 


Agni said : 

1. I shall describe unto you (now) about the manifestation 
(of Visnu) as a tortoise, by hearing which one’s sins will be 
destroyed. In days of yore the celestial gods were defeated by the 
demons in a battle between them. 

2. On account of the curse of sage Durvasas, 1 the celes- 
tials were deprived of all their prosperity. Then they praised 
Visnu who was (reclining) in the milky ocean and said, “Protect 
us from the demons”. 

3. Hari said to Brahma and others, “You make a treaty of 
peace with the demons for churning the ocean for securing amb- 
rosia. 

4. In the interest of an important work even the enemies 
*should be sought for union. I will make you get the ambrosia 
and not the demons. 

5. Making the (Mount) Mandara as the churning rod and 
(the serpent) Vasuki as the rope, you vigilantly churn the milky 

ocean with my help”. 

6. Concluding an agreement with the demons as suggested 
by Visnu, (the celestials) came to the milky ocean. The celes- 
tials began to churn the ocean (from that side ) where the tail of 
the serpent was. 

7. The celestials who were afflicted by the sighs of the ser- 
pent, were comforted by Hari (Vi$nu) . As the ocean was being 
churned the mountain being unsupported entered into the water. 

8. Then Vi^nu assumed the form of a tortoise and supported 
the (Mount) Mandara. From the milky ocean which was being 
churned, first came out the poison known as Hdldhala . 

9. That poison being retained by Hara (Siva) in his neck, 
Siva became (known to be) Nilakanjha (blue-necked). 
Then the goddess V&runi (The female energy of the celestial god 

1 . Name of an irascible sage, son of Sage Atri and AnasQy&. Once he met 
a Vidyftdhara maid with a garland. He took that garland and presented it to 
Indra. Indra put it on his elephant, which in turn threw it on the ground and 
trampled upon it. Enraged at this the sage cursed him that he would lose all 
his fortune. See V$.P. I. ix. 1 if.; P. Index II. p. 106. 



6 Agni PurOna 

Varuna), the P&rij&ta (tree) and the Kaustubha (gem) came out 
of the ocean. 

10. Then came out the (celestial) kine and the nymphs. 
Then came out Laksmi, who became the consort of Hari (Vi$nu) . 
Beholding her and adoring her all the celestials regained their 
lost prosperity. 

11. Then Dhanvantari, (a form of Visnu) and founder of 
the (science of) Ayurveda rose up holding a water-pot full of 
ambrosia. 

1 2 . Taking the ambrosia from his hands the demons Jambha 
and others having given half of it to the celestials went away with 
the other half. Then Visnu assumed the form of beautiful 
damsel. 

13. Having seen that beautiful form, the demons became 
fascinated and said, “O fair-faced one ! Be our wife, take this 
ambrosia and make us drink it.” 

14-15. Hari (Vi$nu) said, “Let it be so”, and took it from 
them and made the celestials drink it. As Rahu assumed the 
form of the Moon and drank a portion, he was detected by the 
Sun and the Moon and was brought to the notice of (Vi$nu). 
His head was severed by his enemy Hari (Vi$nu). That severed 
head of Rahu then said to Hari, the bestower of gifts (by 
whose grace) it had attained immortality. 

16. “When the intoxicated Rahu would seize the Sun and 
the Moon, may the charities made on that occasion be imperi- 
shable.” 

17. Visnu in the company of all the immortals said, “Be 
it so” and cast off his female form. He was then requested by 
Hara to show that form (again). 

18. (Lord) Hari (Vi?^u) showed the feminine form to 
Rudra (Siva). Sambhu (Siva) being captivated by the illusory 
power, renouncing Gaur! (Pirvati) sought that feminine form. 

19. Becoming nude and behaving like a mad man, he held 
the damsel by her hair. She got herself freed and ran away. 
He too followed her. 

20. Wherever the seminal fluid of Hara dropped, there 
came into being sacred places of lingas and gold. 

21. Then knowing her as illusory, Hara (Siva) assumed his 
original form. Then Hari (Vi ?nu) told Siva, “O Rudra (Siva) 
My illusory power has been conquered by you. ^ 



3.23 — 4.1-4 


7 


22-23. There is no other male on the earth besides you, 
who is capable of conquering this illusory power of mine.” Then 
the demons, who had not got the ambrosia were defeated by the 
celestials in battle. The celestials got back to their celestial home. 
One who reads this account goes to the celestial region. 


CHAPTER FOUR 
Manifestations of Vifnu as the Boar 

1 . I describe (unto thee) the manifestation as a Boar (which) 
removes (one’s) sins.Hiranyaksa 1 was a demon chief. He con- 
quered the celestials and got established in the heavens. 

2. Visnu being praised by the celestials (who had) gone 
(to him), (he) assumed the form as Yajftavaraha (boar). Hav- 
ing killed that demon along with the (other) demons (he made 
the earth) devoid of thorns (difficulties). 

3-4. (That) Hari, the protector of righteousness and the 
celestials (then) disappeared. Then (the demon) Hiranyaka- 
$ipu, 2 brother of Hiranyaksa after conquering the celestials (was 
grabbing a share of the offerings) exercised control over all the 
celestials. (Visnu) assumed the form of Narasimha (human 
body with lion’s face) (and) killed him along with the (other) 
demons. 

1. Hiranyak$a, a demon, was one of the sons of Kafyapa and Diti. He 
waxed eloquent and entered the underworld in search of Vi?nu. Viwu 
assumed the form of a boar and after severe combat slew the demon. See P . 
Index III. C. 774. 

2. Hiranyakaiipu, a demon, was the other son of Kaiyapa and Diti. 
He had got a boon that he could not be killed either by a man or by a beast 
or during the day or the night or inside or outside the house. He conquered 
the celestials. His son Prahlada was a devotee of Vi^ui. All the attempts of 
Hiranyaka&pu to wean Prahlada from his devotion to Vi?nu were of no avail. 
Hiranyakaiipu subjected Prahlada to many ordeals. Prahlada emerged uns- 
cathed. The desperate Hiranyakaiipu challenged Prahlada whether that 
VifVu would be present everywhere and Prahlada could show him in the pillar 
in front of them and kicked the pillar. Viftpi manifested in the form of a man 
with lion's face from that pillar and killed Hiranyakaiipu placing him on his. 
lap and at the thresh-hold during the twilight. See P. Index III. pp. 769-70. 



Agni Purfoia 


B 


5-7. (He) re-established the celestials in their original places 
and was praised by the celestials. Once in the battle between the 
celestials and the demons, the celestials were defeated by (demon) 
Bali 1 and other demons (and) were driven away from the heaven 
(and) sought refuge in Hari (Visnu). Having given refuge to 
the devas he being praised by Aditi (wife of the latter) (and 
mother of the celestials) and Kasyapa (a sage) became a Dwarf 
(as a son) of Aditi (and) went to the sacrifice (performed by 
Bali) (and) recited the Vedas at the royal gates of Bali the sacri- 
ficer. 

8-9. Having heard him reciting the Vedas , the bestower of 
the wanted things (Bali) said to the Dwarf in spite of being 
obstructed by Sukra (the preceptor of the demons), “Whatever 
(you) desire I shall give (you)”. The Dwarf asked Bali, 

* ‘Get (me ) three feet of space for the sake of the preceptor. (Bali ) 
said to him, “I shall give (you)”. 

10-11. When the water was poured on the hand the Dwarf 
Became a Giant (and) measured the worlds of Bhuh, Bhuvah and 
Svar with the three strides and (sent) Bali to Sutala (a nether 
world) and (then) Hari (Visnu) gave the worlds to Sakra(Indra). 
&akra (Indra) praised Hari (Vi$nu) along with the celestials 
(and) remained happy as the ruler of the world. 

12-13. “I shall describe (unto you) the manifestation as 
ParaSurama.” “Hear, O twice-born” ! Considering the k§atriyas 
(ruling clan) as haughty, Hari (Visnu), the protector of the cele- 
stials and the brahmins manifested as Bhargava, son of Jamad- 
agni and Renuka and proficient in arms for removing the pre- 
ssure on the earth and for the sake of peace. [Manifestation of 
Vi?nu as Paraiurama ] 

14. Kartavlrya became a king by the grace of Dattatreya 
(considered as a manifestation of the Trinity as son of Atri and 
Anasuya). He had thousand arms. He was the lord of the 
entire world. (Once) he went for hunting. 

1 . Ba)i was a powerful demon. He was a son of Virocana and grandson 
of Prahl&da. Being oppressed by him, the celestials sought refuge in Vi?nu. 
In deference to their wishes, Vifpu assumed the form of a dwarf and 
approached Bali and requested him to give as much earth as he could cover in 
three steps. Bali readily conceded to his request. The dwarf soon grew into a 
mighty form, covered the earth and heaven in two strides and as the third 
stride placed his foot on the head of Bali and subdued him. See Rdm. I. 
xxvii.; P. Index II. pp. 469-70 ^ 



•4.20 — 5.1-3 9 

15. (He) being tired, was invited by the sage Jamadagni. 
The king was fed along with his retinue (by the sage) by the grace 
of the K&madhenu (divine cow). 

16-20. (The king) sought for the K&madhenu . When he 
(the sage) did not give (the cow) the king took it away. Then 
Hama (Paragurama) cut off (the king’s) head with his axe in 
the battle. The cow returned to the hermitage. Jamadagni was 
killed by the sons of Kartavirya on account of revenge, when 
(ParaSu) Rama had gone to the forest. Seeing his father slain 
(and) getting angry on account of the loss of his father the great 
man made the earth devoid of the warrior clan for 21 generations. 
Making out five pits ( kunda ) at Kuruk$etra and satisfying his 
manes, having given the earth to Kafyapa, (he) stationed him- 
self at the Mahendra mountains. (One) who hears (the story 
-of) the manifestations as a Fish, a Boar, a Lion and Rama (Para- 
iurama) goes to the celestial regions. 


CHAPTER FIVE 
Manifestation of Vifnu as R&ma : 


Agni said : 

1. I shall describe (unto you) the (story of) Ramayana, 
■as it (was) once described byN&rada to V&lmiki (and which) 
if read in that manner yields enjoyment and release (from mun- 
dane existence). 

M&rada said : 

2. Brahma (was bom) from the lotus in the navel of Vi$nu. 
(Sage) Marici (was) the son of Brahma. (Sage) Kaiayapa 
(was) then (born) from Marici. The Sun (god) (and) 
Vaivasvata Manu (were bom successively in the line). 

3. Then from him (Vaivasvata Manu), Ik$v&ku (was 
bora). Kakutstha (was born) in his line. Raghu (was the 
son) of Kakutstha. Aja (was born) to him. Then Daiaratha 
{was bora). 



10 


Agni Pur&na 


4-7. Hari (Vi$nu) manifested himself in the four (forms) 
for the sake of the annihilation of Ravana and others. Rama 
was bom from Da£aratha to Kau£alya, Bharata to Kaikeyi and 
Lakpnana and Satrughna to Sumitra simultaneously from parta- 
king of the sweet gruel obtained from (the performance) of the 
sacrifice of the father. The king being requested by (the sage) 
Visvamitra for the annihilation of those who impede (the 
performance) of the sacrifices sent Rama and Lakgmana 
along with the sage. Rama who had gone (with the sage) (and) 
was taught in the use of the weapons ( astro . 1 and f astro) 2 * (became) 
the killer of (the demoness) Tafaka.* 

8. (Rama) made (demon) Marlca 4 stupefied by the missile 
(known as) Mdnava and led him far away. The valiant killed 
also (the demon) Subahu, the destroyer of sacrifices along with 
his army. 

9. Residing at the (place) Siddha£rama 5 along with (the 
sages) Visvamitra and others, (Rama) went along with his. 
brother to see the sacrifice (test for prowess) of Maithila (King- 
Janaka). 

10-12. At the instance of (the sage) Satananda 6 and on acco- 
unt of the glory of Vi$v£mitra, that sage being shown due res- 
pects by the king at the sacrifice and Rama being informed 
sportively pulled the bow and broke it. (King) Janaka gave 
Sita, the girl not born of the womb, and associated with a prize 
bid, to Rama. And when the parents had come, Rama also 

1 -2 . The word astra denotes a weapdn discharged along with the repetition, 
of the mystic syllables, whereas ‘ iastra ' is any ordinary missile. 

3. Ta(ak& was a female fiend, daughter of Suketu. She was the wife of 
Sunda and mother of Marica. She had been changed into a fiend by the sage 
Agastya when she had disturbed his austerities. 

Although R4ma was at first reluctant to raise his bow against a woman, 
she was later killed by him, at the instance of Vi£v&mitra, when she disturbed 
the sacrificial performances of Vi£v&mitra. See Rdm. I.xxv-xxvi. 

4. M&rlca was a demon, son of Sunda and Tatakk. He was die unde of' 
R&va$a. Rdm. I.xxiv. 26-27 

5. Siddh&frama was the place where Vi?$u manifested as the Dwarf to 
subdue the demon Bali, and also where the aspirants realized their ambitions. 
See Rdm . I. xxix. 

6. Satinanda was the son of sage Gautama and Ahaly& and was the family 
priest of Janaka. Sec Rdm. I.ii.l. 



5.13-6.1-8 


11 


married that Jin akl (Siti). In the same way Lakgmana (also 
married) Urmila. 

13-14. Then Satrughna and Bharata married Srutakirti 
and Mandavi, the two daughters of the brother of Janaka. 
Rama after conquering Jamadagni (Para^urama, son of Jama- 
dagni) went to Ayodhya with (sage) Vasi§tha and others and 
Bharata with Satrughna went towards (the country of) Yudha- 
jit (uncle of Bharata). 


CHAPTER SIX 

Manifestation of Vi^nu as Rdma ( continued ) : 

N&rada said : 

1-2. After Bharata had gone, Rama saluted the parents and 
others. King Da£aratha said to Rima, “Raghava (Rama) ! 
listen to me, you have been anointed mentally by the people as 
ruler on account of (your) qualities. I shall make you the heir- 
apparent (next) morning.” 

3-4. “In the night you observe (the necessary) rites (vows) 
along with Sita.” And the eight ministers 1 of the king— Sr?fi> 
Jayanta, Vijaya, Siddhartha, Ra?£ravardhana, Aioka, Dharma- 
pala and Sumantra and also Vasisfha spoke. 

5. After hearing the words of the father and others, Raghav* 
said that he will do accordingly. He worshipped the gods and 
informed the news to Kauialya. 

6. The king told Vasi§tha and others to gather the materials 
required for the coronation of R&ma and went to Kaikeyi. 

7* After seeing the decoration of the city of AyodhyS, and 
knowing that the coronation of Rama is to take place, Manthara 
informed her friend Kaikeyi (accordingly). 

8. Having been pulled by Rama by the foot by mistake, 
on account of that enmity she desired of Rama’s sojourn to the 
forest. 


1. Some of the names of the ministers are little different from those found 
in the Rimfyqut. Instead of the name Artlias&dhaka and Mantrap&la 
in the Rdmfta*a we have Srfdi R&ttravardhana and Dharmap&la here. See 
Rim. I. vii.3. 



42 


Agni Purdya 


9. "O ! Kaikcyi ! you get up (and see) the anointment of 
Rama. There is no doubt (that it is) death (itself) for your son, 
to me and to you” (said Manthara). 

10-11. She (Kaikeyi) heard the words of the kubjd (hunch- 
backed) (Manthara) and gave her an ornament. She said 
"Just as Rama is (my son ) so also Bharata is my son. I do not 
find any plan, by which Bharata may get the kingdom.” The 
angry Manthara after rejecting the ornament (given by Kaikeyi) 
said to Kaikeyi : 

12. “O ! stupid girl you protect Bharata, yourself and me 
from Raghava. Raghava will be the king in future and then 
his son.” 

13-15. O Kaikeyi, “The royal lineage will be taken away 
from Bharata. Once when the people were persecuted by Sam- 
bara 1 at the time of the battle between the gods and demons, when 
the king went there for (rendering help), you protected him by 
your art and skill. Then the king gave you two boons. (You) 
ask for them now from the king. (The boons are) the stay of 
Rama in the forest for fourteen years and the conferment of the 
lieir-apparentship on Bharata. These (the king) will give.” 

16. She (Kaikeyi) being encouraged by the deformed lady 
(Manthara), who saw meaning in the worthless thing, said (to 
her), “ (Tell) me a good plan which would make it work.” 

17-18. (Kaikeyi) having entered the anger apartment 
(remained) in a swoon fallen to the ground. Then the king Da£a- 
ratha having honoured the twice-borns (came there and) saw 
the angry Kaikeyi (and) sajd, “How (is) she such ? Is she sick 
or agitated by fear,” (and $aid) “I shall do as you wish”, 

19. “Without which R&ma, I cannot live (even) a moment, 

I swear by him that I will do as you wish O beautiful woman !” 

20-22. “Speak the truth”, said she to the king (and added), 
■“The two boons (you) granted me formerly, you give me (now) 

(as you swear) by truth, O King ! Let Rima live in the forest 
for fourteen years being self-controlled (and) with these prepa- 
rations let Bharata be installed here this day itself (and) if you 


1. Sambara was a demon chief, ton of Kaiyapa and Danu. At the time 
of the battle between the celestials and die was the 

people. Indra sought help from Dafaratha. Dafaratha who lost his conscious- 
ness in the battle was safely charioted back by Kaikeyi. Seelfam. I.ix. Hff. 



6.23-34 


1 £ 


do not grant (these boons) O King ! I shall die (after) drink- 
ing poison.” Having heard these (words) the (king) fell into a 
swoon on the earth as if struck by a mace. 

23-25. After a moment he regained his consciousness and 
said, “What (harm) was done to you by Rama or by me, O 
lady, determined to do sins ! What you tell me in this manner 
is unpleasant to all the people. By merely doing (something) 
pleasing to you, I will be censured. What a kind of wife (you 
are) like the night of destruction 1 at the end of the world. 
Bharata is not such a kind of son. (You) rule the kingdom as 
a widower after I have died and the son has gone.” 

26-29. Being bound by the noose of truth, (he) called Rama 
and said (to him), “O ! Rama, I have been cheated by Kai- 
keyi; restraining me (you) rule the kingdom. You have to live 
in the forest and Bharata, (the son of) Kaikeyi (is to be) the 
king.” Having saluted his father and Kaikeyi, after doing a cir- 
cumambulation, and bowing down to KauSalya and having 
consoled her and with Laksmana, with (his) wife Sita and with 
Sumantra in the chariot and having made the gifts for the 
brahmins, poor and destitutes, he left the city with the 
mothers, brahmins and others stricken with grief. 

30. Having spent the night on the banks of the (river) 
Tamasa (he went away) leaving the people. Not finding him in 
the morning they all returned to Ayodhya again. 

31. The lamenting king also went to the apartments of 
Kaujalya extremely grief-stricken. Being separated from the 
king all the citizens and women wept. 

32. Rima, being seated in the chariot and wearing the bark- 
garments went to Srngaberapura. Being entertained by Guha* 
there, he resorted to the foot of the Indgudi (tree). 

33-34. And during the nights Laksmana and Guha kept 
awake. Leaving Sumantra together with the chariot in the morn- 
ing, R&ma, Lak?mana and Sita crossed the river Jahnavi (Ganges) 
by boat and reached Pray&ga. (They) paid their obeisance to 
(the sage) Bharadv&ja (and then) reached the Citrakufa moun- 
tain. 

1 . K&lardtri, the night of destruction at the end of the world is identified 
with the Goddess Durgft. 

2. Guha, a hunter chief was reign^np at Sf&gaberapura. He was an ad- 
mirer of lUma. See Rim, 11.1.33. 



14 


Agni Pur dm 


35. Then (they) having performed the VdstupUjd (propitia- 
tory rites at the house site), stayed on the banks of the ]^fanda- 
kini (Ganges). And (then) Raghava showed the Citrakuta 
(mountain) to Sita. 

36. With an arrow (Rama) plucked one of the eyes of the 
crow which was tearing her (Sita) with (its) nails. Then the 
crow sought refuge in the celestials. 

37-40. On the sixth day after Rama had gone to the forest, 
the king told Kau$alya in the night the past story of how in (his) 
youth he had killed unknowingly with (his) Sabdabheda 1 (wea- 
pon) the ascetic youth Yajfiadatta as (he was filling) the pot 
raising asound. Lamenting his father cursed (DaSaratha). 
His mother felt grief-stricken and wept again and again and 
the (two) said, “We will die without the son. You will also die 
of grief.” “O Kau£alya ! without the son and remembering 
(the past) my death (will come off now) on account of grief.” 
After narrating this story and uttering (the words) “Alas ! 
Rama !”, the king passed away. 

41-42. Thinking that the king was sleeping, Kau£alya also 
slept on account of pangs of grief. Early in the morning the sin- 
gers and bards such as the sUtas 9 mdgadhas , the awakeners attempt 
ed to wake him up. He did not wake up and was dead. Know- 
ing him as dead, Kau£alya said, “O I have been ruined.” 

43. The men and women then wept. Then Bharata along 
with Satrughna was hurriedly brought to the city from the 
royal palace by Vasi^ha and others. 

44. Having seen the grief-stricken Kaikeyi he reproached 
(her) out of grief. “ (You) have made censure fall on the head” 
and praised KauSalya. 

45-46. Having done the funeral rites of his father (whose 
body was kept preserved) in oil in oval vessel on the banks of the 
river Sarayu, when (he) was asked by Vasi&ha and others to 
rule the kingdom, he said, “I go now to bring back Rama. 
Rama is the king stronger than myself”. (He went) to Sjngavera 
and to Prayaga where he was entertained by Bharadvaja. 

47-48. Having saluted Bharadvaja, (Bharata) came to 

1. Sabdabhida was a missile capable of reaching a mark merely by the 
sound associated with the mark, die object itself not being perceived. 



6.49—7.N6 


15 


Rama and Lak$mana (and said), “O R&ma ! Our father 
has reached the heaven. You become the king of Ayodhya. I 
will go to the forest adhering to your command.” Having heard 
this, Rama (after) giving him water asked him to go (back) 
taking the sandals. 

49. (Bharata said), “I will not go to the city. I swear, I 
will be remaining with matted locks.” On being urged by Rama, 
Bharata returned to Nandigrama and stationed there with his 
army, leaving the sandal at Ayodhya and worshipping it ruled 
over the kingdom. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 
Manifestation of Vi$nu as RSma {continued) : 

N&rada said : 

1-2. Rama bowed to Vasi?tha, the mothers, (sage) Atri 
and his wife Anasuya, (sages) Sarabhariga 1 and Sutiksna, the 
brother of Agastya and Agastya and reached the Dan^aka forest 
having obtained the bow and sword by the grace of (Agastya). 

3. He was staying at Paficavati in the Janasthana on the 
banks of the (river) Godavari. The awful (demoness) Surpa- 
nakhi* came there to devour them all. 

4-5. Seeing the beautiful form of Rama, that lustful (wo- 
man) said to him, “Who are you? Whence have you come? 
You become my husband being entreated by me. I shall eat 
these two.” So saying to him she approached them. On the 
words of Rama, Laksmana cut off her nose and ears. 

6-7. She returned to her brother Khara with blood oozing 
out (and) said, “I shall die without a nose. I would live, O 
Khara ! only when you would make me drink the hot blood of 
Sita, the wife of RSma and Laksmana, his brother. 

8. Khara said to her that he will do so and went there with 

1 . Sarabhafiga was a sage who entered the fire in the presence of R&ma 
and ascended heavens with a glowing body by the merits of his austerities. 
On his advice R&ma met another sage Sutlkfoa. Rdm. III. v. and vii. 

2. SOrpa^akhk was the sister of R&va$a, the king ofLa&kk and of Khara, 
the rulSr of Janasth&na. 



16 Agni Purity* 

Du?ana, TriSiras and 14000 demons in order to fight (with. 
Rama). 

9-10. R&ma also fought well and killed the demons with hi& 
arrows and led the army consisting of the elephants, cavalry* 
chariots and infantry together with the fighting Trigiras, Khara. 
and Du^ana 1 2 3 to death. Surpanakha went to Lanka and fell down 
on the earth in front of Ravana. 

11-13. (And) said to Ravana angrily, “You are neither a 
king, nor a protector. You abduct Sita, the wife of Rama, the 
killer of Khara and others. I will live only after drinking the blood 
of Rama and Laksmana and not by anything else.” Having 
heard her Ravana also said yes and said to Marica, “You move 
in front of Sita in the form of a golden deer drawing Rama and 
Laksmana away. I will carry her away. Otherwise you will 
be dead.” 

14-15. Marica 9 said to Ravana, “Rama with his bow is 
verily the god of death himself.” “Either I have to die at the 
hands of Ravana or at the hands of Raghava (Rama) . If I have 
to die, it is better (to die at the hands of) Rama than Ravana. 
Having thought so (Marica) became a deer and roamed in front 
of Sita again and again. 

16. Being entreated by Sita, Rama (ran after that deer and) 
then killed that with an arrow. As it was dying, the deer said 
“O Sith and O Laksmana.” 8 

17-20. Then Saumitri (Lakpnana) being told inconsistent 
(words) by Sita went (in search) of Rama. R&vana also abduct- 
ed Sith, having wounded the vulture Jaf&yu, 4 * * and being wounded 
byjafayu, carrying Sita on the lap reached Lank&, kept (her) 
guarded in the Afoka (grove) and said (to her), “You become 
my wife. You will be kept as the foremost.” Having killed Ma- 
rica, Rama saw Laksmana and said (to him), “O Saumitri ! 
this is a phantom deer. By the time you had come here, Sitfr 

1. DC^a^a and Triiiras were the commanders of Khara. 

2. M&rica remembered his past miserable experience at the sacrificial 
site of Viiv&mitra. See V. 8 above. 

3. M&rlca imitated the voice of R&ma while crying aloud. 

4. Jat&yu, the vulture was an intimate friend of king Daiaratha. He 

obstructed the path of R&vapa on hearing die wails of Sttft, and was fatally 

wounded and died after being seen by RAma and L ak|m a o % 



7.21 — 8.1-4 


17 


would have been taken away certainly.” Then he did not find 
her as he returned (to that place). 

21. He lamented with grief (and said), 4 ‘Where have you 
(Sita) gone discarding me ?” Being comforted by Lak$mana, 
Rama began to search for Janaki (Sita). 

22. Having seen him, Jafayu told that Ravana had carried 
her away. He (Jatayu) then died. (Rama) performed his 
obsequies. He then killed (the demon) Kabandha. 1 Getting 
free from a curse, he (Kabandha) said to Rama, “You go to 
Sugriva.” 


CHAPTER EIGHT 
Manifestation of Visnu as Rdma ( continued ) 

Ndrada said : 

1 . Having gone to the lake of Pampa, Rama stayed there 
(that) night thinking (of what to do). Then he was (met and) 
taken to Sugriva by Hanumat. Rama made friendship (with 
Sugriva). 

-T 

2. After having pierced the seven T&la trees with a single 
arrow and (even as others) were seeing, threw away the body 
of Dundubhi* by his foot to a distance of ten yojanas. 

3-4. Having killed Valin,* his (Sugriva’s) enemy, who had. 
been the cause of enmity, he bestowed on him the monkey-king- 
dom of Ki$kindha (as well as) Ruma and Tara on the R?ya- 

] . Kabandha was a heavenly being at first and was later cursed by the 
sage Sthillafiras and Indra to become an ugly-shaped demon as he tormented 
the other ascetics and was told that, he would regain his original form 
after he met R&ma and died at his hands. See ROm. III. lxxi. 1-16- 

2. Dundubhi was & powerful demon slain by Valin, the brother of Sugriva. 
When Sugriva showed to Riraa the skeleton of this demon to show how 
powerful Valin was, Rama gently kicked it and threw it many miles away. 
See ROm. IV. xi. 24 ff. 

3. When Mfty&vin, the eldest son of Dundubhi, a demon, challenged 
Valin, Valin chased him. Mayavin entered a cave and Valin also followed 
suit. Sugriva, who had gone with his brother and was asked by his brother to 



18 


Agni Pur&Qa 


muka (mountains). That ruler of Kiskindha (Sugriva) told 
(Rima),*T will do in such a way, O Rama ! by which 
you will be getting back Sita”. # 

5-7. Having heard that, he (Rama) spent the four months 
on the Malyavat (mountain). As Sugriva had not come to 
Kiskindha to see (Rama), Laksmana (met him and) spoke 
to him the words of R&ma, “ (Y ou) go to Raghava. The way in 
which Valin was killed is not yet closed. O Sugriva ! You 
stand by at this juncture. Do not take to the course of Valin.” 
Sugriva said, “I did not realize the elapse of time on account of 
my preoccupation.” 

8-9. Saying so, he (Laksmana) went away. The lord of 
the monkeys (Sugriva) (approached) Rama, bowed and said, 
* ‘All the monkeys have been brought in order to search for Sita. 
As desired by you, I shall send them. Let them search for JanakI 
in the (direction of) east etc. Let them return in a month. (If 
they come) after a month I will kill them.” 

10. So saying (he sent monkeys in all directions). 
The monkeys sent towards the eastern, western and northern 
routes came (back) to Rama and Sugriva not finding JanakI. 

11. Having taken the signet ring of Rama, Hanumat to- 
gether with other monkeys searched in the south in the caves 
of Suprabha (mountain). 

12-16. And being engaged for more than a month and not 
being able to find JanakI, they said, “We will die in vain. Jatayu 
is fortunate. For the sake of Sita, he gave his life being wounded 
by Ravana in the battle.” Having heard this, (the eagle) Sam- 
pati, abandoning (his intention of) eating the monkeys (said), 
“This brother of mine, Jatayu, was protected by me from the heat 
of the Sun as he was flying in the solar region. Hence, I had my 
wings burnt as I was flying in the clouds. On account of hearing 
the story of Rama, the wings have grown again. I see JanakI 

guard at the entrance to the cave, took his brother to have been slain when he 
had not returned even after a long time. Sugriva closed the entrance to the 
cave with stones, returned to Ki$kindh& and assumed charge. A* Valin return- 
ed, the entreaties of Sugriva were of no avail . Sugriva retreated to R?ya- 
muka mountains to escape the wrath of Valin as Valin dreaded to enter that 
region on account of a curse. Tara, the wife of Sugriva, was also taken away 
fay Valin, but was restored to her husband after Valin was slain by Rama. See 
Rdm. IV. ix.x 



9 . 1-12 


19 


gone to ASoka grove in Lanka in the Triku(aka (mountain) in 
(the middle of) the salt ocean of an extent of hundred yojanas . 
Knowing this let the monkeys tell Rama and Sugriva.” 


CHAPTER NINE 
The Story of Rdma (< continued ) : 

Mrada said : 

1 . Having heard the words of Sampati, Hanumat, Arigada, 
(son of Valin) and others having seen the ocean said, “Who 
may cross the ocean and make us live ?” 

2. For the survival of monkeys and accomplishing the 
task of Rama, that Maruti (Hanumat) crossed the ocean 
extending to hundred yojanas. 

3-5. Having seen the rise of Mainaka (mountain), having 
killed (the demon) Simhika and having seen Lanka and search- 
ing the houses of the demons and those of the women and the 
houses of the tenheaded (Ravana), Kumbha, Kumbhakarna, 
Vibhlsana, Indrajit, and other demons, he did not find (Sita) 
(also) in the place for drinking wine. Becoming anxious and 
having gone to the ASoka grove he found Sita at the foot of the 
&im£apa tree. 

6. Remaining on the Simsapa tree he saw Sita being 
guarded by the demonesses, (and) Ravana asking her to become 
his wife and Sita replying him that she could not. 

7-9. The monkey (also saw) the demonesses asking Sita to 
become the wife of Ravana, After R&vana had gone he said, 
“Daiaratha was a king. His sons Rama and Lak?ma$a, the two 
excellent brothers came to the forest. You, Janaki, the wife of 
Rama were forcibly taken away by Ravana, Rama became a 
friend of Sugriva, sent me to search for you, (and) 
(you) take this signet ring of identification given by Rama.” 

10-12. Sltk received the ring. Having seen Maruti seated 
on the tree and again in front of her, (she) asked him, “If (he) 
lives, how Rama doeraot take me away ?” The monkey said to 
her who was doubtful, “O Sita 1 Rama does not know. Know- 



20 


Agni Purtya 


ing now he will take you away after killing R&vana along with 
his army. O Devi (queen) ! Do not worry. You get me an 
identity.” Sita gave the crest jewel to the monkey. * 

13. (And) said, “You do in such a way that R&ma would 
take me away quickly. O dispeller of grief ! You retell him 
the story of the removal of the eye of the crow.” 

14-15. Getting the jewel and (listening to) the story, Hanu- 
mat said, “The Lord will be taking you away. Otherwise, if 
you feel some hurry, O auspicious one !* You get on to my 
back. I shall show you Sugriva and Raghava today.” Slta said 
to Hanumat, “Let Raghava take me away.” 

16-18. Then Hanumat made a stratagem in order to 
see Da&griva (R&vaiia). He destroyed the grove, having killed 
the guards (of the grove) with his teeth and nails, and all the 
attendants, the sons of seven ministers, prince Ak?a. Sakrajit 
(Indrajit) (son of Ravana) bound him with the N&gapasa and 
took him to the red-eyed Rivana. 

19. R&vana asked him, “Who you are”. Maruti (Hanu- 
mat) said to Ravana, “I am the messenger of Rama. You return. 
Sita to him. Otherwise you will certainly die along with 
the other demons in Lanka being hit by the arrows of Rama.” 

20-25. (Hearing these words) Ravana was intent on killing* 
(Hanumat) but was prevented by Vibhi$ana. He (Rivana) 
made his (Hanumat’s) tail set fire to. Having burnt LaiUdL 
and the demons with the blazing flames Maruti, met Sit& 
again and saluted her. He crossed the ocean and informed 
Angada and others that he had seen Slt&. Having drunk 
honey in the honey-garden along with Angada and others, over- 
powering Dadhimukha and other guards, they met Rama 
and told him that Sita was seen. R&ma also being happy asked 
M&ruti, “How Sita was seen by you ? And what (message) did 
she send for me ? Sprinkle me who sun tormented by the fire of 
passion, with the nectar of the story of Sit&. Hanumat said to- 
Rama (how) he had come after crossing the ocean and seeing; 
Sita, burning the city (ofLankA) and taking jewel from Sita. 
“O Rama ! Do not worry. You will get back Sita after having 
killed Ravana.” 

26-28. Receiving that jewel R&ma being grief-stricken wept 
and said, “Having seen this jewel (I feel) I have seen my J&nakL 
(Sit&) ! (You) take me (there). I cannot live without her.” 



3.29 — 10.1-6 


21 


Being consoled by Sugriva and others (Rima) reached the banks 
of ocean. Vibhl$ana who was forsaken by his wicked bro- 
ther Ravana for having advised him to return Slta to Rhma, 
came there alone to Rama. 

29-31. Rama anointed his friend Vibhl$ana as the ruler 
•of Lanka. He requested ocean for (making) a way. When 
he had not come, then he split the (ocean) with an 
arrow. And the (king of the) ocean who had appeared before 
Hama, said, “by building a bridge in the ocean by Nala you 
reach Lanka. I have been made great by you in the past/' 
Rama also reached the other banks of the mighty ocean by means 
of the bridge constructed by Nala with trees and rocks. Along 
with the monkeys he saw Lanka, himself remaining on the 
Suvela mountain. 


CHAPTER TEN 

Manifestation of Vi^nu as Rdma ( continued ) : 

Jf&rada said : 

1. Being asked by Rama, Ahgada went to R&vana (and) 
said, “Let Janaki be returned to Raghava immediately, 
otherwise you will die.” 

2. R&vana was intent on killing (Ahgada). The ten-head- 
ed'demon who was ready to fight sent words to Rama that war 
was the only way thought of. 

3-5. After hearing these words, R&ma came to Lankh with 
the monkeys for the sake of battle. The monkeys were Hanu m at, 
Mainda, Dvivida, Jambavat, Nala, Nila, Tkra, Ahgada, Dhumra, 
Sufeqta, Keiari, Gaya, Panasa, Vinata, Rambha, Sarabha, 
Krathana the strong, Gav&kga, Dadhivaktra, Gand h ama d a n a 
and others and Sugriva. With these and other innumerable 
monkeys (Rama came to Lanka). 

6. There was a disorderly battle between the demons and 
monkeys. The demons killed the monkeys with arrows, spears 
and mace”. 



22 


Agni Pvr&oa 


7. The monkeys killed demons with nails, teeth and 
stones. The force of the demons consisting of elephants 
cavalry, chariots and infantry was destroyed. 

8. Hanumat killed the enemy Dhumrak§a with a big rock. 
Nila killed the fighting Akampana and Prahasta. 

9. Rama and Laksmana fainted on account of the arrow dis- 
charged by Indrajit. Regaining their consciousness after per- 
ceiving Tark$ya (the chief of the eagles), they killed the forces 
of demons. 

10. Rama made Ravana shattered in the battle by means 
of arrows. And the grief-stricken Ravana woke up Kumbha- 
karna. 

11-12. Then being awakened, Kumbhakarna, drinking 
thousands of pots of wine, and having eaten buffaloes and other 
(animals), said to Ravana, “You have done the sin of abducting 
Slta and because (you are) my master, I shall go now for the war 
and kill Rama along with the monkeys.” 

13. So saying, Kumbhakarna crushed all the monkeys. 
Being seized by him, Sugriva cut off his cars and nose. 

14. Having lost ears and nose he was eating the monkeys, 
then Rama cut off the arms of Kumbhakarna with the arrows. 

15-17. Then having cut off the feet, (Rama) made (his) 
head fall on the earth. And then the demons Kumbha, Nikum- 
bha, Makaraksa, Mahodara and Mahapar£va, the arrogant 
Praghasa, Bhasakarna, Virupaksa, Devantaka, Narantaka, Tri- 
siras, Atikaya (were killed) in battle by Rama, Laksmana and 
the monkeys in the company of Vibhisana. 

18-21 . And other demons, as they were fighting were made 
to fall down. Fighting by conceit, Indrajit bound Rama and 
others with the Ndgdstra got as a gift. After they were made secure 
and free from wounds when Maruti had brought the mountain. 
Hanumat bore him (Laksmana) to that place where (Indrajit) 
was doing horn a and offering ahuti-s unto the fire at NikumbiBk* 
Laksmana killed the valiant Indrajit in battle. Being burnt by 
grief, Ravana was intent on killing Sit&. 

22. The king although obstructed by the women, went (to 
fight) seated on a chariot and accompanied by the army. Be- 
ing directed by Indra, Matali 1 made R&ma seated on a chariot. 

1. Matali is die charioteer of Indra. 



10.23-34 


23 


23. The fight between Rama and Ravana was none the 
second. Ravana attacked monkeys and Maruti and others 
attacked Ravana. 

24-26. Just as a cloud, Rama showered on him (Ravana) 
arrows and weapons. He cut off his flagstaff along with his cha- 
riot, horses and charioteer as well as the bow, arms and heads. 
The cut-off heads grew again (on his body) . Ravana was made to 
fall down to the ground by Rama by piercing (his) heart 
with the Brahm&stra (weapon of the Pitamaha). The ( r&kfasa ) 
women wept along with other demons. After consoling them, 
Vibhi$ana cremated him as directed by Rama. 

27-28. Rama made the pure Sita to be brought (to him) 
by Hanumat. He accepted her who was (declared) pure by her 
entry into the fire and (he) was praised by Indra, Brahma, 
Dasavatha and others as, ‘‘You are Visnu, the killer of the de- 
mon.” Indra being propitiated, revived the monkeys by a shower 
of nectar. 

29-30. They all (Brahma and o hers) being worshipped by 
Rama returned to heavens after witnessing the battle. Rama 
entrusted Lanka to Vibhi$ana. Having honoured the monkeys, 
being seated in the (aerial chariot) Pu?paka in the company of 
Sita, Rama returned by the same route by which he had gone 
(to Lanka) showing the forests and mountains to Sita and having 
a happy mind. 

31. Having paid obeisance to Bharadvaja, he reached 
Nandigrama. Being revered by Bharata there, he reached 
Ayodhya and settled there. 

32. Having saluted Vasisjha and other sages, KauSalya, 
Kaikeyi and Sumitra and having obtained the kingdom he 
honoured the twice-born. 

33. He worshipped Vasudeva (Vi$nu), his own self, with 
the Aiuamedha (sacrifice). He conferred gifts on the deserv- 
ing men). He protected (the welfare) of his subjects. 

34. (He protected) dharma (righteousness), kdma (desire 
for worldly enjoyments) etc. just as his sons. (He) was bent 
on subduing the wicked. The world was abound with all righte- 
ous activities. The earth was abound with all grains. As Rama 
was ruling, there was no premature death. 



24 


Agni Purina 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 
Manifestation ofVi$nu asR&ma {continued) : 

JV&rada said : 

1. The well-honoured sages Agastya and others went to 
Raghava, who was ruling the country (and said), “You are 
fortunate and are victorious because you have killed Indrajit. 

2. Pulastya was the son of Brahma. Visravas was (the son 
of Pulastya). Kaikasi (was his wife). (His ) first (wife) was 
Pu^potkata. 1 The lord of wealth (Kubera) was her son. 

3. Ravana was born to Kaikasi (possessing) 20 arms and 
10 faces. By means of (his) penance he got a boon from Brahma 
and conquered celestials. 

4. Kumbhakarna was always sleeping, Vibhisana became 
deep-rooted in dharma. Their sister (was) Surpanakhfi, Megha- 
nfida (was born) from Ravana. 

5. Having conquered Indra, he became Indrajit. He 
was stronger than Ravana. Desirous of welfare of the celes- 
tials, (he) was killed by you (and) Laksmana”. 

6-7. Having told (thus) those sages Agastya and others had 
gone after being prostrated by (Rama). Satrughna directed by 
Rama as per desires of celestials, became the killer of 
Lavana at some place (known as) Mathura. Being directed by 
Rama, Bharata killed three crores of sons of Sailusa with 
sharp arrows. 

8-9. (Having killed) £ailu?a, the wicked Gandharva, a resi- 
dent on the banks of (the river) Sindhu and having established 
his sons Tak$a and Pu$kara in those countries, Bharata went to 
Righava along with Laksmana and remained worshipping him 
after having killed the wicked in the battle and protected the 
pious. 

10. The two sons Kuia and Lava, the excellent brothers 
were born in the hermitage of V&lmiki to Sita abandoned on 

1 . The name of the first wife ofViiravas is given as Devavarginl, daughter 
of Bharadv&ja. See R&m. VH.ii. 

Viiravas blessed Kaikasi, the daughter of Sum&lin, when she had come to 
him desirous of progeny. But the progeny would be dreadfiil as she had come 
to him at twilight, said the sage. When she again entreated him, he blessed her 
that her next son would be like himself pursuing righteous life. See JUm. 
VII. ix. * 



11.11-12.1-3 


25 


account of rumour among the people; and were known from the 
hearing of (their) good episode. 

1 1 . After having been anointed in the kingdom and being 
bent on contemplation with (the attitude of) “lam brahman”, 
(and then) the son of Slta after having ruled for 1 1,000 years 
and after performing sacrifices went to heaven along with the 
citizens and (his) brother, and being attended to by the people 
and honoured by the celestials. 

Agni said : 

12. Valmlki composed the Ramayana in elaborate (form) 
after hearing from Narada. One who hears this will go to heaven. 


CHAPTER TWELVE 
Manifestation of Vifnu as Kfpia 


Agni said : 

1 . I shall describe the genealogy of Hari (Kr$na) . Brahma 
(was born) from the lotus in the navel of Vi$nu. (Sage) Atri 
(was born) from Brahma. Then Soma (was born). Pururavas 
was born from Soma. 

2. Ayu was (born) from him (Pururavas). From him (was 
born) Nahu$a and then Yayati. From whom Devayani 1 gave 
birth to Yadu and Turvasu. 

3. Sarmitfha, the daughter of Vr?aparvan (gave birth to) 
Druhyu, Anu and Puru (through Yayati). TheYadavas (came) 
in the race of Yadu. Vasudeva was the foremost among these. 

1. Devay&nl was die daughter of Sukra, the preceptor of demons. 
When her love for Kaca, the pupil of her father was not reciprocated by him, 
she cursed him and he in turn cursed her that she would become the wife of 
a warrior. Once when Devay&nl and her companion £armifth& were bathing, 
their dresses got exchanged, and the irate Sarmi9th& slapped Devay&nl and 
threw her into the well. Devay&nl was later rescued from the well by Yay&ti, 
who married her with the consent of her father. As cursed by Devay&nl, Sar- 
mi$th& became her servant. See Apti SD. and M Bh.-ffam* p. 151. 



26 


Agni Pur&Qa 

4-7. From Vasudeva through Devaki (was born Kr?na) in 
order to remove oppression on the earth. Once the sons of 
Hiranyaka£ipu (became) the six embryos in the woirfb of Devaki 
being led by the meditative-sleep cast by Vi$iju. The seventh 
child in the womb of Devaki that was strong was transferred to 
(the womb of) Rohini and (was born) as the son of Rohini. 1 
Then Hari the four-armed (manifested) in the sky on the eighth 
day of the dark fortnight and being adored by Devaki and Vasu- 
deva (was born) as a child with two arms. Vasudeva took (the 
child) to the couch of Ya£oda, being afraid of Kamsa. 

8-10. Ya£oda carried the daughter (born to her) and left 
it at the couch of Devaki. Having heard the cries of the child, 
Kamsa (came there and carried the child) and smashed it on the 
stone slab in spite of being obstructed by Devaki. Having heard 
the voice in the heavens that, “My eighth birth would be your 
death”, and being infuriated all the children born were killed 
(by him) after they were left with him by Devaki as promised 
(by Vasudeva) at the time of their marriage. The girl who was 
thrown (on the slab) (bounced) to the sky and said: 

11. “O Kamsa ! What is the use of throwing me (to kill 
me). One who would kill you, that lord of all the celestials had 
born (already) for the removal of oppression on the earth.” 

12-13. Having told so she (disappeared). And she having 
killed Sumbha 2 and other demons and being praised by Indra 
(was known differently as) the Arya, Durga, the source of the 
Vedas , Ambika (the mother), Bhadrakali (beneficent Kali), 
the beneficent, Ksemya (bestower of peace), propitious, (and) 
multi-armed. I bow unto her. Whoever reads these names at 
the three twilights will get all cherished desires fulfilled. 

1. Vasudeva had two wives — Devaki and Rohini. The six sons bom of 
yogic sleep were carried off by Hiranyakaiipu’s yogic power. They were again 
born to Devaki and were killed by Kaihsa. The seventh child in the womb of 
Devaki was transferred to the womb of Rohini, hence was known as 
Saftkar?ana alias Balarama. Sec Bh&g, P. X.lxxxv. 46-49; Fi.P. V.i. 70;/\ 
Index III. p. 769. 

2. Sumbha and his brother Nifambha, the two demons, propitiated 
Brahm& and requested him that they should have no death. When BrahndL 
declined to grant their request as impossible, they again requested that they 
should not die at the hands of mortals, celestials, animals or birds. They ex- 
cluded women, as they thought that women are not so much powerful to fear 
death at their hands. When they oppressed all beings, the goddess killed 
them. See Dm Bh. P. V. xxi. xxx. xxxi. 



12.14-26 


27 


14-15. Kamsa also sent Putani and others in order to kill 
the boy. (Bala) Rama and Kr?ga, being entrusted by Vasudeva 
to the custody of Nanda, the husband of Yafoda, for their pro- 
tection from the fear of Kamsa and others, were living at Gokula 
with the cows and shepherds. 

16. They (two), the protectors of the entire world became 
the protectors of cows. (Once the boy) Kr$na was tied to the 
mortar with a rope by the bewildered Yafoda (to contain his 
sportive mischiefs). 

17-20. He went in between the two Arjuna- trees 1 and up- 
rooted them. And the cart 2 was made to roll away by a kick of 
the foot. Putana, who was intent on killing (him) was killed by 
that seeker of the breast (milk) by sucking her breast. Krsna, 
who had gone to Vrndavana (grove of holy basil), drew out the 
(serpent) Kaliya, resident in the waters, from the waters of 
(the river) Yamuna and conquered it and was praised by (his 
brother) Bala. (He) made the Talavana (palymyra grove) 
secure after killing (the demon) Dhenuka (in the form of) an 
ass (and) after having killed (the demons) Ari$$a (in the form 
of) a bull (and) Ke£i in the form of a horse. Abandoning the 
festivity for Sakra (Indra), the ritual of protecting the cows was 
made to be observed. 

21. The mountain was borne and the rain (caused to fall) 
by Indra, was warded off. (Then) Govinda (Krsna) was salut- 
ed by Inc’^a and offered with the peacock (plumes). 

22. Festivities for Indra were again caused to be done by 
Kr$na, after being pleased. Riding a chariot he went to Ma- 
thura and was praised by Akrura, as directed by Kamsa. 

23. Being attended to by the devoted and sportive shephe- 
rd women, he having killed the washerman who did not get 
(the clothes), seized the clothes. 

24-26. Wearing the garland along with Rama (Balarama) 
he blessed the garland-maker. He made upright the hunch- 
backed woman who had given him unguent. He killed the 
demon Kuvalay&pltfa (in the form of) an intoxicated elephant. 
Even as Kamsa and others were looking on, he entered the 
(wrestling) court and fought with those (wrestlers) on the dais. 

1. Arjuna trees, later personified as two demons. 

2. The name of a demon, who assumed the form of a cart. 



28 


Agni Purfya 


Much strength was shown by the wrestler Canura and Mutfika. 
The wrestlers C&nura and Mu${ika and others were killed by 
them. • 

27-28. Having killed Kamsa, the ruler of Mathura, Hari 
(Kr?na) made his father as the ruler of Yadavas. Asti and 
Prapti, the wives of Kamsa w;ere the two daughters of Jara- 
sandha. Being entreated by them Jarasandha besieged Mathura 
and fought with the Yadavas with arrows. 

29-31. (Bala) Rama and Kfgna came to Goman taka leav- 
ing Mathura. After conquering Jarasandha, the despiser of 
Vasudeva (Kj*?na) and of Paundraka^he made Dvaraka as 
his capital and stayed there being surrounded by Yadavas. 
Having killed (the demon) Naraka, the son of the Earth, he 
(Kr?na) brought 16000 daughters of the celestials, gandhar - 
vas and yakf as (kinds of semi-divine beings) and married them, 
as well as the eight (girls) Rukmini and others. 

32-34. (Then) the killer of Naraka, (seated) on the (bird) 
Garuda, in the company of Satyabhama and with the jewel- 
store and other jewels after having conquered Indra in the hea- 
vens and brought the (divine tree) Parijata planted (it) in the 
house of Satyabhama. Having learnt the (science of) astra and 
Jastra (use of weapons) from Sandipani (rescued) his son and 
brought him (to him) after conquering the demon Paftcajana 
and was well-worshipped by Yama (the god of death). He kill- 
ed (the demon) Kalayavana* (by a ruse) and was worshipped 
by (the king) Mucukunda. 1 2 3 

35. He worshipped Vasudeva and Devaki the devotees and 

1 . Pauo^raka was the King of K& il and the son of Vasudeva and Sutanu, 

the daughter of K&sir&ja. When he became the king, he asserted that he was 
the real V&sudeva. invaded K&fi and killed him. See Vi.P. V. xxxiv. 

4-28; BhAg. P . X lxi. 1-23; P. Index . II. p. 393. 

2. K&layavana was a king of the Yavanas. He was an enemy of Kr$pa 
and an invincible foe of the Y&davas. Kr$$a found it impossible to vanquish 
him. He cunningly decoyed him to the caye where Mucukunda was sleeping. 
Mucukunda’s sleep being disturbed, he burnt him down. 

3. King Mucukunda, son of M&ndh&tr, assisted celestials in their 
war against demons and got as a boon a long and unbroken sleep and that 
whoever dared to disturb his sleep would be burnt to ashes. Accordingly when 
K&layavana disturbed his sleep, he was burnt to ashes. See note 2 above and 
Apte SD . 



12.36-44 


29 

brahmins. NiSatha and Ulmuka were born to Revati through 
Balabhadra. 

36. Samba (was born) through Jambavati and other sons 
were (born) through other (wives) to Kpsna. 

37-39. Pradyumna was born through Rukmini (to Kr?na) 
and was forcibly taken away on the sixth day by Sambara 1 and 
thrown into the ocean. A fish seized him. A fisherman (caught) 
that fish and brought it to Sambara 1 and Sambara (gave it) to 
Mayavati (the maid). Mayavati having found her husband 
inside the fish, nourished him with respect. She also said to him, 
“I am Rati. You are my husband. You are Kama (cupid) 
and made bodiless by Sambhu (Siva). I was forcibly taken a 
(captive). I am not his wife. You (are) knower of magic. You 
kill Sambara.” 

40. Having heard that Pradyumna killed Sambara and went 
to Kr?na along with (his) wife Mayavati. Then Rukmini was 
happy. 

41-42. From Pradyumna Aniruddha was born, who was the 
husband of U?a and was highly intelligent. Bana (was) the son 
of Bali (and) his daughter (was) Usa. (His city was known) 
as Sonitapura. By (his) penance (he) was (treated as) son oF 
Siva. “Bana ! You will be waging a war (as indicated) by the- 
fall of flagstaff,* 1 said Siva to Bana, becoming pleased. 

43-44. Having seen Gauri (Parvatl) sporting with Siva, U 
was desirous of (getting) a husband. Gauri said to her, “The 
person seen by you in your dream on the twelfth day in the month 
of Vailakha (the second month in the Hindu new year) will 
become you husband”. U?a becoming happy on these words of 
Gauri, saw him (that person) (in dream) while she slept 
in her house. 


1. Sambara was a companion of Kariisa. He took away the child Pra- 
dyumna a couple of days after the birth of the child, knowing that it would be 
his slayer and threw him into the ocean. A giant fish swallowed it. When 
'the fishermen caught the fish and brought to Sambara, the fish was sent to 
the kitchen. When the cooks cut the fish and found the beautiful Child, they 
informed M&y&vati, the mistress of Sambara's household. M&y&vat! knew 
that she was none other than Rati and K&ma was reborn as Pradyumna. She 
nourished and brought up Pradyumn^. Aftet he grew up she revealed the truth 
to him. The two got married. Atlast Sambara was killed by Pradyumna after 
a severe battle. See Bhig. P. X. xxxvi. 36 and lv. 3-24. 



30 


Agni Purdna 


45-46. Knowing (that person) united with herself, she (identi- 
fied) Aniruddha from the drawn portraits (of princes J through 
(the assistance of) her friend Citralekhfi (and) brought that 
grandson of Kpsna from Dvaraka (to her place) by the daughter 
of Kumbhanda, the minister of Bana. Aniruddha went and made 
marry with U?a. 

47-48. (Bana was) informed (of this) by his mobile guards. 
Aniruddha had a fierce fight with Bana. 1 2 3 * * * * Having heard 
this from Narada, Kr$pa (went along) with Pradyumna (and) 
Balabhadra (and) remaining on the Garuda (vehicle of Visnu) 
conquered the fires and the fever related to MaheSvara (Siva). 

49. There was a fight between Hari and Safikara (Siva) 
with arrows. Nandi, Vinayaka, Skanda and others were con- 
quered by Tark$ya (Garuda) and others. 

50. When Sankara (Siva) yawned, Visnu (employed) the 
missile Jjmbhcaya and cut the thousand arms (of Sankara). 
Protection was sought by Rudra (Siva). 

51-53. Bana was animated by Vi$nu. The two-armed 
(Visnu) said to Siva, “What protection was offered by you to 
B&na (is identical with) that (offered) by me. There is no differ- 
ence between us and one who (thinks of) any difference goes to 
hell. Vi?nu was propitiated by Siva and others. Aniruddha 
in the company of U?a and others, having gone to Dvaraka, 
amused himself along with Ugrasena and other Yadavas. Vajra 
(was) the son of Aniruddha. He learnt all knowledge from 
Markan^eya. 

54-55. Balarama was the killer of (the demon) Pralamba 9 
(by whom) there was the dragging of the river Yamuna. The 
destroyer of the monkey Dvivida* and the destroyer of the pride 


1 . As B&na was a devotee of Siva, the forces of Siva came to assist him in 
the war. See verse 42 above. See Bh4g- P* X. lxiii. 23. 

2. Pralamba, an asura friend of Karhsa went in the guise of a cowherd 
to the place where Kr?ria and Balarama were playing with their companions. 
Being admitted to the games, while carrying Balarama on his back, he grew into 
a huge form and was killed by Balarama. See Bh&g. P. X. xviii. 17-29; Af. Bh.- 
JVam. p. 209b; Vi. P. V. ix. 1-38. 

3. Dvivida, a counsellor of Sugrlva and brother of Mainda, was also a 

friend of the demon Naraka. In order to avenge the death of his friend, he 

burnt the cities and villages and caused much havoc. He was finally killed by 

after a hard combat. See Bh&g. P. X. lxvii; Ff'JP* V, xxxvi. 1-23 

md P Mtx II. p. 150. 



13.1-8 


31 


of Kauravas, Lord Hari amused himself in many forms along 
with Rukmini and others. He produced many sons and innume- 
rable Yadavas. Whoever reads the account of the lineage of 
Hari, that person would have his desires fulfilled and attain 
Hari. 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 
Origin of the Kauravas and P&ndavas : 


Agni said : 

1. I shall narrate the (story of) Bharata (which has) the 
description of the greatness of Kr?ga. Vi$nu removed heavy 
oppression on the earth having Pandavas as the instrumental 
cause. 

2. Brahma was born of the lotus in the navel of Vi$$u. 
(Sage) Atri was the son of Brahma. From Atri was born 
Soma. From Soma, Budha was born. From him (Budha) 
was born Aila — Pururavas. 

3-4. Ayu (was bom) from him. King Nahu§a was then 
(born). Then Yayati, then Puru (were born successsively). 
In his race (was born) Bharata. Then king Kuru (was born). 
In that race (was born) Santanu. From him (was born) Bhi$ma 
(as) the son of the Ganges. (His) brothers Citrangada and 
Vicitra (virya) were born to Santanu through Satyavati. 

5-8. After Santanu’s death, Bhigma who had no wife, 
(governed and) protected his brother’s kingdom. The young 
Citrangada was killed by the Gandharva Citrangada. The 
two daughters of Kafiraja, Ambika and Amb&lika brought (as 
captives) by Bhisma, the conqueror of the foes, (became) the 
wives of Vicitravirya,. He (Vicitravirya) died on account of 
consumption. With the consent of Satyavati, from Vy&sa, 
King Dhrtaraftra was (born) through Ambik& and Paiidu 
through Amb&lika as sons. From Dhrtarigpra through Gandhari 
hundred sons (were bom) with Duryodhana as the first. 



32 


Agni Pur&na 


9. By the curse of a sage 1 2 then he (Pandu) died on account 
of union with his wife at the hermitage of Satalrnga, theft Yudhis- 
{hira (was bom) to Pandu through Kunti from Dharma (Yama). 

10. (Similarly) Bhima from Vata (God of wind), Arjuna 
from Sakra (were born) and through Madrl, Nakula and Saha- 
deva from the ASvinI kumara. Pandu died when (he was) 
in union with Madrl. 1 

1 1 . Kama, born to Kunti, when she was a virgin, became 
a dependent of Duryodhana. By destiny there was enmity bet- 
ween the Kurus (Kauravas) and Pandavas. 

12. The wicked Duryodhana burnt the Pandavas in the 
lac house. The Pandavas escaped from the burnt house along 
with their mother as the sixth. 

13. Then at (the place) Ekacakra, in the house of a brah- 
min, they all remained in the attire of an ascetic after killing the 
demon Baka. a 

14. They went to the fair at Pafidtla and in the svayam - 
vara (self-choice) of Draupadi. The well adorned Draupadi was 
obtained by the five Pandavas. 

15. Then (they) were known to have got half of the king- 
dom by Duryodhana and others. The divine bow Gandiva and 
the excellent chariot were obtained from the Fire god. 

16. And in the battle, Arjuna got Kr§na as the charioteer 
and inexhaustible arrows and similarly the missiles (known as) 
Brahma and other weapons (were obtained) from Droi^a. All 
were proficient in (the use of) arms. 

17-18. (Acting on the words of) Krgna, Arjuna put out the 
fire at the Khandava forest. And the Pandava (Arjuna) having 
obstructed rains (caused by Indra) with the shower of arrows, 
conquered the countries in different) directions. Yudhi^hira 
ruled the country along with the (other) Pandavas. (He per- 

1 . The sage Kindama, who was sporting with his wife, both assuming the 
form of a deer, was hit along with his wife by the arrows of P&$d u > who had 
gone there for hunting. The sage cursed P&udu that he would also die while 
copulating with his wife. See Af. Bh> I. cxvii. 5-31. 

2. Baka was a demon living in the city Ekacakrst. Under an agreement 
the residents were supplying his daily food consisting of a buffalo, a man etc. 
from each family in turn. When the five P&odava* were staying in that place 
disguised as ascetics, Bhima killed the demon to relieve a poor brahmin resi- 
dent, who was lamenting his fate as it was his turn that day. JlT. Bh. I. dxvi ff. 



13.19-29 


33 


formed) the Rajasuya (sacrifice) (spending) plenty of gold. 
Suyodhana (Duryodhana) could not bear that. 

19-20. Being directed by brother Duhjasana and by Karna. 
who had been enriched by him, he won over Yudhisthira in 
dice, (being assisted) by Sakuni in playing the dice. His king- 
dom was also won by conceit. Those in the court laughed at 
him. Yudhisthira being won, went to the forest along with the 
brothers. 

2 1 -24. He spent twelve years in the forest as promised (by 
him) along with (the sage) Dhaumya and Draupadi as the sixth, 
feeding 88000 twice-borns as before. Then (he) went to the King 
of Virata, with the other names, the king (Yudhisthira) unre- 
cognised as the brahmin Kanka, Bhima as the cook, Arjuna as 
Brhannala, (their ) wife (Draupadi) as Sairandhrl and the twins. 
And Bhimasena killed Kicaka 1 in the night as he was desirous of 
winning over Draupadi. And Arjuna conquered the Kurus, 
who were engaged in seizing and lifting the cows. (Hence) 
they were recognised as Pandavas (by the Kurus). 

25-28. (Then) Subhadra, the sister of Krsna, gave birth to- 
Abhimanyu, from Arjuna. And (King) Virata gave his daughter 
Uttara to him. Dharmaraja (Yudhisthira ), the master of seven. 
akjauhini a , was (ready) for the war. That Krsna, the messenger, 
having gone to the intolerant Duryodhana said to that lord of 
eleven akfauhini , “Give half the kingdom or five villages to Yudhi- 
sthira. Or else (you) fight (with him).” Hearing (these) words, 
Suyodhana (Duryodhana) said to Krs$a, “I will not give land 
(even of the size) of a needle tip. I will fight engaged in seizing 
it.” 

Agni said : 

29. Having shown the invincible omnipresent form (and) 
being honoured by Vidura, (Krsna) returned to Yudhisthira 
and said to Yudhisthira, “Fight with this Suyodhana (Duryo- 
dhana).” 


1. Kicaka was the commander-in-chief and brother-in-law of King of 
Vir&t*' M. Bh. — Nam, pp. 68-69 

2* The army consisted of 21,870 chariots, as many elephants, 65,610 
horses and 109,350 foot-soldiers. Apte SD, 



34 


Agni Purdna 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 
Story of the Mahdbhdrata 


Agni said : 

1-3. The armies of Yudhi?fhira and Duryodhana went to 
Kuruk$etra. Having seen Bh!§ma, Drona and others, (Arjuna 
said) that he would not fight with his preceptors. The Lord 
(Kj*?na) said to Partha (Arjuna), “You need not worry about 
Bh!$ma and prominent men. The bodies are perishable. But 
the soul does not perish. This soul is the supreme Brahman . You 
know that (by realizing that), T am Brahman .* Being neutral 
towards success and defeat and as a.yogin you protect the duties 
of a king.” 

4-6. Being told thus by Krsna, Arjuna fought (the battle). 
He sounded drums remaining in the chariot. Bhisma was the 
first commander for the army of Duryodhana. And Sikhandi 
(was the commander) for the Pandavas. There was a fight bet- 
ween these two armies. (The armies) of the son of Dhrta- 
r&${ra along with Bhisma killed the armies of Pandavas. 
The Pandavas in the company of Sikhandi 1 and others killed (the 
army) of the sons of Dhjrtarasjra. The battle between the armies 
of Kurus and Pandavas was similar (to the battle) between 
devas and asuras . 

7-10. It was (a cause) for the growth of delight of the devas 
in the heavens who were watching it. For ten days Bhl$ma des- 
troyed the army of Pandavas with astras, On the tenth day Ar- 
juna showered arrows on the valiant Bhigma. On the words of 
Drupada, Sikhandi 2 showered astras just as a cloud would do. 
The elephants, horses, chariots and infantry were brought down 
by the astras (of the two armies) mutually. Bhisma, able to 
die at his own will, after having shown the mode of war and 
being told by the Vasus (a class of deities) f was remaining in the 
bed of arrows awaiting to reach Vasuloka , and for the (com- 

1. Sikhagd** son of Drupada, was at first a woman known as Sikhap- 
dini and was later transformed into a man and was known as Sikha$<Jin. M.Bh. 

V. xci. 

2. Bhlyma had pledged not to fight against eunuchs. As Arjuna had 
Sikhandl ** his charioteer, it was easy fbr him to kill Bhlftna as Bhlfma would 
not fight against flikhapdh a woman transformed Into a mam 



14.11-22 


35 


mencement of the) summer solstice all the while remaining con- 
templating on Vi?nu and praising Him. 

11. As Duryodhana was grief-stricken, Drona became the 
Commander. As the army of Pandavas was jubilant, Dhr?ta- 
dyumna (was made) the Commander. 

12. There was a fierce battle between the two which made 
the domain of Yama (the god of death) extensive. Virata, 
Drupada and others were drowned in the ocean of (arrows 
of) Drona. 

13. The huge army of Duryodhana (consisted of) ele- 
phant, horse, chariot and infantry. Drona became just like Kala 
(death himself) for the (army) headed by Dhrsfadyumna. 

14-15. When it was proclaimed that Aivatthaman was killed, 
Drona abandoned his astras. Overcome by the arrow of Dhr?fa- 
dyumna he fell on the earth on the fifth day, (himself being) 
unassailable and after having killed many warriors. 
As Duryodhana was grief-stricken, Kama became the 
commander. 

16. And Arjuna (became the commander) of the P&ntfava 
forces. There was combat between them, between weapons 
and weapons, very fierce and resembling a war between 
devas and asuras. 

17. In the war known as the Karnarjuna, Kama killed the 
enemies with his arrows. On the second day, Kama was killed 
by Arjuna. 

18. Salya fought for a day and Yudhis$hira killed him. 
Suyodhana (Duryodhana), whose army had been destroyed, 
fought with Bhimasena. 

19. Having killed many men (in their army) (he) challeng- 
ed Bhimasena. Bhimasena killed him, who was attacking with 
the mace. 

20-21. (Bhimasena) killed his brothers with his mace. 
On that eighteenth day, in the night, the very strong Aivattha- 
man killed the sleeping army of P&ndavas of the extent of 
an akfauhiyi, the Paftcalas and the sons of Draupadi. He also 
killed Dhntadyumna. 

22. Then Arjuna seized his crest-jewel with an arrow (and 
gave it) to that Draupadi who had lost her sons and was lamen- 
ting. 



36 


Agni Pur&Qa 


23. Hari (Kf$na) revived (all of them) who were burnt 
by the arrows of Asvatthaman. That embryo of Uttara btcame 
a king (known as) Parik?it. 

24. Krtavarman, Krpa and Drauni (son of Drona) (ASvat- 
thaman) survived in the battle. The five Pandavas, Satyaki 
and Kr?na survived and none else. 

25-26. Then that Yudhi$thira having pacified the grief- 
stricken women, in the company of Bhima and others, having 
done the obsequies for the killed warriors and having offered 
waters and money and after having heard the peace-yielding 
dharmas , the royal duties, dharma relating to final emancipation,, 
dharma relating to charity, became a king. 

27. The destroyer of his enemy (Yudhisjhira) gave away 
charities to the brahmins at the ASvomedha (sacrifice). Having 
heard about the destruction of Yadavas 1 caused by the club 
and having installed Parik$it in the kingdom, (he) reached 
heavens along with the brothers. 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 
Ascendance of Pdn<favas to heaven : 


Agni said : 

1. O Brahmin ! When Yudhi$thira was ruling the king- 
dom, Dhftara&ra went to the forest along with Gandhari and 
Prtha (Kuntl) and passed from one stage of life to another. 

2-5.. Vidura was burnt by the forest fire and ascended 
heavens. Thus, Vi$nu removed the oppression of demons 
and others on the earth, for the sake of dharma and for the destruc- 


1. This alludes to the curse of sages when the Y&dava boys dressed 
up S&mba, son of J&mbavati, as a woman and requested sages to tell 
what kind of child would be born to her. The sages cursed that an iron mace 
would be bom. When it happened accordingly, the mace was powdered and 
thrown into the sea. They were washed ashore and later grew into reeds. 
The Y&davas under the influence of liquor quarrelled with each other and 
destroyed themselves by beating with the uprooted reeds. Set Vi.P.V. xxvii. 
9-10; M. BA. XVI. i. 15-22. * 



15.6*13 


37 


tion of adharma and having the Pandavas as an apparent cause. 
Having the curse of a brahmin, as a pretext, he destroyed with 
the club, the race of Yadavas who were oppressing (the world) 
Then (he) installed Vajra (son of Aniruddha) in the kingdom. 
On the directive of celestials, Hari himself having discarded 
his body at Prabhasa, is being worshipped by the residents of 
heavens at the worlds of Indra and Brahma. Balabhadra, 
(who was) a form of Ananta, reached heavens in the nether 
world. 

6. Hari, the imperishable lord, is always to be contemplated 
upon by those who meditate (on him). Without him (at Dva- 
raka), the ocean flooded the city of Dvaraka. 

7-8. Partha (Arjuna), having performed the obs quies 
of Yadavas, and having offered the waters of oblation and 
money, felt grief-stricken when the women, who were the wives 
of Visnu (Kr§na), were carried away by the shepherds 
(using) the clubs as weapons and defeating Arjuna on account 
of the curse of A^tavakra. 1 

9-12. Being consoled by Vyasa, he thought, “My strength 
remains only in the presence of Kf?na.” Having come to Hastina- 
pura, Partha then informed Yudhi^hira, his brothers and the 
guards of the people. That bow, those weapons and the chariot 
and those horses were lost in the absence of Kr?na, just as a cha- 
rity made to a person not well learned (would be lost). Having 
heard that (news), the intelligent Dharmaraja (Yudhi?{hira), 
having established Pariksit in the kingdom, set out on his final 
journey to relinquish this world along with Draupadi and his 
brothers, after having realized the transitory nature of the mun- 
dane existence and repeating 108 (names) of Hari. 

13. Draupadi, Sahadeva, Nakula, Phalguna* (Arjuna), 
Bhima had fallen on the way (of their march). The king was 
grief-stricken. 

1 . Once when a brahmin Aft&vakra was doing penance standing in neck- 
deep water, the heavenly nymphs who happened to pass that way bowed to 
him and sought his blessings to get a good husband. Being pleased he blessed 
them that they would become the wives of the Lord when he manifested as 
Krwa. Later, when they began to mock at him, on seeing his crooked form as 
he came out of waters, he got enraged and cursed them that they would 
be forcibly taken away by thieves. See ViJ > . V. xxxviii. 71-82. 

2. On account of his birth on the Himalayan peaks as the moon was in 
asterism Uttark Phalgunl, Arjuna was known by this name. 



38 


Agni Purdjta 


14. Mounting the chariot brought by Indra he reached 
heavens along with his brothers, having seen Duryodhana 
and others and Vasudeva and becoming happy. This fs (the 
story of) Bharata told to you. Whoever reads this, goes to 
heaven. 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN 
Manifestation of Visnu as Buddha and Kalki : 

Agni said : 

1. I am describing the manifestation (of Vi$nu) as 
Buddha, by reading and hearing which one gets wealth. Once 
in the battle between devas and asuras, devas were defeated by the 
daityas (demons, sons of Diti). 

2. They sought refuge in the lord saying, “Protect us ! 
Protect us !*\ He (Vi?$u), who is of the form of illusory delu- 
sion became the son of Suddhodana. 

3-4. He deluded those demons. Those, who had abandoned 
the path laid down in the Vedas, became the Bauddhas and from 
them others who had abandoned the Vedas. He then became 
the Arhat (Jaina). He then made others as Arhats. Thus 
the heretics came into being devoid of vedic dharmas. 

5-6. They did such a work deserving hell (as reward ) . They 
would receive even from the vile. All of them became mixed 
Dasyus and devoid of good conduct at the end of Kaliyuga. 
Of the Vdjasaneyaka veda ( Suklayajurveda ) only fifteen sections will 
be existing. 

7. Non-aryans in the form of kings would devour 
men who wear the costumes of righteousness and have a taste 
for unrighteous thing. 

8-9. Kalki, as the son of Vi^uyafas, (and having) Y&jfia* 
valkya as the priest would destroy the non-Aryans, holding the 

Continued from previous page 

STUrwjt fort I 

aruft frr *rr tow* far n 

M. Bh . IV. xliv. 16. c 



16.10—17.2 


39 


astra and having a weapon. He would establish moral law in 
four-fold varnas in the suitable manner. The people (would be) 
in the path of righteousness in all the stages of life. 

10. Hari, after discarding the form of Kalki, would go to 
heaven. Then would come the Kftayuga as before. 

11-13. O Most virtuous person ! Men would remain 
devoted to their respective duties of castes and stages of life. 
Thus, in all the JCalpas 1 2 3 * * and Manvantaras* the manifestations (of 
Vi$nu) are innumerable, some already past and some yet to 
come off. Whoever reads or hears the stories of the manifesta- 
tions of Vi$nu would get all desired things, become 
pure, and attain heaven along with his race. In this way, Hari 
settles the righteousness and unrighteousness. Hari is the cause 
of creation etc. and after manifesting (in different forms) he has 
returned. 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 
Description of Creation : 

Agni said : 

1. I shall describe now the creation of the universe, 
which is the sport of Vi$nu. 8 He who creates heaven etc. is 
the beginning of the creation and is endowed with qualities and 
is without qualities. 

2. Brahma, the unmanifest, was the existent being. There 
was no sky, neither the day nor the night etc. Visnu having 
entered the nature (Prakjrti) and the soul ( Puruja ), then agitated 
them. 


1. Kalpa is a day of Brahm& or thousand (catur ) Yugas being a period of 
432 million yean of mortals and measuring the duration of the world. 

2. Manvantara is the age or the period of Manu, being equivalent to 
l/14th of a day of Br&hmi or 71 caluryugas. 

3. According to the S&hkhya system of philosophy the involuntary union 

of soul and nature causes creation, while others hold creation as due to the sport 

of BrahmA^ 



40 


Agni Purfya 


3. At the time of creation, the intellect ( Mahat ) (emanated 
first). The ego (Ahankara) came into being then, and then the 
evolutes ( Vaikdrikas ) , x the lustre ( taijasa ), the elements etc. and 
the darkness ( t&masa ). a 

4. Then emanated the ether, the sound-principle from the 
ego. Then the wind, the principle of feeling and the fire, the 
colour-principle came into being from it. 

5. The water, the taste-principle (came into being) from 
this. The earth is known as the smell-principle. From the dark- 
ness (born of) ego, the senses (came into being) (which) 
are lustrous. 

6. The evolutes are the ten celestials and the mind, the ele- 
venth sense. Then the lord Svayambhu 1 2 3 Brahma became 
desirous of creating different types of beings. 

7. He created waters first. The waters are referred to 
as nSr&fjL because they are the creation of the Supreme spirit. 

8. Since his motion was first in them, he is known as Nara- 
yana. That egg lying in the water was golden in colour. 

9-10. From that, Brahma was born of his own accord, whom 
we know as the self-born (Svayambhu). Having lived (in it) 
for one full year, the Hiranyagarbha, 4 made that egg into two, 
the heaven and the earth. Between those two pieces, the lord 
created the sky. 

11-13. The ten directions supported the earth floating on 
the waters. Then the lord of the beings (Prajapati) desirous of 
creation, created time, mind, speech, desire, anger, attach- 
ment and other counter-parts. From the lightning he created 
thunder and clouds, the rain-bow and birds. He first 
created Parjanya (Indra). Then he created the Jj[k hymns 
(Ijlcah), Yajur hymns ( Yajurhfi ) and the Saman hymns ( S&m&ni ) 
for accomplishing the sacrifice. 

14. Those who want to accomplish, worship divas with 
these (hymns). The higher and lower beings (were created) 
from the arms. He created Sanatkumara and Rudra, born of 
anger. 

1 . Vaikdrikas are the first creation from the natural state. 

2. T&masa is the creation of ignorance. 

3. Brahma is known as Svayambbfl, as he was self-born. See verses 9-10 
below. 

4. Hiraoyagarbha denotes Brahmk, as he was bom from, the golden egg. 



17.15—18.4 


41 


15. He then created the sages Marici, Atri, Angirasa, 
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Vasistha, who are regarded as the 
seven mind-born sons of Brahma. 

16. O ! Excellent one ! these seven (sages) procreated 
(many) beings and the Rudras. Having divided his body into 
two, he became a male with one half and a female with another. 
Then Brahma procreated children through her (the female half). 


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 
Genealogy oj Svayambhuva Manu i 1 


Agni said : 

1. Satarupa of ascetic disposition (becoming) desirous 
gave birth to two sons Priyavrata and Uttanapada and a 
beautiful daughter 2 3 from Svayambhuva Manu. 

2-3 From (Devahuti) the wife ofKardama, (were born) 
(two daughters) Samrat and Kuksi. 

Uttama was born as the son of Uttanapada through Suruci. 
And Dhruva* was born as the son (of Uttanapada) through 
Suniti. O Sage ! Dhruva did penance for three thousand 
celestial years for gaining fame. 

4. Becoming pleased (with him) Hari conferred on him a 
firm position 8 above the sages. Having seen his progress 
Usanas 4 * recited the (following) verse : 


1 . An epithet of the first Manu was Svayambhuva Manu, as he was a son 
of Brahma. 

2 . The Bh&g. P. specifies the name of the daughter of Sviyambhuva Manu 
as Devah&ti and describes in detail her marriage with Kardama. See ibid . 
III. xxi-xxii. 

* For a detailed account of the story of Dhruva see Vi.P, I. Chs. 11-12. 

3. The young boy Dhruva was one day contemptuously treated by his 
step-mother as he tried to sit on his father's lap. On the advice of his mother 
he retired to the forest and did penance steadfastly devoted to Vinui. At last 
he was raised to the status of a pole-star. See Vi. P. I. xi-xii. 

4. Ulan as also known as Sukr&c&rya or Kfivya was the preceptor of 

Asuras. 



42 


Agni Pur&na 


5. O what a strength his penance had ! How well-heard 
of! What a wonderful thing that the seven sages 1 are situated* 
placing Dhruva in front of them. 

6-7. Sambhu gave birth to Sisti and Bhavya from Dhruva. 
Succhaya bore five blemishless sons from Sisti, (namely), Ripu* 
Ripufijaya, Ripra, Vfkala, Vfkatejasa. Bfhati bore the brilliant 
Caksu§a from Ripu. 

8. Cak?u§a begot Manu through Pu§karinl (also known as 
Virini) (daughter of Virana Prajapati). Ten excellent sons were 
born to Manu through Nadvala. 

9. (They were) t)ru, 2 Puru, Satadyumna, Tapasvin, Satya- 
vak, 3 Kavi 4 5 , Agnistu 6 , Atiratra, Sudyumna, and Abhimanyu. 

10. Agneyi bore six great sons to Uru — Anga, Sumanas, 
Khyati, Kratu, Angiras, (and) Gaya 6 . 

1 1 . Sunitha bore only Vena 7 from Anga. He, who was not 
a protector, and was delighted in doing sins was killed by the 
sages with their ku§a grass. 

12. Then for the sake of progeny, the sages churned his 
right hand. When the hand of Vena was churned King Prthu 
came into being. 

13. Having seen him, the sages said, “This person will make 
the subjects happy and will attain great valour and fame. 

1 4. He was born with a bow and an armour as if consuming 
(everything) by his lustre. Prthu, the son of Vena, the predeces- 
sor of the ksatriyasy protected the subjects. 

15. That lord of the earth is the first among those coronated 
after the Rajasuya (sacrifice). From that (ceremony) were 
born the clever (singers) sUta and m&gadha. 

1. The seven sages are Marlci, Atri, AAgiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu. 
and Vasisfha. 

2. Kuni, see Vi, P. I. xiii.5. 

3. Satyavat, see ibid, 

4. Suci, see ibid. 

5. Agnitfoma, see ibid. 

6* Sibi, see Vi. P. I. xiii.7. 

7. Vena born to Sunitha, the daughter of Mytyu was of wicked nature 
since childhood. When he became the king he proclaimed himself as the lord 
of sacrifices and did not allow sages to propitiate Vij^u by doing sacrifices*. 
Their entreaties being of no avail they killed him by employing ktda grass 
purified by the chant of mystic syllables. Vi.P. I. xiii. 11 



1*. 16-30 


43 


16-17. The two heroes praised him. He became a king by 
pleasing the people. For the sake of (getting) grains and for the 
existence of the subjects, the cow (earth) was milked by him 
along with the celestials, sages, gandharvas , nymphs, manes, 
demons, snakes, plants, mountains and people. 

18. The earth being milked in their respective vessels gave 
milk as much as (they) wished. (All) sustained their lives with 
that. 

19. Antardhana and Palita 1 2 , the two righteous sons were 
born to Pfthu. From Antardhana, Sikhandinl begot Havir- 
dhana. 

20. Dhisana, of the family of Agni gave birth to the six 
sons — Pracinabarhis, Sukra, Gaya, Krsna, Vraja and Ajina from 
Havirdhana. 

21. (He was known as Pracinabarhis) because the kuia 
grass were facing the east as he was praying on the earth.* The 
lord Pracinabarhis was a great progenitor. 

22. Savarna, the daughter of Samudra (the lord of the ocean) 
bore ten Pracinabarhis. All of them were known as Pracetas. 
and were proficient in archery. 

23. Practising the same religious austerities, they all did 
severe penance, remaining in the waters of the ocean for ten 
thousand years. 

24. Having got the status of a progenitor and pleased Vi?nu, 
they came out (of waters) (and found) that the earth and 
the sky were overspread with trees. They burnt them down. 

25. Beholding the destruction of trees by the fire and 
wind produced from their mouths, Soma, the king (of plants) 
approached these progenitors and said : 

26-27. “Renounce (your) anger, I will get you this most 
excellent maiden Marisi, (born to) (the nymph) Pramlocft 
and the ascetic sage Karuju (who was nourished) by me. Hav- 
ing known the future (I have) created (her). Let (she) be 
your wife, capable of multiplying the family. Daksa will be born 
to her who will multiply progenv.” 

28-30. The Pracetas married her and Dak$a was born 
through her. That Dak§a, having mentally created the immov- 

1. vadi, see W.P. I. xiv. 1 

2. i.e., the sacrifices were peif ormed all over the earth. 



44 


Agni Pur&Qa 


ables, movables, bi-footed beings and the quadrupeds, then crea- 
ted the (sixty) daughters (of whom) he gave 1 ten to Dharma, 
thirteen to Kafyapa, twenty-seven to Soma, four to Arisfanemin, 
two to Bahuputra, two to Angiras. 

31. By mental intercourse the celestials, serpents and others 
(were born) to them in the past. I shall describe (you) the crea- 
tion of Dharma through his ten wives. 

32. The ViSvedevas (were born) to Visva, Sadhya gave 
birth to the Sadhyas. The Maruts came into being from the 
Marut and the Vasus from Vasu. 

33. The Bhanus (were) the sons of Bhanu and the Muhur- 
tas (were born) to Muhurta. Gho§a (was born) to Dharma 
through Lamba. Nagavithl was born of Yarn!. 

34. All that belonged to the earth were born of Arundhati. 
Sahkalpa (was born) from Sankalpa. The stars were the sons of 
moon. 

35. The eight Vasus 2 3 are known by the names— Apa, Dhruva 
Soma, Dhara 8 , Anila, Anala, Pratyusa and Prabhasa. 

36. Vaitandya, Srama, Santa, and Muni 4 5 (were) the sons 
of Apa. Kala, the destroyer of the Universe (was the son) of 
Dhruva. Varca was the son of Soma. 

37. Dhara had the sons Dravina, Hutahavyavaha, Sisira, 
Prana and Ramana through Manohara. 

38. Purojava* was (the son) of Anila and Avijfiata of Anala. 
Kumara, the son of Agni, was born in a clump of reeds. 

39. Sakha, Vi Sakha and Naigameya were his younger bro- 
thers. (He was known as) Karttikeya (as he was the son) of 
Krttika. (He is also known as) the ascetic Sanatkumara. 

40. Devala was born from Pratyusa. ViSvakarman (was 
bom) from Prabha, and was the architect of thousands of 
sculptures and the architect of celestials. 

41 . Men earn their livelihood by this art of architecture and 
of (making) ornaments. Surabhi begot eleven Rudras 6 * from 
Kafyapa. 

1. For a detailed account see Vi.P. I. xv. 103b ff. 

2. Vasus are a class of semi-divine beings. 

3. Dharma, see Vi.P. I.xv. 111a. 

4. Dhvani, see Vi.P. I. xv. 112a. 

5. Manojava, see Vi.P. I. xv. 1 14b. 

6. Following the Brahm&gd a P* narration, Ri^dras are given here as 

-sons of Surabhi and Kaiyapa. 



lfl.42 — 19.6 


45 


42. O Most pious man ! By the favour of Mahadeva 
(Siva) (who was) thought of (by her) in her ascetic observances 
Sati gave birth to Ajaikapad, Ahirbudhnya, TvasJj* and Rudra. 

43-44. ViSvarupa, the great illustrious and fortunate (was) 
the son of Tvastr* Hara, Bahurupa, Tryambaka, Aparajita, 
Vr?akapi, Sambhu, Kapardin, Raivata, Mrgavyadha, Sarpa 
and Kapalin were the eleven forms by which the entire world, 
both movable and immovable were pervaded by hundreds and 
thousands of Rudras. 1 2 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 
Description of secondary creation : the progeny of Kaiyapa 
Agni said : 

1-3. OSage ! I describe the creation (made) by Kafyapa 
through Aditi and others. Those devas who were (known) as 
Tu$ita in the Caksusa manvantara, again became (the sons) 
of Kafyapa through Aditi in the Vaivasvata manvantara as the 
twelve Adityas (with the names) Vi$nu, Sakra, Tvastr, Dhatr, 
Aryaman, Pusan, Vivasvat, Savitr, Mitra, Varuna, Bhaga, and 
Aiii£u. The progeny of the wives of Aristanemi were sixteen. 

4. The four lightnings were the daughters of the learned 
Bahuputra. Those born of Angiras were excellent. (The pro- 
geny) of Kr£a£va were the celestial weapons.* 

5. Just as the sun rises and sets, similarly these (do) in every 
yuga. From Kafyapa, Hiranyakaiipu and Hiranyak$a (were 
born) through Diti. 

6. Simhika was also their daughter, who was married by 
Vipracitti. Rahu and others born to her were known as Saim- 
hikeyas. 

1 . The names of Eleven Rudras are not the same in the enumerations in 
different Purai>as. On the Eleven Rudras see Annals of Ori . Res. XXIV. Pt^I 

2. According to the science of Jyotifa, these four lightnings are kapild, 
attlohitd , pits, and asiti indicating respectively wind, heat, rain and famine. 



46 


Agni Purdna 


7-8. The four sons of HiranyakaSipu (were) very effulgent. 
(They were) Anuhrada, Hrada, Prahrada a stauneh devotee of 
Vi$nu; and Samhrada was the fourth (son). Hrada (was) 
the son of Hrada. Ayu§mat, Sibi, and Baskala (were) the sons 
of Hrada. 

9. Virocana (was) the son of Prahrada. Bali was born to 
Virocana. Bali had hundred sons. Bana was the foremost among 
them, O great sage ! 

10. Having propitiated the consort of Uma (Siva) in the 
past kalpa , a boon was obtained by Bana from the lord that he 
would always wander by the side (of the lord). 

11. The sons of Hiranyaksa were five. 1 Sambara, Sakuni 2 3 * * , 
Dvimurddhan, Sankurarya 8 were (the prominent among) 
the hundred sons of Danu. 

12. Suprabha was the daughter of Svarbhanu (a son of 
Danu). Saci was known as the daughter of Puloman (a son of 
Danu). Upadanavl, Haya$ira, and Sarmistha (were) the daugh- 
ters of Vjrsaparvan (a son of Danu). 

13. Puloma and Kalaka were the two daughters of Vai^va- 
nara. They both married Kafyapa and they had crores of 
sons. 

14-16. In the family of Prahrada (were born) four crores 
(of sons) (known as) the niv&takavaca (protected by armour). 
Tamra had six daughters — KakI, Syeni, Bhasi, Grdhrika, Suci 
and Sugriva. The crows and (other birds) were born 
from them. The horses and camels (were born in the line) 
of Tamra. Aruna and Garuda (were born) from Vinata. Thou- 
sands of serpents (were) born of Surasa. Thousands of serpents 
(such as) £esa, Vasuki, Tak?aka and others were born of Kadru. 

1 7. Animals having tusks, other earthly beings and the aqu- 
atic birds were born to Krodha. The cows, buffaloes and other 
animals (were bom) from Surabhi. The grass and other things 
were the production of Ira. 

1. They are Utkura, Sakuni, Bhfltasant&pana, Mah&nabha, Mahabahu 
and K&lan&bha. See Vi.P . I. xxi. 1-3,. 

2. Given aa the son of Hiraoy&k?a. See ibid. 

3. SaAkufir&h. See ibid . 

The reading given in the text here mixes the progeny of Hira^y&kfa and 

that of Danu. 



19.18-28 


47 


18. The Yaksas (semi-divine beings) and the demons (were 
bom) of Khasa. The nymphs came into being from Muni. The 
Gandharvas (a class of semi-divine beings) (were born) to 
Ari§ta. Thus the stationary as well as the movable are born of 
Kafyapa. 

1 9-2 1 . Innumerable are the offspring of these. The Danavas 
(the progeny of Danu) (the demons) were conquered by the 
celestials. Diti, who had lost her offspring, propitiated KaSyapa, 
desirous of (getting) a son capable of destroying Indra. (She) 
achieved (her object) from Kasyapa. Indra, seeking to find a 
fault (found out that she) had slept without washing her feet 1 
and destroyed (cut off) the embryo. They became celestials 
(known as ) Maruts, fifty one (in number) radiant with lustre 
and the allies of Sakra (Indra).* 

22. All these (are) forms of Hari. Having installed 
Pjrthu as the ruler, Hari duly set apart kingdoms for others. 

23. The moon (was made the king) of the twicc-bom and 
the plants, Varuna (as) the king of waters, Vaisravana (Kubera) 
(as) the king of kings, Vi§nu (as) the lord of Suns. 

24. Pavaka (fire) as the king of Vasus; Vasava (Indra) 
(as) the lord of Maruts and then Dak§a (as the king) of 
Prajapatis (patriarchs), Prahlada (as) the ruler of demons. 

25. Yama (was made) the king of manes, Hara (Siva) 
(as) the lord of goblins, Himavat (as the ruler) of moun- 
tains, the ocean (as) the lord of rivers. 

26. Citraratha (was made the ruler) of Gandharvas, 
and then Vasuki (as the ruler) of Nagas, Taksaka (as) the 
king of serpents, and then Garucja, among the birds. 

27. The Airavata (was made the ruler) among the lords 
of elephants, bull of the kine and the tiger, of the animals, 
(and) Plak?a (the Indian fig-tree) (as) the lord of trees. 

28. And Uccaih^ravas (was made the ruler) among the 
horses. 2 Sudhanvan (son of VairajaPrajapati) became the regent 
of the east, Sankhapad (the son of Kardama Prajapati) (the 

1 . Failure to observe the necessary hygiene deprived her desire to get a 
var quisher of Indra. For a detailed account of this episode see VLP. I. xxi. 

30-41 ; P. Indtx II. pp. 87-88. 

2. Qf. Vi. P. I. xxi. 11-14. 



48 


Agni Purina 


regent) of the south, Ketumat (son of Rajas) as the protector 
of the waters (on the west), Hiranyaromaka (son df Parjanya 
Prajapati) on the Saumya (the north). 


CHAPTER TWENTY 
Primary creation 

Agni said : 

1. The intellect ( mahat ) is the first creation of Brahma. 
The second (creation) is that of the subtle principles (tanmatrds) 
known as the bhutasarga (creation of elements). 

2. The third is the creation of evolutes ( vaikarikas ) 
known as the sense-organs. These are the primary creation 
( pr&krtasarga ) produced out of the intellect. 

3. The fourth, is the main creation (mukhyasarga) . The 
immobile things are known as the main (creation). That (crea- 
tion) which is spoken as (the creation of) the lower order ( tirya - 
ksrotas) is known as that of the sub-human beings (animals, 
birds etc.). 

4. Then the sixth creation is that of the higher orders ( urdh - 
vasrotas) y known as the creation of the celestials. Then the seventh 
creation is that of the middle orders ( arvdksrotas ), the man. 

5-6. The eighth is the creation (known as) the anugraha (com- 
passionate divinities), composed of the qualities {sdttvika and 
tdmasa. These (latter) five are known as the Vaikftasarga (crea- 
tion subject to transformation). The ninth creation is the Kau- 
m£ra (the creation of Sanatkumara etc.) These are the. nine 
creations 1 2 of Brahma which are the main cause for the universe. 

7-8. Bhfgu and others married Khyati and other daughters 
of Dak$a. Creation has been described as three-fold by the people. 
They are usual (nitya), subject to some cause (naimittika) , (and) 

1 . The tanm&trds or the subtle principles are related to the sense-organs. 

2. The puranic cosmology divides creations into nine classes. See Siva P, 
(English translation) p. 248 note 214. 



20 . 9-20 


49 


daily (dainandini) .* (The creation) after the intermediate dis- 
solution is known as the daily (dainandini). The constant 
creation that takes place everyday is considered as nitya. 

9. From Bhrgu, Khyati gave birth to the celestials Dhatr 
and Vidhatf. Sri (Laksmi) (was) the consort of Visnu, and was 
praised by Sakra (Indra) for multiplying the progeny. 

10. The sons of Dhatr and Vidhatr were Prana and Mfkan- 
duka successively. Vedasira gave birth to Markan<Jeya from 
Mrkandu. 

11-12. A son (by name) Paurnamasa was born to Marici 
through Sambhuti. Sinlvali, Kuhu, Raka and Anumati were 
the sons of Angiras through Smrti. With Atri, Anasuya gave 
birth to Soma, Durvasas, and Dattatreyajw^zw. 

13. A son (by name) Dattoli was born to Prlti, the wife of 
Pulastya. Sahisnu and Kramapadika 1 2 were born to Ksama 
from Pulaha. 

14. The highly radiant Balakhilyas were born to Sannati 3 
from Kratu. They, who were 60000, were of the size of a joint of 
the thumb. 

15. To Urja from Vasistha (were born) Raja, Gatra, Urdh- 
vabahu, Savana, Alaghu 4 , Sukra and Sutapah, the seven sages. 

16. Pavaka, Pavamana and Suci were born of Agni and 
Svaha. The manes Agnisvattah, devoid of fire and Barhi- 
sada, with fire (were born) from aja (Brahma, the unborn). 

17. Mena and DharinI were the daughters of the manes 
through Svadha. Himsa was the wife of Adharma. Then 
Anfta was born to them. 

18. Nikrti (was their) daughter. Bhaya and Naraka (were 
born) from them, who had Maya and Vedana as their wives. 

19. Of those two, Maya gave birth to Mftyu, the destroyer 
of living beings. And also Vedana gave birth to a son Duhkha 
from Raurava (Naraka). 

20. Vyadhi, Jara, Soka, Tfsna and Krodha were born from 
Mrtyu. (Rudra) was born wailing from Brahma and (was 
known as) Rudra by name on account of the wailing. 

1 . The minor dissolution of the world after 1 5 years of Brahm&’s life is 
known as the dainandina pralqyo. MW. p. 497b. 

2. Vt.P. I. x. 10 reads Kardama and Urvarilpa. 

3. Santati. Vi.P. I.x. 1 1 . 

4. Anagha. Vi.P. 1.x. 14. 



50 


Agni Pur&na 


21. O twice-born ! the grandfather (Brahma) said to 
(him) (called him as) Bhava, Sarva, I Sana, PaSupati^Bhlma, 
Ugra (and) Mahadeva. 

22. His wife Satl gave up her life on account of the wrath 
of Daksa and having become the daughter of Himavat again 
became the wife of Sambhu (Siva). 

23. (I will now describe) the methods of worship of Visnu 
etc., preceded by bathing and other (rites) and yielding enjoy- 
ment and emancipation, by doing which Svayambhuva (Manu) 
(had the benefit), as told by Narada and others to the sages. 


CHAPTER TWENTYONE 
Method of worshipping Visnu and other gods 
Narada said : 

1. I will (now) describe the general method of wor- 
shipping Visnu and others as well as the mantras (mystic formulae) 
which yield good to all. One has to worship (him by saying) 
“Salutations to Acyuta (Visnu) and to (his) entire family 
(of gods). 

2-4. (Salutation to) Dhatr, Vidhatr, 1 Ganga, Yamuna, 
the two nidhis (treasures), the fortune of Dvara(ka), the Vastu- 
deity (the presiding deity of the housesite), Sakti (female divi- 
nity), Kurma (tortoise), Ananta (the serpent), the Earth, 
righteous knowledge, detachment from the world, the omni- 
potence (of the lord), the unrighteousness etc. the root, stalk, 
filament and pericarp of the lotus, Jjtgveda and other (Vedas), 
Krta and other (yugas ), sattva and other (qualities), the solar 
and other regions, the pure and elevating union of knowledge 
and action. One has to worship these. 

5. Joy, truth, the goddess benevolently placed, Durga 
(Parvati), speech, goblins, field and Vasudeva and others are 
worshipped. 


1. Dh&tr and VidhAtf are the two sons of Brahml. 



21.6-16 


51 


6. The heart, head, coat of mail, eye and weapons, 
conch, disc, mace, lotus, Srivatsa (sacred mark on Lord 
Kjrsna’s chest) and the Kaustubha gem are worshipped, 

7. The garland of wood-flowers (worn by Kr$na), Sri 
(Laksmi), Pusfi (nourishment), Garuda (vehicle of Visnu), 
and the preceptor are worshipped. Indra, Agni, Yama, Raksa 
(Naiirta), water, wind, lord of wealth (Kubera) (are 
also worshipped ) . 

8. That Igana, the unborn, and weapons, vehicles, 
Kumuda and others (are worshipped next). By the worship of 
Visvaksena (all-pervasive) (Visnu) in a circle first, one gets 
his desires accomplished. 

9. Then the general worship of Siva (is described). One has 
to worship Nandin at first. (Then) Mahakala (Siva), Ganga, 
Yamuna, Ganas, and others (are worshipped). 

10-11. (Then) the speech, the goddess of prosperity, the 
preceptor, the Vastu (deity), the different female energies and 
Dharma (the lord of death) and other gods (are worshipped). 
(The female energies) Varna, Jyestha, Raudri, Kali, Kalavi-* 
karini, Balavikarini, Balapramathini, Sarvabhutadamani, Mano- 
mani and Siva (are worshipped) in the due order. 

12. (Saying) Ham, Hum, Ham (salutation) to the form of 
Siva, Siva is worshipped along with his limbs and mouth. 
Haum, (salutation) to Siva, Haum and Ham (salutations) 
to Igana (one of the Paficabrahman forms of Siva) and other 
faced (forms of Siva). 

13. Hrim (salutation) to Gauri (Parvati) , Gam (saluta* 
tion) to Gana, face of Sakra (Indra), Can<Ja, heart and others. 
The mystic syllables in the worship of the sun (are described 
now). The tawny-coloured Dancjin is to be worshipped. 

14. One should adore Uccaihgravas (the horse of Indra), 
the very much pure Aruna (younger brother of the Sun-god). 
The moon and the twilight, the other faces and Skanda (progeny 
of Siva) in the middle are worshipped. 

15. Then (the female divinities) Dipta, Suksma, Jaya, 
Bhadra, Vibhuti, Vimala, Amogha, Vidyuta and Sarvatomukhi 
arc worshipped. 

16. Then the mantra Ham, Kham, Kham for the firebrand 
(is used for the worship) of the seat of the sun and (his) form. 
Hram, Hrlm, salutation to the sun, Am, salutation to the heart. 



52 


Agni PurdQa 


17. (Salutation) to the (rays of the) sun, to his head, and 
similarly to the flames reaching up the regions of demons, 
wind, earth, ether, and heavens. Hum is remembered 
as the mystic amulet. 

18-19. (Salutations are made) to the lustre, eye, Hrah, 
to the weapons of Sun, Raji, Sakti, and Ni?kubha. Then Soma 
(Moon), Angaraka (Mars),Budha (Mercury), Jlva (Jupiter), 
Sukra (Venus) and Sani (Saturn) as well as Rahu, Ketu, 
tejas , Canda are worshipped in order in brief. Then the worship- 
per (should worship) the seat of the image (of the deity) and 
the heart etc. 

20. (The mantra) for the seat of Visnu for the image of Visnu 
(is) “Ram, Srim, Srim, Srldhara, Hari.” Hrlm (is) the mystic 
syllable for the images (of all deities) which is capable of capti- 
vating the three worlds. 

21. Hrim, Hr?ike£a (master of the senses) (Visnu), Klim, 
Visnu. With long vowels (one should adore) the heart and other 
things. (The performance) of worship on the fifth day (paficaml) 
with all these (mystic syllables) yields victory in battles. 

22-23. Worship of the disc, mace, conch, pestle, sword, 
Sarnga (the bow), noose, goad, Srivatsa (mark on the 
chest of the lord), with the garland of wood-flowers and with the 
mantra Srim, worship of Sri, MahalaksmI, Tarksya (vehicle of 
Vi$nu), the preceptor, Indra etc. (are made) in order. With 
the (mystic) syllable Aum, Hrlm, Devi (goddess) Sarasvati 
(one has to worship) the seat of (Goddess) Sarasvati. 

24. The Hrt etc., Lak§ml, Medha, Kala, Tu§ti, Pustika, 
Gaurl, Prabhavati, (and) Durga (the different female divinities), 
goblins, preceptor and the presiding deity of the field (are 
worshipped). 

25. Then (one has to say) Gam, (salutation) to the lord 
of the gayas, Hrlm to Gauri, Srim to Sri, Hrlm to Tvarita, Aim, 
Klim, Saum to Tripura using the fourth declensional endings 
and ending with salutations. 

26. All the mystic syllables are pronounced preceded by the 
Pranava (syllable Om), adding bindu (the nasal sound marked 
by a dot), either while offering adorations or the performance 
of repetition. 

27. By the offer of a homa (offer unto the fire) with sesamum 
and ghee and other things, (these mantras) become btestowers of 



22.1-7 


53 


dharma , k&ma, artha and mokfa (four principal objects of human 
life). Whoever reads these syllables of adoration reaches heaven 
after enjoying pleasures. 


CHAPTER TWENTYTWO 
Procedure for bathing prior to a religious rite 
Jfdrada said : 

1. I will (now) describe the (mode of) bathing preceding 
(any religious) act. Having taken a clod of earth accompanied 
by (meditation on) the man-lion form (of Visnu), and making 
it into two parts, (one has to do) mental bathing with one part 
of it. 

2. Having immersed (one’s body in waters) and having 
partaken (three drops of) water and assigning (on the body) 
with the lion (man-lion) one has to get himself protected. Then 
one has to do bathing as laid down, being preceded by the 
control of the breath. 

3. Meditating on Lord Hari in one’s heart with the eight- 
syllabled mantra (Om namo Vasudevaya, Om namo Narayanaya 
or Om namo Narasimh£ya), the clod of earth (is made) 
into three parts on the palm and protection in (all) the quarters 
(is achieved) with the recitation of (the mantra) for the lion 
(man-lion). 

4-7. With the recitation (of the mantra) of Vasudeva, having 
mentally resolved the sacred water and having rubbed 
the body with vedic mantras and having adored the image of 
deity and having remembered the aghamarfana (sQkta) 
which destroys sins) and putting on a cloth, perform the 
(following) rite. Putting water on the palm, accompanied 
by mantras and wiping off waters on the palm, controlling 
with the Narayana (mantra), the air is inhaled and water is let 
off. Then contemplating on Hari, offering waters (of oblation) 
and reciting the twelve-syllabled (mantra), appeasing all others 
with devotion commencing in order with the seat of meditation, 
the mantras upto all the guardian deities of the quarters, the 



54 Agni Purdna 

sages, clans of manes, men, all beings and ending with the mobile 
(beings) are placed. *■ 

8. Then having assigned limbs (for the different deities), 
withdrawing the mantras one has to go to the house for perform- 
ing rites. In this way, one has to bathe with the mulamantra 1 . 


CHAPTER TWENTYTHREE 
Mode of performing worship 

Ndrada said : 

1-2. I will now describe the mode of worship, O brahmins ! 
by doing which one gets all (objects of life). Having washed 
feet, sipping waters, and controlling his speech and having 
guarded (himself like this), facing the east, and having seated in 
the svastika or padm&sana or other posture (one has to meditate) 
on (the syllable) yam at the centre of the navel, having tawny 
colour and of the form of terrible wind. 

3. Then meditating on the syllable k§aum of abundant lustre 
at the centre of the heart, burn down all impurities from the 
body. 

4-5. One has to burn the impurities with the flames surging 
upwards and downwards. One has to meditate on the (i mantra ) 
of the shape of the moon situated in the sky. An intelligent per- 
son has to sprinkle his own body with the nectar-like waters 
pervading the lotus in the heart through (the artery )sufumnd 
and passing through the nerves. 

6. Having purified materials (for worship) one has to 
assign (them). Then (one has) to purify hands as well as 
implements. Commencing with the thumb of the right hand, 
(the fingers) of the two hands are made to rest on the principal 
limbs. 

7-8. (Then) with sixtytwo mantras (sacred syllables) one 
has to assign to the body the twelve limbs — heart, head, tuft of 
hair, armour, weapons, eyes, belly, hinder part, arms, thighs, 

knees and feet. Having offered the mudrd (special posture of the 

> 

1. mUlamantra is the basic subtle mystic syllable. 





23.9-19 


55 


arms and body ) , one has to meditate on Vi$nu, and having repeat- 
ed (his name) one hundred and eight times, one has to worship 
him. 

9. Having placed the water-jar on the left and the mate- 
rials for worship on the right and having washed (them) with the 
implements and water offerings, they are placed together with 
flowers and scents. 

10-11. Having sprinkled the radiant (form) of con- 
sciousness and omnipresence with waters (purified) by the 
repetition (of the mantra of the lord) eight times (and) having 
sprinkled the hand with mantra ending with phaf and then having 
meditated on Hari, with his face directed towards the (south- 
east) direction (presided over by) Agni, (one has to pray) for 
virtue, knowledge, detachment, (and) supremacy. (Facing) 
the east (and other directions), (one has to get rid) of his sins 
and physical impurities remaining in yogic postures. 

12. (Remaining) in Kurma (tortoise) posture, one should 
adore Ananta, Yama, the solar and other luminous regions and 
other planets (occupying) the filament and pericarp (of the 
lotus ) . 

13-14. Having first meditated (on them) in one’s heart and 
having invoked and worshipped in a circle, (offerings) of waters 
of respect, waters for washing feet, waters for rinsing, madhuparka 1 
(respectful offering), bath, cloth, sacred thread, scents, flowers, 
incense, lamp and eatables (are made) (along) with the formula 
(known as) Pundarikaksa. 

15. First, one has to worship the limbs and then Brahma 
at the doorway in the eastern (direction), the disc and the club 
in the southern (direction) ; the conch, and the bow have to be 
assigned in the corner (governed by) the moon. 

16. One should assign the quiver and sword to the left and 
right side of the deity, the armour and nourishment on the left, 
and the prosperity on the right in front. 

17. One has to worship with respective sacred syllables, the 
garland of wild-flowers, (the mark) frivatsa, (the gem) kaustubha 
and the presiding deities of the quarters outside and all (the 
attendant gods) of Vi$rtu as well either partially or wholly. 

18-19. One has to worship with the limbs with the sacred 

1. It consists of curd, clarified butter, water, honey and sandalpaste. 



56 


Agni Purdna 


syllables partially or wholly. After having repeated (the sacred 
syllables), doing circumambulation and adoration and ^offering 
waters of adoration and the offerings, one has to assign in the 
heart and after having meditated, “I am the brahman and Hari”, 
(one has to repeat the words) ‘come’ used in (the ceremony of) 
invocation and “forgive me” in dismissal (at the conclusion). 

20. Having worshipped in this manner with the mantra 
of eight letters (one becomes eligible) to get liberation. The 
(mode of) worship of one form (of a deity) has been described. 
Listen to the (mode of) worship in the structure of nine (apart- 
ments). 

21-23. Having assigned Vasudeva, Balarama) and others 
to the two thumbs and then at first to the fingers, then to the 
body, head, forehead, face, heart, navel, organ of 
generation, knees, (and) between the feet, one has to 
worship in order, single seat of the deity consisting of nine parts 
and then the nine seats and of the nine forms consisting of nine 
parts in nine lotuses as before. Then in the midst of the lotus one 
has to worship Vasudeva. 


CHAPTER TWENTYFOUR 
Mode of constructing the sacrificial pit and the oblations unto fire 
Mrada said : 

1-2. I shall describe the mode of oblation to fire, by 
which (one) gets all his desires fulfilled. One has to dig a square 
pit after having measured out with a thread, four times, twenty- 
four thumbs in length. Leaving a space of the breadth of two 
thumbs a girdle is to be made (around) the pit. 

3. (One seat) of twelve thumbs in length, and eight, two 
and four thumbs respectively in extent (should be made) in the 
east. 

4. (One) beautiful (seat) of ten, six and four thumbs in 
extent and with a mouth, two thumbs in width and tapering 
gradually should be made in the west. 

5. It should be of the form of a leaf of the holy fig tree and 



24.6-19 


57 


should enter a little into the pit. A drain, quarter of a thumb in 
breadth and fifteen thumbs in length (should then be dug). 

6. The base (of the drain) at the seat (will be) three thumbs 
•and the fore part six. (This is) the characteristic (of a pit) of 
one cubit (hand) . (The characteristic of a pit) of two cubits is 
twice (this). 

7. I have thus described to you (about) the pit surrounded 
by three altars. I will now describe (about) the circular pit. 
A thread is to be fixed in half of the pit, the remaining portion 
being fixed at an intermediate point. 

8-9. Having placed half the rope in the pit, if (the rope) 
is moved around it would be a circle. After having marked out 
the centre, (if one makes) a crescent-shaped pit east-west, and 
away from the northern direction, half (the size) of the pit and 
half the angular portion, it indicates auspiciousness. 

10. (In pits of) circular (shape) the girdles would be of the 
shape of the petals of a lotus. The ladle for the sake of oblation 
is to be made of the size of an arm. 

1 1 . Then one has to make (ready) a site (of the length) 
of thirteen thumbs and four (in breadth). A pit of three-fourths 

(of the site) is dug and a beautiful circle (is made). 

12-13. One has to purify (the space) outside the pit evenly, 
horizontally and upwards (to the extent of) half a thumb (and) 
-one-fourth of a thumb. A beautiful boundary line is to be made 
with the remaining (space) (around) the pit. 

14-15. Or it may be half a thumb more. The mouth would 
-be at the front (having) a width of four or five thumbs. Its 
central part might be three times two thumbs and beautiful. 
'The extent (on all sides) (might be) of equal (measurement) 
(and) its central portion is lowered. 

16. There must be a hole at the neck portion (ofsuchasize) 
that the little finger would enter. The other pit should be beauti- 
fully made according to one’s liking. 

1 7. The (sacrificial) ladle should have a handle of the length 
•of one hand. A beautiful spoon (having) circumference of two 
thumbs has to be made. 

18-19. Just as the cow’s foot (would) sink in a little mud, 
so also after having drawn a line (of the length) of a thumb 
..(known as) vajrandsikd , (one has to draw) first a line with a fine 



58 


Agni Purdna 


tip, (then) two lines between it and the east (and) then three 
lines in the middle from the south onwards in order. m 

20. Having drawn (the lines), (and) consecrating, with the 
syllable Om, one who knows the mantras, has to make a seat in. 
which the energy of Visnu rests. 

21-22. Having adorned the incarnate form (of energy), 
one has to throw fire after having remembered Hari. Having 
offered twigs of the size of a span (between the thumb and the 
fore-finger) and having sprinkled water and having spread around 
on the three sides in the east etc. with the darbha grass, the fire 
from the fuel as well as the ladle for pouring clarified butter, 

( sruk ) and sacrificial ladle ( sruva ) are to be placed on the ground. 

23-26. (One should then place) vessels (for keeping) 
clarified butter, (and) {caru) (oblation of rice, barley and pulse 
boiled together), ku$a grass and clarified butter. The prokfani 1 2 
vessel being sprinkled with water with the pranitd 2 vessel, (and) 
taken up and filled with water (and) that water being enclosed 
in the hand with the pavitra {darbha grass) placed in between 
and having taken the prok$ani vessel towards the east and having 
placed it in front of the radiant fire (and) having sprinkled 
(all the vessels) thrice with water and having placed the fuel in 
front, (and) having meditated on Vi$nu in the pranitd vessel 
containing a flower and having then filled vessel for (keeping) 
clarified butter with clarified butter and having placed it 
in front, the purification of the clarified butter is made by strain- 
ing and sprinkling clarified butter on the fire. 

27. One should take up two kufa grass with unbroken tips, 
not being filled in, and of the measure of a span (between the 
thumb and the fore-finger) with the thumb and the nameless 
finger (ring-finger) of the palm facing upwards. 

28-30. Having taken with them the clarified butter twice 
and having carried them, (they) must be cast downwards thrice. 
And again having taken the ladles {sruk and sruva) (and) having 
sprinkled them with water with them (the kuta grass) and having 
heated and wiped them with the darbhas and again having sprink- 
led (water) and burnt and having placed along with the syllable 


1. Small vessel used at the time of religious rites* 

2. Small vessel used at the time of religious rites. 



24.31-39 


59 


0/n, the aspirant must perform fire oblation commencing 
with the syllable Om and ending with salutation. (One has to 
perform) garbh&dhdna and other rites as much as it is laid 
down. 

31. One has to do upto the naming ceremony, the under- 
taking of a vowed observance, observance marking the conclusion 
of study of the student, (and) investiture of authority in due 
manner. 

32. The aspirant must everywhere do the worship with the 
syllable Om. One has to do offering unto fire with the 
auxiliaries befitting one’s means. 

33-34. Gatbh&dh&nd 1 2 3 4 5 6 is the first one. Then purhsavana 9 is re- 
membered. Then the simantonnayana*, jatakarma?, noma (karana)*, 
annapr&fana * , cutfdkrti 7 , vratabandha 8 , and many more are the vedic 
observances. One who has the right to do these rites should per- 
form these in the company of his wife. 

35. Having contemplated (on the deity) in the heart and 
other limbs and worshipping him, one has to offer sixty-four 
oblations for every one of the rites again. 

36. The worshipper has to offer the final oblation with the 
sacrificial ladle, chanting loudly with sweet intonation the mystic 
formula ending with the word vaufaf. 

37. After having purified the fire of Vi§nu, the food intended 
for Visnu has to be boiled. After having worshipped Visual in 
the altar and remembering the mystic formulae one has to 
seek his protection. 

38-39. Having worshipped in order his seat and other things 
along with the enclosures with fragrant flowers and contemplat- 
ing on the most excellent lord of all deities, and placing the 
fuel and then the support, the oblations of clarified butter 

1. One of the purificatory rites performed to ensure conception. 

2. One of the puiificatory rites performed to get a male child when the 
embryo has not yet begun to move. 

3. The parting’ of hair, another purificatory rite performed on the 
eighth month after conception. 

4. rite performed soon after the birth of a child. 

5. rite performed to name the child. 

6. first partaking of food by a child. 

7. tonsure at the age of three. 

8. Undertaking a teligious observance. 



«0 


Agni Purtoia 


(should be poured) in order (on fires) placed in the south-east, 
north-east, north-west and south-west. • 

40. Then having poured portions of the clarified butter in 
the south and north, one has to offer oblation in the middle 
reciting the mystic formulae in the order of worship. 

41-42. One has to offer oblation with clarified butter to the 
deity and a tenth part to the limbs. (Having offered) oblations 
of clarified butter and other things hundred times or thousand 
times, or of the twigs or of the sesamum, and concluding the 
worship ending with the oblation and calling the disciples who 
are pure, and placing the fed beasts in front, (they are) sacri- 
ficed by means of weapons. 

43-45. Having united the disciples with one’s own self with 
the fetters of knowledge and action and the consciousness which 
follows the lifigd and which is protected along with the liftga, 
having been consecrated by means of contemplation, (they) 
have to be purified by the syllables of Vayu. Then the creation 
of the whole egg (the universe), consumed by the fire (and) 
reduced into a heap of fire is contemplated upon with the sylla- 
bles of the Fire god. (Then one should sprinkle ashes on the 
water and meditate on the world. 

46. Then one has to assign the creative power which is 
known as the seed of the earth and which is enveloped by all the 
subtle principles. 

47. Then one has to nfeditate on the egg produced out 
of it, (which) is its base and identical with the self. Then one 
has to meditate on the form of the puru$a (the Supreme Being) 
identical with the pranaoa (the syllable Om) at its centre (centre 
of the egg). 

48. The liAga, situated in one’s self, (and) (which) has been 
purified earlier, is then to be transferred. Then the positions of 
the different important organs are to be thought of. 

49. Then, having remained for one year, the egg is split. 
The heaven and earth (are placed) in a part. Prajapati (the 
creator) (is placed) in between the parts. 

50. Having meditated on his form and again 
having consecrated that child with the pranaua (syllable 
Om) and having made his body made up of the mystic for- 

1. Situated in one's own self, representing die Supreme Being 



24.51-59 


61 


mulae, (one has to do) the assignment (of limbs to different 
deities) as described before. 

51-52. Then having placed the hand of Visnu on the head 
and contemplated on one or many (forms) of Vi?iju in this way, 
(and) having muttered mantras (remaining) in meditative 
posture, (and) seizing the hands with the basic mystic formula, 
one who knows the mystic formula having covered the eyes with, 
a cloth (has to sprinkle) water with a new cloth. 

53. After having performed worship, the preceptor, 
who knows perfectly well the nature of the god of gods, should 
make his disciples sit facing the east and with folded palms 
holding flowers. 

54-55. Having been instructed by the preceptor in this way, 
they (the disciples) also must adore Hari. Having offered the 
handful of flowers there (and) then having offered worship with 
flowers without (the recitation of) any mystic formula and 
saluted the feet of the preceptor, (the disciples) must give (him) 
the fee, either all his possession or half of them. 

56. The preceptor has to instruct the disciples thoroughly. 
Hari must be worshipped by them by (the recitation of his) 
names. The Lord Vijvaksena 1 (whose powers go everywhere), 
who bears the conch, disc and mace has to be worshipped. 

57. (Then that deity) stationed in a circular altar, (and 
who is frightening) (is worshipped) with the fore-finger and is 
requested to leave. 

58-59. The entire remnants of offerings to Vi$nu, must 
be offered to Vi$vaksena. Then having bowed down and sprink- 
led (with waters), (their own persons), (the disciples) havings 
placed the fire of the pit on their own person, Vi?vaksena is 
permitted to leave. One who is desirous of enjoyment gets all 
things. One who is desirous of release from mundane existence 
gets merged in Hari. 


1. A form of that deity to whom the fragments of a sacrifice are offered}, 
also used as an attribute ofVifQtu. AffY. p. 996. coL ! 



€2 


Agni Puripa 


CHAPTER TWENTYFIVE 

The formulae and mode of worship relating to V&sudeva, Sankar$ana , 
Pradyumna and Aniruddha 


N&rada said : 

1 . I shall now describe to you the characteristics of the 
adorable formulae related to Vasudeva and others. Vasudeva, 
Sahkar§ana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha (are the four forms). 

2. (The words) salutations to the lord (are said) at first 
along with the mystical letters a, a, am, ah. (Then) beginning 
with the syllable ‘Om’ (and) ending with (the word) salutations 
and then (the words) salutations to Narayana (are uttered). 

3. Om, salutations to the eternal Brahma, Om, salutations 
to Vi$nu, Om, Kjaum, Om, salutations to the Lord Narasimha 
(are uttered). 

4-6. Om, AAfiA 1 , salutations to lord Varaha. The lords of 
men having the colour of japd (flower) (red), brown, yellow, 
blue, black, red, the colour of a cloud, fire, honey, (and) 
tawny, (are) the nine lords of vowels (and) mystical letters. 
The heart and the different limbs are resolved in order along 
with their respective names being well divided by those proficient 
in the tantras (branch of literature dealing with the magical and 
mystical worship of different deities). The characteristics of 
those mystical letters which are consonants are different. 

7. They are divided by long vowels ending with (the word) 
‘salutation’. The limbs situated in between yoked with short 
(vowels) are described as minor limbs. 

8. The mystic syllable situated at the end of the last letter 
of the name which is divided is excellent. The principal 
and minor limbs (are composed) of long and short vowels inorder. 

9-10. This is the method (of use) of consonants for 
arrangement in the heart (and) other (limbs). One has to repeat 
according to his accomplishment (the mystic formula) divided 
into the mystic basic syllable and their ending names (along with) 
the names of limbs, after having resolved the yoked twelve 
(limbs) beginning with the heart etc. 

11. The heart, head, tuft, armour, eye, weapons (are) 

1. The mystical syllable representing the earth. 



25.12-19 


63 


the six limbs of the mystic basic syllables of the basic (mystic 
formula) constituting twelve parts. 

12. One should then assign in order to (the limbs) — the 
heart, head, tuft, hands, eyes, belly, back, arms, thighs, knees, 
shank, (and) feet, (the following syllables and gods). 

13. (The letters) kam, {am, pam, Sam are for Vainateya 1 . 
(The letters) kham, {ham, pham, sam (are) for the brother of 
mace-bearer (Kj-$na). (The letters) gam, dam, vam, sam 
(form) the mystic formula for the nourishment. Gham, dham, 
bham, ham salutations to Sri (Goddess of wealth). 

14. (One has to worship) Paficajanya 2 , (with the mystic 
letters) vam, jam, mam, k?am. (The mystic letters) cham, tarn, 
pam (are for the worship of) Kaustubha (gem worn by 
Vi§nu on his head), jam, kham, vam for the Sudar£ana (the 
disc in the hands of Vi?nu), sam, vam, dam, cam, lam for 
Srivatsa (the mark on the chest of^ Visnu). 

15. Om, dham, vam salutations to the garland of wild 
flowers (worn by Visnu) and to the great Ananta. 3 The limbs 
are set forth with the words of the mystic formula consisting of 
words without the mystic letters, 

16. Along with the names ending with the caste (names), 
the heart and other (limbs) (are set forth). The pranava (letter 
Om) (is repeated) five times. Then the heart and other (limbs) 
are mentioned five times. 

17. With the prattava (one should adore) the heart first. 
(With the word) ‘for the supreme*, the head (and) the tuft and 
with one’s name, the armour (are adored). The end of the name 
would be (to worship) the weapon. 

18. Om, the supreme weapon is the first. (Then) one’s 
own name ending in the fourth case (is to be said). Then (the 
word) Salutations’ (comes) at the end. This consists of one to 
twentysix parts. 

19. One should worship prakjti (nature) at the tips of 
the little and other fingers of the arms in (one’s) body. (That 
one) consisting of prakjti (nature) is the second form of the 
supreme being consisting of puruja (soul). 

1. Garu^a, the eagle vehicle of Vifpu; born to VinatS and sage Kaiyapa. 

2. The name of the conch of Krftta. 

3. Without end; may deaote Lord VifQu as well as $efa N&ga. 



64 


Agni Pvr&tia 


20-21. Om (salutation) to the supreme being, the foremost 
or the first soul. The air and the sun (are his) two forms. The 
fire the third form having been assigned to pervade hands and 
the body, wind and the sun in the fingers of hand, this 
is embodied in the three parts in the two arms, left and the 
other arm, in the heart, in the body forming the fourth state. 

22. The IfgDeda (is made) to pervade hand. The Yajur 
(Tajurveda) is assigned to fingers. The form of Atharva (is. 
assigned) to two palms. Thus (assignments are made) in 
(different limbs) head, heart, upto the feet. 

23. As before having assigned the extensive sky to his arm 
and body, wind and other (elements), to fingers, head, heart, 
generative organ and the feet. 

24. The wind, fire, water, earth (and sky or ether) 
are spoken as his five forms. The mind, ear, skin, eye, tongue 
(and) nose are said to be the six forms. 

25-28. The extensive mind is assigned from the thumb 
onwards to the head, mouth, generative organ and the 
organ of excretion. The prime form is said to be consisting of 
compassion. It is known as the jiva (life) (which is) all perva- 
sive. The seven (words), earth, ether, heaven, mahas y jana , 
tapa and satya 1 2 3 4 are assigned duly to hands and the body begin- 
ning with thumb. The Lord of the world, the seventh one 
and existing in the palm (is taken) gradually to the body, head, 
forehead, mouth, heart, generative organ and feet. This is said 
to be the Agniffoma .* (Next follows the description of) the* Vdja- 
peya* (and) the $o4aH l rites. 

29-32. Atir&tra 5 and Aptorydma 6 (rites will also be described) . 
The soul of the sacrifice which has seven forms extending to the 
intellect, ego, mind, sound, touch, colour, taste, smell, com- 
prehension, should be assigned duly to the fingers and the body. 
A person has to assign it to the teeth, palms, head, forehead, 

1 . The seven worldi earth etc. are situated one above die other successively. 

2. A sacrificial rite lasting for several days in spring forming part of the 
Jyotiftoma, a soma sacrifice. 

3. One of the soma sacrifices performed by kings or by a brahmin aspiring 
for higher position. 

4. A rite forming part of the soma sacrifice. 

5. An optional part of the Jyotiftama sacrifice. 

6. A particular way of offering die soma sacrifice. * 



25.33-46 


65 


face, heart, navel, the generative organ and the feet. These are 
remembered as the eight VyQhas (parts). The life which consists 
of nine parts — life, intellect, ego, mind, sound, quality, 
wind, colour, and taste, is assigned to two thumbs. They 
(are placed) in order on the left hand by means of the forefinger 
and other fingers. 

33. Indra remains pervading the ten (limbs) consisting of 
body, head, forehead, mouth, heart, navel, the generative 
organ, two knees and feet. 

34-35. The fire (is assigned) to two thumbs. Mind 
consisting of eleven parts — ear, skin, eye, tongue, smell, 
speech, hand, foot, anus is assigned to head, forehead, face, 
heart, navel, the generative organ, two knees and feet with 
the forefinger. 

36. The mind is made to pervade the male organ. The 
two thumbs (are made to pervade) the ear. Commencing with 
the fore-finger in order, the eight fingers (are assigned). The 
(two fingers) left over are assigned to palm. 

37. The head, forehead, month, heart, navel (are assigned) 
in order to generative organ, two thighs, shanks, ankles and 
feet. 

38-39. Visnu, Madhuhara (killer of the demon Madhu), 
Trivikrama, Vamana, Srldhara, Hfslke^a, Padmanabha, Damo- 
dara, Ke£ava, Narayana, Madhava, Govinda (are the names of 
Visnu). Visnu is made to pervade. 

40. The thumb (and other fingers), palms, feet, two 
knees, waist are assigned to head, crown of head, waist, knees 
and feet. 

41-43. There are twelve, twentyfive or twentysix parts — 
the supreme being, intellect, ego, mind, thinking, touch, taste,, 
colour, smell, ears, skin, eyes, tongue, nose, speech, hand, feet,, 
anus, generative organ, earth, water, light, wind and sky. 
The pervasive Supreme Being is assigned and then in the thumbs, 
and other fingers. 

44-46. The remnant are assigned in the palm, head, or fore- 
head and then face, heart, navel, generative organ, thigh, knee, 
and feet are assigned to feet, knee, thing, generative organ, 
heart and head in order. A wise man has to meditate upon the 
great send of the Supreme Being in these twentysix things* 



66 


Agni Purina 


as before and then the nature has to be worshipped in a circular 
(altar). The heart and other (limbs) have to be worshipped in 
the east, south, west and north. 

47. As before the weapons (of Visnu, Vainateya (the 
vehicle bird of Vi?nu) (are adored) in the comers of south-east 
etc. (One should adore) the guardian deities of the quarters 
also. In (the worship of) three parts, the fire (will be) at the 
centre. 

48. The directions east etc. are decorated with the strength, 
abode and kingdom. 

49-50. The omnipresent form (of Vi?nu), endowed with all 
parts and the five constituents Garuda etc. as well as Indra 
and others, should be adored (by one) for conquering kingdoms 
and for firmness of all (objects). One may get all desires 
(fulfilled). Vi§vaksena (an epithet of Vi?nu) is worshipped by 
{his) name, the mystic letter being placed in the ether. 


CHAPTER TWENTYSIX 
A description of different positions of fingers in worship 

1. (I now) describe the characteristic of (the different) 
positions of fingers (mudrd) (which) bring (the worshipper) 
nearer (to the object of worship). Anjali (folding of hands) 
is the first mudrd . (The second) is the Vandani (fingers inter- 
locked) to be placed near the heart. 

2. With the left fist folded and the thumb erect, the right 
thumb interwoven with the erect left thumb is said to be (the 
third one). 

3. (These are) the three common formations. The (follow- 
ing are) not common. By the unyoking of the smallest and other 
fingers eight positions (are formed) in order. 

4. The first eight basic syllables are repeated in order. One 
has to bend the three fingers commencing with the little finger, 
with the thumb. 

5. One has to raise up the hand to the face fpr the ninth 



26.6—27.1*5 


67 


mystic syllable. Then the left hand is raised up and bent half 
slowly. 

6. These are the mudr&s of the limbs of Vardhd 1 in order. 
Then the left fist having been kept closed, the fingers are released 
one by one. 

7. The same position is held by the right hand also and 
the previous position is bent down. The left fist (is held) with 
the thumb erect. This results in the accomplishment of the 
mudrd . 


CHAPTER TWENTYSEVEN 
Mode of performing the initiation rite : 


N&rada said : 

1-2. I shall describe the initiation rite, which yields every- 
thing. Hari should be worshipped in the lotus in a circle. Hav- 
ing gathered the articles (required) for the sacrifice on the 
tenth (lunar) day, assigning and consecrating hundred times 
with the (basic syllables) of the man-lion {Narasirhha) (form), 
one should scatter on all sides the mustard seeds, destructive of 
demons, ending (the act) with the syllable phaf . 

3. The female energy, contained in every being, in the form 
of grace is assigned there. Having collected all the herbs and 
spread, they are consecrated. 

4. A worshipper has to accomplish the five products 8 of the 
cow hundred times in pure vessels by means of the five basic 
forms. 

5. Having sprinkled the earth (with the basic syllable) 
ending with (the word) Nar&yana, with the tips of kuSa (grass), 
those scattered (things) are thrown with the raised hand with 
the (basic syllable of) V&sudeva. 

1. If the two palms are placed together so as to form a cavity it represents 
the Vardha Mudrd . 

2. Milk, curd, butter and the solid and liquid excreta. 



68 


Agni Pur&ria 


6. Then standing with the face facing the east one has to 
meditate on Visnu in the heart. One has to worship Visnuan the 
waterpot along with the vardhani \ 

7. Having recited hundred times the sacred syllables for 
the weapon and having sprinkled the Vardhani (vessel) with a 
continuous shower (of water) it should be taken to the north- 
east quarter. 

8. Taking the jar on his back one has to place it on the 
scattered (mustard seeds) . Then having gathered them by means 
of the Kuia (grass) one has to adore the presiding deity of the 
jar and the karkari f . 

9. One has to worship Hari adorned with clothes (and) 
five jewels, on a piece of ground (made ready), offering oblations 
to fire (for his sake) and reciting the sacred syllables, as before. 

10. Sprinkling with a lotus and anointing with unguents 
the worshipper has to fill the boiling vessel with clarified butter 
and cow’s milk. 

1 1 . Having looked at it with the Vasudeva and the Sanghar- 
§ana (basic syllables), rice mixed with clarified butter should 
be thrown into milk well-cooked. 

12. After stirring it with the (basic syllable of) Pradyumna 
the worshipper has to mix it slowly with the ladle and then the 
cooked food is lifted with the (basic syllable of) Aniruddha. 

13. Having washed him and besmearing (with sandals ) > 
the vertical mark is made on the forehead with the ashes. The 
food thus prepared well is placed by the side with the (basic 
syllable of) N&rayana. 

14. A part of it has to be offered to the deity, the second part 
to the jar, and with the third part he should offer three oblations. 

15-17. The preceptor has to partake of the fourth part in 
the company of his disciples for the sake of purification. Having 
consecrated seven times (the stick) got from the milky tree, the 
piece of wood for cleaning the tree being made use of and dis- 
carded and being conscious of one’s sins and having offered obla- 
tions to the hundred auspicious and most excellent lions lying in 


1. A water-jar of a particular shape. 

2. A water-jar with small holes at the bottom as in a ikve % 



27.18-27 


69 


the north, northeast, east and southeast, having done the dcamana 1 2 
and having entered the chamber of worship, the knower of the 
mystic syllables should assign Vi$nu in the east and do circum- 
ambulation. 

1 8. You are, alone, O Lord ! the refuge of the beings immer- 
sed in the ocean of mundane existence, for the release from the 
fetters. You are always kind towards your worshippers. 

19. “O Lord of Lords ! (you) permit (me). (I will) free 
these beings by your grace from their earlier fetters by which they 
are bound*’. 

20-21. Having submitted thus to the lord of the celestials 
and having made the animals enter (the place), (they) have to 
be purified then by holding them as before and to be consecrated 
with the fire. Having yoked them with the deity their eyes should 
be closed. Their eyes are covered. Handful of flowers are offered 
there and their names are added. 

22. Worship is made duly as before without reciting any 
basic syllable (mantra). That particular name of the idol on 
which the flower falls that is pointed out. 

23. One should then take up a red thread spun by a maiden 
and measure it six times from the tuft of the hair to the toe and 
again multiply it three times. 

24. Then one should meditate on the Prakfti in which the 
universe lies and from which the universe is born, as being pre- 
sent there,. 

25. Having tied the nooses of Prakfti proportional to the 
number of principles, that thread is placed on an earthen vessel 
near the pit. 

26. Then having meditated upon the principles commen- 
cing with the Prakfti to the earth, following the order of creation, 
the spiritual teacher should assign them to the body of the dis- 
ciple. 

27. Those (principles), one, five, ten or twelve* may be 
tied individually and given by those who devote their thought 
on the principles. 

1. Acamana consists of sipping three drops of water, followed by touching 
of different parts of body reciting the different names of VijQu. 

2. Prakfti is represented by one, the subtle principles by five, the organs 
of perception and action by ten, and these ten together with Prakfti and mind 
by twelve. 



70 


Agni Purdpa 


28-29. With the five organs of action (one has to create) 
the entire universe in the order of evolution. Having drawn the 
subtle principles into one’s self and (having placed) the rope of 
illusion on the animal, the nature is taken as the creative power, 
the intellect or the mind as the agent, the five subtle principles 
as born of intellect and the five elements from the organs of 
action. 

30-31. One has to meditate on these twelve principles in 
the rope as well as in the body according to his desire. Having 
made oblations with the residue of offerings according to the 
order of creation, and hundred oblations to each and every 
(principle) and then the final oblation, the earthen vessel is 
covered and is dedicated to the presiding deity of the pot. 

32-33. Having duly performed the initial consecration, the 
devoted disciple is initiated. Then in a place where the wind 
blows, an arrow of a particular shape and a knife made either of 
silver or iron as well as all necessary materials are placed; and 
touched with the principal mystic syllable he should perform the 
initial consecration ceremony. 

34. He should then say “Salutations,. (I offer) the food to 
the goblins on the kuia grass”. Then having contemplated upon 
Hari, the sacrificial yard is adorned with multitudes of vessels 
of sweet meats. 

35. Visnu is then worshipped in a circular altar. Then after 
offering oblations to the fire, the pupils who are seated in the 
Padm&sana 1 posture are called upon and are initiated. 

36-37. Having sprinkled water on Visnu, and touching the 
head gradually, all the principles from the primordial down to 
the transformations as well as their presiding deities, the entire 
divine creation is conceived in the heart and all the subtle princi- 
ples which have become one with the soul are absorbed gradually 

38-40. Then the preceptor has to pray the presiding deity 
of the pitcher and draw the thread. Then having come near the 
fire and placing it (the thread) by the side of the fire, he (should 
offer) hundred oblations to the passive Lord of creation with the 
principal mystic syllable. Then the preceptor having reached 

1. Sitting with crossed legs, the feet placed over the thigh of the opposite 

leg* 



$7.41-50 


71 


him, and having offered the final oblation, has to collect the white 
dust and strike the heart with that sanctified by the basic mystic 
syllable and ending with the syllables hum and phaf . 

41. Then oblations are separately offered in order to the 
earth and other principles with mystic syllables made up by 
subtracting syllables. 

42. When Hari has been uttered unto the fire which is the 
abode of all principles, the wiseman has to remember the 
method that is being followed there. 

43. Separating by means of beating and collecting (them) 
one has to remain quiet. Then after collecting by the Prim- 
ordial, an offering is made into the fire as instructed. 

44. After offering eight oblations each (in favour) of ( Garbd - 
dh&na \ Jdtakarma 1 2 , enjoyment and dissolution, he should offer 
them for purification. 

45. The preceptor should take up pure materials and bring 
together the two excellent principles in order in such a way they 
are not broken. 

46. Then the soul, freed from fetters is immersed in the 
supreme soul in the supreme undecaying position. 

47. A learned person has to think of the peaceful, supreme* 
blissful, pure intellect and offer the completing oblation. Thus 
ends the (rite of) initiation. 

48. I shall describe the mystic syllables for the applica- 
tion with which the oblation (relating to) the initiation is 
closely associated: 

Orjt, Tam , the goblins, the pure hum> phaf . By this one should 
strike and separate the two. 

49. Om,yatn> I destroy the goblins. After having seized this 
(syllable) (you) hear (the mode of) yoking it with the nature. 
Om, am , the goblins and the males. I shall describe the mystic 
syllable for the oblation as well as the final oblation. 

50. Om, destroy the goblins; oblations. Om, am, Om, salu- 
tations to the Lord V&sudeva, vauf'af. After the final oblation the 
disciple has to be accomplished. In this way the wiseman has * 
to purify the principles. 


1 . The rite pOformed for facilitating conception. 

2. The ceremony performed at the birth of a child. 



72 


Agni Purdna 


51. Ending with (the word) salutation and with the basic 
syllable sva and preceded by beating (one has to say) m Om 9 vdm 9 
the organs of action, Om, dem 9 the organs of intellect (sense). 
With the syllable yam similar beating etc. are done. 

52. Only sum y to the principle of smell, separate, hum y phaf . 
Om y protect, hd. 0m y svam , svam 9 unite with the primordial. 
Om , sum , hum , to the principle of smell, destroy oblations. Then 
the final oblation is to be applied in the northern direction as 
follows: Om, rdm , to the principle of taste. Om, bhem 9 to the 
principle of colour. Om, ram 9 the principle of touch. Om, em 9 to the 
principle of sound. Om, bham y salutations. Om, som y egoism . 
Om, nam y to intellect. Om, Om, to the primordial. This method 
of initiation has been described in brief in the case of the deity 
of a single form. The procedure for the nine-vyuhas etc. are also 
Temembered to be of the same kind. 

53. A person after having consumed (all the things) should 
consign the primordial thing to eternal bliss. Then a person has 
to consign the primordial thing to the Lord devoid of transfor- 
mation. 

54. Then having purified the elements, one has to purify 
the instruments of action, the intellect, the principles, mind, 
knowledge and egoism. 

55-56. After having purified the soul of the body, he should 
again purify the primordial principle at the end. The supreme 
being and the pure primordial principle stationed in the Lord 
(which is) held under control and has been rendered an abode 
after being freed from bondage is contemplated upon and the 
final oblation is offered. This is the (mode of) initiation for a 
person (who is) fit. 

57-58. Having worshipped with the constituents of the 
mystic syllables, the principles are uniformly carried and gradu- 
ally purified. Having meditated (on the Lord) endowed with 
all accomplishments, the final oblation is made. This is the (mode 
of) initiation for an aspirant in case if there is no abundance of 
articles and no capacity for a person. 

59. Having worshipped the lord as before endowed with 
all the materials, the excellent preceptor has to initiate (the 
disciple) on the dv&daH (the 12th day) from the beginning of the 
rite. 



27.60-73 


73 


60. The disciple must be devoted, humble, endowed with 
all physical qualities, not very rich. Such a person is initiated 
.after the worship of the deity irt the altar. 

61-62. Having contemplated the entire path, divine, pertain- 
ing to the elements or to the self, in the order of their creation in 
the body of the disciple, the preceptor, desirous of creation, 
having offered first sixteen oblations to Vasudeva and other 
(gods) who are radiant, with their respective mystic syllables, 
(they are) allowed to go. 

63-65. Then purification is made by oblation in the order of 
destruction. Having released all the fetters of deeds, the precep- 
tor, has to purify the principles, having drawn them in order 
from the body of the disciple. Having dissolved in the fire, the 
primordial Visnu and the Supreme Spirit, the pure principle 
is accomplished by (offering) final oblation with impure prin- 
ciple. After the disciple had attained his natural state, he has 
to consume all the qualities of the primordial being. 

66. The preceptor has to release or bind the children. Or 
the preceptor remaining in his natural state has to perform a 
different kind of initiation (called) Saktidikfal, 

67-69. Having worshipped Vi§nu placed nearby with the 
lad in an altar and (who) is being adored with the devotion of 
ascetics and mendicants, the pupil remains facing the deity, the 
self (preceptor) facing obliquely. After having contemplated 
upon the entire course which has been resolved by him (the 
preceptor) according to the phases of the moon, (the preceptor) 
has to think deeply with contemplation on the Lord, the supreme 
spirit, stationed in the body of the disciple. 

70. As before all the principles have to be purified gradually 
by beating etc. on the altar of Hari. Then (he) who is bent on 
the inquiry of the self has to set them aside after having taken 
them, and beating. 

71. He should purify them befitting their nature and unite 
them with the deity. They are then collected with pure mental 
disposition and yoked in order. 

72-73. By means of contemplative mood and the pose of 
knowledge (jfldnamudrd) (they) are all purified. When all the 


1 . Initiation rite relating to the female energy or goddess. 



74 


Agni Pur&na 


principles have been thus purified and the Supreme lord remains 
as the main, the principles have to be burnt and (the ffre) extin- 
guished and the disciples have to be engaged in the service of the 
Lord. Then the excellent preceptor should conduct the aspirant 
on the path of accomplishment. 

74. In the same manner, a householder becomes qualified 
by remaining vigilant in (the performance of) the rites. One 
has to remain purifying his self until there is dissipation of anger. 

75. After having known himself as shorn of anger and puri- 
fied from sins, a self-controlled person should confer the right on 
(his) son or the disciple. 

76. After having burnt the noose composed of illusion, renou- 
ncing and remaining in (the contemplation) of the self, he, who 
possesses the unmanifest form, should remain waiting for the 
decay of his body. 


CHAPTER TWENTYEIGHT 
Mode of anointment for the preceptor 

1-2. I shall describe the anointment of the preceptor as 
the son would do and by which an aspirant would become accom- 
plished and a diseased would get rid of the disease, the king 
(would get his) kingdom, a woman would get a child and also 
destruction of impurity. Pictures made of earth and endowed 
with gems are to be placed in the middle, the east etc. 

3. Thousands or hundreds (of them are placed) in a circular 
form and Vi$nu in the east and north-east at an elevated place in 
an altar. 

4. Having placed all of them the aspirant (should assign) 
his son in parts. After having worshipped well the anointment 
should be performed preceded by songs etc. 

5. Men should offer yogic seats etc. requesting his favour. 

The preceptor also should announce the terms and the pupil 
(initiated) into the secrets then becomes the recipient of all (that 
he wants). m 



29 . 1-11 


75 


CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE 

Mode of worshipping Hari in the figure called Sarvatobhadra 
Ndrada said : 

1 . The aspirant has to accomplish the mystic syllable in the 
temple of the deity after having worshipped the Lord Hari in a 
circular figure in a purified ground. 

2. One has to draw circles etc. in a square piece of ground, 
the Sarvatobhadra 1 is drawn in the compartments of rasa , bdna 
and akfi. 

3. A lotus seat containing thirty-six apartments should be 
outside in a row. Among these two (squares are set apart) for 
the path-way and two for the doors in the quarters. 

4. A lotus figure is drawn in front outside and a circle is 
drawn around it. Half of the lotus is divided into twelve compart- 
ments. 

5. Having thus divided it one should draw four circles, one 
around the other. The first one is that of the pericarp and the 
second, that of the filaments. 

6-7. The third (is) that of the joints of the petals and the 
fourth, that of the tips of the petals. The joints of the petals are 
marked by stretching the threads from the angular points upto 
the middle of the side facing the angle and placing them on the 
tips of the filaments. Then the threads are made to lie (fall) and 
then an eight-petalled lotus is drawn. 

8. Having allowed a measure (equal to) the space between 
the joints of the petals, the tops of the petals are drawn in front 
of it and afterwards. 

9. Having allowed in the middle a measure of space (equal 
to that) of the interstices between the petals, two filaments are 
drawn in between every two petals. 

10. This is the ordinary lotus circle said to be of twelve pe- 
tals. Circles are drawn in order in the east of the measure of half 
the pericarp. 

11. By this drawing there will be six circles on its side. In 
this way there will be twelve fish and twelve petals. 


1. It is so called because it brings about all round happiness. 



76 


Agni Purdna 


12. Having drawn a fish with five petals of a lotus for the 
sake of success, the skyline (is made) outside the se&t (altar). 
The compartments are (cleanly) swept. 

13. Four other places for the feet (are made ready) in the 
angular points. Besmeared vessels are kept in the four quarters. 

14. Two rows are marked in the quarters for the sake of 
pathway. Doors are made in all the four quarters. 

15. A wise man has to make eight ornaments of graceful 
expressions by the side of the doors. An equal number of orna- 
ments are also to be made by their side. 

16. Then corners of ornaments should be made. In each 
one of the middle compartments in all the four directions, two 
figures are drawn. 

17. The four outer compartments are cleansed, as well as 
one on each side. Three figures are drawn on each side of the 
petal for beautifying it. 

18. Similarly, three ornaments are to be drawn on the oppo- 
site direction inside the angular point as well as outside without 
any difference between the two. 

19. In this way, sixteen compartments are formed and in the 
same manner another circle is formed. In the (figure having) 
twelve compartments a lotus figure with thirtysix petals (is 
drawn) . 

20. As before one line is drawn at each door for beautifica- 
tion. In the circular altar of one cubit a lotus should be drawn 
(having ) twelve finger-breadth . 

21. A door should be drawn of the measure of two cubits 
by one cubit. The altar should be a square. The disc of the lotus 
should be of two cubits. 

22. Half the lotus is drawn with nine (finger breadth), the 
navel with three, the radius with eight (breadth), the circumfe- 
rence with four. 


23. Having divided the ground into three parts, an inner 
figure is marked with two (breadth). For the sake of accompli- 
shing (one’s object) one has to mark the five vowels inside and 
the radii. 


24. Then according to his desire, one has to draw figures of 
the petals of lotus or citron leaves or of the shage of lotus leaves. 



29.25-38 


77 


25. Having fixed at the junction of the radius and having 
moved around the outer circumference and having stationed in 
the middle link line one has to move upto the root of the radius. 

26. The middle fire-producing stick is moved equally station- 
ing in the middle of the radius. Some more figures resembling 
citron leaves are drawn in this way for the sake of accomplish- 
ment. 

27-29. Then the ground should be divided into seven parts 
each of them measuring equally of fourteen cubits. There should 
be two hundred and ninety-six apartments. (The word) Bhadra 
(welfare is written in four (compartments) in the middle. All 
around that (space) is set apart for pathway. Then lotus (figures) 
are drawn in all directions. Having swept clean around the 
pathway, four central quarters in all directions are set apart 
for (providing) the neck. 

30. ’Four (apartments) are set apart outside and then three 
in each row. By the side of the neck there should be (an apart- 
ment) outside known as the ornament. 

31-32. Among the outer angles leaving off seven, (the rest) 
and three inside are sprinkled (with water). An altar of nine 
divisions is formed in this way consisting of nine parts. (This 
is) the circular (altar) of twentyfive compartments (in which) 
the universal form of Hari is worshipped. Thirty-two cubits of 
ground should be equally divided into thirty-two (compart- 
ments). 

33-34. When it is done in this way, there would be one thou- 
sand and twenty-four compartments. Having written the (word) 
bhadraka (welfare) in the sixteen middle squares and having 
sprinkled water on the adjacent rows (of compartments), the 
eight bhadrakas are written in sixteen apartments in all direc- 
tions. 

35. Then having sprinkled the rows (of compartments) 
and writing sixteen bhadrakas the rows all around are sprinkled 
and allotment is made. 

36-38. Twelve doors (are drawn) in the usual order in each 
quarter. Having omitted the six (compartments) inside and 
having sprinkled for beautification the four at the centre, the four 
on the sides and two inside and outside, and having cleansed 
three inside and five outside for accomplishing additional doors,. 



78 Agni Purdni 

as before beautification is made. Seven of the corners outside 
and three apartments inside are cleansed. • 

39. The supreme brahman is to be worshipped in the auspi- 
cious twenty-five (compartment) formation. Then in the lotus 
(drawn) in the middle commencing with east, Vasudeva and 
other deities are worshipped in order. 

40. Having worshipped the boar-form in the lotus in the 
east the formation is worshipped in order until the thirty-six 
(forms are finished). 

41. With the effort that it has to be worshipped, (one has 
to worship) all formations in the order in the single lotus as 
described. The progenitor is regarded as the sacrifice. 

42. Acyuta divided into many forms is regarded as ‘truth*. 
Forty cubits of the ground in the north has to be divided in order. 

43-44. Each one (of these divisions) are again (first) divided 
into seven parts and then into two. Then of one thousand seven 
hundred and sixty-four apartments we will have a bhadraka 
(figure) (formed) by the central sixteen apartments. There will 
be a pathway on the side, then eight bhadra apartments and a 
pathway. 

45-46. Then sixteen (figures) of lotuses and twenty-four 
lotuses for the rows and thirty-two for the pathway and forty 
rows and a passage with the remaining three rows (are drawn). 
The doors are provided with ornaments and minor beautifica- 
tions in the directions, omitting the centre. 

47. For accomplishing, two, four and six doors (space) is 
cut off in the four directions and five, three and one outside (are 
set apart) for accomplishing the adornment of the doors. 

t 

48. In the same manner, six or four (compartments) are 
omitted outside the door and four inside. There will be six minor 
adornments. 

49-50. There should be four doors on one side or three doors 
specifically in each direction. One has to draw five apartments 
at the angular points (as well as) in the rows in order. An auspi- 
cious altar dear to a mortal has to be (drawn) in this manner. 



30.1-13 


79 


CHAPTER THIRTY 

Mode of worship of different gods in specially drawn lotus figures 
Jfdrada said : 

1 . One has to worship Brahma in the lotus at the centre, 
the lotus-navelled (Vi$nu) with all his retinue in the east, the 
nature (primordial matter) in the lotus in the south-east and 
the supreme spirit in the lotus in the south. 

2, (One has to worship) the fire-god (in the lotus) at the 
south of the supreme spirit, the wind-god in the south-west and 
west, the sun in the lotus of the moon, the Rg- (Veda) and Yajur- 
(Veda) in the lotus of the lord. 

3-4. Indra and other gods are to be worshipped in the six- 
teen (lotuses) in the second (row) then, (along with) the Sama- 
(veda), Atharva (veda), sky, wind, lustre, water, earth, 
mind, ear, skin, (and) eye. One should also worship the tongue, 
nose, (the worlds) Bhu, (and) Bhuva. 

5-7. Having worshipped (the worlds) Mahas, Janas, Tapas 
(and) Satya and (also the sacrifices) Agni§{:oma, Atyagnis{oma, 
Uktha, §oda§I, Vajapeya, Atiratra, one has to worship Aptor- 
yama, mind, intellect, ego, sound, touch, colour, taste, (and) 
smell in order in twenty-four lotuses. (One has to worship) the 
soul, ego, the lord of the mind, (and) the sound principle of the 
primordial matter. 

8-9. (One should then worship) the images of Vasudeva 
and others, having worshipped the (following) ten — the soul, 
mind, ear, skin, eye, tongue, nose, speech, hand, (and) foot in 
thirty- two lotuses. One has to worship these in the fourth enclo- 
sure along with their attendants and retinue. 

10. Having worshipped the anus and penis one has to wor- 
ship the lords of the twelve months as well as the twentysix forms 
commencing with Puru$ottama in the external enclosure. 

1 1 . Among these the Lords of the months are to be worshipp- 
ed in the lotus of the disc. Then the eight, six, five or four (total 
twenty three) principles of the primordial matter (are to be 
worshipped) in another (lotus). 

12-13. Then one has to dust in a drawn circular altar. (You) 
hear. The pericarp should be of yellow colour, and all the lines 



80 


Agni Purdna 


equal and white. (They) should be two cubits long and one 
thumb in breadth. Half the length are white. The joints ^(should 
be coloured') white, black or dark-blue. 

14. The filaments should be red and yellow-coloured. The 
corners should be filled with red. The yogic seat should be bedec- 
ked with any of the colours according to one’s own desire. 

15. The pathway is decorated with canopy of creepers and 
leaves. The entrance to the altar (should be painted) white, 
bright-red and yellow. 

16. Ornamentation of all the white corners (is done) with 
blue (colour). It has been said that the altar bhadraka should be 
filled (with the colours) and in this way the other (altars) are 
filled. 

17. The three corners should be decorated with pale, red 
and black, the two corners with red and yellow (and) the centre 
of the circle by black. 

18. The black (coloured) radii (should be decorated) by 
yellow and red, the circumference with red, the lines outside 
(being drawn) in white, brown, red, black and yellow. 

19. The powder of rice (is) white. The dust of saffron is 
red. It (becomes) yellow with turmeric. From burnt grains 
(we get) black (colour). 

20. (It becomes) black with fami leaves and other (leaves) . 
By the repetition of the basic mystic letters lakh times and of the 
basic syllables four lakh times, a lakh of mystic learning is 
accomplished. 

2 1 . Ten thousand times of the science of intellect and thou- 
sand times of the hymns (are repeated). The purification of the 
self by means of a lakh of the basic syllables is done prior to this. 

22. Then with another lakh, the basic syllable would get 
established. It has been well advocated that oblation of the 
mystic letters is similar to the prior service. 

23. The prior service has been advocated to be performed 
with a tenth part of the mystic syllables. The monthly austerity 
has to be performed with the preparatory mystic syllable. 

24. The left foot should be placed on the ground and the 
donation should not be accepted. In this way by the repetition, 
twice or thrice (one gets) mediocre and excellent accomplish- 
ments. 



30.25-35 


81 


25. I shall describe the (mode of) contemplation of the 
mystic syllable, by which (one gets) the benefits got from the 
basic syllable. The gross form is composed of sound and is laid 
down as the outward deity. 

26. The subtle form composed of lustre becomes the mental 
(figure) made up of thoughts in the heart. That (form) which is 
beyond thinking, is declared as the suipreme. 

27. The potential of the bear, lion and other forms are 
principally gross. The form of Vasudeva is declared as that be- 
yond the reach of thought. 

28. The other forms are remembered always as existing in 
the thoughts of the heart. The gross (form) is said to be 
vairdja (belonging to Brahman) and the subtle form would be 
marked. 

29-32. The form beyond thought is declared as that of 
ISvara (the lord). One has to contemplate on the lustrous, 
undecaying consciousness residing in the lotus of the heart, 
(namely) the basic letter, the soul of the basic letter of the shape 
of a kadamba flower. Just a lamp lies obstructed inside the pitcher, 
so also the lord of the mystic syllable lies restrained in the heart. 
There are many holes in the pitcher. The beams of the light come 
out through them. In the same way the beams of the mystic 
letters come out through the tubular organs. Then uniting 
themselves with the power of the deity they exist in the body. 

33. The tubular organs, having come out from the heart, 
come within the ken of the sense of sight. Among those (tubular 
organs ) the two tubular organs Agni and Soma are ( those which ) 
remain at the tip of the nose. 

34. Then having conquered the wind in the body the reci- 
ter of the basic syllable engaged in the repetition and contemp- 
lation enjoys the benefits of the basic syllable. 

35. With the gross elements and subtle principles purified,, 
contented (and) practising yoga, (one) gets animd 1 etc. (Remain- 
ing) detached and depending on the lord of the soul one gets 
free from the gross elements and subtle principles and seizure 
of the organs. 

1. The first among the eight kinds of superhuman poweis by which one 
is able to become very minute. 



Agni Pur&na 


82 


CHAPTER THIRTYONE 
Mode of cleansing oneself and others 


Agni said : 

1. I will now describe (the rite) known as the cleansing 
for the protection of one’s self and others, by which a man would 
become freed of miseries and get happiness. 

2-3. 0m y salutations to the greatest object, the soul, the 
great soul, the formless and many-formed, the all-pervading, 
supreme soul, blemishless, pure and (person) engaged in medi- 
tative contemplation. Having saluted I shall expound. May my 
words prove true. 

4. (Salutations) to the Boar, Man-lion and Dwarf (forms of 
Visnu), the great sage. Having saluted I shall expound. May 
my words prove true. 

5. (Salutations) to Trivikrama (a form of Visnu, as he 
measured the three steps and removed the pride of the demon 
Bali), Rama, Vaikuntha (abode of Vi?nu), the (Supreme) man. 
Having saluted I shall expound. May my words become true. 

6. O Boar, Lord as Man-lion, Lord as Dwarf, Trivikrama, 
Hayagrlvesa (Lord as Horse-necked), Lord of all beings, Hr?i- 
kesa (Vi§nu) (the Lord of all senses) destroy my impurity. 

7. With these four most excellent weapons, the ever victo- 
rious disc and others of unbroken power, you become destroyer 
of all wicked things. 

8. You remove the calamity of such a person and do (him) 
all good and also (remove) the fear of distress due to fetters 
of death which is the fruit of sins. 

9. (Y° u ) destroy the magical incantations set up by others 
with meditation for working evils, causing diseases and decrepi- 
tude. 

10. Om 9 salutations to Vasudeva, Kf§na, bearer of sword. 
Salutations to lotus-eyed, KeSava(and) the first holder of the 
disc. 

1 1 . Salutations to the wearer of clean dress made yellow by 
the filaments of lotuses (and) the disc (of Vi?nu) hurled on the 
shoulders of the enemies at the great battle, (and) the wielder 
of the same. 



31.12-25 


83 


12. Salutations to the one who lifted the earth on his tusk 1 , 
who has the three forms embodied in him, the great Yajfia- 
varaha, 2 and the one who reclines on the hood of (the 
serpent) Sesa. 

13. Salutations to you, the divine lion having manes of the 
hue of molten gold, eyes bright like the burning fire, (and) claws 
(harder) than thunder-bolt to touch. 

14. Salutations again and again to you, Kasyapa, the short- 
est statured, adorned with the #£, Tajur and Sama ( veda ) (and) 
the Dwarf form which covered the earth. 

15. O Boar, One with huge tusks, you crush all evils 
completely, their effects and also the effects of sins. 

16. O Man-lion, having a dreadful face (and) the burning 
fire in between the teeth, the destroyer of distress, you break- 
down all evils by your cry. 

1 7. Mayjanardana (Visnu), the one who assumed the form 
of a Dwarf, dispel all grief of this person by words embedded 
with the/?£, Tajur and Santa {veda). 

18-19. O Govinda ! (You) destroy quickly this person’s 
sufferings. Destroy fevers — quotidian occurring on alternate 
days, tertian, quartan and also the terrible satata , those arising 
out of derangement (of humours), the sannipata (caused by the 
derangement of three humours), as well as accidental. 

20-24. The diseases of the eye, the afflictions of the head, 
diseases pertaining to the stomach, (difficulty) in breathing in, 
excessive breathing, burning (sensation) in the body along with 
trembling, diseases in the anus, nose, feet, leprosy as well as con- 
sumption, and diseases like jaundice and very dreadful urinary 
disease, fistula, all kinds of dysentry, diseases of the mouth, 
chest (diseases), stone in the bladder, strangury, and other dread- 
ful diseases, diseases caused by wind, biles and phlegm and 
others like sannifidta , accidentally afflicting diseases, (poison 
due to) spiders and boils etc. 

25. May all these be destroyed by the recitation of (the 
name of) Visnu. Being struck down by the disc of Hari, may all 
these (ailments) be completely destroyed. 

] . This refers to the lifting of earth from waters assuming the form of a 
boar by Viftm. 

2. The boar-form of VijQU. 



84 


Agni Pur&na 


26. I am uttering verily the truth. Being scared by the reci- 
tation of the names Acyuta (undecaying), Ananta (unending), 
Govinda (cowherd) (all are synonyms of Visnu), all the 
diseases are destroyed. 

27-28. On his (name) being recited, may Janardana des- 
troy the poisons of animate and inanimate objects, as well as 
artificially made, those caused by teeth, by nails and those arising 
from the sky as well as those caused by (insects like) spider and 
others which cause grief. 

29-31. May the life of boyhood of Visnu (Krsna) des- 
troy the evil forces which afflict mothers and children* 
such as, planets, evil spirits, female goblins, vampires, ghosts* 
gandharvas, yaksas, demons, the impeding forces such as Sakuni 
Putana and others, (the female forces such as) Mukhamarujl, 
Revati and the terrible Vyddharevati, and the fierce forces known 
as Vrddhaka. 

32. May these evil forces which afflict at the old age, and 
the children and the youth be scorched by the looks of the Man- 
lion. 

33. May the dreadful face of the Man-lion of enormous stren- 
gth destroy these evil forces completely for the welfare of the 
world. 

34. O Man-lion, O Great lion, possessor of garland of 
flames, Fiery-mouthed, Possessor of fiery eyes, Lord of all, devour 
the evil forces completely. 

35-37. May the Lord of all (beings), Supreme Lord, Janar- 
dana destroy diseases, great portents, poisons, great evil 
forces, the fierce beings, the afflictions due to the planets which- 
ever is cruel, the injuries caused by weapons, and jv&lagarda - 
bhaka 1 etc., assuming any one of the forms of Vasudeva and hur- 
ling the SudarSana disc which is dreadful like a garland of fire. 
O Acyuta, the foremost among gods (you) destroy the evil 
forces. 

38. O Sudarsana, the huge fire and great sound (you) 
destroy (all evils). O Vibhl$ana (one who frightens) ! may 
all the evil demons get destroyed. 

1. a kind of disease in which pimples appear on die body* See MW. 

420a. 



31.39—32.1 


85 


39. May the Man-lion (deity) , the soul of all beings, possess- 
ing terrific roars protect me in the east, west, south and north. 

40. May Lord Janardana of manifold forms protect me 
in heavens, on the earth, in the sky, behind me, on the sides and 
in front of me. 

41. As Visnu (protects) the entire universe (consisting of) 
the celestials, demons and mortals, may the evils of this person 
be put down by that truth. 

42. As the sins get destroyed atonce by the remembrance of 
Visnu, may all evil of this person get destroyed by that truth. 

43. As the Supreme Lord Visnu has been extolled in the 
ved&nta (the philosophical inquiry is known as it forms the con- 
cluding portion of the Vedas) may all the evils of this person get 
destroyed by that truth. 

44. As Visnu, the lord of sacrifices is exolled among the 
celestials, may what all has been uttered by me become so by 
that truth. 

45-46. May there be peace. May there be good. May the 
evil of this man get destroyed, being agitated by me with the 
kuSa (grass) originating from the body of Vasudeva. May Go- 
vinda, the Nara-Narayana 1 cleanse me. May there be remo* 1 
of all miseries by the chant (of the names) of Hari in the same 
manner. 

47. This is the weapon which cleans and which wards 
off all diseases. I am Hari. The kuia grass is Visnu. Your 
diseases have been destroyed by me. 


CHAPTER THIRTYTWO 
Narration about the purificatory rites 

Agni said : 

1. An intelligent man has to do forty-eight purificatory 

1. Form of Kr?pa; originally conceived as identical; spoken as re- 
presenting Kr^a and Atjuna in later epics and k&vyas. See Apt* SD . p. 281. 



86 Agni Purdna 

rites 1 2 among the initiatory rites for attaining liberation . You 
hear them, by which one may become a celestial. ^ 

2. One has to perform garbhddhdna as soon as the con- 
ception takes place, then the purhsavanar rite, the simantonnayana 3 , 
the j&takarma 4 5 6 7 , and the naming ceremony. 

3. (One has to perform the rites of) giving food (to the new 
born child), then the tonsure, and the brahmacarya (the life of 
celibacy practised by a boy while studying the Vedas). (One has 
to perform) the four (rites) — the vaifnavi, parthi , bhautiki and 
Srauti B , and making a gift of cows, entering the life of a house- 
holder after completing one’s vedic studies. 

4-7. The seven kinds of Pakayajnas* are asfakd , parvanairaddha 
irdvani 9 agrayani, caitri and divayuji. The Haviryajnas 1 are seven. 
(You) hear them. (They) are {agni) ddhdna , agnihotra , darla - 
purnamasa , cdturmdsya , patubandha , and sautrdmani . (You) hear 
the seven kinds of Somasamsthds 8 agniffoma the excellent sacrifice 
atyagnisfoma , uktha, sodaSi , vdjapeya , atiratra and aptoryama. These 
are of thousand kinds. 

8-9. They are hiranydnghri , hiranydksa, hiranyamitra , hiranya - 
hemaksa, hemdhga , hemasutraka , hiranyasya y hiranydhga, hema- 
jihva , and hiranyavat. The aivamedha is the excellent among them. 
Now you hear the eight virtues. 

10-11. They are — compassion towards all beings, forbear- 
ance, sincerity, purity, ease, wishing the welfare of all, liberality 
and freedom from avarice. A hundred oblations are to be offered 
with the basic mystic syllable. The same procedure is to be 
followed in the initiation (ceremony) related to Saura, Sakti 
(the female deity) and Visnu. 

1. The purificatory rites are referred to as twelve. See Mom 2.27. 

2. The rite performed after the conception of a child to ensure die birth 
of a son. 

3. The rite of parting the hair performed on the fourth, sixth and 
eighth month of pregnancy. 

4 . The rite performed soon after the birth of a child. 

5. These are special rites performed as a mark of respect to the four 
sages who are like the guardian deities for the different k&#<fas of the Vedas. 

6. This is a simple or domestic sacrifice. The text has omitted the 
ith&lip&ka and names only six. 

7. Sacrifices in which oblations of clarified butter are offered. 

8. Sacrifices in which soma is pressed for oblation. w 



32.12-33.1-10 


87 


12. Being purified by these purificatory rites, one may get 
enjoyment, release (from bondage). Such a man becoming free 
from diseases remains like a god. By the recitation (of the names 
of god), by offering oblations and by worship and meditation on 
the deity one gets his cherished desire. 


CHAPTER THIRTYTHREE 

Mode of investiture of the sacred thread for the deity and the installa- 
tion of the deity 

Agni said : 

1 . I shall describe the (mode of) installation of Hari and 
the benefits of worship for a year. The first day (of the lunar 
fortnight ) at the commencement of (the month of) &f&4ha and the 
concluding part (of the month) of Karttika yields riches. 

2-3. Commencing with the second day (of the lunar fort- 
night) (the installation) of Sri, Gauri, Gane£a, Sarasvati, Guha 
(son of Siva), Martan^a (Sun), the divine mothers, Durga, 
Siva and Brahma are performed in order. To which deity one is 
devoted, the lunar day of that deity is sacred to him. 

4-5. The mode of installation is the same (for all the deities ) . 
Only the sacred syllables are different. A thread spun by a brah- 
min woman (made of ) gold, silver, copper, silk or cotton etc. 
or in its absence a purified one is made into nine folds. The 
investiture is done with that. 

6-7. It is excellent if it is longer than one hundred and eight 
(finger-length) or half of it. “Whatever has been prescribed by 
you, O Lord, for the warding off of the discontinuance of the 
rite, that is being done by me O Lord. May there be no impe- 
diment here in the pavitraka rite. O Lord of undiminishing 
success ! Grant me this 9 ’. 

8-10. Having prayed (in this way), one has to tie it to the 
circular altar at first with the Gfyatri* Oth ndrdyandya vidmaht 

1. The G:\yatri is a vcdic metre consisting of 24 letters. Sacred syllables 
consisting of 24 letters in the form of a G&yatrl and addressed to a particular 
deity is known as the G&yatri of that deity and 24 such G&yatrlmantras are 
reckoned. 



Agni Purdna 


88 

v&sudevdya dhimahi tanno visnuh pracoday&t. A garland made of one 
thousand and eight wood-flowers is consecrated to tlwLord of 
lords extending upto the feet and the pavitraka (sacred thread) 
upto the knees, thighs, and navel of the idol befitting him. The 
garland should be made thirty- two fingers length. 

11. In the circular lotus of one finger (breadth) the peri- 
carp, filament, leaf, the first basic syllable and the outer circum- 
ference of the circle are consecrated. 

12-13. By the measure of one’s fingers the threads for the 
preceptors (are consecrated) on the models of the parents on 
the ground. Twelve knots made fragrant are consecrated to 
the end of the navel. Then two garlands arc made ready at first 
containing one hundred and eight flowers. 

14. O twice born one ! Otherwise twenty-four or thirty-six 
garlands should be consecrated to the sun with the ring and 
middle fingers by those who desire for a daughter. 

15. There may be twelve knots in the sacred thread for the 
pot of the Sun, and the fire as in the case of Visnu. 

16. According to one’s ability the knots of the sacred thread 
should be placed in the midst of the articles for the worship 
of Visnu on the altar in the pit encircled by a girdle. 

17-18. One who has bathed and performed the twilight 
worship should dye the seventeen strings divided into three 
parts, with rocand (yellow pigment), agallochum, camphor, 
turmeric, saffron or sandal. Then one has to worship Hari on 
the eleventh lunar day at the sacrificial yard. 

19. One has to offer food to all the subordinate deities 
at the altar. Ksaum , to the guardian deity at the end of the door. 
And (one should then worship) Sri on the garland. 

20. (Adorations) to Dhata, Vidh&ta (names of Brahma), 
(the rivers) Ganges, Yamuna. And after having worshipped the 
two nidhis 1 Sankha and padma at the middle, the vdstu 2 is removed. 
(Adorations) to idrhga (the bow of Vi§nu). Then one has to 
perform the purificatory rites for the elements remaining 
standing. 


1 . The nine treasures of Kubera, the lord of wealth. 

2. Evidently the vdstupurufa governing the site of a dwelling place. 



33.21-27 


89 


Om, hrQm , hah, phaf , hr um , I absorb the subtle principle of smell. 
Salutations. Om , hah, phaf, hrum. I absorb the subtle 

principle of taste. Salutations. Om, hrum, hah, phaf, hrQm I 
absorb the subtle principle of touch. Salutations. Om, hrQm, 
hah , phaf, hrum I absorb the subtle principle of sound. Salu- 
tations . 

21-22. With the five incantations (as above) one has to 
meditate on the yellow-coloured, hard quadrangle of earth of the 
form of subtle principle of smell and governed by Indra with 
the mark of holding the thunder-bolt in between his feet. Then 
the worshipper has to spread the pure subtle principle of taste 
and absorb the subtle principles of taste and colour in this way. 

Om, hrim, hah, phaf, hrum, I absorb the subtle principle of 
taste. Salutations. Om, hrim, hah, phat, hrum, I absorb the subtle 
principle of colour. Salutations, Om, hrim, hah, phat , hrum, I 
absorb the subtle principle of touch. Salutations. Om, hrim, hah , 
phat, hrim I absorb the subtle principle of sound. Salutations. 

23. One has to meditate on the presiding deity Varuna 
placed in between the two thighs, holding a white lotus jar, 
white-hued and crescent-shaped. 

24. With the four incantations (as above) one has to absorb 
the pure subtle principle of taste in the subtle principle of colour. 
The subtle principle of colour is absorbed. 

Om, hrum, hah, phaf, hrum . I absorb the subtle principle of 
colour. Salutations. Om, hrum , hah, phat, hrQm. I absorb the 
subtle principle of touch. Salutations. Om, hrQm, hah , phat, 
hrum I absorb the subtle principle of sound. Salutations. 

25. Having meditated on the Fire, the presiding deity 
which is red triangular fire-column pervading the space bet- 
ween the navel and neck and having the mark of a svastika, that 
pure (sound principle) is absorbed in the principle of touch 
with these three incantations. 

Om, hrim, hah, phaf, hrQm I absorb the subtle principle of 
touch. Salutations. Om, hrim , hah, phat, hrum I absorb the 
subtle principle of sound. Salutations. 

26-27. One has to meditate on the grey-coloured circular 
column of air pervading the space between the neck and nose, 
and bearing the mark of the pure moon with the two incantations 



90 Agrti Purdnct 

(as above). The subtle principle of touch has to be absorbed 
in the principle of sound by meditative yuga. 

28. Om , hrirriy hafi, phaf, hrum I absorb the subtle sound 
principle. Salutations, with the single incantation one has to 
absorb the etherial space of the colour of pure crystal and 
pervading the space in between the nose and tuft. 

29. One has to perform purification of the body by 
desiccation etc. Then the dry body from the foot to the tuft has 
to be meditated upon. 

30-31. After having meditated upon the drop which has 
come out of the cavity of brain with the syllable ram and on 
the body covered by a garland of flames with the syllables yam 
and vam , one has to besmear the body with the ambrosia of ashes. 
Then with the syllable lam , it should be converted into a sacred 
body. 

32. Having made the nydsa 1 on the hand and body one has 
to do mental worship. Visnu is adored with his retinue 
in the heart-lotus with mental flowers. 

33. The lord of lords who yields enjoyment and liberation 
has to be worshipped with the principal mystic syllable. “O 
lord of gods, welcome to you. O Kesava ! be present here.” 

34. “Accept my excellent mental adoration properly.” 
Then the Tortoise, the supporting power, then Ananta and then 
the earth have to be worshipped. 

35-36. The righteousness, un-righteousness etc. (have to be 
worshipped) in the middle of fire etc., the lotus in the middle 
of sattva (goodness) etc., the principle of time, the solar and other 
regions and the king of birds, in mayd (illusion) and avidyd 
(ignorance). Then (the deities) of the quarters commencing 
with north-west and ending with north-east as well as the line of 
preceptors. 

37. The attendant gods, Sarasvati, Narada (sage), Nala- 
kubara (son of Kubera), the preceptor, the sandals of the pre- 
ceptor’s preceptor and of the preceptor have to be worshipped. 

38-39. The perfections already accomplished and the later 
perfections, the female energies — Lak?mi, Sarasvati, Prlti, Kirti 


1 . The assignment of fingers on the different parts of the body by tou- 
ching them. 



33.40-49 


91 


Santi, Kanti, Pusti, Tu$p, Mahendra etc. have to be worshipped 
in the middle. Hari, Dhfti, Sri, Rati, and Kranti etc. have to 
be invoked in the middle. Acyuta is established with the princi- 
pal mystic syllable. 

40. Having prayed by saying “Om, have (your) face to- 
wards me and come near me,” and having placed the articles of 
worship and offered scents etc . one has to worship with the principal 
(mystic syllable). 

41. Om (you) frighten, (you) frighten. Again terrorise 
the heart and head. (You) pound the tuft, commencing with 
the flames and from the iastra 1 2 to the astra .* 

42. (You) protect. (You) destroy. Salutations to the arm- 
our. Om 9 hrum 9 phat . Salutations to the missile. (One should 
worship) the parts of the body with the principal mystic 
letter. 

43-44. At first one should worship different forms of 
idols in the east, south, west and north. Vasudeva, Sankarsana, 
Pradyumna, Aniruddha, Agni, Sri, Dhfti, Rati and Kanti (are) 
the forms of Hari. The conch, disc, mace, lotus and Agni (should 
be worshipped) in the east. 

45. The bow, club, sword, and garland of wild flowers 
(should be worshipped) outside it. Indra and others as well as 
Ananta, and Varuna (should be worshipped) in the 1 south-west. 

46-48. Brahma and Indra (should be worshipped) in the 
north-east and their hosts of weapons on the outside. The Aira- 
vata (the elephant of Indra), goat, buffalo, monkey, fish, deer, 
hare, bull, tortoise, and harfisa (should be worshipped) and 
Krsna on the outside. The gate-keepers Kumuda and others 
(should be worshipped) in pairs from the east to the north. 
After saluting Hari, the food (is offered) outside. Salutations to 
the attendants of Visnu. The offering should be made on the 
altar. 

49. One should worship the Universal Being, the All-perva- 
ding on the north-east. The protective thread should be tied on 
the right arm of the lord. 

1. An ordinary missile. 

2. Any missile discharged after the repetition of appropriate mystic 
syllables. 



92 


Agni Purdna 


50. (One should say), “Om salutations to the one who con- 
fers full benefits of worship done through the whole year. 
You wear this thread for the purpose of installation.” 

51. One should observe the vow of fasting etc. in the pre- 
sence of the deity (saying), “I am pleasing the deity by observing 
fasting etc.” 

52. “May not lust, anger, and all other (qualities) reside 
in me ever. O lord of gods from this day onwards it is the last 
of them.” 

53. If the worshipper is unable (to do as described), he 
should observe the vow eating only in the night. Having made 
oblations, the visarjana (dismissal ) is done, after laudation. This 
is the (mode of) daily worship which yields riches. Om , hrim , 
irim, salutations to Sridhara the enchanter of the three worlds. 


CHAPTER THIRTYFOUR 
Mode of performing oblation 


Agni said : 

1-2. One has to enter the sacrificial ground with the follow- 
ing mystic syllable and adorn it. “Salutations to the brahman, 
the lord, Sridhara (and) undecaying self, the form of Rg, Yajur 
and Sdma ( veda ), (possessing) a body (composed) of sound (and) 
Vi$nu. Having drawn the circular altar in the evening, one 
has to bring materials for the sacrifice. 

3. Having washed hands and feet and made assignment, 
and taken the arghya (respectful offering) in the hands one 
should sprinkle the arghya on the head and the gate-way. 

4. He should then begin sacrifice at the gateway. He 
should worship the presiding deity of the arch. The aivatthc^> 
udumbara 1 2 3 4 , vafa* and plak$cP are the trees of the east. 

1. Ficus religiosa (fig. tree). 

2. Ficus glomcrata. 

3. Ficus xndica (banyan tree). 

4. Ficus infectoria (a large tree with small white fruit). 



34.5-14 


93 


5. The Rg ( veda ) is the ornament of Indra on the west. 
The Tajur (veda) is auspicious for Yama. The Sama (veda) is of 
the water-god and is known as Sudhanvan. The Atharva (veda) 
is of Soma (and is called) Suhotraka. 

6. The edges of the gate, flags, (gate-keepers) 
Kumuda etc. and two pitchers should be adored at every door 
by their respective names, as well as a pitcher full of water in 
the east. 

7. Then one should worship the guards of the doors — 
Ananda, Nandana, Daksa, Virasena, Susenaka, Sambhava and 
Prabhava in the north (Saumya) 1 . 

8. One should enter after having removed obstacles by 
throwing flowers and the repetition of names of weapons. 
Having performed purificatory rites of the elements and the 
assignment (of limbs) one should show the posture of 
hands. 

9-10. Having recited the mystic syllable ending with phat 
one should scatter mustard seeds in different directions. 
(One should sanctify) the cow’s urine with Vasudeva, cow’s 
dung with Sankarsana, the milk with Pradyumna and the curd 
got from it with Narayana. The ghee should be one part and 
the others respectively one part more. 

1 1. When these are mixed in a vessel of ghee it is known 
as the pancagavya 2 (the five products got from a cow). A part of 
it is for the sprinkling of the temple building and the other for 
eating. 

12. One should worship Indra and other guardian deities 
of the world in ten pitchers which have been brought. Having 
worshipped them one has to make them hear command. 
They must be installed by the command of Hari. 

13. Having kept the articles of sacrifice well-protected, 
one must scatter those which must be scattered. Having recited 
the basic mystic syllable eight hundred times one should take 
kttfa grass. 

14. Then one should place there a pitcher and (the vessel) 
vardhani at the north-east. Having worshipped Hari along with. 


1. Soma meaiu Kubcra, the regent of the north. 

2. These are— the dung, urine, milk, curd and glu-c. 



94 Agni Pur&na 

the attendant gods in the pitcher one should worship weapons in 
the (vessel) vardhani . » 

15. (Having made) a circumambulation of the sacrificial 
place, water is sprinkled in broken streams by the vardhani. Then 
the pitcher should be taken and worshipped at a fixed place. 

16. Hari should be worshipped with perfumes etc. in the 
pitcher adorned with five gems and cloth and the weapons 
(should be worshipped) at the left in the Vardhani in which gold 
has been placed. 

1 7. One should worship the goddess of the building and the 
presiding deity of obstacles near it. In the same way, one should 
arrange for the consecration of Visnu on the days of movement 
(of the sun from one stellar place to another), and other days 
(of importance). 

18. Nine dentless jars full of water should be placed in the 
nine corners. One should offer water for washing the feet, arghya 
for rinsing the mouth and the pahcagavya. 

19. The five sweet things, water etc. (are placed) in the east, 
north-east etc. The curd, milk, honey and hot water are the four 
constituents for the worship of the feet. 

20. The lotus, iydmdka (a kind of grain), dUrva (grass) and 
the consort of Visnu are for the worship of the feet. Together 
with barley seeds, perfumes, fruits and unbroken rice, this is 
spoken as constituting the eight articles for the worship of the 
feet. 

21. The ktiia (grass), flowers of white mustard, sesamum 
(are) the articles (used) for adoration. One should offer waters 
for rinsing the mouth together with cloves and kahkola (berries). 

22. One should bathe the deity with the five sweet mate- 
rials along with (the recitation of) the principal mystic syllable. 
One should pour pure water on the head of the deity from the 
central pot. 

23. The worshipper should touch water poured from the 
pitcher and the tip of the kUrcha (bunch of kuia grass). One 
should offer pure water for washing the feet and arghya for sipping. 

24. After having wiped the body with a cloth, the deity 
(adorned) with a cloth should be taken to the altar. Having 

worshipped him there, one should offer oblations in the sacri- 
ficial pit after having controlled breath. 



3,4.25-35 


95 


25. Having washed hands, three lines running towards 
the east from the south to the north and three running towards 
the north are drawn. 

26. Having sprinkled them with the waters of arghya , one 
has to show yonimudrd, 1 Having meditated on the fire of the 
form of the self in the^om one should throw it in the pit. 

27. Then one should place vessels together with darbha 
grass and wooden ladles. The twigs and saw (should be) at 
arm’s distance. 

28. (Then one must bring) vessels pranitd y proksani and 
sthall for (holding) the clarified butter (and offering) ghee etc. 
Two prasthas 2 of rice (are spread) evenly with face downwards. 

29-30. TheArtfa (grass) with its tip (facing) eastwards should 
be placed in the pranita and proksani vessels. Having filled 
pranifd (vessel) with water and having meditated on the deity 
and worshipping, the pranita (vessel) should be placed in the 
midst of materials in front. Having filled the proksani (vessel) 
with water and worshipping it, it should be placed on the 
right side. 

31. The oblation should be consigned to the fire. Brahma 
should be assigned to the south. Having spread the kuia (grass) 
in the east etc. the (line of) enclosure should be drawn. 

32. Rites relating to Visnu should be done with (the rites) 
such as garbhddhdna etc. The garbhddhdna , pumsavana , simanton - 
nayana, and (the rite performed after) the birth (are the rites). 

33. Eight offerings to the fire are made commencing with 
naming (ceremony) and ending with samdvarta (rite performed 
on the completion of one’s studies). The final oblation is made 
with the sacrificial ladles for each act. 

34. The oblation is made after having meditated on the 
lustrous (goddess) Laksml at the middle of the pit. (She) is 
known as Kundalaksmi (Laksml of the sacrificial pit), the source 
of the material world composed of the three qualities. 

35. She is the source of all beings as well as mystic learning 
and collection of mystic syllables. The fire is the cause of libera- 
tion. The supreme soul (Visual) is the conferer of emancipation. 


1 . On this mudrd and other mudrds see Kdli. P, 70.36-56. This is one of 
ten mudrds in the worship of the goddess. See Brahm&oda P. IV. 36.62; 42.1-19. 

. A measure equivalent to 32 polos. 



96 


Agni Purdna 


36. (His) head is spoken as at the east, the two arms are 
situated at the corners north-east and south-east, the #wo thighs 
at the north-western and south-western corners. 

37-38. The belly is called (the sacrificial) pit. The organ 
of generation is said to be the source. The three qualities are the 
girdle. Having meditated thus fifteen twigs should be placed in 
the fire (after reciting) Om by showing musfi mudrd 1 . Oblations 
should be made again to the vessels and worship is offered (to 
the vessels) on the north-west to south-east. 

39. Parts of oblations are offered (for the directions) up to 
the north-east with the basic mystic syllable. (Oblations are 
made) in the north with (the syllables) (forming) the end (of 
the) twelve syllables 2 and with the middle (of the mystic syllable) 
in the south. 

40. The consecrated fire of Visnu, possessing seven tongues 
and having the radiance of crorcs of sums and having the moon 
as its face and sun as the eye and situated in the middle of the 
lotus should be meditated upon with the vydhrtis . 3 Then one 
should offer one hundred and eight oblations (to this form). 
Then fiftyeight oblations (should be offered) and a tenth of it 
for the limbs. 


CHAPTER THIRTYFIVE 
Mode of consecration of an image 


Agni said : 

1. Having sprinkled with the residual offering one should 
perform consecration of the sacred, subtle, and chanted mystic 
formulae of the manlion form. 

2-3. Consecration of the vessels covered by the clothes 
should be done with mystic syllables. The vessels on which water 
is sprinkled once or twice with bel (leaves), should bo placed 


1. This is formed by holding a clenched fist. 

2. Om name bhagavaU N&r&yao&ya. 

3. The basic syllables forming part of the Gfiyatrl-mantra. 



35.4-14 


97 


near the pitcher. Having pronounced the protective spell the 
priest should place stick for (cleansing) the teeth and myrabolan 
on the east with (the recitation of syllable for) Sankarsana. 

4. The ashes, sesamum, and cowdung-mixed earth (should 
be consecrated) on the south with (syllable for) Pradyumna, in 
the west with (that of) Aniruddha and in the north with that of 
Narayana. 

5. Then the waters along with the kuia grass (should be 
assigned) to the south-east with the heart, the saffron and pig- 
ment on the north-east with the head, the incense on the south- 
west with the tuft. 

6. Then the principal beautiful flowers (should be assigned) 
to the north-west with the armour. The sandal, water, unbroken 
rice, curd, and dttrvd (grass) are placed in small cups (made of 
leaves ) . 

7-8. The chamber having been encircled by three threads, 
the articles kept ready should be thrown again. Then in one’s 
own order of adoration one should offer perfumes and (other) 
articles, at the foot of the gate or at the pitcher of Vi$nu with 
sacred syllables. One should then worship the radiant, beautiful 
form of Visnu capable of destroying all sins. 

9. “I conceive on thy limbs, the deity who grants all 
coveted things”. After having worshipped him by (showing) 
the incense, lamp etc., one should approach the gate-way. 

10. One should offer pavitra 1 along with perfumes, flowers 
and unbroken grains. The radiant pavitra ofVi$nu (is capable) 
of destroying all sins. 

11. I hold on my limbs (the pavitra) for the accomplish- 
ment of virtue, desire and worldly benefits. The pavitra is 
offered to the other attendant deities and to the preceptor 
(seated) on a seat. 

12. After having worshipped well with perfumes, one has 
to offer to Hari along with perfumes, flowers etc. and saying, 
“May these become the energy of Vi$nu”. 

13-14. Having offered to the deity stationed in the fire one 
should pray to the deity (saying), “O lord couched on the great 

1. It means the sanctified articles. It also means the twining of the 
darbha grass in a particular shape so that it could be worn on the finger. 



Agni Purina 


1 98 

serpent in the milky ocean. I shall worship you in the morning. 
You (please) be present here O KeSava.” Then having*offer- 
ed offerings to Indra and others one should dedicate them 
to the attendants of Visnu. 

15. Then one should place a pitcher covered by two cloths 
and filled with water mixed with perfumes, rocand , camphor and 
saffron in front of the deity. 

16-18. Having adorned the deity with perfumes and flow- 
wers, one should worship him with the mystic formula. Having 
come out of the hall one should place in three circular enclosures 
the five products obtained from the cow, the sacrificial offering 
(caru) and wood for cleansing the teeth. One should read 
purdpas and recite hymns and along with servants, a women 
and children remain awake. Then the consecration rite should be 
performed immediately without sacred perfumes. 


CHAPTER THIRTYSIX 
Mode of performing the investiture of sacred thread 
Agni said : 

1 . Having bathed in the morning and worshipping the guar- 
dian deities, (the worshipper) should enter the secret chamber 
and gather (articles) and place. 

2. The articles (are) the dress, ornaments and perfumes 
which were offered in the consecration ceremony earlier. Having 
discarded the remnants (of articles for worship), the deity should 
be well-installed and worshipped. 

3. One should offer the paUcdmrta (five sweet articles), the 
unguents, pure and perfumed waters as well as dress, perfumes 
and flowers. 

4. Having offered unto the fire as done everyday one should 
pray to the deity and bow down. Having submitted one’s actions 
to the deity one should perform the naimittika (periodical) cere- 
mony. 



36.5-16 


99 


5. One should worship the gate-keeper, the pitcher of Visnu 
and the varddhanl (vessel) and Hari. The pitcher (should be con- 
secrated) with the sacred syllable ‘ ato deva ’ (and the following). 

6. “O Kr?na ! Salutations to you. You accept this sacred 
thread for the sake of purifying all and which yields fruits 
of a year’s worship. 

7. You purify sins that had been committed by 
me. O God ! the lord of celestials I will be purified by 
your grace.” 

8. Having sprinkled mentally the sacred thread and the self, 
and having sprinkled the pitcher of Visnu, one should go near 
the deity. 

9-10. One should offer a sacred thread to the self, after 
having discarded the protective thread (tied Qn the hand). O 
Lord ! Accept the sacred thread that has been made ready by 
me, for the sake of accomplishing rites so that there may 
not be any fault on me. The sacred thread (should be offered) 
to the gate-keepers, the seat and to the chief preceptors. 

11. The garlands of forest flowers (should be offered) to 
the gods of inferior order with the basic formula. The articles 
should be offered to the heart etc. and ending with Visvaksena 
(an epithet of Visnu). 

12. Having offered to the fire the oblations placed near the 
fire for Vi§nu and other (gods), and having worshipped, the 
final oblation should (then) be made with the basic formula 
for the expiation (of one’s sins). 

13-16. O Lord ! having Garutfa as your emblem ! Let 
this be your annual adoration with one hundred and eight or 
five Upanisads 1 (and) with garlands of gems and corals, the 
flowers mand&ra and others. 

“O Lord ! Just as the garland of wild flowers and the 
kaustubha gem (are) (worn) always on the chest, so also bear 
the sacred thread and the worship on the chest. Whatever has 
been done wantonly or unwantonly in the regulations of the 
worship let it become complete by the rite shorn of impedi- 
ments.” Having worshipped, bowing down, and requesting 
them the purified article should be placed on one’s own head. 

1. The mystical writings ascertaining the meaning of the Vidas , 



100 


Agni Purina 


17. Having made offering to Vi$nu the preceptor should 
be satisfied by (giving) the fees. The brahmins should be «satis- 
fied) by (giving) food, clothes and other things either for a 
day or for a fortnight. 

18. At the time of bathing, having gone down into the 
waters, the sacred thread should be offered. Without any restric- 
tion, food and other things should be given (to others) and 
then one has to eat. 

19-22. Having worshipped fire at the (rite of) dismissal 
the threads are removed. (One should then say) “Having thus, 
duly accomplished my annual adoration O thread ! you now 
go to the world of Visnu having been permitted by me. Hav- 
ing worshipped Somesa and Visvaksena at the centre and having 
worshipped the sacred threads one should dedicate them to the 
brahmins. As many knots as there are in that thread (one will) 
live gloriously for so many thousands of years in the world of 
Visnu. One will get release (from bondage) after having 
redeemed hundreds of his ancestors the ten preceding and the 
ten succeeding and having established them in the world of Vi$nu- 


CHAPTER THIRTYSEVEN 
The investiture of sacred thread for all gods 
Agni said : 

1. Listen to (the description of the mode of) investiture 
for all deities. The thread is the primary characteristic as 
well as its yellow orpiment. 

2. O the cause of the universe ! come here along with 
the attendant gods. I invite you in the morning and offer this 
sacred thread. 

3. O the creator of the universe. Salutations to you ! 
Accept this sacred thread for the sake of purification (and which) 
conveys the fruits of the annual worship. 

4. O God Siva ! Salutations to you 1 Accept jhis sacred 



37.5—38.1 


101 


thread along with garlands of gems and corals and manddra 
flowers. 

5-6. O lord of the learned in the Vedas ! Let this be your 
annual worship. After having accomplished this annual worship 
of mine according to the rules, O articles of worship ! go to 
heavens after being discarded by me. O lord Sun ! Saluta- 
tions to you. Accept this article of worship. 

7. O Lord Siva ! Salutations to you. Accept this article 
■of worship which is capable of yielding fruits of annual worship 
for the sake of purification. 

8. O lord of ganas ! Salutations to you. Accept this 
article of worship which is capable of yielding fruits of 
annual worship for the sake of purification. 

9. O goddess Sakti ! Salutations to you. Accept this 
article of worship which is capable of yielding fruits of 
annual worship for the sake of purification. 

10-14. I dedicate unto you this excellent thread verily the 
same as (lord) Narayana and (lord) Aniruddha and which 
is capable of yielding fruits of annual worship for the sake 
•of purification and which yields wealth, grains and health. I 
dedicate unto you this excellent thread verily the same as 
K&madeva and Sankarsana, which yields learning, progeny 
and welfare. I dedicate unto you this thread verily the same 
as Vasudeva, which yields dharma , artha , kdma 9 and mokfa and 
which is the cause for transport over the ocean of mundane 
existence. This thread verily the universal form is the donor 
of all things, the destroyer of sins and elevates past and 
future lineage. I offer in order to the four younger deities 
with the mystic syllables. 


CHAPTER THlRTYEIGHT 
Benefits of constructing temples 

Agni said : 

1. I will now describe the benefits of erecting the 

1. These are the .four objects of human life, namely, righteousness, 
pleasures, desires and release from bondage. 



102 


Agni Purdna 


temples of Vasudeva and others. One who is desirous of construc- 
ting the temples of gods gets freed from sins incurred in* thou- 
sand births. 

2-5. Those who conceive of building a temple get the sins 
accrued in hundreds of births destroyed. Those who approve 
the building of a temple for lord Krsna, also become free 
from their sins and go to the world of Acyuta (Visnu). Having 
built a temple for Hari, a man immediately conveys a lakh of 
his ancestors both past and future to the world of Visnu. The 
manes of a person who builds a temple for Vis$u having seen it 
remain in the world of Vi$nu well-honoured and relieved 
of their sufferings in hells. The erection of the abode for the 
deity destroys sins such as the killing of a brahmin. 

6. Whichever benefit could not be obtained by doing 
sacrificial rites, could be got by the erection of an abode (for 
the god). He who erects an abode for the god reaps fruits 
of bathing in all holy waters. 

7. Even the making of a temple by perfidy with dust one 
would reach heaven. It gets more benefits than those (got) be- 
ing slain in the battle. 

8. One who builds one temple goes to heaven. One who 
builds three temples goes to the world of Brahma. The builder 
of five abodes reaches the world of Sambhu (Siva). By build- 
ing eight abodes one remains in the world of Hari. 

9-17. One who builds sixteen abodes gets enjoyment and 
emancipation. Having built a small, medium or excellent temple 
for Hari one gets heaven or the world of Visnu or emancipation 
respectively in order. Which merits a rich man would get by 
erecting an excellent temple of Visnu, a poof* man would 
get by (erecting) a small temple itself. Having acquired riches 
and built a temple for Hari even with a small portion of it one 
would get excellent and enormous merits. By erecting a temple 
of Hari with a lakh or thousand or hundred or fifty (units of 
money) one would reach the place of that person who has the 
eagle in his banner. Those who play in their childhood with 
(the building of) abodes of Hari with earth also go to the world 
of Vasudeva. The building of temples of Vi$nu at holy places, 
within temples, accomplished place or hermitage (yields) three- 
fold benefit than those already described. Those who decorate 



38.18-31 


103 


(the temple) of Vi?nu with the bandhuka flowers and an oint with 
fragrant paste, also reach the place of the lord. (Having 
erected the temple of Hari), a person obtains two-fold merits 
after having elevated the fallen, the falling and half-fallen. He 
who brings about the fall of a man is the protector of one fallen. 

18-19. By (erecting) a temple of Vi§nu one reaches his 
region. As long as the bricks remain in the temple of Hari, the 
founder of that family is honoured in the world of Visnu. He 
becomes pious and adorable in this world as well as the next. 

20. He who builds a temple for Kr$na, the son of Vasudeva 
is born as a man of good deeds and his family gets purified. 

21 . He who builds an abode for Visnu, Rudra, Sun or the 
goddess etc. acquires fame. What is the use of the hoarded 
riches for an ignorant person ? 

22-23. If one does not cause an abode for Kr$na to be 
built (with wealth) acquired by hard (work) (and) if one’s 
wealth could not be enjoyed by manes, brahmins, celestials 
and relatives, his acquisition of wealth is useless. As death is 
certain for a man so also the destruction of wealth. 

24. One who does not spend his riches for charities or for 
enjoyments is stupid and is being bound even while alive, while 
the riches are flickery. 

25. Is there any merit in being the lord of wealth 
acquired either accidentally or by one’s effort, if it is not spent 
for acquiring fame or for philanthropy ? 

26-31 . One may give to the foremost brahmins and also do 
(such acts) which would glorify him. More than the charities 
and more than the acts which would glorify him, one has to build 
the temples of Visnu and other gods. The temple of Hari being 
set up by devoted great men, the three worlds, the movable and 
immovable things and the entire objects get established. All the 
things beginning with Brahma to the Pillar, that has already 
born, that 13 being bom*, that is to be born, the gross, the 
minute and the other things are’bom of Vi?nu. Having set up 
an abode for that lord of lords, the omnipresent, the great Visnu, 
one is not bom again in this world. By building temples for the 
celestials, Siva, Brahma, Sim, Vighneia (lord ofimpediments), 
Caruji (Parvati), Lak§mi and others (a man) reaps the same 
benefit as he would get for building an abode for Visi^u. Greater 
merit (is acquired) by installing images of gods. 



104 


Agni Pur&na 


32. In the rites (relating to) installation of an idol there 
is no limit for the fruits (gained). An image made of^ wood 
gives greater merit than that made of clay. One made of bricks 
yields greater merit than that made of wood. 

33. One made of stones gives (greater merit ) than that made 
of bricks. (Images made) of gold and other metals yield more 
benefits. Sins committed in seven births get destroyed even at 
the very commencement of installation. 

34. One who builds a temple goes to heaven and never goes 
to hell. Having elevated a hundred of his ancestors he conveys 
them to the world of Visnu. 

35. Yama (god of death) said to his emissaries : 

Tama said : 

“Those men who build temples of gods and adore the idols 
are not to be brought to hell. 

36. Bring them to my view who have not built temples and 
other things. Move around in the befitting way and execute my 
directive. 

37. Except those who have resorted to Ananta, the father 
of the universe, no other beings would at any time disregard 
the command. 

38. Those who are devotees of Visnu and have their mind 
fixed on him have to be avoided by you. They are not to live 
here. 

39-49. Those who always adore Vi$nu should be avoided 
by you from a distance. Those who sing the glories of Govinda 
while standing or sleeping or walking or standing behind or 
stumbling or remaining (at a place) are to be avoided by you 
from a distance. Those who worship Janardana with obligatory 
and occasional rites are not to be beheld by you. Those who 
follow this course attain good position. Those who wor- 
ship (the god) with flowers, incense, raiments, favourite orna- 
ments, (and) those who have gone to the abode of Kr?na 
are not to be seized by you. Those who besmear with unguents, 
and those who are engaged in sprinkling his body, their children 
and their descendants should be left in the temple of Kr?na. 
Hundreds of men born in the family of one who has built the 
temple of Vi?nu should not be seen by you with evil mind. Who- 



39.1-5 


105 


ever builds a temple of Vi?nu with wood or stone or earth gets 
free from all sins. One who builds the temple of Visnu gets that 
great benefit which (one would acquire) by doing' sacrificial 
rites everyday. By building a temple for Vi$nu (one) conveys 
hundreds of his discendants and hundreds of his ancestors to 
the world of Acyuta. Visnu is identical with the seven worlds. 
One who builds a house for him saves the endless worlds and also 
obtains endlessness. One who builds (a temple) for him, lives 
for so many years in heaven as the number of years the set 
up bricks would remain. The maker of the idol (would reach) 
the world of Visnu. One who consecrates it would get absorbed 
in Hari. 

One who builds a temple, makes an idol and installs it goes 
within his range. 

Agni said : 

*‘I have not brought one who has installed Hari as told by 
Yama”. Hayagiras told Brahma for the installation of gods. 


CHAPTER THIRTYNINE 
Preparations of ground for constructing temples 
Hayagriva said : 

1. O Brahman ! Listen to me speaking about the installa- 
tion of (images of) Vi?nu and others. (The principles of) 
Paflcardtra 1 and Sapiardtra have (already) been described by me. 

2-5. They have been divided by the sages into twentyfive 
(books) in this world. HayaSirja tantra is the first one. Trailokya - 

1 . The word rdtra means knowledge and the Paflcar&lra means the collec- 
tive knowledge of five kinds according to the Nar. S*m. 1.1. 

However the Ahir, Sam . the earliest text of this class of literature would 
take it to mean the fivefold manifestation of Lord Vdsudeva, viz. Para % oyuha, 
tribfutva, arcA and antarydmin. 



106 


Agni Pur&Qa 


mohana , Vaibhava , Paufkara , Prahl&da, Gdrgya , Gdlava , Ndradiya> 
Sriprafna , Gdnjltlya, Atfvara , spoken by Satya, Saunaka , V&siffha, 
jHdnasagara, Svdyambhuva , Kdpila , T&rkjya , Ndrdyaniyaka , Atreya y 
Ndrasirhha , Ananda , Aruna, Baudhtyana , and the one spoken by 
Visva as the quintessence of that (the preceding), having eight 
parts (or the other books). 

6-7. A brahmin bom in the middle country may perform 
installation (rite). Those who were born in Kaccha (Cutch), 
(in the regions of the river) Kaverl, Konkana, Kamarupa, 
Kalinga, KaficI, Ka&nira, Kosala should not (do instal- 
lation). The sky, wind, radiance, water, and earth are the 
cardtra. 

8. Those other than the paHcardtra are inanimate and engulf- 
ed in darkness. He {s the preceptor who hdte the knowledge “I 

am brahman and stainless Visnu”. 

% • • 

9. Even though^ deficient in all characteristics he who is a 
master of the tantras is (to be looked upon as) the preceptor. 
The image of the deity should be placed facing the city and never 
turned backwards. 

10. At Kuruk?etra, Gaya and other places and near the 
rivers, (the image of) Brahma at the centre of the city and (the 
image of) Indra on the east arc auspicious. 

11-12. (The images) of Agni, mothers, goblins, and 
Yama (should be placed) in the south-east. (The images) of 
Candika (should be placed) in the south and those of the manes 
and demons in the south-west. The temples of Varuna and others 
should be built ki the west. (The images) of Vayu and Naga 
(serpent) (should be) on the north-west and those of Yak$a 
and Guha (Karttikeya) on the north. 

13-15. (Those) of Candida (the lord of Candl), the great 
lord and Vi?nu (are) always (placed) in the north-east. One 
should not knowingly construct a temple of a reduced size or 
equal in size or bigger in size than another temple already cons- 
tructed so as to encroach upon it. A wise-man would leave 
between them a space measuring twice the elevation and erect a 
new temple without affecting both the temples. After having 
examined the ground one has to take possession of it. 

16. Hie offerings to the {presiding) goblins should be offer- 
ed upto the outer enclosing wall (with a mixture of) black 



39.17— 40.1-5 


107 


gram, turmeric powder, fried grains, curd and flour. 

17-18. Having dropped the flour in all directions along 
with (the recitation of) eight syllables: (one has to say), 
“The demons and goblins who remain on this ground may 
go away. I am making a place for Hari.” Having cleav- 
ed the earth with the plough one should cleave it with oxen. 

19. Eight Paramdrius make one rath&nu. Eight rathdnus are 
said to make one trasarettu. Eight times that (makes) one bdldgra 
and eight times that is known as likhyd. Eight times that is known 
as yilka. Eight times that is a yavamadhyama. Eight times yava 
(makes) one afigula . Twenty-four afigulas (make) one kara. 
Four afigulas make one padmahastaka . 


CHAPTER FORTY 

The mode of making the respectful offering to the god 
The Lord said : 

1 . In days , of yore that material principle was dreadful 
among all principles. It being placed on the earth it was 
known to be the lord of that place. 

2. At a place (divided) into sixty-four compartments Iia 
occupying a half of the comer square is worshipped with ghee 
and unbroken rice. Then the (god) Parjanya (the rain god) 
occupying a square (is worshipped). 

3. The god Jayanta, who occupies two squares (is worshipp- 
ed) with lotus (flowers) and water, and the lord Mahendra, 
who remains in one square (is worshipped) with a banner. The 
Sun god (is worshipped) in a square with all red things. 

4. The (god of) truth occupying half a square at the bottom 
is worshipped with canopy and profuse offering of ghee. 
The lord of the sky occupying half the angular Square (is propi- 
tiated) with the bird’s flesh. 

5. Hie fire-god in half a square (is worshipped) with the 

1. The mantra of eight syllable*: Orh nemo ndrdyapdra. 



108 


Agni Purdna 


sacrificial ladle and the god Pu$an in a square with fried grains, 
the lord of untruth in two squares with gold, churning rod and 
unbroken rice in the house. 

6. The lord Dharme£a stationed in two squares is worshipp- 
ed) with meat and cooked food, the Gandharva in two squares 
with incense and the tongue of a bird. 

7. Mrga occupying one upper (square) (is) then (worshipp- 
ed) with blue cloth. The manes (are worshipped) with a dish 
composed of milk, sesamum and rice in half a square and sticks 
of tooth-brush in another square. 

8. The (two) door-keepers Sugrlva and Pu?padanta occu- 
pying two squares (are worshipped) with barley grains and 
a clump of grass respectively, and Varuna with lotus flowers in 
a square. 

9. The asura (demon) in two squares (is propitiated) with 
wine, (the serpent) Se$a in a square with ghee and water, the 
sin in half a square with barley grains, the disease in half a square 
with maniaka (a kind of baked flour). 

10. The Naga (serpent) (is worshipped) in a square with 
the ndga flowers and the chief serpent in two squares with edibles 
The Bhallata (a kind of superhuman being) (is worshipped) 
in a single square with rice mixed with kidney-bean, and the 
moon (with the same offering) in the next square. 

11. The sage placed in two squares (is worshipped) 
with honey, sweat gruel and nutmeg, Diti in a square with anoint- 
ments and Aditi in one and a half squares. 

12. Apas (is propitiated) in a square below in the north- 
east with milk and cake and then Apavatsa remaining in a 
square below with curd. 

13. Marici (is propitiated) in four squares in the east with 
balls of sweet-meat and for (the god) Savitr, the red flowers (are 
placed) in the lower angular square. 

14. In the square below that, water along with kuia grass is 
offered to Savitr, red sandal paste is offered to Aruiia in four 
squares. 

15. Respectful offering along with turmeric (is made) to 
Indra in the lower square in the south-west and rice mixed with 
ghee (is offered) in the corner square below Indrajaya. 

16. Sweet gruel (mixed) with jaggery (is offered) to Indra 



4Q. 17-28 


109* 


in four squares and cooked meat (is offered) to Rudra in the 
corner square in the north-west. 

17. In the comer square below that wet fruit (is offered) 
to Yak$a, rice meat and black-gram (are offered) to Mahidhara 
in four squares. 

18. Rice and sesamum should be placed in the central square 
for Brahma. CarakI (is worshipped) with black-gram and clari- 
fied butter and Skanda with a dish composed of milk, sesamum 
and rice and a garland. 

19. Vidari (a demoness) (is worshipped) with red lotuses, 
Kandarpa (god of love) with cooked rice and meat, Putana 
(a demoness) with meat and bile and Jambaka (a demon) 
with meat and blood. 

20. The I$a (is appeased) with bile, blood and bones, 
Pilipiftja (a demon) with a garland and blood. Other deities* 
are worshipped with blood and meat and in their absence with 
unbroken rice. 

21. Sacrificial offerings are made to demons, divine 
mothers, manes and guardian deities of the ground in due order. 

22. One should not build temples and other things 
without offering to these (deities) or appeasing them. Hari, 
Lak$mi, Gana (the attendant deity of Siva) should be wor- 
shipped at the place (set apart) for Brahma. 

23-24. The final offering is then made to Brahma in the 
central pitcher and to Brahma and other deities as well as Mahe- 
svara, the presiding deity of the ground with a pitcher together 
with a small vessel. After having made benediction, and holding 
well the water-jar with small holes at the bottom an auspicious 
circumambulation is made. 

25. O Brahman ! the drop of water is rotated (to fall) 
in a line. As before in the same line seven kinds of seeds are sown. 

26. The excavation should begin in the same way. Then a 
hole of the measure of a hand should be dug at the centre. 

27. Then having made (the pit) smooth to a depth of four 
fingers’ breadth and having contemplated on the four-armed 
Vi$nu (waters of adoration) should be offered from the pitcher. 

28. Then the hole is filled (with water) from the water-jar 
having holes at the bottom, white flowers are placed. The excel- 
lent conch-shell (known as the) Dakgi^iavarta (curved to the 



110 


Agni Purina 


right) has to be filled with seeds and earth. 

29. After having performed the offering of water, one should 
present the preceptor of cows, clothes and other things and 
honour the sculptor, and the vcdsnavas who know the proper time. 

30. One should then dig carefully till water is found. The 
substance lying below the presiding deity under the building 
would not have any beneful influence. 

31 . The bone or substance below if broken, the broken thing 
forebodes baneful influence for the inmate. Whatever kind of 
sound one would hear, (it is to be known) as due to the substance 
lying below. 


CHAPTER FORTYONE 
Mode of performing consecration 


The Lord said : 

1 . I shall narrate the mode of consecration of the founda- 
tion and (the rites relating to) the laying down of the founda- 
tion stone. A shed is erected at first and four (sacrificial) pits 
(are made). 

2. The placing of pitchers (of water) and bricks, the erec- 
tion of the doors and pillars (are finished). The dug up pit is 
filled to a quarter (of its depth) and the presiding deity is wor- 
shipped at the same time. 

3. The bricks should be of twelve fingers in length, with a 
breadth and width of four fingers respectively, and well-burnt. 

4-8. Stones measuring a cubit (in length) would be best 
in the case of stone slabs. Nine copper pitchers and bricks should 
be placed. The pitchers (should be filled) with water, (substance 
known as paficakaf&yd l , waters of all herbs and fragrant waters. 


1. A decoction frou$ tfie fruits of five plants jemba, SSimaU, odfydia, bdkula 
and badara (MW. p. 575). 



41*9-16 


111 


Then with the pitchers filled well with waters (and containing 
gold and rice and anointed by fragrant sandal, and having plac- 
ed the stones along with (the recitation of) the mystic syllables 
— the three-footed dpo hi ; /Ad 1 , latino devi 2 , tarat sa mandil i 3 , 
pdvamani 4 5 6 , uduttamam varuna h y kayd nah tt , varunasya 7 , hamsah iuci§at 8 , 
Srisukta 9 . 

9. Hari should be worshipped in a bed in the shed in the 
eastern part of the (drawn) diagram. Then having kindled the 
fire twelve twigs should be offered (as oblation). 

10. The primary offering and the offering with clarified 
butter should be done with the syllable om. Then subsequently 
eight offerings and again eight offerings with clarified butter 
(should be offered) with the syllables (known as)uydhftis l0 11 duly. 

11. After that offer oblation (in the fire) to the gods, Agni, 
Soma and Purusottama separately with vydhrtis . 

12-13. The preceptor (officiating at the rite) should do the 
expiatory rite facing the eastern quarter offering to the image, 
meat, and sesamum along with ghee separately in the pitchers 
with the vedic syllables or the mystic formula of twelve syllables. 
Having scattered (sesamum) in the eight directions a stone 
and a pitcher should be placed at the centre and the following 
divinities (should be invoked) in order. 

14. Padma u , mah&padma, makara , kacchapa , kumuda 9 nanda y 
padma , fankha and padmini (are the divinities). 

15. The pitchers should not be moved. Eight bricks should 
be placed in them duly beginning with the eastern direction 
and ending with the north-east. 

16. The female energies Vimala and others, the presiding 
deities of these bricks, should be invoked in their proper pitchers. 

1. RV. 10.9.1a. 

2. RV. 10.9.4a. 

3. RV. 9.58.1a. 

4. G. Dh. 19.12. 

5. RV. 1.24.15a. 

6. RV. 4.31.1a. 

7. One of the many hymns beginning with this word See Ved. Con . 

8. RV. 4.40.5a. 

9. This is the stiktot 'ktraQyavafitim haritfm\ RV Kh. 5.87.1a. 

10. The three syllables bhQr, bhuvas, svar. Manu 2.76. 

11. This and the following are the different treasures, $ eeJWpa XVII. 2 
p. 160, The text here omits nlta and repeats Padma. 



112 


Agni Purdna 


The energy Anugraha should be invoked at the central pitcher. 

17. “O perfect, unbroken, full-bodied brick, the* daughter 
of the sage Angiras, I am establishing you. You grant me 
the desired thing.” 

18-20. The preceptor, having placed the brick with this 
mystic syllable should do garbhddhdna 1 . Having invoked the 
goddess Padmin! at the central pitcher, earth, flowers, minerals, 
gems, and iron pieces as well as the weapons of deities of 
quarters (should be placed) in the hole of twelve fingers’ width 
and four fingers’ depth. 

21-22. The goddess earth should be worshipped in a 
copper vessel of the shape of a lotus. “O the exclusive mistress 
of all beings, abound with the summits of mountains as the 
seats, one surrounded by oceans, O goddess ! You resort to this 
hole. O rejoicer ! born of sage Vasi$tha ! you rejoice with 
the Vasus and the progeny. 

23. O Victorious ! related to Bhargava (Parasur&ma) 
Maker of thine subjects victorious ! the perfect ! the relative of 
Angiras ! fulfil all my desires. 

24. O Auspicious one ! related to sage KaSyapa ! Make 
my intellect good. One who is accomplished with all seeds ! 
One vWio possesses all gems and herbs ! 

25. May you be victorious ! O beautiful one ! O re- 
joicer ! Related to Vasi$tha ! The daughter of the creator ! 
O Goddess ! O handsome one ! Stay on here in bliss — O 
majestic one ! 

26. Stay thou in this house ! O beautiful and brilliant 
one ! the daughter of Kaiyapa ! The honoured, most wonder- 
ful and bedecked with scents and garlands ! 

27. O Goddess ! Stay in bliss in this room ! O Bhar- 
gavi (daughter of Sukra) ! Bestower of worldly prosperities ! 
Possessed by the gods, kings, and masters of the house ! 

28. May you become the multiplier of animals for the 
happiness of men and others. Having said in this way one 
should then sprinkle cow’s urine on the pit. 

29. Having done so, one should place in the pit (such that) 
the impregnation would take place in the night. One should 


1. Impregnation at the pit. 



41.30-42.1-2 


113 


give away cows and clothes to the preceptor (the officiating 
priest), and food to other people. 

30. Having filled the hole and placing the bricks in the hole, 
the hole is completely filled. Then one should construct the base 
of the deity proportionate to the edifice of the deity. 

31 . An excellent base is that where it is more than half the 
breadth of the edifice, while a quarter lesser than that would be 
mediocre and that which is half of the excellent base (aforesaid) 
would be the lowest (in merit). 

32. After completing the base, the rite for the presiding deity 
(of the ground) should be done again. One who performs the 
consecration of the base would enjoy in heavens free from sin. 

33. One who would mentally think that “I am going to 
build a temple”, the sins which had stuck to his body would get 
destroyed that day itself. 

34-35. No need to speak (about the merits) of one who has 
built a temple in the prescribed manner. It is impossible for 
anyone to describe the merits one would accrue by building a 
temple with eight bricks alone. One should indeed infer from 
this the (proportionate) fruits (accrued) (from the building) 
of temples of greater dimensions. 

36. The door of the temple at the centre of the village or on 
the eastern part should face the west, while in other directions 
the door should be facing the west and in the southern, northern 
and western parts (the door) should face the east. 


CHAPTER FORTYTWO 
Construction of a temple 


Hayagriva said : 

1 . Listen to me describing the construction of a temple in 
general. A wise man should divide a square ground into sixteen 
parts. 

2. One should make the four central squares endowed with 
wealth. The other sixteen parts are left for the walls. 



114 


Agni Purdiia 


3. The pedestal should extend over four squares. The 
length of the cornice should be double that of the pedestal. 

4. The path of circumambulation should be a quarter of 
(the length) of the cornice. Two equal openings having the same 
width as the latter, should be left on the two sides for projections 

5. The extent of the ground should be made at first equal 
to the length of the tower or twice that such as it may be beauti- 
ful. 

6-7. One should construct the pavilion in front of the sanc- 
tum on the lines running parallel through the sides of its inner 
chamber, adorned with pillars and being of the same length or 
longer than the principal temple sanctorum by a quarter of its 
length. The anti-chamber should then be constructed at 81 steps. 

8. The deities at the end of the base should be worshipped 
before placing the parrots at the front door. In the same manner 
the thirty-two gods at the end should be worshipped when the 
outer wall is raised. 

9. This is the characteristic of a temple in general. Listen 
to the description (of raising) a temple proportionate to the 
(size of the) image. 

10. The base (of the deity) should be of the same size as the 
image. The adytum (of the temple) should be half the size of 
the base and the walls proportionate to the adytum. 

11. The height (of the walls) should be equal to the length 
of the walls. The pinnacle should be made equal to twice the 
height of the wall. 

12. The path around the temple should be a quarter of the 
extent of the pinnacle. The entrance chamber in the front should 
be a quarter of the extent of the pinnacle. 

13. The projections of the arches should be one-eighth of 
the extent of the adytum. The arches should be made propor- 
tionate to the circumference. 

14. The projections of arches should otherwise be made 
as one-third of it. Always there should be three projections on 
the left on the three arches. 

15-16. Four upward lines should be marked for (the con- 
struction of) the pinnacle. A downward line is marked to fall 
above the key-stone which is located at the middle part of the 



42.17-25 


115 


pinnacle. A lion is built at the middle part of the pinnacle in a 
line with the key-stone. 

17. Two such lines should be marked on the sides. There 
should be a small platform above that. 

1 8. (The lion ) should not be in a dropping posture or fierce- 
looking. The conical shaped structure is placed above, propor- 
tional to the small platform. 

19. A beautiful opening should be made twice the length 
of the platform. Two globes should be placed above that with 
beautiful (ornamental) branches. 

20-21. (Forms of) Canda and Pracanda should be carved 
on the door-frame occupying a fourth (of its space), (possessing) 
a staff like that of Visvaksena (Visnu) and at the threshhold of 
the branch beautiful (Goddess) Sri (Laksmi) (should be carved) 
as being bathed by the elephants of the quarters with (waters 
from) the pitchers . The height of enclosing wall should be one- 
fourth of that of the temple. 

22. The height of the tower should be a quarter lesser than 
that of the temple. The pedestal (of the image) of the deity of 
five cubits should be of a cubit. 

23. A shed known as the Garudamandapa and shed for 
Bhauma (Mars) and other (planets) (should be made). In 
the eight directions above (the chamber housing) one should 
make (the images as follows) : 

24-25. (The images of) Varaha (boar) in the east, jVrsimha 
(man-lion) in the south, Sridhara ( a form of Visnu) in the west, 
Hayagriva (horse-necked form of Vi?nu) in the north, Jamadagn- 
yaka (Para$urama, a manifestation of Vi?nu) in the south-east, 
Rdma in the south-west, V Smana (the short-statured manifesta- 
tion ofVi?pu) in the north-west (and) V&sudeva in the north-east. 
The temple should be decorated with gems all around. Leaving 
out one-eighth of the door if that is done, it is not defective. 



116 


Agni Purdna 


CHAPTER FORTYTHREE 
Installation of deities in the temples 


The Lord said : 

1. O Brahman ! Listen to my description (of the mode) 
of installation (of images) of deities in the temples. (Image of 
Vasudeva should be placed at the middle of the five divine) 
edifices. 

2. (The images of) the dwarf-form, man-lion form, horse* 
headed form, (and) boar form (ofVisnu) should be placed in 
the south-east, south-west, north-west and north-east (respecti* 
vely). 

3-5. (The image of) Narayana should be placed in the mid- 
dle. (The images of) the goddess, sun, Brahma and the lihga 
(symbolic representation of Siva) or of Rudra (Siva) should be 
placed in the south-east, south-west, north-west and north-east 
(respectively). Otherwise, (image of) Vasudeva should be 
placed at the centre of the nine chambers and beautiful (images, 
of Indra and the guardian deities of the world (should be placed) 
in the east and other directions. Otherwise, one should make 
five chambers and worship Purusottama (Visnu) in the centre. 

6. (The images of) LaksmI and Vaisravani (Kubera) 
should be placed in the east, the divine mothers in the south, 
Skanda, Gapeja, l£ana (a form of Siva) and the sun and other 
planets in the west. 

7-8. Otherwise, having installed (the images of) the mani- 
festations (of Vi?nu) such as the Fish etc., in the north, Carujika 
(a form of Goddess Parvati) in the south-east, Ambika in the 
south-west, Sarasvati in the north-west, Padma (Lak$ml) in the 
north-east and Vasudeva or also Narayana in the centre. The 
omni-present form of Hari should be placed in the centre in 
(the construction of) the thirteen chambers. 

9-11. (Images of) Ke£ava and others (should be placed) 
in the east and other directions or (the images) of Hari himself 
in all chambers. The images are of seven kinds — earthen, 
wooden, metallic, made of gems, made of stones, made of sandal 
and made of flowers. The images made of flowers, sandal and 
earth yield all desired fruits when they are worshipped at 



43.12-20 


117 


that moment. I shall describe the stone image (where such prac- 
tice) prevails. 

12. In the absence of hills, the stone lying buried in the earth 
should be taken out. Among the colours, white, red, yellow, 
and black are extolled. 

13. When stones of the above-mentioned colours are not 
available (the desired) colour is brought about by the (cere- 
mony known as) sirfihavidyd. 1 

14. After (the performance of) the sirhhahoma (a piece of) 
stone (which becomes) tinged with white colour or black colour 
or produces sound like a bell-metal or emits sparks of fire (is 
•deemed) as male. 

15. The female one is that in which these characteristics 
are present in a lesser degree. If they are devoid of colours they 
are neuter. (The stones) in which the sign of a circle is found 
are to be taken as impregnated and should be rejected. 

16. One should go to the forest and perform the forest 
rites for the sake of an image. After having bathed and plastering 
a shed Hari should be worshipped there. 

1 7. After having made the offering of the victim, the (stone- 
cutter’s) chisel used for the work should be worshipped. Having 
offered homa (pouring of clarified butter into the fire), water 
mixed with rice should be sprinkled over the image with the 
implement (chisel ) . 

18. Having made the protective spell it should be worshipp- 
ed with basic sacred syllable of lord Nj-simha. After having 
made the offering to fire the final oblation should be made. Then 
offerings to the goblins should be given by the preceptor. 

19. Having worshipped the good (spirits), the demons, 
guhyakas (a class of attendant-gods of Kubera), and accompli- 
shed souls and others who may be residing there, should be 
requested to forgive. 

20. (They should be addressed as follows). “This journey 
(has been undertaken) by us for the image of Vi$nu by the com- 
mand of Ke£ava. Any work done for the sake of Visnu, 
should also be your (concern).” 


1. Only Hayaffrfasarhhitd of the PaAcar&tr&gama texts mentions this. 
The present text does not explain this. See Vaifoaoa Iconography , p. 40. 



T 18 


Agni Purdna 


21. “Being always pleased with this offering (you) repair 
quickly to some other place quitting this place for good’*. 

22. Being informed thus (these beings) go to another place 
in good cheer and satisfied. Having eaten the sacrificial 
porridge along with the sculptors, he should repeat in the night 
the following sacred syllables (inducing) sleep. 

23. “Om ! salutations to (Lord) Visnu, the omnipresent, 
Prabhavisnu (Visnu) (strong), the universe, and Salutations 
to the lord of dreams.” 

24. “O Lord of lords I I have slept by your side. (Ins- 
truct me) in my dreams (how to execute) all the works I 
have in my mind.” 

25. “Om Om ! hrum phaf visnave svdkd ! When the dream 
(is) good, everything (will also be) good. If it is bad, it becomes 
good by the performance of the siiiihahoma 1 . Having offered 
reverential waters to the stone in the morning, the implements 
should be worshipped with (the sacred syllables) (for the worship 
of) implements. 

26. The spades and chisels should have their edges be- 
smeared with honey and clarified butter. (The priest) should 
think himself as Visnu and the sculptor as Viivakarman (the 
divine architect). 

27-28. The implement which is of the form of Visnu should 
be given (to the sculptor) and its face and back should be shown. 
Having cut a square block of the stone with controlled senses 
and holding a chisel, the sculptor should make a smaller one for 
the purpose of the pedestal. Having placed (them) in a chariot 
and brought to the workspot together with the cloth (one who) 
makes the image after having worshipped (the form conceived), 
is a sculptor. 


CHAPTER FORTYFOUR 
Characteristics of the image o/Vdsudeva 
The Lord said : 

1-2. I shall describe to you the characteristics of the image 
1. See W. 13 end 17 above. 



,44.3-14 


119 


of Vasudeva and other gods. Having placed the stone to the 
north of the temple facing either the east or the north and 
worshipped it, the sculptor should- divide the stone into nine 
parts along the central line after making the offering. 

3. In the twelve divisions (of the line) a division is said to 
be an angula (a finger breadth). Two afigulas are known to be a 
golaka . It is also said to be a kdlanetra. 

4. Having divided one of the nine divisions into three, 
(with one part) the region of the calves should be made. In the 
same way a part is to be used for the knees and part for the neck. 

5. The crown should be of a measure of a tdla (12 afigulas). 
In the same way the face (should be) of the measure of a tdla. 
The neck and heart should also be a tdla each. 

6. The navel and the genital part should be a tdla apart. 
(The length) of the thighs should be two tdlas . (The length) 
of the part from the ankle to the knee should be two tdlas . Listen 
now to (the description) (of the drawing) of lines (on the body). 

7. Two lines should be drawn on the foot, and (two) more 
in between the calves (and knees). Two lines about the knees 
and two more in between the thighs and the knees should be 
drawn. 

8. One line should be drawn over the genital part, and one 
more about the waist. Another (line) (should) then (be drawn) 
above the navel for accomplishing the girdle. 

9. Then (a line) should be drawn on the heart and two lines 
on the neck. One such line should be drawn on the forehead and 
one more on the head. 

10. One more line should be diawn on the crown by the 
learned. O Brahman ! seven vertical lines should be drawn. 

1 1 . Six lines should be laid in between the armpits and the 
lower part of the spine. These lines alone should be marked 
clearly omitting the central line. 

12. The forehead, the nose and the mouth should be made 
(to measure) four afigulas. The neck and the two ears should 
be made (to measure) four afigulas long. 

1 3 . The cheeks so also the chin should be made ( to measure ) 
two afigulas broad. The forehead is said to be eight afigulas 
broad. 

14. Over that the temples (sides of the forehead) should 



120 


Agni PvrUna 


be made two ahgulas endowed with curbs. The intervening 
space between the eyes and ears is said to be four ahgula $. 

15. The ears should be two ahgulas wide. (The inter- 
space between) the ears and the ends of eyc-lashes (should 
be) two and a half units. The cavity in the ear is spoken to be 
in the same line as the eyebrows. 

16. A pierced ear (should be) six ahgulas and an unpierced 
(ear) (should be) four ahgulas equal to the chin. (Or it should 
be) six ahgulas whether it is pierced or not pierced. 

17. Then the external auditory passage with its membranes 
etc. should be made. The lower lip should be of two ahgulas and 
the upper lip should be half of it. 

18. Then the (breadth) of an eye (should be) half an 
ahgula and the mouth (should be) four ahgulas. The measure- 
ment of its depth is spoken to be one and a half ahgulas. 

19-20. The unopened mouth should be in this way. The 
opened mouth should be three ahgulas. The base of the bridge 
of the nose should be one ahgula high. From its tip it should be 
two ahgulas similar to the karavira (flower) (oleander). The 
intervening space between the two eyes should be made to mea- 
sure four ahgulas. 

21. The corners of the eyes (should be) two ahgulas. The 
space between them (should be) two ahgulas . The pupil (should 
be) one third of the eye and the iris (should be) one fifth (of it ) . 

22. The breadth of the eye (should be) three ahgulas. The 
cavity (of the eye) is considered to be half an ahgula . The lengths 
of the eyebrows are considered to be equal and are proportional 
to the eye-brows. 

23. The middle of the eye-brow should be two ahgulas and 
its length (should be) four ahgulas. The measure round the head 
(should be) thirty-six ahgulas. 

24. The measurement around the heads of the images of 
Kegava and other gods should be thirty-six (ahgulas). The head- 
measure of all those (images) which are short-necked (should 
be) ten (ahgulas). 

25. The inter-space between the neck and the chest should 
be three times the length of the neck and should be thrice as 
much broad plus eight ahgulas. 

26. The shoulders (should) be made (to measure) eight 



44.27-36 


121 


afigulas and the two beautiful shoulder regions (should be) three 
times those. The arms should measure seven times (the length 
of) the eyes. The fore arms (should be) sixteen afigulas. 

27. The arms should be three kal&s 1 2 3 in breadth and the fore- 
arms should also be equal to that. The upper arm should have 
a circumference of nine kalis- 

28. It should be seventeen apgulas at the middle and sixteen 
afigulas above the elbow-joint. O Brahman 1 the circumference 
of elbow should be three times that. 

29. The circumference of the middle of the forearm is said 
to be sixteen afigulas . The circumference of the fore-part of the 
arm is said to be twelve afigulas . 

30. The palm of the hand is said to be six afigulas in breadth. 
The length should be seven afigulas . The middle (finger) should 
be five afigulas (long). 

31. The index finger and the ring finger (should be) ihalf 
an afigula less than that. The little finger and the thumb should 
be made to measure four afigulas each. 

32. The thumb should be made to have two parvans (joints ) . 
The other fingers (should have) three joints. The measure of 
the nail is laid down as half (the size of the joints) on the res- 
pective fingers. 

33. The extent of the belly is same as that of the chest. The 
navel should be an afigula (in breadth) and proportionally deep. 

34. Then the inter-space between the generative organ and 
the intestines should be made to measure a tala . The girth around 
the navel (should be) forty- two afigulas . 

35. The inter-space between the breasts should be made 
to measure a tala in breadth. The nipples should be of the mea- 
sure of a java* (barley grain). The circular space around them 
should be two pddas (two feet). 

36. The circumference of the chest should be made sixty- 
four afigulas clearly. The girth of the lower portion (of the chest) 
is said to be four mukhas* (one tdla). 

1 . Equal to two afigulas. Alio called Gclaka. 

2. One eighth of an afigula . 

3. Seems to be a corrupt form for mukhya equal to one tdla or twelve 
afigulas . 



122 


Agni Pur&nct 


37. The circumference of the waist should be fifty-four 
afigulas . The breadth of the base of the thigh is said to be twelve 
afigulas . 

38. It is somewhat greater at the middle (of the thigh) 
and gradually less (broad) below. The knee-joint (should be) 
eight angulas in breadth and thrice that in its girth. 

39. The middle of the leg from the ankle to the knee is said 
to be seven afigulas broad. The girth of it (should be) three times 
that. The top of the leg (should be) five afigulas broad. 

40. The girth of that (the leg) (should be) thrice its breadth. 
The feet (should) measure a t&la. The extent of elevation 
of the feet (should be) four angulas . 

41. The front (part) of the ankles should be four afigulas 
The extent of the feet should be three kalds. The generative organ 
should be three angulas . 

42. Its girth (should be) five afigulas . The fore-finger 
(should be) of same length. The other fingers are duly lesser 
by one part of eighth. 

43. The height of the toe is said to be one and a half afigulas . 
The nail of the two should be made twice that. 

44. (Those of other fingers) should be gradually made half 
afigula less than the previous. The scrotum should be three 
afigulas (long). The generative organ (should be) four fingers 
(long). 

45. The girth of the upper part of the pouch should be made 
(to be) four angulas . The girth of the scrotum is said to be six 
afigulas . 

46. The image should be adorned with ornaments. This is 
the exact description of details. The features (of the deities) 
should be made in this world, as described. 

47. A disc on the (upper) right hand, and a lotus on the 
lower (right hand), the conch on the (upper) left hand, the 
mace on the lower (left hand) are to be placed according to 
the characteristic of V&sudeva. 

48-49. (The images of) Sri and Pusti should be made carry- 
ing a lotus and a harp respectively in their hands, (their images) 
reaching upto the thighs (of that of Vasudeva). Then the two 
Vidyadharas (a class of semi-divine beings) holding the gar* 
lands (in their hands) should be made in the halo of the prin* 



45.1-9 


123 


cipal image). The halo (should also) be decked with the (ima- 
ges) of (celestial) elephants. The pedestal should be radiant 
like a lotus on which the images (should be worshipped) as 
follows. 


CHAPTER FORTYFIVE 

Characteristics of pedestals and details relating to images 
The Lord said : 

1. I shall describe the characteristics of the pedestal. The 
length is the same as that of the image. The height (should 
be) half of it. It should have sixty-four folds. 

2. Leaving two rows at the bottom, the other parts 
should be polished on either side as also inside. 

3. Leaving two rows at the top, the other parts are polished 
evenly on either side and inside. 

4. The rectangular space in between these should then be 
polished. The first two rows should be divided into four parts 
by a wise man. 

5-6. The girdle should be equal to one such part. The in- 
dent should be half that. Leaving one such part evenly on either 
side a wise man should leave on the exterior a breadth of a foot. 
The water drains should be at the top of each one of the three 
parts. 

7. This auspicious and excellent pedestal (has been des- 
cribed) relating to its manifold ways (of construction). The 
(images of the)goddess Lak?ml and other feminine forms should 
be made (to measure) eight ( tdlas in length. 

8. The eye brows should be more than a yava (in length). 
The nose (should be) less than a yava (in length). The mouth 
(should measure) more than a small ball well distributed above 
and below. 

9. The eye should be made long (measuring) three parts of 
a yava less than three yavas, The breadth of the eyes should be 
made half of it. 



124 


Agni Pur&ria 


10. The beautiful ears should be made to be in a line with the 
corners of the mouth. Then the two shoulders should be made 
sloping by less than a kald. 

11-12. The neck should be one and a half kal&s long and 
made beautiful by a proportionate width. The thighs, knee- 
joints, the pedestal, should be broad. The feet, the hinder part, 
the bullocks and the hips should be made as prescribed. The 
fingers should measure less than the seventh part of the above 
and should be long and not crooked. 

13. The shank, thigh and the hip would be one netra 1 less 
in length. The middle part and the sides should have the same 
roundness. The two breasts (should be) fully developed and 
plump. 

14-15. The beasts should be made to measure a t&la. The 
waist should be one and a half kal&s. The other marks should be 
the same as before. A lotus (should be placed) on the right hand 
and a bilva (fruit) on the left (hand). (There should be) two 
maidens on the sides holding chowries in their hands. (The 
image of) Garucja should have a long nose. I shall then describe 
those which bear the marks of a disc. 


CHAPTER FORTYSIX 
Characteristics of different i&lagr&ma stones 
The Lord said : 

1. I shall describe (the characteristics of) the i&lagr&ma 
mdrti 2 (the different gods represented by different kinds of 
i&lagr&ma stones) which yield enjoyment and emancipation. 
(The stone called) V&sudeva is black (coloured) around its mouth 
and has (marks) of two discs on it. 

2. The Sahkarfana (stone) is red (in colour) and has marks 

1. The measurement indicated by this word is not quite dear. Pro- 
bably equal to two aAgulas. 

2. The i&lagr&ma stones obtained from the beds of Gagdakl river in 
Nepal are associated with the worship of VifQu. The different stones bearing 
different marks are taken to represent different forms df Viftni. 



46.3-12 


125 


of two discs (and is considered as) excellent. The Pradyumna 
(stone) has many holes, elongated and is blue (coloured). 

3. The Aniruddha (stone) is yellow (in colour) and has the 
mark of a lotus. It is circular (in shape) and has two or three 
rays. The Ndrdyaqa (stone) is black (in colour) with an elevated 
and deep hole. 

4. The Paramefti (stone) (has the marks of) the lotus and 
disc. It is perforated at the back and has dots on the surface. 
The Viwu (stone) has a big disc (mark). It is black(in colour)* 
It has a line in the middle part. It is of the shape of a mace. 

5-6. The Nrsirhha (stone) is tawny. It has (the mark of) 
a big disc and five dots. The Vardha (stone) is of the shape of the 
female divinity. It has unequal discs. It is of the colour of sap- 
phire. It is large with the marks of three lines and is good. The 
KUrma stone has an elevated hinder part with circular lines 
and is black (in colour). 

7. The Hayagriva (stone) has a line of the shape of a good. 
It is blue (coloured) and is dotted. The Vaikuntha (stone) has 
(the mark of) a disc and lotus. It has the radiance of a gem. 
It has tail-shaped lines. 

8. The Matsya stone is long and has three dots. It is crystal- 
line-coloured and is well formed. The Sridhara (stone) has a 
garland of wild flowers and five lines and is circular. 

9. The Vdmana (stone) is circular and is very short. It is 
blue (coloured) and has a dot. The Trivikrama (stone) is black 
(coloured) . It has a line on the right and a dot on the left side. 

10. The Ananta (stone) has the mark of the hood of a ser- 
pent, it has variegated colours and manifold forms. The Ddmo - 
dor a (stone) is big and has a disc in the middle part with two* 
minute dots. 

11. The Sudariana (stone) has (the mark of) a disc. The 
Lakfmindrdyana (stone) (is that which has the marks of) two discs* 
The Acyuta (stone) (has the marks of) three discs. Or the 7Vi- 
vikrama (stone) may have (the marks of) three discs. 

12. The Jandrdana (stone) has (the marks of) four discs. 
The Vdsudsva (stone) has (the marks of) five discs. The Pra - 
dyumna (stone) has (the marks of) six discs. I'he Safikarfaiia 
(stone) has (the marks of) seven discs. 



126 


Agni Purdna 


13. The Purufottama (stone) has (the marks) of eight discs. 
The NavavyQha form has the marks of nine discs. (The stone 
representing) the ten manifestations (of Visnu) (is marked) 
with ten (discs). The Aniruddha form (is marked) with eleven 
(discs). The DvadaSdtman (class of Sdlagrdma) (is marked) by 
twelve (discs). (One is deemed to be) the Ananta (class of 
Sdlagrdma) (if it has) more (discs) than these. 


CHAPTER FORTYSEVEN 
Mode of worshipping Sdlagrdma 


The Lord said : 

1 . I shall describe the mode of worshipping the Sdlagrdma 
marked with discs for (the sake of) accomplishment. The wor- 
ship of Hari (in the Sdlagrdma) is of three kinds — 

(i) kdmyd performed for gaining particular benefit 

(ii) akdmyd performed with disinterestedness about the benefits 

(iii) Subhaydtmika , that is of the nature of both of them. 

2. (The worship) of the five (manifestations of Visnu) 
(such as) the Fish 1 etc., is, either kdmyd or ubhaydtmikd . (The 
worship of the manifestations) of the Boar Man-lion and Dwarf 
forms (of Vi?nu is) for emancipation. 

3-6. Listen to the three-fold worship of the Sdlagrdma endow- 
ed with discs. The excellent worship is that performed without 
desiring for the fruits. The worship with desire for the fruits is 
the last (in the rank). The worship of an image is mediocre. 
In a circular lotus placed on a rectangular seat, having assigned 
the pranava (the syllable Om) to the heart and having assigned 
(the sacred syllables) to the parts of the body and having shown 
three mudrds (positions of fingers in the practice of worship), 
the preceptor should be worshipped outside the circle. The 
attendant gods [ganas) should be worshipped on the west. Dilati- 
on the north-west, Vidhatr on the south-west, the Kart& andHarta 
on the south and north, Vi$vaksena(Vi$flu)should be worshipp- 

1 . The text does not specify the names of other manifestations. 



47.7—48.1 


127 


ed in the north-east, and K§etrap&laka (the guardian deity) 
on the south-east. 

7. The Vedas , Rgoeda etc. (should be worshipped) in the east 
etc. (The serpent) Ananta (which is) the support of the earth, 
the seat of worship, the lotus, the three orbs — sun, moon and 
fires (should be worshipped). 

8. The seat (should consist) of twelve letters 1 (forming the 
mystic formula of the God). Having placed (the God) there, 
the stone should be worshipped with the individual syllables 
and the whole of the sacred syllable in order. 

9-10. Then one should worship with the vedic sacred sylla- 
bles accomplished by the syllables such as the g&yatri, etc. and 
pranava on the east and other directions. Then the three mudras 
of the Visvaksena (Vi§nu), the disc and the K§etrapala should 
be shown. This is the first variety of the worship of falagrama. 
Then I shall describe the one with no merits. 

1 1 . One should draw a circle as before with sixteen radii and 
with a lotus. One should then worship the preceptor and others 
with a conch, disc, mace and sword. 

12. The bow and the arrows (should be placed) in the east 
and the north. The seat should be placed with the vedic (syl- 
lables). The stone should be placed with the (sacred) twelve 
syllables 2 of the lord. Listen to the third variety of worship. 

13. One should draw a lotus having eight radii and worship 
the preceptor and others as before. Having offered the seat with 
the eight sacred letters 3 one should place the stone with the same 
(formula). One should worship ten times with that (formula). 
It is then accomplished by g&yatri etc. 


CHAPTER FORTYEIGHT 
Adoration of twentyfour forms of Vifnu 


The Lord said : 

1. Keiava of the form of (syllable) Om bears the lotus, 

1 . Om namo bkagavate u&sudrvtya. 

2. See the previous note. 

3. Om namo v&sudeotya. 



128 AgniPur&nar 

conch, disc and mace. Narayana (bears) the conch, lotus, mace- 
and disc. Circumambulation to Him. m 

2. Then I salute Madhava, who bears the mace, disc, conch, 
and lotus. Govinda wields the disc, the Kaumodaki (name of a. 
mace), lotus and conch. 

3. Vi$nu, the bearer of the disc, the mace, lotus and conch 
is the bestower of emancipation. I salute Madhusudana, who 
bears the conch, disc, lotus and mace. 

4. (I prostrate) with devotion (at the feet of) Trivikrama 
who bears the lotus, mace, disc and conch. May Vamana, the- 
bearer of the conch, disc, mace and lotus protect me always. 

5. Srldhara who holds a lotus, disc, bow and also the conch, 
yields emancipation. Hr?ikeja wields the mace, disc, lotus and 
conch. May He protect us. 

6. And Padmanabha (is one) who yields boons and who- 
holds the conch, lotus, disc and mace, (I salute him). Damo- 
dara (is one) who holds a lotus, conch, mace and disc. I salute 
him. 

7. May Vasudeva, who wields a mace, conch, disc and 
lotus (protect) the universe. May Sankar§ana, who holds a. 
mace, conch, lotus and disc protect us. 

8. Lord Pradyumna is one who holds a mace, disc, 
conch and mace as well as a lotus. May Aniruddha, who wields 
the disc, mace, conch and lotus protect us. 

9. May Puru?ottama, the Lord of celestials, who holds 
disc, lotus, conch and mace (protect you). May Adhokgaja 
who wields lotus, mace, conch and disc protect you. 

10. I salute that Lord Nrsimha, who wields disc, lotus, 
mace and conch. May Acyuta, who holds mace, lotus, disc 
and conch, protect you all. 

11. So also (may) Upendra, who is of the form of a child 
and (who holds) the disc and lotus, (proteci you). And (may) 
Janardana, who wields lotus, disc, conch and mace (protect 
you). 

12. May Hari, who holds conch, lotus, disc as well as 

(mace) kaumodaki yield me enjoyment and emancipation. 
May Kf?na, who holds conch, mace, lotus and disc give en- 
joyment and emancipation. ^ 



48.13—49.1-7 


129 


13. The first manifestation was that of Vasudeva. Then 
Sankarsana manifested. Pradyumna manifested from Sankar- 
$ana. Aniruddha appeared from Pradyumna. 

14. Each one of the (above) forms was divided into three 
forms such as Ke£ava and others.. One who reads or hears this 
hymn consisting of twelve letters on the twenty-four forms gets 
free from impurity and gets all things. 


CHAPTER FORTY-NINE 
Characteristics of forms of ‘ Fish * etc . of Vijnu 
The Lord said : 

1. I shall describe to you the characteristics of the ten 
manifestations (ofVi$nu) beginning with the Fish. The Fish 
(form ofVisnu) should resemble a fish. The Tortoise (form) 
should resemble a tortoise. 

2. The terrestrial boar (manifestation) should have a hu- 
man body and as carrying a mace and other (weapons) in the 
right hand, and the conch, (the goddess) Lak$mi or a lotus in 
the left. 

3. Or (the goddess) (is represented) as resting on the left 
elbow and the earth and (the serpent) Ananta at the feet. The 
installation of the figure secures for a person a kingdom and 
(such a person) gets across the ocean of mundane existence. 

4. The Man-lion image (should be represented) as having 
a wide open mouth and having the killed demon (Hiranya- 
kasipu) on the left thigh. His chest should wear a garland and 
(his arms) should hold disc and mace. 

5. The Dwarf-form may hold an umbrella and a stick or 
have four arms. The figure of Para£urama may hold the bow 
and arrow, a sword and an axe. 

6. (The figure of) Rama should have the bow, arrow, sword,, 
conch or two hands or may have four arms holding a mace and 
plough. 

7. The plough may be provided on the left half (upper arm) 
and the auspicious conch on the lower arm. The mace may be 



130 Agni Purdna 

provided on the right half (upper arm) and the auspicious disc 
on the lower arm. 

8. The figure of Buddha (should be made) as calm, hav- 
ing long ears, white complexion, wearing a cloth, and seated on 
a lotus with its petals upwards and as conferring favour and 
protection. 

9. (The figure of) Kalki is (to be represented as) a twice- 
born endowed with a bow and quiver and as destroying the 
foreigners. Or (he should be represented as) seated on the horse 
and endowed with a sword, conch, disc and arrow. 

10. I shall describe the characteristics of nine forms 
of Vi$nu commencing with Vasudeva. The mace (is placed) 
on the right half (upper arm) and the excellent disc on the left 
half (upper arm). 

1 1 . The image of Vasudeva may be made as before or as 
having four hands or two hands, one holding a conch and the 
other as conferring boons and having Brahma and Isa (Siva) 
always on either side. 

12. (The figure of) Balarama (is represented) as hold- 
ing a plough, mace, club and lotus. (The image of) Pradyumna 
(is represented as having) thunderbolt and conch on the 
right arm and the bow in the left arm. 

13. Or Pradyumna (is represented) as having the mace 
resting on the navel with pleasure or holding the bow and arrow. 
Aniruddha may be (represented as) having four arms. In the 
same way Lord Narayana (may also be represented). 

14. (The image of) Brahma is (represented as having) 
four faces, four hands, big belly, long beards, matted hair, and 
(having) swan as the vehicle in front (of him). 

15. (There should be) a rosary and a ladle on the right 
hand and a water-pot and vessel to hold the sacrificial clarified 
butter. Sarasvati and Savitrl (consorts of Brahma) (should be 
placed) on the left and right sides. 

16. (The image of) Vi?nu (is represented) as having eight 
hands, Garuda (the vehicle), (holding) a sword, mace, and 
arrow in the right hand and as conferring gifts and (holding) 
the bow and mace in the left hand. 

17. (The figure of) Narasimha (is represented) (as having) 
four hands holding the conch and disc and piercing (the body) 
of the mighty demon (Hirapyakajipu). 



49 . 18-27 


131 


18-22. (The figure of) Var&ha (is endowed with) four arms 
holding the (serpent) Se$a in (one of) the hands and the earth 
in the left (hand) and (his consort) Kamala (Lalqml ) . The 
earth should be made as resting at the feet and(goddess)Laksmi 
as seated at the feet. Trailokyamohana (one who stupefies the 
three worlds) (should be represented as riding) the T&rkhya (the 
eagle-vehicle) and possess eight hands, holding the sword, mace 
and goad in the right hand and the conch, bow, mace and the 
noose in the left hand. (Images of)Laksmi and Sarasvati should 
be endowed with lotus and lute (respectively). Then (the form 
of) Viivarupa (of Visnu) (should be endowed) with the club, 
noose, spear and arrow in the right hand and conch, bow, mace, 
noose, tomara (javelin), plough, axe, staff, sword and leather 
sling in the left hand. 

23-24. The Harihara (Siva and Vi$nu) form of Visnu 
(should be placed) on the right or left (side), (being endowed 
with) twenty hands, four faces and three eyes. He should either 
be lying on his left or reclining on the water. (He should further 
be represented) as his leg being held by the goddess Sri (Laksmi). 
He should also be shown as being attended to by (the female 
divinities) Vimala and others. He should also have the four- 
faced (Brahma) in the navel-lotus. 

25. The form of Vignu bearing the marks of Rudra and 
Kejava should hold a spear and sword in the right hand and 
the mace and disc in the other and be in the company of Gaurl 
and Lak?ml (the consorts of Siva and Vi?nu). 

26. The Haya£iras (horse-headed) form of Vi?nu (should 
be represented) as holding the conch, disc, mace and the Vedas. 
The left foot should rest on (the serpent) Se$a and the right on 
the back of tortoise. 

27. The form of Dattatreya may have two arms, the goddess 
Sri (Lak;m3) being seated on the left lap. The Vi?vaksena form 
of Vi?nu (may hold) a disc, mace, plough and conch. 



132 


Agni Pur&nec 


CHAPTER FIFTY 

Characteristics of an image of the goddess 
The Lord said : 

1 -5. (The image of) Candi may have twenty hands and may 
hold the spear, sword, dart, disc, noose, club, (famara (a 
small drum) and spike in the left hands and also (show) protec- 
tive posture (and) the snake as the noose, club, axe, goad, bow, 
bell, banner, mace, mirror, and iron mace in the (right) hands. 
Or (the figure of) Candi is made to have ten hands, with the 
buffalo placed below with its head fully severed and the demon 
as issuing forth from (its) neck with rage and brandishing his 
weapon, holding spike in the hand, vomitting blood, his hairs 
(stained) with blood and blood dripping out from the eyes 
(forming) a garland (on the chest), being devoured by the lion 
and well-bound by the noose in the neck. (The goddess is repre- 
sented as) resting her right foot on the lion and the left foot on 
the demon underneath. 

6-12. This form of Candika, the destroyer of enemies 
(is made as) having three eyes and endowed with weapons. 
(This) Durga is to be worshipped with the nine elements in order 
in a diagram of nine lotuses from her own form at the beginning, 
centre and the eastern and other (directions). (The image 
should be made as) possessing eighteen arms (carrying) a human 
head, club, mirror, tarjani (a kind of weapon ) , bow, banner and 
a little drum in the right hand and the noose, spear, mace > 
trident, thunderbolt, sword, goad and dart in the left hand. 
The others (Rudracanda and other goddesses) should be- 
endowed with the same weapons in their sixteen hands 
except the little drum and tarjani (a kind of weapon). 

The nine (goddesses) commencing with Rudracanda are 
Rudracanda, Pracanda, Cantfogra, Candanayika, Canda, 
Candavati, Candarupa, Aticandika and Ugracapda stationed 
at the centre. (They are made to be) coloured as the rocand 
(yellow pigment), red, black, blue, white, purple, yellow and 
white and as riding the lion. Then the buffalo as a human (form ) 
should be held by the hair by the nine (forms) of Durg& holding 
weapons. 



SO. 13-25 


133 


13. They are in the dlitfha 1 posture. They have to be 
established for the increase of progeny; as also (the forms) 
Gaurl, Candika and others (as well as the forms) Kui?di, Ak$ara- 
Tada (and) Agnidhrk. 

14-15. She is the same as Rambha. (She is) accomplished 
and devoid of fire. (She is) also Lalita. (She) holds the 
severed head along with the neck in the left (hand) and a 
mirror in the second hand. 

(The image of) Saubhagya (is made) as holding fruits in 
the folded palms on the right side. (The image of) Lak$nu 
holds the lotus in the right hand and the hiphala (bilva fruit) 
in the left. 

16. (The image of) Sarasvatl (should be made as holding) 
a book, rosary and lute in the hands. (The image of) Jahnavi 
(the river Ganges) (is represented) as holding a pot and flower 
in the hand (and standing) on the crocodile and of white com- 
plexion. 

17. (The image of the river) Yamuna is worshipped as 
mounted on the tortoise and as holding a pot in the hand and of 
dark complexion. (The image of) Tumburu is represented as 
white (in colour), holding a lute and trident and riding a bull. 

18-19. The four-faced Brahml (the female-energy of Brahma) 
(is represented) as of fair complexion, riding a swan and as 
carrying a rosary, different vessels such as surd and kun$a in the 
left hand. &arikari is represented as white, (seated) on a bull 
holding the bow and arrow in the right hand and the disc and 
the bow in the left hand. Kaumari (is represented) as red 
in colour, riding the peacock and having two arms, holding the 
spears. 

20. (The form of) Lak$mi should hold the disc, and conch 
in the right (hand) (and) the mace and lotus in the left (hand). 
(The form of) Varahl should be mounted on the buffalo and 
hold the stick, conch, sword and goad. 

21-25. (The image of) Aindri conferring success should be 
represented as having thousand eyes and holding the thunder- 
bolt in the left hand. 

1. The posture in shooting, in which the right knee is advanced and 
the left leg is held back. 



134 


Agni Purdna 


Camufl<J& may have three eyes deeply sunken, a skeleton 
form devoid of flesh, erectly standing hair, emaciated belly, clad 
in tigerskin and holding a skull and spear in the left hand and 
a trident and scissor in the right standing on the dead body 
of a man and wearing a garland of bones. (The image of) Vinayaka 
should have a human body, big belly, elephant face, big trunk 
and sacred thread. The mouth measuring 7 kalds in breadth 
while the trunk should measure 36 finger-breadths in length. 
The neck should be 12 kalds in girth and 10 kalds in height. The 
throat-region should be 36 finger (in length). The space about 
the region of anus should have the breadth of half a finger. 

26. (The region of) the navel and thigh should be of twelve 
(fingers) as also the leg from the ankle to the knee and the feet. 
He should be represented as holding his own tusk made into an 
axe in the right hand and the la^duka (a ball of sweet) and 
lotus flower in the left. 

27. (The image of) Skanda, the lord (of the universe) also 
known as Sakha and Vigakha, (is represented) as a boy possess- 
ing two arms and riding a peacock (with the images of) Sumukhi 
and Vujalaksl 1 . 

28-29. The god may be represented as having a single face 
or six faces, six hands or twelve hands carrying the spear and a 
cock in the right hand. In the village or the forest (it should 
have) two arms. (He should bear) the spear, arrow, noose, 
nistrirhfa (sword), goad and tarjani (a kind of weapon) in 
the six right hands and the spear in the left hand. 

30-31 . (The image of) Rudracarcika (the manifestation of) 
the goddess may have a bow adorned by the plume of peacock, 
club, banner, protective posture, cock, skull, scissors, trident 
and noose in the right and left hands. (She should also be) 
clad in the elephant hide, with her leg raised up and the little 
drum placed on the head. 

32. Hence she (is known as) Rudracamunda, the goddess 
of dancing and one who is dancing. This (goddess herself), 
having four faces and in the sitting posture (is known as) Mah&- 
lak$ml. 

1. The consorti of Slcanda. The two names mean good-faced and 
cat-eyed respectively. ■* 



50.33-41 


135 


33-34. (The goddess) having ten hands and three eyes 
(holding) (different) weapons, sword and $<maru (little 
drum) in the right hand and the bell, club, staff with a skull at 
one end and trident in the left (hand) and eating men, horses, 
buffaloes and elephants held in the hand is called Siddhac&- 
mun<j&. 

35. That goddess accomplishes everything and is (known 
(as) SiddhayogeSvarl. She is also represented in another form 
endowed with the noose and goad and red (in complexion). 

36. (The goddess) Bhairavl who has an embodiment of 
beauty is endowed with twelve arms. These are (all) (spoken 
as) fierce (forms) arising from the cremation ground. The 
above are remembered as the eight forms of the goddess. 

37. (The goddess) K?ama (Forbearance) (should be) 
surrounded by jackals, old, having two arms, and widely opened 
mouth. (The goddess) Ksemankari (Benevolent) may have pro- 
truding teeth and be resting her knees on the ground. 

38. The wives of semi-gods should be made to have long 
and motionless eyes. The Sakinls (female attendants on God- 
dess Durga) should be made to have oblique vision. The Maha- 
ramyas should have yellow eyes. The (images of) nymphs should 
always be made beautiful. 

39. (The form of) Nandlsa the bull, the door-keeper (of 
the goddess ) , should carry a rosary and a trident. (The image of) 
Mahakala (a form of Siva as the destroyer) may have a sword, 
human skull, trident and club. 

40. (The form of) Bhrngin (an attendant of Siva) should 
have an emaciated body. Kusman<Ja (another attendant of 
Siva) should have a stout and dwarf form dancing. VIrabhadra 
and other attendants (of Siva) should have ears and faces 
of elephants, cows, etc. 

41. Ghanfakarna (an attendant of Siva) form should have 
eighteen hands crushing the accrued sin, (holding weapons) 
thunderbolt, sword, club, disc, arrow, mace, goad and hammer 
in the right hand and tarjanl (a weapon), club, dart, human 
skull, noose, bow, bell and axe on the left and a trident in the 
(remaining) two hands and wearing a garland of bells and crush- 
ing the eruptive diseases. 



136 


Agni Pttrdna 


CHAPTER FIFTYONE 
Characteristics of the images of the Sun and other planets 
The Lord said : 

1. (The image of) the Sun (should be made) to ride a 
chariot having one wheel and seven horses. (He must) hold two 
lotuses, ink-stand, pen and a staff in his right hand. 

2. Pihgala, an attendant and gate-keeper of the Sun (should 
be placed) on the left with the mace in his hand. (Sun-god) 
should have female attendants bearing chowries (fly-flappers) 
and the pale-looking consort by his side. 

3. Or (the image of) the Sun should be made as riding a 
horse alone. The guardian deities of different quarters 
should duly be endowed with weapons, holding two lotuses 
(in hands) and bestowing boons. 

4. (The images of) Agni and other gods bearing the club, 
trident, disc and lotus should be placed in different directions 
(around). (The images of) the forms of Sun, commencing 
with Aryamaare represented as possessing four arms and placed 
in a diagram of twelve petals. 

5-6. Varuna, Surya, Sahasramsu (one who has thousand 
rays), Dhatf, 'Tapana, Savitr, Gabhastika, Ravi, Parjanya, 
Tva§pr> Mitra(and) Vi$nu are his different names as he moves 
over the zodiacal signs commencing with the Aries in the course 
of months commencing with Marga£lrsa and ending with 
Karttika. 1 

7-9. Their female energies known by the names — Ida, 
Susumna, Vi£varcis, Indu, Pramardini, Prahar$ani, Maha- 
kall, Kapila, Prabodhani, Nllambara, Ghanantastha and Amfta, 
and placed at the ends of petals are of black, red, pale red, 
yellow, pale yellow, white, brown, yellow, green, white, grey 
and blue. 

10. Similar colours are given to Varuna and others placed 
at the tips of petals. The form of Tejas (effulgence) should 
be represented as fierce, extremely crooked, possessing two arms 
bolding a lotus and sword. 

1. These two correspond to the months Dccember-January and Novem- 
ber-December. 



51 . 11-17 


137 


1 1 . The form of Moon should be represented as holding 
a sacrificial pitcher and rosary. (The image of) Mars should 
be) holding a spear and rosary. (The figure of) Mercury (should 
be) holding the bow and rosary in his hands. (The form of) 
Jupiter (should be) holding the sacrificial pitcher and rosary. 

12. (The image of) Venus may be holding the sacrificial 
pitcher and rosary. (That of) Saturn should be endowed with 
a girdle of bells. (While that of) Rahu (the ascending node 
of the moon considered as a planet) (is represented as) holding 
half of the lunar disc, (that of) Ketu (the descending node of 
the moon considered as a planet) (is represented as) holding the 
sword and lamp. 

13. (The serpents) Ananta, Taksaka, Karka, Padma, 
Mahabja and Sarikha are all (represented as) having hooded 
heads with great radiance. 

14. (The image of) Indra is endowed with thunder-bolt and 
.as seated on an elephant, (that of) Agni as riding a goat and 
holding a spear, (that of) Yama as on a buffalo and carrying a 
club and (that of) Nirjti as holding a sword. 

15. (The image of) Varuna (ocean god) is made as seated) 
on a crocodile and as holding a noose, (that of) Vayu (wind 
god) (as riding) an antelope and holding a banner, (that of) 
Kubera (god of wealth) as seated on a sheep and bearing a 
mace, and (that of) Isana (as seated) on a bull and having 
a matted hair. 

16. (The images) of the guardian deities of the quarters of 
the world are endowed with two arms. (The celestial architect) 
Visvakarman (should be represented) as holding a rosary. 
(The figure of) Hanumat (monkey, devoted to Rama) may be 
holding the thunderbolt in his hand and pounding the earth 
with his feet. 

17. (The semi-divine beings) Kinnaras may be (represent- 
ed) as holding lutes in their arms and the Vidy^dharas (semi- 
divine beings) as having garlands (and moving) in the sky. 
The goblins may be (represented) as having emaciated bodies 
and the vampires as deformed faces, the Guardians of the sites 
as having the tridents and the spirits of the dead people as lean 
and big-bellied. 



138 


Agni PurOrta 


CHAPTER FIFTYTWO 

Characteristics of images of different forms of goddesses 
The Lord said : 

1. I shall describe (the characteristics) of the eight 
Yoginls (female attendants on Durga) respectively residents of 
(the eight quarters) east to north-east. (The Yoginls) Ak$obhya, 
Ruk$akarni , Raksasi, Krpana and Ak§aya (reside in the east). 

2. (The Yoginis) Pingaksi, Ksay&, Ksema, Ila, Lila, Laya, 
Lakt&, BalakeSI, Lalasa and Vimala (dwell in the south-east). 

3. (The Yoginis) Huta£a, Vi£alaksi, Hunkara, Vatfava- 
mukhi, Mahakrura, Krodhana, Bhayankari and Mahanana 
(are the residents of the south). 

4. (The Yoginis) Sarvajfia, Tarala, Tara, Rgveda, Haya- 
nana, Sara(khya), Rudrasangrahi, Sambara and Talajanghika 
(occupy the south (-west). 

5. Raktaksi, Suprasiddha, Vidyujjihva, Karahkini, Megha- 
nada, Pracandogra, Kalakarni and Varaprada (are the inmates 
of the west). 

6. Candra, Candravali, Prapaiica, Pralayantika, Si^u- 
vaktra, Pi^aci, Pisita^a and Lolupa (dwell in the north-west). 

7. Dhamanl, Tapani, Ragini, Vikftanana, Vayuvega, 
Brhatkukgi, Vikrta and Vi^varupika (govern the north). 

8. Yamajihva, Jayanti, Durjay&, Jayantika, Vidala, Revati, 
Putana and Vijayantika (hold sway over the north-east). 

9. (These Yoginis should be represented) as having eight 
arms (or) four arms, wielding weapons of their choice and yield- 
ing all benefits (on their votaries). (Lord) Bhairava may hold 
the arka plant (Calotropis Gigantee) in the hand and have 
the face like the knee or elbow bearing the matted hair and the 
Moon. 

10. Kjttiv&sas (should be represented) as holding on one 
side the sword, goad, axe and arrow and offering protection to* 
the universe and a bow, trident, club with a skull at the top and 
noose on the other. 

11. Or he shall be having five faces and be wearing the 
elephant’s hide and adorned by the serpents. He shall be seated 
on the dead body. He must be worshipped in the*hiidst of the 



52*12 — 53.1-2 


139 


mother goddesses. 1 2 

12. One has to worship him being endowed with the 
letters of the alphabet upto the letter ‘ra’ and with (his mantra) 
having six constituents and the eight long vowel mantras. 

13. (He is also to be contemplated upon) as established in 
the wicks of the flame in the house as endowed with golden orna- 
ments and the n&da, bindu and indu % and making the body of the 
divine mother and the lord radiant. 

14. VIrabhadra (attendant of Siva) (is represented) as 
having four faces, seated on a bull in front of the mother (god- 
desses). (Goddess) Gaurl (consort of Siva) (is represented) as 
having two arms and three eyes as endowed with a spear and 
mirror. 

15. (Goddess) Lalita (a form of Durga) (should be re- 
presented) as having four arms (holding) a spear, a small pit- 
cher, (and another) pitcher (in the hands) and showing boon- 
conferring hands. (She should) be seated on the lotus. (She 
should also) be endowed with a mirror, a small stick for apply- 
ing collyrium and Skanda and Gana (Gane£a). 

16. (Goddess) Candika may (be represented) as having 
ten hands having a sword, spear, disc (and) dart in the right 
(hand) and the magical noose, shield, pike, axe, and bow in 
the left (hand). (She must) be riding a lion with the buffalo 
(demon) having been slain with (her) spear in front of her. 


CHAPTER FIFTYTHREE 

Characteristics of the lirtga {parabolic representation of Siva) 
The Lord said : 

1-2. O Lotus-born (Brahman) I shall describe to you 
the characteristics of the lihga and other things. Listen. Having* 
marked a rectangular (block of stone) as divided into two parts 

1. They are Br&hml, M&hefvari, Caadl, V&r&hi, VaifQavi, KaumArl* 

and Gardkl* 

2. These are the sound, dot and crescent, making up the Pra^uwa or 0m. 



140 


Agni Purtya 


lengthwise, the lower part again being divided into eight parts 
and three parts of these divisions being left out, the remaining 
(block) formed by five parts should be divided breadthwise 
into three parts and the three (gods) should be assigned therein. 

3. This is spoken as representing the foims of Brahman, 
Vi$nu and Siva (among) which (the last one) is larger (than 
the other two parts). Half of the figure is marked at the angular 
points in the square. 

4. An octagonal (block) known as the part of Visnu is 
certainly obtained (thus). Then a polygon of sixteen sides is 
made" and then a polygon of thirty-two sides. 

5. Having made a polygon of sixty- four sides, the cir- 
cular shape is accomplished. Then the excellent spiritual teacher 
should chisel the head portion of the emblem. 

6. The breadth of the liAga may be divided into eight parts. 
An umbrella-shaped top portion (of the liAga) is got by discard- 
ing half of this length. 

7. A liAga which has a breadth equal to three-fourth of its 
lehgth bestows all the desired benefits. 

8. The pillar (part of the emblem) should be a quarter of 
the length (of the emblem) in the case of those worshipped by 
the celestials. Listen now (the narration) of the characteristics 
of all liAgas. 

9. The wiseman should divide the liAga measuring 16 
aAgulas into 6 parts through the central line upto the Brahman 
and Rudra parts. 

10. The spaces in between two such lines of division should 
measure eight yavas each in the first two cases, each latter measur- 
ing a yava less than the preceding one. 

11. Having divided the lower part into three parts, one 
part should be left out. Having divided the (remaining) two 
parts into eight parts, the three upper ones (of these divisions) 
should be left aside. 

12. Those (three sections) above the five divisions should 
be rotated and the markings lengthened. Having left out one 
part their union should be brought about. 

13. These are the general characteristics of the liAga des- 

cribed by me. I shall (now) describe the most general (charac- 
teristics) of the pedestals. * 



53.14—54.1 


141 


14. After having known the commencing portion of the 
lihga and height, the part (belonging) to Brahman should be 
well placed by the learned person on the stone (pedestal). 

15. Then having known the height (of the lihga) the differ- 
ent dimensions of the pedestal should be made. The base (of 
the lihga) should be twice the height and length commensu- 
rate with that of the lihga. 

16. The central part of the pedestal should be hewn and 
divided into three parts. Its breadth should be one-sixth part of 
its length. 

17. The girth should measure one-third part of its breadth 
andthedep*h (of cavity) should be equal to that of the girth. 
It should be sloping gradually. 

18. Or the depth (of the cavity) should be one sixteenth 
part of that of the girth. The height of the base should be deviated. 

19. One part of the base should remain imbedded in the 
ground. One part of it will be (the height of) the stool proper. 
Three such parts (will be the height) of the neck portion. The 
first step should be one such part. 

20. The second step should be of two such parts in height 
while the remaining steps should have a height of such a single 
part until one reaches the neck portion step by step. 

21. Outlets to the breadth of such a part should be set apart 
on each one of the steps till the last one. They should be cut into 
three parts by the three outlets. 

22. It should measure a tip of the finger in breadth at the 
base and one-sixth (of a finger) at their ends. Their beds should 
be a little inclined towards the eastern side. These are considered 
to be the general characteristics of the lihga along with the 
pedstal. 


CHAPTER FIFTYFOUR 
The dimensions of different varieties of the lihga 
The Lord said : 

1. I shall describe the measurement of the lihga in 
a different way. Listen. I shall (now) speak about the lihgas 



142 Agni Purdpa 

made of salt, (and) ghee (which when worshipped) increases 
(one’s) intellect. • 

2. A liftga made of cloth (is worshipped) for the sake of 
wealth. It is known as temporal. The one made of earth is either 
burnt or half burnt of which the former is better. 

3. Then, one made of wood is meritorious. One made of 
stone is more meritorious than that made of wood. (The liftga) 
made of pearl is more meritorious than that of stone. Then 
(relatively merit-worthy) are the liftgas made of iron, and gold. 

4. The liftgas made of silver, copper and brass yield enjoy- 
ment and release from bondage. The liftgas made of red lead and 
mercury are excellent and confer enjoyment and release from 
bondage. 

5. The installation of a liftga on the earth made of mercury 
and iron etc or studded with gems increases one’s glory and 
grants success as desired. 

6. If desired one can build temples and bases to these 
(emblems) on the left side. One may worship the image of the 
sun cast on the mirror. 

7. Hara should be worshipped everywhere. The worship 
gets completed only (by the worship) of the liftga. A liftga made 
of stone or wood should be of a cubit length. 

8. The movable liftga should be of the size of a finger and 
encircled by the adytum. The lifiga worshipped in the house 
should be of the size of one to fifteen fingers. 

9. The liftgas are classified into three groups according to 
the measure of the doorway or into nine groups according to the 
measure of the adytum. These liftgas should be worshipped in 
one’s residence. 

10. Thus there are thirty-six liftgas in the first class, thirty- 
six in the second class and thirty-six in the third class. 

11. Thus totally there would be one hundred and eight 
liftgas. The liftgas (measuring) one to five fingers (known as) 
the short are said to be movable. 

12. The movable liftgas measuring six to ten fingers are 
known as middle. Those measuring eleven to fifteen fingers are 
known as the best. 

13. (Those made) of excellent gems (should measure) 
six fingers. (Those made) of other gems (sfibuld measure) 



54.14-25 143 

nine fingers. The golden ones (should be) twelve (fingers). 
The rest of the lihgas (should be) fifteen (fingers). 

14. The four sets of comers from the top should be succes- 
sively cut into four or sixteen equal sides, and those again into 
thirtytwo and sixty-four (in turn so as to make it a polygon of 
sixty-four equal sides). 

15. The two sides being thus lopped off, the neck of a solid 
lihga should be twentysix parts from the rectangular space at its 
foot. 

16. (The face of the lihga ) should gradually be decreasing 
by four, six and eight parts from its base (and similarly) the 
middle part of the lihga should be gradually less than the height 
at its beginning by a foot. 

17. That which is equal to half (the size of) the adytum is 
(said to be) the lowest (variety of) lihga. That which is fifteen 
(fingers in length) is the excellent. Seven equal lines should 
be drawn in the central portion of these lihgas . 

18. In this way there would be nine lines. The middle 
(variety of lihga) would have five lines. The length of the lihgas 
should be nine fingers. The opposite side (should be) separated 
by two intermediate links. 

19. Th e lihga is measured out cubit by cubit till it would 
be nine hands (length). The lihga is of three kinds — inferior, 
mediocre and superior. 

20-22. A wiseman should mark three lihgas at the centre of 
every lihga foot by foot at fourteen (places) by a fixed measure 
of length of the door or the adytum. Four lihgas representing 
Siva, Vi$nu, Brhaspati proportionately should be marked by the 
breadth. The lihga should be (shaped) long to represent the 
three forms. 

23. The lihga should have a circumference of four, eight, 
eight (inches) representing the three qualities. One should make 
the lihgas of such lengths as one desires. 

24. One should divide the figure (marked) by the banners, 
celestial gods, elements or cocks. One should know the good or 
bad from the inches left over. 

25. The banners etc., the crows, lions, elephants and goats 
are excellent. The others are auspicious. Among the primary 
notes of Indian gamut, the first one, second one and the fifth 
one confer good. 



144 


Agni Pwr&Qa 


26-27. Among the elements, the earth is auspicious. Among 
the fires, the consecrated fire (from the household’s perpetual 
fire) is auspicious. Half of the said length having been divided 
in order into seven, eight, five, nine and five parts there would 
be symmetrical representation of Siva, Vi$nu and Brahman. 

28. The fifth one is known as the Vardhamdna, There would 
be two kinds based on the increase of breadth and length. Many 
kinds are described according to Vi$vakarma(the divine archi- 
tect). 

29. The dihya class would be of three kinds on account of 
the size. Measured by the barley grains it would be eight parts, 
by the arm it would be three parts. The last one endowed equally 
is known as jina. 

30-31. (There would be) twenty-five lifigas in the first 
(variety) which are worshipped by the celestials. Then being 
divided into thirtyfive there would be 14000 and 1400 varieties. 
Thus (we have) the eight angitla's extent from the nine cubit 
adytum. 

32. One has to mark the angular points by means of threads 
placed at the angular and middle of angular points. Havingmade 
the expansion from the middle, three parts should be fixed from 
the middle. 

33. There would be eight angular parts above the division. 
Two angular parts represent the part of Siva. From the foot to 
the knee portion (of the liftga) is Brahma. (From the knee) to 
the navel is Vi$nu. 

34. (From the navel) upto the head is the part of Siva. 
Similarly, it is in the case of distinct and indistinct forms. In the 
linga of five parts, the head part is said to be circular. 

35. The images (may be) of the shape of an umbrella, cock 
or crescent moon. I shall describe the merits of the four varieties 
in each (class) differing on account of one’s option. 

36. The head portion (of the linga) should be divided into 
eight parts. The first part of the longitudinal portion should be 
divided into four parts. 

37-39. There (should be) four lines successively drawn in 
order to divide into parts. We have by one part the lotus, the one 
called viMa by cutting off, the frivatsa by thinning out and the 
iatmkjt by elision of the fourth part. In the saruasfltna class the 



54.40-48 


145 


top portion is the excellent and the cock-shaped in the sura class 
among the liAga of four parts. The top portion of the anddi has 
been described. You listen to (the characteristics of) the 
crescent of the top. 

40. At a comer of a part (there should be) the charming 
axis (represented) by four parts deficient by one part. By the 
elision of two, three and four parts in order, (one gets) the 
full, crescent moon and lotus shape. 

41. Listen then to (the description of forms having) four 
or three faces or one face and mukhalinga. The part to be wor- 
shipped is to be made set with nine parts. 

42-43. Having left out twelve parts for the arms and eyes, as 
before, the head, forehead, nose, face, chin, neck are then to be 
made. Having covered by the hands, the arms and eyes (are 
made) with four parts proportionate to the measurement of 
image. 

44. The face should be made equal to one-eighth part of 
the breadth. I have described the four-faced form. Listen ! 
The three-faced form is described now. 

45. The ear and feet are made. One has to mark the fore- 
head etc. for that. Then the arms should be made with four parts 
quite strong. 

46. The projection of the frontispiece (should be) one- 
eighth of the breadth. One face has to be made such as to have 
beautiful eye on the eastern side. 

47'. It should be made round at the forehead, nose, face 
and neck. By one-fifth from the arm one should make it round 
less by one’s arm length. 

48. It is good to have the projections in the frontispiece as 
one-sixth of the breadth for all the mukhaliAgas whether it is 
trapufa or kukkufa (?) 



146 


Agni Purdna 


CHAPTER FIFTYFIVE 
The characteristics of the pedestal 
The Lord said : 

1. I shall describe (the characteristics of) the pedestal of 
images. They have the same length as (the height) of the image 
and have breadth half (the height) of (the image). 

2. Or the breadth should be half or one-third of the measure 
of the height. The girdle should be equal to one-third of its 
breadth. 

3. The cavity should be of the same measure and should be 
inclined towards the posterior part. A quarter of the breadth 
(should be left out) for the canal as outlet. 

4. (The width) of the forepart (of the channel) should 
be half of the breadth of the base. The water-course should be 
one-third of the breadth (of the base). 

5. Or else the length of the lihga is said to be equal to half 
(the length) of the base or equal to the length (of the base). 

6. The height (of the pedestal) should be divided into six- 
teen parts as before. The lower six divisions should be made to 
comprise two parts. The neck should be three parts. 

7. The foundation, projections, joint, seat and other remain- 
ing parts should each comprise one part. This will hold good in 
the case of ordinary images. 

8. The door-way (leading) to the image is said to be pro- 
portionate to the door-way of the temple. The canopy over the 
image should be endowed with elephants and tigers. 

9. The pedestal of (the image of) Hari also should always 
be made beautiful. The measures (laid down) for the images of 
Vi$nu shall apply to (the images of) all gods. Those measures 
set forth for the image of Lakgmi shall apply to all (images 
of) the goddesses. 



56.1-10 


147 


CHAPTER FIFTYSIX 
Five divisions of installation : 


The Lord said : 

1. I shall now describe the five divisions of an installation. 
The image is the embodiment of the supreme being, the real 
principle, the pedestal is the symbol of nature or the Goddess 
Laksmi. The installation is the union of the two. 

2-3. Hence, the installation is done by men who desire to 
have their wishes fulfilled. The officiating priest (has to ar- 
range) sheds (measuring) eight, sixteen or twenty (cubits) 
in front of the temple for bathing, the pitchers, and things 
required for the sacrifice by extending the side lines of the ady- 
tum. 

4. The auspicious sacrificial platform should be made ready 
with one third (or) half (of the above space). It should be 
decked with pitchers big and small and canopies etc. 

5. All the materials (to be used in the rite) should be cleans- 
ed with pancagavya (the five things extracted from a cow). 
The priest should adorn (himself with ornaments). Having 
contemplated his own self as (lord) Vi$nu, he should begin 
worship. 

6. The expert idol- worshippers should be established in 
front of each pit (intended for the rite). (They should be 
endowed) with rings, bracelets and other things. 

7. Logs of the pippala , udumbara 9 vafa trees (should be plant- 
ed) at the doorways of the place for the sake of arches. The 
place may be quadrangular, semi-circular, circular or lotus- 
shaped. 

8. Log of the fig tree should adorn the east, of the subhadra 
the south, of the sukarma and suhotra the northern and western 
doorways respectively. 

9. The pitchers having young sprouts of mango trees should 
be placed five cubits apart at the toot of each one of the suppor- 
ting columns of the arches and be worshipped with the sacred 
syllables syond prthivt 1 . 

10. The sudarfana (disc of Vifliu) should be placed at the 
top. A wise man has to make the banner five cubits long. 

1. *V. 1.22.16. 



148 


Agni Purdy# 


11-12. It should be made sixteen fingers broad. O excellent 
among the celestials ! the height should be seventeen gubits in 
the alternative. The pit should be duly reddish, flame-coloured* 
black, white, yellow, deep red, white and (again) white. 

13-15. The presiding deities of the banners (hoisted) in 
the (quarters) east etc., such as Kumuda, Kumudaksa, Pun<Ja- 
rlka, Vamana, Sankar?ana, Sarvanetra, Sumukha and Supra- 
ti$fhita, who are endowed with countless (divine) qualities should 
be worshipped. One hundred and eight pitchers resembling the 
ripe bimba fruit (in colour), not having black spots and having 
been filled with water and gold and having pieces of cloth around 
their necks should be placed outside the arches. 

16. Pitchers should be placed at the east and other direc- 
tions. Four pitchers should be placed at the corners of the sacri- 
ficial altar with the sacred syllable djighra. 

17. After having invoked Indra and others in the pitchers 
in the east etc. one should worship (Indra). O Indra, the: 
lord of celestials, the wielder of thunderbolt, seated on the 
elephant you come. 

18. (You) protect the eastern door in the company of 
celestials. May salutations be to you. After having worshipped 
(Indra) with the sacred syllable tr didr am indra 1 2 3 , the wise man 
should invoke him. 

19. O Agni ! endowed with a trident, seated on a goat 
and possessing strength (you) come and accept my worship. 
You protect the south-east in the company of celestials. Salu- 
tations to you. 

20-21. One should worship Agni with the sacred syllable 
agnir mitrddhiP . Salutations to Agni. O Yama ! seated on 
the buffalo, wielding the mace, and possessing great strength 
(you) come. You protect the southern gate. O Yama ! 
salutations to you. Yama should be propitiated with the sacred 
syllable vaivasvatarh sahgamanam . a 

22-24. O Nairfta ! carrying a sword accompanied by 
an army and riding an animal, (you) come. Here is the offering 
and water for gashing the feet. You guard the south-western 

1. &V. 6.47.11. 

2. fcV. 8.44.16. 

3. £V. 10.14.1. 



56.25—57.1 


149 


'direction. Men should worship with the sacred syllable e$a te 
nirfte 1 and with offerings. O Varuna ! riding the crocodile, 
holding the noose and possessing great strength (you) come and 
protect the western doorway. Salutations to you. The preceptor 
should worship with (the sacred syllable) ururh hi rdjd varunam 
and offerings. 

25-27. O Vayu ! endowed with strength, holding the 
banner, together with a vehicle you come. You guard the 
north-western direction in the company of celestials and 
Maruts (groups of celestial gods). Salutations to you. He should 
be worshipped with (the sacred syllables) vdta * etc. or with 
‘Om ! Salutations to Vayu’. O Soma ! you come with 
strength, wielding the mace and riding the vehicle. You protect 
the northern gate along with Kubera. Salutations to you. One 
should worship with (the sacred syllable) somarh rdjdnam or 
‘Salutations to Soma\ 

28-30. O I Sana ! (you) come along ! possesser of 
strength, riding the bull. You guard the north-eastern direction 
of the ritual pavilion. Salutations to you. He should be wor- 
shipped with (the sacred syllable). Udnamasyc? or ‘Salutations 
to I Sana*. O Brahman ! (you) come. Seated on a swan ! 
Carrying the sacrificial vessel and ladle ! You defend the direc- 
tion above the sacrificial place, O unborn ! Salutations to 
you. (One) should worship with (the sacred syllable) kiranya - 
.garbka or ‘Salutations to Brahman’. 

31. O Ananta ! you come. Endowed with the disc ! 
Seated on the tortoise ! Lord ofthe^apor. You protect the bottom 
(of the sacrificial place). O Lord Ananta ! Salutations to 
you. One should worship with (the sacred syllable) ‘Saluta- 
tions to serpent’ or ‘Salutations to Ananta’. 


CHAPTER FIFTYSEVEN 
Consecration of pitchers 

The Lord said : 

1. One should do (the ceremony) of taking possession of 

1. VS. 9.35. 

2. RV. 10.186.1. 

3. RV. 7.32.22. 



150 


Agni Purtya 


the ground. One should scatter grains and mustard seeds utter- 
ing (the sacred syllable) ‘Narasimha’ which destroys demons. 
One should sprinkle parkagavya (the five things got from a cow). 

2. Having worshipped the earth in the pitcher containing 
gems as well as Hari and his retinue, worship the eighteen 
pitchers therein with the sacred syllable of weapons. 

3. The rice grains should be purified by an incessant shower 
(of water) and scattered around. The pitcher should be placed 
in their midst. 

4-5. Lord Acyuta and (his consort) Sri should again be 
worshipped in the pitcher (provided with) a cloth. The bed as 
well as the mattress should be spread on the kuia grass on a drawn 
circle with (the recitation of) the sacred syllable yogeyoge. 1 Lord 
Vi$nu, the slayer of (the demon) Madhu and the lord of the 
three (divisions of the universe) and also the different lords of 
learning are worshipped on the bed. 

6-7. Having worshipped Vamana, Sridhara, Hr$lke£a, 
Padman&bha (different forms of Vi$nu) in the north-west 
and other (comers) of the bathing place and the Damodara 
(form of Vi$nu) in the north-east and having brought all the 
materials to the bathing pavilion they should be deposited in the 
four pitchers and the altar in the north-east. 

8. These pitchers should be consecrated in the four quarters 
with the pitchers containing water for the consecration. The 
pitchers should be placed with due regard for the purpose of 
consecration. 

9-11. The young sprouts from the vafa udumbara, aivattha, 
campaka , aSoka, Sridruma , paldfa , arjuna, plak$a 9 kadamba , bakula and 
mango trees should be brought and put in the eastern pitcher. 
The lotus, rocand (a kind of yellow pigment), dUrvd grass, 
darbha grass, pifijala (yellow orpiment), the flowers jdti and 
kunda, (pieces of) sandal wood, red sandal, white mustard, tagara 
(a kind of herb), and rice should be put on the southern one. 

12-14. Silver and gold and earth from the two banks of 
rivers flowing into the ocean especially the earth from the (river) 
J&hnavi (Ganges), the urine of a cow, barley grains, paddy and 
sesamum should be placed in another pitcher. The vipfupar^i 
iydmalatd , bkfitgardja 9 iatdvari , sahadevi 9 mahddevl , bald and i ydr 


1. £V. 1.30.7. 



57.15-26 


151 


ghni (?), the auspicious things arc put in the other pitcher in 
the north-east. 

15. The earth from an ant-hill obtained from seven (differ- 
ent places should be put in another pitcher. The sand from 
the Ganges and its water should be put in another pitcher. 

16. The earth loosened by the boars, bulls, and elephants 
with their horns and tusks as well as earth from the root of the 
lotus and the kuia grass should be placed in another pitcher. 

1 7. One should put in another pitcher earth got from sacred 
places and hills. The flowers of ndgakeiara and k&Smira should 
be put in another pitcher. 

18-19. Flowers together with the sandal wood, agallochum 
and camphor should be placed in another pitcher. (The gems) 
lapis lazuli, coral, pearl, crystal, and diamond should be put 
earlier in one pitcher and placed firmly by the holy priests. Another 
pitcher should be filled with the waters of the rivers and tanks. 

20. Another (set of) pitchers filled with perfumes etc. should 
be placed at eightyone places and consecrated with the irisdkta l . 

21. Barley grains, white mustard, perfumes, tips of kuia 
grass, unbroken rice, sesamum, fruits and flowers should be first 
placed for the sake of worship. 

22. The lotus, (the creeper called) iydmalatd, durvd grass, 
leaf of holy basil and kuia grass (should be kept) on the right- 
hand side for being offered at the foot. The madhuparka 2 is also 
placed on the right side. 

23. The kaftkola , cloves and nutmeg along with the dUrvd 
grass and unbroken rice (should be offered) in the fire on the 
north for the sake of rinsing the mouth. 

24. A vessel for offering camphor and perfumes to be applied 
on the body should be placed on the south-east. A vessel con- 
taining perfumes and flowers should be placed on the north-east. 

25. The murd , mdthsi , myrabolan, sahadevd and niid and sixty 
lamps should be placed. Eight lamps should be kept for the nird - 
jana (showing the light in adoration). 

26. The conch, disc, Mvatsa (mark on the breast of Vi?j?u), 
thunderbolt, lotus etc. should be placed in a golden vessel along 
with flowers of variegated colours. 

1. Hymn commencing with hiraoyavarq&ih hariplm. 5V. Kh. 5.87.1. 

2. A respectful offering consisting of five ingredients: curd, clari- 
fied butter, water, honey, and candied sugar. 



152 


Agni Purtya 


CHAPTER FIFTYEIGHT 
Consecration of the idol 


The lord said : 

1-3. The priest should get ready a pit (for sacrificial fire) 
in the north-east. The fire relating to Visnu should be kindled 
with (the recitation) of gayatri 1 one hundred and eight times. 
Having cleansed the pitchers thoroughly and established (the 
priest) he should go to the shed where the image has been made 
ready accompanied by the sculptors and custodians of the idol 
and along with music of (the instrument) turya. The woollen 
thread containing mustard seeds should be tied on the right arm 
(of the idol) with the syllables Vi§nave tipivift&ya 2 3 etc. The 
priest should also have a piece of silk cloth tied (to his arm). 

4-5. Having placed the idol in the pavilion and having 
adored and worshipped the dressed idol (one has to say ) 4 T bow 
to you the sovereign lady of celestials who has been made 
(ready) by Visvakarman (the divine architect).” I make obei- 
sance to you who is resplendant and is the sustainer of the entire 
universe. I worship in you the healthy Lord Narayana. 

6. Be thou always prosperous (goddess) devoid of defects 
due to the sculptors. Having submitted thus that idol should 
be carried to the bathing pavilion. 

7. The sculptor should be satisfied by offering articles (of 
present). A cow should be given as gift to the priest. Then the 
eyes of the idol should be made open with (the recitation of) 
the syllable citrarh deva . 8 

8. The sight should be endowed with (the recitation of the 
syllable) agnir jyoti . 4 5 Then white flowers, ghee and mustard „ 
seeds should be placed on the pedestal. 

9. The priest should place dQrvd grass and tips of ku$a grass 
on the head of the deity. Then the priest should anoint the eyes 
(of the deity) with the syllables madhu odtd* 

10. The syllables hirarjyagarbha and imam me should be 

1 . The mantra beginning with 'Om bhOr bhuvafc svah consisting of twenty- 
four letters. 

2. VS. 22.20. 

3. RV. 1.115.1. 

4. VS. 3.9. 

5. RV. 1.90.6. 



S8 s ll-17 1 5S 

recited. Then the idol should be anointed with ghee reciting 
(the hymn) ghftavati - 1 

1 1 . The flour paste of mas Ur a (a variety of grain) should be 
rubbed on the deity reciting (the hymn) ato devd. 2 Then the 
priest should wash (the deity) with hot water with the recitation 
of) sapta te ague *. 

12. It should be anointed with (the syllables) Urupadd- 
diva. (The image) should be bathed with (the waters of) the 
rivers and sacred places with (the syllables) dpo hi and with 
the (waters containing) gems (with the) pdvamdna. 

13. (The image) (should be bathed) with the waters of 
an earthern pot with (the syllable) samudrarfi gacchcP. 
It should be consecrated with farmo devi 8 and bathed with hot 
water (consecrated) by gdyatrU 

14. The supreme god should be bathed with five (kinds of) 
earth with (the syllable) hiranya . With pot made of earth of an 
anthill and sand waters and (the syllable) imam me 7 (it should 
be bathed). 

15. (The image should be bathed ) with herbal waters (with 
the syllable) tadvifnohP and yd ofadht 2 with herbal decoctions 
(with the syllable) yajna-yajnd 10 and then with the pahccagavya 
(the five things got from a cow). 

16. (The image should be bathed) with the waters contain- 
ing fruits (with the syllables) payah pfthivydm 11 and ydhphalini 12 
and with (the contents of) the pitchers (kept in) the north and 
east with (the syllables) viivata$cak§uh . 1# 

17. The cleansing (of the image) ofHari (Vi$nu) should 
be done with (the recitation of the syllables somarh rdjdnam , 
vifno rardtamasx 14 from the right and with harhsafi iuci lh on the west 

1. RV. 6.70.1. 

2. RV. 1.22.16. 

3. VS. 17.79. 

4. RV. 10 9.1. 

5. RV. kh. 5.49.2. 

6. RV. 10.9.4. 

7. RV. 1.25.19. 

8. RV. 1.22.20. 

9. RV. 10.97.1. 

10. RV. 6.48.1. 

11. VS. 18.36. 

12. RV. 10.97.15. 

13. RV. 10.81.3. 

14. VS. 5.11. 

15. RV. 4.40.5. 



154 


Agni Purdna 


18. One should offer the dh&tri and mdrfisi (herbs) on the 
head with the sacred syllables murdh&narh div& . (Qne should 
bathe the image) with perfumes with the syllables gandhadv&ra 
and m& nas toka* 

19. (One has to pour over its head the contents of the pit- 
chers) placed in the eightyone squares (with the syllables) idam 
apah . OLordVisnu! the bes tower of grace on the universe ! 
you come. 

20. (You) accept this share in the sacrificial offerings. O 
Vasudeva ! Salutations to you ! Having invoked the lord in 
this way, the wrist thread (on the hand of the image) should be 
unfastened. 

i 

21 . The wrist thread on (the hand of) the priest should also 
be unfastened with the hymn muricami tva ? The water for wash- 
ing the feet should be offered with (the syllable) hiranmayd* 
and the offering with ato devd .* 

22. Th emadhuparka (should be offered) with (the syllables) 
madhuv&tdP and the acamana (the ceremonial sipping of waters 
at the commencement of any rite) should be done with mayi 
gfhndmi . 1 2 3 4 * * 7 8 The learned (priest) should scatter the unbroken rice 
with (the syllable) akfannamlmadanta* 

23. The image should be rubbed part by part and perfumes 
(should be offered) with (the syllable) gandhavat •, garland with 
(the syllable) unnayami and the sacred thread with (the syllable) 
idam visnu. 

24. Pair of cloth pieces (should be offered) (with the syl- 
lable) brhaspate (and) the upper cloth (with the syllable) 
ved&ham. The herbs and the flower of concluding worship should 
be placed with the mah&vrata, 

25. Incense should be offered with dhUrasi and the colly- 
rium (to the eyes of the image) with the hymn (called) v ibhr&f. 
The mark on the forehead (should be made) with (the syllable) 
yunjanti and the garland (should be offered) with dirgh&yuffud.. 

1. fcvT 6.7.1. 

2. &V. 1.114.8. 

3. See LXVII. 22.1. 

4. RV. 10.161.1. 

fi. SB. 14.7.1.12. 

<1. RV. 1.22.16. 

7. RV. 1.80.6. 

8. RV. 10.9. 



58 . 26 — 59 - 1-4 


155 


26. (One should offer) an umbrella with (the syllable) 
indra cchatra , mirror with vtrdja , the chowrie with vikarna and 
the ornaments with rathantara. 

27. (One should offer) the fan with (the syllable) vdyu 
daivatya and flowers with mudcdmi tvd. One should sing in 
praise of (Lord) Hari(Vi?nu) with vedic hymns and (the hymn 
called ) purufasQkta. 

28. All these rites should be performed similarly relating to 
pedestals of Hara (Siva) and other gods. The hymn (called) 
sauparna should be recited at the time of raising (the image of) 
the deity. 

29. (The image) having been raised (by reciting) (the 
syllable) uttisfha , the lord should be led to the bed in the pavi- 
lion with (the recitation of) the hymn fakuna 1 and with (the 
syllable) brahmaratha. 

30. Then the image and the pedestal (should be laid) in 
the bed with the hymn ato deva. 2 With the (recitation of) in- 
sQkta the rite for Visnu is completed. 

31. The eight auspicious things are: the lion, bull, serpent, 
fan, pitcher, banner, trumpet and lamp. 

32-33. (The priest) should show (these) at the foot with 
the hymn (called) aivasukta and the tripdd (gdyatri). One should 
submit a cooking vessel, covering pan, ladle, pestle, crushing 
stone, grinding stone, groomstick, utensils for eating and other 
household things should be given to the goddess. 

34. A pitcher known as nidrd provided with clothes and 
gems and filled with edibles (should be placed) at the head-side 
(of the image). This is the mode of bathing (the image). 


CHAPTER FIFTYNINE 
Preliminary consecration of an image 
The Loti said : 

1-4. The act of causing the presence of God Hari is said to- 
be the adhiodsana (preliminary consecration). Having cofttem- 

i. RV. 9.107. 

2* RV. 1.22.16. 



15 ® 


Apd Pttr&Qa 


plated on the self as the omniscient, all-pervasive and supreme 
spirit and having united one’s self-conceited conscious energy 
with (the syllable) om and after having drawn it* out and 
identifying one’s own self with the all-pervasive lord, (the priest) 
should unite the earth with the wind, illuminate it with the fire 
particle (mentally), draw the fire with the wind (particle) and 
lead the wind into the ethereal space. The wiseman should draw 
in the same order (the other gross elements) after having made 
them the receptacles of subtle principles along with the gross 
principles, the supreme being and the secondary forms such as 
the sddhya-s 1 . 

5. The ethereal space should be drawn into the mind (prin- 
ciple), the mind (in its turn) should be (drawn) into (the prin- 
ciple of) ego, (the principle) of ego in the (principle of) mahat 
(first principle). The mahat should be led into the avydkfta (un- 
manifest). 

6-7. The unmanifest (is led) into the absolute knowledge 
Itnown as Vasudeva. Being desirous to create he, the Lord of 
sound by means of the unmanifest brought into being Sankar- 
?ana (the principle) known as touch. He created Pradyumna 
the form of splendour by agitating the illusion. 

8. He created Aniruddha, (consisting of) taste only and 
Brahma of the form of smell. That Aniruddha, the Brahma 
created water at first. 

9. He also laid the golden egg (of the five principles) 
in that (water). Impregnated with consciousness (this generated) 
a peculiar force within. 

10. The breath united with life force is spoken as existence. 
The inner being also known as the vydhjti 2 is a spiritual entity 
amidst the five winds (prdndh). 

1 1 . Then intellect came into being associated with the prdna 
and with eight-fold modifications. Egoism was born then and 
the mind came out from it. 

12. Then the five (abstract) things were bom possessing 
determination. They are known as sound, touch, sight, taste and 
smell. 

13. The sense-organs possessing consciousness were brought 

1 . They are refined secondary forms. See MW. p. 1202a. 

2. The mystic syllables bhafr, bJmvafi, suvafr. 



50.14-24 


15T 


about by these. The skin, ear, nose, eyes, tongue are the sense- 
organs. 

14. The feet, anus, arms, speech (mouth) and the genitals are 
the five organs of action. Listen (I shall describe) the five elements. 

15. The ether, wind, light, water and earth (are the five 
elements). The gross body is composed of these elements H 
becomes the support for all. 

16. (I shall presently) describe the mystic syllables signi- 
fying these and for being (mentally) placed on (the different 
parts of) the body. The letter ma which is the symbol of the 
inner self should be located to co-extend with (the body of) 
the deity. 

17. The letter bha which is the emblem of life should be 
lodged in the differentiating individuality of the god. The letter 
ba which represents the intellect should be located in the region 
of the heart. 

18. The letter pka representing the sense of ego should also 
be located there itself. The letter pa representing the mind 
should be located in the mental resolve. 

19. The letter na which is a symbol of the principle of sound 
should be placed on the forehead. The letter dha which is the 
symbol of sense of touch should be placed in the region of the 
face (of image). 

20. The letter da denoting the gradations should be placed 
in the region of the heart. The letter Me symbolising the sense of 
taste should be placed in the region of pelvis. 

21. The letter ta signifying the sense of smell should be 
located on the shanks. After having located the letter {ta in the 
ears, the letter dha should be located on the skin. 

22. The letter da should be located in the two eyes, the 
letter fha in the tongue, the letter fa in the nose and the letter 
Ha in the speech. 

23. Having placed the letter jha representing the hands in 
the hands, a wise man should place the letter ja in the feet, 
cha in the anus and ca in the genitals. 

24. The letter Ha symbolising the principle of earth should 
be placed on the feet. The letter gha (should be placed) in the 
pelvis. (The letter ),ga representing the principle of lustre should 
be placed in the heart. 



158 


Agni Purdna 


25. The letter kha which represents the principle of wind 
should be placed in the nose. The letter ka signifying # the prin- 
ciple of ether should be assigned to the forehead by the wise. 

26-27. The letter ya denoting lord Sun having been placed 
in the lotus of the heart, the letter sa possessing sixteen digits 
should be placed in the seventy-two thousand (rays) emanating 
from the (lotus) heart. The priest fully initiated in the mystic 
syllables should contemplate on the point (bindu) representing 
the region of fire in the middle of it. 

28. The excellent letter ha along with the syllable om 
( pranava ) should be placed there. Om, dm, salutations to the 
paramefty&tman. 1 Am, salutations to purufdlman 2 . 

29. Om, Vdm, salutations to the eternal being ! N&m, salu- 
tations to the soul of the universe ! Om, vdm, salutations to the 
soul of all beings ! Thus the five forms of energies have been 
described. 

30. The first one (of the above five syllables ) should be used 
for the place, the second one for the seat, the third one for the 
bed, and the fourth one for the drink. 

31. The fifth one is used at every worship. These (five 
mystic syllables) are known as the five upanisads . The syllable 
hum should be placed in the middle after having contemplated 
on Hari, composed of mystic syllables. 

32. Whichever form of the deity is being installed one should 
assign the particular principal mystic syllable of that form 
afterwards. The principal syllable of Vasudeva is Om, salu- 
tations to Lord Vasudeva ! 

33. (The different forms of the god) should be (mentally) 
assigned to (the different parts of the body such as) the head, 
nose, forehead, face, neck, heart, arms, shanks and feet in order. 
(The manifestation known as) Keiava should be assigned to the 
head (of the image). 

34. Narayaria should be assigned to the face, Madhava to 
the neck, Govinda to the arms, (and) Vi$nu to the heart. 

35. Madhusudana should be assigned to the hinder part, 
Varoana to the belly, Trivikrama to the hip (and) &rldhara to 
the shank. 

1. The word Parmtftf* denotes die supreme being or one of the forms 
of Trinity. 

2. This means a supreme being. , 



59.36-48 


159 


36. Hr$Uke$a (should be assigned) on the right side, Padma- 
nabha on the ankle, Damodara on the feet. 

(This is assignment) in the six limbs commencing with die 
heart. 

37-39. O most virtuous one ! This is general mode of 
assignment of Visnu. In the alternative, the installation of which 
form of the deity has been begun, one should infuse life into the 
image with the principal mystic syllable of that form. The first 
letter of the name of any form of a deity should be used along 
with the twelve vowels and assigned to the different parts of 
image such as the heart. O Lord of celestials ! the principal 
mystic syllable should consist of ten syllables. 

40. The principles should be placed in the body in the same 
order as they are found in the god. Lord Visnu should be wor- 
shipped with perfumes etc., in the diagram of a lotus inscribed 
in a circle. 

41. One should contemplate on the seat as before together 
with the limbs and cover. Then one should imagine an auspi- 
cious disc over that as having twelve radii. 

42. The circle (should be imagined) as having three con- 
centric naves and two outer circles and filled with the vowels. 
The wise man should then place the prakfii (the nature, the source 
of the material world) and other principles. 

43-44. The sun god should again be worshipped at the tips 
of the spokes in the twelve-fold way 1 and the moon possessing 
three-fold armies and sixteen phases should be contemplated 
therein. The excellent worshipper should contemplate on a lotus 
flower of twelve petals. 

45. The effulgent energy of the supreme being should be 
contemplated and worshipped in the centre (of the lotus flower) 
by the priest. Having located (Lord) Hari in that image, one 
should worship him as well as the celestials. 

46. Ke£ava and others should be worshipped well with 
twelve mystic letters 2 with perfumes, flowers etc. and with their 
attendants and enclosures, in due order. 

47-48. The twice-born should worship the guardian deities 
of quarters and others in die circular diagram of twelve 
radii. The image should then be worshipped with perfumes and 

1. Coniiiting of twelve names of Sun. 

2. (M mm* Mq|9Mff 



160 


Agni Purdna 

flowers and with the purusastikta. 1 The pedestal should be wor- 
shipped with the SrlsUkta* The sacrificial fire relating to Vi$nu 
should be kindled in the prescribed manner. 

49. Having made oblation unto the fire with the sacred 
syllables the wise priest should sanctify waters and consecrate 
the image (by sprinkling waters). Then he should kindle fire. 

50. The wise priest should kindle fire in the pit on the 
south with the mystic syllable agnirh hutarri 5 and in the pit on the 
east with the syllable agnim agnim 4 . 

51. In the fire pit on the north, the fire should be kindled 
with the mystic syllable agnim agnirh havimabhih 5 and the sacred syl- 
lable to be used to kindle fire in general is tvam agne hyagnirucyase .•* 

52. One should place one thousand and eight twigs of the paUtta 
tree in each one of the fire pits and offer grains withvedic hymns. 

53. Clarified butter and sesamum (should be offered to- 
fire) with the i ydhftls ( Om bhUh , bhuvah , suvah) and ghee with 
the principal mantra . One should perform the appeasing obla- 
tion with the three sweet things. 7 

54. One should then touch the feet, navel, heart and fore- 
head with (the utterance of) twelve mystic sullables (of the 
god). After having offered ghee, curd and milk, the head of the 
image should again be touched. 

55. After having touched the head, navel, and feet, (the 
priest) should make four rivers Ganga, Yamuna, Godavari 
and Sarasvati present there by pronouncing their names. 

56. (The rivers) should be dried up by (the recitation of the 
vifnug&yatrfi and the sacrificial gruel should be boiled with (the 
recitation of) the g&yatrl. One should offer oblation, offer 
the victim and feed the twice-boms afterwards. 

57. For the satisfaction of the singer of sdmans one should 
give gold and cows to the spiritual preceptor. Having made 
offerings to the guardian deities of the quarters, one should 
spend night in vigil. By singing the praise of the brahman one 
gets fruits of the consecration rite. 

1. RV. 10. 90. 

2. RVkh. 5.87.1a. 

3. Could not be identified. 

4. Cf. RV. 1.12.2a. 

5. Cf. RV. 1.12.2a. 

6. Could not be identified. 

7. Sugar, honey and clarified butter. 

8. nfatya&ya uidnaht vimindya dkhriahi tamo afoub Pmfodqtft. 



60.1-10 


161 


CHAPTER SIXTY 

Mode of installation of the image of Vdsudeva 
The Lord said : 

1 . One should divide the length of adytum into seven parts 
for the installation of the pedestal. The wise man should fix 
the image on the part of Brahman. 

2-3. (One should) never (fix it) in the parts (presided 
over) by the celestials, mortals and goblins, leaving out the part 
(presided over by) Brahman. The pedestal should be carefully 
fixed off the regions of celestials and mortals. Gems should 
be imbedded in the case of a hermaphrodite stone. 

4-5. Having performed oblation with (the mantra sacred 
to) Narasimha (the man-lion form of Vi?nu), the gems 
should be placed with (the repetition of) the same (mantra). 
Rice grains, gems, three (kinds of) minerals, iron and other 
metallic substances, sandal wood etc., should be placed in the 
nine holes commencing with the east at the centre as one likes. 
Then the holes should be filled with the guggulu (a kind of frag- 
rant gum resin) with (the recitation of) the mantras — indr a etc. 

6. After having performed the insertion of gems, the 
preceptor should rub tjje image with sticks of sahadeva (tree) and 
bunches of darhha (grass). 

7. The outer and inner surface (of the image) should be 
cleansed and then purified with the pahcagavya (the five things 
got from a cow). Water should be sprinkled with the darbha 
grass as well as with the waters of the river. 

8. The ground for kindling the sacrificial fire should be made 
ready with sand. An excellent site should be of the measure of a 
cubit and a half on all sides. 

9. The pitchers also should be placed in the eight directions 
commencing with the east. The consecrated fire should be 
brought in uttering the eight letters (described already)' 

10. The twigs should be offered into the fire with (the 
mantras) — team agne dyubhifi 1 andg&yatri. Clarified butter should 
be offered with (the recitation of) eight letters, eight hund- 
red times. 


1. SLV. 2.1.1. 



162 


Agni Purdrta 


1 1 . The appeasing water sanctified hundred times by the 

principal mantra should be sprinkled on the head of the image 
with (the recitation of) the hymn torUca te. 1 9 

12. The image should be lifted up with (the mantra) brahma - 
jajndnd 1 and should be led to the temple with the mantra utti - 
$fha brahmanaspate 8 and tadvifnoh 1 2 3 4 5 . 

13. Lord Hari should be placed in a palanquin and carried 
towards the divine edifice accompanied by songs and vedic 
hymns. He should be held at the gates of the temple. 

14. Lord Hari should be bathed with waters from eight 
auspicious pitchers by women and brahmins. Then the priest 
should worship the image with perfumes etc. and with the 
principal mantra 6 7 8 . 

15. Then the dress, the devotional offerings of eight kinds 
should be offered with (the mantra) ato deviP. (The image) 
should be fixed on the pedestal at the fixed moment with (the 
recitation of) devasya tvff. 

16. The learned (priest) should fix the image on the pedes- 
tal (with the recitation of the following mantra). “O Con- 
queror of three spaces ! Om ! salutations to you who 
surpassed the three regions. 

17. The image should be bathed with the paheagavya 
(five things got from a cow) with (the recitation of) the mantra 
dhruvd dyauffi and vifvatascakfuh 9 and bathed again with perfumed 
water. 

18. Lord Hari should be worshipped along with the atten- 
.dants and paraphernalia. The heavens should be contemplat- 
ed as his form and the earth as the seat. 

19. His body should be imagined as composed of lustrous 
minute particles. (One should say), “lam invoking his spirit 
pervading the twentyfive principles.” 


1. VS. 31.22. 

2. TS. 4.2.8«2. 

3. RV. 1.40. 1. 

4. RV. 1.22.20. 

5. Orh namo bhagavati udsutUvdya. 

6. RV. 1.22.16. 

7. VS. 1.24. 

8. RV. 10.173.4. 

9. RV. 10.81.3. 



€0.20-30 


163 


20-21. O Supreme Lord ! you become firmly established 
in the image. I invoke you, the spirit of supreme happiness, one 
devoid of (three states) waking, dreaming and deep sleep, 
one who is devoid of a body, sense-organs, intellect, life and 
egoism, and one who resides in the hearts of all beings beginning 
with Brahman and ending with a dump of grass. 

22. You make the image imbued with your soul both inside 
and outside. You have taken your abode in this image (of the 
size of) a thumb with attributes. 

23. Having invoked (the god in the image), the supreme 
brahman, lustrous form of knowledge and who is one without a 
second, that is deemed as alive by the use of (the mantra) Om. 

24. The act of bringing the god near consists in uttering 
(the mantra) and touching the heart (of the image). (The priest) 
should recite the purusasUkta 1 2 3 and should recite the following 
(mantra) in secret. 

25-27. Salutations to the Lord of celestials who is of the 
form of happiness and fortune, of the form of knowledge and 
wisdom and who attends on the lustre of the supreme brahman. 
(Salutations to) the one who is beyond properties, the great 
being, devoid of decay, old age. O Vi§nu, you be present here. 
Whichever is the supreme principle in you and that which is 
your form verily f v made up) of knowledge, all that be present 
here in this form. May you awake t 

28. Stationing oneself in from of the deity, (the priest) 
should establish Brahman and other attendant gods as well as 
the respective weapons (by showing) the mudrd (different pos- 
tures shown with the hand). 

29-30. (The priest) should infer the presence of the god 
from th tydtrfi and Having saluted and sung the glories 

and recited the mantras of eight syllables 4 etc., the priest should 
come out and worship Capda and Fracanda (the two guardians ) 
at the gate. (The priest) should go to the place of sacrificial 
fire, install the image of Garuia (the vehicle bird of Lord Vi?nu) 
and worship. 


1. 5tV.10.90. 

2. Existenc e, livelihood. 

3. Rains. 

4. Om mono n&r ty aotya. 



164 


Agni Pur&Tut 


31. Having installed and worshipped (the images) of 
different presiding deities of the quarters in their respectiv&quar- 
ters, the priest should install the image of Lord Vijvaksena 1 2 and. 
worship the conch, disc etc. 

32. Offerings should be made to the attendant gods and to 
the goblins. The priest should be given the fees — (which may be 
of the form of) proprietary right over a village, clothes and gold. 

33. The materials required for (the performance of) 
sacrificial ceremony should be given to the principal priest. The* 
attendant priests should be paid fees half of what was paid to the- 
principal priest. 

34. The other priests should be paid their fees. The brah- 
mins should then be fed. Without any restraint the benefits of 
sacrifice should be extended to the patron-employer by the prin- 
cipal priest. 

35. The consecrator of the image of Visnu leads the self, 
as well as his entire family (to the region of the god). This is the 
general mode of performance for all gods. Only the principal 
mantra would be different. The other formalities are the same. 


CHAPTER SIXTYONE 

Consecration of doors of the temple and the erection of banner 
The Lord said : 

1. I shall describe the purificatory bathing of Vi$iju. The 
offering to the fire is made (with the mantra) na tvfi. Having- 
placed eightyone pitchers (at their respective places) Lord Hari 
should be invoked and installed. 

2. He should be worshipped with perfumes and flowers. 
Having made the offering, the priest should be worshipped. I 
shall describe the (mode of) consecrating the door. (A piece of) 
gold should be placed beneath the door (frame). 

3. The priest should place shoots of udumb ora (fig tree) in. 

1. An epithet ofVifgu. 

2. One of the many hymns beginning with them words. 



€1.4-15 


165 


the (mouth of the) eight pitchers and worship them with per- 
fumes etc. and vedic mantras. 

4. Twigs, fried paddy and sesamum should be offered unto 
the fire in the pits. Having offered the bed etc., the supporting 
•energy should be placed underneath. 

5 . Gods Canda and Pracantfa should be located at the bottom 
of the shoots, Goddess Lak$ml worshipped by the celestials should 
be placed above (the shoot of) the fig (tree). 

6. Having assigned the four-faced (Brahman) and duly 
worshipping (him) (by reciting) the SrisQktd 1 the fruits of the 
bilva (tree) should be offered to him and the fees should be paid 
to the priest. 

7. (I shall describe) the consecration of the divine edifice 
the doors of which have been consecrated and wherein the image 
of Hari has been duly installed. It is in the consecration of the 
adytum. Listen. 

8-9. Pitcher made of gold, silver or bell-metal filled with 
eight kinds of gems, herbs, minerals, seeds of grains, iron and 
water and covered with a cloth should be placed on the darbha 
(grass) in a circle to the east of the altar after the fukan&sa (the 
keystone) has been got ready. 

10. Fallen twigs which have been gathered should be offer- 
ed into fire with (the mantra of) Nrsimha. Then (the temple) 
should be enlivened with the principle known as ndrdyanatattva . 

11. (That lord) who is the life of the temple should be 
contemplated (as) “ O Lord of celestials”. Then a wise man 
has to imagine the temple as the god himself. 

12. (A piece of) gold should be placed below the golden 
pitcher. The priests and others should be paid their fees and the 
brahmins should be fed. 

13-14. Threads should be wound round the altar, neck, 
top and the globe of the temple after that. Then the metallic 
ring known as the sudariana disc should be placed. It should be 
known as the form of (Lord) V&sudeva offering protection from 
fear. 

15. Alternatively a pitcher should be placed (in the place 
of a globe) and the disc above that. O birthless one ! eight lords 


l. See above, p. 15! and fh 1 thereon. 



166 Agnt Purdrut 

of obstacles (VighneSvara) should be placed around the altar 
in the temple. 

16. Or four images of Garuda (vehicle of Lord Vi?nu) 
should be placed in the four quarters. I shall describe now the 
erection of the flagstaff which destroys the evil spirits. 

17. One who performs this remains in the regions of Visnu 
for so many thousands of years as the number of atoms in the 
image of the god in the temple. 

18. O sinless ! It should be known that (a man gets) a 
crorc times more merit by erecting the flag-staff, since it surrounds 
the neck of the temple and it wafts the wind around the globe, 
altar and image. 

19. The flag should be known as the prakfti and the staff 
as the purusa and you know that the temple is another form of 
image of Vasudeva (Visnu). 

20. (In a temple) the dharani (earth) is so called from its 
ability to hold, its internal cavity stands for the sky, the illumi- 
nation inside represents the fire, and its touch represents the wind. 

21. The earthly waters found in the stone slabs (of the 
temple) (represent) the earthly attributes. Its echo stands for 
the principles of sound. Its touch represents roughness. 

22. Its colour which may be white or otherwise stands for 
the subtle principle of colour. The food (and other eatables) 
offered (to the deity) stand for the sense of taste. The perfumes 
represent the sense of smell. The sense of speech lies in the down 
(used in the temple). 

23. The keystone is the nose (of the temple). The two 
apertures (on either side) represent the two hands. The arched 
terrace above is to be taken for its head and the pitcher on the 
head. 

24. Its neck should be known as the neck. The platform 
over the fault is spoken as the shoulder. The outlets for water 
are the anus and genitals. The lime-plaster is spoken as the skin. 

23. The door would be the mouth. The image (installed in 
the temple) is said to be its life. The pedestal should be known 
as its energy. I ts shape should likewise be known as its animation. 

26. Its cavity is its inertia. Lord Keiava is its controller. 
In this way Lord Hari Himself remains in the form of the temple. 

27. God Siva should be known as the shank. God Brahman 



61.28-38 


167 


is located in the shoulder. Lord Vi$nu remains in the upper 
portion of a temple as it is. 

28. Listen to me. I shall describe the consecration of a 
temple by means of a banner. The demons were defeated by the 
celestial gods by erecting banners impressed with the signs 
of divine weapons. 

29. The pitcher (shaped part of the temple) should be 
placed over the top and the flag should be placed over the same. 
The post should be made to measure a half or one third of the 
height of the image. 

30. The flag should have a mark of a circle of eight or twelve 
radii. (There should be the figure) of the man-lion (form of 
Visnu) or the Garu^a (Tarksya) (inside the circle) in the middle. 
The staff of the flag should not have any cut. 

31. The length of the staff is spoken as the measure of the 
breadth of edifice. It should be made cither half of the ter- 
race or a third part of it. 

32. The staff should otherwise be made twice the length 
of the door. The flag staff should be planted on the north-east or 
the north-west of the divine edifice. 

33. The flag should be made of a piece of silk cloth, of a 
single or variegated colours. It should be adorned with bells, 
chowrics and small bells. (It is said to be) destroyer of sins. 

34. A flag which touches the ground and measures a cubit 
in breadth at its extremity or has a breadth equal to one fourth of 
its length at its base is called a mah&dhvaja . It grants all things 
when worshipped. 

35. The banner should measure half (the dimension of) 
the staff. The breadth should measure twenty fingers. 

36. All the rites relating to the consentration of an image 
should be done for (the consecration) of the disc, flag and the 
staff. They should be bathed in the shed. 

37. The priest should duly perform all rites described 
earlier except that of opening the eyes. The consecration should 
be done in the prescribed manner leaving them in the resting 
position. 

38. Then the learned priest should assign (mentally) the 
hymn (called) saka$raiir$d l in the disc. Then the sudafiana mantra 


1. RV. 1G.9G. 



168 


Agni Purtya 


and the principle of mind should be assigned. 

39. It is known as imbued with life by mental formation. 
O excellent among gods, (the different forms of Vi$nu such as) 
Ke£ava etc. should be assigned to the spokes. 

40. The priest should assign twentyfive principles at 
the navel, and each of the arcs of the lotus. The form of Nrsimha 
(the man-lion form of Vi?nu) representing the universe should 
be assigned to the middle of the lotus. 

41 . The sakala (endowed with parts) forms should be assign- 
ed to the staff as the living soul of it. Lord Hari, the supreme 
being of the ni$kala (undivided) form should be contemplated 
and assigned to the flag. 

42. The energies Bala and Abala which manifest in the 
form of the banner should be contemplated. Having placed it in 
the shed and worshipped it, oblation should be made in the pit. 

43. Having placed the golden pitcher over the pitcher and 
putting five (kinds of) gems (at the top of the temple) a golden 
disc should be placed underneath that with the mantra of the disc. 

44. The disc should be washed with mercury and covered 
with the eye-cover. The disc should then be placed. Lord Nfhari 
(man-lion form of Vi snu) should be imagined there in the middle. 

45-46. 0m y h$aum , salutations to Lord Nrsimha. Lord Hari 
should be invoked and worshipped. Then the yajamdna (the 
person who has arranged for the consecration) accompanied by 
his relatives should hold banner and dip the tip of the banner 
in a vessel full of curd. The banner should be worshipped with 
the mantra commencing with dhruvd 1 and ending with phaf. 

47. Holding that vessel on the head and remembering Lord 
Narayana (the yajamdna) should go around the temple along 
with auspicious sounds from the tttri (a musical instrument). 

48. The staff should then be placed with (the recitation of) 
the eight-syllabled mantra *. Then the flag should be (hoisted) 
and unfurled with (the recitation of) the hymn munc&mi tv& 
by the learned person. 

49. The twice-born (yajamdna ) should give the priest the 

1. RV.l 0.1 73.4a. 

2 . Om rutmo ndriyagtya. 

3 . tlV.10.161.la. 



61.50— 62.1-5 


169 


vessel, banner and elephant etc. Mode of consecration of the 
flag has been thus described in general. 

50. The mark which represents a particular god should be 
planted with the respective mantra . By the offer of a banner one 
goes to heaven and becomes a strong monarch on the earth (in 
the next birth). 


CHAPTER SIXTYTWO 

Mode of installation of the image of Goddess LaksmI 
The Lord said : 

1 . I shall describe to you the mode of installation of all divine 
images. At first I shall describe the (mode of) installation 
(of the image) of LaksmI and her attendant goddesses. 

2. As before, one should do all rites such as bathing (the 
image) in the shed. (The image of) goddess LaksmI should 
be placed on the pedestal. One should place eight pitchers. 

3. The image should be anointed with ghee with the prin- 
cipal mantra and washed with the five things got from a cow. 
The eyes of (the goddess) LaksmI should be opened with (the 
recitation of the mantra) hiranyavarndm harinim 1 . 

4. The three sweet things 2 3 4 5 6 7 should be offered with (the 
recitation of the mantra) tam ma dvaha *. She (the image) should 
be bathed with (the waters of) the pitcher on the east with (the 
recitation of) the (hymn) aivapurva A . 

5. The image should then be bathed with (the waters of 
pitchers on) the south, west and north with the recitation of 
hymns kdmo'smi te h > candram prabhdsdm*> dditya var^a 1 (respectively) 


1. RV Kh. 5.87.1. 

2. P. 160. fn 7. 

3. RV. Kh. 5.87.2a, 15a. 

4. cf. RV. Kh. 5.87.3a. 

5. Gould not be identified. 

6. Gould not be identified. 

7. VS. 31. 81 b. 



170 


Agni Purdna 


6-7. (Waters) from (the pitchers placed in) the south- 
east, south-west, north-west and north-cast should bg poured 
on the image accompanied by (the recitation of the mantras) 
upaitu md 1 , ksut pipdsd 2 , gandhadvdra 3 4 , manasah k&mamdkfti*. The 
im^ge should subsequently be bathed with (the waters of) eighty- 
one pitchers (accompanied) by dpah srjan ksitim. 5 6 7 8 9 

8. (The priest should worship the image) with perfumes 
accompanied by ardram puskarinim c , with flowers accompanied 
by tdrh ma avahci 1 and ya ananda* 

9. The goddess should be worshipped in the bed with (the 
mantra) Sdyanti* yena and her presence is accomplished by iri- 
sukta 10 . Her consciousness is invoked and worshipped again with 
the principal mantra of the goddess. 

10. Thousand or hundred lotus flowers or karavira flowers 
should be offered in the fire pit at the shed accompanied by 
irisSkta. 10 

11. Household furniture should be offered with the frisukta 10 
itself. Then the consecration of edifice should be performed 
as described earlier. 

12. The pedestal should be made with (the recitation of) 
the mantra. The installation of the goddess is done subsequently. 
Her presence is accomplished with the Srisdkta . 10 Everyone of 
the hymns (stated earlier) ) should be recited as before. 

13. Having invoked consciousness in the image, her 
presence is accomplished by the principal mantra. The priest and 
the brahmins should be presented with land, gold, clothes, 
cow and food. The images of all other forms of goddesses should 
be installed in the same way. One who invokes (and consecrates) 
in this way is held as going to heaven. 


1. RV. Kh. 5.87.7a. 

2. TB. 3. 4.1. 16. 

3. RV. Kh. 5.87.9a. 

4. RV. Kh. 5.87. 10a. 

5. Could not be identified. 

6. Cf. RV. Kh. 8.87.3a, 14a. 

7. RV. Kh. 5.87.2a, 15a. 

8. Not found. 

9. Could not be identified. 

10. RV. Kh. 5.87.1. 



63.1-3 


171 


CHAPTER SIXTYTHREE 

Mode of installation of other gods and goddesses , the Sudariana disc 
and the writing of books and their installations 

The god said : 

1. The installation of the (images of) Garuda (vehicle of 
Visnu) Brahman, Nfhari (man-lion form of Vi$nu) and of the 
(sudariana) disc should be done in the same way as that of Vi$nu 
with their respective mantras . Listen to me. 

2. O Sudarsana ! The great disc that is tranquil ! Dread- 
ful to the wicked ! Kill kill, pierce pierce, cut through and 
cut through. 

V- 

3. Devour devour the incantations of others. Ea* up, 
eat up the evil spirits. Frighten frighten, hum phaf , salutation to 
sudarfana. Having worshipped the disc with this mantra one 
destroys the enemies in the battle, 

Om ksaum Narasiriiha (man-lion) ! of fierce form ! burn, burn, 
blaze up, blaze up, svaha. Om ksaum salutations to lord Nara - 
siriiha ! Effulgent like crores of radiant suns ! One armed with 
mace, claws and teeth ! One who manifests with a sound similar 
to the trumpet while the dreadful and dishevelled manes wildly 
dance in the storm and one who has agitated the ocean ! One 
who rescues from all incantations ! O Lord Narasiriiha (you) 
come ! Manifest with the divine truth as the universal sub- 
jective and objective ! Open thy mouth ! Attack ! Roar and 
release your lion-like voice ! Cut through ! Drive away ! Pierce 
into all sorts of incantations ! Kill, cut, heap together, dislodge, 
cut open, break up, cause to be burst ! A multitude of cluster 
of flames ! Destroy all nether regions with your disc (shower- 
ing) flames and thunderbolts in all directions ! Besiege the 
ftether regions with your arrows of thunderbolt discharging end- 
less fire ! Pull out the hearts of all demons residing in the 
nether worlds ! Burn quickly ! Cook ! Destroy ! Dry up I 
Hack them to pieces till they have not been subject to my control ! 
Phaf to the nether worlds ! Phaf to the demons ! Phaf to all kinds 
of incantations ! O Lord of the form of Narasiriiha ! Protect 
me from all doubts ! Protect me from all calamities and all in- 
cantations ! O Visnu ! Hum Phaf ! Salutations to you ! This 



1 72 Agni Purdna 

is the spell of Narasimha representing Hari (Visnu) which 
grants all desires. 

4. The captivator of the three worlds ( trailokyamohana ) (the 
image of the lord) should be installed with the mantras known as 
trailokyamohana (captivating the three worlds) (described above). 
(The image) should be made to have two or four arms, holding 
the mace in the right hand and conferring benediction. 

5. The disc should be placed in the upper left arm and the 
(conch-shell) pahcajanya on the lower (arm). (The two right 
hands) should be provided with Sri (riches) and pusfi (nourish- 
ment) along with strength and welfare. 

6. The images of Visnu, Vamana (dwarf form of Visnu), 
Vaikunfha, Hayasya (horse-faccd form of Visnu) and Aniruddha 
should be installed in a shed or house or edifice. 

7-9. (The images of) manifestations (of Visnu) (such 
as) the fish etc. should be installed in waters. (The images 
of) Sankarsana, Visvarupa, linga, the form of Rudra, herma- 
phrodite form (of Siva) (Ardhanarlsvara), Hari (Visnu), 
Sankara, Siva, the divine mothers, Bhairava, Surya, the planets, 
Vinayaka, Gaurl (consort of Siva) worshipped by Indra and 
others, Bala and Abala (should also be installed similarly). I 
shall describe the (mode of) consecration of books and the 
mode of writing them. 

10. Having worshipped the manuscript and the written 
book on a scat made of kuSa grass placed on a svastika figure, the 
preceptor should worship the spell and Lord Hari (Visnu). 

11-12. The yajamana (the person at whose instance a rite 
is performed) should face the cast and contemplate the spiritual 
guide, the spell, lord Hari, the copyist and (the goddess) Pad- 
mini after having written five verses on a silver plate with golden 
pen and devanagari letters. The brahmins should be fed accord- 
ing to one’s capacity and fees should be paid as much as one 
could give. 

13. After having worshipped the preceptor, the spell and 
Lord Hari, one should write the puranas etc. as before in a figure 
in an auspicious seat in the north-east. 

14. Having seen the book in the mirror in the pitcher it 
should be consecrated as (described) earlier. After opening up 
the eyes one should place it in the bed. 



63.15 — 64.1-2 


173 


15. The puru$asukta 1 and the Vedas etc. should be (men- 
tally) located in the book. After having infused life to it, it should 
be worshipped and the porridge offered. 

16. Having fed the preceptor and given the fees, the twicc- 
borns should be fed. The book should be carried by men in a 
car, or on the elephant. 

17. The book should be established and worshipped (on 
its return) in a house or temple. That which is wrapped up in a 
cloth should be worshipped at the commencement and end of 
reading. 

18. Having resolved to have universal peace a chapter of the 
book should be read out. The yajam&na and others should be 
sprinkled with water from the pitcher. 

19. The merit of presenting a book to the twice-born is 
unlimited. Three things (are said to be) gifts par excellence. 
(They are) cows, land and knowledge. 

20-21. O sinless one ! the merits of imparting knowledge 
(is great) . One who presents a bundle of written leaves, remains 
and enjoys in the region of Visnu for so many years as the num- 
ber of leaves and letters (in the manuscript). One who gives 
away pahearatra 1 2 , puranas , bharata (as gift) elevates Jtwentyone 
generations of his family and gets merged in the supreme being. 


CHAPTER SIXTYFOUR 
Mode of consecration of tanks and ponds 
The Lord said : 

1. I shall describe the (mode of) consecration of wells, 
tanks and ponds. Listen ! Lord Hari (Visnu) as Soma and ex- 
cellent Varuna remains in the form of water. 

2. The universe is permeated by fire and water. V^snu in 
the form of water is its cause. The image of Lord Varuna (the 
presiding deity of waters) should be made of gold, silver or gems. 

1. ^tV. 10.90. 

2. The religious code book of the Vaifpavas. 



174 


Agiii Purdna 


3. (The image should have) two hands, the right conferring 
refuge and the left should hold the snake-noose and as seated on 
the harfisa along with the rivers and serpents. 

4. There should be an altar at the centre of sacrificial shed 
having a fire-pit. There should be an arch. A pitcher made of 
stone for Lord Varuna should be placed. 

5. Pitchers (should be placed) at the entrance to the fire 
receptacle which may be of a semi-circular shape or a svastika 
of auspicious nature. Having done the agnyadhana (rite) in the 
pit for water the final oblation should be done. 

6. (The image of) Varuna should be touched in the bathing 
seat with (the mantra) ye te Sate 1 2 3 . It should then be anointed with 
ghee by the priest with (the recitation of) the principal mantra. 

7. Having washed the eight pitchers with pure water with 
(the recitation of) Sam no devi 2 they should be consecrated. Sea 
water (should be kept) in the eastern pitcher. 

8-9. Having kept the Ganges water in the (pitcher on the) 
south-east, rain water in the (pitcher on the) south, water from 
waterfalls in the (pitcher on the south-west, river water in the 
west, water from a masculine river in the north-west, spring water 
in the north, waters from sacred places (should be kept) in the 
north-east. In the absence of all the above, river water (should 
be poured into these pitchers) with the chanting of ydsdm 
rdjd?. 

10. After having cleansed and anointed the eyes with the 
three sweet things {honey, sugar and clarified butter) with (the 
mantra) durmilriya 4 5 6 7 , they should be opened with Citram* and 
taccakfuh*. 

11. Having invoked lustre in them the priest should be offer- 
ed a golden cow. (The image of) Varuna should be consecrat- 
ed with the (waters of the) pitcher on the east with (the recita- 
tion of) samudrajyefthd. 1 

1. K&t. Sr. Sfl. 25.1.11a. 

2. YV. 10.9.4a. 

3. not identified. 

4. VS.6.22 and T.S. 1-4-45-2. 

5. RV.l. 115.1a. 

6. RV 7.66- 16a. 

7. &V. 7.49.1a. 



64.12-18 


175 


12-13. The waters of the Ganges should be poured with 
(the mantra) samudrarh gaccha 1 , rain waters with somo dhenum 2 , 
water from waterfalls with devtrapa 3 , the water of the masculine 
rivers with panca nadyah 4 , the spring water with udbhid*> the waters 
from sacred places with pdvamdni fl , the pancagavya (the five 
things from a cow) with dpo hi sfhd 1 and from the golden (pit- 
cher) with hiranyavamam 8 . 

14. (The image should be bathed) with rain water with 
dpo asmd 9 , with well waters with the vydhrtis ( bhuh , blruvah , suvah). 
(Image of) Varuna should be consecrated with the waters of 
the tank with varunadbhih 10 . 

15. Waters from the hills (should be poured) with (the 
mantra)apo devi n and then with the waters from eightyone pitchers. 
Then (the image) should be bathed with varunasya 12 and waters 
for sipping (should be given) with tvanno varuna 1 *. 

16-17. The madhuparka 14, should be given) with the vydhrtis 1 * 
clothes with brhaspate 16 , pavitra with varuna 17 , the upper garment 
with pranava ( Om ). 

Flowers etc. chowriec, mirror, umbrella, fan and banner 
should be offered to (the image of) Varuna with (the mantra) 
yadvarunya 19 . 

18. The image should be raised up with the principal 
mantra (saying) ‘Rise up* and the preliminary consecration is 
made that night. The presence of divinity is accomplished 
by varunam ca 19 . It should be worshipped with yadvdrunya. 20 

1. RV Kh. 5-49-2. 

2. ^V. 1.91 -20a. 

3. MS. 1.1.11. 

4. VS. 34-1 la. 

5. Could not be identified. 

6. Designation of the hymn sv&diffkqya madi^hayd RV.9.1.1. 

7. RV.l0.9.1.a 

8. RV Kh. 5-87-la. 

9. RV. 10.1 7-10a. 

10. Could not be found. 

11. TS. 1 -3.8-2. 

12. One of the many hymns beginning so. See Bloomfield, Vedic 
Concordance C. 106. 

13. Cf. RV. 10.147.5a. 

14. Curd, clarified butter, water, honey, sugar. 

15. Cf. RV. 2. 23.15a. 

15. Cf. RV.9. 83- la. 

17. Could not be identified. 

18. Could not be identified. 

19. RV.1.2.7b. 

20. Could not be identified. 



176 


Agni Pur Una 


19-20. Life should be infused into the image with the prin- 
cipal mantra and should again be worshipped with perijime etc. 
Having worshipped it well in the shed as before after having 
offered twigs etc. into the fire pits with (the recitation of the 
pranava) the first word of the Vedas > four cows should be milched 
in the four directions. Then gruel of barley should be prepared 
and offered to the fire. 

21. The invocation should be performed with the vyahrtis , 
gdyatri and the principal mantra. Oblation should be done with 
the mantra sUryaya prajdpataye dyauh svdhd cdntariksakah. 

22. (Ceremony is to be performed) for the earth, Deha- 
dhfti, Svadhrti, Rati, Ugra, Bhlma, Raudraka. 

23-24. Visnu, Varuna, Dhatj*, Mahendra the furtherer 
of riches, Agni, Yama, Nairj-ta, Varuna, Vayu, Kubera, Ha 
Ananta, Brahman and the lord of waters should be propitiated 
with oblations reciting svdhd and (the mantras ) idam vifnuh 1 and 
tad viprdsa a . 

25. Having made oblation six times with somo dhenu 3 , 
oblation should be made with imam me 4 . Again oblation should 
be done thrice with dpo hi sfha 5 (and once) with imd rudra 6 . 

26. Bali (offering) should be made in the ten directions. 
The image should be worshipped with perfumes and flowers 
The image should be lifted and placed in a mystic diagram by a 
wise man. 

27-28. (The image) should be worshipped with perfumes 
and flowers as well as golden flowers duly. The excellent priest 
should lay eight raised platforms filled with sand after having 
made ready the water tanks measuring two feet. Then clarified 
butter (should be given as oblation) hundred and eight times with 
(the. mantra) varunasya 1 . 

29. Then the barley gruel should be offered in the fire and 
purificatory water sprinkled over the image. The rite to bring 
life into the image should be performed. 

1. RV.I.22.17a. 

2. B.V.I.22.2U. 

3. RV.I.91.20a. 

4. RV.I.25.19a. 

5. RV.10.9. la. 

6. &V.10.1. 114.1a. 

7. Could not be identified. 




64.30-40 


177 


30. Lord Varuna should be contemplated as being accom- 
panied by goddess Gauri and the host of masculine and feminine 
rivers. Then having worshipped with the mantra “ om salutations 
to Varuna”, the act of bringing near should be done. 

31. (The image) should be lifted and carried around on 
the back of elephant etc. and along with the eight auspicious 
things (a brahmin, cow, fire, gold, clarified butter, sun, water 
and king). With the recitation of apo hi sthd 1 2 , it should be 
immersed in the water of the pitcher into which the three sweet 
things have been put. 

32. The image should be placed in the midst of the tank 
unseen. (The priest) should bathe and contemplate on Varuna, 
the creation known as the primordial egg. 

33. Having purified it with the principal letter (of the 
mantra ) of the fire, the ashes should be scattered over the earth. 
The entire world consists of water. Hence, the lord of waters 
is contemplated. 

34. The sacrificial post of a rectangular, octagonal or cir- 
cular shape should be placed in the middle of the tank. 

33. Having worshipped the symbol of the lord, post made 
of the tree used for the purpose of sacrifice (should be driven) 
ten cubits into the ground in the case of (consecration of) a well. 
At the bottom of the post gold and fruit should be placed. 

36. It should be driven into the ground in the middle of 
water fifteen cubits in the case of a well, twenty (cubits) in the 
case of a tank ( puskarini ) and twentyfive cubits in the case of a 
pond. 

37. In the alternative, (the post) should be driven in the 
centre of the sacrificial bed and with the mantra yupavraskd z 
cloth should be put around. The banner should be put at the 
top of the post. 

38. Having worshipped it with perfumes etc., (the rite 
for) universal peace should be performed. The spiritual preceptor 
should be given the fees (in the form of) land, cows, gold and 
water vessel. 

39-40. Fees should be paid to twice-borns. Those who are 
present should be fed. “From Brahman down to (inanimate 

1. RV. 10.9. la. 

2. fcV.1.162. 6a. 



178 


Agni Purdjia 


objects like) the pillar all those who seek water may get 
satisfied with the waters of the tank !” (With the utterance of 
these words) the water should be given as charity. The five 
things got from a cow should then be thrown (into the water). 

41. With the utterance of (the mantra) apo hi stkd 1 thrice, 
the sanctified water got ready by the brahmins and the holy 
waters of the sacred spots should be sprinkled (into the tank) 
and herd of kine should be given to brahmins. 

42-43. Food and other things should be given to all the peo- 
ple without any restraint. One who consecrates a reservoir of 
water (acquires) in a single day a merit ten crores times more 
than one who performs thousands of aivamedha (the horse- 
sacrifice). Such a person goes to heaven in the (celestial) 
vehicle and rejoices (there). He never goes to hell. 

44. The consecrator can never get any sin as the cattle and 
other (animals) drink water from it. One attains all merits 
by the endowment of water (tank) and goes to heaven. 


CHAPTER SIXTYFIVE 
The building of pavilions in front of the temples 
The Lord said : 

1. I shall describe the mode of building pavilions (in front 
of temples) and their maintenance. The vastuyaga (rite per- 
formed to please the spirits dwelling in a site) should be 
performed after having tested the ground (intended for 
building pavilion). 

2. Having constructed pavilion as per one’s liking, one 
should install (the images of) gods according to his wish. 
(Such buildings) should not be constructed at the junction of 
four roads or at a deserted place in the village. 

3. Such a builder being free from sins and raising his ances- 
tors (to heaven), enjoys in heaven. One should build a seven- 
storeyed building for Lord Hari (Visnu) in the following 
way. 

1. RV. 10.9. la. 



65.4-23 


179 


4. The same rule holds good in the building of other (tem- 
ples of gods), as in the case of erecting the mansions of kings. 
The banner should be placed in the east. The edifice should be 
built as a quadrilateral without (having any walls on) the diago- 
nal lines. 

5-7. The building should have three or two chambers or 
one chamber. The vyaya 1 should not be much. Excessive vyaya 
is deemed to be harmful. Excessive dya 2 is also harmful. Hence 
the two should be made equal. (The priest) well-versed in the 
science of Garga (vastusastra ) , should sum up the hand measures 
of building and multiply it by eight. It should be multiplied 
by three and the resultant product should be divided by eight 
and the remainder is known as vyaya. 

3. Alternatively, having divided the sum of the hand mea- 
sures of the building by three and multiplying it by eight the 
resultant is known as the dhvaja (banner) etc. 

9. Banner, camel, lion, dog, bull, donkey, elephant and 
crow are said to be eight dyas . 

10. It is commended if we have three after leaving the 
north and east in houses having three storeys. Together with the 
building on the opposite side there will always be two buildings 
in the south. 

1 1 . One-storeyed building may be had in the south or there 
may be two one-storeyed buildings in the west. The other kinds 
of buildings cause fear. 

12-13. A four-storcyed building devoid of all defects is always 
commended. One may build a mansion having one-storey or 
seven-storeys without the door, platform and moulding. The 
mansions of the images of gods should be consecrated in the pres- 
cribed way for the gods. 

14-23. The hall should be consecrated with the cere- 
monies as described (for the installation of an image). The 
consecrator should bathe in the herbal waters and becoming 
pure and alert should feed brahmins with sweets. He should 
then enter the hall decked with pitchers and arches, with his 


1-2. One of the formulae for ascertaining the right proportion of measure- 
ment. 



180 


Agni Purina 


hand placed on the back of a cow, and after having wished pros* 
perity to the brahmins. The householder should then enter the 
house after having honoured the astrologers. The following man- 
tra of prosperity should be repeated. 

“Om, O Mother Earth ! related to Vasistha ! you rejoice 
with the Vasus (semi-divine beings) and people. Glory be to the 
daughter of Bhargava 1 (Sukra the preceptor of demons), 
the giver of success to her offsprings. The accomplished goddess f 
relative of Angiras ! You grant me my heart’s desire. O auspi- 
cious one ! related to (sage) Kasyapa ! make my intellect good. 
Endowed with all herbs ! Surrounded by all gems and herbs f 
Shining one ! Joyous one ! related to Vasistha ! May you amuse 
here ! Daughter of Prajapati (Brahman) ! O Goddess ! 
Handsome in all parts ! Noble-minded ! Beautiful one ! The 
strict observer of disciplines ! One who is related to Kasyapa f 
May you enjoy in this house ! O Adored by the great precep- 
tors ! Adorned with perfumes and garlands ! Bestower of pros- 
perity lO Goddess ! Daughter of Bhargava ! May you amuse 
in this house ! The primordial element ! The inexplicable 
one ! Accomplished ! O daughter of sage Angiras ! O 
Goddess of bricks ! I establish you. You confer on me my desi- 
res ! One surrounded by the lords of regions, place and the 
house ! You be furtherer of men, wealth, elephant, horse and 
cow. 


CHAPTER SIXTYSIX 
Mode of consecration of other gods 
The Lord said : 

1-2. I shall describe the mode of consecration (of ima- 
ges) of all gods — the Adityas (the suns, twelve in number), 
Vasus (eight), Rudrah (eleven), Sadhyah, Vilvedevah, Alvins 
and the sages etc. It is like (the consecration of the image of) 
Vasudeva. I shall describe special features (of ceremonies). 
The first letter of the name of particular deity should be 
taken. 


1. Denotes Lakfml. 



€6.3-1 1 


181 


3. It should be split into syllables. The longer vowels should 
be split. The mystical letter (of the deity) is first formed by 
adding a nasal and the pranava. 

4. (The images of) all gods as well as those who had led 
a disciplined life and had observed austerities and atonements 
and those who had lived in the monasteries should be worshipp- 
ed and installed with their respective principal mantra . 

5. I shall describe the mode of fasting for a month and that 
which concludes on the twelfth day (of a fortnight ) . One should 
place a stone slab and pitchers made of bell metal filled with the 
articles (described earlier). 

6. After having collected the brahmakUrca (grass), the wor- 
shipper should prepare the gruel made of barley and milk of 
tawny (coloured) cow with (the mantra) tadvisnoh. 1 2 

7. It should be stirred with the ladle holding it with (the 
recitation of) pranava {om). Having got it ready and bringing it 
down lord Vi?nu should be worshipped and the offering made. 

8. The oblation should be done with the vy&hrti (bhuh y 
bhuvah , svah), the vedic mantras such as gdyatri 1 {mantra), tad - 
mprasa 3 4 , vtivataScaksuh 4 and bhuragnaye 5 6 . 

9. Oblations should be given to Surya, Prajapati (the 
creator), (the lord of) the ethereal region. Oblation to sky ! 
Oblations to Brahman ! (Oblations should be given upto) the 
earth and the great king. 

10. Oblations should be done with (the mantras) tasmai , 
somarh ca , rajdnamidam. Having offered the remaining part of the 
gruel as oblation, digbali (offerings to the quarters) should be 
done with due respect. 

1 1 . Having made oblation of one hundred and eight 
twigs of the pal&fa (tree) along with clarified butter, oblations 
should be done eight times with sesamum and water along with 
the puru$asukta % . 

1. RV. 1.22.20a. 

2 . Om bh Ur bhuvassvafi laisavit ttrvareyyam bhargo devasya dhlmahi dhiyo yo 
nati pracoday&t. 

3. RV.l. 22.21a. 

4. RV.10.81.3a. 

5. TA. 10.2.1 or 10.4.1. 

6. RV. 10.90. 



182 


Agni Purina 


12-13. Having offered oblations for Brahman, Visnu, I$a 
(Siva), the attendant gods, the planets and the presiding deities 
of different worlds, oblations should be offered for the moun- 
tains, rivers, and oceans. Sacrificial spoon full of clarified butter 
should be offered thrice as the final oblation with the (recitation 
of) vyahrtis ( bhuh , bhuvah , svah). 

14-15. O Brahman after having sipped the gruel along 
with the pancagaxya (five things got from a cow) with the 
vaisnava mantra and the syllable vausaf , the priest should be paid 
fees, vessel containing sesamum along with gold, cloth and a 
cow well-adorned. The wise man should complete the austerity 
with (the utterance of) “May lord Visnu be pleased !” 

16-17. I shall describe in full about another mode of conse- 
cration other than that of fasting for a month. The lord of the 
celestials (Visnu) should be worshipped and the gruel pertain- 
ing to Visnu should be prepared out of sesamum, rice, nivdra 
grains (rice growing unsown), fyamaka or barley. After adding 
clarified butter and lifting it up, oblation should be made with 
that with the mantras relating to that form of the lord. 

18. Oblation should be made to Visnu and other gods who 
are the lords of different months then. Om ! oblations for 
Visnu ! Oblations to lord Vi$nu, the ornament ! Oblations to 
Lord Visnu, the fipivisfa (pervaded by rays) (an epithet of 
Visnu) ! Om ! oblations to Narasimha (man-lion form of Visnu). 
Om ! oblations to Purusottama (the foremost) (an epithet of 
Visnu) ! Twelve twigs of the holy fig tree dipped in the clarified 
butter should be given as oblation. 

19. Twelve oblations (should be made) with the mantra 
visqo rardfa 1 . Twelve oblations with the gruel should be made 
with (the mantras) idam vifnu , 2 3 irdvati 8 . 

20. Similarly, oblations should be made with clarified butter 
with (the mantra) tadviprdsa . 4 5 Having done the remaining 
oblation, three concluding oblations should be made. 

21. Having repeated the hymn yunjate* the gruel should be 

1. TS. 1.2.13.3. 

2. £V. 1.22. 17a. 

3. £V. 7. 99.3.a. 

4. RV. 1. 22.21a. 

5. fcV. 5. 81.1a. 



66.22-30 


183 


partaken. With the pranava (syllable om) repeated at the end of 
the respective name the gruel should be placed in a vessel made 
of holy fig tree. 

22. Then twelve brahmins (representing) the twelve pre- 
siding deities of the months should be fed. The priest (would be) 
the thirteenth. The thirteenth place should be offered to him. 

23. Thirteen pitchers containing sweet water along with 
umbrellas, shoes, clothes, gold and garlands should be given to 
them for the sake of conclusion of the rite. 

24. A path-way should be laid out (for the cattle) saying, 
“May the cows get pleased ! May they move happily !” Then 
the sacrificial post should be planted there. 

25-26. A water-shed in the pleasure grove, monastery and 
path-way should be often cubits. Having done the oblation etc. 
in the house duly in the prescribed way, the householder should 
enter the house according to the earlier injunctions. Offering 
of food etc. without any restrictions should be made on all these 
(occasions). 

27. Fees should be paid by wise men to the brahmins accord- 
ing to one’s capacity. Whoever causes to set up a pleasure grove 
stays eternally in the garden of Indra. 

28. One who builds a monastery goes to heaven and remains 
in the world of Indra. One who sets up a water-shed (lives) 
with Lord Varuna. By (the construction of) a pathway one re- 
mains in the heaven. 

29. One who builds a bridge of bricks and who constructs 
a pathway for cows in the cattle stall and one who observes the 
austerities in the prescribed way dwells in the region of Visnu. 
One who performs atonements gets rid of all sins. 

30. Having constructed a house (for the god) one dwells in 
heaven so long as the universe exists. The installation and 
consecration of Lord Siva etc., the lords of their edifices (have 
been described). 



184 


Agtti Purdna 


CHAPTER SIXTYSEVEN 
Renovation of decayed images 


The Lord said : 

1. I shall describe the process of replacing the old images. 
The priest should bathe the images with their ornaments on them. 
The fixed class of images should be put in a room and the ex- 
tremely time-worn ones should be rejected. 

2. A broken or mutilated stone (image) (should be cast 
aside) and a new one the same as the previous one should be 
installed (in its place) by the priest after merging the principles 
according to the process of merging (described earlier). 

3. Having made one thousand oblations with the Nara- 
simha (i mantra ), the priest should lift that image. The old image 
made of wood should be put into fire and the one made of 
stone should be thrown into water. * 

4. The old image made of a mineral or gem should be car- 
ried on a vehicle after covering it with cloth etc. and be 
discarded in the deep waters of the ocean. 

5. It should be thrown into waters accompanied by the 
notes of music instruments. Fees should be paid to the priest. 

6. New images of the same size and made of the same mate- 
rial should be installed on the same day. One accrues great merit 
by the renovation of wells, tanks and ponds. 


CHAPTER SIXTYEIGHT 

Mode of taking out a procession and celebration of festivals after 
fixing the new image : 

The Lord said : 

1 . I shall describe the celebration of festival after the 
image has been installed. It shall be for a night, or three or five 
nights. 



€8.2-13 


185 


2-3. Without the festival the installation would become 
fruitless. The festival for the deity should be celebrated when 
the sun enters the solstitial or the equinoctial points in the bed- 
chamber or garden or it may be done in favour of the person at 
whose instance the ceremony is performed with the sowing of 
auspicious seeds and the notes of sacred music. 

4-5. An earthen vessel, a small water pot or an embankment 
are suitable for the sowing of seeds. Grains of barley, uncultivat- 
ed rice, sesamum, green gram, wheat, white mustard, horse- 
gram, and black gram should be winnowed, washed and 
sown. Offerings should be made in the east and other directions. 
Lighted lamps should be carried round the edifice in the night. 

6. (Offering should be made) to Indra, Kumuda and other 
deities and spirits. They visit the place assuming shapes of 
men. 

7. (One who carries such lamps) certainly gets the merit 
of (doing) atoamedha (horse sacrifice) for every step he places. 
The priest should submit to the lord (as follows) after his return. 

8. “O Lord ! best among the Gods ! you have to be taken 
in a procession tomorrow. By all means you deserve to permit 
us O Lord ! to commence the same. 

9. Having informed the lord in this way the festivities 
should be undertaken. The platform should be decorated with 
young shoots of plants and small water-jar. 

10-11. Four pillars (should be erected). The image should 
be placed in a svastika (figure) (drawn) in their midst. Or de- 
sired objects should be painted and placed there and the act of 
making the deity present in the image should be done with the 
vaifnaua mantra . (The image) should be anointed with ghee 
with (the recitation of) the principal (mantra). Or the wise man 
should arrange an incessant flow of ghee over the image the 
whole night. 

12. Having shown the mirror, there should be the waving 
of light, auspicious singing and instrumental music, fanning, 
worship, and present of light. The deity should be worshipped 
with incense and flowers. 

13. Turmeric, green-gram, saffron and white powders 
should be put on the head of image. But when ghee (is placed 
over the head) it gets the merit of all sacred places for the 
devotees. 



186 


Agni Purdna 


14. Having bathed and worshipped the image that is placed 
in the car for being taken around, the officers of the king should 
take it to the river-side accompanied by music, umb/ella and 
other things. 

15. A platform should be got ready at a distance of a 
yojana (eight or nine miles) before the river. The image should 
be brought down from the car and placed on the platform. 

16. Gruel should be prepared and sweet gruel should be 
offered as oblation. The sacred waters (of the sacred spots) 
should be invoked for their presence with (the recitation of) 
vedic mantras symbolising the waters. 

17. The image should again be worshipped with the prin- 
cipal oblations uttering the mantra dpo hi ffhd 1 2 . The image should 
again be carried to the waters and the aghamarsana 2 hymn repeated. 

18. (The priest) should bathe with the assembly of brah- 
mins and then the image should be lifted and placed on the 
platform. Having worshipped it there that day it should then be 
taken to the temple. The priest should worship it as in the fire 
which gets him enjoyment and liberation. 


CHAPTER SIXTYNINE 

Mode of conducting the bathing festival 
The Fire {Lord) said : 

1. O Brahman ! Listen ! I shall describe in detail (the 
mode of conducting) the bathing festival. The pitchers should 
be placed in a drawn figure in the shed in front of the temple. 

2. First of all, God Hari (Visnu) should be contemplated, 
propitiated and offered oblations before doing anything. One 
should offer oblations hundred or thousand times along with the 
final one. 

3. The materials for bathing should then be brought and the 
pitchers also should be placed. The pitchers to the necks of which 

1. RV.10.9.U. 

2. RV.10.190 — Hath ca salyaih cdbkidh&t 



69.4-16 


187 


threads have been tied should be made fragrant and they should 
be held in a circle. 

4. A square should be drawn and divided into eleven com- 
partments. The gruel should be placed at the centre, the adja- 
cent parts having been cleaned. 

5. The nine angular points commencing with east should 
be filled with powdered rice etc., and the pitcher should be brou- 
ght by the wise man after having formulated the kumbha mudrd *. 

6. Darbha grass should be put on them with the puntfarik&kfa 
(an epithet of Vi§nu) (lotus-eyed) mantra . A pitcher filled with 
water and containing all gems should be placed in the middle. 

7. The barley, paddy, sesamum, uncultivated rice, fy&m&ka 
(grains), horse gram, green gram and white mustard seeds 
(should be put) in the eight directions in order. 

8-9. A pitcher filled with ghee should be placed in the mid- 
dle of the eastern side in the midst of nine pitchers. The 
remaining pitchers should be filled with the decoctions of the 
(barks of) paldSa , aSvattha ) nyagrodha , bilva, udumbara , Sirifa, 
jamb U , Sami and kapittha. The central pitcher in the nine pitchers 
in the south-east should be filled with honey. 

10. The remaining eight pitchers should be filled with the 
earth taken from loosening by cow’s horn, elephant’s tusk, horse 
hoofs, mountains, Ganges bed, sacred spots, rivers and fields. 

11-12. In the nine pitchers on the south, the central one 
should be filled with sesamum. The other eight pitchers should 
be filled with n&rafiga, jambira, kharjUra , n&rikeia (coconut), pUga 
(arecanut), pomegranate, panasa fruits. In the nine pitchers on 
the south-west, the central pitcher should be filled with milk. 

13-15. (The remaining eight pitchers should be) duly 
(filled with) saffron {kuhkuma ) , ndga 9 campaka , mdlatl, jasmine, 
punndga , karavira , and mahotpala flowers. In the nine pitchers on 
the west, the central pitcher should contain the coconut water. 
(The other pitchers should contain) waters of the river, 
ocean, tank, well, rain water, water from the melted ice, 
waters of the falls, and of the Ganges. In the nine pitchers on 
the north-west the central one should have banana fruits. 

16. The divine herbs sahadevi , kumdri , sirhht> vy&gkrl, amft&y 


1 . A posture made with the hands representing a pitcher. 



188 Agni Purtipa 

vifnuparnd, iatativd and vacd should be placed in the other eight 
pitchers. 

17-19. In the east and the northern (directions) among the 
nine pitchers one should place the central one having curd. The 
other pitchers should duly be filled with the fragrant substances — 
cardamom, tvae&> kuffka, bdlaka, the two varieties of sandal, the 
kastUrikA creeper and the black agallochum. (In 'the central 
pitcher among the nine pitchers on the north east) one should 
fill waters for purification. In the other pitchers we should have 
(the materials) candra , t&ra, hikla , giris&ra (iron), trapu (tin), 
camphor, Hr$a and gems. 

20. They should be anointed with ghee and lifted up and 
bathed with the principal mantra with perfumes and worshipped. 
Having offered oblations into the fire, the final oblation should 
be offered. 

21. Offering should be made to all spirits. After paying 
fees to (the priest), (the priest and the brahmins) should be 
fed after having installed the images of deities, sages and other 
divinities. 

22. Having installed (the image of the god) in this way 
one should conduct the bathing festival. One who bathes (the 
image) in one thousand eight pitchers gets all fortune. 

23. By bathing at the conclusion of the rite, the bathing 
festival concludes. The marriage and other festivals of (the 
goddesses) Gaur! (consort of Siva), Lak?mi (consort of Vi$nu) 
should be celebrated after the bathing festival. 


CHAPTER SEVENTY 
Mode of planting trees 


The Lord said : 

1-2. I shall describe the mode of planting trees conferring 
enjoyment and emancipation. The trees having been smeared 
with all the herbs and adorned with fragrant powders should be 
decorated with flower garlands. Cloth should b$ put around 



70.3-71.1-2 


189 


them. (The rite known as) the perforation of the ear should be 
done for them with a golden needle. 

3-4. Collyrium should be applied with a short stick. Seven 
kinds of fruits (should be placed) on the platform. The pitchers 
should be consecrated. The offering should be made for (the 
gods) Indra and others and the consecration should be done. 
Oblations to the fire should be done for (the sake of) plants. 
Remaining in the midst of trees a cow should be let off with 
the (recitation of) abhifekamantra. 

5-6. Brahmins should bathe the trees as well as the yajamdna 
with the waters of pitchers placed in the platform with (the 
recitation of) the jk , yajus , s&ma mantras and also that of varuna 
accompanied by auspicious music. The yajamdna should adorn 
(himself) and should present the fees as well as a cow, ornament 
and cloth. 

7. Food should be given along with milk (to brahmins) 
for four days consecutively. Oblation should be made with sesa- 
mum and twigs of pal&fa (tree). The sacrificial priest should be 
paid the fees double (the value of what is given to other brah- 
mins). 

8. The construction of sheds etc. here should be done as 
laid down earlier. The consecration of trees and a garden 
destroys one’s sins and gets the highest merit. 

9. Listen to the (mode of) installation (of the image) of 
Surya (sun), Ganeia, the goddess (Gaurl) and the attendant 
deities of Lord Hari as described by Iia (Siva) to Skanda (ear- 
lier). 


CHAPTER SEVENTYONE 
Mode of worshipping Ganeia 


The God said : 

1-2. I shall describe the (mode of) worship of Ga$a 
(Ganeia) which removes obstacles and confers the desired 
objects. (The worship of six kinds should be done as follows) : 
The heart with “oblations to Ganeia”, the head with " (obla- 



190 


Agni Purina 


tions) to the one-tusked”, the tuft with “(oblations) to the one 
who has the ear like that of an elephant”, the arfnour with 
“(oblations) to the elephant-faced”, the eye with “(oblations) 
to the big-bellied,” the weapons with “ (oblations) to one who 
has his own tusk in his hands”. 

3-5. One should worship the gam , the preceptor, the sandals, 
the (divine) energy, Ananta, the dharma, and the collection of 
bones in the lower part of the pedestal, the cover, the petals of 
the lotus, the lotus and the principal letter, (should be worshipp- 
ed) in the upper part. (The energies) (are) Jvalinl, Nanda, 
SuryeSa, Kamarupa, Udaya, Kama vartt ini, Satya, and Vighna- 
na£a. The seat (should be worshipped) with perfumes and earth. 
(With the following letters the appropriate acts should be per- 
formed): the drying withjwn, the burning with ram , the agita- 
ting with lam and making it to nectar with vam. The gdyatri - 
mantra is : lambodardya vidmahe mahodar&ya dhimahi tanno dantih 
pracoday&t. 1 

6-7. The following are the names of Gane£a to be worshipp- 
ed : “Ganapati (Lord of ganas ), Ganadhipa (chieftain of the 
ganas ), Ganesa (Lord of ganas), Gananayaka (the lord of 
ganas), Ganakritfa (one who sports with the ganas), Vakra- 
tunda (having a bent trunk), Ekadamspra (having one tusk), 
Mahodara (big-bellied), Gajavaktra (elephant-faced), Lamba- 
kuk?i (long-bellied), Vikaja (dreadful), VighnanaSana (des- 
troyer of impediments), Dhumravarna (tawny-coloured) and 
Mahendra. 


CHAPTER SEVENTY-TWO 
Mode of bathing and daily worship 


The God said : 

1 . O Skanda ! I shall describe the modes of bathing and 
worship after the installation everyday. Having bathed one 
should dig up eight fingers of earth with the sword. 

1. May we know the Supreme person. For that, we meditate upon 
lambodara (long-bellied) and ( big-bellied) . Ma^Dantin (one who 

has the tusk) impel us towards it. 



72.2-12 


191 


2. The pit should be filled with the earth thus removed and 
it should be carried to the river bed and placed there. It should 
then be purified with the weapon. 

3-5. The grass should be lifted up with the tikhd (tuft) 
(; mantra ) and divided into three with the armour {mantra). 
Having washed upto the navel and foot with one part of them, 
the other part should be burnt with the astra mantra and sprinkled 
all over the body. Having pressed the eyes with the hands one 
should remain immersed in the water for some time after con- 
trolling the breath. One should contemplate in the heart, the 
weapon, radiant like the deadly fire. Having finished the mud 
bath in this way one should rise up from waters. 

6-7. Having worshipped the astrasandhyd (the union of 
weapon), one should bathe according to the injunctions laid 
down. The sacred waters of the rivers Sarasvati and others 
should be drawn into the heart with the (formation of) ankuia - 
mudra (a formation with the fingers resembling the goad). Having 
established it (there), one should collect the remaining mud 
formulating the samhdramudrd (posture with the fingers indicating 
destruction) and enter the navel-deep water. 

8-9. (The remaining mud) should be made into three 
parts on the left palm facing the north. One part of it 
on the south once with the adga mantras , the next part with 
the (previous mantra) seven times and the one on the north with 
the Siva mantra ten times and duly thus the parts should be sancti- 
fied. After having recited the mantra for the weapon ending with 
hum phaf, the first part (of the earth) should be scattered in all 
directions. 

10. Having the part on the north and reciting the Siva - 
mantra the waters of Siva should be accomplished. The part on 
the south (sanctified with the ahga mantra) should be smeared all 
over the body from head to foot. 

11-12. After having recited the four ahgamantras and cover- 
ed all the (nine) apertures (in the body) with the recitation of 
the sammukhlkaraQa mantra ( mantra accomplishing the presence), 
one should contemplate Lord Siva or Lord Hari or the Ganges 
and plunge into the waters. Then the fafaftga mantra (i mantra 
for assigning to the limbs of the body) ending with vaufat should 
be recited and water poured (over the head) . 



192 


Agni PurdQa 

13-15. One should place water in the pitchers in the east 
(and other directions) in order to prevent any harm during ablu- 
tion. Having bathed one should apply sweet perfumes such as 
emblic myrabolans which are (considered as) royal honour. 
Having bathed and come out, that water should be made to- 
cease to exist with the samhdrini (mudra). One should then 
bathe from head to foot with the ashes duly purified by the sam - 
hitd (vedic) mantras or concluding rites with (the recitation) 
of the mantra hum pha [ . 

16-17. Having performed the mala sndna y (bathing with 
mud), the vidhisnana (bathing with the recitation of mantras), 
one should besmear the head, face, heart, and the genital organ 
with the ( mantras of gods) Isa (I$ana), Tatpurusa, Aghora, 
Guhyaka and Jata (Sadyojata) in the three twilights, night, and 
before and after the commencement of rainy season. 

18-19. If a person happens to touch a woman, an eunuch, 
a man of lower caste, a cat, hare or mouse just after getting up 
from sleep, or eaten food or drunk water one should do the dgne - 
yaka bathing, standing up with uplifted arms, the face having 
turned towards the east, being cleansed by the shower of sun’s 
rays. 

20. The mdhendra bathing (consists in the recitation of the) 
lia mantra and walking seven steps in the midst of herds of cows 
being besmeared with the dust (arising) from the hoofs. 

21. The pdvana (purifying) bathing (should be done) 
with the nine mantras or the constituent mantra and the pouring 
of water (should be done) with the mantras sadyojdta , etc. 

22. The bathing with the mantra should be done in this man- 
ner in honour of (the gods) Varuna, Agni and others with (the 
recitation) of the principal mantra being preceded by the regula- 
tion of the breath. 

23. The mental bathing which has been universally enjoined 
should be performed in honour of Lord Vi$nu, by uttering the 
mantra sacred to him. 

24. O Guha (son of Lord Siva) ! I shall describe the rules 
(relating to) the twilight (worship) (to be performed) with 
different mantras . After having had a look one should drink the 
water, the Brahma and Sankara tirthas (from the root of diffe- 
rent fingers). 

25. (One should pronounce) the different principles consti- 



72.26-35 


193 


tuting one’s self ending with the term suadhd, touching firmly the 
(nine) apertures (in the body). After having done the sakali - 
katana (accomplishing deed) one should remain composed by 
(the performance of) regulation of breath. 

26. The performer should mentally repeat thrice the 
Hvasamhitd. After having sipped water and performing nydsa 
(assigning gods or mantras in different parts of the body, one 
should meditate upon the goddess brahmi and the sandhya 
in the morning as follows: 

27. (The goddess) having red complexion, has four faces, 
four arms with hanging garlands in the right arms and a stick 
and kamanialu (small pitcher) in the left arms and seated in the 
crossed-leg posture on the swan. 

28. The midday twilight should be contemplated as Vai§- 
navi, white (in complexion), seated with crossed-legs on the 
Garuda, holding conch and disc in the left arm and the mace 
and abhaya (mudra) (hand showing protection) in the right hand. 

29. Raudri should be meditated upon as seated on the lotus 
and as riding the bull, possessing three eyes, decorated by the 
moon and holding trident and rosary in the right arm and the 
protective posture {abhaya) and mace in the left arm. 

30. The twilight is the witness of deeds of men. The 
soul (should be known) as following its radiance. The fourth 
twilight is that of the learned and it is meditated upon in the 
night. 

31. The supreme sandhyd is declared as that which remains 
invisible in the cavities situated at the heart, and the upperend 
of the nose and which secures the realization of Siva. 

32. The root of the fore-finger (is known to be) the pit ? - 
tirtha and that of the little finger as that of Prajapati. The root 
of the thumb (is known to be) that of Brahma, while the fore- 
part of the hand is held sacred for all gods. 

33. It is the place of sacred fire on the palm of the left 
hand, and the soma on that of the right hand. All the tips and 
folds on the fingers (are sacred) for the sages. 

34. After having got ready the sacred waters for Siva with 
the mantras pertaining to Siva, one should sprinkle that water 
with the sarhfutd mantras. 

35. The water sprinkled from the right hand should drip 



194 Agni Purdna 

down through the left hand and the head should be sprinkled 
(with water) with the (repetition of) mantras . # 

36. The water remaining in the right palm should be carried 
to the tip of the nose and should be conceived as white in colour 
and as the embodiment of knowledge. The water should then be 
drawn through the right nostril and retained. 

37. That water should then be ejected into the right palm 
after having conceived it as black in colour because of the re- 
demption of one’s sins. It should be thrown on a stone slab. This 
is known to be the agkamarsana (redeeming from sin) rite. 

38. Then one should repeat the gdyatri mantra as many times 
as possible after having offered the respectful arghya consisting, 
of ku$a> flowers and unbroken rice to Siva with the mantras of 
j§iva ending with (the syllable) svdhd (oblation). 

39. I shall describe the offering of water oblations to the god. 
One should utter the mantra Sivdya svdhd (oblations to Siva) 
and offer water. (The syllable) svdhd should be repeated in 
all cases. 

40. (The nydsa should be done as) hram , to the heart; hrim y 
to the head; hrdm 9 to the tuft of hair; hraim } to the armour and 
the weapons, (or in the alternative), the eight gods (can be 
located) in the heart and other limbs). 

41-44. (The water oblations should be performed for the 
following gods) — hrdm , to the Vasus, Rudras, ViSve (devas), 
(to the sages ) — hdm to Bhrgus, Angiras, Atri; salutation to Va- 
si$tha, Pulastya, Kratu, Bharadvaja; salutations to Vi^vamitra, 
to Pracetas; vasaf to Sanaka; hdm va$af to Sananda, vasaf to 
Sanatana, va$af to Sanatkumara; va$af to Kapila, to Paficagikha, 
(the ceremony being done) with the fingers of the right hand 
placed at the elbow joint of the left. 

45. Vau$af to all spirits. One should (offer water of 
oblations) to the spirits, gods, and manes with the sacred thread 
placed on the right shoulder and with the tips of the kufa and 
sesamum. 

46. (Oblation should be offered) to the fire, the conveyor 
of offerings, to Soma, to Yama, to Aryama, (the manes), Agni- 
manes), Agni$vatta (and) Barhisada with the addition of svadhd 
(food). 

47. (Oblations should be given) to (the i^anes) Ajyapa, 
Soma and to all manes as it would be done for the gods. 



72.48 — 73.1-5 


195 


Orriy hdm to I$ana, the svadhd (food) should be offered to the 
(manes) (departed) father and grand-father. 

48. (Oblations should be offered) to the great-grand- 
father and the manes in the form of preta (the form of the 
manes during the period of obsequies after one’s death), 
the fathers, grandfathers, and great grand-fathers. 

49-50. Food oblations (should be given) to great-great- 
grand-fathers, mother side relatives such as the maternal grand- 
fathers, great-grandfathers, great-great-grandfathers and all 
manes. Food oblation (should be offered) to all departed 
paternal relatives, preceptors, to different quarters of heaven, 
to their lords, to the divine mothers and to demons. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYTHREE 
Mode of worshipping the Sun 


The Lord said : 

1. O Skanda ! I shall describe the (mode of) worship 
of Sun preceded by the assignment (of letters) on the body. 
After having contemplated as “I am the Sun”, one should wor- 
ship by offering waters (< arghya ). 

2-4. It (should be conceived) as filled with red colour with 
the drop (of water) drawn to the forehead. After having wor- 
shipped it and after making the protective covering with the 1 imbs 
of the sun-god, that water should be sprinkled on the materials 
of worship and the sun-god should be worshipped (remaining) 
facing the east. (One should recite) the syllables om am (hfda~ 
ydya etc. and worship Dan^i and Pihgala (attendants of the sun) 
respectively at the right and left sides of the entrance. (Saluta- 
tions should be made to the gana saying) am gandya on the north- 
east. The preceptor (should be worshipped) in the south-east 
and the lofty seat (of the deity) should be .worshipped in the 
middle of the altar. 

5. One should worship uimala 9 sdra> parama and sukha> (the 
rays of the sun), which are to be worshipped in the directions 



196 Agni Purdxia 

south-east (and should be conceived as) strong as the lion and 
of the colours of white, red, yellow and blue. • 

6-8. One should worship (the essences of the energies of the 
lord) ra-diptd (radiant), ra-jqyd (victorious), ru-bhadrd (auspi- 
cious ) , re-vibh uti (prosperity ) , rai-vimald (pure ) , rai-amoghd 
(profound), rau-vidyut (lightning), in the (quarters) east etc. 
inside the lotus (shaped diagram). The seat of the sun would 
be at the centre (established by the syllable) ram. One should 
invoke the sun and worship his form with the six-syllabled 
( mantra ) orh hark khakholkaya . One should assign the sun-god 
after having meditated upon the altar with the folded hands 
lifted to the forehead. 

9. One should invoke the god (with the mantra) hram hrim 
sa and salutations to the sun-god, showing the mudrd. One should 
offer him perfume etc. and show the bimbamudrd 1 2 3 . 

10. One should show the padmamudrd 2 and the bilvamudrd 8 
(to the god) in all directions commencing with the south- 
east. Om am salutations to the heart. (Salutations) to sun on the 
head. 

11. BhUrbhuvah svah ! Obeisance to the lord of celestials 
in the tuft of hair in the south-west, hum to the armour in the 
north-west, hdm to the eyes at the centre. 

12. Va ! (salutations) to the weapons in the east etc. Then 
one should show mudras . Dhenumudra (fingers folded in the 
shape of a cow) to the heart etc. The Govisdna mudrd 4 should be 
shown to the eyes. 

13-14. The trasanl (the dreadful) should be added to the 
mantra of the weapon and obeisance should be made to the pla- 
nets (as follows) — som salutations to the Moon, bum salutations 
to Mercury, bfm to Jupiter, bham to Venus, am to Mars, sam to 
Saturn, ram to R&hu and kem to Ketu(to be done) in the petals 
(of the lotus) commencing with the east. The perfumes etc. 
(should be offered) with the khakholka mantra. 

15. Having recited the principal mantra y water of oblation 
from the water-vessel should be offered to the sun-god. Then 

1. Intertwining of fingers representing a form. 

2. Intertwining of fingers representing a lotus. 

3. Intertwining of fingers in a particular way. 

4. Formation of fingers representing the horn of a co WS 



73,16-74.1-6 


197 


the worshipper should sing the glory of the lord, pay obeisance 
to him with his face turned away and say “Pardon me, (taking 
leave of thee)*\ 

16-17. One should mentally merge the five component 
principles in the fundamental one with the syllable phaf. The 
sun-god should be conceived as identical with lord Siva in the 
lotus of the heart. One should offer light to the lord as a 
garland made of the solar rays. One gets everything by thus 
worshipping and contemplating the sun-god or by oblation unto 
fire in his honour. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYFOUR 
Mode of worshipping Siva 


The Lord said : 

1. I shall describe the (mode of) worshipping Siva. 
After having sipped water, and repeated the syllable Qm, 
one should wash the entrance of the temple with water (conse- 
crated by the) mantra of the weapon and worship the guardian 
deities of the door-ways and of the oblations etc. 

2-3. One should worship goddess Sarasvati (consort of 
Lord Brahma), Lak?mi (consort of Lord Vi?nu) and Gana at 
the threshold, Nandin (attendant of Lord Siva) and the Ganges 
on the right and Mahakala (form of Siva) and the Yamuni 
(river) on the left imagining himself as having divine sight, and 
after having driven the spirits and impediments present in the 
sky by throwing a consecrated flower. 

4. One should kick the earth thrice with the right heels 
and enter the place of worship after leaping across the threshold 
holding the left door frame. 

5. Having entered (the temple) by placing the right 
foot (first) and placing the weapons at the threshold, one should 
worship at its centre (repeating the following) : om, hdm, (obei- 
sance) to Brahmi, the presiding deity of the dwelling place. 

6. Then he should go to the river Ganges silently carrying 



198 Agni Pur&pa 

pure golden pitchers by means of searching instruments, after 
having obtained permission from Siva. 

7. One should fill them with waters of the river filtered with 
the cloth after the repetition of gdyatri or the hfdayamantra 9 
and purifying one’s body. 

8. The materials for worship such as the perfumes, un- 
broken rice and flowers etc. should be placed in front of the place 
and the purification of five material components (of the 
earth) should be done. 

9. Having placed (these materials) on the right side of the 
deity with a pleasing face and having lifted these showing sam~ 
hdra mudrd (posture of the fingers representing destruction), 
one should place them on the head with (the repetition of) 
the mantra . 

10-11. One who is desirous of enjoying the fruits of action 
should meditate upon his soul in the twelve-petalled lotus in the 
heart by means of showing panikacchapikd (a particular way of 
showing the fingers) 1 . As an alternative one should purify the 
five elements by meditating upon the apertures in the body from 
the toes of the feet upwards both inside and outside. 

12. One who meditates should control his breath and medi- 
tate on the energy which pervades the region of the heart, in the 
letter hum which resembles the fire and which is situated at the 
centre of the aperture. 

13. The breath should then be let out and the fiery image 
should be led through the heart, neck, palate, the intervening 
space between the two eye-brows and the seat of the soul in the 
head (brahmarandhra) , with the ending (syllable) phaf . 

14. Having broken the knots, the life syllable hum should 
be located on the head and the consciousness should be reflected 
back in the heart by means of the pur aka (filling with air drawn 
through the nostril). 

15. Having placed (the syllable) hum on the tuft, one should 
meditate upon the absolute soul of the form of a speck. Having 
withheld the breath at a single stretch, one should unite the 
consciousness with Sambhu (Siva). 

16. After having merged himself with Siva, by means of 
drawing his consciousness with the aid of bijamantras and the 


1. Representing the tortoise. 



74 . 17-27 


199 


recaka (exhalation of the breath), (the worshipper) should 
purify by carrying in the reverse order the luminous point (in 
the brain) to the point in (the nerve-complex). 

1 7. One should merge the earth, wind, water, fire and sky, 
one into the other without any deviation in the order. You hear 
about it now ! 

18. The principle of earth is hard, of yellowish colour and 
bears the mark of thunderbolt. Then its destruction is wrought 
by the subtle mantra of the soul (namely) haum. 

19. The entire body from foot to head should be contemplat- 
ed as a four-sided figure, and the principle of wind should be 
meditated therein by five stretches of retention of breath. 

20. This principle which has been established with the 
principal syllable hrim should be contemplated as of half-cres- 
cent-shaped in a liquid state, white in colour, beautiful and 
impressed with (the figure of) the lotus. 

21. The reverential principle of fire which is causeless and 
which is the end of men, should be purified by four stretches of 
retention of breath along with the Rama mantra . 

22. The orb of fire should be conceived as three-sided, red 
(in colour), marked with (the sign of) svastika and as the form of 
knowledge and endowed with the principal syllable hum . 

23. The principle of water should be purified by means of 
three stretches of awful minuteness. The orb of wind (principle) 
(should be conceived) as marked with six dots. 

24. It should be meditated as composed of tranquility, 
black in colour and endowed with the principal syllable of hrim 
(and purified) by two stretches (of retention of breath). The 
principle of earth should be purified. 

25. (It should be contemplated) as filled in with ether, as 
of the form of the speck of ether, uniformly circular, spotless like 
the pure crystal and adorned by the energy of bindu. 

26. After having contemplated on the form of the digit that 
is beyond tranquility by means of the ( mantra ) haum ending 
with phaf , one should contemplate the pure (thing) by one 
stretch (of retention of breath). 

27. One should then permeate the lotus or circles such 
as ddh&ra (base), ananta (endless), dharma (righteousness) 
and fidna (knowledge) with the shower of ambrosia with the 
principal mantra . 



200 


Agni Purdsux 


28. After having contemplated this seat of the heart, one 

should then invoke the form of essence of Siva placed inside 
that (lotus) with twelve petals. • 

29. Then that form should be permeated everywhere with 
the divine ambrosia with the mantra of the energy ending with 
vatifaf and the sakalikarana (accomplishing) rite should be per- 
formed. 

30. The sakalikarana is that by which the mantras for the heart 
etc. are placed in the different parts of the body such as the 
heart, arms, and the little fingers of the hand. 

31. Having protected the enclosure with the weapon and 
the outer place with its mantra the mahdmudrd consisting of the 
energy should be shown below and above that. 

32-33. One should worship Siva in the lotus in the heart 
from head to foot with the retention of breath and with the flow- 
ers of one’s own feeling. One should then offer the clarified butter 
of ambrosia to the fire of Siva in the sacred pit of the navel with 
the mantras of Siva. One should contemplate the white figure of 
the form of bindu on the forehead. 

34. One of the vessels among the golden pitchers, should 
be purified by water of nectar got from the speck and by unbro- 
ken rice. 

35. Having filled the vessel with the six constituents and after 
having worshipped it, it should be consecrated. After having protec- 
ted it with the mantra hd one should cover it with the armour. 

36. After having made ready the water of offering, one 
should sprinkle the eight constituents (with water) by (showing) 
the dhenumudrd (a particular form of intertwining the fingers 
representing the cow). One should then sprinkle one’s own self 
on the head with the particles of that water. 

37. One should sprinkle water of the weapon on the mate- 
rials of worship kept there. One should then encircle them with 
the armour of pinda with the hft (mantra). 

38-39. After having shown the amftd mudrd (formation with 
fingers denoting non-decay) and putting flower on its seat and 
a mark on the forehead consecrated by the principal mantra (of 
the god) a bold man should remain perfectly silent at the time of 
bathing, worship of the god, (offering) oblation unto fire, 
eating, practising yoga and repetition of necessary (mantras). 



74.40-51 


201 


40. The mantra should be purified by pronouncing the ndda 
(pm) at the end. That purified mantra should then be used in the 
worship along with the gdyatri (mantra) and the general water 
of oblation should be offered. 

41. After having repeated the brakmapaficaka 1 , (the wor- 
shipper) should collect the garland from the lihga and offer it to 
Canda in the north-eastern direction. 

42. The purification of the lidga consists in the washing of 
the pedestal and the linga with the water (consecrated) by the 
.mantra of weapon and kfdmantra and sprinkle with the water 

(for washing) from the vessel of arghya . 

43. All the celestials should be worshipped for the purifica- 
tion of the self, the materials, the mantra and the lidga . Hdm> 
salutations to God Ganapati in the north-western direction. One 
should pay obeisance to the preceptor in the north-east. 

44-45. One should worship the goddess of the seat (of the 
god) in the kurmaiild (the tortoise form on the stone) as possess- 
ing complexion of the tender shoots and the seat of Siva known 
as ananta (endless) should be worshipped as seated on the 
brahmatild along with the attendants of the god such as Vicitra- 
ke$a, Krta and Trcta who form the seat and shoes as they were 
of divinity. 

46. Then the worshipper should worship righteousness, 
knowledge, detachment and prosperity, towards the south-east 
as possessing the hues of camphor, saffron, gold and collyrium 
respectively. 

47-48. At the centre of the lotus-shaped diagram and in its 
petals in the east etc. one should worship the energy goddesses — 
Varna, Jyestha, RaudrI, KaU, K&lavikarini, Balavikaran! and 
BalapramathanI in order as holding the chowries and as confer- 
ring boons and offering protection. 

49. One should worship (the goddesses) — /ftFm, (saluta- 
tions) to Sarvabhu tadamanl , (salutations) to ManonmanS, 
to K?iti, to Suddhavidyfi at the extremities of the petals (of the 
lotus diagram) as also the seat as spread over the component 
parts of the universe. 

56-51. The lord of white complexion, possessing five faces 
and ten arms, all-pervasive, bearing the crescent moon and 

1. The five mantras of the five brahman forms of Siva. 



202 


Agni Parana 


carrying weapons — spear, sword, lance, and staff in the right 
hands and a drum, citron, blue lotus, a string and a waterlily 
in the left hands should be located on the lion-seat. 0 

52-54. The image of Siva possessing thirty-two characteris- 
tics (should be installed) at the centre. H&m, ham , hdm (saluta- 
tions) to the image of Siva. After having meditated upon the 
self-luminant Siva, the mantra should be led to the spot sacred to 
Siva after leaving below the place sacred to Brahma. Then (the 
worshipper) having meditated upon that Supreme form of Siva, 
effulgent with the splendour of the moon, as a luminous point 
at the middle of the forehead and being invested with the six 
constituents, with flowers in folded palms, should deposit (those 
flowers) on the form of (Goddess) Lak§mi. 

55-57. 0m, ham, haum salutations to Siva. (The deity) 

should be invoked with the invoking krd (mantra). Having estab- 
lished Siva with the sthdpani (mudrd) 1 , and placed near (that ) 
should be checked with Nisfhura and Kalakantf concluding 
with phaf. After having removed obstructions by sending 
them away and making obeisance by (showing) the lihga - 
mudrd , it should be covered with the krd (mantra). The invoca- 
tion should follow it. Then standing in front of the image he 
should repeat. “Let you be located and firmly established. O 
lord ! I am in your presence.” 

58. The (rite of) avagunfhana signifies the presence and super 
vision of the God and the exhibition of one’s devotion (to the 
God) from the commencement to the end of the act. 

59. After having done the accomplishing act with the six 
mantras , the (rite of) amjtikarana should be performed by men- 
tioning different parts of the body along with the body. 

60-61. The worshipper should permeate his heart with the 
energy of consciousness of Sambhu (Siva). Similarly, (he should 
contemplate) the tuft of hair of Siva as formed of the eight- 
fold glories. The worshipper should contemplate the invincible 
energy of God as forming his armour, the unbearable prowess 
of God which removes all impediments (and the words) 
salutations, svadhd , svdhd and vaufaf (should be appended) in 
order. 

62-65. The water for washing the feet should be offered: 

1. Formation with the fingers denoting firm establishment. 



74.66-73 


203 


preceded by the recitation of the kfi (mantra). The water (should 
be offered) at the lotus feet and the water for the rinsing of the 
mouth at the face of the image, the respectful offering at the head 
of the lord along with the dQrvd (grass), flowers and unbroken 
rice. Having purified the supreme lord with the ten purifica- 
tions thus, one should worship with the five kinds of services 
such as the flowers etc. as laid down (in the code books). 
Having sprinkled and rubbed (the image) with salt, mustard 
seed etc., it should be slowly bathed with drops of water, flowers, 
perfumes, milk, curd, ghee, honey and sugar successively. 

66. The defects in the above materials should be rectified 
by worshipping with materials along with the recitation of l£a 
mantras . Lord Siva should be bathed with water and fragrance 
with the principal mantra . 

67-68. Having applied the paste of barley, it should be ba- 
thed copiously with cold water and also with fragrant water 
according to one’s ability. Having wiped it dry with a clean 
cloth, the preliminary offering of water should be given. The 
hand should not be moved over the head (of the image). The 
liAga should never be left without any flower on its head. 

69. Having smeared it with sandal etc. and worshipped with 
flowers with the mantras of Siva, the vessel for holding the per- 
fumes should be consecrated with the weapons (mantra) and 
worshipped with the mantras of Siva. 

70. The bell consecrated by the weapon (mantra) should be 
taken and the incense should be offered. The water for rinsing 
should be given then (with the repetition of) svadkd at the end 
and with the kfd mantra . 

71. Having shown light for the idol in the night, then 
water for rinsing should be offered. After having made obeisance 
to god and taking his permission, eatables and other articles of 
enjoyment should be offered. 

72. The heart should be worshipped in the south-east, the 
moon on the north-east, the golden-coloured Siva together with 
the tuft and blood on the south-west, Kf?na and armour on the 
north-west. 

73. These gods having four faces and four arms should be 
worshipped in the petals in the east etc. along with the divine 
weapon similar to thunder and fierce teeth. 



"204 


Agtii Purttpa 


74. Ham salutations to Siva at the base, Om htim htim him 
horn in the head, hpn to the tuft, haim to the armour, hah to the 
weapons and to one with the attendants. * 

75-76. Waters for washing the feet, for rinsing the mouth 
and respectful offering, perfumes, flowers, incense, lamp, food 
offerings and water for rinsing again, should be given to lord 
Siva. Intertwined blades of kufa and unbroken rice should be 
placed on the head (of the image) of the lord. Perfumes, betel, 
piece of cloth for wiping the face and a mirror (should also be 
offered to the deity). 

77-78. After having repeated the principal ( mantra ) eight 
hundred times, the sword of the lord covered by the sheath, pro- 
tected by the kuia and flowers and consecrated by hjd ( mantra ) 
along with the unbroken rice and with the udbhava mudrti (a 
formation made with the fingers indicating generation). O 
most mysterious ! Accept this repetition (of mantra) for our 
welfare. 

79-81. “May there be success for me by this by your pre- 
sence here”. Having recited this verse at first, the worshipper 
should offer to Sambhu (Siva) the waters of respect with the 
right hand with (the repetition of) the principal mantra. What- 
ever good or bad that I may do O lord ! let it be cast off from 
me who am in the region of Siva. Htim k$ah O Sankara, Siva 
is the giver, Siva is the enjoyer, Siva is all this universe. 

82. Siva is victorious everywhere. I am identical with Siva. 
After having repeated these two verses, the japa should be dedi- 
cated to the lord. 

83. One-tenth (should be dedicated) to the limbs of Siva. 
Having offered the watenof respect, one should adore (the deity). 
After circumambulating (the deity), one should bow to the 
eight-formed (representing the five elements, sun, moon and 
yajamana) deity by prostrating (the eight limbs touching the 
ground). After salutation (the deity) should be worshipped in 
a picture or in the fire by meditation etc. 



75.1-10 


205* 


CHAPTER SEVENTY-FIVE 

Mode of installation of the fire 


The God said : 

1. (The worshipper) should enter another room unseen 
with the vessel containing water for offering in his hand and 
should look to the arrangements of the materials essential in the 
performance of a sacrifice, as it were, with a divine eyesight. 

2. He should look at the sacrificial pit with his face turned 
towards the north. The sprinkling and beating the water with 
the kula should be done by (repeating) the mantra of the weapon 
and the consecration should be done with the mantra of the arm- 
our. 

3. The digging out (a piece of earth), filling and levelling 
with the sword should be done with (the mantra of) the armour 
and bathing and division into parts (should be done) with the 
mantra of the arrow. 

4. The (rites of) cleansing, anointing, fixing the crescent 
form, investiture of the sacred thread and worship (should be 
done) always by the mantra of the armour. 

5. Three lines should be drawn in the north and one below 
them (should be drawn) so as to face the east. Whatever defects 
in them may be made good by touching them with the kula and 
the astramantra of Siva. 

6. A quadrilateral figure should be drawn with th ekufa 
by the mantras of vajrikarana (establishing firmly) and hjd. The 
vessel for the rosaries should be laid with (the mantra of) the arm- 
our. The seat should be laid with the hfd mantra. 

7-8. The Goddess of speech along with the God should be 
invoked therein and worshipped. The consecrated fire brought 
from a holy place and placed in a pure receptacle, after leaving 
aside its parts presided over by the demons and purified by the 
divine look etc., the three fires auddrya , aindava and bhauta should 
be made into one. 

9-10. Om hum (salutations) to god of fire. (The deity) 
should be established with the principal mantra of the fire. The 
fire which has been invoked with die vedie hymns and made 
immortal by showing the dhemmmdrd (formation with die fingers 
representing a cow), mid protected by mantras of weaponsshould 



206 Agni Purd$a 

be covered by the armour. It should be worshipped by waving 
over the pit thrice and circumambulation. 

1 1 . Having meditated upon (the fire) as an element of 
Lord Siva, (the worshipper) should contemplate it as lying 
dormant in the womb of Goddess of speech and cast by the 
Lord of speech. 

12. The worshipper should have his knees resting on the 
ground and put the fire in his front with the hfd mantra . Then 
the seeds of fire in the vicinity should be gathered at the centre. 

13. The collection of clothes, purification and offering 
of water for rinsing the mouth (should be done) with the hfd 
{mantra). Having worshipped the dormant fire, it should be 
protected by (the recitation of) the mantra of the shaft. 

14. The embryo fire should be contemplated as tied around 
the wrist off the goddess as a bracelet. The fire should be 
worshipped with the sadyojdta {mantra) for the impregnation. 

15. Three oblations to the fire should then be offered with 
(kfdayamantra. For the purhsavana (rite) (for the determination 
of the sex of the foetus) (generally performed) in the third month 
it should be worshipped on the left side. 

16. Three oblations containing drops of water should be 
offered with the head. The simantonnayana (rite) (parting of 
the hair on the head) (performed) in the sixth month should be 
done after having worshipped the fire. 

17. Three oblations should be offered into the fire, after 
having determined the formation of its face and body by one who 
wants to restore or open up the face. 

18. As before the jdtakarma (the purificatory rite on the 
birth of a child) and ftukarma (the rite after the first menses) 
(usually performed) in the tenth month should be performed by 
kindling the fire with darbha etc. (Mental) bathing (should be 
done) to remove the impurities of the pregnancy. 

19. After having mentally contemplated the golden bracelet 
of the goddess one should worship with the hfd {mantra). He 
should sprinkle with water consecrated by the mantra of the wea- 
pon for the immediate removal of impurities after the birth 
of a child. 

20. The pitcher outside the receptacle for the sacred fire 
should be touched with the weapon (mantra) and (water) should 
be sprinkled over with the (mantra) of the armou£. The ends of 



75.21-32 


207 


the ktrfa which form the boundary (of the sacrificial pit) and 
placed on the north and east (should be washed with water) 
with (the mantra of) the weapon. 

21. The periphery of a circle around (the fire) should be 
determined with the kida, previously consecrated with the wea- 
pon and kfd mantra and then the cushions inscribed within it 
should be spread out by (reciting) the weapon mantra . 

22. Five sacrificial sticks dipped in clarified butter should 
be offered into the fire with the repetition of the principal mantra . 
Brahma, Sankara, Vi$nu and Ananta should be worshipped 
with the kfd (mantra). 

23. The gods located in the periphery (of that circle) should 
be worshipped in turn with unbroken rice. The gods Indra to 
ISana who are directly facing the fire and are having their places 
inside the circle should be worshipped in their own regions with 
the kfd (mantra) “Protect this child (fire) by removing all 
obstacles, that might befall it.’* 

24-28. One should then make them hear this command of 
Siva. He should then take the sacrificial spoon and the ladle, 
heat them on the fire and touch them with the base, middle and 
tips of the darbha with face downwards. In the place touched by 
the kuia the three principles relating to the soul, knowledge and 
Siva should be located duly with the sounds hdm 9 brim , hUm and 
sam. Having located the goddess in the sacrificial spoon and 
Sambhu (Siva) in the sacrificial ladle with the hfdaya mantra, 
their necks being girdled with three strings (of thread) and 
worshipped with flowers etc., kuias should be placed on them 
and they should be placed on the right side. 

29-32. Having gathered the clarified butter of the cow that 
has been purified by looking at it and after having contemplated 
one’s own Brahma form and carrying that clarified butter, one 
should wave it over the pit and move it round and round in the 
south-east. Again having contemplated the Vi?nu form, one 
should hold the clarified butter and carry it towards the north- 
east, it should be offered to Vi$nu (into the fire) with the tips 
of the kuia and with the mantra of the head ending with svdhd. 
Similarly, one should conceive the form of Rudra (Siva) as a 
point in one’s own navel and meditate. One should sprinkle 
water over that with two kutas of the length of a span and held 
with the ring finger and thumb. 



209 


Agm Purd&r 


33. Water should be sprinkled over the fire in front (of the 
worshipper) (with the two kuias) held (as above) accompanied 
by the mantra of the weapon. Similarly, the worshipper should 
again sprinkle water (over the fire) in front of him with the kfd 
(mantra). 

34. The burnt ashes of darbha collected with the hrd 
(i mantra ) should be purified by striking with the implements and 
with the other lighted darbha it should be taken out and lighted. 

35-36. The darbha burnt by the mantra of the weapon should 
again be thrown into the fire. Having put the knotted darbha 
of the length of a span in the clarified butter, one should contem- 
plate the two for nights, the three arteries i<j.d etc. in the clari- 
fied butter and offer the clarified butter divided into three parts 
as oblation unto fire with the sacrificial ladle in order with (the 
syllable) sva and R&* The remaining part of the clarified butter 
should also be offered to the fire successively. 

37. Orh hdm oblation to god Agni. Orh hdm oblation to god 
Soma. Orh hdm 'oblation to the gods Agni and Soma. (The 
above oblations should be offered into the fire) for the purpose of 
opening (as it were) the three eyes of the fire god in his face. 

38. The fourth oblation should be offered with the sacri- 
ficial ladle filled with clarified butter. Oth hdm oblation to fire- 
god for the offering of a right sacrifice. After having consecrated 
in the six parts of one’s body, (the fire god) should be invoked 
with the dhenumudrd (posture with the fingers representing a 
cow). 

39. Having covered it with the armour, the clarified butter 
should be protected by the mantra of the shaft. The clarified 
butter should be purified by sprinkling water and offering a drop 
of it into the fire along with the hrd (mantra). 

40. The rites of uniting the mouths of the fire should be 
performed as follows. Orh hdm oblations to Sadyojata. Om hdm 
oblations to Vamadeva. Orh hdm oblations to Aghora. Om hdm 
oblations to Tatpuru?a. Orh hdm oblations to Ifdna. Thus with 
oblations to one by one, one should do the union of the (diffe- 
rent) faces. 

41-42. Orh hdm oblations to Sadyoj&ta and Vtotadeva.0irt 
hdm oblations to V&madcva and Aghora. Oth hdm oblations to 
Aghora and Tatpurufa. Orh hdm oblations to Tatpuru$a and 
I&na. Thus the union is done in order with die recitation of 



75.43-51 


209 


these mantras. With the flow of ghee from the sacrificial ladle 
taking it from the fire through the angular points such as north- 
west, south-west, and ending with north-east, one should unite the 
faces. Orn ham oblations to Sadyojata, Vamadeva, Aghora, 
Tatpurusa and Isana. Thus its form and other faces should be 
contemplated in the face of one’s liking. 

43. Having worshipped the fire in the north-east and offer- 
ing three oblations with the mantra of the weapon, (the worship- 
per) with his entire soul should contemplate — “O Fire-God l 
you are the divine essence of Siva.” 

44. Having worshipped the parents with the hfd (i mantra ) 
and left them aside, the final oblation which concludes the rite 
should be offered as laid down with the principal mantra ending 
with vau$af. 

43. Then one should worship the resplendent, Supreme God 
attended upon by the attendants and retinue, after having in- 
voked him in the lotus of his heart as before. He should offer 
waters of oblation to Siva after having requested his permission. 

46. Having established a union among the god of the sacri- 
ficial fire, god Siva and his soul situated in his arteries, (the 
worshipper) should offer oblations with the principal mantra 
befitting one’s capacity and using one-tenth of mantras as a 
supplement. 

47. A kar$ika (a particular weight) of the clarified butter, 
milk and honey and a Sukti (twice that of kdrsika ) of the curd and 
a handful of sweet porridge (should be) offered. 

48-49. The worshipper should offer as deemed fit the obla- 
tion with all the eatables, a handful of fried grains, three 
pieces of roots and an equal number of fruits. Five half- 
mouthfuls of cooked rice, bits of sugarcane of the length of a 
span and stems of sacrificial creepers measuring two fingers in 
length should be offered into the fire. 

50. The oblations of flowers and leaves should be according 
to their own measure. The sacrificial twigs should measure ten 
fingers in length. The camphor, sandal, saffron, musk and an 
ointment made of camphor, aggallochum and kakkola in equal 
parts (should also be offered). 

51. (Die worshipper) should make an oblation of the kal&ya 
(a leguminous seed) and gtggutu (a flagrant gum-resin) of the 



210 AgniPurdna 

size of the kernel of the jujube fruit and eight parts of the 
roots as laid down. 

52. The oblation should thus be completed with the (prin- 
cipal mantra) brahmabija {om) with sacrificial ladles filled with 
clarified butter holding the ladle in such a way as to have its cup 
part downwards. 

53-56. Having placed a flower at the head of the spoon and 
then holding it first with the left hand and then with the right 
hand and (showing) the mudrd denoting the conch he should 
stand up half erect with feet evenly placed and eyes fixed upon 
the end of the ladle and holding the base of ladle pressed against 
his navel. Then one should rouse up the stream of his pure con- 
sciousness through the sujumnd (nerve centre below the spiral 
chord) and carry it to the base of his left breast vigilantly and tell 
the principal mantra ending with the vau$at in a low tone. The 
clarified butter should be offered having a flow of the measure 
of the barley. 

57. Water for rinsing the mouth, sandal, betals etc. should 
be offered. (The worshipper) should meditate in his greatness 
with devotion and then offer salutation. 

58-59. After having worshipped the fire well with (the 
mantra of) the weapon ending with phaf and showing the sarhhdra 
mudrd (the posture of the fingers conveying destruction) and 
uttering ‘‘Pardon me”, the gods who reside in the periphery 
(of the mystic circle) should be placed in the lotus of the heart 
with extreme devotion with the hfd mantra after taking a breath. 

60. All the edibles (got ready for the worship) should be 
taken and kept in two circular diagrams. Offerings should be 
done both inside and outside in the vicinity of sacrificial pit in 
the south-east. 

61. Orh hdm oblations to Rudras in the east and in the same 
way to the mothers in the south. Hdm, oblations to the ganas 
on the west. This offering is for them. 

62. And hdm to th tyakfas on the north, hdm to the planets 
on the north-east, hdm to the asuras on the south-east, hdm obla- 
tions to the rdkfasas in the south-west. 

63. And hdm to the ndgas on the north-west, and to the stars 
at the centre. Hdm oblations to the constellations in the south- 
east, and then to the Vtivt (deoas) in the, south-west. 



75.64-76.1-6 


211 


64-65. It is said that the offering for the guardian of the 
ground is inside and outside in the west. (Oblations should 
be made) to Indra, Agni, Yama, Nirj-ti, Varuna, V&yu, Kubera 
and I&na in the east etc. outside in the second ma^iala. Salu- 
tations to Brahmi on the north-east. 

66. Oblations to Vi$nu in the south-west. The offerings for 
the crows etc. (should be) outside. The mantras for the two offer- 
ings in one’s soul should be by the sarfihdramudrd (posture with 
fingers indicating destruction). 


CHAPTER SEVENTYSIX 
Mods of worshipping Canda (i attendant of Siva) 

Lord said : 

1. (The worshipper) should approach (the image of Lord) 
Siva and address as follows : “O Lord I accept the merits of the 
worship and the oblations offered by me.” 

2. We should convey these to the lord with a firm mind 
along with the respectful offering of water and uttering the prin- 
cipal mantra preceded by the hfdbija (< om ) and the exhibition of 
the udbhava mudrd (a posture of fingers representing genera- 
tion). 

3. Then having worshipped as before and praising with 
hymns and saluting, (the worshipper) should offer the respectful 
offering of water with his face turned away (from the image) 
and should say “Pardon me”. 

4. The liftga should be discharged by uttering the mantra 
of the weapon ending with phaf coupled with the divine n&rdr 
camudrd (formation with fingers representing an iron arrow), 
it should be merged with the mantra of the image. 

5. After having worshipped god on the platform and 
having merged in himself the collection of mantras as laid down, 
the worship of Ca should be made. 

6. Om salutations to Ca$de£ana. Salutations to the image 
of Ca^da at the centre. Om, htim phaf oblations to Dhulicagtfe- 
ivara. Thus he should be invoked. 



212 


Agni Purdy* 


7. Hum phaf to Carjda at the heart. Then om to Canda on 

the head. Om hum phaf to Can$a on the tuft, to Canda, the pro- 
tector and armour. • 

8. So also to Canda as the weapon hum phaf . One should 
meditate on Canda, born of the fire of Rudra and as carrying 
the mace, axe, rosaries and the anchorite’s pitcher and as having 
a dark complexion. 

9. The four-faced deity should be worshipped in the half- 
crescent shaped axe weapon (of Canda). One should repeat (the 
mantra) befitting one’s capacity, being one-tenth of the principal 
worship. 

10. Except the offerings such as the cow, earth, gold, clothes, 
gems and ornaments, the remains of offerings should be offered 
to Candesa. 

1 1 . Being ordered by Siva, I have offered to you these 
articles of food and drink, betels, garlands and scented pastes, 
the ramnants of offering. 

12. O Canda ! may all these acts of service (undertaken) 
by me by your order (be agreeable to you) . Any shortcoming or 
redundancy out of my ignorance may be made complete always. 

13. Having submitted to the lord thus and offered the 
respectful water and contemplated his form, the mantras should 
be merged with the self with the mantra of the destructive deity 
and showing slowly the sarhhdra mudrd (formation with the fingers 
(representing destruction) along with the principal mantra and 
taking a breath. The offering such as flowers etc. should then be 
removed and that place cleansed with cowdung dissolved in 
waters. After offering water respectfully one should conclude by 
rinsing one’s mouth and do any other worship. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYSEVEN 
Mode of worshipping Kapild (i the Cow) 

The Lord said : 

1 . I shall describe to you the mode of worship of Kapild (the 
cow). The cow should be worshipped with these mantras. Om 



77.2-13 


213 


salutations to you O Kapili, one makes us rejoice, the abode 
of bliss. Salutations to you. 

2. Om salutations to you O Kapila of good disposition. 
O Kapila, as effulgent as Surabhi (the divine cow, daughter 
of Dak$a and wife of Kagyapa). Om Kapila, the good-minded, 
salutations. Om salutations to the bestower of enjoyment and 
emancipation. 

3. O Daughter of Surabhi ! the Mother of the universe ! 
Giver of ambrosia to the celestials ! Granter of boons ! Accept 
this morsel of food and grant me all my desires. 

4. You had been worshipped by Vasistha and the learned 
ViSvamitra. O Kapila ! Take away my sins and the bad acts 
of mine. 

5. (Let there be) cows always in front of me. (Let there be) 
cows behind me. (Let there be) cows in my heart also. I am 
dwelling in the midst of cows. 

6. May you, accept the morsel of food offered by me. After 
repetition (of the mantra) let me be pure like Lord Siva. After 
having worshipped the books of learning one should bow at the 
feet of the preceptor. 

7. One should bathe (again) at noon and worship (Lord) 
Siva with asfapufpikd. The affapufpikd is the worship of the 
image, seat and the limbs of (the image of) Siva. 

8-9. The cooked food should be brought into the well- 
cleansed kitchen at mid-day. Then after the recitation of the 
mftyurijaya mantra (that which conquers death) seven times and 
ending with the vau$a ( , the food should be sprinkled with drops 
of water with the darbha and conch. The entire food should first 
be dedicated to Siva after lifting them up. 

10. Then half of the above should be set apart for oblation 
at the fire-place. After having purified the fire-place as per rules, 
the oblation (should be done). 

11-12. Having made the oblation once in the fire around 
one’s navel one should gather the seed of fire with the breath 
drawn in and after taking it through the places of the letters, 
one should meditate on it as “You are the fire of Lord Siva” 
and it should be put at the fire-place. Oth h&m obeisance to fire- 
god — as also kdm obeisance to Soma. 

13. Obeisince to Sun-god, to Jupiter, the lord of people. 
(Obeisance) to all gods and to all Viivedevas. 



214- 


Agiti Purdryt 


14. Hdm obeisance to fire-god, for offering a right sacrifice. 
One should worship these in the east and other directions. After 
having made oblations ending with the word wdhd one 
should bid farewell after seeking forbearance. 

15. One should worship (the god of righteousness) on the 
right-hand side of the fire-place. “Salutations to the god of right- 
eousness. The lord of unrighteousness (should be worshipped) 
on the left-handside in a vessel containing sour gruel. 

16. Lord Varuna (should be worshipped) as the trans- 
former of the sap and as the lord of fire in the waters. Lord of 
obstacles (Vinayaka) (should be worshipped) at the entrance. 
Obeisance to Subhaga at the grinding stone. 

17. Om obeisance to Raudrika 'and Girika. Obeisance; 
one should worship in the mortar. Obeisance to the pestle, the 
weapon dear to Bala(rama). It should be worshipped. 

18-19. The two gods mentioned (should be worshipped) 
in the broomstick and the god of love in the bed. Having offer- 
ed oblation to the trunk for the presiding deity of the ground 
at the middle stump one should eat from a golden vessel 
or in the petals of the lotus etc. The preceptor, the worshipper 
and the son should maintain silence at the time of this vow. 

20-22. (The leaves) of the vafa, atvattha, arka , vdtdri, sdla 
and bhallataka should be discarded. After having rinsed the 
mouth with water, five oblations should be offered with the five 
prdijas (winds in the body) together with the pranava [pm) ending 
with svdhd (oblations). The fire in the belly .should be kindled. 
With the secondary winds (in one’s body) viz., ndga, kurna , 
kfkara, devadatta and dhananjaya, oblations (should be made). 
Having offered food with the waters of dpoidna (prayer re- 
peated before and after eating), one should drink the rest 
of the water. 

23. You are an ambrosial seat. Oblations for the vital winds 
should be made as before. Oblations to the prdna, apdna , samdna, 
uddna, and vydna. Having eaten food, water should be sipped. 
(The mantra for that) is “you are the ambrosial covering.’* 
Thus the food and the winds in the body (are worshipped). 



78. Ml 


215 


CHAPTER SEVENTYEIGHT 
Mode of investiture of the sacred thread for the deity 
The Lord said : 

1 . I shall describe the (mode of) investiture of the sacred 
thread (for the deity) which completes the acts of worship etc. 
(It is of two kinds), the daily routine (without any motive) and 
the other being undertaken to be done with a motive. 

2. It should be done on the eighth or fourteenth day of the 
bright or dark fortnights in the months of &s&$ha (July-August) 
or irdvana (August-September) or bhadrapada (September- 
October). 

3-4. Or it should be done on the first day of either fort- 
nights during the (above) months upto kdrttika (October- 
November), for (the images of) the fire god, Brahma, Ambika, 
Ibhasya (Ganesa), Naga (lord of serpents), Skanda, Arka 
(Sun), Sulin, Durga, Yama, Indra, Govinda (manifestation of 
Vi$nu), Smara (God of love), Sambhu (Siva) and other gods. 
(The threads should be) made of gold, silver and copper in the 
krta (first one among the four eras) and other yugas (eras). 

5-6. A cotton (thread) or silk thread or the one made of 
(fibres of) lotus should be used in the kali (yuga) (the last). The 
pranava (om), moon, fire-god, Brahma, serpent-god, Guha (son 
of Siva), Hari (Vi$nu), Sarvesa and other gods would reside in 
the nine component strings (of the thread). The uttama 
(excellent) and other classes ( madhyama and adhama) would be 
those which contain one hundred and eight (strings) or half of 
that or a quarter of that. 

7. Or it should be made to contain eighty-one or thirty- 
eight or fifty strings having binding knots at equal intervals. 

8. The breadth of the thread should be twelve or eight or 
four finger lengths or else it should be equal to the breadth of the 
lihga. 

9. (In length) it should be touching the pedestal (of the 
image) or (should be equal) to a quarter of the length of the 
deity as a whole. The descent of the Ganges should be accomp- 
lished by washing with pure (water). 

10-11. The knots should be made with (the mantra of) 
Vfima (deva), purified with that of Aghora, dyed with the paste 




216 


Agni Pwrdna 


of saffron, sandal, musk, yellow pigment, camphor, turmeric 
and red chalk etc. with that of (Tat) purusa. There should be 
ten knots or equal to the number of strings. * 

12-13. The inter-space between the knots (should be) 
one, two or four finger lengths in such a way as to make it ele- 
gant. The knots are known as sadagiva, manonmani, prakrti 
(nature), pauru§i (relating to the puntfa ) , vird (valorous), 
apardjita (invincible), jayd (victorious), vijayd (victorious), 
qjita (unconquered), sadaJivd (always auspicious), manonmani 
(expanding intellect), and sarvamukhi (omniscient) which 
confer good. 

1 4. The sacred thread for the moon, fire-god and sun should 
be done similar to that for Siva, in the heart, or in their own 
image or in a book or in that of the preceptor or the ganas. 

15. In the same way there should be one in each one of the 
pitchers of the door-keeper and the presiding deity of the direc- 
tions etc. The sacred thread for the liriga should measure from 
one to nine cubits in length. 

16-18. The number of knots (in a thread) of the vfddha 
(class) should be twenty-eight, the number for other classes 
being eighteen and eight respectively, their breadth in all being 
proportionate with the breadth of the liriga. On the seventh or 
thirteenth day of a fortnight (one should) become clean and do 
his daily rites. Then (he) should adorn the place of worship with 
flowers, cloth etc. in the evening and should perform the naimit - 
tika (rites done with some motive), especially the waters of ob- 
lation. 

19. After having taken possession of the sacred ground, the 
sun-god should be worshipped. After rinsing his mouth, the pre- 
ceptor should do the rite of accomplishment (mentioning the 
names of the parts of the body along with the mantras). Water 
should be offered with respect with the pranava (the syllable 
om). 

20. The threshold should be sprinkled with water with the 
mantra of the weapon (and) the worship should be duly commen- 
ced from the east. Hdm (obeisance) to the entrance to the tdnti- 
kald (digit of peace) ; (obeisance) to the vidydkald (digit of know- 
ledge). 

21. (Obeisance) to the digit of non-action, t^thebne digit 



79.22-35 


217 


known as existence. The warden of the god should be worship- 
ped at the top sides of those doors, two at each (as follows) : 

22. (Obeisance) to Nandin, to Mah&k&la, to Bhrhgin, to 
Gana, to Vrsabha, to Skanda, to Devi and to Ca$da in order. 

23. In the case of worship being undertaken without 
any motive, the preceptor, having entered and worshipped the 
guardian deities at the western entrance, and after purification 
of materials, should offer water of respect. 

24. After having done the sprinkling (of water) etc., and 
collected the materials for the rite, consecration with darbha , 
dQrvd and flowers should be made with the mantras like hjd etc. 

25. After having permeated thus with the essence of Siva, 
one should place it on his head. I am Siva, the first being, omni- 
scient and I have the importance in the rites. 

26. The preceptor (holding) the sword of knowledge in 
his hand should deeply contemplate the lord. Subsequently he 
should go to the south-western direction and pour (the wash- 
ings etc.) with his face turned towards the north). 

27-28. The respectful water offering, the paficagavya (the 
five things got from a cow) and all other (articles of worship) 
which have been purified by means of rites at the end of cross- 
roads and by divine look etc. and put in the sacrificial pavilion, 
•one should collect the bunch of kuJa lying scattered, place them 
over the little jar in the north-eastern direction. 

29. The presiding deities of the place should be worshipped 
in the south-west and (Goddess) Lak$tni at the entrance. The 
pitcher is placed on all kinds of grains facing the west. 

30. Then the bull-riding God and tfye pitcher ( varddhani ) 
placed on the lion (should be worshipped) with the pronma (om). 
Lord Siva should he worshipped in the jar with his attendant 
gods and the weapons in the vardhani. 

31-32. Indra and other guardian deities of directions, 
Brahm&, Vi^iu and Siva (should be worshipped) in the (differ- 
ent) directions. Having taken the vardhani (in the hand) be- 
hind the pitcher, the preceptor should read out the mandate of 
Lord $iva in aU directions commencing with the east and 
ending with the north-east. (The entire ground) (should be 
made wet) by an unbroken flow of water (along) with the reei- 

tation of nrinflinftt wtamhin 

33-&SL This he snowed around in all dir ectio n s 



218 


Agni Pur&Qa 

for the sake of protection as if it were the weapons. Having 
placed the pitcher in the east, the lord should be worshipped in 
the pitcher placed foremost at the front firmly, while there should 
be one for the weapons to the left of it. The weapons located 
with the pranava (om) (should be worshipped with the vardhanl. 
Then the union of the two, the base and the lingo, should be 
accomplished by (showing) the lingo mudrd (posture of the fingers 
representing the lingo). Then the sword of knowledge should be 
dedicated to the (consecrated) pitcher. The principal mantra 
should then be repeated. 

36-37. Protection should be spelled out with a tenth (of the 
mantra) in the vardhani . After having worshipped Lord Gane£a 
(lord of the ganas) in the north-west and Lord Hara (Visnu) 
with the five sweet things (milk, sugar, ghee, curd and honey), 
the fire sacred to Siva should be worshipped in the sacrificial 
pit as before and bathed after having made the sacrificial gruel 
duly purified by the sampata (residual) oblation. 

38. It should be divided with the kufa into three parts res- 
pectively consecrated to the god, the fire-god, and the soul, of 
which the former two should be offered to Lord Siva and the 
fire-god and the part consecrated to the soul should be kept apart. 

39. (The stick for) cleansing the teeth should be offered 
on the east by (repeating the mantras of) the weapon and arrow, 
and (a piece of) earth on the west or south with the (a) ghora 
and tikha {mantras). 

40. Water reduced in quantity (should be offered )on the north 
with the sadyoj&ta and the hyd {mantras) . Perfumed water (should be 
offered) on the north-east with the v&ma {deva ) and liras {mantras). 

41. The five things got from a cow and flowers like paldSa 
and lotus (should be cast) all around. Flowers should be offered 
on the north-east and the yellow pigment on the south-east. 

42. The agallochum (should be offered) on the south-western 
direction and all the articles for oblation in four equal proportions 
on the north-west with the sadyoj&ta {mantra) and with the kufa . 

43-44. (An anchorite’s) stick, rosary, loin-cloth, alms bowl, 
collyrium, saffron, oil, a small stick (for applying the coilyrium), 
comb, betel (leaf), and mirror should be offered to the image of 
the god. The yellow pigment (should be offered) on the north. 

45. He should offer a seat, a pair of sandals, a vessel, an 
upper cloth and an umbrella on the north-east with the mantra 
of the lord for the satisfaction of Ifana (one <3* the five forms of 



79.46-57 


219 


Siva). The sacrificial porridge together with the clarified butter 
and perfumes etc. should be offered on the east. 

46. Having gathered the sacred threads and sprinkled them 
with the waters offered as respect, they should be led to the pre- 
sence of fire after purifying them with the sarhhitd, mantras . 

47-48. After having covered them with the hide of the black 
antelope and remembering the eternal blissful one, the witness 
of all deeds, the protector, the one without any change, that 
Siva, with the application of sva and ha (mantras) and sarhhiUt 
mantras , the sacred threads should be purified. Twenty-one water 
vessels (should be got ready). 

49. The room (for worship) etc. should be girdled by 
threads. Perfumes etc. should be offered to the sun-god, (who had 
already been) worshipped. After having rinsed the mouth, and 
doing the assigning, the water should be offered with respect. 

50. Then (the worshipper should worship) the vdstu god 
along with the weapons, the guardians of the world, Nandin 
and others by (mentioning) the name of each in the pitcher of 
(lord) Siva after adding perfumes. 

51-52. VardhanI, lord of obstacles, the preceptor should 
be worshipped. Then the sacred thread smeared with (the 
paste of) all herbs and perfumed with the flowers and dtirvtt 
and purified with the mantras should be held between the 
folded palms. Om ! (salutation to you) the regulation for 
rectifying any omission in regulations. 

53. O lord ! I invoke you and that which yields the desired 
boon. O lord of entity and non-entity ! You bless me, 
one who worships, with that success. 

54-55. O Sambhu (Siva) ! Obeisance to you at all times 
and by all means. Be pleased with me. O lord of celestials l 
You have been invoked along with the goddess, lords of ga$as f 
lords of mantras , guardians of the world and attendant gods. 

I invoke you. This sacred thread is for you in the early morning. 

56. O supreme lord ! By your command I shall do the 
prescribed routine. Thus one should invoke the lord and do the 
amftikaraqa 1 rite by drawing in the breath. 

57. Having recited the principal mantra for Siva, it should 
be dedicated to (lord) Siva. After completing the recitation 


I. Mental identification of the parts of one's body with those of die lord. 



220 AgntPurOga 

(of mantra), praises, and obeisance, (lord) Sambhu (Siva) should 
be bid adieu. . 

58-59. Having made oblation with the third part of the 
gruel in the fire (permeated with the essence) of Siva, (oblation 
should be made) for the residents in the quarters, the lords of 
the quarters, the spirits, the mothers, ganas, Rudras, guardians 
of the region. Obeisance. This oblation is given. The oblation 
is made for the (guardian) elephants of the quarters east etc. 
and to the regions. 

60. After having rinsed the mouth, the oblation should be 
done for the rectification of omissions in the observances. After 
doing the final oblation, the fire should be put out. 

61-62. Then om oblations to fire (god), to Soma, am obla- 
tions to fire and Soma. So also to fire-god, the accomplishes 
After having made four oblations, the union of the gods respecti- 
■vely worshipped in the sacrificial pit and the mystic circle of 
lord Siva should be brought about. 

63-64. Then the union should be made by the method of 
assigning in the different parts of the body. Then the sacred 
threads should be placed in a vessel made of bamboo along with 
(the mantras of) weapons and armour and consecrated with the 
( mantras ) of the digits. The six articles of worship should be 
•consecrated with the principal brahma ( mantra ) (Om). (The 
mantras of) the heart, armour and weapon should also be united. 

65. Having girdled the vessel with threads and worshipped 
it with the (mantras of) the parts of the body it should be offered 
to the lord of the universe with extreme devotion for the sake of 
protection. 

66. After it has been worshipped with flowers* incense etc. 
■and two th eo logic al books have been submitted, one should 
go. near the feet of the preceptor and offer the sacred thread with 
devotion- 

67. Having come out of the place and rinsed the month, 
one should worship five things got from a cow, the gruel 
and the stick for cleansing the teeth on three circles made with 
the cow-dung. 

68. After rinsing the mouth again, one should remain 
awake singing songs and repeating hymns and should 
sleep at the end after fasting on a bed of dashka, aft the while 

qh the lord. 



78.69-79.1-9 


221 ' 


69. Even one, who is desirous of cessation of births and 
deaths, should undertake in this way lying only on a bed of 
ashes, lasting and self-controlled. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYNINE 
Investiture of the sacred thread 


The Lord said : 

1. Having got up early in the morning , and finishing bath- 
ing the worshipper should enter the sacrificial shed after com- 
pleting the twilight worship and remaining composed. 

2. Having collected the sacred thread, and the deity not 
being given farewell, the sacred thread should be placed in a 
spotless vessel within a mystic diagram in the north-east. 

3. Then the lord of celestials should be bid farewell 
and the materials of worship should be removed (from the body 
of the deity). He should again perform the two rites as before on 
the cleaned ground. 

4. Then the gods — sun, the guardian deities of the entrance 
and of the directions the pitcher, l&na, Siva and the fire-god 
should specially be worshipped, as usually done in the naimittikl 
(done with some motives) rites, elaborately. 

5. (Having done) the tarpana (appeasing) rite with the 
mantras and the oblation of expiation one hundred and eight 
times with (the mantras of) the arrows, the final oblation should 
be made slowly. 

6. Having offered the sacred thread to the sun god and rins- 
ing the mouth, (the worshipper) should offer it to the guardian 
deities of the entrance and of the directions, the sacrificial pitcher 
and vardhanl etc. 

7. Then having sat in his own seat in the presence of lord 
Sambhu (Siva), (the worshipper) should offer the sacred thread 
to one’s own self, the gapa> the priest and fire-god. 

8-9. Om O lord I soul of the time, whatever has been 
ordained by you in my observances that which has been done, 
contradictorily, and omitted, and that which has been done' 



222 Agni Purina 

secretly O Sambhu let the contradictory thing become normal, 
the contradictory deed become refined, by/ this omniscient 
sacred thread and by your wish. # 

10. Om ! Complete this sacrificial observance ! Oblations 
to the lord of regulations, the principle of the soul, that which 
underlines the natural principle that is protected by the lotus- 
born Brahma. 

11-15. Having recited the principal mantra up to the end, 
lord Siva should be worshipped with the sacred thread. Again 
in the principle of knowledge which is the end of all the learning 
and which is governed by Vi$nu, one should invest the sacred 
thread having recited the mantras of Vi$nu. Similarly, in the 
principle relating to Siva, he should recite the mantras of Siva 
and invest that deity with the sacred thread. O man of good 
practices ! In the case of those governed by all the deities one 
should recite the principal mantra upto the end after having 
recited the mantras of Siva and the descent of the Ganges should 
be accomplished. In the case of those who desire to get release 
(from the cycle of births) it is said that the sacred thread should 
be invested with the mantras of Siva relating to the knowledge 
of the soul. For those who desire to get enjoyment it has been 
pointed out (that the sacred thread should be invested) duly 
with (the mantras of ) the principles of Siva. The mantras should be 
uttered ending with ‘oblation’ or ‘obeisance*. 

16. Orh hdm oblations to lord Siva, the lord of the prin- 
ciple of soul. Orh hdm oblations to (lord) Siva, the lord of the 
principle of learning. Orh hdm oblations to (lord) Siva, lord of 
th? principle of Siva. Orh hdm oblations to lord Siva, the lord 
of all principles (of the universe). Having made obeisance to 
the descent of the Ganges, he should pray to it with folded palms. 
“You are the refuge for all beings. You reside in the movable 
and immovable beings.” 

17. “O Supreme lord ! You are the witness (of the acts) 
of beings by pervading inside the beings. By deed or thought 
or words I have no other being to resort to except you/’ 

18-19. “O Great lord ! Whatever has been done defec- 
tive in the mantra or deeds or in the materials (of worship) or 
in the repetition and worship in the daily (observances), may 
you complete them. O Supreme lord ! You are well-puri- 
fied. You are pure and destroyer of sins. Every being in the 



79.20-32 


223 


universe, the immovable and movable have been purified by 
you. 

20-22. “Olord ! Whatever has been made defectively by me 
in my observances (let it be free) from becoming useless. By 
your mandate let all of them become united, being tied in a 
string.” Having conveyed the recitation (of the mantras) to the 
lord and praising him devotedly, one should take up the vow 
after saluting the preceptor and as directed by him. (It should 
be) for four months, (or) three months, (or) three days or one 
day. 

23-24. After having saluted the lord and seeking excuse, 
the votary should go near the sacrificial pit and cast four sacred 
threads for Siva located in the fire, and worship with flowers, 
incense, unbroken rice etc. The oblation and holy thread should 
be presented to the Rudras. 

25-26. Having entered inside and praising Siva (the lord) 
should be bid adieu with salutations. After having made the 
expiatory oblation and oblation of sweet porridge, the final 
oblation should be offered and (lord) Siva located in the fire 
should be bid farewell. Having performed oblations with 
the vy&kftis (the syllables om bhUft , om bkuvah etc. ) , the fire should 
be obstructed with nitfhur& (scornful goddess). 

27-31. Then four oblations should be offered to the fire-god 
and others. Oblation should be given outside along with a sacred 
thread to the guardian deities of all directions. Two theological 
books and a sacred thread should be offered. Om , ham 9 bhUh 
oblations. Om, hdm y bhuvah oblations. Om, ham svah oblations. 
Om, ham, bhUr bhuvah svah oblations. After having done the obla- 
tions with the i y&hftisy four oblations should be made (as follows ) . 
Om, hdm oblations to the fire-god. Om, ham oblations to the fire- 
god, one who accomplishes all desires. The preceptor should 
be worshipped as lord Siva with clothes, ornaments and bed. 
All annual rites etc. of the performer (become) fruitful if the 
preceptor gets satisfied. The Supreme lord had said so. After 
having placed the thread on the body of the preceptor thus, 
the brahmins should be fed and offered clothes etc. with devo- 
tion. “O lord of celestials ! May lord Siva get pleased by 
this gift of mine.” 

32. After having bathed in the morning (the investor) 
should perform his daily rites of prayer and worship and take 



224 Agni Party* 

leave of (god) Siva after having worshipped him and the sacred 
threads with eight flowers. 

33. After having performed the nitya and nailhittika rites 
as before in full, the sacred threads should be placed and lord 
Siva should be worshipped in the fire after obeisance. 

34. The expiatory oblation should then be done with the 
mantras of the weapons. The final oblation should then be given. 
One who is desirous of enjoyment should then submit the fruits 
of his acts to lord Siva. 

35. “May this rite of mine become fruitful by your grace !” 
One who is desirous of release (from the cycle of births) should 
do this act (as follows) : “O lord ! May there be no bondage 
for me.” 

36. (Lord) Siva located in the fire should be united with 
lord Siva (in the solar plexus of the investor) by nd(tiyoga (assign- 
ment on limbs). The essence of fire should be drawn in one’s 
heart and the fire should be discharged. 

37. After having rinsed the mouth well, (he) should enter 
inside (the shed) and permeate the water of the pitcher with 
the essence of Siva and bid farewell (after saying) “Pardon 
(me)”. 

38. After having taken leave of the guardian deities of the 
world, the sacred thread should be taken from the lord and plac- 
ed on the Can<je$vara (form of the lord) after worship. 

39. The materials of worship along with the sacred thread 
should be submitted to him. In the alternative lord Cantfa 
should be worshipped on the sacrificial ground in the prescribed 
manner as before. 

40. “Whatever annual rite has been done by me defectively, 
may that become perfect by your mandate, O lord ! Cantfa ! 
my master !” 

41. Having thus submitted to the lord of celestials, he 
should be given farewell after obeisance and praise. After 
haying removed the materials of worship (from the images) 
and becoming pure, the votary should bathe (the image) and 
worship (lord) Siva. A man who remains even at a distance of 
five yojanas (a yojana is equal to about eight miles) from the pre- 
ceptor (is deemed to be) pure. 



80.1-12 


225 


CHAPTER EIGHTY 
Mode of investiture with the fibres of Damanaka 
The Lord said : 

1 . I shall describe the mode of investiture with damanaka 
fibres for the lord. It has to be performed as before. Once, the 
celestials were harassed by Bhairava, a form born of the anger 
of lord Hara (Siva). 

2-5. Hence, he was cursed by the foe of Tripura (Siva) 
(saying), “Become a stum”. Being pleased (after propitiation) 
the lord said, “Whoever propitiates you would get full benefits 
and not otherwise.” The votary should address the tree by the 
(following) words of Bhava (Siva) after having worshipped it 
with the vedic hymns on the seventh or thirteenth day (of a 
fortnight). “O (tree) born of the grace of (lord) Hara (Siva) ! 
You be present here. For the sake of work of Siva you have 
to be carried (home) as per the mandate of lord Siva.” (The 
tree) should be invited home and the consecration should be done 
in the evening. 

6. Having worshipped the sun-god, Sankara (Siva) and 
fire-god as prescribed, the root (of the tree) should be placed on 
the west of the lord alongwith the (clump of) earth. 

7. The stump (may be placed) on the left or on the head 
(of the image), the dh&tri (myrabolan) on the north, the broken 
leaves on the south and its Rower on the east. 

8. The fruits and roots should be placed in a cup. Lord 
Siva should be worshipped in the north-east. The lord should 
be invoked after having placed the five articles of worship 
in the folded palms and (later) placing them on one’s head. 

9. “O lord of celestials ! You have been invoked by 
me in the early morning ! O lord ! the merit of this penance 
has to become fully fruitful by your mandate.” 

10. After having kept the sacred remnants in the vessel 
covered, (the votary) should worship the lord of the universe 
with flowers etc., after haying bathed early in the morning. 

11-12. After having performed the nitya and naimittika 
rites, he should then worship with the damana . After having kept 
the remnants in the folded palms, lord Siva, fire-god and the 



226 


Agni Purdna 


preceptor should be worshipped with (the mantras) of the lord 
of the principle of knowledge of soul, the principal mantras of the 
lord ending with (the names of) I £ vara, with four handfuls (of 
offering). “ Orh haum (obeisance) to the lord of sacrifice. Com- 
plete the sacrifice. Obeisance to the holder of the spear.” 

13. “O lord ! Whatever has been in excess or in short in 
my acts let all that be complete by this investiture of the datna - 
naka by me”. (Whoever performs this) would go to heaven after 
having obtained the benefits of all that is got in the month of 
Caitra (April-May ) . 


CHAPTER EIGHTYONE 
Mode of spiritual initiation 


Lord said : 

1-3. I shall describe the spiritual initiation for the sake 
of enjoyment and release from bondage, destroying one’s sins and 
shattering bondages of impurities and illusion; by which, know- 
ledge is gained by the disciple, that initiation (is considered) 
as yielding enjoyment and release. It is considered to be of three 
kinds. The first one is vijfUttakala (cognisant of the beatitudes). 
The second one is pralayakala (a psychic state from which one can 
be cognisant of those attributes). The third one is sakala (cloud- 
ed by worldly impurity). These deserve initiation in scriptures. 
The first (category) among these is free from all mental impuri- 
ties, while the second is free from sinful acts. 

4. The third variety can (hold communion) by prayer 
with the region from kald to the earth. The initiation is also 
considered to be of two kinds — devoid of any hold and possessing 
a hold. 

5. (The initiation) independent of any (external) aid is for 
the first two categories (among the three) and that which is 
dependent on any (external) aid is for (the third category) 
sakala (endowed with a form). (The initiation in the first sort) 
is done by the worship of Sambhu (Siva) alone without any 
dependence. 



81.6-17 


227 


6. That which is remembered as independent (is achieved) 
by an impact of strong piercing force by resorting to the image in 
the form of the preceptor and by rending asunder the (veil of) 
illusion. 

7-8. That (initiation) in which Lord Sambhu (Siva) 
does it, is spoken as dependant. The spiritual initiation is said 
to be of four kinds — sabijd (together with imparting of some 
mantra), bijavarjitd (without any mantra ), sddhikdrd (with some 
governance), anadhikard (without any governance). They are 
described (now). A sabijd (type) is that in which the disciple 
is subject to the control of code of conduct laid down in the scrip- 
tures. 

9-10. The nirbijd (variety) is intended for the incapable 
which is devoid of any code of conduct of the scriptures. The 
sddhikdrd type of initiation shall be in the case of rites of daily 
nature and those done with a motive for the disciple and the pre- 
ceptor. The nirbija type of initiation is in those cases (where the 
disciples) possess characteristics as my two sons. 

1 1 . The niradhikdrikd type of initiation allows one to under- 
take rites in which the disciple does not aspire for the fruits. 
This (initiation) may be of two kinds marked by the individual 
characteristics. 

12. One consists of performance of acts preceded by (pre- 
parations of) sacrificial pits and mystical diagrams. The other 
one is composed of knowledge which is achieved by the operation 
of the mind. 

13. In this way an initiation may be made by a preceptor 
who has the right (to administer). The skandadikfd may be done 
by the preceptor after doing daily rites. 

14-17. (The preceptor) should purify the place from the 
spirits remaining in his own seat, having the arghya (waters of 
respect) in the lotus palm and worshipping the guardian deities 
of the threshold with pranava {mantra) and after removing the 
obstacles and placing the weapons at the threshold. The special 
arghya offering should consist of sesamum, rice, white mustard, 
kuSa, dfirvd, unbroken rice, mixed with water, barley, milk and 
water. Then the materials (for worship) (should be done) pure 
with that water. (After putting) the mark and the worship of 
the selfand of the seat, the materials (of worship) such as the five 



things got from a cow, fried paddy, sandal, white mustard* 
sacred ashes, d&rv&, unbroken rice and kuia should be purified as 
before with mantras . 9 

18. The pure fried paddy which has been scattered should 
be consecrated with mantras of weapons along with incense and 
consecrated with waters with the mantras of implements and 
covered by armour. 

19-21. Having made darbhas into different shapes of missiles 
so as to number thirtysix bunches, each measuring (the length 
of) a palm, which are capable of warding off multitudes of obs- 
tacles, and after having repeated the mantra of the weapon of 
Siva seven times on the sword of knowledge continuously and 
having located in one’s self, lord Siva, the basis of all crea- 
tion, the most sought after, and devoid of any form, one should 
deem himself as “I am (lord) Siva”. After having placed 
turban on the head one should adorn his body (in the following, 
way). 

22. He should besmear his right arm with the sandal paste. 
The lord should be worshipped in the prescribed way. This is 
how the head of Siva is got ready. 

23-25. Having located the luminous lord on one’s own 
head with the mantras of Siva, the doer should conceive himself 
as not different from (lord) Siva as follows: “ (He is) the witness 
of all deeds in the mystic diagram, the protector of sacrifice 
in the pitcher, the recipient of oblations in the fire and the 
liberator of the disciple from the bonds and the benefactor in 
one’s own self,” such that the lord is of six kinds of basis. One 
should consider (himself) as “I am he”. (Lord) Bhava (Siva) 
should again be made firmly established (in one). 

26. (Then) that person should remain facing the south- 
west holding the sword of knowledge and sprinkle the sacrificial 
shed with the waters of respectful offering and the five things got 
from the cow. 

27. By purification at the crossroads and by (divine) look, 
(darbhas) should be purified. Having thrown the scattered 
darbhas there, (darbhas) should be gathered. 

28. A seat should be made ready with them in the north* 
east (direction) for the pitcher. The presiding deity of the place 
and the celestials should be worshipped in the south-west and 
(Goddess) Lak$m! at the entrance (of the sacrificial shed). 



81 .29*37 


229 


29-30. (Goddess) Purayanti of the form of sacrificial 
shed should be worshipped in the west with gems and with the 
hjd {mantra). Lord Sambhu (Siva) should be worshipped in a 
pitcher placed in the north-east over the grains and containing 
water, gems and a piece of cloth (over the mouth) with the face 
of the worshipper turned towards the west. (Goddess) Sakti 
(should be worshipped) in the south of the pitcher. (Goddess) 
Vardhani, in the form of a sword and riding a lion should be 
worshipped in the west. 

3 1 -32. Having worshipped (with their respective names and 
the kfd {mantra) the (gods) Indra and the guardian deities of 
the directions ending with Vi?nu placed on the pranava {om) 3 
riding their respective vehicles and holding their respective 
weapons, that (the sacrificial jar) should be carried round in 
front of pitchers and an uninterrupted flow of water (should 
be made) after making a circumambulation. 

33. After having recited the principal mantra , the mandate 
of (Lord) Siva should be conveyed to the guardian deities. The 
jar should be duly consecrated and it should be held. 

34. After having worshipped lord Sankara (Siva) in the 
pitcher placed on a firm seat along with the retinue, the weapon 
should be worshipped in the vardhani after being placed to purify 
the path. 

Om hafy to the seat of the weapon hQm phaf. Om Om Saluta- 
tion to the embodiment of weapon. Oth hUm phaf obeisance to 
the Pajupata weapon. Om Om obeisance to the heart. Oth frith hum 
phaf obeisance to the head. Othyath hum phaf obeisance to the tuft. 
Oth gQrh hum phaf obeisance to the armour. Om phaf hum phaf 
obeisance to the weapons. 

35. The weapon should be meditated upon as possessing 
lour bfics and having teeth in the company of the Goddess 
Sakti, effulgent like crores of suns and wielding a mace, spear and 
sword. 

36. By (showing) Hhgamudrd (a posture of fingers 
denoting Hh$a)> the union of the bhaga (base) and the liftga 
is accomplished. The pitcher should be touched with the little 
finger, the weapon with the heart and vardhani with the clen- 
ched fist. 

37. The vardhani should first be touched with the clenched 



230 Agni Put&qq 

The sword of knowledge should be offered for protecting the 
mouth of the pitcher. • 

38. After the repetition of the principal (mantra) hund- 
red times, the weapon should be placed in the pitcher. A tenth 
part of it should then be conveyed to the vardhani for the sake of 
protection. 

39. “O lord of the universe ! This sacrificial shed has 
been raised with great effort. O lord ! the sustainer of all 
sacrifices ! This has to be protected by you.” 

40. The lord Gana placed on the pranava {om) and having 
four arms should be worshipped in the north-west by offering 
water. Having worshipped lord Siva on the ground, the 
worshipper should proceed near the pit. 

41-42. Remaining in contemplation for the sake of pleasing 
the mantras , and having placed the water of respectful offering, 
perfumes, ghee etc. on the left and the twigs, darbha , sesamum 
etc. on the right, and having purified the pit, fire, ladle etc. 
as before, (the worshipper) should think of the greatness of the 
elevated-faced (god) in the heart and worship lord Siva in 
the sacrificial fire. 

43. After having performed §f$tinyasa (assignment re- 
presenting creation) in one’s body, in the pitcher of lord 
Siva, on the sacrificial ground, in the hid and (the body of) the 
disciple, purification and meditation (should be done) in the 
prescribed way. 

44. Having contemplated the face of the (same) measure 
of the pit, the hrd blja ( mantras ) are repeated and oblations made 
for the seven tongues of the fire. 

45-46. The principal mantras for the tongue (should have) 
the last letters without (the letter) ‘ra’, and should have the sound 
of six ‘ra’s and the moon, a point and the tuft. Hiranya, Kanaka, 
Rakta, KrsnS, Suprabha, Atirikta and Bahurupa should in 
order (be placed) in the directions north-east, east, south-east 
and west. 

47. Oblations should be done with the sweet things such as 
milk etc. in the rites to appease (god) or seeking welfare and with 
oil-cakes, flour, one’s dress and sour-gruel in the rites performed 
for harming some one. 

48. An angry man should offer oblations of *salt, goat’s 



81.49-58 231 

curd, pungent oil, thorns and crooked twigs along with vedic 
syllables. 

49. Yak$ini (a goddess) becomes certainly favourable by 
doing oblations with the buds of kadamba. One should offer obla- 
tions with bandhdka , kimtuka and other (flowers) for attracting 
and subjugating another person. 

50. The bilva leaves (sacred in the worship of Siva) are 
offered for getting kingdom, the pafala and campaka (flowers) 
for the sake of wealth, lotus flowers for the sake of (becoming) 
a sovereign (and) eatables for wealth. 

51. Durvd (is offered) for the cure of diseases, flowers 
priyahgu and pdfali for exercising sway over all beings, and the 
Amra flower for arresting fever. 

52. (An oblation made with) the mrtyudjaya 1 mantra would 
conquer death. By the oblation of sesamum there would be pros- 
perity. Propitiation of Rudra (Siva) (should be made) for 
all sorts of appeasement. Then the subject of (present) discussion 
is narrated. 

53. Eight hundred oblations with the principal mantra 
and a tenth of it with the subordinate ones should be made. 
Appeasement should be made with the principal mantra . The 
final oblation should be offered as before. 

54. Then the repetition (of mantra) should be made hund- 
red times for each disciple for the entry of the disciple and 
for the sake of good omens after the removal of bad omens. 

55. As before oblation should be made two hundred times 
with the principal mantra . One oblation should be made with 
the principal (mantra) and the mantras of eight weapons con- 
cluding with (the syllable) svdhd (oblation). 

56. The illumination (rite) should be done with the repe- 
tition of mantras of the tuft ending with (the syllable) phaf . 
Oblation should be done with the mantras like Om, hrim , oblations 
to Siva. 

57-58. Then the illumination should be done with (the 
mantras) like Om, hr dm, hraum , hrim y to Siva, hr dm, phaf . Then the 
vessel for preparing the gruel should be washed with waters (made 
sacred by the mantras) of Siva and covered by an armour. It 


1 . Beginning with Tryambakarfi yqj&mahe etc. 



232 


Agni Purina 


should be besmeared with sandal paste and a girdle of darbha 
consecrated with the {mantra) of armour and weapon., 

59. After having placed the seat with (the mantra of the) 
armour, in a semi-circular mystic diagram, Siva, whose presence 
is accomplished in the form of an image, should be worshipped 
with flowers of sentiment. 

60-62. (Worship should be made) alternatively in the vessel 
whose mouth has been covered with a cloth with flowers got from 
outside. Over the oven placed to the right of the pit and having 
its mouth facing the west and previously consecrated with the 
syllables of ahafik&ra (egoism) and (the two sides of the oven) 
having been contemplated as made up of righteousness and 
unrighteousness over which (the mantra) of the soul of man has 
been repeated, the vessel should be placed after having repeated 
(the mantra) of the weapon and sprinkled with the urine of cow. 
The vessel (should have been) cleaned with the milk of cow and 
(the mantra ) of the weapon and repetition of the prds&da ( mantra ) 
hundred times. 

63. Rice and grains such as the Syam&ka etc. should be cast 
into it. If (the initiation) is to be given for a single disciple five 
handfuls (of grains) (should be thrown). 

64. A handful of grains should be added. The above 
grains should be protected with the mantras of the fire or that of 
the armour. 

65-66. The gruel should be cooked in the flame of Siva on 
the eastern face with (the recitation of the) principal (mantra). 
Then having filled the ladle with the clarified butter and heat- 
ed in the oven, it should be offered (to the fire) with the sark- 
hitd mantras ending with (the expression) “oblations for the sake 
of satisfaction’ 9 . The vessel should be placed in the mystic circles 
after having consecrated with the darbha. 

67. Having covered it by the (uttering of) pfaaaoa 
(syllable om)> it should be besmeared with the hfd (mantra). 
Thus it would become cool after having received a cool plastering. 

68-69. (Oblations) should be offered with the recitation of 
satfdtit# mantra once towards the disciple. After having made 
oblation for tbcsakc of seam etc. cn the west of the sacri- 
ficial pit and the mystic diagram, the residual offering s h oul d 
be made with the ladle and pwriflcation should he ppr formed by 
(the recitation o0 ******* (maatm). The gw* should he 



233 


-81.70-78 

taken out from the vessel with (the recitation of) the (syllable) 
vausaf. 

70. The act of making the gruel into ambrosia should be 
done by showing dhenu-mudra (formation made by fingers 
resembling the cow) and it must be allowed to cool on the ground. 
A part of the gruel consisting of clarified butter (should be set 
apart) for the disciples and a part for the lord Fire. 

71. A part containing honey and clarified butter should be 
made over to the guardian deities of the worlds. These are three 
parts. These should be offered to them with the hfd {mantra) 
ending with obeisance. The water for rinsing the mouth (should 
also be given) with the same (mantra). 

72-73. The final oblation should be offered as laid down 
after having made hundred offerings with clarified butter along 
with the recitation of mantra . Having drawn a mystic diagram 
on the east of the sacrificial pit or in the midst of pitchers of 
Lord Sambhu (Siva), Rudra, the divine mothers and the ganas 
(attendant gods of Siva) and after having made offerings 
with the hfd {mantra), the worshipper should identify himself 
with God Siva in the pitcher sacred to Siva even though he has 
not received a command. 

74-76. He should think himself as the omniscient who stands 
above all things around. (He should also think) “The place 
of union is a part of mine and I am the presiding deity at the 
sacrifice. I am lord Siva”. Thus the performer should come out 
of the sacrificial shed with the sense of I-ness. Having made 
the disciple to be seated on the seat of darbha already placed 
on a mystic diagram with the mantra of the weapon and duly 
consecrated with the pranava (syllable am), and (providing him) 
with white upper garment after the bath, (the disciple) should 
be made to face north for emancipation and the cast for 
enjoyment. 

77. Having made (the disciple) to sit erect ahd face the east, 
(the preceptor) should look at him from foot to tuft if (the 
initiation) is for emancipation and in the reverse direction if it is 
for enjoyment. 

78-79. (The preceptor) should look (at the disciple) 
graciously extending the splendour of Siva. Having sprinkled 
water with (the mantra of) the weapon in order to accomplish 
purification by (means of) consecrated water, the disciple should 



234 


Agni Purdna 


be struck with the ashes (accompanied) by (the mantra of) the 
weapon for the purpose of bathing with the ashes and for the 
destruction of obstacles and sins by the union of creation and 
destruction. 

80-81. Having sprinkled him again with the water of the 
weapon for the sake of consummation and having repeated the 
bathing {mantra) of the weapon above the navel with the tip of 
kuia, one should touch thrice under the navel with the 
(recitation of the) principal {mantra) for the destroyal of sin and 
with the mantra of the arrow for the breaking of bonds. 

82. Then (the preceptor) should locate lord Siva in the 
body (of the disciple) along with his seat and attendants by 
offering worship with flowers and by looking into his eyes or 
by the heart. 

83-84. Having tied the seat with a white cloth with (the 
recitation of) mantra , (and) having made him enter by means 
of circumambulation of Siva, the seat along with the cloth 
should be given. (The preceptor) should exhibit the sarhh&ra 
muird (posture with fingers indicating gathering) and communi- 
cate his own self with that form in the lotus of the heart (of the 
disciple). 

85. Having retained that (form of Siva) in the purified 
body and having located (it there), it should be worshipped in 
the east facing the forehead of the disciple with the principal 
mantra . 

86. The hand of the disciple should be converted into a 
hand sacred to (lord Siva) and permeated with the essence of 
(lord) Siva by telling the Siva mantra , such a hand being known 
to convey (the worshipper) to the region of (lord) Siva, and to 
supply him with the only means of worshipping (lord) Siva. 

87. Then after having removed all other materials of 
worship, one should cast flowers on lord Siva in the company 
of attendant gods of lord Siva invoking his presence with 
mantras . 

88-89. The preceptor should name brahmins in the 
usual order or as desired. After having made (the disciple) 
to bow to the pitcher and the vardhani (a kind of vessel), (the 
preceptor) should make (the disciple) seated on the right near 
the sacred fire facing the north. He should thert, meditate on 



81.90—82.1-3 


235 


the stifumrtd (an artery in the body) as emerging out of the body 
of disciple. 

90-93. Having placed the tip of darbha on the right hand 
duly consecrated by the base of darbha and resting on the 
symbol of one’s own self, that base (of kuSa) should rest on 
one’s own knee while the tip (should rest) on the cock-banner. 
Having entered the heart of the disciple by breathing out the 
wind while repeating the mantra of the tuft and re-entered his 
own heart by breathing in and having thus established commu- 
nion again with the fire of lord Siva, the preceptor) should offer 
three oblations with the hfd (i mantra ) for the accomplishment of 
that communion. One should make hundred oblations with the 
principal mantra for the sake of making the hand (of the disciple) 
permeated with the essence of Siva. Being thus initiated in reli- 
gious practices one would become eligible to perform the worship 
of lord Siva. 


CHAPTER EIGHTYTWO 

Mode of performing the purificatory initiation : 

The Lord said : 

1. “O $anmukha (six-faced one) 1 ! Listen to me ! I 
shall describe the mode of performing the purificatory initiation. 
The great god Siva situated in the heart and in the fire should 
be invoked. 

2. Having worshipped those two (God Siva situated in the 
heart and the sacrificial fire) and having appeased them with 
the hrd mantra , one should offer five oblations in their presence 
with the same mantra. 

3. That babe (of fire ) should be struck with a flower conse- 
crated by (the mantra of) the weapon with (the repetition of) 
the hrd {mantra). One should contemplate the starrv-like efful- 
gent form therein. 


I. Son of the divine pair Siva and PArvati. 



236 


Agni Purdna 


4. Having placed the syllable hum in it by exhalation of 
breath and having drawn it by means of sarhhdri&l (mudrd) 
(formation with fingers representing gathering ), it should be 
placed in the heart by the inhalation of breath. 

5. Then (the above-mentioned essence of fire) should be 
cast in the generative organ of goddess Vdgiluari (goddess of 
speech) with the mudrd known as udbhava 1 and the repetition of 
hfd mantra . 

Om hdm , him, h&m obeisance to the soul. 

6. Oblation should be offered in the smokeless sacrificial 
fire fully ablaze (with the above mantra) for the fulfilment of 
desires. Oblation made in undeveloped and smoky fire does not 
get the desire fulfilled. 

7. A fire which is pleasing, circling upwards and sweet 
smelling is commended. So also is the fire which touches the 
ground and which emits sparks in the contrary direction. 

8. Having offered oblations in this way, the impurities of 
the disciple should be destroyed by doing the sin-consuming 
oblation or it may be burnt with the syllables of Siva. 

9-10. Five hundred oblations should be made with the 
principal mantra and vau$af etc. in one-tenth of proportion for 
the sake of getting the characteristics of a twice-born (for the 
disciple) and to permeate him with the essence of Lord Rudra 
(Siva) as well as for the purification of the food etc. and for the 
(rites of) garbhddhdna , stmanta , and n&makarana. 2 

1 1 . The garbhddhdna is spoken as that which elevates the 
soul of the disciple by breaking the bonds and making him 
gain the sonship of Lord Rudra (Siva). 

12. The purhsavana is considered as the manifestation of 
independant attributes of the soul in the initiated. The dawn of 
knowledge by means of discrimination in the disciple clouded 
by illusion is the simantavardhana (growth of simmta). 

13. One’s birth is considered to be the evolution out of the 
principle of absolute bliss etc. The wakening (of conscious- 
ness) is by means of the principle of supreme bliss in the initiated 
which has become equal to the Supreme Being in the spiritual 
perfection. 


1. Posture of finger indicating evolution. 

2. See Ch. 75 Verses 13-17. 



82.14-24 


237 


14. (Then the preceptor) should carry into the lotus of his 
heart his own soul resembling a spark of fire by (exhibiting) 
the satiihdra mudrS (formation with the fingers denoting gather- 
ing)- 

15. Then the principal mantra should be uttered along with 
the retention of breath and the union of God Siva and his own 
soul should be brought about in his heart. 

16-17. (Then the preceptor) well-versed in the procedure 
(relating to the performance of sacrifices) should carry his pure 
consciousness to the region of Siva from the sacrificial perform- 
ances which are the cause of Brahma (and others) by means of 
exhalation of breath and collect it by showing the udbhava 
mudra (formation with fingers denoting generation) and (repeat- 
ing) the mantra of the heart and exhaling the breath he should 
locate it in the petals of lotus of the heart of the disciple. 

18. The preceptor should duly propitiate Lord Siva and 
the fire-god. The disciple (should be made) to bow down to the 
self (preceptor). (He) should then make the disciple hear 
conventions. 

19. One should not blaspheme scriptures or God. One 
should not leap across the materials of worship. One must 
propitiate Lord Siva, the fire-god and the preceptor as long 
as one is alive. 

20. One has to impart these instructions to children, old 
people, women, people addicted to pleasures, and sick people 
according to their capacity (to preserve them) and in entirety 
to those who can practise them. 

21-22. After having consecrated in a vessel the symbols 
of discipline — tuft, ashes, staff and loin cloth in order with 
the Uana , hfd and sarhhitd mantras eliding with (the syllable) 
svahd (oblation) as before, (the preceptor) should show them to 
the presiding deity of sacrificial site after having quickly cast in 
the fire the residual offering. 

23. Having kept them for a while under the pitcher for the 
sake of protection, the preceptor should give them to the person 
who takes the vow after having obtained permission of Lord 
Siva. 

24. Thus in this special spiritual initiation a child especially 
becomes fit to have a scriptural knowledge about the fire and 
oblation unto 'the fire. 



238 


Agni Purdna 


CHAPTER EIGHTYTHREE 
Mode of spiritual initiation that removes one’s bo Adage: 

The Lord said : 

1 • The principal mantra should be stimulated in the spiritual 
initiation. In order to gain strength (to break) the bonds (of 
worldly existence) one may do it by the rites of t&iana (striking 
gently). 

2. (Oblations should be offered) with each one of the 
(principal) mantras or thrice with (them). The principal mantra 
together with half the tuft mantra (should be repeated) along with 
(the syllables) hum , phaf y etc. 

3. The principal mantra should be stimulated by (the sylla- 
bles) Om, hrUm, hraum , haum, hrum. (assigning) to the 
heart as well as the tuft and face with (the syllables) Om, hrUm , 
hraum, hrum , phaf. 

4. One should do the rite of stimulation for each part of 
the principal mantra in all ceremonies performed to cause 
injury (to one’s enemy) while the (syllable) va$af is appended to 
the principal mantra in ceremonies intended to bring peace and 
prosperity. 

5. In all instances of annual rites, oblations should be 
done with religious acts for all desired results along with (the 
syllables) vasaf (and) vaufaf. 

6. Then after having worshipped the disciple having a pure 
body and seated on a circle on the right side of one’s self, (the 
preceptor) should contemplate upon a thread as the susumnd (an 
artery of human body). 

7. The tuft of hair (of the disciple) should be tied with the 
principal (mantra) and (one end of the string) should be led to 
(touch) the toe. In the case of (the disciple) yearning for sal- 
vation (the string) should be tied on the body of the disciple 
showing the sarhhdra (i mudrd ) (posture of fingers denoting gather- 

>ng)- 

8. (The String) should be attached on the right side in the 
case of males and on the left side in the case of females. The 
female deity should be worshipped with the tyantra of the deity 
on the head. 

9. The thread should be collected With ih^sarhh&ra mudrd 



83.10-18 


239 


and placed with the same (mudrt f). The n&tfl (artery) should 
(be mentally) collected with the principal (i mantra ) and placed 
on the string and worshipped with the mantra of the heart. 

10. Having covered it with the Rudra (mantra), oblations 
should be offered thrice with the mantra of the heart for accomp- 
lishing the presence. It is the same way in the case of female 
deity also. 

11-13. Om , h&m obeisance to the path of letters, ham obei- 
sance to the path of residence ( bhavana ), Om , h&m obeisance to 
the path of phases. Having located the path of purification on 
the thread and sprinkled water on the disciple with the weapon 
and beaten gently the heart (of the disciple) with flower conse- 
crated by (the mantra of) the weapon, the preceptor should (men- 
tally) enter the body of the disciple (by pronouncing) the syllable 
hum and exhaling the breath. The spirit situated in the harhsa - 
bija should be separated by (the mantra of) the weapon: Om, 
kaum , hum , phaf. 

14. Having covered the same with the iaktisUtra (the thread 
of energy) by (uttering) the mantra h&rfi ham oblations, it should 
be joined with the thread which has become artery, by (show- 
ing) the samh&ramudrd (posture made with the fingers indicating 
gathering) Orh h&m hath h&m salutations to the soul. 

15. It should thus be conceived as pervasive. It should 
then be covered by the mantra of the armour. Oblations should 
be made thrice with (the mantra of) the heart for the sake of in- 
voking the presence. 

16. Having located the principle of knowledge (in the 
thread), one should look at it as beyond^the state of bliss. Other 
principles which have become mantras as they were should be 
located in that. One should look at it with (the mantra) “ Om , 
h&rfi, haum obeisance to the kal&p&ia (the bondage of phases) 
beyond absolute bliss”. 

17-18. Two principles (out of the twentyfive), mantra of 
single word, sixteen letters, eight worlds, two (principal) 
arteries (i4& and pihgald), (letters ) ka and tha , the one object 
(of sense-perception, the one fundamental attribute, the one 
fundamental cause and die eternal blissful one (tod&Hva) should 
be contemplated as having been located in the (phase of) white 
colour beyond the absolute bliss. 



240 


Agni Purdtu* 


19. Om haurh kwh phaf to the katapdia beyond the region 
of absolute bliss. Having collected the latter by (showing) the 
sarhhdramudrd (posture of fingers denoting gathering), it should 
be placed over the thread. It should then be worshipped and 
three oblations (of clarified butter) should be made for its 
presence (in the thread). 

20-21. Two principles (out of twenty-five), two letters 
ka and tha , two principal arteries ( iid and pifigald ), two 
qualities, two mantras and one supreme lord situated in the 
lotus (of the heart), twelve terms (denoting god), seventeen 
worlds, one of the objects (of sense-perception ) should be con- 
ceived as merged in the dark phase which is beyond the region of 
bliss. (Lord) Acyuta should be meditated upon therein. 

22. Having gathered it after a gentle stroking, it should 
be placed at the mouths of the nerve. Oblations should be made 
thrice with the respective mantras for the sake of its presence. 

23-24. The seven (fundamental) principles, twentyone 
words, six letters, one path-way, twentyfive worlds, three qualities 
and an object for which Rudra is the cause should be located 
in the principle of knowledge and the mantras , artery, (the latters ) 
ka and tha higher above. 

25-26. Having taken the weapon, twenty-two words, six 
worlds, six kalds (phases), four qualities, three mantras and an 
object for which (Lord) Vi$nu is the cause should be meditated 
at the base. The (rites of) beating should be done in the white 
(phase). 

27-29. Then having placed (the same)in the nerve in the navel 
(region), one should offer oblations for the sake of its presence. 
(The preceptor) should then locate (the syllable) hrim, hundred 
worlds, twentyeight words, twice each of the mantras , artery, the 
winds as well as senses, the principle of the letter, the five objects 
of sense-perception and the (first) cause governed by the brah- 
mdn<ia-mantra 9 four times the Sambaras (a religious observance) 
in the principle of non-action of yellow colour. It should then 
be beaten. 

30. The principles which were left out at the outset should 
be located on the thread and worshipped. Three oblations should 
be offered unto the fire for the sake of its presence. 

31. Thus having gathered the principles from the body of 
the disciple, they should be located in the thread.%In the initia- 



83.32-42 


241 


tion with the mantras , it should be done accompanied by religious- 
sacrificial performances. 

32. Other rites (should be undertaken) for the sake of ini- 
tial protection of the body (of the disciple) until the mantra 
accomplishes the desired fruits. 

33-34. The subtle soul awakening {mantra) should be medi- 
tated in the principles of beatific knowledge. (The rites of) 
arpana (pleasing) and dipana (stimulation) should be performed 
in the same way with three oblations with their respective man- 
tras (such as) “ 0m 9 haum oblations to the phase of beatitude 
beyond that of absolute bliss” which is (the mantra for) the 
rite of pleasing; “Om, hdm , ham , ham , hum 9 phaf to the phase of 
beatitude beyond that of absolute bliss” which is (the mantra 
for) stimulation. Then that thread should be considered as 
pervading the five nerve centres. 

35. (The thread) should be smeared with saffron and clari- 
fied butter and (Lord) Siva should be worshipped therein along 
with his attendants with the kald-mantras ending with hum phaf 
after having pierced the bondage through the occult nerve. 

36. Having (mentally) entered inside (with syllables) 
ending with obeisance, (the preceptor) should take hold of 
(the thread) and tie it. 0m 9 hum , hdm , haum y hdm 9 hum , phaf f 
I take hold of the phase exceeding that of pure bliss. 

37. (The preceptor) should place that thread on the shoul- 
der of the disciple after having made him seated for the sake of 
successful completion. 

38. One hundred oblations should be made with the prin- 
cipal mantra for the expiation of all the sins (of the disciple). 
(The oblation should be made) in a covered shallow saucer 
(if the disciple) is a male and in a saucer of enlarged belly (in 
the case of a) female (disciple). 

39-42. The thread which has been covered with the mantra 
of the heart should be placed and worshipped with (the mantra 
of) the heart. After having been made pure by the worship of 
Siva and his attendants the thread should be placed under the 
pitcher (saying), “let protection be announced”. After having 
placed a flower in the hands (of the disciple) and having 
worshipped the pitcher and other things, the disciple should be 
made to bow down and led outside the sacrificial shed. After 



242 


Agni Purdna 


having drawn three circles, the disciple should he made to sit 
facing the north in the case of aspiration for emancipation 
and made to sit facing the east in the case of aspiration (for 
enjoyment). Three handfuls of pahcagavya (the five things got 
from a cow) should be sipped at the outset. 

43-44. After that, three or eight morsels of gruel unpolluted 
by the touch of the teeth should be offered with the hand 
holding a kufa with the leaf of pal&Sa, if desirous of emancipation 
and with the leaf of pippala> if desirous of enjoyment. 

45-47. Having offered profuse feeding with (the mantra of) 
the heart, the pure water should be given for rinsing the mouth. 
After having given the teeth stick (for cleansing the teeth) 
with (the repetition of the mantra of) the heart, one hundred 
and eight oblations should be offered with the principal {mantra) 
for the removal of defects such as deficiency etc. After having 
dedicated all acts to the lord of the ground, the deity should 
be given adieu after worship and Lord Candela should be wor- 
shipped. Then the materials of worship should be removed and 
the remnants of the gruel should be offered to the fire. 

48. After having worshipped the pitcher and the protectors 
of the world and bidding them adieu, one should bid adieu to 
the attendant God and fire if they have been retained on the 
periphery of the mystic circle. 

49. Then having offered oblations in a condensed way to 
the protector of the world at the periphery, one should enter the 
sacrificial shed after bathing with ashes or pure oil. 

50. (If the disciples are) householders, (they) should be 
seated) on a bed of darbhas with their heads facing the east and 
protected well (and if the disciples are) monks, (they should be 
seated) on a bed of ashes with their heads facing the south with 
(the repetition of the mantra ot) the heart. 

51. (Then the preceptor) should bathe the disciples who 
had tied-up their tufts into knots along with the mantras of the 
weapon and sapta mdnavaka and walk out of the place again. 

Om, hili 3 hiliy oblations to the trident-bearer. 

52. After having sipped five things got from a cow and 
the gruel and having collected sticks for cleansing the teeth, 
and having rinsed the mouth (with water), and contemplated 
on (Lord) Siva and having reached the pure bed? the preceptor 



84.1-8 


243 


should enter (a?ain) remembering the rites performed in 
connection with initiation. Thus, the mode of preliminary 
consecration relating to initiation has been described briefly. 


CHAPTER EIGHTYFOUR 
Mode of Initiation for Emancipation 


The Lord said : 

1 . Then the preceptor having got-up early in the morning 
should bathe and finish worship. (Seeing in the dream) 
curd, ginger, meat and wine as being consumed is commended. 

2. So also riding on an elephant or horse as well as seeing 
a white cloth in the dream is auspicious. (Seeing in the dream) 
as smearing the body with oil is inauspicious. Oblation (should 
be done) with the aghora mantra for the sake of appeasement. 

3. After having performed two daily rites (the two twilight 
worships) and entering the sacrificial shed, (the preceptor) 
should rinse (his mouth) and perform duties as in the daily 
routines as laid down for the incidental rites. 

4-5. After having purified his self and (the part of the fore- 
arm known as) the Hoahasta and having located in his inner being 
the Gods Indra and others in order and worshipped the pitcher, 
Siva worship should be done at the shed or on the ground. 
Worship of fire and the (rite of) mantratarpana (offering 
oblations along with the recitation of mantras) (should be done) 
until the final oblation is done. 

6. After having offered one hundred and eight oblations 
with the mantra of the weapon, for the removal of defects due 
to bad dreams, one should activate the mantra with the subtle 
syllable hum . 

7. Having made the antarbali (the rite of middle offering) 
in between the (sacrificial) pitcher and the ground for the 
entry of the disciple, and having obtained permission, the 
preceptor should walk out of the shed. 

8. One should do (the acts of) placing on a mystical diagram 
(and other acts) in the religious initiation. The preparatory 



244 


Agni Purina 


oblation (should be done) with the end of darbha which 
should be looked upon as the umbilical chord of the lajter. 

9. Having offered three oblations with the principal mantra 
for accomplishing its presence, (the preceptor) should worship 
lord Siva in the pitcher and take hold of the thread. 

10. It should be tied on the tuft of the disciple who would 
remain standing on the right-hand -side (of the preceptor) in 
the manner that the thread hangs down upto the toe of the 
foot. 

1 1 . Having placed it and looked at it mentally as pervading 
the non-action, one should know that more than one hund- 
red and eight worlds are in it. 

12-25. Kapala, Aja, Buddha, Vajradeha, Pramardana, 
Vibhuti, Avyaya, Sasta, Pinaki, TridaSadhipa, Agni, Rudra, 
Hutasi, Pirigala, Khadaka, Hara, Jvalana, Dahana, Babhru, 
Bhasmantaka, Ksapantaka, Yamya, Mjrtyuhara, Dhata, Vidhata, 
Karyarafijaka, Kala, Dharma, Adharma, Samyokta, Viyogaka, 
Nairrta, Marana, Hanta, Kruradr?ti, Bhayanaka, Drdhvam- 
£aka, Virupak$a, Dhumralohita, Damstravan, Atibala, Pasa- 
hasta, Mahabala, Sveta, Jayabhadra, DIrghabahu, Jalantaka, 
Vadavasya and Bhima are known as (the manifestations of) 
Varuna. Sighra, Laghu, Vayuvega, Suk?ma, Tik?na, Ksapan- 
taka, Paficantaka, Paficasikha, Kapardi, Meghavahana, Jata- 
mukutadhari, Nanaratnadhara, Nidhlsa, Rupavan, Dhanya, 
Saumyadeha, Prasadakj*t, Praka^a, Lak§mivan and Kamarupa, 
the latter ten; Vidyadhara, Jfianadhara, Sarvajfta, Vedaparaga, 
Matrvrtta, Pirigaksa, Bhutapala, Balipriya, Sarvavidyavidhata, 
Sukhaduhkhaliara are the ten. Ananta, Palaka, Dhira, Patala- 
dhipati, Vr?a, Vrsadhara, Virya, Grasana, Sarvatomukha and 
Lohita known as the ten (manifestations of) Rudra seated on the 
hoods of snakes; Sambhu, Vibhu, Ganadhyaksa, Tryak?a, 
Trida^avandita, Samhara, Vihara, Labha, Lipsu (and) Vicak- 
sana; (and) Atta, Kuhakakalagnirudra, Hafaka, Ku?manda, 
Satya, Brahma, Visnu and Rudra are the eight Rudras who all 
remain in the interior of hemisphere (of the universe). The 
names of these (Gods) as well as the names of worlds should 
be remembered. 

26. Bhavodbhava, Sarvabhuta, Sarvabhutasukhaprada 
(Gran ter of felicity to all), Sarvasannidhyakft, (all pervasive) 
are worshipped by Brahm&, Vijnu and Rudra. * 



84.27*35 


245 


27. O Adored one ! Existing prior to all beings ! Om ! 
The Witness ! Om ! The Destroyer of Rudra ! Om ! Sun ! 
Om ! The Sound ! Om ! The Subtle ! Om ! Siva ! The Granter 
of all things to all beings ! The pervading life-force of all things ! 
The Creator of Brahma, Visnu and Rudra ! Om ! Salutations 
to Siva. 

O Guha (son of Lord Siva and Parvati) ! (in the thread 
described above) the principle of non-action should be contem- 
plated as impregnated with the twenty-eight beatific states, 
together with the eight letters of which the sadya , hfd , astra , and 
netra mantras are composed. 

28. The letter ma is the emblem of the mystic seed, the two 
occult nerves known as i$d and pihgald , the two vital winds 
prdna and apdna and the organs of smell and generation. 

29. Among the five qualities smell etc., the quality of smell 
is spoken as the matter. The principle of matter is yellow (in 
colour) symbolises thunderbolt and is square-shaped. 

30. Its extension is one hundred crores of yojanas ( Siyojana 
is equivalent to eight miles). It should be known that the four- 
teen creative principles are lying concealed in this (zone). 

31. It is the first being and the source of the four-fold exis- 
tence of all celestial beings, Manu, etc. animals and birds and 
crawling insects. 

32-33. (It is also) spoken (as the source of things born of) 
the fifth, the immovable things, the sixth, the beings other than 
human (such as) goblins, demons, yak$as , gandharvas and 
Indra, the seventh, the God of life (Yama) and the eighth, 
Brahma. The earthly principle is considered as controlling the 
eighth. 

34-35. Having contemplated the absolute dissolution (of 
the universe) in the prakfti (the original source of the material 
world) and the intellect and Brahma, the enjoyer, as the cause, 
(as well as) the non-action located along with all the worlds 
continuing through his waking-state, one should unite the appro- 
priate mantras . 

Om, hdm, hrSm , hdm to the thread standing for the beatitude 
of non-action hQm 9 phat > tat. 0m 9 h&m, ham oblations to the thread 
standing for the beatitude of non*action. Having drawn in 
breath along with (the above mantra} and shown the a&kufd- 
mudrd (posture made with fingers denoting a goad), and having 



246 


Agni Purdna 


withheld the breath and carrying it up by showing the sarhhdra- 
mudra (formation with fingers representing gathering )^nd with 
(the mantra ) Om , hr dm, hrdm , hram to the thread of beatitude of 
non-action hdm , phat and having placed it in the pitcher by 
showing the udbhavamudrd (formation with fingers denoting 
generation) and discharging the breath and repetition of (the 
mantra ) Om, Om, hram, hdm obeisance to the thread of beatitude 
of non-action and having offered the respectful offering with 
(the mantra) Om, hdm, obeisance to the thread of beatitude 
of non-action and worshipped, (the preceptor) should offer 
three oblations with face turned away ending with (the word) 
“Oblation” for the sake of accomplishing its presence and then 
offer the concluding three oblAtions. (Lord) Brahma should 
be invoked with (the mantra ) Om, hdm, obeisance to BrahmS, 
and worshipped. (He) should be appeased (with oblations) 
with (the word) “Oblations”. (The preceptor should say), 
“O Brahman ! I initiate (this disciple) in this (world) over 
which you hold sway”. 

36-37. One should submit (to the lord) “you should be 
propitious to him”. Goddess Vagisvari, the deity of protection, 
who is of the form of desire, knowledge and action and is of six 
kinds and is the sole cause (of the universe) should be invoked 
with (the mantra of) the heart. One should worship and satisfy 
the Goddess as follows : — 

38-40. (Goddess) Vagisvari, the cause of agitating the 
receptacles should gently be struck (against) the chest (of the 
disciple) with the repetition of the hjt (mantra) and the principal 
mantra concluding with hum phat and the mantra of the arrow. 
(The preceptor) who knows the procedure (of these rites) 
should then enter into the inner self of the disciple and then 
divide the effulgent consciousness (of the disciple) in the heart 
endowed with the thread located in the beatitude of non-action 
and resembling a spark of fire, with jyeffhd (mantra) as follows: — 
Om, hdm, hdm, hah, hdm, phat and with (the mantra) Om, hdm, 
oblations and then with the ankufamudrd (posture with fingers 
denoting the goad). 

41-43. Having drawn it with its appropriate (mantra) and 
seized it, it should be unite4 with his soul. Om, hdm, hr dm, hdm 
obeisance to the soul. Having imagined the unjpn of his own 
soul with discharge of the breath, it should be led to the abode of 



84.44-53 


247 


Siva after having gradually discarded with discrimination the 
cause such as Brahm&, etc. One should cast it in the womb of 
(Goddess) VIgISvari with the (exhibition of) udbhava-mudrd 
(posture with fingers denoting generation) after having carried 
if for impregnation in all the principles simultaneously. Om , 
hdm , ham , it&m, obeisance to the soul. One should worship with 
this ( mantra ) and after oblations five times. 

44. One should do the purification of the body with the 
mantra of the heart in the case of all other principles. The 
purhsavana (the rite of determining the sex) is not done, as there 
can be a feminine form also. 

45. The simantormayana (parting of the hair) and the divine 
limbs (should be treated) as the body. (The purificatory rite) 
at the birth for all human beings should be done with the mantra 
of the head with aversion. 

46. (The preceptor) should similarly contemplate upon 
the regions over which they have control, with the mantra 
of Siva. The objects of sense pleasure (should be contemplated ) 
with the mantra of the armour and the worldly objects with (the 
mantra of) the weapons. 

47-48. One should contemplate on that one which is known 
as dissolution, as the form of delusion and unbreakable. Streams 
should be purified by (contemplating) the mantra of Siva and the 
purification of the principles should be done with (the mantra 
of) the heart. Five times five oblations should be made in respect 
of the rites of garbhddhdna and others in order for the sake of 
cessation of the bonds due to sinful acts. 

49. One hundred oblations should be made with (the 
mantra of) the heart after having accomplished expiation. 
By obstructing the force of sins one can severe the bonds. 

50. Five times five oblations should be offered with the 
mantra of the weapon ending with oblations. By the repetition 
of the ( mantra of the) weapon seven times one gets free from bonds 
ending with illusion. 

51-53. The accomplishment by the mantra kalpa of the 
weapon is like cutting with a scissor. Am , hUm 9 to the thread of 
the beatitude of non-action, hum , phat> Having accomplished 
the cessation of bondage with the hands and with the mantra 
of the arrow, the thread should be untied and laid in a circular 



*248 


Agni Purtlna 


form on the sacrificial ladle filled with clarified butter. One 
should then burn it with the mantra of the weapon and reduce it 
into ashes with the weapon after having offered five oblations for 
the removal of the goad of bondage. Om , hah , to the weapons 
hum> phat. Expiation should then be made with eight oblations 
made with (the mantra of) the weapon. 

54-56. After having invoked (Lord) Brahma, he 
should be worshipped and appeased. Then Om, ham> O 
Brahman, whom soul and touch cannot perceive, you take 
(these oblations). Oblations. He should be informed of the 
authority invested in him by offering three oblations. “O 
Brahman ! you should not again bind this being whose sins 
have all been burnt. You listen to the mandate of Lord Siva.” 
After having bid farewell to Lord Brahma, (the preceptor) 
should slowly fill ir the soul of the disciple by his own soul with 
retention of breath and exhibiting sarnharamudrd (posture with 
fingers representing collection). (That soul) would then look 
like the disc of the moon at the beginning of the eclipses at a 
particular spot. 

57. After having taken it out, it should be located in the 
thread with the discharge of breath and with udhhavamudrd (posture 
with fingers denoting generation). After having worshipped it, 
the preceptor should place the drop of water in the offering 
vessel resembling the nectar, on the head of the disciple for the 
purpose of completion. 

58. After having bid farewell to the (divine) parents, the 
final oblation should be made with the mantra of Siva ending with 
vausaf . Thus the mode of completion has ended. The non- 
action principle is thus purified. 


CHAPTER EIGHTYFIVE 
Mode of purifying the Beatific principle of establishment 

The lord said : 

1-2. The union of the two principle* good and bad should 
be brought about by the application of short and long 



35.3-22 


249 


(vowels) associated with sound. Om, hdm, krUm, hdrn, water, efful- 
gence, wind, sky, the subtle principles, organs, intellect, the 
three qualities and ego (are) the twenty-four principles (and) 
the puruja (the soul) (is the twenty-fifth). 

3. (The preceptor) should imagine the letters beginning 
with kha and ending vrithjya as merged in the above twenty- 
five principles. 

4. The number of Rudras is equivalent to the bkuvanas 
(Worlds), which are known to be fifty-six. They are as follows: 

5-12. Amare£a, Prabhava, Naimi$a, Pu?kara, Padi, Dantfi, 
Bhavabhuti, Nakuliia the eighth, Harilcandra, Srigaila the 
tenth, Anvl£a, AbhratikeSa, Mahakala, Madhyama, Kedara, 
Bhairava, spoken as the second (group of) eight. Then Gaya- 
kuruk$etra-khalan&dikanadika, Vimala, Attah&sa, Mahendra, 
Bhima, Vasvapada, Rudrakoji, Aviyukta, Mahabala, Gokarna, 
Bhadrakarna, Svarnak?a, Stha^u Ajeya, Sarvajfia, Bhasvara, 
Sudanantara, Subahu, Mattarupl, Vimala, Jajila, Raudra, 
Pingalak$a, K&ladamstri, Vidura, Ghora, Prajapatya, Huti- 
£ana, Kamarupi, Kala, Karna, Bhayanaka, Matanga, Pingala, 
Hara, Datr(samjfiaka), Sankukarna, Vidhana, Srikanjha and 
CandraSekhara. 

13. Their attributes (to be used) along with their names 
are also described then. O (All) pervasive ! Om , Formless ! 
Om, Conqueror ! Om, Lustre ! Om, Light ! Om, (Supreme) 
Being ! Om, Fire ! Om, Smokeless ! Om, Not reduced to ashes ! 
Om, One without a beginning ! Om, Of manifold forms ! Om, 
The Agitator ! Om, The Earth ! Om, the Atmosphere ! Om, 
Heavens ! Om, Deathless ! Born from dissolution ! Auspi- 
cious ! Killer ! Absolute Soul ! Supreme Deity I Lord of 
celestials ! Lord of Good will ! Supreme lustre ! Presiding deity 
of yoga ! (Your) release ! The first soul ! All in all ! Lord of all 
beings ! are the thirty-two 1 attributes. Vamadeva, SiVa, and 
Sikha are the three mantras in the subtle form. 

14. The two occult sychic nerves g&ndh&ri and sufumnd, 
then the winds samdna and uddna, the organs of taste and ^pro- 
duction (are also worshipped). 

15-22. The sentiments are the material objects. The quali- 


1. But, actually only twentynine have been given. 



250 


Agni Purdna* 


ties are perception, hearing, touch and taste. The mystic diagram 
should be circular and bear the mark of a white Ibtus. 

After having contemplated on the worlds as well as those estab- 
lished along with the eagle-bannered god who is the cause for 
the establishment in the dreamy state, the thread should be plac- 
ed on the body with (the recitation) of the appropriate mantra 
and retained (by the preceptor). “Om, hdm , khdm, hdm, to the 
thread of the beatitude of consecration Om, phaf”. With this 
(; mantra ) and ending with ‘oblations’ it should be drawn while 
drawing in breath and exhibiting ahkuia-mudrd (formation with 
fingers denoting a goad). Then “Om, hdm, hr dm , hr dm, hr dm 
to the thread of the beatitude of consecration krdm , phaf”. With 
this and retention of breath and showing sarhhdramudrd (forma- 
tion with fingers denoting gathering) it should be taken from the 
occult nerve below the heart. Om, hdm , hram , hr dm, hdm , obei- 
sance to the thread of the beatitude of consecration. With this 
(j mantra ) and showing the udbhavamudrd (formation with fingers 
denoting generation) and discharge of breath, it should be placed 
on the pitcher. Having worshipped with the mantra “Om, hdm, 
brim obeisance to the thread of the beatitude of consecration” 
ending with ‘oblations’, and offered three oblations for ensuring 
its continuance (lord) Visnu should be invoked (with the 
mantra) “Om, hdm , obeisance to Visnu”, worshipped and offered 
oblations O Vi$nu ! I initiate the disciple who is desirous 
to get liberation herein under your authority”. You should be 
propitious. Thus Lord Visnu should be informed. Then the 
(Goddess) Vagi£vari and Lord Vagina should be invoked as 
before, worshipped and offered oblations and the disciple should 
be gently struck on the chest. Om, hdm, hdm, ham, phaf. (The 
preceptor) should enter with the same ( mantra ) and severe the 
consciousness in the above-said thread with the (mantra) of 
weapon and (showing) the ahkuSamudrd (formation with fingers 
denoting a goad) and jyeffhd (mantra) Om, hdm , ham, ham, hr dm, 
phaf. Having drawn it with (the mantra of) the heart ending 
with “oblations”, it should be lodged in one’s own soul repeating 
the same (mantra) and ending with “obeisance”. Om, hdm, ham, 
ham obeisance to the soul. The union of divine parents 
should be imagined as before with the udbhaaamudrd (posture with 
fingers denoting generation) and (the seed qf the soul) should 
be cast into the womb of the goddess by exhibiting die same 



85.23-28 


251 


( mudrd ) from the left. Om, hdm, ham, hdm obeisance to the souL 
the birth of the body should be (accomplished) by (the mantra 
of) the heart, the postnatal (ceremony) by (the mantra of) 
the head. 

23. Otherwise its possession (could be accomplished) by 
(the mantra of) the tuft. For the sake of enjoyment of pleasures 
it should be done by the mantra of the armour. In regard to 
the purity of principles (it should be done) with (the mantra 
of) the heart and in the case of impregnation it is in the same way 
as before. 

24-25. For cutting bonds (it should be) accomplished by 
(the mantra of) the head. Having cut the bonds thus, the 
preceptor should repeat (the mantra) hundred times. Even after 
having cut the bonds thus, (the preceptor) should cut it with 
the repetition of the mantra of the weapon and with a scissor 
over which the mantra of the beatific principles has been 
repeated. Om, krim, to the thread of the beatitude of 
consecration hah phaf . The thread should be removed and 
kept in a circular shape as before (described in the previous 
chapter) with (the repetition of the mantra of the weapon. 

26. Having placed it over the sacrificial ladle filled with 
clarified butter, oblations should be done with the mantra of the 
beatific principles and weapons. Five oblations should be made 
with (the mantra of) the weapon for the cessation of shoots of 
bondage. 

27. Eight oblations should be made for the sake of expia- 
tion. Om, to the weapons Ar£m, /fa/. Lord Hr?ike£a should 
be invoked and worshipped and offered oblations. 

28. As laid down earlier investiture of authority should 
be made “om, hdm accept this fees of sentiment, oblations" 
(is the mantra which should be repeated). O Hara ! (you) 
should not remain as a bond of this being (the disciple) whose 
bondage has completely been burnt away. Listen to this 
mandate of Lord Siva. Having bid farewell to Lord Go- 
vinda (Vi?nu) and united the soul of knowledge which resembles 
the moon’s disc half uncovered by the band by exhibiting the 
sarhh&ranwdrd (posture with fingers denoting gathering) and 
having bid farewell by showing the udbhavamudrd (formation with 
fingers denoting generation), the drop ofwaier should be placed 
6 n the thread as before. Having bid farewell to die (divine) 



252 


Agni Purdna 


parents and having worshipped the fire with flowers, etc. the 
final oblation should be made as laid down. Thus the conse- 
cration also gets purified. 


CHAPTER EIGHTYSIX 
Mode of Purification of scriptural knowledge 

The Lord said : 

1. The union of the beatific principle of knowledge and 
that of ancient one should be done as before, after having located 
the principles. The union should be done with (the mantra) 
Om , hom 9 hfim. 

2. Attachment, pure knowledge, fate, time, illusion and 
ignorance together with beatific principle are (known as) the 
seven unions. 

3. The six letters, ra, la, va, £a, $a, and sa are said (to re- 
present) >the branches of learning. The terms beginning with 
pranava (Om) are twenty-one (in number) (as below ) — Om 
obeisance to Siva, who is the Lord of all (created) things. Ham , 
to (Lord) Siva, to I&na at my head, to Tatpuru^a at my face, 
to Aghora at the heart, to Vamadeva at the anus, to the form of 
Sadyojata. Om obeisance again and again to the extremely 
secret form, to the protector, to the deathless one, to the Lord 
of all beings, to the form of effulgence, to the Supreme Lord 
(one who pervades) the sky by thoughts Om. 

4-8. Om the forms of Rudras and the bhuvanas (worlds) are 
described now. The first one is Vamadeva (Lord of irascible 
nature), next Sarvabhavodbhava (the source of all beings), 
Vajradcha (possessing a strong body), PrabhU (lord), Dh&t& 
(the supporter), Krama (order), Vikrama (conquest), Su- 
prabha (resplendent), Vaju (youth), Praianta (tranquil), 
Paramak$ara (supreme knowledge), Siva (auspicious), Saiiva 
(endowed with auspicious ness), Babhru (tawny-coloured), 
Ak^aya (imperishable), Sambhu (one who begets peace), 
Adrrt&rupa (having an invisible form), Adttpm&ma (having 
an unseen name), Rupavardhana (promoter of beatuty). 



86.9-17 


25$ 


Manonmana (one who agitates the mind), Mahavlrya (the 
mighty one), Citranga (one who is variegated) (and) Kaly&na 
(the blessed one). Thus (the Rudras) are known by the twenty- 
five names (together with) Mantra (the controller of mind), 
Ghora (the dreadful one) and Amara (the immortal one). 
Pfi 9 & and hastijihva are the two occult nerves in that (above- 
said) beatific phase. Vy&na, n&ga and prabhafijana (are the 
vital winds). 

9. The only object is that of the form. The feet and the- 
eyes are the organs. Sound, touch and sight are known as the- 
three qualities. 

10. Here the state is that of deep sleep. Lord Rudra is the 
cause. All the worlds should be looked upon as located in this 
(beatific principle of) knowledge. 

11. Gentle beating, cutting and entry into it should also be 
done. Having pulled it from the region of the heart by means of' 
knowledge, it should be seized. 

12. It should be super-imposed on one’s own soul. The 
beatific principle should be firmly held and then placed in the 
fire-pit, after having invoked (lord) Rudra, the cause, and sub- 
mitted (to him) the (new born) child. 

13. Having invoked the divine parents, (the preceptor) 
should gently strike the (new-born) child in the heart (of the 
disciple). After having entered it with the mantra spoken earlier,, 
one should unite it with his own soul. 

14. After having drawn it out and taking it, it should be 
united with his own soul by the method described already. It 
should be united in the womb from the left side. After (the 
repetition of) the tbOdafa (twelve) letters of mantra it should be 
taken out. 

15. The rites relating to the birth and post-natal purification 
of the body, enjoyment, deep absorption, purification of the 
stream and of the principles should be performed. 

16. One hundred oblations should be made as expiation 
as laid down for the removal of all bondages due to impurities. 

17. The severance of bondage (should be done) with (the 
mantra of) the weapon. The vanishing force of impurities. 



‘254 Agni Purdya 

should be cut and pounded. Then the thread should be 
placed in a circular form 1 . # 

18. Its burning and the absence of those letters as well as 
-expiation should then be done. The invocation of (god) Rudra, 
(and his) worship and the submission of sensibles of sight 
and smell (should be done). 

19. Om, hrim O Rudra 1 take this fee of the sensibles of 
sight and smell. Oblations. After having conveyed the mandate 
of lord Sambhu (Siva) and bidding farewell to (lord) 
Rudra, the cause, the pure spirit should be located (first) in 
himself and then located in the thread of bondage. 

20. The subtle speck (of the soul) should be placed on his 
head and the divine) parents should be bid farewell. Then the 
final oblation should be made, as laid down, which completes 
all formalities. 

21. The act of gently beating and other acts should be 
done in the beatific knowledge as described earlier. Here the 
speciality is the location of (the soul as a) speck. Thus the 
beatific knowledge is purified. 


CHAPTER EIGHTYSEVEN 
Mod '» of purification of the principle of peace 

The Lord said : 

1-2. The beatific knowledge should be united now with 
the (principle of) peace as laid down. The two principles lie 
in the (principle of) peace. Bhavelvara and SadaSiva are spoken 
as the two letters ha and kfa. The Rudras are equal in number 
to the worlds. They are as follows : 

3. Prabhava (valiant), Saxnaya (time), K$udra (little), 
Vimala (free from impurity), Siva (auspicious), Ghana (heavy), 
Nirafijanak&ra (unstained form), Svaliva (auspicious to him- 
self), Dfptlk&rapa (cause of brilliance), Tridaieivara (lord of 

1. Hit act and the succeeding ones are same at those desc ri bed in the 
previous chapter. 



87.4-11 


255 


the thirty (gods), TridaSa (representing the thirty), Kalasam- 
Jfiaka (known as the time), Suk$ma (minute), Ambuje&rara 
(lord of the lotus). These are the Rudras firmly established in 
the principle of peace. 

4. (Obeisance) to the one who pervades the ether, to the 
form which manifests as the ether, to the all-pervasive, to the 
auspicious one, to the endless, to one who has no master, to one 
who is not having any hold, to the firm one, to the eternal, to the 
•one firmly established in the seat of yoga y to the eternal yogin, 
and one who partakes of such meditation (of votaries) are 
the twelve terms (used in their invocation). 

5. The preceptor should meditate with the two protective 
mantras (known as) bindu and upak&raka , the two occult nerves 
alambusa and syasa and the two vital winds kfkara and kUrmaka 
in the subtle phase. 

6. The organs of skin and hand are considered as the two 
senses of perception for this beatific principle. The attributes 
of touch and sound are the only two attributes, lord (Siva) is 
the only cause of these. 

7. Having contemplated upon the different worlds which are 
located in the beatific principle of peace as the fourth state (of 
consciousness) (in which the soul gets united with the 
Supreme being), (the preceptor) should do the (acts of) gentle 
beating, division, entry and union. 

8. Having drawn the (beatific principle of) peace from the 
string of the face, it should be held (by the preceptor). Having 
merged it in one’s own self, the beatific principle should be held 
and projected in the receptacle. 

9. “O Lord ! I am initiating this disciple desirous of 
release (from bondage) subject to your control. You have to 
be beneficial to him.” The appeal should thus be made. 

10. After having invoked the divine parents and doing 
the gentle beating of the disciple etc. and collecting the soul- 
force, it should be united with his preceptor’s own soul. 

11. Having invoked the divine parents as before by 
(showing) mudrd known as udbhava (formation with fingers 
denoting generation), it should be located in the womb of the 
goddess by repeating the principal mantra of the god preceded 
by the mantra of the heart. 



256 


Agni Purdrut 


12. A corporeal frame for the beatitude should be done 
with the (repetition of the mantra of the) heart five times. (The 
mantra of) the head (should be repeated) for bringing it into 
being. Its authority (is accomplished) by (the mantra of) the 
tuft and the enjoyment by (the mantra of) the armour. 

13. Its repose (is accomplished) by (the repetition of) 
the mantra of weapons. The purification of the currents (is 
achieved) by (that of lord) Siva. In (the case of) purifica- 
tion of the principle, (the rites of) garbh&dh&na etc. (should be 
done) in the same manner as before. 

14. The thread is untied with that of the armour. Having 
completed the purification thus, one should repeat the mantra? 
hundred times. In order to compensate the mitigation of the 
power of mantras five oblations should be made with (the mantra 
of) the weapon. 

15. After having untied the thread, it should be severed 
with a knife by the repetition (of the mantra) of the weapon seven 
times just as the bondage is cut off with the principal mantra . 

16. (The mantra is) : “Om, haum, to the thread of the beati- 
fic principle of peace hak 9 hum , phaf. After having untied and 
made into a circle, the chord should be placed as before in the 
sacrificial ladle filled with clarified butter with (the repetition 
of the mantra of) the weapon. Oblation should be done with 
(the mantra of) the weapon and of the beatific principle. 

17. Five oblations should be made with (the mantra of) 
the weapon for the sake of ending the fresh shoots of bondage. 
To remedy the obstruction in expiation, eight oblations should 
then (be made). 0m 9 hah. to the weapon hUm phaf (is the mantra 
for the same). 

18. Having invoked god with (the mantra of) the heart, 
and offered worship and appeasement, the appropriate fee 
should be offered to him in the prescribed way : “Om, futm , 
O lord ! accept this fee of intellect and ego, oblations.” 

19. O lord ! You should not remain as a bondage for 
this being whose all bonds have been burnt away. Thus the man- 
date of (lord) Siva should be made to be heard. 

20. The god should be bid adieu and the crescent-like soul 
should be united with the lord Rudra. Then it must be united 
with one’s own (preceptor’s) soul in the prescribed way. 



87.21-88.1-5 


257 


21 . The same should be united with the thread by showing 
pure udbhavamudrd (formation with fingers denoting gene- 
ration). The drop of nectar should be put on the head of the 
disciple with (the repetition of) the principal {mantra). 

22. Having taken leave of the (divine) parents after wor- 
shipping them with flowers etc., (the preceptor) should offer 
the final oblation to the fire as a concluding rite. 

23. Even here the acts of gentle beating etc. should be done 
as before. The distinctive feature is (the use of) its principal 
mantra. Thus the purification (of the beatific principle) of peace 
is done without any impediment. 


CHAPTER EIGHTYEIGHT 

Mode of initiation which secures nirvdna {liberation from existence) 
The Lord said : 

1. (The preceptor) should blend the beatific principle 
surpassing peace with the pure beatific principle of peace and 
write the principles of letters with that as before. Om, hrlm, 
kfaum , haum, hdm (are the syllables used for) the union. 

2-5. (Goddess) Sakti and (God) Siva which are the two 
principles (of the universe), the eight perfections of the universe 
(known as) dipaka (illuminating), rocika (brightening), mocaka 
(delivering from bonds), Qrdhvagdmi (ascending up), vyomardpa 
(of the form of ether), andtha (not having any master), andtrita 
(not being dependent) and the eighth the syllable of om , the 
mantra of (lord) l£ana, the sixteen letters beginning with the 
letter ‘ a * and ending with visarga (aspirated sound), the 
principal mantra 9 the two (occult nerves) kuhU and tahkhint 
which are the cause for the body and the two winds devadatta 
and dhanarljaya (should be contemplated as pervading the 
above). The senses of touch and hearing are considered as the 
materials of sense perception. The principle of sound is the 
predominating attribute. Its state is the fifth state exceeding 
that of the fourth state (the state in which the soul becomes 
one with the supreme soul). 



258 


Agm Purdna 


6. Lord Sada&va should be known as the sole cause. 
Having meditated upon the collective beatific principles 
known as beyond (the beatific principle) of peace, (the rites 
of) stroking gently etc. should be performed. 

7. Having gently beaten the beatific principle of the thread 
and dividing it (mentally) with (the recitation of the principal 
mantra) ending with phaf , (the preceptor should penetrate inside 
the noose (with the recitation of the above mantra) ending with 
(the pronunciation of) salutations and loosen (the beatific 
principle with the recitation of the above mantra) ending with 
phaf . 

8. Then (the beatific principle of) the thread should be 
consecrated with (the recitation of) the mantras of the tuft (and) 
heart ending with “oblations” and should be drawn out of the 
head of the thread with the inhalation of breath and showing 
the sfnimudrd (posture with fingers denoting a goad). 

9. Having gathered it with the retention of breath, it should 
be projected into the fire-receptacle with the exhalation of breath 
(and showing the mudrd known as) udbhava (posture with fingers 
denoting generation), after having consecrated with (the mantra 
of) the heart ending with “obeisance”. 

10. All the worship etc. of this should be accomplished as 
(it would be done) for the beatitude of non-action after having 
invoked lord Sada£iva and worshipping him and making 
offerings. 

11. (The lord should be addressed by the preceptor as 
follows) : 

“I initiate this person (disciple) desirous of emancipation 
in this well-known mode of life. You should be beneficial (to 
him)”. I am submitting to you with devotion. 

12. After having invoked the (divine) parents and having 
made offerings and achieving their presence, the disciple 
should gently be struck on the chest with the syllable consecrat- 
ed by (the mantra of) the heart. 

13. Om, hdm, hQm, ham, phaf . Having entered (the heart) 
with (the repetition of) this (mantra), the psychic energy should 
be divided by showing the alikufa mudrd (formation with 
the fingers denoting a goad) and with the weapon along with 
the noose. 



88.14*24 


289 


14. Om, h&m, hafy, hrum, phaf . Having drawn it (with this 
mantra) duly consecrated and ending with “oblations”, it should 
be united with his own soul by concluding with “obeisance”, 
after having seized it. 

15. Om, hdm, ham, him , obeisance to the soul. After having 
meditated on the union of the (divine) parents as before by 
(showing) the udbhava mudrd (posture with the fingers denoting 
generation), (the preceptor) should place (the psychic princi- 
ple) in the womb of the goddess with the same (mantra) and by 
the left. 

16. The (rites of) garbh&dh&na etc. should be done as laid 
down earlier. One should repeat (the mantra of) release and the 
bondage is cut off with that of the principal (mantra). 

17. As before five times five oblations should be done with 
(the mantra of) weapons for the sake of cutting the bonds 
and to destroy the evil forces in the disciple. 

18. With the repetition of the mantra of weapons seven 
times the principal mantra of beatitude the bonds should be cut, 
with the scissor. 

19. Om, hdm, to the noose of beatitude beyond that of peace 
hah, hftm, phaf . (Then the preceptor) should bid farewell to the 
noose as described earlier, make it into a circle, place it in the 
ladle filled with clarified butter and cast it into fire with the 
(mantra of) weapons and of beatitude. 

20. Five oblations should be made with (the mantra of) 
the weapon for the removal of the goad of bonds. Eight oblations 
should be made for compensating atonements. 

21. Having invoked lord Sada&iva with (the mantra of) 
the weapon and done appeasement, one should submit suzerainty 
as laid down before. 

22. “Om, hdm, SadaSiva, accept fees (in the form of) 
the principle of mind. Oblations. O (lord) Sad&iiva I You 
should never remain as a bond for this being whose all shackles 
have been destroyed. You hear the mandate of lord Siva.” 

23-24. The final oblation should be made with the princi- 
pal (mantra). (Lord) S&daiiva should be bid adieu. Then the 
preceptor should unite in his soul, the pure soul in the body of 
the pupil just risen like the autumnal moon by showing the 
sarhhdramudrd (posture made with the fingers denoting gathering) , 



260 


Agni Purity* 


after having collected the same by (showing) the udbhava- 
mudrd (posture made with fingers denoting generation). 

25. Then (the preceptor) should place drops of water 
of arghya (offered for washing) on the head of the disciple as 
completion. Having requested the divine parents with great 
devotion to forgive they should be bid adieu. 

26. “O Parents ! You have been put to trouble for the 
sake of initiating this disciple. Having discarded that gracefully 
depart with pleasure to your own place.” 

27. (The preceptor) should then cut off the tuft (of the 
disciple) of the form of knowledge to a length of four finger- 
breadths with the scissors, the weapon of lord Siva, (duly) 
consecrated with the mantra of the tuft. 

28. “Om, klim; to the tuft, h0m 9 phat , om , hafr 9 to the weapon, 
ham , phat” Then those (cuttings) should be set in a ladle full 
of clarified butter in which a ball of cow-dung is kept in the mid- 
dle and cast into fire with (the recitation of) the mantra of weapon 
ending with phaf . 

29. After having washed the two kinds of ladles and after 
bathing the disciple, the self (preceptor) should sip waters and 
gently beat the soul thus blended with the mantra of the weapon. 

30. It should be disjoined, drawn and worshipped as before 
to the end of twelve (kinds of worship) and placed in the petals 
of the lotus of his own heart. 

3 1 . The ladle is filled with clarified butter. The ladle should 
be held (in such a way that the cup of the ladle) faces down- 
wards according to the rules of daily rites of worship and by show- 
ing the fahkhamudrd (posture made with fingers denoting a conch) . 

32. He should have his head and neck expanded in unison 
with the pronunciation of the nasal sound (om), having his 
sight fixed and (the heart) filled with contemplation of the 
Supreme Being. 

33. Having gathered the six paths 1 in the form of nerves 
from the pitcher, the sacrificial pit, the pupil and from one’s 
own soul, (the preceptor) should place them at the head of the 
sacrificial ladle. 


L* six P at {“ a r c *M*tra,pada t oorpo, bhuvana, tattoa and hold of which 
the first three are related to the sound and the rest to die objects according to 
8X1(1 ** reverse way according to srflikrma?Stc 



88.34-45 


261 


34-35. Having contemplated the soul-energy as a point 
it should be united with the (following) seven (principles) in 
turn. The first one is the union of the soul. Then follows the 
next one consisting of repetition of the mantras of the heart 
etc. after having done the inhalation and the retention of the 
-breath with the mouth open a little. 

36. The form of the sound (om) y which has permeated 
the supmnd (an artery of human body), is the third one. 
There would be calm absorption of the mind in the seventh 
cause by one’s renunciation. 

37-38. The movements above the energy and the sound 
known as the discordant (are the fifth one). (The sound emitt- 
ed) by the universal life, which cannot be measured by energy 
and which is the discordant of time is the sixth one. The seventh 
one is that beyond the (region of) energy. This is the proper 
place for union and is known as the discordant principle. 

39. After having inhaled the breath and retaining it while 
keeping the mouth little open, (the preceptor) should utter the 
principal (i mantra ) and (accomplish) the repose of the soul of 
the disciple. 

40. The letter ha (should be deemed as resting) in the 
lightning stream which is the life force of six paths. The 
letter u remains pervading above the navel for a length of twelve 
ahgulas (an ahgula is equal to four finger breadths). 

41. Then above that the letter ma (should be made to 
occupy) four finger breadths over the heart. The syllable am , 
expressive of lord Vi$nu, occupies the region of the heart for 
eight ahgulas still above. 

42. The letter ma, expressive of (lord) Rudra, occupies 
the region of the palate for four ahgulas . Similarly, the nasal 
phonetic sign, expressive of lord Iivara should occupy the 
middle of the forehead. 

43. The syllable am, (the essence of) Lc^rd Sadaiiva, should 
rest in the aperture on the head. The female energy should be 
located in the aperture on the head. These should always be 
rejected one by one. 

44-45. After having experienced the divine minute contact 
therein, the preceptor should contemplate the soul of the disciple 
in that supreme twelfth principle, characterising extreme happi- 



262 


Agni Pur&pa 


ness, devoid of feelings, beyond the reach of mind, auspi- 
cious and giving rise to eternal qualities. * 

46. After having offered an oblation of clarified butter into 
the fire for lord Siva with the mantra of lord Siva ending with 
vausat for the sake of stability of the union. 

47-52. Having offered final oblation as laid down, 
(the preceptor) should do for the attainment of qualities. “Om, 
h&m, oblations to the soul ! Be omniscient ! Om, hdm , oblations 
to the soul ! Be satisfied ! Om, hrUm, oblations to the soul ! 
Be cognizant of originless existence ! Om, haum , oblations to 
the soul ! Be self-dependent ! Om, haum , soul ! Oblations ! 
Be undiminished in energy ! Om, hah , oblations to the soul t 
Be of endless energy !” The self, possessing six qualities, should 
thus be taken out of Supreme Being and with contemplation 
united in the body of the disciple as laid down. Drops of ambro- 
sia from the water-offering should be placed on the head of the 
disciple to alleviate sufferings due to the projection of powerful 
soul force (into the disciple). Having made obeisance to the 
sacrificial pitcher relating to lord Siva, situated to the right of 
(lord) Siva, and placing the disciple to the right of his self 
with a pleasing face, (the preceptor) should submit to the lord 
(as follows) : “This (disciple) has been favoured by you only ! 
Being present in this form of mine, increase his devotion to the 
lord, fire-god, and preceptor.” Having paid obeisance to the 
lord, the preceptor should himself bless the disciple affectiona- 
tely by saying, “May you have bliss”. The sacrifice should 
be concluded after having offered eight flowers to the lord with 
extreme devotion and bathing the disciple with (the waters of) 
the pitcher of lord Siva. 


CHAPTER EIGHTYNINE 
Initiation of principles 

The Lord said : 

1. Then the initiation in the principles is itap&rted as it is 
concise. Binding with the thread should be done suitably with, 
one’s soul. e 



89.2-90.1-6 


268 


2. The fundamental principles should be contemplated as 
pervading time, fire etc. concluding with pure bliss. They 
should be like the bead of rosaries, the principles distributed 
evenly on the whole thread. 

3. After having invoked the principle of bliss etc., the rites 
of garbh&dh&na etc. (should be done) as before. But the offer 
of all fees should be done with the principal {mantras). 

4. Then the final oblation endowed with the sound- 
essence of all principles should be offered by which alone 
the disciple gets emancipation. 

5. After having offered another such final oblation to lord 
Siva for the sake of union and for securing firmness, (the disciple) 
should be bathed with the waters of the pitcher (consecrated) 
for Siva. 


CHAPTER NINETY 
Anointing the disciple after ivorshipping Siva 

The Lord said : 

1. Having worshipped lord Siva, the (rite of) bathing 
should be done for the welfare of the disciple. Nine pitchers 
should duly be placed in the directions of north-east etc. 

2. The preceptor should invoke the eight oceans of 
alkali, milk, curd, ghee, molasses, wine, sweet water and sour 
water in those pitchers. 

3-4. The following eight Rudras should be duly located in 
them : — (1) Sikhantfin, (2) Srlkanfha, (3) Trimurta, 
(4) Ekarudrakja, (5) Ekanetra, (6) Sivottaina, (7) Sukjma, 
and (8) Ananta. 

5. Lord Siva, the ocean and the mantra of lord Siva should 
be located in (the pitcher at) the middle. Sacrificial sheds (are 
erected) for the deities of the quarters within the pavilion. 

6. A platform measuring eight inches in height and two 
cubits in length should be erected wherein an endless seat should 
be made as also a seat of hel leases. 



264 


Agni Purdna 


7-14. Having made the disciple face eastwards, and doing 
the sakalikaraQa \ (the preceptor) should worship (the pupil). 
His body should then be rubbed with sour gruel, earth, ashes, 
dUrvd (a kind of grass), cowdung balls, white mustard and curd 
mixed with water. Then the pupil should duly be bathed with 
the waters of the pitchers starting 'with that of alkali with 
the repetition of (the mantras of) the heart, vidyeia and iambara 
with pleasure and devotion. Having clad him in white dress 
nnd placed him to the right of lord Siva, the disciple should 
again be worshipped as before in the cushion mentioned already. 
(The preceptor should address him as follows) : “From this day 
onwards you shall test well the recipient of the dress of an ancho- 
rite such as the turban, cloth on the body while in meditation, 
crown, knife, pot, rosary, book etc., initiation, exposition and 
installation before you favour him. You hear the command.” 
After having saluted the disciple and prostrating (in front of 
lord) Mahejvara, the following submission should be made for 
the removal of all impediments. “I have been commanded by 
you in the form of a preceptor for doing abhifeka (anointing) 
ceremony. This (disciple) who is well-versed in the scriptural 
lore has been anointed by me O (Lord) Siva.” Five times 
five oblations should be made for the propitiation of the chain 
of mantras . 

15-16. Then the final oblation should be made. The dis- 
ciple should then be made to sit on the right side of one’s self 
(preceptor). Then (the preceptor) should mark the fingers of 
the right hand of the disciple beginning with the thumb with the 
burnt edge of darbha with the iambara {mantra) for the sake of 
establishing contact. After having placed flowers on the hand, 
he should be made to bow down. 

17-18. The merits of performance of this rite should be 
assigned to (lord) Siva, the fire, the pitcher and his own self. 
(The preceptor should address him as follows) : The disciples 
who have been well examined in the scriptures should be blessed 
by you. Like a monarch the desired objects are gained by 
men by this anointing (with the mantra of) the * eapons — Om t 
fr&m, Mm , paium, hQm , pha{. 

1. The act of assigning the different parts of the body to die 
different deities with the different mantras . * 



■91.1-10 


265 


CHAPTER NINETYONE 
Different kinds of mantras for the worship of God : 

The Lord said : 

1. One should worship lord Siva, (lord) Vi$nu and other 
gods such as Bhaskara (Sun) after being anointed, accompanied 
by the sounding of the conch, bheri (a kind of kettle-drum) and 
bathe (the images) with five things got from a cow. 

2-3. Whoever (worships) gods (in this manner) goes 
to heaven and elevates his departed manes. Whatever sin has 
acciued to him in the course of millions of years gets reduced 
to ashes in the fire by anointing gods with ghee. Whoever bathes 
gods with an adhaka (two maands) of ghee etc. becomes a 
celestial. 

4-6. After having applied sandal paste, (the lord) should 
be worshipped with perfumes etc. The gods praised with 
hymns with little effort always confer ability to know past and 
future events, proficiency in mantra , enjoyment and emancipa- 
tion. 

7. Having taken principal letters of the mantras , if they 
are divisible by two, (one should know) (whether they are) 
auspicious or inauspicious. (If divisible) by three (they denote) 
jlva, rnUla and dhatu, (and if divisible) by four (they denote 
the four castes) brahmin etc. (Divisible) by five denote 
the five principles (elements) (earth etc.). So also for mutter- 
ing (the mantras) etc. (one should find whether they are auspi- 
cious or inauspicious) . If the mantra consisting of groups of three 
letters happens to have the letters pa, ma and ka and letter ma 
comes in the middle it is inauspicious. Lord Indra and a king 
occurring in the middle are auspicious. 

8-9. One should write the mantras of Surya, Ganapati, Siva, 
Durga (Saivite goddess), Sri (consort of Visnu) and Vi?nu in a 
lr tus. One should write on that the mantras commencing with a 
three-letter unit to those having four letters in the form of the 
gomO.tr a (a particular form of writing letters) with a conse- 
crated stylus. 

10. In the same way (one should know) the auspiciousness 
etc. of (mantras) of sixtyfour letters from the fall on or contact 
of the dice with the odd place. 



266 


Agni Purdna 


11. Commencing with one unit of three-lettered {mantras) 
to eight units of three-lettered {mantras) , denoting the dhvaja 
(flagstaff) etc. even ones are inauspicious and odd ones are 
auspicious. 

12. The mantra known as tripurd is composed of the letter 
€ ka 9 amplified by a, i etc., and preceded by the sixteen letters 
along with their vowel sounds. 

13. The mcnti as having for its principal part (the syllable) 
hrim , preceded by pranava {om) and concluding with “obeisance” 
used in worship are twenty-thousand one hundred and sixty. 

14. The mantras *am, hrim * are for (goddess) Sarasvati 

(goddess of learning), Can^ aur? ^nd Durga (different 

forms of consort of Siva). So t m 9 i are the mantras for 
Sri (goddess Laksm i). 

15. Then kfaum , kraum are the mantras for Sun, and am, haum 
for god Siva. Am , gam are the mantras for lord GaneSa and dm 
for lord Hari (Visnu). 

16-17. The preceptor should after anointing repeat 
one hundred and fifty times the letters *ka' etc. as well as the 
sixteen vowels. With three *ka' at the beginning along w'ith the 
vowels and ending with 6 ka 9 all the mantras are formed. After 
contemplation (the preceptor) should initiate the disciples. 


CHAPTER NINETYTWO 
Mode of installation of the image of lord Siva 
The Lord said : 

1. O Guha (a name of the son of lord Siva and Parvati) ! 
I shall briefly describe the (mode of) installation of the lihga 
(representing) Siva and the pedestal (representing) the female 
energy. Their union (is accomplished) by (the repetition of) 
the mantras of Siva. 

2. There are five different wavs of installation. I shall 

* 

describe to you their characteristics. Where there is union of 
the brahmaSild , that installation is worth that name. 



92.3-13 


267 


3. The sthdpana (fixing) is the proper manner in which (the 
lifiga) is placed in the pedestal. The installation in which (the 
linga) is placed in pedestal with a cleave it is called stkitasthdpana 
(installation on a pedestal already existing). 

4-5. It is (known as) utthdpana (re-installation) in which 
the removal (of the old linga ) precedes. It is known as dsthdpana 
in which the new linga is placed and consecration is done by wise 
men. (The installation of the images) of (lord) Visnu etc. are of 
two kinds. In all these cases supreme lord Siva should be made 
the soul-energy. 

6. There are five divisions in the case of the temples also 
on the basis of the above differences. The ground should be 
examined according to the requirements for the respective 
temple. 

7. The earth is white (coloured) having the smell of clari- 
fied butter, blood -coloured, possessing the smell of blood, the 
yellow one having sweet smell and black one having the smell 
of wine, w'hich are respectively known as the brahmin etc. 

8. Among these the earlier ones are commendable than the 
later ones. If the ground of this type is dug upto a cubit and 
filled again it would be in excess of the pit. 

9. The kind of earth which is moist with water is also to be 
known as excellent. The preceptor should purify well (the 
ground) which is impure because (of the presence) of bones, 
charcoal etc. 

10. The ground where a city, village, fort, house or temple 
is to be constructed (should be purified) repeatedly by digging 
or by erecting cattle sheds or by ploughing. 

11. The worship of the (sacrificial) shed (should be done) 
as also the concluding (rite) for the satisfaction through the 
mantras . Having concluded the rites, (the preceptor) should 
offer one thousand oblations with the aghordstra {mantra) in the 
prescribed manner. 

12. After having levelled the ground and plastering the 
ground, the preceptor should purify it. Encircling lines should 
be drawn with gold, curd and unbroken rice. 

13. (Lord) Siva should be worshipped in the filled up 
pitcher at the north-east corner from the centre. After having 
worshipped the presiding spirit, those waters should be sprinkled 
on the spades etc. 



268 


Agni Pur&pa 


14. Having offered oblations to the groups ol demons in the 
prescribed manner, they should be scattered ii^ (different) 
directions. Having sprinkled (water) over the ground, the spades 
(and other implements) should be washed and worshipped. 

15-16. Having placed a pitcher (filled with water) and 
covered by a pair of clothes on the shoulder of a brahmin, being 
accompanied by the sounding of musical instruments, it should 
be placed at the south-east corner (of the shed ) and worshipped 
at the auspicious moment. The ground should be excavated with 
the spade duly consecrated and sprinkled with honey. 

17. The earth dug out should be deposited on the south- 
west corner and water from the pitcher should be put into the 
pit. The eastern boundary of the edifice should be extended as 
far as desired. 

18. Then having stood there for a while, the preceptor 
should make the excavations carried around and sprinkle water 
over the same until the north-eastern corner of the ground is 
reached. 

19-20. This is spoken as the arghyaddna (offering of waters) 
(accomplished) by taking round the pitcher. The ground should 
thus be taken possession of. After that, (the preceptor) should 
cause the ground to be excavated, if it is a virgin one, until the 
stone or water (is reached), in order to ward off evils due to the 
extraneous matter. The extraneous matter should be dug out 
in the prescribed manner. 

21. If (the extraneous matter) relates to a human being, 
the (presence of) extraneous matter could be known by writing 
letters, a y ka> ca y /«, ta, pa 9 ya, fa and ha for query and casting 
the die. If it falls on the flagstaff etc. at the south-east corner, 
it indicates the presence of extraneous matter. 

22. The existence of that (matter) could be validly known 
from the changes noticed in the body of the questioner or from 
the wailing of animals in (different) directions or from their 
entry (and movement) into the ground. 

23. In the alternative, the presence of extraneous matter 
could be known by writng the letters of the alphabet on a plank 
or on the ground, dividing them into eight groups and from the 
presence of the group (of letters) in the directions east to north- 
east in order. 



92.24-35 


269 


24-25. One should declare the presence of (a piece of) 
iron in the eastern part if the letter of the V group is met. 
Similarly, the presence of charcoal in the south-eastern part 
from 'ka 9 group, of ash in the southern part from *ca 9 group, of 
bones in the south-western part from 'fa 9 group, of bricks in the 
western part from 7a 5 group, of skull (in the north-western part) 
from ‘ pa 9 group, of a corpse from 'ya 9 group and of (a piece of) 
iron from 7 a 9 group (could be declared). 

26-28. So also, (the presence of) silver, from 'ha 9 group and 
(the presence of) something causing harm (could be known) 
from ‘ a 9 group. (After removal of these extraneous matters) and 
after taking eight inches of earth and sprinkling water with (the 
mantra of) the soul, three-quarters of the pit should be filled with 
water and earth broken by a club. Having made the ground 
levelled, the preceptor should go to the sacrificial shed with the 
general argha offering in the hand. After having worshipped the 
two guardian deities of the entrance, the preceptor should enter 
the temple through the western door. 

29-30. (Then the preceptor) should purify his self as well 
as the sacrificial shed and sacrificial pit. The sacrificial pitcher 
along with the small sacrificial pitcher (should be placed) there. 
The worship of (lord) Siva and the guardian deities of the world 
and the generation of the fire and its worship and other acts 
should all be done as before. (The preceptor) should go to the 
bathing shed of the stones along with the yajamdna (at whose 
instance the sacrifice is performed). 

31-32. . The stone slabs of a temple for the liiiga are known 
as the pdda or dharma etc. They are commended if they are square 
shaped, eight inches in height and one cubit in breadth. Those 
made of bricks should be half (the size) of those made of stones. 
If the temple (is built of) stones the images (should be made of) 
stones and if (it is) of bricks the images (should be of) bricks. 

33. (These statues) (should be) marked with nine faces 
and lotus flowers known as nandd, bhadrd y jayd y riktd , and the fifth 
( ptirud). 

34. Padma , mahdpadma , faHkha, makara and samudra the five 
treasures; the presiding deities of these should be located in 
pitchers. 

35. The names of stones are nandd 9 bhadrd, jayd 9 p&rnd, aJUd , 
apardjitd , vijayd, mafigald and dhara$i , the ninth. 



*270 


Agni Purdna 


36-37. Subhadra , vibhadra , sunanda , pufpanandaka , jaya, vijaya, 
Kumbha , and w/tora are the nine pitchers <ff treasures. 

Having offered the cushion to them, (the preceptor) should 
(gently) beat and write on them with the mantra of the weapon. 

38-39. All the stone slabs should be covered without excep- 
tion with the mantra of armour. They should be bathed with 
perfumed waters mixed with earth, cow-dung and cow’s urine 
with the recitation of mantra of weapon ending with hum phap . 
Then they should be bathed with the five things got from a cow 
and also the five sweet things (milk, sugar, ghee, curd and honey) 
as laid down. 

40. Then they should be immersed in perfumed water with 
the repetition of mantra containing their own names. Then (they 
should be bathed) with water containing fruits, gems, gold and 
cow’s horn. 

41-48. After having applied sandal paste, the slabs should 
be wrapped up with clothes. After having provided a seat made 
of gold and led them to the sacrificial shed circumambulating, 
they should be laid on a bed or on a mattress of kuSa with (the 
recitation of the mantra of) the heart. After having worshipped, 
the principles commencing with the intellect and ending with the 
earth should be located therein. The three principles permeating 
the three divisions should be located in order. (The first group 
consists of) principles beginning with intellect and concluding 
with mind, (the second group consists of principles beginning 
with) thought and concluding with the subtle principles and 
(the third group) begins with the subtle principles and conclu- 
des with the earth. These principles should be taken as loca- 
tion of pure bliss, knowledge and soul. The principles should 
be worshipped with their respective mantras and their lords with 
the mantra of the heart in their respective places marked with 
garlands of flowers in order (as follows) : “Om, hdm , obeisance to 
the principle of absolute bliss ! Qm, hdm obeisance to (lord) 
Rudra, the lord of the principle of absolute bliss ! Om, hdrji obei- 
sance to the principle of knowledge ! Om, hdm obeisance to 
(lord) Vi§nu, lord of the principle of knowledge ! Om, hdm 
obeisance to the principle of soul ! Om, hdm obeisance to (lord) 
Brahm&, lord of the principle of soul 1” Each one of the princi- 
ples — earth, fire, the sacrificer, sun, water, wind*, moon and ether 



92.49-56 


271 


of the eight forms (of the lord) should be located in each one of 
the slabs along with their presiding deities Sarva, PaSupati, 
Ugra, Rudra, Bhava, MaheSvara, Mahadeva and Bhima in 
order. “Om obeisance to the image of the earth ! Om obeisance 
to the presiding deity of the earth !” are the mantras for duly 
locating the guardian deities. The pitchers should be worshipp- 
ed with their own mantras or with these mantras . The principal 
mantra for (lord) Indra etc. are as narrated below : lum, rQm> 
Sum, sum , v urn, yum, mum , hum, ksum. 

49. (The procedure for the installation) in the case of nine 
images has been told. (The procedure for installation) in the 
case of five images is being told now. Each one of the five 
principles of creation such as the earth etc. of the images should 
be located (in the slabs). 

50. As before the five presiding deities of these, Brahma, 
Visnu, Rudra, I$vara and SadaSiva should also be worshipped 
in them. 

51-54. “Om obeisance to the image (of the principle) of 
earth ! Om obeisance to Brahma the presiding deity (of the/prin- 
ciple) of earth” ! are the mantras. Having worshipped the five 
pitchers in order with their own names, the rite of location should 
be done as laid down, duly commencing with the central image 
with the pr&kara mantra as well as auspicious darhhas and sesamum. 
After having located the supporting cdrikd (energy) in the sacri- 
ficial pit and worshipping it, the principles, the presiding deities 
of the principles, the images and the presiding deities of the images 
should be pleased with ghee etc. Then the slabs should be sprin- 
kled with waters of propitiation after having offered hundred 
oblations upto the final one for the purification of the part (of 
the slab known as) Brahma, after having touched each one of 
the principles with kuias in order and worshipped. 

55. Having done the rites of invoking the presence and 
union, (the principles) should be located again (in the slabs) 
after purification, in the same way one should do these rites 
for the three groups (of principles). 

56. “Om, dm and im obeisance to the principles of soul and 
knowledge.” (Reciting this mantra , the preceptor) should duly 
touch the three parts (of the stone), Brahmd etc., with the 
base of the kuia etc. The union of the fundamental principles 



272 


Agni PurOna 


should be done by the applications of short and long {mantras). 

57-59. “ Om , ham, um obeisance to the principle* of know- 

ledge and absolute bliss.” Oblation should be made in the pre- 
sence of pitchers filled with clarified butter and honey and into 
which gems have been put and on which the five things got 
from a cow have been sprinkled, after having worshipped them 
with their respective mantras being presided over by the guardian 
deities of the world. The presiding deities of all the slabs should 
then be contemplated as of the form of knowledge, as having 
bathed, gold-coloured, and wearing the dress in the form of 
knowledge. Hundred oblations should be offered with the mantra 
of the weapon and the mantra of the head for the purification of 
the sacrificial site and for the removal of defects of deficiency etc* 


. CHAPTER NINETYTHREE 

Mode of worshipping the presiding deity of a ground 
The Lord said : 

1 . Strings should be laid in the sacrificial shed so as to en- 
close it. The ground should be divided into sixty-four squares 
of equal measurements. 

2. Two bamboo poles should be fixed at each one of the four 
corners. Strings (should be laid down) across the eight angular 
points. They should enclose two squares and six squares. The 
presiding deity of the ground should be worshipped therein. 

3. At the time of worship, one should meditate on the pre- 
siding deity of the ground in the fire-pit, as the form of a demon 
with curled locks and head held raised up from the ground and 
facing north. 

4. The knees, knee-joints and thighs (of the deity) should 
be taken as lying in the directions of north-west and south-east* 
the two soles of feet in the south, the head in the north and the 
two folded palms in the heart. 

5. The auspicious gods located in the body of this person 
are worshipped. The presiding deities of the eightwngular points* 



93.6-16 


273 


situated in the eight half chambers of the angular points (should 
also be worshipped.) . 

6. The sages Marici etc. should be located in the six squares 
commencing with the east, Brahma in the four squares at the 
centre. The rest of the gods are known to occupy one square 
each. 

7-8. The twelve joints such as the trident, svastika (a kind 
of figure), thunderbolt, mahdsvastika , sampufa, trikafu, manibandha 
and the pure square among all the joints of the presiding deity 
of the ground should be left in the walls etc. 

9. Oblations of unbroken rice along with clarified butter, 
for (lord) I$a, offering of water with lotus flowers for lord 
Parjanya (god of rain), and a bright saffron-coloured banner 
should be offered for Jayanta (son of Indra). 

10. Gems (should be offered) to Mahendra (lord of the 
celestials), smoke-coloured canopy for the Sun, wheat and ghee 
for (the god of) truth and clarified butter alone for (lord) 
Bhjsa. 

1 1 . Unclean meat (should be offered) to (the lord of the sky) 
and the flour of barley (first fried and then ground) for all those 
gods commencing with the east. A ladleful of honey, milk and 
clarified butter should be given to the fire-god. 

12. Fried paddy put in golden waters should be offered to 
(god of) untruth. Honey should be offered to the destroyer of 
the house and palaudana for Yamaraja (god of death). 

13. Perfumes (should be given) for the lord of the gandhar- 
vas (semi-divine beings), a bird’s tongue for Bhrnga (one who 
wards) and lotus leaves for the beast on the south. Thus the 
eight deities (should be offered offerings). 

14. Sesamum mixed water and milk (should be given) for 
the manes. Sticks from the trees for cleansing the teeth should 
be given to the lord of the entrance by showing the dhenumudrd 
(posture with fingers indicating a cow). 

15. Cakes should be offered to Sugriva, darbha to 
Puspadanta (a yakfa), red lotus flowers to Pracetas (lord of 
waters) (and) wines to demon. 

16. Ghee and rice mixed with jaggery (should be given) 
to £e$a (serpent-god), ghee mixed with baked flour or fried 
paddy to disease. Thus the mode of offering for gods in the 
western direction has been told. 



1274 


Agni Purdna 

17. A yellow banner (should be offered) to Maruta(wind 
god), ndgakesara (a kind of fragrant flower) to serpent-god and 
eatables and well-cooked gruel of green gram to Mukhya. 

18. Sweet gruel mixed with clarified butter should De given 
to Soma, root of lily flower to (goddess) Dawn, lopi to Aditi, 
and pUri to Diti. These are the gods placed in the northern direc- 
tion. 

19. Sweet meats (should be offered) to Brahma on the east 
and to (sage) Marici in the six squares. Red flowers (should be 
offered) to (god) Savitra situated below the angular square 
(assigned to) the fire-god. 

20. Waters along with the ku$ a should be presented to god- 
dess Savitrl below that square. Red sandal should be offered to 
(god) Vivasvan occupying six squares on the south. 

21. Turmeric mixed rice (should be offered) to lord 
Indra in the corner square below that of the demon. Mixed rice 
should be presented to Indra-jaya below that of Indra. 

22. Rice mixed with jaggery (should be offered) to (lord) 
Mitra occupying six squares on the west. Rice cooked with ghee 
should be offered to (lord) Rudra at the square below the angu- 
lar point in the north-west. 

23. Meat (should be offered) to the servant of Rudra below 
that. An offering of black-gram should be offered to the moun- 
tain (god) occupying the six squares on the north. 

24. One should duly offer curd and milk to dpas and its 
progeny below the angular point (dedicated to lord) Siva after 
worshipping in the proper way. 

25. Brahma located at the four squares in the middle of the 
place should be presented gruel along with clarified butter and 
the five things got from a cow. 

26. Outside the sacrificial ground the four demonesses 
CarakI etc. should be worshipped in the angular points com- 
mencing with the north-east and ending with the north-west in 
order. 

27. Meat with ghee should be offered to CarakI, curd with 
lotus flowers to (demoness) Vidarl and meat, bile and blood to 
(demoness) Putana. 

28. Bones, blood, biles and meat (should be offered) to 
demoness sin. Lord Skanda should be offered rice mixed with 
black gram on the east. 



93.29-38 


275 


29. Sweet cakes along with kfsara (rice and peas boiled 
together) (should be offered) to (lord)Aryaman in the southern 
direction), meat along with blood to Jambhaka in the western 
direction. 

30. Rice mixed with blood and flowers (should be present- 
ed) to Pilipifija (monster-maiden) on the north. Otherwise all 
the presiding deities of the ground should be worshipped with 
water along with unbroken rice and kuSa . 

31. In the case of a residential building or town, worship 
should be done in eighty-one squares. The lines (drawn across 
the cardinal points of the diagram) should be made to occupy 
(the breadth of) three squares and comprise (the breadth of) 
six such squares at the other angular points. 

32. The gods I$a and others should occupy one square each 
in that (diagram), the serpents and others two squares each, 
(sages) Marici and others six squares each, Brahma is known to 
occupy nine squares. 

33. The above diagram may comprise hundred squares in 
the case of a city, village or hamlet. Two bamboo poles (are 
known) as ‘invincible’ and irresistible always. 

34. The location (of the deities) in the hundred squares is 
commended if the rite is done as in the case of a divine edifice. 
The planets and gods such as (lord) Skanda are known to occupy 
six? squares in that (diagram). 

35. Demoness Carakf and others should be located in five 
squares. The lines and bamboo should occupy spaces as des- 
cribed earlier. In the case of a sacrificial ground relating to the 
founding of a country, it should comprise one hundred and 
thirty-four squares. 

36. (In that diagram) Brahma occupies sixty-four squares, 
as also (sages) Marici and others. The eight gods, dpas etc. 
should occupy fiftyfour squares. 

37. (Gods) I$ana and others should occupy nine squares. 
(The gods) Skanda and others should occupy eight squares. 
(Demonesses) Caraki and others, lines, bamboo should also be 
located as before. 

38. In a sacrificial ground comprising twenty-thousand 
squares, the location of the deities should be such that they 
occupy nine times more than what has been enjoined in the 
founding o country. 



276 


Agni Purdna 


39. The diagram which is divided into twentyfive squares 
is known as the vait&la . The other diagrams are known to have 
nine squares and sixteen sub-divisions. 

40. There may be a square figure inscribed in a sexagon or 
triangle. The location (of the gods) in the case of excavation 
around should be done as in the case of (the stone slab known as) 
brahmaSild. 

41 . An offering of sweet gruel to all gods should be made at 
the installation of the image of a deity or the burial of a dead 
body. 

42. In the absence of any specified measurement, the sacri- 
ficial ground should measure five cubits. The sacrificial ground 
proportional to the measure of the house or divine edifice is al- 
ways held as excellent. 


CHAPTER NINETYFOUR 
Mode of placing the stone slabs 


The lord said : 

1. (Demonesses) CarakI and others should be worshipped 
in the angular points of north-east etc. and outside as before. 
Three oblations should be done to each one of the gods in suc- 
cession. 

2. After having offered oblation to the presiding spirit, the 
placing of stone slab (is done) thereafter. (Goddess of) energy 
and the excellent pitcher known as ananta should be located in 
the middle line. 

3-5. The stone slab should be held in this pitcher with (the 
recitation of) the principal {mantra) coupled with the letter 6 na\ 
Having placed the eight pitchers known as Subhadra etc. in 
order in the directions east etc. with the recitation of the mantra 
of the guardian deities of the world and having located the god- 
desses in each one of the holes, the stone slabs such as Nanda 
etc. should be duly placed in them by repeating the iambara 
(; mantra ) sacred to the presiding deities of the different images, 



94.6-17 


277 


in such a way that they are in order from the middle of the gro- 
und. The eight (deities) such as the guardian deities of virtue 
etc. should be located in the different angular points in order. 

6. The four pitchers Nanda etc. out of Subhadra etc. are 
placed in the south-eastern corner. Ajita etc. out of the group 
commencing with Jaya should be located in the east etc. 

7. (Lord) Brahma should be invoked in them and (lord) 
Mahesvara (Siva) should be contemplated as pervading the 
internal space (of the shed) which would serve as a receptacle 
of these. 

8. After having offered oblation one should repeat (the 
mantra of) the weapon for warding off impediments. The pro- 
cedure in the case of five stone slabs is now described a little. 

9. (The preceptor) should locate the stone slab Purna in 
the pitcher (known as) Subhadra half-immersed. The stone slabs 
respectively known as Nanda etc. should be placed in the pitchers 
Padma etc. at the different angular points south-east etc. 

10-17. Four slabs should be contemplated as located in 
the middle with the exuberance of mother’s affection. “ Om 
Purna ! You are the great learning ! Possessor of all divine 
attributes ! O Daughter of Angiras ! You make all (this under- 
taking of mine) here as complete. Om ! Nanda ! you make 
men rejoice ! I establish you here. You remain in this temple as 
fully satisfied as long as the moon, sun and stars shine. 
O Nanda {Daughter ofVasistha ! You grant long life, fulfil- 
ment of) desires, prosperity to men. You have to strive to pro- 
tect in this temple always. Om Bhadra ! Daughter of Kasyapa ! 
You always do good to the people. O Goddess ! You be 
granter of long life, of desired (objects) (and) prosperity always. 
Om ! Jaya ! O Goddesss ! You be granter of prosperity 
(and) long life always. Om ! Jaya ! Being established by me 
you remain here for ever. O Daughter ofBhrgu ! You become 
the governess of prosperity and success. Oth ! Rikta ! Des- 
troyer of excessive defects ! O Auspicious one ! Granter of 
accomplishment and emancipation ! One who is of the form of 
the universe and one who underlies all the world, you remain 
here always.” After having contemplated upon the ethereal 
mansion, (the preceptor) should locate the three principles 
therein. Then the sacrifice should be completed in the prescribed 
manner after having offered the expiatory oblation. 



278 


Agni Purdna 


CHAPTER NINETYFIVE 
Mode of installation of the lihga 


The Lord said : 

1 . I shall describe the mode of installation of a lihga in 
temple which yields enjoyment and emancipation. One should 
always do it for the purpose of enjoyment and emancipation on 
the day of the god. 

2. The installation ceremony should be performed in the 
five months commencing with magha (February-March) except 
(the month of) caitra (April-May) and in the first three katanas 
(one of the eleven divisions of the day) at the rising of the 

Jupiter and Venus. 

3. (The ceremony should be undertaken) especially in the 
bright fortnight or in the dark fortnight omitting the fifth, fourth, 
ninth, eighth and fourteenth days (of the fortnight). 

4-5. (All) the other days are auspicious except those falling 
on the days of inauspicious planets. Commencement during 
(the rule of) the stable stars of §atabhisak , dhanisfd , drdrd , anurddhd, 
the three uttara ( uttard , uttaraphdlguni and uttarabkadrapada ) , 
rohini and fravana yield good results. (The days fixed for the rite 
should possess) the rising points of aquarius, leo, scorpion, libra, 
virgo, taurus and Sagittarius. 

6. Jupiter is always commendable in the above nine stars 
and seven constellations. Mercury (is commendable) in the 
sixth, eighth, tenth, seventh and fourth, from the lagna (rising 
point in the east), while Venus (is commendable) in all the places 
except the fourth. 

7. The Moon is always strengthening if located in seventh, 
fourth, third or tenth, the sun in the tenth, third, and sixth places 
and Rdhu (ascending node of the Moon) in the third, tenth and 
sixth places. 

8. The Saturn, Mars, Sun and Ketu (the descending node 
of the Moon) are commendable in the sixth, and third places. 
Both the good and bad (planets) in the eleventh place are cruel. 

9. Their aspect full in the seventh place, half in the ninth 

and fifth places, one fourth in the first and tenth places and one 
fourth less in the fourth and eighth places. „ 



95.10-20 


279 


10. (The two constellations) pisces and aries have a dura- 
tion of three and three-fourth n&dis (two and a half n&tfls are 
equal to one hour). The (constellations) taurus and acquarious 
have a duration of three and three-fourth n&tfis. 

11. Capricorn and gemini have a duration of five ( n&dis ), 
Sagittarius, scorpion, leo and cancer have a duration of five and 
three-fourth (nafis) and libra and virgo have a duration of five 
and a half ghafikds (synonym of nd(jli). 

1 2. (The constellations) leo, taurus and acquarius are statio- 
nary and yield success. (The constellations) Sagittarius, libra 
and aries are movables.. The third (constellations) have both 
the characteristics. 

13-14. The constellations aspected by auspicious planets 
or associated with them are auspicious and are commendable. 
Jupiter, Venus and Mercury in the lagna confers abundant 
strength, long life, sovereignty, valour, strength, progeny, 
fame and virtue. The first, fourth, seventh and tenth (places 
from lagna) are known as the kendras . 

15. Jupiter, Venus and Mercury in these (houses) yield 
all perfections. The presence of wicked planets in the third, fourth 
and eleventh houses from the lagna are beneficial. 

16-17. The learned should combine these with the tithis 
(the days reckoned by the phases of the Moon) for good per- 
formances. (The preceptor) should raise a square shed in front 
of (the temple) leaving a space equal to or five times that (of 
its measurement) at twelve cubits from the flight of steps with 
four entrances. (The shed) for (sacrificial bathing) should be 
half the size of that shed). 

18. The shed should be constructed) in the north-cast, 
east or north, (measuring) one or ten or twelve cubits respecti- 
vely and having a single entrance or four entrances. 

19. The remaining eight sheds should be measuring two 
cubits more than that (shed). The sacrificial altar (should 
measure) four kara lengths in the middle and should have pillars 
at the angular points. 

20. Leaving apart a quarter of the platform nine or five 
fire pits or a single pit (should be dug up) in the north-east or 
east. (The digging of one pit ) is done only in the case of the wor- 
ship of the preceptor. 



28C 


Agni Pur&na 


21-24. (The fire pits) should be a span, an aratni (a cubit 
of the middle length, from the elbow to the tip of the little finger ) , 
a cubit, a yard, four cubits and eight cubits respectively depend- 
ing on fifty, hundred, thousand, hundred thousand, lakh or a 
crore oblations (are offered in the pits). (The pit) in the south- 
east (should be of) the shape of the female generative organ, in 
the south (of the shape of) the crescent moon, in the south-west 
(of the shape of) a triangle, in the north-west (of the shape of) 
a hexagon, in the north (of the shape of) a lotus, in the north- 
east (of the shape of) an octagon. The pit made at an inclined 
angle with a border above is auspicious. There should be three 
borders around that respectively measuring four, three and 
two fingers in breadth. Alternatively there should be a single 
border measuring six fingers in breadth or the borders (should 
be) of the shape of sacrificial pit. 

25. The aperture should be above that. It should resemble 
the leaf of the holy fig tree in its shape. (The aperture should 
be) an angula in height and eight angulas in breadth. 

26. Its length (should be) half the length of the pit and 
(should be) in the same level as the neck. The apertures of the 
fire pits on the east, south-east and south should face the north. 

27. It should face the east (if the fire pits have been located) 
in other directions, while those situated at the other points of 
compass should have their outlets turned towards the north- 
east. The twenty-fourth of the fire receptacles is called the 
angula (finger breadth). 

28. The four entrances (to the sacrificial shed) on the east 
etc. should be made of (woods of) plaksa , udumbara , aivattha and 
vafa (trees) which duly (stand for) peace, prosperity, strength 
and health. 

29. (The sheds) should be eighteen cubits in length, one 
cubit high and half (the lengthen breadth and should be decorat- 
ed with mango leaves. 

30. The banners should have (colours) resembling (the 
colours) of a rainbow (or be) red, black, tawny, (or) of the 
colour of the moon, (or be) white, golden coloured or resembling 
that of a crystal. 

31. (The banner) dedicated to the lotus-born (Braluna) 
in the east (should be) red (and that) which belqpgs to Ananta 



95.32-42 


281 


(lord of the serpents) in the south-west (should be) blue. The 
banners (should be) five cubits long and half as much broad. 

32-33. The rods should be commensurate with the five 
cubits of banners being a cubit for every cubit. Twelve 
kinds of earth from (the places such as) the ant-hill, the tips of 
the tusk of elephant, horns of the bull, bunch of lotuses, pastures 
of boars and cows and the cross-ways of roads should be taken in 
the case (of installation of an image) of Vaikuufha (Vi$nu) 
and eight (kinds) in the case (of installation of an image) 
ofPinakin (Siva). 

34. The decoctions made up from the barks of nyagrodha , 
udumbara, aSvattha , cUta and jambti and eight palas (a measure of 
weight) of the essence of flowers should be taken. 

35-36. The waters of the sacred pools, fragrant waters and 
the waters mixed with the herbs (should be taken). I shall des- 
cribe the (names of) auspicious flowers (and) fruits (after- 
wards). Waters mixed with five kinds of gems, cow’s horn and 
also five things got from a cow should be taken for bathing. A 
piece of cloth in which the paste has been put should be taken 
for rubbing. 

37. A pitcher having thousand holes should be used for 
bathing and the yellow pigment for decoration. Roots of hund- 
reds of herbs (are needed). Therein (the roots of) vijayd, lakf- 
mand, bald , gudUcl , atibald, pdfhd, sahadeud , iatdvarl , fddhi , suvarcald 
and vfddhi have been prescribed separately for bathing. 

38-41. (Either) an incessant pouring of waters together 
with the sesamum and darbha (or) merely the bathing with the 
sacred ash (has been prescribed) for protection. A wiseman 
should prepare a paste of powders of barley, wheat, bilva 
(fruit), along with camphor. (He should also make ready) 
the pitcher and ga$da (a small vessel with a narrow tube like 
outlet for pouring). The bed-stead along with two mattresses, 
pillow bed and cloth should be made ready suited to one’s aim 
and in accordance with his means. The vessel filled with ghee 
and honey and a golden brush should be made ready. 

42. The sacrificial small pitcher, the pitcher (sacred to 
Lord) Siva, and the pitchers for the guardian deities of the direc- 
tions, (should be made ready). One pitcher for each of the sacri- 
ficial fire-pits^hould be set apart for inducing sleep and for peace. 



282 


Agni Purdnct 


43-44. The pitchers for the attendant deities at the door* 
god of virtue, for PraSanta (a deity), vdstu (presiding deity of the 
ground), (goddess) Laksmi (consort of Visnu), (Lord) GaneSa 
(son of the divine pair Siva and Parvati) and pitchers for others 
should be placed on heaps of grain along with the cloth and 
garland and gold should be put and they should be filled with 
fragrant waters. 

45-51. They should be supported by vessels filled with 
(rice), fruits and decorated by tender leaves and should be cover- 
ed by cloths. White mustard seeds and fried paddy should be 
brought for scattering. As before the sword of knowledge should 
be made ready. Sacrificial twigs, the vessel (for cooking) por- 
ridge, the sacrificial ladle made of copper and the vessel filled 
with ghee and honey for anointing the feet, four seats made of 
three hundred darbhas and of the measure of two cubits long, 
pal&Sa twigs for enclosure, and vessel for sesamum, vessel for 
havis (food offering), vessel for water which can respectively hold 
one, twenty and eight palas and the sacred thread (should be 
made ready). A pitcher, an incense-burner, sruk and sruva (the 
two kinds of sacrificial ladle), a box, a seat, a chowrie, dry fire- 
wood, flowers, leaves, scented gum resin, lamps with ghee, 
incense, unbroken rice, sacred thread, clarified butter from the 
cow’s milk, barley and sesamum stems of ku$a> the three sweet 
things (honey, sugar and clarified butter), sacrificial twigs of 
the length of ten parva (the interspace between the folds on the 
fingers) are all needed for appeasement. The sacrificial ladle 
(sruva) of a length of one cubit is required for the appeasement of 
the sun and other planets. 

52. There should be one hundred and eight sticks of arka , 
paldta, khddira , amdrga, pippala , udumbara , fami, durvd as also green 
kuSa. 

53-54. In their absence barley and sesamuhi (are used). 
So also the household articles, a sthdli (a kind of vessel), a sacri- 
ficial ladle, lid etc. and two pieces of cloth for the gods, coins, 
crown, apparels, necklaces, earr&gs and bracelets should be made 
ready for the worship of the preceptor. One should avoid 
making them costly. 

55. Worship of the. custodians of images should be a 
quarter less than that stated before and that of those who repeat 
(the mantra of) the weapon is still a fourth less thsfti that. Worships. 



96.56-96.1-5 


283 


of brahmins, astrologers and sculptors are as done for those who 
repeat (the mantras). 

56. The diamond, sun-stone, sapphire, atinila , pearl, topaz, 
ruby, lapis lazuli are the eight gems. 

57. UHra (the fragrant root of a plant), mddhavakrdntd , red 
sandal, agallochum, sandalwood, sdrika , kuffha, and tofikhini 
are the (eight) kinds of herbs. 

58-60. The metals (are) gold, copper, silver, bell-metal, 
lead and iron. Yellow orpiment, red arsenic, red chalk, suvama 
mdksika (honey-like mineral), mercury, vahnigairika , sulphur, 
and mica are the eight kinds of minerals. The eight kinds of 
grains are stated to be wheat, sesamum, black-gram, green- 
gram, barley, short term paddy, fyamaka. All these things should 
be gathered. 


CHAPTER NINETYSIX 

Mode of initial consecration of an image : 

The Lord said : 

1 . After having bathed and performed the two daily (wor- 
ships), the preceptor should enter the sacrificial shed with the 
argha offering in his hand and accompanied by the brahmins 
who are the protectors of the idols. 

2. The doors (of the sacrificial shed) (known as the doors) 
of peace should be worshipped duly as before and also the warder- 
gods (located) in the branches (of the sacrificial trees) by the 
(performance of) circumambulation. 

3. (The warder-gods) Nandi and Mah&k&la (should be 
worshipped) at the east, Bhrngi and Vinayaka at the south, 
Vjr?abha and Skanda at the west, (the warder) goddess and 
CatKla at the north (of the sacrificial shed). 

4-5. Then the preceptor should worship two pitchers each 
at the base of the branches (of the sacrificial trees ) — frafdnto 
(tranquil) and tiHra (cool), parjanya (rain-cloud ) and aioka 
(griefless), safyivana (reviving) and amfta (ambrosia), dhanada 
(bestower of wealth) and hiprada (bestower of prosperity) one 



384 


Agni Purdna 


after another with (the repetition of) their names ending in the 
fourth case preceded by (the syllable) om and finding with 
‘obeisance 9 . 

6-7. The worlds, planets, warder gods and rivers, two in 
^ach one of them, three suns, two Vedas, (goddess) Lak?ml and 
(lord) Gai^apati are the gods who stay in the sacrificial shed 
at each one of the doors for warding impediments and guarding 
the sacrifice. 

8. The thunder-bolt, spear, club, sword, noose, banner, 
mace, trident, disc and lotus should be duly worshipped in 
the banner with the mantras Om hrim fihaf obeisance. Om krftm 
phaf to the spear at the door, hrUm phap obeisance. 

9-10. The eight presiding deities of the banner such as 
Kumuda, Kumudak^a, Pundarika, V&mana, Sankukarna, Sarva- 
netra, Sumukha and Suprati^fhita should be worshipped in 
the east etc. with (the offering of) oblation to all beings and 
with the mantras om kaum obeisance to Kumuda etc. 

11-12. In the same manner the eight guardian deities 
Hetuka, Tripuraghna, Sakti, Yamajihva, Kala, Karalin, Ek&n- 
ghri and Bhima should be worshipped in the (different) direc- 
tions with offerings, flowers and incense. (The preceptor) 
should contemplate them as satisfied. 

13. The five fundamental principles earth etc. should be 
worshipped in kakfitfna (a kind of fragrant grass), bamboos, 
pillars and other things in order with the mantras sadyojdta 1 etc. 

14. The preceptor should look at the sacrificial shed as per- 
meated by the essence of (god) Sadaliva, hallowed by his pre- 
sence and endowed with the banners and spears in the form of 
fundamental principles. 

15. After having warded off the divine ethereal and earthly 
obstacles as (laid down) before, (the preceptor) should enter 
(the shed) through the western door and look at the other 
remaining doors. 

16. After having walked around (reverentially) and seated 
on the southern side of the altar and remaining facing the north, 
one should perform the purification of elements as before. 


1. Sadyo j&tam prftpady&ni, Vftmadcy&ya lifting jyesthftya n a m afr, 
tatpumf&ya Vidmahe, aghorebhyo, the ghorebbyab and binafr larvavidy&nftm. 



96.17-27 


285 


17. Then the internal sacrifice, the purification of the man- 
tras and the materials, and the worship of one’s own self (should, 
be done). The five things got from a cow (should be applied) 
as before. 

18. Then the sacrificial pitcher should be placed therein 
along with the receptacle, especially for the principle of Siva and 
the three fundamental principles (soul, body and matter) 
in order. 

19. The preceptor should locate by means of his psychic 
force, the supreme principle of Siva along with the presiding 
deities Rudra, Narayana and Brahma in his body from the fore- 
head and trunk to the foot. 

20. Om, ham, hdm , The images of the god and their presid- 
ing deities should be located therein as before (and contemplate 
himself) as covered by the essence of Siva along with his consti- 
tuent members and forearm of Siva on his head. 

21. (The preceptor) should then contemplate the efful- 
gence (of Siva) (which has permeated his body and) which has 
entered the cavity of the brain as coming out dispelling darkness 
and illuminating the inter-space between directions. 

22. Having decked himself with flowers, garlands and 
cloth along with the custodians of deities (the preceptor) 
should contemplate as “I am Siva” and draw out the sword of 
knowledge. 

23. The sacrificial shed should be purified with the four- 
fold rites of purification. After having scattered the kuSa all 
around, they should again be gathered. 

24. After having seated the guardian deity of the ground 
etc. in the big pitcher (vardhan!) as before, (the preceptor) 
should worship them. The pitcher sacred to god Siva and the 
weapons and the vardhani (pitcher) should be worshipped in the 
fixed seat. 

25. Then the guardian deities of the worlds along with their 
weapons and vehicles should be worshipped in order in the pit- 
chers situated at the different directions as laid down. 

26. (The preceptor) should contemplate (god) Indra as 
having a golden complexion, thousand eyes, wearing the crown, 
and wielding the thunderbolt. 

27. (God) Sapt&rcis (Fire god) (should be contemplated) 
as holding a rosary, kama$falu (a small water pitcher), and a 



286 Agni Pur&m 

spear in the hand, red (in complexion), engulfed by garland of 
flames and as riding the goat. * 

28. (God) Yama (god of death) should be remembered as 
riding a buffalo, carrying a club in his hand and of the form of 
destructive fire and (lord) Nirrti as riding an ass, carrying a 
sword in the hand and having red eyes. 

29. (The preceptor) should then meditate (lord) Varuna 
as seated on a crocodile and having white complexion holding 
a noose of serpent in his hand and (lord) Vayu (wind god) 
as riding an antelope and having blue complexion and Kubera 
(god of wealth) as seated on a sheep. 

30. (Lord) l£a (Siva), the trident-bearer should be contem- 
plated (as seated) on a bull, (god) Ananta, the disc-bearer (as 
seated) on a tortoise, and (lord) Brahma, the four-faced and 
four-armed as riding a gander. 

31. (Lord) Dharma (god of virtue) and others should be 
worshipped in the pitchers located at the base of the pillars at the 
comers. Some also worship (the gods) Ananta and others in the 
pitchers placed at the corners of different directions. 

32. The injunction of (lord) Siva should be made to be 
heard. The pitcher placed behind one’s own self should be gently 
turned around. Then as before the pitcher should be firmly 
put first and then the pitcher vardhani . 

33. After having worshipped (lord) Siva (seated in) a 
firm seat and (again in) a firm seat for the sake of weapons, 
(the preceptor) should as before touch with the udbhavamudrd 
(posture made with the fingers denoting generation). 

34. “O lord of the universe you protect this sacrifice of thy 
own self out of compassion for the devotee”. After having add- 
ressed these words, (the preceptor) should place the sword in the 
pitcher. 

35. After having worshipped the lord in the pitcher or on 
the ground or in the shed relating to initiation and establishment, 
(the preceptor) should go in front of the fire-receptacle. 

36. The custodians of images who are seated in front of 
the centre of the pit should purify the respective pits as directed 
by the preceptor. 

37. The reciters (of mantras ) should recite (the mantras) 
as many times (as laid down). Others (should recite the sash* 



96.38-51 


287 


hitd mantra . The brahmins, well-versed in their respective bran- 
ches should read the appeasing mantras. 

38. A follower of the Rgveda should recite the hymns frlsQkta, 
pdvamdni, maitraka and vrf&kapi on the east. 

39. A follower of Sdmaveda should recite the hymns — 
devavrata , bhdrunda, jytftha and rathantara on the south. 

40. A follower of Tajurveda should recite the hymns rudra, 
purufasukta , ilokddhydya especially and the brdhmanas in the west. 

41. An Atharvavedin should repeat the hymns — nilarudra , 
sukfmdsdksma and the atharvaUr$a in the north. 

42. After having ignited the (sacrificial) fire, the preceptor 
should fill the eastern part of each one of the pit from the east in 
order. 

43. Incense, lamps and sacrificial porridge should be offer- 
ed to them. Then the fire should be offered. After having 
worshipped Siva as before, offering unto fire should be made 
(accompanied by the chanting of) mantra. 

44. After having made the oblation for making the place 
and time of the sacrifice as auspicious and to ward off omens 
portending evil, the knower of mantras should offer the final 
oblation which brings forth good. 

45. After having prepared the sacrificial porridge as before, 
it should be offered to each one of the pit. Then the yajamdnas 
(persons at whose instance a ceremony is performed) should go to 
the bathing shed well-adorned. 

46. (The image of) the god should be placed on the auspi- 
cious seat and covered with the essence of the mantra after gently 
stroking it. After having worshipped, it should be bathed with 
mud and herbal waters. 

47. The image should be bathed in between with the urine 
of a cow and cowdung, sacred as and perfumed water with 
(the recitation of the mantra of) the weapon ending with (the 
syllable) phaf . 

48. The preceptor, after having purified the casual princi- 
ples, should cover (the image) with a yellow coloured cloth 
(sanctified) by the repetition of the dharma ( mantra ) in the com- 
pany of the protectors of the image. 

49-51. After having worshipped (the image) with white 
flowers it should be carried to the sacrificial platform at the 



288 


Agni Purdna 


north. After having laid (the image) on a seat placed over the 
bed, the preceptor should mark (on the image) with lines of 
saffron-smeared strings and mark (the position of) the eyes with 
a golden stick. The collyrium should be put on (the eyelids) 
and then the sculptor should carve out the eyes with an imple- 
ment at the spot as laid down in the technical works. 

52. The eyes should be carved into a spot just at half of one 
third or half of one fourth or half of half the length, for accompli- 
shing all desires and it is auspicious. 

53. Taking one-fourth part of the length of the lihga and 
having divided it into three parts, one such part should always 
be the breadth of the body. 

54. In the lihga of a cubit length, the cavity of the eyes 
should be a ninth part of one eighth of 3. yava (measure) both in 
depth and breadth. 

55. In the lihga of one and a half cubit length, the sockets of 
the eyes would measure an eighth part of 3 yava (measure) more 
(than that of the preceding). In that (the lihga ) of a cubit len- 
gth (the cayity of the eyes) would be eight yava (measure) in 
depth and breadth. 

56. In all the lifigas of Sambhu (lord Siva) where the length 
would increase by the pdda (measure), the measures of the cavi- 
ties of the eyes would also correspondingly increase by a yava 
(measure). 

57. The lines (on the top of the lihga) would abo increase 
by three parts both in depth and breadth. In all the cases the top 
of the lihga would be narrow and tapering. 

58-59. The region of the eyes should be divided into eight 
parts and the lower part of the head into two. The two lower 
parts (of the region of the eyes) should be left out. The remain- 
ing six parts should be carved into three lines taken round and 
joined at the back (of the emblem). The line at the top should 
be made to measure a yava (measure) in the case of (a lihga ) 
made of gem as well as of gold. 

60. The form and characteristic features of these are that 
the radiance of those made of gem is spotless. (The emblem) 
should be endowed with the eyesight by carving the above mark 
(into the part indicated above) * 

61 . After having worshipped the lines bringing out the cha- 
racteristic features of the emblem with ghee and Abney with (the 



96.62-73 


289 


repetition of) the mftyufijayamantra 1 in order to remove the defects 
due to the sculptor, the liftga should then be worshipped after 
having bathed it with mud and other things. After having grati- 
fied the sculptor, a cow should be given to the preceptor. 

62-64. After having worshipped the lifiga with incense and 
other things, married women should sing (in praise of the lord). 
After having touched the (< liiiga ) on the left and right with the 
string or with the kufa, and rubbing with rocana (pigment), the 
women should be sent away after giving gifts of molasses, salt 
and brains. 

65-67. The preceptor along with the custodians of idols 
should bathe (the lihga) with mud, cow-dung, cow v s urine, 
ashes and water with the (recitation of) hfdayamantra or pranava. 
Then (it should be bathed) with the five things got from a cow 
preceded by (bathing with) the five sweet things. After the 
smearing (of decoctions) of herbs (it should be bathed) with 
all herbal waters. (Then it should be bathed) with waters mixed 
with white flowers, fruits, gold, gems, horn and barley. Then 
(it should be bathed) with thousand pourings of divine herbal 
waters. 

68. Subsequently, the liiiga should be bathed with sacred 
waters, waters of (river) Ganges, waters mixed with sandal and 
from the pitcher representing milky ocean and that pitcher of 
water sacred to lord Siva. 

69-71. Rubbing and besmearing should be done with fra- 
grant sandal and other things. After having worshipped (the 
lingo) with flowers with the recitation of brahma ( mantra ) and with 
red garments with (th z mantras of) armour and after having 
shown a red flower preceded by the offer of protective mark, the 
linga should be worshipped with the mantra of purufa , after having 
appeased it with jets of ghee, water, milk, kufa , other articles of 
worship and praises. After having rinsed the mouth with (the 
mantra of) the heart (the preceptor) should say, “O lord ! May 
you rise up !” 

72. Then the lord should quickly be led to the shed along 
with the articles (of worship) in a divine chariot and placed in 
the bed (made ready) at the western door (of the shed). 

73. At the western door itself a pedestal should be placed on 

1. addressed to lord Siva praying for deliverance from death. 
Tryambakaih yajimahe tugandhim puUivardhanam urv&rukamiva 
bandhan&n m^tyor mukjlya mftmrt&t. 



290 


Agni Pttr&Qa 


an auspicious seat permeated with the goddesses beginning with 
Sakti and ending with Mati, The brahmafild should jalso be 
bestowed therein. 

74-75. The sacrificial pitcher in which the psychic sleep had 
been induced should be converted into the fixed seat. After 
having placed it in the north-east corner of the shed and offered 
waters for washing with (the mantra of) the heart, the lifiga 
should be lifted (from the bed) and deposited on the seat with 
the head turned towards the east and obeisance to Dharma 
(god of virtue) and others (should be done) with (the mantra 
of) creation. 

76. Incense should be offered. After having worshipped 
the liftga y garments and household articles should be offered with 
{the mantra of) the heart befitting one’s capacity. 

77-78. A vessel filled with ghee and honey should be placed 
near the foot as unguent. The officiating priest who is present 
therein should locate the thirtysix principles beginning with 
energy and ending with the earth along with their respective 
presiding deities and divide (the above body) into three parts 
with garlands of flowers. 

79-83. After having located the fundamental principles 
beginning with the principle of illusion and ending with that of 
the absolute energy, together with the principles of soul, know- 
ledge and pure bliss, in the order in which they were created, 
in the different parts of the body such as the square, octagon or 
circle and the presiding deities of the above three principles such 
as the gods Brahma, Visnu and Siva having been pro- 
jected into each of the above said divisions and also the different 
embodiments of gods such as the earth, fire, the person for 
whom the sacrifice is done, sun, water, air, moon, sun, 
sky together with their respective deities such as Sarva, Pa$u- 
pati, Ugra, Rudra, Bhava, Mahegvara, Mahadeva and Bhlma 
and these letters respectively sacred to them such as la , va, 
&, $a y ca , ya 9 sa and ha should be located therein. The pranava 
of three parts or the mantra of the heart or some other principal 
mantra (are also located). 

84-85. (The preceptor) who knows the mantra should locate 
five deities of (the five fundamental principles earth, water, 
lustre, wind and ether along with their five presiding^deities, and 



96.86-92 


291 


Brahmfi, Dharanldhara, Rudra, 1 5a and Sad&5ivain the order 
of creation in the case of a sacrifice having five fire-pits. 

86. (The principles of) non-action, and other things, and 
their presiding deities Ajata and others or the three principles 
should be located as the cause of pervading in the case of a seeker 
of release (from bondage). 

87. Gods known as Vidye5as (lords of learning) should be 
meditated upon in the case of one’s own soul being pure and the 
Lokanayakas (lords of the world) in the case of one’s own and 
being impure and also the protectors of images, enjoyers and lords 
of the mantras . 

88. (The fundamental principles numbering) twenty-five 1 , 
eight 2 , five* and three 4 and their lords such as Indra and others 
(should be worshipped) in order as follows: 

Orh hdm obeisance to the principle of energy etc* Orh hdm 
obeisance to the presiding deity of the principle of energy etc. 
Orh hdm obeisance to the image of k$md (earth) . Orh hdm obeisance 
to (lord) Siva, presiding deity of the image of earth etc. Orh 
hdm obeisance to the image of pfthivl (earth). Orh hdm obeisance 
to Brahmd , the presiding deity of the image etc. Orh hdm obei- 
sance to (lord) Rudra, the presiding deity of the principle of 
Siva (auspiciousness) etc. 

89-91. (The preceptor) should recite (the above mantras) 
from the region of the navel, spreading like the sounds of bell, 
rejecting the causes such as Brahma and others and meditate on 
the mantra resting in (the lotus of) twelve petals and which is 
different from the mind and which resembles the sentiment of 
bliss obtained. Having collected filaments from the twelve (petall- 
ed lotuses) (lord Siva), who pervades (everything) and is 
devoid of holds , should be contemplated upon as shining re- 
splendent with thirtyeight kalds , effulgent with thousand rays, 
consisting of all energies and accompanied by the attendant 
gods; (he) should be then projected in the lihga. 

92. The jivanydscfi in the lihga will be accomplished in this 

1. The avyakta, mahat, ahahk&ra, paflcabhfttas, pattcatanm&tr&s, paHeakar* 
mtndriyas, pa ficqj fl&rundriyas, manas and yejam&na . 

2. The five elements, sun, moon and yajam&na, 

3. The five elements. 

4. The three qualities sattua, rajas and tamos . 

5. The projection of vital energy. 



292 Agni Purdnot 

manner. It yields all fruits. The location in the pedestal etc. 
will be described now. , 

93-94. After having been washed and besmeared with sandal 
paste etc., the pedestal should be covered by a good cloth. 
Then the stone set ready just like the lihga and placed at the north 
of the lihga should be endowed with the five gems in its aperture 
resembling the female organ of generation and should be wor- 
shipped as laid down. 

95. The (pedestal) stone which has been bathed again 
should be deposited at the foot of the lihga. So also the bull and 
(others such as the goddess of) energy should be located after 
doing the rites of bathing etc. (to them). 

96-97. It should be done being preceded by the prarpua 
(syllable om) and (followed by) any one of (the mystic letters) 
hum , pum and hrim. The pedestal stone which is of the form of the 
base and which is endowed with the energy of action (should be 
worshipped) with sacred ashes, darbha and sesamum. Then the 
three outer walls should be set up. The guardian deities with 
their weapons should be worshipped outside for the sake of pro- 
tection. 

Orh hdm, hrdm obeisance to the energy of action. Orh hUm , 
hrdm> hah oblation to Mahagauri, the consort of Rudra — this 
(being performed) on the pedestal. Orh> hdm obeisance to the 
energy of support. 0m, hdm obeisance to the bull. 

98-101. The (female deities) Dharika, Diptimatl, Ugr& 
Jyotsna, Balotkaja, Dhatrl and Vidhatri or the five goddesses 
Varna, Jye$fha, Kriy£, Jfiana, Vedha or the three Kriya, Jfiana 
and Iccha should be located as before. So also the female god- 
desses should be located in the benefic forms of gods. The five 
energies TamI, Moha, Ksami, Nisjha, Mrtyu, Maya, or Bhava 
Jvara, Mahamoha, Ghora, Tritayajvara or the three presiding 
female deities Kriyi, Jfiana and B&dha should be located in the 
three indomitable principles of soul etc. 

102. Even in this case the pedestal (should be worshipped) 
in the Brahmfi — part (of the lihga ) in the order. All routines 
should be performed as before with (the goddess) Gauri and 
others. 

103-105. Having located in this manner, (the preceptor) 
should go near the (fire) pit and invoke (lord) MaheSvara at the 
centre of the pit and on the borders, the goddess of action in the 



96.106-114 


293 


other border and the sound {om) at the lip. Then the union of 
the occult psychic force with the sacrificial pitcher, the ground, 
fire and (lord) Iia (should be brought about). 

106-107. The preceptor should contemplate his psychic energy 
resembling the fire of a lotus rejected upwards by the rising wind, 
entering by the path of the sun, emerging out and again enter- 
ing by the path of void. In this manner mutual union with (the 
psychic forces of) the protectors of guardians should be brought 
about everywhere. 

108. After having worshipped the energy (known as) 
Dh&rik& (ability to hold), duly the fundamental principles 
along with their presiding deities, and the images (of gods) along 
with their presiding deities with ghee etc. and offered oblation 
duly in the fire-pit in their presence with the sarhhitd mantras , 
oblation should again be made hundred or thousand or five 
hundred times (concluding) with the final oblation. 

109. Similarly, the guardians of deities should also satisfy 
the fundamental principles along with their presiding deities, 
and the images (of gods) along with their presiding deities and 
offer oblation. 

110-111. After having satisfied the (goddess of) energy 
with Brahma mantras befitting one’s capacity and time and sprink- 
led the waters of the pitcher with the ends of the kuta and touched 
the base of the liiiga , one should repeat (the mantras) as many 
times as (the number of) oblations. The presence of the god 
should be accomplished by (repeating) the mantra of the heart. 
The act of covering (the image) should be done by (repeating) 
the mantra of the armour. 

112-13. After having performed (the rites) thus for the 
purification of (the parts of the liiiga presided over by) the gods 
Brahm& to Vi?nu, (the preceptor) should complete the oblation 
and repetition of the mantras as many times (as mentioned above). 
The middle and tip of the liiiga should be touched with the middle 
and tip of the kuta. The mode of achieving the union is described 
now: 

Om, hdm, ham, om, om, om, em, om, bhUm, bhtim obeisance to the 
image outside. Om, Mm, v&m, om, om, om, f&m, om, bhQm, bhfkm , 
vdm obeisance to the image of fire-god. 

1 14. Similarly, the images of thcyajamitna and others should 
be contemplated (in the liiiga). So also in the case of the five 



294 AgniPwrtiQa 

manifestations of the god, union must be brought about with 
(the repetition of the mantra of) the heart etc. » 

1 15. It should be known that (the union) in the case of the 
three fundamental principles (soul, knowledge and bliss) with 
the liAga, pedestal and bull is brought about by the principal 
( mantra ) or with their own fundamental (letters) completely 
and without any omission. 

116-19. Hundred oblations should be made for the puri- 
fication of the different parts (of the liAga) and hundred and 
eight (oblations) with the mantra of (lord) Siva for the removal 
of any deficiency (in performing the sacrifice). After having 
made oblation, whatever act has been done that should be 
uttered in the ear of (lord) Siva: “This act has been completed 
by me by your grace ! O lord ! Om, obeisance to lord Rudra ! 
Obeisance to (lord) Rudradeva ! Whether this act is complete 
as laid down or incomplete, you complete it by your power and 
accept it. Then the learned (preceptor) should locate in the 
liAga and the act in the pedestal of the image. 

120-121. The energy of the form of support should be locat- 
ed in the Brahma (part of the) stone. The (rite of) adhivasana 
(staying together) should extend over seven nights or five nights 
or three nights or a single night or be done immediately. The 
sacrifice performed without (the performance of) adhivdsana 
does not yield any benefit even if performed. 

122. Hundreds of oblations should be offered everyday 
with the respective mantras . Worship of the pitcher of (lord) 
Siva and offering to the quarters should be conveyed. 

123. The adhivdsa is so called because the disciple stays with 
the preceptor practising vows. It is said to be the attitude till 
the end of the stay. 


CHAPTER NINETYSEVEN 

Mode of installation of the image of {lord) Siva 
The lord said : 

1. After having performed the daily rites in the morning 
and worshipped the guardian deities, the preceptor should enter 
(the temple) as described already and purify his body. 



97.2-16 


295 


2-3. After having worshipped the lords of the quarters, the 
sacrificial pitcher of (lord) Siva and the small pitcher and hav- 
ing satisfied the litlga and the fire duly with eight handfuls (of 
oblation), (the preceptor) should enter the temple reciting 
(the mantra of) the weapon by the command of (lord) Siva* 
The obstacles therein should be removed by (the repetition of) 
the mantra of the arrow ending with (the syllables) hum, phaf. 

4-7. The lihga should not be established at the middle (of 
the temple) to avoid the defect of injury. Hence the stone slab 
should be established having left half of a yava (a measure) or a 
yava from the centre a little towards the north-east. 

That slab (known as) ananta (literally without end) and which 
is of the form of support of all (should be established) with the 
principal {mantra). The stone slab known as Acald (without 
movement) which is all-pervading and is of the form of the seat 
of (lord) Siva should be placed by the use of (the mantra of) 
creation or by (the repetition of) the following mantra : — “Om l 
All pervading goddess ! Firm and unmovable (goddess) Acala ! 
obeisance. Hram, lam, hrim , oblations. You must always remain 
here by the command of (lord) Siva.*’ 

8-16. After having spoken thus and having worshipped (the 
Hhga), (the preceptor) should arrest its movement by showing 
the raudramudra (a posture made with, the fingers). After that, 
(the preceptor) should place the diamond and the other gems, 
fragrant root, metals like gold and bronze yellow orpiment etc., 
cereals and grains described already and respectively representing 
lustre, beauty, strength and valour duly in the holes in the 
(directions) east etc. after having devotedly contemplated with 
the mantras of guardian deities of the world. A tortoise or bull 
made of gold or silver (should be located) along with earth from 
the banks of a river or from the peaks of a mountain in the central 
(and other) holes facing the entrance. Otherwise a golden image 
of a meru along with honey, unbroken rice and collyrium (should 
be located). Otherwise a golden or silver image of the earth 
should be located along with syllables of all the mantras and gold. 
Then a lotus stalk made of gold or silver or all metals together 
with a dish consisting of sesamum and grains should be located. 
After having located the seat of the lord representing the energy 
it should be anointed with sweet porridge or guggulu (an aroma- 



296 Agni Purtya 

tic) and covered with a cloth protected by (the recitation of) 
the {mantra) of the armour and weapon. 9 

1 7-21 . After having offered oblations to the presiding deities 
of the quarters and rinsing the mouth, the preceptor should offer 
hundred oblations either with (the repetition of) (the mantra of 
lord) Siva or with (the mantra of) the weapon along with the 
final (oblation) for the removal of defects in the cavity of the 
stone slab on account of contamination. After having appeased 
the presiding deities of the ground by offering an oblation, the 
preceptor should lift the deity along with the seat with (the reci- 
tation of the mantra of) the heart and the sounding of auspicious 
notes. Then the preceptor should walk ahead of the deity and 
behind the sacrificial ground of the lord along with the four 
•custodians of the image standing in the (different) directions and 
the person at whose bidding the rite is performed. After having 
done the circumambulation, the lifiga should be established in 
front of the door known as bhadra (welfare). After having offered 
waters for washing, (the lifiga) should be taken to the temple 
through the door, the door frame and the region of the door. 

22. The great lord should be taken only through the door 
without contacting the door (in the case of an unfinished temple) 
if the door frame has unfinished edges or incomplete or is half 
done. 

23-24. In the case of the construction of a temple being 
begun, (the lingo) should be taken in through the corner also. 
This is the general rule even in the case of a manifested lifiga as 
the worldly practice for entry into the temple through the door. 
It is known that if the entry into the temple is made through 
the side door it causes destruction of the race. 

25-33. After having placed the lifiga in the seat facing the 
door with the sounding of auspicious tUrya (a kind of musical 
instrument) and (offerings of) dUrvd (a kind of grass) and un- 
broken rice, (the preceptor) should recite the great p&fupata 
{mantra) after uttering ‘Rise, O lord* with (the recitation of the 
mantra of) the heart. After having removed the sacrificial pit- 
chers from the holes, the preceptor in the company of the guar- 
dians of the image should mentally repeat the mantra and con- 
template (the lifiga) besmeared with saffron and other things 
and the union of the god and goddess as protected. After having 
recited the principal (mantra) till deep concentration «(is gained). 



97.34-39 


297 


(the preceptor) should touch (the lifiga) and place it in the hole. 
Either a portion of the Brahma-part (of the lihgi i) or two parts 
(of the same) or half of it or one-eighth of the whole ( lihga ) 
should be under (the earth). After having covered (the lihga) 
with lead upto the waist with concentration, (the preceptor) 
should fill the cavity with sand and say, <c (You) be firm”. Then 
after the lihga has become firm, (the preceptor) should contem- 
plate him who is of all the forms (of beings), recite the principal 
(i mantra ) and locate the nifkala (devoid of attributes) upto the 
energy by the (order of) creation. If the lihga that is being estab- 
lished leans towards the south, the preceptor should offer obla- 
tions with the mantras of the respective presiding deities of the 
directions until the final (oblation) along with the fees. (The 
preceptor) should offer hundred oblations either with the prin- 
cipal mantra or (the mantra) of manifold forms if (the lifiga leans) 
to the left or slips down or cracks. Even in the case of other 
defects (the preceptor) should similarly perform the blissful 
appeasing rite. 

34. A lihga associated with the rites of location etc. in this 
manner does not bring any harm. The pedestal should be con- 
secrated as possessing a part of the characteristic (mentioned 
already for the lihga). 

35. After having projected the mantra of (the goddess) 
Gaurl (consort of lord Siva) in the pedestal, the pedestal should 
be consecrated with (the mantra) of creation. The sides (of the 
lihga) should be smoothened and binding cement and sand 
should be put. 

36-37. Then the preceptor in the company of the custo- 
dians of the image should bathe the images (with the waters) 
from the pitcher of peace and other pitchers placed there as well 
as the pahcdmrta (a composition of the milk, sugar, curd, ghee 
and honey) and other things. It should then be besmeared with 
sandal paste and other things. After having worshipped the lord 
of the universe (Siva), (the preceptor) should touch the parts 
(represented by lord Siva and his consort Umi) with the reci- 
tation of the mantras of (goddess) Um& and (lord) Maheia 
(Siva) and showing the lihgamudrd (a posture made with the 
fingers). 

38-39. Then (the preceptor) should (mentally) project 



298 


Agni Pur&na 


the three (fundamental) principles 1 in that preceded by the six 
kinds of worship. After having located the image along avith the 
presiding divinities of the (different) parts as also (lord) Brahma 
in the seat of action, the learned person should bathe it. After 
having besmeared it with fragrant (pastes) and showing frag- 
rant fumes, it should be located as the sole pervading principle 
of (lord) Siva. 

40-44. After having offered to (lord) Siva the garlands of 
flowers, incense sticks, lamps, edible offerings and fruits with 
(the recitation of the mantra of) the heart befitting one’s capacity 
and sipping waters (thrice), water should be offered to the lord 
for cleansing. After the recitation (of the mantras sacred to the 
lord) and assigning the merits of the same on his right hand 
(the preceptor) should address the lord in the company of the 
custodians of (the image of lord) Siva as follows: “O lord ! 
You should stay in this temple by your own wish as long 
as the sun, moon and stars (would shine in the sky).” 
After having made obeisance thus, (the preceptor) should 
go outside (the temple reciting) either (th6 mantra ) of the heart 
or the pranava (syllable om ). After having established (the image 
of) the bull, (the preceptor) should make the offering as 
before. One hundred oblations should be made with the 
mflyunjaya ( mantra ) (that which conquers' death) for the removal 
of defects like omission etc. In order to appease the lord obla- 
tions with sweet porridge should be done with (the recitation of 
the mantra of) the heart. “O great lord ! Whatever thing has 
been done by me through ignorance or inadvertance you make 
it good.” 

45. One should dedicate all things to the lord of the goddess 
who is the cause of gold, animals, earth, songs and musical instru- 
ments with devotion and within one’s means. 

46. Gifts (should be given) and then festivities should be 
celebrated for four days. The preceptor should offer oblations 
for three days at the three conjunctions (of time) (the morning, 
midday and evening) in the company of the custodians of the 
image. 

47-48. And the final oblation composed of sacrificial 
porridge should be offered in all pits purified with the obla- 


Soul, knowledge and bliss. 



97.49-59 


299 


tion (known as) samfidta (fulfilling oblation) on the fourth day 
with (the recitation of) the bahurUpi (mantra). The flowers used 
should be kept for four days after that and removed afterwards. 
After having bathed the image, it should be worshipped. 

49-52. Worship in the case of ordinary liftgas should be done 
by (the repetition of) the general mantras. Except conscious- 
ness of the liftga , the lord should be bid adieu. In the case of 
liftgas of extraordinary nature (lord) should be bid adieu (with 
the repetition of words), “Pardon (us O lord I )” In 
vocation, manifestation and dismissal (are done) befitting one’s 
ability. According to some it has been stated that seven obla- 
tions for the steadiness etc. (should be cast) at the end of instal- 
lation. Steadiness, immeasurableness, cognisance of the origin- 
less existence, eternity, all-pervasiveness, deathlessness, seen 
as manifested are spoken as the characteristics of (lord) Siva 
for the manifestation. 

53-54. “0/7! ! obeisance to (lord) Siva. Be thou steady.” 

This is the order offering oblations. After having accom- 
plished this in this manner and having permeated the two pit- 
chers with the essence of lord Siva, the (lord) Bhava (Siva) 
should be bathed with (the waters of) the one and the other 
should be borne for bathing the performer. 

55-57. After having made the offering, (the preceptor) 
should do the dcamana (sipping of waters thrice) and go outside 
with the permission of lord Siva. (The god) Ca$da should 
be located on a seat over a good pedestal in the north-eastern 
direction outside the sacrificial ground and worshipped with 
the brahma mantras preceded by contemplation, and rites of loca- 
tion and offering of oblations. The worship using the brahma 
mantras is that in which the components are mentioned at first. 

Om, hum, phaf obeisance to Sadyoj&ta. Om, hdm , phaf obei- 
sance to Vamadeva. Om, Vum , phaf obeisance to Aghora. Om, 
vaum, phaf obeisance to Tatpuru^a. Om, hUm 9 phaf obeisance to 
l£ana. 

58-59. After having conveyed the (merits of) repetition 
(to the lord) and appeased him, (the lord) should be addressed 
as follows preceded by bowing. O (lord Ca$da) ! Stay (in this 
temple) as long as the lord (Siva) stays here. O(lord) Candela I 
Whatever has been omitted or made in excess by me out of 
ignorance, make it complete by your grace* 



300 


Agni Purina 


60. Lord Canda should not be invoked in cases where a 
bdnalihga (a kind of stone representing lord Siva) or a liUga placed 
on the bdria stone or an accomplished liiiga or self-originated 
linga or images of all gods (are established). 

61-66. Even in the case of rites relating to the presiding 
deity of the sacrificial ground in which there is the mental atti- 
tude of union with the lord, the preceptor should worship (lord) 
Candeia, and the yajamdna (the person for whom the work is 
done) along with his son and wife and should bathe himself 
with (the waters of) the pitcher already placed. Th t yajamdna 
should also worship the preceptor as (the lord) Maheia (Siva) 
and make gifts of rarth, gold and other things without any distinc- 
tion whatever. After having satisfied befittingly the protectors 
of images, those who repeat (the mantras ), the brahmins, astro- 
logers and sculptors, the destitutes, forlorns and others should 
be fed. “O lord ! Ocean of compassion ! Forgive me for all 
the sufferings you had in being present here.” To th t yajamdna 
who has spoken thus, the preceptor should offer with his own 
hands the merits of consecration resplendent like the 
glowing star along with the kuia, flowers and unbroken rice. 

67. After having then saluted (lord) ParameSvara (Siva) 
endowed with the pdiupata (mantra), (the preceptor) should 
address the attendant gods (of the lord) with offerings for their 
presence. 

68-71. “You should stay here in as long as (the lord) Hara 
(Siva) is present here. Then the preceptor should take posses- 
sion of the sacrificial shed along with the cloth etc. Then the 
sculptor (should take possession of) the bathing shed along with 
the articles (found therein). All other gods should be estab- 
lished with the repetition of the mantras as given in the dgamas 1 . 
(In these establishments of other gods) the splitting of the first 
letter of the (respective) names (of the gods) and the location 
of fundamental principles pervading these (should be made). 
The gods commencing with Sadhya, the rivers, herbs, the guar- 
dian deities of the ground, kinnaras (semi-divine beings) and 
others should lie in the principle of earth. In some places the 
location of the (goddesses) Sarasvatl and Lak?ml (are) in the 
waters. 


— * — 

1 . Texts relating to worship of deities in the temples. 



97.72-83 


301 


72. The presiding deities of the world (should be estab- 
lished) in those places where they remain firm. The place of 
Brahmk is the three fundamental principles which extends to 
the important cause of expansion of the (primordial) egg. 

73. The place of Hari (Vi?nu) is the triad (of worlds) 
which has the subtle principles as the main. The places for the 
lord of dancing (Nafyefa, a form of Siva), gaiias (attendant gods), 
mothers (goddesses), Yak?e$as (semi-divine beings) and (lord) 
Subrahmanya (are as described above). 

74. The place of Ganapati is that upto the principle of pure 
knowledge. (The place) of splendours emitted by (lord) Siva 
and (his consort) Siva (Pirvati) extends to the energy in the 
region of a part of the illusion. 

73-77. In the case of manifested images, the place is spoken 
as upto the lord (Siva). Some forms like the tortoise as well as 
the five things such as the gem etc. should be put in the hole of the 
pedestal except in the case of (the image of) the five brahman 
forms (of lord Siva). In the hole divided into six parts one part 
from the end is left out and fixing is made in the fifth part. If 
it is divided into eight parts, the fixing is done in the seventh 
part. This fixing in the case of images brings forth happiness. 

78-79. Purification is done by meditation when the images 
are fixed. In the case of plastered and painted images bathing, 
placing on a pedestal, placing gems (underneath), opening of 
the eyes, the (placing of) mantras, and the offer of seats etc. 
(should be done) mentally. Worship should be done with flow- 
ers without water in them so that the picture may not get spoilt. 

80-82. “The mode (of fixing) the movable variety of litiga 
is described now.” (The litiga) should be divided into five or 
three parts separately and three or two parts (should be set 
apart for fixing). On account of the different fundamental prin- 
ciples, the purification of the pedestals as well as the liAgas made 
of crystals (should be done) with the mantra of creation as laid 
down. In those cases there is no need to place the brahmaHli 
and the gems etc. 

83. The placing of the image on the pedestal should be done 
mentally. There is no special procedure for purification in the 
cue of self-originated liAgas and b&naliAgas ( liAgas made of a 
kind of stone). 



302 


Agni PurQata 


84. (The movable lihgas) should be bathed with (the 
recitation of) the vedic mantras . So also the (rite of) assigning 
an oblation should be done (with the same mantra!). The 
(sacred) rivers, oceans and mountains are installed as before. 

85-86. The liitgas made of earth and flours are known as 
aihika (relating to this world) and kfata (perishable). After 
having made such a lirtga pure, one should worship as laid down 
with the rites of initiation etc. Then after having withdrawn the 
mantras into himself in its presence, the preceptor should cast 
that lihga in the waters. It yields one’s desires within a year. The 
installation of (the images of) Vi$nu etc. should be done with 
separate mantras . 


CHAPTER NINETYEIGHT 
Mode of installation of the image of goddess Gauri 
The Lord said : 

1 . Listen ! I shall describe the mode of installation together 
with the worship (of the image) of (goddess) Gaur! (consort of 
lord Siva). The sacrificial shed etc. should be erected and (the 
image of the goddess) should be placed therein. 

2. O Guha (son of lord Siva and Parvatl ) ! After having 
placed the goddess on the bed, the mantras of the images (should 
be located therein), and the principles commencing with the 
knowledge of the soul and ending with Siva as also lord I$ana 
(Siva) should be located. 

3. After having located the goddess of absolute energy, 
offered oblations and recited (the mantras) as before, the pedestal 
of the form of the energy of action should be placed. 

4-5. After having contemplated it as pervading the same 
place and having put the gems etc., the goddess of the form of 
supreme energy should be fixed therein with her own mantras . 
The energy of action should be located in the pedestal and the 
energy of knowledge in the image (of the goddess). 

6. Then the pervading energy should be invoked and locat- 
ed therein. Then the mother goddess known also as $iva should 



99.1-2 


303 


also be invoked and worshipped. Om , obeisance to the sustain- 
ing energy. Om, obeisance to the tortoise (supporting the uni- 
verse). Om, obeisance to (lord) Skanda (son of lord Siva and 
Parvatl). Om, hrim obeisance to (lord) Narayana (Vi§nu). 
Om, obeisance to sovereignty. Om, am obeisance to the under- 
cover. Om, obeisance to the lotus seat. Then (the gods) Kejava 
(Vi?nu) and others should be worshipped. Om, hrim obeisance to 
the pericarp. One should worship here with (the mantras) “Om, 
k$am obeisance to the lotus eyes”. Om, hdm obeisance to nourish- 
ment, hrim (obeisance) to knowledge, hrim (obeisance) to action. 
Om, obeisance to the stalk of lotus. Rum, obeisance to virtue. 
Rum , obeisance to knowledge. Om, obeisance to indifference to 
the world. Om obeisance to impiety. Om, Rum obeisance to igno- 
rance. Om obeisance to attachment to the world. Om obeisance 
to indigence. Hum, obeisance to speech, to the passionate, kraim 
to the fiery. Om, hraum obeisance to tranquility. Then hrum 
obeisance to the elder (goddess). Om, hrum, raum , kraum (obei- 
sance) to (goddess) of fresh energy, gaum to the seat of Gauri. 
Gaum obeisance to the form of Gauri. Then the principal mantra 
of (goddess) Gauri is told. Om, hrim, sdh, maha Gauri, consort 
of Rudra (Siva), oblations ! Obeisance to (goddess) Gauri. 
Gdm, hrtim, hrim, Sivah, gdm, to tuft, to armour. Gom to eye and 
gom to the weapon, om, gaum to the energy of wisdom, om Gdm 
obeisance to the energy of action. (Gods) Indra and others (are 
worshipped) in the east and other directions. Om, sum obeisance 
to Subhaga (favourite wife). Hrim bija lalita then. And om, 
hrim obeisance to Kamini (an affectionate woman). Om hrum 
KamaSalini. After having established (goddess) Gauri with 
the mantras, worshipping (her) and repeating (the mantras), 
one may get everything. 


CHAPTER NINETYNINE 
Mode of installation of the image of the sun-god. 

The lord said : 

1-2. I shall describe (the mode of) installation of the sun- 
god. The sacrificial shed (and other things) should be (made 



304 Agni Pur&na 

ready) as before. Then after having completed the rites of ablu- 
tion etc., as prescribed before, and having located the sun-god 
with his attendants and (goddess) Vidya in the seat aifd bed, 
(the preceptor) should locate the three (fundamental) princi- 
ples (of soul, knowledge^and bliss) and the five (principles of) 
sky etc. along with chants. 

3. After having done the purification etc. as before and hav- 
ing purified the pedestal as before, (the preceptor should locate 
the five principles upto their own place. 

4-5. After having established (the pedestal) then along with 
the (goddess of) energy (called) Sarvatomukhi as laid down, 
the preceptor should establish (the image of) the sun (god) 
as laid down with the (utterance of) its mantras as permeated 
with the energy or the master. The name should be borne upto 
the end of the foot. The mantras which have been described 
already should be seen at (the time of) establishment also. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED 
Rites of consecration of doors of a temple 
The Lord said : 

1 . Then I shall describe the mode of consecrating the doors 
(of a temple). After having washed the door frames with decoc- 
tions of herbs, they should be laid on the bed. 

2-3. The three fundamental principles — the soul etc. to- 
gether with their lords should be located in the lower, middle 
and upper parts. After having offered oblations, and repeated 
the rupa mantras , the vdstu (the presiding spirit of the place) should 
be worshipped there itself with the mantra of Ananta (an impor- 
tant serpent chief). After having placed the five things gem etc., 
the rite of appeasement should be done. 

4-5. Barley, white mustard, krdntd 9 fddhi , vfddhi, mahdtila , 
gornjrt, mustard, rdjendra , mohani , lakfmand, amftd , rocand , rug, vacd , 
dttrvd and pdfali should be placed on the threshold under the 
temple in their natural form for the sake of protection after the 
recitation of (the syllable) om. 



100.6-9 


305 


6. The northern door should be consecrated after sprinkl- 
ing water. The fundamental principle of the soul should be 
located under that and the principle of knowledge on the sides. 

7. The principle of bliss (should be located) in the region 
of the sky as permeating the entire region. Then (lord) Mahe- 
$anatha (Siva) should be installed with (the recitation of) the 
principal mantra. 

8. The turrets etc. resting on the door (should be located) 
with their respective names appended. Oblation to fire should 
be made hundred times or half the number of times or twice that 
or according to one’s ability. 

9. One hundred oblations should be made with the mantra 
of the weapons to ward off defects of omission etc. After 
having offered oblations for the quarters, the fees etc. should 
be paid. 



THE 


AGNI PURANA 


PART 1 1 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE LIMITED • DELHI 



First Edition: Delhi , 1954 
Reprint: Delhi , 1998 


MOTILAL BANARS1DASS 

41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007 
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, Warden Road, Mumbai 400 026 
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004 
Sanas Plaza, Subhash Nagar, Pune 411 002 
16 St. Mark's Road, Bangalore 560 001 
8 Camac Street, Calcutta 700 017 
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004 
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 


PRINTED IN INDIA 

BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS, 
A-45 NARAINA INDUSTRIAL AREA, PHASE I, NEW DELHI 110 028 
AND PUBLISHED BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED, 
BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 1 10 007 • 



CONTENTS 


PART II 


CHAPTERS 

101. Mode of consecration of a temple 

102. Mode of consecrating the flag staff 

103. Mode of repair of old or broken lingas 

104. General characteristics of a divine edifice 

105. Mode of worship of the presiding deity of a place 

106. Vfistu relating to Cities 

107. The creation of Svayambhuva Manu 

108. Cosmographical account 

109. The greatness of sacred spots 

110. The greatness of Ganga 

111. The Greatness of Prayaga 

112. The greatness of VSranasi 

113. The greatness of Narmada 

1 14. The greatness of Gaya 

115. Mode of making a pilgrimage to Gaya 

1 16. Mode of making a pilgrimage to Gay& 

117. Mode of performing the ancestral rites 

1 1 8. The Country of Bharata 

1 19. Description of different continents 

120. The extent of the universe 

121. The Science ofjyotisa (Astronomy and Astrology ) 

122. Paficanga: The Almanac 

1 23x Svarodaya cakra, Sanicakra, Kurmacakra, Rahu- 
cakra 

124. Essence of astrology as described in the Victory 

in battles 

125. Different circles which get success in battle 

126. Combinations of good and bad astcrisms 

127. The auspicious and inauspicious periods of the day 

based on certain combinations 


307 

308 
311 
313 
316 
320 

322 

323 
326 

328 

329 

330 

331 

332 
335 
341 
345 

350 

351 
353 
356 
364 

370 

372 

375 

380 

383 



Contents 


128. The Kofacakra — a drawing to forecast results 385 

129. Guide-lines for storing and selling grains 386 

130. Different spheres marked by astorisms indicating 

victory in battle 387 

131. Ghataka cakra, Naracakra, Jayacrkra indicating 

failure or success in battle 388 

1 32. Sevacakra and the indication of accrual of benefits 390 

133 Different traits in infants and combinations indi- 
cating success in battle 392 

134. Sacred formula for the conquest of three worlds 396 

135. Formula for success in battle 397 

136. The diagram of asterisms indicating the period for 

undertaking a journey 400 

137. The formula known as Mahamari 401 

138. The six accessory acts relating to all mantras 403 

1 39. The names of sixty years of Hindu cycle and the good 

or bad results accruing from them 404 

140. Description of herbs used in charms 405 

141. Description of herbs used in charms, medicines 407 

142. Description of medicinal incantations 409 

143. Mode of worship of Goddess Kubjika 41 1 

144. Mode of worship of Goddess Kubjika 413 

1 45. Different Kinds of mantras and the rites of locating 

them. 416 

146. Names of different Goddesses 420 

147. Mode of worshipping the goddess Tvarita and others 423 

148. Mode of worship for success in the battle 425 

149. Mode of performing Lak$a and Kofihoma 425 

1 50. Names of different Manus, different sages and others 

during their period 427 

151. Duties laid down for different castes 429 

152. Duties of a householder 431 

153. Duties of a student 432 

154. Rules of marriage 434 

155. The Code of Conduct 436 

156. Purification of things 439 

157. Pollution and Purification 440 

158. Kinds of pollution 444 

159. The merits of libation and the performance of 
good deeds 


450 



Contents 


160. Duties of a brahmin leading life in the forest 452 

161. Duties of an ascetic 452 

162. Code of laws 455 

163. Mode of performing a £r&ddha 457 

164. Propitiatory rite for the planets 461 

165. Code of Conduct 463 

166. Duties of different castes 465 

167. Propitiatory rite for the planets 467 

168. Kinds of major sins 471 

169. Atonements for various offences 474 

1 70. Expiations for association with major sinners 478 

171. Description of certain subtle expiations 482 

1 72. The hymn which destroys sins 483 

173. Different expiations for different sins 485 

1 74. Expiations for discontinuing the worship of gods 490 

175. Rules and regulations relating to the Vows 492 

1 76. Vows observed on the first lunar day 497 

177. Vows observed on the second lunar day 498 

1 78. Vows observed on the third lunar day 500 

1 79. Vows observed on the fourth lunar day 503 

180. Vows observed on the fifth lunar day 504 

181 . Vows observed on the sixth lunar day 504 

182. Vows observed on the seventh lunar day 504 

183. Vows observed on the eighth lunar day 505 

184. Vows observed on the eighth lunar day 507 

185. Vows observed on the ninth lunar day 509 

186. Vows observed on the tenth lunar day 510 

187. Vows observed on the eleventh lunar day 511 

188. Vows observed on the twelfth lunar day 512 

189. Rules of observing &ravanadv&da£i vrata 513 

190. Mode of practising Akhandadv&daii vrata 514 

191 . Mode of practising vows on the thirteenth lunar day 515 

192. Vows to be observed on the fourteenth lunar day 516 

1 93 . Description of Sivaritrivrata 5 1 7 

194. Details relating to the vows of Atoka Purnimk 518 

195. Vows relating to the weak-days 519 

196. Vows relating to different asterisms 520 

197. Vows performed on certain days 522 

198. Vows performed in different months 523 

199. Vows relating to different seasons 524 



Contents 


200. Vow of giving a gift of a lamp 525 

201 . Mode of Worshipping Vi§nu in a figure of nine # 527 

Compartments 

202. Different flowers used in worship 528 

203. The nature of hell 530 

204. Mode of practising the vow of fasting for stipulated 

months 533 

205. Mode of performing the BhI ?mapaficaka vra ta 534 

206. Mode of offering water of libation to the Venerable 

sage : Agastya 535 

207. Mode of performing Kaumuda vrata 537 

208. Rules and regulations relating to vows and gifts in 

general 538 

209. Rules relating to gifts 539 

210. Sixteen great gifts 544 

211. Different kinds of gifts 546 

212. Gifts granting the desired fruits 552 

213. Mode of making a gift of the earth and its benefits 555 

214. The system of veins in the body and their benefits 556 

215. Mode of reciting Gayatri and its greatness 559 

216. Instructions relating to Gayatri 563 

217. Vasisfha’s hymn to lord Siva 564 

218. Mode of performing the Coronation of a king 566 

219. Sacred syllables for the coronation 569 

220. Accomplishment of assistance to the king 573 

221. Code of Conduct for the servants 575 

222. Construction of forts j76 

223. Duties of a king 579 

224. Duties of a king in the harem 581 

225. Duties of a King 584 

226. Means of Conciliation 587 

227. Code of Criminal laws 588 

228. Instructions relating to military expedition 594 

229. Significance of dreams 595 

230. Inauspicious auguries 597 

231 . Good and bad augures known from the sounds of 

animals and birds 598 

232. Omens known from birds 600 

233. Propitious periods for undertaking an expedition 604 

234. Six expedients used by the King * 606 



Contents 


235. Daily duties of a king 608 

236. Rites preceding the march of a king 609 

237. A hymn to Laksmi for success 615 

238. Ethics narrated by Rama 617 

239. Duties of a King 618 

240. Six expedients used by a king 622 

241 . Four ways of policy : Conciliation etc. 624 

242. Statesmanship for a king 629 

243. Physiognomy of men and their indications 635 

244. Characteristic features of women 637 

245. Characteristics of the royal fan, bow and sword 638 

246. Testing of gems 640 

247. Characteristics of a Site for building 642 

248. Benefit of worshipping lord Vi?nu with flowers and 

leaves 644 

249. Science of archery 645 

250. Science of archery 647 

251. Method of using a noose 649 



CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND ONE 


Mode of consecration of a temple 


The Lord said : 

1-5. I shall describe the mode of consecrating a temple. 
By that itself it would become permeated by the divine force. 
After the angular projection is completed, the preceptor should 
locate a pitcher made of gold or other metals at the middle 
of the eastern altar. It should be filled with the pancagavya (five 
things got from a cow), honey and milk. Five kinds of gems 
should be placed under (the pitcher). (The pitcher) should be 
adorned with garland and cloth. It should be besmeared 
with fragrance. It should be decorated with fragrant flowers. 
The temple should be decorated with tender leaves of trees like 
mango etc. After having finished the accomplishing rite in his 
body, the preceptor should gather (his soul energy) with the 
breath drawn in. The preceptor should then convey to (lord) 
Sambhu (Siva) by his command with the exhalation of breath 
after the soul had been conceived as different from all the (other) 
souls with (the recitation of) its own mantra . 

6. After having gathered the same from the twelve-petalled, 
that one shining like a spark-of fire, the beatific states should be 
located in the pitcher as laid down in the tantras. 

7. The image, its qualities, the beatific states, the letters 
upto k§a and their lords and the collection of fundamental' 
principles should be located. 

8. The ten n&d*s (tubular organs of the body), ten vital 
winds and the thirteen sense-organs as well as their presiding 
deities (should be located) after having united the syllable am 
with their names. 

9. (The two fundamental principles of) illusion and univer- 
sal space which stand in relationship of cause and effect 
towards each other, the gods of learning who direct the pervad- 



308 Agni Pur&ya 

ing (lord) Sambhu (Siva) (should also be located therein) 
with the (recitation of) mantras . 

10-12. After having located the accessories, the preceptor 
should prevent (the deity) from going away by showing the 
rodhamudrd (posture made with the fingers denoting restraint). 
Otherwise an image of the god (should be made) of gold or 
•other metals and it should be purified as before with the five 
things got from a cow etc. After having placed the pitcher on 
the bed and contemplating (lord) Rudra, the consort of Uma, 
(the lord) should be located in that (image) as the pervasive 
(lord). Oblation, sprinkling, touching and repetition (of 
mantras) (should be done) for accomplishing (lord’s) stay therein 
permanently. 

13. After having completed thus the announcement of 
invocation in its three divisions, the preceptor should place the 
image in the pitcher. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWO 
Mode of consecrating the flagstaff 

The Lord said : 

1. O Skanda ! I shall describe (the mode of) consecra- 
tion of the pinnacle, the banner and the flag-staff relating to a 
temple as laid down. 

2. Either it should be half the depth of the tank or of the 
whole edifice. The banner-staff should be made of wood in the 
case of (a temple) built of brick and of stone in the case of that 
built of stone. 

3. In the case of a temple of Vi?nu, the pitcher should have 
the mark of a disc and be proportionate to the image of the deity. 
If it is with a trident it is known as agracula (the tip of the top 
portion). 

4. If the (mark of a) lifiga is found on the top it is called 
Ifainla (the banner-staff of Siva). This kind (of flagstaff) is 



102.5-17 


309 


also found to be described in saivite texts as having th ebijapdraka 
(of the shape of common citron) 

5. The coloured banner should be made to reach down to 
the half of the plinth (of the temple), or to commensurate with 
its entire length, or of the same length with its rod, according to 
the option (of the consecrator), 

6-7. That banner is known as the mah&dhvaja (great banner) 
which flaps around the platform of the edifice. The rod measur- 
ing fourteen, nine or six cubits in length should be known as the 
excellent etc. by learned men. A flagstaff made of a bamboo 
or of wood etc. yields all desires. 

8. A flagstaff breaking down in the middle at the time of 
planting the same augurs evil to the sovereign of the country 
or to the consecrator. 

9. It should be remedied by (the repetition of) the bahu - 
rupamantra. Then the guardian deities of the door should be 
worshipped and appeasement with the mantras (should be done). 

10-12. After having placed the flagstaff, it should be, 
bathed with (the repetition of) the mantra of the weapon. After 
having sprinkled the flagstaff (with water) with (the repetition 
of) the same mantra , the preceptor should then bathe (it) with 
herbal waters and make the divine edifice. After having smeared 
(the rod) with juice and laid on the bed as before, the location 
(of the mantras) (is done) in the flagstaff as in the case of the 
lifiga. But one should not locate the energies of knowledge and 
action. There is no need to use the fourth case (of inflection) 
indicating speciality. There is also no need for constructing an 
altar. 

13-14. Then the principle of artha (sense), the second prin- 
ciple of knowledge and the faces (of Siva) such as Sadyojata 
etc. and the principle of Siva (should be located) in the flag- 
staff. Lord Siva, the indivisible, whose attendants have been 
located should be worshipped^ Then oblations should be made 
with the vedic mantras for the sake of the presence of the flag- 
staff and ending with (the w<$$£:$hat for every part of the flag- 
staff. The flagstaff is also consecrated in a different way. 

15-17. All about this has been described in the mode of 



S10 


Agni Pttrdna 


the astray&ga. After the temple has been made, the bedstead and 
the quadrangle having been decorated at the (decided) place, 
and the three fundamental principles have been located»therein, 
the oblations etc. should be offered and then (lord) Siva should 
be worshipped as before. 

18-22. After having meditated on (lord) Siva as the repo- 
sitory of all the principles, the all-pervasive god should be located 
(therein). The (gods) Ananta (serpent chief) and Kalarudra 
(a form of lord Siva) should be considered as lying at the lotus 
feet, the (lords) Ku$manda and Hafaka at the platform at the 
top of the plinth and the guardian deities along with the nether 
worlds, hells, other worlds and the hundred Rudras representing 
the cosmic egg having been contemplated should be considered 
at the plinth. Then (the preceptor) should contemplate the 
picture of a man on the cloth with a lion on the left along with the 
forty such as principles of water, lustre, and wind, that which is- 
known as enclosing all things, the eight resultant of the intellect, 
the eight kinds of yoga, and the three qualities ending with des- 
truction. The four (principles of) learning etc. (should be consi- 
dered) as located in the cornice of the temple. 

23. The (principle of) illusion along with (lord) Rudra 
(are located) in the neck,., the learning in the threshold, the 
mystic circle, the master along with the lord of learning in the 
(ornamental) pot above. 

24. It should be conceived as the matted hair and the cres- 
cent (on the top) as the trident (of the lord). The three energies 
(should be located) in the flagstaff and should be looked upon 
(as permeated) with the sound. 

25-26. (The preceptor) should also conceive that the energy 
(known as) krnfali is present in the banner. Thus (the different 
gods) should be conceived as present in that abode. After having 
lifted the lihga along with its pedestal or with the earth (lying 
at its bottom ) with (the recitation of) the mantras, it should be 
placed in its seat namely the lotus of energy after having placed 
the gems etc. 

27. After the banner staff has thus been fixed, the person 
for whom the rite is performed gets the desired fruits after cir- 



102.28-30—103.1-5 


311 


cumambulating the edifice along with his relatives and friends. 

28. After having contemplated (the mantra) p&fupata, along 
with the presiding deities of the mantras , the preceptor should 
invoke the presiding deities possessing the weapons for the sake 
of protection. 

29. After having made oblation for the removal of 
defects of deficiency etc. and making offerings to the quarters, 
fees should be paid to the preceptor. The yajamdna (the person 
for whom the rite is done) would go to the heavens. 

30. Such a person would enjoy comforts for so many thou- 
sand as the number of atoms in the structures of the image, 
lifiga and the altar. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THREE 
Mode of repair of old or broken lifigas 
The Lord said : 

1-2. I shall describe the repairing of the lifigas which have 
become old etc. as laid down. That one which is devoid of the 
characteristics, or broken or whose outlines have become blunt 
or that which is struck by lightning or cracked or broken or 
mutilated or damaged in any other way should be installed on 
its pedestal as also its bull. 

3-5. The lifigas which have been shaken (from their position) 
or which have become unsteady or which have been 
slantingly fixed or which lean towards a particular direction or 
those which have been fixed exactly at the centre (of the temple) 
should be fe-installed (in their places) if they are devoid of any 
cracks or if they have been washed by floods of river water etc. 
A lifiga of Siva duly reinstalled at a different place as laid down 
should not be removed whether it has been perfectly fixed or 
improperly fixed. 



312 


Agni Purina 


6. A lihga should be established by (offering) a hundred 
(oblations) and be removed by (offering) a thousand (oblations). 
If the lihga is worshipped, it would set right even the old ones. 

7. After having erected a sacrificial shed either in the south- 
ern part or in the north-eastern part of the ground and an arch 
on the door on the western side and completed the worship of 
the guardian deities, worship with the mantras (is done) on the 
(sacrificial) ground. 

8-10. After having appeased with the mantras and worshipp- 
ed the presiding deities of the ground as before and made 
offerings for the quarters outside, the preceptor should sip waters 
(thrice). After having fed the brahmins, (lord) Sambhu (Siva) 
should then be informed, “O (lord) Sambhu ! This lihga is 
defective and is to be removed. O (lord) Siva graciously take 
thy seat in myself for a while if it pleases you”. After having 
submitted to the lord thus one should offer oblation of appease- 
ment. 

11-12. (The preceptor) (should offer) one hundred and 
eight oblations with honey, clarified butter, milk, and durvd 
(a kind of grass). After having established the lihga , it should 
be worshipped on the ground then. (The Siva mantras for the 
worship are (as follows) : “O/w, to the all-pervading etc.” “Om, 
obeisance to the lord of the heart, the pervading.” The ahga 
mantras (those for assigning on the different parts of the body) 
are “ Om obeisance to the pervading lord, to the head.” etc. 
Then the principle abiding therein should be addressed with the 
mantras of the weapon. 

13-17. (Then the preceptor should say as follows) : * ‘Which- 
ever good spirit that is lodged in this lihga may go to its place of 
liking after leaving this lihga by the command of (lord) Siva. 
(Lord) Bhava (Siva) being attended to by the learning and the 
presiding deities of learning would remain here.” Then having 
made thousand oblations for each one of the (three) parts with 
the p&fupata mantra , sprinkled waters of appeasement and 
touched with the kuia, (the preceptor) should repeat (the man- 
tras). After having offered the arghya (waters for washing) in 
the reverse order to the (fundamental) principles and to the 
presiding deities of the principles, the preceptor should bid fare- 
well to the presiding deities of the eight manifestations (of lord 
Siva) located in the lihga and the pedestal by binding them with 



103.18-22 — 104.1-3 


31$ 


a golden noose placed on the shoulders of the bull and leading 
them with the repetition of the mantras of (lord) Siva and should 
put it in the waters. Then the preceptor should offer hundred 
oblations in order to confer prosperity. 

18-22. One hundred oblations each (should be offered) to 
satisfy the presiding deities of the quarters and for the purifica- 
tion of the sacrificial ground. After having laid protection for 
*hat building with the (repetition of the mantra of) p&fupata wea- 
pon, the preceptor should establish another lihga therein as laid 
down. ( Lingas ) established by demons, sages, brahmins belong- 
ing to the clan of renowned sages and those well-versed in the 
Tantras (class of literature dealing with magic and mystic formu- 
lations for the worship of different deities) should not be removed 
even as laid down, even though they may be old or broken* 
This is the procedure to be followed for replacing an old edifice. 
After having located the collection of mantras on the sword ano- 
ther edifice should be made. If (the edifice is) made less spacious 
it is said to confer death (on the consecrator) and if made too 
spacious it would cause loss of wealth. Whether the same mate- 
rials (are used) or better materials it should be done well to be 
of the same measure as before. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FOUR 
General characteristic of a divine edifice : 

The Lord said : 

1 . One who has peacock on the banner ! I shall describe 
you the general characteristics of a divine edifice. In a ground 
divided into four parts, the breadth of the walls should comprise 
a part. 

2. The adytum should be one-seventh of this. The pedes- 
tal (should be) a quarter of its extent. The pedestal should 
occupy the central part of the ground divided into five parts. 

3. The aperture and the wall should be one part each. Two 
adytums in two parts is medium. One adytum in two parts is 
excellent. 



314 


Agni Purdna 


4-6. According to some the vault of the adytum should 
•occupy three such parts and the walls the rest. In the case of a 
plot divided into six parts the walls (should comprise) dne such 
part. The breadth of the adytum (should be) one part and that 
of the pedestal two parts. The height of the temple (should be) 
double or greater than twice (the breadth) by a quarter or in 
certain cases triple (that of the breadth). Sometimes it would 
be half the breadth or one-third of (the entire area of) the ground, 

7. The (inner) circumference (of the vault would be) a 
quarter less than the area of the temple. The outer circumference 
(would be) a third of it. Small chariots should be got ready at 
the centre. 

8-9. Lords Camunda, Bhairava and Na{ye£a (different 
forms of Lord Siva) should be placed in them. Images of eight 
or four deities should be made outside to surround (the main 
temple) and they should occupy half the space of the temple. 
They may or may not be within the temples. The (images of) 
Adity&s (the 12 suns, progeny of Aditi and KaSyapa) should 
be plaqed at the east. The (images of) Skanda and Agni (should 
be placed) in the north-west. 

10. In this way, images of Yama (lord of death) and other 
deities should be placed in the respective directions over which 
they preside. After having divided the pinnacle into four parts, 
the region of the vault (should be made to comprise) two such 
parts. 

11-13. The top platform of (god of) fire should be in the 
third part. The flat cushion (should be placed above that) 
with a cornice. The five (classes of temples) are vairdja , pu $ - 
J>aka, kail&sa, manika and triviffapa (characterised by structures 
of different shapes) built over the top platform. The first (among 
the above) is a square, the second one a rectangle, (the third one) 
circular, the next one oval and the fifth one is octagonal. Each 
one of these is divided into nine (thereby) giving rise to forty- 
five divisions. 

14-15. The temples belonging to the vairdja class are — the 
first one meru> mandara the second one, vimdna , bhadra , sarvato - 
bhadra, caruka , nandika , nandivardhana and brivatsa. 

16-17. The nine temples belonging to the pufpaka (class) 
are valabhi, gjhar&ja, Jdldgfha , mandira , vUdla, brahmamandira, 
bhavana, prabhava and tibikdve&ma . The circular shaped temples — 



104.18-31 


315 


valaya , dundubhi , padma , mahdpadma , varddhani , u$nl$a y iaftkha , 
and khavfk§a belong to the kaildsa class. 

18-21. The nine — £ 0 / 0 , vffabha, hamsa, garutm&n, fkfandyaka, 
bhufana , bhUdhara , irijaya and pfthividhara are oval-shaped and 
belong to (the class called) manika. Vajra, cakra, svastika, vajra- 
svastika , citra> avastika-khadga , gad£, frikanfha and vijaya are the 
names of those which belong to triviffapa (class). 

22. These are the names given to the towns of Latas etc. 
The top portion should be half the height of the neck and propor- 
tionately broad. 

23. After having made the top platform into ten parts, 
the breadth of the shoulder portion (should be made to comprise) 
five parts. The neck portion should be made (to comprise) 
three parts, and the pracaniaka (?) should be four such parts. 

24. The doors should be made so as to face the cardinal 
points and never on the intermediate points. The pedestal 
should extend to two corners (of the temple) and to the middle 
part of the adytum. 

25. Sometimes (the pedestals) extend up to the fifth part of 
the adytum from the posterior edge thereof, their height being 
double of their length. A different type (of construction) is 
•described now. 

26-30. Four doors should be made so as to measure ten fin- 
gers less than one hundred and sixty fingers known as the uttama 
(excellent ones). Three (doors) would be of the madhyama 
(middle) order and three (doors) of the kaniyasa (inferior ones). 
The breadth (would be) equal to half the height or height grea- 
ter than (the breadth) by a third part. The height may be four 
or eight or ten fingers more. The breadth may be a fourth (part) 
of the height. There should be ornamental indents on the thres- 
hold. It has been stated that the breadth of all of them (should 
be) half the breadth (of the doors). The door with two, five, 
seven or nine ornamental indents confers the desired (fruit). 
Two warders should be carved in the doorframe to occupy a 
quarter part of the latter below the lower (ornamental) branch. 
The ends of the (ornamental) branches should be decorated with 
(the images) of the fairy twins. 

31. (In a temple) if the post has been encroached (the 
•consecrator) would be a slave and if the tree has been impeded 



316 


Agni Purdna 


in its growth it would confer poverty, if it has encroached on a 
well at the gate it portends fear and if it protrudes over the 
ground (it augurs) loss of wealth. 

32. If it has encroached a thoroughfare it would get capti- 
vity (for the consecrator). One would get poverty if the temple 
had been built to make the hall (in front) as narrow. If it obs- 
tructs the varna (?) it will make one deformed. 

33-34. If a mortar causes an obstruction it would give po- 
verty. If a stone-block causes obstruction it would cause enmity. 
If it is shadowed (by some other building) it gives poverty. 
There will not be defects of obstruction (in the following cases) 
— by felling a tree, uprooting (of stone) or by leaving interven- 
ing space equal to twice that of the original compound. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIVE 
Mode of worship of the presiding deity of a place 
The Lord said : 

1 . The presiding deity of the ground should be worshipped! 
in (a mystic diagram) of eightyone squares for the prosperity 
of a city, village, fort, house or temple and their definite accom- 
plishment. 

2-4. I shall narrate the names of the ten occult nerves 
which face the east. (They are) Sdntd, yaSovati , kdntd 9 viiald y 
prdnav&hiniy sati , vasumati, nandd, subhadrd and manoramd. (The 
following occult nerves) are remembered in the north in twelve 
of the eighty-one squares — harini, suprabhd, lakpni , vibhdti, vimald y 
priydy jayd 9 jvdld and viiokd. 

5. (Gods) I$a and others should be worshipped in the eight 
directions. (Gods) I$a, Dhanaftjaya, Sakra (Indra), Arka 
(Sun), Satya (truth), BhrSa (strong) and Vyoma (sky) 
(should be worshipped) in the east. 

6. (Gods) Havyavaha (fire), Pu$an, Vitatha, (untruth), 

Bhauma (Mars), Kj-tanta (god of death), Gandharva (a semi- 
divine being), Bhrnga and Mrga (should be worshipped) in 
the south. ^ 



105.7-17 


317 


7. The Pitrs, the door-keepers, Sugriva, Puspadanta* 
Varuna, Daitya (demon), Sesa (the serpent-god), and yak?man 
(consumption) (should be worshipped) always in the west. 

8. The diseases, the serpent-chief, Bhall&ta, fortune, Aditi, 
and Diti should occupy six half squares. (God) Brahma should 
be worshipped in the nine squares (at the centre). 

9-10. (God) known as AYA (should be worshipped) in the 
two north-eastern squares of Brahma. (God) known as 
Apavatsa (should be located) in the six squares below that 
between the central points. (God) Savita should occupy 
two squares in between those of Marlci and Fire-god. (God) 
Savitri should occupy two places below that and (God) Vivas- 
van six places below that. 

11. (One should worship) (the gods), Visnu, Indra, Jaya 
and the moon in the squares belonging to Pitrs and (lord) 
Brahma. (The god)Mitra should be worshipped in the six squa- 
res in between those of (gods) Brahma and Varuna. 

12. The attendant of (god) Rudra (should be worshipped) 
always in the ten (squares) in between those of the diseases and 
(god) Brahma. (The disease) yakpnan (consumption) (should 
be worshipped) in the two squares below that and dharadhara 
in the six squares on the north. 

13. (The demonesses and demons) CarakI, Skandavikata 
Vidarl, Putana, Jambha, Papa and Pili-piccha should be wor- 
shipped outside in the directions of north-east etc. 

14. There should be eightyone divisions of squares (in the 
case of a site relating to) a house. The same should be one hund- 
red divisions (if it relates to) a (temple) pavilion. As before, 
the gods should be worshipped. (Lord) Brahma (should be 
worshipped) in the sixteen squares (at the centre). 

15-16. (The gods) Marlci, Vivasvat, Mitra and Pjthvi- 
dhara should be (worshipped) in ten squares in the (four) direc- 
tions. Diti, Iianl, Mrga, Mukhya, Pitrs, Papa (spirit of sin)* 
yaksman (consumption) and fire-god should be (worshipped) 
in one and a half square each in the (eight) directions north- 
east etc. 

17. O Guha (Kumara, son of Lord Siva and Parvati) ! 

I shall briefly describe the measures (of different forms of 
temples) in order. It should measure twentyeight cubits in 
length and twentyeight cubits in breadth. 



318 Agni Purtya 

18. The entire circumference would measure twenty-two 
cubits. The width of the wall would measure nine. The above 
measures would hold good in the case of pavilions known as 
Jiv&Jraya, iivdkhya , rudra-htna and sadobhaya. 

19. (The pavilions of) the Savitra class would measure 
eighteen cubits in length and fifteen in breadth, and the width 
of the walls would be made equal to a thirtieth part of the above. 

20. The height of the walls above the plinth would measure 
thrice the width thereof. The ground elevation of manifold 
kinds depending on the passages should be in a same line with the 
foot of the wall. 

21. In the Bhadra (type of temples ) there should be passages 
(on all sides) except at the front. There should be a passage at 
the entrance. The Srljaya (class) would be devoid of the hinder 
(passage). If there are no passages on the sides it is Bhadra 
class. 

22. The passage (should be) as wide as the adytum or 
half of it. The supplementary passage (should be) half (that) of 
the (main) passage and should link one, two or three chambers. 

23. I shall describe the common features of the temples 
which would confer all the desires (on the consecrator). (It 
should have) one, two, three, four or eight rooms in order. 

24. In a temple having one room the southern part should 
face the north. If there are two, one of them should have its 
western part facing the east. If there are four rooms there should 
be one room each as stated above facing the north and east res- 
pectively. 

25. If it faces the west it is known as Siva, the east (it is 
known as) Yamasuryaka, the. east and north (it is known as) 
Da$da, and the east and south (it is) known as Vata. 

26. If it faces the west and north it is called Bali. That 
which is (known as) the Trifula will get destruction of wealth. 
A house devoid of its eastern wing will be Suk?etra which con- 
fers prosperity. 

27. One devoid of southern rooms is (known as) Sull. 
That are having three rooms confers excessive prosperity. The 
building without any room on the west destroys the progeny 
of the consecrator) and also creates many enemies. 

28-29. I shall describe the eight chambers commencing with 
the east (known as) dhoaja etc. The washing anct fragrance 



105.30-38 


319 1 


chambers as well as the kitchen (should be) on the south-east. 
The parlour and bed chambers (should be) in the south. (The 
chamber) for bows and weapons (should be) at the south-west. 
(The chamber) for costly articles (should be) at the west. 
(Room) for articles of perfume (should be) at the north-west. 

30. (The chamber) for wealth and cattle should be made in 
the north. The excellent place for initiation (should be) on the 
north-east. The building (should be made) according to (a 
standard) measured with the consecrator’s hand and co- 
extensive with the pedestal. 

31. The cubit measures should be tripled and then divided 
by eight. Then the remainder should (be the measure) of the 
dhvaja etc. upto the end of v&yasa. 

32. A building (raised on) the second, third, fourth, sixth, 
seventh and the eighth (parts of the ground) as well as in the 
middle and end will be ruinous. 

33. Hence, the divine edifice built on the ninth part is deemed 
to be auspicious. The pavilion built at the centre thereof having 
a breadth equal to or twice the breadth (of the edifice) is com- 
mendable. 

34-38. Eight rooms each should be built on the east, west, 
north and south. The effects of these from east onwards are 
respectively (described). Fear, association with woman, victory, 
prosperity, fame, righteousness, strife and poverty are the eight 
effects of the doer on the east. The eight effects of the door on 
the south are conflagration, unhappiness, annihilation of friends, 
loss of property, death, (gain of) wealth, becoming a sculptor 
and (birth of) children. Long life, banishment, grains, wealth, 
peace, destruction of wealth, emaciation, enjoyment, progeny 
are the effects of the door on the west. Illness, intoxication 
affliction, prominence, wealth, longevity, intelligence and 
honour are the effects of the door on the north. 



320 


Agni Purdna 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIX 
V&stu relating to Cities 

The Lord said : 

1. I shall describe the v&stu (worship of the presiding deity) 
relating to a city for the prosperity of the kingdom. Land mea- 
suring eight miles or half of it or a quarter of it should be set 
apart. 

2. After having worshipped the presiding deity of the city, 
enclosure should be made ready in the thirty squares of lord I$a 
(Siva) and others. The eastern gate (should be) on that of 
(lord) Sun. 

3. The southern (gate) should be (raised) on (the squares) 
of the gandharvas (semi divine beings) while the western one 
(should be raised) on that of (lord) Varuna. The northern gate 
(should be) made on that of (lord) Soma. The low-roofed 
chambers should be made extensive. 

4. The doors should be six (cubits wide) so that the ele- 
phants and other (animals) could easily pass through. A city 
should never be founded (on grounds) far away from one an- 
other, or of shape of the crescent moon or hypotenuse (of the 
plot) broken. 

5. (A city of the shape) of the face of a vajrasQci (diamond 
needle) or having two or three easy ways is not favourable. The 
frontage of a city resembling (the shape of) a bow or vajran&ga 
is beneficiary. 

6. After having worshipped (the gods) Vi$nu, Siva, 
Sun and others and bowing down, the founder (of a 
city) should make the offerings. The goldsmiths and blacksmiths 
should be provided for at the south-eastern quarter of the city. 

7. The houses of professional dancers and courtesans 
(should be located) in the southern quarter. (The houses) of 
actors, potters and fishermen (should be located) in the south- 
western quarter. 

8. (Space) should be (set apart for) war-chariots, weapons 

and swords in the western quarter (of a city). Distillers of liquor 
and those engaged in the service (of the state) (should be located) 
in the north-western quarter. * 



106.9-19 


9. Brahmins, ascetics and holymen (should be provided 
for) in the northern quarter. Those who sell fruits and other 
articles and merchant community in general should be located 
in the north-eastern quarter. 

10. The commanders of army (should be given quarters) 
in the eastern quarter. Different regiments of the army (should 
be provided) in the south-eastern quarter. The officers who 
attend upon the ladies (should have their residence) in the 
southern quarter. Royal camps should be located in the south- 
western part. 

11. The chief ministers, treasurers and architects (should 
be located) in the western direction. Men of judiciary 
belonging to the clan of brahmins and eminent men (should be 
located) in the northern part. 

12. The military men (should be located) in the southern 
part, the tradesmen and iudras (fourth class of men) in the wes- 
tern part. The physicians (should be provided with quarters) 
in all directions and horses and army should be placed in all 
quarters. 

13. The movable class of lingas (should be placed) in the 
east and the cremation ground in the south. Cattle-sheds (should 
be located) in the western part and farmers in the northern part. 

14. Foreigners should be located in the angular points. 
This should be observed even in small villages. Those who see 

(the goddess) LaksmI and Kubera at (each side of) the eastern 
gate-way (of the city) obtain prosperity. 

15. The temples of gods (should be established) in the west- 
ern part facing the east. (The divine edifices should) face to- 
wards the west and north respectively in the east and the south. 

16-17. The temples of gods Brahma, Ila (Siva) and 
Vi§nu (should be built in the city) for the protection of the city. 
A city, a village, a fortress or a house not having a (guardian) 
deity will be swallowed by the goblins etc. and becomes infect- 
ed by diseases. The cities protected by deities confer victory, 
enjoyment and emancipation. 

18. The treasure-house should be in the east, the kitchen in 
the south-east, the bed-chamber in the south and the arsenal 
on the west. 

19. The dining (chamber) (should be) in the western part, 



322 Agni Purdrur 

the granary in the north-west, store-house in the north and the 
chamber for the deities in the north-east. m 

20-23. The palaces may have four chambers or three or 
two or one. In the case of palaces having four chambers there 
are two hundred and fiftyfive subdivisions based on the terraces 
in front of the buildings, whereas those having three chambers 
(will have) four (sub-divisions) and those having two chambers 
(will have) five (sub-divisions) and those having one chamber 
(will have) four. The terraces should number twentyeight 
both in a house and city or they should be four, seven, fiftyfive > 
six, twenty-eight or eight only. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVEN 
The creation of Sudyambhuva Mam 


Fire-god said : 

1-3. I shall describe the different worlds, the earth and the 
continents. King Priyavrata had ten sons Agnidhra, Agni- 
bahu, Vapusman, Dyutiman, Medha, Medhatithi, Bhavya, 
Savant, Jyoti$man, and Satya. The father gave them seven 
continents as follows: He gave Jambudvipa to Agnidhra and 
Plak?a to Medhatithi. 

4. He gave (the continent of) Salmala to Vapugman, 
(continent) Ku£a to Jyoti^man, continent of Krauf&ca to Dyuti- 
man and (continent of) Saka to Bhavya. 

5. He gave Pu?kara to Savana. What Jambudvipa was 
given to Agnidhra by his father (was divided by him and given 
to his sons). He gave (the country) called Hima to Nabhi. 

6. (He gave) Hemakufa to Kimpuru^a, Naigadha to Hari- 
varga, central Meru to Ilavrta, NU&cala (Nila mountains) to 
Ramya. 

7. (He gave) §vetavar$a to Hira$vat, Kuru to Kuru, 
Bhadra$va to Bhadr&iva, western (countries) to Ketumala. 

8. The king having established the sons of Priyavrata (in 
the regions) of Meru, went to the forest. After having performed 
penance, he reached god Hari. 



107.9-18— 108.1 


323 


9. O Foremost among beings ! the eight countries Kim- 
purusa and others by nature abound in happiness and felicity 
and have natural perfection. 

10. There is no fear of old age or death, (adherence or 
non-observance of) moral obligations relating to yuga periods, 
or lower or middle class of beings in (the country) of Hima. 

11. R§abha was born to Nabhi through Meru. Bharata 
was born to R$abha. After having entrusted the kingdom to his 
son, Rsabha resorted to Salagrama and attained Hari. 

12. The country was called Bh&rata after the name 
Bharata. Sumati was born to Bharata. Bharata resorted to 
Salagrama (to worship) Hari after entrusting his kingdom (to 
his son). 

13. He became a yogin (on practising yoga). I shall des- 
cribe his life later at the time of narration of yoga. From Sumati, 
Tejas (was born). Indradyumna was born from him. 

14-15. Paramesthi was born from him and Pratihara was 
born then. Pratiharta (was born) from Pratihara and then 
Bhuva, Udgltha and Prastara from Pratiharta. Vibhu was the 
son of Prastara. Then (was born) Pj-thu and Nakta. Gaya 
was the son of Nakta. 

16. Nara was the son of Gaya. Then Virat was his son. 
Mahavirya was the son (of Virat). Dhiman was born to him. 

17. Mahanta was his son. Manasya was his (Mahanta’s) 
son. (Then) Tvasta (was born to him). Viraja (was born) 
to Tvasta. Raja was his son. 

18. Satyajit (was born) to Raja. O Sage ! one hundred 
sons were born to him. They were the lights of the universe. 
The (country of) Bharata was well-developed by them. The 
creation of the Svayambhuva (Manu) was remembered (so far) 
relating to Kfta and Treta (yugas). 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHT 
Cosmograpkical account 

Fire-god said : 

1. The seven continents are Jambu, Plaksa, Somali* 
Kula, Kraufica, Saka and Pu$kara. 



324 


Agni Purdna 


2. These continents axe surrounded by seven oceans 
namely, Lavana (salt), Iksu (sugarcane juice), Sura (nectar), 
Sarpis (clarified butter), Dadhi (curd), Dugdha (milk) and 
Jala (water) of even proportions. 

3. The Jambudvipa (continent of Jambu) is situated at 
the centre of continents. The Meru mountain which is the 
kind of sixteen mountains towers majestically extending to eighty- 
four (jojanas). 

4. The mountain rises to thirty two thousand (jojanas) 
above (the earth) and spreads to sixteen thousand (jojanas) 
under the earth. Its peaks are in the shape of a pericarp of a 
lotus. 

5. Himavan, Hemakuta and Nisadha are in the southern 
part. Nila, Sveta and Srngi are the varsaparvatas (boundary 
mountains) in the northern part. 

6. Two of the above (mountains) extend to two lakhs 
(jojanas)at their middle, while the others are ten thousand (yoja- 
nas) less. Their altitude is two thousand jojanas and they have 
an equal breadth at the base. 

7. O Twice-born one ! Bharata is the first mountain. 
Kimpurusa is known as the next one. Harivarsa is the next one 
to the south of Meru. 

8. Ramyaka, Hiranyaka and Uttara Kuru are in the north 
just as the Bharata (in the south). 

9. O Excellent sage ! Each one of them is nine thousand 
(jojanas) in their extent. Ilavjrta is at the middle. Meru rises 
up from the centre with its golden peak. 

10. O Fortunate one ! Ilavjrta spreads to nine thousand 
( jojanas ) all around Meru. There are four mountains here. 

11. They are beams of support for the Meru, each one 
extending to one lakh (jojanas ). (Among these) the Mandara 
(mountain) is in the east and the Gandhamadana is in the south. 

12-13. The Vipula (mountain) is in the west and the 
Supargva (mountain) is in the north. The Kadamba, Jambu, 
Pippala and Vata are the trees in these extending to eleven hund- 
red (jojanas) (serving as) their banners. Jambudvipa gets its 
appellation on account of the Jambu fruit of the size of an ele- 
phant. 

14. The waters of the river Jambu deposit the golden ores. 



108 . 15-27 


325 


The Supar^va (mountain lies) on the east of Meru and the 
KetumaJa (mountain) on the west. 

15. The forest of Caitraratha (lies) on the east, Gandha- 
madana on the south, Vaibhraja on the west and Nandana on 
the north. (I shall describe) the lakes herein. 

16. (They are) Arunoda, Mahabhadra, Sitoda, Manasa, 
Sitambha, Cakra and Munja. The mountains known as Kesara- 
cala 1 are in the east. 

17-18. The mountains (called) Trikuta 2 (group) lie 
on the south. The Sikhivasa 3 (group) (lie) on the west. The 
Sarikhakuta 4 (group) lie on the north. The abode of lord 
Brahma is on the Meru (mountain) extending to fourteen thou- 
sand yojanas above. (The abodes) of Indra and other guardian 
deities are around the abode of Brahma. 

19. The river Slta, after falling from the feet of (lord) 
Visnu, washes the lunar region and falls' from heavens on the 
east (on the Bhadrasva mountain). It falls from Bhadrasva on 
the hills below successively and reaches the ocean. 

20-21. Similarly, (the river) Alakananda flows in Bha- 
rata through the south and reaches the ocean after dividing 
itself into seven branches. 

(The river) Caksu reaches the ocean on the west. So also 
(the river) Bhadra (passes through) the Uttara Kuru (country) 
and reaches the northern ocean. (The mountains) Malyavat 
and Gandhamadana extend upto the Nila and Nisadha (moun- 
tains in the north and south respectively). 

22-27. The Meru (mountain) lies in between them in the 
shape of a lotus. (The countries) Bharata, Ketumala, Bhadrasva, 
and Kurus situated outside these boundary mountains are the 
petals of this lotus of the world. The two boundary mountains 
Jathara and Dcvakuta extend upto the Nila and Nisadha moun- 
tains on the north and south. The Gandhamadana and Kailasa 

1. They are Sitambha, Kumuda, Kurari, Malyavan and Vaikanka. 
See Vi.P. Il.ii.2G. 

2. They are Trikuta, Sisira, Paiariga, Rucaka and Nisada. See Vi. P . 
II.ii.27. 

3. They arc Sikhivasa, Vaitfurya, Kapila, Gandhamadana and Ja- 
rudlii. See Vi.P. II.ii.28. 

4. They are Sankhakflfa, R?abha, Hamsa, N&ga and K&laAjara. See 
id . 29. 



326 


Agni Pur&na 


(mountains) spreading in the east and west to eighty yojanas 
lie in the ocean. The two boundary mountains Nisadha and 
Pariyatra are situated on the west as in the east. (Similarly), 
the boundary mountains Jathara and others (are situated) 
around Meru in four directions. 

28. O Excellent sage ! Abodes of (goddess) Lak^ml^ 
(lords) Visnu, Agni and Surya and other gods are situated in the 
caves in the mountains Kesara and others. 

29-30. They are the abodes of gods on the earth. Sin- 
ners do not go there. Lord Visnu resides in Bhadragva as 
Hayagriva, in Ketumala as Varaha, in Bharata in the form of 
Kurma (tortoise) and in Kurus in the form of Matsya (fish). 
Lord Hari is worshipped everywhere in his universal form. 

31. In the eight countries Kimpurusa and others, there is 
no (misery such as) hunger, fear, grief and others. The twenty- 
four thousand inhabitants live without diseases. 

32. There is no imaginary division of time such as the Krta 
(yuga) etc., the division of worlds, waters and clouds. There are 
seven principal mountains in each one of these countries. 

33. Hundreds of rivers rise from them giving rise to sacred 
waters. I shall describe the sacred spots situated in Bharata. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINE 
The greatness of sacred spots 


Fire-god said : 

1-4. I shall describe the greatness of all sacred spots which 
confer enjoyment and emancipation. One, whose hands, feet 
and mind are well-disciplined and one who possesses learning, 
austerity and penance, reaps the fruits of pilgrimage. One who 
has restrained from accepting alms, one who eats less, one who 
has conquered his senses, one who is devoid of sins, such a person 
on pilgrimage would get the fruits of all sacrificial rites. One 
would be born as poor, if he has not fasted three nights, had not 
gone on pilgrimage and had not given gold and cows as gift. 
Whatever fruit is got by doing sacrificial rites wilj be gained 
by going on pilgrimage. 



109.5-18 


327 


5. O Brahmin ! Puskara is the excellent sacred spot. 
One should dwell there atleast for three nights. There are 
thousand crores of sacred places in Puskara. 

6. Lord Brahma resides here along with celestials. 
The sages who desire for everything and the celestials have had 
perfection here after bathing and worshipping the ancestors 
and celestials. 

7. They attain the fruits of performing Asvamedha rite 
and reach Brahmaloka. One who gifts food in (the month 
of) Karttika, gets free from sins and reaches Brahmaloka. 

8. It is difficult to go to Puskara and the austerity at Puskara 
is still more difficult. It is difficult to give gift at Puskara and 
it is still more difficult to stay at Puskara. 

9. One elevates hundreds of manes by staying therein, by 
repetition (of divine names) and by doing ancestoral rites. The 
path to Jambu also lies therein, as also the sacred spot of Tan<Ju- 
likasrama. 

10-11. The Kanvasrama, Kotitirtha, (river) Narmada, 
Arbuda, Carmanvati, Sindhu, Somanatha, Prabhasa, con- 
fluence of (river) Saras vat I at the ocean, the ocean, Pindaraka, 
Dvaraka and Gomati yield all fruits. 

12-13. The Bhumitirtha, Brahmaturiga and the (land of) 
five rivers, the king of mountains, Devika, the destroyer of sins, 
the meritorious Vina^ana, Nagodbheda, the destroyer of sins 
the Kumarakoti are spoken as bestowers of all benefits. 

14. Whoever always says, “I will go to Kuruk§etra and live, 
therein”, becomes free of sin and goes to heaven. 

15. The gods Visnu and others dwell there. (One who) 
lives therein reaches lord Visi^u. One who bathes in the river 
Sarasvatl and Sannihata reaches the region of Brahma. 

16. Even the dust particles at Kuruk§etra confer excellent 
position. The Dharmatirtha, Suvarna and Haridvara are excel- 
lent places. 

17. The sacred places Kanakhala and Bhadrakarnahrada 
are meritorious. The confluence of the rivers Ganges and 
Sarasvatl and the Brahmavarta destroy sins. 

18. The Bhrgutunga, Kubjamra and the place of origin of 
Ganges destroy sins. Varanasi is an excellent sacred spot. 
Avimukta is unsurpassed. 



328 


Agni Pur&ria 


19. The sacred Kapalamocana and Prayaga, the excellent 
sacred spot, the confluence of Gomati and Ganga and (the 
river) Ganga throughout do not confer hell. 

20. The sacred Rajagrha is meritorious. Salagrama removes 
sins. Vatesa, the sacred Vamana and the confluence of 
Kalika are excellent places. 

21. Lauhitya, (river) Karatoya, Sona, Rsabha (hills) 
are excellent places. Sriparvata, Kolbagiri, Sahyadri and 
Malayagiri (are sacred). 

22. The rivers Godavari, Tungabhadra, Kaveri, Tapi, 
Payosni and Reva are the bes towers (of fruits). The Dandaka 
forest is excellent. 

23. Kalanjara, Mufijavata, Surparaka, (river; MandakinI, 
Citrakuta and Srngaverapura are excellent spots. 

24. Avanti is an excellent place. Ayodhya destroys one’s 
sins. Naimisa is an excellent place which yields enjoyment and 
liberation. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TEN 
The greatness of Ganga 


Fire-god. said : 

1. I shall describe the greatness of (river) Ganga. She 
should be worshipped. She yields enjoyment and liberation. 
The countries through which she flows are holy and excellent. 

2. The (river) Ganges is the succour for the beings who 
resort to it always. The (river) Ganges duly worshipped, suc- 
cours the two lines of ancestors. 

3. The drinking of the waters of Ganges (confers the merits 
of performance of) thousands of Candrayana. One who 
worships the Ganges for a month gets the fruits of all sacrificial 
rites. 

4. The goddess (Ganges) destroys all sins and confers (ac- 
cess to) heavens. One continues to stay in heavens as long 
as (his) bones remain in the (waters of the) Ganges. 

5. Blind people and others attain equal stattis with the 



110 . 6 — 111.12 


329 


celestials by worshipping her. The carrying of the earth dug up 
from the beds of Ganges destroys one’s sins just as the Sun. 

6. (The river) purifies hundreds and thousands of holy 
men who look at it, touch it, drink (its waters) and repeat (the 
word) Ganges. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND ELEVEN 
The Greatness of Prayaga 

Fire-god said : 

1 . I shall describe the greatness of Prayaga, the excellent 
place, which confers enjoyment and emancipation. O Excel- 
lent sages ! the gods Brahma , Visnu and others stay at Prayaga. 

2. So also the rivers, oceans, siddhas (accomplished persons )> 
gandharvas (semi-divine beings) (stay there). There are three 
fire-pits and the Ganges (flows) in the middle. 

3. (The river Yamuna), the daughter of Sun, renowned 
in the three worlds flows there with force having all sacred spots 

before her. 

4. (The land) in between (the rivers) Ganges and Yamuna 
is known to be the thigh of (goddess) earth. The sages knew that 
Prayaga is the generative organ situated in the thigh. 

5. Prayaga and Pratisthana are the woollen blanket and the 
mule. The holy place of Bhogavati is the platform for the god of 
creation (Brahma ) . 

6-7. The scriptures and sacrificial rites are endowed with 
forms at Prayaga. By singing in praise of this sacred place, or by 
the repetition of (lord’s) names or by touching the earth here 
(one) gets free from all sins. Charity, ancestral rites and recita- 
tion (of names of the god) done at Prayaga, the place of con- 
fluence (of the two rivers), has undecaying merits. 

8. O Twicc-born ! One who has resolved to die at Prayaga 
at the end (of his term of life) should not change his mind on the 
authority of scriptures or on the words of the people. 

9-12. Ten thousand and six crores of sacred places are pre- 
sent only here. Hence Prayaga is the foremost (place). The 



330 


Agni Pur Una 


Bhogavati, sacred spot of Vasuki (serpent chief) and the flight 
of swans are present here. One reaps the fruits of making a*cha- 
rity of a crores of cows by bathing at Prayaga three days in the 
month oimagka (February-March). The learned have declared 
thus. It is easy to have access to Ganges all along its course, 
but very difficult at the (following) three places — Garigadvara 
(Haridvara), Prayaga and the confluence of Ganges with the 
ocean. One goes to heaven by giving alms here and one will 
become a monarch here itself. 

13-14. One who dies at the root of the banyan tree and the 
confluence goes to the abode oflord Visnu. The sacred sands 
on which UrvasI (a nymph) had sported, the Sandhyavata, the 
Kotitirtha, the Asvainedha, the pure Manasa, and Vasaraka are 
all excellent places. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWELVE 
The greatness of Varanasi 

Fire-god said : 

1. (Lord) Mahesvara (Siva) said to Gauri (consort of 
Siva) that Varanasi is the sacred place. It confers enjoyment 
and emancipation on those who reside there and recite (the 
name of god) Hari (Visnu). 

Rudra {Siva) said : 

2. “The sacred place, O Gauri, has never been forsaken 
(by me) and hence it is called Avimukta 1 . The repetition (of 
god’s names), the performance of penance and giving alms at 
Avimukta indeed (yields) undiminishing benefits. 

3-5. After rubbing away dust from the feet with a stone, 
one should stay at KaSI (Varanasi). He should never forsake it. 
The eight holy spots — Hariscandra, Amratake$vara, Japyesvara, 
Sriparvata, Mahalaya, Bhfgu, Cantjesvara and Kedara, remain 
concealed at Avimuktaka (Varanasi). Avimuktaka is the most 
sacred place among all sacred places. 

6. It extends to two yojanas in the east and half z^yojana in 
1. Avimukta is one of the names of V&r&nasl. 



1 12.7 — 1 13.1-6 


331 


the opposite direction. The (two) rivers Varana and As! (flow) 
and Varanasi lies between the two. 

7. Bathing, muttering (of divine names), oblations (to 
gods), (one’s) death, worship of gods, ancestral rites, alms- 
giving and stay and whatsoever done here is capable of confer- 
ring enjoyment and emancipation. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTEEN 
The greatness of Narmada, 


Fire-god said : 

1. I shall describe the greatness of Narmada which 
yields great pleasure. The water of the Ganges purifies the 
bather at once. The water of the river Narmada (purifies) 
at the mere sight of it. 

2-3. It extends (in length) to one hundred yojana and two 
yojanas in breadth. There are sixty thousand holy places and 
sixty crores on the hills on either side at Amarakantaka. (The 
place of) confluence with Kaveri is meritorious. Listen to me. 
I shall describe about Sriparvata. 

4-5. (Goddess) Gaurl in the guise of (goddess) Sri (LaksmI) 
did penance here. Lord Hari told her, who was doing pen- 
ance, that she would attain salvation, and that hill will be known 
after her name as Sriparvata. Hundred yojanas all along (the 
hill) would become greatly meritorious. Charity, penance, 
chants and ceremony done here all yield undiminishing 
merits. 

6. Death at this place (conveys one) to the world 
of Siva. This excellent sacred place yields everything. Lord 
&iva sports here with his consort. (The demon) Hiranyakasipu 
performed penance here and became mighty. The sages 
attained perfection here. 



332 


Agni Pur&na 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FOURTEEN 
The greatness of Gaya 


The Fire-god said : 

1-2. I shall describe the greatness of Gaya. It is the most 
excellent among the sacred places. The demon Gaya practised 
penance. Being tormented by the heat of his penance, the celes- 
tials (approached lord) Visnu who was lying in the milky 
ocean and told him “Kindly protect us from the demon Gaya.” 
(Lord) Hari (Visnu) said yes. He met the demon and asked 
him to request for a boon. 

3-4. The demon requested that he would be the holiest of 
all places. Lord Visnu granted his request. Having seen that 
the demon (was on the earth) and the earth had become deserted 
without Lord Visnu, the celestials, Brahma and others in the 
heaven met lord Hari (Visnu) and said, “O (lord) Hari ! 
The earth has become deserted.” 

5. On seeing the demon’s presence, lord Hari (Visnu) 
asked (lord) Bralima, “You go to the demon along with the 
celestials and request for his body for the purpose of a sacrifice.” 

6. After having heard that, Brahma went to the demon 
Gaya along with the celestials and said to him as follows: 
“I am your guest. I request you (to give me your) pure body 
for (the sake of being offered in) a sacrifice.” 

7. The demon Gaya granted the request. He fell down. 
(Lord Brahma)did the sacrifice on the skull. As it was moving* 
(lord Visnu) asked lord Brahma to offer the final oblation. 

8-9. Even as the final oblation was being offered, the demon 
moved. Hence lord Brahma asked Lord Visnu. Lord 
Visnu then called Dharma (the god of virtue) and said, “O 
celestials ! you all support this divine stone. The club-wielding 
form of mine along with the gods will be present on this slab.” 

10-11. Having heard that, lord Dharma supported that 
excellent divine slab. Marici, the son of Brahma married Dharma 
vrata, the daughter of Dharma and Dharmavatl. She was devot- 
ed to doing penance. (They two spent happily) just as (lord) 
Hari sported with (goddess) Sri (Laksmi) and (lord) Sambhu 
(Siva) with (goddess) Gauri (Parvati). 

12. (Once) he returned from the forest with^Mia (grass) 



114-13-25 


333 


and flowers and was very tired. After taking food he said to 
Dharmavrata, “Massage my feet.” 

13. The dear wife accordingly was massaging the feet of the 
sage who was taking rest. In the meanwhile, as the sage fell into 
a nap, lord Brahma came there. 

14. Dharmavrata began to think, “Shall I worship lord 
Brahma ? Or shall I continue to massage the feet (of my lord) ? 
Brahma who is the lord of my lord should be worshipped.” 

15-17. After thinking (for some time) she began to worship 
lord Brahma with all the honours. Marlci (woke up and) 
saw her (doing service to Brahma). As she was not doing as di- 
rected he cursed her angrily, “You will become a stone”. Dhar- 
mavrata also said to him, “After having stopped massaging your 
feet, I had worshipped (Brahma) your lord. As you have cursed 
me, a faultless person, you will be cursed by (lord) Sankara 
(Siva) . Dharmavrata bore the curse singly and resorted to 
fire-god. 

18. She performed penance for a long period. Then Visnu 
and other celestials appeared in front of her and asked her to 
request for a boon. 

19-22. Dharmavrata said to the celestials, “O Gods let 
my curse come to an end. The celestials said, “The curse given 
by Marici will not be otherwise. You will become a sacred stone 
bearing the marks of the foot-prints of lord (Visnu). You will 
be endowed with the essence of the gods, O Devavrata (Dhar- 
mavrata) ! You will be representing the forms of all celestials, 
You will be meritorious for making the demon motionless”. 
Devavrata said, “If you are pleased with me, may Brahma, 
Visnu, Rudra, Gauri, Laksmi and other gods stay in me ever.” 
The fire-god said, Having heard the words of Devavrata, 
the celestials said in affirmative and repaired to the heavens.” 

23. That divine stone slab of the demon was supported by 
(lord) Dharma. The demon began to move with the stone slab 
on which (the gods) Rudra and others remained. 

24. The demon was still moving along with celestials. 
Then lord Hari (Visnu), who was reclining in the milky ocean, 
was requested by celestials and he gave his form of wielding 
a mace. 

25. (He said) “You all may go. I shall myself go there with 
the form known to all celestials.” There lord Gadadhara 



334 Agni Purana 

manifested (in the form of) manifest, unmanifest and both mani 
fest and unmanifcst. 

26-30. (Lord) Adigadadhara was himself present in order 
to make (the stone slab) steady. There was a demon named 
Gada. He was killed by lord Visnu. Visvakarma (the celes- 
tial architect) made a mace from the bones (of that demon) . 
(Lord) Gadadhara killed Heti and other demons with that first 
mace duly. Hence, he is known as Adigadadhara. When lord 
Adigadadhara was manifest in the divine stone slab and the 
demon remained steady, then lord Brahma offered the final 
oblation. The demon Gaya asked celestials ‘‘Why I was 
deceived ? By the more command of lord Visnu I would have 
remained steady. Because you have tormented me you should 
give me a boon”. 

The celestials said : 

31-32. “Since you have been made steady by us, this will 
become a holy place of the lords Visnu, Sambhu (Siva) and 
Brahma. (It would become) more renowned than all other 
sacred places. It would confer the region of Brahma on the 
(departed) ancestors”. Having spoken thus, the gods and god- 
desses remained there. All the sacred places also were present 
there. 

33-35. After having performed the sacrifice, Brahma gave 
fees to the priests. The sacred place of Gaya (extends to) 
five krofas (ten miles). Fiftyfive villages were endowed with (the 
following): Golden hills flowing with rivers, milk and honey, 
reservoirs of curd, clarified butter, plenty of hills of food, kdma - 
dhenu (the celestial cow), kalpataru (the celestial tree) and abodes 
made of gold and silver. Let “the brahmins here do not seek 
alms. The lord gave all these things after having spoken very 
little. 

?6-37. (The brahmins) at Gaya were cursed by lord 
Brahma when they on account of their greed received gifts of 
money and other things of the righteous sacrifice “You will be 
deprived of learning. You will be greedy. The rivers will be 
bereft of milk and other tilings. The mountains will become mere 
rocks.” 

38-40. The brahmins said to (lord) Brahma, “Everything 
has been lost on account of the curse. Kindly be gracions to us 



114.41-115.1-9 


335 


for the sake of our livelihood”. He replied to the Brahmins, “You 
will be dependent on (the pilgrims to) the sacred place as long 
as the moon and sun (exist). The people who come to Gaya 
and worship you by offering gifts of food, wealth etc. and ances- 
tral rights shall elevate hundreds of their families to heaven from 
hell and excellent position after heaven.” 

41. Gaya also performed a sacrifice offering plenty of food 
and profuse fees. The place has been named as Gaya after him. 
The Pandavas worshipped lord Visn u. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FIFTEEN 
Mode of making a pilgrimage to Gayd 

Fire-god said : 

1-7. When he has decided to go to Gaya after having duly 
performed the ancestral rite, he should wear ochre robes and do 
circumambulation of the village. He should control his mind 
and should not seek alms as he proceeds on the journey everyday. 
As soon as he has started from his house to go to Gaya, he 
secures for his ancestors the steps to ascend to heaven at each one 
of his steps. What is that to be done by acquiring knowledge about 
the brahman (the absolute) ? What is the benefit of dying at a 
cowshed ? What is the use of stay at Kuruksetra ? If the son 
goes to Gaya, the ancestors celebrate it on seeing that the son 
has reached Gaya. (They would think), will they (the sons) 
offer us waters atleast by touching with their feet ? The knowledge 
about brahman , the ancestral rite at Gaya, the death at the cow- 
shed and stay at Kuruksetra are the four ways of attaining libe- 
ration. The ancestors who are afraid of hell desire that their 
sons who go to Gaya would be their saviours. Tonsure and 
fasting is a general rule (to be adhered) at all the sacred places. 

8. There is no restriction about time at Gaya. The obla- 
tions may be offered always. One who stays there for three 
fortnights purifies seven generations. 

9. In the a$taka ceremony and in the vfddhi rite at Gaya 
on the day of death, separate rite is performed for the mother at 
Gaya. But it is performed along with the husband at other places* 



336 


Agni Pur ana 


10. So also with the rites for the nine relatives such as the 
father etc. and for the twelve relatives. One should bathe ifi the 
sacred water of Uttaramanasa on the first day. 

11. One should bathe in the sacred Uttaramanasa for the 
sake of increase of longevity and good health, for the destruction 
of all sins and for liberation. 

12. By satisfying gods and ancestors with offerings, 
the doer of ancestral rite is deemed to have offered them the 
balls (of rice) “I am satisfying gods remaining in heaven, sky 
and earth.” 

13-16. One should satisfy beings in heaven, sky and 
earth, and father and mother (with the words), “I make 
these offerings of balls (of rice) for (my) father, grandfather, 
greatgrandfather, mother, (paternal) grandmother, (paternal) 
great-grandfather, (maternal) grandfather, (maternal) great- 
grandfather and (maternal) great great grandfather and others 
for their uplift. “Our salutations to the Sun-god who is of the 
forms of (the planets) Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, 
Saturn, Rahu and Ketu. Whoever bathes in the Uttaramanasa 
elevates his entire family. 

17-18. After having saluted Sun (god) one should goto 
the Daksinamanasa without speaking (any word). (One should 
contemplate as follows) : “I bathe in the Daksinamanasa for the 
satisfaction of (my) ancestors. I have come to Gaya. May all 
my ancestors ascend heaven. ” After having performed 
ancestral rite and offered balls (of rice), one should utter as 
follows after worshipping Sun (god) : 

19. “Om, salutation to Sun (god), lord (of the 
universe. O Supreme god ! get me the cherished end. Graci- 
ously grant enjoyment and emancipation to all my ancestors. 

20-21. May the most propitious Fire-god, the conveyor 
of oblations, Soma, Yama, Aryama, and groups of manes — 
Agnisvattah, Barhisadah, Ajyapah come here. My ancestors 
such as mother, (maternal) grandfather and others were 
protected here by all of you. 

22-24. I am the person to offer them balls (of rice). 

I have come to this Gay k (Ksetra) . The sacred place named 
Kanakhala, renowned in three worlds and being worshipped 
by celestials, sages and ganas , lies to the north of Mun^a- 



115.25-36 


337 


pj*stha (the place where tonsure is done). It is being guarded 
always by the licking great serpents that give pleasure to accom- 
plished persons and frighten sinners. The mortals on earth 
go to heavens and sport there by bathing there (in the waters of 
Kanakhala). 

25. Then one should go to Phalgutirtha situated on the 
MahanadI after having visited Uttaramanasa, Naga, Janar- 
dana, sacred well and banyan tree. 

26. This is spoken as the Gayasira. It is also called 
Phalgutirtha. The Mundaprstha, Naga hill and other places 
are the most excellent among outstanding. 

27. The water on the earth is veritable Kamadhenu which 
yields prosperity and heaven. The Phalgutirtha causes delight 
to the eyes. No other place is like the Phalgu (tlrtha). 

28. The man who bathes in the Phalgutirtha and 
worships lord Gadadhara (Visnu) is deemed to have achieved 
all things got by the doers of good deeds. 

29. The sacred places on earth, commencing with 
oceans and ending with tanks go to Phalgutirtha once every- 
day. 

30. Whoever bathes reverentially at the Phalgutirtha, the 
foremost among tlrthas, causes forefathers to reach the region 
of Brahma and the own self to get enjoyment and emanci- 
pation. 

31-33. One who performs the ancestral rite here should 
bathe, offer balls (of rice) and worship (lord) Brahma. 
In this Kaliyuga, all regions (of the universe) are presided 
over by (lord) Mahesvara (Siva). But (lord) Gadadhara 
(Visnu) is the presiding deity here. (Lord) Brahma (remains 
here) in the form of a linga. (One should say), “I make obei- 
sance to (lords) (Mahesvara) Siva, Gadadhara (Visnu), Bala, 
Kama (god of love), Aniruddha (a form of Vishu) and Nara- 
yana. I also make obeisance to Brahma, Visnu, Nrsiriiha and 
Varaha (forms of Visnu) and others.” Then one elevates hund- 
reds of his family after worshipping (lord) Gadadhara. 

34. Then one should go to Dharmaranya on the second 
day, bathe in Matangavapi at the excellent MatangaSrama, 
do the ancestral rite and offer balls (of rice). 

35-36. One should utter the following (words), after wor- 
shipping gods Matangeia and Siddhe£a: “Let the gods and 



338 


Agni Purdna 


guardian deities be the witness (to the fact) that I had come here 
and performed rites at this Matanga for the liberation of my 
fore-fathers. Bathing, offerring waters of liberation, performance 
of ancestral rite and other acts (should be performed) at 
Brahmatlrtha and the sacred well. 

37. The performance of ancestral rite between the well and 
the sacrificial post lifts hundreds of fore-fathers. The righteous 
person who salutes the Mahabodhi tree gets the region of heaven. 

38-39. On the third day, having control over the senses, 
one should bathe in the Brahmasaras, with the words, “I bathe 
in the sacred Brahmasaras for the favour of lord Brahma 
and convey forefathers to the region of BrahmA served by the 
brahmarsis and ganas. The doer of ancestral rite should offer 
waters of libation, offer balls (of rice) and sprinkle (water 
over his body). One who wants to have Vajapeya (rite) should 
circumambulate the brahmay upa (post). 

40. One sage offers water at the root of the mango tree hold- 
ing a pitcher and kuSa in his hand. The mango trees are watered 
and the forefathers are satisfied. One act is well known as yield- 
ing two fruits. 

41-42. By making obeisance to lord Brahma one elevates 
hundreds of generations. On the fourth day, after having bathed 
in the Phalgutlrtha and offering tarpana to gods, one should 
do the ancestral rite together with (the offering of) balls (of 
rice) at the Gayasiras. The extent of sacred Gaya is five kroias 
(ten miles) and the extent of GayaSira is one kroSa (two miles). 

43. By offering balls (of rice) there, one elevates hund- 
reds of generations. The great lord Mahadeva (Siva) has 
placed his foot at the Mundaprstha. 

44. The Gayasira is said to be the sanctuary at Munda- 
prstha. The Gayasira itself has been made the hermitage at 
Phalgutlrtha. 

45-48. The nectar flows therein. Whatever is offered there 
to the forefathers never decreases. After having bathed at 
Da£a£vamedha and worshipped lord Brahma, whoever 
touches the Rudrapada (the foot mark of lord Rudra) will 
not be born again. Having offered the ball of rice of the mea- 
sure of a Sami leaf at GayaSira, those who are in the hell go to 
heaven and those who are in heaven attain liberation. The offer 



115.49-62 


339 


of ball (of rice) (is made) along with pdyasa, (sweet porridge) 
flour made into a paste, gruel, rice and wheat and mixed with 
sesamum. By offering the ball (of rice) at Rudrapada, one ele- 
vates hundreds of generations. 

49. Similarly, one who offers the ball (of rice) at the ances- 
tral rite at Vi?nupada gets released from debts (due to 
ancestors). One will elevate hundreds of fore-fathers as also 
his own self. 

50-53. So also, one who does the ancestral rite at the Brahma- 
pada (the place where the footmarks of Brahma are situated) 
conveys the forefathers to the region of Brahma. Similarly, (the 
performance of) ancestral rite at the daksindgnipada , gdrhapatya - 
pada and the dhavaniyapada 1 confers the fruits of (performance 
of a) sacrificial rite. One who does the ancestral rite to dvasthya 2 
(fire), (gods) moon, sun, gana , (sage) Agastya and Karttikeya 
elevate the family. After having saluted the chariot of Sun, 
one should make obeisance to Karnaditya. After having worshipp- 
ed the foot of (lord) Kanake£a, one should make obeisance 
to Gayakedara. (By such acts) one gets freed from all sins 
and conveys his fore-fathers to the region of Brahma. 

54-55. Prince Vi£ala at Vi£ala became father of children by 
offering balls (of rice) at Gayasiras. He asked the brahmins, 
“How can I have children ?” The brahmins told ViSala, 
“All things will be got by offering balls (of rice) at Gaya.” 

56-59. Then Vi$ala also offered balls (of rice) to the fore- 
fathers at Gayasiras. Having seen white and red (coloured) 
souls in the sky, he asked them, “Who are you ?”. One among 
them, the white person, said to Vi$ala,“I, the white person, 
am your father now going to the region of Indra on account of 
(your) good deeds. O son ! the red coloured (person) is 
my father and the black coloured is my grand-father. We had 
reached hell and we are liberated by you. Because you have 
offered balls (of rice) we are going to the region of Brahm&”. 
After saying thus they went away. ViSala got progeny, ruled 
the kingdom and (finally) reached lord Hari (Vi$nu). 

60-62. The foremost among the pretas said to the merchant 
for his liberation, “Good fruits are enjoyed by all pretas , who 

1. The places associated with the fires of the household. 

2. A household fire. 



340 


Agni Purd^a 


are tormented by sufferings. Once, a pitcher together with food 
.and water was given on a Sravanadvada£i day at noon. That lias 
been sustaining (us ever since). You go to Gaya with money and 
offer us balls (of rice) 5 *. The merchant went to Gaya with 
money and offered balls (of rice). 

63-64. The foremost among the pretas was led to the region 
of (lord) Hari (Visnu) along with the other pretas . (One libe- 
rates) his own self, his forefathers and those who have died on the 
paternal and maternal side, as also those related to the preceptor, 
the father-in-law and other relatives, by the offer of balls (of 
rice) at GayaSiras. 

65-67. (One should utter the following words): “Those 
who have been deprived of the offer of balls for their sake, those 
who do not have a wife or children, those for whom the rites 
could not be done, those who were blind, lame or of deformed 
limbs, those who were born prematurely and other known and 
unknown (relatives) in my family, for their sake, I have offered 
the ball (of rice). Let it remain undecaying. Those fore-fathers 
of mine who remain in the form of a preta , let all of them be pleas- 
ed for ever by the offer of the ball (of rice)”. 

68. All those who desire to elevate the family should offer 
balls (of rice) to all. So also one desirous of (elevating his own 
self) and getting imperishable place should offer (ball of rice). 

69-70. The wise man should bathe at Gadalola with 
the (repetition of) mantras. O lord Janardana ! I bathe in 
this sacred Gadaprak§alana at the extremely sacred Gadalola 
in order to appease sufferings due to mundane existence. 
Obeisance to the Akfayavafa (banyan) tree, which yields un- 
decaying heaven. 

7 1 . One should do the ancestral rite at the spot of the banyan 
tree and feed brahmins for (securing) undecaying position 
of forefathers and for the destruction of all sins. 

72. If one brahmin has been fed, crores (of brahmins) 
would become fed. What more to say ? If many are fed, the offer- 
ings done to the fore-fathers become undecaying. 

73. The fathers of those who offer food at Gaya become 
virtually the putriria (i.e. having sons). After having saluted the 

1. The word putra means — one who saves parents from the hell 
called put. % 



115.74—116.6 


341 


banyan tree and the lord of the banyan tree, one should worship 
the great grand-father. 

74. One would attain imperishable position and elevate 
hundreds of his family members. The pilgrimage made to Gay& 
always (bears) fruit whether it is done in the proper way or not. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTEEN 

Mode of making a pilgrimage to Gayd 
The Fire-god said : 

1. One should do sandhya (twilight worship) after 
bathing in (the river) Mahanadi with (the recitation of) 
gdyatri (mantra). The ancestral rite and offer of balls (of rice) 
in the morning preceded by (the recitation of) gdyatri (man- 
tra) yields undiminishing (fruits). 

2. Having bathed in the noon (as the sun remains up) 
and having worshipped with songs and (playing of) musical 
instruments, the (evening) twilight worship is done there itself 
in front of the sun and the offer of balls (of rice) is made. 

3. (Similarly) one should (offer) at the place of Agastya. 
One, who has come out after having entered the yonidvdra (the 
fissure in the hill), does not enter thjtyoni (the womb) again and 
will be liberated from the cycles of birth and death. 

4. (He) should then pay obeisance to Bali (a demon king) 
at K&ka£ila and (lord) Kumara (Subrahmanya).Then one 
should offer balls (of rice) at Svargadvara, Somakuntfa and 
Vayutirtha. 

5. Then (he) should offer balls (of rice) at Akasagang& 
and Kapil&. After having paid obeisance to Siva, the lord of 
Kapil&, one should offer bails (of rice) at Rukmikunda. 

6* After having worshipped (lord) Kofl$a at Kojitlrtha, 
one (should offer balls of rice) at Amoghapada. Then the balls 
(of rice) should be offered at Gadalola, Vanaraka and Gopra- 
cara. 



342 


Agni Purdna 


7. After the worship of the cow, one who does the ancestral 
rite and offers balls (of rice) at (the river) Vaitarini, elevates 
twentyone generations. Then one should offer balls (of rice) 
at Krauficapada. 

8-11. (The pilgrim) should then offer balls (of rice) at 
Vi§ala and Ni§cira on the third day. One who bathes in the 
Rnamok§a and Papamoksa and with the sacred ash at the Bhas- 
makunda gets free from sin. One should then worship lord 
Janardana (uttering as follows) : “I have placed this ball (of 
rice) on your hand. O Janardana ! When I die let this remain 
without decay.” (Lord) Janardana himself (remains) at 
Gaya in the form of forefathers. Having worshipped that 
lotus-eyed lord one gets liberated from three debts. After having 
worshipped (lord) Markandeyesvara, one should worship (lord) 
Grdhresvara. 

12. Then the balls (of rice) should be offered to (lord) 
MaheSa at the Mulaksetra at Dhara. Balls (of rice) should be 
offered at Grdhrakuta, Grdhravafa and Dhautapada. 

13. (The pilgrim) should then offer balls (of rice) at the 
Pu$karim, Kardamala and Ramatlrtha. One should make obei- 
sance to (lord) Prabhasesa and offer pinijta (balls of rice) at 
PretaSila. 

14. (The following words should be recited on these occa- 
sions) : “May all (my) fore-fathers and relatives who are still 
in the form of pretas (the dead people still in the state of a spirit) 
in the heavens, sky or earth get released from that state by my 
offer of pin&as .” 

15. One who offers pin<j.a at the following three places- 
Pretaiila, the sacred GayaSiras and Pretakunda at Prabhasa, 
liberates his family. 

16. (The pilgrim) should pay obeisance to (lord) Vasi$- 
fheia and offer pinia in front of that (deity). He should then 
offer pin<j,a at Gayanabhi, Su$umna and Mahakofi. 

17. (Pinfa should be offered) in front of(lord Gadadhara) > 
at Mugdaprrtha and in the presence of the goddess. The Munda- 
pr?{ha together with the guardian deities should be worshipped 
first. 



116.18-32 


343 


18. By doing such worship, one will not have fear and the 
effects of disease and poison will be destroyed. One who worships 
(lord) Brahma conveys his family to the region of Brahma. 

19. One who worships Subhadra (sister of lord Kr?na), 
Balabhadra (brother of lord Kr?na) and Purusottama (here 
refers to lord Kr§na), gets all his desires fulfilled, elevates his 
family and attains heaven. 

20. One should pay obeisance to (lord) Hr?Ikesa and offer 
pinia in front of that (deity). Having worshipped (lord) Ma- 
dhava, one becomes honoured by the celestials. 

21. One who worships (the goddesses) Mahalaksmi, Gauri, 
Marigala and Sarasvatl elevates his fore-fathers and enjoys all 
pleasures in heaven and becomes a learned man (in his next 
birth). 

22-24. One who worships the twelve Adityas (suns), Fire- 
god, Revanta and Indra, gets free from diseases etc. and attains 
heaven. One who worships Kapardi, Vinayaka and (lord) 
Karttikeya (Subrahmanya nourished the six Krttikas) gets his 
desire accomplished without any impediment. One would get 
everything by worshipping the eight mysterious lingas — Soma- 
natha, KaleSa, Kedara, Prapitamaha, SiddheSvara, RudreSa, 
RameSa and Brahmakesvara. 

25. By worshipping (lords) Narayana, Varaha and Nara- 
simha one would get prosperity. By worshipping (lords) Brahma, 
Vi$nu, Mahe£a and Tripuraghna (destroyer of Tripura) one 
would get all things. 

26. He who worships SIta, Rama, Garutfa and Vamana 
gets all the desired things and conveys his forefathers to the 
region of Brahma. 

27. By worshipping lord Adigadadhara in the company of 
celestials, one gets free from three debts 1 and redeems the 
entire family. 

28. The stone slab is of the form of celestials and it is 
hence meritorious. There is no place in Gaya where there is no 
sacred spot. 

29-32. That person in whose name a pi^ia is offered, is con- 
veyed to (the region of) Brahm& eternally. After having paid 
obeisance to PhalgvHa, Phalgucandl and Arig&rakeSvara, one 
should perform the ancestral rite at the place of Matanga and 
1. They are due to the sages, gods and manes. 



344 


Agni Purina 

Bharatasrama. So also one should offer food at Hamsatirtha, 
Kotitirtha and PanduSila. There, at the Agnidhara, and at 
Madhusravas, pin$a should be offered. One should offer pinfa 
at the forest of Dhenuka and worship the cow at Dhenupada. 
One who offers pinfa in the Sarasvat! (river) redeems all the fore- 
fathers. 

33. After having worshipped the evening twilight, one 
should pay obeisance to (goddess) Sarasvati. The brahmins 
proficient in the Vedas and Vedangas should do the three twilight 
worships. 

34. After having done circumambulation of Gaya and 
having worshipped the brahmins at Gaya, offer of food or any- 
thing else becomes undecaying. 

35-42. The lord Adigadadhara should be glorified and 
prayed to as follows: “I pray to the conferer of yoga, (lord) 
Gadadhara, the resident of Gaya, who redeems the fore-fathers 
for the sake of dharma (righteousness), artha (prosperity) kama 
(pleasure) and mokfa (redemption). I salute that true brahman, 
who is devoid of a body, organs, mind, intellect, life-force and ego 
who is always pure, and who is endowed with intellect. I always 
salute the lord who is bliss, without a second form, who is wor- 
shipped by the celestials and demons, and who is surrounded by 
gods and goddesses. I pay obeisance to the destroyer of the 
sinful propensities of the Kali period, the person wearing the 
garland of wild flowers, the protector of all the worlds, the one 
bent on the redemption of the family, the one divided himself 
into the manifest and unmanifest. I worship that destroyer of 
frightful sins and one who remains as the permanent essence. O 
lord ! Gadadhara ! I have come to Gaya in order to do the 
ancestral rite. You be the witness for me here today. Let me be 
free from three kinds of debts. May the gods Brahma, l£ana and 
others be the witness for me. I have come to Gaya and have 
redeemed my forefathers. Whoever reads (about) the greatness 
of Gaya at the time of (doing) the ancestral rite, attains the 
region of Brahma. The ancestral rite done to the forefathers 
becomes undecaying and it confers the region of Brahma. 



117.1-12 


345 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEEN 
Mode of performing the ancestral rites 


Fire-god said : 

1-5. I shall describe (the mode of performing) iraddha 
(ancestral rite) as described by sage Katyayana to the sages. 
One should do Sraddha at Gaya especially on the sahkrdnti 1 
etc. or on the day of the new moon or on days after the fourth 
day. After having reached there, one should invite (any one of 
the following for the iraddha ) : the mendicants, pious householders 
one who has completed his studies, learned brahmins, those who 
are faultless, those who strictly observe the propriety of conduct. 
Persons afflicted by white leprosy or leprosy should not be invit- 
ed. So also people who are present uninvited should not be 
entertained. They should have bathed, be pure and have self- 
control. They should face the east while doing divine acts. 
The three fore-fathers (father, grand-father and great grand- 
father) should separately be invoked. So also the fore-fathers on 
the maternal side (to whom one is entitled to offer) should be 
invoked. 

6. The performer of the fr&ddha should observe continence 
that day. (He should be) gentle, calm, not hasty, true and not 
intoxicated. (He should) not stir out. (He should) not read the 
scriptures and practice silence. 

7. Kind enquiries should be made of the chief among those 
seated. Even number of darbha should be spread for the fore- 
fathers. The (appropriate) deity shoftld be invoked. 

8. One should ask, “Shall I invoke Vi$vedevas ?” (He 
should be replied), “you invoke’*. After having invoked 
ViSvedevas, and having spread barley, one should repeat the 
following : 

9. O ViSvedevas ! You hear this. I invoke the fore-fathers. 
Having asked thus and being permitted to invoke, one should 
invoke them (saying) “You be pleased.” 

10-12. After having spread the sesamum, one should invoke 
the fore-fathers with the repetition of (the mantra), “Fore-fathers” 
One should sprinkle on* the kuia with the mantra Sash no devL 

1 . The day on which the sun enters a new sign of the zodiac. 



346 


Agni Purfaa 


After having scattered the grains of barley with the (repeti- 
tion of the mantra) “You are the barley grains”, the seSamum 
(is scattered) (with the repetition of the mantra) “You are the 
sesamum. You are permeated with the essence of Soma. 
Graciously gratify the souls of forefathers. Salutations.” Flowers 
should be offered with (the mantra “£rlsca te” in a golden or silver 
vessel or a wooden (vessel) or sword or vessel made of a leaf. 
The circumambulation is done clockwise in the case of 
celestials and anticlockwise in the case of fore-fathers, wearing 
the pavitra (made of darbha) on the hand, one for each one 
(of the fore-fathers). 

13. (Then he should recite the following mantra ): “May 
the celestial waters together with the waters of the earth and sky 
and the golden sacrificial waters confer blessing on you.” (Then 
the waters of respectful offering should be offered to the Visve- 
devas with the mantra ): “O Visvedcvas ! Here are the offerings 
for each one of you”. (Similarly, offerings should be made to the 
forefathers saying) “Here is the offering for you, O Forefathers ! 

14. Similarly, offerings should be made (to the grand- 
fathers) with (the mantra) “Obeisance to the grand-fathers.” 
The sacrificial vessel is lowered with (the repetition of the mantra) 
“You are the seats of my forefathers.” 

15. Then perfumes, flowers, incense sticks, lamps, shawls 
and food with clarified butter should be raised up (by the per- 
former of ancestral rite). (The brahmins should then be asked) 
“Shall I offer them in the sacrifice ?” 

16. Being permitted (by the brahmins) to do so, those things 
should be offered to the fire in the case of those who maintain 
fire and on the hands of forefathers in the case of those who 
do not maintain fire with the repetition of the following 
mantra and (wearing) the pavitra (made of darbha worn on the 
finger). 

17. The first oblation is (made with the mantra ): “Obei- 
sance to the Fire-god, the conveyor of offerings.” The subse- 
quent ( mantras ) are to Soma, to forefathers, to the god of 
death and Angiras. 

18. The remnants of oblations should be collected in the 
food vessel. “O Nectar ! this earth is your receptacle, the sky 
is the covering. The brahmin is your mouth. I am cashing in that 
mouth permeated with the nectar.” After having repeated (the 



117.19-31 


347 


mantra) “This Vi?nu”, the thumb of the brahmin is placed in 
the food. 

19. The sesamum should be scattered with (the mantra) 
“Removed”, and the food should be given. After saying, “Be 
pleased”, the gayatri and other mantras should be repeated. 

20. “Obeisance to the gods, the forefathers, great yogins, 
Svadha and Svaha always.” 

21. After having known that they are satisfied, the food 
must be scattered and water should be given to each one of them. 
After repeating the gdyatri ( mantra ) as before, (the mantra) 
“honey, honey” should be repeated. 

22-23. They should be asked, “Are you all satisfied ?”. 
They should say, “We are satisfied.’ Being permitted by them 
the residual food should be gathered together and water should 
be sprinkled by the side of the place where food was eaten. Three 
pindas should be placed on ku$a , after they have done the acamana 
(rinsing of the mouth). 

24. After the rinsing of the mouth, water, flowers and un- 
broken rice should be offered. The water given may be undimi- 
nishing. Then (the forefathers) should be requested (as follows): 

25-31. “May the forefathers be gracious: May our progeny 
prosper always. May the donors enjoy prosperity. So also (may) 
the Vedas and progeny (prosper). May our earnestness never 
fail.. May we have plenty to give. May our food get profuse. 
May we get (enough) guests. May there be (plenty) seeking 
alms. May we not seek alms from anybody. The stems of knia 
over which the (term) svadha (obeisance) has been repeated 
are then gathered along with the pavitras and (permission) should 
be asked to say obeisance (to forefathers). After having been 
permitted, (the following mantra) should be recited: “Obeisance 
to the fathers (includes the brothers and cousin of the father) 
grandfathers and great-grand fathers. Obeisance.” As one is 
repeating this, water should be sprinkled from the raised pot and 
fees should be paid according to one’s means. In the ceremonies 
related to the gods and forefathers one should say : “May the 
Vi$vc devas be pleased”. They should be bid adieu (with the 
mantra) “Vaje vaje”. Then one should accompany the brahmins 
(with the repetitipn) of (the mantra) “amavajasya,” do circum- 
ambulation of them and enter the house. One should do this on 
the new moon day every month. 



348 


Agni Purdna 


32. I shall describe (the mode of doing) ekoddisfa (rite done 
for an individual only). The fraddha rite is done as befortf. One 
pavitra , argha and one pinda are offered. 

33-34. In this rite, there is no invocation and the offering 
is not made in the fire. The Visvedevas are not (invited) here. 
At the (time of) query about satisfaction (one should ask) “May 
it be relished”. The brahmin should say, “well relished”. They 
should be asked to be seated and be pleased with the offering. 
They (should say), “We are pleased”. The remaining (part of 
the ceremony) should be done as before. 

35-37. I shall describe (the mode of performing) the sapinfi- 
karana (a rite in honour of the dead person done on the 1 2 th day 
after death or at the end of one year). (It is done) at the end of 
a year or in the middle. Three vessels should be kept for the fore- 
fathers and one vessel for the dead person. The four (vessels) 
should be provided with the sesamum and flowers along with the 
pavitra. Having filled them with scented water, sprinkle the 
vessel of the dead person with the mantra “ye samana”. The 
offering of the pinda should be (done) as before. By this rite 
(the soul of) the dead person attains the position of fathers. 

38-49. I shall describe (the mode of doing) the iraddha 
rite which confers prosperity. Everything is done as before. One 
should repeat (the mantras) except the mantra of the father and 
(do) circumambulation in the forenoon. The materials (re- 
quired are) good ku§a y and barley grains instead of sesamum in 
this rite. The query about satisfaction is “Is it well done”. 
The brahmin should say, “well done”. The pindas should be 
composed of curd, broken rice and the jujube. One should ask, 
“Shall I invoke the ancestors who are fit to receive ndndi 
(rite)’\ They should be requested to be satisfied with the offer- 
ings. The manes (who are) the ndndimukhas, I shall describe. 
One should ask the clan of manes, the ndndimukhas to be pleased. 
The ndndimukhas are — father, grand-father, great-grandfather, 
maternal grandfather, maternal great grand-father and maternal 
great great grand-father* (In this ceremony) the term svadhik 
should not be added. Even number of brahmins should be fed. 

I shall describe the country herbs which would satisfy the manes. 
They would get satisfied with the roots and fruits of the forest 
for a month, with the fish f or two months, /with the ominous bird 
for three months, with the deer for four (months), with the goat 



117.50-58 


349 


for five or six, with the tortoise for seven or eight, with the boar 
for nine (months), with the meat of the ram, (meat) of the 
buffalo and the spotted antelope for ten months, with the milk 
of a cow and pdyasa (sweat gruel) for one year. They would 
be satisfied for twelve years with the meat of a sacrificial goat. 
The meat of a rhinoceros, the kdlaiaka (a kind of vegetable), 
(meat) of a red goat, honey and sea crabs offered in the rainy 
season and sraddha (done) in the (asterism) of maghd (tenth in 
the cycle) (yields) undiminishing benefits. The brahmins who 
study the Vedas , who do agnihotra , who study their own branch 
of Vedas , those who are learned in the six ancillary texts (of the 
Vedas), one who worships the Naciketa fire thrice a day, the three 
madhu (rks of the Rigveda), those who read the dharmadrona , one 
who knows the trisup arna (. sukta ) and the jyesthasdman are those 
spoken as the pahklipdvanas (the purifiers of an assembly). 

50-53. I shall describe the mode of performing fruit-bearing 
(rites). (The irdddha done) on the first lunar day confers plenty 
of wealth, on the second day (gets) beautiful wives, on the fourth 
day the fulfilment of heartfelt desires, on the fifth day (confers) 
progeny, on the sixth day (makes the doer) thrive well, on the 
seventh day (increases) agricultural prospects, on the eighth day 
(confers) material prosperity, on the ninth day mules, on the 
tenth day plenty of cows, on the eleventh day off-springs, on the 
twelfth day wealth and grains, on the thirteenth day (ensures) 
excellent position among one’s kinsmen. The irdddha of those 
dead by means of weapons (should be done) on the fourteenth. 
It is said that one gets all (desires fulfilled by doing irdddha ) 
on the new moon day. 

54-58. “The seven hunters (who resided) in Da£ar$a, 
the deer (which dwelt) upon the mountain Kalafijara, the 
cakravdka (a species of water birds) in the Saradvlpa, the harhsas 
(ganders) in the Manasa lake were bom at Kuruk$etra as 
brahmins well- versed in the Vedas. They had gone a long way. 
May you excel them.” When this verse is read at the (time of) 
irdddha etc., the irdddha gets completed and it yields the region of 
Brahma. A son may perform irdddha of his grandfather even 
as his father is alive, or of the grandfather when the great grand- 
father is living, or of the great grandfather when the great great 
grandfather is living. So also (, irdddha is done) for the mother,, 
maternal grandfather etc. Whoever reads the Srdddhakalpa (that 



350 Agni Parana 

relating to performance offr&ddha) gets the fruits of performing a 
frdddha . 

59-63. A irdddha performed at a sacred place, or on the days 
of the commencement of th eyuga or Manu period gets undimini- 
shing fruits. Similarly, (sraddha done) on the ninth day of bright 
fortnight in (the month of) Asvayuk (October-November), 
on the twelfth day in Karttika (November-December), on third 
day in Magha and Bhadrapada (February-March and Septem- 
ber-October), on the new moon day in Phalguna (March- 
April), on the eleventh day in Pausa (January-February), on the 
tenth day in Asa^ha (July-August), on the seventh day in the 
month of Magha (February-March), on the eighth day of dark 
fortnight in Sravana (August-September), on the full moon day 
in Asa^ha (July- August) and on the full moon days in Karttika, 
Phalguna and Jyestha (June-July) (confer manifold benefits). 
The days of commencement of the Svayambhuva Manu periods 
are also of undiminishing benefits. Gaya, Prayaga, (river) 
Ganga, Kuruksetra, (river) Narmada, Sriparvata, Prabhasa, 
Salagrama, Varanasi and river Godavari (are sacred places)-. 
Sraddha (done) at those places and also at the Purusottama 
(ksetra) (Puri) (yields manifold fruits). 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTEEN 
The country of Bhdrata 


Fire-god said : 

1 . That country which (lies ) to the north of ocean and south 
of Himadri (Himalaya) is known as the Bharatavar$a ex- 
tending to nine thousand [yojanas). 

2-4. This is a land of religious rites. It gives accomplish* 
ment of action in getting redemption. Mahendra, Malaya, 
Sahya, Suktimat, Hemaparvata, Vindhya and Pariyatra are the 
seven principal mountains here. Indr ad vl pa, Kaseru, Tamra- 
varna, Gabhastiman, Nagadvipa, Saumya, GandharvS, Varur^a 
and Bh&rata are the nine territories here surrounded by the ocean. 



118.5—119.7 


351 


5-8. The continent extends to one thousand yojanas from 
north to south. There are nine divisions of the Bharata lying 
around the central part. The kirdtas (hunting tribes) (are) 
in the east. Th eyavanas (the foreigners) (are in the west). The 
brahmins and others devoted to the Vedas and smjtis (code books) 
(are) in the central part. The rivers rise from the Pariyatra 
(mountains). Narmada and other (rivers) flow from the Vindhya. 
(The rivers) Tapi, Payosnika, Godavari, Bhimarathi and 
Kr$naveni and others flow from the Sahya (mountains). (The 
rivers) Kftamala and others flow from the Malaya (mountains). 
(The rivers) Tris&ma and others originate from the Mahendra 
(mountain). (The rivers) Kumara and others rise fromSukti- 
mat (mountain). (The river) Candrabhaga rises from the 
Himalaya (mountains). The countries Kuru and Paftcala and 
the Madhyadesa are situated in the western part. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETEEN 
Description of different continents 


Fire-god said . : 

1. The Jambudvipa extends to a lakh of yojanas. It is sur- 
rounded by the K$iroda (ocean) measuring one lakh yojanas. 

2. The Plaksadvipa is surrounded by the Ksara ocean. 
The seven sons of Medhatithi are the rulers of Plaksadvipa. 

3. They are Santabhaya, SiSira, Sukhodaya, Ananda, Siva, 
K$ema and Dhruva after whom the countries are named. 

4. Gomedha, Candra, Narada, Dundubhi, Somaka, Su- 
mana and Vaibhraja are the boundary mountains. The inhabi- 
tants are good. 

5. There are seven principal rivers here. The inhabitants 
from Plaksa to Saka live for five thousand years and they adhere 
to righteous way of life adhering to the institutions of caste and 
stages of life. 

6-7. Aryakas, Kurus, VivimSasand Bhavins are respectively 
the brahmins and others ( kfatrtyas , vaiSyas and SUdras) here. They 
worship (lord) Soma (moon). Its extent is two lakhs yojanas 



352 


Agni Purdna 


and it is surrounded by the ocean of ikftirasa of equal measure. 
The Salmala (dvlpa) is twice that. The seven sons of Vapu§mat 
were the rulers of Salmala. 

8-12. Sveta, Harita, Jfmuta, Lohita, Vaidyuta, Manasa 
and Suprabha are their names and the countries were known by 
their names. This twice bigger continent is surrounded by the 
Suroda (ocean) of equal measure. The seven (boundary moun- 
tains) are Kumuda, Anala, Balahaka, Drona, Kanka, Mahisa 
and Kakudmat. The brahmins and other (three castes) are 
Kapila, Aruna, Pita and Kj-sna (respectively). They worship 
(the lord) in the form of Vayu (wind god). This is surrounded 
by Suroda. Udbhida, Dhenumat, Dvairatha, Lambana, Dhairya, 
Kapila and Prabhakara, (the sons) of Jyotismat were the rulers 
of Ku$a (dvlpa). Dadhimukhya 1 and others are the brahmins 
and others. They worship (the lord) in the form of Brahma. 

13. Vidruma, Hemagaila, Dyutimat, Puspavat, Kusesaya, 
Harisaila and Mandara are the boundary mountains. 

14-16. This is surrounded by the Ghftoda ocean as well 
as the Krauftcadvipa. The sons of Dyutimat were the rulers of 
Krauftca and the countries (ruled by them) were named after 
them. They are seven — KuSala, Manonuga, Usna, Pradhana, 
Andhakaraka, Muni and Dundubhi. (The names of) the seven 
mountains here are Kraufica, Vamana, Andhakaraka, Devavrt, 
Pundarika and Dundubhi. Each one of them is twice as big 
as the other. 

17-19. The mountains in the respective continents are also 
twice as the corresponding one in the others. The brahmins and 
others (three castes) are Puskara, Pu$kala, Dhanya and Tisya 
and (they) worship Hari. The Krauftcadvipa is surrounded by 
Dadhimarujodaka (ocean) 2nd the Sakadvipa. The sons of 
Havya and the rulers of Sakadvipa were Jalada, Kumara, 
Sukumara, Manivaka, Kusottara, Modak i and Drama. The 
countries were known by their names. 

20-21. Udaya, Jaladhara, Raivata, Syama, Kodraka, 
Ambikeya and the beautiful KeSari are the seven (boundary) 
mountains. The brahmins and others are Maga, Magadha, 
Manasa and Mandaga. They worship (the lord) in the form of 
the Sun. The Saka dvlpa is surrounded by the Kgirabdhi. 

1. These are Daminafe, Sujmfyab, Snehifr and Mandeh&fc. 



119.22—120.5 


353 


22-24. It is also surrounded by Puskara ( dvipa ). (The 
ruler of Pu§kara), Savana had two sons — Mahavlta and Dhataki. 
They ruled over two countries known by their name. There is 
one boundary mountain called Manasa at the centre in the shape 
of a bracelet. It extends to one thousand yojanas and is of equal 
height. (The people here) live for ten thousand years. (Lord) 
Brahma is worshipped here by celestials. This continent is 
surrounded by the Svadudaka ocean of equal measure. 

25-26. The waters of the ocean neither decrease nor in- 
crease. O Sage ! At the moon-rise or moon-set and at the 
white and dark fortnights, an increase or decrease of waters by 
five hundred and ten ahgulas (equal to one finger-breadth) is 
seen in the oceans. 

27-28. The Svadudaka is of many good qualities. The land 
is golden and is devoid of living beings. The peak (called) Loka- 
loka extends to a lakh of yojanas. It is engulfed in darkness in the 
form of the pan of the egg-shaped (universe). This land found 
with this pan of the egg-shaped (universe) extends to fifty crores. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY 
The extent of the universe 


The Fire-god said : 

1 . The extent of the earth is believed to be seventy-thousand 
(yojanas). Its height is ten thousand. The nether worlds (extend) 
to one thousand each. 

2-3. The seven nether worlds are Atala, Vitala, Nitala, 
Gabhastimat, Mahatala, Sutala and Patala. The demons 
dwell in those pleasant lands which are respectively coloured 
black, yellow, red, white, stony and golden. 

4. Lord Vi$nu in the tdmasa (darkness) form as Se§a 
(the serpent) lies under the nether worlds. He, the Ananta 
(infinite) on account of his infinite (good) qualities, (lies there) 
supporting the earth with his head. 

5. There sure many hells under the earth. A vaifnava (devo- 



354 


Agni Purdna 


tee of lord Visnu) should not fall therein. The extent upto which 
the earth is illuminated by the sun is known as the sky. # 

6. O Vasi$fha ! The region of the sun is at (a distance of) 
one lakh {yojanas ) from the earth, the region of the Moon at one 
lakh ( yojanas ) from the Sun, and the region of the stars at one 
lakh {yojanas ) from the moon. 

7-8. (Planet) Mercury is at two lakhs {yojanas ) from the 
region of the stars. (Planet) Venus (is) at two lakhs from Mer- 
cury. (Planet) Mars (is) at two lakhs from Venus. (Planet) 
Jupiter (is) at two lakhs from Mars. (Planet) Saturn (is) at 
two lakhs from Jupiter. (The region of) the seven sages (ursa 
Major) (is) at one lakh from Saturn, the polestar (is) at one 
lakh from the sages (Ursa Major) and is at the apex of the three 
worlds. 

9. The Maharloka (lies)at a crore {yojanas ) from the pole- 
star, where those who have seen a full cycle of time reside. The 
Jana (loka), wherein dwell (the sages) Sanaka and others, 
(lies) at two crores (of yojanas) from that. 

10-11. The Tapo (loka) (is) at eight crores from Jana (loka) 
where Vairajas (a class of celestial beings) are the presiding 
deities. The Satyaloka is at ninetysix crores from the Tapo 
(loka). It is known as the Brahmaloka where dwell celestials 
who do not die. The region fit for one to move on foot is the 
Bhuloka (the earth). The region of Bhuvarloka is said to be 
between (the earth and) the Sun. 

12. The Svargaloka lies between the Sun and the pole-star 
in the fourteen lakhs {yojanas of space). These regions cover as an 
exterior shell of the universe. 

13. They are again covered by ten- fold layers of elements 
water, fire, wind and ether. 

14. O Great sage ! Each one of the ten latter regions lie 
enfolded in one another and thus form an exterior cover of the 
primary thing. 

15. O sage ! One does not have any knowledge about the 
limit of that infinite. That nature has been the source of every- 
thing else. 

16. This kind of innumerable eggs had come into being 
there. The pumdn {brahman) exists in a potent state in the univer- 
sal nature just as the fire in the wood and oil in tfee sesamum. 



120.17-32 


355 


17-19. This pumdn lies embedded in the natui e as a conscious 
onlooker and knower. O Wiseman ! The nature and the brah- 
man are held together by the force of Visnu, the form of the 
essential virtues of all beings. That is the cause for their separate 
existence as well as union. O Great sage ! That is the cause for 
the agitation at the time of creation (of beings). It is similar to 
the wind sustaining hundreds of water particles after its contact 
with water. 

20. The celestial beings and others are born through the 
concerted action of the nature and the effect of the foice of 
Visnu acted upon by the force of the former. 

21-29. Visnu is identical with brahman itself from whom 
this entire universe (has come into being). The chariots of the 
Sun are nine (occupying) thousand yojanas. O Excellent 
sages ! The axis is double that (measure). The axle of its wheel 
is one and half crores and seven lakhs (yojanas). The wheel is 
fixed there. It has three naves 1 , five spokes 2 , six circumferences 3 , 
two movements 4 5 consisting in the cycle of period. O Great 
intellectual ! The second axis of the Sun’s chariot is twentytwo 
thousand seven hundred and fifty (yojanas) . The measurement of 
the two axles is equal to its yoke. The shorter axis and its yoke 
rest on the polestar. O Best disciplined ! The seven metres 
gqyatri 5 and others are its horses. Sun’s rise and setting are his 
being perceived and not being perceived. O Vasistha ! The 
regions from the earth to those where the polestar remains 
get lost at the time of deluge. The region where the polestar is 
stationed to the north of Ursa major is the excellent shining 
third place of (lord) Visnu in heaven. This is the excellent 
place of ascetics who have become free from impurities. 

30. The river Gariga which purifies one by mere remem- 
brance flows from there. It is to be known that the porpoise shape 
of the planets in the sky is that of lord Visnu. 

31-32. The polestar is situated at its tail. It revolves (on 
its non axis) and causes the planets to go round. That chariot 

1. Forenoon, midday and afternoon. 

2. Pariuatsara etc. 

3. The seasons. 

4. Northern and southern. 

5. gAyairf, bth&tt, uwik, jagatf, triffup, anuffup and paAkti . 



356 


Agni Pur&na 


of the Sun is ridden by different celestials, Adilyas (sons of 
Aditi), sages, gandharvas (semi-divine beings), apsaras (semi- 
divine beings), gramani (semi-divine beings), serpents and de- 
mons. Lord sun is the cause of snow, heat and rain. 

33-36. He is the manifestation of lord Visnu of the form 
of Rgveda and other (vedas) and is the cause of good and evil. 
The chariot of moon has three wheels drawn by ten horses yoked 
to its left and right and of the colour of jasmine. Thirtysix 
thousand three hundred and thirty-three celestials drink (the 
phases of) the moon. The manes (drink) one phase. One 
(phase) (is lost) being associated with the rays of the new moon. 
The chariot of the son of the Moon Mercury is composed of 
the fiery and windy material. Mercury moves on drawn by its 
eight horses. 

37-41. The chariot of Venus (has got) eight horses, as also 
the chariots of Mars, Jupiter and Saturn (drawn) by horses. 
The chariot of Rahu (ascending node of the Moon) (has) eight 
horses. The chariot of Ketu (descending node of the Moon) 
(has) eight horses. O Brahmin ! From this body of (lord) 
Visnu this lotus-shaped earth with the mountains etc. has 
originated. (Lord) Hari (Visnu) is the galaxy, worlds, rivers, 
mountains, oceans and forest. Whatever exists or ceases to exist 
is (lord) Visnu, known through true knowledge about (lord), 
Visnu. There is nothing beyond the purview of knowledge. 
Knowledge is the supreme place, the (lord) Visnu. One has to 
do that act by which that true and infinite knowledge, namely, 
(lord) Visnu, may be attained. 'Whoever reads (the section on) 
cosmogony would attair happiness. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYONE 
The science of Jyotisa (Astronomy and Astrology) 

Fire- god said : 

1. I shall describe the science of astrology which gives dis- 
crimination of good and bad events. It is the quintessence of 
four lakhs (of treatises). By knowing this (science) one becomes 
omniscient. 



121.2-10 


357 


2. The marriage of girls should not be done when there is 
faifastaka 1 or dvidvadasd 2 as well as in trikona 3 . In other cases as 
well as in samasaptaka , there will be happiness. 

3. If there is friendship between the lords of the second and 
twelfth (houses) or the trines or there is single lordship, then there 
will be prosperity in the married life even if there be hostility. 

4. Even in such a condition the union maybe made, but 
not in sixth-eighth (sadasfaka) condition. (If the marriage is 
done) when Jupiter or Venus has set, the bridegroom and bride 
would die. 

5. A marriage is not commendable when the Sun is in the 
house of Jupiter or Jupiter is in the house of the Sun. 

6. The marriage should be postponed by three fortnights 
or by four months respectively when there is transit (of a planet 
from one house to another) or retrograde motion (of a planet). 
A vow or marriage should not be done when there is retrograde 
motion or transit of Jupiter. 

7. (Marriages done) in (the months of) Caitra (April- 
May), Pausa (January-February) on the riktd days (fourth, 
ninth and the fourteenth day of a fortnight) or when (lord) 
Hari (Visnu) is asleep, or on Tuesdays and Sundays or on the 
new moon day would bring forth unfavourable result. But the 
twilight (time) is auspicious. 

8. A marriage is said to be commendable in the asterisms 
rohini , uttard, mula , svdti , hasta and revati (when the Sun is) in 
Libra or Gemini. 

9. One should avoid a viddharksa 4 in celebrating a marriage, 
piercing the ears, vow, rite to determine the sex of a child before 
its birth, the first feeding of the child, and the tonsure. 

10. The rite to determine the sex of the child before its 
birth should be done in (the asterism) Sravana , mula and pusya , 
on Sundays, Tuesdays and Jupiter and in (the signs of) Aqua- 
rius, Leo and Pisces. 

1. The sixth and eighth; counting from the ascendant in the horoscope 
of the proposed life partners the ascendant in the other person’s horoscope gives 
sixth or eighth. 

2. The second and twelfth; counting as before which gets the second or 
twelfth. 

3. The trine, Leo, Taurus, Virgo, Sagittarius, Libra and Aquarious are 
the trines for the planets sun etc. 

4. Certain asterisms said to be opposed to certain other asterisms. 



358 


Agni Purdna 


11. The discharge of a debt (should be done) in (the aster- 
isms) hasta , mulct, mrga($ir§a) and revati and on Wednesday and 
Friday. The (rite of) chewing of betal leaf should be done on 
Sunday, Monday, Thursday and Friday and in (the asterism) 
mula. 

12. The first feeding (of a child) (should be done) on a 
Friday or Thursday or in (the asterism) mrga($irsa) in (the sign 
of) Pisces, in the five asterisms (beginning with hasta (citra and 
svati) and in the three asterisms beginning with krttika ( rohini 
and mrgattrsa ) . 

13. New fruits and food should be eaten in (the asterisms 
of) aSvini or revati , pusya , hasta, jyesfha, rohini, Havana and aivini. 

14. Medicine should be administered in (the asterisms of) 
svdti, saumya (name of the five stars in orion’s head), the three 
piirvas ( PUrvaphalguni , purvabhadrapada and purvdsdiha , maghd, 
ydrnya ( [bharani ) and the three (beginning with) fravana which are 
auspicious. 

15-20. One should bathe first after becoming free from ill- 
ness on Tuesday or Sunday or Saturn. One should write eight 
times the syllable ‘hrim’ and the name (of the enemy) in the 
middle and the (names of the eight) vasus as well as the (syllable) 
brim in the (eight) angular points on a Tuesday and wear it in 
his cloth on the neck with the gorocand (pigment got from the 
cow) and saffron. It is certain that one’s enemies get sub- 
jugated by this mantra . Srim hrim is the protective ( mantra ) when 
the ( mantras ) him and hrim are written on the bhurja leaf as stated 
above in the eight (points) together with gorocand and saffron 
and covered by turmeric. (Similar writing) on a stone slab 
kept buried under the soil with its face downwards nullifies them. 
Om hQm sah is the mantra . This mantra written on a bhUrja leaf 
along with gorocand and saffron wards off death. The first, fifth 
and ninth houses confer satisfaction and second, sixth and 
twelfth confer general welfare. 

21-23. The third, seventh and eleventh cause acquisition; 
fourth, eighth and twelfth cause enmity. (The twelve houses 
Me?a etc. denote) respectively the body, wealth, brothers, 
friendship, progeny, enmity, wife, death, righteousness, activity, 
income and expenditure. One should speak about the nine 



121 . 24*33 


359 


tdrdbala 1 (as follows) : the janma (birth), sampat (prosperity), 
vipat (misfortune), ksema (welfare), pratyari (enmity), sddhaka 
(seeker or accomplisher), nidhana (death), mitra (friend) and 
paramamitra (close friend ) . 

24. The first shave (of a child) is commended on Sunday, 
Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday in the six months 
commencing with Magha (February-March). 

25-26. Th ekarnavedha (piercing of the ear) (should be done) 
on Wednesday and Thursday in the (asterisms of) pusya , iravana 
and citra. The commencement of study in the fifth year (should 
be done) after worshipping (lord) Hari (Visnu) and (goddesses) 
Van! (goddess of speech) and Sri (LaksmI, goddess of wealth), 
avoiding the sixth, first and the fifteenth, the riktd days (fourth, 
ninth and fourteenth days) and Tuesday. The tying up of the 
girdle is auspicious (if done) in the six months commencing 
with Magha . 

27-31. The tonsure and other (rites) are not commended 
in (the asterisms) iravana etc. The investiture of a brahmin 
(boy) performed when the Jupiter or Venus has set and the 
Moon is waning brings forth death or stupidity. The rite mark- 
ing conclusion of the study should be done on an auspicious day, 
in the asterism suitable for shaving, at an auspicious place on 
the rising constellations in a good house. The imparting of the 
science of archery in the asterisms aSvini, magha, citra, svati, ydmya 
( bharani ), uttara , punarvasu and pusya is commendable. One who 
desires to live should not wear new clothes in the asterisms 
bhararii, ardra, magha , aUesa , krltikd and uttar aphalguni. (Wearing 
of new) clothes on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday is not 
objectionable at (the time of) marriage (and other festive occa- 
sions). 

32. Wearing of gems like conch-shell and coral is commen- 
dable in (the asterisms of) revati , aivini, dhaniffha, and the five 
commencing with hasta . 

33. Anything bought in (the asterisms of) bharani , sarpa 
(a particular constellation), dhani§tha, the three purva [purva - 


1. Counting from the birth asterism to die asterism of diat day that 
number should be divided by nine, the remainder indicates the t&r&bala as 
shown above. 



360 Agni Purdna 

phdlguni , purvabhadrapada and purvasadha) and varuna (fatabhifak) 
causes adversity. Also its sale causes adversity. 

34. Anything bought in (the asterisms of) afvini , svdtl , 
extra , remit and fatabhisak and on Sunday causes profit. If any- 
thing is sold (on the days ruled by these asterisms) causes adver- 
sity. 

35. An employer should not be attended upon in (the 
asterisms of bharani, the three purvas (see verse 33 above), ardra , 
dflesa, magha, svati, krltikd, jyesfhd and vifakha. 

36. Money is deposited or articles are given or taken back 
in (the asterisms of) uttara , Havana and fakra (jyesfha). The 
coronation of a king should be done (in these asterisms). 

37. Entering a house (for the first time) is auspicious in 
the months other than Caitra (April-May ) y Jyesfha (June-July), 
Bhddra(pada) (Septembcr-October), Afvina (October-Novem- 
ber), Pausa (January-February) and Magha (February-March). 

38. The commencement (of the construction) of a house in 
(the asterisms of) afvini , rohini , mulct , the three uttar as ( uttara - 
phalguni , uttarabhadrapada , and uttarasadha) , mrgattrsa, svati , hasta 
and anuradha is commendable. 

39-40. Sundays and Tuesdays should be avoided for (the 
excavation of) a tank or (the construction of) a palace. So 
also the building of a house should be avoided when Jupiter is 
in Leo or in (the conjunction of) Jupiter and Sun or in an inter- 
calary month or when Venus is in the transit ascension or des- 
cension or has set. (It would cause) burning by fire, fear, disease, 
affliction from the sovereign or loss of wealth. 

41. Hay should be gathered in the five (asterisms of Havana 
etc.). One should enter the (new) house in the asterisms of 
dhanisfkd, uttara and varuna {iatabhisak ) . 

42. The second, third, fifth, seventh and thirteenth days 
(of a fortnight are commendable) for the construction of a boat. 
A sovereign should be seen in (the asterisms of) hasta , revati and 
afvini. 

43. Pilgrimage undertaken in (the asterisms of) the three 
uttara (uttardfddha, uttaraphdlguni y and uttarabhadrapada ) , dhanisfhdy 
ardrdy kfttikd> saumya (mrgafirfa) , vi$dkhd> dSle$d and afvini accom- 
plishes prosperity. 

44-47. One should not graze the cows in the three (aster- 
isms of) uttardy rohiyi or on sinivdli caturdafi (da^prior to new 



121 . 48-54 


361 


moon) or in (the asterisms of ) Sravana , hasta , citrd and vaisnavl 
( [iravana ). One should not enter (the cow-pen) in (the asterisms 
of) anila (svati ) , uttard , rohini , mrga (Ursa), punarvasa , Iravana 
and hasta . One should do agriculture in (the asterisms of) punar- 
vasu, uttard, svati , Bhaga (p urvaphalguni ) , m tlla, Indra (p urvasadha) 
and varuna (fatabhisak) or on Thursday or Friday or Monday 
or Sunday or in (the zodiacal signs of) Taurus, Virgo and 
Gemini. 

48-5 1 . One who desires fortune should sow seeds except 
that of the mandara (coral) on the second, third, fifth, seventh* 
tenth and thirteenth (days of the fortnight) and in (the asterisms 
of) revati , rohini , Indra (p urvasadha) , Agni ( krttikd ), hasta , maitra 
( anurddhd ) and uttard. Harvest of grains should be done in (the 
asterisms of) revati , hasta , mula, fravana. Bhaga (purva-phdlguni) , 
maitra (anuradha), pitfdaiva ( maghd ) and saumya (; mrgaHrsa ). 
One should take them into the house at the time of the rise of 
(the as ter ism) mrgaSirsa or in (the asterisms of) hasta , citrd, 
Aditi ( punarvasu ), svati, revati or in the three stars (commencing 
with) Havana or in a fixed sign or on Thursdays, Fridays and 
Wednesdays or in (the asterisms of) ydmya ( bharani ) Aditi (punar- 
vasu), maghd , jyestha and uttar a. 

52. (The following mantras) written on a leaf and placed 
amidst the heap of grains in (the asterisms of) the three purvas 
(p urvasadha, p urvaphalguni and p urvabhadrapada ) , vtidkha, dhanisfhd 
and varuna (Satabhisak) increases the grains “ Om , (salutation) 
to the bestower of wealth and the lord of all wealth. Give me 
wealth. Oblations. O goddess Ila (Laksini) ! One who 
makes the world thrive ! The desire incarnate ! Grant me 
wealth in the new year ! Oblations. 

53. Wisemen know that grains should be taken out in the 
(above) six asterisms. Tanks, gardens and (images of) gods 
should be consecrated when the Sun is in the Cancer. (Lord) 
Cakrapani (the wielder of the disc) (Visnu) should always be 
laid down when the Sun is in the (sign of) Gemini and it is the 
twelfth day after the new moon. 

54. When the Sun is in the (sign of) Leo and in Libra and 
the two twelfth days after the new-moon, the first is the day of 
getting up of (lord) Indra and (the second one) is the waking 
up of (lord) Hari. 



362 


Agni Purdna 


55-57. Similarly, (the goddess) Durga is made to get up 
when the Sun enters (the sign of) Virgo. When a bhBdratithi 
(the second, seventh and twelfth days of a lunar fortnight) occurs 
on a Tuesday, Sunday or Saturday and is marked by three fourth 
of a constellation that (combination) is known as tripuskara. 
All ceremonies should be done when the moon and star are pure. 

58. One has to forecast prosperity for those in whose (chart), 
the Moon is situated in the sixth, seventh, tenth or eleventh 
house from the ascendant. 

59-60. The second, fifth and ninth in the bright fortnight 
brings good. The asterisms are (known to be ) friendly, extremely 
friendly, accomplisher of riches and welfare etc. (The one known 
as friendly) causes death by its ascendancy. That which is 
calamitous (causes) destruction of wealth. One should know 
that which is pratyari (enemy) (causes) death. One gets death 
in that which is (known as) destruction. 

61. The period from the eighth day of the dark (fortnight) 
till the eighth day of the bright (fortnight), the moon is known 
to be waning and is known to be full thereafter. 

62. It is known to be mahajyaisthi if the Sun is in (the signs 
of) Taurus or Gemini and Jupiter is in (the asterisms of) mrga - 
Hrsa or jyesfha and the full moon (occurs) on a Thursday. 

63. It is also called mahajyaisthi when Jupiter and Moon 
are in (the asterism of) jyesfha and the Sun is in (the asterism of) 
rohini on the full moon day in the month ofj iyeffhd (June-July). 

64. The banner of (lord) Indra fastened to the support 
should be hoisted in (the asterism of) svdti. It should be lowered 
down after a week in (the asterism of) asvini and in the sign of 
Leo. 

65. When the Sun is eclipsed by Rahu (the ascending node) 
any gift is deemed to be gold, all the brahmins are equal to 
(lord) Brahma and all the waters are equal to Gariga. 

66. O Brahmins ! The entry of the Sun in the different signs 
is known by the names of dhvdnksi , mahodari, ghord, mandd , mandd- 
kini and rajasi. 

67. If the Sun passes (from one sign to the other) in the 
katanas (divisions of a day) bdlava y kaulava and taitila , then the 

people would be happy. % 

68. People would suffer from poverty and harassment by 



121.69-79 


363 


the sovereign if (the Sun) enters (the astral combinations known 
as) gar a, vava, vanik, viffi, kintughna and fokuna. 

69. If the Sun makes a transit in lying position in catu $ - 
pada, visti or vdnijya (karanas 1 or divisions of the day), it would 
cause famine or war between sovereigns or quarrel among hus- 
bands and wives. 

70. If (the Sun) stays in one’s birth-star it would cause 
disease or mental anguish, while (its presence) in the asterisms 
of krttikd and rohini would cause misery for nine nights and three 
nights respectively. 

71-76. It is said that the transit in (the asterism of.) mfga- 
tira (causes misery) for five nights, in ardra (causes) death, and 
in j bunarva.su or pusya (causes) (misery) for seven nights. Its 
entry in (the asterism of) a§lesa (causes misery) for nine nights, 
in maghd (causes misery) until one’s death, in purvaphalguni 
(causes misery) for two months and in uttar a (causes misery) 
for fifteen (days). While the sun is in (the asterism of) hasta , 
the (asterisms) citrd, svdti and vi§dkha would bring misery for 
a fortnight, two months and twenty days respectively. Its transit 
in (the asterisms of) anurddha,jyesthd,mula and purvdsaiha (would 
cause misery) for ten days, a fortnight, no relief (from misery) 
or fifteen days respectively. (The Sun’s transit) in (the asterisms 
of) utlar d , teavana , dhanisfa and iatabhisak (would cause misery) 
for twenty days, two months, fifteen days or ten days respecti- 
vely. There will not be relief (from misery) if it enters (the 
asterism) bhadrapada . (The Sun’s transit) in (the asterisms of) 
uttar a, revati and aSvini would (cause misery) for fifteen days or 
ten days or a single day respectively. 

77. Its transit in (the asterism) bharani causes danger to 
life and it becomes auspicious by doing oblations with the gdyatri 
{mantra). Making a gift of a cow with five kinds of grains, sesa- 
mum, clarified butter to a brahmin compensates (the evil in- 
fluences). 

78-79. The periods of influence of the Sun, Moon, Mars, 
Mercury, Saturn, Jupiter, Rahu and Venus are six, fifteen, 
eight, seventeen, ten, nineteen, twelve and twentyone years 
respectively. 


1 . These are different karayas or eleven divisions of the day. 



364 


Agni Pur&na 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYTWO 
Pancanga : The Almanac * 

God Agni said : 

la. Time is (reckoned by) the accumulated number of 
years, (months etc., from the epoch up to the point of time under 
consideration). I shall set forth the calculation involved in reckon- 
ing time. 

lb. The accumulated (i.e. elapsed) number of years (up to 
the required point of time) is to be multiplied by 12 ( arka ) and 
the (number of months elapsed in the current year from) Citra 
is to be added to the product) 1 

2a. The sum obtained is doubled and placed at two places. 
To one is added 4 (veda) and to the other 865 {pancdngds(a). 
(The latter figure is to be divided by 60 and the quotient added 
to the first, while the remainder is kept as the second figure) . 
The resultant is to be called i guna\ 2 

* General : Paflcdnga or the five aspects of reckoning time for each day, com- 
puted and recorded in Hindu almanacs arc: (i) Vara (day of the week), (ii) 
Tithi (lunar day), (iii) Nakfatra (the Constellation through which the moon 
moves), (iv) Toga (Sum of the longitudes of the Sun and the Moon), and(v) 
Karapa (half-Jif/ii). All these reckonings have religious and ritualistic signi- 
ficances. 

The verses in this chapter are all of a highly cryptic nature and, like philo- 
sophical aphorisms, imply much more than what is actually expressed, and 
can be conectly understood only with suitable explanations. While the implied 
information is given brackets in the translation, an example is worked out in 
the Notes illustrating the working, step by step. 

1. Any epoch or starting point in time might be adopted, like, for 
instance the Kalpa or the beginning of creation, the Caturyuga, Kaliyuga etc. 
or any of the eras like the Saka. 

Let the point of time taken for consideration, for which the Paflcdnga is 
required be Saka 10 (elapsed), in the month of Vaisakha, 1st tithi of the bright 


fortnight. 

Multiplying by 12, the elapsed years, 10 X 12 — 120 

Adding the 1 month, Mc$a, elapsed, - 1 


Total months elapsed from epoch = 121 

2. Multiplying the months from epoch by 2 (i.e. 121 X 2=242) 
and plactng them in two places: 242 242 

Adding 4 and 865 4 865 


246 1107 

Dividing the second figure by 60 and 

adding to the first ,264 2J (Gupa) 



122.2b-5 


365 


2b. (The guna) is placed at three places (one below the 
other, in the serpentine fashion, each being written one step to the 
right of the preceding one). The ‘middle’ is multiplied by 8 
( vasu ) and the product again multiplied by 4 (veda). (The 
columns are to be added up.) and again written as ‘upper 1 \ 
‘middle’ and ‘lower’. 1 

3. Subtract 398 ( asta-randkra-agni ) from the lower and 87 
(saika-rasdsfaka) from the ‘middle’. Divide (the ‘middle’ and 
the ‘lower’) by 60 and add the quotients to the preceding, (keep- 
ing the remainders in their places). 2 

4a. Vara-tithi correction . The first (i.e. ‘upper)’ when divided 
by 7 will give the week-day constant for tithi. (The quotient is 
to be rejected as of no more use.) The resultant is to be used as 
the Vara-correclion for tithi-nd&kas ' . 8 

4b-5. Naksatra-Yoga constants. The ‘ guna ’ derived above 
is to be multiplied by 2, and 3 subtracted from the second figure. 
Guna is set down before the result (in the serpentine fashion). 
30 (kha-rama) is set down below the last figure, and 6, 12 and 8 
[rasa-arka-asta) , respectively, below the three figures, (and the 
columns added up and elevated by dividing by 60). Divide the 
first figure by 28 and place it below the ‘correction for tithi 9 (ob- 
tained in verse 4a) . (add and take the result as a second ‘upper’). 3 4 * * * 


1 . Placing the gupa) in three places 

in the serpentine fashion: 264 27 (upper) 

264 27 (middle) 

264 27 (lower) 

Multiplying the ‘middle* by 8 (i.e. 2112-216) and again by 4 (i.e. 8448- 
864), and setting it down in the above scheme: 

264 27 

8448 864 

264 27 

Adding the columns, the new ‘upper*, ‘middle* 


and ‘lower’ arc: 

264 

8475 

1128 27 (27 is 
rejected) 

2. Subtracting 398 and 87 


87 

398 


264 

8388 

730 

Elevating by 60 

404 

0 

10 


3. Dividing the ‘upper* by 7 for weekdays and rejecting the quotient, 
we get the aara-correction for tithi as 5-0-10. 

4. Multiplying the 'guya 9 (264-27) by- 2 (i.e. 528-54 and subtracting 3 

,528 51 

Setting down the ‘gwpa’ below j. _ 264 27 

Adding 30 to the last figure 30 

Adding 6-12-8 to the expression 6 12 8 



366 


Agni Pur&ria 


6-8a. The ‘guna’ is halved, 3 subtracted (from its second 
figure) and the whole expression multiplied by 2. The first figure 
here is multiplied by 11 ( rudra ); the second figure is increased 
by 1 and divided by 39, the quotient being subtracted from the 
first figure and the remainder kept in its place. The resultant is 
termed madhya. Subtract 22 from the first figure and divide it 
by 60 ; the remainder is deductive ; the quotient is added to the 
(second) ‘upper’ (of verses 4b-5). The first figure is divided by 
27 and the remainder set down in its place. The resultant expres- 
sion is the constant for the correction of naksatra and yoga. 1 

8b-9a. Naksatra. For the calculation of tithi, there is a 
monthly constant, being 2 pin (fas (i.e. whole units) and 32 na<fi- 
kas (which has to be added to the tithi correction contained in 
verses 4a) . Similarly, for the naksatra , there is a monthly constant, 
being 2 naksatras and 11 ndtjlikds , (which, when added to the 
naksatra correction of verse 8a, will give the elapsed naksatra and 
the nafikas gone in the current naksatra.) 1 2. 


Adding the whole 

534 

327 

65 

Elevating by 60 

Dividing the first figure by 28 and rejecting 

539 

28 

5 

the quotient 

Adding the correction for tithi, i.e. the second 

35 

28 

5 

‘upper* 

5 

0 

10 

Adding 

40 

28 

15 


1. The gupa (2C4-27) is halved (132-14), 3 subtracted from the second 
figure (132-11) and multiplied by 2 (i.e. 264-22). The first figure is multi- 
plied by 11 (i.e. 2904); to the second figure 1 is added (i.e. 23) and divided 
by 39 and the remainder (i.e. 23) is retained. This is termed the new ‘middle*. 
Subtracting 22 from the fiist figure (i.e. 2882-23) and elevating by 60, we 
get 48-2-23. 

Applying this 48 2 23 

to the new second ‘upper' 40 28 15 

we have 88 30 38 

Dividing by 27 and ignoring the quotient, 

the correction for naksatra andjo^a: 7 30 38 

2. Adding the Zi7//i-constant (2-32-00) to the vdra-tithi correction (5-0-10), 
we have 7-32-10, being the varadi (week, day etc.) correction for the point of 
time taken for consideration. For the naksatra of that point of time, add the 
naksatra constant (2-11-00) to the nakfatra correction (got in verses 6-8a), i.e. 
7-30-38, and we have the nakfatra as 9-41-38. In other words, at the point of 
time taken, nine nakfatras have passed by, and in the curren^lOth nakfatra , 
magha, it is 41 ndfikds and 38 vin&fikas . 



122.9b- 17a 


367 


9b-10. Weekday and commencing point of Tithi. Add the tithi- 
correction above (to the varddi-tithi correction got in verse 4a) * 
placing the tithi number below the vara number. Divide by 7 
(if vara plus tithi exceeds 7 ) ; the remainder will give the elapsed 
week-day counted from Sunday, and the ndifikas gone in the next 
day at the point of the commencement of the relevant tithi ) 
In the case of tithis after adding the complete units ( pindakas ), 
the sum should be divided by 14 (if the sum exceeds 14, and the 
remainder taken as the tithi.) 1 

11 -14a. True-Tithi correction. The correction, in nadikds , 
for the fourteen tithis would be, in order, minus, plus, plus, minus, 
(minus and so on). Whi e the correction for the 14th tithi is 
zero), the correction for the thirteenth and the first is 5 ( vind - 
dikas) (each, minus and plus, respectively), that for the 12th 
and the 2nd, 10 ( vindtjlikds ), that for the 11th and 3rd, 15 ( vind - 
dikas), that for the 10th and 4th, 19 {vinadikas) , that for the 9th 
and 5th, 22 ( vinadikas ), that for the 8th and the 6th, 24 ( vind - 
dikas), and that for the 7th, 25 ( vinadikas ). These khandakas 
(correction-bits) are to be applied appropriately to the pindakas 
(full units). 8 

14b-17a. Vikald correction. In the case of (the three), Karka- 
taka, (Simha and Kanya), divide the rdf is, respectively, by 6 
{rtu), 4 (yfrf<z)and3 ( traya ); in the case of Tula, (Vrscika and 
Dhanus), divide, respectively, inthc reverse, i.e.by 3, 4 and 6; 
in the case of Makara, (Kumbha and Mina), respectively, by 
3, 4 and 6; and in the case of Mesa, (Rsabha and Mithuna), 
divide, respectively, in the reverse, i.e. by 6, 4 and 3. The cor- 
rection, in vikalds, which is positive in the case of the three, Me§a 
etc., are 50 ( kha-isu ), 40 (kha-yuga) and 12 ( mitra ); in the case 

1. Adding the tithi constant (2-32-00) to the v&ra-tithi correction (5-0-10). 
we get 7-32-10 for the week, day, which means that 7 days have elapsed as / 
counted from Sunday, and at the point of time in consideration, i.c. Sqkla- 
pratipad in Vaisakha, it is Sunday at 32 n&dik&s and 10 vin&dikds (Mean). 

2. The ndtfikd corrections enunciated are: 


Tithi 

Nddikd con. 

Tithi 

Nddikd con 9 

14 

0 



13 

~ 5 

1 

+ 5 

12 

-10 

2 

+ 10 

11 

-15 

3 

+ 15 

10 

-19 

4 

+ 19 

9 

-22 

5 

+ 22 

8 

-24 

6 

+ 24 



7 

+ 25 



368 


Agni Put ana 


of the three , Karkataka etc., it is in the reverse order, (i.e. 12, 
40 and 50, but positive) ; in the case of the three, Tula etc., (it 
is 50, 40 and 12), negative; (and, in the case of thethree, Makara 
etc., it is 12, 40 and 50, negative). 1 

17b- 19a. Application of the vikala correction. The vikala cor- 
rection is to be applied to the tithi multiplied by 4. Multiply 
their eleven vikalas by the difference in liptas (i.e. kalas) bet- 
ween the elapsed and to-elapse portions of the tithi and divide 
by 60. If the elapsed portion is less than/the portion to-elapse, 
treat the correction as positive even if it be negativeand or posi- 
tive, retain it as positive; while, in the case of the portion to- 
elapse being greater, the reverse is the case (i.e. the correction is 
to be taken as negative both if it is negative or positive). 

19b-21a. Further correction to the Tithi. Double (PTrcble) 
(the nadikas of) the tithi and subtract from it one-sixth of (the 
product). Apply to it the tlthi-ndtjlikds obtained for the sun in 
the reverse order, and subtract the result from 60; the true 
n&tjlis of the tithi would be obtained. If not subtractible, add 60 
and subtract; if more than 60, reduce it by 60 and subtract. 2 

2 lb-22. Toga. The tithi is associated with the constellation 
The tithi multiplied by 4 and a third (of the tithi) added to it. 
Apply to it the negative correction. ( By dividing it by 27, the 
yoga elapsed and the nadikas in the current yoga are obtained.) 
True tithihas be to be used as the means for calculating th eyoga? 

23a. The yoga is, indeed, got also by adding (the longitudes 


1. The vikdld corrections enunciated are: 



Month 

Divisor 

Corr. 

Month 

Divisor * 

Corr. 

Karkataka 

6 

+ 12” 

Makara 

6 

- 12” 

Sirhha 

4 

f 40” 

Kumbha 

4 

-40” 

Kanya 

3 

+ 50” 

Mina 

3 

-50” 

Tula 

3 

+ 50” 

Mesa 

3 

-50” 

Vrscika 

4 

+ 40” 

R?abha 

4 

-40” 

Dhanus 

6 

+ 12” 

Mithuna 

6 

-12” 


2. For the third tithi correction, multiply the tithi-nafikds, 32-10 (of vcises 
9b-10) by 3 (i.e. 96-30), and deduct a sixth thereof (i.e. 16-5), resulting in 
80-25. Adding to this the tithi - ndrfikas (32-10), we get 1 12-35. The correction 
for one tithi (viz. 5 ndtfik&s , of verse ll-14a) being applied negatively, wc get 
107-35. Dividing it by 60, the true nddikas in the current tithi is got at 47-35. 

3. Togas form variable divisions of time during which the joint motion 
of the Sun and the Moon in longitude is 13° 20* or 800 katas. In a cycle there 
are 27 yogas, some of them being considered as auspicious and others inauspi- 
cious. Their significances are taken due note of in deciding i^pon the times 
for rituals and domestic ceremonies. The 27 yogas are: 



122.23b-24c 


369 


of) the sun and the moon (in kalds and dividing by 800 ). 1 

23b-24a. Karana . (The number of) the tithi reduced by 
1 and multiplied by 2, and the product divided by 7, gives the 
karana of day-time. The tithi-num ber multiplied by 2 and the 
product reduced by 1 and divided by 6 (krta) gives the karana 
of the night. 2 

24b-c. The karana of the end (i.e. seeondhalf) of the 14th 
tithi of the dark fortnight is called Sakuni; (that of the first half 
of the full moon day is called Catuspada; that of the end (i.e. 
second half of the full moon day) is called Ahi (Naga) ; and that 
of the beginning (i.e. first half) of the prathama (of the bright 
fortnight) is called Kiriistughna. 


1 . 

Viskambha 

10. 

GajiuJa 

19. 

Parigha 

2. 

Prlti 

11. 

Vrddhi 

20. 

Siva 

3. 

Ay usman 

12. 

Dhruva 

21. 

Siddha 

4. 

Saubhagya 

13. 

Vyaghata 

22. 

sadhya 

5. 

Sobhana 

14. 

Harsana 

23. 

Subha 

6. 

Atiganda 

15. 

Vajra 

24. 

Sukra 

7. 

Sukarma 

16. 

Siddhi 

25. 

Brahma 

8. 

Dhrti 

17. 

Vyatipata 

26. 

Indra 

9. 

Sula 

18. 

Variyan 

27. 

Vaidhrti 


Multiplying the true tithi (viz. 47-35 of verses 19-20) by 4 (i.e. 190-20) 
and adding a third of the tithi (viz. 15-52), we get 206-12. Dividing by 27 
(which is the total number of yogas in a cycle) and rejecting the quotient, we 
have 7-12. i.e. 7 yogas up to Sukarma have gone by and, in the current 8th yoga , , 
Dhrti, 12 rndikas too are over. 

1. In the alternative method of calculating the yoga, the longitudes of 
the Sun and the Moon are added and the sum divided by 800 (which is the 
said sum in terms of six kalds). The quotient will give the number of the yogas 
elapsed and the remainder the nadikas etc. elapsed in the current yoga . 

2. The Karaya is a measure of time extending over half a tithi , having 
astrological significance. They carry eleven names, being: (1) Bava, (2) 
Balava, (3) Kaulava, (4)Taitila, (5) Gara., (6) Vanija, (7) Vi?ti, (8) Sakuni, 
(9) Catuspada, (10) Naga and (II) Kimstughna. A cycle consists of 60 
karayas (during the 30 tithis or 60 half-tithis) . The last four kara^as occur only 
once and occupy the four half-tithis from the second half of the 14th of the dark 
fortnight to the first half of the/1 st titni of the bright fortnight, and, so, are called 
sthira or ‘fixed’ karafias , while the other seven kararias occupy the remaining 56 
half-/t7/uj, by repeating themselves eight times, and, so, are called cala or ‘moving* 
kar atias. 

CORRECTIONS TO THE PRINTED TEXT (SV Edn). 


Verse 

For 

Read 



aftsfat 

7b 

-JJST 

-asir 

10a 



14b 

fW+K 

fWPT 

19a 

fafafe 

fafafs (? fta) 

22a 

fcTfafer 

fafafa 

22b 

SftERTT 

HTEFPT 

23b 

FfaflraT 

ffafoar 

24c 

-at ff 

-atsf?: 



370 


Agni Purdna 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND T WENTYTHREE 

Description of the Svarodayacakra, Sanicakra , Kurmacakra 
and Rdhucakra 

The Fire-God said : 

1. I shall describe the {svarodayacakra) in order to know the 
victory and welfare in a military expedition. The vowels a, i, 
u, e and o (should be written) in order (in the different squares) 
and then the days ( tithis ) nanda and others (should be written 
below) in order. 

2. (The names of) the planets Mars, Sun, Mercury, Moon, 
Jupiter and Venus (are marked) on the right-hand side and 
Mars, Sun and Saturn on the other side in the letters £ ka’ to 
‘ha*. 

3-7. The time between the rising of the Sun to its rising on 
the next day should be multiplied by thirty-nine and then divid- 
ed by twelve, and the quotient should be divided by nine and 
three respectively, the quotient being the time of predominance 
of the vowels or the principles they represent from day to day. 
The tithi on which the predominance takes place, brings death 
(to the organiser of any expedition). 

Three sphuranas (throbs) make up one ucchvasa (breath). 
Three ucchvdsas make up one pala (a measure of time). Sixty 
palas constitute one liptd. Sixty liptds (make up) a day. 

The five (vowels are known to be) child, boy, youth, old 
and death in their half-rising state. It is said to be rising and 
setting when it is in the eleventh place and together with the 
fifth (place) brings death and reverses. 

(Thus-far the Svarodayacakra) 

8. In the Sanicakra (the diagram of Saturn) the rise of the 
planets is taken into account in a fortnight. There will be fifteen 
squares herein. Therein the place of Saturn indicates death. 

(Thus ends the Sanicakra) 

9. (The Kurmacakra) is in the shape of a tortoise. (The 
result is known) from the position of Saturn in the asterisms 
beginning with maghd and ending with kfttikd . 

(Thus ends the Kurmacakra) 

10-11. In the Rdhucakra , one should write seven (squares) 
above and seven below. On the full-moon day, l^ahu travels • 



123.12-25 


371 


from the south-east by the north-west to the south-west occupy- 
ing the north-west on the new-moon day. The letter *ra’ should 
be written in the southern part and the letter ‘ha* in the north- 
west. The letters ‘ka’ etc. (are marked) on the first lunar day 
and other (days) and the letter ‘sa’ in the north-west. 

12-20. When it happens to be in the face of Rahu it brings 
reverses. On the fiill-moon day and in the south-east it is uiffi. 
It is kardli in the east and on the third day. It is (known as) 
ghord in the south and on the seventh day. It is (known as) 
saumya in the north-east and on the tenth day. One should 
avoid travel towards the north-west on the fourteenth day, 
towards the west on the fourth day, towards the south on the 
eighth day of the bright fortnight, and on the eleventh day. The 
(names of the) fifteen muhurtas (a period of fortyeight minutes) 
are Raudra, Sveta , Maitra , Sdrabhafa , Sdvitra , Virocana , Jayadeva, 
Abhijit , Rdvana , Vijaya, Nandin, Vanina, Tama, Saumya and Bhava. 
One should do violent deeds in the Raudra , ceremonial bathing 
in the Sveta, the marriage of one’s daughter etc., in the Maitra, 
auspicious deeds in the Sdrabhafa, establishing in the Sdvitra , 
deeds relating to the monarch in the Virocana, victorious deeds 
in the Jayadeva, battles in the Rdvana, agriculture and commerce 
in the Vijaya , wearing the turban in Nandin, the digging of tanks 
in the Varuna, acts of destruction in the Tama and good acts in 
the Saumya . 

21-22. Th e yogas (a division of time) are known to be indi- 
cating good or bad from their names. Rdhu (ascending node) 
(travels) from the east to north-west and thence to the south. 
From the south (it goes) to the north-east, and from the north- 
west to the west, then to the south-east, then to the north for 
three (ghafikas). Then after four ghafikas it affects the (point of) 
concurrence. 

(Thus ends the Rdhucakra) 

23-24. The (following) excellent herbs (should be) worn 
for victory cantfl, indrdni , vdrdhi, musali , girikamikd, bald , atibald, 
kfiri , mallikd, yUthikd, fvetdrka, iatdvari and guidcl . 

25. One should tie up the tuft of hair with (the repetition 
of) the mantra , “ Om , salutations to (lord) Bhairava (a form of 
Siva) , the wielder of a sword and axe in his hands; 'Om, hrQm\ 
(salutation) to the destroyer of obstacles, (“Om, hr am, phaf 
for success. With the same mantra, mark on the forehead, colly- 
rium to the eyes and scented fumes should be applied. 



372 


Agni Pwrdna 


26-32. Listen to me. (I shall describe) the different kinds 
of unguents for bathing and drinking and powdered drugs. 
A mark on the forehead composed of subhagd, manahtild (arsenic) 
tdla, shellac and the milk of taruyi (gives) conquest (over one’s 
enemy). Visnukrdnta , sarpdkfi , sahadeva and rocand made into a 
paste with the milk of goat and worn on the forehead gains 
success (over one’s enemy). Priyaiigu, saffron, ktiffha , mohani 
and tagara worn along with clarified butter subjugates (the 
enemy). Rocand , red sandal, niSd, manahtild, tdla , priyangu and 
mustard (made into a paste and worn) also yields the same result. 
Mohini , haritd, kdntd, sahadevl and tikhd made into a paste in the 
juice of pomegranate and worn on the forehead as a mark sub- 
jugates (all). Even the celestials including Indra are subjugated. 
Then what about the poor mortals? Mafijisfhd, red sandal, kafu- 
kanda and vildsini together with punamavd as a paste subjugates 
even the Sun (god). Sandal, ndgapuspa, manjitfhd, tagara, vacd, 
lodhra, priyahgu and rajani mixed with oil of mast controls others. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYFOUR 
The essence of astrology as described in the science of victory in battles 
Fire-God said : 

1 . I shall describe the essence of astrology as propounded 
in the (science) of victory in battles, without the employment of 
mantra and herbs and as narrated by Isvara (Lord Siva) to Uma. 

The Goddess said : 

2. Explain to me the strategy by which the demons were 
conquered by celestials. So also (explain to me) the knowledge 
relating to success in battles which give discrimination about 
good and bad. 

The Lord said : 

3. Energy comprising fifteen letters was bom by the desire 
of the chief god. The movable and immovable were born then. 
One finds one’s desire fulfilled by the worship (of the energy). 



124.4-13 


373 


4. I shall explain the base of the mantra which is produced 
from five mantras. Those mantras remain in all the mantras in 
their beginning and end. 

5-6. They are the mantras of IjLk, Tajus , S&man, and Atharva 
vedas in order. The mantras of lords Brahma, Vi?nu, Rudra, 1 3a 
(Siva), Indra and others who are (known as) Sapta$ikha devas 
are these five mantras . ‘a, i, u, e, o’ (are) the parts. The funda- 
mental (mantra) is stated to be Brahma. 

7. Just as the fire in the wood which has not developed 
fully is not seen, the energy of lord Siva remaining in the body 
is not seen. 

8. The energy adorned with the syllable of ‘Om’ is first born. 
O Great lady ! the bindu (dot) (was) then (born) together 
with the letter ‘e\ 

9. The letter c u* which is the soul of the sound was born 
then. It produces the sound remaining in the heart. Then the 
letter T of the shape of a crescent, which gives knowledge about 
the path of release, (was born). 

10. The letter ‘a* which is the supreme one giving enjoy- 
ment and emancipation, was born manifest. The letter c a’ is 
under the power of control of the lord. It is remembered as the 
part of cessation of activity. 

11-12. The fragrance, the mystical letter ‘na’, prdyx (life 
breath), ii& (a tubular vessel in the body) and the energy known 
as fixed rest in this. The letter T is known as the stable part. 
The essence, the apdna (one of the five life-winds) in the body), 
pidgald (a tubular vessel in the body), the energy (known as) 
krQrd and the mystical letter T remain united inside. The letter 
*u’ is the knowledge part. The form which is the characteristic 
of fire, the mystic letter l ra 5 , the samdna (one of the five life- 
winds in the body), the gdndhdri (one of the tubular verse in the 
body), and the energy damanl (rest therein). 

13. The letter ‘e* is the tranquil part. The sense of touch 
which is the characteristic of the wind, the uddna (one of the 
five life-winds in the body), the cald (one of the tubular organs 
of the body) and the energy (called) kriyd (rest therein). The 
syllable * orrC is that beyond the tranquil part. The sound which 
is the characteristic of the sky and the vydna (one of the five life- 
winds in the body) (rest therein). 



374 


Agni Purina 


14. The (above-mentioned) are the five kinds of letters. 
The (planets) Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn res- 
pectively (preside over) the letters ‘a* etc. The letter* ‘ka* 
and others are placed below these. 

15. Everything relating to the movable and immovable 
(objects of the world) is known through these. I shall describe 
the knowledge-base. The pranava (syllable *om 9 ) is stated to be 
(lord) Siva. 

16. (When we say) Uma, it denotes (lord) Siva along with 
(his consort) Uma. Uma is the energy (of Siva) This energy 
remains (in three forms) as Varna, Jye$tha and Raudrf. (It 
remains in the three forms of) Brahma, Visnu and Rudra duly. 
Creation etc. are the three qualities (associated with them). 

17-18. Three n&tfis (tubular vessels in the body) which are 
gem-like (are also present). (The pranava) is moreover gross 
and subtle (which are respectively) highest and lowest. One 
should contemplate (on) that {pranava ) day and night as white- 
coloured, as showering the excellent ambrosia and flooding the 
soul. O Goddess ! One would become unaging and attains the 
qualities of lord Siva. 

19. The limbs (of the body) (are assigned) in (the fingers) 
beginning with the thumb and the eye at the centre. Then one 
should worship (lord) Mftyuftjaya (Siva, conqueror of earth) 
and become victorious in the battles. 

20. The sound is void and without any support. The 
sparta (consonants ka to ma) should be touched bending hori- 
zontally. The form is stated to be having upward motion and 
rests under the water. 

21. The fragrance remains detached from all places. The 
principal part is at the centre. The bulbous root, which is of the 
form of (lord) Siva remains at the base of the navel. 

22. The formation with energy houses the moon, sun and. 
(lord) Hari (Vi$nu). It is endowed with the ten winds and the 
five primary elements. 

23. (That bulbous root) which is the soul of lord Siva 
is of the shape of the destructive fire that is shining. That is the 
life of the entire world of living beings of the immovables and 
movables. When that one having the fire as its soul is lost, I 
consider that it is dead. 



125.1-10 


375 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYFIVE 

Different circles which get success in battle 
The Lord said : 

1. “ Orh hrirh (Goddess) Karnamo^ani ! Manifest in differ- 
ent forms ! Possessor of many teeth ! hrfim phaf om hah . Om 
devour devour. Cut cut. Suck suck. Hrtirn phaf salutation”. 
When this mantra is repeated by persons angrily and with red 
eyes, it would bring about the death or the downfall (of his 
enemy) or stupefy (his mental calibre). 

2. The great incantation of (Goddess) Karnamotin! is the 
protector of all castes. I shall describe the rise of five 
principles which rests on the svarodaya (science of sound). 

3. The wind moves in the space between the navel and the 
heat. One should repeat this at the time of battle etc. It 
would pierce the ears and eyes (of the enemy). 

4. The accomplisher should be bent on repetition (of 
mantras) and oblation (to fire). When the wind (moves) from 
the heart (downwards) to the anus and (upwards) to the throat, 
the acts of bringing fever on the enemies or causing their death 
(should be undertaken). 

5. When the wind blows through the larynx with the essence, 
(the votary) should do rites conferring peace and prosperity. 
When (the wind flowing) from the eyebrows to the nostrils 
(known as) gandha (smell) (is present) one should practise the 
divine paralysing or drawal. 

6. There is no doubt that one would be able to paralyse 
by making the mind absorbed in the smell. The votary should 
perform the (acts of) paralysing and wedging. 

7. (To accomplish this he) should worship (the divinities) 
Ca$da, Ghanda, Karall, SumukhI, Durmukhl, Revatl, Pratham& 
and Ghora in the wind-circle. 

8-10. The goddesses who accomplish the charm remain 
well-established in lustre. They (are) Saumya, Bhlsanl, Jayk, 
Vijaya, Ajita, Aparajita, Mahkkofi and RaudrI. (These 
goddesses who possess) dry bodies take away life. (The 
goddesses) dwelling in the essence are Virupak?!, Para,JDivyi, 
AkaSamitrs, Saihh&rl, Daih$tr&la and Su?kareyatl. 



376 


Agni Purdria 


11-12. Pipilika, Pustihara, Mahapu$(ipravardhana, Bhadra- 
kall, Subhadra, Bhadrabhima, Subhadrika, Sthira, (Ni§tliura, 
Divya, Niskampa and Gadini) (are the goddesses staying in the 
circle of smell. These thirty-two mothers reside in the circles 
at the rate of eight in each. 

13. There is only one Sun and only one Moon (in the 
world) . Each one of these goddesses preside over each one of the 
sacred places on the earth. 

14. The one (universal) life force remains divided through 
(different) circles among created beings. It remains in tenfold 
forms on account of division into left and right. 

15. Out of the skull (cup) of the universe (they) drink the 
supreme nectar, the mystical drops, encircled by the apparel 
of principles. 

16-18. Listen to those five groups of letters which give vic- 
tory in battle. (The letters), a, a, ka, ca, ta, ta, pa, ya and £a 
are said to be the first group; i, i, kha, cha, tha, tha, pha, ra, 
and sa (form) the second group; u, u, ga, ja, da, da, ba, la and 
sa (form) the third group, c, ai, gha, jha, dha, dha, bha, va and 
ha form the fourth group and o, au, am, ah, na, fta, na, na and 
ma form the fifth group. 

19-20. These fortyfive letters (indicate) the prosperity of 
men. (These letters in each group) are respectively) known as 
the child, boy, youth, old, death, affliction to one’s self, emacia- 
tion, indifference and destroyer. The (asterism) krttika, the 
first day of a fortnight and (the planet) Mars are known as bene- 
ficial to one’s self. 

21-22. The sixth day (of a fortnight) and (the asterism) 
maghd (occurring) on a Tuesday and the eleventh day (of a fort- 
night) and (the asterism) drdrd (occurring) on a Tuesday (cause) 
affliction. (The asterism) maghd and the second day (of a fort- 
night) occurring on Tuesday (yields) gain. (The asterism) 
drdrd and the seventh day on a Wednesday bring loss. The aste- 
risms bharani and Havana on a Tuesday (are) also of the same type. 
A Thursday marked by (the asterism) purvaphdlguna and third 
day is profitable. 

23. A Thursday (marked) by (the asterism) dhanifthd 
and drdrd on the eighth day, and the same day (ruled]^ by (the 
asterism) dflefd on the thirteenth day causes death. A Friday 



125.24-35 


377 


(marked) by (the asterism) pdrvabhddrapada on the fourth day 
(also yields the same). 

24. A Friday ruled by (the asterism) pUrvdsddhd and the 
ninth day as also by (the asterism) bharani and the fourteenth 
day causes affliction. 

25. The fifth day and the (asterism) krttikd occurring on a 
Saturday is said to be prosperous. The tenth day together with 
the (asterism) dSlefd in conjunction with Saturday would be 
causing affliction. 

26-27. The conjunction of (asterism) maghd , Saturday 
and full moon is held as fatal. First to the ninth have (the direc- 
tions) east, north, south-east, south-west, south, north-west, 
moon and Brahma as the aspects. If they have aspects 
together with the signs (artificial division of the ecliptic) as well 
as the planets that would confer perfection. 

28. The four constellations me fa to kumbha cause victory if 
full and death if otherwise. It is to be duly calculated, the absence 
of Sun etc. as well as whether they are full. 

29. The Sun has no influence in the case of war. The Moon 
influences to appease defeat. One should know that Mars 
causes riot. Mercury (influences) to realise desire. Jupiter 
influences to get success. 

30-31. Venus influences to get mental happiness. Saturn 
would influence to get defeat in battle. In the pifigaldcakra , the 
asterisms in which the Sun moves should be arranged (in the 
shape of a human figure), at the face, eyes, forehead, head, 
hands, thighs and feet. If the three stars at the foot (are 
identical with the natal star of the person concerned) (it 
indicates) death. (It indicates) loss of prosperity if on the sides. 

32. (If the three asterisms) on the face (are identical with 
the natal star) (it indicates) affliction. If that on the head (is 
identical) (it indicates) failure of the task undertaken, and that 
on the head (indicates) fruitfulness. (I shall) describe the Rdhu~ 
cakra now. 

33-35. It goes from the east to the south-west, from the south- 
west to the north, from the north to the south-east, from the 
south-east to the west, from the west to the north-east, from the 
north-east to the south, from the south to the north-west and 
then again to the north, during (the period of) four {ghafikds 



378 


Agni Purdna 


every day). O dear ! I shall now tell you about the lunar 
phases which act as the above said Rahu and about different 
directions south-east to north-east and from the full-moon etc. 
to which a journey should be held inauspicious during their 
respective continuance. (An expedition commenced) at the 
back of Rahu brings success in battle, (while that undertaken) 
at its front brings death. 

36. Till the eighth day of the dark fortnight, the east aspect- 
ed by Rahu would cause fright. (Similarly) Rahu acts in 
the north-east, south-east, north-west and south-west (on the 
same day). 

37-38. If the constellations Aries etc. are in the directions east 
etc., and when the Sun is (present) there it causes death, The 
third day in the dark fortnight, the seventh day, the tenth day, 
the fourteenth day in the bright (fortnight) ; fourth day, the ele- 
venth day and the fifteenth day viffi (a kind of adverse period ) 
in the south-east and north-west. 

39-42. (The letters) a, ka, ca, ta, ta, pa, ya and £a are the 
(five) groups (of letters) (standing for) the planets Sun etc. 
The vulture, owl, hawk, a small owl, owl (, kauJika ), crane, pea- 
cock and the water-fowl are known to be birds (in the dia- 
gram). At first the mystic syllable should be accomplished by 
means of oblation. Then it is known as expansion when it is 
ucc&fa (a kind of charm which drives away one’s enemy). Then 
the application (of the mystic syllable) accomplishes (the 
desired results) in bringing another under one’s control, in fever 
and in attraction. The syllable ‘salutations’ should be used in 
acts of bliss and peace-making, the syllable vau$af in (rites for) 
nourishment and in controlling etc. (The syllable) hum (is 
used) for (causing) death, breaking amity (between two per- 
sons), while (the syllable) phat (is used) for driving away one’s 
enemies. (The syllable) vajat (is used) in (connection with) 
progeny and bringing splendour etc. Thus there are six kinds 
of mystic syllables. 

43-45. I shall now describe the medicinal plants which 
provide good protection. Mahdkdli , cantfi, vdrdhl , Uvari , sudarSand 
and tndrdril when worn on the body protect. Bald, qftbald , bhiru , 
musaliy sahadevi , jdti, mallikd , yUthi 9 gdruqtl, bhffigarQja and cakra- 



125.46-50 


379 


rUpd, are great herbs which confer victory when worn (on the body ) . 

46-48. O Greatest Goddess ! if these are gathered during 
an eclipse they confer good. Making an elephant endowed with 
all characteristics out of earth, one’s enemy should be benumbed 
by doing the rite at its foot. After having gathered earth from 
an ant-hill (the rite should be done) at the summit of a moun- 
tain or at (a place having) a single tree or at a place struck by 
lightning. Then (the previously invoked) two divine mothers 
should be attached. Om ! obeisance to Mahabhairava ! to the 
Fierce form with deformed tooth ! to the Yellow-eyed ! to the 
Bearer of trident and sword Waufaf. O Goddess ! One should 
worship the mud and benumb multitudinous weapons (of the 
enemy). 

49-50. I shall describe rites relating to fire which ensures 
victory in battle etc. The votary should remain nude, have 
the tuft untied, face the south and offer human flesh, blood and 
poison mixed with chaff of grain, pieces of bone as oblations to 
fire kindled with logs of wood at the cremation ground in the 
night uttering the name of the enemy one hundred and eight 
times. “Om obeisance to Goddess Kaumari ! (You) dally, 
(You) coax ! O' Ghantadevi ! (You) kill this person at once. 
Obeisance tp you O Goddess of knowledge ! Oblations.” By 
oblations made with this formula the enemy gets fettered. 

Om ! One having a hardy frame ! One having a fierce 
mouth ! One possessing a tawny complexion ! One having a 
dreadful face ! One possessing erect hairs ! One having great 
strength ! One possessing a red face ! One having the lightning 
as the tongue ! Most fierce ! Possessing large teeth ! Having 
dreadful form ! One who strikes very firmly (at the battle) ! 
One who built the bridge to the city of Lanka ! The 
carrier of the mountain ! One who moves about in the ethereal 
space ! You come O lord ! Possessor of great strength ! Vali- 
ant ! The Bhairava makes known (his presence). O Great 
Raudra (fierce) you come ! You encircle this person with 
the long tail, pierce and trample him. HrGm pka(. O Goddess ! 
(oblation should be made) one hundred and thirty-eight times 
(with the above). Hanumat (monkey-faced god) accomplishes 
all acts. The enemies get routed on seeing Hanumat in the 
picture. 



380 


Agni Purdna 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYSIX 
Combinations of good and bad asterisms 
The Lord said : 

1-2. I shall describe combinations of asterisms deter- 
mining good and bad. One should count the asterism in 
which the Sun is present and assign three (asterisms) from that 
at the head (of human figure drawn), one at the face, two in the 
place of the eyes, four at the hands and feet, five at the heart, 
the genital organ and the knee. Then one should determine one’s 
longevity etc. (based on that). 

3. The presence of the natal star on the head or at the face 
indicates acquisition of kingdom. (Its location) on the eyes 
(indicates) fortune and lustre. (Its location) at the heart (indi- 
cates) acquisition of wealth. 

4. (Its presence) on the arms (indicates) that one would 
be a thief. (Its presence) on one of the feet (indicates) death or 
(the natal would be) a wanderer. 

5. (Commencing with the asterism in which the Sun is 
stationed, the respective names of the days associated should be 
written on eight pitchers leaving the pitcher for the Sun as 
empty). The pitcher of the Sun exerts malignant influence and 
the pitchers in the east and other directions benevolent influence. 

I shall describe the (method known as) Phani Rdhu , which indi- 
cates success or failure (in battle). 

6-10. Twenty-eight circles should be drawn, intersected 
by four lines. The asterisms should be arranged therein in rows 
of three. The asterism occupied by Rahu (the ascending node) 
should be deemed as the head of the serpent. Commencing with 
that, the twenty-seven asterisms are arranged in successive order. 
The presence of seven asterisms at the face (of the serpent) 
(indicates) that one will die in the battle. The presence of 
seven asterisms at the shoulders as well as the middle part (of the 
body) (portends) complete rout. Their presence at the belly 
foretells honour and success for the native. Their presence about 
the waist indicates success over rivals in the battle. One would 
get fame if (the asterisms) are situated on the tail. The asterisms 
aspected by Rdhu indicate death. I shall describe you^i differ- 
ent (combination) known as the strength of the Sun and Rdhu. 



126.11-26 


381 


11-12. Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, 
Mars andRahu respectively preside over one-sixteenth part of 
a day. One who (sets out) after the expiry of (the periods of) 
Saturn, Sun and Rahu, conquers battalions of army, and a mar- 
ching force and wins in gambling. 

13-15. (The aster isms) Rohini and the three Uttaras 
(Uttaraphalgunl, Uttarasadha and Uttaraprostapada) and the 
Mrga^Irsa are the five fixed (asterisms). (The asterisms) 
AsvinI, Revat!, Svati, Dhanisjha and the Satabhisak are the 
five movable (asterisms). One should undertake journeys in 
these (asterisms). Anuradha, Hasta, Mula, Mrgasirsa), Pusya 
and Punarvasu are (commended) for all acts. Jyesfha, Citra, 
Vi&ikha, the three Purvas (PurvaphalgunI, Purvasacjba and 
Purvaprostapada), Kfttika, BharanI, Magha, Ardra and ASlesa 
are evil. 

16. (All acts) at fixed places (should be done under the 
influence) of fixed asterisms. Movable asterisms are excellent 
for journeys. One should do (acts) in mild (asterisms) for con- 
ferring prosperity and frightful (deeds) in malignant (asterisms). 

17-21. An evil (act) should be done (under the influence) 
of an evil asterism. I shall now describe (the asterisms known to) 
have their faces downwards etc. (The asterisms) Krttika, 
BharanI, Aslesa, Visakha, Magha, Mula, the three Pfirvas 
(Purvasadha, PurvaphalgunI and Purvaprostapada) (are 
known to be) downward-faced. One should do such acts (which 
require) keeping one’s face downwards. (Digging) of wells and 
tanks, acts relating to imparting knowledge and preparation of 
medicine, the launching of a boat, installation of a prince and 
pitching (of a royal camp) etc. (should be performed) in these 
(asterisms). (The nine (asterisms) Revatl, A$vinl, Citra, Hasta, 
Svati, Punarvasu, Anuradha, Mrga(£ir?a), Jye§{ha are known 
as having their faces lateral. One should perform coronation 
of kings, construction of stables for elephants and horses, laying 
of garden houses, building of palaces, walls, doorways, fixing 
of flagstaff and banner etc. under these (asterisms). 

22-26. The twelfth day falling on a Sunday, the eleventh 
day on a Monday, the tenth day on a Tuesday, the third day on 
a Wednesday, the sixth day on a Thursday, the second day on a 
Friday, and the seventh day on a Saturday are inauspicious. 



382 


Agni Purdria 


I shall now describe the (combination known as) tripuskara. 
The second, twelfth, seventh and the third day with the Sunday, 
Tuesday and Saturday, these six (are known to be tripuskara. 
(The asterisms) ViSakha, Krttika, the two Uttaras, Punarvasu 
and the Purvabhadrapada, these six (are known to be) tripus - 
kara . Any profit, loss, victory, disease, birth of a son, loss, some- 
thing which has slipped and that which has strayed, all these 
get multiplied thrice (during the tripuskara period). 

27-28. The seven (asterisms) ASvin!, Bharanf, A$lesa, 
Pusya, Svatl, Visakha and Sravana are known (to be having) 
firm look. They have their look in ten directions. The jour- 
ney undertaken to a far off place at an auspicious moment (is 
followed by a safe) return journey. 

29-31. The five asterisms — the two Asa^has (Purvasaqlha 
and Uttarasadha), Revatl, Citra and Punarvasu (are) squint- 
eyed. The person undertaking a journey under these asterisms 
(has a safe) return. Krttika, Rohin!, Saumya (the five stars on 
the orion’s head), Phalguni, Magha, Mula, Jyesfha, Anuradha, 
Dhanistha, Satabhi$ak and Purvabhadrapada are known as 
blunted. One who undertakes journey under these asterisms 
would again return home. 

32. Anything lost (on days ruled by the asterisms) Hasta, 
Uttarabhadra(pada), Ardra and Asa^ha cannot be recovered 
and a battle commenced in these asterisms) would not continue. 

33-36. I shall again describe the gantf&nta (the first fourth 
of an asterism preceded by a node of asterisms) in the midst of 
asterisms as such. The four nails (one nd(fi equals 24 minutes) 
of the (asterism) Revatl and the four ( n&4%s ) of ASvini 
(are known as ganias). One has to avoid with great care those 
yamas (three hours) (in undertaking a journey etc). The four 
ghafikds (one ghafika equals 24 minutes) forming last part of 
A£le$a and the first part of Magha are called the second gar^ia. 
Listen to me ! O Bhairavl ! The third (gayia) is between the 
asterisms of Jye§tha and Mula, and that is of the form extre- 
mely malignant for three hours. One should not do auspicious 
acts in these, if he wants to live. At the time of birth of a 
child in these periods the parents would die. 



127.1-9 


385 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYSEVEN 

The auspicious and inauspicious periods of the day based on certain 
combinations 

The Lord said : 

1. The three ghafikds (one ghafikd is equal to 24 minutes) 
(from the commencement) of vifkambha (an inauspicious 
period), the five ghafikds of $ula (an adverse period), the six 
(gha(ikds) respectively in the ganfa and atigan^a (types of impedi- 
ments) and the nine ( ghafikds ) in the vydghdta and vajra (a kind 
of adverse period) should be avoided. 

2. One should avoid all undertakings when the whole day 
is ruled by both parigha and vyatipdta (obstacles) and the 
undertaking of any journey or commencing a battle on the day 
ruled by vaidhrta (obstacle). 

3. O Goddess ! I shall describe the good or bad (effects 
of the positions of planets) in the constellations of Me fa and others. 
The Moon and Venus occupying the first house confer good 
when they leave (the same). 

4. One has to forecast loss of property, absence of gain and 
reverses in the battle if the Mars, Sun, Saturn and Rahu 
(occupy) the second house. 

5-6. The second (house) occupied by the Moon, Mercury 
Venus and Jupiter confers good. Just as the Sun, Saturn, Mars 
and Venus in the third (house) confer good so also all the planets. 
Mercury, Moon and Rahu yield benefits. Mercury and Venus 
in the fourth (house) are beneficial. All other planets are 
ominous. 

7. Just like Jupiter in the fifth, the presence of Venus, 
Mercury and Moon yield the desired gains. The Sun is auspi- 
cious in the sixth (place). 

8. O Goddess ! The planets Moon, Saturn, Mars and 
Mercury confer good (if they remain) in the sixth (place) from 
the native sign. One should avoid Jupiter and Venus in the 
sixth (house). 

9. The Sun, Saturn, Mars and Rahu in the seventh (house) 
(indicate) misery and Jupiter, Venus and Mercury (in the 
seventh house) indicate happiness. The Mars and Venus are 



38* 


Agni Pur&iia 


auspicious in the eighth (house). 

10. All other planets (in the eighth house) (indicate) 
evil propensities. The Mars and Venus in the ninth ^house) 
are auspicious. The other (planets) (in the ninth) (exercise) 
evil influences. The Venus and Sun in the tenth (house) confer 
gains. 

11. The Saturn, Mars, Rahu, Moon and Mercury bring 
good. All planets are good in the eleventh (house). One should 
avoid Jupiter in the tenth (house). 

12. The Mercury and Venus in the twelfth (are beneficial). 
One should avoid all other planets in the twelfth. The twelve 
zodiacal signs exercise influence over the whole day (in order). 
I will describe them (now). 

13-14. (It takes) four ndtfis for the Sun to traverse the (zo- 
diacal signs). Pisces, Aries, Taurus and Gemini, six ndtjlis (to 
traverse) Cancer, Leo, Virgo and Libra and five ndtjlis (to traverse) 
Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn and Aquarius. The (Zodiacal 
signs) Aries and others are respectively movable, fixed and of 
dual nature. 

15. The Cancer, Capricorn, Libra and Aries are movable. 
One should do all acts involving movement and permanent 
victory, both good and bad. 

16. The Taurus, Leo, Acquarius and Scorpio are the fixed 
signs and all acts of fixed nature (should be done in them). 
(A person going away under their influence) will not return 
quickly. (One who) falls sick (under their influence) will not 
get cured. 

17. The Gemini, Virgo, Pisces and Sagittarius are of dual 
nature. These dual-natured ^signs) are always auspicious for 
all acts. 

18. One would get increase, victory and gains in sojourn, 
trade, battle, marriage and royal audience. One would get 
victory in battle. 

19. (The asterisms) ASvini (consisting of) three stars is 
of the form of a horse. If it rains in this (asterism), it would rain 
for a Aight. If it rains in the asterism presided over by Yama 
(god of death) (BharanI) it would rain for a fortnight. 



128.1-10 


385 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYEIGHT 
The kofacakra — a drawing to forecast results 
The Lord said : 

1 . I shall describe kofacakra . One should draw a square. 
One should draw another square inside that (square) and again 
another square inside the second. 

2. The zodiacal signs Aries etc. (should be assigned) to 
the directions east etc. (in the three squares) which are the 
symbols of the three n&$is (tubular organs in the body). The 
(asterism) Krttika (is located) in the east and the (asterism) 
A£le$a in the south-east. 

3. (Asterism) Bharani should be placed in the south. 
Visakha should be assigned in the south-west. (Asterism) Anu- 
radha (should be located) in the west and Sravana in the north- 
west. 

4. (Asterism) Dhanistha should be located in the north 
and Revati in the north-east. These eight asterisms are located 
in the outer n&di carefully. 

5. The asterisms Rohini, Pu?ya, (Purva) Phalguni, Svati, 
Jyestha, Abhijit, Satatara and Aivini (are located) in the middle 
square in order. 

6. I shall describe the n&d% at the middle of the drawing. 
In that inner square, the (asterism) Mrga(Sirsa) (is located) 
at the east, and Punarvasu at the south-east. 

7-8. The Uttaraphalgunf (is placed) in the south. (The 
asterism) Citra (is located) in the south-west. Having placed 
Mula in the west, the Uttarasadha in the north-west, the Purva- 
bhadrapada in the north and Revati in the north-east, the central 
square should be thus made to contain the eight asterisms. 

9. (The asterisms) Ardra, Hasta, the four Asatfha 1 2 and the 
three Uttara* should be placed inside the central square as four 
pillars. 

10. Fortifications should be made thus. A belligerent com- 
ing from outside from the direction of lord (planet) (that 
presides over the day) and the asterisms (representing that 

1. The PArv&^ldha and Uttar&$&£ha. 

2. The Uttaraph&lguni, Uttar&f&dha and Uttaraproftapada. 



386 


Agni Purdna 


quarter) is sure to get the benefits. 

11. If the planets and asterisms at the innermost square 
are good, it is known that those remaining in th* inner 
square would be victorious and defeat for that person coming 
(from outside). 

12-13. One should enter the fort when the conducive aster- 
ism (rules) and one should come out under the influence of 
conducive asterism. One should know if the battle commen- 
ced when the planets Venus, Mercury and Mars leave their 
respective asterism one would face defeat. If the battle com- 
menced when the asterism held auspicious for entering the castle 
was ruling, then that fort would be captured. One need not get 
surprised. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYNINE 
Guidelines for storing and selling grains 
The Lord said : 

1-2. I shall describe the quantity of food-grains to be 
gathered when there may be fall of meteors, earthquake, hurri- 
cane, eclipse, entry of foreign matter and conflagration in 
different directions in different months (of the year). 
If these occur in the (month of) Caitra (April-May), the orna- 
ments etc. gathered (would become) four-fold (worth) in (the 
course of) six months. 

3. All things collected in the (month of) Vaigakha (May- 
June) would become six-fold (worth) in eight months. In the 
same way, the grains such as barley and wheat (stocked) in the 
(months of) Jye?{ha (June-July) and A^tfha (July-August) 
(would fetch m ore ) . 

4. (Similarly) one would get (increased returns) in the 
month of Margaiirga (December-January) from ghee, oil etc. 
purchased in (the month of) Srava^a (August-September), 
apparels and grains in Alvina (October-November) and grains 
(purchased) in Karttika (November-December). 



129.5— 1 30. 1 -1 2 


387 


5. (One would get) profit by the purchase of saffron and 
perfumes in Pusya (January-February), food grains in Magha 
(February-March) and perfumes in Phalguna (March- April). 
Thus the arghakan$a (section on storing and selling of grains 
and goods) has been described. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY 
Different spheres marked by asterisms indicating victory in battle etc . 
The Lord said : 

1-2. O Good-natured Goddess ! I shall describe the four 
kinds of spheres (to find) one’s victory. (The asterisms) Kpttika, 
Magha, Pusya, Purva (phalguni), Visakha, Bharani and Pfirva- 
bhadrapada belong to the sphere of fire. I shall describe its 
characteristic. 

3-9. If the wind blows, holes (are noticed) in the disc of the 
Sun and Moon, earthquakes (occur), hurricanes (strike), (there 
be) the eclipses of Sun and Moon, smoky flames, conflagra- 
tion in (different) quarters, and comets are sighted and 
(there be) blood-like red showers, heat waves and fall of meteo- 
rites (under these asterisms), (there would follow) epidemics of 
eye diseases and hiarrhoea. The fire would rage. The cows would 
yield reduced (quantity of) milk. The trees (would bear) lesser 
(quantity) of flowers and fruits. The food grains would get 
destroyed. One should foresee little rain. The four castes of 
people would be harassed. The entire humanity would suffer 
hunger. The inhabitants of (the regions of) Sindhu, Yamuna, 
Gurjara, Bhoja, Vahlika, Jalandhara, KaSmlra and the Uttara- 
patha as well as these countries would be destroyed when these 
portents are noticed. (The asterisms) Hasta, Citra, Magha, 
Svati, Mrga(slrsa) or Punarvasu, Uttaraphalguni and A&v'ml 
are spoken as comprising the sphere of wind. 

10-12. The people would become bereft of virtues. All 
would lament in despair. (The countries) Dahala, Kamarupa, 
Kalinga,' Ko£ala, Ayodhya, Avanti, Konkana and Andhra would 



388 


Agni Purdna 


get destroyed. (The asterisms) Aslesa, Mula, Purva?adha, 
Revatl, Bhadrapada and Uttara (form the regions ♦where) 
water reigns supreme. If something unusual takes place under 
their influence, it should be spoken as resultant of their respective 
influences. 

13-14. Cows would have plenty of milk and trees would 
abound with flowers and fruits. There would be good health. 
The earth would abound with grains. The grains would be highly 
valuable. The kingdom would be prosperous. There would 
be grave battles among kings. 

15-19. (The asterisms) Jyestha, RohinI, Anuradha, Dha- 
nistha, Uttarasadha and Abhijit witnessing any unusual com- 
motion are said to be related to celestial (region). The subjects 
would be jubiliant being free from all diseases. Kings would 
conclude treaties and the kingdom would be prosperous. The 
eclipses are known to be of two kinds — by the head or by the 
tail of Rahu. If the Sun or Moon and ascending node of Moon 
are in the same sign, it is known to be eclipse by the head. If it 
is the jamitra (the seventh sign of Zodiac) it is said to be by 
the tail. When the Moon stays at the fifteenth asterism from the 
one occupied by the Sun and if the lunar day begins and ends in 
between two sunrises, one should indicate the lunar eclipse. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYONE 

Diagrams known as Ghatakacakra, Naracakra and Jayacakra 
indicating failure or success in battle etc . 

The lord said : 

1-3. The vowels commencing with ‘a* should be written in 
a circular form commencing from the east. One should write 
such circles for the months Caitra (April-May) and the other 
months. The vowels should be considered as representing the 
lunar days first to thirteenth. If the (names of) lunar days 
of first, full moon, thirteenth, fourteenth, eighth, eleventh and 
seventh in the circle of Caitra happened to be pouched, one 



131.4-15 


389 


should know about one’s victory or gains. One should know that 
it augurs well if odd numbers (of vowels are present). It is said 
that it augurs bad if even numbers (of vowels are present). 

4-5. When the name of a person is pronounced at the time 
of commencement of the battle, if one’s name begins with a long 
vowel, he will always have victory even in dreadful battles. If 
the name of the warrior (commences with) short vowel, he would 
die without any prevention. 

6. If the first letter is long and the middle letter is also 
long (both indicate) death. If two letters at the middle are 
first (among the letters), it would end in the death (of the 
person) without any doubt. 

7. If there are vowels at the beginning and the end, one 
should know (impending) death (if the vowels are) short and 
victory (if the vowels are) long. 

8. I shall describe Naracakra (the figure of a man) 
consisting of asterisms. A human figure is drawn first and 
the asterisms are arranged (in order). 

9-11. Three asterisms are placed at the head (of the figure) 
one at its face, two at the eyes, four on the arms and two at the 
ears. Five asterisms (are placed) at the heart and six asterisms 
at the feet. The asterism for one’s name should be found out and 
be placed at the centre of the drawing, at the eyes, head, right- 
ear, right-hand, feet, heart, neck, left hand, secret organ and 
feet (of the human figure). 

12. One should know that fatality is certain at that 
asterism occupied by the Sun, Saturn, Mars or Rahu (the 
ascending node). 

13. I shall (now) describe the Jayacakra (the circle of 
victory). One should draw letters a to ha. One should 
draw thirteen lines (on a plane) and six lines obliquely. 

14-15. The quarters, planets, sages, Sun, priest and the 
lunar days are placed (in the chambers above) in order. Stupe- 
faction, remembrance, scriptures, asterisms etc. and the 
letters a, ka , (to, ma etc, (are written) below them. The Sun and 
other planets when placed in seven places, the planets are power- 
ful at the end of the name. (The planets) Sun, Saturn and Mars 
(are) for victory and the planet Mercury for truce. 



390 


Agni Purdna 


16-18. Twelve lines are drawn, six on the right and six on the 
left. Fourteen, twentyseven, two, one, fifteen, six, fou#, three 
and seventeen are known as weak points for wealth. The letters 
a 9 ka, fa and pa should be located below. After having assigned 
letters one by one the rest should be located as follows : the 
figure made up of fetters comprising the name should be divided 
by eight. ■ 

19-20. The quotient if identical with the number represent- 
ed by a crow (fourteen) would signify the diagram a strong 
one, while the same equal to the numbers represented by an ass, 
bull, elephant, lion, horse and camel would signify greater suc- 
cess respectively than the preceding one. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYTWO 

Description of Sevacakra and the indication of accrual of benefits 
The Lord said : 

1. I shall describe the Sevacakra that indicates the gain or 
loss from the father, mother, brother, husband or wife. 

2. One should know from that from whom one would get 
benefits. One should draw six vertical lines and eight different 
lines obliquely. 

3-4. Then there would be thirty-five chambers. The letters 
should be written in these (chambers) . The five vowels are drawn 
and afterwards one should discard the three (consonants known 
as) hinariga (diminutive) and write letters ka to ha in groups 
of siddha , sadhya , susiddha, art and mftyu. 

5. Names (which begin with letters) falling under (the 
chambers) ari and mftyu should be avoided in all acts by one’s 
efforts. 

6-7. (The letter) falling in the first place (should be deemed) 
as yielding good. The second place would be a supporter and 
the third one would confer materials. The fourth one causes 
one’s own destruction, while the fifth one gives death. The 
chambers occupied by friendly, servile and related letters would 
indicate acquisition of wealth. 



132.8-20 


391 


8. All the letters respectively occupying the siddha , 
sddhya and susiddha always yield fruits and the two an and mftyu y 
should be rejected in all undertakings. 

9. The vowels a , i, u, e and o are known as included in the 
term akardnta as told now. Now I shall describe the different 
species of beings for which the different groups of letters stand 
for. 


10-11. The celestials occupy letters falling under the 
group of letter c a\ the demons occupy letters of ‘A<z’ group, 
the serpents letters of *ca 9 group and the gandharvas (a kind 
of semi-divine beings) letters of ‘fa 9 group. The sages are 
stated to be in letters of Ha 9 group, the demons are known to 
be in letters of c pa 9 group, the goblins in letters of c ya 9 
group and the men in letters of *sa 9 group. 

12-13. Demons are stronger than celestials, serpents than 
demons, gandharvas than serpents and sages than gandharvas. 
Demons are stronger than sages, goblins than demons and 
men than goblins. One (under the influence) of a stronger 
species should avoid (contact with one of) the weaker. 

14-18. Listen again duly (to the narration) about 
Taracakra which indicates friendship. As before it is calculated 
from the star and the first letter of the name of a person. 
The nine stars which should duly be ascertained from the natal 
star of a person are — janma , samp at, vipat , ksema, pratyari , dha - 
nadd , fasfhi, nidhana , mitra and paramitra . The star known as the 
janma is inauspicious. The star (known as) sampat yields ex- 
tremely great result. The star (known as) vipat makes (one’s 
attempts) futile. The star (known as) ksema is favourable for all 
undertakings and pratyari destroys one’s wealth. The star 
(known as) dhanadd gets the benefit of kingdom etc., and the 
nidhana makes all attempts futile. The effect of the star (known 
as)mitra is friendship and that of paramitra is conferring benefits. 

19. O dear, the number of syllables which are the nume- 
rical equivalents of vowels in the names of two persons (to 
be related in any way), should be counted and added and (the 
total) be divided by twenty. The remainder indicates the result. 

20. One should find the debt and credit between the two 
names from the debt being indicated by lesser number of 



392 


Agni Purdna 


syllables and the credit by greater number of syllables. 

21. Friendship (would grow between two persons y whose 
names stand in relationship of credit and indifference in the 
case of relationship of debt. This is said to be the Bevacakra 
which indicates benefits or the contrary. 

22. (There would be) friendliness (between those born 
under the constellations) of Aries and Gemini as also between 
those of Gemini and Leo. There would be great amity (between 
the born under the constellations) of Libra and Leo as also bet- 
ween Sagittarius and Acquarius. 

23-25. One should not accept the service of a person if 
his natal sign and that of the other person are in (relation- 
ship of) friendship. There is friendship between the following 
Taurus and Cancer, Cancer and Acquarius, Virgo and Scorpion, 
Capricorn and Scorpion, Pisces and Capricorn when they are 
respectively the third and eleventh signs. The constellations 
Libra and Aries would be in great friendship, Taurus and Scor- 
pion would be in great enmity. There would be friendship bet- 
ween Gemini and Sagittarius, Cancer and Capricorn, Capri- 
corn and Acquarius as also Virgo and Pisces. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYTHREE 

Different traits in infants and combinations indicating success in 
battle 

The Lord said : 

1-5. I shall describe the character (of an infant) from the 
nature of planets presiding over nativity. One would be 
bom not extremely tall, neither lean nor stout, possess even loins, 
of a reddish yellow complexion, having reddish eyes and would 
be possessing good qualities and brave in the house of the Sun. 
One who was born in the house of the Moon would have good 
fortune and be of mild disposition. One who was born in the 
house of Mars would be flatulent and greedy. A person born in 
the house of Mercury would be intelligent, fortunate and res- 
pectable. A person born in the house of Jupiter vJbuld be ex- 



1 33.6-14 


393 


tremely irascible and fortunate. One born when the Venus 
was rising would be charitable, enjoy comforts and fortune. 
A person born in the house of Saturn would be intelligent, for- 
tunate and respectable. One born in a good-natured lagna (the 
rising point at the east at the time of one’s birth) would be good- 
natured and one (born) in cruel-natured lagna would be cruel- 
natured. 

6-11. O Gauri ! I shall describe the effect of the presence 
(of the planets) in the sign of one’s nativity according to one’s 
name. The presence of Sun in such a position would get the 
native elephants, horses, wealth, grains, wide sovereignty and 
recovery of lost wealth. The period of Moon would get (the 
native) a damsel of celestial beauty. In (the period of) Mars 
one acquires land and happiness. One (gets) land, grains and 
wealth in (that of) Mercury. One (gets) elephant, horse etc. 
and wealth in (that of) Jupiter. In (that of) Venus one (is 
blessed with) plenty of food and drink and wealth. One is afflict- 
ed with diseases etc. in (that of) Saturn. (One is blessed with) 
good services with unguents etc. and good trade if Rahu (as- 
cending node of the Moon) is seen (In the nativity) even if the 
name of person contained odd number of letters or if it be in the 
flow of left naii. Similarly, the presence of Saturn, Mars 
and Rahu (in the left n&di) would make the native victorious in 
the battle. The presence of the Sun in the flow of the right n&4i 
would augur loss in trade. A person would certainly be victo- 
rious in battle if his name contains even (number of letters). 
One should know victory in battle if the movement is down- 
wards and death if the movement is upwards. Om hUm om hrdm 
om sphem break down the weapons. Om break to pieces. Om 
rout all enemies. Om hrum om hrah phaf . 

12-14. One should place (the above) mantra (on his body) 
repeating seven times and should meditate on his self as lord 
Bhairava, auspicious, possessing four or ten or twenty hands, 
wielding in the hands a spike, a club, a sword, raised kaftdri , 
devouring the army of others and having his back on his own 
forces. One should repeat this one hundred and eight times in 
front of the army of enemies. By the repetition of this and 
the sound of small drum the enemy force would run away 
abandoning their weapons. 



394 


Agni Purdna 


15-24. Listen ! I shall again describe another applica- 
tion that breaks the army of others. After having collected the 
charcoal from the cremation ground and the excrements of owl 
and crow one should draw the image of Bhairava on a cloth. 
The name of the enemy together with the letters are to be 
written at nine places such as the head, face, forehead, heart, 
genital organ, feet, back and between arms. (The image) 
should be broken down at the time of battle with the 
repetition of the above sacred syllable. 

I shall describe Tarksyacakra for the sake of victory and 
which is (known as) trimukhdksara (three-faced syllable). Throw 
away. Om oblations. Tarksya is destroyer of enemies, disease 
and poison. It also sets right one possessed by an evil spirit or 
afflicted by diseases or grief-stricken. One would accomplish 
results proportional to his actions through the bird (Tarksya). 
All poisons such as those due to a plant, movable beings and 
spiders and artificial poison get destroyed by the look of an 
accomplisher. One should again contemplate on the great 
Tarksya having two wings and of the form of a man, having two 
arms and a curved beak, supporting an elephant and tortoise 
and coming in the middle of the sky having innumerable ser- 
pents at its feet. One would see the enemies being swallowed, 
eaten, hit and struck by the beak in the battle, some crushed by 
the feet, some crushed by being struck by the wings and some 
running away in ten directions. One who contemplates on 
Tarksya would be invincible in the three worlds. 

25-26. I shall describe the work to be done to accomplish 
the sanctity of the bunch of peacock’s feathers. Om hr um bird! 
Cast away ! Om hum sah ! The most valiant and of great 
strength ! Devour all forces (of the enemy). Om trample down. 
Om break to pieces. Om melt away. Omhumkhah om ! Bhairava 
may accept oblations. One should repeat this at the (time 
of) lunar eclipse and the bunch of peacock’s feathers should 
be sanctified and waved in front of the army. Just as the one 
riding the lion would do the herds of deer, one would rout (the 
army of enemies) by the sound and contemplation on the 
elephant and lion. 

27-33. I shall describe the invocation with the sacred syl- 
lable (which would rout the enemy force) from a distance by its 



133 . 34-41 


395 


sound. Porridge should be offered to the divine mothers, espe- 
cially to Kalaratri. One should invoke (the goddess) from a 
distance with the flowers malati and cdmari together with the ashes 
from the cremation ground and the roots of cotton (plant). 
Om ahe he Mahendri ! Break ! hi om discard ! Devour the enemy ! 
lili kili om hum pha{ ! By this breaking sacred syllable ( bhahga - 
vidya) repeated from a distance the enemy would be destroyed. 
A mark on the forehead made up of apardjitd and dhattura 
(should be made use of) together (with the mantra). Om kili 
kili vikili icchdkili ! (Goddess) Uma ! Destroyer of goblins ! 
Sankhini (woman fairy) ! Wielder of a club ! Ferocious ! 
Mahesvari (Great goddess) ! Projecting meteors from the 
mouth ! Emitting fires from the mouth ! Possessing ears like the 
conch ! Possessing emaciated thighs ! One who vomits (Alam- 
busa) ! Take away ! Om dug up all wicked persons. Om ! O 
Goddess ! whoever looks at me (you) stupefy them. Om ! the 
terrible (goddess) remaining in the heart of Rudra (Siva) ! 
By your gracious disposition protect me then. Oblations. After 
having drawn the divine mothers surrounded by all their forms 
outside, the (above) sacred syllabic, which accomplishes all 
desires, should be written on a betel leaf. It was worn by 
(gods) Brahma. Rudra, Indra and Visnu on the hand before. 
The celestials were adorned with this protective potent of (god- 
desses) Narasimhi, Bhairavi, all goddesses of the form of Sakti, 
(goddess) TrailokyamohinI and Gauri at the time of great 
battle between celestials and demons. 

O auspicious one ! It is known as the protective amulet 
in which the letters consisting of the name (of the wearer) 
sanctified by the principle sacred syllable on the petals of a 
lotus (shaped diagram) and duly worshipped with the accesso- 
ries. 

34-41. I shall describe mftyuhjaya (conquering death). 
The name surrounded by kalds (syllables) should be in the 
midst of sacred syllable and preceded by the letter sa. The 
letter ja coupled with the dot and the syllable om, containing the 
letter dha at the middle and with the letter va together with the 
sanctified Moon at the middle that routs all the wicked (should 
be placed) . Otherwise one should write the name and the object 
on the petals. The syllable om should be written on the petal 



396 


Agni Pur&na 


on the east, one’s right and north. The syllable hum (should 
be written) on the south-east etc. and the (other) syllables on 
the sixteen petals. (The consonants) ka etc. (should be written) 
in the thirtyfour petals. One should write this sacred syllable of 
conquering death outside on a bhurja leaf together with rocand 
(yellow pigment), saffron, camphor and sandal. It should be 
enclosed with a white thread, covered by bee-wax and worship- 
ped on a pitcher. By wearing this amulet one gets cured of his 
diseases and his enemies would perish. I shall explain the sacred 
syllable known as Bhelakhi that wards off separation and death. 
Am Vatala (windy) ! Vitala (located in the lower region ! 
Cat-faced ! Daughter of Indra ! Born through the agency of 
wind god ! Obstruct. Come. Hdjd in me, V aha ityadi duhkha 
nityakanthoccairmuhurtanvayd aha marhyasmaham upadi om Bhelakhi ! 
Om ! oblations. (Similarly) the sacred syllable of Navadurga 
repeated seven times if worn on one’s mouth paralyses the mouth 
(of the enemy). Om hum phaf oblations. One undefeated in a 
battle with a word if held after repetition for seven times. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FOUR 
Sacred formula for the conquest of three worlds 
The Lord said : 

1-3. I shall describe (the formula) that conquers three 
worlds and crushes all (other) amulets. Om hum ksum hrum om 
obeisance. O Goddess ! Possessing (frightful) teeth ! Possess- 
ing fierce face ! One having a very fierce form ! Hilt, kili ! 
Possessing red eyes ! Kili, kili ! Possessing great sound ! kulu 
om ! Possessing a tongue resembling the lightning ! kulu om ! 
One having no flesh ! kata kafa ! Wearing the ornament of 
gonasa (a kind of gem) ! Cili cili ! One who wears the garland 
of dead bodies ! Drive away. Om ! One having a terrible form I 
One who is clad in raw hide ! (You) gape ! Om ! Dance O 
goddess wielding the creeper-like sword ! One whose side 
glances have been hot with anger. One having the third eye l 
One whose body has been besmeared with marrmfr and fat f 



135.1 


397 


Kaha kaha om. Laugh. Be angry. Om. One possessing the colour 
of a blue cloud ! One who has made the garland of cloud as the 
ornament ! Shine ! Om. One having the body strewn by the 
sound of the bell ! Om ! One who rides the lion ! One of light- 
red complexion ! Om hrdm hrim hrum . One of terrible form ! 
Hrum hrim klim om hrim hrum om. Attract. Shake. Om he hah 
khau. One who wields the club ! Humkfumksam. One who has 
the form of wrath ! Inflame. Om. Terribly frightening one ! 
Break. Om. One having a big body ! Cut. Om. One having 
a dreadful form ! Burrow. The mother of great goblins ! One 
who wards off all the wicked ! Victorious one ! Om. Victorious 
one ! Om. One who conquers the three worlds ! H&m pha / 
oblations. One should propitiate the goddess of blue comp- 
lexion, remaining on dead bodies and possessing twenty arms for 
(gaining) victory. After having located on the five parts of the 
body, red flowers should be offered (to the goddess). There 
would be routing of the (enemy) forces in the battle by the 
repetition of the formula (known as) conquering three worlds. 
Om. (Obeisance) to (the god of) manifold forms. Paralyse. 
Om. Stupefy. Om. Scatter away all enemies. Om. Attract 
(lord) Brahma. Attract (lord) Visnu. Attract (lord) Mahe- 
$vara (Siva). Om. Make (the god) Indra tremble. Om. Make 
the mountains move. Om. Dry up seven oceans. Om. Cut 
through. Cut through. Obeisance to (the god) of manifold 
forms. One should then meditate (while pronouncing this 
formula) that the enemy is present in an image of a serpent 
made up of earth. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYFIVE 
Formula for success in battle 


The lord said : 

1 . I shall describe the garland of words of the formula that 
gives victory in the battle. Orti hrim (Goddess) Camun^a (hav- 
ing a terrific form) ! One who dwells in the cremation ground 1 
One who holds in hand the club with a skull at the top ! 



398 


Agni Purina 


One who is riding the terrific dead body (or the body in the form 
of universe at the time of deluge) ! One who is surrounded 
by the great vehicle in the form of the decaying universe ! 
The dark night at the destruction of universe ! One who is 
surrounded by the great attendant gods ! Goddess with a great 
mouth ! Possessing several hands ! (One who holds) the bell, 
the little drum and the small bell ! One who has a terrific lau- 
ghter ! Kili kili om hum phaf . One who makes (the world) dark 
by her fierce teeth ! One who makes many kinds of sounds ! 
One who is clad in the hide of an elephant ! One who is bes- 
meared with flesh ! One whose terrific tongue is licking ! The 
great demoness ! One having the terrible teeth ! One who has 
frightening roar of laughter ! One who has the splendour of 
shining lightning ! Move. Move. Om . One who has the eyes 
like the Cakora 1 (bird) ICili.Cili . Om. One who has a lustrous 
tongue ! Om bhim. One who has a frown on the face ! One 
who frightens by uttering the syllable hum ! One who 
wears the moon on the crown on her matted hair surrounded by 
the garland of skulls ! One who has the terrific laughter ! Kili 
kili om hrum. One who makes (the world) dark by her frighten- 
ing teeth ! One who destroys all obstacles ! (Youm) accomp- 
lish this act. Om. Do it quickly. Om phaf om subjugate with 
(your) mace. Enter. Om Dance. Dance .Shake. Om. Make (the 
enemies) move. Om. One who is fond of blood, flesh and 
intoxicating drink ! Kill. Om trample. Om cut. Om kill. Om chase 
Om make the strong body (of the enemy) fall down. Om. 
Enter into the beings of three worlds whether wicked or not 
wicked, taken possession or not. Om dance. Om extol. One who 
has sunken eyes ! One having erect hairs ! One having the 
face of an owl ! One who holds skull (in the hand) ! Om. 
One who wears a garland of skulls ! Burn. Om. Cook. Cook. 
Om. Seize. Om. Enter into the middle of the circle (of the ene- 
mies). Om. Why do you delay? Overwhelm (them) with the 
strength of (lords) Brahma, Visnu and Rudra and the strength 
of sages. Om Kili kili om khili khili vili vili om. One who dis- 
plays an ugly form ! One whose body is enveloped by a black 
serpent ! One who subjugates all planets ! One who has a long 
lip ! One whose nose rests on the frowning eyes ! One who is 


1 . A fabulous bird supposed to live on the ambrosia of thS Moon. 



135.2-6 


399 


having a frightful face ! One having tawny matted hair ! 
Brahmi ! Break. One whose mouth emits flames ! Yell. Om. 
Make (the enemies) fall down. Om . One having red eyes ! 
Roll the earth. Make (them) fall. Om . Catch hold of the head. 
Close the eye. Om. Catch hold of the arms and feet. Split open 
the posture (of the hands). Om phaf om. Pierce open. Om. Cut 
with the trident. Om kill with the mace. Om strike with the 
stick. Om. Cut with the disc. Om. Break with the spear. Stake 
with the teeth. Om. Pierce with the middle finger. Om. Seize 
with the goad. Om. Release. Release the possessive spirits like 
the Dakin! and Skanda and also the fevers occurring every day, 
second day , third day and fourth day (and the diseases of) the 
head and eyes. Om. Cook. Om. Destroy. Om. Make them fall 
to the ground. Om. Brahman! I 1 Come. Om (goddess) Mahe- 
svar! ! Come. Om Kaumari ! Come. Om Vaisnavi ! Come. 
Om Varahi ! Come. Om Aindri ! Come. Om. Camun<Ja. Come. 
Om Revati ! Come. Om. Akasarevati. Come. Om. One who 
moves like the snow. Come. Om. One who has slain (the de- 
mon) Ruru ! One who annihilated the demons ! One who 
goes in heaven ! Bind. Bind with the noose. Pierce with 
the goad. Stand for the moment. Om enter the circle (of 
enemies) ! Om. Seize. Bind the face. Om. Bind the eyes, arms 
and feet. Bind the malefic planets. Om. Bind directions. 
Charm the cardinal points, the space below and all places. Om. 
Subjugate all with ashes or water or earth or mustard. Om. 
Make them fall. Om. (goddess) Camunda ! Kili kili dm vicce 
hum phat oblations. This is known as the garland of words that 
accomplishes all acts. 

2-6. One gets victory in battle always by oblations, repeti- 
tions and reading of this formula. One has to contemplate (on 
the goddess) as having twenty-eight hands holding the sword, 
club, mace, stick, bow, arrow, clenched fist, -hammer, conch, 
sword, banner, club, disc, axe, little drum, mirror, spear, dart, 
plough, mace, nose, an iron club, large drum, panava (a kind of 
musical instrument), conferring pose, clenched fist, threatening 
posture, killing the (demon in the form of a) buffalo in the pairs 
of hands. By making oblations one would conquer the enemies. 

1. From Brahzn&Qi to C&muQd& m the eight divine mothers. 



400 


Agni Purdna 


The (above) oblations should be done with three sweet 
things (honey sugar and clarified butter). This incantation 
should not be disclosed to everyone. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYSIX 

The diagram of asterisms indicating the period for undertaking a 
journey 

The Lord said : 

1-6. I shall describe the diagram indicating good or bad 
results in journey undertaken. A diagram consisting of three 
columns should be drawn and (the asterisms) Asvini etc. should 
be represented therein (by their first letters). (The asterisms) 
A$vinl, Ardra, Purva (phalgunl), Uttaraphalguni, Hasta, Jyes- 
tha, Mula, Vanina (Satabhisak) and Ajaikapat (Purvabhadra- 
pada) consist of first column. (The asterisms) Yamya 
(BharanI), Mrgasira, Pusya, Bhagya (Purvaphalguni), Citra, 
Maitra (Anuradha), Apya (Purvasadha), Vasava (Jyestha) 
and Ahirbudhnya (Uttarabhadrapada) (are located in the 
second column). (The asterisms) Kfttika, Rohin!, Ahih (Aslesa) 
Citra, Svati, Visakha, Sravana and Revat! are located in the 
third (column). One should know the good or bad results from 
the asterisms associated with ' three columns. This is known 
as the diagram of phanUvara (lord of serpents) divided into 
three columns. The presence in Sun, Mars, Saturn and Rahu 
(the ascending node) indicate bad luck and the rest good luck. 
The position is the same, such as the country or village, the 
brothers and wife indicate good. The twentyseven asterisms 
should be known as (represented by letters) a 9 bha , kf> ro 9 
mr , 5, pu , pu , 5, ma , pu , u , ha y ci , sva y vi 9 a 9 jye 9 mfi, pU 9 u , ira 9 dha, 
ia 9 pu, u and re . 



137.1-7 


401 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYSEVEN 
Description of the formula known as Mahdmdri 
The Lord said : 

1. I shall describe the formula known as Mahamari (that 
which brings death) that routs the enemies. Om hrim Maha- 
mari ! One having red eyes ! One having black complexion ! 
O One who commands the god of death ! One who destroys 
all beings ! Kill such and such a person. Kill. Om burn, hum. 
Om cook, cook. Om pierce, pierce. Om kill, kill. Om annihilate, 
annihilate. Om one who charms all good (beings) ! One who 
grants all desires ! Hum phaf oblations. Om Mari ! Obeisance 
to the heart. Om Mahdmdri ! Oblations to the head. Om Dread- 
ful night (at the time of deluge) ! Vausaf to the tuft. Om 
possessing black complexion ! Khah to the armour hum . Om 
one having starry eyes ! One having the tongue-like lightning ! 
One who frightens all beings ! Protect, protect in all my under- 
takings. Hrdm . To the three-eyed vajat. Om Mahamari ! One 
who controls all beings ! Mahakali ! To the weapons hum 
phaf . O Great goddess ! This is the rite of location to be per- 
formed by the votary. 

2-3. After having collected from the dead body, the cloth 
of the shape of a square of three cubit’s length, one should draw 
(the image of the goddess) of black complexion, having three 
faces and four hands, (and draw) on the cloth with different 
colours, (the weapons) bow, spear, scissor, staff with skull at its 
top and the eastern face having black colour. 

4-6. By the fall of the sight (of this face) it would devour 
the man in front. The second (face) on the south (is) red- 
red-tongued, frightening, licking, dreadful and frightful with pro- 
truded lips through which a row of horrid teeth are visible. A 
look at this (face) is sure to devour the horses etc. (of the enemies). 
The third face of the goddess is of white colour and is the des- 
troyer of the elephant etc. The western face (of the goddess) 
should be propitiated with incense, flower, honey and clarified 
butter etc. 

7. By the remembrance of this sacred syllable the diseases 
of the eye, head and others (limbs) get destroyed. The yak$as 



402 Agni Purdna 

(semi-divine beings) and demons come under one’s control. 
The enemies get destroyed. 

8. There is no doubt that by oblation made with the twigs 
of margosa tree mixed with the blood of a she-goat, the angry 
votary would kill (his enemies). 

9. If the oblation is done for seven days in front of the army 
of the enemy, the army would be afflicted with diseases and the 
enemies get routed. 

10. In whose name eight thousand oblations are made with 
(the same) twigs, he would die even if protected by Brahma. 

11. (If oblations are made) for three days with the twigs of 
unmatta (a kind of plant) with blood and poison for thousand 
times, the enemy would get destioycd together with his army. 

12. One would rout the enemy by doing oblations of black 
mustard and salt for three days. The oblations made with the 
addition of the blood of an ass would make the enemy fly away. 

13. The oblation made with the addition of the blood of a 
crow would cause annihilation of the enemy. Whatever 
(the votary) does as he wished for the destruction (of the enemy) 
(should be completed with an oblation performed with the same 
material). 

14-18. Then at the time of battle the votary should 
ride an elephant accompanied by a couple of girls, his body 
having been sanctified by sacred syllables. He should then charm 
the musical instruments like the conch etc. at some distance 
(from the enemy) and should cut (the enemy forces) at the 
battle-field holding the cloth containing the figure of Maha- 
maya. He should show that great cloth against the army of the 
enemy. The girls should be fed therein and the lump (of food ?) 
should be carried round. The votary should then think that the 
army has become immobile like a stone, crest-fallen, broken and 
confused. This paralysing (formula) has been uttered by me. 
It should not be disclosed to everyone. The cloth described 
above (may also have the outlines of) Durga, Bhairavl, Kubjika, 
(different forms of the consort of Siva), Rudra and 
Narasimha (man-lion) manifestation ofVi?nu) besides those of 
(Maha) maya that conquers the three worlds. 



138.1-11 


403 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYEIGHT 
The six accessory acts relating to all mantras 
The Lord said : 

1-5. I shall describe six acts (to be used) in all 
sacred syllables. Listen (to me). The s&dhya (to be accomp- 
lished) should be written first being followed by the sacred syl- 
lable. This is known as the pallava (bud) and should be used in 
all incantations. First the sacred syllable (is written), then the 
s&dhya and then the sacred syllable. This is known as the yoga 
(combination). This should be employed for the uts&dana (ex- 
tinction) of one’s race. The sacred syllable is written first and the 
s&dhya is added at the middle and again the sacred syllable 
at the end. This tradition is (known as) the rodhaka (that which 
arrests) and should be employed in stambhana (stupefying the 
faculties of the enemy). The sadhya should be added at the 
bottom and top, left, right and middle. This is known as the 
samputa (casket) and should be employed in vaSya (subjugation) 
and akarsa (attraction). 

6. When the letters composing any particular sacred syllable 
are of the category of s&dhya\ letters, that sacred syllable is known 
to be the first class. It is capable of attracting and subjugating 
(another person ) . 

7. Two of the letters constituting the sacred syllable are 
written first and one s&dhya letter afterwards. This is known to 

be the vidarbha and should be made use of in attraction and sub* 

> 

jugation. 

8-10. The acts of &kar$ana etc. as also (in subduing) high 
fever should be performed only in the spring. The term sv&hd 
(oblations) is auspicious in attraction and subjugation. The 
term namask&ra (obeisance) should be employed for peace and 
prosperity. The term vasaf (should be made use of) for good 
health and in acts of attraction and subjugation. (The term) 
phaf would be (used) for creating dissension, causing death and 
to break an auspicious one. The term va$af gives accomplish- 
ment in gains and initiation in sacred syllables. 

11. You are Yama (god of death). You are the sovereign 
over the dead (Yamaraja). You are of the form of time. You. 



404 Agni Purina 

are the reign of righteousness. You quickly make dead this enemy 
offered by me. 

12. The priest, who is the destroyer of the enemy, should 
say with pleased mind, “O Votary ! Be calm ! I shall kill 
(him) with (all my) efforts.” 

13-14. This gets accomplished after worshipping the god 
of death in white lotus and making oblations contemplating 
himself as Bhairava and KuleSvari (as remaining) at the centre. 
(The votary) would know in the night the result (of the incan- 
tation) on himself and the person (concerned). One would 
become the killer of his enemy by propitiating the (goddess) 
Durga with the formula “O (goddess) Durga ! Durga ! You 
are the guardian !” One should kill the enemy by the 
repetition of letters “ha, sa , ksa, ma, la, va, ra and ya” sacred to 
(the goddess) Bhairavi. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYNINE 

The names of sixty years of Hindu cycle and the good or bad 

results from them 

The lord said : 

1. Listen ! I shall describe the names of sixty years 
and the good or bad results from them. Sacrificial rites (would 
be done) in Prabhava. The people would be comfortable in 
Vibhava . 

2. All grains (grow well) in Sukla . (People) rejoice in 
Pramoda ( Pramodat ). There would be increase (of articles of 
Comforts) in Prajdpati (Prajotpatti) . (The year) Ahgird (Afigi- 
rasa ) would increase comforts. 

3. The people (population) increase in Srimukha . Thou- 
ghts flourish well in Bh&va ( Bhava ). (In the year) Yuva the life 
essence gets filled up. Dhdtd makes the herbs sprout well. 

4. Uvara (gives) welfare and health. Bahuddna gives pros- 

perity. In Pramdthl (there would be) moderate rains. There 
would be plenty of grains in Vikrama. * 

5. Vffa ( Vifu ) makes all things thrive. Citrabhdnu sees many 



139.6-140.1-3 


405 


wonderful events. Svarbhdnu (gives) prosperity and health. 
The clouds are favourable in T&rana. 

6. (There would be) abundance of rains in Parthiva. Jaya 
(Vijaya) (indicates) excessive rains. Sarvajit (indicates) good 
showers. Sarvadhatri gives prosperity. 

7. Virodhi destroys clouds. (Vikrti) causes panic. Men 
become chivalrous in Khara . The people rejoice in Nandana . 

8-9. Vijaya kills enemies. (Jaya) annihilates enemies 
and diseases. People suffer from fever in Manmatha. People 
become wicked in the cruel Durmukha. There will not be pros- 
perity in Hemalamba . O great goddess ! the year Vilamba gives 
prosperity. 

10. Vikari causes the wrath of enemies. O Victorious 
one ! (The year) Sarvadd ( Sarvari ) gives comforts to all. 
Water inundates (the earth) in Plava. O Good-natured one ! 
The people do auspicious things in Subhakft 1 . 

11. The people (become) cruel in Raksasa. In Anala (Mala) 
(there would be plenty of) different kinds of grains. (There 
would be) good showers in Pingala and destruction of wealth in 
Kalayukti. 

12. All things are accomplished in Siddhdrtha ( Siddharthi )• 
Dreadful events take place in Raudra (Raudri). (There would be) 
moderate rains in Durmati. Dundubhi causes welfare and (plenty 
of) grains. 

13. It rains well in Rudhirodgarl. Raktdksa and Krodhana 
(give) victory. I nK$aya (Akfaya) people get reduced to poverty. 
These are the sixty years. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY 
Description of herbs used in charms 

The Lord said : 

1-3. I shall describe (drugs) used in charms. These 
should be written in eight squares. They are bhfAgaraja , saha- 

1. The text then omits the names of 12 years and continues from 
R&fasa, the 49th year. 



406 


Agni Purina 


devi , maydrafikkd, putrafijiva, kftdftjali, adhahpufpd , rudantikd, 
kumdri , rudrajafa , vismkranta , white flrfaz, lajjaluka , mohalatd , black 
dhattura y gorakja, karkati, mesafrfigi and snuhi. 

4-5. The symbolical numbers of herbs are ftvijah (priests) 
(16), vahnayah (fires) (3 ),ndgah (elephants) ( Q) f paksau (wings) 
(2), mwii (sage) (3), Afa/iK (14), .tfu/a (11), vasavah (vasus) 
(8) (directions) (10), rarJA (tastes) (6), wrfJA (4), grahdh 
(planets) (9), rtavah (seasons) (6), /tow’ (Sun) (12), Candra - 
m<zA (Moon) (1) and tithayah (phases of the Moon) (15). The 
first four (of the above-said herbs) should be used to 
fumigate (the body of the votary) or in the burning sticks. 

6. Collyrium should be made out of the third (in the list). 
Bathing should be done with the fourth. The unguent of four 
kinds should be made with the bhrngaraja and the one following 
it (in the list). 

7-8. (The herbs represented symbolically by) muni in the 
list should be used in unguent for the right side, by yuga for the 
left side, by bhujaga for the foot and ttvara for the head. Fumiga- 
tion of the centre should be done with arka (12) and fafi (1), 
in all acts. A body besmeared with these would be worshipped 
even by the celestials. 

9. Incense sticks made of the sixteenth (herb in the list) 
should be burnt and taken round the house. (The herbs stand- 
ing as) the fourth should be used in the collyrium and those 
(standing as) the fifth should be used in bathing. 

10. (The herbs denoted by the number) eleven should be 
used for eating and fifteen for drinking. A mark on the forehead 
with (the herbs denoted by the numbers) jtvik (16), veda (4), 
rlu (6), nayana (2) captivates the world. 

11. A lady being besmeared with (the herbs denoted by) 
surya (12), tridaSa (13 ) y paksa (2) and Saila (7) gets captivated. 
Women get captivated by besmearing their genital organ with 
(herbs denoted by) candra (1 ), Indra(\),phani (8) and rudra (1 1 ) # 

12. A pill made of (herbs denoted by) tithi (15), dik 
(8 ),yuga (4), and bdna (5) can subjugate. This pill should be 
given in eatables, food and drink as a charm. 

13. (The herbs denoted by) ftvik (16), graka (9), akfi (2) 
and iaila (7) if had on the face (are effective) in paralysing 
weapons. One can remain in waters by besmearing limbs 



140 . 14 - 141 . 1-5 


407 


with (the herbs denoted by) Saila (7) Iridra (1), veda (4) and 
randhra (9). 

14. A pill of (the herbs denoted by) btya (5), aksi (2), 
manu (14) and rudra (11) removes hunger and thirst. A miser- 
able woman would be made happy by besmearing with (herbs 
denoted by) tri (3), $odafa (16), dik (8) and bona (5). 

15. One would (be able to) play with serpents by besmear- 
ing with (herbs denoted by) tri (3), data (10), akfi (2), dik (8) 
and netra (2). A woman delivers a child comfortably by an 
application of the unguent of (the herbs represented by) tri 
(3), da§a (10), akfi (2), iia (11) and bhujaga (8). 

16. One is sure to win in dice (by wearing) a cloth bes- 
meared with (the herbs represented by) sapta (7), dik (8), muni 
(3) and randhra (9). Male child (would be born) by besmearing 
the penis with (the herbs denoted by) tri (3), daia (10), ak§a 
(2), abdhi (7) and muni (3) before coition. 

17. A pill made (of the herbs represented by) graha (9), 
abdhi (7), sarpya (8), tri (3) and daia (10) would be able to 
charm. The efficacy of the herbs in the sixteen places has been 
explained. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYONE 
Description of herbs used in charms , medicines etc . 

The Lord said : 

1. I shall describe the effect of the herbs arranged in 36 
squares which were used by lords Brahma, Rudra and Indra 
and which if used make men immortals. 

2-5. (They are) — haritaki , ak§i 9 dhdtri 9 marica 9 pippali , iilphd 9 
vahniy funfhiy pippali , gujlticl, vacd 9 nimba 9 vdsaka, fatamUli 9 sain - 
dhava 9 sindhu-vdraka 9 kanfakdri 9 gokfurakd, bilva 9 paunarnavd 9 bald 9 
erandamunfa rucaka, bhfhga 9 kfdra 9 parpafa 9 dhanydka, jiraka , 
Satapufpiy javdnikd 9 vidaftga 9 khadira 9 kftamdla 9 haridrd 9 and 
siddhdrtha located in the 36 squares. 



408 


Agni Purdna 


6-10. The herbs duly counted from one and placed in all 
squares are highly efficacious in curing ailments, Snaking 
(men) immortal and cure wrinkles and baldness. Their crushed 
powder compounded and treated with mercury and used as an 
electuary with pieces of jaggery, honey or ghee or as an astrin- 
gent or through the medium of ghee or oil taken by all would 
save their lives. One can take half a karsa 1 or one karfa or half 
a pala 2 or one pala and may live for 300 years although he may 
be pursuing an indisciplined way of life. There is no other com- 
bination more (efficacious) than this remedy reviving the dead. 

11. One gets free from all diseases by the combination of 
the first nine (herbs). One gets free from aches by (the use of) 
second, third and fourth (herbs). 

12. So also (one gets free from all diseases by the use of) 
six herbs from first to sixth as well as ninth. 

13. One gets free from wind (affecting the body) by (the 
use of herbs) one to eight and from biles by agni (third) 
'bh&skara (twelfth), twenty-sixth and twenty-seventh. 

14. One gets cured of (deranged) phlegm by (the use of 
herbs) bdna (fifth), rtu (sixth), iaila (seventh) vasu (eighth) 
and tithi (fifteenth). (Herbs denoted by) veda (four), agni 
(three), bana (five) and six would be (efficacions) against 
(diseases caused by) charm. 

15. One would get freed from (all afflictions due to) 
planets and being possessed (by goblins) by (the due use of 
herbs denoted by) one, two, three, six, seven, eight, nine and 

eleven. 

16. There is no doubt that (they would also be cured by 
herbs denoted) by thirty-two, fifteen and twelve. This knowl- 
edge relating to thirty-six places should not be imparted to 
everyone. 


1. One karfa is equal to 1 6 mdfas where m&$a stands for the weight of a 
kind of grain. 


2. One pda is equal to 4 karfas . 



1 42. 1-1 Oa 


409 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYTWO 
Description of medicinal incantations 


The Lord said : 

1-2. I shall describe the medicinal incantations and dia- 
grams which yield all (desires). The number of letters 
composing the name of a thief should be doubled (and added 
to) the number of its syllables multiplied by four. (The total 
thus obtained) should be divided by (the number of letters in) 
the name (of a person) and if there be any remainder (he should 
be reckoned as) a thief. I shall describe (the process of reckon- 
ing) the birth (of a child). If there are odd numbers of letters 
in the question (put to the soothsayer), it indicates that the child 
in the womb would be a male. 

3-4. (The child would be born) blind in the left eye if the 
letters in the name are even and in the right eye if the letters are 
odd. The number of letters composing the names of both the 
male and female should be multiplied by the number of their 
syllables and divided by four. (The quotient), if even, (would 
indicate the birth of) a female child and if odd, a male child. 
If there is no remainder, (it indicates) the death of the woman. 

5. If there is no remainder in the former, (it indicates) 
the death of the husband first. In hoary science one should take 
the subtle aksara in all divisions. 

6-7. I shall describe the diagram of Saturn. One should 
avoid the aspect of that (Saturn) (at all times). (The Saturn 
in) its house has one hundred and fourteen (units) aspect at the 
seventh. It has one-fourth its aspect in the first, second, eighth 
and twelfth (places). One should avoid them. The lord of the 
day governs one eighth part of a day. The others govern half a 
y&ma (three hours ) . 

8- 10a. One should avoid the period of Saturn during 
the battle. I shall describe the rule of Rahu (the ascending 
node) on a day. It (lies) always at the east on Sunday, at south-- 
east on Saturday, at the south on Thursday, at the north-west 
on Friday, at the south-east on Tuesday, and at the north on 
Wednesday, while the Phanir&hu lies enclosing at the north- 
east, south-east, south-west and north-west and kills one who 
sets on a journey against it. 



410 


Agni Putdrja 


lOb.-l 3. I shall describe the position of Rahu on different 
days of a month. Rahu kills the enemy facing it on the 
full moon day at the south-east and on new moon day at the 
north-west. Rahu will lie facing on the days represented by (the 
letters) ka to ja and, in the south on (the days of) sa to da> in 
the east on (the days of) dha to ma and in the north on (the days 
of) ya to ha and one should avoid those associated with Mars 
in the bright (fortnight). Three lines towards the east and three 
lines towards the south (should be written) and then one should 
write from Suryardii onwards in the main division. (If battle is 
made) in the rdfi aspected by Rahu there will be defeat and 
victory if otherwise. 

14-1 8a. I shall describe the viftirahu. Eight lines should be 
drawn. The Rahu, the great, moves with the viffi (hell) from 
the north-east to the south, south to the north-west, from the 
north-west to the east, from the east to the west, from the south- 
west to the north, from the north to the south-east and then to 
the west and from the west to the north-east. The Rahu kills 
the enemies on the third day (of a lunar month) in the north- 
east, on the seventh day in the south and so also in the dark and 
bright fortnights in the north-west. (One has to propitiate), 
Indra and others, Bhairava and others, brahmin and others and 
planets numbering eight in each class in the east and other 
(directions) and the vdta-yogini (the presiding goddess) in (the 
directions) south and others. One should kill the enemy in that 
direction in which the wind blows. 

18b-19. I shall describe (the rite) that strengthens one. 
(The herb known as) Sarapuiikhikd if worn on the neck, arm etc. 
on (a day ruled by the asterism) Pusya would prevent the 
(enemy’s weapon) striking at the neck. Apardjitd and Pdfhd, 
the two (herbs) in the same manner would ward off the sword. 
(The following is the mantra to be used) : — Om . Obeisance. 
Goddess Vajra£rnkhal£ ! Kill. Kill. Om. Devour. Devour. 
Om. Eat. Am. Eh. Drink the blood with the skull O Red- 
eyed one ! One having the red cloth ! One having the body 
besmeared with ashes ! One wielding the weapon of mace ! 
One who is covered by the action of the mace ! Close, close the 
eastern direction. Om. Close, close the southern direction. Om , 
Close, close the western direction. Om. Close, close*he northern 



143.1-6 


411 


direction. Bind, bind the serpents. Bind, bind the wives of the 
serpents. Om. Bind, bind the demons. Om. Bind, bind the 
Yaksas, demons and goblins. Om. Guard, guard (me) from 
the dead, goblins and Gandharvas , whoever troubles me. Om. 
Guard, guard above. Om. Guard, guard below. Om. Bind, bind 
the knife. Om. Burn. One of great strength ! Ghafi ghafoi: Om 
Mofimofi safdvali. Fiery mace ! One who strikes with the mace ! 
Him phaf hrim hr dm §rim phaf hrim hah phftm phem phaU. From all 
planets, from all diseases from all wicked afflictions, hrim from all 
things guard, guard me. One should employ this in all acts 
such as those relating to the planets, fevers and goblins. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYTHREE 
Mode of worship of Goddess Kubjikd 


The Lord said : 

1. I shall describe the mode of worship of (goddess) Kub- 
jika that accomplishes all comforts. (It is only by such worship) 
the celestials had conquered the demons together with their 
weapons and kingdom. 

2-3. One should locate the maydbija (the secret basic mantra 
of the goddess) at the secret organ and the six (syllables) of the 
weapons on the hand. (One should say) Kali, Kali (and touch) 
the heart and Dus{acandalika (vicious Candalika) (and touch) 
the head. “ Hrim sphem ha sa kha ka cha da syllable om Bhairava” 
(is the mantra to be said to touch) the tuft. Bhelaki ( for ) the 
kavaca (armour) and Duti and Raktacantfika (for) the eyes. 

4-5. (Then one should say) guhya Kubjika (and touch) 
the weapon. One should worship (goddess Kubjika) in the 
lotus at the centre and the seat at the south-east, the head at the 
north-east, the tuft at the south-west, the armour at the west, the 
eyes at the centre and the weapons in all directions of the 
circle in the thirty-two petals. The principal mantra (for the 
goddess Kubjika is) ha, sa, kfa , ma, la, na, va, va$ad 

6. (The eight goddesses) Brahman!, MaheSI, Kaumari, 



412 Agni Purdna 

Vaisnavi, Varahi, Mahendri, Camunda and Candika (should 
be worshipped) in the directions east onwards. # 

7-8. One has to (locate and) worship (the subtle letters) 
ra, va, la, ka, sa, and ha at the (petals at the) north-cast, east, 
south-east, south, south-west and west. A garland of flowers 
and the five mountains such as Udcjiyana, Jalandhara, Purnagiri 
and Kamarupa should be worshipped at the north-west, north- 
east, south-east and south-west and (goddess) Kubjika at the 
centre. 

9-10. The five Vimalas such as Anadivimala, Sarvajna- 
vimala, Prasiddhavimala, Samyogavimala and Samayavimala 
(should be worshipped at the tips (of the petals) at the north- 
west, north-cast, south-west, south-east and north. 

11-14. Khinkhini, §astha, Sopama, Susthira and Ratna- 
sundari (should be worshipped) in the north-east corner for 
(the worship of) Kubjika. The eight Adinathas — Mitra, Odlsa, 
$asthi, Varsa etc. (constituting) the jewels of heaven (should 
be worshipped) in the south-east, west and north-west and the 
kavacaratna (the excellent mantras serving as armour) in the west. 
(The syllable) ‘ brum ’ (should be worshipped) in the north-west, 
north-east and south-east together with the five basic letters. 
The five gems (the divine mothers) (should be located and 
worshipped) at the south and south-east. Among these, the three, 
Jyestha, Raudri and Antika are very old. They and other god- 
desses and others (should be worshipped) with the five pranavas 
(syllable om). The worship is of two kinds — twentyseven and 
twentyeight. 

15-17. Then (the god) Ganapati (lord of the attendant 
gods on Siva and son of the latter) of the form of pranava and a 
boy should be worshipped duly with (the mantra om em gSm. 
Ganapati should be worshipped in a square diagram on the 
south. The Vatuka (form of Ganapati) (should be worshipped) 
on the left. The sixteen preceptors — n<J/A<w(tantrik preceptors) 
and eighteen ndthas should be worshipped in the north-west 
and other (directions). Then the gods Brahma and others 
(should be worshipped) around in the six angular points. At the 
centre the nine gods (should be worshipped). This is always, 
the mode of worship of (goddesses) Kubjika, Kula{£ etc. 



144.1-12 


413 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYFOUR 
Mode of worship of goddess Kubjikd 


The Lord said : 

1. I shall describe the worship of glorious Kubjika who 
grants righteousness, wealth and victory. One should worship 
her together with her attendants with the basic mantra : Om aim 
hraum Mm khaim hrem ha, sa, ksa, ma , la, va, ra, ya, urn Goddess ! 
Mother ! Hrarh hrim ksrim, ksaurh ksum krim Kubjikd ! Hrim om 
ha, ha, na, na, ma Aghoramukhi ! Vdm chrdm chim kili kili kjraum 
vicce khyom Mm krom om hrorfi aiifi Vajrakubjini ! Strirh Trailokya- 
karsini (One who subjugates the three worlds) ! Hrim Kamanga- 
dravini (one who melts away the god of love) ! Hrim strim 
Mahaksobhakarini (the great agitator) ! Aim krirh ksraum airft 
hrim Mm pherh ksaum obeisance. O Goddess ! Ksaum Kubjikd ! 
hrim krairh ha, ha, na, na, ma Aghoramukhi ! Chrdm chdm vicce om 
kili kili . 

2-4a. After locating the mantras on the hand and the body, 
one should perform the worship of twilight (addressed to the 
goddesses) Vama, Jyesfha and Raudri. (The following is the 
mantra ) — May we know you as Kulavag!£i. Let me contemplate 
on (the goddess) Mahakall. May (goddess) Kauli impel us to 
the same. There are five mantras such as pranava etc. (The 
votary should say) “I am worshipping the sandals.” The name 
(should be) at the middle, ending with (the term) obeisance 
with eighteen bija (letters). Then (the name of the goddess) 
in the sixth (declensional) case with (the term) ‘obeisance’ and 
the end. I shall describe all of them to be known. 

4b-12. Kaulisanatha, Sukala, Kubjika from the birth, 
Srikanjhanatha, Kaule$a, Gagananandanatha, Catuladevi, Mai- 
triSI, Karall, Turnanathaka, Ataladevl, Srlcandradevl are their 
names. (These should be invoked) as stupefying the attendants 
of Siva and the sandals should be worshipped. Then the sandal 
endowed with gems that excel the bliss in the world should be 
worshipped. Brahmajftana, Kamala and Parama together with 
Vidya (should also be worshipped). I shall describe the three- 
fold purifications of vidyd (knowledge), Devi (goddess) and guru 
(preceptor). By means of the $o4dnydsa (six ways of touching 



414 


Agni Purdna 


the body with mystical letters) the following deities should be 
located in the body — Gagana, Cafuli, Atma, Padmananda, 
Manx, Kala, Kamala, Manikyakantha, Gagana, Kumuda, 
Sri, Padma, Bhairava, Ananda, Deva, Kamala, Siva, Bhava, 
Krsna, the nine and then sixteen siddhas — Candrapaura, Gulma, 
Subha, Kama, Atimuktaka, Viraktaka, Prayoga, Ku£ala, 
Devabhoga, Visvedeva, Khadgadeva, Rudra, Asidhanya, 
Mudrasphota, Vamsapura and Bhoja. 

13-14. After having put flowers on the circle, the circles 
(of the deities) should be worshipped. Then one should worship 
Ananta, Mahananta, sandals of Siva, mahavyapti (the great 
pervading force), the void circle consisting of five principles, 
sandals of Srikanthanatha and Sankara and Ananta. 

15. One should worship within the circle Sadasiva, Pingala, 
Bhrgvananda, Nathaka, Rangulananda and Samvarta. 

16-18. Srimahakala, Pinaki, Mahendraka, Khadga, Bhu- 
janga, Bana, Aghasi, Sabdaka, Vaga, Ajfiarupa and Nanda- 
rupa should be worshipped in the south-west after making the 
offering (victim) (with the following mantra) — Hrorh kham kharh 
hum saum (obeisance) to (god) Vatuka. Aru aru (you) accept, 
accept argha (water offered as token of respect), flower, incense, 
lamp, perfumes and bali (offering). Obeisance to you. Orfi 
hrdm hrtrh hrurh k$em (obeisance) to the guardian of the ground. 
(You) descend, descend. One bearing the great grown matted 
hair ! One having a face shining with the flames in the three 
^yes ! (You) come. Come. Accept, accept worship with 
perfumes, flowers and bali (offering). Khah , khah> orh kah , orh 
lah om oblations to the lord of great damara (uproar). The 
trikUfa (the three groups) should be worshipped with (the 
syllables) hrirh hrQrh hath Mm and the offering of the remnant of 
bali in the left, right and middle. The sandals of Niianatha 
(are worshipped) in the south, Tandrinatha on the right and 
Kalanala in the front. 

19-24. The mountains Uddiy&pa, Jalandhara, Purna and 
Kamarupa and the five gems Gagananandadeva, Svargananda, 
Paramanandadeva, the sandals of Satyananda and Nagananda 
(should be worshipped) in the north. One should worship the 
-six — the sandal of Suranatha (Indra), Srlsamayakotfga, Vidya- 
kofigvara, Kofiga, Bindukoflga and Siddhako (I s vara iifthe north- 



144.25-37 


415 


east. The siddhacatu?ka (four siddhas) — Amarile$vara, Cakri- 
Sanatha, KurangeSa, Vftresa and Candranathaka should be 
worshipped in the south-east with perfumes etc. The Vimala * 
paficaka. (five Vimalas) — Anadivimala, Sarvajfiavimala, Yogl- 
Savimala, Siddha (vimala) and Samaya (vimala) (should be 
worshipped) in the south. 

25. One should worship the four gods Kandarpanatha 
and others, all the female energies already described and the 
sandals of (goddess) Kubjika. 

26. (The votary) should always worship the thousand-eyed 
and blemishless (god) Visnu and (god) Siva with the mantra 
of nine syllables or five pranava (mantras). 

27-37. Brahma and other gods (should be worshipped) 
from the east to the north-east. (The goddesses) Brahmani, 
Mahesvari, Kaumari, Vaisnavi, Varahl, Indrani, Camunda 
and Mahalaksml should be worshipped from the east to the 
north-east. (The goddesses) Dakini, Rakini, Kakinl, Sakini 
and Yakini should be worshipped in the six directions (commenc- 
ing) from the north-west. The goddess composed of thirty- 
two letters should be worshipped with five pranavas or syllable 
hrim . She should be contemplated upon as of dark complexion 
like the petals of blue lotus, having six faces, of six kinds, as 
eighteen kinds of cicchakti (faculties of the mind), possessing 
twelve arms, seated comfortably on the throne, remaining on 
the lotus of absolute dead (of primordial matter), and shining 
with the splendour of multitudes of kulas. She should also be 
contemplated as having Karkotaka (one of the eight princi- 
pal cobras) as the girdle, Taksaka (a cobra) above, Vasuki (a 
cobra) as a garland on the neck, Kulika (a cobra) on the ears, 
the tortoise as the ear-stud, (the serpents) Padma and Maha- 
padma forming the eye-brows, and having skull, a serpent, 
rosary, a club with a skull at the top, a conch and a look in her 
left (hand) and a trident, a mirror, a sword, a garland of gems, 
dart and a bow in the right (hand). The upper front face of the 
goddess (should be contemplated) as having a white complexion 
and elevated, the eastern face pale, the southern one angry, the 
western face of black colour, and the northern one of the colour 
of snow and jasmine. Moreover, Brahmd (should be imagined 
to be) as remaining at the foot, Visnu at the buttocks, Rudraat 



416 


Agni Purdna 


the heart, I £ vara at the neck, Sada£iva at the forehead, Siva as 
remaining above her, Kubjika should thus be contemplated as 
whirling in all acts of worship. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYFIVE 
Different kinds of mantras and the rites of locating them 
The Lord said : 

1. I shall describe different kinds of mantras preceded by 
sodhanyasa (the six ways of touching the body with the mantras). 
There are three kinds of sodhanyasa — the fdkta , Sambhava and 
yamala devoted to the goddess, lord Siva and both). 

2-3. In the fambhava (rite), the six terms would have six- 
teen knots. The three kinds of knowables are related to the 
nydsa of this kind. It connotes the principles. The fourth ( nydsa ) 
is of the vanamald of twelve flokas (letters). The fifth (nydsa) (is 
known as) the Ratnapahcatmd (comprising the five gems) and the 
sixth one is said to be the Navatma (comprising nine). 

4-17. In the case of idkta (nydsa), (the first one is) Malini 
(nydsa) the second one (is) trividyd , the next one (third is the 
nydsa of) the eight aghoris . The fourth one (is on) the twelve parts 
(of the body). The fifth one is (of) six parts. (The sixth one) is 
of the astracandikd of the form of fakti (goddess). Krirh hraum 
klirh frirh krum phat (are the mantras in the above) three, known 
as the fourth accomplishing everything. The mdlini would be 
from na to pha . The nadini is- known to be the tuft. The agrasani 
would be on the head. (The letter) fa (should be) like a garland 
around the head. (The letter) fa (representing) peace be (on) 
the head. (Goddess) Camunda (be) on the three eyes. (The 
letter) dh<* (denoting) pleasing look (should be) on the two eyes. 
(The goddess) Guhya^aktini (should be) on the nostrils. (The 
letter) na (standing for) (goddess) Narayani (should be) on the 
two ears. (The letter) ta that stupefied (should be) on the right 
ear. (The letter) ja (representing) wisdom (should) remain 
on the left ear. (Goddess) VajrinI is known to be on the face, 
(The letter) ka (representing) (the goddess) Karali <(of horrible 



145.4-17 


417 


features) (should be on) the right tooth. (The letter) kha (re- 
presenting) (the goddess) Kapalinl (bedecked with human 
skulls) (should be on) the left shoulder. (The letter) ga (re- 
presenting the goddess) Siva be (on) the upper tooth. (The 
letter) gha (representing the goddess) Ghora (should be on the 
left tooth. (The letter) u (denoting the goddess) Sikha has her 
place on the tooth. (The letter) i (representing the goddess) 
Maya is represented by the tongue. (The letter) a should 
be (located) as (the goddess) Nagesvari in the words. 
(The letter) va (representing the goddess) Sikhivahini (having 
peacock as the vehicle) (is located) in the throat. (The letter) 
bha (representing the goddess) Bhisani (frightening) (is located) 
on the right shoulder. The letter ma (representing the goddess) 
Vayuvega (swift as the wind) (should be located) on the left 
(shoulder). (The letter) 4a (denoting) Nama (should be loca- 
ted) in the right arm. (The letter) (representing the goddess) 
Vinayaka (remover of obstacles) on the left arm. (The letter) 
pa (denoting) Purnima (the full moon) (be located) on the two 
hands. The syllable om etc. should be (located) on the ring 
fingers. (The letter) am (be represented by) DarsanI (one who 
exhibits) on the finger of the left (hand). (The letter) ah be 
(located) on the hand (representing) SanjivanI (the vitalising 
force). (The letter) /a (be located on) the skull (representing) 
Kapalinl (the goddess wearing garland of skulls). (The letter) 
ta (representing) DipanI (the goddess who illuminates) (be 
located) on the staff of the spear. (The letter) ca (representing) 
Jayanti (the goddess who is victorious) be (located) on the tri- 
dent. (The letter) ya is remembered to be Sadhani (one who 
accomplishes) (as representing) the process of growth. (The 
letter) sa known to be Parama (the Supreme goddess) be (lo- 
cated) in the soul. (The letter) ha remembered to be (repre- 
senting) Ambika (the mother goddess) be (located) in the vital 
principle of life. (The letter) cha (representing) Sarira (the 
goddess with a visible body) (be located) on the right breast. 
(The letter) na (representing) Putana (the demoness) (be 
located) on the left breast. (The letter) za (be looked upon as 
permeating) the breast milk. (The letter) a (representing) the 
crushing Lambodarl (the big- bellied goddess) (be located) in 
the belly. (The letter) k$a representing Samharika (the goddess 
of destruction) may be (located) on the navel. Mahakali (the 



418 


Agni Purdna 


most ferocious goddess) (be located) at the buttocks. (The 
letter) sa representing) Kusumamala (the goddess wearing 
garland of flowers) (be located) in the arms. (The letter) §a 
(representing) Sukradevika (the goddess of fertility (be located) 
in the semen. (The letter) ta (representing) Tara may be 
(located) on the two thighs. (The letter) da (signifying) Jftana 
(the goddess of knowledge) (be located) on the right knee. 
(The letter) au (representing) u Kriyasakti (the energy of acti- 
vity) may be (located) in the left (knee). The letter ro (deno- 
ting) Gayatri (the personification of the mantra of that name) 
be located in the groins. (The letter) o (representing goddess) 
Savitrl (be located) on the left groin. (The letter) do (repre- 
senting) (goddess) Dohini (be located) on the right (groin). 

18-31. (The letter) pha (representing the goddess) Phet- 
kari (should be located) at the left foot. I shall describe the rite 
relating) to the Mdlini-mantra of nine parts. (It is as follows). 
(The letter) a (denoting the god) Srikantha be (located) on the 
tuft. (The letter) d (representing the god) Ananta be (located) 
on the face. (The letter) i (standing for the god) Suksma be 
(located) on the right eye. (The letter) i (signifying the lord) 
Trimurti (of three forms) (be located) at the left (eye). (The 
letter) u (representing) Amarisa (the lord of celestials) 
(be located) at the right ear. (The letter ) u representing 
Ardhamsaka 1 (one who has assumed half of the divine form) 
(be located ) at the other ear (left ear ) . (The letter) r (denoting) 
Bhavabhuti (the lord of ensuing fortune) (be located) at the 
tip of the nose. (The letter) r (denoting) Tithlsa (the lord of 
the day) (be located) on the left nostril. (The letter) 1 (repre- 
senting) Sthanu (of the form of a pillar) should be (located) 
at the right cheek. (The letter) i (signifying lord) Hara (should 
be located) at the left cheek. (The letter) o (standing for) 
Katisa (be located) at the rows of teeth. (The letter) ai (re- 
presenting) BhutiSa (the lord of fortunes) (should be located) 
at the upper (row of) teeth. (The letter) o (denoting) Sadyo- 
jata (one of the five forms of Siva) (should be located) on the 
lower lip. (The letter) au (standing for) AnugrahiSa (one who 
confers blessing) (should be located) at the upper lips. (The 

1 . This may denote one half of either the combined for^t of Siva and 
Vifttu. or (hat of Siva and his consort. 



145.4-17 


419 


letter) am (denoting) Krura (the cruel one) be (located) at 
the back of the neck. (The letter) ah (signifying) Mahasena 
(the lord of huge army) (be located) in the tongue. (The 
letters) ka , kha , ga , gha , ha, ca, cha,ja,jha , ha, (a, (ha, 4a, 4ha, na , 
ta, tha , da, dha, na, pa, pha, ba, bha, ma,ya, ra, la, va , ia, $a, sa, ha 
and ksa respectively denoting KrodhUa (lord of wrath) , Carujlsa 
(consort of Candi), Paficantaka (the destroyer of the five 
elements), Sikhi (tufted), Ekapada (onefooted), Kurmaka 
(manifest as the tortoise), Ekanetra (one-eyed), Caturvaktra 
(having four faces), Rajasa (possessing the quality of rajas — 
passion) Sarvakamada (one who confers all desires), So- 
mesa (lord of moon), Daksa (Abie), Langali (wielder of 
the plough), Daruka (lord of woods), Ardhajalesvara 
(lord of half the watery region), Umakanta (consort 
of Uma (Parvati)). Asatjhi (holding a kind of wood), Dandi 
(holding a stick), Bhida (one who breaks), Mina (of the form 
of the fish), Mesa (of the form of the ram), Lohita (of red com- 
plexion), Sikhi (tufted), Galanda(?),Dvirandaka(?) Mahakala 
(the great god of darkness at the time of deluge), Vanisa (the 
god of speech), Bhujangega (the lord of serpents), Pinaki (the 
wielder of the bow pindka ), Khadgega (the lord of the sword), 
Baka, Sveta (Siva’s manifestation as the sage), Bhrgu (a sage), 
Nakullsa (a manifestation of Siva) and Samvarta (lord of 
destruction) .(may be respectively) (located) on the right shoul- 
der, arms, elbow, right wrist, fingers, left shoulder, arms, elbow, 
wrist, fingers, buttocks, right thigh, right knee, leg from the 
ankle to the knee, fingers, buttocks, left thigh, left knee, left leg 
from the ankle to the knee, toes, right belly, left belly, the back 
bone, navel, heart, memory, blood, flesh, one’s own self (soul), 
bones, marrow, semen, life force and sheaths (of human 
organism) . One would get all things by the worship of the energy 
of Rudra with the syllable hrim. 



420 


Agni Pur&na 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYSIX 

Names of different goddesses 


The lord said : 

I- I shall describe the three parts (of mantras) relating to 
(the gods) Brahma, Visnu and MaheSvara. Om obeisance to 
the lord Rudra. Obeisance. Obeisance to Camunda. Obei- 
sance to the (divine) mothers in the ethereal region who accom- 
plish all the desired materials, who have unobstructed move- 
ment everywhere, who transform their forms, who are engaged 
in doing all deeds of sattva , vaSikarana, utsadana and unmulana 
(pacification, attraction, destruction and eradication) . The secret 
( mantra ) of all the divine mothers, the most accomplished one 
which nullifies the incantations of others and accomplishes the 
supreme (thing) ! (The following) one hundred and twenty- 
one (terms) are in the section of Brahma. They are as follows : 
Om obeisance. Camunda (a terrific form of Durga) ! Brah- 
man! (consort of Brahma) ! Aghora (not terrific) ! Amogha 
(infallible) ! Varada (conferer of boons) ! Vicca (one who 
shines) ! Oblations. Om obeisance. O Camunda ! Mahe- 
svari (consort of Lord Siva) ! Aghora ! Amogha ! Varada ! 
Vicca ! Oblations. Om obeisance. O Camunda ! (one 
having a maiden-form ) ! Aghora ! Amogha ! Varada ! Vicca ! 
Oblations. Om obeisance. O Camunda ! Vaisnavi (relating 
to Visnu) ! Aghora ! Amogha ! Varada ! Vicca ! Oblations. 
Om obeisance. O Camunda ! Varahi (the .faAri of Visnu in the 
form of the boar) ! Aghora ! Amogha ! Varada ! Vicca ! 
Oblations. Om obeisance. O Camunda ! Indrani (the 
consort of Indra) ! Aghora ! Amogha ! Varada ! Vicca ! Ob- 
lations. Om obeisance. O Camunda ! Candi ! (name of 
Durga) ! Aghora ! Amoglia ! Varada ! Vicca ! Oblations. 
Om obeisance. O Camunda ! Isan! (related to the Isana form 
of Siva) ! Aghora ! Amogha ! Varada) ! Vicca ! Oblations. 

2. The second part relating to Visnu has equal number of 
terms (as follows). Om obeisance. O Camunda ! One who 
lias erect hairs (on the head ) ! One who has flames on her 
head ! One whose tongue is like lightning ! One whose eyes 
are sparkling like stars ! One who has tawny brows ! One 
who has uneven teeth ! The Angry one ! Om, One who is fond 



146.3-21 


421 


of flesh, blood, wine and spirituous liquor ! (You) laugh, laugh. 
Om dance, dance. Om yawn, yawn. Om bind, bind, Om to all 
those thousands of sorceres who change the form of three 
worlds by their incantations ! Om thrash, thrash. Om ciri ciri . 
Om hiri hiri. Om bhiri bhiri. One who frightens and frightens. 
One who whirls round and whirls round. One who makes 
(something else) melt and melt. One who agitates and agitates. 
One who kills and kills. One who revives and revives. Heri 
fieri geri geri gheri gheri om muri muri om obeisance to the mothers. 
Obeisance. Obeisance. Vicca. (There are) thirtyone terms for 
Sambhu (Siva) and the syllables (are) one hundred and seventy- 
one. 

3-21. One should repeat trikhantfi ( mantra ) ( [mantra of 

three parts) (with the syllables) he and ghaum preceded and 
followed by the five pranavas ( omkaras ) and worship. The sacred 
secret mantra he ghaum of (the goddess) Kubjika should be added 
in between the terms. It should be in the middle of the three 
akuladi , the three kuladi , the three madhyama and the pinda at the 
foot. It must have one and a half vowels and pravtava etc. (at 
the) tuft of Siva. Om ksraurh obeisance to Sikhabhairava. Skhim 
Skhim Skhem the three letters with the bija (basic) mantra). Hram 
hrim hraim without the bija , the three waters and the supreme 
thritytwo letters. The letters ksa, ka are the akula {mantras) 
according to the order of Kula. (The goddesses of energy are) 
SaSini (goddess in the moon), Bhanavi (the energy in the sun), 
Pavani (the purifier), Siva, Gandhari (whose essence is the 
letter) na , Pindaksi (of round eyes), Capala (fickle-minded), 
Gajajihvika (tongue like that of an elephant). (The letter) 
ma represents (the goddesses) Mrsa (untruth) and Bhayasara 
(the essence of fear). (The letter) pha (represents) (goddesses) 
Madhyama (the middle one), Ajara (without aging). (The 
letter) na represents (goddesses) Kumar! (maiden), Kalaratri 
(dreadful night at the time of deluge). (The letters) da and dha 
respectively represent (goddesses) Sankata (diffiiculty) and 
Kdlikd (of dark complexion). (The letter) pha (represents) Siva 
(consort of Siva), na — Bhavaghora (the frightening god of the 
cycle of existence), fha — Bibhatsa (disgusting one), ta — Vidyuta 
(the goddess in the form of the lightning), / ha — ViSvambhara 
(the sustainer of the universe). (The letter) dha (is the repre- 
sentation) of SamsinI (the goddess of doubt), Jvalamala (gar- 



422 


Agni Purdna 


land of flames), Karali (ugliness), Durjaya (invincible), Rang! 
(sportive), Varna (beautiful), Jyestha (the eldest) and Raudr! 
(terrible). (The letter) kha (represents) Kali (the goddess of 
time), ka — Kulalambi (goddess regulating succession of events), 
da — Anuloma (of descending order) and Pindini (regulating the 
three primordial forces), d — VedinI (of the form of pain), i — 
Santimurti (of the form of peace) and Kalakula (embodying the 
arts), f — Khadgini (the sword-wielding goddess), u — Balita 
(strong), / — kula (belonging to the kula class), / — Subhaga 
(fortunate), Vedana (pains), r — Karali (dreadful), am — 
Madhyama (middle one) and ah — Apetaraya (unimpetuous). 
These goddesses of energy should be duly worshipped on the 
altar. Skham skhim skhaum obeisance to the great Bhairava. (The 
(goddesses) Aksodya (uncrushable), Aksakarni (eyes reaching 
up to the* ear), Raksasi (demoness), Ksapanaksaya (indes- 
tructible), Pingaksi (having tawny coloured eyes), Aksaya 
(undecaying), Ksema (of the form of welfare), and Brahman! 
(energy relating to Brahma) are the eight (belonging to the 
group of Brahman!). (The goddesses) Ila (representing the 
earth), rilavati (sportive), Nila (blue-coloured), Lanka, Larike- 
£vari, Lalasa (extreme desire), Vimala (spotless) constitute the 
group of Mahesvari (relating to Siva). (The goddesses) Huta- 
gana (fire), Visalaks! (large-eyed), Hrunkari (of the form of 
syllable hr urn) Vadavamukh! (having volkanic fires in the mouth) 
Haharava (having wailing sound), Krura (cruel), Krodha 
(angry), Bala (graceful) and Kharanana (having the face of 
an ass) had their origin from] the body of (the goddess )Kaumar! 
(virginity). (They are) accomplishers of all things when wor- 
shipped. (The goddesses) Sarvajna (omniscient), Tarala (tre- 
mulous), Tara (shining), Rgveda (the goddess of the Rgveda), 
Hayanana (horse-faced ) , Sara (essence ) , Sarasvayamgraha 
(one who herself absorbs the essence) and Sasvati (eternal one) 
(had their origin) in the family of (goddess) Vai$navl (rela- 
ting to Visnu). (The goddesses) Talujihva (of the form of a 
crocodile), Raktak§! (red-eyed), Vidyujjihva (lightning like 
tongue), Karankin! (having the skull ) , Meghanada (sounding 
like the cloud), Pracandogra (terribly ferocious), Kalakarni 
(representing misfortune) and Kalipriya (fond of strife) were 
born of the family of (the goddess) Varahi (relating to the boar 
form). They should be worshipped by those who^eek victory. 



147.1-2 


423 


(The goddesses) Campa, Campavati, Pracampa, Jvalitanana 
(having flaming face), PisacI (of the form of a demoness), 
Picuvaktra and Lolupa (ardently longing) are born of (the 
goddess) AindrI (relating to Indra). (The goddesses) Pavanl, 
Yacani, VamanI, Daman!, Binduvela, Brhatkuksi, Vidyutanana 
ViSvarupini born in the family of goddess Camunda should be 
worshipped in the circle of victory. (The goddesses) Yama- 
jihva (frightening tongue), Jayanti (victorious), Durjaya 
(unconquerable), Yamantika (one who subdues the god of 
death), Bitjali (a female cat), Revati, Jaya (victorious) and 
Vijaya (victorious) were born in the class of (goddess) Maha- 
laksml. Thus the eight (goddesses) in the eight groups of (god- 
desses) have been explained. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYSEVEN 
Mode of worshipping the goddess Tvaritd and others 
The Lord said : 

1-2. Om Guhyakubjika (Goddess Kubjika of secret powers) l 
Hum phat . You destroy and destroy all my miseries and also 
whatever incantations of the form otyantra (written on a plate), 
mantra (repetition of some syllables), tantra (use of mystic sylla- 
bles) and curna (powders) done or made to do by some one, or 
being done, or would be done or would be made to do. O 
One possessing frightening teeth ! Hrairh kriifi hum oblations to 
Guhyakubjika. Hraum om khe vom obeisance to Guhyakubjika. 
Hrim. One who subjugates all people ! One who attracts the 
people ! Om khem khyarh . One who attracts all people be the 
stupefier of the people. Om khyaum. One who paralyses all 
people ! aim kharfi khrdm . Agitator. Aim the basic syllable 
comprising the three principles, that which is excellent in the 
kula (system). The five-syllabled mantra . Pharh irirh ksirh him 
hrirh k§em 0 Jacchd ! kse kse hrum phaf hrirh obeisance. Oih 
hrdrh kse Vacca kse k$o hrirh phaf . Thus the tvaritd mantras are 
of nine kinds. They must be known and they confer victory if 
propitiated. 



424 


Agni Purdna 


3. The seat should be (offered) with (the mantra )• hraurh 
to the lioness. (The mantra) hrim kse is said to be the heart. 
Vaccha ! Oblations to the head. This ( mantra ) of Tvarita is 
remembered in the tuft. 

4. Kjerh hrim vausaf be (the mantra) for the tuft. Kserh hurh 
would be for the armour. Hr dm vausaf (be) for the three eyes 
ending with hrim and phaf . 

5. (The names of) the nine (goddesses of) energy (are) 
Hrimkari, Khecari, Can<Ja, ChedanI, KsobhanI, Kriya, Ksema- 
karl, Hrimkari and Phatkarl. 

6-8. Now, I shall describe the envoys (companions) of the 
goddess Tvarita), to be worshipped in the directions east and 
others. Hrim Nala ! possessing thick lips and who moves in the 
sky. Hrim Khecara (one whose region of movement is the sky) ! 
Embodied as glowing flames ! Burn, kha khe cha che. Frighten- 
ing like the dead body ! Ca che O Canda (fierce) ! ChedanI 
(one who breaks) ! Karali (dreadful) ! kha khe che khe . One 
whose physical constituents arc (the letters) kha , ra and ha. 
Hrim kse va kse O Kapila (tawny-coloured) ! Ha kse hr urn kum 
Jejovati (resplendant) ! Raudri (one in rage) ! O Mother ! 
Hrim uhe ve phe phe Vakra (crooked one) ! Vari phe pufi pufi 
ghore (frightening one) ! Hrum phaf Brahmavetali ! Middle 
one ! I shall again describe the secret mantras and principles 
relating to (the goddess) Tvarita. Hraim hram hah are said to 
be (located) at the heart. Harurh and ha are remembered to be 
(for) the head. Phdm sparkle sparkle (is for) the tuft. Vara 
ild hram hurh krorh ksum Mm is said (to be for) the eye. Ksaurh 
(is) for the weapon. Or (the mantras) phaf hurh khe vacche kseh 
hrim kserh hurh phaf (is said) then. O Hum for the head must 
be in the middle. Khe at the beginning. O Sadasiva (ever 
benevolent one). Va (for) Iiah y che (for) ManonmanI, ma and 
kfe (for) the Garutfa, hraurh for Madhava, ksem (for) Brahma, 
hurh (for) Aditya. The (mantra) phaf hraurh is always remembered 
as cruel. 



148 . 1 — 149.1 


425 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYEIGHT 
Mode of worship for success in the battle 


The Lord said : 

1-7. Orh (fe kha khyam. Obeisance to Sun, the victorious in 
the battle, hrarh , hrim , hrum , hrerh , Atww, hr ah. These are the six 
mantras for the Sun, who confers success in the battle. Orh ham 
kharn oblations to Khakholka. Sphitm hrurh hum krum trim horh 
krerh . The eight attributes prabhuta (plenty), vimala (spotless), 
sara (essence), aradhya (to be worshipped), parama (supreme), 
sukha (happiness), dharmajhana (knowledge of righteousness) 
and vairagya (firm resolve) should be worshipped. Then the 
seats anantasana (having ananta,the serpent as the seat), simhd- 
sana (the lion seat), padmdsana (lotus seat) (should be worshipp- 
ed). Then the pericarps N (of the mystic diagram) consisting 
of the spheres of sun, moon and fire such as Dipta (luminous), 
Suksma (subtle), Jaya (victorious), Bhadra ! (conferring 
safety), Vibhati (fortune), Vimala (spotless), Amogha (infal- 
lible), Vidyuta (lightning) and Sarvatomukhl (having face 
every side), the ninth one, should be worshipped. Then one 
should worship (the qualities) sattva , rajas and tamas , prakjti 
(the source of the material world) and purusa (thesoul), one’s 
soul, one’s inner soul and the supreme soul. All the endowed with 
the bindu and mdyanila. One should worship U§a (dawn) , Prabha 
(lustre), Sandhya (twilight), Sayam (evening), Maya (myste- 
rious), Bala (strong), Bindu (dot) and endowed with Visnu. 
The eight attendant gods at the entrance such as Surya, Can^a, 
pracan^a and others should be worshipped with perfumes etc. 
One would be victorious in the battle etc. by the worship, medi- 
tation and oblation. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYNINE 
Mode of performing laksa and kopihoma 
The Lord said : 

1. A homa (oblation) performed after having practised the 



426 


Agni Pur&na 


pranaydma (control of breath) hundred times and purifyipg with 
the rite of kfcchra , confers victory in battle, gets kingdom and 
destroys obstacles. 

2-5. After having repeated gayatri ( mantra ) (remaining) 
in the water, one should perform pranaydma sixteen times. Ob- 
lation of havis (clarified butter) should be made into fire in 
the forenoon. One should eat only that which has been procured 
after begging or eat only fruits and roots. One should take only 
single morsel of food such as milk or flour or ghee. O Parvati ! 
as soon as the (rite of a) lakh of oblations concludes, one should 
give cows, clothes and gold as fees. (The oblation should be 
done) by fifteen brahmins in the case of all disasters that befall. 
There is no disaster in the world that docs not get warded off by 
this oblation. 

6-10. There is no such benevolent (rite) that could excel 
this (rite). A king, whosoever, arranges to do the rite of kofi - 
homa (making a crore oblations) as before (employing) the brah- 
mins, his enemies cannot face him in battle any time. There 
cannot also be any disease in his country that would kill him. 
(By its virtue) excessive rainfall, deficient rainfall, mice,crickcts, 
parrots demons and others get controlled. So also the ene- 
mies (get controlled) in the battle. One should employ twenty 
or a hundred or a thousand brahmins for the performance of 
kotihoma. One would get fortunes as much as one desired. 
A brahmin or a king or a tradesman, whoever may perform the 
kofthoma , would get whatever was desired by him. (Moreover) 
he would go to heaven with his mortal frame. 

11.15. By the performance of this homa with the gayatri 
{mantra) 9 or the mantras of planets, or those used in the (rite 
known as) kusmdn$a or those addressed to the Fire God or the 
gods of directions east, west, north-west, south and south- 
east or the mantras relating to (lord) Visnu or the goddesses or 
&ambhu (Siva) or Sun, one would get lesser benefits (if it is 
done) for ten thousand times. One who does homa a lakh 
times would be able to get rid of all distress. The all-yielding 
kotihoma (is done) for the destruction of all aflictions. The 
following materials should be used for oblations — barley, 
paddy, sesamum, milk, ghee, ku$a 9 prasdtikd (a variety of rice), 
petals of lotus, ufira (the fragrant root of a plant} and bilva. 
In the kofihoma the fire-pit should measure eight cubits. Half 



150.1-15 


427 


its measure is laid down in the oblation for a lakh times. Thus 
the mode of performance of oblation ten thousand lakh and 
crore times have been explained. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY 
Names of different Manus , different sages and others during their periods 
The Fire-god said : 

1-5. I shall describe the Manu periods. Svayambhuva is 
(the name of) the first Manu. Agnidhra and others (were) 
his sons. The celestials (were) known as Yama 1 . Indra (was a 
performer of) hundred sacrifices. In the period of (the second 
Manu) Svarocisa, the seven sages (were) Aurva and others. 
Indra (was) VipaScit. Paravatas and Tusitas (were) the celes- 
tials. Urja, Stambha and others (were) the brahmins. Caitra, 
Kimpurusa and others (were) the sons. The third Manu (was) 
Uttama. Indra (was) Susanti. Sudhama and others born in 
the family of Vasistha (were) the seven sages. Aja and others 
(were) their sons. Tamasa Manu was the fourth. Svarupa and 
others (were) the celestials. Sikhi 2 , Jyotirddhama and others 
(were) the sages and Navakhyati and others his sons. 

6. In the (period of the fifth Manu) Raivata, Vitatha 3 
(was) the Indra, Amitabhas were the celestials, Hiranya 4 - 
roma and others were the sages and Balabandha and others 
were his sons. 

7, In the (period of the sixth Manu), Caksusa, Manojava 
(was) the Indra. Svati and others (were) the celestials, Sume- 
dha and others (were) the sages and Puru and others (were) 
the sons. 

8-15. Sraddhadeva, son of Vivasvan (Sun) (was) 
the next Manu. Adityas, Vasus and Rudras (were) the celes- 
tials. Purandara (was) the Indra. Vasi§jha, Kaiyapa, Atri, 

1. For their different names see Vi.P . I,vii. 7-21 and III. i-iL 

2. Vi.P . Ill . i. 17 reads Sibi. 

3. Vi.P . Ill.i. 20 reads Vibhu. 

4. Vi.P. Ill.i. 23 reads Balabandhu. 



428 


Agni Parana 


Jamadagni, Gautama, Visvamitra and Bharadvaja j[were) 
the seven sages. Iksvaku and others (were his sons). Lord Visnu 
was manifest with a part (of his energy in each one of these 
periods). He was born as Manasa in the (period of) Svayam- 
bhuva and Ajita in the next one (that of Svarocisa). Then (he 
was born as) Satya, Hari, Devavara, Vaikuntha and Vamana 
(in the respective Manu periods which followed). The eighth 
Manu would be born as the son of Surya and Chaya. As he would 
be a cognate of his predecessor, this eighth Manu to come (would 
be known as) Savarni. Sutapa and others (would be) the clans 
of celestials. DIptiman Drauni (Asvatthama) and others (would 
be) the sages. Bali (would be) the Indra. Viraja and others 
(would be) the sons. The ninth (Manu would be) Daksasa- 
varni. Para and others (would be) the celestials. Adbhuta 
(would be) the Indra. Savana and others (would be) the sages. 
Dhrtaketu and others (would be) (his) sons. The next (Manu 
would be) Brahmasavarni. Sukha and others (would be) 
celestials. Santi (would be) their Indra. Havisya and others, 
(would be) the sages. Suksetra and others (would be) the 
sons of that (Manu). 

16-19. (The eleventh Manu would be) Dharmasavarni. 
Vihariga and others (would be) the celestials then. The Indra 
(would be Vrsa) 1 . Niscara 2 and others (would be) the sages. 
The sons of Manu (would be) Sarvatraga and others. Rudra 
Savarni would be (the twelfth) Manu. Rtadhama (would be) 
the Indra and Harita and others (would be) the celestials. 
Tapas and others (would be) the seven sages. Devavan and 
others (would be) the sons. The thirteenth Manu (would be) 
Raucya. Sutramana and others (would be) the celestials. 
Divaspati (would be) their Indra who routs the demons etc. 
Nirmoha and others (would be) the seven sages. Citrasenaand 
others (would be) the sons. 

20-22. The fourteenth Manu (would be) Bhautya. Suci 
would be the Indra. Caksusa and others (would be) the celes- 
tials. Agnibahu and others (would be) the sages. Uru and 
others (would be) the sons of Bhautya, the fourteenth Manu. 
The seven sages (would descend) to the world from the heavens 


1. Cf. Fi.P. III. ii.29. 

2. Vi.P. III.ii.30 reads Nissvara. 



150.23 — 151.1 


429 


and propagate the Vedas . Then (the respective) celestials would 
partake the oblations of sacrifices and the earth would be 
protected by the sons (of Manus). O Brahmin \ Fourteen 
Manus (will reign) in the course of a day of Brahma. 

23. Lord Hari fVi§nu), who preceded the Manus, divided 
the Veda at the end of the dvdpara 1 2 3 4 5 ( yuga ). The first Veda had 
four parts consisting of a lakh (of verses). 

24-26. The Tajurveda originally a single work was divided 
into four. The sage (arranged) the office of an adhvaryu 2 priest 
(to be done) with the Tajurveda), the hotrtP with the Rks, the 
audgdtra 4 with the Samans and brahmatva 5 (relating to omissions 
and antedotes) with the Atharvan. Paila, the disciple of Vyasa 
and proficient in the Rgveda imparted the first (Veda) to Indra- 
pramiti and the samhitd (part) to Baskala. He also (divided) 
that sarfihitd into four parts and gave it to Bauddhya and others. 

27-30. The great man of intellect VaiSampayana, the dis- 
ciple of Vyasa, divided the tree of Tajurveda into seven branches. 
The Kanvas, Vajasancyas and others are known to be (the 
branches founded) by Yajfiavalkya and others. Jaimini, the 
disciple of Vyasa, divided the tree of Samaveda into branches and 
Sumantu and Sukarma received one part of th z samhitd. Sukarma 
had received one thousand samhitd text. Sumantu, the disciple 
of Vyasa, divided the tree of Atharvaveda . He imparted it to 
thousands of Paippalada, his disciples. Suta made the Purdria- 
samhitd by the grace of Vyasa. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYONE 
Description of duties laid down for different castes 
The Fire-god said : 

1. Pu§kara narrated to Para^urama the duties which the 


1. The third among the four yuga periods of time, equal to 8,64,000* 
years of men. 

2. The priest of the Tajurveda who attends to the needs of the sacrifice. 

3. The priest of the Rgveda who does the oblation. 

4. The priest of the Sdmaveda who sings the sdman melodies. 

5. The priest of the Atharvaveda. 



430 Agni Pur&na 

Manus practiced and had enjoyment and emancipations des- 
cribed by lord Varuna to him. 

Puskara said : 

2. I shall describe the laws of conduct relating to the castes, 
stages of life etc. spoken by the Manus and others, that would 
give all (benefits) and please (lord) Vasudeva (name of Vi§nu 
in his manifestation as Krsna) and others. 

3-9. O Excellent one among Bhrgus ! abstaining from 
killing, truthfulness, compassion, kindness towards all beings, 
visiting sacred places, munificence, celibacy, not jealous, doing 
service to god, brahmins, preceptors and others, listening to all 
laws of conduct, worship of the manes, veneration towards the 
king, sustained interest in good scriptures, mercy, forbearance 
and theism are the general good and bad conduct for all castes 
and stages of life. The duties of a brahmin should be pointed 
out as performing religious rites, officiating as priests at 
the sacrifices, munificence, imparting vedic knowledge, 
accepting gifts and engaging in the study. The duties of a 
ksatriya (warrior class) and the vaiiya (tradesman) are said to 
be munificence, engaging in the study and perform sacrificial 
rites as laid down. Protection and suppression of the wicked 
are special (duties enjoined) on a ksatriya. Agriculture, protec- 
ting the cows and trade are spoken to be (the duties) of a vaiiya . 
(The duties) of a iudra (the fourth class of men) (are) to serve 
the brahmins or (to practise) handicrafts. 

10. Since the binding of the girdle of the munja grass (at 
the time of investiture of the sacred thread), the brahmins 
and others (are supposed to) take a second birth. One’s caste is 
decided from that of the mother in the natural order of castes. 

1 1 . Contrary to the natural order the son of a brahmin 
woman through a iudra (is known as) Canql&la, from a ksatriya 
(as) suta and from a vaiiya (as) devala . 

12. A son born to a ksatriya woman and a Sfidra contrary to 
the natural order would be (known as) pukkasa . Similarly (a 
son born to a ksatriya woman) and a vaiiya would be magadha 
and from a iudra as dyogava . 

13. There are thousands of pratilomas (born to^higher caste 
woman and lower caste man) among the vaiiyas from the order 
contrary to natural one. Therefore a marriage (should be done) 



151.14-152.1-5 


431 


only between (members of) the same class and (should not be) 
with (members of) either the higher or the lower class. 

14. The killing of those condemned to death by law and 
living by means of women are laid down as the duty of a candala. 
(The duty) of a vaidehaka is said to be their protection. 

15-18. To be a charioteer (is the duty) of the sutas , and 
hunting (is the duty) of the pukkasas. (The duty) of the maga - 
dhas is singing panegyrics. (The duty) of an dyogava is said to 
be the profession of an actor and living by handicrafts. It is 
laid down that a candala should live outside the village, wear 
the clothes of the dead and should not be touched by others. 
One, who belongs to any one of the other community, discards 
his life for the sake of a brahmin or a cow or a woman or child 
in distress, gets accomplished. The mixed castes should be known 
from the work done by the father or mother. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYTWO 
Duties of a householder 


Puskara said : 

1 . A brahmin should live following the code of conduct laid 
down for him or those of the ksatriya or vaifya or Sudra . But he 
should never live by doing such acts exclusively (laid down) 
for a iudra. 

2. A brahmin may engage himself in agriculture, trade, 
keeping cows and usury. But he should abstain from taking milk, 
jaggery, salt and meat and using red-dye. 

3. One gets purified from the sin accruing from ploughing 
the earth and cutting the plants and killing insects and ants by 
doing a sacrifice. The cultivator (gets free from the sin) by 
worshipping the god. 

4. A virtuous man (should yoke) eight bullocks, one who 
lives by any means six bullocks, wicked men four bullocks and 
those who have transgressed rightful living two bullocks. 

5. One should live by picking grains in the field and on alms 
got without solicitation. (One may live) on alms got by solici- 



432 


Agni Purdna 


tation or got without solicitation a second time. Otherwise (one 
may live) by truth and false (i.e., trade). But (one should never 
(live) on servitude. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYTHREE 
Duties of a Student 


Puskara said : 

1-6. Listen ! I shall describe the righteous (way of living 
for those in (different) stages (of life), which yields enjoy- 
ment and emancipation. The mensus flow for women lasts for 
sixteen nights. Among these the first three are censured. One 
who desires for a male child should cohabit on even (nights). 
When the conception is explicitly known, the rite favouring con- 
ception is prescribed. The rite to be performed with the inten- 
tion to get a male child is done even before the embryo (in the 
womb) begins to move. The (rite of) parting of the hair 
(should be done) in the sixth or eighth (month). The asterism 
relating to the name should be such that it confers a child (good) 
and is auspicious. (The rite known as) the jdtakarma (per- 
formed soon after the birth of a child) should be done by wise 
men before the separation of the umbilical cord. The rite of 
naming the child should be done after the period of pollution 
is over. The name of the child of a brahmin is said to end with 
(the word) Sarmd , of the warrior class to end with (the word) 
varmd , of the tradesmen and Sudra with (the words) gupta and 
dasa respectively. (After the birth of a child) the child should 
be brought to the father (of the child by the other) with (the 
words) “This is your son”. 

7-10. The tonsure ceremony (is laid down) according to 
one’s family (custom). Upanayana (the rite of investiture of 
sacred thread) should be done in the eighth year from that of the 
conception or in the eighth year of the child for a brahmin. 
(The same is to be done) in the eleventh year from that of preg- 
nancy for the warrior class and in the twelfth year from that of 



153.1 1-17 


433 


pregnancy for a tradesman. It should never be done after the 
sixteenth year (for any one) . The maunjya (the girdle to be worn 
after the above rite) is known to be (made) of munja (grass) 
or bark. The hides of deer, tiger or goat (should be worn) by 
those in the student life. The sticks are said to be from the parna 
( pald§a ), pippala (fig) and bilva tree. They should be (long 
enough to reach) upto the hair, forehead and face respecti- 
vely (for the three classes). All the sticks should be having the 
barks and should not be having bends or be burnt ones. 

11-12. The sacred tliread (should be made of) cotton, silk 
or wool respectively (for the three classes). The three classes 
are indicated by the (repetition of the word) bhavati (address 
to the housewife) at the beginning, middle or end while begging 
food. One should seek food first at such a place where one would 
be certain about getting food. The above rites are performed 
without (the repetition of) mantra in the case of female children. 
But the marriage (should be done) with (the repetition of) 
mantra. 

13. After investiture of the sacred thread, the preceptor 
should instruct his pupil first with cleanliness and then with 
codes of conduct, the worship of fire and the worship of 
twilight. 

14. Eating facing the eastern direction is conducive to 
(one’s) longevity, the southern direction brings fame. Eating 
facing the western direction gives wealth. Eating facing the 
northern direction gets rightful living. 

15. Offering to fire should be made in the morning and in 
the evening. (One should) not (offer) impure things or with 
separated hands. One should abstain from (drinking) intoxi- 
cants, (eating) flesh, singing and dancing with men. 

16. (One should also eschew) violence, spreading scandal 
abo.il others and especially speaking unpleasant words. (The 
student), whose stick (and other things) get damaged, should 
throw them in water and have another. 

17. (He) should learn the scripture (from the preceptor), 
pay fees to the preceptor and perform the bathing (ceremony 
marking the completion of one’s study). But the naisfika 
brahmaedri (one who has taken a vow of life-long abstinence) 
should remain with the preceptor till his (own) death. 



434 


Agni Purdna 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYFOUR 
Rules of Marriage 


Puskara said : 

1 . The brahmin should marry four wives, the warrior class 
three wives, the tradesmen two wives as they desire. The last 
class should marry only one wife. 

2-3. All the righteous acts should not be done in the com- 
pany of women not belonging to one’s own community. One 
should marry only from his own community. (At the time of 
marriage) the warrior class should hold the arrow, the trades- 
men should bear the toad and then the last community the 
fringe of a garment. A girl should be given (in marriage) only 
once. One who abducts such a girl deserves the same punish- 
ment as for a thief. 

4-7. No atonement is laid down for one who sells his children. 
Marriage is said to consist of four kinds of acts such as kanyadana 
(giving the girl as a gift), faciyaga (rite relating to the wife of 
Indra), marriage and caturthika (the fourth one). Women are 
allowed to have another husband in the following five adversi- 
ties — if (the first husband is) lost, dead, has become an ascetic, 
impotent or fallen morally. If (the husband) is dead, (she) 
should be given to the brother (of the deceased). In the absence 
(of a brother) (she should be given) as one wished. The three 
purvas ( purva , purvasadha , p urvapros fapadi ) , dgneya ( krtlikd ), 
vdyavya ( svati ), the three utlaras ( uttard , uttar dsdihd^ uttarapros fa- 
padi) and rohini are the asterisms always commended for copu- 
lation. 

8-11. O Bhargava (Parasurama) ! One should not choose 
(the bride) from the same gotra or born in the line of same sage. 
(One may choose) from (descendants of) more than seven 
(generations) on the paternal side and more than five (genera- 
tions) on the maternal side. Having invited a person endowed 
with good conduct and belonging to a good family and giving a 
girl as a gift is known as brdhma (type of marriage). The lustre 
due to the offering of a girl as a gift always elevates men. 
Then the marriage accompanied by the offer of the gift 
of a pair of cows is spoken to be the ar$a (variety of marriage). 
The offer made to one after solicitation (is known to be) prdjd- 



154.12-19 


435 


patya (variety of marriage) for the purpose of righteousness. It is 
dsura (type of marriage in which the girl is offered) along with 
the purchase money. (It is considered as) the lowest. The 
marriage by mutual consent (is known as) g&ndharva. (Marri- 
age) by abduction after a battle (is known as) r&kfasa (variety 
of marriage). (It is known as) the paif&ea (variety) if the girl 
is married after deceiving her. 

12. An image of Indrani (wife of Indra) should be made 
with potter’s earth on the marriage day. She (that image) 
should be worshipped at a pond and (then) the bride should 
be taken inside the house accompanied by music. 

13-14. The marriage should not be done when lordKe£ava 
(Visnu) sleeps 1 and also in (the months of) Pauja (December- 
January) and Caitra (April-May), on Tuesday and on the days 
of rikta i 2 3 and viffi* (The marriage should also) never (be done) 
when Venus and Jupiter are not to be visible and the Moon has 
been eclipsed. (So also it should not be done) in asterisms ruled 
by (the planets Sun, Saturn and Mars and days afflicted by 
vyatipdta , 4 

15. The asterisms (suitable) for (the performance of) a 
marriage (are) MrgaHrsa , Maghd, Svdti , Hasta, Rohini, the three 
Uttaras (Uttar a, Uttardsdihd and Uttaraprosfapadi ) , Mtila, Anurddhd 
and Revati. 

16-19. The ascendant and the arhia (subdivision of the 
stellar house) relating to a mortal are auspicious. (The planets) 
Sun, Saturn and Mercury in the third, sixth, tenth, eleventh 
and eighth (houses) are commendable. Mars in the eighth (is) 
not (commendable). All the other planets are commendable in 
the seventh, twelfth and eighth (houses). Even among them, 
Venus in the sixth from the sixth house is not commendable. 
(Just as the worship of Indrani is done) in the asterism on the 
marriage day, the caturthikd (the rite on the fourth day of the 
marriage) should also be done in the asterism of the marriage. 
The marriage should not be performed if four planets are in the 


1 . The four month period commencing with the eleventh day of the 
bright half of the month of Af&tfha (June-July). 

2. The fourth, ninth and fourteenth days of a lunar fortnight. 

3. An adverse period. 

4. The day of die new Moon occurring on a Sunday and when the 
Moon is in a particular asterism. 



436 


Agni Pur&na 


same house. One should cohabit his wife only on days other 
than the parva (days) (the eighth and fourteenth days as well 
as the full-moon and newmoon days). When a truthful (girl) 
is given in marriage (there would be) pleasure always. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYFIVE 

The code of conduct 


Puskara said : 

1-12. After getting up in the brShma muhQrta (about 48 
minutes prior to sunrise), one should contemplate on the gods 
Visnu and others. One should pass both urine and stools facing 
the north during the day time, facing the south during the night 
and as in the day during the two twilight periods. One should 
not do on the roads, water, streets and on the grassy surface. 
After having purified oneself with earth, one should sip water three 
times and then cleanse the teeth. Bathing is said to be six kinds 
such as daily, casual, performed with some desire, part of a puri- 
ficatory rite, removing the bodily dirt and at the time of 
obsequies. The religious act done without bathing yields no 
result. Hence one should bathe in the morning. Among the 
waters of a sacred place, a river, a tank, flowing water, water 
present in the well and water drawn (from the well), the preced- 
ing one is more meritorious than the succeeding one in order. 
The waters of (the river) Ganges are always meritorious. After 
having cleansed the impurities (on the body), one should remain 
submerged in (the waters of) the tank. After having touched 
waters one should sprinkle them (on his body) three 
times with the (repetition of the mantra) hiranyavarrfi 1 ^ then with 
(the mantra)$anno devi 2 > three times with dpo hi and then with 
idam &p<A. Then one should remain in the water of the tank and 
mutter (sacred syllables) (remaining) in the water. One should 

1. P.V. 5^87.1a. 

2. Srislikta. (tV. 10.9.4a. 

3. (tV. 10.9.1a. 

4. (tV. 1.23.22a. 



155.13-20 


437 


either recite the aghamarsana 1 2 3 4 hymn or the irupadi 1 or yurljate 
mane fl or the purufas&kta?. The gayatri ( mantra ) should be recited 
especially. Bhavavrtta is the deity, Aghamarsana is the sage 
and anus tub h is the metre for the aghamarsana hymn. Lord Hari 
(Visnu) is remembered to be Bhavavrtta. After squeezing the 
garment (one should) offer (respectful) waters of oblation to 
the gods and manes. One should offer waters of homage with 
the palms with the recitation of the purusasUkta. Then one should 
offer oblation to fire and make gifts befitting one’s capacity. 

13-14. Then one should worship lord (Siva) for the sake 
of one’s prosperity. One’s seat, bed, vehicle, wife, children and 
water-vessel are pure for one’s self. (But they) are not pure for 
others. Even preceptors should leave way for pregnant women 
afflicted by the weight. 

15. One should not look at the rising or setting Sun or in 
the waters. One should not look at naked woman. One should 
not peep into the well and look at a dog, or drinking house and 
a sinner. 

16. One should not tread on cotton, bones, ashes and that 
which is despised. (One should not enter) the apartments of 
women or treasury. One should not go as an emissary of another 
person. 

17. One should not board an uneven boat, or (climb) a 
tree or a mountain. One should then be interested in sciences 
relating to acquisition of wealth. 

18. One who tramples on clod of earth, one who cuts the 
grass and one who eats the nail would perish. One should not 
desire to raise sounds with the mouth. One should not stir out in 
the night without a lamp. 

19. One should not enter a house not having a door. One 
should not change the colour of the face. One should not inter- 
rupt in the midst of a conversation. One should not wear other’s 
garments. 

20. One should always say good. One should never utter 
that which does not please others. Seat made of paldSa (wood) 
is prohibited. One should move in the shade of gods etc. 


1. (tV. 10.190. 

2. AV. 6.115.3a. 

3. (tV. 5.81.1a. 

4. (tV. 10.90. 



438 


Agni Pur&qa 


21. One should not go in between revered people. One 
should not look at the broken (and falling) asterism. Oi\p should 
not utter the name of another river (while standing) in one river. 
One should not gargle with two hands. 

22. One should not cross the river without propitiating the 
forefathers and gods. One should not throw impurities like feces 
in the waters. One should not bathe remaining naked. 

23. Then one should worship lord !$vara (Siva) for the 
sake of welfare and prosperity. One should not remove one’s 
garland oneself. One should avoid the dust of an ass and other 
animals. 

24. One should not ridicule mean (people). One should 
not go (with them) and live with them. One should not also 
reside at a place devoid of a physician, a king and a river, a 
place ruled by other races, women and many men. 

25. One should not converse with women in their monthly 
menstrual courses or otherwise fallen. One should contemplate 
on lord Ke£ava (Visnu) (if happened to converse with the above). 
One should not laugh, yawn and sneeze without covering the 
mouth. 

26. A wiseman should avoid disrespect shown to his 
master and his own self. One should guard the words of one’s 
self and his master. One should not yield to (the dictates of) 
his organs. One should not control the natural impulses of the 
body. 

27. O Bhargava ! One should not ignore a disease like 
an insignificant enemy. One should always sip waters (for 
purification) whenever one goes in the street. One should not 
carry water and fire. 

28. One should not utter hum to a good and venerable 
person. One should not tread over one foot with the other. One 
should not speak something unpleasant to someone either in his 
presence or his absence. 

29. One should refrain from abusing the scriptures, king, 
sages and gods. One should not envy women and one should 
avoid having faith in them. 

30. One should hear righteous things, have devotion to 

gods and adhere to righteous path. One should worship 
Soma (moon) as well as gods and brahmins in the natal 
star. * 



155.31-156.1-9 


439 


31. One should avoid bathing with the application of oil 
on the sixth, eighth and fourteenth (days of the fortnight). 
(One should pass) urine and stools far away from the house. 
One should not have enmity with great men. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYSIX 

Purification of things 


Puskara said : 

1-2. I shall describe the (mode of) purification of things. 
Earthen vessel made impure by contact with urine or feces would 
become pure by heating again. A copper and gold vessel simi- 
larly made impure (may be made pure) by melting or the copper 
one by water or acid. (The vessels made) of bell-metal and 
copper (may be purified) with acid. (Those made) of pearls 
(get purified) by washing. 

3-5. Lotuses, vessels made of iron, vegetables, ropes, 
roots, fruits and cane (could be made pure by washing). The 
sacrificial vessels (are made pure) by sprinkling (water) with 
hand at the sacrificial work. Those made of oily things (such as 
wax) could be purified with hot water being sprinkled in the 
house. Muddy water may be purified by straining it through a 
cloth, or by sprinkling on many cloth. Wooden (things) get 
purified that moment (by sprinkling with water). 

6-7. Liquid materials which have become solidified (would 
become pure) by sprinkling or by leaping up. A bed, seat, 
vehicle, winnowing basket and cart would become purified by 
sprinkling (water), as also in the case of straw and fuel. (Things 
made) of the horn and tusk (may be purified) by a paste of 
white mustard. 

8. A vessel (containing) flesh (may be purified) with cow’s 
tail. Bones have to be (purified) as in the case of horns. Molasses 
of jaggery and solution of salt (may be purified) by drying. 

9. Safflower, flowers, wool and cotton (may be puri- 
fied) in the same manner. The flowing water of a river k pure. 
So also the water that remains spreads out. 



440 


Agni Purdya 


10-15. A cow is pure except in its mouth. The mouths of 
a horse and goat are impure. The mouths of women, calves 
of cows, birds and of dogs (are pure). While hunting a dog 
dripping water from its mouth is always pure. One should sip 
(water thrice for purification) after eating, sneezing, sleeping, 
drinking (water), having had a dip in the water, walking on the 
street and having changed the dress worn. The cat is pure be- 
cause it moves (here and there). A women in her menstrual 
courses (becomes pure) after bathing on the fourth day. She 
becomes eligible (to take part) in rites relating to gods and 
manes. (In impurity) due to the apdna (one of the airs in the 
body) five parts of mud (should be used), fifteen parts in purifi- 
cation after urine and seventeen parts in impurity due to feces. 
One should apply one part of mud to the penis and three times 
two parts (of mud) on both hands. For the brahmacdrins 
(students), the foresters and ascetics (it is laid) as four times. 
Silken cloth (are purified) with sriphala (emblic myrabolan), 
white cloth with white mustard. It is said that the hairs of ani- 
mals would be purified by sprinkling water. Flowers, fruits etc. 
would get purified by sprinkling water. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYSEVEN 
Pollution and Purification 


Pu§kara said : 

1 . I shall describe purification after death and after the 
birth (of a child). The pollution due to the death of a sapinda 1 
is prescribed for ten days. 

2*7. O Excellent among Bhrgus (descendants of 
Bhfgu) ! So also purification (from pollution) is after birth in 
the case of brahmins, after twelve days for the warrior class, 
after fifteen days for the tradesmen, and after a month for 
iudra (fourth class). If the dead belongs to the higher class, 
the pollution for the servant (of the lower class) would be as for 

1 . A kinsman connected by offering the funeral rice-ball to the manes 
of certain relatives. ^ 



157.8-16 


441 


the master. A brahmin or a person of the warrior class who had 
his bii th through the warrior, tradesman or f&dra gets purified 
after six or three or one day in order. O ParaSur&ma ! if born 
of a tradesman and iGdra purification would be after six or three 
nights (respectively) and if born of a Sudra and tradesman 
purification would be) after six (nights). (If one’s child dies) 
before the formation of teeth, one become pure at once, (if it 
dies) before tonsure, (the parent) has pollution for a night, if 
before the vratabandha (vow relating to investiture of thread) 
pollution lasts for three nights, and ten nights if afterwards. If 
a Sudra dies at less than three years of age, the purification should 
be after five days. If aged more than three, purification would 
be after twelve days, if aged six years, the purification would 
be after a month. 

8-9. If a female (child) (dies) before tonsure, the puri- 
fication would be after a night. Similarly, the relatives of 
female children dying after tonsure get purified in three days. 
No pollution is laid down for the parental side if (a female dies 
after marriage. If a woman delivers a child in her parent’s 
house, the relatives get purified after a night. 

10-14. A woman after childbirth gets purified after ten days) 
and not otherwise. There is no doubt that if a married girl dies 
in her father’s house, the relatives get purified after three nights. 
If two pollutions take place and the second one is equal or infe- 
rior to the first one, the pollution ends with the first one, and 
ends with the second one if the second is not equal. These are 
the words of Dharmaraja 1 . One who lives abroad happening to 
hear (the news about) the death of his kinsmen would be impure 
only for the remaining part of the ten days (of impurity). (If 
it is known) after ten days, impurity would last for three days. 
Then if one year had elapsed, one would become pure after 
bathing. (One has to do as before) if either the maternal grand- 
father or the preceptor dies. 

15-16. One gets purified after abortion after the same num- 
ber of nights proportionate to the months (period) of pregnancy. 
O Bhargava (son of Bhrgu) 2 3 whoever of a sapinia 8 of a brah- 
min caste may die the pollution ends after ten days for all with- 

1 , The lord of righteous living; may mean any upholder of a code. 

2, Denotes Paraiur&ma. 

3, See 157. fin 1. 



442 


Agni Pur&na 


out any distinction. So also for a warrior (class) (it would end) 
after twelve days, the tradesmen after fifteen days and the JUdr as 
after a month. 

1 7. A ball should be made and offered from the remnants 
of the ceremony and placed in front. One who does the deed 
should then declare the name and clan of thal person (dead). 

18-24. After the excellent brahmins had partaken food, 
were well honoured with gifts and had blessed with unbroken 
rice and water with the recitation of the name and clan (of the 
doer), one should dug up three pits of four cubits breadth and 
depth and of twelve cubits length. Near the pits one should 
kindle three fires. O Rama (ParaSurama) one should offer 
oblations to Soma, Agni (Fire god) and Yama four (handfuls) 
three times each. Balls of rice should be offered separately (in 
each one of these) as before. One should fill (pits) with cooked 
rice, curd, honey and flesh. If an inter-calary month occurs 
this should be done in addition. Or (this ceremony) should be 
completed in twelve days. If an inter-calary month occurs in 
the middle of the year, then there would be extra rites at (the 
time of doing) the twelfth ceremony. After the completion of 
one year the ceremony should be done as the annual ceremony. 

25. If one dies balls of rice should be offered to the ancestors 
of the three past generations. Likewise the fourth is brought 
together. 

26. O Bhargava ! After having worshipped and offering 
(ball of rice) with (the recitation of syllables) pjthvi sam3n& 9 
the ball of rice (intended) for the dead should be united with 
those (intended) for the other (ancestors). 

27. So also the vessel for the dead should be united with the 
vessels (for the ancestors). This rite of uniting the vessels should 
be done one by one. 

28. This rite is laid down without (the recitation of) 
syllables for the iUdra. The rite of sapinfikarana* should be done 
in the same way for women. 

29-30. If one dies, a potful of cooked rice should be offered 
for a year and the ceremony should be done every year. One 

1. tf. prthvf somd HG. 2-11-4. 

2. The rite of uniting the ball of rice for the dead with those for the 

ancestors* * 



158 . 31-41 


443 


if 


may be able to count the sand particles in the Ganges or the rain 
<lrops as Indra rains. But one may not be able to count in this 
world the past ancestors. In the ever-moving time there is no 
permanence. Hence, one should do the deeds. 

31-32. The dead would get the results of ceremony whether 
(they are) in heaven (or) in hell. No benefit would 
accrue to the dead if one is only mourning (the death). There 
is no pollution due to the death of a person by (falling from) 
a cliff, (burnt) by fire, in a trap, by (drowning in) the water or 
by suicide. (There is no pollution on account of the death) of 
those fallen (from their caste) and those killed by lightning and 
weapons. 

33. Ascetics, those who have undertaken vows, student- 
celibates, kings, sculptors and those initiated for religious cere- 
monies and those under the command of the king should bathe, 
if they had followed the dead body. 

34. Immediate bathing is laid down after copulation and 
(coming across) smoke from (a burning) dead body. A §udra 

should never carry the dead body of a brahmin. 

35. So alsp a brahmin should not carry (the dead body) 
of a f udra. Therfc would arise sin from these. One would reach 
heaven by carrying the dead body of a destitute brahmin. 

36-41 . One who gifts fuel for burning the (dead body of a) 
destitute person would get victory in battle. (One who performs 
the cremation of the dead) should solemnly vow that he is a 
relative and then circumambulate the funeral pyre in the anti- 
clock direction. (After the completion of cremation rite) all 
should get out and bathe with their clothes. Then handful 
of water should be offered thrice for the dead. After that one 
should enter the house after placing the foot on a stone at the 
entrance (to the house). Unbroken rice should be offered to the 
fire and margosa leaves should be eaten. All should sleep sepa- 
rately on the floor. One should eat light fodd that has been 
bought. The learned one who offered the ball of rice becomes 
pure after shaving, bathing with white mustard and sesamum and 
wearing different clothes on the tenth day. Neither cremation 
with fire, nor the rites of offering waters should be done in the 
case of the death of children who had not grown teeth and in the 
case of abortion. The gathering of the bones (of the cremated) 
should be done cm the fourth day* It is laid down that one may 



444 Agni Pur&qa 

touch (the polluted person) after (the rites of) gathering of 
bones have been done. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYEIGHT 

Kinds of pollution 

Puskara said : 

1-4. I shall describe the pollution due to abortion accepted 
by Manu and others. In the case of abortion (pollution lasts) 
so many nights proportionate to the period of preg- 
nancy (for the mother). If the abortion is after four months 
(the pollution lasts) for three days, after five months for ten days. 
It lasts for four nights in the case of royal people, and ’for five 
days in the case of tradesmen. It lasts for eight days in the case 
of iudra and for twelve days in the case of others. Purification has 
been prescribed for women. But the father (of the abortive) 
(becomes pure) by bathing alone. No bathing has been laid 
down for those who are sapindas . (If the abortion) occurs in 
the seventh or eighth (month), (pollution lasts) for three nights. 
In the case of the death of a child after the appearance of the 
teeth, the sapindas become purified immediately. 

5-7. (If the death of a child occurs) before the tonsure, 
the pollution is for a night, q^nd before the undertaking of the 
vow (for the investiture of sacred thread) (it lasts) for three 
nights (for sapindas ). For the mother and father (the pollution) 
lasts for ten nights. (For those who are not sapindas ), if the child 
dies before the appearance of the teeth, or after the tonsure, 
(the pollution) lasts for three nights. If the child dies before it is 
three years old, one becomes pure after a night. In the case of a 
warrior class purity is after two days, and three days in that of the 
tradesman. A SQdra becomes pure after five days. (If the death 
occurs) before marriage, (the pollution lasts) for twelve days. 

8. In the circumstances in which the pollution for brah* 
mins is noted as three nights, in such cases a I Odra (vfould have) 



158.9-19 


445 


for twelve days and the warrior class and tradesmen (would 
have) for six and nine (days respectively). 

9. If (a child) dies (when) two years old no cremation 
(be done). It should be buried in the ground. No water of liba- 
tion need be given even if it had been named. Or it should be 
done if the child had grown teeth. (If death occurs) after the 
investiture of sacred thread (one has pollution) for ten (days). 
A brahmin who propitiates the fire and is well versed in the 
scriptures becomes pure after a day. 

10. (The pollution) lasts for three or four days if one is 
inferior or still less inferior in his (learning). 

1 1 . One who has neglected the worship of fire (would be- 
come pure) after five days. One who has neglected the duties 
of a brahmin (would become pure) after ten days. 

12. A warrior gets pure after nine days and a brahmin 
possessing qualities after seven days. A tradesman possessing 
qualities (becomes pure) after ten days. A §udra (gets pure) 
after twenty days. 

13. (The normal period of pollution) would be ten days 
for a brahmin, twelve days for the warrior class, fifteen days for 
the tradesman 'and one month for the Sudra. 

14. If there be excellent qualities (the normal pollution) 
for ten days would become three days, for three days would 
become a day, for one day would become immediate purity. 
One has to infer in this way in all the cases. 

15. The pollution for the servant, pupil, hired servant and 
disciple, residents of same place will be as that of their masters. 
But the pollution for the death would be separate. 

16. In the case of pollution due to' the death of a person who 
performs sacrifices etc., the obsequial rites should be commen- 
ced after doing purification before the cremation is done. 

17. One may touch a person (polluted) after one- third (of 
the period of pollution) is over in the case of all the castes. (The 
period after which) one may touch (the polluted) is three, 
four, five and ten days for the (four) castes respectively. 

18. The gathering (and immersion) of the bones should be 
done on the fourth, fifth, seventh and ninth day (after the death) 
for the (four) castes in the successive order. 

19. (Pollution) would be for a day in (the death of) girls 
not given in marriage and three days in (the death of) girls 



446 


Agni PurdQa 


after marriage. A night and two days enclosing it has been laid 
down (as the period of pollution) in the (death of) married sisters 
and others. 

20. The gotra for the unmarried girls would be that of the 
father, and for the married girls that of their husbands. The 
water of libation (should be offered) to the father on both 
sides in the case of the married. 

21. (The pollution) for the parents (would be) for three 
days after ten days in (the case of) the death of the daughter. 

0 Brahmin ! the sapinias would become pure immediately 
in (the death of the boy) before the tonsure is done. 

22. (The pollution would be) for one day in (the death of 
a girl) before the marriage (had been done) and three days 
after the girl had been given in marriage. (The pollution lasts) 
for a night and two days enclosing it in (the death of) the bro- 
ther’s son and immediately for the sapinias. 

23. A brahmin becomes pure after ten days in the death 
or birth through the brahmin woman. So also (a brahmin be- 
comes pure in the death or birth) through the warrior, trades- 
man and iudra respectively after six or three days or one day. 

24-27. This should be known as (applicable) to the sapinias . 

1 shall describe (the pollution) in (the case of the death of) 
illegitimate (children). It is said that there would be purity 
after three days in (the case of the death of) the illegitimate 
children adulterous wives and women who had former husbands. 
No water of libation (need be given) for those born in the mixed 
castes and, those gone abroad and those committing suicide. 
Pollution for those having one mother and two fathers and bro- 
thers having illegitimate wives' would be one day for birth and 
two days in (the case of) death. (I have described) the pollu- 
tion for sapiriias . I shall describe (the pollution) for those having 
relationship by the libation of waters. 

28. One becomes pure after bathing with the dress worn 
at the death of a person who is not a sapinia, whether the dead 
be a boy or has died abroad. 

29. But sapinias would become pure only after ten days in 
the case of both birth and death. The members of the same 
family (distant relatives) (would become pure) after three nights. 
Those belonging to the same clan would become pu^p after bath. 



158.30-41 


447 


30. The relationship of sapirtia would cease after the seventh 
(generation) in the case of males. The status of being eligible 
for waters of libation would cease after the fourteenth generation. 

31-33. If details about one’s birth are not remembered he 
is said to belong to another clan. One who hears about the death 
of a person abroad within ten days after the death, pollution 
would last only for the remaining period of the days. (If it 
is heard) ten days after (the death) pollution would be for three 
days. (If one hears) after one year had elapsed, one becomes 
pure after touching waters. (The pollution lasts) for a night 
enclosed by two days (in case of death) of the maternal uncle, 
a night (in case of death) of the pupil, priest and relatives. 

34. Only bathing is laid down in (case of) the death 
of son-in-law, daughter’s son, nephew (sister’s son), brother- 
in-law and the son of the latter. 

35-38. (The pollution would last) for three days in 
(case of) the death of maternal grand-mother, preceptor and 
maternal grand-father. It is laid down that one becomes pure 
(in the following cases) : (Death at the time of) a famine, the 
decadence of kingdom, a calamity has befallen, in case 
of death due to misfortune (or at the time of eclipse), in the 
death of) knower of brahman by means of fire, (in case of 
the death of) one who constantly performs sacrifice, one who 
observes a vow, a celibate, in (case of death at) battle and 
national calamity, while gift is being made, a sacrifice is being 
performed and the marriage is being conducted. An atonement 
in the form (of discarding life) by entering fire or water has been 
laid for those who kill a brahmin, a cow, and the king as also 
those who (attempt to) commit suicide, and one who has an 
incurable disease and one who is incapable of doing sv&dky&ya 1 . 

39-41. If a woman or a man dies by hanging one’s self on. 
account of disgrace, anger, affection and insult, somehow he 
(or she) would live for aiakh (of years) in an impure hell. If 
an old man who has neglected the ritual enjoined by the scrip- 
tures and code books, discards his life, (the period of) pollution 
is for three days. The collection of bones (after cremation) is 
done on the second day. Water of libation is to be done on the 

1. Study of one's own branch of die Vida. 



448 Agni Pur&na 

third day. The irdddha (annual ceremony for the dead) should 
be done on the fourth day. m 

42. In the death of people struck by lightning or by fire, 
pollution lasts for three days for the sapinqlas. Women who had 
taken to heretic path and those who had killed their husbands 
are not eligible for water of libation. 

43. If one’s father or mother had died (in the above des- 
cribed manner), one should wear wet clothes, and fast. After 
one year had gone, the obsequies should be done as laid down. 

44. If one, who is an asapintfa 1 2 * * , carried the dead body, he 
becomes pure after bathing with the dress, touching the fire and 
taking ghee. 

45. If one eats food from them, he becomes pure only after 
ten days. If not eaten food there, he becomes pure that day itself. 
Then one should not stay in that house. 

46. The brahmins who carry the dead body of a destitute 
brahmin, get the benefits of a sacrifice at their each step and 
would become pure after bathing alone. 

47-49. A brahmin who accompanies the dead body of a 
iudra becomes pure after three days. After having mourned 
the death of a person along with the relatives, one should avoid 
making any gifts or doing irdddha etc. will-fully for a day. If a 
iQdra woman delivers (a child) or dies in one’s house, the vessels 
should be discarded and one becomes pure after three days by 
sweeping the floor (of the house with water). The dead brahmin 
should not be made to be carried by a iudra when the same 
(caste men) are available. 

50. After bathing the dead body, it should be cremated after 
being worshipped with flowers. Never should the (dead) body 
be cremated naked. A part (of the body) should be left (un- 
covered). 

51-53. One who is born in the same clan should lift and 
place (the dead body) on the funeral pyre. A brahmin who had 
consecrated the sacred fire should be appropriately cremated 
with the three fires 8 . One who has not consecrated the sacred 

1 . Not a sapiptfa. 

2. Sacrificial fire of three kinds g&rhapatya , dhavaniya and dakfi$a — the 

fire perpetually maintained in the house, a consecrated fire taken from the 

previous, the sacred fire lit on the south. ^ 



158.54-63 


449 


fire (should be cremated) with one (among these three fires). 
The others (should be cremated) with the ordinary (fire). 
The son should place the fire at the face with the words, 1 ‘You 
were born from this. May this be born from you again. This is 
for the heaven”. The relatives (should utter) the name and 
clan (of the dead) and sprinkle water once. 

54, The water of libation (should be done) in this way in 
the death of the maternal grand-father, and the preceptor.The 
water of libation is optional in (the case of) the death of the girl 
friend, sister’s son, father-in-law and priest. 

55-56. The son should offer the water of libation for ten 
days (with the syllable) apo nah &o$ucad} Ten balls of rice 
should be offered (at the death) of a brahmin. Twelve (balls 
of rice) are remembered (to be offered) for a warrior. Fifteen 
(balls) are spoken to be for a tradesman. It is said that thirty 
(balls) (should be offered) for a Sudra. A son or daughter or 
anybody else may offer the balls of rice like the son. 

57-59. After biting the margosa leaves, becoming self- 
controlled and sipping water at the entrance to the house, all 
should touch fire, water, cowdung, white mustard and place foot 
slowly on a stone and enter (the house). Till the pollution goes 
pungeant and saline food should not be taken. Flesh should 
not be eaten and all should sleep on the floor. After bathing, food 
bought from outside should be eaten. The same person, who did 
the first day rite, should do rites for ten days. In the absence 
(of that person), a brahmacari may offer the balls of rice and 
waters of libation 

60. Just as the pollution for the sapinias at the death (of 
their relatives) has been laid down, so also it would be in regard 
to birth for those who desire for purification. 

61 . The pollution due to death is applicable to all. But the 
pollution due to birth is only for the father and mother. Pollu- 
tion would be for the mother only and the father would become 
pure after touching water. 

62. If it had been decided that irdddha should be done on 
the day of birth of the (dead) son, cow, gold and dress should 
be given as gift on that day. 

63. The pollution due to death (goes) with (another) 


1. RV. 1.97.1 a. 



450 


Agni Pur&na 


pollution. The pollution due to birth (goes) with (another) 
pollution. Even between them one gets pure with that which 
occurs first. 

64. If a pollution due to death occurs while there is pollu- 
tion due to birth and vice-veraa, the pollution is based on that 
of death only and not on that of birth. 

65. If one pollution occurs when there is already another 
pollution, if the two are equal or the latter is less equal then the 
pollution should be completed with the former. If the two are 
unequal, it should be completed with the second according to the 
words of Dharmaraja. 

66. If death occurs at the end of another death, there is 
purification after the end of first pollution. The greater one 
always affects the lighter one. But the lighter one never affects 
the greater one. 

67. If the pollution due to death or birth occurs in the mid- 
night when there is already a pollution due to death or birth, 
all would become pure with the remaining part of pollution. 
That is that part of the night added to two days. 

68. If the pollution occurs in the morning, one becomes pure 
after three days. In both cases one should not eat food from 
that family. 

69. One should refrain from making any gifts. If one hap- 
pened to die, he should do rites of atonement. There is no sin if it 
is done unknowingly in the former. Otherwise, it would be for a 
day for the one who dines. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYNINE 
The merits of the offer of libation and the performance of good deeds 
Pufkara said : 

1 . One would reach heaven whether the cremation is done 
or not done if Lord Vi$nu is remembered. The dead gets 
redemption if the bones are immersed in the waters of the 
Ganges. 



159.2-15 


451 


2-4. One remains in heaven till (the period) his bones 
remain in the waters of the Ganges. No cremation (is laid down) 
for those committing suicide and those fallen (from righteous 
living). Even for them it is beneficial to drop their bones in the 
waters of the Ganges. The waters and food offered for them 
would be absorbed in the sky. The (rite of) Narayanabali 1 should 
be done with great compassion for the dead fallen (from righte- 
ousness). Hence, that person would enjoy favour. 

5. The lotus-eyed (Visnu) is without decay. That which 
is offered there will not perish. Lord Janardana (Visnu) is the 
vessel because that protects from falling. 

6. It is certain that (Lord) Hari (Visnu) is the only (god) 
who confers enjoyment, emancipation etc. for the fallen. Seeing 
the people dying one should do the helpful righteous deeds. 

7. Even after the death (of a person), the relatives would 
not be able to follow the dead person.The path of death is differ- 
ent for all others except the wife. 

8-15. Only the deeds accompany one wherever one may go. 
One should do today the work of tomorrow and in the forenoon 
that of the afternoon. The death does not wait to see whether 
(the work) has been done or not done. One who is attached to 
the plot, market and house and has his mind drawn towards 
something else, death takes him and goes away like the 
she-wolf seizes the ram. No one is dear, nor one is an enemy 
of time. When the life (period) and one’s work are over, 
(it) endures and takes away the people. Even if pierced 
with hundred arrows one does not die at the inopportune time. 
One does not live if the destined time has come even if he has 
been touched only by the tip of ku$a (grass). Medicines and sac- 
red syllables and others cannot save one who is destined to die. 
Certainly one’s past actions find the doer like (the cow finding 
its) calf. That which precedes one’s birth and that which 
succeeds one’s death is not explicit. Only that which is in between 
is explicit in this world. Just as we have the boyhood etc. for the 
body, so also another body is got. Just as the body wears another 
new dress, so also the soul (gets another body). (The soul) 
is always indestructible. Hence one should discard grief. 


1. A particular funeral ceremony. 



452 


Agni Purdya 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY 

Duties of a brahmin leading life in the forest 
Pufkara said : 

1-2. Listen to me ! I shall describe the duties of an ancho- 
rite leading life in the forest. He should have matted hair, wor- 
ship fire, sleep on the ground and wear the hide of an antelope. 
He should live in the forest. He should maintain his life with 
milk, roots, nivdra (rice growing uncultivated) and fruits. He 
should not take alms. He should bathe thrice a day. He should 
observe celibacy. 

3. The duty of an anchorite is to worship gods and 
guests. A householder after having seen the grandchild should 
resort to the forest. 

4-5. The third part of one’s life (should be spent in the fo- 
rest) either alone or with the wife. One should do severe penance 
in the midst of five fires in the summer, under the clouds as 
the shelter in the rainy season, with wet dress in the winter. One 
should resort to a life of not expecting (any thing from anybody) 
and go on straight in (different) directions. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYONE 
Duties of an ascetic 


Pufkara said : 

1. I shall describe the duties of an ascetic which confer 
knowledge and release (from cycles of birth and death). When 
one reaches the fourth part of his life, he should renounce 
contact (with men). 

2-3. One should renounce on that very day when he gets 
disinterested (in worldly activities). A brahmin should 
leave the house after performing the Prdjdpatyd 1 rite, worship of 

1. Giving away the whole of one's property before entering the life 
of an ascetic. 



161.4-16 


453 


all gods along with the (appropriate) fee and invoking fire* 
in one’s own self. One should move alone daily. One should 
resort (to the village) only for a morsel of food. 

4-5. The ascetic should be indifferent and should not ac- 
quire wealth. A bowl, roots of a tree, tattered clothes and 
equanimity towards everything are the characteristics of a libe- 
rated soul. One should neither welcome death nor life. 

6-8. One should await only the time just like a servant 
(waiting for) the command. One should set his foot (at a place) 
purified by his look, drink water purified with a cloth, utter 
words purified by truth, do (things) (that are considered to be) 
purified by the mind. A vessel made of gourd or wood or earth 
or burnt ashes (are the symbols) of an ascetic. An ascetic should 
seek alms daily (from the house) when the smoke has ceased, 
the pestle has been set aside, the charcoal has been put out, the 
inmates have eaten, the food vessel has been kept inverted after 
eating. 

9. Begging is of five kinds — collected from different places 
like a bee, unintended (not already fixed), that has already been 
fixed, temporary (arranged just when the ascetics seek alms) 
and (food) made ready and brought (to him). 

10. (The alms) may be (received) in the vessel in the hand 
or transferred from the vessel to the vessel. He has to examine 
the state of men (from whom alms are received) due to their 
discreditable conduct. 

11. One should pursue righteousness entertaining purity 
of thought in whichever order of life he may be interested. He 
should treat all beings equally. The cause of righteousness does 
not lie in the symbol (associated with the different orders of life) . 

12. Although the fruit of the kataka tree purifies the water, 
the water cannot become pure by the mere mention of its name. 

13. An honest person, eunuch, lame, blind and deaf person 
associated with the wicked on account of ignorance get liberated 
by pious men. 

14. If an ascetic kills any being unknowingly during the 
day or night he should bathe for purification and do the prd - 
ndydma six time 

15-16. (The ascetic) should discard his body having 
bones as the pillar, united with sinews, besmeared with 
flesh and blood, covered with skin, full of foul smell of 



454 


Agni Purina 


urine and feces, subject to old age and grief. (It is also) the 
abode of diseases and afflictions, emotional and non-eternal. 

1 7. Firmness, forgiveness, self-restraint, not-stealing, purity, 
control of senses, modesty, learning, truthfulness and absence 
of anger are the ten characteristics of righteousness. 

18. The ascetics are of four types — kuficaka, bahudaka , 
hathsa and paramahariisa. Each succeeding one is superior. 

19-26. An ascetic would be liberated, whether he is an 
ekadandin (holder of one stave) or tridandin (holder of three long 
staves tied (together). Abstaining from killing, truthfulness, 
not stealing, celibate life, and non-possession of things are the 
five moral observances for an ascetic. Purity, gratifying, penance, 
study of vedic texts of one’s school and worship of the deity 
are the (five) self-imposed moral observances. The padmaka 1 
and others are the postures. The prdndydma (the controlled brea- 
thing) is of two types — sagarbha and agarbha. The garbha type is 
that associated with the repetition and contemplation (of a 
sacred syllable) and agarbha is the opposite. Each one of these is 
again of three kinds — inhalation (filling), retention and exhala- 
tion (emptying). The breath is said to be filling as it fills up, 
retention as there is no movement, and emptying on account of 
emptying. It is also of three kinds on account of difference 
in the (period of) measure, such as twelve, twenty-four and 
thirtysix matrS respectively. One mStra is the time (taken) for 
(pronouncing) a short vowel. One should repeat syllables 
like the pranava ( orh ) slowly. The pratydhSra (restraining the 
organs) is (only) for those who repeat (sacred syllable). 
Dhydna is the contemplation on god. The firmness of mind is 
the dharana. Samadhi is the state of continuous existence in brah- 
man. This self is the supreme brahman (of the form of) truth, 
knowledge and bliss. I am that supreme brahman, effulgent 
self, the (lord) Vamadeva (Siva) liberated orh. 

27-28. (I am) devoid of a body, sense organs, mind, intel- 
lect, life and ego. (I am) free from (the states of) waking, dream- 
ing and deep sleep, (and I am) the brahman of the fourth (state) . 

(I am) eternally pure, realised, liberated, truth, bliss and without 

1. The posture of sitting erect with crossed legs, the right foot resting 
on the left loin and the left foot on the right loin. 



161.29-162.1-7 


455 


a second. I am the brahman , the supreme effulgence, undecaying 
(and) all-pervading lord Hari (Visnu). 

29. That person who (is in the) Sun, that I am, the un- 
divided, orh . (I am) one who is devoid of all beginnings, equal 
towards grief and pleasure and having forbearance. 

30-31. A person would become brahman being pure in one’s 
thought and after having pierced the primordial egg. One should 
perform the vow of c&turmasya 1 on the full moon day of &$&4ha 
(June-July). Then one should move out on the ninth day etc. 
One should have the shave at the junction of two seasons. 
The atonement for ascetics are contemplation, (doing )prdndyama 
and (the practice of) yama y (moral observances). 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYTWO 

The code of laws 

Puskara said : 

1-2. I shall describe concisely the code of laws as narrated 
by Manu, Visnu, Yajriavalkya, Harlta, Atri, Yama, Angiras, 
Vasistha, Daksa, Samvarta, Satatapa, Parasara, Apastamba, 
USanas, Vyasa, Katyayana, Brhaspati, Gautama, Sankha and 
Likhita.You listen to that which would yield you enjoyment and 
emancipation. The path of action adhering to the Vedas is of 
two kinds — taking active part in worldly life (pravftta) and abs- 
taining from worldly acts ( nivftta ). 

3-5. An act performed for (getting) particular object would 
be taking active part in worldly life. Abstaining from worldly 
acts is preceded by true knowledge. The study of the Vedas , 
penance, knowledge, control of senses, non-injury and service 
to the preceptor all confer extreme pleasure. But the knowledge 
of one’s own self is the most superior to all. 

6-7. It is the leading one among all knowledge. One gets 
ambrosia from that. A learned man who studies his own self 

1 . A period of four months during which an ascetic has to stay at the 
same place. 



456 


Agni Pur&na 


and sees equally his own self in all beings and all beings 
in his own self attains identification of his own self with the 
brahman. One should make equal efforts in (the acquisition of) 
knowledge about self and in the study of Veda . 

8-10. This is the same for all the twice-borns and it is spe- 
cially (laid down) for brahmins. One who knows the scrip- 
tures and sciences and their import is set for becoming identical 
with brahman even as he is living in this world and remaining 
in different stages of life. The commencement of vedic 
study of one’s own school should be in the month of fr&vana (July- 
August) in the (asterism) havana. (It can also be done) in the 
(asterism) hasta or Monday or fifth day (of the lunar fortnight) 
in the (month) otirdvana, or in the (asterism) rohini in the month 
pausa (January-February), or in the asfakd (the three days 7th 
to 9th). 

11-18. The study of Veda should be commenced as laid 
down outside on the banks of a tank. There would be cessation 
of vedic study for three days at the death of the pupil or the 
officiating priest or the preceptor or the relative. So also (there 
would be cessation of vedic study) at the beginning and conclu- 
sion of the vedic study if a person well-versed in one’s own branch 
of Vedas (dies). If there is thunder at the (time of) twilight or a 
hurricane or earthquake or fall of meteor (cessation of study is 
laid down). Even if the study has been completed and the cease- 
less study has been made in the forest (there would be cessation 
of study). So also (there would be cessation of study) on the 
fifteenth, fourteenth and eighth days of a lunar fortnight, at the 
time of eclipse (of the sun or moon), at the junctions of seasons, 
after having dined at a sraddha and after having received a gift. 
(There would be cessation of study )for a day and night if a hare 
or frog or mongoose or dog or serpent or cat or pig goes in bet- 
ween (the preceptor and the pupil). It is the same if there is 
lightning or rising of planets. If the sounds of a dog or a jackal 
or ass or owl (are heard) once, five times or six times or at a 
place impure, or associated with a corpse, iudra , or an antya 
(the fifth caste), cremation ground or a person fallen from righ- 
teous living, (there is cessation of study). (So also there is cessa- 
tion of study) in evil asterism, and when there is lightning, 
thunder and floods. (So also there is no study*} after eating, 
with wet hands, remaining in waters, at midnight, (and on 



163.1-7 


457 


the days when there is) excess of wind, dust storm, morbid heat, 
the fall of snow and at the time of twilight and while having* 
other fears. (So also there is no study) while running or being 
disturbed by animals or when a great person has come home or 
while climbing a mule, camel, vehicle, elephant, horse, boat 
and tree. These are known to be the thirtyseven temporary 
(instances) of cessation of the vedic study. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYTHREE 
Mode of performance of a Sr&ddha 


Puskara said : 

1-2. Listen to me. I shall describe the procedure for (the 
performance of) annual ceremony that yields enjoyment and 
liberation. After having invited brahmins the previous day, 
they should be welcomed in the afternoon, worshipped and 
seated on the seat. Two (brahmins are invited) in the cere- 
mony intended for gods and one by one in the ceremony intend- 
ed for departed forefathers. They (are made to sit) facing the 
east in the ceremony for the gods. There may be three or one 
(brahmin) in the ceremony for forefathers. 

3-7. The same (procedure is followed) in regard to the 
ceremonies) of the maternal forefathers also. (I shall describe 
the procedure for) the vaiivadeva l 2 3 4 . After having given (waters) 
for washing hands and kuia (grass) for the sake of seat 
and having obtained permission (from brahmins) (all 
gods) should be invoked with the syllables, viivedevdsah a . 
After having spread the barley then, and pouring water in the 
vessel containing pavitraka (the purifying kuSa) with (the syllables) 
ianno devi 3 and then the barley with (the syllables) yavo’si*, the 


1 . An offering made to gods. 

2. Ap$. S. 3-10-1 d. 

3. RV. lu.9.4a. 

4. ApS. S. 7.9.10. 



458 


Agni Purdna 


libation is placed on the hand with the sacred syllables j/5 divyd 1 2 . 
Then, after having offered waters, fragrance, flowers, incepse and 
lamp, and shifted the sacred thread to (rest on) the right (shoul- 
der), the forefathers should be circumambulated. The fore- 
fathers should be invoked with the syllables ufantastvd 2 extending 
two ku$a (grass). After having been permitted by them, one 
should recite (the syllable) dyantu nah 3 4 . 

8-15. Sesamum should be used in the place of barley. 
Respectful offering of water should be made as before. After 
having done it, the remains of libation should be collected 
in a vessel as laid down and the vessel is turned upside down 
with the (syllable) pitfbhyah sthanamasi* . Then the cooked rice 
covered with ghee should be taken (in hand) and asked, “shall 
I offer it to the fire?”. Being permitted (to do so saying) 
“Do it”, one should offer it to the fire as in the ceremony (done) 
for the manes. The remnants of offering should be given with 
devotion in vessels secured according to one’s status or especially 
in silver (vessels). After having offered food the vessel should 
be consecrated with (the sacred syllable) pfthivipdtram 5 6 7 . Then 
the thumb of the brahmin should be placed therein with (the 
recitation of the sacred syllable) idam visnuh*. After reciting 
gayatri 7 together with the vyahrtis 8 9 and the hymn madhuvatcP it 
should be stated “(eat) comfortably”. They should also eat 
controlling their speech. They should be served the cooked rice 
and the clarified butter after the repetition of (sacred sylla- 
ble) of purification. Then cooked rice should be taken (and 
shown and enquired) : “Are you satisfied ?”. The remaining 
cooked rice should be scattered on the ground and water should 
be sprinkled one by one. The cooked rice (that was scattered) 
should be gathered together with sesamum and as in the case of 
the ceremony for the manes the balls of rice should be offered 


1. ApS.S. 22.28.13. 

2. ApS.S.8.14.18. 

3. cf. d jyantu nab V. Sam, 19.58 a. 

4. Y.Dh. 1.234. 

5. Y.Dh. 1.237. 

6. Y.Dh. 1.237. Ap.S. 2-6-1. 

7. Oth bhdrbhuvassuvah tatsaviturvaretiyam etc. 

8. Om bh&b etc. 

9. ApS.S. 16-25-1. JtV. l-90-6a. 



163.16-24 


459 


remaining facing the south in the proximity of the place where 
the food was eaten (by the brahmins). 

16-20. (It is done) in the same way for the maternal fore- 
fathers also. Then water for sipping is offered. Then the words 
of benediction should be uttered. So also the undecaying 
waters (should be offered). After having paid fees befitting 
one’s capacity, the syllable svadhd should be pronounced. After- 
having been permitted to say, (the words) svapitfbhyah, svadhd 1 
( svadhd to my forefathers) should be said. When (the brahmin) 
says let svadhd be (repeated), it should be done so. Then water 
should be sprinkled on the ground. Water should be offered 
with the (repetition of the syllables) priyantdm 2 3 or viSve devah .* 
After having said “Let our donors, the Vedas and the progeny 
flourish. Let not our earnestness dwindle. Let us have plenty to 
give” 4 5 6 and uttering sweet words (the brahmins) should be allow- 
ed to go. The satisfied manes should be bade adieu after (re- 
peating the syllable) vdje vdje B . 

21-23. The vessel in which the remnants of libation had 
been poured earlier, that vessel of the manes should be made 
upright and the brahmins should be bade adieu after following 
them in such a 'way as circumambulating. After having eaten 
(remnants of) the food partaken by the forefathers, one should 
observe continence that night in the company of brahmins. 
After having done the circumambulation of the manes in the 
nandi* in connection with the impurity caused by the birth of a 
child, they should be worshipped with the balls of barley mixed 
with curd and (fruit of) jujube. 

24. The ekoddiffa 7 (ceremony) (is done) without (the wor- 
ship of) (ViSve)devas. There would be only one libation and 
one purificatory rite. The (offering should be made) in the 

1. MS. 1.6.1.45. 

2. MS. 11.9.2. 

3. Sec p. 457, vv 3-7. 

4. Y.Dh. 1.245. 

5. RV. 1.30.7b. 

6. The ceremony performed in memory of the manes, preliminary to 
■any festive occasion such as marriage etc. 

7. The rite performed for one individual deceased not including other 
ancestors. 



460 


Agni Purdtia 


dvdhana fire without the instrumental (syllable) with the sacred 
thread lying on the right shoulder. # 

25.. One should say ‘let you get up* in place of ‘impe- 
rishable’ and ‘may you be satisfied’ in place of bidding adieu, 
to the manes (in the former). They should say “We are satisfied” 

26-27. Four vessels containing fragrant waters and sesamum 
should be kept apart, the vessel of the dead person should be 
sprinkled with (waters), the waters of libation from the ves- 
sels of the forefathers with the two (sacred syllables) beginning 
with) samand 1 . The remaining (acts) should be done as before. 
When this ekoddisfa 2 3 becomes the sapindikarana 2 (it should be done 
adding the (dead) woman also. 

28. If the sapindikarana has to be performed for a (dead) 
person within a year (after death), the food for him should be 
given to a brahmin the whole year together with a vessel filled 
with water. 

29. The ceremony should be done on the day of death for 
every month in a year and should be done for every year as the 
food (offered) every month. 

30-31. (The forefathers would be satisfied for) a month 
with cooked rice and a year with payasa (sweet liquid made 
with flour, rice, sago etc.). The forefathers get pleased by a 
month more with (the offer of) flesh of the fish, deer, ram, bird, 
sheep, spotted antelope, black antelope, ruru deer, boar and 
hare in the succeeding order. 

32-33. The offer of any one of the following — the flesh of 
a buffalo, of a kind of sea crab, cooked rice with honey, the flesh 
of the red goat, kdlaSdka , the flesh of a rhinoceros while at Gaya 
would (please the manes) immensely. So also (the offer made) 
on the thirteenth day in the as ter ism of maghd in the rainy season 
(would) no doubt (please the manes). 

34-35. One who does the (annual) ceremony always makes 
grow the prosperity of his daughter, progeny, attendants, animals, 
chief among the sons, ghee, agriculture, trade, animals-cloven- 
footed and not cloven-footed, sons possessing the lustre of brah - 

1. ApS. S. 1.9.12 a; T. Dh. 1.253. 

2. See p. 453. fn. 7. 

3. The rite performed to merge the soul of the dead person with the- 
ancestors. 



163.36—164.7 


461 


man, gold, silver and the excellence of the relatives. He will also 
get his desires fulfilled. 

36. The ceremony is to be done on all days from the 
first lunar day except the fourteenth day. (The ceremony) 
is to be done on that day (fourteenth) for the sake of those who 
were killed by weapons. 

37-39. One who does the ceremony as laid down gets hea- 
ven, progeny, radiance, valour, land, strength, excellence of sons, 
progeny with prosperity, importance, sons, unimpeded sover- 
eignty, trade, lordship, unimpaired health, fame, absence of 
grief, excellent state, wealth, learning, the accomplishment of a 
physician, silver, cows, small cattle, horses and long life. 

40-41. (If the ceremony) is done in the asterisms com- 
mencing with Krittika and ending with bharani one gets all these 
desires fulfilled. The Vasus, R.udras, Adityas, the deities in 
the form of manes get pleased with the men who satisfy the 
manes with (the performance of) ceremony. The forefathers 
being pleased confer on men long life, progeny, wealth, learning, 
heaven, liberation and comforts. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYFOUR 
The propitiatory rite for the planets 
Puskara said : 

1 . One should commence the propitiatory rite for the pla- 
nets if one desires for prosperity or appeasement (of planets) or 
rains, long life, or nourishment or exorcising for malevolent 
purposes. 

2-3. Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, 
Rahu and Ketu (the ascending and descending nodes of Moon 
referred to as planets) are known to be planets. (The images 
of) these planets should be made of copper, crystal, red sandal, 
gold, silver, iron and lead respectively. 

4-7. Otherwise (the images may be made) of gold and wor- 
shipped. Or their figures may be drawn in the circles drawn with 



462 


Agni Purdna 


fragrant materials. The dress and flowers should be offered 
matching their respective colours. Lines made of perfumes and 
guggulu as the incense should be offered. Cam 1 should be offered 
to each god along with the sacred syllables (as follows) :a fysnena 2 3 4 5 6 
imarh devcP , agnirm Grddha divah kakut 4 and udbudhyasva 5 are said 
to be the syllables in order. Brhaspate atiyadaryah * , anndt parisru - 
tah 7 8 9 10 , iarh no devi*> kdniat 9 and ketum krnuan 10 are the (syllables). 

8-9. The arka , khadira, apdmdrga , pippala, udumbara , §ami> 
durva and ku§a are the twigs in order. Each one of these should 
be offered to fire one hundred and eight times or twenty-eight 
times together with honey, clarified butter and curd. 

10-12. Rice boiled with coarse sugar, rice boiled with milk 
or water, cooked food, dish of liquid rice and milk, curd rice, 
ghee, small round cakes made of flour, flesh and rice mixed with 
coconut and other things should be offered to the planets in the 
respective order. A wiseman should feed the brahmins accord- 
ing to one’s capacity after having worshipped them as laid down 
according to one’s knowledge. Cow, conch, ox, gold, dress, 
horse, black cow, iron and goat are the things to be given as gifts 
in order. 

13-14. One should worship a planet with great effort if 
that planet remains in a bad house at that time for that person. 
They were blessed by lord Brahma (that they should be) wor- 
shipped (by the people). The rise and fall of the people are 
subject to the planets. They are the existence and the non-exis- 
tence of the world. Hence the planets ought to be worshipped. 


1 . An oblation of rice, barley and pulse boiled. 

2. Y.Dh. 1.299. 

3. Y.Dh. 1.299. 

4. APS. S. 5.28.11. 

5. APS. S. 3.13.1. 

6. APS. S. 17.21.7. 

7. V. Saxh. 19.75a. 

8. Y.Dh. 1.300. IjtV. 10.9.4a... 

9. APS. S. 16.24.1* 

10. APS. S. 20.16.3. SLV. 1.6.3a. 



46$ 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYFIVE 

Code of conduct 


Fire-god said : 

1 . One should contemplate the soul, the lord that remains 
in the heart like a lamp, having his mind, intellect, memory 
and the senses not resting on any other object. 

2. One should give things got from a cow, curd, ghee, and 
milk. Saffron, masQra (a kind of pulse), v&rtdku (egg-plant) 
and kodrava (a species of grain) should not (be given). 

3. When the son of Sirfihikd (Ketu) swallows the Sun (that 
is, there is an eclipse of the Sun due to the descending node of 
the Moon) at the junctions of the lunar fortnights, it is known 
to be hasticchdyd. The ceremony and gift made then (yield) 
undiminishing (benefits ) . 

4. When the Moon is in (the asterism) paitrya (i maghd ) 
and Sun in (the asterism) kara ( hasta ) 9 the day is known as 
Vaivasvati and the shadow is that of kunjara. 

5. The remnant of that offered unto the fire should not be 
given in the (rite of) vaifvadeva. The fees should be paid on the 
hand of the brahmin in the absence of fire. 

6-9. A woman is not defiled by a paramour and also a 
brahmin (who has defaulted) from vedic rites. A woman en- 
joyed by employing force or fallen into the hands of an enemy 
should be abandoned. She becomes pure after the menstrual 
period. Earlier, women were enjoyed by the celestials such as 
the Moon, Gandharvas and Fire. The men enjoy them later. 
(Hence) they do not get defiled by any one. If a woman is 
impregnated by one not belonging to the same caste, that 
woman becomes impure till the extraneous matter is not dis- 
charged. When the extraneous matter had come out, she then 
becomes pure by her menstrual flow. 

10-12. Whoever does not see another as different from 
his own self, becomes here the brahman itself. One who re- 
joices in his own self is (said to be) free from impurity. Some 
describe union as the union of objects and senses. Verily 
unrighteousness has been taken as righteous view by those igno- 
rant (people). Others (say) that the union of the soul and mind 
as the union. 



464 


Agni Purdna 


13. After having restrained the mental activity and unify- 
ing one’s soul with the Supreme Being, one gets released from 
bondage. This union (is said to be) the outstanding one. # 

14. It is a collection of five family members. The sixth one 
is extremely great. It cannot be conquered by the celestials or 
demons or mortals. 

15. All those (the senses) which look externally should be 
made (to look) inward. The collection of senses (should lie) 
in the mind. The mind should be united in the soul. 

16. One’s soul that is free from all feelings should be 
fixed in the brahman . This is the knowledge and meditation. 
Everything else that remains would be elaborating the text. 

17. That matter which (one thinks) as non-existent in all 
the worlds is spoken to be as present. That which is spoken (as 
being present) does not remain in the heart of another (other 
than a yogi). 

18. As a virgin (does not know) the happiness of a woman 
so also that brahman is really unknowable. One who is not a 
yogin never knows it just as a born-blind person (does not know) 
the pot. 

19. Having seen a renouncing brahmin, the Sun moves 
from his position (thinking that) “This person would pierce my 
orb and reach the Supreme Brahman”. 

20. (One would get as) a fruit of that what one would get 
by fasting, vow, bathing, sacred spots, the fruit of penance and 
the gaining of a brahmin. 

21. Supreme Brahman is the single letter. The control of 
breath is the supreme penance. There is nothing more purifying 
than the (sacred syllable) Savitrl (addressed to the Sun-god). 

22. One who eats even from an outcaste would get pure 
by contemplation. The meditator is the soul, the meditation 
is the mind, the object of meditation is lord Visnu and the 
fruit is lord Hari. 

23-28. Just as the Paftktip&vand 1 purifies in a ceremony so 
also the ascetic (gets) imperishable worlds (for others). I do 
not find an atonement that purifies a brahmin if he slips after 
entering the state of abstinence. He is the killer of (his) soul. 

1. One who purifies a party of diners by his presence. He would be a 
learned person and follower of codes of conduct. 



166.1-7 


465 


Those who are the progenitors through their wives after having 
renounced, (their progeny) become outcastes known as 
binduld . There is no doubt. An eagle dies after hundred (years). 
A dog (lives) for twelve (years). A vulture (lives) for twenty 
years. Then the pig (dies) after ten (years). A tree without 
flowers becomes fruitless and is surrounded by thorns. Then 
having been burnt by forest fire it becomes a dry trunk on a 
peak. Then it remains a lifeless matter for eight hundred years. 
After one thousand years are over it becomes a brahmardksasa 
(spirit of a brahmin indulging in sinful deeds). One gets libe- 
ration from this either by deluge or the annihilation of the 
family. One should always resort to (the practice of) yoga . 
There is no other sacred syllable that removes sin. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYSIX 
Duties of different castes 


Puskara said : 

1-5. I shall describe the codes of conduct (laid down) 
by the scriptures and codes of law. (The codes of conduct) 
are of five kinds. That is known to be the codes of conduct 
of the castes in which the authority rests on the caste alone. A 
thing that is laid down resting on the stages of life is said to be 
the code of conduct of the stages of life. The codes of (the 
above) both which are made prevalent by a motive is known to 
be naimittika (occasional or produced by a cause) like the codes 
of atonement. O King ! the student, the householder, the 
forester and an ascetic are said to be the codes of conduct of 
stages of life. The fourth one is the practical code and the fifth 
one is the metaphysical code. It is said to be the practical 
code which has its say in the six qualities. 

6. This is of three kinds. According to Manu mantra (mystic 
syllable) and ydga sacrifice (are) metaphysical codes. Those 
which belong to the two classes are justice and administration 
of justice. 

7. Even for the same kind of things it is said that there would 



466 Agni Purdna 

be option due to ydga (sacrifice). The same duty is laid down in 
the codes also as in the scriptures. 

8. Followers of Manu (declare) that the code brings forth 
repetition for the purpose of the work undertaken. Otherwise 
the repetition is specially for the quality of limitation. 

9. Followers of Manu (state) that this (repetition) is only 
a special practical code for the result. One would reach the 
world of Brahma by doing the forty-eight purificatory rites. 

10-19. (They are) the impregnation 1 , causing the birth 
of a male child 2 , the parting of the hair 3 , rites done at the birth 
of a child, naming the child, the first rice-feeding of the child 4 
the tonsure 5 , investiture of the sacred thread, the collection of 
four vedic observances — the completion of one’s studies, marri- 
age, the collection of five devotional acts — towards the gods, 
manes, mortals, beings and sages, seven simple domestic 
sacrifices — the asfaka and pdrvanasraddha , frdvani, agrahdyani , 
caitri , and dfvayuji> then the haviryajfias (such as) the agnyadheya , 
agnihotra, darSapaurnamdsa , caturmdsya , dgrahdyanyesfi, niru$ha - 
paiubandhaka and the sautrdmani , the seven somasamsthas — com- 
mencing with agnisfoma — atyagnisfoma , uktha, fotfafiy vdjapeyaka y 
atirdtra etc. and the eight basic human qualities — compassion, 
forbearance, freedom from malice, absence of exertion, propitia- 
tion, charity and absence of desire. Whoever possesses these attains 
the supreme. One should observe silence in the six (acts) — 
evacuation of bowels, copulation, passing urine, cleaning the 
teeth, bathing and eating. One should avoid making a 
gift again (of an article received as a gift) drinking separately 
the ghee and milk in the night, removal of teeth and hotness in 
the seven (kinds of) flours. One should not gather flowers 
without bathing. It is said to be unfit for the (worship of) gods. 

20. If a person not belonging to the same gotra and not 
related does the cremation of a dead person, he has to complete 
ten day rites by offering balls of rice and water. 

1. Is done when the conception is known. 

2. Is done before the embryo begins to move. 

3. Is done in the eighth month after pregnancy. 

4. Is done in the six months after the birth of a child. 

5. Is done in the third y ear of a child. 



-166.21— 167.1-7 


467 


21 . If one has to dine with unequal persons there is no defi- 
ling of the row if (the two) are separated by water or grass or 
ashes or door or pathway. 

22. The five oblations to the (five breaths) (at the com- 
mencement of taking food) should be done with the union of 
the ring-finger and the thumb. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYSEVEN 
Propitiatory rite for the planets 


Fire-god said : 

1. I shall again describe (the mode of performing) the 
propitiation of the planets for the sake of prosperity, peace and 
success. The propitiation of planets is of three kinds — oblations 
ten thousand times, lakh times and crore times. 

2-7. After having invoked planets in a circle at the 
north-east of the fire-pit with the sacred syllables, Jupiter (should 
be located) at the north (of that circle), Mercury at the north- 
east, Venus at the east, Moon at the south-east, Mars at the south 
and the Sun in the middle. Saturn (should be located) at the 
west, Rahu, the ascending node at the south-west and Ketu, 
the descending node at the north-west. Ila (lord Siva), Um&, 
Guha, Vi§nu, Brahma, Indra, Yama (god of death), Kalaka 
and Citragupta 1 are the presiding deities (of the places where 
the planets have been located). The fire, water, earth, Hari 
(lord Visnu), Indra, the presiding deity of the east, Prajela 
(the lord of men), Serpent (god) and Brahma are the subordi- 
nate deities respectively. Ganeia, Durg& (the consort of Siva), 
wind, sky and ASvinI gods (are also the gods). They should be 
worshipped with their respective basic vedic syllables. The 
twigs of arka 9 paldia 9 khadira , ap&m&rga , pippala y udumbara, §ami } 
dUrvd and ku§a should duly be offered in the fire mixed with honey, 
clarified butter and curd one hundred and eight times. 

1- An inmate of the world of Yama recording the vices and virtues of 
mankind. 



468 


Agni Purina 


8. After having filled one, eight and four pitchers, the final 
oblation (should be made). Then the vasordh&rd 1 2 should'be offer- 
ed and the fees paid. 

9-10. The sacrificer should be anointed with (the waters 
of) the four (pitchers) along with sacred syllables. (The follow- 
ing benediction should be made) — “May the celestials — Brahma, 
Vi$nu, MaheSvara, Vasudeva, Jagannatha, lord Sankar§ana 
Pradyumna and Aniruddha be for your victory.’ * 

11-13. May Indra, Fire-god, Yama, Nairrta, Varuna, 
Pavana (wind), Kubera (lord of wealth), Siva, Sesa (the lord 
of serpents) along with Brahma and the gods of the directions 
always protect you all. May the (divine) mothers, the chaste 
wives Kirti, Laksmi, Dhfti, Medha, Pusti, Sraddha, Kriya, 
Mati, Buddhi, Lajja, Vapus, Santi, Tusfi and Kanti who have 
gathered here anoint you. 

14. The planets Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, 
Venus, Saturn, Rahu and Ketu, who have been appeased, 
anoint you. 

15-18. May the celestials, demons, gandharvas , yak$as , rdk - 
fasas, serpents, sages, Manus, cows, the divine mothers, the wives 
of gods, trees, serpents, progeny of Diti, heavenly nymphs, 
attendant gods, weapons, scriptures, kings, vehicles, herbs, 
gems, the constituents of time, rivers, oceans, mountains, holy 
waters (places), clouds and the west-flowing rivers all these 
anoint you for the attainment of all desires. After having 
adorned, one should then give gold, cow, food, earth etc. 

19. O Rohinl ! The Tawny-coloured ! You are to be 
worshipped by all gods and hence you are made up of all holy 
spots and gods. Hence you give me tranquillity. 

20. O Conch ! You are the meritorious among all merits, 
auspicious among all auspiciousness. You are borne by lord 
Vi?nu always. Hence (you) give me tranquillity. 

21. O Righteousness ! You make the universe rejoice in 
the form of the bull. You are the location of eight forms. 9 
Hence you give me tranquillity. 

1. A profuse oblation of ghee offered in the fire through a long bamboo 
or plough. 

2. Relating to Siva, being the five elementt/sun, moofif and the sacrificer. 



167 , 22-41 


469 


22. O Golden embryo of the Fire god or Sun that is lying 
imbedded inside the golden egg ! You give me appeasement 
that yields limitless meritorious fruits. 

23. The pair of yellow cloth is the favourite of lord 
V&sudeva. Hence lord Visnu (would be pleased) by making 
a gift of the same. Hence give me tranquillity. 

24. You are lord Visnu in the form of Fish from which 
the nectar has come. You have the moon and the sun as the 
vehicle always. Hence you get me tranquillity. 

25. O Cow of the colour of (lord) Kesava (Visnu), on 
account of the fact that you are the entire earth that always 
removes the sin, you give me tranquillity. 

26. (O Iron) On account of (the fact that) all deeds 
as well as weapons such as the plough are always subject to 
your control, you get me tranquillity. 

27. On account of (the fact that) you are always the origin 
of fire and remain as a constituent of all sacrifices, you get me 
tranquillity. 

28. Because the fourteen worlds remain in the limbs of the 
cow, let me have good in this world as well as in the next. 

29. On account of the fact that the beds of Kesava and 
Siva are not empty let my bed also be not empty in every birth 
being given (now). 

30. Just as the celestials are established in all gems so 
also let the celestials get me tranquillity by my gift of gems. 

31. Just as the other gifts are not equal to one-sixteenth 
(of the merit) of making a gift of land, may I have peace by the 
gift of the land. 

32-41. (The performance of) sacrifice (to appease) 
the planets with ten thousand oblations with the payment of 
the fee (secures) victory in battle. At the time of marriage, 
festivities, sacrifices, rites for the installation and for the fulfilment 
of desires, it is said (that one should do) the two — the obla- 
tions a lakh times and crore times. In the (oblation) ten thou- 
sand times a pit of one cubit length and another pit having a 
girdle and hole (should be made ready) at (the exact spot for 
building) the house and pavilion. (There should be) four 
sacrificial priests. In the (oblation for a) lakh tunes there may 



470 


Agni Purdna 


be the self alone. These are ten times meritorious. (The pit may 
be a square of) four cubits or two cubits (long). Here Tarksya 
(the bird vehicle of lord Visnu) should be worshipped more. 
(He should be addressed as) “You are the vehicle of highly 
adorable god and your body is composed of the sound of sdman 
(melodies). You are always the remover of things. Hence you 
get me tranquillity. As before the sacrificial pit should be sancti- 
fied and the oblation lakh times performed. The vasordhari 1 2 
should be given then. (Then) bed, ornaments and other things 
should be offered (as gift). There may be ten or eight sacrificial 
priests in the performance of oblations lakh times. (By the 
performance of this) one would get sons, food, kingdom, con- 
quest, enjoyment and liberation. One who performs oblation 
a crore times after making different gifts, would kill his enemy 
as a result of it. The sacrificial pit (may be a square) of four or 
eight cubits and there may be twelve sacrificial priests. (There 
may be) twentyfive or sixteen (priests) and four (?) a on a cloth 
at the entrance. One who does oblation crore times gets the 
desired things and reaches the world of lord Visnu. The 
oblation (may be done) with the sacred syllables of planets, 
or the gayatri or those of Visnu, or those addressed to the fire 
god or those of Siva or the well-known vedic (hymns). One 
gets the benefit of (doing) aivamedha (sacrifice) by (making 
oblations with) sesamum, barley, ghee and grains. 

42-44. (In the oblations intended) to cause enmity or 
sorcery the sacrificial pit should be a triangular one. The twigs 
(should be offered) with the left hand together with bones 
of the eagle and fire by (those) who contemplate evil for their 
enemy and who have red dress and untied hair. “Let the person 
who hates have enemies. Hum phaf”. This is the (sacred syllable). 
The image (of the enemy) made of flour should be cut with 
a knife and the enemy should be killed. Or one ball of rice should 
be offered. One who does so would go to heaven. 


1. See p. 468 fn. 1. 

2. The text is cryptic. The exact significance is not known. 



168.1.11 


471 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYEIGHT 
Kinds of major sins 


Pu§kara said : 

1. The king should punish the men who do not perform 
atonement (for their own misdeeds). One should perform 
atonement (irrespective of the fact that the misdeed was done) 
with one’s wilful desire or not. 

2. One should never eat (food) from intoxicated, angry 
and sick men. (One should not eat food) touched by great sinners 
and that touched by a woman in her courses. 

3-9. (One should) also (not take) food (prepared) for a 
group of persons, food from the courtezan, an usurer, a singer, a 
cursed person, an eunuch, a (woman) having a paramour in the 
house, a washerman, a noxious person, a pancgyi'ist, a cheat, a false 
ascetic, a thief, one who has undergone a punishment, one who 
is born to an adulterine, one who is born to a widow, one who is 
controlled by a woman, one who sells scriptures, an actor, 
a weaver, and food from an ungrateful person. One should avoid 
food from the blacksmith, hunter, washerman of sarees, falsely 
renounced person, a harlot, an oilman, one who had ridden (on a 
horse etc.) and fallen and one’s enemies. So also (one should 
not eat food) from a brahmin, being not invited by that brah- 
min. So also a iudra should not eat food from a brahmin even if 
invited. If one happens to eat unknowingly from the other 
among these, one has to fast for three days. After having eateq 
knowingly one should observe the krcchra , L One who had eaten 
food from a Cancjala and svapaca and the semen, feces and urine, 
should observe the candrayana 1 2 

10-11. One should observe taptakfcchra after having eaten 
food within ten days of pollution, food intended for the dead or 
that is smelt by a cow or the remnant of that eaten by a iUdra 
or a dog and the food from a fallen person. (When the food has 
been taken) at the time of pollution one should observe kfcckra . 
Whoever eats food from a person having pollution also becomes 
impure. 

1. A simple expiation of fasting etc, 

2. Fast regulated according to the phases of the moon* 



472 


Agni Purtya 


12. An excellent brahmin who had drunk water from a 
well into which a five-nailed dead animal (had fallen) &r con- 
taining feces, should observe fast for three days. 

13-21. In all the cases the &udra> vaisya and bhumipa (the 
ruling class) (would have fasting) one fourth, half and three- 
fourth (of days prescribed for the brahmins). A brahmin who 
has partaken the urine and excreta of a bird, boar, mule, camel, 
jackal, monkey and crow should observe candr&yana. 1 2 3 4 One gets 
purified by (observing) taptakfcchra 2 after having eaten dry flesh, 
food (intended) for the dead, (flesh of) karaka (a species of 
bird) (and also after eating the flesh) of a carnivorous animal, 
boar, camel, jackal, monkey, crow, cow, man, horse (and) 
camel and after having eaten mushroom, the village cock as 
well as the flesh of an elephant. So also a brahmacari having 
eaten at the amaSraddha 3 and consumed honey or garlic or 
onion etc. get purified by (doing) prajdpaiya 4 etc. So also one 
should do candrayana 6 after having eaten flesh made ready (cook- 
ed) by himself. So also pelugavya 6 and peyusa 1 6 * which cause 
excess of phlegm and vjld-kxsarasamydva 8 , payasd 9 , cakes, fried 
eatables made of flour, flesh of animal not prepared for a sacri- 
fice, food intended ior the gods, oblations and all (kinds of) 
milks except (those) of cows, she-bulFaloes and goats are prohi- 
bited as well as their waters ten days old. The hare, porcupine, 
godha (a kind of an alligator), rhinoceros and tortoise are (those 
among) the (animals having) five nails (wiiose flesh) could be 
eaten. The remaining ones are prohibited. One may eat fish 
such as the p&thina, (a kind of sheat-fish), rohita and lion-faced 
fish. 

1. ' See note 2 on p. 471. 

2. Drinking water with milk and ghee once in three days for twelve 
days. 

3. An ancestral rite in which uncooked food is offered. 

4. Aland of fast for 12 days, eating food in the morning for the first 

three days, in the evening for the next three days, only if given as alms the next 
three days and a plenary fast the rest of the days. 

5. See note 2 on p. 471 above. 

6. The exact meaning is not known. 

; 7. The milk of the cow within seven days after calving. 

8. Food consisting of wheat flour, rice and sesamum not prepared for 
any religious purpose. 

9. Rice boiled with milk or sugar. 



168 . 22-40 


473 


22-23. (Having eaten) all (eatables) made of barley and 
wheat and (all) transformations of milk, v&gaf&dgavacakra (?) 
and others, that which is oily and (the food) kept overnight, a 
brahmin should do the agnihotra 1 2 , kindle the fire and as desired 
observe cdndrdyana 1 for a month. The posture of virdsana 3 is said 
to be conducive. 

24-25. The killing of a brahmin, drinking of wine, stealing 
and copulating with preceptor’s wife are said to be great sins. 
The association with them, pleasure in untruth, miserliness in 
a king, speaking ill of the preceptor are equivalent to the killing 
of a brahmin. 

26. Neglecting the Vedas, censuring the Vedas, bearing false 
witness, killing of a friend, eating forbidden food and clarified 
butter are the six equivalents to the drinking of wine. 

27. The stealing of the entrusted such as a man, horse, 
silver, land, gems like diamond are remembered to be equiva- 
lent to the stealing of gold. 

28. Cohabiting with consanguineous girls, (women) of low 
caste, wife etc. of the son of a friend are known to be equivalent 
to cohabiting with the wife of the preceptor. 

29-40. Killing of a cow, doing a sacrifice for an outcaste, 
adultery, selling oneself, forsaking the preceptor, mother, and 
father as well as one’s vedic study, the fire-worship and the son, 
marrying before the marriage of one’s elder brother, getting one’s 
daughter married to a person whose elder brother is unmarried, 
conducting a sacrifice for them, seducing a girl, practising usury, 
breaking of a vow, selling a tank, garden, wife and son, becom- 
ing an outcaste by the non-performance of the religious rites, 
forsaking the relatives, teaching the servant taking instruction 
from a servant, selling of things prohibited for sale, exercising 
control over all the mines, instituting a potent amulet, destroy- 
ing herbs, living by means of a woman, disregarding one’s work, 
felling of unwithered trees for fuel, taking many wives, associating 
with those who despise women, commencing some action for the 
benefit of one’s own self, eating of censured food, not invoking the 


1. A daily oblation to the fire. 

2. See note 2 on p. 471. 

S. Posture of squatting on the thighs, the lower leg being crossed over 
each other. 



Agni Purina 


474 

sacrificial fires, indulging in stealing, not discharging the debts, 
studying of false scriptures, bad conduct, (doing) deeds harmful 
(to others), stealing grains^ metal and cow, cohabiting woman 
fond of drinking, killing a woman, a Sudra 3 a vaiSya , or a ksatriya 
and atheism are all minor sins. Causing injury to a brahmin, 
the act of smelling something that should not be smelt or the 
wine, deceitfulness, and cohabiting with men are known to be 
the acts to make one an outcaste. The killing of a dog, mule, 
camel, lion, goat, ewe, fish, snake and mongoose are known to 
be sahkirnakarana (mixed acts). Getting money from the defa- 
med, doing trade, serving a Sudra , and speaking untruth are 
known to be apdtrikarana (doing unworthy acts). The killing of 
insects, worms and birds, taking food followed by drinking wine, 
stealing fruits, fuel and flowers and cowardice are also defiling 
(acts). 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYNINE 
Atonements for various offences 

Pufkara said : 

1-4. (I) shall describe the atonements for the sins described 

so far. A killer of a brahmin should live in a forest for twelve 
years in a hut. For the sake of one’s purity one should seek alms 
carrying the skull of the dead person on a staff. Or one should 
throw oneself in the kindled fire thrice with head downwards. 
Otherwise one should do the aSvamedha , svarjit or gosava. Or one 
should recite one of the Vedas and walk one hundred yojanas 1 . 
Otherwise one should give away all (his wealth) to a brahmin, 
learned in the Vedas. The impurity due to the great sins gets 
destroyed by these observances. 

5-10. One who is possessed of minor sins (such as) killer 
of the cow should drink (only water along with) barley. After 
having had a shave he should live in the cowshed covering 
himself with the hide of that (cow killed by him). He should 


1. A yojona is equal to eight or nine miles. 



169.11-18 


475 


eat a little without alkaline things and salt in the fourth part 
(of the day). He should bathe in cow’s urine for two months 
controlling his senses. He should follow the cows during the day 
and consume the dust rising (from their feet) standing with 
raised (face). After having taken and observing a vow, he 
should make a gift of eleven bulls and a cow. In the absence of 
these one should make a gift of all his possessions to those learned 
in the scriptures. Having caused obstruction to the movement 
(of a cow) one should do a fourth (of the above atonements) 
and two-fourth if (he had) kept (the animal) bound. It would 
be a fourth less (i.e., three-fourth) if yoked and in full if (a cow) 
has been killed. If some mishap has occurred (to the cow) 
in the forests, mountains, inaccessible (terrain) and (due to) 
sickness, one fourth (of the atonement) is laid, if it dies on acco- 
unt of the tying of the bell or ornament, half the above (atone- 
ment) should be prescribed. 

11. A quarter less (of the above expiation) should be ob- 
served if (the cow or ox) dies on account of taming (goading) 
or cliaining or confining or yoking to a cart or (while being tied) 
to the pillar, chain or rope. 

12-15. When the horn or the bone (of a cow) has been 
broken or the tail has been cut off, one has to drink barley (water) 
till the cow becomes healthy. One should repeat the gomati - 
vidyd 1 and the hymn on the cow and contemplate on the gomati 
(vidya). If a herd of cows has been killed accidently, one fourth 
(atonement) should be practised separately for every killing. 
There will not be any sin if any mishap occurs when some help 
is rendered (with good intention). Those subject to minor 
sins except those who have violated the vow of continence should 
observe this vow or the c&ndrqya$a. 

16-18. One who has broken the vow of continence should 
worship Nirj-ti in the night at the cross-road with the perform- 
ance of pdkayajna (a domestic sacrifice) with a black ass. After 
having kindled the fire as laid down, a wiseman should offer 
oblation to the Moon, Indra, Jupiter, Fire-god and others with 
twigs, vedic hymns and clarified butter. Otherwise one should 
wear the hide of an ass and roam about in the world. One should 

1. A vedic hymn A to be repeated while observing an expiation for having 
killed a cow* 



476 Agni Purina 

observe the vow for killing a brahmin after having killed an ass 
unknowingly. 

19. Having drunk wine, through ignorance, a brahmin 
should drink wine of the colour of fire, or cow’s urine of the 
colour of fire or water alone. 

20-21. A brahmin, who has stolen gold should approach 
the king and confess his act and say, “Let you punish me”. 
The king should take the club and kill with one stroke the person 
who had himself come. The expiation for the thief is by death. 
A brahmin (gets purified) by doing penance. 

22-24. Having violated one’s preceptor’s bed, one should 
cut off the penis and testicles himself, hold (them) in the folded 
palms and move towards the south-west until he does not fall 
down. Then he should observe candrayana for three months con- 
trolling his senses. After having done wilfully one of the acts 
making one an outcastc, one should practise the sdntapana 1 . 
The expiation (known as) the prajdpatya (is laid down for the 
same done) unwillingly. For acts causing mixture of castes, 
the expiation of candrayana (should be observed) for a month. 

25-29. Foi acts which defile one (drinking of) boiled barley 
(water) for three days would be (the expiation). A fourth part 
(of the expiation) for the killing of a brahmin is prescribed for 
killing of a warrior class, an eighth part (for killing) a trades- 
man and a sixteenth part (for killing) the fourth class. Having 
killed a cat, a mongoose, a blue jay, a frog, a dog, gadhd (a kind of 
allegator), an owl, and a crow one should practise the expiation 
as for killing the S&dra. For having killed an unsteady woman 
belonging to any one of the four castes and for having killed a 
woman unintentionally one should observe the expiation as 
for killing the fourth class. Doing breath-control is the expiation 
for killing all (beings) not having bones. One should practise 
the expiation sdntapana for having stolen things of little value from 
another’s house. One becomes pure after completing the vow. 

30. The five products got from a cow are the purification 


1, The expiation in which cow’s urine, cowdung, milk, curd, clarified 
butter or water with ku& is taken and fasting is observed for o^e night. 



169.31-41 


477 


for the stealing of eatables, food, vehicle, bed, seat, flowers, 
roots and fruits. 

31. Fasting for three nights would be (the expiation) for 
(having stolen)grass, log of wood, tree, rice in the husk, molas- 
ses, saree, hide and flesh. 

32. One should be eating a small quantity of food for twelve 
days (having stolen) gems, pearls, corals, copper and silver. 

33. (One who had stolen) the cotton or silk or woollen rope 
of cloven-hoofed or whole-hoofed (animal), a bird, perfume and 
herb (shall take) only milk for three days. 

34. One who had cohabited with a woman related by 
blood or with the woman, or daughter of the son of a friend as 
well as a woman belonging to the low caste should practise the 
expiation for that of violating the bed of his preceptor. 

35. One should practise candr&yana for having cohabited 
father’s sister’s daughter, (one’s) sister, mother’s sister’s dau- 
ghter or (the daughter) of mother’s brother or a friend. 

36. One should practise the kjcchra santapana for having 
(emitted semen) in an unnatural way or (having gone) to a 
menses woman or having emitted semen in the water. 

37. A brahmin who had intercourse with a woman in the 
bullock-cart or in the water or during the day should bathe 
together with his dress. 

38. A brahmin cohabiting a woman of the caxii&la or the 
low caste and having eaten (food therein) and having received 
a gift (from them) unknowingly gets defiled. But (done) know- 
ingly becomes in par (with them). 

39. The husband should keep the woman defiled by a brah- 
min confined in a room. That which a male should observe 
for having cohabited other’s wives, the same vow should be 
made to be practised by her. 

40. If she is defiled again being advised by a person of the 
same (character), only kfcckra c&ndrdyana is remembered to be 
the purification for her. 

41. That which a brahmin does in one night by resorting 
to a low-caste woman, gets rid of it by eating only that collected 



478 Agni Purdna 

as alms and by repeating (the sacred syllables) daily for three 
years. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY 

The description of expiations for association with major sinners 
Pufkara said : 

1. I shall describe the expiations (to be practised) 
by those who associate with major sinners. A man having asso- 
ciated with a degraded person for a year would himself be 
degraded. 

2-3. A person who officiates as a priest or teaches or has 
marital relationship or travels in the same vehicle or eats together 
or shares a seat and has thus association with a degraded person 
should do that vow (relating to that act) for the purification 
from such an association. The water of libation should be offer- 
ed (for that person) in the company o [sapindas 1 and relatives. 

4-9. On the day of degradation, a servant (of that person) 
should throw around a pot with water in the presence of the 
relatives, priest and preceptor at evening (time) as if he was 
dead. One should fast the whole day and observe pollution along 
with the relatives. (The relatives) should cease to talk with him 
and seize the share (of the paternal property) as the eldest. 
The share of the property as the eldest would be got by the youn- 
ger brother excelling him in moral qualities. After the expiation 
has been done (the relatives) should bathe in the sacred waters 
of a tank and fill a new pot with water and drink water along 
with the degraded person. The same procedure has to be follow- 
ed in the case of degraded women also. They should be supp- 
lied with dress, food and drinks and they should live near the 
houses (of their husbands). The hymn of Savitri 2 of those 
brahmins (who officiate as priests for the degraded) become 
degenerated. (A brahmin who) has officiated so should practise 


1 . Those eligible to have the same rice-ball offering. 

2. The gtyatri mantra is called so as it is addressed to the Sun god. 



470.10-19 


479 


three kfcchra 1 2 3 4 5 (observances) and as laid down should be invest- 
ed with the brahminhood. (Those brahmins) who do not 
practise the rites enjoined on them become outcastes and the 
same procedure is to be prescribed also for them. 

10. One gets free (from the sin) of accepting a gift from a 
vile person by repeating the sdvitri (mantra) for three thousand 
times and drinking milk at the cow-shed for a month. 

11. For having forsaken a person who had sought refuge 
and having violated the Veda , a brahmin gets rid of that sin by 
taking limited food for a month. 

12. One who has been bitten by a dog, jackal, mule or carni- 
vorous village animals, or a man, camel or horse or pig gets pure 
by doing prdndyama . 

13-19. In the (case of) breaking the vow of sndtaka 2 and 
neglecting) his duty (one should) fast. Having uttered the 
syllable of hum to a brahmin and (having made) familiar address 
to the elder, one should bathe and abstain from food the rest of 
the day and appease (the offended person) after prostration. 
One should practise krcchra and atikfcchra 3 respectively for having 
assaulted and assaulted fatally (a brahmin) . One should observe 
krcchrati-krcchra* for having caused blood to come out from a 
brahmin. If a cdndala and others happen to stand at the house 
(of a person) unknowingly, purification should be done from 
the time it was known explicitly, Cdnirdyana or paraka B are the 
purificatory (rites) for a brahmin. Prajdpatya is (laid down for 
the fourth class of men. The rest follow this. If the jaggery or 
flower (safflower) or salt or grains etc. (get polluted) they should 
be kept in the house and at the entrance and they should be put 
into the fire. It is laid down that (the polluted) earthen vessel 
should be discarded. 

1. Consists of taking urine or dung or milk or curd or butter of a cow 
or the kuia immersed water and fasting for a night. 

2. The observance marking the completion of one’s study. 

3. A kind of severe penance to be finished in 12 nights. 

4. Eating for nine days the quantity of water one can hold in the hand 
and fasting for three days. But compare the explanation given in the next 
chapter. 

5. Fasting for twelve days. 



480 


Agni Pvrdna 


20-29. Purification of the materials is laid down in the case 
of materials which are remnants. Those who have become pol- 
luted by drinking (water) from the same well and by touch get 
pure by fasting or by the five things got from a cow. A brahmin 
who eats as desired after having touched a canddla, should do the 
candrayana or the taptakrcchra . One becomes pure after six nights 
after having eaten or drunk from a vessel in a melee defiled by 
canddla and others of vile (caste). Those of the twice-born 
communities after having eaten the remnants (of food) eaten 
by the low-castes should do the vow of cdndrdyana and a $Udra 
(should do it) for three nights. A brahmin who had unknow- 
ingly drunk water from a well or pot (used by) a canddla should 
do the sdntapana 1 and a Sudra should fast for a day. A brahmin 
who drinks water after having been touched by a canddla (should 
fast) for three days and a iudra should fast for that day. A brah- 
min who has been touched by a dog, a id dr a or by the remnants 
(of food) becomes pure after fasting a night and by taking 
the five products obtained from a cow, and (if touched) by a 
tradesman or a warrior should bathe (that) night. A brahmin 
beginning a journey and discharging urine at a forest where 
there is no water holding cooked food on his lap without placing 
it anywhere should cleanse himself, sprinkle (water on the food) 
and show it to the sun and fire. 

30-32. I shall describe the mode of purification for travel- 
lers for having taken food both permitted and prohibited in a 
place habited by aliens and robbers. After having returned to 
one’s native place (one should do) in the natural order of the 
castes. At the end of the kfcchra a brahmin is again to be given 
the samskdra (purificatory rite A warrior (class) (gets purified) 
after three-fourths (of the above rite), a tradesman after half 
of it and the fourth class after doing a quarter and gets purified 
after making a gift. 

33. A woman in her courses touched by another woman in 
her courses belonging to the same caste no doubt gets purified 
by bathing that day itself. 

34. A woman in her courses having been touched by a 


1. Drinking milk, ghee or water heated once every three^iftyf . 



170 . 35-45 


481 


woman of the lower caste should not eat until she gets pure. 
She gets pure by the purificatory bath. 

35. A man having discharged urine passing through a road 
and drinking water forgetfully becomes pure after fasting a day 
and night and by taking the five products got from a cow. 

36. A brahmin having discharged urine and eaten for- 
getfully without having cleansed himself becomes pure after 
drinking barley (water) for three nights. 

37-38. I shall now describe the mode of purification 
for the brahmins who have renounced the life of a mendicant 
and the life of detachment. They have to do three krcchras 1 2 3 
or edndrayana . a Then they should be purified by purificatory rites 
such as the jatakarman 8 and others. 

39. One whose face comes into contact with the sandal or 
impure thing, the means of purification for him are the earth, 
cow-dung or the five things got from a cow. 

40. A brahmin who had shaved or sold or wears blue colour- 
ed cloth etc. for the purpose of austerity becomes pure by 
(doing) three krcchras . 

41. A woman in her courses having been touched by a low 
caste or a cantata becomes pure on the fourth day. She has to 
observe (a vow for) three nights. 

42. One who has touched a canddla or Svapaca or the dis- 
charge from a delivered woman or a dead body or a person who 
has touched it (dead body) becomes pure immediately after 
bathing. 

43-45. A brahmin gets purified by bathing with oil after 
touching the bone of a man. One who had a vomitting or 
purging becomes pure after (smearing) with street mud 
and water below the navel, bathing and taking ghee. One 
who had done the shaving (gets pure) by bathing, One 
who eats food at the time of an eclipse (gets purified) by doing 
the kfcchra . One who has eaten food with an outcaste (becomes 
pure) after taking (the five) things got from a cow. One who 
has been bitten by a dog, one who has been bitten by an insect 
and one who commits suicide (gets purified) by (doing ) kfcchra. 


1. A kind of simple expiation. 

2. See note 2 on p. 471. 

3. Rite performed immediately after the birth of a child. 



482 Agni Purdna 

repetition (of mantras) and (offering) oblations. All sinners get 
purified by repentance and by doing oblation etc. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYONE 
Description of certain subtle expiations 


Puskara said : 

1. I shall describe certain subtle expiations which are 
highly purificatory. One’s sins would get destroyed by the repe- 
tition of the purusasukta 1 for a month. 

2. By the repetition of the aghamarsand 2 thrice one gets free 
from all sins. The repetition of the vedic {mantras) such as the 
(hymns of) vdyu^yama and gayatri and the observance of the vow 
destroys all sins. 

3-7. In all the (expiations called) kfcchras (there would be) 
shaving, bathing, offering of oblations and worship of Hari 
(Visnu). After getting up, one should stand during the day and 
sit during the night (when practising the expiations). This is 
said to be the virdsana. One who does the k rcchra in that (posture) 
gets rid of sins. (Eating) eight morsels (of food) everyday is 
known as jati-candrayana. (Eating) four (morsels) in the morn- 
ing and in the evening is known to be SiSucdndrdyana. Eating two 
hundred and forty balls (of food) in any manner in a month is 
suraedndrayana . One should drink hot water for three days and 
hot milk for the (next) three days. (Then) drinking hot ghee 
for three days, one should be consuming (only) wind for three 
days. .This is said to be taptakfcchra . It is said to be iita {kfcchra) 
by the (use of) cold (things). 

8-10. Kfcchrdtikfcchra (is that of maintaining) with water 
for twentyone days. (Drinking) cow’s urine, cow dung, milk, 
curd, clarified butter and water with kuSa (for a day) and fast- 
ing one night is known to be the expiation sdntapana. The same 
if practised every day is known to be mdh&s&ntapana. If each 


1. P.V. X. 90. la. 

2. £V. X. 190. 



171.11 — 172.1-2 


483 


one of these is taken for three days, it is known to be atis&ntapana. 
The expiation known as pardka would be (the practice of) fasting 
for twelve days. 

11-14. Practising eating (food) once a day for three days 
and (eating food obtained) unsolicited in the night (is known to 
be) prajapatya . A quarter (of the kfcchra ) is the p&dakfcchra . 
(Maintaining) with fruits for a month (is known to be) phala 
(i krcchra ) and with bilva, is said to be irUkfcchra . (Similarly, one 
may maintain) with lotus seeds and myrabolans. (Maintaining) 
with flowers (is known to be) puspakr:chra. Palrakrcchra (would 
be) with leaves, toyakfcchra with water, and mulakjcckra with roots. 
(So also one may maintain) with curd, milk and butter-milk. 
It would be vayavyakfcchra if one eats food (every day) for a 
month that he can hold in the hand. The expiation (known as) 
dgneyakrcchra (is) by (the eating of) sesamum for twelve nights. 
It destroys one’s disease. 

15-16. (Eating) a handful of fried grain (every day) for 
fifteen days would be brahmakQrcca. One should fast on the four- 
teenth day and then eat the five things got from a cow on the 
full-moon day and twice-cooked food thereafter. A person who 
does so twice in a month gets free from all sins. 

1 7. One who desires to be prosperous and wealthy and one 
who wishes to attain heaven and to have ail sins destroyed should 
be intent on propitiating god. One who performs the expiations 
would get all things. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYTWO 
The hymn which destroys sins 


Pujkara said : 

1. When the minds of men indulge in (coveting) other’s 
wives or other’s property or in doing harm (to others) the 
expiation for that is the extollation (of the god). 

2. Obeisance to that all-pervasive (four times repeated) 
always. I salute the All-pervasive who resides in the mind, and 
that lord Hari (Vi$nu) who is the sense of my ego* 



484 


Agni Purdna 


3. (Obeisance to) that lord who remains in the mind and 
who is unmanifest, endless and unconquered. (I salute) lord 
Vi?nu (all-pervasive), the adorable by one and all, one with- 
out an origin, endless and lord of all. 

4-5. Let my sin get destroyed by my contemplation on 
that only lord Vi?nu, who remains in my mind, intellect and 
ego and that lord Visnu, who is well-established in me and 
who makes the immovable and movable beings as made of 
their acts. 

6. I (bow) to that Upendra 1 , (lord) Visnu and (lord) 
Hari that removes the distress of the worshipper, and who re- 
moves the sin seen in one’s dream or due to imagination. 

7. I salute that supreme lord Visnu who is the supporting 
hand for one who is sinking down in the supportless dark world. 

8. O Lord of all lords ! Lord of all ! Supreme soul ! 
One who has under him the thunderbolt ! O Lord of the sen- 
ses ! (repeated three times) (My) obeisance to you. 

9. O Man-lion-formed ! Endless one ! Cow-herdsman ! 
An Efficient cause of all beings ! One having handsome hair ! 
(My) obeisance to you ! You subdue the sin, the wicked (words ) 
spoken, wicked (deeds) done and (wicked) thoughts. 

10. O KeSava (one having handsome hair) ! You put 
down the wicked thoughts of mine under the influence of the 
mind and that very fierce and unworthy (act of mine). 

1 1 . The Sacred god ! Cowherdsman ! Devoted to the 
sublime truth ! The Lord of the universe ! The creator of the 
world ! O Decay less one ! Subdue (my) sin. 

12-13. Let my sins done in the forenoon, midday, after- 
noon and night with the body, mind or speech unknowingly or 
knowingly or in dream get destroyed by the repetition of the three 
names — O Hrsikesa (lord of the senses) ! Lotus-eyed ! Con- 
sort of Laksmi ! 

14. O Lord of the senses ! Lotus-eyed ! Consort of 
Lak?mi ! You destroy my sins done by my body or speech. 

O Consort of Lak$ml ! 

15-16. Whatever sin I have committed while eating, sleep- 
ing, standing, going and remaining awake by my body, mind 

1 . Vi?iiu in his manifestation as the dwarf was known to be the brother 
of Indra and was called as Upendra. 



172.17-173.1-4 


485 


or speech, whether little or big which brings forth a wretched 
birth or stay in hell, let all that be subdued by the pronunciation 
of the word Vasudeva 1 . 

17. That which is the Supreme Brahman, the Supreme 
Abode, the Holiest, the Supreme, when that Lord Vi$nu is 
praised let my sin get destroyed. 

18. Let that position of Visnu reaching which the learned 
never return and which is devoid of smell, touch and other 
(qualities), subdue all my sins. 

19-21. Whoever either reads or hears this hymn, which 
destroys the sins, would become free from sins done by the bodies, 
minds and speeches. One reaches the supreme place of lord 
Visnu (released) from all evil planets. Hence one should repeat 
this hymn that destroys the sin when a sin has been done. This 
hymn is an expiation for multitude of sins. This is the excellent 
one for a person practising a vow. Sin gets destroyed by expia- 
tions, repetition of hymns and vows. Then one has to do them 
for the sake of perfection and for enjoyment and emancipation. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYTHREE 
Different expiations for different sins 
The Fire-god said : 

1. I shall describe the expiation as told by Brahma that 
would alleviate the sin. That action which results in the separa- 
tion of the soul from the body (death) is known to be killing. 

2. One who kills a brahmin on account of anger, hate or 
by one’s own or other’s fault, would become a killer of a brahmin. 

3. If one is a killer among many who are engaged in the 
same act and who bear weapons, all of them are considered to 
be killers. 

4. If a brahmin dies on account of being censured or beaten 
or is hurt by means of wealth that person (who caused death) 
is said to be the killer of that person. 


1. An appellation of Lord Vi^u in his manifestation as lord Kwpa, 
son of Vasudeva. 



486 


Agni Purdna 


5. When some help is rendered such as (the supply of) 
medicine there is no sin if the recipient dies. There is no sin when 
the son or pupil or wife dies when chastised. 

6. One should examine carefully the place, time, age, 
ability and sin and lay down expiation when no expiation 
has been indicated. 

7. One should give up his life at once for the sake of a cow 
or a brahmin. One gets free from (the sin of) killing a brahmin 
by throwing himself into the fire. 

8. One who kills a brahmin should hold the skull on the 
banner and seek alms proclaiming the act (done by him) for 
twelve days, eating moderately. He would become pure. 

9. A man who had killed a brahmin becomes pure by doing 
good deeds for six years. Twofold (expiation) is laid down for 
a motivated action as that of an unmotivated one. 

10-12. The expiation would be for three years in the (case 
of a brahmin) who has attempted to kill. If a warrior kills a 
person (the expiation would be) twofold. A tradesman or the 
person of the last class (doing that crime has to observe) thrice 
that twofold (expiation). In the case of a brahmin (causing the 
death) of a warrior (the expiation) would be a fourth less (of 
that prescribed for the death of a brahmin), and half a quarter 
in the case of (causing the death of) a tradesman. In the death 
of a warrior caused by a warrior and (the death) of an old man, 
woman, child and sick it would be one fourth of that for killing 
a brahmin. In (the death of) a tradesman (it would be) one- 
eighth part (of that) and it would be known to be one-sixteenth 
in commencing (to kill) the last caste. 

13-20. One should practice the vow (prescribed) for kill- 
ing the last caste for having killed a woman not wicked. A killer 
of a cow should drink five things got from a cow and have 
(the senses) subdued for a month. (He) should lie down in a 
cowshed, follow a cow and he becomes purified by giving a cow 
as a gift. It will be a quarter less in the kfcckra or atikrcchra for 
the kings and others. A brahmin who has killed a very old or 
very emaciated or very young or sickly cow should practice half 
the vow as mentioned above. He should feed the brahmins 
according to his ability and should give away gold, sesamum 
etc. It should be declared as killing a cow if the cow had been 
struck with clenched fist or by the elbow or the Itorn had been 



173.21-28 


487 


broken or had been struck with the club or stick. In the event 
of the death of a cow while being subdued or chained or yoked 
to a cart etc. or (being tied) to a post, chain or rope, one should 
do three-fourth (expiation of the above). One should practise 
santapana (if the death is due) to a log of wood, prdjdpatya (if due) 
to a lump of earth, taptakfcchra (if due) to a stone and atikjcchra 
(if due) to a weapon. One who has killed a cat or an alligator 
or a mongoose or a frog or a dog or a bird should drink milk 
for three days and practise expiation (called) cdndrayana. (If 
the sin has been done) in secret, the expiation (should be done) 
in secrecy and (if done) explicitly, (expiation should be done) 
explicitly. 

21-25. One should do hundred prdndyama 1 for dispelling 
all sins. Beverages, grape juice, date juice, palm juice, sugar- 
cane juice, spirituous liquor got from the flower of madhUka , 
fankamadhvika (a kind of liquor), maireya (a kind of in- 
toxicating drink) and coconut juice are not (classified as) intoxi- 
cating drinks although (they are) intoxicating. Only those 
which are mainly made of flours are known to be surd (wine). 
Drinking (of wine) is prohibited for the three castes. After drink- 
ing so one should do penance and become pure (by drinking) 
water. Then he may eat small quantity of food for a year or 
oil-cake once in the night. For dispelling (the sin due to) drink- 
ing of wine one should wear woollen dress, have matted hair 
and hold a staff. Having eaten unknowingly the excreta or 
urine or something which has come into contact with wine, the 
three castes of twice-bprns require to be purified again by the 
performance of rites. One who has drunk water kept in the 
vessel for wine should observe a vow for seven days. 

26. One who has drunk water belonging to a canidla should 
practise a vow for six days. One should practise santapana for 
having drunk water from the well or vessel belonging to a cdnddla . 

27-28. A brahmin (becomes pure by eating) the five things 
got from a cow for three nights for having drunk the water be- 
longing to the last caste. (One who has eaten) fish, tjiorn, snail, 
conch-shell, shell and a small shell and has drunk fresh water 
becomes pure by (taking) five things got from a cow. One 


1 . Breathing regulated by the repetition of gdyatri mantra and the tjydhftis . 



488 Agni Pur&na 

gets pure after three nights after having drunk water from a well 
having a dead body. 

29. One should practise c&ndr&yana for having eaten food 
from a man belonging to the lowest caste. (If one had eaten 
food) at the house of a SUdra at the time of distress, he becomes 
pure by means of repentance. 

30-31. A brahmin eating from the vessel of a §Udra (gets 
purified) by (eating) the five things got from a cow and fasting. 
That which is cooked in an oven, cooked in oil, oil, curd and 
flour as well as jaggery, milk and juices from a iudra are not 
prohibited (items). One who eats without bathing gets pure 
by fasting and repeating (sacred syllables) at the end of the day. 

32-34. One who had eaten food after discharging urine 
without getting purified becomes pure after three nights. One 
who had eaten food into which hair or worm had fallen, know- 
ingly touched by the foot, seen by one who causes abortion, or 
touched by a woman in her courses, licked by a crow and other 
(birds), touched by a dog, and smelt by cow etc. should fast for 
three days. One who eats the semen, excreta or urine should 
practise the prajapatya. 

35-36. It is opined that c&ndrayana (should be done) at (the 
time of) navaSraddha 1 , par&ka at the mdsika (monthly rites for the 
dead). Atikrcchra would be (in the ceremony) after three fort- 
nights and krcchra at the six-monthly (rite). P&dakfcchra would 
be (done) at the annual (ceremony) and one day (rite) at the 
second annual (ceremony). The annual ceremony will be on the 
preceding day and the second annual ceremony on the next 
day. 

37. The expiation for having eaten the prohibited food is 
fasting. One should do the fihika expiation ( Stiuc&ndrayana ) for 
having eaten bhustjna (a kind of fragrant grass) and garlic. 

38. One who has eaten prohibited food and remnant of 
food eaten by women and a iUdra and prohibited flesh 
should drink milk for seven nights. 

39. If a brakmac&rl (student) or an ascetic or one who has 
undertaken a vow (drinks) wine and eats flesh while he is impure 
due to the death (of a person) or birth (of a child), he should 
do the expiation (known as) pr&j&patya. 

1. The first series of ceremonies collectively offered on the 1st, 3rd, 5 th, 
7th, 9th and 11th days after the death of a person. * 



1 73.40-54 


489 


40-41. Taking away another’s (belongings) by illegitimate 
means is said to be stealing. One who has stolen gold gets puri- 
fied if the king beats him to death with a club. Otherwise he 
should lie down on the floor, bear matted hair, eat leaf, root 
and fruit and eat well only once a day. He gets purified after 
twelve years. 

42. A person who had stolen gold or drunk wine or killed 
a brahmin or cohabited the wife of the preceptor or committed 
theft or drunk wine should practise kjcchra for a year. 

43. (One who steals) gems, pearls and corals, copper, 
silver, iron, bronze and stones should cat little quantity of food 
for twelve days. 

44. The expiation for abduction of men or women or taking 
possession of lands or houses or wells or tanks is said to be c&ndrd - 
yarn. 

45. The five things got from a cow are the purification for 
the stealing of eatables, food, vehicle, bed, seat, flowers, roots 
and fruits. 

46. One should not take food for three nights (for having 
stolen) the grass, wood, tree, dry food, jaggery, dress, hide and 
flesh. 

47-54. One who cohabits his mother, sister, the daughter 
of his preceptor, the wife of the preceptor and his own daughter 
should be deemed to have violated his teacher’s bed. He should 
be declared as having violated his teacher’s bed and made to 
embrace a heated and glowing iron image (of a woman) and he 
becomes purified by death. Otherwise a person who has violat- 
ed the bed of his teacher should practise c&ndrayana for three 
months. One should follow the same procedure for having coha- 
bited even fallen women. One should perform that vow for such 
(women) which a person would perform for others’ wives. It is 
laid down that one should end his life for having cohabited 
girls, cani&la women, daughters and wives of one’s sapinia. 
(The sin) which a brahmin commits in a night by coha- 
biting a women of the lowest caste is got removed by him in 
three years by eating (the food) got after seeking alms and daily 
repetition (of sacred syllables). One has to practise cdndrdya$a 
for having cohabited the wife of the paternal uncle, wife of one’s 



490 


Agni Pur&na 


brother, woman of the lowest caste, a woman of the pukkasa 1 
caste, one’s daughter-in-law, sister, friend, sisters of the # mother 
and father, a woman who has been entrusted to one’s care, a 
woman who has sought refuge, wife of (maternal uncle, one’s 
sister, a woman belonging to the same clan, a woman who desires 
another person, the wife of one’s pupil and the wife of one’s 
teacher. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYFOUR 
Expiations for discontinuing the worship of gods 
Fire- god said : 

1 -3. (I shall describe) the expiation for omission in the wor- 
ship of gods and orders. One should repeat one hundred 
and eight times and worship twice for omission in worship. 
After having made oblations with the five upanisadic sacred 
syllables brahmins should be fed. One should repeat hundred 
times if (the idol of) the deity has been touched by a woman 
who has delivered a child, a woman of the lowest caste and a 
woman in her courses. (One should do) worship with the five 
upanisadic (sacred syllables) and two times bathing. When 
there is omission in the oblations brahmins should be fed. (Then 
one should do) oblation, bathing and worship. 

4-5. When the materials for the oblation have been 
eaten by rats, etc., or abound with worms, that part alone 
should be rejected, sprinkled (with water) and the deities 
worshipped. When it is broken or damaged to the extent of a 
sprout it should be rejected. When it has been touched by an 
untouchable it should be transferred to another vessel. 

6. If the sacred syllable or the materials get altered at the 
time of worship or in destroying the impediments due to the 
gods and mortals one should mutter the basic (syllable) and 
repeat again. 

7. (One should) repeat one hundred times if the pot is lost. 
If (the image of) the deity has fallen from the hand and got 

1. A kind of mixed caate. 



174 . 8-19 


491 


broken or lost there will be welfare only after fasting and (doing) 
oblations hundred times. 

8. For a man who repents after doing a sin, the best expia- 
tion is to remember lord Hari. 

9. The practice of cdndrdyana or pardka or prdjdpatya des- 
troys the sin. The repetition of the sacred syllables of the Sun, 
I$a (lord Siva), Sakti (consort of lord Siva), SrISa (lordVi§nu) 
and others would destroy the sin. 

10-11. The repetition of gdyatri , pranava ( orh ), hymns 
and sacred syllables destroy sins. The sacred syllables of the Sun, 
l£a, Sakti and Srlsa beginning with the (letters) ‘ ka ’ etc. and 
their basic syllables and ending with the respective letters are 
separately more than a crore. (The sacred syllables) such as 
orh , hrim etc. and ending with (the name) in the fourth case and 
(the word) ‘salutation’ are capable of yielding all desires. 

12. The sacred syllables of (lord) Nrsimha (man-lion form 
of lord Visnu) consisting of twelve and eight letters etc. destroy 
sin. The reading and hearing etc. of A gneyapurana (would 
also be expiation to remove all sins). 

13-16. Lord Visnu is of two forms of Vtdya 1 . He is praised 
in the form of fire. The supreme lord is praised in all scrip- 
tures as the face of the celestials. He is worshipped as the con- 
ferer of enjoyment and emancipation in taking active part in 
worldly life as well as in inactivity. The oblations, contempla- 
tion, worship, repetition (of sacred syllables), hymns and obei- 
sance made to lord Visnu of the form of Fire (god) would 
destroy sins relating to one’s body. Making a gift of ten gold 
(things), twelve (kinds) of grains, sixteen great gifts such as 
making a gift of something equal to one’s own weight and 
other great gifts such as giving food remove all sins. 

17. Practising vows on the phases of the moon, weeks, 
asterisms, movement (of planets from one constellation to ano- 
ther), good periods of the day and period of Manu for the Sun, 
I$a, Sakti and others would destroy sins. 

18-19. The sacred places such as Ganges, Gaya, Pra- 
yaga, Ka£I, Ayodhya, Avantika, Kuruksetra, Pu?kara, Nai- 
mi?a, Puru§ottama (Puri), Salagrama, Prabhasa and others 

1 . Vidyd, knowledge, is of two kinds : apard and part, standing respectively 
for the vidas etc. and lor the knowledge about supreme Brahman. 



492 Agni Purdna 

also destroy sins. The contemplation that T am the brah- 
man, the supreme effulgence* would destroy sins. 

20-24. The Brakmapurdna and the Agneyapurdna, '(lords) 
Brahma, Visnu, Mahesvara, the manifestations (of the god), 
all kinds of worship, the installation of the images (of deities) 
etc. (also remove one’s sins). The science of astrology. Pur anas , 
codes of law, penance, vow, the science of politics, sarga 1 etc., 
the medical lore, the science of archery, phonetics, metrics, 
grammar, etymology, lexicon, manual of rituals, logic, mlmamsd 
(the science investigating the vedic texts) and all other things 
are the lord Hari (himself). The sins of others get destroyed by 
seeing one who has got the knowledge about the single lord 
without the second from which (all are produced) and in which 
(all repose) and who is everything. He is verily the lord Hari. 
Lord Hari remains in the form of eighteen vidyds 2 . He is 
subtle and gross. He is the most supreme. He is the effulgence 
and the sentient, immutable, brahman, supreme, omni-present 
and blemishless. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYFIVE 

Rules and regulations relating to the vows 
Fire-god said : 

1. Listen O Vasi§tha ! I shall describe the vows for 
men and women (to be observed ) in order on the phases of the 
moon, weeks, asterisms, particular day (of a week), month, 
season, year and the entry of the Sun (from one constellation into 
another). 

2. The vrata (vow) is a restraint as told in the scriptures. 
It is known to be a penance. The special observances of dama 
(subduing) etc. are for the vow. 

1 . The primary and secondary creation, genealogy of gods and sages, 
periods of Manus and accounts of royal genealogy. 

2. The four Vedas, the six accessory texts, mimdrksd, t\ydja> dhanna - 
lAstra, purdoa, Ayurveda, dhanwveda, gdndharvaveda and arthat&stra. 



175.3-17 


493 


3. A vow is designated as a penance because it causes morti- 
fication of the body for the doer. It is said to be a restraint as it 
controls the collection of senses. 

4-9. O brahmin ! Those brahmins who do not worship 
fire get prosperity by vows, fasting, restraints and many kinds of 
gifts. The gods etc. who confer enjoyment and emancipation 
become pleased. One who has turned back from sins and lives 
with qualities it is known as upavdsa (fasting). It is devoid of all 
enjoyments. One who is fasting should reject bcllmetal, flesh, 
mas Ur a (a kind of pulse), chick-pea, koradusaka (a species of 
grain), vegetable, wine, food from others, (association with) 
a woman, flowers, ornaments and dress, incense, perfume and 
unguent. (People) do not commend the cleaning of teeth and 
(use of) collyrium. The five things got from a cow should be 
used in the place of the toothstick in the morning and the vow 
commenced. Fasting gets vitiated by frequent drinking of water, 
the chewing of betels, dreaming and having intercourse during 
the day. 

10-17. Forbearance, truth, compassion, charity, cleanli- 
ness, control of the senses, worship of gods, making oblation to 
fire, happiness and not stealing are remembered to be the ten 
general virtues (to be practised) in all vows. Befitting one’s 
capacity one should repeat the sacred hymns and offer oblations 
(to fire). One should bathe daily, eat moderately and worship 
preceptors, gods and brahmins. One should avoid taking 
alkaline substances, honey, salt, wine and meat. Among the 
grains (all the grains) except sesamum and mudga (a kind of 
kidney-bean) are commendable. Wheat, kodrava (a species of 
grain), cinaka (a kind of paddy), devadh&nya , leguminous grain, 
sugar, Sitadh&nya (barley or white paddy ?), roots from the mar- 
ket are deemed to be alkaline things. Rice, fajfika (a kind of 
rice), mudga (a kind of kidney bean), sesamum, barley, fy&m&ka 
(a kind of corn), rice grown without cultivation and wheat etc. 
are conducive to vows. One should avoid taking pumpkin, 
bottle-gourd, brinjal, udlariki (?) and pUtikd (a kind of herb). 
Sweet porridge, the flour of barley, paja-herb, curd, ghee, milk, 
fy&m&ka (a kind of corn), rice, rice growing without cultivation, 
mfilatantfula are conducive as havifya (fit to be offered as oblation) 
at the time of vows (in general) and nakta (vrata) (eating food 
only in the night) in the rites of offering made to fire. Except 



494 Agni Purdna 

wine and meat, the other things are said to be conferring good 
in a vow. # 

18. A brahmin who observes the prdjdpatya should eat in 
the morning for three days, in the evening for three days, without 
seeking alms for three days, and should not eat the next three 
days. 

19. A brahmin who is practising the atikrcckra should eat 
one morsel a day for three days three times as before and fast for 
three days at the end. 

20. The expiation santapana is known to be (that of taking) 
cow’s urine, cowdung, milk, curd, clarified butter and water 
with the kuSa and fasting for a night. 

21. Maintaining with the (six) materials used in the santa - 
pana , each one for a day for six days together with fasting in seven 
days is known to be mahasdntapana, which removes the sin. 

22. Pardka is fasting for twelve days and it destroys all 
sins. If it is three-fold (of above) it is said to be mahapardka . 

23-30. Commencing with fifteen morsels (of food) on full- 
moon day, reducing one morsel a day and no food on new-moon 
day and then increasing a morsel a day is (known to be) candrd - 
yarn. Or one pala (a measure of weight) of urine of a tawny cow, 
cowdung of half the volume of a thumb, seven palas of milk, two 
palas of curd, ghee one pala , one pala of water (in which kuSa 
has been dipped) should be collected. Among these, urine of 
cow should be gathered with the syllable gdyatri 1 , cowdung with 
gandhadvara 2 3 4 5 , milk with apyayasva 8 , curd with dadhikravna 1 clari- 
fied butter with tejo asi 6 7 , and water in which kufa has been dipped 
with devasya*. It is brahmakurca by doing as above. Then one 
should repeat the hymn dpohiffhd 1 . They all should be mixed 
with the (repetition of the) hymn aghamar$ancP or the pranava 
(syllable om). After drinking (the mixture) one gets free from all 
sins and reaches the world of Visnu after fasting. A person who 


1 . The mantra addressed to the deity in the orb of the Sun. 

2. RVKh. 5.87.9a. 

3. RV. 1.91.16a. 

4. RV. 4.39. 6a. 

5. TS. 1.1.10.3. 

6. TS. 1.3.1. 1. 

7. RV. 10.9.1a. 

8. RV. 10.190. 



175.31-41 


495 


fasts, eats only in the evening, an ascetic, and one who eats only 
in the sixth part of the day, avoids (eating) meat, performs the 
aivamedha (sacrifice) and speaks truth would reach heaven. 
The maintenance of sacred fire, the installation (of images 
of deities), (the performance of) sacrifices, (making) gifts and 
(practice of) vows, observance of religious vow, the rite of letting 
out a bull, tonsure, (the investiture with) the girdle and the 
auspicious bathing should be avoided in the malamasa (a solar 
month in which two new moons occur) . 

31 . The lunar (month) would be from the new moon to the 
new moon. The sdvana (month) (would be of) thirty days. 
The solar month (would be reckoned) from the movement (of 
the sun from one constellation to another). An astral (month) 
is from (one) revolution of an asterism. 

32. Solar month (should be taken) for the marriage etc., 
and sdvana for sacrifices etc. Lunar month is recommended for 
the annual ceremony and ancestral rites. 

33. The fifth one would be that which concludes with the- 
(month of) d$a4ha (July-August). One may perform the cere- 
mony (for the ancestors) at that time whether the Sun moves 
into the constellation Virgo or not. 

34. Whenever a lunar day occurs twice in a month in a year, 
there the second one is known to be the excellent one and the 
first one would be bad. 

35. One should fast in an asterism when the Sun sets in that. 
The lunar days are meritorious during the day. They are auspi- 
cious in the night in the rite observed in the night. 

36-37. The combination of the lunar days — second and 
third, fourth and fifth, sixth and seventh, eighth and ninth, 
eleventh and twelfth, fourteenth and full moon, the first and the 
new moon is of great consequence. This is individually very 
bad and destroys the meritorious act done previously. 

38. It has been stated that (there would be) immediate 
purity for the kings, ministers and ascetics in (the case of) cala- 
mity at the time of marriage etc. as also in the forest path or 
some danger or in the assembly. 

39-41 . A king should not obstruct the vow of those who had 
undertaken a prolonged penance or of a woman. If a pregnant 
woman or a woman who has delivered a child or a girl who is in 
her monthly course becomes impure after beginning a long 



496 


Agni Pur&na 


vow she may arrange always to do the same by someone else. 
If the vow is broken on account of anger or mistake or # greed, 
one should not eat for three days. Otherwise, one should shave 
his head. If a person who practises a vow is unable to continue, 
his wife or son may be made to continue it. 

42. A worship that has been begun should not be disconti- 
nued when (a pollution is caused) by the birth (of a child) or 
by the death (of some relative). A person observing a vow fall- 
ing into a swoon should be brought back to his senses by the 
preceptor by (giving him) milk and other drinks. 

43. Water, roots, fruits, milk, clarified butter, the desire 
of a brahmin, the words of the preceptor and herb are the eight 
(things) which do not vitiate a vow. 

44-58. (One should resolve as follows) : “O Lord of 
vows ! I am doing this vow for the furtherance of fame, 
progeny, learning, prosperity, and health and for purity, 
enjoyment and emancipation. I have taken this excellent 
vow in your presence. O Lord of the Universe ! Let it come to 
fruition without impediment by your grace. After taking this 
excellent vow if I happen to die when it is not completed, let 
all that be complete when you, the lord of beings, are pleased. 

I invoke the embodied image of the vow, the prosperity of the 
world for all accomplishments. My obeisance to you. O 
Lord Kesava (one having beautiful hair) ! Be manifest. 

I bathe you with the five nectars, the five things got from 
a cow and good water mentally arranged with devotion. 
You become the remover of my sin. O Lord of libation ! 
(Here is) the auspicious libation mixed with fragrance, flower 
and water. Accept waters for washing (the feet), for sipping. 
Make me always fit to offer libation. O Lord of dress ! 
Accept the meritorious dress and O Good lord of vows ! 
Make me always covered by good dress, ornaments etc. O 
Embodiment of fragrance ! Accept the spotless fragrant perfume. 
You make me have good fragrance and (make me) free from 
smell of sin. Accept the flower and make me always abundant 
with flowers. The spotless fragrance of the flower is for the 
furtherance of longevity and health. Accept the incense (stick) 
made of ten (fragrant) ingredients, the guggulu and ghee. 
O good lord of incense ! You make me fragrant with per- 
fumes. O Embodied form of the lamp 1 You accept the lamp 



175.59-176.1-2 497 

having upward flames and which makes everything shine. 
(You) make (me) endowed with lustre and elevated movement 
always. O Good Lord of food ! Accept the offerings such as 
food etc. (You) make (me) abundant with food and as a giver of 
food and all (things). O lord ! whatever my omission in the 
sacred syllable, in the act and devotion, and the worship offered 
to you may all that be complete for me. O lord of vows ! 
Give me virtue. Give me wealth, prosperity, continuous flow 
of qualities and fame. Give me learning. Give me longevity, 
heaven and emancipation. O Lord of vows ! Accepting this 
worship you may go now only to come again, to confer boons, 
O Lord ! 

59-62. In all the vows the embodied golden images of vows 
should be worshipped by the person practising a vow after bath- 
ing (according) to his means. He should sleep on the floor. 
(He should do) repetition (of sacred syllables ) , (offer) oblation 
and (make) gifts at the end of a vow in general. Twentyfour 
or twelve or five or three or one brahmin should be worshipped. 
The preceptors should be fed. The fee (such as) cows, gold etc., 
sandals, shoe, water vessel, food vessel, earth, umbrella, seat, 
bed, pair of dress and pots should be paid according to (one’s) 
means to every one. The rules and regulations have thus been 
described. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYSIX 
Vows observed on the first lunar day 

Fire-god said : 

1 . I shall describe the vows for the first lunar day which 
would confer on you everything. The first lunar day of kdrttika 
(November-December), OSvayuji (October-November) and 
caitra (April-May) are the days of (lord) Brahma. 

2. After having had no food on the fifteenth (lunar) day, 
one should worship (lord) Aja (Brahma, the unborn) on the 
first lunar day (with the words) Orh tatsat obeisance to (lord) 
Brahm& or with gdyatrl for a year. 



498 


Agni Pur&na 


3. A golden (image of lord) Brahm& (carrying) a rosary 
and ladle in the right (hand) and a kaman$alu (a wooden or 
earthen water-pot) and a small ladle in the left (hand) and 
(having) a long beard and matted hair should be worshipped. 

4. According to one’s means one should offer milk, (to 
lord Brahma stating) that let (lord) Brahma be pleased. A 
brahmin would become stainless, enjoyer of pleasures in heaven 
as well as on earth and wealthy. 

5-6. I shall describe an excellent vow (by practising which) 
an unfortunate one would become fortunate. After having 
fasted and offering oblations on the night of the first lunar day 
of mdrgalirsa (December-January), one would get all (things) 
by worshipping fire (stating) ‘Obeisance to fire’. Eating food 
once on the first lunar day and giving a tawny (cow) at the 
conclusion one reaches the place of lord fire. This is known to 
be iikhivrata (vow dedicated to fire). 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYSEVEN 
Vows observed on the second lunar day 


Fire-god said : 

1-8. I shall describe vows (performed) on the second 
lunar day which would confer enjoyment, emancipation etc. 
Eating flower one should worship Alvins the celestials. One 
who practises vow for a year would get good fortune and 
reach heaven. One should worship the god of Death on the 
second day of the bright fortnight in (the month of) kdrttika 
(November-December). A practiser of the vow fasting for a 
year would reach heaven and (would) not (go to) hell. I shall 
describe the vow (called) aSunyaSayana (the bed that has not 
become empty) which would confer (the fruit of) not becoming 
a widow. This should be practised on the second lunar day in 
the dark fortnight in (the month of) Sr&vaga (August-Septcm- 
ber). “O Bearer of irivatsa (a mark on the chest of lord 
Vi?nu) 1 Consort of Sri ! (Lak$mi) ! Abode of Sri (Lak$mi) ! 
Consort of Sri ! Immutable 1 May not my life gf a householder 



177.9-20 


499 


get destroyed. Let it be the conferer of virtue, materials and 
desire. Let not the (sacred) fires be destroyed. Let not the deities 
be destroyed. Let not my ancestors be destroyed on account 
of my married life being shattered. Just as you the lord never 
get separated from (Goddess) Lak§mi, so also O lord ! let 
not my association with my wife get separated. O Conferer 
of boons, O Lord ! Just as your bed does not become devoid 
of (Goddess) LaksmI, O Slayer of (demon) Madhu ! let my bed 
also be not empty. One should worship (Goddess) LaksmI and 
(Lord) Visnu for a year and bed and fruits should be given away 
(as gift). 

9-12. Libation should be offered to Soma (moon) every 
month with the (recitation of) sacred syllables. One who lights 
up the courtyard of the sky ! One who is born from the churning 
of the milky ocean ! Enjoyer of the starry quarters of heaven ! 
Younger brother of LaksmI ! Obeisance to you. Qrri him obei- 
sance to the Sustainer of Sri ! One should worship lord Hari 
of the form of the Moon. Dham, <jlham , bham , hath obeisance to 
Sri ! to the great soul of ten forms ! Oblation (should be made) 
in the night with ghee. A bed may be given to a brahmin. A 
pot with water and an image of the deity together with a lamp, 
food vessel, umbrella, shoe, seat and a vessel (may be given) 
then. 

13-14. One who docs so in the company of his wife would 
get enjoyment and emancipation. I shall describe the kantivrata 
(the vow that makes one shining). It should be done in the white 
(fortnight) of (the month of) kdrttika (November-Dccember). 
Taking food only in the night on the second lunar day, one should 
worship Bala(rama) (brother of Visnu in his manifestation as 
Krsna) and Kcsava for a yeai. One gets shining (body), long 
life and health etc. 

15-20. Then I shall describe the Visnuvrata which gets the 
mentally desired (fruits), after doing it for four days in the second 
lunar day in the white (fortnight) of (the month of) pau$a 
(January — February) etc. One should bathe on the first (day) 
with white mustard, then with black sesamum the second 
day) and with vacd (aconis calamus) on the third day and with 
all herbs on the fourth (day). Murdm&rfisi , Vacd 9 kusfha 9 u$}ha 
foileya (bitumen), the two (kinds of) rajani, toft, campaka and 
musta are remembered to be the collection of herbs. One should 



500 


Agni Purdna 


worship with (the repetition of) the names Kfsna, Acyuta 
(unslipping), Ananta (endless), HrfikeSa (the lord of th€ senses) 
with flowers duly at the foot, navel, eye and head. Libation 
(should be made) to Moon with the (repetition of the) names 
Safi, candra , SaSahka and indu. The person (who does the vow 
should eat in the night before the moon sets. (By the practice of) 
this purifying (vow ) for a year and a half, the performer would 
get all things. This vow was practised by the kings and 
women in the past. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYEIGHT 
Vows observed on the third lunar day 

Fire-god said : 

1. I shall describe the vows (to be practised) on the 
third lunar day which would confer enjoyment and emancipa- 
tion. Listen to me. (I shall describe) the mulagaurivrata for the 
(goddess) Lalita (a form of consort of Siva) (to be done) on 
the third lunar day. 

2-23. Goddess Gauri was married by Hara (Siva) on the 
third day of the bright (fortnight) in (the month of) caitra 
(April-May). (Then on that day) one should bathe with sesa- 
mum and worship Sambhu (Siva) in the company of Gauri 
with golden fruits etc. “Obeisance to Patala” (saying so one 
should worship) the feet of the goddess and Siva. One should 
worship ankles for Jaya after saying “to Siva”. (One should 
worship) the two shanks (by saying obeisance) to the destroyer 
of the three cities, to Rudra, to Bhavani, the two knees (by 
saying obeisance) to Siva, to Rudra, to Isvara (the lord) and to 
Vijaya (the victorious), the hip (by saying obeisance) to I$a 
for the goddess and to Sankara for Sankara. The two bellys 
(should be worshipped by saying obeisance) to Kofavya and 
the Sulin (lord Siva) (by saying obeisance) to the one having 
trident in the hand. The stomach should be worshipped (by 
saying) obeisance to you, Mahgala (the auspicious). Rudra 
(should be worshipped by saying) obeisance to the soul of all 



178 . 2-23 


501 


beings, the two breasts (by saying obeisance) to l£ani. Similarly 
(lord) Siva should be worshipped (by saying) (obeisance) to 
Hladinl. Lord Siva (should be worshipped by the words obei- 
sance) to the great lord and the two hands (by saying obeisance) 
to Ananta. (Lord) Hara (should be worshipped with the words 
obeisance) to the three-eyed one and the arm (with the words 
obeisance) to the consort of the destructive fire at the end. The 
ornaments should be worshipped (by saying obeisance) to 
Saubhagya (the fortunate) and the great lord. The lips (should 
be worshipped by saying obeisance) to the (goddess) dwelling 
in the honey of a§oka (flowers) and to the lord. The face (should 
be worshipped) by saying obeisance to the consort of the four- 
faced one and to Hara and the immovable one. Obeisance to 
lord Hara, the lord of the man-woman form and the nose (should 
be worshipped) (by saying obeisance) to measured limbs. The 
lord of the universe (should be worshipped by saying) obeisance 
to the fierce one and then the two eyes (saying obeisance) to 
Lalita. The destroyer of the cities (should be worshipped saying 
obeisance) to Sarva (all) and the palate (with the words obei- 
sance) to VasantI (the one belonging to the spring), Obeisance 
to the consort of Srikantha (one having the auspicious mark on 
the throat) and the hair (saying obeisance) to Sitikanfha (hav- 
ing black mark on the throat). (Obeisance) to fierce one 
and (the goddess) of good form and (worship) the head (by 
saying) obeisance to the soul of all beings. The (following) 
flowers should be used in order in the respective months — 
jasmine, aioka , lotus, jasmine, tagara 9 mdlati , kadamba , karavira , 
bdna , mldna , kunkuma and sindhuvdra After having worshipped 
(goddess) Uma and (lord) MaheSvara, the (following) 
eight auspicious things should be placed in front : ghee, 
nifpdua , kusumbha , kfirajivaka , tarurdja , ikfu, lavana and kustumburu. 
One should take ifdgodaka in (the month of) Caitra (April- 
May) and sleep in front of the god and goddess. One 
should bathe in the morning, worship (the god and goddess) 
and worship the brahmin couple. The above (mentioned) 
eight (things) should be given to the brahmin. (He should then 
say) “Let (the goddess) lalitd (consort of Siva) be pleased (by 
this gift of) mine. Sfftgodaka , cow-dung, manddra , bilva leaf, 
water with ku£a, curd and milk are the things and ghee mixed 
with coagulated milk (are the things offered) in (the month of) 



502 


Agni Purdna 


karttika (November-December). Cow’s urine, clarified butter, 
black sesamum and the five things got from a cow (are the) 
food to be eaten duly. “(Goddesses) Lalita, Vijaya, Bhadra, 
Bhavani, Kumuda, Siva, Vasudevi, Gauri, Marigala, Kamala 
and Sat! be pleased.” Thus one should say at the time of mak- 
ing a gift in (the months of ) Caitra (April-May) etc. He should 
then offei one pala (a measure of weight) of the purifying clari- 
fied butter and a bed should be given at the end of the vow, A 
golden (image of) Umamahegvara, (Siva and his consort), a 
bull and a cow (should also be given). The performer would 
get enjoyment and emancipation by (offering) clothes etc. and 
worshipping the teacher couple. (One would get) fortune, 
health, beauty and longevity from the (performance of the) 
vow saubhagyatayana. One should perform the vow in the (month 
of) nabhas ( Sravana — -July-August) or vaiiakha (June-July ) or 
m&rgaEra (December-January) on the third lunar day in the 
bright fortnight. One should worship (saying) “Obeisance to 
(goddess) Lalita”. After having worshipped in every for tnight 
and having worshipped twentyfour couples at the end of the vow 
by (giving) clothes etc , the performer gets enjoyment and eman- 
cipation. 

24-28. Thus a second way (of performance of the vow) has 
been told. I shall describe the saubhdgyavrata (the vow which 
confers fortune). One should avoid salt on the third lunar day 
in the (month of ) phalguna ( March- Apr il ) . When (the vow) is 
completed he should give a bed and a house with household 
things after having worshipped a brahmin couple (by saying) 
“Let (goddess) Bhavani be pleased”. The vow on the third 
lunar day for the sake of (getting) fortune has been told. (God- 
dess) Gauri confers heaven etc. So also (one would get) by 
doing the vow on the lunar day in (the months of) magha (Fcb- 
ruary-March), bhadra (pada ) (September-October) and vaiiakha 
(May-June) A person who performs (the vow of) damanakatrtiya 
should worship with damanaka (fragrant leaf used for worship) 
in (the month of) caitra (April-May). (The third lunar day) 
in (the month of) marga {Ursa) (Dccember-January) (is k.nown 
as) atmatftxyd (the third lunar day i elating to the soul). One 
who worships by giving the goddesses) Gauri, Kali, Uma, 
Bhadra, Durga, Kanti, Sarasvati, Vai§jiavi, LgksmI, Prakrti, 
Siva and Narayani duly commencing from the third lunar day 



179.1-5 


503 


in (the month of) m&rga(ttr$a) (December-J anuary ) , (by giving) 
the desired things, food etc would get fortune and gold. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYNINE 
Vows observed on the fourth lunar day 


Fire-god said : 

1-5. I shall describe now the vows (to be performed) on 
the fourth lunar day which would yield enjoyment and emanci- 
pation. On the fourth lunar day in the bright (fortnight) in 
(the month of) mdgha (February-March), one should fast and 
worship gariafati( the lord of attendants). One who gives sesa- 
mum rice on the fifth lunar day for a year will be happy without 
obstacles. Gam oblations is the chief mystic syllable. (The syl- 
lables) commencing with garii are the heart etc. (of the mystic 
syllable). Having invoked (god) (saying), “come (obei- 
sance) to ulka (the fiery)”. The permission (for the deity) to go 
(would be by saying) “Go away (obeisance) to ulka (the fiery)”. 
One should worship commencing with *ga’ and 'gam * and ending 
with ulka by (offering) modaka (sweet ball) etc. (The sacred 
syllable would be) — “ Orh we know the great fiery (god), we 
meditate on the (god) with the curved trunk, let that god having 
the tusk impel us”. One who performs the vow on the fourth 
lunar day in the month of bhddrgtpada (September-October) 
would reach (lord) Siva. One would get (alldesired things) by 
worshipping the lord of attendants on the fourth lunar day 
on Tuesday. It is known to be avighnd caturthi (the fourth 
lunar day without any obstacle) on the night of the fourth lunar 
day in (the month of) phalguna (March-April). One who wor- 
ships (the lord of) attendants on the fourth lunar day in (the 
month of) caitra (April-May) with damana would be happy. 



504 


Agni Purdna 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY 
Vows observed on the fifth lunar day 

Fire-god said : 

1-2. I shall describe the vow (performed) on the fifth lunar 
day which would confer health, heaven and emancipation. The 
serpents Vasuki, Taksaka, Kaliya, Manibhadraka, Airavata, 
Dhrtarastra, Karkotaka and Dhanafijaya should be worshipped 
(on the fifth lunar-day) in the bright fortnight in (the month of) 
nabhas (August-September), nabhasya (Scptember-October), 
divina (October-November) and kdrttika (November-Decembcr). 
These would confer protection from fear, longevity, learning, 
fame and wealth. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYONE 
Vows observed on the sixth lunar day 

Fire-god said : 

1-2. I shall describe vows (to be performed) on the 
sixth lunar day. It should be done in (the monihs of) kdrttika 
(Novcmber-Dccember) etc. One who eats fruits and offers 
libation etc. on the sixth lunar day gets enjoyment and emanci- 
pation. The skandasasti vow (done) on the sixth lunar day in 
(the month of) bhadra(pada) (Septembcr-October) is said to 
(confer) undiminishing (benefits). I shall describe the kf$na - 
sasfivrata that should be done in (the month of ( margatirsa ) 
(Deccmber-January) remaining without food fora year. One 
would get enjoyment and emancipation (by that). 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYTWO 
Vows observed on the seventh lunar day 

Fire-god said : 

1-4. I shall describe vows (performed) on the seventh 
lunar day that would yield enjoyment and emancipation. One 



183.1-17 


505 


would be free from grief by worshipping Sun in the white lotus 
in the month of magha (February-March). One would get 
everything by the worship of Sun on the seventh lunar day in the 
month of bkddra(pada) (September-October). The worship of 
Sun in the bright (fortnight) in the month of pau$a (January- 
February) without taking food would destroy the sin. The 
seventh lunar day in the dark fortnight (in the month) of 
magha (February-March) would confer everything. The seventh 
lunar day in the bright fortnight in (the month of) phdlguna 
(March-April) (is known as) nanddsaptami . (It confers benefit) 
by the worship of Sun. The seventh lunar day in the bright 
(fortnight) in (the month of) mdrgaiirsa (December-January 
(is known as) aparajita (unconqucred). (It would make one so) 
by worshipping (Sun then). Women (who worship) on the 
seventh lunar day in the bright (fortnight) in (the month of 
margaUrsa (December-January) and for a year would get female 
children. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYTHREE 
Vows observed on the eighth lunar day 


Fire-god said : 

1-2. I shall describe the vows (to be performed) on the 
eighth lunar day. Lord Krsna (one of the ten manifestations 
of lord Visnu) was born in (the asterism) to rohini on the eighth 
lunar day in the month of bhadrapada (September-October) at 
midnight. Hence the eighth lunar day would be victorious. 
By fasting on that day one would become free from sins commit- 
ted in seven generations. 

3. Fasting on the eighth lunar day in the dark fortnight in 
(the month of) bhddrapada (September-October) marked by 
(the asterism) rohini one should worship lord Krsna, the besto- 
wer of enjoyment and emancipation. 

4-17. I invoke (the gods) Kr§na and Balabhadra (brother 
of the former) and Devaki (mother of the former), Vasudeva 
(father of the former), YaSocUi (the cowherdess who brought up 



506 


Agni Pur&na 


Krsna in his childhood) and the cows. I worship them. 
“Obeisance to you. Obeisance (repeated) to the communion, 
the master of the communion and the lord of the communion. 
Obeisance (repeated) to the one who grazes the cows and the 
one who is born of communion.” (Water for) bathing should 
be given and the libation should be made with this (utterance). 
Obeisance to the sacrifice, the lord of the sacrifice and the master 
of sacrifices. O Lord ! Accept the fragrant flowers dear to you. 
O Lord ! Saluted by the celestials ! Be the bestower of all my 
desires. O Perfumed by the incense ! You being incensed 
accept the incense (offered) by me. O Lord Hari ! You make 
me always profusely perfumed. You accept the great lamp that 
is lighted and offered by me and be always confercr of the light 
of the lamp. Make me going upwards. Obeisance (repeated) 
to the universe, master of the universe and lord of the universe. 
It has been made known to the one born of the universe etc. and 
the cowhcrdsman. Obeisance (repeated) to virtue, master of 
virtue, lord of virtue and to the one born of virtue etc. O cow- 
herdsman ! You lie down. Obeisance (repeated) to one who is 
everything, to the master of everything, to the lord of everything 
and to the one born of everything. And to the cowherdsman, 
the purification. O The one born of the milky ocean ! The 
one born of the eye of (the sage) Atri ! O One having the spots 
resembling the hare ! Accept libations of mine in the company 
of rohini (the asterism, referred to as the wife of the moon). 
The lord should be established on the altar. Rohini together with 
the moon should be worshipped. (In the same way) one should 
worship Devaki, Vasudeva, Yasoda, Nandaka (foster father of 
Krsna) and Bala(bhadra). Showers of milk together with molas- 
ses and clarified butter should be made to fall (on the image) 
in the midnight. Clothes, gold etc. should be given (to brahmins). 
The person who piactises the vow should feed the brahmins. 
One who does the vow of janmdsfamt (the eighth lunar day, the 
birth-day of Krsna) would have children and attain the world 
of Visnu. One who does it every year seeking progeny does not 
know any fear. “Give me children. Give me riches, longevity, 
health, progeny, virtue, desire, fortune, heaven and emancipa- 
tion. 



184.1-10 


507 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYFOUR 
Vows observed on the eighth lunar day 


Fire-god said : 

1. Since (the gods) Brahma and others worshipped the 
(divine) mothers one should repeat (their names) on the eighth, 
lunar day of the group of (divine) mothers. One would get 
wealth by the worship of (lord) Krsna on the dark fortnight in 
the month of caitra (April-May) and for a year. 

2-10. I shall describe the krsnajtami vrata (the vow practised 
on the eighth lunar day of the dark fortnight) . It should be per- 
formed in the month of margaHra (Decembcr-January). Having 
(fasted) in the night and becoming pure one should drink cow’s 
urine in the night. The doer of the vow should lie on the (bare) 
floor in the night and worship (lord) Sankara (Siva). (One 
should worship) lord Sambhu (Siva) in (the month of) pausa 
(January-February) after taking ghee lord Mahesvara (the 
great lord, Siva) in (the month of) magha (February-March) 
(taking) milk and lord Mahadeva (the great god, Siva) in 
(the month of) phdlguna (March-April) after fasting and taking 
sesamum. One should worship lord Sthanu (firm as the pillar, 
Siva) in (the month of) caitra (April-May) taking barley and 
lord Siva in (the month of) vaUakha (May-June) taking water 
with ku$a and lord Pasupati (lord of the flock) in (the month 
ot)jyaisfha (June-July) taking fyngodaka. One (should worship) 
lord Ugra (the fierce, a form of Siva) in (the month of) 
asadha (July-August) eating cow-dung, (lord) Sarva (a form 
of Siva) in (the month of) Sravana (August-September) eating 
the arka (the sun-plant), lord Tryambaka (three-eyed ) in 
(the month of) bhadrapada (September-October) eating bilva 
leaf in the night, lord Isa (a form of Siva) in (the month of) 
aSvayuji (October-November) eating rice and lord Rudra in 
(the month of) kdrttika (November-December) taking curd. 
Oblations should be made and worship should be offered in a 
circle at the end of the year. Cow, clothes and gold should be 
given to the preceptor. After having requested the brahmins 
thus and after feeding them one would get enjoyment and eman- 
cipation. One should eat only in the night on the eight lunar 
days. One who gives a cow at the end of the year would get the 



508 


Agni Purttna 


place of Indra (the lord of celestials). Svargativrata (the 
vow that conveys one to heaven) is described. When the eight 
lunar day (falls) on a Wednesday in both fortnights, then 
the vow should be practised. Otherwise one who eats (food) 
with molasses and observes discipline on that (day) would 
never have his fortune affected. 

11-12. Eight times fist full of rice less the quantity that would 
rest on two fingers should be cooked and kept on mango leaves 
knit together and spread on the kufa and (the goddess) Ambika 
with her retinue and benevolent attendants should be worshipp- 
ed. (The food) should then be eaten while the anecdotes 
(relating to the goddess) are being heard. Fees should be paid 
according to one’s means. (One should also give) karkafi (a sort 
of cucumber) together with rice. 

13-23. (The following is the anecdote related to the vow) : 

(There was) a brahmin (by name) Dhira. His wife (was) 
Rambha, son Kausika and daughter Vijaya. The bestower of 
wealth for that Dhira was a bull. Kausika took that and was 
grazing it in the company of cowherds. When he was bathing 
in the river Ganges, the bull was driven away by thieves. 
After bathing and not finding the bull he started searching for 
that in the company of his sister Vijaya. He then found a group 
of divine damsels in a tank and asked them to give (him) food. 
The group of damsels told him “You do the vow and hence (be) 
our guest and cat”. (Accordingly) after performing the vow he 
ate (the food) and got (the position of) the guardianship of the 
forest. He then came to Dhira with the bull and Vijaya. Vijaya 
was given by Dhira to the God of Death and the father died 
(afterwards). On account of the merits of the vow Kausika 
became the king of Ayodhya. Seeing the parents in hell 
Vijaya (felt) grief-stricken. She went to the God of Death (and) 
implored him to show them mercy). (Finding Dhira) come for 
hunting (the next day) she asked him how he got freed from 
hell. The God of Death said that it was after getting the two vows 
which Kausika had given. The two parents reached heaven as a 
fruit of the two eight lunar days on Wednesday. Vijaya rejoiced 
and practised the vow for accomplishing enjoyment and emanci- 
pation. Those who drink eight buds of aSoka in the (asterism) 
punarvasu in the month of caitra (April-May) on the eighth lunar 
day of a white (fortnight) would never get grief. (The following 



185.1-10 


509 


is the prayer made to aSoka ) : “O A£oka ! Dear to Lord 
Hara (Siva) ! One produced in the month of madhu (January- 
February) ! Being tormented by grief I am drinking you. You 
always make me free from grief. One who worships (divine) 
mothers in (the month of) caitra (April-May) on the eighth 
lunar day would conquer his enemies. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYFIVE 
Vows observed on the ninth lunar day 


Fire-god said : 

1. I shall describe the vow (performed) on the ninth lunar 
day which would accomplish enjoyment, emancipation etc. 
The goddess should be worshipped in the bright (fortnight) 
in (the month of) a&vina (October-November). It is known as 
the gaurinavamivrata . 

2-4. The ninth lunar day known as the pisfaka (cake made 
of the flour of any grain) (is called so) on account of eating the 
cake and worshipping the goddess. On the eighth lunar day in 
the bright (fortnight) in (the month of) divina (October-No- 
vember) when the sun is in the (constellation) Virgo in the aste- 
rism mula is said to be the great navami (ninth lunar day) which 
destroys the sin always. (Goddess) Durga (a form of the consort 
of Siva) should be worshipped as housed in nine places or as 
stationed in one place having eighteen hands. The rest (of the 
images) (should have) sixteen hands. The collyrium and iamaru 
(little drum) (should be held in two hands). 

5-10. (The forms of the goddess) to be worshipped (are) 
Rudracanda, Pracanda, Cancjogra, Cand&nayika, Canda, 
Candavati, Candarupa, Aticandika and Ugracanda (other- 
wise known as) Durga, the killer of the buffalo (demon) in order 
at the centre. The ten-syllabled mystic formula is Om Durga ! 
Durga ! The protector ! Oblations ! It begins with the long 
letter a, has nine eyes and ends with ‘obeisance*. Obeisance, 
svadhd , vasatkdra and kft etc. occupy six places. After having 
assigned the limbs in the toes to the little finger, (goddess) Siva 



510 


Agni Pur&na 


should be chanted. One who repeats thus the secret (syllable) 
would not be affected by anybody. One should worship ( the 
goddess) as holding human skull, khefaka (club), bell, 
mirror, threatening posture, bow, banner, little drum and noose 
in left hands. One should worship (her as holding) the wea- 
pons spear, club, pike, thunderbolt, sword, dart, conch, disc 
and stick (in right hands). 

11-15. After having repeated (the name) Kali (twice) (a 
form of consort of Siva), the animal (that is to be offered to her) 
should be killed with a sword. “O Kali ! Kali ! VajreSvari 
(the goddess with the thunderbolt) ! Obeisance to the one hav- 
ing the metal rod ! ” (is the formula). The blood and flesh 
got from that (killing) (should be offered) to Putana (a demon- 
ness) on the south-west, to Paparaksasi (the demoness represent- 
ing sin) on the north-west, to Caraki (a form of the goddess) 
on the north-east, to Vidarika on the south-east and Maha- 
kausika (should be worshipped) for the fire. The king should 
bathe in front of that and kill the (form of the) enemy made of 
the cake. Offerings should be made to Skanda and Visakha 
(the progeny of Siva and Parvati). (The goddesses) Brahml 
and others should be worshipped in the night. Obeisance to you 
O JayantI (victorious) ! Mangala (auspicious) ! Kali (dread- 
ful) ! Bhadrakall (Benevolent Kali) ! KapalinI (the bearer of 
(the skull) ! Durga (difficult to reach) ! Siva (auspicious) ! 
Ksama (forbearance) ! Dhatrl (supporter) ! Svaha and Sva- 
dha (the two syllables used at the time of oblations made into 
fire). After having bathed the goddess with the five sweet things, 
she should be worshipped with veneration etc. One who carries 
the goddess in a chariot with banner etc. and offers a victim would 
get all benefits. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYSIX 
Vow observed on the tenth lunar day 

Fire-god said : 

1. I shall describe the vow (to be performed) on the tenth 
lunar day that would confer virtue, desire etc* One should 



187 . 1-9 


511 


cat once on the tenth lunar day and give ten cows as gift at 
the end. Land and gold should be given. One would become a 
lord of the brahmins. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYSEVEN 
Vows observed on the eleventh Lunar day 
Fire-god said : 

1-9. I shall describe the vow (to be performed on the) 
eleventh (lunar) day that would yield enjoyment and emanci- 
pation. One should take restricted food, avoid (eating) flesh 
and copulation. He should not take food on the eleventh day 
in both the lunar fortnights. When there is a conjunction of the 
eleventh and twelfth (lunar) days (lord) Hari (Visnu) is present 
therein. One gets the merit of doing hundred sacrifices by 
(such fasting and) taking food on the thirteenth (lunar) day. 
When a pare of the eleventh day exists followed by the twelfth 
day (if one fasts) and takes food on the thirteenth day one gets 
the merit of (doing) hundred sacrifices. One should never eat 
at the junction of tenth and eleventh (lunar) days. It would 
confer hell. One should fast on the eleventh day and take food 
the next day (and say) “O lotus-eyed ! I am eating. O 
The unchanging one ! (You) become my refuge*’. When the 
asterism pusya rules over the eleventh day of a bright fortnight 
one is said to get undiminishing benefit. It is known to be des- 
troyer of sins. If the (asterism) kavana marks the conjunction of 
the eleventh and twelfth (lunar) days, it is said to be victorious. 
It confers victory on the votaries. The same in the month of 
phdlguna (March- April) and endowed with the (asterism) pusya 
it is said to be victorious by pious men. (It is said to be of) rores 
and crores of virtues. One should worship lord Visnu on the 
eleventh day. It confers all good, (makes one) wealthy and be- 
gets progeny in this world. It makes him honoured in the world 
of lord Visnu. 



512 


Agni Purdna 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYEIGHT 

Vows observed on the twelfth lunar day 
The Fire-god said : 

J-14. I shall describe the vows (to be observed) on the 
twelfth (lunar) day that would confer enjoyment and emanci- 
pation. The person practising the vow should eat once in the 
course of the day food that has been got without seeking alms, 
or fast or eat food obtained after seeking alms. One who practises 
the vow of MadanadvadaH should worship lord Hari and the 
God of love on the twelfth day in the bright fortnight inthe month 
of caitra (April-May), if he desires enjoyment and emancipa- 
tion. One who practises BhimadvadaU on the twelfth day in the 
bright (fortnight) of (the month of) magha ^February-March) 
should worship (lord) Visnu (repeating) “Obeisance to lord 
Narayana (attribute of Visnu)”. He gets all things. One who 
practises GovindadvadaU (should worship) in the bright 
fortnight of phdlguna (March-April). One who performs the 
VUokadvddaH should worship lord Hari in the (month of) 
dSvayuja (October-November ) . One who gives salt on the twelfth 
day of a bright (fortnight) in the (month of) m&rgaSirfa (Decem- 
ber-January) after worshipping lord Kfsna, is deemed to 
have given all niceties (of food). One who observes the vow of 
Govatsadv&daH should worship a calf in the (month of) bhddra - 
( pada ) (September-October). When the (month of) mdgha 
(February-March) is over and if the twelfth (lunar) day is 
marked by the (asterism) Havana in the dark (fortnight), it is 
said to be Tiladvddatt. Bathing and oblation are done with 
sesamum. Sesamum balls are the offering. A lamp (should be 
lit) with the sesamum oil. Then water of libation should be given 
together with sesamum. Sesamum should be given to brahmins. 
One gets the fruit by doing oblation and fasting. One should 
worship (with the sacred syllable) Orh. Obeisance to lord V£su- 
deva. One who practises the vow of TiladvddaSi reaches 
heaven with his family. One who performs Manorathadvd - 
daH should worship in the bright (fortnight) in (the month of) 
phdlguna (March-April). One who practises the vow of Ndma - 
dvddaii should worship lord Hari for a year with (the recita- 
tion of) names Ke£ava and others. That person would reach 
neaven and not hell. One becomes the performer of the vow of 



189.1-15 


513 


SumatadvddaSi by the worship (of the lord) in the bright (fort- 
night) in (the month of) phdlguna ( March- Apr il ) and the per- 
former of the vow of AnantadvddaH in the bright (fortnight) in 
the month of bhadrapada (September-October). A person who 
performs Tiladv&dail should do oblations with sesamum and 
worship (the lord saying) “Obeisance to (lord) Krsna” in the 
asterisms of dilesd or muld in (the month of) mdgha (February- 
March). The performer (of the vow) of SugatidvadaH should 
worship (the lord) in the bright (fortnight) in (the month of) 
phdlguna (March-April). (One should worship the lord) for a 
year (on the twelfth days) (saying) “O Victorious Kfsna ! 
Obeisance to you” to get enjoyment and emancipation. One is 
(known to be) the performer of SampraptidvadaH (by the worship 
of the lord) on the twelfth day in the bright (fortnight) of pau$a 
(January-February ) . 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYNINE 
Rules of observing SravanadvadaH vrata 

Fire-god said ; 

1-2. I shall describe the (mode of performance of ) Srdvana- 
dvadaii . Fasting (on the twelfth day) in the bright (fortnight) 
in the month of bhddrapada (September-October) marked with 
(the asterism) Sravana is highly meritorious. One would get the 
benefits of the Srdvanadvadafi by bathing at the confluence of 
rivers. (The twelfth day) marked by (the asterism) fravana 
and a Wednesday is extremely meritorious for making gifts. 

3-15. One should do even that which is prohibited. One 
should eat after the fast on the thirteenth (lunar) day. One 
should fast on the twelfth (lunar) day (saying) “I am worshipp- 
ing Vamana” and invoke the golden (image) (of Vamana) 
in a water-pot (saying) “I am invoking Vamana, (a form, of) 
Vi$nu bearing the conch and disc. I am bathing lord Visnu 
with waters such as the five sweet things and others in the pitcher 
covered by a pair of white cloth (and provided with) good 
umbrella and sandals. (I worship lord) Visftu holding an um- 
brella and staff. Obeisance to Vamana. O Lord of the celestials 



514 


Agni Purina 


I offer you libation. Being worshipped always with good liba- 
tion and others you make me endowed with enjoyment, ^emanci- 
pation, progeny, fame and all fortune. Obeisance to Vamana.” 
With this (sacred syllable), perfume (is offered) and oblations 
hundred (times are made). “Om, Obeisance to Vasudeva.” 
The head of lord Hari is worshipped. Similarly the face 
(is worshipped with the syllable obeisance) to Sridhara , and on 
the neck (with) “Obeisance to Krsna”, the chest (with) “Obei- 
sance to the consort of Sri (Laksml, the arms (with obeisance)*’ 
to the wielder of all weapons” 1 , the navel (with) “Obeisance to 
the omnipresent”, the hip (with) “Obeisance to Vamana, the 
male organ with (obeisance) “to the Creator of the three worlds”. 
The shank of lord Hari should be worshipped (with Obei- 
sance)” to the lord of everything”. The feet of Visnu (are wor- 
shipped with) “Obeisance to the lord of ail beings” . Offering 
prepared in ghee as well as pitchers with curd rice should be 
made. After having remained awake in the night and bathed 
in the morning at the confluence (of rivers) and worshipped 
with perfumes, flowers and other things, one should say “This 
handful of flowers (is offered)” “Obeisance to you, O Go- 
vinda ! One who is named as (the planet) Mercury and 
(asterism) Havana ! You destroy the floods of sins and become 
the conferer of all happiness. O Lord ! Lord of celestials ! 
Be pleased with me always O Janardana !” Vamana is the 
bestower of wisdom. Vamana himself is stationed in the mate- 
rials. Vamana accepts the gift and Vamana also confers on me. 
Vamana is always stationed in the materials. Obeisance to 
Vamana’*. After having given fees to the brahmins and fed 
them, (the performer) himself should take food. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY 
Mode of practising AkhandadvadaU vrata 
Fire-god said : 

1-6. I shall describe the (mode of performing) Akhanda - 
dv&daH vrata (unbroken twelfth day), that is complfementary to all 



191.1-10 


515 


vows. The performer should worship lord Visnu on the twelfth 
day in the bright (fortnight) in the (month of) m&rgaHr$a (De- 
cember-January) after fasting and bathing in water mixed with 
five things got from a cow and drinking the same. He should 
give to a brahmin a vessel with barley and rice on the twelfth 
day. “O Lord ! that vow which has been broken by me in the 
(past) seven births let it now get complete for me by your grace. 
O Excellent Being ! Just as you are the unbroken entire world, 
in the same way let all my vows get completed.” It is laid down 
for every month in the same way for four months. Otherwise 
(it may be practised) in the months of caitra (April-May) etc. 
Vessel (filled) with flour should be given as a gift. If the vow 
is begun in the (months of) irdvana (August-September) etc., 
one should break it at the end ofk&rttika (November-December). 
The deficiency in the vows (practised) in the seven (past) births 
gets fruitful by the performance (of this). One would get long 
life, health, fortune, kingdom and pleasures. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYONE 

Mode of practising vows on the thirteenth lunar day 
Fire-god said : 

1-10. I shall describe vows (to be practised) on the 
thirteenth day that gives all (things). I shall describe Anahga - 
trayodaii (the thirteenth day of God of love) that was done at 
first by the God of love. Lord Hara (Siva) (of the form of) 
God of love should be worshipped on the thirteenth day in the 
bright (fortnight) in (the month of) mfirgaHr$a (December- 
January). One should take honey in the night and do oblation 
with ghee, sesamum and unbroken rice. One who worships 
YogeSvara (Lord of Yogas) (on the thirteenth day of the bright 
fortnight) in (the month of) paufa (January-February) after 
using sandal and offering oblations and one who worships Mahe- 
svara (the great lord Siva) in (the month of) mdgha (February- 
March) (on a similar day) after using pearls would reach heaven. 
One who practises the vow should take water and raven and 



516 


Agni Purdna 


worship (on a similar day) in (the month of) ph&lguna (March- 
April) and consume camphor and worship (lord Siva) of his 
own form in (the month of) caitra (April-May). (IJy those) 
one would become fortunate. One should worship Maharupa 
(the lord of the great form) in (the month of) vatiakha (May- 
June) eating fruits of nutmeg. One who practises vow should 
worship (lord) Pradyumna (one of the five forms of Visnu) on 
(a similar) day in (the month of) jyaisfha (June-July) eating 
cloves. One should worship the consort of Uma (Siva) in (the 
month of) dsadha (July-August) taking sesamum water. One 
should worship the bearer of trident in the hand (Siva) in (the 
month of) Srdvana (August- September) consuming fragrant 
water. (The practiser of vow) should worship Sadyojata 
(one of the five forms of Siva) in (the month of) bhadrapada 
(September-October) consuming agallochum. One should wor- 
ship Indra (the lord of thirty-three celestials) in (the month 
of) dfvina (October-November) taking gold (immersed) water. 
The person practising vow should worship Vighnesvara 
(lord of obstacles, son of Siva) in (the month of) karttika (Novem- 
ber-December) eating madana. The golden (image of) Siva 
should be covered with mango leaves and a cow (covered and) 
worshipped and bed, umbrella, pitcher, sandals and vessel for 
edibles should be given to a brahmin at the end of the year. 
One should contemplate on (lord Siva) causing delight to Rati 
(wife of God of love) on the thirteenth day in the bright (fort- 
night) in (the month of) caitra (April-May) and should draw 
aioka tree with red-lead and turmeric. One who seeks plea- 
sure should worship for a year and practice the vow of Kama - 
trayodaH. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYTWO 
Vows to be observed on the fourteenth day 

Fire-god said : 

1-10. I shall describe the vow (to be practised) on the four- 
teenth (lunar) day that would confer enjoyment and emanci- 



193.1-6 


517 


pat ion. One should fast on the fourteenth day in (the month of) 
k&rttika (November-December) and worship (lord) Siva. One 
who performs (the worship of) Siva (on) the fourteenth day 
would get all pleasures through the year, wealth and long 
life. One should take the vow of an ascetic on the eighth or 
third or twelfth or fourteenth day in the bright (fortnight) in 
(the month of) m&rgatirsa (December-January), eat fruit (only) 
and worship the lord. Then one should leave (taking fruits) 
and give fruits as gifts practising the vow of PhalacaturdaH. One 
should worship (lord) Sambhu (Siva) on the eighth and four- 
teenth days in both the dark and bright fortnights without eat- 
ing. (One who practises the vow) on both the fortnights would 
reach heaven. One who eats food only in the night on the eighth 
and fourteenth days of the dark (fortnight) would get all 
pleasures in this world and good position in the other 
(world). One who bathes on the fourteenth day in the dark 
(fortnight) in (the month of) karttika (November-December) 
(would be) happy, when he worships Mahendra in flagstaffs 
in the form of the banner. One should worship Ananta 
(endless), (a form of) Hari on fourteenth day of the bright 
(fortnight). After having made a water-vessel out of darbha , 
one should prepare cakes from the flour of a prastha (a measure) 
of rice. He should give one half (of that) to a brahmin and 
enjoy the other half himself. (This vow) should be done near 
the river and after the narration of the anecdotes of (lord) 
Hari. “O (lord) Vasudeva ! Lift us drowned in the great 
ocean of endless mundane existence and put in the limitless 
form. Obeisance to you of the limitless form”. After having 
worshipped with these (words) and bound the consecrated thread 
on his own hand or the neck, the performer of the Anantavrata 
becomes happy. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYTHREE 
Description of Sivar&trivrata 

Fire-god said : 

1-6. Listen ! I shall describe the vow of Siva’s night that 
confers enjoyment and emancipation. The fourteenth day in the 



518 


Agni Purdya 


dark (fortnight) in between (the months of) mdgha (February- 
March) and phdlguna (March-April) is endowed wtfh k&ma 
(pleasure). One who practises the vow should fast, keep awake 
(and resolve) “I shall do Sivardtrivrata fasting on the four- 
teenth day and worship lord Siva after remaining awake and 
undertaking the vow. I invoke lord Sambhu (Siva), the 
conferer of enjoyment and emancipation and the boat that 
rescues from the ocean of hell. Obeisance to you. Obeisance to 
lord Siva, the tranquil person, the bestower of progeny and 
kingdom, the giver of fortune, health, knowledge, material pros- 
perity and the pathway to heaven. Give me righteousness. 
Give me riches. Give me fulfilment of desires and enjoyment. 
Give me the happiness of good quality and fame. Get me also 
heaven and emancipation. (By the practice of this vow) the 
greedy sinner Sundarasena acquired merit. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYFOUR 
Details relating to the vows of Afoka-purnimd 
Fire-god said : 

1-7. I shall describe the (vow of) Afokapurnimd . One should 
worship Bhudhara(the supporter of the universe) and the earth 
on the bright fortnight in (the month of) phdlguna (March- 
April). One would get the whole year enjoyment and emancipa- 
tion. After having set free a bull in (the month of) kdrttika 
(November-December) one should do the nakta ( vrata ) (eating 
food only in the night). One would reach the place of lord 
Siva. This Vjrfa vrata (vow of letting lose the bull) is an excel- 
lent one. The offering made to the fore-fathers on the ntw-moon 
day relating to the forefathers has undiminishing (benefits). 
After fasting the whole year and worshipping the forefathers one 
becomes free from sin and reaches heaven. One who worships 
the birthless deity (Brahma) on the fifteenth (lunar day) (new 
moon) in (the month of) mdgha (February-March), would get 
all (things). I shall describe the new-moon da> (known as) 



195.1-5 


519 


the Savitri, that is auspicious and bestows enjoyment and emanci- 
pation. A woman should practise vow on the fifteenth day 
(new moon) in (the month of) jyetfha (June-July) and worship 
the great chaste woman (Savitri) at the foot of the banyan tree 
with seven (kinds of) grains after fasting three nights. Women 
should deeply embrace the banyan tree (besmearing) with saff- 
ron etc. doing dancing and singing in the night and worship 
(Satyavan and Savitri) in the morning (saying) “Obeisance to 
Savitri and Satyavan”. The offering should be gifted to a brah- 
min. After reaching the house one should feed brahmins and 
eat oneself and request them to go (saying) “May the goddess 
Savitri be pleased and let (me) get fortune etc.” 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED NINETYFIVE 
Vows relating to the week-days 

Fire-god said : 

1-5. I shall describe vows relating to the week-days 
that would confer enjoyment and emancipation. (The asterism) 
punarvasu on the Sunday is the hand (of Sun). Bathing with 
all herbs is auspicious (on that day). One who performs ihe 
ancestral rite on a Sunday would be free from disease for seven 
births. A Sunday (occurring) on the sahkrdnti (Sun’s entry 
from one constellation into another) is the auspicious heart 
of the Sun. One who eats in the night on a Sunday (occurring) 
in (the asterism hasta) for a year would get everything. One 
who practises a vow on Mondays (occurring) in (the aste- 
rism) citrd seven times would be happy. One who undertakes to 
do the vow of eating only in the night on a Tuesday (occur- 
ring) in (the asterism) svati seven times would be free from diffi- 
culties. One who takes the vow of eating only in the night on 
Wednesday (occurring) in (the asterism) vildkhd seven times 
would get rid of afflictions due to planets. One who eats only 
in the night on Thursday in (the asterism) anurddhd seven times 
would destroy all afflictions due to planets. One who under- 
takes to practise eating only on Friday in (the asterism jyefthd 



520 


Agni Put&qq 


for seven nights would get rid of all afflictions due to planets. 
One who resolves to practise eating only seven nights on Satur- 
day in (the asterism mula would destroy all afflictions due to 
planets. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYSIX 
Vows relating to different asterisms 

Fire-god said : 

1-7. I shall describe (the practice) of vows in (different) 
asterisms, Lord Hari worshipped in the asterism gives mate- 
rial prosperity. Lord Hari in the form of asterisms should 
be first worshipped in the month of caitra (April-May). The 
legs should be worshipped in (the asterism) mula . The shanks of 
lord Hari should be worshipped in (the asterism) rohini, the 
knee in the combination of aSvini , the two thighs in the asaiha , 
the male organ in the purva and uttara, the hip in the kfttika , 
the two sides in the bhadrapada , the belly in the revati , breasts in 
the anuradhdy the backside in the dhanisfha. The arms should be 
worshipped in the viSakha , the fingers in the punarvasu. Having 
worshipped nails in the dSlesa , the neck should be worshipped 
in the j iyesfhd. The two ears of lord Visnu should be wor- 
shipped in the fravana and the face in the pusya . The tip of the 
tooth should be worshipped in the svdti 9 the face in the iata- 
bhi§ak , the nose in the magha, the eyes in the mrgaiir^a , the 
forehead in the citrd and the hair in the Ardra . A golden image of 
lord Hari should be worshipped in a pot filled with molasses 
at the end of a year and bed, cow and materials (should be given ) 
as fees. 

8-22. Lord Visnu should be worshipped in the 
form of the asterisms and in the form of lord Siva. One who 
practises the vow (known as), Sdmbhavdyaniya should worship 
lord Hari in the asterisms of every month, in the kfttikds in 
the (month of) kdrttika y in the mfgaHrfa in the mfgdsyaka {mdgha) > 
with the names, such as Kesava etc. or (with the w^rds) “Obeis- 
ance to Acyuta (one without a loss) 0 . One should worship 



196.1-22 


521 


lord Hari of the form of the as ter isms on the day of (the aster- 
ism) kfttikd in the (month of) k&rttika . (One should resolve 
that) “I shall do the vow (known as the) Sdmbhav&yaniya , that 
confers enjoyment and emancipation. I am invoking the lord of 
great forms such as Ke£ava etc., that bestows everything and 
furthers longevity and health”. Food together with a pool 
(should be offered) for four months commencing with k&rttika . 
Rice and pulse boiled with spices (should be offered for four 
months) beginning with ph&lguna and sweet gruel from &$&ifha. 
Offering should be made to the lord and brahmins in the night. 
One becomes pure after bathing in water (mixed with) the five 
things got from a cow and drinking the same. Whichever mate- 
rial is offered before allowing the invoked deity to go is told as 
offering. When lord Jagannatha (the lord of the world) is 
allowed to go it becomes the remains of the offering in a moment. 
“O Acyuta (one without a loss) ! Obeisance to you. Let my 
sin get destroyed and (my) merits grow. Let all my fortune, 
wealth etc. be without decay. Let not my progeny get destroy- 
ed. Just as you are decayless, greater than the greatest, that 
Supreme soul who has become the Brahman, in the same way, 
you make that desired by me as without a loss. O Immeasur- 
able one ! You take away the sin done by me. One without 
a loss ! Limitless 1 One who protects the cows ! You grace me 
with the desired things. O Immeasurable being ! You make 
me without a loss, O Excellent among beings 1” After having 
worshipped for seven years one would get enjoyment and emanci- 
pation. I shall describe the vow (known as) Ananta , (endless) 
among the vows relating to asterisms, that would yield wealth. 
One should worship lord Hari in the (asterism) mrgaJlra in 
(the month of) m&rgasirfa drinking cow’s urine. Lord Ananta 
(the limitless) confers endless fruits for all desires and also the 
same endless (fruits) in the next birth. This great vow makes 
one acquire a limitless acquisition of merits. It would make one 
get the desired objects without loss. After having worshipped 
the feet etc., one should eat without oil in the night. Oblation 
should be made for four months for the sake of Ananta with 
ghee. Oblation (should be made) with rice (for four months) 
commencing with caitra and with milk in (the four months) 
beginning with fr&vaQa. Mandhatd, was bom as the son of 
Yuvan&iva as a result of (doing) Anantavraku 



522 


Agni Pur Una 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYSEVEN 
Vows performed on certain days 


Fire-god said : 

1-6. I shall describe the vows to be performed on certain 
days. I shall first explain the Dhenuvrata (vow of giving a cow 
as a gift) . One who gives as a gift a cow delivering a calf together 
with plenty of gold and observes the payovrata (drinking milk 
oozing from the udders of a cow), reaches the exalted position. 
After practising payovrata for three days and giving a golden 
(replica of) kalpapadapa (the celestial tree that yields the 
desired ooject), one reaches the place of lord Brahma. This is 
known as the kalpavfkfavrata. One should give as gift golden 
(replica of) earth (weigning) more man twenty palas and prac- 
tise payovrata that day. That person would reach (the world of) 
Rudra. One who eats food only once a day for tliree days in 
every fortnight would get enormous wealth. One who observes 
the trirdtravrata (vow for three nights) every day in every month 
eating only once (in the nights) ior tliree nights hi every month 
would get the place of Ganesa. One who practises tne trirdtra- 
vrata intended for lord Janardana (a form of Vi§jpu) would 
reach the abode of lord Hari taking with him hundreds of his 
own family. 

7-11. One who practises the vow called trirdtravrata should 
begin it on the ninth day in the bright fortnight in (the month 
of) mdrgatir$a. One should repeat, “Ow, obeisance to Vasudeva”, 
a thousand or hundred times. One should eat once on the eighth, 
day, fast for three days worship lord Vi$$u on the twelfth 
day and practise the vow in kdrttika . After having fed the brah- 
mins, one should give clothes, beds, seats, umbrellas, sacred 
threads and vessels. He should then request brahmins “What- 
ever has become incomplete for me in this difficult vow, let it 
become complete being permitted by you”. One who practises 
the trirdtravrata would attain lord Vi$$u after having enjoyed 
all comforts. 

12-16. I shall describe the kdrttikavrata that would confer 
enjoyment and emancipation. One who partakes five things 
got from a cow on the tenth day, fasts on the eleventh day and 
worships lord Vi$Qu in tne bright fortnight in kdrttika would 



198 * 1-7 


523 


reach him by the celestial vehicle. One who eats for three 
nights in caitra and gives five goats would be happy. Drinking 
milk for three nights and fasting for three days on the sixth day 
etc. of the bright fortnight in k&rttika is said to be the expiation 
mahendra . After having drunk milk for five nights, fasting, 
taking only curd, on the eleventh day in kdrttika is (known to 
be) the expiation Bhaskara, that confers wealth. Taking gruel 
made of barley and rice, curd, milk, ghee and water on the fifth 
day clc. in the bright fortnight is known to be expiation 
s&ntapana. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND N1NETYEIGHT 
Vdws performed in different months 

Fire-god said : 

1-2. I shall describe vows (to be performed) in differ- 
ent months, that would yield enjoyment and emancipation. A 
wise man should avoid bathing with oil for four months com- 
mencing with afddha. One who abstains (from using) flower 
and salt and gives a cow (as a gift ) in vaUdkha would become a 
king. One who gives a cow and lasts a month is said to practise 
a terrible vow and is deemed to be lord Hari. 

j-4. One who bathes (daily) early m the morning for four 
montns commencing with d$d<j,ha would reach lord Vi$nu. 
One who gives molasses and cow in the month of mdgha or caitra 
on the third day would be the great performer of tiie gudavrata 
(vow of giving away molasses) and he would get (an identical 
form of ) consort of Gauri. One who eats food only in the night 
in the months of margaHrfa etc. would attain the world of lord 
Vi§nu. 

5-7. Sq also one who eats only once a day and observes the 
twelfth day vow would do. One who rejects fruit for four months 
commencing with Havana and gives (the fruits) as gift would get 
everything. One should fast on the eleventh day in the bright 
fortnight in tif&dha and prepare to do the vows lasting for four 
months. One should worship lord Hari in the &$&4ha at the 
entry of the Sun (into a constellation) in karkafa. 



524 Agni Purtya 

8-10. “O lord ! This vow has been undertaken by # me in 
your presence. O Kesava ! When you are pleased let it be 
accomplished without impediment. O lord ! If I die after 
taking this vow and the vow becomes incomplete, let it become 
completed by your grace, O Janardana !” One should avoid 
eating flesh and a brahmin should refrain from (the use of) oil 
and worship lord Hari. One who fasts on alternate days and 
for three nights would reach the world of lord Visnu. 

1 1 . One who practises tnc candrayana would reach the world 
of Vi$nu, the vow of silence would be fit for liberation, the vow 
of prajdpatya eating the Hour of barley would reach heaven. 

12-15. One who takes milk etc. and one who takes five 
things got from a cow would reach heaven. A person eating 
vegetables, roots and fruits would reach the world of Vi§nu. 
One who avoids flesh and tasty food and takes barley would 
reach lord Hari. I shall describe the Kaumudavrata. Having 
observed a fast on the twelfth day in kartlika one should besmear 
lord Visnu (with sandal) and worship (him) with lotuses 
and blue lotuses and offer a lamp Jit by ghee and sesamum oil. 
“ Om obeisance to Vasudeva.” One should worship him with 
a garland of mdlati (flowers). One who practises the kaumuda- 
vrata would get piety, pleasure, wealth and liberation. One who 
practises the vow of fasting in the months (specified) and worships 
lord Hari would get everything. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYNINE 
Vows relating to different seasons 


Fire-god said : 

1-3. I shall describe the vows relating to the seasons 
that would bestow enjoyment and emancipation* A brahmin 
who gives away fuel in the four seasons beginning with the rainy 
season and gives ghee and cow at the end would become agni- 
vrati. Maintaining silence at the twilight and giving a pitcher 
with ghee at the end of the month as well as sesamum, bell and 
clothes one would be happy. (He is known to be) the performer 



199.4 — 200.1-5 525 

of Sarasvatavrata. One who bathes with the five sweet things for 
a year and gives away a cow would become a king. 

4-5. Eating only in the night on the eleventh day in caitra 
food should be ofFered to (lord Visnu). That person who prac- 
tises the Visnu-madvrala would reach the golden feet of lord 
Visnu at the end of the month. One who eats sweet gruel and 
offers a pair of cows as a gift would get fortune. He would be 
(known as) the performer of Devivrata. One who offers to the 
pitfdevas (the dead ancestors) and eats (the food) would be- 
come a king. 

6-8. I have described the Varsavratas (the vows relating to 
rainy season) . I shall describe the vows relating to the movement 
(of the Sun) . A person who keeps awake in the night at the time 
of the movement (of the Sun from one constellation into another) 
would go to heaven. Similarly worship of Siva in the form of 
the Sun at the time of the new-moon and Sun’s movement 
(would get the same result). Bathing (the image of) Ke£ava 
with a prastha (a kind of measure) of clarified butter of thirty- 
two pala measures one gets free from all sins. One who bathes 
(the lord) with ghee, milk etc. at the time of the equinox etc. 
(would get the* same fruits). 

9-10. The Umdvrata done on the third day and the eighth 
days confers fortune on women. One who worships (goddess) 
Gauri and lord Mahesvara would get all fortunes. After 
worshipping UmamaheSvara one gets non-separation. The main 
performer of the vow in the Umetovrata is the woman. A woman 
who is devoted to the Sun would certainly become a male. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED 
Vow of giving a gift of lamp 

Fire-god said : 

1-5. I shall describe the vow of making a gift of a lamp that 
would yield enjoyment and emancipation. One who gives a 
lamp to the abode of a deity or a house of a brahmin is rewarded 
with everything for a year, (One who does so) for four months 



526 


Agni Purdna 


would reach the world of Vi?nu, and (giving) in kdrttik^ would 
reach heaven. There is nothing greater than the gift of 
a lamp, neither there was, nor there would be. One gets longe- 
vity, eyesight, fortune and progeny etc. by giving a lamp. 
One who gives a lamp enjoys in heaven after getting fortune. 
Lalita, the daughter of the king of Vidarbha, the beautiful and 
faithful spouse of a king became the foremost among hundreds of 
wives (of the king) by giving a lamp. That chaste lady used to 
give thousand lamps to the temple of Vi§nu. When enquired 
about the greatness of the lamp she said to her co-wives as follows : 

Lalita said : 

6-18. In olden days Maitreya was the priest of the king of 
Sauvira. He caused a temple to be built for lord Vi$nu on the 
banks of Devika. He gave a lamp (for that temple) in kart - 
tika . (The lamp) which was about to be extinguished was kindl- 
ed with the wick by me as a mouse with iny mouth (taking 
shelter there) on account of being afraid of a cat. After the death 
I was born as the daughter of a king and became a queen 
among the hundred (of the king’s wives). The fruit of that act 
of kindling tiie lamp of the temple of Vi§nu, even though not 
resolved, is enjoyed by me. Because I remember my past birth. 
I give lamps day and night. One who gives a lamp on the ele- 
venth day rejoices in heaven in a vehicle. One who steals a 
lamp would become dumb or dull or fall into the dark hell diffi- 
cult to be crossed. Seeing the crying men, the servant of the God 
of Death said to them : 

“Enough of your wailing. What use of your wailing, over 
misdeeds wantonly done by you before ? One is born as a man 
after a cycle of thousand births. O Extremely stupid fellow 1 
Why do you run after pleasures even in that (life) ? The result 
of enjoying according to one’s desire is that of coming here and 
wailing. You are enjoying the fruits of your past deed. Why 
have you not thought about it ? The embrace of the breasts of 
other women for your pleasure has given you grief. The worldly 
enjoyment for a while causes grief many crores of years. O 
Seducer of other’s wives ! Why do you cry “O Mother ! ? 
What would be very heavy (to bear) when the nagoe of Hari 
is repeated with the tongue ? Fire can be had always with a wick 
and oil at low cost. The lamp has been stolen by you not showing 



200.19— 201.1-10 527 

inclination for giving. That is the cause of your grief. What 
use in wailing now ? You bear that which has happened. 

Fire-god said : 

19. After hearing what was told by Lalita, (the other wives) 
reached heaven after giving a lamp. Hence there would be great 
benefit by the gift of a lamp. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND ONE 

Mode of worshipping Visnu in a figure of nine compartments 
Fire-god said : 

1-6. I shall describe the navavyuhdreana (worship in nine 
compartments) that was narrated by Hari to Narada. The 
letter V with Vasudeva should be worshipped at the centre of a 
lotus figure and the letter a with Sahkarsana and Pradyumna 
at the south, the letter ah and Aniruddha at the south-west, 
the letter om and Narayana at the west, (the words) tat sat 
and Brahma at the north-west, (the letter) hurfi and Visnu and 
(the letter) tyaurfi and Nrsimha at the north, and (the letter) 
bhuh and Varaha at the north-east. (The letters) katii, farh, 
tam , torh and Garutmat (vehicle of Visnu) (should be worshipp- 
ed) at the western entrance (of that figure), (the letters) kharh , 
chanty varfiy hum, phaf and the eastern face at the south, (the letters) 
kharhy (ham, pharfi , torn and the mace at the north. (The letters) 
barfly narhy marhy k$aurh and I Sana should be worshipped at the 
north-east, (the letters) dharh , darft , bharii, hath and Sri (Lak?mi) 
at the south and (the letters) gam , darhy varfiy torh and Pu$th 
(The letters) dharhy varft (should be worshipped) and the gar- 
land of wild flowers at the west of the pedestal, the Mvatsa 
(the mark on the chest of lord Vi?nu) and (the letters) sash, 
hath, larh at the west and (the letters) charfiy tartly yarh and the 
kaustubha (the crest-jewel) to the west of it. 

7-10. (After having worshipped with) “Obeisance to 
Ananta”, worship should be made below in the order of the ten 
(forms) of Vif^u and the four pitchers representing Mahendra 



528 


Agni Purdna 


and others in the east and other directions in the above order of 
the ten forms (of Visnu). The arches and canopy (should also 
be worshipped in the same way). After having cont&nplated 
the orbs of fire, wind and moon with (their respective) letters in 
order, one should worship the body and then bathe it. One should 
then contemplate on the subtle form of the self in the sky, 
submerged in the white nectar that flows from the disc of the 
moon. That is the eternal seed of one’s self that has been conse- 
crated by the flood. One should thus resolve the spirit that is 
being produced in the self. 

11-16. Then one should do the location of twelve letters 
(after saying) “I am verily Visnu produced (again)”. The 
heart, head, tuft, armour and weapons should be located (res- 
pectively) on the chest, head, tuft, back and eyes. Then the 
weapons should be located on the two hands. Then one would 
have a divine body. One should do this location on the body of 
the disciple in the similar way (as it lias been done) on one’s 
self as well as the deity. The worship done for Hari on the heart 
is known to be anirmalya (without remnant) and that done in a 
circle as sanirmdlya (together with remnant). The disciples with 
their eyes covered should throw the flower (on the images) 
(at the commencement of the worship). On which images the 
flower falls that name should be given to them. Then the discip- 
les should be seated on the left and sesamum,rice and ghee should 
be offered (as oblation). After having made one hundred aud 
eight oblations, (one should do) thousand (oblations) for the 
purification of the body. One should do more than hundred 
(oblations) for the limbs of the images of the nine compart- 
ments. After having made the final (oblation) the preceptor 
should initiate them (the disciples). He has to be respected by 
them with riches etc. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWO 
Different flowers used in Worship 

Fire-god said : 

1-2. Lord Hari gets pleased with flowers, perfumes, in- 
cense, lamps and offerings. I shall describe you flowers which 



202.3-15 


529 


arc fit and unfit for the god. Mdlati is the excellent flower. 
Tamdla (flower) confers enjoyment and emancipation. Mallikd 
(jasmine) destroys all sins. (The flower) yuthikd gets the world 
of Visnu. 

3. Atimukta will also get the same fruit. The pdfald (flower) 
conveys one to the world of Visnu. One gets the world of Visnu 
with the karavira (flowers). One becomes fortunate with japd 
(flowers). 

4. One would reach the world of Visnu with the pdvanti , 
kubjaka and tagara (flowers). (One would reach) the world of 
Visnu with the karmkara . There would be destruction of sin with 
kurunfha . 

5-6. One will have an excellent position with lotuses, ketaki 
and jasmine. One would reach the world of Hari with bdna 
flowers, barbara and krsnd . Similar result would be got by aSoka , 
tilaka and atarusabhava. The leaves of bilva would confer libera- 
tion. One will have the supreme position with the leaves of 
Sami. 

7-11. One would reach the world of Visnu with the bhrnga - 
raja . One would have same fruits with the leaves of tamdla. 
The black and white basil, white lotus, blue lotuses, lotus, red 
lotus are meritorious. Lord Hari (gets pleased) with a gar- 
land of hundred lotuses. One would gel enjoyment and emanci- 
pation and destruction of sin with nipa, arjvna , kadamba , vakula , 
fragrant kimSuka y munipuspa y gokarna , nagakarm , sandhyd flower, 
bilva , ranjaniy ketaki , k usman ja y timira y kuSa y kdSa y Sara, dyuta etc., 
maruvaka leaves and other fragrant (leaves and flowers). The 
god would get pleased with all (that is offered) with devotion. 
A flower is more meritorious than a lakh of gold and a garland, 
more than a crore times. 

12-15. It would be three times more meritorious with the 
forest flowers than with the flowers from one’s own garden pr 
another’s garden. One should not worship lord Vi$nu with 
withered or broken (flowers) or (flowers) having more than the 
usual parts. (One would reach) hell (by worshipping) 
with kdncandra, unmatta, girikarnika , kufaja Sdlmaliyd and Sir If a. 
Lord Hari (is pleased) with sugandha, brahma, lotuses and blue 
lotuses. Lord Hara is worshipped with arka mandara (and) 
dhustura flovycrs. b One should not offer Kufaja , karkafl flowers 



530 Agni PurSna 

and ketakl for Siva. (One should not use) kHmdn^la y nimba 
and wild flowers without fragrance (in worship). 

16-18. One would get enjoyment and emancipation by 
worshipping gods with the eight flowers of gestures such as 
non-violence, conquest of senses, forbearance, knowledge, com- 
passion and learning. Non-violence is the first flower. (The 
second) flower is the control of senses. Compassion for the 
beings is (said to be) all flowers. The flower of tranquility 
excells. Quietitude is a flower and penance is a flower. Medi- 
tation is the seventh flower. Truth is the eighth flower. Lord 
Ke£ava is pleased with these flowers. 

19-23. When lord Hari is worshipped with these flowers, 
he certainly gets pleased. O Excellent among men ! There are 
other external flowers. When lord Visnu is worshipped with 
devotion together with compassion, he gets pleased. Water is 
the flower for Varuna. Ghee, milk and curd (are the flowers) 
for Soma. Food etc. (are the flowers) for Prajapati (Brahma) 
and incense and lamp for Fire (god) . The fifth flower is the fruits 
and flowers of the forest. The hula, roots etc. are the flowers of 
the earth. Fragrant sandal is that of the Wind (god). Earnest- 
ness is the flower for lord Visnu. These are always the eight 
flowers. The seat, the form, the five limbs (such as the heart 
etc. ) and Visnu are the eight flowers. (Worship should be made 
with the names) Vasudeva and others for Visnu and Isana and 
others for Siva. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THREE 
The nature of hell 


Fire-god said : 

1-5. I shall describe bells. One does not go to them if 
he worships lord Visnu with flowers and other things. A man 
gets released from his life forces at the end of his life even though 
he does not wish for it. A man gets released from his life on acco- 
unt of some case such as water, fire, poison, weapon, hunger, 
illness and fall from a mountain. One takes another body to be 



experienced as a result of one’s own acts. One who has committ- 
ed a sin would experience grief and one who does good (deeds) 
would experience happiness. One is led to the God of Death by 
the dreadful messengers of God of Death through the southern 
gate if one has taken evil path. Pious men (would be taken) by 
the western and other (doors). (They are) cast into hells by the 
servants being ordered by the God of Death. On account of 
piety one is led to heaven according to the words of Vasistha. 

6-9. The killer of a cow is tormented for a lakh of years in 
the mahavxci (one of the hells). The killer of a brahmin (would 
be tormented) in a well-heated copper pot (for the same period). 
One who steals the land would be slowly tormented in the 
raurava (hell ) till the great deluge. One who kills a woman, 
child or the old (is tormented) in the dreadful mah&raurava 
(hell) till (the period of) fourteen Indras. One who 
sets fire to the house, ground etc. is burnt for a kalfia (432 million 
years of mortals). Thieves would fall into the tdmisraka 
hell. They would be pierced by the attendants of the God 
of Death with spears etc. for many kalpa periods. Then they 
would be tormented in the mahatamisraka hell by serpents, 
leeches etc. 

10-11. One who kills his mother would be struck by swords 
in the osipatravana (forest where the trees have leaves as sharp 
as swords) for many kalpa periods as long as the earth (remains). 
One who has burnt men would be burnt in muddy region with 
gravel etc. One who has eaten sweet food alone will suffer 
in kdkola (hell) eating the excreta of insects. 

12. One who has discontinued (doing) five sacrifices 1 
(would suffer) in kuftala hell eating urine and blood. One 
who has eaten the forbidden food would take blood in the 
filthy hell. 

13. One who afflicts others would be tormented in the 
hell tailapaka like sesamum. One who kills a person who has 
sought refuge would be cooked in the tailapdka . 

14. One who withholds gifts at the sacrifice and who sells 
wine would be thrown into the hell nirucchv&sa. Similarly, 

1. To be performed by a householder — brahmayajfla, pitryajfta , daioa- 
pitryqjfia ,, bhutayajfta and nryqj&a respectively denoting teaching, libation 
to manes, oblation to gods, offering made to spirits and feeding guests. 



532 


Agni Purdna 


one who lies (would be thrown) into the great hell vajrakavdfa . 

15. Evil-minded persons (would suffer) in (the hell) 
mahdjvdla; one who has cohabited the forbidden woman (would 
suffer) in (the hell) krakaca , the doer of mixed sins in (the hell) ; 
one who strikes at other’s weakness would suffer in hells 
gutfapdka and pratoda . 

16. The killer of an animal (would be thrown) into an 
alkaline lake. One who steals the land (would be placed) under 
a current as sharp as a razor. One who steals a cow or gold 
(would be thrown) into (the hell) ambarisa. One who cuts a 
tree (would be put) in (the hell) vajraSastraka . 

17. One who steals wine would be put into paritapa (hell) 
and one who steals other’s wealth into kdlasTdra (hell). One 
who eats flesh in excess (would be thrown) into ka§mala (hell). 
One who does not offer the rice-balls (for the manes) (would 
be put) into ugragandha hell. 

18. One who receives a bribe (would be tormented) in 
(the hell) durdhara. One who cohabits women taken captive 
(would suffer) in the hell (called) manjusa. One who censures 
scriptures (would be thrown) in the unstable hell loha . 

19-20. One who bears false witness (would be put) in (the 
hell) putivaktra. One who steals wealth and one who kills a child, 
woman or the old and one who afflicts a brahmin would suffer 
in (the hell) karala. A brahmin who drinks wine (would suffer) 
in (the hell) vilepa. Those who have caused breach (of friend- 
ship) (would be put) into (the hell) mahdtdmra. 

21. One who cohabits others’ wives (would enter) (the 
hell) Salmala (and embrace) glowing iron or stone. Similarly, a 
woman cohabiting many men would do. 

22-23. Those who cohabit their mothers and daughters, 
those who have cut the *ongue (of others), those who have 
looked (at others’ wives) with lustful eyes and those who have 
plucked the eyes would be thrown into a heap of charcoal. 
Thieves would be pierced with razors. One who eats flesh (would 
be made) to cat his own flesh. One who practises fasting for 
(the stipulated) months would not go to hell. So also one who 
practises the vow on the eleventh day and the bhismapaftcakavrata - 
(would not go to hell). 



204.1-12 


533 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FOUR 

Mode of practising the vow of fasting for stipulated months 
Fire-god said : 

1-2. I shall describe the vow (known as) fasting for a month, 
that is the most excellent among (the vows). After having 
done the sacrifice relating to (lord) Vi$nu and got the command 
of the preceptor and knowing one’s own strength with (the 
practice of) krcchra etc., O Sage ! a forester or an ascetic or a 
woman or a widow should fast for a month. 

3-5. One should undertake to observe this vow for thirty- 
two days after having fasted on the eleventh day of the dark 
fortnight of (the month of) aivina (October-November). “ O 
lord Visnu ! Commencing from this day until you get up 
(from sleep) I shall worship you without taking food for thirty 
days. O Visnu ! (this vow would be) till you get up in the 
(months of) aivina and karttika . Let not my vow be incomplete 
if I happen to die in the middle.”. 

6-9. (Lord Visnu should be worshipped thrice with fragrant 
flowers after bathing thrice. The person practising the vow should 
repeat the songs of lord Vi§nu and contemplate (on him). 
He should avoid vain discussion and should avoid desire for 
wealth. He should not touch someone who is not practising 
the vow. He should not enter into conversation with those 
addicted to vices. He should dwell in temple for thirty days. 
The observer of the vow should worship the brahmins on the 
twelfth day and feed them. After completing vow and paying 
fees, he should break the fast. One would get enjoyment and 
emancipation for thirteen kalpas (a kalpa is equal to 432 million 
years) by practising thus. 

10-12. He should do the sacrifice relating to Visnu and 
worship thirteen brahmins. He should give them as many pairs 
of clothes, vessels, seats, umbrellas, metal rings, pairs of sandals, 
upper cloth and sacred threads. All these things should also 
be given to another brahmin being permitted by them. After 
having worshipped golden lord Visnu on the bed, he should 
worship his own form with clothes and other things. 



534 


Agni Purina 


13-15. Then he should tell brahmins, “O Brahmins ! 
I am going to the world of Visnu being freed ifrom all sins^by the 
grace of lord Visnu. I am becoming lord Visnu himself”. 
(The brahmins should say), “O One with divine wisdom ! 
You go to the faultless place of lord Visnu by this vehicle and 
remain there spotless bearing the form of lord Visnu”. Then 
that bed should be offered to the preceptor. One who practises 
thus would elevate hundreds of his family and take them to the 
world of Visnu. 

16-18. That country in which there is a person observing 
fast for a month, would become spotless. What to speak about 
the family in which there is one who fasts for a month ! Seeing 
the person practising a vow fallen into a swoon, one should make 
him drink milk and clarified butter. These things would not 
nullify the vow. The ghee is allowed by the brahmins, and milk, 
water, roots are beneficial remedies (administered) by the pre- 
ceptors. Lord Visnu is the maker of all remedies. Hence he 
will make the vow complete. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIVE 

Mode of performing the Bhismapahcakavrata 
Fire-god said : 

1. I shall describe the Bhtsmapahcaka, 1 that is the foremost 
among the vows and that which yields everything. It should be 
done on the eleventh day in the bright fortnight in kdrttika. 

2. (The observer of the vow) should bathe thrice (daily) 
for five days and satisfy gods and manes with five kinds of 
grains and sesamum. He should worship lord Hari silently. 

3. Having bathed the deity with the five things got from a 
cow and with the five sweet things, sandal paste should be be- 
smeared and guggulu should be burnt along with ghee. 


h The five days from the eleventh to the fifteenth of the bright half 
of kdrttika said to be sacred to Bhl?ma. See chapter 205 below. 



205.4-206.1-4 


535 


4. A lamp should be offered. Food offering should be made 
day and night. He should then repeat (the syllable) “Om obei- 
sance to Vasudeva” one hundred and eight times. 

5. The performer of the vow should then make oblations of 
sesamum and rice dipped in ghee with the sacred syllable of six 
letters along with the word ‘oblations.’ 

6-8. He should worship the feet with lotuses (on the first 
day), the knee and thigh with the bilva leaves on the second day, 
the navel with the bhrngardja on the third day, with the bdna , 
bilva and japa (flowers) on the fourth day and with mdlati on the 
fifth day. The votary should lie down (only) on the (bare) 
floor. (He should use) cowdung on the eleventh day and cow’s 
urine, curd and milk (on the subsequent days). (He should use) 
five things got from a cow on the fifth day. He should take 
food only in the night on the full moon day. The votary would 
get enjoyment and emancipation. 

9. After having practised the (Bhismafiaficaka)Bhlsma. reach- 
ed lord Hari. That is why (it is known as) Bhismapancaka. 
One should worship lord Brahma and fast while practising 
the vow. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIX 
Mode of offering water of libation to the venerable sage Agastya 
Fire-god said : 

1-4. (Sage) Agastya (is verily lord) Visnu. After having 
worshipped him one would reach lord Visnu. When the Sun 
has not entered (the constellation) Virgo one should offer liba- 
tion to Agastya for three days and one-third part of a day after 
having fasted and worshipped him. An image of the sage 
(Agastya) made of the kdia flower should be located in a pot at 
(the time of) nightfall and that image in the pot should be wor- 
shipped. He should then remain awake in the night. “O 
Agastya ! The foremost among sages ! A multitude of brilli- 
ance ! Great-minded person ! You accept with your wife this 
worship done by me” . After having invoked the presence (of 



536 Agni Purd$a 

(of the sage) with libation, he should worship him with sandal 
and other things. m 

5-13. After having led (the image) near the water tank in 
the morning libation should be offered. “O One having the 
colour of kaia flower ! Born of Fire and Wind (gods) ! Son of 
Mitra and Varuna !-Born in the pitcher I 1 Obeisance be to 
you ! That Agastya by whom Atapi was eaten as also Vatapi 2 , 
the great demon and the ocean was dried, may he be present 
before me. I am praying to (the sage) Agastya with my deeds, 
mind and speech. Being desirous of attaining the other world, 
I shall pray to the son of Mitra, born in a different continent 
and most dear to the gods. Kindly accept the sandal that is the 
king among the trees. May you accept the garland, that is the 
destroyer of sins, the vessel of piety, wealth, desire and libera- 
tion and that which confers fortune, health and prosperity. O 
Lord ! Let the incense be accepted. You make my devotion 
steady. You confer on me the desired boon and also auspicious 
position in the next (place) (got) by the celestials and demons. 
O Excellent among the sages ! Conferer of all the desired fruits ! 
This libation has been offered by me together with clothes, rice, 
fruits and gold. I make known to (sage) Agastya that which I 
have raised with my mind. I offer libation with fruits. You 
accept libation, O Great Sage ! 55 Agastya being thus exca- 
vated with the spades (gave) men the desired progeny 
and strength. (The sage) with fierce splendour along with his 
chaste wife nourished the two ears. He then conferred blessing 
on the celestials. 

14. “O Daughter of a king ! 3 Obeisance to you, the 
wife of the sage (Agastya) ! One who is a great devotee ! O 
Governess of the celestials ! Accept libation. O Lopa- 
mudra ! One who is famous ! 

15-16. Libation should be offered to Agastya together with 
a vessel containing five gems, gold and silver and enclosed by 
seven kinds of grains as well as curd and sandal. (The above 
libation should be done) by women and iUdras without (the reci- 

1 . When the seed of Mitra and Varupa fell at the sight of the nymph 
Urvaft, part of it fell into ajar and part into water. From the former arose 
Agastya, hence called ‘bom of the pitcher*. 

2. They were brothers, both demons. 

3. Daughter of the king of Vidarbha. * 



206.17-207.1-5 


537 


tation of) the sacred syllables. “O Agastya ! Foremost among 
the sages ! A multitude of splendour ! Bestower of all things !” 

1 7. After having accepted this worship of mine you retreat 
in peace. One has to forego a kind of grain, a variety of fruit and 
a kind of taste for the sake of Agastya. 

18. Then the brahmins should be given food (as well as) 
ghee, sweet gruel and sweet balls. Cows, clothes and gold should 
be given to them as fees. 

1 9. That pitcher should be given to a brahmin together with 
gold and its mouth being covered by another vessel contain- 
ing glice and sweet gruel. 

20. All would get all things by offering libation for seven 
years. A woman (would get) children and fortune and a girl 
(would get) a husband born to a king. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVEN 
Mode of performing Kaumudavrata 

Fire -god said : 

1 . The Kaumudavrata, which has been described 1 by me, 
should be practised in the bright (fortnight) in aivayuji . After 
fasting on the eleventh day, lord Hari should be worshipped 
for a month. 

2. (One should resolve as follows): “I shall practise the 
Kaumudavrata taking food only once (daily) in the brightfort night 
in aivina after repeating (the name of) Hari for a month, for the 
sake of enjoyment and emancipation”. 

3-4. After fasting, he should worship lord Vi§nu, after 
having besmeared the lord with sandals, agallochum and saffron 
with lotus, blue lotus flowers or white lotuses or mdlali (flower). 
(He should offer) a lamp with oil silently. Offering of sweet 
gruel, cakes and sweet balls (should be made) day and night. 

5. “ Orii obeisance to Vasudeva”. Having made the offering 

(with this syllable) (the vow) should be completed. Food and 
other things should be given to a brahmin. The fast for a month 
would continue until the lord wakes up. (If it is continued) 
beyond that (it would get) greater benefit. 


1. See Ch. 198 13-14. 



538 


Agni Purana 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHT 
Rules and regulations relating to vows and gifts in general 
Fire-god said : 

1-3. I shall describe briefly the vows and gifts in general. 
Whichever vow or whichever gift or whichever article or the 
routines in whichever time such as the first lunar day and other 
days, on days such as the (Sunday), in asterisms such as the 
krttikd , in viskumba (a particular combination) etc., in the (constel- 
lations) aries etc. and at the time of the eclipses, lord Visnu 
is the governing deity for all these materials, and time. Sun, 
Isa, Brahma, LaksmI and all others are the manifestations of 
lord Visnu. 

4-12. The vow, gift, worship and other acts done for him 
would yield all things. “O lord of the universe ! You come here. 
(Her c are) scat, water for washing the feet, waters of libation, 
the sweet drink, water for sipping, bathing, clothes, perfumes, 
flower, incense, lamp and offerings. Obeisance to you.” This is 
the common statement in worship, vow and giving gift. The 
statement for giving a gift is similar. Listen to me. “Today I 
offer this article dedicated to Visnu to such and such a brah- 
min belonging to such and such a golra. I offer this gift to you 
for the appeasement of all sins, for increasing the longevity and 
health, for increasing the fortune, for furthering the progeny in 
the golra, for conquest, wealth, piety, desire for prosperity, the 
removal of that sin, and release from mundane existence. For 
the sake of the accomplishment of this gift I am giving to you 
only. May the lord, the master of the world, get permanently 
pleased with this. O Lord of sacrifice, gift and vow ! Give me 
knowledge, fame and other things. Give me piety, desire, wealth 
and emancipation, that which is wished by the mind”. Whoever 
reads this collection of vow and gift daily, would get the desires 
fulfilled, would become pure and get enjoyment and emancipa- 
tion. The vows which should be practised under the auspices of 
different lunar days, weekdays, casterisms, positions of the sun, 
astral combinations and Manu and the like should not be practis- 
ed by worshipping god Vasudeva in one and the same way. 



209 . 1-12 


539 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINE 
Rules relating to gifts 

Fire-god said : 

1. Listen to me. I shall describe the charities that would 
bestow enjoyment and emancipation. One who docs acts of 
charity (such as digging wells etc. ) would get all things. 

2. (Digging) reservoirs, wells and tanks, (constructing) 
temples, giving food and (establishing) gardens arc (known to 
be) purtadharma , that confers emancipation. 

3. Performing agnihotra (a kind of sacrifice), penance, truth, 
protecting scriptures, serving guests, (doing) vaifvadeva (an 
offering made to the gods Visvedevas) arc said to be ista that 
take one to heaven. 

4. The gift (made) at the time of the eclipse of planets and 
(that offered) at the time of the entry of the Sun from one constel- 
lation to another, gift made on the twelfth lunar days etc. 
(arc also) purta , which also take one to heaven. 

5-7. A gift at the (proper) place, time and (to a proper) 
person would be of crore merits especially in the transit of the 
Sun on the tropics, on the equinox, at the (time of) vyatipata , 
at the waning of the day, at different days beginning the cycles 
of period, at the transit of the Sun from one constellation to 
another, on the fourteenth days, on the eighth days, on the full- 
moon days, on the twelfth days, at the time of affakas 
(a collection of three days beginning from the seventh day 
after the full moon), at the time of sacrifices, festivals and marri- 
ages, at the Manu-periods, at the vidhrti (yoga) 9 on having had a 
bad dream and when a good brahmin has been got. 

8-12. Otherwise it is desired that a gift (has to be bestowed) 
always upon those on whom one has the faith to do. Tropical 
(periods are) two, equinoxes (are) two making up four. The 
eightysix (auspicious periods are) — the four visnupadis 1 ., the 
twelve transits of the Sun from one constellation to another (and) 
the transit of the Sun in virgo, gemini, pisccs and sagittarious. 
The eightysix (periods) are said to have eightysix times merits 
(than ordinary periods). The two summer and winter solstices 


1. They are taurus, leo, scorpio and acquarious. 



540 


Agni Purdna 

are meritorious when it has come and when it has not come i.e., 
thirty naqlis 1 in cancer and twenty in capricorn respectively. 
When the Sun stays in the libra or aries (it would be) ten ( nails ) 
in both. In the eightysix (periods) described already sixty nd$ikds 
(are auspicious after the Sun’s entry). Among the auspicious 
periods of visnupadi sixteen (na<j.is) before and after (are auspi- 
cious). 

13. It is said to be the vyatipata if the Sunday morning occurs 
in (the astcrisms) fravana , aivani , dhanisfha and d$le$a. 

14-15. The krta(yuga) began on the ninth day in the bright 
fortnight in karttika , the treta (yuga) on the third day in the bright 
(fortnight) in vaiSdkha , the dvapara {yuga) on the new-moon day 
in the month of magha and the kali {yuga) on the thirteenth day 
of the dark (fortnight) in nabhasyaka {bhadrapada) . One has to 
know them thus. One should also know the periods of Manu and 
others thus. 

16-19. Gifts made on the ninth day of the white (fortnight) 
in aSvayuk , the twelfth day in karttika , the third day in magha and 
bhadrapada , the new-moon day in phdlguna , the eleventh day in 
pausa, the tenth day in asarfha, the seventh day in the month of 
magha , the eighth day of the dark (fortnight) in Srdvana , the full- 
moon day in dsddha , and similarly fifteenth day of karttika , phdl- 
guna and jyaisfha , the three asfakas 2 in the later part of dgrahayani 
(December-January) and the eighth day known as the as taka 
confer undecaying benefits. 

20. (In the same way one should give gifts in the auspicious 
periods) at sacred places like Gaya, (the river) Ganga and 
Prayaga and temples etc. Gifts should be made without being 
requested. But knowledge, wealth and girls (should) not (be 
given as gifts thus). 

21. Gift should be made facing the east and the gift should 
be received facing the north. (By this) the longevity of the giver 
increases and that of the recipient does not decrease. 

22-26. (In general) (the name of ) the gotra of the recipient 
and their own selves are repeated and the gift is made (by the 
givers). In the case of giving away a girl in marriage (the name 
of) the three {gotras) (should be repeated). Gift should be given 
after bathing and worshipping the deity (along) with (the reci- 


1 . One nadl is equal to 24 minutes. 

2. The collection of seventh, eighth and ninth days after fulPmoon. 



209.27-38 


541 


tation of) the vydhrtis (the syllables bhu etc. of the gdyatrl mantra) 
together with water. Gold, horse, sesamum, elephant, servant, 
chariot, earth, house, girl and tawny, cow are the ten great gifts. 
The money got by one’s learning, valour, penance, means of a 
girl, by officiating as a priest and through the disciple is (said to 
be) iulka (fees, or bride’s-price etc.). All the wealth acquired by 
following some trade or work is also (known as) iulka. Ail that 
which was got by usury, agriculture and trade and that obtained 
as a favour and the one got by gambling, dice, stealing etc. and 
similar heroic pursuits (are said to be acquired) by some device. 
The three kinds (of acquisition) have three different kinds (of 
fruits). 

27. Woman’s property is said to be of six kinds — adhyagni 
(gift made to a woman at the time of marriage), adhyavaha - 
nika (gift made to a woman at the time of leaving her father’s 
house for her husband’s house), gift made (by the husband) 
out of love or affection and gifts got from the brother, mother or 
father. 

28. Brahmins, warriors and tradesmen (have their own) 
wealth. (But) a iudra (will have) by their favour. One should 
not give as gift cow, house, bed and women to many. 

29-30. If one promises to give a gift and does not give, it 
would kill hundred of generations. Whatever little merit one 
has acquired should be made to the gods, preceptors, mothers 
and fathers with one’s effort. The wealth that has been given 
(as a gift) with a view to have something in return (would be) 
useless. 

31-33. Piety is accomplished by faith. Even water given 
(to the thirsty gets) undiminishing (merit). One is said to be an 
excellent person (to receive a gift) if he is endowed with knowl- 
edge, good conduct and quality, avoids doing harm to others 
and protects and saves the ignorant. A gift made to the mother 
is hundred times (meritorious than the others), and that to the 
father is thousand times (meritorious). The gift given to the 
daughter (gets) endless (merits) and that to the sister (gets) 
undecaying (merits). A gift (given) to a creature (is) of equal 
merit and that (given) to a sinner (is) of great merit. 

34-38. (A gift) to (a person of) the mixed caste (is) two 
times (meritorious) , a gift to a iftdra (is) four times (meritorious), 
to a vaiiya (is) eight times (meritorious) and to a kfatriya is sixteen 



542 


Agni Purdna 


times (meritorious). I shall describe (the merits of giving a 
gift) to a brahmin. (Gift made) to one who has "studied] the scrip- 
tures is hundred times (merit-worthy), to one who imparts 
the scriptures is of endless (merit). It is said that gift (given) 
to the priest and the officiating priest is of undecaying (merit). 
Gift given to those devoid of wealth and to a sacrificer would be 
of limitless (merit). A brahmin who does not do penances and 
study and has desire to accept gift would get drowned along with 
that just like a practitioner together with the stone in the floods. 
After bathing and touching (waters) properly one should 
accept the gift after becoming pure and restraining senses. 
The recipient of the gift should always repeat the sdviiri ( gdyatri ). 
Then the deity should be glorified together with the materials. 

39-48. The recipient should utter the complimentary words 
loudly after having received from an excellent brahmin, (in a) 
soft (voice) (after receiving) from a ksatriya (warrior), in a low 
voice (after receiving) from a vifa (tradesman) and mentally 
(after receiving) from a Sudra. (I shall describe the deities of 
different things). All (the gods) are the presiding deities for 
(the gift of) protection. Visnu is the deity of the earth. Girl, 
servant and female servant arc said to be governed by Prajapati. 
An elephant is also governed by Prajapati. The deity for the 
horse is Yama (god of Death). Similarly all the one-hoofed ani- 
mals and the buffalo are governed by the God of Death. Nirrti 
(is the presiding deity) of the camel, Siva is that of a cow, t ire- 
god is tliat of a goat, Varuna is that of a ram, Hari is that of a 
boar, Wind-god is that of forest animals, Varuna for the tank, 
(Varuna) for vessels of water such as the pot etc. and gems got 
from the ocean, Fire-god for gold and iron, Prajapati for food 
grains and cooked food, Gandharva for fragrant material, 
Brhaspati for dress, Wind-god for all birds, Brahma for knowledge 
and its accessories, Saras vail for books etc., Visvakarma for 
sculpture, Vanaspati for the trees etc. The deities of the materials 
make up the body of Hari. Angiras is said to be the deity of 
umbrella, antelope-skins, bed, chariot, seat, sandals and vehicle. 
All ammunitions, weapons, banners etc. (are governed) by all 
the gods. A house also (is governed) by all the gods. (Lord) 
Vi§nu is the presiding deity of all things. 

49-54. Or Siva may be (the presiding deity) ^because there 
is no other article besides the above. One should mention the 



209.55-63 


543 


name of the material and say that “I am giving”. Then water 
should be given on the hand. This is known to be the procedure 
in all gifts. (The receiver) should say c< (Lord) Visnu is the 
giver. (Lord) Visnu is the materials. I am receiving.” Wish- 
ing the welfare of the giver is the duty of the recipient (that 
confers) the two fruits of enjoyment and emancipation. One 
may accept gift from all for protecting the preceptors and servants 
and also to propitiate gods and manes. But he should not get 
satisfied with that. Money should not (be taken) from a iudra 
for the sake of sacrifice. The benefit of that would reach the 
§udra. Molasses, butter-milk and juices etc. may be accepted by 
an anchorite from a iudra, A brahmin struggling for his existence 
may accept gift from all. If the brahmins are associated with 
fire and sun there cannot be any defect in teaching performing 
sacrifice or by accepting a gift from a prohibited person. 

55. (A gift) is given in the krtayuga by approaching the per- 
son, is given in the tretayuga after inviting (the person concerned) . 
(A gift is made) in the dvaparayuga to one who seeks and in the 
kaliyuga to one who follows and begs. 

56-63. Water should be poured on the ground after mentally 
resolving to give to a suitable person. The ocean has its limit. 
But there is no limit for the gift. (I shall give) to such and such 
a person belonging to such and such a gotra, who is a good soul, 
and a proper person who is learned in the Vedas and its accesso- 
ries at the time of the eclipse of the Moon and Sun, at the entry 
of the Sun into a constellation, at the sacred places of great merit 
such as the Ganges, Gaya, Prayaga etc. “I make a gift of such 
and such an article for which Visnu and Siva and others, are the 
presiding deities for the sake of (getting) children, grand child- 
ren, house, fortune, wife endowed with good qualities and for 
the increase of fame, learning, desire, fortune and health and for 
the destruction of all sins and for getting heaven, enjoyment and 
emancipation. I give this to you. May lord Hari (identical with) 
Siva, the destroyer of spate of evils belonging to the heaven, sky 
and earth be pleased. May you be the conferer of the world 
of Brahma on me for the sake of getting the piety, wealth and 
desire. I offer gold as fee to such and such a brahmin of such and, 
such a gotra for the sake of making this gift established”. AH 
gifts should be made with this sentence for giving a gift. 



544 


Agni Purdna 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TEN 
Sixteen great gifts 

Fire-god said : 

1-4. I shall describe all the gifts. The great gifts (are) 
sixteen. (The gift known as) the tuldpurusa 1 is the first. (The 
others are) gift of hiranyagarbha , brahman da kalpavrksa (celestial 
tree). The fifth one (is the gift of) thousand cows. (The gift 
of) golden kamadhenu (the celestial cow) (is the sixth one). 
The seventh one (is the gift of) golden horse. (The other gifts 
are) the golden horse and chariot and the golden elephant and 
horse. Then (the remaining gifts arc) five ploughs and (the 
gift of) earth, vtivacakra , kalpalatd , the excellent seven oceans, 
ratnadhenu and mahabhutaghafa. (The gift) should be given on an 
auspicious day. 

5. Gift should be given to a brahmin after having worshipp- 
ed gods in a circle in a shed. Listen to me. I shall describe 
ten gifts (known as) meruddna (heaps of different things). 

6. The best gift is that of a thousand dronas (a measure) 
of grains. The rest are successively half (the quantity) of the 
preceding ones. An excellent gift of a mountain of salt should be 
given (consisting of) sixteen dronas . 

7. An excellent (gift) of a mountain of molasses would be 
of ten bhdras (a measure). The rest (would be) successively half 
of the preceding ones. An excellent hill of gold would be of 
thousand palas (a measure of weight) and the rest as that (des- 
cribed above). 

8. A hill of sesamum would be of ten dronas (the rest being) 
duly five and three dronas . The hill of cotton would be twenty, 
ten and five bhdras (respectively). 

9. An excellent hill of ghee would be twenty pots of ghee. 
An excellent hill of silver (would be) ten thousand palas . 

10-12. (An excellent) hill of sugar (would be) eight bhdras 
and the medium (would be) half that (and the inferior still half 
that. I shall describe the ten cows by giving which one would 
get enjoyment and emancipation. The first one would be the 
cow of molasses and the next one would be the cow of ghee. 
The third one is the cow of sesamum and the fourth one cow of 

1. gold, jewel or other valuable things equal to a man** weight given 
to a Brahmana as a gift. 



210.13-29 


545 


water. (The others are) cow of milk, cow of honey, cow of sugar, 
cow of curd and the cow of juices. The tenth one is the cow in 
its natural form. This is said to be the rule (governing the ten 
cows). 

13-18. In the case of liquid materials given as the cow, 
they should be in the form of the pots. But they should be a heap 
in the case of other (materials ) . One should place a deer skin 
of four cubits (length) on the ground besmeared with cow dung 
with the neck (part) on the east. Darbha should be spread every- 
where. Similarly (a seat) should be made for the calf with 
the tender skin of enaka (a kind of black antelope). The cow to- 
gether with the calf should be arranged such as it faces the 
east and the feet point to the north. An excellent gift of cow of 
molasses would always be of four bharas (out of which) the calf 
should be of one bhara, The middle type is known to be of two 
bharas (for the cow) and half a bhara for the calf. The last type 
should be one bhara (for the cow) and a quarter {bhara) for the 
calf. Otherwise (the gift may be made) according to the molasses 
and wealth one may have. One masa (a measure) is five krsqa - 
lakas (seed of the guhja plant). One suvarna is equal to sixteen 
masas. One pala is equal to four suvarnas, One tula is known to 
be one hundred palas. A bhara would be twenty tulas. One 
drona (is equal to) four a$haka. 

19-22. The cow and the calf both made of the molasses 
should be covered by a thin white cloth. The ears (should be 
made of) pearl oyster, the feet of sugarcane and the eyes of pure 
pearls. The veins (should be made of) white thread, the woollen 
blankets (for spreading) of white wool, the backside with copper 
vases, the hairs with white chowrie, the two eye-brows with coral, 
the breast with butter, the tail with silken cloth, the milk pails 
made of bronze and the pupils with sapphire. The ornaments on 
the horns should be made of gold and the hoofs of silver. The 
teeth should be of different kinds of fruits and the nose of sandal. 

23-29. O Brahmin ! After having made ready the cow, 
it should be worshipped with these sacred syllables. “That god- 
dess who is the fortune of all beings and who remains in the celes- 
tials may in the form of the cow give me peace. The (god- 
dess) Rudrani is always dear to lord Safikara and remains 
in the body, may that goddess in the form of the cow 
dispel my sin. That one who is on the chest of (lord) Vi$nu 



546 


Agni PurSna 

and who is the Svaha for the fire, who is the energy of the moon, 
sun and star, that is of the form of the cow O Goddess of 
Fortune ! May that cow which is the fortune of the four-faced 
one (Brahma), the god of wealth and the guardian deity of 
the world, be the confercr on me. You are the svadha (obla- 
tion of food) for all the manes and the svaha for the partakers of 
sacrifices. Hence you are the cow that removes all sins. 
Hence you get me peace”. The cow that has been sanctified 
thus should be given to a brahmin. The same procedure (holds 
good ) for the (offerings ) of all kinds of cows (mentioned already ) . 
After having obtained the benefits of all sacrifices one (would 
become) pure and get enjoyment and emancipation. 

30-34. One should give as a gift a cow having golden horns, 
silvery hoofs, of good conduct and having udders with bronze, 
with milk and decked with cloth together with the fees. One 
who gives such a cow would stay in heaven for as many years 
as the number of hairs (on its body). If it is a tawny (cow) 
it would again elevate seven generations (of the giver). One 
who gives a cow having golden horns, silvery hoofs and bronze 
attached udders together with fees befitting one’s capacity would 
get enjoyment and emancipation after giving. By giving a cow 
with a calf, i.e., a cow that is delivering a calf, one would reach 
heaven and stay there for so many years as the number of 
hairs (on the body of the cow). It should be given as laid down 
before. A cow and a calf should be given as a gift by one that is 
about to die as (laid down) before. (He should say) “There 
is the dark Vaitarani river at the dreadful entrance to (the place 
of) the God of Death. I am giving this black cow in order to 
cross that Vaitarani.” 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND ELEVEN 
Different kinds of gifts 

Fire-god said : 

1. One who has ten cows should give one. One having 
hundred cows should give ten cows. A person having a thousand 
cows should give hundred. All yield the same benefit. 



211.2-16 


547 


2. Those who give thousand cows (as gift) would go to a 
place where the mansions are golden, there would be flow of 
wealth and the gandkarvas and celestial nymphs (dwell). 

3. By giving hundred cows one becomes free from the ocean 
of hells. By giving a weaned calf one stays in comfort in the 
heaven. 

4-6. By the gift of a cow one would get longevity, health, 
fortune and heaven. She is the auspicious queen of the 
guardian deities such as Indra and the like; may she be the bes- 
tower of all my desires by the greatness of the gift of the she- 
buffalo. That mother of the demon in the form of buffalo 
the children of which (woman) are established by the assist- 
ance of the Lord of Dharma, may be the bestower of 
wealth on me. One would get fortune by giving a she-buffalo 
and reach heaven by giving a bull. 

7-11. The gift known as samyuktahalapafikti (attached with 
ten ploughs) confers all fruits. A collection of ten ploughs is 
said to be a palikti. They should be made of wood and yoked to 
bulls. One would stay in heaven by giving them bound with 
golden strips. The benefits of giving ten tawny cows at the 
Pu§kara (a sacred place) in (the month of) jyesfhd is said to be 
undecaying. Similar benefit would accrue by releasing a bull. 
(One should say) <c O Four-footed one ! You are the virtue.. 
These four are dear to you. O lord of Vi$nu ! One who nour- 
ishes the manes, beings and the sages ! Let me have the worlds 
free blemishes and undecaying when you are released. May I 
not have the debts due to the gods, beings, manes and mortals. 
You are the virtue. That fate which befalls one who resorts to 
you, let it be firm in me.” 

12-16. One should mark (the bull) with the circles and 
spears and let it go with these sacred syllables (described above). 

If a bull is released on the eleventh day of a dead person he would 
be freed from the world of the dead. (The same benefit would 
accrue if a bull is let loose) at the time of six-monthly cere- 
mony and annual ceremony (for the dead). One who makes a 
gift of gocarma (a measure of surface) would get rid of his sins. 

A nivarttana would be of thirty kunfas, each ktmja being ten 
cubits. The ground extending to ten times (the nivartma) (is 
known to be) gocarma. One who gives deert skin together with 



548 


Agni Purdna 

a cow, earth and gold would get united with lord Brahma, 
even though he had done many sinful deeds. One may give 
vessels filled with sesamum, honey and black sesamum # as well 
as a prastha (a particular measure) of long pepper. Having 
given a bed of good quality one may get enjoyment and emanci- 
pation. 

1 7. After having made a golden image of the self and given 
(the same as a gift), (the giver could reach) heaven. 

1 8. After having made a large house and giving it one would 
get enjoyment and emancipation. (One would reach) heaven 
by giving a house, a hut for an ascetic, hall and shelter. One 
who builds a cattle-shed and gifts it would be free from sin and 
reach heaven. 

19-20. One who makes a gift of the buffalo (the vehicle) 
of the God of Death would be free from sin and would go to 
heaven. One who gives (as a gift the images of gods) Brahma 
Hara (Siva), Hari with the celestials and the messenger of the 
God of Death in their middle and (the god) Pa£I (Varuna) 
as cutting the head of the latter would reach heaven. A 
brahmin who accepts this gift known as the ‘three-faced 5 would 
incur sin. 

21. One should give to a brahmin a wheel made of silver 
together with gold after having placed it on (his own) lap. 
This is (known as) the ‘wheel of time 5 of great merit. 

22-27. One who makes a gift of iron equal to one’s weight 
would not go to hell. One who gives an iron rod of fifty palas 
covered by a cloth to a brahmin would not get (the chastising) 
rod of the God of Death. One should give the root or fruit or 
other material collectively or separately for the Conqueror 
of Death for the increase of one’s life. One should make (a 
figure of) a man with black sesamum, with the teeth (made) 
of silver, eye (made) of gold, wielding a sword in the hand, 
bedecked with japd flowers, wearing red cloth, adorned with 
a garland of conch-shells, the feet having a pair of sandals, 
the sides (covered) by black wool and holding a ball of flesh 
in his left (hand). He is (known as) the embodiment of time. 
After having worshipped that (image) with perfumes and other 
things, it should be given to a brahmin. (Such a giver) would 
be free from death and disease and become a monarch. 

28. One who gives a gift of a cow and a bull t* a brahmin 



211.29-41 


549 


would get enjoyment and emancipation. One would not die by 
giving a golden hairy horse. 

29-31. One who makes such a gift endowed with bells 
would also get enjoyment and emancipation. One who gives 
gold would get the desired things. When gold is given as 
gift, silver should be given as remuneration. Gold is the 
remuneration even in the case of other gifts. No remuneration 
(should be given) when gold, silver, copper, rice and other 
grains (are given as gift) or at the daily ceremony for the manes 
and at the worship of gods. 

32-35. Silver (given) as remuneration at the ceremony for 
the manes is a means to get piety, pleasure and material comfort. 
A wiseman who gives land as a gift should also give gold, 
silver, copper, gems, pearls, wealth and all other things. One 
who makes a gift of land, that composed man satisfies the 
manes in their world and the gods in the world of gods. One who 
gives (as a gift) a market town or small town or village or field 
abound with grains or hundred nivartand 1 2 or half of that or a 
house etc. or only gocarma* extent of land would get all things. 

36. Just as a drop of oil spreads on the waters so also the 
fruit of all gifts would follow the mortal in the next birth. 

37. The benefit (of making a gift) of gold, land and an 
eight year old girl would follow (the giver) in his seven births. 
One who gives a girl (in marriage) would elevate twentyone 
generations of his family and attain the world of Brahma. 

38. Having given an elephant together with remuneration 
one becomes free from blemish and would attain heaven. 
Having given a horse one would get long and healthy life and 
fortune and ascend heaven. 

39-40. One who gives a maid servant to an excellent brah- 
min would reach the world of nymphs. Having given a 
copper plate weighing five hundred pa las (a measure of weight) 
or half the weight or a quarter of that weight or one-eighth of 
the weight would get enjoyment and emancipation. By giving 
a cart together with a bull one would go to heaven by means of a 
cart. 

41. One who makes a gift of cloth would get longevity, 

1. See verse 13 above. 

2. Sec verse 14 above. 



550 


Agni Purdna 


health and undecaying heaven. The giver of grains such as the 
wheat, kalama (rice sown in June and harvested in December) , 
barley and other (grains) would attain heaven. 

42-43. Having given (as a gift) a seat, metallic vessel, salt, 
fragrant sandal, incense, lamp, betel, iron, silver, gem and other 
rare materials, one would get enjoyment and emancipation. 
One would ascend heaven by giving sesamum and a vessel 
for keeping sesamum. 

44-46. There is nothing superior to the gift of food. Neither 
there was nor there would be. The (merit of) gift of an elephant, 
horse, chariot, maid-servant, servant and house will not equal 
a sixteenth part (of the merit) of giving food. One who gives 
food after committing a great sin would become free from all 
sins and attain undecaying worlds. One who sets up a place for 
distributing water for drinking would get enjoyment and emanci- 
pation. 

47. By giving fire and firewood (for travellers) on the way, 
one would get radiance etc. and would be served in the (celes- 
tial)vehicle in heaven by the celestials, gandharvas and women. 

48. One would get all things by giving ghee, oil and 
salt. After having given umbrella, sandal and firewood etc. 
one would dwell in heaven happily. 

49-52. A gift made after worshipping lords Hari, Hara, 
Brahma and the guardian deities on the important lunar days 
like the first etc., on the combinations (known as) vifkambha 
etc., in the (months) caitra and others, in the years and the 
(aster isms) aivini etc. is of great merit. One would get enjoy- 
ment and emancipation by providing shady trees, feeding pla- 
ces, (vehicles) to carry burden and for anointing the feet. There 
are three things which are of equal merits. (They are) — cows, 
land and imparting knowledge. By imparting knowledge one 
becomes blemishless and attains the world of BrahmSTOne who 
imparts knowledge about the brahman , would be equal to one 
who gives earth consisting of seven continents. 

53-54. One who gives refuge to all beings would get all 
things. One who copies and gives the purdna or Bhdrata or 
Rdmdyana , would get enjoyment and emancipation. One who 
teaches scriptures dancing and music would reach heaven. 



211 * 55-69 


551 


55. Money should be given to the teacher and food etc. 
for the students. What more can be possibly given by one who 
does with a motive to acquire virtues and desires. 

56. There is no doubt that one would get by imparting 
knowledge every benefit that he would get by (performing) a 
thousand Vdjapeya sacrifices. 

57. One who reads a book would be the giver of all gifts 
at the temples of (lords) Siva, Vi^nu and the Sun-god. 

58. All the castes and the four institutions of life separately 
and all the gods such as Brahma and others are established on the 
gift of knowledge. 

59. Knowledge is the wish-yielding cow. It is the unsur- 
passing eye. One rejoices with the Gandharvas by giving the 
Upavedas (the secondary texts such as the Ayurveda). 

60. One would attain heaven by giving the accessory texts 
of scriptures. One would rejoice with piety by giving the 
religious law books. 

61. There is no doubt that one gets release (from the mun- 
dane existence) by giving the established texts (of any discip- 
line). One would reap the same benefit by giving a book as he 
would by imparting knowledge. 

62. One would get everything by giving sacred religious 
texts and Pur&oas. One would get the benefit of Pundarika 1 
by imparting (knowledge to) the disciples. 

63-65. There is not known to be any limit for the benefit 
accrued by one who gives that by which he lives. That which is 
the most excellent in the world and that which is liked by one 
should be given to the manes by one who desires to have them 
without depletion. One who gives materials for worship 
after having worshipped (lords) Visnu, Rudra (Siva), the 
Lotus-born (Brahma), Goddess, VighneSvara .(lord of impedi- 
ments) and others would get everything. One who causes (to 
construct) a temple and to make an image would get all things. 

66. One would be free from blemishes by washing and clean- 
ing the temple. One who draws the mystic diagrams would 
become the ruler of a province subsequently. 

67-69. After having given perfumes, flowers, incense, lamp, 
food offering, circumambulation, bell, banner, canopy, (arran- 


1. A unit of measurement. 



552 


Agtti Purdya 


ged) a show, musical instruments and music and clothes, for the 
lord, one would get enjoyment and emancipation. One should 
give musk, benzoin, sandal wood, agallochum, camphor, musta 
(a kind of grass), guggulu (a fragrant resin) and vijaya . One who 
establishes light at the time of solstice and others with a prastha 
(a measure) of ghee would get everything. 

70-71. Bathing is known to be with hundred palas (of 
materials), bathing with oil with twentyfive palas . A great bath- 
ing is said to be with a thousand palas (of materials) . (By bathing) 
with water ten sins (are washed off), by bathing with thick 
milk hundred sins (are washed off), (by bathing) with milk 
a thousand (sins are washed off) and ten thousand (sins are 
washed off by bathing) with ghee. 

72. One would get fortune and wealth and would go to 
heaven by giving a maid-servant, servant, ornaments, cow, land, 
horse and elephant and other things for the deity. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWELVE 
Gifts granting the desired fruits 

Fire-god said : 

1. I shall describe gifts that confer the desired bene- 
fits. One should do daily worship each month and do the 
worship for (the accomplishment of one’s) desires. 

2-3. The undertaking of the vow, worship of the preceptor 
and the grand worship at the end of the year (are the routines). 
One who gives a horse and a lotus made of flour to lord Siva 
after worship in m&rgaiir§a would live in the world of Sun for a 
long time. (By giving) an elephant made of flour in pau$a , 
one would lift twentyone generations. 

4. By giving a horse and a chariot made of flour in mdgha , 
one would not go to hell. One would become a monarch and 
would ascend heaven by giving a bull made of flour in ph&l- 
guna . 

5. Having given a cow made of sugarcane together with a 
servant and a female servant in caitra, one would remain in 



212 . 6-18 


553 


heaven for a long time and would become a monarch at the end. 

6. One would become verily (lord) Siva himself by giving 
seven kinds of rice in vatidkha . One would become (identical 
with lord) Siva by making a circular altar in the &$&4ha. 

7. One would ascend heaven and also (become) a 
king by giving a vehicle made of flowers in irdvaya. By giving 
two hundred fruits one would elevate his family (and become) 
a king. 

8. One would become a king after ascending heaven 
by giving guggulu (gum resin) etc. in bhddra. Giving a vessel 
filled with milk and clarified butter in divina would convey one 
to heaven. 

9. Having given pieces of jaggery and clarified butter in 
the kdritika one would go to heaven and then be a king. I shall 
describe the twelve varieties of gifts (known as) meruddna (heaps 
of things resembling the Meru mountain) that confers enjoyment 
and emancipation. 

10-18. In the meruvrata one should give a meru (moun- 
tain) of gems to a brahmin in kdritika. Listen to me. (I 
shall describe) the measure (of things) in all (the gifts of) Merus 
duly. Only a prastha (a measure) of diamond, ruby, mahdnila 
(a kind of sapphire), sapphire, crystal, topaz, emerald and pearl 
are excellent. Half of that (measure) would be medium and a 
quarter of that (would be) inferior. One should avoid doing 
trickery knowingly. The Meru should be located in the peri- 
carps presided by (the lords) Brahma, Vi§nu and Isa. Malya- 
van should be worshipped on the east and that is known as 
Bhadra still to its east. A$varak$a is said to be the next. The 
Ni$adha, Hemakuta and Himavan, the three, should be (wor- 
shipped) on the south of Meru. The three (mountains) Nila, 
Sveta and Spigl are (worshipped) on the north (of Meru). 
(The mountains) Gandhamadana, Vaikanka and Ketum&la 
would be on the west. Thus the Meru would be associated with 
the twelve (mountains). One should worship (lord) Viftiu or 
(lord) Siva after fasting preceded by bathing. The Meru should 
be worshipped with the sacred syllables in front of the deity and 
given to a brahmin. (One should say) ( T give this excellent 
material of (the shape of) Meru belonging to god Vi^u to a 
brahmin of such and such a gotra to become sinless and for the 
sake of enjoyment and emancipation.” (One who does so) 
would be honoured by the celestials and would sport in the 



554 


Agni Purina 


(divine) chariot in the worlds of Indra, Brahma, Siva and Vi?nu 
after elevating his family. One should make the gift even at other 
times such as the entry of the Sun from one constellation into 
another. 

19-22. One should offer the golden Meru of (the weight 
of) a thousand palas . It should have three peaks representing 
the (lords) Brahma, Vi$nu and Hara (Siva). Each one of the 
mountains should be hundred {palas ) . Together with the Meru, 
the mountains are known to be thirteen. One who makes a gift 
of gold Meru to a brahmin at tne time of solstices, eclipses 
etc., in the presence of (lord) Vi§nu, after having worshipped 
lord Hari (Vi§nu), would live in the world of Vi§nu for a long 
time. One would be a king for such a long time as the infinite- 
simal particles (of the gift) . One should resolve and give a silver 
Meru having twelve mountains. 

23-26. It would have the aforesaid benefit. One should 
worship lord Vi§nu and a brahmin and resolve (to give) 
bhQmimeru (land in the form of Meru) consisting of a circular 
orb or a village of one-eighth part. The other parts (carry) 
the same benefit as before. One who gives the Meru in the form 
of an elephant together with the twelve mountains and the three 
beings (gods) would get infinite benefit. Meru (in the form) 
of a horse (would be) fifteen horses together with twelve horses. 
Giving this (as a gift) after worshipping lords Vi?nu and others 
one would enjoy comforts and become a king. One should give 
a Meru (in the form) of cow of the same number as the horse 
as before. 

27. A gift of a Meru (in the form) of cloth would be a 
bhdra of silk cloth in the middle with the twelve cloth as moun- 
tains (around). By giving (this gift) (one will have) undimi- 
nishing benefit. 

28-29. A mountain of clarified butter (would be) five 
thousand palas of ghee, each one (of the mountains being) five 
hundred. One should worship lord Hari in this mountain. 
Having offered it to a brahmin in the presence of (lord) Viftjiu, 
one would get everything and reach lord Hari. One would 
get (the same fruit) by making a Meru ofsugarcandy and giving 
in the same way. 

90-35. The Meru of grains (should be) five ftltai (a mea- 
sure equal to 15 dramas) and the other (mountautt) of one kttsri 



213.1-9 


555 


each. All should have golden peaks (denoting lords) Brahma, 
Vi$nu and Mahefvara. One would acquire special benefit by 
worshipping lord Vi$nu in all of them. One should set up a 
Meru of sesamum in the same way measuring ten parts. The 
peaks should be as before for that (mountain) and other moun- 
tains. One who makes a gift of a Meru of sesamum would 
reach the world of Visnu together with his relatives. “Obeisance 
to the form of Visnu. Obeisance to (the mountain) Dharadhara. 
(Obeisance) to one having lords Brahma, Visnu and Isa on 
the peaks, to one remaining at the navel of the earth, to the lord 
of twelve mountains, to the destroyer of all sins, to the devotee 
of lord Visnu and to the calm person. You always protect 
me so that I may reach lord Visnu together with my forefathers 
becoming sinless. Om , obeisance. You are indeed lord Hari. 
I am lord Visnu in the front of (lord) Hari. I shall inform 
lord Visnu with devotion for the sake of enjoyment and eman- 
cipation. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTEEN 
Mode of making a gift of earth and its benefits 
Fire-god said : 

1-4. Is hall describe (the mode of) making a gift of the earth. 
The earth is known to be of three kinds (extending to) hundred 
crores of yojanas (containing) seven continents and the oceans. 
That earth upto the continent of Jambu is spoken as excellent. 
One should make an excellent one with five bhdras (measure of 
weight) of gold. The tortoise and lotus (supporting that) should 
be laid with half that (measure). The excellent earth is said to 
be (of the full measure). The middle one (is said to have) two 
parts. The last one (should be of) one-third part. The tortoise 
and lotus will be one-third. The wish-yielding (celestial) tree 
should be made (to weigh) a thousand palas . 

5-9. The central stalk (of the tree) together with the leaves, 
fruits and flowers and having five branches should be got ready 
and the five should be given by a good man. One who makes 



556 


Agtii Purdna 


this gift would rejoice in the world of Brahma together with the 
manes for a long time. The celestial cow (should be* made) 
with five hundred palas in front of lord Vi$nu. The gods 
Brahma, Visnu, Mahe£a and others are settled in the cow. 
The gift of a cow is the gift of all (things). It gives all (things) 
and also the world of Brahma. Having given a tawny cow one 
would elevate all families. By giving a girl (in marriage) 
after decorating her, one would acquire the benefit of (doing 
the) horse sacrifice. One who gives a land in which all grains 
grow would get everyting. One who gives a village or a town or 
a hamlet would be comfortable. By setting free a bull in karttika 
one would elevate the family. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FOURTEEN 
The system of veins in the body and their benefits 
Fire-god said : 

1-4. I shall describe the system of veins by knowing which 
one would know lord Hari. Fibre-like things spread out from 
the bulbous root below the navel. They are seventy-two thou- 
sand situated at the centre of the navel. They spread out and 
occupy everywhere across, above and below. They are situat- 
ed like a wheel. Among these i<fd> pihgald , sufumnd , gandhdri , 
hastijihvd , pfthd , ya§&> alambusd, huhu and lank hint are the ten 
principal veins. 

5-14. These veins are said to be carrying the ten life forces — 
prdna y apdna, samdna , uddna vydna , ndga, kurma , kfkara, devadatta 
and dhanahjaya . Prdna is the chief wind and is the lord of the ten. 
The prdna makes the life living from exhalation after the 
inhalation. Remaining in the chest of beings it fills up daily. 
The prdna gets united with life by exhalation, inhalation and 
coughing. Because it moves out from the life it is said to 
be prdria. Apdna pushes down the food in men. It is said to be 
apdna because it is the wind that carries the urine and semen. 
The wind known as samdna equalises the blood, biles, phlegm 
and wind in the body (caused by) drinking, eating and smelling. 



214.15*26 


557 


The wind known as uddna agitates the vulnerable points and caus- 
es the quivering of lips, face and causes change in the com- 
plexion of the eye. (The wind) vyana depresses the body and 
activates the disease. It is said to be vyana because it returns 
from the throat and spreads out. The wind naga (is known to 
be) in vomitting and kurma remains in the opening. (The wind) 
kfkara is in eating, devadatta in yawning, dhanahjaya in raising 
loud sound. They do not abandon even the dead. Thus goes 
the life cycle with the ten activities. Hence it is the cycle of 
veins. 

1 5-20. The solstices, the equinoxes, day and night, the sun’s 
passage north and south of the equator, intercalary month, debt, 
the incomplete night and wealth (are attributed to the differ- 
ent parts of the body and their functions). The incomplete 
night would be the hiccough and the intercalary mouth the 
yawning. The debt would be coughing. The exhalation is said 
to be wealth. The right side (of the body) is known to be the 
north and the left side is designated as the south. The equinocti- 
cal points are said to be in the middle line passing through the 
two parts while the solstice is that passing from its own nerve- 
centre to another centre. O Brahmin ! Susumna is establi- 
shed in the middle of the body, the ida on the left and the pifigald 
on the right. The prdrjLa above is remembered to be the day. In 
the same way apdna would be the night. One wind (exists) 
in ten forms. The expanse in the middle of the body is said to be 
the lunar eclipse. The expanse between the principles of the 
body is known to be the solar eclipse. 

21. Filling the abdomen with wind as much as one desires 
is known to be the prdndydma known as the pur aka because it 
fills up. 

22. After covering all the holes, one should remain like a 
pot after filling (the abdomen with air) without exhalation 
and inhalation. That is the kumbhaka (variety of) prdndydma. 

23-26. One who knows the sacred syllable should push the 
wind upwards and let out in one breath. He should evacuate if 
upwards (to the region of' the brain). Since (lord) Siva residing 
in the body (of beings) himself utters (that) (the letter ha), 
that is said to be the repetition for those who know the principles. 
That master of yoga does the repetition twentyone thousand six 
hundred times in the course of a day and night. This gdyatri 



55d Agni Purdna 

known as the ajapd is of the form of Brahma, Vi?nu and Mahe- 
ivara. There is no rebirth for one that repeats this ajapd {mantra ) . 

27. The foremost kunjalini (the energy coiled in one of the 
psychometric centres) is considered to be associated with the 
moon, fire and sun. It is known to remain in the heart in the 
form, of a sprout. 

28-32. The location of the creation should be therein be- 
cause of its suspension from that. The foremost worshipper 
should contemplate therein the flowing ambrosia. The sakala 
(endowed with the parts) is known to be remaining in the body 
and the ni§kala (without the parts) as devoid of the body. That 
one who tepeats hariisa is the lord Sadasiva (ever auspicious). 
That person remains in the body of the man both outside and 
inside just as oil m the sesamum and fragrance in the flowers. 
Lord Brahmd has his place in the heart. Lord Vi?nu remains 
at the throat. Lord Rudra is situated in the middle of the 
cheeks. Lord Mahesvara is at the forehead. Lord Siva 
should be known as the tip of the vital principle and the higher 
and the lower as its end. The sakala form is said to be of five 
kinds and nifkala form as the contrary. 

33-41. That person who produces the sound that is prdsdda 
(propitious) and repeats hundred times would no doubt get 
accomplished in six months endowed with yoga. There will be 
destruction of all sins because of the knowledge of the past 
and future events. One would get virtues such as a$imd 
(the power to become minute as an atom) in six months. The 
prdsdda has been described by me as three: gross, subtle 
and foremost. Prdsdda is of three kinds — short, long and 
protracted. The short one burns sins. The long one would 
confer emancipation. The elongated one is in accomplishing 
things. It is adorned with a dot on its head. The syllable phaf 
is beneficial at the beginning and end of the short sound for 
the sake of destroying an enemy. The heart {mantra) at the 
beginning and end is stated to be useful in captivating (others’ 
minds). One should repeat (the same) five lakhs time (standing 
facing) the southern face of the deity. After the repetition there 
should be oblation of ghee ten thousand times. With the sacred 
syllable having been accomplished thus one should do the repeti- 
tion for captivating etc* It is void above, c void iaftfac middle 
and void below. It is devoid of blemishes. (Whichever brahmin 



215.1-9 


559 


knows the three voids would certainly be released (from the 
mundane existence). One is said to be not a preceptor if he does 
not know the prdsdda , made of the five sacred syllables, endowed 
with thirtyeight parts. So also the preceptor knows the syllable 
orfi) the gdyatri , (lord) Rudra and others. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTEEN 

Mode of reciting gdyatri and its greatness 
Fire-god said : 

1-3. One who knows the syllable om is verily a yogin and 
(the lord) Hari. Hence one should practise the syllable orh , 
that is the essence of all sacred syllables, and the giver of all 
things. The pranava (orh) is known to be the first in the applica- 
tion of all the sacred syllables. Hence the act which becomes 
complete with that, will not get completed with any other (syl- 
lable). There are three great unmutilating vyahjtis (syllables) 
which are preceded by the syllable orh. The three-footed sdvitri 
(gdyatri) should be known as the face of (lord) Brahma. 

4. One who unweariedly repeats these everyday for three 
years, reaches the supreme brahman becoming the wind and 
embodying the sky. 

5. The one syllable is the supreme brahman and pr&Q&ydma 
(control of the birth) in the supreme penance. There is nothing 
greater than sjivitri . Truthfulness excels silence. 

6-7. The repetition (of gdyatri) seven times would des- 
troy one’s sins and ten times would convey (the person) to 
heaven. That goddess repeated twenty times would convey him 
to the abode of (lord )Iivara (Siva). One would cross the ocean of 
mundane existence by repeating it hundred and eight times. 
The Gdyatri excels the repetition of Rudra and Ku?m&nda 
( mantras ) in its merit. 

8-9. There is nothing excelling Gdyatri for repetition. 
There is nothing equal to vydhftis for doing oblations. A 
quarter of the hymn or a half of it or half the hymn or the whole 
hymn being repeated purifies one of the sins such as the killing 



560 Agni Purina 

of a brahmin, drinking of wine, stealing of gold and cohabiting 
the preceptor’s wife. 

# 

10. On having committed a sin it is said that one should do 
oblations with sesamum repeating Gayatrl. After repetition of 
Gayatri a thousand times and fasting one gets rid of his sin. 

1 M2. The killer of a cow, the patricide, the matricide, the 
killer of a brahmin, the defiler of the bed of preceptor, the 
person who has stolen gold and the drunkard get purified after 
repetition (of the mantra) a lakh number of times. Otherwise 
one should bathe and repeat hundred times remaining in the 
water. One would get rid of his sin by drinking water 
(consecrated by the repetition) of Gayatrl hundred times. 

13. The Gayatrl repeated hundred times is remembered to 
destroy one’s sins. That goddess repeated a thousand times would 
destroy the minor offences. 

14-21. The repetition a crore times would yield the desired 
benefits and lead one to godhead and sovereignty. After having 
uttered the syllable orh first and (the syllables) bhuh , bhuvah 
and suah (the earth, sky and heaven) then, and the pranava ( orh ) 
and Gayatri at the end is said to be (the mode) for repeti- 
tion. Vifvamitra is the sage, gayatri the metre and Savita (Sun) 
the god (for the mantra) when it is used for appeasement 
(of gods), for repetition and for offering oblation. The gods 
who preside over different letters constituting the mantra are 
the Fire god, Wind god, Sun, Lightning, God of Death, lord 
of the water (ocean), Jupiter, God of rain, Indra, Gandharva, 
Pu?an, Mitra, Varuna, Tvastr, Vasus, Maruts, Moon, Angiras, 
Vi$ve (devas), jViwa^fl(Asvins),Ka, Rudra, Brahma and Vi$nu 
respectively who are said to destroy sins at the time of repetition 
of Gayatri. (They respectively protect) the toes, ankles, legs, 
knees, shanks, the male organ of generation, testicles, hip, 
navel, belly, breasts, heart, neck, face, cheek, nostrils, eyes, the 
centre of the eye-brows, forehead, front part of the face, the two 
sides on the right and left, head and the mouth in order. 

22-24. Yellow, blue, tawny, green, colour of the fire, the 
golden colour of lightning, smoky, black, red, white, colour of the 
sapphire, crystal coloured, golden, white, red, all the lustre, 
golden, smoky, blood red, blue red, golden, white, dark green 



215.25-34 


561 


are the colours of G&yatri. It destroys sins at the time of repeti- 
tion and confers all desires when used to offer oblation. 

25-28. Oblations made with sesamum and Gayatri 
would destroy all sins. One who desires to appease should 
do with barley. One who desires life should do with ghee. 
For success in one’s work (one should do) with white mustard. 
(One should do) with milk for spiritual splendour, with curd if 
one wishes to have children, with sali (grains) if one desires to 
get grains. One (should do oblation) with twigs of ksiri (milky) 
trees for the appeasement of affliction due to planets. Then 
one desiring for wealth (should do) with bilva (a kind of tree) 
and desiring for fortune (should do) with lotuses. (One should 
do) with durvd (a kind of grass) if he desires for health and the 
same if portents (are met with). (One should do) with guggulu 
(gum-resin) aspiring for prosperity and with sweet porridge if 
seeking knowledge. 

29. There would be the indicated success with (oblation 
done) ten thousand times and the mentally desired (benefit) 
with a lakh times. One would be released from (the sin accrued) 
by killing a brahmin, be lord Hari and the elevator of the family 
with (oblations done) crore times. 

30-31. One should invoke Gayatri at the commence- 
ment of oblations done for propitiating the planets or the one for 
ten thousand times or any other sacrifices. Then he should medi- 
tate on the syllabic om. After having remembered the syllable 
om one should tie up the tuft with the Gayatri. Then after hav- 
ing sipped (three drops of water) one should touch the heart, 
navel and shoulders. 

32. The sage is Brahma, the metre is gayatri and the 
god is the Fire god for the pranava {orh). It is the Supreme soul 
and it should be associated in all acts. 

33-34. (She should be contemplated as) possessing white 
complexion, having fire as the mouth, divine, born in the gotra 
of Katyayana, encircling the three worlds, associated with the 
support of the earth, wearing the rosary, the goddess seated in 
the padm&sana (posture of sitting with legs crossed) and auspi- 
cious (with the following words) : “ Orh ! You are the lustre, the 
sacrifice, the strength, one of the seven Suns, the abode of the 
gods, the universe, the life of the universe, all beings and the 



562 


Agni Purdria 


life of all beings. Orh ! to the earth. O Goddess ! Bestower 
of boon ! You come ! The one to be repeated ! You be present 
before me !” 

35-37. Prajapati is the sage for all vydhftis (the syllables 
bhu etc.). (They are used) separately and collectively with the 
letter orh of Brahma. The sages (of the vydhftis are) Visvamitra, 
Jamadagni, Bharadvaja, Gautama, Atri, Vasisfha and KaSyapa 
in order. Fire god, Wind god, Sun, Jupiter, Varuna, Indra, 
Visnu are the (presiding) deities of vydhftis in order. 

38. Gayatrx, Usnik, Anustubh, Bj-hatl, Pankti, Trispibh, 
and Jagatl are said to be metres (of these) respectively. 

39-40. It is remembered that eight drops of water should be 
thrown upwards with the hymn dpo hi sfhd 1 or drupaddt 2 or hiranya - 
varndrf? or pdvamani 4 at the end in the use of the vydhftis , in the 
prandydma and in oblation. It destroys the sin done since the birth. 

41. One should recite (the hymn) ftam cat, the destroyer of 
sins, thrice in the water. Sindhudvlpa is the sage for the hymn 
dpo hi sfha . 

42. The metre is gdyatri and deity water for this (hymn) 
for brahmasnana (bathing to get rid of sin). It should be used for 
sprinkling water on the body or at the time of bathing at the 
conclusion of a sacrifice. 

43. Aghamarsana is the sage for this aghamarsana hymn. 
Anustubh would be the metre. Bhavavrtta is the deity. 

44-49. (The mantra) dpo jyoti raso 6 is remembered to be the 
head of Gayatrl. Prajapati (Brahma) is the sage for that 
because the^z/Mr (i mantras ) are not metrical. Brahma, Fire god, 
Wind god and Sun are said to be deities. The wind is gene- 
rated from the suppression of breath. Fire is produced from 
wind. Water (is produced) from fire and then purity. Then 
one should rinse. It moves within beings, cavity and 
universal gods. The syllable vafaf is the sacrifice in the form of 


1. p.V.10.9.1. 

2. AV. 6.115.3. 

3. This is Srisukta, RVkh. 5.87. 1- 

4. Designation of RV. 9.1.1 ff 

5. JLV.10.190. 1. 

6. fcV.10.9. 



216. MO 


563 


penance. Water is the lustrous sap of nectar. The sage of the 
hymn udutyam jatavedasarh 1 is said to be Praskanna (?) : Gdyatri 
is stated to be the metre and Sun the deity. It is used in the 
atirdtra (sacrifice) and the agnisfoma is the employer. Kautsa 
is stated to be the sage for the hymn citram devdndm*. Trisfubh is. 
said to be the metre for this (hymn) and Sun the deity. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTEEN 

Complete instruction relating to Gdyatri 
Fire-god said : 

1-4. After having performed the twilight worship thus, one 
should recite Gdyatri. It is known to be Gdyatri because it 
saves disciples, wives and lives. It is known as the Savitri 
because it illumines the Sun. It is (known as) Sarasvati because 
it is the form of speech. It is known to be the bharga , the lustre, 
because it is the effulgence of supreme brahman. (The root) 
bhd denotes shining. It is also known that bkrasj denotes cooking. 
It ripens the herbs etc. (The root) bhrdjr would denote shining. 
(The word) Bharga would be (denoting) shining. (In this sense) 
it has been used in the scriptures many times. 

5-6. (It is said to be) most excellent because it has an exalt- 
ed position than all the splendours. It is the one always desired 
by those who wish to attain heaven. As (the word) vfnoti means 
covering, (it signifies) an eternal, absolutely pure conscious, 
absolutely real and great god that is beyond (the states of) 
waking, dreaming and deep sleep. 

7-10. I am that brahman, the supreme effulgence. I con- 
template on that for the emancipation. That effulgence is 
lord Visnu that is the cause of origin of the universe. Some 
read Siva, some read a form of goddess, some Sun and some 
such as those learned in the scriptures and those propitiating fire, 
thefire (god). Lord Vi$nu of the form of fire etc. is praised in the 
scriptures as the brahman . That most exalted place of lord 
Vi§nu is known to be that of lord Savit£ (Sun). That lord Hari, 
the self effulgent produces the (libations of) clarified butter. 

1. fcV.1.50. 1. 

2. RV.1.115. 1. 



564 


Agni Ptirdna 


(The same god) as the god of rain, the god of wind and the Sun 
would nourish (everything) by means of cold, heat etc. 

11. Libations cast into the fire reach the Sun. Rains are 
produced from the Sun. Food grains (grow) from rain and then 
the people. 

12-13. (The word) dhimahi (may be) from the root dhd 
(to hold). (It means) “May we retain in our minds”. The 
word nah (means) ‘our’ May that Bharga who is in the intellects 
of all beings prompt the intellects of those who enjoy in all 
their acts and results seen and unseen. He is of the form of Visnu, 
Sun and Fire. 

14. Being prompted by the lord one may reach heaven 
or the pit (of mundane existence). Everything is an abode 
of the lord. Lord Hari is verily (the worlds) such as the 
mahat. 

15-16. “I am that lord who sports with the paradise and 
the like. That lord the universal being known as Bharga in- 
side the Sun should be contemplated by those desiring for eman- 
cipation for the destruction of birth and death and the three 
kinds of griefs. This universal being should be beheld in the orb 
of the Sun. 

17. You are that Supreme Being, the conscious brahman 
which is the exalted position of lord Vi§nu. I am Bharga, the 
most exalted fourth place of lord Sun. I am the body and the 
like, the state of waking and that upto that brahman . I deem 
myself as the brahman. I am that absolute spirit in the Sun. I 
am the infinite. Orh. I am that one who always directs the know- 
ledge in auspicious acts and the like. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTEEN 
Vasiffha’s hymn to lord Siva 

Fire- god said : 

1. After having propitiated lord Siva of the form of the 
Hfiga with G&yatri, Vasis^ha obtained yoga* Moreover he 



217.2-12 


565 


got the exalted brahman and emancipation from lord Safikara 
(Siva). 

2. Obeisance to the golden lihga and the lifiga in the form 
of scriptures. Obeisance to the supreme lihga and the lihga 
in the form of the sky. 

3. Obeisance to the thousand lihga- s and the lihga in the form 
of the fire. Obeisance to the lihga of the forms of the Pur&ya 
and the scriptures. 

4. Obeisance to the lihga in the form of the nether worlds 
and the brahman. Obeisance to the mysterious lihga and the 
lihga above the seven continents. 

5. Obeisance to the lihga as the soul of all beings and to 
the lihga that is the limb of all people. Obeisance to the 
unmanifest lihga and the lihga of the form of the intellect. 

6. Obeisance to the lihga representing the ego and to the 
lihga denoting the beings. Obeisance to the lihga of the form of 
senses and the subtle principles. 

7. Obeisance to the lihga denoting the Supreme spirit and 
the sentiments. Obeisance to the lihga above the (principle of) 
rajas and to the (principle) of sattva. 

8. Obeisance to the lihga of the form of becoming and of 
the form of the three qualities. Obeisance to the lihga denoting 
future and the form of lustre. 

9. Obeisance to the lihga beyond the wind and of the form 
of the scriptures. Obeisance to the lihga in the form of the (hymns 
of) Atharva (veda) and the S&ma ( veda ). 

10. Obeisance to the lihga that is the limb of the sacrifice 
and of the form of the sacrifice. Obeisance to the lihga 
of the form of principles and to the lihga of the form of the 
companion of the lord. 

11. You impart me the excellent yoga. (Bless me) with a 
son equal to me. O Lord ! May I attain the imperishable 
brahman . O Lord (you also confer) tranquillity. May the pro- 
geny be without break and let them have an undiminishing in- 
terest in righteousness. 

Fire-god said : 

12. Once after having been propitiated by Vasi?fha on the 
Sriparvata (mountain) thus, Sambhu (Siva) granted the boon 
to Vasi$tha and disappeared there itself. 



566 


Agni Purana 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTEEN 
Mode of performing the coronation of a king 

Fire-god said : 

1. O Vasistha ! I shall describe now the duties of a king 
as told by Puskara to Rama as the latter asked (him the same). 
Puskara said : 

2. I shall describe the duties of a king (foremost) among 
the host of other duties. The king should be the slayer of the 
enemy, protector of the subjects and administer justice properly. 

3-6. He would look after the welfare of all those who are 
on the righteous path. He should practise this vow. He has to 
choose the astrologer, the brahmin priest, the ministers who had 
known the minds of the people and the queen endowed with 
righteous qualities. (After having practised the vow) for a year 
the king should have the anointment with all the regal para- 
phernalia at the proper moment. But there is no regulation about 
time for the same if the king has died (and a new king is install- 
ed). He should be bathed with sesamum and mustard and the 
astrologer and the . priest should hail victory for the king. 
(Then the king) seated on the throne should proclaim protec- 
tion (for all) and throw open (the gates of) the fortress for the 
provincial governors. 

7-11. Before the anointment (is done), the priest should 
do the rite to appease Indra. After having fasted on the day of 
anointment, offerings should be made into the sacrificial 
fire for the Manus with the sacred syllables of lord Visnu, 
Indra, Savitr (Sun), and the Visvedevas and the sacred syllables 
that are auspicious, beneficial, conferring longevity and protec- 
tion. The golden pitcher known as apardjitd (not defeated by 
anybody) containing the remnants of the sacrifice should be 
worshipped with perfumes and flowers on the right side of the 
fire. (The sacrificial) fire should have flames circling clock- 
wise, having the colour of heated gold, should be like the moving 
chariot, be making sound like the cloud and without smoke. 
The flames in their natural form, fragrant, resembling the figure 
of a svastika 1 , with clear and high flames and without sparks are 
benevolent. 

1. Made up of two lines intersecting at right angles having perpendi- 
cular lines in the clock-wise direction at the ends of two lines. 



218.12-29 


567 


12-17. Cats, deer and birds should not pass between (the 
king and the sacrificial fire). The king should cleanse his head 
with the mud (obtained) from the summit of a mountain, the 
ears with the mud from the top of an anthill, the face with that 
(mud) from the temple of (lord) Kesava, the neck with the mud 
from the temple of (lord) Indra, the heart (breast) with that 
(got) from the courtyard of the king (king’s palace), the right 
arm with the mud dug up by the tusk of an elephant, the left 
arm with the mud dug up by the horns of a bull, the back with 
the mud from a tank, the abdomen with the mud from the con- 
fluence of rivers and the sides should be purified with the mud 
from both the banks of a river. It is laid down that the waist of 
a king should be cleansed with the mud (obtained) fiom the 
threshold of a courtesan, the thigh (with mud got) from the 
sacrificial place, the knees (with mud obtained) from the cow- 
shed, the shanks (with that got) from the stable, the feet with 
the mud from the wheel of a chariot. The head of the king seat- 
ed on the throne (should be washed) with the five things got 
from a cow. 

18-29. Four ministers (of the king) should anoint him with 
(waters from ) the pitchers. A brahmin (minister should anoint 
him) with a golden pitcher filled with ghee from the east, a 
ksatriya (minister) with a silver pitcher filled with milk from the 
south, a vaiiya (minister) with a copper pitcher (filled) with 
curd from the west and a iudra minister with an earthen (pot) 
with water from the north. Then a brahmin priest reciting the 
Rgveda should anoint the king with honey and a priest of the 
Samaveda with waters along with the ku$a. O Fortunate one ! 
Then the (royal) priest should go towards the pitcher containing 
the residual offering , perform duly the protective amulet of 
the fire for the courtiers and give it (to the king) with those 
sacred syllables mentioned in connection with the coronation 
and with the recitations made by the brahmins. Then the 
priest should go to the foot of the sacrificial platform and 
anoint (the king) with a golden vessel having hundred 
holes. The head (of the king) should be touched with the 
herbs with (the recitation of the sacred syllables) y& o$adhi l 9 


1. (tV. 10.97. 1. 



568 


Agni Purdna 


with perfumes, with flowers with (the syllables) pufpavati 1 2 3 4 5 6 , with 
seeds with (the syllables )brdkmana % 9 with gems with (the syllables) 
tiSilnah?) with ku$a dipped in water with (the syllables) 
ye dev&h* and a reciter of the Tajurveda or the Atharvaveda should 
touch the head and throat with rocand with (the recitation of 
the syllables) gandhadv&rd 6 and other brahmins with all the sacred 
waters. Then they should hold a pitcher filled with the herbs 
in front of the king to the accompaniment of singing and instru- 
mental music and the (waving of) chowries and fans. The 
king also should see them as well as the auspicious things such as 
the mirror and ghee etc. Then the priest, seated on a bed covered 
with a tiger-skin, should worship (gods) Visnu, Brahma, 
Indra and others and the lords of planets and place the turban 
after having given the respectful offering of mixture of honey. 

30-34. The crown of the king should be fixed with the hides 
of five animals. The king should place the hides of a bull, a cat, 
elephant, lion and tiger on that seat with (the recitation of the 
sacred syllables) dhruvd dyauh*. Then the door-keeper should 
present the ministers to the king. Then the king should give 
presents of cows, goats, sheep, houses and other gifts to the astro- 
logers and priests. (The other) brahmins should be honoured by 
(giving gifts of) land, cows, food etc. Then (the king) should 
circumambulate the (sacrificial) fire and make obeisance to 
the preceptor. (He should then move) backwards, touch the 
bull and worship the cow and calf. Then he should ride the 
consecrated (royal) steed. Similarly, he should worship the royal 
elephant and mount it. He should then go round the royal path 
along with his army. Then he should enter the palace and 
send away all (those gathered) after pleasing them with gifts. 


1. (tV. 10.97.3. 

2. AV. 5. 17.9. 

3. (IV. 10.103. 1. 

4. MS. 2.6. 3. 

5. (tV Kh, 5. 87. 9. 

6. (tV. 10.173. 4. 



219.1-13 


569 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETEEN 
Sacred syllables for coronation 


Pufkara said : 

1 . I shall describe the sacred syllables for the anointment 
of a king or god which would destroy sins. One would accom- 
plish everything by sprinkling water from the pot with the facto* 

2-6. (The sacred syllables are as follows) : “May the 
gods Brahma, Visnu, MaheSvara, Vasudeva, Sankar$ana, 
Pradyumna and Aniruddha install you. May the gods Indra 
and others occupying ten cardinal points confer victory on 
you. The lords of created beings such as Rudra, Dharma, 
Manu, Daksa, Ruci, Sraddha, Bhrgu, Atri, Vasisfha, Sanaka, 
Sanandana, Sanatkumara, Ahgiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, 
Marici and Kafyapa guard (you) always. May the God of 
Death, lustrous celestials, (the manes) Barhi^adas, Agnisvattas 
Kravyadas, Upahutas, Ajyapas and Sukalins guard you. May 
(the goddesses) Laksmi and others, the consorts of Dharma 
anoint you with (ires. 

7-13. May the consorts of Adityas and others, the progeny 
of Kafyapa, having many offspring, the wives of KrsaSva, the 
son of A&ui, ( the wives) of Aris{anerai, Afviru and others, (the 
wives) of the Moon and the wives of Pulaha, namely, 
Bhuta, Kap!£a, Dam?trl, Surasa, Sarama, Danu, SyenI, Bhasi, 
Krauftcl, Dhrtara?fri and SukI (install you). (May) Aruna, 
the charioteer of the Sun anoint you. May Ayati (future), 
Niyati (fate), Ratri (night) and NidrA (sleep) who stabilise 
the world and support it as well as (the goddesses) Uma, (con- 
sort of Siva), Mena (wife of Himavan), Sac! (wife of Indra) 
guard (you). May Dhumra, Crria and Nirrti (confer) victory. 
May (the goddesses) Gaud, Siva, Rddhi, Vela, Nadvala, Asiknl 
and Jyotsna, the consorts of the celestials and the presiding 
deity of the forest (confer victory). May the mahdkalpa (greater 
cycle of time), kalpa /smaller cycle of time), manoantara (Manu 
periods ) 9 yugas (a certain long period of time), sorhvatsara (years), 
varfas and the two half years (based on the movement of the sun) 
guard you. May the seasons, months, fortnights, nighty day* 
twilight, titki r (lunar days), nmhSrtas (period of 48 minutes)* 
which are the constituents of the time personified (guard you). 



570 


Agni Purdna 


14-41. May the planets such as the Sun as well as (the 
Fourteen Manus) Svayambhuva and other Manus guafd you. 
Svayambhuva, Svarocisa, Auttami, Tamasa, Raivata, Caksusa 
the sixth, Vaivasvata, Savarni, Brahmaputra, Dharmaputra, 
Rudraja, Daksaja, Raucya and Bhautya are the fourteen Manus. 
May the foremost celestials Visvabhuk, Vipascit, Sucitti, Sikhi, 
Vibhu, Manojava, Ojasvi, Bali, Adbhuta, Santi, Vjrsa, Rta- 
dhama, Divasppk, Kavi, Indraka, Raivanta, Kumara, Vatsaka, 
Vinayaka, Virabhadra, Nandi, Visvakarma and Purojava ano- 
int you. May the celestial physicians Nasatya, 1 the eight Vasus 
Dhruva and others, the ten Arigirasas and the scriptures anoint 
you for gaining perfection. May the soul, duration of life, mind, 
mental power, egoism, life-breath, possessed of oblation, the most 
important, divine law and truth guard you. May Kratu, Daksa, 
Vasu, Satya, Kalakama and Dhuri (lead you) to victory. May 
the Pururavas, Madravas, Visvedevas, Rocana, Angaraka and 
others, Surya, Nirrti and Yama, Ajaikapat, Ahirbudhnya, 
Dhumaketu, Rudrajas, Bharata, Mrtyu, Kapali, Kirikinl, 
Bhavana and Bhavana protect you with their children and wives, 
Kratusravah, Murddha, Yajana, Abhyus'anah, Prasava, Avyaya, 
Daksa, Bhrgu, the celestials, Manah Anumanta, Pranah, 
Nava, Apana, Viryavan, Vitihotra, Naya, Sadhya, Hamsa and 
Narayana protect you. May the foremost among the celes- 
tials who are devoted to the welfare of univcise such as Vibhu, 
Prabhu, and the twelve Suns Dhata, Mitra, Aryama, Pusa, 
Sakra, Varuna, Bhaga, Tvasta, Vivasvan, Savita and Visnu 
as well as Ekajyotis, Dvirjyotis, Trijyotis, Gaturjyotis, Ekasakra, 
Dvisakra, Trisakra, Mahabala and Indra command (saying) 
‘do not’. Then may Pratimakrt, Mita, Sammita, Amita, Maha- 
bala, Rtajit, Satyajit, Susena, Senajit, Atimitra, Anumitra, 
Purumitra, Aparajita, Rta, Rtavak, Dhata, Vidhata, Dharana, 
Dhruva and Vidharana, the mighty friend of Indra, Idrksa, 
Adrksa, Etadrk, Amitagana, Krldita, Sadfksa, Sarabha, Maha- 
tapas, Dharta, Dhurya, Dhuri, Bhlma, Abhimukta, Ksapatsaha, 
Dhfti, Vasu Anadhrsya, Rama, Kama, Jaya, Viraf, the forty- 
nine wind gods protect you. May the Gandharvas — Citrarigada, 
Citraratha, Citrasena, Kali, Crnayu, Ugrasena, Dhrtara^ra, 

1. Literally means helpful, denotes the ASvini kum&ras, the celestial 
physicians. 



219.42-53 


571 


Nandaka, Haha, Huhu, Narada, Visvavasu and Tumburu 
anoint you for your victory. May the foremost among the priests 
and the divine group of damsels Anavadya, SukesI, Menaka, 
Sahajanya, Kratusthala, Ghrtaci, Visvaci, Pufijikasthala, Pram- 
loca, Orvasi, Rambha, Pancacuda, Tilottama, Citralekha, 
Laksmana, Pundarika and Varuni guard you. May the demons 
Prahlada, Virocana, Bali and Bana and their sons and other 
foremost demons Heti,Praheti, Vidyut, Sphurjathu anoint you. 
(May) the Yaksa, the accomplished soul-Manibhadra, Nandana, 
Pingaksa, Dyutiman and Puspavanta bring forth victory. (May) 
the treasures i ankka (conch ), padma (lotus), makara (fish), kacchapa 
(tortoise) (bring) victory. 

42-46. May the ghosts Ordhvakcsa and others, the goblins 
who dwell on the earth, the (divine) mothers led by Mahakala 
(form of Siva at deluge) and Narasimha (man-lion form of 
Vismi), Guha (son of Siva), Skanda, Visakha and Naigamcya 
(other names of Guha) anoint you. May the female goblins 
and female attendants on God Siva dwelling in the sky and on 
the earth and the principal birds such as the Garuda, Aruna 
and Sampati guard you. May the great serpents Ananta, 
Vasuki, Taksaka, Airavata, Mahapadma, Kambala, Asvatara, 
Sahkha, Karkotaka, Dhjtarastra and Dhananjaya, and the 
elephants Kumuda, Airavana, Padma, Puspadanta, Vamana, 
Supratika and Aftjana protect you always from all evils. 

47. May the swan, the bull, the lion and the buffalo, 
(respectively the vehicles) of Brahma, Sankara, Durga and God 
of Death guard you. 

48. (May) Uccaihsravas, the lord of the horses, (lord) 
Dhanvantari, Kaustubha, the foremost among the conches, 
always (proect) the mace, spear and the disc. 

49. May Nandaka, Dharma, the governor of conduct, 
Citragupta, the wieldcr of the punishing rod, Pihgala, Mftyu 
(death) and Kalaka (the regulator of time) protect the weapons. 

50-51. May the sages Valakhilyas and others and the fore- 
most among the sages such as Vyasa and Valmiki, (the foremost 
among the kings of the past) Pjrthu, Dilipa, Bharata, Du§yanta, 
Sakrajit,Bali,Malla, Kakutstha, Anenas, Yuvanasva, Jayadratha, 
Mandhata, Mucukunda aitd PurQravas guard you. 

52-53. May the presiding deities of the grounds and the 
twenty five principles confer victory on you. (May) the golden 



572 


Agni Pur&na 


earth, rocky soil, nether world, blue soil, yellowish red # earth, 
white soil, Ras£tala (a nether world), the earth, the terrestrial 
region and the foremost among the continents Jambu etc. 
(bring you) fortune. 

54-55. May the Uttarakurus and the continents Ramya, 
Hiranyaka, Bhadrasva, Ketumala, Balahaka, Harivar$a, Kim- 
purusa, Indradvlpa, KaSeruman, Tamravarna, Gabhastiman, 
Nagadvipa and Saumyaka guard you. 

56-72. Varuna, the ninth gandharva , the conferer of domi- 
nion protect you. The mountains Himavan. Hemakufa 
Nisadha, Nila, Sveta, Srngavan, Meru, Malyavan, Gandha- 
madana, Mahendra, Malaya, Sahya, Suktiman, Rk$avan, Vin- 
dhya and Pariyatra bestow peace upon you. May the Rgveda 
and the other (Vedas), the six accessory texts 1 2 3 4 Itih&sa and Purdnas, 
medical science, science of music and archery, the accessory 
Vedas protect you. Phonetics, the texts laying down rules 
for sacrificial acts, grammar, etymology, astronomy and metrics, 
the (four) scriptural texts, mim&rhslP, the science of logic, code of 
laws and Pur&na are the fourteen branches of learning. (The 
schools of philosophy such as) the S&nkhya and Yoga, the P&iu - 
pata # , the Vedas and the P&Hcar&tra A are the five dogmas. May 
(the goddesses) Gayatri, Siva, Durga, Vidya and Gandhari 
protect you and confer peace on you. Ma” the four oceans of 
salt, sugarcane juice, liquor, clarified butter, curd, milk and water 
and the d :a erent sacred spots protect you . (They are) Pu$kara, 
Prayaga, rrabhasa, the excellent Naimi?a, GayaSIrsa, Brahma- 
Sira, Uttaramanasa, Kalodaka, Nandikuntfa, Paftcanadatirtha, 
Bhrgutirtha, Prabhasa, Amarakanfaka, Jambumarga, the spot- 
less, the hermitage of Kapila, Garig&dvara (Haridvara), KuSa- 
varta, Vindhyaka, Nllaparvata, Varahaparvata, Kanakhala, 
Kalafijara, Kedara, Rudrakoji, Varanasi, the great spot Badari- 
ka$rama, Dv£raka, Srigiri, Puru$ottoma (Puri), Salagrama 
and Varaha, the spots of confluence of the rivers with the ocean, 
Phalgutlrtha, Bindusara, KaraviraSrama and the rivers Gaflgi, 

1. Phonetics, the texts laying down rules for sacrificial acts, grammar,, 
etymology, metrics and astronomy. 

2. The texts dealing with the interpretation of vedk texts. 

3. Saivite philosophical texts. 

4. Vaifpavite philosophical texts. 



220.1-7 


573 


Sarasvati, Satadru, GandakJ, Acchoda, Vipa$a, Vitas t&, DevikA, 
Kaveri, Varuria, Nifcira, Gomatl, Park, Carmagvati, Rupk,. 
Mandakini, Mahanadi, Tapi, Payo?nI, Vena, Gaurf, Vaitara^I, 
Godavari, Bhimarathl, Tungabhadra, Aran! and Candrabhaga 
(and the goddesses) Siva (and) Gauri anoint and protect you. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY 
Accomplishment of assistance to the king 


Pufkara said : 

1-7. A foremost king thus crowned along with his ministers 
should conquer the enemies. A brahmin or a k§atriya should be 
appointed by the king as the commander-in-chief. He should 
also be a descendant of a noble family and well-versed in ethics. 
The door-keeper (should be) learned in ethics. The emissary 
should be speaking sweet, strong and a matchless warrior. The 
betel-bearer (may be) a man or a woman devoted (to the king), 
capable of enduring fatigue and be affectionate. One who is 
proficient in the six expedients of royal policy 1 should be made 
the minister of foreign affairs. A guard should bear the sword. 
A charioteer should know the strength of (the hostile) army. 
The chief cook (should be) a beneficiary, learned and one living 
in the (royal) kitchen. The courtiers should be well-versed in 
righteousness. The (royal) scribe should be well versed in (the 
art of) writing. The door-keepers should know the appropriate 
time of call and bebeneficiai. The treasurer should be a man well- 
acquainted with the gems and be beneficial in the acquisition 
of wealth. The royal physician should know the science of medi- 
cine. The superintendent of elephants should know (the science 
of) elephants. The rider of an elephant should be one who has 
conquered fatigue. The superintendent ofhorses should know 
equinology. The superintendents of forts should be beneficient 
and wise. The architects should be well-versed in the nature of 
the grounds. 

1. Alliance, war, march, halt, seeking shelter and duplicity. 



574 


Agni Parana 


8. Persons (employed) to give instructions in (the/ise of) 
weapons, should be well-versed in the use of weapons projected 
by the machines or discharged by the hands or not discharged 
entirely or discharged and held back and fight with hands. He 
should be beneficial to the king. 

9. The officer in the harem should be old, fifty years old if 
women and seventy years old if men. They should be engaged in 
all types of work. 

10-15. (The man) in (charge) of the arsenal should be 
wakeful. A person is employed in a task after knowing (his 
ability). A king should employ foiemost, medium and ordinary 
people after knowing the tasks as excellent, medium and ordi- 
nary. A king desirous of victory should bring beneficial accom- 
plices. Righteous men (should be engaged) in righteous acts, 
valorous men in tasks like battle, clever men in acts yielding 
material gains and men of good conduct in all acts. Eunuchs 
should be employed in (matters relating to) women and cruel- 
(hearted men) in cruel deeds. Whomsoever the king knows to 
be of good conduct, that person should be employed (by the 
kings) in the acts of piety, acquisition of wealth and pleasure. 
Vile people (should be employed) in bad acts. The king should 
employ in appropriate task those people whose fidelity has been 
tested. The minister should engage properly men of the same 
kind to find the evil doers just as an elephant (is employed to 
control) the wild ones. 

16-24. Experts should be employed in their own fields of 
specialization. The servants who have been serving since the 
time of the grandfather and father (of the king) should be 
engaged to do all tasks except in matters which are to be done by 
the heirs. In those acts, only those who have come (in that line 
should be employed). Men who have come from other kings 
(and) desiring protege should be given protection (irrespective 
of the fact) whether they are bad or good. If one is known to 
be bad, (the king) should not trust him and keep his livelihood 
under his control. Men who have come from a different country 
should be watched by (engaging) spies and then honoured (if 
they are found to be good). The enemies, fire, poison, serpent 
and the sword on one side and the trustworthy, distinguished 
servants (on the other side) should be known (as ftqual). So 
also the wicked servants on one side (equal the loyal servants) (?) 



221.1-5 


575 


The king should have the spies as the eyes. He should always 
employ the spies. The spies should not be known to the people. 
They should be good and not known to each other. (He should 
employ the spies ) in the guise of tradesmen, diplomats, astro- 
logers, physicians and as ascetics knowing the strength and weak- 
ness (of the people). The king should not trust (the words of) 
a single person. He should believe the words of many. The 
king should make use of the likes, displeasures, merits and de- 
merits of his servants and people, as well as the good and bad 
(deeds done by them) in order to control them. He should 
do only such acts which would attract them and desist from 
acts causing displeasure. The king would be adorned by the 
fortune of the pleasure of the people because of pleasing the 
people. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYONE 
Code of conduct for the servants 


Puskara said : 

1-5. The servant has to carry out the orders of the king, 
like a disciple, for the prosperity of the master. He should not 
disobey the commands of the king. He should speak only that 
which is good and dear to him. If an unpleasant news is 
beneficial (to the king), (the servant) should let him know in 
privacy. When he has been employed in some work he should 
not swindle the money. He should not do anything that would 
affect his dignity. He should not similarly put on the dress of 
the king and speak and act in the manner of the king. The super- 
intendent of the attendants of the harem should not have any 
contact with those dismissed (by the king) and have become 
enemies. The servant should guard the secret of the king. After 
having done some act of ingenuity, (the servant) should ascribe 
it to the king. He should not give publicity to any of the secrets 
heard by him from the king. When some (superior person) 
orders him (to disclose) he should say, “what to do ?” 



576 


Agni Purdna 


6-7. He should wear the dress, gems and ornaments given 
by the king. He should not enter the royal chamber without 
being asked (by the king). He should not see him at an impro- 
per place. He should avoid yawning, spitting, coughing, frown- 
ing based on depravity, raising the eyebrows and eructation near 
him. 

8-14. One should engage others cleverly by making the 
king know about his qualities. Perfidy, avarice slandering, 
atheism, meanness and fickle-mindedness should always be avoid- 
ed by one in the service of the king. A servant who thus asso- 
ciates his own self with the self by means of scriptural knowledge 
and manual work should then do the service to the king for the 
sake of the growth of fortune. He should always bow down to 
the sons, favourites and ministers of that person (the king). He 
need not gain the confidence of the ministers. He should do 
(such acts) which please the king. (The servant) should ignore 
those not liked by the king. One who knows the king should 
desire to earn his livelihood from those liked by the king. He 
should not speak anything when not asked by the king. He 
should do the desired when (he has) a misfortune. The king 
would be pleased with a person who gathers the words spoken. 
The king also would not suspect (that he would disclose) his 
secrets. (The duty of the servant is) to enquire about the health 
(of the king) and to make the seat ready (for him). (A servant) 
rejoices to hear the exploits of the king. He rejoices even after 
(hearing) an unpleasant (comment). He receives the small 
remuneration and remembers it on other occasion. Only such 
a servant should be employed. The services of others should be 
avoided. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYTWO 

Construction of Forts 

Pufkara said : 

1-2. I shall describe the excellent fortification. The king 
should reside in the fort. It should abound with th^ traders and 



222.3-14 


577 


servants and sparsely with others. It should have few brahmins 
and plenty of artisans. A country not depending on rain-water 
and having plenty of water (for cultivation) is commended. 

3. It should not be vulnerable for attack by others and 
should abound with flowers, fruits and grains. It should be im- 
passable by foreign army and should be free from rogues and 
thieves. 

4-5. The mighty king should build one of the following 
types of forts and live there. O Bhargava (son of Bhfgu; 
Parasurama) ! Fort guarded by archers, land, men, forest, 
water and hill (are the six kinds of forts). The excellent among 
these (forts) would be the fort protected by the hill. It is indes- 
tructible and it destroys others. 

6. Such a fort should have the market place, temple and 
other things. A fort furnished with weapons and implements 
and surrounded by water is an excellent one. 

7-9. I shall describe the means of protecting the king. The 
king has to be saved from poison. The tirifa well ground with 
(cow’s) urine, (known as) panc&ftga destroys poison. Saidvari , 
chinnaruhd , vi§aghni , taniuliyaka , koSdtakl , kalhdri , brdhmi , citrapafo - 
lika, manivkaparni , vdrdhi , dhdtri, dnandakarh, unmddini , somaraji and 
the gemstone destroying poison (are the antidotes for poison). 

10. Residing in the fort possessing the characteristics of a 
dwelling place, (the king) should propitiate gods. (He) 
should protect the subjects, conquer the wicked and make gifts. 

11. (The king) who takes away the articles (dedicated to) 
the god would dwell in hell for a kalpa (period). The king 
being devoted to the worship of gods should erect temples. 

12-13. The temples should be protected and (images of) 
deities should be installed. A wooden one is meritorious than the 
earthen one, one made of bricks than the wooden one. One 
made of stone is meritorious than that of the (image) made of 
brick. One made of gold and gems (is meritorious) than 
that of the stone one. Even by the construction of a temple 
sportively one would get enjoyment and emancipation. 

14. One who donates paintings, musical instruments and 
(arranges for) dramatic performances to be seen and who anoints 
the deity with oil, clarified butter, honey, milk and other things 
would go to heaven. 



578 


Agni Pur&na 


15-18. The king should worship and protect the brahmins. 
He should not take away the belongings of a brahnyn. (The 
king ) would reach hell and remain there till the inundation 
of beings (deluge) by taking away (a piece of) gold, a cow 
or an ahgula breadth of a thumb) measure of land (from a brah- 
min). There is no other sin greater than the killing of a brahmin. 
The brahmins would make non-divine into divine and divine into 
non-divine. Brahmins are the most fortunate ones. They should 
always be respected. A brahmin woman who weeps would 
destroy the family, kingdom and subjects (of a king). 

19-23. A righteous king should protect the chaste women. 
The women should engage happily and efficiently in the cores 
of household work. (She should be) decorating well the house- 
hold articles and be frugal in her expenses. She should always do 
service to her husband to whom her father has given her (in 
marriage). The lady practising continence after the death of the 
husband goes to heaven. She should not have the desire (to live) 
in other’s house and should not be quarrelsome. A widow as 
well as the wife of a man who has gone abroad, should not deco- 
rate her person. She should always be bent on the worship of 
god and the welfare of the husband. (A woman whose husband 
has gone abroad) should wear some ornaments for the welfare 
(of the husband). The woman (widow) who enters the (funeral) 
fire along with the (dead) husband would also reach heaven. 
(A householder) should worship the goddess of fortune and 
do the cleansing of the house etc. (He should worship lord) 
Vi§nu on the twelfth day oZKarttika and then make a gift of a 
cow together with a calf. Her husband was saved by Savitri 
(wife of Satyavan, king of Salva) by practising truthfulness and 
good conduct. There need not be any doubt that a woman 
would have children by the worship of the Sun on the seventh 
day in the bright (fortnight) in (the month of) mdrgaHr$a . 



223.1-1 7 


579 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYTHREE 

Duties of a king 

Pufkara said : 

1-4. A king should appoint a head for (every) village, for 
ten villages, for hundred villages, and then an over-all head. 
Their salaries would be in conformity with their duties. (The 
king) should watch them daily through (his) spies. Any irre- 
gularity that has arisen in the village should be controlled by 
the village head. If (he is) not able (to set it right) (he) should 
approach the head of ten villages and report him. The head of 
the ten villages also should take appropriate step after having 
heard the same. The king would get wealth etc. by protecting 
the state. 

5-13. A wealthy man gets righteousness and enjoys the 
desires. All actions without (being supported by) wealth would 
be ephemeral just as the river in the summer. There is no diffe- 
rence between the fallen and the poor in the world. No one would 
take from the fallen. A poor man would not give. Even the wife 
of the poor would not lend him support. A king oppressing the 
country would dwell in hell for a long time. A king should 
do in the same way as a pregnant woman who would abandon 
her comforts and would attend to the welfare of the child in the 
womb. What (use) of the sacrifices or of the penance (for a 
king) whose subjects have not been protected. One whose sub- 
jects have been well protected, his house would be equal to 
heaven. One whose subjects have not been protected, his house 
would be the hell. The king collects one-sixth (of the income) 
of both the good and bad subjects. (The king) would acquire 
virtue by protecting (the subjects) and sin by not protecting them. 
The subjects should be protected (by the king) from the oppres- 
sions by thieves (in the guise of) the officers of the state, espe- 
cially the writer-caste, just as a virtuous woman afraid of a 
villain (is protected). The subjects being protected from their 
fear (by the king) would be the subjects of the king. If not pro- 
tected they become an easy prey fqr them. The wicked should 
be put down and the tax laid down in the codes should be taken. 

14-17. Half (the amount collected) should be kept in the 
treasury and the other half should be given to brahmins daily. 
Having found a treasure a brahmin should take it in entirety. 



580 


Agni Ptirdna 

The same having been found by a ksatriya, a vaiSya or a SUdra 
it is enough if one-fourth or one-eighth or one-sixteenth part of 
the treasure is given (to the king) in order as per law. One 
who lies is punishable (with a fine) of one-eighth part of the 
treasure. The king should keep an unclaimed property in his 
custody for three years. (One who is able to establish his claim) 
after three years by saying that ‘it is mine* should be given the 
property as laid down. On the contrary the king would forfeit 
the wealth. 

18-21. The owner (of a property) deserves (to get) that 
property after furnishing (details about) its nature, dimension 
etc. The king should manage the property belonging to a minor 
till he (the minor) completes his study or crosses the state of 
childhood. The same (procedure) should be followed in the 
(case of the properties) belonging to widows with children and 
those not having the guardians. The righteous king should 
punish those relatives who seize (the properties) of faithful 
women (who have become) widows and weak, even as they are 
alive, with the punishment meted to the thief. In general the 
property stolen by a thief should be paid by the king himself. 

22. The king should obtain from thieves and the officers 
in charge of the protection, the property taken by them. One 
who lies that he has been robbed when he has not been robbed 
should be punished and expelled (from the country). 

23-29. The property that has been stolen by the inmates 
of the house need not be restored by the king. O Brahmin ! 
the king should take one twentieth of the value from the mer- 
chandise belonging to his country. The fees to be levied on 
goods from foreign countries should be determined after knowing 
the cost, the wear and tear and the profit got by the trader. (In 
this case) one twentieth of the profit should be taken. If not 
(paid) (the importer) should be punished. Freight should not 
be collected from women and mendicants. The ferryman should 
be made to repay by the king that which has been lost in transit 
on account of the fault of the ferryman. The king should take 
one sixth in the case of the grain iUka (barley) and one eighth 
in the case of the grain Hmbi (a kind of kidney bean) as toll 
befitting the region and season. The king should take four and 
five parts respectively in the case of animals and gold. Only 
a sixth part should be collected in the case of perfumes, herbs. 



223.30-224.1-9 


581 


cereals, flowers, roots, fruits, leaves, vegetables, straw, bamboos 
hides, wicker works and vessels made of stone and all (other 
materials), honey, meat and clarified butter. 

30-33. (The king) should not levy tax on the brahmins 
even in emergency. The king in whose realm a brahmin, 
well-versed in the scriptures, perishes on account of hunger, his 
kingdom gets ruined on account of diseases, famine and thieves. 
The king should ascertain the attainments land provide him 
an occupation. (The king) should always protect him just as 
the father (would protect) his son. The life of the king, the wealth 
and the kingdom would increase by the meritorious deeds of a 
person (brahmin) being protected by the king. The artisans 
of the king should work for a day in a month (without any 
remuneration). The other workers under him should (work 
without any remuneration) by taking food only. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED TWENTYFOUR 
Duties of a king in the harem 


Puskara said : 

1-2. I shall describe the duties of the king in the harem. 
Virtues etc. (are) the purpose of life (for the king). The kings 
should entertain them without mutual conflict in the company 
of the women. Virtue is the root, worldly prosperity the bough 
and action or deed the great fruit. One who fosters this tree of 
the three objects of worldly existence, would realise the fruits. 

3-9. O Rama ! Women are subject to desire. Hence the 
gems are gathered for their sake. They should be entertained and 
also not much entertained by the king who desires for wealth. 
One should not indulge excessively in eating, sexual pleasure and 
sleep. It would cause disease. The king should share his bed 
only with his beloved women. A woman behaving badly, not 
rejoicing in (hearing his) exploits, associating with the enemies 
(of the king), feeling haughty and proud, wiping her face when 
kissed, not feeling grateful after accepting a present, sleeping 
before and getting up later after sleep, shaking the body when 



582 


Agni Purdna 


touched and preventing from touching the body on account of 
shyness, scarcely listening to pleasing words and keeping the 
face turned away, ignoring to look at things placed in front, 
concealing the loins, having a pale face when looked at, turning 
her face away from the friends, appearing as if a mediator in the 
(affairs of) other women loved (by the king) and not adorning 
her person even after knowing that it is time for adorning (should 
be rejected). 

10-19. One who is disinterested should be rejected and one 
who is loving should be entertained. (The characteristics of a 
loving woman are as follows). She rejoices even at the sight 
(of her husband). When looked at she casts her eyes down. 
Being looked at she places her shaking glances elsewhere. Yet 
she would not be able to turn aside her look completely. O 
Bhargava (son of Bhrgu, Parasurama) ! She exhibits her con- 
cealed parts of body and covers up with effort the organs prohi- 
bited (from being displayed). She embraces and kisses him 
(immediately after) being seen. She always speaks only the 
truth. When being touched feels horripilation later manifest- 
ing as the sweat-drops (on the body). (O Rama ! She 
asks for easy and simple things (from the husband). She 
gets great rejoice after getting even a little. She feels elated 
and favoured much by the mere pronunciation of her name. 
She sends fruits to her husband with the impressions of her 
nails. She holds those sent by her husband on the chest out of 
regard. She besmears the body as if with the ambrosia by her 
embraces. She sleeps after (the husband) had slept and would 
get up before (he gets up). She would wake him up from sleep 
by touching his thigh much. O Sage ! The clarified butter 
becomes fragrant by combination with the powders of kapittha 
and a column of curd as also with barley put in milk. This is the 
way by which an eatable thing should be dressed. Now I shall 
describe the mode of preparation of perfumes. 

20*22. O Rama ! Cleansing, gargling, vomitting, adorn- 
ing (with flowers etc.), heating, burning (incense sticks) fumi- 
gation and perfuming are indicated to be the eight acts. Puri- 
fication of a thing is by washing it with, water containing the 
leaves of Kapittha , bilva, mango and Karavira. In the absence 
of these, purification should be done with water saturated with 
musk. 



224 . 23-40 


583 


23 - 29 . The twenty-one herbs for fumigation are — nakha , 
ku$fha, dhana , mdmsi , spfkka , faileyaja, jala, saffron, shellac, sandal, 
agallochum, nirada , sarala, devakfyfha , camphor, tala, 

kunduruka , guggulu , Sriniv&saka and sarjarasa. Two of these should 
be taken and mixed with parts of resin from a AJ/tf tree. They 
become fit for fumigation by being mixed with nakha, pinydka , 
malaya and honey and made as desired in the proper way. The 
bark, tubular part, fruit, oil, saffron, granthiparvaka , faileya , tagara, 
kdnta , ro/fl, camphor, marhsi , and ku$fha are said to be the 

things (to be used) for bathing. One should bathe with any 
three (things) from these collected as one desires after mixing 
with the musk. This would increase the passion. 

30. If one bathes with tvak , mura and analada in equal pro- 
portions added to half (the quantity) of bdlaka with saffron and 
oil, one would have the fragrance of the lotus. 

31. By adding a half of tagara (in the same), it will have the 
fragrance of th ejati flower. It gives a captivating fragrance of the 
bakula (flowers) with the dhyamaka (grass). 

32. One would get an auspicious fragrant oil by putting 
the manjisfhd , tagara , cola , tvak , vyaghranakha, nakha and gandha - 
patra. 

33. O Rama ! the oil extracted from the sesamum and 
scented with any of the flowers would certainly have the frag- 
rance of the flower. 

34. Cardamom, clove, kakkola , nutmeg and camphor mixed 
with the skin of the nutmeg would be able to make the mouth 
fragrant. 

35-38. O Rama ! a kdrsika (weight) of camphor, saffron 
kantd, musk, harenuka , kakkola , cardamom, clove, jdti , koiaka , 
tvakpatra , trufi , musta , kastdrikd latd , the thorns of clove, the fruit 
and skin of nutmeg and kafuka should be powdered and a fourth 
part of the essence of khadira that gives fragrance should be added. 
Then tablets should be made of them by (adding) mango juice. 
When kept in the mouth they give fragrance and destroy the 
diseases of the mouth. 

39. Arecanut well washed with the waters of the leaves of 
five (trees) and made fragrant with the (above) things (used) 
for (making) the pills would make the mouth fragrant. 

40. O Rama ! (the herbs) kafuka and dantakd$fha soaked 



584 Agni Purina 

in cow’s urine for three days and perfumed as the arecanut would 
make the mouth fragrant. 

41. Equal parts of tvak and pathya mixed with half (the 
quantity) of the camphor would give an attractive fragrance in 
the mouth similar to that of the nagavalli (betel) . 

42. The king should always protect the women thus. He 
should not trust them, especially, the mother of children. He 
should never sleep in the night in the apartment of a woman. 
The faith (placed in them) should be feigned one. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYFIVE 

The duties of a king 

Puskara said : 

1-2. A king should protect the princess. He should instruct 
them in the sciences of virtue, polity, erotics, archery and fine 
arts through reliable persons. In the guise of protecting the body 
of the prince, guardians should be engaged (to guard from) 
those feigning to speak pleasant. 

3. He should not be given (an opportunity) to associate 
with angry, greedy and dishonoured persons. If not able to 
inculcate virtue (in the prince, the king) should bind him with 
pleasures. 

4. An obedient prince should be engaged in all posts of 
authority. The king should avoid hunting, drinking and dice 
(playing) that destroys the kingdom. 

5-7. (He) should also avoid sleeping during the day-time, 
strolling about idly and scurrilous language. He should also 
leave off censuring, cruel infliction of punishment and extrava- 
gance. The destruction of mines, neglecting- the care of the 
fort etc. and scattering wealth are said to be extravagance. 
A gift that is made to an unworthy person at an inappropriate 
place and time and engaging in unworthy acts are said to be 
extravagance. 

8. One should avoid passion, anger, haughtiness, pride. 



225.9-20 


585 


greed and arrogance. Then one should win (the love of) 
citizens after having controlled the servants. 

9. Then (he) should subjugate his external enemies. 
The external enemies are of three kinds — those belonging to 
the same clan, those having enmity from the period of the ances- 
tors and those who have enmity on account of some particular 
reason. Among these three each preceding one is greater 
than the succeeding one. 

10. O Fortunate one ! Friends are of three kinds — 
friend of the father and grandfather, feudatory under the enemy 
and artificial. 

11. O Knower of virtue ! An empire is said to possess 
seven constituents — king, minister, subjects, fort, punish- 
ment, treasury and allies. 

12-16. The central figure is the king. He should be protect- 
ed and the kingdom is especially dependent on him. One who 
rebels against any of the above constituents of the kingdom 
should be killed. The king should be firm and liberal at (the 
appropriate) time. Thus there are two worlds (to be conquered 
by the king. The king should not cut jokes with the servants. 
The servants soon get an upper hand of the king whom they can 
persuade to laugh. In order to control people he should 
feign grief (in their misery). He should speak preceded by a 
gentle smile. He should make them feel delighted. It would 
certainly be detrimental to the work if the king is procrastinating. 
Procrastination is commended in the (following) acts — passion, 
arrogance, pride, quarrel, sinful acts and unpleasant things 
to be told. The king should hold secret counsel. There is no 
danger from secret counselling. 

1 7-20. The acts relating to the state done (by a king hold- 
ing such a counsel) is known from the deeds done and begun to 
be done. One’s mind is known from the postures, gestures, gaits, 
action, speech and the changes in the eye and face. The king, 
should not keep his own counsel, nor consult a large number 
(of his ministers). The king may have the counsel with many 
(ministers). But it (should be had) separately. (He should 
see that) none of his ministers would disclose his secret counsels. 
Men will always have trust in some one somewhere. In counsel 
decision must be made by one wise man. 



S86 


Agni Pur&na 


21-22. A king would perish on account of immodesty and 
would acquire a kingdom on account of modesty. (A kirfg should 
learn) the three sciences, the science of administration, meta- 
physics, science of wealth and business from the world. Only a 
person that has conquered his senses would be able to keep his 
subjects under his control. 

23. The gods and all brahmins should always be worshipp- 
ed and gifts should be given to them (brahmins). Gift made to 
a brahmin (would be) imperishable and the treasury cannot be 
destroyed by any of these. 

24. Not retreating in the battle, protecting the subjects 
and giving gifts to the brahmins are the supreme good for 
a king. 

25. (The king) should likewise arrange for the welfare and 
livelihood of the poor, destitute and old people, widows and 
women whose husbands have gone abroad. 

26-33. (The king) should arrange for (the proper pursuit 
of) the orders of the varna (castes) and aframa (stages of life). 
(He should) worship the ascetics. He should not trust everyone 
and trust only the ascetics. He should make (others) trust 
him adducing reason (to show that his words) are not impeach- 
able. The king should think about the wealth like a crane, con- 
quer like a lion, pounce (on the enemies) like a wolf, dart forth 
like a hare and strike firmly like a boor. The king should also 
be showing vanity like a peacock, faithful as a horse and be 
speaking pleasantly like a cuckoo. A king should always be 
suspicious as a crow while living in the residence of a stranger. 
A king should not partake of the food and touch a bed not 
tested before. He should not visit a woman whom he had not 
known before and not board an unfamiliar boat. One who 
oppresses his subjects would be deprived of the position and com- 
forts of a sovereign. Just as a nourished bull gains strength and 
becomes fit for work, so also O Fortunate one ! the nourished 
sovereignty becomes fit for work. All these works are dependent 
on the providence and on one’s efforts. Out of these two the 
providence is unthinkable and one’s accomplishments depend 
on his effort. The kingdom and the wealth of the earth of a king 
belong to him by the good-will of the people. 



226.1-16 


587 


TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYSIX 
The means of Conciliation 

Pttfkara said : 

1-4. One’s own act that has been acquired from a previous 
existence of a person is known as the providence. Hence peo- 
ple declare that will-force is superior. So also an adverse provi- 
dence can be nullified by one’s efforts. One will accomplish by 
his previous deeds of virtue without providence. O Bhargava 
(son of Bhrgu) ! Effort yields fruit at the proper time by the 
grace of providence. The providence and effort are the two that 
yield fruit for a man. The fruits would be accomplished at 
the proper time by the combination of rain and ploughing. 
Along with virtuous deeds one should exert effort. One should 
neither be lazy nor be dependent on fate. 

5-11. Ail the stratagems are accomplished by means of con- 
ciliation and other things. The seven means are conciliation, 
making gifts, creating dissent, punishment, stratagem, indiffer- 
ence and deceit. Conciliation is said to be of two kinds — true 
and untrue. Of these two the untrue (reconciliation) would 
be for the censure of the good people. Those who belong to good 
families, upright, always virtuous and have conquered their 
senses are conquerable by conciliatory words. Even demons are 
taken by false (conciliations). The description of the good ser- 
vices rendered by them (is conciliation). A dissension may be 
created between cwo who are inimical to each other, angry, afraid 
of each other and have been insulted by each other. He should 
instill fear in them. A king should give hopes to his own people 
(relatives). He should cause dissent in adversaries by holding 
out threats about which they are afraid. One who causes such 
dissents among such kinsmen should be protected by the king. 
The anger of the soldiers is external and those of the ministers, 
counsellors and princes etc. (are internal). The king should 
pacify the internal anger and conquer that of the enemies. 

12-16. Paying money is the excellent expedient. By 
giving money one would get both the worlds There is no one for 
instance who is not influenced by the payment of money. Only 
(a king) who makes a gift of money would be able to cause dissent 
in the enemies who have become allies. A king should accom- 



588 


Agni Purina 


plish by (means of) punishment and service that which could 
not be accomplished by the other three. Everything rests on 
punishment which would destroy everything if improperly used. 
A king would be destroyed by punishing those unpunishable 
and not punishing those punishable. In the absence of punish- 
ment, the gods, demons, serpents, men, accomplished persons, 
goblins and birds would transgress their limits. The wisemen 
call ‘the punishment’ so because it controls the uncontrolled, 
punishes the unpunishable, controls and punishes. 

1 7-20. The king like the sun cannot be looked at on account 
of his splendour. He should be like the moon to look at in order 
to please the people. The king is the wind-god since he spreads 
himself in the world by means of his spies. He becomes 
fire when he burns the wicked. When lie makes the gift to the 
brahmins he is the lord of wealth (Kubera). Because he 
showers wealth he is known to be god Varuna among 
the celestials. The king would be the earth by supporting the 
universe with his forbearance. Then he is lord Hari (Visnu) 
because he would protect the people with determination, 
incantation, strength etc. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYSEVEN 
The code of criminal laws 


Pu$kara said : 

1-8. I shall describe the criminal laws by (enforcing) which 
an elevated position is attained by a king. You know that (the 
weight of) three barley (grains) is (equal to) one berry seed. 
(The weight of) a black gram would be that of five berries. O 
Rama ! It is said that sixty berries (make up) a half of one 
karsa (weight). O Rama ! A suvarna (weight) is said to be 
(equal to) sixteen blackgrams. Four suuarpas make up one 
nifka and ten niskas one dharana . These are the measures of weight 
(used) in (weighing) copper, silver and gold. O Rama ! 
Kdrpka is said to be kfyf&pava by coppersmiths well-versed (with 
the same). Two hundred and fifty panas are remembered to be 



227.9-22 


589 


the sahasa first. The middle one is known to be (equal 
to) five (hundred panas) and the foremost one as one thousand 
(patias). (These are the three kinds of punishments). If a per- 
son tells ‘I have been robbed’, when he has not been robbed by 
the thieves and is handed over to the king, such a person should 
be punished by making to pay the same amount. One who tells 
differently or falsely (about the exact amount robbed), both 
these should be levied double the punishment by the king. 
The men belonging to the three castes (other than brahmins) 
who bear false witness should be levied punishment. A brahmin 
(bearing false witness) should be expelled. The above punish- 
ment has not been prescribed (in that case). One who enjoys 
(a property) entrusted with him should be levied a fine cf equal 
value. 

9-11. O Righteous one ! (The same fine should be levied) 
in the case of clothes etc. (being used similarly). One would 
not swerve from righteousness by such an act. One who 
conceals the entrusted property and one who asks for restoration 
of things without having entrusted the same (to some one) 
should be punished like robbers or levied double the fine. 
One who sells away another’s property unknowingly is free of 
fault. But (one who sells another’s property) knowing (that it 
belongs to another) deserves punishment as for a robber. One 
who receives the price for a work and does not give goods, is 
indeed punishable. 

12. The king should levy a fine of one suvarna for one who 
promises (to give something) and does not give. One who accepts 
payment and does not do the work should be levied a fine of 
eight krwalas. 

13-22. But (a master) dismissing a servant before (the 
end of) the term should be punished with the same fine. One 
who has a remorse after buying or selling something may return 
to its master or take from him within ten days (as the case may 
be). Neither one can receive nor return after ten days (in such 
a deal). Any person receiving or returning (such a property 
after that) should be levied a fine of six hundred (panas ) by the 
king. One who solicits a girl for a bridegroom, should be levied 
a fine of two hundred (panas) by the king whether the marriage 
has been done or not. One who gives in marriage a girl who had 
already been married to another should be punished by a king. 



590 


Agni Pur&na 


The fine of uttama sdkasa (one thousand panas ) (should be levied) 
in that case. One who enters into a solemn agreement (with 
a person for sale) and sells it to another person out of greed deser- 
ves to be punished with six hundred {panas). The keeper (of a 
cow-shed) not restoring the cow (to the owner) after receiving 
the charges for the upkeep should be punished by the king with 
one hundred {panas) and a suvarna if not taken proper care (of 
the entrusted animal). Land to the extent of one hundred dhanus 
(one dhanu is equal to four cubits) should be set apart around the 
village and twice or thrice as much around a city (for the graz- 
ing of the cows). It should be made in such a way that a camel 
would not be able to look over (the encircling wall). When the 
(stored) grains have not been enclosed and were lost there would 
be no punishment. One who frightens (the owner) of a house, 
tanx, garden or land and takes the same should be punished with 
five hundred {panas). (If it is done) inadvertently the fine (would 
be) two hundred {panas). All those who break the boundaries 
should be punished with the first sahasa 1 . 

23-25. O Rama ! A ksatriya censuring a brahmin deserves 
to be punished with (a fine of) one hundred panas , a vatiya, two 
hundred panas and a hldra , a capital punishment. A brahmin 
having censured a ksatriya should be punished with (a fine of) 
fifty (panas), (having censured) a vaiiya, twentyfive {panas) 
and (having censured) a Jiudra, twelve (panas). Avaifya (having 
censured) a ksatriya should get (punishment to pay) the first 
(class of) sahasa. A §udra having censured a ksatriya should be 
getting (the punishment of) severing the tongue. 

26-27. A Sudra giving moral instruction to brahmins is liable 
for punishment. One who preaches falsely the doctrines of 
scriptures should be levied (a fine of) twice the sahasa. One 
who insults men of respect should be (meted the punishment of) 
uttama sahasa. But the above described punishments should 
be half if the crimes have been done inadvertently or for fun. 

28. One who accuses his mother or father or elder brother 
or father-in-law or the preceptor should be levied a fine of one 
hundred (panas). (The same punishment should be levied) for 
obstructing the pathway of the preceptor. 

29. One of a lower caste should without enquiry be severed 


I. See verse 4, pp. 588-589. 



227.30-42 


591 


of the organ by which he had done harm to a member of the 
(three) higher castes. 

30-31. The king should cause the lips to be cut off if a 
person spits on the ground with pride. Similarly, one passing 
urine or faeces on the body (of a brahmin) (should be punished 
by cutting the) penis and the anus respectively. If a member 
of a low caste had occupied the seat of a member of a higher 
caste, his lower organ (buttocks) should be cut. One who causes 
injury to any organ of another (should be punished by cut- 
ting the same organ (of the offender). 

32. The killers of a cow, elephant, horse or camel should 
have their legs and hands cut off. One who would make a tree 
barren deserves the fine of a suiarna. 

33-36. When the pathway or a boundary or the tank has 
been cut (by a person he) should be levied double the (above) 
fine. One who either wilfully or unintentionally takes away the 
articles of another should restore it to him to satisfy him and pay 
the fine to the king. One who steals the rope or the pot from the 
well and damages the channel should be punished for a month 
(with imprisonment). One should be punished (similarly) if 
he beats an animal. The punishment for stealing ten pitchers 
full of paddy is more than death. The punisliment (for stealing) 
more than that (quantity) would be eleven times (the former). 
Capital punishment (should be ordered for stealing) gold, silver 
etc. (and for kidnapping) men and women. 

37. The organ with which one would steal from others 
should be removed by the king for the sake of discipline. 

38-39. A brahmin taking little (quantity of) vegetables and 
grains etc. (for his use without the knowledge of the owner) 
would not be a criminal. (Similarly) in the case of taking for the 
cows or gods (one would not be a criminal). One who attempts 
to kill another, should be killed. 

40. One who seizes the house or field (belonging to another, ) 
one who copulates with another’s wife, one who is an incendiary 
and one who administers poison should be killed. So also in 
the case of one who attacks with a drawn weapon. 

41-42. A king should kill those who cause the death of 
cattle by magic spells. One should not converse with another’s 
wife and should never copulate with a forbidden (woman). 
A girl choosing her husband herself should not be punished by 



592 


Agni Purdna 


the king. A man of the lower caste holding incest with £ woman 
of the higher caste deserves to be killed. The woman who 
breaks her faith in the husband, should be made to be bitten 
by dogs. A woman defiled by a man of her own caste should be 
made to live on a morsel of food (a day). 

43-47. A woman defiled by one of the superior (caste) 
should have her head shaved. A brahmin copulating with a 
vatiya woman and a ksatriya going to a woman of the low caste 
(should be fined) with the first (variety of fine). A ksatriya and 
a vatiya are punishable for going to a §udra woman. If a courtesan 
after having received a contract, goes to another on account of 
greed, she should pay (the first one), twice the contracted amount 
and (pay) twice the amount as fine. One’s wife, sons, servants, 
pupil and brother having done an offence should be beaten with 
a rope or with a piece of bamboo A thief should be struck on 
the back but not on the forehead. One would acquire sin (by 
doing so) (by striking on the forehead). The officers in charge 
of protecting the people seizing very much should be banished 
(from the kingdom) after having seized all their (property). 

48. Those who have been employed to do certain work if 
do not do the work of their employers, the king should make 
those shameless, cruel-minded to be penniless. 

49. Likewise the king should banish the minister or justice 
after having taken the entire (property) for doing the work of 
another (king). 

50. If one violates the bed of the preceptor, (mark of) 
female generative organ should be made (on the forehead), 
a pot of wine in case of drinking of wine, a dog in case of stealing 
and the head of a person in the case of killing a brahmin. 

51. The king should kill (criminals belonging to) iUdra 
and other (communities) and banish the brahmin sinners. 
The wealth belonging to great sinners should be offered to 
(god) Varuna (God of righteousness). 

52. (A king) should kill all those who offer shelter, food 
and wealth to thieves in the villages also. 

53-54. The feudatory chiefs and the governors of provinces 
in the kingdom who are sinful should be killed. The king should 
place on the pike after having cut the arms of thos£ thieves who 
commit theft in the night after having agreed (to show good 



227.55-66 


593 


conduct). The king should kill those who break tanks and 
temples. 

55. One should be levied (a fine of) a karsdpana for having 
committed nuisance on the thoroughfare when there was no 
adversity and be made to clean the impurity. 

56-59. One who breaks his contract every month should 
pay (a fine of) five hundred (panas) to the party concerned 
(Merchants), dealing fraudulently with honest men in respect 
of the price (of a commodity), should be punished with the 
first or the middle (kind of) fine. The king should confiscate 
all goods from the obstructing merchants by (paying) small 
sum and punish them with the uttama (variety of) sahasa separa- 
tely. One who adulterates the materials and who sells imitation- 
articles should be given the middle (kind of) punishment. One 
who makes contraband goods (should be made to pay) uttama 
( s&hasa ). One who insults in a quarrel should be given the 
punishment of twice that (amount). 

60-64. A fine of kjsnala 1 (should be collected) from a brah- 
min or a Zudra who eats the forbidden food. One who makes 
false balance and weight and those who make use of these should 
be levied the uttama (kind) of fine. The women who administers 
poison to hex husband or preceptor, or a brahmin and children 
or sets fire to the house should be banished (from the country) 
with cows after having cut her ears, hands and nose. Those men 
who damage a land or house or village or forest and one who 
seduces the wife of the king should be burnt with the fire from the 
cremation ground. One who copies the royal edict omitting or 
adding (some sentences) and one who sets free an adulterer and 
a thief should be punished with the uttama ( sahasa ) fine. The 
punishment for one who ascends the vehicle or the seat of the 
king is the uttama sahasa . 

65-66. If one thinks that he has not been defeated even 
though he has duly been defeated, (the king) should defeat him 
again and inflict double-fold punishment. One who summons a 
person that had not done any crime should be put to death. If 
an accused person escapes from the custody of the punisher on 
account of the latter’s carelessness, that punisher should pay the 
fine. 

1. See the first verse, p. 588. 



594 


Agni Purttnd 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYEIGHT 
Instructions relating to military expedition 


Puskara said : 

1 . When a king is attacked by a strong enemy and he thinks 
“I have been attacked”, he should undertake the military 
expedition. 

2. If the (king thinks that the) warriors had been well- 
cared for and the servants well supported and he feels, £< I have a 
strong army and I am capable of protecting the central (army)”, 
he should go with them and move into the camp. 

3-5. Otherwise one may invade (the country of) the enemy 
when it (the latter’s country) is afflicted by natural calamities 
such as the appearance of the earthquake in that direction or the 
comet afflicting it or the army of the enemy king dislikes that 
king and awaits his ruin. One should enter the kingdom of the 
enemy when he has auspicious throbbing (of the muscles) 
of the body, has good dreams and good omens. One should em- 
•ploy an army consisting largely of infantry etc. and elephants in 
the rainy season. 

6. In the early and advanced winter it should consist of 
chariots and cavalry, while it should consist of four divisions 
of an army (cavalry, infantry etc.) in the spring and autumn. 

7. An army consisting of a large number of infantry would 
always win the enemies. The throbbing (of the muscles) on the 
right side (of the body) would be commendable. 

8. So also the palpitation on the left back and the heart and 
mark of mole (on the left side) should be known as not commen- 
dable. While the contrary to what has been told on the left 
side would be auspicious for women. 



229.1-18 


595 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYNINE 
The significance of dreams 

Puskara said : 

1-14. I shall describe the good and bad omens and the way 
to prevent bad dreams. The growth of grass and trees on one’s 
body except the navel, the breaking of bronze on the head, the 
shaving (of the head), remaining nude, clad in tom dress, anoin- 
ting with oil, besmearing with mud, falling from a great height, 
one’s marriage, music, playing on the lute or any other stringed 
instrument, swinging in a hammock, gathering lotus and metals, 
killing of serpents, seeing red flowers and trees and a cdn$dla> 
riding a pig or dog or ass or camel, eating the flesh of birds, and 
the oil of krsara (?) entering the mother’s womb, getting into the 
funeral pyre, the fall of the flag-post etc., the fall of the moon 
and the sun, seeing the divine beings of the terrestrial and celes- 
tial regions as well as a calamity (such as the earthquake), the 
wrath of the divine beings, brahmins, other beings and precep- 
tors, dancing, laughing, marriage and singing, playing on strin- 
ged instruments other than the lute, drowning in a river, bathing 
in water mixed with cow-dung, or muddy water or water mixed 
with ink, embracing the unmarried girls, sexual union of men, 
injury to one’s limbs, purging or vomiting, starting in the direc- 
tion of the south, being afflicted by diseases, plucking of fruits > 
breaking of diseases, breaking of minerals, falling of buildings, 
sweeping the house, playing with goblins, flesh-eaters, monkeys 
and low-caste men, insult from others and feeling grief on 
account of that, wearing ochre robes and playing in that dress, 
immersion in oil and drinks anointing with red unguent are 
inauspicious omens and it is better not to describe them. 

15-18. (After dreaming as above) one should continue to 
sleep, bathe, worship a brahmin, do oblations with sesamum, 
worship (gods) Hari (Vi?nu), Brahma, Siva, Sun and Ganapati 
(Vinayaka). Then one should recite hymns (on gods) and 
repeat hymns such as the PurusasQkta 1 . The dreams dreamt 
in the first quarter of the night yield results within a year, the 
second (quarter), within six months, the third quarter of the 


1. RV. 10.91.1. 



596 


Agni Puritia 


night, within three months, the fourth (quarter), within a fort- 
night and within ten days (if dreamt) at (the time of) the sun- 
rise. If (two dreams) either auspicious or inauspicious (were 
dreamt) on the same night, one should indicate the result of the 
dream dreamt later. 

19-22. Hence, it is not commended to sleep after a good 
dream (has been dreamt). (Dreaming) as climbing a hill, 
mansion, elephant, horse or bull is beneficial. O Brahmin ! 
(Seeing) trees and white flowers in the sky (seeing) the navel as 
grown with trees, (seeing oneself) as having many arms and many 
heads, (seeing) the appearance of grey hair, bearing a garland 
of white (flowers), wearing white garment, the eclipses of the 
moon, sun and the stars, washing (oneself), embracing the 
flag-post and the raising of the banner (are good). 

23-27. O Brahmin ! Seizing of land and stream of water, 
victory over the enemies, success in dispute, dice-play and battle, 
eating of raw meat and drinking of sweet porridge, seeing blood, 
bathing in blood, drinking of spirituous liquor, blood and wine, 
drinking of milk, making marks with the weapons on the earth, 
(seeing) the cleat sky, and sucking milk from cows, she- 
buffalos, lionesses, she-elephants and mares are commendable. 
O Brahmin ! The favour from the gods, brahmins and precep- 
tors, the anointment with water and falling down from the horns 
of cow (are also commendable). 

28-29. O Rama ! (The dream) as falling down from the 
horns of a moon is known to be capable of bestowing kingdom. 
The installation as the sovereign, the cutting of one’s head, the 
death, the destruction of one’s house by fire, the gain of royal 
rewards and the play on stringed instruments (are auspicious). 

30-31. The family of a person flourishes that sees an ele- 
phant or horse or gold or bull or cow. (Dreams of) riding a bull 
or an elephant, the climbing a peak or a tree, weeping, besmeared 
with ghee or excreta, copulating with a forbidden women, 
(seeing) a white cloth, clear waters, tree laden with fruits and 
clear sky (are good augury). 



230.1-13 


597 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY 
The inauspicious auguries 

Pujkara said : 

1-4. Mixtures of herbs and black cereals are inauspicious, 
Cotton, grass, dried cow-dung, wealth, charcoal, molasses and 
resin, one having a shaven head or one that has besmeared oil 
(for bathing) and one that is nude, iron, mud, hide and hair, a 
lunatic, an eunuch, a.c&ncf&la, a dog, an outcaste and others, men 
guarding the captives, a pregnant woman, widow and oil-cake, 
etc., dead (body), husk, ash, skull and bone and broken vessel 
are not commendable (to be seen) . The sounds of musical instru- 
ments that are broken, frightening and harsh are also not com- 
mendable. 

5. The sound ‘come on’, (heard) in front of the person under- 
taking a journey) is commendable, (while) that from behind 
is not (commendable). 

6-7. The undesirable sounds (such as) “Where do you go”, 
‘Stand’, ‘Do not go’, ‘What is there for you by going’ are for 
death. So also (the appearance of) carnivorous animals, banners 
etc., the fall of vehicles etc., the breaking of weapons, dashing 
of the head against the door etc., and the fall of umbrella, dress 
etc., (are not commendable). 

8. An inauspicious (augury) gets destroyed by the worship 
and invocation of lord Hari (Vi$nu). If a second inauspicious 
augury is seen (while setting out) then one should re-enter the 
house. 

9-13. White flowers are excellent augury. (So also) a 
pitcher full (of water) is greatly meritorious. Meat, fish, a dis- 
tant sound, an old man, an animal, goat, cows, horses, elephants, 
(images of) gods, glowing flame, dUrvd (grass), wet cow-dung, 
courtesan, gold, silver, gem, vacd 9 white mustard, herbs, beans, 
weapons, sword, umbrella, throne, insignia of royalty, a dead 
body without (being followed by) mourners, fruit, ghee, curd, 
milk, unbroken rice, mirror, honey, conch, sugarcane, auspici- 
ous sentence, the instrumental music of the devotee, the loud 
sound of thunder and lightning are all auspicious. The satis- 
faction in the mind (of the person undertaking a journey is also 
auspicious. 



598 


Agni Purtya 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYONE 

The good and bad auguries known from the sounds of 
animals and birds 

Pufkara said : 

1 . Birds let us know the good and bad indications for a man 
staying or leaving a country or town or (putting) a question. 

2. All excited sounds are pointed out to indicate evil accord- 
ing to fortune-tellers and cooing sounds are said to indicate good 
results by fortune-tellers. 

3. The excitements of birds are said to be of six kinds based 
on the divisions of time, direction, place, kararta (a division of 
the day), the sound and the species (of the bird). 

4-6. Each preceding (item in the above list) should be 
known as more powerful. The nocturnal (bird) moving in the 
day-time and that of the day-time moving in the night (are 
known to be the excitement in time). One should know the 
malefic asterisms, ascendants and planets also as excited. It is 
known to be dhumita (obscured), jvalitd (burning) and ahgdrita 
(burnt) if the sun goes to or stays or leaves (a particular 
quarter). These three are remembered to be the excited ones 
and the gentle (cooings) are of five kinds. 

7-9. It is said to be agitated bird if it makes an excited 
sound in the direction that is (termed) agitated. Similar (appel- 
lations should be given) to wild (birds making sound) in the 
village and the village (birds) in the forest as well as on an inaus- 
picious tree. O Foremost brahmin ! The detodipta (agita- 
tion in respect of a place) is known to be in inauspicious place. 
It is designated as kriy&dipta (excitement in respect of an action) 
if there is any action improper for one's own species. It is said 
to be the rutadipta (excitement in respect of sound) making 
broken and harsh sounds. It is known to be the j&tidipta (excite- 
ment in respect of the species) in the case of the carnivorous 
species alone. 

10. If the excited characteristics of different categories 
occur together it is stated to be good. If they are mixed the result 
is said to be mixed. 

11. The cows, horses, camels, asses, dogs, (birds) sdriki !, 

small house-lizards, sparrows, vultures and tortoises and others, 
are said to be living in the villages. * 



231.12-29 


599 


12. Goats, black sheep, parrots, elephants, pig, buffalo 
and crow are said to be both domestic and wild. All other (birds 
and animals) are wild. 

13. The cat and the cock are both domestic and wild. We 
know about them from the change in their characteristics. 

14-16. The snakes, peacocks, ruddy geese, mules, pigeons, 
cows, light-brown horses, wild cocks, hawks, jackals, wag-tails, 
monkeys, fataghna (?), sparrows, cuckoos, blue jays, hawks, 
kapinjala 1 the three, tittiri (francoline partridge), peacocks, 
pigeons, wag-tails, gallinules, parrots, cranes, cocks, skylarks 
and deer are known to be moving about during daytime. 

17. The fowlers, owls, Sarabha-s , 2 curlews, hares, turtles, 
jackals and pingalikas (a kind of owl) are said to be nocturnal. 

18-19. Ganders, deer, cats, mongooses, bears, serpents, 
red dogs, lions, tigers, camels, domestic boars, men, dogs, 
porcupines, bulls, jackals, wolves, cuckoos, cranes, horses, men 
in ragged clothes and alligators wander day and night. 

20. The above seen in a group in front (of the king) making 
an expedition with the forces are stated to bring victory and seen 
on the back cause defeat. 

21-22. If the blue jay comes out of the house and makes 
the sound remaining in front, it indicates humiliation for the 
king and (making sound) on the left (indicates) quarrel and 
gaining food. It being sighted on the vehicle or on the right 
side of the body are commended. The peacock making an 
unusual sound conveys plundering by thieves. 

23-29. O Rama ! a deer (seen) in front of one that has 
set out would be (indicating) danger to life. O Rama ! The 
bears, rats, jackals, tigers, lions, cats and asses (runningaway) 
in the opposite direction as well as mule braying strangely (would 
indicate the same result). The kapinjala (bird) (seen) on the 
left or right is an excellent (augury). But it does not augur well 
(if seen) on the back. The tittiri (bird) (in any one of the above 
positions) is not commended. Thp black deer, boars and spott- 
ed antelopes crossing from the left to the right would always be 
beneficial and the contrary (movements) are condemned. The 
bulk, horses, jackak, tigers, lions, cats and asses are known to 

1 • The cdtaka bird that is said to drink water directly from the rains. 

2. A fabulous animal powerful than the lion. 



600 


Agni Purdna 


confer the desired results if they move to the left from the right. 
The vixen, fyamdnana (?), chucchU (a kind of animal), pihgald 
(a kind of owl), house alligator, sow and a female cuckoo (are 
said to be) male (omens) if they are on one’s left. The vulture, 
rUsa (?) monkey, Srikarna (antelope), and citkard (?) are 
known as feminine (omens). The monkey, frikarna, pipilikd> 
tutu (a kind of deer) , and hawks (auger well seen) on the right. 
The sounds made by the bull that is born, the serpent, hare, 
hog and alligator are good. 

30-33. Then it is not desirable to see the monkey and bear 
at the commencement of a work. The strong omen from a bird 
as one sets out on a day should be explained by wise men as bear- 
ing result on the same day. O Brahmin ! Mad ones, those 
concerned only with the prey, young ones, those mutually quar- 
relling and those separated by a distance should be known to 
bear no effect. The vixen howling alone or in groups of two or 
three or four forebode good. It is said to be not beneficial if 
five or six (vixen howl). It would be good if seven (vixen howl) 
and there would be no effect if more than that. 

34. The volcano facing the sun that causes the horripila- 
tion in men should be known to bring ill luck to vehicles and 
increase the fear. 

35-36. When an antelope is seen at a good place it would 
give good results. It would give bad results for the whole year 
for the man (if seen) at a bad (place). One may know the result 
for himself for the whole year as he had seen the deer on the first 
day. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYTWO 
Omens known from birds 

Pufkara said : 

1. An army would take possession of a city that is under 
siege by that way through which many crows enter that city. 

2. It indicates unfordable fear if a crow taking its abode in 
the place of the army goes about cawing with agitation and fear. 



232.3-13 


601 


3. If (the crow) pecks at the shadow, body, vehicle, shoes, 
umbrella and clothes and other things (of a person, it indicates) 
death (for that person). If it honours (the person, he) will be 
honoured. If it gives something that it is fond of, (it augurs) 
good. 

4-6. A crow going to and fro at the entrance (to a house, 
indicates) the return of the absentee owner of the house. It 
indicates destruction by fire (if the crow) throws a red or burnt 
thing inside the house. A red (thing) placed (by the crow) 
in front of a person indicates imprisonment. O Bhargava (son 
of Bhfgu ) , if (a crow) brings (to the house) a yellow substance, 
gold or silver, it would indicate the gain of that (substance). 
So also one should indicate the loss of that thing which (a crow) 
should take away. 

7. (If a crow) vomits raw flesh in front (of a house) there 
would be gain of wealth. (There would be) gain of land if (a 
piece of) earth is thrown. (There would be gain of kingdom if 
a great gem is cast. 

8. If the crow (flies) favourably to the person who under- 
takes a journey it bids welfare and he would be able to accomp- 
lish his task. But if (it flies) against him it should be known that 
the task would not be accomplished and would cause fear. 

9. If the crow comes cawing loudly against (the person) 
it would be an impediment to the journey. A crow on the left 
is considered to be beneficial and causing destruction of the 
task if on the right. 

10. (If the crow flies) on the left in the direction (of the 
person undertaking a journey), it is excellent and medium if 
on the right. (If it flies) against the direction of the traveller 
on the left, it would cause impediment to the movement. 

11. If the crow comes to the house when the traveller is 
beginning to move it should be known that he can set out. (If 
a crow) stands on one leg and looks at the sun with a single eye 
it causes fear. 

12. (If a crow) makes its habitat in a hollow of a tree there 
would be great misfortune. A crow (seen) in the saline soil is 
not for good. But (the same seen) as having its wings with mud 
is commendable. 

13* A crow (seen ) as having its mouth full of excreta accom- 



602 


Agni Pur&na 


plishes all things. O Son of Bhj*gu ! The other birds should 
also be known as (indicating the same results) as the? crow. 

14-20. Dogs (howling) on the right of a royal camp (indi- 
cate) the destruction of the brahmins. If they howl at the place 
of Indra in the palace, at the main entrance to the royal city and 
inside the house, it would augur the death of the lord of the house. 
It indicates the accomplishment of the task, if (a dog smells 
the left side of the body (of a man) and fear if (it smells) the 
right side of the body and the left arm. A dog coming against 
the traveller would be adverse to the journey. O Bhargava 
(son of Bhrgu) ! (a dog) obstructing the path (of a traveller) 
indicates robbers on the way. (A dog)holding a piece of bone in 
the mouth (being seen in front indicates) fruitlessness (of the 
effort). Similarly (a dog being seen) holding a rope or rag in 
the mouth is sinful. (A dog being seen) as holding the shoes as 
well as full of meat in the mouth is also beneficial. (A dog being 
seen) as holding the hair or any filthy substance in the mouth is 
inauspicious. (A dog) urinating and going in front (of the 
traveller) would bring fear. If (one sees a dog) urinating and 
going to an auspicious place or tree or to an auspicious substance 
(it indicates) the accomplishment of the task for that person. 
O Rama (Parasurama) ! Jackals and other (animals) should 
also be known (to indicate) the same (result) as a dog. 

21. The lowing of the cows should be known as auguring 
fear for the master. (If a cow lows) in the night it would be indi- 
cating fear from thieves. (If it) wails (it forebodes) death. 

22. If a bull bellows in the night it would be for the welfare 
of the master. A bull let loose in the night would confer victory 
on the king. 

23. The cows belonging to a person that were given as gift 
(indicate) security (if found) eating (as they wish). (The cows) 
that had withheld showing affection to the calves are known to 
be (indicating) miscarriage (in the family). 

24. (The cows) that pound the earth with their feet and 
are frightened bring fear. (The cows) that have wet skin, hor- 
ripilation and earth stuck to the horns are auspicious. 

25-31. It should be told in the same way in the case of the 
she-buffalos and others by those knowing (the science). A sad- 
dled horse (being seen) as ridden by another (o^her than the 
appointed person) forebodes evil. (A horse being seen) as plung- 



232.32-37 


603 


ing into the water and tumbling over the ground is not desirable. 
A horse that (is seen) sleeping without a good cause causes mis- 
fortune. (If a horse) has aversion to barley and balls (of grains) 
all of a sudden it is not commended. Bleeding from the mouth 
and trembling of the body are also not commended. (If a horse) 
plays with cranes, pigeons and the sdrikds (a species of birds), 
one should indicate death. A horse licking the leg with the 
tongue with tear-filled eyes forebodes ruin. (If a horse) scratches 
the earth with the left foot or sleeps during the day (lying) on 
the left side, it does not confer good. The horse that passes urine 
once (a day), that is looking drowsy, does not allow to be 
ridden and that returns home frantically if ridden upon, indi- 
cates impediment for the journey. (It indicates the same result) 
if it touches the left side (of its body). (The horse) that neighs 
(on seeing) the enemy warrior and touching its leg brings vic- 
tory. 

32-35. If an elephant courts (openly) in a village it would 
ruin the country. If a she-elephant after delivering a calf runs 
amuck (it forebodes) the death of the king. (If an elephant) 
does not allow itself to be ridden or frantically returns home after 
being ridden or ichor flows from the elephant, it foretells the 
death of the king. (An elephant) crossing its left foot with its 
right foot and entwining its right tusk with its trunk is 
auspicious. A bull or a horse or an elephant entering the enemy 
forces is inauspicious. If clouds get broken (suddenly) and rain 
excessively, (the king) would get his army routed. 

36. The tumbling down of the umbrella at the time of a 
travel or during the war on account of adverse asterisms and 
planetary conditions or the wind blowing against (the forces) 
forebodes fear. 

37. Contended men and favourable planets are the charac- 
teristics for (foreboding) victory. The warriors being attacked 
by the crows and demons (forebodes) the destruction of the 
army. The east, west, north-east and north are the excellent and 
auspicious directions. 



604 Agni Purdnct 

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYTHREE 

The propitious periods for undertaking an expedition 
Pufkara said : 

1-3. I shall describe all kinds of journeys relating to a sove- 
reign. A journey should be abandoned when the Venus has set 
or is in a weak house or debilitated or in the house of an enemy 
or retrograde or malefic. One should avoid a journey when the 
Mercury is retrograde, the presiding planet of the quarter or 
any other planet (in a similar position), is under the vaidhfti 1 , 
vyatipata , ndga 2 } iakuna , catuspada and kintughna . 

4. One should avoid undertaking journey under (the in- 
fluence of} vipat ( tdra ) 3 4 , naidhana, pratyari , as well as the janma , 
the gander and the void lunar day. 

5. The north and the east are said to be having the same 
virtues. In the same way the west and south are of the same 
virtues. 

6.. One should not cross the obstacle that has risen from the 
north-west to the south-east. Sundays, Mondays and Saturdays 
are not auspicious (for a journey). 

7-10. (The asterisms) krttikd and others (for journey) 
in the east, (the asterisms) maghd and others (for journey) in 
the south, (the asterisms) anurddhd and others (for journey) in 
the west and (the asterisms) jyesfhd and others (for journey) 
in the north are all commendable. I shall describe the measure 
of the shadows (cast by the sun on different days. It is said 
to be twenty for the Sun, sixteen for the Moon, fifteen for the 
Mars, fourteen for the Mercury, thirteen for the Jupiter, twelve 
for the Venus and eleven for the Saturn. These are said (to be 
valid) for all actions. One should not set out on a journey under 
his native ascendant and in the direction of the rainbow. 

11. One should march on an expedition after meditating 
on lord Hari for victory if the omens and other things are good. 

I shall describe the circle (of twelve primary kings) to be thought 
about that would offer protection to the king. 

1. This and the next one are among the twenty-seven yogas or combi- 
nations. 

2. This and the following three are some of the eleven divisions of a day 
called kara^as. 

3. This and die next three are the astral indications. 

4. This is one of the twentyseven yogas. 



233 . 12-25 


605 


12. A kingdom is said to consist of seven constituents — 
the king, minister, fort, treasury, punishment (law), allies and 
township. 

13. One should destroy all those who obstruct (the normal 
course) of the seven constituents of a kingdom. Efforts should 
be made by the king to make all these circles develop. 

14-15. The kingdom over which a king exercises direct 
control would be the first circle. The feudatories of that kingdom 
should be known as the enemies. If they are attached (to the 
paramount lord they) should be known as friends. The next 
(circle is) the allies of the enemy. The next (circle) should be 
known as the ally of the ally. The next (circle would be) the 
enemy of the ally of the ally. 

16-20. Those in front have been described. Tell me those 
who are behind. Then there would be the enemy in the rear. 
A king whose kingdom lies next but one is said to be the next one 
(friend in rear). A hostile king would be the next one (friend 
of the rear enemy). That which is adjacent to the former is said 
to be the next one (friend of rear friend). O Brahmin ! This 
is (the way of maintaining order) by an independent king that 
has an enemy and is desirous of conquering (the same). O 
Excellent among men ! It is not possible to declare that it is 
settled. One is said to be an intermediary that is capable of 
punishing and favouring. A mighty king that would be able to 
punish and favour all is said to be neutral. No one is really one’s 
enemy or ally. One is an enemy or an ally on account of some 
reason. I have described these twelve circles relating to a 
king. 

21-25. Enemies, are known to be of three kinds — ancestral, 
personal and artificial. Each one of the preceding class among 
them are (known to be) stronger (than the succeeding ones). 
One that is a personal enemy is considered by me as artificial. 
An enemy in the rear of an enemy and his hos tiles would be one’s 
friends. A king should subdue his hostile king in the rear by 
means of strategies. The ancient authorities commend the extinc- 
tion of an enemy with (the help of) an ally. An ally may become 
an enemy after being a feudal. A king wishing to vanquish an 
enemy should himself destroy him if it is possible for him to do* 
There will not be any fear from an enemy when the glory is 
waxing. A king desiring to conquer righteously should exercise 



€06 


Agni Purdna 


control over the world in such a way that the people do not feel 
grief-stricken and trust him. # 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYFOUR 
The six expedients used by the king 

Puskara said : 

1. I have already described (the political expedients of) 
conciliatory measures, creating dissensions, bribery (to win the 
enemy) and punishment. I have described the punishment 
(to be made by the king) in his own country. I shall (now) 
describe (the punishment to be meted to a person living) in a 
foreign country. 

2. Punishment is said to be of two types — public and pri- 
vate. Public punishment (consists of) looting and the destruc- 
tion of villages (of the enemy country), destruction of the 
food grains and setting fire. (The private punishment consists 
of) killing by poisoning or setting fire or by engagingseveral men, 
dishonouring pious men and poisoning waters. 

3-7. O Bhargava (son of Bhrgu) ! I have described 
the mode of executing the punishment. Listen ! I shall describe 
when (the king) should be indifferent. A king should make 
peace (with his enemy) if he thinks that by his battle in the 
battle-field there would be bad consequences. One maybe indif- 
ferent (when he would find) the conciliatory measures as 
securing the position (of the enemy), paying a bribe would be 
squandering money and creating dissension would have punish- 
ment as the consequence. One may resort to indifference (if 
he is sure) that ‘this person is not capable of doing any harm to 
me 9 and ‘I am not capable of causing any harm to him*. In that 
case the king should humiliate the enemy (by being indifferent) . 

8-14. I shall describe the strategies of illusion (to be practis- 
ed by a king). The enemy should be agitated by false portents 
by sending extensive lighted torches (tied to) the tails of strong 
birds in the camp of the enemy. Then the fall of the meteor 
should be shown to them. In this way many other portents 
also should be shown. The enemies should thus be agitated by 



234.15-25 


607 


different (kinds of) deception. The astrologers and ascetics 
should proclaim the fall of the enemy. A king that desires to 
conquer the earth should agitate others by the above (procla- 
mation). The favour of gods should also be proclaimed to 
others. A king should declare (to his men) “We have received 
increased strength and you strike without fear; all others have 
been routed”, when the battle has begun. War-cry and great 
commotion should be made saying that the enemy has been 
routed. (It should also be proclaimed) ; “The king has been 
blessed by the gods profusely and is ready for the battle”. I 
shall describe Indrajdla (a kind of stratagem in war). 

15. A king should exhibit the four divisions of the army 
(such as the infantry, cavalry, men mounted on elephants and 
chariots) (to delude the enemy) that the gods had sent them for 
aid. Showers of blood should be shed on the enemy. 

16. Severed heads of the enemy should be exhibited on (the 
terrace of) palaces. I shall describe six expedients, among 
which war and peace are most excellent. 

17. Making peace, war, expedition, halt, seeking shelter 
and duplicity are said to be the six expedients. 

18-25. Making peace is known to be a treaty. War is 
offending (the enemy). Expedition is said to be the march aga- 
inst the enemy by the one that desires to conquer. It is said to 
be ‘the halt* when (a king) remains in his own territory (mobi- 
lising his forces) for the war. Mobilisation of half the army in 
the enemy country is said to be ‘seeking shelter*. It is said to be 
duplicity on account of resorting to indifference or neutral 
position. A king should seek a treaty with an equal (person) 
or not of lower strength and more powerful. A powerful king 
should make a war with (a king of) inferior strength. In that 
case he should take a stronger (king) as an ally when he is not 
having an enemy in the rear. A king should mobilise his army 
when he could easily intercept the work of the enemy, though 
he is not free from an enemy in the rear. One who is strong en- 
ough could mobilise half of his army in the territory of the enemy 
even though he may have an enemy in the rear. An alliance 
with another king is said to be the worst of all expedients a king 
fighting with a stronger adversary is compelled to do. It is said 
to bring many a long and tedious marches, loss of many lives and 
expenditure. A king should have an alliance only when he would 



608 


Agni Purina 


have great benefits later. Moreover, he should have an alli- 
ance only when he has been deprived of all his strength. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYFIVE 
The daily duties of a king 

Puskara said : 

1-2. I shall describe the perpetual daily duties of the king. 
The king should put an end to his sleep with the songs and music 
of the panegyrists when two muhurtas (fortyeight minutes) 
are still left in the night. He should then see spies in such a 
way that they are not known as his own men by anybody. 

3. He should then hear the report about the income and 
expenditure as laid down. After having eased, the king should, 
go to the bath-room. 

4. The king should then bathe preceded by cleansing the 
teeth. After having done the twilight worship and the repetition 
(of the sacred syllables) (the king) should worship lord 
Vasudeva (Vi§nu’s manifestation as Kr?na). 

5. He should then offer unto the fire holy (twigs). Liba- 
tions should be offered to the ancestors. Accompanied by the 
blessings of brahmins, he should then give a cow (as gift) together 
with gold. 

6. He should then see his face in the mirror after having 
adorned himself and besmeared (his body with sandal-paste). 
(He should also then see his face in clarified butter kept toge- 
ther with gold. The king should then hear about (the nature of) 
the day etc. 

7. (He should then take) medicines prescribed by the 
physicians. He should then touch the auspicious things. He 
should then see the preceptor and go to the court after having 
been blessed by him. 

8. O Fortunate one ! He should then see brahmins, 
ministers, counsellors and others presented by the door-keeper. 

9-13. After having heard the traditional history and things 
to be done, he should determine the business (to far done). He 



235.14-236.1-5 


609 


should then look into civil disputes and have counsel with the 
counsellors. He should not have the counsel with a single 
person or with many or ignorant men or untrustworthy men. 
He should also not make public the secret (counsel) . The coun- 
sel he had should be given effect to promptly so that the state 
may not get affected. The secret counsel is considered to be 
guarded well by a king by his postures. Wise men gather 
secrets from the postures of others. A king gets prosperity by 
following the words of astrologers, physicians and connsel- 
lors, because they sustain the king. After having had the counsel 
(he should do) physical exercises with discs, chariot and weapon. 

14. He should then bathe in tanks not inhabited by living 
creatures and see lord Vi$nu that has already been worshipped. 
He should then see fire into which oblations have been made 
and also see brahmins that have been worshipped well. 

15-17. After having adorned himself he should take food 
after having fed beings and after having tested the food 
duly. After having taken food, he should chew betels and rest 
lying on the left. He should then have inquiry in the sacred 
texts. After having met the warriors and seen the granary 
and the armoury he should do the evening twilight worship. 
He should then think of the tasks to be done, send spies, eat 
food and spend time in the harem with instrumental music and 
being guarded by others. A king should do thus daily. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYSIX 

The rites preceding the march of a king 
Pufkara said : 

1-5. I shall describe rites to be performed before com- 
mencing a march. When a march of a king has to begin after 
seven days, (lords) Hari (Vi?nu) and Sambhu (Siva) should 
be worshipped as well as lord Vin&yaka (the elephant-faced 
god, lord of impediments) with sweet balls and other things 
(on the first day). After having worshipped the guardian 
(deities) of (different) directions, (the priest) should lie 



610 


Agni Purdna 


down (on a bed). He should then worship gods either 
(remaining) on the bed or in front of them. He should then 
think of Manu. “Obeisance O Sambhu (conferer of good) ! 
to the three-eyed, dreadful and conferer of boons. Obeisance to 
the dwarf (manifestation of lord Visnu), the formless lord of 
dreams. O Master ! Lord of the lords ! Bearer of the trident ! 
One riding the bull ! O Eternal one ! Let me know in my 
dream while I sleep, the good or evil (to befall me). (The 
impressions) in the waking state (maybe driven) far away.” 
The priest should thus utter these sacred syllables (on the 
second day). 

6. He should worship the guardian (deities) of the quar- 
ters, Rudras and the lords of directions on the third day, 
the planets on the fourth day and the two Alvins (divine physi- 
cians) on the fifth day. 

7-14. Then (the gods on the way (of expedition) and 
the sacred rivers (presided over) by those gods should be wor- 
shipped. Offerings (should be made) to gods dwelling in 
heavens, atmosphere and earth. The group of goblins and 
(gods) Vasudeva and others should be worshipped in the night. 
(Worship should be) made to (goddesses) Bhadrakali and Sri. 
One should pray to all gods. “May gods Vasudeva, 
Sahkar$ana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha, 1 Narayana (Visnu), 
Abjaja (born in the lotus, Brahma), Visnu, Narasimha (man- 
lion form of lord Visnu), the boar (manifestation of lord Visnu), 
O Rama ! Siva, Isa 2 (I$ana), Tatpuru§a, Aghora, Satyaja 3 , 
the Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, Rahu, 
(the ascending node of Moon), Ketu (descending node of Moon), 
Ganapati (lord of goblins), Senani (son of Siva and Par- 
vati) (leader of the celestials against the demon Taraka), (god- 
desses) Candika, Uma (consort of Siva), Laksmi (consort of 
Vi§nu), Sarasvatl (goddess of speech), Durga a form of Parvati), 
Brahman! (consort of Brahma), the Rudras (forms of Siva, 
eleven in number), (the celestials) Indra and others such as the 


1. This and the preceding three are the four forms oflord Vi$gu. 

2. This and the next four are the five forms of Siva. 

3. Obviously a mistake for Sadyaja denoting Sadyoj&ta. * 



236.15-23 


611 


Fire-god, serpents, Tark?ya (Eagle, vehicle of lord Visnu) 
and other celestials dwelling in heavens, atmosphere and 
earth be for my victory. Let them crush the enemies in the 
battle after having accepted offerings (made by me). O 
Gods ! I have sought your refuge together with sons, mother 
and servants. Obeisance to you ! After going to the rear of the 
enemies destroy them. I will offer more than that I have given 
after returning from the battle”. 

15-21. On the sixth day, the king should bathe for victory 
just as the bath at the coronation. Lord Trivikrama (mani- 
festation of lord Visnu as a dwarf and taking three strides humi- 
liating king Bali) should be worshipped on the seventh (day), 
the day of expedition. The weapons and vehicles should be 
worshipped with the sacred syllables prescribed for nirdjana 
(rite of purification). The following sacred syllable should be 
uttered (in the ear of the king) with the sounds of auspiciousness 
and victory. “May the celestials dwelling in heaven, at- 
mosphere and earth be bestowers of longevity on you. May 
the success of gods be attained by you. Let your (expedition) 
be the expedition of gods. May all gods protect you”. After 
having heard this, the king should proceed. After having taken 
the bow together with the arrow with (the recitation of the sac- 
red syllable) dkanumaga 1 , (the king) should place his foot in the 
direction of his enemy after having repeated (the sacred syllable) 
tad visnoh*. (After having set) his right foot, he should place 
thirty steps in different directions such as the east in due 
order. He should duly climb the elephant., chariot, horse and 
the animal carrying the burden. After having climbed he should 
move on along with the sounds of musical instruments without 
looking back. After having gone (a distance of) a kroia (two or 
two and a half miles) he should halt and worship gods and 
brahmins. He should move to the foreign country protecting 
his own army. 

22-23. After having reached the alien country (enemy’s 
domain) the king should protect the guardian (deity) of the 
country. He should worship deities and should not destroy 
their properties* He should not humiliate the natives of that 

1. Gould not be identified. 

2. &V._ 1.22.20. 



612 


Agni Purdna 


country. After having returned to his metropolis again after 
having gained victory, the king should worship gods and 
tnake gifts. 9 

24-27. If there is a battle on the second day, the elephant, 
horse etc. should be bathed and lord Nrsimha (man-lion mani- 
festation of lord Visnu) should be worshipped. The royal in- 
signia such as the umbrella etc., weapons and the goblins (should 
be worshipped) in the night. After having worshipped lord 
Nrsimha and all vehicles in the morning, (the king) should 
see the sacrificial fire kindled by the priest. After having made 
oblations into the fire, the king should worship brahmins. 
After having taken the bow and arrow he should mount the ele- 
phant and move. He should walk in the country of the enemy 
without being noticed (by anybody) (and find) the nature (of 
the enemy). He should cause a small army of men spread 
extensively. 

28-35. A small army as the mouth of a needle can stand 
against many. The arrangement of the army is of the 
form of animals and things such as the garu$a (the king of 
birds), crocodile, circle, vulture, semi-circle, vajravyUha (a 
strong impenetrable array), cart (shaped), the sarvato-Bkadta 
circular (array) and sQcivyuha (as a needle). An army in one 
of the above arrays should be arranged in five parts — the two 
composing its two principal wings, the two forming its sides to 
protect the wings and the fifth one would be the main body. 
A battle should be fought with one or two of the above parts. 
The remaining three parts should be stationed only for their 
protection. A king should never be in arrays. If the main 
force is destroyed, (the whole army) will be routed. A king 
should not himself fight. A king should remain at a kroia (about 
two or two and a quarter miles), behind the army. It is said 
that a broken army could be resustained by that. One’s stay 
is not laid down if the main army has suffered a defeat. The 
soldiers in the array should not be set up too close or too wide 
apart, so that there may not be any clash of their weapons 
mutually. 

36-43. One who wants to break the hostile army should do 
so only with collective strength. So also the enemy should pro- 
tect it from being broken with the collective strength. That 
division of a hostile army among many divisions, should be. 



236.44-55 


613 


first attacked and broken through (by the commander) as he 
desires. O Brahmin ! There should be four soldiers to guard 
each foot of an elephant. There should be four cavalry and an 
equal number of armoured soldiers for guarding a chariot. 
(There should be) an equal number of bow-men as the armoured 
soldiers in front of the armoured soldiers in the battle. Behind 
bow-men, the cavalry and the chariot-fighters and then the 
soldiers mounted on elephants should be set up by a king. 
He should look after the duties of the infantry, elephants and 
horses with effort. Bold men should be placed in front. Only 
a division of the army should be shown. Cowards should not be 
placed in front because that would break the work of 
driving away the enemy. The bold men remaining in the front 
would enthuse cowards in the battle. Men of tall stature with 
acquiline noses, not having squint eyes, with well-blended eye- 
brows, irascible, fond of quarrels, contented, happy and lustful 
are known to be bold. 

44-48. Carrying the wounded and the dead from the battle- 
field, offering water to the elephants in each war, bringing wea- 
pons (to the soldiers) are said to be the work of the soldiers. 
Protecting their own army from the enemies desiring to break, 
breaking the collected force (of the enemies) are the works 
of armoured men. Making (the enemies) turn away from 
battle is the task of bow-men. It is said that the chariot of a 
wounded person should be led away to a distant place. It is stated 
that the work of the chariot-warriors is to frighten the enemy 
army. The duties of men mounted on elephants are to break 
through the collected force of the enemy, to gather soldiers 
got split in the army of the self and the destruction of walls, 
arches, battlements and trees. 

49. The ground for the infantry to fight is known to be 
uneven and that for the cavalry and chariot as even. The battle- 
fields for the elephants are pointed out as wet. 

50-55. After having arranged the arrays thus and having 
the Sun behind and the Venus, Saturn, guardian deities of 
the quarters and the gentle breeze being favourable, all the war- 
riors should be encouraged by repeating their names and the 
(achievement of their) clans (and pointing out) gain of pros- 
perity on success and gain of heaven for the dead. After conquest 
pyer the enemies one gets pleasures. There would be supreme 



61 4 


Agni Pur&qa 


position for the dead. There is no way of requital for the food 
taken from the master equal to (sacrificing in) the battle. They 
would be washed of their sins as blood flows from the bold 
warriors. The endurance of pain due to wounds is the 
excellent penance. Thousands of celestial women attend on a 
man killed in the battle. One’s master gets (the result of) 
the deeds (done) by those who run away after being defeated (in 
battle). It is said that such people get the fruits of killing 
a brahmin at each one of their step. The gods would be lost for 
one who deserts his companions in the battle-field. 

56-60. It is said that the brave who do not retreat in 
battle would get the benefit (of performing the sacrifice) of 
aivamedha. If the king is righteous he would be victorious. 
He should fight with men of equal valour. Men mounted.on 
elephants should be fought by men mounted on elephants. 
Retreating men, spectators, those not having weapons and those 
that have fallen should not be killed. One should do treacherous 
warfare when one is fatigued, sleeping, is crossing half the river 
or forest and on bad days. Raising up arms one should cry 
that the enemies have been defeated. “We have got the ally 
with abundant strength. The king (of the enemy forces) and 
the commander have been slain or the (hostile) king had retreat- 
ed.” One may kill easily the retreating warriors. 

61. O One well- versed in righteousness ! incense that 
stupefies the enemies should be burnt. The banners and other 
paraphernalia and the musical instruments making frightening 
sounds should be made use of. 

62-65. After having gained victory in the battle, one should 
worship gods and brahmins. In a battle won by the minis- 
ter, the gems (acquired by the minister) should be made over 
to the king. The wives of a defeated king would not belong to 
anyone else (but to that defeated king). The wives of the de- 
feated king should be protected (by the conquering king). 
A king should honour a hostile king defeated in the battle and 
treat him as his own son. He should not fight with him again. 
He should honour the customs and manners (of that country). 
Then after having entered his native country, he should enter 
the palace when a fixed star is ruling. He should worship 
the deities etc. and protect the families of warriors. He should 
divide the booty got from the battle among hw* servants. The 



237.1-9 


615 


procedure for commencing a military expedition has thus been 
described to you. It gives sure success for the king. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYSEVEN 

A hymn in praise of goddess Sri ( Laksmi ) for the sake of success 
Puskara said : 

1. Indra made the prayer to (the goddess Sri (Laksmi) 
in days of yore for securing the kingdom. A king should simi- 
larly do that prayer for the sake of victory. 

Indra said : 

2. I make obeisance to the mother of all worlds, that is 
born of the ocean, the (goddess) Sri (Fortune), that has eyes 
like the lotus that is waking up after sleep and that person dwell- 
ing on the chest of lord Visnu. 

3-4. O Goddess ! You are the success. You are 
the Svadha (food offered to the manes), the Svaha (obla- 
tions). You are ambrosia. (You are) the purifier of the 
world. You are the twilights, night, lustre, wealth, memory, 
faith and Sarasvati (the goddess of speech). (You are) 
the sacrificial knowledge, supieme knowledge and secret knowl- 
edge. O Auspicious one ! O Goddess ! You are the knowl- 
edge of the soul and the conferer of the benefit of emancipation. 

5. You are the metaphysics, the three Vedas and the science 
of administration. O Goddess 1 The Beautiful ! This has been 
filled by your beautiful worldly forms. 

6. O Goddess ! Who else other than you would rest in 
the body composed of all sacrifices of the mace-wielding 
Lord Narayafta, the god of gods whom the yogins contemplate. 

7. O Goddess 1 All the three worlds were forsaken by 
you and the Earth was almost lost and resuscitated by you now. 

8. O Most Fortunate One ! Men would always get 
wives, sons, house, friends, grains, wealth etc. on account of your 
glances. 

9. O Goddess t It is not impossible for men seen by your 



6 j 6 Agai Purdtfa 

jQfc 

glances to get beauty , health , fortune , destruction of the enemy 
beside happiness. 

10. You are the mother of all beings; and Lord 
Hari (Visnu), the god of gods, is the father. O Mother I 
This world of movable and immovable beings is pervaded by 
you and lord Vi§nu. 

11-12. O Purifier of all ! Do not forsake honour, 
treasury, granary, house, attendants, body and wife. One resting 
on the chest of lord Vi§nu ! Do not desert children, circle 
of friends, cows and ornaments. 

13. O Spotless one ! Those men forsaken by you would 
be forsaken at once by nobility, truth, purity and other qualities 
such as good conduct. 

14. Men seen by you would atonce be endowed with all 
qualities such as good conduct, the fortune of good family 
etc. even though they be without good qualities. 

15. O Goddess ! Whoever is seen by you would be praise- 
worthy, possessing good qualities, fortunate, belonging to a good 
family, wise, valiant and victorious. 

16. O Consort of lord Visnu ! The Sustainer of the 
universe ! All qualities such as good conduct shed their 
excellence at once in men from whom you have turned your 
face. 

1 7. Even the tongue of Braluna is not capable of describing 
your qualities. O Goddess Lotus-eyed ! Be gracious. Never 
forsake us. 

Pufkara said : 

18-19. Being thus adored, (goddess) Sri (Lak§mi) conferr- 
ed on Indra the desired boon (such as) firmness of sover- 
eignty and success in the battle etc. It confers enjoyment and 
emancipation on those reciting or hearing the hymn. Hence one 
should always read and listen to the hymn on (goddess) Sri 
(Lak?ml ) . 



CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYEIGHT 


The ethics narrated by Rdma 

Agni said : 

1. I have narrated the ethics told by Pu$kara. Listen. 
I shall now narrate the ethics narrated by Rama to Laks- 
maga for victory and that would increase piety etc. 

Rdma said : 

2. Wealth should be acquired by rightful means. It should 
be developed and guarded. It should be given to a deserv- 
ing person. These are the four obligatory acts of a king. 

3. Humility is the cause of statesmanship. Humility is the 
resultant of determination from scriptures as well as the 
control of senses. The king should guard the earth endowed 
with these. 

4-5. Scriptures, knowledge, fortitude, dexterity, proficiency, 
reticence, energy, eloquence, generosity, endurance at the time 
of distress, greatness, purity, amity, renunciation, truthfulness 
gratitude, good family, good conduct, self-control are the qua- 
lities for gaining fortune. 

6. The elephant (in the form) of senses running uncon- 
trolled in the forest of diverse pleasures should be controlled 
with the goad of knowledge. 

7. A king should give up the aggregate of six things, 
namely, lust, anger, greed, delight, pride and arrogance. The 
king who rejects these would be happy. 

8. A king being endowed with modesty should contemplate 
on metaphysics, the three Vedas , emissary and polity with those 
well-versed in these and those practising them. 

9. The knowledge about true nature of things is got 
through metaphysics. Virtue and vice rest on the three Vedas. 
Material prosperity and misfortune depend on emissary and 
justice and injustice on polity. 

10. Abstaining from killing or causing injury to beings, 
courteous language, truthfulness, purity, kindness, and forbear- 
ance are the general virtues of the religious students. 

1 1-13. One should show compassion to all beings and prac- 
tise codes of conduct. Courteous words, compassion, charity 
and protection of one that has sought refuge are the acts of good 



618 


Agni Purdna 


people agreeable to pious men. Which king would do impious 
acts for the sake of the body that is encompassed by misery and 
disease and that is liable to get destroyed today or tomorrow ? 
One should not oppress the poor people desiring his own happiness. 

14-15. A poor man being oppressed kills the king by means 
of his anger. A king desiring his own good should conduct 
with more humility than that shown to a respectful kinsman 
with folded palms. One should always speak only in a pleasing 
manner to friends and foes. 

16. Those who speak pleasingly arc gods and those who 
speak harsh are animals. One should always worship gods 
with cleanliness and get purified with piety. 

17-18. The preceptors (should be respected) as gods 
and friends as one’s own selves. The preceptor (should be 
pleased) by bowing down. The favourable pious men (should 
be pleased) by doing true gestures and services. The gods 
(should be pleased) by good deeds. A friend should be attract- 
ed by courteousness and kinsmen by showing respect. 

19-22. The wife and servants (should be pleased respecti- 
vely) by (showing) affection and (making) gifts. The rest of the 
people (should be won) by (showing) compassion. Not reviling 
the acts of others, maintaining to do one’s duties, kindness to- 
wards the poor, sweet words towards all, helping a true friend 
even by (sacrificing one’s) life, receiving warmly the person 
that has come to the house, making a gift (according) to one’s 
ability, forbearance, absence of pride in prosperity, not jealous 
at other’s prosperity, not speaking words hurting (the feelings of) 
others, practising the vow of silence, maintaining the bondage 
with kinsmen, keeping even attitude towards one’s own men 
and taking actions conducive to welfare are the acts of 
greatmen. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYNINE 

The duties of a king 

R&ma said : 

1. The king, ministry, kingdom, fort, treasury, army and 
allies helpful to one another are said to be the seven eonstituents 
of a kingdom,. 



2-16, The sovereignty is the most important means of a 
kingdom. It should hence always be protected. Good descent, 
good conduct, (young in) years, good quality, compassion, 
quick action, consistency, truthfulness, service to the aged, 
gratefulness, being fortunate, intellect, possessing an unwicked 
retinue, able to exhibit his valour, faithfulness, foresightedness 
zeal, purity, generosity, modesty and virtuousness are the quali- 
ties of a pious man and a king. A king, seeking his o*vn good, 
should make those belonging to a good family his attendants, 
be not cruel, but capable of winning the people and pure. A 
king should be eloquent, confident, possessing good memory, 
distinguished, strong, self-controlled, a leader, well-versed in polity 
and the different branches of fine arts, capable of facing an 
attack, capable of remedying all evils, one who knows the move- 
ments of hostiles, one who knows the principles of peace- 
making and war; capable of knowing the secret counsels (of the 
hostiles), knower of opportune time and place, one that takes 
goods in the proper way and distributes to the proper person, 
free from wrath, greed, fear, doing evil, haughtiness and fickle- 
ness, free from harassing others, calumny, jealousy, envy and 
untruth, fortunate (in getting) the counsel of the aged, able, 
showing his amiable manners and one tliat is fond of good 
qualities which are known to confer prosperity. Men of 
noble descent, virtuous, brave, learned, attached, those who 
would implement the rules of punishment should be the 
ministers of the king. The minister should moreover be having 
good physique, a native of the country, belonging to a good fa- 
mily, endowed with good conduct and knowledge in arts, 
eloquent, courageous, possessing good eye-sight, enthusiasm, 
discrimination, devoid of rigidity and ficklemindedness, friendly, 
capable of enduring hardship, virtuous, possessing (the qualities, 
of) truthfulness, good nature, firmness, perseverence, dignity, 
good health, able, having retentive memory, firm devotion (to 
the king) and not creating enmity (with other kings). Good 
memory, good application of the mind conducive to gain, deci- 
sive knowledge, firmness and guarding the secret counsels are 
the virtues of a minister. The royal priest should be profiicient 
in the Vedas and codes of punishment. 

17-23. The priest should do the expiatory and welfare- 
yielding rites as laid down in Atharvaveda. The wise king 



620 


A gni Purdna 


should examine the fitness of these ministers with the help of 
experts. The two qualities of having a clear sight and skill should 
be examined. He should know ahout the family and the integ- 
rity from his own people. The three qualities — ability in service, 
knowledge and endurance should be examined. So also the 
boldness, and their pleasure in conversation should be known. 
Their eloquence, truthfulness, enthusiasm, greatness, endurance 
for hardship, firmness, loyalty and steadiness in distress should be 
noted. The king should know their devotion, friendship and 
honesty from their conduct. Likewise their strength, good nature, 
health, good conduct, not being fickleminded and not exhibiting 
their enmity (should be known) from their companions. Their 
gentleness and meanness should be known (from their acts) 
in his presence. Everywhere the virtues of them (practised) 
not in his presence should be gauged from results. 

24-25. A region having good crops, meritorious, endowed 
with minerals, beneficial for cows, having plenty of water 
having holy cities, enchanting, abounding in elephants, having 
water courses and not depending on rains is commended for 
abundant prospeiity. 

26-27. It should abound with ^udras , artisans and mer- 
chants and have great enterprises and agriculturers. (It should 
abound with men) fondly attached (to the king), hating the 
hostile king, capable of enduring hardship. It should contain 
people who have come from different countries and who are 
pious, possessing cattle and strength. Such a country is commend- 
ed. The head should be wise and not addicted to any vice. 

28-30. The fortress should be built on hills having a river 
or desert or forest (as a boundary) covering a large area and 
having a deep moat, high walls and gateways. The fort should 
contain water, grains and treasures to stand a long siege. Those 
surrounded by water, mountain, forest, desert and archers are 
six (kinds of forts) 1 . The forts should be replete with choice 
things, righteously acquired since the time of forefathers that 
would stand a heavy drain for the furtherance of righteousness 
etc. 

31-37. (The servants should be descendants) of their fore- 
fathers’ (servants), subservient, salaried, known for their valour, 

1. It mentions only five names. 



239 . 38-45 


621 


belonging to a good family, able, possessing knowledge about 
omens. (The army of the king should be) armed with different 
kinds of weapons, conversant with different types of warfare, 
possessing varied kinds of warriors, having horses and ele- 
phants duly sanctified, which lias endured hardships in battle 
and sufferings in expeditions etc. Those who administer justice 
should be undivided and mostly drawn from the k§atriya com- 
munity. One that is proficient in yoga , good-natured, possess- 
ing a strong army, conversing affectionately, able to wait pati- 
ently for the outcome, not divided and belonging to a good 
family should be befriended. Approaching from a distance, 
uttering words having clear meaning and agreeable to the heart 
and doing good deeds are the three ways of acquiring friendship. 
One gets three kinds of fruits such as piety, enjoyment 
and prosperity through the friend. The son of a friend, a newly 
acquired iriend, an ancestral friend and one protected from 
distress are known to be the four kinds of friends. Truthfulness 
and other things and similar pleasure and pain are the qualities 
in the friend. 

33-41. I shall describe the conduct of those who serve (the 
king) . A servant should serve the king (to the best of his ability). 
Ability, good disposition, firmness, forbearance, ability to 
endure hardship, liappincss, good conduct, enthusiasm are 
ornaments tor the servants. A servant shouLd serve the king to 
the best of his ability for the agreed period* He should give up 
visiting the place of enemies, doing cruel acts, haughtiness 
and jealousy. A servant should not exchange harsh words 
with his superiors. He should not publicise the confidential 
matters and the secret councils of his master. He should desire 
the prosperity of the affectionate king. He should desert a king 
that is not affectionate. 

42. Dissuading the king from doing evil deeds and 
persuading him to do good deeds (are said to be) the good con- 
duct in brief for the relatives, friends and servants. 

43-45. The king, like the god of rain, should be sustainer 
of all good. He would take a part of the earnings from the sources 
of one’s earning. He should employ efficient men to be in charge 
of all deeds. A good king should protect eight things such 
as agriculture, trade, fort, bridge, elephant stable, mines. 



622 Agni Purdpa 

ocean (the source of gems) and the abodes of the downcast 
and thus follow a good code of conduct. 

46. There is danger for the subjects from the (following) 
five sources such as the soldiers, thieves, subjects, king’s officers 
and the greed of the king. 

47. The king should take tax after having taken note of 
this danger at the proper time. He has to protect his own body 
and the external body, the kingdom. 

48. He should punish those deserving punishment and 
protect himself from poison as well as his wives and sons from 
the enemies. He should never trust them. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY 
The six expedients used by a king 

R&ma said : 

1-5. A king should think mainly about the circle of twelve 
kings. The enemy, friend, ally of an enemy, ally of an ally, ally 
of an ally of the enemy are known to be at the front of the con- 
queror. An enemy in the rear, a king whose kingdom lies next 
but one, the allies of these two is the circle (of kings) of a king 
desiring to conquer. One who is beyond the enemy and the 
invader is the neutral. One is a master in favouring the united 
and the suppression of the divided. One who is beyond this 
circle of kings and possessing a greater strength is known to be 
a neutral. One is a lord in favouring the allies and the annihi- 
lation of the divided. I shall describe the treaty, battle, vehicle, 
seat etc. 

6-9. One should make a treaty with the strongly opposed 
for one’s welfare. Treaties are said to be sixteen — kapdla , upahdra , 
santdna , sahgata , upany&sa , pratlkdra s sarityoga, puruf&ntara, adfffa- 
nara > ddtsfa, dtman , upagraha , parikrama , chinna , parade ana and 
skandhopaneya. Reciprocally beneficial, mutual amity, being 
related to each other and making presents (as token of friendship) 
are the four principal treaties. 



240.10-32 


623 


10-14. One should not make treaties with the twenty 
people such as a child, an old man, one ill since a long time, an 
excommunicated relative, a coward, cowardly people, greedy 
people, one who has renounced the world, one excessi- 
vely fond of worldly things, one devising many schemes, a 
despiser of gods and brahmins, an ill-fated one, one who 
speaks ill of fate, one suffering from famine, one having a dis- 
contented army, one having many enemies within the country 
and one who had become free in course of time and one 
swerved from adhering to truth and virtuous life. They should 
always be fought. A war is the result of mutual offence of 
men (hostile kings). 

15-18. One aspiring the prosperity for himself, one being 
oppressed by another and one having favourable position, 
time and strength should begin war. Taking possession of 
kingdom, women, suzerainty, knowledge and strength, pride, 
honour, loss of fortune, destruction of knowledge, one’s soul force 
and the virtue, that is due fate, dishonour on account of a friend, 
the destruction of a relative, cessation of the favour of (natu- 
ral) elements, disturbance among the circle of monarchs, intense 
attachment for the sake of one are the causes for hostility. 

19-24. Enmity is said to be of five kinds — through the co- 
wife, on account of one’s abode, on account of wife, that 
arising from one’s expression and that due to an offence. It should 
be amended by (suitable) expedients. A king should not engage 
in any of the following sixteen kinds of war, such as giving 
meagre result, yielding absolutely nil result, of uncertain result, 
that vitiating the existing order, proving fruitless in the long run 
that which affects in the long run and the existing order, with 
an army mobilised by enemy whose strength is not known, being 
undertaken for the sake of an ally or for the (recovery of a) 
woman or that (lasting) for a long time, or with brahmins, 
with one equipped with an untimely providence, with (an 
enemy) supported by a mighty friend, when it yields some result 
only at that moment but with no fruit in the long run and that 
which bears fruit in the long rim but no benefit at that very 
moment. A king should undertake a task that would bear fruit 
at that moment and also in the long run. 

25-32. One should wage war when one’s forces are happy 
and strong and the enemy forces are of contrary nature. One 



624 


Agni Purdna 


should commence a battle when the friend, an ally and a neigh- 
bouring king are firmly attached to him and that of tho enemy 
is the contrary. A military expedition is said to be of five kinds 
by experts such as an open foe, as an ally (If one of the comba- 
tants), as united force, as occasional and remaining neutral. 
Like the expedition, halt is also of five kinds according 
to the ability of mutually (combating forces) of the enemy 
and the invader. One should inform his arrival to (the com- 
mander of) the stronger of the two opposing forces remaining 
without taking the side of either of them and like the eye of the 
crow remain un-noticed. One shouid join the stronger one 
when the hostilities begin. When both of them suspect his feign- 
ed neutrality and would dislike the engagement, one should 
himself attack the enemy that is more antagonistic. When a 
king with his army is routed by the powerful enemy and does not 
find a strategy, he should practise truthfulness and noble virtues 
of the ancestors. He should visit the powerful ally frequently, 
stay by his side, view things as he does and show gratitude for 
the support extended. The code of conduct for those seeking 
refuge has been heard. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FORTYONE 
The four means conciliation etc. 

Rdma said : 

1 . The power of counsel is commended than the power of 
greatness and enthusiasm. Kavya (Sukra), the preceptor of 
demons), possessing greatness and enthusiasm was conquered 
by the priest of the celestials (Brhaspati). 

2-4. One should not have a counsel with untrustworthy 
and foolish persons. How can a scheme that is impossible to 
begin be made to bear the fruit without toil. A counsel is 
laid down as of five kinds — knowledge of the unknown, ascertain* 
ment of that known (already), removal of doubt relating to an 
ambiguous matter in politics, (determination) of the right time 



241.5-24 


625 


and place of action and helpful means, and remedial measures 
against misfortunes. 

5. The marks of success in the acts are the cheerfulness of 
the mind, faith, efficiency of* the means, aid and effort. 

6. Pride, negligence, lust, prattling in sleep and enjoying 
pleasures with the beloved women break the secret counsel. 

7-13. A person who is bold, having good memory, eloquent 
well-versed in the (wielding of) weapons and in the sciences, 
and one accustomed with the work deserves to become a messen- 
ger of the king. A messenger is said to be of three types such as one 
that discharges duty efficiently, one that does moderately and 
one who just conveys the message. (Each one of the succeed- 
ing one) is inferior by a quarter based on the ability (of the 
respective ones). One should not enter the city of the enemy 
and his assembly without having (previous) acquaintance. 
One should abide the right time and should fall upon (the 
enemy) after knowing (the opportune moment). One should 
know the weakness of the enemy as well as his treasury, friends 
and strength. He should also know the likes and dislikes from 
the looks and gestures (of the enemy). (An enemy) should 
make four-fold eulogies of both the sides (i.e. the master and the 
enemy). He should live with good spies having the guise of 
ascetics. An ambassador would be an open spy. A spy in dis- 
guise is of two kinds. Spies would be in the guise of a mer- 
chant, agriculturer or mendicant and the like. When the effort 
of the messenger has become fruitless, the king should attack the 
distressed enemy. One should take into account the natural 
calamity (that has befallen the enemy) and fall upon him. 

14-24. Because it destroys the good fortune on account of 
bad policy it is said to be misfortune. Conflagration, water, 
diseases (epidemics), famine and hell are the five calamities 
due to divine agency. The rest are due to human agency. The 
misfortune due to divine agency should be subdued by means 
of human effort and appeasing rites. The misfortune due to 
human agency should be removed by means of expedients based 
on the rightful living. Deliberation, the reaping of the fruits 
of deliberation, following a course of action for future contin- 
gencies, the income and expenditure of the state, enforcing 
laws, the prevention of (the encroachment by) the enemy, 
(taking) remedial steps for the calamity and the protection of 



626 


Agni Purdna 


kingdom and the king are the duties of a minister. Hence 
one beset with misfortune would ruin kingdom. G61d, grain, 
clothes and vehicle would be through the subjects. In the same 
way other things (are got through the subjects). If the subjects 
are having misfortune (all the above) are destroyed. Citizens 
of the city etc. help to protect subjects having misfortune as 
well as the treasury and law if it is sought. (The duties of feuda- 
tory chiefs) arc to put down disturbance, help the sovereign 
in war, protection of people and taking note of the allies and 
foes. A king would perish on account of the fault of the vassals 
and suffer misfortune. Treasure enables a king to pay his servants, 
to win him friends and subjects, to aid the purposes of virtue and 
desire, to attend to the renovation of forts. If that is having 
misfortune, it would ruin the king. The king is dependent 
on the treasury. The enforcement of law is a means to create 
friends and foes, to acquire land and gold, to conquer enemies, 
to accomplish a work quickly that would take long time. If 
that is affected it would ruin the king. An ally would collect 
together allies, destroy the enemy and help him with money 
etc. If that is affected, that would destroy the king. 

25-27. The king having a vice would destroy the affairs 
of the state. The vices of a king are the use of harsh words, (inflic- 
ting) cruel punishment, wasteful spending of revenue, drink- 
ing, (excessive enjoyment of the company of) women, hunting 
and gambling. Idleness, obstinacy, pride, intelligence and dupli 
city are the defects of a minister as already pointed out. Drought 
and epidemics etc. are the misfortunes of a country. 

28. Shattered machines, walls and ditches not equipped 
with weapons and possessing a depleted army are the defects of 
a fort. 

29. One nearly drained, not filled regularly, not being 
accounted, not accumulated, made waste and situated at a far 
off place are the defects in treasury. 

30-33. Being obstructed, scattered, not honoured, dis- 
respected, not existing, afflicted with disease, tired, arrived from 
a distant place, newly recruited, much reduced, disappointed, 
repulsed much, abound with hopes and disgust, deceived, having 
wives, having grievance within, bre&k in the supply of pro- 
visions of different kinds, the base being made v*id, divided by 



241.34-51 


627 


the hostile (king), deprived of a leader and bribed by the hostile 
king at the rear are said to be the defects of an army. 

34. An ally suffering adverse fate, attacked by the enemy 
forces, having lust, rage etc. and energy would be (considered 
as) an enemy. 

35-41. Lavish spending of money, inflicting harsh words 
and punishment on account of anger, due to lust, hunting, 
gambling, drinking and women (are the vices of a king). Harsh 
words cieate the estrangement in the world and havoc. Punish- 
ment is a means (to achieve) things difficult to accomplish. A 
king should remove it with care. A king that inflicts punishment 
and harsh words would agitate the subjects. The agitated sub- 
jects resort to the enemy. Multiplication of enemies would be 
for your destruction. A wasteful expenditure of wealth to a 
greater extent in order to defile one is said to be extravagance in 
spending by the learned in political science. By drinking one 
becomes ignorant, by hunting one gets destroyed by the enemy. 
One should wander in the forest that is guarded doing hunting 
in order to remove hardships due to victory. The destruc- 
tion of virtues* wealth, life and quarrels etc. would be on 
account of gambling. Delay and affliction to virtue and wealth 
would result from the defect of association with women. On 
account of the vice of drinking (there would be) destruction of 
life, indecision relating to things to be done and not to be done. 

42-46. One who knows the (mode of) laying the capital 
and the opportune moments would conquer the enemy. The 
dwelling of the king alongwith the treasury should be in the 
midst of the royal capital. The artisans, friends, unhostile fores- 
ters and the main division of the army should be placed surround- 
ing the royal dwelling. The army should be placed ready at a 
corner under the lead of the commander. They should roam 
about the quadrangular points in a circle during the nights. 
Information relating to one’s self should be known (through 
spies) moving about the borders (of the country). All should 
leave and enter the city being noticed, The seven (political) 
expedients such as conciliation, gift, dissension, punishment 
indifference, conjuring and deceit should be instituted for accom- 
plishing them. 

47-51 Conciliation is of four kinds such as the expression 
of gratitude, recollection of the relationship between one another. 



628 


Agni Purtya 


use of soft words and seeing and submission of the self with the 
words “I am yours”, when (the other person) had ccflne. The 
making of a gift of wealth to one that has come (is of three kinds 
such as) excellent, medium and inferior. The making of a gift 
is of five kinds (such as) giving back (the gift), accept- 
ing (the gift) received, making a novel gift, accepting a gift 
by his own choice, giving and returning. Dissension is 
of three kinds by experts knowing dissension (such as) destroy- 
ing amity, creating a thrill of fear, inducing dissension between 
the two. Punishment is of three kinds (such as) killing, confis- 
cating the property, and imposing hardship. 

52-53. (Punishment is also of two other kinds such as) 
public and secret. The public enemies (should be punished) 
in public. In cases in which the people would get agitated by 
killing in public, (killing by poisoning) the food is commended. 
The enemies (of the public should be killed) by employing 
special black rites or with weapons etc. A member of the 
brahmin community alone should not be killed even after being 
under control after conciliation. 

54-58. A good person should do conciliation (speaking) 
sweet words as if besmearing the heart, looking (at the person) 
as if feasting and taking in his form as if ambrosia. One duped 
with false hopes, desirous (of getting) wealth, one being invited 
and insulted, one having contempt for the king, one superseded 
in honour, one thinking much about his virtue, one whose virtue, 
desire and riches have been cut off, one that is angry, one having, 
self-respect, insulted, one rejected without any cause, appeased 
even though had enmity, one whose wealth and wife have been 
taken, one deserving to be honoured but not honoured and such 
men permanently remaining in the enemy camp and are to be 
suspected should be divided. 

59-62. (A king) should honour those that have come 
(from the enemy side) with presents and pacify those on his own 
side. Winning affection by conciliatory measures, showing 
threats, and honouring and buying the allegiance of principal 
men are stated to be the means for dissension. One having a 
frustrated ally is ruined like the timber eaten by an insect. (A 



241.63-242.1-6 


629 


king) possessing the three kinds of regal power 1 and one who 
knows the proper place and time should subjugate his enemies 
by (means of) force. The ruler of a neighbouring country who 
is favourably disposed should be pacified in the event of his 
being befriended by mighty allies. The greedy and poor (should 
be won) by making a gift. Other friends (should be won by 
pointing out) danger from others. The wicked (should be won) 
by threats of punishment and the sons, brothers and others by 
conciliatory measures. The chieftains of the army, the warriors 
(and) the heads of provinces (should be controlled), the 
vassals and foresters by making gifts and (causing) dissension 
(among themselves). The offenders (should be put down) 
by (means of) dissension and punishment. 

63-68. After having propitiated the images of gods the male 
should dress as the female and illusions should be made by men 
such as the forms of goblins, meteors, monsters and vixens, 
assuming the desired form, showering of weapons, fire, stones 
and water, (and showing) the divine phenomena such as dark- 
ness, wind, fire, and cloud. Bhima (one of the Pan^avas) killed 
Klcaka * (son of king of Virafa) assuming the form of a woman. 
It is said to be indifference when one does not dissuade another 
from unfair battle or plight just as Hitjimba (the demoness that 
married Bhima) remained indifferent towards his brother (when 
he was fighting with Bhima). Indrajala (stratagem) such as 
clouds, darkness, rain, fire, mountain, wonders, the banners of 
a large army causing fright and mirage-like picture of being tom 
and spread should be shown in order to frighten the enemies. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FORTYTWO 
Statesmanship for a king 

R&ma said : 

1-6. After having worshipped gods and arranging six 
divisions of the army (the king) should march against the 
enemy. (The six divisions of the army are) the central force, 
the front, the rear, the auxiliary, hostile and the pioneer. 

1. These are the supreme position of the king, the strength of a good 
council and energy. 



630 


Agfti Pur&na 


Each (division) of ihe (above) forces are more important (than 
the succeeding ones). (The same holds good in the case of) 
reverses also. The commander-in-chief should go to such 
places as the rivers, mountains, forests and forts wherever there 
may be danger, with the army in array consisting of six divi- 
sions, machines, treasury, foot-soldiers, cavalry, chariots and 
elephants. The leader (of the forces) should march at its head 
being surrounded by best warriors. The queen, king, treasury 
and the excellent warriors of the army should be placed in the 
middle. The cavalrymen (should be) on the two sides, the 
chariots by the side of the cavalry and the elephants by the side 
of the chariots. The pioneer forces (should be by the side) of 
the elephants. Then the commander-in-chief should go slowly 
behind all with a fully equipped army encouraging the dejected. 

7-13. A marching army should be set in (the array of) a 
crocodile and in (the array of) a hawk with raised wings or a 
sUci or viravaktra 1 in case of danger in the front. In case of fear 
behind, (an array in the form of) the cart (should be made). 
(In case of fear) on the sides, (an array) known as vajra (should 
be made). If there is 'danger on all sides one should set up 
(the array known as) sarvatobhadra. (A commander) should 
guard his army (while passing through) a cave, mountain forest, 
river and dense forest. (He should also guard) when the army 
has to go a long way, when it is tired, when it suffers hunger, 
thirst or adversity, when it is affected by ill-health, famine and 
epidemics, when attacked by robbers. (He should also protect 
the army) from marshy land, dust storm and watery place. He 
should see that they a*re neither scattered nor gathered together 
on the way. (He should also guard them) while sleeping, eating 
their food, while staying at an unfit place, when they are not 
well-placed, when they have been scared by robbers, fire and 
fear and when they have been struck by rains and wind. When 
the army of the enemy (is in a similar position) it should be 
struck. One should have an open encounter (with an enemy) 
only when the grounds and time are favourable and one is 
strong. On the contrary (one should do) treacherous warfare . 
When they (enemies) are attacking, the bewildered should be 
killed. 

1 . Types of arrangement of the army. 



242.14-27 


631 


14-17. (An enemy) on another’s soil (could be won) from 
staying in one’s own soil. (An enemy) in one’s own soil (could 
be won) by means of sowing seeds of dissension. (An enemy) 
subject to the wrath of his people should be made captive by 
employing the foresters and others and killed. They can also be 
conquered by employing extremely brave warriors. (One may 
also employ) dissension, bribe or (may) draw away. By appear- 
ing in front of (the enemy) the king would become a sure object 
of their aim. Then (the enemy) should be killed by extremely 
brave warriors by striking swiftly with a strong force. Brave 
warriors could be set in an array in front or at the back (and 
the enemy) could be killed. It has been explained by these 
two (methods) as to how to attack the two enemies on the adja- 
cent sides in a treacherous warfare. If the front part (of the 
hostile army) is in an unfavourable land, the rear portion 
should be attacked swiftly. 

18-22. If the front and rear are both unfavourable (one 
should strike) on the sides in the same way. After having fought 
with the vanguards, allies (of the enemy) and the pioneers, 
one should attack the fatigued, slow and the one whose aid has 
been cut off without causing fatigue for his force. In the alter- 
native, one should defeat by emploiyng the pioneer force or the 
allies. Or, one should feign defeat and attack, (the enemy) that 
is complacent that he has won by resorting to good counsel. 
One should destroy the enemy force when it is resting in the 
camps, barracks, villages, fields and among subjects without 
protection. Otherwise the cattle of the enemy should be 
seized and then the army on their Way to reach the goal. Or 
the hostile army fatigued on account of overnight vigil fearing 
an attack and sleeping during the day overcome by sleep should 
be attacked (to gain victory). 

23-27. In the alternative (a hostile army) sleeping during 
the night without any fear (should be attacked) by (employing) 
elephants or with men armed with swords. The functions of 
(men on) elephants are proceeding in front of the marching 
army, entry into forest fortification, division of the united (hos- 
tile) army, collecting together a divided army, causing right, 
breaking the doors (of the fort) and the protection of the trea- 
sury. Division of an undivided army and effecting the union 
of friendly forces are the task of (the men on) chariots. The 



632 


Agni Purdna 


functions of cavalry are to reconnoitre the forests, different 
directions and the highway, guard the transport of provisions, 
follow the retreating army, attend to tasks requiring quick 
action, follow the weak and attack the last columns and rear 
(of the hostile army). (The functions) of infantry are to 
bear always the weapons, inspecting the camps and the high- 
ways and to remove (obstructions). 

28-33. The ground (suitable) for infantry should not 
be very uneven or abound with thick rows of trees, ant hills, 
bushes and thorns and should have (provision for) escape. The 
ground (suitable) for cavalry should have scanty trees, should 
be quickly traversible, firm, without sand and not be marshy 
and have (provision for) escape. The ground (suitable) for the 
chariot should not have trees, fields, mire, trees causing obstruc- 
tion, creepers and mire. The ground for the elephant are hills 
difficult to cross having streams. (A king should march) setting 
the army in an array consisting of different (segments) such as 
chest etc. It is known as the rear of the army. It is capable 
of serving the needs of the king. An array not having this (the 
division) would appear as if it has been segmented. A wise 
king desiring to conquer should not fight without having (the 
array with) the divisions. The treasury would remain with the 
king. A kingship would be suzerainty over the treasure. 

34-48. The soldiers should be paid (rewards) on gaining 
victory. It is not proper to give only a little. A lakh (should be 
given) on the death of (the enemy) king and half that when the 
son of that king is killed. Similarly (the soldiers) should be 
paid when the (enemy) commander-in-chief is killed or at the 
killing of the elephant etc. Otherwise (the soldiers) should 
fight in such a way that the infantry, cavalry, (men on) chariots 
and elephants do not get affected when the battle has been com- 
pleted. (The soldiers) should fight without confusion. Con- 
fusion causes melee. One should employ an elephant in battles 
causing great confusion. Three infantry soldiers would be equal 
to fight a cavalryman. Three such cavalrymen should be em- 
ployed (to combat) a single elephant (man). Fifteen infantry 
men would guard (each) foot (of the elephant). It is laid down 
that an arrangement known as an anika (a unit) of the elephants 
should be made for (guarding) the chariots There should be 
nine elephant men. The vulnerable point of such an army is 



242.49-59 


633 


said to be of five kinds. An array should be set by this division 
of the army. The chest, sides and wings are said to be 
(three) divisions. An array is said to have seven parts such 
as the chest, sides, wings, centre, back (hip), rear and the edge 
by those well acquainted with (the arrangement of) arrays. The 
array (called) guru consists of chest, sides and wings together 
with the rear. That of fukra is devoid of two sides. The 
commanders should remain being surrounded by excellent war- 
riors. They should fight without any faction defending one 
another. Excellent warriors of the army (should be) at the 
centre. A commander (of an army) is the life of a battle. It 
would be destroyed if it is without a commander. The powerful 
elephants should be placed at the chest (of an array) , the chariots 
on the sides and horses on the wings. This array is said to be 
breaking the central force. An army of horses at the centre, an 
army of chariots on the sides and an army of elephants on the 
wings is known to be an array of breaking the inner (force). 
Station the cavalry in the place of chariots, the infantry in 
the place of cavalry (in the above order) or place elephants 
everywhere in the array in the absence of chariots. (There is 
another view). If there is more than the required army it is 
said to be dbadha. 

49-59. (An array called) bhoga consists of arranging (the 
army) in concentric circles. (An array called) dan$a is of many 
kinds. (I shall describe them) to you. Listen. (An array) 
spread horizontally would be (called) dan&a, . (The array called) 
bhoga is in the form of a wave. (The array called) maniala 
(would be) in perfect circle. The asarhhata (class) (would be) 
in concentric circles. (The other arrays such as) the pradara , 
dfdhaka , asahya , cdpa, kukfi , pratiffha, supratiffha , §yena, vijaya , 
sahjaya, viSdla, vijaya , s&ci, sthUndkarna camUmukha, sarp&sya and 
valaya are all invincible and modifications of (the array called) 
dasiia* They have the following characteristics — extending 
on both sides, extending on one side, extending in one wing, 
extending on both wings, three others of the contrary nature. 
(The array) pratiffha extends on the wing and chest (and) the 
other supratiftha is the contrary, (The arrays called) sthdnd - 
pak$a and dhanufi pak$a y doisthQna and dantja after that (are of) 
doubled units at the end or an additional wing or of the reverse 
of another. They should be known to have the characteristics 



634 


Agni Purdna 


of two or four columns of soldiers in order. (The arrays known 
as) gomdtrikd , ahisahcdri , lakafa and makara are said to be Varia- 
tions of the (array) bhoga. So also (the array called) p&riplavafl~ 
gaka. (The array called) yugorasya (consists of) two wings in 
(the array) dantfa. (The array of the form of) cart is contrary to 
that. (The array of the name) crocodile is of mixed nature. 
(The array) k§a (is marked) by the rows of elephants. (The 
arrays) sarvatobhadra and durjaya are the modifications of the 
array (called) mandala. That which has openings on all sides is 
the first one and that having the eight army units is the second 
one. (The arrays known as) ardhacandraka (of the shape of half 
the moon) and urdhvdnga (elevated parts) (are formed) by 
the combinations of (different) divisions of (the class known 
as) the vajra. In the same way (the arrays known as) karkafrngi 
(the pincers of a crab), kdkapdda (the feet of a crow) and godhikd 
(lizard) are known from their difference in shape (consisting) 
of three, four and five units of army. 

60-67. Seventeen kinds of arrays could be formed from the 
(array called) danda. Two from the mandala (class), six from the 
asahghdta and five from the bhoga (are combined) in a battle. 
(The structures of the abovesaid battle arrays) may be modified 
by omitting a wing or two wings. Otherwise (a squadron) 
may be taken from the chest (of the army) and placed around 
the edges. After having attacked the boundary army in the front 
with the army forming the wings, one should strike the army at 
the hip with (the army at) the boundaries and attack with that 
comprising the chest. The routed soldiers of a hostile army as 
well as the reserves should be completely destroyed and one s 
own should be expanded. The main part (of the hostile army ) 
should be attacked with double that of the main and the reserve 
f orce (of the hostile army) with the main. A compact (hostile) 
army should be scattered with a strong contingent of elephants. 
If (the hostile army) is (in the array) dandaka with the flanks, 
wings and chest (drawn up) then (a general) should employ 
the (array) darida and quickly show the position. (The array 
called) praddraka would be by the addition of two wings to the 

dan da. If it is added with wings and flanks it is known as dfdha . 

The array that is increased by (adding) two flanks is known to 
be asahya. The (array) khdtaka (consists of) keeping 4he flanks 
and wings down and attacking with the troops at the chest. 



242.68-243.1-7 


635 


68-72. The array valaya is said to be (the union of) two 
dongas capable of breaking the enemy. The (array) durjaya 
(consists of) four valayas that is capable of routing the enemy 
forces. By changing the arrangement of elements (troops) 
on the flanks, wings and chest of (the array) bhoga (we get the 
arrays) sarpacdri and gomUtrikd . The array Sakata is of the shape 
of a cart. The reverse is said to be the array amara capable 
of destroying the enemies. The arrangement (of troops) 
on the sides, wings and chest would be in the same way as the 
(array) maniala. The divisions (called) cakra,padma and others 
are variations of the maniala . In the same way the arrays sarva- 
tobhadra , the excellent vajraksa , the crow-shaped one, the half 
moon, Srngdfaka (resembling the junction of four roads) and 
acala of the forms corresponding to their names should be 
formed according to one’s convenience that would prevent 
the enemy forces. 

Fire-god said : 

73. O Brahmin ! Rama 1 2 reached Ayodhya after killing 
(the demon) Ravana. Laksmana (brother of Rama) killed 
Indrajit (son of Ravana) in days of yore by means of statesman- 
ship narrated by Rama. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FORTYTHREE 
Physiognomy of men and their indications 
Fire-god said : 

1. O King ! Ethics were described by me to Rama. 
I shall now describe the characteristics of men and women 
as described by Samudra to sage Garga formerly. 

Samudra said : 

2-7. I shall describe the good and bad characteristics of 
men and women. O Virtuous one ! A man having (the signs 
and features symbolised by the terms) ekddhika* 3 dviSukla (two 
whites), trigambhira (three depths), tritrika (three triads or nine 
virtues), tripralamba (three elongated organs), a spreading in 
three, threefolds (of skins), trivinata (having bends at three 

1. One of the manifestations of lord Vi&u. 

2. These terms are explained below in verses 7 ff. 



636 


Agni Pur&na 

places), trikdlajfta (knowing the three periods of time) and 
trivipula (broad organs at three places) would be possessing £ood 
characteristics. Similarly, (one possessing) four marks (on four 
different parts of the body), or four equal parts of the body, or 
cubits four frontal teeth (of commendable size), dark complexion 
of four, in four (parts of the body), sweet smells at the four 
(joints of the body) and four (specific^ organs) of short stature, 
five (parts of the body) small and long, six (parts) raised, eight 
bones (strong), seven (parts) glossy, nine (parts) clean, nine 
(parts like) the lotus, ten (parts like an) array and of the form 
of the fig tree, fourteen pairs (of parts) equal and sixteen eyes 
is commended. 

8-15. (The term) ekadhika stands for virtue together with 
(the goals of life) righteousness, attainment of riches and plea- 
sures. (The term) dviiukla (signifies) the whiteness of teeth and 
the eyes except the two pupils. (The term) trigambhira (de- 
notes) depth in the ear and navel and (the term) tritrika the 
virtues of absence of envy, compassion, forbearance, endowed 
with auspicious deeds, purity, desire, liberality, ease and valour 
known as one triad of virtue. (The term) tripralamba (denotes) 
a person that would have the testicles and arms long. One who has 
spread by his radiance, fame and fortune on the quarters, 
country and his own class (is said to be) trikavy&pi. A person 
that has three folds on the belly (is said to be) trivalimdn . Listen 
to me. I shall describe the man having three bends. (He 
is the person) that bows to the gods, brahmins and preceptors. 
One who knows the suitable time for (the practice of) virtues, 
attainment of riches and pleasure is said to be the knower of 
three periods. One who lias a broad chest, forehead and 
face (is said to be) trivistirna. The two hands and two feet bear- 
ing (the marks of) banners, umbrellas etc. (are deemed to be 
bringing good). The fingers, chest, back and hip that are equal 
are commendable. The commendable height (of the human 
figure is) four cubits. Four (frontal) teeth having moon-like 
lustre (is meant by eaturdarfifprah). I shall describe the four 
black things. The two pupils of the eyes, the two eye-brows, 
the beard and hair (are the four) black (things). 

16-26. The absence of bad smell in the nostril, mouth, 
perspiration and armpits (is caturgandha). The four short things 



244.1-6 


637 


are short penis, neck and the two shanks. The finger-joints 
nails, hair on the head, teeth and skin (are the five) minute, 
(parts). The two cheeks, two eyes, forehead, nose and the space 
between the breasts (are the five) long parts. The chest, 
shoulders, nails, nose, face and the back of neck (are the six) 
raised parts. The seven parts that are glossy are the skin, 
hair on the head, teeth, hair on the body, one’s sight nails 
and speech. (The eight bones that are strong are those in) 
the two knees, two thighs, back, bones of the hand and 
nose. The nine parts that are clean are the two eyes, 
two nostrils, two ears, penis, anus and face. The ten (parts 
of the body) of men of the lustre of a lotus that are commended 
are the tongue, two lips, palate, eyes, hands, feet, nails, 
tip of the penis and face. The hand, foot, face, neck, two 
ears, heart, head, forehead, belly and back, the ten that are 
broad (like an array) are praiseworthy. One is said to be of 
the form of a fig (tree) if the inter-space between the two middle 
and index fingers of the extended arms is equal to the height. 
The two feet, ankles, buttocks, sides, groins, testicles, breasts, ears, 
lips, thighs, shanks, hands, fore-arms and eyes are the pairs of 
fourteen organs that are equal in general for a man. One that 
sees with the fourteen branches of learning and the two eyes is 
said to be having sixteen eyes. One with extremely dry body 
with exposed veins and emaciated, smelling badly (is deemed to 
be) unfortunate. The person with contrary (characteristics) 
and pleasing look is commendable. The voice of a lucky man is 
sweet. His gait resembles that of an elephant in rut. He 
has two hairs from the same root. It gives protection from fear 
at once. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FORTYFOUR 
The characteristic features of women 


Samudra said : 

1-6. A woman that is beautiful in all her limbs, having the 
gait of an elephant in rut, having heavy thighs and hips and 
possessing a look like that of a longing pigeon is commendable. 
One that is having luxurious dark hair, slim, not having hairs. 



638 


Agni Purdna 


on the body, beautiful, feet touching the ground evenly, and hav- 
ing a pair of breasts closely pressing each other (is also deemed 
to be lucky) . The navel spiralling right to left, the private organ 
resembling the leaf of the fig (tree), ankles having a dip in the 
middle and (the dip in) the navel is of the measure of (the head 
of) a thumb (are also commendable). One that is not having an 
elongated abdomen (is also praiseworthy). One whose hairs 
are not soft is not good. One that is not having the name of an 
asterism, tree and river, one that is not fond of quarrels, one that 
is not greedy and one that does not speak harsh is auspicious and 
is honoured by the celestials. One that is having her cheeks of 
the colour of the madhuka flower, one that is not (having the body 
as) sinewy and abound with hairs, not having the eyebrows 
close to one another (is also commended) . Even if one is crooked 
if she bestows her affection on the husband (she is deemed to be) 
the life of the husband even if the good characteristics are not 
present. If the quality of attraction is present other qualities 
(would also be present). One whose little toe does not touch the 
earth is verily the death itself. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FORTYFIVE 

The characteristics of the royal fan, bow and sword 
Fire-god said : 

1-6. The handle of (the royal) fan (should be of) gold. 
The royal umbrella made of the feathers of hartisa , peacock, 
parrot or the feathers of crane is praised. It should not be made 
with mixed feathers,. (An umbrella) of a brahmin (should be) 
of square shape and that of a king (should be) circular and white. 
(There should be) three, four, five, six, seven or eight joints on 
the handle (of umbrella). The auspicious seat of the king 
(should be made) with (the wood of) the kfira trees of fifty inches 
long. Its breadth should be three cubits and decorated with gold 
and other things. O Excellent brahmin ! The bow (is made 
of three materials) iron, horn or wood. The three qjaterials for 
the bow-string are the bamboo fibre, hide and wood. Four 



245.7-27 


639 


cubits would be the excellent measure of a bow. It is said to 
be mediocre if equal and inferior if less than that. Materials 
should be added at the middle part for the sake of the grip of the 
fist. 

7-13. O Brahmin ! the tip of the bow made of horns or 
iron (should be having) minute edge (covered) by hides. The 
edge (should be) like the creeper, (like) the eye-brow of a beautiful 
damsel and should be fastened well. O Brahmin ! One should 
make the bow separately made of the horn or iron or (the two) 
mixed. A good bow should suitably be decorated with particles 
of gold. A bow that is crooked, broken and with incisions is not 
commended. Gold, silver, copper and black iron are remember- 
ed (to be the materials) in (making) a bow. A bow (made of) 
horns of a buffalo, a farabha (a fabulous animal) or rohifa 
(a kind of deer) are auspicious. A bow (made of) sandal, 
cane, sdla , dhavala and kakubha (trees) (are good). The most 
excellent bow is that made of bamboos cut and collected in the 
autumn. The bow should be worshipped with the sacred syllab- 
les called trailokyamohana (captivating the three worlds) (used) 
for the swords. The arrows (may be made) of iron, bamboO or 
reeds. (They should be) straight and gold-coloured and bound 
by sinews. (They should have) good feathers. (They should 
have) gold feathers that are good. (They should) be cleaned 
with oil and be of good colour. One should worship weapons, 
bows and other things before starting an expedition or the royal 
consecration. 

14-27. The king (should also worship) those carrying 
banners and weapons and the astrologers. Lord Brahma 
performed a sacrifice on the banks of celestial Ganges on the 
peaks of the Meru (mountain). When he was contemplating 
at the sacrifice he saw the demon Loha (that causes) obstruction. 
As he was thinking about that, a great mighty form appeared 
from the fire in front of him. He bowed down to the lord 
(Brahm&) and the celestials greeted him with joy. Lord Hari 
took the sword (called) NanAdka from the demon as 
requested by the celestials. The lord seized it slowly and it be- 
came unsheathed. The sword was blue (in colour) with gem 
(studded) handle. Then the demon became (endowed with) 
hundred hands. That demon made the celestials run away in 
the battlefield by means of the mace: The body of the demon was 



640 


Agni Purdna 


cut by lord Hari with the sword and (the parts of) the body 
fell on the earth and all of them became pieces of iron on atcount 
of their contact with the (sword) Nandaka, After having killed 
him lord Hari gave him a boon (saying) “Your holy body 
would become (the material) for weapons on the earth”. On 
account of the grace of lord Hari, Brahma also worshipped 
lord Hari with the sacrifice without obstruction. Then I shall 
describe the characteristics of a sword. Swords that are pro- 
duced at (the places) Kha{l and Khatfara are known to be 
worthy of being seen. Those belonging to (the region called) 
‘Rsi* (would be capable of) cutting the body. Those produced 
from Surparaka would be strong. Those got from Vanga are 
sharp and capable of cutting. Those produced from the country 
Anga are sharp. Sword (of the length) of fifty inches is said to 
be excellent. Half of that measure is known to be medium. One 
should not bear a sword shorter than that length. O 
Noblest one ! It is said to be extremely worthy to wear a sword 
that is long and that which makes a sweet sound like that of a 
bell. A sword having the tip resembling the lotus flower or 
round is commended. Swords having the colour of the tip of a 
karavira leaf, the smell of ghee and the lustre of the sky (are also 
good). Spots at equal intervals of an inch on the swords are 
commendable as on the lifiga. Those resembling the colour of a 
crow or owl and of an uneven shape are not auspicious. One 
should not see his face reflected in the sword. One should not 
touch the sword after eating (without washing the mouth). 
One should not disclose the value and quality of a sword. One 
should not place the sword under the head in the night. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FORTYSIX 

The testing of gems 

Fire-god said : 

1-7. I shall describe the characteristics of gems. The gems 
that are to be worn by the kings are diamond, emerald, ruby, 
pearl, sapphire, mahdnila (a kind of sapphire), Blpis lazuli, 



246.8-15 


641 


gandhafasyaka (?), moon-stone, sun-stone, crystal, pulaka, karke- 
tana , topaz and the jyotirasa . Crystal, rdjapaffa (an inferior kind 
of diamond) and rajamaya are auspicious. O Brahmin ! Ruby, 
ganja, conch-shell of a variety, gomeda , rudhirakfa (holy beads 
and the marking nut (are auspicious). O Excellent brahmin! 
Dhuli emerald, blue vitriol, lead, pilu , coral girivajra (?) the 
gem (found) in the serpents, auspicious diamond, tittibha (?), 
pinda (?), bhrdmara (a kind of stone ?) and utpala — (these) gems 
set in gold (and worn) would confer prosperity and success. 
Inward lustre, free from impurities and good formation of the 
shape (are the characteristics of good gems). 

8-15. Such gems could be worn. Those not having lustre, 
impure, cracked and containing pebbles inside should not at all 
be worn. It is commendable to wear the diamond. The diamond 
that could be carried away by water, that is unbreakable, with- 
out impurity, of hexagonal shape, has the lustre of the rainbow, 
light and (brilliant) like the sun is auspicious (to wear). Simi- 
larly an emerald possessing the hues of the plumes of a parrot, 
glossy, radiant, without impurity and containing minute parti- 
cles resembling powdered gold is auspicious. The rubies got 
from crystal mines would be extremely red and spotless. Those 
got from (the place) Kuruvinda are naturally red. and those got 
from sulphur mines are of dark brown (colour). The pearls got 
from oysters are free from impurities. O Sage ! Those got 
from the conch-shells are superior to them. (The pearls) obtain- 
ed from the tusks and temples of the elephants, those got from 
the boars and fish and those found in the bamboos and clouds are 
excellent. Rotundity, whiteness, transparency and heaviness 
are the (good) qualities in a pearl. A good sapphire shines in the 
milk, spreads more lustre and tinge of its own colour. It should 
be declared as invaluable. The lapis lazuli of red-blue (colour) 
is excellent and should be used in a necklace and other (orna- 
ments). 



642 


Agni Purdna 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FORTYSEVEN 

The characteristics of a site for building 
Fire-god said : 

1-3. I shall describe the characteristics of a building site for 
the brahmins and others. They are white, red, yellow and 
black (soil) in order (for the four castes). A building site should 
have the smell of ghee, blood, cooked rice and wine in order (for 
the four castes). (They should also) taste sweet, pungent and 
acid and other secondary tastes in order. (The ground) should 
be cleared of kufa 9 reeds, kdia (a kind of grass) and durva (a 
kind of grass having razor-like edges) after having dug out pieces 
of iron etc. and worshipped the brahmins. 

4-9. Sixty-four squares should be made. Lord Brahma 
(occupies) the four central squares. The presiding deity (of the 
two squares) on the east of those (squares) is said to be lord 
Aryama. God Vivasvan is (on the two squares) on the south. 
God Mitra is (on the two squares) on the west. Gods 
worshipped on the angular points are :) God Mahidhara 
(Pythvldhara) is on (the two squares on) the north. Apas and 
(Apa) Vatsa are on the south-east. God Savitra, Savita, Jaya 
and Indra (are respectively) on the south-west and west. God 
Rudra and (personification of) disease are on the north-west. 
(The gods worshipped) outside on the east and other directions 
from the angular squares are Mahendra, Satya and Se$a on 
the east. Grhaksata, Aryaman 1 2 3 , Dhrti and Gandharva on the 
south, Puspadanta, Asura Varuna and Yajfia* on the west and 
Bhallata Soma, Aditi 8 and Dhanada on the north. Naga is 
the lord on north-east. Similarly, the first and the last are 
said to be the lords in each one of the eight directions. 

10-15. Paijanya is the first god. The second one is 
Karagraha. (The other gods are) Mahendra, Ravi, Satya, 
Bhj*£a andGagana. Pavana (should be worshipped) in the east, 
(gods) Antarik^a and Dhanesvara in the south-east and the 
celestials Mfga and Sugrivaka in the south-west. Roga and 
Mukhya (should be worshipped) in the north-west, Pu?pa, 

1. Yama and Bhfhgar^ja in other texts. 

2. Se$a in other texts. 

3. Gar aka, in other texts. 



247.16-31 


643 


Kubera as well as Grhaksata, Yama, Bhr£a, Gandharva and 
Nagapaitfka on the south, Dauvarika, Sugrlva, Puspadanta, the 
demon, the (presidting deity of) water (should be worshipped) 
in the west. The pulmonary disease that emaciates (men) and 
Nagaraja (the king of the serpents) (should be worshipped in 
the north). (The gods) Mukhya, Bhallata, Moon, Aditi, Ku- 
bera, Naga, Fire (god), the excellent Indra and Sun (god) 
(should be worshipped) in the east. Gfhaksata and puspa 
(are worshipped) in the south, the outstanding Sugrlva in the 
west and Puspadanta and Bhallata at the northern door. 

16-23. A stoneslab or a brick should be laid on the ground 
and worshipped with the mystic syllables (as follows) and the 
celestials should be worshipped. O Daughter of (the sage) 
Vasistha ! Gladden us with wealth and progeny. O Victo- 
rious one ! Heir of sage Bhargava (ParaSurama) ! Bring 
victory to the progeny. O Heir of (sage) Angirasa ! The 
Satisfied one ! Fulfil my desires. O Auspicious one ! Heir 
of sage KaSyapa ! Make my mind good. O One endowed 
with all seeds ! One surrounded by all gems and herbs ! 
O Bright one ! Rejoicing one [Daughter of (sage) Vasi$fha ! 
Be pleased here. O Daughter of Prajapati ! Goddess on 
the quadrangle on the earth. O Goddess of Good fortune and 
Good demeanour ! Auspicious one ! Daughter of (sage) 
Kasyapa ! Be pleased in (this house). O One worshipped by 
great masters and adorned with incense and flowers ! O 
Goddess that makes one get prosperous ! O Daughter of 
(sage) Bhargava ! May you be pleased in this house. One not 
mutilated ! Unbroken one ! Complete one ! Daughter of the 
sage Angirasa ! I establish you on this brick. Confer on me 
the desired (things). One that is held by sovereigns, chieftains 
and owners of houses ! May you be one that increases the pro- 
geny, wealth, elephants, horses and cows. (A brick or) stone 
should similarly be laid at the entrance to the house (for the first 
time). 

24-31. A plak$a tree would be auspicious on the north and 
the vata (tree) on the east of the house. Udumbara on the south 
and the aivattha on the west are excellent. A garden should be 
laid on the left (of the house). Dwelling in such a house is good. 
The trees planted and grown should be watered morning and 
evening in the summer, alternate days in the winter and each 



644 


Agni Purdna 


night in the rainy season if the ground gets dried. They should 
be sprinkled with cold water mixed with the paste of vida&ga 
(a medicinal herb used as a vermifuge). If the fruits get des- 
troyed, (the trees should be sprinkled with water mixed) with 
(the paste of) horse-beans, black-gram, green gram, sesamum 
and barley. Sprinkling of cold water together with ghee is always 
(beneficial) for (the trees bearing) fruits and flowers. Sprink- 
ling water with fish makes the trees grow. The powdered excre- 
ment of the sheep and goat (mixed with) the powdered barley 
and sesamum, beef and water should be buried in the ground for 
seven nights and then sprinkling that would make all the trees 
bear fruits and flowers abundantly. Sprinkling mango trees 
with cold water mixed with fish is commended. The gentle 
kick of the aSoka (tree) by women with their feet is also commen- 
ded. Date palms, coconut and other trees grow well by (add- 
ing) salt. Sprinkling with water mixed with vidahga (herb) and 
fish would be beneficial for all trees. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FORTYEIGHT 

Benefit of worshipping lord Vifnu with flowers and leaves 
Fire-god said : 

1-6. (Lord) Visnu would confer success in all ventures by 
worshipping (him) with flowers. (The flowers for worship are) : 
malatiy mallika, yuthi, pdf aid, karaviraka, pdvanti, atimukta,karrtikdra , 
kuranfaka , kubjaka , tagara , nipa ) vdna , barbara 9 mallikd 9 afoka, tilaka, 
kunda (and) tamdlaka would be good for worship. The leaves 
of bilva, Sami y bhrngardja y tulasi 9 and vdsaka (are deemed good) 
for worship. The ketaki leaf and flower, lotus and red lotus 
and others (are also good). But the arka 9 unmattaka, kdrtei , 
girimallikdy kaufaja, Sdlmuli and kanfakdri flowers are not at all 
good for the worship. The bathing of lord Vi$nu with a prastha 
( measure) of ghee would be equal) to the benefit (of making 
a gift) of a crore of cows. (By doing so) with ddhaka one would 
become a king. One would ascend heavens (by bathing) 
with ghee and milk. % 



249.1-19 


645 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FORTYNINE 
The science of archery 

Fire-god said : 

1-5. O Brahmin ! I shall describe the science of archery 
in four sections. It is said to be of five kinds resting on the 
warriors on chariots, elephant, cavalry and infantry. It is said to 
be of five kinds such as those projected by a machine, thrown by 
the hand, those cast (by hands) and retained, those permanently 
retained (in the hand) and boxing. (The weapons) are said 
to be of two kinds — ordinary weapons and missiles. They are 
again stated to be of two kinds by the divisions (such as) curved 
and conceit. (The weapons projected) by means of a sling or 
bow or other such contrivances are said to be projected by a 
machine. Stones and weapons such as the iron clubs are stated 
to be (weapons) thrown by the hand. (Weapons) such as the 
prdsa (dart) would be known as (the weapons) cast and retain- 
ed. Swords and other (weapons) are those permanently retain- 
ed. Personal combat without weapons (is the last one). 

6-8. After surmounting the dilficulties, (the king) desiring 
to fight should engage fit men (for the purpose) . Battles (fought) 
with the bows (and arrows) are excellent, those with 
darts are mediocre, those with swords are inferior and 
those fought with hands are still inferior to them. A 
brahmin is said to be the preceptor in archery for two castes. 
A iudra has the right to fight in case of an emergency if he had 
undergone training. The people of mixed castes belonging 
to that country should render assistance to the king in the battle. 

9-19. If the thumbs, calves, palms and feet are kept closely 
pressed against each other, the position (is said to be) samapada 
from its characteristic feature. Itis said to be vaifilkha if one stands 
on the outer toes and the two knees are held in a straight and 
motionless posture and the distance (between the two soles) 
is three vitastis (twelve afigulas). It is known as mandala if the 
two knees look like a row otharhsas and (the feet are) four vitastis 
apart. It is stated to be dlidha when the right thigh and knee 
are held motionless and (appear) like the plough and are 
five vitastis apart. If the same is changed (to the left) it is known 
to be pratydlidha . If the left leg would be curved and the right 



646 


Agni Purdna 


would be straight and the two calves and the legs remain fifteen 
ahgulas apart, the posture would be (known as) jata *(on the 
whole) extending to twelve ahgulas . If the left knee would be 
straight and the right knee extended well or the right knee is 
curved and motionless and the feet together with the knee are 
four cubits apart, it is said to be vikafa extending to two cubits. 
If the knees (are kept down) twice (as much) and the two legs 
are raised, that posture is said to be vikafa. The feet are a 
little turned round, lirm and equal to four cubits. It is properly 
seen to extend to sixteen ahgulas. U iirahmin 1 With this 
posture (known as) svastika one should lirst bow down holding 
the bow by the left hand and the arrow by the right hand. 

20-29. One tliat loves his bow should remain in the (pos- 
tures) vaisakha or jdla or linn or extended and put the string on 
the bow. The lower tip of the bow and the striking part of the 
arrow should be fixed on the ground. O One practising good 
austerities ! it should be raised with the hands by means of the 
curved lore-arms. That bow and arrow of a person is excellent 
which has a space of twelve inches between the bow and the 
feathered part of the arrow. The string should be made neither 
too long nor too short. Holding the bow (in line) with the navel 
and the quiver on the back, the bow should be raised 
with the left hand between the eye and the car. The arrow 
should be taken with the right list to the edge of the breast. 
(Then the string) should be put on and quickly drawn to its 
full capacity. (It should not be stretched so much as to be) 
within or beyond or above or below or curbed or raised or shak- 
ing or extremely obstructed. It should be parallel, firm and 
straight like a rod. After having covered the mark with the right 
fist, the archer (should stand) with his chest raised and 
bent in the shape of a triangle, the shoulders stooping, the neck 
without motion, and the head poised erect as a peacock. The 
space between the fore head, nose, face, shoulder and the elbow 
should be equal. The space between the chin and shoulder is 
known Uo be three ahgulas. 

30-37. The interval between the chin and shoulder is said 
to be three ahgulas in the first, two ahgulas in the second and one 
ahgulas in the third (kind of bow) 1 After having taken the fea- 
thered end of an arrow with the thumb and the index finger and 
then with the ring and middle (finger of the right hand). 



250.1-7 


647 


it should be drawn fully such that the arrow gets completely 
stretched. After having begun in this way, the arrow should 
be released in the proper manner. O Man of good conduct I 
The target that has been seen (by the eyes) and covered by the 
fist should be split with the arrow. After releasing (the arrow) 
the left hand should be thrown back quickly. O Brahmin 1 
It is known as excision. It should be known by you. An expert 
in the archery should keep the elbow down while drawing (an 
arrow), above while releasing and be in line with the target in 
the middle (state). Those who are well-versed in (the science of) 
archery know it as the excellent. The superior kind of arrow is 
known to be twelve musfis L , the mediocre of eleven muftis and 
the inferior one of ten musfis. A bow of four cubits is excellent, 
that of three and a half cubits is mediocre and that of three 
cubits is said to be inferior always by the infantry men. The 
same is said to be excellent in (the case of) cavalry, chariot 
and elephant. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY 
The science of archery 

Fire-god said : 

1-7. Then a brahmin should get ready the weapons such as 
the mace, bow etc., wash them well free from flesh and place 
them on the sacrificial ground. Then after having collected the 
arrow, furnishing himself with an armour and remaining 
composed he should get the quiver and bind it firmly on the 
right shoulder. Even though there may not be any definite aim, 
that arrow that has been placed in it in that position should be 
lifted from the quiver with the right hand. Then the arrow to- 
gether with the hand that be lifted should be placed*(on the bow) 
and held. The middle-part of the bow should be held with the 
left hand. After having made his mind diverted of all anxieties, 
the feathered end of the arrow should be placed on the string 

1. The breadth of the clenched fist. 



648 


Agni Purdna 


After holding firmly in the (position known as) strhhakar^a evenly 
with the feathered end, the fruit of the left that rested on tfie left 
ear should be borne (?) The covers should be borne with the 
left middle finger. One who knows the procedure should fix 
his mind on the target and (hold the arrow) with (the right) 
fist on the right side of the body and discharge covers. 

8-12. (One that practises to shoot an arrow) should place 
a pole as the target in line with the fold on the forehead. The 
circular mark (of the extent) of sixteen angulas should be struck 
after pulling (the arrow). After having discharged such an 
arrow, one should then practise (discharging) fire-brands with 
tliat. One should place the arrow again and again with the mid- 
dle finger. One should strike from the quiver at the target per- 
ceived by the eye (imagining) as a square on the right. One 
tliat is in the first stage should practise to pierce (the target) 
in a square. Then he should practise to aim quickly, turning 
round and to pierce that below or above. When (the targets 
are) at the position of being pierced the bow (should be lifted) 
from its position and the hands should threaten with varied 
sounds of invincible (nature) (?) 

13-19. O Brahmin ! Among those (objects) to be struck 
(by a bow-man), two (kinds) are known to be driha (requiring 
firm hand), two are known as Du§kara (difficult to hit) and 
two as citraiufkara (extremely difficult to hit). That which 
is not below and liard is stated to be requiring firm hand. That 
which is below as well as that which is above is said to be dufkara. 
That which is between the head and the zenith is known as citra - 
dufkara. Thus after having known the position of the objects to 
be hit with the right and left, a hero (archer) should first make 
progress. Then one would be the conqueror of the target. This is 
said to be the rule that has been laid by those well-versed in that. 
It is said that one would have more mobility from that practice. 
The target that comes within the purview of the arrow should 
be aimed at firmly. One should strike at once, break, pierce 
and cause distress to that which is whirling round, that which 
is moving and that which is extremely steady. One who is well- 
versed in the performance of actions should practise this way 
after knowing that. One that has learnt the application would 
conquer (the lord of) death by means of his mind, eye* and look. 



251.1-12 


649 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTYONE 
The method of using a noose 

Fire-god said : 

1-6. One that has controlled the hand, conquered the mind 
and obtained proficiency in (hitting) the target perceived should 
board the chariot after getting the specified perfection. A noose 
should be ten cubits (long), round and such as to be held in the 
hand. The thread (of the noose) should be made cither of cotton 
or muhja (grass), tendon, arka (plant) or hide. It may be made 
of any other strong (material) well twined with thirty (pieces). 
A wiseman should make the noose well-rounded. The instruc- 
tors should always provide a place for that on the sides. Having 
gathered it with the left hand it should be lifted with the 
right-hand. After having made (the noose) into a loop, it should 
be whirled round the head and thrown quickly on a person cover- 
ed by the armour and quiver. One that is well-trained should 
be employed after having made him proficient to use the noose 
on the (horsemen) galloping, capering and running away. 

7-12. After having conquered the enemy, he should be 
made a captive in the proper manner. The sword should be 
hanging on the left side on the waist. (The sheath) should be 
held firmly by the left (hand) and (the sword) should be drawn 
out (from the scabbard) with the right hand. The circum- 
ference of a dart should be six ahgulas , its height seven hastas 
and it (be made) of iron. Armours are of different kinds. It 
should be half the hasta , equal, spreading across and upwards. 
It should be fitted in the proper manner. Listen to me as I 
describe. After having made the person stand with the quiver 
and armour on his body, one should take the new, strong club 
in the right hand, move nine ahgulas and strike. By this (blow) 
the head (of the enemy) would certainly be destroyed. (Other- 
wise) he may be struck down with both hands. After having 
done thus without strain, one is said to accomplish the death 
of the person. I have already described how to cause the distress 
of the arms for the sake of the movement. 



THE 

AGNI PURANA 

PART III 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE LIMITED • DELHI 



First Edition: Delhi, 195 4 
Reprint: Delhi, 2000 


Also available at: 

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 

41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007 
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, Warden Road, Mumbai 400 026 
120 Royapeuah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004 
236, 9th Main III Block, Jayanagar, Bangalore 560 011 
San as Plaza, 1302 Baji Rao Road, Pune 411 002 
8 Camac Street, Calcutta 700 017 
Ashok Raj path, Patna 800 004 
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 


Printed in India 

BYJAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHR1 JAINENDRA PRESS. 
A-45 NARAINA, PHASE-1. NEW DELHI 1 10 028 
AND PUBLISHED BYNARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED, 
BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 1 10 007 



CONTENTS 


PART III 

CHAPTERS 

252. The mode of wielding the swords, maces etc. 651 

253. The description of the administration of justice 653 

254. Debts and their repayments 659 

255. Description of rules relating ' to disputes and 

different kinds of ordeals 66 1 

256. Description of the procedure for division of 

properties 666 

257. Settlement of disputes relating to the boundaries 

of fields 670 

258. Punishment for making defamatory speeches and 

committing other offences 675 

259. The application of the mantras of the Rgveda 683 

260. The use of the hymns of Yajurveda 695 

261. The use of the hymns of S&maveda 704 

262. Tile use of the hymns of Atharvaveda 707 

263. Appeasing rites for portents 710 

264. Worship of gods to ward off the effects of portents 

and mode of offering the Vaisvadeva ball 713 

265. The sacred bathing of the deities 716 

266. The mode of performing the ceremonial bathing 

to wash off obstacles 7 18 

267. Ceremonial bathing known as Mahejvara and 

other kinds of ablutions 719 

268. Mode of worshipping Indra, doing nlrajana (relat- 
ing to King’s expedition) and other rites 722 

269. The sacred formulas for the consecration of the 

umbrella and other royal insignia 725 



Contents 


270. A hymn to Visnu that destroys Evil 728 

271. The different recensions of the Vedas 730 

272. The meritoriousness of making gifts of the different 

Puranas 732 

273. The description of the solar race 735 

274. Description of the lunar race 738 

275. Description of the dynasty of Yadu 740 

276. The manifestations of Lord Visnu 744 

277. The narration of the lineage of Anga 747 

278. The description of the lineage of Puru 748 

279. The description of the potent remedies 751 

280. The remedies for all the diseases 757 

28 1 . The description of the characteristics of the different 

tastes and the qualities of the herbs 76 1 

282. Description of horticulture 764 

283. The remedial herbs for all the diseases 766 

284. Narration of sacred formulas that are medicinal 770 

285. The accomplished recipes that would revive the 

dead 772 

286. Collection of medical recipes 778 

287. The treatment of the diseases of elephants 781 

288. The diseases of the horses and the management of 

the horses 784 

289. The characteristics of the horses and the treatment 

of the diseases of the horses 789 

290. Propitiatory rites for curing the ailments of horses 794 

291. Propitiatory rites for curing the ailments of ele- 
phants 795 

292. The greatness of cows and their welfare 798 

293. Different kinds of mantras and their nomenclature 802 

294. The characteristics of different kinds of serpents 807 

295. .The medical treatment for a serpent bite 81 1 

296. The five constituents of the worship of Rudra 814 

297. The remedial mantra that would remove poison 817 

298. The treatment for the poison due to snakes such 

as the gonasa and others 818 

299. Recipes for the diseases of infants 820 

300. Description of the mantras which remove the bane- 
ful influences of planets 826 



Contents 


301. The mode of worship of Sun 830 

302. Description of different kinds of potential mantras 

and herbs 832 

303. The propitiation of the letters of one’s limbs to 

ward off evil 833 

304. The mode of worship of Siva with the mantra of 

five syllables 837 

305. The fiftyfive names of (Lord) Vi?nu and their 

greatness 840 

306. Description of the mantras to be repeated to ward 

off evil incantations etc. 843 

307. Description of the mantras that would stupefy the 

three worlds 845 

308. On the mode of worship of goddess Lak?mi and 

others that confer immense benefits 849 

309. The mode of worship of Tvarita 852 

310. The narration of the spell relating to Tvarita 854 

311. The location of the basic mantras of Tvarita and 

her worship 858 



CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-TWO 
The mode of wielding the swords , maces etc. 

Fire-god said : 

I- 4. Bhrantam, udbhrdntam, dviddharh , dplularh, viplutarh, sfta, 
sathpdlarh , samudirnarfi , iyenapdtaih, Skid am, uddhRtaih, avadh&larh, 
savyam, dakfinarh, andlakfita, oisphofa, kardla, indramahasakha , vik- 
ardla, nipdla, vibhifana, bhayanaka, samagra (the entire), ardha 
(half), trtiydrhia (one-third), />&/<*, p&ddrdha, vdrija, pralydlldham, 
Slidharfi, vardham and lulitarh are known to be the thirty-two 
kinds of employment of the sword and armour in a battle. 

5-6. Paravrttarfi, apdvrttam , grhllarii, that known as laghu, 
urdhvaksiptam, adhahksiptam, sandhdritam, vidhdritam, Syenapatam, 
gajapdlath and grdhagrahyath are the eleven ways of manipulating 
a noose. 

7. Great men hold that the five ways of casting a noose 
are : extending in a straight line, long, broad, horizontal and 
whirling. 

8. The uses of a disc (are) : cutting, piercing, felling, 
whirling and severing. 

9. May you know that the uses of a spear are : slapping, 
thrashing, cleaving, frightening, incarcerating and, the sixth, 
striking down. 

10. O Excellent Brahmin ! It has been declared that an 
iron club (TOMARA) (is used) in striking the eyes, the arms 
(and) sides (of the enemy) and should be countered with an 
arrow of the defendent. 

II- 12. O Brahmin I It has been declared that a mace 
(GADA) is used for the acts (such as) dhata, gomQtra , prabhOta, 
kamaldsana , Rrdhvagdtra , vdmanamita, dakpinanamita, dvftta, pardvftta , 
pddodbhUta , aoapluta, hathsamardda and vimarda. 

13. The use of a battle-axe is said to be kardla (dreadful), 
avaghdta (sharp blow), dcuiiSa (cutting), upapluta (leaping). 



652 Agni Pur&na 

ksiptahasta (that has been released from the hand), sthita (re- 
maining in the original position) and Sunya (void) . 

14. O Brahmin ! The use of a mudgara (mace) is for striking, 

cutting, pounding, causing deluge and killing • 

15. The uses of a bhindipala (sling) are for sarh£ranta> wi- 
r&nta and govisarga and sudurdhara (that is extremely unbearable) . 
The same are the uses of a lagu$a (club) . 

16. O Excellent Brahmin ! The uses of a mace (VAJRA) 
are for (striking) with the end, with the middle, turning back 
and commanding. The same (are the uses) of a paftifa (a kind 
of spear with sharp edge). 

17. Taking away, cutting, killing, piercing, anointing, 
felling and snapping are indicated as the uses of a sword. 

18. The functions of a sling are indicated to be frighten- 
ing, protecting, killing and helping a big fighting column. The 
same are the functions of a machine also. 

19-30. The methods of using the mace (GADA) should 
be known as total discharge, stimulating, throwing upwards 
in the posture of a boar, using the hand and the back of the 
hand, standing with the right knee being advanced and the left 
leg retracted, (holding) with one hand, (holding) by the back 
of the hand, (holding) with two hands, with the arms thrown 
round as in embracing, discharging from the hip, raising up- 
wards, striking on the chest, striking on the forehead, bhujdvi - 
dhamana (?), raising with the hand, lifting skywards, striking at 
the feet, injuring the feet, pressing the body together, putting 
an end, total destruction of the body, striking after raising up, 
blowing, intermittently (striking), wielding in the left or right 
(hand) , enabling to cross, enabling to protect, (like a) stick, 
fettered like the braid of hair, agitating, transversely locked up, 
removal, frightening speed, good looking, attacking like lion or 
elephant or an ass. The modes of wrestling are drawing (the 
enemy), drawing apart the base of the hands, the turning about of 
the neck, the breaking of the back, the terrible one, revolution, 
reversion, the manner of slaughtering animals, ajdvika (?), 
hitting the feet, slapping (as done with the arms) , discharging 
from the hip, resting on the shoulder, (using) the earth as a 
contrivance, striking at the chest and forehead, open conquest, 
raised one, as a wave, moving transverse, riding an elephant. 



252.31-33—253.1-4 


653 


casting down, not having the face turned aside, the path of the 
celestials, downward path, moving haphazardly, consistent, 
striking with a club, casting down, tearing the earth, locking 
up in the knees, locking up by the arms, embracing by the 
body, the terrific one, backwards, together with water, shining 
one and enclosed with the arms. At the time of the battle, (the 
warriors) should be ready with the weapons, elephants and 
other (divisions). 

31-33. Two soldiers (should be) bearing excellent goads, 
one of them on the neck (of the elephant) and the other on 
the shoulder and two archers and two (soldiers) carrying the 
sword on the elephant. Three cavalry men should be there (to 
defend) a chariot or the battle-front or the elephant man. It 
is said (that there should be) three archers to guard the cavalry. 
Armoured men should be employed for the protection of the 
archers. Whoever goes for a war after having worshipped the 
weapon with the respective sacred formula or (the sacred 
formula known as) the one captivating the three worlds, would 
conquer the enemies and would govern the earth well. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-THREE 
The description of the administration of justice 
Fire-god said : 

1 -4. I shall describe the administration of justice that gives 
the discriminative knowledge of justice and injustice. It 'is said 
(to comprise) four feet, four places and four means. That 
which is beneficial to four (classes of men), extends to four 
(different parties) and benefits fourfold. In the same way (it 
is said to comprise) eight parts and hundred divisions. (It has) 
three sources, two sorts of statements, two parties and two 
kinds of issues. The codes of law, justice, conduct and the 
command of the king are the four feet in the administration of 
the justice. (Among these) each subsequent one is the means 



654 Agni Purina 

for the previous one. Therein righteousness rests on truth. A 
law suit (rests) on the witnesses. 

5. The conduct of a person (rests) on the opinion of the 
people. The decree (depends) on the command of 9 the king. 
Since (a legal case) could be decided by the means such as the 
conciliation (and the like), they are said to be the four 
means. 

6-12. Since it is protecting the four institutions (such as 
the student life) , it is said to be beneficial in four ways. 
Because (the suit) encompasses the plaintiff, witness, assessors 
and the king, one-fourth each, it is said to be encompassing 
four-fold, it is said to be the instruments of four kinds, because 
it accomplishes the four-righteousness, material prosperity, 
fame and esteem of man-kind. The king with the attendant, 
courtiers, scripture, astrologer, scribe, gold, fire and water are 
stated to be the eight accessories (in a law-suit). It is said to 
be having three sources because it results from the three such 
as lust, anger and greed. Hence these three are the cause of a 
law-suit. The cause of the law-suit are two such as apprehension 
and firm disquisition. Among these, apprehension is known 
from association with six things and the genuine (fault) from 
the preceding events of six kinds. Because the suit has two sides 
it is said to be having two openings. Among these (two) , the 
first one is the plaintiff and the other one is the defendant. The 
two courses are said to be that which has happened and the guise. 

13. (The term) debt (denotes that admitted) by a person 
as payable or that denied by him as not payable or that which 
is given as gift (to another) . 

14. One’s own property placed out of trust (with another) 
without any doubt is said by wise men to be a trust that is a 
matter of dispute. 

15. The place where the merchants and others collectively 
transact business (called) the active occupation is known to be 
a matter of dispute. 

16. If one wants to take back that he has paid (to an- 
other), that is called the withdrawer of a gift and is known to 
be the matter of dispute. 

17. Having agreed to do service (to another), if one refuses 



253.18-29 


655 


to do so, it (is known as) refusal to do service and is said to be 
a matter for dispute. 

18. The wage of a servant is said to be coming under the 
head of debts and the non-payment (of the same) is deemed to 
be a matter of dispute. 

19. If one sells the entrusted property of another or the lost 
( property of another) after having got it or having stolen it 
without the’ knowledge (of the owner), it is known to be selling 
of another’s property. 

20. After having sold the goods for money if (the goods) 
are not made over to the buyer, it is non-delivery of sold (arti- 
cles) and is a matter for dispute. 

21-22. If a put chaser opines that the articles bought are 
not good after having bought (it is also a disputable thing). 
That condition of a wicked (assuring) good conduct is said to 
be conventional practice. The transgression of the conventional 
practice is said to be a matter for dispute. 

23. The dispute that arises in respect of the right over the 
land that has been determined by a bridge or a field or drawn 
boundaries is said to be that (dispute) arising from the land. 

24. Where the marriage rite of men and women is declared 
that is named as the union of women and men and is a matter 
for dispute. 

25. That which is termed the division of the ancestral 
(property) by the sons is said to be the partition of the property 
and a matter of dispute by the wise men. 

26. A rash act done by those haughty of their strength is 
said to be a crime and is declared as a matter for dispute. 

27. It is said to be an abusive language that (is spoken) 
out of hostility with reference to the country, caste and family 
and the like with gestures. 

28. It is said to be an assault if injury (is inflicted) on 
other’s bodies with hands, feet, weapons tod destructive mate- 
rials such as the fire. 

29. It is said to be divine gambling (when it is played) 
with dice, vajra (diamond) and rod etc. It is termed as animal 
gambling (if it is played) with animals, and birds kept for 
pleasure. 



656 


Agni Pur&na 


30. That dispute is again known to be a miscellaneous 
one if it does not rest on anything. The violation of the com- 
mand of the king as well as not carrying out that command (also 
constitute an offence) . 

31. 'Dius disputes are of eighteen kinds and there are one 
hundred divisions of these. These hundred divisions (of disputes) 
are stated to be due to difference in the acts of men. 

32-37. A king should examine the disputes with the help 
of learned brahmins without becoming angry. The courtiers 
(jurists) should be disposed equally towards the enemies and 
friends. They should not be greedy and they should be proficient 
in the scriptures. When such men cannot be found, a brahmin 
should be engaged with (the help of) the courtiers. Judges 
swerving from the codes of law and the like out of attachment, 
greed or fear should be punished separately. The fine is double 
as that for a quarrel. If a person that has been annoyed by 
others by following a method that is contrary to the codes of 
law arid practice, informs the king, that is (known to be) a 
matter for dispute. The year, month, fortnight, day, name, 
caste and the marks (on the body) should be recorded by the 
complainant as known to him in the presence of the defendant. 
The reply of the defendant after having heard (that of the 
complainant) should be recorded in the presence of the 
complainant. Then the complainant should record (the argu- 
ments) that would accomplish his statement. He would get 
success if it is established or the contrary if otherwise. 

38-46. These are the four steps indicated (by experts) in 
disputes. Without having settled a plaint, (the court) should 
not accept a cross-suit. One should not take up a case rejected 
by another (tribunal). A counter-suit could be made only in 
the case of a quarrel or violence. An appropriate bail should be 
collected from both (the parties) in deciding optional cases. 
One should pay (a fine of) equal amount to the king for the 
denial of an established matter. Double the fine has to be 
collected for a false plaint from the plaintiff. Cases of rash acts, 
theft, abusive language, pronouncing a curse and disappearance 
of women should be examined at once. It has been said that in 
other cases, they may be (put off to a different) time option- 
ally. One that wanders from one place to another, one that 



253.47-59 


657 


licks the corners of the mouth, one whose fore-head perspires, 
one whose face gets discoloured and one who by his nature gets 
changed in his thought, speech and physical actions is, said to 
be adefamer fora plaint and witness. (A witness) (uttering) 
words of ambiguous import, uttering voluntarily something (not 
being summoned), falling down (when questioned) , not telling 
something when summoned is known to be punishable if he is 
rich. Among the witnesses of both the sides, the witness of the 
plaintiff (should be heard first). When the examination of the 
plaintiff is completed, (the examination) of the defendant 
would be done. If the dispute is between members of the same 
clan, the younger should be punished. 

47-49. The king should conduct the proceedings with 
respect to money paid or property or riches of a rich man after 
removing the fraud by (employing) the messenger. The king 
should confiscate all treasures, if it is concealed wholly or partly. 
All such properties should not pass over to the sovereign unless 
voluntarily offered (by the parties). In the case of conflict 
between two law codes in deciding a suit, equity relevant to 
the suit (should be considered as) stronger. 

50-5 1 . The codes of law are deemed to be stronger than the 
science of wealth. The documents, actual enjoyment and the 
witnesses are said to be evidences (in a law suit). An oath is 
prescribed in the absence of one of these. The later incidents 
are stronger in all the law suits. 

52-59. The preliminary (events) are stronger in the case of 
a mortgage, gift or purchase. (The ownership) of a ground 
taken possession of forcibly by another with the knowledge of 
the rightful owner could be disputed only within twenty years. 
The wealth enjoyed by another (could be disputed by the 
legitimate owner) only within ten years, except in the case of 
a mortage, an encroachment, a property held in trust, wealth 
belonging to an idiot or an infant, or treasures or wealth 
belonging to the sovereign, to a woman or a brahmin. One 
who sells away a mortgaged property should pay the value to 
the owner of the property and pay an equal amount of fine or 
that befitting his ability to the king. Possession is title, even in 
the absence of (proof of) continuous enjoyment. But possession 
without (proof of) even a little enjoyment has no strength (for 



658 


Agni Purdna 


the title). An enjoyment with good possession (of a property) 
becomes valid. An enjoyment without proper possession could not 
be valid. The possession made by the trespasser should be reco- 
vered by a suit. It would be of no avail that thfe present 
possessor had got it from the son or the son’s son of the original 
trespasser. In the case of the death of the possessor, the value 
of the property should be recovered from the property left by 
him. An enjoyment without a sound possession could not be 
a valid reason (against that). (The king) should prevent the 
encroachment by force or deceit. 

60-62. A transaction done by a woman or in the night or 
inside a room or outside or made by an enemy (as well as that 
done) by a drunkard, lunatic or one addicted to evil, an infant 
or a frightened one or one that is defective is not valid. The 
king should' cause (the mortgager) to return to the mortgagee 
the property mortgaged. If not possible, an amount equal to 
the property should be paid. The king should pay to the village 
headman the property stolen by a thief. 

63-66. The interest relating to (a loan for which interest 
accrues) every month is one eightieth (of the amount lent). 
Otherwise the interest should be two, three, four or five (per 
cent) in the order of the castes (to which they belonged). It 
is seventieth part in the case of animals and women, eight 
times in the case of food, four or three or two times in the case 
of dress, food grains, gold and other things. If ( the money is 
lent) to a person of a different village* (it should be) ten (per 
cent) and if beyond the ocean, (it should be) twenty (per cent). 
(Members of) all castes may pay (rates of) interest of their 
choice. A king would not be censurable by paying money to 
those in need. One that would go to the king after having 
obtained (a loan) would be liable for punishment and that 
money should be confiscated. 



254.1-10 


659 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FOUR 
Debts and their repayments 

Fire-god said : 

1-4. A debtor may pay the borrowed money to a creditor 
in instalments. One has (to pay) to the king after paying to a 
brahmin first. It is said that the debtor should be made to pay 
ten per cent of the loan by the king(as fine). In case the debtor 
had realised his money back, five per cent (of the amount) 
should be made payable (to the king). (A debtor belonging to) 
the low caste and impoverished should be made to work in lieu 
of the debt. A brahmin (debtor) who is impoverished should 
be made to pay leisurely after the betterment. The money that 
the creditor does not accept when offered, should be deposited 
with an arbitrator and it would cease to bear any interest. 

5. One that inherits a property, as well as the wife of a 
deceased person that inherits the property should be made to 
pay the (incurred) debt. The debt of a sonless owner of a pro- 
perty (should be paid) by the person that inherits the property. 

6-7. The debt that is incurred on an undivided family for 
the sake of the family should also be paid similarly (by the 
person that inherited that property) . When the head of a 
family is dead or had gone* abroad, (it should be done 
similarly). The wife (is) not (bound to repay) (the loan in- 
curred by the husband or the sons and the father (is not bound 
to repay) the loan incurred by the son. The husband need not 
repay the loan incurred by the wife unless it has been (taken) 
for the sake of the family. 

8. The husbands of the women of the gopa (a guard), 
Samixka (a distiller and seller of spirituous liquors) , fail Of a (an 
actor or dancer), rajaka (a washerman) or vy&dha (a hunter) 
(castes) should repay the loan incurred by them because their 
livelihood is dependent on them (those women). 

9. The wife need not repay any other loan except that 
(incurred by her husband) with her consent, or that incurred 
jointly with her husband or that incurred by herself. 

10. When the father has gone abroad, is dead, overpowered 
by misfortune, the loan (incurred by him) should be paid by 



660 


Agni Pur&na 


the sons and grandsons. If ( the loan incurred by the father) is 
not known (to the son) , (it should be paid) on being estab- 
lished by the witness. 

11. The son need not repay the debt incurred by the 
father by drinking or wenching or by way of the balance of fine 
inflicted by the court or by making improper gifts. 

12. A loan should be- got by a member of the undivided 
family against the surety of the brothers, the husband and wife, 
the father or the son. 

13. A surety .consists in being a witness, or in giving a 
guarantee (for the repayment of a* debt). When a property is 
pledged by a person that has no riglit of possession, the sons of 
that mortgager should be liable to repay (the incurred loan). 

14-16. The sons of the deceased persons who had been 
sureties as witnesses or as guarantors, need not pay that money. 
But those who had induced to make the payment should pay 
(in similar cases) . In case if there were many guarantors to an 
advance made, the guarantors should be made to pay their 
respective shares. A creditor will have the choice (of realising 
his dues) from any one of the sureties of the joint bond. A 
debtor should pay double the amount to his surety, in case if 
the latter pays the loan with the knowledge of the debtor. 

17. If the hypothecated thing is one’s own progeny or the 
wife or cattle or grains, double the amount (has to be paid to 
redeem) . It is said that four times that in the case of dressing 
material and eight times that in the case of condiments (has to 
be paid to redeem). 

18. A mortgage shall be forfeited if that is not redeemed 
by paying double the amount. (The right for redemption) 
would cease at the lapse of the period agreed upon at the time 
of the mortgage. But it would not cease if enjoyments of the 
proceeds have been ageed upon. 

19-20. Interest need not be paid on a thing left as a deposit 
or in a deposit that has been left for enjoyment. (If the 
mortgaged property) is lost on account Qf any reason other 
than fate or the king, it should be restored (to its original state) . 
On the acceptance of the hypothecated property (by the 
mortgagee), it becomes valid. If (the mortgaged property) 
being governed, gets deteriorated, a different property should 



254.27-255.1-2 


661 


be mortgaged. Otherwise the creditor should.be paid money (in 
lieu of it) . 

21. Money borrowed by pledging one’s character, should 
be repaid together with interest. Money borrowed on a solemn 
affirmation should be returned double ( that) . 

22-24. (A mortgaged property) should be released (by the 
mortgagee) , when it is sought for. Otherwise he would be liable 
for punishment. If the money-lender belongs to one’s own 
family (and advances money on the security) of one of his co- 
parceners, he should be looked upon as a mortgagee. The value 
(of that property) should be determined according to the 
market at that time and it should remain without any interest. 
The property may be sold without (the consent) of the debtor 
in his very presence, if the debt on the mortgage gets doubled. 
The mortgaged property should be released if double the amount 
is produced (by the debtor). 

25-27. A packet that has been entrusted with another with- 
out disclosing its contents is (said to be) a deposit and it should 
be returned in the same condition. If it (the contents of that 
packet) has been destroyed by (the acts of) the king, fate or 
the robbers, it need not be restored. If that is found after search 
and the custodian returns it after being urged (to .do so) , ( the 
custodian) should be punished to pay an amount equal to that. 
If the custodian wilfully derives benefit (from that), he is 
punishable and should pay together with the benefit. The same 
rule (holds good) in the case of deposits such MyScita, dhita and 
nyisa. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FIVE 

Description of rules relating to disputes and 
different kinds of ordeals 

Fire-god said : 

1-2. There should be five or three witnesses £uch as those 
who sure ascetics, munificent, born in noble families, truthful, 
virtuous, honest, having progeny, wealthy- and regular in per- 



662 Agni Pur&na 

forming the paUcayajtid l . They may all belong to the samejdlt or 
varna 2 or from all (the castes). 

3-7a. Those who are not suitable to be witnesses are 
women, old men, children, cheats, intoxicated, lunatics, injured, 
actors, heretics, men of the writer caste, those having defective 
sense organs, those that take food from degraded persons, 
relatives or friends or enemies (of the persons contesting the 
dispute) and thieves. All people are deemed to be witnesses in 
cases of thefts, violence and rashness. A virtuous man accepted 
by both the parties may be a witness. A person that refuses to 
answer the questions relating to a loan in which (interest) at 
the rate of ten per cent (has been allowed) should be made by 
the king to pay the full amount (together with interest) within 
fortysix days. The vilest person that does not depose the facts 
even though he is aware of them, is (considered) as equivalent 
to the sins of false witnesses and is also liable for similar 
punishment. 

7b-10a. The witnesses (of the plaintiff as well as the 
defendant) should be questioned in the presence (of the 
parties) (as follows) : “A person making a false statement 
would incur all (the sins) that would accrue to the sinners, 
deadly sinners, incendiaries and the murderers of women and 
children. You also know that the few good deeds that you had 
done in hundreds of your previous births, would befall that 
person whom you defeat by fraud.” 

10b- 13. In the case of conflict of evidences (among the 
witnesses) , (one should accept) the statements of the numerous. 
(If the statements of the witnesses of both the sides) are equal, 
then that of the virtuous (should be accepted). In the case of 
conflict (among the views) of the virtuous, the statement of 
more virtuous should be accepted. That person whose witnesses 
make the truthful declaration, would become the winner. That 
plaintiff whose (witnesses) are different (from the above), his 

1. These are the five obligations that a person has to discharge daily — 
the act of the religious instruction, offering water to the manes, oblations for 
the gods, oblations to the goblins and entertaining the guests. 

2. The word jdti denotes the castes in general and the word oarva 
denotes the four principal castes. 



255.14*23 


663 


defeat is certain. When a set of witnesses have deposed, if 
more virtuous men or double (the previous number) make 
statements against that, the previous witnesses become false 
witnesses. Then the forgers and (false) witnesses should be 
punished separately. 

14-15. The punishment would be double that of the (fee 
for) litigation. A brahmin (witness in similar circumstances) 
should be banished (from the country) . A person that conceals, 
on account of his ignorance, the statements of evidences heard ' 
from others, should be fined eight times. A brahmin (in similar 
circumstances) should be banished (from the country) . A false 
statement may be made only when a brahmin (stands) to be 
capitally punished. 

16-19. If a property has been accepted after mutual con- 
sent of two parties, the loan-bond should be endorsed by the 
witness in the presence of the creditor. That bond should bear 
(the details such as) the year, month, fortnight, date, name, 
caste, one’s own clan, and the name of one’s fellow-student, 
one's own name and that of the father etc. When the bond has 
been completed, the debtor should enter his name in his 
own handwriting (and also write) , “I, so and so, son of so and 
so, fully agree to the statements made above." Then the wit- 
nesses also should write their names after (having written) the 
names of their fathers (and write) "I, so and so, son of so and 
so, put my name as a witness". 

20-21. An unlettered debtor should cause (the writer of 
the deed) to write his assent. A witness (that does not know 
how to read and write) (should cause his assent to be written) 
by another witness in the presence of the other witnesses. Then 
the scribe of the deed should write "I so and so, son of so and 
so, being requested by both the parties have written this deed” 
and then write the deed. 

22. A deed that has been written in the handwriting of 
the mortgager is valid • even without the attestation by the 
witnesses, except in (cases) where undue compulsion had been 
made. 

23. The debt mentioned in a deed has to be discharged 
by the three men (the debtor, the son or grandson). A mort- 
gage remains in force until the pledge is not redeemed. 



664 


Agni Purina 


24. A new deed has to be written when the old one has 
been taken abroad or the original writing has been forged or 
lost or erased or seized or torn or mutilated or burnt. # 

25-27. One should record in his own hand, things that 
are explanatory of ambiguous terms, on the back of the deed, 
such as total, receipt, investigation, indication, relation, addi- 
tion and means. The creditor should endorse all that he has 
received from the debtor with his own mark. A deed should be 
destroyed after paying the debts and another deed of release 
should be executed. It should duly be attested by the witnesses, 
if the original one was also made in the presence of witnesses. 

28-31. The balance, fire, water, poison and holy water are 
the divine ordeals (to test) one’s innocence. These ordeals 
(should be instituted) in cases of great offences when the 
accuser agrees to undergo punishment. Or one may be 
made to undergo the ordeal, and the other to undertake the 
agreement to undergo punishment. They may be made to 
undergo, an ordeal even without the agreement in cases of 
treason and sin. One should not parry the ploughshare, 
the balance, or the poison for matters of less than a thou- 
sand (coins). In the case of treasons one should always 
agree to carry (these ordeals to show their) innocence. The 
balance and other (ordeals) are instituted in the case of 
(matters) exceeding one thousand and the holy water (is insti- 
tuted) even for minor (offences). If it is lesser than that and 
the innocence has been established in the ordeal, one should 
pay fifty (coins) . If the offence has been proved, one has to 
be punished. 

32. (The accused) that has bathed together with the dress 
and observed fast should be called up and made to carry all 
the. ordeals in the presence of the king and brahmins. 

33. The balance is for women, boys, the aged, the blind, 
the lame, brahmins and the sick. The (ordeals of) fire, water 
and seven yacd- (weights) of poison are for the SQdra. 

34. (The accused) that is resorting to the balance is 
weighed by those conversant with balances. After the balance 
comes to rest, line is drawn and (the accused) is taken off. 

1. a kind of grain. 



255.35-47 


665 


35-37. (The accused should begin the ordeal thus) : “The 
Sun, the Moon, the Wind, the Fire, the Sky, the Earth, the 
Waters, the Heart, the god of Death, the Day, the Night, die 
two Twilights 1 , as well as the god of Virtue know the acts of 
man! O Balance ! You are the abode of truth. You were created 
by the gods in olden days. Speak the truth. O Auspicious one 1 
Deliver me from suspicion. If I am a sinner, O mother 1 Then 
lead me downwards. If I am pure then take me upwards.*' 
Thus one should address the balance. 

38-42. One should mark the hands of a person that has 
rubbed rice, and then place seven leaves of the holy fig tree 
(on those hands) and (fix them) with a string wrapped asmany 
times. (Then he should be made to utter as follows) : “(O 
Agni !) O Purifier ! You reside in all beings. O Truthful 
one ! speak the truth like a witness about my good deeds and 
sins.” After he has said this, (the judge) should place a red-hot, 
round ball of iron weighing fifty palas on both his hands. After 
he has taken that, he should walk slowly through the seven 
circles. The inner space of the circle is known as sixteen 
atigulas (four finger breadth). After he has released the fire and 
rubbed rice (between his hand), the one that is not burnt gets 
(freed) as innocent. If the ball falls in between or if there is 
doubt, he should carry it again. 

43-45a. (One should say as below in the water ordeal) : 
“You are the most holy among the holy. O Purifier 1 You purify 
the accused. O Varuna ! (You) protect me with the truth.” 
Having addressed (the water) thus, one should enter the water 
holding onto the thighs of a man standing in water upto his 
navel. His innocence would be established, if one bringing back 
an arrow simultaneously discharged, finds him fully dived (into 
the water) . 

(In the case of the ordeal of poison one should address the 
poison as follows) : 

45b-47a. “O Poison ! the son of Brahmk : One esta- 
blished in truth and Virtue ! Deliver me with your truth from 
this curse. You become ambrosia for me.” After having said 


1. In the morning and in the evening. 



666 


Agni Purdna 


thus, he should take the f&rftga 1 poison that is got from the 
Himalaya mountain. His purity should be declared *if he could 
assimilate (the poison) without vomitting. 

47b-50. (Alternatively), one should collect the waters 
for bathing dreadful gods after having worshipped them. (He) 
should proclaim (that he has not done the crime) and drink 
three handfuls of that water. He should be deemed undoubtedly 
pure if no dreadful malady afflicts him within fourteen days. 
Truth, vehicles, weapons, cattle, grain and gold, the feet of the 
gods and preceptors and the consecrated tanks are the easy oaths 
proclaimed for minor matters. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-SIX 

Description of the procedure for the division of properties 
Fire-god said : 

1-2. A father that desires to partition ( his properties) , 
should divide (them) either equally among his sons, or (set 
apart) a greater portion for the eldest son. The wives that had 
not been given private property by their husbands or fathers- 
in-law, should be given a share in the division, if equal divisions 
are made ( for the sons) . 

3. After having given a little (of the share) to the wealthy 
that does not wish to have (the share then), the division 
(should be made afterwards). Unequal divisions made by the 
father (should be held as) legal. 

4. The sons should equally divide (among themselves) the 
liabilities of their father afterwards. The outstanding debts of 
the mother (should be borne by) the daughters, if they had no 
progeny. 

5. That which one has earned (by his effort) without the 
destruction of the paternal property, (that acquired) from 
friends (as a gift) and through marriage, cannot be claimed 
by the co-parteners (for a share) . 

1 . The poison got from the iwga plant. 



256.6-15 


667 


6. The benefits of a common property should be divided 
equally. The sons of different fathers (forming an undivided 
family) should take their shares according to (the shares of) 
their fathers. 

7. Both the father and the son would be entitled to equal 
shares in the property or wealth of the land acquired by the 
grand-father. 

8. If a son is born to a man through his wife of his own 
caste after the division of the property, a share should be set 
apart, even after the settlement of the accounts after it is seen. 

9. One should not give to the co-parceners an ancestral 
property that was lost and recovered by him, as well as that 
acquired by (his own) skill. 

10. The property that has been given to one by his parents 
would be his own. But the mother also would have an equal 
share in the property that has been divided by the grand- 
father. 

1 1 . Marriage of the unmarried sisters should be done by 
the brothers already married (in the event of the death of the 
father) by giving a fourth part of their share. 

1 2. The sons of a brahmin father would be eligible for four, 
three, two or one share respectively according to -the caste (of 
their mothers) . (Similarly) the sons of a warrior caste (would 
be eligible) for three, two or one shares and that of a tradesman 
for two or one shares. 

13. The property that has been wrongly taken possession 
of by somebody and divided should again be equally divided. 
That is the practice. 

14. A son got by one not having a son by niyoga 1 through 
another’s wife inherits the properties of both the parents. He 
(is allowed) by the codes of law to do the obsequies ( of his 
father) . 

15. A son born to one through his lawful wife (is called) 
aurasa (legitimate). A daughter’s son (is deemed) to be ranking 

1 . A practice prevalent in ancient times which permitted a childless 
widow to cohabit the brother or any near kinsman of her deceased husband 
to raise up issue to him. 



668 


Agni Purdna 


equally with him. A son begotten through the wife of a man 
Jjy one belonging to his own gotra (clan) , or by anyone else, is 
known as kfetraja 1 (a legitimate son) . 

16. A son clandestinely begotten in the (paternal) house 
(of a woman) is known to be born in secret. A son bom to a 
virgin (is known as) kinina and is held to be the son of the 
maternal grandfather (girl's father) . 

17. A son born (of a married woman by another) , whether 
she had menstruated or not, (is known as) pamarbhaoa. A son 
given as adoption by his mother or father would be a dattaka 
(an adopted son) . 

18. A son sold by them (his original parents) is known as 
krita (bought) . A son adopted without the consent of his parents 
would be (known as) artificial. A son offering himself (as a 
son) to another is (known as) datUUman (one that offers himself). 
A son in the womb (at the time of his mother's marriage) is 
known as sahodqja (son of a woman pregnant at marriage). 

19. A son deserted (by his father) and becoming a filial 
(of another) is known as apamddha (abandoned). (All these) 
are eligible to offer cakes (at the obsequies) and to inherit their 
shares. Among these, the subsequent ones (are eligible) if the 
preceding ones do not exist. 

20-21. I have described to you the injunctions in the case 
of sons (born of the parents) of the same castes. A son got by a 
iQdra out of lust through a slave girl would be entitled to have 
a share ( in the property of his deceased father) . On the decease 
of (his father), his brothers should give him half a sliare. Such 
a person should take the entire property (after the death of 
the father) in the absence of any brothers or son of sisters. 

22-23. The wife, daughters, parents, brothers’, their sons, 
one bom in the same gotra, a relative, a disciple and co-students 
(are deemed as heirs to a sonless man), each one of the latter 
being eligible in the absence of the former. This rule (holds 
good) in the case of those died without progeny belonging to all 
the castes. 

1. One of the twelve kinds of sons allowed by- the law ibr inheritance; 
the others being, aarasa, paunarb/uwa, dattaka, krita, kttrima, lahoijaja, apaviddha, 
jSdhotpama, kinina, svayariidatta andiaudra. (See Mam IX. 138-60. 166-80) 



256.24-33 


669 


24. The preceptor, the good disciple, the fellow religious 
student of the same religious order are duly the heirs to the 
properties of a vdnaprastha (forester), ascetic and a religious 
student. 

25. A coparcener and a brother may give to a coparcener 
or a brother that is born or may take away from a coparcener 
or a brother that is dead. 

26. The coparcener not born of the same womb should not 
inherit the property of one not born of the same womb. A 
coparcener not born of the same womb should not inherit the 
property of one born of different mother. 

27-28. A degraded person, his son, a eunuch, a lame 
person, a mad man, a dull person, one suffering from incurable 
diseases should be entitled for maintenance but not a share (in 
the ancestral property) . The sons of these (persons) , those born 
of the same womb and those born to a different mother not 
having any of the above defects (are permitted) to get their 
share. The daughters of such persons are to be maintained until 
they are got married. 

29. The wives of men not having sons should be maintained 
if they follow pious paths. But those (wives) that are unchaste 
and infidels should be banished. 

30. The wealth of women is said to be that given by the 
father, mother, husband, brother and that presented to her near 
the fire and the Qdhivedanika , l 

31 . The presents made to a woman by her relatives at the 
time of her marriage would be inherited by her relatives in the 
event of her death without progeny. 

32. The wealth of a woman not having progeny (would 
belong) to the husband after her death (applicable to) all the 
four castes such as the brahmins etc. The daughters (would be 
the legal heirs) if they had delivered a child. Otherwise it would 
go to the father. 

33. One who takes away the property given to his daughter 
is liable to punishment. (He ) is bound to defray the expenses 
incidental to her marriage and aintenance. In the event of her 


1. Property, gifts etc. made to a first wife upon marrying a second. 



670 Agni Purdna 

death, he may take away that given to her after checking the 
two expenses (mentioned above). 

34. A husband need not return the wealth of his wife in 
the event of (it being spent to meet) a famine, relfgious obser- 
vance, illness or on account of imprisonment. 

35. One should pay an amount of wealth to his second wife 
equal with what he has done to his first wife. If he has not given 
to the first wife already, he should pay a half now. 

36. In case that share has been kept as a secret, the division 
has to be made on being attested by his own people and relatives 
as witnesses. This should be known as the method by which the 
division of the house and property and that relating to the dowry 
(is made). 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY SEVEN 

Settlement of disputes relating to the 
boundaries of fields 

Fire-god said : 

l r 2. In the event of a dispute relating to the boundary of 
a field, the guards, the assembly of elders, cowherds, the tillers 
of the bordering lands and all the foresters should lay down 
(the boundaries) demarcated by coal, husks, trees, mounds, ant- 
hills, slopes, bones, and pile of stones. 

3. Four or eight or ten guards wearing (garland of) red 
flowers and red dress should be there in each village for laying 
the boundaries. 

4. (Those that make a) false statement (relating to the 
boundaries of a held) should be punished with the madhyamasd - 
hasa} In the absence of men familiar with the fields or the 
marks of identification, the king himself should demarcate. 

5. The same procedure is known (to be applicable) in the 
case of groves, temples, villages, reservoirs, gardens, houses and 
channels of rain water* 


1. One cf three kinds of penalties or modes of punishment. 



257.6-14 


671 


6. If one transgresses the boundary or encroaches into 
(another's) field or removes the boundary, that person is to be 
punished with th cadhama or uttama or madhyama (sdhasa). 1 

7. A minor encroachment should not be obstructed if it is 
for the sake of a bridge that benefits (all). (Similarly) one that 
encroaches another's field for a well occupying a little space and 
providing copious water (should not be obstructed) . 

8. If a bridge is built in a field without informing its owner, 
the owner will have the right to its use after it is completed. 
The king (would have the right to its use) in the absence of an 
owner. 

9. One who does not cultivate or employ ( someone) to 
cultivate in a field that has been tilled should not be given the 
fruits of the cultivation and the field should be made over to 
another (for cultivation) . 

10-11. The owner of a she-buffalo that (trespasses on an- 
other's field and) causes destruction of the grains, should be 
fined eight masas (a particular weight of gold). (The owner) of 
a cow (should be fined) four (md$as ) , of a shegoat two ( mdsas ) 
(for the same offence). (They should be levied) twice that 
told above, if they sit (and watch) them grazing in the pasture 
land. The same amount (of fine) has to be levied as that for the 
she-buffalo, if an ass or camel (trespasses into another's field). 

12. The owner of the field would get the same quantity of 
grains that has been destroyed (as above). The keeper (of the 
animal) should be beaten and the owner of the cow should get 
the punishment already described. 

13. But it is not objectionable (if the grazing is" done) on 
a field laying along the roadside, or at the end of the grazing 
grounds of a village if done unintentionally. But if it is done 
wantonly, (the concerned person) deserves to be finished like 
a thief. 

14. The cows let loose by strong bulls, (the cow) that has 
delivered (a calf), the cow that has strayed and those that have 
the keeper should be freed (i.e. not to be punished) . (So also 
cows) injured accidentally or by the king (should also not be 
punished). 

1. Three kinds of fines of varying proportions. 



672 


Agni Purdna 


15. The cowherd should return the cows in the evening as 
entrusted to him (in the morning). A paid servant is bound to 
pay (the price of the animals) that were killed or lost (in his 
custody) by his negligence. 

16. A cowherd is to be punished in the event of a cow 
being killed on account of his negligence. In such cases, he has 
to pay a fine of half of thirteen panas ( pqna is a particular coin) 
to the master and also (restore a similar) animal. 

17. The pasture land should be set apart (at a place) 
according to the wish of ( the people of) the village or being 
beneficial to the land and the king. A brahmin may collect grass, 
fuel and flowers from any land as if it were his own. 

18. The extent of the interspace between the village and 
the field should be one hundred dhanus ,* while that between 
the market- town (and the field) should be two hundred {dhanus) 
and that between the city (and the field should be) four hund- 
red {dhanus). 

19. If a property is sold to another without disclosing its 
defects, then (the purchaser) has the right to take it at a lower 
price. If it is sold at a higher price than its real value (the 
excess amount has to be returned). If it is sold without defin- 
ing the boundaries, (the disposer is considered) as a thief. 

20. (A man) who has found out a lost and stolen 
(article) should cause the thief to be apprehended. But if there 
was a lapse of time and (was found), at a distant place, (the 
owner) should himself apprehend (the thief) and hand him 
over (to the authorities). 

21. (The purchaser) gets free after showing the seller (of a 
stolen property). The owner (would get) the property. The 
king (would get) the fine. The purchaser would get his money 
back from the seller. 

22. Allowance should be made for wear and tear by way of 
addition or enjoyment (for an article). If it exceeds the limit, a 
five-fold fine (should be paid) to the king. 

23. A man who recovers or takes back a stolen or lost article 
from another, without intimating the king should be fined (to 
pay) ninetysix panas. 


1 . One dhanus is equal to four times the length of the fore-arm. 



257.24-34 


673 


24. A lost or stolen article recovered by the customs officers 
or sentinels (should be given) to the owner if it is less than a 
year (after its loss) and thereafter (it should be) with the king. 

25. One should pay (as interest) four panas for a single 
hoofed animal, five for a slave, two for a buffalo, camel and cow 
and one fourth of that for a goat and sheep. 

26. One may give away (his possessions), except his wife 
and son, for interest, without causing hardship to his own family 
members, if not objected to by any of them. If he docs not 
have the progeny, he may give all his possessions. 

27. The acceptance (of a property) should be made public, 
especially of an immovable property. After having given the 
promised thing that is payable to one, one should not take it 
back. 

28. A person who gives the seed, iron, vehicle, gem, woman, 
milch animal and a man should wait for ten, one, five, seven 
days, a month, three days and a fortnight respectively (for inte- 
rest) . 

29-31. In the case of gold (that docs not get) reduced in 
fire as well as silver, ( interest would be) two palas for (every) 
hundred palas , eight palas in the case of tin and lead, five in the 
case of copper and ten for iron. Interest (would be) ten {palas) 
for hundred for wool and cotton. For mediocre quality it is 
known to be five palas and in extremely thin varieties it is three 
palas. The wastage is known to be a thirtieth part (of the 
original weight) in the case of embroidered and woollen mixed 
material. No allowance for decay or interest in the case of silk 
and bark (garments) . 

32 . The experts should declare with certainty the allowance 
to be made (on things) after knowing the place (of origin) of 
the things, the season, the wear and tear and the strength of 
the materials. 

33-34. One who has saved the life of his master and has 
been forcibly made a slave by thieves and sold should be made 
free (by the king) even by paying a ransom. A religious mendi- 
cant who has renounced his order is a slave of the king until his 
death. For the (four castes) , men of the next natural order of 
castes alone could be a slave, but not of the reverse order* 



674 


Agni Pur&na 


35. A pupil who has completed his studies should stay for 
the stipulated period at the house of his preceptor and has to 
serve him for the food got from him. 

36. The king should allot fi frontal place to the •brahmins 
(in his city), provide for their livelihood by means of the three 
Vedas and tell them, “May you adhere to your own duty”. 

37-38. One who adheres to the work agreed upon without 
conflicting with one’s own duties should also be protected by 
the king with care. One who transgresses the discipline laid 
down by the king, who swindles the property of the society and 
who breaks an agreement should be deprived of all his posses- 
sions and banished from the country. 

39. Everyone should follow the words of those who preach 
for the welfare of the society. One who does the contrary should 
be made to pay the first ( sahasa ) fine. 

40. One who is entrusted with a task relating to the society 
should offer (to the king) all that he gets. If he himself does 
not offer, he should be made to pay a fine eleven times (that 
collected by him) . 

41. Those who think of public service should be learned 
in the scriptures and not greedy. (All) should follow the words 
of those who speak for the welfare of the society. 

42. ' The same rule ( holds good) in the case of guild of 
traders, assembly of interpreters of the scriptures and those 
professing other religions. The king has to maintain the separate 
entities of these and govern the former profession. 

43. One who does not do a work after having received the 
wages (for the same) should pay double the amount ( as fine) . 
(If the amount) has not been taken, one has to pay an equal 
amount (as fine) . The supplementary grants (given to the 
servants) should be retained by them. 

44. One who gains by trade, cattle or grains without 
obtaining the previous permission should be made to pay one 
tenth (of the gain as fine) by the king. 

45 . 1 1 is the discretion of the employer to pay ( an employee ) 
if one does work for more than the stipulated period and does 
work beyond the country that was stipulated. More (money) 
should be paid if more work has been done. 



257.46—258.1 


675 


46. One’s wages would be commensurate with the work 
done by him. If both the parties find it untenable, it should be 
done as laid down in the scriptures. 

47. A carrier should restore to the owner, the article that 
he was carrying but was lost due to causes other than the govern- 
ment or accident. One who ‘ causes obstruction to a public 
carrier should pay double the amount of the wages. 

48. If the carrier abandons the goods at the start, or on 
the way or on half the way, (he) would be required to pay one 
seventh or one fourth or the entire wages respectively. 

49-53. If the stake at gambling is in the multiples of 
hundreds, then the king’s share would be five hundred ( panas ) . 
If they are cheats and swindlers, then the king should take one 
thousand panas . The manager at the gambling house should run 
it properly and pay the king’s share as laid down. The defeated 
person should be made to deposit the amount that is payable 
to the victor. One should hear the true words (of the gamblers) 
patiently. When the king has obtained his share in the reputed 
society of the gamblers, he should put the defeated in the 
midst of the gamblers to pay the fine. If not, he should not. 
They are who see and the witnesses in such transactions. 
Those who indulge in false die and fraudulent ways should be 
banished by the king along with the marks (on their person). 
There should be only one leader of the gambling house in order 
to know the cheats (in gambling) . The same is the procedure 
ir gambling with fighting animals and betting after setting 
animals to fight. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-EIGHT 

Punishments for making defamatory speeches and committing 

other offences 

Fire-god said : 

1. If a person abuses the sick and men having defective 
organs, by means of lampoons, whether true or untrue or 
otherwise, he should be fined thirteen and a half pantos. 



676 


Agni Purdna 


2. The king should levy a fine of twentyfive ( panas ) on one 
that abuses another (with the words) “I copulate with your 
sister or (I copulate with your) mother**. 

3. A punishment should be awarded after due consideration 
of the higher or lower caste. (A man of the higher caste commi- 
tting adultery (on women) of the lower caste (should be levied) 
half (the fine) and (a man of the lower caste committing 
adultery) on (women) of the higher caste (should be levied) 
double (the fine) . 

4. The men of lower orders of castes censuring the men of 
the next higher order should be levied double or three times 
the fine. But in the case of censures made by men of the higher 
orders on those of lower orders, half the fine should be levied. 

5. The fine (that should be levied) on a capable person 
uttering words threatening the injury of the hands, neck, eyes 
and thighs (of another) should be levied (the sdhasa) fine. It is 
half the fine, if it relates to the foot, nose, ear and arms. 

6. An incapable person who says as above should be levied 
a fine often panas. So also a capable person should give surety 
for the safety of that person. 

7. The middle sdhasa fine should be levied on that person 
who abuses one ascribing degrading sin (to him). The first kind 
of sdhasa should be levied onx>nc who ascribes (another) with 
minor sin of second degree. 

8. The highest sdhasa (should be levied) for offences 
villifying the brahmins, kings and gods. Middle ( sdhasa ) (should 
be levided for offences villifying) one’s own relatives and the 
members of the village assembly and the first ( sdhasa ) (for 
speaking ill of one’s own) village or country. 

9. In the case of charge of murder without witness, (the 
judge) should pronounce (the judgement) after considering the 
marks, reasoning and written testimony, in order to safeguard 
(himself) from being misled by false marks. 

10. The fine for touching (another) with ashes, mud or 
dust is said to be ten panas and for touching with filth or the 
heels or spitting, double (that). 

11. (For offences against women) of one's own (caste) 
single (fine should be levied) and twice that in the case of 
other women as well as of higher castes. The fine is half in the 



258.12-21 


677 


case of (offences against those) belonging to lower castes. (For 
offences done) under delusion or the influence of liquor, (there 
is) no punishment. 

12. The organ of a non-brahmin that inflicts pain on a 
brahmin should be cutoff. First (s&hasa) punishment (should 
be prescribed) for one who raises (one's arms and strikes a* 
brahmin) and half that (fine) if one touches. 

13. If the hand and the leg are held and pulled, the fine 
is ten and twenty ( panas ) respectively. If (several men) one by 
one (hold and pull), the scriptures (prescribe) the middle 
s&hasa for all of them. 

14. The fine for pulling the feet or hair or the garment or 
hand is ten panas . The fine for causing affliction or pulling or 
dragging after putting cloth around or placing foot (on a 
person) is one hundered ( panas )., 

15. One who causes misery by means of a log of wood etc. 
and (if there be) no blood (injury), should be fined thirtytwo 
panas. Double that (is the fine), if blood is seen. 

16-17. The middle (s&hasa) fine is levied for breaking hand, 
foot and teeth and cutting ear and nose. Similarly one causing 
injurious wounds, (one who) strikes fatally, (one who) impairs 
(organs of) movement, eating and speaking, (one- who) pierces 
eyes etc., and (one who) breaks neck, arm and thigh ( should be 
punished with) middle s&hasa . 

18. If many persons (jointly) assault a man, each one of 
them (should be levied) double the (amount of) fine laid 
down before. Articles (forcibly) taken away after a quarrel 
should be returned and the fine is said to be double. 

19. A person who causes grief should pay the cost of recovery 
(of the article) and the fine is said to be the same as laid down 
in the case of a quarrel. 

20. A ferry-man collecting a land-toll should be punished 
(to pay) ten panas. A brahmin (going to dine) at the neigh- 
bour’s house uninvited, (shall be liable) for the same punish- 
ment). 

21. One has to be fined five, ten, twenty and sixty panas 
respectively for assaulting, piercing, cutting and breaking the 
house (of another person). 



678 


Agni Purdna 


22. One should be fined sixteen panas for having thrown 
into another’s house, an object, that would cause misery or 
death to another. The abettor should be fined the middle 
sdhasa. 

23. One should duly be fined two panas onwards for having 
caused misery or bleeding injury or breaking the limbs of 
the body of a small animal . 

24. (One should be fined) the middle ( sdhasa ) and should 
pay the price for having cut off the genital organ (of an 
animal) or having killed it. In the case of bigger animals, in 
these instances, the fine would be double (the above). 

25. The fine is forty (panas) for lopping the branches, 
trunk of the tree or the whole tree that is growing and providing 
sustenance. 

26. One who causes another to indulge in a violent act 
shall have to pay double the fine and one who says that he 
would pay (if fine is imposed) and causes another to do (a 
violent act) (shall be required to pay) four times (that fine). 

27-28. It has been fixed that, a person who reviles or shows 
disrespect to a respectable person, one who beats the wife of his 
brother, one who does not give the promised gift, one who 
breaks the summer-house built in the midst of water and one 
who injures the neighbours, shall be fined fifty panas. 

29-32. One who copulates with a licentious widow, one 
who assaults (another) uttering abuses, one who abuses 
( another) without any reason, a man of the low caste touching 
the men of higher castes, a iudra (a man of the fourth caste) 
eating the meal at the time of the ceremony of a mendicant 
and in the divine and ancestral ceremonies, one who makes an 
improper oath, an incompetent person who does the act of a 
competent person, one who castrates the bulls or small animals, 
one who hides a well-known matter, one who destroys the foetus 
of a servant woman, one who disregards any one of the following — 
father, son, sister, brother, husband or wife, preceptor and 
pupil, that has not been degraded, shall be fined a hundred 
(panas). 

33. A washerman who wears the dress of others (given to 
him for washing) should be fined three panas. It is ten po$as if 



258.34-44 


679 


he sells them or requests others to take (them) without any 
charges. 

34. One who deals with those who make false (marks) on 
weights and measures and make counterfeit coins should be 
fined the highest ( sdhasa ). 

35. The coin-tester who declares the genuine as counter- 
feit and the counterfeit as genuine should be fined the first 
( sdhasa ) . 

36. A physician who gives wrong medical treatment to 
birds and animals, men ( in general) and men of royal ( house- 
hold) , should be punished with the first, middle and the 
highest fine respectively. 

37. (An officer) who keeps in custody a man that should 
not be kept incarcerated and allows an untried (criminal) to 
escape, should be fined the highest [sdhasa), 

38. One who steals an eighth part (of the real weight) of 
an article, by means of (false) scale or (fraudulent) measure- 
ment, should be fined twentytwo panas , no matter, whether (the 
real weight) has been increased or decreased by that fraction. 

39. One who mixes low-standard (material) in medicines, 
oils, salts, perfumes, grains and molasses etc. should be fined 
sixteen panas . 

40. A thousand ( parkas ) is said to be the fine (to be 
imposed) on the artisans who collectively (indulge) in affect- 
ing the value (of the goods) (or cause) the decrease or the 
increase of the wealth. 

41. It is considered to be profitable for the traders to sell 
or purchase everyday, goods that are dependent on the king. 

42. A trader should take five per cent profit on indigenous 
goods and ten percent (profit) on foreign goods that are bought 
and sold immediately. 

43. (A trader) , after having added the incidental expenses 
relating to the goods, to (the price) of the goods, should settle 
its price with the seller or purchaser. 

44. A trader not delivering the goods to the purchaser from 
whom the cost has been collected, should be made to pay (the 
amount) along with the profit or the profit (allowed) on the 
foreign (goods) if (the goods) have come from the foreign 
(country). 



680 


Agnt Purdna 


45. Goods that are sold (already) could (again) be sold, 
if the previous purchaser has not taken delivery (of the goods) . 
The defects in the goods due to the purcliaser’s fault should be 
borne only by the purchaser. 

46. In the case of any damage to the goods caused by 
political disturbances or natural calamities, or due to non-deli- 
very at the desired time, the consequences have to be borne 
only by the seller. 

47. The fine payable by a seller for the damage or the 
apparent damage to goods sold through his agent would be 
double the value of the cost (of the goods). 

48. A trader who has purchased the goods without the 
knowledge of the decrease or increase ( in their prices ) should 
not reopen the negotiation. In case he does so, he should be 
punished (to pay) one sixth (of the value of the whole stock) . 

49-50. The profits and losses of traders trading as partners 
for the sake of profit, (should be divided) proportionately to 
their shares in the capital, or according to agreement made (at 
the commencement of the business). (A partner) should make 
good the loss sustained by him on account of doing the pro- 
hibited thing or doing a thing that he has not been asked to do 
or on account of folly. A partner who has saved (the goods) 
from destruction is eligible to get one tenth ( of the value of the 
goods). 

51. The king shall take a twentieth part (of the value) of 
the abandoned goods as tax. The contraband (goods) fit for 
royal use and sold (to someone) should go to the king. 

52. A deceitful purchaser or seller giving out false measures 
and going away from the toll office should be fined eight times 
(the value of the goods) . 

53. Relatives and rightful heirs who have come should 
get the properties of a person on his death or his settlement 
abroad and the king (should get) in the absence of them (the 
legal heirs) . 

54. The (following) injunctions have been laid down for 
the officiating priest and ploughman : They should eschew 
dishonesty. They should not be greedy. They should get the 
task done by (employing) another in the case of (personal) 
incapacity. 



258.55-66 


681 


55. A thief is apprehended by constables on finding the 
stolen property in his possession, by (his) foot-print, his past 
crime and dirty clothes. 

56-57. Others that hide their caste, name etc. should also 
be held on account of suspicion. Persons addicted to gambling, 
wenching and drinking and those who turn pale and speak in 
a dry and broken voice (should also be held). Those who 
enquire about the properties and houses of others, those who 
wander in disguise, those who spend (much) without income, 
those who sell lost goods (should also be held) . 

58. If one who is held on suspicion for theft cannot 
expiate (himself ) , he should restore the stolen property. He 
should be punished as a thief. 

59. Stolen (articles) should be recovered from the thief 
and he should be put to death by different (methods). A 
brahmin (convicted of theft) should be branded and banished 
from his country. 

60-61 a. The headman of a village should be held respon- 
sible for murder and theft, if (the criminal) has not left his 
jurisdiction. He should be brought to account in the village 
where he sets his foot. Similarly five or ten villages within a 
radius of two miles (of the place) (are held responsible) . 

61b-62a. Those men who abduct the captives, horses and 
elephants and those who murder violently should be put on the 
(iron) stake. 

6*2b-64. A stealer of clothes and a pick-pocket should be 
deprived of both the hands (ie., hands should be cut off) . (Or) 
for the latter offence, one hand and leg should be cut off. 
(Putting) a thief or a murderer to death by means of giving 
food or stimulant, (or by means of) fire, water, mantra or 
weapon is known as excellent punishment. The highest ( sdhasa ) 
(should be) the punishment for causing abortion/miscarriage 
by means of a weapon. 

65. The highest or the lowest (fine) (should be imposed) 
on those who kill a man or a woman. A woman who kills a man 
by giving poison should be fastened to a stone and thrown into 
water. 

66. A woman who kills by giving poison or setting fire to 



682 Agni Purdria 

her preceptor or offspring should be deprived of her ears, hands, 
nose and lips and killed by (employing) cows. 

67. Incendiaries of fields, dwelling houses, forests,, villages, 
pasture lands and threshing floors and a person who has had 
intercourse with the king’s wife should be burnt by fire fed on 
straw placed around. 

68. A man should be caught by the hair when he is having 
adultery with other women. The highest (sdhasa) is the fine if 
(the woman belonged) to his own caste and middle fine ( is 
prescribed) if (the woman belonged) to the lower caste. 

69a. (But) if (the woman) belonged to the higher caste 
(than the adulterer), the man should be killed and the ears of 
the woman should be cut off. 

69b-71a. One who forcibly removes the garments covering 
the waist, breast, navel and braids (of a woman) , and one who 
engages in conversation (with a woman) at an inappropriate 
place and time and who stays with her (similarly) (is liable to 
be fined). If it is prohibited for a woman, she has to pay (a 
fine) of one hundred ( panas ) and (if for a man) , he (has to 
pay) two hundred (Juanas). (In spite of the prohibition if they 
indulge in the above crimes) , they have to be fined as in the 
case of adultery. 

71b. A person mating with an animal shall be fined one 
hundred (panas), and (one mating) with a woman of low caste 
or with a cow (shall be fined) the middle (sdhasa). 

72. A person (who mates) with a slave girl ora maid- 
servant held in captivity, though otherwise fit for cohabitation, 
should be fined fifty panas . 

73. The fine is said to be ten panas if one forcibly copulates 
with a slave girl. One who mates with a woman of the last 
caste and a woman mendicant should be fettered and banished 
(from the country). 

74. A person who adds or omits in copying the royal edict 
or one who releases a seducer should be fined the highest 
(sdhas ) . 

75a. One who pollutes a brahmin (by mixing) forbidden 
food, should be fined the highest ( sdhasa ) . 

75b-76a. One who deals in counterfeit gold and one who 



258’76b-259.1 


683 


sells unclean meat should be maimed and fined the highest 
(sahasa ) . 

76b-77. An owner who releases the wild boars and horned 
cattle, though he is capable (of keeping them penned) , should 
pay the first sdhasa (as fine) . (If it is accompanied) by shout- 
ing, (the owner should pay) double (the fine). (A man) whb 
calls an innocent man a thief should be made to pay a fine of 
five hundred ( panas ). 

78-79. One who utters undesirable words against the king, 
one who abuses the same, one who sells things connected with a 
dead body, one who beats his preceptor, one who divulges his 
(preceptor’s) mantra , should be banished (from the country) 
with his tongue cut off. The fine for a person who rides the 
carriage or sits on the seat of the king, is the middle s&hasa. 

80. The two eyes should be plucked out in the case of a 
person who acts hostile to the king or the nation. A SRdra living 
like a brahmin ( should be) fined eight hundred ( panas) . 

81. If one has been defeated in the proper way, thinks 
that he is unconquered, he should be defeated ( again) when he 
comes and should be punished (to pay) double the (amount 
of) fine. 

82. A king who has fined a person unjustly should offer 
the amount to (lord) Varuna 1 and pay thirty times (the 
amount) to the brahmins. 

83. Piety, wealth, fame, esteem of mankind, favour, love of 
the subjects and permanent residence in heaven, dispensing 
justice even as (people) watch are the seven qualities of a king. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-NINE 

The application of the mantras of 'the ftgveda 
Fire-god said : 

1 . I shall (now) describe to you the application (of the 
mantras) of the fig ( veda ), Tajur ( veda ), Sdma ( veda ) and 


1 . Lord of ocean and righteousness. 



684 


Agni Purdna 


Atharva (veda) that yield enjoyment and emancipation when 
repeated and (are used for making) oblations (as) described by 
Puskara to Rama. 

Pufkara said : 

2. I shall (now) describe the (religious) rites (relating) to 
each one of the Vedas . You listen first to the application of the 
ftg (veda) that would yield enjoyment and emancipation. 

3. The repetition of the Gayatri (mantra ) 1 especially with 
(the practice) of prarUtydma (regulated breathing), (while re- 
maining) in the water as well as at (the time of making) 
oblations confers the fulfilment of heart’s desires. 

4. O Brahmin ! The repetition of the Gayatri ten thousand 
times by a man eating only in the night and bathing many 
times (during the day), destroys all the sins then and there. 

5. One who repeats (the mantra) a lakh times while eating 
the oblations, becomes fit for emancipation. The pranava (the 
syllable Om) is identical with the Supreme Braman and its 
repetition destroys all the sins. 

6. One who repeats the syllable Om while remaining in 
waist-deep water and drinks the water becomes free from all 
sins. 

7. (The pranava consists of) three mdtrds (syllabic instants), 
three Vedas , three gods (Brahma, Visnu and Siva) and three 
fires. 2 3 The mahdvyahrtu r* are the seven worlds 4 . An oblation made 
with these destroys all the sins. 

8. Gayatri is the most excellent (among the mantras fit) for 
repetition. The mahdvydhrtis are also of similar nature. O Rama ! 
The aghamarsana ( sukta ) 5 6 (destroyer of sins) should be repeated 
(while remaining) in the water. 

9- 11 a. The hymn agnimile purohitarii 8 (is sacred) for the 
Fire-god. One should repeat (this hymn) over a year holding 


1. RV. 3. 62.10. 

2. The three sacrificial fires — gdrhapatya , Ahavaniya and dakfipa. 

3. The syllables bhuh, bhuah , svah, mahah,janah tapah and satyam . 

4. The same as in footnote 2 above. 

5. RV. 10.190. 

6. RV. 1.1.1. 



259.1 lb-18 


685 


the fire on the head, (performing) oblation three times (a day) 
with soma (juice) , living on alms and without lighting the fire 
(for cooking) . Then the seven fks (hymns) known as Vayu etc. 
should be daily repeated devoutly. Thus one will realise all his 
desires. 

1 lb. One who desires to improve his memory should repeat 
the hymn known as sadasaspatim 1 2 . 

12-13a. These nine hymns (beginning with) anvayoyan* are 
said to be destroyers of death. One who is a captive or being 
obstructed should repeat (the hymn) iunabSeparh y/t/w 3 . One be* 
comes free from all sins (by this). One who is sick becomes free 
from sickness. 

13b- 14. One who is desirous of (gaining) permanent 
pleasures and the friendship of the wise Purandara (Indra) 
should repeat daily the sixteen hymns (beginning with) indrasya , 4 5 6 
One who repeats (the hymn) hiranyastUpam 5 will cause affliction 
to the enemies. 

15- 16a. One who repeats (the hymn) ye te panthdhP will be 
safe on his journey. One who praises lord Iidna with six Rudra 
hymns everyday or one who offers oblation to Rudra will have 
greatest peace. 

16b-17a. One who extolls the rising Sun with (the hymn) 
( iuf 7 8 9 and offers water with folded palms seven times will be able 
to dispel his mental grief. 

17b-18. One who repeats the half hymn dvi$antarh % ending 
with yadvipra will get his sin destroyed within seven nights. One 
who desires health or one who is sick should repeat (the hymn) 
praskannasyottamam*. 


1. RV. 1.18.6. 

2. Not tracable. 

3. Not traceable. 

4. RV. 1.32.1. 

5. Probably RV. 10.149. 5a. 

6. RV. 1.35.11a. 

7. See Bloomfield, Vedic Concordance p. 261. 

8. RV. 1.50.13. 

9. Not traceable* 



686 


Agni Purdna 


19-20. One who repeats the half hymn uttamastasyd 1 in 
various postures will get long life; if it is repeated at midday 
one will get radiance; if (repeated) at sunset one will afflict 
his enemies. One who repeats the hymns na vadhaffi will destroy 
his enemies. 

21. One who repeats the eleven supanjc P hymns will 
accomplish all the wishes. One who repeats (the hymn) ddhydt - 
mikih ka} will get emancipation. 

22-23. (One who repeats the hymn) d no bhadrd 5 will get 
long life. One should look at the rising moon with (the repeti- 
tion of) the hymn tvam soma and worship with the twig in the 
hand. He will certainly get garments. One who desires (long) 
life should always repeat the hymn of Kautsa (beginning with) 
imam} 

24. By glorifying the Sun at midday with (the hymn) 
apanafa foiucad 1 , one gets freed from sin like (a bow) when the 
arrow is discharged. 

25-26. One’s pathway becomes safe by the repetition of 
(the hymn) jdtavedasa 8 . One gets free from all fears. That person 
enjoying auspicious things will get houses. This (hymn) des- 
troys the bad dream of the previous night. One should repeat 
(the hymn) pramandina 9 and (a woman) who is delivering a 
child will do so with ease. 

27. A man will get free from all sins after bathing with 
(the repetition of the hymn) upannindrark 10 and offering clarified 
butter as oblation (while repeating) the seven Vaiivadeva 
(hymns). 

28-29. One who repeats (the hymn) imdm 11 always will get 
all his desires fulfilled. One who fasts for three nights and 

1. Not traceable. 

2. Not traceable. 

3. Cf. RV. 105.1a. 

4. Not traceable. 

5. RV. 1.89. la. 

6. Not traceable. 

7. RV. 1.97.1a. 

8. RV. 1.99.1a. 

9. RV.101.la. 

10. Gould not be traced. 

11. ‘ Gf. Bloomfield, Vedic Concordance p. 233. 



259.30-37 


^87 

offers the twigs of udumbara (tree) dipped in clarified butter with 
(the repetition of) the two (hymns) mi nastoka 1 2 * 4 5 6 etc. after be- 
coming pure will cut all the fetters of death and live free from 
disease. 

30-3 la. One who having glorified Lord Sambhu with (the 
repetition of) this hymn with arms raised, binds the tuft into a 
knot while repeating the hymn minastoka, no doubt, becomes 
invincible by all beings. 

31b-32a. One should worship the Sun daily at the three 
twilights with ( the repetition of the hymn) citrarii * holding the 
twig. Thus he will get the desired wealth. 

32b-33. One will destroy the entire bad dream and get 
good food by the repetition of (the hymn) atha svapna? in the 
morning and noon everyday. (The hymn ). ubhepumin is said to 
destroy the demons. 

34. One who repeats the hymn ubhe vds& will get all the 
pleasures. A person repeating (the hymn) na sagarfi will escape 
from the murderer. 

35. One who repeats (the hymn) kayi Subha 9 will attain 
caste-excellence, and (the hymn )imath nrsomath 7 8 will give all the 
pleasures. 

36. Conveying obeisance with (the hymn) pitah 9 one will 
always acquire riches. Oblation made with ghee with (the 
repetition of the hymn) ague naya * also shows the path. 

37. One who repeats suSloka 10 will always get a progeny of 
heroes. One is able to destroy all poisons by (the repetition of) 
the hymn kaAkato na. 11 


1. RV. 1.114.8a. 

2. Same as above. 

3* RV. 1.115.1a. 

4. a. RV. 1.33.1. 

5. Could not be traced. 

6. RV. 1.165.1a. 

7. Could not be traced. 

8. Could not be traced. 

9. RV. 1.189.1a. 

10. Cf. Tait Sam. 1.8.16.2. 

11. RV. 1.191.1a. 



688 


Agni Purdtja 


38. One will get all the pleasures by (the repetition of) 
the Yiymnyo jdta 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 . One will get an excellent friend by (the repe- 
tition of) the hymn ganandm*. 

39-41 a. (One should repeat) the hymn yo me rdjan 3 that 
destroys bad dream. One who commences a Journey* and faces 
an unpraiseworthy or praiseworthy enemy should repeat the 
(hymn) kwndafigtP. One will enjoy all the desired pleasures by 
repeating the excellent hymn ddhydtmika i consisting of twenty- 
two verses on the full and new moon days. 

41b-43. One should offer an oblation of clarified butter 

with concentrated (mind) repeating the hymn kfnufva*. One 

will take away the lives of enemies and destroy even the 

demons (by this) . One should worship daily the Fire (god) 

with the hymn part 1 . The Fire (god) having a face on every 

side Himself protects that person on all sides. One should look 

at the Sun, (remaining) pure and (repeating) the (hymn) 

hathsah SueifadA 
* 

44-47. A man about to cultivate a field should offer obla- 
tions of pot-boiled porridge at the centre of the field as laid 
down with the five (hymns) svani svdha 9 . A farmer should 
derive his plough in the approriate manner (and offer obla- 
tions) to ( the gods) Indra, Maruts, Parjanya and Bhaga. One 
should then worship Indra and these deities with perfumes, 
garlands and * prostrations (after having worshipped) the 
ploughshare (saying) (the yoke) has been fastened for the sake 
of grains. Agriculture will thus always thrive and the work 
relating to sowing ( the seeds), cutting, threshing and ploughing 
will yield profuse results. 

48-49. One will get the desired things from the Fire (god) 


1. RV. 2.12.1a. 

2. RV. 2.23.1a. 

3. RV. 2.28.10.* 

4. RV. 10.131.2a. 

5. Gould not be traced. 

6. RV. 4.4.1a. 

7. RV. 10.10.13d, 14b. 

8. RV. 4.40.5a. 

9. Gould not be traced. 



259.50-56 


689 


by (the recitation of) the hymn samudrdt 1 . One who worships 
the Fire (god) with the two hymns (called) vtiv&nara 2 3 4 5 6 7 , sur- 
mounts all difficulties, gets undiminishing fame, abundant 
wealth and unsurpassed victory. 

50. One gets the desired riches by propitiating (the Fire 
god) with (the hymn) ague tvarn 8 9 . A person desirous of having 
progeny should repeat the three hymns of VaruQa daily. 

51-52. (Each) morning, one should recite the three svasti* 
hymns, whereby one (will) always secure great prosperity. By 
the recitation of (the hymn) svasti panthdnfi one will have safe 
journey. One who desires to conquer (should repeat the hymn) 
vanaspate # , ( by which) enemies will be laid down with disease. 
(By the recitation of the same hymn) a woman having a dead 
foetus will have a good delivery. 

53. One who is desirous to get rain should employ the 
hymn acchavada 7 after fasting and wearing wet clothes. It will 
rain in no time. 

54. A person who desires to have a cow should repeat (the 
hymn) manasah kdma.* One who desires to have progeny 
should bathe (reciting the hymn) kardamena *, after becoming pure 
and practising vow. 

55-56. A man who wants to acquire kingdom should bathe 
with (the repetition of the hymn) aSuap&rv&rfi 10 . A brahmin 
should bathe (standing) on a deer-skin as laid down. A king 
(should bathe standing) on a tiger-skin and a man of the 
merchant class on a goat (skin) in the same way. It has been 
declared that ten thousand oblations (should be done) in each 
case. 


1. RV. 4.58.1a. 

2. Cf. RV. 186.1b and 7.76.1b. 

3. RV. 5.24.1a. 

4. Gf. Bloomfield, Vidic Concordance pp .1053-4. 

5. RV. 5.51.15a. 

6. RV. 6.47.26a. 

7. RV. 5.83.1a. 

8. RV. khila 5.87.10a. 

9. RV. khila 5.87.11a. 

10. RV. khila 5.87.3a. 



690 


Agni Purtya 


57. If a person desires to have (the herds of cattle) always 
undiminshing (in his cowpen) , he should worship the cow, the 
mother of the worlds, in the cowpen with (the recitation of) 
the hymn dg&vo 1 . 

58. A' king should consecrate the (royal) drum with the 
three (hymns beginning with) upd 2 . (By this) he will get 
radiance and strength and rout the enemy. 

59. One who is surrounded by the demons should repeat 
the hymn raksoghnam 3 4 5 6 holding grass in the hand. By re- 
peating the hymn ye ke ca jamcP one will gain long life. 

60. One should consecrate the constituents of his army by 
the hymn jimUtaP first like a lihga. Then the king will destroy 
the enemies in the battle. 

61-62. One will gain undiminishing wealth by (the recita- 
tion of) the three hymns (beginning with) dgneya fl . One may 
fix goblins by (the repetition of) the hymn amivahd 1 in the night. 
One should repeat this hymn in danger, difficulty, when caught 
in a fort, taken as a prisoner, while setting out some time, 
while running away, or when held as a captive. 

63-64a One should fast for three nights with self-control, 
boil sweat gruel and cast one hundred oblations with that with 
(the repetition of) the hymn tryambakd 1 9 in honour of (Lord) 
Siva. One will thus live happily for hunderd years. 

64b-65. One should worship the rising Sun and the Sun 
at the middle (of the day) after bathing and with the hymn 
tacedkfufp if one desires to have longlife. The hymn (called) 
indrd soma, 10 (when repeated), is said to destroy the enemy. 

66. A person who has lost his vow by mistake or on account 


1. RV. 6.28.1a. 

2. Cf. Bloomfied, Vgdic Concordance pp. 2 64-68. 

3. RV. 10.82.1. a 

4. Could not be traced. 

5. RV. 6.75.1a. 

6. Cf. Vgdic Concordance p. 155. 

7. RV. 7.55.1a. 

8. RV. 7.59.12a 

9. RV. 7.66.16a. 

10. Cf. Bloomfield, Vgdic Concordance p. 225. 



259.67-73 


691 


of association with the vrdtyas l , should fast and offer oblation 
with clarified butter with (the recitation of the hymn) tvamagne 
vratapd 2 . 

67. A person who repeats the hymn ddityd 3 and samrdjoP 
will get victory in debate. One will become free from great fear 
by (the repetition of) the four (hymns beginning with) maAi 5 . 

68. One will get all the pleasures by the repetition of the 
hymn yadi hyetat 6 . One will destroy his enemies by the repetition 
of the forty two aindra 7 hymns. 

69-70. One gets good health by repeating (the hymn) 
vdedmahi 8 . A person who eats food repeating the two (hymns) 
ianno bkava 9 after becoming clean and controlling the senses 
and touches the heart with the hand will not be attacked by 
diseases. One will destroy the enemy by offering oblations with 
( the hymns) uttamedam 10 after bathing. 

7 1 . One will get food by making oblation with the hymn 
ianno' gnir 11 . One will get free from the defects of the quarters 
(on journey) by (repeating) the hymn kanydvdrarfi 12 . 

72. One is able to subjugate the whole universe by the 
repetition (of the hymn) yadetya kavya lz at (sun) rise. One’s 
speech gets refined by the repetition of (the hymn) yadvdk 14 . 

73. One gill get good speech by repeating ( the hymn) 
vdeo vidam 1B . The pdvamdnya 16 hymns are considered to be most 
sacred. 


1 . A man of the first three classes who has lost caste owing to the 
non-performance of the principal purificatory rites enjoined. 

2. RV. 8.11.1a. 

3. Cf. Bloomfield, op. cit. pp. 162-63. 

4. Cf. RV Khila 10.128.5a. 

5. RV. 1.22.13a. 

6. Could not be traced. 

7. Could not be traced. 

8. RV Khila 5.6.7. 

9. RV Khila 10.37.10. 

10. Could not be traced. 

11. Cf. RV. 7.35.4, 

12. RV. 8.91.1. 

13. Could not be traced. 

14. RV 8.100.10. 

15. Could not be traced. 

16. a. MS. 3.11.10a. 



692 


Agni Pwrdna 


74. The thirty vaikhanasa 1 hymns are considered to be 
extremely sacred. O Foremost among the sages ! the parasva 1 2 3 4 
hymns arc said to be sixtytwo. 

75. The sixty-seven hymns — svddistaya 3 — are declared as 
destroyers of all sins, purifiers and conferrers of welfare. 

76. The six hundred and ten hymns of pavamdnyd 1 when 
repeated and used for making oblations will enable one to 
conquer the dread of death. 

77. One should repeat (the hymns) dpo hisfha while stand- 
ing in the water to destroy the fear of sin. A man passing 
through a desert should repeat (the hymn) pradevanna 5 6 after 
the control (of senses). 

78. When one is haunted by the fear of death, one will 
get (the end of) his life quickly. One should repeat the single 
hymn prdveydbhi 6 mentally in the night. 

79. (If it is repeated) at dawn or at sunrise one will get 
victory in gambling. One who has lost his way will find his way 
by (repeating the hymn) md pragdma 7 8 . 

80-81 a. If one thinks that the life of a friend of himself 
is running out, he should bathe and touch the head of the 
friend (reciting the hymn) yatteyam 8 thousand times for five 
days. He will thus find him long-lived. 

81b-82. A wise man should offer a thousand oblations 
with ghee with (the repetition of the hymn) Ham medhya 9 . One 
who desires to have cattle (should do it) at the cowpen and 
one who desires riches, at the crossroads. One who repeats ( the 
hymn) vayafr suparnd 10 will acquire wealth. 


1. Gould not be traced. 

2. Cf. parasyd RV. 8.75. 1 5. 

3. RV. 9.1.1a. 

4. See 73.2. 

5. RV. 10.9.10a. 

6. Gould not be traced. 

7. Gould hot be traced. 

8. RV. 10. 75.1. 

9. RV. 4.5.6. 

10. KathaSam. 9. 19a; TB. 2.5.8.3a. 



259.83-90 


693 


83. One will become free from all sins by the repetition of 
(the hymn) havisyantiyam 1 . His diseases will get cured and the 
digestive power increased. 

84. (The hymn) yd ojadhayali 2 (when repeated) is a means 
of securing prosperity and* curing all the diseases. One who 
wishes to have rain should employ (the hymn) bfhaspate ati # . 

85. (The hymns) sarvatrefi and pratiratha* are known (to 
confer) supreme peace. (The recitation of the hymn) sUta 
saftkdfyaparh 6 daily is commended for a person desirous to have 
progeny. 

86. A person who (recites the hymn) ahaih rudra* becomes 
an eloquent speaker. The learned person who recites (the 
hymn) rdti % in the nights is not born again. 

87. The person who recites the f&trisdkta 9 in the night 
spends the night safely. By doing the recitation of (the hymn) 
kalpayanti 10 daily (one will be able to) destroy the enemies. 

88. (The recitation of) the great Ddkfdyava 11 hymn confers 
longevity and radiance. A person who has undertaken a vow 
should recite (the hymn) uta devd 12 , that will destroy the 
diseases. 

89. When there is fear from fire, one should recite the 
hymn ayamagnejani 1 *. One should repeat( the hymn )arai;iyini u in 
the forests to destroy the fear therein. 

90. (One who recites the two hymns) 15 with devotion to 


1 . Cf. havifmatir imd dpah Taitt. Sam. 1 .3. 1 2. 1 a. 

2. MS. 2.7.13a: 93.1. 

3. Taitta. Sam. 1.8.22.2a, 

4. Could not be traced. 

5. Could not be traced. 

6. . Could not be traced. 

7. Cf. ahaqi rudrebhir RV. 10.125.1a. 

8. Cf. rdtrib ketund Vaj. Sam. 37.21 : 38.16; MS. 4.9. 8: 128.14. 

9. Could not be traced. 

10. Could not be traced. 

11. Could not be traced. 

12. MS. 4.14.2a: 217.16, 

13. Cf. ayam agnt jaritd RV. 10.142.1a. 

14. Cf. RV. 10.146.1a; TB. 2.5.6a. 

15. Could not be traced. 



694 


Agni PurSaxa 


(goddess) Br&hml (the goddess of speech) (and makes use of) 
brdkml and Satdvari ( the two herbs) together with water or ghee 
separately will gain intelligence and wealth. 

91. One who desires to conquer his enemy in the battle 
(should recite the hymn) mdsa 1 . (The repetition of the hymn) 
brahmoQo'gnib samvid&nam 2 prevents the death of the child in the 
womb. 

92. After getting pure one should recite the hymn apaihi s , 
that destroys (the effects of) bad dreams. One gains supreme 
concentration by the repetition of (the hymn) yenedari i 4 . 

93. (The recitation of the hymn) mayo bhdrvdto 5 is an 
excellent means of securing the welfare of the cattle. One will 
ward off sorcery or jugglery by (the repetition of) this (hymn). 

94. One should repeat (the hymn) mahl trlndmavaro' stu* 
for securing one’s welfare on his journey. One should repeat 
(the hymn) agnaye vidvifan 7 , which will destroy the enemies. 

95-96. The presiding deities of the houses should be 
worshipped with the hymn vdstofpate 8 . The procedure relating 
to the repetition has been told. That relating to the oblation 
has to be known as different. The (prescribed) fee has to be 
paid at the end of the oblation. (There will be) expiation of 
the sin by (offering) an oblation. The oblation done with food 
appeases by the offer of food and gold as gift. 

97-99. The blessings of brahmins will be unfailing. One 
should bathe outside in every case. Oblations made with the 
white mustard, barley, grains, milk, curd, ghee and the twigs 
of the kflravrkfa-s?, yield all the pleasures. The twigs of thorny 
(trees), black mustard, blood, poison and stone (are used as 
oblation) in incantation. Saktu 10 , milk, curd, food collected as 


Gould not be traced. 

2. Gould not be traced. 

3. Gf. RV.10.164.1a. 

4. Gf. Vtdic Concordant* p. 802. 

5. Taitt. Sam. 7.4.17.1a. 

6. Ms. 1.5.4a; 70.7; 1.5.11:79.9. 

7. Gould not be traced. 

8. Taitt. Sam. 3.4.10.1a. 

9. The four trees — r&agrodka, udumbara, atoattha and madhOka 

10. The flour of barley first fried and then ground. 



260 . 1-7 


695 


alms, fruits and roots are the food while offering an oblation. 
Thus the use of the hymns of Rgveda has been explained. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY 
The use of the hymns of Tajuroeda 

Puskara said : 

1-2. I shall describe the use (of the hymns) of Tajur (veda), 
that yield enjoyment and emancipation. Listen (to me) : O 
Rama : The great vyihftis 1 are considered to be preceded by 
the syllable orh. They destroy all sins and yield all pleasures. 
A wise man should worship the gods with thousand oblations 
of clarified butter. 

3. O Rama : This confers the desired pleasures. One who 
desires peace should offer (oblation) with barley. (One should 
offer) with sesamum for the destruction of sin. 

4. (One should offer oblation) with grains and white 
mustard that will confer all the pleasures. (Offering oblations) 
with the twigs of udwmbara (tree) is commended for one who 
desires cattle. 

5. One who desires food (should offer oblation) with curd 
and one who desires peace (should) with milk. One who 
desires plenty of gold (should offer oblation) with the twigs of 
apamdrga. 

6. One who seeks a maiden should offer oblation of jiti 
flowers that have been strung together in pairs and soaked in 
ghee. One who desires to have (governorship qver) a village 
should offer (oblations of) sesamum and rice. 

7. The oblations (of the twigs) of Sdkhofa, odsd and ap&mdrga 
(trees) (are commended) for bringing (others) under control. 
O Son of Bhrgu (ParaSurama) : (oblation) of twigs mixed with 
poison and blood (should be made) for causing the death of 
one after becoming sick. 

1. The syllables bhob, bhuvah, stub, mahab, janab tapofr and satyatp. 



696 


Agni Purdna 


8-9. One who is angry (should act) perfectly in the above 
manner in order to kill his enemies. O Brahmin : After having 
made an image of the king made up of rice one should offer 
a thousand oblations. The king will thus be subjected to one’s 
control. Flowers (are to be used) by one who desires clothes. 
(The offering of) dUrvd (grass) destroys disease. 

10. It is laid down that strong scents (should be used) by 
one who desires to gain the splendour of a realised soul. Obla- 
tion should be offered with the ash of husk and thorns in 
retaliatory enchantments. 

11-12. (In incantation) to cause animosity, the wings of 
a crow and owl (should be offered). O Brahmin ! One should 
offer the ghee of a black cow to fire at ( the time of) the lunar 
eclipse and partake of it after having mixed it with the residue 
of powdered vacd (a kind of aromatic root) after incantation a 
thousand times. This will make him intelligent. 

13-14a. A peg of eleven inches made of iron or khadira 
(tree) should be buried in the house of the enemy after repea- 
ting (the hymn) dvisato vadho'si 1 2 3 4 5 6 . This act of magical incanta- 
tion for (the destruction of) the enemy has been narrated to 
you. 

14b-15. By the recitation of (the hymn) cak$ugy& one will 
get back lost eyesight. (The repetition) of the section (of 
the hymn beginning with) upayuhjatd 3 will procure food. One 
will be free from difficulties by offering oblation of dQrvd 
(grass) (with the recitation of the hymn) tanUnap&gne sat*. 

16-18. Oblation made with curd and clarified butter (with 
the recitation of the hymn) bhefajamasi 6 will cure the sick- 
ness of domestic animals. Oblation (made with the recitation 
of the hymn) tryambakarti yajdmahe • will increase one’s fortune. 
(One who makes an oblation with this hymn) pronouncing the 
name of a maiden', will secure that maiden. One who repeats 


1. V&j. Sam. 1.28. 

2. Gf. cSkfufmatyAya svdhd TB. 3.10.7.1. 

3. Gould not be traced. 

4. Gf. Bloomfield, Vidic Concordance p. 397b. 

5. Vaj. Sam. 3.59. 

6. Taitt. Sam. 1.8.6.2a. 



260.19-28 


697 


(this hymn) daily when he is stricken with fear, will get free 
from fears. By making an oblation with th edhutWra flower along 
with ghee (repeating this hymn), one will get all the pleasures. 
O Rama ! One who makes an oblation with gtiggulu (a fragrant 
gum resin) (with the recitation of the hymn) will see SaAkara 
(Siva) in the dream. 

1 9-20. One will get long life by repeating the section 
yunjate maria 1 2 3 4 5 6 . (The repetition of the hymn) vifnorar&fam* 
destroys all the obstacles. It is capable of destroying demons. 
It also confers victory. (The repetition of the hymn) ayarii no 
agnifi* yields victory in battle. 

21-22. (The hymn) idamapah pravahala* (when repeated) 
while bathing is capable of destroying sins. If one buries an iron 
nail of ten inches length at the threshold (of the house) of a 
maiden with (the repetition of the hymn) viSvakarmannu haois* 
she will not be given (in marriage) to somebody else. One who 
makes an oblation with (the repetition of the hymn) deva- 
savitah 6 will get food. 

23-24. O Knower of virtue ! The excellent brahmin who 
desires strength should do oblation with sesamum, barley, rice 
and (twigs of) apam&rga with (the recitation of) agtiau svdhd 
( oblations to fire) . O Brahmin ! One will win the affection of 
the people by making a mark (on the forehead) with gorocand 
(yellow pigment got from the belly of cow) after having made 
the incantation (of the sacred syllable ) a thousand times. 

25-28. The repetition of the Rudra (hymns) 7 is capable 
of destroying all the sins. The oblation (made with that hymn) 
accomplishes all tasks and ensures peace everywhere. O 
Bhargava ! Knower of virtue ! when the goats, sheep, horses, 
elephants, cows, men, kings, children, women, villages, cities 
and countries are being attacked or afflicted by diseases, when 

1. V&j. Sara. 5.14a; Taitt. Sam. 1.2.13.1a. 

2. V&j. Sam. 3.21; Taitt. Sam. 1.2.13.3. 

3. Vfij. Sam. 5.37a; 7.44a; Taitt. Sam. 13.4.1a; 4.46.3a. 

4. RV. 1.33.22a; V4j. Sam. 6.17a. 

5. Cf. Bloomfield, Vedic Concordant* p. 878a. 

6. V*j. Sara. 9.1; 11.7; 30.1; Taitt. Sam. 1.7.7. 1; 4. 1.1. 2. 

7. na mas U rudra maipa v* Taitt. Sam. 4.5.1.1a; V&j. Sam. 16. la. 



698 


Agni Purina 


there is the outbreak of plague and there is fear from the enemies, 
then (the offering) of oblation with Rudra hymns with sweet 
porridge and ghee (will confer) supreme peace. 

29-30. One gets free from all sins by offering oblation 
with pumpkin and ghee (with the Rudra hymns). Excellent 
man ! One gets free from ( the sin of) killing a brahmin by 
eating the flour of barley, barley or alms in the night and 
bathing for a month outside. One will get everything by offer- 
ing oblation with (the repetition of) the hymn madhuvitd 1 . 

31. One will certainly get childem by offering oblation 
(with the recitation of the hymn) dadhikrivna. 2 3 4 5 Similarly (obla- 
tion made) with ghee (with the recitation of the hymn) 
ghftaoati * will give life. 

32. (The recitation of the hymn) svasli na indra 4 would 
destroy all difficulties (and the hymn) iha givah prajiyadhvam 1 
would increase the strength. 

33-34. A thousand oblations made with ghee (with this 
hymn) will ward off ill-luck. (Oblations made) with (the twigs 
of) apimirga and rice (with the recitation of the hymn) 
sruvena devasya tvtP will without any doubt free one quickly from 
the deformities inflicted by incantation. One would get gold by 
(oblations) with the twigs of paliSa with (the hymn) rudra pdlu 7 8 9 
(Rudra protect) . 

35. One should offer oblations with rice with ( the recita- 
tion of the hymn) Sioo bhava ®. (The repetition of the hymn) 
yah sen# removes the fear of thieves. 

36. O Brahmin ! One who makes a thousand oblations with 
black sesamum with (the recitation of the hymn) yo asmabhy- 


1. Taitt, Sam. 4.2.9.3a; D.2.8,6. 

2. Taitt. Sam. 1.5.11.4a; 7.4.19.4a. 

3. Cf. Taitt. Sam. 4.4. 1 2.5a. 

4. RV. I.89.6a; V&j. Sam. 25.19a; MS. 4.9.27a; 140.1. 

5. AV. 20.127.12a; K&th. Sam. 35.5a. 

6. Could not be traced. 

7. Could not be traced. 

8. VSj. Sam. 11.45a; Taitt. Sam. 4.1.4.2a. 

9. Could not be traced. 



260 . 37-43 


699 


amay&tiy&t 1 will become free from deformities caused by inca- 
ntation. 

37. One will get food by offering an oblation of food with 
(the recitation of the hymn) annapate 2 . The repetition of (the 
hymn) hamsahi fticifad 3 (while remaining) in the water destroys 
sins. 

t 

38. (The repetition of the hymn) catvdri fyfigdfc* (while 
remaining) in the water will remove all sins. By the repetition 
of ( the hymn) devd yajha 5 one will be respected in the world of 
Brahma. 

39. One will obtain the favour of the Sun by offering 
oblation with clarified butter with (the repetition of the hymn) 
vasanta # . The rites relating to (the use of the hymn) suparno'si 1 
are the same as for the (seven) vydkftis 8 . 

40. One will get released from bondage by repeating 
namah svdhdP three times. By repeating (the hymn) drupadd 10 
three times (while remaining) in the water will destroy all sins. 

41. The sacred formula iha gdvah prajdyadhvam 11 is capable 
of sharpening the intellect when oblations are offered with 
clarified butter, curd, milk and sweet porridge. 

42. Oblations made with leaves and fruits with (the recita- 
tion of the hymn) Satam yo 12 confers health, wealth and long 
life. 

43. (The recitation of the hymn) osadhih pratimodadhva rft 13 
while mowing and cutting will give returns. Oblations made 
with sweet porridge (with the repetition of the hymn) atvdvat 14 
will secure peace. 

1. Vaj. Sam. 11. 80a; Taitt. Sam. 4.1.10.3a. 

2. Taitt. Sam. 4.2.3.1a; 5.2.2.I. 

3. Vaj. Sam. 10.24a; 12.14a; Taitt. Sam. 1.8.13.2a; 4.2.1.5a. 

4. Vaj. Sam. 17.91a; MS. 1.6,2a; 87.17. 

5. Cf. dud yqjflam nayantu RV. 1.40.3d; MS. 4‘9.1d; 120.10. 

6. - Vaj. Sam. IO.lOj Taitt. Sam. 4.3.3.I. 

7. Vaj Sam. 10.4; 17.72; Taitt. Sam. 4.1.1CL3; 6.5.3; 5.1.10.5. 

8. See note to verse 1 above. 

9. Cf. G. Dh. 27. 9. 

10. Cf. drupadid iva Vaj. Sam. 20. 20a. 

11. Kafh. Sam. 35. 3a. 

12. Tait. Sam. 3.7.2.3c. 

13. RV. 10.97.3a; Vaj. Sam. 12. 77a. 

14. RV. 9.63. 18b; Vaj. Sam. 8. 63b. . 



700 


Agni Purdna 


44. One will be released from bondage by (the repetition 
of) the sacred formula tasmd 1 . One will get excellent dress by 
(repeating the hymn) yuvd sttvds&h 2 . 

45. (The recitation of the hymn) muheantu ma fdpathydt 3 * 5 is 
capable of destroying all the enemies. Oblation of sesamum 
(while reciting the hymn) ma ma hirhsilk 1 is capable of destroying 
enemies. 

* 46. (Oblations of) ghee and sweet porridge (with the re- 
petition of the hymns) namo'stu sarvasarpebhyo 5 and krnudfwam raja 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
destroys magic incantations. 

47-49. One can control an epidemic in a village or coun- 
try by making ten thousand oblations of pieces of dfirvd grass 
with (the recitation of the hymn) kanijidt kdnddt 1 . One who is 
suffering from a disease will be cured and the grief-stricken (will 
become free) from grief (by this). ORama ! A person who offers 
a thousand twigs of tidumbara (tree) as oblation with (the recita- 
tion of the hymn) madhimdnno vanaspatih 8 will get wealth. One 
will also get great fortune and victory in litigation. 

50-51. One will make the gods rain by offering oblations 
(of the same) with (the recitation of the hym n)apam garbharh .• 
O Knower of virtue ! By making oblations of curd, ghee and 
honey (with the repetition of the hymn) apah pinva 10 one will 
make it rain heavily. (The repetition of the hymn) namaste 
rudra 11 destioys all misfortunes. 

52-53. (The above hymn) is also said to ensure all peace 
and destroy great sins. One who is afflicted by a disease is pro- 
tected by (the repetition of the hymn) adhyavocat. 12 It is also 
capable of destroying demons, increasing fame, long life and 


1. Cf. RV. 10.9.3a; Taitt. Sam. 4.1.5.1a. 

2. RV. 3.8.4a; MS. 4. 13.1a: 199.13. 

3. RV. 10.97.16a; Vaj. Sam. 12.90a. 

*4. Tait. Sam. 1. 2.2.2. 

5. RV. Kh. 7.55.10a; Tait. Sam. 4.2.8.3a. 

6. RV. 7.32.9b. 

7. Tait. Sam. 4.2.9.2a. 

8. Tait. Sam. 4.2.9.3a. 

9. Tait. Sam. 4.1.4.3b. 

10. Tait. Sam. 4.3.4, 3. 

11. Tait. Sam. 4.5.1.1a. 

12. Tait. Sam. 4.5.1.2a. 



260.54-62 


701 


strength. One will be happy by scattering white mustard and 
repeating this (hymn) on the journey. 

54-55a. O Knower of virtue ! One will get long life and 
undiminishing food by worshipping daily the sun morning and 
evening unweariedly repeating, (the hymn) asau yastdmro 1 . 

55b-56. Weapons are consecrated by the six (hymns) 
prammea dhanvanas 2 . It will frighten enemies in battle. One need 
not entertain any doubt. ( The repetition of the hymn) mdno 
niahdntam 3 4 5 6 7 confers peace on children. 

57. One should offer oblations of black mustard soaked in 
pungent oil (with the repetition of) the seven sections (beginn- 
ing with) namo hiranyabdhave 1 that will destroy enemies. 

58. One becomes a sovereign by offering oblations of a 
lakh lotuses with (the recitation of the hymn) namo vah kirike- 
bhyo h . By similar (offerings) of bilva (leaves) (one will acquire) 
gold. 

59. One will obtain wealth by oblations of sesamum with 
(the repetition of) ima rudrdya 8 9 . Oblations with dOni I grass (will 
make one) free from all diseases. 

60. (The hymn) aiuh SiSana 1 ( is used) in the protection of 
weapons. O Rama ! It is said to destroy all the enemies in 
battle. 

61 . O Brahmin ! Knower of virtue ! One thousand oblations 
of clarified butter with (the repetition of) the five (hymns) 
raja sama 8 will cure the eye disease (of a person) . 

62. The oblation (done with the hymn) ianno vanaspate gehe* 
will destroy the defects of a building. One will not earn enmity 


1. Tait. Sam. 4.5.1.3a. 

2. Tait. Sam. 4.5.1 0*2a. 

3. Tait. Sam. 4.5.10.2a. 

4. Tait. Sam. 4.5.2. 1. 

5. Tait. Sam. 4.5.9.2. 

6. Vaj. Sam. 16.48a. 

7. Tait. Sam. 4.6.4.1a. 

8. Gould not be traced. 

9. Gould not be traced. 



702 Agni Purtoia 

with anyone by offering oblations of clarified butter (with the 
repetition of) agna ayUtii$i l . 

63. One will gain victory by the oblation of fried paddy 
(with the hymn) apdrirphena 2 . He who has defective* ense-organs 
will get sound ones by the repetition of (the hymn) bhadrd 3 . 

64. (The hymn) agniica prthivi cat (is) an excellent charm. 
One who repeats the hymn adhvana 5 will be victorious in 
litigation. 

65. (The hymn) brahma rdjanyarh* accomplishes the task 
(when repeated) at its commencement. One will be free from 
disease by the oblation of ghee a lakh times (with the repetition 
of the hymn) samvatsaro'si 7 . 

66. (The hymn) keturh kpwarP will confer victory in battle. 
(The hymn) indro' gnirdharma* ensures fair play in battle. 

67. The hymn dhanvand ga xo is excellent for the bow wielder. 
The hymn yunjita 11 is known (to be used) in consecrating (the 
bow) . 

68. The hymn dhirathd 12 should be used for the consecration 
of arrows. Bahvinam pita 13 is said to be the hymn for consecrating 
quiver. 

69. Tunjanti 14 is said to be the hymn for arranging horses. 
(The hymn) afali ftidna 1 * is said (to be used) while commencing 
a journey. 


1. TS. 1.3.14.7a. 

2. Cf. apdm phenenaVa j. Sam. 19.71a. 

3. Cf. RV. 8. 19. 19b. 

4 . Vaj. Sam. 26.1. 

5. Tait. Sam. 1.7.8. 1. 

6. Cf. brahma rdjanydbhydm Vaj. Sam. 26.2c. 

7. Vaj. Sam. 27.45 or TB. 3.11.1.14. 

8. Tait. Sam. 7.4.20.1a. 

9. Could not be traced. 

10. Tait. Sam. 4.6.6.1a. 

11. Could not be traced. 

1 2. Could not be traced. 

13. Tait. Sam. 4.6.6.2a. 

14. Cf. Yuftfanti bradhnam Tait. Sam. 7.4.20.1a. 
15* Tait. Sam. 4.6.4.1a. 



260.70-78 


703 


70. The hymns vifnoh krama 1 (is said to be) excellent for 
one who boards a chariot. (The hymn) djaAghanti 8 is said (to be 
used) for whipping the horses. 

7 1 . One should repeat (the hymn) yah send abhitvarfl when 
facing the army of the enemy. The war drums are beaten with 
(the recitation of the hymn) dundubhya 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 . 

72-73. One will become victorious by offering oblations 
earlier with these hymns. A wise* man who offers one crore 
oblations with (the recitation of the hymn) yamena dattam 5 will 
soon produce a chariot that will give victory in the battle. The 
ceremonies relating to (the hymn) d are similar to that 
of the vydhftis (bhdh etc.) . 

74. One will get the composure of mind by the repetition 
of (the hymn of) iivasaAkalpa 1 . One will get fortune by making 
five lakh oblations (with the repetition of the hymn) pahcana - 
dyah 8 9 . 

75. One should wear a golden (plate) after making incan- 
tations one thousand times with the hymn yad abadhnan ddk$&yanff. 
It will ward off the enemies. 

76. One will not have the fear of thieves by throwing stones 
and lumps of earth in all the four directions in the house (after 
repeating the hymn) imam jiuebhyah 10 11 . 

77. (The hymn) pari me gamanefata 11 is excellent for charm- 
ing. One who has come to kill will be subdued. 

78. O Knower of Dharma ! A person will be brought under 
one’s complete control soon by giving him food, betels, flowers 
and other things charmed (with this hymn). 


1. Tait. Sam. 1. 6.5.2. 

2. Tait. Sam. 4.6.6.5a. 

3. Gould not be traced. 

4. Cf. Vedic Concordance p. 485b. 

5. Tait. Sam. 4.6.7.1a. 

6. Tait. Sam. 3.4.11.2a. 

7. Gould not be traced. 

8. V&j Sam. 34.11a. 

9. Vaj Sam. 34.52b. 

10. Vftj. Sam. 35.15a. 

11. VSj. Sam. 35.18a. 



704 


Agni Purdna 


79-80. (The hymn) tamo mitra 1 always confers peace every- 
where (when repeated). One will be able to charm the entire 
world by making oblations of all grains ( with the repetition of 
the hymn) gandndrh tva ganapatitii 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 at the junction of -four roads. 
The hymn hiranyavarndh tucayah 8 (is used) in consecration. 

81-82. (The hymn) tanno devir abhiffay^ (is) excellent for 
conferring peace. There is no doubt that one will appease the 
planets and get their grace by offering oblations of clarified 
butter in parts ( to the respective planets) with (the repetition 
of) the hymn ekacakrcP. One who makes oblations of clarified 
butter with the two (hymns) gdvo bhago • will get cows. 

83. (The hymn) praodd&rh$ah sopat 7 is used in the propitia- 
tory rite in the house. (The hymn) devebhyo vanaspate 8 is pres- 
cribed (for use) in the rite for the consecration of a tree. 

84. (The hymn) tad vifnoh paramarix padarfp is known to be 
the gayatri for (Lord) Vi$nu. It is capable of destroying all the 
sins and granting all the pleasures. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-ONE 
The use of the hymns of Sdmaueda 

Pufkara said : 

1. I have described the use of ( the hymns of) Tajur {peda ) . 
I shall (now) describe the use of (the hymns of) Sdma ( veda ). 
One will get all the pleasures by repeating the uaifnaui hymns. 


1. RV. 1.90.9a; V&j. Sam. 36.9a. 

2. Tait. Sam. 2.3.14,3a. 

3. Tait. Sam. 5.6.1.1a. 

4. RV. 10.9.4a. 

5. Cf. TA. 1.11.7c. 

6. RV. 6.28.5a. 

7. Gould not be traced. 

8. MS. 4.13.7a: 208.10. 

9. Tait. Sam. 1.3.6.2a. * 



261.2-10 


705 


2. One pleases (Lord) Sahkara (Siva) by repeating the 
ch&ndasi (Saman ) hymns well. One will get the grace by repeat- 
ing the skdndi and paitri hymns. * 

3. (The repetition of the hymn) yata indra bkaydmahe 1 is 
capable of destroying the harmful effects (of incantations). One 
who has broken the vow of continence will be released (from 
the fault) by repeating ( the hymn) agnistigmenar. 

4. (The repetition of the hymn) paritosaih ccP is known to 
be capable of destroying all sins. One who has sold (a thing) 
that should not be sold, should repeat (the hymn) ghrtavati 1 2 3 4 5 . 

5-6. (The hymn) adyd nodeva savitah 5 is known to be capa- 
ble of destroying bad dreams. O Rama ! The foremosr ofBhrgus ! 
It is* laid down that the girdle may be tied with the remnant of 
the ghee that has been sprinkled with ( the hymn) abodhyagnih 6 7 8 
as laid down, in the case of the women who have a mis- 
carriage. 

7. Then it should be tied on the wrist of the child that is 
born, with (the repetition of the hymn) somam rdjdnarti \ This 
will make the child free from all diseases. 

8-9. By the use of sarpasdmd 8 one will not have the fear of 
serpents. A brahmin will not have any fear from weapons by 
tying thelatdvari (a herb) after making a thousand oblations with 
(the hymn) mddya tod vddyate 9 . One will get plenty of food by 
making oblation (with the hymn) dlrghatamaso’rka 10 11 12 . 

10. One who repeats (the hymn) samamadhydyanti 11 will not 
die of thirst. One will not get a disease by repeating (the 
hymn) tvamimd o$adhih Xz . 


1. SV. 1.274a; 2.671a. 

2. Tail. Sam. 4.6.1.5a; SV. 1.512a. 

3. Cf. parfto fificatd SV. 1.512a. 

4. SV. 1.378a. 

5. SV. 1.141a. 

6. SV. 1.73a; 2.1096a. 

7. Cf. Vedic Concordance p. 1033b. 

8. Could not be traced. 

9. Could not be traced. 

10. Could not be traced. 

1 1 . Could not be traced. 

12. RV. 1.91.22a. 



706 


Agni Purdna 


U. One will become free from fears by repeating (the 
hymn) devavrata 1 on the journey. Oblations offered with (the 
hym n) yadindro munaye tva 2 increase fortune. 

12. O Rama ! Collyrium applied to the eyes (with the 
hymn) bhago na dire? will increase fortune. There need be no 
doubt. 

13-14. The repetition (of the hymn) indreti varga 4 will also 
increase fortune. A man who seeks the love of a woman should 
make her listen to (the hymn) pari priyd divah kavih 6 . O Rama ! 
There need be no doubt that she will love him in return. (The 
repetition of the hymns) rathmtarcP and vdmadevya 7 increases the 
divine splendour. 

15. A child should be fed with the powder of vacd soaked in 
ghee daily with the repetition of (the hymn) indramidgdthino 8 . It 
will give him good memory. 

16. There is no doubt that one will get progeny after re- 
peating* (the hymn) rathantara 9 and offering oblations. The hymn 
mayi /ri/i 10 has to be repeated for the increase of fortune. 

17. The repetition of the eight vairiipya 11 (hymns) daily 
confers fortune. One will get all the desires fulfilled by repeating 
the saptd$taka 12 (hymns) . 

18. One who worships cows daily morning and evening 
(with the repetition of the hymn) gavyo§uno 13 unweariedly will 
always have cows in his house. 

19. One who offers a droqa (a measure) of barley soaked in 


1. Could not be traced. 

2. Could not be traced. 

3. SV.1.449ab. 

4. Could not be traced. 

5. SV. 1.476a; 2.285a. 

6. Tait. Sam. 1.8.13.1. 

7. MS. 4.9.11:132.10. 

8. SV. 1.198a. 

9. See 14.1. 

10. RV.Kh. 5.87. lOd. 

11. Cf. Tait. Sam. 4.4.2.2. 

1 2. Could not be traced. 

13. SV. 1.186a. 



261.20—262.2 


707 


ghee into fire (with the repetition of the hymn), vita ioitu 
bhesajam 1 2 as laid down will ward off all spells. 

20-2 la. Oblations of sesamum with ( the repetition of the 
hymn) pra daivo d&so a destroys witchcraft. (Repeating the hymn) 
abhi tvfi puna pitqye 3 4 5 6 7 8 followed by the syllable oasaf while offering 
oblations made with perfumed fuel will yield victory in battle. 

2 lb-24. A wise man should make good figures of elephants, 
horses and men with flour and represent the chief men of the 
enemy with oily cakes of flour and cut them into pieces with a 
knife. Then the knower of the sacred .formulas should offer obla- 
tions (with these cakes) soaked in mustard oil with wrath while 
reciting the hymn abhi ivS SQranonumah* The wise man gets 
victory in battle by this act. The hymns gSrutfa*, vdmadevya ,* 
ralhantara 7 and brhadratha 8 are without any doubt said to destroy 
all sins. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-TWO 
The use of the hymns of Atharvaoeda 


Pufkara said : 

1 . The application of the hymns of Sima ( oeda ) has been 
described. I shall describe to you ( the application) of (the 
hymns of) Atharva (oeda) . One gets peace by offering oblations 
with the hymns of the peace class. 

2. One will get rid of all the diseases by offering oblations 
to ( the gods of) the remedial class. One will get free from all 
sins by offering oblations to (the gods of) the trisaptiya class. 


1. SV. 1. 184a; 2.1190a. 

2. SV. 1.51a; 2.867a. 

3. SV. 1.256a; 2.923a. 

4. SV. 1.233a; 2.30a. 

5. Gould not be traced. 

6. MS. 4.9.11:132.10. 

7. See p. 706, note6. 

8. Tail. Sam.2.3.10.2. 



708 


Agni Purdna 


3. One will never get fear by offering oblations to ( the gods 
of) the protection class. O Rama ! one will never be born by 
offering oblations to (the gods of) the apardjita (unconquered) 
class. 

4. One will ward off untimely death by offering oblations 
to (the gods of) the life-giving class. One will get welfare 
everywhere by offering oblations to (the gods of) the welfare 
class. 

5. One will get united with good fortune (by propitiating 
the gods of) happiness and armour group. One will remove the 
defects of a building by offering oblations to the class of deities 
presiding over the foundations of a house. 

6. In the same way one will remove all the defects by 
offering oblations to ( the gods of) the Raudra class. Oblations 
(are to be offered to) these ten classes in eighteen propitiatory 
(rites) . 

7-9. (The goddesses) Vaisnavi, §anti, Aindri, Brahmi, 
Raudri, Vayavya, VarunI, Kauberi, Bhargavi, Prajapatya, 
Tva$trl, Kaumari, Vahnidevata, Marudgana, Gandharl, Santi 
Naiirtakl, $&nti Angirasi, Yamya and ParthivI (are the eighteen 
propitiatory items) that yield all pleasures. The recitation (of 
the hymn) yastvd mjrtyu/i 1 conquers death. 

10. One will never be afflicted by serpents by offering 
oblations with (the hymn) suparnastvd 2 3 l (The hymn) indrena 
dattam* confers all the pleasures. 

1 1 . (The hymn) indrena dattam 4 5 6 7 is capable of destroying all 
obstacles. The hymn imd devfl is an excellent all-appeasing 
(hymn). 

12. (Thehymn) devd maruta • confers all the pleasures. (The 
hymn) yamasya lokdt 1 is excellent for removing (the effects of) 
bad dreams. 


1. AV. 3.11.8c. 

2. AV. 4.6.4a 

3. Tait. Sam. 2.3.10.2b. 

4. ' See note 3 above. 

5. Could not be traced. 

6. Could not be traced 

7. AV. 19.56.1a. 



262.13-20 


709 


13. (The hymn) indraica pafkavanijd 1 is excellent for profit 
in trade. Oblations offered with (the hymn) kdmo me vdji 2 in- 
crease the fortune of women. 

14. Oblation offered a lakh times with (the repetition of 
the hymn) tu bhyameva ja rimarP and with (the hymn) agne gobhir 
na 4 will promote the intellect. 

15. Offering oblation with (the hymn) dhruvarh dhruvena 5 
will ensure the acquisition of land. The repetition of ( the 
hymn) alaktakajivoP will ensure prosperous agriculture. 

16. (The hymn) aharfi te bhagna 1 increases fortune. (The 
hymn)j* me pdidhfi secures release from bondage. 

17. Oblation offered with the repetition of (the hymn) 
SapatvaharP destroys enemies. (The hymn ) tvamuttamam 10 is capa- 
ble of increasing fame and intellect. 

18. (The hymn) yathd mpgamati 11 increases the good fortune 
of women. (The hymn) yena cehadifam 12 is advantageous for 
conception. 

19. (The hymn) ayarh teyonih 13 is favourable for progeny. 
(The hymn) iivah Sivdbhifi 14, increases good fortune. 

20. (The repetition of the hymn) brhaspatimah paripdtu 1 5 
secures safety on the journey. (The hymn) munedmi tud 16 is said 
to ward off untimely death. 


1 . Could not be traced. 

2. Could not be traced. 

3. AV. 2.28.1a. 

4. Tait. Sam. 2.4.5.1a. 

5. AV. 6.87.3b; 7.94.1a. 

6. Could not be traced. 

7. Could not be traced. 

8. Could not be traced. 

9. Could not be traced. 

10. Could not be traced. 

1 1 . Could not be traced. 

12. Could not be traced. 

13. AV. 3.20.1a. 

14. RV. 1.187.3b. 

15. AV. 7.51.1a. 

16. AV. 3.11.1a. 



710 


Agni Purina 


21. One who masters the atharvaSims 1 becomes free from 
all sins. I have described to you some procedures relating to 
some important hymns. 

22-24a. The first material for oblations is the twigs of trees 
suitable for such rites. O Bhargava ! Clarified butter, rice, white 
mustard, unbroken rice, sesamum, curd, milk, darbha (grass), 
durvd (grass), bilva (leaves) and lotuses are always said to be 
the materials that promote peace and prosperity. 

24b-25. O Knower of righteousness ! Mustard oil, blood, 
poison, twigs of thorny (trees) should be used in magic in- 
cantations. One who knows the employment should repeat the 
sage, deity and metre (relating to the hymns). 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-THREE 
Appeasing rites for portents 

Puskara said : 

1. The hisukta of each Veda is known to be capable of 
increasing fortune. The fifteen hymns (beginning with) hiranya - 
varqdrh harinim 2 (are considered to be conferring) fortune. 

2. The four hymns rathefvakfefu vr$abha z in the Tajur (Veda) 
(are said to confer) fortune. The Sdma hymns srdvantlyartf is 
the irisQkta in the Sdmaveda. 

3. In the same way, (the hymn) iriyarh dhdtarmayi dhehi 1 2 3 4 5 6 
in the Atharvaveda is said (to be conferring fortune). One who 
repeats the irisUkta with devotion and offers pblation gets 
fortune. 

4. One will get fortune by offering oblations of lotuses, 
bilvd (leaves), clarified butter and sesamum. The puru$asQkta • 
is the same for each one of the Vedas. It gives everything. 

1. The Atharvarpa hymns. 

2. RV. Kh. 5.87.1a. 

3. Vidh. 65.7. 

4. Cf. irdyanta iva f Vaj. Sam. 33.41a. 

5. Ap. Sr. 6.20.2. 

6. RV. 10.90.1a. 



263-5.17 


711 


5. If libation of water is presented with ( the recitation 
of) each one of the hymns, it will make one free from sin. One 
will destroy his sins by offering flowers to Vifou with each one 
(of the hymns) after bathing. 

6. One would get all the pleasures by giving away a 
fruit with each one (of the hymns) after bathing. By the re- 
petition of the PurufasUkta major and minor sins are destroyed. 

7. One gets everything by repeating the krcchra (hymns) 
and offering oblations (with them) after becoming clean by 
bathing. Three other appeasing (hymns) besides the eighteen 
appeasing (hymns) are excellent. 

8-10. Amrta, abhaya and saumya destoryall the calamities. 
Amrta (is governed) by all the gods. Abhaya (is governed) by 
Brahma and Saumya by all gods. Any one (of them will) 
confer all the pleasures. O Foremost among Bhfgus ! The 
wristlet with the Varuna (hymn) is to be prepared for the 
abhayd appeasement. Similarly fatakdntfa is' (for the wristlet) 
for amrtd and conch for saumya . In order to accomplish ( the 
desired results) the respective hymns of the deities should be 
used for the wristlets. 

11-13. These are capable of destroying the calamities 
relating to the heavens, atmosphere and earth. Listen to me ! 
(I shall describe) the supernatural events relating to the 
heavens, atmosphere and the earth. You learn from me that 
(the phenomena) relating to the heavens are caused by the 
ruling asterisms of the day. (Those) of the sky are the fall of a 
meteor, scorching glow in the directions, the halo around the 
sun or moon, (the appearance of) fairy towns and rains. (The 
phenomena) relating to the earth are the extraordinary events 
affecting the movable and immovable things and earthquake. 

14. The portent will not bear any fruit if it rains within 
seven days. A portent without any appeasement within three 
years is very dangerous. 

15- 16a. The images of gods will dance, shake, glow, shout, 
weep, perspire and laugh. (These are portents.) The changes 
in the images can be pacified by worshipping (Lord) Prajapati 
(Brahma) and offering oblations. 

16b-17. When there is blaze in a country without fire. 



712 


Agnt Purdna 


with loud noise and without fuel that burns, that country will 
be tormented by kings. O Son of Bhrgu ! The change in the fire 
is appeased with the hymns of Fire (god) . 

18. When the trees bear fruit out of season, ooze out milk 
and blood, one should do the appeasing rite for the portents 
after worshipping ( Lord) Siva. 

19-20a. Both excessive rains and draught are considered to 
give rise to famine. Rain occurring consecutively for three 
days out of season is known (to be a portent) of danger. The 
change in (the pattern of) rain is nullified by the worship of 
Parjanya (Rain god). Moon and Sun. 

20b-21. If rivers recede from the cities or come near them, 
if they flow gushing forth or get dried up, then the Varuna 
hymn should be recited as also in the case of deterioration in the 
(state of) the reservoirs. 

22-23a. The women may deliver prematurely or may not 
deliver at the appropriate time. They may deliver children 
with deformities or deliver twins etc. One should worship the 
women and brahmins in the case of such deviations in the 
delivery (as above). 

23b-25a. If a mare or she-elephant or cow gives birth to 
twins or to deformed younger or to ones different from the 
species, it will die within six months. In the case of deformed 
youngs there will be danger from hostile forces. The recitation 
and oblation as well as worship of brahmins should be done 
(in such cases). 

25b-26a. If vehicles run without being yoked (to steeds), 
if (vehicles) yoked (to steeds) do not run, or trumpet sounds 
(are heard) in the sky, then it forebodes great impending 
danger. 

26b-30a. If wild animals and birds enter village and those 
of village enter forest; land (animals) enter water and water 
(animals) enter land, vixens howl at the threshold of a palace, 
cocks crow at prado fa (the time preceding the nightfall) ; vixens 
howl at the residence or at the rising Sun; dove enters the 
house, carnivorous birds stoop down on the head; bees make 
sweet (sound); crows mate in sight; strong arches of palace, 



263.30—264.3 


713 


garden, door-ways, corridor and mansions fall without an 
obvious cause, it forebodes evil. _(It forebodes) the death of the 
king. 

30b-31. If the quarters are filled by dust or smoke, if 
(the country is) under the influence of the descending node, 
if spots in the moon and sun are visible, or if the stars and 
planets are not to be seen, it also indicates fear. 

32. Where the fire does not glow, the waterpots ooze, 
there is the fear of death and witchcraft as the result of the 
portents. The portent is appeased by the worship of brahmins 
and gods, recitation of hymns and offer of oblations. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-FOUR 

Worship of gods to ward off the effects of portents and mode of 
offering the VaiJvadeva ball 

Puskara said : 

1 . I shall describe the mode of worshipping the gods and 
other rites that destroy (the effects of) portents. One should 
offer respectful water of libation to (Lord) Visnu with the 
three (hymns beginning with) apo hi ffhd 1 after having bathed. 

2. O Brahmin ! Water for washing the feet (should be 
offered) with the three (hymns beginning with) hiranyavarya 2 3 4 . 
Water for sipping (is offered with the recitation of the hymn) 
ianna dpo 3 and for bathing with (the hymn) idamapah* 

3. Perfumes (are offered) with the three (hymns) rathe 
akse 5 6 7 8 and dress with (the hymn) yuva Flowers (are given) 
with (the recitation of the hymn) pu$pavatiff and* incense with 
( the hymn ) dhupo'si. 2 

1. RV. 10.9.1a. 

2. RV.Kh. 5*87. la. 

3. AV. 1.6.4a. 

4. RV. 1.23.22a. 

5. Rathe akjefu, AV. 6.38.3a. 

6. Gf. Bloomfield, Vedic Concordance pp. 792-93. 

7. RV. 10.97-3b. 

8. Cf. dhUr asi 9 Tait. Sam. 1.1. 4.1. 



714 


Agni Purdna 


4-6. (The hymn for offering) the lamp is tejo\si l and for 
the madhuparka 2 3 , dadhi 8 . O Foremost among men! The eight 
hymns (beginning) with hiranyagarbhah 4 are said to be (used) in 
offering eatables ( to gods) , cooked rice, drinks,, perfume, 
chowrie, fan, shoe, umbrella, chariot and scat. Whatever other 
thing has to be offered should be accompanied by the recitation 
of (the hymn) of (god) Savitf. The purusasukta 5 should be 
repeated and oblations should be offered with the same (hymn) . 

7. In the absence of an image (of Lord Vi$nu) ( the deity 
should be invoked) on the altar or in water or • in *a pot full 
(with water) or on the banks of a river or in a lotus. One 
would thus accomplish the propitiation by worshipping (lord) 
Vi§nu. 

8-12. Then the oblations should be offered to the glowing 
fire with the entire food being collected and offered with ear- 
nestness after cleaning the ground, sprinkling water and spread- 
ing sand and kuia grass. (One should say) (obeisance) to 
Vasudeva, to the lord, to the master, to the immutable, to the 
Fire (god) , to Soma 6 , to Mi tra, to Varuna and to Indra. O 
Fortunate one 1 Obeisance to Indra and Fire (god), the Vis- 
vedevas 7 and to the lord of the beings. Oh ! Rama ! Then (one 
should say) (obeisance) to Anumati 8 , to Dhanvantari 9 , to 
Vasto?pati 10 , to the goddess, to the Fire that accomplishes the 
sacrificial rite. After having made the oblations (thus) with the 
names ending in the dative case, a part of the offering is given 
away as gift. 

13-14. O Son of Bhrgu ! Knower of righteousness ! Taksa 
and Upatak$a towards the east, then the horses and the hairs 

1. Tait. Sam. 1.1.10.3 

2. Consisting of curd, clarified butter, water, honey and candied 
sugar. 

3. Cf. AV. 20.127.9b and TB. 3.7.6.13. 

4. RV. 10.121.1a. 

5. RV. 10.90.1a. 

6. This and the following three are different celestial gods. 

7. A particular group of deities ten in number and supposed to be 
sons ofVisv&. 

8. A female deity. 

9. The physician of the gods. 

10 k The deity that presides over the foundation of a house. 



264.15-28 


715 


(on the south), NirundhI and Dhumrinlka (on the west) and 
Asvapanti and Meghapatn! (on the north) are the names of all 
those (to be worshipped) all around (in a circle) . 

15-16. The Fire-god and other gods should be located in 
( the places of ) the goddesses. O Son of Bhrgu I (goddesses) 
Nandinl, Subhagya, Sumahgali, Bhadrakali, Sthuna, Sri, Hi 
anyakeSi and Vanaspati are worshipped. 

17-22. Offering is made to Dharma and Adharma at the 
door, Dhruva at the centre of the house, Mrtyu outside, Varuna 
at a reservoir, the goblins outside (the house) , the god of 
wealth at the house, Indra and companions on the east, , Yama 
and his attendants on the south, Varuna and his companions 
on the west and Soma and his attendants on the north. (Offering) 
is made to Brahma and his attendants at the centre. (Offerings) 
should be made in the sky, above, on the floor and on the 
earth during the day (for the spirits) that wander during the 
day and in the night for those that wander during the night. 
Offering should be made (to the spirits) morning and evening 
daily outside. Then offering of balls of rice is made (for the 
manes). It should not be* done in the evening. 

23-28. Offering is first made to(the dead) father, then to the 
grandfather and great-gradfather, then to one’s mother, paternal 
grandmother and paternal great-grandmother. The manes should 
thus be worshipped on the kuSa (grass) having their tips facing 
the south. The offerings of balls of rice to the crows are made 
with the repetition of the sacred formula stating ‘let the crows 
partake in the directions of east, west, north-west, south and 
south-west’. (Similarly) the ball of rice to the dogs is offered 
(with the repetition of the sacred formula, ‘I am offering 
the ball of rice to the dogs in the family of Sun that are black 
and of variegated colours. May it protect me always on the 
path to the next world’). (Then offerings are made to the 
cows with the following words:) ‘Accept this oblation of mine, 
O cows, the daughters of the celestial cow* that are good for 
all, holy, destroyer of sins and the mothers of the three worlds’. 
After having offered the food to the cows and • bidding adieu, 
one should offer the alms. After having 'worshipped the guests 
and the poor, the householder should himself eat. One should 
say, K Orii bhUlx oblations. Orh bhuvah oblations. Oth svah oblations. 



716 


Agni Purdna 


Ombhurbhuvah svah oblations. Orh oblations, you are the atonement 
for sins done by the gods. Orh oblations, you are the atonement 
for sins done by the manes. Orh oblations, you are the atone- 
ment for sins done by me. Orh oblations, you are the atonement 
for sins done by men. Oblations, you are the atonement for all 
sins done by the learned meh and the ignorant men. Oblations, 
to Fire god that accomplishes the desires. Orh oblations to 
Prajapati (lord of beings). I have described to you (the mode 
of) worship of (Lord) Visnu and the ofLring made to all gods. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-FIVE 
The sacred bathing of the deities 

Fire-god said : 

1 . Listen to me. I shall describe the bathing that accom- 
plishes all objects and that is propitiatory. A wise man should 
bathe the planets and (Lord) Visnu on the banks of a river. 

2. One who is afflicted by fever as well as one who is 
afflicted by planets causing obstacles (should bathe it) in a 
temple. One who desires to acquire knowledge (should bathe it) 
on ( the banks of) a tank or in the house and one who desires 
victory (should do the sacred ablution) at a sacred place. 

3. A woman who has a miscarriage should be bathed in a 
lotus tank, and one whose issue dies after birth should bathe in 
the presence of an aSoka (tree) . 

4. One who desires to have flowers, one who desires to 
have progeny and who desires to have a house and other for- 
tunes (should bathe) respectively at a place abounding in 
flowers, an ocean and in the presence of (the image of Lord) 
Vi$nu. 

5. Bathing in ( the as terisms) iravaQa> revati and pu$ya is 
meritorious for all. One who wishes to do the ceremonial 
bathing has to observe a purificatory vow for seven days prior 
to that. 



265.6-18 


717 


6,-8a. (The herbs) punarnaod , rocand, fat&iiga, gurunitoak, 
madhSka, the two sorts of rajani , tagara , ndgakeSara, ambari , man- 
jiffhd, marhsl , ydsaka, kardama, priydAgu, mustard, kuffha, bald, 
brahmi, saffron and the five things got from a cow should- be 
mixed with the flour of barley and rubbed (on the body). One 
should then bathe. 

8b- 11a. (Lord) Vi?nu should be worshipped on the pericarp 
of a circle, (Lord) Brahma on the right side and (Lord) Siva 
on the left side. (Lord) Indra and others should be drawn from 
the east onwards in order together with their weapons and 
associates. Bathing circles should be drawn in the different 
directions and the intermediary directions. (Lords) Vi§nu, 
Brahma, Ila (Siva), Sakra (Indra) and others and their we- 
apons should then be worshipped and oblaiion offered. One 
hundred and eight twigs, sesamum and ghee (are offered) to 
each one (of the gods). 

1 lb-13. The pitchers bhadra, subhadra, siddhirtha, amogha, 
citrabhdnu, parjanya and sudarlana that give prosperity should be 
placed on the ground. (The gods should be invoked in them as 
follows) : “May the Alvins, Rudras, Maruts, Vilvedevas, 
Demons, Vasus and Munis and other gods get pleased and enter 
these pitchers.” 

14-16. The herbs jay anti, .vijayd, jayd, Satdoari, latapufpd, 
vifnukrantd, apardjitd, jyotifmati, atibald, sandal, ultra, keiara, musk, 
camphor, bdlaka, pair aka, tvak, jdtiphala (nutmeg), clove, earth 
and the five things got from a cow should be put into the 
pitcher. Then the person (who desires to have the ceremonial 
bath) should be made to sit on the auspicious seat and bathed 
by brahmins. 

17-18. Then oblations should separately be offered to the 
gods with the sacred formulas used in the anointing of' kings. 
Then the final oblation should be made and the fee paid to the 
preceptor. In olden times (Lord) Indra was able to kill the 
demons being (thus) bathed by the preceptor. (I) have des- 
cribed ( to you) the bathing of the guardians of the directions 
(that give) victory in the- battle and other things. 



718 


Agni Purdna 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-SIX 

The mode of performing the ceremonial bathing to 
wash off obstacles m 

Pufkara said : 

l-6a. I shall describe the bathing that would be beneficial 
for those afflicted by (the evil spirit called) Viniyaka. The 
spirit Vinayaka was commissioned by ( Lords) Keiava (Vi$nu), 
Isa (Siva) and Pit&maha (Brahma) as the leader of the 
attendants in order to frustrate the work of men. One who is 
possessed by Vinayaka dreams as if he is . bathing in water 
excessively, sees shaven heads, rides the demons (in a dream) 
and as he goes thinks that he is being followed by others. The 
fruitless beginning (of a task) leads to frustation and (the 
body) emaciates without any reason. A girl does not get a 
(suitable) bridegroom, a married woman does not get pro- 
geny, a brahmin does not become a preceptor and a pupil does 
not get instruction. A trader does not get profit and a culti- 
vator, the produce. A king does not get a kingdom. In such 
cases a (ceremonial) bath has to be done. 

6b-9a. (It should be done) on an auspicious seat in (the 
asterisms) hasta, pu$ya 9 aivini , mfgatir$a and iravana. Levigated 
powders of white mustard mixed with clarified butter, all herbs 
and perfumes should be besmeared on the head (of the person 
concerned). He should be bathed with (the waters in) four 
pitchers into which all herbs have been put. Earth brought 
from stables of horses and elephants, anthill and confluence of 
rivers as well as resin got from a cow, perfumes and guggulu 
should be put (into the pitchers) . 

9b-17. (The bathing is done with the repetition of the 
following sacred formulas) “ Sahasrdksam iatadhdram ftibhih 
pdvanam krtarh 1 . I bathe you with the waters that have been 
made holy by the sages. May the removers of sins protect you.*’ 
Bhagarii te varuno rdjd bhagarh sUryo bfhaspatib bhagamindraka vdyuSca 
bhagam saptarfayo daduh 2 . “May Varuna, the Sun, Bjrhaspati, 

1. YDh. 1.280a. 

2. YDh. 1.281a. 



266.18—267.1 


719 


Indra, Vayu and the seven sages give you wealth.” “May the 
misfortune that sticks to your hair, the parting line of the hair, 
head, fore-head, ears and eyes always be removed by the 
water.” Then the preceptor should hold the leaf of the darbha 
( grass) on the left hand and pour the mustard oil on the head 
of the person that has bathed with a ladle made of udumbara 
(tree). Then oblation should be made holding the kuSa grass 
on the head with the left hand (repeating) the names Mita, 
Sammita, Salaka, Kanfhaka, Kupnanda and Rajaputra together 
with (the word) oblation, the sacred formulas for oblation 
and obeisance. Then after having spread the kuSa (grass) every- 
where at the crossroads, one should offer cooked and uncooked 
rice, meat, food, large quantities of raw fish, coloured flower, 
wine, mulaka t cake, sweet cake of flour, garland of enfavikd (?), 
curd rice, sweet porridge ( ptyasa ) , piffaka (a cake made of any 
grain) , modaka ( a kind of sweetmeat in the form of balls ) and 
treacle on a winnowing basket. 

18-20. ThenAmbika (mother goddess; consort of Siva), 
the mother of Vinayaka, should be worshipped after having 
offered durvd (grass), mustard and flowers and the final obla- 
tion is made. (The following request is made) : O Fortunate one ! 
You give me beauty, fame, good fortune, progeny, wealth and 
all desired things. The brahmins should be fed and a pair of 
clothes should be given to the preceptor also. One would get 
the fruit of his action and wealth after worshipping the (spirit) 
Vinayaka and the planets. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-SEVEN 

Ceremonial bathing known as MdheSvara and other 
kinds of ablutions 

Pufkara said : 

1. I shall describe the bathing (known as) MaheSvara that 
has been described by Uianas (preceptor of demons) to Bali, 
the king of demons, in olden days and that would promote the 
victory of a king and others. 



720 


Agni Purdna 


2. When the sun has not risen the votary should be bathed 
on a seat with (the waters of) pitchers (with the repetition of 
the following words) : Om obeisance to Lord Rudra arjd to Bala 
besmeared with ashes of grey colour. Victory ! Victory ! 
Trample, down all the enemies of a weak man in wars and 
arguments. Orh ! Crush down all the (hostile) marchers. Let 
that god who desires to barn (all the worlds) at the end of the 
yuga (period), and who having terrible form (accept) this 
worship. Let that god having thousand rays and white (in 
complextion) protect your life. May that (Lord) Siva, the 
destroyer of Tripura 1 2 3 , who resembles the samvartaka 2 fire and is 
of the form of all the gods, protect your life; likhi : likhi , khili 
oblations. After bathing, oblations should be done with scsa- 
mum and rice with (the repetition of the above) sacred 
formulas. 

3. After having bathed with the pahcamjic * 3 , the trident 
bearing lord should be worshipped. I shall describe ( to you) 
the other kinds of ablutions that would always be for your 
victory. 

4. Bathing with ghee is said to be excellent for the length- 
ening of life. (Bathing) with cow-dung would be (conferring) 
fortune. (Bathing) with cow’s urine would destroy the sins. 

5. (Bathing) with milk would be (giving) strong intellect 
and with curd, would further fortune. One would be destroying 
the sins by bathing with kuia grass and would get all the things 
by bathing with the five things got from a cow. 

6. One would get everything (by bathing) with iatamfda . 
One would destroy the sins (by bathing) with the waters 
(touched by) the horns of a cow. One would get everything 
by bathing with paldSa , bilva, lotus and kuia (grass). 

7-8. Bathing with vac&> two varieties of haridrd and musta 
(is spoken as) excellent for killing the demons. One would gain 
long life, fame, righteousness and intellect by ablution with 
washings of gold. It would be auspicious (to bathe) with the 

1. The three cities of the demons T&rak&k? a, Kamal&k?a and Vidyun- 
m&lin. 

2. The fire that destroys the universe at the end. 

3. The five sweet things — milk, sugar, ghee, curd and honey. 



267.9-18 


721 


washings of silver and copper. One would gain victory and 
fortune respectively by bathing with the washings of gems 
and all perfumes. 

9. One would gain health and excellent fortune respec- 
tively (by bathing) with water containing fruits and water with 
dhatrL One would get wealth and fortune respectively (by 
bathing) with sesamum and white mustard .and priyaitgu . 

10. (One would gain) wealth (by bathing with water 
containing) lotus, blue lotus and kadamba. (One would gain) 
strength (by bathing) with the water containing (the twigs of) 
the bald tree. Bathing with the water that has washed the feet 
of (Lord) Visnu is the best among all kinds of ablutions. 

11 -13a. (At the time of bathing) one should repeat the 
hymn ekakdmdya 1 alone duly. A band made of (the herbs) 
kuffha , pdfhd, vacd , sunfhi , conch and iron etc. should be tied 
round the wrist with (the repetition of) the hymn akrandayati . 1 2 
Lord Hari (Visnu) is the master of all desires. One would 
enjoy all the pleasures by worshipping Him. 

1 3b- 14. By bathing (the image of Lord Visnu) with ghee 
and milk and worshipping Him, one would get rid of biliousness. 
By offering an oblation of five kinds of pulses one would get 
free from dysentry. By bathing (the image) with the five things 
got from a cow, one would get rid of rheumatism. 

15-16. Bathing with dvisneha (ghee and water) with intense 
devotion would remove derangement of phlegm. Ghee, oil and 
honey (is said to be) the trirasa (three fluids mixed together) 
that is excellent for bathing. Ghee and water mixed for bathing 
(is said to be) dvisneha , Ghee and oil (mixed for bathing is said 
to be) samala . Bath water with honey, the juice of sugar-cane 
and milk is known to be trimadhura (three sweet things ) . 

17-18. Bath water with ghee, juice of sugar-cane, oil and 
honey (is known to be) trirasa (three fluids) (good) for wealth. 
An unguent of the three white (things) — camphor, uttra( a frag- 
rant thing) and sandal (should be used for bath). Sandal, 
agallochum, camphor, musk and saffron are the five unguents 
for (Lord) Visnu that yield all the pleasures. 

1. Could not be traced. 

2. Cf. RV. 6.47.30a. 



722 


Agni Pur&na 


1 9. The three fragrant things are camphor, sandal and 
saffron. Musk, camphor and sandal (used as an unguent) yield 
all the pleasures. 

20-22. Nutmeg, camphor and sandal (are said to be) the 
three cooling things. O son of Bhrgu! The five colours are in- 
dicated as yellow, blue, white, black and red. Blue lotus, lotus 
and jdti (flowers) (are spoken to be) the three cool things (that 
are commended) for the worship of (Lord) Visnu. Saffron, red 
lotuses and red lilies are the three red things. Men would get 
peace by worshipping (Lord) Vi?nu well by (showing) incense, 
lamp, etc. 

23. One would duly get all peace by worshipping the 
planets with the gdyatri 1 (hymn) after offering a lakh or crore 
oblations of sesamum, clarified butter, barley and other grains 
in a square sacrificial pit (done) by eight or sixteen brahmins. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-EIGHT 

Mode of worshipping Indra , doing nirajana 
( relating to King's expedition) and other rites 

Pufkara said : 

1-2. I shall describe the rites to be performed by the kings 
in the course of a year. On (the day of) the birth-asterism He 
(Lord VisQu) should be worshipped. The Sun, Moon and 
other gods should be worshipped every month at the time of 
sun’s entry into one of the signs of the zodiac. Agastya should 
be worshipped at the time of the rise of Agastya (Canopus). 
(Lord) Hari (Vi$nu) should be worshipped for four months. 
Festivities should be had for fifteen days in connection with the 
lying down to sleep and waking up from sleep (of Lord Vispu) 1 2 . 

1. RV. 3.62.10. 

2. These are respectively the periods corresponding to June-July and 
September-October. 



268.3-16 


723 


3-5. A mansion should be made ready (by the king) on the 
east of his army camp in the bright fortnight of the month 
(ruled by the asterism) Protfhapada (i.e. Bhadrapada— 
September-October) for (worshipping) Jndra from the first 
lunar day. The banner of Indra should be raised therein. (Lord) 
Indra and (his consort) Sac! should be worshipped (therein). 
Those two and the fiag-stafif should be led to the proper place 
accompanied by the sounding of musical instruments on the 
eighth day. He should fast on the eleventh day, raise the flag 
staff (on the twelfth day) and worship the flagstaff, as well as 
the Lord of celestials (Indra) andSaci in a pitcher covered by a 
cloth etc. (repeating the following words) : 

6-12. “O Indra ! You flourish ! Conqueror of the enemies ! 
Killer of (the demon) Vrtra ! Punisher of the demon Paka ! 
Lord of lords ! Most fortunate one ! You have come to the 
earth. You are the master, the eternal one and one who is bent 
on the welfare of all the beings. You are a person who has end- 
less lustre and splendour. You are the one who increases fame 
and victory. May these gods increase your lustre. O Sakra 
(Indra) ! One who causes good rain! May (the Lords) Brahma, 
Vi$nu, Maheia (Siva), Kartikeya (son of Siva), Vinayaka (son 
of Siva), (the twelve) Suns, (the eight) Vasus, (the eleven) 
Rudras, the Sadhyas, the Bhrgus, the (different) quarters, 
group of Maruts, the protectors of the world, planets, the 
Yaksas (a kind of semi-divine beings) , the rivers, the oceans, 
(goddesses) Sri (the consort of Vi?Qu), Earth, Gauri (consort 
of Siva) , Candika (a form of the consort of Siva) and Sarasvad 
(goddess of speech; consort of Brahm&) increase your radiance. 
Hail O Indra ! Consort of SacI ! May auspicious things accrue 
to me daily by your victory. Always extend thy grace to the 
kings, brahmins and people. May the earth abound in grains 
by your grace. May there be prosperity without any obstacle. 
May calamities come to an end.” 

13- 16a. After having worshipped Iitdra with (the 
above) sacred formulas, one will conquer the earth and reach 
the heaven. (The picture of) Bhadrakall (a benevolent form of 
the consort of Siva) should be drawn on a cloth on the eighth 
day of the bright fortnight in the (month of) Aivina (October- 
November) for victory. In the same way, the weapon, bow. 



724 


Agni Purina 


banner, umbrella, the insignia of the king such as the arms 
(should be worshipped) with flowers. After remaining awake in 
the night, the offering should be made. (She) is again wor- 
shipped on the second day. O Bhadrakall ! Mahakali ! Durga ! 
Remover of all difficulties ! Conqueror of the three worlds ! 
Cancjl ! Be successful in (conferring) peace on me ! 

16b-20. I shall describe the mode of performing the 
nir&jand 1 (rite) . A chamber should be got ready in the north- 
eastern direction. Three arches should be erected therein and 
the gods should be worshipped daily. The worship should be 
done from the moment Sun leaves (the asterism) Citra and 
enters (the asterism) Svati and stays therein. (The gods) 
Brahma, Visnu, Sambhu (Siva), Sakra (Indra), Fire-god, 
Wind-god, Vinayaka and Kumara( the two sons of Siva) , Varuna, 
Dhanada (god of wealth), Yama (god of death), ViSvedevas 
(a group of gods) and the eight elephants of VaiSravasa (son 
of Viirav&s) such as Kumuda, Airavana, Padma, Puspadanta, 
Vamana, Supratika, Afijana and Nila, should be worshipped in 
the chamber. 

21-23. The priest should offer as oblation clarified butter, 
twigs, white mustard and sesamum. After worshipping eight 
pitchers, the excellent horses and elephants should be bathed 
with them. The horses should be bathed (first) and the balls 
of rice offered. Then the elephants should.be led out first 
through the arches but should not be made t6 cross the prin- 
cipal gateways etc. Then all should set out. The insignia of the 
king should be worshipped in the chamber. After having 
worshipped (Lord) Varuna on the west, the offering to the 
spirits should be made in the night. 

24-26. When the Sun has entered (the asterism) Visakha, 
the king should stay in the hermitage. The chariot should be 
specially decorated on that day. The royal insignia that has 
been worshipped should be placed in the hands of the respec- 
tive men. O Knower of righteousness ! An astrologer should 
then consecrate the elephant, horse, umbrella, sword, bow, war 


1 . - Lustration of arms, a kind of military and religious ceremony, per- 
formed by kings or generals before they set out. 



268.27— 269.9a 


725 


drum, flag staff and flag (of the king). After consecration they 
should be made to be carried on the elephant. 

27-30. The astrologer and priest should then ride the ele- 
phant. (The king) should ride the consecrated horses and set 
out through the arch. After setting out he should ride the ele- 
phant and go out through the arch. After having offered the 
oblation, the king riding the elephant and remaining calm 
should circumambulate (the city) thrice as the collection of 
fire-brands illuminate the different quarters of space, the four- 
fold army keep company and the entire army shout (victory) . 
After doing this, (the king) having offered water with the 
palms should go back to the palace. This is the appeasing rite 
(called) nirajand that would make (a king) prosper and kill the 
enemy. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-NINE 

The sacred formulas for the consecration of 
the umbrella and other royal insignia 

Puskara said : 

1-3. • I shall describe the sacred formulas for (the consecra- 
tion of) the umbrella and other things, the worship of which 
(would confer) victory and other things. “O One with great 
intellect ! One having the splendour of jasmine ! One havirlg 
the lustre of snow, jasmine and moon ! You be glorious by the 
true words of Brahma, Soma, and Varuna and the power of the 
Sun. May you shield the king for the achievement of success 
and promotion of health in the same way as the cloud covers 
the earth for its welfare. 

4-9a. O Horse ! You were born in the race of the 
Gandharvas (a kind of semi-divine beings) . May you not be- 
come a defiler of the race. You be glorious by the true words 
of Brahma, Soma and Varuna and the power of Fire (god) as 
well as the splendour of the Sun, the penance of the sages, the 



726 


Agni Purdqa 


continence of Rudra (Siva) and the strength of the Wind 
(god). You remember that you are of royal birth. You 
remember the kaustubha gem. May you not incur the sin 
that would accrue to the killer of a brahmin, or to a patricide 
or to a matricide or to a person who utters a lie for the 
sake of (gaining) a land or to a man of the warrior-class 
who turns his back (upon the battle), although you may 
swiftly move that way. O Horse ! May you not meet with 
adversity in the battle or on the road. May you be happy to- 
gether with your master after killing the enemies in the battle. 

9 b-13. O Banner of Indra ! Suparna of great valour has 
taken his position on you. The lord of birds. Son of Vinata, 
One (seated) on the banner of Narayana (Vi$riu), A progeny 
of (sage) Kafyapa, One that carried away the nectar, The 
Enemy of the serpents, the Vehicle of (Lord) Visnu, Immeasur- 
able one. Unassailable in the battle, Destroyer of the enemies 
of the celestials, One having great strength, One having swift 
speed. One possessing a huge body, One who drinks the nectar, 
The winged one, One who has the swiftness of Maruti (son of 
Wind, Hanumat) is always present in you. You have been 
fixed by (Lord) Visnu, the lord of lords, for the sake of Indra. 
May you always give me victory, prosperity and strength. (You) 
protect the warriors together with their horses, armours and 
weapons. You burn our enemies. 

14-23. Kumuda, Airavana, Padma, Pujpadanta, Vamana, 
Supratlka, Afijana and Nila 1 are the eight (elephants) of 
divine origin. Their sons and grandsons constitute eight forces. 
You remember Bhadra, Manda, Mrga and Sankirna that have 
been born in the different forests and have become great ele- 
phants. May the (eight) Vasus, (eleven) Rudras, (twelve) 
Adityas, the group of Maruts protect you. O King of ele- 
phants t Protect the master ! May the obligation be discharged ! 
(Lord) Indra, the lord of the celestials, riding the Air&vata 
(the elephant of Indra) and wielding the (weapon) thunder- 
bolt following you, protect you. May you gain victory in the 
battle and march always in good state. May you get the 
strength of Airivata (elephant of Indra) in the battle. May 


L Supposed to guard the quarters. 



269.24-33 


727 


you get wealth from Soma, strength from Vi?nu, splendour from 
Sun, speed from wind, firmness from mountain, yictory from 
Rudra and fame from Lord Purandara (Indr a). May the ele- 
phants protect you in the battle. May the quarters in the 
company of Aivins (the two physicians of the gods) and 
Gandharvas (semi-divine beings) protect you in all the direc- 
tions. May the Manus (the first representative of man-kind) , 
Rudras, Vayu, Soma, the great sages, Nagas (serpents), 
Kinnaras (semi-divine beings), Gandharvas (semi-divine be- 
ings) , Yaksas (semi-divine beings) , the hosts of spirits, planets, 
goblins with Adityas, the Lord of the goblins with the (divine) 
mothers, Indra, Skanda (son of Siva) the commander-in-chief 
(of the celestials) and Varuna resting in you burn all the 
enemies. May the king gain victory. 

24-28a. May the festoons used by the enemy for deco- 
ration everywhere, fall down being struck by your splendour. 
In the same way as you have shone at the time of killing (the 
demon) Kalanemi, 1 2 the destruction of Tripura 8 , the battle with 
Hiranyakasipu 3 and the killing of all the demons, may you 
shine now. You remember the opportune moment. May the 
enemies of the king be destroyed quickly. (May the enemies) 
be conquered by different kinds of terrible diseases and wea- 
pons. May (the names) Putana, Revati, Lekha and Kalaratrl 
that we have read (as terrible forces) burn all the enemies 
quickly with your help. 

28b-33. (O sword !) You have been created by the god of 
gods, the trident-bearer, (Lord) Sarva (Siva) out of the essence 
of the world at the great sacrifice in which everything was 
offered. The destroyer of the enemies ! Remember the 
foremost form ofNandaka (the sword of Lord Kr?na). One 
having a dark complexion like the petals of blue lotus 1 Dark 
one ! Destroyer of bad dreams ! (Lord) Brahma has declared 
the following as your eight names : asih, viSasanah, khadgah, 
tik;nadharah, durasadah, $rigarbhah, vijayah and dharma- 
palafi. Krttika is your asterism. Lord Mahe£vara (Siva) is 


1. A demon killed by Vi^u. 

2. The three cides destroyed by Siva. 

3. A demon killed by Vino*. 



728 Agni Purdna 

your preceptor. Gold is your body. Janardana ( Visnu) is your 
lord. 

34. O Armour! You cause (the enemy fojces) to feel 
ashamed in the battle. I will have fame in the army today. O 
Sinless one ! Protect me, worthy of being protected by you ! 
Obeisance to you. 

35-38. O War drum ! You cause the hearts of enemies to 
tremble by your sound. You act in such a way that you may 
achieve victory for the king’s army. Just as the excellent elephants 
get delighted on (hearing) the sound of the (colliding) clouds, 
in the same way (let us) rejoice on (hearing) your sound. You 
bring us joy. Just as the rumbling clouds cause fright in women, 
so also let our enemies get frightened by your sound in the 
battle. (These) should always be worshipped with sacred 
formulas. They should be employed for victory etc. Every year 
(Lord) Vi§nu should be anointed with ghee and water. The 
king should be given the ablution by an astrologer and priest. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY 
A hymn to Vifnu that destroys Evil 

Pufkara said : 

1. O Foremost among brahmins ! This (hymn) Vi§nu- 
pafijara was prescribed by Brahma for the protection of Siva, 
who was desirous of destroying Tripura in olden days. 

2. It was told by Vagina (Brhaspati, the preceptor of the 
celestials) to Indra, who was making efforts to kill (the demon) 
Bala. I shall describe its form. You listen to that which will 
give you victory. 

3-4. (Lord) Vi§nu is stationed in the east bearing the disc. 
(Lord) Hari (is stationed) in the south bearing the mace. 
(Lord) Vi?nu (remains) in the west bearing the bow. (Lord) 
Vi§nu (is stationed) to my north bearing the sword. (Lord) 
Hr?ike£a is in the angular points and (Lord) Janardana in the 
inter-spaces. (Lord) Hari (is stationed) on the earth in the 



270.5-15 


729 


form of a tortoise and (Lord) Narasiihha (man-lion form of 
Visriu) in the sky (above) me. 

5. This sharp-edged and stainless Sudarsana disc (of 
Visnu) revolves. His garland of rays is imperceivable. “May 
you kill the evil spirits and those who wander in the night.' 1 

6. This mace has the lustre of the flames given out by the 
Sun. It is capable of destroying the demons, goblins, spirits and 
female spirits. 

7. May the bow of Vasudeva (Visnu), that is striking 
suddenly, kill all my enemies, such as birds, men, kupnd^a and 
the spirits of the dead. 

8. Those who have been shaken by the shining lustre of 
the stroke of the sword, let those assembed (enemies) be subdued 
at once, like serpents by Garuda (vehicle of Vi$nu). 

9-12. May the ku$mati4as y yak§as> demons, the night wan- 
derers, spirits of the dead, Vinayakas, cruel men, jambhagas 
(jackals ?) , birds, lions and other animals, serpents and others 
become good being struck by the sound of the conch of Vi$nu. 
Those that take away my thinking faculty, those men who affect 
my memory, those who affect my strength and splendour, those 
who cast their shadow, those who affect my pleasures, those who 
destroy my traits, may those kufmayqlas get destroyed by the 
sound of the disc of (Lord) Visnu. 

13. May my intellect, mind and sense-organs be healthy by 
the singing of (the glory of) lord of lords, Vasudeva. 

14. May (Lord) Janardana, Hari, be behind me, in my 
front, on the south and north and at the angular points. One 
that makes obeisance to (the Lord) Janardana, one worthy of 
worship, I sana, endless and undecaying will not have grief. 

15. Just as (Lord) Hari is the Supreme Brahman, that 
Ke£ava is above the form of the universe. May my three kinds 
of inauspiciousness get destroyed by the truth of singing the 
name Acyuta (undecaying). 



730 


Agtii Purdna 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-ONE 
The different recensions of the Vedas 


Pufkara said : 

1. The number of hymns of the ftg ( veda ), Tajur { veda ), 
Sdma {veda) and Atharva {veda) that yield all (the desires) and 
confer the four ends of the human life 1 is one lakh. 

2. {The ftgveda) is divided into two branches, Sankhyayana 
and Aivalayana. The brdhmanas (of this Veda) (contain) two 
thousand one hundred and ten hymns. 

3. The j Rgveda is considered as the authority by the Dvai- 
payanas and others. The hymns of the Tajurveda number one 
thousand nine hundred and ninetynine. 

4-5. Their branches are one thousand eightysix. The 
branches of the Tajur {veda) are (known as) Kanvl, Madhyan- 
dini, Kathi, Madhyakafhi, Mai tray am, Taittiriya and Vaisam- 
payana. 

6-8a. The first (branch) of the Sdmaveda is known as 
Kauthuma and the second as Atharvanayani. The songs of this 
Veda consist of dranyaka , uktha and uha . The extent of the 
( Sdmaveda) is said to be a collection of nine thousand four 
hundred and twentyfive. 

8b-9a. Sumantu, Jajali, Slokayani, Saunaka, Pippa- 
lada, Mufijakeia and others (are those who represent the 
branches) of Atharva {veda). 

9b-10. The Lord (Vi snu) in the form of (sage) Vyasa 
divided the ten thousand and six hundred hymns and one 
hundred Upanifads into different recensions. (Lord) Visnu also 
made the divisions of the Epics and Purdnas. 

11-12. The bard Lomaharsana got it from Vyasa. Sumati, 
Agnivarcas, Mitrayu, SimSapayana ( Samsapayana ?) , Krtavrata 
and Savarni were his disciples. Sarhsapayana and others were 
the makers of the collection of Puranic texts. 

13. The Brahma {purdna) and other Purdnas are eighteen. 
(They are known to be) learning relating to (Lord) Hari 


1. Righteousness, material prosperity, pleasures and beatitude. 



271.14-22 


731 


(Visnu) . (Lord) Hari remains in the form of learning in the 
great Purttya (called) Agni. 

14. One would get enjoyment and emancipation by wor- 
shipping and praising Him, who is immanent, transcendent 
and bears the gross and subtle forms. 

15. (That) all-pervasive, triumphant (lord) wishing for 
prosperity is of the forms of Fire, Sun etc. (Lord) Vi$iju, that 
is the mouth of the gods in the form of the Fire (god) , is the 
supreme state. 

1 6. The embodiment of sacrifices is praised in the Vedas 
and Purdnas . The Agneya- pur aim is the greatest of the forms of 
Visjiu. 

1 7-22. The composer and listener of the Agneya-purdna is 
(Lord) Janardana (Vi$nu) . Hence the Agneya-pur&na is great as 
that made up of all the Vedas . It is of the form of all learning, 
meritorious, of the form of all knowledge and excellent. It is of 
the form of all the beings and of (Lord) Hari (Visnu) . (It is 
meritorious) for the men who read and listen to (its narration) . 
It gives knowledge to those who seek knowledge. It yields 
material prosperity to those who seek material prosperity. It 
confers kingdom on those who desire to have kingdom. It yields 
righteousness to those who seek righteousness. It confers heaven 
on those who seek heaven. It blesses those who seek progeny 
with progeny. It gives cows to those who seek cows. Those 
who seek a village would be blessed with a village. Those who 
desire pleasures would be getting pleasures. It gives all good 
fortune. It gives good qualities and fame to men. Those who 
seek victory would get victory. It gives all things to those who 
seek everything. Those who desire emancipation would be 
blessed with emancipation. The Agnipmana destroys the sins of 
sinners. 



732 


Agni Purdna 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-TWO 
The meritoriousness of making gifts of the different Purdnas 
Pufkara said : 

1-2. (The Purdna) that was narrated by Brahma to Marici 
in olden days in fifty thousand verses (is said to be) Brahma - 
purdna . One who desires to attain heaven should write and give 
it as a gift on the full moon day in (the month of) Vatidkha (May- 
June) together with water and a cow. The Padma purdna that 
contains twelve thousand verses should be given (on a similar 
day) in (the month of) (June-July) together with a cow. 

3-4a. (Sage) Parasara narrated the Vaisnavapurdna based on 
the accounts of the Vardhakalpa 1 in twenty thousand verses. One 
who makes a gift (of the same) together with water and a cow 
in (the month of) Afdtfha (July-August) would reach the place 
of (Lord) Visnu. 

4b-5. The Vdyaviya {purdna) (that contains) fourteen thou- 
sand (verses) (is) dear to (Lord) Hari (Vi$nu). The Wind 
god has narrated the righteous way in this ( Purdna ) with refer- 
ence to (the incidents of) the Svetakalpa . It has to be copied 
and given as a gift to a brahmin together with the molasses and 
a cow (on the full moon day) in (the month of) Srdvana (August- 
September) . 

6-7. It is said to be the Bhdgavata ( purdna ) in which the 
virtues have been explained with reference to the gay atri 1 2 (mantra) 
and also the killing of the demon Vftra during the &drasvatar 
kalpa has been described. It should be given as a gift in (the 
month of) Prosfhapadi ( September-October) together with a 
golden lion. It contains eighteen thousand (verses). 

8-9a. It is said to be the Ndradiya (purdna) consisting of 
twenty five thousand (verses) in which (the sage) Narada des- 
cribed the virtues based on the Bfhatkalpa . One can have the 
supreme attainment by making a gift (of the same) (on a full 
moon day) in (the month of) Aivina (October-November) to- 
gether with a cow. 

1. There are thirty-two kalpa periods each equal to 432 million years 
of mortals. 

2. RV. 3.62.10. 



272.9b-19a 


733 


9b- 10a. The M&rkantfeya (pur&na) (contains) nine thousand 
(verses) in which there is a discussion of righteousness and un- 
righteousness relating to the enemies. It should be given as a 
gift (on the full moon day) in (the month of) Kdrttika (Novem- 
ber-December). 

lOb-lL That (Pur&na) is Agneya that was spoken by the 
Fire-god to (sage) Vasi^tha. (It contains) twelve thousand 
(verses) and imparts all knowledge. It should be copied and 
offered as a gift in (the month of) MargaUr$a (December- 
January) . It yields everything. 

12. The Bhavisya ( Pur&na ) (contains) fourteen thousand 
(verses). It had its origin from the Sun. (Lord) Bhava (Siva) 
narrated it to Manu. It should be offered as a gift in (the 
month of) Pausya (January-February) together with molasses 
etc. 

1 3-1 4a. The Brahmavaivarta (pur&na) was narrated by Savarni 
(Manu) to (sage) Narada (dealing) with the history of 
Rathantara and the boar (manifestation of Visnu) in eigh- 
teen thousand (verses). One who gives it in (the month of) 
M&gha (February-March) as a gift would reach the world of 
Brahma. 

14b- 15. The Liitga ( Pur&na ) is that in which the great Lord 
(Siva) residing in the fiery lihga in the Agneyakalpa described 
the virtues in eleven thousand (verses). One who makes a gift 
of the same in (the month of) Phalguna (March-April) 
together with sesamum and cow would have the vision of (or 
attain to) Siva. 

16- 17a. The Varaha (purana) was narrated by (Lord) Vi§nu 
in fourteen thousand (verses) . The account of the boar (form 
of Vi$nu) was propagated by (Lord) Vi$nu on the earth ( assuming 
the form) of a man. (One who makes a gift of it) together 
with a golden (image of) eagle in (the month of) Caitra (April- 
May) would reach the place of (Lord) Vi$nu. 

17b- 18a. The great Skanda (purana) was narrated by (Lord) 
Skanda in eighty-four thousand (verses) on the virtues in the 
Tatpurupa kalpa . One should make a gift (of the same). 

18b- 19a. The V&mana (pur&ryi) narrates the story of (Lord) 
Hari ( Vi$nu) relating to Dhaumdkalpa in ten thousand (verses) 



734 Agni Pur Ana 

dealing with the virtues and material prosperity should be given 
(as a gift) during autumnal equinox. 

19b-20a. The Kurma (purana) was narrated by the tortoise 
(form of Lord Visnu) in eight thousand verses in Connection 
with (the story of) Indradyumna in the nether world. It should 
be given (as a gift) together with a golden (image of) tortoise. 

20b-21a. The Matsya (puraqa) was narrated by (Lord Visnu 
in the form of a) fish to Manu at the beginning of the kalpa 
(period). It should be given (as a gift) at the time of the 
equinox together with a golden (image of) fish. 

21b-22a. The Garuia ( purana ) was narrated by (Lord) 
Visnu in the Tarksakalpa describing the birth of Garu<Ja (the 
vehicle bird of Lord Visnu) from the universal egg. It should 
be given (as a gift) together with a golden (image of) hamsa 
(swan). 

22b-23a. The Brahmantjia (purana) is that in which (Lord) 
Brahma described the greatness of the universe in twelve 
thousand (verses). It should be given (as a gift) to a brahmin. 

23b-26. The reciter of the ( Mahd ) bhdrata should be hono- 
ured with clothes, perfumes, garlands and other things after 
the completion of each parvan (each one of the eighteen divisions) 
and brahmins should be fed with sweet gruel. After (the 
recitation of) each parvan is complete cows, land, village, gold 
and other things should be given (as gift) . After ( the recital of 
the text) of Bhdrata is complete, a brahmin and the Samhita texts 
should be worshipped. Then the book should be wrapped in 
silken cloth and kept at a sacred place. (Lords) Nara and 
Narayana 1 and the books should be worshipped with flowers and 
other things. The recitation should be completed by making 
gifts of cows, food, land and gold and feeding (the brahmins). 

27-29. Great gifts should be made and different kinds of 
gems should be given. Two or three m&§akas (a particular weight 
of gold) should be given every month. It is laid down that gift 
(should be given) to the reciter at the commencement of the 
solstice. O Brahmin ! The reciter should be worshipped by all 

1 . Originally regarded as identical but in mythology and epics consi- 
dered as distinct beings, Arjuna being identified with Nara and K^s^a with 
N&r&yapa. 



273.1-10a 


735 


the listeners. One who makes a gift of the Epics and Puranas (in 
the above manner) after worship would get long and healthy 
life and would attain emancipation and heaven. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-THREE 
The description of the solar race 

Fire-god said : 

1-4. I shall describe to you the genealogies of the solar 
and lunar races and of other kings. (Lord) Brahma was born 
from the (navel) lotus of (Lord) Hari (Visnu). (Sage) Marici 
was the son of (Lord) Brahma. (Sage) Kasyapa was born from 
Marici and Sun from Kasyapa. He (Sun) had three wives — Samjna, 
Rajhi and Prabha. Rajhi was the daughter of Raivata. She 
gave birth to a son (called) Revanta. Prabha (gave birth) to 
Prabhata through the Sun. Samjna, the daughter of Tvasjr 
(ViSvakarman) (gave birth) to a son (called) Manu. The 
twins Yamuna and Yama were born (to Rajhi). Chaya gave 
birth to Savarni, Sani, Tapati and Vi?ti. Sarhjha gave birth to 
Vaivasvata Manu and again the Asvins 1 . 

5-6. Vaivasvata Manu had eight sons best of all but not 
equal to him — Iksvaku, Nabhaga, Dhrs$a, Saryati, Nari§yanta, 
Pram^u, Karusa and Pfsadhra. They were of great prowess 
and lived in Ayodhya. 

7. Ila was the daughter (of Manu). Pururavas (was born) 
to her through Budha. That Ila (again) became Sudyumna (a 
male) after delivering Pururavas. 

8- 10a. The three kings Utkala, Gaya and VinataSva 
were from Sudyumna. The country of Utkala was given to 
Utkala, the western part (of the earth) to Vinatasva and all 
the quarters to the foremost king Gaya (with his capital at) 
Gayapuri. Sudyumna obtained Pratisfhana by the words of 

1 . For an account relating to and Ch£y& See Ling. P. 65. 

3-14. 



736 Agni Purina 

Vasi?fha. After getting the kingdom, Sudyumna gave it away 
to Pururavas. 

1 Ob-11. Sakas (were) the sons of Narifyanta. Ambariga, 
a devotee of (Lord) Vi?nu (was the son) of Nab'kaga and a 
protector of the people. The race of Dhargfaka (was) from 
Dhrgta. Sukanya and Anarta (were the sons) of Saryati. King 
Vairohya (was the son) of Anarta. 

12-16. Kusasthali became the domain of Anarta. The 
virtuous Raivata, known as Kakudmin was the eldest among 
the hundred sons of Reva. He got the kingdom of Kuiasthali. 
He heard the science of music from Brahma in the company of 
his daughter. In moment of the god passed ages of the world of 
mortals. He returned to his city hurriedly surrounded by the 
Yadavas. He made the beautiful Dvaravatl (Dvaraka) having 
many doors (as his capital) guarded by the Bhojas, Vr?nis and 
Andhakas led by Vasudeva and others. He gave away (his 
daughter) Revati of spotless beauty in marriage to Baladeva. 
Then He performed penance on the peak of the Sumeru moun- 
tain and reached the abode of (Lord) Visnu. 

17. Nabhaga had two sons, that were Vaiiyas, who became 
brahmins (later on) . Karugas (were born) from Karu?a, who 
were of the warrior caste that were invincible. 

1 8. . Prgadhra became a Sudra on account of killing the cow of 
his preceptor. Vikukgi, the divine ruler, was born from Ikgvaku, 
the son of Manu. 

1 9-20. Kakutstha was bom from Vikukgi and Suyodhana 
was his son. Prthu was his son. Vifvaga jva was the son of Prthu. 
His son was Ayus. YuvanaSva was his son. Sravanta was bom 
from Yuvanaiva. The city of Sravantika in the east (was his 
capital). 

21 . Brhadasva was born from Sravanta. Kuval&iva was the 
next king. He got the name Dhundhum&ra (as he killed a 
demon) named Dhundhu 1 in olden days. 

22. The three kings Dr^haiva, Dapd a and Kapila (were 
the sons) of Dhundhumara. Haryafva and Pramodaka (were 
bom) from Drdh&fva. 


1. See Vi. P. IV. 2 40. 



273.23-33 


737 


23. Nikumbha (was born) from Haryalva and Samhatasva 
from Nikumbha. Akr$a£va and Ran&Sva were the two sons of 
Samhataiva. 

24. Yuvanaiva (was the son) of Rani jva. Mandh&tr (was 
born) from YuvanaSva. Purukutsawas (born) from Mandhatr. 
Mucukunda (was his) second (son). 

25. Trasadasyu and Sambhuta 1 (were born) from Purukutsa 
through Narmada. Sudhanva was (bom) from Sambhuta. Then 
Tridhanva (was bom) from Sudhanva. 

26. Taruna (was born) from Tridhanva and Satyavrata 
(was) his son. Satyaratha (was bom) from Satyavrata. 
Hariscandra (was) his son. 

27-29. Rohitagva (was bom) from Hariscandra. Vrka was 
(born) from RohitaS va 2 . Bahu (was born) from Vyka and Sagara 
from Bahu. His dear (wife) Prabha was the mother of sixty 
thousand sons. (His other wife) Bhanumati 3 (gave birth) to 
Asamafijasa from that king by the grace of the pleased (sage) 
Aurva. The sons of Sagara were burnt by Vi?nu (Lord Vi$nu 
in the form of sage Kapila) as they were digging up the earth. 
Amsuman (was bom) from Asamafijasa. Dillpa was (born) from 
Amsuman. 

30. Bhagiratha (was born) from Dilipa. He brought down 
the Ganges (from the heaven). Nabhaga (was born) from 
Bhagiratha and Ambari$a from Nabhaga. 

3 1 . Sindhudvipa (was bom) from Ambarisa. Srutayu is 
known to be his son. Rtuparna was (born) from Srutayu. 
Kalma§apada (was) his son. 

32. Sarvakarma (was born) from Kalma§apada. Anaranya 
was (bom) from him. Nighna (was born) from Anaranya, 
Anamitra (from Anaranya) and Raghu (from Anamitra). 

33. Dilipa was (bom) from Raghu. Aja (was) the (next) 
king (born) from Dilipa. Dirghabahu (was born) from Aja and 
K&la and Ajapala were (born in order). 


1. Differs from Vi. P. IV. 3. 17 Anaranya was bom from Trasa- 
dasyu. 

2. The list here omits certain names. See Vi. P. IV. 3. 25. 

3. The names of the wives of Sagara differ from Vi. P. IV. 4. 1. 



738 


Agni Purana 


34-35. Then Dasaratha was born. He had four sons who 
were all partial manifestations of (Lord) Narayaiia (Vi§nu). 
Rama was the eldest among his (sons). That foremost of the 
Raghus was the ruler at Ayodhya and the Killer of (the demon) 
Ravana. (Sage) Valmiki composed his life accounts after hear- 
ing that from (sage) Narada. 

36. Kusa and Lava, the furtherers of the family, (were) 
the sons of Rama through Sita. Atithi was born from KuSa. 
Nisadha (was) his son. 

37. Nala was born from Nisadha. Nabha was born from 
Nala. Pundarikawas (born) from Nabha. Then Sudhanva was 
born. 

38. Devanika (was born) from Sudhanva and Ahinasva 
was his son. Sahasra£va (was bora) from Ahinasva and Candra- 
loka was born then. 

39. Tarapida (was born ) from Candraloka. Candraparvata 
(was born) from him. Bhanuratha (was born) from Candragiri 
( parvata) . Srutayu was his son. These are known to be the 
descendants of the Iksvaku family that bore (the name of) the 
Solar race. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-FOUR 

i 

Description of the Lunar race 


Fire-god said : 

1 . I shall describe the Lunar race. It would destroy the 
sin of one who reads it. Brahma was born from the navel-lotus 
of (Lord) Visnu. (Sage) Atri was the son of Brahma. (Soma 
was born) from Atri. 

2-5. Soma performed the Rajasuya (sacrifice) and gave 
away (the suzerainty over) the three worlds as the fees (for 
the priest) . When the final (bathing) was finished, the wives 
of the mortals who desired to look at his (beautiful) form 
served him being tormented by the arrows of the god of love. 
(Goddess) Lak§mi deserted (lord) Naraya$a. Sinivali, Dyuti, 



274 * 6-19 


739 


Pusfi, Prabha, Kuhu, Klrti, Vasu and Dhrti respectively 
deserted Kardama, Vibhavasu, the undecaying Dhata, Prabha- 
kara, Havisman, (the husband) Jayanta, Marlca Kafyapa and 
(husband) Nandi and entertained Soma alone then. 

6-7. Soma also bestowed his affection on them as if they 
were his wives. The husbands of these (women) were not able 
to curse him or (punish him) with the weapons, although he 
had done a misdeed, as he had obtained suzerainty over the 
seven worlds by means of his penance. 

8-10. Being influenced by their submission his mind 
faltered. Soma seduced hastily the glorious Tara, the wife of 
Brhaspati (the preceptor of the celestials) and thus insulted the 
son of Angiras (Brhaspati). On account of this (incident) there 
was the battle well-known as Tarakamaya (involving the 
celestials) between the celestials and the demons causing great 
destruction to the world. Brahma (intervened and) prevailed 
upon Usanas (preceptor of the demons) (to shed his wrath) 
and entrusted Tara to (the care of) Angiras (Brhaspati). 

11. Guru (Brhaspati) finding her pregnant said to her 
“Shed the child in the womb”. The child that was delivered 
was effulgent and said “I am the son of Moon”. 

12-13. Thus Budha was born from Soma. Pururavas was 
his son. The nymph UrvasI deserted heaven and was enamou- 
red of him. O Great sage ! The king spent fiftynine years with 
her. 

14. There was only one fire in days of yore which was 
made into three by him. 1 Pururavas practised yoga and reached 
the world of the Gandharvas. 

15. UrvaS (wife of Pururavas) gave birth to the kings 
Ayus, Drdhayus, Asvavus, Ghanayus, phrtiman, Vasu, Divijata 
and Satayus 2 . 

16-19. Nahusa, Vrddhagarman, Raji, Darbha and Vipapma 
were the sons of Ayus. Raji had a hundred sons known as 
Rajeyas. Raji having obtained a boon from (Lord) Visnu killed 


1. For a detailed account see Vi. P. IV. 6. 77-94. 

2. Sons are said to be only six in the Purdpas and MBh . — Ayu, Dhlmftn, 
Am&vasu, Dpjh&yu, and Satftyu. See MBh. Adi. 75.24-25. 



740 


Agni Purdna 


the demons on the request of the celestials. He gave the status 
of a son to Indra and bestowed his kingdom on him and ascen- 
ded the heavens (to fight with the demons). But tlje kingdom 
of Indra was usurped by the wicked sons of Raji. Brhaspati 
deluded the sons of Raji and restored that (kingdom) to Indra 
by means of performing the appeasing (rites) of the planets. 
Then they (the sons of Raji) became the followers of their own 
dharma . 

20. Nahusa had seven sons — Yati, Yayati, Uttama,Udbhava, 
Paficaka, Saryati and Meghapalaka. 

21-23. Yati, even as a boy, contemplated on (Lord) Visnu 
and attained Him. Then DevayanI, the daughter to Sukra ( the 
preceptor of the demons) , became the wife of Yayati. Then 
&armi$tha, the daughter of Vrsaparva (became the wife) of 
Yayati and had five sons. DevayanI gave birth to Yadu and 
Turvasu. Sarmisfha, the daughter of Vrsaparva (gave birth) to 
Druhya, Anu and Puru. Yadu andPuru, among them, (became) 
the founders of dynasties. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-FIVE 
Description of the dynasty of Tadu 

Fire-god said : 

1. Yadu had five sons — Nilafijika, Raghu, Krostu, Satajit 
and Sahasrajit and Sahasrajit was the eldest among them. 

2. Satajit had three (sons) — Haihaya, Renuhaya and 
Haya. Dharmanetra (was the son) of Haihaya. Samhana (was 
the son) of Dharmanetra. 

3. Mahima was (the son) of Samhana. Bhadrasenaka 
(was bom) from Mahima. Durgama was. (bom) from Bhadra- 
sena. Kanaka was (bom) from Durgama. 

4. Krtavlrya, Krtagni, Karavlraka and Krtaujas were the 
four (sons) of Kanaka. Arjuna (K&rtaviry&rjuna) (was born) 
from Krtavlrya. 



275.5-19 


741 


5-9. Suzerainty over the seven continents of the earth, 
(possession of) thousand arms and invincibility by the enemy 
in the battle and certain death at the hands of (Lord) Vi?pu in 
case of leading an unrighteous life were conferred on (Karta- 
virya) Arjuna who was doing penance. That king Arjuna per- 
formed ten thousand sacrifices. By the remembrance of him* 
(his name) there was no loss of property in the kingdom. The 
kings would not certainly attain the position of Kartavirya by 
(doing) sacrifices, (giving) gifts, (performing) penances, by 
valour and by learning. Among the hundred sons of Kartavirya 
(the following) five (were) foremost — Surasena, Sura, Dhr?to- 
kta, Kfsna and Jayadhvaja. (Jayadhvaja) was a great king 
among the Avantayas. 

10-11. Talajangha (was born) from Jayadhvaja. The sons 
ofTalajangha formed the five branches of the Haihayas— 
Bhojas, Avantas, Vitihotras, Svayaiftjatas and Saundikeyas. 
Ananta was (born) from Vitihotra. Durjaya (was) king from 
Ananta. 

12. I shall describes the race of Krostu in which (Lord) 
Hari Himself was born. Vrjinlvan (was bom) from Krosfu. 
Svaha was (born) from Vrjiniv&n. 

13. Rugadgu (was) the son of Svaha and Citcaratha (was) 
his son. Saiabindu (was born) from Citraratha. He was a 
great monarch and a staunch devotee of (Lord) Hari. 

14-15’. Among the ten thousand intelligent, handsome, 
wealthy and radiant sons of &a£abindu, PfthuSrava was the 
foremost. Suyajflaka was his son. Ujanas (was) the son of 
Suyajiia. Titiksu (was) the son of UJanas. 

16-18. Marutta was (bom) from Titiksu. Kambalabarhisa 
(was born) from him. ( Rukmakavaca was bom from him) . 
Fifty (sons) were (bom) from Rukmakavaca (among whom) 
Rukme$u, Pfthurukmaka, Havis, Jy&magha and P&paghna 
(were) most prominent. Jy&magha was a hen-pecked husband. 
Vidarbha was (bom) from Jyamagha through Sevya. Kauiika, 
Lomap&da and Kratha (were) his sons. From- the excellent 
Lomapada, Krti (was bom) and Cidi (was) the son of Kauiika. 
His successor kings were hence known as Gaidyas. 

19. Kunti (was bom) from Kratha, the son of Vidarbha. 



742 


Agni Purdna 


Dhnstaka (was the son) ofKunti. Nidhrti (was the son) of 
Dhr§ta. His (son was) known as Udarka. Viduratha (was his 
son). 

20. Vyoma (was) the son of Dasarha (Viduratfia). It is 
said that Jimuta was (horn) from Vyoma. Vikala was the son 
of Jimuta. Bhimaratba (was) his son. 

21. Navaratha (was born) from Bhimaratha. Drdharatha 
was (born) then. Sakunti (was born) from Drdharatha. Karam- 
bhaka (was) from Sakunti. 

22. Devarata was from Karambha. Devaksetra was his 
son. (A son) by name Madhu (was) from Devaksetra. Dra- 
varasa was from Madhu. 

23. Puruhuta was from Dravarasa. Jantu was his son. 
Satvata, the Yadava king of good quality, (was) the son of 
Jantu. 

24. Bhajamana, Vj-sni, Andhaka and Dcvavrdha were the 
four (sons) of Satvata. Their races were renowned. 

25-26. Bahya, Vrsti, Krmi and Nimi were (the sons) of 
Bhajamana. Babhru was from Devavrdha. The following verse 
is sung about him: “We hear his virtues sung close by (in the 
same way) as we had heard from a distant place. Babhru is the 
foremost among men and (considered) by the celestials as 
equal to Devavrdha.’* 

27. Babhru (had) four sons. (Those were) kings and 
devotees of (Lord) Vasudeva (Hari). (They were Kuhura, 
Bhajamana, Sini and Kambalabarhi?. 

28. Dhr?nu (was the son) of Kuhura. Dhrti (was) the son 
of Dhrsnu. Kapotaroma was from Dhrti. Tittiri (was) his son. 

29. Nara (was) the son of Tittiri. Candanadundubhi (was) 
his (son). Punarvasu (was) his son. Ahuka (was) the son of 
Ahuki (wife of Punarvasu) . 

30-33. Devaka was born from Ahuka and Ugrasena was 
born then. Devavan and Upadeva are known to be the sons of 
Devaka. They had seven sisters. (Devaka) gave them in 
marriage to Vasudeva. They were Devaki, Srutadevi, MitradevI, 
YaSodhara, Sridevi, SatyadevI and Surapi. Ugrasena had nine 
sons among whom Kamsa was the eldest, (the others being) 
Nyagrodha, Sun&man, Kanku, $anku (the protector of earth), 
Sutanu, R&tfrapala, Yuddhamu§ji and Sumu^ika. 



275.34-46 


743 


34. Viduratha, the chief among the charioteers (was) the 
son of Bhajamana. The powerful king Sura was the son of 
Vidfiratha. 

35. Sonagva and Svetavahana (were) the two sons of that 
mighty monarch. Sami, Satrujit and others were the five sons of 
Sonasva. 

36-37. Pratik$etra (was) the son of Sami and Bhojaka 
(was the son) of Pratiksetra. Hrdika (was) the son of Bhoja. 
Hrdika had ten sons — Krtavarma, Satadhanva, Devarha, 
Bhl$ana and others. Katnbalabarhis (was born) from Devarha. 
Asamaujas was (then born from Kambalabarhis). 

38-39. Sudamstra, Suvasa and Dhr?ta were (born) from 
Asamaujas. Gandharl and Madri were the wives of Dhr§ta. 
Sumitra was born to Gandhari. Madri gave birth to Yudhajit. 
Anamitra and Sini (were the descendants) from Dhr$ta. 
Devamidhu§a (was born) then. 

40-43. Nighna (was) the son of Anamitra. Prasenak a and 
Satrajit (were the sons) of Nighna. When Prasenawas wearing 
the syamantaka jewel got from Sun god by Satrajit and wander- 
ing in the forest, a lion killed him and carried away the 
gem. The lion was killed by Jambavan (the king of bears) and 
Jambavan was conquered by (Lord) Hari (Visnu). He got the 
jewel and Jamba vatl (the daughter of Jambavan) and went to 
the city of Dvaraka (on the western coast of India in Gujarat). 
(He) gave (the gem) to Satrajit. Satadhanu killed him 
(Satrajit). The famous Krsna killed Satadhanu, recovered the 
gem and entrusted the gem to Akrura in the presence of Bala 
(deva) and the Yadava chiefs. 

44. Kr§na thus got rid of the false accusation on him that 
he had killed Satrajit. One who reads (this account) would go 
to the heaven. Satyabhama (the daughter of Satrajit) became 
the wife of Kr?na. 

45. Sini was born Irom Anamitra. Satyaka (was) the son 
of Sini. Satyaki was born from Satyaka. Dhuni was (born) 
from Yuyudhana (Satyaki). 

46. Yugandhara (was) the son of Dhuni. Svahya was 
(born from him). He was invincible in battle. Rsabha and 
K?etraka (were) his (sons). Svaphalkaka (was born) from 
Rsabha. 



744 


Agni Purdfta 


47. Akrura (was) the son of Svaphalka. Sudhaiivaka (was 
bom) from Akrura. Vasudeva and others (were bom) from 
Sura. Prtha (KuntI) was the wife of Pandu. 

48. Yudhifthira was born to KuntI (wife) of Pandu, from 
Dharma (god of virtue), Vrkodara (Bhimasena) from Vaya 
(Wind god), Dhanafijaya (Arjuna) from Indra and Nakula and 
Sahadeva to Madri (the other wife of Pandu) . 

49-51. (Bala) rama, Sarana and Durdama (were born) to 
RohinI from Vasudeva. Susenaka was born first . to Vasudeva 
through Devaki. (The other sons were) Kirtiman, Bhadrasena, 
Jarukhya, Vi$nudasaka and Bhadradeha. Kaihsa killed these 
six childem. Then Bala (rama) , Kr?na, Subhadra, that speaks 
sweet and Carudesna (were born) . Samba and others were the 
sons of Jambavati from Kr?na. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTYSIX 
The manifestations of Lord Vifnu 

Fire-god said : 

1-2. (The patriarch) Kaiyapa manifested as Vasudeva 
and Aditi (his wife) as the excellent Devaki. Kr?na was bom 
to Devaki and Vasudeva being endowed with penance for the 
sake of the protection of righteousness, removal of unrighteous- 
ness, protection of the celestials and others and the destruction 
of the demons and others. 

3-5a. Rukmini, Satyabhama, Satya, Nagnajiti, Gan- 
dhari, Lak^mapa, Mitravinda, Kalindi, Jambavati, Su^ila, 
Madri, Kauialya, Vijaya, Jay& and others were the sixteen 
thousand wives (of Kr$na) among whom Satyabhama served 
(Lord) Hari (Kr?na). 

5b-6. Pradyumna and others were bom to Kr?na 
through RukmiQi, Bhima and others through Satyabhama, 
Samba and others through J&mbavati and thus were among 
the one hundred thousand sons of that wise man. 



276.7-17 


745 


7-9. Yadavas were eighty thousand that were protected by 
(Lord) Krsna. Pradyumna (son of Kr$na) had Aniruddha, who 
was fond of war, as his son through Vaidarbhi. The mighty 
Yadavas Vajra and others (were the sons) of Aniruddha. Thus 
there were three crores and sixty lakhs of Yadavas. He (Kr?pa) 
appeared for the destruction of the demons that afflicted men. 
(Lord) Hari (Visnu) is born as a mortal in order to regularise 
the duties (of men). 

10. There were twelve battles between the celestials and 
the demons for the sake of their (legitimate) portions. The first 
(war of Visnu was in) the man-lion form. The second war (was) 
as a dwarf. 

11. The battle (fought) as the boar (was) the next one. 
The fourth one was for the churning of the nectar. The sixth 
one was the battle involving all the celestial bodies for the sake 
of resuscitation. 

12. (The seventh one was the destruction of) the three 
cities. (The eighth one was for) the destruction of (the demon) 
Andhaka. The ninth one (was) the killing of (the demon) Vrtra. 
The deadly (poison of) halahala was conquered (in the tenth 
one). (The demom) Kolahala (was subdued in the next one). 

13. (The next one was) the form as the man-lion, the 
protector of the celestials in olden days, that pierced the chest 
of (the demon) Hiranyakasipu with his nails and made 
Prahlada the king. 

14. In (the dispute between) the celestials and the demons, 
(the Lord) was bom of Kaiyapa and Aditi as a dwarf, deceived 
the powerful (demon) Bali and restored the kingdom to Indra. 

15. The manifestation as a boar (was made by Lord Visnu) 
and the demon Hiranyaksa was killed, protecting the celestials 
thus. He lifted up the earth that got submerged and was 
praised by the celestials. 

16. (The mount) 'Mandara was made the churning rod, 
(the serpent) Vasuki as the string and (the ocean) was churned 
by the celestials and the demons. The ambrosia (that was 
obtained) was given to the celestials. 

17. The celestials were in the same way protected at the 
time of the battle of the stars after preventing Indra, Guru, the 



746 Agni Purina 

celestials and demons (from a combat) and thus the Lunar 
race was made to flourish. 

18. (The sages) ViSvamitra, Vasistha, Atri and Brahma 
protected the celestials in the battle after warding off the 
demons that were having infatuation and hatred. 

19. Lord Hari (Vi?nu) was the refuge of (Lord) I Sana (Siva) 
that had (Lord) Brahma as the charioteer of the earth, the 
chariot. The protector of the celestials and the destroyer of the 
demons burnt the three cities. 

20. (Lord) Rudra (Siva) was attacked by (the demon) 
Andhaka desirous of carrying away Gauri (consort of Siva). 
(Lord) Hari, who was fond of (his beloved) Revati killed the 
demon Andha. 

21 . (Lord) Visnu became the foam of the water at the 
time of the battle between the celestials and the demons and 
killed (the demon) Vrtra that afflicted the celestials, and pro- 
tected the virtues of the celestials. 

22. (Lord) Hari, (manifested as) Parasurama, conquered 
the demons such as Salva and protected the celestials after 
killing the wicked ksatriyas (kings). 

23. Madhusudana (the destroyer of demon Madhu) took 
away the demon of Halahala poison from Mahesvara and des- 
troyed the fear of the celestials. 

24. The demon Kolahala was conquered by Him at the 
battle of the celestials and demons. All the celestials were 
protected by (Lord) Visnu by protecting righteousness. 

25. The kings, princes, sages and the gods are the mani- 
festations of (Lord) Hari, whether (their names) have been 
narrated or not (in the traditional list) . 



277.1-11 


747 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-SEVEN 
Th* narration of the lineage of Ahga 

Fire-god said : 

1. Varga (was) the son of Turvasu. Goblianu was his son* 
Traisani was (born) from Gobhanu. Karandhama (was the 
son) ofTaraisani. 

2. Marutta was (born) from Karandhama. Dusyanta (was) 
his son. Varutha was (the son) of Dusyanta. Gandlra (was born) 
from Varutha. 

3. Gandhara (was born) from Gandlra. The mighty five 
peoples — Gandharas, Keralas, Colas, Pandyas and Kolas (were 
born) then. 

4. Druhyu and Babhrusetu 1 (were the sons of Gandhara). 
Purovasu(was born) from Babhrusetu. Then Gandhara (was born) 
and Dharma from Gandhara. Ghrta was (born) from Dharma. 

5. Vidusa (was born) from Ghrta. Pracetas (was born) 
from him. He had a hundred sons (among whom) Anadra, 
Sabhanara, Caksusa and Parame$uka (were foremost). 

6. Kalanala (was born) from Sabhanara. Srfijaya, was 

born from Kalanala. Puranjaya (was the son) of Srfijaya. 
Janamejaya was his son. 1 

7-8. Mahasala (was) his son. Mahamanas was his son. 
O Brahman ! Uslnara (was) from him. He had then a son 
Nrga through (his queen) Nrga, (a son) Nara through (his 
queen) Nara and (a son) Krmi (through) Krmi. Suvrata was 
born (to him) through Dfsadvati. 

9. Prthudarbha, Viraka, Kaikcya and Bhadraka were the 
four sons of Sibi. There were prosperous regions in their names. 

10. Titiksu was born from Uslnara. Ru§adratha (was born) 
from Titiksu. Paila was (born) from Rusadratha. Sutapa (was) 
the son of Paila. 

11. The great ascetic Bali (was born)' from him. Anga, 
Vanga, Mukhyaka, Pundra and Kalinga (were the sons) of 
Bali, Bali, the ascetic, (generated them) by means of his power. 


1 . Given as two separate names and subsequent names also differ. See 
Vi. P . IV. 17. 



748 


Agni Parana 


12. Dadhivahana was (born) from Ariga. Diviratha (was 
the next) king after him. Dharmaratha (was born) from Divi- 
ratha. Citraratha (was) his son. 

13. Satyaratha (was born) from Citraratha. Lomapada 
(was) his son. Caturariga (was born) from Lomapada. Prthu- 
laksa (was) his son. 

14. Campa was (born) from Prthulaksa. Haryarigaka was 
from Campa. Bhadraratha was from Haryariga. Brhatkarman 
(was) his son. 

15. Bfhadbhanu was born from him. Brhatmavat (was) 
from Bfhadbhanu. Jayadratha was from him. Brhadratha (was 
born) from Jayadratha. 

16. ViSvajit (was born) from Brhadratha. Karna was from 
Visvajit. Vrsascna (was the son) of Karna. Prthusena was his 
son. These are the kings born in the race of Ariga. Describe 
me the race of Puru. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-EIGHT 
The description of the lineage of Puru 

Fire-god side : 

1. Janamejaya was (born) from Puru. Pracinavan was his 
son. Manasyu was from Pracinavan. Vitamaya (was) the 
(next) king from him. 

2. Sundhu was from Vitamaya. Bahuvidha was the son of 
Sundhu. Samyati (was) from Bahuvidha. Rahovadi 1 (was) his 
son. 

3-4. Bhadrasva (was) his son. Bhadrasva had ten sons — 
Rkseyu, Krscyu, Sannateyu, Ghrteyu, Citeyu, the noble 
Sthandilcyu, Dharmeyu, Sannateyu (?) , Krteyu and Matinara. 

5. Tamsurodha, Pratiratha and Purasta were the sons of 
Matinara. Kanva was (born) from Pratiratha. Medhatithi was 
from Kanva. 


1. Names differ from VI. P. IV. 19. 



278.6-20 


749 


6-8. Dusyanta, Pravira, Sumanta and Vira (were) the 
four (sons) from Tamsurodha. Bharata was (born) from 
Dusyanta through Sakuntala. The descendants known as 
Bharatas were mighty. When the sons of Bharata were lost on 
account of the wrath of the mother, then the Maruts (gods) 
brought Bharadvaja, son of Brhaspati and made (him) to meet 
(Bharata) . Vitatha was born as a consequence of rituals (done 
by Bharadvaja). 

9-11. That Vitatha also generated five sons — Suhotra, 
Suhotf, Gaya, Garbha and the great Suketu. Kapila had two 
sons — Kausika and Grtsapati. The brahmins, warriors, trades- 
men were the sons of Grtsapati. The Dirghatamas were the sons 
ofKasi (Kausika?). Dhanvantari was (born) then. Ketuman 
was his son. 

12. Hemaratha (was born) from Ketuman. He was well- 
known as Divodasa. Pratardana (was) from Divodasa. Bharga 
and Vatsa (were born) from Pratardana. 

13. Anarka was from Vatsa. K?emaka was born from 
Anarka. Var§aketu (was) from K$emaka. Vibhu is remembered 
( to be) from Var§aketu. 

14. Anarta was the son of Vibhu. Sukumaraka (was the 
son) of Vibhu. Satyaketu (was born) from Sukumara. Vatsa- 
bhumi (was born) from Vatsaka. 

15. Bfhat (was) the son of Suhotra. Ajamidha, Dvimidha 
and the brave Purumldha were the three sons of Brhat. 

16. The valorous Jahnu was born to Ajamidha and Kesini. 
Ajaka£va was born from Jahnu. Balakasva (was) his son. 

17. Ku£ika (was the son) of Balakasva, and Gadhi, the 
Indra, (was born) from Ku£ika. Satyavati (was) the daughter 
of Gadhi and Visvamitra his excellent son. 

18-20. Devarata and Katimukha were the sons of Viiva- 
mitra. SunahSepa (known also as) A${aka (was) the other 
(son). Santi was born as son to Ajamidha through Nilini. 
Purujati (was born) from (Su) Santi. BahyaSva (was bom) 
from Purujati. The five kings Mukula, Sffijaya, Bfhadi^u, 
Yavinara and Krmila (were) from BahyaSva. They were known 
as the Paftcklas. 



750 


Agni Pur&na 


21-23. (The descendants) of Mukula, (known as) the 
Maukulyas were brahmins endowed with property. Cafica$va 
was born from Mukula. Caficasva had the twins — Divodasa and 
Ahalya. Satananda (was born) from Saradvata through 
Ahalya. Satyadhrk (was born) from Satananda. Then a pair, 
Krpa and KrpI, (were born from Satyadhrk). Maitreya (was 
born) from Divodasa and then Somapa (from Maitreya). 
Paflcadhanus (was born) from Srrijaya. Somadatta was his son. 

24. Sahadeva (was born) from Somadatta. Somaka (was 
born) from Sahadeva. Jantu was from Somaka. Pr$ata (was) 
the son of Jantu. 

25. Drupada (was) from Pj-sata. Dhr$tadyumna (was) 
from him. Dhrstaketu was his son. Rk$a was born to Ajamidha 
through Dhumini. 

26. Samvarana was born from Rk$a. Kuru (was) then 
(born) from Samvarana. He migrated from (the city of) 
Prayaga and founded (the kingdom of ) Kuruk?etra. 

27. Sudhanva, Sudhanu, Parik$it and Arimejaya (were the 
sons) of Kuru. Suhotra was from Sudhanva. Cyavana was born 
from Suhotra. 

28-29. Seven other sons such as Brhadratha, Ku£a, Vira, 
Yadu, Pratyagraha, Bala and Matsyakali, were born through 
(his queen) Girika by propitiating (the sage) Vasisfha. 
Ku^agra was from King Brhadratha. Vrsabha was born from 
Ku£agra and Satyahita was his son. 

30. (His son was) Sudhanva, Drja was his son. Sambhava 
was (born) from Crja. Jarasandha (was) from Sambhava. 
Sahadeva was his son. 

31. Udapi (was born) from Sahadeva. Srutakarmaka 
(was born) from Udapi. The righteous Janamejaya was the 
descendant of Pariksit. 

32. Trasadasyu (was born) from Janamejaya. Suratha, 
Srutasena, Ugrasena and Bhimasena (are) the names of the 
sons of Jahnu. 

33. Janamejaya had two sons Suratha and Mahiman. 
Viduratha was born from Suratha. Rk$a was born from 
Viduratha. 



278.34—279.2 


751 


34. Bhimasena was the son of Rk^a 1 the second. Pratipa 
(was) from Bhimasena. Santanu (was the son) of Pratipa. 

35. Devapi, Balhika and Somadatta (were born) from 
Santanu. Somadatta, Bhuri, Bhurisravas and Sala were born 
from Balhika. 

36-38. Santanu had Bhi§ma through Ganga and Vicitra- 
viryaka through Kali (Satyavati). Kfsna Dvaipayana begot 
Dhrtara$tra> Pandu, and Vidura through the wife of Vicitra- 
virya. Yudhis^hira, Bhimasena and Arjuna were the three sons 
of Pandu through Kunti and Nakula and Sahadeva through 
Madri by divine agency. Saubhadra (Abhimanyu born to 
Subhadra) (was the son) of Arjuna. Parik§it (was born) from 
Abhimanyu. 

39-40. Draupadl was the wife of the Pandavas. Through 
her Prativindhya was born to Yudhisthira, (Srutasena) from 
Bhimasena, Srutakirti from Dhanafijaya (Arjuna), Srutavarma 
from Sahadeva and Satanika was the (son) of Nakula. 
Ghatotkaca was another (son) of Bhimasena through Hidimba. 

41 . These are the past and future kings. There is no count 
of their numbers. O Brahmin ! They have gone along with 
the passage of time. Lord Hari (Vi?nu) is really the time. 
Hence one should worship Him. Hence one should offer obla- 
tion to fire intended for Him that would yield all the desires. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-NINE 
The description of the potent remedies 

Fire-god said : 

1 . I shall describe the science of medicine, that was pro- 
pounded by lord Dhanvantari to SuSruta, the essence that 
would revive the dead. 

Suiruta said : 

2. Describe to me the science of medicine that would cure 
1 . See verse 25 for Rk?a, the first. 



752 


Agni Purdna 

the diseases of men, horses and elephants and also the potent 
combinations and potent charms that would revive the dead. 

Dhanvantari said : 

3-7. One that is having fever should be made to fast by 
the physician protecting his strength and then feed him with 
gruel made of fried paddy, and dry ginger. The patient having 
thirst at the end of the fever (should be given) water boiled 
with rnusta (cyprerus rotundus), parpafa (oldenlandia), uiira 
(the fragrant root of a plant), sandal, udicya (a kind of per- 
fume) and dry ginger. After six days, (the patient) may be 
made to drink pungent food certainly. After the disorder has 
subsided, (medicated) oil should be rubbed (on the body). 
Then purgative should be given. Old nivdra (rice grown 
without cultivation), sasfika (a kind of rice), red paddy 
and pramodaka (a kind of rice) and similar things and barley 
converted into any form are the favourite (food) at (the time 
of)fev,er. Green gram, masura (a kind of pulse), chick-pea, 
horse-gram, saussurea, adhaka (a kind of pulse), ndraka (?), 
karkofaka (a kind of paddy), kafolbaka (?), snake-gourd, neem 
together with the fruits, parpa fa and pomegranates (could safely 
be used by a patient) having fever. 

8. An emetic is commended in the case of downward 
hemorrhage and a purgative in upward (hemorrhage). The 
six constituents 1 except the dry ginger (should be given) as the 
drink. 

9-10. Flour of barley, wheat, fried paddy, barley, Sdli (a 
kind of rice), masura , makuffha (a kind of lyice), chick-pea, 
green-gram and eatables (made) of wheat mixed with ghee and 
milk are beneficial. Honey and the juice of vna (a kind of 
drug) are good. Eating old Sdli rice is beneficial in dysentry. 

11. The food .that does not cause excessive (motion), and 
that mixed with the barks of lodhra (a kind of tree) are 
commended. One should avoid taking food that causes excess 
of wind. One should always make (extra) efforts in (treating) 
the enlargement of spleen. 

12. (Those suffering from dropsy) should take fried barley 
with milk. Vdstdka (chenopodium album) mixed with ghee, 

1 . These are musta, par pa {aka etc. noticed in verse 4 above. 



279.13-24 


753 


wheat, S&li rice and bitter things are beneficial for those having 
dropsy. 

13- 14a. Wheat, S&li rice, green gram, cow’s urine, rksa, 
khadira , abhayd , pahcakola (the five spices — long pepper etc.), 
venison, neem, dh&tri (a variety of myrobalan) , snake-gourd, 
the juice of citron, nutmeg, dried radish and saindhava (a kind 
of rock-salt) (are good for dropsy) . 

14b- 16. Water (boiled) with khadira is commended as a 
drink for those affected with leprosy. (Similarly) mas ura (a 
kind of pulse) and green-gram (with water should be given) 
for drinking. Old S&li rice may be eaten. The juice of venison 
(mixed) with neem and parpafaka and vegetables, vitfanga 
(embelia ribes) , black pepper, musta , kusfha, lodhra 9 natron (are 
also good) . Paste of red arsenic and vacd (a kind of aromatic 
root) with (cow’s) urine cures leprosy. 

17- 19a. Cakes, kufpha , kulmasa (black barley) and barley 
etc. are beneficial for diabetes. Things made out of 
cooked barley, green gram, horse-gram, old S&li rice, vegetables 
that are bitter and astringent, bitter green things, oils (extract- 
ed) from sesamum, Sigru (the leaves of a kind of tree) , vibhitaka 
(a kind of myrobalan) and ifigudi and greengram, barley, wheat 
and grains stored for a year (are also good). 

1 Ob-21 . The juice of venison is commended as food for 
those suffering from pulmonary consumption. Horse-gram, 
green-gram, black pepper etc. and dry radish compounded with 
venison or cakes or bird’s flesh or compounded with curd and 
pomegranade juice, dressed with the juice of citron, honey, 
grapes and vyosa (dried ginger, long and black pepper) and 
cooked barley, wheat and S&li rice should be given as food to 
an asthma patient. 

22. Decoction made of the ten kinds of drugs (such as 
brhati etc.), bala, r&sn& and horse-gram should be drunk with 
cakes in order to get relief from breathing (difficulty) and 
hiccough. 

23. One should take dry radish, horse-gram, mUla (the 
root of long pepper) and juice of venison mixed with cooked 
barley, wheat and S&li rice and old uSira. 

24. One who is having a swelling should eat molasses 



754 


Agrii Purdna 


together with pathyd (the long pepper) or molasses with dry 
ginger. Both buttermilk and citraka (a kind of root) are excellent 
remedies for diarrhoea. 

25-26. Old barley, wheat, sdli rice, juice of venison, green- 
gram, dmalaka (one variety of myrobalan), dates, grapes, jujube 
fruits, honey, clarified butter, milk, sakra> neem, parpataka , ma, 
buttermilk and arista are always commended for rheumatic 
patients. 

27-28a. Purgatives should be given to those having heart 
disease. Long pepper is beneficial for those having hiccough. 
Buttermilk, gruel made from the fermentation of boiled rice, 
spirit distilled from molasses together with cold water (are 
also beneficial). Muklas> natron and wine are commended in any 
distemper due to drunkeness. 

28b-30a. A person who has been injured (on the chest) 
should drink lac together with honey and milk. Wasting 
diseases could be cured by eating the essence of meat and by 
protecting the digestive power. One should eat red Sdli > nivdra 
and kalarna varieties of rice, cooked barley, meat, vegetables, 
natrum and Safi. 

30b-31. In the same way pathyd (is beneficial) for piles. Its 
scum (should be used) with buttermilk and water. Musta should 
be repeatedly used. Ointment with turmeric and citraka should 
be applied. Modified forms of boiled barley, Sdli rice, vastuka 
(clienopodium album) and natrum (are also beneficial). 

32. Water-melon, cucumber, and wheat mixed with milk, 
(juice of) sugarcane and ghee are commendable for painful 
discharge of urine. Scum and wine etc. (are commended) for 
drinking. 

33-34. Fried paddy, flours of fried barley, honey, flesh 
roasted on a stick, brinjal and gourd are drinks for remedying 
vomitting. Cooked Sdli rice, water and milk simply heated or 
boiled (would be beneficial for the same). Pills of musta and 
molasses held in the mouth would remove thirst. 

35-37a. Modified forms of cooked barley, cakes made of 
dried radish, vegetables, snake-gourd and tender shoots of 
cane would remedy the stiffness of thigh. One should take food 
consisting of old wheat, barley, Sdli rice together with soup 
made of green-gram dihaka and masdra (different kinds of 



279.37b.48 


755 


pulses) , sesamum, juice of venison, saindhava (a kind of rock- 
salt), ghee, grapes, dried ginger, dmalaka (a kind ofmyrobalan) 
and black pepper. 

37b-38. One who is having a dry spreading itch (should 
use) juice of pomegranate together with candied sugar, honey 
and grapes. Red paddy, wheat, barley, green-gram and other 
such light (eatables are also beneficial). Kdkamdri, shoots of 
cane, vdstrlka and natrum\(may also be used). 

39. Water, candied sugar and honey are commended for 
remedying acute gout. Dutva (a kind of grass) soaked in ghee is 
beneficial in nasal diseases. 

40. Oil made up of the juice of bhrngaraja (a kind of shrub) 
or the juice of dhatri (a variety of myrobalan) (may be used) 
as sternutatory in all diseases relating to the head. 

41-42. O Brahmin ! The eating of sesamum and drinking 
cold water and eating cold food are said to strengthen teeth 
and also give supreme satisfaction. Gargling with sesamum oil 
would also strengthen teeth. The powdered viiahga (mixed 
with) goat’s urine is used in destroying all worms. 

43. The fruits of dh&tri (a variety ofmyrobalan) and clari- 
fied butter are excellent as an ointment for head for the dest-. 
ruction of all diseases relating to head. The food should consist 
of oily and hot things. 

44. Filling ear with oil or the urine of goat is excellent for 
the destruction of pain in ear. O Brahmin ! All kinds of oysters 
(may also be used). 

45-48. A wick made by compounding red chalk, sandal, 
lac and buds of mdlati (a kind of jasmine flower) would cure 
the whiteness in eye. Vyo$a (dried ginger), long pepper and black 
pepper) mixed with the triphald (the three myrobalans taken 
collectively), and water with blue vitriol would cure all eye 
diseases. The collyrium of blue vitriol will also produce the 
same result. (If collyrium) fried in ghee r ground on a stone 
together with lodhra , sour gruel and natrum is sprinkled, it 
would be beneficial in all the diseases of eyes. Application of 
ointment of red chalk and sandal is commended for the exter- 
nal eye. One should always use triphald (the three kinds of 
myrobalans) for curing the diseases of the eyes. 



756 


Agni Pur Ana 


49-51 a. One who desires to have a long life should take (a 
mixture of ) honey and clarified butter every night. Milk and 
ghee boiled with the juice of iatavari are known to be the 
givers of vitality. Similarly kalambikas y black-gram,# milk and 
ghee increase vitality. Triphald is known to be the giver of long 
life (when used) with madhuka as before. (The same) together 
with the juice of madhuka would arrest all senile degeneration. 

5 lb-52. O Brahmin ! Ghee heated with vac A would destroy 
the defects due to goblins. Food offered to manes would give 
intellect and secure all objects. A decoction made of the paste 
of bald is beneficial when besmeared. 

53. Oil together with rasna and sahacaya (is good) for 
deranged wind. Food that does not cause excessive phlegm is 
commended for abscess. 

54. Flours of fried barley made into balls as well as amid 
are commended (for making the abscess) to ripen. The pulve- 
rised neem (is used) to make ( the ripened abscess to) open and 
for healing. 

55. The treatment of women after delivery consists mainly 
of offering oblations to all the creatures. The use of amulet for 
women after the delivery as well as for animals is always 
beneficial. 

56-60a. Chewing the leaves of neem is the remedy for one 
bitten by a snake. The (shoots of ) palmyrah, ke{ya , old oil, old 
barley and old ghee (are also good for the same). A fumigation 
with the plumes of peocock with ghee (is good) for one bitten 
by a scorpion. A plaster of the seeds of palate ground with the 
juice of arka (plant) (is also beneficial). Black pepper or yellow 
myrobalan with the three kiqds of myrobalans (is beneficial) for 
one bitten by a scorpion. If the juice of arka (plant), gingelly 
oil, flesh and molasses in equal proportion is drunk, it would at 
once destroy the poison due to (the biting of) a dog that is 
difficult to cure. The root of rice (if ground) with equal part of 
trivrt (three kinds of myrobalans) and clarified butter and drunk, 
it would destroy quickly the poisons due to snakes, and other 
insects even if they are very powerful. 

60b-61. (A mixture of) sandal, padmaka , kusfha , latdmbu (?), 
UHra , pdfald, nirguntfi, idrivd and selu (?) would destroy the poison 
due to spiders. O Brahmin ! Molasses and dried ginger are 



279.62—280.5 


757 


commended as eliminator (of toxic matter) from head. 

62. Nothing excels oil or ghee for anointing, as a drink or 
as diuretic. Fire is the best sweating agent. Cold water is the 
best astringent. 

63. The trivjt (the three myrobalans) is the best purgative. 
So also madana is the best emetic. Oil, clarified butter, and 
honey are the best remedy for (deranged) wind, biles and 
phlegm, as diuretic, and emetic. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTY 
The remedies for all the diseases 

Dhanvantari said : 

la. Diseases are considered to be (of four kinds such as), 
relating to the body, relating to the mind, arising accidentally 
and arising naturally. 

1 b-2a. Fever, leprosy and the like (are considered) to be 
relating to the body. Anger etc. are considered to be relating 
to the mind. Those that are due to a blow etc. (are known) as 
accidental. Hunger, old age and the like (are known) as 
natural. 

2b-3. One should give ghee, molasses and salt along with 
gold to a bralunin on a Sunday in order to get rid of the 
diseases relating to the body and those that are accidental. 
One who makes a gift of oil for bathing to a brahmin on* a 
Monday would become free from all diseases. 

4. Oil should be given on Saturday. One who makes a gift 
of food with cow’s milk in the (month of ) Afvina (October- 
November), (would also get rid of the diseases). One who 
bathes the liftga (representative symbol 'of Lord Siva) with 
ghee and milk would become free from diseases. 

5. One should offer unto fire durvd (grass) dipped in the 
three sweet things (sugar, honey and clarified butter) with ( the 
recitation of) the gdjatri (mantra). One should bathe and make 
the offering in that asterism in which one got the disease. 



758 


Agni Purdna 


6. A hymn to (Lord) Viwu would remove the diseases that 

are mental. Listen to me. (I shall describe) the defects (of the 
humours) wind, bile and phlegm as well as the ingredients of 
the body (such as blood). » 

7. O Susruta ! The food that is eaten gets two forms after 
leaving the stomach. A part becomes secreted and the other, 
the constituent fluid of the body. 

8. The part that is secreted is the impurity such as feces, 
urine, sweat, rheum of the eyes, the mucus of the nose, the ear- 
wax and the bodily impurity. 

9-1 Oa. From the constituent fluid, serum (is formed) which 
again is turned into blood. Flesh (is formed) from blood and then 
fat and bones from fat. Sap (is formed) from bones and then 
semen. From semen, complexion and strength (are got) . 

10b- 11a. One should render treatment (to a patient) after 
examining (the nature of) the country, the disease, the strength, 
the stamina, the season and the nature (of the patient). Then 
the strength of the remedy (should also be examined). 

lib- 14. One should reject the rikta 1 days, Tuesdays and 
Saturdays and baneful (combination)(and begin treatment) after 
worshipping (Lord) Hari (Vi$riu), a cow, a brahmin, the Moon 
and the Sun and the celestials. O Learned one ! Listen to this 
sacred formula (that has to be recited) before commencing the 
treatment. “ May (the gods) Brahma, Daksa, ASvins, Rudra, 
Indra, the Earth, the Moon, the Sun, the Wind, the Fire, the 
sages, the collection of herbs and the hosts of spirits protect you. 
Let this medicine be like the elixir of life of the sages, the 
nectar of the gods and the ambrosia of the outstanding 
serpents.” 

15-16. A country abounding in trees and having plenty of 
water is known as an upa (marshy) and would produce (excess 
of), wind and phlegm. (A country) that is devoid of (the above 
features) (is known as) j&ngala (rural or picturesque). A country 
that has trees and water in moderate proportion is known as 
sddhdrana (ordinary). (The country known as) jdhgala ( pro- 
duces) excessive bile. The sddhdrana (type) is known as 
moderate. 

1. The fourth, ninth and fourteenth days of a lunar fortnight. 



280. 17-3 la 


759 


17. It is said that wind is dry, cool and unsteady, bile is 
hot like the three kinds of astringents and phlegm is steady, 
acid, unctuous and sweet. 

18. They get increased by things having the same (qualities) 
and get abated by things having the opposite (qualities). 
Things that have sweet, sour and saline taste generate phlegm 
and destroy wind. 

19. Those that are pungent, bitter and astringent produce 
wind and destroy phlegm. Similarly those that are pungent, 
sour and saline are known to increase bile. 

20. Those that are bitter, sweet and astringent destroy 
bile. This is not the effect of the taste but only of its chemical 
action. 

21. O Susruta ! Those that are stimulant and hot destroy 
phlegm and wind. Those that are cold destroy bile. They (the 
herbs) exert their influence according to their qualities. 

22. It is said that phlegm gets collected, deranged and 
subsided in winter, spring and summer respectively. 

23. O Suiruta ! wind is said to get collected, deranged and 
subsided in the nights of summer, rainy season and autumn 
(respectively). 

24. Bile is said to get collected, deranged and subsided in 
the rainy season, autumn and fore-winter (respectively) . 

25. The three (seasons) 1 beginning with the rainy (are 
said to be) visargas. The three (seasons) 2 beginning with winter 
and ending with summer (are) adana . 

26-3 la. The visarga relates to the moon and the dddna is 
stated to be relating to the fire. The moon going round the 
three seasons such as the rainy etc. by turns produces the three 
tastes — sour, saline and sweet in order. The sun going round 
the three seasons such as winter and the like increases the three 
tastes — bitter, astringent and pungent flavours in order. As the 
duration of night increases, the strength of men also increases. 
When they decrease, (the strength) also decreases. During the 
beginning, middle and end of nights, eating, days and one’s 

1. Rainy season, autumn and fore-winter. 

2. Winter, spring and summer. 



760 


Agni Purina 


age, phlegm, bile and wind get deranged. They are said to get 
collected before the beginning of their derangement and get 
appeased after their derangement. 

31b-34a. O Brahmin ! All the diseases are cafised by 
excessive eating or not eating or forcing or retaining the flow 
(of urine etc.). Two parts of the belly should be filled with 
food, one part with drink and one part should be left free for 
the wind etc. to work. A remedy is only that which is the 
opposite of the cause of a disease. This is what should be done. 
I have described to you the essence. 

34b-36a. (Though) it is said that phlegm, bile and wind 
have their places above and below the umbilical region and 
the regions of the anus and the buttocks (respectively) in the 
body, they are capable of coursing through the entire body. 
Especially wind (can do so). Heart is at the centre of body 
and it is known to be the place of mind. 

36b-39a. It is said that a man of windy temperament 
would be emaciated, have scanty hair, be fickle-minded, 
garrulous, have uneven wind, and feel - flying in the air in his 
dream. A man of bilious temperament is said to be having 
ultimely grey hair. He would be irritable and would perspire 
copiously. He would be fond of sweets and would see glowing 
things in dream. A phlegmatic man would have strong body 
and firm mind. He would be brilliant. He will have glossy 
hair on the head. He would see clear water in dream. 

39b-40a. O The foremost among the sages ! Men of windy, 
bilious and phlegmatic temperaments are known to be t&masa 
(inactive), rdjasu (passionate) and sdttvikc (virtuous) (respec- 
tively) . 

40b-43a. Raktapitta (haemoptysis) (is caused) by excessive 
coition and engaging in doing hard (physical) work. The wind 
in the body gets deranged on account of eating bad food or on 
account of grief. O Brahmin ! Bile gets deranged on account 
of internal heat, eating hot food, making a journey as well as 
due to fear. Phlegm gets deranged due to excessive drinking of 
water, eating heavy food and lying down after eating. A lazy 
man also gets his phlegm deranged. 

43b. After knowing the diseases caused by (humours) wind 



280.44—281.2 


761 


and the like from their characteristics, one should remedy them 
(as below). 

44. The characteristics of the disease due to the (derang- 
ed) wind are — pain in the bones, bitter taste in the mouth, 
parched state of feeling in the mouth, yawning and bristling 
of the pair. 

4”). A disease due to (deranged) bile is marked by yellow- 
ness in the nails, eyes and veins, bitter taste in the mouth, thirst 
and burning heat (in the body) . 

46. The characteristics of disease due to phlegm are 
languor, flow of water (from the mouth), heaviness (of the 
body), sweet taste in the mouth and longing for heat. 

47. (Eating of) oil and hot food, anointing the body with 
oil and bathing and drinking of oil and the like would appease 
(deranged) wind. Clarified butter, milk, sugar and the rays of 
the moon and the like would counter (deranged) bile. 

48. The oil of the three myrobalans together with honey 
and doing exercises etc. would remove (deranged) phlegm. 
Contemplation on (Lord) Visnu and His worship would 
appease all the diseases. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDERD AND EIGHTY-ONE 

The description of the characteristics of the different tastes and the 

qualities of the herbs 

Dhanvantari said : — 

1 . Listen to me ! I shall describe the tastes and the other 
characteristics and merits of the herbs. A physician who knows 
the properties of the herbs, such as taste, strength and flavour, 
will be able to save kings and other people. 

2. O One possessing powerful arms ! The tastes such as 
sweet, sour and saline are stated to come from the moon. The 
tastes — bitter, astringent and pungent — are (known to be) from 
fire. 



762 


Agni Purdna 


3. The herbs have three flavours — bitter, sour and saline. 
The strength (of the herbs) is said to be of two kinds— hot and 
cold. 

4-5a. O Foremost among the brahmins ! The effect of the 
herbs is indescribable. Those that are sweet, astringent and 
bitter are said to be having cold potency. The rest are stated 
to be hot. 

5b-6. Although gutjuci has the bitter taste, it is hot on 
account of its high potency. O One who shows respect ! Pathya , 
though an astringent, is (considered) hot. Although meat is 
sweet, it is said to be hot. 

7. The saline and sweet tastes would become sweet flavour. 
The sour things that are hot are also said to become so. The 
rest would have pungent flavour. 

8. One has to determine the drugs that have got modified 
in their potency and flavour from their efficacy. Honey, although 
sweet, is said to be pungent in flavour. 

9. (The herb) should be boiled with water, sixteen times 
its proportion, until it comes down to four times the proportion. 
This is the general rule for (preparing) a decoction wherever 
(something else) has not been stated. 

10-12. The decoction (thus prepared) (should be composed) 
of water alone. In a decoction prepared with oil, it should be 
four times that of the drug. A wise man should take equal 
quantity (of water) to that of the herb. Then the herb and oil 
should be added. Oil should be one-fourth the measure of the 
substance. The herb that is free from water would be (known as) 
extraction in oil. The process of preparing decoctions of the 
herbs in oil has been explained. O Susruta ! (The method of 
preparation) of the lambativc is also similar. 

13-1 5a. The decoction that is clear and having little 
medicinal ingredient would be as above described. (The dosage) 
for pulverised drugs is stated to be an aksa (a particular measure 
of weight equal to 16 mdfas) and four palas (a particular weight) 
for the decoction. This measure is said to be middling. There is 
no hard and fast rule about the dosage. O Fortunate one ! The 
measure of the dosage has to be decided according to the age, 
time, strength, digestive power, place, herb and disease. 



281.1 5b-30a 


763 


15b-16a. Those tastes are known to be saumy&b which 
increase the quality of the ingredients. Those that are madhurdft 
are specially known to increase the quality. 

16b- 17a. That substance which has the qualities in equal 
proportion to the defects wquld be for betterment. The opposite 
would subdue the effect. 

1 7b-20. O Foremost among men ! There are said to be 
three functions in this body, such as, eating, sleeping and 
coition. One has to pay attention to these always. One would 
get destroyed if there is no indulgence or is over-indulgence (in 
any one of these). An exhausted body has to be strengthened. 
Obesity of a person should be reduced. The middle type has to 
be protected. These are considered to be the three different types 
of bodies. Gratification and non-gratification are said to be the 
two courses of action. One should moderately eat (food) that is 
good (for health) after the food already taken had been 
digested. 

21 -24a. O Foremost among men ! The remedies are classi- 
fied into five groups— juice, levigated powder, the distilled, 
the cold and decoction. Juice is known to be that got by press- 
ing. Levigated powder is got by pulverising the drug after 
heating. The distilled is that got after boiling. The cold one is 
that allowed to cool the previous night. Decoction is that 
distilled immediately after boiling. There are one hundred and 
sixty ways of doing so. One who knows the ways would become 
inconquerable. That person is skilled in the preparation of 
mixtures. 

24b. The purity of food is for the sake of digestion. A good 
digestion is the root cause of the strength of men. 

25-30a. One should eat the three myrobalans together 
with the rock-salt, that would give good complexion to a king. 
(One would get similar benefit by using) the juice of venison 
together with rock-salt or curd or small quantities of milk. One 
whose constitution is windy should eat (a food) that has either 
more juice or the same proportion of juice. It is said that 
massaging (the body) (should be done) in summer. In winter 
it should be in equilibrium. It is known to be of middling type 
in the spring. The intense massaging in the summer is first done 
on the skin and then on the muscles, veins, blood and the body. 



764 


Agni Purdna 


The bones would get strengthened and become fleshy. A wise 
man should massage well the shoulders, arms, shanks, knees, 
collarbones and the chest as before as if (one is attacking) 
an enemy. After having massaged the joints well, # one should 
stretch them slowly without making a violent jerk. 

30b-33. One should not do any physical exercise while the 
food still remains undigested nor after taking food, nor after 
drinking (water) . One should never do any exercise in the half 
of the prahara 1 after a quarter part of the day. One should 
bathe in cold water (only) once. Bathing intrepid wacer would 
remove fatigue. One should not forcibly retain the breath in 
the heart. Physical exercises would remove the (excessive) 
phlegm. Massaging would remove the (excessive) wind. Bathing 
would remove the excessive bile. (One should not) expose his 
body to sunlight or enjoy the company of women (after doing 
exercises). Men should not do exercises affecting one’s body 
under the sunlight. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTYTWO 
Description of horticulture 

Dhanvantari said : 

1 . Now I shall describe the science of medicine relating 
to trees. It is good to have a plak$a (tree) on the north, a banyan 
tree on the east, a mango (tree) on the south and a holy fig 
tree on the west. 

2-4a. (It is better) to have thorny trees on the south near 
the house. A garden should be near the house. Blooming sesa- 
mum plants should be gathered and the trees should be planted 
after worshipping a brahmin and the moon. The five fixed 
asterisms sv&ti, hasta 9 rohinl, Iraoana and mala are commended for 
planting the trees. 

1. An eighth part of a day. 



282.4b- 13 


765 


4b.-5. (The trees) should be planted such that they are 
fed by rivers or should be made to be on the banks of a tank. 
(The asterisms) kasta, magha , anurddha , aSvint, pusya and jyefthd as 
well as iatabhUak and the three uttaras ( ultaraphalguni , uttardfdtfha 
and uttarabhddrapada)(art good) for beginning (the construction) 
of tanks. 

6- 7a. It should be done after worshipping (lords) Varuna, 
Vi$nu and Parjanya. (Trees such as) dfoka, punndga, 

priyahgu , plantain, jambn, bakula and pomegranate (should be 
planted) as above. 

7b.-9. The planted trees should be watered morning and 
evening in the summer season, on alternate days in the winter 
season and in the night in the rainy (season) if the earth has 
become dry. (Trees planted) twenty cubits apart are (deemed as) 
excellent and sixteen (cubits) apart are (deemed as) medium. 
There should be minimum twelve cubits (distance) in between 
one tree and the other. Trees (planted) densely would not bear 
fruits. They should first be pruned with a cutter. 

1 0. (The trees) should be sprinkled with cold water mixed 
with a paste of viiahga and ghee. If the fruits get destroyed, 
(cold water should be sprinkled) with (a paste of) horse-gram, 
black-gram, green-gram, barley and sesamum. 

11-12. One should always sprinkle cold water with ghee 
for (getting abundant) fruits and flowers. Sprinkling with the 
excrements of sheep and goat and pulverised barley, sesamum 
allowed to be soaked in meat and water for seven nights would 
also increase the bearing of fruits and flowers in all the trees. 

13. Sprinkling with the washings of the fish would also 
increase the growth of the trees. Fish and meat mixed with the 
viiahga and rice would make (them) bear fruits. This would 
universally control the diseases of all the trees. 



766 


Agni Purina 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTYTHREE 

The remedial herbs for all the diseases 
Dhanoantari said : 

w 

1. A decoction of simhi , Safi, two kinds of ntid (turmeric) 
and vatsaka is commended for all types of infantile dysentery as 
well as defects due to mother’s milk. 

2. One should lick pulverised ifngi , kr$n& and atibald to- 
gether with honey. (Otherwise) ativifd alone would remove the 
cough, vomitting and fever of a child. 

3-5a. Vaca should be taken by children together with clari- 
fied butter, or with milk or with oil. The child should drink 
yasfikd or iarikha flower together with milk. This would improve 
speech, complexion, longevity, intellect and beauty of the child. 
Vdcd, agniiikhd , vdsd , dried ginger, kr$nd (long pepper), turmeric, 
yaffi and rock salt should be given to a child in the morning for 
drinking. It would develop the memory. 

5b-6a. A decoction of devaddru , mahdiigru , the three myroba- 
lans and payomuca made into a paste with long pepper and honey 
would remove all worms. 

6b-7. The juice of the three myrobalans, bkrfiga and viSva 
soaked in honey, clarified butter, goat’s milk and cow’s urine is 
beneficial in the diseases of children. The juice of dUrvd (a kind 
of grass) when inhaled is excellent remedy for bleeding of the 
nose. 

8. (Similarly) filling the ear with the juice of garlic, ginger 
and figru (would remedy the bleeding of the ears). Extracts of 
ginger and nutmeg in oil would remove intestinal colic and also 
the diseases of the lips> 

9. The outer skin of the nutmeg, dry ginger, pepper, long 
pepper and turmeric would remove the urinary defects. A paste 
of mustard made into a decoction in milk dissolved in oil would 
remove toothache. 

10. The coriander water, coconut, cow’s urine, betelnut and 
dry ginger made into a decoction and used for gargling would 
remedy the defects in the tongue. 

1 1. The juice of nirgunfikd with the paste of Idhgali prepared 
in oil when inhaled would destroy gantfamdld and galagantfa. 



283.12-24 


767 


12. One should rub (the affected part of the skin) with the 
leaves of arka, pUtikd and snuhi together with cow’s urine. (By 
this one would destroy) all the defects of the skin. 

13. Vdkucl and sesamum eaten for one year is a cure for 
leprosy. Paihyd, bhalldtaki and a lump of molasses in oil would 
also conquer leprosy. 

14. One suffering from piles should drink buttermilk to- 
gether with the powders of yUthikd y vahni , turmeric, the three 
myrobalans and vyoja or should take abhayd with molasses. 

15. One suffering from a urinary ailment should take a 
decoction of the (three) myrobalans, a variety of turmeric and 
vi$a or the juice of the emblic myrobalan or the paste of turmeric 
with or without honey should be used. 

16. A decoction of vdsd mixed with castor oil would remove 
acute gout. The drinking (of the juice) of long pepper, would 
cure enlarged spleens. 

17-20. One who has an abdominal disorder should take 
black pepper that has been soaked well in the milk of snuk or 
should drink milk mixed with the paste of rucya % dantya, agnivi - 
dahga and vyosa. The granthika , ugra, mustard, long pepper and 
vxianga soaked in ghee (and allowed to remain) in buttermilk 
for a month would remove diarrhoea, piles, jaundice, enlarge- 
ment of spleen and worms. The decoction of the three myro- 
balans, amrtd, vdsd y tiktabhunimbaja together with honey would 
remove jaundice with acidity. One who is having acute gout 
should drink a potion of vdsd together with molasses and honey. 
Or (one may drink) milk in which vari 9 grapes, bald and dried 
ginger have been dissolved. 

21. One who is suffering from consumption should lick 
(the compounded powders of) vari 9 viddri 9 pathyd y the three (kinds 
of) balds , vdsaka and Ivadariiffra together with honey and clarified 
butter. 

22. The essence of the bark of pathyd , hgru y karahja and 
arka together with honey and rock salt would cure abscess as 
well as (help) ripening of the intestines. 

23-24. Anointing a wound with trivrt y jivati , danti y manjiffhd, 
the two varieties of turmeric, tdrkfaja and neem leaves is com- 
mended for fistula. An ointment of pulverised rugghdta y turmeric, 



768 Agni Purdna 

shellac mixed with ghee and honey, and vdsa would be an anti- 
septic and arrest its spread. 

25. Oil boiled with fydmd , yasfi, turmeric, lodhra, padmaka> 
utpala , sandal and black pepper, and distilled in milk would 
heal a wound. 

26. Burnt ashes of the leaves of black holy basil and cotton, 
nutmeg, rock-salt and turmeric made into a paste and boiled in 
oil in a copper vessel would be a good remedy for ulcers. 

27. Kumbhtsdra mixed with milk should be heated in fire 
and applied on the wound. It could also be cured by sprinkling 
with the chops of coconut and ghee. 

28. Dried ginger, ajamoda , rock-salt and bark of tamarind 
in equal proportions together with mustard in the same propor- 
tion should be drunk with butter-milk or hot water. It would 
cure dysentery. 

29. In the case of dysentery that is longstanding and accom- 
panied by constipation, discharge of blood and pain, one should 
be made to drink water boiled with vatsaka , ativisd , dried ginger, 
bilva and musta . 

30. One suffering from any type of colic should drink warm 
water saturated with rock-salt burnt in charcoal. Alternatively 
(one may take a mixture of) rock-salt, asafoetida, long pepper 
and mustard in the same way. 

31 . Kafurohini , long pepper, dtafika and powdered fried paddy 
made into a paste with honey that is filtered through a cloth and 
held in the mouth would remove thirst. 

32-33. A decoction of pdfhd, ddrvi (a variety of turmeric), 
skin of nutmeg, grapes and the three kinds of myrobalans to- 
gether with honey if gargled would remedy sore-mouth. A 
decoction of long pepper, ativifa, tiktendra, ddru,pd(hd and payomuc 
boiled with (cow’s) urine (taken with) honey would remove all 
throat affections. 

34. Drinking of a decoction of pathyd y gokfura , dusparfa , 
rdjavfkfa and iildbhit together with honey would remedy painful 
discharge of urine. 

35. A decoction of bamboo bark and varuna would remove 
stone in the bladder. One who is suffering from elephantiasis 
should take the decoction of Sdkhofaka together with honey and 
milk. 



283.36-48a 


769 


36. Oil made with blackgram and the milk extracted from 
the bark of arka (as well as) rock-salt mixed with honey would 
be remedy for the diseases of leg. Clarified butter similarly 
(would cure) jalakukkutqja. 1 

37. Powder of dried ginger, natron and asafoetida mixed 
with the juice of dried ginger boiled with ghee would remove 
sickness and this decoction is known to be efficacious in 
improving digestion. 

38. One who is having enlargement of spleen should drink 
buttermilk together with juices that aid digestion such as natrum, 
ngni and asafoetida, or with i ri(la and dipyaka . 

39. A decoction of emblic myrobalan, snake-gourd and 
greengram together with clarified butter would cure dry spread- 
ing itch. Dry ginger, dam and navd made into a decoction with 
milk together with the urine of a cow also (would remove 
swelling) . 

40. Decoction of dry ginger, pepper, long pepper, kfara and 
the three myrobalans would remove swelling. (Similar effect is 
had by using) treacle, tigru and trivrt together with pulverised 
rock-salt. 

41 . A decoction of trivrt and the three myrobalans together 
with treacle would act as a purgative. A decoction of vacd and 
three kinds of myrobalan with milk would be an emetic. 

42-44. One hundred palas (a measure of weight) each of 
the three myrobalans soaked in the essence of bhrftgaja mixed 
with ten parts of vitfanga and iron filings and twentyfive palas of 
iatavaiif guduci and agni should be licked with honey, clarified 
butter and sesamum oil. (One would be) free from . aging and 
greying of hair. He would live a hundred years free from all 
diseases. The three myrobalans with honey and sugar is capable 
of destroying all diseases. 

45-46a. Taking mustard together with honey, ghee, pepper, 
the three myrobalans, pathyd , citraka, dry ginger, guduci , muiali - 
raja and treacle would remove disease and make (one live) for 
three hundred years. 

46b-48a. The japd flower (dried) and made into a powder 
and then into a ball should be put in water. The oil of the 


1 . A disease of the leg. 



770 


Agni Pur&na 


paste with water would be like ghee. By the incense (of the 
above) one that is old would see things as variegated. One 
would see as before by the incense of mdkfika . 

48b-49. If camphor, oil (extracted) from leech and frog 
and root of pafali are ground well and anointed on the two feet, 
one could walk on the fire after arranging and raising of the 
grass (? ) and provide entertainment to the spectators. 

50-51. (The scope of medicine) is stated to fall under six 
heads such as poison, (influence of) stars, ailments (in general), 
violent deaths, minor (ailments) and love potents. It leads to 
two kinds of accomplishments. Sacred formulas meditation, 
medicine, conversation, mudrd (postures of the hand) and sacri- 
ficial worships are the means therein. The four goals (of life) 
have been narrated. One who reads (the same) would reach 
heaven. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTYFOUR 

Narration of sacred formulas that are medicinal 
Dhanvantari said : 

1. The syllable *om ’ and others confer longevity, health and 
heaven. The syllable * orh* is the foremost sacred syllable and 
one becomes immortal by repeating the same. 

2. The gdyatrl ( mantra ) is the supreme sacred formula. One 
gets enjoyment and emancipation by repeating the same. The 
formula “ Orh , Salutations to(Lord) Narayana” shall accomplish 
all things. 

3-6a. (The sacred formula) “Orh, Salutations to (Lord) 
Vasudeva” yields all (things). The formula “ Orh hrUrh , obeisance 
to (Lord) Vi?nu” is the foremost medicine. The celestials and 
demons became prosperous and free from sickness by (repeating) 
this (formula). It is benevolent for the beings. The dharma (mantra) 
is a great remedy — “Virtue, one who does virtuous deeds, and 



284.6b- 13 


771 


(mantras). “Conferer of prosperity, lord of prosperity, abode of 
prosperity, bearer of wealth, the abode of wealth, lord of pro- 
sperity, the supreme prosperity” — One would obtain prosperity 
by (the repetition of) these (words) . 

6b-7a. “One who loves, bestower of desires, desire, the 
governor of desires, Hari, happiness, consort of Lak§mT’ are 
the names of (lord) Hari, (which should be repeated) for 
(gaining) pleasures. 

7b-8. “Rama (one that makes us pleased), Paras'urama (the 
Rama, with the battle-axe), Nrsiriiha (the man-lion form of 
lord Visnu), Vi$nu, Trivikrama (the lord that measured three 
spaces with three strides)” are the names that are to be re- 
peated by those who desire to conquer. One who desires to 
acquire knowledge should repeat daily the name “Puru sot tama” 
(foremost among beings). 

9. (The repetition of the name) Damodara (one having a 
string around the belly, denotes lord Krsna) would remove 
bondage. (The repetition of the name) Puskaraksa (lotus-eyed) 
would cure eye-disease. (The name) Hrslkesa (the lord of the 
sense-organs) would remove fear. This has to be repeated while 
preparing medicines. 

10-11. The name ‘Acyuta’ (the changeless one) is an 
immortal one and confers victory in the battle. One who begins 
to cross a water-course (should repeat the name) Narasimha 
(man-lion form of Visnu). One who desires to have welfare in the 
east and other directions shdhld remember “Cakrin (the bearer 
of the disc), Gadin (the wielder of the mace), Sarngin (the 
bearer of the bow), and Khadgin (the bearer of a sword)”. 
(One should repeat) the name ‘Narayana* at all times. (The 
repetition of the name) Nrsiriiha (man-lion form of Visnu) 
would remove all fear. 

12. (The repetition of the name) “Garudavahana” (one 
having the eagle on the banner) would remove poison. The 
name “Vasudeva” (son ofVasudeva) has to be repeated always. 
One should repeat (the names) ‘Ananta’ (endless) and ‘Acyuta’ 
(changeless) while storing grains etc. and while going to sleep. 

13. (One should repeat) ‘Narayana’when getting a bad 
dream and (the term) ‘JalaSayin* (one who reposes on the 
water) when there is outbreak of fire etc. One who desires to 



772 


Agni Purina 


gain knowledge (should repeat the name) Hayagriva (one 
having the neck of a horse, denotes a form of Visnu) . (One who 
desires) to gain progeny (should repeat the word) Jagatsuti 
(the progenitor of the universe). (The name) Balabhadra 
(the elder brother of lord Kf?na) (should be repeated) during 
acts of valour. This single name accomplishes things. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTYFIVE 

The accomplished recipes that would revive the dead 
Dhanvnantari said : 

1. I shall describe to you the infallible recipes that would 
revive the dead. They were expounded to me by (the sage) 
Atr eya. They are divine and are capable of curing all diseases. 

Atreya said : 

2. A decoction of the five roots, such as those of bilva, (is 
an excellent remedy) for fever due to (deranged) wind. Other- 
wise (a decoction of) the root of long peppier, gud&ci and dry 
ginger is purifying. 

3-4. (A decoction of the herbs) cmblic myrobalan, mustard, 
black pepper and vahni would cure all fevers. Bilva 9 agnimantha, 
fyonaka , KaSmari , ()dtald } sthira, trikanfaka , priniparni , brhati and 
kaQtakarika are remedies for fever, indigestion, pain on the sides 
(of the body) and cough. The root of kuSa (grass) (should also 
be added to this) . 

5. GudUciy parpafi, musta, kirdta and dry ginger should be 
given in fever due to (deranged) wind and bile. This is known 
as pancabhadra (the five beneficial things). 

6. A decoction made, of trivrt 9 viidla y kafnkdy the three 
myrobalans and dragvadha is a purifier, loosens the bowels and 
has to be drunk to get relief from all fevers; 

7. Devaddru , bald, vdsd , the three myrobalans, yyo?a t padmaka , 
and i ntfahga with an equal proportion of candied sugar made 
into a powder would conquer five kinds of cough. 



285.8-25a 


773 


8-9. Dafamuli , iatU rdsnd, long pepper, bilva, paufkara , Sffifita 9 
emblic myrobalan, bhdrhgi gutfOci, ndgavalli and barley compoun- 
ded well and a decoction prepared from that should be drunk. 
It would remedy cough, diarrhoea, (pain) on the sides, hiccough 
and difficult breathing. 

10. The three kinds of salts (as well as) madkuka together 
with honey, long pepper together with sugar, and ndgara to- 
gether with treacle would remove hiccough. 

11. Kdravya y jdji, pepper, grapes, hog-plum, pomegranate, 
natrum, treacle and honey would remedy all kinds of loss of 
appetite. 

12. One should be made to drink the juice of Srhgavera 
(ginger) together with honey. It would remedy loss of appetite, 
difficult breathing and cough. It would also remedy catarrh and 
excess of phlegm. 

13. (The root of) banyan, Srngi, red earth, (the bark of) 
lodhra 9 pomegranate, madkuka and honey should be taken with 
the scum. It would remove thirst and arrest vomitting. 

14. GuducU vdsaka 9 lodhra and long pepper together with 
honey would remedy fever accompanied by thirst, cough and 
expectoration of phlegm together with blood. 

15. Likewise the juice of vasaka y the juice of tdmraja mixed 
with honey, and pepper infused in the juice of the firifa flower 
would also be beneficial. 

16. (The pulse called) masura removes all kinds of pain. 
(The washings) of rice would remove excess of bile. Nirgundt , 
§drivd 9 felu and afikola would remove poisons. 

17. Dry ginger, amrtd, kfudrd, puskara and granthika made 
into powder should be taken with decoction of long pepper when 
one suffers unconsciousness and intoxication. 

18. Asafoetida, natrum and vyo$a (dry ginger) and pepper 
(each weighing) two palas , an dfhaka (a measure) of ghee soaked 
in four parts of cow’s urine would remedy'insanity. 

19. Saftkha flower, vacd and kuffha soaked in the juice of 
brdhmi destroys long-standing epilepsy and insanity. It is also 
excellent for improving memory. 

20-25a. The ghee made up of the five products got from 
a cow has also similar effects. The same with mustard is a 



774 


Agni Purdna 


remedy for leprosy. Snake-gourd, the three myrobalans, neem, 
guiUci , dhavani , vf$a and karafija boiled with ghee destroys lep- 
rosy and is known as vajraka (potent remedy). Neem, snake 
gourd, vydghri y gwfflci and vdsaka should be taken ten pa las each 
and pounded well. (The mixture) should then be heated in 
water vessel (with water) till it is reduced to one fourth (of 
its original volume). It should then be soaked in one prastha 
(a -measure) ghee and boiled with the three myrobalans. This 
ghee is known as pancatiktaka (five bitter things). This ghee is 
capable of curing leprosy. This excellent recipe would cure 
eighty varieties of diseases due to (deranged) wind, forty 
(diseases) due to (deranged) bile, twenty (diseases) due to 
(deranged) phlegm as well as cough, catarrh, piles, wounds and 
other diseases just as the sun (would remove) darkness. 

25b-26a. One should sprinkle a wound with the decoction 
of the three myrobalans and the juice of bhfhgardja for the 
cure of the venereal disease. 

26b-28a. The powder of the leaves of snake-gourd and the 
five particles of the skin of pomegranate should be pounded 
with gaja (a variety of pepper) and the powder of the three 
kinds of myrobalans. Oil boiled with the three myrobalans, 
grains of iron, yaffi, mdrkava % blue lotus, pepper and rock-salt 
would remedy vomitting when used for bathing. 

28b-29a. Oil boiled with milk, juice of markava , two prasthas 
each of madhuka and utpala made into one guiava (a measure), 
if used as sternutatory would arrest greying of hair. 

29b-30. The two compounds— neem, snake-gourd, the 
three kinds of myrobalans, guduciy khadira and vrsa as well as 
bhUnimba , pdf ha , the three kinds of myrabolans, gutfQci and red 
sandal would remedy fever, leprosy, tumour and the like. 

31. A decoction prepared from snake-gourd, amrta , bhtini- 
mbay vdsdy ari$(aka t parpafa and bark of khadira would appease the 
fever due to tumour. 

32. The daiamUliy chinnaruhdy mustard, ddru y punamavd, Sigru 
and dry ginger are beneficial for (remedying) fevers, abscess and 
swelling. 

33-34. Besmearing with (a paste of) madhuka and neem 
leaves would clean the wounds. A decoction of the three my- 
robalans and the leaves of khadira , ddrvl, nyagrodha y atibaldy kuia 



285.35-46 


775 


(grass), necm, and mUlaka are beneficial in cleaning (wounds). 
The juice of karanja , arista and nirgwjdi would destroy the 
parasites of wounds. 

35. Besmearing with a paste (made up) of dhdlaki , sandal, 
baldy manga , madhuka 9 blue lotus, ddrvi and meda mixed with 
clarified butter would heal a wound. 

36. Gugguluy the three myrobalans, dry ginger, pepper 
and long pepper in equal proportions mixed with ghee would 
heal wounds due to affected arteries and painful fistula. 

37. The yellow myrobalan boiled in cow’s urine with oil 
and salt should be used every morning. It would remove excess 
of phlegm and wind. 

38. A decoction of dry ginger, pepper, long pepper and the 
three myrobalans should be drunk with alkali and salt as a 
purgative in (deranged) phlegm and wind. It arrests the in- 
crease of phlegm. 

39. The decoction of long pepper, the root of long pepper, 
vaedy citraka and dry ginger should be drunk to remedying 
constipation. 

40. One should drink the great remedy — rdsndy guduci y root 
of castor and devadaru in case of rheumatism (that affects) all 
the limbs, joints, bones and marrow. 

41-43. Otherwise one may drink a decoction of daiamula 
together with dry ginger and water. By the use of a decoction 
of dry ginger and goksuraka every morning one would get back 
digestive power that has been impaired and would get relief 
from rheumatic pain in the hip. The oil extracted from the 
roots, leaves and branches of prasdrini, an extracted juice or 
paste or powder or decoction of guduci would relieve one from 
acute gout when used for a long time. 

44-45a. Long pepper and castor-oil may be used. One 
would conquer quickly acute gout accompanied by burning 
sensation by drinking snake-gourd, the three varieties of my- 
robalans, twrakafuka and amrta boiled with mustard or treacle. 

45b-46. Rheumatic pain would be relieved at once by 
(drinking) guggulu in warm water or drinking guddei with the 
three myrobalans in water together with baldy punamavdy castor 
seed, the two kinds of brhaiiy gokfura , asafoetida and salt. 



776 


Agni Ptirdna 

47-50a. A kar$ika (a measure of weight) each of the root 
of long pepper, the five kinds of salts, long pepper, citraka , dry 
ginger, the three varieties ofmyrobalans, trivfty vac&, two sorts 
of alkali, tedvala , danti 9 svarnakftri and vifdnikd (should bf ground 
well) and kola (a measure of weight) measure of pill should be 
drunk with jujube. (This would remedy) swelling. It is an 
excellent remedy with trivrt for indigestion and enlargement 
of the abdomen etc. Milk together with ddru 9 varfdbhU and dry 
ginger would be excellent for removing swelling. Sprinkling 
with a decoction of arka , var$dbhu and bhunimba would remove 
swelling. 

50b-51. Piles would go without any doubt if the clarified 
butter boiled with three parts of ashes of dry ginger, pepper 
and long pepper mixed with paldia dissolved in water is used. 
Vi$vak$ena 9 lotus flower and nirgnndi boiled with salt would also 
have similar results. 

52-53a. Oil (prepared) with vidahga 9 anala , rock-salt, 
rasud, agrak$dra and daru boiled with four times water saturated 
with a pungent material would remove inflammation of the 
glands of the neck and would remedy goitre if used as an 
unguent. 

53b-54a. Decoction of Safi, kundga and valaya together with 
the juice of kfira boiled with the paste of payasya , long pepper 
and vdsd would be beneficial for consumption. 

54b-55. (A compound of) vaca, vitf, mustard, dry ginger, 
asafoetida, kus{ha, agni dipyaka (mixed in the proportion of) 
two, three, six, four, one, seven parts and a fiftieth part res- 
pectively, if drunk would destroy tumours in the abdomen, 
(abdominal) colic and coughs. 

56. Pills made of paf/id, nikumbha , pepper, dry ginger, long 
pepper, the three kinds of myrobalans and agni boiled with 
cow’s urine would remedy abdominal tumour, spleen and the 
like. 

57. Vasa, margosa, snake-gourd and the three myrobalans 
would destroy (deranged) wind and bile. Powdered viiafiga if 
licked with honey would destroy worms. 

58-59a. The yellow myrobalan together with vidaftga 9 rock 
salt, kfdra (alkaline salt) and cow’s urine (will also produce 
the same effect) . The barks of &allakl y jujube, rose apple, piydla 9 



285.59b-71 


777 


mango and arjwia (trees) soaked in honey and taken with milk 
separately would arrest haemorrhage. 

59b-60a. Equal proportions of the juice of bilua, mango 
( bark) , dhdtaki, pdflid, dry ginger and moed when taken with 
treacle or butter-milk would arrest severe dysentery. 

60b-61a. The drinking of a decoction of angeri , kola, curd 
water, dry ginger and k$dra (an alkaline salt) together with ghee 
would remove pain due to inflammation of anus. 

61b-62a. Vidaiiga , ativifa , musta, ddru , pafhd and kaliftga 
(taken) together with black pepper would cure dysentery 
(accompanied by) swelling (of the limbs). 

62b-63. One would live for a hundred years happily by 
eating two yellow myrobalans (everyday) together with sugar, 
rock-salt and dry ginger or long pepper, honey and treacle. 
The same would be the result of taking the three kinds of 
myrobalans and long pepper together with honey and clarified 
butter. 

64. One should lick powdered emblic myrobalan soaked in 
(the juice of) the same with honey, clarified butter and sugar 
and drink milk if desirous of enjoying women. 

65-66. Powdered black gram, long pepper, idli (a variety 
of rice) , barley and wheat in equal proportion should be fried 
with long pepper. One should eat them and drink sweet milk 
with sugar. (Such a person) would gain strength to enjoy 
women ten times like a sparrow. 

67. MaAgd , dhdtaki flower, lodhra and blue lotus should be 
given to women together with milk. It would remedy pradara 
(a disease) of women. 

68-69a. (A mixture of) bija 9 kauranfaka, madhuka , white 
sandal, the roots of lotus and blue lotus, sugar and sesamum is 
excellent for arresting miscarriage and causing pregnancy. 

69b-70. An unguent of deuad&ru , nabha , kuffha, nalada and 
dry ginger mixed with sour gruel and oil would remedy head- 
ache. If rock salt mixed with water is poured ( into the ear) 
after gently heating and filtering through a cloth, it would re- 
move ear-ache. 

71. The juice of garlic, ginger, Sigru or plantain (may be 
taken) separately. One may drink them with (the mixture of) 



778 


Agni Parana 


bald , iatdvari 9 rdsna and amrla together with sairiyaka (?). 

72-74a. Clarified butter together with the three ^myrobalans 
is an excellent remedy against blindness. One should drink 
ghee boiled with the three myrobalans, dry ginger * pepper, 
long pepper and rock-salt. It would strengthen eyesight, loosen 
bowels, strengthen heart, stimulate digestion and remedy cold. 
The filament of blue lotus together with cowdung and water is 
(known as) collyrium. It would be beneficial for day or night 
blindness. 

74b-77. Yasllmadhu , vacd, long pepper and seeds of kutaja 
made into a paste mixed with a decoction of neem is a good 
emetic. Glossy and greasy barley water should be given as a 
purgative. If it is (used) otherwise it would impair the diges- 
tion, make the body heavy and cause loss of appetite. A pulve- 
rised (compound of) mustard, rock-salt and long pepper 
should be drunk with warm water. This is an excellent purga- 
tive that would remedy all diseases. This is known as ndraca 
(destructive). The infallible compositions that have been 
expounded by Atreya to the sages are capable of curing all 
diseases and are declared by Susruta as conferring all boons. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTYSIX 
Collection of medical recipes 

Dhanvantari said : 

1 . I shall describe the recipes of medicines that would 
conquer death, confer longevity and cure diseases. The three 
myrobalans and amfta together with honey and clarified butter 
would cure disease and would make one live for three hundred 
years. 

2. (One who uses) one pala 9 half a pala or a karsa (a 
measure of weight) (would enjoy) the full span (of life). One 
who uses the oil of bilva as sternutatory for a month (would 
live) for five hundred years and (would become) a poet. 

3-4. (The use of) sesamum and bhalldtaka would overcome 



286.5-14 


779 


disease, premature death and senility. One would overcome 
leprosy by (using) a decoction of five parts of powdered vdkucl 
with the waters of khadira for six months. (Otherwise) powder 
of mlakuru#fa may be used (for the same) . One who eats 
khandadugdha together with milk or honey (would live for) 
a hundred years. 

5. One who uses a pala (weight) of honey, clarified butter 
and dried ginger in the morning would conquer death. One 
who drinks milk with the powder of mdndaki would overcome 
old age and live long. 

6. One who drinks milk with a kar$a of need fa and honey 
would conquer death. One would overcome disease and death 
(by using) nirguntfi together with honey, clarified butter or 
milk. 

7. One should drink a karfaka of the oil of paldSa together 
with honey for six months. Milk may be drunk afterwards. This 
would make one live for five hundred or a thousand (years) . 

8-9a. One should drink the juice of the leaf of jyoti$mati 
and the three myrobalans together with milk. Similarly a pala 
(weight) of the pulverised fatdvari together with honey and 
clarified butter or nirgmix with honey, clarified butter and milk 
would overcome disease and death. 

9b-10. Five parts of pulverised neem boiled with the decoc- 
tion of khadira (used) with a kar$a (weight) of the juice of 
bhjfiga would make one overcome disease and become immor- 
tal. One who drinks milk after taking rudanti with clarified 
butter and honey would conquer death. 

11. One should take a kar$a (weight) of the powder of 
yellow myrobalan boiled with the juice of bhjiigardja together 
with ghee (or) honey. He would live for three hundred years 
and conquer disease. 

12-14. (One would live) for five hundred years (by using) 
a kar$a (weight of) vdrdhikd , juice of bhrtiga , oxide of iron, 
iatdvari together with clarified butter. Powdered kart a (gold 
filings) and iatdvari boiled with (the juice of) bhfhgardja (used 
with) honey and clarified butter would make one live for three 
hundred years. Mango, amrtd , trivrt in equal proportion (and) 
sulphur purified with the juice of kumdrikd (are made into 
pills). (One who uses) two (such) pills together with clarified 



780 


Agni Purina 


butter would live for five hundred years. A pala (weight) of 
aioagandhi used with oil, clarified butter and treacle would make 
one (live for) a hundred years. 

15. Drinking a pala (weight) of pulverised* pmamaoi or 
afoka together with honey, clarified butter and milk would 
remove one’s ailment. 

16. One who uses the sesamum oil with honey as sternu- 
tatory will live for a hundred years ( retaining) the black hue of 
the hair. One would live for a hundred years by drinking a 
karfa (weight) of akfa together with honey, clarified butter and 
milk. 

1 7. After taking mustard with treacle, ghee and sweet 
things etc., one who eats rice mixed with milk would have 
black hair, be free from disease and live for five hundred years. 

18. One who drinks a pala (weight) of pulverised kUsmin- 
4tki together with honey, clarified butter and milk and eats 
rice mixed with milk for a month would live for a thousand 
years without any disease. 

19. The powder of SilBka together with the juice of bhrAga, 
honey and clarified butter would make one live for a hunderd 
years. A karfa (weight) of the oil of kafutumbi (used) as a 
sternutatory would make one live for two hundred years. 

20. The use of the three myrobalans, long pepper and 
dried ginger would make one live for three hundred years. If 
the same is compounded with Sativarl it would make one strong 
and live for one thousand years. 

21-24. Pills should be made with citraka, dried ginger, 
oitfaAga, iron oxide, bkrAgarija, vala, the five kinds of neem, 
khadira , nirgundl, kanfakiri and visaka boiled with varfibhU or its 
juice. This powder together with ghee or honey or treacle or 
water is an excellent compound. It should be consecrated with 
the formula “Ons hrUrh sa n . It would be a recipe for reviving 
the dead and overcoming disease and death. The collections of 
recipes were made use of by the celestials, demons and sages. 
(I shall describe) the science of medicine relating to the 
elephants (that) was narrated by (sage) Palakapya to the king 
Anga. 



287.1-10 


781 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTYSEVEN 
The treatment of the diseases of elephants 
Palakdpya said : 

1-3. O Lomapada ! I shall describe to you the characteristics 
of the elephants and the treatment (of their diseases) . Those 
that have long trunks, deep breath and are of enduring type are 
commended. Those that have twenty or eighteen nails, those 
that exude rut (even) in winter, those that have an elevated 
right tusk, those that have wide ears resembling the cloud, with 
minute dot like (marks) on the skin should be maintained. 
Those that are short and have bad features should not be 
maintained. 

4-5. (Similarly it is not advisable to capture) the she- 
elephants that bear the foetus on their sides and those that are 
stupid. The elephant that has (good) complexion, good nature, 
strength, appearance, beauty, firmness and speed would conquer 
enemies in the battle. The elephants add beauty to the army 
camp and the army. 

6a. A king could gain victory by the diligent (employment) 
of elephants. 

6b-7. In the case of all the fevers (of elephants), they 
should be anointed. Bathing them after anointing them with 
ghee or oil would remove the wind (in the body). The shoulders 
should be treated by the kings as indicated in the case of the 
fevers (of elephants). 

8. O Brahmins ! Cow’s urine together with ghee and the 
two varieties of turmeric (are commended) for jaundice. An 
infusion (with the above remedy) soaked in oil is commended 
for constipation. 

9-10. V&runi (a kind of liquor) mixed with five kinds of 
salts should be given for drinking. An elephant should be fed 
with balls of (mixture of) vifariga, the three myrobalans, dried 
ginger, pepper and long pepper and salt in the case of fainting. 
He should be made to drink honey and water. The head should 
be anointed with oil for headache. A sternutatory is also 
commended. 



782 


Agni Pur&tja 


11. The diseases affecting the legs of an elephant should 
be treated by anointing with oil. Then it is laid down that they 
should be cleansed with the paste of sediments of oil. 

1 2. An elephant that is suffering from shivering should be 
fed with the juice of the flesh of peacock and tittiri (partridge) 
mixed with long pepper and pepper. 

13. A morsel comprising tender bilva , lodhra , dhataki to- 
gether with sugar should be given to an elephant suffering from 
dysentery. 

14. Ghee mixed with common salt should be given as 
sternutatory in the case of numbness of the trunk. (Otherwise) 
long pepper, dried ginger and the cumin-seed boiled in the rice 
or barley gruel together with musta grass (could be given) . 

15- 16a. The juice of the flesh of a pig should be given for 
ear-ache. Oil boiled with the ten kinds of roots, the horse beans, 
tamarind and kakam&ci would remove the pain due to stiffness of 
the neck caused by fetters. 

16b-17. Ghee mixed with the eight kinds of salts made into 
a paste should be given for drinking in the case of retention of 
urine. Otherwise a decoction of the seeds of trdpusa (may be 
given) . An elephant should be made to drink a decoction of 
the bark of neem or vt fa, 

18-19. Cow’s urine and vidanga are commended for worms 
in the intestines. Milk boiled with dried ginger, long pepper, 
grapes and sugar is (an excellent) drink for curing the wounds. 
The juice of the flesh is also good. Rice and green gram boiled 
together and mixed with dried ginger, pepper and long pepper 
is commended for loss of appetite. 

20. Oil mixed with trivft , dried ginger, long pepper and 
pepper, agnidanti , arka , iyama % milk and bigger variety of long 
pepper would remedy the enlargement of spleen. 

21-22a. All sorts of disorders that arise could be remedied 
by means of loosening, enema, anointment, application of oil, 
drinks and oily enemas. One could be given yaffika with idrada 
(a kind of beans) together with the soup of green gram for 
drinking. 

22b. Besmearing with tender • bilva is commended in the 
diseases (known as) kafu. 



287.23-33 


783 


23. Vifanga, indrayava , asafoetida, sarala and the two varie- 
ties of turmeric could be given in the form of balls in the fore- 
noon to remedy all kinds of colics. 

24. The main meal for them should be composed of (the 
rice varieties known as) faffika, vrihi and i&lL (The meals) con- 
sisting of barley and wheat are (considered as) mediocre. The 
other kinds (of food) are (deemed as) inferior for the 
elephants. 

25. Barley and sugarcane increase the strength of the 
elephants. Dried barley would derange the humours of the 
elephants. 

26. Drinking of milk is commended for an elephant that is 
emaciated on account of rutting. The juice of flesh that has 
been cooked with the substances that are stimulants is good. 

27. In the event of severe injury in the war, balls of (flesh 
of) crows, hens, cuckoos and owls (could be given) mixed with 
honey. 

28. An incense (consisting) of pepper, fish, vi$aiiga> alkaline 
salt, juice of kofataki and turmeric ensures victory in the battle 
for the elephant. 

29. (A liniment consisting of) long pepper, rice, oil, honey 
of different kinds applied along the eyelids is commended as 
sharpening the eyesight. 

30-3 la. Feces of a sparrow and a pigeon, the resin of the 
ksira tree and the liquor (known as) prasannd are the excellent 
collyrium. Such a collyrium applied on the eye would make 
the elephant destructive in the battle. 

31b-32a. Blue lotuses, musta and tagara made into a paste 
with water in which rice has been washed is an excellent cooling 
agent for the eyes. 

32b. (Once in a month) the grown-up nails should be cut. 
(They) should be bathed with oil once in a month. 

33. The bed of an elephant would be powdered dry cow 
dung. It is commended that (the elephants) should be anoint- 
ed with clarified butter in the autumn and summer. 



784 


Agni Pur&na 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTYEIGHT 
The diseases of the horses and the management of the horses 
Dhanvantari said : 

I 

1. I shall describe the essence of (science relating to) the 
management of horses and the treatment of their diseases. In 
order to achieve dharma, artha (virtue) and kama (enjoyment 
and prosperity) (a king) should acquire (good) horses. 

2. (The asterisms) aivini, havana, hasta and the three uttaras 
(uttardfd4ha y uttaraphalguni and uttarabhddrapada) are commended 
for the first ride on the horses. 

3. The early winter, winter and spring are commendable 
for riding the horses. The riding of the horses in the summer, 
autumn and rainy season is forbidden. 

4-6a. One should not whip the horses severely or with 
other kinds of sticks or at an improper place. One who rides 
a horse* at a place abounding in nails, thorns and bones, on a 
nigged ground, on a sandy and muddy ground and spoilt by 
• pits and falls without knowing the temper (of the steed) and 
without the saddle would be carried away by the horse even 
as he is seated on its back. 

. 6b-7a. There may be an excellent person among the learn- 
ed, a fortunate one who knows the behaviour (of the horse) 
and is able to ride without any instruction on account of his 
practice and application. 

7b-12a. The different gods are assigned on (the different 
parts of) the body of the horse that has been consecrated, 
and faces the east, commencing with the syllable orh and end- 
ing with ‘obeisance* with the respective bijd 1 in order. (Lord) 
Brahmd (is assigned) in the mind, (Lord) Visnu in the strength, 
Vainateya (vehicle bird of Vi$nu) in valour, the Rudras on 
the sides, Guru in the intellect, the Vigvedevas in the vital 
parts (of the body), the Moon and the Sun in its glances and 
eyesight, the two Aivins (the celestial physicians) on the ears, 


1. The mystical letter forming the essential part of the mantra of a 

deity. 



288.12b-22 


785 


the Fire (god) on the stomach, Svadhd in the sweat, the (godd- 
ess of) speech on the longue, Wind (god) on speed, the vault 
of the heaven on the back, all the mountains on the tip of the 
hoof, the asterisms in the pores of the hairs, the digit of the 
moon in the heart, the Fire-god in the lustre, the goddess of 
love on the buttocks, the lord of the world on the forehead, the 
planets in the neighing, Vdsuki (a foremost serpent) on the 
chest. 

12b. One who is to ride (the horse), should fast, worship 
the horse and recite (the following mystic words) in the right 
ear ( of the horse) . 

13-19. <fc Oh ! Horse ! You arc a Gandharva prince! You 
listen to my words. You are born in the family of Gandharvas. 
Do not become a defiler of the family. O Horse ! Remember 
your creed by the true words of the brahmins, of Soma, of 
Garutja, of Rudra, of Varuna, by the strength of Pavana( Wind- 
god) and by the radiance of the Fire-god. You remember that 
you are the son of a paramount sovereign. You remember the 
promise ( you had made at the time of churning the ocean). 
You remember the daughter of the ocean (Goddess Laksmi) . 
You remember the kaustubha jewel. You were born in the 
divine family at the time of the churning of the milky ocean by 
the celestials and the demons. You keep up your promise. You 
were born in the family of horses. You become my eternal 
friend. O Friend ! You listen to this well.. You be ready as my 
vehicle. You be victorious. You protggt me and bring me 
success in the battle. In olden days thg demons were destroyed 
by the celestials riding on your back. I will now ride on you 
and conquer the army of the enemy.” 

20. After having repeated (the above prayer) into the 
ears (of his steed) the rider should confuse the enemy, saddle 
the horse and ride (the horse) . (This would give him) victory 
in the battle. 

21. Generally the defects in the horses are produced in 
their bodies. The excellent riders should convert them into 
good qualities with much effort. 

22. The good qualities that are due to the ability of the 
riders would appear as natural. 



786 


Agni Purdim 


23. Other riders would destroy even the natural qualities. 
Some know the good qualities. Some others know their defects. 
One is fortunate who knows (the qualities as well as the defects 
in) a horse, A stupid one is he who docs not know both. 

24. Even though one is a good judge, he is not commend- 
ed if he does not know how to manage a horse, does not know 
the means (at the time of an emergency), acts rash, is of 
irritable nature and engages in excessive punishing at the 
vulnerable points. 

25. One who knows the means (of handling an emergent 
situation), one who knows the temper (of the horse), one 
who is pure, one who removes the defects and takes the (good) 
qualities is always an expert in all acts (engaging the horses). 

26. One who has entered the riding ground holding the 
bridle should ride his steed either from his right or left. 

27. An excellent horse should not be whipped at once after 
mounting. Whipping causes fright and fear would produce 
confusion. 

28. The rider should conduct (the horse) in a gallop in 
the morning holding the rein. (He should conduct the horse) 
slowly in the evening holding the rein but without handling it. 

29. (The following are the four political expedients) : 
stroking is said to be conciliation, isolation (from the other 
steeds is) division, whipping with the whip and other things 
(is) punishment and biding time (is reckoned as) gift. 

30-31. Each succeeding one should be employed when each 
preceding one fails. While riding a horse, (the bridle) should 
be placed without touching the tongue. The reins with hund- 
reds of threads should be entered at the tip of the mouth. (The 
horse) should be made to forget (that) and then one may ride. 
One should (ride) slowly if the reins have become loosened. 

32. If the tongue of the horse is ulcerated, the joint on the 
tongue should be released. The tight hold should be released 
till the horse does not give up its jumping. 

33-36. The cuirass should be tied when the steed is releas- 
ed. (A horse) that has a raised face by nature should have its 
cuirass made loose by the foremost rider and then mounted 
with a sportive look. One that would make the left fore-leg (of 



288,37-47 


787 


the steed) joined with the left rein, would get the hinder-leg 
seized. By that the right one (also controls). One that practices 
in this way with the left rein, the two feet (would be con- 
trolled). Then the foot would be held from the left itself. If the 
fore-feet are released, one would become firmly seated. 

37. The left fore-leg should be tied with the rein to the 
left hind-leg (of a horse) of mischievous habit. It should be 
ridden by holding the left rein. 

38. The nature of the horse is to turn round its face again. 
It is not on account of tying the legs of the horses thus. 

39. After having looked at a trusted horse and after having 
taken a firm seat on the saddle, ( the horse) should be made to 
touch his leg with the face by holding (the rein). Such a 
(posture known as) lokana is beneficial. 

40. The rein is clasped after pulling and firmly pressing 
with the legs. It is said to be vakkana if the two legs are bound. 

41. It is considered as mo tana if there is binding of the 
legs with the rein and letting it go by freeing the fore-legs. 

42. A wise man should know the loss of consciousness and 
destruction for a horse and the fourth rule, namely, the mofana , 
is laid down. 

43. A horse whose leg does not touch the ground in a 
small circle, that foot should be restrained by means of mofana 
and vakkana . 

44. It is said to be sangraharjta when it is held with exertion 
and when one goes slowly holding it after fastening well on 
the seat. 

45. After striking on the side by kicking (the horse) that 
has distracted mind while one remain on the seat, the rein is 
drawn and held by the foot. It is known as grdhya-kanfaka- 
pdyanam. 

46. If a horse stands on the feet and hurts the rear legs, 
it is known as khalikdra (hurting). 

47. It is known as gahana (intensified), if (the horse), that 
is in any one of the motions 1 , is held after striking with a stick or 
with the leg as desired. 


1. The trot, the gallop or the canter. 



788 


Agni Purdna 


48. It would be ucchvasana (exhalation), if the horse is 
hurt and taken through a quadrangle by means of a different 
bridle by cheering. 

49. It is considered to be mukhavydvartana (turning the face 
away), if the nature (of a horse) to turn its face and move 
towards the place (from which it has been taken out), is rest- 
rained and held. 

50. After restraining by any one of the three (ways) in 
order, it should be controlled by taking to the courses such as 
the circles and the like in order. 

51. A wise man should relax and ride a horse that raises 
its head from its knee onwards. One should rise a horse till its 
limbs are light. 

52. A horse that is soft at its shoulder, light at its face and 
flexible at its joints, when it becomes controlled by the rider, 
then it should be tamed. 

53-54a. The hinder leg should not be freed when (the 
horse) becomes quiet. Then it should be drawn forward with 
the hands by means of the bridle. The horse stands with the 
part about the hips becoming normal, the neck raised, and 
face on level. 

54b-56. If (the horse) keeps the hinder legs on the ground 
and the fore legs lifted up and runs very fast, one should hold 
the bridle with the fist and stop it. If the horse does not stop 
when suddenly pulled thus and if it shakes its body, it should 
be stopped by taking it in a circular path. The horse that casts 
off the shoulder should be stopped by means of the bridle. 

57. The cowdung, salt and (cow’s) urine boiled with mud 
is besmeared on the body as a remedy for bites of flies, etc. 

58. The scum of boiled rice should be given by the rider 
to (the horses) belonging to the bhadra and other breeds. The 
bites of tiny insects make the horse feel indolent and hungry. 

59. A horse should be trained in such a way that it would 
become tamed. Horses would perish if they are made to run 
much. They do not get practice if not made to run. If the faces 
become white, (the horses) should be made to run. 

60-61 a. After having pressed the horse well with the two 
knees (one should ride the horse) with a firm fist. Gomutra , 



288.61b— 289.5 


789 


kufild, oeni, padmamandala, and ( padma ) mdlikd are well known 
as the pancoldkhalikd. 

61b-62a. Similarly sanfaipta, vikfipta , kuncita , yathdcita, valgita 
and avalgita are said to be six kinds of phases (of a horse) . The 
path would be hundred dhanus (a measure of length equal to 
four cubits) or eighty or ninety ( dhanus ) . 

63. (Horses are said to be of four varieties such as bhadra> 
manda f mrga and sahkirna .) The (type of horse known as) bhadra 
could be trained well, the manda variety, (by making use of ) a 
stick. (The type) of horse (known as) mrga. (is classified) 
taking the shank of a deer (as the basis) . The above charac- 
teristics would be found mixed in the sahkirna class. 

64-65a. The horse that eats sugar, honey, and fried rice 
and has a good aroma is said to be clean and belonging to the 
brahmin class. The horse that belongs to the warrior class 
would be lustrous, meek and clever. ( If the above qualities are 
found in lesser proportions it is known as the vaifiya class.) 
(The horse that is) impure, unsteady, dull, ugly, foolish and 
wicked (is said to belong to) the iudra (class). 

65b-66. The horse that would show saliva when being held 
by the bridle, should be driven in phases by holding and loos- 
ening the rein. I shall describe (to you now) the characteristics 
of the horses etc. as expounded by (the sage) Salihotra. 1 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTYNINE 

The characteristics of the horses and the treatment of the 
diseases of the horses 

Salihotra said : 

1-5. O Susruta ! I shall describe the characteristics of the 
horses and the treatment of the diseases. A horse with lesser 
number of teeth, one devoid of teeth, one that is having dread- 

1 . Salihotra is credited with the authorship of works on veterinary 
science. 



790 


Agni Purdna 


ful appearance, one that has a black palate and black tongue, 
one that is born as a twin, one that has no testicle, one that 
has a cleft-hoof, one that has a horn, one that is tricoloured, 
one that has the colour of a tiger, one that has the cojour of an 
ass, one that has the colour of ash, one that is not having a good 
colour, one that has a hump, one that has white patches (on 
the skin), one that is (often) ridden by the crows, the voice of 
which resembles that of an ass, one whose eyes resemble those 
of a monkey, one that has black manes, one whose anus is 
black, one whose nostrils have a black hue and are pointed, 
one that has the colour of a tittiri (bird), one that has unequal 
legs having white patches on the foot, one that is devoid of fixed 
rings and has rings indicating inauspiciousness, should be 
avoided. 

6. The pairs of curls of hair on the skull, uparandhra 
(flanks), head, chest, forehead and neck of a horse are (deemed 
to be auspicious. 

7. The curls of hair at the corner of the mouth, forehead, 
the root of the ear, the throat, root of the forelegs, neck are 
auspicious. (The curls of hair) at other (places) are inauspi- 
cious. 

8. The horses which resemble the colour of a parrot, 
indragopa (a kind of insect), moon and a crow and those which 
have a golden colour and are glossy are always commendable. 

9. One should dismiss all the hopes of conquest where the 
horses of the kings have long necks, broad eye-corners and 
auspicious short ears. 

10. A horse or an elephant which is guarded confers good 
and confers misery otherwise. Those horses are excellent and 
are gandharvas which increase the fortune and progeny. 

11a. A horse is offered as an oblation in the aSvamedha (a 
horse-sacrifice) on account of its purity. 

1 lb-1 3a. A morsel composed of vrfa, neem, brhatl, gud&ci 9 
makfikd , siriihd and gandhakari anointed on the head (of a horse) 
or asafoetida, root of pufkara f ndgara with sour vetasa , long 
pepper and saindhava (a kind of rock salt) with hot water 
would remove the pain (in the stomach). 

13b- 14a. A decoction of dried ginger, atwifd , mustd , ananta 



289.14b-25a 


791 


and bilva leaves would remove all kinds of dysentery if given 
as a drink. 

14b-15a. A horse would become free from fatigue by drink- 
ing a potion composed of goat’s m\\k 9 pariyangu and sdriva (?) 
with profuse (quantity of) sugar. 

15b-16a. Oily emetic is to be given for the horse in a 
dronikd (an oval basin of wood). It should penetrate the sinews 
of the viscera. It would make it feel comfortable. 

16b- 17a. A ball of pomegranate, the three myrobalans, 
dried ginger, pepper and long pepper with equal proportion of 
molasses should be given to the horses. It would cure the 
harassing cough. 

17b-18a. The juice of vr$a together with priyangu , lodhra 
and honey should be given to a horse for drinking. Or the five 
kola etc. 1 (should be given) with milk. It would cure the 
cough. 

18b- 19a. It is beneficial to give emetics at first in all the 
kinds of diarrhoea. Then anointing with oil, rubbing with 
fragrant unguents, besmearing medicated oil, giving sternuta- 
tory and besmearing with unguents should be done in order. 

19b. The process of treatment for horses afflicted by fever 
is with water only. 

20. Anointing with the roots of lodhra and karaflja , mdtu- 
luhga , agni, dried ginger, kusfha , asafoetida, vaSd and rdstid would 
cure swelling. 

21-22. A horse which drinks marijifthd , madhuka, grapes, 
bfhati , red sandal, the seeds and roots of wild cucumber, 
Srngdfaka and kakruka boiled with goat’s milk and then cooled 
together with sugar and abstains from food would become free 
from passing of blood in the urine. 

23. Anointment with kafutaila of the affected parts (of a 
horse) is commended in the case of swelling in the wrist, cheek 
or throat or stiff-neck. 

24-25a. (A horse) that is affected by stiff-throat would 
have probably swelling in the region of the throat. A sternuta- 
tory with mustard, vahni, rock-salt, juice of holy basil, black 
pepper and asafoetida (is given) . 

1. The five spices such as the long pepper, etc. 



792 


Agni Purdna 


25b-26a. Besmearing a paste of two varieties of turmeric, 
jyotismati , pdfhd, black pepper, ktiffha, vacd and honey mixed 
with molasses and (cow’s) urine is beneficial in paralysis of the 
tongue. 

26b-27a. Paste made with sesamum, yaffi, turmeric, neem 
leaves mixed with honey and clarified butter is a remedy for 
ulcers. 

27b-28a. The horses which limp on account of whipping 
and feel extreme pain should be fomented with oil. It would 
remove the pain quickly. 

28b-29a. The same procedure as in the case of ulcers (is 
to be followed) in the case of a hurt or deranged state of the 
humours or one caused by whipping. A decoction of the barks 
of aivattha, udumbara , plakja, madhuka and vafa with profuse 
quantity of water in comfortable heat would cure the ulcers. 

29b-31. Oil prepared with a decoction of Jatdhvd, dried 
ginger, rasna, mahjUthd , kuffha rock-salt, devaddru , vacd, two 
varieties of turmeric and red sandal mixed with gu^tdci and 
milk is used for smearing, as emetic and sternutatory and as 
unguents in all cases when there is oozing of blood at the eye- 
comers (of a horse) suffering from eye-disease caused by 
leeches. 

32-33. Decoction of the barks of khadira , udumbara and 
aivattha mixed with equal parts of emblic myrobalan, durdlabhd , 
tiktd, priyangu * saffron and guduci is beneficial in case of a limp- 
ing one (horse) , a wound of the tendon, or of an ear or a dry 
tumour. 

34a. In the case of a fast developing derangement of a 
humour, it is desired that it is broken at once. 

34b-35a. Rubbing with cowdung, manjikd , kusfha, turmeric, 
sesamum and mustard ground with cow’s urine would remedy 
itching. 

35b-36a. A decoction of the above mixed with honey and 
cooled should be given through the nostrils together with sugar 
and cJvakanja. It would remedy the haemoptysis. 

36b-37a. Salt should be given to the horses on every 
seventh day. The liquor vdruni should be given to them as an 
additional drink after they had eaten as above. 



289.37b-50 


793 


37b-38a. (A decoction) with jiuaniya, madhura , mjrdvikd, 
sugar, long pepper and padmaka should be given as a substitute 
drink in the autumn. 

38b-39a. (A decoction made) with vidahgd, long pepper, 
coriander, Satdhvd, lodhrd , rock-salt and citraka (should be given) 
to horses as a substitute drink on the advent of winter. 

39b-40a. A substitute drink in the spring would be with 
the herbs lodhrd , priyahgu^ must * f long pepper and dried ginger 
mixed with honey. This would remedy (the deranged) 
phlegm. 

4Qb-41a. Wine together with the potent herbs priyahgu , 
long pepper, lodhrd and ya$fi together with molasses should be 
given as the substitute drink in summer. 

41b-42a. A substitute drink on the advent of the rainy 
season would be (decoction made of) stick of lodbrd y salt, long 
pepper and dried ginger mixed with oil. 

42b-44. The horses should be given ghee to remedy the 
(deranged) bile in the summer, increase of the blood in the 
autumn and loosening of the feces in the rainy season. The 
horses which have excess of phlegm and wind should be given 
oil to drink. Any evil consequence of the abuse of oil (should 
be remedied) by making them dry (to remove fat). Food 
consisting of barley with butter-milk for three days would 
make them shed (excess fat). 

45. Clarified butter in the autumn and summer, oil in the 
cold and spring (seasons) and through the syringe in the 
advanced winter is desired to be the restraining (remedy). 

46. Food that is heavy and that would increase the 
phelgm, exercise, bathing, hot (sun) and wind are prohibited 
for a horse which has been given oil to drink. 

47. Horses should be bathed and made to drink only once 
on the advent of the rains. On an extremely stormy day 
drinking only once is commended. 

48. When heat and cold are blended in a season, (horses) 
should be made to drink twice and bathe once. In the summer 
they should be bathed and led to drink thrice and should be 
allowed to plunge (into the water) for a long time. 

49-50. Four ddhakas (a measure) of barley without the 
husk should be given (to the horses) . They may also be given 



794 


Agni Purdna 


bengal gram, vrihi (a kind of paddy) and green gram. In a 
whole day and night (a horse may be fed) ten and a half tulds 
(weight) of barley and eight tulds of dried (grains) or four 
(parts) of vyofa 1 (dried ginger) . 

51-52. DQrvd (a kind of grass) would remedy (the de- 
ranged) bile, barley (would remedy) the cough, mustard, the 
congestion of phlegm and arjuna (would set right) breathing. 
So also mdna (7) (would rectify) loss of strength. The horse 
that takes a meal of durvd (grass) would not be affected by 
diseases due to (deranged) wind, bile, phlegm or their com- 
bined action. 

53-54. Vicious horses should be tied with two ropes on 
each side to posts behind them at a distance of a dhanus (four 
cubits) . They may stay in places (stables) where (hay) has 
been strewn and the ground has been fumigated. Barley should 
be placed therein. The place should be well-lit and protected 
well. Animals such as the goats and monkeys as well as cocks 
should be kept in the stables of horses. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETY 

Propitiatory rites for curing the ailments of horses 
Sdlihotra said : 

1. O Susruta ! Listen to me. I shall describe the three 

i 

kinds of propitiatory rites for the horses — the daily, the 
periodical and optional (rites) that would cure the diseases of 
the horses. 

2. After having worshipped Sridhara (a form of Visnu), 
Sri (consort of Visnu) and Uccaihsravas, the chief among the 
horses, on an auspicious day, one should offer ghee as oblation 
with (the recitation of the formula) Savitra (Gayatri). 

3-6a. Then fees should be paid to the brahmins. Then the 
horses would increase. The propitiatory rite (should be done) 


1. The reading vapufm ata b in the venk. edn. does not fit in. 



290.6b— 291.1 


795 


on the fifteenth (lunar) day of the bright fortnight in the 
(month of) aivayuk (October-November). It should especially 
be done outside (the stable). (Lord) Varuna (water-god) 
should be worshipped. (A mystic) diagram should be drawn and 
(the image of) the goddess (placed at the centre) should be 
surrounded by branches (of trees). Pitchers filled with all 
flavours and covered by cloth should be placed at the cardinal 
points. After offering oblations of barley and clarified butter, 
the horses and the Asvin gods 1 should be worshipped. Fees 
should be paid to the brahmins. Listen to me ! (I shall now 
describe) the periodical (rites) . 

6b-8. One should worship (Lord) Visnu, (goddess) Sri 
(Lak$mi), (Lord) Brahma, (Lord) Sankara, (Lord) Soma 
(Moon), (Lord) Adi tya (Sun), the A^vin gods, Revanta and 
Uccaihsravas (the horse of Indra) in the (constellations) 
Capricorn etc. for the horses with lotuses. The guardian deities 
of the cardinal points (should be worshipped) on the petals. 
Pitchers (should be dedicated) for each one of the (above) 
deities (and worshipped) on the altar at the auspicious place. 
After having fasted, oblations of sesamum, unbroken rice, 
clarified butter and white mustard should be made a hundred 
times for everyone of the gods. This act would ward off the 
diseases of the horses. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETYONE 

Propitiatory rites for curing the ailments of elephants 
Salihotra said : 

1. I shall describe the propitiatory rites that would destroy 
the deseases of elephants. One should worship (Lord) Vi$nu, 
(goddess) Sri and the elephant (Airavata) of Indra on the 
fifth (lunar) day. 


1 . a pair of celestial gods believed to have been born to Sun through 
a nymph in the form of a mare. 



796 


Agrii Purdna 


2-5a. (Similarly one should worship) Brahma, Sankara 
(Siva), Vi$nu, Sakra (Indra), Vaisravana (god of wealth), 
Yama (god of death), Moon, Sun, Varuna (Water-god), 
Wind-god, Fire-god, the Earth, the Sky, Sesa (the serpent 
couch of Lord Vi§nu), the mountains and the eight elephants 
which guard the cardinal points such as Virupaksa, Maha- 
padma, Bhadra, Sumanasa, Kumuda, Airavata, Padma, Pu§- 
padanta, Vamana, Supratika and Afijana 1 . Oblation should 
then be made and fees paid (to the brahmins). The elephants 
which are sprinkled with the propitiatory water would multiply. 
Listen tome ! I shall describe the periodical rites. 

5b-7a. In a lotus diagram (drawn) on the ground outside 
the city at the constellation Capricorn etc. of the elephants or 
at the north-eastern (angular point), (Lord) Vi§nu should be 
worshipped at the centre, (goddess) LaksmI in the filament, 
(gods) Brahma, Bhaskara (Sun), the earth and then (Lord) 
Skanda (son of Siva), the sky, (Lord) Siva, the Moon and 
Indra and his weapons on the petals in order. 

7b-8a. (The weapons) such as the thunder-bolt, spear, 
rod, club, noose, mace, spike and the lotus should be wor- 
shipped on the periphery of the outer circle (of the diagram). 
The Sun and the pair of Asvins should be worshipped at its 
centre. 

8b- 11- The eight Vasus and the Sadhyas (a class of 
celestials) (should be worshipped) at the petals at the southern 
and the south-western ends. The celestials, (the sages) Arigirasa 
and others, the Bhfgus and the Wind-god (should be worship- 
ped) at the north-western (petal), the Vigvedevas at the 
southern (petal) and thcRudras at the north-eastern (petal). 
The gods should be worshipped at the outer periphery of the 
exterior circle. The sages who composed the aphorisms, 
(goddess) Van! (Sarasvatl, goddess of speech), the rivers and 
mountains (should be worshipped) on the east etc. The great 
spirits should be worshipped at the angular points such as the 


1. Airavata, Pun^arika, Vamana, Anjana, Pu?padanta, Sarvabhauma 
and Supratika are the standard names of the elephants of the cardinal 
points. The text here reads additional names. 



291.12-22 


797 


north-east and the like. The lotus, disc, mace and conch (which 
form) the four sides (enclosing) the circle (should be wor- 
shipped) . 

12-14. Pitchers (should be placed) at (each one of) the 
four entrances (at the east etc.) and banners on (the angular 
points such as) the south-east etc. Four ornamental arches 
(should be erected at the entrances) . The elephants Airavata 
and others ( should be invoked to guard the entrances). Se- 
parate containers with herbs (should be placed) on the east 
and other directions for the gods. After having offered a 
hundred oblations with clarified butter and worshipped the 
elephants, one should circumambulate them. After having 
worshipped the elephant, fire-god and the gods at the outer 
periphery, the worshippers would go home. Fees should be 
paid to the brahmins as well as the physicians of the elephants. 

1 5-20. An astrologer should then mount the famale ele- 
phant and utter in its ear. After having done the propitiatory 
rite in this eternal king of elephants, one should recite the 
(following) mystic words : “O ! Fortunate one ! The king 
has made you the chief among the elephants. The king would 
worship you with perfumes, flowers and excellent attendants. 
Then the people would worship you by his order. The king has 
to be protected by you in the battle, on the way and in the 
house. Abandoning your animal nature you remember your 
divine nature. In olden days, at the time of the battle between 
the celestials and demons, the celestials created the divine 
elephant. The elephant called Ari?ta that was born to Airavata 
(elephant of Indra) inherited the splendour of the divine 
elephants. O King of elephants ! You attain that splendour 
endowed with divinity. May you b t blessed with virtues ! You 
protect the king in the battle.” 

21. The king should (then) mount (the elephant) that has 
been consecrated thus. Excellent warriors bearing weapons 
should follow it. 

22. Again in a lotus diagram (drawn) outside (the shed) 
on the ground, the guardians of the cardinal points and others 
should be worshipped. Bala (deva), Naga, the earth and 
(goddess) Sarasvati (should be worshipped) in the filaments. 



798 


Agni Purina 


23. After having worshipped the small drum at the centre 

with perfume, garlands and unguents, oblations should be 
made and a pitcher filled with sweet juice should be given to a 
brahmin. # 

24. Then the superintendent of the elephant, the guard 
of the elephant and the astrologer should be worshipped . A 
small drum should be given to the superintendent of the ele- 
phant and he should make it sound. It should produce aus- 
picious and loud sounds. He should sound this while remaining 
on the buttocks (of the elephant). 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETYTWO 

The greatness of cows and their welfare 
Dhanvantari said : 

1. A king should protect cows and brahmins. I shall des- 
cribe the propitiation of cows. Cows are sacred and auspicious. 
The world is sustained by them. 

2. Their feces and urine are the excellent destroyers of 
poverty. Stroking of a cow and the water from its horns would 
destroy multitudes of sins. 

3. The urine and feces of a cow, milk, curd, clarified 
butter and rocani (yellow pigment got from a cow) are the six 
constituents that are excellent and when drunk they would 
prevent bad dreams etc. 

4. (Go) rocani is capable of nullifying poison and demons. 
One who feeds the cow with a morsel of food would go to 
heaven. In whose house cows are ill-kept, that person would go 
to hell. 

5-6a. One who gives a morsel of food to a cow belonging to 
another would go to heaven. One who does good to a cow 
would reach the world of Brahma. One who makes a gift of a 
cow, one who sings her praise and one who saves her life would 
elevate his family. The earth becomes pure by the breath of 
cows. Sins get destroyed by their touch. 



292.6b-18 


799 


6b-8. The urine of a cow, the feces, milk, curd, clarified 
butter and the water in which kuia (grass) (has been dipped) 
(being taken) and a night’s fasting would purify even a vile 
person. It was practised by the gods in days of yore to 
destroy all inauspiciousness. If each one of the above was 
practised for three days, it was known as the mahdsdntapana . This 
is capable of fulfilling all the desires (of a person) and des- 
troying all that is inauspicious. 

9. It was (known as) krcchratikrcchra, if one lived on milk 
for twcntyone days. The excellent men (who practised it) 
would become stainless, would get all the desires fulfilled and 
attain heaven. 

10-11. One should drink hot urine, hot ghee, and hot 
milk, each one for three days and consume air only for the 
next three days. This vow known as taptakrcchra would destroy 
all sins and confer the world of Brahma. It is known as tttakrc - 
chra if done with cold things (as above) . It was described by 
Brahma. It would yield the world of Brahma. 

12- 13a. One should bathe in the urine of a cow, maintain 
himself with milk and move with the cows eating after they 
had eaten. It is known as govrata. One would become free from 
the sins in a month. He would attain the world of cows and 
reach heaven. 

13b- 14a. One who mutters the gomati vidyd (a sacred 
formula) would reach the excellent world of cows. Therein he 
will enjoy music, dance and the company of nymphs in the 
celestial car. 

14b- 18. Cows are always fragrant. They give out the 
perfume of guggulu (fragrant resin) . They are the sustainers of 
beings. Cows are the supreme conferers of welfare. The excellent 
food for gods is the clarified butter from cows. They pour out 
and utter purity for all the beings. They satisfy the immortals 
in heaven with the clarified butter purified by mystic formulas. 
Cows are connected with sacrificial rites such as agnihotra of the 
sages. Cows are the excellent refuge of all beings. They are 
supremely holy and are exceedingly auspicious. Cows are the 
steps leading to heaven. They are the perpetually blessed 
ones. 



800 


Agni Parana 


19. Obeisance to cows ! To the fortunate ones ! To the 
fragrant ones ! Obeisance to the daughters of Brahma ! Obeisance 
to the holy ones ! 

20-22. One family has been made into rivo (such as) 
brahmins and cows. The sacred formulas remain on one side 
and clarified butter on the other. The entire universe is supported 
by gods, brahmins, cows, holy men and chaste women. Hence 
they are always considered to be the fittest to be worshipped. 
Wherefrom {cows) would drink is known to be a sacred spot. 
Cows are really the Ganges and others. The greatness of cows 
has been told. Listen to me ! I shall now describe the treatment 
(of their diseases). 

23. Oil mixed with rock salt and decoction of fyngavera, 
bald and mdqisa , together with honey should be used for the 
diseases affecting the horns of cows. 

24. Oil prepared with manji$fhd y asafoetida and rock salt 
or garlic alone should be used in all kinds of pain in the 
ears. 

25. Besmearing a paste of the roots of bilva, ap&marga, 
dhdtaki, pdfald and kufaja at the base of the teeth would remove 
the pain therein. 

26. O R&ma ( Ghee heated with the ingredients used for 
removing tooth-ache is known to remove the disease of mouth. 
Rock-salt (is used) for the diseases of tongue. 

27-28. Sfftgavera^ the two varieties of turmeric and the 
three kinds of myrobalans (are useful to remedy) the stiffness 
of neck. The three myrobalans mixed with ghee given as a 
drink to cows is commended in heartache, stomachache, rheu- 
matic complaints and pulmonary diseases. The two varieties of 
turmeric and pdfhd may be given for dysentery. 

29. Sfiigavera and bhdrgi may be given for the diseases of the 
digestive organs and the pulmonary capillaries, cough and 
asthma. 

30. Priyadgu together with salt should be given for joining 
the broken (bones) . Oil that removes wind, when heated with 
madhuyaftl (would cure) biliousness. 

31 . Mustard mixed with honey (would be the remedy) for 
(deranged) phlegm. (For the diseases) of the flesh, the same 
with the dust of puftaka (would be the remedy). One should 



292 . 32-43 


801 


apply oil, clarified butter and harit&la on wounds from which 
blood oozes out. 

32-34. Blackgram, sesamum, wheat, cow’s milk and ghee 
made into a ball with salt gives nourishment to the calves. It 
would give strength to the young bulls. Fumigation would 
destroy the affliction due to evil planets. Fumigation with 
demdaru , vacd, mdriisi , guggulu , asafoetida and mustard is bene- 
ficial for cows against pain due to evil planets. After fumigation 
a bell should be tied to cows. 

35. If a cow is fed with aivagandhd and sesamum it would 
increase its strength and make it yield profuse milk. For a bull 
that is maintained in the house, oil-cake (would be) the elixir. 

36. The goddess of fortune should always be worshipped 
in the feces of the cows on the fifth (lunar day) for peace. (Lord) 
Vasudeva (should) also (be worshipped) with perfumes etc. A 
different propitiatory rite will be described now. 

37. (Lord) Hari (Visnu) should be worshipped on the 
fifteenth day of the bright fortnight in (the month of) aSvayuk 
(October-November) . (Lord) Hari, Rudra, Aja (Brahma), 
Sun, (goddess of) Fortune and Fire-god (should be worshipped) 
with ghee. 

38- 39a. After feeding cows with curd and worshipping 
(them), one should circumambulate the fire. One should also 
arrange for a bull-fight accompanied by singing and instrumental 
music outside (the place) . Salt should be given to cows. 
Brahmins (should be paid) the fees. 

39b-43. In the periodical (propitiatory rite) (Lord) Vi$nu 
should be worshipped at the centre of a lotus (diagram) on the 
ground along with (goddess) Sri oh the (occasion of Sun’s 
transit through) Capricorn etc. The celestials should be wor- 
shipped in the filaments in the (different) directions. The Sun, 
the Subhadrdja (born as fortunate) and Bali, the Bahurupa 
should be worshipped outside. The Sky, Vifvarupa, Siddhi, 
Rddhi, Santi, Rohini (should also be worshipped). The guardian 
cows of the cardinal points — east etc., the Moon and Iivara 
(should be worshipped) in the filaments. The guardian deities 
of the cardinal points (should be worshipped) in the pitchers 
(placed) on the petals of the lotus. Oblation should be made 



802 


Agni Parana 


unto the fire with the twigs of the kfvra tree, mustard and un- 
broken rice a hundred times each. Gold and bronze should be 
given away to brahmins. Cows should then be worshipped and 
released for the sake of peace and to be endowed # with milk etc. 

Firc-god said : 

44. Salihotra narrated the veterinary science relating to 
the horses to Susruta. Palakapya narrated the science relating 
to the elephants to Angaraja. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETYTHREE 

Different kinds of mantras and their nomenclature 
Fire-god said : 

1. Listen to me ! 1 shall describe the science relating to the 
mystic formulas that would yield enjoyment and emancipation. 
O Brahmin ! The mystic formulas containing more than twenty 
letters are known to be mdldmantra-s . 

2. The mystic formulas having more than ten letters (and 
less than twenty) are designated as arvdgbija-s . These yield 
results in the old age, while the mdldmantras in the youth. 

3-5a. The formulas having more than five letters yield 
fruits always. The other formulas belonging to the group of 
mantras are of three kinds such as feminine, masculine and neuter. 
The feminine mantras end -with (the term) Svaha (consort of 
Fire) . The neuter mantras end with (the term) obeisance. The 
rest are masculine. They are commended (to be used) in charms 
to subjugate and' to drive away (evil). The feminine ( mantras ) 
(are used) to destroy diseases due to mean acts, while the 
neuter ones in other cases. 

5b-7. Mantras (are also classified as) dgneya (fiery) and 
saumya (pleasing). They should be repeated at the beginning 
and end of the asterisms and the halves. The dgneya mantra is 
generally laid down as having the asterism at the end and the 
fire and the ether (in greater proportions). The rest (are said 



293.8-16 


803 


to be) saumya . The two (varieties of mantras) are commended to 
be used in cruel and good deeds (respectively). The dgneya 
mantra may perhaps be saumya by the addition of ‘obeisance* at 
the end. Saumya mantra (would also) in the same way (be) 
dgneya by the addition of the syllable phaf. 

8. A mantra would not accomplish (the result) if it is either 
asleep or awakened. The sleeping state (of a mantra) is when 
there is powerful (breath through the nostrils and the waking 
state when the breath) flows through the right (nostril). 

9. By the inversion (of the letters) of an dgneya mantra one 
would get (the letters) of a saumya mantra . One should ascertain 
the waking state of both (the mantras) and the day for both. 

10- 14a. The mantras , whose letters are presided over by 
baneful asterisms and constellations, should be avoided. In order 
to acquire kingdom, the vowel letters which arc inimical to the 
component letters of one’s name, should be first arranged in due 
order. “May you go and fill the abode of the king”. Thus the 
script is made ready. The vowels should be arranged in the 
different asterisms in order ending with the (asterism) Revatl. 
The chambers should be marked as the siddha-s (successful, such 
as the ninth, the first and the fifth chamber), the sddhya-s 
(successful in time, such as the sixth the tenth and the second 
chamber), the susiddha-s (extremely successful, such as the third, 
the seventh and the eleventh chamber), and the ari (hostile, 
such as the fourth, the eighth and the twelfth chamber) and 
the character of each mantra in relation to the name of the 
individual to whom it should be imparted, should be calculated 
therefrom. 

14b- 15. One accomplishes merely by the repetition of the 
siddha (mantra). The sddhya (mantra) (could accomplish) by the 
repetition, worship and making an oblation. The susiddha ( mantra ) 
would accomplish by mere contemplation. (The mantra known 
as) ari would destroy the votary. A mantra full of baneful letters 
of the alphabet is condemned by all. 

16. After having been duly initiated .ending with the cere- 
monial bathing and after having had the exposition of the tantra 
from the preceptor, one has to practise the desired mantra got 
from the preceptor. 



804 


Agni Purina 


1 7*1 8a. A person who is bold, competent, pure, devoted, 
bent on repetition, contemplation and the like, accomplished, 
who practises penance, is intelligent, knows the tantra , speaks 
the truth and is capable of restraining and blessing (^the disciple) 
is said to be a preceptor. 

18b- 19. A disciple ( should be) calm, restrained, clever, 
studied, celebate, and eating food fit for oblation. He should do 
service to the preceptor. He should be eager to accomplish. He 
(should be) instructed. He (should be) like a son, modest and 
capable of giving money. 

20-21 a. A mantra should be imparted by the preceptor. When 
it is accomplished the preceptor should repeat it a thousand times. 
A mantra that has been heard accidentally, or got by fraudulent 
means or by force or written on a leaf or (got) in the form of a 
gathd (a verse) would not bear any fruit. 

21b-23a. One who practises a mantra by means of several 
acts such as repetition, oblation, worship and the like, attains 
success by little practice. There is nothing which cannot be 
achieved by means of a mantra that has been perfectly practised. 
What to say about a person who has practised many mantras . He 
is really Siva Himself. 

23b-24a. A mantra (consisting) of a single letter bears fruit 
after repetition for ten lakh (a million) times. The repetition 
is reduced as the number of letters (in the mantra) is increased. 
In this way one has to flock together the other mantras . 

24b-25. The mantras containing letters twice or thrice the 
blja mantras should be repeated like a m&l&mantra. A mantra 
should be repeated a hundred and eight or a thousand times if the 
number of their repetition has not been specified. It is known 
that the number of libations and anointments is in general a 
tenth part of the number of repetitions. 

26. For one who is not able to repeat, ghee (would be the 
material) for libation, in all the cases, if the material has not 
been specified. The number of repetitions of the component 
(i mantras ) would be a tenth as that of the main mantra. 

27. When the mantras are repeated according to their 
potency, the presiding deities of th? mantras yield the desired 
(fruits). They get pleased with the contemplation, oblation 
and worship etc. of the votary. 



293,28-40 


805 


28. The muttering of a mantra is ten times more meri- 
torious than their loud repetition. Repetition with the tongue 
(within the mouth) is hundred times (meritorious) . The mental 
(repetition) is known to be a thousand times (more meri- 
torious). 

29. One should begin the repetition of a mantra facing the 
east or looking downwards. All the mantras should begin with 
the firanava (the syllable Orh) . One should restrain from convers- 
ing and eat the prescribed food. 

30. One has to repeat the mantras remaining seated. He 
should look at his preceptor and the (favourite) deity alike. 
The places (suited for the practice) are a solitary cottage, 
temples and (banks of) rivers and tanks. 

31-34, One who wants to gain perfection (in a mantra ) , 
should live on rice-gruel, cakes, milk or havisya (that is to be 
offered to fire) food. The votary should worship the presiding 
deity of the mantra on the lunar days and week-days such as the 
eighth and fourteenth days of the dark fortnight and eclipses etc. 
Dasra (Asvini devata), Yama (God of Death), the Fire-god, 
Dhatr (Brahma) , the Moon, Rudra, Jupiter, Diti, the serpents, 
the Pitfs, Bhaga, Aryama, the Sun, Tva$tj*, the Maruts, Indra, 
the Fire-god, Mitra, Indra, Nirrti. the Water, Visvedevas, 
Hfsike$a (name of Vifnu), the Winds, the god of water 
(Varuna), Ajaikapad (one of Rudras), Ahirbudhnya (one of 
the Rudras), Pu?an are the deities of (theasterisms) ASvini and 
others. 

35-36a. The fire-god, Dasra (Asvini devata) , Uma (con- 
sort of Siva) , Nighna (Vina y aka ?), Naga (serpent), the Moon 
(Candra) , the Sun, the divine mothers, (goddess) Durga, the 
presiding deities of the cardinal points, Krsna, Vaivasvata (god 
of death), Siva, the Moon (Sasanka) and the Pitrs are the 
presiding deities of the lunar days. 

36b-40. Hara (Siva), Durga, Jupiter, Vi?nu, Brahma, 
Lak$mi and Kubera are the presiding deities of the days of 
the week. I shall describe the assignment of the letters (on the 
different parts of the body) . The letters constituting the five 
groups (of consonants such as ka 9 ca , fa 9 ta and pa) 9 should be 
assigned on the tips of the grown up hair, eyes, the pair of ears, 
nose, cheeks, lips, teeth, head, mouth, arms, feet, joints, sides, 



806 


Agni PurSrta 


back, navel and heart in order. The letters ya and others should 
be assigned on the heart. Skin, blood, flesh, fat, bone, marrow 
and semen are the seven essential ingredients (of the body). 
The regent of the letters beginning with rasa (essential juice) 
and ending with payas (milk) should be written. 

41*42. Srikantha, Ananta, Suk;ma, Trimurti, Amare- 
Ivara (Indra), Agnisa, Bhavabhuti, Tit hi la, Sthanuka, Hara, 
Dancjlsa, Bhautika, Sadyojata, Anugrahelvara, Akrura and 
Mahasena are the presiding deities to be worshipped. 

43-46. The deities Krodhisa, Canda, Paiic&ntaka, Siva, 
Rudra, Kurma, Trinetra, Caturanana, Ajela, Sarma, Somesa, 
Langali, Daruka, Ardhanarilvara, Uma, Kanta,Asadhi, Dandin, 
Atri, Mina, Mesa, Lohita, Sikhi, Chagalanda, Dviranda, 
Mahakala, Balin, Bhujariga, Pinaki, Khadgila, Baka, Sveta, 
Bhrgu, Lagudit Isaksa, Ksaya and Samvarta (are also to be 
assigned). 

47. After having written (the names of) the Rudras 
together with their consorts at first, then ending with obeisance, 
they should be assigned in order. Then the aftga-mantras should 
be located. All the mantras with their constituents are capable 
of yielding perfection. 

48-51. These anga-mantras should be completed with the 
hrllekha and vyoma and located. Then the heart and other 
parts of the body should be associated with the aUgamantras. 
‘Obeisance’ would be for the heart, svakd (oblation) for the 
head, vafaf for the tuft, hum for the armour, vaufaf for the eye 
and phaf for the weapon. Eye need not be included when the 
five aAgas are uttered. Where there is no aAgamantra (for a 
mantra) , the location should be made in the self and repetition 
is made a million times. After having located in order the 
goddess Vagisi and the other gods mentioned, sesamum should 
be offered to the fire. The goddess of letters who bears the 
garland of letters, a pitcher, a book and a lotus would bestow 
the ability to compose poetry. One should do the assignment 
at the beginning of an act. All the mantras become spotless and 
yield perfection by (the grace of) the divine mothers even if 
one is not a poet. 



294.1-12 


807 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETYFOUR 

The characteristics of different kinds of serpents 
The Fire-god said : 

1. The different species of serpents, their nature, the ten 
places (in the body at which a bite would be fatal) , the re- 
medial action, (the resultant) impurity and the behaviour of 
the (person) bitten (by the serpent) are said to be the seven 
characteristics. 

2-3. Se$ a, Vasuki, Taksa, Karkotaka, Abja (Padma), 
Mahambuja (Mahapadma), Sankhapala and Kulika are the 
eight chief serpents. They have ten, eight, five, three, three and 
hundred heads in order. Every two of these serpents are said to 
be brahmins , ksatriyas, vaiSya and S&dras in order. 

4-8. (The serpents) born in their family (are) five hundred 
from whom innumerable serpents came into being. (The ser- 
pents are of three kinds such as) the phani> maniali and rdjtta 
being windy, bilious and phlegmatic respectively. The variety 
known as vyantara has these humours mixed. The serpents are 
known as having hoods. They bear (the signs of) cart-wheels, 
ploughshares, umbrellas, svastikas and goads. (The serpents 
known as) gonasas move slowly. They are long and bear 
different kinds of rings. (Those known as) rdjilas are variega- 
ted, glossy and (can fly) across and upwards with their wings. 
The vyantaras (would have) mixed mants. (They are again 
classified) into four kinds as earthy, watery, fiery and windy 
and are divided into twentysix kinds. The gonasas are sixteen 
kinds, the rdjilas , thirteen and the vyantaras , twentyone. Those 
which are born at an unspecified time are known as the 
vyantaras . 

9-12. Their impregnation lasts for four months beginning 
with the three months commencing from Afddha. Two hundred 
and forty eggs are laid. . The serpents swallow their young with- 
out showing any distinction such as the males, females and 
hermaphrodites. The eyes get opened in seven days. The outer 
(skin) becomes black after a month. After twelve days its faculty 
gets developed. The teeth appear on seeing the Sun. The teeth 
kardtl 9 makari, kdlardtri and yamadiitikd (grow) in twenty to 



808 Agni Ptir&na 

thirtytwo days. There are the venomous teeth on the left and 
right sides. 

13-14. They discard their (outer) skin after six months. 
They would live for one hundred and twenty years. Seven 
serpents (among the eight mentioned earlier) preside over the 
days and nights of days such as Sun-day and the like. Among 
them six (preside over) every week. Kulika (is the lord) of 
all the junctions of periods. Kulika may exercise its influence 
jointly w.ith either Sankha or Mahabja (Maha-padma) . 

1 5. One n&4ik& (24 minutes) in between the two is the 
period of the Kulika. It is a malignant period in all the cir- 
cumstances and especially in the serpent bite. 

16-18a. The asterisms Kjttika, Bharani, Svatl, Miila, 
the three purvas (purvaphalgunl, Purva$a(Jha and Purvabha- 
drapada) , Asvini, ViSakha, Ardra, Magha, Aslesa, Citra, Sra- 
vana, RohinI, Hasta, Saturdays and Tuesdays among the days, 
the fifth, eighth, sixth as well as fourth, ninth and the fourteenth 
lunar days are malignant. The four twilight periods and mali- 
gnant .yoga (periods) as well as the (malignant) constellations 
are bad. 

1 8b-20a. There would be a single or a couple or many 
bites (of the serpents) . The bites are of four varieties — pierced, 
cut, apprehended and concealed. The bites in which there are 
three or two incisions or a single incision, pain, profuse bleed- 
ing and a bite in the leg in the night accompanied by (swel- 
ling) resembling (the shape of) a tortoise are directed by Yama 
(i.e. sure to be fatal) . 

20b-21a. A bite accompanied by burning and itching 
sensation (at the mouth of the bite), swelling and pain in the 
neck, gruelling pain and knotty (swelling) (should be known) 
to have the poison spread (in the body) . If it is otherwise it 
should be taken as free from poison. 

2 lb-25. It is inauspicious if one is bitten in a temple, an 
uninhabited house, an ant-hill, a garden, a hole, at a cross- 
road, in a cremation ground, on the bed of ^ river, at the con- 
fluence (of a river) with the ocean, in an island, at the meet- 
ing point of four roads, on the terrace of a building, in a 
flower, on the summit of a hill,* at the mouth of a hole, in an 
old well, in a dilapidated house, on a wall and on the trees such 



294,26-34 


809 


as the Sigru, ile$m&tdka , akfa 9 jambu , udumbara , zgpa and wi/a (the 
fig tree) as well as on a demolished compound, or at an aper- 
ture of the human body, face, heart, arm-pit, collar bone, 
palate, bone of the forehead, neck, head, chin, navel and feet. 
A messenger (who is sent to convey the news to the snake- 
charmer) is auspicious, if he has a flower in his hand, speaks 
well, is intelligent, belongs to the same sex and caste (as that 
of the person bitten), wears white dress, has no blemishes and 
is pure. 

26-28. One who enters through the side door, one who 
carries a weapon, one who has erred, one who has a down-cast 
look, one who wears decoloured dress, one who has the noose 
etc. in his hand, one who stammers, one who holds a dry piece 
of wood, one who feels depressed, one who holds sesamum in 
his hand and clothes, one who wears a wet dress, one who wears 
black or red flowers on his tuft, one who presses the nipple, 
one who cuts the nails, one who touches the buttocks, one who 
scratches (the earth) with the foot (toe), one who pulls out 
his hair and one who cuts the grass are inauspicious messengers. 

29. The sex of the person bitten should be known as male 
or female or hermaphrodite from he flow of the breath forcibly 
through the left or right or both tne nostrils of the self (the 
snake-charmer) or the messenger. 

30. One should indicate that part of the body as having 
been bitten which the messenger touches (when he meets the 
snake-charmer). It forebodes evil if the messenger moves his 
legs. If one has his (foot) raised without movement it indicates 
good. 

31. If the messenger has an animal by his side (when 
conveying the news), it augurs good. If he is found with any- 
thing else it forebodes evil. If the animal that is present paces 
here and there, it forebodes bad. But (if it paces here and there) 
when the messenger is conveying (the message), it augurs good. 

32. If the speech of a messenger is faulty at the beginning 
or middle, it is extremely ominous. The period that the venom 
would last could be known from the distinctions at the end of 
his speech. 

33-34. The alphabets are divided into two groups — the 
vowels beginning with ‘a* and the groups of letters beginning 



810 


Agni Purdna 


with *ka 9 ( ka , ca f fa, ta and/w). The group forming the vowels 
is known as vasum&n. The four letters of the consonants are sac- 
red to the Wind-god, Fire-god, Indra and Water respectively. 
The fifth letters belong to hermaphrodite. The vowels arc sac- 
red to Indra and water (alternatively). 

35. The presence of letters sacred to Wind and Fire (gods) 
at the beginning of a speech of the messenger is not good. (The 
presence of a letter sacred to) Hari (Indra) is mediocre. (The 
presence of) letters (sacred) to Varuna (god of water) is com- 
mendable. (The presence of) hermaphrodite (letters) is ex- 
tremely ominous. 

36. An auspicious sentence (heard as the messenger) de- 
parts or the thundering of a cloud or the trumpeting of an 
elephant are auspicious. The circular movement (of birds) or 
crying from a fruit or tree on the left side is (also) auspicious. 

37. Sounds such as music etc. would be auspicious. Such 
things would accomplish the result. Worthless words or words 
expressing a calamity, a wailing sound, a scream heard from 
the right (side), a sneezing (are bad omen) . 

38-39a. The sneezing of a courtesan, a king, a virgin, a 
cow, an elephant, muraja (a musical drum), a banner, milk, 
clarified butter, curd, water from the conch, umbrella, bherl 
(a kind of musical drum), fruit, the celestials, rice, gold and 
silver are fruitful if one comes across them on his way. 

39b-40. (The sight of) an artisan holding a burning log 
of wood, one who is clad in dirty clothes carrying a load, one 
who carries an axe, a jackal, a vulture, an owl, one having the 
matted hair, oil, skull and cotton is to be warded off. (The 
sight of) ash (brings in certain) loss. 

41 . The malady due to poison is of seven kinds depending 
on the movement (of the poison) from one essential ingredient 
of the body to another 1 . A poisonous bite (first) reaches the 
forehead, then the eyes, then the face. From the face it reaches 
the nerves associated with speech and other essential ingredients 
(such as the blood etc. of the body). 

1. They are the blood, flesh, fat, etc. 



295.1-4 


811 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETYFIVE 

The medical treatment for a serpent bite 

Fire-god said : 

1-2. I shall describe to you the treatment of a (poisonous) 
bite by means of mystic formulas, meditation and herbs. “ Orh ,* 
Obeisance to lord Nilakantha 1 (Siva)”. The repetition of this 
(mantra) would be an antidote for poison. Liquid cowdung with 
clarified butter should be drunk as a life-saving medicine. Poison 
is said to be of two varieties — the poison due to animals such 
as the serpent, rat etc. and that due to the plants such as the 
Srnga etc. 

3-4. Lord Brahma is represented by the soft vowels and 
those known as lohita and capable of protecting represent Lord 
Siva. This (the following) is a mantra (bearing) the name of 
the bird Tarksya (eagle, vehicle ofVisnu) consisting of letters 
(sacred to it). 

Orix ! burn ! A person of great intellect ! is for the heart. 
Garudavidala is on the head. To Garuda the crest-bird of 
heaven is for the tuft. “O Garuda ! One who destroys the 
poison ! One who pierces ! You frighten and trample down” (is 
the mantra) for the armour. “One whose command none can 
dispute ! hurh ! phat” (is the mantra ) for the weapon. “One 
who bears a dreadful appearance ! One who frightens all ! 
You frighten all ! Burn. Burn them into ashes. Oblations” (is) 
for the eye. (In order to worship Garuda with the above 
mantra) a lotus (diagram) is contemplated in the heart. The 
seven constituent elements (of the body are assigned therein). 
The vowels are arranged in the petals pointing to the eight 
cardinal points. The letters are located in the filaments etc. 
The fire (is located) near the pericarp (of the lotus). Then the 
snake-charmer should mentally remember it on the palm of 
the left hand. The letters should then be assigned on the 
thumb and other (fingers). Thus the consfituent parts of the 
mantra of the bird are distributed. 


1 . As he has drunk the deadly poison that came out of the milky ocean 
as it was churned. 



812 


Agni Pur&na 


5-7. Then (Lord) Indra, the presiding deity of the earth, 
of yellow colour, is assigned in a quadrilateral of the form of a 
mace. The white-coloured (Lord) Varuna, the presiding deity 
of water, (is assigned) in a semi-circle like the half of a lotus. 
(Lord) Fire, the presiding deity of lustre, (is assigned) in a 
svastika figure (inscribed within a triangle). (Lord) Wind, (is 
assigned) in a circle with a dot, bearing a black garland. 
These are assigned respectively in the middle of the fingers 
beginning with the thumb in their x-espective places covered by 
golden (images of) Garuda. 

8-10. The four letters of the mantra (should be contem- 
plated) as having a good halo of similar radiance. They 
should be located in the formless ether, presided over by (Lord) 
Siva of the form of the subtle principle of sound. The first 
letter (of the mantra) should be located on the middle fold of the 
little finger. The first letters of the serpents are also located as 
being present in their own spheres. The first letters of the earth 
and other elements are located on the last mark of the thumb 
etc. Then a wise man should locate the proximate qualities 
such as the subtle principles and the like on the fingers. 

11-14. By the touch of this Tarkiya ( mantra ) assigned on 
the hand all kinds of poisons would be destroyed. Then the 
letters of the mantra of the bird should be located in the halos 
in the regions of the umblicus and the joints of the body. It is 
excellent to have it as two fingers long. A wise man should 
contemplate Tark§a (the Eagle), who pervades the cosmic 
universal egg, who wears the serpent ornament known as the 
candra reflecting the blue hue of his dreadful beak and who has 
the great wings from the knee (to the navel) as golden coloured, 
from the navel (to the neck) as snow-coloured, from the neck 
(to the hair) as red like the saffron and from the ends of the 
hair as black. There would thus be a charm for a poison from 
the statement of a charmer who is pervaded by (the letters of ) 
the Tark$ya ( mantra ) . 

15-20a. A blow with the fist, thus charged with the 
Tarksya ( mantra ) , would remove poison. Raising the hand 
charged with the Tarksya ( mantra ) and passing over (the place 
of bite) the five fingers, and by having a look at the person 



295.20b-24 


813 


intoxicated, one would arrest the spread of the poison. One 
should arrest the spread of the poison by the repetition of the 
(following) mantra : “This bhubija (mantra), the lord of the five 
letters has descended from the sky. I shall arrest the excessive 
poison.** By reversing the bhiibija , the resultant mantra, “Flood, 
Flood, Yama !**, well-accomplished, would remove the poison. 
This would raise one like a stick, by bathing him with water 
after repeating (this mantra ) well. Similar result could be 
obtained by hearing the sound (produced) by a conch or bheri 
(war drum) after repeating (this mantra) properly. (This 
mantra) with the inversion of (the components of) earth and 
splendour would burn (the poison). This mantra with the 
inversion of (the components of) earth and wind would 
transfer the poison. 

20b-24. The practitioner of this charm possessing the 
shape of the figure of Garuda, should practise this act inside his 
own house with the components of earth, fire, moon and water. 
The repetition of this ( mantra ) in the abodes of Garuda and 
(Lord) Varuna would destroy the poison. This is said to be the 
holy janudantfi. It would destroy all posions and ward off fever, 
diseases and untimely death by bathing and drinking (the 
water consecrated by its repetition) marked with the compo- 
nents of (the syllables) svadhd and 3ri. “Oh ! Bird ! Bird ! 
Great bird ! Great bird ! Vi ! Vi ! Oblations ! Oh ! Bird ! Bird ! 
Great bird ! Great bird ! K$i ! Kfi ! Oblations !’* These two 
mantras of the king of birds are capable of destroying poison by 
chanting. (The gayatri mantra of Garuda is) : “We contemplate 
the king of birds. We meditate on the lord of the birds. May 
that Garuda prompt us (our minds)**. Then “Kala and 
Langali’*, the ( mantra ) of Nilakanfha. (blue-necked, an epithet 
of Siva) bearing the insignia of tooth and stick should be 
assigned on the chest, neck, tuft etc. on the body in front of 
the fire after consecration. Hara ! Hara ! Obeisance to the 
heart ! To the head, for Nilakantha, to the tuft ! Oblation to 
one who drank the poison kdlakuta 1 ! Then the armour on the 
neck. (Obeisance) to the three-eved lord wearing the hide of 

1. The poison that came out from the milky ocean when it was 
churned. 



814 


Agni Pur&rta 


elephants (present) in (the region of) the eye ! The faces of 
the Lord from the east onwards (should be then contemplated) 
as having (the colours of) white, yellow, red and black. 

25-29. The Lord should be contemplated • as offering 
protection and boon and holding the bow and the serpent in 
His hands. (Goddess) Gaurl and (Lord) Rudra (are contem- 
plated) as His presiding deity above and on the left. After 
having assigned the letters of the mantra on foot, knee, private 
organ, navel, heart, neck, face, head, hands, fingers beginning 
with the thumb, fore-finger and folds (on the fingers) and then 
all of them should be assigned on the thumb. After having con- 
templated thus, (they) should be bound quickly with the mudrd 
(formation made with the fingers), (in the shape of) a spike. 
The little finger should be held by the thumb. The other three 
are stretched out quickly. (This is that mudra.) The left hand 
(is used) for destroying the poison and the right hand in other 
acts.“Oiii ! Obeisance to Lord Nllakan{ha ! Cih ! To the clear- 
necked ! Cih ! (Obeisance) to the omniscient neck ! Cih ! Cast 
down ! Om ! Oblations ! (Obeisance) to the clear-necked, blue- 
necked ! To the destroyer of more than one or all poisons ! 
Obeisance to (Lord) Rudra-Manyu !” The poison gets des- 
troyed by rubbing with this ( mantra ) or by repeating in the ear 
or by (wearing) the sandal. There is no doubt. (Lord) Blue- 
necked, the great lord should be worshipped by following the 
rule laid down for the worship of Rudra. One would destroy 
the poison and disease by doing worship according to the rules 
of Rudra (worship) . 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETYSIX 
The Jive constituents of the worship of Rudra 

Fire-god said : 

1-2. I shall describe the five constituents of the worship 
of Rudra. It is the most excellent that confers everything. The 



296 . 3-10 


815 


livasadkalpa (resolve for Siva) is the heart. The Purufasuktal is 
the head. (The hymn) adbhyah sambhuta 2 is the tuft. The hymn 
(called) afa 1 2 3 is the armour. The iatarudriya (hymn) 4 * 6 7 is the 
weapon. These are the five constituents in the worship of 
Rudra. 

3-4a. After having assigned the five constituents and 
contemplating Him, the Rudra hymns are repeated in order. 
The hymn (beginning with) yajjdgrata 6 is known to be repeated 
mentally. The sage (of that hymn) is fivasaftkalpa (resolve) 
and the metre is said to be trUtubh (consisting of 11 syllables in 
a quarter) . 

4b-5a. (For the hymn) sahasraSirstiP for the head the sage 
is Narayana. The deity (of this hymn) is the supreme soul. 
The metre is known to be triffubh. 

5b-6. The sage for the hymn adbhyah sambhuta 1 9 is the person 
going to the north. Iritfubh is the metre for the firsf three 
hymns, anttsfubh for the next two and trisfubh for the last 
(hymn). The deity for this (hymn) also is the supreme soul. 

7-8. Indra is the lord for the twelve hymns beginning with 
dSifl. Irisfubh is said to be the metre and Pratiratha, the sage. 
The deities are separate for each one of the verses in the hymn 
of seventeen verses. The deity of the constituent part is 
Puruvit. The metre of the remaining deities is said to be 
antisfubh . 

9. Indra is the deity for (the hymn) asauyastamrafjP . Puru- 
liriga is the deity for the constituent parts. Pahkti is the metre. 
The deities of the constituent parts are vital. 

10. Paramesthin is the sage for all the hymns of the 
Rudradhyaya 10 . For the three hymns commencing with 


1. RV. 10.901a. 

2. TA. 3.13.1a. Cf. adbhyah sambhrtafr . 

3. Gould not be traced. 

4. Same as Rudradhyaya. 

Could not be traced. 

6. RV. 10.90.1a. 

7. See 1 above. 

8. Could not be traced. 

9. VS. 16.6a; TS.4.5. 1. 2a. 

10. The hymns beginning with namaste rudra many am: 
VS. 16.1a; TS. 4.5.1.1a. 



816 


Agni Pur&va 


* devandm kulsasya 991 9 Prajapati is the sage. 

11. For the two (hymns beginning with) mono 2 , Uma is 
the single deity and Rudra for rudr&ica 3 . Ekarudra is the deity 
for the first anuvdka (name of a section of the "collection of 
hymns ) . 

12. Gdyatra is the metre for the first (hymn), anu$tubh for 
the (next) three verses and pankli and anusfubh for the (subse- 
quent verses) . 

13. Then jagati is the metre for the (next) two (verses) 
The Rudra (hymns) are eighty. The Hiranyabahus are three. 
“Obeisance to Thee ! O Kirika” is one. 

14. Rudra is the deity of the five hymns of the twenty 
mantras of the Rudranuvaka. Bj-hatl is known to be (the metre) 
of the first hymn. 

15. The second one is a rk. The next three are in jagati 
(metre) . The third one is a trisfubh. Then the next four are 

yajur ( mantras ) in anuftubh. One will gain perfection by means 
of the aryd (hymns). 

16-17. One would be able to destroy the poison, disease 
and the enemy with (the repetition of) (the mantra) trailokya - 
mohana (one that stupefies the three worlds) . “/m, $rirh % hririi t 
hr urn ! Obeisance to (Lord) Visnu, the stupefier of the three 
worlds.” One could (also) destroy the poison and disease with 
theNrsimha ( mantra ) in the anusfubh ; “ Orh , ham y im ! I make 
obeisance to the fiercely brave great Visnu, who is glowing and 
who has His faces on all sides. He is the frightening Nrsimha, 
who is benevolent and is the destroyer of death.” 

18-19. This is the mantra of five parts that accomplishes 
all things. The two mantras having twelve 4 and eight 5 letters 
are capable of destroying poison and disease. (The goddesses) 
Kubjika, Tripura, Gauri and Candrika are capable of destroy- 
ing poison. The mantras relating to them also would remove 
poison and make one gain good health. Similarly the mantras 
relating to Sun, (Lords) Vinayaka (the elephant- faced god) 
and Rudra (would give) everything always. 

1. Gould not be traced. 

2. Cf. RV. 10.57 3a. 

3. Gould not be traced. 

4. om namo bhagavate v&sudev&ya. 

5. om namo n&rdya^Hya, 



297.1-Sa 


817 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETY SEVEN 

The remedial mantra that would remove poison 
Fire-god said : 

1-2. “ Om , obeisance to Lord Rudra! You cut down venom ! 

(Obeisance) to the wielder of an axe of fire in his hand ! 
Obeisance to Lord Rudra in the form of the bird (Garuda) ! 
You make the bitten person get up ! Shake him up ! Make 
him converse ! Rouse up the person bitten by the serpent ! 
Make him dangle ! Bind him ! Release him ! Oh ! The Excel- 
lent Rudra ! You go, strike, bend, make noise and frighten and 
destroy the poison with your fist ! Tha ! Tha !” 

The poison gets destroyed by the repetition of the mantra of 
the bird. “Om ! Obeisance to Lord Rudra ! Destroy all kinds of 
poison — vegetable or animal, artificial or natural, primary or 
secondary ! Destroy different kinds of poison ! Destroy the 
venom in the bitten person ! Subdue ! Eject ! You become free 
from poison by the showers of darkness in the form of the 
clouds. Destroy ! Go forth! You neutralise the poison by ejecting 
it.” The poison would be controlled with the repetition of this 
mantra. u 0m! Throw away ! Om Throw away ! Oblations! Om, 
hram % hrirh , khtifi , sah , fharfi, draurfi, hrim y thah !” Being accom- 
plished by the repetition, one would be able to bind the ser- 
pents always. One could accomplish all things (by the repeti- 
tion of the mantra) : “Obeisance to the beloved of milk-maids” 
having one, two, three or four letters and having the disc of 
Krsna as the fifth part. 

3-4a. “Orh, obeisance to Lord Rudra, the lord of ghosts ! 
Listen ! Make sound ! Make to rotate ! Release ! Stupefy ! 
Manifest ! Enter ! Golden bird ! Rudra makes known ! Tka !” 
This mantra known as the agitator of hell would destroy the 
poison when repeated. A person bitten by a snake should 
cauterize with log or stone for subduing the poison immedia- 
tely after being bitten. The bitten part of the body should be 
cauterized with burning red lotus etc. 

4b-5a. The drinking or besmearing or collyrium of the 
three pungent things— seeds of iirifa flower, arka flower and 
ksird seeds would destroy the poison. 



818 


Agni Furdna 


5b-6a. There is no doubt that the white pepper mixed 
with the essence of the firisa flower would remove poison when 
drunk or used as sternutatory or collyrium. 

6b-7. The three pungent things, kosdlakU vaca and asafoe- 
tida mixed with the milk of firisa and arka and the mesa mixed 
with water would remove the poison when used as a sternuta- 
tory. The powder of asafoetida and all parts of iksvaku used 
as a sternutatory would remove the poison. 

8. The expressed juice of indrabald , agtiika , drona> tulasi, 
devika and saha mixed with the powder of the three pungent things 
when eaten would remove the poison. The five parts of the 
firi?a eaten on the fifth (lunar day) of the dark (fortnight) 
would remove the poison. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETYEIGHT 

The treatment for the poison due to snakes such as 
the gonasa and others 

Fire-god said : 

1. O Vasistha ! Listen to me ! I shall describe to you the 
treatment for (the poison due to) gonasa and others (snakes). 
Hrirhy hrim oblations to the stainless bird ! A charmer would 
remove the poison due to mandalin (a kind of snake) by eat- 
ing the betel leaf (after consecrating it with the above mantra ). 

2. Garlic, asafoetida, kus(ha 9 agni 9 dried ginger, pepper 
and long pepper (are remedies) for poison. The milk of snuhi 
and clarified butter from the cow would remove the poison due 
to . a class of snakes called ahi 9 when it is drunk for a fortnight. 

3. When one is bitten by (the snake called) rdjila, he 
should drink pepper with rock-salt. Clarified butter, honey and 
cow-dung water ( taken) with puritaki would remove poison. 

4-6a. Thick milk and clarified butter together with pepper 
should be drunk with honey. Pepper, dried ginger and long 
pepper, the feather of a peacock, the bone of a cat and the 
hair of a mongoose in equal parts should be powdered after 



298.6b- 15 


819 


soaking with the milk of a goat. Fumigation (with the above 
powder) would remove all kinds of poisons. The hair (of 
mongoose) , nirguntfi , and kola with same proportion of garlic 
burnt with the leaf of (the plant) muni and boiled with sour 
gruel (could be used for fumigation to remove poison). 

6b-7. Rats are of sixteen kinds. One should drink the 
juice of cotton together with oil ( to remove the poison due 
to them). The phalini flower will also destroy the affliction 
due to the rats. Eating of molasses together with nagara would 
also remove that poison and the loss of appetite. 

8-1 la. There are twenty ways of treating (this poison). 
The group (of remedies) for removing the poison due to a 
spider etc. : padmaka , pdfali, kusfha, uSira , sandal, nirgundU Sarikd 
and Selu should be made into a paste and applied for affliction 
due to the spider. The leaves of gunjd y nirgundi and ankola, dried 
ginger, the two kinds of turmeric, the kernel of karanja made 
into a paste and applied (would also remedy that poison). 
Listen to me ! (I shall describe) the remedy that would remove 
the poison due to a scorpion. A paste of the mixture of 
manjisfhd , sandal, dried ginger, pepper, long pepper and the 
flowers of firipa and the white water-lily used in four ways such 
as ointment and the like would Remove (the poison due to) a 
scorpion. 

1 1 b- 1 2. Orh obeisance to Lord Rudra ! Civi ! Civi ! Cut ! 
cut ! Kiri ! kiri ! Break ! Cut with the sword ! Pierce with the 
spear ! Severe with the disc ! Omhrum phaf. When (the herb) 
is given after the repetition of the (above) mantra 9 it would des- 
troy the poison due to an ass and others (animals). The three 
myrobalans, uHra , musta water, mdrhsi , padmaka and sandal being 
drunk together with goat’s milk would remove the poison due 
to an ass and others (animals) . 

13. Five parts of Sirtfa (together with) dried ginger, pepper 
and long pepper would remove the venom due to the centipedes. 
The neck of the fir If a and its kernel would remove the poison 
due to a rat. 

14-15. The dried ginger, pepper and long pepper together 
with clarified butter and made into a paste with the root of 
long pepper would remove the poison. (A mixture of) alkali, 
dried ginger, pepper and long pepper, vacd, asafoetida, vifafiga. 



820 


Agni Purdna 


rocks a It, ambaffha , atibala and ku$tha would remove the venom 
due to all insects. A combination oiyasti , dried ginger, pepper 
and long pepper, treacle and milk would remove^the poison 
due to a dog. 

16-18. Orii, obeisance to Subhadra ! Orii> obeisance to 
Suprabha ! You have been told by Brahma that you should 
absorb the seed of the herbs which are taken by people without 
(adhering to) the instructions. After having made obeisance to 
them and the herbs later, the barley grains should be scattered 
with the fist. This mantra should be repeated ten times. Then 
obeisance should be made to that herb. (One should say) “I 
lift you, the one looking upwards” and take the herb. 

19-21. “Obeisance to the lion among men (eminent man) ! 
Obeisance to the cowherd ! O Kfsna ! You yourself have 
admitted that one (who takes your name) will not be defeated 
in battle”. May the medicine be successful for me ! Obeisance 
to Vaidurya mother ! O Gauri ! Protect me therein from all 
venoms ! O Gandhari ! O Cantab ! O Matangini ! Obla- 
tions to the illusive energy of Hari ! This is the mantra to be 
used before (administering) the medicine in the case of a vege- 
table poison. If there is burning sensation after taking a medi- 
cine, the patient should be made to drink cold water together 
with the root of lotus; ghee and honey should be taken if poison 
persists even then. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETYNINE 
Recipes for the diseases of infants 

Fire-god said: 

1-2. I shall describe the science relating to (the diseases 
of) children that would destroy the evil spirits that seize child- 
ren. The Papin! (-sinister) spirit possesses the child on the day 
of its birth. (The child) would have tremblirtg of the body. It 
would not take food and would toss about its neck. These are 
the reactions due to the above (spirit) . It would also take away 
the strength of the mothers. 



299.3-12 


821 


3-5. (An offering consisting) of fish, meat, wine, edibles, 
perfumes, garlands, incense and lamps (should be made to 
appease this spirit) . The child should be besmeared with a 
paste of dhdtaki (a variety of myrobalan), lodhra , manjisfhd , tdla 
and sandal. The spirit known as Bhlsani (frightful) (would 
seize the child) on the second night after birth. An incense 
made of mahifdkfa (should be offered to drive the spirit). A 
child possessed by this spirit would have cough with hard 
breathing and writhing of the body again and again. The body 
of the child should be besmeared with urine of goat together 
with black pepper, apdmdrga and sandal. An incense made of 
cow’s horn, tooth and hair should be offered. Offering (should 
be made to the spirit) as before. 

6-7. The spirit Ghan{ali (possesses) on the third (night 
after the birth). (The affected child) would cry repeatedly, 
yawn and make sounds. It would exhibit fear with convulsions. 
It would not have appetite. The child should be besmeared 
with a paste of keiara (filament of a flower), anjana , the tooth 
of a cow and tusk of an elephant together with goat’s milk. An 
incense consisting of nakhardji and leaves of bilva should be 
offered. Offering (should be made to the spirit) as before. 

8-9. The spirit (known as) Kakoli (possesses) on the fourth 
(night after the birth). (The child would have) convulsion, loss 
of appetite, frothing, and would turn to look in the different 
directions. An offering (to the spirit is made) with kulmdfa and 
spirituous liquor. The body should be besmeared with (the 
scrapings of) the tusk of an elephant, the slough of a serpent 
and the urine of a horse. Fumigation should be done with (the 
vapours of ) turmeric ( and) neem leaves fanned by the hair. 

10-1 la. (The monstress) Hamsadhika (would affect the 
child) on the fifth (night). It is marked by yawning, breathing 
upwards and clenched fists. Offering ( to the spirit) should be 
made with fish and the like. The child should be besmeared 
with (the scrapings) of goat’s horn, bald, lodhra , Hid and tdla. 

11b- 12. The monstress Phafkari (takes possession of the 
child) on the sixth (night) . (The child would exhibit) fear, 
fainting and excessive weeping. It would not take food and 
have convulsions. The offering (is made to the spirit) with fish 



822 


Agni Purdna 


etc. (The body of the child) is besmeared with turmeric, 
guggulu, kuffhta , (scrapings of) tusk of an elephant etc., and 
fumigation is done with the same materials. 

13- 19a. A child is afflicted by (the spirit) Muktake£i on 
the seventh (night). There would be foul smell, yawning, ex- 
haustion, excessive weeping and coughing. Fumigation should 
be done with tiger’s nails. (The body of the child) should be 
besmeared with vacd , cow-dung and cow’s urine. The spirit 
(known as) Srldanqll (afflicts the child) on the eighth (night). 
(The afflicted child) would look in different directions, move 
the tongue, cough and weep. Offering is done as before with 
fish etc. Fumigation and besmearing is done with hitigul&, vacd , 
mustard and garlic. The frightful monstress Ordhvagrahi 
(affects the child on the ninth day). (The affected child) 
would get agitated, have upward breathing and bite its clench- 
ed fist. Fumigation is done with red sandal, ku$tha etc. and the 
child is besmeared (with the same) . Fumigation is done with 
the hair and nails of a monkey. The monstress RodanI (affects 
the child) on the tenth day. (The affected child) would always 
weep, ( the body) would smell sweet and turn blue. Fumigation 
is done with neem (to appease) the terrible monster. (The 
body) should be besmeared with turmeric and the juice of 
sarja (a kind of tree) . Offering should be made outside (the 
house) with fried grains, kulm&fa and barley. Fumigation and 
other such acts should be done in this manner until the thir- 
teenth day (after the birth). 

19b-22a. The terrible monster (known as) Putana takes 
possession of the child that is one month old. The (afflicted 
child) weeps like a crow and breathes heavily. The body would 
have the smell of urine. The eyelids would close. Such a child 
should be bathed with cow’s urine. Fumigation is done with 
the tooth of a cow. (The spirit should be appeased) by giving 
yellow clothes, red garland, red sandal, oil lamp, three kinds of 
sweet porridge, wine, sesamum and four kinds of flesh. Such an 
offering should be made for seven days, at the foot of a karaftja 
(tree) in the direction of Yama (south). 

22b-23. (The female spirit) Muku{& (would seize the child) 
two months old. The body (of the child) would get cold. 
There would be vomitting, parching of the mouth and other 



299.24-31 


823 


things. Flowers, incense, cloth, sweet cake, cooked rice, lamps 
and (things) of black colour (should be offered). Camphor and 
fumigation (also should be shown). 

24-26a. (The famale spirit) Gomukhi (possesses) in the 
third (month). (The afflicted child) would sleep (long), pass 
urine and motion (in excess) and cry. (This spirit should be 
appeased) by offering barley, priyatlgu , meat, kulm&§a (a kind of 
grain), vegetables, cooked rice and milk in the morning. 
Fumigation (should be made) with clarified butter at midday. 
(The child) should be bathed with (water mixed) with (the 
leaves of) five kinds (of trees). (The spirit) Pingala would 
afflict (the child) in the fourth month. The body (of the child) 
would become chill, have putrid smell and be parched. That 
child would certainly die. 

26b-27a. (The spirit) Lalana (would seize the child) in 
the fifth (month). It would make the body weary. Blood 
would come out through the mouth. The stools (would be) 
yellow in colour. Offerings of fish and the like are made in the 
south (in order to appease that spirit). 

27b-28a. (The spirit) Pankaja (would seize the child) in 
the sixth month. (Crying and modified) voice (are) the symp- 
toms. Offering (to appease the spirit) is done with fish, meat, 
wine, cooked things, flowers and perfume and the like. 

28b-29. (The monstress) Nirahara (would seize the 
child) in the seventh (month). (The child would have) fetid 
smell and the like and have toothache. Offering (is made) 
with flour-paste, wine and meat. (The name of the spirit that 
would seize the child) in the eighth (month) is Yamuna. There 
would be boils, desiccation and the like. One should not do 
medical treatment for that. 

30. (The spirit) Kumbhakarni (afflicts the child) in the 
ninth (month). The afflicted child would have fever and would 
vomit and cry. Offering should be made with meat, kulm&fa (a 
kind of grain) and wine and the like in the north-eastern 
(direction). 

31. (The demoness) Tapasi (seizes the child) in the tenth 
(month). The symptoms are : the child would refrain from 
(taking) food and have the eyes closed. (The monstress is 



324 


Agni Purina 


appeased) with (the tying of) a bell, (fixing) a banner and 
offering of wine and meat together with flour jon a level 
(ground). 

32-33a. The demoness RaksasI (afflicts the child) in the 
eleventh (month). It would affect the eyes etc. There is no 
medical treatment (for that). (The spirit) Caftcala (would 
seize the child) in the twelfth (month). There would be heavy 
breathing. (The child) would exhibit fear etc. 

33b-34a. (The monstress) Yatana (would affect the 
child) in the second year (afterbirth). (The child would have) 
pain and would cry. Offering is made with sesamum, meat, 
wine etc. As before bathing and other (practices are done). 

34b-35. (The monstress) Rodani (would seize the child) 
in the third (year). (The body would) tremble. (The child) 
would cry and pass urine (mixed) with blood. Cooked rice 
mixed with molasses and sesamum cake (should be offered) to 
the image (of the monster) made of sesamum flour. It is 
bathed with sesamum. Fumigation (should be done) with five 
varieties of leaves and the bark of rdjaphala (a kind of fruit). 

36. (The monstress) Cataka (would afflict the child) in 
the fourth (year). There would be swelling (in the body), 
fever and exhaustion in all the limbs. Offering (to appease is 
made) with fish, meat, wine, etc. Bathing and fumigation (are 
also done). 

37-38a. (The monstress) Caflcala (would seize the child) 
in the fifth year. (The child would have) fever, fear and ex- 
haustion in the limbs. Offering (is done) with meat, cooked 
rice and the like. Fumigation (is made) with the horn of a 
ram. Bathing should be done with the water in which the 
leaves of the trees— paldSa, ttdumbara, afvattha , vafa and bilva 
(have been put). 

38b-39a. (The inonstress) Dhavani (would afflict the 
child) in the sixth year. (The child would have) desiccation, 
insipidity and exhaustion in the body. Offering should be 
made for seven days. Fumigation and bathing with bhfAgaka is 
done before that. 

39b-40a. (The spirit) Yamuna (would possess the child) in 
the seventh year. (The child would have) vomitting, speech- 



299.40b-48 


825 


lessness, fits of laughter and weeping. Offering consists of meat, 
sweet giucl, wine and the like. (Then there should be) bathing 
and fumigation. 

40b-41a. (The spirit) Jatadeva (would possess the child) 
in the eighth year. (The child) would not take food and 
would cry. Offering (should be done) with kf&ara (sesamum 
and rice mixed), cakes and curd etc. Bathing and fumigation 
(should also be done). 

41b-42a. (The monstress) Kala (would seize the child) in 
the ninth year. (The child would make) sound by beating the 
arms, would roar and (exhibit) fear. The offering would be 
with sesamum mixed with rice, cakes, flours, kulm&fa (a kind 
of grain) and sweet gruel. 

42b-44. (The spirit) KalahamsI (would possess the child) 
in the tenth year. There would be burning sensation, emacia- 
tion and fever. Offering should be made with the paulika cake 
(a kind of cake) and curd rice for five nights. Fumigation with 
nimba and besmearing with histha (is done to appease the 
spirit). The possessive spirit Devaduti (seizes the child) in the 
eleventh (year). (The child would utter) harsh words. Offering 
and smearing (are done) as before. (The spirit) Balika (would 
possess the child) in the twelfth (year). There would be hard 
breathing. The offering and smearing (are) as before. 

45-47. (The spirit) Vayavl (would possess the child) in 
the thirteenth (year) . The face and external organs would 
become emaciated. Offering (consists of) red-coloured cooked 
rice, incense, flowers etc. (The child) should be bathed with 
the five (kinds of) leaves. Fumigation (should be done) with 
rdjly and neem leaves. (The monstress) Yaksini (would possess 
the child) in the fourteenth (year). Colic, fever and burning 
sensation arc the effects (due to this spirit). Offering (is made) 
with meat, eatables etc. Bathing for the appeasement (of the 
spirit is done) as before. (The spirit) Muncjika (would possess) 
in the fifteenth (year) . Discharge of blood is due to this 
(spirit). The mother (of the child) should always be attended 
to in such cases. 

48. Vanari (would seize the child) in the sixteenth (year). 
The child would fall to the ground, sleep always and have 



826 


Agni Pwrdna 


fever (under the influence). Offering (is made). with sweet 
gruel etc. for three nights. Bathing etc: (are done as before). 

49. Gandhavati (would possess the child) in the seven- 
teenth (year). The body (of the child) would tremble and the 
child would cry much. Offering (should be made) with kulmasa 
etc. Bathing, fumigation and smearing etc. (are done) as 
before. (The spirit) Putana exercises her influence during the 
day and Sukumarika during the whole year. 

50. Orh ! Obeisance to all the mothers. Consume ! Con- 
sume the affliction that has got united with the child ! Attack ! 
Attack ! Explode ! Explode ! Agitate ! Agitate ! Seize ! Seize ! 
Manifest ! Manifest ! Thus Siddharupa announces. Take away! 
Take away ! Make the female or male child or the woman or 
man free from defect from the seizure of all the spirits. O 
Camunda ! Obeisance to the goddess ! Hrurh ! Hrum ! Hrim ! 
Drive away (all) the evil spirits ! Hrum ! Let the possessors go 
elsewhere by another way. (Lord) Rudra makes known (thus). 
This mantra would yield the desired result in all the cases of 
seizure of children by evil spirits. 

51. Oml Obeisance to the Goddess! O Camuruja ! 
Make the male or female child free. Accept the offering ! Be 
victorious ! Be victorious ! Dwell ! Dwell ! This mantra that 
protects is read in all instances of offering being made.. May 
(the gods) Brahma, Visnu, Siva, Skanda, Gaurl, LaksmI, and 
the Ganas protect and release the child from the affliction due 
to burning sensation. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED 

Description of the mantras which remove the baneful 
influences of planets 

Fire-god said : 

1-2. I shall describe the mantras which would remove the 
baneful influences of . planets and crush the planets. There 
would be five kinds of insanity due to joy, desire, fear, grief, 



300.3-12b 


827 


eating food items which have contrary qualities and are not 
clean, and the wrath of the preceptor and gods etc . These are 
caused by the three defects (of deranged humours), their com- 
bined effect and external things. 

3-5a. On account of the wrath of Rudra, the gods became 
the several planets. The planets would seize men and women 
at a river, ocean, tank etc., mountain, garden, bridge, conflu- 
ence of a river, a deserted house, an entrance to a hole and a 
lonely tree in (any one of the following states) : one who has 
slept, a pregnant woman, a woman about to commence her 
menstrual period, and one who bathes naked after the menstrual 
period. 

5b-8. Disrespect, enmity of men, obstacles, change of for- 
tune, trangression of the codes of conduct relating to the gods 
and elders, fall from a mountain, tree and the like, brushing 
aside the hair on the head frequently (are the symptoms of 
evil influences of the planets). A person possessed (by planets) 
would weep, dance, have red eyes, be deformed, be agitated, 
suffer from pain and burning sensation, be affected by hunger 
and thirst and have headache. A person possessed by a planet 
that desires for a victim wouldrequest (saying) “Give ! Give !*\ 
A man possessed by a planet having excessive desire would 
desire for women, garlands, enjoyment and bath. - 

9. {The mantras) of the great Sudarlana (disc of lord 
Visnu) that pervades the sky, twig-shaped nose, Patalanara- 
simha and the like and the Candimantras are capable of 
subduing the planets. 

10- 12a. One should worship the lord who is fond oipfinl 
(an aquatic plant), asafoetida, vacd and bunch of $irl$a 
(flowers). (One should worship Him) who is the supreme 
person, who bears the noose, goad, rosary, human skull, who 
holds (.in his hand) a club with die skull, lotus and mace, who 
has four faces, who is on a lotus amidst inner and outer staffs 
with skull in the orb of the Sun together' with the Sun and 
others should be worshipped and water for sipping should be 
offered to the Sun who has risen. 

12b. Venus (should be contemplated) as having the form 
of breath, poison, fire, a brahmin, pitcher and kfllekhd 
(knowledge ?). 



828 


Agni Purdna 


13-14. “ Bhurbhuvah svafi ” for Arka (Sun) and JalinI the 

family mace (are used in the worship ofSun). The Moon (is 
contemplated as) seated on the lotus, having light red com- 
plexion, wearing red clothes, spreading radiance in the uni- 
verse, lofty, holding lotuses in his two hands and having all the 
limbs adorned. Moreover the heart and other limbs (should 
be contemplated) as red, benevolent, conferring boons and 
holding lotuses. 

15-16. Mars (should be contemplated) as resembling a 
multitude of lightning, wearing white clothes, beautiful and 
light red in complexion. Mercury (is also contemplated) in 
the same manner. Jupiter (is contemplated) as yellow, Venus 
as white, Saturn as dark, Rahu (the ascending node) as 
resembling charcoal and Ketu (the descending node) as grey. 
They (should be contemplated as having) the left hand 
(placed) on the left thigh and the right hand (placed) on the 
right thigh and knee. 

17. The first letters of their names would be their bijas 
(the mystical letter forming the essential part of the mantra). 
The two hands are purified with (the mantra of) the weapon. 
Then (the letters) should be assigned on (the fingers) begin- 
ning with the thumb, the palm, the two eyes as pervading the 
heart and the other (limbs) . 

18. One should contemplate the life force and carry out 
the location of the three basic letters (of the mantra) in the 
limbs. The vessel should be sprinkled with (the mantra of) the 
weapon and filled with water with the basic ( mantra ) . 

19. After having placed incense, flowers, unbroken rice 
and durvd (grass), the offering should be sanctified. One should 
then spinkle that (water) on oneself as well as on the materials 
for worship. 

20. Then one should contemplate the absolute, pure, 
essence (that confers) supreme happiness. One should then 
(mentally) set up the seat etc. in the centre and in the differ- 
ent directions with (the mantras of) the heart. 

21. One should (offer the worship) on the seat and in the 
(main) directions as well as the intermediate directions with 
(the mantra of) the heart. (One should contemplate) the heart- 
lotus on the seat and the eight female energies in the filaments. 



300.22-31 


829 


22-23. One should worship ( the goddesses) Dipta, Suk- 
sma, Jaya, Bhadrika, Vibhuti, Vimala, Asighatavidyuta and 
Sarvatomukhi and the seat with the syllables varhy virh t vurfi , 
vttrh , vem 9 vairiiy vorhy vaum and vam and then worship the Sun 
with (the syllable) vafr. Oh ! One who practises austerities ! 
Water for drinking and other formalities should be offered 
with ( the mantras of) the heart and the six accessories after 
having invoked. 

24. The two *kka ’ syllables, the two dantfins, the two 
Candas y the marrow together with the teeth, m&msadirghd ( ?) , 
jaradvayu (?) etc. of the Sun that confer all the things (should 
be worshipped) with (the mantra of) the heart. 

25. The heart etc. should be worshipped in the south-east, 
north-east, south-west and north-west, extending upto the 
pericarps with their respective mantras . The weapon with the 
eye (should be worshipped) in the forepart of the directions. 

26. (The planets) Moon, Mercury, Jupiter and Venus 
should be worshipped in the directions commencing with the 
east. In the case of diseases caused by planets, one should do 
the sternutatory, unguent etc. with priniy asafoetida, vac& 9 
cakra (?), Jirlsa and garlic together with the goat’s urine. 

27. One pala each ofpdfha 9 mustard, vaedy iigrUy rock-salt 
and dried ginger, pepper and long pepper ground well and 
mixed with an ddhaka (a unit of measure) of goat’s milk and 
the ghee prepared. (The use of this) would remove all (the 
defects due to) the planets. 

28. One should drink the water mixed with the vjicika (a 
herb), ally phaliy kustha, the salts and iarhgaka . It would destroy 
epilepsy. 

29-31. One should drink the decoction made with vidariy 
kuiay kdto and sugarcane mixed with milk and boiled (as a 
remedy for the same). (Similarly) clarified butter boiled with 
essence of yasfika 9 drona and k&smdnia (would be a remedy) . So 
also ghee of the five things got from a cow (would do good). 
Listen to me about the combination that would remove the 
fever. “Om ! Let us know (the nature of) the deity that has 
the weapon to reduce (all the things) to ashes. Let us meditate 
on (that god having) single tusk. May fever make us meditate 



830 


Agni Pwrdrfa 


on that.” One should lick (a paste made of) long pepper, - 
pepper, turmeric, rdsnd, oil extracted from grapes and molasses. 

32. One who has breathing trouble should lick bhdAgi 
(hemp) and yatfi with honey and clarified butter. «Or else one 
should lick pdfhd, tiktd, kand and bhdAgi with honey. 

33. Dhdtri, oiSvasitd , kffna, musta , kharjura , mdgadhi and pioara 
(?) would destroy hiccup. The three should be licked with 
honey. 

34. One should drink the juice of kdmdll, jira, mdndQki, 
turmeric and dhdtri (one of the myrobalan) . Long pepper, pepper 
dried ginger, padmaka, the three myrobalans, vidaAga, devaddru , 
and the powdered rdsnd taken in equal proportions would remedy 
cough. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND ONE 
The mode of worship of Sun 

Fire-god said : 

1-3. “Sayyd (bed) , Dandi, Ajesa, Pavaka, the four-faced’’ 
is the basic ( mantra ) that accomplishes all the desires. It is said 
for the sake of (gaining) power. The (bija (basic)) should 
contain long vowels. The constituents should be evenly set in 
the bija (mantras). Each collection of mantras would have five 
parts such as the khdta , sadhu, vifa, bindu and sakala. Each one 
has a separate great merit. The gaita (should be worshipped as 
follows) : “Obeisance for the sake of victory. (Obeisance) to 
the one having one tusk ! To the elephant-faced 1 One having 
big belly and hands !” These five constituents are common for 
all (the mantras) . One would accomplish his desires by repeating 
a lakh times. 

4-6. “(Obeisance) to the head of the ganas (goblins), to 
the leader of the gartas, to the lord of the ga$as, and to the one 
who sports with the gagas.” The image should be worshipped as 
before with the five constituents in the directions which are 
the petals. (Obeisance) to one having curved trunk, single tusk, 
big belly and elephant face. (Obeisance) to the dreadful one, to 



301.7-14a 


831 


the lord of obstacles and to the one of grey complexion. One 
should worship these (gods), the lords of the worlds, in the 
(main) directions and the intermediary directions by (showing) 
the mudrd formed by inserting the two thumbs in between the 
(two) middle and index fingers of the clenched fists. One 
should (contemplate the god) as having four hands filled with 
modakas{ ball-shaped sweets) and bearinga club, noose and goad. 
One should worship (the god) as holding the eatables with 
his tusk, as red in complexion, as holding a lotus and as surround- 
ed by a noose and goad especially on the fourth day (of a lunar 
fortnight) and in general everyday. 

7. (If the oblation) is done with the root of white arka 
(plant) it would confer all desires. (If it is done) with sesamum, 
ghee, rice, curd, honey and clarified butter one would get pros- 
perity and power to subdue. 

8. Lord Martandabhairava (the Sun god) (who) affects 
the skin, blood, breath and the vital energy, (who is) the cause 
of virtue, material prosperty, desires and emancipation (and 
who is) covered by the orb (is contemplated). 

9-1 3a. (He should be worshipped such that) His five forms 
(are represented by) the short (syllables) and the limbs by the 
long (syllables). The Sun-god possessing a red complexion as 
the sindura (vermilion) and having His consort on His left (is 
worshipped) in the north-east. Mars, Saturn, Rahu, Ketu and 
others (are worshipped) in the angular points south-east etc. 
After having bathed as laid down, the Sun-god should be wor- 
shipped preceded by (the offer of) respectful water. At the end 
of the worship, a garland of flowers should be offered to the 
dreadful effulgent (form) in the north-east. Lighted (lamp), 
rocand (the yellow orpiment got from the cow), saffron, water, 
red perfume and unbroken (rice), sprout (of the paddy), 
bamboo-seed, barley, S&li (a kind of paddy), Sydmdka (a kind of 
grain), sesamum and mustard together with japd flower should 
be offered. Then they (should be collected) in the vessels and 
should be held on the head. Then one should prostrate bending 
his knees on the ground and dedicate the offering to the Sun- 
god. 

13b- 14a. After having worshipped the planets with nine 
pitchers sanctified with their respective mystic syllables, one 



832 


Agni Purina 


should bathe for appeasing the planets. After the repetition of 
the syllable sacred to Sun-god, one will get all (the things). 

14b-15. The btja mantras together with agni, do$a and bindu , 
that confer victory in battle, should be located from 
head to foot. The basic ( mantra ) is worshipped by (showing) 
the mudri. After having performed the assignment on the 
different limbs, one has to imagine himself as the Sun-god. 

16-18. (The Sun-god) should be contemplated as yellow- 
coloured in incantations practised for death as well as for stupe- 
fying the senses, as white for the sake of satisfaction, as black 
for achieving the destruction of the enemy and as the colour of 
the rain-bow for stupefaction. One who is always bent on doing 
ablution, repetition (of the mantras ), contemplation, worship 
and oblation would become resplendent, invincible, prosperous 
and gain victory in the ocean etc. After having located (the 
mantra of the Sun) in the betel etc. and after repetition (of the 
mantra ), one should offer uHraka (the fragrant root of a plant). 
A person who touches with the hand in which the bija ( fnantra ) 
has been located would certainly charm (the person). 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWO 

Description of different kinds of potential mantras and herbs 
Fire-god said : 

1. The chief mantra, that is (known as) Saras vat! (Goddess 
of learning) , that which has the letters that have the directive 
at the end of the oblation (is) “For speech, deed, united to 
the side, white, and for the sake of the child is deemed to be the 
ship.” 

2. A person who repeats this collection of mantra a lakh 
times would become a wise man. The supreme (i mantra ) of the 
heart for Indra is “Atri, together with fire, vdma, eye and dot 
(bindu). 99 

3-4a. (Lord) Indra having yellow complexion and wielding 
the thunderbolt and lotus should be invoked and worshipped. 



302.4b-13 


833 


Ten lakh oblations of clarified butter and sesamum should be 
made and (the image) should be anointed with that. (By doing 
so) a king would recover the lost kingdom and progeny etc. 

4b-6. (Lord Siva) is known to be with the female energy 
Hfllekha and possesses do$a 9 agni 9 dandi and danda. After having 
propitiated (Lord) Siva, one should repeat (the mantra of) the 
female energy on the eighth and fourteenth (lunar days) . (The 
goddess should be contemplated) as bearing disc, noose and goad 
and as showing protection and conferring boons. One would 
gain prosperity, poetic skill and progeny by doing oblation etc. 
“0m, krirh , om obeisance to (god of) desire, to the one beneficial 
to all the beings, to the one who stupefies all the beings, to the 
one who makes the hearts of all the beings glow. Come and 
take a place in my self (repeated).” Om. One would subjugate 
the entire world by the repetition of this mantra etc. 

7-9. “0m, hrim, Oh ! Camurnja ! Burn(?)and cook ( ?) such 

and such a person. You bring him under my control (repeated). 
Tha ! Tha ! This mantra of (goddess) Camun<ja that would 
subjugate has been told. The genital parts should be washed 
with the decoction of the three myrobalans. (It) would sub- 
jugate (the partner). Similarly a wife should smear with a$va- 
gandha , barley, turmeric and comphor (with the same results). 
(So also) long pepper, eight grains of rice, twenty numbers of 
pepper, besmeared with the juice of brhati would keep (the 
husband) under one’s control till death. Besmearing with the 
root of kafira and trikafu mixed with honey would also have 
similar results. 

1 0- 1 2a. A paste made of sandal wood, fruit, karabha 9 m&gadhl , 
madhuka and honey besmeared would bring prosperity to the 
couple. The juice of kadamba and honey mixed with sugar and 
besmeared in the vagina (will also yield the same fruit). 
Pulverized sahadevi , mah&lakfmi, putrajivi and krtdnjali thrown on 
the head would subjugate the world. 

12b-13. One prastha (a measure) of the decoction of the 
three myrobalans, two kudavas (a measure) each of the juice of 
bhfftga , hema and do$& and an equal (measure) of honey got 
from musk-rat boiled with ghee (and mixed with) turmeric 
dried in the shade, when besmeared, would delight (the 
couple). 



834 


Agni Purdna 


14. One who drinks daily vidari y uccafd , mdsa and pulverized 
sugar mixed well with milk could cohabit with a hundred 
women. 

15- 16a. A woman, who desires to have a son, should drink 
the roots of aivattha (holy fig), bamboo, darbha (grass), vaisnavi , 
frl 9 ddrvti (grass) and aSvagandha mixed with powdered gulma> 
mdsa , sesamum, vrihi paddy together with milk. 

16b- 17a. The fibrous roots of kaunti zndlakfmi, dhdtri 9 vajra 9 
lodhra and the sprouts of vata (banyan tree) should be drunk by 
a woman during her menstrual period together with clarified 
butter and milk for the sake of (getting) a son. 

17b-18. A woman who desires to have a son should drink 
milk together with the root of fri ( bilva ) and the shoots of 
banyan. Alternatively she may use the juice of bilva , shoots of 
banyan and devi as sternutatory or she may drink the root of 
bilva and lotus ground with milk together with the root of 
holy fig tree in abundance. 

19. Tarala with milk and the fruits and the tender branches 
of the cotton tree, the tip of the apdmdrga flower and fresh 
buffalow milk would have the same effect. 

20-21. Four kinds of compounds are said (to be beneficial) 
for the sake of progeny by using the three kinds of herbs. 
Sugar, utpala flower, akfa 9 lodhra 9 sandal and sdrivd should be 
given with rice-water for abortion. One may alternatively lick 
fried ric e,yaf(i 9 sugar and grapes together with honey and 
clarified butter. 

22. A woman would have comfortable delivery if a paste 
of the fibrous roots of afardfa , Idftgall and kdkam&ci are besmeared 
separately below the navel. 

23-26. One should drink (the juice of) red or white japd 
flower in the case of discharge of blood and semen. The eating 
of the filament, the root of brhati, gopl 9 ya$ti 9 grass and utpala 
mixed with goat’s milk and oil would make the hair grow. 
When the hairs begin to fall, this would make them firm. 

A prastha (measure) of emblic myrobalan and the juice of 
bhrdga and an d4haka (measure) of oil and milk (boiled with) 
oil and anjana fruits is beneficial for hairs, eyes and head. 

If khdrt (quantity) of turmeric, the bark of rdjavrkfa, root of 
tamarind, rock-salt and lodhtaka are drunk it would remove 



303.1-7 


835 


quickly the swelling of the belly of the cow. “Orh, obeisance to 
the lord having three eyes ! Subdue ! Subdue ! eulu (2), mili 
(2) (Break (2) ! One that regards the cattle! In the disc! 
Hrurfi phaf ! You protect the cattle in this village (2) ! Appease 
(2) ! (The lord) having bell-like ear, the leader of a host of 
army, the warrior is said to be having great strength. May that 
lord of the world who is capable of destroying the epidemic 
diseases protect me. These mantras in the form of a verse which 
are capable of protecting the cows should be located. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THREE 

The propitiation of the letters on one's limbs to ward off evil 
Fire-god said : 

1. It is known to be the period of paufna when the Moon 
reaches the natal asterism and the Sun occupies the seventh 
house. One has to examine one’s breath then. 

2. The throat and the lips move from their position, the 
nose (becomes) bent and the tongue (becomes) black. That 
person would live for seven days only. 

3-4a. (The following is the mantra for warding off this evil 
consequence) : ‘'taro meso mifarh danti naro dirghd ghand rasaJj , to 
kruddholka, maholka, virolka, ulka and sahasrolka .” This is the 
eight-syllabled mantra of (Lord) Vi?nu. 

4b- 7. These should be located in the folds of the eight 
fingers beginning with the little finger. The eight letters of (the 
eight) asterisms represented by the eight folds beginning with 
the first fold on the middle finger should be located in order on 
the head. The asterism (is located) on the index finger, the 
lagnas on the thumb as also with the middle finger. In the same 
way the letters of the asterisms etc. are located on the palm 
and thumb. (The letters of the mantras should be contemplated) 
— as red, white, tawny, green, golden .and (the remaining) 
three as white. These letters having the above colours and set 
with their true state should be located in order at the heart, 
face, eyes, head, feet, palate, private organ and hands. 



836 


AgniPurtya 


8. After having assigned the principal letters on the hand 
and body, the location of the constituent parts. The location 
on (the image of) the deity should be done as in the case of 
oneself except (that) the hand (is not involved). 

9-12. The letters located in the different places such as the 
heart should be worshipped with incense and flowers. The 
virtues etc., fire etc. and unrighteousness etc. are located res- 
pectively on the body, seat and the lotus. The three orbs of 
the Sun, Moon and Fire pervading the filaments (of the lotus) 
should be located in order with their distinctions. The 
qualities sattva etc. and the female energies Vimala, UtkarsinI, 
Jftana, Kriya, Yoga, Prahvi, Satya and Isananugraha (arc to 
be located) in the filaments therein in order. After having wor- 
shipped the yogic seat at the centre, (Lord) Hari should be 
invoked and worshipped. 

13. The five practices of worship such as water for washing 
the feet, arghya (respectful offering) , water for sipping, yellow 
clothes and ornament are all offered with the principal 
{mantra). 

14. The images of (gods) Vasudeva (a form of Vi§nu) 
and others, namely four 1 , should be worshipped in the four 
(principal) directions. (Goddesses) Sri (Laksmf), Sarasvati, 
Rati and Santi should be worshipped in the intermediary 
directions. 

15. The conch, disc, mace, lotus, pestle, sword, iarnga 
(bow) and the garland of wild flowers should duly be wor- 
shipped in the principal and intermediary directions. 

16. After having worshipped Tarksya (eagle vehicle of 
Lord Visnu) outside in front (of the Lord) , Visvaksena and 
Somega should be worshipped outside at the centre and Indra 
and other attendant gods outside the enclosure. One would 
obtain everything by this worship. 


1 Visudeva, Pradyumna, Aniruddha and Sarikar?ana. 



304.1-11 


837 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FOUR 

The mode of worship of Siva with the mantra of five syllables 
Fire-god said : 

1. “Mejah, Sarhjhd , visarh y sajyarh , asti, dirghodakam f rasah” 
This is the mantra sacred to (Lord) Siva that confers good. 

2-4. After having worshipped the asterisms etc. well one 
would gain the status of the celestials etc. (Lord) Siva, the 
embodiment of knowledge, the Supreme Brahman and the 
highest intellect (should be contemplated) in one’s heart. 
Brahma and other gods are born of His power and are only His 
manifestations. The letters of the mantra (gave rise) to the 
five elements, their respective mantras and their respective 
matter. Prana and other (vital) winds, the five organs of sense 
and five organs of action, everything are (the manifestation of) 
Brahman, namely, the five letters. Similarly we have the 
embodiment of eight syllables. 

5-8. The place of initiation sanctified by the mantra should 
be washed with (the five .things got from a cow) . The essential 
articles for worship (should be taken to the place) and (Lord) 
Siva should be worshipped as laid down. After having practised 
the location of the mantras on the m tin image and the limbs, 
rice should be scattered. Then the porridge should be made 
ready and the milk boiled. Then it should be divided into three 
parts. One part should be dedicated (to the god), the second 
should be given as oblation and the third should be taken by 
the preceptor and the pupil. After rinsing the mouth and 
accomplishing the transformation, the preceptor should give 
the disciple a twig of the k$ira tree for (cleansing) the teeth 
after sanctifying it with (the mantra of) the heart. After having 
cleaned the teeth and washed the mouth, he should throw it on 
the ground. 

9-11. It (indicates) good if it falls in the northern or 
western direction from the east and bad otherwise. The wise 
(preceptor) should make it dry by tying the tuft. of the disciple 
who has come and make him lie down on the sacrificial altar 
on the bed of darbha (grass) together with himself. At dawn 
the pupil should meet the preceptor who has slept well and let 
him know (the dream he had) . Then worship (should be done) 



840 


Agni Purd$a 


supreme principle. Then the preceptor should regenerate the 
pupil by the process of (tantric) creation. After having located* 
(the supreme principle) in the pupil, he must be led circumam- 
bulating. After bringing him to the western door, ( the precep- 
tor) should make (the pupil) throw (the flowers) held in 
the folded hands. On whatever place the flowers fall that name 
should first be given (to the pupil). 

36b-41 . By the side of the sacrificial shed a pit should be 
dug up in such a way that it has the navel and girdle. The fire 
of Lord Siva should be generated and worshipped. It should 
again be worshipped by the pupil. (Then the preceptor) should 
absorb the pupil in his own self after contemplation by means of 
the process of dissolution. Again regenerating him, darbha 
■ (grass) consecrated with the repetition of mantras should be 
placed in his hand. The principles such as the earth and others 
should be offered to the fire with ( the repetition of the mantras 
of ) the heart and others. After having offered hundred obla- 
tions for each one (of the principles), one should do oblation 
with the principal {mantra) of (the principle of) sky. After 
having offered the final oblation, one should offer eight obla- 
tions with (the mantra of ) the weapon. (After having perform- 
ed) the rite of atonement for the sake of purification, it should 
be completed with the residual offering. Then a consecrated 
pitcher should be worshipped well and the pupil bathed on the 
seat. (Then the preceptor) should instruct the pupil in the 
ceremonial practice and (the pupil) should pay respect to his 
preceptor by (offering) gold and other things. Thus the initia- 
tion into the five syllables relating to (god) Vi$nu and others 
has been narrated. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FIVE 
The fifty five names of {Lord) Vi$nu and their greatness 
Fire-god said : 

1. A person who repeats the filtyfive names of (Lord) 
Vi$nu would get the fruits of Repeating the mantras and the 



305.2-10 


841 


worship (with these names) at the sacred places (of 
pilgrimage) would have undiminishing fruits. 

2. Pundarlkaksa (lotus-eyed) (should be contemplated) 
at Pu$kara, Gadadhara (one who wields the club) at Gaya, 
Raghava (Rama as the scion of Raghu) at Citrakufa and 
Daityasudana (the destroyer of the demons) at Prabhasa. 

3. Similarly Jaya (the victor) (should be worshipped) at 
Jayanti, Jayanta (one who gains victory) at Hastinapura, 
Varaha (manifestation as boar) at Vardhamana and Cakrapani 
( one who holds the disc ) at Kasmira. 

4. (One should contemplate) Janardana (one that re- 
moves the difficulties of people) at Kubjamra, Kesava at 
Mathura, Hfsike£a (lord of the senses) at Kubjamra and 
Jatadhara (one who bears the matted hair) at the place where 
the Ganges enters the plains. 

5. (One should contemplate) Mahayoga (one who ardently 
practises Toga) atSalagrama, Hari at the Govardhana mountain, 
Caturbahu ( one having four arms) at Pindaraka and Sankhin 
(the holder of the conch) at Sarikhadvara. 

6. Vamana (the Dwarf manifestation) (is worshipped) at 
Kuruksetra, Trivikrama (the conqueror of three worlds) at (the 
river) Yamuna, Vi^vesvara (the lord of the universe) at (the 
river) &ona andKapila (propounder of the Sankhya philosophy) 
on ( the banks of) the eastern ocean. 

7. (One should repeat the name of) Visnu (on the shore 
of) the great ocean at the confluence of the river Ganges with 
the ocean, Vanamala (the bearer of garland of wild flowers) 
at Kiskindha and Deva ( lord) at Raivataka. 

8. Mahayoga (the great yoga) (is contemplated) at Kasi, 
Ripufijaya (the conqueror of enemies) at Viraja, Ajita (the 
unconquered) at Visakhayupa and Lokabhavana (the creator 
of the world) at Nepala. 

9. One should know that (one has to repeat the name) 
Krsna at Dvaraka, Madhusudana (the slayer of the demon 
Madhu) at Mandara (mountain ) and Ripuhara ( the destroyer 
of enemies) at Lokakula and one should think of Hari at Sala- 
grama. 

10. (One should repeat the name) Puru§a (the Supreme 
person) at Puru§avata, Jagatprabhu (the lord of the world) at 



842 


Agni Purdna 


Vimala, Ananta (the endless) at the Saindhava forest and 
Sarngadharin (the wielder of the bow) at Dandaka (forest). 

1 1 . Sauri (the hero) (should be contemplated) at die whirl- 
pool (called) Utpala, Sriyahpati (the consort of LaksmI) at 
(the river) Narmada, Damodara (having the enlarged belly) 
at Raivataka and Jala£ayin (one who reclines on the water) at 
Nanda. 

12. It is known that (one has to repeat the name) Gopi- 
£vara on (the shore of) the Sindhu ocean, Acyuta (unswerv- 
ing) at Mahendra (hill), Devadevesa (the lord of gods) at the 
Sahya mountain and Vaikuntha (one who has united the 
earth etc.), at the M&gadha forest. 

13. (One should repeat the name) Sarvapapahara 
(Destroyer of all sins) at the Vindhya (mountain) and Puru- 
§ottama (the foremost among men) in (the region of) Odhra. 
One should know the universal soul (residing) in one’s heart. 
The recitation (of these names) confers enjoyment and eman- 
cipation. 

14. (One has to contemplate) the VaiSravana (the great 
fig tree) at every fig tree, (Lord) §iva('the auspicious) at every 
quadrangle, Rama on every mountain and Madhusudana ( the 
slayer of the demon Madhu) everywhere. 

15. One who contemplates the Supreme spirit on the 
earth and sky, the god having eagle in the banner in ( the 
great sage) Vasisfha and Vasudeva (epithet of Kr?na) every- 
where would get enjoyment and emancipation. 

16-17. One would obtain all (the desires) by the repeti- 
tion of these names of (Lord) Visnu. The (performance of) 
ancestral rites, (offering) gifts, repetition (of the names of 
god) and (offering of waters of) libation in all these sacred 
places will have manifold (benefits). One would become 
verily the Brahman after one’s death. One who reads or 
listens to this (will become) free from impurity and will obtain 
heaven. 



306.1 -7a 


843 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIX 

Description of the mantras to be repeated 
to ward off evil incantations etc. 

Fire-god said : 

1-2. Stupefaction, dissension, ruin, destruction, delusion, 
death and illness are known to be (due to) evil incantations. 
Listen to me ! I shall describe the means of getting relief from 
them. Oth obeisance to lord Unmattarudra (intoxicated 
Rudra) ! Stupefy (2) l 1 Make (him) wander (2) ! Threaten 
such and such a person! Hurl him aloft (2) with anger ! 
Hum, phaf, (ha (2) : One should do oblation with honey with 
the twigs of dhxtrta in the funeral fire after repeating ( this 
mantra) three lakh times at night in a Cremation ground. (By 
this) the enemy would be wandering always. 

3. (After having made) a black image (of the enemy) with 
red chalk, if it is pierced in the throat or heart with golden 
needles after repeating (the above mantra), the enemy would 
die. 

4. One who wants to destroy (his enemy) should throw 
pulverized tail of the ass, funeral ash, brahmadandl and markafi 
on the house or head of the person. 

5-7a. (I shall describe the method of worshipping the 
disc in the. thousand-petalled lotus.) “Bhrgu, ether, glowing 
fire, bhrgu, fire armour, phaf” (is for the armour). One (should) 
thus (worship) in the thousand-petalled (lotus). “ Hihh , phaf, 
to the disc (acakraya) oblations” is for the heart, (hUm phaf) 
to the disc (vicakraya) for the head, (hum phaf) to the disc 
(sikhacakra) of the tuft (for the tuft), (hUm phaf) to the disc 
(vicakra) for the eye, ( hurhphat ) to the disc ( sahcakra ) for the 
weapon and (hum phat) to the glowing disc (jv&l&cakra) as 
before for the bow. (By worshipping) the disc in this way 
(with the constituent mantras), it would remove all the afflic- 
tions due to evil incantations and accomplish all (the desires). 
The letters of this (mantra) should be located on the head, 
eyes, mouth, heart, genital organ and feet. 

1. The number 2 after the words indicates repetition of the respective 
words. 



844 


Agni Pur&na 


7b-9a. (One should contemplate the Sudarsana disc 
personified as) seated on the lotus, resembling the colour of 
fire, having large teeth and four hands, (holding) the conch, 
disc, mace, lotus, brush and goad in his hand, holding the 
bow, having reddish brown hair and eye and pervading the 
three worlds by means of the spokes (of the disc). If the navel 
is pierced with its fire, the diseases and (afflictions due to) the 
planets would get destroyed. 

9b- 10. One should draw two discs. They should be yellow. 
They should be bearing the disc. The spokes should be red and 
their inter-spaces black. The periphery should be white and 
the outer line black. The inter-space should bear the colour 
of silver. 

1 1-12. After having brought a pitcher with water first, it 
should be placed in front and the Sudarsana (disc of Lord 
Visnu) placed there. One should offer oblation in order to the 
disc on the south. Clarified butter, twigs of apamdrga , unbroken 
rice, sesamum, mustard, sweet gruel and clarified butter from 
the cow (are the materials that are offered). (One should do 
oblation) one thousand and eight times. 

13-14. The remaining (part) of each one of the materials 
after the oblation should be put into the pitcher by one who 
knows the mode of performance. A ball made of these offer- 
ings should be placed in the pitcher. (By doing so) (Lord) 
Visnu and others would enter that (pitcher). Then offering 
should be made in the south with the residual water with (the 
repetition of) the mantra “Obeisance to the retinue of (Lord) 
Visnu who appease everything. May they accept. Obeisance 
for peace !” 

15-16a. (It may also be performed differently). One may 
inscribe (the disc) on a plank, place a vessel filled with milk 
and perform oblation with the twigs oipalaSa and kfira (trees) 
in the different directions engaging brahmins. These two obla- 
tions done after offering appropriate fees (to the priests) 
would destroy the spirits, etc. 

16b-17. Evil incantations would be removed by writing 
on leaves soaked in cow’s milk and without leaves. (One has to 
do oblation) with dUrvd (grass) for (prolonging) life, with lotus 
flowers for prosperity, with ( twigs of) udumbara for progeny. 



306.18—307.2 


845 


with clarified butter at the cow-shed for cattle and with (the 
twigs) of all the trees for intellect. 

18. Om, ksaum ! Obeisance to Lord Narasimha ! To one 
who has the flames as the garland, one who has effulgent 
teeth, one who has fiery eyes, one who is the annihilator 
of all the demons ! To one who destroys all the spirits ! To 
one who destroys all fevers ! burn (2) ! cook (2) ! protect 

(2) \huriiphat ! This mantra of Narasimha (the man-lion mani- 
festation of Lord Visnu) removes ail sins. Its repetition would 
remove evil incantations, (evil influences of malignant) planets, 
epidemics, poisons and diseases. One could arrest the force of 
water and fire (by rubbing over the body) the ground marrow 
of a frog (after the repetition of the above mantra). 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVEN 

Description of the mantras that would 
stupefy the three worlds 

Fire-god said : 

1-2. I shall describe to you the mantra that would .stupefy 
the three worlds and would accomplish the four ends of human 
life. Om, $rim y hrim , hrum, om obeisance ! Oh ! Foremost among 
men ! Flic prototype of foremost among men ! The abode of 
Laksrni (goddess of fortune) ! One who agitates the entire 
world ! One who opens the hearts of all women ! One who 
intoxicates the three worlds ! Burn (2), Make glow (2), Dry 
up (2), Kill (2), Arrest (2), Melt (2), Attract (2) the hearts 
of the maidens of the heaven and. earth ! ,Oh ! The most 
fortunate one ! The giver of all good fortunes ! Conferer of 
desires ! (You) kill such and such a person (repeated) ! You 
pierce with the disc, mace, sword and all the weapons ! Cover 
(2) with the noose ! Strike with the goad (2) ! Hasten (2) ! 
Why do you tarry till accomplishing my desire ! Hum, pka{ 9 
obeisance. Om, foremost among men !, One. who intoxicates 
the three worlds l HUm> phatA Obeisance to the heart I 



846 


Agnt Purdna 


Attract ! Oh ! One of great strength ! Hum,phaf to the weapon! 
Oh ! lord of the three worlds ! You kill, pierce, and bring 
under my control the hearts of all men ! Hurh , phaf ! To the 
eyes ! Oh ! stupefier of the three worlds ! The lord of the sense 
organs ! Incomparable one ! One who attracts the hearts of 
all women ! (You) come (2) ! Obeisance ! The location of 
the auxiliary ( mantra ) pervading the limbs and eyes should 
also be done as described for the principal (mantra). After 
having worshipped, repeating (the mantra ) fifty times and 
anointing one thousand times, (the preceptor) should prepare 
porridge in the divine fire* and do hundred oblations in the 
fire in the pit. 

3-4. Curd, ghee, milk, porridge, clarified butter and 
boiled milk (should be offered) separately. Twelve oblations 
(should be made) with (the repetition of) the principal 
(mantra). (Then one should offer) unbroken rice and sesamum 
a thousand times and barley, the three sweet things (sugar, 
honey and clarified butter), flower, fruit, curd and twigs 
a hundred times. After having offered the final oblation, (the 
preceptor) should make the disciple drink the porridge to- 
gether with ghee. 

5-6a. After having fed the brahmins, the priest should be 
pleased (by paying the fee). Then the mantra would get 
accomplished. After having bathed and rinsed (the mouth) as 
laid down, (the votary) should go to the sacrificial chamber 
restraining his speech. He should sit in the padmasana (sitting 
posture with legs crossed) and dry up his body as laid down. 

6b-l 1. The sudarsana (disc) that destroys the demons and 
removes the obstacles in the (different) directions should be 
placed at first. Then one should contemplate the principal 
(syllable) ‘yam* that is at the centre of the navel. It is of the 
nature of the terrific wind. It is conceived as absolving all the 
sins from the body. After having contemplated the principal 
(syllable) rath situated in the lotus of the heart, one should 
burn with (its) flames spreading above, below and across in the 
head. Then after contemplation the body should be flooded 
with the ambrosia that flows out and in through the path of 
sufumnd (one of the arteries in the body). After purifying the 
body thus, one should do prd^dydma (regulated breathing) three 



307.12-19 


847 


times with the mantra . Then the energy should be located in 
the hand, head, face, genital organ, throat, heart, belly, the 
(different) directions and everywhere in the body. The supreme 
lord (endowed) with all (good) characteristics should then 
be contemplated in the lotus of the heart after being invoked 
from the orb of the Sun through the aperture in the crown of 
the head with (the repetition of) the tdra ( mantra ) : “We know! 
To the stupefier of the three worlds ! May we meditate on the 
lord of remembrance, may (Lord) Visnu lead us to reflect on 
that.” 

12. After (having done) the soul-worship, (the votary) 
should sprinkle (water) on the materials for worship and the 
pure vessel. After having done the soul-worship as laid down, 
the deity should be worshipped on the ground. 

13-17. (Lord) Visnu should be contemplated as riding the 
eagle and as remaining on a lotus over a seat composed of 
one’s deeds etc. (He should be imagined as) having beautiful 
limbs, having attained the beauty appropriate to the youthful 
age, the reddish-brown eyes reeling with intoxication, lofty, 
agitated by love, adorned with divine flowers, dress and un- 
guents, having a smiling face, being sui rounded by many 
attendants of different kinds, as compassionate to the beings, 
beautiful, having the lustre of one thousand sons, bearing the 
five weapons, one who has attained the desires as known from 
his eyes, having two or four hands, one surrounded by divine 
women and one who is affectionately looking at the face of his 
consort. One should worship Him as bearing the disc, conch, 
bow, sword, mace, pestle, goad and noose commencing with 
invocation and ending with the request to leave. 

18-19. (Goddess) Sri (consort, of Vi$nu) (should be ima- 
gined) as seated on the left thigh andshank (of the lord) and 
as embracing the consort with her hand. (She should be con- 
templated ) as having a well-built body, holding a lotus and 
chowrie in her hand and endowed with the Srivatsa (mark) 
and Kaustubha (gem). One should worship (Lord) Hari 
( Vi?nu) as wearing a garland, yellow garment and as endow- 
ed with the disc etc. Orh ! SudarSana ! The great lord of discs ! 
Dreadful for the wicked ! Gut (2) ! Tear (2) ! Devour mighty 
spells (2) ! Eat (2) ! Catch hold of the spirits (2) 1 Hfkth phaf 



848 


Agni Purana 


om oblations to one who remains in the water ! One as sharp as 
the sword ! Cut (2) ! Obeisance to the sword ! To the bow 
with the arrow hurii, phat ! “We contemplate the union of the 
elements. We meditate on the four-fold principles# May that 
Brahman lead our mind (to meditate) on that.” Oh ! Fire that 
destroys the world (Samvartaka) ! The embodiment of breath! 
You recoil (2) ! Hum phat oblations ! O ! Noose ! Bind (2) ! 
Attack (2) ! Hurnphaf ! One has to worship these weapons on 
the hands with their respective mantras. 

20-22. One has to worship Tarksya (the eagle vehicle of 
Visnu) in the pericarp (with the mantra ) “Om ! To the king 
of birds ! Hum phaf !” Then the presiding deities of the limbs 
(should be worshipped) as laid down. The female energies 
(should be worshipped) at the places of Indra and others and 
Tarksya and others as holding chowrics. Indra and others 
should be worshipped first and the energies at the end by the 
priest. Laksini and Sarasvati (should be contemplated) as 
yellow, Rati, Priti and Jaya as white, Klrti and Kanti as white, 
and Tusti and Pusti as black ( and worshipped) as laid down. 
(One should worship ) upto the guardian deities of the worlds 
and then Lord Visnu for the sake of gaining one’s desired fruits. 

23. After having repeated the mantra , one should contem- 
plate (the lord), offer oblation and do consecration. Orh , frfm, 
krlm , hrlrii, hum obeisance to Visnu, the stupefier of the three 
worlds ! As before one would get all his desires by doing this 
worship. 

24-26. One should please the sammohanl (i vidya ) (the stupe- 
fier) daily with water and flowers. The principal part of the 
Trailokyamohana (the stupefier of the three worlds) is “Brahma, 
Sakra (Indra), Sri (Lak$ml) and Dandi.” One would get long 
life by repeating (the mantra) three lakhs times and offering 
oblations (with the mantra) one lakh times with bilva (leaves), 
clarified butter, rice, fruits, perfumes and dun & (grass). (Lord 
Visnu) being pleased with anointment, oblations and other acts 
with that (vidya) would confer all the-desired things. Om f 
obeisance to Lord Varaha (Boar manifestation of Lord Vi$nu) ! 
To the lord of (the three worlds) Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svah ! Grant 
me the suzerainty over the earth ! Oblation to the heart ! One 



308.1 -9a 


849 


would get long life and kingdom by repeating (the above mantra) 
ten thousand times daily together with the pahcahga 1 (five parts 
of the body). 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHT 

On the mode of worship of goddess Laksmi and 
others that confer immense benefits 

Fire-god said : 

1. (The mantras ) “chest, together with fire, beautiful 
woman, Dandi, Srlh (goddess of fortune) ” gives all prosperity. 
Obeisance ! O ! greatest fortune ! O ! great prosperity ! O ! 
One having a lustre as the powerful lightning ! Obeisance to 
the goddess of prosperity ! O ! Victorious ! O ! Mighty one ! 
Bind (2) ! Obeisance ! Hum ! One having a big body ! One 
holding the lotus in the hand ! Hum phaf ! Obeisance to Sri ! 
To Sri, phat , obeisance to Sri ! To Sri, the conferer of pros- 
perity ! Obeisance ! Oblations Sri-phaf ! 

2. The constituent parts of this {mantra) are said to be 
nine. One should resort to one of these. It would confer pros- 
perity if repeated three lakh or one lakh times with rosary beads 
or lotus (seeds). 

3-4. One would get wealth by worshipping Sri in the 
temple of Sri or Visnu. One lias to do oblation with rice soaked 
in clarified butter in the fire (kindled with) khadira (twigs). (By 
this) the king would be under one’s control. One will have 
more and more growth and prosperity. Bathing done with 
mustard would destroy the (evil propensities of) planets. 

5-9a. Oblations done with the bilva (leave) (with the 
repetition of) Sri {mantra), would increase one’s wealth. Then 
one has to contemplate the mansion of Indra having four doors 
in his heart. One should contemplate (the energy) Balaka, 


1. The obeisance conveyed by the touching of the ground simultaneously 
with the two arms, the two knees, the head, chest and the eyes. 



850 


Agni Purdna 


short and black sporting (and guarding) at the eastern entrance 
with the two hands held upwards holding white lotus flowers, 
(the energy) Vanamalini of white (complexion) at the southern 
entrance with the hands held upwards holding red lotus flowers, 
Vibhlsika, the messenger of Sri, having green (complextion), 
at the western entrance, with Her two hands lifted upwards 
holding white lotus (flower). Sahkari (should be contemplated) 
at the northern entrance. 

9b-14a. One should contemplate Vasudeva, Sankar$ana , 
Pradyumna and Aniruddha in the lotus petals carrying conch, 
disc and mace. They are of the colours of collyrium, milk, saffron 
and gold and wear good dress. One should contemplate the 
elephants such as Guggulu, Kuruntaka, Damaka and Salila 
(having) the colour of silver, in the different directions such as 
south-east etc. in the petals. (These elephants should be imagin- 
ed as) bearing golden pots. Sri should be contemplated in the 
pericarp as having four arms, two of which are raised upwards 
and hold lotus. (She is also conceived as having the following 
characteristics) : golden coloured conferring protection and boons 
with the right and left hands respectively, besmeared with white 
sandal, wearing a silvery garland and carrying the weapon. One 
would get all (his desires) by contemplating as above and wor- 
shiping Her together with Her attendants. 

14b-15a. (The worshipper of Sri) should not wear the 
drona and lotus flowers and the leaf of the bilva tree on the head. 
So also salt and embelic myrobalan are prohibited on the eighth 
and twelfth days (of the lunar fortnight) in order. 

15b-16. Taking (only) sweet porridge one should repeat 
the irisukta 1 and anoint (goddess) Sri with (the repetition of) 
that (hymn) . One has to contemplate mentally as doing the 
rites beginning with the invocation and ending with the dismis- 
sal and worship Sri. One would gain prosperity by doing obla- 
tions separately with (the twigs of) bilva, clarified butter, lotus 
and sweet porridge. 

17-24. “ Poison, buffalo, the destructive fire at the end of 

the world, Rudra, the effulgence, the two bakas” “ Oth hrirh the 
slayer of the great buffalo-demon! Tharh\ Thafr\” (is) the 

] . Designation of the hymn hiragyavarp&m hariijirh 'RVkh. 5.87.1a. 



308.17-24 


851 


principal mantra (of Durga, a form of the consort of Siva). 
“Obeisance to the lioness (that killed) the buffalo (demon). O ! 
Enemy of the (buffalo) demon ! Make (the enemy) whirl 
round (2) ! Hum, phaf, fha {ham ! Make the buffalo (demon) 
neigh (2) ! Hum slay the buffalo (2) 1 O ! Goddess ! Hurt ! The 
slayer of the buffalo (demon) ! Phaf !” This is said to be the 
Durgahfdaya (the heart of Durga) . Together with its accessories 
it is capable of accomplishing all the things. One should worship 
that goddess and the seat in the middle of the accessories thus : 
Ort hrlm ! O ! Durga ! Durga ! Protector ! and oblations'*. 
Obeisance to Durga ! Obeisance to Varavami, Arya, Kanaka- 
prabha, Kmika, Abhayaprada, Kanyaka and Surupa ( excellent 
complexion, noble, golden-coloured, offering protection, virgin 
and having good form respectively). These forms (of the goddess) 
should be worshipped on the leaves with the principal syllables 
in due order. (One should also worship the weapons) disc, 
conch, mace, sword, bow and arrow. One should worship this 
(goddess) Durga, the tranquil one in the world, on the eighth 
day (of the lunar fortnight). This association with Durga would 
increase longevity, prosperity, favour of master and victory. 
Oblation and sesamum with (the repetition of) the Isana mantra 
after the worship (of Durga) would enable one to gain control. 
(Oblation made) with lotuses would ensure victory. One desirous 
of appeasement (should do oblation) with durvd (grass). One 
will gain strength (by performing oblation) with (the twigs of) 
Palafa . Death, dissension etc. would be caused (by offering 
oblation) with the wings of the crow. This mantra would re- 
move all the difficulties such as evil influences due to malignant 
planets, evil incantations and fear etc. u Ort ! O ! Durga ! 
Protector ! Oblations !'* This ( mantra ) together with the acces- 
sories of the victorious Durga is said to be able to protect. One 
should contemplate the goddess as black, having three eyes, 
four arms, bearing the conch, disc, lotus, spike, sword and trident 
and as having a wrathful form. One would gain victory in battle. 
One (who wants to have) victory of sword etc. should worship 
Her. “ Ort obeisance to the Goddess having a garland of flames, 
surrounded by flocks of female eagles move ! Oblations to the 
protector !" One should repeat this mantra for (gaining victory 
in) battle. The combatant would conquer his enemies. 



852 


Agtii Purdna 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND NINE 

The mode of worship of Tvaritd 
Fire-god said : • 

1. I shall describe (to you) the constituent ( mantras ) (relat- 
ing to the worship) of Tvarita 1 that is capable of conferring enjoy- 
ment and emancipation. “Om obeisance to the the supportive 
energy ! Oth hrim punt (2) obeisance to great lion ! Oth obeisance 
to the lotus ! Oth hrim hrum khecacheksah ! Strim oth hrum ksaim hrurii 
phaf ! Obeisance to (goddess) Tvarita ! Khe ca obeisance to the 
heart ! Cache obeisance to the head ! Chcksah obeisance to the 
tuft ! Ksastri obeisance to the armour ! Strim hrum obeisance 
to the eye ! Hrum khc obeisance to the weapon phat !” 
<( 0/w ! We known the Tvarita-vidya. Let us meditate oil the 
turnavidya . May the goddess prompt us (to meditate) on her.” 
(This is the Gayatri mantra for the goddess Tvarita.) Obeisance 
to the confcrrer of prosperity. Obeisance to the syllable hrum ! 
Obeisance to the syllable oth ! Oth kheca obeisance to the heart ! 
Obeisance to the one who is able to fly ! Oth obeisance to* the 
fierce one ! K$a strim obeisance to the armour ! Obeisance to 
the cutter ! Obeisance to the thrower ! Obeisance to the woman 
of the form of the syllable hum ! To the one that gives safety ! 
To the victor ! To the conqueror! Protect ! Oth be firm by the 
command of(Goddcss) Tvarita vasaf ! This is the incantation 
known as Tvarita. It is known as Totala and Turna. 

2 -3a. After having touched the head, forehead, throat, 
heart, navel, genital organ, thighs, knees, shanks and feet (with 
the mantra) in order and thus complete the location spread 
over the whole body. 

3b-6. The goddess has to be contemplated as having the form 
of daughter of the mountain, huntress, supreme, conferring boons 
and protection, having the peacock feather on the head, having 
the tender sprout as the upper garment, seated on lion throne 
together with an umbrella of peacock plumes, the dark-compl- 
exioned goddess wearing the garland of wild flowers, having the 
brahmin class of serpents as the car ornament, the ksatriya{ class of 
serpents) as the bracelets, the vaUya class of serpents as the girdle 

1 . The goddess conferring benefits quickly. 



309.7-17 853 

and vrsala (fourth class) class of serpents as the anklets. Then 
one should repeat that mantra ten lakh times. 

7. In days of yore the lord took the form of a hunter and 
(the goddess) Gaurl also (took a) similar (form). One has to 
repeat (the mantra of the Goddess). One has to contemplate 
and worship Her for accomplishing all ( the things) and for the 
removal of poison etc. 

8-10. (Goddess Tvarita) has to be worshipped in a lion 
seat (having) eight (petals) . Gayatrl, Pranlta, humkdra etc. and 
Phatkari are located in the petals in the east etc. in front of the 
Goddess with the principal mantra of Sri. Their colours and 
weapons are as those of the guardians of the quarters. Phatkari 
should bear the bow. Jaya and Vijaya should be worshipped as 
at the entrance holding golden staff. Kinkara, Barbari, Mundi 
and Lagudi (should be worshipped) outside them. 

11-15. After having worshipped (them) thus, one has to 
accomplish (them) with materials. Oblation should be made 
in a sacrificial pit of the shape of the female organ of generation. 
One would gain gold (by doing oblation) with white grains, 
increasing prosperity with wheat, all accomplishments and the 
destruction of iti 1 with barley and sesamum, insanity of the 
enemy with rosary seeds, death (of the enemy) with (the twigs 
of) silk cotton tree, gain of wealth and grains with rose apple, 
satisfaction (pleasure) with blue lotuses, abundant prosperity 
with red lotuses, great prosperity with kimda (a kind of jasmine) , 
disturbance in the city with mallika (a kind of jasmine) , good- 
will of people with white lilies, birth of a son with afoka (a 
kind of flower), an auspicious and beautiful woman with pdfala 
(trumphet flower), long life with mango (flowers), fortune with 
sesamum, prosperity with bilva, wealth with campaka (flowers), 
desired (object) with madhuka (flowers) and omniscience with 
bilva (leaves). 

16-17. One would get all things by the repetition (of the 
mantra) three lakh times or by doing oblation or contemplation 
or worship. After having worshipped with the gayatri in a circle, 
(one should offer) twentyfive oblations. A person who offers 
three hundred oblations with leaves with the principal (mantra) 

1. These are six; excessive rain, drought, locusts, rats, parrots and 
foreign invasions. See Apte SD p. 96. 



854 


Agni Purina 


would become initiated. After having taken the five things got 
from a cow, one should take porridge. (This is the proce- 
dure) always. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TEN 

The narration of the spell relating to Tvariti 
Fire-god said : 

1-5. I shall describe (to you) the worship of Tvarita by 
another method that would yield enjoyment and emancipation. 
One has to worship the Goddess in a diagram of the shape of a 
thunderbolt drawn with dust. One has to draw a lotus inside it. 
One has to contemplate the Goddess and draw quickly eight 
thunderbolts in the (main) directions and the intermediate 
directions and also draw pathway, entrance, ornamenta} arch 
and secondary decoration. (One has to worship the Goddess) 
as having eighteen hands and Her left shank placed on the lion. 
Two-fold fee should be offered at Her pedestal. (She should be 
worshipped) in the sacrificial pit in the form of the thunderbolt 
as being adored by serpents, and as holding the sword, disc, 
mace, spike, arrow and mace in the right hands and as confer- 
ring boons and as holding the bow, noose, arrow, bell, threaten- 
ing posture of the first finger, conch, goad and thunder- bolt in 
the left hands and as offering protection. 

6. If one worships this form, one’s enemy would die, one 
would win a kingdom with ease, gain long life, become the 
ruler of a kingdom and gain perfections such as supernatural 
powers. 

7-8b. There are the seven nether regions below, which are 
as destructive as the destructive fire at the end of the world. The 
syllable orh and others denote (the space) beginning with the 
heaven and ending with the primordial egg. One has to whirl 
round water with (the repetition of) the syllable orh (and repeat) 
“To tala, Tvarita” then. (Then) orle has to whirl round water 
with (the repetition of) the syllable 'to* (and repeat) “Totala, 
Tvarita” then. 



310.8c-18 


855 


8c-l8. I shall introduce the (method of writing the mantra ) . 
The group of vowels should be written on the ground. (The next 
group) would be the c Aa* group (belonging to) the palatal 
class. The third (letter) is (the letter belonging to) the tongue 
and palate. The fourth (letter) is (the letter belonging to) the 
palate and the tip of the tongue. The fifth (letter) is that of 
the tongue and teeth. The sixth one consists of eight letters. The 
seventh one is of mixed group of letters. (The eighth one 
consists of) the sa group of letters (known as) sibilants. The 
mantra should be constructed then. The first (basic syllable) 
should begin with the sixth vowel and end with last of the 
letters of u$ma (sibilants) together with bindu (the nasal sound 
marked by a dot). Then the second (letter) among the palatals 
is compounded with the eleventh vowel. Then the combination 
of the (letters belonging to) the tongue and palate would be the 
first simple (basic syllable) . The second (letters) of the same 
(group of letters) should be compounded below. Then the first 
letter among the palatals should be compounded with the 
eleven vowels. Then the second letter among the sibilants is 
coupled from below. The second letter among the sibilants 
coupled with the sixteenth vowel should be compounded below 
with the first letter belonging to the union of the tongue and 
dental region. Then the second letter belonging to the mixed 
group should again be coupled below. Then the second letter 
among the sibilants combined with the fourth vowel and yoked 
with the first letter of the palatals should be coupled below. 
Then the last among the sibilants together with the bindu (the 
nasal sound) is coupled with the eleventh vowel. Then the 
letter formed by the union of the (two) lips is joined with the 
fifth vowel. Then the second of the palatals is joined with (the 
letter belonging to) the tip of the tongue. Then the first letter 
of the fifth group should be combined with half- vowel and. thus 
the mantra is constructed. One should repeat (the above mantra 
coupling) with the syllable Orh at the beginning and obeisance 
at the end. One has to add ‘oblation* (at the end) in acts of 
offering oblation in fire. (The rite of location of the above 
mantra should be done as follows) : “Orh> hrlm 9 hrUrh y hrafr (let it 
permeate) the heart. H&rh hah (let it permeate) the head. 
Hrirhy burn, bum would be (for) the tuft. Hulu, hulu is for the 



856 


Agni Purdna 


armour, Hrurh , brim, ksum is said to be the mantra for the three 
eyes. Ksaum , hath, khaum, hum, phaf is for the weapon. The secret 
auxiliaries are assigned before ( the above location is done). 

19-26. Listen to me ! I shall describe the constituent parts 
of the mantra relating to (the worship of Goddess) Tvarita. 
The first two (letters in the mantra) are said to be the heart. 
The third and fourth are said to be the head. The fifth and 
sixth are said to be the tuft and the seventh and eighth as the 
armour. The pupil (of the mantra) would be the eye. It has the 
characteristic (of containing) nine and half letters. It is known 
to be (the mantra of) Totala (Tvarita). Then (the worship of) 
Vajratunda (would be described) . There are ten syllables in 
(Her worship). Kha,kha, h urn (obeisance to) Vajratuncja, the 
messenger of Indra. Khecarl ! Jvdlinl ! Jvdld ! kha ! kha arc the 
ten syllables for JvalinI (glowing) Sabari (huntress) ! Bhlsani 
(frightening) ! kha ! kha ! grow ! are (the syllables) for &abari. 
Che ! ChedanI (one that cuts) ! Karalini (terrible) ! khal kha ! 
are for Karali. Sravadravaplavan! (one who floods the ear and 
the liquid) ! kha kha (is for) the messenger Plavangi for the sky. 
Strikalakara (one who creates women and time) ! Dhunani (one 
who agitates) ! is for Svasi (the Goddess possessing the swiftness 
of breath) . Kscpaksa! Kapila! Hariisa (is for) the messenger 
called Kapila. Hrurfil Tejovati (one having lustre)! Raudri 
(terrible one) and Matangi (huntress) (are for) the messenger 
of Rudra. Pufe pufe kha kha kha$ga (to the sword) phaf (for) 
Brahmadutika (messenger of Brahma). Ten syllables of (the 
mantra of) VaitalinI have to be discarded like the cloud and 
straw. (This is the method) for locating (the mantras relating) 
to the heart and the like. A wise man should locate ( the 
mantra of) the eyes at the centre. 

27-31. Beginning with the leg and ending with the head, 
beginning with the head and ending with the leg, and beginn- 
ing with the navel, heart and neck and (ending) in the feet, 
knees, thighs and genital organ the location is done. The votary 
should contemplate the vajramanfala above and the basic be- 
ginning syllables above and below that and then the cow of the 
form of a moon that showers ambrosia as entering. ( the brain) 
through the aperture in the crown of the head. The votary 
should locate the first basic syllable (a) in the head, face, neck, 



310.32-41 


857 


heart, navel, genital organ, thigh, knee, feet and (the fingers) such 
as the fore-finger again and again. One who visualises the body 
made up of the basic syllables as Ranked above by the moon 
and the lotus below would not die. He would not suffer from 
diseases or fevers. One should locate the Goddess thus and 
worship Her repeating hundred and eight times. 

32-41. I shall describe the postures such as the Pranltd and 
the like. (The postures called) Pranitds are known to be of 
five kinds. The two hands are interlocked and the thumbs are 
put over that. Then they are placed on the head, the two fore- 
fingers resting on the head. This is known to be the Pranltd . 
That is then brought to the region of the heart. The twice* 
born know ( the Pranltd) to be an excellent one in which the 
little and middle (fingers) are turned upward and endowed 
with the basic syllables. When the tip of the thumb is placed 
beneath the middle finger and the fingers are mutually resting 
on the middle (part) of the fore-fingers, it. is said to be the 
Bhedani . This ( mudrd ) held in the navel region and the thumbs 
raised upwards is known as the great mudrd Kardli . The same 
located in the heart of the votary and the middle finger resting 
on the aperture on the head and raised upwards is said to be the 
V ajratunda. It should be placed on the vajradefa (the part of the 
body known as vajra) and the wrist should be locked up by the 
two hands stretching the three fingers (of each hand) ; it is said 
to be the Vajramudrd. The postures such as Dan<j.a (club), 
Khadga (sword), Cakra (disc) and Gadd (mace) are known to 
have the (respective) shape. Three fingers (are stretched) and 
held upwards and (their bases) are touched by the thumb. It 
would be Trtiula (trident posture). If the middle finger 
is neld upwards it is said to be Sakti (spear). Thus there are 
twenty-eight postures of the hand such as Sara (arrow), 
Varada (bestowing boon), Capa (bow), Pdia (noose), Bhdra 
(weight), Ghanfd (bell), Sankha (conch), Ahkuia (goad), 
Abhaya (offering protection) and Padmam (lotus) (having the 
respective shape). The five Pranltd mudrds such as Grdhant 
(one that seizes), Moksani (one that liberates), Jvdlinl (one 
that sets fire to), Amftd (ambrosia), and Abhayd (that offers 
protection) should be employed in the worship and while 
offering oblation. 



858 


Agni Purdna 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND ELEVEN 

The location of the basic mantras ofTvarita and Her worship 
Fire-god said : 

l-8a. I shall describe the (rite of) initiation etc. after 
having located in a lotus (diagram) furnished with (a diagram 
of) lion and thunderbolt. (The Tvarita-ma/zlra for this is) : “He 
he, huti , Vajradanta (one having the tooth like the thunder-bolt) ! 
puru, punty lulu 9 roar, roar here! Obeisance to the lion seat!’* 
There should be four lines running across and vertical. A wise 
man should draw nine squares (formed by these lines). Only 
the squares in the directions should be taken and those in the 
in between directions should be destroyed. Outside the angular 
points of the chambers there should be eight outer lines. The 
outer line should be divided into two so that the middle horn 
of the vajra occupies the middle of the outside of the outer 
chamber. The outer line would be curved. A wise man should 
divide it into two. The central chamber would have a radiant 
lotus having yellow petals. One should draw the thunder-bolt 
and sword above (the lotus) with black dust. The outer square 
should be adorned with the sign of a thunder-bolt. The votary 
should add lour signs of thunder-bolt at the entrance. ( If it is 
done so) the centre of the lotus and the left line will be on the 
same line. The centre as well as the petals (should be made) 
red. Initiated women (should be worshipped) in this circle. 
(By this) one would conquer the kingdoms of others and recover 
(the lost) kingdom quickly. 

8b-12a. O! Twice-born! The image (of the Goddess) 
illumined by the prantava (syllable orh) should be commissioned 
with the syllable hurfi. After repeating the basic syllable as if it 
had occupied the (regions of) the wind and sky, a person 
(should worship) it as the first one. One should worship it again 
in the pericarp. After having worshipped each one of the 
syllables from the beginning thus in the cyclic order, one should 
worship the subordinates of the mantra in the middle of the 
petals, Nirrti in the south-east (corner), the eye at the centre, 
the weapons in the directions and Rak§ana in the genital organ. 
Five offerings of oblations at the filaments on the left and right 
side should be worshipped with their respective mantras . 



311.12b.23a 


859 


12b-l8. The eight guardian deities ofthe world should be 
located outside the central circle. The respective names should 
be added to the last syllable of the agni mantra split by the sixth 
vowel and permeated by the fifteenth (letter). One should 
worship (the Goddess) in (the image of) the lion in the peri- 
carp (of the lotus) with perfume and other things for prosperity. 
It should be surrounded by eight pitchers consecrated with (the 
repetition of the mantras ) one hundred and eight times. After 
having repeated the ( mula ) mantra eight thousand times and the 
subordinate mantra a tenth of that (number), one should offer 
the oblation in the fire-pit. (Then the fire) should be stirrred 
with the fire mantra . The fire should be placed with (the mantra 
of) the heart. Then the Goddess should be contemplated as 
remaining at the centre of the fire. Then the oblations for the 
garbhddhana 1 2 3 , pwmavana 1 and jatakarma* are made. (The oblation) 
with (the mantra of) the heart (would be) one hundred (times). 
The fire should thus be generated at the centre of the fire-pit. 
The fire of the Goddess would glow with the final oblations 
made with the mantra . Then oblation should be made with the 
principal mantra a hundred times and a tenth of that with the 
subordinate {mantra). Then it should be dedicated to the 
Goddess. Then the disciple should be ushered in. 

19-23a. After striking with (the repetition of the mantra 
of) the weapon, the secret subordinate ( mantras ) should be 
located in the disciple. The disciple should be bound with the 
subordinate ( mantras ) and then charged with the subordinate 
{mantras). Then the disciple should be made to throw a flower. 
He is then led to the sacrificial pit. One hundred oblations 
should be made with the principal mantra with barley, grains, 
sesamum and clarified butter. The first oblation (is intended 
for) the state of a plant, the next one for the state of reptiles 
(like the serpents), and (the subsequent oblations are) for the 
states of being a bird, animal and human beings, mortals, 
Brahma, Vi§nu and Rudra. The concluding oblation would be 

1. Rite for impregnation. 

2. Rite performed prior to the movement of the foetus for the sake of 
getting a male child. 

3. Rite performed soon after the birth of a child. 



860 


Agni Purina 


at the end. The disciple would become initiated by a single 
oblation. (The disciple) would have the authority in this way. 
Listen to me! I shall hereafter describe (the way to gain) 
liberation. 

23b-30. The votary who remains steadfast at the feet of 
Lord Sadasiva (always benevolent) and on the Sumcru should 
offer one thousand oblations for improper and proper acts 
composed. That yoginwill not be stained by dharma (righteous- 
ness) and adharma (unrighteousness). He could attain the 
supreme place of liberation from which he would not return. 
Just as water poured into (larger quantity of) water becomes 
merged as water, so also the mortal becomes one with (Lord) 
Siva. Consecration should be made with the pitchers. One would 
gain victory, kingdom and all the things (by such a worship). 
One should worship Kumar! and Brahman! (obviously the 
divine mothers). Fees should be paid to the preceptors and others. 
After having worshipped, one thousand oblations should be 
offered everyday with sesamum or clarified butter. The pro- 
pitiated Goddess would confer the desired things, abundant 
riches and anything else that is desired. (A person) who repeats 
the mantra a lakh times would become the master of a treasure. 
(A person) would get the kingdom by repeating (the mantra ) 
twice (that) and become a Yaksin" (a semi-divine being) by 
repeating thrice ( that) . (A person) would get the position of 
Brahma (by the repetition) four times (that number) and then 
gain the place of Visnu. (A person who repeats it) six times 
(that number) would gain great powers. (The person who 
repeats it) one lakh times would get rid of his sin. The repetition 
ten times would purify the body. (The repetition) a hundred 
times (would confer) the fruits of bathing in the sacred water. 

31-36. ( Goddess )Sigra(Tvarita) should be worshipped on a 

cloth or in an image or on the altar. It is said that hundred, 
thousand or ten thousand are the counts for the repetition (of 
the mantra) or oblation (with that). After having repeated thus 
as laid down one should offer oblation one lakh (times) with 
the fat and flesh of a buffalo or goat or the body of a man. 
After having done the oblation with sesamum, barley, fried 
paddy, paddy, wheat, mango, iriphala ( bilva ) together with 
clarified butter, one should practise austerities. Equipping him- 



311.31-36 


861 


self with sword, bow, arrow and the like at midnight, (the 
votary) should dress himself with a single (piece of) cloth of 
varied colours or red or yellow or black or blue. He should 
worship the Goddess with the same (materials). Then the wise 
man should set out in the southern direction and offer the 
victim at the entrance with (the repetition of) the dutimantrd . 
(It should be done) at the entrances or a single tree or in the 
cremation ground. If it is done so a king would enjoy all 
pleasures and the entire earth. 



THE 

AGNI PURANA 

PART IV 


TRANSLATED AND ANNOTATED BY 

N. GANGADHARAN 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS • DELHI 



First Edition: Delhi, 1 955 
Reprint- Delhi, !9S7, 1994, 2003 

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 
Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110007 

Branches 

Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004 
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Madras 600 004 


PRINTED IN INDIA 

BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS, A-45 NARAINA 
INDUSTRIAL AREA, PHASE I, NEW DELHI 110028 AND PUBLISHED BY 
NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR MOTILAL BANARSIDASS, DELHI 110007. 



CONTENTS 


CHAPTERS 

312. The occasions for the use of the Tvarild-mantra 

and the benefits 863 

3 1 3. The mantras relating to the worship of different 

gods 865 

3 14. Mantras relating to the worship of Goddess 

Tvarita 868 

315. Narration of mantras relating to paralysing, 

captivating etc. 871 

316. Narration of different kinds of mantras 872 

317. The different kinds of mantras of Siva 873 

318. The mode of worshipping Ganapati, accom- 
plishing all things 876 

319. Mode of worshipping Vaglsvari (Goddess of 

speech) 878 

320. The different mystic diagrams 879 

321. The appeasing rites relating to Aghorastra 883 

322. The appeasing rite employing the mantra of 

the weapon of Pasupati 885 

323. The mantra of the weapons of Aghora and 

the six constituents 887 

324. Appeasing rite for lord Siva 891 

325. The benefits of wearing the rosary beads and the 

counting of the formulae with them 894 

326. Description of the mode of worshipping 

Goddess Gaud for gaining enjoyment, 
rmancipation etc. 896 



Contents 


327. The greatness of establishing a lihga and 

worship with the accessories 899 

328. The rules of prosody 901 

329. An abridgement of rules of prosody relating to 

the Vedic metres 902 

330. An abridgement of the rules of metres 902 

331. Metres of different kinds 905 

332. The metres of un-equal characteristics in the 

four quarters 908 

333. Description of metres having equal characteris- 
tics in the alternate quarters 910 

334. Description of metres having similar charac- 
teristics in the four quarters 91 1 

335. The tabular representation of long and short 

vowels of different metres 915 

336. Description of phonetics 915 

337. Description of the characteristics of a kavyti 918 

338. Description of the different types of drama 92 1 

339. Description of the santiments, emotions, hero 

etc. 923 

340. Description of diction and mode 927 

341. Description of the actions and movements of 

the limbs 928 

342. Definition of dramatic representation 930 

343. Definition of the embellishment of words 933 

344. Description of the embellishment of sense 939 

345. The embellishments of sound and sense 942 

346. Investigation into poetic excellences 944 

347. Investigation into poetic blemishes 946 

348. List of mono-syllabic words 950 

349. The pratyaharas and fundamental rules in 

grammar 953 

350. The forms of completed euphonic combinations 954 

351. Perfected forms of inflection in the nouns 957 

352. Narration of the finished forms of the substan- 
tives in the feminine 966 

353. The finished forms of substantives in the 

neuter 968 



Contents 


354. The relation between a noun and a verb in a 

sentence 970 

355. Different kinds of compounds 973 

356. The rules governing the formation of taddhita 

(secondary nominal bases) 976 

357. The formation of the primary nominal bases by 
adding primary affixes known as unadi, beginning 

with affix u 980 

358. The completed form of the verbs after adding 

the conjugational signs etc. 981 

359. The finished forms after adding the krt affixes 

(primary affixes added to verbs) 985 

360. The synonyms of group of words denoting the 

celestial region and the nether world 986 

361. The indeclinables 996 

362. Words having many meanings 1001 

363. The words denoting earth, city, forest and herbs 1005 

364. Words denoting men and four classes of men 1013 

365. Words relating to the class of brahmins 1017 

366. Words relating to ksatriya, vaifyas and other 

classes 1018 

367. The class of words dependent on the substantives 

for their genders 1024 

368. Constant dissolution, occasional and total 

dissolution 1028 

369. The description of absolute dissolution and the 

process of creation 1030 

370. The constituent parts of a body 1034 

371. The description of hells 1037 

372. The major and minor religious observances 

(yama-s and myoma- s) 1041 

373. Description of asanas (different physical 

postures) and control of breath 1044 

374. Contemplation 1046 

375. Fixing-up of the mind in the object of 

contemplation 1049 

376. Deep meditation ( sam&dhi ) 1051 

377. . Knowledge of Brahman 1055 



Contents 


378. Knowledge of Brahman 1057 

379. Knowledge of Brahman again 1059 

380. Knowledge of non-dual Brahman 1062 

381. The essence of the Bhagavadgita 1068 

382. The Tamagitd 1073 

383. The glorification of the Agnipurdna 1077 

INDEX 1085 



CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWELVE 


The occasions for the use of the Tvaritd-mantra and the benefits 
Fire-god said: 

I- 3. I shall describe the application of the (Tvarita) Vidya 
that would bring about success in matters pertaining to dharma 
and fulfil worldly desires. One who knows the mantra divided 
and spread over nine squares in the regular and reverse order 
as a whole and divided in combination with karnd-vikarna(?) 
and then by their parts combined in the different triangular forms 
together with the image of the Goddess would know the man- 
tras that confer success as well as the manifold external appli- 
cations. 

4-10. The mantras are manifold in different scriptures. It is 
difficult to find (the description of) their application therein. 
The first would be long. It is not described in the early hours 
of the morning. (The mantras ) having a single letter, two 
letters and three letters would be applied. (The mystic dia- 
gram) should be divided by four lines each drawn horizontally 
and vertically. Thus there would be nine chambers. These 
(letters) should be established in the central region clockwise 
and then the order is split. One who finds the order by means 
of combination of the order that votary would have all the des- 
ired things in his folded hands. The three worlds would be at 
his feet. He would get the earth consisting of nine sections. The 
votary should write the principle of Siva all around on the skull 
or on a rag (got) from the cremation ground after he has come 
out. The name should then be written on it at the centre or on 
the pericarp. It should then be fumigated with the burning 
charcoal of khadira (tree). Then a piece of birch-bark should 
be held under the feet. (By this process) one would be able to 
bring under his control the entire universe together with the 
movable and immovable things in seven days. 

II- 12. (Otherwise) the name (of the enemy) should bewritten 
inside a thunderbolt (shaped) diagram drawn inside (a circle 



864 


Agni Purdna 


having) twelve spokes sanctified with (the principle of) Sada£iva 
(‘always auspicious’). (Alternatively) (the name should be 
written) on a wall, or a plank or a stone slab with turmeric. 
There would be paralysis of the face, the arrest of movement 
and the arrest (of the movement) of the army. 

13-17. A wiseman should write (the name of the adversary) 
with poison and blood inside a diagram of a club in the middle 
of a hexagon on a skull in the cremation ground and add (the 
principle of) the Goddess. This would kill the enemy struck in 
the cremation ground in no time. It will also ruin the kingdom. 
The name of the enemy should be written on a disc. The God- 
dess should be invoked on the blades of the disc. The enemy 
would be destroyed by means of his name. A person should 
write the principal letter (of the mantra ) of Tark§ya in the middle 
part of the sword. Then the name of the enemy should be wri- 
tten with the ashes (collected) from the cremation ground. One 
would be able to win a country. One should strike with the 
ashes of a dead person. (The mantra of) Siva should be used in 
creating dcssension, division and death. The Taraka and Netra 
(mantras) should be employed in propitiatory and nourishing 
(rites) . 

18-21. This is the application (known as) dahanadi (capa- 
ble of) captivating even Sakini (an attendant of Goddess Durga). 
(The diagram) having the Varan! (mantra) at the centre and 
endowed with Vakratunda (bent tusk ) would no doubt destroy 
the diseases such as leprosy and the like. Repeating the Karali 
(mantra) set up (as spreading) from the middle and ending with 
the northern direction would guard one’s own amulet. The same 
should be coupled with the principle of Siva and directed against 
the opponent. Then it should be located in (the directions) 
beginning with the west. This would destroy sufferings due to 
fever. (If the location is done) commencing with the north and 
ending with the middle, it would cause heaviness in the body. 
(If it is done) beginning with the east and ending with the 
middle, it would make (the body) light in a moment. 

22-25. After having written this on the bhSrja leaf (with 
resin) endowed with the marks of thunderbolt, one should add 
the principal letters of the mantra. This would offer protection 
to the bodies etc. If it is encircled by engraved gold, this amulet 



313.1-6 


865 


would annihilate death. The same worn (on the body) would 
(remove) obstacles, sins and subdue enemies. (It) would (also) 
confer good fortune and longevity. No doubt, it would give 
victory in gambling and battle even if the army of Indra (is to 
be fought against). This amulet is one like the (gem) cintdmani 
and would confer progeny on barren women. One would be 
able to conquer other kingdoms, (recover one’s own) kingdom 
and gain sovereignty over the earth. By repeating (the syllables) 
phaf, strirfi, kse, hurfi a lakh (number of times), one would gain 
control over the yaksas (semi-divine beings) and others. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTEEN 
The mantras relating to the worship of different gods 
Fire-god said: 

1-2. I shall describe the mode of worshipping (lord) Vina- 
yaka (the lord of obstacles) . One should first worship the energy 
of the pedestal. One should worship the eight (things) such as 
the virtue and the like on the stem. The pericarp, filaments etc. 
(of a lotus) and a lotus representing the three qualities (should 
be worshipped). Then (the Goddesses) Jvalini, Nanda, Suyaia, 
Ugra, Tejovati and Vindhyavasini should be worshipped. 

3-6. (The different) forms ofGanapati should then be wor- 
shipped (as follows) : “Victory to gapa” would be for the heart. 
(Obeisance) to one having single tusk that is strong (is) for the 
head. (Obeisance) to the one having immovable ears (is) for 
the tuft. (Obeisance) to the elephant-faced (is) for the armour. 
The assignment should end with ‘h&rfi phaf. (Then the following) 
eight (forms of Ganapati should be worshipped): Mahodara 
(big-bellied), Dagdahasta (one that holds the club in the hand), 
Jaya (victorious), Ganadhipa (lord of the Gagas), Gaganayaka 
(leader of the Gagas), Ganesvara (lord of the Gagas), Vakra- 
tugda (one having bent trunk) and Ekadanta (one having single 
tusk) should be worshipped in the east (and other directions); 
one that is fierce, Lambodara (big-bellied) „Gajavaktra (having 



866 


Agni Purina 


elephant face), Vikajanama (known as dreadful) and Vighna- 
na Sana (the destroyer of obstacles) should be worshipped in the 
east (adding the syllable) hunt. Dhumravarna (grey-coloured), 
Mahendra and others (should be worshipped) outside (the 
diagram) . This is the mode of worshipping the lord of obsta- 
cles. 

7-12. I shall describe the mode of worshipping (Goddess) 
Tripuri. (One should worship first) Asitanga (black-coloured 
one), Ruru, Canda (wrathful) , Krodha (angry one), Unmatta 
(intoxicated), Kapali (one wielding the human skull), Bhi?ana 
(the dreadful one), Samhara (the destroyer) and Bhairava 
(the terrible one) in order. (The Goddesses) Brahml, Hrasva, 
Bhairava, Brahmani, Sanmukha and Dirgha (should be 
worshipped). The four celebates — Samayaputra, Yoginiputra, 
Siddhaputra and Kulaputra should be worshipped in 
(the angular points such as) the south-east and others. Hetuka, 
K$etrapala, Tripuranta, Dvitiyaka, Agnivetala, Agnijihva, 
Karali, Kamalocana, Ekapada and Bhlmak§a should be 
meditated as the seat of the pretas and worshipped with (the 
( mantras ) aitfi and kserfi. Goddess Tripura, seated on a lotus seat, 
holding a book and offering protection (with the right hand) 
and a garland and conferring boons with the left hand (should 
be worshipped with) the two ( mantras ) airh, and orh. The loca- 
tion in the heart etc. is also done with the principal ( mantra ) . 
Jt is a perfect net (that yields) the desired (result). 

13-16. The name (of the enemy) should be written at the 
centre of (a diagram of) an eight-petalled (lotus drawn) on the 
ground. (Or it should be written) on a piece of cloth at the 
cremation ground with a charcoal from the cremation ground. 
Or an image (of the enemy) should be made with charcoal of 
the funeral pyre ground well. After contemplation (the incan- 
tation) should be placed inside the stomach (of the image) and 
it should be bound with blue thread. Then there would be the 
magic incantation. Orh, obeisance ! O Fortunate One ! Jva- 
lamalini (one having the flames as a garland) ! One surrounded 
by flocks of eagles ! Oblations. A person who goes to the battle 
after repeating (this) mantra would become victorious. Orh, frith 
hrith, klirh obeisance to Sri. One has to worship Goddess Ghrnini 
belonging to the sun on a square (drawn) in (the directions) 



313.17-26 


867 


commencing with the north. (Goddesses) Aditya, Prabhavati, 
Hemadri, Madhura and Sri (should be propitiated). Orh, hrirfi 
obeisance to Gauri. This mantra of (Goddess) Gaurl would yield 
all things when (it is used) for doing oblation, meditation, re- 
petition and worship. 

1 7-20. A person who prays to the Goddess of red comple- 
xion, liaving four arms and holding a noose and conferring boons 
with the right hand and holding a goad and offering protection 
(with the left hand) , after contemplation of Her form, would 
live for a hundred years. He would be a wiseman. There would 
not be fear due to thieves and enemies. An angry person would 
become graceful by drinking the water charmed with the mantra 
in the battle. A collyrium or mark (made with the same) would 
make one get poesy at the tip of his tongue. The repetition of 
that ( mantra ) at the time of coition would captivate (the con- 
cerned person) . (One would captivate a person) by looking at 
the genital organ after the repetition of the {mantra). (A person 
would be captivated) by the touch (after the repetition of the 
same) . One would accomplish all things by doing oblation with 
sesamum. A person who eats food that has been charmed seven 
times (with the above) would always (get) fortune. 

21-22. This ( mantra ) is a form of ArdhanariSa (hermaphro- 
dite form of lord Siva), as well as (Goddess) Lak$mi, (lord) 
Visnu and others. One has to repeat (the mantras of Goddesses) 
Anangarupa, Madanatura, Pavanavega, Bhuvanapala, Sarva- 
siddhida, Anangamadana and Anangamekhala for (gaining) 
fortune. 

23-24. (The syllable) hrirh, the vowels and (the letters) ka 
etc. should be written at the centre and on the petals of a lotus 
or on a hexagon or on a pot. (A person that looks at women 
after doing thus) would captivate the women. Oth, hrirfi, chUrfi, 
O Nityaklinna (ever moist) 1 O Madadrava (one who exudes 
intoxicating fluid) ! Oth, Orh. This principal mantra after location 
on the six limbs (the two shanks, two arms, head and middle) 
(and then written) on red-coloured triangle (and worn on the 
body) would have great power to melt (the heart), make happy 
and agitate. 

25-26. (Goddess) Nitya (should be worshipped) at the 
centre as well as (the angular points such as) the north-east to- 



868 


Agni Purina 


gether with the noose, goad, skull, the wish-yielding tree, lute 
and red-coloured (?). (Goddesses) Nitya, Abhaya, Mangala, 
Navavira, Mangala (?) , Durbhaga, Manonmani and Drava should 
be worshipped in the (directions) commencing with the east. 

27-28. Om, hrirh obeisance to Ananga 1 (without a body). 
Om, hrirh, hrlrh, obeisance to Smara ( one that makes one to re- 
member), (obeisance) to Manmatha (one that agitates the 
mind ), to Mara and to Kama. The five (forms of God of love) 
should be contemplated as holding a noose, goad, bow and 
arrows and as in the union of Rati (Goddess of love) (and her 
companions) Virati (non-attachment), Priti (pleasure), Vipriti 
(displeasure), Mati (thought), Dhrti (firmness), Vidhjrti (fickle- 
mindedness) , and Pusti (nourishment). Orh, cham , O Nitya- 
klinna (ever moist) ! Madadrava (exuding intoxicating liquid) ! 
Orh, Orh, a, a, i, i, u, H, r, r, l, l, e, ai , o, au, aih, ah, ka, kha, ga, 
gha , ha, ca, cha,ja,jha , Ha, fa, fha, 4, 4 ha, na , ta, tha,da,dha, na,pa, 
pha, ba,bha, ma,ya, ra, la, va,Sa, sa, sa, ha, ksa, Orfi, chath oblations 
to Nityaklinna and Madadrava, The energy of support and the 
lotus (should be worshipped) on the lion and the Goddess in the 
heart and other (limbs). Orh, hrirh, Gauri (white coloured) ! 
The consort of Rudra (Siva) lYogeSvari (mistress of faculties) ! 
HUrh, phaf oblations. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FOURTEEN 
Mantras relating to the worship of Goddess Tvarita 
Fire-god said : 

1-3. Orh, hrirh, hrurh, khe, che, ksah, strim, hrUrh , kse, hrirh, 
phaf obeisance to (Goddess) Tvarita. After doing the nyasa 
(location of the mantra) (Goddess) Tvarita possessing two or eight 
arms should be worshipped. The energy of support and lotus 
(should be worshipped) in (a diagram of) a lion and the Goddess 
and the heart etc. (should also be worshipped) . Gayatri (per- 

1 . This and the following four names denote the God of love. 



314 4-16 


869 


sonification of the mantra) should be worshipped in a circle in 
the east (and other directions) (showing) the pranita ( mudra ). 
(The Goddesses) Humkara, Khecarl, Canda, Chedani and 
Ksepani (should also be worshipped). Humkara, K;emakari 
and Phatkari should be worshipped at the centre. Jaya and 
Vijaya (should be worshipped) at the entrance. The servant 
(should be worshipped) in front of them. 

4-10. (One should do) oblations with sesamum with (the 
repetition of) the vyahflis in order to get all things. Obeisance to 
Ananta 1 ! Oblations. Obeisance to Kalika ! Svadha. Oblations 
to King Vasuki. Vausat to Sankhapala. Va§at to Tak§aka 
always. Obeisance to Mahapadma. Oblations to Karkotauaga 
phat. Obeisance to Padma. (The diagram of) nigrahacakra (the 
magic circle that causes obstruction) should be drawn on one’s 
clothes, or a piece of cloth or on the body, or the birch-bark 
(leaf) or on a slab or on staffs. The name of the sadhya ( the 
object to be accomplished, namely, the enemy) (should be 
written) in the middle chamber and (the syllables) orii, hrirfi , 
ksurh on the chambers on the east and other (directions). The 
thorns and Kalaratrika (should be written) in the north-east, 
west etc. and (lord) Yama (the lord of death) outside. (The 
following mystic couplet should be written on the other 
chambers) : 

Kallnaravamall kalinamaksamalini 
mamodetat tadomoma rak;ata sva sva bhaksa va 
yamapatatayamaya matamo tatamo tama 
varao bhurivabhumeya tatarisva^vari tata. 

(The syllable) varfi (should be located) outside the chamber of 
lord Yama and (the syllable) tarh that has the potency to kill. 

11-12. (The above verse should be written) with crow’s 
quill at the cremation ground or the junction of four roads with 
a mixture of lamp soot, the resin of neem, marrow, blood, poison, 
charcoal, and pingaladhara (?) and placed under a pitcher. 
Otherwise it should be placed in an ant-hill. The spell (placed) 
under a bibhitaka tree is capable of destroying all the enemies. 

13-16. The anugrahacakra (a circular figure that confers 

1. This and the following are the names of different serpents. 



870 


Agra Purina 


grace) should be written on a white leaf or on the bhurja (bark) 
with shellac or saffron or red sandal. The name (of the enemy) 
should be written in the central chamber on the earth and the 
wall. (Th t mantra) Orh harfisa and the paffiSa (a kind of spear) 
should be written in the region of the west. The charm of 
(Goddess) Lak;mi and Siva and others should be written in the 
north-west etc. in order. (The mystic verse is) : 

£rlh samamoma sa £rih sanau yajfie jfieya nausa 

matha Ilia lali vama yajfie jfieya nausa maya 

Sighra (should be worshipped) outside where the six Hili' (is 
placed). The pitcher is also (placed) outside. Slghra is outside 
where jfieya is placed. (The syllable) rath is in the different 
direction. The pitcher would be outside. 

17. The wheel of lotus on a lotus (figure) would conquer 
death, convey (a person) to heaven and (give) firmness. It is 
the foremost appeasing rite among such rites. It confers fortune 
etc. 

18-22. (In the wheel known as) Rudra, there should be 
chambers of the number of Rudras (i.e. eleven). That (i mantra ) 
should be written therein beginning with the syllable orh and 
ending with hrurh phaf, the first letters of the vidya being 
written at the end. This is known as the pratyangira which 
accomplishes all the desired objects. In (a circle having) eighty- 
one chambers, the first letters (of the vidya) (should be located) 
such that they would be from the beginning to the end and the 
name (of the enemy should be added) ending with vafaf. This 
is (known as) a different pratyangira. (vidyi) which would 
accomplish all tasks. The nigraha and anugraha (obstruction and 
grace) circles should be drawn to have sixty-four chambers. 
This is (known as) amfli vidya (reviving) . , (The syllables) krim 
sah hiixh with the name (of the enemy) at the centre and the 
syllable phaf at the beginning (written) on a leaf should be 
encircled by three syllables of krirh. This (charm) worn with (a 
mark of) a pitcher will kill all enemies and yield all things. 
If (this mantra) is repeated in the ear letter by letter or as a 
daniaka (a group of letters), it would destroy poison. 



315.1-8 


871 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTEEN 
Narration of mantras relating to paralysing , captivating etc. 
Fire-god. said : 

1. I shall describe to you (the mantras and acts) relating 
to paralysing, stupefying, captivating, ruining the enemy, 
neutralising the ( effects of) poison and diseases and causing the 
death (of an enemy). 

2-4. A twice-born should draw (the figure of) a tortoise 
of six inches (length) on a birch-bark by (the act of) taiana 
and then locate the mantra on the face and four feet. The 
syllable krirh should be written on the four feet, the syllable 
hrirh at the centre of the face, the vidya ( mantras ) on the belly 
and ( the name of) the person concerned on the back. After 
having encircled it with the mdlamantras (garland of letters), it 
should be placed over a brick. It should then be covered with the 
back of a tortoise and then charmed with the karala (mantra). 

5-8. After having worshipped the great, tortoise (manifest- 
ation of Visnu), (the votary) should sprinkle water on the feet 
(of that form). After having thought of the enemy, (the votary) 
should kick seven times (on the ground) with the left foot (of 
the toroise) . It would cause paralysis to the enemy. One should 
assume a terrible form by having change in the complexion of 
the face and write the garland of mantras. Orh ! One who 
paralyses the face of the enemy 1 An embodiment of desire 1 
One that stands with arm discharging an arrow ! Hrirh pherh, 
Phetkaririi ! Paralyse (2 1 ) the face of my enemies given by the 
gods 1 Paralyse (2) the face of all my enemies ! Orh, hum, pherh, 
Phetkarini ! Oblations ! Phaf ! After having written the mantra, 
one would gain great strength at the end of its repetition. One 
should draw (the figure of) a tree and the trident on the right 
hand with the left hand. The mantra of lord Aghora (a form of 
Siva) should then be written. One would paralyse the enemies 
in the battle, Orh, obeisance to the Fortunate One 1 O Bhaga- 
malini ! Agitate (2) ! Throb! O Nityaklinna ! melt (2), 
hurh sah ! Embodiment of the syllable krirh ! Oblations. One 
who wears a mask with the resin with ( the repetition of) this 
(i mantra ) would stupefy the world. 

1. The figure indicate* repetition of the preceding word. 



872 


Agni Purina 


9- 13a. Oth, pherh, huth, pkaf Phetk&rini ! Hrith, burn (2), 
stupefy (2) the three worlds. O Guhyakalika ! Oblations. 
One would captivate the king and others by making a ( fore* 
head) mark with this {mantra). The dust (under the feet) of a 
donkey mixed with the sutaka 1 fluid and the menstrual blood of 
a woman should be thrown on the bed (of a person) in the 
night. This would cause enmity. The hoof and horn of a cow, 
the hoof of a horse and the head of a serpent (charmed as be- 
fore and) thrown into the house (of a person) would cause the 
ruin of the enemy. The root of the yellow karavira together with 
mustard (would be potent) to cause death. The blood of a 
serpent and a musk-rat together with karavira would also produce 
similar result. A lizard, bee, crab and scorpion are ground 
well and thrown into oil. One who anoints with that (oil) 
would get leprosy. Oth (obeisance) to the nine planets. Conquer 
(2) my enemies. Kill (2) (them). Ath, som, math, buth, cum, oth, 
iath, varh, kerb, oth oblations. 

1 3b- 14. After having worshipped ( the planets) with hundreds 
of arka (flowers) , this should be placed in a cremation ground. 
The planets should be drawn on a birch-bark or in an image 
for the ruin of the enemies. Oth Kufijari, Brahman! ! Oth Mafijari, 
Mahesvari ! Oth Vetali, Kaumari! Oth Kali, Vai§navi ! Oth 
Aghora, Varahi! Oth Vetali, Indrani, UrvaSl! Om Vetali, Candika! 
OjftJayani, Yaksini! ONine Mothers ! eh ! Seize (2) my foe. 
After having written the name of the enemy on a birch-bark, 
if it is worshipped in the cremation ground, (the foe) would 
die. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTEEN 
Narration of different kinds of mantras 

Fire-god said : 

1-5. The syllable huth is at the beginning. Then the letters 
khe, ca , che , and the visarga that is outside the group of conson- 

1. The discharge at the time of the birth of a child. 



317.1-8a 


873 


ants (are added). It ends with slrirh, hurii, ksepa and phaf. This 
vidyd is known as subduing all things. It also destroys the 
poisons of serpents. Oth , khe, che should be practised to revive 
a person bitten by a deadly serpent. Oth, hftrh, ke, ksah should 
be used to destroy poison and enemies. Slrirh, kilrh, phaf is (the 
mantra ) to be used for conquering sins and diseases etc. Khe, cha 
is the application for removing evil obstacles. The application 
of hum, strirh, oth would captivate women. The application of 
khe, strirh, khe, cha should be used for captivating and conquest. 
Aim, hrirh, Srirh, spherh, kairh, ksauth, Bhagavatl! Ambika! Kubjika! 
spherh, orh, bharh, lath subjugate. Obeisance to Aghora on the 
face ! Brarh, broth , kili, kili, viced, sphauni, herh, sphiith, Sraurh, hrirh, 
aith, Srirh. This vidyd of Kubjika is known to accomplish all the 
things. I shall describe to you again the mantras narrated by 
(lord) I la (Siva) to (lord) Skanda. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEEN 
The different kinds of mantras of Siva 

The Lord said: 

1. (The mantras) of Siva are divided into eight kinds, such 
as sak-ala (endowed with parts), niskala (without parts), Sunya 
(void) , kaladhya (abounding in parts), khamalaAkrta (adorning 
the sky), ksapana (suppressing), ksaya (destroying) and Siva 
(benevolent). The letters which lay inside and belong to (the 
regions of) the throat and lips (should be present in them). 

2. O Guha (name of Kumara, son of Siva and Parvati) 1 
There are eight kinds of the benevolent ( mantra ) known as 
para (supreme). The form of the word Sadaliva is efficacious 
for accomplishing all things. 

3-8a. (The forms) of the vowels are Ampta, Amlumat, Indu, 
Ilvara, Ugra, Dhaka, Ekapada, Oja and Ausadha. Amsumat 
(among these) is capable of subjugating. (The forms) of the 
letters ka to ksa are: Kamadeva, Sikhandi, Ganesa, Kala, Sankara, 
Ekanetra, Dvinetra, Trilikha, Dirghabahuka, Ekapad, Arddha- 



874 


Agni Purina 

candra, Balapa, Yoginipriya, Sakti^vara, Mahagranthi, Tarpaka, 
Sthanu, Dantura, NidhJSa, Nandi, Padma, Sakinipriya, Mukha- 
bimba, Bhlsana, Krtanta, Prapa, Tejasvi, Sakra, Udadhi, 
Srikanfha, Simha, SaSamka, Viivarupa and Narasimha (repre- 
senting) k,ia. 

8b-lla. (The syllable of) ViSvarupa should be made to be 
pervaded by the syllables of Surya (Sun) . After having coupled 
the syllable of §a$i (Moon) with Amiumat, ( the syllabic of) 
I Sana pervaded by (the syllable of) Ojas should first be raised 
up. (Among the above names), the third should be known as 
(Tat)Puru§a, the fifth as Daksina, the seventh as Vamadeva, 
the next one as Sadyojata and the ninth as coupled with the 
rasa ( bija ). This is known as the brahmapaficaka (the five 
brahmans) . 

1 lb-14. All the mantras begin with the syllable oth and end 
with (the name in) the fourth case and obeisance. (The first 
one is presided over by) Sadyojata. The second one is the heart 
together with the subordinate one. The fourth should be known 
as the head known by the name lgvara. Dhaka should be known 
as the tuft endowed with Visvarupa. Its mantra is known to be 
the eighth. The eye is considered as the tenth. O Sikhidhvaja 
(Kumara, having peacock as the banner) ! The weapon is said 
to be the Moon known as Siva. Obeisance, oblation, vaufaf, 
hum and phafka is the order. 

15-17. I shall describe the prasada mantra (the benevolent 
one) relating to the heart etc. belonging to phafka. One should 
raise the (syllable) known asRudra from l£ana adorned with 
Am£u that remains above the group in the region of head per- 
vaded by Au$adha. It has half-crescent nada (nasal sound) up- 
wards having two dots in the middle. Visvarupa is at the end 
bent thrice. This is the pras&da mantra capable of accomplishing 
all the things. 

18-2 la. After having raised the syllables of the tuft ending 
with the syllable phaf placed on the half crescent, it is known as 
Kamadeva that flows (and is verily) the great Paiupata wea- 
pon that destroys all evils. I have described the prdSSda {mantra) 
endowed with parts. I will describe (the mantra) without parts 
now. (This consists of)Au?adha, Visvarupa, Rudra, orb of Sun, 
coupled with n&da of the form of half-moon, without designa- 



317.21b-34 


875 


tionand bent. The niskala ( mantra ) confers enjoyment and 
emancipation. It is always benevolent because it is endowed 
with five parts. 

21b-31. (The mantras ) that are void (consist of) Amsumat, 
ViSvarupa and divested of Brahmariga (class of letters). Its 
form is the essence. It destroys obstacles when worshipped by 
boys and ignorant men. Am&imat coupled with ViSvarupa and 
situated over the Dhaka is the mantra known as kal&dhya (fully 
endowed with parts) . It is always used in the worship in the 
same way as the mantra with parts. The khamalafikrta consists of 
Narasimha ( mantras ) situated in Kytanta pervading above the 
radiant life force, coupled with Amsumat and pervaded by 
Dhaka above and below. It is composed of half-moon nada 
adorned by Brahma and Vi$nu. The Udadhi ( mantras ) and 
Narasimha should be divided with the vowels of Surya. The 
other subsidiary rites should be done as before. The first letter 
is that which is known as Ojas, coupled with Arhsumat that is 
to be raised. The foremost among the second letter is the Amlu- 
mat pervaded by Am£u. Similarly the Amgumat (pervading) 
the ISvara is capable of conferring emancipation. The Dhakas 
are pervaded by Amlu and (followed by) Varuna, Prana and 
Taijasa (syllables). It is known as the fifth one. The next one 
is the Krtanta. The Amsumat (coupled with) Udaka and 
Prana is raised as the seventh one. The Padma is pervaded by 
Indu. The Nandi£a is coupled with Ekapada. The first one is 
added at the end. (That is known) as Ksapanaka consisting of 
ten syllables. The third, fifth and seventh would number half of 
it. The Sadyojata would be the ninth, the hrd and other (man- 
tras) (taken) from the second. The mantras consisting of the 
(above said) ten syllables should end with phaf. This aslra 
( mantra ) should be raised. 

32-34. The subordinate mantras (in the above) should be 
coupled with obeisance. It is not done in any other way. From 
the second to the eighth are considered as the Vidyeivaras (the 
lords of the mantras) — Anantesa, Suk$ma, Sivottama the third, 
Ekamurti, Ekarupa, Trimurti the next one, Srikanfha and 
Sikhandi are known to be the eight VidyeSvaras. The ends of 
the mantras from that of Sikhandi to the end of Ananta are said 
to be the embodied form. 



876 


Agni Purtofa 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHTEEN 

The mode of worshipping Ganapati, accomplishing all things 
The Lord said : 

1-2. The Visvarupa (syllable) should be raised and placed 
above the Tejas. Then the Narasimha and Krtanta are placed 
below one below the other. Thtpranava ( orh ) should be placed 
below that and the Udaka below that. The AmSumat that re- 
mains in the Visvamurti, the letter of the throat and lip region 
and the pranava (pm) (should be below that). 

3. The first four letters should end with obeisance. It 
should then be coupled as before with the aiigamantras adding 
also the syllables of Surya and ViSvarupa, the cause. 

4. The syllable om should be raised first and the luminous 
form without a second one should be repeated. The Ghora- 
ghoratara (terrible one) (should be repeated). That form 
should then be remembered. 

5-6. After having made the cafa sound twice, the (syllable) 
orh should be repeated. Then one has to repeat twice ‘burn’ and 
then twice ‘ vama ’. After having stated ‘kill’ twice, one should 
repeat hurii phaf at the end. This would be the mantra of the 
weapon for (lord) Aghora. I shall describe the gdyatri ( mantra ) 
(sacred to the same deity) now — “We know the true self of 
(lord) Maheia. We meditate on the supreme god. May that 
auspicious god kindle our (mind) to that." This gdyatri (mantra) 
is capable of accomplishing all things. 

7-14. One has to worship ( lord) Gana (Ganapati) when 
one sets on a journey or in battle etc. for prosperity. One has 
to draw (the figure of a lotus having three petals inside a tri- 
angle on a fourth part of a square place divided into twelve 
chambers. On its back (back of the lotus) steps and pathway 
(should be drawn) having (the mark of) a horse on (each) 
petal. There should be silken cloth for footrest together with 
eight lotuses having three petals. The platform should be made 
above that measuring a fourth part. (The figure) should have 
a door containing (a figure of) a lotus. The side door from the 
chamber should be made pale. The circle drawn with doors 
and side-doors would destroy obstacles. The central lotus should 



318.15-22 


877 


be red. The lotuses outside that should (also be red) . The path- 
way should be made white. The doors (should be coloured) as 
one wishes. The pericarp as well as the filaments would be 
yellow in colour. This circle is known as destroying obstacles. 
(Lord) Ganapati should be worshipped. The first name would 
be that of (lord) Siva together with Indra and others. The 
head is struck with Tatpurusa. Oth is the first (syllable) with 
obeisance at the end. 

15. (The gods) Gaja (elephant), Gaja5ir§a( elephant-head- 
ed), Gangeya (son of Gariga),Gananayaka (lord of theGanas), 
Triravartta (turned round thrice), Gaganaga (one who travels 
in the sky), Gopati (a leader) (should be worshipped) in the 
first row. 

16-22.' Vicitramsa (one possessing strange characteristics), 
Mahakaya (one having a big body), Lambosta (having a hang- 
ing lip), Lambakarnaka (one having drooping ears), Lambo- 
dara (big-bellied), Mahabhaga (very fortunate one), Vikfta 
( having strange appearance) , Parvatl-priya (one who is dear 
to Parvati), Bhayavaha (frightening), Bhadra (auspicious), 
Bhagana (the cluster of asterisms), Bhayasudana (one that 
destroys fear) are the twelve (to be worshipped) on the ten 
rows. Devatrasa (frightening the celestials) (should be worship- 
ped) on the west. Mahanada (one having a great sound), Bha- 
svara (one having lustre), Vighnaraja (lord of obstacles), 
Ganadhipa (lord of the Ganas), Udbhafa (the pre-eminent 
one), Svanabha (self-originating), Canqla (wrathful), Maha- 
£uiicia (one having a big trunk), Bhimaka (the terrible), Man- 
matha (captivating the mind), Madhusuda (the destroyer of 
Madhu), Sundara (beautiful one) , and Bhavapusfaka (one that 
nourishes one’s thoughts) (should be worshipped). (Lord) 
Brahmesvara (lord of Brahma), Brahma, Manovrtti (mental 
attitude), Samlaya (well-absorbed) , Laya (absorption), Dutya- 
priya (fond of being a messenger), Laulya (extremely desirous), 
Vikarna (having a strange ear), Vatsala (affectionate) , Krtanta 
(the destroyer) and Kaladanda (death) (should be worshipped) 
on the north. A sacrificial pitcher should be worshipped as 
before. The mantra should be repeated ten thousand times. Ob- 
lation should be done one tenth of that number. When the other 
(i mantras ) are repeated oblations should be made ten times. 



878 


Agni Purina 


After having performed the final oblation, one should do the 
consecration. One would accomplish everything. A person 
should honour the preceptor by (giving) land, cows, horse, ele- 
phant, clothes and other articles. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND NINETEEN 
Mode of worshipping VagiSvari ( Goddess of speech ) 

The Lord said : 

1. I shall describe the worship of (Goddess) Vagisvari 
(Goddess of speech) in a circle. The mantra (made up of syllable 
of) Ohaka together with ( that of) Kala added with the letters 
(would be the mantra for the Goddess). 

2-4. O Nigada (hunter) (denotes Kumara) ! The mantra 
(for Goddess Vagisvari) should be used like that of the Moon 
and Sun. No letter need be assigned. One should contemplate 
(the Goddess ) as having the complexion of jasmine and moon, 
embodying the fifty letters 1 (of the alphabet) , adorned with 
garlands of pearls and flowers, (holding the postures of hand) 
offering boons and protection and holding books and possessing 
three eyes. One should repeat the garland of letters from ‘a* to 
‘kga* remembering as pervading (the body of the Goddess) upto 
the tip of the head and the ends of the shoulders. 

5-10. The preceptor should make a circle for the sake of 
initiating (the disciple) in a mantra. A lotus (figure) that is good 
(for the worship of the Goddess) should have twelve tips divided 
into two parts. One should make ready the pathway and steps. 
There should be eight lotuses on the cross-road. The pathway 
and steps should be provided outside also. There should be 
doors in two squares. Similarly the side-doors, the construction 
of angular points and two strips of cloth should be done. The 
nine lotuses (should be) white. The pericarp of the lotus 
(should have) the hue of gold. The filaments should be variegat- 

1. The letters a to kfa of the Sanskrit language. 



320.1 -5a 


879 


ed. The angular points should be filled with red (-coloured 
substance) . The inner space between the lines of the sky (should 
be painted) black. The doors should be of the measure of the 
elephant of Indra. (Goddess) Sarasvati (should be contempla- 
ted) at the centre of the (above) lotus. (Goddess) VaglSI 
(should be contemplated) on the eastern lotus. (Goddesses) 
Hrllekha, Citrav&glsi, Gayatrl, Visvarupa, Sahkarx, Rati and 
Dhrti (should also be worshipped). (The syllable) hririi and the 
respective syllables ( should be worshipped) in the east and 
other (directions) . (The Goddess) should be contemplated as 
(Goddess) Sarasvati. Oblations (should be done) with clari- 
fied butter from the milk of a tawny cow. One would then be- 
come a Samskrta and Prakfta poet and one who is well-versed 
in the science of poesy and other things. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY 
The different mystic diagrams 


The Lord said : 

l-5a. O Guha 1 ! I shall describe to you the Sarvato- 
bhadraka 2 ( that which confers good from all sides) . A wiseman 
should worship the favourite Goddess of energy on the east at 
(the time of) the equinox. Then he should hold the thread cast- 
west having the middle point between ( the asterisms) Citra and 
Svati and mark at its centre after causing it to move gently. 
Two points on the north and south should be marked from its 
middle point. The two points should be brought in line with 
the middle point after having moved (the string) gently north- 
south. The junctions of angular points should be marked such 
that one would have one hundred and fifty divisions. Thus a 
quadrangle would be formed by causing the four lines to move- 
gently. The auspicious Bhadra diagram should bedrawn in that. 

1. denotes Kumara, son erf' Siva and Parvati. 

2. a kind of mystical diagram. 



880 


Agni Purina 


5b-8a. (The quadrangle) should be divided into eight 
squares. The pathways and doorways should be made in two 
squares each. The cupola should be proportionate to the mea- 
sure of the lotus. The excellent angular joints should be formed 
by turning round two squares. The lotus should be (painted) 
white, the pericarp yellow, the filaments variegated, the path- 
way red and the door having the hue of Loke£a (Lord of the 
world) . The angular point (should be) red. (This is the lotus to 
be drawn ) in the case of a daily rite. Listen to me ! ( I shall 
describe the mode of drawing) a lotus for an occasioned ( rite) . 

8b-9. There are two varieties of lotus (diagrams), (the 
diagram) that does not touch and (the diagram) that touches, 
which confer enjoyment and emancipation. That which does not 
touch (is intended) for those who desire for release (from 
worldly existence). That which touches is of three (kinds) — 
young one, middle one and old. (These three) yield the fruits 
and perfection according to their respective names. 

10-14. Lines should be drawn in the different directions as 
well as the directions in between in the place for the lotus. Five 
circles should be drawn (having dimensions) equal to that of 
the lotus. There should be nine lotuses around the pericarp in 
the first (circle). The second (circle) should have twentyfour 
pericarps. There should be a union of petals, the tip of the 
petal resembling the temple of an elephant. The fifth should be 
of the form of the sky. This is known as contiguous (type of) 
lotus. In the uncontinguous one, the tip of the petal should be 
divided into four from the bottom. After having discarded two 
parts, a petal should be set with one-eighth of the remaining. 
The petal should be anointed with the line at the union from 
the base. This would be Vrddha class on the left and right. 

15-1 7a. In the alternative one should whirl round from 
the middle of the union to form a semi-circle. The two unions 
and the foremost line (should be made into circles) . This would 
form a young type of lotus. One should turn it from behind 
with half the measure of the union line. This lotus having 
pointed tip known as youthful class is capable of conferring 
enjoyment and emancipation. The b&la class of lotus is known 
as of two kinds — mukta and vrddha useful in subjugating (one’s 
enemy) etc. 



320. 17b- 30a 


881 


1 7b-22. A ground measuring nine cubits should be made 
ready as having nine central points with parts possessing mantras. 
A lotus (should be drawn) at the centre having a banner at 
the centre and a door proportionate in size to that of the lotus. 
Leaving its neck portion and the adjacent parts, a pathway 
should be made outside. The pathway should have five parts. 
There should be ten parts around that. Lotuses (should be 
drawn) in the eight directions and the directions in between. 
The lotus at the entrance should have a pathway. A pathway 
of five foot (breadth) adorns outside that. The door and the 
neck ( should measure) like that of the lotus. The frontal and 
neck (should measure) a foot. The cupola should be made a 
foot. There should be three doors in the (different) directions. 
The angular joints will have three chambers. Two chambers 
would bear the mark of a mace. The central lotus (should be) 
white (and other lotuses should be) yellow, red, blue, whitish 
yellow, smoky, red and yellow conferring emancipation. 

23-24a. One should worship Siva, Vi$nu and others in the 
eight lotuses on the east etc. After having worshipped Indra and 
others at the centre of the edifice, the weapons in the lotuses 
and (lord) Vi§nu and others in the external pathway, one 
would get (the fruits of performing) the aivatnedha (sacrifice). 

24b-30a. One should draw a great circle in connection with 
the investiture of the sacred thread on the idol etc. A piece of 
ground (measuring) eight cubits should be divided into eight 
chambers. There should be a lotus in two chambers at the 
centre and the pathway in one chamber. Eight blue lotuses 
should be marked in the different directions and the spaces in 
between. Thirty blue lotuses without the union of petals (should 
be drawn) measuring the same size as the central lotus. There 
should be a pathway behind occupying a chamber. There 
should be (the figure of) svastika-s above that. As before the 
pathway outside should be in eight (chambers) divided into 
twenty parts having (the figure of) svaslikas in two chambers. 
The doors and the boundaries should be proportionate to the 
lotus. The angular point, the pathway and the lotus in the 
circle should be red, yellow and blue respectively. O Guha 1 
the svastika (figure) etc. of varied colour are capable of fulfill- 
ing all the desires. 



882 


Agni Purina 


30b-33. (The circle having) five lotuses should measure 
five cubits. It should be wholly divided into ten parts. The path- 
way (should occupy) two chambers of the lotus, and the tablet 
(in one chamber) . There should be four lotuses at the cardinal 
points. There should be a pathway on the rear in one chamber 
or two chambers. The doors should be endowed with bounda- 
ries and adjacent spaces. There should be a lotus at the centre. 
In this circle consisting of five lotuses, (the lotus) in the east (is) 
white and yellow, the lotus in the south ( is) of the hue of lapis 
lazuli, the lotus in the west (is) of the colour of jasmine, the 
lotus in the north (is) of the colour of a conch and all the rest 
of varied colour. 

34-37. I shall describe a circle of ten cubits which yields all 
the desires. It should be a four-sided one divided into ten 
parts. The door would occupy two chambers. As (described) 
earlier (there should be) a lotus at the centre. I shall now des- 
cribe (the circle known as) the destroyer of obstacles. After 
having made (ready) a place (measuring) four cubits, a circle 
measuring two arms length (should be drawn). The pathway 
(should measure) only a cubit. It should be made to contain 
many figures of svastika. The doors should measure a cubit. 
There should be circle containing lotus (figures) in the cardinal 
points. Five white coloured lotuses (should be drawn) . God 
without any attributes should be worshipped at the centre. 
The heart (and other limbs) (should be worshipped) in the 
east and other directions. The weapons should be worshipped 
in the directions in between (these directions). 

38*41. As before the five Brahmans (forms of Siva * should 
be worshipped) . I shall describe the support of intellect. A 
place should be divided into hundred parts and a lotus (should 
be drawn) in fifteen parts. (Figures) of eight iiAgas should be 
drawn in the (eight) directions. The girdle should occupy a 
part and the boundary would be in two chambers. The preceptor 
should provide decorative festoons etc. making use of his crea- 
tive thinking. 1 There are one thousand four-hundred and forty 
circles for the gods Hari, Sambhu and Sun and the goddess. 


1. Verse number 40 is cryptic and has not been translated. 



320.42—321.4 


883 


42-48. Listen to me ! I shall describe the decorations and 
marks to be made in (a place) divided into seventy (parts). 
Fifteen, one, three and five (chambers ) in the cardinal points 
should be erased. The temple of lihga should be made above in 
two chambers on the sides. A lotus should be drawn in two 
chambers at the centre. A lotus should be drawn in one cham- 
ber on either side of the litiga. By destroying the six lines of the 
decorations the remaining (would form lines) for (lord) Hari. 
After having erased the two squares above, it is said to form the 
auspicious as taka (having eight parts) of (lord) Hari. It is 
decorated by erasing four lines and possessing beam like (lines). 
Then the lotus for a seat is made in twentyfive (chambers) . 
After having retained two chambers on each side, the eight 
secondary decorations (arc made). The diagram sacred to the 
goddess is big at the centre and small above. There should be 
a lotus at the centre in nine chambers and four chambers in the 
cardinal points. The remaining thirteen chambers form a circle 
resting on one’s intellect. That one having one hundred and 
sixty petals based on one’s intellect (is intended) for Hara 
(Siva) and others. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTYONE 
The appeasing rites relating to Aghordstra 


The Lord said : 

1. (The propitiatory) rite for the weapons has to be done 
first. It is capable of yielding the results in all actions. The wea- 
pons relating to (lord ) Siva and others should be worshipped at 
the centre. The thunderbolt and others (weapons) (should be 
worshipped) from the east onwards in order. 

2. One would gain victory in battle etc. by worshipping 
five discs in (a place measuring) ten cubits. In the worship of 
the planets the Sun (has to be worshipped) at the centre and 
the Moon and others (planets) in the east and other directions. 

3-4. All the planets (would be beneficial) as if they are in 



884 


Agni Purina 


the eleventh house, by their worship. I shall describe (the rite 
of) appeasing the weapons that would destroy all the portents, 
remedy the baneful influences of planets and crush the epidemics 
and enemies. One should repeat (the mantra sacred to) the wea- 
pon of Aghora 1 that would burn the impediments. 

5-6. (The repetition of the mantra ) a lakh times would des- 
troy (the baneful influences of) the planets. (One should do) 
oblations with sesamum (to nullify) portents. (In the case of 
portents occurring) in the sky one should do (oblation or repe- 
tition) half a lakh times which would destroy the portents. It 
is beneficial to do oblation with ghee a lakh times in the case of 
portents relating to the earth. All types of portents are nulli- 
fied by doing oblation with ghee and guggulu (fragrant gum- 
resin) . 

7. There is no doubt that diseases (get cured) by perform- 
ing oblation with durva, (grass) , unbroken rice and clarified 
butter and bad dreams get destroyed (by doing oblation) one 
thousand times. 

8. The evil effects of the planets would get nullified (by 
doing oblation) with ghee mixed with japa (flower) ten thousand 
times. Oblation performed with ghee ten thousand times would 
appease the afflictions due to Vinayaka (an evil spirit) . 

9-10. The spirits and goblins would be appeased by (the 
oblation of) guggulu ten thousand times. (One would get good 
results) by offering oblations with durva (grass), clarified butter 
and unbroken rice when a giant tree falls down or a serpent or 
a heron perches on the house or while one enters the forests 
etc. One would get good results by offering oblations with 
sesamum and clarified butter when a portent or earthquake 
occurs. 

ll-12a. (Oblations done) with guggulu ten thousand times 
would be beneficial if the trees ooze out blood. Oblations made 
with sesamum and clarified butter half a lakh times (would be 
beneficial) when (the trees) bear flowers and fruits in improper 
season, (when there is) unrest in the country, (when enemies) 
invade the country and epidemics affect the bipeds etc. 


1. One of the five forms of Siva. 



321.12b-322. 1 


885 


12b* 13a. It is said that rite of appeasement should be done 
ten thousand times in order to appease the epidemics in eleph- 
ants, in order to strengthen the tusk of the female elephants and 
when the elephants are found rutting. 

13b. -14a. When there is a miscarriage of the foetus at an 
improper time, or when the child perishes after birth, or when 
the children are born deformed or when one undertakes a jour- 
ney, one should do oblations ten thousand times. 

I4b-15a. Oblations done with sesarnurn and clarified butter 
one lakh times would yield excellent results, half that number 
( would yield) medium results and a quarter of that number 
(would yield) poor results. 

1 5b-c. Similar to the repetition (of the mantra) oblation 
done (with the mantra ) would confer victory in battle. One 
should repeat (the mantra of) the weapon of Aghora after mak- 
ing the (mental) location (of the mantra on the limbs) and 
contemplating the excellent five-faced (lord). 1 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTYTWO 
The appeasing rile employing the mantra of the weapon of Pasupali 
The Lord said : 

1. I shall describe first the appeasing rite and repetition 
with (the mantra) of the weapon of Pasupati. If it is repeated 
with phaf at the end it would remove one’s misfortune. Om ! 
Obeisance to the lord ! to great lord of the flock ! to one posses- 
sing matchless prowess and strength ! to one having fifteen eyes ! 
to the person having varied forms ! to one who is armed with 
different kinds of weapons ! to one having blood besmeared all 
over the body ! to onewho is blended with a mass of collyrium ! 
to one who is fond of the cremation ground and goblins ! to one 
who removes all impediments ! to one who confers all perfec- 

1. Aghora is one of the five faces of lord Siva; the other faces are : 
I Sana, Tatpurusa, Vamadeva and Sadyojata. 



886 


AgniPurfbpa 


tions ! to one who is gracious to the devotees ! to one who has 
innumerable faces, arms and feet ! to the one who has attained 
perfection ! to one who frightens the goblins ! to one who causes 
commotion in Sakinl (female attendant on goddess Durga) ! to 
the person who controls the diseases ! to one who destroys the 
sins ! to one who has the Sun, Moon and Fire as the (three) 
eyes ! to one who is the armour of (lord) Visnu ! to one who 
(holds) the sword and thunderbolt in the hand ! to one who 
has the club of Yama and the noose of Varuna (the lord of the 
West and upholder of moral law) ! to the one holding the tri- 
dent of Rudra ! to the person who has the burning tongue ! to 
the person who drives away all diseases ! to one who controls 
the plants ! to one who annihilates the malicious serpents ! Orh 
phaf to the black and brown ! Phnt to the person having the 
sound hurh as the weapon ! Phal to one holding the thunderbolt 
in the hand ! Phaf to the spear ! Phaf to the club ! Phaf to Yama ! 
Phaf to the sword ! Phaf to lord of north-west ! Phaf to Varuna ! 
Phaf to the noose ! Phaf to the banner ! Phaf to the goad ! Phaf 
to the mace! Phaf to Kubera (lord of wealth) ! Phaf to the tri- 
dent ! Phaf to the hammer! Phaf to the disc ! Phaf to the lotus ! 
Phaf to the serpent weapon ! Phaf to Igana ! Phaf to the club 
weapon (called khefaka ) ! Phaf to the headless trunk! Phaf to 
the weapon, the headless trunk! Phaf to the weapon, the skeleton ! 
Phaf to the weapon, the feather of a peacock ! Phaf to the weapon, 
the sharp knife ! Phaf to the weapon Brahmastra! Phaf to the 
weapon Saktyastra! Phaf to the weapon of the Gana (attendant 
of lord Siva) ! Phaf to the accomplished weapon! Phaf to the 
weapon pilipiccha\ Phaf to the weapon of the Gandharva (semi- 
divine being)! Phaf to the weapon oimurva (a kind of grass 
from which strings and girdles of ksatriyas are made) ! Phaf to the 
weapon of the right! Phaf to the left! Phaf to the weapon of the 
west ! Phaf to the weapon of mantral Phaf to the weapon of Sa- 
kini (female attendant of Goddess Durga) ! Phaf to the weapon 
of yogini (another female attendant of Goddess Durga)! Phaf 
to the weapon, the club ! Phaf to the weapon, the great club! 
Phaf to the weapon, the serpent! Phaf to the weapon of Siva! Phaf 
to the weapon of I gana! Phaf to the weapon of (Tat) puru$a! 
Phaf to the weapon of Aghora ! Phaf to the weapon of V&madeva! 



322.2—323.2 


887 


Phaf to the weapon of Sadyojata! Phaf to the weapon of the 
heart ! Phaf to the great weapon! Phaf to the weapon of Garu^a 
(vulture vehicle of lord Visnu)! Phaf to the weapon of the 
demons! Phaf to the weapon of the Danavas (demons, progeny 
of Danu) ! Phaf to the weapon of the man-lion form (of Vi§nu) ! 
Phaf to the weapon of Tva$tr (a celestial god) ! Phaf to all the 
weapons! nah phaf ! vah phaf\ pap, phaf ! phah phaf ! map phaf ! frip 
phaf\ hrai phafl (region) bhuh phafl (region) bhuvah phafl (region) 
svahphaf ! (region) mahah phaf ! (region) janah phaf ! (region) 
tap ah phaf ! Phaf all worlds ! Phaf all nether worlds ! Phaf all 
principles ! Phaf all life forces ! Phaf all nerves ! Phaf all causes ! 
Phaf all the Gods ! hritfi phaf ! him phat ! lirurh phaf ! srum phaf ! 
arhphaf Mam phaf IPhaf to indifference( for worldly pleasures) \Phaf 
to the weapon of illusion ! Phaf to the weapon of desire ! Phaf to 
the weapon of the guardian of the field ! Phaf to the weapon, the 
sound hum ! Phaf to the weapon of the Sun ! Phaf to the weapon 
of the Moon ! Phaf to the weapon of lord of obstacles ! Gauth 
gaum phafl Khrom Khrauth phafl Hrorh hraurhphaf ! Cause to roam 
about (2) phafl Burn (2) phaf ! Cover (2) phafl Uproot (2) 
phaf ! Threaten (2) phaf ! Revive (2) phaf ! Drive away (2) phafl 
Destroy all misfortunes phaf ! 

2-3. The repetition (of the above) even once would destroy 
all the impediments. One would destroy all the portents by re- 
peating hundred times and would be victorious in the battle 
etc. One would accomplish even that one could not accomplish 
by doing oblation with ghee and guggulu (fragrant gum-resin). 
One would have all ( kinds of) peace by reading this weapon of 
( lord) Pagupati (lord of flock of beings) . 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTYTHREE 
The mantra of the weapons of Aghora and the six constituents 
The Lord said: 

1-2. Death, diseases and other things are controlled by (the 
repetition of) the mantra “Om hrurh harhsa One has to bring 



888 


Agni Purdpa 


into effect appeasement and nourishment by doing a lakh of 
oblations with durva (grass) . O Six-faced one 1 1 Appeasement 
of portents, (un-natural flowering of) the trees and those relat- 
ing to gods, sky and the earth (could be done) with (the repe- 
tition of) the pranava ( orh ) or mdya 2 (mantra). “ Orh ! obeisance ! 
O Ganges ! Kali ! Kali (one having dark complexion) ! 
Mahakali ! Mahakali ( the great dark-complexioned one) ! One 
who eats flesh and blood ! One having red and blackface ! Bring 
the men under control ! Oblation ! Orh , ! 

3-5a. After having repeated (the mantra) one lakh times 
and offering oblations one-tenth ( of that number) one would 
become the accomplisher of all tasks. One would subjugate 
Sakra (Indra, the chief of the celestials). One need not say 
about (its influence on) the mortals. This mantra is capable of 
making (the votary) invisible, captivating and paralysing 
(others) . It brings the enemies under control and confuses the 
intellectual faculties of the enemies. This mystic learning is the 
Kamadhenu (wish-yielding divine cow) when repeated seven 
times. 

5b-6. I shall describe the foremost formula which would 
captivate enemies, thieves and others. One should remember 
(this formula) revered by (lord) Hara (Siva) in the case of all 
kinds of great apprehensions. After having repeated one lakh 
times (one should do) oblation with sesamum which would ac- 
complish (the task). Listen (to me) ! (I shall describe the for- 
mula of) deliverance: Orh ! The plough-bearer ! The trident- 
bearer ! Gome ! Protect me with the truths of (gods) Brahma, 
Vi§nu and Rudra ! Oblations to Lord of speech ! 

7-9. (Goddess) Siva (consort of Siva) is known as Durga 
because (She) saves (people) from adversity. Orh ! Fierce bear- 
er of the skull ! Gnash the teeth ! Gnash ! Destroy (2) Mysterious 
one ! Phaf Hrirh ! The rice grains should be consecrated with this 
excellent formula after repeating thirty times and given to 
thieves. (It would establish their) innocence if the chewed cud 
ejected (by them) is white. Orh ! One having glowing eyes! One 
shining with dark-brown matted hair ! One who drives away ! 

1. denotes Kumara, son of lord Siva and Parvatl. 

2. the letters a, i, i, u, r, J*T, kha, ma, ya, k$a, hruih, klirh 



323.10-17 


889 


One who frightens the three worlds ! Cut (2) ! Roam about 
(2) ! Attract (2) ! Break (2) ! Twist (2) ! Burn (2) ! 
Cook (2) ! Thus Rudra, who accomplishes, makes known ! I 
shall bring back the person possessedby spirit even if he has 
gone to the heaven, region of the gods or sporting in the sum- 
mit! Accept (2) the offering I am giving! dilations! After hav- 
ing offered the victim to the guardian of the ground and ( the 
performance of the rite) of locating the planets, (the enemy) 
would be subjugated. The enemies would get destroyed. The 
enemy forces would be routed in the battle. 

10-13. One would nullify three kinds of poisons by the 
location of tine harfisabija. 1 2 After having made equal proportion 
of aguru, sandal, ktisfha , saffron, nagakeSara , nakha and deoadaru 
and mixing with honey, one should fumigate the clothes etc. of 
an idol. This would bring good result in discussion, charms, 
adorning women and quarrels. (The same fumigation) is con- 
secrated with mayamantra 2 in the case of selection of a bride and 
for fortune. A person who looks at a person after wearing 
a mark on the forehead with the yellow pigment (got from a 
cow), nagapuspa, saffron and arsenic (and uttering the syllable) 
hrirfi would subjugate him. 

14-17. Pulverised Saiavari drunk with milk would help 
( a man) to get a male child. Pulverised nagakeSara boiled with 
ghee would also help (a man) to get a male child. Similarly one 
would get a male child by drinking the seeds of pal&Sa. Orh ! O 
Camunda ! Rise up ! Make (this person) yawn (2) ! Charm (2) ! 
Subjugate this person (2) ! Oblation ! This is the twentysixth 
formula that is accomplished. After having (made an image) 
of the lady (to be subjugated) with the earth (got) from 
the banks of a river and writing the name on an arka leaf 
with the juice of the unmatta (plant) and having urinated, (the 
formula) should be repeated. Then the lady would be subju- 
gated. 

Orh, ksuth , sah, vasaf. This formula (known as) the great 
conqueror of death gives nourishment when repeated and used 
for doing the oblation. 

1. The letters ma,ya, ra, sa and ha 

2. containing the letter krith etc. 



890 


Agm Purina 


Orh, harhsah , hrurfi, hrftrh , sa, hr ah, saurh, skaift consisting of 
eight syllables (is known as) a formula that revives the dead and 
brings victory in battle. 

18-21. The formulae beginning with I Sana and others confer 
virtues, pleasures etc. (Lord) Isana (Siva) is the lord of all 
formulae, lord of all beings. He is the lord of Brahma. May that 
Brahman, (lord) Siva always be benevolent to me ! Orh I know 
(the lord) Tatpuru$a. I meditate on (lord) Mahadeva (the 
great god) . Hence that Rudra incite us. Orh obeisance to those 
who are not fierce, to those who are fierce, to those who are 
most fierce and to all the manifestations of Rudras. Orh obeis- 
ance to Vamadeva ! Obeisance to the seniormost ! Obeisance to 
the most excellent ! Obeisance to Rudra ! Obeisance to Kala 
(time) ! Obeisance to Kalavikarana ! Obeisance to Balavikarana! 
Obeisance to the strong one ! Obeisance to one who controls 
strength ! Obeisance to one who controls all the beings ! Obeis- 
ance to one who disturbs the mind ! Orh I resort to (lord) Sad- 
yojata! Obeisance to Sadyojata 1 

On the lord of the beings (2)1 On the lord of eternal being ! 
Be manifest in me. Obeisance to the god proceeded from the 
eternal being. 

I shall describe the six formulae which are accessories to the 
five Brahman (formulae) . Orh 1 Obeisance to the Supreme ! to 
the grantor of desires ! to the Supreme lord ! to the lord of 
communion ! to the lord produced out of communion 1 
to the doer of all things ! Do (2) ! True (2) ! Lord of beings 
( 2) 1 One manifest from the eternal beings 1 Vamadeva 1 
Doer of all things 1 Destroyer of sins l Always benevolent ! One 
who is pleased ! Obeisance to you ! Oblations. 

(The formula of) the heart, which yields all things, consists 
of seventy letters. Orh ! Siva ! Obeisance to Siva ! Siva ! Orh ! 
Oblations to the glowing (energy) in the heart is (the formula 
for) the tuft. Orh ! One who is verily of the nature of benevol- 
ence ! One possessing great splendour ! Omniscient 1 O Lord ! 
Turn round ! One who is most fierce! One having a dark arm- 
our ! Obeisance ! One having a great armour ! Bind (2) the 
heart by the command of Siva! Whirl round (2) ! Pulverise ! 
One who holds the subtle thunderbolt ! One who has the strong 



324.1-7 


891 


noose ! One whose strong body bears the bow and thunderbolt ! 
You enter my body and paralyse all the evil forces (2) ! Huth ! 

The armour consists of one hundred and five letters. Oth ! 
To the Vigour (of the lord) ! Oth ! Make the eyes quiver (2) l 
One having subtle form( 2) ! Pierce (2) ! Pierce intensely (2) ! 
Cover (2)! Vomit (2)! Kill (2) ! Hum, phaf (is the) weapon 
of Aghora. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTYFOUR 

Appeasing rile for lord Siva 

The Lord said : 

1-3. I shall describe the appreasing rite for Siva which is 
preceded by the collection of formulae of Aghora. It is 
the lord of seven crores (of formulae) . It is fierce. It is 
capable of destroying sins such as killing a brahmin etc. It is 
the abode of both excellent as well as ordinary achievements. 
It destroys portents pertaining to the celestial region, sky and 
earth. It devours poisons, spirits and goblins. It confers all the 
desires. It is an expiation destroying a host of sins. It destroys 
misfortune and difficulties. 

4-7. After having located Ekavira, the five faces should 
always be contemplated. (The face should be contemplated 
as) white in (the rites of) appeasement and nourishment, red 
in (the rites of) subjugation, yellow in (the rites of) paralysing, 
smoky in (the rites of) uccafana (a kind of charm for expulsion) 
and black in (the rites of) attracting (a person). One should 
worship the thirty- two letters for confounding (an enemy). The 
formula should be repeated thirty lakh times and the oblation 
should be done one-tenth (of that number) . Gum resin mixed 
with amjta would accomplish all things. There is no other 
formula superior to the Aghora formula that would give enjoy- 
ment and emancipation. (By this repetition) one who is not a 
religious student would become a religious student and one who 
has not had his ablution after completing studies would have 
that. 



892 


Agni Purina 


8. The weapon of Aghora and Aghora are the two excellent 
formulae. One who repeats (the formulae) or does oblation 
(with them) or worships would rout the army of the enemy in 
the battle. 

9-13. I shall describe (the rite of ) appeasement of Rudra 
which is beneficial and which accomplishes all the desires. For 
the sake of progeny, for removing the malignant influences 
of the planets, for removing poison and curing diseases, for 
controlling famine and epidemics, for removing (the effect of) 
bad dreams, for gaining army and kingdom, for the destruction 
of enemies (it should be performed). When trees bear 
flowers untimely and for controlling all spirits (the formula 
should be used). (The word) obeisance should be used for 
worship, ending with oblation for making the oblation, the 
syllable vasal for strengthening and vausap for nourishment. In 
the place of ‘ca' letter two times, the union of that class (of 
names) is made. 

Oifi ! Obeisance to Rudra and to you and to the bull. 
(Obeisance) to one who does not leave, to unborn one, to the 
prime entity, to the worshipful, to Isana and to one possessing 
valour. (The following) five (are worshipped) in the north. 
(Obeisance) to the omnipresent, to the dreadful one, to one 
having distorted features, one who does not have any change 
in the form. 

(Worship is made) for the sake of removal in (the principle 
of) kala and water in the south-western direction. 

Obeisance to Ekapingala, to Svetapingala (and) to Kr?na- 
pingala. Obeisance to Madhupingala. (Obeisance) to Madhu- 
pingala in self-restraint. (Obeisance) to Ananta, to Ardra, to 
£u§ka (dry) and to Payogana in the principle of kala (time). 
To the dreadful one, to the most dreadful one in the two 
principles of mayd (illusion) . To the thousand-headed one, to the 
thousand-mouthed one, to the thousand-handed and footed one 
and to the thousand liilga in the principle of learning. One 
should locate on the right petal from thousand-eyed. To Ekaja(&, 
Dvijafa, Vijafa, to the form of Svdhd, to the form oiSvadha> to the 
form of vapap, to the six Rudras. O Guha ! these are situated 
in the leaf of fire in the principle of Isa. To the lord of goblins, 
to the lord of beings, to the lord of Uma and to the lord of 



324.12-13 


893 


time. The six are to be worshipped in the eastern petals in the 
principle called Sadaiiva. To Uma, bearing a dreadful form, 
Orh ! do (2) , Ruhini (2) ! You are Rudra, God of the celestials, 
Vi£akha ! Kill (2), bum (2), cook (2), churn (2), turn (2), 
oru (2), and sum (2). Remember the appeasement of Rudra. 
O Kj-snapingala ! Obeisance to the lord of the universe, the 
lord of the untimely goblins. (Goddess) Uma and (god) 
Mahesvara should be worshipped in the pericarp in the princi- 
ple of Siva. Orh to one pervading the sky, to the form of the 
sky, to omnipresent Siva, to the endless, to one without anyone 
to govern, one who is not resorted, to Siva. These nine terms 
are said to pervade the sky in the principle of Siva. Obeisance 
to the eternal one ! to the one seated on the yogic altar ! to the 
eternal yogin ! to the person having contemplation as food ! 
Orh obeisance to Siva ! Lord of all (beings) ! One having l£ana 
as the head ! One having Tatpurusa and others as the five 
faces ! O Guha ! The five chambers on the eastern petal in 
the principle of sat should be worhipped ! To one having 
Aghora as the heart ! To one having Vamadeva as the secret 
organ ! To one embodied as Sadyojata ! Orh obeisance ! To one 
extremely secret ! To one who conceals ! To one who does not 
have death ! To one who presides over death ! To one of the 
form of radiance ! in the leaf (presided over) by Fire, in the 
principle of oblation 1 in the principle of knowledge ! in the 
south ! To the supreme lord ! To the sentient and insentient ! 
To the sky-pervading one ! The splendour of the prime splend- 
our ! in the principle of illusion in the south-west ! in the 
principle of time in the west! Orh, dkr, dhr t nand, vdrh, oath ! 
Deathless one ! Born of death ! Benevolent one ! The supreme 
soul ! Great god ! Master of good feelings ! Great splendour ! 
Presiding deity of yoga 1 Release, release, churn, churn ! Orh 1 
O Sarva (everything) (2) ! Orh Bhava (The source) (2) 1 
One who bestows happiness on all beings ! In the son of Wind 
(god) and in the man of restraint in the north ! One who is 
manifest in the presence of all ! One who is above Brahma, 
Visnu and Rudra ! One who is not worshipped ! One who is 
not worshipped 1 One who is not extolled ! The witness 
(2) ! Come ! Come ! O Sun ! O Fire (2) 1 O Knowledge 
(2) ! Sound ! Subtle one (2) ! Benevolent one (2) ! Giver of 



894 


Agni Pur&ya 


all things (2) ! Oth ! Obeisance to Siva. Oth obeisance to Siva. 
Oth f Obeisance. One should worship, offer oblation and repeat 
(the above formula) in the prSkfta principle in the north-east. 
It would remedy all afflictions due to planets, diseases and 
incantations and accomplish all things. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTYFIVE 

The benefits of wearing the rosary beads and the counting 
of the formulae with them 

The Lord said : 

1-3. One should wear a garland of rosary beads even or 
uneven (in number) and firm. One may wear beads having 
single face, three or five faces or as available. Beads having two, 
four or six faces, unbroken and having sharp thorns are com- 
mendable. One should wear the four-faced (bead) on the right 
hand and the tuft etc. (By this) one not observing celibacy 
would become a celibate, and a person not observing religious 
ablution would get the vow fulfilled. Otherwise one should 
wear a golden ring after having worshipped with the formula of 
Siva. 

4-7a (They are divided into four) classes ( gocaras ) : Siva , 
Sikhd, Jyoti and Sdoitra. Gocara means the family. A person who 
has been initiated is to be known from that. The Prdjdpatya, 
Mahipdla, Kapota and Granthika (belong) to the Siva (class of 
beads) . The Kutilas, VetSlas, Padmas and Hathsas (belong) to the 
Sikhd class (of beads) . The Dhrtarasfras, Bakas, Kakas and 
Gopalas belong to (the class of beads) known as Jyoti. The 
Kufikas, Sdrafhas, Gufikas and Dandins (belong) to the family of 
Sdvitri. Thus there are four varieties in each one of these 
(classes) . 

7b-13. I shall describe the constituents of the formulae by 
which the formula would yield perfection. The formula should 
be written on the ground omitting the kilfa and ;an<fa (class of 
letters) . The component letters of the formula should besepara- 



325.1 4-20a 


895 


ted (one by one) and the nasal sound should be added separa- 
tely. (The letters) in the name of the votary should be separated. 
The letters (in the name) of the votary should be added at the 
beginning and end of the formula. (These letters) from the 
name (of the votary) should be reckoned as siddha (successful), 
s&dhya (capable of being accomplished), susiddha (successful 
easily) and ari (hostile) . A formula having the siddha (letters) 
at the beginning and end would give hundred percent results 
immediately. (A formula having) susiddha (letters) at the be- 
ginning and end should be deemed (to have the same result) as 
the siddha (letters). (A votary) should avoid at a distance the 
ari (letters) at the beginning and end. The siddha and susiddha 
(formulae) should be used for (rites of) same nature and 
the ari and s&dhya (should also be used) similarly. The 
presence of thousands of hostile (letters) in the middle would 
not be a defect in a formula having siddha (letters) at the be- 
ginning and end. 

14-17a. In the well-known formulae such as may a 1 , pras&da 2 3 
and praxiavcP , there are no divisions. The formula presided over 
by Brahma (is known) as Brahmavidya. Those known as 
vaifnava (pertaining to Visnu) are sacred to Vi$nu. The formulae 
of Rudra are called Viras. Those pertaining to Indra are 
dear to Isvara. Those presided over by the serpents would make 
the serpents motionless. Those relating to the Yaksas (a kind 
of semi-divine beings) are fond of ornaments. Those sacred to the 
Gandharvas are excessively (fond of) music etc. Those relating 
to the demons are dreadful. (The formulae) of the goblins are 
covered by filth. One should examine a formula and then 
impart (it). 

17b-20a. (There are) formulae beginning with one letter 
and ending with phaf upto those having fifty letters. The formula 
(known as) bala consists of twenty letters. That (known as) 
Rudra consists of twentytwo (letters). The formulae having 
more than that number upto three hundred (letters) are known 
as vrddha (expanded). The letters beginning with a and ending 


1. Seep. 888fn. 2. 

2. the syllables hath, haunt. 

3. the syllable orh. 



896 


Agni Purina 


with ha represent the white and dark fortnights. Among the 
ten vowels omitting the anusvdra (nasal sound) and visarga 
(aspirated sound) the shorter (vowels) represent the phases of 
the white fortnight and the longer ones those of the dark 
fortnight. 

20b-21. (The incantations) for peace etc. (should be 
practised) when (the Sun) has risen. Those for subjugation 
(should be done) when (the Sun) is on the move. The incant- 
ation for creating dissension (should be practised) when (the 
Sun) has completed the revolution at the twilight periods and 
those for stupefaction (done) at sunset. The spells for peace 
(should be practised) when (the wind) flows through the Ida 
(one of the arteries) and those for attracting (a person) (should 
be done) when (the wind flows) through the pingala (one of the 
arteries) . 

22-23. (Charms) for destruction and driving away (and 
such other results) (should be practised) at the time of the 
equinox. The incantations are thus of five kinds. The principle 
of earth (remains) on the lower part of the lip, lustre above, 
water in between, ether on the sides, wind outside and the 
great lord pervading everywhere. One has to practise the spell 
for paralysing in the earth (principle) , appeasement in water, 
subjugation etc. in (the principle of) light, (spell) for driving 
away (a man) in (the principle of) wind and the auspicious 
moment in (the principle of) ether. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWETYSIX 

Description of the mode of worshipping Goddess Gauri for 
gaining enjoyment, emancipation etc. 

The Lord said : 

1 . I shall describe the (mode of) worship of Uma (consort 
of Siva) for fortune and conferring enjoyment and emancipation. 
(I shall also describe) the meditation of the formula, the 



326.2-1 Oa 


897 


mystic diagram, the mudri 1 and the oblation which are the 
means (for the same) . 

2-6a. After having drawn Citrabhanu (Bhairava form of 
Siva), Siva and Kala together with Great Energy, Ida (one 
of the arteries) is drawn together with the lord and the modi- 
fication. The second (circle) should have the door and words 
which please (goddess) Gauri (synonym of Uma). The princi- 
pal formula of (goddess) Gauri should be made to end with 
fourth case (dative). Orh, hrith, sah, saurh obeisance to Gauri (is 
the formula). Six inches should be endowed with the three 
letters appropriate to the group. The seat (should be spread out) 
with pranava (syllable orh) and the image (of the goddess) with 
(the formula of) the heart. The syllables of water, time and 
Siva in the formula should be raised. The life (syllable) should 
be endowed with long vowels and (location on) the six parts 
of the body (should be made) . (The consecration of) the seat 
should be made with the pranava and the consecration of the 
image with the formula of the heart. 

6b-7. O Child ! Thus I have described to you (according 
to) the Yamala. I shall explaing to you (according to) the 
Ekaviranow. The basic syllable consisting of those of (lord) Siva 
and the goddess devoid (of the syllables) of heart are spread 
out endowed with the order of creation with (the syllables of) 
vahni , 2 may a, 3 and krSanu.* 

8- 10a. (The goddess) Gauri should be worshipped in (an 
image made of) gold, silver, wood or stone. In the alternative 
(the goddess may be worshipped) in Her unmanifest form in 
five balls at the centre and the (four) angular points. (The 
goddesses) Lalita, Subhaga, Gauri and Ksobhani (should be 
worshipped) in order beginning with the south-east. (The 
goddesses) Varna, Jyestha, Kriya and Jfiana should be worship- 
ped in the circle beginning with the east. The unmanifest form 
of (lord) Siva (should be worshipped) on the left side together 
with the pedestal. 

1 . Holding the fingers interlocked in a particular position representing 
different things. 

2. the syllable f. 

3. See p. 888 fn 2. 

4. the syllables pa, ra and rath. 



898 


Agni Parana 


10b-13. ( In the worship of the manifest form of the goddess) 
(the goddess should be worshipped) as manifest with two eyes, 
the syllable orh (containing the three letters), pure and being 
present with (lord) Sankara (Siva). Two lotus seats (should be 
provided). (She may be endowed) with two arms or four arms. 
She may be riding a lion or wolf or have eight or eighteen hands. 
(She may be wearing) a garland and rosary beads. (She may 
wear) a bunch of lotuses on the neck. She may be holding an 
arrow or bow with the right hand and a book, betel-leaf, club, 
offering protection and a kamantfalu (waterpot) with the left hand. 
One should place in each one of these (hands) Ganesa, mirror 
and an arrow. 

14-19. In the alternative (the goddess) should be made in 
Her manifest and unmanifest form. The deity is invoked on the 
pedestal by (showing) the padma mudra (posture of the hands for- 
med as a lotus). It is said that liAgamudrd (posture representing 
the lifiga shape) is for (invoking) (lord) Siva. For (invoking) 
both, the avahani mudra (invocation posture) (is to be used). 
The posture for invoking the goddess isyoni (female generative 
organ) . The mystic diagram (for the worship should be) a squ- 
are. A lotus having three petals occupying the central four 
chambers should be made within that square. A triangle in two 
squares in the middle and a half crescent in double that space 
(should be made) in order. The entrance should be double that 
as well as double that of the approach to the door. (There should 
be) three doors in each one of the three directions. In the alter- 
native (the goddess) may be worshipped on a bhadraka (lotus 
diagram) or on the ground after having established (the goddess) 
and worshipped Her with the five things got from a cow and the 
five sweet things. (A votary') should offer red flowers and offer 
hundred oblations with the five sweet things and clarified butter 
facing the north. Then the final oblation (should be made). 
(The votary) would accomplish all the desired things. After 
having offered a victim, three or eight girls should be fed. The 
offering made to the goddess should be given to the devotees of 
Siva and should not be taken by oneself. 

20-22a. (By thisworship) one desirous of getting a daughter 
would get a daughter, a person not having a son would get a 
son, an unfortunate woman (would get) fortune and the king 



326.22b— 327.5 


899 


(would get) a kingdom and victory in battle. By (repeating the 
formula of the goddess) eight lakh times, a votary (would get) 
efficacy of speech and the gods would come under his control. 
(The votary) should not eat without offering (to the goddess). 
One should worship with the left hand especially on the eighth, 
fourteenth and the third (lunar days) . 

22b-26. I shall describe the worship of (lord) Mrtyufijaya 
(the conqueror of death; a synonym of Siva) . (The god) should 
be worshipped inside a pitcher. The pranava (the syllable orh) 
should be used for the oblation. The lustre of the god would be 
had by this ( method) . The basic formula (should be) ending 
with nausat. (The votary) should show the kv.mbhamu.ira (posture 
of the fingers representing a pitcher) . Oblations should be made 
with milk, diirva (grass), clarified butter, amrta, punarnava, sweet 
porridge and cake. The formula should be repeated ten thousand 
times. (The god should be contemplated as) having four faces 
and four arms, holding pitchers in two hands and offering boons 
and protection by two (others). (The god) should be (mentally) 
bathed with the kumbhamudra. One who partakes the auspicious 
herb sanctified with the formula would have healthy life, fortune 
and long life. When contemplated, He would destroy untimely 
death and when worshipped (would confer) wonderful results. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTYSEVEN 

The greatness of establishing a lihga 
and worship with the accessories 

The Lord said: 

1-5. The austerities are completed after having worshipped 
Satya and others, the presiding deities of austere observances. 
Arista, the lord of the thread (of a rosary) is capable of nullify- 
ing misfortune. (A string) having golden andgem (beads) (con- 
fers) fortune. (A string) (containing beads made of) great conches 
is for causing death. (A rosary) (containing) conch-shells is 
for a charm (while) that one (having) pearl beads increases 



900 


Agni Purina 


progeny. (A rosary having) crystal (beads) confers fortune. (A 
rosary having) rudraksa confers emancipation. A rudraksa of the 
size of a dhatri fruit is excellent. The mental repetition (may be 
done) with the central bead or without the central bead in the 
string. The repetition should be done using the ring finger and the 
thumb. While doing so one should not cross the central bead. 
When the rosary has fallen down by mistake, one should repeat 
(the formula) two hundred times. 

6-7a. A bell possesses (the sounds of) all the instruments. 
Hence sounding it confers wealth. The linga (the emblem deno- 
ting lord Siva) and the abode (of the deity) should be cleansed 
with cow-dung, cow’s urine, earth from the ant-hill, ashes and 
water. 

7b-10a. O Skanda ! The formula ‘Obeisance to (lord) 
Siva’ is capable of accomplishing all things. These five syllables 
are commended in the Vedas. The six syllables 1 are commended 
in the world. Lord Sambhu (Siva) is present at the end of c 0rh’ 
like the seed of a (holy) fig tree as a seal. It is known that 
‘Obeisance to Siva* is the designation oflsana and others in order. 
One would acquire the collection of formulae by repeating the six 
syllables. l Om obeisance to Siva’ is the excellent formula. 

1 Ob-1 2. (The votary) should worship the linga with this (for- 
mula) since (lord) Siva dwells in the linga for the sake of con- 
ferring His favour on the people and since He is the conferer of 
virtues, desires, wealth and emancipation. A person who does 
not worship the liAga does not become a fit person to get virtues 
etc. One would get enjoyment and emancipation by worshipping 
the liAga. Hence one should worship (Him) so long as he lives. 
One should never eat without worshipping Him. It is better 
to discard one’s life (than not to worship Him). 

13. (One would become) Rudra by worshipping Rudra, 
Vi?nu by worshipping Vi?nu, Surya by worshipping Surya and 
the goddess etc. by worshipping the goddess. 

14. One would acquire a crore times more benefits by esta- 
blishing the liAga than what one would acquire by doing sacri- 
ficial rites, penances and offering gifts, visiting sacred places 
and reading the Vedas. 

1. The five syllables with the syllable om. 



327.15—328.3 


901 


15. One who worships the earthen liftga during the three 
twilights with bilva, would redeem one hundred and eleven 
generations of his family and would attain heaven. 

16. A person should build a temple according to his capa- 
city. The small or big (temple) (built) by a poor or a rich person 
would have equal benefit. 

17. On account of the transitory nature of one’s life one 
should set apart two parts (of his wealth) for the sake of virtuous 
deeds and one part of the wealth for maintaining his life. 

18. A person who builds a temple would redeem twentypne 
generations of his family and gain wealth. One would get mani- 
fold benefits (by building a temple) with earth, wood, brick and 
stone etc. 

19. A person who builds a temple of God with eight bricks, 
would reach heaven. Even one who builds a temple with dust in 
sport would acquire wealth. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTYEIGHT 

The rules of prosody 

Fire-god said : 

1-3. I shall describe 1 (the rules of) prosody in order as 
laid down by Pingala making use of the basic letters. There are 
eight gams (classes), viz. magana, nagarta, bhagana,yagana, jagana, 
ragana, sagana and lagana made up of the letters ma, na, bha, ya, 
ja, ra, sa and ta. Each one of these ganas is formed by three 
syllabic instances. All the three syllables may be long or short 
or the first or middle or final syllable may be long or short. A 
sy lla ble is long or short according as the vowel at the end is 
long or short. A short vowel becomes long when it is followed 
by a nasal sound or visarga (aspirated sound) or a conjunct 

1. The Pvrdpa summaries very briefly and does not give a clear defini- 
tion. Hence the translation has been rendered in such a way as to make it 
clear. 



902 Agni Purdna 

consonant or a jihvamuliya 1 2 ora upadhmaniya *. Thus the ganas are 
eight according to tradition. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTYNINE* 

An abridgement of rules of prosody relating to the Vedic metres 
Fire-god said : 

1. TheGayatri and the Goddess are of equal (number of) 
letters in the section on metres. It would have fifteen letters. 
(The metre called) Prajapati (consists of) eight letters. 

2. (The metre) Gayatri (used) in the Tajurveda (consists 
of) six letters and that in the Samaveda would have twelve 
letters. It would have eighteen letters in the ftgveda. Two more 
letters are added in the Samaveda. 

3. The fourth quarter in the Jigveda and all the quarters in 
the Prajapati would get lengthened. There would be increase of 
one syllable each in the rest. The Asuri would drop one (letter) . 

4. (The metres) U?nik, Anustubh, Brhati, Parikti, Tristubh 
and Jagati should be known as gradually (increasing). All 
these Gayatris (are known as) Brahma. 

5. If groups of three (of the above) are added each one 
would be the name (of the metres) of the Rgveda and Tajurveda. 
They should be written in a square of sixty-four chambers. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY** 

An abridgement of the rules of metres 

Fire-god said : 

1. When a quarter does not have the sufficient letters it 
has to be filled with iya etc. The Gayatris are known to have 

1. A term applied to the visarga before k and kh and also to r, f and the 
gutturals. 

2. The visarga before the letters p and ph. 

•This chapter sums up second chapter of Pingala. 

••This chapter sums up the third chapter of Pingala. 



330.2-1 1 


903 


eight in a quarter. The Jagati (would have) twelve in a quarter. 
Virat is said to have ten. 

2-5a. The Tri?{ubh has eleven letters in a quarter. There 
are also others having Ekapada 1 (one foot) etc. (Gayatra 
metre) consists of four feet, six letters in each foot. In some 
places it has seven letters. The Pratisfha (gayatri) has three feet 
(having eight, seven and six letters respectively) . VardhamSna 
consists of three feet having six, eight and eight letters respec- 
tively. (The Pratistha gayatri) has three feet having six, eight 
and seven letters. The Nagigayatri (consists of) three feet hav- 
ing nine, nine and six (syllables) respectively. Varahi (would 
have) six, nine and nine (letters) . The third one (Virat gayatri) 
having two feet (would have) twelve and eight (syllables) and 
that having three feet (would have) same syllables as Tri§tubh 
(ie., eleven syllables each). 

5b. The Usnik metre is described in the Vedas (as having) 
eight syllables in two feet (and twelve syllables in the third 
foot). 

6-7a. (The variety of) U$nik (known as) Kakub (would 
have) three feet (consisting of) eight, twelve and eight letters. 
Pura-u?nik would have three feet having twelve, eight and 
eight letters, the Paro-u§nik would be the next (having eight, 
eight and twelve syllables) . A metre with four feet (having seven 
syllables is also Usnik) . 

7b-8a. (The metre) with eight letters in each one of the 
four feet would be Anu§£up. It may have three feet also some- 
times. It may have eight, twelve and twelve letters. If the 
middle and end (of a Jagati is a Gayatra it is also Anu&up). 

8b- 11. Brhati would be one foot Jagati and three feet 
Gayatri. (If the first Jagata foot is) third (and others Gayatri) 
it is Pathya (Brhati). (If the first Jagata foot is) second (and 
others Gayatri) it is Nyankusarini (Brhati) . The same is known 
as Skandho-grivi according to Kraustuki. The same is known as 
Urobrhati according to Yaska. (If the Jagati foot is) at the 
end (and the rest are Gayatra) it is Uparistad-brhati. (If the 
same Jagati foot is) at the beginning (and the rest are Gayatra) 
it is Purastad-brhati. In some (texts) there would be four feet 


1. one foot, two feet etc. 



904 


4gni Purdpa 


with nine syllables each (also known as Brhatl). In some places 
(it would have eight letters. Mahabfhatl is constituted of three 
Jagati feet. The same is Satobrhati according to Bhan^ila 1 . 

12. If the first two of the four feet (are Jagati and the 
other two Gayatri) it is Pankti. (Another variety of Pankti) is 
Satahpankti. 2 3 Even if it is in reverse order (it is Satahpankti) 8 . 
(If the first two feet are Jagati) it is Prastara-pankti, (If the 
Jagati occurs) in the last two feet it is Astara-pankti. 

1 3. The Akgarapankti consists of four feet having five 
letters in each half of each foot. Padapankti consists of five feet 
( having five letters in each) . ( If the first foot has) four letters, 
(the second) six letters and the last three (five letters) (it is 
also Padapankti). 

14. It would be Jagati-pankti if i t has six (Gayatri) feet 
(and Pathya-pankti) if it has five feet. It is said to be Jyoti§- 
mati Jagati if it has one foot (Gayatri and the other three) 
Tri?fubh. 

15. The Purastad-Jyotih (tristup) consists of (Gayatri) in 
the first (the remaining three being Tristup) . The Madhya- 
Jyotih consists of (Gayatri) in the middle (and Tri?tup preced- 
ing and succeeding) . Upari$tajjyotih (consists of three Tristups 
and a Gayatri) at the end. 

16. It is known as Sankumati (gayatri) (if it has one foot 
having five letters and three having six letters). Kakudmati 
(consists of) six (letters in one foot and the usual number in 
other feet). (The metre) would be (known as) Pipilikama- 
dhyama if it has ( eight letters in the first and third and three in 
the middle) in the three feet. 

17. If the case is otherwise (i.e. it has few letters in the 
first and the third and many in the middle) it is (known as) 
Yavamadhya. It is known as Nicrt if (a Gayatri having twenty- 
four letters) has one letter less. If the same (Gayatri) has two 
letters less it would be Virat. 

18-22. If (the Gayatri) has two additional letters it would 
be Svaraf. In case of doubt (in the case of metre having twenty- 

1. The Chandafr S&tra III. 36 reads as Tapdin. 

2. having first and third as Jagati. 

3. i.e., having first and third feet Giyatrl and the rest Jagati. 



330.22—331.5 


905 


six letters whether it is Gayatri Svara{ or U$nik Svarat), it 
should be decided on the basis of the first foot. The deities of 
the metres are : Fire-god, Sun, Soma, Brhaspati (preceptor of 
the celestials), Varuna (lord of ocean and morality), Moon, 
and ViSvedevas. The musical notes saija , rsabha, gandh&ra, 
madhyama, paficama, dhaivata, nisada (should duly be associated 
with the metres). (The metres beginning with Gayatri are) 
duly white, variegated, tawny, black, blue, red and white. The 
compositions are of the colour of gorocana (yellow pigment got 
from a cow). The metre called Jyotih is black (coloured). The 
goiras (of the metres beginning with the Gayatri) are said to be 
Agnivesya, Kasyapa, Gautama, Angirasa, Bhargava, Kausika 
and Vasi?tha. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTYONE 

Metres of different kinds* 

Fire-god said : 

1 . (The metre) Utkrti consists of one hundred and four 
letters. One should drop four letters (step by step) (and get 
other metres). They would respectively be metres abhi, sarfi, vi, 
&Ai and pra etc. (prefixed) to Krti separately. 

2. Then (there would be metres) such as Krti, Atidhrti, 
Dhrti, Atya$ti, A?ji, Atisakvarl, Sakvarl, Atijagati and Jagatl. 

3-4. The metres described hereafter are classical. The 
Vedic metres beginning with Tri§tup (in the Vedas) (would 
be noticed in the same way in the classical). Tri?{up, Pankti, 
Bfhatl, Anu$tup, U§nik and Gayatri are said (to be the metres) . 
Supratigfha (twenty letters), Prati?tha (sixteen letters), 
Madhya (twelve letters), Atyukta (eight letters) and Ukta 
(four letters) : thus each one has lesser (number of) letters. 

5. The fourth part (of a Gayatri having twentyfour 
letters) would be a foot. The Ganacchandas 1 is described now. 

•This chapter sums up the fourth chapter of Pihgala. 

1. See ch. 328. w. 1-3. 



906 


Agtti Purina 


The ganas are made up of four syllables. They may be a guru 
(long syllable) at the beginning, middle or end or two long 
syllables (or four short syllables) . 

6. Four syllabic instants and five gaiyss (groups) are said to 
be the characteristics of the Arya (metre) . When there are 
seven and a half ganas in one half (of a verse) it is Arya. The 
other half also (would be similar). (In the Arya the odd) are 
not jagana (having long syllable in the middle). 

7. The sixth (gana) would be a, jagana. (The sixth) may be 
having all short syllables. When it has all short syllables the 
foot begins with the second word. (When it is long syllable in 
the middle or all short syllables) and the seventh (is all short) 
(the foot begins with) the first (letter). If in the second (half), 
the fifth (g ana be all short) ( the foot begins with the first letter 
of the first half) . 

8. If in the second half the sixth (gana) (be either long in 
the middle or all short), the short vowel (is introduced). The 
variety of Arya is known as Pathya if it has three ganas (in a 
foot) in the last half and first. 

9. Vipula (is the next variety) (having no pause in the 
three ganas in the last or first half or both). Capala is that where 
the second and the fourth (ganas) are long in the middle, (the 
first is long at the end, the third is two long syllables, the fifth 
long at the beginning and the rest as usual) . Mukhapurvika 
has the characteristics of Capala in the first half. 

10. In the Jaghanacapala, (there are the characteristics of 
Capala) in the second half. Mahacapala (has]the characteristics 
of Capala) in both (the halves) . Giti is that where the first half 
is similar. 

11. Upagiti is that where the second half is similar. Udgiti 
is said to have the order reversed. Aryagiti (has) eight gayas in 
the (first) half. The metres regulated by prosodial instants (are 
described) now. 

12. Vaitaliya (metre) has seven (syllabic instants) in the 
first and the second quarter and sixteen lakiras (one mitrd 
syllables) in the second and fourth and there should be ra, la and 



331.13-19 


907 


ga at the end of both the foot. (If the Vaitaliya) has an addi- 
tional long syllable (it is known as) Aupacchandasaka 1 . 

13-15. The Pafalika 2 3 has bhagana (and two long syllables) 
at the end in addition to the above (characteristics). (The 
lakdra) that has not been described so far (in the above should 
not be mixed) with the next. The second and third foot in the 
above should not be employed separately. Pracyavrtti is shown 
(now). When in the second and fourth feet, the first lakdra gets 
mixed up, it is (Pracyavrtti) . If the first lakdra gets mixed up 
with the third in the first and the third feet, it is Udlcyavrtti. 

If the above characteristics are found together in the same it is 
Pravrttaka. When all the feet (in the Vaitaliya) have the 
characteristics of the first and third (letters), it would be 
Caruhasini. When all the four feet possess the characteristics of 
the second and fourth (letters) , it would be Aparantika. 

16. It is said to be Matrasamaka when there are sixteen 
lakdras ( one mdtrd syllable) ending in guru. (At the end one of 
the two is made guru and the ninth is a lakdra) . a When there 
are twelve lakdras and the ninth (retains its own form in a 
quarter) (it is called) Vanavasika. 

1 7. (Where in all the four quarters) the fifth and the 
eighth (are lakdras and the rest as laid down) (it is) Vi$loka. 
Where the ninth lakdra remains as also the fifth and eighth it is 
Citra. If it gets mixed with the next (i.e. the tenth) it is Upa- 
citra. Padakulaka is the next (metre) . 

18-19. (Where there are sixteen lakdras in a quarter it is 
known as) Gityarya. (When the two halves of Gityarya) are 
reversed (i.e. one half is all short and the other half is all long) 
it is Sikha. When the first half is all short (and second half is 
all long) it is Jyoti. When the first half is all long (and the 
second half is all short) it is Saumya. Culika is said to be hav- 
ing (twentynine lakdras in the first half and) thirty one (in the 
second half) and a long syllable at the end. The number of 
syllables should be deducted from the number of mdtrds so that 
the remainder would be gurus (long). The number of gurus 


1. The Purapa reading Gopuccham is obviously incorrect. 

2. The ChaadassQtra reads Apatalika. 

3. The text in the Puiana is corrupt. 



908 Agni Purina 

(long) should be subtracted from the total number of mitris so 
that the remaining would be lagku (short) - 1 2 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTYTWO* 

The metres of un-equal characteristics in the four quarters 
Fire-god said : 

1. I shall describe the equal, half equal and unequal 
(metres), the three (divisions) of the classical metres. (The 
equal metres have the same characteristics in all the four 
quarters, the half-equal in two quarters and the unequal have 
different characteristics in all the four). The number of half- 
equal metres are arrived at by multiplying the number of 
equal metres with the same number. 

2. (The number of) unequal metres (is got by multiplying 
the number of half-equal metres with the same number) . (The 
number of pure half-equal metres is got by) deducting (the 
number of the equal metres) from the number (of half equal 
metres). (The metre is known as) Samani where it ends with a 
long and short syllable. The Pramani (metre) ends with a short 
and long syllable. The Vitanaka is different from the above 
(two). 

3. It would be Vaktra metre (by adding four syllables) at 
the beginning of a quarter (of an Anu$tup). (In it after) the 
first (syllable) there should not be sagana and nagana 8 (and repha 
in the second and fourth quarters). (One may use) some other 
ganas except the above. The yagana should come after the fourth 
(syllable of a quarter) . In the Pathyavaktra (metre), jagana 
(comes after the fourth syllable) in the second and fourth quar- 
ters. 

4. According to others, it is Pathya metre when it has the 


1 . The Purarja reading is corrupt here. 

"‘This chapter corresponds to Pingala ch. V. Sutras 1-31. 

2. See ch. 328. vv 1-3 for the gafias. 



332.5-9 


909 


characteristics contrary to the above. It is Capala, if there is 
nagana after the fourth letter in the first and third quarters. It is 
Vipula, when yagana is everywhere in the second and fourth 
quarters and the seventh syllable is short. According to Saitava 
(acarya) 1 , the seventh syllable should be short in all the 
quarters. 

5. If there is bhagana or nagana or tagana (instead of yagana 
in the first and third quarters after the fourth syllable), it is 
Vipula. Many varieties of the Cakra class have been described. 
When four letters are added to each one of the quarters, the 
metre is Padacatururdhvam. 

6. The metre is Apida, if there are two long syllables at 
the end (of each one of the quarters) . If two long syllables 
occur at the beginning (of each one of the quarters), it is Prat- 
yapida. 2 

7-8. In the Apida, when the first ( pada ) is interchanged 
(with the second) it is Maftjari, (when interchanged with the 
third) it is Lavali 3 and (when interchanged with the fourth) it 
is Amrtadhara. Udgata is described now. 4 5 Ithas (ten syllables) — 
sa(gana), ja{gana),sa{gana) and la{ghu) (in the first quarter) (ten 
(syllables) — na(gana), sa (gana) , ja(gana) and ga (long syllable) 
(in the second quarter) (eleven syllables) — bha {gana), na 
{gana), ja { gai}a ) and la (short syllable) (in the third quarter) 
(thirteen syllables) — sa {gana), ja ( gatia ), sa {gana), ja 
{gana) and ga (long syllable) . When (in Udgata), the third 
(quarter) has (ten syllables) — ra {gana), na {gana), bha {gaita) 
and ga (long syllable) it is Saurabha. Lalita (consists of) two 
na {garias) and two sa {ganas) (in the third quarter) (in Ud- 
gata) . 

9. Upasthitapracupita 6 has ma, sa, ja and bha {ganas) and 
two gas (in the first quarter) , sa, na,ja and ra {ganas) and ga 
(in the second quarter), two na, sa {ganas) (in the third) and 
three nas, ja and two ya {ganas) (in the fourth) . 


1. The Puranic reading is corrupt. 

2. The text wrongly reads gapadika instead of gav&dau. 

3. The text wrongly reads Lavapi. 

4. The text reads wrong. 

5. The text is corrupt. 



910 


Agni Purina 


10. In Upasthitapracupita, when there are two nas, sa, two 
nas, na again and two sas in the third quarter, it is Vardhamana. 
Suddhaviradarijabha 1 2 3 is said to have ta, ja, and ra ( gams ) (in 
the third quarter) (in the Upasthitapracupita) . Then I shall 
describe the half-equal metres. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTYTHREE* 

Description of metres having equal characteristics in the alternate 

quarters 


Fire-god said : 

1. The metre Upacitraka (consists of) three rot, la, and two 
gas (in the first quarter), three bhas and two gas (in the second) 
(and the third and the fourth like the first and second). Druta- 
madhya is said to have three bhas and two gas (in the first 
quarter), na, two jas and y a (in the second quarter) (and the 
third and fourth like the first and second quarters) . 

2. Vegavat! has three sas and ga (in the first quarter) , three 
bhas and two gas (in the second) . Bhadravirat has ta, jas, ra and 
gas (in the first quarter), and ma, sa, ja and two gas (in the 
second quarter). 

3. (When the first quarter) has sa, ja, sa and ga and (the 
second quarter) has bka, ra, na and two gas it is Ketumati. Akhya- 
niki has two tas, ja and two gas (in the first quarter) and ja, ta, 
ja and two gas (in the second quarter). 

4. Viparitakhyanikl hasja, ta,ja and two gas (in the first 
quarter) and ta, ta, ja and two gas (in the second quarter). 
Harinapluta 8 has three sas, la and ga (in the first quarter), na, 
bha, bka and ra (in the second quarter). 

5-6. Aparavaktra 9 consists of two nas, ra, la and ga (in the 


1. The text is corrupt. 

*This chapter corresponds to Pingala ch. V, sutras 32-45. 

2. The Purana wrongly gives HarinavallabhS 

3. The Purana reads Apar&kraxnam. 



334.1-3 


911 


first quarter) and na, ja, ja and ra (in the second quarter). 
(Pujpitagra 1 2 has two nas, ra andja (in the first quarter) and 
na, ja, ja, ra and ga (in the second quarter). Yavamati 8 has ra, 
ja, ra and ja (in the first quarter) and ja, ra,ja and ra (in the 
second quarter). Sikha consists of twentyeight (short letters) and 
a long syllable at the end (in the first quarter) and thirty letters 
and a long syllable at the end in the second quarter. (The third 
and fourth quarters are also similar.) (The metre) Khaftja has 
got the characteristics reversed. Metres of similar characteristics 
(in the four quarters) are described now. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTYFOUR* 

Description of metres having similar characteristics in all the 

four quarters’. 

Fire-god said: 

1. Yati (caesura) is said to be the break or pause (at the 
end of a quarter). (The metre) Tanumadhya (has) ta and ja 
(in a quarter) . Kumaralalita 3 has ja, two sas and ga (in a quar- 
ter) (the pause occurring at the end of every three and four syl- 
lables) . Citrapada is known to have two bkas and two gas (in a 
quarter) . 

2. Vidyunmala has two mas and two gas (in a quarter) . 
(The pause occurs after every four syllables.) Manavakakridi- 
taka would be had with pha, ta, la and ga. (The pause occurs 
after every four syllables.) Halamukhi has ra, na and sa (in a 
quarter). (The pause occurs after three and 3ix syllables.) 

3. Bhujangasisusuta has two nas and ma (in a quarter). 
(The pause occurs after seventh and second syllables. ) Hamsa- 
ruta 4 consists of ma, na and two gas (in a quarter) . Suddhaviraf 

1. The Purapa reads Pu?pita. 

2 . The Pur&pa reads Panamati. 

•This corresponds to PiAgala chs. VI, VII and VIII, Sdtras 1-19. 

3. The Purapa is corrupt. 

4. The text is very corrupt. 



912 Agni Purina 

has ma, sa, ja and ga in every quarter. (The pause occurs at 
the end of a quarter.) 

4. Panava has ma , na,ya andga (in every quarter) . (The 
pause occurs after every five syllables.) Mayurasaririi has 
ra, ja, ra and ga (in every quarter) . (The pause occurs at the 
end of a quarter.) Matta has ma, bha , sa and ga (in a quarter). 
(The pause occurs after fourth and sixth syllables.) Upasthita 1 
has ta, ja, ja and ga (in a quarter). (The pause occurs after 
every second and eighth syllables.) 

5. Rukmavati has bha, ma, sa and ga (in a quarter). (The 
pause occurs at the end of a quarter.) Indravajra has two tas, 
ja and two gas (in a quarter). (The pause comes at the end of 
a quarter.) Upendravajra consists of ja, ta, ja and two gas, 
(The pause occurs at the end of a quarter.) Mixed varieties are 
formed by (Indravajra and Upendravajra) coming alterna- 
tively at the beginning and end. 

6-7. Dodhaka has three bhas and two gas. Salim con- 
sists of ma, ta, ta and two gas. The pause occurs after every 
four and seven syllables. Vatormi consists of ma, bha, ta and two 
gas. (The pause occurs after) every fourth and seventh syllables. 
Bhramaravilasita has ma, bha, na, la and ga. (The pause occurs) 
after fourth and seventh syllables. Rathoddhata has ra, na, ra, la 
and ga. 

8. Svagata has ra, na, bha and two gas. Vfnta has two nas, 
sa and two gas. Syen! consists of ra, ja, ra, la and ga. Ramya 2 
has ja, ra, ja and two gas. 

9. (The metres belonging to) the Jagati 3 (class are now 
described) . Vamsastha consists of ja, ta, ja, and ra. Indravamsa 
has two tas, ja and ra. To(aka is said to have four sas. 

10-11. Drutavilambita would be with na, bha, bha, and ra. 
Pu$a has two nas, ma and ya. (The pause occurs after) the eighth 
and fourth syllables. Jaloddhatagati consists of ja, sa,ja and sa. 
(The pause occurs) after every sixth syllable. (The metre) Tata 
is said to have two nas, ma and ra. Kusumavicitra has na, ya, na 
and ya. Caficalak;ika 4 would have na, na ra and ra. 

1. The reading in the text is wrong. 

2. Kngalacchandas VI. 32 reads Vilasini. 

3. having twelve syllables in a quarter. 

4. The Pura^a reads Calambiki. 



334.12-23 


913 


12. Bhujangaprayata has four ya (ganas) . Sragvini has 
four ra (ganas) . Pramit&kgara has sa, ja and two sas. Kantot- 
plda has bha, ma, sa and ma. 

13. Vaisvadevi consists of two mar and two yas. (The pause 
occurs after the fifth and seventh 1 syllables. ) Navamalini con- 
sists of na, ja, bha and ya in each quarter. The Atijagati (metres) 
are described now. 

14. Praharsini 2 has ma, na, ja, ra and ga. The pause is after 
the third and tenth (syllables) . Rucira has ja, bha, sa, ja and ga. 
It has pause after the fourth and ninth (syllables) . 

15-16. Mattamayura consists of ma,ta,ya,sa and ga. The 
pause is after the fourth and ninth (syllables) . Gauri has three 
nas, sa and ga. Asambadha has ma, ta, na, sa and ga. It has pause 
after the fifth and ninth syllables. Aparajita would have two 
nas, ra, sa, la and ga. (It has pause after every seven syllables.) 

17. Praharanakalita 3 (has two nas, bha, na, la and ga). 
Vasantatilaka contains ta, bha, two jas and two gar. It is Simho- 
nnata (according to) the sage (Kajyapa). It is Uddharsini 
according to Saitava. 

18-20. Candravarta has four nas and sa. The same is (known 
as) Mala, if it has the pause after sixth and ninth letters. The 
same would be Manigunanikara (if it has pause after the eighth 
and seventh syllables) . Mai ini has two nas, ma and two yas. The 
pause is after the eighth and seventh (syllables) . Rsabhagaja- 
vilasita 4 has bha, ra, three nas and ga. The pause is after seventh 
and ninth (syllables). Sikharini (has ya, ma, na, sa, bha, la and 
ga). Pfthvi consists of ja, sa, ja, sa, ya, la and ga. It has pause 
after the eighth and ninth syllables. Thus they have been des- 
cribed by Pingala before. 

21. It would be VamSapatrapatita, (if a quarter has) bha, 
ra, na, bha, na, la and ga. The pause occurs after the tenth ( and 
seventh syllables) . Harini has na, sa, ma, ra, sa, la and ga. It has 
pause after e^ery sixth, fourth and seventh (syllables). 

22-23. Mandakranta has ma, bha, na, ta, ta and two gas. It 


1 . The Pur&Qa wongly reads aftga denoting six. 

2. The Pur&Qic text is corrupt. 

3. The Purina has not defined this metre. 

4. The text is corrupt. 



914 


Agni Purina 


has pause after the fourth, sixth and seventh (syllables) . Kusu- 
mitalatavellita (has) ma, ta, na and three yas. It has pause after 
the fifth, sixth and seventh syllables. (The following is based on 
the Vedic metre) Atidhrti. Sardula vikrid ita consists of ma, sa, 
ja, sa, two tas and ga. The pause comes after the twelfth and 
seventh (syllables). 

24. (The following metres are based on the Vedic metre) 
Krti. Suvadana has ma, ra, bha, na, ya , bha, la and ga. The pause 
comes after the seventh, seventh and sixth (syllables) . (The 
metre) Vftta has ga and la in order. 

25. (The following metre is based on the Vedic metre Prakrti.) 
Sragdhara consists of ma, ra, bha, na and three yas. The pause 
comes after seven, seven, seven syllables. Bhadraka 1 has bha, ra, 
na, ra, na, ra, na and ga. (The pause occurs after) the tenth and 
twelfth (syllables). 

26. (The following are based on the Vedic metre Vikj-ti. ) 
Asvalalita consists of na, ja, bha, ja, bha,ja, bha, la and ga. (The 
pause occurs after) the eleventh (and twelfth syllables) . Matta- 
krida has two mas, ta, four nos,. la and ga. (The pause comes 
after) the eighth and fifteenth (syllables) . 

27. (The following is based on the Vedic metre Sankfti.) 
Tanvi has bha, ta, na, ma, two bhas, na and yd. (The pause comes 
after) the fifth, seventh and twelfth (syllables). (The following 
is based on the Vedic metre Abhikrti.) Krauflcapada consists of 
bha, ma, sa, bha, four nas and ga. (The pause comes after) the 
fifth, fifth, eighth (and seventh syllables) . 

28-30. (The following metres are based on the Vedic metre 
Utkrti.) Bhujangavijrmbhita 2 3 has two mas, ta,na, ra, sa,la and ga. 
The pause comes after the eighth, twelfth and seventh syllables. 
(The metre) called Apavahaka® similarly has ma, six nas , sa and 
two gas. The pause occurs after the ninth, sixth, sixth (and fifth 
syllables). (The Dandakas are now described.) Dandaka has 
two nas and seven ras (in a quarter). (The first variety of Da$- 
daka) is Candavr&iprapataka 4 . (It has twentyseven syllables in 

1. The Purana reads Samudraka. 

2. The text is corrupt here. 

3. The text reads Upahdra. 

4. The text reads Cag4avr9tipraghataka. 



335.1—336.1 


915 


a quarter) . Other varieties (of Dandaka) such as Vyala, Jimuta 
etc., would be had by adding one ra (each time) (to the 
original Dandaka). 

The remaining varieties are known as Pracita. The tabular 
representation (of long and short vowels) of Gatha (etc.) are 
described (now). 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTYFIVE* 

The tabular representation of long and short vowels of 
different metres 

Fire-god said : 

1 . That which has not been described in the treatises on 
metrics is known as Gatha. All syllables in a quarter would 
be long. The next one is made one ( matra ) less and the rest the 
same as the previous. 

2. If the mark in the middle of (the metre) to be known is 
equal, the first letter would be short. If it is unequal it is long. 
If should then be made as half unequal. If it is the reverse the 
first letter would be short. When two are desired one will be 
reduced. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTYSIX 

Description of phonetics 

Fire-god said : 

1. I shall describe the phonetics. The letters are either 
sixtythree or sixtyfour. The vowels are twentyone. The conson- 
ants are twentyfive. 

•The Purina summarises the first stitra and the concluding sfitras 24-34 
of Pi&gala ch. VIII. The verses are very cryptic. Verses 3 and 4 have not 
been translated. 



916 


Agni PurSqa 


2-3. (The letters) ya and others (the semi-vowels and 
sibilants) are known to be eight. The twin sounds are four in 
number — such as the nasal sound, visarga, ka, pa. The letter t is 
known as (produced) by touching light. It is a protracted 
sound. 

4. (The origin of the letters is described now.) The soul 
together with the internal organs and those in the abdomen and 
throat contacts the intellect and joins the mind with a desire to 
speak. 

5. The mind impels the bodily fire, which urges the air to 
move. The air moving with the chest produces the sound (called) 

mandra. 

6. The Gayatra metre at the time of morning ablution is 
recited in that (sound) . (The air) moving in the throat gives 
rise to the (sound) madhyama that which is associated with 
Trigpibh for the midday ablution. 

7-8. The air that reaches the head produces the (sound) 
tdrd fit for reciting Jagatl for the third (evening) ablution. 
The same wind moving upwards strikes against the head, reaches 
the mouth and produces the letters. These are divided into five 
(groups) on the basis of the articulation, period (of utterance), 
place (of articulation) , efforts (to utter) and the sense conveyed. 

9. Chest, throat, head, root of the tongue, teeth, nose, 
upper lip and palate are the eight places (ofarticulation) of the 
letters. 

10. The articulation of the sibilants and h ) are of 

eight kinds such as innate nature, expansion, Sa, sa, ra , 
jihvamula (the visarga before k and kh) and upadhm&niya (the 
visarga before p and ph). 

11. The letters u and the like are excellent for combining 
compositions of metrical nature. The vowels at the end should 
be known to be of similar nature. Whatever else remain are the 
explicit sibilants. 

12-13. A man incurs sin by pronouncing( letters) from wrong 
places (of articulation) , by inauspicious and defective articul- 
ation. Similarly a person incurs merits. A person who employs 
good sounds, well articulated, according to the treatises and 
acquired from auspicious sources with a dean mouth shines in 
the (world of) Brahma. 



336 . 14-21 


917 


14. A person should not use harsh and indistinct letters, 
nasals, labials excessively with stammering and split tongue. 

15. The letters should be uttered in such a way that they 
are not indistinct and are not mutilated. A person rejoices in 
the world of Brahma by employing the letters properly. 

16. The sounds are (divided into) three classes (such as) 
udStta (accentuated), anud&tta (grave accent) and svarita (in- 
termediate) . They are distinguished as short, long and protrac- 
ted on the basis of the period (of their pronunciation). 

17-18. The letters a and leu 1 are from the throat, i and cu are 
from the palate, u and pu are the labials, the letters r, fu, ra and 
fa are the cerebrals, and /, tu, la and sa are the dentals. The 
sound hvah is said to be from the root of the tongue. Learned 
men remember vah as labio-dental. (The sounds) e and ai are 
gutturo-palatials. O and au are remembered to belong to the 
gutturo-labials. 

19. The gutturals a, a, i, e etc. would have half a matrd 
value. (The letters) which share the places of articulation are 
known to be not capable of being combined. 

20. The vowels (are known to be) produced not by touch 
and the letters ya etc. by partial touch. These are known to be 
consonants not produced by touch. The other consonants are 
produced by touch. I shall explain the important among them. 
(The letters) am and ah are nasals. (The letters) ha, jha and fa 
are known to have the bellowing sound. 

21. The letters ya etc. possess partial sound. Kha, fiha etc. 
are aspirated. The cara is known to have little aspiration. This 
is said to be long. 


1 . The letters ku, cu, fu, tu, pu stand for the four letters in the respective 
group. 



918 


Agni Pttrtya 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTYSEVEN 

Description of the characteristics of a kavya 
Fire-god said : 

1. I shall describe the embellishments of poetry and drama 
and the like. The constituents of speech are sound, word, letters 
and sentence. 

2. Whereas the three are obtained in the sentences of the 
treatises (£astra) and epics, word is predominant in the treatises 
and the meaning is dominant in the epics. 

3-5a. Kavya is different from these two because the power 
of denotation is dominant (there). It is difficult to be born as a 
man in this world and (acquiring) knowledge is more difficult. 
Being a poet is still difficult. Poetic genius, originality of ideas 
and power of discrimination are still more difficult. The entire 
Sdstra sought by people who are not learned does not materia- 
lise. 

5b-6. The collection of letters falls into groups such as 
primary letters, secondary, the aspirated and the fourth. Words 
(are divided into two) on the basis of distinction as nouns and 
verbs. Sentence in brief is a series of words possessing a delight- 
ful sense. 

7. Kdvya is that where literary embellishments are displayed 
and which possesses literary merits and is free from blemishes. 
The sources of (poetry) are the Vedas and the world. A kdvya 
not originated from the above sources could be understood from 
the import of the words. 

8. Samskrta (language) is for the gods and others. There are 
three varieties of Prakrta for men. Kavya etc. are known to be 
of three kinds — prose, poetry and mixed. 

9. Prose is (defined as) unmetrical combination of words. 
It is divided into three: Curnaka.Utkalika and Gandhivjrtta. 

10. What is known as Curnaka has short compounds and 
does not have very soft words. (Thesame) with long compounds 
would be Utkalika. 

1 1. Gandhivftta would have medium arrangement of words 
and absence of very difficult compounds. (It possesses) sem- 
blance of metrical form. 



337.12-27 


919 


12. The prose kdvya is said to be divided into five — Akhy- 
ayika, Katha, Khandakatha, Parikatha and Kathanika. 

13-1 5a. It is known to be Akhyayika where there is an 
eulogistic account of the ancestors of the author, a detailed des- 
cription of the abduction of maidens, fight, separation and 
other calamities. It should be replete with riti (diction), vftti 
(style) and pravftti (power of words). Its story is divided into 
Ucchvasas (chapters) . It should contain Curnaka type of prose 
at the end. It may (employ) Vaktra or Aparavaktra (metre) . 

15b-17. It is designated as Katha where the poet briefly 
praises his ancestors in metrical composition, where there is 
another episode while introducing the main theme. There would 
not be any division. Sometimes there would be (divisions 
called) lambakas. Khandakatha is contained in Katha in 
catuppadi (verses in four lines). Parikatha (is a combination 
of the characteristics of the two (Katha and Akhyayika) . 

18-19. The hero is known to be a minister, merchant or a 
brahmin. Pathos should be known (to be the sentiment) of the 
two. Love in separation is of four kinds. The first one is not 
obtained (here) . It follows the story. Parikatha is known so 
because of its mixed characteristics of Katha and Akhya- 
yika. 

20. Kathanika (is defined as beginning with) the (senti- 
ment of) terror embodying sentiment of love and (sentiment 
of) wonder at the end. It is accomplished withgood senseand is 
free from bombastic (expressions) . 

21 -23a. Padya is (a metrical composition) of four lines. 
It is divided into two — Vftta andjati. Vrtta beginning with 
Uktha and ending with Utkrti is regulated by the number of 
letters. Jati is that where the syllabic instants are counted ac- 
cording to Kalyapa. According to Piiigala Vfttas (are 
divided) into three — equal (quarters) , half-equal and unequal. 
It is the ship of knowledge for those desirous of crossing the 
deep ocean of Kdvya. 

23b-27. The family of poetry (consists of) Mahak&vya, 
Kalapa, Paryabandha, ViSesaka, Kulaka, Muktaka, and Kola. 
A Mahakavya is divided into sargas (cantos) and is begun with 
Sanskrit and those of similar nature are not avoided. The equi- 
valent (Prakrta) does not become a blemish. The theme has its 



920 


Agra Parana 


origin from historical incidents or other real incidents. It may 
describe council of states, sending of emissaries and marching 
(of soldiers) in battle-array. It should not be very elaborate. It 
should be composed in equal ( sama ) (metres) such as Sakvari, 
Atijagati, Atisakvari, Trifpibh, Pufpitagra and Vaktra. Mukta 
describes different incidents not having short cantos. 

28-29a. (One canto may be composed) in the Atiiakvari 
and A?{i (metres), another in mixed metres, whereas some other 
canto (maybe composed) in the Matra. The last canto (may 
be employed) for praiseworthy (matter) . This optional rule is 
very much condemned. Hence good people do not respect it 
especially. 

29b-32. (Poetry) should be adorned with description of 
cities, seas, mountains, seasons, (the rise of) the moon and sun, 
hermitages, trees, gardens, sports in the water, drinking bouts 
and amorous dalliances, sending of female emissaries, the 
accounts of unchaste women, darkness, pleasant breeze and 
delineation of other vibhdvas (condition that produces a state of 
mind). It should contain all styles, power of words, bhavas 
(states of mind) , dictions, sentiments, qualities and embellish- 
ments. That is why (it is called) a Mahakavya and its com- 
poser a great poet. 

33. The sentiment is its very life even though verbal in- 
genuity may be predominant here. (It gains) a body from the 
sentiments in the eloquent expressions being accomplished with 
special efforts. 

34-36. The fruit of the all-pervading fourfold object of 
human existence has been explained through the medium of 
the hero. Kalapa is composed in the same metre throughout 
and is soft on account of the KaiJiki vrtti (style) . Here the 
sentiment is incipient love and sojourn abroad. It is Vife§aka 
when it contains (mention of) attainment etc. and (iscomposed) 
in Sanskrit or any other (language). Kulaka would have many 
couplets. It (is also known as) chained. Muktaka consists of 
single verses and is capable of gaining the admiration of good 
people. 

37-38. Koiais full of elegant verses of great poets. It is 



338. 1-1 Oa 


921 


divided into (sections called) Vrajyas 1 pleasing to the learned 
men. Where there is power comparable to splendour and in 
which there is a difference of the metre in a canto, (it is known 
as) the mixed. It is known to be (divided into) two — Vapu and 
Praklrnaka. Praklrnaka can be heard (read) and represen* 
ted on the stage by all kinds of expressions. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTYEIGHT 

Description of the different types of drama 

Fire-god said : 

l-4a. (Drama consists of) twentyseven types — Najaka, 
Prakarana, Pima, Ihamrga, Samavakara, Prahasana, Vyayoga, 
Bhana, Vithi, Anka, Trotaka, Natika, Saftaka, Silpaka, Karna, 
Durmallika, Prasthana, Bhanika, Bhani, Gogthi, HallHaka, 
Kavya, Srigadita, Natyarasaka, Rasaka, Ullapyaka and Pren* 
khana. 

4b-7a. The general and particular (are) the two courses for 
the characteristics (of a drama) . The general (relates) to all 
topics. The other one exists in certain (topics). After the preli- 
minary function (relating to the drama) is finished, the two 
(come into operation) . The general (relates) to both place and 
time, sentiments, emotions, excitants and ensuants, gesticula- 
tions, act and position because they pervade all through. The 
particular is to be employed as the occasion (arises) and the 
general is described first. 

7b* 10a. Drama is said to be the means of attaining the three- 
fold ends of life. The preliminary function is its instrument and 
course of action in the proper way. There are thirtytwo compo- 
nents beginning with benediction. Salutation to gods, praise of 
preceptors, and the blessings etc. of cow, brahmins, kings and 
others are sung. The stage-director (is introduced) after the bene- 
diction. This is set in (all) the dramas. 


1. Tic text wrongly read* Br ahmA . 



922 


Agni Purina 


1 Ob-1 la. (The poet) should indicate the following five — the 
successive order of the teachers,the praise of the lineage, the 
power of the poet, the relation and the purpose of the kdvya. 

1 lb- 17a. It should be known by learned men as the Prologue 
(Amukha) in which an actress or a jester or an attendant con- 
verses with the stage-director using charming expressions befitt- 
ing the purpose with mutual objections or doubts relating to the 
subject matter. It is also (known as) Prastavana. Pravrttaka, 
Kathodghata and Prayogatisaya are the three divisions of Amu- 
kha arising in the elements of the germ (of the plot) . It is known 
as Pravrttaka where the stage-director describes the timely 
entrance of a character with reference to the time that has 
commenced. It is said to be Kathodghata (opening of the 
story) in which the characters enter taking up the remark or the 
sense of a remark of the stage-director. It is said to be Pra- 
yogatisaya (superseding of a performance) in which the stage- 
director describes a particular contrivance in the midst of the 
proceedings and a character enters thereafter. 

17b- 18. The incident is said to be the body of the dramas 
and others. ‘Established’ and ‘Fancied’ are known to be its two 
kinds. The ‘Established’ is found in the scriptures and the 
‘Fancied’ is the creation of the poet. 

19-20. The Arthaprakrtis (the leading sources in a drama) 
are five — the germ, drop, episode, an intervening episode and 
denouement. The endeavour is also of five kinds — the beginning, 
effort, prospect of attainment, certainty of attainment and 
attainment of fruit in order. 

21. The opening, progression, development, pause and 
conclusion are also the five junctures in order. 

22. That which is described only a little spreads in many 
ways and which ends with the fruit is said to be the germ. 

23. That is said to be the opening in which there is the 
germination of the germ giving rise to various matters and 
sentiments conforming to the body of the poetic composition. 

24-25. The composition of the desired theme, continuity of 
the narrative, interest in the representation, concealment of 
that which should be concealed, narration as a wonderful thing 
and making explicit the thing that is to be made explicit — 
(These are the objects of the components of the juncture) . The 



338.26— 339.9a 923 

poetic composition (bereft of the divisions of the juncture) is 
not excellent in the same way as a crippled person. 

26-27. Even a little incident does not occur without (ref- 
erence to) the place and time. Hence the place is described 
(now) because of the employment of these two (in a drama). 
Bharata is among the countries and the three yugas beginning 
with the Krtayuga with reference to time. There is no rise of 
happiness or grief without these two for beings anywhere. And 
contextual narration of creation and others while (describing) 
creation does not become a defect. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTYNINE 
Description of the sentiments , emotions, hero etc. 

Fire-god said : 

1-2. The Supreme Brahman, who is imperishable, eternal, 
unborn and mighty is said to be the single consciousness, efful- 
gence and Supreme Being in philosophy. Bliss is natural to him. 
Sometimes it is manifested. The manifestation of this is called 
consciousness, charm and sentiment. 

3. Its first modification is known as self-consciousness. 
Conceit (is produced) then and the three worlds get exhausted 
in that. 

4. Pleasure (proceeds) from conceit and this attains 
gratification on account of (contact with) the transitory (feel- 
ings) etc. in general and is declared as the (sentiment of) 
love. 

5-9a. Comic (sentiment) and others which are verily its 
other varieties, whose characteristics are exhibited by their 
respective special permanent moods by being expanded by the 
qualities such as goodness, have their origin from the Supreme 
Soul. The erotic (sentiment) is produced from attachment. The 
(sentiment of) wrath is born from fierceness. The heroic (senti- 
ment) is born from haughtiness. (The sentiment of) disgust is 
said to be originated from revulsion. The comic (sentiment) is 



924 


Agrtt Purina 


produced from the erotic (sentiment) . The sentiment of pathos 
(is) from fury. (The sentiment of) wonder arises from heroism. 
(The sentiment of) fright would be from disgust. Among the 
sentiments of love, humour, pathos, fury, heroism, fright, dis- 
gust, wonder and tranquility, four sentiments are self-developed 
(as described above) . 

9b-ll. The goddess of speech does not shine without senti- 
ment like the goddess of wealth without renunciation. The poet 
alone is the creator in the boundless course of poetry. The uni- 
verse changes in the way (he) likes. If the poet is impassioned 
in his poetry, the world becomes verily full of sentiment. If the 
poet is detached, indeed it becomes manifested as devoid of 
sentiment. 

12-1 3a. There is no (poetic) sentiment devoid of emotion. 
There is no emotion devoid of sentiment. (The poets) bring 
into being the sentiments and the sentiments are being produced 
by these (emotions) , (namely), the eight permanent emotions 
beginning with love, stupor and the like and the transient 
emotions. 

13b- 15. Love is said to be the feeling of happiness in 
respect of (the object) agreeable to the mind. Laughter is said 
to be the expansion of the mind through mirth etc. (People) 
describe fear as mental affliction (arising) from seeing a 
picture etc. Disgust is censure of things which bring misfortune. 
Wonder is the expansion of the mind (arising) from seeing things 
pre-eminent. 

16-22. The eight (transient emotions) such as stupor (are) 
from goodness, passion and ignorance. Stupor is a resistance of 
effort (paralysed state) brought about by excessive fear or love. 
Perspiration is water from the body originating from internal 
agitation accompanied by fatigue and attachment. The internal 
horripilation (is) the heaving of the body (caused) by joy etc. 
Broken speech originates from joy etc. and hoarse voice (is 
caused) by fear etc. Grief is said to be the distress of the mind 
(caused) by the destruction of the desired (thing) etc. Anger is 
the awakening of fierceness resembling contradiction. Enthu- 
siasm is said to be the sense of gaining the desired goal. Trem- 
bling is declared as the stupefaction arising from the agitation 
of the mind. Change of colour is the reverse of splendour arising 



339.23-33 


925 


from grief etc. Tear is known as the water from the eyes produ- 
ced by sorrow, happiness etc. Loss of consciousness is the cessation 
of (the working) of the sense-organs due to lasting etc. The 
depression of the mind arising from indifference (to worldly 
things) is said to be despair. Debility (is) physical langour from 
mental suffering and the like from the body. 

23. Indifference arises from dependence on doubt. Envy is 
jealousy. Intoxication (is) the infatuation of the mind arising 
from the use of wine etc. 

24. Weariness (is) exhaustion arising from the inner 
body caused by excess of work. Aversion of the mind towards 
acts such as love etc. is said to be indolence. 

25. Miserable state is due to deviation from goodness. 
Thought is contemplation of objects. Perplexion is said to be not 
finding the mode of doing (a thing) . 

26. Recollection would be the reflection of an enjoyed 
thing. Opinion (is) ascertainment of purpose brought about by 
knowledge of reality. 

27. Bashfulness (is) certain shrinking of the mind arising 
from passion and the like. Fickleness would be unsteadiness. Joy 
is the pleasure of the mind. 

28. Excitement is the distress of the soul caused by the 
hope of remedy. The loss of intellect in those to be done is said 
to be stupidity. 

29. Equanimity is the elevation in wealth on the attain- 
ment of the desired end. Pride is contempt for others and 
attitude of supremacy of the self. 

30. Impediment caused by fate and the like in respect of 
the desired object is despondency. An unsteady condition caused 
by desire when the desired end has not been gained is longing. 

31. Absent-mindedness (is) immobile condition causing 
benumbing of the senses and the mind. Terror (is) repeated 
surprise in the mind (caused) by opposition and the like in 
war. 

32. Intolerance (is) non-pacification of anger. Awakening 
(is) the rise of consciousness. Dissimulation is the concealment 
coming under the range of gesture and appearance. 

33. Harshness of vehement verbal attack arising from 
anger is~known to be fierceness. Conjecture is examination 



926 Agtii Purfaa 

and determination. Disease (is) the impediment of the mind and 
body. 

34. Madness (is) incoherent utterances and the like caused 
by passion and the like. Tranquility (is) the cessation of 
passion of the mind by means of the knowledge of reality and the 
like. 

35-38. The emotions and sentiments should be employed 
by poets in poetry and the like in which (the emotions of) love 
and the like are developed. (The means) by which they are 
developed is known as excitant. It is of two kinds — support- 
ing and enhancing. The supportive excitant is that on which the 
group of emotions such as love subsists. It is produced through 
(the medium of) the hero and the like. The hero is known to be 
of four types — brave and noble-minded, brave and haughty, 
brave and sportive and brave and tranquil. (The hero is also 
classified as) faithful, gallant, sly and saucy (on the basis of his 
relationship with one heroine or more). 

39-40. Comrade (Pithamarda) , Companion (Vita) and 
Jester (Vidu§aka) are the three minor heroes who help the hero 
in love as pleasure companions. The comrade is without 
resource. The companion is beautiful and belongs to the same 
country. The jester is the provider of mirth. The heroes and 
heroines (are of) eight (types) (as described in verse 37). 

41 . According to KauSika, (the heroine may be) one’s own 
or belonging to another or remarried, and general but not 
remarried. Thus there are many types. 

42. The enhancing excitants are those which excite the 
feelings in the subsisting excitants by (means of) different kinds 
of refinement. 

43. The sixtyfour (fine) arts are divided into two accord- 
ing as they begin with action or music. Jugglery, memory, and 
perhaps jester and the aids to jester (are included) in these. 

44-45. The ensuant is known to be only the exertion of the 
mind, speech, intellect and the body arising from recollection, 
desire, hatred and effort of the learned and caused by the ex- 
cited and accomplished emotions of the supportive excitant. 
Moreover this is experienced and certainly arises (after love 
etc.) and hence defined here. 



339.46—340. 1 


927 


46. The exertion of mind is said to be characterised by the 
occupation of the mind. This is also known to be twofold as 
relating to men or women. 

47. Those relating to men are eight — beauty, vivacity, 
grace, steadiness, equanimity, gallantry, magnanimity and 
dignity. 

48. Beauty (prevails) in contempt for inferiors and emu- 
lation of superiors. (It is) heroism. (It is) the cause of dexterity 
and the like. Beauty occurs in mental virtue in the same way as 
a house becomes beautiful. 

49-50. The excitants of women are said to be (of) twelve 
(kinds) — (primary indication of) emotion, its manifestation (a 
little), its decided manifestation, brilliance, loveliness, lustre, 
sweetness, heroism, boldness, generosity, firmness and gravity. 
The primary indication of emotion arises from a little of joy 
and the little manifestation is the sportive indication of emo- 
tion. 

51-54. The exertion of speech would be the appropriateness 
of speech. It is indeed (of) twelve (kinds) : conversation, exces- 
sive utterance, sorrowful speech, repeated speech, question and 
answer, evasion, sending a message, expounding, pointing out 
truth, description of something else, instruction and dissimulat- 
ing (speech) . This process is for the understanding. It is said to 
be the exertion of good intellect. It has three divisions, namely, 
diction, mode, and perseverence. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY 
Description of diction and mode 


Fire-god said: 

1. Diction (is essential) for a good knowledge of speech. It 
is of four kinds — Paficali, Gaudadefiya, Vaidarbhi and Lafaja 
(respectively belonging to the regions Paricala, Gauda, Vidarbha 
and La{a)- 



928 


Agni Purina 

2-4. The Paficall is endowed with metaphorical expression. 
(It is) soft (and has) shorter compounds. The Gaudiya is a 
loose composition having long compounds and not having many 
metaphorical expressions. The Vaidarbhl is not a very soft com- 
position. It is devoid of metaphorical expressions and is free from 
compounds. The Latiya (is) a clear composition not having 
too many compounds. This is also devoid of much metapho- 
rical expressions. 

5. The mode is uneven in the actions (of a drama). It has 
been established as fourfold — Bharat!, Arabhatl, KausikI and 
Satvati. 

6. The diction Bharatl is said to be known so because it 
was formulated by Bharata. It is predominantly verbal, (con- 
sists) generally ( of actions) of men but also of women and has 
expressions in Prakrta. 

7-9. Bharatl has four components: Vithi, Prahasana and 
Prastavana of the drama and the like. The sub-divisions of 
Vithi are thirteen :Udghataka, Lapita 1 , the second, Asatpralapa, 
Vakfren! 2 , Nalika, Vipana, Vyahara, Trimata, Chala, Avaskan- 
dita 3 , Ganda, Mrdava and Aficita 4 , the thirteenth. 

10. Prahasana is the speech ridiculing the ascetics and 
the like. Arabhatl is known to be abounding in trickery, 
witchcraft, war and the like. (It is of the varieties) Sanksiptaka, 
Avapata and Vastutthapana. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FORTYONE 

Description of the actions and movements of the limbs 
Fire-god said: 

1. The exertion of the body is regarded as the particular 
gesture relating to the limbs and subordinate limbs and as their 
action. The former generally relates to women. 

]. The amended reading is Avalagita. 

2. The amended reading is VSgvcriI. 

3. The amended reading is Avasyandita. 

4. The printed text wrongly reads ucita. 



341.2-12 


929 


2-5a. It is (divided) into twelve 1 — sportiveness, playful 
gesture, cessation (of care in dress etc.), amorous play or move- 
ment, amorous agitation consisting of laughter, weeping, etc., 
involuntary expression of affection towards the lover, repulse of 
lover’s caresses, indifference towards a beloved object ( bibboka ), 
that which arises from tenderness ( lalita ) , affected by passion or 
emotion, pleasure-giving pastime and amorous sport. Sportive- 
ness (is) the imitation of the gesture of the beloved person in a 
hidden abode. Playful gesture is said by good people as exhibiting 
some peculiarities a little. Kilakificita is the combination of 
laughter, weeping and the like. Bibboka is some kind of perturb- 
ation. Lalita arises from tenderness. 

5b-6a. The head, hand, chest, side, loin and foot (are) 
successively (known) as the limbs and the creeper-like (tender) 
eyebrows and the like as the minor limbs. 

6b-7a. (There cannot be) the use of the limbs and minor 
limbs without the exertion born of effort. It is straight and in- 
direct sometimes. 

7b-9a. The head is known (to move) in thirteen ways — 
trembling, shaking, gentle shaking (dhuta ) , violent shaking ( vid- 
huta ), excessive movement (pariv&hita ) , agitated, tossed, graceful, 
contracted, turned round, raised upwards, bent downwards and 
rolling. 

9b. The movement of the eyebrow should be known as 
sevenfold (such as) lowering, knitting etc. 

10. The glance (is said) to be threefold as being related to 
the sentiment, the permanent (feeling) and the transitory (feel- 
ing). It is divided into thirtysix kinds, among which eight arise 
from sentiments. 

1 1 . The function of the pupil is ninefold — moving, rolling 
and the like. (The actions of) the nose are known to be six. 
(Those of) respiration are said to be nine. 

12. The actions of the lower lip are of six kinds. The actions 
of the chin are of seven kinds. Those of the face beginning with 
perturbation are of six kinds. (The actions of) the neck are 
known as of nine kinds. 


1. The text explains only five among these. 



930 


Agni Purdna 


13- 19a. The hand is employed as unfolded and folded by 
the character. One banner, three banners, scissor-edge, half- 
moon, opening up, parrot-beak, fist, pinnacle, wood-apple, club- 
edged (?), needle-pointed, lotus bud, snake-hood, deer-head, 
kttfigulaka, alapadma, round pillow, bee, swan-mouth, swan-wing, 
pincers, blossom, spider and cock are the twentyfour of the un- 
folded hands. Those of the folded hands are thirteen — slightly 
folded or open pigeon, crab, soastika. kafakava rdhamana 1 2 , asanga *, 
nifadha , swing, flower-casket, crocodile, elephant tusk, bahista - 
mbha 3 and oardkamdna. 

19b-20. The chest may be of five kinds, such as a little curv- 
ed and straight 4 5 etc. The belly is threefold — not very slender, 
slender 6 and full. The actions of the sides are five. The actions 
of the shank are also five. The action of the feet in dance and 
the like in a drama is known to be manifold. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FORTYTWO 
Definition of dramatic representation 

Fire-god said : 

1-2. Dramatic representation should be known by learned 
men as carrying forward the sense (of the drama) . It arises in 
four ways resting on internal feeling, speech, limbs and bringing 
out (the feeling). Stupor and the like are the internal (feeling). 
The speech is the beginning of speech. That relating to the 
limbs is the exertion of the body. The internal feeling is the 
operation of the exertion of the intellect. 

3. The employment of sentiment and the like arising from 


1. The text reads kafaka and vardham&na. Cf. NS IX. 8-10 reading these 
two as one. 

2. utsaAga (lap), Cf. NS IX. 

3. Cf. NS IX. given as aoahittha (dissemination of internal feeling). 

4. The text wrongly reads norland. Cf. NS IX. 

5. Hie text reads khapfa for khalla in NS X. 



342.4-14 


931 


conceit are being described now. Independence of all kinds (of 
gesticulation) is meaningless without this. 

4. The erotic (sentiment) is said to be twofold, namely, 
love in union and love in separation. Both these are again two- 
fold, namely, concealed and manifest. 

5. The erotic (sentiment) known as love in separation is 
fourfold — incipient love, jealous anger, sojourn abroad and 
pathos. 

6. The other kind is different from these in four ways and 
has the characteristic of increased enjoyment. But it does not 
surpass the former. 

7. It arises in men and women. Love accomplishes it. All 
internal emotions except the change of colour and loss of con- 
sciousness (are) in it. 

8-9a. The erotic (sentiment) thrives (aided) by piety, 
wealth, pleasure and emancipation on particular supportive 
^ excitants) and (becomes) uninterrupted by their peculiarities. 
The erotic (sentiment) should be known as twofold consisting 
(of the mode) of speech and the act of decoration. 

9b-l la. The comic (sentiment) is said to be fourfold 1 2 3 — smita, 
smile in which the teeth are not visible, hasita, in which the tips 
of the teeth are slightly visible and the eyes are dilated, vihasita, 
that is sonorous, upahasita, that is crooked 8 , apahasita 8 , that is 
with sound and atihasita, that is without sound. 

1 lb-12. The sentiment known as pathos is of three kinds — 
arising from violation of virtue and originating from loss of 
wealth. While sorrow is the permanent (emotion) , pleasure is 
considered the dominant (emotion) of the former two ( senti- 
ments of erotic and comic) . 

13. The sentiment of wrath is threefold — by means of limbs, 
dress and speech. Its accomplishing factors are anger, perspira- 
tion, horripilation and trembling. 

14. The heroic (sentiment) is threefold — heroic in libera- 


1 . The puripa mentions only four divisions but defines six as in NS VI. 
51-52. 

2. The purdga wrongly reads jikoa instead of jihma. 

3. Wrongly printed as pipahasita. 



932 Agni Purina 

lity, heroic in virtue and heroic in battle. Enthusiasm is said to 
be the cause of its accomplishment. 

1 5. The sentiment called terror which arises at the com- 
mencement (of an action), follows the heroic (sentiment) only. 
Fear is its accomplishing factor. 

16-1 7a. (The sentiment of) disgust is said to be twofold — 
agitating and distressing. The agitating (type) would arise on 
account of stink 1 and the like and the distressing (type) by 
means of blood and the like. Aversion gives rise to it and the 
sdttvika element recedes in it. 

17b-19a. The elements which add beauty to poetic compo- 
sitions are said to be the embellishments. These embellishments 
are threefold — ( tending to embellish) word, meaning and both. 
Rhetoricians declare those which are capable of embellishing 
word by means of proficiency and the like as embellisments of 
word. 

19b-21 . The nine, namely, chaya, mudra, ukti, yukti, gumphand, 
vdkovdkya, anuprSsa, citra and dufkara should be known as the 
embellishments of words because of the absence of commixture. 
There, chdyd (reflection) is the imitation of the utterance of 
others. It is again fourfold — imitation of popular saying, clever 
speech, childish utterance and intoxicated raving 2 (mat la). 

22. The proverb ( dbhdnaka ) is a popular saying and they 
are common to all. That which follows the proverb is said to be 
the lokokticchayd by the wisemen. 

23. The clever are the cultured. Expert knowledge of fine 
arts is culture. That which delineates it is said to be the Cheko- 
ktichayd by poets. 

24. All understand childish speech as the utterance of the 
ignorant. The imitation of the childish speech hence merely 
imitates this kind of speech. 

25. The vulgar speech of the intoxicated is similarly (com- 
posed of) confused letters. That which is similar to this is called 
mattoktichdyd which even surpasses the intoxicated speech. 

26. That which exhibits the power of the poet in its parti- 
cular purpose (is called) mudrd because it affords pleasure. This 
is also (known as) repose in our opinion. 

~ Text wrongly reads pluti instead of p&ti. 

2. The textual reading is wrong. 


342.27—343.4 


933 


27. That is said to be ukti (expression) in which some reason- 
able sense pleases the heart of good people because of some 
precept relating to the affairs of the world. 

28. Ukti (expression) is sixfold — injunction and prohibition, 
restricted and unrestricted, and alternative and exclusive. 

29-30. Combination is termed so by the wisemen because of 
its being made for connecting the two, word and sense, which 
are mutually unconnected. It is sixfold — inflected word, meaning 
of inflected word, sentence, meaning of sentence, context and 
amplification. 

3 1 . Stringing is the practice of composition within the scope 
of a word, meaning and their order. It is threefold based on 
imitation of word, succession of meaning and regular arrange- 
ment. 

32-33. V&kov&kya is a sentence containing question and ans- 
wer. It is twofold on the basis of the classification as straight 
speech and crooked speech. The first of these is natural speech. 
It would be of two kinds according as it is preceded by a question 
or not. But, crooked speech is intonation or occurs by indirect 
speech. Hence it is twofold. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FORTYTHREE 
Definition of the embellishment of words 

Fire-god said : 

1-2. Alliteration is the repetition of letters in (inflected) 
word and sentence. The class of letters of repetition is twofold — 
single letter and many letters. Five kinds of mode are produced 
from the repetition of a single letter — sweet, soft, mature, graceful 
and harsh. 

3-4. The consonant letters ofthe sweet ( ' madhurivftti ) should 
occur below the last letters ofthe (respective) consonant classes: 
the letters ra and na should be separated by short vowels, coupled 
with letter na and should be joined with hard aspirates and 
sibilants. The varga-varnas (letters ka, ca , fa, ta and pa) should 



934 Agni Purina 

not be repeated in more than five ways. They are not to be 
followed by short syllables. 

5. The soft one abounds in (the use of) ra 1 and la. In the 
mature one, (the letters) pa,na and (other) consonants are joined 
with (the letter) ra at the head. But neither the cerebral nor the 
fifth (letters of the consonants are joined) . 

6- 10a. The remaining (letters) would be present in the 
graceful one. The harsh one is said to be that in which the sibil- 
ants are joined with the very same letters. There is abundant 
repetition of vowels excepting the letter a. The anusvdra and vis- 
sarga are also constant in harshness. The sibilants are combined 
with ra. (The letters) a and ha are also abundantly joined for 
harshness. (They are also joined with) the semi-vowels, na and 
ma 2 3 4 5 . Otherwise, if the conjunct is a hindrance, a hard consonant 
(is used) as the first letter for harshness. But the fifth one is not 
favoured. The harsh one is employed in censure and imitation 
of words. 

1 Ob-1 la. Karnafi, Kauntali, Kaunti, VamanasikcP, Dravani * 
and Mddhavl 6 (are) respectively (characterised) by the semivo- 
wels and sibilants. 

1 lb- 17. That which has repetition of many letters conveying 
different meanings is yamaka. It is of two kinds — contiguous and 
non-contiguous. The contiguous one (has the letters) in close 
succession. The non-continguous one (has the letters repeated) 
with intervals. These two become fourfold on account of two 
kinds of differences in the position (of the letters) and the (met- 
rical) foot. (The first kind is) of seven varieties according (as 
yamaka occurs) in one, two and three at the beginning, beginn- 
ing of the foot, in the middle and at the end (of the metrical 
feet) . The other kind occurs in six ways when the commence- 
ment of one, two or three metrical feet is similar in each successive 
foot with reference to each preceding one. The third (variety) 

1. Hie printed text reads va. 

2. The reading antasthibhinruanibhyiUca in the printed text has been 
changed to antasthdbhirnarrUIbhydflca. 

3. The correct reading seems to be VdnavSstkS. 

4. Obviously wrong reading for DrSoifl. 

5. Obviously wrong reading for Mathurl. 



343.1 8-27a 


935 


is threefold (according aayamaka) occurs at the beginning, in 
the middle and at the end of (the metrical) foot. Other yamakas 
are many. The prominent ten are : j pSdSntayamaka, kSnciyamaka , 
satfisargayamaka 1 , vikrSntayamaka, pSdadiyamaka, amrefita, catunyava- 
sita and malSyamaka. 

18. The repetition of a word is twofold according as it is 
independent or dependent on others. Thus men know the repe- 
tition of words which have different purposes. 

19. The compounded (repetition) arises from the compou- 
nding of two repeated words. The uncompounded (repetition) 
arises from the absence of compounding between the two words 
from dissolving the compounds in one part of the metrical foot. 

20. The repetition of a sentence is said to be possible in 
this way. Alliteration is thus the foremost among the embellish- 
ments by virtue of its fitness though being short in the middle. 

2 1 . That alliteration, where the similarity of sound is enjoy- 
ed by means of any vrtti (mode), having uninterrupted sequence 
of words, is charming. 

22-23a. Citra (picturesque KSvya) is said to be a composi- 
tion of words exciting curiosity in a learned assembly. It 
is of seven different varieties — PraSna, PrahelikS, Gupta, Cyrlta, 
Datta, Cyuta and Datta combined and SamasyS arising from 
union of different meanings. 

23b-24. That is PraSna (query) in which a reply is given 
having similar arrangement of letters. It is twofold according to 
the difference of reply to the question asked by one or two. The 
query asked by one, again, is indeed twofold according as it is 
compounded or uncompounded. 

25-26a. PrahelikS (riddle) consists of words having even 
two meanings concealed. It has two kinds — verbal and meaning- 
ful. The meaningful arises from the comprehension of meaning 
and the verbal from the knowledge of word. PrahelikS is said to 
be of six kinds. 

26b-27a. That is Gupta (concealed) in which even a part 
of a sentence remains concealed and the resultant meaning for 
which there is expectancy by that part is not whollytrue.lt (is) 
also (called) Gudha (covert). 

1. Obviously wrong reading for samudgayamaka. 



936 


Agni Purdna 


27b-28. Where there is the appearance of a different sense 
by means of dropping a part of a sentence etc. and there is ex- 
pectancy raised by that part, it is known as Cyuta (dropped). It 
is fourfold arising from the dropping of the vowel, consonant, 
bindu ( anusvara ) and visarga. 

29. That is said to be Dalla (added) in which a second 
sense is suggested, even though a part of the sentence is given. 
Its varieties are considered to be the same as in the previous by 
means of vowels and the like. 

30. It is said to be Cyutadatta (dropped and added) in 
which there arises a different sense even when another letter is 
inserted in the place of the removed syllable. 

31. That is Samasyd (union) in which one verse involves 
good puns and is composed of various verse fragments. (It 
arises) from the blending of the composition of others and of 
one’s own. 

32-33a. Duskara (difficult) is that (which is) constructed 
with very great difficulty, indicating poet’s ability and producing 
great delight in clever persons in spite of tastelessness. It is three- 
fold from niyama (restraint), vidarbha 1 (variation) and bandha 
(structure) . 

33b-34a. Niyama (restraint) is considered to be the fulfil- 
ment of promise of the poet, who is delighted for his composi- 
tion. It is threefold according as it (is regulated) by position, 
vowel and consonant. 

34b-35a. Vikalpa (variation) is so called from the reverse 
and natural order (of letters) . The reverse and natural order 
arises from word as well as sense. 

35b-37a. The skillful composition (of different kinds) of 
the forms of various well-known objects by means of arrange- 
ment of letters repeated in many ways is said to be bandha 
(structure). It is (divided into) eight (varieties) —GomQtrikd, 
Ardhabhramana, Sarvatobhadra, Arnbuja , Cakra, Cakrdbjaka , Dan da 
and Muraja. 

37b-39a. ( Gomutrikd ) would have similar alternate syll- 

ables in each metrical foot in each half (of a verse). GomU- 


1. Obviously vikalpa. See verse 34b. 



343.39b-52 


937 


trika (zigzagging like the cow’s urine) is twofold — the first 
kind is said to be Aivapada (horse foot) by others. The last 
kind of Gotti utrikd is also called Dhenu (cow) and J&labandha 
(net structure) . An arrangement of these is made by two halves 
and by half metrical feet. 

39b-47. That is indeed Sarvatobhadra (good in every 
direction) where (i) the letters (are arranged) one below the 
other in successive order, (ii) the letters are arranged one 
below the other up to the fourth feet, and (iii) (the letters are 
arranged) from the fourth foot onwards the half foot in the re- 
verse order. It is threefold — Sarasiruha (lotus), Catuspatra 
(four-petalled) and Vighna , both of which are four-petalled. 
The uppermost (letters) of the first foot are the letters of the 
three feet. They occur indeed at the end of all feet. The last 
two letters of the preceding foot are at the beginning of the 
succeeding foot in the reverse order. The last two letters of the 
last foot (are in the same order) at the beginning of the first 
foot. This would be in (the lotus of) four petals. But there 
would be three letters in the lotus of eighc petals. On the other 
hand, it is alternate, if it is a single letter, in (the lotus of) 
sixteen petals. A series of letters in the form of the petals should 
be drawn above the pericarp in the lotus of four petals and 
then made to enter the pericarp. One letter should be written 
in the pericarp and letters two at a time in the cardinal and 
intermediate (points) in the lotus of eight petals. The entrance 
and exit (of letters) should be made in the cardinal (points) . 
The insertion of similar syllables (is done) in the middle of dis- 
similar letters occurring in the rows of petals on all sides in the 
lotus of sixteen petals. 

48-52. Cakra (wheel) is twofold— consisting of four spokes 
and six spokes. The first one among these has the first and fifth 
letters in the quarter of the first half as similar. The fourth and 
eighth letters of the odd and even foot are in order in its nor- 
thern, eastern, southern and western 1 spokes. The four halves 
of the (two) feet should be in the nave. Its first letter should 
be taken as far as the last spoke, the remaining two feet (being) 


1. The text is wrong. It has been corrected as tasyodakprigaitikpratyago- 



938 


Agrti Pur&jia 


in the circumference. It is said to be the Bfhat-cakra (big 
wheel) , if the third letter at the end of the fourth foot and the 
first two letters are similar, if the tenth letters of the three feet 
are similar, if there are six letters at its beginning and end and 
if (a letter) is separated by two letters in the last foot. 

53-54. (The two) feet are written one by one gradually in 
the two front spokes. But the tenth letter should be drawn in 
the nave and the fourth foot in the circumference. The first, last 
and tenth letters of the verse are similar. The first and the last 
(letters) of the two even feet (are also similar). The first, 
fourth and fifth letters of the first and fourth feet are similar. 

55-58. If the third (foot) is produced by reversing the 
second and the petals are arranged, it is the Banja (staff). (It 
is known as) Cakrabjaka (lotus-wheel), if the second and 
seventh (letters) are similar in the first petal of a composition, 
(if) the succeeding two petals are similar by the two second 
(letters in each) , (if) the second, sixth, fourth and fifth letters 
are similar in the two halves, (if) the first and the last feet, the 
seventh letters of the extreme halves are also similar. Then one 
should arrange the fourth and fifth similar (letters) in order. 
Similarly the two fourth (similar letters) of the krama feet at 
the end of the petals should be arranged. 1 

59-61. The first and the last of the two halves are similar 
in Muraja (drum) . The letter occurs in the half-foot according 
to the natural or reverse (order) . Muraja (drum) shape is ob- 
tained thus. The last is set in such a way that the fourth becomes 
the first* 

62. The second (variety of) Cakra (circle) is accomplished 
with Ssrdulavikrijita. 2 3 The Gomutrikd ( bandha ) (is composed) 
in all the metres. But other bandhas (are set) in Anus tub h?. 

63. If the names of the poet and the poetic composition are 
not found in these, friends become delighted and enemies also 
do not feel depressed. 

64-65. The arrow, bow, sky, sword, club, lance, meeting 


1. This line is not intelligible. 

* Verses 60-61 are cryptic and the idea conveyed is not clear. 

2. Metre consisting of ma, sa t ja, sa, ta, fa (gapat) and ga. 

3. Consisting of eight syllables. 



344.1 -9a 


939 


place of two, three or four 1 roads, thunderbolt, mace, 
goad, chariotwheel, food of the elephant, pond and knife are 
(the different) bandhas (patterns in which verses are composed). 
Others ( bandhas ) should be known by the wisemen similarly. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FORTYFOUR 
Description of the embellishment of sense 

Fire-god said : 

l-2a. The embellishment of sense is said to be the beautify- 
ing of senses. Even the beauty of words is not charming without 
that. The goddess of speech is just like a widow without the 
embellishment of sense. 

2b-3a. It is of eight kinds — svarQpam (natural form) , sSdrSyam 
( similarity) , utprek$& (fancy), atiSaya (exaggeration), vibhdvana 
(imagination), virodha (contradiction), hetu (cause) and samam 
(evenness). 

3b-4. The very nature of things is said to be the natural 
form. It is said to be twofold such as, innate and adventitious. 
The innate (is) natural and the adventitious is occasional. 

5. Similarity is (the presence of) common attributes. It is 
indeed fourfold : Upama (simile), RQpakam (metaphor), 
Sahokti (description of the common action of two different 
objects as coexisting) and Arthantaranyasa (corroboration). 

6-9a. It is named as Upama (simile), in which, there exists 
a standard of comparison and a subject of comparison. The 
course of affairs proceeds by taking even a slight identity and 
the separate entity exists although possessing internal similitude. 
It is of two kinds — by compounding or not compounding the 
counter-parts (of comparison). The compounded (arises) from 
the compounding of the correlated expression and the latter is 
otherwise. The compounded is threefold — by (the compound 

1. The reading dvicatufka seems to have sense instead of dvicaturtha in the 
text. 



940 


Agni Purina 


ing of) the word indicative of simile, (of) the word (expres- 
sive) of the subject of comparison and (of) both of these. 
The last one is of three kinds. 

9b. Eighteen kinds of simile are distinguished. 

10. The Dharinn (attribute) and Vastu (object) -upama is 
that where the common attribute is expressed or implied, 
(depending) on the prominence of dkarma (attribute) or 
vastu ( object) . 

11-12. Where the two (objects) having the (common) 
attribute are compared reciprocally, it would be Parasparo- 
patni (mutual simile). When their (comparison) is reversal of 
what is well known, it would be Viparilopama (reversed simile). 
JViyamopama (restrictive simile) is that in which (the resem- 
blance) is restricted (to one excluding others). Aniyamopama 
( unrestrictive simile) would be from (the resemblance found) 
in others as well. 

13-14. Samuccayopama (cumulative simile) consists of 
the mention of multitude of other attributes. When difference 
is indicated in spite of similarity of many attributes, it is (known 
as) Vyatirekopamd (simile of contrast), because distinction is 
spoken of. It is the Bahupama (multiple simile) in which there 
is comparison with many similar (objects). 

15. When the attributes are different for each standard of 
comparison it is indeed Mdlopamd (garland of simile). If 
comparison is made by modifying the standard of comparison, 
(it is known as) Vikriyopama (simile of modification) . 

16. That is well known as th e Adbhutopamd (hypothetical 
simile) in which comparison is made by the poet by superim- 
posing something non-existent in all the three worlds on the 
standard of comparison. 

17. It is Mohopamd (illusive simile) in which, the subject 
of comparison is declared as identical with the standard of 
comparison, after imposing the standard of comparison on the 
subject of comparison. (It has) a mistaken statement. 

18. Sarhiayopamd (simile by doubt) (arises) from the 
uncertainty of the real nature of both the entities having com- 
mon attributes. NiScayopama (determinative simile) (arises) 
from determining the subject of comparison after having doubt- 
ed it. 



344.19-28a 


941 


19. Vaky&rthopamd (simile of the sense of the sentence} 
arises from a comparison of verily the meaning of the sentences. 
Asadharapopama (absolute simile), (which is) extraordinary, 
(occurs) when there is a comparison of a thing with itself. 

20. When a subject of comparison is (a standard of com- 
parison) of another it is considered as Anyasyopama (simile of 
another). It is (known as) Camanopamd 1 (simile of succession) 
when the subject of comparison of a thing becomes the stand- 
ard of comparison of another in regular succession. 

2 1 . Upamd (simile) is again known to be of five kinds : 
praise, censure, fancied, similar and little similar. 

22-23a. It is known by the name RQpaka (metaphor), in 
which the subject of comparison is identified with the standard 
of comparison after the perception of thesimilarity of attributes. 
Or, Rupaka is indeed f'pania itself in which the difference 
(between the standard and subject of comparison) is concealed. 

23b. Sahokti (connected description) (arises) from the 
description (of objects) having similar attributes as being 
simultaneous. 

24a. Arthanlaranydsa (corroboration) arises when there is 
a posterior similarity (of a preceding statement to the succeeding 
one). 

24b-25a. It is said to be Utpreksa (poetic fancy) where 
the condition of a sentient being or otherwise, which occurs 
in one way, is conceived (as occurring) differently. 

25b-26a. It is named as AtiSayokti (hyperbole) wherein the 
attribute of an object, that has passed beyond ordinary limits, 
is described. It is twofold on the basis of possibility and im- 
possibility. 

26b-27a. That is said to be Visesokti (special utterance) 
where the imperfection in the quality, genus, action and the 
like (of an object) are perceived just for the purpose of showing 
(its) speciality. 

• 27b-28a. That is Vibhavana (presumption) where a differ- 
ent cause or naturalness is presumed excluding a well known 
cause. 


1. The printed text wrongly reads Gaganopami. 



942 


Agni Purina 

28b-29a. It is said to be Virodha (contradiction) where 
there is realisation, by adjustment, of congruity between two 
incongruous things, with a previous contradiction. 

29b-32. Hetu (cause) is that which accomplishes the 
object desired to be accomplished. It is produced in two (ways) 
such as kdraka (efficient) and jfidpaka (indicative). The 
efficient cause occurs before and (the other) after the production 
of an effect. These two kinds known as the precedent and an- 
tecedent arise from the controlling relation of cause and effect 
or identity. There is difference in the indicative one such as the 
perception of a flooding river. The rule of inseparable connec- 
tion arises from the perception of inseparable connection. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FORTYFIVE 
The embellishments of sound, and sense 


Fire-god said : 

1. An embellishment of both sound and sense adorns the 
two simultaneously just as a necklace laid in one place (adorns 
both) the breast and neck of a woman. 

2. Six varieties of it are explicitly in existence, namely, 
PraSasti, Kdnti, Aucitya, SaAksepa , Tavadarthata and Abhivyakti. 

3-4a. PraSasti (eulogy) (is) skillful speech (employed) 
for the act of melting the subtle (heart) as if it is subservient. It 
is of two kinds on account of the distinction as Premokti and 
Stuti. A friendly speech and a panegyric are the synonyms of 
Premokti and Stuti (respectively) . 

4b-5a. Kdnti (loveliness) (is) the fitness of the expressed 
(sense) and the expressive ( word) agreeable to all the minds. 
(In that) the diction is befitting the theme and the mode to the 
sentiment. 

5b. The propriety arises from strong and soft compositions. 

6. SaAksepa (brevity) (is) the comprehension of many 
meanings by means of few expressive words. Y&oadarthata 



345.7.17 


943 


(correspondence) is neither deficiency nor excess of the word 
and the theme respectively. 

7-9a. Abhioyakti (manifestation) (is) explicitness. It has 
also two (sub) divisions, Sruti and Aksepa. Sruti (direct hear- 
ing) is the word that gives up its own meaning. It is of two 
kinds — Naimitliki (occasional) and P&ribhasiki (technical). 
Technicality is convention. Hence arises the Technical. (The 
two) are again each divided as Mukhyd (primary) and Aup- 
acSriki (metaphorical). 

9b-10a. That is Metaphorical by which a word whose 
function deviates from its own primary sense expresses, for 
certain reason, a sense which is not primary. 

10b- 12a. It is Indicatory and Qualitative by association 
with indication and qualities (respectively). Indication is said 
to be the apprehension (of a secondary sense) always associated 
with the expressed sense. Indication is regarded as fivefold 
arising from connection with the primary sense, proximity, 
cohesion, contrariety and association through action. 

12b- 13, The Qualitative (is) endless in view of the endless- 
ness of qualities in accordance with the desire of the speaker. 
It is known here as Samadhi (transference) in which the 
attribute of one object is transferred to another by a person 
complying with worldly limits. 

14-16. Thatis Atyepa (interdiction), on account of which 
the vital essence not available from direct hearing (of the 
word) becomes manifest. It is also (known as) Dhvani (sug- 
gestion) , since it is impliedby suggestion by means of word and 
sense, where the (suggested) sense (appears) by subordinating 1 
its own (expressed sense). That is said to be Aksepa (interdi- 
ction) where there is an apparent denial of the desired sense in 
order to convey something special. 2 3 Again, this (is known as) 
Aprastutastolra * (indirect praise) where there is a praise of 
another object deviating from the object on hand. 

1 7. Because of brevity of expression that is termed by the 
wise as S amSsokli (brevity of speech), where another object 

1. The reading is taken as upasarjanam instead of upirjanam. 

2. The reading should be viltfa instead of vifefo. 

3. The textual reading atra stutam stotram is obviously incorrect. 



944 Agni Purdija 

having common characteristics is suggested, when one object is 
described. 

18. Apahnuti (concealment) (consists of) conveying 
another sense by concealing something. That is Parydyokta 
(periphrasis) which is stated in a different way. Hence Dhvant 
(suggestion) is, indeed, the name of any one of these. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FORTYSIX 

Investigation into poetic excellences 

Fire-god said : 

1. Pcotry, even though embellished, does not produce 
pleasure, if it is devoid of gurias (excellences) . A necklace would 
only be burdensome to women, if their bodies are not beauti- 
ful. 

2. It cannot be ’said that excellence would only be the 
absence of defect. 1 Excellences such as Slesa (coalescence) and 
the like and defects scuh as Gudhdrlha (obscurity of sense) and 
the like have been distinguished from one another. 

3. An excellence is that which confers great charm to 
poetry. It exists in two forms such as general and particular. 

4. That which is common to all 2 is considered to be the 
general. The general (excellence) is threefold relating to word, 
sense and both. 

5-6a. The excellence (of word) is that which relates to the 
word, the body of the poetry 3 . The excellences of the word are 
sevenfold, namely, $le$a (coalescence), Lalitya (smoothness), 
Gdmbhirya (depth), Saukumdrya (softness), Uddratd (rich- 
ness of expression) , Sati (purity) and Taugiki (derivative). 

6b. That is said to be Coalescence in which there is a 
closely coalesced arrangement of words. 


1. The reading dof o bhdva has been corrected as dofdbhiva. 

2. Probably the Ritis, 

3. The reading kdvyaSariram is better than kdtpath iarlram. 



346.7-17 


945 


7. Smoothness is declared as that in which a letter that is 
already combined in the words by means of (substitution such 
as) guna, ddeSa and the like is never euphonically combined. 

8. The wise name it as Depth which is a composition 
chiselled by special characteristics and which contains elevated 
words; others (name) the same as SuSabdatii (grammatical 
correctness) . 

9. Softness consists of words mostly of unharsh letters. 
Elevatedness consists of elevated words and is endowed with 
praiseworthy epithets. 

10. Splendidness {Ojas) ( is) abundance of compounds. It 
is the life of prose etc. 1 From the Highest Being to a clump of 
grass, manliness (comes) by ojas alone. 

11-12. That is said to be the Excellence of Sense 2 which 
brings out the excellence of a described object by whichsoever 
word. There are six varieties of it, viz., Madkurya (tranquility), 
Saihvidhana (contrivance), Komalatvaih (softness), Udaratd 
(elegance), Praudhi (maturity) and Samayikatva (being 
conventional) . 

13. The gravity of appearance even in anger (and) deep 
state of composure is Tranquility. Contrivance (consists of) the 
effort for the accomplishment of an expected object. 

14. An arrangement of words free from rigidity appearing 
after setting aside laxity (of structure) is (known as) Softness. 

15. The excessive gracefulness of intention which indicates 
the characteristic of the disposition of being aimed at explicitly 
is the Elegance of Guria. 

16. That is declared Maturity in which there are mature 
reasonings impregnated with logical reasonings bringing about 
accomplishment of what is intended. 

17. The apprehension of the sense in the demonstrated 
conclusion 3 of something independent or dependent (is known 
as) 'Being Conventional*. 

1. The text wrongly reads as padya. 

2. arthaguoa seems to be better than the reading ortho gupa. 

3. The reading rdddhdntah samqyo matah seems to be better than bdhydnta(i 
samayogatafr of the printed text. 



946 


Agni Purina 


1 8- 19a. That which embellishes both word and sense is 
known by the name 'the Excellence of Both*. Prasada (lucidity), 
Saubhigya (loveliness), Tathisafikhya (relative enumeration), 
Praiastati (praiseworthiness), Paha (ripeness) and Riga 
(tint) are its six (varieties) divulged in their manifoldness by 
the wise. 

19b-20. Lucidity is glorified as consisting of words posses- 
sing very well-known sense. That which, when expressed, sug- 
gests some eminent attribute, is declared by the wise as Saubh- 
igya (loveliness) or Udaratva (elegance). 

21 -22a. Tathisafikhya (is) Relative Enumeration extended 
to similar things. Praiseworthiness is the description of even a 
terrible object by means of a word not terrible, when there is an 
occasion. 

22b-23. A certain high maturity is said to be Ripeness. It 
is of four kinds, viz., as the ripeness of grape and that of co- 
conut water etc. That is indeed the ripeness of grape in which 
there is sweetness both at the beginning and the end. 

24-25. It is glorified as Tint which is a special characteris- 
tic for the purpose of poetic composition. It excels even the 
natural grace (when) put to constant practice. It is again of 
three varieties : yellow, saffron and indigo. That which is with- 
in the range of its own characteristics is to be recognised as 
the particular (Excellence). 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FORTYSEVEN 
Investigation into poetic blemishes 

Fire-god said : 

1 . Blemish causes distaste in the refined men. It is sevenfold 
as applied to one, two and three of the speaker, the denoter and 
the denoted. 

2-3. The speaker is certainly the poet therein. He is also 
known to be fourfold: suspicious, insolent, ignorant and learned. 
The denoter is that which affects the meaning on the ground 



347.4-15 


947 


(for employment) and technicality. Its subdivisions are two: 
word and sentence. The characteristics of both have been 
stated. 

4. Grammatical incorrectness and reconditeness are the 
only two defects of word. Wisemcn know grammatical incorrect- 
ness as repugnance to the science of word. 

5-6a. Reconditeness is said to be the non-employment by 
the well-versed. It is fivefold: Ch&ndasatva (Vedic usage), 
Avispasfatva (lack of clarity), Kastataa (unpleasantness), 
Asamayikatva (not being conventional) and Grdmyatva (vul- 
garity) . 

6b-9. Chandasatva is that which is not found in the 
spoken language. Lack of clarity arises from lack of understand- 
ing. Obscurity of meaning, Perversion of meaning and Ambi- 
guity are varieties of Lack of clarity. It is known as obscurity of 
meaning in which the sense is understood with difficulty. Per- 
version of meaning again is wrong perception of the meaning of 
a word other than that intended. Non-conformity to established 
meaning and Incapability (of expressing the intended meaning) 
approach this only. Ambiguity is said to be the doubtful nature 
of the expressed (meaning) . 

10-1 la. Without causing distress to good people, faultiness 
attaches to unpleasantness which comprises difficult pronuncia- 
tion. Not being conventional consists of deviation from conven- 
tion. The sages named it jXeya. 

1 lb-12. Vulgarity is the damaging apprehension of a low 
meaning. It is threefold: arising from the expression of an in- 
tended vulgar sense, recollection (of the same) and from close 
resemblance (of an expression) with the word expressive (of that 
sense). 

13. Defect of meaning is twofold: general and paiticular. 
The blemish that relates to many is said to be the general. 

14. The general (impurities) are five, namely, Kriy&bhr- 
arhSa (dropping of the verb) , KdrakabhrariiSa (dropping of the 
case-endings), Visandhi (lack of euphonic combination), Pm- 
aruktatd (tautology) and Vyastasambandhali (confused conn- 
ection). 

15. The dropping of the verb is the absence of the verb. 
Dropping-of the case-endings again is the absence of cases begin- 



948 Agni Purina 

ning with the subject. Lack of euphonic combination is the defi- 
ciency of the same. 

16. It is twofold : deficient euphonic combination or repu- 
gnant. The repugnance of euphonic combination (arises) from 
difficulty in reading or from the appearance of a different 
sense. 

1 7-1 8. The continued repetition of an expression is Tauto- 
logy. It is also twofold: repetition of sense and repetition of 
word. The repetition of sense is also twofold: by making use of 
a chosen word and by means of a different word. In the repeti- 
tion of a word, a word is repeated and not the sense. 

19-21. The confused connection (is) improper connection 
that arises from the intervention (of a word) . It is, indeed, three- 
fold — arising from the implication of a different connection, from 
the occurrence of a different connection and in the absence of 
both of them, from internal intervention. Each one of these is, 
again, twofold by means of the intervention of a word or a sen- 
tence. Of the word and the sentence, the meaning 1 is what is 
expressed, because it is intended to be conveyed. The expressed 
is divided into two, viz. already-developed or yet-to-be-deve- 
loped. 

22-23. The incapability of the cause is the state of causing 
obstacle to the intended. (It occurs in the following forms) : 
inconclusiveness, contrariety, absence of invariable concomit- 
ance, being liable for a valid opposite argument, union of unti- 
mely reason, non-existence in the subject, non-existence in simi- 
lar instance and existence in contrary instance. 

24. The eleven kinds of meaninglessness do not become 
painful to those who are competent in poetry. They do not be- 
come defects in difficult compositions. 

25. Obscurity of meaning does not make the knowers of 
defects in difficult compositions feel distress. Vulgarity does not 
annoy by being admitted by people (in general) and in techni- 
cal works. 

26. There is no blemish in thedropping of the verb because 
(the ellipsis) of the verb could be supplied. The dropping of 


1. The correct reading is vityamartho. 



347.27-40 


949 


the case (becomes possible) when the case is supplied by means 
ofimplication. 

27. Non-occurrence of euphonic combination does not affect 
in the (case of a) pragrhya 1 (vowel). Absence of disagreeable 
euphonic combination that arises from difficulty in reading does 
not become unpleasant in harsh utterances and the like. 

28-29a. The repetition of a word and confused connection 
are good in alliteration. It is not a defect in understanding the 
sense. It is also not tarnished by (the defects) such as the inver- 
sion of order and the like of the case ending, number and gender. 
There is no distress for the wise in these. 

29b. There is difference in number between the standard 
of comparison and the object of comparison there. 

30-33. The right practice of the poets is glorified as the 
(poetic) convention, where there is (comparison) of many with 
one and many with many, which is good. It is twofold: general 
and particular, similar to excellence. That which is well known 
from the absence of dispute among famous knowersof established 
truth is considered as the general convention of poets. According 
as all the knowers of truth or only a few agree faultlessly, the 
general is twofold. The other (namely, the particular) , arises 
from defective doctrine, such as the error of some people. 

34-35a. Some sage has the knowledge of reasoning. Some 
(has) transitory (consciousness) of the created beings. Some 
(has) self-manifestation 2 3 of knowledge. Similarly, there is gross- 
ness of known objects and uncertainty of words for the Arhats 
(Jains). 

35b-36a. The Saivas (devotees of Siva) , Vaisrtavas (devo- 
tees of Visnu), Sauras (devotees of Sun god), who know the 
established truth, opine that Brahman is the cause of the world. 
(The cause is associated) with Pradhana (Primordial) for the 
Sankhyas. 2 

36b-40. It is said to be the particular, in this world of 
speech, that people moving together and perceiving mutually, 

1. That which is not governed by the rules of sandhi or euphony and is 
permitted to be written and pronounced separately. 

2. The reading soaprakiiatd seems to be better. 

3. The-followers of die S&hkhya philosophy, promulgated by Sage Kapila. 



950 


Agni Pur&pa 


fasten upon. This being divided, is also known as twofold, accord* 
ing as being accepted as unreal and being non-accepted as real. 
That which gets affected by the means of knowledge such as 
perception and the like, is known as the unreal. That is to be 
accepted by the poet as the manifestation of knowledge. That 
alone which accomplishes an action with purpose, is ( taken to 
be) the highest truth, out of ignorance. Brahman alone is the 
real, the highest truth, from knowledge. ( Lord) Vi?i?u is the 
cause of creation and the like. He is embodied of words and 
embellishments. Knowledge is Para (superior) and Apara (in- 
ferior) . One is released from birth by knowing it. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FORTYEIGHT 
List of monosyllabic words 

Fire-god said: 

1-2. I shall describe the mono-syllabic (words) ending with 
the letters ( of the alphabet) . (The letter) “a” (denotes) (lord) 
Visnu and negation. ‘A’ (means) Brahma, a sentence as well as 
a boundary. * A ’, when used as an interjection would also be (an 
expression of) anger and affliction. */’ (signifies) (God of) love. 
*r (denotes) Rati ( the wife of God of love) and Laksmi (God- 
dess of wealth and consort of Lord Vi?nu) . ‘U* (signifies) (lord) 
Siva (and) ‘O', the demons and others. 

3. ‘/P (denotes) a word and (the deity) Aditi (the 

mother of Aditya) . (The letters) / and / (respectively) (denote) 
Diti (the mother of the demons) and Guha (son of Siva and 
Parvati). ( E* (denotes) the goddess and ( ai' would mean Yogiiu 
(female attendant of the Goddess). *0’ (signifies) Brahma and 
‘au\ MaheSvara (Lord Siva). 

4-5. ‘Art’ (denotes) the God of love and ‘aA’ a commenda- 
ble thing. ‘Ka' (stands for) Brahma and others (and) ‘kit’ con- 
temptible thing. (The letter) 'kharti signifies void, the senses 
and a sword. A Gandharva and (lord) Vinayaka (lord of obs- 
tacles) (are denoted by die letter) , gatk\ ‘Go' (signifies) a song 



348.6-14 


951 


and the singer. ‘Gka’ stands for a bell, a small bell and the like 
and beating. (The letter) 'Aa' signifies desire and Bhairava (a 
terrible form of lord Siva). 

6. 'Ca' (stands for) the wicked (aud) stainless. 'Cha' (in- 
dicates) division and 'ji' t conquering. 'Jarh' (denotes) a song 
and 'jha', commendable. (The letter) 'Aa' (signifies) strength and 
*tah\ singing. 

7. ‘7 Tia' (denotes) the orb of Moon, (lord) Siva and tying. 
'Da' is regarded (as signifying) Rudra, sound and fear. 
(denotes) a drum and sound. 

8. ‘J^a' (means) extraction and ascertainment. 'Ta' (signi- 
fies) a thief and the inside of the tail. 'Tha' (denotes) eating, 
l dah\ cutting, sustaining and ornamentation. 

9. 'Dhafy' (signifies) Brahma and th cdhuttura (flower). *Na* 
(stands for) a collection and correct course of action. 'Pa' is 
known (to denote) a garden. Pha' is regarded (as signifying) a 
squall. 

10. 'Pha' (stands for) phQtkdra (blowing with the mouth) 
and fruitlessness. 'Bi* (denotes ) a bird and * bharfi ’, the asterism. 
'MS, would (mean) Goddess of wealth, measure and mother. 
'Ta' (stands for) a sacrifice, traveller and a brave person. 

11. (The letter) *raii’ (denotes) Fire (god), strength and 
Indra. (The letter) 'la' is said (to denote) the creator. 'Vi * 
(signifies) separation and ‘ Va Varuna. '&ah' (means) lying 
down and ‘ Satfi happiness. 

12. ‘ $ah' (denotes) excellence and 'sah', the past. 'Sa' (means) 
Laksmi (the goddess of fortune) and 'sarh' is regarded (as 
representing) locks of hair. 'Ha' (denotes)sustenance and Rudra 
(a form of Siva) . 'K$a' (stands for) the warrior class and 
regarded as the alphabet (imperishable) . 

13. (The letter) kfo (denotes) (lord) Nfsimha, Hari and the 
guardians of the land (and entrance). A sacred formula of one 
syllable (should be deemed as) the deity (itself whom it repre- 
sents) and it confers enjoyment and emancipation. 

14. The formula (running as) * kfaum obeisance to Hayaii- 
ras 1 ’ confers all knowledge. The letter 'a' and the other letters 


1. The hone-headed form assumed by Lord Vifgu to rescue the Vtdat. 



952 Agni Pur&pa 

(described above are also) formulae. (They are known as) 
mdtfkimantras and are excellent. 

15-16. These (deities of the mdtfkSmantras ) and the nine 
Durgas — Bhagavati, Katyayanl, Kausiki, Candika, Pracanda, 
Suranayika, Ugra, Parvat! and Durga. Orfi, we may know (the 
Goddess) Candika, let us meditate on the goddess and may 
(Goddess) Durga lead our mind to that. Then the worship should 
be done in the proper way together with the six accessories. The 
garia should be an aspirate. 

17-18. Then (the goddesses) Ajita, Aparajita, Jaya, Vijaya, 
Katyayanl, Bhadrakali, Marigala, Siddhi and Revat! and the 
accomplished (deities) Vatukas should be worshipped. The nine 
guardian deities Hetuka, Kapalika, Ekapada and Bhimarupa 
(should be worshipped) in the middle. 

19-20. Hrlrfil O Durga ! (2) Protector! Oblations for the 
sake of perfection of the formula. Then (goddess) Gauri, 
Dharma and others and the female energies (such as) Skanda 
should be worshipped. Prajfta, J fiana, Kriya, Vaca, VagiSi, 
JvalinI, Kamini, Kamamala, the energies of Indra and others 
should be worshipped. 

21-23a. “Orfi garfi oblations” (is) the basic formula. “Gath, 
obeisance to Ganapati (lord of the Ganas)” (is) the accessory 
formula. The six accessory (worship should be done). They are 
Raktagukla (red and white) , Dantaksa (having axis like tusk), 
ParaS utka{a (powerful axe), Samodaka (having the sweet ball 
cake), Gandhadi (fragrance etc.), and Gandholkaya (to the 
person having a fragrant stick) in order. The elephant (god) , 
the great lord of the Ganas (attendants) and having a magnifi- 
cent incense stick should be worshipped. Oblation to Ku?m- 
anda, to the single-tusked one, to the destroyer of the three cities, 
to the black-teethed one, to one whose dreadful laughter startles 
(all) , to one having elongated nose and face, to one having the 
lotus in the tusk, to Megholka, to DhQmolka, to one having 
curved trunk, to the lord of obstacles, to the fierce and dreadful 
one, to one having the gait of the elephant of Indra, one having 
the serpent-lord (V&suki) as a necklace, to one bearing the cres- 
cent moon, and the lord of the Ganas (attendants). After having 
worshipped with these formulae ending with oblations and with 



348.23b— 349.2 v 953 

(the performance of) the oblations with sesamum, one would 
get wealth. 

23b-24a. The formulae may, in the alternative, consist of the 
letters beginning with ka and with the subtle syllable and ending 
with obeisance separately having two ras and two faces and two 
eyes. 

24b. I shall describe now the grammar that was imparted 
by Skanda to Katyayana. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FORTYNINE 

The pratyaharas and fundamental rules in grammar 
Skanda said : 

1. O Katyayana ! I shall describe the essence of grammar 
that is of the form of perfected words for imparting to the begin- 
ners. 

2. Pratyaharas 1 etc. are the notations facilitating the func- 
tion of the treatise, Aiun flk, eon, aiauc, hayaoaraf, lan, Ramahananam 
jhabhaR, ghaihadhaf, jabagafadal, khaphachathalhacafatav, kapay, 
lafasar, hal are ( the fourteen ) pratyaharas. In the enumeration, 
the consonant at the end is indicatory. The vowel would be 
(read with) the nasal. The first letter being taking together 
with the indicative letter at the end, would become the denota- 
tive of the letters which occur in between such as ati, eh, af, yah , 
chav, jharh, bhas, ak, ik, an, iq, yan, with the letter na coming after- 
wards. (Similarly we have) arh.yarh. Rath, ac,ic, aic, ay, may,jhay, 
khay, jav, jhav, khav, coo, Sav, aS, hal, oal,jhaS, al,hal,val, ral, jhal 
and al the pratyahhras. 


1. Several letters or affixes are comprehended as one syllable by means 
of combining the first letter of an aphorism with its final indicatory letter or 
if several aphorisms are comprehended, the final letter of die last member is 
combined with the first such as ap etc. denoting awn etc. 



954 


Agni Purdya 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTY 

The forms of completed euphonic combinations 
Skanda said : 

1-5. I shall describe the forms of finished combinations 1 (of 
vowels and consonants). First (I shall describe) the combination 
of vowels. 


da?da 

+ agram 

= 

dand&gram 

sa 

agata 

= 

sagata 

dadhi 

+ idarh 


dadhidam 

nadi 

+ Ihate 

= 

nadihate 

madhu 

4* udakam 

= 

madhudakam 

pitr 

+ r?abha 


pitrsabha 

The letter ‘l’ also becomes similar. 


(hotf 

-(- Jkara 

- 

hotrkara) 

tava 

4- idam 

- 

tavedam 

sakala 

+ udakam 

= 

sakalodakam 

The following is a half- vowel : 
tava + lkara 


tavalkara 

sa 

+ esa 

- 

saisa 

sa 

-(- aindri 

- 

saindri 

tava 

+ odanam 

- 

tavaudanam 

khafva 

+ oghah 

= 

khatvaughah are thus 

formed 

vi 

+ asudhilj 

_ 

vyasudhifr 

vasu 

4- alafikrtam 

- 

vasvalankrtam 

pitr 

4- artha 


pitrartha 


4* upavana 

* 

pitrarthopavana 

nai 

-j- aka 

- 

nayaka 

lo 

4- aka 

— 

lavaka 

te 

4- iha 

- 

ta iha, tayiha etc. 

te 

+ atra 

— 

te’tra 

yafc 

4- atra 

- 

yo’tra 

jale 

4* akajam 

= 

jale’kajam 


1. The text gives only the combined forms. The individual words have 
also been given here for easy comprehension. 



350.6-9 


955 


(The following do not undergo any change) : 


aho 

+ 

ehi 

- 

aho ehi 

a 

+ 

avehi 

*= 

a avehi 

• 

1 

4- 

indrakam 

« 

i indrakam 

u 

+ 

uttistha 

- 

u uttistha 

kavi 

+ 

etau 

- 

kavi etau 

vSyu 

+ 

etau 

- 

vayuetau 

vane 

+ 

ime 

- 

vane ime 

ami 

+ 

ete 


ami ete 

yajftabhute + 

ehi 


yajftabhute ehi 

deva 

4- 

imannaya 


deva imannaya 

6-9. I shall describe now the conjunction of the consonants, 

vak 

+ 

yatab 

— 

vagyatah 

ac 

+ 

ekam&trkah 

- 

ajekamatfkah 

?a{ 

+ 

ete 

- 

sadete 

tat 

4- 

ime 

- 

tadime 

va 

+ 

adi 

«= 

vadi ( ?) 

vak 

+ 

iutih 


vannitih 

Sap 

+ 

mukha 

- 

Sanmukha etc. 

vak 

+ 

manasam 

- 

vahmanasam 

vak 

4* 

bhagadih ■ 

- 

vagbhagadih 

vak 

+ 

llaksnam 

- 

vakilaksnam 

tat 

+ 

Sarirakam 

- 

taccharirakam 

tat 

+ 

lunati 

- 

tallunati 

tat 

+ 

caret 

- 

taccaret 

kun 

+ 

aste 

* 

kunnaste 

sugan 

+ 

iha 


suganniha 

bhavan 

+ 

caran 

- 

bhavamscaran 

bhavan 

+ 

chatro 


bhavanichatro 

bhavan 

+ 

tika 

« 

bhavam?tika 

bhavan 

4 

takah 

- 

bhavamstakah 

bhavan 

+ 

tirtha 

- 

bhavamstlrtha 

bhavin 

+ 

stheyan 

- 

bhavamstheyan 

bhavan 

+ 

lekha 

« 

bhavamllekha 

bhavan 

4- 

jayah 

- 

bhavaftjayafr 

bhavan 

i 

i- 

Sete 

- 

bhavamSchete 

bhavan 

+ 

ca £ete 

- 

bhavaficaieie 

bhav&n 

+ 

sete 

- 

bhavififote 



956 


Agni Purina 


bhavan + dinah 

tvam 4- bharta 

tvam + karisyasi 


bhavandinah 
tvambharta 
tvankari$yasi etc. 


The conjunctions of visarga are known (as follows) 


10-11. kab + chindyat 

kah + caret 

kab + tab 

kab + sthab 

kab + calet 


kagchindyat 

kascaret 

kastah 

ka§thah 

kascalet 


(In the following cases the visarga becomes the upadhmdniya ) : 
kab + khanct = kah^khanet 

kah -f- karoti = kabX^aroti sma 

kab 4- pafhet = kahXpathet or 

kab 4* phaleta = kahXphaleta 


(The following may occur in two forms) : 
kab 4" Svasurah = kassvasurah (or) 

kab svasurah 

kab + savarab — kassavarab or kab 

savarab 


(In the following cases there is no change) : 
kah + phaleta — kah phaleta 

kab 4" Sayita =* kab Sayita 

(The following is an instance of cliange) : 


kab 4“ atra yodhab = ko’tra yodhah 

(The visarga is dropped in the following cases) 
12-13. kab + uttamab — ka uttamah 

dev&b 4- ete — deva ete 

bhob 4" iha = bho iha 

sodarab 4" yanti => sodara yanti 

bhago 4~ vraja — bhago vraja 


(In the following the visarga becomes repha (r) : 
supub4*sudub4~ r atrib =* supuh suduratrib 
vayub 4* yati — viyury&ti 

punab 4* nahi «• punarnahi 

punab 4- eti — punareti 



351.1-7 


957 


(The oisarga is dropped in the following cases) : 
sah yati+iha ~ sa yatiha 

e$ali + yati -•= e$a yati 

kah + iSvarah — ka Isvarah 

jyotib + rupam — jyotirupam 

(The following are examples of other kinds of union) : 
tava + chatram — tavacchatram 

mlecchadhlh+chidram-f- — mlecchadhischidramac- 
a -|-chidat chidat 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTYONE 
Perfected forms oj inflection in the nouns 

Skanda said : 

1-3. O Katyayana ! I shall describe to you the finished 
forms of inflections. There are two kinds of inflections — sup 
(substantives) and tin (verbs). The substantives have seven 
cases. (The inflections) su,au,jas (constitute) the first (case) 
(Nominative). Arfi, au, Sas (are the inflections of) the second 
(case) (Accusative). T&, bhydrh , bhis (are the terminations of) 
the third (case) (Instrumental). Jfe, bhydrii , bhyas (constitute) 
the fourth (case) ( Dative) . Jfasi, bhydm, bhyas arc (the inflec- 
tions of) the fifth (case) (Ablative), ffas, os, dm (are the termi- 
nations for) the sixth (case) (Genitive). Jfi, os, sup (are for) 
the seventh (case) (Locative). These would be added after the 
uninflected substantives. 

4. The substantives are twofold — ending in vowels and 
ending in consonants. Each one of this would again be three- 
fold : masculine, feminine and neuter. 

5-7. The models of these are given. Those which are not 

mentioned here (follow those) on account of their strength. 

(Those ending in vowels are to be declined as the following 

examples). Vrksali (tree) 1 , Sarvalji (all), Purvalj (former), 

Prathamah (first), Dvitlyakah (second), Trtiyafr (third), 

Khandapi (protector of a group), Vahnilt (fire), Sakha 

(friend), Patih (husband), Aharpatifr (Sun), Patufr (clever), 

Gramaiii (chief of the village), Indra(the lord of the celestials) , 

~ T The text gives only the nominative singular forms of the substantives 
in this charpter. 



958 Agni Purfaia 

Khalapub (one who sweeps), Mitrabhuh (being a friend), 
Svabhuh (an epithet of Brahmi), SuSrih (good fortune), 
Sudhib (a wiseman), Pita (father) , Bhrata (brother), Na (a 
man), Karta (doer), Kro&u (a jackal), Naptr (grandson), 
Sura (intoxicating drink), Rk (Rai means wealth), Gauh 
(cow), Dyauh (heaven), Glauh (Moon) (are) examples for 
the masculine (nouns) ending in vowels. 

8-1 2a. (Examples for substantives ending with the conso- 
nants) : Suvak (good expression or speech), Tvak (skin), Pr$at 
(a drop of water or any other liquid), Samrat (a paramount 
sovereign), Janmabhak (one who has obtained birth), Surat 
(a good sovereign), Apab (water), Marut (Wind), Bhavan 
(becoming), Dipyan (shining), Bhavan (you) (polite form), 
Maghavan ( Indra) (prosperous), Piban (drinking), Bhagav&n 
(fortunate, hence denotes the lord), Aghavan (a sinner), 
Arv&n (a horse), Vahnimat (possessing fire), Sarvavit (knower 
of all things), Suprt (a good army), Suslma (good boundary), 
Kundi (Kundin denotes Siva, holding a bowl). Raja (king), 
Sva (horse), Yuva (youth), Maghava (Indra), Pusa (Sun), 
Sukarma (doer of good deeds) , Yajva (sacrificer) , Suvarma 
(good armour) , Sudharmaria (council of gods, court-hall of 
Indra), Aryama (Sun), Vrtraha (Indra, killer of Vrtra), Pan- 
thab (path), Sukakud (good summit) etc. and Paiica (five), 
PraSan (one who is tranquil), Sutan (one who spreads well), 
Pafica (five) etc., Sugauh (good cow), Surah (one who is 
wealthy) and Supub (good city), Candramah (Moon), Suva- 
cab (good speech), Sreyan (excellent), Vidvan (learned), and 
U£anas (the preceptor of the demons), Pecivan (one who has 
cooked) , Gauh (cow) , Anadvan (an ox), Godhun (one who 
milks a cow) , Mitradruh (one who is treacherous to a friend), 
Svalif (one who licks like a dog). 

12b-19. (Substantives) in the feminine (are):Jaya (wife), 
Jara (old age), Bala (young girl), Edaka (a ewe),Vrddha (old 
woman), K?atriya (a woman of the K^atriya class), Bahuraja 
(land having many rulers) , Bahudama (having many garlands) 
and B&lika (an young girl), Maya (illusion), Kaumudagandhii 
(smelling like a lily), Sarva (all), Purva (the preceding one) 
and Any4 (someone else), Dvitlyfi (second one), Tj-tiya (third 
one), Buddhi (intellect), Stri (woman), Sri (Lak?mi, goddess 



351 .20*28a 


959 


of wealth), Nadi (river), Sudhifr (wise), Bhavanti (one who 
becomes), Divyantl (one who shines) , Bhatl (one who appears), 
Bhinti (one who shines), and Yanti (one who goes), Sffivati 
(one who hears), Tudati (tormenting), Kartri (doer), Tudant! 
(tormenting), Kurvati (one who is doing), Mahi (earth), Rud- 
hanti (one who is obstructing), Krfdati (one who is playing), 
Danti(one who is restrained), Palayanti (one who is protecting), 
and Surani(a celestial woman) , Gauri (having white complexion, 
denotes consort of Siva), Putravati (one who is having a son), 
Naub (ship or boat), Vadhuht (bride), Devata (deity) and 
Bhuh (earth). Tisra (three) and Dve (two) (both denoting 
feminine) , Kati (how many), Var?abhuh (a female frog) , Svasi 
(sister), Mata (mother), Vara (excellent) , Gauh (cow), Naub 
(ship or boat), Vak (speech), Tvak (skin), PracI (east), AvacI 
(south), TiraScI (the female of an animal or bird), SamlcI (a 
doe), Udici (north), Sarat (autumn), Vidyut (lightning), Sarit 
(river), Yosit (lady in separation), Agnivit (knower of fire), 
Sampat (wealth), Dr$at (stone), Ya (who), E$a (this), Vedavit 
(knower of the Veda), Samvit (knowledge), Bahvi (many), 
Rajfil (queen), Tvaya (by you), Maya (be me), Sima (boun- 
dary), Pafica (five) etc., RJLjl (line or row), Dhub (shaking), 
Pub (purifying) , DiSa (direction), Gira (speech), Gatasrab (four), 
Vidu?i (learned person) , Ka (who), Iyam (this), Dik (direction), 
Drk (look), Tadrii (that kind) . These are chief among (the 
substantives belonging to) the feminine gender. (I shall describe) 
the chief among (the substantives belonging to) the neuter. 

20-22a. Kundam (a bowl or pit), Sarvam (all), Somapaiii 
Dadhi (curd), Vari (water), Khalapu (that which sweeps), 
Madhu (honey), Trapu (tin), Bhartr, Atibhartr, Payab (milk), 
Purab (city), Prak (east), Pratyak (?) (backwards), Tiryak 
(across), Udak (above or nothward), Jagat (world), Jagrat 
(awakening state), Sakrt (excrement) , Susampat (good wealth), 
Sudandi (good stick), Ahab (day) , Kim (what), Idaih (this). 
Sat (six).Sarpih (clarified butter), Sreyab (fortune) , Gatvari 
(four) , Adab (that thing) . Others are similar to these. 

22b-28a. (The inflections of) the first case (Nominative) 
etc. would come after these uninflected forms. A form of a word 
which is neither a verbal root (dhdtu), nor an affix {pratyaya ) is 
a nominal base (pritipadika). The first case from the nominal 



960 


Agni Puri Ipa 


base is employed to denote the subject. The first case (is also 
employed) in addressing when the agent and the object are 
mentioned. That which is done (by the agent) is the object 
(karma). Second case (Accusative) is used in the object. That by 
which something is done is the instrument ( katana) . One who 
does is the agent (kartd) . When the object is not specified to be 
the agent through the verbal affix or suffixes of the krt and tad* 
dhita type, the third case (Instrumental) is used in (denoting) 
the instrument and the agent. The fourth case is employed in 
sampradina (to be given). It is said to be sampradina in which 
the desire to give is indicated. Ap&d&na , is that from which some- 
thing moves away or taken away. The fifth case (Ablative) is 
used (to denote) apiddna. The sixth case (Genitive) (is used to 
denote) one’s ownership. The term adhikarana is used in the 
sense of the base ( Sdhira ) . The seventh case (Locative) (is used) 
therein. 

28b-29a. Singular is used to denote a single thing. Dual 
comes in the sense of two things. Plural would occur in the 
(sense of) many. I shall describe the finished forms (now). 

29b-32a. (The following are examples for the Nominative): 
Vfksah (tree), Suryahi (Sun), Ambuvahafi (cloud), Arkah 
(Sun) . The following are the examples for«the Vocative) : He 
Ravi (O Sun!), He Dvij&tayas (O twiceborns !), Viprau 
(O Brahmins !) . (Then the example for the Accusative) : Gajan 
( the elephants) . (Then the examples for the Instrumental): 
Mahendrena (by Mahendra, the lord of the celestials), Yama- 
bhyam (by two Yamas — by the twins), Analaifi kjrtam (done 
by Anala, fire plural) . Ramaya (for Rama) , Munivaryabhyam 
(for the two excellent sages) , Kebhyah (for whom, plural) (are 
examples for the Dative) . Dharmat (from Dharma), Harau 
ratih 1 (?), Sarabhyam (from the two arrows), Pustakebhyafi 
(from the books) (are illustrations for the Ablative). Arthasya (of 
the sense), Iivarayoh (of the two lords), Gatih balanam (the fate 
of children) (are for the Genitive). Sajjane pritifi (pleased in good 
people), Hamsayoh(in the two haihsas), Kamale?u (in the lotuses) 
(are examples for the Locative) . In the same way, the words 


1. The reading is obviously wrong. 



351.32b-41a 


961 


Kama (God of love), Maheia (the great lord) and other (words) 
should be known like (the word) Vfk?a (tree). 

32b-36a. Sarve (all) , Visve ( all or entire or whole) , Sarv- 
asmai (for all) , Sarvasmat (from all) and Katara (who or which 
of two) are regarded (as similar). Sarve?am (of all), Svam (one’s 
self), Vilvasmin (in the whole). The other forms arc like (the 
word) Vrksa (tree). Similarly Ubhaya (both), Katara (who or 
which of the two), Katama (who or which of many), Anyatara 
( one of two) etc. (should be known). Purve (all the former), 
Purvah (all the former, feminine) , Purvasmai (for the former) , 
Purvasmat (from the former), Purve (in the former), Purvasmin 
(in the former). The other forms are like that of Sarva. Para 
(superior), Avara (inferior) as well as Daksina (south), Uttara 
(north) , Antara (in between), Aparah (others), Adharah (below) 
(are to be known) in the same way. Nemah (parts), Prathamah 
(the first ones), Prathame (<n the first one) are like the word 
Arka (Sun). In the same way (we whould have) Caramah (last), 
Alpa (little), Ardha (half) and theNema (part) and others. 

36b-41a. Dvitiyasmai (or) Dvitiyaya (for the second), 
Dvitiyasmat (or) Dvitiyakat (from the second), Dvitlyasmin 
(or) Dvitiye (in the second) and Tftlya (third) like (the word) 
Arka (Sun). Somapah ( a drinker of Soma) and Somapau (two 
drinkers of Soma) should be known. Go to Somapah (drinkers 
of Soma) (or) Somapam (a drinker of Soma). Kilalapau (two 
drinkers of a heavenly drink similar to nectar) and Somapah 
( drinker of Soma), Somapah (drinkers of Soma ),Somape dada(give 
to a drinker of Soma), Somapabhyam (to two drinkers of Soma - , 
Somapabhyah (to many drinkers of Soma), Somapah (drinker 
of Soma), Somapau (two drinkers of Soma) (belong to) a group. 
(The words) such as Kilalapah (drinkers of a celestial drink) 
would be similar. Kavih (poet), Agnih (fire) and Arayah (ene- 
mies) , He kave ! (O poet !) , Kavim (the poet, accusative), Agn! 
(two fires, accusative), Tan Harm (those Hari-s), SatyakinA 
hytam (taken by Satyaki) , Ravibhyam (by two Suns), Ravibhih 
(by the Suns), Dehi vahnayeyah samagatah (Give to Fire who 
has come), Agneh (of fire), Agnyoh (of two fires), Agnlnam 
(of many fires), Kavau (in the poet), Kavyoh (in the two poets) 
and Kavifu (in many poets) (are examples for words ending in 
‘»’). Similarly Susftih (good path) , Abhrantih (not an error). 



962 Agni PttrOQa 

Suklrtifr (good fame) and Sudhj-tih (firmness) (are to be dec- 
dined). 

41b-43a. (Some more examples for words ending in *i’) : 
Sakha (a friend), Sakhayau ( two friends) , Sakhayab (many 
friends). ‘He sakhe ! vraja satpatim* (O Friend 1 go to a good 
master), Sakhayam (the friend), Sakhayau (the two friends), 
Sakhin (the friends) (are accusative forms). Sakhya gatab 
(gone with the friend). Dada sakhye ( give to the friend) . Sakh- 
yuh (from a friend), Sakhyuh (of the friend), Sakhyoh (of the 
two friends). That rest (are formed like) the forms of Kavi 
(poet) . Patya (by the master) , Patye (for the master), Patyun 
(from the master) , Patyuh (of the master) , Patyoh (of tlie two 
masters) are like (the word) Agni (fire). 

43b. Dvau (two), Dvau (the two), Dvabhyam (by the 
two), Dvabhyftm (for the two), Dvayoh (from the two) and 
Dvayob (of the two) are in the sense of dual. 

44. Trayah (three), Trln (the three), Tribhih (by the three), 
Tribhyah (for the three) , Trayanim (of the three) and Tri§u 
(in the three) (are) in order. Kati (how many) and Kati (how 
many) . The other plural forms are like Kavi (poet) (in the 
plural) . 

45. (The word Nl, leader is declined as follows): Nib (a 
leader) , Niyau (two leaders) and Niyah (many leaders). He nih 
(O leader 1) , Niyam (one leader) , Niyau (two leaders), Niyab 
(many leaders). Niya (by a leader), Nlbhyam (by two leaders), 
Nibhib (by many leaders). Niye (for a leader), Nibhyab (for 
many leaders). Niy&ih (of many leaders), Niyi (in a leader) and 
Niyob (in two leaders). 

46-48a. SuSrib (good fortune), Sudhlh (good intellect) etc. 
Gr&manlb ( a leader), pujayeddharim (should worship Hari). 
Gramapyau (the two chiefs), Gramanyab (the many chiefs), 
Gramapyam (the chief, accusative), Gramanya (by the chief) , 
Gramanibhib (by many chiefr), Gramanyah (of a chief), Gram- 
any&m (in a chief). Words beginning with Sen&nl (leader of an 
army) are similarly (declined). Subhub (good land) and Sabhu- 
vau (two good lands). Svayambhuvab (self-bom), Svayambhuvam 
(self-bom, accusative), Svayambhuva (by the self-bom), Svaya- 
mbhuvi (in the self-born). Pratibhuvab (bail or surety) etc. 
(should be formed) similarly. 



351.48b-57a 


963 


48b-49. Khalapuh (that which sweeps), Khalapvau (the two 
which sweep), Sresjhau (that are excellent), Khalapvam (that 
which sweeps, accusative), and Khalapvi (in a sweeper) . (The 
words) beginning with Sarapuh would be in the same way. 
Krosfha (a jackal) and Kro?lharab (many jackals), Krofthun 
(the jackals, accusative plural), Krosfhuna or Kro?thra (by a 
jackal), Kro?thunaih (of the jackals), Krosfhari (in a jackal) 
are said to be (formed) thus. 

50-52a. Pita (father) , Pitarau (two fathers) , Pitarah (many 
fathers) , He pitah (O Father !) , Pitarau subhau (O Auspi- 
cious fathers!) , Pitrn (the fathers, accusative) , Pituh (from the 
father) , Pituh (of the father) , Pitrob (of the two fathers) , 
Pitjtiam (of many fathers) , Pitari (in the father) are 
formed) thus. In the same way Bhrata (a brother), Jam&tr 
(son-in-law) and others (words) (are formed) . Then NJnam 
or Nrnaih (of the men) . Karta (doer) , Kartarau (two doers) , 
Kartrn (many doers, accusative) , Kartmam (of many doers) 
and Kartari (in a doer) are thus (formed) . Udgata (a singer 
of Vehic hymn) , Svasa (sister) , Naptr (grandson) are known to 
be like (the word) Pitr (father) . 

52b. Surah (good fortune) , Surayau (dual) , Surayab (plu- 
ral), Surayam (accusative), and Surayi (locative). 

53. Gaub (a cow), Gavau (two cows). Gam (accusa- 
tive), Gab (accusative, plural), Gava (instrumental), Gob 
(genitive) , Gavoh (genitive, dual), Gavam (genitive, plural) 
and Gavi (in a cow). In the same way Dyaub (heaven) and 
Glaub (Moon)and the chief masculine words ending in vowels. 

54-57a. Suvak (good speech) , Suvaci (nominative dual), 
Suvaca (instrumental), Suvagbhyam (instrumental, dual), Su- 
vaksu (locative, plural) . Similarly the directions beginning with 
(east) . Pran (east), Prafici (nominative neuter dual), Praftcam 
( to the east) bho vraja (you go) . Pragbhyam (instrumental, 
dual), Pragbhib (instrumental, plural), Pracaxh (genitive), 
Praci (locative, singular), Prahsu and Prank^u (locative, plu- 
ral). In the same way Udan or Udlci (north), Samyan (well) , 
Pratyak (western), Samici (a doe),Tiryan (that which moves 
horizontally), Tirasca 1 , Sadhryan (a companion, especially 


1. Stems to be Tiraid, denoting a female of any animal. 



964 Agnt Pur&tfa 

husband) , Vi?vadryan (all-pervading) are known to be like the 
former. Adadryan, Adamuyafi, Amumuyan (all meaning going 
to that) etc. are similar. Adadryofic (one who has gone to that 
direction) and Amudricah (one who has gone to that direction) 
and Adadryabhyam are as before. 

57b-59a. Tattvatyt (desirous of truth) (nominative) , Tat- 
tvatrjau (dual) , Tattvatrnbhyarii (with men desirous of Truth) 
samagatah (one has come together) ,Tattvatr?i (in one desirous of 
truth) , Tattvatrtsu (among those desirous of truth) . In the same 
way Kasfha (wood) , Tada (?) etc. (are formed). Bhisak (a 
physician) , Bhisagbhyam (by two physicians) , Bhigaji (locative) . 
(The words) such as Jannabhak (are) then (similarly declined) . 
Marut (wind) , Marudbhyam (by two winds) , Maruti (in the 
wind). In the same way (we have) Satrujit (conqueror of an 
enemy) etc. 

59b-61. Bhavan (you, polite form), Bhavantau (dual), 
Bhavatam (of you, plural) , Bhavan (vocative) , Bhavati (in you). 
Mahan (great) , Mahantau (dual) , Mahatam (of great people) , 
Bhagavat (fortunate) etc. In the same way Maghavan (Indra) , 
Maghavantau (dual) . Agnicit (one who has kept the sacred fire) , 
Agniciti (locative) , Agnicitsu (locative, plural) . In the same 
way Anyat (another) , Vedavit (one who knows the scriptures) , 
Tattvavit (knower of truth) etc. (We will have) Vedavidam 
(in locative singular) . In the same way Anyat (some other per- 
son) . One who knows all is Sarvavit. 

62-64. (The word Rajan is declined thus) : Raja (king) , 
Rajanau (dual) , Raj ft ah (genitive) , Rajfti or Rajani (locative) , 
Rajan (vocative) . Yajva (a performer of a sacrifice) , Yajvanah 
(plural) are similar. Kari (an elephant) , Dandl (one who holds 
a stick) , Dandinau (dual), Panthah (path) , Panthanau (dual) , 
Pathah (plural) , Pathibhyam (instrumental, dual) and Pathi 
(locative) (will be) similar. Mantha (that which churns) , Rbh- 
uk$ah (nominative plural) (Rbhuksah means Indra) and Pathya 
(wholesome food) etc. (should be known) . Pafica (five) , Paftca 
(accusative), Paftcabhifi (instrumental;. Pratan (one who spr- 
eads well) , Pratanau (dual) , Pratanbhyarh (instrumental, dual) , 
He Pratan (vocative) and Su^arma^ah (vocative, those who 
are happy). (The following is always plural) : Apah (water) 
(nominative) , Apafi (accusative) , Adbhifi (instrumental) . In 



351.65-73 965 

the same way Pras&n (one who is tranquil) and Prasani (loca- 
tive) also. 

65-67. Kah (who), Kena (by whom) like Sarva (all). 
Ke?u (among whom), Ayaih (this), Ime (dual), Iman (accusa- 
tive plural), Anena (by this), Abhyam (instrumental, dual), 
Ebhih (instrumental, plural) , Asmai (dative, singular) , Ebhyah 
(dative plural), Svam (one’s own), ,\sya (genitive), Anayoh 
(genitive, dual), E?am (genitive, plural) and E?u (locative, 
plural) would be (formed). Catvaral.i (four), Caturah (accusa- 
tive), Caturnam (genitive), Catursu (locative). Sugih (good 
speech), Sugirfu (locative, plural), Sudyaul.i (good day), Sudivau 
(dual), Sudyubhyam (instrumental dual). Vit (merchant), 
Visau (dual), Vitsu (locative, plural). Yadfsah (ablative, singu- 
lar, from which kind of a thing) , Yadrgbhyaih (ablative, dual) 
Vidbhyaih (dual in the third, iourth and fifth cases). §a( (six), 

(accusative) $annam (genitive plural), §a^su (locative, 
plural). 

68-70a. Suvacah (eloquent), Suvacasa (instrumental), 
Suvacobhyam (instrumental, dual), HeSuvaco (vocative). He 
U£anan (Usanas denotes the preceptor of the demons) (voca- 
tive), U£ana (instrumental), Ulanasi (locative), Purudarisa (a 
goose), Aiicha (a stupid person), He Vidvan (O Learned 
man 1), Vidvan (nominative) Vidu$e namah (obeisance to the 
learned, dative), Vidvadbhyam (instrumental, dative and abla- 
tive, dual), Vidvatsu (locative, plural). Babhuvivan (one that 
has become). (We have) in the same way, Pecivan (one that 
cooks), Sreyan (excellent), Sreyamsau (nominative, dual), 
Sreyasah (accusative, plural). 

70b-73. The following are the forms of Adas (that) : 
Asau, Amu, Am!( nominative, singular, dual and plural), Amum 
and Amun (accusative singular and plural) , Amuna, Amibhih 
(instrumental singular and plural), Amusmai (dative), Amu?- 
mat (ablative), Amusya, Amuyofr, Amisam (genitive singular, 
dual and plural) and Amu?min (locative) . Similarly (we have) 

( the forms of Godhuk, one who milks the cow): A person has 
come with one who milks the cow. Godhuksu (locative plural) . 
Thus (we have) other (forms). Mitradruhah (one who is trea- 
cherous to a friend), Mitradrugbhyaih (dual instrumental), 
Mitraduigbhih (plural) and Cittadruhah (inimic to the mind) 



GC& 

900 


Agni Purina 


etc. Svalif (one who licks himself) , Svalidbhyam (instrumental 
dual), Svalihi (locative). Anaglvan (nominative of Anaduh, a 
bull),Anadutsu (locative plural). These are (the words) ending 
in the vowels and consonants in the masculine. I shall describe 
(now) those in the feminine. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTYTWO 
Narration of the finished forms of the substantives in the feminine 
Skanda said : 

1-2. (The following are the forms of feminine nouns ending 
in 5) : Rama (Lak$mi, consort of Visnu), Rame, Ramah (the 
three forms in the nominative) are auspicious. Ramam, Rame, 
Ramah (the three forms in the accusative) , Ramaya, Rama- 
bhyarii, Ramabhih (tht three forms in the instrumental) (by 
Rama) it was made imperishable. Ramayai, Ramabhyam (are 
the singular, dual dative). Ramayah, Ramayoh, Ramanam 
(are the three forms in the genitive). Ramayam and Ramasu 
(are the singular and plural forms of the locative) . Kala (fine 
arts) is similar. 

3-4 . (The following are also feminine) : Jara (old age), 
Jarasau or Jare, Jarasah or Jarah (are the forms in the nomi- 
native). Jaram or Jarasam (is the form in the accusative 
singular) , Jar&su (is the locative plural). Similarly (we have) 
Sarva and Sarve (all) (in the nominative singular and dual). 
Sarvasya (instrumental), give Sarvasyai (dative) (to all). 
Sarvasyab (ablative), Sarvasyab (and) Sarvayob (genitive 
singular and dual) . The other forms are like that of Rama. 
(The following are always plural) : Dve (two in the 
nominative) , Dve (in the accusative) and Tisrah (three in the 
nominative) and Tispjam (in the genitive). 

5-8. (The following are examples of substantives of the 
feminine ending in T) : Buddhife (intellect) (nominative), 
Buddhya (instrumental), Buddhay a (dative) and Buddheb (abla- 



352.9-10 


967 


tive and genitive) . (The vocative form of Mati, mind, is) He 
mate. (The word Muni) will have (the forms) like that of Kavi 
(poet) : Munlnam (genitive) (of the sages). (The following are 
the forms of the substantives of the feminine ending in 1) : 
Nadih, Nadyau (singular and dual in the nominative). Nadixh, 
Nadifr (are the singular and plural in the accusative) . Nadyft, 
Nadibhih (are the singular and plural in the instrumental). 
Nadyai (is dative singular). Nadyam and Nadi$u (are the 
locative singular and plural). Similarly (we have the forms of) 
Kumari (a young girl), JrmbhanI (yawn) etc. Srib (fortune) , 
Sriyau, Sriyah (are the three forms in the nominative). Sriya 
(instrumental), Sriyai and Sriye (dative) (are the other forms). 
The following are the forms of the word Stri (woman) : Strim 
and Striyarh (in the nominative singular) and Strib or Striyab 
(in the plural), Striya (instrumental), Striyai (dative), Striyab 
and Strinam (singular and plural in the genitive) and Striyam 
(locative singular). (Similarly) Gramanya (locative singular) . 
(The forms of words ending in ‘a’ are) : Dhenva (by a cow) and 
Dhenave (dative). (The following are examples for those 
ending in S.) : Jambu (the rose apple), Jambvau (nominative 
singular and plural), Jambub (accusative singular), Drink the 
fruits of the Jambu (genitive). Var?abhvau (is the nominative 
dual of Var?abhu, a female frog) and Punarbhavau (nomin- 
ative dual of Punarbhu, a widow remarried). Matrh (is the 
accusative plural of Mate, mother ending in r). Gauh (cow) , 
Nauh (boat) (are examples of words ending in 0 ) . 

9-10. (Now we have examples for words ending in con- 
sonants) : Vak (speech) (nominative), Vaca, Vagbhih (instru- 
mental singular and plural) and Vak?u (locative plural) and 
Sragbhyam (instrumental dual) and Sraji, Srajoh (locative 
singular and dual) (for the word Srak (garland). (The forms 
of the word Vidvat, learned, are) Vidvadbhyam (dual in the 
instrumental, dative and ablative) and Vidvatsu (locative 
plural). (The following words ending in t take i — ending) : 
Bhavati (respect form), Bhavanti (one who is becoming), 
Divyanti (shining) Bhati (shining), Bhanti (appearing), Tudantl 
(inflicting pain), Tudatl, Rudatl (crying), Rundhati (obstruct- 
ing), the Goddess Grhyati (who is seizing or holding) and 
Corayand (one that is stealing). 



968 


Agni Purdm 


1 l-12a. (The following are other examples of nouns ending 
in 0 : Df?at (stone) , Drsadbhyam (instrumental, dative and 
ablative dual), Df?adi (locative) are the special models. Samit 
(twig), Samidbhyam (instrumental, dative and ablative dual), 
Samidhi (locative) (are other examples). (The following are 
examples for words ending in n ): Sima (boundary) (nomi- 
native), Slmni or Simani (locative). Damanibhyam (instru- 
mental etc. from the word Daman meaning a line or streak) . 
Kakudbhyam (from Kakud, summit). Ka (who) (is a pronoun), 
Iyaih (this) (demonstrative pronoun) and Asu (locative plural, 
in them) . 

12b-l 3. (The forms of the word Gih, speech, are as follows) : 
Glrbhyarh (dual in instrumental, dative and ablative) , Gira 
(instrumental) and Glr$u (locative plural) . (The following are 
also feminine nouns) : Subliuh (good land) , Supuh (good city), 
Pura (through a city) , Puri (in a city) . (The following are the 
forms of dyo, heaven) : Dyauh, Dyubhyam (dual, instrumental 
etc.),Divi (locative), Dyu?u (plural). Tadrsya (by that kind) 
(instrumental) . That kind of direction etc. Yadrfyam (in 
which kind) , Yadr^i (which kind) are similar. Suvacobhyam 
(with good words) , Suvacahsu (locative) . Asau (that, nomi- 
native), Amum (accusative) , Amuh (plural) , Am ubhili (instru- 
mental plural) , Amuya (instrumental singular) and Amuyoh 
(genitive and locative dual) (are the forms of Adas in the 
feminine) . 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTYTHREE 

The finished forms of substantives in the neuter 
Skanda said : 

1 . (The forms) in the neuter (are as follows) : Kim, Ke, 
K&ni (the three forms in nominative, meaning what) . Kim, 
Ke, Kani (are the forms in the accusative) . Then (the word) 
Jalaih (water) . Sarvam (all) (nominative) , Sarve (nominative, 
dual), Purva and other (words), Simaparh (protecting the 
boundary) (accusative) , Simapani (accusative, plural) . 



353.2-9 


969 


2. (The words ending in l V are as follows) : Gramani, 
Gramanini, Gramaril and Gramanini (are the forms in the 
nominative of Gramani, leader) . Vari, Varitii, Varini (in the 
nominative) , Varinam 1 (in the genitive plural) and Varini 
(locative singular) are thus (the forms of Vari, water) . 

3. (The word Suci, pure, has two forms in the dative) : 
Sucaye and Sucine dehi (give) . Similarly (the word Mrdu, 
soft, has two forms in the instrumental) : Mrdune and Mrdave. 
(The word Trapu, tin has the forms) : Trapu (nominative) , 
Trapuni (locative singular) and Trapunarh (genitive plural) . 
Khalapuni (nominative plural) and Khalapvi (locative singular, 
(forms of Khalapu, a sweeper) . 

4. Kartra (instrumental) , Kartrne or Kartre (dative) (are 
the forms of Kartr, doer). Atiri (nominative) and Atirinam 
(genitive plural) (are the forms Atirin, one who goes beyond) . 
Abhini, Abhinini (are nominative forms of the word denoting 
performance) . Suvacamsi (nominative plural) and Suvuk$u 
(locative plural) (are from Suvak, good speech) . 

5. (The relative pronoun) Yad, yat (who) , and pronoun 
Ime (that) , Tat (that) (belong to neuter) . Karmani (is the 
plural of Karma, work) . Idam, Ime, Imani (are the forms of 
Idam, this) . Idrk (this kind) , Adah, Amuni, Amuni (in the 
nominative), Amuna ( in the instrumental) and Ami?u (in the 
locative plural) (are the forms of Adas, that) . 

6-9. (The forms of Asmad, I, are) : Aham, Avam, Vayam 
(nominative) , Mam, Avam, Asman (accusative) , Maya, Ava- 
bhyam, Asmabhih (instrumental) done. Mahyam and Asma- 
bhyam (dative singular and dual) , Mat, Avabhyaih, Asmat 
(ablative) . Mama, Avayoh and Asmakam (genitive) ayam 
putrah (This is my, our son) . Asmasu (locative plural) . (The 
forms of Yu?mad, you, are) , : Tvam, Yuvam, Yuyarh (nomi- 
native) ijire (praise). Tvam, Yuvam, Yusman ( accuative) , 
Tvaya and Yu?mabhih (instrumentral, singular* and plural) are 
stated (to be the forms) . Tubhyam, Yuvabhyam, Yusmabhyam 
(dative) , Tvat, Yuvabhyam, Yu?mat (ablative) , Tava, Yuva- 
yoh, Yu?makam (genitive) and Tvayi, Yu?masu (locative, 
singtdar and plural). These are the characteristics of the 


1 . OMoualy a mistake for V&ri^&tb. 



970 Agni Pur&pa 

language. (The substantives) ending in vowels and consonants 
have been described. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTYFOUR 

The relation between a noun and a verb in a sentence 
Skanda said : 

1. I shall describe the k draka ( the relation that exists bet- 
ween a noun and a verb) together with the significance of the 
inflection (of nouns). (There) is a village. O Great Arka 
(Sun) ! I salute (lord) Vi?nu together with Sri (His consort) 
here. 

2-4. The agent is said to be fivefold : (1) The agent is 
independent. The composers of the sacred knowledge are res- 
pected. (2) The agent gets to that cause when the agent is the 
doer. The dull headed breaks up himself. The tree cuts itself. 
(3) The agent expressed is good. The agent not expressed is 
low. (An example) for the agent not expressed (is) : The dharma 
is being expounded to the pupil. Listen to me ! ( I shall des- 
cribe) the seven kinds of objects. 

5-8a. (The first one is) the desired object such as “An 
ascetic pays respect to (lord) Hari ( Vi?nu)”. (The second one 
is) the object that is not desired, such as “A person jumps over 
a serpent repeatedly." “After drinking milk, eat dust" (is an 
example) for neither desired nor not desired (object of the third 
kind). (The fourth one consists of) not being told (such as) 
“The cowherd is milking the cow”. (The next one is) the 
object of the agent such as “Let the preceptor send the disciple 
to the village". (An example for the sixth variety, namely), 
the object that is expressed, (is) “Worship is made to (lord) 
Hari for prosperity". “Make an eulogy to ilord) Hari that 
yields all (things) ” (is an example) for the object that is not 
expressed, (the seventh variety of object). 

8b-9a. The instrument is said to be two kinds — external 
and internal. A person perceives the form by means of the eye 



354.9b- 18 


971 


(in an example for the internal). May a person cut that with a 
sickle (is an instance of) external. 

9b-10. The sampraddna (giving) is said to be threefold: (1) 
preraka (sending) a cow to a brahmin, (2) anumantfka (with 
consent) (such as) “A person gives a servant for the king”, (3) 
anirdkartfka (a thing that could not be refused) (such as) “A 
good person may give flowers to the master.” 

11. The apddSna (that which is being taken away) is said to 
be twofold : (1) calarft (moveable) : (A person) has fallen 
from a running horse and acalath (immoveable) : That devotee 
ofVi?nu comes from a village. 

12-14a. The adkikaravia (thejbase) is fourfold : (1 ) vyipaka 
(pervading) just as ghee in curd, (2) aupaSlesika (juxtaposition) 
is said (to be the existence of) oil in sesamum for the sake of 
God, (3) vaifayika (pertaining to an object) is known (to be) 
like the monkey may remain on a house (or) a tree, (and) (4) 
sdmipyaka (proximate) known (to be) like fish in the water and 
a lion in a forest. (A fifth variety) is known as aupac&rika (meta- 
phorical) such as the existence of a hamlet on the (river) Ganges. 

14b-l 7. (Now I shall describe the use of different inflections 
indicating different senses. ) The third or the sixth ( case) is known 
(to be used) when (the intention is) not expressed. ( Lord) Vi?nu 
is worshipped by people, To be gone by him or of him (are 
examples) . The first case (is used) when the agent is expressed. 
(Accusative is used to denote) object : May a person make 
obeisance to Hari. The third case (is used to denote) cause 
(of an action) 1 2 3 : May one live for the sake of another. The 
fourth case is expressive of the purpose for which anything is 
done* : The water (is) for the three. The fifth case (is indica- 
ted) by means of (the words) pari , upa and &A etc. 8 in combin- 
ation. Outside the village this God was strong before. (Other 
examples) 4 . ‘To the east of the village', ‘without (lord) Vi?nu 
(there is) no emancipation’ and ‘different from Hari’. 

18. There would be either third of fifth case with (the 


1. cf. pi *. n. 3. 

2. See Kale, Higher Skt Gr. 827. 

3. It should be pari, apa and M. See Pa. II. 3. 10. 

4. See Kale, ib. 840 



972 


Agni Purina 


words) such as Pfthak, Vina etc. 1 2 : different from the village, 
without sport (with the word) Sri (prosperity) (such as) sriya 
(instrumental) and ^riyah (ablative). 

19. There would be second case when combined with 
karmapraoacanljas .* The warriors are inferior to Arjuna (and) 
near the village are said (to be examples). 

20. The fourth case is used with ( the particles) namafy 
(obeisance), iv&ha (ablations), svadka, svasti (well-being) and 
vafaf etc. 3 : Obeisance to the lord and Farewell to thee. (The 
fourth case) of an abstract noun (formed from a root may 
be used) to express the sense of the infinitive (of the same 
root) . 4 5 

21. (The object governed by an infinitive mood not actu- 
ally used but implied is put in the fourth case such as) (He) 
goes for cooking (in order to cook) ( p&kaya ). The third case 
(is used)when accompanied by (the word) saha. The third case 
(is also employed) to express the cause or motive 3 (or the 
object or purpose of an action), (to express) some defect in a 
limb 6 (of the body) or a characteristic attribute 7 (indicative of 
the existence of a particular state). 

22-23a. (The following are illustrations for the use of the 
third case) : The father went with the son ( saha putreiia) ; blind 
of one eye {kano ’ kfna); He is Hari (apparent) from his club 
(gadayd) ; The servant may stay on account of the wealth 
(artkena). The seventh case (is used (to denote) the time (of 
action) and becoming. (The following are the examples) : 
One would get release (from bondage) when (lord) Visnu is 
propitiated( visnau nate ). (He) attained Hari in the spring. 

23b-24. (We have the sixth or seventh case in the following 
instances) : Master of men (or) master among men, lord of 
men, lord of good people, witness of men (or) witness among 


1. See Pa II. 3. 32 

2. Prepositions used by themselves and governing nouns are known as 
Karmapravaeanlyas. See Pa. II. 3.8. 

3. See Pa. II. 3. 16. 

4. See Pa. II. 3. 15. 

5. See Pa. II. 3. 

6. Cf. Pa. II. 3.20. 

7. See Pa. II. 3. 21. 



354.25—355.7 


973 


men, lord among the cows, born among the cows (or) born of 
the cows, a heir or son of kings. 

25. (When the word hetu, cause or object is used in a 
sentence, that which is the object and the word hetu are put in 
the genitive) 1 : (A person) dwells for the sake of food. A word 
or object expressing remembrance (is put in the genitive) (such 
as): Remembers the mother (matuh), the guardian always. (The 
genitive is used) in the sense of the subject or the object (of the 
action denoted by the primary nominal bases) : The splitter of 
water, your action. The genitive (is) not used with past parti* 
ciples (niff ha) 2 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTYFIVE 
Different kinds of compounds 

Skanda said : 

1 . 1 shall describe the six kinds of compounds. They are 

again divided into twentyeight kinds. They are twofold being 
divided as eternal and non-eternal, those which drop(the suffixes) 
and those which do not drop. 

2-3a. (The following are examples of) eternal (compounds) : 
Kumbhakarah (a potter), hemakarah. (goldsmith) etc. Rajflah 
puman or rajapuman (a person with royal authority). This 
also is an eternal compound. Ka?tasritah ( ka$fena sritah) (joined 
with difficulty) (is an example of) dropping (the suffix). Karijhe- 
kalah etc. (kanjhe-f ka’ah) (black-necked) (are examples) for 
not dropping (the suffix). 

3b-7. Tatpurusa (Determinative compound) is of eight 
kinds. The first one is that where the words when compounded 
with substantives are placed first. This is the first (variety) of 
Tatpurusa. Purvam Kayasya when (the compound is) dissolved 


1. Cf. Pa. II. 3. 27. 

2. See Pa. II. 3. 69. 



974 


Agni Purdrta 


(becomes) purvakayah 1 2 3 4 5 6 (the upper part of the body), Apara- 
k&yafi (lower part of the body) , Adharottara-kiyakah (the 
lower and higher part of the body) . Ardham Kanayah (be- 
comes) Ardhakan^h (half of a grain). Bhik?aturyam* (begging 
alms a fourth time)is also of this type(signifying the whole of which 
they are parts) (optionally placed first). Apannajivikah® (apanno 
jivikam) is similar (in the second case). AdharS^ritah( adharam 
airilah — one who has resorted to a lower person). Var$am- 
bhogyah (or) Var?abhogyah (to be enjoyed for a year). (An 
instance of compounding) with (nouns in) the third case : Dhan- 
yarthah (Dhanyena arthah) (wealth obtained by means grain). 
(The noun) would be in the fourth case (when compounded 
with the word bait) : Vi?nubalih ( Vi?nave balih). Vjkabhltih* 
(Vrk4t bhitih, fear from a wolf) (is an example for compound- 
ing with a noun in) the fifth case. (An example for) sixth case 
(is) Rajflab puman (an officer of a king) (becoming) Rajapu- 
man. Similarly (we have) Vrk?aphalam (the fruit of a tree) . 
The seventh case (is used in the following): This one (is) Ak$a- 
£aunda s (Ak?e?u Saundah) (skilled in dice). Ahitah (not bene- 
ficial) (is an example) for Negative Tatpuruja. 

8-12. Karmadharaya (appositioned compound) is seven- 
fold*. Nilotpala (Nilaih ca tad utpalarh ca) etc. are known (to be 
the examples) for compounding the adjective and the noun it 
qualifies). (1) The qualifying word is placed first or (2) the word 
that is qualified is placed afterwards. (Words expressive of the 
persons or things condemned are placed first) : Vaiyakarana- 
khasucih (a bad grammarian) (an example for first kind) . 
£ito;nam (cold and hot) and Dvipadam (two words) (are ex- 
amples for the second) . ( 3) Expressive of standard of compa- 
rison placed as first member : Sankhapandara (white as the 
conch) ( iahkhah ivapandarah) . (4) The standard of comparison 


1. See Pa , II. 2. 1. They are not strictly Genitive Tatpuru?a. But called 
by some as Prathamft Tatpuruja. 

2. See Pa. II. 2.3. 

3. See Pa. II. 1. 24. 

4. See V&rttika under Pa* II. 1. 37. 

5. Pa. II. 1.40. 

6. But it is actually six-fold . 



355.13-18 


975 


placed as the second member : Puru savyaghrafr (a man like a 
tiger) (purufo vyaghrafi iva) . (5) Words of respect placed first: 
Gunavfddhib dissolved as guriah iti vjddhih. (elongation). Suhfd 
and Subandhu (are examples). (6) The woid signifying pro- 
minence is placed as the first member (pada eva padmatfi- p&da- 
padmarh ) . Bahuvrihi (attributive compound) is sevenfold. (The 
following are examples) for the Bahuvrihi having two words : 
drfldhabhaoano narah (A man who has stepped into a house) . 

13. These brahmins are about ten (ie., nine or eleven). 
upada&h(— daSanam samipe ye santi te) is (an example of 
Bahuvrihi having the) numeral as the second member. (Examp- 
les of Bahnvrihi) having both ( the members) as numerals are 
such as dvitrS (two or three), dvyekatraya (two or one or three) 
men. 

14. The particle saha (may be compounded) when it be- 
comes the first member. The tree has been pulled out together 
with its root (samula) (is an example) . Those having the 
characteristic of reciprocity : (a battle in which the warriors 
fight) seizing each other’s hair, (ke£ake£) fighting one another 
with nail (nakhanakhl) . 

15. (A Bahuvrihi compound may be formed) to denote a 
direction (in between two directions) : dakfinapUrvi (the point 
of direction in between the south and east) . A Dvigu (having 
a number as the first member in a compound) is said to be 
twofold. It becomes singular (when denoting an aggregate) , 
* having two peaks’ ’having five roots’. It is possible in many 
ways. 

16. A Dvandva (copulative compound) is twofold 
itaretarayoga and sam&h&ra (the members are treated separately, 
and an aggragete of the things enumerated constituing a complex 
(idea). (An example for the first is) Rudravisnu (Rudra and 
Vi?nu) . (An example for the second is) Bherlpafaha. (It is 
always singular.) 

17-18. Avyayibhava (compound consisting of two members, 
the first of which is, mostly, an indeclinable) is said to be of two 
kinds. An example for one having a noun as the first member (is ) : 
i&kasya mdtrd (very little vegetable) — iakaprati. An example for 
one with the first member as an indediable (is) : upakumbharh 
(near a pot) and upcarathyam ( near a chariot). The compounds are 



976 


Agni Purina 


fourfold on account of the prominence (of one member) — that 
which has the second member prominent and Dvandva, where 
both (the members) are prominent. Avyayibhava has the 
first member prominent and Bahuvrihi (in which the im- 
portance lies) externally. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND E1FTYSIX 

The rules governing the formation of taddhita 
( secondary nominal bases ) 

Skanda said : 

1-4. I shall describe the three kinds of taddhita ; the general 
type (will be formed) by using the following affixes) 

lac (la) — amsalah (having muscular shoulders) ; 

vatsalah (compassionate) . 

ilac ( ila ) — phenila (foamy) ; picchila (slippery) . 

Se(Sa) — loma&ah (hairy, a monkey) . 

ne (na) — pamanah (sulphur) 

an (a) — prajfta (wise) , arcaka (relating to a wor- 

shipper) . 

urac (ura) — forms dantura (having projecting teeth) 

fromdanta (tooth). 

ra — madhura (sweet) ; susira (for a long 

time) . 

(by adding va) Kesava (having beautiful 
hair) (is formed) similarly, 
ya — hiranyam (gold) 

va — Malava (name of a country) 

valaci (vala) — rajasvala (menstruous woman) 

ml — dhani (rich) ; kari and hast! (elephant) 

fikan ( ika ) — dhanika (rich) 

t tin — payasvi (milky) ; mayavl (magician) 

yuyuc (jus) — Dnpayufi (woolen) 

5-8. min (ml) — vagm! (eloquent) 

dlac (Ha) — (vacala) 

and 



356.9-13 


977 


dfac — vacaka (eloquent) 

ina — phalinah (fruitful) ;barhinah (a peacock) ; 

kek! (a peacock) 

kan — vrndaraka (venerable or beautiful) 

Hue — SItalu — fitam na sahate (unable to endure 

cold) ; himalu — himarii na sahate (not able 
to bear snow) 

We would have the form vitula from vita (by adding) ulac. 

an (is used to denote) progeny (such as) Vasi^ha, Kaurava. 

so’sya vasakah — Paficalah 

tatra vasah — Mathurah 

vetti adhite candravyakaranam — Candrakah 

9-12. Khati (ka) priyahgunarh ksetram praiyangavinakam 


a (i) 

— Dak?ih (the son of Daksa) ; Dafarathih 
(the son of Daiaratha) . 

kac 

— Narayana 

phah 

— Afvayanaht 

yac 

— Gargyah (son of Garga) ; Vatsyakah (of 
the family of Vatsya) 

<jhak (eyd) 

— Vainateya (son of Vinati, ie., Garuda) 
etc. 

erak 

— Cafakerah 

ihak 

— Gandheraka 

gha (iya) 

— k;atriya (born in the race of a ruler) 

kha {Ina) 

— kulinah (bom of a good family) 

nya ( ya ) 

— Kauravya (a descendant of Kuru) 

yat 

— murdhanya (being in or on the head) ; 
mukhya (chief) etc. 

— sugandhih (good fragrance) 

. itac (ita) 

(will be used) for Taraka group 1 (of words) 
(in the sense of that is obtained or posses- 
sed by) such as ‘the sky studded with 
stars'. 

anarti (an) 

— kundodhni (a cow with a full udder) ; 
pu$padhanvan (the god of love) ; sudhan- 
van (having an excellent bow) . 


1. See Pa. V. 2. 36 



978 Agrti Pardon 

14. cutlcup ( cuhcu ) — vittacuftcuh would be used in the sense of 

one having wealth. 

canap (earn) — kelacanah (renowned for the hair) 
rOpa — pafarupa (in the form of a cloth) . 

15-16 iyas — it would be paflyan (cleverer) 
tarap (tara) — akjatara (fairly proficient in dice) ; 

pacatitaram 1 (cooking fairly well) 
tamap (lama) — afatitamaiii 2 (wandering excellently) ; 

mfdvitama (much soft). 

kalpap (kalpa) — Indrakalpah (equal to Indra) ; ardhakal- 

pakah (equal to half) 

deSlya or deiya — rajade&yah (almost a king) 

17. jttlya — Pafujatiya (belonging to an intelligent 

group) 

mitrac (m&tra) — janumatram (reaching as far as the knee) 

dvayasac — urudvayasa (reaching 

( dvayasa ) upto the thigh) 

dadhnac (dadhna ) — urudadhna (reaching upto the thigh) 

18. tayap ( taya ) — paficatayah (fivefold) 

thak (ika) — dauvarikah (door-keeper) 

The general suffixes have been described. (I shall describe 
now) the secondary affixes known as indeclinables. 

19-20. tasil (las) — yatah is formed (in the sense of) from 

which. 

tral is said (to form) yatra (where) , tatra (there) , adhuni (is 
used in the sense of) at that time, and din (is used in) id&nlrti 
(now) . Di is used (to form) sarvadd (always) together with 
sarva. hil (hi) forms tarhi in the sense of that time and karhi , at 
which time. Ha (is used to form) iha (in the sense of) now. 
21-24a.tAd/ (thi) — yatha (when) ; 
tham (tha ) — katham (how). 

Let one gather in the eastern direction astdt (il) for purva 
(Sabda). 

May the leaders move in the front (purastat) . (The word) 
sadya is said (to be used) (in the sense of) same day. Ut (is 
used) for the previous year and Parut for \the year) preceding 

1. See Pa. V. 4.1 1 

2. See ibid. 



356.24b-30 


979 


that Pardri is also (used in the same sense) . Aifamo (is used in 
the sense of) this year derived from the word samas ) . Edyavau 
and Paredyavi would (denote) the next day. Adya means 
today. Dye is used in combination as Purvedyuh and Edyufr (the 
previous day) . 

24b-27. Let one dwell in the southern direction. Dak$ifiat 
and Dak?inadi (in the southern direction) . May one dwell in 
thenorthern direction: Uttarat and Uttaradi (in the northern 
direction) . May one dwell above: Upari$$at. Ri$(atiand Ordh- 
vakat (above) (have similar meaning) . By adding suffix d c 
we have dak$iria. By adding ihi we have daksin&hi (in the south) 
vaset (may one dwell) . Dha in doidhd denotes two ways. When 
dhyamuH is added to eke it becomes ekadhyam (thinking in one 
form only) , Likewise dhamuri is added to dvi we have dvaidham 
(to forms) ... 1 

28-30. The particles which are secondary suffixes have beat 
described. (I shall describe) the secondary affixes which are 
abstract nouns. Pafor bhavali — papitvam (cleverness) (using) 
(suffix) tva. Pafutd is said (to be by using; talk. By adding iman 
to prthu (we have) prathimd (extension). Saukhyam (happiness) 
is said to be from sukha (by adding) fyaft. Steyam (theft) (is 
framed) (by adding) yat to stena (a thief; . The state of being a 
monkey is kdpeyath. Sainya (army) and pathya (beneficial) are 
said (to be formed by adding) yak (ya). Aivarii (relating to a 
horse) Jiaum&rakath (relating to boyhood) and yauvarunh (relating 
to youth) (are from) dp (d ) . Acdryakarh relating to the prece- 
ptor) (is) from km. The other secondary suffixes are said (to be 
formed) in the same way. 


1. The-next two words are not dear. 



980 


Agtti Purina 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTYSEVEN 

The formation of the primary nominal bases by adding 
primary affixes known as uriidi, beginning with affix u 

Kumdra said : 

l-2a. The Unadis (a kind of primary nominal affixes) are 
spoken as pratyayas (suffixes) added to roots. (The word) Kim 
(denoting) an artisan (is formed by adding the suffix) un. (The 
other examples are) jiyuh (medicine or physician), m&yuh 
(meaning) bile, gomiyuh (biles in the cow) . These unadis are 
widely used in the Ayurveda (Indian system of medicine) ter- 
minology. 

2b-4a. (The other examples are) dyuh (life) , svidu (sweet) , 
hetu (cause) etc. KithSimfy (means) the beard of a corn. Kfka- 
viku denotes a cock. Guru is the master. Maru is (a desert) . 
Sayu is known as a big serpent. Sam is saidtobea weapon (sword) . 
Svatu (denotes) the thunderbolt. Trapu (means) stsam 1 . Phalgu 
is said (to mean) worthless thing. 

4b-6. (The following words) are known (to be derived 
by adding the corresponding suffixes') : gjdhrab (vulture) (from) 
Aran, mandiram (an abode) and timirarh (meaning) darkness 
(from) kirac, salilarh (meaning) water and bhapdHa (meaning) 
auspicious (from) ilac. Budhah (meaning) a learned person 
(from) koasu. (The word) Sibira (denotes) a concealed position. 
Otufi (denotes) a cat (from the suffix) tun. (The words) karryib 
(ear) , kimi (a lustful person) , gfharh (house) , bhah (earth) , 
oistu (the site of a house) a.ndjaioitfkah (the moon) are known 
to be unidis because they denote (objects) . 

7. (The word) anadodn (a bull) is from (the root) vah (to 
bear) with <fran. Jioa (life) , arnava (ocean) and aufadha (herb) 
convey genus. (The word) vahni (fire) is (by adding the suffix) 
ni, harinah (meaning) a deer (from inan) and kimi (one who is 
lustful) (denotes) a fit person. 

8. SaAghita (a collection) ; oarUda (mixed caste) , saranda 
(means) an animal, erayda (is a kind of) tree; sima (chant) . 
nirbhara (full) . 

1. But trapu denotes tin and stsam, lead. 



357.9—358.5 


981 


9. (The word) sphdrath would mean (plenty) ... (The 
words) cira (denoting) a bark garment belongs to the same cate- 
gory. (The word) kdtara (means) timid. But ugra (means) fierce. 
Javasa (denotes) grass. 

10. Jagat (signifies) the earth and krSdnu, the lustre of the 
Sun. Varvara (means') curled and dhurta (a wicked person) . Cat - 
vararh (denotes) a junction of four roads. 

1 1 . Civara (is) the dress of a mendicant. Aditya is said to be 
Mitra ( the Sun) . (The word) putra (stands for) a son and pitd , 
for father. (The words) prddku (denotes) a tiger and a scorpion. 
Garta (denotes) a hole. Bharata (means) an actor. These are the 
other unddis. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTYEIGHT 

The completed forms of the verbs after adding the 
conjugational signs etc. 

Kumdra said : 

1. I shall describe the terminations (which are added) to 
the verbs as well as the substitutes in brief. The verbs occur in 
three forms such as bhSve (impersonal) , karmani (passive) and 
kartari (active) . 

2. They are known to be transitive and intransitive in the 
two padas (Atmanepada and Parasmaipada) in the Active. In 
the same way the substitutes in the transitive and intransitive. 

3. Laf is the designation for the present tense. Lift is said 
to be in the sense of the potential ( mood) etc. Lot (is) for bene- 
diction and conditional etc. LaA (is the designation) for the past 
not relating to the present day. 

4. LuA (is the name) for the past (Aorist) and lit for re- 
mote past and luf for immediate (first) future. LiA (is used) for 
benediction and Irf in the remaining senses. LjA would denote 
the (second) future. 

5. (LfA, conditional) (is used in the sentences) in which the 
Potential may be used, when the non-performance of action is 



982 


Agni Purina 


implied. The latter nine (are) Atmanepada (the result of the 
action accruing to one’s self) and the former nine (are) Paras- 
maipada (the result of the action accruing to another person) . 
Tip, las and anti (are the terminations of) the prathamapu - 
rufa. 1 

6-7a. Sip, thas and tha (are the terminations of) the madhya- 
mapurufa 2 and mip, vas and mas (fur) the uttamapurufa ®. Ta, itSrh 
and anta (are) the prathamapurvfa (terminations) in the Atmane- 
pada, this, ithirh, dhvarh in the madhyama and i, oahi , mahi in the 
uttama (in the imperfect) . Bhft (to be) etc. are known to be the 
roots. 

7b-10a. The following are the important roots belonging to 
the different conjugations 4 . (The roots) bhu (to be) , edh (to 
prosper ) , pac (to cook), nand (to rejoice), dhvarhs (to perish), 
Sarhs (to praise) (belong to the first conjugation) . Pad (to go) 
(fourth) , ad (to eatl (second) , HA (to lie down, second) , krid 
(to buy) (first) , juhoti (hu to offer in a sacrifice) (third) , jahSti 
(hi to abandon, third) , dadhiti ( dha to bear, third) , divyati (di 
to play or to shine, fourth) , svapiti ( svap to sleep, second) , nah 
(to tie, fourth) , sunoti (su, to press out juice, fifth) , vas (to dwell) , 
tud (to strike, wound, sixth) , mriati (mji to touch, sixth) , muAcati 
(muhc to lose, sixth) , rudh ( to hold up, seventh) , bhuj (to enjoy, 
seventh) , tyaj (to abandon, first) , and tan (to spread, eighth) . 
(The roots) man (to think) , karoti ( kf , to do) , k r idati (krid, to 
play) , vp i (to choose) , grah (to seize) , cor (cur, to steal) , pi (to 
drink and protect) , ni (to carry) and arc (to worship) are the 
important in the iap h and other modifications. 

1 Ob-1 3a. In (the root) bhu (by adding tiA, we would have 
sap bhavati (he becomes) , tau bhavatah (they two become) and te 
bhaoanti (they all become) . (Similarly we have) you become, 
you two become and you all become and I become, we two be- 
come and we all become. (Similarly in the Atmanepada) , the 

1. corresponding to the third person. 

2. corresponding to the second person. 

3. corresponding to the first person. 

4. The roots are divinded into ten conjugations known as bhoidi, adidi, 
jutm&Adi, dw&ii, spM, htdidi, rudhtoh, tmidi, krtidi and curtdi. 

5 . it the designation of the termination added to the first conjugation. 



358.1 3b-20 


983 


family prospers, two prosper and (many) prosper. You grow 
with intellect, (you two) prosper and you all prosper. We two 
grow with intellect. We all prosper with devotion to (lord) Hari. 
(He) cooks etc. are as before. 

13b- 15. One becomes and one enjoys (are examples) for 
the impersonal forms. The passive (is formed by adding) yak. 
The desiderative form (of root bhu is) bubhfifati. Thus in the 
causal (one) meditates on the lord. In the frequentative (we have 
the form) bobhByate (Atmanepada) or bobhoti when yoA is drop- 
ped (is the form) in the Parasmaipada frequentative. Putrlyati 
(treats like a son) on account of desire for children and thus 
pafapafdyate (utters the sound pafpaf ) , ghafuyali (brings about) 
(are examples) of the desiderative. He causes the figure to be 
adorned ( bubhusayati ) (is the form) in the causal. 

16. Bhavet (may become) , bhavetam, bhaveyuh, bhaveh 
bhavetam, bhaveta, bhaveyam, bhaveva, bhavema are (the 
forms in the three persons in the singular, dual and plural) 
in the Potential (mood) (in the Parasmaipada) . 

17. Edheta, edheyatarh, edheran (grow or prosper) with 
the mind and prosperity, edhetah, edheyatharh, cdhedhvam, 
edheya, edhevahi, edhemahi (are the forms of the Potential 
moon in the Atmanepada) . 

18-1 9a. Let it be. Bhavatam, bhavantu, bhavatador bhava, 
bhavatam, bhavata, bhavani, bhavava, bhavama (are the forms) 
in the Imperative mood. Edhatam (may one prosper) , edhetam, 
cdhantam (in the third person) , edhai(in the first person singular) 
(are the forms of Atmanepada Imperative) . Pacavahai, pac&- 
mahai (are the forms of Atmanepada Imperative dual and plural 
from pac to cook) . 

19b-20. Abhyanandat (felicitated), apacatim (cooked), 
apacan (they cooked) , apacah (you cooked) , abhavatam (you 
two became) , abhavata (you all became) , apacam (I cooked) , 
apacava (we two cooked) , apacama (we all cooked) (are the 
examples for the past (imperfect) injthe Parasmaipada) . Aid h a t a, 
aidhetam (third person singular and dual) , aidhadhvam (second 
person plural) , aidhe, aidhamahi (first person singular and 
plural) are said to be (the forms in the past tense, Atmane- 
pada) . _ 



984 


Agni Purdna 


21. Abhut, abhutam, abhuvan, abhuh and abhuvam (are 
the forms of the root bhu to be or become) in the Aorist. Aidhi- 
?|a, Aidhifatam (Men prospered) , aidhi?thah, aidhi?! (are) thus 
(the forms of the Aorist Atmanepada) . 

22. (The root bhU becomes) babhuva, babhuvatuh, babh- 
uvuh, babhuvitha, babhuvathuh, babhuva, (babhuva), babhu- 
viva and babhuvima (are the forms) in the Perfect tense (in the 
Parasmaipada) . 

23. Pece, pecate, pecire (cooked) and edhaficakr?e tvam 
(you prospered), edhaficakrathe, pecidhve, pece, pecimahe 
(are the forms in the Perfect in the Atmanepada and Periphras- 
tic perfect). 

24-25. In the first future ( the root bhu has the forms) bha- 
vita, bhavitarau, bliavitarah (will become) Hara and others. 
Bhavit&si, bhavitasthah; bhavitasmah vayam (we) (are the 
other forms) . Pakta, paktarau, paktarah (are the forms of the 
root pac in the first future third person) . You will cook (pak- 
t&se) good food. Paktadhve, I will cook (paktahe), paktasmahe 
(we will cook) the porridge for lord Hari (are examples for 
some of the forms of the root pac in the first future Atmane- 
pada) . 

26-30. In the benedictive: May there be (bhuyat) happi- 
ness, Hari and Sankara bhuyastim (be benevolent) , bhuyasuh 
they, you bhuya^, you two gods bhuyastam, you all bhuyasta, 
aham bhuyasam (May I be) , bhuyasma (we all may be) always 
(happy). Yak§I?ta, edhi;iy&stam, yaksiran, edhi§Iya, yak?!vahi, 
edhi$Imahi (are some of the forms of the roots yaj, to sacrifice 
and edh to prosper in the Atmanepada) in the Benedictive. 
Ayak?yata, ayak$eyatam, ayaksyanta, ayaksye, ayak?yetham 
you two, ayak^yadhvam, aidhi?yavahi, aidhisy&mahi we all (are 
the forms) in the Conditional mood in the Parasmaipada, Atma- 
nepada. Bhavifyati would be (the form) in the second future. 
Edhifyamahe is similar. In the same way vibhavayi$yanti, bo- 
bhaviyyati (frequentative second future) (will become again 
and again) . Ghafayet, pafayet, putriyati, kamyati (are other 
forms of nominal verbs and frequentatives) . 



359.1-7 


985 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTYNINE 

The finished, forms after adding the krt affixes (primary 
ajfixes added to verbs) 


Kumdra said : 

1-3. The krts are to be known in all the three forms (such 
as) the impersonal, passive and active. Ac, lyuf (to form neuter 
abstract nouns by adding na ) , ktin (ti) (to form feminine abs- 
tract nouns) , ghah (added to roots ending in consonants) , and 
yac in the impersonal (are the affixes) . (Their examples are) in 
the ac : vinaya (modesty) , utkarah (heap, multitude), prakarah 
(collection, heap), deoah (lord) , bhadrah (good) , Srikarah (con- 
ferer of prosperity). The form in lyut (is) iobhanarh (auspicious), 
in ktin (ti) (the forms are) vfddhi (increase) , stuti (praise) and 
mati (intellect) . (The form) in ghah is bh&va (feeling or state) , 
in yufi — kdrand (doing action), bhdvand (bringing into exist- 
ence) etc. and in the syllable a — (represented) by cikitsi (re- 
medy) . 

4. Then (the affixes) tavya and anlya (forming the words) 
kartavyam, karaniyakarh (fit to be done), (the affix)_rn/ (to form) 
deyatfi (ought to be given) and dhyeyarh (ought to be meditated) , 
in nyat (to form) kdryarfi (a work or task) and krlyakdfr (work to 
be done). 

5. Kta and other ( affixes) are to be known in the active, 
and some in the impersonal and passive. (A person) has gone 
to the village. The village has been reached. The preceptor has 
been embraced by you. 

6. Satrfi (present participle in the Parasmaipada) and sanae 
(present participle in the Atmanepada) are bhavan (becoming) 
and edhamana (being prosperous) . Nvuh and trc (are) added to 
all the roots (to form agents such as) (i bhivakah and bhavitd 
(feeling or manifestation and that which is about to become) . 

7. (An example) for ending in kvip (is) Svayambhuh (self- 
originated) . Koas (vas) and Kdnac (dna) (are the affixes) (of 
the participles) of the perfect (Parasmaipada and Atmane- 
pada) . BabhQoivat and pecivat (in the Parasmaipada) and pecdnah 
and fiffddadh&nakafc (in the Atmanepada) (are the examples) . 



986 


Agni Purina 


8. Kumbhakdra (a potter) etc. would be (formed by adding 
the affix) an. The unddis are known to be in the past. Vdyufi 
(wind) , pSyuh (the antis) and k&ru (artisan) would be (formed 
from them) . These are said to be widely used in the Vedas. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTY 

The synonyms of group of words denoting the celestial region 

and the nether world * 

Fire-god said: 

1. I shall describe to you i the synonyms) of heaven etc. 
of which lord Hari is the indication. Svafr, svargah, nakafy, 
tridivah, dyauh, triviftapa are synonyms (denoting heaven) . 

2-3a. Devas, Vrndarakas and Lekhas (are the names for 
the celestials) . Rudra and others (are) the chief of group of gods. 
Vidyadharas,Apsaras, Yaksas, Raksas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras, 
PiSacas, Guhyakas, Siddhas and Bhutas had celestial origin. 

3b. The enemies of the Devas, Asuras and Daityas (bom of 
Diti) (are the names of the demons). Sugatafr and Tathagatah 
(denote Buddha). 1 

4. Brahma, Atmabhuli (self-born), Surajye^fha (chief of 
the Devas) (are the synonyms of Brahma). Vi?$u, N&rayana 
and Hari (are the names of Vifnu). Revatiia (husband of 
Revatl), Halirama (Rama with with plough) (are the words 
denoting Balarama) (elder brother of Krs?a) . Kama, Pafica- 
£ara (having five shafts) and Smara (are the names of God of 
love). 

5. Lak^ml, Padmalay a (having the lotus as abode), and 
Padma (are the names of Goddess Lakpxu) . Sarva (all things) , 
Sarveivara (lord of all beings) , and Siva (auspicious) (are the 


•The Purina summarises the Amarakotfa in eight chapters. This chapter 
is an abridgement of the K&oda I, Svargavarga 6-79 verses and Pit&lavarga 
239-347 verses. 

1. The founder of Buddhism. 



360.6-12 


987 


names of Siva) . Kaparda is his matted hair. Pin&ka is the bow 
(of lord Siva) also known as Ajagava. 

6. His attendants are (known as) Pramathas. Mrdini 
(compassionate) , Candik& (fierce) and Ambika (mother) (are 
the names of Goddess P&rvatl). Dvaimatura 1 (having two mo- 
thers) and Gaj&sya (having an elephant face) (are the names 
of lord Ganesa) . Sen&nl (leader of an army) , Agnibhu (fire- 
born) and Guha (reared in a secret place) (are the names of 
Skanda) . 

7. Akhandala (breaker) , Sunasira (favourable for the grow- 
th of grain) , Sutriman (guarding well ) and Divaspati (lord of 
the heaven) (are the names of Indra) . Pulomaji (duaghter of 
Puloman, a demon) , Sad (powerful) and IndranI are the names 
of wile (of Indra). 

8. His (Indra's) mansion (is known as) Vaijayanta. Jayanta 
(victorious) (is the name of) PakaSasani (son of P&kaj&sana, 
Indra) . Airavata, Abhram&tanga (elephantine cloud) , Air&vana 
and Abhramuvallabha (mate of the female elephant of the east) 
(are the names of the elephant of Indra) . 

9. Hladini (that which delights) , Vajra, that it not a femi- 
nine (word) , Kuliia, Bhidura (neuter words) and Pavi (mascu- 
line) (are the words denoting Indra's club) . Indra's chariot is 
called) Vyomayana and Vim&na (the vehicle of the sky) . (The 
latter word is) not feminine. Piyu$a, Amrta and Sudha (denote 
ambrosia) . 

10. Sudharma is the council of gods. Svargahgi and Sura- 
dirghika (denote the celestial Ganges) . The celestial women 
such as Urvafi and others (are denoted by the words )Svarveiya 
and Apsarasah. (Here the latter word is always) feminine and 
plural. 

11-12. Haha and Huhu (are the names of) Gandharvas 
(semi-divine beings) . Agni, Vahni, Dhanafijaya (conqueror of 
wealth), Jatavedas (knower of all things), Krsnavartman (whose 
way is black), Ajrayaja (consuming everything with which it 
comes into contact), P&vaka (purifier), Hiranyaretas (having 
golden seed) , Saptarcis (having seven rays) , Sukra (white) . 
A$uiuk;ani (shining forth) , Suci (pure) and Appittam (bile of 

1. having a natural mother and ■ step-mother. 



988 Agni Purina 

water) (are the words denoting fire) . Aurva, Vadava and Vada- 
vanala (denote the submarine fire) . 

13-14. Among the words denoting the flames of fire, Jvala 
and Kila (are masculine and feminine) , Arcis (feminine and 
neuter) and Hetiand Sikha (are) feminine. Sphuliiiga and Agni- 
kana (denote a spark of fire). (These words are used) in all the 
three (genders) . Dharmaraja (lord of virtue) , Paretaraf (master 
of the dead), Kala (the Time), Aniaka (Destroyer), Dandad- 
hara (Wielder of a staff) and Sraddhadeva (lord of the ancestral 
rite) (are the synonymns of God of Death) . Rak$asa, Kaunapa 
(coming from a corpse) , Asrapa (blood drinker) , Kravyada 
(flesh eater) , Yatudhana and Nairfti (are the words denoting a 
demon). 

15. Pracetas, Varuna and Pasi (having a noose) (denote 
Varuna, the upholder of moral laws) . Svasana (who breathes) , 
Sparlana (who touches), Anila, Sadagati (always moving), 
Matariivan, Prana ( life breath) , Marat and Samirana (denote 
wind). 

16. Java, rarfiha and tara (denote speed). Laghu, kfipram, 
aram , drutam, satvaram, capalam, turnam, avilambitam and dSu (de- 
note haste) . 

17-18. . Satatam, andratam, aSrdntam, santatam, aviratam, aniSam, 
nityam, anavaratam and ajasram (mean eternally) . AtiSaya, bhara, 
ativelam, bhjiam , atyartham, atimdtram, udgddham, nirbharam, tivram, 
ekdntam, nitdntam, gd&ham, b&iham , and dxiham (denote excess) . 

19. Guhyakela, Yak^araja (chief of Yak$as), Rajaraja and 
Dhanadhipa (lord of riches) (denote Kubera) . Kinnara, Kimpu- 
rufa, Turangavadana (horse-faced) and Mayu (denote the 
Kinnaras, a class of semidivine beings) . 

20. Afidhi and ievadhi (mean treasure) . (Both the words 
are) masculine. Vyoma, abhram, pufkaram, ambaram, dyo, divam, 
antarikfam and kham (denote the sky) . 

21 -22a. Kifthi, did and kakubha (denote) the direction. 
Abhyantara and antardla mean the interspace ^between the heaven 
and earth) . Cakravdla and ma^dala (mean a range or orb of thi- 
ngs) . Taditodn (having lightning) , v&rida (giver of water) , megha, 
stanayitnu (that which makes sound) and baldhaka (stand for 
cloud) . Kddmbini and meghamdld (denote a row of clouds) . 
Stanita and garjita (mean the rumbling of thunder clouds) . 



360.22b-34a 


989 


22b-23. Samps, Satahradd, hrddini, airdoati, kpanaprabhd, tadit, 
saud&mini, vidyui , cadeald and capald (denote lightning) . 

23b-24. SphUrjathub and vajranirghofa (mean the peel of 
thunder) . The cessation of rain (is denoted by the word) avagraha. 
Dhdrdsampata and dsdra( denote incessant rain) . Sikara (is known 
to be) drops of water (carried by wind) . Varsopala and karakdfa 
(are the first rain drops falling like a stone) . A cloudy day (is 
known as) durdinatn (a bad day) . 

23. Antardhd, vyavadhd (feminine) , antardhi (masculine) , 
apavdranam, apidhdnam, tirodhdnam, pidhdnam, and dcchddanam (mean 
concealing or covering) . 

26-27. (The words) Abja, Jaivdtpka, Soma, Glautp, Mrgdhka, 
Kaldnidhi, Vidhu and Kumudabandhu (denote the Moon) . Bimba 
and mandala (are the words denoting the orb of the moon, 
the former is) feminine (and the latter is used in) all (the gen- 
ders) . A sixteenth digit (of the moon) is kald. Bhitta, iakala and 
khantfaka (denote a part) .Candrikd, kaumudi and jyotsnd (denote the 
lustre of the moon). Prasdda and prasannatd (denote clear lustre) . 

28-29a. Lakfanam, lakfmakam and cihnam (stand for a mark). 
Sobhd. kdnti, dyuti and ehavi (denote lustre) . Susamd (denotes) 
exquisite lustre. Tusdra, tuhinam, himam, avaiydya , nihdra , prdleyam, 
SiSira and himam denote snow) . 

29b. Nakfatram, rkfam , bham, tard, tdrakd and « {fa (denote an 
asterism). There the last word may also be feminine. 

30. Guru , Jiva and Ahgirasa ( are the words standing for 
Jupiter). Uianas, Bhdrgava and Kaoi (denote Venus). Vidhuntuda 
(afflicting Moon) and Tama (denote) Rahu. The rise of 
the constellations is known to be lagna. 

31. Sages such as Marici, Atri and others 1 2 are the seven 
sages. (They are known collectively as) CitraSikhandins. Hari- 
daSva, Bradhna, Pusd, Dyumani , Mihira and Ravi (denote the Sun) . 

32-34a. (The halo around the Sun is known as) parivefa, 
paridhi, upas dry akam and mapdalam. (The ray of the Sun isdenoted 
by the words) kirana, usra , mayOkha, arftiu, gabhastighjmi , dhfppP, 


1. Angirsu. Pul as ty a. Pul ah a, Kratu and Vaiiftha are the remaining 
five. 

2. the Amara 210 reads print. 



990 


Agni Purdna 


bhdnu, kara , marici , and didhiti where marici is feminine and mas- 
culine (while) didhiti is feminine. (The lustre is denoted by the 
words) prabhd, ruk, ruci, tvif, bhd, bhdh, chad, dyuti, dlpti, rod and 
tod, where the last two are neuter, (while the other words are 
feminine) . (The lustre of the Sun is denoted by the words) prakdia, 
dyota and dtapa. 

34b-38a. (The words) kosnam, kavofttam, mandosnam and 
kadttfnam (denote little heat) . They take neuter when referring 
to a quality and take all genders as attributes. Similarly 
(the words) tigmam'tikfnam and kharam (denoting excessive heat) 
take neuter or all the genders. (The words) diffa, anehd and 
kdlaka (denote time) . (The words) ghasra, dinam and ahas (denote 
day) . Sdyam, snndhyd and pitfpras&h (denote the evening) . PratyU- 
fas, aharmukham, kalyam , usas and pratyUfas (denote dawn). 
The three twilights (are known as) prddujn (morning) , apardhna 
(evening) are madhydhna (midday) . Night is denoted by the 
words) iarvari,ydmi and taml. (The night endowed with darkness is) 
tamisrd and (that with moonlight is) jyotsnl. The night together 
with the preceding and succeeding days (is known as) pakuni. 
The two (words) ardhardtri and niSithn (denote) midnight. Pradofa 
and rajanlmukham (is the period preceding the night) . 

38b-40. The intervening period between the pratipat (first 
lunar day) and the fifteenth (lunar day) is parvan. There 
are two fifteenth (days) at the end of each one of the fortnights. 
Paurpamdsi and pUrnimd (denote the last days of the bright lunar 
fortnight) . (If that full moon) is a digit less (it is known as) 
anumati. If it is full, (it is) rdkd. Amdvdsyd, is being near; darSa 
and sQryendu-saAgama (union of Sun and Moon) (denote 
the last days of the dark lunar fortnight) . If the moon is perceiv- 
ed (on the new moon day) , (it is) sinivdli and if the same (is 
seen) a digit less, (it is) kuha. 

41 -42a. Sariwarta, pralaya, kalpa, ksaya and kalpdnta (denote 
deluge) . (The words) kalusam , Vfjinam, map, agham, ariihah, durl- 
tam and dufkftam (denote sin) . (The words) dharmam, pvtfyam, 
Sreyas, sukftam and v ffa (denote good deeds) . The word dharmam 
(is used) in the masculine and neuter. 

42b-43a. (The words) mut, priti , pramada, harfa, pro- 
moda , dmoda, sammada, dnandathuh, dnanda, Sarma, sdtam and sukham 
(denote rejoice) . 



360.43b-52a 


991 


43b-44a. (The words) SoafySreyasam, Sivam, bhadram, kalydnam, 
maflgatam. Subham, bhdvukam, bhavikam , bhavyam, kuSalam and 
kftmam (denote only welfare) . (There) kfemam is used in mascu- 
line and neuter. 

44b. Daivam, disfam, bhdgadheyam, bhdgyam, niyati and vidhi 
relate to (fruits of) previous birth. (The latter two) are 
feminine. 

45a. Ksetrajila, dtman and purufa relate to the soul in the 
body. Pradhinam and prakjti (relate to the state in which the 
three qualities are in the same proportion) . (The latter is used) 
in the feminine. 

45b-46a. Hetu, kdranam and bljam (denote) cause. But nid&na 
is the primary cause. Cittam, cetas, hrdayam, svantam, hrt, mdnasam 
and manas (denote mind) . 

46b-47a. Buddhi, manisd, dhi\ana, dhify, prajnd, Semuff, mati, 
prekfd, upalabdhi, cit, sarhvit, pratifiat, jhapti and cetand (denote 
intellect) . 

47b-48. The intellect (dhi) which possesses retentive power 
(is known as) medhd. SaAkalpa (resolve) is an activity of mind. 
Cared (discussion) , SaAkhyd (deliberation) and viedrand (inquiry) 
(relate to examination of an object by means of knowledge) . 
Vicikitsd and sarfiSaya ( relate to doubtful knowledge) . Adhydhdra 
(inference), tarka (logical reasoning) and uha (conjecture) 
(relate to logic), Nirnaya and niSeaya mean conclusive knowledge. 

49. (The words) mitkyddrffi and ndstikatd (are used to de- 
note knowledge arising from the argument that the other world 
does not exist) . Bhrdnti, mithydmati and bhrama (mean false 
(knowledge) . Adgikdra , abhyupagama, pratiSraya and samdSraya 
(denote acceptance) . 

50-5 la. Knowledge relating to liberation from mundane 
existence (is) jdanam. (When it is used with reference to) 
architecture and scientific literature, ( it is) vijndnam. Mukti, 
kaivalyam, nirvdnam, Sr eyas, nihSreyasam, amftam, mokfa and apavarga 
(denote liberation from mundane existence). (The words) 
ajfidnam, avidyd and ahammati (stand for ignorance). (Among 
these, the last two words are used) in the feminine. 

51b-52a. (The word) parimala (is used to denote) fragrance 
arising from pounding or rubbing which attracts men. That 
which attracts very much (is known as) dmoda. (The words) 



992 Agni Purdna 

surcibhi and ghrdnatarpana (denote an object possessing good 
fragrance). 

52b-53. (The words) Sukla, subhra, fuci, Sveta, viSada, Syeta, 
p&ndara , avad&ta, sita, gaura, valakfa, dhavala, arjuna, harina , pandura 
and pAndu (denote white). That which is little white (is denoted 
by the word) dhUsara. 

54. (The words) nila , asita, Syutnv, kdla , sySmala and mecaka 
( denote) black. (The words) pita, gaura and haridrabha (denote 
yellow) . (The words) pdlaSa, harita and harit (mean) the green 
colour. 

55. (The words) rohita, lohita and rakta (denote red colour) . 
(The word) Son a (denotes) the colour resembling red lotus. 
Little redness (is denoted by the word) aruna. (The word) 
pdfala (stands for) red mixed with white. 

56-57a. Sydva and kapiSa (denote whitish red). Dhilmra and 
dhumala (denote) red and black mixed. Kadara. kapila, pinga, 
piSafiga, kadru and pingala ( denote reddish brown) . Citram, kir- 
mira, kalmdsa, sabala, eta and and karbura (denote variegated 
colours) . 

57b. (The words) vySh&ra, ukti and lapitam (denote speech) . 
ApabhraihSa (means) a corrupted word. 

58. A collection of tiA (verb) and subanla (noun) is a 
sentence. Or it may be an activity together with the case rel- 
ation between a noun and a verb. Ilihdsa is that which has 
happened in the past. Pur ana has five characteristics. 1 

59. Akhydyika is a narrative of a past event. Prabandha is an 
imaginary story. Samdhdra and s angraha (denote a collection 
of stories) . Pravahlikd and prahelikd (are involving conjecture) . 

60. Samasya is a puzzle that has to be completed. Smfti is 
a collection of texts (composed for propagating) religious 
and moral duties. AkhyS, dhv& and abhxdhana (denote name) . 

V dr til and vrttdnta are said (to denote) narration of worldly course 
of events. 

61 . (The words) li&ti, akaratfd and (iho&nam (denote calling) . 
Upanydsa and vdAmukha (mean beginning of a speech) . Vivdda 
and vyavahdra (are used in the sense of disputes relating debts, 

1. These are: creation, secondary creation, Toyal genealogies, Manu 
periods and genealogy of gods and sages. 



360.62-69 


993 


gifts etc.). (The words) pratiodkyam and uttaram (are used in the 
sense of reply). 

62. Upodghdta and uddhdra (are used to denote the thought 
relating to accomplishment of a contextual object). Mithyfl- 
bhiSarhsanam and abhiSdpa (mean insult or abuse). (The words) 
yafas and kirti (denote fame) . (The words) praSna , prcchd and 
anuyogaka (mean a query). 

63. (The word) amre$ilam (means) repetition two or three 
(times). (The words) kutsd, nindd and garhanam (denote censure) . 
(The words) abhdfanam and alapa would (mean conversation 
preceded by mutual call). Pralapa is meaningless utterance. 

64. Anuldpa and muhurbhdfa (mean repeated conversation). 
Vilapa and paridevana denote speech preceded by weeping. Vi pra- 
lapa and virodhokti (denote mutually contradictory utterances) . 
Sarhldpa is conversation between one another. 

65. Supralapa and suvacanam (mean good utterance) . Apa- 
Idpa and nihnava (mean veiled statement). RuSali 1 2 means in- 
auspicious utterance. Sangatam and hrdayangamam (would denote 
well-constructed sentence) . 

66. That which is exceedingly sweet is sdntvam. Abad- 
dham and anarlhakam would (mean absurd). NiftkuramA and paru- 
fam (mean harsh utterance). Aililam and grdmyam (mean un- 
refined utterance) . The statement which is pleasing and true 
(is) funrtam. 

67-69. Satyam, talhyam, jtam and samyak (would mean truth ) . 
(The words) ndda, nisvdna, nisvana, drava, drdva, sarhrdva and virdva 
(denote ordinary sound). Marmara (denotes) the sound made 
by cloth and leaves. (The sound made) by the ornaments (is) 
Hnjilam. Nikvana and kvdna (denote the sound) of a lute. The 
sound made by birds ( is) vasitam. Koldhala and kalakala (mean 
the clear sound made by many) . The two (words) gitam and 
gdnam mean the same (namely, a song) . Pratiirut and pratidhvdna 
(mean echo) , where the former is feminine. (The sounds such 
as) nisdda (and the like) arise from stringed instruments and 
throats (of singers) . 

1. The printed text wrongly reads tifatl. 

2. The Puranic text mixes this term and the next. This has been corrected 
on the basir of Amara. 



994 


Agni Purfoia 


70-71. A subtle (sound) is kOkali. That which is sweet and 
not explicit is kola. Mandara is a lofty sound. Tdrais a very loud 
sound. Where there is a resonance and well blending of the 
(last) three sounds it is said to be ekatdla. Vind, vallaki and viftanei 
(denote lute) . That which is known to have seven strings is 
pam&dini. 

72. Vind and other instruments are spread out. Muraja and 
the like are bound. Variifa (flute) and others have holes. An ins- 
trument made of bell-metal and the like is ghanam. 

73. Thus there are four kinds of musical instruments having 
the appellation vdditram and dtodyam. Mrdanga and Muraja (are 
synonyms) . Ankydfr, dlifigyah and Urdhvaka are different kinds of 
Mfdahgas. 

74-75a. The drum that is sounded (at first) for the sake of 
fame (is known as) Qhakkd. Bheri and Dundubhi (are synonyms) , 
the former is feminine and the latter masculine. 1 Anaka and 
Pafaha (are synonyms) . Jhatjharly Qindima , Mardala and Parana 
(are different kinds of percussion instruments) .* T&la is the mea- 
sure of time relating to the performance. 

75b. Lay a is the equal proportion of the performance and 
time (relating to music, dance etc. ) Tdndaoam, ndfyam, l&syam and 
nartanam (are synonyms) . 

76. Nrtyam (dance), gitam (singing) and tidy am (instru- 
mental) , the three (are known collectively as) tauryatrikam. The 
king is known as Bhaffdraka and Deoa. (The queen) who had 
been anointed is Devi. 

77-81a. Sfhgdra (erotic), vlra (heroic), karma (pathos), 
adbhuta (wonder), hdsya (mirth), bhaydnaka (frightening), bibha - 
tsa (disgust) and raudra (wrath) are the sentiments. The erotic 
(is also denoted by the words) Suci and ujjvala. The heroic senti- 
ment (is also known as) utsihavardhana. Kdrmyam, karund, ghrntd, 
krpd, dayd, anukampd and anukroia (denote thesentiment of pathos). 
Hasa, hdsa and hdsyam (mean the same) . Bibhatsa (is also known 
as) vikfta. These two are masculine (when denoting the senti- 
ment) . Vismaya, adbhutam , dicaryam and citram (denote wonder) . 
Bhnravam, ddrunam, bhisanam, bhifmam t ghoram, bhimam, bhaydnakam , 

1 . The textual reading is wrong. 

2* The reading tufa* in the text is not correct; opv would be better. 



360.81 b-91 


995 


bhayakkaram and pratibhayam (denote frightening) . Raudra is ugra 
(terrible) . (These fourteen beginning with adbhuta are masculine 
relating to a sentiment.) (Otherwise they take) the three (gen- 
ders). Dara, trisa, bhltih, bhih, s&dhoasam and bhayam (mean 
fear) . 

81b. The change relating to mind is bhdoa. AnubhAva is 
the expression of the mental change. 

82. (The words) garva, abhimAna and aharhkdra (denote 
pride). Mina is elevated thinking. Anidara, paribhava , paribhAva 
and tiraskriyA ( mean disrespect) . 

83. (The words) vritfA, lajjS, trapA and hrl (would mean 
shyness). The desire for wealth (is) abhidhyimm 1 . (The words) 
kautuhalam, kautukam, kutukam and kutuhalam (denote curiosity). 

84. (The words) vilAsa t bibboka, vibhrama , lalitam , helA and 
lila denoting the behaviour of women are known as hAva pro- 
duced from erotic state. 

85. (The words) drava, keli, parihAsa, kridd and lilA (denote 
only erotic sport). KUrdanam (means child’s play) . A burst of 
laughter with a motive (is) acchuritakam. The same, if little, (is 
known as) smitam. 

86. Adhobhuuanam and pAtAlam (denote the nether world) . 
(The words) chidram, Svabkram , vapi and Sufi (denote a hole in 
general) . Garta and avapa (denote) a hole or pit in the earth. 
(The words) tamisram, timiram and tama (denote darkness). 

87. (The words) sarpa , prdAkuh , bhujaga, dantaSAka and 
bilelaya (denote a serpent) . (The words) vifam, kfvefa and gara- 
lam (mean poison) . (The words) niraya and durgati (mean 
hell) . The latter is feminine. 

88. (The words) payah, kilAlam, amrtam , udakam, bhuvanam and 
varum (are used in the sense of water) . Bhafiga , tarafiga and Urmi 
denote waves. Kallola and ullola (denote mighty waves) . 

89. (The words) prfanti, bindamh and prsatah (stand for 
drops of water). (The words) kfUam, rodhas and tira(ka)m 
(denote banks) . That which rises from water is pulinam (sand) . 
(The words) jambAla, paftka and kardama (mean mire) . 

90-91 . The overflow of floods is (denoted by the words) 


1. Amara 409 reads 'ablndhyi' meaning desire to covet another** pro- 
perty. __ 



996 Agni Purina 

jalocchvdsdh and parxvdhdh.. (The words) kdpakdh and viddrakdk 
(are pits made in the dry bed of rivers). Atara and tarapanyam 
(are used in the sense of ferry charges). The wooden water- 
carrier is droni. Kaluga and Avila are (used to mean) impure 
andaccha, pure. (The word) gabhlrakam (denotes deep). Agadham 
(means very deep). (The words) dd$a and kaivarta (denote a 
fisherman). Jamb Okas (bivalve shells) are oysters in the water. 

92. Saugandhika and kalhdra (denote white lotus blossoming 
in the evening) . Indivara is a blue lotus. Utpala and kuvalaya 
denote blue lotus. Kumuda and kairava (are used to denote) 
white (lotus). 

93. The root of these lotuses (is) Sdluka. (The words) padtnam 
and tSmarasam (denote a lotus). Nilotpalam and kuvalayam (denote 
a lily) . The red lotus is known as kokanadam. 

94-95. Karahdfa and Siphdkandam (denote the root of a lotus). 
Kinjalka and kesara mean the filament, not in feminine. 1 (The 
words) khani and dkara (denote the place from where the 
gems are produced). The former is feminine. Pdda and pratyan- 
taparvata (denote) smaller hills. That which is still nearer to the 
hill, (is said to be) upatyaka. The earth above the hill (is known 
as) adhityakd. The groups of words belonging to the heaven and 
hell have been described. Listen to me ! I shall describe words 
having different meaning. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTYONE* 

The indeclinables 

Fire-god said : 

1. (The indeclinable) aii is used in the (following) in the 
sense of a little, pervading, limit and in combination with verbs. 
(The particle) A known as pragfhya is used in sentences to denote 
remembrance. (The same with a visarga) (denotes) anger and 
affliction. 

1. After summarising the first K/hpfa °f Amaru, the Purina jumps to the 
middle of the second K&q4<*- 

•The Pur&qa summarises in this chapter, from Amara III. pahkti 2814. 



361.2-12 


997 


2. (The particle) ku (is used) in the sense of sin, condem- 
nation and little. Dhik (is used in the sense of) disgust and 
censure. Ca (is used) to connect with another, as a collection, 
union with one another, for connecting mutually independent 
words with a common word. 

3. Svasti (is used in the sense of) benediction, well-being 
and meritorious act. Ati (has the sense of) excess and crossing. 
Svit (is used in the sense of) interrogation and doubt. Tu (is 
used to denote) division and limitation. 

4. Sakrt (is used in the sense of) together with and once. 
Aral (has the sense of) near and far off. (The word) paiedt (is 
used in the sense of) western direction and the end. Api (has 
the sense of collection) . Uta has the sense of option. 

5. SaSval (is used in the sense of) repetition and together 
with. Sakfat (denotes) perception and identity. Bata (is used in 
the following senses) : grief, pity, pleasure, surprise and invita- 
tion. 

6. Hanta ( is used to express) rejoice, pity, beginning of a 
sentence and grief. Prati is used according to tradition in (the 
sense) of a representative both as repetition and as indicative 
etc. 

7. Iti (is used in the sense of) cause, context, making ex- 
plicit etc. and conclusion. Purastdt (is used to denote) in the 
east, at first, before and in front of. Api is also (used in the 
same sense) . 

8. Ydvat and tavat ( are used in the sense of) whole, end, 
measure and determination. Atha (is used to express) auspi- 
ciousness, continuity, beginning, query and whole. 

9. Vjthd (is used to convey) uselessness and devoid of in- 
junction. Ndnd (conveys) many and both. Nu (expresses) query 
and option. Am (expresses) succession and resemblance. 

10. Nanu (is used to indicate) query, determination, per- 
mission, pacification and invitation. Api (is used to denote) 
censure, collection, query, doubt and conjecture. 

11. Vd (expresses) comparison and option. Sdmi (conveys) 
half and disgust. Amd (denote) togetherness and proximity. Kam 
(means) water and head. 

1 2. Evam (is used to convey) similarity and such and such 
a manner. N&nam (is used) in logic and determination. Jofam 



998 Agni Purina 

(is used to mean) silence and happiness . Kim (is used to convey) 
query and disgust. 

13. Kama (is used to mean) making explicit, conjecture, 
anger, approximation and censure. Alam conveys ( the sense of) 
ornament, satiety, ability and prevention. 

14. Hum (is used to convey) doubt and inquiry. Samayi 
(denotes) proximity and middle. Punaty (conveys) not being the 
first and difference. Nih (expresses) certainty and prohibition. 

15. Puri would (be used to indicate) continuity, long past, 
nearness and the future. The three (words) urari, Sri and urari 
(are used in the sense of) expansion and that which is agreed 
upon. 

16. Svah (is used in the sense of) heaven and other 
world. Kila (is used in the sense of) tidings and conjecture. 
(The word) khalu (is used to denote) prohibition, verbal em- 
bellishment, desire to know and pacification. 1 

17. (The word) abhitah (is used in the sense of) proximity, 
both ways, quickness, whole and facing. Priduh (is used to con- 
vey) name and explicitness. Mithah (denotes) between one an- 
other and in secrecy. 

18. (The word) tirah (is used to denote) disappearance and 
horizontal. (The particle) hi (is used to express) pain, anger 
and grief. Ahaha (is used to denote) surprise and grief. (The 
particle) hi (is used to denote) cause and determination. 

19. (The words) ciraya, ciriritriya , cirasya and others (are 
used) in the sense of long time. Muhuh, punah punah , SaSvat , 
abhikfnam and asakft (again and again) have the same (sense). 

20. (The words) Irak, jhafiti, ahjasi,ahniya, sapadi,drik and 
maAkfu are (used in the sense of) quickness. (The words) bala- 
vat, susfhu and kimuta (denote) excessive. Kim, kimu and uta (are 
used in the sense of) option. 

21. (The particles) tu, hi, ea, sma,ha and vai (are used) for 
completing a quarter of a verse. Su and ati( are used to denote) 
worship (reverence). Divi (is used to denote) at day. Dofiaad 
naktam (are used in the sense of) night. 

22. Sici and tirah (are used) in the sense of horizontally. 
(The words) pyif, pdf, aAga, he, hai and bhoft (are used) in the 


1 . The Purina reads wrongly aoasara. 



361.23-32 


999 


sense of calling a person. Samayd, nikasd and hiruk (have the 
sense of proximity) . 

23. Sahasa (is used in the sense of) unexpected. Purafi, 
puratah and agratah (mean) in front of. Svdhd, fraufaf, vau/af, 
vasaf and svadhd (are used) in offering made to the gods. 

24. (The words) kidcit, if at and mandk (are used in the 
sense of) a little. Prelya and amutra (are used in the sense of) 
the other world. Tathd and tathd (convey) similarity. Aho and ho 
(indicate) surprise. 

25-26. (The words) tdfnim and t&ftiikam (are used in the 
sense of) silence. Sadyah and sapadi (denote) the present mo- 
ment. Disfyd and samupajosam (convey) rejoice. (The words) 
antare , antard and antarena (denote) ‘in the middle*. Prasahya 
means ‘by force’. The two (words) sdmpraiam and sthdne (convey 
the sense) appropriate. Abhikfnam and SaSvat (mean) eternally. 

27. (The words) nahi, a, no and na (indicate) non-exist- 
ence. (The words) mdsma, md and alarh (are used in the sense 
of) restraining. Cel and yadi (are used to denote) alternative. 
The two (words) addhd and ahjasd (are employed to convey) 
truth. 

28. Prddufr and ilvih indicate explicitness. Oth, evarti and 
paramarh (convey) opinion. (The words) samantatah, paritah, , 
sarvatah and viSvak (convey) all around. 

29. Kdmam (is used to convey) permission unwillingly 
granted. An acceptance preceded by jealousy (is indicated by 
the word) astu. (The word kdmam is) also (used in the same 
sense). Nanu (indicates) a contrary opinion. Kaccit (indicates) 
affectionate enquiry. 

30. (The words) nih samam and duh samam (are used to 
convey) condemned. Tathdsvam and yathdyatham (convey the 
sense) of appropriate or befitting. Mjfd and mithyd (indicate) 
false. Tathdrtham and yathdtatham denote truth. 

31. (The words) evath, tu, punah, vai and vd are expressions 
(indicating) conclusion. Prdk (conveys) the thing that has taken 
place already. The two (words) n&nam and aoaiyam (are used 
to indicate) certainty. 

32. Sartivat ( is used to mean) the year. Arvdk (means) 
below. Am and evath (convey) approval. Svayam (means) by the 



1000 


Agni Purina 


self. Nicaify (means) low. Uccaih (means) great .Prdyafc (denotes) 
a great quantity. Sanaih (is used in the sense of) slowly. 

33. The word sand (denotes) eternal. Bahifi (conveys the 
meaning) outside. ■ Strut (indicates) the past. Astam (demotes) 
invisible. Asti (conveys the sense) of reality. U is an expression 
of anger. Om( indicates) a query. Ayi (is an expression of) paci- 
fication. 

34. Item (is used in) discussion. (The word) ufd (has the 
sense of) end of the night. Namah (conveys) obeisance. Anga (is 
used) in the sense of again. Dustu (is an expression of) censure 
and suffu, of praise. 

35. Sdyam ( conveys the sense) in the evening. ( The words) 
prage and prdtah ( convey the sense) ‘in the morning*. Nikafd 

(conveys the meaning) nearby. (The word) parut (denotes) the 
last year and pardri, the year before the last. Tati (denotes the 
current year). 

36. Adya (denotes) the present day. (The words) purvedyuh 
etc. ( convey the sense of ) the previous day etc. Similarly one 
should know that (the words uttaredyufi, aparedyuh, adharedyuh, 
anyedyuh , anyataredyuh and itaredyuh are formed) from uttara 
(tomorrow) , apara (some other) , adhara (the previous) , anya 
( some other) , anyatara ( some other next) and itara (some 
other). 

37. Ubhayadyuh and ubhayedyuh (convey the sense of) both 
the days. Paredyavi (means ) on the next day. Hyah ( denotes) 
yesterdayand tvah, theday yet to come next. Parafvah (denotes) 
the day after tomorrow. 

38. (The words) tadd and taddnim (denote at that time). 
Tugapat (means) once. Sarvadd and sadfi (mean) always. Etarhi , 
samprati, iddnim, adhund and sdmpratam (mean) the present 
moment. 



362.1-8 


1001 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTYTWO 

Words having many meanings 

Fire-god said : 

1 . (The word) ndka (is used to denote) the sky and hea- 
ven. (The word) loka (means) the world and people. Sloka (is 
used to mean) a verse and fame. SJyaka (has the meaning) an 
arrow and sword. 

2. Anoka (denotes) a bheri as well as pa (aha (two kinds of 
drums) . Kalahka is a mark as well as a scandal. (The letter) ka 
in the masculine (is used to denote) wind, Brahma and the 
Sun and karh in the neuter (is used to denote) head and 
water. 

3. (The word) pul&ka (denotes) empty or bad grain, 
abridgement and rice-water. (The word) kausika (is used in the 
sense of) Mahendra, guggulu (resin got from cow) , owl, serpent 
and alligator. 

4. A monkey and a dog (arc denoted by the word) Sdld- 
vfka. Man am is a means of measure. Sarga (is used in the sense 
of) one’s nature, natural state, relinquishment, decision, chapter 
and creation. 

5. (The word) yoga (is used in the sense of) an armour, 
means (expedience) , contemplation and union. (The word) 
bhoga (has the meaning of) happiness and enjoying the com- 
pany of a harlot. The word abja (is used to denote) conch and 
moon. 

6. Kara (a (denotes) a crow and the cheek of an elephant. 
Sipivifta (denotes) a leprous person. (The word) riffa (is used 
in the sense of) prosperity, good and bad luck and ariffa, good 
and bad luck. 

7. (The word) vyuffi (is used in the sense of) a fruit and 
plenty. (The word) drffi (is used to denote) knowledge, eye and 
perception. (The word) niftah (has the sense of) accomplish- 
ing, non-existence and destruction. (The word) k&ffhd (is used 
to denote) excellence, state and direction. 

8. (The words) iid and ild (convey the sense of) a cow, 
earth and speech. Prag&iham (denotes) much and difficult. The 
word df dha (means) capable of and stout. 



1002 


Agni Purina 


9. Vyttfha (has the meaning) placed in order and firmness. 
(The word) Kffiyt (denotes) Vyasa, Arjuna and Hari 1 2 3 . Pasia 
(is used to denote) the stake in gambling etc., wages, price and 
a particular coin. 

10. (The word) gtu^a (is used in the sense of) the bow- 
string, quality of a substance, (qualities like) sattva (goodness) , 
bravery* and treaty etc. (The word) grdmani (is used to denote) 
excellent (person) and leader (in a village) . 

11. Tfsnd (is used to convey) desire and desire to drink. 
(The word) vipani (is used to denote) a merchant’s shop. Tik- 
$nam ( is used to mean) poison, battle and iron in the neuter, 
but in all the three (genders) when (denoting) sharp-edged.® 

12. (The word) pramiiia (is used to mean) cause, limit in 
the Sdstra, extent and the knower. Karana is the excellent means. 
It is also (used to denote) the sense-organs. (The word) iriqam 
(is used to convey) a barren land and a desert. 

1 3. (The word) yantf (is used in the sense of) a mahout 
and a charioteer. (The word) heti (denotes) flame 4 . (The word) 
Srutam (is used to convey) scriptures and accurate knowledge. 
Kftam (is used to mean) the (first) yuga and enough. 

14. Pratlta (is used to mean) well-known and delight. Abhi- 
jdta (is used to denote) bom in a good family and wise. (The 
word) vivikta (means) pure and devoid of men. Murchita 
(means) stupefied and elevated (prosperous) . 

15. Artha (conveys the sense) ‘to be expressed’, riches, an 
object, use and end. Tlrtham (expresses the sense of) water 
tank, scriptures, water courses honoured by sages and preceptor. 

16. Kakudah (is used in the sense of) importance, the in- 
signia of a king and a limb of a bull (hump on the shoulder) 
in the masculine and neuter. The feminine (word) sarfivit (con- 
veys the sense of) knowledge, conversation, a disciplined action, 
battle and name. 

1 7. (The word) upanisat (is used in the sense of) dharma and 
secret doctrine (such as) philosophy. (The word) Sarat (has the 

1 . This line is not in the Amara. 

2. The text wrongly reads iukla instead of iamya. 

3. The printed text wrongly reads svara instead of khara. 

4. Vide Amara pa&kti 2476. The Purina has omitted the other senses: 
ray of the Sun and weapon. 



362.18-26 


1003 


meaning of) a season and a year. (The word) padam (is used in 
the sense of) endeavour, protection, position, mark, foot and 
object. 

18. (These are used) in all the three (genders) : (The word) 
svddH (denotes) favourite and sweet. Mjdxi (denotes) not sharp 
and soft. Sat (is used to convey) truth, good people, existence, 
praiseworthy and respectable. 

19. (The word) vidhi (is used to denote) an injunction and 
Brahma. Prayidhi (conveys the meaning of) request and a spy. 
Vadhnh (means) wife, son’s wife and woman in general. Sudhd 
(denotes) plaster (used in temples etc.) , nectar and the milk- 
hedge plant. 

20. (The word) Sraddhi (denotes) respect and desire. Patfdi- 
tammanyah is one who thinks himself as learned and proud as 
well. Brakmabandhu (is used in the sense of) censure. Bhdnu means 
ray as well as Sun. 

2 1 . Graven ( is used to denote) a hill and a stone. (The word) 
pfthakjana (denotes) a fool and also a low class man. (The word) 
itkharin (denotes) a tree as well as a mountain. Tam (denotes) 
the skin and the body. 

22. (The word) yatna (denotes) soul, firmness, intellect, 
nature and path of Brahman. Utthdnarii (denotes) effort and re- 
medial act for family. Vyutth&narh (denotes) rejection. 

23. ( The word) niiydtana (is used to denote) revenge, gift 
and restitution of a deposit. Vyasanam (has the sense of) grief, 
fall and crime due to passion or wrath. 

24. Hunting, dice-play, dreaming during the day, accusa- 
tion, women, intoxication, the triple symphony (dance, music 
and instrumental music) and strolling about idly are the group 
of crime arising from passion. 

25. Slandering, bravery, offence, hatred, jealousy, extravag- 
ance, reprimand and harshness are the eight crimes arising from 
wrath. 

26. Kaupinam (is used to denote) a wrong deed, secret and 
organ of generation. Maithunam (is employed in the sense of) 
relating to union with wife and sexual union. Pradhdnam (de- 
notes) the superme spirit and intellect. PrajUdnam (is used to 
mean), intellect and mark. 



1004 


Agni Purina 


27. Krandanam ( means ) crying and calling. Varsma (denotes ) 
body and extent. Aridhanam (means) accomplishing, attainment 
and satisfaction. 

28. ' Ratnam (is used to mean) that which is excellent among 
its own class. Lakfma ( is used to denote) a mark and chief. 
Kalipa (denotes) an ornament, peacock’s plumes, quiver and a 
collection. 

29. (The word) talpam (is used to denote) bed, an apart- 
ment on the roof and woman. Dimba (is used the mean) a child 
and a fool. (The word) stambha (is used to denote) a pillar of 
a building and dull. (The word) sabhi (is used to convey the 
meaning of) an assembly and member of a house. 

30. Raimi (is) a ray (of light) as well as rein (of horses etc.). 
(The word) dharma (is used to denote) merit and self-control 
etc. (The word) lalama (conveys the meaning of) tail, mark (on 
the forehead of horses etc.) , horse, ornament, prominence and 
banner. 

31. (The word) pralyaya (is employed in the sense of) sub- 
ject to control, oath, knowledge, faith and cause. (The word) 
samaya (is used to convey) an agreement, practice, time, a dogma 
and knowledge. 

32. (The word) atyaya (is used to mean) transgression and 
crime. Satyam (means) an oath and truth. (The word) viryam 
(is used in the sense of) strength, and greatness. Rupyam (is 
used to mean) praiseworthy form. 

33. Durodara ( is employed to denote) a gambler and duro- 
daram ( to denote) the stake in gambling. (The word) kinlara 
(is used to mean) a great forest or a difficult path, in the mas- 
culine and neuter. 

34. (The word) hari (is used to denote) Tama (god of 
death) , Anila (wind) , Itidra (ruler of the celestials) , Candra 
(Moon) , Arka (Sun) , Visnu and a lion etc. (The word) dara 
(is employed to mean) a hole and fear, in die masculine and 
neuter. (The word) jafhara (means) hard (besides stomach) . 

35. Udira (is used to denote) giver and great. Itara (means) 
different as well as low. Cudi (denotes) crown and hair. The 
lock of hair (is called) mauti. 

36. (The word) bali (is used to mean) tax, offering etc. 
(The word balam (is used to denote) an army and firmness. 



362.37—363.1 


1005 


(The word) nivi (is employed to mean) the knot on the 
waist garment of a women and ransom (against the prince etc. 
held as captive) . 

37-38a. (The word) orsa (is used in the following senses) : 
the scrotum (that discharges semen) , rat, excellence, good deed 
and a bull. (The word) j dkarsa (is used to denote) dice-play, the 
die and the board for dice-play. (The word) aksam ( means) an 
organ, and in the masculine, the dice, difference in the measure, 
dispute and the oibhitaka (one of the three myrobalans) . 

38b. (The word) usnisa (is used to mean) crown etc. 1 2 
Karsu conveys the sense of a small river. 

39. (The word) adhyaksa (means) visible and one who 
presides over. (The word) vibhavasu denotes the Sun and Fire. 
(The word) rasa (is employed to denote) (the sentiments) 
such as erotic and others, poison, splendour, qualities (such as 
sweet, sour etc.) , passion and juice. 

40. (The word) varcas ( denotes) feces as well as splendour. 
(The word) aga (denotes) sin and crime. (The word) chandas 
(means) poetry and desire. Sddhiyan (is used to denote) good as 
well as strong. Vyuha (means) a collection as well as (strength) . 
(The word) ahih (denotes) Vftra as well as a serpent*. Fire, 
Moon and Sun (are referred to as) tamonuddh (destroyers of 
darkness) . 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTYTHREE 

The words denoting earth , city, forest and herbs * 

Fire- god said : 

1. I shall describe the words denoting earth, city, forest, 
herbs and lion etc. (The following words denote the earth) : 
bh&ht ananta, kfami, dh&tri, kfmd, jyS, kuh and dharitrl. 


1. The crown and the turban. Cf. A mar a Pahkti 2776. 

2. The Purina omits this word. Cf. A mar a pahkti 2812. 
♦The Purdpa summarises Atnara karpdas II. 2, II. 3 and II. 5 



1006 


Agni Purdna 


2. (The words) mft and mfttikd (denote a piece of earth). 
Commendable earth (is denoted by the words) mjtsd and mrtsnd. 
(The land space on the earth is denoted by the words) jagat, 
viffapam, loka , bhuvanam and jagati. 

3. ( The words ) , ayanam, vartma, mdrga, adhva, panthd, pa - 
davl, Sfti, sarani , paddhati , padyd, vartani and ekapadi (denote a 
path). 

4 -6a. (The words) p&h, purl, nagarl, pattanam and putabhe- 
danam (denote a town). Sthdniyam is a big city surrounding big 
pathways. Sdkhdnagarath is a suburb of a principal city. The 
suburb where the harlots dwell is veia. Apana and nifadyd (denote) 
the place for selling goods. Vipani and panyavithikd (denote) the 
market street. Rathyd, pratoll and vifikhd (denote) the pathways 
in the interior of a village. Caya and vapram ( mean the earth 
dug up from a moat) in the masculine and neuter. 

6b. Prdkdra, varana and Sdla (denote the surrounding fence 
set up with poles, thorns etc.). A surrounding fence made up at 
the border (with bamboo, thorns etc.) (is called) prdclnam. 

7-8. Bhitti and kudyam (denote a wall) . That wall set with 
bone etc. inside (is known as) edUkarh. (The words) vasa, kufl, 
Sdld and sabhd (denote the assembly hall). Sahjavanam and catu- 
bidlam (is a group of four houses forming a court) . PamaSdld and 
ufaja (not feminine) denote a hermitage. Caityam and dyatanam 
(denote a sacrifiicial hall) . VdjiSdld and mandtird (denote a 
stable) . 

9. The dwelling place of the rich (is) hamyadi. The place 
of the gods and kings (is called) prdsdda. (The words) dvdh, 
dvdram and pratlhdra (denote a door), where the word dvdh is 
feminine. Vitardi and vedikd ( mean a fence) . 

10- 11 a. (The words) kapotapdlikd and vifaAkam, respectively 
masculine and neuter (denote a pigeonhouse made of wood etc.) . 
Kapdfa and arara are synonyms (meaning a door). Nihfreifi and 
adhirohvjti ( denote steps made with wood etc. for ascending). 
Sammdrjani and SodharA (mean broom-stick). Safikara and 
avakara (denote sweepings) . 

1 lb-12. (The words) adri, gotra, girt and grdod (denote 
mountains in general). ( The words 'l gahanam, kdnanam and vanam 
(denote a forest) . (The words) drdma and upavanam (denote) an 



363.13-23 


1007 


artificial garden (that has been accomplished) . The same that 
is fit for harem (is called) pramadavanam. 

13. (The words) vithi, dlify, dvalify, panktih and irenl (denote 
a row) . (The words) lekhdh and rdjayah (denote lines) . A tree 
(that is seen) with fruits (produced) from flowers (is) vanaspalyah. 
A tree (that is seen) with fruits not (produced) fromflowers (is) 
vanaspalify. 

14. Those which end with fruit-bearing (are known as) 
osadhi-s. (The words) pald&i , drub, druma and agama (denote a 
tree) . (The words) sthdnu, dhruva and Sanku (denote a cut tree) . 
(The word) sthdnu is optionally masculine. (The words) pra- 
phulla, utphulla and samphulla (mean a flower that has blossom- 
ed). 

15-16a. (The words) paldiam, chadanam and parnarn (denote 
a leaf) . (The words) idhtnam, edhah and samit, famininc (denote 
dry wood and grass) . Bodhidrurna and caladala (denote the holy 
fig tree) . Dadhittha, grdhi, manmatha, dadhiphala , puspaphala and 
dan t a kit ha (denote the woodapplc tree) . 

16b- 17. (The words) udumbara, hemadugdha , koviddra and 
dvipatraka (denote udumbara) . The saplaparna (tree) (is also 
known as) viidlatvak. The krtamala (tree is also known as) suvar - 
naka, arevala, vyadhighata, iampadia and cuturahgala. 

18. The Jambira (tree is also called) danlaiaflia. The Varuna 
(tree is also called) tiktaSdka. Punndga (tree is also called) purufa, 
luhga, kesara and devauallabha. 

l9-20a. Nimbataru , manddra and pdrijdtaka (are the other 
names of) pdribhadra (tree) . Vanjula and citrakrt (arc the other 
names of tiniSa tree) . Pitana and kapltana (denote) the dmrdlaka 
(tree). (The other names) of madhuka (are) gudapufpa and 
madhudruma. 

20b. Gudaphala and srathsl (are the other names of) pilu. 
Nddeyi is the other name of ambhuvetas. 

21. Signify, tiksnagandhaka, akfiva and mocaka (are the other 
names of) Sobhdhjana. If this ( Sobhdiijana ) is red (it is called) 
madhufigntfy. Arista and phenila are synonyms. 

22. Lodhra (is also called) gdlava, idbara, lirifa, tilva and 
mdrjana. Udddlaka (is also known as) ieluh, Slesmdtaka, Sita and 
bahuvdraka. 

23. _(The other names of) vikankata (are) sruvdopkfa, granthila 



1008 


Agni Purina 


and vyighrapit. Tinduka (is also called) sphdrjaka and k&la 
( skandha )>. (The terms) nddeyl and bhdmijambuka (denote niga* 
raAga ) *. 

24. Kdkatindu and ( k&ka ) fiiluka are synonyms. Kramaka and 
pattikikhya would (denote lohitalodhra)*. Kumbhi (is also known 
as) kaidarya and katphala. 

25-26a. Vlravrkfa, arufhara and agnimukhi (are the synonyms 
of) bhalldtaki in (all the three genders) . Sarjaka, pitatdraka 9 and 
asana (are synonyms of) jiva ( ka ). Sarja and ahakarna (are syno- 
nyms of) sdla. s Arjttna (tree) (is also called) virataru 9 , indradruh, 
and kakubhah. 

26b-27. Ingudi (is also known as) tdpnsatam. Sdlmali (is also 
known as) mocd. Cirabilva, naktamila and karaja (are the other 
names of) karafijaka. ( PUtika is also known as) prakirya and pUti- 
karaja. Markafi and ahgaravallari (are varieties of karanja ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 . 

28. Rohi, plihaSatru and d&dimapufpaka (are synonyms of) 
rohitaka. Khadira (is also known as) gdyatri, balalanaya and danta- 
dhdvana. 

29. Arimeda and vifkhadira (denote varieties of bad smelling 
khadira ). Kadara (denotes) the white khadira. (Eranda is also 
called) parkdngula, oardhamdna, carlcu and gandharvahastaka. 

30-3 la. Pinditaka and maruvaka (are synonyms of madana ) . 
Devaddm (is also called) pitaddru, ddru and pdtikdffham. Priyangu 
( is also known as) Sydma, mahilahvayd, lati, govandani, gundrd, 
phalini and phali. 

31b-32a. Sonaka (is also known as) mandukapama, patrorna, 
nafa, kafvanga, funfuka, syondka, Sukandsa, fk§a, dirghavrnta and 
kufannafa. 

32b. Pitadru and sarala (are synonyms) . Nicula, ambuja and 
hijjala (are the synonyms of a kind of reed) . 


1. Cf. Amara paAkti 725. 

2. Cf. ibid. paAkti 724. 

3. Cf. ibid. paAkti 730. 

4. The PurOfia wrongly reads pllaUla. Cf Amara paAkti 735. 

5. Cf. Amara paAkti 737. The pur&gic reading is wrong. 

6. Cf. Aman paAkti 738. 

7. Cf. Amara paAkti 745. 



363.33-42a 


1009 


33. Kdkodumbarikd and phalguh (are the synonyms of malayO. 
Arifta, picvmardaka 1 2 3 4 5 , sarvatobhadra (are synonyms of) nimba. Sirifa 
(is also known as) kapltana. 

34-35a. Va(ba)kula (is said to be vahjula. ( Kapil # * is also 
called as) picchild and aguruSirhiapd. Jayd,jayanti and tarkdri (are 
synonyms of vaijayantikd *. Kanikd (is also known as) ganikdrikd, 
iriparnam and agnimantha. Vatsaka and girimallikd ( are synonyms 
of kufaja) .* 

35b-36. Kalaskandha (is a synonym of) tamdla. Taixduliya (is 
known as) alpamdrisa. Sinduv&ra (is also known as) nirgundi. The 
same ( mallikd ) grown in the forest (is known as) dsphofd 6 . Tdthikd 
(is also known as) ganika and ambaffhd. Navamdlikd (is also known 
as) saptala. 

37. Atimukta and puntfraka (are different varieties of kunda ) .' 
Kumdri (is also known as) sahd and tarani. Therein 7 8 9 , the red 
variety is kurabaka and the yellow variety is kuruntaka. 

38. The blue jhinfi (is also known as) bdtfa. (It is also 
known as dasi and artagala 6 .) Jhitifi (in general is known as) 
saireyaka. If it is red, it is known as kurabaka. If it is yellow, it is 
known as sahacarl (and also as sahacara ) . 

39. Kitava and dhUrta (are the other names of) dhattdra. 
Rucaka (is the other name of) mdtuluAgaka. Samirana, maruvaka, 
prasthapuspa and phanijjaka (are the synonyms of jambira) 

40-42a. Kufheraka ( is the other name of) parndsa. Vasuka and 
dsphofa (are the synonyms of) arka. Sivamalli and pdiupata (are 
synonyms). Vpida, vjksddanl , jivantikd and vfkfaruhd (are the 
synonyms of the plant that clings to a tree and grows). Gud&cl 
(has the other names) tantrikd, amftd, somavalli and madhuparpi. 
Murva (is also called) morafd, madhulika, madhuireni, gokarni and 
plluparnl. 


1. Cf. Amara paAkti 773-picumanda. 

2. Cf. ibid. paAkti 773. 

3. Cf. ibid. paAkti. 779. 

4. Cf. ibid. paAkti. 781. 

5. The Puripa mixes with the previous. Cf. Amara paAktis 785 and 788. 

6. Cf. Amara. paAkti 792. 

7. Refers to andiaa. Cf. Amara. paAkti 796. 

8. Cf. Amara paAkti 797. 

9. Cf ibid. paAkti 806-807. 



1010 


Agni Purina 


42b-43. Pdf hi (is also known as) imbafthd, viddhakarnl, pr acini 
and vanatiktiki. JCafuh, kafumbhari, cabrdAgi and Sakul&dani (are 
the names of kafurohini 1 ) . Atmagupta, prdvftdyi 2 3 and kapikacchu 
(are the other names of) markafi. 

44. Apdmdrga ( is also known as) Saikharika, pratyakpami and 
maydraka. PkahjiktP and brdhmanl (are the other names of) bhdrgi. 
Dravanti, iambari and vpfd (are synonyms). 

45. Man/jiukaparni, bhan<j,iri, samangd and kdlamefikd (are 
synonyms of manjisfhd ) . Rodani, kacchura, ananld, samudranta and 
durilabhi (are synonyms of dhanvayisa ) 4 5 . 

46. Priniparni, prthakparni, kalaji, dhdvani and guha (are 
synonyms) . Nidigdhikd, sprii, vydghri, ksudrd and dussparSd (are 
synonyms) . 

47. Avalguja, somardji, suvalli, somavalliki, kdlameH, krpjaphald 
and pitiphali (are synonyms of) vdkuci. 

48. Kartd, usand and upakulyi ( are synonyms) . Sreyasi and 
gajapippali 6 7 8 (are synonyms) . Cavyath and cavikd (are synonyms) . 
Kdkacinci, guhja and krpnali (are synonyms) . 

49-50. Vikd, visd and prativifd (are synonyms) . Vanairngdfa 
and gokfura (are synonyms) . Ndrayani and Satam Qli (are synonyms). 
Kdliyaka, haridruh, dirvi, paeampacd , ddruhtkld 6 and haimavati 1 ( are 
synonyms of parjani). Ugragandhd, fadgranthd,golomi and iataparvikd 
(are the synonyms of) vacd. 

51. Asphofd and girikarni (arc synonyms) . Sithhdsya, vdsaka 
and vffa (are synonyms) . Madhurxkd (is also called) misi and 
chatrd. Kokildkfa (is also known as) ikpira and kfura. 

52. VifaAga is known as kpnighna (and is used) in the mas- 
culine and neuter. Vajradru (is also known as) snuk, snuhi and 
sudhdP Mrdvika and gostani (are the other names of) draksa. Bald 
and vdpydlaki (are synonyms) . 


1. Cf. Amaru, pankti 819 . 

2. pTdDffdyatti. cf. Amara pankti 821. 

3. Amara paitkti 827 reads haHjiki. 

4. Cf. Amara pankti 831 -832. 

5. karipippalt. Cf. Amara pankti 842 . 

6. Amara paiikti 852 reads dim haridri. 

7. ibid, reads parjani. 

8. Amara pankti 859 reads gutfi. 



363.53-62 


1011 


53. Kdld and masBravidald (are synonyms of black trivrt) 
Trivft (is also known as) triputd and trivrtd. Madhukam, klUakam , 
yasfimadhukam and madhuyasfikd (are synonyms). 

54. Iksugandhd (is also known as) viddri, ksirafidcla and kropfrl. 
Gopi, Sydma , SarivS and ananta (are the other names of) utpala- 
i&riva. 

55. Mod and rambhd (are synonyms of) kadali. Bhanfdkl 
and dufptadharfiipi (are synonyms) . Salaparni (is also called) 
s third and dhruva. Srngi and vrfa (arc the synonyms of the herb) 

vrpabha. 

56. Gangeruki (is also called) nagabald. Mu$a (sa) li and 
talamiilika (are synonyms). Patolika (is also known as ( jyotsni 
and jiila. AjaSrngi and visat}ikd ( arc synonyms) . 

57. Lahgali (is also known as) agnifikha. Tdmbuli and ndga- 
valli (are synonyms) . (The fragrant) retiukd (is also called) harertu 
and kaunli. Hribera (is also known as) divyanagaram. 1 2 

58. (The other names of) Saileya (are) kdldnusdri, vrddhd , 
aSmapaspam and Sitaiivam. Mura (is also known as) tdlapanpi, daitya 
and gandhakuti. 

59. Sukam and barham (are other names of) granthipamam 
(as well as) bald*. Tripufa and trufi (are the synonyms of sukf- 
maild) 3 4 . Siva and tdmalaki (are synonyms of bhumyamalaki ) . Hanu 
and haffavildsini (are synonyms). 

60. Kufamatam, ddSapuram, vaneyam and paripelavam (are 
synonyms) . Jafamarfisi (is also known as) tapasvinl. Sprkkd (is 
also called) devi, laid and laghu .* 

61. Karcuraka and drdvitfaka (are synonyms) . GandhamBli is 
also known as Safhi. Vrddhaddraka (is also known as) rksagandhd, 
chagalantrd and vegi. 

62. RaktaphaH, bimbikd and piluparni (are the other names 
of) tundikeri. Cangeri , cakrikd 8 and ambaifhd (are synonyms). 
Svarnakfiri (is also known as) himavati. 


1. This name is not found in Amara fiankti 892. 

2. This term is not found in Amara paAkti 913. 

3. Cf. Amara paAkti 899. 

4. The purifu reading laSi(t is obviously wrong. 
5 Argara paAkti 929 reads eukrikd. 



1012 


Agni Purina 


63. Sahasraoedhl, cukra and Satavedhl (are the other names of) 
amlaoetas. Jivanti (is also known as) jivani and jivd. Bhu (mi) - 
nimba (is also called) kirdtaka. 1 2 * 4 5 

64. KUrcaSirfa and madhuraka (are synonyms). Candra, kapi- 
vj'ka, 1 dadrughna and edagaja are synonyms. Probably varfdbhd and 
sobahdrini are also synonyms (?) . 

65. Kunandati, nikumbhastrd, yamdni and v&rfikd (are syno- 
nyms).' LaSunam (is also known as) ■ grnjanam , arista, mahdkanda 
and rasonaka. 

66-67. Badard and grsfi (are synonyms of) vdrahi. Vdyasi (is 
also known as) kdkamdci. Madhurd (is also known as) Satapuspa, 
sitacchat r d, aticchatrd, misi, anakpuspi and karavi. Sarana, p r asarani, 
kafambhard and bhadrabald (are synonyms) . Karcura and Safi (are 
synonyms) . 

68. Pafola is (also known as) kulaka and tiktaka. Karavella 
(is also known as) kafkillaka. Kusmdndaka (is otherwise called) 
karkdru. Karkafi (is known as) urvdmh. and (used) in the 
feminine. 

69. Kafutumbl (is also called) ikfvdku. Indravdrwnx (is also 
known as) viSdld. (The other names of) surana (are) arSoghna and 
kanda. Mustaka and kurunindaka (are synonyms). 

70. Venn (is also called) varhSa, tvaksdra, karmdra, maskara 
and tejana. Chatra, aticchatra, pdlaghna, mdldtrnaka and bhustrna 
(denote different kinds of jalatpia .) . 

71a. Tdla is also called trnardja. Pdga (is also called) gkottfd 
and kramvka. 

71b. £drd&la? and dvlpi (are synonyms of) vydghra (tiger). 
Hatyakfa, kesari and hari (denote a lion) . 

72. (The words) kola, potri and vardha would (denotea 
boar) . (The words) koka, Ihdmrga and vrka (denote a wolf) . Lutd, 
Qryandbha, tantuvdya and markafa (denote a spider) . 

73. Vftcika and Sukakifa (scorpion) (are synonyms). SdraAga s 
and tokaka are synonyms (denoting a cdtaka bird) . Kjkavdku and 


1 . kir&tatikta. <f. Amara patkti 934. 

2. Corrupt reading for kimpilya and karkaia. ef. Amara paAkti 941-2. 

9. The Pur&pic reading is corrupt. Qf. Amara paAkti 937-38. 

4. The section on animals begins here. 

5. From here begins the listing of synonyms of birds. 



363.74—364.2 


1013 


tdmracBda (are synonyms denoting a cock) . Pika and kokila (are 
synonyms denoting a cuckoo) . 

74. Karafa and ariffa (denote) a crow. Baka and kahva de- 
note a crane. Cakravdka is also known as koka and cakra. 
Kddamba and kalaharhsaka (are synonyms). 

75. PataAgikd and puttikd (are synonyms denoting different 
kinds of honey-bees) . Dvirepha, puspalif , bhynga, safpada t bhramara 
and ali (denote a bee) . 

76. Kekl ( denotes a peacock) . KekS. (denotes) the sound 
made by a peacock. (The words) Sakunti, Sakuni and dvija (de- 
note a bird) . Paksati is the base of the wing. It is in the feminine. 
Cahcu and trofi (denote the beak) . Both ( the words ) are femi- 
nine. 

77-78. (The words) ufflinam and sandinam (denote) the gait 
(of birds). Kulaya and nidam (denote a nest). They are (used) in 
the masculine and neuter. PeSl, kosa and a? {fa (denote an egg) . 
If less than two, anda is used in the neuter. (The young one of a 
bird is denoted by the words) prthuka, Sdvaka , Situ, pota, p&ka, 
arbhaka and 4-imbha. (The following words denote a collection) : 
sandoha, vyBhaka, gana, stoma, ogha, nikara, vrdta, nikurambam, kada • 
mbakam, sanghdtah, sane ay ah and vrndam. Punja, rdii and kufakam 
(are used to denote heap of grains) . 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTYFOUR 

Words denoting men and the four classes of men 
Fire-god said: 

1. I shall describe the class of men, brahmins, kfatriya-s, 
vaiiya-s and Sudra-s. (The words) tiarafr, pancajandh, martydh (de- 
note men). (The words) yofit,yofd, abald and vadh&h (denote a 
woman) . 

2. A person seeking a lover, going to the place indicated 
(by the lover) (is called) abhisdrikd. (The words) kulafd, puthS - 
call and asati (mean a wanton woman). A nude woman (is call- 
ed) kofmoi. 



1014 


Affix Purdtia 


3. K dtydyanl is middle* &gcd) (wears ochre garment and is 
without husband) 1 . One who lives in other’s house (is called) 
sairindhrl. (She is independent and proficient in hair dressing 
etc.). 2 Asikni is not old (and serves the harem). Malini is a 
woman in her monthly course. 

4. VdrastrU ganikd and vefyd (mean a courtezan) . Brothers’ 
wives are (mutually known as) yatara- s. Husband’s sister (is 
known as) tiandnda. (The descendants for seven generations are 
known as) sapintfa - s and sandbhi- s. 

5. (Sisters born of the same womb are called )samdnodaryah 9 
sodaryah, sagarbhyah and sahajdh. (The words) sago fra, handhava , 
jddti , bandhu , svah and svajana are synonyms (denoting relatives 
belonging to the same clan) . 

6. (The words) dampali , jampati , bhdrydpati and jdydpati 
(denote the husband and wife) . (The outer skin of the embryo 
is known as) gaibhdiaya , jardyu and ulbam. (The foetus is called) 
kalala , in the neuter. 

7. (The words) garbha and bhrUna are synonyms denoting 
(the young one in the womb). (The words) kliba , iaqdha (are 
used to denote) a eunuch. Utldnaiaya and (fimbd would (mean a 
child that sucks milk from the mother’s breasts). Bala (boy) (is 
known to be) manavaka : 

8. (The words) picandila and hrhatkukfi (mean a person hav- 
ing a big belly) . (The word) abhrafa (is used to mean) a natand - 
sika (one having a flat nose) . (A naturally deformed person is 
denoted by the words) vikaldnga and apoganda. (The words) aro - 
gyarn (free from illness) would (also be known as) anamayam. 

9. (A deaf person is denoted by the words) eda and badhira. 
(The word) gadula (is used to denote) a hunch-back. (The 
word) kuni (is used to denote) a person having a maimed hand. 
(The words) kfaya, Sofa andyakpnd (mean consumption) . Pratii- 

ydya and pinasa (catarrh) (are synonyms) . 

10. Ksut, kfutam and ksava (sneezing) (are synonyms). (The 
word) k$ut is feminine. (The words) kdsa and kfavathu (meaning 
cough) are both masculine. Sotha (swelling) is also known as 


1. The purity* omits the other characteristics. See Amara pahkti 1 108. 

2. Qf. Amara paAkti 1 109. 



364 . 11-19 


1015 


fvayathu and iopha. Pddasphofa (sore on the loot) (is also known 
as) vipadikd. 

11. Kilasam and sidhmam (scab) are synonyms. Pdma, p&md 
and v icarcika (are used to mean) kacchu (scab) . (The words) 
kofha, manialakam , kuftham and Svi tram (white leprosy) (are syno- 
nyms) . Arias (piles) (is also known as) durndmakam. 

12. (The words) dndha and nibandha (denote suppression of 
urine and feces) . Grahanlruk and pravahika (denote diarhoea) . 
(The words) bijam, viryam , indriyam and suklam (mean 
semen) . (The words) palalam, krmyam and umisavi (denote flesh) . 

13. Bukka and agramamsam (denote the lotus-shaped flesh in 
the heart) . Hrdayam and hjt (heart) arc synonyms. Vapa and vasd 
(denote the marrow of the flesh) . The artery on the back of the 
neck (is known as) manyd. (The words) naji, dhamani and sird 
(artery) (are synonyms) . 

14-15. Tilakam and kloma (denote lump of flesh) . Mastifkam 
(is die fluid on the fore-head) . Dufika (denotes) the rheum of 
the eyes. Antra (intestine) (is also known as) purilal. Plihd and 
gulma (spleen) (arc synonyms) . (The words) vasuasd (in the mas- 
culine) and snayu (in the feminine) (denote tendon) . Kdlakhan- 
dam and yakrt are synonyms (denoting liver) . Karpara and kapdla 
(denote skull ) , kapalam in the neuter. Bones (are in general de- 
noted by the words) kikasam, kulyam and asthi. 

1 6. (The word) kahkdla (denotes) skeleton in the body. (The 
word) kaieruka (denotes) back-bone. The skull-bone (is called) 
karofi, in the feminine. (The word) parSukd denotes the bones on 
the sides (of the body) . 

17. The limbs of the body (are denoted by the words) aA - 
gam, pratika and avayava. (The words) Sariram, varfma and vigraha 
(denote a body) . Sroni-phalakam (buttocks) (is also called) 
kafa (and that word is) masculine. Ka(i, Sroni and kakudmati (hip) 
(are synonyms) . 

18. The hinder part of the waist of women (is known as) 
nilamba , in the neuter. The frontal part is jaghanam. The kupaka-s 

(hollows below the loins) are in the nilamba. (The word is 
used) in the neuter. (The hollows above the loins are called) 
kukundara-s. 

19. The fleshy portions in the hip are called) sphicau (sphic) 
and kafiptothau. (The organ of generation of woman is called) 



1016 


Agni Purdya 


upastha (because that is near) the two which are to be described 
now. In the case of women it is (called) bhagam and yoni. SiSna, 
medhra, mehanam and Sepha (denote penis) . 

20. (The words) picanda, kukfi, jafharam, udaram and tundam 
(denote belly) . Stana and kuca (mean breast) . CQcuka is the tip 
of breast. (The words) krodam and bhujdntaram denote chest. The 
word krodam is not masculine. 

21. Skandha, bhujafiras and arhsa denote shoulder. (The junc- 
tion of shoulder is known as) jatru. (Nail is denoted by the 
words) punarbhava, kararuha, nakhara and nakha (used) not in 
feminine. 

22. Pr&detika is the span of the thumb and the forefinger. 
TB.li is the span of the thumb and the middle finger. Gokarna 
is the span of the thumb and the ring finger. The span of the 
thumb and the little finger is vitasti measuring twelve finger 
breadths. 

23. The open hand with the fingers extended (is called) 
cape fa, pratala and prahasta. Ratni (is the distance) from elbow 
to the end of closed fist. Aratni (is the distance) from elbow 
to the end of little finger. 

24. Neck with three lines (is called) kambugrivd. (The words) 
aoafu, ghdfd and vfkdfikd (denote the backside of the union of 
head and neck) . Cibuka (chin) is below the lips, then the two 
garida-s (cheeks), the throat and chin. 

25-26. The outer ends of eyes are (called) apdAga- s. Kafdkfa 
(is used to denote) the look with apdAga. (The words) cikura, 
kuntala and vdla (denote hair) . (The words) pratikarma, prasdd- 
hanam, dkalya, ve$a and nepathyam (denote) beautification. It is 
perceivable and is produced by union with a play. Cdddmani is 
the crest-jewel. The central gem in a necklace (is called) 
tarala. 

0 

27. (The ear-ornament is called) kamikd and tdlapatra. 
Lambanam or lalantikd (denote) a long necklace. (The words) 
maHjira and ndpura (denote the anklet) on the foot. KiAkini and 
kfudraghaQtikd(dtnote a small bell) . 

28. (The words) dairghyarh, dydma and droha (are used to 
denote the length of a cloth etc.) . (The words) pari$dha and 
viSdlald (denote the width) . Pafaccaram (denotes) a rag. Sarhvydnam 
(is the cloth worn) on the shoulder. 



364.29—365.7 


1017 


29. (The words) vacant and parisyanda (denote the arrange- 
ment of flowers etc.) . (The words) dbhoga and paripftrnatd (denote 
the fulfilling of all services). Sanmdgaka and sampufaka (mean a 
casket) . (The words) pratigraha and patadgraha (mean a spitoon) . 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTYFIVE 
Words relating to the class of brahmins 


Fire-god said : 

1-3. (Words denoting genealogy are) vaihSa , anvavdya , 
gotram, kulam, abhijana and anvaya. Acarya is that person 
who expounds the scriptures. The person who instructs the 
priests in the sacrifice (is called) vratl, yasfa and yajamdna. Upa - 
krama (denotes) the beginning after having known (the course 
of action) . Those having the same preceptors (are called) satlr- 
thyah. The members of an assembly (are called) sabhya-s, sdmd- 
jika-s, sabhdsada and sabhdstdra-s. (The priests who officiate in a 
sacrifices are known as) ftvija-s and ydjaka-s. Adhvaryu is the 
priest associated with the Tajurveda. Udg&tf is the priest profici- 
ent in the Samaoeda and Hotj in the Rgveda. 

4. Casala is the wooden ring on the top of a sacrificial post. 
Sthanfclam and catnaram are synonyms (denoting the ground 
made) ready for a sacrifice) . The transformation that occurs in 
milk by the addition of curd is known as dmikfa. 

5. Ghee together with curd (is called) pffaddjya. (The 
words) paramdrmam and p&yasam (denote cooked rice mixed with 
milk) . The animal that is killed in a sacrifice after being sancti- 
fied with formulae (is called) updkjta. 

6. (The words) parampardkam, Samanam and prokfanam (con- 
vey) the sense of killing. (The words) pBjd, namasyd , apaciti, 
saparyd , arcd and arhand are synonyms (denoting worship) . 

7. Varivasyd, SufrOfd, paricaryd and updsand. (are synonyms 
meaning mode of worship) . (The words) niyama and vratam (sig- 
nify religious observance) . (They are) not feminine. It consists 
of the meritorious deeds such as fasting and the like. 



1018 


Agai Purdna 


8. The first injunction is called mukhya. That which in infe- 
rior (subordinate) to that (is known as) anukalpa. Kalpa (the 
texts laying down injunctions) is known as vtdhi and krama. 
Viveka is the power to distinguish between the world and the 
spirit. 

9. The receiving of instruction in the scriptures after purifi- 
cation is known as upakartmam. (An ascetic is denoted by the 
words) bhiksu, parivraf , karmandi, pdrdlari and maskari. 

10. (The sages are in general denoted by the words) rsi-s 
and satyavacdh. A student who has had the ceremonial bath (is 
called) snataka . Those who have conquered the sense-organs 
(are known as) yatinah and yatuyah. 

1 1 . Tiie daily rite which depends on the body as means 
(is known as) yama. But niyama is that which depends on exter- 
nal conditions (and is voluntary) . The state of brahman (is de- 
noted by the words) brahmabhuyarn, brahmalvam and brahmasdyujycm. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTYSIX 

Words relating to ksatriyas, vaiSyas and other classes 
Fire-god said : 

1 . (The words denoting the warrior caste are) murdhabhifi- 
kta, rdjanya, bahuja , kfatriya and virdf. A king who is respected by 
the vassals is known as adhlSvara. 

2. (A king who holds way over the entire earth is known as) 
cakravarti and sdrvabhauma. A king who is different from the 
above is a manfaleivara. (Minister or counsel is known as) man- 
tri , dhisaciva and amatya. (The chief counsel is known as) mahd- 
mdtra and pradhdnaka. 

3. A person who attends to disputes (is called) prddvivdka 
and aksadarlaka. The man in charge of gold in a royal treasury 
(is called) b/umrika. (The words) adhyakya and adhikfta are 
synonyms (denoting a superintendent). The person invested 
with the charge of the harem (is called) antaroaidSika . (The 
words) sauvidallas, kahcukin-%, sthdpatya-s and sauvida-s (also denote 
the same). 



366.4-14 


1019 


4-6a. The words fa (sa) n<ta and varsavara (denote the servants 
in the harem, who are eunuchs) . (The words) sevaka, arthi and 
arnjivi (denote a servant) . A ruler of the region other than one’s 
own is a tatru (enemy) .One who is beyond that region is a mitram 
(friend) . A person beyond that is uddsina (neutral) . A king who 
is in the rear (of a kingdom) is p&rsmgraha . 

6b-7. ( A spy is denoted by the words) cur a, sputa and prani- 
dhi. The time that is to come is ayati. The present time is known 
as tatkala and tadatvam. The fruit accruing in future (is called) 
udarka. (The fear that is caused) by such factors as excessive 
rains and fire (is) adfftam. (The fear that is caused) by one’s 
own kingdom or other (is) drftam. 

8. (The words) bhndrakumbha and puruakumbhu (are synony- 
ms meaning a pitcher that is full) . (A vessel made of gold is 
called) bhrhgdra and kanakatukd. (A rutting elephant is called) 
prabhinna , garjita and matta. (A particle of water splashed by the 
trunk of an elephant is called) vamathu and karnilkata. 

9. A goad is known as srni, in the feminine and unLitui, in 
the masculine. (The words) paristoma and kutha (denote) the 
carpet on the back of an elephant in both (the genders) . (A 
vehicle used by ladies for ' transport is called) karniratha and 
pravahanam. The words dola (palanquin) and preftkhd (swing) 
etc. (are used) in the feminine. 

10. (The words) ddhorandh, hastipak&h . , hastydrohah and nifd- 
dinah (denote mahouts) . (Warriors are denoted by the words) 
bhafdk, yodhah and yoddh&rah. (The words) kancuka and varana 1 
(mean armour) . They are not feminine. 

11. Sirsatiya (is used to denote) Sirastra (helmet). (The 
words) tamtram , varma and darhianam (are used to mean armour) . 
(The words) dmukta , pratimukta , pinaddha and apinaddha (are used 
to mean a person covered by armour) . 

12-14. An arrangement of army (for the sake of battle) is 
yyuha. (The words) cakram and anlkam (denote an army) . It is 
not feminine. The patti (consists of) an elephant, a chariot, 
three cavalrymen and five infantry. Three times the constituents 
of a patti and subsequently in the same way in order would be 


1. Amara paAkti. 15 93 reads viravdtta. 



1020 


Agni PurOpa 


sendmukham, gulma, gana, vdhini, prtand, camuh anikini, daidnikinl 
and akfauhini. A bow (is also known as) kodantfa, and ifvdsa. 
The tip (kofi) (of a bow) is known as afani. 

15. The middle of a bow (is called) lastaka. (Thebowstring 
is called) maurvl, jyd, Sinjini and gana. (The words) prsatka, bdna, 
viSikha, ajihmaga, khaga and dSuga (denote an arrow) . 

16. (The words) tuna, updsahga, tuipira and nifadga (denote 
a quiver) both in the masculine and feminine. (The words) asi, 
riffi, nislrirhia, karavdla and krpdna (mean a sword) . 

17. Tsaru is the handle of a sword. Ili and karavalikd (denote 
a short sword) . The words kufhara and soadhiti (denote an axe) . 
(The word kufhara is used in) both (masculine and feminine)'. 
(The words) churika and asiputrika (denote a knife) . 

18. Pr&sa is known to be kmta (meaning a spear) . Sarvald 
and tomara (mean an iron club) (used) in the masculine and 
neuter. (Bards who sing praises and wake up in the morning are 
called vaitdlika - s and bodhakara- s. Magadha - s (are bards in gene- 
ral) . Vandin - s and stud ( pafhaka-s ) (are bards singing in praise 
of the kings) . 

19. SarhSaptaka - s are those who do not turn back from battle. 
(The words) patSkd, vaijayanti , ketanam and dhvajam (denote a 
banner) . (The word) dhvajam (is used) in the masculine and 
neuter. 

20. (A fight with enthusiasm) I first, I first, (is known 
as) ahaihporvikd, in the feminine. Where mutual ego is shown (I 
am capable) it is known as ahamahamikd. 

21. (The words) fakti, pardkrama, prana , iauryam, sthdma, 
saha and balam (denote valour) . Mdrcchd, kaSmalam and moha 
(denote stupefaction) . Avamardana and pijlanam (mean devasta- 
tion of grains etc. by the invading forces) . 

22. (The words) abhyavaskandanam and abhydsddanam (mean 
encountering an enemy by trick) , Vijaya and jaya (are synonyms 
meaning conquest). (The words) nirvdsanam, sarhjnapanam, mdra- 
nam and pratighdtanam (mean killing) . 

23. (The words) paficatd, kdladharmaj diffdnta, pralqya and 
atyaya would (mean death) . (The words) vif, bhdmispfk and 
vaiiya (denote a tradesman and agriculturist). (The words) 
vftti, vartanam and jivanam (mean livelihood in general). 



366.24-32 


1021 


24. Kffi (agriculture) etc. are to be known (as the means 
of livelihood of a vaiSya) . (The words) kusldam and vfddhijioikd 
mean existing on interest by lending money) . Uddh&ra (means 
debt). (The word) arthaprayoga 1 (also means kusida). KatfiSa 
(denotes) the ear of a corn. 

25. Kirhidru (denotes) the beard of a corn. Stamba (means) 
a bunch of grass etc. (Paddy etc. are denoted by the words) 
dhanyam, vrihi and stambakari. (The minute particles of straw) are 
known as kaiahgara and busam. 

26. Blackgram etc. are grains in the form of pods. Barley 
and other grains are in the form of beards. (Grains such as) 
niv&ra are wild grains ( tjnadhdnya ) . A winnowing basket is also 
known prasphotanam. 

27. (A sack made of cloth to carry grains is known as) 
syuta and praseva. Kandola and pi fa (denote a cotainer made 
of bamboo etc) . Kafa and kilihjaka (relate to different varieties of 
reeds) . These are similar. Rasavati, pakasthanam and mahdnasa 
(denote a kitchen) . 

28. The kitchen superintendent (is called) paurogava. (Cooks 
are denoted by the words) s iipakdras, vallavas, drdlikas, andhasika-s 
suda-s, audanikas and gun as. ■ 

29. (A frying pan is denoted by the word) ambarifam, in the 
neuter and bhrdffra, in the masculine. (The words) karkari, dlu 
and galantikd (denote a small pitcher) . (A big pitcher is called) 
alinjara and manika. Sufavi (is the name of) black cumin seed. 

30. (The words) drandla and kulmdfam (denote a kind of 
gruel) . The words vdhlika, hingu and rdmafham (denote asafoetida). 
(The words) niSd, haridrd and pits, feminine (denote turmeric). 
(The words) matsyandi and phd^ilam (mean molasses) . 

31. Transformed milk (is called) kdrcikS. (The words) 
cikkatfam, maspiam and snigdham (denote bland). (Rice parched 
and flattened is denoted by the words) prthuka and cipifaka. 
Fried and powdered barley (is called) dhdtiS, in the feminine. 

32. (The words) jemanam, leha and dhdra (denote food) . 
(The words) tndheyi and saurabhi denote a cow. Those which are 
yoked (are called) yugyah, prasaAgyah and fdkafafi. 

1. Qf. Amara paAkti 1714. The Purina while making an extract mixes the 
two terms. 



1022 Agni Purina 

* 

33. (A cow) that has delivered a calf long time back (is 
called) vafkayant, and (one) that has delivered recently (is 
called) dhenu. (The cow) that is attacked by a bull (for mating) 
(is called) sandhini. A barren cow (is called) vehat. 

34-35. (A person sustaining himself by buying and selling 
is called) patiydjiva and dpanika. A thing left as trust (is called) 
upanidhi and the word is masculine. The words vipann and 
vikraya (mean sale) . The numerals one to eighteen (are to be 
used) in all the three (genders) and the numerals twenty on- 
wards take only singular always. While counting number two 
takes the plural. Among them (the numerals) upto ninety are 
feminine. 

36-37. (A unit measuring ten is called a pankli ) . Successive 
multiples of a pahkti would be hundred, thousand etc. They are 
measured by tul&nguliprastha 1 2 - s. Five gunja-s (make) one 
ddyamdsaka. Sixteen (mas as) (make) one aksa (otherwise called) 
karfa. The word is not feminine. Four karsa-s (would make) one 
palam. An akfa (measure) of gold (is known as) suvarna and bista. 
A pa la (measure) of the same (is called) kuruvista. 

38. One hundred pala - s (make) one tula. That (word) is 
feminine. Twenty tuld-s would make one bhdra. (A karsa measure 
of silver) is called kdrsapana or karfika. A karfa (measure) of 
copper (is known as) pana. 

39-40a. (The words) dravyam, vittam, svapaleyam, riktham, 
fklham, dhanam and vastt (denote wealth) . (The words) riti and 
drakufa (denote brass). It is not in the feminine. (The words) 
Sulbarn and audumbaram (are synonyms of) tamrakam (brass). 
Kaldyasam and aya (are synonyms of) loha (iron) . 

40b. (The words) kfara and kaca (alkali) (are synonyms) . 
(The words) capala , rasa, sUta and parada (are synonyms 
denoting mercury) . 

41. The horn of the wild buffalow (is called) gavalam. 
Trapu and piccatam * (tin) (are synonyms) . Sisakam 3 (denotes 
lead) . (The words) hindira, abdhikapha (sea-foam) and phena (are 


1. tula is explained below; aAguli is fingerbreadth and on cpraftha isequal 
to thirtytwo pala- s explained below. 

2. The other equivalents are given in the next verse. 

3. The Purdfla wrongly mixes this word with the previous. 



366.42-48 


1023 


synonyms) . (The words) madh&cchiftam and sikthakam (bee-wax) 
are synonyms. 

42. (The words) raAgam and vaAgam 1 (denote tin) . (The 
words) picu and tula (mean cotton) . Kunafi (den toes) manahSili 
(arsenic) (especially the Nepalese variety) . Tavakfira (nitre) 
would be (known as) pakya. (The words) tvakkjiri and vathia r o- 
cand (denote a medicinal substance got from the bamboo) . 

43. Vrfaldfji, jaghanyajih and S&drih (are synonyms) (denot- 
ing the fourth class of men) . Can data- s and other low caste men 
(are known as) mixed (castes) . Kim and Silpl (denote the 
artisan) . Their union (with those) of their own caste (is called) 
ireni, both in (the feminine and masculine) . 

44. (A painter is denoted by the words) raAgi-jiva and 
cilrakira. (A carpenter is denoted by the words) takfi, vardhaki 
and tvaffd. (The words) nidindama and svarnakira (denote a 
goldsmith). (The words) nipita and antivasiyi (denote a 
barber) . 

45. (A shepherd is denoted by the words) jibila and 
ajijiva. (A person living by serving the god is called) devijiva and 
devala. (Actors are denoted by the words) jiyijiva- s and iailQfa-s. 
(The words) bhftaka and bkftibhuk (denote a person living on 
wages) . 

46. (A low person is denoted by the words) vivarna, pimara, 
nica, prikfta, pfthagjana, nihina, apasada and jilma. (The words) 
disera and cefaka (are used to denote) a servant. 

47. (The words) pafu, peiala and dakfa (mean a clever 
person) . Mrgayu is known to be bibdhaka (hunter) . Cindila (low 
classman) (is also known as) divikirti. (The word) pustam (is 
used) in (the sense of) plastering. 

48. A puppet (made of cloth etc.) is piflciliki. Any young 
animal (is known as) oarkara. (The words) maAjOfi, pefaka and 
pefi (denote a box) . (The words) tulya, sidhirana and sama 
(mean equal or similar) . (The word) pratimi would (mean) 
pratikrti (an image or statue) . The brahma and other classes have 
been described so far. 


1. Qf. the previous verse. 



1024 


Agni Pur&va 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTYSEVEN* 

The class of words dependent on the substantives 
for their genders 

Fire-god said : 

1 . Listen to me ! I shall describe the genders of the sub- 
stantives in general. (The words) sukrti, punyavdn and dhanya 
(denote a fortunate person) . (A generous person is denoted by 
the words) maheccha and mahdiaya. 

2. (The words) pravina, nipuna , abhijita, vijha, nifnata and 
iikfita 1 (a proficient person) (are synonyms) . (A very liberal 
person is denoted by the words) vaddnya, sthdlalakfya, danaSaunda 
and bahvprada. 

3. The words krti* krtajha 8 and kuiala (mean a clever 
person) . (The word) dsakta (means one drawn towards some- 
thing) . (The words) udyukta and utsuka (mean being drawn 
towards something by one’s own desire) . (The words) ibhya, 
dtjihya and parivfdha (denote a rich man) . Adhibhufi, ndyaka and 
adhipa (mean a master) . 

4. (A person endowed with fortune is denoted by the words) 
lakfmivdn, lakpnana and Srila. (The words) svatantra, apdvrta and 
svairi (denote an independent person) . KhalapU would (mean) 
bahukara (a sweeper). (The words) dirghas&tra and cirakriya 
(denote a lazy person) . 

5. Jdlma and asamiksyakdri (mean a person acting without 
discriminating good and bad) . One who is slow in doing things 
is known as kunfha, (One who is proficient in doing things is) 
karmaidra or karmatha. (The words) bhakfaka, ghasmara and 
admara (denote a gluttonous person) . 

G Jjolupa (denotes a person having ardent desire) . (The 
words) gardhana and gfdhmb (denote a greedy person) . (A 
modest person is denoted by the words) vinita and prairita. (The 

•This chapter summarises Amara, kipfa III, paAktis 2030 ff. 

1. Other words having the same meaning have been wrongly put in the 
next verse in the Purina. 

2. These words should be read with those in verse 2. 

3. This word means a grateful person. Probably a for kftmukha , 

Cf. Amara, patikti, 2033. 



367.7-15a 


1025 


words) dhtfnuk and viydta (are synonyms of) dhrffa (immodest) . 
Jfibhrta 1 2 3 and pratibhdnvita (denote a person having imagination) . 

7. (The word) adhira (means a person afflicted by fear, 
hunger, thirst etc.) . (A cowardly or timid person is denoted by 
the words) bhlruka and bhiru. (The words) vanddru and abhivd - 
daka (denote a polite or respectful person) . (The words) 
bhUsit a, bhavifnu and bhavitd (mean a person desiring to become 
rich). A knower (is denoted by the words) vidura and vinduka. 

8-9a. (The words) matta, fauntfa, utkafa and kfiba (denote 
an intoxicated person). Canda (means) atyantakopana (extremely 
short-tempered). DevadrayaA is a person adoring a deity. A person 
serving the world is vifvadrayaA. A companion, especially the 
husband (is denoted by the word) sadhryah. A person serving 
crookedly (is called) tiryah. 

9b-10a. (The two words) vdcoyuktipafu and vdgml (denote 
a logician). A garrulous person (is denoted by the word) 
vdvaduka. (A person indulging in unrefined talks is denoted by 
the words) jalpdka, vdcdla, vac 3 (a and bahugarhyavdk. 

1 Ob- 11. (One who is censured is called) apadhoasta and 
dhxkkjta. (The words) kllita axi&sarhyata (denote a person) bound 
(with rope etc.). (The words), ravana * and Sabdana (denote a 
person making sound). (The words) ndndivddl and ndndikara are 
synonyms (denoting laudatory singer). (The words) vyasandrta 
and uparakta (denote a person afflicted by misfortune) *. 

12. (The words) vihasta and vydkula are synonyms (mean- 
ing a person who does not know what to do on account of grief. 
(The words) nfiaihsa, krftra, ghdtuka and pdpa (mean a person 
bent on harming others) . DhBrta and vancaka (mean a cheat) . 
(The words) mBrkha, vaidheya and vdliSa (denote a fool) . 

13. (A miser is denoted by the words) kadarya, typana and 
ksudra. (The words) mdrgana, ydcaka and arthl (mean a beggar) . 
(The word) ahathyu (means) an egoistic person. A person en- 
dowed with good fortune (is called) iubharhyuh. 

14-1 5a. (The words) kdntam, manoramam and rucyam (are 
used in the sense of a beautiful thing) . A thing that is desired 


1 . Amara, paAkti 2075 reads prageibha. 

2. The Purdga wrongly reads car Of a. 

3. The next two words repeated from verse 10— obviously a mistake. 



1026 


Agni Purina 


(is denoted by the words) hjdyam and abhlfftam. (The words) 
asdram and phalgu (mean a worthless thing) . (The word; iunyam 
(means void) . (An important thing or person is denoted by the 
words) mukhya , varya and varenya. 1 2 3 (The words) Sreydn, freffha 
and pufkala would (mean the outstanding) . (The wends) prdgiya, 
agrya , agriya and agriya (also mean an important person) . 

15b- 16. (The words) vatfram, uru and vipulam (mean wide). 
(The words) pinam, piva, sthdlam and pivaram (mean) stout. (The 
words) stoka, alpa and kfullaka (are used in the sense of alittle) . 
(A minute thing is denoted by the words) sukfmam, Slakfttam, 
debhram , kfSam and tarn. (The words) mdtra and kufi (in the 
feminine) and lava and kana (in the masculine) (have the same 
sense) . (The words) bhUyiftham, puruha and puru (mean plenty) . 

17. (The words) akhandam, purrym and sakalam (denote the 
whole) . (The words) upakanfha, antika, abhita, samipa, savidha * 
and abhydsa (mean near) . (The word) nediffham (means) very 
near. 

18. (The word) davisfham would (mean) very far. (The 
words) nistala and vartula (would mean) circular. (The words) 
ucca, prdmlu, unnata and udagra (mean high) . (An eternal thing is 
denoted by the words) dhruva, nitya and sandtana. 

19. (The words) dviddham, kufilam, bhugnam, vellitam and 
vakram (denote the crooked) . (An unsteady thing is denoted by 
the words) caRcalam and taralam. (The words ')ka\horam,ja\harair^ 
and dfdham (mean hard) . 

20. (The words) pratyagra, abhinava, navya, navina, rntana 
and nava (mean fresh or new) . (The word) ekatdna (means) 
concentrated on a single object. (The word) uccandam (means) 
quickly. 

21. (The words) uccdvacam and naikabhedam (mean manifold 
ways) . (The word) sambddha (means a narrow way) . Kalilam 
(means a difficult path) . (The words) timitam, stimitam and 
klinnam (mean wet). (The word) abhiyoga (means) abhigraha (an 
attack) . 


1. Some of the other words having the tame meaning have been given 
in the Purina in the next verse after a break. 

2. The ptd. text of the Purina reads samidha. 

3. Abo spelt as jarafham. 



367.22-27 


1027 


22. (The word) sph&ti (is used to mean) increase. (The 
word) prathd (is used to denote) fame. (The word) samtthSra 
(means) a collection. (The word) apah&ra (means) apacaya 
(removal) . (The words) vihdra and parikrama (mean movement 
on foot) . 

23. (The words) pratydh&ra and up&ddnam (are used in the 
sense of restraining the sense-organs) . (The extraction of 
extraneous objects from the body is denoted by the words) 
nirhara and abhyavakarfanam. (The words) vighna, antardya 
and praiyuha would (mean an obstacle). (The words) dsyd, dsyand 
and sthiti (are used in the sense of a seat) . 

24. (The words) sannidhi and sannikar$a (would (mean 
proximity) . (A difficult path is indicated by the words) saAkrama 
and durgasancara. (The words) upalambha and anubhava (convey 
the meaning of experience) . (The words) praty&deia and nirdkrti 
(are used in the sense of rejection) . 

25. (The words) parirambha, parifvanga, sarfiilefa and «6- 
agUhanam (denote embrace) . An inference (is that which is 
gained) by means of pakfa (subject of a syllogism) , hetu (reason) 
and the like 1 2 3 . The words damara* and viplava (are used) in (the 
sense of) frightening an enemy by shouts. 

26. The knowledge about an object, that is not perceived, 
(arising) from the statement is said to be i&bdam Upam&na ( ka ) 
(comparison) would be the cognition arising from seeing the 
resemblance in a similar (object) . 

27. Arthdpatti (presumption) would be the knowledge about 
a different thing which would not exist without (the thing seen) 
Abhdva (non-existence) is the cognition "it is not there” when 
the counter-correlative is not apprehended on the ground. Thus 
ends the genders of substantives told by Hari (Vi?nu) for the 
sake of knowledge of men. 


1. This is not found in Amara. 

2. The printed text wrongly reads bhramara. 

3. This and other terms of NySya given here are not found in Amara. 



1028 


Agni Fuxfaja 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTYEIGHT 
Constant dissolution, occasional and total dissolution 
Fire-god said : 

1-2. The dissolution of beings is of four kinds, such as 
constant dissolution of all beings (that takes place daily) , the 
dissolution (known as) Brdhma, (otherwise known as) naimittika 
( pralaya ), the prdkfta pralaya, occurring at the end of a thousand 
of foxxryuga 1 2 3 * periods and the absolute dissolution (of all beings) 
by the union of all souls in the supreme soul by means of 
knowledge. 

3-5. I shall describe to you the nature of the naimittika 
dissolution that occurs at the end of a kalpa 2 period. When the 
earth (has become) almost depleted at the end of a thousand of 
four yuga cycles, there would be a severe drought for hundred 
years. Then (all) the beings would perish. Then (lord) Vi?nu, 
the lord of the universe, remaining in the seven rays of the 
Sun, drinks the waters. The water in the oceans, the earth and 
the nether world and the like gets dried up. 

6-8. Then by the divine power (of lord Vi?iiu) , the very 
same seven rays (of the Sun) , nourished by the water, become 
seven Suns. O Twice-born ! They burn the three worlds 
completely together with the nether world. (The surface of) 
the earth would (appear) like the back of a tortoise. Then the 
terrible lire (of dissolution) , a manifestation of (lord) Rudra, 
burns the nether worlds below in association with the breath 
of the serpent &/a 8 . Then the all-pervading (fire) bums the 
(region) from the nether worlds to the surface of the earth and 
from there to the heaven. 

9-1 1 . Then all the three worlds appear like one blazing 
mass. Then the inhabitants of the two worlds, oppressed by the 
terrible heat, ascend to the Maharloka and tothejanaloka from 


1. The four yugas — kfta, trtlS, dvipara and kali are reckoned as equivalent 
to 1,728,000, 1,296,000, 864,000 and 432,000 years respectively. 

2. One kalpa is equivalent to a day of Brahm& consisting of one thousand 
yugas. 

3. The serpent having thousand hoods on whose body reclines (lord) 

Viypu. 



368.12-22 


1029 


Maharloka. After the world is burnt (by the God) (assuming) 
the form ofRudra, there arise clouds of different shapes together 
with lightning from the breath of (lord) Hari (Vi$nu) . They 
rain for a hundred years and put down the fire that lias arisen. 

12-13. When the water rises upto the region of the seven 
sages (Great Bear) , a hundred storms issue from the breath of (the 
lord) Vi?nu and disperse those clouds. Then after having drunk 
the wind lord Hari lies down on that mass of water, having 
assumed the form of Brahma, extolled by sea-dwelling persons 
who have gained supernatural powers and by sages. 

14. (Lord) Madhusudana (slayer of demon Madhu; i.e. 
Vi?pu) lies down (on that mass of water) resting in the yogic 
sleep, which is his divine illusory form, contemplating His own 
form known as Vasudeva. 

15. He then lies down (in sleep) fora kalpa 1 2 (period) and 
after waking up, in the form of Brahma, He creates. O Twice- 
born! Then (the universe) lies in an unmanifest state in the 
Prakrti for two pardrdha 9 - s. 

lf>-19. One place is ten times the other place when ex- 
pansion is made from one place. Then the eighteenth place 
would be said to be pardrdha. The prdkrta dissolution is known to 
be twice the pardrdha. O Twice-born ! When everything is burnt 
by contact with fire and on account of drought, (it is prdkfla dis- 
solution) . The modifications of mahal (one of the principles) , 
(get merged into one) losing their separate existence, and get 
re-absorbed (into prakrti) on account of the will of (lord) 
Kr?na. Water first swallows the qualities of earth such as smell 
and the like. Then earth (divested of) its characteristic of smell 
tends towards dissolution. 

20. Then water having the characteristic of taste remains. 
It is drunk by light. When it is lost, fire glows on. 

2 1 . Then wind swallows light together with its characteristic 
of colour and form. When fire is lost, strong wind blows on. 

22. The characteristic of wind, namely touch, is then 
consumed by ether. O Twice-born ! When wind is also lost, 
ether remains without any sound. 


1. Seep. 1028 fn. 1 above. 

2. £_qual to 100,000,000,000,000,000 years. 



1030 


Agni Purdna 


23. (The characteristic) of ether is sound. Ether (together 
with its characteristic) is swallowed by Bhutidi ( i.e. AhaAkdra 
or Ego Principle in which the element of Tamas dominates ) . Ether 
born of Ego and Bhatddi are swallowed by Mahat i.e. Buddhi 
tattva (the first evolute of Prakfti in Sankhya) . 

24-25. Earth gets merged in water, water in light, light in 
wind, wind in ether and ether in ego. O Twice-born ! that 
(cg°) (gets merged) in the principle of mahat and (the principle 
of) mahat is swallowed by prakfti (nature) . The prakfti (consists 
of two parts) such as manifest and unmanifest. The manifest 
(part of prakrti) gets merged in the unmanifest. 

26. The purusa (primordial being) is pure and is one un- 
decaying (entity) . He is also a part of the Supreme Soul. These 
prakfti and purusa get merged in the Supreme Soul. There is no 
determination such as name, species and the like in that lord of 
all. (That Supreme Soul) is composed only of existence. He is 
to be known and (is of the form of) knowledge. (All) other 
souls (are merged) in (such Supreme Soul). 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTYNINE 

The description of absolute dissolution 
and the process of creation 

Fire-god said : 

1 . I shall describe absolute dissolution. Absolute dissolution 
arises from knowledge after having known the sufferings caused 
by the mind etc. from one’s disinclination. 

2. The sufferings are of two kinds : physical and mental. 
The physical sufferings are manifold. O Twice-born 1 Listen to 
me ! I shall describe them. 

3-5. The (individual) soul after having discarded the 
sensual body enters the womb as a result of (the past) deeds. O 
Twice-born ! this body known as dtivdhika (that is carried for- 
ward) is peculiar to men alone. O Twice-born 1 when the 
time for death comes the bodies of men are carried away by the 



369.6-15 


1031 


servants of Yama (God of Death) along the path of Yama. O 
Sagel this is not the case with the other beings. Such a person 
would wander in heaven and hell like the ghafayantra 1 . 

6-7. O Brahmin ! This is a land of deeds and is known to 
bear fruits (of one’s actions). Yama (God of Death) is the cause 
of one’s birth. He determines the hell (to which one has to go) 
on account of the deed. Being awaited by them (men) , Yama, 
makes them get their befitting places (dependent) on their 
(deeds) . The beings which have got ethereal (bodies) reach the 
(befitting) wombs. 

8-9a. A man is led by the messengers of Yama and he sees 
him (Yama) . A pious man is honoured by him and a sinner is 
beaten. Gitragupta 2 3 informs him the good or bad deed (done) in 
(every) house. 

9b- 1 2a. (The departed soul) dwells in the Ativ&hika 
(provisional) body and partakes the funeral oblations offered by 
the relatives. O Knower of virtue ! (After the funeral is over) 
(the soul) rejects that preta body (attained after death) and 
ascends to another region from that of the pretax. It dwells 
(there) experiencing hunger and thirst and partakes the raw 
offerings (made to it by the relatives) . A person does not get 
release from this newly acquired body without (eating) the 
funeral oblations. He partakes the ball-offerings there itself. 

12b- 13a. When the sapintfikarana* has been done, a (dead) 
man discards the preta body and gets a sensuous body after one 
year. 

1 3b- 14. Both the bodies are said to be sensuous and designa- 
ted as inauspicious and auspicious. After having enjoyed by 
means of the sensuous body, one gets released from the bondage 
of deeds. Demons devour that body after that. 

15. O Twice-born! A person who does sinful deeds, would 
enjoy (the fruits of good deeds at first) in the heaven. Then he 
takes a second body of sinners to experience (the fruits of 
sin) . 

1. A mechanism for drawing water from a well. 

2. One of the assistants of Yama who records the virtuous and vicious 
deeds of men. 

3. The rite performed at the end of one year or on the twelfth day 
after th^jdeath of a person to unite the dead with the departed ancestors. 



1032 


Agni PurSna 


16. After experiencing the fruits of sin one that has enjoyed 
heaven, is thereafter born in a pure and prosperous family. 

17. A person doing pious deeds having (a little of) sin would 
first experience (the fruits of) the sin and when that body is 
dissolved would attain a beautiful body. 

1 8. A person gets freed from hell even if a little of past deed 
still remains. There is no doubt that he would be bom as an 
animal after getting liberated from hell. 

19-20. The soul after having entered the womb dwells in 
the foetus. It gets hard in the second (month) . The limbs (grow) 
in the third (month) . Bones, skin and flesh (are formed) in the 
fourth (month) . Hair grows in the fifth (month) . Heart (is 
formed) in the sixth. The soul feels pain in the seventh. 

21. Thus (the child) remains in the womb being covered 
with the placenta and having hands folded above the head. A 
eunuch stays in the middle (of the abdomen) , a female (child) 
on the left side and a male (child) on the right side. 

22. The child stays in the womb facing the back (of the 
mother) . There is no doubt that it (the child) recognises the 
person in whose (womb) it stays. 

23. It knows fully all the incidents of previous life from 
birth onwards. A person finds a great darkness and (experiences) 
suffering. 

24. In the seventh month it partakes the food eaten by the 
mother. It becomes extremely restive in the eighth and ninth 
months. 

25. It suffers when there is coition and physical exercise 
on the part of the mother. It becomes sick when (the mother is) 
sick, a moment (of agony) appearing as if lasting for a hundred 
years. 

26. It is tormented by the (past) deeds and makes resolu- 
tions : “O Brahman ! After getting out from the womb I will 
gain knowledge relating to liberation (from this bondage) 

27. Being pressed down by the wind inside (mother s) 
womb, it gets out through the vagina. It gets afflicted in the 
first month (after birth) and feels pain when touched with the 
hand. 

28. The auditory organs, minor organs and the state of 
being separate (are produced) in the body from the ether with 



369.29-41 1033 

(its attribute of) sound. The process of breathing, movement 
and the feeling of touch are due to the wind. 

29. Personality, sense of seeing, heat, celebrity, biles, intellect, 
colour, strength, shade, splendour and valour arise in the body 
from fire. 

30. Sweat, the organ of taste, moisture, marrow, taste, 
blood, semen, urine and phlegm and the like are produced in 
the body from water. 

31-33. The sense of smell, hair, nail, weight and firmness of 
the bones (are) from earth. The delicate organs, skin, flesh, heart, 
navel, marrow, ordure, fat, moisture and the upper part of the 
belly are got from the mother. Veins, arteries and semen are 
got from the father. Lust, anger, fear, joy, the states of being 
pious and not pious, form, voice, colour and the discharge of 
urine and the like are due to one’s own (state) . 

34. Ignorance, negligence, idleness, thirst, hunger, infatu- 
ation, jealousy, defectiveness, grief, weariness and fear are 
qualities of tamas (temperament) . 

35. O Great sage ! Lust, anger, valour, desire to do 
sacrifice, garrulousness, ego and contempt for others are qualities 
of r&jasa (temperament) . 

36. Desire to be righteous, desire for emancipation, extreme 
devotion to (lord) Kesava (Vi?riu) , compassion and diligence 
should be termed as arising from sdttvika (temperament) . 

37. A person in whom wind predominates would be fickle, 
irritable, cowardly, garrulous, yielding to vices of kali (ytiga ) 
and dreams of flying in the air. 

38. A person in whom bile predominates would be pre- 
maturely grey-haired, irritable, very learned, fond of battle 
and one who sees conflagrations in dream. 

39. A person in whom phlegm abounds would be a stead- 
fast friend, constantly enthusiastic, having firm limbs, endowed 
with wealth and one who perceives water and white colour in 
dream. 

40-41 . Serum is the life force in the body of beings. Blood 
(serves as) the anointment. Flesh causes urination and perspir- 
ation. Bones make (the body) firm. Marrow would fill up and 
increase potency. Semen gives potency. Ojas (virility) is the 
sustainar of life. 



1034 


Agni Purina 


42. Virility is subtler and lesser yellow than semen and 
flows in the vicinity of heart. There are six parts of the body, 
viz, two thighs (legs), two hands, head and belly. 

43-45. The six external layers of skin are the epidermis, 
(the layer) that contains blood, the next one that contains 
features of grace, the fourth one that bears the sacs (storing 
fluids) , the fifth one that is the seat of abscesses and the sixth 
one that supports life. There are seven sheaths (namely) that 
which supports flesh, the second one, blood, that which is the 
prop for liver and spleen, the next one that holds fat and that 
which supports bone, that which holds marrow, phlegm and 
feces, situated in the abdomen. The sixth is that which holds 
bile and (the next one) that holds semen in the region of that 
sac. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY 
The constituent parts of a body 


Fire-god said : 

1-2. The auditory organ, skin, the two eyes, tongue, nose, 
intellect, the five elements and their qualities (such as) sound, 
touch, colour, taste and smell, the anus, the organ of generation, 
the two hands, the two feet are the embodiments of sky. Their 
functions are emission, exhilaration, taking, movement and 
speech and the like. 

3. Five among these are organs of action, five are organs of 
sense. The five great elements are objects of senses having the 
mind as that which governs. 

4. The soul is unmanifest. The principles are twentyfour. 
The purufa is the supreme. (The soul exists) just like the fish in 
the water attached and detached. 

5. The qualities sattva, rajas and tamos dwell in the unmani- 
fest (Prakfti). The inner being is the purufa. It is the Supreme 
brahman, the cause. 



370.6-1 9a 


1035 


6-7. One who knows this Supreme purusa, attains the sup- 
reme position. There are seven sacs in the body. The first one is 
the sac of blood. (The other sacs) are those of phlegm, of un- 
digested food and of bile. The fifth one is that of digestion. The 
receptacles for wind and urine (are the sixth) and seventh. The 
uterus is the eighth one in women. 

8-9. The sac of digestion gets dilated by bile and the vagina 
by internal fire. The uterus would resemble lotus and expand 
during the menstrual period. There it holds semen together with 
blood. O Sage ! semen deposited in the vagina is led to the 
uterus in course of time. 

10. Even during the menstruous period, the vagina would 
be surrounded by wind, bile and phlegm. It would not get dilated 
then. 

1 1-12. O Fortunate one 1 heart, lungs, liver and spleen are 
formed in due succession. O Knower of virtue ! spleen and liver 
of men are formed from the essence of the serum that gets con- 
densed. Lungs (are formed) from the froth of blood. 

13. Blood is then converted into bile and it is then known 
as taniaka. Heart is formed from the spreading of fat and 
blood. 

14. Intestines of mortals are formed from the spreading of 
blood and flesh. They should be known as three and a half 
vy&ma-s 1 ( long) in men. 

15. They are three vy&ma-s (long) in women according to 
those learned in scriptures. Its rise in passion is said to be from 
the union of blood and wind. 

16. Heart assumes the shape of a lotus from the expansion 
of phlegm. That cavity hangs down and the soul remains 
therein. 

1 7. All the feelings which accompany consciousness remain 
there. Spleen is to its left and liver is on the right. 

18-19a. Lungs are on the right side of the (above) lotus. 
The sense organs are formed from the veins and arteries in the 
body which carry the phlegm and blood. They are the means to 
cognise objects. 

1. A vySma is a measure of length equal to the space between the tips of 
the fingers of either hand, when the arms are extended. 



1036 


Agni PurOna 


19b-20. The orb of the eyes is white. It is a paternal ele- 
ment and it owes its origin to the phlegm. The orb is black 
arising from wind and it is a maternal element. The entire skin 
is formed from the bile and it is formed from the lather as well 
as the mother. 

21-24. The tongue is formed out of flesh, blood and phlegm. 
The testes are from the marrow, blood, phlegm and fat. One has 
to know the ten vital places of life in the body (namely) head, 
heart, navel, throat, tongue, semen, blood, anus, pelvis and 
ankles. Sinews are said to be sixteen in the two hands, two feet, 
including four on the back and the neck. The membranes are 
sixteen from head to foot in the body. Flesh, sinews, arteries 
and bones are firmly placed around the wrist and ankles separa- 
tely. 

25. There are six brush (-like formations) in the hands, feet, 
neck and anus as pointed out by men. 

26. There are four thread-like flesh formations in the region 
of the spinal column. There are ninety muscles, which bind them 
(in their places) . 

27-28a. There are seven slvani - s (a kind of thin muscles) , 
among which five are on the head, one each in the penis and 
the tongue. There are sixtythree bones. Together with the mi- 
nute ones there are sixtyfour in all. The teeth and nails are 
twenty. 

28b-30. Hands, legs and the tips of these are the four places 
(of bones) . Bones are sixty in the fingers, two on the heels, four 
at the ankles, four at the elbows, the same number on the shanks, 
two each at the knee, cheek and thighs which arise from the hip 
and shoulder. One has to know in the same way at the akfasthBna, 
shoulder and hip. 

31. There are one at the penis, forty-five on the back, and 
similar number of bones at the neck, collar bones and cheek. 

32. The base of these which are two, have their places at 
the neck, eye, throat, nose and feet. The ribs together with the 
palate and lumps of flesh are seventytwo. 

33. (There are) two temporal bones. There are four (bones) 
on the skull and the head. There are seventeen bones on the 
chest. There are two hundred and ten (bones) of the joints. 



370.34—371.2 


1037 


34. Among the sixty-eight in the arms sixty-one remain 
distributed. In the neighbourhood are eighty-three (bones) . The 
sinews are nine hundred. 

35. (There are) two hundred and thirty (bones) and seventy 
in the interior. Six hundred go upwards. (The bones) of the arm 
have been described. 

36. The muscles are five hundred. Forty (among them) go 
upwards. There are four hundred in the arms and sixty in the 
interval. 

37-39. There will be twenty-five more, ten more on the 
breast, thirteen in the organ of generation and four in the uterus 
in the case of women. There are thirty lakh veins in the bodies 
of men. There are also others numbering nine (thousand) and 
fifty-six thousand. They carry the (vital) fluid, the moisture and 
the fat inside the body just as the channels (carry water) to the 
basins (around plants) . 

40-43. O Great sage ! There are seventy two crores of hair. 
O Twice-born !Thea njali 1 measure of marrow, fat, urine, bile and 
phlegm, feces, blood and fluids are in order one and a half times 
more than the preceding one respectively. The semen is half 
anjali. The ojas is half of that. Wisemen point out that the men- 
strual fluid (in women) is four times. Knowing that the body is 
a mass of dirt and impurity, one should discard and (take 
interest) in the soul. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYONE 

The description of hells 

Fire-god said: 

1-2. I will describe to you the path (leading) to Tama (i.e. 
the world of God of Death) which have been pointed out (by 
the learned) . The bodily heat getting intense and diffused by the 
deranged wind, obstructs the body as well as all the defects. 
Moreover it breaks the subtle places of life (in the body) . 


1 . A measure of corn. 



1038 


Agni Purtya 


3-4. The wind excited by cold seeks an aperture (for its 
movement) . The seven apertures are— two eyes, two ears, two 
nostrils and head. The eighth one is the mouth. Generally the 
lives of pious men escape through these holes. 

5. (The lives) of doers of bad deeds (escape) through the 
anus and the organ of generation in the lower (region) . The 
lives of yogins get out breaking the head by own will. 

G-7. When the time for death has come, when the life force 
has approached the apdna 1 , when knowledge has been engulfed 
by darkness and when the vulnerable spots (in the body) have 
been surrounded, the life ismoved by thewind from the umblicus. 
Being affected thus it draws the eight fundamental attributes 
of vitality (life) within. 

8-10. The accomplished beings and celestials witness with 
their spiritual vision, the exit (of life) , the birth and the entry 
into the uterus. As soon as the life leaves the body it assumes a 
light body by means of yoga. When one is dead, the ether, wind 
and lustre go upwards from the body, the water and earth (go 
downwards) (and get merged in their respective elements) . The 
messengers ofYama lead this light body. 

1 1 . The path to the place of God of Death is much dreadful. 
It extends over (a space of) eighty-six thousand ( kroSas ) . Being 
led thus, it partakes the food and water given by the kinsmen. 

12. After having seen the God of Death, being directed by 
him on the words of Citragupta (the personal assistant of God 
of Death) , a person is taken to the dreadful hells. A virtuous 
person is lead to the heaven by auspicious path. 

13-14a. I shall describe the hells in which the sinners are 
placed and the sufferings (therein) . There are twenty-eight 
im portant hells below the earth at the end of the seventh layer 
of the region covered by dreadful darkness. 

14b-18. Ghora is the name of the first hell. Sughora is 
below that. The others are Atighora, Mah&ghora, Ghorarupa, 
the fifth, the sixth known as Taralatara, the seventh one Bhaya- 
naica t Bhayotkata, Kalaratri, Mahacanqla, Capd&> Kolahala, 
the one known as Pracarida, Padma, Narakanayika, Padmavati, 
Bhl$an£, Bhima, Karalika, Vikarala, Mahavajra, Trikona, 


1. One at the five winds in the body. 



371.19-31 


1039 


Paftcakonika, Sudirgha, Vartula, Saptabhuma, Subhumika and 
Diptamaya. The wicked suffer in these. 

19. There are five foremost (divisions) among each one of 
the twenty-eight hells known as Raurava and others numbering 
one-hundred and forty. 

20-22. Tamisra, Andhatamisra, Maharaurava and Raurava, 
Asipatravana (forest of sword-like leaves), Lohabhara, Kalasutra, 
Mahanaraka, Safljlvana, Mahavici, Tapana, Sampratapana, 
Sanghata, Sakakola, Kudamala, Pufimrttika, Lohasariku and 
Rjisa (are the sub-divisions) . Salmali is the main river. 

23. One should know that the hells are governed by dread- 
ful looking serpents. They put the sinners in each one of the 
hells as well as in many of them. 

24, Having their faces resembling cats, owls, frogs and vul- 
tures etc., they throw the man in caldrons of oil aud then light 
the fire. 

25-28. Some (are put) in frying pans, some in copper vessels, 
some others in iron caldrons and others among sparks of fire. 
Some are placed on the tip of pointed pikes. Some are pierced 
in the hell. Some are thrashed with whips. Some are made to 
eat molten iron. The men are made to consume dust, excreta, 
blood, phlegm etc. and made to drink hot wine by the mess- 
engers of God of Death. The men are again pierced. They are 
tortured by mechanical devices and (the bodies are) eaten by 
crows etc. Hot oil is sprinkled over them and the head is pierced 
repeatedly. 

29-30. Wailing aloud ‘Oh ! father!’, (the men) denounce 
their (past) deeds. After having reached dreadful hells as a 
result of censurable great sins, the great sinners are reborn here 
when the (fruits) of the (past) deeds are exhausted. A killer of a 
brahmin is born in the womb of a deer, dog, pig and camel. 

31. A drunkard (is born in the womb) of a PukkaSa 1 or 
Mleccha 2 . A person stealing gold (gets) the state of an insect, 
worm or locust. A person defiling the bed of his preceptor 
(attains) the state of a clump of grass. 

1. A mixed caste; an offspring of a hunter male and a iudra woman. 

2. A non-Aryan. 



1040 


Agni PwrSaia 


32. A killer of a brahmin would get consumption. A drun- 
kard (would have) dark brown teeth (a dental disease) . One 
who steals gold (would) have bad nails. A person violating the 
teacher’s bed (would have) a skin disease. 

33. A person commiting a sin by a particular limb would 
get that limb affected. A person stealing food would become 
dyspeptic. A person harming the articulation (of a man) (would 
be bom) dumb. 

34. A person stealing grains would have abnormal limbs. 
A miser (would be born as) having a fetid nose. A person 
stealing oil would become a bird. An informer would have an 
offensive breath. 

35. A person abducting the wife of another and defiling 
a brahmin would be born as a brahmardksasa (a kind of ghost) 
in an uninhabited forest. 

36. A person stealing gems (attains birth) in a low caste. 
(One who steals) perfumes (would be born) as the female of 
the muskrat. One who steals leaves, vegetables (would become) 
a peacock and one who steals grain (would become) a crow. 

37-38a. (A person stealing) a domestic animal, milk, vehicle, 
fruit, honey, flesh, condiment, clothe or lotus and salt (would 
respectively be born as) a goat, crow, camel, monkey, fly, 
vulture, gjhakdka (domestic crow), one afflicted by psoriasis 
and as cricket. 

38b-39. Afflictions in mundane existence are said to be of 
three varieties namely, adhy&lmika (affecting mind and its facul- 
ties) , Sdhibhautika (caused by weapons etc.) , and ddhidaivika , due 
to the planets, fire and gods. Men should nullify them by know- 
ledge, by atonements, vows, making gifts and worship of (lord) 
Vi$nu etc. 



372.1-12a 


1041 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYTWO 
The major and minor religious observances (yama-s and niyama-s) 
Fire-god said : 

l-2a. I shall describe to you the yoga having eight consti- 
tuents in order to get free from the sufferings due to mundane 
existence. Knowledge makes Brahman manifest. There, yoga is 
the concentration of mind and the withdrawal of the mind 
(from all other objects) . (It is) the highest (union) of the in- 
dividual soul and the Supreme Brahman. 

2b-3. O Brahmin ! Non-injury, truthfulness, non-stealing, 
celibacy and rejection of gifts are known to be the five major 
observances. These together with the minor observances yield 
enjoyment and emancipation. Purity, contentment, penance, 
study of one’s own scriptures, worship of God are minor obser- 
vances. 

4-5a. Non-injury means not causing injury to the beings. 
Non-injury is the foremost virtue. Just as the footsteps of the 
travellers on foot could be contained in the footstep of an ele- 
phant, so also all the virtuous acts are said (to be included) in 
non-injury. 

5b-7a. Injury (would) create anxiety, cause suffering, 
mental and physical pain (spilling of blood), slandering, great 
obstruction to beneficial thing, opening of vulnerable parts, 
denial of happiness, obstruction and killing. Thus it is of ten 
kinds. 

7b-8. Truthfulness is defined as speech that would be 
extremely beneficial to beings. Speak the truth. Speak 
what is pleasing. But do not speak the truth that is not 
pleasing. Do not also tell a lie that would be pleasing. This is 
the eternal virtue. 

9-10. Celibacy is the shunning of sexual enjoyment. It is 
eightfold. Men declare that sexual enjoyment is eightfold 
such as remembrance, praise, sport, seeing, talking in secret, 
resolve, endeavours and the final consummation. 

1 l-12a. Celibacy is at the root of action and an action be- 
comes fruitless otherwise. , Even the elders in age and wisdom, 
such as Vasiftha, Candramas, Sukra, the preceptor of gods 
(Brhaspati), and Pitamaha (Brahma) were captivated by 
women.- 



1042 


Agni Purina 


12b- 14a. The three kinds of wine are known as gautfi 
(from molasses) i paiffi (from flour) and mSdhvi (from honey). 
The fourth sort of wine is known as woman by which the world 
has been deluded. One gets intoxicated just after seeing a wo- 
man, but one gets intoxicated by wine only after drinking. 
Since a woman is like wine by being looked at, one should not 
look at her. 

14b- 15a. A person who forcibly takes away another’s pos- 
session, whatever it may be, would certainly attain the state of 
lower animals. (Similar would be the result) for eating (steal- 
thily) the butter offered as oblation. 

15b-17a. (A mendicant) may accept a loin-cloth as cover- 
ing, clothing, wallet that prevents cold and a pair of sandals. 
But one should not covet anything beyond these. Dress etc. are 
put on (the body) for the sustenance of the body. Body is 
associated with virtue. Hence it should be protected with care. 

17b- 18. Purity is said to be twofold — external and inter- 
nal. External purity is to be maintained by means of earth and 
water and the internal by cleaning the feelings. One who is 
pure in both these respects is said to be pure, and not otherwise. 

19-20a. Contentment is said to be the feeling of satisfaction 
with whatever one gets. Penance is the concentration of the 
mind and senses on a single object. The conquest of senses and 
mind is said to be the foremost among all virtues. Penance 
which fulfils all desires is threefold, namely, oral consisting of 
repetition of sacred formulae etc., mental (consisting of) 
eschewing desires, and physical (consisting of) the worship of 
gods etc. 

20b-31. The Vedas begin with pranava (the syllable om) and 
also end with the pranava. Pranava is the entire collection of 
words. Hence one has to repeat pranava. (It is composed of) the 
syllables a , a and tn, (the latter) being half a syllabic instant. 
The three syllabic instants (represent) the three Vedas. The 
three worlds Bhu etc. are its qualities. (It also represents) the 
three states such as waking, dreaming and deep sleep. (It is also 
equated with) the gods Brahma, Vi?nu and MaheSvara. (The 
divine forms) such as Pradyumna, Srivasudeva etc. (have all 
come) duly from the syllable orh. (The pranava) to which a 
syllabic instant is not added or that which is bereft of a syllabic 



372.32-36 


1043 


instant or more is not auspicious. One who has learnt the 
syllable orh is a sage and none else. The fourth syllabic instant 
is endowed with the gindhari (accent) and is indicated on the 
head. It is the fourth one, the Supreme Brahman, like the 
lamp in a pot. One has to contemplate always (that Brahman) 
resting in the lotus of the heart. Pranava is the bow, the (indi- 
vidual) soul is the arrow and Brahman is said to be its target. It 
should be known with all assiduity and one should become 
united like the arrow. This single syllable is Brahman. It is the 
supreme entity. A person who knows this syllable would get 
what he wishes (to get). The goddess Gayatrl is its metre. The 
lord within is known to be its sage. The Supreme Soul is its 
deity. This application would yield enjoyment and prosperity. 
‘Bhuh, to the soul of fire* is (the formula of) the heart. ‘Bhuvafi, 
to the soul of Prajapati* is (the formula of) the head. 'Svah, to 
the soul of Sun’ is said to be the armour of the tuft. 4 Oth bhur 
bhuvah svafr’ is the armour. ‘To the soul of truth’ (is) the wea- 
pon. After having placed (lord) Vi?nu, one should repeat 
(this formula) for the sake of enjoyment and emancipation. 

32-33. One should offer oblations of sesamum and clarified 
butter etc. One would obtain all things. A person who repeats 
the syllabic twelve thousand times everyday would have the 
manifestation of the Supreme Brahman (in front of him) in 
twelve months. By the repetition (of the syllable) one crore 
times (one would gain perfections) such as antmS (subtlety) etc. 
One would gain the grace of the (goddess of) learning (by 
repeating this) a lakh times. 

34. Sacrificial rites for (lord) Vi$nu are of three kinds, 
Vedic, Tantric and mixed. One should worship (lord) Hari 
(Visnu) , by one of these three methods that is desired. 

35. The position which one gains by prostrating flat on 
the ground like a stick and worshipping (lord Vi?nu) , (he 
would) not (gain) by means of (performing) hundreds of 
sacrificial rites. 

36. The import of these explained here would become 
manifest to those great men who have extreme devotion for the 
god and also for the preceptor as for the god. 



1044 


Agni Purina 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYTHREE 

Description of isanas {different physical postures) 
and control of breath 

Fire-god said : 

l-3a. (The term) dsana denotes postures such as the ‘lotus’ 1 
etc. Sitting in that posture one should contemplate the Supreme 
(Being) . After having established oneself firmly in that posture 
in a pure place which is neither too much raised nor too much 
lowered, on the skin of an antelope and the kuSa (grass), one 
should concentrate after controlling the mind and the senses. 
Seated in that posture one should practise yoga for the sake of 
the purification of the self. 

3b-6. The body, head and neck should be held erect and 
firm without movement and one should look at the tip of the 
nose. One should not look in any other direction. One should 
protect the testicles and the penis with the heels, and place ( the 
heels) on the thighs, keep the hands across with effort and 
place the back of the right palm on the left (palm) . After rais- 
ing the face slowly and holding the mouth forward (one should 
practise the control of breath). Prana is the wind in one’s body 
and its Sydma is its retention. 

7. (Holding and) closing (one of) the nostrils with the 
finger (exhale and) empty the air from the chest with the other 
nostril. Because of emptying it is known as recaka (exhalation). 

8. Fill the inside with external air like a leather bag till it 
gets fully filled and remains steady. It is known as pQraka (fill- 
ing) because of filling to the full. 

9. When one neither lets off the air inside nor inhales the 
air but remains steady like a completely filled pot, (it is called) 
kumbhaka. 

10-11. (Again priQ&y&ma is divided into three classes) : 
Kanyasa (the shortest one) is inhaling once for a duration of 
twelve mitrd-s (moments). Madhyama (the middle one) is inhal- 
ing twice lasting for a duration of twenty-four moments. Uttama 
(the longest) is inhaling thrice lasting for a period of thirty-six 


1. See verses 3b ff below. 



373.12-21 


1045 


moments. Uttamottama (the foremost one) is that which produces 
sweat, shivering and stiffness. 

12-13. One should not tread on untrodden ground. (By 
doing so) (one would be liable to get) hiccough, breathing 
(trouble) etc. When the vital air is conquered there would be 
little defect in the feces, urine etc. (One would gain) health, 
quick gait, enthusiasm, clarity of voice, grace in strength and 
colour and the loss of all defects. 

14. That ( prdndydma ) which is not accompanied by, 
muttering (of prayer, divine name etc.) and contemplation (is 
known as) not impregnated. That which is accompanied (by 
muttering of W etc. is known as) impregnated. An impreg- 
nated ( prdndydma ) should be practised foremost for the subju- 
gation of the senses. 

15. When the senses are conquered along with the acqui- 
sition of knowledge and detachment and one has acquired 
mastery in prdndydma, everything else would then become 
conquered. 

16. The senses are really everything (which leads) to 
heaven or hell. By controlling, them or leaving them unbridled 
(one would go) to heaven or hell. 

1 7-18. The body is said to be like a chariot and the senses 
(are) its horses. The mind is said to be the charioteer. Prdndydma 
is known to be the whip. With the reins of knowledge and deta- 
chment and by getting rid of illusion, the mind attains steadiness 
by means of prdndydma alone. 

19. (The practice of) prdndydma (gives) the same benefit 
that would accrue to a person who drinks drops of water 
through the tip of a kuSa (grass) month after month for whole 
period of one hundred years. 

20. Pratydhdra is said to consist in the withdrawal and re- 
straining of the senses which are ordinarily immersed in the 
ocean of objects. 

21 . One should pull up the self by one’s own effort just as 
a man sinking in the water (is pulled out). (One should cross) 
the rapid current of the river of enjoyment of objects by resort- 
ing to the tree of knowledge. 



1046 


Agni Party* 

CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYFOUR 

Contemplation 

Fire-god said : 

1. The root dhyai is known (to be used) in (the sense of) 
contemplation. A constant meditation on (lord) Vi$nu without 
digression of mind is said to be contemplation. 

2. Contemplation is said to be that power of the soul equal 
to the thought of the (Supreme) Brahman by means of one’s own 
will unconditioned by any category. 

3. (In other words) contemplation is said to be that 
thought found to be together with a similar thought resting on 
an object to be contemplated and which is free from the 
thought of any other kind. 

4. Itissaidto be contemplation when the mind thinks 
constantly of a thing that is to be contemplated at any fixed 
place. 

5. A person who discards his body (with his mind) 
endowed with such contemplation would elevate his family, 
kinsmen and friends and would become (lord) Hari (Visnu). 

6. The position which one attains by contemplating (lord) 
Hari with faith for a moment or half in this manner, could not 
be got by (performing) all great sacrificial rites. 

7. A person who knows the truth should apply himself to 
(the practice of) yoga, after having known the four (things) such 
as the contemplator, contemplation, the thing to be contem- 
plated and that which is the benefit of the contemplation. 

8- 9a. A person would obtain release (from bondage of 
mundane existence) by practising yoga (and would also gain) 
eight (kinds of) great powers 1 . (A person who is) endowed with 
knowledge and detachment, earnestness, forbearance, devotion 
to (lord) Vi§nu and is always enthusiastic is deemed to be the 
Supreme Soul after such contemplation. 

9b.- 10a. The Supreme Brahman is both embodied and not 
embodied. Contemplation is (the constant) thought about that 


1. These are the eight miraculous powers such as atumd (becoming 
minute as an atom) etc. 




374.10b-21 1047 

(lord) Hari. (Lord) Hari, the omniscient and supreme should be 
known as endowed with parts and without parts. 

10b. The benefit of contemplation is the gain of powers 
such as anima (ability to become minute like an atom) and the 
like (as well as) emancipation. 

1 1 -1 2a. (Lord) Viflju associates (us) with the fruit and hence 
one should contemplate the Supreme Lord. One should always 
think of the lord while moving, standing, sleeping, waking, 
opening and closing the eyes, whether one is clean or not clean. 

12b-14a. After having established (lord) Kesava (Visnu) in 
the mind residing inside the body one should worship Him as 
seated on the pedestal of one’s lotus-like heart, by means of the 
yoga (union) of contemplation. This sacrifice (in the form) of 
contemplation is supreme, pure and is devoid of all defects. By 
worshipping thus one gets released (from bondage of existence) 
and not by external cleanliness and sacrificial rites. 

14b. (Because contemplation) is free from the defect of 
violence, it is the means of purifying the mind. 

15-lfia. Hence the sacrifice in the form of contemplation is 
the highest as it yields final beatitude. Hence after having dis- 
carded the temporal impure external means such as the sacrifi- 
cial rite etc., one should intensively practice yoga. 

16b- 17. First of all one should contemplate in the heart the 
three qualities, unmanifest, free from any modification and 
endowed with the objects of enjoyment and (the feeling of) 
pleasure after having covered (the quality) tamas by means of 
rajas and then rajas by means of sattoa. 

18- 19a. Then one should first contemplate the three spheres 
such as black, red and white in order. The Supreme Soul, the 
twenty fifth principle, that is beyond the limiting adjunct of 
sattva (quality), should be contemplated. After having discarded 
the impure thing, pure thing should be thought of. 

19b-21. A glorious divine lotus exists above the Supreme 
Being. It measures twelve inches wide. It is pure, blossomed 
and white. Its stalk is eight finger-breadths (long) . It had its 
origin from the bulbous root of the navel. The eight petals 
of the lotus should be known as the eight qualities such as 
anima. Its pericarp, filament and stalk are knowledge and 
detachmCht. 



1048 


Agni Purina 


22. Its root is the dharma (characteristic) of (lord) Vi?nu. 
Such a lotus should be meditated upon. Its characteristic, 
namely, knowledge and detachment, is wholly composed of the 
foremost glory of (lord) Siva. 

23-24a. Alter having known the lotus posture completely, 
one would have the end of all miseries. One should meditate on 
the lord (in the form of) the syllable Orh, that is spotless, of the 
size of a thumb and of the form of the wick of a pure lamp. 

24b-25a. Otherwise one should contemplate (the lord) as 
resembling the form of an asterism, as having the form of a 
cluster of kadamba (flowers) and illumined by a cluster of rays. 

25b-26a. One should contemplate and repeat the syllable 
Orh that is supreme, undecaying (symbolizing) the lord, the 
principal entity, that transcends the purusa and dwells in the 
lotus (of the heart) . 

26b-28. (Yogins) want to contemplate on gross things first 
for making the mind firm. One would be able to get steadiness 
in (contemplating on) minute things also after gaining firmness 
(in the above) . A stalk ten finger-breadths long is at the root of 
the navel. A lotus of twelve finger-breadths and having eight 
petals (is supported) by the stalk. Orbs of sun, moon and fire 
(are situated) in the pericarp and the filament. 

29-32a. (Lord) Visnu having four arms bearing conch, disc, 
mace and lotus and stationed at the centre of an orb of fire, or 
(lord) Hari having eight arms bearing a bow, rosary, bracelet, 
noose and goad etc., and of a golden complexion, white com- 
plexion, wearing the Jrivatsa 1 (mark on the chest), the kaustubha 
(gem), a garland of wild flowers and a gold necklace, and shining 
with ear-ring (in the shape) of a fish (should be contempleted) . 
(He should also be imagined) as wearing a sparkling gem 
(studded) crown and silk robes and endowed with all kinds of 
ornaments. Otherwise (one may contemplate a form) of the size 
of twelve finger-breadths as one would like. 

32b. (One should also repeat the formula) “I am Brahman, 
light, soul, Vasudeva (name of Vi?nu, as manifested in the 
form of Kr?na), the liberated, Orh”. 


1 . The curling hair on the chest. 



374.33—375.5 


1049 


33. When one has become tired of contemplation, one may 
repeat the formula. When one has got tired of repetition one 
may meditate. (Lord) Vi?nu gets pleased quickly with a person 
engaged in the repetition (of a formula), contemplation and the 
like. 

34. The merits of (performing) sacrificial rites are not 
worth even a sixteenth part of the merits of the rites of repeat- 
ing (a formula) . Diseases, calamities and (evil influences of) 
planets do not approach a person repeating (a formula). One 
would get the benefit of devotion, liberation and conquest over 
death by means of the repetition of a formula. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYFIVE 
Fixing-up of the mind in the object of contemplation 
Fire-god said : 

1. Dhdrand is the fixing-up ofthe mind firmly on (the object) 
to be meditated upon. Like dhydna (contemplation), it is also 
twofold according as the object is an embodied or an unem- 
bodied form of (lord) Hari. 

2. The mind does not get shaken from the object that lies 
outside. That period for which the mind remains in a state of 
obsorption in a particular place without being distracted (is 
known as) dhdrana. 

3 . Dhdrana is said to be that period for which the mind 
remains absorbed (in the contemplation) of god, without de- 
viating from its object. 

4. Dhdrand has a duration of twelve ydma'-s. Twelve dhdrand 
-s (are equal to) dhydna. It is said to be samddki which consists of 
twelve (such) dhydna-s. 

5. If a person practisting dhdrand discards his life, he attains 
supreme position in the heaven after elevating twenty-one (genera- 
tions of his) family. 


1. O aejdma is equal to three hours. 



1050 


Agni Purina 


6. When a particular part of the body of a yagin gets affected 
by disease, (the yogin) should fix up the mind on that particular 
part as though pervaded by the mind. 

7*10. ( Dhdrand is fourfold namely) dgneyi, vdrunf, aiSdnl and 

amjtdlmikd (respectively) belonging to Agni, Varuna and liana 
and (the fourth) of the nature of ambrosia. O Foremost among 
the twice-born ! (In the agncyi), the SikhS (formula of the tuft) 
of (lord) Vi?nu ending with phaf should be repeated. The glorious 
tip of the spear that is cleaved by the nddi - s (arteries) should be 
pierced with that. O Great sage ! The votary should think of all 
those from the big toe to the skull as surrounded by orbsof rays 
spread across lower and upper parts (of the body) by excessive 
lustre. One’s own body that has been (conceived mentally as) 
burnt to ashes should be withdrawn into one’s self. O Twice- 
born ! The cold, phlegm etc. and sin get destroyed thereby. 

11-1 5a. (The varwii dhdrand is explained now). One should 
think of the head, neck, dhira (?) and kdra (?) (as existing) in 
the face bent downwards. Then after conceiving the mind 
as unbroken and concentrated, the entire earth should be thought 
as being filled with showers of snow produced by glittering spray. 
(The mind) should be brought down from the Brahmarandhra 1 2 3 to 
the Mt~dadhdra a through the path of sufumna * by means of shak- 
ing and as remaining in the orb of the full moon should be 
flooded with nectar-like water (produced) by contact with snow. 
A votary who is afflicted by sufferings such as hunger, thirst and 
the like should bear this vdruni (dhdrand) vigilantly for the sake of 
pleasure. 

15b-20. I have described to you the vdruni dhdrand. Listen to 
me ! (I shall now describe) the aifdni dhdrand. One should con- 
template the grace ft of (lord) Vi§nu, after having nullified 
the (airs) prana and apana 4 in the lotus, that is verily Brahman, 
in the sky, until one’s thoughts cease. Then one has to repeat the 
great truth. The lord (should also be contemplated) as pervading 


1. An aperture in the crown of the head through which the soul is said 
to escape after the death of a person. 

2. A mystical circle above the organs of generation. 

3. One of the arteries in the human body. 

4. The printed text wrongly reads qprdpo. 



675.21—376.4 


1051 


everything, as half moon, supreme, tranquil, without any sem- 
blance and unstained. Until a person knows one's real form 
through the words of his preceptor the entire unreal world 
(movable and immovable) appears as real. When that 
Supreme Principle is realised all the entities from the world to 
the brahman, the knower, the means of knowledge and the things 
to be known, the shaking of the lotus in the heart by means of 
contemplation, repetition, offering oblation, worship etc. and 
everything, (would appear) like the sweet cakes given by the 
mother. (The whole thing) may also be done with the formula 
of (lord) Vi$nu. I shall describe to you the amrta-dh&rand 
(now) . 

21-22. (In the amrta-dh&rand the votary) should contemp- 
late a lotus resembling the full moon held in the clenched hand of 
the votary. (Then the votary) should contemplate with effort a 
region of the full-moon having the spendour of a lakh moons 
filled with the waves (of bliss) of (lord) Siva as situated on the 
head. (Then he should think of the same as filling) in the lotus 
of the heart. (Then the votary) should think of his body at its 
centre. The votary would become free from distress by means 
of the dhdrand- s and the like. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYSIX 

Deep meditation ( samadhi ) 

Fire-god said : 

1 . The deep meditation is said to be that contemplation in 
which the consciousness alone appearing in its spiritual aspect, 
remains like the ocean of coagulated milk made immobile and 
ceases to be operative. 

2. Ayogin is said to be in deep meditation if he remains 
steady in contemplation with the mind deeply absorbed, like 
fire (kept) in a windless (place). 

3-4. He does not hear or smell or see or spit out. More- 
over, he does not feel the touch. His mind does not make any 



1052 


Agni Purina 


resolve. He does not think and remains like a log of wood with- 
out knowing anything. A person who is absorbed in the lord 
thus is stated to be in deep meditation. 

5-10. Just as a lamp remaining in a windless (place) does 
not shake, this is said to be similar. For a yogin who is in deep 
meditation, contemplating himself as (lord) Viggu, divine 
portents occur indicating success. The essential ingredient of 
the ear gets fallen. There would be pain in the teeth and the 
limbs. The celestials beseech that yogin with divine pleasures. 
The kings (approach) him with gift of land. The rich ofTer 
wealth. The Vedas and all other i&stra - s become manifest them- 
selves. He gains mastery over the metres as well as poetry in 
abundance. Excellent medical recipes, medicinal herbs and all 
sculpture and other arts become known to him. The virgins of 
the world of Indra and qualities such as imagination (also 
come to him) . (Lord) Vi?nu gets pleased with one who dis- 
cards these as grass. 

11 -12a. (Such a yogin) endowed with the wealth of 
powers such as animi (becoming subtle like an atom) etc., 
after having imparted knowledge to the pupil and after having 
enjoyed the pleasures as much as desired and after having dis- 
carded the body, should abide in his self that is of the form of 
knowledge, bliss and Brahman. 

12b-13. Just as a dirty mirror is not capable of knowing 
the self (i.e., the reflection of the self) , so also the soul experi- 
encespain in thebody because it is connected with all(things). 
A person united with yoga does not experience the pain of all. 

14. Just as the single ikdSa (space) becomes distinct in the 
pot etc., so also the single soul (remains) in many as the Sun 
(is reflected) in the reservoirs. 

15. The Brahman, sky (ether), air, lustre, water and 
earth, the materials on earth, these worlds, this soul and the 
movable and immovable (objects) have all (come) from Him. 

16-18a. Just as a potter (makes) a pot by the conjunction 
of clay, rod and the wheel and just as a person building a 
house makes a house with grass, earth and wood, so also the 
soul creates itself (its body) in different wombs making use 
of the materials (five elements) and combining them. (The 



376.18b — 31 1053 

soul) gets fettered by its (past) deeds, faults and ignorance by 
its own will. 

18b-21. The (individual) soul is released (from bondage) 
by means ofknowledge. A yogin does not fall sick because of his 
virtue. Just as a lamp is maintained (to burn) by the combi- 
nation of the wick, base and oil, (so) (the body) also under- 
goes changes. The life goes away premature. Like a lamp the 
soul that is inside the heart, has many rays — white, black, 
tawny, blue, red, yellow and brown. A person who remains 
(firm) above all these, pierces the region of the Sun, crosses 
the world of Brahma and attains the highest state. 

22-23. One reaches the abodes of the celestials by means 
of the other hundred rays which are situated above. Those 
rays of different forms which are below have soft lustre. He 
moves around here by means of them for enjoying (the fruits) 
of (his past) deeds. 

24-25. All the organs of sense, mind, organs of action, ego, 
the earth etc. (are known as) th eksetra (‘field') . The unmanifest 
soul is said to be the knower of the kfetra. The lord who is in all 
the beings is existent, non-existent, as well as both existent and 
non-existent. 

26-27a. The intellect has its origin from the unmanifest. 
Then the ego and the (five elements) sky etc. come into being. 
They have twenty-one qualities. Sound, touch, colour, taste 
and smell are their characteristics. 

27b-28. That (quality) which rests on a particular thing 
gets absorbed in that particular thing. Sattva, rajas and tamos 
are also stated to be its qualities. He wanders like a wheel 
being possessed by rajas and tamos. 

29. The one who is without a beginning and the first is 
(said to be) the Supreme Being. That which is knowable by 
means (cf knowledge) and the senses is said to be a modification 
(of that self) . 

30. The Vtda-s, Parana- s, learning, Upanifad-s, verses, 
aphorisms, expositions and all other words are from Him. 

31. Those who perform the agnihotra 1 rite for progeny. 


1. A short rite invoking Fire-god. 



1054 Agni Purina 

pass through the path of the manes, the upavitki and that of 
(sage) Agastya towards the heaven. 

32-35a. Those who are given to charity and are endowed 
with eight qualities, the eighty-eight thousand sages, who 
kindle the household fire are born again as the upholders of 
virtue. They reach the celestial world by the path of the 
seven sages and the serpents. Only so many sages devoid of 
all beginnings remain in each one of the places endowed with 
penance, celibacy, discarding association and learning till all 
the beings get destroyed. 

35b-36a. The study of the Veda- s, sacrificial rites, celebacy, 
penance, restraint, earnestness, fasting and truth are the causes 
for (gaining) knowledge of the soul. 

3bb-40a. All those who adhere to truth have to practise 
profound meditation in this way only. It should be seen, 
thought about and heard by the twice-born. Those twice-borns 
who thus find (the truth) by resorting to the forest and medi- 
tation and are endowed with truth and extreme earnestness, 
will become united with pure white lustre in course of time. 
Then those people reach the celestial world, the Sun, lightning 
(and attain) the world of Brahma. They are not reborn here. 

40b-42a. Those men, who gain heaven by means of sacri- 
ficial rites, penance and gifts, reach the world of manes, the 
moon, the sky, air, water and earth through smoke, night, 
dark fortnight and the dakfitiiyana (the period when the Sun 
moves towards the south). They are again born here and again 
return. 

42b-44. Those who do not know the two courses of the 
soul would become a serpent or a cricket, or a worm or an 
insect. The individual soul would become immortal by contemp- 
lating the Brahman resembling a lamp in the heart. Even a 
householder who accepts wealth acquired in the right way, 
remaining steady in knowledge about the truth, getting de- 
lighted in ( seeing) guests, who performs ancestral rites and 
speaks truth, would get release (from bondage) . 



377.1-13 


1055 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYSEVEN 

Knowledge of Brahman 


Fire-god said : 

1. I shall describe the knowledge about Brahman for the 
sake of getting released from the ignorance of mundane exist- 
ence. A person gets released (by constantly thinking), “I, this 
soul, is verily the Supreme Brahman." 

2. The body is not the soul because that is perceived like 
a pot etc. It is known certainly while sleeping and at the time 
of death that the soul is different from the body. 

3. If the body is the soul it should behave like one which 
does not undergo any change etc. The organs such as the eye 
and the like are only instruments (of knowledge) and hence are 
not the soul. 

4. The mind and the intellect also are not the soul. They 
are only instruments like a lamp (for supplying light) . The life- 
breath is also not the soul as (no 7) consciousness manifests 
during deep sleep. 

5-6a. The consciousness is not experienced during waking 
and dreaming (states) because it is mixed up. Since the life- 
breath devoid of consciousness is known during deep sleep, the 
soul is not the same as the organs which belong to die soul (as 
instruments) (and so are not identical with it) . 

6b-7. The ego is also not the soul because of its non- 
constancy like the body. This soul which is distinct from the 
above-mentioned categories remains in the heart of all (beings). 
(The self) is the seer and enjoyer of all things like a glowing 
lamp in the night. 

8-10a. A sage should contemplate thus at the time of 
commencing deep meditation : Sky (came) from Brahman, 
air from sky, fire from air, water from fire, earth from water 
and the subtle body from that (earth). The quintuplated 
forms of the five elements came from the free forms of the five 
elements. After having meditated upon the gross body, one 
should think of getting absorbed in Brahman. 

10b-13. The elements have been quintuplated and the 
Viral ( the first creation of Brahman) is known to be their 



1056 


Agio. Purina 


effect. This gross body is the product of the ignorance of the 
soul. Wise men know knowledge through the senses as the wak- 
ing state. The world has attachment for it. These three are not 
creation. The effect of the elements which are not quintuplated 
is said to be the lifiga. The union of the seventeen (categories) 
is known as the ‘golden egg.’ The body is stated to be the 
subtle mark of the soul. 

M. Dream is the recollection of experience occurring in 
the waking state. The soul also would resemble it. (The soul 
that has not been fettered) with the universe (is known as) 
taijasa. 

15. There is one single cause of the two known as the 
gross and subtle body. The soul, that is knowledge and possess- 
ing lustre, is said to be inferred from that. 

16-17. It is not sat (existence) , not asat (non-existence), 
not sadasat (existence as well as non-existence) . It is neither 
composed of components, nor devoid of components. It is 
neither separated, nor not separated. It is both separated and 
not separated. It is inexplicable and is the creater of bondage 
and mundane existence. That single Brahman (is obtained) by 
means of knowledge and is never obtained by means of actions. 

18. (The means of the knowledge of the soul) by all means 
is to control the senses which are the cause of the bondage of 
the soul. The place of the intellect is deep sleep. It affects the 
two. 

19. This wise soul is known to be the pranava composed of 
the three syllables. The syllables a, u and m combined (is the 
pranava ) . 

20. It is the witness of all things as ‘I’. It is of the form of 
consciousness alone in the waking, dreaming and other states. 
Ignorance and bondage in mundane existence etc. are not its 
work. 

21. It is eternal, pure, free from bondage, truth, bliss and 
without a second. I am Brahman. I am Brahman. I am the 
supreme splendour and the ever free Oth. 

22. I am Brahman, the supreme knowledge — this con- 
templation destroys the bondage. Brahman is eternal, bliss, 
truth, knowledge and endless. 



377.23-378.8 


1057 


23. This soul is the Supreme Brahman. “You are that 
Brahman.” This individual soul is instructed by the preceptor, 
(to identify himself with Brahman) as “I am Brahman.” 

24. That Brahman is the Sun. I am that partless being. 
Om. The knower of Brahman gets freedom from the worthless 
mundane existence. He would become Brahman. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYEIGHT 

Knowledge of Brahman 

Fire-god said : 

1 . I am Brahman, the Supreme Light devoid of earth, 
water and fire. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light devoid of 
wind and sky. 

2. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light devoid of the 
primary undertaking. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light bereft 
of the first creation and the soul. 

3. I am Brahman, the Supreme Effulgence devoid of wak- 
ing place. I am Brahman, the Supreme Lustre devoid of the 
feeling of universality. 

4. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light devoid of the 
syllable *a\ I am Brahman, the Supreme Effulgence devoid of 
speech, hands and feet. 

5. I am Brahman, the Supreme Lustre devoid of anus and 
penis. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light devoid of ears, skin 
and eyes. 

6. I am Brahman, the Supreme Effulgence bereft of taste 
and form. I am Brahman, the Supreme Lustre devoid of all 
smells. 

7. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light without tongue and 
nose. I am Brahman, the Supreme Effulgence bereft of touch 
and sound. 

8. I am Brahman, the Supreme Effulgence bereft of mind 
and intellect. I am Brahman, the Supreme Lustre devoid of 
consciousness and ego. 



1058 


Agrti PurSna 


9. I am Brahman, the Supreme Effulgence free from (the 
vital winds) prana and apina (in the body). I am Brahman, the 
Supreme Lustre bereft of (the vital winds) vyOna and uddna (in 
the body) . 

10. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light devoid of (the 
vital wind) Samdna (in the body) . I am Brahman, the Supreme 
Effulgence devoid of old age and death. 

11. I am Brahman, the Supreme Effulgence bereft of grief 
and ignorance. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light free from 
hunger and thirst. 

12. I am Brahman, the Supreme Lustre devoid of all 
modifications of sound. I am Brahman, the Supreme Efful- 
gence bereft of the golden egg. 

19. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light devoid of the 
dreaming state. I am Brahman, the Supreme Effulgence devoid 
of luminosity etc. 

14. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light free from harm etc. 
I am Brahman, the Supreme Lustre devoid of knowledge relat- 
ing to an assembly. 

15. I am Brahman, the Supreme Lustre bereft of infer- 
ence. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light devoid of the qualities 
such as sattva (goodness) and the like. 

16. I am Brahman, the Supreme Effulgence devoid of the 
feeling of sat and asat ( existence and non-existence) . I am 
Brahman, the Supreme Light, bereft of all components. 

17. I am Brahman, the Supreme Lustre devoid of differ- 
ence and non-difference. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light 
devoid of the location of deep sleep. 

18. I am Brahman, the Supreme Effulgence free from the 
feeling of being learned. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light 
free from the syllables such as ‘ma’. 

19. I am Brahman, the Supreme Lustre free from the 
means and objects knowledge. I am Brahman, the Supreme 
Light free from knowledge and knower. 

20. I am Brahman, the Supreme Effulgence devoid of 
being a witness etc. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light devoid 
of effect and cause. 

21. Iam Brahman devoid of body, organs, mind, intellect. 



378.22—379.6 


1059 


life-breath and ego. I am Brahman, the fourth state that is free 
from (the states of) waking, dreaming and deep sleep. 

22. (I am) eternal, pure, wise and free, truth, bliss and 
without a second. I am Brahman. (I am) Brahman endowed with 
knowledge and absolutely free. Oth. I am Brahman, the Supreme 
Effulgence, deep meditation and the supreme being that confers 
emancipation. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYNINE 

Knowledge of Brahman again 

Fire-god said : 

1. (The votary) reaches the region of the gods by (per- 
forming) sacrificial rites and the region of Virdf by (doing) 
penance. By renouncing actions (one would gain the place) of 
Brahmd. By detachment (one would get) absorbed in nature. 

2. Liberation is got by means of knowledge. These are 
known to be the five courses. Detachment is turning away from 
the feelings of happiness, torment, grief etc. 

3. Renunciation is giving up all actions already performed 
together with those yet to be performed. (By such means) one 
would get free from the difference of change beginning with the 
unmanifest and ending with discrimination. 

4. Knowledge is said to arise from knowing (the soul) as 
different from the animate and inanimate things. The Supreme 
Soul, the Supreme Lord is the sustainer of all things. 

5. He is glorified in the Veda - s and the philosophical trea- 
tises by the name of (lord) Vi?rm* That lord of the sacrificial 
rites (known as) TajHapurufa is worshipped by those who are 
engaged in that. 

6. That embodiment of knowledge is perceived by those 
who have abstained from (doing actions) by means of associa- 
tion with knowledge. That Supreme Being (is referred to) as 
speech (connsting of the sounds) short, long and protracted 
etc. - 



1060 


Agni Purina 


7. O Great sage ! The action that is the means of attaining 
Him is said to be knowledge. The knowledge is said to be two- 
fold : that which is explained in the Agama 1 2 - s and (that which is 
obtained) from discrimination. 

8. The Sabdabrahman (Brahman composed of sound) is an 
embodiment of the Agama- s and the Supreme Brahman is the 
knowledge arising from discrimination. One should know the 
two Brahmans — the Sabdabrahman and the Supreme Brahman. 

9. Learning in the form of the Veda-s and the like (is known 
as) aparam (not the supreme) . The imperishable Brahman is the 
supreme (learning). This (Brahman) is denoted by the term 
“ Bkagavdn ” (prosperous) in service, worship and other acts. (The 
letters of the word mean as follows :) 

10. The syllable ' bha ’ has two senses — bharta (protector) and 
sambharti{ one who collects or hoards). O Great sage ! The letter 
*ga * (means) the leader, the conveyor and the creator. 

1 1 . The word * bhaga * (which is the combination of the 
letters bha and ga) means the six: the entire wealth, valour, 
fame, fortune, knowledge and detachment. 

12. All the things exist in (lord) Vi?nu. That Supreme 
Spirit is threefold. In the same way (the word) Bhagavan (is 
used) in the case of (lord) Hari and elsewhere as a courtesy. 

13. He knows the creation, destruction, the coming and 
going of the beings, true knowledge and nescience and hence is 
designated * Bhagavan ’. 

14. The term ‘Bhagavan' connotes knowledge, power, sup- 
reme opulence, strength and splendour in entirety without the 
bad qualities fit to be avoided. 

15- 16a. In olden time, Khantfikya KeSidhvaja imparted to 
(King) Janaka®, the yoga (as follows) : The seed of the origin 
through ignorance is twofold ; the notion of self in things 
which are not the self and the notion that self and body are 
identical. 

16b-20. The soul enshrined in the body made of five 


1. The sacred texts explaining the nature of Siva or Vi$pu and the 
methods of worshipping them. 

2. The famous king of Mithilfi; known for his knowledge; became an 
anchorite in later days. 



379.21-28 


1061 


elements and engulfed in illusion and darkness entertains the 
bad thought ‘I am this’. In the same way a person (entertains 
the thought) in the sons, grandsons etc. and their progeny. The 
learned (entertain) similar notion with respect to the physical 
bodies of others. A man does work for the welfare of all the bodies 
(men). But a person (begins to think) that those bodies are 
different; it becomes a cause for the bondage. This spotless soul 
is verily of the form of liberation and knowledge. Impiety of the 
form of painful experience belongs to the prakrti and not to the 
soul. Just as water cannot be united with fire and a union is 
brought about by means of the intervening vessel, (pain and 
illusion though they do not belong to the soul, appear as though 
associated with the soul) . 

21 . O Great sage ! The sounds such as *ka' etc. (are said 
to be) the result of its action. In the same way, the soul unit- 
ing with prakrti , is endowed with the feeling of the self. 

22. (The self seems) to enjoy all the bodily attributes. But 
it is different from them and it is without any modification. The 
contact ( of the mind) with the things is for bondage and one 
should withdraw his mind from the things of the senses. 

23. After having withdrawn it from the things, one should 
think of (lord) Hari, the one identical with Brahman. O Sage ! 
It leads a person meditating on Brahman to gain the state of 
Brahman. 

24-25a. After due thought (one should strive) by means of 
one’s own effort. (The attraction of Brahman) would be 
like the magnet (drawing) the iron. It is said to b tyoga which 
is the union of the distinct mental path with Brahman depen- 
dent on one’s effort. 

25b-27a. (The mind) steady in a state of deep meditation, 
attains the Supreme Brahman. By means of self-control, by 
withholding the senses from the objects, conquering the winds 
by doing retention of breath, regulation of breath and subjugat- 
ing the senses by means of withdrawal of breath, one should 
make the mind steady in the auspicious repose. 

27b-28. Brahman, that is to be resorted to by the 
mind, is twofold, namely, embodied and not embodied. (The 
sages) Sanandana and others were endowed with the thought of 



1062 Agni Puritfa 

being Brahman, while the gods and other created beings 
(gained elevation) by means of action. 

29-32. In the case of the golden egg etc., it is twofold such 
as due to knowledge and action. The mental activity is said 
to be threefold. The whole universe is contemplated as 
Brahman. That knowledge which is of the form of pure ex- 
istence, beyond the reach of expression, that which does not 
possess the sense of being different and which could be known 
by the soul is designated as Brahman. That is the Supreme Form 
of (lord) Vi?nu, devoid of form, unborn and indestructible. It 
is difficult to contemplate at first ( the formless). Hence one has 
to meditate on the embodied form (at first). Such a person 
would become indistinct from the Supreme Soul by attaining the 
state of absence of the attitude of possession. (The feeling of) 
his difference would be due to his ignorance. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY 
Knowledge of non-dual Brahman 


Fire-god said : 

1-5. I shall impart the knowledge of the non-dual Brahman 
which was expounded by Bharata. He (Bharata) performed 
penance at Salagrama (name of a place) worshipping Vasudeva 
(Kj-?na, a manifestation of Vi$nu) etc. Because of the company 
of a deer, (the sage) thinking of the deer at the end of his life, 
became a deer (in the next birth) . But because he carried the 
memories of his past birth even after being born as a deer, (he) 
discarded his life by means of yoga and regained his self. Having 
attained identity with the non-dual Brahman, he wandered in 
the world like an inert thing. An attendant of king Sauvira 
advised (him) to serve (the king) for wages and led him to the 
camp. Being prompted by the words of the servant, the wise- 
man accepted to serve and carried the palanquin in order to 
destroy (the past deed) of the self. While others (carrying the 



380 . 6-18 


1063 


palanquin) moved fast, he was lagging behind. Seeing the others 
moving fast and himself (moving) slow the king said to him : 

The king said : 

6. Are you tired ? you have borne my palanquin only for 
a short distance. You seem to be stout. Are you not able to 
stand the fatigue ? 

The brahmin said : 

7. I am not stout. I have not borne your palanquin. I am 
neither tired nor fatigued. O King ! You are a person to be 
borne. 

8-10. The pair of feet rest on the earth, the two shanks on 
the pair of feet, the two thighs on the pair of shanks, which in 
turn are the support for the belly. Then the region of the chest, the 
two arms and the pair of shoulders are resting on the belly. This 
palanquin is on the shoulder. What has the feeling of ‘mine* done 
here. This body remaining on the palanquin is beheld as your- 
self. There (the terms) ‘you’ and ‘I* (arc worldly conventions). 
This may be described in another way. 

11-14. O King 1 I, you and others are being borne by the 
elements. This conglomeration of gunas (‘qualities’) fallen in 
the stream of guyas goes on. O Ruler of earth ! These ‘qualities’ 
of goodness etc. are bound by the (past) deeds. The karma (past 
deed) is acquired by ignorance in all the creations without any 
exception. The soul is pure, imperishable, calm, devoid of gunas 
and superior to paxkjtu Among all the creations, this alone does 
not have growth or decay. O King ! Just as it does not have 
growth, so it does not also have decay. Hence how is it that you 
have said ‘you are stout’ 1 

15-18. This palanquin is resting on the earth, shank, feet, 
hip, thigh and belly etc. and similarly on the shoulder. Hence 
(my) feeling is same as yours. O King ! By means of bearing 
the palanquin (I have become similar) to the other beings. 
Whether originated from a mountain, other materials or a house 
or originated from the earth, as the purufa (soul) is different 
from the physical causes. How can there be a big burden to be 
borne by me? O King ! With what material the palanquin has 
been rqgde, the other worldly things have been made with the 



1064 Agni Purina 

same material. In this respect, yourself, myself and all others 
have been made similar. 

19. After having heard these words, the king held his feet, 
beseeched him to forgive (and said) : “Be pleased. Lay off this 
palanquin and speak to me who is listening to you. Who are 
you? For what reason have you come here ?” 

The brahmin said : 

20-21. Listen to me. It is not at all possible to tell you 
who I am. Everywhere the act of coming is for the sake of 
enjoying (the fruits of past deeds). Every being reaches a place 
etc. to enjoy the pleasure or pain arising from (the past) pious 
or impious (deeds) resting on place etc. 

The king said : 

22. O Brahmin ! How is it not possible to say that I am 
that person who is here. O Twice-born ! It is not wrong (to 
apply) this word 'I' to mean the self. 

The brahmin said'. 

23-28. It is not wrong to use the word ‘I* to denote 
the self. But it is fallacious to think and say that a thing 
that is not the self is the self. When there is a single soul 
enshrined in all the bodies, it is meaningless to ask who you 
are and who lam. O King ! You, this palanquin, these palanquin 
bearers going in front, and this world of yours are not said to 
be existence. Wood (the material for making the palanquin) is 
got from a tree. O King ! Is this palanquin on which you are 
placed designated as a tree or as wood ? A sensible man does not 
say that the great king is seated on a tree. So also (seeing) you 
on a log of wood, all do not say that you are on a palanquin. 
(In reality) the palanquin is a combination of wood in a parti- 
cular design. O Excellent king ! Look at the palanquin in its 
distinctive feature. 

29. A man, a woman, cow, horse, elephant, bird, tree should 
be known as worldly convention to denote the bodies due to the 
effect of (the past) deeds. 

30. O King 1 the tongue, teeth, lips and palate say ‘I’. 



380.31-44 1065 

They are not *1’ because all these are means of making an 
utterance. 

31 . For what reasons does speech itself says ‘I’ ? Even then 
it is false and not proper to say speech is not I. 

32. O King ! because (limbs such as) the head, anus etc. 
of men are different from the body, how can I denote them as *1* ? 

33. O Excellent king ! Only if something different from 
me exists, it is possible to say ‘This is I and that is another’. 

34. In fact, there is no difference such as immobile, animal, 
tree and different bodies etc. These are all the effects of past 
deeds. 

35. O King ! A person (designated) as a king and those 
(designated) as the soldiers of the king, that and other appella- 
tions are not real. 

36. You are a king to the world, a son to (your) father, a 
foe to an enemy, husband to (your) wife, father of a son. O 
King ! How shall I call you? 

37. O Lord of the earth ! Are you this head? Do not the 
head and belly belong to you? Are not the feet etc. yourself? Or 
do they not belong to you? 

38. You are different from all the constituent parts. O 
King! Think seriously as to who you are. 

After having heard that, the king said to that anchorite 
brahmin (who was a manifestation of lord) Hari (as follows): 

The king said : 

39. O Twice-born ! Once I endeavoured to ask sage Kapila 
(to explain to me) what was beneficial (to a man). You are a 
part of that sage Kapila. You are giver of knowledge on earth 
for my sake. (Release) the wave of knowledge from the ocean (of 
knowledge) . Impart to me whatever is beneficial to me. 

The brahmin said : 

40-44. You are again asking (me) what is beneficial. You 
are not asking about the reality. OKing ! All those things which 
are beneficial are unreal. After having propitiated the gods, 
(men) desire for abundant wealth, desire for sons and for king- 
dom. O King ! What is the benefit? The wise (hold) that the 
communion with the Supreme Being is the only good. Acts such 



1066 


Agni Pur&ya 


as the (performance of) sacrificial rites (would not confer this 
union) . One would not get wealth (by such union) . The union 
of the self with the Supreme Being is said to be the foremost 
thing. The ( Supreme) Soul, which is one, is all-pervading, even, 
pure, without characteristics, superior to nature, devoid of birth, 
growth etc., omnipresent and undecaying. It is wholly of the 
form of supreme knowledge and that lord is not associated with 
qualities, kinds etc. 

45-47. O King 1 Listen to me 1 1 shall describe to you the 
dialogue between Nidagha and Rtu 1 . Rtu was the son of Brahma 
and was a wiseman. Nidagha, the son of Pulastya, was his disci- 
ple. After gaining knowledge from him, (Nidagha) came to the 
city and was living there. Once Rtu, while walking along the 
banks of (river) Devika, thought of him. After one thousand 
celestial years had passed, (Rtu) had gone to see Nidagha. 
After doing Vai^vadeva 2 (worship) Nidagha took food and asked 
him “You have eaten. Have you been satisfied? Is that satisfac- 
tion eternal?” 

Rtu said: 

48-55. O Brahmin ! A person feeling hungry would get 
satisfied after eating food. I had no hunger. Why do you ask 
me about getting satisfied? O Twice-born 1 Hunger and thirst 
are said to be the properties of the body and hence do not be- 
long to me. Because you have asked me I shall say that I am 
always satisfied since I am the (Supreme) Spirit, omnipresent 
and all-pervasive like the sky. Hence I am the inner self of all 
the beings. How then can I be restricted to this? I neither go, 
nor come, nor am confined to a particular place. You are not 
different from me, nor am I different from yourself. Just as a 
mud house is strengthened by plastering with mud, so also this 
body made of earthly (element) (is held fast) by infinitesimal 
particles of earthly (materials) . O Twice-born ! I am Rtu, your 
preceptor, come to impart to you wisdom. I have come here and 
I shall go now as soon as you know the highest truth. You know 
that there is only one and there is no difference in the entire 


1. The text consistently reads Rtu; probably a mistake for Rbhu. 

2. A daily rite to please all gods performed before taking food. 



380.56-65 


1067 


universe. (All the things) are the manifestation of the Supreme 
Being known as Visudeva (name of Krtfia, manifestation of 
Vi?nu). 

Rtu went again to that city after one thousand years. He 
said to Nidagha staying at a lonely place on the outskirts of 
the city, “Why do you stay at a lonely place? 

Nidigha said: 

56. O Brahmin t There is a strong rumour that the king 
would go round (the city) to see the beauty of the city. Hence 
I am staying here. 

Rtu said : 

57-60. Who is a king here and who are the other subjects? 

0 Excellent Twice-born ! Tell me this. You are conversant 
(with these) ! O Foremost among twice-borns !” 

(Nidagha said) : “He is the king who rides that elephant in 
rut rising from the peak of the mountain and others are 
(those) moving around him. O Brahman ! That which is under 
is the elephant and one who is above is the king.*’ Rtu asked 
(again) : “Who is the elephant and who is the king?” 

Nidagha said (the same thing again) . Rtu made Nidagha 
to lie crawling on fours and rode him (and said) , “I am above 
like the king and you are below like the elephant.” 

61-62. Rtu said to Nidagha, “How shall I name you then?” 
Being told thus Nidagha prostrated and said, “You are certainly 
my preceptor. My mind has not been (made free from the dua- 
listic bias by anyone else”. Rtu said to Nidagha, “I had come 
here to impart to (you) knowledge relating to Brahman. I have 
shown to you the highest truth, verily the essence, that is one 
without a second.” 

The Brahmin said : 

63-65. Nidigha also became converted to non-dualism by 
the counsel (of Ijttu) . He then perceived all beings without any 
difference in his own self. He attained liberation by means of 
knowledge. You will also similarly obtain liberation. You and 

1 and all other beings are (lord) Vi?^u from whom all has come. 
Just as the single sky is perceived variedly as yellow, blue etc., 



1068 Agni Parana 

so also the single soul (is perceived) as separate on account of 
erroneous perception. 

Fire-god said : 

66. The king gained liberation by means of the knowledge 
imparted by Bharata. Contemplate that the knowledge of 
Brahman is the enemy of the tree of ignorance of mundane 
existence. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYONE 
The essence of the Bhagavadgitd 

Fire-god said : 

1 . I shall describe the essence of the ( Bhagavad ) gild, that is 
foremost among all the gitd-s and which Kr$na imparted to 
Arjuna in olden days and which yields enjoyment and emancipa- 
tion. 

The Laid said : 

2. One should not feel grief-stricken by the thought that the 
life is extinct or not extinct. The[soul within the body is birthless. 
The soul neither gets old nor dies. It cannot be differentiated. 
Hence one should discard (the feeling of) grief etc. 

3-5a. Brooding on the objects (of senses) , man gets attach- 
ment for them. From attachment (arises) desire, then (comes) 
anger and delusion (proceeds) from anger. Confused memory 
(arises) from delusion and one gets ruined on account of the 
confusion. Association with bad elements is destroyed by means 
of association with good elements. The desire for gaining libera- 
tion destroys the desire (to enjoy pleasures) . By discarding 
desire one gets firm on his own self. He is said to be a man of 
steady wisdom. 

5b-7a. That which is night to all beings, in that the disci- 
plined man wakes; that in which all beings wake, is night to 
the sage cognizing (the soul) . There is nothing to be done by 



381.7b-19 


1069 


him who feels happy in his (own) soul. For him there is no object 
to acquire by doing (an action) ; nor is there any (loss) by not 
doing (an action) . 

7b-8a. O Mighty-armed ! The knower of the truth relating 
to the nature of guqas and action knows that gunas (as senses) 
merely abide with the gunas (as objects) and does not get 
entangled. 

8b-9a. By the raft in the form of knowledge one goes beyond 
all pain. O Arjuna ! The fire of knowledge burns all the deeds 
to ashes. 

9b- 10a. One who dedicates his deeds to Brahman discarding 
all attachment, is not stained by sins just as a lotus by water. 

10b- 12a. A person united to yoga would perceive himself 
in others and others in his self and would view all as equal. A 
person fallen from yoga would be born in the house of prosperous 
and pious persons. O Son ! A person doing auspicious things 
does not suffer. 

12b-13a. Verily this divine illusion of mine, consisting of 
the qulities, is difficult to surmount. Only those who resort to 
me cross over this illusion. 

13b-14a. O Foremost among the Bharatas ! Four types of 
men worship, namely, a man in distress, a man seeking knowledge, 
a man seeking wealth and a man imbued with wisdom. (Among 
them) the wiseman (is) ever steadfast. 

14b-I8. The imperishable is the Supreme Brahman. Its 
dwelling in the individual body is said to be adhyatman. The 
offering which causes the origin of beings is called karma. The 
perishable nature is adhibhQta. The purusa (the being) is adhi- 
daivata. I alone am the adhiyajfia here in this body, O Best 
among the embodied ! Whoever, at the time of death, remembers 
me alone, attains oneness with my state without any doubt. A 
man would attain the same state which he thinks of at the end 
after discarding the body. Fixing the life-energy in the middle 
of the eye-brows (a person) reaches me uttering the one-sylla- 
bled ‘Om’, the Brahman, and then discarding the life, (and 
knowing that) (the things) beginning with Brahma and ending 
with a tuft of grass are all my magnificence. 

19. All glorious and noble beings are known to be a part 



1070 Agni Purina 

of Myself. One who knows that the universe is a manifestation 
of me. gets released. 

20. One who knows the body as the field is said to be 
kfetrajfia (knower of the field) . The knowledge about the field 
and the knower of the field is deemed by Me (lord) as 
knowledge. 

21-22. The great elements, egoism, intellect, unmanifest 
(principle), the ten (organs of) senses, one (mind) and the five 
objects of senses, desire, hatred, pleasure, pain, the aggregate, 
consciousness and firmness — all these have been described briefly 
as the kfttra (field) with its modifications. 

23-27. Humility, modesty, non-injury, forbearance, upright- 
ness, serving the preceptor, purity, steadfastness, self-control, 
not having desire for the objects of senses, absence of egoism, 
cognizing the evil in birth, death, old age, sickness and pain, 
non-attachment, non-identification (of the self) with son, wife, 
home and the like, constant equanimity towards desirable and 
undesirable happenings, exclusive unswerving devotion to 
Me (god), resorting to solitary places, distaste for an assembly 
of men, constancy in knowledge about self, viewing things in 
accordance with the knowledge of truth— these are declared as 
knowledge. Ignorance is the opposite of these. 

28. I shall describe that which has to be known, by 
knowing which one enjoys immortality. The Supreme Brahman 
is without a beginning. It is said to be neither existence, nor 
non-existence 1 . 

29-31. With hands and feet everywhere, with eyes, heads 
and mouths everywhere and with ears everywhere* — (He) 
remains enveloping all. Shining by the fiinctions of all the 
senses, (He) is without all the senses. (Although) unattached, 
(He) is the supporter of all (beings). (Although) devoid of 
qualities, (He) is the person experiencing them. He is outside 
and within (all) the beings. He is movable as well as immov- 
able. He is incomprehensible because of his subtlety. He is far 
and near. 


1. Hie textual reading is wrong. It has been corrected as in BG XIII. 

12 . 

2. The textual reading has been corrected on the basis of U BG XIII. 13. 



381.32-43 


1071 


32-33. He is undivided and yet He seems to be existing in 
beings as divided. He should be known as the supporter of 
beings. He devours and is mighty (generator). The light of 
all lights. He is said to be beyond darkness. (He is) the know- 
ledge, the knowable and the goal of knowledge, remaining in 
the hearts of all (the beings) . 

34-35. By means of meditation some behold the self in the 
self by the self. Others (see the self) by sdnkhya-yoga (deliber- 
ation) and yet others by karma-yoga (action) . Still others, not 
knowing thus, worship (Him) as they have heard from others. 
They too cross death quickly by their devotion to what they 
have heard. 

36. Knowledge arises from sattva (goodness) , greed from 
rajas and error, delusion and ignorance from tamas. 

37. One who simply stands composed (thinking) that the 
giuyis exist in him and is not shaken (by them) and remains 
equanimous towards respect and insult, friend and foe, (is said 
to be) free from gunas. 

38. The imperishable aSvattha (holy fig tree) is said to be 
having its roots above and branches below. Its leaves are the 
Veda- s. One who knows it is the knower of the Vedas. 

39. There are two (types of) beings in this world, the 
divine and the demoniacal. Non-injury etc. 1 and forbearance 
belong to one born for a divine state. 

40. Neither purity, nor (right) conduct belong to one born 
for a demoniacal state. As anger, greed and sex lead to hell, 
one should reject the three. 

41-42. Sacrificial rites, penance and charity are known to 
be of three varieties due to the (three) qualities, sattva etc. The 
food that augments life, purity, strength, health and pleasure 
(is known to be) sattvika. The food that is pungent and dry 
and productive of pain, grief and disease (is) rSjasa. The food 
that is impure, rejected, putrid and tasteless ( is said to be) 
tdmasa. 

43. The sacrificial rite is said to be sdttvika if it is performed 
as laid down without desiring reward. (A sacrifice is) r&jasa. 


1. See BG XVI. 2-3 for other characteristics. 



1072 Agni Purdtui 

if it is (done) for the sake of gaining a fruit. If it is for vanity 
it is tdmasa. 

41. Physical penance is said to be that which is accom- 
panied by faith, sacred formula and the like. Worship of 
the gods etc. and non-injury etc. are said to be verbal 
penance. 

45. A speech that does not cause excitement, truthfulness, 
practice of the study of the scriptures of one's own school and 
sacred repetition (are said to be austerity of speech) . Mental 
(austerity) consists of purity of disposition, silence and self- 
control 1 2 . 

46-47. The sdltvik austerity (is done) with no desire (for 
any fruit), the rdjasa, with the intention of gaining an object 
and the tdmasa for harming others. The sdttvika charity is that 
which is performed at the right place etc. with a sense of duty. 
Rdjasa (charity) is that (performed) with a view to receive in 
return. It is said to be tamasa (when performed) at a wrong 
place and insultingly. 

48. “Obi tat sat ( Obi , that and real)” has been declared to 
be the triple designation of Brahman. Sacrificial rites, charity 
and such other deeds confer enjoyment and emancipation to 
men. 

49. The threefold fruit of action— disagreeable, agreeable 
and mixed— accrues after death to a person who does not relin- 
quish (karma) but never to those who renounce. 

50-51. The tdmasika action (arises) from an action associated 
with delusion, the rdjasa action from pain, fear etc., and the 
sdttvika from non-desire. These (following) five are the five causes 
of an action — the body, the agent, the various instruments such 
as the senses, the different* functions of various sorts and the 
presiding deity, the fifth. 

52-53a. The knowledge that (everything is) one is sattvika. 
The knowledge that it is separate is rdjasa. That which is 
contrary to reality is tdmasa. The sdttvika action is without any 

1. The text has carelessly abridged BG XVII. 15-16. 

2. The printed text wrongly reads trividhSfi for vioidhdh. 

Cf.BGXV III.14. 



381.53b— 382.4 


1073 


desire. The rdjasa action is with desire. The tdmasa (action) is 
from ignorance. 

53b-54. A sdttvika agent would be equanimous towards 
success and failure. A rdjasa (doer) (would be) deceitful. A 
tdmasa (doer would be) languid. The understanding at the begin- 
ning of an action is sattviki. That which is only at the time of 
an action would be rdjasi. The contrary (would be) tdmasi. 

55-56a. The firmness of mind (towards pleasure and pain 
etc.) would be sattviki. The desire (of the mind) for satisfaction 
is rdjasi. Grief etc. is tdmasi. There would be pleasure at the 
beginning from sattva. The pleasure that comes at the end is 
rdjasa. Pain at the beginning and end is tdmasa. 

56b-58. All the beings had their origin from that by which 
this (universe) has been pervaded. One finds success by wor- 
shipping (lord) Vi§nu by one’s action. A person who knows the 
world from Brahma to a tuft of grass as (lord) Vi?nu by means of 
his action, mind and speech in all the states gains success 
always. The devotee of the lord (would) certainly (be) a 
bhdgavala. 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYTWO 

The Tamagitd 


Fire-god said'. 

1. I shall describe to you the Tamagitd expounded to Naci- 
ketas. It would confer enjoyment and emancipation to the 
pious desiring emancipation who read and listen to this. 

Tama said: 

2. Alas! man himself being non-eternal, desires for eternal 
seats, beds, vehicles, clothes, houses etc. on account of ignorance. 

3. It has been said by (the sage) Kapila (in olden days) 
that always having non-atiachment for pleasures and viewing 
one’s own self (critically) are most excellent for men. 

4. (The sage) Paricasikha has said that impartiality to 



1074 Agni Purina 

wards all, attitude of non-possession, not being attached (to 
worldly pleasures) are most excellent for men. 

5. Gangavignu has declared that a true knowledge (of the 
miseries) of the stages (of life) beginning with that of embryo 
and including birth, childhood and old age etc. is most excel- 
lent for men. 

6. Janaka has stated that remedying the pains such as the 
idhydtmika (bodily and mental) and the like from the beginning 
to the end is most excellent for men. 

7. Brahma holds that the most excellent thing for men is 
to perceive the oneness of the Supreme Being appearing as 
different (in different beings) . 

8. Jaigigavya has said - that the highest good lies in dis- 
chargingone’s duties as laid down in the Rg, Tajur or Sdma(veda) 
without attachment and with a sense that they have to be done. 

9. Devala is said to hold the view that the most excellent 
thing for men would be to abandon all actions for the sake of 
the happiness of the self. 

10. (Sage) Sanaka has declared that the knowledge (gained) 
from renunciation of desires leads one to Brahman, the supreme 
place, and that those who entertain desires (do not get) this 
knowledge. 

11. (Lord)Hari has said that the foremost among the excel- 
lent is to transform the actions done with attachment into those 
of non-attachment. This is verily non-action, the Brahman. 

12. The elevated person who has gained knowledge does 
not become different from Brahman, known as (lord) Vignu, 
the supreme and indestructible. 

13. A person would gain by (doing) austerities whatever 
he mentally desires such as knowledge of Brahman, knowledge 
of worldly existence, faith in god, good fortune and a beautiful 
form. 

14. There is nothing to be contemplated equal to (lord) 
Vignu. There is no austerity superior to fasting. There is no 
fortune equal to health. There is no river equal to the (river) 
Gangi. 

15-16. There is no kinsman other than (lord) Vig$u, the 
' lord of the universe. A person who meditates on (lord) Hari 



382.17-28a 


1075 


as (existing) below, above, in front and in the body, senses, 
mind etc. and passes away would become (lord) Hari. That 
which is the Brahman, from that all the things (have emanated) 
and in that all the things exist. 

17. (Lord) Visnu dwells in the hearts of all in the form of 
higher and lower, as un-understandable, indefinable and well* 
established. 

18. Some (people) invoke that lord Vi$nu as the lord of 
sacrifices. Some (invoke) Him as (lord) Hari, some as (lord) 
Hara (Siva) and some others as Brahma. 

19. Some (invoke) Him by the names of lndra etc. and 
others as Sun, Moon and as the eternal time. People state that 
the whole earth, from Brahma to a tuft of grass, is Vi§nu. 

20-2 la. A person who has attained (lord) Visnu, the 
Supreme Brahman, never returns (to worldly existence) . A man 
may acquire such a state by making great gifts such as gold, 
bathing in sacred waters, meditation, austerities, worship, wealth 
and listening to sacred texts. 

21b-22. Know the soul as traveller, the body as chariot, 
intellect as charioteer and mind as reins. The senses are said to 
be horses and the objects the pasture ground for them. 

23-24a. People name the soul united with the mind and 
senses as the enjoyer. He who is not wise and whose mind is 
not always associated (with the soul), does not reach the Su- 
preme Brahman and is bom in the world. 

24b-25a. He who is wise and whose mind is united (with the 
soul) always, attains the place (of Brahman) and is not bom in 
this world again. 

25b-26a. A person who has knowledge as the charioteer and 
mind as the reins, reaches the end of his journey and (gets) the 
highest region of (lord) Vi?nu. 

26b-28a. The objects (of senses) are higher than the res- 
pective organs; the mind is higher than the objects; the intellect 
is higher than the mind; the self (is higher) than the intellect 
and (the principle of) mahat is higher than the self. The un- 
manifest is higher than the mahat. The Purufa (the spirit) is 
higher than the unmanifest. There is nothing higher than the 
Supreme^ Spirit . It is the ultimate end and course. 



1076 


Agni PurdQa 


28b-30. This self hidden in all the bodies does not reveal 
itself. The subtle one is perceived by men having sharp intellect 
and subtle vision. A wiseman should restrain his speech in the 
mind, that knowledge in the self, that knowledge in the great 
self and place it at the end in the self. After having known the 
union of Brahman and the self by means of moral duties etc., 
one would become Brahman. 

31-32. Non-injury, truthfulness . non-stealing, celibacy, re- 
fraining from receiving gifts (are known) as the yama - s (moral 
abstentions) . The niyamas (abservances) (are) five — purity, 
happiness, austerity, study of the Veda (of one’s school) and 
worship of God. The (physical) postures are such as the pad- 
maka etc. Prdndydma (is) conquest of wind. Pratyahara is the res- 
training of the mind in the self. 

33. Dhdratid consists of fixing of the mind on an auspicious 
object. O Twice-born ! It is said to be the dhdrand by the wise 
because the mind is steady. 

34. The continuous fixing-up of the mind in the same place 
is known as dhydna (contemplation) . Samddhi is the state of (hav- 
ing the attitude) (< I am Brahman”. 

35. Just as the space enclosed by a pitcher becomes one 
with the sky when the pitcher is destroyed, in the same way the 
liberated soul becomes Brahman. 

36. The individual soul deems itself as Brahman by 
(means of) knowledge (alone) and not by any other (means) . 
The individual soul gets released from ignorance and its effect 
and becomes undecaying and immortal. 

Fire-god said'. 

37. O Vasi$tha ! I have expounded (to you) the Yamagitd 
which yields enjoyment and emancipation to the readers. The 
eternal union is stated to be the total occupation of the intellect 
by Brahman (as outlined) in the philosophical thought. 



383.1-10 


1077 


CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYTHREE 

The Glorification of the AgnipuratjA 

Fire-god said : 

1-4. I have expounded to you the Agneyapurdna of the form 
of Brahman. It with extension and without extension consists of 
the two vidycP-s. The learning consists of the Fg, Tajur, Selma and 
Atharva (veda). Vi$nu is the creator of the world. Prosody, 
phonetics, grammar, lexicon, astronomy, etymology, dhamaSSstra 
(treatises on religious duties) , mimdmsd (inquiry) , nyaya (logic) , 
science of medicine, archery, science of music and science of 
statecraft are all (known as para) vidyd. The other one 
beyond the Vedas is lord Hari known as apard vidyd (that which 
has nothing superior to it) . Highest knowledge is the supreme 
undecaying thing. 

5-6. One who has the feeling that all the things are (the 
manifestations of lord) Vi$nu, is not affected by the Kali (era) . 
One would not incur any sin by not performing the great sacri- 
ficial rites or not offering the obsequial rites to the 
manes if he worships (lord) Kr$na with devotion. One does not 
get ruined by intensive contemplation of (lord) Vi^nu, who is the 
cause of all things. 

7. A person whose mind has been drawn towards the 
objects arising from defects due to other rituals, gets released 
from sins, even after doing a sin, by contemplating (lord) 
Govinda (Kr?na) . 

8. It is contemplation where there is Govinda. It is a 
narrative where there is KeSava. That is an action which is 
devoted to Him. What is the use of others which are repeat- 
edly spoken about. 

9. He is not a father who fails to describe this supreme 
knowledge spoken by me to the son and he is not a preceptor 
who fails to impart (this) to his pupil. 

10. O Twice-born ! One could get a son, wife, wealth, pros- 
perity, friends and other things by wandering in this world, but 
not this knowledge. 


1. explained below. 



1078 


Agni Purina 


1 1. What is the use of son and wife? What (comes out of) 
friend, land and relatives? Such knowledge is the supreme rela- 
tive, which liberates a person. 

12. There are two courses for the beings — divine and 
demoniac. Constant devotion to (lord) Visnu is divine and the 
contrary is demoniac. 

13. This, which has been expounded to you, is sacred, 
healthy, praise-worthy, capable of destroying bad dreams, giving 
pleasure and satisfaction and liberation to men. 

14. In whatever houses transcripts of the AgneyapurSaia are 
kept, disturbances never approach them. 

15. What is the good of pilgrimages, or making gifts of 
cows, or sacrificial rites or fasting, when people hear the Agneya 
( pur &na ) daily? 

16. A person who gives a praslha (measure) of sesamumor 
a mafa (weight) of gold, would obtain equal (merit) by listen- 
ing to one verse of the Agni ( Purdna ) . 

1 7. The reading of a chapter of this {Purina) is more com- 
mendable than making a gift of a cow. A sin done in the course 
of a day and night by a person is destroyed by his desire tolisten 
to this (Purina). 

18. (The benefit) that would accrue by making a gift of 
hundred tawny cows at Pujkara 1 in (the month of) Jyesfha 
(June-July) , that benefit would be obtained by reading the 

Agntyapurana. 

1 9. The piety of two kinds — being engaged and being with- 
drawn — does not become equal to this sacred text of Agnipurdna. 

20. O Vasi?tha ! A devoted man would get liberated from 
all sins by either reading the Agnipurdna daily or listening to it. 

21*22. Where there is a copy of the Agnipurdna, in that 
house there would not be any difficulty, mishap or fear of theft, 
or fear of miscarriage of foetus, or possession of children by the 
spirits. There would not be the fear of the evil spirits and the 
like, where there is (a copy of) the Agnipurana. 

23. By listening to this (purdna) , a brahmin would become 
learned in the Vedas, a ksatriya (would be) a monarch, a vaifya 
would gain wealth and a Sudra would get health. 

1. A holy place of pilgrimage in Rajasthan. 



383.24-35a 


1079 


24*25. O Brahmin ! A devotee of Vi?iju, having equanimity 
would get all his afflictions destroyed by reading or listening to 
the Agnipurdna. (Lord) Keiava would destroy all the misfortunes 
that would be celestial, terrestrial or earthly such as bad dreams, 
evil incantations and other mishaps (of such a person). 

26-28. The reading or listening to the text is more merito* 
rious for a man than performing a sacrificial rite. A person who 
listens to the sacred Agnipurdna in the Hemanta (early winter) 
after offering worship with perfumes and flowers would get the 
benefit of (performing) Agnisfoma (rite). (A person would get 
the benefit of performing) the Pun$arlka (rite) in Sifira (advanc- 
ed winter) , ASvamedha (rite) in the spring, Vdjapeya (rite) in the 
summer and Rajasuya in the rainy season. (One would get) the 
benefit (of making a gift) of thousand cows in the autumn by 
reading this ( Purina ) . 

29. O Vasi$tha ! He who devoutly recites the Agnipurdna 
in front of (lord) Hari, would be deemed as worshipping (lord) 
Ke£ava with the rite of knowledge. 

30. He who has a book of the Agnipurdna in his house would 
be victorious. In whose house the transcribed (Purdt^a) is wor- 
shipped, (that person) has enjoyment and emancipation on his 
hand. 

31. Thus (lord) Hari (Vi$nu) has expounded to me in day > 
of yore in the form of the destructive fire at the end of the world. 
The Agneyapurdna consists of two sorts of knowledge. O Vasi?tha! 
You would impart to the devotees these two kinds of knowledge. 

Vasiffha said : 

32-33a. O Vy&sa ! I have narrated to you the Agneyapurdiia, 
consisting of two sorts of knowledge, obtained from (lord) Vi$nu, 
the Supreme Brahman, and as expounded to me by Agni (Fire- 
god) in the presence of the celestials and sages. It makes every- 
thing known. 

33b-35a. O Vyasa I He who reads or listens to or writes or 
causes to write or causes to listen to or causes to read or wor- 
ships or carries this Agnipurdna, known as the Brahman and 
expounded by Agni (Fire-god) in days of yore, would be liberat- 
ed from all sins and would attain heaven after obtaining the 
desires. - 



1080 


Agni Purina 


35b-36. After having caused the excellent Purina to be 
copied, he who gives (the copies) to brahmins, would attain 
the world of Brahma and elevate hundreds of his family. He 
who reads a verse (from this Parana) would become free from 
the mire of sin. 

37-38. Hence, O Vyasa ! This Purina making everything 
explicit should always be read to the disciples in the company 
of the sages such as Suka and others who are desirous of hearing. 
The Agneya(purina) read and contemplated would be auspicious 
and confer enjoyment and emancipation. Obeisance to that 
Fire-god who has sung the Purirta. 

Vyisa said : 

39-44a. O Suta (redactor) : This Agncya (purana) which is 
of the form of pari and apari vidyi and the supreme position was 
sung by (sage) Vasistha in days of yore and it has been ex- 
pounded to you by me. The fortunate ones would attain a form 
difficult to get. Those who meditate upon this Agneyapurina, the 
Brahman, would reach (lord) Hari. Those who seek knowledge 
(would get) knowledge. Those who wish for kingdom would 
obtain kingdom. Those without progeny get children. Those 
without resort would reach a resort. Those who seek fortune and 
those who desire for liberation get them. Those who transcribe 
and those who cause it to be transcribed become sinless and 
gain fortune. O Suta ! Think of the form of the Agneyapurina 
(expounded) by Suka, Paila and others. There is no doubt that 
you would gain enjoyment and emancipation . You recite the 
Purina to the disciples and devotees. 

Suta said : 

44b-47a. I have heard the Agneyapurina with respect by the 
favour of Vyasa. The Agni (purana) is a manifestation of the 
Supreme Brahman. You and other sages such as Saunaka and 
others had worshipped lord Hari in the Naimi?a forest. They 
were steadfast. The Agnipurina is spoken by Agni and conforms 
to the Vedas. This (Puritta) endowed with the two (sorts of) 
brahmaoidyi confers enjoyment and emancipation. 

47b-51. There is nothing richer in substance than this. 
Nothing is a better friend than this. There is no greater work 



383.52-60 


1081 


than this. There is no better course than this. There is no 
greater treatise than this. There is no greater scripture than this. 
There is no superior knowledge than this. There is no smfti 
(textbook of piety) than this. No igama (texts dealing with 
worship) is superior to this. No knowledge is greater than this. 
No exposition excels this. There is nothing extremely auspicious 
excelling this. No philosophic exposition is greater than this. 
This is the foremost Purina. There is no object more difficult to 
obtain than this on the earth. All the lores have been expounded 
in this Purina. 

52. All the manifestations (of lord Vi?nu) such as the fish 
and the like, Giti, Ramayina ((epic story of Rima ) , HarivaihSa 
(Account of the successors of lord Krsna), Bhirata (the legend 
of the patricidal war between the Kauravas and Pandavas) 
and fresh creation have been described. 

53-55. The vaipnava dgama (mode of worship relating to 
Vi$nu) such as worship, initiation and installation (of the idol) , 
investiture with the sacred thread, the characteristic of the 
idols and temples etc. and formulae yielding enjoyment and 
emancipation, texts dealing with worship relating to Saivite 
gods and their substance, (the worship) of the goddess and 
Sun, different circles, vistu (relating to the ground) , different 
types of formulae and secondary creation of the primordial egg 
and the like have been sung. 

56. The geography of the world with the continents, 
mountain ranges and rivers and the greatness of the sacred 
places of pilgrimage such as Gaya, Ganga, Prayaga etc. have 
been told. 

57. The galaxy of stars, astronomy and prognostication for 
victory in battle have been described. The different periods of 
Manu and the duties of different classes of men have been 
explained. 

58. Pollutions, purification of things and expiations have 
been explained. The duties of kings, the making of gifts and 
different kinds of austerities have been described. 

59-60. Disputes, appeasing rites, the application (of the 
formulate) of the Rgveda etc., the Solar and Lunar dynasties. 



1082 


Agni Pui&na 


archery, medical scieuce, science of music, statecraft, mim&rhsd 
(inquiry), nydya (logic), the greatness and number of Pur/bia-i, 
prosody and grammar have been explained. 

61. Poetics, lexicography, phonetics and rules relating to 
performance of rites have been described. The casual, natural, 
and absolute destructions have been explained. 

62. VedSnta is said to be the knowledge about Brahman 
and yoga as having eight constituents. The eulogy, greatness of 
the Purdnas and the eighteen lores have been expounded. 

63. The Pgveda etc. (are known to be) the paravidyd (that 
which has something superior to it) and the aparavidya (that 
which has nothing superior to it) is the undecaying Supreme 
Brahman. The form of Brahman is said to be cosmic and 
acosmic. 

64. This Purina (having an extent) of fifteen thousand 
(verses) 1 is always read by the celestials in the celestial world 
as having one hundred crore (verses) . 

65. Fire-god has sung it here after shortening it for the 
sake of the welfare of the world. O Sages, Saunaka and others I 
You know that all the things (are manifestations of) Brahman. 

66. One may listen to, cause to be heard, read, cause to 
be read, transcribe, cause to be transcribed, worship or sing 
(its glory) . 

67-68. The king should take effort to honour the reader of 
this Purdiia. After having honoured him by (making) gifts of 
cows, land and gold and the satiating gifts of clothes and orna- 
ments, one would get the fruits of listening | to (the recitation 
of) the Pu r &na. At the end of (the reading of) the Purina, the 
twice-born must be fed. 

69-71. (He who does as above) would become spotless, 
gain all the riches and attain heaven * along with his ancestors. 
He who gives leaves (paper) for (copying) the book, thread 
for stitching together the leaves and the cloth for binding 
would attain heaven. He who gives (the book as a gift) would 


1. But this Purina hen contains about 8000 vencs only. 



383.71 


1083 


reach the world of Brahma. He who has the book in his house 
does not have the fear due to portents. (Such a person) would 
get enjoyment and emancipation. You all remember the 
AgtuyapurUna as a form of the lord. After having been honoured 
by them (Saunaka and others) Suta went away and Saunaka 
and others reached (lord) Hari. 



INDEX 


Abala, a deity, installation of, 172 
abdhi, refers to a herb, 407 
abdominal disorder, remedy for, 767 
abduction, of captives, punishment 
for, 681 

abhapaka, a popular saying, 932 
abhava, explanation of the term, 1 027 
abhaya, one of the postures of the 
hand, 857 

abhaya, one of the Pranita-mudras, 

857 

Abhijit, an asterism, 385, 388 
abhijit, a muhurta, division .of a 
day, 371 

Abhikrti, classical metre based on, 
914 

Abhimanyu, son of Arjuna and Su- 
bhadra, 751 ; birth of, 33 
Abhimanyu, one of the ten sons of 
Manu and Nadvala, 42 

Abhivyakti, an embellishment of 
sound and sense, 942 
two divisions of, &ruti and Akgepa, 
943 

further divisions of; sub-divisions, 
of, 943 

abscess, commendable remedy to 
ripen, 756 

remedy to open and heal, 756 
remedy for, 767 

type of food commended when one 
suffers, 756 

abuses, punishment for different kinds 
of, 675-76 

acala, an array; optionally formed, 

635 

acamana, sipping of water, 69, 69fn. 
acarya, explanation of the term, 1017 
acceptance, words for, 991 
actions, need for abandoning, 1074 
Acyuta, denoting lord Vi?nu; propi- 
tiation of, 50 

Acyuta, form of Vi wu on Mahendra 
hill, 842 

Acyuta, as3lagr5ma, 125 
Adbhuta, Indra, during the period 
of ninth Manu, 428 
Adbhutopami, explanation of, 940 
adhabpu;p&, herb, 406 
adbaka, a measure, 265 
(agni) adh&na, a haviryajfia, 86 


Adharma, married Hixhsa, a daugh- 
ter of Dak$a, 49 

adhibhuta, explanation of the term, 
1069 

adhidaivata, explanation of the term, 
1069 

adhikarana, four kinds of; explana- 
tion of, 971 
a fifth variety of, 971 
adhi£vara, significance of the term, 
1018 

adhiyajria, explanation of the term, 

adhvaryu, priest for Yajurveda, 429 
adhyagni, a division of property of 
women, 541 

adhyatma, explanation of the term, 
1069 

adhy&vahanika, a division of pro- 
perty of women, 541 

Adigadadhara, name of Visnu, 
334 

Adigadadhara, on the worship of, 343, 
344 

Adinathas, eight, 412 
Aditi, wife of Kafyapa, 8, 85 
Aditi, manifested as Devaki, 744 
Aditi, worship of, 274, 317 
Adityas, (twelve) 45 
images of, 314 
consecration of, 180 
on the worship of, 343 
ride the chariot of Sun, 356 
adnta, fear known as, 1019 
Adntan5ma, a form of Rudra, 252 
Adfftarupa, a form of Rudra, 252 
adytum, measure of, 313 
Agastya, sage, 15, 24 
reason for being called as 4 born of 
pitcher*, 53o 

mode of offering libation to, 535-7 
should be worshipful, 339 
at Gayi, 341 
agent, five kinds of, 970 
Aghamar$ana, sage of aghamar$a$a 
hymn, 437 

aghamar^aiia (sukta), 53, 437 
efficacy of the repetition of, 482 
Aghasi, worshipped, 414 

Aghaora, the mantra of the weapons 
of; six constituents o£ 887-91 
collection of formulae of; precedes 



1086 


the appeasing rite for Siva, 891- 
92 

weapon of; the efficacy of repeating 
the mantra relating to, 885 
weapon of; as an excellent 
formula, 892 

aghorastra, accessory rites relating 
to, 885 

Aghoramukhi, synonym of Kubjika, 
413 

aging, tonic for, 769 

igneya, kj-ttika; commended for cop- 
ulation, 434 

Agneyakalpa, a kalpa period, 733 
&gneyakrcchra, expiation of eating 
sesamum for twelve nights, 483 
fcgneyamantras, characteristics of and 
effects of, 802-3 

Agneya(Agni)purana, spoken by 
Agni, 2 
extent of, 733 

consists of two kinds of knowledge, 

1079 

as a form of the lord, 1083 

as a form of para and apara vidya, 

1080 

as the essence of Vedas, 731 
the greatness of, 731 
greatness of hearing and reading, 
491, 492, 1078 

merits of having transcripts of, 1078 
should be copied and given as a 
gift in Marga£ir;a, 733 
merits of making a copy and giving 
as a gift, 1079 

merits of meditating on, 1080 
(See also Agnipuraga) 

Agneyi, wife of Uru, 42 
ftgneyl, one of thedharapas; expla- 
nation of, 1050 

Agni (fire), synonyms of, 987-8 
Agni, progeny of Dhi;ai?& of the 
family of, 43 

Agni, birth of Kum&ra to, 44 
and Sv&h&, sons of, 49 
direction presided over by, 55 
propitiation of, 176 
worshipped, 51 
image of, 106, 137, 314 
agni (three), herb denoted by, 408 
Agnib&hu, sonofKingPriyavrata, 322 

Agnib&hu, sage, 428 
Agnidhar&, at Gay&, 344 
Agnidhra, ruler oFJambGdvipa, 322 
Agnidhrk, a goddess, 133 
agnihotra, a haviryajfla, 86, 466 
included under igta, 539 
Agnipur&Qa, Vasi;tha*s request to 
the Fish to narrate, 3 


Agni Pwr&Qa 

extent given as fifteen thousand 
verses, 1082 

abridgement of that in the, celestial 
region having one hundred crore 
verses, 1082 

as a manifestation of Vi^u, 731 
as a manifestation of the Supreme 
Brahman, 1080 

the matters described in, 1081-1082 
is more meritorious than piety, 1078 
nothing greater than, 1080-1 
merits of reciting the, 1079 
the merits of listening to indifferent 
seasons, 1078, 1079 
(See also Agneyapuraga ) 

Agni$toma, a somasamstha, 86, 
466, 1079 
description of, 64 
worshipped, 79 

Agni; pi, a son of Manu and Nadvala, 
42 

Agni;v&ttah, birth of the manes, 49 
prayer to, 336 

Agnivarcas, a disciple of Lomahar- 
fana, 730 

Agnivrati, explanation of, 524 
agnyadheya, a haviryajna, 466 
agrahayani, a sacrifice, 466 
agrahayaoye;ti, a haviryajna, 466 
agrayani, a pakayajna, 86 
Ayodhya, city of, 15 
Ahalya, was married by Saradvata, 
750 

Ahamkara, origin of, 40 
£havaniyapada, at Gaya, 339 
Ahi, a karana (Naga), 369 
ahi, a variety of sexpent; remedy for 
poison due to, 818 
Ahirbudhnya, bom to Sati, 45 
ahisaficari, an array; a variation of 
the array bhoga, 634 
Ahln&iva, son of Devanika; son of, 
738 

Ahuka. son of Punarvasu; son of, 
742 

Ahuki, wife of Punarvasu, 742 
Aila, Purflravas; bom to Budha, 
31 

aindava, a kind of fire, 205 
Aindri, image of, 133 
prayer to, 399 

Air&vata, Indra’s elephant made 
ruler of elephants, 47 
worshipped, 91 

ai&n!, one of the dh&rapas; explana- 
tion of, 1050-1 

Aiivara, a Paficar&tratantra spoken 
by Satya, 106 



Index 


1087 


aja, denotes Brahma, 49 
Aja, son of Dilipa; son of, 737 
Aja, son of Raghu, 9 
Ajaikapad, born to Sati, 43 
Ajakasva, son of Jahnu; son of, 749 
Ajamidha, one of the sons of Bfhat, 
749 

Ajamidha, had NilinI as wife; son of, 
749 

Ajamidha, father of Rk$a; Dhumini 
was the wife of, 750 
ajapa, gayatri known as; greatness 
of, 557-8 

Ajapala, son of Kala, 737 
Ajina, son of Havirdhana and Dhis- 
ana, 43 

Ajita, a manifestation of Vi§nu, 428 
form of Vi?riu at Visakhayupa, 841 
Ajita, goddess, 375 
ajita, a stone, 269 

Ajnarupa, a deity; worship of, 
'414 

Ajyapafr, class of manes; prayer to, 
336 

Akampana, a demon killed by Nila, 
22 

akarsana, one of the acts, 403 
Akasagariga, at Gaya, 341 
Akasamatrs, goddesses, 375 
Aka&revati, prayer to goddess, 399 
akhandadvadasi, mode of practising 
the vow of, 514-3 
Akhyaniki, characteristics oft he 
metre, 910 

Akhyayika, narrative 992 
a division of the prose kavya; 
characteristics of, 919 
Akrsasva, one of the two sons of 
Samhatasva, 737 

Akrura, son of Svaphalkaka ; son of, 
744 

the syamantaka was entrusted by 
Kfsna to, 743 
praised Kr$na, 27 
ak§a, herb denoted by, 407 
Ak$a, demon prince, 20 

Ak$arapankti, a variety of Pahkti; 

composition of, 904 
Ak^ararada, a goddess, 133 
akgauhini, a unit of army, 33 
Ak$aya, a year of the Hindu almanac, 
403 

Aksaya, a form of Rudra, 252 
Aksaya, image of, 138 
Ak;epa, a division of Abhivyakti; 
explanation of; also known as 
Dhvani, 943 
ak$i, herb, TO7 
Ak§obhyA, image of, 138 


Alaghu, a sage born to Vasitfha and 
UrjA, 49 

AlakanandA, a river, 325 
alambuga, a vein; carries the wind 
kfkara, 556 

ftlidha, a posture relating to archery, 
133, 645 

alliteration, when conceived as char- 
ming. 935 

Amara, a form of Rudra, 253 
amara, an array; reverse of Aakafa, 
certain features same as mandala, 
635 

Amarakaitfaka, 331 
Amarisa, letter denoting, 418 
Amariscsvara, a siddha; worship of, 
415 

amavasya, means near 990 
AmbalikA, a daughter of KAiiraja, 31 
Ambariga, son of Nabh&ga, 736 
a son of Vaivasvata Manu; son of, 

737 

was a devotee of Vi$i>u, 736 
ambarisa, a hell, 532 
Ambika, denotes goddess DurgA, 26, 

215 

letter denoting, 4 1 7 
Ambika, daughter of KaSiraja 31, 
Ambikeya, a boundary mountain, 352 
ambrosia, rise of Dhanvantari with, 6 
Ambuja, one of the bandhas, 936 
Ambujeivara, a Rudra, 253 
&mik$A, explanation of, 1017 
Amogha, a female divinity, 51 
Amoghapada, at Gaya, 341 
Amratakclvara, place at VAranasi, 
330 

amredita, one of the yamakas, 935 
amrta (ambrosia), synonyms of, 987 
amrta, one of the Pranitamudras, 857 
Amfta, a female energy, 136 
AmrtadharA. characteristics of the 
metre, 909 
amrtamudrA, 200 

amrtatmika, one of the dh&ra^as; 

explanation of, 1051 
amitividyA, description of, 870 
Arhs'u, one of the twelve Adityas, 45 
Am sum An, son of Asamaftjasa; son 
of, 737 

Amukha (prologue), explanation of; 
also called PrastavanA, 922 
three divisions of, 922 
amulet, protective, 395 
AnAdivimala, one of the gods to be 
worshipped, 412, 415 
Anadra, one of the foremost sons of 
Viduja, 747 

Anagha, different reading for Ala- 
ghu, 49fn. 



1088 


Agni Purdna 


Anala, one of the Vasus, 44 
Anala, a boundary mountain, 352 
Anamitra, descendant of Dhr$ta; 

Sini as bom from, 743 
Anamitra, son of Nighna; son of, 737 
(wrongly given as son of Anara^ya) 
Ananda, a guard of the doors to be 
worshipped, 93 
a deity to be worshipped, 414 
one of the Pancaratra tantras, 106 
one of the sons of Medh&tithi, 351 
anangatrayodasi, on the practice of 
the vow of; for god of love, 515-6 
Ananta, serpent, 50, 55, 63 
image of, 137 
propitiation of, 176 
worshipped, 414 
letter denoting, 418 
Balabhadra was a form of, 37 
a Rudra, 263 

form of Vi?pu at Saindhava, 842 
name of a £alagrama, 125, 126 
son of Vitihotra; son of, 741 
anantadvadaii, on the practice of, 513 
Anaragya, son of Kalma$apada; son 
of, 737 

Anarka, son of Vatsa; son of, 749 
Anarta, a son of Saryati; Kusasthali 
as the domain of, 736 
son of Vibhu; son of, 749 
an&srita, a perfection, 257 
Anasuya, wife of sage Atri, 8, 1 5, 49 
anatha, a perfection, 257 
ancestral rites, at Gaya, mode of 
performing, 345-50 
anchorite, duties of, 452 
Aficita, a division of Vi thi, 928 
Andhaka, a demon, reference to his 
attack on Siva, 746 
killed by Vi$pu, 745 
one of the sons of Satvata, 742 
Andhakaraka, a son of Dyutimat 352 ; 

mountain named after, 352 
Andhakas, a division of Yadavas, 736 
Andhatamisra, sub-division of a hell, 
1039 

Andhra, a country, 387 
Artga, one of the sons of Oru and 
Agneyi, 42 

one of die sons of Bali , 747 
lineage of, 746-7 
son of, 748 
a country, 640 

Afigada, son ofValin, 19, 20, 21 
aftgamantras, details relating to use 
of, 806 

A&g&raka, a planet; worship of, 52 
Aftgarakesvara, atGayft, 343 
Ahgirft (Ahgirasa), a year of the 
Hindu almanac, 404 


Ahgiras, sage, 41, 42fn, 1 12 
married two daughters of Dak$a, 44 
Angiras, progeny of, 49 
Angiras, excellence of progeny of, 45 
a law-giver, 455 

one of the sons of Oru and Agneyi, 
42 

angula, a measure, 107, 1 19, 140, 261 
Anila, one of the Vasus, 44 
animals, words denoting different 
species of, 1012 
life periods of certain, 465 
Aniruddha, a form of Vasudeva, 62- 
91 

image of, 130 

installation of image of, 172 

worship with the mantra of, 68 

a salagrama, 125, 126 

son of Pradyumna, fond of war, 29 

fight with liana, 30 

father of Vajra, 37 

the Yadavas, Vajra and others as 

sons of, 745 

Aniyamopama, explanation of, 940 
Anjali, a posture of the hand, 66 
a measure, 1037 
Anka, a type of drama, 921 
anka, a unit relating to elephant- 
force in the army, 632 
ahku£a, one of the postures of the 
hand, 246, 258, 857 
annaprasana, rite of, 59 
anointment, for the preceptor, mode 
of doing, 74 
disciple, 263-4 

Antardhana, a son of P|*thu; progeny 
of, 43 

Antika, a divine mother, 412 
Anrta, born to Adharma and Hixhsa, 
49 

Anu, one of the sons of Yayati and 
Sarmistha, 25, 740 
anudatta, a division of the sound, 917 
anugraha, the eighth creation, 48 
Anugraha, an energy, 112 
anugraha-cakra, a mystic diagram 
conferring grace, 869-70 
Anugrahisa, letter denoting, 418 
Anuhr&da, one of the sons of Hirajiya- 
kasipu, 46 

anukalpa, that which is inferior to 
mukhya, 1018 

Anumati, one of the sons of AAgiras 
and Smyti, 49 

anumati, a digit less than the full 
moon, 990 

anupr&sa. an embellishment of word, 

932 



Index 


1089 


anuradhi, an asterism, 360, 361, 363, 
381, 382, 383, 388, 400 
Anu§tubh, a metre, 562, 902 

tawny coloured; belongs to Gau- 
tamagotra, 905 

the nutnber of letters in each pida 
of, 903 

Anyasyopama, explanation of, 941 
Apa, one of the Vasus, 44 
apadana, two kinds of, calam and 
acalam, explanation of, 971 
Apahnuti, concealment of something 
conveying another sense, 944 
ap:ina, functions of, 556 
equated with the night, 557 
Aparajita, one of the Rudras, 45 
Aparajita, a goddess, 375 
a herb, 410 
a stone, 269 

characteristics of the metre, 913 
Aparantika, characteristics of the 
metre, 907 

Aparavaktra, characteristics of the 
metre, 910 

Aparavidya, explanation of, 2-3, 1082 
Apastamba, a law-giver, 455 
Apavahaka, characteristics of the 
metre, 914 

Apavatsa, one of the deities to be 
worshipped, 108, 317 
Apida, characteristics of the metre, 
909 

appetite, loss of, remedy for, 773 
application, that breaks the army of 
others, 394 

Aprastuta-stotra, explanation of, 943 
apsaras, celestial maiden, 356 
Aptoryama, a sacrificial rite, 64, 79, 
86 

Aquarius — a zodiacal sign, 384, 392 
Arabhap, one of the inodes; abounds 
in trickery, witchcraft, war etc. ; 
three varieties of, 928 

5ra$yaka f section of Samaveda, 730 
Arbuda, a sacred place, 327 
archers, the units of army needed to 
protect, 653 

archery, description of the sciences 
of, 645-7 

five different kinds of, 643 
different postures relating to, 645-7 
instructions relating to the use of 
bow and arrow, 646-7 
details relating to science of, 647*8 
preceptor in, 645 
time for imparting, 359 
Ardhabhramapa, one of the bandhas, 
936 


ardhacandraka, an array; formed 
from divisions of vajra, 634 
Ardhajalesvara, letter denoting, 419 
Ardhaihsaka, letter denoting, 418 
Ardhanarisvara, installation of image 
of, 172 

ardra, an asterism, 359, 360, 363, 376, 
381, 382, 385, 400 

arghak&od a > section on storing grains, 
387 

Arhata(Jaina), reference to Vi$(iu be- 
coming an, 38 

ari, relating to the letters in the name 
of the votary, 390, 391, 895 
Aries, a constellation, 378, 384, 385, 
392 

Arimejaya, one of the sons of Kuru, 
750 

Arifta, demon killed by Kr§i}a, 27 
Arista, mother of Gandharvas, 47 
Aristanemin, married the four dau- 
ghters of Dak§a, 44 
progeny of, 45 

Arjuna, born to Kunti from god 
Indra, 744 
birth of, 32 
son of, 751 

conquest of Kurus by, 33 
fought on the words of Krwa. 34 
commanded the P&ndava forces, 35 
fall of, 37 

Arjuna: See Kartaviryarjuna 
Arjuna, a tree, 27 
a flower, 529 

Arka. denotes Sun; worship of 215. 
316 

arka, denotes a herb, 406 
arka (white), a herb; used in charm. 
406 

a flower for worshipping lord Hara, 
529 

armoured men, duties of ( 613 
armours, different kinds of, 649 
army, the composition of 621 
words denoting the arrangement 
of, 1019 

six divisions of, 629 
six other divisions of, 630 
array for a marching 630 
different kinds of arrangemet of. 
612 

defects of, 626-7 

number of vulnerable points of an, 
633 

the mode of attacking an, 634 
array(s), different kinds of, 612, 633, r 
other kinds of, 635 
five parts of, 612 
seven parts of, 633 
three divisions of, 633 



1090 


Agni Purdna 


of army; different types of, 630 
the king should never be in, 612 
king should arrange the army in an, 

632 

of other kinds of different shapes, 634 
structures may be modified by omit- 
ting one or two wings, 634 
arrow, excellent kind of, 647 
characteritic features of, 639 
the materials for making. 639 
&rsa, a type of marriage, 434 
artha, homa that confers, 53 

Arthfcntaranyasa, one of the similari- 
ties, 939 

explanation of, 941 
arthapatti, explanation of the term, 
1027 

arthaprakftis, five divisions of, 922 
Arthas&stra, science of, 3 
artisans, words denoting different, 1023 
Aru$a, born to Vinata, 46 
younger brother of Sun, 51 
a Paficaratra text, 106 
brahmins in Kusadvipa, 352 
Arundhati, progeny of, 44 
Arunoda, a lake, 325 

arvagbijas, mantras having more 
than ten letters and less than twelve, 
yield result in old age, 802 
arvaksrotas, creation known as, 48 
Arya, metre; characteristics of, 906 
Arya, a name of Durga, 26 
Arjagiti, characteristics of the metre, 

Aryakas, a class of men in Plaksa- 
dvipa, 351 

Aryaman, one of the Suns, 45, 136 
offering made to, 275 
requested to accept offering, 336 

Asadharapopama, explanation of, 941 
Agi^ha, an asterism, 382 
A?a<jha, the four asterisms, 385 
Agasha, a month, 386 
Ag&<Jhl, letter denoting, 419 
asahya, a modification of the array 
called da$4a, 633 
array formed by adding two flanks, 
634 

Asamafijasa, bom to Sagara and 
Bh&numatl by the grace of sage 
Aurva, son of, 737 
Asamaujas, son of Kambalabarhis, 
sons of, 743 

As&mayik&tva, a defect of word, 947 
Asambadha, characteristics of the 
metre, 913 

asarhhata, an array; description of, 

633 


asana, explanation of the term, 1044 
asangh&ta, an array; six units taken 
from and combined (for a battle). 
634 

Asatpralapa, a division of Vithi, 928 
ascetic, words denoting, 1018 
duties of, 452-5 
Asi, a river, 330 

Asidhanya, one of the sixteen sid- 
dhas, 414 

asipatravana, a forest in hell, 531 
subdivision of a hell, 1039 
asita, a lightning, 45fn. 

Aslega, an asterism, 359, 360, 363, 
376, 381, 382, 385, 388, 400 
Asoka, grove at Lanka, 16 
Sita found by Haniimatat, 19 
Asoka, a minister of King Dasaratha, 

asoka, a flower, 529 
asokapQrnima, vow on a full-moon 
day. 518-9 

ass and other animals, mantra for the 
removal of poison due to, 819 
assault, explanation of the term, 655 
assembly, words signifying member 
of, 1017 

A? taka, name of Sunafrsepa, 749 
astaka, a sacrifice 86, 466 
Astarapankti, a variety of Pankti; 

composition of, 904 
Agtavakra, a brahmin, 37 

curse on the nymphs made by, 37 fn. 
asterisms, letters denoting, 400 
words denoting, 989 
actions appropriate to. 381 
adverse for serving the employer, 360 
auspicious for entering a new house, 

360 

beneficial for undertaking a pilgri- 
mage, 360 

causing adversity, 360 
causing profit, 360 
commendable for marriage, 357 
commended for copulation, 434 
commended for taking harvest grains 
inside the house, 361 
commended for harvesting grains, 

361 

diagram of; relating to beginning 
a journey, 400 
down faced, 381 
evil. 381 

favourable for a person to return, 
382 

favourable for seeing a sovereign, 
360 

fixed, movable and commendable* 
381 

for constructing a house, 360 



Index 


1091 


forbidden for entering the cow-pen, 
361 

for hoisting and lowering of banner 
oflndra, 362 
friendly etc., 362 
good for agriculture, 361 
good for sowing seeds, 361 
good for gathering hay, 360 
good or bad; combinations of, 380-2 
good for taking out the grains, 361 
increasing the heap of grains, 361 
lateral faced, 381 

malignant relating to snake-bite, 808 
new purchases prohibited under 
certain, 359 

not commended for grazing the cows, 
360 

suited for giving or taking or de- 
positing, 360 

to be avoided for wearing new clo- 
thes, 359 

vows relating to different, 520 
the names of the presiding deities 
of, 805 

asthapana, explanation of, 267 
asthma, food for a patient suffering 
from, 753 

A§ti, name of a metre, 905 
Asti, daughter of Jarasandha and wife 
of Kaiiisa, 28 

astrology, essence of 372-74; as the 
lord Hari, 492 

asunya£ayana, a vow, 498-99 
asura, a type of marriage, 435 
asuras, 34, 35, 38 

Asvalalita, characteristics of the me- 
tre, 914 

Agvamedha, a sacrifice, 23, 36, 86, 
327, 330, 474, 1079 
A£vapada, one of the varieties of 
Gomutrikabandha, 937 
as'vattha, tree, 92 

Agvatthaman, killed the PaQdava sol- 
diers, 35 

survived the Bharata war, 36 
asvayuji, a sacrificial rite, 86, 466 
A£v&yus, a son of Pururavas, 739 
Alvina, month of, 360 
Alvini, an asterism, 358, 359, 360, 
362, 363, 381, 382, 385, 386, 387, 
400 

is of the shape of a horse, 384 
Agvini Kumara, birth of Nakula and 
Sahadeva through, 32 
Alvins, worship of, 180 
A tala, a nether world, 353 
Ataladevf, goddess to be invoked, 413 
atarQ$abhava, a flower, 529 
AtharvsQIfruti (Mugd&kopani^ad), 1 
Atharv4$&yani, a branch of s&ma- 


veda, 730 

Atharvaveda, an Apar&vidy&, 2 
sacred for Soma, 93 
use of the hymns of. 707-7 iO 
hymns to be recited by the follower 
of, 287 

branches of, 730 
assigned on the palms 64 
atibal&, a herb, 371, 378 
Atican^ika, a goddess, 132 
Atidhfti, name of a metre, 905 
metre based on, 914 
atigagda. an impediment, 383 
Atighora, a hell, 1038 
Atijagati, name of a metre, 905 
a metre to be employed in compo- 
sing a Mah&k&vya, 920 
metres belonging to the class of, 913 
Atik&ya, demon, 22 
atikfcchra, an expiation, 479, 486, 487 
explanation of, 494 
to be observed three fortnights after 
death, 488 

atilohita ? one of the four kinds of 
lightning, 45fn. 
atimukta, a flower, 529 
Atimuktaka, one of the siddhas, 414 
Atirakta, a goddess, 230 
Atir&tra, a sacrifice, 42, 64, 79, 86, 466 
Atigakvari, name of a metre, 905 
used in the Mah&k&vya, 920 
atis&ntapana, an expiation, explana- 
tion of, 483 

atigaya (exaggeration), an embellish- 
ment of sense, 939 
Atis'ayokti, explanation of, 941 
Atithi, son of Ku£a; son of, 738 
&todyam, a kind of musical instru- 
ment, 994 

atonements, different kinds of, 474-78, 
for ascetics, 455 
for minor sins, 474-5 
( See also expiations) 

Atreya, a Paficaratra tantra 106 
Atreya, the infalliable composition 
propounded by, 778 
Atri, sage bom from Brahm&, 25, 31, 
41 42 fn, 738 
Atri, a law-giver, 455 
progeny of, 31, 49 
Datt&treya as son of, 8 
bowed to by Rama, 1 5 
protected the celestials, 746 
attachment, actions done with; to 
be transformed as those of non- 
attachment, 1074 

attendants, the king should choose 
what type of, 619 

Atyagniftoma, a sacrifice, 79, 86, 466 
Atyajp, name of a metre, 905 



1092 


Agni Pur&ita 


Atyukta, a metre; number of letters 
in, 905 

Aucitya, an embellishment of sound 
and sense 

explanation of, 942 
audarya, a kind of fire, 205 
audg&tra, priest for S&mans, 429 
audumbara, a tree, 92 
auguries, auspicious and inauspici- 
ous, 597 

good and bad; known from sounds 
of animals and birds, 598-600 
Aupac&riki, a division of Abhivyakti, 
explanation of, 943 
Aupacchandasaka, characteristics of 
the metre, 907 

Aurva, a sage; was pleased by King 
Sagara, 737 

austerities, the gains of doing, 1 074 
fiv&hani, a posture made with the 
hands, 898 

Avalagita, a division of Vithi, 928 
Avantayas, one of the five branches 
of Haihayas, 741 
Avanti, a country, 387 
Avantik&, a sacred place, 328, 491 
Avap£ta, a variety of Arabhati, 928 
&vasthya, fire, 339 

avastika-khadga, a type of temple, 315 
Avasyandita, a division of Vithi, 928 
avighnftcaturthi, a vow; details re- 
lating to, 503 

Avijfiata, son of Anala, a Vasu, 44 
Avimukta, name of Varanasi, 330 
greatness of, 327 

Avispa?tatva, a defect of word, 947 
Avyayibh&va (compound), two kinds 
of; examples of, 975 
Ay&, a deity, 317 

Ayodhy&, city, decoration of, 11 
return of the people to, 1 3 
Rama’s return to, 23 
greatness of 328, 491 
destruction of, 387 
ftyogava, caste, 430 
duty of, 431 
Ayurveda, science of, 6 
Ayus, son of ViSvagasva, 736 
Ayus, bom from Fururavas, 25, 31 
sons of, 739 

Ayufmat, a son of Hrada, 46 

Babhru, a form of Rudra, 252 
was bom from Devavfdha; glory of; 
four sons of, 742 

B&bhrusetu, son of Gindh&ra; son of, 
747 

Badarik&lrama, a place, 1 
Bfthu, son of Vfka; son of, 737 
Bahud&na, a year of the Hindu alma* 


nac, 404 

Bahyasva, son of Purujati; progeny 
of, 749 

Bahupama, explanation of, 940 
Bahuputra, married two daughters of 
Dak$a, 44 

lightnings, as four daughters of, 45 
Bahurupa, one of the Rudras, 45 
Bahurupa, a goddess, 230 
Bahuvidha, son of Sundhu ; son of, 748 
Bahuvrihi (compound), formation of, 
975 

Bahya, one of the four sons of, 742 
Baka, demon, 32, 32fn 
letter denoting, 419 
a variety of beads belonging to 
Jyoti class, 894 

Bala, one of the seven sons of Suhotra 
and Girika, 750 
bala, a herb, 371, 378, 407 
bala, a formula consisting of twenty 
letters, 895 

installation of image denoting, 172 
Balabhadra, denotes Balarama; pro- 
geny of, 29, 30 

a form of Ananta; returned to 
original place, 37 
merits of worshipping, 343 
Baladeva (Balarama), married Revati, 
daughter of Raivata, 736 
Kf$^a entrusted the gem to Akrura 
in the presence of, 743 
balagra, a measure, 107 
Balahaka, a boundary mountain, 352 
Balakasva, son of Ajakasva; son of, 749 
Balakesi, image of goddess, 138 
Balakhilyas, 60000 in number of the 
size of a thumb; born to Kratu and 
Sannati, 49 

Balapramathini, a goddess, 51, 201 
Balarama, one of the sons of Vasudeva 
and Rohigi, 744 

origin of; reasons for being known 
as Sankanjana, 26fn 
was entrusted to the custody of 
Nanda, 27 

reached Gomantaka from Mathur& 
28 

killed the demon Pralamba, 30, 30fn 
figure of, 130 

assigned and worshipped, 56 
synonyms of, 986 
b&lava, a kara^a, 362, 369fn 
Balavikarfoi, a goddess, 51, 201 
Balhika, one of the sons of Santanu; 
sons of, 751 

Bali, Indra at the time of eighth Manu, 
428 

Bali a demon, the story relating to 
VigQu’s manifestation as a dwarf to 



Index 


1093 


subdue, 8, 745 
son of Virocana, 8fn; 
reference to subdual of, 82 
father of Ba^a, 29 
had hundred sons, 46 
to be paid obeisance at Gaya, 341 

son of Sutapa; sons of, 747 
the name of a temple, 318 
Balika, the spirit possessing the child 
in the twelfth year; symptoms of the 
child possessed by; offering and 
smearing when the child is possessed 
by, 825 

Balotkata, a female deity, 292 
Bana, demon, 29, 30 
foremost among the sons of Bali, 46 
worshipped, 414 

symbol denoting a herb, 406, 407, 
408 

a flower, 529 
banaliflga. 300, 301 
bandha, relating to a kind of Yamaka, 
936 

bandhas, eight kinds of; description 
of, 936 

Anu$tubh as a metre for most of 
the, 938 

banks, words signifying, 995 
banner, words denoting, 1020 
erection of, 167-69 
length of, 309 
presiding deities of, 
worship of, 284 
barbara, a flower, 529 
Barhi$adab, manes, origin of, 49 
requested to come, 336 

Baskala, sariihita given to, 429 
one of the sons of Hrada, 46 
bath, ingredients for ceremonial, 717 
bathing, six kinds of, 436 
after illness, asterism for, 358 
mantras for, 436-7 

procedure for, 53-54 
to ward off obstacles, 718-19 
known as Mahesvara; promoting 
the victory of a king, 719-22 
benefits of, 764 

merits of; with different materials, 
552 

bathing of deities, mode of, 190-195 
different kinds of, 192 
to accomplish one’s desires, 716 
bathing festival, mode of conducting, 
186-88 

battle, worship for success in, 425 
things to be done after gaining vic- 
tory i rtf merits of endurance of pain 
in; the demerits of deserting a, 614 


battles, success in; means for gaining* 
372 

between celestials and demons; twelve 
in number; details about, 745 
battle-axe, different uses of, 651-2 
Bauddhas, reference to demons be- 
coming, 38 

Baudhayana (tantra), 106 
Bauddhya, Vedas given to, 429 
Bava, a karana, 369fn 

beads, made of different materials, 
merits of, 899-900 

bees and honey-bees, words denoting, 
1013 

begging, five kinds of, 453 
beings, two kinds of; their characteris- 
tics, 1071 

bell, used in worship; greatness of, 900 
belly, three-fold division of, 930 
betel, time suitable for rite of chewing, 
358 

Bevacakra, to find friendship between 
two people, 392 
bhadra, a variety of horses, 789 
Bhadra, a type of temple, 3H 

characteristics of, 318 
bhadra, a stone, 269 
Bhadra, a female divinity, 51 
a river, 325 

Bhadra, name of a month, 360 
Bhadrabhimi, a goddess, 376 
Bhadradeha, one of the sons of Vasu- 
deva and Devaki, was killed by 
Kamsa, 744 

Bhadrakali, a goddess, 26, 376 
Bhadrakaruahrada, a sacred place, 327 
Bhadraka, one of the four sons of Sibi, 
747 

characteristics of the metre, 914 
bh&drapada, an asterism, 363, 388 
Bhadraratha, son of Haryangaka ; son 
of, 748 

Bhadrasena, one of the sons of Vasu- 
deva and Devaki, was killed by 
Karhsa, 744 ** 

Bhadrasenaka, son of Mahim&; son 
ot 740 

Bhadr&sva, son of Rahovadi ; ten sons 
of, 325, 748 
country, 322, 325 
Viftni as Hayagriva in, 326 
a mountain, 325 

bhadr&tithi, certain days of lunar 
fortnight, 362 

Bhadravir&t, characteristics of the 
metre, 910 

Bhaga, one of the Adityas, 45 
Bhagavadgit&, essence of, 1068-1073 



1094 


Agni Purdna 


bhag&van, the significance of the term, 
1060 

Bh&gavatapurapa, containing expla- 
nation of virtues; to be given as a 
gift in Pro$thapadi, 732 
Bhagiratha, son of Dilipa; brought 
down Ganges from heaven; son of, 
737 

Bhairava, image of, 138, 314 
installation of image of, 172 
to be contemplated, 404 
located on the body, 414 
mantra having the word, 41 1 
Bhairavi, goddess; mantra sacred to, 
404 

image of, 133 

cloth bearing the figure of, 402 
Bhajam&na, one of tlic four sons of 
Satvata, 742 
four sons of, 742 

Bhajamana, one of the sons of Babhru, 
742 

father of Viduratha, 743 
Bhallata, (a superhuman being) 108 
worship of, 317 
Bhai^a, a type of drama, 92 1 
Bhandila, an authority in prosody; 
given as Tannin in Ghandah Sutra, 
904 

bhangavidya, relating to goddess, 395 
Bhacu, a type of drama, 921 
Bhaijiika, a type of drama, 92 1 
Bh&nu, mother of Bhanus, 44 
Bhanuman, second wife of Sagara, 
son of, 737 

Bhanuratha, son of Candragiri; son 
of, 738 

Bh&nus, progeny of Bh.mu, "14 
bhfira, one of the postures of the hand, 
857 

Bharadvaja, son of Brhaspati; was 
brought to Bharata by Marut gods, 
performed rituals, 749 
saluted by Rama, 13, 23 
saluted by Bharata, 14 
Bharaitf, an asterism, 359, 360, 361, 
363, 376, 377, 381, 382, 385, 387, 
400 

Bharata, reference to penance at 
Siilagr3ma performed by, 1062 
birth of, 10 

married Man^avi, 11 
Kaikeyi’s request to make heir ap- 
parent, 12 

Da£aratha’s words about, 1 3 
brought to AyodhyS, 14 
was urged by Rama to return to 
Ayodhyi, 15 


revered Rama after his return from 
Lanka, 23 

killed three crores sons of &ailu?a 
and returned to Raghava, 24 
Bharata, born in the race of Puru, 31 
country called Bharata after, 323 
loss of the sons of, 749 
Bharata, denotes Mahabhiirata, 31 
story of, 38 

Bharata, country, named after Bharata, 
323, 325 

Vi$nu as Kurina in, 326 
Bharata, a mountain, 324 
Bharata srama, at Gaya, 344 

Bharata varsa, extent of, 350-51 
divided into nine parts, 351 
Bharatas, the mighty descendants of 
Bharata, 749 

Bharat!, one of the modes; formulated 
by Bharata; characteristics of; four 
components of, 928 

Bharga, son of Pratardana, 749 
Bhargava, denotes Parasurama, mani- 
festation of Vi§iju, 8 
goddess earth addressed as related 
to, 112 

Bhargavi, daughter of Sukra, 1 12 
Bhasakarna, demon, 22 
Bhasi, a daughter of Tamra, 46 

bhaskara, signifies a herb, 408 
Bhauma (Mars), 115 
worshipped, 316 
bhauta, a kind of fire, 205 
bhautiki (rite), 86 
Bhautya, fourteenth Manu, 428 
Bhava, a name of Rudra, 50 

a divinity, 292, 412 
worship of, 290 
Bhava, a muhurta, 371 
Bhava (Bhava) a year of Hindu al- 
manac, 404 

bhava, change relating to the mind, 
995 

Bhavabhuti, letter denoting, 418 
bhavana, a type of temple, 3 1 4 
Bhavavftta, deity of aghamarsana 
hymn; identified with Visiju, 437 
Bhaveivara, letter denoting, 254 
Bhavins, a class of people in Pu$kara, 
351 

Bhavi ?yapura^a, had its origin from 
the Sun; narrated by Siva to Mann; 
extent of; should be given as a 
gift in Pau$ya, 733 

Bhavya, son of Dhruva, 42 
Bhavya, ruled Saka, 322 
Bhaya, son of Adharma, 49 
Bhay&nak&, a hell, 1038 



Index 


1095 


Bhayankari, image of, 138 
Bhayotkafa, a hell, 1038 
bhedani, a mudra, 857 
BhelakI, a divinity, 41 1 
Bhelakhi, sacred syllable known as, 
396 

Bhida, letter denoting, 419 
Bhima, bom from Vata, 32, 32fn 
stayed as a cook at Virata, 33 
Yudhisthira pacified women in the 
company of, 36 
fall of, 37 

(See also Bhimasena) 

Bhima, one of the sons of Kr?oa and 
Satyabhama, 744 
Bhima, a Rudra, 50 
a guardian deity, 284 
worship of, 290 
propitiation of, 176 
Bhima, a hell, 1038 
bhimadvadasi, details relating to the 
practice of, 512 

Bhimaratha, son ofjimuta; son of, 742 
Bhimarathi, a river, flows from Sahya, 
351 

Bhimasena, born of Kunti from god 
Vayu, 755 

son of Panqlu and Kunti; son of; 
through his wife Hidimba, had 
Ghatotkaca as the son, 751 
killed Duryodhana, 35 
Bhimasena, son of Rksa the second; 
son of, 751 

Bhimasena, one of the four sons of 
Jahnu, 750 

bhindipala, uses of, 652 
bhiru, a herb, 378 

Bhigania, one of the ten sons of Hrdika, 
713 

Bhi$a$a, a hell, 1038 
Bhi9aid, goddess, 375, 417 
Bhi$ani, an evil spirit which possesses 
the child on the second night after 
birth; symptoms of the child pos- 
sessed by; offering to appease; 
unguent for the child possessed by, 

Bhigma, son of Santanu and Gang&, 
751 

as ruling the kingdom after San* 
tanu’s death, 31 

killed the soldiers of P&odavas, 34 
resolve not to fight against eunuchs, 
34fh 

Bhigmapaftcaka, mode of practising 
the vow of, 534-35 
explanation of, 534fn, 535 
merits of practising, 532 
bhoga, a*- array; description, of, 633 
an array; variations of; live units 


taken from and combined (for 
a battle), 634 
modifications of, 635 
Bhogavati, a place, 329, 330 
Bhoja, region of; portent affecting, 387 
Bhoja, one of the siddhas, 414 
Bhojaka, son of Pratik?etra ; son of, 743 
Bhojas, one of the five branches of 
Haihayas (Yadavas), 736, 741 
bhramara, auspiciousness of a stone 
called, 641 

Bhramaravilasita, characteristics of 
the metre, 912 

Bhrgu, married Khyati, daughter of 
£)ak§a, 48 
progeny of, 49 
a holy spot, 330 
letter denoting, 419 
Bhfgutunga, a holy place, 327 
Bhfgvananda, a divinity to be wor- 
shipped, 414 
bhpiga, herb, 407 
Bhrnga, worship of, 273, 316 
bhrngaraja, a flower, 529 
bhrngaraja, a herb, 378, 405, 406 
Bhrngin, image of, 135 
Bhfsa, personified, 316 
worship o£ 273 
Bhu, one of the worlds, 79 
bhudhara, a type of temple, 315 
bhujaga, herb symbolised by, 406, 407 
Bhujaiiga, worshipped, 414 
Bhujangaprayata, characteristics of 
the metre, 913 

Bhujaiigasisusuta, characteristics of 
the metre, 911 

Bhujangavijpnbhita, characteristics of 
the metre, 914 

Bhujange£a, letter denoting, 419 
Bhuloka, (earth) 354 
Bhumitirtha, a sacred place, 327 
Bhfiri, one of the sons of Balhika, 751 
Bhuriiravas, one of the sons of Balhika, 
751 

bhuga^a, a type of temple, 31 5 
Bhutasantapana, a son of Hirapyakfa, 
46fn 

bhutasarga, creation known as, 48 
Bhuti£a, letter denoting, 418 
Bhuva, one of the worlds, 79 
Bhuva, son of PratihasU, 323 
Bhuvarloka, location of, 354 
bibboka, a kind of gesture, 929 
bijamantras, on thepractice of, 804 
bile, remedy for forty diseases due 
to deranged, 774 

remedy to remove excess of, 773 
bilva, herb, 407 



1096 


Agni Purdna 


bilva, flower, 529 

bilvamudra, a posture with hands, 196 
bimbamudra, a posture with hands, 
196 

Bindukotisa, a sacred place, 414 
bindula, an outcaste, 465 
birds, and their gaits; words signifying, 
1012-3 

birth, previous; words denoting, 991 
birth and death, description of the 
process of, 1031 
black, words denoting, 992 
bladder, remedy to remove stone in, 
768 

Blemishes, relating to poetry; seven 
kinds of — relating to speaker, denoter 
and denoted; further divisions of, 
946 

blindness, excellent remedy for, 778 
blood and semen, discharge of; re- 
medy for, 834 

blue vitriol, auspiciousness of, 641 
Boar, manifestation of Vi?nu as, 7 ff, 
9, 129 

the killing of Hirariyak^a by, 745 
body, description of the names and 
formation of constituent parts of, 
1034-36 

three functions of; to be paid equal 
attention, 763 
as the chariot, 1075 
bondage, way to get release from, 464 
bones, words signifying the different, 
1015 

in the body, the description of their 
number, 1036-37 

bow, material for; measure of, 638, 639 
the different characteristics relating 
to, 639 

made of bamboo as the most excel- 
lent one, 639 
excellent kind of, 647 
mantra for worshipping, 639 
bow-men, task of, 613 
bows, should be worshipped before 
an expedition is begun, 639 
bow-string, material for, 638 
brahma, a flower that pleases lord 
Hari, 529 
BrahmS, 1, 3 etc. 

born from the navel lotus of Vi?nu, 
9, 735, 738 

self-originated, 40, 40fn 
synonyms of, 986 
as the charioteer of the earth, 746 
stopped the celestial war, 739 
mind-bom sons of; divided into 
two halves, 41 

presiding deity of an element, 271 
image or, 130 


worship of, 274 

worship of golden image of, 498 
worshipped by people of Kusa, 352 
worshipped by residents of Pu$kara, 
353 

brahma, a type of marriage, 434 
Brahmakesvara, one of the lingas at 
Gaya, 343 

brahmakurca, expiation of eating 
handful of fired grain for fifteen 
days, 483 

Brahmajnana, a female divinity, 413 
Brahmaloka, name of Satyaloka, 354 
brahmamandira, a type of temple, 314 
brahma muhurta, one should get up 
in, 436 

brahman, unknowable, 464 
two kinds of, 1, 1060 
identity of soul and Supreme, 34 
as the cause of the world as held 
by Saivas etc., 949 
words denoting state of, 1018 
description of the nature of, 1056-7 
knowledge relating to, 1057-9 
brahman, knowledge relating to mys- 
tic; expounded by Bharata, 1063-8 
brahmanda, a great gift, 544 
Brahmandapurana, in which Brahma 
describes the greatness of the uni- 
verse; extent of; should be given 
as a gift, 734 
version followed, 44fn 
Brahmani, one of the eight goddesses, 
411,415 

Brahmapada, at Gaya, 339 
brahmapancaka, mantras known as, 
874 

Brahmapurana, one of the eighteen 
Puranas; narrated by Brahma to 
Marici ; extent of; to be given as a 
gift on full-moon day in Vaisakha 
732 

as destroying sins, 492 
Brahmasaras, at Gaya, 338 
Brahmasavarni, tenth Manu, 428 
brahmas'ila, relating to liflga, 266 
Brahmastra, weapon, 23, 32 
Brahma tuftga, a holy place, 327 
brahmatva, related to Atharvan, 429 
Brahmavaivartapurana, narrated by 
Savan^i Manu to sage N&rada; 
extent of; deals with the history of 
Rathantara and Boar manifestation 
of lord Vi?ou; should be given as a 
gift in M&gha, 733 
Rrahm&varta, a sacred place, 327 
Brahma vetali, a goddess, 424 
Brahma vidy&, the formula presided 
over by Brahmk, 895 



Index 


1097 


Brahmi, a mother goddess, 1 39fn 
image of, 133 

brahmin, code of conduct for, 431 
breathing, remedy for trouble in, 830 
Bfhadasva, son of Sr&vanta, 736 
Bfhadbhanu, son of. Bfhatkarman; 
son of, 748 

Brhadi$u, one of the five bom from 
Bahyasva, 749 

Bfhadratha, son of Jayadratha; son 
of, 748 

one of the seven sons of Suhotra 
and Girika ; son of, 750 
Brhannala, Arjuna at Virata as, 33 
Bfhaspati, a law-giver, 455 
Bfhaspati, a rite to appease the planets 
performed by, 740 
Bfhat, son of Suhotra; son of, 749 
Bfhatcakra, a kind of bandha, 938 
Brhati, a son of Sistf and Succh&ya, 42 
Brhati, a metre; characteristics of, 902 
is made up of one pada Jagati and 
three pada Gayatrl, 903 
black coloured; belongs to Angirasa 
gotra, 905 

sages and gods associated with, 562 
different kinds of, 903-4 
Bfhatkalpa, a kalpa period, 732 
Brhatkarman, son of Bhadraratha; son 
of, 748 

B[-hatkuk$i, goddess ruling over north, 
138 

Brhatmavat, son of Bfhadbhanu; son 
of, 748 

bride, rules relating to choosing of, 434 
Buddha, manifestation of Vi$gu as, 38 
figures of, 130 

Budha, story relating to his birth to 
Soma; 739, son of; saluted, 31, 52 
buildings, of different people; parts of; 

words denoting, 1 006 
building sites for different castes; cha- 
racteristics of, 642 
worship of different gods in, 642-3 
burst of laughter, word for, 995 


Caidyas, name of the descendants of 
Cidi, 741 

Gaitra, month of, 360, 386, 388 
Caitraratha, a forest, 325 
caitri, a sacrifice, 86, 466 
Gakra, a lake, 325 
a type of temple, 315 
a posture, 857 

an array; a variation of map^ala, 
635 

one of the bandhas; two kinds of; 

explanation of, 936, 937 
accomplished with the metre, 938 


S&rdulavikridita class of metres, 909 
Gakra bjaka, one of the bandhas; ex- 
planation of, 936, 937 
Cakrapagi, form of Vi$nu at K&smira, 
841 

cakrarupa, efficacy of the herb, 378-9 
Gakrisanatha, a siddha, 415 
Gak$u, a river, 325 
Gaksu$a, the sixth Manu, 427 

the devas in the period of; bom 
as sons of Kasyapa, 45 
Celestial at the time of the 14th 
Manu, 428 

son of Ripu and Brhati, 42 
one of the foremost sons of Vidu$a, 
747 

calamities, due to divine agency; 

remedial steps for, 625 
calling, words denoting, 992 
Campa, son of Pfthulaksa; son of, 748 
camumukha, a modification of the 
array danda, 633 
Camunda, image of, 314 
Camund'i, a mother goddess, 1 39fn 
request made to, 397, 399 
characteristics of the image of, 1 34 
worshipped, 412, 415 
invoked, 416 

Cafical&, a spirit seizing the child in 
the twelfth month : symptoms of 
child seized by, 824 
a monstress seizing the child in 
the fifth year; symptoms of the 
child seized by; offering to ap- 
pease; fumigation and bathing 
when child is seized by, 824 

Caficalak$ikA, characteristics of the 
metre, 912 

Cancasva, son of Mukula; had the 
twins, 750 

Cancer, a constellation, 36 1 , 384, 392 
Canda, an attendant of Siva; wor- 
shipped, 51, 52 
mode of worshipping, 211-12 
carved on the door-frame, 1 15 

Caoda* a goddess, 1 32, 375, 424 
a hell, 1038 
Ca^d&la* a caste, 430 
duties of; rules relating to dress etc., 
431 

Candanadundubhi, son ofTittiri; ion 
of, 742 

Cagdanayika, a goddess, 132 
Cagdarupk, a goddess, 132 
Cagdavatl, a goddess, 132 
Cagdavrotiprapataka, a variety of 
Dagd&ka; characteristics of, 914- 5 
Caodeivara, a holy spot at V&r&gasi, 
330 



1098 


Agm Purdna 


Gaodi, a mother goddess, 139fn 
image of; 132 
(See also Capita) 
a herb, 371, 378 

Capdika, image of, 106, 132, 139 
benefit of establishing, 133 
worshipped, 412 

Candida, placing the image of, 106 
letter denoting, 419 
Gaodogra, a goddess, 132 
Candra, a boundary mountain, 351 
Candra, image of, 138 
Candrabh&ga, river; rises from the 
Himalaya, 351 

Candr&loka, son of Sahasra£va; son 
of, 738 

Gandramah, herb denoted by, 406 
Candranathaka, one of the siddhas, 415 
Gandraparvata, son of Tarapida; 
son or, 738 

Gandrapura, one of the siddhas, 414 
Candravali, image of, 1 38 
Candravarta, characteristics of the 
metre, 913 

Candrayana, an expiation, 328, 471, 
472, 473, 475, 476, 477, 479, 480, 
481, 487, 488 
explanation of, 494 
to be observed for having done cer- 
tain sins, 489 
destroys sin, 491 
merits of practising, 524 
Ganura, a wrestler killed by Kr?na, 28 
capa, a posture of the hands, 857 
a modification of the array danda, 
633 

Gapala, characteristics of the metre 
906, 909 

Capricorn, a constellation, 384, 392 
Garakt, a demoness, 317 
worship of, 274, 275, 276 
materials for the worship of, 1 09 
Carcik&, a mother goddess, 1 39fn 
Carman vati, a sacred place (river), 
327 

carrier, rules relating to, 675 
caru, a sacrificial offering, 58 
Carudesna, born to Vasudeva, 744 
C&ruhasini, characteristics of the 
metre, 907 

Garuka, a type of temple, 314 
cag&la, meaning of the word, 1017 
case, that is rejected by another should 
not be taken up, 656 
cases, the employment of the seven, 
960 

casket, words denoting, 1017 
castes, duties of, 429-31 
duties of different, 465-7 
* words denoting the fourth, 1023 


CatakS, . a monstress affecting the 
child in the fourth year; symptoms 
of the child seized by; offering to 
appease; fumigation and bathing 
when the child is affected by, 824 
catarrh, remedy for, 773 
Catul&devi, a female divinity, 413 
Caturbahu, form of Vi$nu at Pinda- 
raka, 841 

caturmasya, a havir-yajna, 86, 466 
the period for observing, 455 
Caturthika, one of the four acts rela- 
ting to a marriage, 434 
Gaturvaktra, letter denoting, 419 
caturvyavasita,one of the yamakas, 935 
catu$pada, a karapa, 363, 369 
Catu$patra, a variety of bandha, 937 
cause, words denoting, 991 
word denoting primary, 991 
cavalry, functions of; ground suitable 
for; three infantry soldiers needed 
to fight, 632 

the. units needed to protect, 653 
celestial region, astcrisms belonging to, 
388 

celestial women, words denoting, 987 
celibacy, eight kinds of, 1041 
censure, words denoting, 993 
centipedes, reined v for poison due to, 
819 

Ghala, a division of Vithi, 928 
Ghandasatva, a defect of work, 947 
Chandovidhana, science of, 2 
charm, of the shape of the figure of 
Garuqla, efficacy of, 81 1-14 
charms, herbs used in, 405-7 
chariot, ground suitable for; to be 
protected by elephant (men), 632 
chariots, (men on) functions of, 631 
chariot-warriors, work of, 613 
charities, merits of making, 539 
Ghaya, gave birth to Savarnu, Sani, 
Tapati and Vi$p, 735 
an embellishment of word; ex- 
planation of; four kinds of, 932 
Chedani, a goddess, 424 
Ghekoktichayft, explanation of, 932 
chest, five kinds, 930 
chest injury, remedy for, 754 
child, in the womb of mother; des- 
cription of the stages of growth of, 
1032 

period good for first feeding of. 358 
children, of different ages; words 
denoting. 1014 

remedy for cough, vomitting and 
fever of; herbs which would improve 
the speech etc. of, 766 
child’s play, word for, 995 



Index 


1099 


chin, seven actions of, 929 
Cidi, son of Kamika; descendants 
known as Caidyas, 741 
circles, mystic, 375-79 
different kinds of, 870 
Citeyu, one of the ten sons of 
Bhadras'va, 748 

cities, provision of places for different 
people in, 320-21 
vastu relating to, 320-22 
citra, an embellishment of word, 932 
Citra, a type of temple, 31 5 
Citra, an asterism, 339, 360, 361, 363, 
381, 385, 387, 400 
characteristics of the metre, 907 
Citrabhanu, a year of the Hindu calen- 
dar, 404 

citradu$kara, a division of objects to 
be struck by an arrow, 648 
Citragupta, presiding deity of place of 
worship of planets, 467 
Citrakavya, definition of; seven kinds 
of, 935 

Citrakuta, name of a place, 841 
a sacred spot, 328 

Rama’s arrival at the mountain of, 
13, 14 

Citralekhfi, friend of Usii, daughter 
of Ba$a, 30 

Citranga, a form of Rudra, 253 
Citrangada, a Gandharva, 31 
son of Santanu, 3 1 

Citrapada, characteristics of the metre, 
911 

Citraratha, ruler of the Gandharvas, 
47 

son of Ru?adgu; son of, 741 
son of Dharmaratha ; son of, 748 
Citrasena, son of Raucya Manu, 428 
cloth, words relating to different kinds 
of, 1016 

cloud, words denoting, 988 
clouds, words denoting row of, 988 
clouds (thunder), words denoting, 988 
club, wielding of, 649 
Coalescence, explanation of, 944 
Colas, origin of, 747 
colic, remedy for, 768, 776 
intestinal, remedy for, 766 
colours, words denoting different, 902 
words denoting mixed, 992 
commander (s), duties of, 630 
instructions for, 633 
comic sentiment, origin of, 923 
four-fold; description of, 931 
compositions, of different kinds such 
as GonxutrikS, 936 

compounds; divided as eternal and 
nonetermd; examples of; six kinds 
of; divided into 28 kinds, 973 


four-fold classification of; on ac- 
count of proininance of one 
member, 975-76 
concealing, words denoting, 989 
Conceit, origin of, 923 
conch-shell, a variety of, stated to be 
auspicious, 641 

conciliation, a political expedient, 627 
two kinds of, 587 
four kinds of, 627-8 
method of employing, 628 
conduct, codes of, 436-39, 463-65 
towards different people, 618 
five kinds of codes of, 465 
conjecture, word for, 991 
conjugations, the important roots 
belonging to the ten, 982 
conjuring, a political expedient, 627 
consecration, commendable time for, 
361 

of the doors of the temple, 164-69 
304-5 

of the idol, 152-55 
of an image, 96ff, 283-84 
of the images of gods, 180-83 
materials used in, 1 50-51 
mode of doing, 210-113 
of pitchers, 149-51 
preliminary, 155-60 
of tanks and ponds, 173-78 
of a temple, 307-8 
of umbrella etc ; mantras for, 725-28 
constellations, the things they denote, 
358 

constipation, a decoction that is a 
remedy for, 775 

consumption, remedy for, 767, 776 
contemplation, of different kinds, 
1046-1049 

explanation of the term; benefit 
of practice of; mode of, 1 046 
contextual object, words denoting 
thought related to, 993 
continents, names of, 323 

extent and description of, 351-3 
contrivance, explanation of, 945 
conventional, a variety of excellence 
of sense; explanation of, 945 
conversation, words denoting, 993 
word denoting mutual, 993 
cooked rice mixed with milk, words 
denoting, 1017 
coral, auspiciousness of, 641 
coronation of a king; mode of per- 
forming, 566-68 
sacred syllables for, 569-73 
asterism good for, 360 
corrupted word, term denoting, 992 
cough, remedy for, 830 
remedy for five kinds of, 772 



1100 


Agni Purdna 


cough and other ailments, remedy for 
773 

counsel, five kinds of; the type of 
persons with whom the king can 
have, 624-5 

things which would break a secret, 
625 

counsels, words denoting chief, 1018 
counter-suit, could be made when, 
656 

countries, different kinds of; based on 
landscape, 758 

country, description of a prosperous, 
620 

courses, for beings; two kinds of, 1078 
courtiers, the qualities of and selection 
of; should be neutral, 656 
cows, of different kinds; words de- 
noting, 1021-22 
elixir for, 801 

excellence of the six items got from, 
798 

food that yields more milk from, 
801 

fumigation against evil planets for, 
801 

a great gift of thousand, 544 
greatness of, 798, 799, 800 
mantras for the protection of, 835 
merits of making gift of different 
numbers of, 547 

nourishing food for calves of, 801 
propitiatory rites preceding the 
worship of, 801-2 

the purificatory item got from, 799 
oil that removes biliousness of, 800 
prescription for joining broken bones 
of, 800 

pain in the ears of, 800 
wounds of, 801 

remedy for deranged phlegm of, 
800 

diseases affecting the horns of, 800 
diseases of digestive organs etc. of, 
800 

diseases of the flesh of, 800 
dysentery of, 800 
heartaches and stomachache etc. 
of, 800 

pain in the teeth of, 800 
stiffness of, 800 
swelling of the belly of, 835 
toothache and diseases of mouth 
and tongue, 800 

creating dissent, one of the means to 
be employed by the king, 587 
creation, description o £ 39-41 
process of, 1030 
/primary, 48-50 

secondary, description o t, 45-48 


of the world, 39 

cremation, cases when not done, 451 
crystal, a gem; is said to be auspicious, 
641 

Cudakrti, one of the saihskaras, 59 
Culika, characteristics of the metre, 
907 

curiosity, words signifying, 995 
Cfiroaka, a division of prose Kavya, 
918 

Gyavana, son of Suhotra, 750 
Gyuta, a kind of Gitrakavya, 935 
definition of, 936 

Gyutadatta, a kind of Gitrakavya, 935 
definition of, 936 

Dadhi, an ocean, 324 
Dadhimancjodaka, ocean, 352 
Dadhimukha, monkey guarding 
_ honey-garden, 20 
Dadhimukhya, a class of men at 
Kusadvipa, 352 

Dadhivahana, was bom from Anga, 
748 

Dadhivaktra, a monkey, 21 
Dahala, a country, 387 
dainandinl, the creation known as, 49 
Daitya, to be worshipped, 317 
daityas, defeated the devas, 38 
Daityasudana, form of Vi§Qu at 
Prabhasa, 841 

Pakini, a goddess; worshipped, 415 
Dak§a, bom to Pracetas and Marina, 43 
made the ruler of Praj&pati, 47 
Khyati and others married the 
daughters of, 48 

Sati discarded her life on account 
of wrath of, 50 

one of the guards of the doors; 

to be worshipped, 93 
letter denoting, 419 
a law-giver, 455 
Dak$asavami, ninth Manu, 428 
daksiriagnipada, at Gaya, 339 
damanaka, investiture of fibres of, 
225-26 

Daminah, a class of men at Ku£ad- 
vipa, 352 fn 

Damodara, a name of Vi? 9 u, 65 
form of Vi$uu at Raivataka, 842 
a Salagr&ma, 125 
Daihgtr&lk, a goddess, 375 
Danavas, progeny of Danu, 47 
Dagda, one of the three sons of 
Dhundhum&ra, 736 
the name of a temple, 318 
one of the bandhas, 936 
explanation o£ 937 

dauda, an array; description of; other 
arrays which are modifications of 



Index 


1101 


the array called; characteristics of, 
633 

seventeen kinds of arrays could be 
formed from, 634 

characteristics of arrays which are 
modifications of, 633 
yugorasya as a variation of, 634 
valaya, an array formed by union 
of two, 633 
a posture, 857 

Dai^dahasta, one of the eight forms 
of Ganapati, 865 

Da^daka, forest; as excellent, 328 
Rama's arrival at, 1 5 
Sarrigadharin form ofVi?nu at, 842 
characteristics of, 914 
different varieties of, 15 
dandaka, weapon to be used against 
danda of the enemy, 634 
Dandi, an attendant of Sun, 1 95 
Dandi, letter denoting, 419 
Dandin, tawny-coloured; to be wor- 
shipped, 51 

beads belonging to the Savitra 
class, 894 

Danu, a demoness; progeny of, 46, 
46fn, 47 

Darbha, one of the sons of Ay us, 739 
darbha, grass, 58, 94, etc. 
darkness, words denoting, 995 
darsa, union of Sun and Moon, 990 
Darsanl, letter denoting, 417 
darsapaurnamasa, a haviryajfta, 86, 466 
dart, measurement of, 649 
Daruka, letter denoting, 419 
dasa, denotes a herb, 407 
Dasagriva, denotes Ravaqia, 20 
Dasaratha, son of Aja, 9 
four sons of, 10, 738 
saw the angry Kaikeyi, 1 2 
Hanuman's narration of the story 
of, 19 

praised Rama for having slain 
Ravaqa, 23 

Dasarha, another name of Viduratha, 
742 

Dasarna, the seven hunters of, 349 
Dasasvamedha, at Gaya, 338 
Dasyus, a class of men, 38 
Datta, a kind of Gitrakavya, 935 
definition of, 936 

Dattatrcya, manifestation of the Tri- 
nity of gods, 8 
form of Vis^u, 131 
bom to Atri and AnasCya, 49 
Dattoli, son of Pulastya and Priti, 49 
dawn, words denoting, 990 
day, words denoting, 990 
words "denoting past, current and 
future, 1000 


dead, recipes which would revive, 772 
death, the process of, 1037-8 
medicines which would conquer, 779 
medicine that overcomes prema- 
ture, 778-9 

dcbt(s), definition of, 654 

discharge of; astcrism governing, 
358 

rules relating to, 659-61 
deceit, a political expedient, 587, 627 
deeds, merits of good, 451 

need for performing virtuous, 901 
defect, of meaning is twofold — general 
and particular, 947 
Dehadhyti, propitiation of, 176 
deities, names and worship of female, 
292 

presiding over the asterisms, lunar 
days etc., 805 
worship of, 806 

presiding over different things, 542 
sacred bathing of, 7 1 6-7 
deliberation, word denoting, 991 
deluge, words denoting, 990 
demon, words denoting, 986, 988 
deposit, definition of the term; rules 
relating to, 661 

Depth, explanation of the composi- 
tion known as 945 

depth, words denoting different, 996 
desires, renunciation of; praise of 
knowledge gained by, 107 
Dcva, form of Vi$riu at Raivataka, 841 
one of the deities to be located in 
the body, 414 

Dcvabhoga, one of the siddhas, 414 
devadatta, a life-force, 257 
carried by the vein huhu, 556 
functions of, 557 

Devadevesa, form of Vi$nu on the 
Sahya mountain, 842 
Devaduti, a spirit possessing the 
child in the eleventh year; sym- 
ptoms of the child possessed by; 
offering and fumigation when the 
child is possessed by, 825 
Devahuti, wife of Kardama; progeny 
of, 41, 41 fn 

Devaka, son of Ahuka; sons of; dau- 
ghters of, 742 

Devaki, one of the daughters of 
Devaka; married by Vasudeva, 26, 
26 fn, 742 

as a manifestation of Aditi, 744 
was worshipped by Knpa, 28 
Devak$etra, son of Devar&ta; son ot, 
742 

Devakuta, a boundary mountain, 325 
Devala, exposition made by, 1074 
son of PratyO$a, 44 



1102 


Agni Purdna 


devala, a caste, 430 
Dcvamidhu$a, born in the line of 
Dhrfta, 743 

Dev&nika, son of Sudhanva; son of, 
738 

Devantaka, a demon, 22 
Devapi, one of the sons of Santanu, 751 
Devarata, one of the sons of Visva- 
mitra, 749 

Dcvar&ta, son of Karambha: son of, 
742 

Devarha, one of the ten sons of Hj dika ; 
son of, 743 

devas, the battle between asuras and, 
34, 35, 38 

benefit of worship of, 40 
Devavan, son of Rudra Savariju Manu, 
428 

son of Dcvaka, 742 
Devavara, a manifestation of Visnu, 
428 

Devavarnini, first wife of Visravas, 
24 fn 

Devavrata, 333 (See Dharmavrata) 
Devavfdha, one of the four sons of 
Satvata; son of, 742 
Devavrt, mountain, 352 
Devayani, daughter of Sukra; was 
married by Yayati, 25, 25fn., 740 
Devi, significance of the term 994 
Devika, a river, 526 
a holy place, 327 
Devivrata, explanation of, 525 
Dhairya, son of Jyoti$mat, 352 
Dhamani, image of; governs the north, 
138 

dhananjaya, a life-force, 257 
carried by the vein sankhini, 556 
functions of, 557 

Dhananjaya, a divinity worshipped in 
the east, 316 

dhani?tha, an asterism, 359, 360, 361, 
363, 376, 381, 382, 385, 388 
dhanufi pak?a, an array; characteri- 
stics of, 633 

Dhanus, a constellation, 367, 368 fn. 
Dhanvantari, a form of Vi$iiu, 6 
was born from Dirghatamas; son 
of, 749 

science of medicine propounded 
to Suiruta by, 751fF 
Dhanya, a class of men in Kraunca- 
dvfpa, 352 

dhany&ka, a herb, 407 
Dhara, one of the Vasus, 44 
dh&raQ&, definition of, 454 
explanation of the term, 1076 
(See also retention) 
c&araQl, a stone, 269 


Dharika, a female deity, 292 
Dhari$i, daughter of the manes and 
Svadha, 49 

dharma, a puru$artha protected by 
Vi?riu, 23 

Vibhi$ana was deep-rooted in, 24 
Bhlsma’s discourse on, 36 
the homa that bestows, 53 
Dharma, alternate reading for Dhara, 
44fn 

Dharma, married ten daughters of 
Dak$a, 44 

Dharma, god of virtue, 32, 332 
worshipped, 51 
worship of, 286 
son of Gandhara; son of, 747 
dharmadrona, a hymn, 349 
Dharmanetra, son of Haihaya; son of, 
740 

Dharmapala, a minister of King 
Das'aratha, 1 1 

Dharmaraja, denotes Yudhi§thira, 
33, 37 

Dharmaranya, a sacred spot at Gaya, 
337 

Dharmaratha, son of Diviratha; son 
of, 748 

dharrnas, the origion of heretics devoid 
of Vcdic, 38 

Dharmasastra, science of, 2 
Dharmasavarni, eleventh Manu, 428 
Dharmatirtha, a holy place, 327 
Dharmavati, wife of Dharma, 332 
Dharmavrata, daughter of Dharma; 
married by Marici, 332 
Marici’s curse on, 333 
Dharmesa, a divinity worshipped, 
108 

Dharmeyu, one of the ten sons of 
BhadrasVa, 748 

Dharmopama, explanation of, 940 
Dharsfaka, race of; was from Dhj^ta, 
one of the sons of Vaivasvata Manu, 
736 

Dhata, a form of Rudra, 252 
a year of the Hindu calendar, 404 
Dhataki, son of Savana, 353 
Dhatf, one of the Adityas, 45, 136 
worship of, 176 
saluted, 50, 50fn 
adored, 88 

Dhatr, a celestial; son of Bhfgu and 
Khyati, 49 
dhatri, herb, 407 
Dh&trl, a female deity, 292 
dhattura, black; herb, 406 
Dhaumakalpa, a kalpa period, 733 
Dhaumya, sage, 33 

Dh&vani, a monstress afflicting the 



Index 


1103 


child in the sixth year; symptoms 
of the child afflicted by; offering to 
appease; fumigation and bathing 
when the child in afflicted by, 824 
Dhenu, one of the varieties of Gomu- 
trika-bandha, 937 

dhenu, a posture of the hand, 196, 205, 
208, 273 

Dhenuka, a demon, 27 
Dhenuka, a forest, 344 
Dhenumat, son of Jyotismat, 352 
Dhenupada, at Gaya, 344 
dhenuvrata, mode of practising, 522 
Dhiman, son of Mahavirya, 323 
Dhisana, of the family of Agni; pro- 
geny of, 43 

Dhr§nu, son of Kuhura; son of, 742 
Dhrsfa, one of the eight sons of 
Vaivasvata Manu, 735 
One of the sons of Asamanjas; 
two wives of, 743 

Dhf?tadyumna, son of Drupada; son 
of, 750 

fate of army headed by, 35 
Dhfstaka, son of Kunti; son of, 742 
Dhr?takctu, son of Dhr$tadyumna, 750 
Dhfstokta, one of the sons of Karta- 
vlrya, 741 

Dhftaketu, son of Daksasavarni Manu, 
428 

Dhftarasfra, begot by Kr$Qa Dvai- 
payana through the wife of Vici- 
traviryaka, 751 
born to Ambika, 31 
Pandavas’ destruction of the sons of, 
34 

resorted to the forest after the war, 36 
beads belonging tojyoti class, 894 
Dhrti, a form of Hari, 91 
son of Dhrsi^u; son of, 742 
wife of Nandi, 739 
name of a metre, 905 
Dhftiman, a son of Pururavas, 739 
Dhruva, son of Uttanapada and Suniti, 
41 

story of, 41 fn 
as a celestial star, 42 
Dhruva, one of the Vasus, 44 

one of the seven sons of Medhati- 
thi; after whom the country was 
named, 351 

dhuli, auspiciousness of gem called, 641 
Dhumini, wife of Ajamidha, 750 
Dhumra, a monkey, 2 1 
Dhumrak?a, a demon killed by Hanu- 
mat, 22 

Dhumra varna, a name of the elephant- 
faced god, 866 

Dhundhu«a demon killed by Kuvali- 

Sva, 73o 
9 * 


Dhundhumara, name of Kuvalasva 
as he killed the demon Dhundhu; 
the three sons of, 736 
Dhuni, son of Yuyudhana alias 
Satyaki; son of, 743 
dhustura, a flower for worshipping 
lord Hara, 529 

Dhvani, alternate reading for Muni, 
44fn 

stated as identical with any one of 
the figures like Ak$epa, 943, 944 
dhvarik§i, denotes the entry of the Sun 
in one of the signs, 362 
dhyana, definition of, 454 

explanation of the term 1076 
diabetes, remedy for, 753 
diamond, a gem, 640 

auspiciousness of and qualities of 
a good, 641 

diarrhoea, excellent remedies for, 754, 
767 

diction, four kinds of, 927 
digestion, remedy that stimulates, 778 
digestive power, remedy to restore, 775 
dik, herb denoted by, 406, 407 
Dilipa, son of Aimuman; son of, 737 
son of Raghu; son of, 737 
Dima, a type of drama, 92 1 
dipaka, a perfection, 257 
Dipani, letter denoting, 4 1 7 
Dipta, a female divinity; worshipped, 
51 

Diptamaya, a hell, 1039 
Diptikarana, a Rudra, 254 
Diptiman, a sage, 428 
Diptimati, a female deity, 292 
direction, words denoting, 988 
Dirghabahu, son of Aja; son of, 737 
Dirghatamas, son of Kasi (Kausika?) ; 

son o£ 749 
disc, uses of, 651 
disciple, qualities of, 804 
anointment of, 263-4 
discussion, word denoting, 991 
diseases, different kinds of, 83 

words denoting different; words 
denoting persons free from ill- 
ness, 1014-15 

four kinds of; description of; re- 
medies for; making gifts to get 
rid of, 757 

mental; hymn on Vi$nu for, 758 
excessive eating as cause of, 760 
of children; remedies for, 766 
general remedies for all, 769 
forty kinds of, due to deranged 
bile; twenty kinds of, due to 
deranged phlegm, remedy for 
eighty kinds of; due to deranged 
wind, 774 



1104 

caused by planets, remedy for, 829 
disgust, origin of the sentiment, 923 
sentiment of; is twofold; arises from 
aversion, 932 

dispute, explanation of the matters 
for, 654-55 

dispute, the preliminary procedures 
relating to; before taking up for 
discussion; termed as miscellaneous; 
being annoyed contrary to codes 
is a matter for, 656 

disputes, words denoting discussions 
relating to, 992 

four steps relating to; eighteen kinds 
of and one hundred divisions of; 
should be examined by the king, 
656 

qualifications of witnesses, 661-2 
relating to boundaries; procedures 
for solving, 670-71 
disrespect, words meaning, 995 
dissension, a political expedient, 627 
three kinds of; means of employing, 
628 

as a means to win an enemy, 631 
dissolutions, of four kinds; description 
of, 1028-9 

description of the absolute, 1030 
Diti, wife of Kasyapa; progeny of, 45 
mother of the demons, 7 fn 
lost her offspring and propitiated 
Kasyapa, 47 
worship of, 274 
worshipped, 317 

Divaspati, Indra during the period 
of the thirteenth Manu, 428 
Divij&ta, a son of Pururavas, 739 
divine edifice, general characteristics 
of, 313-16 

Diviratha, was the next king after 
Dadhiv&hana; son of, 748 
Divodasa, popular name of Hemara- 
tha; son of one of the progeny of 
Caficasva, 749 
progeny of, 750 
Divy&, a goddess, 375-376 
Doahaka, characteristics of the metre, 
912 

dog, remedy for poison due to, 820 
dog-bite, remedy for poison due to, 756 
DohinI, letter denoting, 418 
dramas, names of twentyseven types of; 
I two courses of characteristics of; 
means of attaining threefold end 
of life; thirty two components of, 921 
explanation of opening in, 922 
dramatic representation, four ways of; 

explanation of, 930 
DtfeuQi, (Aivatth&mft) a sage, 428 
survived the Mah&bn&rata battle, 36 


Agni Purdna 

Draupadl, married by the Pandavas, 
32, 751 

stayed in the forest with Pindavas, 33 
Asvatthama’s destruction of the 
sons of, 35 
fall of, 37 

Dravarasa, son of Madhu; son of, 742 
Dravidi, characteristics of, 934 
Dravina, son of Dhara, 44 
dftlha, a division of objects to be 
struck by an arrow, 648 
dftUiaka, a modification of the array 
called da^ida, 633 

array formed by adding wings 
and flanks, 634 

Dfdbaratha, son of Navaratha; son 
of, 742 

Dfdbasva, one of the three sons of 
Dhundhumara; the two sons of, 
736 

Dfdhayus, a son of Pururavas, 739 
dreams, significance of, 595-6 

recollection of the experience in 
the waking state, 1056 
drinks, not intoxicating, 487 
Droria, conferred weapons on Arjuna, 
32 

Arj una’s apathy to fight on seeing, 

description of the fight of, 35 
Draunu as son of, 36 
a boundary mountain, 352 
dropsy, remedy for, 752-3 
Dnadvati, wife of Usinara, 747 
dntam, fear known as, 1019 
Druhya, one of the three sons of 
Yayati and Devayani, 740 
Druhyu, son of Yayati and $armi$tha, 
25 

son of G&ndhara, 747 
Druma, son of Havya, 352 
drunkenness, remedy for distemper 
due to, 754 

Drupada, son of Prsata; son of, 750 
on whose words Sikhandi showered 
arrows on Bhi$ma, 34 
Drona’s shower of arrows on, 35 
drupada, hymn, 437 
drupadat, a hymn, 562 
Drutamadhya, characteristics of the 
metre, 910 

Drutavilambita, characteristics of the 
metre, 912 

Dugdha, an ocean, 324 
Duhkha, bom to Vedana, 49 
Dub&sana, brother of Duryodhana; 

directed the dice-play, 33 
Dundubhi, demon slain by Valin, 17, 
17fh 

son of Dyutim&t, 352 



Index 


1105 


a year of the Hindu almanac, 405 
a boundary mountain, 351, 352 
dundubhi, a type of temple, 315 
durdhara, a hell, 532 
Durdama, one of the sons of Vasudeva 
and Rohi^i, 744 
durdina, denotes a bad day, 989 
Durga, the other names of, 26 
day of getting up, 362 
image of, 1 32 

outlines on cloth of the form of, 402 
worshipped, 50, 52 
investiture of sacred thread for image 
of, 215 

benefits of propitiating, 404 
Durgasena, son of Bhadrasenaka; son 
of, 740 

durjaya, an array; a modification of 
the array masala; has eight army 
units, 634 

an array; made up of four valayas, 
635 

Durjaya, son of Ananta, 741 
Durjaya, image of, 1 38 
Durmallika, a type of drama, 921 
Durmati, a year of the Hindu almanac, 
405 

Durmukha, a year of the Hindu al- 
manac, 405 

Durmukhi, a goddess, 375 
durva, a kind of grass, 94 
Durvasas, son of Atri and Anasuya, 49 
curse on celestials by, 5 
Duryodhana, son of Dhrtarasfra and 
Gandhari, 3 1 

Karima became a dependent on, 32 
refuses to give half the kingdom, 33 
going for battle at Kuruk?etra, 34 
army of, 35 

seen by Yudhi$thira on the way to 
heaven, 38 
Dugana, demon, 16 

commander of Khara; was killed by 
R&ma, 16 fn 

Du$kara, an embellishment of word, 932 
a kind of Yamaka; three kinds of; 
explanations of, 936 
du$kara, a division of objects to be 
struck by an arrow, 648 
Du$tacam;ialika, a female divinity, 
411 

Du?yanta, son of Marutta; son of, 747 
one of the four sons of Taxhsurodha; 
wife of; son of, 749 
Duti, a female divinity, 411 
duties, as laid down in the Vedas; 

excellence of, 1074 
Dv&da&tman, a Salagr&ma, 126 
Dvaip&yanas, Rgveda as the autho- 
rity for, 730 


Dvairatha, a son of Jyoti$mat, 352 
Dvandva (compound), two kinds of— 
itaretarayoga and sam&h&ra; ex- 
amples of, 975 

dvapara, a yuga; division of Veda at 
the end of, 429 

Dvaravati, city founded by Raivata, 
736 

a sacred spot, 327 
made as his capital by 28 

Kjsiia’s return to, 743 
Aniruddha brought to Soriitapura 
by U$a from, 30 
solutation to the fortunes of, 50 
repetition of the name of Kf?oa at, 
841 

was flooded by ocean, 37 
dvidvadasa, denotes the second and 
twelfth houses, 357 
Dvigu (compound), having a number 
as the first member, 975 
Dvimidha, one of the three sons of 
Bfhat, 749 

Dvimurdhan, one of the sons of 
Hiragyak§a, 46 

Dviraqujaka, letter denoting, 419 
dvisthupa, an array; characteristics of, 
633 

Dvivida, a monkey that accompanied 
Rama for the battle at Lanka, 21 
killed by Krroa as he avenged the 
death of Naraka, 30, 30 fn 
Dwarf, Vi$Qu's manifestation as; as son 
of Kafyapa, and Aditi, 745 
alms sought from Bali by, 8 
obeisance made to, 82, 83 
characteristics of the image of, 129 
dysentery, medicine for, 752 
infantile; remedy for, 766 
remedy for; remedy for long 
standing, 768 

of acute nature; remedy for, 777 
accompanied by swelling; remedy 
for, 777 

Dyuti, wife of Vibhavasu, 738-9 
dyuta, a flower, 529 
Dyutiman, ruled Kraufica, 322 
Dyutimat, a boundary mountain; 
son of, 352 

ear, pain in; remedy for, 755 
bleeding of; remedy for 766 
ear-ache, remedy to remove, 777 
earth, extent of, 353 
and parts of, words denoting, 1005-6 
best suited for installation of an 
image, 267 
a great gift, 544 

merits of and mode of making, 555-6 



1106 


Agni Purina 


saluted, 50 

eclipse, merits of making a gift at the 
time of, 362 

Ekacakra, city, Paodavas stay at, 32, 
32 fn 

Ekadarh$tra, a name of the elephant- 
faced £od, 190 
ekadaruhn, an ascetic, 454 
Ekadanta, one of the eight forms of 
Gaijapati, 865 
Ekanetra, a Rudra, 263 
letter denoting, 419 
Ekiiighri, a guardian deity, 284 
Ekap&da, letter denoting, 419 
Ekarudr&k$a, a Rudra, 263 
Ekavira, mode of worship of Gauri 
according to, 897 
ekodditfa* ceremony, 459 
mode of performing, 348 
Elegance, relating to Gui^a; explana- 
tion of, 945 

elephant, words denoting things re- 
lating to, 1019 
ground suitable for, 632 
elephant (golden) and horse, a great 
gift, 544 

elephantiasis, remedy for, 768 
elephants, men mounted on; func- 
tions of, 631 

needed to protect a chariot, 632 
three cavalry (men) to be emplo- 
yed to fight with, 632 
elephants, characteristics of; treatment 
of their diseases, 781-83 
having commendable qualities to 
be possessed, 781 
diseases of the legs of, 782 
remedy for all sorts of disorders of, 
782 

remedy for colics of, 783 
constipation of, 781 
dysentery of, 782 
earache of, 782 
fainting of, 781 
the fevers of, 781 
. worms in the intestines of, 782 
jaundice of, 781 

the disease known as <katu’ of, 782 
loss of appetite of, 782 
injuries of, 783 
stiffness of neck of, 782 
shivering of, 782 

the enlargement of spleen of, 782 
numbness of trunk of, 782 
~emoval of excess wind in the 
bodies of, 781 

propitiatory rites for curing the 
ailments of, 795-98 
anointment for, 783 
anointment for headache of, 781 


bed for, 783 

excellent colly rium for, 783 
cooling agent for the eyes of, 783 
for sharpening the eyesight of, 783 
dried barley for deranged humours 
of, 783 

kind of food good for, 783 
incense which makes them victori- 
ous in battle, 783 
milk as a drink for emaciation due 
to rutting in, 783 

nails of ; cutting of; should be bathed 
with oil once in a month, 783 
prescription that increases the 
strength of, 783 

medicine for drinking in the case 
of retention of urine of, 782 
excellent drink for wounds of, 782 
elevated thinking, word signifying, 995 
embellishment, of senses; eight kinds 
of, 939 

of both sound and sense; six varieties 
of, 942-44 

embellishments, word, meaning and 
both; of words, nine kinds of; ad- 
ding beauty to poetry; three kinds 
of, 932 

embryo, words relating to, 1014 
emerald, a gem, 640 
qualities of a good, 641 
emetic, commended in the case of 
hemorrhage, 752 
the best, 757 

decoction which would, serve as, 769 
a decoction that serves as a good, 778 
emotions, eight transient, 924-6 
inter-dependent on sentiment, 924 
empire, seven constituents of, 585 
employer, has the option to pay an 
employee for overtime, 674 
endeavour, the five kinds of, 922 
enemies, three kinds of, 605 

opportune moments to win on the 
sides of an array; means to win, 
631 

enemy, definition of an; ways to 
conquer an, 627 

in one’s own soil or another’s soil; 
means to win, 631 
enmity, five kinds of, 623 
epics, merits of making a gift of, 735 
epilepsy, remedy for long standing, 773 
remedies for, 829 
craridamufldi herb, 407 
erotic, origin of the sentiment; two- 
fold; subdivided into two; four- 
fold divisions of a division of, aids of, 
931 

erotic sport, words denoting, 995 
eternally, words denoting, 988 



Index 


1107 


eunuch, words which are used in the 
sense of, 1014 

euphonic combinations, examples of, 
954-57 

evening, words denoting, 990 
events, preliminary and later; the 
strength of, 657 
evidences, in a lawsuit, 657 
fine for false, 663 

excellence, adds charm to poetry; 
exists in two forms, 944 
of word ; seven kinds of, 944 
of sense; six varieties of, 945 
of words and sense; six varieties of, 
946 

excess, words denoting, 988 
excitant, two kinds of; supportive; the 
influence of the emotions asso- 
ciated with; the nature of enhan- 
cing, 926 

of women are twelve, 927 
exercise, rules relating to doing, 764 
exertion, of the body regarded as 
gestures of the body, 928 
expedients, six kinds of, 606-8 
the seven political, 627 
expedition, definition of, 607 

instructions relating to military, 594 
propitious periods for undertaking, 
604 

expiations, different kinds of; subtle 
kinds of, 482-3 
different kinds of, 485 
destroying sins, 490 
for association with sinners, 478-82 
for discontinuing the worship of 
gods, 490-92 

factors to be examined before lay- 
ing down, 486 

expression, two forms of natural form 
of, 939 

extraneous matter, detection of, 268, 
269 

eye, remedy for all diseases of; white- 
ness in; remedy for; ointment for 
external part of, 755 
eye-brow, sevenfold movement of, 929 
eyesight, prescription that strengthens, 
778 

face, six kinds of actions of, 929 
fame, words signifying, 993 
fasting, rules relating to and benefits 
of, 492 

as superior austerity, 1074 
ferry charges, words tor, 996 
festivals, celebrations of, 184-86 
feet, manifold action of, 930 
feudatories, duties of, 626 
fever, medicines for, 752 


due to deranged wind; remedy for 
772 

due to deranged wind and bile; 
remedy for, 772 

due to tumour; remedy for, 774 
fever and other ailments, decoction 
of herbs for, 772 

fever with other ailments, remedy for, 
773, 774 

fevers, remedy for all, 772 
fevers and other ailments, remedy for, 
774 

fine arts, sixtyfour varieties of; two 
divisions of, 926 

fines, different kinds of; for different 
offences, 589-93, 676-79, 681 
for various offences, 682-3 
fire, as the best sweating agept, 757 
a prescription which would enable 
one to walk on, 770 
fire, spark of; words denoting, 988 
sphere of; asterisms belonging to, 
387 

words denoting flames of, 988 
words denoting submarine, 988 
Fire (god), 60, 215 
mode of installation of, 205-1 1 
Fish, Visnu’s manifestation as, 3 ff., 9, 
129 

image of, 116 

fisherman, words denoting, 996 
fistula, remedy for, 775 

anointment for wounds in, ointment 
which arrests its spread, 767, 768 
flagstaff, material for making; length 
of, 308 

consecration of, 308-1 1 
floods, words denoting overflow of, 
995 

flowers, eight kinds of gestures re- 
ferred to as; eight different things 
as scat etc. referred to as, 530 
words which mean arrangement 
of, 1017 

food, two parts; one getting secreted 
and the other getting absorbed, 758 
forest, words which mean, 1006 
formula, for conquering the three 
worlds, 396-7 

for success in battle, 397-400 
formulae, presided over by different 
gods, and their characteristics, 895 
having more than five letters fruit- 
ful always, 802 
fort, defects of, 626 
fortress, to be built on hills, 620 
forts, construction of, 576-7 
the situation of; the six kinds of, 620 
fragrance, word for; word for attra- 
ctive, 991 



1108 


Agni Purina 


word denoting object having good, 
992 

Friday, for first feeding of a child, 358 
for first shave of a child, 359 
should not enter the cow-pen on, 361 
causes death with certain asterisms, 
376 

causes afflictions with certain aster- 
isms, 377 

inauspicious if coincides with se- 
cond day, 381 

R&hu rules in the east on, 409 
friend, the three gains got through a, 
621 

friends, four kinds of, G2 1 
friendship, qualities of men with 
whom king should make; means 
of acquiring, 621 
fright, origin of the sentiment, 924 
fruits, asterism for eating, 358 
fruits of action, three, 1072 
fumigation, herbs used in, 583-4 
fundamental principles, worship of, 
291 


Gabhastika, a name of the Sun, 136 
Gabhastiman, one of the territory, 
350 

Gabhastimat, a nether world, 353 
Gad&, a demon killed by Vi?nu, 334 
gada (mace), used for acts such as 
&hata etc., 651 

gads (mace), methods of using of, 652 
gads, a posture, 857 
a type of temple, 315 
GadSdhara, form of Vi§Qu at Gaya, 
841 


killed Heti and other demons, 334 
merits of worshipping, 337 
Gadaloka, sacred place at Gaya, 340, 
341 

GadSprak$Slana, sacred place, 340 
GSdhi, Indra; was bom from Kufika; 

son and daughter of, 749 
Gadini, a goddess, 376 
Gagana, a deity assigned on the body, 


GaganSnandadeva, worshipped, 414 
GaganSnandanStha, a deity, 413 
gahana, a posture relating to the riding 
of horses, 787 
gaja, a type of temple, 315 
Gajavaktra, an appellation of ele- 
phant-faced god, 190,865 
galaganda, a disease; remedy for, 766 
Galana, letter denoting the divinity, 

419 


GSlava, a PaflcarStra tantra, 106 
GantanopamS, explanation of, 941 
G&mbhirya, an excellence of word; 


(see also depth) , 944 
gambling, different types, 655 
rules relating to, 675 
evil results of, 627 
Gana, worship of, 197 
obeisance to, 51 

Ganacchandas, description of, 905 
Ganadhipa, one of the eight forms of 
Ganapati, 190, 865 
Canakriqla, one of the names of 
Gai^esa, 190 

Gananayaka, one of the names of 
Garies'a, 190 

Ganapati, elephant-faced god to be 
worshipped, 190 
different names of, 877 
of the form of pranava, 412 
mode of worship of, 876-78 
Ganapati, eight forms of ; worship of, 
865-66 

Ganas, worshipped, 51 
gaiias, relating to metres, explanation 
of, 906 

Ga?d a » a division of Vithi, 928 
ganqla, an adverse period, explanation 
of, 382 

period of, 383 

gandamal5, a disease, remedy for, 766 
gai^d anta > an adverse period, des- 
cription of, 382 
Gandhamadana, a monkey, 21 
a mountain, 324, 325 
a forest, 325 

Gandhara, son of Gai^jira, sons of, 
the descendants of, 747 
Gandharas, origin of, 747 
G&ndharl, one of the wives of Kj-§na, 
744 

one of the two wives of Dhrofci 743 
wife of Dhftarastra* 31 
accompanied her husband to the 
forest, 36 

gandhari, a vein, carries the wind 
ud&na, functions o£ 556 
Gandharva, located in a square for 
worship , 108 
worshipped, 316 
Gandharva, the science of, 3 
a territory, 350 

g&ndharva, a type of marriage, 435 
Gandharvas, bom to Ari$ta, 47 
names of, 987 

Gitraratha made the ruler of, 47 
Kf$na married the daughter of, 28 
milking of die cow in the company 
of, 43 

ride on the chariot of the Sum 356 
prayer to destroy evil forces of, 84 
gandhafasyaka, a gem (?), 641 
Gandhavati, spirit possessing the 



Index 


1109 


child in the seventeenth year, 
symptoms of the child possessed 
by, offering to appease, 826 
Gan^ira, son of Varutha, son of, 747 
Gaijujiva the bow got from Fire-god, 32 
Gandhi vftta, a division of prose kavya, 
918 

Ganesa, other names of, 190, 987 
establishment of image of, 116 
mode of worshipping, 189-90 
obeisance to, 1 

Gapesvara, one of the eight forms of 
Ganapati, 865 

Ganga (Ganges), words denoting 
celestial, 987 

brought down from heavens by 
Bhagiratha, 737 

had Bhi§ma as the son from Santanu, 
31, 751 

sacred, 350, 491 
excellence of, 1074 
greatness of, 328-29 
greatness of its confluence with 
Sarasvati, 327 

greatness of its confluence with 
Gomati, 328 
always meritorious, 436 
greatness of land adjacent to, 329, 
330 

water at the time of eclipse getting 
the sanctity of, 362 
purifies the bather, 331 
purifies one by mere remembrance, 

355 


Vi$nu to be contemplated at the 
confluence of the river with the 
ocean, 841 
worship of, 197 
adored, 50, 88 
worshipped, 5 1 

Gangadvara (Haridvara), not easily 
accessible, 330 

Gangavi?nu, exposition made by, 1074 
gafij&, said to be auspicious, 641 
gara, an astral combination (karana), 
363, 369fn 

Garbha, one of the five sons of Vitatha, 
749 

Garbhadh&na, a rite, 59, 71, 86, 95, 
112 

garden, words for, 1006-7 
G&rgya, a Paficaratratantra, 106 
g&rhapatyapada, at Gaya, 339 
garuda, an array, 612 
Garuda, bom from Vinat& and Ka£- 
yapa 46, 63fn 

was made as the chief of the birds, 
47 _ 

Kttol a* riding, 28, 30 
installation of the image o£ 173 


benefit of worshipping, 343 
worshipped, 5 1 (See also Vainateya) 
Garudamandapa, a shed in a temple, 
115 

Garudapurana, narrated by lord Vi?pu 
in the Tark$akalpa, describes the 
birth of Garuda from the Universal 
Egg, should be given as a gift, 734 
Garudi, name of a herb, efficacy of, 
378 

garutman, a type of temple, 315 
Gatha, definition of the metre, 915 
Gatra, one of the sons of Yasi$tha and 
Urja, 49 

Gaudiyd, a variety of diction, cha- 
racteristics of, 927 

Gauri (Parvati ) , renounced by Siva, 6 
seen by U?;t as sporting with Siva, 29 
image of, 1 39 

installation of image of, 172, 302-3 
at Gaya, benefit of worship of, 343 
to be worshipped, 1 33 
different modes of worship of, 896-99 
adored, 1, 51, 52 
characteristics of the metre, 91 3 
gaurinavamivrata, mode of practising, 
509-10 

Gautama, a law-giver, 455 
Gavak$a, a monkey, 2 1 
Gava, given as one of the sons of, 
Uru and Agneyi, but Sibi according 
to Vi?pupurai?a, 42 
a demon, legend relating to, 332-35 
son of Dhi$ai^a of the family of 
Agni, 43 

a son ofSudyumna, ruled over all 
the quarters, 735 

one of the five sons of Vitatha, 749 
son of Nakta, 323 
a monkey, 21 

Gaya, a sacred place, 350, 491 
ruled by Gaya (Gayapuri*), 735 
extent of, 334 

Brahmd’s curse on the brahmins 
at, 338 

mode of pilgrimage to, 335-44 
mode of performing sraddha at, 
345-50 

Janardana as ancestors at, 342 
merits of performing ancestral rites 
at, 335 

significance and greatness of, 332-35 
Gadadhara to be contemplated at, 
841 

sacredness of image of Brahmd at, 
106 

Gayaked&ra, at Gayd, obeisance made 
to 339 

Gayan&bhi, at Gayd, one should offer 
piflda at, 342 



1110 


Agni Purtina 


Gay£siras, at Gaya, 337, 342 
extent of, 338 
G&yatri, a metre, 562 
number of letters in, 902 
the number of letters in a quarter of, 
902-3 

white coloured, belongs to Agni- 
veiyajptra, 905 

appropnate time for recital of, 916 
mantra, name of the gods presiding 
over the letters of the colours 
associated with, 560-1 
mode of reciting, the greatness of, 
559-63 

use of, 87, 87fn 
should be recited, 437 
destroys sins when repetition is 
made, 491 

merits of doing oblations with, 561 
explanation of, 563-4 
that is known as ajap&, 557-8 
mantra personified as goddess, 
white in complexion, born in 
the Katyayani gotra, 561 
letter denoting, 418 
gem, in the serpents, auspiciousness 
of, 641 

Gemini, commendable for marriage 
when ruled over by certain asterisms, 
357 

relating to worship of Visnu, 361 
good for agriculture, 361, 
a special designation of, presence 
of Sun in, 362 

time taken by the Sun to cross, 384 
friendly with Sagittarius, 392 
gems, words denoting the place of 
origin of, 996 
eight kinds of, 283 
characteristics of, 640-641 
good characteristics of, 641 
asterisms suitable for wearing, 359 
to be worn by a king, 640 
genealogy, words which mean, 1017 
germ (in a play), explanation of, 922 
gestures, eight kinds of, 530 
twelve kinds of, explanation of 
five of, 928-9 
Ghana, a Rudra, 254 
Ghan&ntasth&, a female energy, 136 
Ghan&yus, a son of Pururavas, 739 
Ghaptfa, a female divinity, 375 
gha$t&, one of the postures of the hand, 
857 

Ghattf&devi, a female divinity, 379 
Ghai?t5kan?a, image of, 1 35 
GhaQt&li, an evil spirit which possesses 
a child on the third night after 
birth, 821 

symptoms of the child possessed by, 


offering to appease, unguent for 
the child possessed by, 821 
Ghatakacakra, a mystic diagram to 
know victory etc., 388-9 
Ghafotkaca, son of Bhimasena and 
Hi^imba, 751 

Ghora, a form of Rudra, 253 
located and worshipped, 292 
ghora, signifies the entry of the Sun in 
one of the constellations, 362 
Ghora, a female divinity, worshipped, 
375 

located on the left tooth, 417 
a hell, 1038 
Ghorarupa, a hell, 1 038 
Ghosa, born to Dharma and Lamba, 
44 

Ghrdrika, one of the daughters of 
Tamra, 46 

Ghrta, son of Dharma, son of, 747 
Ghfteyu, one of the ten sons of, 
Bhadrasva, 748 

Ghftoda, an ocean surrounding the 
Kusadvipa, 352 

gift^a political expedient, three kinds 

five kinds of, 628 
mode of making, 544 
suitability of a person to receive, 541 
injunctions on the recipient of, 542 
to be made to poor and greedy for 
winning them, 629 
efficacy of making a, 463 
becomes futile if made expecting 
return, 541 

gift of a cow, mode of making and 
merits of, 545-46 
merits of giving cows as, 547 
offering grains as a best, 544 
of earth, merits and mode of making, 
555-6 

gifts, sixteen great, 544-46 
different kinds of, merits of giving, 
546-52 

proportionate to one’s possession, 546 
as a means to be employed by the 
king, 587 

which confer the desired fruits, 552-55 
rules relating to making, 538, 539-43 
certain rules relating to making, 549 
rules relating to accepting, 543 
common procedures in making all, 
543 

the words to be said while making, 
543 

mode of making, for different 

yugasi 543 

greatness of making different kinds 
of, 544 



Index 


1111 


merits of making, 491, 538, 541, 542 
merits of making different kinds of, 
556 

merits of giving on certain days, 550 
meritorious than performing sacri- 
fices, 551 

girdle, time for tying of, 359 
Girika, queen of Suhotra, propitiated 
Vasigtha and had seven sons, 750 
girikarnika, flower not to be used in 
worship, 529 
a herb, 371 

girivajra, auspiciousness of, 641 
Giti, characteristics of the metre, 906 
Gityarya, characteristics of the metre, 
907 

glance, three-fold, divided into thirty- 
six kinds, 929 
goad, words for, 1019 
Gobhilnu, son of Varga, son of, 747 
goblins, worshipped, 50 

remedy for defects due to, 756 
gocarma, (a measure of surface) 
merits of making a gift of, 547 
Godavari, flows from Sahya, 351 
Janasthana on the banks of, 1 5 
greatness of, 328 
sacredness of, 350 

goddesses, names of different, 420-23 
images of, 132-35, 138-39 
mode of worship of, 23-4 
godhika, an array, consists of five 
units of army, 634 
God of Death, synonyms of, 988 
gods, forms of, represented by the 
vowels and consonants, 873-74 
worship of different, 273-75, 952-3 
consecration of the images of, 180-83 
merits of worshipping different such 
as Rudra, Vi§i?u etc., 900 
gods and goddesses, comprising the 
part of a mantra relating to Brahma, 
420 

comprising the part of mantra 
relating to Vi$$u, 420-21 
comprising the part of mantra 
relating to Siva, 421-22 
installation of images of, 1 7 1 -3 
goitre, a remedy to be used as an 
unguent in, 776 
gokarna, a flower, 529 
gok?uraka, a herb, 407 
Gokula, a place, 27 
Gomantaka, a place, 28 
Gomati, river, confluence with Gafigi 
327, 328 

GomatIvidy&, a sacred formula, effi- 
cacy of mpeating the, 799 
repeated' as an atonement, 475 


gomeda, a gem , said to be auspicious, 
641 

Gomedha, a boundary mountain, 351 
Gomukhi, a spirit possessing the 
child in the third month, symptoms 
of a child possessed by, offering 
to appease, bathing the chila 
possessed by, 823 

gomutrika, an array, a variation of 
array called bhoga, 634, 
an array, modification of bhoga, 635 
Gomutrika, one of the bandhas, two 
kinds of, description of, 936-7 
bandhas, composed in all the metres, 
938 

gonasas, serpents known as, 807 
treatment of poison due to, 818 
good deeds, words denoting, 990 
good people, commendable acts of, 
617-8 

Gopala, beads belonging to Jyoti 
class, 894 

Gopisvara, form of Vi?nu to be con- 
templated on the shore of Sindhu 
ocean, 842 

Gopracara, at Gaya, 341 
gorak$a, a herb, 406 
gosava, a sacrifice, 474 
Go$thi, a type of drama, 921 
gout, of acute nature, an extraction 
of oil of herbs as a remedy for, 775 
remedy for, 755, 767 
Govardhana, a mountain, 841 
govatsadvadasi, mode of practising 
the vow of, 512 

Govinda, a name of Vi$nu, 65 
characteristics of the form of, 1 28 
auspicious day for making an image 
of, 215 

saluted by Indra, 27 
govindadvadasi, mode of practising the 
vow of, 512 

govisanamudra, a posture of the hands, 
196 

govrata, definition of the austerity 
termed as, 799 

graceful, a mode, explanation of, 933-4 
graha, herbs denoted by, 406, 407 
grahagi, one of the praruta mudris, 
857 

gr&hyakaQtak&payana, a posture 
relating to riding of horses, 787 
grains, eight kinds of, 283 
words denoting, and related things, 
1021 

guidelines for storing and selling, 
386-7 

grimaid, ride the chariot of Sun, 356 



1112 


Agni Parana 


grammatical incorrectness, a defect of 
word, 947 

Gramyatva, a defect of word, 947 
Granthika, beads belonging to the 
Siva class, 894 

grazing, rules relating to, 671-72 
Grdhresvara, at Gaya, to be wor- 
shipped, 342 

Gfdhrakuta, at Gaya, balls of rice to 
be offered at, 342 

Gfdhravata, at Gaya, balls of rice to 
be offered, 342 
green, words denoting, 992 
greying of hair, herbs to be used as 
sternutatory to arrest, 774 
grharaja, a type of temple, 314 
grief, need to discard, 1068 
group of gods, words denoting, 986 
ground, period within which owner- 
ship can be claimed, 657 
Gftsapati, one of the two sons of 
Kapila, brahmins, warriors and 
tradesmen as descendants of, 749 
guardian deities, names and worship 
of, 284 

gu^ap&ka, a hell, 532 
Guqlartha, a defect, 944 
gudavrata, merits of practising, 523 
guduci, a herb, 371, 407 
Guha, image of, 106 

hunter chief entertained Rama, 13 
Guhyakubjika, a goddess, 423 
Guhyalaktinl, a female divinity, 416 
Gulma, one of the siddhas, 414 
gumphana, an embellishment of word, 
932 

explanation of, three kinds of, 933 
gurtas, in poetry, the place of, 944 
(see also excellence) 

Gupta, a kind of Gitrakavya, defini- 
tion of, 935 

Gurjara, (region of), 387 
guru, an array, description of, 633 
Gutika, beads belonging to the Savitra, 
class, 894 

haemoptysis, cause of, 760 
haemorrhage, medicines for, 752 
remedies which arrest, 776-777 
Haihaya, one of the sons of Satajit, 
son of, 740 

Haihayas, descendents of Talajafigha, 

741 

h&l&hala, poison, 5 

a deadly poison, Vi$nu’s tenth 
manifestation referred to, as for 
the conquest of; took the poison 
from Maheivara, 746 
Halamukhi, characteristics of the 
nfetre, 91 1 


Hallijaka, a type of drama 921 
Hamsa, beads belonging to Sikha 
clars, 894 

hamsa, a type of temple, 315 
hamsa bija, mantra, efficacy of locat- 
ing, 889 

Haihsadhika, a monstress possessing 
the newly bom child on the fifth 
night, symptoms of child possessed 
by, unguent for the child possessed 
by, offering to appease, 821 
Hamsaruta, characteristics of the 
metre, 911 

Hamsatirtha, at Gaya, 344 
hand, employed in two ways — folded 
and unfolded, thirteen actions of 
the folded, twentyfour actions of 
the unfolded, 930 

Hanumat, Rama taken to Sugriva by, 
17 

searched the southern direction, 18 
crossed the ocean, 19 
words spoken to Sita by, 20 
accompanied Rama to Lanka, 21 
killed Dhumraksa, 22 
bore Laksmana to Nikumbhila, 22 
brought Sita to Rama as directed, 23 
figure of, 137 
accomplishes all acts, 379 
Hara, poison retained by Siva, 5 
one of the eleven forms of Siva, 45 
made as lord of the goblins, 47 
letter denoting 418 (See Siva) 
harem, words denoting superinten- 
dent of, 1018 

Hari, a manifestation of Vi^riu, 428 
manifestation in four forms, 10 
form of Vi§nu on Govardhana, 841 
different forms of, 47 
to be contemplated at Salagrama, 
841 

cause of creation etc. 39 
showing the feminine form to Siva, 6 
reference to fight with Siva, 30 
conferred supreme position on 
Dhruva, 41 

manifested with four hands before 
being bom as Kr?na, 26 
day of waking of, 361 
installation of image of, 172 

referred to as, 28, 31, 36 
sages conducting a sacrifice to, 1 
mantra having the name of, 52, 56 
to be contemplated, 37 
should be adored, 61, 67, 68 
remembered, 58 
uttering the name of, 71, 73 
meditation on, 53, 55 
worship of, 75ff 

a female divinity to be invoked, 91 



Index 


1113 


handra, a herb, 407 
Handvara, a sacred spot, 327 
Harihara, form of Vi?i?u, 131 
Harinapluta, characteristics of the 
metre, 910 

Harinl, characteristics of the metre, 
913 

hariiii, a nerve, 316 
Harisaila, a boundary mountain, 352 
Hariscandra, son of Satyaratha; son 
of, 737 

a place at Varanasi, 330 
Harita, a celestial at the time of the 
12th Manu, 428 
a country, 352 
harita, a herb, 372 
Harita, a law-giver, 455 
haritaki, a herb, 407 
Havis, one of the sons of Rukma- 
kavaca, 741 
Haviyya, a sage, 428 
Havya, sons of, 352 
Havyavaha, (fire) to be worshipped, 
316 

hay^ asterisms good for gathering of, 

Haya, one, of the sons of Satajit, 740 
Hayagriva, form of Vi§riu, 326 
image of, 115 
Salagrama called, 125 
a demon killed by Vi?rju, 4 
Hayagrivesa, prayer to, 82 
Hayanana, a female divinity: image of, 
138 

Hayasira, daughter of Vfsaparvan, 46 
Hayas'iras, form ofVi$rm, 131 
Hayaslrsatantra, a Pancaratragama, 
105, 117 fn. (samhita) 

Hayasya, image of; installation of, 172 
head, thirteen ways of movement of; 
diseases relating to; sternutatory for, 
929 

Harivarga, a mountain, 324 

Naisadha given by Priyavrata to, 
322 

harsh, a mode; explanation of, 933-4 
Haryangaka, son of Gampa; son of, 
748 

Harya£va, one of the two sons of 
Drdhasva, 736 
son of, 737 

Hasta, an asterism, 357, 358, 359, 360, 
361, 363, 381, 382, 385, 387, 400 
haste, words denoting, 988 
hasticch&ya, definition of, 463 
hastijihv&, an occult nerve, 253 
carries the wind vy&na; functions, 
of, 536 

Hastinapura, a city, 37 


Jayanta to be worshipped at, 841 
Hataka, a male divinity worshipped, 
310 

hava, the collective word for beha- 
viour of women, 995 
Havirdhana, son of Antardhana and 
Sikhandini; sons of, 43 
haviryajfia, one of the domestic 
sacrifices, 7 kinds of, 86, 466 
head, ointment for, 755 

remedy for fall of hair from, 834 
headache, remedy to remove, 777 
health, no fortune equal to, 1074 
heart, location of, 760 
heart, disease, purgatives to be given 
for, 754 

heat, words denoting excessive and 
little heat, 990 
heaven, synonyms of, 986 
heaven and earth, interspace between; 

words denoting, 988 
hell, words denoting, 995 
hells, the names of different, 1038-39 
the nature of different, 530-32 
hemajihva, rite called, 86 
hemaksa, rite called, 86 
Hemakuta, country, 322 
location of, 324 

Hemalamba, a year of the Hindu 
calendar, 405 
hemanga, rite called, 86 
Hemaparvata, mountain, 350 
Hemaratha, son of Ketum&n; well 
known as Divodasa, 749 
HemaSaila, a boundary mountain, 
352 

hemasutraka, rite called, 86 
herbs, eight kinds of, 283 
symbolical numbers denoting, 406 
hot and cold, the two kinds of 
strength of, 762 

tastes and qualities of, three fla- 
vours of, 761, 762 

general rule for making a decoction 
of, 762 

purpose for which used, 406 
used in charms, medicines etc., 
405-8 

which give good complexion, 763 
which would subjugate the partner, 
833 

which would bring happiness and 
prosperity to the married couple, 

that should be used for getting a 
son, 834 

heroes, four kinds of; four different 
kinds of; the three minor compa- 
nions of, 926 

heroic, origin of the sentiment, 923 



1114 

threefold; accomplished by enthu- 
siasm, 931-2 

heroines, different types of, 926 
Heti, a demon, 334 
hetu (cause), an embellishment of 
senses, 939 

explanation of; produced in two 
ways, 942 

Hetuka, a guardian deity, 284 
hiccough (hiccup), remedy for, 753, 
754, 773, 830 

Hidimba, wife of Bhimasena, 751 
hill, word denoting; word denoting 
earth near and above, 996 
Hima, country, 322 
life in, 323 

Him&dri, (Himalaya) 350 
Himalayas, mountain, 37 fn., 351 
Himav&n, location of, 324 
Himavat, (Himalaya) 47, 50 
Himsa, wife of Adharma; progeny 
of, 49 

Hira^vat, son of Agnidhra; region 
given to, 322 

Hiranya, a female divinity, 230 
Hirapyagarbha, denotes Brahma, 40 
creation made by, 40 fn 
hiranyagarbha, a great gift, 544 
Hirariyaka, a mountain, 324 
Hiranyakasipu, a demon; bom to 
Kasyapa and Diti, 45 
brother of Hirapyak$a, 7, 7 fn. 
performed penance at Srlparvata, 
331 

reference to his destruction of 
Vi$nu, 745 
sons of, 26 

becoming embryo in the womb of 

Devala, 26fn 

the four sons of, 46 

Hiranyak?a, demon; son of Kafyapa 
and Diti, 45 

killed by Visnu in his manifest- 
ation as a boar, 7, 7fn, 745 
five sons of, 46 

progeny mixed with that of Danu 
in the text, 46fn 
hirany5ksa, a rite, 86 
hiraoyamitra, a rite, 86 
hirapy&nga, a rite, 86 
hiraQy&nghri, a rite, 86 
hirapyapaoi, a rite, 86 
Hiragyaromaka, son of Parjanya Pra- 
japati, 48 

hira$y&sya, a rite, 86 
hira^yavarp^, a hymn, 436, 562 
hirapyavat, a rite, 86 
hole, words signifying, 995 
hones, four varieties of; methods to 
train, 789 


Agni Purdna 

four different varieties of; such as 
brahmin etc, 789 
certain kinds of gaits of, 788-89 
auspicious physical features of, 790 
inauspicious features of, 790 
having certain physical features 
to be avoided, 789-90 
rider should make good the bad 
qualities in, 785 

management of; treatment of the 
diseases of, 784-89 
taming of, 788 
means of control, 788 
instructions relating to keeping 
of vicious, 794 

four political expedients relating 
to; and appropriate time for 
using them, 786 

qualities of men expert in hand- 
ling, 786 

preparatory steps before riding, 785 
asterisms and seasons commendable 
for first ride on, 784 
seasons forbidden for riding, 784 
ability without instruction to ride 
on, 784 

names of different postures rela- 
ting to riding, 787 

instructions relating to riding of, 
786-7 

instructions relating to riding in 
the morning and evening, 786 
places unsuitable for riding on, 784 
should not be whipped soon after 
mounting, 786 

should not be whipped at improper 
places, 784 

censure of a person not knowing 
how to manage a, 786 
praise of a person who knows both 
the good and bad qualities of, 786 
food for different breeds of, 788 
the food and the quantity of food 
to be given for, 1 793-4 
drinks for, 792 

instructions relating to bathing of, 
793 

substitute drinks during different 
seasons for, 793 

consecreation and location of gods 
on the bodies of, 784-5 
characteristics of, treatment of the 
diseases of, 789-94 
propitiatory rites for curing the 
ailments of, 794-5 
bitten by files; remedies fur, 788 
a curative for harassing cough of, 
791 

emetics for all kinds of diarrhoea 
of, 791 



Index 


1115 


an oily emetic that makes com- 
fortable, 791 

remedy for dysentery of, 790-1 
remedy for eye diseases of, 792 
a potion that removes the fatigue 
of, 791 

remedy for haemoptysis of, 792 
remedies for deranged humours of, 
793, 794 

remedy for itching of, 792 
afflicted by fever should first be 
treated with water, 791 
remedy for pain due to whipping 
of, 792 

prescription to remove pain in the 
stomach of, 790 

beneficial remedy for paralysis of the 
tongue of, 792 

remedy for swelling due to stiff- 
throat of, 791 

anointment for swollen (limbs) of, 
791 

remedy for ulcers of, 792 
remedy for passing of blood in urine 
of, 791 

remedy for a wound of the tendon 
or of an ear etc. of, 792 
horse (golden), a great gift, 544 
horse (golden) and chariot, a great 
gift, 544 

horticulture, science of, 764-5 
hotra, priest for R.ks, 429 
house, good time for building, 360 
good asterisms for entering the new, 
360 

months good for entering, 360 
householder, duties of, 431-32 
houses, the trees which should be 
grown around, 643 
Hrada, son of Hrada, 46 
Hrada, one of the sons of Hirai^ya- 
kafipu, 46 

Hrimk&ri, a female divinity, 424 
Hflika, son of Bhoja; ten sons of, 743 
Hnikesa, a form of Vi$ou, 65 
form of Visnu at Kubjamra, 841 
at Gaya worshipped, 343 
invocation to, 52, 82 
huhu, a vein ; carries the wind 
devadatta, 556 

humility, as cause of statesmanship, 
617 

need for practising, 618 
humours, the qualities of the three, 
759 

get increased or abated in the diff- 
erent seasons, 759 
characteristics of men having in 
excess one of the three, 1033 
the nature of people having in 


excess one kind of, 760 
get increased or abated according 
to the quality of the food, 759 
as capable of coursing through the 
entire body, 760 

cause and symptoms of the deran- 
gement of different, 760 
the defects due to, 758 
certain practices which would re- 
move each one of the three, 764 
remedies for diseases due to derange- 
ment of, 761 

Hunkara, one of the Yoginls; image of, 
138 

Hutahavyavaha, one of the sons of 
Dhara, 44 

Hutasa, one of the Yoginls; image of, 
138 

Ibhasya (Gat>e£a), worship of the 
image of, 215 

Iccha, a female divinity, 292 
Ida, a female energy, 136 
ida, a vein; carries the wind pra^a; 
functions of, 556 

established on the left side of the 
body, 557 

idol, conservation of, 152-55 
ignorance, words denoting, 991 
ihamfga, a type of drama, 921 
Ik§u, an ocean, 324 
Iksvaku, one of the eight sons of 
Vaivasvata Manu, 9, 735 
descendants of family of, 738 
Ila, one of the Yoginis; image of, 
138 

Ila, daughter of Manu ; later changed 
as a male, 735 

Ilavfta, Meru given by Agnldhra to, 
322 

Ilavjta, a mountain, 324 
illusions, different kinds of, 629 
image, consecration of, 283-94 

preliminary, consecration of, 155-6 
image of Siva, installation of, 294-302 
image of V&sudeva, installation of, 161- 
64 

images, renovation of decayed, 1843 
pedestals of, 123 

impartiality, commended, 1073-4 
impure, words denoting, 996 
impurities, five kinds of general, 947 
incantations, description of, 409-1 1 
of five kinds, 896 

of different kinds; appropriate 
period for practising, 896 
effects of evil; means of getting 
relief from, 843-5 
incessant rain, words denoting, 989 



1116 


Agni Pur&na 


incident, as the body of the drama 
two varieties of, 922 
indeclinables, the different meanings 
of the various, 996-1000 
Indication, explanation of; five kinds 
of, 943 

indifference, a political expedient, 587, 
627 

explanation of, 629 
indigestion, remedy for, 776 
Indra, synonyms of, 987 
the word Parjanya denotes, 40 
name of the mansion of, 987 
words denoting the club of, 987 
name of the chariot of, 987 
brought the chariot for Yudhi$thira, 
38 

name of the charioteer of, 22 fn 
Diti’s desire to get a vanquisher of, 
47 fn 

Indrajit as the conqueror of, 24 
revived the monkeys, 23 
conquest of Knna over, 28 
Arjuna’s obstruction of rain caused 
by, 32 

Maruts as allies of, 47 
festivities for, 27 
day of waking of, 361 
restored to status by Raji, 740 
kingdom restored by Vi$nu to, 745 
Vi?nu worshipped by residents of the 
world of, 37 
praised the goddess, 26 
praise of Sri made by, 49 
Indra, image of, 137 
pervades the limbs, 65 
worship of the image of, 215 
obeisance made to, T 
worshipped, 51, 52, 66 
offering made to, 274 
herb denoted by, 406 
herbs made use of by, denotes the 
asterism Purv£$adha, 407 
Indradvipa, one of the territories in 
Bh&rata, 350 

Indradyumna, son of Tejas, 323 
Indrajit, a demon; Hanumat searched 
the house of, 19 

Rama and Lak^maga fainted on 
account of the weapon used by; 
was killed by Lak$maua, 22 
known so on account of the con- 
quest of Indra, 24 
Indr&oi, other names of, 987 
image of; worshipped on the mar- 
riage day, 435 
one of the goddesses, 415 
indr&pl, a herb, 371 
a herb worn on the body for pro- 
tection, 378 


Indrapramiti, Rgveda imparted to, 429 
Indravajra, characteristics of the 
metre, 912 

Indravajra, mixed varieties are for- 
med from, 912 

Indravamsa, characteristics of the 
metre, 912 

Indu, one of the female energies, 136 
infantry, functions of; ground sui- 
table for; to protect each foot of 
elephant (men), 632 
infants, recipes for the diseases of, 
820-826 

inference, word for, 991 
inflammation, of the glands of the 
neck; remedy for, 776 
of anus; remedy to remove pain in, 
777 

inflections, two kinds of— sup and tin, 
957 

use of the different, 971-73 
Ihgudi, a tree, 13 
initiation, mode of performing, 67-74 
purificatory, 235-37 
that secures nirvana, 257-62 
of principles, 262-3 
injury, ten kinds of, 1041 
inquiry, word denoting, 991 
insanity, five causes for, 826 
remedy for removal of, 773 
insects, remedy for venom due to all, 
819-20 

installation, of the deity, 87ff 
installation, five kinds of, 266 
of deities, 1 16-1 18 

of an image; five divisions of, 147-49 
of images presiding over five ele- 
ments, 27 1 
of a linga, 278-83 
suitable period for, 278-9 
of the image of Gauri, 302-3 
of the image of Siva, 266-72, 294- 
302 

of the image of Sun-god, 303-4 
of an image of V&sudeva, 161-64 
instrument, two kinds of— external 
and internal, 970-71 
insult, words denoting, 993 
intellect, words denoting; retentive 
power of; word for, 991 
interest, rules relating to period of, 673 
intoxication, remedy for removal of, 
773 

investiture of, fibres of datnanaka, 225- 
26 

investiture of sacred thread, for the 
deity, 87 ff 
time for, 359 
for all gods, 100-101 
for Vijou, 98 ff 



Index 


1117 


invocation, that routs the enemy, 394-5 
Ira, grass and other things as pro- 
duction of, 46 
Iia, propitiation of, 176 
worshipped, 316 
Ha, a herb denoted by, 407 
I £ana, a name denoting Rudra, 50 
worshipped, 51 
a form of Siva worshipped, 51 
worship of the image of, 116 
Isani, worshipped, 317 
ista, explanation of, 539 
Isvara, presiding deity of an clement, 
271 

Isvara (Siva), adored, 1 
Isvara, a year of the Hindu Calendar, 
404 

isvara, a herb denoted by, 406 
isvari, name of a herb, 378 
itch, dry spreading 755; remedy for, 
769 

itihasa, definition of the term, 992 

Jagati, a metre, 902, 905 

white coloured; belongs to Vasi§tha- 
gotra, 905 

the number of letters in a quarter 
of, 903 

appropriate time for recital of, 916 
metres belonging to the class of, 912 
Jagatipankti, composition of, 904 
Jagatprabhu, form of Vi§nu at Vimala, 
841-2 

Jaghanacapala, characteristics of the 
metre, 906 

Jahnavi, (river Ganges) crossed by 
Rama, 13 
image of, 133 

Jahnu, son of Aj amid ha and Kes'ini; 
son of, 749 

names of the four sons of, 750 
Jaigisavya, exposition made by, 1074 
Jaimini, disciple of Vyasa, 429 
Jajali, represents a branch of Athar- 
vaveda, 730 
Jala, an ocean, 324 
Jalabandha, one of the varieties of 
Gomutrika bandha, 937 
Jalada, son of Havya, 352 
Jaladhara, a boundary mountain, 
352 

Jalandhara (region of), 387 
Jalandhara, mountain, 412, 414 
Jalaiayin, form of Vi?$u at Nandi, 
842 

Jaloddhatagati, characteristics of the 
metre, 912 

Jamadagni, Vi$i>u's manifestation as 
Bh&rgava, son of, 8, 9 
conquered by Rima, 1 1 


Jamadagnyaka, image of, 115 
Jirabavat, name of a person who 
accompanied Rama, 21 
killed the lion that killed Prasena, 
743 

Jambavati, daughter ofjambavan, 743 
one of the wives of K^rta, 744 
birth of Samba to Kroia and, 29 
Yadavas dressed up Samba, son of, 
36fn 

Jambha, a demon, 6, 317 
Jambhaka, a demon; offering made to, 
109, 275 

Jambu, a river, 324 
jambu, a tree, 324 
jambu, fruit; dvipa gaining the name 
on account of, 324 
Jambudvipa, one of the seven con- 
tinents, 323 

given by Priyavrata to Agnidhra, 
322 

location of, 324 

an appellation on account of jambu 
fruits, 324 
extent of, 351 
division of, 322 

jamitra, the seventh sign of the zodiac, 
388 

Janaka, king of Mithila, 10 
exposition made by, 1074 
Janaki (Sita), married by Rama, 11 
Rama's search of, 1 7 
monkeys sent in directions other 
than the south could not find, 1 8 
words spoken by HanOmat to, 19 
Rama’s reaction on seeing the 
jewel as if he has seen, 20 
Angada’s advice to Ravai^a to 
return, 21 

Janaloka, distance of, 354 
Janamejaya, son of Purafijaya; son 
of, 747 

son of Puru, son of, 748 
a descendant of Parikgit, son of, 
two other sons of, 750 
Janardana, epithet of Vi?i>u, 84 
form of Vi$i>u at Kubj&mra, 841 
at Gaya, 337 
a ialagr&ma, 125 

Janas, one of the worlds; worshipped, 
79 

Janas thana, on the banks of river 
God&vari; R&ma's stay at, 15 
janma, one of the tar&balas, 359 
Janm&$tami, merits of practising, 506 
JantUj son of Puruhflta, son of, 742 
son of Somaka, son of, 750 
japi, a flower, benefit of worshipping 
with, 529 

Japyesvara, at V&r&pasl, 330 



1118 


Agni Pur&ta 


Jar&sandha, son of Sambhava, son of, 
750 

Mathura was besieged by, 28 
J&rukhya, one of the sons of Vasudeva, 
and Devaki; was killed by Kamsa, 
744 

Jara, one of the progeny of Mjtyu, 49 
j&ta, a posture relating to archery, 
646 

posture advocated, 646 
Jatadeva, a spirit possessing the 
child in the eighth year, symptoms 
of a child possessed by, offering to 
appease, bathing and fumigation 
for child possessed by, 825 
Jatadhara, form of Vi?Qu on Ganges, 
841 

j&takarma, rite after the birth of a 
child, 432 

done for purification, 481 
as a yedic rite, 59 

oblation made for purification with, 
71 

a rite to be performed, 86 
Jatayu, a vulture wounded by Ravaija, 
16 

told Rama about Ra vaija’s ab- 
duction of Sita; death of, 17 
words spoken by Sampati, brother 
of, 18 

Jathara, a boundary mountain, 325, 
326 

Jati, a division of Padya; characteris- 
tics of, 919 

jati, greatness of the herb, 378 
jaundice, remedy for removal of, 767 
javanika, one of the herbs, 407 
Jaya, a year of the Hindu almanac, 
405 

one of the eight forms of Ganapati, 
865 

form of Vi$$u at Jayanti, 841 
jaya, a pitcher, 270 
Jaya, one of the female divinities, 51, 
375 

one of the wives of Kr^a, 744 
jaya, a stone, 269 
a nerve, 316 

Jayacakra, a diagram for finding 
victory; description of, 389-90 
Jayadeva, a muhilrta; deeds to be 
done in, 371 

Jayadhvaja, one of the sons of Kar- 
tavirya; was great among Avan- 
tyas; son of, 741 

Jayadratha, son of Bj-hatmavat ; son 
of, 748 

Jayanta, a male divinity, 107 
worship 273 


form of Vi§gu at Hastinapura, 841 
a minister of king Dasaratha, 1 1 
Jayanti, letter denoting, 417 
image of, 138 
name of a place, 841 
Jayantika, a female divinity, image 
of, 138 

Jejovati, a female divinity, 424 
Jimuta, son of Vyoma, son of, 742 
a country, 352 

a variety of Dandaka ; formation 
of, 915 

Jj'raka, a herb, 407 
Jiva, denotes Jupiter, worshipped, 52 
Jfiana, a female divinity, 292 
— letter denoting, 418 
Jnanamudra, a posture made with 
the hands, 73 

JA&nasagara, one of the Paficaratra 
agamas, 106 
Jfmbhana, a missile, 30 
judges, swerving from codes are 
punishable, fine for swearing double 
that of a quarrel, 656 
junctures, the five kinds of, importance 
of, 922 

Jupiter, words denoting, 989 
image of, 137 

is contemplated as yellow, 828 
chariot of, 356 

distance of Mars and Saturn from, 
354 

letter presided over by, 374 
characteristic of a person born in 
the house of, 392 

period (years) of influence of, 363, 
393 

the part of a day presided over by, 
381 

a period called mahajyaisti on the 
basis of location of, 362 
occupying certain constellations 
should be avoided for building 
houses, 360 

not recommended for marriage 
when set or retrograde or transit- 
ing, 357 

not commended for Upanayana 
when set, 359 

in the tenth house to be avoided, 
384 

in the second and seventh houses 
indicate happiness, 383 
gives success, 377 

justice, its four feet, four places and 
four means; eight parts of; three 
sources of; two sorts of statements 
for; two parties of; two kinds of 
issues for, 653 



Index 


1119 


administration of, 653-58 
jvala, an occult nerve, 316 
jv&lagardabhaka, a disease, 84, 84fn. 
jvalini, one of the pranita-mudras, 857 
Jvara, personified and worshipped, 
292 

Jyamagha, one of the sons of Rukma- 
kavaca; a hen-pecked husband; 
names of the wife and son of, 741 
Jye$tha, month of, 360, 362, 386 
Jye$tha, a female divinity, 51, 201, 
292, 374, 412, 413 
an asterism, 358, 360, 361, 362, 
363, 381, 382, 385,388,400 
jyegthasaman, a hymn; a panktipavana 
should know, 349 

Jyoti, one of the four kinds of rosary 
beads; the four divisions of, 894 
characteristics of the metre, 907 
jyotirasa, a gem (?), 641 
Jyoti §a, science of, 336-63 

four lightnings according to, 45fn 
Jyoti$mat, ruled Kus'a, 322 
names of the sons of, 352 
Jyoti $mati (Jagati), a metre; compo- 
sition of, 904 

Jyotistoma, a sacrifice, 64fn 
Jyotsna, a female divinity, 292 

Kabandha, a demon killed by Rama, 
17 

Kaca, Sukra’s curse on, 25fn 
Kaccha, a region; installation should 
not be done by men from, 106 
kacchapa, one of the treasures. 111 
Kadamba, a tree, 324 
a flower, 529 
Kadru, progeny of, 46 
Kaikasi, wife of Vis'ravas; progeny of, 
24, 24fn 

Kaikeya, one of the four sons of Sibi, 
747 

Kaikeyi, birth of Bharata to, 10 
was informed abouf the coronation 
of Rama by, 11, 12 
Dasaratha’s words to, 1 3 
reproached by Bharata, 14 
was paid respects by Rama, 23 
Kailasa, mountain, 325 
kailasa, a class of temple; circular 
shaped, 314 

the temples belonging to the class 
of 31 5 

Kaka, beads belonging to Jyoti class, 
894 

kakapada, an array; consists of four 
units of army, 634 
K&kasila, at Gay&, 341 
Kaki, a daughter of TamrS, 46 
K&lrini, a female divinity, 415 


K&koli, a evil spirit which possesses 
a newly bom child on the fourth 
night, symptoms of the child pos- 
sessed by; offering to appease; 
unguent for the child possessed by, 
821 

Kakub, a variety of U$uik; the number 
of letters in each p5da of, 903 
Kakudmat, a boundary mountain, 352 
Kakudmati, composition of the metre, 
904 

Kakudmin, an alias of Raivata, 736 
Kakutstha, born in the line of Ik^vaku, 
9 

from Vikuk?u, 736 
Kala, a female divinity, 52 
kala, a measure, 134 
Kala, death; Dro$a compared with, 35 
a guardian deity, 284 
son of Dhruva, 44 
son of Dlrghabahu, 737 
Kala, a monstress seizing the child in 
the ninth year; symptoms of child 
seized by; offering to appease, 825 
kala^hya, one of the kinds of mantras 
of Siva, 873 
description of, 875 

Kalahamsi, a spirit possessing the 
child in the tenth year; symptoms 
of the child possessed by; offering to 
appease; fumigation when the child 
is affected by, 825 

K&laka, presiding deity of place of 
worship of planets, 467 
Kalaka, one of the daughters of Vaif- 
vanara, 46 

Kalakanti, a female divinity, 202 
Kalakarpl, a female divinity; image of, 
138 

Kalanabha, one of the sons of 
Hirauyak?a, 46fn 

Kalanala, a divinity; worshipped, 414 
son of Sabhanara; son of, 747 
Kalanjara, mountain; sacredness of, 
328, 349 

Kalapa, division of poetry called, 919 
nature of; employs Kaiiiki vjtti, 920 
K&lar&tri, night of destruction, 1 3fn 
personified as a divinity; offering 
made to, 395 
a hell, 1038 

Kalasa, a type of temple, 315 
Kalasaihjfiaka, a Rudra, 255 
Kiilasutra, sub-division of a hell, 532, 
1039 

Kalavikariip, a female divinity, 51 
K&lavikarigi, a goddess, 201 
K&layavana, a demon, 28, 28fn 
K&layukti, a year of the Hindu calen- 
dar, 405 



1120 


Agni Purdna 


K&lela, a linga, 343 
Kali, repetition of the name of the 
goddess, 411 
worshipped, 51, 201 
name of Satyavati, wife of Santanu, 
751 

K&lika, a river; greatness of confluence 
of, 328 

K&lindi, one of the wives of Kr 9 $a, 744 
Kalihga, country of; asterisms indi- 
cating destruction of, 387 
installation rite should not be done 
by one bora in, 106 
one of the sons of Bali, 747 
K&liya, a serpent subdued by Kj-§$a, 

Kaliyuga, Siva as presiding over all 
the regions of, 337 
conduct of the people at the end of, 
38 

Kalki, Virtu’s manifestation as, 38, 39 
figure of, 130 

Kalm5$apada, son of Rtuparna; son 
of, 737 

Kalpa, science of, 2 
Kalpa(s), significance of the term, 
1018 

manifestations of Vi§nu, innumer- 
able in the different, 39, 39fn 
reference to Baca’s propitiation of 
the goddess in the previous, 46 
dissolution at the end of, 3 
Kaipalata, a great gift, 544 
Kalpa vj"k§a, a great gift, 544 
Kalpavfkgavrata, mode of practising 
the vow of, 522 

Kalyana, a form of Rudra, 253 
KSma (god of love), synonyms of, 
986 

Kama, Pradyumna identified with, 
reborn as Pradyumna, 29, 29fn 
one of the siddhas, 414 
kama, one of the puru^arthas protect- 
ed by Rama, 23 
mantra which bestows, 53 
Kamadhenu, divine cow in the 
possession of Jamadgni, 9 
water on earth identified with, 337 
Kamadhenu, golden, a great gift, 544 
Kamala, a female divinity; wor- 
shipped, 413, 414 

Kamangadravii>i, Kubjika addressed 
as, 413 

K&marupa, augury foreboding des- 
truction of, 387 

* installation should not be done by 
those bom in, 186 
a mountain; wonhipped, 412, 414 
kaputtrayodafi, see anahgatrayodafl 
Kambalabarhif, one of die sons of 


Babhru, 742 

son of Devarha; son of, 743 
Kambalabarhi?, son of Marutta; 
son of, 741 

Kamsa, the eldest among the sons of 
Ugrasena, 742 

the destruction of the children of 
Devaki by, 26, 26fn 
reference to killing of Pralamba, an 
asura friend of, 30fn 
attempts made to kill Kfsna by, 27 
Sambara as a companion of, 29fn 
was killed by Kr$$a, 28 
Kanaka, son of Durgama; sons of, 740 
Kanaka, a female divinity; wor- 
shipped, 230 
Kanake£a, at Gaya, 339 
Kanakhala, a sacred place; glory of, 
327 

location of, 336 

kancanara, flower not to be used in 
worship, 529 

Kanci, installation should not be done 
by those born in, 106 
kaficiyamaka, one of the Yamakas, 
935 

Kandarpa, god of love; worshipped, 
109 

Kandarpanatha, a male divinity; wor- 
shipped, 415 
Ka^du, a sage, 43 
Kanka, Yudhi$thira disguised as, 33 
a boundary mountain, 352 
kankola, given as an offering, 94 
Kanku, one of the sons of Ugrasena, 
742 

kanta, a herb, 372 
a nerve, 316 
kanfakari, herb, 407 
Kanti, a form of Hari, 91 

an embellishment of sound and 
sense; explanation of, 942 
Kantotpida, characteristics of the 
metre, 913 

Kanva, son of Pratiratha; son of, 748 
Kanvas, a branch of Yajurvedins, 429 
Kanvasrama, glory of, 327 
Kanvi, a branch of Yajurveda, 730 
Kanya, a constellation, 367 
(See also Virgo) 

kany£dana, one of the four acts re- 
lating to a marriage, 434 
kanyasa, a variety of pr£n£y£ma, 1044 
Kapalamocana, a sacred place, 328 
Kapalin one of the eleven (Rudras), 
45 

Kapalini, a female divinity; worship 
of; letter denoting, 417 
Kaparda, matted hair of Siva, 987 
Kapardin, benefit of worshipping, 343 



Index 


1121 


Kapardin, one of the eleven forms of 
(Rudra), 43 

Kapila, form of VUqu on the banks 
of the eastern ocean, 841 
enunciation made by, 1073 
a class of men in the Salmaladvipa, 
352 

one of the sons of Jyotigmat, 352 
one of the three sons of Dhundhu- 
mara, 736 
two sons of, 749 

Kapila, a female energy, 136, 424 
at Gaya, 341 

a class of cow; mode of worshipping, 
212-14 

kapila, one of the lightnings, 45fn 
Kapila, a Pancaratra agama, 1 06 
Kapota, beads belonging to the Siva 
class, 894 

Kapotaroma, son of Dhfti; son of, 742 
kara, a measure, 107 
karaka, explanation of the term, 970 
Karakabhraxiisa, an impurity, 947 
karala, a hell, 532 

Karali, a goddess; worshipped, 375, 
413, 416, 424 
kar&li, a mudra, 857 
Karalika, a hell, 1038 
Karalin, a guardian deity, 284 
Karambhaka, son of Sakunti, son of, 
742 

Karana, a measure of time; correction 
for, 369, 369fn 

Karandhama, son of Traisani; son of, 
747 

Karankini, image of, 1 38 
Karatoya, a river, 328 
karavira, a flower, 529 
Karaviraka, one of the sons of Kanaka, 
740 

Kardama, Prajapati, father of 
Sankhapad, 47 
two daughters of, 41, 41 fn 
Kramapadika given in Agnipurana 
instead of, 49fn 
Kardamala, at Gaya, 342 
Karka, a serpent; image of, 137 
Karkari, a water jar, 68 
Karkasfhgi, an array; consists of three 
units of army, 634 
Karkataka, a constellation 367, 368 
(See also Cancer) 
karkafi, a herb, 406 
a flower; not to be used for Siva, 
529 

karketana, a gem, 641 
Karkofaka, one of , the eight chief 
serpents, 415 

the nttmber of heads of, 807 
Xarmadh&raya (compound), seven 


kinds of; examples of, 974-75 
Karga, born of Kunti; became a 
dependent of Duryodhana, 32 
aided Duryodhana in his dice play, 
33 

killed the warriors of Pa^davas and 
was killed by Arjuna, 35 
son of Visvajit; son of, 748 
a type of drama, 92 J 
Karriaditya, at Gaya; worshipped, 339 
Kar$amotani, goddess; incantation 
of, 375 

Kargati, characteristics of, 934 
kar^avedha, time for, 359 
karnikara, a flower, 529 
kar§a, a measure, 408 
karsika, a weight, 209 
Kartaviryarjuna, son of Kftavirya 
greatness of, 740, 741 
had thousand arms and was valorous. 
8 

the names of five foremost among 
hundred sons of, 741 
Jamadagni killed by the sons of, 9 
Karttika, benefit of purchasing grains 
in the month of, 386 
Karttikavrata, for Vi?nu; mode of 
practising, 522-3 

Karttikeya, name ofKum&ra, as he 
was son of Kfttika, 44 
benefit of offering homa to, 339 
benefit of worshipping, 343 
Karusa, one of the eight sons of 
Vaivasvata Manu, 735 
Kariisas, were born from Karusa; 

were of warrior caste, 736 
ka£a, a flower, 529 
Kaseru, one of the nine territories, 350 
an advice to stay at, 330 
Paun^raka as the ruler of, 28fn 
Kasi, a sacred place, 491, 841 
Kasiraja, Sutanu as daughter of, 28fn 
Ambika and Ambalika as daughters 
of, 31 

kasmala, a hell, 532 
Kasmira, name of a region, 387, 841 
installation not to be done by those 
born in, 1 06 

Kastatva, a defect of a word, 947 
Kasyapa, a sage, son of Marici, 9, 735 
married thirteen daughter* of Dak?a, 
44 

father of Sun, 735 
progeny of (through Diti), 7fn, 45 
Rudras as sons of Surabhi and, 44fn 
Danu’s propitiation of for offspring, 
47 

Garuda bom to Vinatd and, 63fn 
Puloma and K5lak5 as wives of, 46 
earth given by Paraiuraxna to, 9 



1122 


Agni Purdna 


goddess earth addressed as related 
to, 112 

Vi soil’s manifestation as a dwarf 
as a son of Aditi and, 745 
manifested as Vasudeva, 744 
his view relating to a metre, 91 3 
Katha, a division of the prose k&vya; 

characteristics of, 919 
Kathanik£, a division of the prose 
k&vya; definition of, 919 
Kathi, a branch of Vajurveda, 730 
Kathodgh&ta, a division of Amukha; 

explanation of, 922 
Katimukha, one of the sons of Visva- 
mitra, 749 

Kafisa, letter denoting, 418 
katukanda, a herb, 372 
Katyayana, sage, 345 

£raddha rite as narrated by a law- 
giver, 455 

kaulava, a karana, 362, 369fn 
Kaule£a, a male divinity, 413 
Kauli, prayer made to goddess, 413 
Kaulisanatha, a male divinity, 413 
Kaum&ra, the ninth creation known 
as, 48 

Kaumarl, a mother goddess, 139fn, 
411,415 

prayed, 379, 399 
image of, 133 
Kaumodaki, a mace, 128 
kaumndavrata, mode of practising 
and merits of, 524, 537 
to be practised in the bright fort- 
night of asvayuji, 537 
Kauntali, characteristics of, 934 
Kaunti, characteristics of, 934 
Kauravas, origin of, 31 
Kauialya, Rama's birth from Daiara- 
tha and, 10 

was informed by Rama about the 
coronation, 11 

bowed to by Raina before leaving 
for the forest, 13 

Da£aratha's narration of the past 
curse on him to, 14 
was saluted by Rama after returning 
from the forest, 23 
one of the wives of Kf?na, 744 
Kautika, one of the sons of Vidarbha; 
son of, 741 

one of the two sons of Kapila, 749 
KausikI, one of the modes, 928 
Kaustubha, gem, 6, 51, 55, 63, 99 
Kauthuma, a branch of Samaveda, 
730 

Kautsa, sage for the hymn cittern 
devAn&m, 563 

K&veri, a river; greatness of, 328 


installation should not be done by 
those born in the region near, 106 
river, confluence with Narmada, 331 
Kavi, one of the sons of Manu and 
Nadvaia, 42 

Kavya, a type of drama, 921 
k&vya, definition of; three kinds of; 
definition of prose; three divisions 
of, 918 

five divisions of prose, 919 
Kedara, one of the holy places, 330 
a linga; benefit of worshipping, 343 
Keralas, origin of, 747 
Kesar&cala, group of mountains, 325, 
325fn 

have abodes of gods, 326 
Ke£ari, a monkey that accompanied 
Rama to Lafika, 21 
a boundary mountain, 352 
Kesava, a name of Vi$nu, 65 
characteristics of the form of, 127 
killed the demon Hayagriva, 4 
form of Vi$gu at Mathura, 841 
Kesi, a demon in the form of a horse; 

killed by KrsrLa, 27 
Kesini, wife of AjainI<Jha, 749 
Ketaki, a flower, 529 
not to be used for worshipping 
Siva, 530 
Ketu, form of, 137 
the form that is to be contemplated, 
828 

chariot of, 356 
worshipped, 52 
Ketumala, a mountain, 325 
a country, 325 
Vi?iju as Varaha in, 326 
Western countries given by Agni- 
dhra to, 322 

Ketuman, son of Dhanvantari ; son of, 
749 

Ketumat, son of Rajas; was made the 
protector of waters, 48 
Khadga, a male divinity; worshipped, 
414 

khadga, a posture, 857 
Khadgadeva, one of the siddhas, 414 
Khadgesa, letter denoting, 419 
khadira, a tree, 407 
khalik&ra, a posture of the horse, 787 
khamalankfta, one of the kinds of 
mantras of Siva, 873 
description of, 875 

Khandakath&, a division of prose 
kavya; contained in the Katha in 
the catu$padi, 919 
KhSndava a forest, 32 
KMod&ya, a king of Mithil&, 1060 



Index 


1123 


Khaflja, characteristics of the metre, 
911 

Khara, demon brother of Surpanakha; 
ruled Janasthana, 15, 15fn 
a year of the Hindu calendar, 405 
Khasa, Yak?as and demons born from, 
47 

khataka, an array formed by modi- 
fication of dantfa, 634 
Khatf, a place worthy to be seen, 640 
Khattara, a place worthy to be seen, 
640 

khavfksa, a type of temple, 315 
Khecara, a goddess, 424 
Khecari, a goddess, 424 
Khirikhini, a female divinity to be 
worshipped, 412 

Klwati, one of the sons of Oru and 
Agneyu, 42 

a daughter of Dak$a; married 
Bhrgu, 48 
progeny of, 49 

Kicaka, brother-in-law of Virata; was 
killed by Bhimasena, 33, 33fn 
kilakincita, a kind of gesture, 929 
killer, definition of, 485 
killing, definition of, 485 
words denoting, 1017 
Kimpuru§a, Hemakuta was given by 
Agnidhra to, 322 

characteristics of the region called, 
323 

country; no misery in, 326 
a mountain, 324 
kimsuka a flower, 529 
Kindama, a sage; cursed Pandu, 32fn 
king, words denoting, 994 

mode of performing the coronation 
of, 566-68 

should be endowed with modesty, 
617 

the qualities of, 619 
the seven qualities of, 683 
code of righteous conduct for, 588 
vices of, 627 

vices which should be avoided by 
a, 626 

aggregate of six things to be given 
up by, 617 

compare! to the sun, moon etc., 588 
strategies to be employed by, 606-7 
the six expedients used by, 607-8 
general duties of, 579-81, 584-6 
duties of, 619, 621-22 
daily duties of, 608-9 
duties in the harem, 581-82 
should protect himself and the king- 
dom, 622 

should fJTotect the people, 674 
means 6f protecting, 577 


guidelines for employing men of 
good conduct and ability by, 573-5 
to make treaties with whom, 623 
twelve circles of friends and enemies 
relating to, 605, 622 
details relating to payment of share 
of gains to, 674 

the four obligatory acts of; relating 
to wealth, 617 

should worship those who carry 
banners and weapons, 639 
when should a battle be begun by, 
623-624 

the sixteen kinds of war to be 
avoided by a, 623 
rites preceding the march of, 609-12 
kingdom, the seven constituents of, 
605, 618 

sovereignty as the most important 
means for, 619 

kings, rites to be performed in a year 
by, 722-25 

kinnaras, synonyms of, 988 
image of, 137 

Kintughna, a karana, 363, 369 
Kirti, a female energy; worshipped, 90 
wife of Jayanta, 739 
Kirtiman, one of the sons of Vasudeva 
and Devaki; killed by Kaiiisa, 744 
Ki$kindha, Sugriva made ruler of, 17, 
18 

a place; form of Vi$nu to be wor- 
shipped at, 841 
kitchen, words related to, 1021 
knots, on the sacred thread, names of; 

number of, 216 
knowledge, word for, 991 

relating to science; word for, 991 
relating to unreality of world ; words 
for, 991 

doubtful; words referring to, 991 
false; words denoting, 991 
conclusive; words for, 991 
two kinds of-— para and apara, 2 
the foremost, 455 

relating to Brahman; the great- 
ness of, 1059 

the different virtues considered as, 
1070 

state of persons who had gained, 
1074 

as means for realizing the identity 
of soul and Brahman, 1076 
merits of gaining, 1077 
Kodraka, a boundary mountain, 352 
Kol£hala, a demon ; was subdued, by 
Vippi in his eleventh manifestation, 
745, 746 

Kofehafe, a hell, 1038 
Kolas, origin of, 747 



1124 


Agni Purina 


Kolbagiri, a sacred place, 328 
Komalatva (softness), an excellence 
of sense, 945 

KoAka^a, installation not to be done 
by people born in, 106 
augury indicating the destruction 

Ko£a, contains elegant verses of great 
poets, 920-21 
two divisions of, 921 
Kosala, installation should not be done 
by people bom in, 106 
augury indicating the destruction 
of, 387 

Kotacakra, mode of drawing etc. 38 j-6 
kotihoma, mantras and materials for; 
mode of performing; merits of 
performing, 42 G 

Kotisa, at Kofitirtha; worshipped, 341 
worshipped, 414 

Kotifirtha, a sacred spot, 327, 330 
Kotitirtha, at Gaya, 341 
offering to be made at, 344 
Krakaca, a hell, 532 
Krama, a form of Rudra, 252 
Kramap&dika, son of Pulaha and 
Krama, 49 

Kr&nti, a female divinity, 91 
Kratha, one of the sons of Vidarbha; 
son of, 741 

Krathana, a monkey that accompanied 
Rama to Lanka, 2 1 

Kratu, a sage; a mind-born son of 
Brahmi, 41, 42fn 
Balakhilyas were born from, 49 
one of the sons of Cm and Agneyi, 
42 

KrauAca, a continent, 323 
given to Dyutiman by Priyavrata, 
322 

rulers of; ocean around, 352 
a mountain, 352 

KrauAcapadA, characteristics of the 
metre, 914 

KrauArapada, at Gaya, 342 
Krau$tuki, an authority in prosody, 
903 

kfcchra, an expiation; explanation of, 
482 

an atonement for eating food from 
certain people, 471 
for officiating as priest for degraded 
person, 479 
for mendicants, 481 
period of observance for kings and 
others, 486 

to be observed at the six-monthly 
rite, 488 

to, be observed for having commit- 
ted sins, 489 


as a means of testing one’s strength,. 
533 

kfcchra candrayana, an expiation, 477 
kfcchra santapana, an expiation, 477 
krcchratikfcchra, an expiation, 479 
explanation of, 482, 799 
Kriya, a female divinity, 292, 424 
Kriyabhramsa, an impurity, 947 
Kriyasakti, letter denoting, 418 
krkara, a life-force carried by the vein 
alambu^a, 556 
functions of, 557 

Krmi, one of the four sons of Bhaja- 
m£na, 742 
wife of U sinara, 747 
son of Krmi and U Sinara, 747 
Kpnila, one of the five kings born 
from Bahy5sva, 749 
Krodha, bom from Mrtyu, 49 
Krodha, animals were born from, 46 
Krodhana, a year of the Hindu Calen- 
dar, 405 

Krodhana, image of, 1 38 
Krodhisa, letter signifying, 419 
Kro?pi, one of the sons of Yadu, 740 
the race of; in whose race Lord 
Hari himself was bom, 741 
son of, 741 

Kfpa, one of those who survived in 
the (Bharata) battle, 36 
one of the pairs born from Satya- 
dhfk, 750 

Kfparia, image of, 138 
Kfpi, one of the pairs bom from 
Satyadh?k, 750 

Kfiasva, the celestial weapons as the 
progeny of, 45 

Kf$eyu, one of the ten sons of Bhadra- 
$va, 748 

Krftia, manifestation of Visniu as, 25- 
31 

appeared for the destruction of 
demons, 745 

bom to Vasudeva and Devaki to 
remove oppression on the earth, 
26, 744 

entrusted to Nanda by Vasudeva, 27 
reference to Pralamba approaching, 
30fh 

came to Gomantaka from Mathur£, 
28 

destruction of Kalayavana by, 28fn 
story relating to Agt&vakra’s bless- 
ings on the nymphs to become 
wives of, 37fn 

some names .among the sixteen thou- 
sand wives of, /44 
married Satyabh&ma, 743 
the genealogy of, 25, 29, 744 



Index 


1125 


killed Satadhanu and recovered the 
gem and entrusted to Akrftra, 743 
recovered the syamantaka gem 
from Jamba van and married 
J&mbavati, son of, 743, 744 
exoneration of, 743 
story relating to Aniruddha, grand- 
son of, 30 

story of Bharata, describing the 
greatness of, 31 

became the charioteer of Arjuna, 32 
birth of a son to Subhadra, sister 
of, 33 

encouraged Arjuna to fight, 34 
survived the Mahabharata war, 36 
in whose absence the chariot etc. of 
the Pancjavas were lost, 37 
the mark on the chest of, 51 
letters denoting, 63 
name of the conch of, 63 fn 
form of Vi?i*u, 841 
name to be repeated at Dvaraka, one 
of those assigned on the body in 
worship, 414 

Krsrta, one of the six sons of Dhisai^a, 43 
Krtfia, one of the sons of Kartavirya, 
741 

Krsna, a class of men in the Salmala 
Dvipa, 352 

Knfla, one of the female divinities 
invoked, 230 
Kr$na, a flower, 529 
Krsna Dvaipayana, begetting sons 
through the wife of Vicitraviryaka, 
751 

Ktfria^tami, mode of practising the 
vow of, 507-8 

K^ijiavenl, a river; flows from Sahya, 

Kfta, an attendant of Siva, 201 
Kftagni, one of the sons of Kanaka, 
740 

Kftamala, river; flows from Malaya, 
351 

story relating to Manu’s libation 
at, 3 

kftomala, a herb, 407 
kftanjali, a herb, 406 
Kftanta, god of death; worshipped, 
316 

Kftaujas, one of the sons of Kanaka, 
740 

Kftavarma, one of the ten sons of 
Hrdika, 743 

Krtavarman, one of those who survived 
after the Bharata war, 36 
Kftavirya, one of the sons of Kanaka; 
son of, 740 

Kftavratara disdple of Lomahar^aga, 
730 


Kftayuga, repeats in a cyclic order, 39 
worshipped, 50 

creation of Manu relating to, 323 
Kfteyu, one of the ten sons of 
Bhadrasva, 748 
Kfti, son of Lomapada, 741 
name of a metre, 905 
classical metres based on, 914 
kfts, the primary affixes added to 
verbs, 985-6 

Kfttika, asterism; belongs to the 
sphere of fire, 387 

an asterism; mother of Karttikeya, 
44 

commended for first feeding of the 
child, 358 

commendable for sowing seed, 361^ 
occurring on a Saturday as auspi- 
cious, 377 

not to wear new clothes on, 359 
misery caused by Sun’s presence in, 
363 

categorised as evil, 381 
located in the east in kftacakra, 385 
located in the third column in the 
diagram to find period for 
journey, 400 

Kfttivasas, image of, 138-9 
Krura, letter denoting, 419 
K$ama, wife of Pulaha; progeny of, 49 
image of, 135 
K$ami, an energy, 292 
kgapanaka (mantra), description of, 
875 ‘ 

K$ara, an ocean, 351 
k$ara, a medicine, 407 
ksatriya, synonyms of, 1018 
k$aya, one of the kinds of mantras of 
Siva, 873 

Ksay&, image of, 138 
Kgema, one of the sons of Medha- 
tithi, 351 

k$ema, one of the tarabalas, 359 
K§ema, image of, 138 
K$emaka, son of Anarka; son of, 749 
K$emakarf, a goddess, 424 
Kfemankari, image of, 135 
K$emy&, a name of Durga, 26 
k$etra, things denoted by the term, 
1070 

k$etrajna, meaning of the term, 1070 
Ksetraka, son of Svahya, 743 
K*irabdhi, ocean around Sakadvtpa, 
352 

kflri, a herb, 371 
k?iroda, an ocean, 351 
K$obha$i, a goddess, 424 
Ksudra, a Rudra, 254 
Kubera, lord of wealth; son of 
Vitfravas, 24 



1126 


Agni Purina 


synonyms of, 988 
was made king of kings, 47 
image of, 137 
propitiation of, 176 
worshipped, 51 
kubjaka, a flower, 529 
Kubjamra, a sacred place, 327 
greatness of Hr$ike£a to be con- 
templated at, 841 
Kubjika, goddess;, 41 Iff 
mode of worship of, preliminaries 
for worship of, 412 
mode of worship of, 413 
mode of contemplation of, 416 
worship of the sandals of, 415 
a charm in a cloth may have the 
outlines of, 402 

Kudamala, sub-division of a hell, 1039 
Kuhu, a son of Arigiras and Smfti, 49 
wife of Havi$m&n, 739 
kuhu, denotes the moon a digit less 
on the new moon day, 990 
an occult nerve, 257 
Kuhura, one of the sons of Babhru; 
son of, 742 

Kuk?i, a daughter of Kardama and 
Devahuti, 41 

kukri* a modification of the array 
daijda, 633 

Kulaka, division of poetry called, 919 
has many couplets, 920 
Kulafa, a female divinity; mode of 
worship of, 412 

Kulavagiri, goddess Kubjika addressed 
as, 413 

Kulesvari, female divinity; contem- 
plated, 404 

Kulika, one of the eight chief ser- 
pents; the number of heads of, 807 
presides over the junctions of 
periods; duration of the rule of, 

808 

assigned on the cars in the worship 
of Kubjika, 4 1 5 

Kumara, denotes Skanda born of Agni 
in a clump of reeds, 44 
Kumara, son of Havya, 352 
Kum£ra, river; rises from Suktimat, 351 
Kum&rakotf, a sacred place; great- 
ness of, 327 

Kum&ralalit&, characteristics of the 
metre, 91 1 
kumari, a herb, 406 
Kumbha, a demon; Hanumat searched 
for Sita in the house of, 19 
killed by Rama, 22 

Kumbha, a constellation; correction 
for, 367 

victory or death indicated by, 377 
Kumbha, name of a pitcher, 270 


Kumbha, a posture made with the 
hands, 187, 899 

Kumbhaka, a variety of pra$ayama; 

reason for its name as, 557 
Kumbhakaroa, a demon; Hanumat 
searched for Sita in the house of, 19 
was always sleeping, 24 
battle of; killed by Rama, 22 
Kumbhakan^i, a spirit afflicting the 
child in the ninth month; symptoms 
of child affected by; offering to 
appease, 823 

Kumbhan^a, a minister of Bana, 30 
Kumuda, worshipped, 51 
Kumuda, a divinity assigned on the 
body, 414 

Kumuda, a deity presiding over the 
banner, 148 
worshipped, 284 

Kumuda, a gate-keeper; adored, 93 
Kumuda, a boundary mountain, 352 
kumuda, one of the treasures, 1 1 1 
Kumudakga, a deity presiding over 
the banner, 148 
worshipped, 284 

Kundalak§mi, goddess Laksmi at the 
middle of sacrificial pit, 95 
kunqlalini, nature and location of, 558 
Kuridi) a goddess, 133 
Kuni, a son of Manu and Naqlvala, 
42 fn 

Kunti, son of Kratha, 741 
son of, 742 

Kunti, wife of Papdu, 744 
sons of, 751 

birth of Yudhisthira, Kan^a and 
others to, 32 

went to the forest after the Bharata 
war, 36 

Kurangesa, one of the siddhas; wor- 
shipped, 415 

kurcha, used for worship, 94 
Kurma, form of Vi§pu, 326 
saluted, 50 

salagrama representing, 125 
kurma, a life-force carried by the 
vein Ya£a, 556 
functions of, 557 
a posture, 55 

Kurmacakra, to find the victory etc., 
description of, 370 
Kurmaka, letter denoting, 419 
Kurmapur&oa, narrated m connection 
with the story of Indradyumna; 
narrated by tortoise form of lord 
Vi$nu; extent of; should be given 
as a gift, 734 

Kuru, name of a king, 322 
bom in the family of Aila Purfiravas, 
31 



Index 


1127 


son of SaihvaraQa; migrated from 
Prayaga and founded kingdom 
of Kurukgetra; the four sons of, 
750 

Kuru, a country on the western part, 
322, 351 

Kuru, Uttara, a mountain, location 
of, 324 

Kuru, Uttara, a country; river Bhadra 
passes through, 325 
Kuruk§etra, one of the sacred places, 
491 

five pits made by Parasurama at, 9 
armies of Pan^avas and Kauravas 
met at, 34 
greatness of, 350 

greatness of even the dust parti- 
cles of, 327 

liberation conferred by stay at, 335 
certain men and species of beings 
born as brahmins at, 349 
auspiciousness of image of Brahma 
at the centre of, 106 
Vamana form of Visnu worshipped 
at, 841 

Kurus (Kauravas), enmity between 
Pandavas and, 32 

Kurus, recognised the Pa^clavas in the 
Virata, 33 

description of the battle between 
Pandavas and, 34 

Kurus, a class of men inPlakgadvipa, 351 
Kurus, country; location of, 325 
Visgu as Matsya in, 326 
Kuruvinda, nature of rubies got from, 
641 

Kusa, born to Sita in the hermitage 
of Valmiki, 24 

born in the family (of Raghus) as 
son of Rama; son of, 738 
Ku£a, one of the seven sons of Suhotra 
and Girika, 750 
Kusa, a continent, 323 
given by Priyavrata to Jyo tinman, 
323 

rulers of, 352 

kusa (grass). Vena was killed by the 
sages, with, 42, 42fn 
the name Pracinabarhis associated 
with, 43 

used in worship, 58, 67, 68, 94, 95 
Kuia, a Bower, 529 
Kuiagra, bom from Bfhadratha; son 
of, 750 

Kuiala, country ruled by a son of 
Dyutimat, 352 

Kuiala, one of the siddhas, 414 
Kuiasthali, as the domain of Anarta; 

kingdonTof; got by Raxvata, 736 
Kuiefeya, a boundary mountain, 352 


Ku&ka, son of Balak£sva; son of, 749 
Kuiottara, son of Havya, 352 
KQ$mand^* an attendant of Siva; 
image of, 1 35 
worship of, 310 
ku?manda, a flower, 529 
not to be used in worship, 530 
ku$tha, a herb, 372 
Kusumamala, letter denoting, 418 
Kusumavicitra, characteristics of the 
metre, 912 

Kusumitalat&vcllit&, characteristics of 
the metre, 914 

kutaja, a flower; not to be used in 
worship, 529 

not to be used for Siva, 529 
Kutika, beads belonging to the 
Savitra class, 894 

Kutila, beads belonging to Sikh& class, 
894 

Kuftala, a hell, 531 
Kuvalaiva, son of Brhadasva; got the 
name Dhundhum£ra, 736 
Kuvalayapida, a demon, 27 

lagna, denotes the rise of a constel- 
lation, 989 
laguda, uses of, 652 
lajj&luka, a herb, 406 
lak$ahoma, mode of performing, 425-6 
Lak?maria, born to Sumitra, 10 
married Urmila, 1 1 
accompanied Rama to the forest, 
13 

cut the nose of £urpai}akha, 15 
Sita’s words to; Rama’s words to, 
16 

comforted Rama, 1 7 
Hanumat recounting to Sita the 
story of Rama and, 19 
killed Indrajit, 22 
reference to killing of the demons by, 
24 

Lak?maria, one of the wives of Knoa, 
744 

Lak$mi, consort of Naraya^a (Vi?ou), 
49, 738 

synonyms of, 986 
origin and greatness of, 6 
characteristics of the image of, 131, 
133 

characteristics of certain forms of 
Vijoii in the company of, 131 
installation of image of, 169-70 
worshipped, 51, 52, 197 
mode of worship of, 19, 849-51 
lakfmi, a nerve, 316 
Lak^minarayaoa, a fclagrama, 125 
Lakti, image of, 138 
Lalana, a spirit seising the child in 



1128 


Agni Purtya 


the fifth month; symptoms of the 
child seized by; offering to appease, 
823 

L&lasii, image of, 1 38 
Lalita, characteristics of the metre, 909 
lalita, a kind of gesture, 929 
Lalita, another name ofGauri, 133 
characteristics of the image of, 139 
Lalita, daughter of king of Vidarbha, 
320 

Lalitya, an excellence of word 944 
(See also smoothness) 

Lamb&, wife of Dharma ; progeny of, 44 
Lambaka, a division of prose kavyas, 
919 

Lambakuk$i, a name of Gariesa, 190 
Lambana, a son of Jyotismat, 352 
Lambodara, one of the eight forms of 
Ganapati, 865 

Lambodari, letter denoting, 417 
L&hgali, letter denoting, 419 
language, explanation of abusive, 655 
LaiikS, Surpaoakha’s arrival at; 

Si ta carried by Rava^a to 16 
Sampati’s words about Slta’s presence 
at, 19 

Hanuman’s search for Sita at, 19 
burning of city of, 20 
Vibhi$ana anointed as ruler of, 21 
entrusted by Rama to Vibhi$aoa, 23 
goddess addressed as builder of 
bridge to, 379 
lapis lazuli, a gem, 640 

qualities of excellent variety of, 641 
L&ta s, the names of towns given to, 31 5 
L&fiya, a variety of diction; charac- 
teristics of, 927 
Lauhitya, a sacred place, 328 
Lava, born in the family (of Raghus ) 
as son of Rama, 738 
born to Sita in the hermitage of 
Valmfki, 24 

Lavali, characteristics of the metre, 909 
Lavaca, an ocean, 324 
Lavaca, a demon killed by Satrughna, 
24 

law codes, stronger than sciences of 
wealth, 657 

procedure if there is conflict bet- 
ween two, 657 
laws, code of, 455-7 
laws, code of criminal, 588-93 
law-suit, rests on the witnesses, 654 
as protecting the four institutions 
of life, 654 

as encompassing four persons, 654 
the four items accomplished by 
means of, 654 
eight accessories of, 654 
the three causes for, 654 


two other causes of; the six things 
associated with each one of the 
two, 634 

the three evidences in, 657 
laya, explanation of, 994 
Laya, image of, 138 
layers, of the skin; description of, 1034 
lead, auspiciousness of, 641 
leg, diseases of; remedy for, 769 
Leo, a fixed sign; acts of fixed nature 
to be done in, 384 
the time taken by the Sun to cross, 
384 

rite to determine the sex of the 
child to be done in, 357 
building of a house to be avoided 
when Jupiter is in, 360 
the day of getting up of Indra when 
Sun is in, 361 

banner of Indra to be lowered in, 
362 

friendly with Gemini as also Libra, 
392 

leprosy, remedy for, 753, 767, 773-4, 
779 

letters, are either sixtythree or sixty- 
four; classification of, 915 
origin of, 916 

division into five groups on the 
basis of place of articulation etc., 
916 

places of articulation of, 916, 917 
merits or demerits of sticking to or 
shifting the places of articulation 
of, 916 

instructions in using the, 916, 917 
in the name of a votary; the four- 
fold classification of, effects of, 895 
in the name, as aid to prognosti- 
cation, 409 

indicating victory and prosperity, 
376 

group of; denoting the planets, 378 
libation, mode of offering, 535-37 
merits of offering, 450-51 
liberation, words denoting, 991 
got by means of knowledge, 1059 
Libra, a constellation commendable 
for marriage when Sun is in, 357 
known as the waking day of Hari 
if Sun is in, 361 

time taken by Sun to traverse, 384 
friendly with Aries, 392 
lightning, words denoting, 989 
Likhita, a law-giver, 455 
likhya, a measure, 107 
Lite, image of, 138 
lily, words denoting, 996 
limbs, words denoting the different, 
1015 



Index 


1129 


eight kinds of; associated with 
exertion, 929 

liAga(s), different varieties, dimen- 
sions, of, 141-145 

movable variety, mode of fixing, 
301-302 

classified into groups of; on the 
basis of doorway etc., 142 
description of, 143 
made of earth; merits of worship- 
ping, 142, 901 
movable, 321 
characteristics of, 139-41 
measurement of eyes proportionate 
to, 288 

mode of installation of, 172, 278-82, 
295, 296, 297, 960 

rites relating to installation of, 289- 
90 

old or broken; repair of, 311-13 
mode of worshipping, 299 
benefits of worshipping different, 
142, 900 

contemplation of; as in one’s own 
body, 60 

linga, a posture made with the hands, 
218, 229, 297, 898 

Lirigapurana, in the Agneya-kalpa; 
extent of, 733 

contains description of virtues by 
lord Siva in the form of fiery 
linga, 733 

merits of making a gift in Phalguna, 
733 

Lion, manifestation of Vi$nu, 9 
lip, lower; six actions of, 929 
lipta, a measure of time, 370 
loan, rates of interest relating to, 658 
loan-bond, rules relating to writing of, 
663-4 

lodhra, a herb, 372 
logical reasoning, word for, 991 
Loha, name of a demon, 639 
cut by lord Vi?$u, 639-40 
Loha, a hell, 532 

Lohabhara, subdivision of a hell, 1039 
Lohasanku, subdivision of a hell, 1039 
Lohita, a divinity; letter denoting, 419 
Lohita, a country known by the name 
of a son of Vapugm&n, 352 
Lokabhavana, form of Vi?Qu at 
Nepala, 841 

Lokakula, a place; Ripuhara to be 
worshipped at, 841 

Lokaloka, a peak; extension of, 353 
lokana, a posture relating to riding 
horses, 787 

lokokticch£y&, that which follows the 
proverb, 932 


Lolupa, a female divinity; image of, 1 38 
Lomahar^ana, got the Vedic lore 
from Vy&sa; disciples of, 730 
Lomapftda, one of the sons of Vidar- 
bha; son of, 741 

Lomap&da, son of Satyaratha; son of, 
748 

long life, a mixture that would give, 
756 

prescription to get, 777 
lotus, words denoting different kinds 
of, 996 

words denoting the root of a, 996 
worship of gods in, 79fn 
efficacy of worshipping with, 529 
merits of worshipping lord Hari 
with, 529 

diagram of; for daily worship etc., 

Lunar race, description of, 738-40 
lunar days, the names of the presid- 
ing deities of, 805 
lustre, words denoting, 989, 990 
lute, words denoting different kinds 
of, 994 

machine, uses of, 652 
madanadvadaii, mode of practising 
the vow of, 512 
Madhava, a name of Y r i$pu, 65 
characteristics of the form of, 128 
Madhav!, characteristics of, 934 
Madhu, Vi$nu as the killer of the 
demon, 65 

Madhu, son of Devaksetra ; son of, 742 
Madhuhara, a name of Vi$Qu, 65 
madhuparka, offered at the time of 
worship. 55 

madhura vjtti, explanation of, 933 
madhu rks, recitation of; as a paAkti- 
pavana, 349 

Madhurya (tranquility) an excel- 
lence of sense, 945 

Madhusudana, Vi$qui as the destroyer 
of demon Madhu, 746 
form of Vi$i>u on Mandara, 841 
to be contemplated everywhere, 842 
Madhusravas, at Gaya, pineja to be 
offered at, 344 

Madhya, a metre; number of letters 
in, 905 

Madhyadesa, location of, 351 
Madhya Jyotis, composition of the 
metre, 904 

M&dhyakathi, a branch of Yajurveda, 
730 

madhyama, a variety of pr&Q&y&ma, 
1044 

M&dhyandinl, a branch of Yajurveda, 
730 



1130 


Agni Pwr&Qa 


M&dri, one of the wives of Knua, 744 
M&drI, one of the two wives of Dh^ta; 
progeny of, 743 

M&dri, other wife of P£od u > 32, 744 
progeny of, 751 

death of Pandu while hnving union 
with, 32 

Maga, a class of men at Sakadvipa, 352 
Magadha, a class of men at the 
&akadvipa, 352 

Magadha, a forest; the name Vaikup- 
tha to be repeated at, 842 
magadha (s), a caste, origin of, 42, 430 
duty of, 431 

Magh&, an asterism known as down- 
faced, 381 

comprises the sphere of wind, 387 
comprises the sphere of fire, 387 
effect of Sun’s transit in, 363 
harvest of grains to be done in, 361 
auspicious for administering medi- 
cine, 358 

known as blunted ; its effect relating 
to journey, 382 

not commendable for attending on 
the employer, 360 

not commended for wearing new 
clothes, 359 

affliction caused by its occurrence 
on a Tuesday, 376 
fatality indicated by its conjunc- 
tion with Saturday and full 
moon, 377 

Magha, a month; a commendable 
day for first shave in, 359 
benefit of purchasing food grains 
in, 387 

inauspicious for first entry into a 
house, 360 

Mahabahu, one of the sons of Hira- 
j^yaksa, 46fn 

Mahabhadra, a lake in the JambG- 
dvipa, 325 

Mahabhairava, obeisance to, 379 
Mah&bharata, story of, 34ff 
mode of honouring a person recit- 
ing, 734 

mode of making gifts after the 
recitation of, 734 

mahabhutaghata, a great gift, 544 
Mah&bja, a serpent; image of, 137 
Mah&bodhi, tree at Gaya; merits of 
worshipping, 338 

Mahabfhati, constitution of; another 
name of, 904 
Mah&caud&> a hell, 1038 
Mahacapalk, characteristics of the 
metre, 906 

Mah&deva, a form of Rudra, 50 
favour extended to Sail by, 45 


worship of, 290 
Mah&ghora, a hell, 1038 
Mah&jvala, a hell, 532 
mahajyai$thi, the presence of Jupiter 
and Moon in the asterism Jyegtha, 
362 

Mahakala, image of, 135 
letter denoting, 419 
to be worshipped, 51, 197, 283 
Mahakali, a female energy; colour of 
136 

letter denoting, 417 
contemplation on, 413 
mahakali, a medicinal plant, 378 
Mahakavya, characteristics of poetry 
called, 919-20 

Mahakofi, at Gaya; pin<Ja to be 
offered at, 342 
Mahakoti, a goddess, 375 
Mahakrura, a yogini ; image of, 1 38 
Mahak$obhakariui, Kubjika addressed 
as, 413 

Mahalaksmi, characteristic features 
of the form of, 1 34 
worshipped, 52, 415 
benefit of the worship of, 343 
Mahalaya, a holy spot at Varanasi, 
330 

Mahamanas, son of Mahasala; son of, 
747 

Mahamari, goddess; image of, 401 
a formula affecting enemies; des- 
cription of, 401-2 

Mahamaya, cloth containing the 
figure of, 402 

Mahamoha, one of the gods to be 
located and worshipped, 292 
mahamudra, a posture with the hands, 
200 

Mahanabha, one of the sons of 
Hiranyaksa, 46fn 

MahanadI, river at Gaya; bathing 
in, 341 

Phalgutirtha on, 337 
Mahanan&, image of, 138 
Mahananta, worshipped, 414 
Mahanaraka. sub-division of a hell, 
1039 

mah&nila, a kind of sapphire, 640 
Mahanta, son of Dhiman, 323 
Mah&padma (Mah&mbuja), one of 
the eight chief serpents; the number 
of heads of, 807 

forms the eyebrows of the goddess, 
415 

mah&padma, a type of temple, 315 
a treasure, 111, 269 
mah&paraka, an expiation; explana- 
tion of 494 



Index 


1131 


Mahaparfva, a demon killed by 
Rama, 22 

Mahapu g tfpravardhana, a goddess 
staying in a particular circle, 376 
Maharamyas, images of, 135 
Mah&raurava, sub-division of a hell, 
531, 1039 

Maharloka, distance of, 354 
worshipped, 79 

Maha&la, son of Janamejaya; son of, 
747 

mahasantapana, an expiation, ex- 
planation of, 482, 494, 799 
Mahascna, letter denoting, 419 
Mahat, origin of, 40, 48 
Mahatala, a nether world, 353 
Mahatamisraka, a hell, 531 
Mahatamra, a hell, 532 
Mahavajra, a hell, 1 038 
Mahavici, sub-division of a hell, 531, 
1039 

Mahavirya, a form of Rudra, 253 
Mahavirya, son of Viraf, 323 
Mahavlta, son of Savana, 353 
Mahayoga, form of Vigou at Kasi, 841 
form of Vignu at Salagrama, 841 
Mahendra, a name of the elephant- 
faced god, 190, 866 
Mahendra, lord Indra; worship of 176 
offering of gems made to, 273 
Mahendra, mountain in Bhkratavarga, 
350 

rivers originating from, 351 
Parasurama's final stay at, 9 
Mahendra, a female energy; to be 
worshipped, 91 

Mahendra, hill the name of Acyuta to 
be repeated at, 482 

Mahendraka, a divinity worshipped, 414 
Mahendri, one of the eight goddesses, 
412 

Mahesvara, worship of, 290 
Krftia’s conquest of the fever re- 
lated to, 30 

Mahesvari (Mahesi), one of the eight 
goddesses, 1 39fn, 399, 41 1 , 41 5 
Mahidhara, offering made to, 109 
Mahima, son of Samhana; son of, 740 
Mahiman, son of Janamejaya, 750 
Mahipala, beads belonging to the 
Siva class, 894 

Mahiga, a boundary mountain, 352 
Mahodara, one of the forms of 
Ganapati, 190, 865 
Mahodara, a demon killed by RAma, 22 
mahodarl, denotes the entiy of the 
Sun in one of the signs, 362 
Mainaka, a mountain; rise of, 19 
Mainda, **& monkey; accompanied 
R&xna to Lanka, 21 


whose brother Dvivida was killed 
by Balar&ma, 30fn 
Maithila, denotes King Janaka, 10 
Maitra, a muhurta; deeds to be done 
in, 371 

Maitra = Anuradha 
Maitrayaiii, a branch of Yajurveda, 
730 

Maitreya, priest of king of Sauvlra,526 
Maitreya, son of Divodasa; son of, 750 
Maitrisi, one of the goddesses, 413 
Makara, a constellation; correction 
for 367 

(See also Capricorn) 
makara, a treasure, 111, 269 
makara, an array; a variation of the 
array called bhoga, 634 
Makar&kga, a demon killed by Rama, 
22 

Mala, characteristics of the metre, 913 
malamantras, have more than twenty 
letters; yield results in youth, 802 
on the practice of, 804 
malati, a flower, 529 
Malaya, mountain, 350, 351 
Malayagiri, as a sacred place, 328 
malayamaka, one of the yamakas, 935 
Malini, characteristics of the metre, 
913 

Malinimantra, rite relating to, 418-9 
mallikS, a herb, 371, 378 
a flower, 529 

Malopama, explanation of, 940 
Malyavat, mountain, 325 
Rama's stay on, 18 
mana^sila, used as an unguent, 372 
Manasa, a manifestation of Vi gnu, 428 
Manasa, one of the sons of Vapugmat; 
denotes also the country ruled by 
him, 352 

M&nasa, as an excellent place, 330 
Manasa, a boundary mountain, 353 
M&nasa, a lake, 325, 349 
Manasya, son of Mahanta, 323 
Manasyu, son of Pracinav&n ; son of, 
748 

M&nava, a missile, 10 
Manavakakrifjitaka, characteristics of 
the metre, 911 

manda, a variety of hones, 789 
m&nd&, a name of the entry of the 
Sun in one of the signs, 362 
Mandaga, a class of men in the 
$&kadvipa, 352 

MantUkini, river; as excellent, 328 
Rama's stay on the banks of, 14 
mand&kini, a name of the entry of 
the Sun in one of the signs, 362 
Mand&kr&nta, characteristics of the 
metre, 913-4 



1132 


Agni Purina 


masala, an array; description of, 633 
an array; two units taken from 
and combined (for a battle), 634 
an array; modifications of, 634 
some variations of, 633 
certain features of amara same as, 
635 

mairfala, a posture relating to archery, 
645 

maptjlala, baked flour, 108 
ma^dale&vara, meaning of the word, 
1018 

ma^dali, a class of serpents based on 
excess of one humour, 807 
Mandara, a boundary mountain, 324, 
352 

made as the churning rod to chum 
the ocean, 3, 745 

the name Madhusudana to be 
repeated at, 841 
mandara, a type of temple, 3*4 
mandara, a flower; used in the wor- 
ship of Vi$nu, 99 

used in the worship of Siva, 101, 529 
Mandavi, married by Bharata, 1 1 
Mandehah, a class of men in the 
Kusadvipa, 352fn 

Mandhatf, son of Yuvanasva; sons of, 
737 

father of Mucukunda, 28fn 
mandira, a type of temple, 314 
Mangali, benefit of worshipping the 
goddess, 343 
mangala, a stone, 269 
MagiguQanikara, characteristics of 
the metre, 913 

manika, a class of temple; oval-sha- 
ped; the temples belonging to the 
class of, 315 

Manivaka, son of Havya, 352 
Mafijarl, characteristics of the metre, 
909 

manji$th&, used for making an 
unguent, 372 
Maftju$a, a hell, 532 
Man-lion, form of Vi$ou, 129 
Manmatha, a year of the Hindu 
calendar, 405 

Manohara, wife of Dhara; sons of, 44 
Manojava, different reading for Puro- 
java, 44fn 

Manomanl, a female divinity; wor- 
shipped, 51 

Manonmana, a form of Rudra, 253 
Manonmani, a goddess; an envoy of 
goddess Tvarita, 424 
Manonuga, one of the sons of 
Dyutimat, 352 
manoram^, a nerve, 316 
raanofathadv&dafi, mode of practi- 


sing the vow of, 512 
Manthara, an attendant of Kaikeyi, 1 1 
words of, 12 

Mantra, a form of Rudra, 253 
mantra, eight-syllabled, 53, 56 

known as ari; destructive nature of, 
803 

which accomplishes all the desires, 
830 

for conquest of evil influences of 
pau?oa, 835 

propitiation of the letters compos- 
ing a; benefit accruing from, 
835-836 

of five syllables sacred to Siva; 
mode of worship with, 837-40 
mantras, forming base of all mantras, 
373 

different kinds of, 265-66, 358, 416- 
19, 832-35 

their nomenclature, 802-806 
narration of different kinds of; 

effects of, 872-3 
for worship; description of, 50 
collection of; the five parts of, 830 
of different kinds; application of, 
863-64 

classification as agneya and saumya, 
802 

should begin with pranava, 805 
the six accessory acts relating to, 
403-4 


instructions relating to repetition 
of, 805 

to be repeated facing east or looking 
downwards, 805 

means of acquiring perfection in and 
the efficacy of, 804 

whose letters are governed by 
baneful asterisms to be avoided, 
803 

number of repetitions of; inversely 
proportional with the number of 
letters in, 804 

sleeping and waking states relating 
to, 803 

method to find the auspiciousness 
of, 265 

which remove the baneful influences 


of planets, 826-30 
eight kinds of benevolent, 874 
for making offering to the spirits, 826 
relating to six kinds of acts such as 
paralysing, 871-2 

that would stupefy the three worlds, 
845-9 

three parts of; relating to the three 
gods, 420 

relating to worship of different gods, 



Index 


1133 


of Siva; different kinds of, 873-75 
relative merits of different methods 
of repetition of, 805 
Manu, the term denoting the period 
of, 39fn 

— Svayambhuva as the first, 41fn 
creation of, 322-23 
born to Cak$u$a and Pu?kari$i; 
progeny o£ 42 

— Vaivasvata; born to Sun and 
Samjiia, 735 

words spoken to the Fish by, 4 
— a law-giver, 455 
— herb denoted by the term, 406, 407 
Manus, names of different, 427-9 
reign in a day of Brahma, 429 
periods of different, 427-9 
names of Indra and the sages during 
the periods of, 427-9 
Manvantaras, periods of Manu, 39fn 
manifestations of Vi$QU innumer- 
able in, 39 

Margaftr?a, month; increased return 
of certain food articles in, 386 
marica, a herb, 407 
Marica, a demon ;s tupefied by Rama’s 
missile, 10 

words spoken to Ravana by, 16 
imitated the voice of Rama and 
cried aloud, 16fn 

Marici, a sage; mind-born son of 
Brahma, 9,41, 42fn, 735 
Kasyapa bom from, 9 
had Paumamasa through Sambhuti, 
49 

worship of, 108, 274, 275, 317 
Marina, daughter of Ka^uju and 
Pramloca ; offered by Soma to 
Piacetas, 43 

mark, words denoting, 989 
Markarjdeya, born to Mfkaodu and 
Veda&ra, 49 

imparted knowledge to Vajra, 30 
Markandeyapurana, contains discus- 
sion on righteousness; extent of, 732 
to be given as a gift in Karttika, 732 
M&rkagdeyesvara, at Gaya ; wor- 
shipped, 342 

marriage (s), four kinds of acts relating 

rules relating to, 434-36 
eight kinds of, 434-5 
time for performing, 357 . 
commendable constellations and 
planets for, 435 

asterisms commendable for, 435 
prohibited periods for performance 
of, 435 

Man, distance o£ 354 
chariot o£ 356 


period (yean) of influence of, 363, 
393 

presides over a par! of day, 381 
letter presided over by, 374 
the effect of occupying the second 
house by, 383 

confen good in the (tenth house), 
384 

indicates defeat if battle is begun 
when it leaves its asterism, 386 
bad luck indicated by, 400 
causes riot, 377 

the days which are to be avoided 
if associated with, 410 
is for victory, 389 
nature of penon born in the house 
of, 392 
image of, 1 37 

the form of that is to be contem- 
plated, 828 

Marta^da (Sun), the day for the in- 
stallation of, 87 

Marut, Maruts came into being from, 
44 

Maruta, Wind-god; worship of, 274 
Maruti (Hanumat), crossing of the 
ocean by, 19 

words spoken to Ravana by, 20 
Rama and Laksmaria were made 
secure when the mountain was 
brought by 22 
attacked R&vaga, 23 
Maruts, were born from Marut, 44 
Vasava was made the chief of, 47 
brought Bharadvaja to Bharata, 749 
Marutta, son of Titikju; son of, 741 
— son of Karandharaa; son of, 747 
maruvaka, leaves, 529 
masi, oil of, 372 

masika, ceremony; par&ka to be obser- 
ved at the time of, 488 
massaging, method of; benefits of, 
763-4 

M&tali, charioteer of Indra, 22, 22fn 
Matahga, at Gaya, 338, 343 
Matang&frama at Gaya, 337 
Matahgavapi, at Goya, 337 
Matangeia, at, Gaya; worshipped, 337 
Mathur&, Lavana killed by satrughna 
at, 24 

Kr$oa rode a chariot and reached, 27 
Krwa came to Gomantaka leaving. 
28 

Ke£ava to be worshipped at, 841 
Matin&ra, one of the ten sons of 
Bhadraiva; the three sons of, 748 
Matr&samaka, characteristics of the 
metre, 907 

m&trk&-mantras, denote the monosyl- 
labic words; deities governing, 952 



1134 


Agni Purdna 


Matsya, form of Vi?nu, 326 
— name of a s&lagrama, 125 
Matsyakali, one of the seven sons of 
Suhotra and Girika, 750 
Matsya-pur&tia, narrated by lord 
Vi$ijm in the form of a fish to Manu, 
4, 734 

should be given as a gift at the time 
of the equinox, 734 
MattS, characteristics of the metre, 
912 

Matt&krida, characteristics of the 
metre, 914 

Mattamayura, characteristics of the 
metre, 913 

Mattoktichaya, explanation of, 932 
mature, a mode; explanation of, 933, 
934 

Maturity, explanation of, 945 
Maukulyas, were descendants of 
Mukula, 750 

M£y&, a female energy, 292, 417 
— wife of Dhaya, 49 
mayS. (mantra), denotes certain group 
of letters, 888 
no divisions in, 895 
M&y&vati, Rati born as; maid of 
Sambara; married Pradyumna, 29, 
29fn 

Mayurasarini, characteristics of the 
metre, 912 

mayura£ikh£, a herb, 406 
M&y&vin, son of Dundubhi, 17fn 
means, seven kinds of, 587 
measures, table of, 1022 
MedhS, a female divinity; worshipped, 
52 

— one of the sons of Priyavrata, 322 
Medh&tithi, ruled Plak$a, 322 
names of the sons of, 322, 351 
son of Kanva, 748 

medicine, asterism good for taking, 358 
dosage of; the factors to be noted 
in deciding, 762 

medicines, falling under six heads 
and accomplishing two kinds of 
effects, 770 

conferring longevity and curing 
diseases, 778-80 

meditation, on Brahman; mode of 
practising, 1055-6 

Meghan&da, was bom from R&vaoa, 
24 

Meghan&d&, image of, 138 
Meghap&laka, one of the seven sons 
of Nahufa, 740 

memory, herb for improving, 773 
men, different classes of, words de- 
noting, 1013 

having different deformities or 


abnormalities; words for, 1014 
mounted on elephants, work of, 613 
Mena, a daughter of the manes and 
Svadha, 49 

mental change, word denoting, 995 
Meru, mountain; extent of, 324 
— is in the shape of a lotus, 325 
— a region, 322 

Rsabha was bom to Nabhi through. 
323 

meru, a type of temple, 314 
Mercury (a planet), distance of, 334 
chariot of, 356 

period (years) of influence of, 363, 
393 

presides over a part of day, 381 
the form that is to be contemplated 
of, 137, 828 

gives realisation of desire, 377 
letter presided over by, 374 
characteristics of a person bom in 
the house of, 392 
good for truce, 389 
occupying second house confers 
good, 383 

beneficial in the twelfth, 384 
indicates defeat in battle begun 
when it is leaving its asterism, 38G 
merudana, ten kinds of, mode of 
making, 544-5 
twelve varieties of, 553-5 
mode of offering (goddess), 554 
Me$a, a constellation; letter denoting, 
419 

correction for, 367 
causes victory if full and death 
otherwise, 377 

good and bad effects of planets in, 
383 

me?a$pigi, a herb, 406 
messenger, qualification of; three 
types of, 625 

metals and chemicals, words denoting, 
1022-3 

metres, Vedic; rules relating to, 902 
having different numbers of padas, 
903 

of other kinds formed from Utkfti, 
905 

the gotras of; the deities of, 905 
colours of different, 905 
classical, 905 

the three divisions of, 908 
characteristics of equal, 908 
calculating the number of half-equal 
908 

on the calculation of the number of 
unequal, 908 

classical, based on Vedic metre 
Abhikrti, 914 



Index 


1135 


based on Atikj-ti, 914 
based on Kfti, 914 
classical; based on Prakfti, 914 
classical; based on Vedic metre 
Sankfti, 914 

classical; based on the Vedic metre 
Utkrti, 914 

classical; based on Vedic metre 
Vikfti, 914 

tabular representation of, 915 
to be employed in a Mahakavya, 
920 

midnight, words denoting, 990 
military expedition, instructions relat- 
ing to, 594 

Mimamsa, science of, 2 
Mina, correction for 367 
(See also Capricorn) 
letter denoting, 419 
mind, words denoting, 991 
mind, two divisions of exertions of; 
one of them relating to men divided 
further into eight, 927 
as the reins, 1075 
minerals, eight kinds of, 283 
minister, words denoting, 1018 
ministers, qualities of, 6 1 9 

how the king should examine the 
worthiness of, G 19-20 
defects of, 626 
mire, words denoting, 995 
miscarriage, in women; remedy for 
arresting, 777 

miseries, true knowledge about; com- 
mended, 1074 

Mithuna, a constellation; correction 
for 367 

( See also Gemini) 

Mitra, one of the twelve Adityas; son 
of Kasyapa, 45 

as one of the names of Sun, 136 
— a divinity to be worshipped, 317 
worship of, 274 
—one of the Adinathas, 412 
mitra, one of the tarabalas, 359 
Mitradevi, one of the daughters of 
Devaka; married by Vasudeva, 
742 

mi tram, explanation of, 1019 
Mitra vinda, one of the wives of Knoa, 
744 

Mitrayu, a disciple of Lomahar^a^a, 
730 

mocaka, a perfection, 257 
Mod&ki, son of Havya, 352 
mode, fourfold; uneven in the actions 
of a drama, 928 

modes (vjtti), five kinds of; produced 
by repetition of a single letter, 933 
Media, an ttoergy, 292 


mohalata, a herb, 406 
mohini, a herb, used for subjugation, 
372 

Mohopama, explanation of, 940 
mok$a, one of the puru$£rthas, 53 
mokgam, one of the pranitamudrds, 

857 

Monday, rite of chewing betel leaf to 
be done on, 358 
first shave commended on, 359 
one should not do agriculture on, 
361 

inauspicious nature of eleventh day 
falling on, 381 

month, lunar, solar and astral, 495 
Moon, only one in the world, 376 
synonyms of, 989 
orb of; words denoting, 989 
lustre of; words denoting, 989 
sixteenth digit of; words denoting. 
989 

distance of, 354 
period (years) of, 363 
influence of, 393 
periods over a part of a day, 381 
form of, 1 37 
appeases defeat, 377 
benefits caused by different positions 
of, 383, 384 

death caused by investiture of thread 
when Moon has set, 359 
its presence in asterism jye$th& 
known as mahajyai$thi, 362 
when holes are noticed in the disc of, 
387 

eclipse of the head known by the 
presence of, 388 

characteristic of a person born in the 
house of, 392 

ceremonies to be done when it is 
pure, 362 

moon-stone, a gem, 641 
moral observance, five kinds of, 454 
mortgage, rules relating to different 
types of, 660-1 

motana, a posture relating to riding 
horses, 787 

mountains, words denoting, 1006 
mfdanga, synonym for; different kinds 

Mpdava, a division of Vithi, 928 
Mfga, a divinity; worshipped, 108, 
316, 317 

mrga, a variety of horses, 789 
Mrgafir^a, one of the fixed asterisms, 

cqmprises the sphere of wind, 387 
location in adiagram,385 
located in the second column in 
a diagram, 400 



1136 

an asterism; good for discharging 
debt, 358 

commendable to begin the con- 
struction of a house, 360 
good for harvesting grains, 361 
good for taking harvested grains 
inside the house, 361 
mahdjyaisthi caused by, 362 
effect of Sun’s transit in, 363 
commended for all acts, 381 
Mfgavyadha, one of the eleven forms 
of Rudra, 45 

Mrkantdu, son of Vidhatf; son of, 49 
Mftyu, father of Sunitha, 42fn 
— born to Bhaya and Maya, 49 
— an energy, 292 

mrtyu, one of the groups of letters, 390 
to be rejected in all undertakings, 
391 

Mftyuftjaya, a form of Siva; mode of 
worship of, 899 
worshipped, 374 

mftyufijaya, a formula known as; des- 
cription of, 395 

Mucukunda, son of Mandhatf, 28, 737 
obtained a boon of long sleep, 28fn 
mudgara, uses of, 652 
mudra(s), posture of the hands for 
worship, 53 

different kinds — formation of, 66-67 
for worship of Sun, 1 96 
— an embellishment of word, 932 
explanation of, 932 
Mudrasphota, one of the siddhas, 414 
Muhurta, Muhurtas were born from, 
44 

Muhurtas, born from Muhurta, 44 
muhurtas, different names of, 371 
Mukhamandi, a female force, 84 
Mukhapurvika, characteristics of the 
metre, 906 

mukhavyavartana, an action of the 
horse while moving, 788 
Mukhya, a divinity worshipped, 317 
offering made to, 274 
mukhya, denotes first injunction, 1018 
Mukhya, a division of Abhivyakti, 943 
Mukhyaka, one of the sons of Bali, 747 
mukhyasarga, the fourth creation, 48 
Muktaka, division of poetry called, 919 
consists of single verses, 920 
describes different incidents, 920 
MuktakeSi, a monstress possessing 
the newly bom child on the seventh 
night, 822 

symptoms of child possessed by, 822 
material for fumigation when s pos- 
sessed by, 822 

unguent for the child afflicted by, 
822 


Agni Purtina 

Mukula, one of the five bom from 
Bahyasva, 749 
Cancasva as son of, 750 
whose descendants were known as 
Maukulyas and were brahmins, 
750 

Mukuta, the female spirit possessing 
the child two months old; symp- 
toms of the child possessed by, 
822 

offering and fumigation to appease, 
823 

Mula, an asterism; belongs to the 
watery region, 388 
marriage is commendable in, 357 
discharge of debt to be done in, 358 
commendable for beginning the 
construction of a house, 360 
good for doing agriculture, 361 
good for harvest of grains, 361 
commended for all acts, 38 1 
one of the blunted asterisms, 382 
misery caused by Sun’s transit in, 
363 

has face downward, 381 
location in kotacakra for forecast, 
385 

occupies the first column in a dia- 
gram, 400 

mfilagaurivrata, for Goddess Laksmi, 
500-2 

mitlakrcchra, an expiation, 483 
mulamantra, bathing of the deity 
done with, 53 

mundane existence, three kinds of 
afflictions in, 1040 

Mundaprstha, at Gaya, 336-7, 338 
worshipped, 342 

Mundika, a spirit possessing the 
child in the fifteenth year; symptoms 
of the child possessed by, 825 
Muni, the nymphs were born from, 47 
one of the sons of Dyutimat, 352 
one of the sons of Apa, 44 
muni, herb denoted by the word, 406, 
407 

munipuspa, a flower, 529 
munja, a lake in Jambudvipa, 325 
Mufijakesa, represents a branch of 
Atharvaveda, 730 
Mufijavafa, an excellent spot, 328 
Muraja, one of the bandhas; explana- 
tion of, 936 

murder, without witness; precau- 
tionary steps for passing judgement, 
676 

musall, a herb, 371, 378 
musical instruments, four kinds of, 
994 

words denoting different, 994 



Index 


1137 


mustard, used in a paste to give suc- 
cess against enemy, 372 
Mu$tika, a wrestler killed by Kr$na, 28 
mustimudra, a posture of hands used 
in worship, 96 

mystical diagrams of different kinds; 

for worship, 879-83 
mystic syllables, used in consecration, 
111 


Nabha, son ofNala; son of, 738 
Nabhaga, one of the eight sons of 
Vaivasvata Manu,735 
had two sons who were vaisyas and 
became brahmins later, 736 
— son of Bhagiratha; son of, 737 
Nabhi, was given country Hina by 
his father Agnidhra, 322 
Rsabha born to Meru and, 323 
Naciketa, fire; merits of worshipping 
thrice a day, 349 

nadi-s, the three being present in the 
goddess, 374 
( See also veins) 

Nadvala, wife of Manu; ten sons of, 42 
Naga, a hill at Gaya; excellence of, 337 
Naga, image of, 106 

investiture of sacred thread for; 
to be done, 215 
naga, a vital wind, 253 

a life-force carried by the vein pftha, 
556 

functions of, 557 

Nagadvipa, one of the nine territories, 
350 

nagah, herb denoted by the word, 406 
nagakari?a, a flower, 529 
Nagananda, sandals of; should be 
worshipped, 414 

Nagapasa, weapon used by Indrajit to 
bind Hanumat, 20 

nagapuspa, used as an unguent to 
control others, 372 

Nagas, Vasuki was made the ruler of, 
47 

Nagastra, weapon used by Indrajit, 22 
(See also Nagapasa) 

Nagavithi, was bom from Y&mi, 44 
Nagesvari, location of the letter re- 
presented by, 417 

Nagigayatri, the number of letters in 
the three feet of, 903 
Nagnajiti, one of the wives of Kr 
744 

Nagodbheda, greatness of the sacred 
place of, 327 

Nahuja, son of Ayu, 25, 31 

one of the sons of Ayus; seven sons 
of, W9 

Naigameya, brother of Kum&ra, 44 


Naimi$a,§aunaka and other sages at, 1 
a sacred place, 491 
merits of, 328 

naimittika, one of the three kinds of 
creation, 48 

ceremony should be done, 98 
Naimittiki, a division of Abhivyakti, 
943 

Nairfta, propitiation of, 176 
worshipped, 5 1 
Naisadha, a country, 322 
nai§(hika brahmacari, should stay with 
the preceptor till death, 433 
Naksatra-Yoga, constants, 365-6 
Nakta, son of Prthu and father of Gaya, 
323 

Nakula, born to Madri and Pandu, 
744, 751 
son of 751 

fell on the way of the march, 37 
born through Asvinikumara, 32 
Nakulisa, letter denoting, 419 
Nala, a monkey; building of a bridge 
in the ocean by, 21 
accompanied Rama to Lank5, 21 
— son of Nisadha; son of, 738 
— a year of the Hindu calendar, 405 
Nala, a goddess, 424 
Nalakiibara, son of Kubera, 90 
Nalika, a division of VithI, 928 
Nama, location of the letter denoting, 
417 

n&madvadasi, merits of practising the 
vow of, 512 

namakararja, one of the Vcdic rites 
to be performed, 59 
namask&ra, use of the term, 403 
name, words denoting, 992 
Nanda, a cowherd chief; Balarama 
and Kf$na left in the custody of, 27 
nanda, one of the treasures, 1 1 1 
Nanda, a place ; Jalasayin to be wor- 
shipped at, 842 
nanda, name of a stone, 269 
— a nerve, 316 

nandaka, description of the sword 
called, 639 

Nandana, a guard of the door; to be 
worshipped, 93 

— a year of the Hindu Calendar, 405 
— a forest, 325 

Nandarupa, worshipped, *14 
nandasaptami, a vow; details relating 
to, 505 

Nandi (n), conquered by T£rk$ya, 30 
worship of, 197, 283 
to be worshipped, 51 
Nandigr&ma, Bharata's return to, 15 
Rama’s arrival at, 23 
nandika, a type of temple, 314 



1138 


Agni Purdna 


Nandin, a muhurta; deeds to be done 
in, 371 

Nandi £a, image of, 135 
nandivardhana, a type of temple, 314 
Nara, son of Gaya, 323 
— son of Utinara and Nar£, 747 
Nara, wife of Ufinara, 747 
Naracakra, to find failure etc., 389 
N&rada, story of Ramaya^a described 
by V&lmilu to, 9 

V&Lmiki’s composition of Ram&- 
yaoa after hearing from, 25 
Kr 9 ^a*s action after hearing from, 
30 

methods of worship of Vi$$u as told 
by, 50 

— a boundary mountain, 351 
Nfiradiya, a Pancaratra agama, 106 
N&radlyapurapa, narrated by N&rada; 
extent of; to be given as a gift in 
AsVina, 732 

Naraka, demon; Kr?na as killer of, 28 
the story relating to Dvivida, 
friend of, 30 fn 

called Rauraka, Vedana as wife of, 
49 

Narakanayika, a hell, 1038 
Nara-N&r&yaqta, prayer to cleanse the 
votary, 85 

Narantaka, a demon killed by Rama, 22 
Narasimha, man-lion form of Visnu 
to kill HiranyakaSipu, 7 
basic syllables of; used for con- 
secration, 67 
obeisance made to, 62 
an image of, 130 
benefit of worshipping, 343 
outlines of; on a cloth, 402 
(See also Nrsimha) 

Narasimha, a Paftcaratra agama, 106 
N&rayana, one of the names of Vi^rjiu, 
65 

the reason for being called as, 40 
image of, 130 

characteristics of the form of, 128 
basic syllable ending with, 67, 68 
mantra used in religious rite, 53 
obeisance made to, 62 
benefit of worshipping, 343 
syllable of; for food offering, 68 
Salagr£ma denoting, 125 
N&rayatiiyaka, a P&ficar&tra agama, 
106 

N&r&yaitf, location of the letters 
denoting, 416 

Nari?yanta, one of the eight sons of 
Vaivasvata Manu, 735 
Narmada, wife ofPurukutsa, 737 
Narmada, (river) flows from Vindhya, 
351 


greatness of, 327, 331, 350 
purifies by mere sight, 331 
Sriyafr pati to be contemplated on, 
842 

nasal diseases,' beneficial remedy for, 
755 

Nataka, a type of drama, 921 
Nathaka, one of those worshipped, 414 
Nafika, a type of drama, 921 
Natyarasaka, a type of drama, 921 
Nafyesa (Siva), image of, 314 
Navamalini, characteristics of the 
metre, 913 

Navaratha, son of Bhimaratha; son 
of, 742 

nava&addha, the rites after the death 
of a person, 488 
Navavyuha, a lalagrama, 126 
navavyuharcana, for Vi$riu, 527-28 
nayana, herb denoted by the word, 
406 

neck, nine actions of, 929 
Nepala, a place, 841 
nerves, names of the ten, 316 
nether world, words denoting, 995 
nether worlds, extent of; names of, 353 
netra, a herb, 407 
— a measure, 124 

neva, another name of Asamayikatva, 
947 

Nicft, composition of the metre, 904 
nidhana, one of the tarabalas, 359 
Nidhyti, son of Dh^taka; son of, 742 
night, words denoting, 990 
endowed with darkness; word 
denoting, 990 

with moonlight; word denoting, 990 
Nighna, son of Anaranya; son of, 737 
son of Anamitra; sons of, 743 
Nikfti, daughter of Adharma and 
Himsa, 49 

Nikumbila, a place where Indrajit was 
doing homa, 22 

Nikumbha, a demon killed by Rama, 

22 

son of Haryas^a; son of, 737 
Nila, a monkey; accompanied Rama 
to Lank&, 21 

killed Akampana and Prahasta, 22 
Nila (Nil&cala), mountain; was given 
by Agnidhra to Ramya, 322 
a varsa-parvata on the north, 324 
as a boundary, 325 
Nilakantha (Siva), reason for being 
called so, 5 

NUambara, a female energy; colour of, 
136 

Nilafljika, one of the sons of Yadu, 740 
nimba, herb, 407 
flower not to be used in worship, 530 



Index 


1139 


Nimi, one of the four sons of, 742 
nipa, a flower, 529 

Nirahara, a spirit possessing the 
child in the seventh month; symp- 
toms of the child seized by; 
offering to appease, 823 
Niraftjan&klra' a Rudra, 254 
Nirmoha, a sage, 428 
Nirjrti, image of 137 
Nirucchvasa, a hell, 53 1 
nirudhapasubandhaka, a haviryajna, 
466 

Nirukta ^etymology), science of, 2 
nisa, a herb; used to make an unguent, 
372 

Nisadha, mountain; location of, 324, 
325, 326 

son of Atithi; son of, 738 
Nisanatha, worship of the sandals of, 
414 

Nisafha, son of Balarama and Revati, 
29 

Niscara, a sage at the time of the 
eleventh Manu, 428 
Niscayopama, explanation of, 940 
Niscira, at Gaya, 342 
ni$kala, one of the kinds of mantras 
of Siva, 873 
description of, 875 
Ni$kampa, a goddess, 376 
Niskubha, salutations made to, 52 
Nissvara, different reading for NiScara, 
428fn 

Nisfha, an energy, 292 
Nisthura, a goddess staying in the cir- 
cle of smell, 376 

name uttered in worship of Siva, 202 
Misumbha, a demon; gained favour 
from Brahma and was later killed 
by the goddess, 26 fn 
Nitala, a nether world, 353 
nitya, one of the three kinds of crea- 
tion, 48 

explanation of, 49 

nivatakavaca, a term denoting the 
progeny of Prahrada, 46 
niyama, relating to a kind of yamaka, 
936 

explanation of the term, 1017 
niyaxnas, five kinds of, 1076 
Niyamopama, explanation of, 940 
nominal bases, examples of forms 
after inflection of, 960-66 
primary; formation of, 980-81 
non-attachment, for pleasures; com- 
mended, 1074 

noose, materials for the thread of, 
649 ^ 

method pf using, 649 

eleven ways of manipulating a, 651 


five ways of casting a, 651 
nose, bleeding of; remedy for, 766 
six actions of, 929 
nouns, inflections in, 957 
Nrga, son of Usinara and Nrga, 747 
Nrga, queen of Usinara, 747 
Npiihha, i ma g e G f, 115 

mantra for the worship of, 117 
(See also Narasimha) 
salagrama designated as, 125 
Nfhari, installation of the image of, 
179 

Nyagrodha, one of the sons of 
Ugrasena, 742 

Nvankusarini, a metre; composition 
of; different name of, 903 
nyasa, in the worship, 90 
Nyaya, science of, 3 

Oath, when prescribed, 657 
objects, seven kinds of, 970 
as the pasture ground, 1075 
oblation, mode of doing, 92ff, 467 
observances, different kinds of, 1041 
Oceans, surrounding the continents, 
324 

a great gift of (seven) 544 
Odhra, region of; Puru$ottama to be 
worshipped at, 842 
Odisa, an Adinatha, 412 
offences, of different kinds, fine for, 
676-79, 681 

offering to god, mode of making, 107- 
110 

officiating priest, injunctions for, 680 
oil, as an excellent diuretic, 757 
old age, remedies to rejuvinatc in, 
769-70 

Om, syllable of; consecration to be 
done with, 58 
oblation begun with, 59 
as the first term in the different 
formulae, 62 

repeated with different formulae, 
72 

omens, known from birds, 600-603 
ordeals, five kinds of divine, 664 
instituted for great offences, 664 
of five kinds instituted for different 
persons, 664 

procedure relating to, 664-6 
ornaments, of different kinds; words 
denoting, 1016 
oysters, word for, 996 

Padacatururdhvam, characteristics of, 
909 

p&d&di-yamaka, one of the yamakas, 
935 

p&dakfcchra, an expiation, 483 



1140 


to be observed at the annual cere- 
mony, 488 

P&dakulaka, characteristics of the 
metre, 907 

P&danicft, a variety of Gayatri, 903 
padantayamaka, one of the yamakas, 
935 

Padapahkti, a variety of Pankti; com- 
position of, 904 

Padma, a deity ; located on the body, 4 1 4 
—one of the eight chief serpents; the 
number of heads of, 807 
forms the eyebrow of the goddess, 
415 


image of, 137 

— beads belonging to Sikha class, 894 
padma, an array; a variation of 
mandala, 635 
— a type of temple, 315 
— a treasure, 88, 111, 269 
padma (m), a posture made with the 
hands, 196, 857, 898 
Padma, a hell, 1038 
padmaka, a posture of sitting, 454, 1076 
(See also padmasana) 
padmahastaka, measure, 107 
radmanabha, one of the names of 
Vi$iju, 65 

Padmapurana, extent of; to be given 
as a gift in Jyestha, 732 
padmasana, a pasture of sitting, 70 

i Sce also padmaka) 
imavati, a hell, 1038 
Padmini, a goddess; invoked, 112 



919 


(See also poetry) 

Paila, disciple of Vyasa, 429 
paid respect to Vyasa, 1 
— son of Rusadratha; son of, 747 
pains, such as adhyatmika; need for 
remedying, 1074 

Paippalada, disciples of Sumantu, 429 
paisaca, a type of marriage, 435 
p&ka (ripeness), an excellence of 
word and sense; explanation of; 
four kinds of, 946 

Pakayajfta, a domestic sacrifice, 475 
Pakayajfias, the seven kinds of, 86 
pak$a, the herb denoted by the word, 
406 


paksini, night with preceding and 
succeeding days, 990 
a measure, 408 
measure of time, 370 
P&lita, one of the sons of Prthu, 43 
pallava, explanation of, 403 
Pamp& lake, R&ma’s arrival and stay 
at, 17 


Agni Purdna 

Panasa, a monkey; accompanied 
Rama to Lanka, 21 

Panava, characteristics of the metre, 
912 

Paftcabrahman, six formulae; acces* 
sories to, 890-891 

one of the forms of; worshipped, 51 
paheabhadra, remedies known as, 772 
pancadhanus, son of Syhjaya; son of 

750 

pancagavya (five things got from a 
cow), efficacy of taking, 488 
as a purificatory for stealing, 489 
Paiicajana, a demon conquered by 
Krsi^a, 28 

Paiicajanya, letters for the worship of, 
63 

Pancaka, one of the seven sons of 
Nahu$a, 740 

Pancakonika, a hell, 1039 
Pancala, a country, 351 

the visit of the Panda vas to, 32 
Pancalas, killed by Asvatthaman, 35 
— the five kings known as, 749 
Pancali, a variety of diction; charac- 
teristics of, 927 

paiicamrta, offered in the course of 
worship, 98 

Pancanga (Almanac), 364-69 
Pancantaka, letter denoting, 419 
Pancaratra, the names of the differ- 
ent texts of, 105 

reference to simhavidya in one of 
the, 1 17fn 

Pancas'ikha, exposition made by, 1073- 
4 

pancatiktaka, remedy known as, 774 
Pancavad, on the banks of river 
Godavari, Rama’s stay at, 15 
Paqidavas, collective term for the sons 
ofPaQdu, 751 

taken as the instrumental cause for 
Visflu’s manifestation, 31, 37 
escape from the lac house, 32 
stay at Ekacakra, 32fn 
were recognised by the Kurus after 
the death of Klcaka, 33 
Sikhaudi became commander of the, 
34 

Asvatth&mfi’s destruction of the 
sleeping army of, 35 
the five; as the survivors of the 
battle, 36 

worshipped lord Vi?uu, 335 
ascendance to heaven of, 36-38 
Pdodu, begot by Kfsoa Dvaipayana 
through the wife ofVicitraviryaka; 
son of, 31, 751 

married Kunti; sous ot 32, 744 
M&dri was the other wife of, 744 



Index 


1141 


story relating to curse of sage 
Kindama on, 32fn 

Pantfusila, at Gaya ; food to be offered 
at, 344 

Paru-lyas, origin of, 747 
panikacchapikd, a posture, 198 
Pankaja, a spirit seizing the child in 
the sixth month; symptoms of the 
child possessed by; offering to 
appease, 823 

Pankti, a metre, 562, 902 
composition of, 904 
blue coloured; belongs to Bhargava 
gotra, 905 

panktipavanas, explanation of the 
term, 349, 464 

Papa, a demon to be worshipped, 317 
Papaghna, one of the sons of Ruk- 
makavaca, 741 

Papamok$a, at Gayd; one should 
bathe at, 342 

Papini, the name of an evil spirit 
which possesses the child on the 
first day after birth; symptoms of 
the child possessed by, 820 
offering to appease; unguent for the 
child possessed by, 821 
Para, a goddess, dwelling in the es- 
sence, 375 

Para, a celestial at the time of the 
ninth Manu, 428 

paraka, an expiation; explanation of, 
483, 494 
destroys sin, 491 
for purification, 479 
to be done at masika after death, 
488 

para ma, a ray of the Sun, 195 
Parama, a goddess; worshipped, 413 
letter denoting, 417 
Paramak$ara, a form of Rudra, 252 
paramamitra, one of the tarabalas, 359 
Paramanandadeva, worshipped, 414 
paramanu, a measure, 107 
Paramesthi, son of Indradyumna, 323 
Paramesthi, salagrama called, 125 
Paramesuka, one of the foremost sons 
of Vidu$a, 747 

parardha, explanation of the term, 
1029 

Parasara, a law-giver, 455 
Parasparopama, explanation of, 940 
Paras'urama, manifestation of Vi?nu, 8 
son of Jamadagni, 9 
narration of duties of castes to, 429 
Paravidya, as superior knowledge, 3 
explanation of the term, 1082 
P&ribh&gikju a division of Abhivyakti, 
943 

parigha, a period of obstacle; all under- 


takings to be avoided in, 383 
Parijata, divine tree, 6, 28 
Parikatha, a division of prose 
kavya; has the combined charac- 
teristics of Katha and Akhy&yik&, 
919 

Pariksit, one of the sons of Kuru, 750 
Janamejaya as a descendant of, 750 
son of Abhimanyu, 751 
embryo saved in the womb of 
Uttard was born as, 36 
was established in the kingdom by 
Yudhisthira, 37 

Pariplavangaka, a variation of the 
array bhoga, 634 
Paritapa, a hell, 532 
Pariyatra, mountain, 326, 350, 351 
Parjanya flndra), created by 
Prajapati, 40 
worshipped, 107 

one of the different names of Sun, 
136 

Parjanya Prajapati, Hirapyaromaka 
as son of, 48 
parpata, a herb, 407 
parsnigraha, explanation of the term, 
1019 

Partha (Arjuna), words spoken by 
Kfsna to, 34 

obsequies of Yadavas performed by, 
37 

parthi, a rite to be performed, 86 
Parthiva, a year of the Hindu calendar, 
405 

parvan, the period between first and 
fifteenth lunar day, 990 
parvanasraddha, a domestic sacrifice, 
86,466 

Parvati, synonyms of, 987 

was, seen sporting with Siva by 
U$5, 29 

worshipped, 50, 51 

Paryabandha, division of poetry called, 
919 

Paryayokta, saying in a different way, 
944 

pa£a, a posture of the hands, 857 
passive, examples for the formation 
of, 983 

pasture land, location of; extent of, 
672 

pasubandha, one of the haviryaj ftas, 86 
Pa£upati, Rudra was calleds as, 50 
worship of, 290 

weapon of; appeasing rite employ- 
ing the mantra of, 885-87 
p4tala, a Rower, 529 
Pat£la, a nether world, 353 
P&talihA, characteristics of the metre, 
907 



1142 


path, words having the sense of, 1006 
path of action, two kinds of, 455 
p&tha, a herb, 410 
pathos, origin of the sentiment, 924 
three kinds of, 931 

Pathya, a variety of the Ary a metre; 
number of £apas in, 906 
characteristics of the metre, 908 
Pathyapankti, composition of, 904 
Pathyavaktra, characteristics of the 
metre, 908 

patrakrcchra, an expiation, 483 
pattisa, uses of, 652 
paunarnava, a herb, 407 
Pauodraka, conquered by Kf§Qa, 28 
story relating to, 28fn 
Paurnamasa, son of Marici and Sam- 
bhuti, 49 

Pam;a, month of; auspicious to enter 
a house in, 360 

Pau$kara, a Pancaratra agama, 106 
pau$na, explanation of the period 
known as, 835 

Pavaka, son of Agni and Svaha, 49 
was made the king of Vasus, 47 
Pavam£na, son of Agni and Svaha, 49 
pavamani, a hymn, 562 
pavanti, a flower, 529 
pavilions, building of different kinds 
of, 178-80, 318 
pavitra, of darbha grass, 58 
Payo§ijLi or Payo?nika, a river that 
flows from Sahya, 351 
as a bestower of fruits, 328 
payovrata, mode of practising, 522 
pearl (s), a kind of gem, 640 
from oysters are pure, 641 
other excellent kinds of, 641 
pedestal, characteristics of, 146 
pedestals of images, characteristics of, 
123-24 


peel of thunder, words denoting, 989 
percussion instruments, different kinds 
of, 994 

perfections, eight kinds of, 257 
perfumes, mode of preparation of; 

eight acts in, 582-3 
periods of the day, good or bad, 383-4 
phalacaturdafi, on the practice of, 517 
phalakfcchra, an expiation, 483 
Phalgucandi, at Gayi; obeisance paid 
to, 343 

Ph&lguna, benefit of purchasing per- 
fumes in the month of, 387 
—denotes Arjuna; fallen on the way 
of march, 37 

Phalguni, an asterism known as 
blunted, 382 

(Purva) phalguni, as asterism; loca- 
tion in Kotacakra, 385 


Agni Purdna 

Phalgutirtha, at Gay 5; merits of 
bathing at, 337 

Gayasiras has been made the hermi- 
tage at, 338 

PhalgviSa, at Gaya; obeisance made to, 
343 

phai^i, a class of serpents based on 
excess of one humour, 807 
— herb denoted by the word, 406 
Phanirahu, a method to find the 
results of a battle, 380 
Phaiiirahu, the effect of its position 
in various directions, 409 
phanisvara, diagram of, 400 
phat, use of the term, 403 
Phatkari, a goddess, 424 

a monstress possessing the newly 
bom child on the sixth night; 
symptoms of child possessed by; 
offering to appease, 821 
unguent for child possessed by, 

Phetkari, letter denoting goddess, 418 
phlegm, remedy for the removal of 
excess of, 775 

remedy for twenty kinds of disea- 
ses due to deranged, 774 
phlegm and wind, a purgative for 
deranged, 775 

phonetics, description of, 915-17 
physician, fine for giving wrong medi- 
cal treatment, 679 

physiognomy of men, indications of, 
635-7 

piety, two kinds of; not equal to 
Agnipur&na, 1078 
piles, beneficial remedies for, 754 
remedy for, 767, 776 
pilgrimage, benefits of, 326 
Pilipiccha, a demon, 317 
Pilipifija, a demon; appeasing off- 
ering to, 109 
offering made to, 275 
pilu, auspiciousness of, 641 
Pinaka, bow of Siva, 987 
pi$da (?), auspiciousness of a gem 
called, 641 

Pind^raka, a great place, 327 

Caturbkhu to be worshipped at, 841 
Pingakgi, image of, 138 
Pihgala, an attendant of Sun, 136, 
195 

— a divinity; to be worshipped, 414 
— a year of the Hindu calendar, 405 
Piugal&, afflicting the child in the 
fourth month; symptoms of the child 
afflicted by, 823 

pfogalk, a vein; carries the wind ap&na, 
functions of, 556 



Index 


1143 


is established on the right side of 
the body, 557 

Fingalacakra, description of, 377 
Pin&ki, a divinity wonhipped, 414 
letter denoting, 419 
Pipilik&, a goddess, 376 
Pipilikamadhyama, composition of 
the metre, 904 
pippala, a tree, 324 
Pippalada, represents a branch of 
Atharvaveda, 730 
pippali, a herb, 407 
Pisaci, image of, 138 
Pisces, the time taken by the Sun to 
transit, 384 

the rite to determine the sex of a 
child to be done in, 357 
the first feeding of the child to be 
done in, 358 
friendly with Virgo, 392 
Pisitasa, image of, 138 
Pita, a class of men at Salmala, 352 
pita, name of a lightning, 45fn 
pitchers, of different kinds; words 
denoting, 1019 
consecration of, 149-51 
worship of different, 277 
Pitrs, worship of 317 
pits, in the dry bed of rivers; words 
for, 996 

place and time, the role of, 923 
plaintiff, to be examined first, 657 
Plak$a, a continent, 323 
about the people of, 351 
given by Priyavrata to Mcdhatithi, 
322 

the rulers of and the oceans sur- 
rounding, 351 
plaksa, a tree, 47, 92 
planets, metals for making images of, 
461 

propitiatory rite for, 461-2 
offerings for, 462 
mantras for propitiating, 462 
three kinds of propitiation of, 467 
propitiatory rite for, 467-70 
benefits of propitiation of, 469-70 
effect of presence in nativity sign, 
393 

character of an infant known from, 
392-3 

good or bad depending on the 
positions of, 383-4 

symptoms of those possessed by evil 
influences of, 827 
plants, medicinal, 378 

of different kinds; words which 
meaxk 1008-12 

PJava, a year of the Hindu calendar, 
405 


pleasure, proceeds from conceit, 923 
ploughman, injunctions for, 680 
ploughs (five), a great gift, 544 
poet, the five items to be indicated by, 

922 

creator with reference to poetry, 924 
poetic convention, definition of; two 
kinds of; further divisions of, 949 
poetry, different kinds of, 919 

the nature of matter treated in, 920 
poison (s), words denoting, 995 
two kinds of, 811 

the three pungents which as a drink 
or unguent or collyrium would 
remove, 817-18 

use of white pepper and sirisa flower 
against, 818 

of different kinds; remedy for, 818-9 
remedy for removal of all, 773 
of different kinds; effective remedy 
for, 756 

the different remedies against, 577- 
818 

due to an ass etc; mantra for the 
removal of, 819 

due to gonasa and other snakes; 

treatment of, 818-20 
due to a scorpion; remedy for, 819 
due to a spider etc.; remedy for, 819 
remedial mantra for the removal of, 
817-18 

mantra to be recited to destroy 
the vegetable, 820 
due to a dog; remedy for, 820 
due to sixteen kinds of rats; remedy 
for, 819 

twenty ways of treatment for, 819 
polestar, location etc. of, 355 

Svargaloka as lying between the 
Sun and, 354 

pollution, instances when there is no, 
443 

periods for different kinds of, 444-50 
different kinds of, 444-50 
pollution and purification, 440-44 
portents, relating to images, 711 
foreboding the death of the king, 
712-3 

appeasing rites for 710-713 
worship of gods to destroy the 
effects of, 713-16 

possession, desire for; referred to as 
due to ignorance, 1073 
Prabha, one of the wives of the Sun, 
735 

— wife of Sagara; bore sixty sons, 737 
— wife of Rrabh&kara, 739 
Prabh&kara, a son of Jyotigmat, 352 
prabandha, imaginary story, 992 
prabhafijana, a vital wind, 253 



1144 


Agni Purdfia 


Prabhasa, a sacred place, 350 

Daityasiidana to be contemplated 
at, 841 

Hari (as Kj-?oa) discarded his body 
at, 37 

greatness of, 327, 491 
— at Gay&; merits of offering pirida at 
the pretakuQda at, 342 
— one of the eight Vasus, 44 
Prabhases'a, at Gaya; obeisance to be 
. made to, 342 

Prabh&ta, born to Sun and Prabha, 
735 

Prabhava, a Rudra, 254 
— a guard, 93 

— a year of the Hindu calendar, 404 
— a type of temple, 314 
PrabhAvatl, a female divinity; wor- 
shipped, 52 

Prabodhani, a female energy; invoked, 
136 

Prabhu, a form of Rudra, 252 
Pracai^da, a male divinity; figure car- 
ved on the door-frame, 1 1 5 
Pracaijda, a goddess, 132 
— a hell, 1038 
Pracandogra, image of, 1 38 
Pracetas, (lord of waters) worship of, 
273 

— name of the sons of Pracinabarhis, 
43 

— son of Vidu§a; names of foremost 
among hundred sons of, 747 
Pr&cinabarhis, son of Dhi?ana; sons 
of, 43 

Pracinavan, son of Tanamejaya; son 
of, 748 

Pracita, a variety of Dan<jaka, 915 
Pracyavftti, characteristics of the 
metre, 907 

pradara, a modification of the array 
called da$da, 633 

— a disease of women; remedy for, 777 
pradaraka, an array; formed by two 
wings to daod&> 634 
Pradhana, a son of Dyutimat, 352 
Pradhanam, significance of, 991 
prado$a, period preceding night, 990 
pr&4viv&ka, meaning of the word, 
1018 

Pradyumna, one of the sons of Kr§na 
and Rukmigu, 744 
son of; wife of, 745 
story relating to, 29, 29fn 
accompanied Knoa, 30 
image of, 130 

worship of; formulae relating to, 62 
worship with the basic syllable of, 
68 

worshipped, 91 


a salagrama characteristics of, 125 
marks of six discs on, 125 
Praghasa, a demon killed by Rama, 22 
Praharartakalita, characteristics of the 
metre, 913 

Prahargarii, a female energy, 136 
Prahar$irii, characteristics of the 
metre, 913 

Prahasana, a type of drama, 921 
a component of the mode Bh&rati; 
ridicules the ascetics ana whe like, 
928 

Prahasta, a demon killed by Nila, 22 
Prahelik£, a kind of citrakavya; 
definition of, 935 

Prahl(r)ada, son of Hiraoyakasipu ; 
story of, 7fn 
a devotee of Visriu, 46 
made the king by Vi$rm, 47, 745 
story relating to Bali, grandson of, 
8fn 

a Pancaratra agama, 106 
Prajapati, creation of time etc. by, 40 
sage for the vyahftis (of Gayatri), 
562 

name of a metre; number of letters 
in, 902 

Prajapati (Prajotpatti), a year of the 
Hindu calendar, 404 
Prajapatis, Dak$a made the king of, 
47 

prajapatya, an expiation; eating food 
once a day for three days, 483 
explanation of, 494 
for having eaten garlic etc., 472 
for doing an act of an outcaste, 476 
for the fourth class for purification, 
479 

for having caused the death of a 
cow, 487 

for having taken urine, excreta 
etc., 488 

for drinking wine and eating flesh, 
488 

destroys sin, 491 
merits of practising, 524 
a rite performed before becoming 
an ascetic, 452 
a type of marriage, 434-5 
beads belonging to the Siva class, 
894 

Prakarana, a type of drama, 921 
Prakirgaka, a division of Koia, 921 
pr&kftasarga, explanation of, 48 
prakrti, relating to a state of being, 991 
Prakfti, Viftiu’s entry into, 39 
classical metres based on, 914 
Pralamba, a demon killed by Bala- 
r&ma, 30 

story relating to, 30 fh 



Index 


1145 


Pralayantika, image of, 138 
PramaQi, characteristics of the metre, 
908 

Pramardini, a female energy, 136 
Pramathi, a year of the Hindu 
Calendar, 404 

Pramitak^ara, characteristics of the 
metre, 913 

Pramloca, mother of Marina, 43 
Pramoda, a year of the Hindu calendar, 
404 

Pramodaka, one of the two sons of 
Drdhasva, 736 

Pramsu, one of the eight sons of 
Vaivasvata Manu, 735 
prana, a life force carried by the vein 
ida; functions of, 556 
equated with the day, 557 
Prana, a son of Dhara and Manohara, 
44 

— son of Dhatr, 49 
pranava, explanation of the signifi- 
cance and greatness of, 1 042-3 
the first syllable, 559 
precedes all the mystic syllables, 52 
a formula; no divisions in, 895 
equated with the soul, 1056 
Gapapati as representing, 412 
equated with lord Siva, 374 
used for consecrating a child, 60 
used in worship, 415 
repeated, 63 
destroys sins, 491 
pranavahini, a nerve, 316 
praQ&y&ma, two kinds of, 454, 557 
meaning of the term, 1076 
(agarbha) three kinds of, 454 
(sagarbha) three kinds of, 454 
different varieties of; merits of 
practising, 1044 
as an atonement, 455 
as dispelling sins, 487 
praflita, a vessel, 58, 94 
five mudr&s known as, 857 
shown in worship, 857, 869 
Prapanca, image of, 1 38 
Prapitamaha, a liriga, 343 
Prapti, one of the two wives of Kamsa, 
28 

prasa, a weapon that is cast off, 645 
Prasada (lucidity), an excellence of 
word and sense; explanation of, 946 
pr&sada, significance of the mantra 
known as; three kinds of, 558 
description, 874 

with parts and without parts, 874*75 
no division in, 895 
Pra Santa, a form of Rudra, 252 
praSara, a*tind of citrakavya; defi- 
nition o£ 935 


Prasastata ( praiseworthiness ), an ex- 
cellence of word and sense; explana- 
tion of, 946 

Prasasti, an embellishment of sound 
and sense; explanation of; two 
kinds, 942 

Prasenaka, son of Xighna; was killed 
by a lion, 743 

Prasiddhavimala, one of the vimalas 
412 

Prastara, son of Pratiharta, 323 
Prastarapankti, a variety of Pankti, 
composition of, 904 
Prastavana, another name of Amukha, 
922 

— a component of the mode Bharati, 
928 

rastha, a measure, 95, 1078 
rasthana, a type of drama, 921 
Prarardana, son of Divodasa; two 
sons of, 749 

Prathama, a goddess, 373 
Pratihara, son of, 323 
Pratiharta, son of Pratihara; sons of, 
323 

Pratiksetra, son of &ami; son of, 743 
pratiloma, relating lo caste, 430 
Pratipa, son of Bhimasena; son of, 
751 

pratipadika, explanation of the term, 
959 

Pratiratha, one of the three sons of 
Matinara; son of, 748 
pratistha, a modification of the array 
danqla; characteristics of, 633 
Pratistha, a metre; number of letters 
in, 905 

Pratistha (gayatri), characteristic of, 
903 

Pratisthana, a place; described as the 
mule of Brahma, 329 
got by Sudyumna; given to Puru- 
ravas, 735 

Prativindhya, son of Yudhisthira and 
Draupadi, 751 
Pratoda, a hell, 332 
Pratyagraha, one of the seven sons of 
Suhotra and Girika, 750 
pratyahara, explanation of the term, 
1C45 

significance of the word, 1076 
to be done only by those who re- 
peat mantras, 454 

pratyaharas, the fourteen notations in 
grammar; explanation of, 953 
pratyah'dha, a posture relating to 
archery, 645 

Praty&pida, characteristics of the 
metre, 909 

pratyari, one of the t&rabalas, 359 



1146 


Agni Pur&na 


Fratyflfa, one of the Vasus; father of 
Devala, 44 

Prau^hi (maturity), an excellence of 
sense, 945 

Pravira, one of the four sons of 
Tarhsurodha, 749 

Pravfltaka, characteristics of the metre, 
907 

a division of Amukha; explanation 
of, 922 

Pray&ga, a sacred place, 350 
greatness of, 328, 329-30 
destroys sins, 491 
Rama's arrival at, 13 
Bharata’s visit to, 14 
Prayoga, a deity; location of, 414 
Prayogatigaya, a division of Amukha; 

explanation of, 922 
preceptor, characteristics of, 8C* 
should be respected, 618 
preceptors, word denoting persons 
having same, 1017 
Premokti, a variety of Prasasti, 942 
Prehkhana, a type of drama, 921 
present time, words signifying, 1019 
presiding deities of elements, location 
and worship of, 290-91 
presiding deity, worship of, 316-19 
presiding deity of a ground, mode of 
worshipping, 272-6 
Fretagila, at Gaya ; merits of offering 
piruja at, 342 
pnde, words denoting, 995 
priests, associated with different Vedas; 

words denoting, 1017 
priests, officiating, words denoting, 
1017 

rinciples, initiation in, 262-3 
riti, mother of Dattoli, 49 
worshipped, 90 
priya, a nerve, 316 
priyahgu, a herb, 372 
Priyavrata, son of Svavambhuva Manu 
and &atarupa, 41 

sons of; performed penance and 
attained god, 322 
prok;ani, a vessel, 58, 95 
properties, division of, procedure 
relating to, 666-70 
of a dead man; rules relating to 
payment to heirs, 680 
property, code of law relating to 
disputes about, 657-8 
enjoyment and possession as valid 
relating to, 657-8 
rules relating to sale of, 672 
mortgaged; disputes relating to, 

Ifcblen; rules relating to, 672-73 
' it women; six kinds of, 541 


prosody, rules of, 901-2 
relating to Vedic metres, 902 
prostration, merits of, 1043 
pr$adajya, explanation of the word, 
1017 

Pirsadhra, one of the eight sons of 
Vaivasvata Manu, 735 
became a gudra on account of kill- 
ing the cow of his preceptor, 736 
Pr$ata, son of Jantu; son of, 750 
Pftha, denotes Kunti; accompanied 
Dhftara?tra and Gandhari to the 
forest, 36 

Pftha, a vein; carries the wind naga, 
556 

Pfthu, son of Vena, 42 
Pfthu, installed as the ruler, 47 
two righteous sons of, 43 
— son of Vibhu, 323 
— son of Suyodhana, 736 
Pfthudarbha, one of the four sons of 
Sibi, 747 

Pfthulak$a, son of Lomapada; son of, 
748 

Pfthurukmaka, one of the sons of 
Rukmakavaca, 741 
Pfthusena, son of V^asena, 748 
Pfthusrava, foremost among the sons 
of Sasabindu; son of, 741 
pfthividhara, a type of temple, 315 
Pfthvi, characteristics of the metre, 
913 

Pfthvidhara, a god; worshipped, 317 
pfthvisamana, mantra, 442 
public service, qualities of those in, 
674 

pukkasa, a caste, 430 
pulaka, a gem, 641 

Pulaha, a sage; a mind-born son of 
Brahma, 41, 41fn; 
sons of, 49 

father of Visravas, 24 
Pulastya, a sage; a mind-born son of 
Brahma, 41, 41fn 
father of Dattoli, 49 
pulmonary consumption, commend- 
able food during, 753 
Puloma, a daughter of Vaisvanara, 46 
Puloman, son of Danu and father of 
Saci, 46 

purhsavana, one of the rites, 59 
the time for performing, 86, 95 
punamava, a herb ; used as an unguent, 
372 

Punaruktatt (tautology), an impurity, 
947 

two kinds of, 948 
sub-divisions of, 948 
Punarvasu, an asterism; has the face 
lateral, 381 



Index 


1147 


comprises the sphere of wind, 387 
its location in Kotacakra, 385 
commended for all acts, 381 
commendable for imparting arch- 
ery, 359 

commendable for taking harvested 
grains inside the house, 361 
misery caused by the transit of Sun 
in 363 

should not enter the cow-pen in, 
361 

— son of Candana-dundubhi; wife 
and son of, 742 

Pun<Jarika, a deity presiding over the 
banner, 148 
worship of, 284 
— a rite, 1079 
— son of Nabha; son of, 738 
— mountain, 352 
— a measure, 551 

Pu?darikak$a, form of Vi§nu at 
Pu§kara, 841 

— a formula known as, 55 
Pundra, one of the sons of Bali, 747 
punishment, one of the means to be 
employed by the king, 587 
a political expedient, 627 
two kinds of, 606 
three kinds of, 628 
two different kinds of, 628 
for abuses; varies according to the 
order of castes, 676 

pupil, obligation to the preceptor, 673 
nine-fold function of 929 
puraka, a variety of pranayama ; reason 
for its name as, 557 
purapa, defined as having five charac- 
teristics, 992 

Puranas, eighteen in number, 2, 730 
as a form of Hari, 492 
as an AparavidyS, 2 
the names of eleven Rudras in, 45fn 
merits of making a gift of, 735 
Puraftjaya, son of Srftjaya; son of, 747 
Purasta, one of the three sons of 
Matinara, 748 

Purastad Bfhati, composition of, 903 
Purastad Jyotis, composition of, 904 
pure, word denoting, 996 
things which are, 440 
purgative, the herb that is the best, 
757 


decoction of herbs to be given as, 
769 

a decoction to be given as, 775 
greasy barley water as; a different 
combination known as n&raca as, 
778 

purification for different pollutions, 
441 


for travellers for eating food, 480 
mode of, 82 ff 

of the principle of establishment, 
248-52 

of the principle of peace, 254-57 
of remnant materials, 480 
of scriptural knowledge, 252-54 
of things, 439-40 

purificatory rites, their number and 
names, 85ff 

forty-eight names of, 466 
puritv, two kinds — external and inter- 
nal, 1042 

Purina, a mountain, 414 
punpa, a pitcher, 270 
purjia, a stone, 269 
Pfirnagiri, a mountain, 412 
purquma, fifteenth day of lunar fort- 
night, 990 
letter denoting, 417 
Purojava, son of Anila, 44 
Purovasu, son of Babhrusetu, 747 
purtadharma, explanation of, 539 
Puru, one of the sons of Manu and 
Nacjvaia, 42 

— one of the sons of Yayati, and 
Devayani, 25, 31, 740 
Janamejaya was born to, 748 
one of the founders of a dynasty, 740 
lineage of, 748-51 

Puruhuta, son of Dravarasa; son of, 
742 

Purujati, was born from Santi; son of, 
749 

Purukutsa, son of Mandhatf ; wife of; 
sons of, 737 

Purumidha, one of the three sons of 
Brhat, 749 

Pururavas, born to Budha and Ila, 
735, 739 

born from Soma; father of Ayu, 25 
enjoyed the company of Urvasi, 739 
practised Yoga and reached the 
world of Gandharvas; eight sons 
of, 739 

divided one fire into three, 739 
Puru?a, form of Vi$nu at Puru?avata, 
841 

Purusa (soul), Vi§nu’s entry in, 39 
Puru$asukta, hymn ; offering of water 
made with, 437 

repetition of; as remover of sins, 
482 

Purusavafa, a place; the name of 
Puru$a to be repeated at, 841 
Puru?ottama, form of Vi$flu in the 
region of Odhra, 842 
—a &lagrama, 126 
Puru$ottaxna (Puri), a sacred place, 
491 



1148 


Agni Purtya 


merits of doing Sr&ddha at, 350 
Purvabh&drapadi, an asterism; belongs 
to the sphere of fire, 387 
location in kotacakra, 385 
represented by letters, 400 
associated with increase of grain, 
361 

causing death, 377 

Purvaphalguni, an asterism; belongs 
to the sphere of fire, 387 
location of letters representing, 400 
commendable for doing agriculture, 
361 

associated with increase of grains, 
361 

profitable, 376 
misery caused by, 363 
Purvas, the three asterisms; associated 
with increase of grains, 361 
medicine to be administered in, 358 
commended for copulation, 434 
adversity caused by purchase of 
goods in, 359 

an employer should not be attended 
to in, 360 

Purvasadha, an asterism; belongs to 
the watery region, 388 
location of letter representing, 400 
commendable for sowing seeds, 36 1 
associated with increase of grains, 
361 

misery caused by transit of Sun in, 
363 

affliction caused by, 377 
pu?a, an occult nerve, 253 
Pu$an, one of theAdityas; as son of 
Kafyapa, 45 
to be worshipped, 316 
worshipped with fried grains, 108 
Puskala, a class of men in Kraunca- 
dvipa, 352 

Pu$kara, narration of duties of castes, 
by, 429 

— a continent given to Savana, by 
Priyavrata, 322, 323 
ruler of, 353 
— a holy spot, 327 

PuQdarikak$a to be contemplated 
at, 841 

destroys sins, 491 

benefit of making a gift at, 1078 
— son of Bharata, 24 
— a class of men in Krauncadvipa, 352 
Pu?karii?i, at Gaya; balls of rice to 
be offered at, 342 

— daughter of V*rana Prajapati; wife 
of Cak?u$a, 42 

Pu?padanta, door keeper, 108 
^ worship of, 273, 31/ 


putpanandaka, a pitcher, 270 
Pu$paka, chariot, 23 
— a class of temple, 314 
rectangle-shaped, 314 
nine temples belonging to the class 
of, 314 

pu?pakfcchra, an expiation; explana- 
tion of, 483 

Puspavat, a boundary mountain, 352 
Puspitagra, characteristics of the metre, 
911 

to be employed in a Mahakavya, 
920 

Pu$potkat&, wife of Visravas, 24 
Pusfi, wife of Dhata, 739 
worshipped, 91 

Pustf, nourishment; worshipped, 51 
Pu$tihara, a goddess, 376 
Pu§(ika, a female divinity; worshipped, 
52 

Pu$ya, month; profit gained by pur- 
chase of perfume in, 387 
— asterism; belongs to the sphere of 
fire, 387 

has a firm look, 382 
located in kotacakra, 385 
location of the letter representing, 
400 

benefit of wearing a herb in, 410 
rite to determine the sex to be 
performed in, 357 
karnavedha to be done in, 359 
good for eating new fruits and 
food, 358 

commended for all acts, 381 
misery caused by transit of Sun in, 
363 

Puta, characteristics of the metre, 912 
Putana, a demoness; sent by Kariisa 
to kill Kr?na, 27 

Putana, exercises her influence during 
the day, 826 
letter denoting, 417 
holds sway over the north-east, 138 
symptoms of a child possessed by, 

a monster taking possession of 
the child that is one month old, 
822 

material for the child possessed by, 
822 

material for fumigation when pos- 
sessed by, 822 

offering for seven days to appease, 
822 

prayer to boyhood form of Vi^u to 
destroy evil forces like, 84 
worshipped by offering meat etc., 
109 

offering of meat etc. to, 274 



Index 


1149 


to be worshipped, 317 
PQtimrttika, sub-division of a hell, 
1039 

Putivaktra, a hell, 532 
putraiijiva, a herb, 406 

Qualitative, a kind of Abhivyakti, 943 
qualities, eight kinds of, 466 

characteristics associated with the 
three, 1 033 

needed for gaining fortune, 617 
query, words standing for, 993 

Raga (tint), an excellence of word 
and sense; explanation of, 946 
Raghava, words spoken by after 
hearing Da£aratha's words, 1 1 
Hanumat’s words to Sita to show, 
20 

Angada's words to Ravana to return 
Sita to, 21 * 

Bharata's visit to, 24 
the words of praise spoken by the 
sages to, 24 

form of Visnu at Citrakuta, 841 
(See also Rama) 

Raghu, son of Kakutstha, 9 
— son of Anamitra; son of, 737 
— one of the sons of Yadu, 740 
Ragini, image of, 138 
Rahovadi, son of Samyati; son of, 748 
Rahu, words denoting, 989 

born to Simhika and Vipracitti, 45 
drinking of the nectar in the guise 
of the Moon by, 6 
form of, 1 37 
chariot of, 356 

period (years) of influence- of, 363, 
393 

presides over one-sixteenth part 
of day, 381 

description of its rule on a day, 409 
two kinds of eclipses caused by, 388 
head denoted by the asterism occu- 
pied by, 380 
worshipped, 52 

contemplated as resembling char- 
coal, 828 

merits of making a gift when the 
Sun is eclipsed by, 362 
predi' lions based on the position 
of, 410 

in tenth house confers good, 384 
good or bad luck indicated by, 400 
fright caused by the aspect of, 378 
fatality indicated by, 389 
indicates misery by presence in the 
seventh house, 383 

R&hucakra, procedure for writing, 
370-71 ^ 


description of, 377-78 
Raivata, one of the eleven forms of 
Rudra, 45 

— the fifth Manu, 427 
— son of Reva; known as Kakudmin; 
an account of; performed penance 
on the Sumeru Mountain and 
reached lord Vi?nu; founded 
Dvaravati (Dvaraka), 736 
— a boundary mountain, 352 
Raivataka, a place; Deva worshipped 
at, 841 

Damodara worshipped at, 842 
Raja, son of Vasigtha and Urja, 49 
— son of Viraja and father of Satyajit, 
323 

Rajagrha, a place; merits of, 328 
rajamaya, auspicious nature of the 
gem called, 641 

rajani, a herb; used as an unguent, 372 
rajapatta, an inferior kind of diamond; 

said to be auspicious, 641 
Rajas, father of Ketumat, 48 
Rajasa, a form of god ; letter denoting, 
419 

rajasi, denotes the entry of the Sun in 
a sign, 362 

Rajasuya, a sacrifice, 33, 42, 1079 
Rajeyas, name of the one hundred 
sons of Raji, 739 

Raji, one of the sons of Ay us; hundred 
sons of, 739 

got a boon from lord Vi$nu and 
killed the demons, 739-40 
whose sons usurped the kingdom 
of Indra, 740 

Raji, salutations made to, 52 
rajila, a class of serpents, 807 
Rajiu, daughter of Raivata ; one of the 
wives of the Sun, 735 
Raka, a son of Angiras and Smfti, 49 
raka, the full moon is called, 990 
Rakini, a goddess; worshipped, 415 
Raksa (Nairj-ta), worshipped, 51 
Rak$asa, a year of the Hindu calendar, 
405 

rakgasa, a type of marriage, 435 
Rak$asi, a spirit afflicting the child 
in the eleventh month; symptoms 
of the child afflicted by, 824 
image of, 138 

Rakta, invoked in worship, 230 
Raktacandika, invoked as the eyes 
in the worship of Kubjika, 411 
Raktak$a, a year of the Hindu 
calendar, 405 

Raktak?!, image of, 138 
Rama, manifestation of Vi^u as, 9-25 
foremost of Raghus, 738 



1150 


eldest son of Dasaratha, 738 
birth of, 10 
married Sita, 1 1 

conquest of ParaSurama by, 1 1 
proposal for coronation of, 1 1 
Kaikeyi’s request to send him to 
forest, 12 

Da&ratha's words to, 13 
Bharata’s meeting with; arrival 
at Dai>daka, 15 

Khara, Du§ana and other demons 
killed by, 16 

lamented and searched for Sita, 17 
befriended Sugrlva, 17 
was assured by Sugrlva of help to 
get back Sita, 18 
Sugriva’s meeting with, 18 
signet ring of, 18 

Hanumat recounting the story of, 
19 

crossing the ocean by, 21 
fainting of, 22 

killing of R&vaga by, 23, 738 
rescue of Sita etc. by, 23 
ruled at Ayodhya, 738 
image of, 115, 129 
to be contemplated on every 
mountain, 482 
salutations made to, 82 
benefit of worshipping, 343 
ethics narrated by, o 1 7-18 
Rama (Paras'urama), 9 
Rama, See Balarama 
Ramana, a son of Dhara and 
Manohara, 44 

R&matirtha, at Gaya; balls of rice 
to be offered to, 342 
Ramayana, story of, 9 

composed by Valmiki after hearing 
from Narada, 25 

Rambha, a monkey; accompanied 
R£ma to Lanka, 21 
Rambha, as a form of Gauri, 133 
Rame£a, a linga at Gaya; benefits 
of worshipping, 343 
Ramya, Nilacala given by Agnidhra 
to, 322 

Ramy&, characteristics of the metre, 
912 

Ramyaka, a mountain, 324 
Ran&£va, one of the two sons of 
Samhat&sva; son of, 737 
randhra, herb denoted by, 407 
range of thing s, words denoting, 988 
Rkfigulananda, to be worshipped, 414 
rafijani, a flower, 529 
ras &b» herb denoted by, 406 
Rasaka, a type of drama, 921 
Ratfrapala, one of the sons of Ugra- 
sena, 742 


Agni Purtya 

Ratfravardhana, a minister of King 
Dasaratha, 1 1 
rathaou, a measure, 107 
Rathoddhata, characteristics of the 
metre, 912 
Rati, invoked, 91 
propitiation of, 176 
reborn as Mayavati, story of 29, 
29fn 

ratnadhenu, a great gift, 544 
Ratnasundari, worshipped in the 
worship of Kubjika, 412 
rats, poisons due to sixteen kinds; 
remedy for, 819 

Raucya, thirteenth Manu, 428 
Raudra (Raudri), a year of Hindu 
calendar, 405 

— a muhurta; deeds to be done in, 37 1 
Raudraka, propitiation of, 176 
Raudri, a female energy, 51 
one of three forms of Uma, 374 
a comparison of goddess Tvarita, 
424 

as an old goddess, 412 
characteristics of, 375 
worshipped, 51, 201, 413 
to be worshipped, 412 
Raurava, had a son Du^kha through 
Vedana, 49 
Raurava, a hell, 531 
sub-division of hells, 1039 
Ravana, Vi$rm’s manifestation to kill, 
10 

son of Visravas and Kaikasi, 24 
the king of Lanka, 15fn 
Surpagakha’s visit to; abduction 
of Sita by, 16 

requesting Sita to marry him, 19 
reference to Jatayu wounded by, 18 
battle with R5ma and fall of, 23 
search for Sita by Hanumat in the 
house of, 19 

Hanumat’s words to and anger of, 20 
was intent on killing Angada, 21 
Kumbhakarga's words to, 22 
killed by Rama, 738 
— a muhurta; deeds to be done in, 371 
Ravi, as a name of the Sun, 136 
— herb denoted by, 406 
recipes, which would revive dead, 772 
reconditeness, a defect of word; five 
kinds of, 947 

red, words denoting different shades 
of, 902 

regal power, three kinds of, 629 
rejoice, words denoting, 990 
relatives, words denoting different 
kinds of, 1014 

religious observance, words denoting, 



Index 


1131 


remedies, five groups of; the ch&rac- 
tens tics of, 763 

renovation of decayed images, 184 
ReQukhaya, one of the sons of Satajit, 
740 

Renuka, Bhargava as son of, 8 
renunciation, explanation of the term, 
1059 

greatness of, 464 
repetition, word meaning, 993 
of a word; two kinds of, 935 
compounded, 935 
of a sentence, 935 
reply, words signifying, 993 
respiration, nine actions of, 929 
retention, explanation of the term, 
1049 

four kinds of; explanation of, 1050 
Reva, Raivata alias Kakudmin was 
the eldest among the hundred sons 
of, 736 

Reva, a river; greatness of, 328 
Revanta, son of Sun and Rajhi, 735 
Revanta, merits of worshipping, 343 

Revati, a female force, 84 
image of, 138 
goddess invoked, 399 
worshipped in the wind-circle, 375 
— daughter of Raivata; given in 
marriage to Baladeva, 736 
wife of Balabhadra; sons of, 29 
beloved of lord Vi§nu, 746 
— an asterism; has its face lateral, 381 
belongs to the watery region, 388 
location in kotacakra, 385 
location in a diagram, 400 
marriage commendable in, 357 
profit caused by things bought in, 
360 

sowing seeds gains fortune in, 361 
new fruits and food to be eaten in, 
358 


wearing of gems commendable in, 
359 

misery caused by Sun’s transit in. 


reward, for soldiers after victory; 
proportionate to the task accom- 
plished, 632 

Rgveda, authority for the Dvai- 
p&yanas, 730 

hymns to be recited by the follow- 
ers of, 287 
two divisions of, 730 
number of hymns of the brihmanai 
of, 730 

application of the mantras of, 683- 
695 ~ 

as a manifestation of lord Vim 356 


as an Apar&vidyh, 2 
saluted, 50 

assigned on the hand, 64 
ornament for Indra, 93 
Rgveda, a Yogini; image of, 1 38 
rheumatic pain, in general and in the 
hip; remedy for, 775 
rheumatic patients, commendable 
medicines for, 754 
rheumatism, remedy for, 775 
righteousness, ten charcteristics of, 
454 

rikta days, good for commencement 
of study, 359 

Ripra, one of the sons of Sifti and 
Succhaya, 42 

Ripu, had the son C&k?u$a through 
Bfhatl, 42 

Ripuhara, form of Vi$ou at Lokikula, 
841 


Riguftjaya, form of Vi?Qu at VirajA, 

— one of the sons of Sitfi and 
Succh&y&, 42 

rite, strengthening, 410-11 
rites, different kinds of, 379 
Rji$a, sub-division of a hell, 1039 
Rk, hymns; creation of, 40 
Rkja, born to Aj amid ha and DhO- 
minl; son of, 750 

Rk$a (the second), son of Viduratha; 
son of, 750, 751 

fkfanayaka, a type of temple, 315 
Rkseyu, one of the ten sons of 
Bhadrasva, 748 

Rrtamok^a, at Gay&; merits of bathing 
in, 342 

rocana, a herb, 372 
roeika, a perfection, 257 
Rodani, a monstress affecting the 
child on the tenth day after birth; 
symptoms of the child possessed by; 
offering and fumigation to appease; 
the unguent to besmear on the 
child possessed by, 822 
— a monstress seizing the child in the 
third year; symptoms of the child 
seized by; offering to appease; 
fumigation when the child is 
seized by, 824 

xodhaka, explanation of, 403 
rodhamudra, 308 

RohiQi, one of the fixed asterisms, 38! 
one of the blunted asterisms, 382 
location in kotacakra, 385 
location of the letter denoting, 400 
reason for unusual commotion in, 
388 

a combination caused by the pre- 
sence of Sun in, 362 



1152 


Agrti Pur&na 


new fruits and food should be 
taken in, 358 

commendable for marriage, 357 
commended for copulation, 434 
good for the first feeding of the 
child, 358 

good for commencing construction 
of a house, 360 

not good for entering the cow-pen, 



caused by Sun's presence in, 


wife of Vasudeva; the birth of 
Balar&ma to, 26, 26fn., 744 
Rohit&sva, son of Hariicandra; son 
of, 737 

roots, paste of; to make the woman 
deliver the child comfortably, 834 
rosary, the presiding deity of the 
thread of, 899 

rosary beads, four different kinds of; 
each subdivided into four; bene- 
fits of wearing and using for 
counting, 894 

row, words which mean, 1007 
royal fan, characteristics of, 638 
royal priest, qualities of, 619 
R?abha, a constellation; correction 
for, 367 

( See also Taurus) 

— son of N&bhi and Meru, 323 
— son of Svahya; son of, 743 
R$abha (hills), as a sacred place, 328 
R$abhagajavilasi tam, characteristics 
of the metre, 913 
R$i, region known as, 640 
R?yamiika, mountain; kingdom re- 
stored to Sugriva by Rama at, 17-18 
Rtadhama, Indra during the period 
of the 12th Manu, 428 
ftavab, herb denoted by, 406 
Rtu, story relating to his disciple 
Nid&gha, 1066f 
ftu, herb denoted by, 408 
Rtuparna, son of Srutayu; son of, 737 
ftvijah, rtvik, herb denoted by, 406 
ruby, a gem, 640 
characteristics of, 641 
said to be auspicious, 641 
rucaka, a herb, 407 
Rucira, characteristics of the metre, 913 
rudantikS, a herb, 406 
rudhiraksa, said to be auspicious, 641 
Rudhirodgari, a year of the Hindu 
calendar, 405 
Rudra, creation of, 40 
as a son of Satl, 45 
being known so because of birth 
from wailing Brahma, 49 
protection sought by, 30 


herb denoted by, 406, 407 
the five constituents of worship of, 
814-15 

the sage, metre and deity for the 
hymns for, 815-16 
the order of recitation of different 
hymns of, 815 

presiding deity of an element, 27 1 

worship of, 274, 290 

denoting Siva as destructive fire; 

as a form of Visgu, 2 
the feminine form of Vi?nu seen by, 
6 

Rudracamunqia, a goddess of dancing; 
image of, 134 

Rudracairfa, a goddess; worshipped, 
132 

Rudracarcik£, a goddess, image of, 
134 

rudrahina, a pavilion relating to the 
presiding deity, 318 
rudrajat&, a herb, 406 
rudr&ksa, excellence of, 900 
Rudrap&da, at Gaya; merits of 
touching, 338 

Rudrasangrahi, a goddess; image of, 
1 38 

Rudras, as a creation of the sages, 41 
names of eight, 263 
eleven names of, 44, 44fn., 45fn. 
fourteen names of, 254-55 
25 different forms of, 252-3 
names of different, 249 
numerous, 45 
consecration of, 180 
Rudra, a siddha, 414 
Rudresa, a linga, 343 
Rudra Savaroi, the twelfth Manu, 428 
Rukmakavaca, son of Kambalabar- 
hi$a; foremost among fifty sons of, 
741 

Rukmavati, characteristics of the 
metre, 912 

Rukme$u, one of the sons of Ruk- 
makavaca, 741 
Rukmikugda* at Gaya, 341 
Rukmini, one of the wives of Kf?i>a, 
28, 744 

birth of Pradyumna to, 29 
had many forms together with 
Ky?ga,3! 

Rftkgakantf, a goddess; image of, 138 
Rum&, entrusted to Sugriva by R&ma, 
17 

Rfipaka, explanation of; when it may 
be called Upam&, 941 
RQpakam, one of the similarities, 939 
R&pavardhana, a form of Rudra, 252 
Ruru, a demon; slayer of, 399 
Ru^adgu, son of Sv&hk; son o £ 741 



Index 


1153 


Ru$adratha, son of Titikju; son of, 747 
Sabdabhcda, a weapon, 14 
Sabdabrahman, one of the two brah- 
mans; explanation of the term, 1060 
Sabdaka, one of those worshipped in 
the worship of Kubjik&, 414 
Sabdam, explanation of the term, 1027 
Sabhanara, one of the foremost sons 
of Vidusa; son of, 747 
Saci, daughter of Puloman, 46 
saciyaga, one of the four acts relating 
to a marriage, 434 

sacred formulas, conferring prosperity 
and having medicinal effect; des- 
cription of, 770-72 
sacred spots, greatness of, 326-8 
sacred thread, made of different 
material for the different castes, 433 
investiture of, 221-24 
mode of investitute of, 215-21 
knots on, 216 

sacrifices, seven domestic, 466 
sacrificial ground, words denoting, 
1017 

sacrificial pit. mode of constructing, 
56-61 

sacrificial rites, of three kinds, 1043 
classified as sattvika, rajasa and 
tamasa, 1071-72 

Sadasiva, presiding deity of an ele- 
ment, 271 

identified with letter k?a, 254 
worshipped in die worship of 
Kubjika, 414 

Sadasiva, a goddess worshipped in the 
worship of Tvarita, 424 
sad&?taka, position of planets, 357 
sadhaka, one of the tarabalas, 359 
Sadhani, letter denoting, 417 
sadhya, relating to letter in worship, 
<*90, 391, 403 

relating to the letters in the name 
of the votary, 895 

Sadhya, Sadhyas were bom to, 44 
sadhyamantras, become fruitful by 
repetitions, worship etc, 803 
Sadhyas, bom to Sadhya, 44 
consecration of the images of, 180 
sadobhaya, a pavilion, 318 
$adrfyam (similarity), an embellish- 
ment of senses, 939 
Sadyojata, letter denoting, 418 
saffron, used as an unguent, 372 
Sagara, son of Bahu; two wives of; 
sons of; whose sons were burnt by 
sage Kapila, 737 
sages, general term for, 1018 

names of the seven prominent 
referred to as CitrafikhawJin, 
989- 


Sagittarius, the time taken by the 
Sun to traverse, 384 
friendly with Gemini, 392 
Sahadeva, son of Somadatta; son of, 
750 

— son of Jar£sandha ; son of, 750 
— born to Madri and Pagdu, 744, 751 
bom through the grace of Asvinl- 
kumara, 32 

fell on the way of march, 37 
son of, 751 

sahadeva, a herb, 372 
sahadevi, a herb used as an unguent. 
372 

offers good protection, 378 
used in a charm, 405-6 
sahasa, denotes fine; three kinds of. 
588-89 

Sahasrajit, eldest son of Yadu, 740 
Sahasramsa, a name of the Sun, 1 36 
Sahasras'va, son of Ahinas'va; son of, 
738 

Sahi$Qu, one of the sons of Pulaha and 
K$ama, 49 

Sahokti, one of the similarities, 939 
explanation of, 941 
Sahya, mountain, 350 
rivers flowing from, 351 
Devadevefo to be worshipped, 842 
Sahyadri, a sacred mountain, 328 
Saila, herb denoted by, 406, 407, 408 
£ailu$a, a Gandharva; sons of, 24 
Sairhhikeyas, R&hu and others; pro- 
geny of Siriihik&, 45 
Saindhava, a forest, 842 
saindhava, a herb, 407 
Sairandhri, Draupad! as, 33 
Saitava, an authority in prosody, 913 
Saka, one of the seven continents, 323 
given by Priyavrata to Bhavya, 322 
rulers of, 352 
about the people of, 351 
sakala, one of die kinds of mantras 
of Siva, 873 

Saka, son of Nari?yanta, one of the 
sons of Vaivasvata Manu, 736 
sakata, an array; a variation of the 
array called bhoga, 634 
an array of the shape of a cart, 635 
S&kha, younger brother of Kum&ra, 44 
image of, 134 

Sakini, a goddess; to be worshipped, 
415 

Sakini-s, image of, 135 
Sakra (Indra), was given the worlds 
by Vijijiu, B 

abandoning of the festivity of, 27 
birth of Aijuna by the grace of, 32 
Maruts as the allies of, 47 
praised Lakjrai, 49 



1154 


Agni Pur&na 


salutation made to the face of, 51 
worshipped, 316 
one of the twelve Adityas, 45 
Sakrajit (Indrajit), 20 
&kta, a method of locating mantras, 
416 

Sakti, a guardian deity, 50 
saluation made to, 52 
worshipped, 284 

jakti, a posture of the hands, 857 
Saktidikja, initiation to be performed, 
73 

tfakuna, an astral combination, 363 
Sakuni, a son of Hira^y&kga, 46, 46fn 
— assisted Duryodhana in dice play, 
33 

^ an impeding force; prayer to Kf?na 
to destroy, 84 

— karana on fourteenth day of dark 
fortnight, 369 

S&kuntal&, wife of I>u?yanta, 749 
Sakunti, son of Drdharatha; son of, 
742 

Sakvari, name of a metre, 905 

Mahikavya should be composed in 
the metre, 920 

Sala, one of the sons of Balhika, 751 
Salagrama, a sacred place, 350, 491 
Mahayoga to be contemplated at, 
841 

Hari to be contemplated at, 84 1 
resorted to by R$abha, 323 
merits of, 328 

&lagrama, characteristics of, 1 24- 
126 

three kinds of worship of, 126 
mode of worshipping, 126 

&lagfha, a type of temple, 314 
S&lihotra, science of horses expounded 
by, 789 

S&lini, characteristics of the metre, 
912 

Salmala, a continent, 323 
given by Priyavrata to Vapu$m£n, 
322 

extent of and rulers of, 352 
S&lmalft, a hell, 532 
S&lmali, main river in the hell, 1039 
&lxnaliya, flower not to be used in 
worship, 529 

Salya, fought for a day and was killed 
by Yudhitfhira, 35 

sam&dhi, definition of, 454 
explanation of, 943, 1076 
explanation of the mode of practis- 
ing, 1051 

benefits of practising, 1052 
samam (evenness), an embellishment 
of sense, 939 


S&man, hymns; creation of, 40 
sam&na, a life-force carried by the 
vein 8u$umn&; functions of, 556 
Sam&ni, characteristics of the metre, 
908 

samapada, relating to archery, 645 
samasaptaka, position of planets, 
happiness indicated by, 357 
Sam&sokti, brevity of expression, 943 
Samasya, a puzzle, 992 
a kind of Citrak&vya, 935 
definition of, 936 
Samavak&ra, a type of drama, 921 
samavarta, a rite to be performed, 95 
Samaveda, as an Apar£vidy£, 2 
two branches of, 730 
division of, 429 
three kinds of songs of, 730 
extent of, 730 

hymns to be recited by a follower of, 
287 

use of the hymns of, 704-7 
the frisukta of, 710 
sacred for water god, 93 
Samaya, a Rudra, 254 
Samayavimala, to be worshipped, 
412,415 

Samayikatvam (conventional), an ex- 
cellence of sense, 945 
Samba, son of Jambavati from Kr§na, 
29, 744 

curse of the sages on, 36fn 
Sambara, a son of Hiranyakja, 46 
— demon; Da£aratha’s battle with, 
12fn 

— a companion of Karhsa, 29 
— story relating to, 29fn 
Samba r£, image of, 1 38 
Sambhava, one of the guards of door; 
worshipped, 93 
son of Urja; son of, 750 
S&mbhava, a method of locating 
mantras, 416 

sambhav&yanlya, details relating to 
the vow of, 520-1 

Sambhu, denotes Siva; reference to 
K&ma made bodiless by, 29 
Sati bom again and becoming wife 
of, 50 

investiture of sacred thread for, 215 
one of the Rudras, 45, 252 
— wife of Dhruva and mother of 
Si$ti and Bhavya, 42 
Sambhttta, son of Purukutsa; son of, 
737 

Sambhuti, wife of Marid; progeny of, 
49 

Saihhana, son of Dharmanetra ; son 
of, 740 

Sarhh&ri, a goddess, 375 



Index 


1155 


saihh&ramudr&, 198, 211, 212, 237, 
238, 239 

Sa mh & ri ka, letter denoting, 417 
Sarhhar^umudra, 236 
Saxhhatasva, son of Nikumbha; two 
sons of, 737 

Sami, one of the five sons of Sopkiva; 
son of, 743 

SamjfiS, daughter of Tvajtr; one of 
the wives of the Sun; gave birth 
to Vaivasvata Manu and the 


Asvins, 735 

sampat, one of the tar&balas, 359 
Sampati, eagle brother of Jafayu; 
words spoken to the monkeys by, 18 
words spoken to Hanumat and 
others by, 19 

samprad&na (giving), three kinds of; 
explanation of, 97 1 


ijjraptidvldas;! 


, on the practice of, 


Sampratipana, sub-division of a hell, 
1039 


samputa, relating to a mantra, 403 
Samrat, daughter of Kardama and 
Devahilti, 41 

sarhsargayamaka (samudga?), one of 
the Yamakas, 935 
Samsayopama, explanation of, 940 
Samuccayopama. explanation of, 940 
Samudra, father of Savarna, 43 
samudra, a treasure, 269 
Samvarana, son of l^kga; son of, 750 
Samvarta, a law-giver, 455 
Samvarta, one of those worshipped in 
the worship of Kubjika, 414 
letter denoting, 419 
Samvidhana (contrivance), an ex- 
cellence of sense, 945 
Samy&ti, son of Bahuvidha; son of, 
748 


amyogavimala, one of the Vimalas; 
worshipped, 412 

im^uktahalapankti, name of a gift, 


Sanaka, a sage; dwells in Janaloka, 
354 


expositions made by, 1074 
Sanatkum&ra, creation of, 40, 48 
Kumara identified with, 44 
sand, word for, 995 
sandal, red; as an unquent, 372 
sandhya, a flower, 529 
Sandhy&vata, as an excellent place, 
330 

SaQdilya, a Paficarfttr&gama, 106 
S&ndipanl, guru of 28 

Safighita^ sub-division of a hell, 1039 
sangraha/ collection of stories, 992 
safigrahana, a posture relating to 


riding horses, 787 
Sani, worshipped 52, 

Sanicakra, to find victory; drawing of, 
370 

safijaya, a modification of the array 
dao^a, 633 

Sanjivana, sub-division of a hell, 1039 
Saftjlvanl, letter denoting, 417 
Sankalpa, progeny of, 44 
Sankara (Siva), fight between Hari 
and, 30 

installation of image of, 172 
worshipped in the worship of 
Kubjika, 414 

&ankari, image of, 133 
Sankarsana, denotes Balar&ma, 26 fn 
as a form of Vis^u, 62 
installation of image of, 172 
as a deity presiding over the banner, 
148 

worship with the basic syllable of, 68 
worshipped, 91 
— a salagrama, 124, 125 
Sankha, a law-giver, 455 
— a serpent, image of, 137 
iahkha, a type of temple, 315 
— a treasure, 88, 111, 269 
— one of the postures of the hand, 857 
§ankhadv&ra, a place, 841 
Sankhakuta, group of mountains, 325, 
325fn 

Sankhapad, son of Kardama Praj&- 
pati; made ruler of the south, 
47 

§afikhap&1a, one of the eight chief 
serpents, the number of heads of, 

Sahkhin, form of Visnu at Sankha- 
dvara, 841 

&aiikhini, an occult nerve, 257 
carries the wind dhanafijaya, 556 
Sankhya, creation according to, 39fn 
sankirna, a variety of horses, 789 
Safikfti, classical metres basal on, 914 
Sank$epa, an embellishment of sound 
and sense; explanation of, 942 
Sank?iptaka, a variety of Arabhaft 
928 

£anku, one of the sons of Ugrasena, 
742 

Sankukama, worship of, 284 
Sankumati, gayatri, composition of 
the metre, §04 

Sankurarya, one of the sons of Danu, 
46 

Sankufirk^, different reading for 
Safikur&rya, 46fh 

Sannateyu, one of the ten sons of 
Bhadr&tva, 748 



1156 


Agni Purdna 


Sannati, wife of Kratu; progeny of, 49 
S&nta, a son of Apa, 44 
iSmth, a nerve, 316 

S&ntabhaya, a son of Medhatithi, 351 
Santanu, bom in the race of Bharata 
son of Pratlpa; 31 

sons of; through Gang& and Kali 
(Satyavati), 751 

s&ntapana, an expiation; explanation 
of, 482, 494 

for having stolen things, 476 
for having drunk polluted water, 
480, 487 

Santati, different reading for Sannati, 
49fn 

S&nti, Indra at the time of the 10th 
Manu, 428 

— a female energy; worshipped, 91 
— bom to Ajami tfha and Nilini, 749 
sapindikaraga, rite; mode of per- 
forming, 348-9 

to be performed for women, 442, 460 
sapphire, a gem, 64u 
qualities of a good, 641 
sapta, herb denoted by, 407 
Saptabhfim&, a hell, 1039 
Saptaratra, religious texts, 105 
Sapt&rcis, worship of, 285 
<ara, a posture of the hands, 857 
a flower, 529 
s&ra, a ray of the Sun, 195 
S&r&, image of, 138 
Sarabha, a monkey that accompanied 
R&ma to Lank&, 21 
Sarabhanga, sage saluted by R5ma, 15 
entered die fire in the presence 
of R&ma, 15fn 

S&rabhata, a muhurta; deeds to be 
done in, 371 

Saradvata, married Ahlay&, and had a 
son, 750 

Saradvipa, future birth of cakrav&kas 
in, 349 

S&ragia, one of the sons of Vasudeva 
and Rohitf, 744 
iarapunkhikS, a herb, 410 
Sarasiruha, a variety of bandha, 937 
S&rasvatakalpa, a kalpa period, 732 
sArasvatavrata, mode of practising, 524 
Sarasvatl (goddess), saluted, 1 
the term used in a formula, 52 
image of, 131, 133 
worship of, 197 
benefit of worshipping, 343 
— river, 327 

confluence of Ganges with, 327 
Sarasvatl, river at Gayi, 344 
S&ratha, beads belonging to the Savitra 
clan, 894 

SarayQ, a river, Daiaratha’s funeral 


rites done on the banks of, 14 
Sarira, letter denoting, 417 
Sarmi^tha, daughter of Vr?aparvan, 
25, 46, 740 

was the second wife of Yay&ti, 25, 
740 

story relating to Devayani’s curse 
on, 25fn 

S&rnga, worshipped, 52, 88 
Sarngadharin, form of Vi?nu at 
Daod&ka> ^42 

Sarpa, a form of Rudra, 45 
sarpa, a constellation; adversity cau- 
sed by purchase of things in, 359 
sarpacari, array; modification of 
bhoga, 635 

sarpak$i, used as an unguent, 372 
sarpasya, a modification of the array 
danda, 633 

Sarpis, an ocean, 324 
sarpya, herb denoted by, 407 
Sarva, a name of Rudra, 50 
worship of, 290 

sarvabhauma, significance of the word, 
1018 

Sarvabhavodbhava, a form of Rudra, 
252 

Sarvabhutadamani, a female energy; 
worshipped, 51 

Sarvada (Sarvari), a year of the 
Hindu calendar, 405 
Sarvadhatri, a year of the Hindu 
calendar, 405 

Sarvajit, a year of the Hindu calendar, 

SarvajfiS, image of, 138 
Sarvajiiavimala, one of the Vimalas, 
412 

worshipped, 415 

S&rvakamada, letter denoting, 419 
Sarvakarm£, son of Kalm£$apada ; son 
of, 737 

Sarvanetra, a deity presiding over the 
banner, 145 
worship of, 284 

Sarvap&pahara, form of Vi$nu on 
Vindhya mountain, 842 
Sarvatobhadra, a mystical diagram, 
879-80 

worship of Hari in, 75fn 
— a type of temple, 314 
—one of the bandhas; description of; 
936 

three kinds of, 937 
— an array, 612, 630 
modification of mar^dala, 634 
has opening on all aides, 634 
formation optional, 635 
SarvatomukhI, an energy, established, 
304 



Index 


1157 


worshipped, 51 

Sarvatraga, son of Dharmas&varrii 
Manu, 428 

Saryati, one of the eight sons of 
Vaivasvata Manu, 735, 736 
two sons of, 736 

—one of the seven sons of Nahu?a, 74C 
Sasabindu, son of Citraratha; a great 
monarch; a devotee of lord Visnu; 
had ten thousand sons, 741 
£a£i, herb denoted by, 406 
Sasiva, a form of Rudra, 252 
§a?tha, worshipped, 412 
$a?thi, one of the Adinathas, 412 
Satabhigak, a movable astcrism, 381 
a blunted asterism, 382 
an asterism; profit caused by pur- 
chase in, 360 

for increasing the grains, 361 
misery caused by Sun’s transition, 
363 

location of letter representing, 400 
Satadhanu, was killed by Knoa, 743 
Satadhanva, one of the ten sons of 
Hrdika, 743 

Satadyumna, a son of Manu and 
Nadvala, 42 

&atahparikti, a variety of Pankti, 904 
Satajit, one of the sons of Yadu; three 
sons of, 740 
fatamuli, a herb, 407 
Satananda, a sage, 10 
son of Saradvata and Ahaly&, 750 
son of, 750 

Satanika, son of Nakula and Draupadi, 
751 

iatapu^pi, a herb, 407 
Satarupa, two sons of, 41 
Satajpiga, hermitage of, 32 
Satatapa, a law-giver, 455 
Satatara, an asterism; located in 
Kotacakra, 385 
$atavari, a herb, 371 
Sat&yus, a son of Pururavas, 739 
Sati, gave up her life; bom as 
daughter of Himav&n, 50 
— a nerve, 316 
— an excellence of word, 944 
Satobfhati, name of Mah&bfhatl 
according to Bhandila, 904 
Satrajit, son of Nighna; got the Syam- 
antaka from Sun god; Syamantaka 
gem returned by Kr?na to; was 
killed by Satadhanu, 743 
iatru, explanation of, 1019 
Satrughna, birth of, 10 
married Srutakirti, 1 1 
was brought to the city along with 
Bharata, 14 
killed Lavaca, 24 


Satri^it, one of the five sons of So$&£va, 

Sattaka, a type of drama, 92 1 
s&ttvika, one of the qualities, 48 
Saturday, tripu?kara caused by, 362 
prosperity caused by Kfttikl occurr- 
ing on, 377 

inauspiciousness of seventh day on, 
381 

rule of Rahu lies at south-east on, 
409 

Saturn, distance of, 354 
chariot of, 556 

period (years) of influence of, 363, 
393 

presides over a part of day, 381 
diagram of, 409 
the letter presided over by, 374 
image of, 137 
contemplated as dark, 828 
confers good in sixth place, 383 
brings good in tenth place, 384 
victory indicated by, 393 
begets defeat, 377 
fatality indicated by, 389 
bad luck indicated by, 400 
Satvata, son of Jantu; four sons of; 

a good Yadava king, 742 
S&tvati, one of the modes, 928 
Satya, a manifestation of Vi§QU, 428 
— AiSvara, an &gama, spoken by, 106 
—one of the sons of Priyavrata, 322 
— a world; worshipped, 79 
— personified; worshipped, 516 
Satya, one of the wives of Kn^a, 744 
Satyabhama, daughter of Satrajit; 
married by Kf^a, 743, 744 
was devoted to Knpa, 744 
return of Krma in the company of, 
28 

Satyadevi, one of the daughters of 
Devaka; married by Vasuaeva, 742 
Satyadhfk, son of Sat&nanda; pro- 
geny of, 750 

Satyahita, son of Vnabha; son of, 750 
Satyajit, son of Raja, 323 
Satyaka, son of Sini, 743 
Satyaketu, son of Sukum&ra, 749 
S£tyaki, son of Satyaka; also known as 
Yuyudhana, 743 
survived the Bharata war, 36 
Satyaloka, distance of; residents of, 
354 

Saty&nanda, sandals of; worshipped, 
414 

Satyaratha, son of Satyavrata; son of, 
737 

son of Citraratha; son of, 748 
Satya v&k, one of the sons of Manu 
and Nacjval&, 42 



1158 


Agni Pur&fa 


Sftty fcvat, different reading for 
Satyav&k, 42fn 

Satyavati, daughter of Gadhi, 749 
wife of Santanu, 31 
had Vicitravfryaka as a ion, 751 
Satyavrata, son of Tarui^a; son of, 737 
Saubhadra, denotes Abhimanyu 
Saubh&gya (loveliness), an excellence 
of word and sense; explanation of, 
946 

Saubh&gya, image of, 133 
saubh^yavrata, details relating to, 

Saukum&rya, an excellence of word, 
944 

Saumitri, Lak?mana, Sita’s words to, 
16 

Saumya, a blunted asterism, 382 
— a territory, 350 

— (north) Hiraoyaromaka made as 
regent of, 48 

— a muhurta; deeds to be done in, 371 
SaumyS, a goddess accomplishing a 
charm, 375 

characteristics of the metre, 907 
saumyazrantras, characteristics of and 
effects of, 802-3 

got by inversion of the letters of 
&gneyamantras, 803 
Saunaka, at the forest of Naimi$a, 1 
— represents a branch of Atharvaveda, 
730 

— a P&flcar&tragama, 106 
Saundikeyas, one of the five branches 
of Haihayas, 741 

Saurabha, characteristics of the metre, 
909 

Sauri, form of Vi^u at Utpala, 842 
sautr&mapi, i havir-yajna, 86, 466 
Sauvlra, a king; an account of know- 
ledge imparted by Bharata to, 1062ff 
Sauvira, country; Vi?nu temple built 
by king ot, 526 
Savana, a sage, 428 
-—one of the sons of Vasi$tha and 
Uija, 49 

—son of Priyavrata, 322 
ruled Pu$kara, 353 
sons of, 353 

Savarod, daughter of Samudra; pro- 
geny of, 43 

S&varQi, the eighth Manu; son of 
Sfirya and Ch&y&, 428 
a disciple of Lomahargaga, 730 
Savitj, one of the twelve Adityas, 45, 
136 

worshipped, 317 
red flowers for worship of, 108 
Savitr*, worship of, 274 
S&vitra, one of the four kinds of rosary 


beads; the four divisions of, 894 
a muhurta; deeds to be done in, 371 
SSvitri, letter denoting, 418 
located for worship, 317 
worship of, 274 

name of a new-moon day conferring 
benefits, 519 

s&vi trimantra, as purifying from sin, 
479 

Scorpio, time taken by the Sun to 
transit, 384 

friendly with other constellations, 
392 

scorpion, remedy for poison due to, 

scorpion-bite, remedy for, 756 
seasons, two divisions of; the different 
tastes grtting increased in, 759 
seat of a king, characteristics of, 638 
self, the subtle nature of, 1076 
self, golden image of; merits of giving 
as gift of, 548 

selling, words denoting, 1022 
senility, remedy which arrests, 756 
sense (s ) , compared to an elephant, 6 1 7 
as the horses, 1075 
embellishment of, 939 
description of, 42 
sentence, definition of, 992 

that is well-constructed; word for, 
993 

sentiments, importance of; inter- 
dependent on emotion, 924 
the names of, 994 
words denoting different, 994-5 
exhibited by moods; origin of, 923- 

four self-developed ones, 924 
serpent, words standing for, 995 
serpent bites, four kinds of, 808 

at certain places described as 
inauspicious, 808-9 
auspicious and inauspicious sounds 
anH objects seen relating to, 809 
description of auspicious-inauspi- 
cious type of messengers conveying 
news about, 809 

the prison due to; the way in which 
spreads, 810 

the treatment with mystic formulae 
for, 811, 814 

serpents, the different species of, 807 
seven factors such as the nature 
etc. of, 807 

the names of eight chief; classified 
into groups, 807 
three classes of, 807 
having hoods bear different signs, 
807 

four divisions of, 807 



Index 


1159 


the names of the different teeth of, 
807 

details relating to impregnation, 
laying of eggs etc. by, 807-8 
seven among the eight preside over 
the days of the week, 808 
servant, words denoting, 1019 

the qualities marking the king's, 621 
servants, of the king, code of conduct 
for, 575-6 

the qualities of, 620-21 
Sesa, one of the eight chief serpents 
the number of heads of, 807 
born from Kadru, 46 
Vi$nu as, 333 

the word Ananta denoting, 63fn 
worship of, 273, 317 
worshipped, 108 

se?a, an array; marked by rows of 
elephants, 634 

Sevacakra, indicating gain or loss, 
390-91 

Scvya, name of the wife of Jyamagha, 
741 

sheaths, description of the seven, 1034 
shellac, as an unguent, 372 
shyness, words denoting, 995 
Sibi, a son of Hrada, 46 
different reading for Gaya, 42fn 
the four sons of. 747 
Sibikavesma, a type of temple, 314 
sickness, a general remedy to remove, 
769 

siddha, letters falling into the group 
of, 390 

relating to the letters in the name 
of the votary, 895 
as fruitful, 391 

Siddha (vimala), worshipped, 415 
Siddhacamui?d^> image of, 135 
siddhacatu$ka, four siddhas, 415 
Siddhakofisvara, worshipped, 414 
siddhamantras, become fruitful by 
mere repetition, 803 
Siddhartha, a minister of King Daia- 
ratha, 11 

— a year of the Hindu calendar, 405 
siddhartha, a herb, 407 
siddhas, names of, 414 
Siddhairama, a place; Rama’s stay at, 
10 

SiddhayogeSvari, image of, 135 
Siddheivara, a lihga, 34* 
sides, five actions of, 930 
Sikh&, a goddess, 417 
— one of the four kinds of rosary 
beads; die four divisions of, 894 
^-characteristics of the metre, 907, 911 
fikha, a herb, 372 
&khaQdir*o* of Dnipada, 34fa 


fought on the side of the P&irfavas, 

, 34 

Sikhaudm, a Rudra, 263 
SikhaQdiri* later transformed to a 
male form, 34fn 
wife of Antardh&na, 43 
Sikharigi, characteristics of the metre, 
913 

Sikhi, letter denoting, 419 
Sikhivahini, a goddess; location of the 
letter denoting, 417 
Sikhivasa, group of mountains, 325, 
325fn 

£ik?a (phonetics), science of, 2 
Silpaka, a type of drama, 921 
simantnonayana, a rite, 59, 86, 95 
Siriiha, a constellation; correction for 
367 

(See also Leo) 

simha-homa, performance of, 118 
siihhakarga, a position relating to 
archery, 648 

simhavidya, ceremony known as, 1 17 
Simhika, a demoness, daughter of 
Kasyapa and Diti, 45 
killed by Hanumat, 19 
Sirahonnata, the name of Vasanta- 
tilaka according to sage Kasyapa, 913 
similarity, explanation of; is four-fold, 
939 

Simsapa, tree in the Atoka grove, 19 
Si(Sa)mtopayana, a disciple of 
Lomahar$ana, 730 
sin, words denoting, 990 
sins, major types, 471-74 

the consequential births for diff- 
erent, 1039-40 
hymn which destroys, 483-5 
Sindhu, region of, indication of the 
destruction of the inhabitants of, 387 
— ocean; name of Gopisvara to be 
repeated at, 842 
— a river, 24 
as yielding all fruits, 327 
Sindhudvipa, sage for the hymn &po 
hi $th&, 562 

— son of Ambarifa; son of, 737 
sindhu-varaka, a herb, 407 
Sini, one of the sons of Babhru, 742 
— descendant of Dhrtfa; 743 
Sini, was born from Anamitra; son of, 
743 

Sinlv&ll, wife of Kardama, 738-9 
— a son of Angiras and Smrti, 49 
sinlv&li, the new-moon day if the 
moon is perceived, 980 
siniv&li, caturdaii, 360 
fiph^, a herb, 407 

<iri*a, flower not to be used in worship, 
529 



1160 


Agni Purdna 


Sitira, a son of Dhara, 44 
one of the sons of MedhAtithi, 35 1 
£ifti f son of Dhruva and Sambhu; 
son of, 42 

riiucAndrayapa, an expiation; ex- 
planation of, 482 

iisuka (si 6ucandr Ayana ) , an expiation 
for eating certain things, 488 
Si^uvaktra, image of, 138 
SltA, daughter of Janaka, 10 
wife of Rama, 738 
RAma was asked to observe vows 
along with, 1 1 

crossed the river Jahnavi, 13 
S&rpagakh&’s words to Ravar^a 
relating to, 15 
abduction of, 16 
search ordered by Sugrlva for, 18 
Jafayu gave his life for, 18 
seen by HanOmat, 19 
Crest-jewel given to Hanumat by, 
20 

Vibhi Sana’s advice to RAvana, 21 
Kumbhakan^a’s words to Ravapa 
relating to, 22 

RAvapa’s intention to kill, 22 
brought back after purification, 23 
birth of Kusa and Lava to, 24 
rule of son of Slta, 25 
merit of worshipping, 343 
—a river, 325 

iitakfcchra, an expiation; explanation 
of, 482, 799 
Sitambha, a lake, 325 
Sitoda, a lake, 325 
Siva, synonyms of, 986-7 
a form of Rudra, 252, 254 
Vigpu as the refuge of, 746 
name of attendants of, 987 
BApa considered as a son of; words 
spoken to Bana by, 29 
words spoken by Vigpu to, 30 
image of; meditation on, 202 
installation of image of, 172 
mode of worshipping, 197-204, 
837-40 

worship of, 274 
a sacred formula of, 837 
eight kinds of mantras of, 873 
appeasing rite for, 891-94 
to be contemplated at every quad- 
rangle, 842 

a deity located in the body, 414 
— herb denoted by, 406 
— a son of Medhatithi, 351 
— the name of a temple, 318 
—one of four kinds of rosary beads; 

tike four divisions of, 894 
fiva, one of the kinds of mantras of 
Siva, 873 


Siva, worshipped, 51 
location of the letter reoresenting, 
417 

tfivakhya, a pavilion, 318 
iivaratrivrata, description of, 517-8 
iivasraya, a pavilion, 318 
Sivottama, a Rudra, 263 
Skanda, synonyms of, 987 
conquered by Tarkgya and others, 
30 

obeisance made to, 1 
worshipped, 51 
image of, 134, 314 
placing of the image of, 116 
worship of the image of, 215 
offering made to, 274, 275 
Skandapurapa, narrated by lord 
Skanda ; on the virtues of Tatpuru?a- 
kalpa; extent of; should be given 
as a gift, 733 

skandagagthi, a vow; details relating to, 
504 

Skanda vikata a demon, 317 
Skandhogrivi (Brhati) , name of Nyan- 
kusarini according to Kraustuki, 903 
skin, defects of; remedy for, 767 
sky, words denoting 988 
slave, rules relating to making free a, 
673 

Slega, a variety of guna relating to 
word, 944 

( See also coalescence} 
sling, uses of, 652 

SlokAyani, represents a branch of 
Atharvaveda, 730 

Smara, worship of the image of, 215 
smoothness, explanation of, 945 
smrti, collection of texts relating to 
religious duties, 992 
Smrti, wife of Angiras, 49 
snake-bite, remedy for 756 
( See also serpent bite) 
snataka, denotes a person who had the 
ceremonial bath, 1018 
SnehAfr, a class of men at Kuiadvipa, 
352fn 

snow, words denoting, 989 
snuhl, a herb, 406 

society, everyone should strive for 
the welfare of, 674 
godaia, herb denoted by, 407 
$oda£, a somajarhsthA, 64, 79, 86, 466 
$o<jhAnyAsa, three kinds of, 416 
soft, a mode; explanation of, 933, 934 
Softness, explanation of, 945 
§oka, horn from Mjtyu, 49 
solar race, description of the genealogy 
of, 735-38 

solar region, worshipped, 50 
soldiers, methods of fight by; to be 



Index 


1161 


rewarded suitably after the victory, 
632 

Soma, born from Brahm£, 25 
given as born from Atri, 31, 738 
bom to Atri and Anasdya, 49 
married 27 daughters of Dak?a, 44 
performance of R&jastiya by, 738 
the supremacy gained by, 739 
the wives of the celestials, and sages 
deserted their husbands and 
served, 738-39 

seduced Tara, wife of Bfhaspati, 
739 

the king of planet; words spoken 
to progenitors by, 43 
worship of, 274 
worshipped, 52 
requested to come, 336 
—one of the eight Vasus; father of 
Vardi, 44 

Somadatta, son of Pancadhanus; son 
of, 750 

— one of the sons of Balhika, 751 
—one of the sons of Santanu, 751 
Somaka, a boundary mountain, 351 
son of Sahadeva; son of, 750 
Somakuud a > at Gaya, 341 
Soman&tha, a linga, 343 
greatness of, 327 
Somapa, son of Maitreya, 750 
somasamsthas, the seven kinds of, 466 
thousands of, 86 
Some£a, letter denoting, 419 
worshipped, 100 
$o$&, a river, 841 
as excellent, 328 

Son5$va, one of the two sons of Sura; 

sons of, 743 
Souitapura, city, 29 
Sopama, worshipped, 412 
sore-mouth, remedy for, 768 
soul, words denoting, 991 
that is liberated becoming one 
with Brahman explained, 1076 
as the traveller, 1075 
sound, words standing for ordinary, 
993 

sounds, three divisions of, 917 
words denoting different kinds of, 
993-4 

spear, uses of, 651 

speech, twelve kinds of exertions of, 
927 

preceded by weeping; words denot- 
ing, 9?3 

words denoting, 992 
words signifying beginning of, 992 
spheres, different kinds of, 387-8 
sphuraoa, denoting a division of time, 
370 


spiders, remedy for poison due to, 
756, 819 

spies, characteristics of, 625 
(evil) spirits, possessing the newly 
born child from the first day on- 
wards; the names of different, 820-26 
spiritual initiation, removing bondage, 
238-43 

for emancipation, 243-48 
four kinds of, 227 
mode of, 226-35 
spitoon, words denoting, 1017 
spleen, enlargement of; remedy for, 
752, 767, 769 

splendidness (Ojas), abundance of 
compounds, 945 
spy, words denoting, 1019 
frdddha, mode of performing, 457-61 
merits of doing on different day, 
349, 350 

Sraddhadeva, the seventh Manu, 427- 
8 

Sragdhara, characteristics of the metre, 
914 

Sragvigi, characteristics of the metre, 
913 

Srama, a son of Apa, 44 
frauti (rite), to be performed, 86 
Sravana, an asterism having firm look, 
382 

the rite to determine the sex of 
the child to be done in, 357 
auspicious for administering medi- 
cine, 358 

new fruits and food to be eaten in, 
358 

good for gathering hay, 360 
money is deposited or articles taken 
back in, 360 

not commendable for tonsure and 
other rites, 359 

cow-pen should not be entered in, 
361 

misery caused by Sun’s transit in, 
363 

located in Kofacakra, 385 
located in a diagram, 400 
Sr&vaga, benefit of oil purchased in 
the month of, 386 

^ravanadvadasi rules relating to the 
practice of, 513-14 
rfr&vaoi, a sacrifice, 86, 466 
Sravanta, son of Yuvan&iva; had 
Sr£vantik& as capital, 736 
Sr&vantika, a city in the east: was the 
capital of Sr&vanta, 736 
Sr!, became the consort of Vijou, 49 
located on the body, 414 
hymn in praise o£ 615-16 
mentioned as a form of Hari, 91 



1162 


wonhipped, 1, 51, 52, 63 
Sricandradevi, a goddess, 413 
$zidaQdi> a spirit possessing the 
child on the eighth night after birth; 
symptoms of child possessed by; 
offering to appease; materials for 
fumigation and besmearing when 
the child is possessed by, 822 
Srldevi, one of the daughters of 
Devaka; married by Vasudeva, 742 
Sridhara, a name of Vi?iju, 65 
contained in a formula, 52 
image of, 115 
name of a Salagrama, 1 25 
Srigadita, a type of drama, 921 
Srijaya, a type of temple, 315 

characteristics of the temples of the 
class of, 318 

Srikaptha, a Rudra, 263 
letter denoting, 418 
— a type of temple, 315 
Srikattthanatha, worshipped, 413, 414 
irikrrchra, an expiation, 483 
Srlmah&kala, worshipped, 414 
Srimukha, a year of the Hindu 
calendar, 404 

Sriparvata, one of the eight holy 
spots, 330 
as sacred, 328, 350 
significance and greatness of, 331 
Sriprafna, a Pancaratr&gama, 106 
Srisamayakotisa, worshipped, 414 
Srivatsa, worshipped, 51, 52, 55, 63 
— a type of temple, 314 
842 

Sriyafipati, form of Vi§i?u on Narmada, 
842 

Sjrngaberapura, a place; Rama's 
arrival at, 13 
Bharata's visit to, 14 
as an excellent spot, 328 
ffng&taka, an array; formation 
optional, 635 

Spi^l, a var$aparvata, 324 
Sffijaya, son of Kai&nala; son of, 747 
— one of the five bom from Bahya£va, 
749 

son of, 750 

a minister of King Da&uratba, 1 1 
snik, a ladle, 58 

Srutadevi, one of the daughters of 
Devaka; married by Vasudeva, 742 
Srutakarmaka, son of Ud&pi, 750 
Srutakirti, son of Axjuna and 
Draupadl, 751 

— married by Satrughna, 11 
Srutasena, one of the four sons of 
Jahnu, 750 

—son of Bhimasena and Draupadl, 
751 


Agni Purina 


Srutavarmi, son of Sahadeva and 
Draupadl, 751 

Srutayu, son of Sindhudvipa; son of, 
737 

— son of Bhanuratha, 738 
Sruti, a division of Abhivyakti, 943 
sruva, a ladle, 58 
sthali, a vessel, 94 
sthalipaka, a rite, 86fn 
Sthandilcyu, one of the ten sons of 
Bhadrasva, 748 
Sthaou, letter denoting, 418 
sthapana, explanation of, 267 
sth&jianimudra, a posture of the hand, 

Sthira, a goddess, 376 
sthitasthapana, explanation of, 267 
sthupakarna, a modification of the 
array dan^a, 633 

sthunapak?a, an array; characteristics 
of, 633 

stone slabs (in temples), mode of 
placing 276-7 

strategem, one of the means to be 
employed by a king, 587 
strength, prescription for gaining, 777 
student, duties of, 432-33 
study, commencement of; time for, 
359 


conclusion of; time for rite relating 
to, 359 

Stuti, a variety of Prasasti, 942 
Subha, one of the siddhas, 414 
subhadra, a pitcher, 270 
Subhadra, daughter of Vasudeva, 744 
wife of Arjuna, 751 
birth of Abhimanyu to, 33 
as a goddess, 376 
merit of worshipping, 343 
subhadra, a nerve, 316 
Subhadrikt, a goddess, 376 
subhaga, a herb, 372 
Subhakjt, a year of the Hindu 
calendar, 405 
Subhumik&, a hell, 1039 
subjects, five sources of dangers for, 
622 

substantives, the inflections of the 
seven cases of, 957 
two kinds of — ending in vowels and 
ending in consonants; again 
dividra into three, 957 
examples for the two varieties, 
957-58 

in the feminine; examples for, 958- 
59 

example for those in the neuter, 
959 

in the feminine; examples of fini- 
shed forms of, 966-68 



Index 


1163 


in the neuter; examples of finished 
forms of, 968-70 
different kinds of, 1024-7 
success, the marks of, 625 
Succhaya, wife of §i$ti, 42 
Suci, bom from Agni and Sv&h&, 49 
— a daughter of Tamra, 46 
— different reading for Kavi, 42fn 
— Indra at the time of the 14th Manu, 
428 

suci, a kind of arrangement of the 
army, 630 

a modification of the array dapd a » 
633 

sucivyuha, an array, 612 
Sudam?tra, one of the sons of Asamau- 
jas, 743 

Sudarsana, the disc of lord Vi?pu, 
827 

installation of, 179 
worshipped, 63, 84 
— a falagrama, 125 
Sudariana, a herb, 378 
§uddhavirad&r?abha, characteristics 
of metre, 910 

Suddhavirit, characteristics of the 
metre, 91 1-2 

Suddhodana, Vi$nu’s manifestation as 
son of, 38 

Sudhanu, one of the sons of Kuru, 750 
Sudhanva, son of Sambhuta; son of, 
737 

— son of Purujarika; son of, 738 
— son of Satyahita; son of, 750 
— one of the sons of Kuru; son of, 750 
Sudhanvaka, son of Akrura, 744 
Sudhanvan, water-god known as, 93 
became the regent of the east, 47 
Sudharm£, name of the council of 
gods, 987 

Sudirgha, a hell, 1039 
Sudyumna, a son of Manu and 
Nadvala, 42 

— name of 115 after she changed sex, 
735 

the three sons of, 735 
sufferings, two kinds of; explanation 
of, 1030 

sugandha, a flower that pleases lord 
Hari, 529 

sugatidv&dafi, on the practice of, 513 
Sughor&, a hell, 1038 
Sugriva, Rflma advised by Jat&yu to 
meet; met by R&ma, 17 
Lak$mapa’s words to, 18 
reference to his becoming a friend 
of R&ma, 19 
consoled Rjbna. 21 
accompanied R&ma to Lafikk, 21 
cut the nose of Kumbhakarpa, 22 


reference to Dvivida, counsellor of, 
30fn 

as a door-keeper, 108 
worship of, 273, 317 
Sugriv&, a daughter of T&mr&, 46 
Sumitra, saluted by Rama, 23 
Suhotra, one of the five sons of Vitatha, 
749 

Suhotra, son of Sudhanv&; son of; 
seven other sons of, 750 
Girika was the queen of, 750 
Suhotraka, name of Atharvaveda, 93 
Suka, paying respects to Vy&sa, 1 
Sukala, a goddess, 413 
Sukanya, a son of Sary&ti, 736 
Sukarma, a part of Samaveda given 
to, 429 

Suketu, one of the five sons of Vitatha, 
749 

Sukha, a celestial, 428 
sukha, a ray of the Sun, 195 
Sukhodaya, a son of Medhatithi, 351 
Sukla, a year of the Hindu calendar, 
404 

Sukra, preceptor of the demons, 8, 
41 fn, 740 

story relating to Dcvayani, daugh- 
ter of, 25fn 

daughter of; invoked, 112 
— planet worshipped, 52 
■ — a son of Dhi$apa, 43 
— a sage; son of Vasi?tha and Urj&, 49 
£ukra, an array; description of, 633 
£ukradevik&, letter denoting, 418 
Suksetra, son of Brahmasavarpi Manu, 
428 

— the name of a temple, 318 
Suksma, a Rudra, 255, 263 
Suk?ma, a female divinity, worshipped, 
51 

sukti, a weight, 209 
Suktimat, a mountain, 350, 351 
Sukumara, son of Havya, 352 
Sukumdraka, son of Anarta; son of, 749 
Sukum&rik&, spirit exercising her 
influence die whole year, 826 
Sfill, the name of a temple, 318 
Sulin, worship of the image of, 215 
Sumilin, father of Kaikaii, 24fn 
Sumank, a boundary mountain, 351 
Sumanas, a son of Agneyi, 42 
Sumanta, one of the four sons of 
Tamsurodha, 749 

Sumantra, a minister of King 
Dairatha, 1 1 
left back by Rima, 13 
Sumantu, a disciple of Vy&sa; a part 
of S&maveda given to; divided 
Atharvaveda, 429 



1164 


represents a branch of Atharvaveda, 
730 

sumatadv&da£, mode of practising 
the vow of, 513 

Sumati, a disciple of Lomahar$aoa, 
730 

— son of Bharata, 323 
Sumbha, a demon; killed by the 

goddess Durg&, 26, 26fn 

Sumeru, a mountain where Raivata 

performed penance, 736 
Sumitra, born to G&ndh&ri and 

Dhnta, 743 

Sumitr&, birth of Satrughna to, 10 
Sumukha, a deity presiding over the 
banner, 145 
worship of, 284 

Sumukhi, consort of Skanda; image of, 
134 

a goddess worshipped, 375 
Sumuspka, one of the sons of Ugrasena, 
742 

Sun, synonyms of, 989 
only one, 376 

as a manifestation of Vi?i?u, 356 
born from Marici, 9 
bom from Kajyapa, 735 
three wives of, 735 
(planet) distance of, 354 
the extent of the chariots of; the 
horses etc. of, 355 
celestials who ride the chariot of, 
355 

words denoting the lustre of, 990 
words denoting halo around, 989 
words denoting the ray of the, 989- 
90 

image of, 136 

contemplating the form of, 827 
mantras for, 425 
mode of worshipping, 195-97 
mode of worship o£ 830-32 
worshipped by people of Sakadvipa, 
352 

worship of, 51 

worship of the weapons of, 52 
eclipse of, 388 

period (years) of influence of, 363 
presides over a part of a day, 381 
effect of stay in one’s birth-star, 363 
effect of stay in certain asterisxns, 
363 

effects of transit in some kara$as, 
363 

way to find strength of, 380 
no influence on war, 377 
qualities of a person indicated by, 
392 

consecration to be done in a parti- 
cular position of, 361 


Agni Purdna 

benefit of transit in some karapas, 
362 

gains indicated by, 384 
gains of position etc. indicated by, 
393 

marriage not commendable in 
particular position of, 357 
adverse effect of entry in certain 
astral combinadons, 362-3 
death caused by the posidon in 
Aries, 378 

misery indicated by, 383 
epidemics indicated by certain 
things in the disc of, 387 
fatality indicated by its presence 
in an asterism, 389 
bad luck indicated by, 400 
Sun, Vi$$u made as the lord of, 47 
SunahSepa, also known as A? taka; was 
the other son of Visvamitra, 749 
Sunaman, one of the sons of Ugrasena, 
742 

sunanda, a pitcher, 270 
Sunday, rite for determining the sex 
of the child to be done on, 357 
rite of chewing betel leaf to be 
done on, 358 

first shave of a child commended 
on, 359 

profit caused by purchase made on, 
360 

excavadon of a tank etc. to be 
avoided on, 360 

cows should not be grazed on, 361 
a special combinadon caused by, 362 
inauspiciousness of twelfth day 
occurring on, 381 
the rule of Rahu on, 409 
Sundhu, son of Vitamaya; son of, 748 
Sunitha, daughter of Mftyu; wife 
of AAga, 42 

Suniti, wife of Utt&napada, 41 
sun-stone, a gem, 641 
ftiuthi, a herb, 407 
sGnya, one of the kinds of mantras of 
Siva, 873 

description of, 875 
Suparsva, a mountain, 324, 325 
supernatural events, relating to the 
three worlds, 711 
Suprabha, a form of Rudra, 252 
a country, 352 

Suprabha, a mountain in the south, 18 
a goddess; worshipped, 230 
daughter of Svarbh&nu, 46 
suprabha, a nerve, 316 
Suprasiddh&, image of, 138 
supratitfha, a modification of the 
array dap^Ut; characteristics con- 
trary to, 633 



Index 


1165 


Supratiftha, number of letters in the 
metre 905 

Suprati$thita, a deity presiding over 
the banner, 145 
worship of, 284 

Supreme Being, praise of perception 
of one’s oneness with, 1074 
Supreme Brahman, nature of 923, 
1070-1 

identified with knowledge, 1060 
declared as the thing to be known, 
1070 

Supreme spirit, as the highest, 1075 
water known as narftb because of 
its creation by, 40 
Sura, an ocean, 324 
sura, explanation of, 487 
Sura, one of the sons of Kartavirya, 
741 

— son of Viduratha; son of, 743 
Vasudeva and others bom to, 744 
Surabhi, birth of eleven Rudras to 
Kasyapa and, 44, 44fn 
cows, buffaloes were bom from, 46 
—divine cow; worshipped, 213 
suracandraya^a, an expiation; ex- 
planation of, 482 

Suranatha, sandal of; worshipped, 414 
Surapi, one of the daughters of 
Devaka; married by Vasudeva, 742 
Surasa, mother of the serpents, 46 
Stirasena, one of the sons of Karta- 
virya, 741 

Suratha, son of Janamejaya; son of, 
750 

—one of the four sons of Jahnu, 750 
surety, for a loan; details relating to, 
660 

Suroda, an ocean, 352 
Surpagakha, a demoness 15 
sister of Ravaua, 15fn, 24 
Surparaka, a place, 640 
an excellent place, 328 
Suruci, wife of Uttanapada; birth of 
Uttama from, 41 
Surya, a name of the Sun, 1 36 
herb denoted by, 406 
installation of image of, 172 
Susabdata, Gambhirya called by 
some as, 945 

Su$ena, a monkey that accompanied 
Rama to Laiik&, 21 
Susenaka, first child of Vasudeva and 
Devakl, 744 

SugeQ&ka, a guard of the doors; 
worshipped, 93 

susiddha, relating to the letters in 
the name of the votary, 390, 391, 
803, 89S 


Susila, one of the wives of Kn$a, 744 
Sugkarevat!, a goddess, 375 
§u$minab, a class of men at Kusa- 
dvipa, 352fn 

Susruta, compositions declared as 
conferring boons by, 778 
Susthirft, a goddess; worshipped, 412 
Sugumnft, as a female energy, 136 
— at Gay ft; pi$qU to be offered at, 342 

su$umna, an artery, 54 
carries the wind samana; functions 
of, 556 

is established in the middle of the 
body, 557 

suta, as an interlocator, 42 
a caste; origin of, 430 
duty of, 431 

Sutala, a nether world, 8, 353 
Sutanu, daughter of Kaiirftja and 
wife of Vasudeva, 28fn 
Sutanu, one of the sons of Ugrasena, 

742 

Sutapft, clan of celestials in the period 
of the 8th Manu, 428 
— son of Paila; son of, 747 
Sutapafe, a sage; son of Vasitfha and 
Urja, 49 

Sutlk$oa, a sage; paid respect by 
Rama, 15, 15m 
Sutramaga, a celestial, 428 
Suvadanft, characteristics of the metre, 
914 

Suvar$a, an excellent place, 327 
Suvasa, one of the sons of Asamaujas, 

743 

Suvela, mountains; Lankft seen by 
Rama from, 21 

Suvrata, son of U Sinara and Dp$advat3, 
747 

Suyajnaka, son of Pfthusrava; son of, 
741 

Suyodhana, son of Kakutstha, 736 
denotes Duryodhana, 33, 35 
Svadha, mother of Menft and Dhftripi* 
49 

Svadhfti, propitiation of, 176 
Svadudaka, ocean around Pujkara, 
353 

Svagatft, characteristics of the metre, 
912 

Svfthft, wife of Agni; sons of, 49 
— son of Vrjinivftn; son of, 741 
Svfthya, son of Yugandhara; was 
invincible; sons of, 743 
SvaphaUca^kj^), son of Rfabha; 743 

Svarftt, composition of the metre, 904 
Svarbhftnu, mother of Suprabhft, 46 
— a year of the Hindu calendar, 405 



1166 


Agni Pur&Qa 


Svargadv&ra, at Gaya, 341 
Svargaloka, location of, 354 
Svargananda, wonhipped, 414 
Svargativrata, on the eighth lunar 
day, anecdote etc. relating to, 508-9 
svarita, a division of sound, 917 
svarjit, a sacrifice, 474 
Sv&roci?a, the second Manu, 427 
Svarodayacakra, success in battle 
known from, 370, 375 
•varOpam (natural form), one of the 
kinds of embellishment of sense, 939 
Svativa, a Rudra, 254 
svastika, a type of temple, 315 
a posture relating to archery, 646 
Sv&ti, a movable asterism, 381 
has a firm look, 382 
comprises the sphere of wind, 387 
commendable for marriage, 357 
good for administering medicine, 
358 

archery to be imparted in, 359 
compendable for construction of 
a house, 360 

one should do agriculture in, 36 1 
banner of Indra to be hoisted in, 362 
an employer should not be attend- 
ed upon on, 360 

one should not enter the cow-pen 
in, 361 

misery caused by Sun’s presence 
in, 363 

location in the Kofacakra, 385 
located in a diagram, 400 
Svayambhu, denotes Brahma, 40, 40fn 
Sv&yambhuva, the first Manu; pro- 
geny of, 427 

genealogy of, 41, 41fn, 41-45 
method of worship of Vi$Qu as 
done by, 50 

— a P&ficar&tr&gama, 106 
Svayariu&tas, one of the five branches 
ofHsuhayas, 741 
svayamvara, of Draupadi, 32 
Sveta, letter denoting, 419 
— a country, 352 
— a parvata, 324 

— a muhflrta; deeds to be done in, 
371 

Sveta kalpa, a kalpa period, 732 
£vet&rka, a herb, 371 
Svetavarga, country, 322 
Svetav&hana, one of the two sons of 
Sura, 743 

sweet, a mode; explanation, 933 
swelling, herbal remedy for 753-4 
decoction of herbs which removes, 
769 

remedy for, 776 

sword, a weapon, fifty inches long 


as the excellent one; 645 
commendable qualities of; certain 
rules relating to the use of; 
certain colours as not auspicious; 
the characteristics of, 640 
mode of wearing, 649 
thirtytwo kinds of employment of, 
651 

uses of, 652 

Sy&ma, a boundary mountain, 352 
jyam&ka, a grain used in worship, 94 
fyena, a modification of the array 
da$<la, 633 

Syeni, a daughter of T5mr£, 46 
—characteristics of the metre, 912 
syllables, use of different kinds of, 378 

taddhita, bases, rules governing the 
formation of, 976-79 
tagara, a flower, 529 
—a herb, 372 
taijasa, evolution of, 40 
Tailap&ka, a hell, 531 
taitila, a karaita, 362, 369fn 
Taittiriya, a branch of Yajurveda, 730 
Tak?a, son of Bharata, 24 
Takga (ka), one of the eight chief 
serpents; the number of heads of, 807 
born from Kadru, 46 
made as the king of serpents, 47 
image of, 137 

Kubjik& worshipped having, 415 

t&la, an unguent, 372 
a measure, 119 etc. 
explanation of the term, 994 
T&lajahgha, son of Jayadhvaja; the 
five branches of Hathayas formed 
by the sons of, 741 
T&lajanghika, image of, 138 
T&lavana* made secure by Krfua, 27 
tam&la, a flower, 529 
Tamas& river, RJUna's halt on the 
banks of, 13 

T&masa, the fourth Manu, 427 
t&masa, evolution of, 40, 40fn 

eighth creation having the quality 
of, 48 

Tami, an energy, 292 
T&misraka, a hell, 531, 1039 
T&mr&, daughters of, 46 
T&mravarQa, a territory, 350 
Taihsurodha, one of the three sons 
of Matin&ra, 748 
four sons of, 749 
t&tyd&vam, synonyms of, 994 
Tandrin&tha, worshipped, 414 
tank, excavation of; good day for 360, 
tanks, asterisms good for construction 
of, 765 



Index 


1167 


tanks and ponds, consecration of, 173-78 
tanmatras, creation of, 48, 48fn 
tantras, application as per, 62 
Tanumadhya, characteristics of the 
metre, 911 

Tapana, a name of the Sun, 1 36 
— sub-division of a hell, 1039 
Tapani, image of, 1 38 
Tapas, a world; worshipped, 79 
—a sage, 428 

Tapasi, a spirit seizing the child in 
the tenth month; symptoms of the 
child seized by, 823 
offering to appease, 823-4 
Tapasvin, a son of Manu and Nadvala, 
42 

Tapi, a river, flows from Sahya, 351 
merits of, 328 
Tapoloka, distance of, 354 
(See also Tapas) 

Taptakfcchra, an expiation; explana- 
tion of, 482, 799 

to be practised for eating food 
during pollution, 471 
for having eaten offering intended 
for the dead, 472 

to be practised for certain pollution, 
480 

to be observed for having caused 
death, 487 

Tara, a monkey; accompanied Rama 
to Lanka, 21 

Tara, entrusted with Sugriva, 1 7 
— wife of Bfhaspati; seduced by Soma; 
restorted to Brhaspati; was found 
pregnant and was directed to 
shed the child, 739 
— letter denoting, 418 
image of, 138 

t£rabala, indication to find, 359 
Taracakra, indicating friendship; des- 
cription of, 391 

Tarakamaya, battle involving the 
celestials on account of Soma, 739 
Visnu's role in, 745 
Tarala, image of, 138 
Taralatara, a hell, 1038 
Tarawa, a year of the Hindu calendar, 
405 

Tarapida, son of Candraloka; son of, 
738 

Tark$ya, eagle chief, 22 

Nandi and others conquered by, 30 
as destroyer of enemies etc, 394 
worshipped, 52 
— a PaAcaratragama, 106 
T&rk$yacakra, description of, 394 
Tampa, son of TridhanvA; son of, 737 
tarupi, milk of; used as an unguent, 
372 


tastes, the different; as having origin 
nated from moon and fire, 761 
Tata, characteristics of the metre, 912 
Tafaka, a demoness; killed by R&ma, 10 
Tatpurusa (compound), eight kinds 
of; examples of, 973-74 
Taurus, a fixed sign, 384 
agriculture to be done in, 361 
a special combination caused by, 
362 

has enmity with Scoipion, 392 
tauryatrikam, a collective term, 994 
teeth, measure to strengthen, 755 
Tcjas, born from Sumati, 323 
temples, preparing the ground for, 
105-107 

construction of, 113-115 
benefits of constructing, 1 0 1 - 1 05, 90 1 
merits of causing the construction 
of, 551 

divisions based on installation of 
deities, 267 

measurement of the stone slabs for, 
269 

common features of, 318 
five classes of, 314 
names of; containing rooms facing 
different directions, 3 1 8 
the location of different chambers 
in, 318-19 

location in cities, 321 
to be protected by the king, 577 
tenses and moods, grammatical con- 
notation for, 981-2 
formation of; examples for, 982-4 
termination, for the verbs, 981 
terror, sentiment of; accomplishing 
factor of, 932 

thief, apprehension of, 681 
thigh, stiffness of; remedy for, 754 
thirst, pills to remove, 754 
herbs which remove, 768 
remedy for removal of, 773 
throat-affections, remedy for 768 
Thursday, profitable nature of, 376 
chewing of betel leaf to be done on, 
358 

karnavedha to be done on, 359 
agriculture to be done on, 361 
inauspiciousness of sixth day falling 
on, 381 

Rahu lies at the south on, 409 
tiladvadasi, details relating to the 
practice and merits of, 512, 513 
tilaka, a flower, 529 
time, words denoting, 990 
words denoting different periods 
of time, 1000 
reckoning, 364 
timira, a flower, 529 



1168 


Agni Purdna 


tiryaksrotas, explanation of, 48 
Ti$ya , class of men at Krauftcadvipa, 

tithayab, herb denoted by, 406 
Tithi, commencing point of and 
correction for, 367 
further correction for, 368 
herb denoted by, 408 
Tithi£a, letter denoting, 418 
Titikgu, son of U&mas; son of, 741 
— was bom from U Sinara; son of, 747 
tittfbha(?), auspiciousness of a gem 
called, 641 

Tittiri, son of Kapotarom&; son of, 742 
tomara (iron club), used for striking 
the eyes etc, 651 
tongue, defects in; remedy for, 766 
tonsure, time for, 359 

to be done according to family 
custom, 432 

toothache, remedy for, 766 
topaz, a gem, 641 

tortoise, form taken by Visnu, 5ff, 
129 

Totaka, characteristics of the metre, 
912 

town, and suburbs and parts of words 
signifying, 1006 

toxic matter, from head; eliminator 
for, 757 

toyakf-cchra, an expiation, explanation 
of, 483 

trader, percentage of profit allowed 
for, 679 

rules relating to, 679-80 
Trailokyakarsini, Kubjika addressed 
as, 413 

Trailokyamohana, a Paftcaratragama, 
105-6 

Traisani, son of Gobhanu ; son of, 747 
Tranquility, explanation of, 945 
transactions, when considered as 
invalid, 658 

Trasadasyu, son of Purukutsa, 737 
— son ofjanamejaya, 750 
trasarezjLU, a measure, 107 
treasures, words denoting, 988 

to be confiscated by the king if 
concealed, 657 
treasury, defects of, 626 

should always be with the king, 632 
term denoting person in charge of, 
1018 

treaties, sixteen kinds of, 622 

those with whom one should make, 
622 

treatment, to be begun on a good day; 
the factors to be examined before 
giving, 758 

treaty, denned as making peace, 607 


trees, and parts of, different categories 
of, words which stand for, 1007-8 
mode of planting, 188-89 
the directions good for planting; 

the asterisms auspicious for, 764 
planting and nurturing; planting 
and watering of; to be planted in 
such a way as to be fed by rivers 
etc; the minimum distance 
between, 643 

method to make them bear more 
fruits, 765 

bearing fruits; protection of, 644 
Treta, an attendant of Siva, 201 
Tretayuga, creation relating to, 323 
tri, herb denoted by, 407 
tridapdin, an ascetic, 454 
Tridasa, a Rudra, 255 
tridasa, herb denoted by, 406 
Tridases'vara, a Rudra, 254 
Tridhanva, son of Sudhanva; son of, 
737 

Tnkona, a hell, 1038 
trikona, marriage of girls not to be 
done in, 357 

Trikuta, group of mountains, 19, 325, 
325fn 

Trimata, a division of Vithi, 928 
Trimurta, a Rudra, 263 
Trimurti, letter denoting, 418 
trine, prosperity in married life indi- 
cated by, 357 

Tripura, the names of gods and 
goddesses to be worshipped in the 
worship of, 866-8 
mode of worship of goddess, 866 
salutation made to, 52 
Tripuraghna, a guardian deity, 284 
worshipped, 343 

tripu§kara, combination called, 362, 
382 

triratravrata, for lord Vi$nu; mode 
and merits of practising, 522 
Trisam&, a river; originating from 
Mahendra, 351 
Trisiras, a demon 16 

commander of Khara, was killed by 
Rama, J6fh, 22 
Tri$tubh, a metre, 562, 902 
the number of letters in a quarter of, 
903 

red coloured; belongs to Kau&- 
kagotra, 905 

appropriate time for the recital of, 

a metre to be employed in a 
Mahak&vya, 920 

Trisula, the name of a temple, 318 
tri&la, a posture, 857 
trisupangta, a yk, 349 



Index 


1169 


Tritayajvara, located in connection 
with consecration, 292 
Trivikrama, a form of Vi?nu, 65, 82 
form of Vi$rjui on Yamuna, 841 
— name of a salagrama; characteris- 
tics of, 125 

trivisfapa, a class of temple; octagonal 
shaped, 314 

temples belonging to the class of, 

Trotaka, a type of drama, 92 1 
Tf§ria, bom from Mrtyu, 49 
truth, words denoting, 993 
trust, definition of, 654 
Tryambaka, a form of Rudra, 45 
Tuesday, writing a formula for sub- 
jugation on, 358 
gain indicated, 376 
unfavourable for marriage, 357 
to be avoided for commencing first 
study, 359 

to be avoided for the excavation 
of a tank, 360 

inauspiciousness of sixth day oc- 
curring on, 381 

a special combination caused by, 
362 

Rahu lies at the south-east on, 409 
Tula, a constellation; correction for 367 
(See also Libra) 
tulapuru^a, a great gift, 544 
Tumburu, image of, 133 
tumours, in the abdomen; remedy for 
the destruction of, 776 

Tungabhadr&, a river, 328 
Turnanathaka, worshipped, 413 
Turvasu, one of the sons of Yayati 
and Devayani, 25, 740 
father of Varga, 747 
Tu$ita, the names of Devas in the 
Gak$u$a manvantara, 45 
Tusti, a female divinity; invoked, 
91 

worshipped, 52 

Tvarita, goddess; mode of worship of, 
423-4, 852-54 

mantras relating to the worship of, 
424, 868-69 

spell relating to, 854-57 
secret mantra relating to, 424 
location of the basic mantras of, 
and worship of, 858-861 
companions of, 424 
addressed, 52 

Tvarita mantra, benefit of knowing, 
863 

Tvafta, son of Manasya, 323 
Tva?tf, one of the Rudras, 45 
— one of the Adityas, 45, 1 36 


twilights, words denoting the three, 
990 

Uccaibsravas, was made the ruler 
of horses, 47 
to be adored, 51 

ucchvasa, a division of time, 370 
— a division of the prose kavyas, 919 
ucchvasana, an action relating to the 
riding on horses, 788 
udana, a life-force carried by the vein 
gandhari, 556 
functions of, 557 

Udapi, son of Sahadeva; son of, 750 
Udarata, an excellence of word, 944 
(See also splendidness) 

Udarata, (elegance) an excellence of 
sense, 945 

Udarka, son of Nidhrti; son of, 742 
udarka, explanation of the term, 1019 
udasina, significance of the term, 1019 
udatta, a division of sound, 917 
Udaya, a boundary mountain, 352 
udbhava, one of the seven sons of 
Nahu$a, 740 

udbhavamudra, 204, 236, 237, 246, 
247, 248, 255, 258, 259, 260, 286 
Udbhida, a son of Jyotigmat, 352 
UddharinI, the name of Vasantatilaka 
according to Saitava, 913 
Ud4iyi*na, a mountain, 412, 414 
Udgata, characteristics of the metre, 
909 

Udghataka, a division of Vithi, 928 
Udgitha, son of Pratiharti, 323 
Udicyavftti, characteristics of the 
metre, 907 

udu iyam j&tavedasam , a hymn, 563 
Ugra, Rudra was variously called as, 
50 

propitiation of, 176, 290 
Ugra, a female deity, 292 
Ugracai}d&> a goddess, 132 
Ugragandha, a hell, 532 
Ugrasena, a Yadava, 30 
son of Ahuka, 742 
nine sons of; Kaihsa as the eldest, 
742 

— one of the four sons of Jahnu, 750 
uha, section of Samavcda, 730 
Ukta, a metre; number of letters in, 
905 

Uktha, a somasamstha, 79, 86, 466 
uktha, section of Samaveda, 730 
ukti, an embellishment of word, 932 
explanation of; six kinds of, 933 
ulcers, good remedy for, 768 
Ullapyaka, a type of drama, 921 
Ulmuka, a son of Balabhadra and 
Revati, 29 



1170 


Agni Purina 


Um&, consort of; propitiatated by 
B&ga, 46 

Umakanta, letter denoting, 419 
um&vrata, merits of practising, 525 
umbrella, characteristics of royal, 638 
a brahmin’s, characteristics of, 638 
umesavrata, should be practised by 
women, 525 

unconsciousness, remedy for removal 
of, 773 

unguents, for bathing, 372 
Universe, extent of, 353-56 
unmatta, flower not to be used in 
worship, 529 

Upacitrii, characteristics of the metre, 
907 

Upacitraka, characteristics of the 
metre, 910 

Upad&navi, daughter of Vr?aparvan, 
46 

Upadeva, son of Devaka, 742 
Upagiti, characteristics of the metre, 
906 

up&karagan, explanatiom of the term, 
1018 

upakrama, explanation of the word, 
1017 

upakfta, denotes an animal killed and 
sanctifled, 1017 
Upama, explanation of, 939 

two kinds of — compounding or not 
compounding; further divisions 
of, 939-40 

eighteen kinds of, 940 

another classification into five kinds, 

941 

upam&na, explanation of the term, 
1027 

upanayana, to be done in the eighth 
year for a brahmin, 432 
to be done in the eleventh year for 
the warrior class, 432 
to be done in the twelfth year for 
tradesman, 432-3 

should never be done after sixteenth 
year, 433 

Upani$ads, adoration with, 99 
Upari$t&d Bfhati, composition of, 903 
Upari$t&ijyotib, composition of the 
metre, 904 

Upasthitft, characteristics of the metre, 
912 

Upasthitapracupita, characteristics of 
the metre, 909 

Upendra, requested for protection, 

128 

Upendravairii, characteristics of the 
metre, 912 

Urddhvab&hu, a son of Vasitfha and 


Urja, 49 

urdhvag&mi, a perfection, 257 
Ordhvagr&hi, a monstress possessing 
the newly born child on the 
ninth day; symptoms of the child 
possessed by; materials for fumi- 
gation and besmearing when the 
child is possessed by, 822 
urdhvanga, an array; formed from 
divisions of vajra, 634 
nrHhvasrotas, creation of, 48 
urinary ailment, remedy for, 767 
urinary defects, remedy for, 766 
urine, painful discharge of; remedy for, 
754, 768 

Orja, son ofSudhanva; son of, 750 
Urja, wife of Vasistha, 49 
Urmila, married by Lak$mana, 1 1 
Urobfhati (metre), name of Nyaii- 
kusadrin.1 according to Yaska, 903 
Ursa Major, asterism denoting the 
seven sages, 354, 355 
Uru, son of Bhautya Manu, 428 
Cru, sons of, 42 

Urvarupa, different reading for 
Kramapadika, 49fn 
Urvasi, a nymph, 330 

her love for Pururavas, 739 
U§a, daughter of Bana, 29 

accompanied Aniruddha to Dvaraka, 
30 

Usanas, praised Dhruva, 41' 

known also as Sukracarya, 41fn 
— a law-giver, 455 
— son of Suyajnaka; son of, 741 
U sinara, son of Mahamanas; wives 
of; sons of, 747 

U$^a, a country ruled by a son of 
Dyutimat, 352 

U$nik, a metre, 562, 902 

two varieties of; — pura and para; 
number of letters in the pada of, 
903 

the number of letters in, 903 
has variegated colour; belongs to 
Kasyapagotra, 905 
u§ni§a, a type of temple, 315 
Utkala, name of a country, 735 
— a son of Sudyumna; ruled over 
Utkala, 735 

Utkalik&, a division of prose kavya, 918 
Utkfti, number of letters in the metre, 
905 

Utkrti, classical metres based on the 
Vedic metre, 914 
Utkura, a son ofHirapyaksa, 46fh 
Utpala, a whirlpool, 842 
utpala, auspiciousness of a gun called, 
641 



Index 


1171 


utprek§d (fancy), an embellishment of 
senses, 939 
explanation of, 941 

utsadana, the syllables used for the 
act of, 403 

Uttama, the third Manu, 427 
— son of Uttanapada and Suruci, 41 
— one of the seven sons of Nahu$a, 740 
uttama, a variety of prdnaydma, 1044 
uttamottama, a variety of praoayama, 
1045 

Uttanapada, sons of, 41 
uttara, a pitcher, 270 
Uttara, daughter of King Virata; 
wife of Abhimanyu, 33 
whose embryo survived as Parikgit, 
36 

uttara, the three asterisms known as, 
360, 381, 385 

commended for copulation, 434 
Uttara, an asterism; forms the watery 
region, 388 

commendable for marriage, 357 
commendable for imparting sci- 
ence of archery, 359 
to enter a (new) house, 360 
to take grains into the house in, 361 
misery caused by Sun’s transit in, 
363 

Uttarabhadrapada, an asterism; a 
thing cannot be recovered if it is 
lost in, 382 

location in a diagram, 400 
Uttaramanasa, at Gaya; bathing at, 
336 

one should go to Phalgutirtha 
after visiting, 337 
Uttarapatha, region of, 387 
Uttaraphalguni, an asterism; com- 
prises the sphere of wind, 387 
new clothes should not be worn in, 
359 

location in Kotacakra, 385 
located in a diagram, 400 
Arjuna’s name related to his birth 
in, 37fn 

Uttarasacjha, as asterism; located in 
Kotacakra, 385 

indication of unusual commotion 
in, 388 

utterance, words signifying contra- 
dictory, 993 

word denoting sweet, 993 
words denoting unrefined, 993 
that is meaningless; word denoting, 
993 

words denoting good, 993 
words denoting absurd, 993 
word signifying inauspicious, 993 
words denoting harsh, 993 


utth&pana, explanation of, 267 

vied, a herb, 407 

used as an unguent, 372 
Vadavamukhi, image of, 138 
Vadi, different reading for Palita,43fn 
Vaditram, one of the kinds of musical 
instrument, 994 

Vagisvari, goddess of speech; mode 
of worship of, 878 
invocation of, 246 
Vagveiji, a division of Vithi, 928n 
Vahni, adored, 1 
vahni, a herb, 407 
vahnayab, herb denoted by, 406 
Vahlika, region of, 387 
Vaibhava, a Pancardtragama, 106 
Vaibhraja, a forest, 325 
a boundary mountain, 351 
Vaidarbhi, wife of Pradyumna, 745 
— a variety of diction; characteristics 
of, 927 

Vaidehaka, a caste; duties of, 431 
vaidhfta, an obstacle; journey or 
battle to be avoided in, 383 
Vaidya, science of; Visriu as the 
cause of, 3 

Vaidyuta, a country, 352 
Vaijayanta, name of the mansion of 
Indra, 987 

Vaikdrikas, creation of, 40, 40fn 
as the third creation, 48 
Vaikftasarga, explanation of, 48 
Vaikuritha, a manifestation of Visiju, 
428 

form of Vi§nu at Magadha forest, 
842 

image installation of, 172 
— abode of Vispu, 82 
— name of a salagrama, 1 25 
Vainateya, letters representing, 63 
weapons of; adored, 66 
Vairaja, a class of temple; square 
shaped; nine temples belonging 
to the class of, 314 
Vairaja Prajapati, father of Sudhavan, 
47 

Vairajas, presiding deities of Tapoloka, 
354 

Vairohya, son of Anarta, 736 
Vailakha, month of; multiplication 
of things brought in, 386 
relating to Usd’s dream, 29 
vai&dkha, a posture relating to archery, 
645 

advocated, 646 

Vaijampdyana, disciple of Vydsa, 429 
a branch of Yajurveda, 730 
vai$$ava, the formulae relating to 
Vi§pu, 895 



ri72 


Agni Purdna 


Vai$pavapurana, narrated by Para - 
Sara; based on accounts in Varaha- 
kalpa; merits of making a gift of, 

Vaiwavi, a mother goddess, 139fn 
invoked, 399 

to be worshipped, 412, 415 
vai$navl, a rite, 86 
— denotes asterism sravana 
VaiSravana (Kubera), made as the 
king of kings, 47 

thegeat fig tree to be contemplated, 

Vaigravagl, image of Kubera, 116 
vaisvadeva, offering made to all gods, 
539 

VaiSvadevi, characteristics of the 
metre, 913 

Vai£v&nara, the two daughters of, 46 
vaifya, words relating to the activi- 
ties of, 1020-21 

Vait&liya, characteristics of the metre, 
906 

Vaitandya, a son ofApa, 44 
VaitarinI, river at Gaya, 342 
Vaivasvata Manu, was born from Sun, 
9 

eight sons of; at Ayodhya, 735 
penance of, 3 

Vaivasvata manvantara, devas be- 
coming Adityas in, 45 
Vaivasvati, explanation of, 463 
Vajapeya (ka ), a somasamstha, 86, 4 66 
certain practices relating to, 338 
benefit of performing, 1079 
located on the body, 64 
worshipped, 79 

V&jasaneyas, a branch of Yajurveda, 
429 

Vajasaneya Veda, only 15 sections 
would exist in Kaliyuga, 38 
Vajra, son of Aniruddha, 30, 745 
was installed in the kingdom, 37 
vajra, an adverse period; to be avoid- 
ed, 383 

— a type of temple, 315 
— an array; arrangement of army in, 
612 

to be made when there is fear 
on the sides, 630 

arrays formed from divisions of, 634 
vajra (mace), uses of, 652 
Vajradeha, a form of Rudra, 252 
Vajrakavata, a hell, 532 
Vajr&kga, an array; formation op- 
tional, 635 

Vajrakubjini, goddess Kubjika in- 
voked, 41S 

nfisikS, a line drawn known as. 


V^jrasastraka, a hell, 532 
Vajra !$rnkhala, a goddess, 410 
V^jrasvastika, a type of temple, 315 
vajratuntja, a mudra, 857 
VajriijLi, a goddess located on the face, 
416 

vakovakya, an embellishment of 
word, 932 

explanation of; two kinds of, 933 
Vakratuirfa, one of the forms of 
Gariapati, 190, 868 
vakula, a flower, 529 
Vaktra, characteristics of the metre, 908 
a metre to be employed in a 
Mahakavya, 920 

Vakyarthopama, explanation of, 941 
valabhi, a type of temple, 3 1 4 
valaya, a type of temple, 315 
valaya, a modification of the array 
daquja, 033 

an array formed by union of two 
dandas, 635 

durjaya made up of four, 635 
Valin, brother of Sugriva; killed by 
Rama, 17 

Valmiki, sage, story of Ramayaga 
narrated by Narada to, 9 
composed the Ramayana, 25, 738 
birth of Kusa and Lava at the 
hermitage of, 24 

Varna, as female energy; as one of the 
three forms of Uma, 374 
located, 292 

worshipped, 51, 201, 413 
Vamadeva, a form of Rudra, 252 
Vamana, a name of Vi$gu, 65 
a manifestation of Vi$pu, 428 
form of Vi?i^u at Kurukgetra, 841 
a deity presiding over the banner, 
148 

as an excellent place, 328 
worship of, 284 
merits of worshipping, 343 
image of, 115 

installation of image of, 172 
name of ialagrama, 125 
mountain, 352 

V amanapurai.ia, narration of story of 
Vi$nu relating to Dhaumakalpa in, 
733 

extent of, 733 

should be given as a gift during 
autumnal equinox, 734 
Vam£apatrapatita, characteristics of 
die metre, 913 

VamiapQra, one of the siddhas, 414 
Vam&stha, characteristics of the 
metre, 912 

Vanam^la, form of Vi«iu at Ki$ki nd h& , 

841 




Index 


1173 


Vanaraka, at Gaya, 341 
V&nari, a spirit seizing the child in 
the sixteenth year, 825 
symptoms of the child seized by 
825-6 

offering to appease, 826 
V&navasika, characteristics of the 
metre, 907, 934 

Vandanl, a formation made with 
fingers, 66 

Vanga, one of the sons of Bali, 747 
a place, 640 

Vanija, a karana, 369fn 

famine indicated by Sun’s transit 
in, 363 

vanik, an astral combination, 363 
Vanisa, letter denoting, 419 
Vapu, a division of Kosa, 921 
Vapu$man, ruled Salmala, 322 
names of sons of, 352 
varada, a posture of the hands, 857 
Varaha, form of Visflu at Vardha- 
mana, 841 

Vi$nu resides at Ketumala as, 326 
saluted, 62 
worshipped, 343 
image of, 115, 131 
&lagrama denoting, 125 
a posture of the hands, 67 
Varahakalpa, a period, 4, 732 
Varaha-purana, narrated by lord 
Visnu, dealing with the account of 
boar form; extent of; merits of 
making a gift of it in Caitra, 733 
Varahi, a mother goddess, 139fn 
invoked, 399 
image of, 133 
worshipped, 412, 415 
name of a metre; the number of 
letters in the padas of, 903 
var&hi, a herb, 371, 378 
Varava, a river at Varanasi, 330 
Varaprada, image of, 138 
Varanasi, location and greatness of, 
330- 1 

an excellent sacred place, 327, 350 
Vara-tithi, correction, 365 
Varca, son of Soma, 44 
Vardhamana, a variety of metre; 
the number of letters in each pada 
of, 903 

characteristics of, 910 
— name of a place, 841 
Vardhani, a water jar used in worship, 
68, 94 

worshipped, 99 
. — a type of temple, 315 
Varga, son of Turvasu; son of, 747 
Var?a, an-Adinatha, 412 


Varsaketu, son of K$emaka; son of, 
749 

varsavratas, vows, relating to rainy 
season, 525 
VartulS, a hell, 1039 
Varuna, one of the Adityas, 45 
a name of Sun, 1 36 
Varuria, words denoting, 988 
made as the king of water, 47 
image of, 137 

installation of image of, 173 
consecration of image of, 174-77 
meditation of, 206 
propitiation of, 176, 317 
meditated upon, 89 
temple of, 106 
— a territory, 350 

— a muhurta; deeds to be done in, 
371 

varuna, denotes &atabhi$ak, 360 
Varuni, a goddess; origin of, 5 
v&runi, one of the dh&raQas; explana- 
tion of, 1050 

Varutha, son of Du$yanta; son of, 747 
Vasa, a deity; worshipped, 414 
vasaka, a herb, 407 
Vasantatilaka, characteristics of the 
metre; differently called by others, 
913 

Vasaraka, a sacred place, 330 
va$at, use of the term, 403 
V&sava, Indra; made the ruler of 
Maruts, 47 

Vasava, denotes the astcrism Jye$thi 
vasavah, herb denoted by, 406 
Vasiftha, one of the sages; creation 
of, 41 

an interlocutor, 2, 3 
Dasaratha’s request to arrange for 
Rama’s coronation, 1 1 
Bharata brought to the city by, 14 
saluted by Rama, 15, 23 
progeny of; through his wife Urj&, 
49 

goddess earth addressed as born of, 

112 

as one of the seven asterisms having 
Dhruva in font, 42fn 
merits of contemplating as a form 
of god, 842 

one of the sages who protected the 
celestials in the battle, 746 
hymn addressed to Siva by, 564-65 
a law-giver, 455 

Vdsi$tha, a Pkficar&tragama, 106 
Vasi$thesa, at Gay&; obeisance and 
offering of piijuja to, 342 
V&stu, deity worshipped, 50, 51 
Vfistu, relating to cities, 320-22 



1174 


Agni Pur&Qa 


Vastupami, explanation of, 940 
vistupuja, performed by Rama, 14 
Vast0tth4pana, a variety of Arabhafi, 
928 

Vasu, a son of Pururavas, 739 
— wife of Marica Ka^yapa, 739 
Vasus as born from, 44 
vasu, merits of use of herb denoted 
by, 408 

Vasudcva, born to &ura, 744 
a manifestation of Kafyapa, 744 
wife of; sons of, 744 
other sons of, 744 

birth of Krwa to Dcvaki; wife of, 26 
story relating to, 26, 26fn 
Kf§na entrusted to Nanda by, 27 
worshipped by Kr?ria, 28 
VAsudeva, as a form of Hari, 9 1 
the foremost among the Yariavas, 25 
Jarasandha referred to as the des- 
piser of, 28 

as leading the Yadavas, 736 
Paundraka asserting as the real, 
28fn 

seen by Yudhisthira on the way to 
heaven, 38 
image of, 115, 1 30 
characteristics of the image of, 

1 18-23 

installation of an image of, 161-64 
located on the thumbs, 56 
obeisance made to, 1 
worshipped, 50, 71 
refers to Visnu; worshipped by 
R&ma, 23 

characteristics of formulae relating 
to, 62 

recitation of mantra relating to, 53 
use of basic syllable of, 67, 68 
oblations made to, 73 
— a s&lagrama, 124, 125 
V&suki, one of the eight chief ser- 
pents; the number of heads of, 807 
born from Kadru, 46 
made the ruler of Nagas, 47 
was used as the rope while churning 
the ocean, 5, 745 

as a garland on the neck of goddess 
Kubjika, 415 

— a sacred spot; as being present at 
Pray&ga, 330 

Vasuloka, Bhi?ma waiting on the bed 
of arrows to reach, 34 
vasumati, a nerve, 316 
Vasus, a class of semi-divine beings, 
44fn 

born from Vasu, 44 
the names of the eight, 44 
P&vaka made as the king of, 47 
directed Bhljma to wait to reach 


Vasuloka, 34 

mode of consecration of, 180 
vata, a tree, 92, 324 
Vata, Wind god; birth of Bhima from, 
32 

— the name of a temple, 318 
Vatesa, an excellent place, 328 
Vatorml, characteristics of the metre, 
912 

Vatsa, son of Pratardana; son of, 749 
Vatsabliumi, son of Vatsaka, 749 
vatsaka, father of Vatsabhumi, 749 
Vatu, a form of Rudra, 252 
Vatuka, obeisance made to, 414 
a form of Ganapati, 412 
Vava, an astral combination, 363 
Vayavi, a spirit possessing the child in 
the thirteenth year; symptoms of 
child possessed by; offering to 
appease; bathing and fumigation 
when the child is possessed by, 825 
Vayaviya-puraria, narrated by Vayu 
relating incidents of Sveta kalpa; 
extent of; to be copied and given as 
a gift in Sravana, 732 
vayavya, denotes the asterism svati; 

commended for copulation, 434 
vayavyakrcchra, expiation of; eating 
handful of food everyday for a 
month, 483 

Vayu, image of, 106, 137 
propitiation of, 176 
contemplation on, 286 
syllables of; used for purification, 60 
worshipped by inhabitants of Sal- 
mala, 352 

Vayutirtha, at Gaya, 341 
Vayuvega, location of letter denoting 
the goddess, 417 
image of, 138 

Veda, efficacy of herb denoted by, 470, 
408 

vedah, denotes a herb, 406 
Vedana, sons of, 49 
Vedanta, is knowledge about Brahman, 
1082 

Vedas, goddess as the source of, 26 
the number of hymns of all, 730 
division of at the end of dvapara, 
429 

the different recensions of, 730-31 
Hayagriva a demon killed by 
Visnu to rescue, 4 
reference to those who had become 
Bauddhas abandoning, 38 
adored, 50 

Veda£ir&, wife of Mrkantfu, 49 
Vedha, a goddess, 292 
Vedic study, period for commencing 
and cessation of, 456 



Index 


1175 


Vegavati, characteristics of the metre. 
910 

vehicle, words for, 1019 
veins, convey the ten life-forces, 556-7 
number 72000; the names of ten 
prominent, 556 

Vena, son of Ahga and Sunitha, 42 
birth of Ai'iga when his right hand 
was charred, 42fn 
story relating to, 42 
venereal disease, remedy for, 774 
venom, due to all insects; remedy for, 
819-20 

due to centipedes; remedy for, 819 
(See also poison) 

Venus, words denoting, 989 
distance of; from Mars, 354 
distance of; from Mercury, 354 
chariot of, 356 
letters presided over by, 374 
period (years ) of influence of, 363, 
393 

presides over a part of a day, 381 
gives mental happiness, 377 
confers good occupying first house, 
383 

confers good occupying the second 
or third house, 383 
indicates happiness occupying the 
seventh house, 383 
auspicious occupying the ninth 
house, 384 

confers gain in the tenth house, 384 
beneficial in the twelfth house, 384 
plenty of wealth etc., in the period 
of, 393 

marriage not commended when set, 
357 

investiture of sacred thread not 
commended when set, 359 
building of a house should be 
avoided when set or transition, 
360 

defeat indicated by movement from 
its own asterism, 386 
image of, 137 

contemplated as white, 828 
verbs, three forms of bhava, karmani 
and kartari, 981 

transitive and intransitive; the two 
other forms of, 981 
primary affixes added to, 985-6 
Vetala, beads belonging to Sikha 
class, 894 

vibhadra, a pitcher, 270 
Vibhava, a year of the Hindu calendar, 
404 

vibh&vana (imagination), an embellish- 
ment of seflles, 939 
explanation bf, 941-2 


Vibhi$ana, a demon ; HanQmat search- 
ing the house of, 19 
prevented R&vaga from killing 
Hanumat, 20 

anointed as the ruler of Lanka, 21 
was on the side of Rama, 22 
Lanka entrusted by R&ma to, 23 
became deep-rooted in dharma, 24 
invoked for destroying evil demons, 84 
Vibliu, son of Prastara, 323 
— son of Varsaketu; son of, 749 
Vibhuti, a female divinity; worshipp- 
ed, 51 

vibhuti, a nerve, 3 1 6 
Vicitrakesa, an attendant of Siva, 201 
Vicitravirya (ka), son of Santanu and 
Kali (Satyavatn, 31, 751 
Ambikfi and Ambalika became 
wives of; died on account of con- 
sumption, 31 
Vidala, image of, 138 
Vi<jlalak$i, consort of Skanda, 134 
vidariga, a herb, 407 
Vidarbha, son of lyamagha; sons of, 
741 

Vidarbha, king of; benefit gained by 
giving a lamp by the wife of, 526 
vidarbha, explanation and use of the 
term, 403 

Vid&ri, a demoness; worshipped with 
red lotuses, 109 

word with lotus flowers offered to, 
274 

worshipped outside, 317 
viddhark§a, to be avoided in a mar- 
riage, 357 

Vidhatf, son of Brahma, 50fn 
father of Mrkanclu, 49 
adored, 50, 88 

Vidh&tri, a female deity, located, 292 
Vidruma, a boundary mountain, 352 
Vidura, begot by Kj*sna Dvaipayana 
through the wife of Vicitraviryaka, 
751 

was burnt by forest fire, 36 
honoured Kfsna, 33 
Viduratha, son of Udarka; also known 
as Dasarha; son of, 742 
— chief among the charioteers; son o 
Bhajamana; son of, 743 
— son of Suratha; son of, 750 
Vidu$a, son of Ghrta; son of, 747 
Vidya, a goddess; worshipped, 413 
Vidy&dharas, image of, 1 37 
Vidyakotisvara, worshipped, 414 
Vidy&s, two kinds of— -para and apar&; 
explanation of, 1077 
Lord Vi$pu is of the form of two, 491 
Vidyelvaras, the names of the eight, 
875 



1176 


Agni PuT&na 


Vidyujjihva, image of, 138 
Vidyeias, meditation of, 291 
Vidyunmala, characteristics of the 
metre, 911 

Vidyuta, a female divinity; worshipped 

Vighna, a variety of bandha, 937 
Vighnanasana, a name of the ele- 
phant-faced god, 190, 866 
Vihanga, a celestial, 428 
Vijaya, a minister of King Dasaratha, 

Vijaya, a year of the Hindu calendar, 
405 

— a muhurta; deeds to be done in, 371 
— a kind of temple, 315 
— a pitcher, 270 

— a modification of the array dan<ja, 
633 

Vijaya, a goddess accomplishing a 
charm, 375 

—one of the wives uf Kr?na, 744 
—a stone, 269 
Vijavantika, image of, 138 
vikala, correction, 367 
' application of, 368 
vikalpa, relating to a kind of yamaka, 

Vikar&l&, a hell, 1038 
Vik&ri, a year of the Hindu calendar, 
405 

Vikata, a name of the elephant- 
faced god, 1 90, 866 
vikata, a posture relating to archery, 
646 

Vikarama, a form of Rudra, 252 
—a year of the Hindu calendar, 404 
vikr&ntayamaka one of the yamakas, 
935 

Vikriyopama, explanation of, 940 
Vikfta, image of, 138 
Vikrt&nan&, image of, 138 
Vikfti, a year of the Hindu calendar, 
405 

classical metres based on, 914 
Vikuk$i, was bom from Ik?vaku; was 
a divine ruler, 736 

Vilamba, a year of the Hindu calendar, 
405 

vil&sinl. used in a paste for subjuga- 
tion, 372 
Vilepa, a hell, 532 
Vimala, a Rudra, 254 
— a place, 842 

vimala, a ray of the Sun, 195 
Vimala, a female divinity; image of, 
138 

worshipped, 51 
. Invoked, 111 

form of Vifou to be represented as 


attended by, 131 
vimala, a nerve, 316 
Vimalas, five names of, 415 
vimana, a type of temple, 314 
VinaSana, as meritorious, 327 
Vinata, a monkey; accompanied 
Rama to Lanka, 21 
Vinata, mother of Arana and Garu<ja, 
46 

mother of Garu^a, 63fn 
Vinata ^va, a son of Sudyumna; ruled 
over the western part of the earth, 
735 

Vinayaka, conqured by Tark$ya, 30 
image of, 134 

installation of image of, 172 
mode of worshipping of, 865 
merits of worshipping, 343 
Vinayaka, letter denoting, 417 
Vindhya, a mountain, 350, 842 
Narmada and other rivers flow 
from, 351 

Vip&pma, one of the sons of Ayus, 739 
Viparitakhyanika, characteristics of 
the metre, 910 

Viparitopama, explanation of, 940 
Vipaija, a division of Vithi, 928 
vipat, one of the t£r&balas, 359 
Vipracitti, married Simhika, 45 
Vipula, a mountain, 324 
Vipula, characteristics of the metre, 
906, 909 

Vira, one of the four sons of Taihsu- 
rodha, 749 

— one of the seven sons of Suhotra and 
Girika, 750 

Virabhadra, image of, 135, 139 
Viraja, son of Savami Manu, 428 
Viraja, son of Tva?ta, 323 
— a place, 841 

Viraka, one of the four sons of Sibi, 
747 

Virakataka, one of the siddhas, 414 
Virata Prajapati, father of Virini, 42 
Viras, the name of the formulae of 
Rudra, 895 

VlrSsana, a posture, 473, 482 
Vlrasena, a guard of the door; to be 
worshipped, 93 
Virat, son of Nara, 323 
— metre; the number of letters in a 
quarter of, 903 
composition of the metre, 904 
Vir5fa, country, 33 
king of, 33fn 

drowned in the ocean of arrows of 
DroijLa, 35 

Vir&t g&yatri, the number of letters in 
the p&da of, 903 
viravaktra, an array, 630 



Index 


1177 


Virgo, friendly with Scorpion, 392 
has dual nature, 384 
one should do agriculture in, 361 
goddess Durg& is awakened when 
Sun enters, 362 

time taken by Sun to transit, 384 
Virimsas, a class of men in the Plak$a- 
dvipa, 351 

Viriqu, daughter of Virata Prajapati; 

also known as Pugkaripi, 42 
Virocana, son of Prahrada, 46 
father of Bali, 8fn, 46 
— a muhurta; deeds to be done in, 37 1 
virodha (contradiction), an embel- 
lishment of sense, 939 
explanation of, 942 

Virodhi, a year of the Hindu calendar, 
405 

virtues, eight kinds of, 86 
ten kinds of, 493 
of religious students, 617 
Virilpaksa, a demon ; killed by R&ma, 
22 

Virup£k$i, a goddess dwelling in the 
essence, 375 

Visakha, younger brother of Kumara, 
44 

Visakha identified with Skanda, 1 34 
Vi£akha, an asterism; belongs to the 
sphere of fire, 387 
down-faced, 381 
known as Tripu?kara, 382 
grains increased if a formula is 
written and placed in, 361 
an employer should not be attended 
upon in, 360 

misery caused by Sun’s transit in, 
363 

assigned in the south-west, 385 
location of, 400 
Vi£akhayupa, a place, 841 
Viiala, a prince, 339 
— a type of temple, 314 
— a modification of the array darjuja, 
633 

Vi&lS, at Gaya, 339, 342 
— a nerve, 316 
Visalaksi, image of, 1 38 
Visandhi, an impurity, 947 
two kinds of, 948 

Vi£e?aka, division of poetry called, 919 
definition of the k&vya known as, 
920 

Vife$okti, explanation of, 941 
Vi?kambha, the part of which to be 
avoided, 383 

Vtiloka, characteristics of the metre, 
907 

Vi^u, syndByms of, 986 
the different names of, 65 


Sri as the consort of, 49 
Brahma was born from the navel 
lotus of, 9, 31 

identical with brahman, 355 
as the cause of the universe, 356 
as the refuge of Siva, 746 
Gambia as the vehicle of, 51 
Pracinabarhis conferred status of 
progenitor by, 43 
Dnru va’s steadfast devotion to, 4 1 fn 
manifestation as a Fish, 2, 3fF 
killed Hayagriva, a demon, 4 
tortoise form of, 2, 5ff 
manifestation as a boar, 7fF 
Prahrada as a staunch devotee of, 46 
the first war assuming the form of 
a man-lion, 745 
manifestation as Rama, 9ff 
Rama praised by Indra and others 
as; worshipped by Rama, 23 
meditative sleep cast on the sons of 
Hiranyakasipu by, 26 
manifestation as Kfsna, 25-31 
removed the oppression of the de- 
mons on earth, 36 
Y5dava women referred to as the 
wives of, 37 

manifestation as Buddha, 38 
manifestation as Kalki, 38 
manifestation as Vyasa and divisions 
of Vedas etc., 730 
kings etc. as manifestations of, 746 
the different manifestations of; and 
the battles in which he partici- 
pated, 745 

manifestations innumerable, 39 
past manifestations of, 428 
greatness of; knowing the objects of 
world as manifestations of, 1077 
different forms of, 82 
characteristics of the form of, 1 28 
characteristics of the different forms 
of, 129-31 

as being present in all the beings, 
1075 

invoked differently by different men, 
1075 

the Purana dealing with the eternal 
form of, 3 

reference to Garuda, vehicle of, 30 
presiding deity of an element, 27 1 
image of, 130 

installation of the image of, 172 
to be meditated, 55, 58 
to be contemplated at the conflu- 
ence of Ganges with the ocean, 
841 

adoration of different forms of, 1 27- 
29 

propitiation of, 176 



1178 


Agni Purdna 


worship of the disc, gem etc., of, 63 
adoration of the weapons of, 66 
reference to Bhi§ma as contemplat- 
ing on, 35 
assignment of, 69 

purification of fire of and boiling 
food intended for, 59 
placing on head the hand of, 6 1 
primordial form dissolved in fire, 73 
mode of worshipping, 50-53 
mode of worshipping in nine com- 
partments, 527-28 
mantra for the seat and image of, 52 
meditation on man-lion form of, 53 
salutations made to, 50, 62 
meditated, 68 

worshipped in a circular altar, 70 
merits of worshipping, 51 
as the greatest kinsman, merits of 
meditating on, 1074 
greatness of a person who has attain- 
ed, 1075 

the qualification of a person who 
attains the place of, 1075 
merits of contemplation on, 1077 
merits of worshipping, 644, 731 
the greatness of, 731 
the greatness of fiftyone names of, 
840-42 

hymn on; destroys all sins, 483-5 
a hymn that destroys evil addressed 
to, 728-29 

salagrama representing, 1 25 
— a name of the Sun, 1 36 

devas born as one of the Adityas 
as, 45 

made as the lord of Suns, 47 
— a law-giver, 455 

Viiftiudasaka, one of the sons of Vasu- 
deva and Devaki; was killed by 
Kamsa, 744 

vi$Qukranta, a herb used as a paste, 372 
used as a charm, 406 
Visnumadvrata, explanation of, 525 
Visnupada, at Gaya; merits of doing 
ancestral rite at, 339 
Vi$riiivrata, details relating to, 499- 
500 

Vi$nuyasas, father of Kalki, 38 
visok&, an occult nerve, 316 
vi£okadv&da£f, on the practice of, 
512 

Visravas, son of Pulastya; wives and 
progeny of, 24 

Vi$ti, a karaiia, explanation of, 369fn 
adverse effect of Sun’s entry in, 363 
vi$tir£hu, description of, 410 
Vifva, tantra spoken by, 106 
Vi$v&, mother of Viivedevas, 44 
viivacakra, a great gift, 544 


Vi£vag££va, son of Pfthu, 736 
Vitfvajit, son of Bfhadratha; son of, 748 
Visvakarman (celestial architect), was 
born from Kasyapa and Prabha, 44 
made a mace for Vi?tm, 334 
image of, 137 

the sculptor should be imagined by 
the priest as, 118 

Visvaksena, form of Vi§nu; character- 
istics of, 131 
to be worshipped, 6 1 
worshipped, 66, 100 
merits of worshipping, 51 
carving of staff similar to that of, 115 
Visvamitra (sage), son of Gadhi; sons 
of, 749 

respected on account of his glory, 10 
one of those who protected the 
sages in battle, 746 

Visv&rca, a female energy placed at the 
end of a petal; colour of, 1 36 
Visvarupa, one of the Rudras, 45 
form of Visnu ; characteristics of the 
image of, 131 

installation of the image of, 172 
Vis'varupika, image of, 138 
Vis'vedcvas, born to Visva and Kas- 
yapa, 44 

mode of consecration of the image 
of, 180 

invoked at the time of Sraddha, 346 
one of the siddhas, 414 
Visvesvara, form of Visiju on river 
Sona, 841 

Vitala, a nether world, 353 
vitality, the things which give, 756 
Vitamaya, son of Manasyu; son of, 748 
Vilanaka, characteristics of the metre, 
908 

Vitatha, worshipped, 316 

bom to Bharata after performance 
of rituals by Bharadvaja; five sons 
of, 749 

Vithi, a type of drama, 921 
thirteen sub-divisions of, 928 
a component of the mode Bh&rati, 
928 

Vitihotra, Ananta was the son of, 741 
Vltihotras, one of the five branches of 
Haihayas, 741 

Vivasvat, one of the Adityas, 45 
a god to be worshipped, 317 
worship of, 274 

viveka, denotes power to distinguish, 
1018 

vomitting, beneficial drinks during, 
754 

oil boiled with herbs to be used for 
bathing to remedy, 774 
yow, of giving a gift of lamp, 525-6 



Index 


1179 


of fasting; mode of practising and 
merits of, 533-34 
on the eleventh day; merits of, 532 
rules relating to the practice of, 493, 
538 

certain regulations relating to, 497 
ten virtues to be practised during, 
493 

eight things which do not vitiate a 
vow, 496 

resolutions relating to, 496-7 
to be observed on the first lunar 
day, 497-8 

to be observed on the second lunar 
day, 498-500 

to be observed on the third lunar 
day, 500-3 

to be observed on the fourth lunar 
day, 503 

to be observed on the fifth lunar day 
for the serpents, 504 
to be observed on the sixth day, 504 
to be observed on the seventh lunar 
day for the sun, 504-5 
to be observed on the eighth lunar 
day; for lord Krsna, 505-6, 507-8 
to be observed on the ninth lunar 
day for goddess Durga, 509-10 
to be observed on the tenth lunar 
day; merits of, 510-11 
to be practised on the eleventh day 
for Lord Visnu, 511 
to be practised on the twelfth lunar 
day, 512-3 

to be practised on the thirteenth 
lunar day, 515-6 

to be practised on the fourteenth 
lunar day for lord Siva, 516-7 
relating to week days, 519-20 
relating to different asterisms, 520- 
21 

that are practised on certain days, 

522- 3 

to be performed in different months, 

523- 4 

relating to different seasons, 524-25 
merits of practising, 591, 538 
expiation for breaking, 496 
Vraja, one of the sons of Dhi?a$a, 43 
Vrajyas, names of sections of Kosa, 921 
vrata, as a penance, 492-3 
vratabandha, one of the Vedic rites, 59 
vrddha, formulae having upto 300 
letters, 895 

Vfddhaka, a fierce force; prayer made 
for protection from, 84 
Vfddharevati, a terrible force; prayer 
made for protection from, 84 
Vrddhaiarniftn, one of the sons of 
Ayus, 739 


Vrjinivan, son of Kro?tu; son of, 741 
Vfka, son of Rohitas'va; son of, 737 
Vfkala, a son of Sisii and Succhayi, 42 
Vrkatejasa, a son of Si§ti and Succhil- 
ya, 42 

Vfkodara, denotes Bhimasena, 
Vrndavana, Kfsna’s visit to, 27 
Vfnta, characteristics of the metre, 912 
Vf?a, Indra at the time of the II th 
Manu, 428 

Vrsa (Visa), a year of the Hindu 
calendar, 404 

Vfsabha, son of Kusagra; son of, 750 
vr$abha, a type of temple, 315 
Vnakapi, one of the Rudras, 45 
Vfsaparvan, father of Sarmis^ha, 25, 
740 

daughters of, 46 

Vr$ascna, son of Karima; son of, 748 
Vrscika, vikala correction for, 367 
(Sec also Scorpion) 

Vr$rii, one of the four sons of Satvata, 
742 

VfsnLs, a division of Yadavas, 736 
Vfsti, one of the four sons of, 742 
Vrtra, a demon, killed by lord Visiju 
in his ninth manifestation in the 
form of a foam, 743, 746 
Vftrcsa, a siddha to be worshipped, 
41 5 

Vrtta, characteristics of the metre, 914 
Vrtta, a division of Padya; charac- 
teristics of, 919 
Vrttas, three divisions of, 919 
vrtti, see modes 
Vyadhi, born from Mftyu, 49 
vyaghata, an adverse period to be 
avoided, 383 

Vyahara, a division of Vithi, 928 
vyahrtis of gayatri, name of the sage 
associated with, 562 
Vyakarana (grammar), as an Apara- 
vidya, 2 

Vyala, a variety of Dan^aka; forma- 
tion of, 915 

Vyana, a vital wind, 253 

carried by the vein Hastijihva, 556 
functions of, 557 

vyantaras, a variety of serpents; have 
mixed marks born at an unspecified 
time, 807 

Vyasa, as a manifestation of lord 
Visnu, 730 

divided the Vedic hymns and 
Upani^ads into recensions, 730 
as an interlocutor, 1 
birth of Dh|tara$tra from, 31 
consoled Arjuna, 37 
a law-giver, 455 

Vyastasambandhat&, an impurity, 947 



1180 


Agni Purdna 


vyatip&ta, an obstacle to be avoided, 
383 

Vyatirekopama, explanation of, 940 
Vyayoga, a type of drama, 921 
Vyoma, worshipped, 316 
Vyoma, son of Viduratha; son of, 742 
Vyuhas, the names of the eight, 65 

wages, commensurate with work, 675 
war, when one should bepin a, 623 
warriors, the duties of different kinds 
of, 613 

wasting diseases, food that gives 
strength in, 754 
water, as a form of Vi$$u, 173 
words used in the sense of, 995 
word denoting drops of, 989, 995 
asterisms belonging to regions of, 
388 

relative merits of bathing in different 
kinds of, 436 

cold, as the best astringent, 757 
waves, words denoting, 995 
wealth, words denoting, ^ 1022 
word representing desire for, 995 
three kinds of acquisition of, 541 
should be acquired by rightful 
means, 617 

period within which one can claim 
his ownership of, 657 
weapons, of different kinds; words 
denoting, 1020 

two kinds of — weapons and missiles, 
645 

two kinds of— those cast off and 
those retained, 645 
two divisions of — curved and con- 
ceit, 645 

the gradations in the use of, 645 
should be worshipped before an 
expedition is made, 639 
should be washed before use, 647 
propitiatory rites for, 383-35 
Wednesday, discharge of debt to be 
made on, 358 

the first shave of a child is commend- 
ed on, 359 

harvested grains to be taken into 
the house on, 361 
loss brought by Ardra occurring on, 
376 

inauspicious nature of third day 
occurring on, 381 
R&hu lies at the north on, 409 
week days, the names of the presiding 
deities of, 805 

weight, different measures of, 588 
welfare, words denoting, 991 
white, words denoting, 992 
white, word denoting little, 992 


wind, words denoting, 988 

sphere of; asterisms belonging to, 
387 

that is deranged; remedy for, 756 
remedy for eighty kinds of diseases 
due to deranged, 774 
remedy for the removal of excess of, 
775 

wind and bile, remedy for deranged, 
776 

wine, three kinds of; women men- 
tioned as the fourth, 1042 

winning, different means for, 629 
witnesses, lawsuit depending on, 654 
codes relating to, 656-7 
qualifications and rules relating to, 
661-2 

when considered as false, 663 
of the plaintiff should be heard 
first, 657 

women, words which denote, 1013 
words denoting different, 1014 
words denoting the parts of body of, 
1016 

characteristic features of, 637-8 
when allowed to re-marry, 434 
when declared as pure and impure, 
463 

three divisions of property of, 541 
results of the defect of association 
with, 627 

nature of treatment after delivery 
of, 756 

wonder, origin of the sentiment, 924 
wooden water-carrier, word denoting, 
996 

words, having many meaning, 1001- 
1005 

denoting conjunctural stories, 992 
division of, 918 

repetition of; two kinds of— single 
letter or many letters, 933 
two kinds of defects of, 947 
denoting celestial region and nether 
world; synonyms of, 986ff 
of threat; fine relating to, 676 
mono-syllabic; their meaning, 950- 
52 

world, Brahman as the cause of; Pra- 
dhana as the cause of, 949 
worldly events, words denoting, 992 
worms, remedy which destroys, 755, 
776 

remedy to remove all, 766 
worship, words denoting, 1017 
words denoting mode of, 1017 
mode of, 54-56 
of deities, mode of, 190-95 
five constituents of, 836 
of V199U and other gods, 50-53 



Index 


1181 


relating to forms such as Vasudeva, 
62-66 

in different diagrams of the shape 
of a lotus, circle etc., 880-83 
of gods in sixtyfour squares, 272ff 
in eightyone squares, 275 
of Hari in Sarvatobhadra, 75-78 
of different gods in a lotus figure, 
79-81 

for success in battle, 425 
different flowers used in, 528-29 
withered and broken flowers not to 
be used in, 529 
merits of, 538 

of gods: expiations for discontinuing, 
490-2 

worshippers, of lord; four types of, 
1069 

wound, a paste that heals, 775 
healing medicine for, 768 
wounds, a paste for cleaning, 774 „ 
due to affected arteries, 775 
parasites of; juice that destroys, 775 
a decoction for cleaning, 774-5 
wrath, sentiment of; origin of, 923 
three-fold ; factors accomplishing, 
931 

wrestling, modes of, 652-3 

Yadavas, belong to the race of Yadu, 
25 

counted as eighty thousand; were 
protected by Kf§Qa, 745 
rise of innumerable, 3 1 
Kamsa’s father made ruler of, 28 
Kalayavana, as a foe of, 28fn 
Kr$na's amusement at Dvaraka 
with, 30 

destruction of, 36, 37 
legend relating to destruction of, 
36fn 

Axjuna*s performance of obsequies 
of, 37 

Yadu, one of the sons of Yayati and 
Devayani, 740 
founder of a dynasty, 740 
Yadavas came in the race of, 25 
five sons of, 740 

one of the seven sons of Suhotra and 
Girika, 750 

Yajamana, explanation of the term; 
synonyms of, 1017 

Yajfiadatta, an ascetic youth killed by 
Daiaratha, 14 

Yajftavaraha, form taken by Vi?nu, 7 
Yajnavalkya, as a priest of Kalki, 38 
branches of Yajurveda founded by, 
429 

— a law-giygr, 455 
Yajur hymns, creation of, 40 


Yajurveda, an Aparavidy5, 2 
branches of, 730 
division into four of, 429 
division into seven of, 429 
number of hymns of, 730 
auspicious for Yama, 93 
the hymns to be recited by a follower 
of, 287 

use of the hymns of, 695-704 
the hymns of; which confer fortune, 
710 

assigned on the fingers, 64 
Yakini, a goddess, 415 
Yak?a, image of, 106 
Yak?a, born from Khasa, 47 

Kr§na married the daughter of, 28 
prayer made for protection from, 84 
Yak§ini, a monstress possessing the child 
in the fourteenth year; symptoms of 
child possessed by; offering to 
appease; bathing when the child is 
possessed by, 825 
Yaksman, worshipped, 317 
Yama, born to Sun and Samjna, 735 
also called Dharma; Yudhi^hira as 
born due to the grace of, 32 
domain enlarged due to Bharata 
war, 35 

made the king of manes, 47 
Kfsna was worshipped by, 28 
image of, 106, 137, 314 
investiture of sacred thread for the 
image of, 215 
contemplation of, 286 
requested to come, 336 
propitiation of, 176 
worshipped, 51, 55 
praise of, 403-4 
asterism of, 384 

— name of celestials during the period 
of Svayambhuva Manu, 427 
— a law-giver, 455 
— a muhurta; deeds to be done in, 371 
— denotes daily rites, 1018 
Yamaka, explanation of; two kinds of 
— contiguous and non-contiguous, 
934 

further divisions of, 934 
ten prominent kinds of, 935 
Yam ala, a method of locating mantras, 
416 

mode of worship of Gauri according 
to, 897 

Yamagita, narration of; consists of ex- 
position made by Kapila and others, 
1073-76 

Yamajihva, a guardian deity, 284 
image of, 138 
worship of, 273 
Yamas, description of, 1076 



1182 

Yamasuryaka, the name of a temple, 
318 

Y&mi, Nagavithi born from, 44 
Yamuna, the spirit afflicting the child 
in the eighth month; the symptoms 
of child seized by, 823 
— the spirit possessing the child in the 
seventh year, 824 

symptoms of the child possessed by, 
824-5 

offering to appease, 825 
bathing and fumigation for child 
possessed by, 825 
— born to Rajhi and Sun, 735 
— river; Kona’s conquest of Kaliya in, 
27 

was dragged by Pralamba, 30 
flowing at Prayaga, 329 
region of; indication for the des- 
truction of, 387 
image of, 133 
worship of, 197 
worshipped, 51, 88 
Trivikrama to be contemplated at, 
841 

Yamya, denotes the asterism Bharani, 
medicine to be administered in, 
358 

imparting the science of archery to 
be done in, 359 

ya£a, a vein ; carries the wind Kurma, 
556 

Yaska, an authority on metrics, 903 
Yasoda, lord Hari as a child taken by 
Vasudeva to, 26 

in the custody of Nanda, the hus- 
band of, 27 

Yasdohara, one of the daughters of 
Devaka; married by Vasudeva, 742 
Yasovati, a nerve, 316 
Yatana, a monstress affecting the 
child in the second year; symptoms 
of the child affected by; offering to 
appease; bathing and other prac- 
tices for child affected by, 824 
Yath&sahkhya (relative enumeration), 
an excellence of word and sense; 
explanation of, 946 
Yati, one of the seven sons of Nahu?a; 
even as boy contemplated on Vi$ou 
and attained him, 740 
explanation of, 911 
yatic&ndrayaoa, an expiation; ex- 
planation of, 482 

yatis, significance of the term, 1018 
Yaugiki, an excellence of word, 944 
yava, a measure, 107, 123, 140 
Y&vadarthath, an embellishment of 
sound and sense, 942 
explanation of, 942-3 


Agni Purdna 

Yavamadhya, composition of the 
metre, 904 

yavamadhyam&, a measure, 107 
yavamati, characteristics of the metre, 
911 

Yavanas, Kalayavana as the king of, 
28fn 

Yavinara, one of the five born from 
Bahyasva, 749 

Yayati, one of the seven sons of 
Nahu$a, 25, 31, 740 
rescued Devayani and married her, 
25fn 

married Devayani the daughter of 
Sukra, 740 

married also Sarmistha, daughter of 
Vf^aparva, 740 

had two sons through Devayani and 
three sons through £armi§tha, 740 
years, cycle of; results indicated by 
names of, 404-5 
yellow, words denoting, 992 
Yoga, one of the five factors in the 
almanac; correction for, 368, 369 
division of time; good or bad known 
from names, 371 

— and its constituents; explanation of, 
1041 

has eight constituents, 1 082 
— relating to a mantra, 403 
Yoginis, image of, 1 38 
Yogifevimala, worshipped, 415 
yogorasya, an array; two wings in the 
array daod a > 634 

yoni, a posture made with the hands, 
95, 898 

Yuddhamu$ti, one of the sons of 
Ugrasena, 742 
Yudhajit, uncle of Bharata, 1 1 
born to Madri and Dhf?ta, 743 
Yudhi§thira, born to ParjuJu and 
Kunti from god Dharma, 32, 744, 
751 

son of, 751 

was defeated by Duryodhana in 
dice, 33 

Knoa's directive to fight with 
Duryodhana, 33 

army of, going to Kuruk$etra, 34 
killed Salya, 35 
became a king after the war, 36 
set on his final journey, 37 
Yuga (s ), extent of, 39fh 
creation takes place in every, 45 
salutation made to 50 
— herb denoted by, 406 
Yugandhara, son of Dhuni; son of, 743 
Yufea, a measure, 207 
yukti, an embellishment of word, 932 
explanation of; six kinds of, 933 



Index 


1183 


yufijat* memo* a hymn, 437 
yuthi, yuthika, a herb, 371, 378 
yuthika, a flower, 529 
Yuva, a year of the Hindu calendar, 
404 

Yuvan&lva, son of Ayus, 736 
— son of Raria^va ; son of, 737 


Yuyudh&na, another name of S&tyaki, 
743 

Zodiacal si^ns, movable; fixed and 
dual; their influence on the days; 
the time taken by the Sun to tra- 
verse, 384 









